
■<:m\m 












L- 



THE 



FAMILY BIBLE 



CONTAINING 



THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS. 



VVTTH 



BRIEF XOTES A?sD mSTRUCTIONS, 

DESIGNED 

TO GIVE THE RESULTS OF CRITICAL INVESTIGATION, AND TO ASSIST 

COMxMON READERS TO UNDERSTAND THE MEANING OF THE 

HOLY SPIRIT IN THE INSPIRED WORD. 

LNCirDING 

THE REFERENCES AND MARGINAL READINGS OF THE 
POLYGLOT BIBLE. 



V. - 



PUBLLSHED BY THE 
AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK. 



THE 

BOOK OF JOB 



The design of the book of Jol) will best appear from a brief survey f)f its plan. Job, a man eminent 
above all others for his uprightness and piety, is accused by Satan of serving God from mercenary 
motives. To show the falsehood of this charge, God permits Satan first to take from Job his property 
and his children, and afterwards to smite him with a loathsome and distressing disease. Thus stripped of 
every thing that could make life valuable, the patriarch still holds fast his integrity and blesses God. 
His three friends, who have come to comfort him, amazed and- confounded at the greatness of his calami- 
ties, sit down with him in silence for seven days. After this, Job, with vehement expressions of grief and 
impatience, curses the day of his birth. The three friends sharply rebuke him for the manifestation of 
wiiat they consider to be a rebellious spirit, and enter into an earnest controversy with him upon the false 
ground that special calamity comes only as a punishment for special wickedness, and is therefore'itsclf a 
proof of such wickedness. Accordingly, they exhort him to repent of his past sins, and seek God's for- 
giveness, as the sure means of removing his present misfortunes. Conscious of his integrity. Job, with 
much warmth and asperity, repels their unjust charges, and refutes their false arguments by an appeal to 
facts. The ground he takes is, that, by some inscrutable plan of God, calamity comes alike upon good 
and bad men. He passionately beseeches God to show him why he thus deals with him ; and, according 
as faith or despondency prevails in his soul, he sometimes expresses the firm hope that he shall come out 
of his troubles like gold tried in the fire ; at other times, the fear that he shall speedily sink down to the 
grave under the weight of his sorrows, and nevermore see good. Having put to silence his three friends 
i)y an array of facts to which they can make no replj', he freely expresses his belief that the lij^ocrite's 
end shall be destruction, chapter 27 ; shows that the wisdom by which God governs the world is above 
the comprehension of man, whose true wisdom lies in fearing and obeying his Maker, chapter 28; con- 
trasts his present calamities with his former prosperity, chapters 29, 30 ; and closes with a solemn protes- 
tation of his integrity, chapter 31. 

Elihu, a young man who has hitherto been a silent spectator, now takes up the argument upon the 
ground that trouble is sent by God upon men as a discipline, that by it they may be made aware of their 
errors and infirmities ; and that, if they make a right improvement of it, by bearing it with patience and 
submission, and looking to God in penitence and prayer for its removal, it will end in renewed and higher 
prosperity. To show the unreasonableness of charging injustice upon God, he dwells at length upon his 
infinite greatness and power. The special ground of Job's trial, as given in the first two chapters, Elihu 
could not of course understand. But his general position in regard to human afflictions is right, and it is 
to be carefully noticed that their issue in the case of a good man, as described by him, is precisely what 
happens to Job when he humbles himself before his Maker. 

Jehovah now addresses Job out of the whirlwind, rebuking him for his presumptuous language, and 
setting before him His infinite perfections, manifested in the creation and government of the world, as a 
sufficient proof that He must be just in his dealings with men, and that to arraign Him at the bar of 
human reason is folly and presumption. Job now humbles himself before God, and God publicly justifies 
him to his three friends, declaring that he has spoken of Him the thing which is right, chapter 42:8. 
This is to be understood as referring not to the spirit manifested by Job, which God had sharply rebuked, 
l)iit rather to the ground taken by him in respect to God's dealings with man. By God's direction, the 
three friends now offer sacrifices ; Job prays for them, and his former prosperity is restored to him in 
double measure. 

From this sketch of llie ]ilan of the book, it is manifest that its design is to show that God governs the 
world not upon the princii)le ol' simple retribution, so that the righteous arc always free from calamity, 
and the wicked always speedily punished, but rather, according to an inscrutable plan, which allows out- 
ward sorrow to come upon (he rii>-hleous as well as upon the wicked, yet so that the sufterings of good 
37 '" 577 



JoVs p'uiy and prosperity. 



JOB I. 



Satan has leave to try him. 



the end conduct them to a higher degree of true 



men are always intended for their benefit, and wil 
prosperity and happiness. 

Job plainly belonged to the patriarchal period. This appears from his longevity. lie lived after his 
trial a hundred and forty year.s, chapter 42:10, and he must have been then considerably advanced in 
life. This points to a period earlier, perhaps, than that of Abraham. To the same conclusion are we 
brought by the fact that no form of idolatry is mentioned in the book, but only the worship of the heav- 
enly bodies. The simplicity of the patriarchal age appears, moreover, in all its descriptions. But we 
cannot from this infer with certainty that the book was written in the patriarchal age, for the inspired 
author may have received from the past the facts wliicli lie records. The book is written in pure Hebrew, 
and has, moreover, all the freedom of an original work, as distinguished from a translation. Tlie author 
was intimately acquainted with both Arabian and Egyptian scenery. Whether, as some suppose, he was 
Moses, or a Hebrew of a later day, cannot be known to us. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 The holiness, riches, anil religious care of Job fnr his children. C Pa- 
tan, appearing before God, by calumniation obtaineth leave to tempt 
Job. 13 Understanding of the loss of his goods and children, in his 
mourning he hlesseth God. 

THERE was a man in the land of Uz,*'"' whoso 
name icas Job;'' and that man was perfect 
and upright, and one that feared God,'^ and eschew- 
ed evil. 

2 And tlierc were born unto him seven sons and 
three daughters. 

;^ His substance' also was seven thousand sliecp, 
and three tliour^and camels, and five hundred yoke 
of oxen, and five hundred she asses, and a very 
great houseliold;* so tiiat tins man was the great- 
est of all the moii^ of tlic oast. 

4 And ids sons went and feasted m </terV houses, 
every one his day ; and sent and called for their 
three sisters to cat and to drink witii them. 

5 And it was so, when the days of their feasting 
were gone about, tiiat Job sent and sanctified them, 
and rose up early intlie morning, and offered burnt- 
offerings according to the numl)er of tlieni all : for 
Job .said. It may 1)0 tliatmy sons have sinned, and 
cursed God in tlioir hearts.'' Thus did Job con- 
tinually.' 

6 1 Now there was a day " when the sons of God 
came to present tiiemselvcs before the Lord,'' and 
Satan' came also among tiiem.' 

7 And the Lord said unto Satan, Wiicncc com- 
est thou? Then iSatan answered the Loud, and 



• MoM« in thought to have written the book of Job while among the Midian- 
itei, B. C. 1.VJ0. ■! Chr. 1:17, 42; I.am. •I:->1. b E«k. 14:14, 20. c Prov. 
lfl:0. lOr, MK/i-. \ Or, husbandr II. » Hcb. soni. ■! Lev. 24:15, 18. I Hcb. 
allthedays. och.2il,eto. H Kingi 22; 19; ch. .'i-:?. \ Ueb. Ihe aitver- 



CHAPTER I. 

1. Ife; adistrict in Arabia, oast of Palestine. Perfect and 
upright; a man who habllually feared God and obeyed all 
his comiriandmenta. Like /,:i(liariah and Elizahetli, he was 
"rightetms before (Jod, walking' in all tlio eommandments 
and ordinances of the Lord lilanu'less." Luki^ I:(i. Feared 
Gail; witli childlike, rcverenlial, Imly fear. Eschewed; de- 
parted from, avoided. 

i. lli.iday; his birthday, chap. D:!-."?. 

,'). Sent and .tanctified tliem ; lie direeted them to perform 
those outward cleansings which were a necessary prep- 
aration for offering sacrifices, and wliicli wero a sign of 
that purity of heart and life wliieh God requires of all his 
worshippers, and whicii Job inculcated on Ids children by 
both precept and example. Cursed God in their hearts; 
dishonored him by unworthy and wicked thoughts of him, 
578 



said. From going to and fro in the earth, f^.yi.an. 
and from walking up and down in it.*"' 'iiiw. 

8 And tlie Loiin said unto Satan, Hast thou con- 
sidered* my servant Job, tliat there is none like 
liim in the earth, a jieri'ect and an upright man, 
one that feareth God, and csclicweth evil? 

9 Tiien Satan answered the Lord, and said. Doth 
Job fear God for naught? 

10 Hast not tliou made a hedge about him,*" and 
about his house, and about all that he hath on 
every side ? thou hast blessed the workofhishands, 
and his substance* is increased in the land. 

11 But put forth thy hand now, and touch all 
tliat he hatii,' and he will curse thee* to thy face.^ 

12 And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, all 
that he hatli ix in thy power; only n])on himself 
put not forth thy hand. So Satan went forth from 
the presence of the Lord. 

13 "[ And there was a day when his sons and his 
daughters Ircre eating and drinking wine in their 
eldest brother's house : ^ 

14 And there came a messenger unto Job, and 
.«aid, Tiie oxen were ploughing, and the asses feed- 
ing beside tliom : 

15 And the Sabeans fell !//)o?j Mom, and took them 
away ; yea, tiiey have slain the servants with the 
edge of the sword ; and I only am escaped alone 
to tell thee. 

16 While lie was yet speaking, there came also 
another, and saiil, Tlic lire of God' is fallen from 
heaven, and hath burned up the shcei), and the 



rary; 1 Chr. 21 : 1 
S>!alt. I2:4-); 1 


Zich. 3:1; Rev. 12:9, 10. • Hob. in Ike midil of Ihrm. 


'et. 5:8. 1 Heh. Sfl l/iy htart on. bPM. 34:7, 1 Or, mf- 


lit. 1 ch. 19:21 


» lleb. if lu curat Iha not. J Isa. 8:21. 1 Heb. Hand; 


Gen. 10:0. k Kc 


cl. 9:12. 5 Or, X prfcif J!r(!. 



Titus did Job continually ; liabitually, after each yearly foaet 
of his assembled households. 

6. TIte sans of God; die angelic hosts, as in chap. 38:7. 
The scene of this transaction is laid in heaven. Compare 
1 Kings 22:19. 

9. For naught; without being paid for it. Satan means 
to insinuate "that Job's piety is wholly selfish, and will 
vanish as soon as ho finds that it ceases to bring to him a 
rew.inl of ciirthly good. 

10. Made a hedge about him ; to defend him from all evil. 
lilessed the irork of his hands; rewarded him abundantly 
for his seeming pietj". 

11. Timch all that he hath; destroy it. Curse thee to thtj 
face; openly, with divring impiety. 

12. Vpim himself put not forth thy hand; do not injure 
him in his person. 

1."). Sabeans; an .\ial) tribe. 



Joh is sorely afflicled. 



JOB IT. 



Three frwnds v'lsU hini. 



A. M. 24.S1. servants, and consumed tliom ; and I only 
15a" " am escaped alone to tell thee. 

17 Wliilc lie was yet speaking, there came also 
another, and said, The Chaldeans made out three 
bands, and icU* upon the camels, and have carried 
them away, yea, and slain the servants with the 
edge of the sword ; and I only am escajied alone 
to tell thee. 

18 While he was yet speaking, there came also 
another, and said. Thy sons and thy daughters were 
eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's 
house: 

ly And behold, there came a great wind from* 
the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the 
house, and it fell upon the young men, and they are 
dead ; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. 

20 Then Job arose, and rent his mantle,'" and 
shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, 
and worshipped,'' 

21 And said. Naked came I out of my mother's 
womb, and naked shall I return thither:'^ the 
Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away ]^ bless- 
ed be the name of tlie Lord." 

22 In all this Job sinned not,'' nor charged God 
foolisidy.* 

CHAPTER II. 

1 Satan appearing again before God obtaineth further leave to tempt 
Job. 7 He smitetli him with sore boils. 9 Job reproveth his wife, 
moving him to curse God. 11 His three friends condole with him in 
Silence. 

AGAIN there was a day when the sons of God 
came to present themselves before the Lord, 
and Satan came also among them to present him- 
self before the Lord."^ 

2 And the Lord said unto Satan, From whence 
comest thou? And Satan answered the Lord, 
and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and 
from walking up and down in it. 



• Heb. naked, t Heb. from aside. 
5;fi. c 1 Tim. 6:7. i Lam. .'iSH. 
attributed folhj to God. e ch. 1:8, 



: Or, robe, a Gen. 37:29. b 1 Pet. 
Psa. 89:;!^, Si. t ch. 2:10. i Or, 
o. h ch. 27:5, 6; Psa. 2(>:1; 4[:12. 



17. The Chaldeans; a troop of pillagers from near the 
Euphrates. 

20. Rent his mantle, and shaved his head; in token of deep 
mourning. 

21. Shall I return thither; to the womb of the earth, 
which is the mother of all mankind. Ho uses the word 
■•womb" in a twofold sense, first literally-, and then figu- 
ratively. 

22. Charged God fool ishhj ; that is, as in the margin, 
attributed folly to God. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. God sometimes bestows on his children great wealth, 
numerous friends, and abundance of earthly blessings, and 
thus increases their obligations to love and serve liim. 

4. It is proper to partake of the bounties of Providence 
■with gratitude and joy ; and pleasant when brothers and 
sisters love one another, rejoice in each other's society, 
and together celebrate the goodness of God. 

'). Seasons of feasting arc seasons of peculiar danger. 
While men partake freely of God's gifts they are tempted 
to forget or in some other way to dishonor the giver, and 
thus they need his pardoning mercy through Jesus Christ. 

9. Those who contend that all religion is selfish, and 
that good men serve God only because he does them good, 
resemble Satan and take part with him ui promoting his 
cause. 

12. Satan, if permitted by God, may not only tempt men 
to sin, but bring upon tlicm great and sore calamities. 



3 And the Lord said unto Satan, llast thou con- 
sidered my servant Job, that there is none liko 
him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, 
one that feareth God, and cscheweth evil? and 
still he holdetii fast his integrity,'' altlioiigh thou 
movcdst me against him, to destroy him witiiout 
cause. 

4 And Satan answered the Lord, and said. Skin 
for skin, yea, all that a man hath will lie give for 
his life.' 

5 But put forth thy hand now, and touch his 
bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy 
face. 

6 And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, he is 
in thy hand ; but^ save his life. 

7 ' So went Satan forth from the presence of 
the Lord, and smote Job with sore boils from the 
sole of his foot unto his crown. 

8 And he took him a potsherd to scrape himself 
withal ; and he sat down among the ashcs.J 

9 II Tiien said his wife unto him. Dost thou still 
retain thine integrity? curse God, and die. 

10 But he said unto her. Thou speakcst as one 
of the foolish women speaketh. Vv'hat! shall wo 
receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not 
receive evil?'' In all this did not Job sin with 
his lips.' 

11 IT Now when Job's three friends heard of all 
this evil that was come upon him, they came every 
one from his own place; Eliphaz the Tcmanite,'" 
and Bildad the Shuliite," and Zophar the Naa- 
mathite: for they had made an appointment to- 
gether to come to mourn with him, and to comfort j 
him." 

12 And when they lifted up their eyes afar oflf, 
and knew him not, they lifted up their voice, and 
wept ; and they rent every one his mantle, and 
sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.'' 



■iUeh. swaUoiii lumxiji. i Malt. (■>:25. 1 Or, on/y. J Ma 
5:1U. II. 1 P.sa. a9:l. m Gen. 30: 1 1 ; Jer. 49:7. n Ger 
12:15. pNeh. 9:1; Lam. 2:10. 



20. Good men will not overlook God's hand wlicn calam- 
ities come upon them, nor fail to humble themselves before 
him. 

21. Nothing so sustains the soul in the day of severe 
trial, as the thought that God sends it. 

CHAPTER II. 

3. He holdeth fast his integrity; persevered in yielding 
obedience to God, notwithstanding his calamities. 

4. Ski ti for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for 
his life; Satan here renews his charge of selfishness against 
Job. True he has lost his property and his children, but 
his person yet remains unharmed. Should God touch him 
here, he will renounce his allegiance to God, and blas- 
pheme his name. To show the falsehood of this, exhibit 
the nature of true religion, and prepare Job for greater 
good in the end, God permitted Satan to try it. 

7. With sore hods ; his disease, is generally regarded to 
have been a malignant and painful species of lejirosy. 

8. Potsherd ; a piece of earthen ware. 

10. Shall u-e not receive evd ? though Satan was the instru- 
ment, yet Job viewed his trials as coming from God; and 
as such, he humbly submitted to them. 

12. Knew him not; he was so altered by his disease, that 

at first they did not recognize him. They lifted up theirvoice 

and wept; when they saw how dreadfully he was afflicted. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Though true religion has been proved a thousand 

57'J 



Job cwrseih the- 



JOB III. 



day of his birth. 



13 So they sat down with him upon tlic orround" 
seven days and seven nights,'' aud none spake a 
word unto him : for they saw that his grief was 
very great. 

CHAPTER III. 

I Job curses the day and services of liis birtli. 13 The ease of death. 
20 He complaineth of life, because of his anguish. 

AFTER this opened .Job his mouth, and cursed 
his day. 

2 And Job spake,* and said, 

3 Let the day perish wherein I was born,*^ and 
the night in which it was said, There is a man- 
child conceived. 

4 Let tliat day bo darkness ; let not God regard 
it from above, ueitlier let the light shine upon 
it. 

5 Let darkness and the shadow of death stain* 
it; let a cloud dwell upon it; let the blackness of 
the day terrify it.' 

.iy for tliat night, let darkness seize upon it ; 
let it not be joined unto^ tlie days of the year; 
let it not come into the number of the months. 

7 Lo, let that uight be solitary ; let no joyful 
voice come therein. 

8 Let them curse it that curse the day, who are 
ready to raise up their mourning.'"' 

9 Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark ; 
let it look for light, but have none; neither let it 
see the dawning of tlie day :''' 

10 Because it siiut not up the doors of my moth- 
ers womb, nor hid sorrow from mine eyes. 

11 Why died I not from the womb? tvhy did I 



» Ezra 9:3-5. !> Gen. 50:10. • Heb. answmd. 
a!l:l-l. t Or, c/mllenge. 1 Or, lei l/iem terrifij it, m 
'lay; Amos 8: 10. « Or, rejoice among. I Or. a lev 



••■ ch. 10:18, etc.; Jer. 
those wlio have a /litter 
Ulian. d .Ter. 9:17-'->0. 



times to be genuine, yet Satan and his agents still insist 
that it is all hypocrisy and selOshness. To show the false- 
hood of this, God sometimes suffers him to visit his peo- 
ple with calamities, while he so sustains them by his grace 
as to silence the objections of foolish men. 

9. Our most intimate friends may become our greatest 
tempters, and thus, unless resisted, our most dangerous 
foes. 

10. God is wise and good, not only in the mercies which 
he bestows, but in the trials which he sends or permits. 
Wliile grateful for the one, we should be submissive under 
the other, and thus strive to honor him in both. 

12. Sickness and trials may so emaciate and disfigure 
our bodies that our friends will hardly know ns, and our 
suflferings be such that they can give us no relief. 

CHAPTER III. 

1. Ill's day; the day of his birth, feeling that he had been 
deprived oi' all his possessions and of all capacity to enjoy 
life, and that thus existence had become a heavy calamity 
to him. The language of Job throughout this chapter is 
that of passionate complaint against God's ])rovidenco, and 
in using it he sinned; but Satan could not prevail with 
him to curse his Maker. 

8. Tliem — that curse the day; magicians, who were sup- 
posed to have power to curse certain daj's.aswoll as per- 
sons. Compare what Balak says to Balaam, Num. 22: (1. To 
raise up their mourning ; or, as the margin, to raise uj) levia- 
than. He would ha\ e the most powerful enchanters em- 
ployed, who, according to the superstitious belief of the 
multitude, were able lo raise up leviathan from the deep. 

12. Prccent me; in the old English sense id' anticipating, 
being reatlv beforehand to meet one. 
580 



not give up the ghost when I came out of a. ii.sjst 

,, V II o li.e. about 

the belly? isai. 

12 Why did the knees prevent me?*" or why the 
breasts that I sliould suck? 

13 For now should I have lain still and been 
quiet, I should have slept : then had I been at 
rest, 

14 With kings and counsellors of the earth, 
which built desolate places for themselves ;'^ 

15 Or with princes that had giild, who filled 
their houses with silver: 

16 Or as a hidden untimely birth I had not 
been;8 as infants which never saw light. 

17 There the wicked cease /;-o??i troubling; and 
there the weary' be at rest. 

18 There the prisoners rest together ; they hear 
not the voice of the oppressor. 

19 The small and great are there ; and the ser- 
vant is free from his master. 

20 Wherefore is light given to him that is in 
misery, and life unto the bitter in soul ; 

21 Which long* for death," but it comcth not; 
and dig for it more than for hid treasures; 

22 Which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad, when 
they can find the grave? 

23 Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, 
and whom God hath hedged in?' 

24 For my sighing cometh before I cat,* and my 
roarings are poured out like the waters. 

25 For the thing wliieli I greatly feared is come 
upon me,^ and that which I was afraid of is come 
unto me. 

20 I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither 
was I quiet; yet trouble came. 



1 Heb. eyelids of the morning, e Isx. 0I):12. < ch. 15:2?. j Psa. 5S:8. 
• Keh. wearied in slrenglh t Heb. trait, h Rev. 9:0. i ch. 19:s; Lam. 
3:7 I Heb. my meat. 5 Heb. I feared a fear, and it came upon me. 



14. Desolate places for themselves; cities in the desert; or 
perhaps sepulchres, which they built where tliey might 
rest and be quiet. Had he died at his birth. Job thought 
he should have rested ivith equal quietness. 

19. There; in the grave, which Job here regards as a 
place of rest from the sufferings of life. 

20. Unto the bitter in sord; to him who pines in misery. 

21. Difefor it; earnestly desire and seek it. 

23. Whose vay is hid; so that he can see no possibility 
of escape from his sufferings. Hedged in; so that he is 
shut UJ) to calamity, without the hope of release. 

25. The thing which I greatly feared is come upon mc; or, 
" When I fear a fear, it comes upon me:" calamities more 
and more dreadful follow each other in quick succession. 

I.\STRUCTIONS. 

3. A good man under trials may become fretful and pee- 
vish, have hard thoughts of God and his ways, and may 
say things which he will afterwards see to be foolish and 
wicked, and of which he will be utterly ashamed. Chap. 
•12 : 3-G. 

11. Man if left to themselves under trials, may wish that 
they were dead, and be tempted sometimes even to kill 
themselves; but this is rebellion against God, and is the 
way to increase their own sorrows. 1 Sam. 28:16-20; 
31:"t; Matt. 27:3-:); Mark 14:21. 

23. Men sometimes wonder why it is that God pre- 
serves their lives, when they seem to be receiving no 
good themselves, and doing no good U> others. But God 
has wise and good reasons; anil thrnugh their preserva- 
tion and trials, may bless not oidy thrm, but mullituiles of 
others to the end of time and to eternity. Horn. M:7; 
iTun. 1:1(;. 



The address of EUphaz. 



JOB V 



His solemn visi 



CHAPTER IV, 



1 Eliphaz reproveth Job for want of religion. 7 He teachefli God's judg- 
ments to be not for the righteous, but for the wiolied. 12 His fearful 
Tision, to humble the excellency of creatures before God. 

''T^HEN Elipliaz tlie Temanite answered and 
_L said, 

2 If w'Q essay to commune' witli tlicc, wilt thou 
be grieved? but who can witliliold himself from 
speaking?'' 

3 Behold, thou hast instructed many, and thou 
hast strengthened the weak hands." 

4 Thy words have upholden him that was fall- 
ing, and thou hast strengthened the feeble' knees. 

5 But now it is come upon thee, and thou faint- 
est; it toucheth thee, and thou art troubled. 

6 Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy hope, 
and the uprightness of thy ways? 

7 Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished, be- 
ing innocent? or where were the righteous cut 
off? 

8 Even as I have seen, they that plough iniquity, 
and sow wickedness, reap the same." 

9 By the blast of God they perish, and by the 
breath of his nostrils^ are they consumed. 

10 The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the 
fierce lion, and "the teeth of the young lions, are 
broken." 

11 The old lion perisheth for lack of prey, and 
the stout lion's whelps are scattered abroad. 

12 Now a thing was secretly' brought to me, 
and mine ear received a little thereof. 



• He b. a word. Wleh. refrain from icoriis' aha. 35:3. \lh-h Ijowing ; 
Heb.l2:la. bGal. 6:7,8. 5 That is, /as aJiffer,- ch. 15:30; Isa. 11 :•!. ' P.-a. 
5d:6. tl Heb. by stealth. TI Heb. rmt me, ' Heb. the muUitiuU of. t Or. / 



CHAPTER IV. 

3. Tlie weak hands; persons that were ready to faint and 
despond under trouble. 

5. It; distress. 

6. Is not this thy fear ; that is, thy religious fear, or thy 
piety. The meaning of Elihu, according to our version, 
is, that Joti's fear of God, trust in him, and uprightness of 
Hfe, for which he has enjoyed so high a reputation, ought 
now, if they be indeed genuine, to sustain him ; since it is 
not possible, under the righteous government of God, that 
the innocent and righteous should perish. But many pro- 
pose to render, "Shouldnotthy fear be thy confidence? thy 
hope, should it not even be the righteousness of thy ways ?" 
which, however, comes to substantially the same idea. 

7. JVho ever perished, being innocent 1 this is true if we look 
to tlie final end of the righteous, but not true if we look 
simply to their outward lot in this world ; and here lay 
the mistake of Job's friends. They looked upon this world 
as a state not merely of trial, but of retribution. In this 
Job justly differed from them ; and this was the point of 
controversy between them. 

8. Plough — SOIL'; practise. Reap the same; experience 
t'ne fruit or effects of their sins. Verses 9-11. 

10. The roaring of the lion; the lion here represents 
haughty and powerful sinners, who prosper for a while, 
and then are violently destroyed. Compare Psa. 37 : 35, 3G. 

12. Secretly brought; revealed in a dream or vision. 

16. It ; the spirit. 

17. More just than God? so that he can rightly arraign 
the conduct of his Maker ? Ought he not rather to submit 
to all His dispensations ? 

19. Them that dwell in houses of clay ; a figurative descrip- 
tion of man's mortal frame, as weak and perishable. 

20. From morning to euenmg- ; ^either within the space of 
a single day, as a poetic description of the brevity of life; 
or, all day long, that is, continually. 



13 In thoughts from the visions of the night, 
when deep sleep falleth on men, 

14 Fear came upon me,'' and trembling, which 
made all* my bones to shake. 

15 Then a spirit passed before my face ; the hair 
of my flesh stood u]) : 

l(j It stood still, but I could not discern the form 
thereof: an image icas before mine eyes, there was 
silence, and I heard a voicc,^ saying, 

17 Shall mortal man be more just than God? 
shall a man be more pure than his Maker? 

IS Behold, he put no trust in his servants; and 
his angels he charged with folly:*'' 

19 How much less in them that dwell in houses 
of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which are 
crushed before the moth? 

20 They are destroyed* from morning to even- 
ing : they perish for ever without any regarding it. 

21 Doth not their excellency ichich is in them go 
away?'' they die,*^ even without wisdom. 

CIIAPTEPt V. 

1 The harm of iiiconsideration. 3 The end of the wicked is misery. G 
God IS to be regarded in atiiietiun. 17 The happy end of God's cor- 
rection. 

CALL now, if there be any that will answer thee ; 
and to which of the saints wilt thou turn?' 

2 For wrath killeth the foolish man, and envy'' 
slayeth the silly one. 

3 I have seen the foolish taking root:" but sud- 
denly I cursed his habitation. 



fimni a still voice, t Or, no 
'2:4. 5 Heb. beaten in pieces, 
iiuligimtion. S Psa. 37:35. 



« /lis angel.-i, in whom he put liglit. il -2 Pet. 
! Psa.U4U:3, 4. Usa. a:a-J- I0v,look. 1 Or, 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The ability and disposition to give instruction to the 
ignorant, consolation to the sorrowful, and encouragement 
t(.i the despairing, are valuable traits of character, which 
.should be diligently cultivated and faithfully improved for 
the benefit of men. 

5. It is much easier to preach than to practise ; and 
those instructions which we give to others, and which 
sometimes comfort and sujiport them, we at other times 
fail properly to apply for our own direction and benefit. 

7. The idea of Eliphaz and his friends, that good mon_ 
will not be afflicted or suffer a violent death, and that of 
course the afflictions of Job proved him to be what Satan 
accused him of being, a hypocrite, was false. By adopting 
this idea and applying it to Job, they joined themselves 
with Satan in tormenting him. John 16:33; Rev. 7:14. 

13. Dreams are not now to be relied on ; and yet, if they 
are the means of suggesting important thoughts and lead- 
ing to useful reflections, they should be gratefully acknow- 
ledged and made subservient to our own good and that of 
others. 

18. In comparison with God, all created wisdom, power, 
or goodness are as nothing. His perfections infinitely 
surpass all finite conceptions. 

CHAPTER V. 

1. Answer thee; as a friend and patron, ready to support 
tliy cause. The saints; here probably the holy angels. 

2. Envy; more exactly, as the margin, indignation. It 
is the wrath and indignation of one who reliels against the 
discipline of God's providence, which Eliphaz means. These 
are the means of ruin to the wicked who indulge them. 

3. Foolish ; here, as throughout the book of Job, the fool- 
ish are the wicked, who are destitute of true wisdom. 
Suddenlq I cursed his habitation ; I saw destruction suddenly 
come upon his habitation, and prononnced it accursed. 

581 



Address of Eliphaz. 



JOB VI. 



Object of God's judgmtnts. 



4 His children arc far from safety, and they are 
crushed in the gate, neither is there any to deliver 
them. 

5 Whose harvest the hungry eateth up, and tak- 
etli it even out of the thorns, and the robber swal- 
lowetli up their substance. 

(j Althoughaffliction* Cometh notforthof the dust, 
neitlier doth trouljle spring out of the ground ; 

7 Yet man is born unto trouble,^" as the sparks 
fly upward.* 

8 I would seek unto God, and unto God would 
I commit my cause : 

9 Wiiicli (loeth great things and uiLsearchable;" 
marvellous things without number : ' 

10 Who giveth rain upon the earth, and sendeth 
waters upon the fields : ' 

11 To set up on high those that be low; that 
those which mourn may be exalted to safety. 

12 He disappointetli the devices of the crafty,'' 
so that their hands cannot perform their enter- 
prise.* 

13 He takoth the wise in their own craftiness t'^ 
and the counsel of the froward is carried head- 
long. 

14 They meet with* darkness in the daytime, and 
grope in tiie noonday as in the night. 

15 But he saveth the poor from the sword, from 
their moutli, and from tiie hand of the uughty.'' 

16 So tlic poor hath hope, and iniquity stoppeth 
her moutli. 

17 Beiiold, happy is the man whom God cor- 
rectetli:" therefore despise not thou the chasten- 
ing of the Almighty : 

18 For ho maketh sore, and bindeth up : he 
woundeth, and his hands make whole.' 



• Or. iniquity. \ Or. labor, a 1 Cor. 10:13. i Ueh. .wns of the burning 
fOaltift up to fly. § Heb, there is no search. H Heb. tilt there be no number. 
I.Heb. oiK-ptaces. bNeh. 4:1.3. • Or, ony lA/ny. c| Cor. 3:19. 1 Or, run 
into: Isa.59:I0; Amos9:9. d Psi. 107:41. e Heb, li::>; Jis. 1:12. r Deut. 
32:39. rPsi. 91::3. h Paa. .17: li). t Heh. hand.i. i Or. whenihe tongue 



ly He shall deliver thee in six troubles : a. m. jisi. 

Ill •! 11 (» " '■ "I'OUt 

yea, m seven there shall no evil touch thee.'^ i-'2« 

20 In famine he shall redeem thee from death:'' 
and in war from tlie power* of tlie sword. 

21 Tliou shalt be hid from the scourge of the 
tongue:*' neither shalt thou be afraid of destruc- 
tion when it cometh. 

22 At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh : 
neither shalt tliou be afraid of the beasts of the 
earth. 

2?) For thou shalt be in league with the stones 
of the field : and the beasts of the field shall be 
at peace with thee.J 

24 And thou shalt know that thy tabernacle .ihall 
be in peace;' and thou shalt visit thy habitation, 
and shalt not sin.^ 

25 Thou shalt know also that thy seed shall be 
great,* and thine offspring as the grass of the 
earth. 

26 Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age,*^ 
like as a shock of corn cometh in* in his season. 

27 Lo this, we have searched it, so it «•;' hear 
it, and know thou it for thy good.* 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 Job showeth that Iiis complaints are not causeless. 8 He wisheth for 
death, wherein he is assured of comfort. W He reproveth his friends 

of unliiudness. 

BUT Job answered and said, 
' 2 Oil that my grief were tiioronghly weighed, 
and my calamity laid^ in the balances together! 

3 For now it would be heavier than tlie sand of 
the sea:'" therefore my words arc swallowed up.' 

4 For the arrows of the Almigiity are within me, 
the poison whereof drinketh up my spirit : the ter- 



4. Crushed in the gate; coudemned in the place where 
judgments were issued. 

5. Even out oftIi£ thorns; liero probably a hedge of thorns 
intended for the protection of the harvest. 

G. Cometh not forth of the dust; affliction docs not come 
by chance; it is ordered by (jod, and therefore should be 
cheerfully submitted to. 

7. As the sparks fiy upward ; it is as natural for fallen man 
to sin and suffer, as for sparks to fly ujnvard. 

8. / would seek unto God; if I were in thy place; thus 
expressing the duty of all men in aflliction. 

13. Tlie wise; the worldly wise. Tlie froward ; the per- 
verse who disobey God. 

15. The poor; the afflicted, who trust in God. 

17. Whom God correctcth; and who receives correction 
in a proper manner. 

19. In six troubles — in seven ; a definite is here put for a 
large indefinite number. 

21. Hid; safe, where the scourge of the tongue cannot 
find thee. "The scourge of the tongue " refuesciits those 
false accusations which expose a man to tlie spoiling of 
his goods, to imprisonment, and even death. 

2:i.- In leaeeue with the stones; they shall not hurt thee. 

24. Not sm; not wander, err, or miss the way to his 
house, but find it safe as he left it. 

25. Great; iniinerous and prosperous. 

26. In afidl age; not meet a premature death. 

27. We have searched it; learned from observation, that 
those who feel and act right, are delivered or saved from 
trouble; and those only contiinie to be afflicted, who con- 
tinue to feel and act wrong. From this Eliphaz would 

582 



scourgeth. > Vsl. 31;2U. J Ua. 11:9. 1 Or. that peare is tliylal>tTnacU. 
T Or, err. ' Or, murJi. t Prov. 0:11. 1 Heb. asnndelk. • Prov. 2:3-3. 
l}Ieb. l/ii/.«t//,- 1'IMV.9:12. 8 Heb. ///(«/ up. m Prov. 27:3. I That is, / 
want words to express mij grief; Psa. 77: 1. 



draw the erroneous conclusion, that the continuance of 
Job's afflictions proved him to be as Satan affirmed, a 
hypocrite, or a very selfish, wicked man. 

IXSTRUCTIOXS. 

1. Men sometimes think that all the good agree in 
opinion with themselves, and that those who do not are 
wicked. 

3. It needs no spirit of prophecy to foretell tlie ruin of 
such as continue in a course of disobedience to God. 

6. As troubles do not come by chance, but arc directed 
by infinite wisdom and goodness, for most benevolent ends, 
they should be borne with patience, and cheerful submis- 
sion to the i>f rfect will of God. 

12. No wisdom but that which comes from above will 
guide a man in the path of truth and duty, or ultimately 
meet with success. 

17. Trust in God and supremo devotion to him, will 
sanctify every trial while it lasts, and in due time secure 
certain, full, and eternal deliverance. 

27. Human reason and observation, without revelation, 
are unsafe guides; and none, unless enlightened by God, 
will have sneh views of his character and ways as lead to 
safety and success. 

CHAPTER VI. 

3. Ilenmrthnn the sntid ; very great, insupportable. Are 
swalloved up; are insiiffiiiiwit to express my calamity. 

4. Arrotes of the Almighty ; such distresses as God alono 
can inflict. 



Job reprordh 



JOB VII. 



his three friends. 



A. M. 24S1. rors of God do sot themselves in array 

IJ. r. about ■ . ^ 

153U. against nie." 

5 Doth the wild ass bray wlien he hath grass ? ' 
or lowetli tlic ox over his fodder? 

6 Can tiiat whicli is unsavory be eaten without 
salt? or is there any taste in the white of an egg? 

7 The tilings that my soul refused to touch are 
as my sorrowful meat. 

8 Oh that I miglit have my request ; and that 
God would grant me the thing that I long for ! + 

9 Even tiiatit would please God to destroy me ;'' 
that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off! 

10 Then should I yet have comfort ; yea, I Avould 
harden myself in sorrow : let him not spare ; for 
I liave not concealed the words of the Holy One." 

1 1 What is my strength, that I sliould hope ? and 
what is mine end, that I should prolong my life? 

12 Is my strengtli the strength of stones? or is 
my flesh of brass?* 

13 Is not ray lielp in me? and is wisdom driven 
quite from me? 

1-i To him that is afflicted^ pity should he showed 
from his friend;'' but he forsaketh the fear of the 
Almighty. 

15 Mybrethrenhavedealtdeceitfullyas alirook," 
and as the stream of brooks they pass away ; 

10 Which are blackish by reason of the ice, and 
wherein the snow is hid : 

17 What time they wax warm, they vanish:' when 
it is hot,' they are consumed* out of their place. 

18 The paths of their way arc turned aside ; tliey 
go to nothing, and perish. 

19 The troops of Tenia looked,'' the companies 
of Sheba waited for them. 



» Psa, 83:15, 16. • Heb. at grass, t Heb. mij expsetatlon. 1> 1 Kings 
19:4; Jon. 4:3,8. c Psi. 40:9; Isi. 57:15; Act3 2U:au, 87. ) Heb. brazen, 
i Ueb. mdtetk. dHcb. 13:.3. eP.,a. .38:11 I Heb. are cut off . ? Heb. m 
the heat thereof. * Heb. extinguished, f Gen. 'i5:15. t Or, ye are like to 



5. Loweth the ox over his fodder? the beast does not com- 
plain without reason ; nor, as Job contended, did he. 

6. Unsavory be eaten without salt? or, unsavory for want 
of salt be eaten ? his calamities are to him as unsavory 
food, causing bitter complaint. 

8. T/i£ thing that I long for ; immediate death. 

10. Harden myself in sorroie; or, exult in sorrow; that 
is, in the present connection, in the pangs of death. Not 
spare; to cut short my life. Not concealed the words of the 
Holy One ; not denied his commands, but made them the 
rule of my life. 

11. Should hope; for returning health and prosperity. 
Wliat is mine end; what favorable issue to my present 
calamities can I look for? 

13. h not my help in me — wisdom driven quite from me? 
or, as we may render, " Is it not so that I have no help in 
me, and counsel is driven quite from me ?" 

14. He forsaketh ; he who does not show pity to the 
afflicted, sins against the Almighty. 

15. As a brook; a brook that abounds with water for a 
time, and then dries away. 

10. Tite ice; that melted from the mountains. 

19. Tema — Sheba; countries of Arabia. 

20. Hoped ; to find water in the channel of the river in 
the desert. 

21. Ye are nothing; of no worth to me as comforters, 
like the brooks that pass away. 

22. Did I say, Bring unto me ? did he request his friends 
to help him ? All that he had asked of them was comfort- 
ing words. But these were denied him. 

25. Riglit u-ords ; words of truth, which, as Job contend- 
ed, the words of Eliphaz were not. 



20 They were confounded because they had hoped ; 
they came tiuther, and were ashamed." 

21 For now ye are nothing;^ ye see my casting 
down, and are afraid. 

22 Did I say. Bring unto me ? or. Give a reward 
for me of your substance ? 

23 Or, Deliver me from the enemy's hand? or. 
Redeem me from the hand of the mighty? 

24 Teach me, and I will hold my tongue: and 
cause me to understand wherein I have erred. 

25 How forcilde are right words 1 = but what dotli 
your arguing reprove? 

26 Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the 
speeches of one that is desperate, ichich are as 
wind ? 

27 Yea, ye overwlielm* the fatherless, and ye dig 
a pit for your friend. 

28 Now therefore be content, look upon me ; 
for it is evident unto you* if I lie. 

29 Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity; 
yea, return again, iny righteousness is in it. 

30 Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my 
taste '^ discern jicrverse things? 

CHAPTER VII. 

1 Job excuseth his desire of deatii. 12 He complaineth of his own rest- 
lessness, 17 and 'jod's watchfulness. 

7S there not an appointed time* to man upon 
earth?'' are not his days also like the days of 
a hireling? 

2 As a servant earnestly desireth^ the shadow, 
and as a hireling looketh for the rewardof his work ; 

3 So am I made to possess months of vanity, and 
wearisome nights are appointed to me.' 



il.orlhem; lleh. not. sEccl. 12:11. t Heh. cause to fail npon. 5 Heb. 
it/ore your face. I Tb3.% h, this matter. ^Ueb. palate. ' Or. a warfare . 
hch.l4:5, 14 lUeh. gapeth after. ) Psa. 6:B. 



27. Overwhelm the fatherless ; or, cast lots upon the fa- 
therless ; that is, upon his substance, after spoiling him. 
He means to say. You exhibit towards me a similar cru- 
elty ; for I am in the condition of a fatherless child over- 
whelmed with sorrow, and without helpers. 

29. Return, I pray you; and address him in a different 
manner, one that should not impute to him iniquity, but 
should admit that he was upright and sincere. 

30. Discern; between good and evil in himself. 

INSTRUCTIOiN'S. 

3. Complaints under calamities, instead of lessening, gen- 
erally increase them, and unfit the mind to bear them with 
patience, or receive the benefit they might otherwise oc- 
casion. 

7. Trials from which we instinctively shrink in pros- 
perity, sometimes become so wearisome in adversity, that 
we \vish for death. 

14. The distresses of others should draw forth our com- 
passion and kindness ; and the manifestation of a contrary 
spirit, is a sin not only against men, but against God. 

21. Expectations of help from earthly friends are often 
disappointed ; but those which are placed on God will in 
the end be more than realized. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1. An appoiiited time; or, as the margin, a warfare. He 
means that his whole life is, as it were, a warfare. Like 
the days of a hireling; occupied with hard labor, so that 
he longs for their close, ver. 2. 

2. The ■'ihadow ; of evening. 

3. Mlonth.i of vanity — wearisome nights; so that, like the 
hireling, I long to have the day of life close. 

583 



Joh desireth deith. 



J0i5 VIII. 



Address of li'ddad. 



4 When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, 
and the night be gone?* and I am full of tossings 
to and fro unto the dawning of tlie day.'' 

5 My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of 
dust ; my skin is broken, and become loatlisome. 

G My days arc swifter than a weaver's shuttle, 
and are spent without hope. 

7 remember that my life is wind : mine eye 
shall no more* see* good.'' 

8 The eye of him that hath seen me shall sec me 
no more: thine eyes are upon me, and I am not.^ 

9 As tlic cloud is consumed and vanishetii away ; 
so he that goeth down to the grave shall come up 
no more. 

10 He shall return no more to his house, neither 
shall his place know him any more.*^ 

11 Tiioreforc I will not refrain my mouth ; I will 
speak in the anguish of my spirit ; 1 will complain 
in the bitterness of my soul. 

12 Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou settest a 
watch over me? 

13 When I say. My bed shall comfort me, my 
coucli shall case my complaint; 

14 Tiien thou scarcst me with dreams, and tcr- 
rifiest me through visions : 

15 So that my soul chooseth strangling, and 
death rather than my life.' 

16 I loathe it: I would not live alway: let me 
alone ; for my days arc vanity.'' 

17 What is man, that tliou shouldest magnify 
him? and that thou shouldest set thy heart upon 
him?'= 

18 And thai thou sliouldest visit him every morn- 
ing, and try him every moment? 

19 How long wilt thou not depart from me,'' nor 
let me alone till I swallow down my spittle? 

20 I iiavc sinned ; what shall I do unto thee, 
thou preserver of men?'-' why hast thou set mo as 





Hob. 


evening he 


tneasured. 


J 


Deut. 2-5:67. 


t Heb 


not return 


I To 


!iK 


that 


s, to enjoy. 


b Uen. 4*2 


::t(i 


i That is. / 


mn lii-t 


no longer. 


<: P*a. 


v^ 


19. 11 


1 Heb. bones, d ch 


Id 


1, 20. «• Psa. 


8:4. 1 


Psa. tU:4. 


cPsa. 


3(i:6. h 


Lam. 3: 12. 


i iMioah 7 


I*', 


10; lJohnl;9. J Ps 


a. 103:15. 


t Deut. 



6. Without hope; of recovery, or any relief except ia 
death. 

8. Arc upon me — am not; or, "shall bo upon me, and I 
shall not bo." Thou ehalt seek me, but I shall no more be 
found in the land of the living, ver. 21. 

12. Tliou scltest a tvatch over me; guardest mc as if I need- 
ed strong restraint. 

10. Let mc alone; coaso from troubling me during the 
brief day of life. 

17. Magnify him ; make so much account of him in the 
way of cliastisement ami discipline. 

19. Till I swallow down mij spittle; a proverbial expres- 
sion, meaning, till I have a little respite. 

20. Set me as a mark; for the arrows of the Almighty. 

21. For now sliall I sleep in the dust; he means, that if 
God does not soon pardon his transgression, and restore 
to him the light of his countenance, there will be no more 
opportunity to show him kindness, since he is passing 
down rapidly to the grave. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The length of human life is fixed by Ond ; and all the 
d.ay.s of our appointed lime we hIiouUI wait with iiatienee, 
and labor with diligence, till our change come. 

5. No perfection of liuman character will exempt men 
ill this world from trials; and none but those who have 
experienced them, can realize the difrieulty of exercising 
at all times a cairn, quiet, peaceful submis.sion under tliem. 

13. Quiet and refreshing rest in sleep is the gift of God, 

584 



a mark against thee,*" so that I am a bur- a ji sjw. 
den to myself ? 1520. 

21 And why dost thou not pardon my transgres- 
sion, and take away mine iniquity?' for now shall 
I sleep in the dust ; and thou shalt seek me in the 
morning, but I shall not be.' 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1 Bildad showeth God's justice in dealing with men according to their 
■works. S He ailegeth antiquity to prove the certain destruction o[ 
the hypocrite. 20 He applieth God's just dealing to Job. 

THEN answered Bildad the Shuliito, and said, 
2 How long wilt thou speak these things? 
and how long shall the words of thy mouth be like 
a strong wind? 

3 Doth God pervert judgment?'' or doth the 
Almighty pervert justice? 

4 If thy children have sinned against him, and 
he have cast them away for their^ transgression; 

5 If thou wouldest seek unto God betimes, and 
make thy supplication to the Almighty;' 

G If thou v:crt pure and upright ; surely now he 
would awake for thee, and make the habitation of 
thy righteousness prosperous. 

7 Though thy beginning was small, yet thy lat- 
ter end should greatly increase. 

8 For inquire, I pray thee, of the former age, 
and prepare thyself to the search of their fathers : 

9 (For we are htt of yesterday.'" and know noth- 
ing,' because our days ujjon earth are a sliadow :") 

10 Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee, and 
utter words out of their heart? 

11 Can tiic rush grow up without mire? can the 
flag grow without water? 

12 Whilst it is yet in his greenness, and not cut 
down, it withereth before any other herb." 

13 So are the paths of all that forget God; and 
the hypocrite's hope shall perish :p 



32:4; a Chr. 19:7; ch. 34:12, 17; Psa. fc9:14; Dan. 9:11; Rom. 3:5. 0. 
ineh. in the imml of their. 1 ch. 11 :I3; 22:23, etc. ■» Psa. .39:.'>. • Hcb. 
not. n 1 Chr. 29:lj. » Psa. 129:0; Matt. 13:20. p ch. 1 1:20; 27:8; FroT. 
10:29. 



and a blessing the greatness of which no one who has not 
for a time been deprived of it will duly appreciate. 

20. All men have sinned, and deserve all that they suf- 
fer ; and the only sure way of deliverance is in acknow- 
ledging their transgressions, and looking up to Him who 
is exalted to give repcnt;iuce, that ho would freely and 
abundantly pardon. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

3. Botli God pervert judgmcnl ? .Tob had not asserted this, 
though Bildad speaks as if he had. 

C. He woidd awake for thee; God would remove his calam- 
ities and make him prosperous; and because he did not 
do it, Bildad like Eliphaz erroneously concluded that Job 
was a wicked man. Their error w'as, in supiiosing that 
the outward condition of men in this world was according 
to their character. 

8. Prepare thyself; meaning, Direct thy attention. TIte 
search of their fathers; the maxims concerning God's deal- 
ings with men which their fathers have searched out ; 
those, n.amcly, contained in verses 11-19. 

9. We are Intl of yesterday ; our life is too short to enable 
us to reach the wisdom of the fathers, who lived much 
longer than we, and had more lime for observation. 

10. Thei/; the fathers. 

11. Cati the flag grow without v<nter? as the flag withers 
as soon as the ground becomes dry, so is the prosperity 
of hypocrites short-lived. 



The hijpocrite's hope. 



JOB IX. 



JoVs reply to B'ddud 



AM 2484. 14 Whose hope shall be cut off, and 
'i52u. whose trust shall he a spider's web.* 
15 He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not 
stand :"■ he shall hold it fast, but it shall not en- 
dure. 

1(5 He is green before the sun, and his branch 
shootetli ibrth in his garden. 

17 His roots are wrapped about the heap, and 
seeth the place of stones. 

18 If he destroy him from his place, then it shall 
deny him, saying, I have not seen thee.'' 

19 Beliold, this is the joy of his way, and out of 
the earth shall others grow.'= 

20 Beliold, God will not cast away a perfect 
7nan;^ neither will he help tlie evil-doers:* 

21 Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy 
lips with rejoicing.* 

22 They that hate thee shall be clotlicd with 
shame f and the dwelling-place of the wicked shall 
come to naught.^ 



1 Job acknowledgir 
him. 22 Man's 



CHAPTER IX. 

\ G-od's justice, showeth there is no contending with 
not to be condemned by afflictions. 



THEX Job answered and said, 
2 I know it is so of a truth : but how sliould 
man be just with' God?'' 



• Heb. AoKSe; Isi. 59:5, 0. a Matt. 7:-.>o. b Psa. 37::i6. t iMatl. 3:0. 
<1 Psa. 94:14. t Heb. take the uiigoilti/ by the haml. 1 Heb. shoutitig for 
joy. e Psa. 132:1-. i Heb. not he. 1 Or. Iiefare. I Psa. 143:2; Rom. 3:-Jll. 
e Jude 24, 2.5. h Heb. 12:2U. ■ Josh. 1U:12. J Psa. 104:2, 3; Isa. 40:22, 2S. 



1.'). It shall not stand; that on which he depends shall 
give way and disappoint him. 

It). He is green before the stin ; the h3'pocritc tlouri.shc.s 
a -while, like a luxuriant plant. 

17. Are wrapped about the heap ; about the heap of stones. 
This figure has been interpreted in different ways ; but, 
from its connection, it seems to denote the vigorous growth 
of the plant. Seeth the place of stones ; the place of stones 
is the same as the heap just mentioned. This he sees by 
reaching it with his roots. 

18. If he ikstroy him ; if one destroy him ; or, if God de- 
stroy him ; that is, the hypocrite under the figure of a 
plant. From liis place; where he is growing so luxuriantly. 
It is a sudden destruction which Bildad means to set forth. 
Compare chap. 5:3. /( shall denij him ; the place where he 
was lately growing shall deny all knowledge of him. The 
above all goes upon the erroneous supposition that men are 
always treated in this world according to their character. 

19. Tins IS the joy of his way; this is its sudden end. 
Shall others grow; other plants in his stead; that is, good 
meu shall succeed to his prosperity. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 

3. It is common for men in controversy to impute sen- 
timents to their opponents which they do not hold, and 
to charge them with consequences which they reject and 
abhor. 

G. Many errors arise from confounding this state of trial 
with the future state of retribution. God will arise for 
the deliverance and salvation of his people, but it may not 
be in this world. Here they may have tribulation, but in 
heaven they will have rest. 1 Cor. 15: 19. 

8. Much may be learned from the experience and obser- 
vation of those who have gone l)efore us ; but their prin- 
ciples as well as our own should be tried by the unerring 
word of God, and if not in accordance with that should be 
rejected. 

13. That on which hypocrites depend will, at death, if 
not before, utterly fail them. 

20. Though God will not cast away the righteous, or 



3 If he will contend with him, he cannot answer 
him one of a thousand. 

4 He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength :- 
who hath hardened himself against him, and hath 
prospered ? 

5 Which removeth the mountains, and tliey know 
not ; which overturneth them in liis anger ; 

6 Which shakcth the earth out of her place,'' and 
the pillars thereof tremlile ; 

7 Whicli commandeth the .-un, and it riseth not ;' 
and sealeth up the stars ; 

S Which alone spreadeth out the heavens, and 
treadeth upon the waves' of the sea;'' 

9 Which makcth Arcturus, Orion,' and Pleiades,* 
and tlie chambers of the south ; 

10 Which doeth great things past finding out; 
yea, and wonders without number. 

11 Lo, he gocth by me, and I see him not: he 
passetli on also, but I perceive him not. 

12 Beliold, he taketh away, who can hinder him?' 
wlio will say unto him. What doest thou?™ 

13 If God will not withdraw his anger, the proud 
helpers' do stoop under him. 

14 How much less shall I answer him, a?id choose 
out my words to reason with him? 

15 Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I 
not answer, but I would make supplication to my 



judge." 








1 Heb. heights, k Ma 
inrth. 1 Heb. ti/Tn him 
pride, or strength, n cl 


t. 14:2.3. 
away? gl 
. 34:31 


1 Amos S:s. 
. 11:10. m Da 


Heb. Ash. Cecil, and Ci- 
1.4:35. i lUh. helpers of 



help the wicked in the future world, yet in this, the wick- 
ed may be in great prosperity, and the righteous in great 
adversity. Psa. 73:1, 15. 

CHAPTER IX. 

That we may understand the true attitude of Job in this 
painful controversy with his friends, the present chapter 
should be carefully studied, as furnishing the key to hia 
discourses throughout. While he indignantly repels the 
charge of being an ungodly man and a hypocrite, he does 
not deny his general sinfulness before his Maker. Should 
God call him, or any other man, into judgment, he could 
not answer Him for one of a thousand, ver. 3. God is every 
way infinite. As none can withstand his almighty power, 
so none can call him to account for his dealings. If Job 
should attempt to contend with him, his divine majesty 
would utterly overwhelm him. All his arguments to main- 
tain his innocence would be turned against him, ver. 20, 
30. 31. He knows that God is righteous, yet he is con- 
scious to himself of having lived an upright life. His 
calamity is to him an inexplicable mystery. All he can 
say of it is, that God " destroyeth the perfect and the 
wicked," ver. 22-24. The thought of God's repeated and 
terrible blows overwhelms him, and fills him with despair. 
It is his Maker's determination to hold him guilty ; why 
should he waste time and strength in justifying himself? 
ver. 27-31. Yet if God would lay aside his chastising rod 
and his terrible ni;ijesty, and permit him to converse with 
him, as a man witli a man, then he would plead his cause 
before him with confidence, being sustained by the con- 
sciousness of his uprightness, ver. 32-35. 

2. I know it is so; that man in his best estate is a sinner, 
and that God in all his dealings is just. 

3. Answer him; excuse or justify himself, in one of a 
thousand of his actions. 

5. Tliey know not ; he does it suddenly, unexpectedly. 

6. Which shakcth the earth ; as an earthquake. 

13. The proud helpers ; who are banded together to sup- 
port each other in a wicked cause. 

15. Though I were righteous; not conscious of sin. / 
585 



Job ajpostulateth 



JOB X. 



frcdy with God. 



IC If I liad called, and he had answered me ; yet 
■would I not believe that he had hearkened unto 
mj' voice. 

17 For he broaketh nie with a teni])cst, and niul- 
tiplietli my wounds without cause. 

18 IJe will not sullV'r nie to take my ))rcath, but 
illleth me with bitterness. 

19 If / speak of strength, lo, he is strong: and 
if of judgment, who shall set me a time to plead? 

20 If I justify myself, mine own mouth shall con- 
demn me : if I say, I am perfect, it shall also prove 
me ])erverse. 

21 Though I iverc perfect, yet M-ould I not know 
mj soul : I would despise my life. 

22 This is one thing, therefore I said it, He dc- 
stroyeth the perfect and the wicked." 

23 If the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh 
at the trial of the innocent. 

24 The earth is given into the hand of the wick- 
ed: he covereth the faces of the judges thereof; 
if not, where, and who is he? 

25 Now my days arc swifter than a jjost : they 
flee away, they see no good. 

26 They are ]iassed away as the swift ships:* as 
the eagle that hastcth to the prey. 

27 If I say, I will forget my complaint, I will 
leave off my heaviness, and comfort myself; 



» Ezek. 21 ;3. * Or, ships of EUli; Hcb. ships of desire, b Jer. a:-3d. 
t Heb. make me to be adhoned. 1 Or, umpire; Heb. one that should argue. 



uvuM make supplication ; sensible that God might see sins 
where \k did not. 

IC. Had culled; liad called God to argvio my cause with 
liim. Thid he liad hcnrlcencd ; tliat he would so listen to my 
words that they should be of any account with him. 

17. Multiplicl/i 1111/ v:ounds without cause; the cause of 
which Job could not see. 

18. To take my breath; his trials wore constant as well 
as great. 

21. Though I were perfect ; in his own estimation; yet he 
did not know tlic state of his own soul, as God did. / 
ivoM despise my life; submit to any trials that God might 
lay upon him. 

22. This is one thing; God has one rule for the righteous 
and the wicked: he sends calamities on both. In this 
opinion Job differed entirely from his three friends. 

24. He covereth the faces of the judges thereof; he makes 
its judges blind to truth and justice, so that the cause of 
the innocent does not prevail with them. If not, where, 
and who m he ? if you say, It is not God who does this, then 
whore and who is the ruler of the world ? 

25. A post; a runner sent, after the ancient custom, to 
carry a message. 

28. Afraid of all my sorrows; terrified at the thought of 
the repeated calamities which God sends upon mo. / 
know that thou wilt not hold me innocent; the most distress- 
ing part of Job's trial was the despairing view which he 
took of God's dealings witli liini. lie felt that his .Maker 
was determined to destroy him, and tliat tluro was no 
hope of any rctu»n of his former prosperity. In tliis the 
agency of Satan is clearly viNil)le, and it must bo taken 
into account if we would riglilly interpret his vehement 
expressions of dismay and despondency. 

2!). Why then tabor I in vain ? why should he seek to 
show that he was innocent when God would show him to 
be wicked? 

32. Not a man, as I am ; one with whom I can argue my 
cause on equal terms. See introductory note. Answer him; 
contend with him iu judgment, and try to show my hmo- 
cence. 

.33. Daysman; arbiter to decide between us. 

35. But It IS not so vith me; better, as tlie margin, " for I 
580 



28 I am afraid of all my sorrows, I know a. m. 24gi. 
thai thou wilt not hold me innocent. 1120' 

2!) If I be wicked, why then labor I in vain? 

30 If I wash myself with snow-water, and make 
my hands never so clean ;'' 

31 Yet slialt thou jilunge me in the ditch, and 
mine own clothes shall abhor me.* 

32 For he is not a man, as 1 am, that I should 
answer iiim, and we should come together in judg- 
ment. 

33 Neither is there any daysman' betwixt us," 
that might lay his hand upon us both. 

34 Let him take his rod away from me," and let 
not his fear terrify me : 

35 Then would 1 speak, and not fear him ; but 
it is not so with me.* 

CHAPTER X. 

1 Job, taking liberty cf complaint, expostulateth with God about his 
afflictions. IS He complameth of life, and craveth a little case be- 
fore death. 

Y soul is weary of my life;' I will leave my 
complaint upon myself ; I will speak iu the 
bitterness of my soul. 

2 I will say unto (Jod, Do not condemn me;' 
show me wherefore thou contendest with me.'" 

3 Is it good unto thee that thou shouldest op- 



am not so with myself;" that is, so conscious of being an 
ungodly man as to fear the result 

IXSTRUCTIOXS. 

3. The justice of God in all his dispensations should be 
taken for granted ; and whatever may be a man's views 
of himself, liis only safety is in the mercy and grace of 
God. 

10. As the greatness of God is past finding out, so tho 
reason of many of his dealings is to creatures unknown, 
and can be reveali'd only by himself. 

l(i. Unbelief shuts out God from the soul, and prevents 
it from rejoicing ui or seeing the manifestations of his 
mercy. 

20. All eflforts at self-justification in the sight of God, 
arc proofs of a want of submission to him, and only increase 
the dilficulties they are intended to remove. 

22. Since this world is one of trial, and not of strict 
retribution, we must not be surprised or discouraged if 
things happen outwardly in many respects alike to the 
righteous and the wicked ; rememberuig that in the end 
(iod will cause all to see the difference between him that 
fears, and him that despises his Maker. 

24. AVhile God is never the author of sin, his hand is to 
be reverently acknowledged in all the evil that comes 
upon us through the agency of wicked men. 

27. Tiiere is no help for man but in the grace of God, 
abounding through Jesus Christ otir Lord. 

28. It is above all things im]uirlaiit that tlie afflicted and 
tempted believer should avoid despairing views of the end 
of God's dealings with him; for nothing can so cut tho 
sinews of Ids spiritiud strength, and give Satan such an 
advantage over him. 

CHAPTER X. 

1. Leave my comptnini ; or, let loose my complaint ; pour 
it out upon myself without restraint. 

2. Sliou- me wherefore thou ronteittkst with me ; Job wished 
to know why it was that God so afllieled him. 

3. Shine i//)on the counsel of the wicked; by prospering 
them, and so afflicting Job as to givo the wicked occasion 
to say lie was a hypocrite. 



Jub cravctk relief. 



JOB XI. 



Zoji/tar rcproxclh him. 



A. M. 1184. press, that thou shouldost despise thework' 
isiu °" of thy hauds, and shine upon the counsel 

of the ■picked? 
■i Hast thou eyes of llesh? or scest thou as man 

seeth?" 

5 Jire thy days as the days of man ? an thy years 
as man's days, 

6 That thou inquirest after mine iniquity, and 
scarchest after my sin?'' 

7 Thou knowest* that I am not wicked ;'' and 
there is none that can deliver out of tliy hand. 

8 Thy hands have made me* and fashioned me 
together round about ; yet tliou dost destroy mc. 

9 Remember, I beseech thee, that tliou hast made 
me as the clay j** and wilt thou bring me into dust 
again? 

10 Hast thou not poured me out as milk, and 
curdled me like clicese? 

11 Thou hast clothed me ■with skin and flesh,'' 
and liast fenced-^ me witli bones and sinews. 

12 Thou hast granted me life and favor, and thy 
visitation hath preserved my spirit. 

13 And these things hast thou hid in thy heart : 
I know that this is with thee. 

14 If I sin, then thou markcst me, and thou wilt 
not acquit me from mine iniquity. 

15 If I be wicked, woe imto me;'' and if I be 
rigliteous, yet will I not lift up my head. / am 
full of confusion; tlierefore see thou mine afflic- 
tion; 

16 For it increaseth. Thou huntest me as a 
fierce lion:^ and again thou showest thyself mar- 
vellous upon me. 

17 Thou renewest thy witnesses' against me, and 
iucreasest thine indignation upon me ; changes and 
war are against me. 



•IIA. labor, a ISam. Hi:7. 1' I'si. 10: 15. \ \lth. \l is upon tkij know- 
!dgc. c JoKiiai:l7. t Hfh. look pains about mc. d Jer. l?:li; Rom. Siai. 
Psa. 139:13. i Heb. /letlged. I Isa. 6:5. S Lam. 3:1U; Hos. 13:7, 8. 



4,5. Eyes of flesh — clays of man; is (5od compellcJ, like 
man, to look on outward appearances '! or is he, like man, 
short-lived and ignorant? These questions all have refer- 
ence to verse 6. 

6. Tluit thou inquirest— searchest ; rather, that thou should- 
ost inquire and search. Since thou art God, and not man, 
thou knowest me perfectly, without any necessity of long 
inquiry. 

7. I am not wicked; not a hypocrite, as Satan and his 
agents contended. Here he prays for deliverance from 
his sufferings on the ground of tiod's perfect knowledge 
of him as one of his upright wor.shippers. There is none 
that can deliver; he asks for deliverance on the ground of 
God's absolute power and sovereignty, which enable Him 
to do all his pleasure. 

8. Thy liantls have made me; in this and the following 
verses he prays for deliverance on the ground that God is 
his maker, and has been hitherto his preserver. 

13. These things hast thou hid in thy heart; the reasons of 
Job's sufferings, as well as God's purposes concerning 
him, were all known to God, but not to him, and he was 
greatly perplexed in view of them. 

15. If I be wicked; hypocritical, as his enemies said. 
Rifrhteous; upright, sincere, and pious, as he behoved him- 
self to be, notwithstanding all his troubles. 

IG. Shojvest thyself marvellous upon me; inflictest upon 
me marvellous calamities. 

20. Cease then; cease to afflict me. 

21. The land of darkness ; a description of the world of 
departed spirits, respecting which we must suppose Job 
had not the clear light which we now enjoy. 



18 Wherefore then hast thou brought me fortli 
out of the womb? Oh that 1 liad given uj) the 
ghost,'' and no eye had seen me! 

19 1 should have been as though I had not been ; 
I sliould have been carried from the womb to the 
grave. 

20 Are not my days few?' cease theji, and let mo 
alone, tliat I may take comfort a little, 

21 Before I go ichencc 1 shall not return, own to 
the land of darknessJ and the shadow of death ;'' 

22 A land of darkness, as darkness itself; and 
of the shadow of death, without any order, and 
where the light is as darkness. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 Zopliar reproveth Job for justifying himself. 5 God's wisdom is un- 
searchable. 13 The assured blessing of repentance. 

THEN answered Zophar the Naamathite, and 
said, 

2 Should not the multitude of words be answer- 
ed?' and should a man full of talk' be justified? 

3 Should thy lies* make men hold their peace? 
and wlion tliou mockest, shall no man make thee 
ashamed? 

4 For tliou hast said. My doctrine is pure, and 
I am clean in tliine eyes.'" 

5 But oh tliat God would speak, and open his 
lips against thee ; 

(j And tliat he would show thee the secrets of 
wisdom, that they are double to that which is! 
Know therefore that God exactethof thee less than 
thine iniquity descrveth." 

7 Canstthouby searching find out God?" Canst 
thou find out the Almighty nnto perfection? 

8 It is as high as heaven;* what canst thou do? 
deeper than hell ; what canst thou know? 



II That is, p/agUM. hch. 3:11. i ?sa. 30:.';, 13. iPsa. b¥:l-J. k Psa. 2:1:J. 
1 Prov. 10:19. 1 Heb. o/;;ps. • Or. devins. m ch. C:30; 10:7. n Ezra 
9:13. olsa. 40:28; Rom. 11:33. 1 Ueb. the tieighls of heaven. 



INSTRUCTIOXS. 

1. Complaints under trials reflect on the wisdom and 
goodness of God, and milit the soul to look unto him for 
help. 

7. Conscious integrity is no sure safeguard against trials ; 
nor will it, of itself, support the soul under them. What 
is needed is the presence of the Holy Spirit, inspiring it 
with that confidence in God which is the substance of 
things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. 

17. Without constant, strong, and loving confidence in 
God, trials may become so gretit, that even good men may 
wish to die, or find fault with God for bringing them into 
being, and continuing them amidst their accumulated suf- 
ferings. But let them in patience wait upon God, and they 
will find that he is very jiitiful and of tender mercy; that 
not a trial has been .suffered that has not aided in working 
out for them an exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 

CHAPTER XI. 

3. Lies; ftilse assertions concerning his innocence and 
God's dealings with him. 

4. 3Iy doctrine; here in the general sense of discourse 
concerning God and his dealings with men. In thine eyes; 
in God's eyes. Compare chap. 10:7. 

6. That they are double to that which is; the word here 
translated " that which is," is often elsewhere rendered 
wisdom, or"eounsel," chap. 6:13; 12:16; 26:3; Prov.2:7; 
3:21 ; 8:14; Isa. 28:29. Retaining this meaning here, we 
mav render the clause thus: "thtit there is double to coun- 
sel]" meaning that God's counsel is double, or immensely 
58t 



The reply of Juh. 



jcr. XII. 



Omnipotena of Qod. 



9 The measure thereof is longer than the earth, 
and broader than tlie sea. 

10 If he cut off,* and shut up/' or gatlier together, 
tiien who can hinder him?* 

11 For lie knoweth vain men :'' he secth wicked- 
ness also; will he not then consider it? 

12 For vain* man would be wise, though man be 
born like a wild ass's colt. 

13 If thou prepare thy lieart,"^ and stretch out 
thy hands toward him ; 

14 If iniquity he in thy hand, put it far away, and 
let not wickedness dwell in tiiy tabernacles.'^ 

15 For then shalt thou lift up thy face without 
spot; yea, thou shalt be steadfast, and shalt not fear : 

16 Because thou shalt forget thy misery, and re- 
member it as waters that pass away : 

17 And thine age shall be clearer than the noon- 
day;* thou shalt shine forth, thou shalt be as the 
morning." 

18 And thou shalt be secure, because there is 
lioj)e ; yea, thou shalt dig about tliee, and thou shalt 
take thy rest in safety. 

19 Also thou shalt lie down, and none shall nuiko 
thee afraid; yea, many shall make suit unto thee.'' 

20 But the eyes of the wicked shall fail,'' and 
they shall not escape," and their hope shall be as 
the giving up of the ghost.*"' 

CHAPTER XII. 

1 Job mjiintaineth himself against his friemls th;it reprove hitn. 7 He 
aclcnowledgeth the gfueral doctrine of God's omnipotency. 

AND .Job answered and said, 
2 No doubt but ye arc the people, and wis- 
dom shall die with you. 



* Or, viake a cktiti^f. aRev.3:7. ^ \\(i\i, turn him away? tPca. 10:14; 
John 2:-2l, 25. fiUh. empnj. c 1 Sa.m. 7:3. "l Psa. 1U1:3. i MA. arise 
aliove the noonday. « Prov. 4:18; Isi. 5S:S, 10. I Ilob. entreat thij face; 
Psa.. 4.');1;>. f Deut. 2j:0.5. V Re\>. /light shall perish from tliem. "Or, 



greats far above and beyond what man can discover or 
uiKlerstiUid. Isa. 40:2; fit:?. 

10. Cut off; or, as the word is rendered in some other 
places, jiass along, namely, for tlie purpose of ajiprehending 
or intercepting the sinner. Shut, up ,• against tlie (.lay of trial. 
Outlier together; the people to witness the offender's trial. 

11. Hn seeth wickedness; in men, often when they do not 
see it in tliemselves. 

15. Spot ; stain of sin or sorrow. 

17. ThoH shalt shine forth, thou shalt he ax the morninp;; 
or, tliough tliou be [now] in darkness, [then] thou slialt bo 
as tlie morning. 

18. Thou shalt (hp; lie might labor and rest in safety. 
But soine prefer to render, Though thou be [now] ashamed, 
[then] Ihou shalt rest in safely. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Men in controversy often charge their opponents 
with that of which they are not guilty ; which tends only 
to irritate, not to convince ; and which leads to jiersoiial 
altercation, rather than to an amicable adjustment of their 
differences. 

7. No one can fnlly understand the perfections of God, 
or the reasons of his ways ; yet from revelation wo can 
learn as much as it is neeilfiil for us to know, in order to 
be satislied of his wisdom, justice, goodiu'ss, and truth. 

11. The best human services are polluted in the sight 
of God ; and the most perfect human characters need liis 
pardoning mercy, through Jesus Christ. 

17. Light is sown for the righteous and gladness for the 
upright in heart. They may be afllicted here, and contrary 
08S 



3 But I have understanding* as well as a. m. «»«. 
you; 1 avi not interior to you:* yea, who laa. 
knoweth not such things as these?* 

4 I am «.s one mocked of his neighbor, who call- 
eth upon God. and he answcreth him: the just up- 
right man is laughed to scorn. 

5 lie that is ready to slip with his feet is as 2i 
lamp despised in the thought of him that is at 
ease. 

6 The tabernacles of robliers prosper ,** and they 
that provoke God are secure; into whose hand 
(jod bringcth abundantly. 

7 But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach 
thee ; and the fowls of the air, and they shall tell 
thee : 

8 Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee; 
and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee. 

9 Who knoweth not in all these that the hand 
of the Lord hath wrought this? 

10 lu whose hand is the soul' of every living 
thing, and the breath of all mankind.' 

11 Doth not the ear try words? and the mouth* 
taste his meat? 

12 With the ancient is wisdom; and in length 
of days understanding.' 

13 With him^ is wisdom and strength, lie hath 
counsel and understanding.-' 

14 Behold, he brcakoth down, and it cannot be 
built again : he shuttetli up' a man. and tiiert' can 
be no opening. 

15 Behold, ho withholdeth the waters, and they 
dry up : also he scndeth them out, and they ovei'- 
turn the earth. 

10 With him is strength and wisdom: the de- 
ceived and the deceiver are his." 



a puff of br 


mrh 


. E Prov 


11:7. f Hcb 


a hear 


. I Heb 


fall not Ifficer than 


you,. S llcb 




th ichom 


are not stidi as 


Ihtsel 


h IVa. 7. 


:12.e 


.:.; .Ir 


r 12:1, 


HO. 1 Or. 


ife. 


^ Hcb 


Jleshofman. 


• Hcb 


palate. 


1 ch. 


12: 7. 


t That 


is, God. i 


Pro% 


.8:14. 


Hcb. upon. 


t Ezok. 


14:!). 









to the docti-ino of Zophar and his friends, their afflictions 
may continue to the end of life ; but glory, honor, and 
perfect bliss await them in the life to come. 

CHAPTER XII. 

2. Yc; Zophar and his friends; spoken in irony, mean- 
ing that they made vain pretensions. 

4. Tr/(o callcth — he answcreth ; or, who called — he an- 
swered. I, who have been accustomed to call upon God, 
and receive answers from him, am now laughed to scorn. 

6. licadi/ to slip; when a man falls into trouble, he is 
overlooked or treated with contempt by those wlio are in 
prosperity. A lamp ilcspisr/l; a torch that is burned out, 
and therefore thrown away, as no longer of any service to 
the bearer. 

C. The lahcrnarks nfrnbhcrs; very bad men are often pros- 
pered iu this world, while very good men are afilicted. 

9. In all these; in the proofs which all these classes of 
.animals give of God's universal power and providence. 
Ilath wrou!;ht this; the whole course of nature and provi- 
dence, in which is included the jirosiierity of the taber- 
nacles of robbers, vcr. G. 

11. Tlic car try umds ? — the mmith taste his meat ? there is 
here an implied comparison: as the mouth can distinguish 
between savory and unsavory food, so the ear of a wise 
man can discern between wise and foolish words. 

12. With the ancient; with aged men, to whoso wisdom I 
have access as well as you. 

in. Him ; God. 

Hi. Are his; they are under his control, and all their 
circumstances directed by him. 



Juh icilh confulcncc 



JOB xiir. 



ajppealih unto God. 



AM. 24^4 17 Ho leadoth counsellors away spoiled, 
loai ' and luakcth the judges fools.''' 

18 He looseth the bond of kings, and girdcth 
their loins with a girdle. 

19 He leadcth princes away spoiled, and over- 
tlirowcth the mighty.'' 

20 lie renioveth away the speech of the trusty,' 
and taketh away the understanding of the aged.'' 

21 lie jTOureth contempt upon princes,'' and 
weakcneth the strength of the mighty.* 

22 He discovereth deep things out of darkness,'' 
and bringeth out to light the shadow of death.'' 

23 He increaseth the nations,'-' and destroj'eth 
tlieni : he enlargeth the nations, and straiteneth 
them' again. 

24 He taketh away the heart of the chief of the 
jioople of the earth, and causeth them to wander 
iu a wilderness ichere there is no way.'' 

25 They grope in the dark without light,' and 
he maketli them to stagger^ like a drunken man. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

1 Job rcproveth iiis friends of partiality. 14 He professelh liis con- 
tiJence in (jod : 20 and entreateth to know his own sins, and God's 
purpose in afflicting him. 

LO, mine eye hath seen all this, mine ear hath 
heard and understood it. 

2 What ye know, the same do I know also : I am 
not inferior unto you. 

3 Surely I would speak to the Almighty ,J and I 
desire to reason with God." 

4 But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all physicians 
of no value.' 

»Isa. 10:13. bls^i, 45:1. • -Reh. lip of tite faithful. 'Isa. 3:1-3. li Dan. 
a;21, 22. t Ot. toosetli the girdle of Hie strong, e 1 Cor. 4:5. ( eh. 34:2i. 
e Psa. 107:38. '1 Heb. fe«/ef/i I'n. h Dan. 4: IG, 3:3. ■ Dent. 23:29. 5 Heb. 
wander. J ch. 2:3:3; 31:35. t Isa. 1:1S; Micah (5:2, etc. Ich.l6:2. nProv. 



18. Looseth the bond of kings; that is, accordmg to our 
version, their authority over their subjects. Girdcth tlicir 
loins ivith a girdle; strengtheneth them for governing. But 
iiiauy prefer to render, " He bindeth a band upon their 
loins." The whole verse will then mean that he sets kings 
tree from their bonds, and binds them at pleasure. 

22. He disconcreih deep things out of darkness; his infinite 
knowledge of all hidden things is here considered as ena- 
l)ling him to control the destinies of men. 

24. Taketh away the heart ; leaves them to be infatuated, 
and to act without wisdom or discretion. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. Men who are greatly courted and whose influence is 
eagerly sought in prosperity, are often overlooked and 
despised in adversity, and treated as if they were of no 
worth. 

6. Though God is acquainted with all the wickedness 
of the wicked, and tliey are entirely dependent on him, yet 
in this world lie often suffers them to prosper, and pours 
upon them abundance of earthly blessings. 

20. The most -wise and trustworthy of men, when left of 
* iod, wander in darkness ; their wisdom is seen to bo folly, 
and their plans come to nauglit. 

CHArTER XIII. 

1. All this; God's dealings, in his providence, with both 
the righteous and the 'wicked. 

3. Reason with God; and not men, about the cause of my 
calamities. 

4. Forgers of lies; they gave a false vicw^ of the reasons 
of his afflictions. Physicians of no valve; they did not ap- 



5 Oh tliatyc would altogtilher hold your peace! 
and it should Vie your wisiiom.'" 

6 Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the 
jileadings of my lips. 

7 Will ye speak wickedly for God'.-" and talk 
deceitfully for him?" 

8 Will ye accept bis person?" will ve contend 
for God? 

9 Is it good that he should search you out? or 
as one man mocketh another, do ye so'mock him?i' 

10 He will surely reprove you, if ye do secretly 
acce])t persons.'' 

11 Shall not his excellency make you afraid?"' 
and his dread fall upon you? 

12 Your remembrances arc like unto ashes, your 
bodies to bodies of clay. 

13 Hold your peace,' let me alone, that I may 
speak, and let come on me what irill. 

14 Wliercforc do I take my flesh in my teeth, and 
put my life in my baud? 

l.j Tliough he slay me, j-et will I trust iu him:' 
Ijut I will maintain' mine own ways before him. 

10 He also shall be my salvation:' for a hypo- 
crite shall not come before him." 

17 Hear diligently my speech, and my declara- 
tion with your ears. 

18 Behold now, I have ordered 7ni/ cause; I 
know that I shall be justified. 

19 Who is he that will plead with me?'' for now, 
if I hold my tongue, I shall give up the ghost. 

20 Only do not two things unto me ; theu will I 
not hide myself from thee. 

21 Withdraw thy hand far from me:"' and let 
not thy dread make me afraid. 



1T:2S; Amos.^:13. n cli. 32:21, 22. o2Cor.4:2. pGal.O--, qrsa.S2:l, 
2. r Jer. .'):22; 10:7, 10. I Heb. Be silent from me. ' Psa. 23:4; Prov. 
14:32. 1 Heb. proKS, or argue. tPa.27:l. ulsa.33:14. » Isi. 50:8; Rom. 
8:33,34. "Psa. 39:111. 



ply the right remedy to his case, nor in the least assuage 
his anguish. 

7. Speak wickedly for God; attempt to justify liis ways 
by falsehood in respect to me. 

8. Will ye accept hi.s person ? show partiality towards him 
at the expense of truth and righteousness ; as if he and 
his government needed to be defended by such means. 

9. Is it good; wiU it result in your good'? Search you 
out; make manifest the unrighteousness of your proceed- 
ings under the pretence of honoring him. Mock him ; they 
mock God 'who defend his dealings towards men by false- 
hood and unjust accusations of their brethren. 

10. Secretly accept persons ; see note to verse 8. 

12. Remembrances; hercprobably in the sense of maxims 
of wisdom. Your bodies to bodies of clay; or, your bulwarks 
are bul'warks of clay ; that is, your boasted arguments 
amount to nothing. 

14. Take my flesh in my teeth; the same as, put my life in 
my hand ; that is, expose myself to the loss of life by 
speaking boldly, ver. 13. The reason why he does this is. 
that he must speak, 'whatever shall be the result. 

1.5. Maintainmine own ways ; show his integrity, and that 
he was not a hypocrite. 

18. Shall be justified; proved to be innocentof the charges 
which they made against him. 

19. Who is he tliat will plead witli mel a passionate ex- 
pression of his desire to find one who imderstands his 
cause, and 'with whom he can argue it That one can bo 
no other than God. 

20. Do not two things; continue not his distresses, nor 
overa-sve him with His majesty, ver. 21. f^ce introductory 
note to chap. 9. 

580 



Of man's mortality 



JOB XIV 



and of a future life. 



22 Then call thou, and I will answer r"* or let nic 
speak, and answer tiiou me. 

23 How many HJT mine ill i(|ni tics and sins? make 
mc to know my transLTession and iny sin.'' 

24 Wherefore hidest tiiou thy face,'' and holdcst 
mc for thine enemy?'' 

25 Wilt thou break a leaf (lriv<>n to and fro?'' 
ami wilt thou pursue the dry stubble? 

26 For thou writest bitter thinss ajrainst me, and 
makcst mc to possess the ini(iuitics of my youth.' 

27 Thou puttcst my feet also in Ihe stocks,'"' and 
lookest* narrowly unto all my ])aths ; fhou settest 
a print upon the heels* of my feet. 

28 And he, as a rotten thing, consumeth, as a 
garment that is moth-eaten. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1 Job entreatcth God for favor, by the shortness of life, and certainty of 
death. 7 Though life once lost be irrecoverable, yet he waiteth for 
his change. 16 By sin the creature is subject to corruption. 

]\ ["AN that is born of a woman is of few' days, 
IV L and full of trouble." 

2 He Cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down :' 
he fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not. 

3 And dost thou open thine eyes upon such a 
one,' and bringest mc into judgment with thee?*^ 

4 Who can bring* a clean thing out of an un- 
clean?' not one. 

5 Seeing his days are determined, the number of 
his months are with thee, thou hast appointed his 
bounds that he cannot pass;™ 



«Ch. 3S:3. bch. M:32; .Tohnl6:8, 9. tPsa. 102:2. ■) Lam. 2:5. e Isa. 
49:.3. ' Psa. 25:7. g ch. 33:11. " Heb. obstrvesl. t Heb. roots. I Hob. 
short of. h Ecd. 2:23. i Psa. 00:5-10. j Psa. 144:3. k P.<a. 143:2. S Heb. 
willgivt. 1 Psa. 51:2, 10; John 3:0. m ver. 14 ; Heb. 9:27. I Heb. rea.w. 



23. Mine iniquities; for which ho was so dreadfully 
afflicted. 

2G. Possess the iniquities of my youth; bo punished for 
sins committed when young. 

27. Puttest my feet — la tlie stocks; confined him by sick- 
ness as really as if put in the stocks. 

28. And he; man. Here Job passes from the consider- 
ation of his own calamities to that of the common miseries 
of man. See tlio foUowirit; chapter. 

INRTRUtTIONS. 

3. 'Wlien the soul is conscious of integrity and duly feels 
its dependence on Ood, it will look to him, rather than to 
men for help, feeling that he alone can grant relief. 

9. God does not need falsehood in his creatures to vin- 
dicate his dealings ; and those who are guilty of it, what- 
ever be their motives, will fall under his righteous dis- 
pleasure. 

15. Confidence in God is the grand safeguard in trouble, 
and a preparation for deliverance from it. 

21. God can so alllict the soul and overawe it with his 
presence as entirely to unfit it to comniune with liim, or 
experience the benefit of calling upon him in spirit and 
in truth. 

2(!. Sins committed in early life may be the means of 
great suflorings in age, which sliall continue till those who 
committed them go down to the grave. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

In this chapter .Tob laments the brevity and misery of 
human life, 'flic general course of thought is ])laiii, and 
needs little illustration; yet the passage in verses 13-1.'> 
presents peculiar dilliculties. The words in tho preceding 
verse, " till the heavens be no more," m;iy mean simply as 
long as the world stands. Compare I'sa. 72:;'), 17, " they 
shall fear thee as long as tho sun and moon endure ;" 
590 



G Turn from him, that he may rest,' till a.m ;484. 
he shall accomplish, as a hireling, his da}-, isi)!"""' 

7 For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, 
that it will sprout again, and that the tender 
branch thereof will not cease. 

8 Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, 
and tho stock thereof die in the ground ; 

y Yet through the scent of water it will bud, and 
bring forth boughs like a plant. 

10 But man dictli, and wastcth away:' yea, man 
giveth up the ghost, and where is he? 

11 Jls the waters fail from the sea, and the flood 
decayeth and drieth up ; 

12 So man licth down, and riseth not: till the 
heavens be no more," they shall not awake, nor be 
raised out of their sleep. 

13 Oh that thou wouldGst hide me in the grave, 
that thou wouldcst keep me secret, until thy wrath 
be past, that tliou wouldest appoint me a set time, 
and remember me! 

14 If a man die, shall he live again?" all the 
days of my appointed time will I wait, till my 
change como.P 

].") Thou shalt call, and I will answer thee : thou 
wilt have a desire to the work of tliy hands. 

IG Fornow thou numberest my steps:'' dost thou 
not watch over my sin? 

17 My transgression is scaled up in a bag, and 
thou sewest up mine iniquity. 

18 And surely the mountain falling comcth* to 
naught, and the rock is removed out of his place. 

19 The waters wear the stones: thou washcst' 



t Heb. is Ktakentd. or ntt off. n Psa. 102:20; Isa. 51:0; 2 Pot. 3: HI, II: 
Rov. 20:11. o I Thess. 4:14-18. P 1 Cor. 15:5U51. q Prov. 5:21. 'He.. 
fadelh. t Heb. orerflowesl. 



" his name shall be continued as long as the sun." Ac- 
cordingly, some interpreters understand verses 13-15 as 
expressing not so much .Tob's confident hope of what shall 
be, as his ardent wish what might be. See notes to these 
verses. Others think that in verses H. l.i, he expresses 
the assurance that, though he die under the weight of 
his present trouble, he shall yet, when the ]>eriod of his 
trial is past, see God interposing in his beiuilf, and rejoice 
in his salvation. Thus understood, this passage has a 
remarkable agreement with cliap. 19:25-27. See notes on 
that passage. 

•1. Not one; no one differs in natural moral character 
from his parents ; but as are the parents, so are the chil- 
dren, naturally depraved and spiritually unclean. 

G. Rest; be freed for a little time from distresses. 

10. Where is he? he docs not appear again in this world : 
his departure is final. 

l:s. In the <rrave; literally, "in Sheol," the abode of de- 
]i;irted spirits. U'oiMc.-it appoint mc a set lime; namely, to 
bring me out of Sheol, again to enjoy thy favor. Job was 
here led to inay for that very gift which God has in reserve 
for all who love him. 

14. Sliall he live again ? that is, in Oiis world. The ques- 
tion is to be answered in the negative. Appointed time; or. 
warfare, in the sense of exhausting sorrow, ver. 13. Wilt 
I wait ; or, as wo may also reiuler, " would I wait." So in 
tho next ver.se wo may translate, either, as in onr version, 
"thou shalt call,'' or, " thou shouldost call," and so in tin- 
following clauses. See introductory note to this chapter. 

Ifi. For now thou numlierest my steps; that thou raayest 
notice and punish any false step. 

17. Scirest up mine iniquitii; koepcst it safe in thy record, 
till it shall be brought forth to judgment. 

19. TIte liojK of man: his hope of continuing in this 
world. 



Eiqthaz reprovclh Job. 



juii XV. 



Sorrows of ike wicked. 



A.M24S1 away the things which grow out of the 
"isio'.'''"'" dust of the earth ; and thou destroyest the 
liopo of man. 

20 Thou in-cvailest for ever against him, and lie 
passeth : f hou ehangest his countenance, and send- 
est him away. 

21 His sons come to honor, and lie knoweth it 
not; and tliey are brought low, but he j)('rcciveth 
it not of them. 

22 But his flesh upon him shall have pain, and 
his soul within him shall mourn. 

CHATTER XV. 

1 Elipliaz reproveth Job of impiety ill justifying himself. 17 He prov- 
eth by tradition the imquietness of wicked men. 

THEN" answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and said, 
2 Should a wise man utter vain knowledge,* 
and fill his belly with the east wind? 

3 Should he reason with unprofitable talk?-' or 
with speeches wherewith he can d(j no good? 

4 Yea, thou castest oif* fear, and restrainest 
prayer* before God. 

5 For tliy mouth uttercth^ thine iniquity, and 
thou choosest the tongue of the crafty. 

6 Thine own mouth condemneth thee,'' and not 
I: yea, tiiinc own lips testify against thee. 

7 .firt thou the first man that was bom ? or wast 
thou made before the hills ?■= 

8 Hast thou heard the secret of God?'" and dost 
thou restrain wisdom to thyself? 

9 AVliat knowestthou, that we know not?" ichat 
understandest thou, which is not in us? 

10 Witli us are both the grayheaded and very 
aged men,' much elder than thy father. 

11 Arc the consolations of God small with thee? 
is there any secret thing with thee? 



• Heb. knowledge o/whid. a I Tim 6:4.5. t Heb. makf:st void. 1 Or, 

spach. illeh.leacktlh. ^ Luke I9:a-2. = Psa. 90:a; Prov. 8:2.1. <i Rom, 

11::)4; 1 Cor. 2:11. e ch. I:):2. f ch. .'i2:6-9. gMal. :!:I3. h P.sa. ! 4 : .T ; 

Piov. 20:9; Eph. -Z-.S; IJohn 1:8, 10. i ch. 25:.5. J I'sa. 53:3. k cli. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The shortness and uncertainty of life should keep us 
from placing our affections on things below, and lead us 
to regard principally things unseen and eternal. 

4. As children inherit the same depraved nature with 
their parents, they ought not to marvel at the cliange 
which Christ says they must experience, in order to see 
the kingiloin of (iod. John 3:3. 

10. Earthly joys are uncertain, and at longest must be 
of sliort continuance ; but the joys which await the people 
of (Iod, wlien the heavens shall pass away with a great 
noise and the elements melt with fervent heat, will be 
sure, sati.sfying, and eternal. 2 Pet. 3:10. 

17. The transgressions of the wicked are never forgot- 
ten ; and unless repented of and forgiven through the 
atonement of Jesus Christ, will be brought forth to their 
shame and condemnation. 

21. All that is done for our own welfore or that of oth- 
ers, must be done in time. What our hands find to do, 
we should do with our might; that when our days on 
earth shall be finished, our work may be done, and our 
souls fitted, through grace, to enter on the rest which 
remains for the people of God. 

CHAPTER XV. 

2. Utter vain knowledge; this Eliphaz ascribes to Job. 

4. Fear; the fear of God. This charge was unfounded. 

5. The tongue oftlie crafty; by trying to cover his hypoo- 
ri.sy with the appearance of piety. 



12 Why doth thy heart carry thee away? and 
what do thine eyes wink at, 

13 That thou turnest thy spirit against God,'-' 
and lettest such words go out of thy mouth? 

14 What is niiin, that lie should bo clean? and 
he ichich is born of a woman, that he should be 
righteous?*" 

15 Behold, he putteth no trust in his saints; yea, 
the heavens are not clean in his sight.' 

1(5 How much more abominable and filthy is 
nian,^ which drinketii iniquity like water!'' 

17 1 will show tlicc, hear me ; and that which 1 
have seen I will declare; 

IS Which wise men have told from their fathers, 
and have not hid it: 

19 Unto whom alone the earth was given,' and 
no stranger passed among them.'" 

20 The wicked man travaileth with pain all his 
days," and the number of years is hidden to the 
oppressor." 

21 A dreadful sound' is in his cars:'' in pro.s- 
pcrity the destroyer shall come upon him.'' 

22 He believeth not that he shall return out of 
darkness, and he is waited for of the sword. 

23 He wandereth abroad for bread, saying. 
Where is it ? he knoweth that the day of darkness 
is ready at his hand. 

24 Trontde and anguish shall make him afraid; 
they shall prevail against him, as a king ready to 
the battle. 

2.5 For he strctchcth out his hand against God.'' 
and strengtheneth himself against the Almighty.' 

2l) He runneth upon him, even on his neck, upon 
the thick bosses of his bucklers : 

27 Because he covereth his face with his fatness, 
and makcth collops of fat on his flanks.' 

28 And he dwelleth in desolate cities, and in 



20:12; Trov. 19:23. I Deut. .32:8. in.Toel3:17. ■iEocl.9:3. oPsa. 90:12. 
•iHeh. A sound of fears. P Lev. 23:3(5. 1 1 Thess. 5:3. r Isa. 27:4. • cli. 
9:4. < Psa. 73:7, etc. 

6. Thine own mouth condemneth thee; Eliphaz says that 
Job maintained doctrines which condemned himself, and 
showed that he was a hypocrite. 

11. The consolation.i of God; those which Eliphaz and his 
friends offered a.s if Hicy cwim/ finm God. 

12. Cam/ tlicv luivi/: ini.i sii. h irreverent complaints 
against God. U'liat iln Ihinc ci/r^ irink at; or, why do thine 
eyes wink? 'Winking is here the gesture of anger and 
impatience. Compare chap. 5 : 2. 

19. Tlic earth; here in a restricte<l sense of the country 
where these ancients dwelt. No f:lriiii'jrr pn'isrd among 
them; they were not visited or corrni'tcil liy Imcigners. 

20. Is hidden; he knows not what is lirluro liini, or how 
soon or suddenly he may be cut off. 

26. He runneth upon — ^his bucklers; the whole verse may 
be thus rendered: "lie [the wicked man] runneth iipcju 
him [God] with [proud] neck, with the thick bosses of his 
bucklers." Tlie wicked man is here compared to an armed 
warrior at the head of his band rushing upon God, his 
adversary. His bucklers are the bucklers of his followers 
whom he leads forth to this impious war. 

27. Corcrcth his face with his fatness; by pampering hi.'; 
appetite. Collops; thick lumps. 

28. He dwelleth ; or shall dwell. This verso is interpreted 
in two dilferent ways; either as describing the wicked 
man's violence, he dwelleth in cities made desolate by 
himself, etc.; or as describing his punishment, he sIkiII. 
as an outcast from society, dwell in desolate cities, etc. 
The latter is the more probable meaning. 

591 



Job bemoaneth 



JOB XVI. 



his culamitks. 



houses which no man inhabiteth, which are ready 
to become heaps. 

29 He shall not be rich, neither shall his sub- 
stance continue, neither sliall he prolong the per- 
fection thereof upon the earth. 

30 Ho shall not depart out of darkness; the flame 
sliall dry up his branches, and by the breath of 
his mouth shall he go away. 

31 Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity :" 
for vanity shall be his recompense. 

32 It shall be accomplished* before his time,"' 
and his branch shall not be green. 

33 He shall sliake off his unripe grape as the vine, 
and sliall cast off his flower as the olive. 

34 For tlie congregation of hypocrites shall he 
desolate,'^ and fire shall consume the tabernacles 
of bribery.'* 

35 They conceive mischief," ami bring forth van- 
ity,* and their belly prepareth deceit. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

1 Job reproveth his friends of untnercifulness. 7 He slioweth the piti- 
fulness of his case. 17 He maintaineth his inaocency. 

^T^HEN Job auswered and said, 
X 2 1 have heard many such things : miserable* 
comforters are ye all.' 

3 Shall vain words^ have an end? or what em- 
boldoneth thee that thou answercst? 

4 I also could speak as ye do: if your soul were 
in my soul's stead, I could heap up words against 
you, and shake my head at you." 

5 Bat 1 would strengthen you with my mouth, and 
the moving of my lips should assuage your grief.'' 

6 Though I speak, my grief is not assuaged: and 
though I forbear, what am I eased?' 



alal. 59:1. • Oi. cut off. I> Psa. 55:2;J. c ch. 27:8; Isa. 33:14. d Amos 
.5:11, 12. c Hos. lU:13j Gal. 0:7, 8. t Or, iniquity. I Or, troultksome. 
f ch. 13:4. S Hcb. TOords o/tomJ; ch. 15:2. e Psa. 22:7. h Piov, 27:9. 
llUh. gocth from mel iEph.S:a7. J cli. 1():1U. 17. k ch. 13:24. 1 tarn. 



29. Not be rich; not contiimo to bu rich. His blessings 
shall bo short-lived. 

30. By the breath of his mouth; by the angry breath of 
God. 

31. In vanity; vanity hero describes the wicked man's 
plana as empty, because destitute of righteousness and 
iUith in God. For -vanity; hero the word describes the 
wicked man's reward as empty ; that is, disai^pointing his 
liope. lie reaps what he sowed. 

32. It sluill be accomplislicd ; liis recompense, which con- 
sists in liis destruction. Before his time; he shall be cut 
oft' by an untimely end. 

35. They conceive mischief — prepareth deceit ; the same as, 
they trust in vanity; and vanity is their recompense, ver. 
31. Ah tlicir plans an<l works are ruinous to others, and 
Ihoy end in the ruiu of themselves. 

INSTIirCTIONS. 

4. Those doctrines which h-ad men to cast off the fear 
of God and restrain prayer, must be false. 

6. The sentiinenta which many profess and propagate 
condemn themselves, and show tlicrn to bo wicked men, 
as really as if they were guilty of open immorality. 

13. Good men arc sometimes habic to think that what 
is opposed to them, is opposed also to God; and thus 
unjustly charge others witli opposition to liim. 

20. 'I'lio general and sweeping declarations of earnest 
disputants, while they express some important truth, may 
also express much hurtful error; and the true must be 
Heparated from the false, before their statements can safely 
be received. 

692 



7 But now he hath made me weary : thou a.m. 2101 
hast made desolate all my company. isi" °"' 

b And thou hast filled me with wrinkles,' whidi 
is a witness against me : and my leanness rising up 
in me beareth witness to my face. 

9 He tcareth ine in his wrath,J who hatetli me : 
he gnasheth u])on me with his teeth; mine enemy 
sharpeneth his eyes upon me.'' 

10 They have gaped upon me with their mouth : 
they have smitten me upon the check reproach- 
fully;' they have gathered themselves together 
against mc.'" 

11 God hath delivered me^ to the ungodly, and 
turned mc over into the hands of the wicked." 

12 I was at ease, but he hath broken me asun- 
der : he hath also taken me by my neck, and shaken 
me to pieces, and sot me up for his mark." 

13 His archers compass me round about, he 
cleaveth my reins asunder, and doth not spare: 
he pourcth out my gall upon tlie ground. 

14 He brcaketh me witli breach upon breach;'' 
he runneth upon me like a giant. 

15 I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin, and 
defiled my horn in the dust.'' 

IB Jly face is foul with weeping, and on my eye- 
lids is tlic shadow of death ; 

17 Not for any injustice in my hands :"■ also my 
prayer is pure.* 

18 earth, cover not thou my blood, and let my 
cry have no place. 

19 Also now, behold, my witness is in heaven, 
and my record w on high." 

20 My friends scorn me:* but mine eye pourcth 
out tears unto God. 

21 Oh that one might plead for a man with God,' 
as a man pkadeth for his neighltori* 

3:3U. mPsa. 3J:15. 1 Hcb. shut mt up. n ch. 1:15. 17. och. 7:2U. p Psa. 
42:7. q ch. .30:10. r Psa. 44:17-21. ■ Psa. 00: If*, II). • Hcb. in the high 
f tacts I Eph. 1:3. t Hcb. are my icorncrs. i Rom. 9:2U. I Ot, friend. 



29. Though the wicked may be greatly prospered for a 
time, and in some instances their outward blessings be 
continticd to the end of life, yet, if they continue in their 
wickedness, they are destined to poverty, shame, and ever- 
lasting contempt. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

7. He; God. 

10. They; .Job's pretended friends. Smitten me; they 
had opposed and reproaelied liim. 

12. Was at case; before iiis aftlictions came. 

13. He pourcth out my gall; an expression denoting the 
most intense anguish. 

15. Defiled my horn; the horn was an emblem of power. 
authority, and infiuenco ; and the meaning is, ho was shorn 
of his power, his authority was gone. 

17. Pure; free from liypocrisy. Of this Sat.in had ac- 
cused liim before God, and his friends had insuiuated 
against him the same charge. 

IS. Carer not thou my blood; he speaks of himself as an 
innocent man appointed to die, and asks the earth to leave 
his blood uncovered that it may cry aloud for redress. 
Let my cry have 710 place; that is, the cry of my blood: let 
it have no j)lace where it shall be liid in silence. Accord- 
ing to others the meaning is, that if ho had been guilty of 
heaven-daring crimes, as his enemies charged, he did not 
ask that his crime should be hid : nor could ho expect 
that God would licar his cry for deliverance from punisli- 
ment. 

19. My vitncis is in heaven ; God knows that I am euiccre 
though here I am charged with hypocrisy. 



Juh appcaletk to God. 



JOB XVIII. 



Address of Bi/dad. 



A. M. 24S4. 22 When a few years" are come, then I 
i.ii" " shall go the way whence I shall not re- 
turn." 

CHAPTER XVII. 

1 Job appealeth from men to God. 6 The unmerciful dealing of men 
with the afflicted may astonish, but not discourage the rigliteous. 11 
His hope is not in life, but in death. 

n\ TY breath is corrupt,* my days are extinct, the 
JA J. graves are ready for mo.'' 

2 ,rtre there not mockers with me? and doth not 
mine eye continue* in their provocation? 

3 Lay down now, put me in a surety with tlrec : 
who is he that will strike hands with me?'' 

4 For thou hast hid their heart from understand- 
ing : therefore shalt thou not exalt them. 

5 He that speaketh flattery to Ats friends,'* even 
the eyes of his children shall fail. 

6 He hath made me also a byword of the peo- 
ple; and aforetime^ I was as a tabret. 

7 Mine eye also is dim by reason of sorrow, and 
all my members' are as a shadow. 

8 Upright men shall be astonished at this, and 
the innocent shall stir up himself against the hyp- 
ocrite. 





Ileb. years of nu 


Mer. 


a 


Eccl. 


■'S 


tOr, 


sjihlt is 


s])ent 




V 


ii 


b^::i. 


4. 


1 Heb. 


lodge, c 


Hrov 


(> 


1. d 


Hsa 


12::). 


S Or, 


l.efnr. 


III. 


m 




1 (Ir, 


tho 


ights. 


e Psa. 84 


7,11; 


r 


ov. 14 


18. 


l Heb 


add str 


ni^tl, 


t 


V 


^ 


24:4. 



22. Wlien a few years are come; if he is to liave any de- 
liverance in this life, it must come speedily, for death is 
near. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. Those who have themselves suffered great afflictions, 
are most disposed and best prepared to sj-mpathize with 
the atSictions and assuage the grief of others. 

9. In the depths of distress, even good men, if left to 
themselves, will have hard thoughts, and complain not 
only of men but of God, and speak as if he not only were 
the author of their afflictions, but had become their enemy. 

11. Whoever may be the instruments of afHiction to the 
people of God, they should not overlook his all-controlling 
hand, or feel that without his permission others could have 
any power over them. 

20. When the soul pours ouj. its complaints to God, and 
looks to him for help, though he may not at once seem to 
hear, in due time he will answer and grant a glorious 
deliverance. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

2. Mine eye continue; to be intently- fixed on their prov- 
ocations. 

3. Lay down nnw; that is, a pledge, as was the custom 
with men when about to contend in law before the judge. 
Put me in a surety with thee; be my surety that justice 
shall be done me. Will strike hands with me ; as was done 
in becoming surety for another. These expressions are 
borrowed from the usages of legal tribunals in Job's day. 
From his friends, whom God has deprived of understand- 
ing, ver. 4, he passionately appeals to God. The reader 
will notice that in this proposed trial of his cause God is 
both his adversary, and his patron and judge. 

o. Speaketh flattery to his friends; others render, beti"ays 
his friends to plunder, a figurative expression for unfaith- 
fulness to them in the time of their calamity. The eyes of 
his chddren shall fail; they shall suffer great calamities. 

8. At this; the afflictions of Job ; and that his friends 
should so far take j>art with Satan, as to contend that they 
were sent on account of his peculiar wickedness ; whereas 
the fact was, they were sent, or permitted, to show the 
reality and genuineness of his religion, and that those who 
accused him of hypocrisy were in the wrong. Stir up him- 
38 



9 The righteous also shall hold on his way,"" and 
he that hath clean hands shall Ije stronger and 
stronger." 

10 But as for you all, do ye return, and come 
now: for I cannot find one wise man among you. 

11 My days are past, my purposes are broken 
off," even the thoughts* of my heart. 

12 They change the night into day: the light is 
short* because of darkness. 

13 If I wait, the grave is my house : I have made 
my bed in the darkness. 

14 I have said* to corruption. Thou art my fa- 
ther; to the worm, Thenc art my mother, and my 
sister. 

1.5 And where is now my hope? as for my hope, 
who shall see it ? 

10 They shall go down to the bars of the pit,'' 
when crnr rest together is in the dust.' 



CHAPTER XVIII. 



The calami- 



1 Bildad reproveth Job of presumption and impatienc 
ties of the wicked. 

^T^PIEN answered Bildad the Shnhite, and said. 
I 2 How long icill it he ere ye make an end of 
words? mark, and afterwards we will speak. 



self; be excited to greater fidelity in avoiding hypocrisy, 
and be guarded against considering peculiar trials as 
proofs of peculiar wickedness. 

;). Shall hold on; instead of being induced to give up his 
religion on accoimt of his trials, or because others con- 
sider them as proofs of his hj'pocrisy, he who has true 
religion will persevere in it to the end ; and whatever his 
condition here, will grow stronger and stronger in faith, 
patience, experience, hojie, and all the graces of the Spirit. 

10. Return; return to the argument, and say something 
that is to the purpose and that is worth hearing. 

13. The grave is my house; the place which I shall oc- 
cupy, and where I shall remain till these heavens and 
earth pass away. 2 Pet. 3:13, 14. 

16. T/iey shall go down ; all my hopes. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. We should not conclude that our work in this world 
is done, so long as we are continued in it ; or forget that 
we may be useful by patient sufiering, as well as by active 
benevolent labors. 

4. When God leaves men to the wickedness and folly 
of sin, it is evidence that they are on the way to destruc- 
tion, and that unless they change their course and turn 
their feet into the path of life, they wiU sink into unavail- 
ing sorrow. 

8. The dealings of Providence with the righteous will 
render them more and more watchful, and lead them more 
carefully to distinguish between good and evil, and more 
diligently and perseveringly to pursue the one and avoid 
the other. 

13. As the grave is the house appointed for all the liv- 
ing, and the one which they will shortly occupy, it should 
be the great object of each one so to live, labor^ and if 
need be suffer, that when the body shall sleep in the grave 
the soul shall be with God till the morning of the resur- 
rection ; and that when the body shall lie redeemed from 
the power of the grave, it may dwell in the new Jerusa- 
lem for ever. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

2. Ye make an end; the words are addressed to Job, and 
seem to mean, thou and others that think and speak hke 
thee. So verse 3, "in your sight.' 

593 



Terrors of Utc wicked. 



3 Wherefore are we counted as beasts, and rejjut- 
cd vile in your sight? 

4 Ho tearclli himself in his anL'^er:' shall the 
earth be forsaken for thee? and shall the rock be 
removed out of his ))lace? 

5 Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out,'' 
and the spark of his lire shall not shine. 

() The light shall be dark in his tabernacle, and 
his candle' shall be jjut out with him. 

7 The steps of his strength sliall be straitened, 
and his own counscd shall cast him down.'-" 

8 For he is cast into a net by his own feet, and 
lie walketh upon a snare." 

1) The gin shall take him by the heel, and the rob- 
ber shall prevail against him. 

10 The snare is laid' for him in the ground, and 
a trap for liini in the way. 

11 Terrors shall make him afraid on every side,*" 
and shall drive ^ him to his feet. 

12 J lis strength shall be hunger-bitten, and de- 
struction shall be ready at his side. 

13 It shall devour the strength' of his skin : rvcn 
the first-born of death shall devour his strength. 

14 His confidence shall be rooted out of his tab- 
crnack',''auil itshall bringliim to the kingof terrors. 

15 It shall dwell in his tab('rnacle, because it is 
none of his : brimstone shall be scattered upon his 
habitation. 

16 His roots shall be dried uj) l)eneath,''' and 
above shall his branch be cut olT. 

17 His remembrance shall perish from the earth,'' 
and he shall have no name in the street. 

18 Ho shall be driven' from light into darkness, 
and chased out of the world. 

19 He shall neither have son nor nephew among 
his people,' nor any remaining in his dwellings. 

20 They that come after kim shall be astonished 
at his (lav,-' as they that went before' were af- 
frighted.*' 

21 Surely such are the dwellings of the wicked, 
and thig is the place of kim thai kuowcth not God." 



JOB XIX. Job's reply to Bildad. 

C II A P T E R XIX. ». c. hHm 'uai. 

1 Job complaining of his friends' cnielh', showclli there is misery enoiigh 
in him to feej their crutlty. 21, -Js He cravelh pity. 23 He be- 
lievcth the resurrection. 

''T^HEN Job answered and said, 
X 2 How long will ye vex my soul, and break 
me in j)ieces with words? 

3 These ten times have ye reproached me:' ye 
are not ashamed that ye make yourselves strange 
to me.* 

4 And be it indeed that I have erred, mine error 
remaineth with myself. 

5 If indeed ye will magnify yourselves against 
nic,'" and ])l('ad against mc my rejiroach; 

G Know now that God hath overthrown mc, and 
hath compassed me with his net. 

7 Behold, I cry out of wrong,^ but I am not 
heard: I cry aloud, but thtre is no judgment. 

8 He hath fenced up my way that I cannot pass, 
and he liath set darkness in my paths. 

9 He hath stripped me of my glory, and taken 
the crown fru7n my head. 

10 He hath destroyed me on every side, and I am 
gone:" and my hope iiath he removed like a tree. 

11 He hath also kindled his wrath against me, 
and he countcth me unto him as one of his enemies. 

12 His troops come together, and raise up tlieir 
way against me, and encamp round about my tab- 
ernacle. 

13 He hath put my brethren far from me, and 
mine acquaintance are verily estranged from me. 

14 My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar 
friends have forgotten mc." 

15 They that dwell in my house, and my maids, 
count me for a stranger: 1 am an alien in their sight. 

16 1 called my servant, and he gave me no an- 
swer ; I entreated him with my mouth. 

17 My breath is strange to my wife, though I en- 
treated for the children's sa/ce of mine own body.' 

18 Yea, young children"' despised mc; I arose, 
and they spake against mc. 



•neb.Ais.wu/. «ch.l:i:ll. b ?rov. ai:iO. t Or, /amp. cProv.UM- 
.■?.'. i I'rov. 5:-i-2; •i9M. I Hcb. hiililm. t Jcr. 20:.-), 4. » Heb. statler. 
I Heb. «aM. ( Prov. 10:23. S Isa. 5:21. hPsa. 34:10. ^ \Uh. They shall 
drive him. ■ lal. 14.1!-2. JPsi. 37:1;). • Ot, lived with him. t Heb. /aid 



3. Wc; Bilflad and his two friends. 

4. lie tenreth himself; spoken of .lob. 

5. Shall be put out; his ))ros|ici-ity sliall cease. 
7. Jie straitened; he sliall l)ecome feeble. 

9. Gin ; a snare, or trap. Ver. 10. The robber shall prevail 
against him ; or, as some render, the snare shall seize upon 
hiin. 

12. Be hunger-bitten ; fail through luingor. 

13. The strength of his skin; or the members of his skin ; 
that is, his body. Thejirst-born of death ; death in the most 
terrible form. 

11. It shall bring him to the king of terrors; the calamity 
sent upon him from God sliall bring him down. 

15. /( is none of his; it is no longer his secure resting- 
place, being t;iken from him and desolated by (Jod's judg- 
ments. Brimstone slmll be scattered ; possilily with allusion 
to the overthrow of Sodom and (ioniorrali. (ien. l:i:24. 

17. No name in t lie .street; there shall be none to speak 
of him, or keep him in remembrance after he is dead. 

19. Neither tiave son nor nepliew ; he shall leave no pos- 
terity. 

20. Thei) tluit come after him; men of a later day, wlio 
hear of Ins terrible overthrow. His dai/; the day of his 
destruction. They that went before; that lived with him; 

594 



hoM on horror, k 2 Thcss. 1:8. .1 Gen. 31:7. I Or, harden yourselves 
against nu. m Psa. 3S:10. t Or, violence. ■> Liin. 2:5, 0. o Pa. a?:U. 
I Heb. my lelti/. 1 Or, the wicked. 



his contemporaries. Were affrighted ; at the greatness of 
his calamities. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Those who abuse or say hard things of others, aro 
the persons who are most likely to be irritated and com- 
plain when others abuse or say hard things of them. 

f). Though evils greater than can be described are before 
the wicketi, they may not come upon them in this life ; 
and the idea of Uildad and his friends, that a man's i-liar- 
acler can be determined by his i>re8eiit outward condition, 
is false. Their conclusion, tlierefore, concerning Job, that 
he must be a very wicked man, was utterly wrong. 

12. The righteous and the wicked may both in this world 
be visited by trials; and a just discrimination between 
them may never fully appear till they enter the world of 
spirits. 

17. The memory of the wicked shall rot, but the right- 
eous shall be had in everlasting renioinbrancc. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

3. Ten times; many times, very often. 

4. Itimaincth vithmijxelf; I must liear the consequences. 
II. Have forgotten me; they neglected him, as if he were 

not remembered. 



Faith in God's juilgmnit. 



JOB XX. 



Address of Zophar. 



A. M ;4w. 19 All luy inwai'd friends* nMiorrcd 
lo'i" ^ me: and they whom I loved are turned 

a.frainst me. 
20 My bone cleaveth to my skin and to my flesh,'' 

and I am escaped with the skin of my teeth. 
121 Have pity upon me, have pity u))on me, ye 

my friends; lor the hand of God hath touched 

me. 

22 Wliy do ye persecute me as God,'' and are not 
satisfied with my flesh? 

23 0' that my words were now written! that 
they were printed in a book! 

24 That they were graven with an iron pen and 
lead in the rock for ever ! 

25 For I know that my Redeemer liveth, and 
t/iat he shall stand at the latter day npon tlie earth : 

26 And though after my skin worms destroy this 
body, yet in my flesh shall I see God:*" 

27 Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes 
shall behold, and not another;'-' though my reins 
be consumed withiu me. ' 

28 But ye should say, Why persecute we him, 
seeing the root of the matter is found in me?* 

29 Be ye afraid of the sword : for wrath bringcth 
the punishments of the sword, that ye may know 
there in a judgment.'' 

CHAPTER XX. 

Zophar showeth the state and portion of the wicked. 

THEN answered Zophar the Naamathite, and 
said, 



• Ylah. the nun of mn stcrrt. » Psa. 1(K;5. b Psa. (iO:ai. t Heb. IWio 
will give. I Or, A'fttr I shall awake, though this body be destroyed, yet out 
of my flesh shall 1 see God. <: I Cor. 15:53; 1 John :):-J. i Heb. a slmii- 
ger. 1 Or, my reins within me are consumed with earnest desire for that day. 
1 Heb. in my bo.<iom. ' Or, and what root of matter is found in fne? d Psa. 



20. With the skin of my teeth; but just escaped from death, 
or utter ruin. 

22. Are not sat i.fied with mij flesh? he compares them to 
beasts of prey. 

23. My words; those that follow, ver. 25-27. Printed; 
tliat is, inscribed, as the original word signifies. 

24. With an iron pen; a sharp-pointed instrument of 
steel, such as was used to cut letters into metallic plates, 
or, as here, into stones. And lead; after the letters had 
been cut deep into the stone, it was customary to till them 
with lead. The language of verses 23, 24, implies that 
what Jie is now about to utter is no common maxim, but a 
momentous truth, worthy to be perpetuated to the end of 
time. By placing his words in the volume of inspiration, 
God has made them more permanent, and infinitely better 
known, than if they had been graven with a jien of iron 
and lead on the rocks of Arabia. 

2(i. After my skin; after my skin shall have been de- 
stroyed by the force of my disease. Chap. 7:5. Worms 
ileslroy this body; the words " worms " and " body " are not 
in the original, as the italic letters indicate. The literal 
rendering is, " they destroy this," or, this be destroyed, 
meaning this body. In rnyfcsh; the literal rendering is, 
■■ from my flesh," or, " out of my flesh," as in the margin. 
This is taken by some to mean, looking forth upon God 
from my body of flesh, that is, after its resurrection, which 
is the idea given by our version, "Yet in my flesh shall I 
see God." Others understand the words to mean, seeing 
God when out of my flesh, or separated from my flesh, that 
is, in a disembodied state. 

27. Though my reins be consumed within me; the marginal 
rendering, " Jly reins within me are consumed with ear- 
nest desire for that day," is to be preferred. 

29. The sword ; of divine justice, for your unjust treat- 
ment of me. ' Wrath; such imrighteous wrath as yours 



2 Tliercfore do my thoughts cause me to answer, 
and for this I make haste.* 

;{ I have heard the check of my re])roach, and 
tlie spirit of my understanding causctii me to an- 
swer. 

4 Knowest tliou 7wt this of old, since in;iu was 
placed Hjion cartli, 

5 Tliat the triumphing of the wicked is sliorl,* 
and tlie joy of the hypocrite but for a mo- 
ment?" 

6 Tiiough his excellency mount up to tlie heav- 
ens,' and Ids iiead reach unto tlie clouds;^ 

7 Yet lie shall perisli for ever like his own dung :s 
tliev which have seen him sliall sav. Where is 
he? 

8 He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not lie 
found:'' yea, he shall be cliased away as a vision 
of the night. 

9 The eye also whieh saw him shall see him no 
more; neither shall his place any more bcliold 
him. 

10 His children shall seek to please the poor,' 
and his hands shall restore their goods.' 

11 His bones are full of the sin of his youth,J 
which shall lie down with him in the dust. 

12 Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, 
though ho hide it under his tongue;" 

13 Though he spare it, and forsake it not, but 
keep it still within his mouth ;^ 

14 Yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the 
gall of asps within him. 

15 He hath swallowed down riches, and he shall 



.55:10, 11. t Heb. my haste is in me. I Heb. /rom near, e Mw. 7:-Jl. 

( Isa. 14:1.1, 14. § Heb. eloud. S I Kings H:10. I> Psa. ^3■.■M. I Or, The 

poor shall oppress his children. ' ver. 18. i ch. 13:26, t cb. 15:16. » Heb, 
in the midst of his palate. 



towards me. A judgment ; when God will reward all ac- 
cording to their works. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The aflSict'.ons with which God visits us are greatly 
lessened, or increased, by the conduct of our friends. If 
they are kind, and ready to assist us, they iielp us bear 
our burdens ; but if unkind, negligent, and reproachful, 
they greatly increase our sorrows. 

11. No permanent or safe dependence can be placed 
upon the most intimate and endeared earthly friends. For 
the continuance of their affection and care, we are depend- 
ent upon God ; and if they are forsaken of him, they may 
forsake us. 

25. Strong confidence in an almighty, ever-living Re- 
deemer, and the expectation of meeting him as a friend 
and portion, support the soul in the deepest afiliction, and 
cause it to rejoice in hope of the glory of God. 

CHAPTER XX. 

2. Therefore; because of thy impiety in justifying thy- 
self against God. 

3. Tlie dieck of my reproach; the reproachful rebuke ad- 
ministered to me and my friends by thee. To answer;^ to 
reply to what Job had said in opposition to his doctrine 
and that of his friends. 

5. TItc triumphing — is short; short compared with his 
whole existence, though itmay sometimes continue through 
life, and life be continued till old age. 

10. Plea.K tlie poor; on whom tliey shall bo dependent, 
or to wliom they shall apply for help. Restore tlicir goods; 
those which they had wrongfully taken away. 

11. Tlie sin ofliis youth; he shall carry the efi'ects of it 
to the grave. , , . 

14, Tlic gall ofwtps; his pleasures are aU turned to bit- 
terness. 

595 



The portion of the wichd. 



JOB XXI. 



Yet they do often prosper. 



vomit tliem up again : God shall cast tliem out of 
lii^ belly. 

16 lie shall suck the poison of asps :" the viper's 
tongue shall slay him. 

17 He shall not see tlio rivers, the floods,* the 
brooks of honey and butter. 

18 That wliicli he labored for shall he restore, 
and sliall not swallow it down: according to his 
substance shall the restitution 6c,* and he shall not 
rejoice therein. 

19 Because he hath oppressed* and hath forsaken 
the poor : because he hath violently taken away a 
house wliich lie builded not ; 

20 J^urely he shall not feel* quietness in his belly, 
he shall not save of that wiuch he desired. 

21 There shall none of his meat be left ;"" thcre- 
foi-e shall no man look for his goods. 

22 In the fulness of his sufiBciency he shall be 
in straits: every hand of the wicked^ shall come 
upon him. 

23 When ho is about to fill his belly, God shall 
cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain 
it upon him while he is eating.*^ 

24 He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the 
bow of steel sliall strike him through. 

25 It is drawn, and comcth out of the body; yea, 
the glittering sword cometh out of his gall : terrors 
are upon him.*" 

26 All darkness shall be hid in his secret places : 
a fire not blown shall consume him;" it shall go 
ill with him that is left in his tabernacle. 

27 The heaven shall reveal his inicpiity ; and the 
earth shall rise up against him. 

28 Tiie increase of his house shall depart, and his 
goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath. 

29 This is the portion of a wicked man from 
God, and tiie heritage appointed unto him bv" 
God. 



« Rom. 3: 13. • Or, 
change. I Heb. rritsfied. 5 Heb. kiw, 
bEccl. 5:13, 14. 1 Or. trouble 



ng brooks, t Hub. the siihslnnce of hii 
I Or, «f nont left for his r. 
78::», 31. JPsa. 73:la. ' 



17. The brooks of lioncij and butter; emblems of worldly 
abundance. 

18. According to his substance; his substance wrongfully 
gotten by oppressing the poor. 

21. Ttierefore sliall no man tonic for his goods; because 
they are perished, and looking for them will bo in vain. 
But we may better render, "Therefore shall his prosperity 
not abide." 

26. All darkness sliall be hid in his secret places; or, all dark- 
ness shall be laid up tor his treasures. All darkness means 
calamities of all kinds. Not blown; not kindled or kept 
alive by man, but by (iod. 

29. The portion of a wicked man; what, as Zophar and his 
friends contended, always came upon the wicked in this 
life. In the next chapter, Job shows by facts that their 
doctrine was false. 

INSTRnCTIONS. 

2. Those arc often most in haste to speak, who are least 
able to speak to the purpose, or with any good effect, 
.las. 1:19. 

11. Sins committed in youth may produce consequences 
which shall be felt in old age, and which shall follow 
transgressors to the grave antl onward to eternity. 

18. Whatever may bo the pleasures of sin for a season, 
in the end they shall bo turned to bitterness and death. 
I'lov. 23:32. 

29. The evils consequent upon sin are the appointment 
of God ; and no one can continue in it, and escape them. 
596 



1 Job showeth that even in the jud-jment of man he hath reason to be 
grieved. 7 Sometimes the wicked do so prosper, as they despise God. 
16 Sometimes their destruction is manifest. 22 The happy and un- 
liappy arc alike in death. 27 The judgment of the wicked ia in 
another world. 

BUT Job answered and said, 
2 Hear diligently my speech, and let this be 
your consolations. 

3 Suffer me that I may speak ; and after that I 
have spoken, mock on. 

4 As for me, is my complaint to man? and if it 
were so, why should not my sjiirit be troubled?* 

5 Mark* me, and be astonished, and lay yourhand 
upon your nunitii.'^ 

6 Even when 1 remember I am afraid, and trem- 
bling taketh hold on my flesh. 

7 Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, 
are mighty in power?'-' 

8 Their seed is established in their sight with 
them, and their offspring before their eyes. 

9 Their houses are safe from^ fear, neither is the 
rod of God upon them. 

10 Their bull genderclji, and faileth not; their 
cow calveth, and casteth not her calf. 

11 They send forth their little ones like a flock, 
and tlioir cliildren dance. 

12 They take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice 
at the sound of the organ. 

13 They spend their days in wealth,' and in a 
moment go down to the grave. 

14 Therefore they say unto God, Depart from 
us;" for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. 

15 What is the Almighty, that we should serve 
him?' and what profit siiould wc have, if we pray 
unto him?-' 

16 Lo, their good is not in their hand: the coun- 
sel of the wicked is far from me." 

17 IIow oft is tiie candle^ of the wicked put out! 



al:'.); Matt. 3:12. • Heb. of his decree from. 1 Heb. shortened. I Heb. 
Look wtto. ( ch. 40;4. s Jer. 12:1, '2. i Hob. peace from, I Or, mirlh. 
hch. 2-2:17. i Exod. 5:-2. J.Mai. 3:14. kPsa. 1:1. 1 Or, /<imp. 



They may not, in all cases, be seen or felt in this world ; 
but they will overwhelm all continued transgressors, iu 
the world to come. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

2. Let this be your consolations ; if you will candidly listen 
to me, I will accept this in place of the consolations I might 
have so reasonably expected of you. 

4. Is mij complaint to man? merely, or principally. And 
if it were so, why slioidd not my spirit be troubled? better, 
omitting the italics, which are not in the original, to read, 
" And why should not my spirit be trimliled T' that is, in 
view of the mighty alUictions laid upon me by Gods 
hand. 

5. Mark me; behold my affliction. Liiy your hand upon 
your mouth ; be silent. 

7. The wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty; this, in 
opposition to the doctrine of Job's friends, is often the 
case. Psa. 73:3-17. 

13. In a moment; without long, lingering illness. 

14. Therefore; I'a-cI. s:11. 

IC. Not in their hand ; not in their own power. It comes 
from God, and they are wholly dependent on him. 

17. How oft ; many understand this (juestion as extend- 
ing to the following versos l.'<-20, which may then bo rend 
interrogatively thus: How oft doth God distribute? how 
oft arc they as stubble? etc.; and as meaning to afBrm 
that such a thing seldom happens, or ratlicr, does not 



Ikath and t/ic jiulgmrrit. 



JOB XXII. 



Elipluiz answereth Job. 



A. M. JIM. and hojc oft cometli their destruction upon 
"iSo"''™' tliemlGorfdistributetlisorrowsinliisauger. 

18 They are as stubble before the wind, and as 
cliaft' that the storm carrieth avray." 

19 God hiyetii up his iniquity* for his children :" 
he rewardeth liiui, and lie shall know if. 

20 His eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall 
drink of the wrath of the Almighty. 

21 For what pleasure hath he in his house after 
him, when the number of his months is cut olY in 
the midst? 

22 Shall any teach God knowledge?" seeing he 
judgoth those that are high. 

23 One dieth in his full strength,* being wholly 
at ease and quiet. 

24 His breasts^ are full of milk, and his bones 
are moistened with marrow. 

25 And another dieth in the bitterness of his 
soul, and never eateth with pleasure. 

26 They shall lie down alike in the dust, and the 
worms shall cover them. 

27 Behold, I know your thoughts, and the devi- 
ces vMch ye wrongfully imagine against me. 

28 For yc say, Where is the house of the prince? 
and Avhere are the dwelling-places" of the wicked? 

29 Have ye not asked them that go by the way? 
and do ye not know their tokens, 

30 That the wicked is reserved to the day of 
destruction? they shall be brought forth to the 
day of wrath. ^ 

31 Who shall declare his way to his face? and 
who shall repay him ichat he hath done? 

32 Yet shall he be brought to the grave,* and 
shall remain in the tomb.* 

33 The clods of the valley shall be sweet unto 



• Heb. sitaleth away, t That is, Ihe puniskment of his iniquity. » Exod. 
•20:5; Ezek.l3:U. bRora.ll:3i. \ Huh. very perftetioli,OT. iiltlie slrmgth 
o/ his perfection, i Or, mitk-pails. I Ueh. lent of llie labfrnucUx. H Heb. 
wraths. • Heb. graves, t Heb. u-aldi in the heap, c Heb. a:a7. J ch. 



happen to the wicked more than to the righteous. But 
see note to chap. 27 : 13. 

21. Wliat pleasure Imth he in his house after A/m ; wlien the 
wicked man's days are ended, he can liave no more inter- 
est in the hit of his children. If tliey be cut off, that does 
not affect him. 

20. They shall lie down alike; God does not deal with 
tliera here according to their character, but treats them in 
many respects alike. 

28. Where is tlie house of the prince? meaning, of me, Job, 
who once lived as a prince. 

29. Tltem lluit go bij the way ? travellers, who have had 
the opportunity of extended observation. Tlieir tokens; 
tlie indications which they give of the course of God's 
providence. 

30. Is reserved to the day of destruction; now he is suffered 
to prosper, being reserved for destruction hereafter. 

31. Wlio shall repay him ; no one in this world ; but God 
shall reward him in tlie world to come. 

32. Aiul shall remain in the tomb ; literally, and shall watch 
over the mound, meaning the sepulchral mound. Some 
render this clause impersonally : " and one shall watch over 
the mound ;" that is, the sepulchral mound of this power- 
ful and prosperous simier shall be carefully guarded. 
Others understand it as a poetical description, by which 
he is represented as watching, through his monumental 
inscription, over his grave. 

33. Every man; shall in like manner go to the grave. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
4. In our trials and distresses we should look not so 



him, and every man shall draw after him," as 
there are innumerable before him, 

34 How then comfort ye me in vain,'' seeing in 
your answers there remaiueth falsehood?* 

CIIAPTEIl XXII. • 

1 Eliphaz showeth that man's goodness profitcth not G-od. .5 He ac- 
cuseth Job of divers sins. 21 He exiiorteth liini to repentance, with 
promises of mercy. 

THEN Eliphaz the Temanite answered and 
said, 

2 Can a man be proiitable unto God," as he that 
is wise may be proiitable unto himself?^ 

3 Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou 
art righteous? or is it gain to him, that thou mak- 
est thy ways perfect? 

4 Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? will he 
cuter with thee into judgment? 

5 Is not thy wickedness great? and thine iniqui- 
ties infinite? 

G For thou hast taken a pledge from thy brother 
for naught, and stripped the naked of their clothing.' 

7 Thou hast not given water to the weary to 
drink, and thou hast withholden bread from the 
hungry. 

8 But as for the mighty man,' he had the earth ; 
and the honorable* man dwelt in it. 

9 Thou hast sent widows away empty, and the 
arms of the fatherless have been broken. 

10 Therefore snares are round about thee,'' and 
sudden fear troubleth thee ; 

11 Or dai'kness, that thou canst not see; and 
abundance of Avaters cover thee. 

12 Is not God in the height of heaven? and behold 
the height* of the stars, how high they are! 



16:2. I Me-h. transgression, e Psa. lf>:2. ^ Ol, if he may be profitable, Aot\i 
his good success depend thereon ? I Heb. clothes of the naked. \ Heb. man 
of arm. ' Heb. eminent, or accepted for countenance. ' ch. lS:S-iU; Psa. 
ll:(i. inA.liead. 



much to men for help, as to God; and feel that whoever 
or whatever may be the instrument, he is the only source 
of relief. 

7. The wicked are sometimes prospered in this world, 
and receive more outward blessings than their pious 
neighbors. They may live longer, and die in less distress. 
The reason of this is to men not known, and it sometimes 
occasions them great perplexity. Psa. 73:2-17. 

17. However prosperous may bo the condition of the 
wicked in this world, or however adverse that of the 
righteous, in the future world it will be reversed ; the 
righteous will be comforted, and the wicked tormented. 
Luke 16:24,25. 

30. The fact that men are not treated according to their 
character in this world, is evidence of a coming judgment, 
when a just discrimination will be made, and each one 
receive according to his works. Mai. 3:16-ls. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

3. Any pleasure — that thou art riglilcous? that is, any 
pleasure in view of the profit he shall derive from thy 
righteousness. 

4. For fear oftheel lest thy sin should bring damage to 
him. The meaning of Eliphaz is, that God has no private 
interests to be promoted by our righteousness, or dam- 
aged by oiu- wickedness. He is tlierefurc infinitely above 
all those inthii'nces which among men produce partial and 
unjiisl .•oiiduit. 

's. Ui hn.l the earth; Eliphaz hero falsely charges Job 
with favoring the mighty and hononildc, and oppressing 
the poor and needy. 

697 



Job exhorted to ptiiitence. 



13 And thou sayest, How doth God know?" can 
he judire tlirough the dark cloud? 

1-1 Tliick clouds are a covcrini^ to him, that he 
seetli not ; and he walketh in the circuit of heaven. 

1.5 Ilast thou marked the old way wlucii wicked 
men liavc trodden? 

16 Which were cut down out of time, whose 
foundation was overflown witli a Hood:* 

17 Wliich said unto God, Dejtart from us:'' and 
wiiat can the Almighty do for* them? 

IS Yet lie filled tiieir houses with good things:'^ 
but the counsel of the wicked is far from me. 

19 Tlie righteous sec it, and are glad : and the 
innocent laugh tiiem to scorn. 

20 VVlicreas our substanco^ is not cut down, but 
the remnant of them' the fire consumeth. 

21 Acquaint now thyself with him,^ and be at 
peace:'' tlioreby good shall come unto thee. 

22 Receive, I pray thee, the law from his mouth, 
and lay up liis words in thy heart." 

23 If thou return to the Almighty,*' thou shalt 
be built up, thou shalt put away iniquity far from 
thy tabernacles.* 

21 Then shalt thou lay up gold as dust,* and the 
gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks. 

25 Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defence,* and 
thou shalt Iiave plenty of silver.* 

26 For then shalt tliou have thy delight in the 
Almighty, and shalt lift up thy face unto God. 

27 Thou shalt make thy prayer unto him,'' and 
ho shall iiear thee, and thou shalt pay thy vows. 

28 Tliou shalt also decree a thing,' and it shall 
be established unto thee : and the ligiit shall shine 
upon thy ways. 

29 Wiicn men are cast down, then tlion shalt say. 
There if lifting up; and he shall save the humble 
person.*^ 

30 He shall deliver the island of the innocent:' 
and it is delivered by the pureness of thy hands. 



J P> X X I T I . He longtth to ap-pcar before God. 

CHAPTER XXIII. Bc.i^J!!.^: 

1 Job longeth to appear before Ood, G in confidence of his mercy. 8 
God, wfio is invisible, observetb our ways. H Job's innocency. 13 
God's decree is immutable. 

THEN Job answered and said, 
2 Even to-day is my complaint liitter;" my 
stroke^ is heavier than my groaning. 

3 Oh that I knew wlierc I might find him!' that 
I might come even to ids scat! 

4 I would order my cause before him," and fill 
my mouth with arguments. 

5 I would know the words tchich}\(i would answer 
me, and understand what he would say unto me. 

6 Will he j)lcnd against mewitli Awgreatpower?" 
No; but lie would put strength in mc. 

7 'i'here the I'iglitcous might dispute with him; 
so should I be delivered for ever from my judge. 

8 Behold, I go forward, but hew not there; and 
backward, but I cannot perceive him: 

9 On the left hand, where he doth work, but I 
cannot lichold him: he liideth himself on the right 
hand, tliat I cannot see him: 

10 But he knoweth the way that I take:*wAen 
he hath tried mc, 1 shall come forth as gold." 

11 My foot hath held his steps, his way have I 
kept, and not declined : 

12 Neither have I gone back from the command- 
ment of his lips; 1 have estecmctl* tlic words of 
his mouth more tlian my necessary yiiof/.'P 

13 But he is in one miml, and who can turn him? 
and rrhat liis soul desireth, even that he doeth. 

14 For he performeth the thing that is appointed 
for me:'' and many such things arc with him. 

1.5 Theretbre am I troubled at his presence: 
when [ consider, I am afraid of him."' 

10 For God maketli my heart soft, and the Al- 
mighty troublcth me : 

n Because 1 was not cut off before the darkness, 
neither hath he covered tlie darkness from my face. 



fouTUI/Uioa; Gen. 7:10, etc.; 2 Pel. 2:5. I) ch. 21:U. 1 Or, to. c Acts 
U;13, 17. JOr,Mm(«. t Ot. their exccUennj. HTliat is, (Joii. Jlsa. 27:5; 
Phil. 1:7. 0PH:v.ll9;n. nin,.Il:I,2. g -'Tim. -JtlU. • Or. an t/if ilusl. 
t Or, golil. I Hob. silver of utrtngtU. Ii Paa. Uo:17-2(). i M.iu. 21:22. 



Ifi. Oui of time; bofore their time; iu the prime of life, 
when they had not lived out the ordinary period of human 
life. Psa. 5.'):'z:i. Wilh a flood; the reference seems to be 
to the deluge of Noah. 

20. WItcreas — fire cotisumcth; this verse may be thus ren- 
dered: "JIas not our adversary been cut off? and their 
excellency [that of the un'^odly] the live lias coiisuincd." 
It is then the language of "the righteous" and "the inno- 
cent," mentioned in tlie preceding ver.se. 

21. Acquaint now lliij-idf with him; Eliphaz speaks as if 
Job were unacquainted with God, and at enmity with Iiim. 

24. Lay up gold ; a man's piety, iu the estimation of Job's 
friends, might be measured by the amount of his worldly 
prosperity, and his guilt by his calamities. 

211. Wlieii men are cmt down ; when wicked men are cast 
down for their impiety. There is lifting up; that is, of tlie 
righteous. 

30. The innocent; the innocent shall deliver or save the 
island or country for which they intercede. 

INSTRUCTIONS, 
l."). Tlic history of past generations, both of the riglit- 
cous and the wicked, is full of instrtiction to the children 
of me . 

21. All men who have the Bible may become acquainted 
with God, and by cordial reconciliation to him may have 
598 



! Heb. Aim that hath loiv eyes. J 1 Pet. 5 


j. I Or, The innoreni siall deliv- 


er the island; Gen. ld:2li. k Pea. 77:2-9. 


1 Heb. Aand. 1 I»a. 20:8; C^:R, 


7. m Isa. 4:):ae. n Isa. S7:)ri. • Heb. i 


iK'ilA me. ol Pet. 1:7. t Heb. 


hid, or taid vp. 1 Or. appointed portio 


1. P Psa. 19:9, IU; Jer. 15:1(5. 


q 1 Thess. :(:■!. r p..i. |1.J:12I1. 





that peace which passcth all understanding, which tlie 
world can neither give nor take away. 

26. Delight in the character of tiod and in the keeping 
of his commands will secure all needful good to those who 
exercise it, and in:ikc them great blessings both to tliem- 
selvcs and their fellow-men. 

CHAPTER XXI H. 

3. Him; God. 

6. Put strength in me; or, as some render, attend to mo ; 
that is, graciously listen to my words. 

7. From my judge; from God, who would not condemn 
me. 

10. Come fwth ai gold; he justified as righteous, and 
accepted. 

15. Troubled at hi a presence ; because instead of allowing 
me to |)lo;id wilh him, as a man with his friend, he comes 
wilh terrible majesty, and overwhelms me with continu- 
ally new calamities. These, as Job iii;iintain8, come from 
his unseiirchable and unalterable decree, the grounds of 
which no nr.in can understand or explain. See chap. 9:34, 
35, and introductory note to chap. fl. 

17. Beraxt.ie I was not cut off before the dnrknesx; because 
I was not taken away by iVath before these calamities 
came upon mo. 



Sin often godh for 



JOIJ XXIV. 



a time, iitipuidshe/f. 



J.J'St.520. CHAPTER XXIV. 

1 Wickedness goeth often nni>miislied. 17 There is a secret judgment 
for the wicked. 

WHY, seeing times are not liiddeii from tlie 
Almighty, do they that know him not see 
his ihxys? 

2 Some remove the landmarks ; tlicy violently 
take away flocks, and feed thereof." 

3 They drive away the ass of the fatherless, they 
take tiie widow's ox for a pledge." 

4 Tliey turn tlie needy out of the way : the poor 
of the earth hide themselves together. 

5 Behold, a,? wild asses in the desert.go they forth 
to their work ; rising betimes for a prey : the wil- 
derness yieldeth food for them and for their children. 

6 They reap every one his corn+ in the field : and 
they gather the vintage of the wicked.* 

7 They cause the naked to lodge without cloth- 
ing, that they have no covering in the cold. 

8 They are wet with the showers of the moun- 
tains, and embrace the rock for want of a shelter.'' 

9 They pluck the fatherless from the breast, and 
take a pledge of the poor. 

10 They cause him to go naked without clothing, 
ami they take away the sheaf yVo?ra the hungry ; 

1 1 Which make oil within their walls, and tread 
their wine-presses, and sufl'er thirst. 

12 Men groan from out of the city, and the soul 
of the wounded crieth out: yet God layeth not 
folly to them. 

13 They are of those that rebel against the light ; 
they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the 
paths thereof. 



Or, them, i Deut. 21 fi, 17. 
jrhkerl ^athi'r tlie vintai;i'-. b 
5 Heb. sMtth his/.i« in srcre 



leb. mingled corn, or dredge. I Heb. 
n. 4:5. « Psa. 10;8-ll. <i Prov. 7:S, 
! John 3:20. f Pji. V:!:!'^, 1'.). II Heb. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 
3. In our distress, we should look away from man and 
seek tliat help which cometli from God only. If we can- 
not at once find him, we should still wait upon him in 
humble, believing, aifectionato prayer, till he arise and 
have mercy upon us. 

10. Tliough God may not at once give relief to his dis- 
tressed people, he is never unmindful of their sorrows ; 
nor will ho continue them a moment longer than his glory, 
their good, and the good of his kingdom require. 

15. Even the children of God sometimes exercise that 
fear of him which hath torment; and which nothing but 
the manifestation of his grace and an increase of faith and 
lovo can cast out. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

1. Sep /i« days; of righteous retribution on the just and 
unjust. 

6. The wicked ; gather the vintage of the poor. 

8. They; those whom they have robbed. 

9. They; the freebooters or robbers. Pluck thefatlier- 
Ics.i ; seize little children to use them as slaves. 

11. Which make oil; the oppressed and hungry, spoken 
of in the preceding verse, make oil and wine for their rich 
oppressors. Witliin their walls; within the inclosure of 
their houses. And suffer thirst ; they compel the poor to 
tread their wine-presses without compensation, or suffer- 
ing tlieni to drink of the wine. 

12. Lin/eth not folly; doth not punish thorn. 

13. liehel against the liglit ; the light they have ; they shun 
the light of day, and perform their deeds in darkness. 
John 3:20. 

1(>. Which they had marked for themselves in the daytime; 
or, as some render, " They shut themselves up in the day- 



14 The murderer rising with the light killcth 
the poor and needy, and in the nisjlit is as a 
thief.'' 

15 The eye also of the adulterer waiti'th fir the 
twilight,'' saying. No eye shall see me: and dis- 
guiseth his face.* 

16 In the dark they dig through houses, u-hirh 
they had marked for themselves in the daytime: 
they know not the light." 

17 For the morning is to them even as the shadow 
of death : if one know them, they are in the terrors 
of the shadow of death.' 

18 He is swift as the waters; their portion is 
cursed in the earth: he beholdeth not the way of 
the vineyards. 

19 Drought and heat consume' the snow-waters: 
.so doth the grave those ichich have sinned. 

20 The womb shall forget him; the worm shall 
feed sweetly on him ; he shall be no more re- 
membered;''' and wickedness shall be broken as 
a tree. 

21 lie evil entreateth the barren that beareth 
not, and doeth not good to the widow. 

22 He draweth also the mighty with his power: 
he riseth up, and no 77?a« is sure of life.'' 

23 Though it be given him to be in safety, where- 
on he restcth ; yet his eyes air upon their ways."* 

24 They are exalted for a little while,' but are 
gone* and brought low; they are taken* out of 
the way as all others, and cut off as the tops of the 
cars of corn. 

2.5 And if 7^ he not so now, who will make me a 
liar, and make my speech nothing worth? 



time," being afraid of tlie light. Know not the tight; care- 
fully avoid it. 

18. He is swift as the waters; literally, " he is swift upon 
the face of the waters." The whole verse is variously 
interpreted. Some understand it as a descrijition of the 
wicked man's life. He glides away with his Ixmty, as a 
swift boat on the surface of a stream, or as a lloutiug body 
is carried off by the current; his portion is cursed, be- 
cause gotten by rapine and wickedness. He beholdeth not 
the way of the vineyards; that is, hath nothing to do with 
the way of industry and diligence in lawful business. 
Others understand the verse as describing the wicked 
man's end. After he has enjoyed his day of prosperity, 
he passes away suddenly from his ill-gotten portion on 
which God's curse rests, to see his former possessions no 
more. See chap. 21:13, and note to the following verse. 

19. So doth the grave; these notoriously wicked persons 
die and .are buried and forgotten like others; there are no 
judgments here in the course of providence to distinguish 
them from the rest of mankind. 

23. His eyes; the eyes of God. He sees all their iniqui- 
ties, if he does not nnw ])iinish them. 

24. As all; men in this life, whatever be their character, 
are in many respects treated alike; and you cannot from 
their present condition determine their character. This 
was the doctrine which Job contended was taught by 
facts. 

25. Who trdl make me a liar; disprove the facts, and the 
truth which I have maintained. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. Though God sometimes bears long with atrocious 
offenders, and continues to pour blessings upon them to 
the end of life, yet he marks all their transgressions, and 
will in duo time treat them according to their works. 
599 



Address of Bildiitl, 



JOB XXVII, 



and tlic reply of Job. 



CHAPTER XXV. 



Btldad showeth that man cannot be justified before Gotl. 

THEN aiisworcMl Bildad tho Sliuliite, and said, 
2 Doiniiiiori and Tear arc with him;" he mak- 
oth pcaco in liis hiii'li i)laccs. 

3 Is tliore any number of his armies? and npori 
whom doth not liis lii^ht arise?'' 

4 Uow then can man be justified with God?"^ or 
how can he be clean that is born of a woman?'' 

5 Behold even to the moon, and it shineth not : 
yea, the stars arc not pure in iiis sight. 

6 How much less man, t/iot is a worm? and the 
son of man, which is a worm? 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

1 Job, reproving the uncharitable spirit of Bildad, 5 acknowledgeth the 
power of God to be innriite and unsearchable. 

BUT Job answered and said, 
2 How hast thou helped him that is without 
power?" hoio savcst thou the arm that hath no 
strength ? 

3 How hast thou counselled him that luith no 
wisdom? and how hast thou plentifully declared 
the thing as it is? 

4 To whom hast thou uttered words? and whose 
spirit came from thee?'' 

5 Dead thinfrs are formed from under the waters, 
and* the inhabitants thereof. 

6 Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath 
no covering." 

7 He stretcheth out the north over the empty 
place, and hangeth the earth upon nothing.'' 





4:3, 


34 : Jude 


•25. 1> Matt 


6:45 


c 


eh 


4:17, etc. 


; 15:14 


etc.; 


Psa. 143 




.•i 


1 21. d 
iSccl. 12:- 


Zech. 


13: 


; 


Cor. 0:11 


1 John 1:9: 


Key. 1:5 


«I 


a. 40:14. 


1 


. •() 


, w 


tl, 


ft Psa. 139:8,11 


Prov. 


15:11; Heb. 4 


13. 1> P 


sa 


104:2. i 


Gen. 


:", 


7; 


Prov. 30:4. 


J Psa 


97:2. 


k Prov. 8 


:-29. 


t Heb. end 


of light u 


ith dtirkne 


s. 


1 Heb. \-l 


26. m 


Kxf.d. 



13. The wicked rebel against the light of their own 
minds, as well as the light of day and the light of diviiio 
truth; they seek darkness as a coverhig for their evil 
deeds, and" hasten on to the time when they will sink self- 
condemned into the blackness of darkness for ever. 

24. Though tho difference between the righteous and 
the wicked may not be seen in their condition in this life, 
the time is at hand when all will discern between them; 
and the difference of condition between him that served 
God and him that served him not, will then be as great 
as that between heaven and hell. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

2. In his hi^h places; among tho heavenly hosts, the 
"armies" mentioned in tho following verses. 
INSTRrCTIONR. 

4. None wlio have just views of (he holiness of God and 
the sinfulness of men, will attenii)t to justify themselves 
in his sight, or expect acceptance and salvation except 
through his rich grace in Jesus Christ. 

CH.VPTER XXVI. 

2. Helped him that is u-ithout power? spoken ironically, 
implying that what Hildad had saiil was not to the point, 
and of no avail. 

5. Dead things— the irJiahilants thereof; rather, the dead 
tremble; the waters midcrneafh ami their inhabitants. 
The dead are, as the original word implies, the spirits of 
the dead in Sheol, or the world of spirits. These, as well 
as the inhabitants of the deep, feel God's almighty power 
and Ireinble before it. The world of spirits and the dee]> 
abys.icH of the sea are named as tho places fartliust re- 
moved from human vision. 

COO 



8 He bindeth up the waters in his thick *■ >' 2<84. 
clouds;' and the cloud is uot rent under iiao* 
them. 

9 He holdeth back the face of his throne, and 
spreadeth his cloud upon it.J 

10 He hath compassed the waters with bounds,^ 
until the day and night come to an end.* 

1 1 Tiie pillars of heaven tremble, and are aston- 
ished at his reproof.' 

12 He divideth tiie sea with his power,"" and by 
his understanding he smiteth through the proud.*" 

13 By hisSpirit he hath garnished the heavens;" 
his hand hath formed the crooked serpent. 

14 Lo, these are parts of his ways;'' but how 
little a portion is heard of him ? but tlie thunder 
of his power who can understand? 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

1 Job protesteth his sincerity. 8 The hypocrite is without hope. 11 
The blessiiigs wliich the wicked liav'e are turned into curses. 

OREOVER Job continued^ his parable, and 
said, 

2 Jls God liveth, 2cho hath taken away my judg- 
ment ; and the Almighty, icho hath vexed my soul ;' 

3 All the while my breath is in me, and the spirit 
of God^ is in my nostrils; 

4 My lii)s shall not speak wickedness, nor my 
tongue utter deceit. 

5 God forbid that I should justify you: till I die 
I will not remove mine integrity from me.'' 

6 My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let 
it go: my heart shall not reproach mc so long as 
I live.''' 



14:21; Isa. 51:15. 1 lUh. pride, n Dan. 4:37. o Psa. 33:0, 7. P 1 Cor. 
13:9,12. i Heh. added lo lake up. I Heb. made my soul biller ; Ruth 1:20. 
1 That is, the brealk which Cod gave him; Gen. 2:7. q ch. 2:3, 9. • Heb. 
from 7nij days, r Acts 24:10; 1 John 3:19-21. 



8. liindclh up tlie waters; the clouds convey vast masses 
of waters through the heavens, as if treasured up in bot- 
tles, chap. :i.'<:37. without being rent by their weight. 

9. lloldeth hack; covercth, or reiideroth invisible. 

13. Garnished the htaveng ; with sun, moon, and stars. 
T/ic crooked scrjieiit ; generally understood of the northern 
constellation, which has been known from remote anti- 
quity by tho name of the serpent or dragon. The book 
of .Tob contains other references to the heavenly constel- 
lations, chap. 9:0; 38:31, 32. 

11. Parts of his iraijs; the ways of God; only a small 
part of whicli are known by men. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

G. All things are naked and open to the all-seeing eye 
of God ; and the kingdoms of nature, providence, and gmce 
are entirely under his control. 

14. What we know or ciin know of the ways of God is 
but little, very little, compared with what reuuvins to bo 
known, and which will be unfolded with greater and greater 
clearness and glory for ever. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

1. Parahic; a representation from which moral instruc- 
tion may be drawn. 

2. Takei) auvy my judgment ; refused to justify him, or 
appear to do so, by removing his calamities. 

4. Not speak wichxiiicss ; by condemning himself as a hyp- 
ocrite, or approving the doctrine of his friends. 

,1. fVill not remove miuc integritij; the same as. I will hold 
f;i.st my righteousness, ver. 6. Job means that, as ho is 
conscious of having led an upriglit life, and of being still 
determined to do so, he will never acknowledge the justice 
of tho accusations which his friends bring against him. 



The icickcd arc accursed. 



JOB XXVIII. 



Of human Innwlcrlge. 



A. M. 2484. 7 Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and 
isii"'"" he that riseth up against me as the im- 
righ toons. 

8 For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though 
he hath gained, when God taketh away his soul?" 

9 Will God hear his cry when trouble cometh 
upon him?'' 

10 Will he dclighthimself in the Almighty? will 
he always call upon God?' 

Ill will teach you by* the hand of God; f/iaf 
which is with the Almighty will I not conceal. 

12 Behold, all yc yourselves have seen it; why 
tluMi arc ye thus altogether vain ? 

13 This' is the portion of a wicked man with God, 
and the heritage of oppressors, which they shall 
receive of the Almighty. 

14 Ifhischildrcube multiplied, ''/^m for the sword: 
and his offspring shall not be satisfied with bread. 

15 Those that remain of him shall be buried in 
death : and his widows shall not weep."-' 

16 Though he heap up silver as the dust, and 
prcjiare raiment as the clay ; 

17 lie may prepare it, but the just shall put if 
on, and the innocent shall divide the silver.' 

18 He buildeth his house as a moth, and as a 
booth that the keeper maketh. 

19 The rich man shall lie down, but he shall not 
be gathered:" he openeth his eyes, and he is not. 

20 Terrors take hold on him as waters, a tem- 
pest stealeth him away in the night. 



a Matt. I6:as. b Prov. 1:2S. ' Matt. 13:ai. * Or, being in. d Dent. 
2S:41; 2 Kings 10:7, 8; Ho3. 9:13. e Psa. 78:S4. t Eccl. 2:26. g Luke 



7. A.^ the wicked — as the unrigliteous; Job by no means 
approved of the wicked ; though he contended, in opposi- 
tion to liis friends, that they were sometimes prosperous 
in this world. 

8. Though he hath gained; the reputation of being pious, 
or ever so mucli worldly good. But some render, " when 
lie shall be cut off," which agrees with the following 
clause. 

11. / will teach you; teach you the true doctrine con- 
cerning the wicked. By the hand of God; or, concerning 
the hand of God. 

12. Seen it; seen illustrations of the truth in the facts of 
divine Providence. 

13. This is the portion of a wicked man; at first .sight, the 
description of Job, ver. 13-22, seems to agree altogether 
with tliat of the three friends. Hence many interpreters 
have understood it as spoken in their name, thus: " Why 
then are ye thus altogether vain, [saying,] ' This is the por- 
tion of a wicked man,' " etc. But Job undertakes, ver. 11, 
to teach his friends concerning God's providence, and 
these verses appear to contain his doctrine. It differs 
from that of his friends in this important respect, that 
according to them, calamity always speedily overtakes 
tlic wicked, and is sent only as a punishment for wicked- 
ness ; while Job's position is, that good and bad men are 
both alike subject to calamities; and yet the final end of 
the ungodly must be destruction, while the good man, 
after he is tried, shall come forth as gold, chap. 23:10. 
If at times he speaks as if he were sinking down under 
his sorrows, without the hope of ever again seeing good, 
we must remember that this is the language of impatience 
anil unbelief, to which all believers are liable in tlie hour 
of severe trial. 

19. Shall tie down; in death. Be gathered; by an honor- 
able funeral. It is of a man who has gained his riches by 
wickedness that he speaks. Openeth his eyes, and he is not ; 
perishes in the twinkling of an eye. This seems to be a 
proverbial expression. 

22. God shall cast upon him, and not spare; visit him with 



21 The east wind carrieth hini away, and he de- 
partcth : and as a storm hurleth him out of his 
place.'' 

22 For God shall cast upon him, and not s])are: 
he would fain flee* out of his hand. 

23 Men shall clap their hands at him, and shall 
hiss him out of his place. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

1 There is a knowledge of natural thiny:s. 12 But wisdom is an excel- 
lent gift of CJod. 

SURELY there is a vein* for the silver, and a 
place for gold where they fine it. 

2 Iron is taken out of the earth,** and brass is 
molten out of the stone. 

3 He setteth an end to darkness, and scarcheth 
out all perfection : the stones of darkness, and the 
shadow of death. 

4 The flood breaketh out from the inhabitant; 
even, the waters forgotten of the foot : they are dried 
up, they are gone away from men. 

5 Jlsfor the earth, out of it cometh bread : and 
under it is turned up as it were fire. 

6 The stones of it are the place of sapphires : and 
it hath dust of gold.' 

7 There is a path which no fowl knoweth, and 
which the vulture's eye hath not seen:' 

8 The lion's whelps have not trodden it, nor the 
fierce lion passed by it. 



calamities. This is often the case in this world, and always 
in the world to come. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. Conscious integrity will give confidence in God, and 
support the soul under the sorest trials ; but the want of 
it will deprive one of rest and peace. 1 John 3: 20, 21. 

10. Delight in the Almighty will be manifested by habit- 
ual communion with him ; while neglect of communion 
with God, is evidence of want of love to him and to his 
ways. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

The train of thought in this chapter is the following : 
Man can penetrate the dark recesses of the earth, as the 
miner does, and bring out to light its hidden treasures. 
But wisdom, that wisdom which consists in the know- 
ledge of God's secret comisels and the reasons of his prov- 
idential deaUngs with men, is hid from the eyes of all 
living. God alone understands such wisdom. The wis- 
dom which he proposes to men lies not in their searching 
into the mysteries of his dealings with them, but in their 
fearing and obeying him. 

3. Setteth an end to darkness; the miner with his lamp 
enlightens the dark places underground. 

4. The flood breaketh out — gone away from men; this ob- 
scure and difficult verse has been variously interpreted. 
The following rendering gives its probable meaning: "He 
[the miner] breaketh a channel [down] from the inhabi- 
tant [of the surface ;] they [the miners] who are forgotten 
of the foot [above,] dwindle [from view,] they wander [far] 
from man." They are said to be forgotten of the foot, be- 
cause they who walk over the earth's surface above them 
perceive nothing of them. 

5. Bread; grain, of which bread is made. Fire; spark- 
ling stones resembhng fire. 

7. A path; that which is made by miners deep under 
ground. 

601 



The fear of God is wisdom. 



JOB XXIX. 



Job's former prnsjperity. 



9 Ho piittotli forth liis hand upon the rock;* he 
overturueth tlic mountains by the root?. 

10 He cutteth out rivers among tlie rocks;" and 
his eye sectli every precious thing. 

11 He bindetli the floods from overflowing;*'' 
and the t/iing that is iiid bringetli he forth to light.'' 

1-2 But where shall wisdom be found? and where 
ix the place of understanding?'' 

13 Man knoweth not the price thereof;'' neither 
is it found in the land of the living. 

1-1 The depth saitli, It is not in me; and the sea 
saith, It is not with mo. 

15 It cannot be gotten for gold,* neither shall 
silver be weighed /or the price thereof.'' 

16 It cannot bo valued with the gold of Ophir, 
with the precious onyx, or the sapphire. 

17 The gold and the crystal cannot equal it : and 
the exchange of it shall not be for jewels* of line 
gold. 

18 No mention shall be made of coral,' or of 
pearls : for the price of wisdom is above rubies. 

19 The topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, nei- 
ther shall it be valued with ])ure gold. 

20 Whence then comcth wisdom? and where is 
the place of understanding?^ 

21 Seeing it is hid from tiie eyes of all living, 
and kept close from the fowls of the air.' 

22 Destruction and death say. We have heard 
the fame thereof with our ears. 

23 God understandcth the way thereof, and he 
knoweth the place thereof:" 

24 For he looketh to the ends of the earth, and 
seetti under the whole heaven;' 

25 To make the weight for the winds; and he 
weigheth the waters by measure.-' 





Or 


fl 


n(. » 


Hub. 


3:!1. 1 


Heb. weeping 


!> ch. 80:8. 


•: 1 Cor. 4:5. 


<i EccI 




■M. t 


ProT. 


3:i3-U 


. 1 Heb 


Fine 


gotd shall not be 


given for U. 


ri' 


rov. 


M: 


1. 19; 


IG:II! 


♦ Or. 


vessels. 


lOr. 


}iamoth. e ver. 


l->; Jas. 1:5. 


17. 


lOr 


heaven, h p 


rov. '.G 


iProv 


15;.!. 


J Psa. laO;?. 


Or, number. 



9. The rock; he cuts it through, undermines, breaks, and 
removes it, in search of gold and precious stones. 

11. From overjlowing ; weeping or dripping down, so as 
to annoy him in working his mine. The thing tluU is hid; 
the precious treasure. 

12. Wisdom; thd reasons of God's dispensations; or the 
wisdom which ho exercises in the government of the 
world. 

13. The price; value, or waj' to obtain it. 

IG. Gold of Ophir ; the most valuable kind. Onyx; a 
precious gem. 

18. Coral — rubies; precious stones. 

19. Topaz of Ethiopia ; a most precious gem. 

2.5, 20. To make the weight for the winds — weighcth the 
■waters — a decree for the rain — a way for the lightning; the 
argument is, that lie wlio made the world, and cstiiblishcd 
all its laws, must know how to administer its affairs. 

27. See it; that high wisdom by which he governs the 
world. 

2B. Tliat is wi.idom ; wisdom for man, in distinction from 
the divine wisdom which belongs to God alone. 

INSTRUCTION'S. 

1. The goodness of God in storing the earth with all 
needful treaRurcs, which may be nl)t:iiiiod by human skill, 
ind\i3try, and ])erscvcrance, slioidd lie devoutly acknow- 
ledged by all, ami li-ad thern gratefully to adore and serve 
him. 

9. Should men seek for heavenly wisdom as sincerely, 
carni'slly, and persoveringly as miners do for silver, and 
search for it as they do for hidden treasures, they might 
602 



20 When he made a decree for the rain, a. m. sjm. 
and a way for the lightning of the thunder ; isaj." 

27 Then did lie see it, and declare' it; he pre- 
pared it, yea, and searched it out. 

28 And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of the 
Lord,'' that is wisdom ;' and to depart from evil is 
understanding. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

Job bemoanetli tiimsc-lf of his former prosperity and honor. 

]\ TOREOVER Job continued* his parable, and 
IM said, 

2 Oh that I were as in months past, as in the 
days ii;htn God ju-eserved me; 

3 When his candle' shined upon my head, and 
ichcn by his light I walked through darkness;"" 

4 As I was in the days of my youth, when the 
secret of God was upon my tabernacle ;" 

5 When the Almighty was yet with me, when 
my children trcre about me ; 

When I washed my steps with butter," and the 
rock poured me^ out rivers of oil ; 

7 When I went out to the gate through the city, 
when I prepared my seat in the street! 

8 The young men saw me, and hid themselves: 
and the aged arose, and stood up. 

9 The jirinccs refrained talking, and laid their 
hand on their mouth. 

10 The nobles held their peace,- and their tonguo 
cleaved to the roof of their mouth. 

11 When the ear heard me, then it blessed me;' 
and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me : 

12 Because I delivered the poor that cried, and 
the fatherless, and him that had none to help him.'' 



k Deut 


4-«: 


•s.-i. 


111:10; Prov 


1:7 


0:1(1; E 


.cl. 12 


13. 


1 .la-.. 


:l:17. 


tHeb. 


added lo take 




t Or, tamp. 


ml' 


a. ■Ja:4. 


oPsa 


2i 


14. 


Ill- lit 


\a.-n. 


i Heb. 


with 




1 Heb. 3Vi« 


voic 


of the 71 


obits was 


h,d. 


I Luke 4:22; 


11:27. 


qPsa 


7-i 


12; Prov. 21: 


U\ 


M:U, 12. 













all possess that fear of the Lord which is true wisdom, 
and that knowledge of God and of his wa3'8 which is life 
to the soul. 

13. True wisdom is to be found neither in Bearching the 
recesses of the earth and ransacking the bowels of na- 
ture, nor in vain endeavors to penetrate the mysteries of 
God's being and providence. It consists rather in hum- 
bly receiving the revelation of his will which he has been 
pleased to make known to us, and conforming our lives 
to it. 

23. God, who understands all wisdom, will communicate 
to the humble and teachable, who Uiok to him by hearty 
imiviT in connection with the diligent study of his word, 
the wisdom which they need to m;ike them blessed here, 
and to prepare them for everlasting blessedness in his 
presence hereafter. 

28. Heavenly wisdom if it prevails will lead a person. 80 
far as he understands what is right, to make it iiis great 
object heartily to do it as unto the Lord ; and f.o tar as ho 
understands what is wrong, to avoid it, and thus strive 
habitually to perfect holiness in the fear of God. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

2. 7)1 months past; in the time of liis prosperih,-. 
C. Butler, and — od ; evidences of great prosperity and 
abundiuice. 

7. / prepared my seat ; as a magistrate or judge. 

8. Stootl up; as a token of rcspeot, 

10, Aiut their tongue rlrinvd lo Ihr rnof of their month ; they 
were overawed and held their iieace. 

11. Gave wdncss to me; lo his integrity and usefulness. 



JoUs former honor is 



JOB XXX, 



turned into ronffinpi. 



I. M. 2484. 
J. t;. about 
1520. 



13 The blnssing of liim that was ready 
to perisli came upon lue : and I caused the 
widow's lieart to sina; for joy. 

14 I put oil righteousness, and it chitlicd nie:** 
my judgment teas as a robe and a diadcni. 

15 I was eyes to the blind,'' and feet teas I to tiic 
lame. 

Iti I was a fatlier to the poor: and tlic cause 
n-Ziich I knew not I searched out.*^ 

17 And I brake the jaws* of the wicked, and 
plucked ^ the spoil out of his teeth. 

18 Tiien I said, I shall die in my nest, and I sluill 
mnltiply my days as the sand.'' 

li) My root was spread* out by the waters, and 
tiie dew lay all night upon my branch. 

•20 My glory was fresh^ in me, and my liow was 
renewed' in my hand.'' 

21 Unto me me7i gave car, and waited, and kept 
silence at my counsel. 

•JlJ After my words they spake not again ; and 
my speech dropped upon them. 

23 And they waited for me as for the rain ; and 
they opened their mouth wide as for the latterrain. 

24 If I laughed on them, they believed it not; 
and tiie light of my countenance they castnotdown. 

25 I chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt 
as a king in the army, as one that comforteth the 
mourners. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

1 Ji'b's honor is turned into extreme contempt, l-'j His prosperity into 
calamity. 

J^UT now they that are younger^ than I have 
3 me in derision, whose fathers I would have 
disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock. 



al.i. 61:10; Eph. 0:14. b Num. 10;3I . c Prnv. -iO:?. ■ lieh. jaw t.tll,, 
OT i;riililfrs. t Heb. ra.tr. d Pra. 30:6. I Heh. opfiutl. ! Heb. new. I Ileb. 
cIuuiicjI. « Gen. 49: -21. T Heb. o//eK'i,r ,/aj/s. • Or, ilark as t/ie night. 



2 Yea, wlicreto might the strength of tlieir hands 
profit me, in whom old ago was iicrislicdV 

3 For want and famine they were solitary;* flee- 
ing into the wilderness in former time* desolate 
and waste: 

4 Who cut up mallows by tlie bushes, and jiuii- 
per-roots_/b;- their meat. 

5 They were driven forth from among men, (tlicy 
cried after them as after a thief,) 

() To dwell in the clefts of the valleys, in cavc^ * 
of the earth, and in the rocks. 

7 Among the bushes they brayed ; under tlic 
nettles tiiey were gathered togetlicr. 

8 They were children of fools, yea, children of 
base men:^'' they were viler than the earth. 

y And now am I their song,- yea, I am their by- 
word.'' 

10 They abhor me, they flee far from me, and 
spare not to spit in' my face.' 

11 Because he hath loosed my cord, and afflicted 
mc, they have also let loose the bridle before me. 

12 Upon my right /(avid rise the youth ; they push 
away my feet, and they raise up against nie the 
ways of their destruction. 

13 They mar my path, they set forward my calam- 
ity, they have no helper. 

14 They came upon mc as a wide breaking in of 
waters: in the desolation they rolled themselves 
upon me. 

15 Terrors are turned upon mo : they pursue my 
soul" as the wind: and my welfare passcth away 
as a cloud. 

16 And now my soul is poured out upon rac;^ 
the days of affliction have taken hold upon me. 

17 My bones are pierced in me iu the night sea- 
son : and my sinews take no rest. 



14. It clothed me; uprightness was that by which he was 
known. It was his covering and ornament. 

16. / searched out ; he inquired into and examined with 
impartiality the cause of the stranger, as well as tliat of 
his acquaintance. 

17. iSrake tlic jaws; overcame the oppressors, and deUv- 
ered tlie oppressed. 

18. Die mmij nest; notmeetwitli reverses, but live long, 
and go to the grave in peace. 

19. Mij root was spread out; he flourished like a tree by 
a fountain of water. 

20. ilij bote was renewed; the bow is an emblem of 
strength, and a means of defence. The meaning is, he 
was lispt constantly strong. 

22. They spake not again; men were satisfied with his 
decisions. 

2:i Theij waited for me; to speak and settle their diffi- 
culties. 

24. Lauglicd; smiled kindly. Believed it not; for joy. 
YtA. 126:1. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Prosperity is the gift of God. He grants as much of 
it to his people, and continues it as long, as he sees best ; 
but no one should feel that it will certainly be continued 
to the end of life, or forget that it may soon and suddenly 
be taken away. 

18. t'oiifidence in the continuance of peace and prosper- 
ity is dangerous, and often followed by disappointment 
and sorrow. If the Lord will, we shall live ; and wo shall 
be in this condition or that, in prosperity or adversity, as 
Beemeth good in his sight. 



t Heb yfslentight. 1 Heb. holrs. S H 
l:). s I'sa. 0'.):I2; Lam.3:14.d3. hot 
from. ilsa. 50:0; Matt.2S:6<; 27:30. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

2. Old age was perished ; they were prematurely old and 
feeble on account of their poverty. 

3. Fleeing into tlie wilderness ; they were vagabonds, slnin- 
ning the society of their fellow-men. 

4. Mallows; a plant like spinach, the leaves of which 
are used by the poor, both cooked and raw, as a relish for 
their bread. Juniper-roots; the Hebrew word denotes a 
species of broom, the roots of which are very bitter, and 
are used for making charcoal. Compare Psa. 120:4. For 
their meat; that is, for their living or sustenance. The 
roots were probably not eaten, but either used for cooking 
their food, or sold to obtain food. 

5. Theij were driven forth ; on account of their crimes. 

7. Brayed ; uttered their cries. 

8. Viler than the earth ; or driven out from the earth ; 
that is, from the habitable earth into the desert. 

11. He; God. Loosed my cord; taken aw.ay my former 
authority, by which they were overawed and restr;uned. 
Let loose the brulle; cast off all restraint in afflicting mc. 

12. Raise up against me; this is a figure taken from mil- 
itary operations. They cast up their mounds against me 
as a besieging army against a fortress. The ways cf their 
destruction; ways, that is, embankments, that have for their 
object to destroy me. 

13. They have no helper; they need no one either to in- 
cite them, or help them complete their work of destruc- 
tion. 

17. My bones are pierced ; expressive of the keenest and 
most aggravated pain. 

603 



Joh bemoancth his slate, 



JOB XXXI. 



and protesfdh his initgrity. 



18 By the great force of my disease is my gar- 
ment changed : it biudeth me about as the collar 
of my coat. 

19 lie hath cast me into tlie mire, and I am l)e- 
come like dust and ashes." 

20 I cry unto thee, and thou dost not hear me : 
I stand up, and tiiou regardest me not. 

21 Thou art become" cruel to mo: with thy 
strong hand* thou opposest thyself against me. 

22 Thou liftest me up to the wind; thou caus- 
est me to ride upon it, and dissolvest my sub- 
stance.* 

23 For I know t/iat thou wilt bring me to death, 
and to the house appointed for all living.'' 

24 Howbeit he will not strctcii out kis hand to 
the grave,* thougli they cry in his destruction. 

25 Did not I weep for him that was in trouble?" 
was not my soul grieved for the poor? 

26 Wlien 1 look(Ml for good, then evil came unto 
me:'' and when I waited for light, there came dark- 
ness. 

27 My bowels boiled, and rested not: the days 
of affliction prevented me. 

28 1 went mourning without the sun : I stood 
up, and I cried in the congregation. 

29 1 am a brother to dragons, and a companion 
to owls.^ 

30 My skin is black upon me, and my bones are 
burned with heat.'' 

31 My harp also is turned to mourning, and my 
organ into the voice of them that weep. 



a Ch. a::ti. 
wisttotn. b Ge 
1 Or, ostrUhes. 



' Heb. turned lobe, t Heb. lAe slren^lh of thy hand. 1 Or, 

\. a: 19. « Heb. heap. 1 Hcb. hard of day. ' Jec. 8:r5. 

d Lim. 4;3: 5:1U. e Mitt. 5:4i rProv. 6:45. 5 Jer. 



CHAPTER XXXI. B.c.iJ,5}^: 

Job maketh a solemn protestation of his integrity in several duties. 

I MADE a covenant with mine eyes;* why then 
should 1 tiiink u])oii a maid?' 

2 For what jiortion of God is there from above? 
and what inheritance of the Almighty from on high? 

3 /snotdcstructiontotiic wicked? anda strange 
punishment to the workers of iniquity? 

4 Doth not he see my ways, and count all my 
stcps?"^ 

5 If I have walked with vanity, or if my foot 
hath hasted to deceit;'' 

6 Let me be weighed in an even balance,* that 
God may know mine integrity. 

7 If my step hath turned out of the way, and ray 
heart walked after mine eyes,' and if any blot hath 
cleaved to my hands; 

8 T/itn let me sow, and let another eat ; yea, 
let my offspring Ijc rooted out. 

9 If my heart have been deceived by a woman, 
or if I have laid wait at my neighbor's door; 

10 Then let my wife grind unto another, and let 
others bow down upon her. 

11 For this is a heinous crime; yea, it is an 
iniquity to be punished by the judges.' 

12 For it is a lire that consumeth to destruction," 
and would root out all mine increase. 

13 If I did despise the cause of my man-servant or 
of my niaid-scrvant, when they contended witli me ; 

14 Wiiat then shall I do when God riscth up? 
and when he visiteth, what shall I answer hiin? 



18. My garment cimnged; defiled and made stiff from my 
running sores. But some understand the word garment 
to refer to his skin, which is disfigured and made stifT by 
his sores. 

20. T/iee; God. Dost not liear; dost not remove my dis- 
tress. 

24. Howbeit — in his destruction; the meaning of this verse 
is uncertain. Some propose to render it thus: Surely there 
can be no prayer [prayer can avail nothing] when he [God] 
stretchcth out his hand: in his calamity [when God sends 
calamity upon a man] shall there then be a cry ? [can a cry 
to God avail any thing?] 

25. Did not I weep; at the calamities of others, when he 
was in prosperity. 

26. I looked for good ; in connection with his charitable 
deeds. 

27. Prevented; went before, came upon me. 

29. Dragons; the original word means beasts of the 
desert, like jackals, that are noted for their mournfid cry. 
Owls; or ostriches, also well known as raising a loud cry, 
which much resembles the roar of the lion. 

IXSTr.l'CTIOXS. 

1. Great prosperity may sjieedily be followed by great 
afflictions. None, therefore, should be unduly lifted up by 
the one, or cast down by the other. Both are under the 
control of God; and in both, the great object of all should 
be to know him. 

9. To be the song of the drunkard and the jest of the 
vilest of mankind has often been the lot of the virtuous; 
C8pec:ially of those who have been active in bringing pun- 
ishment upon the vicious. 

17. Bodily diseases are often more distressing, and the 

pains wliich they occasion arc harder to bear, than any 

can realize, except those who endure them ; and when 

Buch are neglected and reviled by those who ought to pity 

604 



:I9; John 1:13. h Psa. JI-JO, 2!. • Hcb. Aim nvi?A m« in io/onrej o/ 
Slice, i Ezek. 14:3-7. j Lev. 20:10. k .Mai. 3:5; Heb. 13:4. 



and relieve them, the evil is greatly increased. Ch. 16 : 1-5 ; 
19:20, 21. 

20. When good men in distress cry unto God, though 
he hears and will eventually answer, and do exceeding 
abundantly above all that they ask, yet he may not, and 
often docs not, at once relieve them ; but calls them to let 
patience have its perfect work, that thus they may be 
perfect and entire, wanting nothing. 

23. The nearness and certainty of death should lead all 
to be habitually prepared for it; and though deeds of 
mercy for Christ's sake will not secure uninterrupted pros- 
perity in this world, not even the giving of a cup of cold 
water to his disciples will fail of an abundant reward in 
the life to come. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

1. Made a cmvnant with mine cjirs; that they should look 
upon nothing that could excite I'miiuro desire. 

2. Wtiat portion of God; what portion to one who trans- 
gresses his law. 

4. He; God. 

5. Hasted to deceit; to execute a deceitful or fraudulent 
purpose. 

6. Let me be weighed in an even balance; bo righteously 
judged. 

7. If any blot hath cleaved to my hands; if ho had com- 
mitted any crime. 

9. Laid wait; to commit adultery with his neighbor's 
wife. 

11. Ptini.ilicd by the judges; it is an oflenco not only 
against individuals lull ;igainst society, and as such to bo 
punished by the magistrates. 

13. If I did despise the cause of my man-servant or — maid- 
scrvnnl ; if he hail not been strictly impartial and just tow- 
ards them, as well as towanls his equals. 

14. Risclh up; to judgment. 



Joh solemnly ajipealdh 



JOB XXXI. 



to the Almighty. 



B u ib^i ^^ -^^^^ ""* '^^ ^'^^* made mo in tlic -n-omb 
■ is-.u"" make him?" and did not one fasliion us in 
the womb?" 

It; If 1 have withheld the poor from i^efr desire, 
or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail ; 

17 Or have eaten my morsel myself alone, and 
the fatherless iiath not eaten thereof ; 

18 (For from my youth he was brought up with 
me, as ^iith a father, and I have guided her^ from 
my mother's womb;) 

19 If I have seen any perish for want of cloth- 
in:|, or any poor without covering; 

20 If his loins have not blessed me," and if he 
were not warmed with the fleece of my sheep ; 

21 If I have lifted up my hand against the father- 
less, wlien I saw my help in the gate : 

22 Then let mine arm fall from my shoulder- 
blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone.' 

23 For destruction from God was a terror to 
me,'^ and by reason of his highness I could not 
endure. '' 

24: If I have made gold my hope, or have said to 
tlie fine gold. Thou art my confidence;" 

25 If I rejoiced because my wealth was great, 
and because my hand had gotten^ much; 

2G If I beheld the sun' when it shined, or the 
moon walking in brightness;"' 

27 And my heart hath been secretly enticed, or 
my mouth hath kissed my hand:* 

28 This also were an iniquity to be punished by 



' ProT. 2-^:2. * Or, did he not fashion us in one womb? t That is, Ihe 
milow. I> Deut. 2J:13 I Or. Ihe channrt bone, c Psa. 119:1-20. 3 Psa. 
76:7. elTim. 0:ir iUi-h. foml. I Hi^b. lisht. 1 Heh. bright. • Heb. 
7ni/ hand hath kissed my mouth, f Deut. i7:'2-7. t Heb. palate. S Eccl. 



1.5. Make him; we had one common Creator, have cue 
common nature, and are brethren. 

10. Their desire; what they ought to desire and might 
reasonably expect. 

18. Her; the widow. From my mother's womb; from his 
earhest years. 

21. Saw my help in the gate; saw those ready to aid and 
abet me before the magistrate in any course I miglit take. 
The gate is mentioned as the place where courts were held. 

23. Could not endure; to oppress the fatherlLSs ; ho was 
kept from it by the fear of God. 

27. Secretly enticed ; to worship any of the heavenly 
bodies. Kissed my hand; a form of idolatrous worship. 

29. Lifted up myself; been elated, and rejoiced when 
evil came upon his enemy. 

31. Uhthatwehadofhisflesh.' — cannot be satisfied; or,assome 
render, " Where is one who was not satisfied from his flesh?" 

33. Hiding mine iniquity ; from men, and trying to hide 
it from God. 

34. That I kept silence; when he should have spoken. 
Went not out; from fear of the contempt of his neighbors. 
Some have supposed the meaning of this verse to be. Let 
me be confounded before the multitude, let the contempt 
of families follow me, let me be silent and not go abroad, 
if I have covered my transgressions, or committed any of 
the crimes above-mentioned. 

35. Written a book ; written out the charges against him, 
that he might understand and answer them ; have a fair 
trial, and be acquitted. 

30. Take it upon my shoulder^- sustain his innocence, and 
in such a manner that all might see it. He would even 
wear the disproved accusation as an ornament. 

37. Ai a prince would I go ; with confidence to be acquit- 
ted and approved ; not as a criminal to be condemned. 

38. If my land cry against me; for having wrongfully 
obtained it, or not justly rewarding those who have cul- 
tivated it. 



the judge ;<■ for I should have denied the God that 
is above. 

29 If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that 
hated me, or lifted up myself when evil found 
him; 

30 Neither have I suffered my mouth^ to sin by 
wishing a curse to his soul.''' 

31 If tlie men of my tabernacle said not, OIi tliat 
we had of his flesh! we cannot be satisfied. 

32 Tlie stranger did not lodge in the street:'' 
but I opened my doors to the traveller.* 

33 If I covered my transgressions as Adam,^' by 
hiding mine iniquity in my bosom: 

34 Did I fear a great multitude^ or did the con- 
tempt of families terrify me, that I kept silence, 
and went not out of the door ? 

35 Oh that one would hear me! behold, my de- 
sire is, that tlie Almiglity would answer me,' and 
that mine adversary had written a book. 

36 Surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and 
bind it as a crown to me. 

37 I would declare unto him the number of my 
steps; as a prince would I go near unto liim. 

38 If my land cry against me, or that the furrows 
likewise thereof complain;^ 

39 If I have eaten the fruits* thereof without 
money, or have caused the owners thereof to lose 
their life:^'' 

40 Let thistles grow instead of wheat, and cockle* 
instead of barley. The words of Job are ended. 



5:6. h Isa. 68:7; Heb. 13:2. t Or. tray. S Or, after the manner of men 
i Gen. 3:r, 12. j Exod. 23:2. I Or, my sign is that l/ie Almishlt/ will an 
swerme. 1 Heh. weep. • Huh. strength. 1 Or, Ihe soul of the owners there 
of to expire, ot breallte out k 1 Kings 21:13. t Or, noisome weeds. 



39. Without money; without fully paying for it, or for 
the labor bestowed upon it. Caus'ed — to lose their life; by 
taking away their means of support. 

40. Thistles — and cockle; noisome weeds. The words of 
Job are ended; his discussion with his friends. He speaks 
afterwards only in two short prayers and confessions to 
God. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. True religion leads those who have it to feel that the 
eye of God is upon them, and strive to regulate their ap- 
petites and passions, and all their thoughts and feelings, 
as well as their outward conduct, according to his will. 

5. Piety towards God will lead to justice, impartiality, 
and kindness towards men ; to honesty, cliastity, diligence, 
sobriety, and all those virtues which promote the welfare 
of individuals and of the community. 

11. Infidelity to the marria.ge covenant is a great crime, 
and those who are guilty of it are among the basest and 
most mischievous of men. 

13. Servants and masters have the same heavenly Par- 
ent, and are brethren ; and they are bound to treat each 
other as such, doing, each to the other, as they ought to 
wish that the other should do to them. 

10. True religion is compassionate, and leads those who 
have it to assist the widow and the fatherless, the poor, the 
sick, and the destitute, and in various ways, as they have 
opportunity and ability, to help the needy. 

21. Piety in magistrates will lead to fidelity in the dis- 
charge of oflicial duties ; will secure the weak and help- 
less against the encroachments of the strong and overbear- 
ing ; and will afford protection to the just rights of all. 

24. The increase of riches increases the danger of set- 
ting the heart on them ; and men are often secretly idola- 
ters, without publicly bowing down to idols. They deny 
to God the homage of their hearts, and live without loving 
or obeying him. 

32. It is exceedingly difficult for a man to recount his 
605 



Elihu rejiroveth Juh 



JOB XXXIII. 



and his t/tree friends. 



CHAPTER XXXII, 



1 Eliha is angry with Job and his three friends. C Because wisdom 
Cometh not from age, he excuselh the boldness of his youth. 1 1 Ho 
reproveth them for not satisfyin^j of Job. It) His zeal to speak. 

SO these three men ceased to answer* Job, be- 
. ._ cause lie iras ri>>-ht(H)us lu liis own c)-es. 

'2 ThLMi was kindled the wrath of Elihu the son 
of Barachel the Buzitc, of the kinilretl of Ram: 
against Job was his wrath kindled, because he 
justified iiimself' rather than God. 

3 Also ngain.st his throe friends was his wrath 
kindled, because tiiey had found no answ-er, and 
yd had condemned Job. 

4 Now Elihu had waiteil till Job liad spoken,' 
because they uryr elder' than he. 

.') When Elihu saw that there was no answer in 
the mouth ol' these three men, then his wrath was 
kindled. 

G And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzile an- 
.swered and said, I am young,' and ye are very old ; " 
wherefore I was afraid, and durst not' show you 
mine opinion. 

7 I said, Days should s]ipak, ami multitude of 
years should teach wisdom. 

8 But there is a spirit in man;" and the inspi- 
ration of the Almighty givcth thein uuderstand- 
iiig." 

9 Great men are not always wise;'' neither do 
the aged understand judgment. 

10 Therefore I said, Uearkeii to me; I also w'ill 
show mine opinion. 

11 Behold, 1 waited for your words; I gave ear 
to your reasons," whilst ye searched out what to 
say.* 

12 Yea, I attended unto you, and behold, there 
lias none of you that convinced Job, or that an- 
swered his w^ords : 



• Heb. fram aniiocrmg. t Heb. his foul. X Heb. expected Job in words, 
i Hub. eliler for dai/.f. I lleh. few of dai/s. »ch. 15:11). ^ Ueh. fenred. 
bProir. -JUiaV. cProv. 2:Ii; Dan. a:21. d Matt. 1 1:25: 1 Cor. 1: 'J?. 'Heb. 
understandings. 1 lleh. words, ejcr. 9;d3. I Qr^ ordered. 5 Heb removed 



virtues and not be elatetl, and it is ordinarily not best to 
atti-njpt it; yet sometimes it is proper, and if done with a 
right sphit, may be useful; but much grace is needful to 
prevent being so lifted up with pride as to fall into the 
condemnation of the devil. 

39. To withhold a just reward from the laborer, or cat the 
fruit of his toil without compensation, is a heinous sin ; and 
tliongh it may be hidden from tncn, it will bo bronglit to 
light by God, and be visited with his sore disi>leasure. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

1. Wa.1 ri<rhteou.'< in his own cijcs; maintained that he was 
no hypocrite, but a pious and benevolent man. 

8. A spirit in man; that is, not in old men alone, but in 
all men. They are enlightened by God to discern between 
what is right and what is wrong. Elihu uses this as an 
argument why he, a young man, should 8i)eal<. 

I'i. Lest ye should say; tliey had not been jiermitted to 
convince .lob or settle the controversy, lost they should 
attribute it to their own wisdom and bo lifted up with 
pride, (iod, and not man, must convince .Job of his errors. 

K. With your speeclics; in the manner which they at- 
tempted. 

1.5. They; Job's three friends. 

19. h a.<t wine which hiilli no vent; he was so full of the 
subject that he could not refrain from 8])eaking. New 
hollies; leathern bottles tilled with new wine in a state of 
fermentation. ('om]iare .Mall. 9:17. 

21. Accept any man's person; use any partiality. 
C06 



1;5 Lest ye should say, We have found out a. m. ;4W. 
wisdom:'' Godthrustctlihiiudown.not man. i^ 

14 Now he hath not ilirccted^ //w words against 
rae: neither will I answer him with your speeches. 

15 They were amazed, they answered no more: 
they left olT speaking.* 

16 When 1 had waited, (for they spake not, but 
stood still, and answered no more.) 

17 1 .mid, I will answer also my part; I also w ill 
show mine opinion. 

18 For I am full of matter;' the spirit within 
me^ constraineth me. 

19 Behold, my belly is as wine trhich hath no 
vent;" it is ready to burst like new bottles. 

20 I will speak, that I may be refreshed ;' I will 
open my lips and answer. 

21 L(!t me not, I pray you, accept any man's per- 
son ; neither let me give flattering titles unto man. 

22 For I know not to give flattering titles;'' in 
so doing my ]\Iaker would soon take me away.^ 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

I Elihu ofTereth himself instead of God. with sinci-rity and meekness, to 
reason with Job. S He exruseth (jod from ^^ivinj;: man an account 
of his ways, by his greatness. ]4 God calleth man to repcnrance by 
vision.s, ID by afBictions, 23 and by his ministry. 31 He inciteth Job 
to attention. 

T\ THEREFORE, Job, I pray thee, hear my 
V V speeches, and hearken to all my words. 

2 Behold, now 1 have opened my mouth, my 
tongue hatli spoken in my mouth.' 

3 My words shall he of the uprightness of my 
heart :" and my lips shall utterknowledge clearly.' 

4 TheHpiritof God hath made mo, and thebreath 
of the Almighty hath given me life. 

5 If thou canst answer inc, set thy leords in order 
before me, stand up. 

speeches from themselves. I Heb. words. T Heb. of my belly. * Heb. is 
not opened, t Heb. breathe. I Gal. 1:10. e P»a. li.2, 3. I Heb palate. 
li Prov. b:()-0. iTit. 2:7, a. 



22. I know not; it was not his character, or habit. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. In earnest controversies, an impartial bystander may 
often see much to disapprove and comlemn in both par- 
ties; and when they have finished their arguments, he 
may to advant;ige, in a idain, kind, and friendly maimer, 
point out their mistakes. But it is generally not best to 
attempt this, till the heat of the controversy is over, ami 
they are prepared to receive his suggestions with atten- 
tion and candor. 

8. All true wisdom is from above, and comes down from 
the Father of lights; and he sometimes imparts more of 
it to the young than to the aged, and makes those who 
are tiuight wiser than their teachers. 

13. Sometimes the errors of men arc such that none but 
God can convince them, or lead them to embrace the truth ; 
and in our attempts to do it we should look up to him 
without whose influence all human efforts will fail. 

21. Imiiartiality in the treatment of disputants is essen- 
tial to mutual conviction ; and a deep sense of account- 
ability to ti oil, before whom all must shortly appear, should 
ever pervade our minds when we undertake to point out 
the errors and correct the mistakes of our fellow-men. 

CHAPTER XX XI 11. 

3. Clearly; purely, with sincerity, as the original word 
implies. 

4. //«//( made — given me life ; halh matle nic a man en- 
dowed with reason. See note to chap. 32:8. 



Gml often udleih 



JOB XXXIII. 



imn tn repentance. 



AM 2W1. (i Behold, I am accordinjr to tliy wish" 
lio' ' in God's stead:" I also am Ibnued^ out of 
the clay. 

7 Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid,'' 
neither shall my hand be heavy upon thee. 

8 Surely tliou hast spoken in my hearing,* and I 
have heard the voiee of thy words,'' saying, 

9 I am clean without transgression, I am inno- 
cent; neither is there iniquity in me. 

10 Behold, he tindeth occasions against me, he 
couiitcuh me for his enemy j"^ 

11 lie putteth my feet iu the stocks, he marketh 
all my patlis.*^ 

VI lichold, in this thou art not just : I will an- 
swer thee, that God is greater than man. 

13 Why dost thou strive against him?'' for he 
giveth not account^ of any of his matters.'^ 

14: For God speakoth once, yea, twice,'' yd man 
perceiveth it not. 

15 In a dream, in a vision of the night, when 
deep sleep falleth upon men, in slumberings upon 
the bed ; 

IG Tlien he oponeth^ the ears of men, and seal- 
eth their instruction, 

17 That he may withdraw man from his pur- 
pose,'' and hide pride from man.' 

IS He keepeth back his soul from the pit, and 
his life from perishing by* tlie sword. 

19 He is cluisteued also with pain upon his bed, 
and the multitude of his bones witli strong pain:^ 

20 So that his life abhorreth bread, and his soul 
dainty meat.'' 



■ H^h. mouth. »ch. 9:M, 33. t Ueb cut. bch. U:34 ! TIc-b. , 
(IT; l(i 17; iJ:!!, 12; •.27;5, «; •2'.):14. d ch. 19:11. e cli. 1:1 



6. In God's Stead; lie would speak for God, :uul attempt 
to justify him in his dealings with Job. 

7. My terror — my hand; he rctl-rs to Job's words, cliap. 
9:32-35; 13:20-22. 

9. lam innocent; Job meant, that he was innocent of tlie 
crimes with which his friends charged him ; but Elihu 
interpreted what he liaJ said, to mean that he was free 
from all sin. 

10. He; God. 

11. He piUtcth my feet in the stocks; shuts me up to great 
calamities. 

12. Thou art not just ; in thus speaking of God as if he 
were unjust and cruel. 

U. For God speaketh; though God will not allow himself 
to be arraigned for his dealings at any human tribun;d,yet 
he graciously reveals his will to the liuml.ile and teachable, 
by night visions, ver. 15-18 ; and by fatherly chastisement, 
vcr. 19-22. They who will attend to these admonitions 
shall be restored to God's favor and their former prosperi- 
ty, ver. 23-30. Such is the course of Elihu's argument. 

lli. Sealeth their instruction ; impresses instruction upon 
their minds and hearts, as to the consequences of virtue 
and vice. 

17. His purpose; his purpose of committing iniquity. 
Huh pride from man; make him humble. 

IS. He keepeth back; or, that he may keep back; for this 
verse expresses the end for which God instructs men iu 
visions of the night. 

19. He IS chastened; Elihu here names the second way in 
wliich God impresses instruction upon man, namely, by 
visiting him with sickness, and in various ways afQicting 
liim, not for his destruction, but for his profit. 

22. To the destroyers; the ministers of death, whether in 
the form of diseases or of destroying angels. 

23. A messenger — an interpreter ; a messenger sent to the 



21 His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot 
be seen ; and his bones that were not seen stick 
out. 

22 Yea, his soul drawetli near unto tlic grave, 
and his life to the destroyers. 

23 If there be a messenger with him, an inter- 
preter, one among a thousand, to show unto man 
liis uprightness; 

24 Then lie is gracious unto him, and saitli. De- 
liver him from going down to the pit: I have 
found a ransom.' 

25 His flesh shall be fresher than a child's:' he 
shall return to tlie days of his youth : 

26 He shall pray unto God, and he will be fa- 
vorable unto him: and he shall see his face with 
joy; for he will render unto man his righteous- 
ness. 

27 He lookefh u]joii men, and if any sa}", I Jiave 
sinned," and perverted that ichich ivas right,' and 
it profited me not ; 

28 He will deliver his soul from going into the 
pit, and his life' shall see the light. 

29 Lo, all these things worketh God oftentimes* 
witli man, 

30 To bring back his soul from the pit,"" to be 
cnliglitened with the light of the living." 

31 Mark well, Job, hearken unto me : hold 
thy peace, and I will speak. 

32 If thou hast any thing to say, answer me: 
speak, for I desire to justify thee. 

33 If not, hearken unto me : hold thy iieacc, and 
I shall teach thee wisdom. 



>'.</«. I Or. nnnlontmenl. ( H.-h. r/./W/io 
nnil sny. I liave sinned. 1 IJohn 1 :a. ^i 
mul m,j life. • Heb. twice and Ihrire. m P 
l.i; Acts '-iC: la. 



man in his affliction to interpret to him its meaning, and 
show him his duty in regard to it. Some understand here 
a heavenly messenger, that is, an angel ; others, an earthly 
messenger. The last interpretation is favored by the 
words, '• one among a thousand," which imply that among 
men such a wise expounder of God's will is rarely to be 
found. To show unto man his uprightness; to show him the 
uprightness or righteousness of God in his afflictions, that 
they are designed to lead him to repentance, and thus 
prc]>are him for a renewal and increase of blessings. 

24. Then he is gracious ; then, when he repents and ac- 
knowledges God's uprightness, God will be gracious to 
the penitent, and deliver him from death through the ran- 
som or atonement he has provided. 

25. His flesh shall he fresher than a child's; he shall be 
restored to perfect health, and put on again the freshness 
and vigor of youth. 

27, 28. He looketh upon men — shall see the light; of this pas- 
s;ige there are two readings, one given by our translators in 
the text, the other in the margin, tlius: " He [the restored 
penitent] shall look upon men, and say, I have sinned, and 
perverted right, and it profited me not. He hath deliv- 
ered ray soul from going into the pit, and my life sees the 
light." If any say, I have sinned; repent of and forsake his 
sins. See the light ; be visited with prosperity. 

30. .Tb bringback his soul from the pit ; the general doc- 
trine of Elihu was, that the Lord sends afflictions to bring 
men to repentance, and thus to save them from death and 
fit them for the blessings of his grace. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. If we cannot justify ourselves before frail sinful men 
like ourselves, much less can we before the omniscient, 
heart-searching, rein-trying God ; and wo should not at- 
tempt it, but confess and forsake our sins and turn heart- 
ily to him. that we may find mercy. 
607 



God omnijiotent 



JOB XXXIV. 



cannot be vnjust. 



CHAPTER XXXIV, 



1 Elihii accuseth Job for charging God -wiih injustice. 10 God omnip- 
otent f annot be unjust. 31 Man must humble himself unto God. 34 
Elihu reproveth Job. 

FURTHERMORE Elihu answered and said, 
2 Hear my words, O ye wise mm; and give 
ear unto nie, ye that have knowledge. 

3 For the ear trieth words, as the mouth' tasteth 
meat. 

4 Let us choose to us judgment: let us know 
among ourselves what is good. 

5 For Job hath said, I am righteous ; and God 
hatli taken away my judgment.'' 

6 Should I lie against my right? my wound* ?^s 
incurable without transgression. 

7 What man is like Job, who driuketh up scorn- 
ing like water ; 

8 Wiiich goeth in company with the workers of 
iniquity, and walkcth with wicked men? 

9 For he hath said. It profiteth a man nothing 
that he should delight himself with God.*" 

10 Therefore hearken unto me, ye men of under- 
standing:* far be it from God, that he should do 
wickedness ; and//-07?!. the Almighty, that he should 
commit iniquity. 

11 For the work of a man shall he render unto 
him, and cause every man to find according to his 
■ways." 

12 Yea, surely God will not do wickedly, neither 
vill the Almighty pervert judgment. 

13 Who hath given him a charge over the earth? 
or who hath disposed the whole world ?^ 

14 If he set his heart upon man,' ?yhe gather 
unto iiimself his spirit and his breath: 

15 All flesh shall jjcrish together, and man shall 
turn again unto dust. 

16 If now thou had understanding, hear this: 
hearken to the voice of my words. 

IT Shall even he that hateth right govern?^'' and 
wilt thou condemn him that is most just? 



• Hcb. palate. » ch 


•J7:'2. 


t Ueb. orro«%oh.0:4. 


l-ch. i 


:22,23 


1 llcb. 


kfirt. 


« Rev 2-2:13. 


SHeb 


all of it. 


1 Heb. hi. 




IHeh. 


biiid. 


i 2 Sam. 


a:i::i. 


« Kxod. -irl-.-ll 


' HL-b. \i:-2i. 


r IPct. 1: 


17. 


• He 


1. they 


ihall take 


away 


the mighty, t 


2Chr. 


10:9. i 


I'sa. 139:2 


3. 


J Am 


03 9:2, 


3; Heb. 


4:l:). 


k Rev. 0:15, 


10. 1 


Isi. .l-.':3 


1 Cor. lU 


13 


t H 


b. go. 


I Heb. 



10. Great care should bo taken, that in our distresses 
we do not seem to reflect upon tlie righteousness, wisdom, 
or goodness of God; or attribute to him, even in thought 
or feeling, any thing derogatory to his holy and iJorfect 
character. 

17. God addresses men in a great variety of ways, some- 
times in mercies and sometimes in trials ; but his object 
is to humble them for their sins, lead them to repentance, 
and thus prepare them for his everlasting love. 

23. The great and effectual teacher as to the righteous- 
ness of God in all his dispensations, and the sinfulness of 
men, is the Holy Spirit; and if a man receives his teach- 
ing and obeys it, God will be gracious to him, overrule 
his trials for his good, and through the ransom which lie 
has provided, save him with an everlasting salvation. 

26. The humble and penitent soul has access to (iod by 
prayer and supplication ; and he receives gracious answers 
of peace, and is ripening.under all tlie dispensations of I'ro v- 
idence, for complete deliverance from sin, and an entrance 
into that rest which remaineth for llie people of God. 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

■1. Jial foment; that which is right. 

5. Tiikcn away mij jmlgmcnl; alllicts me without cause. 
608 



18 7,9 it fit to say to a kinL^ Thou art a. m zwt 

• 1 Ti J 1 ■ 1- ' 11 .1.. B c sbont 

Wicked.'' and to princes, ie are ungodlv.''^ i;-j) 

19 How mxich less to him that acccpteth not the 
persons of princes,"^ nor rogardeth the rich more 
than the poor?"* for they all are the work of his 
hands. 

20 In a moment shall they die, and the people 
shall be troubled at midnight, and pass away : and 
the mighty shall be taken away" without hand. 

21 For his eyes are upon the ways of man,'' and 
lie seeth all his goings.' 

22 There is no darkness,^ nor shadow of death, 
where the workers of iniquitj- may hide them- 
selves.'' 

23 For he will not lay upon man more than right ;^ 
that he slioukl enter* into judgment witli God. 

24 lie siiall break in pieces niiglity men without 
number,* and set others in their stead. 

25 Therefore he knoweth their works, and he 
overturneth them in the night, so that they are 
destroyed.^ 

26 He striketh them as wicked men in the open 
sight of others;"" 

27 Because they turned back from^ him, and 
would not consider any of his ways:" 

28 So that they cause the cry of the poor to come 
unto him, and he heareth the crv of the afflict- 
ed." 

29 When he giveth quietness, who then can make 
trouble?'' and when he hidoth his face,'> who then 
can behold iiim? whetheriV be done against a nation, 
or against a man only : 

30 That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people 
be ensnared.'' 

31 Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have 
borne chastisement, I will not offend ajiy more :^ 

32 That which I see not teach thou me:' if I 
liave done iniquity, I will do no more." 

33 Should it be according to thy mind?* he will 
recompense it, whether thou refuse, or whether 



smrrhms out. 4 Heb. mished. I Hub. plare of beholders. "■ 1 Tim. .'):24. 
1 H,b. frrnn after, n Prov. 1:29. 3U. o Exod. 22:27. P Kom. 8:31-34. 
qP>a. 113:7. r l Kincs I2:2S. • Dan. 9:7-14. > Psa. 32:f . u Eph. 4:22. 
' ileb./rom with IheeJ 



8. Wdketh with wicked men; pursues the same course of 
argument as they do in reasoning about tJie government 
of God. 

13. Wio Imth ^ivenhim a charge; He is independent and 
reigns of right over all. litre, again, the argument is, that 
He who made the world has a right to govern it according 
to the comisel of his own will. 

14. If lie set Ins heart V poll man ; if God direct his thoughts 
towartis man in anger, for his destruction. Gather unto 
himself his spirit; recall the breath of life which he has 
given him. Gen. 2:7. The argument is, that mun is abso- 
lutely dependent on God for life and breath and all things, 
and should not presume to call in question the rectitude 
of his ways. 

Ifi. Thmi; Job. 

17. Slinll even he that hateth riplit irnirrn? that God is the 
absolute and independent governor of the world, all must 
admit. Can it then be reasonable to charge him with 
hatred of right ? The argument is the s:ime as that used 
by Abraham: "Shall not the .ludge of all the earth do 
right?" Gen. 18:25. Him tiiat is most jiwit? or, "the just 
mighty One." 

20. Shatl they die; rich men and princes, if God so wills it 

:i:!. Should it be aaordiuf; to thi) mind? God will not 
change his plans to meet the views of men. He will ruoin- 



Man should humble. 



JOB XXXVl, 



himself before God. 



B c liboiti ^^^^ choose; and not I: therefore speak 

' i-^ai. what thou knowest. 

34: Let men of understanding* tell me, and let a 
wise man hearken unto me. 

35 Job hath spoken without knowledge," and his 
words ivcre. without wisdom. 

36 My desire is that Job may be tried* unto the 
end, because o? his answers for wicked men. 

37 For he addeth rebellion unto his sin, he clap- 
pcth his hands among us, and mnltiplieth his words 
against God. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 



1 Comparison is not to be made with God, because our good or evil 
cannot extend unto him. 9 Many cry in their afflictions, but are not 
heard for want of faith. 

ELiriU spake moreover, and said, 
2 Thinkest thou this to be right, that tliou 
saidst. My righteousness is more than God's?'' 

3 For thou saidst, What advantage will it be 
unto thee?'^ and, What profit shall I have, if I he 
cleansed from my sin?* 

4 I will answer thee,^ and thy companions with 
thee. 

•5 Look unto the heavens, and see ; and behold 
the clouds ivhich are higher than thou. 

6 If thou sinnest, what doest thou against him? 
or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what doest 
thou unto him?" 

7 If thou be righteous, what givcst thou him? or 
what rcceiveth he of thy hand?'' 



' Heb. heart. « ch. 38:2. t Or, My father, let Joli lie tried, b ch. 9:17, 
.14; 16:12-17; 27:2-6. ' ch. 31:2, etc. ! Or, by it more than by my sin. 
\ Hcb. return to thee words, i Jer. 7:19. e Psa. 10:2: Prov. 9:12. f Isa. 



pense; treat every man in the end according to his char- 
acter. Whetlier thou refuse, or — cJioosc; to submit to, and 
obey hira. 

36. His answers for wicked men; because he had seemed 
to justify them. 

37. Mnltiplieth his words against God; in seeming to speak 
of him as if he were unjust. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. It is wise to address respectfully, and attempt to 
conciliate those whom we would convince of their errors 
and lead to embrace the truth. 

7. Men in controversy are apt to put the worst con- 
struction upon the language of their opponents, and to 
charge them with what they do not admit, and with con- 
sequences which they deny. 

13. God is independent, and will govern the world ac- 
cording to his pleasure. All men are dependent on him 
for life and its enjoyments, and when he sees fit they 
instantly die. 

20. The groat and the mighty are equally dependent on 
(lod with the small and the feeble, and all their interests 
are equally at his disposal. 

27. Want of consideration is a fruitful reason why men 
often turn from the ways of the Lord, and by oppression 
and cruelty drjiw down his judgments upon themselves 
and their fellow-men. 

CH AFTER XXXV. 

3. Thnu .midst; Job had said that from which Elihu drew 
ilie conclusion which he here states. 

6. What doest tliau against him ? for the meaning of this 
and the two following verses, see note to ch. 22:3, 4. 

9. Tliey; the oppressors. 

10. Bill none saith; none of those who cry out by reason 
(if oppressions. They do not look to God for deliverance 
from their troubles, and therefore tliese are not removed. 

S9 



8 Tliy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art; 
and tiiy righteousness may profit the son of man. 

9 By reason of the multitude of oppressions they 
make the oppressed to cry : they cry out by reason 
of the arm of the miglity. 

10 But none saith. Where is God my maker, wlio 
givetli songs in the night; 

11 Who teacheth us more than the beasts of the 
earth, and maketh us wiser than the fowls of 
heaven ? 

12 There they cry, Imt none giveth answer, be- 
cause of the pride of evil men. 

13 Surely God will not hear vanity,*" neither will 
the Almighty regard it. 

14 Although thou sayest thou shalt not see him, 
yrf judgment w before him;' therefore trust thou 
in liim. 

15 But now, because it is not so, he ' hath visited 
in his anger; yet he^ knoweth it not in great 
extremity:'' 

16 Tiierefore doth Job open his mouth in vain; 
he mnltiplieth words without knowledge. 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

1 Elihu showeth how G-od is just in his ways. 16 How Job's sins 
hinder God's blessings. 2-1 Gods works are to be magnified. 

ELIHU also proceeded, and said, 
2 Suffer me a little, and I will show thee 
that / have yet to speak on God's behalf.* 

3 I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will 
ascribe righteousness to my Maker. 



7:5-10. II That is, God. II Tliat i 
I yet words for God. 



, Job. b Hos. 11 :H, 9. 



It is a prominent thought with Elihu that trouble is sent 
upon men as a discipline to bring them to repentance, and 
that when they repent and call upon God, he saves them. 
Giveth songs in the night; giveth deliverance, and thus 
songs of praise in the night of sorrow. 

12. They cry; the oppressed cry out in their calamity, 
but not in a proper manner, and therefore they are not 
heard. Because of the pride of evil men; these words are 
probably to be connected with the first clause, " There 
they cry." Compare ver. 9. 

13. Not hear vanity; not heed vain, empty, formal, hypo- 
critical prayers. 

14. Judgment is before him ; he will do only what is right. 

15. Because it is not so; Elihu says, that because Job did 
not so trust in God, his afflictions were continued. He know- 
eth it not; he says. Job did not know the cause of his calam- 
ities, nor did he take the right way to remove them. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Men in great trials should be careful not only thai 
they do not say what is not true, but also that they do not 
so express themselves as shall be misunderstood and do 
mischief to their fellow-men. 

6. The conduct of men may injure or benefit themselves, 
but cannot add to or diminish the essential glory of God. 

10. Many continue in affliction because they do not in 
a proper manner, and with a right spirit, cry unto God for 
relief. 

14. Though God is invisible, yet he is perfectly ac- 
quainted with the 'wants of all the children of men, and 
gives them the most abundant reason at all times to trust 
in him. 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

3. From afar; from without and beyond the range of 
common thought. 

cm 



EUhu. shciWtth thai God 



JOB XXXV r. 



is just in all his ways. 



4 For truly my wOrds shall notic false: he that 
is perfect in knowlcdo'o w witli Ihec. 

5 Behold, God is iniirlily, and dospisoth noiany: 
he is mighty in stronu'th and wisdom.'" 

6 He preservctli not the life of the wicked : but 
jriveth risrht to the poor/ 

7 He withdraweth not his eyes from the rijrht- 
eous:'' but with kings arc they on the throne ; yea, 
lie doth establish them for ever, and they are ex- 
alted. 

8 And if they be bound in fetters, and be holdcn 
in cords of affliction ;" 

9 Then he showeth them their work, and their 
transgressions that they have exceeded. 

10 I-fe openeth also their car to discipline, and 
connnandetii that they return from iniquity. 

11 If tliey obey and serve him, they shall spend 
their days in prosperity, and their years in pleas- 
ures. 

12 But if they obey not, they shall perish* by the 
sword, and they shall die without knowledge. 

13 But the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath:'' 
fliey cry not wiien he bindeth them. 

14 They die* in youth,'= and their life is among 
the imclcan.' 

15 He delivereth the poor' in his affliction, and 
openeth their ears in ojipression. 

IG Even so would he have removed thee out of 
flie strait into a broad jilace,' wiiere there is no 
straitncss; and that which sliould be set on thy 
table* should be full of fatness.'-' 

IT But tliou hast fulfilled tiie judgment of the 
wicked: judgment and justice take hold on thee.* 

18 Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee 



■ Heb litarl. ' Jer 


3i:l'J. 1 Or. nfflUled. b Hcb. 1;5;5. 


c Psa. UI7:UI. 


1 Heb. jrass away, d 


Rom. 2:-'i. 4 Hcb. 7'heir .soul diHh 


f Psa. 5.^:33. 


1 Or. so'lomites; Deut 


2:!:17. 1 Or, afflkted. 1 Psa. 31 :S. 


• Heb. the mt 


oJtkytabU. tPaa. S 


:.>. 1 Or, should uphold lhc(. I Heb. 


turn thee aside. 



i. Perfect in knowledge; this Elihu applies to himself. He 
uses the word perfect in the sense of upright or sincere, 
meaning that he is one wlio will utter what he knows in 
sincerity, avoiding all sophistry and false reasoning. 

9. He showeth them l/icir voric; their evil work: this Elihu 
states as the object of their afllietion. Exceeded; tliat 
their transgressions have lieen great. 

12. Without knowledge ; tlrat is, from want of knowledge. 
Because they did not understand and make a right use of 
God's disciiiline. 

13. Thetj cry not; they do not call upon God in affliction. 

14. Their life is among the unclean ; their life perishes by 
a premature and base death, like that of the unclean. The 
word rendered " unclean " means Sodomites. 

1.5. Openeth their cars; to the instructions which his deal- 
ings are suited to impart In oppression; in a time of afflic- 
tion and by moans oi" it. 

17. Fulfilled the jwlgmcnt of the wicked; had acted as they 
do, and been afHicted accordingly. Elihu does not nie.an 
to charge Job with having been a hypocrite addicted to 
gross sins, as his three friends had done, but rather with 
behaving like the wicked under his afflictions, and there- 
fore failing to receive deliverance. 

20. TAc n>,q-/(/ ; the night of death. Chap. 3:20-23. When 
people arc cut off in their place; when the successive gener- 
ations of men vanish each from their place. 

21. Regard not iniquitij; indulge not thyself in it. It is 
the iniquity of impatience and rebellion against God's 
dealings with him, that Elihu charges upon Job. This; 
iniquity'. Rather than njflict ion ; thou ]>referrest to spentl 
thy time in murmuring against God, rather than in psitient 
Bubraission to his rod. 

GIO 



away with his stroke : then a great ransom a. m. hm. 
cannot deliver thee.' ;ia). 

19 Will he esteem thy riches ?'' no, not gold, nor 
all the forces of strenu'tli. 

20 Desire not the night, when people are cut off 
in their place. 

21 Take heed, regard not iniquity: for this hast 
thou chosen rather than affliction. 

22 Behold, God exalteth by his power:' who 
tcacheth like him?J 

21) Wlio hath enjoined him his way? or who can 
say, Tliou hast wrougiit ini([uity'.' 

24 Remember that tluiu magnify his work, which 
men behold." 

2.5 Every man may see it; man may behold it 
afar off. 

26 Behold, God is great, and we know him not, 
neither can the number of his years be searched 
out.' 

27 For he maketh small the drops of water : they 
pour down rain according to the vapor thereof;'" 

28 Which the clouds do drop and distil upon man 
abundantly. 

29 Also can any understand the spreadings of the 
clouds, or the noise of his tabernacle'.' 

30 Behold, he spreadeth his light upon it," and 
covereth the bottom^ of the sea. 

31 For by them judgeth he the people ;" he giv- 
eth meat in abiuidance.'' 

32 With clouds he covereth the light ; and com- 
mandeth it >iot to shine by the cloud that cometh 
betwixt. 

33 The noise thereof showeth concerning it," the 
cattle also concerning the vapor.' 



hProv.ll;4. > Dan. 4:25, 32. iPBa94:12 t Psa. 111:2-8. 1 Psa. 102:21. 
m Psa. 147:8, 9. u Luke 17:24. « Heb. Tools, o Deut. 8:2. I.l. P Pta. 
136:25; Acts 14:17. <1 1 Kings 18:41, 45. I Heb. (Aol whielt goelli up. 



23. Iflio hath enjoined him ; pointed out to God what he 
should do. 

24. Which men behold; or, which men celebrate ; namely. 
all rightonus men. 

27. Maketh small ; or draweth up, that is, in vapor, that 
he may pour them down again in rain. Vamr; this word 
lure signifies the mass of clouds out of which the rainfalls. 

29. The spreadings of the clouds; the way in which God 
spreads forth his clouds in the firmament above. Tht 
noise of his tahernacle; the thunder that comes from his 
tabernacle in the clouds. 

30. His light ; lightning. IJpcm it ; the cloud. The bot- 
tom of the sea; he covereth with water. 

31. By them; the things mentioned above, the clouds, 
r.ain, thunder, and lightning. 

32. With cloiutu — cometh betxrixt ; this verse may be thus 
rendered: lie covereth his hands with light, [lightning:! 
and gives it a charge ujion its mark, [the object it shall 
strike;] or, as some prefer, gives it a charge against the 
opposer; that is, the man that is rebellious against God. 

33. The noise thereof slionreth concerning it ; or. his noise 
[thunder] shows coiiccrning him : that is. announces his 
approach in a tempest. The cattle al.to; the cattle also, by 
their actions, give signs. The vapor; the mass of rising 
clouds. 

IN,-5TRr("TI0KS. 

9. In speaking for God. men sliould be careful to declare 
only his truth, an<l in such a manner as sliaU lionor him 
and 111' useful to their fellow-men. 

JO. The design of God in afflictions, is to lead men to 
forsake their sins and obey him. If they do this, he will 
indue time remove their trials and bestow upon tliem the 



Gad is terrible 



JOB XXXVII. 



in his great xrvrks. 



fi i! Sia^o CHAPTER XXXVII. 



1 God is to be feared be. 



of his great 
-rchable m thci 



irks. 15 His wisJo 



AT this also my heart tremblcth, and is moved 
out of his place.''' 

2 Hear attentively* the noise of his voice, and 
the sound that goeth out of his mouth. 

3 He directcth it under the whole heaven, and 
liis lightning* unto the ends' of the eartii. 

4 After it a voice roareth:'' he thundereth with 
the voice of his excellency ;'-" and he will not stay 
them when his voice is heard. 

o (Jod thundereth marvellously with his voice; 
great things doeth he, which we cannot compre- 
hend.'* 

6 For he saitli to the snow, Be thou on. the earth ; 
likewise to the small rain, and to the great rain 
of his strength. 5 

7 He sealeth up the hand of every man : that all 
men may know his work." 

8 Then the beasts go into den?,'' and remain in 
their places. 

9 Out of the south' comcth the whirlwind: and 
cold out of the north.^ 

10 By the breath of God frost is given :" and the 
breadth of the waters is straitened. 

1 1 Also by watering he wearieth the thick cloud : 
he scattereth his bright cloud:* 

12 And it is turned round about by his counsels: 



a Dan. 10:7, 8; Matt. •l-'-.-'-A: Acts l(!:'Ji;--JO. ■ Heb. He 


ar in Itmring. 


t Heb. liskt. : Heb. lODlffs. b Psi. a--:33. c Psa. ay:3. 


d Eccl. 3:11; 


Rom, U ::S. S Heb. and to l/te showir of rain, ami to the ska 


aersofrainof 


hisstrenglli. e Psa. 1U0;-J7. t Psi. 10!:-2i. I Ueh chamber 


T Heb. seat- 


tering winds, e Psa. 147:1", lb. * Heb. llie cloud of Ids 


light. 1> Psa. 



riclies of his mercy ; if tliey do not, they will treasure up 
wrath and perish without hope. 

18. AVhen men have once passed the boundaries of pro- 
bation, they are unalterably fixed in their final unchanging 
state. 

26. The character and ways of God are in many respects 
unsearchable, past finding out. It is our wisdom and duty 
to bow submissively before him, feeling that though clouds 
and darkness are round about him, justice and judgment, 
righteousness and truth are the habitation of his throne. 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 

1. At this; tlio tempest mentioned in the jireceding and 
following verses. 

2. Tlie noise of his voice; the thunder. 

4. After it; after the lightning. He will not stay them; 
he will not hold back his lightnings ; or, as others prefer, 
his treasures of rain, hail, and wind. 

7. He sealeth up the liand; by the approach of the storm 
he sto]5s the laborer in his work. 

;i. The north ; the original word seems to mean scatter- 
ing winds ; that is, winds coming from the north, scatter- 
ing the clouds, and bringing cold weather. 

10. The breadth of tlie waters is straitened; by being fro- 
zen up. 

11. He wearieth tlie thick cloud; exhausts it, by causing it 
to pour out its contents of rain upon the earth. Some prefer 
to render. Also he ladeth his thick cloud with moisture. 

13. It ; the rain, or storm. 

L). Disposed them ; the clouds, rain, thunder, etc. 

111. Tlie balancings of the clouds; see note to chap. 3f):29. 

17. Quieteth tlie earth by the south wind; by the sultry 
•r.irocco, which overpowers every thing by its heat, and 
produces universal languor. 

19. Him; God, when wc think to arraign him for his 
doings. 

20. Sivallowed np ; overwhelmed with the greatness, 
majesty, and glory of God. 



that they may do whatsoever he comniandeth them 
upon the face of the world in the earth.'' 

13 He causeth it to come, whether for correc- 
tion,*' or for his land,' or for mercy." 

14 Hearken unto this, Job: stand still, and 
consider tlie wondrous works of God. 

1.5 Dost thou know when God dispo.-ed tiiem, 
and caused the light of his cloud to shine? 

10 Dost thou know the balancings of the clouds, 
the wondrous works of him whicii is perfect in 
knowledge? 

17 How thy garments are warm, when he quiet- 
eth tlie earth by the south idnd? 

15 Hast thou with him spread out the sky,' u-hich 
is strong, and as a molten looking-glass? 

19 .Teach us what wc shall say unto him ; for we 
cannot order our speech by reason of darkness. 

20 Shall it be told him that I speak? if a man 
speak, surely he shall be swallowed up. 

21 And now men see not the bright light which 
is in the clouds : but the wind passeth,and cleanseth 
them. 

22 Fair' weather comcth out of the north : with 
God is terrible majesty. 

23 Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him 
out:'" he is excellent in power," and in judgment," 
and in plenty of justice:'' he will not afflict.^ 

24 Jlcn do therefore fear him :■■ he respecteth not 
any that are wise of heart.^ 



148:S. 


t He 


b. a rod 




1 r=a 


m. 1 


>:18; Ezra 


11 


., 


1 King 


5 18:45. 


k Jcel 


2:S). 


1 f=a 


40:a-i; 


44 


04 


1 H 


b. GoM. 


m 


1 'I'lt 


n. Ii:lli. 




B-J: 1 1 ; 


60:3. 


Psa 


. 99:4. 


P 


sa. 


l.'!--.!! 


. q Lain 


3: 


J3. 


r .Matt. 


0:28. 


' iVIalt. 


n:vjDl 


ICor 


. 1:26. 





















21. And now — cleanseth them; the meaning, according to 
our version, is that the bright light of the sun is hid from 
men's view by the clouds, till the wind cleanses them 
away. Some propose to render thus: "And now men 
cannot look upon the bright light which is in the clouds, 
when the wind passeth and cleanseth them ;" that is, it is 
too dazzling to behold. 

23. Hewillnotafflict; improperly, or withoutgood reasons. 

24. Wise of heart ; Ho receives no assistance from the most 
intelligent ; but forms and preserves his own plans, without 
asking counsel or receiving aid from any of his creatures. 

From the twenty- seventh verso of the preceding chap- 
ter to the close of the present, Elihu is occupied with the 
description of God's majesty and power as manifested in 
■• fire and hail, snow and vapor ; stormy wind, fulfilling his 
word." Psa. 148:8. JIany suppose that the tempest out 
of which God soon spoke, ch. 38: 1, was seen approaching, 
and that this gave to Elihu's words their peculiar turn. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. All the operations of nature are under the control of 
God. He orders the seasons and all things with regard to 
them as seemeth good in his sight; as is best suited to pro- 
mote his glory and the good of those who trust in him. 

13. Storms are sometimes sent, and property to a grcaf 
amount swept away or destroyed, for the correction of 
those who have sought it as their chief good; to sliow 
them the uncertainty of earthly things, and lead them to 
seek durable riches and righteousness, a treasure in heaven 
which will never be taken away. 

16. As men by doing their duty may enjoy all the bene- 
fits of the seasons without being able to explain the rea- 
sons of Iheni, so the believer in revelation may have a'.l 
its benefits without being able to explain its mysteries, or 
understand the reasons of divine dispensations. 

20. Suitable views of God will always inspire reverence 
and awe, humihty and holy fear, as well as affection, con- 
fidence, and joy. 

Cll 



The Lord spcah-th 



JOB XXXVIII. 



out of the whirlwind. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

1 God challengetli Job to answer. 4 Ood, by his mifjhty works, con- 
vincetii Job of ignorance, 31 and of imbecility. 

''yilEN the Lord answered Job out of the whiil- 

X wind, and .said, 

•J Who is this tliat darkcnoth counsel by words 
without knowledLCC?'' 

3 Gird up now thy loins like a man ; for I will 
demand of thee, and answer thou me.* 

4 Where wast thou when I laid the foundations 
of the earth?" declare, if thou hastuud(!rstanding.* 

5 Who hatli laid the measures thereof, if thou 
knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it? 

6 Whereupon are the foundations* thereof fast- 
ened?' or who laid the corner-stone thereof; 

7 When the morning-stars sang together," and 
all the sons of God shouted for joy? 

8 Or who shut up the sea with doors, when it 
brake forth, as if it had issued out of the womb? 

9 Wlien I made the cloud the garment thereof, 
and thick darkness a swaddling band for it, 

10 And brake up for it my decreed place,* and 
set bars and doors, 

11 And said, Hitherto shaft thou come, but no 
further ; and here shall thy proud waves'* be stay- 
ed?" 

12 riast thou commanded the morning since thy 
days ; and caiused the day-spring to know his place ; 

13 That it miglit take hold of tlie ends* of the 
earth, that the wicked might be sliaken out of it? 

14 It is turned as clay to the seal ; and they stand 
as a garment. 

15 And from the wicked tlioir light is withhold- 
on, and the higli arm shall be broken." 

16 Ilast thou entered into the springs of the sea? 
or hast thou walked in tiie search of tlie do])th? 

17 Have the gates of death been opened unto 
thee?' or hast thou seen the doors of the shadow 
of death? 



« Cli. 3J:ar.; :)5:Ui. ' Heb. make me know. 
knowest. I Heb. sockets, i Heb. made to sink. 
tished my decree upon it. 1 Heb. t/ie pride of thy v 
winss. e Ps,^. 10:15. f Psa. 9; 13. t Or, at. 



)V. B;-J;i-yU t Heb. 
. 2:2S. 1 Heb. estab- 
J Psa. 89:9. "Heb. 
xod. 9:18. •J4; Josh 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

3. Gird up nmi) tliij loins; summon up all thy courage, 
resolution, and wisdouj. 

5. Stretclied tite line upon it ? as a carpenter in buildint; a 
house. 

7. Sons of God; the angelic hosts. 

8. Stiut up the sea; set bounds to it, that it cannot pass 
over. 

13. Take liold of the ends of tlie earth; shine upon every 
part of it. Miglit lie shiJicn out of it ; driven away by tlie 
light from their deeds of darkness. 

14. /( zs turned; the whole earth assumes a fresh, new 
form ; like the wax under the seal. Anil they stand as a 
garment; all things on the earth's surface sl;ujd fortli like 
a new and beauteous robe. 

15. From the wicked their light is withholden; because the 
darkness of night is their light; that is, it furnishes their 
opportunity to do evil deeds : the coming of the morning 
is to them the shadow of death. Chap. 24:17. The high 
arm shall Ik broken ; their power to do mischief is prevented 
by the ap|>roaching light of day. 

17. The giitcs qf death ; the passage to the invisible world, 
the world of spirits. 

19. Ltglit—niid — darkne.v; could Job explain their ori- 
gin, nature, and effects? — things which existed and oper- 
ated loiiL' before he was born. 
612 



18 Hast thou perceived the breadth of a. m. 24g«. 
the earth? declare if thou knowest it all. i^i" °°' 

19 Where is the way where light dwelleth? and 
as for darkness, where is the place thereof, 

20 That thou shouldest take it to* the bound 
thereof, and that thou shouldest know the paths 
to the house thereof? 

21 Knowest thou il, because thou wast then born? 
or because tiie number of thy days is great? 

22 Hast thou entered into the treasures of the 
snow? or hast thou seen the treasures of the hail, 

23 Which I have reserved against the time of 
trouble, against the day of battle and war?''' 

24 By what way is the light parted, which scat- 
tereth the east wind upon the earth? 

25 Who hath divided a watercourse for the over- 
flowing of waters, or a way for the lightning of 
thunder ; 

2(5 To cause it to rain on the earth," where no 
man is ; on the wilderness, wherein M<Te is no man; 

27 To satisfy the desolate and waste ground;^ 
and to cause the bud of the tender herb to spring 
forth? 

28 Hath the rain a father? or who hath begot- 
ten the drops of dew? 

29 Out of whose womb came the ice? and the 
hoary frost of heaven, who hath gendered it?J 

30 The waters arc hid a.s with a stone, and the 
face of the deep is frozen.* 

31 Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Ple- 
iades,- or loose the bands of Orion?'" 

32 Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth' in his sea- 
son? or canst thou guide* Arcturus with his sons? 

33 Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven?' 
canst thou set the dominion thereof in the earth? 

34 Canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that 
abundance of waters may cover thee? 

35 Canst thou send lightnings, that they may go, 
and say unto thee. Here we are ?* 



101 


1; Isa. 


ail 


•HI; 


Hev. 1« 


•.']. h Psa. 


14-:« 


Jor. 14 


:•£!. i 


Psa. Ui7 


■a. 


i i-h 


;)7:l(l 


1 


Hub. taken. 


»0r, 


thesn 


len stars; Heb. 


C'lffioA 


IHeb. 


Ce. 


ril. 


k ch. 


9:9 


; A 


mos 5:S. 


1 Or 


the twelve 


signs. 


Ucb. 


guide ti 


em. 


I.Ier 


■.n-.-M 


:jii 


f 


Heb. Behold u 















23. Against the time of trouble — battle and uvr? against 
the day when I come forth as a warricr to tight against 
mv enemies with great hail-stones. Exod. 9:22-25; Josh. 
10:11; Isa. 30:30, etc. 

2 1. WhitJi saittereth tlie cast wind; or. By what way is the 
east wind scattered ? 

25. Divided a mitercoursc for the ovcrjlouing nfunters; dis- 
tributed the overflowing waters of the clouds into their 
proper channels. This is a figurative description of the 
distribution of rain, borrowed from tlie manner in which 
the eastern husbandman irrigates his laud by distributing 
the water through it in proper ckumels. 

30. Are hid; beneath their icy covering. 

31. Tlic svcet influrnces of Pleiades ; the sweet influeuces 
of Spring which accompany the rising of Pleiades. Ple- 
iades is Ihe seven stars which rise in tlie spring of the 
year. Some render this clause, "(."anst thou bind the bauds 
of Plcia<l('s ?" Loosing and binding the constellations 
means making their movements and influences subject to 
our will. Orion; a constellation of stars on the equinoc- 
tial. 

32. Mazzaroth; the twelve signs of the zodiac. Arcturus 
with his sons; a constellation of stars now called the Great 
Bear, and revolving around the North star. 

33. The ordinonus of heaven f the laws which govern the 
heavenly bodies. The dominion ; the iuUueuce tliey have 
upon the earth. 



M'vnderfal and gocdly 



JOB XXXIX. 



creatures of God. 



A. M. 24M. 36 "Who iiatli put wisdom in tlioinward 
ij-ii" °" parts?" or wlio hath given understanding 
to the heart? 

37 Wlio can number the clouds in wisdom? or 
who can stay" the bottles of heaven, 

38 When the dust growetli into liardness/ and 
the clods cleave fast together? 

30 Wilt thou liunt the prey for the lion?" or fill 
the appetite* of the young lions, 

40 When they couch in their dens, and abide in 
the covert to lie in wait? 

41 Who provideth for the raven his food?'' wlien 
his young ones cry unto God, they wander for laclc 
of meat. 



CHAPTER XXXIX 



1 Of the wild goats and hinds. 5 Of the wild ass. 9 The 
13 Tlie peacock, stork, and ostrich. 19 The horse. 26 The hawk. 
27 The eagle. 

K NO WEST thou the time when the wild goats 
of the rock bring forth? or canst tliou mark 
wlien the hinds do calve?** 

2 Canst thou number the months that tliey fulfil? 
or knowest thou the time when they bring forth? 

3 They bow themselves, they bring forth their 
young ones, they cast out their sorrows. 

4 Their young ones are in good liking, they grow 
up with corn; they go forth, and return not unto 
them. 

5 Who hath sent out the wild ass free? or who 
hath loosed the bands of the wild ass?° 



\ise to lie down, t Or, is turned into mire; Heb. is 
1 Heb. life, c Psa. 147:9; Mitt. 6:-.>6. d Psa. 
3:9. fell. 'Jl:.?. i HA. salt -plates. I Heb. cxaclor, 



37. Stay the bottles of lieaveii; or, as the margin, cause to 
lie down as a bottle, in emptying it; that is, pour forth 
rain from the clouds. 

38. Ulien the dust — cleave fast together; as in a time of 
drought. But the margin gives another rendering-: "When 
the dust is melted into mire, and the clods cleave fast 
together ;" that is, are reduced by rain to a mass of coher- 
ing clay. This is then to be regarded as the effect of 
emptying the bottles of heaven. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. When men undertake to sit in judgment on the works 
and ways of God, or to exjitain the reasons of all his deal- 
ings, they generally darken their own minds and the minds 
of others by words without knowledge. 

6. Tlie works and ways of God in creating and govern- 
ing the world, though ordered in infinite wisdom and good- 
ness, are far above and beyond the most enlarged and 
exalted conceptions of men, and call for adoring gratitude, 
admiration, and praise. 

12. Tlie regularity of day and night, and the benefits 
they impart to the human family, are constant evidences 
of the goodness of God ; and lay men under ever new 
obligations to acknowledge, trust in, and obey him. 

16. The greatness, wisdom, power, and goodness of 
God, are seen in the sea, in the inexhaustible treasures it 
contains, and in the facilities it affords for the intercourse, 
health, prosperity, and happiness of man. 

22. The snow and the hail, the storm and the tempest, 
the liglitning, thunder, rain, dew, and sunshine — all gov- 
erned by exact and immutable laws, which no man can 
control or evade — proclaim the omnipotence, and show 
forth the presence of an all-surrounding God. 

31. The nature, number, courses, and influences of the 
stars, though perfectly known to Him who calleth them 



6 Whoso house I have made tlie wilderness,' 
and the barren land^ his dwellings. 

7 He scorneth the multitude of the city, neither 
regardeth he tlie crying of the driver.' 

8 The range of the mountains w his pasture, and 
lie searcheth after every green tiling. 

9 Will the unicorn be willing to serve thee, or 
abide by tliy crib?'' 

10 Canst thou bind the unicorn witli hi.s band in 
the furrow? or will he harrow the valleys after 
thee? 

11 Wilt thou trust him, because his strength « 
great? or wilt tliou leave thy labor to him? 

12 Wilt thou believe him, that he will bring 
home thy seed, and gather it into thy barn? 

13 Gavest thou the goodly wings unto the pea- 
cocks? or wings and feathers unto the ostrich ?■* 

14 Which leaveth her eggs in tlie earth, and 
warmeth them in the dust, 

15 And forgettctli that the foot may crush them, 
or that the wild beast may break them. 

10 She is hardened against her young ones,'' as 
though they were not hers: her labor is in vain 
without fear; 

17 Because God hath deprived her of wisdom, 
neither hath he imparted to her understanding.' 

18 What time slic lifteth up herself on high, she 
scorneth the horse and his rider. 

19 Hast thou given the horse strength? hast thou 
clothed his neck with thunder? 

20 Canst thou make him afraid as a grasshop- 
per? the glory of his nostrils is terrible.* 



all by their names and employs them to accomplish his 
purposes, can be but very imperfectly comprehended by 
the most intelligent and wisest of the children of men. 

36. All the knowledge and wisdom which men possess, 
above the beasts of the field, or the fowls of the air, 
come from God. Let not the wise man glory in his wis- 
dom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might; let 
not the rich' man glory in his riches ; but let him that glo- 
rieth, glory in the Lord. 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

1. Wild goats of the rocic— hinds; those that live in the 
mountains, far away from the abodes of men. 

3. They bring forth their young; dependent only on the 
care of God. 

4. With corn ; or, in the open field ; that is, far away from 
all human care. 

7. Neither regardeth ; literally, heareth not. He is fiir 
removed from the driver. 

9. Unicorn ; according to some, the eastern buffalo ; ac- 
cording to others, the rhinoceros, an immensely strong 
animal with one horn a little above its nose, or some other 
wild animal of great strength. See note to Num. 23: 22.^ 

13. Gavest thou— the ostrich 1 the exact rendering of this 
verse is difficult. Some propose to translate as follows: 
" The wing of the ostriches exulteth: are its plumage and 
feathers those of the stork?" meaning, does the ostrich 
have the tender disposition of a stork towards its young ? 

16. She IS hardened against her young; treats her young 
as if she had no natural affection. 

18. She lifteth up herself; to escape her pursuers, running 
by the help of her wings with great swiftness. 

20. Canst thou make him afraid? or, cause him to leap. 
Is it from thee that he receives the agility of a locust in 
leaping ? 

613 



Jul humlldh hiimelf. 



JOB XL. 



Tlie behemoth dcscriled. 



21 IIo paweth* in the valley, and rejoicctli in Aw 
strcuiith : he sroelh on to meet the armed nicu.*" 

22 lie mockcth at fear, and is not alTrighted; 
neither turncth he back from the sword. 

28 The quiver rattletli against liim, the glitter- 
ing spear and the shield. 

24 He swallovveth the ground witli fierceness and 
rage : neitiier believeth he that it is the sound of 
the trumpet. 

25 He saitii among the trumpets. Ha, ha! and he 
smelleth the battle afar off, the thunder of the cap- 
tains, and the shouting. 

20 Doth the hawk fly by thy wisdom, a/ul stretch 
her wings toward the south? 

27 Hotii tiie eagle mount up at thy commaud,* 
and maki^ her nest on high?'' 

28 Slie dwelleth and abidcth on the rock, upon 
the crag of the rock, and the strong place. 

29 From thence she scckctli the prey, and her 
eyes behold afar off. 

30 Her young ones also suck uj) blood : and where 
the slain arc, tliere is she.'' 



CHAPTER XL. 



1 Job humbletli liii 
rijfhteousnca 



.self to God. G God stirreth liim up to show liis 
, power, and wisdom, lo Of the behemoth. 

OREO VER the Lord answered Job, and said, 
2 Shall he that contendeth with the Al- 
mighty instruct him'."^ he that reproveth God, let 
him answer it. 

3 •' Tlien Job answered the Lord, and said, 

4 Behold, I am vile;" what shall I answer thee? 
I will lay my hand upon my mouth.'' 

.5 Once have I spoken; but I will not answer: 
yea, twice; but I will proceed no further. 

■[ Then answered the Lord unto JoIj out of the 
whirlwind," and said, 



• Or, His feet dig. t Heb. armor. « Jer. 8:C. 1 Heb. hy thy moulh. 
bjer. 49:10; Obad. 4. ' Matt. a4:'i3; Lukol7:37. d ch. m.V.i; Isa. a?:!, 
e E2nl9:6; oh. 42:0; Psa. 51:4; laa. 0:5; 04:0; Dan. 9:5,7; Lulte l»:i:). 
I oh. 29:9; Mic. 7:10; Zcch. 2:13; Rom. 3:19. t ch. 3?:I, etc. •> I'sa. 



24. Neither believeth he; that is, for joy. Bni many pre- 
fer to render, "neither will ho stand still when there is 
the sound of the trumpet." 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Creatures that are dependent only on the providence 
of God, are hy him provided for, its really as those whose 
wants are supplied by human instrumentality ; while in 
both ho equally shows his wisdom, power, and love. 

9. It is not enou;;li for usefulness to luivc great strength, 
or superior natural qualities; there must also be the abil- 
ity and the disposition rightly to use them. 

IG. To all classes of creatures God gives just the kind 
and degree of wisdom which they need to accomplish the 
ends for which ho made them; what would only be a use- 
less annoyance to thorn, he has wisely and mercifully with- 
held. 

19. The courage, agility, and strength of the horso, liis 
afTection and docility, his readiness to labor, his patience 
oven under hardship and abuse, and his subserviency to 
the various Wiints of men, are all evidences of the good- 
ness of God, in which his hand should be gratefully rec- 
ognized. 

30. The most rapacious and savage of tho feathered 
trihea, who teach their young to revel in blood, do not 
take tho life of their own species ; this is the sin of the 
abused nnderst;indings and dei>raved hearts and bloody 
hands of men. 

614 



7 Gird u]i thy loins now like a man: I a. m. sim. 
will demand of thee, and declare tiiou unto '^ii- 
me. 

8 Wilt thou also disannul my judgment? wilt 
thou condemn me, that thou mayest be righteous? 

9 Hast thou an arm like God? or canst thou 
thunder with a voice like him?'' 

10 Deck thyself now icit/i niiijesty and excellen- 
cy ; and array thyself with glory and beauty.' 

11 Cast abroad tho rage of thy wrath: and be- 
hold every one that is proud, and abase him. 

12 Look on every one f/tat is proud, and bring 
him low ;J and tread down the wicked in their place. 

13 Hide tliem in the dust together; and bind 
their faces in secret. 

14 Tiien will I also confess unto thee that thine 
own right hand can save thee. 

15 Behold now behemoth,^ which I made with 
thee; he eateth grass as an ox. 

16 Lo now, his strength is in liis loins, and his 
force is in the navel of his belly. 

17 He moveth' his tail like a cedar: the sinews 
of his stones are wrapped together. 

18 His bones are as strong pieces of brass; his 
bones are like bars of iron. 

19 He is the chief of the ways of God: he that 
madehimcan make his sword toapproach tnUo him. 

20 Surely the mountains bring him forth food," 
where all tlie beasts of the field play. 

21 He liotli under the shady trees, in the covert 
of the reed, ;ind fens. 

22 The sliady trees cover him uitfi their shadow ; 
the willows of the brook compass him about. 

23 Behold, he drinketh up^ a river, and hastcth 
not : he trustcth that he can draw up Jordan into 
his mouth. 

24 He takcth it with his eyes: his nose pierccth 
through snai-cs." 



29:3,4. i Psa. 93:1; 1UI:1. j Exod. 18:11 : Prov. 15:85; Isa. 2:12; D«n. 
4::n. » Or, (/« rtpAniK, as some think. I Or, sttltl/i up. kPsa. I»l:14. 
1 Heb. oppresselh. ' Or, Witt any take him in hit sight, or bort bis nose 
withagtn? ch. 41:1,2. 



CHAPTER XL. 

4. Lny my hand upon my mottth; be silent. 

8. Disanmil; make voitf, or reverse. 

13. Bind their faces in .■secret ; thrust them bound into dun- 
geons, where Oiey shall no more be seen nor lunird of. 

15. Behemoth; supposed by some to be tho elephant; by 
others, tho hii)popotanius. 

19. Tlie chief; one of the most wonderful beasts that 
God has made. 

24. He ttiketh it with his ei/es; or. Can one take him in liio 
sight, or pierce his nose with a hook or ring? 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Comjilaining of the ways of God is finding fault with 
him, as if we were wiser than he. and could instruct him 
as to the Itcst way of governing the world ; and all must 
one day answer to him for all the hard speeches which 
they have uttered against him. 

4. Right views of God will silence objections to his 
providence, and lead us humbly to submit to all his dis- 
pensations ; saying, It is tho Lord ; let him do as seemeth 
good in his sight. 

9. The character, works, and ways of God, show that ho 
alone is fitted to govern tho world ; ;iii<l that all creatures 
are, and for ever must bo, at his dis))oKal. 

15. The greatest and most fi>rniiii;ible of creatures on 
tho land or in the water, are dependent on God ; and he 



God's gnat power 



Jul) XIJ. 



in Ike kvml/utn. 



CHAPTER XLI. 



Of God's great power in the leviathan. 

CANST thou draw out leviathan* with ahook?" 
or liis tongue with a cord which thou lettesi 
down?^ 

2 Canst thou put a hook into his nose?'' or bore 
his jaw through with a thorn? 

3 Will he mak« many supplications unto thee? 
■will he speak soft words unto thee? 

4 Will he make a covenant with thee? wilt thou 
take him for a servant for ever? 

5 Wilt tliou play with him as icith a bird? or wilt 
thou bind him for thy maidens? 

(> Shall the companions make a banquet of him? 
shall they part him among the merchants? 

7 Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or 
his head with fish-s])cars? 

8 Lay thy hand upon him, remember the battle, 
do no more. 

y Behold, the hope of him is in vain: shall not 
one be cast down even at the sight of him? 

10 None is so fierce that dare stir him up; who 
then is able to stand before me? 

11 Who hath prevented me, that I should repay 
him'." ivhatsoever is under the whole heaven is 
mine.'' 

12 I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, 
nor his comely proportion. 

13 Who can discover the face of his garment? 
or who can come to him with* his double bridle? 

14 Who can open the doors of his face? his teeth 
are terrible round about. 

15 His scales^ are his pride, shut up together as 
with a close seal. 

IG One is so near to another, that no air can 
come between them. 



• That is, a whale, or a whirlpool. > Psi. 104:a6; Isa. 27:1. t Heb. 
llrownest. 6 Isa. 37:39. c Rom. 11 i.So. d Exod. 19:5; Deut. 1U:14; Psa. 
24 1: 611:12; 1 Cor. 10:-.'6, 28. X Or, within. iKeh. strong pieces of s/lields. 



can control them with as much ease as he does the small- 
est and weakest, and dispose of them at his pleasure. 

CHAPTER XLI. 

I. Leviathan; supposed by some to be the whale, by 
others, the crocodile, with which latter animal the descrip- 
tion best agrees. 

f). The companions ; the companies of fishermen. 

7. Canst thou Jill his skill with barbed I rons? — with fish-spears? 
tlu' bony armor or scales of the crocodile's skin make it 
impenetrable to spears, or even niusket-balls, except in 
particular parts. 

8. Remember the battle; think of the conflict that would 
ensue should yon attempt to take him, ami refrain from it. 

9. The hope of him ; tlie hope of taking him ; or, the liope 
of him who would take him. 

II. Prevented me; gone before me in the bestowment of 
favors, and laid me under obligation to repay them. 

13. Discover the face of his garment? strip off his skin. 
Come to him with his double bridle ? or, as the margin. Come 
within his double bridle, a figurative expression for his 
two rows of teeth. 

14. The doors of his face? his jaws. 

15. Neesings; sneezing, or violent breathing, as when he 
comes to the surface after being some time under tlie 
water. A light doth shine; the reference here, and in tlie 
following verses, seems to be to the white spray glittering 
in tlie sun. wliich he throws with violence from his iiioutli 
and nostrils. 



IT Tliey are joined one to another, tliey stick 
together, that they cannot be sundered. 

18 By ills neesings a light dolli .-hine, ami his 
eyes arc like the eyelids of lh(> morning. 

19 Outof his mouth go burning lamps, ««dsi)arks 
of lire leap out. 

20 Out of his nostrils goelli smoke, as out of a 
seething pot or caldron. 

21 His breath kindleth coals, and a flame goeth 
out of his mouth. 

22 In his neck remaineth strength, and sorrow 
is turned into joy" before him. 

23 The flakes' of his flesh are joined together ; 
they are firm in themselves ; they cannot be moved. 

24 His heart is as firm as a stono ; yea, as hard 
as a piece of the nether millstone 

25 When he raiseth up himself, the mighty are 
afraid : by reason of breakings they purify them- 
selves. 

26 The sword of him that layeth at him cannot 
hold: the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon." 

27 He esteemeth iron as straw, atid brass as rot- 
ten wood. 

28 The arrow cannot make him flee : sling-stones 
are turned with him into stulilile. 

29 Darts are counted as stubble : he laugheth at 
the shaking of a spear. 

30 Sharp stones* a)-e under him: he spreadeth 
shar]i-]ioiuted things upon the mire. 

31 He maketh the deep to boil like a pot : ho 
maketh the sea like a jiot of ointment. 

32 He maketh a path to shine after him : owe 
would think the deep to be hoary. 

33 Upon earth there is not his like, who is made 
without fear.' 

34 He beholdeth all high things: he is a king 
over all the children of pride. 



t Ueh. rejaictlh. ^ llA. falling.'^. • Or.l.rea.'.lplate. 1 \i«h. pteres of pa 
sherd, t Or, behave themselvtn without fear. 



22. Sorrow is turned into joy ; this some have translatetl, 
terror danceth before him. 

2.5. By reason of breakings tliey purify themselves ; or, they 
lose themselves with terror. 

26. Cannot hold; see note to verse 7. Habergeon; coat 
of mail. 

30. Sharp stones; rather, as tlie margin, sharp pieces of 
potsherd. These, and the " sharp pointed things," refer 
to tlie sharp protuberances on his belly. 

32. He maketh a path to shine after him ; makes the deep 
white with foam. 

34. The children of pride; tlie most strong and courage- 
ous of the animal creation. 

IXSTRrCTIOXS. 

I. Tlie principal superiority of man above many of the 
beasts consists not in his size or strength of body, but in 
the faculties and powers of his mind ; and the cultivation 
and right use of these should be his chief concern. Gen. 
1:26-29; Acts 17:26-29. 

II. None can devote any thing to God which He has not 
first given to them, or lay him luider obligations to bestow 
any good upon them ; but all must depend on his good- 
ness, mercy, and grace. 

25. The fear of man which is impressed upon most of 
the animal tribes, and which adds so much to his safely 
and comfort, is a striking evidence of the goodness of God ; 
and lays men under obligations to employ the influence 
he has given them for the good of all. 
615 



Job submitteth himsdf 



CHAPTER XLII. 



1 Job submitteth himself unto God. 7 God, preferring Job's cause, 
maketh his friends submit themselves, and acoeptcth him. 10 He 
ma<;tiifieth and blesseth Job. 16 Job's age and death. 

""pHEN Job answered the Lord, and said, 

V 2 1 know that thou caiii^t do every tJnn<r,°- 
;iiid that no thoii^'ht ean bo withholdeii from thee.* 

3 Wlio w he that hidetli coun^el without know- 
ledge?'' therefore liavc I uttered tliat 1 understood 
not"; things too wonderful for me, which I knew 
not." 

4 Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak: I will 
demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.'' 

5 1 have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear ; 
but now mine t;yc seetii thee: 

6 Wiierefore 1 abhor myself," and rejient in dust 
and ashes.' 

7 ■ And it was so, that after the Lord had spoken 
these words nnto Job, the Lord said to Elipliaz 
the Temanite, Aly wrath is kindled against thee, 
and against thy two friends: for ye have not spo- 
ken of me the thing that is riglit,*^ as my servant 
Job hnth. 

8 Therefore take unto you now seven bullocks 
and seven rams,'' and go to my servant Job, and 
ofler up for yourselves a burnt-oflering ; and my 
servant Job shall ])ray for yon:' for him* will I 
accept: lest I deal witli you after your folly, in 
that ye have not spoken of me the thing which is 
right, like my servant Job. 



» Gen. 18:14; Isa. 43:13; Matt. 10:20. • Or, 


of thine can be hindered. 


bch.:W:a.3. cpsa. 131:1; 139:(1. <lch.40:7. 


c Ezra 9:6; ch. 4U:4: Psa. 
1:21. ePsa.61:4. l.Num. 


ri\:l-l: Jer. 31:19; Jas. 4:1U. I Dan. 9:3; Matt. 1 


•23:1. i Jas. 5:10; 1 John 5:10. t Heb. kis/ac 


, or person; 1 Sam. 25:35; 



CHAPTER XLIL 

4. Ifcai; I beseech thee; Job humbly asks (W>d to listen to 
his imiuiries, and teach him the truth concoriiiiig llimself 
and his ways. 

5. I have heard of thee; ho had had dark and indistinct 
views of God. liow mine eye seeth tliee; his views of God 
were more clear and distinct. 

6. Wherefore I abhor myself; on account of my sins. 

7. A^ my seriHint Job hath; Job's general doctrine con- 
cerning God and his providence, though maintained with 
niucli impatience and infirmity of spirit, was yet correct; 
and it was more honorable to God than the doctrine of his 
friends. 

10. Turned the cnplivily of Job; removed his calamities, 
and restored his |ircKspi:rity. 

11. Did eat lirend witli him; a token of restored kindness 
and friendship. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
3. Men know very little about the clmracter and ways 
of God, except as he reveals them ; and when they attempt 



J B X L 1 1 . to God and is blessed. 

9 So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad a m mm. 
the Shuhite and Zo])har the Naamathite im). 
went, and did according as the Lord commanded 
them : the Lord also accepted Job.'J 

10 And the Lord turned the captivity of Job," 
when he prayed for his friends : also the Lord gave 
Job twice as much as he had before.* 

11 Then came there unto him all his brethren, 
and all his sisters, and all they that had been of 
his actiuaintancc before,' and did eat bread with 
him in his house: and they bemoaned him, and 
comforted him over all the evil that the Lord had 
brought upon him: every man also gave him a 
piece of money, and every one an ear-ring of gold. 

12 So the Lord blessed the latter end of Job 
more than his beginning:'" for he had fourteen 
thousand sheep, and si.\ thousand camels, and a 
thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she- 
asses." 

I'd He had also seven sons and three daughters. 

14 And he called the name of the first. Jemima ; 
and the name of the second, Kc/.ia ; and the name 
of the third, Keren-happuch. 

lo And in all the land were no women found so 
fair as the daughters of Job : and their father gave 
them inheritance among tiieir brethren. 

IC) Alter this lived Job a hundred and forty 
years, and saw his sons, and his sous' sons, even 
four generations. 

17 So Job died, being old and full of days." 



Mai. 1:9. tUch. Ihe face of Job. J Prov 
14:7: 120:1. i Heb. added all that had bee 
19:13. "1 Deut. 8:16; ch. 8:7; Jas. 5:11. 



3:11. 12. k ISen. 20 17; P 
to Job unto the double. I i 
ch. 1:3. och. S:-Jj. 



to go bevond his revelation, they darken counsel by words 
without knowledge. 

5. Closer views of the character and will of God, and 
right feelings towards him, will lead men to abhor their 
sins, and heartily to turn from them to him, whose favor 
is life, and whose loving-kindness is better than life. 

7. The Lord will in due time vindicate his servants from 
the aspersions which men have wrongfully cast upon them, 
and bring forth their righteousness as the ligbt, and their 
integrity as the noonday. 

10. The end of a good man is more Vilcssed than his 
beginning; an<l the darkness and distress of the night 
will be followed by the light, the joy, and the glory of a 
cloudless and eternal day. 

11. Many who neglect a man, or stand aloof from him in 
adversily, w'ill return to him and be very friendly and 
kind in prosperity. 

Ifi. Let a niiin be patient under trials : if reviled, not 
revile again; hold fast his integrity, commit himself to 
Ilim that judgeth righteously, and justil'v God in all his 
ways, and his end will be peace aud his eternity blessed. 



616 



THE 

BOOK OF PSALMS. 



TnE BOOK OP PsAUis is a collection of sacred Ij-rics ; that is, of poems expressive of relig-ious feeling, 
designed to be sung in tlie worship of (lod. In respect to subjects, the Psalms exhibit a wonderful 
diversity, thus covering a wide field of religious experience, and furnishing to the churches an inexhaust- 
ible treasury of sacred song for all ages. Seventy-two of the Psalms are expressly ascribed to David, 
and the whole book, as referred to in the Now Testament, bears his name. As to the authorship of many 
of the Psalms, or the date of their composition, learned commentators are not agreed. The ninetieth is 
explicitly ascribed to Moses, and some appear from their contents to have been written as late as the era 
of the captivity and restoration. 

In regard to the external arrangement of the Psalms, wliicli is generally attributed to Ezra, they arc 
divided in the Hebrew Bible into five books, each closing witli a doxology, except the last, to which, as 
well as to the whole collection, the closing psalm serves as a doxology. Tliis division is as follows : 

Book I. contains psalms 1 to 41 ; book II., psalms 42 to 72 ; book III., psalms 13 to 89 ; book IV., 
psalms 90 to 106 ; book V., psalms 107 to 150. 

One psalm occurs twice, with small variations, Psalms 14 and .53 ; some occur as parts of other 
psalms, and some are found also in the historical books. See notes to Psalms 18, 70, 9(5, 105. 

Besides the name of the author, or the occasion of their composition, many of the psalms bear other 
inscriptions. Of these the principal are the following : 

1. The dedicatory title, to the chief musician, which is iirefixed to fifty-three psalms, signifies that the 
psalm is assigned to him, as the leader of the choir at the tabernacle or temple, t<j be used in the public 
worship of God. Here some place the title, for the sons of Knrah ; while others render \t,by the sons of Korah, 
and regard it as indicating that the psalm was written by one of their number. 

2. Titles relating to the character of the composition. Of these tlie most common and general is 
Psalm, a lyric poem to be sung. The title, Song, is borne by sixteen psalms, generally in connection with 
tlie word psalm, where it should be translated, " a psalm, a song ;" or "a song, a psalm." All the psalms 
thus designated, with the exception of 83 and 88, are of a joyous character, that is, songs of praise. The 
title, Song of degrees, however, is to be explained upon another principle. See note to Psalm 120. The 
titles Prayer, Psalms 17, 90, 102, 142, and Praise, Psalm 145, require no explanation. 

Besides these titles tliere are several others left untranslated in our version, as Maschil, teaching, that 
is, a didactic psalm; Michtam, Psalms 16 and 56 to 60, either simply a writing, namely, a poem, or a, 
golden psalm. 

3. Titles indicating the manner of the musical performance. Of these the most common is Selah, a 
much disputed word. It is generally agreed, however, that it signifies a rest, either in singing, for the 
purpose of an instrumental interlude, or an entire rest in the performance, whereby eftect is added to the 
words immediately preceding it. As a general rule this title closes a division or clause of a psalm in 
respect to the sense. 

Of the titles supposed to indicate either musical instruments or modes of musical performance, the 
following are examples. Negiimth, Psalm 61, or more commonly Neginoth, sfritigerl instruments; Gittith, 
Psalms 8, 81, 84, from the word Gath, which denotes either a city of tiio Philistines or a wine-press. 
Accordingly it has been taken to signify, first, an instrument of music brought from Gath, or resembling 
a wine-press in its shape ; secondly, an air or melody brought from Gath, or one used in treading the 
wine-press ; Shoshannim., liliai. Psalms 45, 69 ; Shushun-eduth, lily of the testimony. Psalm 00 ; Shoshtinnim- 
eduth, lilies of the. testimony, Psalm 80, either a musical instrument so named from its shape, or a particular 
melody, or, as some think, an emblematic term referring to the contents of the psalm. See notes to 
Psalms 45, 60. To the above may be added Sheminith, Psalms 6, 12, the eighth, or octave, wliich is possi- 
bly an indication of a musical key. To Psalms 57, 58, 59, 75, is prefixed the title, Al-taschith. that is, 
deMroy not, perhaps as the name of an air taken from a well-known poem, though some regard it as indi- 
cating the contents of the psalm. See note to the title of Psalm 57. 

Other titles, occurring but once or twice, will be considered in their place. 

G17 



The godly and the ungodly. 



rSALM II. 



The kingdom of Christ. 



PSALM I. 

1 The happiness of the godly. 4 The unhappiness of the ungodly. 

I~) LE:>SED (■« thomnn thut walkcth notin thccoun- 
I) sel o{' the uiii^odly." nor stiiiidetli iu tlie way 
of f^inncrs," nor t^ittclli iu tlie «:atof the scoruful i"* 

2 But his delight is in the hiw of tlie Lord ;" and 
in his law doth he meditate day and night.** 

3 And he shall be like a tree "planted by the riv- 
ers of water, that briiiueth fmili his fruit in his 
season f his leaf also slmll not wither ;* and what- 
soever he doplh shall prosper. 

4 The nngodly are not so: l)ut arc like the chaff 
which the wind driveth away.' 

5 Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the 
judgment,'-' nor sinners in the congregation of the 
righteous. 

6 For the TjOrd knoweth the way of the right- 
eous;'' but th(; way of the ungodly shall perish.' 



w 



PSALM II. 

1 The kingdom of Christ. ]0 Kings are exhorted to aeeept it. 

HY do the heathen rage,'^ and the people 
imagine^ a vain thing?'' 



•Or. wicked, a Prov. <l:l-l, 1.'). bjer.l5:l7. cJob2i:I->. J Psa. 119:07. 
eJcr. 17:8. t Heb./adf. f Matt. 3:12. s Matt. •i5:n, 4(i. h Job 2:1:111. 
i ProT. 15:9. 1 Or, tumultuous!;/ assemble, i Psa. 4():6. i Keh. meditate. 



2 The kings of the earth set themselves, and the 
rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, 
and against his anointed,' saying, 

S Let us break their bands asunder, and cast 
away their cords from us.'" 

4 lie that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh : the 
Lord siiall have them in derision." 

5 Then shall lie speak unto them in his wrath, 
and ve.x' them in his sore displeasure. 

G Yet have I set' my king upon my holy hill of 
Zioii.'" 

7 J will declare the* decree: the Lord hath said 
luito me, Tliou art my Son ; this day have 1 begot- 
ten Ihee.i' 

8 Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen 
for tliine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of 
the earth /or thy possession. 

9 Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron ; thou 
shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel.'' 

10 Be wise now therefore, ye kings: be in- 
structed, ye judges of the earth. 

11 Serve the Loud with fear,^ and rejoice with 
trembling. 

12 Kiss the Son,' lest he be angry, and ye perish 



PSALM L 

The theme of this psalm is the permanent prosperity 
and happiness of the righteous, and tlic certain destruc- 
tion of the wicked. It stands .as an appropriate introduc- 
tion to the whole boolj. The righteous man is descril)ed 
here, as often elsewhere, in absolute terms ; that is, with- 
out any notice of his inlirmities and failures in duty ; ami 
the promise is made to him in the same absolute way. 
The meaning of such a promise, when applied to a good 
man in covenant with (lod, yet not free from sin, is that 
God will withhold from liim no good thing, P.sa. 84:11; 
that he will chasten him, as a father his child, for his 
instruction and profit, that lie may purify him from sin, 
and thus prepare him for greater prosperity and hapiii- 
nesa, Psa. 94: 12, 13 ; Prov. 3: II ; I Cor. U :32 ; lleb. 12:(i-12 ; 
and that he will supiJort him under his trials, Psa. 37:24, 
grant him a perfect deliverance from them, Psa. 34:17-19, 
and everlasting blessedness in his presence, Psa. IG:11; 
17:15; 73:24-20; Rev. 14:13. Upon this broad jirinciijlc 
are to be interpreted all those psalms which describe the 
prosperity and blessedness of the righteous in unqualified 
terms ; as, for example, Psa. 112, ll.-i, 121, 12.5, 128. 

1. U'alkelk not in the coun-tcl of tlie ungotlly; does not 
embrace their principles, adopt their ma.xims, or encourage 
their practices. 

2. In the law (f the Lord ; in learning and doing his will. 

3. Like a tree ptanled by the rivers; his excellence, useful- 
ness, and blessedness shall habitually increase, and he 
shall go from one di'gree of holiness to another for ever. 
Shall prosper ; the Lord shall bless him in all his ways. 

4. The ungodly; those who are not governetl by the will 
of God. Lihe the chaff; worthless ; and all their blessings 
of short continuance. 

5. Not stand in the judcmenl ; not be approved, but con- 
demned and se])arated lor ever from the righteous. The 
judgment here spoken of includes all the ways in which 
God purifies his people from the wicked here and here- 
after. What we see of (Jod's judgment in this worlil, how- 
ever, is only a fiireshadowing of that great day when the 
separation between the righteous ami the wicked will be 
perfect and eternal. 

6. Knoweth ; sees and approves the course of the right- 
eous, and will for ever bless them. Shall jtcr ink; leads to 
destruction. 

618 



k Acts 4:25. 20. I Psa. 45:7. m Lake 19:14. n 
1 Heb. anointed. • Heb. Zion thehWofmyhatim! 
P.Matt. 3:17; 17:5; Acts 13::J3. <lRcv.2:3(. ' 



Prov. l:2(i. I Or. trouble. 
:s. o Act.«5:31. T Or. /bra. 
Heb. 12:2S. "John 5:23. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. All needless intercourse with the wicked should be 
avoided, as it tends to make us more and more like them. 

2. Supreme devotion to God is the way not only of duty, 
but of safety, prosperity', and happiness. 

4. Whatever may be the contlition here of those who 
regard not God, they are in his sight worthless ; and their 
blessings being abused, will soon all be taken away. 

C. The righteous and the wicked here live together, and 
are often connected in bonds of social intercourse and 
affection ; but the Lord is perfectly acquainted with their 
dilTerent ways, and in the future world will make an ever- 
lasting separation between them. 

PSALM II. 

David was the divinely constituted head of Israel, the 
visible church of God, and was an eminent type of Clirist. 
The assaults made upon him liy the surrounding nations 
were assaults ujjon God's church, and his victories over 
them were victories in her behalf; and were also tj'pes 
and pledges of the future victories of the Messiah over all 
his enemies. The promises contained in this and similar 
psalms were fulfilled in David's time and person only in a 
lower and imperfect sense. Their high and absolute ful- 
filment is in Christ, the everlasting King of David's line, 
who "must reign till he halh ))ut all enemies under his 
feet." 1 Cor. 15:25. The dramatic character of this iisalni 
is remarkable. The following is the order of speakers : 
verses 1, 2, the psalmist; verse 3, the ungodly kings and 
rtilers; verses 4,5, the psalmist; verse C. Jehovah ; verses 
7 to 9. the Messiah ; verses 10 to 12, the psalmist. 

1. The heathen — and the people; all who are opposed to 
being governed by God and his Sou .lesns Christ. 

3. Break their bands asunder ; refuse to be governed by 
God's revealed will. 

4. Shall laugh — tiave them in derision; shall look dowii 
from heaven upon them in serene majesty, unmoved by 
their imjiotent malice. 

fi. My king; the .Messiah, and David as his type. 

7. The decree; constituting Christ .Mediator and universal 
King. Begotten thee; manifested thee as the Messiah, the 
Son of (!od. 

9. Them ; his oppoacrs. 

12. A'/.M llu Son; submit to, trust in, and obey him. The 
kiss is here, in accordance with oriental usage, a sign of 



Safety of God's people. 



PSALM V 



His r.iemies exhurlid. 



from tlie way, when liis wrath is kindled but a lit- 
tle. Blessed are all they that put their trust in 
him." 

PSALM III. 

The security of God's protection. 
«T A Psalm of David, when he fled from Absalom his son."" 

LORD, how are they increased that trouble 
mo! many are they that rise up against me. 

2 Many there be wliich say of my soul. There is 
no help lor him in God.'= Selah. 

3 But thou, Lord, art a shield for' mc; my 
glory, ami the lifter up of my head. 

4 I cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he 
hoard me out of his holy hill. Selah. 

5 I laid me down and slept;'' I awaked; for the 
Lord sustained me. 

I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, 
that have set themselves against me round about.'' 

7 Arise, Lord ; save me, my God : for thou 
hast smitten all mine enemies upon the cheek Ijone ; 
thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly. 

8 Salvation helongeth unto the Lord i*^ thy bless- 
ing is upon thy people." Selah. 

PSALM IV. 

1 DaviJ prayeth for audience. 2 He reproveth and exhorteth his ene- 
mies. 6 Mail's happiness is in (jod's favor. 

*' To the chief* Musician on Neginoth, A Psalm of David. 

HEAR me when I call, God of my righteous- 
ness : thou hast enlarged me when I was in 



distress; have mercy upon' me, and hear my 
prayer. 

2 ye sons of men, how long u-ill ye turn my 
glory into shame? how long will yo love vanity, 
a?id seek after leasing? Selah. 

3 But know that the Loud hath set apart liini 
that is godly for himself: the Lord will hear wlicn 
I call unto him. 

4 Stand in awe, and sin not: commune with your 
own heart upon your bed, and be still. Selah. 

5 Offer the sacrifices of righteousness," and put 
your trust in the Lord. 

There be many that say. Who will show us any 
good? Lord, lift thou up the light of thy coun- 
tenance upon us. 

7 Thou hast put gladness in my heart, more than 
in the time that their corn and their wine increased. 

8 I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: 
for thou, Lord, only makest me dwell in safety.' 

PSALM V. 

1 David prayeth and professeth his constancy in prayer. 4 God favor- 
eth not the wiclced. 7 David, professinj; his faith, prayeth unto God 
to guide him, 10 to destroy his enemies, 11 and to preserve the godly. 

f\ To the chief Musician upon Nehilotli, A Psalm of David. 
/'~^ IVE ear to my words, O Lord ; consider my 
VJT meditation. 

2 Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, 
and my God: for unto thee will I pray. 

3 My voice shalt thou liear in the morning. 
Lord ; in the morning will 1 direct my prayer uuto 
thee, and will look up. 

3:19. t Or, ie gracious unto, t Deut. 33:19. i Psa. 3:5. 



.submission and allegiance. Him; the Son of God, the 
Messiah. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 

1. It is natural for rulers and people, when left by God 
to themselves, to be opjiosed to his reigning in and over 
them, and to refuse to submit to hiiii a.s tlieir rightful Lord 
and King ; but their opposition will injurL- tliciu.si'lves only. 

7. Tlie decree which constituted ('Innst Mediator and 
gave him the ownership of all the earth, as a reward for 
his sufferings unto death, secures the salvation of all who 
sulimit to and trust in him, and renders certain the de- 
struction of all who contiuue to oppose and rebel against 
him. 

PSALM III. 

Title, From Absalom lus son ; at the time of his rebellion. 
2 Sam. chap. 15-18. 

3. Shield; protection. My glory; here, probably, the 
maintainer of my glory ; tliat is, of my kingly dignity. 

4. His holy hill ; alluding to Zion, where God dwelt be- 
tween the cherubim, and whence he is represented as 
sending succor to his servants. Psa. '20:'2; 80:1. Selah; 
see introductory remarks to the book of Psalms. 

5. Slept ; in peace and safety. 

6. I will not be afraid; because he had God for his pro- 
tector. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The enemies of the righteous may be numerous, ma- 
lignant, and powerful, but the Lord will take care of his peo- 
ple, and in due time deliver them from all their troubles. 

4. The grand means of deliverance and safety to the 
righteous is prayer, and having committed themselves 
and their cause in humble believing supplication to God, 
they may rest in quietness, knowing that he and ho only 
can make them dwell in peace. 



8. The people of God know that the Author of their 
salvation is the Lord ; tliey acknowledge him as the source 
of all their blessings, and to him give the glory. 

PSALM IV. 

This psalm was probably written on the same occasion 
as the ]ireceding. 

2. My glory; my kingly dignity conferred upon me by 
God. Leasing; lies. 

3. Set apaii him that is godly; David doubtless refers 
immediately to himself, as the anointed king of Israel; but 
the language applies to all who are doing their duty in the 
sphere to which God has called them. 

4. In awe; of God. Be still; cease from your attacks 
upon me, and quietly submit yourselves to God, who has 
appointed me to be your king. 

G. Any good; real, substttntial happiness. 

7. Put gladness in my heart; through loving, trusting in, 
and obeying thee, while thou liftest upon me the light of 
thy countenance. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The gracious answers which God in times past has 
granted to the prayers of his people, encourage them to 
continue to call upon him, especially in distress, expecting 
that he will hear and relieve them. 

4. Acquaintance with one's own heart is essential to a 
right understanding of our wants as sinners, and of the 
way of life by faith in Jesus Christ. 

6. Satisfying enjoyment can be found only in doing the 
will of God, and in his love. 

PSALM V. 

Title, Upon Nehiloth; probably wind instruments of some 
kind. 

•2. My King; to whom he would yield obedience. 
619 



God favorelh not sinners. 



PSALM VII. 



DavitPs complaint in sichiess. 



4 For tliou art not a God that Iiath ploasuro in 
wickedaes^s :•■' neitluT sliall evil dwell with thee. 

5 Tlie foolish shall not stand in thy sight:* thou 
hatest all workers of ini(|uity. 

6 Thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing : the 
Lord will abhor the liloody and deceitful man/ 

7 But as for nic, I will eome into thy house in 
the multitude of tliy mercy: and in thy fear will 
1 worship toward thy holy temple.' 

8 Lead me, Loud, in thy righteousness because 
of mine enemies;'' make thy way straight lieforc 
my face. 

9 For there is no faithfulness' in their mouth;' 
their inward parti? very wickedness ;" their throat 
wan open sepulchre ; they flatter with their tongue. 

10 Destroy thou them,^ God; let thorn fall l)y 
their own counsels;' cast them out in the multi- 
tude of their transgressions ; for they have rebel- 
led against thee. 

11 But let all those that put their trust in thee 
rejoice :*■ let them over shout for joy, because thou 
defendest^ them : let them also that love thy name 
be joyful in thee. 

12 For thou, Lord, wilt bless the righteous ; with 
favor wilt tliou compass him as icitk a shield. 



PSALM VI. 



1 David's complaint in lii 



S By faitli lie triumpheth 



^ To the chief Musician on Neginoth upon Shcniinith,'' A 
Psalm of David. 

LORD, rebuke mo not in thine anger,'' nei- 
ther chasten me in thy hot displeasure." 



o 



» Hab. 1:13. • Heb. before tidne etjes. t Ueb. 7nan ofblomlsanddeeeit. 
I Hcb. the temple of Ihy knlintus, i Heb. those wkiek observe me; Psa. 
27:11. I Or, steadfastness. ^ Ilcb. his, that is, in the mouth ofamj of them. 
' Heb. wiekednesses. t Or, miil.-e them guilty. I Or, from their counsels. 
b Isa. 65:13-18. i Heh. covercst over, or proterlest. f Or, the eighth. « 1 Chr. 



5. The foolish; wicked. Nut stand; not Ije ainiroved, but 
condemned. 

7. Thy house — thy temple; for tlie imblic worship of Je- 
hovah. 

5. Make thy way strai'rht before my fare; open before nie 
a plain and safe patli, in whicli T may walk without stum- 
bling. God's way is here the way in wliich lie leads the 
psalmist. It is a way of [irotection as well as of obedience. 

9. Their mouth; the mouth of my enemies, who are also 
the enemies of God and rif^hteoiisness. An open sepulchre ; 
readj' to swallow u]) and destroy, ('ompare Jcr. .5:1(1. 

10. Destroy thou them; if (hey turn not from their sins 
thou wilt destroy them, and all thy people will approve 
of thy judgments. 

IXSTltrCTION,-:. 
1. ^[editation and prayer should be united. and the early 
part of each day spent in comtminion with (iod, and in 
supplication for his presence and blesBing in all its duties 
and enjoyments. 

6. To be abhorred Viy the bord of hosts is one of the 
greatest evils that can come upon the children of men, 
and one which, by repentance of sin and faith in Jesus 
Christ, they should all be most anxious to avoid. 

8. When the righteous man is surrounded by enemies lie 
has peculiar need of earnest ]irayer to be kept from any 
false step that shall give them an occasion to blaspheme. 

11. Those who liave chosen God as their portion, and 
who put their trust in him, have cause for habitual and 
ever-increasing joy. 

PS.VLM VI. 

Written by David under the pressure of deep and long- 
continued sufifering, which had its origin in the persecu- 
020 



2 Have mercy upon me, Lord ; for I am weak : 

Loud, heal mo; for my bones are vexed.'' 

3 My soul is also sore vexed : but thou, Lord, 
how long? 

4 lleturn, Lord, deliver my soul : Oh save me 
for thy mercies' sake.- 

5 For in death there is no remembrance of thee ;" 
in the grave who shall give thee thanks?' 

G I am weary with my groaning; all the^ night 
make I my bed to swim ; I water my couch with 
my tears.J 

7 Mine eye is consumed because of grief; it 
waxeth old because of all miue enemies.- 

8 Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity;" 
for the Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping.' 

9 The Lord hath heard my supplication ; the 
Lord will receive my prayer. 

10 Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore 
vexed: let them return and be ashamed suddenly. 

PSALM Vll. 

1 David prayeth against tlic malice of his enemies, professing his inno- 
cency. 10 By faith he seeth his defence, and the destruction of his 



'I Shiggaion of David,"" which he sang nnto the Lord, concern- 
ing the words ' of Cush the Benjamitc." 

OLOIID my God, in thee do I put my trust: 
save me from all them that persecute me, and 
deliver me: 

2 Lest he tear my soul like a lion, rending it in 
pieces, while there is none to deliver.* 

3 Loud my God, if I have done this ; if there 
be iniquity in my hands 



15:21; Psa. 12, title. J Jcr. 10:24. c Psa. 2:3. ' Psa. 51:8. S Eph. 2:7, 
8. h Isa. 3S:18. i Piia. 8S:U. 1 Or, evert/. J Job 7:3. k Psa. 119:115; 
139:19. lPsa.U5:18. "Hab.S:!. • Or, business, o 2 Sam. 10. t Heb. 
not a deliverer. 



tions to which he was exposed, ver. ", 8, 10, but which 
seems to }iave reduced his body to a weak and languish- 
ing state. 

1. Rebuke me not in thine anger; though David's enemies 
are persecuting liim wrongfully, he yet humbly acknow- 
ledges the hand of God chastening him tlirougli them for 
his sins. 

2. Mtj bmies; my whole frame. Are vexed; filled with 
great distress. 

S. Hoio lont^7 wilt thou continue to afflict me? 
5. For in ileath there is no remembrance of thee; at death 
all our opportunities of praising God on earth cease. 

7. Waxeth old; becomes dim. 

9. Receive my prayer; hear, and answer me in mercy. 
IX.STRUCTIONS. 

1. The righteous, as well as the wicked, are in this world 
exposed to great and sore troubles ; but to God they look 
for help, and place their hope in his mercy. 

f.. The friends of God value life mainly for the opportu- 
nities it affords of honoring him and laboring in his ctmse. 

8. Great trials, borne with submission, and removed in 
answer to prayer, are often followed by gladness and 
exceeding joy. 

PSALM VII. 

Title, Slii-riraion ; a word of uncertain meaning. Accord- 
ing to Home.lt is a lyric ode of a bold character ; accord- 
ing to others, a bold style of musical performance. Its 
plural, Shigionoth. occurs Hab. 3:1. Vic u-nrds ofCtt-ili the 
lienjamitf: a slanderous accusation brought by him against 
David, probably that he sought to take the life of Saul. 

2. lie; the persecutor of God's jieople. 

3. This; the evil afterwards mentioned. 



An appeal against enemies. 



PSALM IX. 



God's sreal love to man. 



4 If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at 
peace witli me ; (yea, I have delivered him that 
without cause is mine enemy ;) 

5 Let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it : 
yea, let him tread down my life upon the eartli, 
and lay mine honor in the dust. Selah. 

6 Arise, Lord, in thine anger,* lift up thyself 
l)ccause of the rage of mine enemies : and awake 
for me <o the judgment that thou hast commanded.'' 

7 So shall the congregation of the people compass 
thee about : for their sakes therefore return thou 
on higli. 

8 The Lord shall judge the people : judge me, 
Lord, according to my righteousness," and ac- 
cording to mine integrity that is in me. 

9 Oh" let the wickedness of the wicked come to 
an end; but establish the just: for the righteous 
God trieth the hearts and reins.* 

10 My defence w of* God,'= which saveth the up- 
riglit in heart. 

11 God judgeth the righteous,^ and God is angry 
u-ifh the wicked every day. 

12 If he turn not, he will whet ids sword; he 
hath bent his bow, and made it ready.' 

13 He hath also prejiared for him the instruments 
of deatli ; he ordaineth his arrows against the per- 
secutors.*'' 

14 Behold, ho travaileth with iniquity, and liatli 
conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood. 

15 He made a pit,* and digged it, and is fallen 
into the ditch lohich he made." 

16 His mischief shall return upon his own head, 
and Ids violent dealing shall come down upon his 
own pate. 

17 I will praise the Lord according to las right- 
eousness : and will sing praise to the name of tiie 
Lord most high. 



PSALM VIII. 



a Psi. 94:1, 2. b Psa. Ai-r,; 7i:-20: Isa. 51 :9. <= Psa, lS;aO. d Rev. 2:43. 
• Heb. buckler is upon, e Psi. b<):lS. t Or, isa riglUtous judge. I Matt. 
.•!:J0. 6 Deut. 32:23; Psa. 45:5. t Tieh. hatk diggeda fit, h Esth. 9:25; 

5. Mhiehonor ; here, as in some other passages, a poetical 
word for soul, or life. Gen. 49 : 6 ; Psa. 10:9; 57 : 8 ; 108 : 1. 

G. Commanded; ordained, or appointed. 

7. Compass thee about; to hear thy righteous judgments 
and praise thee for them. Return thou on hi^h; to thy 
judgment-seat, to execute justice upon the wicked. 

12. If he turn not; if the wicked turn not from his sin. 
This condition is to be understood where evil is threat- 
ened against the wicked. He will whet; God will wliet. 

14. He ; the persecutor. Travadcth unth iniquity — brought 
forth falsehood ; his plans are all mischievous, and they end 
ill bringing mischief upon himself What he sows for 
others, he reaps for himself See note to Job 15:35. 

INSTRCCTIONS. 

1. Confidence in God, and a disposition to look to him 
for help, are the grand safeguards in persecution and in 
all kinds of trouble, and the sure means of ultimate deliv- 
erance and triimiph. 

4. True piety towards God and sincere benevolence 
towards men arc essential to acceptance with Him who 
searches the heart, and wiU render to every one accord- 
ing to his work. 

9. True religion will lead those who have it earnestly 
to desire that the wickedness of the wicked may come to 
an end, and the righteous be established and prospered 
over all the earth. 

14. The wicked are often the means of their own destruc- 
tion ; and their efforts to ruin others bring ruin upon 
themselves. 



G-od's glory is magnified by bis works, and by liis love to man. 
*l To the chief Musician upon Gittitli,' A Psalm of David. 

OLORD our Lord, how excellent is thy name 
in all the earth !J who hast set thy glory 
above the heavens. 

2 Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast 
thou ordained^ strength because of thine enemies,'' 
that thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger.' 

3 When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy 
fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast 
ordained ; 

4 What is man, that thou art mindful of him? 
and the son of man, that thou visitest him?"" 

5 For thou hast made him a little lower than the 
angels, andhast crowned him with glory and honor. 

6 Thou madest him to have dominion over the 
works of thy hands ; thou hast put all things under 
his feet:" 

7 All sheep and oxen,' yea, and the beasts of the 
field; 

8 The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and 
whatsoever passeth through the patlis of the seas. 

9 Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name 
in all the earth! 

PSALM IX. 

1 David praiseth God for executing judgment. 11 He inciteth others to' 

praise him. 13 He prayeth tliat he may have cause to praise him. 
^ To the chief Musician upon Muth-labben, A Psalm of David. 

I WILL praise ;/;fp, Lord, with my wholeheart; 
I will show forth all thy marvellous works." 

2 I will be glad and rejoice in thee : I will sing 
praise to thy name, thou Most High." 

3 When mine enemies are turned back, they shall 
fiill and perish at thy presence. 



Eci-l 10-8. i Psa. bl, si, title, i Psa. 148:13. 5 Heb. /ounderf. k Matt. 
11:25; 21:16; 1 Cor.):27. iPsa.44:lfi. m Psa. 144:3; Heb. 2:6-9. n 1 Cor. 
15:27. I Heh. flocks and oxen, all of Ihem. oPsa.l39:I4. pPsa. 83:18. 



rSALM VIII. 

1. Excellent is thy name; glorious are the manifestations 
of thy character. 

2. Ordained strength; literally, founded strength ; that is, 
an impregnable fortress of strength against thine enemies. 
This he does by leading little children to proclaim his 
praise, and thus put to silence his enemies. Avenger; the 
man whose heart and lips are fuU of impious rage against 
God. 

5. A little lower than the angels ; in his nature and condi- 
tion. Crowned him with glory and honor; these words, and 
those which follow, have" their highest fulfilment in Christ, 
who as Lord of all in our nature is cro\vned with glory 
and honor. Heb. 2 : 6-9. 

6. Under his feet; in subjection to him. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The manifestations of the divine perfections in the 
works of creation and providence are in all respects glo- 
rious, and such as should call forth devout and admiring 
praises from intelligent beings throu,ghout the universe. 

5. The goodness of God to man, in making him head of 
this lower creation, in taking his nature upon himself in 
the person of his Son, and giving his life as a ransom, thus 
opening the way for our deliverance from sin and our 
preparation for celestial glory, is worthy of grateful cele- 
bration to aU eternitj-. 

PSALM IX. 

Title. Upon Muth-labbcii : Muth-labben signifies death to 
()21 



God exccutcth judgment. 



PSALM X, 



Outrages cf the wicked. 



4 For thou hast raaintainod niv riulit' and nij' 
cause; tliou satost in llic throne jiid^Mnij riLrht.* 

5 Thou hast rebuked the heatlieii, thou hast de- 
stroyed the wicked, tiiou hast put out tlieir name 
for ever and ever." 

thou enemy, destructions arc come to a per- 
petual end: and thou hast destroyed cities;' their 
memorial is ])erished witii them.'' 

7 J>ut the Loud shall endure for cver:"^ he hath 
prepared his throne for judfjinent. 

8 And he siiall judge; the world in rigliteousness,'' 
he shall minister judgment to the people in up- 
rightness. 

9 The LoRn also will be a refuge^ for the o])- 
pressed, a refuge in times of trouble. 

10 And they that know thy name will put their 
trust in thee;*' fin- thou. Lord, hast not forsaken 
them that seek thee. 

11 Sing praises to the Lord, which dwellcth in 
Zion : declare among the people his doings. 

12 "Wiien he maketh inquisition for lilood, he 
reniembereth them: he forgetteth not the cry of 
the humble.' 

Vi Have mercy upon me, Lorto; consider my 
trouble xvhich I suffer of them that hate me, thou 
that liftest me up irom the gates of death: 

14 That I may show forth all thy praise in the 
gates of the daughter of Zion: I will rejoice in 
thy salvation. 

15 The heathen are sunk down in the pit that 
they made : in the net which they hid is their own 
foot taken. 

16 The Lord is known by the judgment which 
he executeth : the wicked is snared iu the work of 
liis own hands. Higgaion.''' Selah. 

17 The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all 
the nations that forget God.^ 



' llc.h. matle mtfjudg7ncnt. 1 llcb. in rii^hteousness. aProv. 10:7. I Or, 
the de$lruct'tons ot titt tnemij are rotne to a perpetual enfl; and their rities hast 
thou destroyed. biKings lU:'J3,etc. c Psa. IUv>:a6. d Rev. 20: 12, 13. (Hob. 
a high place. cProv. 18:10. I Hub. afflicted. I Heb. that is. mrf/MIiOJi. 
f Psa. 1!);I4; 9-':.1. S Vm. SOiii. hhi. 41:17. " Psa. 83:15, 18. • Heb. in 



the son ; and is pcrliaps the name of an air, so called from 
the subject of tlic song to which it originally belonged. 

5. T/iou haM rebuked the henthen ; the nations that know 
not God. These words are spoken by propliotic antici- 
pation. They describe the final issue of God's judgments 
upon his enemies. 

6. Dednicttons ; those caused by the wicked ; they and 
their works perish together. But we may better render, \s 
to the enemy, [his] destructions are completed forever; that 
is, lie is comjiletolyilestroyed for ever. And thou; Jehovah. 

9. A refuge ; a sure defence. 

10. Know till) name; arc acquainted with the manifesta- 
tions which thou liast made of thj'self. 

11. In Zion; in his sanctuary, or among his redeemed 
people. 

12. T/tcm; thehumlile. 

15. In the net whidi thctj htd ; for the purpose of taking 
the rigliteous. 

16. Tiiejutlgmenl which he executeth ; on the wicked. Jlip- 
fxaion; tins word is rendered " soU-mn sound," Vsn. 02:.'!. 
It seems to denote an instiunient.il inlcrludo of some kind, 
while tlic voices of the siiigirs rested. 

20. Put them ; that is, the wicked persecutors spoken of 
in the preceding versos. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. Praises and all divine worship, to lie acceptable to 
God, must flow from the heart, and b(! the offspring of sin- 
cere and upright devotion to liis holy service. 
()2'2 



18 For the needy shall not always be forgot- 
ten :'' the expectation of the poor shall not perish 
for ever. 

1!) Arise, O Lord ; let not man prevail : let the 
heathen be judged in thy sight. 

20 Put them in fear, Lord:' that the nations 
may know themselves to be but men. Selah. 

PSALM X. 

1 David complaincth to God of the outrage of the wicked. 12 He 
pr.ayeth for remedy. 16 He professeth Ills confidence., 

standcst thou afar off, Lord? why 
hidest thou thyself \n times of trouble? 

2 The wicked in his pride doth' persecute the 
poor : let them be taken in the devices that they 
have imagined.^ 

3 For the wicked boasteth of his heart'.s* desire, 
and blesseth the covetous, whom the Lord abhor- 
reth.t 

4 The wicked, through the pride of his counte- 
nance;, will not seek after God: God is not in all 
his thoughts.^" 

5 His ways arc always grievous ; thy judgments 
are far above out of his sight : as for all his enemies. 
he pufTcth at them. 

6 He hath said in his heart, I shall not be moved : 
for / shall never- he in adversity. 

7 His mouth is full of cursing and deceit' and 
fraud : under his tongue is mischief and vanity.* 

8 Hesitteth in the lurking places of the villages: 
in the secret places doth he murder the innocent: 
his eyes are privily set* against the poor. 

9 He lieth in wait secretly* as a lion in his den : 
he lioth in wait to ('atch the ponr : he doth catch 
the poor, when lu; drawcth him into his net. 

lU He croucheth,* and humbleth himself, that the 
poor may fall by his strong ones.' 



ous blesseth himself, Ac abhorreth the LORD, i Or, all his thoughts Ikre, There 
i»noGod; Psa.l4:l. k Eph. 2:1*2. I llhh. unto generation artd grneratioM. 
1 Heb. deceits. " Or, tnifuily. t Heb. hide Ihrmsetres. I Ueb. in the srnet 
places. % lleh. brealeeth himself . t Or^ into his strong parts. 



C. Though the wicked may flourish for a time, and suc- 
ceed ill their projects against the righteous, tliey are des- 
tined to complete and everlasting disa]>pointnient. 

10. Those who are acquainted with the miiMifestations of 
God, especially in the person and work of his Son, will in all 
times of trouble flee to him as their refuge ; and in seeking 
him as their chief good, they will not want any good thing. 

11. The righteous desire salvation, that the praise of 
their deliverance from Satan, sin, and deaih, and of their 
preparation for heavenly glory, may be given to God. 

18. The poor and the needy may for a time seem to be 
forgotten, and may be called to exercise long patience : 
but let them trust in the Lord, and in the end they will 
see that they have always l)een remembered, and their 
highest hopes will be more tiiau realized. 

PSALM X. 

3. niesxcth the covetous — alihorrelh ; or, blesseth the covet- 
ous, [and] abhorreth the Lord. 

4. find i.s' not; the wicked feel and act as if there were 
no God. Ver. ll-i:j. 

5. Fur aliove out of his si^ht ; ho ha.s no faith in God's 
word, and because he sees not His threatened judgments, 
which are reserved in heaven against the ajipoiutcd time, 
he utterly disregards them. 

10. He crouchelh, mid humlilcth himself; like a lion prcjiar- 
ing to spring on his prey. 15ut many render, " He [the 
poor man] is crushed, he sinketh down ; and the poor 



Gdcts providence and justice. 



PSALM XIII. 



1 1 lie liatli said in his licart, God hatli forgotten : 
ho Indeth liis face; he will never see j7." 

12 Arise, O Loud ; O God, lift up thy hand : for- 
get not tlie htinihle.* 

1 3 Wherefore doth the wicked contemn God ? lie 
hath said in his heart, Thou wilt not require it. 

14 Thou hast seen it; for thou beholdest mis- 
cliief and spite, to requite it with th_y hand : the 
poor eonimitteth' himself unto thee; thou art the 
hcli»er of the fatherless. 

15 I5reak thou the arm of the wicked and the evil 
man:^' seek out his wickedness till thou find none.'' 

l(j The Lord is King for ever and ever :'' the 
heathen arc perished out of his laud. 

17 Lord, thou hast heard the desire of the hum- 
ble:" thou wilt prepare* their heart, thou wilt 
cause thine car to hear : 

IS To judge the fatherless and the oppressed,' 
tliat the man of the earth may no more oppress.^ 



PSALM XI. 

1 PaviJ encourageth himself in God aijainst his enemies. 4 The prov- 
idence and justice of God. 

•j To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. 

IN the Lord put I my trust : how say ye to my 
.soul, Flee as a bird" to your mountain? 
'1 For lo, the wicked bend their bow, they make 
ready their arrow upon the string, that they may 
privily' shoot at the upi-ight in heart.' 

3 If the foundations be destroyed,'' what can the 
riu'htcous do? 

4 The Lord is in his holy temple,' the Lord's 
throne is in heaven: his eyes behold, his eyelids 
try, the children of men. 

5 The Lord trieth the righteous : but the wicked 
and him that loveth violence his soul hateth. 

6 Upon the wicked he shall rain snares,^ fire 



" Eccl. S:ll. ■ Or, nfflicted. t Heb. knveth. 1> I'sa. 37:17. » 2 Kings 
21:1-2-15. d ITim. U:lo. lU. ' Isa. ()5:31. I Oi, estahlisk. I Isi. 11:4. 
8 Or, tcTTlfi/. 1 Heb. m darkness. 6 Psa. 64:2-4. b 2 Tim. 2:19. i Hab. 
2:20. ^ Ot^ quick-hurnins coats, j Gen. 19:24. ' Qz, burning. 1 Or. the 



fall." By liis strong ones; probably, by his strong limbs 
or jaws, the enemy l;)eing compared to a lurking lion, 
io. Tdl thou find none; that remains unpunished. 

INSTPXtTK )XS. 

4. Pride leads the wicked to forsake God, and to act as 
if he had no existence, and as it' no one would ever call 
them to an account for their sins. 

12. God is perfectly acquainted with the doings both of 
the righteous and tlio wicked, and in due time will appear 
and render to all according to their works. 

PSALM XI. 

This psalm seems to have been written at a time wlicn 
law and order were prostrate, and the wicked triumphed 
over the righteous. 

1. Ye; addressed to David's timid and unbelieving 
friends, who counselled flight. Flee as a bird ; from here to 
the end of verse 3, we have the counsel of those friends. 

3. The foundations; of social order, truth, and piety. 

4. His eyelids try ; he sees the whole conduct of men, 
and will protect and save his friends and destroy his ene- 
mies. The psalmist's reply to his unbelieving friends. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Without firm confidence in God a man will be liable 
to desert the post of duty, and expose himself to the re- 
bukes of the Almighty, and to the triumphs of his foes. 

4. However adverse may be the present state of the 



David sa'kHh his help. 
' tempest : this shall 



andlirimstone,^ and ahorribl 
be the ])ortion of their cup. 

7 For the righteous Lord loveth righteousness ; 
his countenance doth behold the upright. 

PSALM XII. 

1 David destitute of human comfort, craveth help of God. 3 He com- 
fortptb himself with God's judgments on the wicked; his confidence 
ill God's promises. 

^ To the chief JIusician upon Sheminith,' A Psalm of David. 

HELP, Lord ; for the godly man ceaseth ; for 
the faithful fail from among the children of 
men. 

'2 They speak vanity every one with his neigh- 
bor: with flattering lips a^id with a double heart* 
do they speak. 

3 The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and 
the tongue that speaketh proud^ things:" 

4 Who have said. With our tongue will we pre- 
vail ; our lips are our own : ' who is lord over us? 

5 For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing 
of the needy, now will I arise, saith the Lord ; I 
will set him in safety from him that puffeth at him."' 

6 The words of the Lord are pure words;' as 
silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven 
times. 

7 Thou shalt keep them, Lord, thou shalt pre- 
serve them* from this generation for ever. 

8 The wicked walk on every side, when the vil- 
est meu^ are exalted. 



PSALM XIII, 



npla 



eth of delay in liflp. 3 He 
ace. 5 He bo.tsteth of divi: 



prayeth for j 
cy. 

^To tlie chief Musician, A Psalm of David. 



HOW long wilt thou forget me, Lord ? for 
ever? how long wilt thou hide thy face from 



eighlh; Psa. 6, title. 1 Heb. 


a hear 


and a heart. S Heb. great. ^ I Sam. 


2:3; Dan. 7:S, 25. t Heb. 


oitli u 


s. 1 Or, would ensnare mm. I Psa. 


119:140. ■ Heb. /ii)k; that is 


every 


ne of them, t Heb. o///ie sons ofirmn. 


tOr, overseer. mPsa. 8S:14. 







righteous, or prosperous that of the wicked, the end of 
the one will be joy and triumph, of the other defeat anil 
ruin. 

PSALM xn. 

1. The faithfid fad ; they are removed by death, and 
others are not raised up to fill tlieir places. 

2. They; the wicked. A doub/e heart; making different 
representations to different persons, or saying one thing 
and meaning another. 

4. Oitr lips are our own ; we will use them as we please. 
(). The words of the Lord are pure words ; all faithfulness 

and trutli, like pure gold or silver that has no dross in it. 

7. r/(cm ; the poor and needy. Ver. 5. This generation : 
the generation of the wicked. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. "When pious men die and none are raised up to fill 
their places, but they are succeeded by the thoughtless, 
wicked, and ])rofane, the times look dark to the people of 
God, and lead them to cry with peculiar earnestness to 
him for help. 

5. In answer to the prayers of those who cry to him. 
God will arise and plead his own cause, save his people 
from their oppressors, increase the number of his friends, 
and cause them to sing for joy. 

PSALM Xlll. 

I. Forget me; forbear to deliver me. 
i■>■2^^. 



The folly of sinners. 



PSALM XV 



A citizen nf Zioii. 



2 How long shall I take counsel in my soul, hav- 
ing sorrow in my heart daily? how long shall mine 
enemy be exalted over me? 

3 Consider and hear me, Loud my God : lighten 
mine eyes, lest I slecj) the sleep ^y deatii j" 

4 Lest mine enemy say, 1 have prevailed against 
him ; and those that trouble me rejoice when 1 am 
moved. 

5 But I have trusted in tiiy mercy; my heart 
shall rejoice in thy salvation. 

6 I will sing unto the Lord, because he hath 
dealt bountifully with me. 

PSALM XIV. 

1 David describeth the corruption of wicked men. 4 He convincetK 
the wicked by tlie light of their conscience. 7 He glorieth in the 
salvation of God. 

^ To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. 

THE fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. 
They are corrupt, they have done abominable 
works, there is none that doetli good. 

2 The Lord looked down from heaven upon the 
children of men, to see if there were any that did 
understand, and seek God. 

3 They are all gone aside, they are all together 
become lilthy :* there is none that doeth good, no, 
not one. 

4 Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? 



2. Take counsel in my send; as to the way and means of 
deliverance from his troubles. 

3. Lighten mine eijes; remove from them the darkness of 
approaching death. 

4. When I am moved; overcome by his enemies. 

6. Dealt bountifully with me; in delivering him from ti'ou- 
blo, and bestowing upon liim his salvation. 
IXSTRUCTIOXS. 

1. The believer may for a time seem to bo forgotten, 
and fear that he shall be cast off for ever ; but lot him 
wait upon God, pleading his promises and trusting his 
grace, and in due time he sliall sing of salvation. 

6. In answer to the prayers of his people, God not only 
delivers them from trouliles, but often does exceeding 
abundantly above their expectations, causing them to re- 
joice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. 

PSALM XIV. 

This psalm occurs again as psalm fifty-three, with some 
variations. 

1. Tliey are corrupt; the practical atheists mentioned in 
tlie preceding words, who feel and act as if there were no 
God. 

2. Did understaml, and seek God; had any true knowledge 
of God, or desire for communion with him. This is to be 
understood as referring to men's natural state. 

3. Not one; that naturally does any thing spiritually- 
good. 

4. Eat up my people; plunder and destroy them. 

u. There; in the midst of their wicked oppression of 
the righteous. Were they in great fear; the judgment of 
God overtook them, and put theni in great fear. 

6. Sluiined; held up to cnntcmpt. 

7. Out of Zion; the dwelling-place of God; where ho 
manifested his presence.. 

IN8TRUCTI0X.S. 

1. The man who wishes that there were no God, or who 
feels and acts as if there were none, is in the most emphatic 
sense a fool. 

2. Tlic nthoism of the heart is the fruitliil source of every 

('.24 



j wiio eat up my people as they eat bread, and call 
not upon tlie Lord. 

5 There were they in great fear;*'' for God win 
the generation of the righteous. 

6 Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor, be- 
cause the LoiiD is his refuge. 

7 Oil that' the salvation of Israel were come out 
of Zion!'' when the Lord bringeth back the cap- 
tivity of his jjeople, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel 
shall be glad. 

PSALM XV. 

David describeth a, citizen of Zion. 
•; A Psalm of David. 

LORD, who shall abide^ in thy tabernacle? who 
shall dwell in thy holy hill?'' 

2 He that walketh uprightly ."^ and worketh right- 
eousness, and speaketh the truth in his heart. 

3 He that backl)iteth not with his tongue, nor 
doetli evil to his neighbor, nor taketh up' a re- 
proach against his neighbor.'' 

4 In whose eyes a vile person is contemned ;^ but 
he honoreth them that fear the Lord. He thai 
sweareth to his men hurt, and changeth not. 

5 He that putteth not out his money to usury,'' 
nor taketh reward against the innocent. lie that 
doetli these thinss shall never be moved.' 



Isa. 33:15. 16. \ Oi. receiveth, ot cndureth. ( Exod. 23:1. s£i!th.3:2 
h Ezek. 18:8, 17; ft>:12. i 2 Pet. 1:10. 



crime. They who give themselves up to the practice of 
sin, banish the tlioughts of God; and having done this, 
have nothing to restrain them from every iniquity. 

3. -Ml the good that is done or experienced in this apos- 
tate worlil, is the fruit of the grace of God. 

5. Persecutors of God's people often have fearful fore- 
bodings of coming wrath. 

G. Though the ])oor may be derided for their confidence 
in God, he will not disappoint them, but in due time will 
ajipcar to their everlasting joy. 

PSALM XV. 

1. Wlio sluill abide in thy tabernacle? be admitted, as an 
acceptable worshipper, to tliino earthly temple, and be 
qualified to dwell with thee in glory. 

2. Walkclh uprightly ; conducts according to the will ol 
God, in sincerity and righteousness and truth. 

3. Backbitcth not — nor doeth evil ; does not injure another 
in word or deed. 

4. r(7c,- wicked. CAangrtA n(rf ; keeps his word, though 
it causes him great sacrifices. 

5. To xisury; tlie Hebrew was not allowed to receive 
interest for nionev lent to his brother Uebrew. Exod. 
22 : m ; Lev. 2 '> : 3K,"37 ; Dcut. 23 : 19, 20. The spirit of these 
words forbids our taking imlawful or extravagant pay for 
the use of money, and requires us to employ our property 
in the service of God and to his glory. Reward agniiuit 
the innocent; a bribe oftVrcd to induce him to condemn the 
innocent. Never be moved ; he shall have true prosperitj' 
and happiness on earth, and an everlasting abode witli 
God in heaven. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. Sincority. honesty, and truthfulness in feeling and 
conduct; kindness and lienevolence towards others; ab- 
liorrence of wickedness in every form, and delight in the 
hohness an<l Iiappiness of them that fear and Jove the 
Lord; fidelity to all lawful engageincnts. and a disposition 
to use ]iro]ierty in relieving the needy and in doing pood, 
are evidences of devotiim lo (Jod and preparation to dwell 
with him in his heavenly kingdom. 



Darid Jkvlk unto God, 



PSALM XVII. 



and uppe/ih to his providence. 



PSALM XVI, 



1 David, in distrust of himself, and liatred of ulohitry, fleeth to God for 
preservation. 5 He showeth the hope of his calling, of the resurrec- 
tion, and life everlasting. 

•[[ Michtam' of David. 

T3 RESERVE me, God: for in thee do I put 
X my trust. 

'2 my soul, thon hast said unto the Lord, Thou 
art my Lord: my goodness extendeth not to thee;" 

3 But to the saints that are in the earth, and to 
the excellent, in whom is all my delight.'' 

4 Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten 
after another* god; their driuk-oflbrings of blood 
will I not oifer, nor take up their names into my 
li])S.'" 

5 The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance* 
and of my cup:'' thou maintainest my lot. 

G Tiie lines are fallen unto me in pleasant /)/acf* ; 
yea, I have a goodly heritage. 

7 I will bless tlie Lord, who hath given me coun- 
sel : my reins also instruct me in the night sea- 
sons. 

8 I have set the Lord always before me :" l)e- 
causc he is at my right hand, I shall not be 
moved. "^ 

9 Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory re- 
joiceth: my flesh also shall rest in hojie.* 

10 For thon wilt not leave my soul in hell ; 
neither wilt thou sufler thy Holy One to see cor- 
ruption.''' 

11 Thou wilt show me the path of life:'' in thy 
presence is fulness of joy;' at thy right hand^ 
there are pleasures for evermore.'' 



• Or, .4 golden Psalm; Psa. 5li to OIJ. « Job :)3:7, «. ^ .Mai. :i: 17. t Ur, 
give sifts to anutlur. »Hos. 2:17. iK<A. my part. J Lam. 3:'J4. = Acls 
a:*), etc. f I'sa. 73:23-26. iHeh. dweU confidently. 5 Acts 3: IS. h Matt. 
7:14. i Jude U». J Matt. 25:3). k Psa M-.fi. I Heb. justice. H Hcb. 
without lijis of deceit. I Psa. 139:23. m Psa. 39: 1, 2; Proi-. 13:3. n Prov, 



PSALM XVI. 

2. Extendeth not to; doth not profit. 

4. TIteir drink-offerings of blood; such as were offered 
to idols. 

C. The lines; measuring lines used in the distribution 
of land ; put here for tlie heritage measured out by them. 
Tlio whole of this verse is to be understood not literall_y 
of David's earthly heritage in the laud of Canaan, but fig- 
uratively of God himself, as his all-satisfying portion. 

7. My reins also instruct me; his midnight meditations 
united with the word and providences of God in affording 
him instruction as to his duty. 

9. My glory; his most glorious spiritual part, his soul. 
31 11 flesh; his body. 

10. In hell ; in the Old Testament, the word hell is often 
used for the invisible world, or place of the dead, without 
describing their condition. To see corruption ; Christ's 
body arose from the grave without seeing corruption. Acts 
2 : 25-28, 31 ; and the bodies of believers shall be delivered 
from corruption by virtue of their union with him. 

11. Life; the eternal life of both soul and liody in God's 
presence. Christ has received eternal life for himself and 
for all that believe in him. John 14:19. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. Though we cannot, by our best services, merit any 
good at the hand of God, or be profitable to him, we may 
thus benefit ourselves and our fellow-men; and if we de- 
light in doing good, especially to the friends of God for 
his sake, wo shall have evidence that he is our portion 
and that it will never be taken away. 

7. The meditations of believers, by night and by day, 
40 



PSALM XVII. 

1 PaviJ, in confidence of his integrity, c^.^^•eth dcfcncr' of God ag,^i^s^; 
Ins enemies. 10 He showetli their pnilc, cr:irt. and eagerness. IS 
He prayeth against them in confidence of his hope. 
^ A Prayer of David. 

HEAR the right,' Lord, attend unto my cry ; 
give car unto my prayer, that goetli not out 
of feigned lips.'' 

2 Let my sentence come forth from thy presence ; 
let thine eyes behold the things that are equal. 

3 Thou hast proved my heart;' thou hast visited 
me in the night ; thon hast tried me, and shalt find 
nothing : I am purposed tliat my mouth siiall not 
transgress.'" 

4 Concerning the works of men, by the word of 
thy lips I have kept mefrovi the paths of the de- 
stroyer." 

5 Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my foot- 
steps slip not.* 

6 I have called upon thee, for thou wilt hear me, 
God : incline thine ear unto me, and hear my speech. 

7 Show thy marvellous loviug-kiudness, thou 
that savest by thy right hand them which put their 
trust in thee from those tliat rise up against them.'* 

8 Keep me as the apple of the eye; hide me 
under the shadow of thy wings, 

9 From the wicked that oppress' me, from my 
deadly enemies,^ who compass me about. 

10 They are inclosed in their own fat: with 
their mouth they speak proudly. 

11 They have now comi>assed us in our steps: 
they have set their eyes bowing down to tiie earth ; 

12 Like as a lion that is greedy of his prey," and 
as it were a young lion lurking'' in secret places. 



21(1- 


I."") 


• Heb 


be not 


noved. t 


n 


,t/iem 


rliirk 


trust i 


rx thee fr 


mi th 


i.« 


thttt 


ISC 


up agai 


ist thy r 


ghl J.aml. 




Heb. 


caste 


4 He 


. enetnies 


a^ni 


nt 


the s 


ul 


« Heb 


The lik 


nessofki 


m 


that 1. 


,ol e 


■ery oi 


e of theif 


, IS a 


a 


lion that desireth to raven 


. 1 Heb. 


SI 


iting. 













concur with the word and the providences of God in giv- 
ing them a knowledge of his will. 

10. The victory of our Lord Jesus Christ over death 
and hell was a victory for himself the head, and for his 
body the church. Because God lias shown him the path 
of life, he will show it to them also that are united to him 
by faith. Though their bodies go down to the grave, they 
will not be left there for ever. When Christ shall appear 
the second time, all who have died in him shall b.e raised 
up incorruptible and glorious. " For this corruptible must 
put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immor- 
tality." 1 Cor. 15:52-55. 

PSALM xvn. 

I. Feigned; insincere. 

3. la tlie night; when the mind is free from outward 
occupations, and its true bent is manifested most clearly. 

4. The works of men; their evil works. By the word of 
thy lips; by giving heed to it. Psa. 119:9. From the paths 
of the destroyer; from walking in his paths ; that is, imitat- 
ing his ways. The desti'oyer is the wicked and bloody 
oppressor of his fellow-men, who makes himself rich and 
great by violence and falsehood. 

8. As the ajiple of the eye; in perfect safety. 

10. Tiiey are inclosed in their own fat; or, they have shut 
up their fat, that is, their fat heart. They have pampered 
themselves by self-indidgence, and thus become hard- 
hearted and insensible in respect to both God and man. 

II. They have set their eyes howmg down to the earth; as a 
beast of prey before he springs ujion Ids victim. But we 
may better render, " They have set their eyes [upon the 
righteous] to cast [him] down to the earth." 

625 



A psalm of thanksgiving 



PSALM XVIII. 



for mighty deliverances. 



13 Arise, Lord, disappoint him,' cast him down : 
deliver my soul from the wicked, which m thy* 
sword:" 

14 From men ivhich are tliy' liand, Lord, from 
men of the world, which have tlicir portion in thix 
life,"" and wiiosc belly thou fillet^t with thy hid 
Erasure: they arc full of children,^ and leave the 
rest of their substance to their babes. 

15 As for me, I will l)chold thy face in right- 
eousness:'' I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with 
thy likeness. 

PSALM XVIII. 

David praiseth G-od for his manifold and marvellous blessings. 
^To the chief Musician, A I'salm of David, the servant of the 
Lord,'' who spake unto the Lord the words of this song iu 
the day (hat tlie Lord ciellvcrc<l liim from the hand of all his 
enemies, and from the hand of Saul : ' And he said, 

I WILL love thee, Lord,'' my strength. 
2 The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and 
my deliverer ; my God, my strength,' in whom I 
will trust; my buckler, anil the horn of my salva- 
tion, and my liigh tower. 

3 I will call upon the Lord, ^vho is worthy to be 
praised;'-' so shall I be saved from mine enemies.'' 

4 The sorrows of death compassed me, and the 
floods of ungodly^ men made me afraid. 

5 The sorrows* of hell coiupassed me about : the 
snares of death prevented me. 

() In my distress I called upon the Loud, and cried 
unto my God : he heard my voice out of his temple, 
and my cry came before him, even into his cars.' 

7 Then the earth sliook and trembled ; the foun- 
dations also of the hills moved and were .<haken, 
because he was wroth. 

8 There went u]) a smok(> out of^ his nostrils, 
and fire out of his mouth devoured : coals were 
kindled by it. 

9 He bowed the heavens also, and came down :' 
and darkness wax under his feet. 

10 And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly : yea, 
lie did fly upon the wings of the wind. 



• Heb.p«tyil( /»»/«!■«. t Or, 4y (/ly. » Ui. 1U:.>. 1 Or, by (Ay. b I.ukc 
16:25. S Or, their rAiHreJi nri- /ii«. ciJohn:i:2. ■' Psa. 30, title. ' 2 Sam. 
■tZ. I 1 John 4:19. I H«b. rock, s Rev. Ji; 11-13. ti P,a. 50:1.5. 1 Heb. 
Bllial. 'Or, cordi. > ;! Clir. 30:-.>7. t Hcb. 6y. i Pta. 144:5, etc. k Psa. 



13. Thij sword; the iiistniinent by which God punishes 
his people. 

14. Hid treasure; eartlily good. 

15. When I (lU'iilte; in the world to come. With tliij like- 
neaa; with belioldiiiK tliy likeiics.s. To behold the likeness 
of (}od, is to behold (iod himself. So Num. 12:8, where 
the original word is the same. 

I.NSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Sincerity of soul in our prayers is essential to accept- 
ance with (lod. He searches the heart and tries the reins 
of the children of men, and those who worship him must 
worship him in spirit and iu truth. 

'1. The words of the Lord are the great means of keeping 
his people from those paths of initpiity which end in ruin. 

8. Confidence in God is the grand means of security, and 
those who trust in him shall be kept in perfect safety. 

15. As the beatific vision of Goil in heaven is reserved 
for all the righteous, they have no occasion to envy rich 
:ind prosperous sinners who have their portion in this life. 
Luke 16:25. 

PSAL.M XVI 11. 
This psalm is nearlv \.\w same as 2 Sam. chap. 22. 



11 lie made darkness his secret place; his pa- 
vilion " round about him were dark waters and thick 
clouds of the skies.' 

12 At tiic brightness that icas before him his thick 
clouds passed, iiail-.s^07ies and coals of fire. 

13 The Lord also thundered in tiie heavens, and 
the Highest gave his voice ;'" hail-A/on«s and coals 
of fire. 

14 Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered 
them; and he shot out lightnings, and discomfited 
them. 

15 Then the cliannels of waters were seen," and 
the foundations of the world were discovered at 
thy rebuke, Lord, at tiie blast of the breath of 
thy nostrils. 

16 He sent from above, he took me, he drew me 
out of many* waters. 

17 He delivered me from my strong enemy, and 
from them which hated me: for they were too 
strong for me. 

18 They prevented me in the day of my calamity : 
but the Lord was my stay." 

19 lie brought me forth also into a large place; 
he delivered me, because he delighted in me. 

20 The Lord rewarded me according to my 
righteousness;'' according to the cleanness of my 
hands hath he recompensed me. 

21 For I have kcjit the ways of the Lord, and 
have not wickedly departed from my God. 

22 For all his judgments were before me, and I 
did not put away his statutes from me. 

23 I was also upright before^ him, and I kept 
myself from mine iniciuity.'' 

24 Therefore hath the Lord recompensed me 
according to my righteousness, according to tlie 
cleanness of my hands in iiis eyesight.' 

25 With the merciful thou wilt show thyself 
merciful ; with an upright man thou wilt show thy- 
self U])right ; 

2(3 With the ]uni' tliou wilt show thyself pure; 
and with the I'roward thou wilt show^ thyself fro- 
war d.' 



•-'7:5. 1 Pna 'J7:J. m 1 Sam. 7:ni. " \'n. lUli;a. : Or, ^rral. « I Sam. 
:)ll:6; P»a. 3:1-5. P I Sam. 34:17. •JU. IHeb. ici'lA. qPsa. 37:27. I H«b. 
bt/ore his eyes, t Or, wrestle, r Prov. 3:34. 



2. My rock, and my fortress; source of support and se- 
curity. 

4, 5. Sorroirs of death — snrrmes of hell ; or, as the margin, 
Cords of death, cords of hell ; that is, snares set to take 
away his life and bringhim down to hell, the word hell lieing 
here used, as in I'sa. Ki: 10, for the place of the dead. Pre- 
vented me ; met me and stopped my way, wherever I turned. 

9. liotced the heavens; bent them aside as a curtain. 

10. Cherub; the cherubim are represented as the bearers 
of (Jod's throne, Kzek. chap. 10. 

12. At the brightness that was before him ; literally, From 
the brightness before him. Jehovah is represented as 
dwelling in light unapproachable, whence proceed thick 
clouds with tempests of hail and lightning. 

M. Scattered them ; my enemies. 

15. Channels of waters— foundations of the rrorld ; the deep 
abysses of the sea. These arc made bare by the convul- 
sions of nature. 

1(>. Mani) waters; numerous and great troubles. 

18. Prevented me; thrust themselves before me and inter- 
cepted my escape. 

2(;. S'low thyself f I award; be opposed to tliose who op- 
pose thee. 



A psalm of praise. 



rSALM XIX. 



Cluirs glory in crmlion. 



27 For thou wilt save the aflflictod people; but 
wilt bring down higli looks/ 

28 For thou wilt light my candle:''' the Loud 
my God will enlighten my darkne?;*. 

2'.1 For by thee I have run* through a troop ; and 
by my Clod have I leaped over a wall. 

30 As for God, his way is perfect: the word of 
the Lord is tried:*" he is a buckler to all those 
that trust in him.'' 

;>l For who is God save the Lokd? or who is a 
rock save our God? 

;)2 It is God that girdeth me with strength, and 
maketh my way perfect.'' 

33 lie makctli my feet like hinds' /fpi, and set- 
tetli me upon my high places. 

34 He teacheth my hands to war, so that a bow 
of steel is broken by mine arms. 

35 Thou hast also given me the shield of thy sal- 
Tation: and thy right hand hath lioldcn me up, 
and thy gentleness hath made me great.^ 

36 Thou hast enlarged my steps under me, that 
my feet' did not slip.'" 

37 I have pursued mine enemies, and overtaken 
them: neither did I turn again till they were con- 
sumed. 

38 I have wounded them that they were not able 
to rise:'^ they are fallen under my feet. 

39 For thou hast girded me with strength unto 
the battle: thou hast subdued under mc^ those 
that rose up against me. 

40 Thou hast also given me the necks of mine ene- 
mies ; that I might destroy them that hate me. 

41 They cried, but there ivas none to save them: 
even unto the Lord, but he answered them not." 

42 Then did I beat them small as the dust be- 
fore the wind: I did cast them out as the dirt in 
the streets. 



» Prov. (i:l(i, 17. • Or, lamp; Job 20:3. I> Prov. 20:27. t Or, brokrn. 
I Or, refined. <: Psa. 12:6. •' Prov. 3U:5. e 2 Cor. 3:5. i Or, with Ihij 
meekness thou liast multiplied me. i Heh. ancles, f Prov. 4:12. e 2 Sam. 
5:20. ^ Weh. mused to bow. hjer. 11:11. i Isa. .55:5. • Reh. At the hear- 
ing of the ear. t Heb. sans of the stranger. I Ileh, lie, or yield feigned uhe- 



28. Li^ld mij candle; grant him light in darkness. 

29. Bii my God; by liis lielp. Leaped over a wall; sur- 
mounted the wall of the enemy's fortress, and thus taken 
it by storm. 

.SO. Buckler; shield, protection, 

33. Like hinds' feet ; tlio hind is celebrated for its flieetness. 
Upon my hi ^h places ; where I am safe from my enemies. 

34. Is broken; or, is bent. The bending of a bow of steel 
represents the strength he has received from Jeliovah. 

40. The necks of mine enemies; caused my enemies to turn 
their backs before me. E.xod. 23:27. 

42. Beat them small; utterly destroy them. 

45.- Then close places; their fortresses. 

50. To his seed; to whom God had confirmed the king- 
dojn for ever. 2 Sara. 7:12, 16. The seed of David is, in 
a special sense, Christ; and, in Christ, all who have like 
precious faith with David. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The Lord is the safeguard and protector of his peo- 
ple, and supplication to him in all times of trouble is the 
grand means of deliverance. 

9. At the appearance of God all the elements do him 
homage, and as his servants are entirely under his control. 
He uses them and disposes of them as seemeth good in 
his sight. 

18. In times of calamity tlie Lord is the support of his 
people, and he will deliver and save all who put their trust 
ill him. 



43 Thou hast delivered me from the strivings 
of the people ; and thou hast nmde me the head of 
the heathen: a people ic/wni I have not known 
shall serve me.' 

44 As soon as they hear of me,* they shall obey me : 
the strangers* shall submit themselves* unto me. 

45 The strangers shall fade away, and )jc afraid 
out of their close places. 

46 The Lord liveth; and blessed 6r my Ilock ; 
and let the God of my salvation be exalted. 

47 It M God that avengetli me,^ and subdueth' 
the people under me. 

48 He delivereth mo from mine enemies; yea, 
thou liftest me up above those that rise up against 
me : thou hast delivered me from the violent man.^ 

49 Tiierefore will I give" thanks unto thee, 
Lord, among the heathen, and sing praises unto 
thy name. 

50 Great deliverance giveth he to his king; and 
showeth mercy to his anointed, to David, and to 
his seed for evermore.^ . 

PSALM XIX. 

1 The creation showeth God's glory. 7 Th.e excellency of his law. 12 

David prayeth for grace. 

*i To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. 

THE heavens declare the glory of God ; and 
the firmament showeth his handywork." 

2 Day unto day uttercth speech, and night unto 
night showeth knowledge. 

3 There is no speech nor language, tvhe7'e their 
voice is not heard.* 

4 Their line* is gone out through all the earth, 
and their words to the end of the world. Li thcin 
hath he set a tabernacle for the sun, 

5 Which was abridegroom coming out of his cham- 
ber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race. 



die 


ice 


H 




vetli a 


■ensevicnt 


fo 


me 


1 Or 


destroyetti. 


1 Heb. » 


urn 


af 


jinlen 


re 


• Or, 


conte 


s. i Rom 


II 


■X). K 


H/.r 


n. 1:19, 20. 


t Heb. w 


Ih- 


out 


their 


rn 


ce heard, or 


without these 


their 


voic 


e is heard. 


1 Or, rule 


or 


,lir 


ction 























25. The Lord will treat men, in many respects, as they 
ti-eat their fellow-men. Matt. 6:14, 15. 

32. For all their successes the people of God are indebt- 
ed to him, and to him they give the glory. 

41. The wicked may call upon God when he will not an- 
swer ; they may seek him early and not find him. If they 
hate knowledge, and do not choose the fear of the Lord, 
they must eat the fruit of their own way, and be filled with 
their own devices. Prov. 1 : 23-32. 

PSALM XIX. 

The subject of the first six verses of this psalm is the 
revelation which God makes of himself in the heavens; 
of the five following, the revelation which he has given in 
his word, with its blessed effect on those who receive 
and obey it. Then follows a prayer that God woukl help 
the psalmist to be conformed, inwardly and outwardly, to 
this perfect rule, tliat he may be accepted and not put to 
shame before his Maker. 

2. Day unto day — night unto night; each day and night 
delivers over to the succeeding day and night the work of 
declaring God's glory, so that the testimony of the heavens 
is uninterrupted from age to age. 

3. No speech — their voice is not heard; they do not speak 
in words to the ear, but to the uiidorstaiiding and the 
feelings. 

4. Their words; in silence speak to the hearts of those 
who attend to them. 

621 



Perfectimi of God^s word. 



PSALM XXI. 



A thanksgiving for riclory. 



6 ITis croing forth is from fhc end of the heaven, 
and hi.s circuit unto tlic ends of it: and there is 
nothing iiid from the iioat thereof. 

7 The law' of the Loud is perfect, converting* 
the soul : the testimony of the Lord is sure, mak- 
ing wise the simple. 

8 The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing 
the heart : the commandment of the Lord is pure, 
enlightening the eyes. 

!) The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for 
ever : the judgments of the Lord are true,* and right- 
eous altogether. 

10 More to be desired are they than gold, yea, 
than much tine gold : sweeter also than honey and 
the honey-comb.* 

11 iloreover by them is thy servant warned: 
and in keeping of them there is great reward. 

12 Who can understand /lis errors? cleanse thou 
me from secret faults. 

13 Keep back thy servant also from presumptu- 
ous sins ; let them not Lave dominion over me:" 
then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent 
from tlie great' transgression. 

14 Let the words of my mouth, and the medita- 
tion of my heart, be acceptable in tiiy sight, 
Lord, my strength,'' and my redeemer. 



PSALM XX, 



1 The church ble 



eth the king in his exploits. 7 Her confidence 
God's succor. 



1 



^] To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. 
^IIE Lord hear thee in the day of trouble ; the 
name of the God of Jacob defend thee;* 



■ Or, dorlrine. 1 Or, restoring. I Ueb. trulli. i Hsb. Ilie ilroppi 
onetj.romis. a R.^m. fi: I'J-H. I Or, miirh. ^ Ueh. rork. • Hub. s 
tt a high pla^e. t Heb. thy help, t Heb. support, i Hub. turn to as 



7. The law of the Lord; the doctrine or truth which he 
has revealed. Converting the soul; that believes and obeys 
it. Making wise; all who embrace it. 

8. T/te statutes of th^ Lord; what he has ordarned. The 
commandment of tlic Lord ; his requirements. 

9. Clean; pure and purifying. Judgments; decisions, 
especially judicial decisions. 

10. More to be desired — than gold; because true and right ; 
making wise, exccUeut, useful, and happy all who follow 
thera. 

12. His errors; as seen in the light of the perfect and 
all-comprehensive law of God. Secret faults ; those which 
escape his own notice. 

13. Pref^umptiious sins ; committed against light and know- 
ledge. From the great transgression ; more literally, as the 
margin, from much transgression, such as must be the cer- 
tain result of ignorance of God's law, or inattcntiuii to it. 

INSTRUCTION'S. 

1. In the creation and government of the world, the 
invisible things of God, even his eternal power and God- 
head, may be so clearly seen, that all who do not render 
him spiritual homage will be without excuse. Kom. 1 :20. 

7. The WTitton word of God is perfect as a rule of faith 
and practice, making all who follow it wise unto salvation ; 
by being led to renounce all dependence upon their own 
rightoonsness. to trust alone for acceptance with God upon 
the atonement, righteousness, an<l intercession of Christ, 
and to seek to please him by Ue(])ing his commandments. 

12. The more men become acr|uainte(l with the Uible, 
and the more they are in the habit of comparing their 
hearts and lives with its requirements, the greater will be 
their conviction of the niunbcr and aggravations of their 
Bins, and of their need of the grace, strength, and salvation 
of the I'edeemer. 

628 



2 Send thee help* from the sanctuary, and 
strengthen* thee out of Zion ; 

3 Remember all thy ofierings, and accept* thy 
burnt-sacrifice ; Sclah. 

4 Grant thee according to thine own heart, and 
fulfil all thy counsel. 

5 We will rejoice in thy salvation, and in the 
name of our God we will set up our banners: the 
Lord fulfil all thy [petitions. 

6 Now know I that the Lord savethhis anoint- 
ed; he will hear him from his holy heaven' with 
the saving strength of' his right hand. 

7 Some trust in chariots, and some in horses: but 
we will remember the name of the Lord our God. 

8 Tliey are brought down and fallen: but we are 
risen, and stand upright. 

9 Save, Lord: let the King hear us when we 
call. 

PSALM XXI. 

1 A thanksgiving for victory. 7 Confidence of further success. 
^ To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. 

THE king shall joy in thy strength, Lord; 
and iu tliy salvation how greatly shall he 
rejoice! 

2 Thou hast given him his heart's desire, and 
hast not withholden the request of his lips. Selah. 

3 For thou preventest him with the blessings of 
goodness : thou settest a crown of pure gold on 
his head. 

4 He asked life of thee, and thou gavest it him, 
even IcnErth of davs for ever and ever. 



mnke/iU; 1 Kinijs M::iS; 2Chr. 7:1. I Heb. Ac 
iy the strength of the salvation of. 



ofhisholii 



PSALM XX. 

1. Defend thee; by the manifestation of his power and 
grace. In these words the church prays for her divinely 
appointed head. 

2. From the snnctuartj — out of Zion; where God dwelt 
between the cherubim. 

5. hi thy salvation; in the salvation granted to thee, our 
king, by God. 

6. His anointed; David was the Lord's anointed, and as 
such was a type of the Messiah. 

7. The name of the Lord; his manifestations of himself in 
behalf of his people. 

8. They are brought down; those who trust in earthly 
help, ver. 7. 

9. The King; King of heaven, Jehovah. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The manifestations of the perfections of God 'are a 
sure ])rotection of his people, and those who trust in him 
will find him an habitual and all-B«nicient defence. 2 Chr. 
20:8, 9; I'rov. 18:10. 

5. Those who form their ]ilans and (Uidertake their en- 
terprises in the name of the Lord, and for the purpose of 
honoring him, will find in him a ground of dependence 
more safe and more efficacious than fleels and armies, or 
any aid that mere creatures can alVord. 

PSALM XXL 

3. Preventest him ; meetest him as a frieinl and helper. 

4. He nskcdlife of thee; the life here spoken of seems not 
to be sinqily David's life as a man. but to include the life 
of his successors upon the throne which was to be perpet- 
uated " for ever and ever " in Clirist. 



David, in great distress, 



PSALM XXII. 



sccketh relief from Gnd. 



5 His glory is great in thy salvation : honor and 
majesty hast tliou laid upon him. 

6 FoV thou hast made him most blessed' for ever : 
thou hast made him exceeding glad* with thy coun- 
tenance." 

7 For the king trustethin the Lord,'' and througli 
tlic mercy of tlie Most High he shall not be moved. 

8 Tiiy "hand shall find out all thine enemies : thy 
right hand shall find out those that hate thee." 

9 Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven in the 
time of thine anger:* the Lord shall swallow 
them up iu his wi-ath, and the fire shall devour 
them.'' 

10 Tiieir fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, 
and their seed from among the children of men.'' 

1 1 For they intended evil against thee : they 
imagined a mischievous device, which they are not 
able to perform? 

12 Therefore shalt thou make them turn their 
back,' when thou shalt make ready thine arrows 
upon thy strings against the face of tiicm. 

13 Be thou exalted. Lord, in thine ownstrength :'" 
so will we sing and praise thy power. 

PSALM XXII. 



1 David complaineth in great discouragement. 9 He prayeth in great 
distress. 23 He praiseth G-od. 

^ To the chief Musician upon Aijeleth Shahar,' K Psalm of 
David.' 

MY God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?' 
lohy art thou so far from helping me," and 
from the words of my roaring?-' 

2 O my God, I cry in the daytime, but thou hear- 
est not; and in the night season, and am not si- 
lent."' 

3 But tliou art holy, thou that inhabitest the 
praises of Israel.'' 

4 Our fathers trusted in thee: they trusted, and 
thou didst deliver them. 

5 They cried unto thee, and were delivered : they 
trusted in thee, and were not confounded. 



* Heb. set him to be blessings; Gen. 12:*2. t Heb. gladdened kirn with joij, 
»Psa. 4:0,7; 10:11. b l gam. 30:6; Psa. 26:1. c Amos 9:2, 3. dMal.4:I. 
elsi. -ai:!!. ' Psa. 37:as. sPsa. •2:1,4. t Or, sM (A«»» as a «M«; Heb. 
shouMer. hJob9:19. i Ot,tke hind of tlie morning, i Matt. 27:40; Luke 
■24:44. \ Ueh. my sutvation. j Heb. 5:7. H Heb. there is no S(7en,« w me. 
k Psa. 6.5:1. 1 Isa. 41:14. m Isa. 53:.3. " iMark 15:29, etc.; Luke 2:3:35, 



5. Honor and majestii hast thou laid upon him ; by estab- 
lishing the throne of his kingdom for ever. 2 Sam. 7: 13, 16. 
9. As a fiery oven; utterly consuming them. 

IXSTRDCTIOXS. 

1. The Lord's salvation is the joy and rejoicing of his 
people. They glory in it, as the ground of all their pres- 
ent blessings, and all their future hopes. 

8. However long God may bear with the wicked, and 
however numerous the blessings which he may bestow 
upon them, if his blessings do not lead them to repent- 
ance, but are abused, they will only be the means of ripen- 
ing theni for a more aggravated destruction. 

PSALM XXII. 

This psalm has its chief fulfilment in Christ. It is ful- 
filled in all his followers, so far as they constitute his body 
and suffer with him. 

1. My God, my God; the language of Christ on the cross. 
Matt. 27:4ti. 

2. Thou, hearest not; God did not answer in the removal 
of David's suffermgs. 



6 But 1 am & worm,' and no man ; a reproach of 
men, and despised of the people.'" 

7 All they that see me laugh me to scorn : " they 
shoot out* the lip, they shake the head," saying, 

8 He trusted* on the Lord that he would deliver 
him : let him deliver him,'' seeing he dcliglited iu 
him.* 

y But thou art he that took me out of the womb : 
thou didst make me hope^ when 1 was upon my 
mother's breasts. 

10 I was cast upon thee from the woml>: thou 
art my God from my mother's belly." 

11 Be not far from me ; for trou))le is near ; for 
there is none to help." 

12 Many bulls have compassed me : strong bulls 
of Bashan have beset me round. 

13 They gaped upon me icith their mouths,'' as a 
ravening and a roaring lion. 

14 I am poured out like water, and all my bones 
are out of joint:* my heart is like wax ; it is melt- 
ed in the midst of my bowels. 

1.5 My strength is dried up like a potsherd ; and 
my tongue cleaveth to my jaws ; and thou hast 
brought me into the dust of death. 

Ifi For dogs have compassed me:'' the assembly 
of the wicked have inclosed me ; they pierced my 
hands and my feet.'* 

17 I may tell all my bones : they look and stare 
upon me.' 

18 Tlicy part my garments among them, and cast 
lots upon my vesture. 

19 But be not thou far from me, Lord : my 
strength, haste thee to help me. 

20 Deliver my soul from the sword ; my darling * 
from the power* of the dog. 

21 Save me from the lion's mouth :" for thou hast 
heard me from the horns of the unicorns.'' 

22 I will declare thy name unto my bretliren : in 
the midst of the congregation will I praise thee.'" 

23 Ye tliat fear the Lord,'' praise him ; all ye 
the seed of Jacob, glorify him; and fear him, all 
ve the seed of Israel. 



itc. • Heb. open, o Psa. 109:25. t Heb. 
Or, if he delight in liim. 5 Or, keptest me 
Heb. not a helper T Heb. opened their moitt 
Rev. 2-i:15. s Jobn 19:23; 20:25-27. t 
Heb. Aaarf. "2 Tim. 4:17. v Isa. 34:7. 

t Psa. 115:11, 13. 



nsell. P Psa. 91:14. 
■. q Isi. 40:3; 49:1. 
I me • Or, sundered. 
1. t Heb. only one. 
40:9; Heb. 2:11, 12. 



6. / am a worm ; exceedingly weak and despised, and 
treated with contempt. 

7. They shoot out the lip ; expressive of the manner in 
which the multitude treated the Saviour. 

8. Let him deliver him ; the ironical language of his op- 
posers. Seeing Iw delighted m hem; seeing God delighted 
in this sutl'erer, who is the Messiah. 

9. Thou art he; the language of the Saviour, expressive 
of his holy confidence in God the Father. 

12. Many bulls; his numerous, fierce, and strong enemies. 
Bull.'< of lia.shan; the fiercest and strongest. 

It. Poured out like water; expressive of extreme weak- 
ness, the most exhausting sufferings. 

16. They pierced my hands and my feet; Matt. 27:35-44; 
John 19:23, 24. 

20. 3Iy darling; an expression for his soul or life, as his 
most precious possession, and one that could not be re- 
placed when destroyed. 

21. The horns of ilie unicorns; the power and malice of 
his mightiest and most cruel opposers. 

22. My brethren; the redeemed, whom Christ made his 
brethren by taking upon himself their nature. Heb. 2: 11-14. 

0^9 



Praise, for delirerunce. 



PSALM XXIV. 



Trust in God's sraot. 



24 For he liath not despiscil nor aliliorrod flic 
aHliction of the afliicted ; neither hath he liid liis 
face from him; but when he cried unto him, he 
heard." 

25 My praise shall he of tliee in tlie great con- 
gregation:'' I will pay my vows before them that 
fear liim.'^ 

2(i The meek shall cat and be satisfied ■.'^ they 
shall praise the Lord that seek him: your heart 
shall live for ever. 

27 All tiie ends of the world shall remember and 
turn unto the Lord: and all the kindreds of the 
nations shall worship before thee. 

28 For the kingdom is the Lord's: and he is the 
governor among the nations. 

2'.) All thcii that be fat upon earth shall eat and 
worship: all they that go down to the dust shall 
bow before him: anil none can keep alive his own 
soul. 

30 A seed shall serve him ; it shall be accounted 
to the Lord for a generation. 

31 They shall come, and shall declare his right- 
eousness unto a people that shall be born," that 
he hath done this. 



»Heb. 5;7. >> Psa. 00:13, 16. e Psi. 110:14; Eccl. 5:1. 5. 
! Rom. 3:21-26. f Isa. 40:11 ; John 10:11, 14. e Pal. 84:11. 



' Heb. jias- 



The victory over his cnenucs, whii.-li the Saviour here an- 
ticipates, is shared by all his fohowers. 

25. I win paij mi/vou's; the vows made in the time of 
my trouble. According to Hebrew usage, they consisted 
of thank-offerings, which were a form of peacc-offcring, 
and were paid publicly at the tabernacle or temple in tlic 
presence of tlie congregation. Psa. 110:14-19. After cer- 
tain prescribed ])oi-tioii8 liad been burned on the altar, the 
offerer and liis friends feasted on the remainder. Ley. 
chaps. :h and 7. When, on occasions of great joy, kings 
offered peace-ofl'erings, they made a feast for tlic whole 
people. 2 Sam. «:18, ID ; 1 Kings 8:fi2-C6. In alhision to 
these sacrificial vows of the ancient Hebrews, the iniglity 
sufferer of this psalm, who is David in the type but Ciirist 
in the antitype, promises, when he has obt;iined deliver- 
ance, to spread a feast for " all the kindreds of the nations," 
ver. 26-29. Compare Isa. 25 : 6 ; 55 : 1, 2. 

26. Shall cat; of the feast provided by the Redeemer, 
when ho pays his vows for deliverance. The alhision is 
to the sacrificial vows of the ancient Hebrews. 

27. All the ends of tlic ivorld; people of all countries. 
This shall bo the fruit of the Saviour's sufferings. Isa. 
5:5:10, 11. 

28. lie is tlie governor among the nations; the riglitful King 
of all people. 

29. All theif that he fat upon earth; the rich, great, and 
powerful. The;/ tlml po tliiirn to the dust ; the poor, afliicted, 
and despised. All classes must partake of his salvation, 
or perish. 

30. A generation; a posterity that shall servo the Lord. 

31. Declare his righteousness; they shall declare to those 
who come after them the righteousness of the Lord as the 
ground of human hope, and what he has done for the lost 
children of men. 

INS'l'llUCTIONS. 

1. We should never forgot that all tho sufferings of the 
Saviour were for our sakcs, that we might bo saved t'riiin 
the pangs of tho second death, and inherit everlasting life 
and glory. John 3:l(i. 

8. The oxactness with which tho circumstances of our 
Saviour's crucifixion wore foretold more than a thousand 
years before it took place, is evidence that tho Hiblc is 
inspin.d, ami that holy men in preparing it wrote as they 
were moved by the Holy Ghost; so that what they wrote 
is the testimony of God. 
630 



PSALM XXIII. 

nfidence in God's "Trace. 



•; A Psalm of Da\id. 

THE Lord is my shepherd / I shall not want.* 
2 lie maketh me to lie down in green pas- 
tures:* he leadeth me beside the still waters.* 

3 He restoreth my soul : he leadeth me in the 
paths of righteousness for his name's sake. 

4 Yea, though I wtilk through the valley of the 
shadow of death, I will fear no evil : for thou art 
with me;" thy rod and thy statT they comfort me. 

5 Thou i)reparest a table before me in the pres- 
ence of mine enemies: thou anointest* my head 
with oil ; my cup runneth over. 

6 Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all 
the days of my life ; and I will dwell in the house 
of the Lord for ever.* 

PSALM XXIV. 

1 God's lordship in the world. 3 The citizens of his spiritual kingdom. 

7 An exhortation to receive liim. 

U A Psalm of David. 

THE earth is the Lord's, and the fulness there- 
of; the world, and they that dwell therein. 



tUTUX of tender ^ass t Heb. waters of quit 
makestfat. i Heb. to length of days. 



I> Isa. 43:2 I Heb. 



16. The wicked, in crucifying the Lord of glory, did, 
without intending it or thinking of it, precisely what God 
declared a thousand years before that they would do. Acts 
2:23. 

22. The Scriptures were fulfilled not onlj' in the cruci- 
fixion of our Lord, but also in his resurrection and tlie 
events which followed. 

29. The Scriptures will yet be fulfilled in the universal 
spread of tho gospel, and in all people's bowing in cheer- 
ful and willing obedience to the S;iviour ; owning him as 
the Lord their righteousness and salvation, and giving 
united, hearty, and everlasting thanks to his great and 
holy name. 

PSALM XXIIL 

1. My shepherd ; to feed, guide, and protect him. Com- 
pare John 10:10-16. 

2. Green pastures; expressive of the refreshment and 
supi)ort which by his ordinances the Lord grants his 
people. 

3. His name's sake; the display of his perfections. 

4. Thy rod and thy staff; the shepherd's badges, and the 
symbols of his |>rosence. 

5. My cup; of blessings. 

6. Dwell in the house of the Lord ; bo admitted to the mem- 
ber.ship of God's holy family, enjoy communion with him, 
and dwell in his presence for ever. Compare Psa. 16: 11 ; 
49:15; 73:24; and especially Psa. 36:7-9. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Those who have Jehovah to ]>rotoct and iirovido for 
them, will imt want any^ood thing. He will guide them 
by his counsel while on earth, and afterwards receive 
them to glory. 

4. To the believer, even the valley of tho shadow of 
death will be illuminated with the presence and favor of 
Jehovah, so that he shall fear no evil, but when absent 
from tho body, shall bo present with the Lord and rejoice 
lor ever in the fulness of his love. 

rs.\i,M XXIV. 

There is much in the character of this psalm to favor 
tho ancient supposition that it was sung on the occasion 
of tho transfer of tho ark to the tabeniaide which Ilavid 
had pitched for it on Zion. 2 Sam. 6:12-19. 



Citizens of God's kingdom. 



PSALM XXV. 



Dii rid's confidence in •prayer. 



2 For he hath founded it upon the seas, and es- 
tablished it upon the floods. 

3 Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? 
or who shall stand in his holy place?^ 

4 He that hath clean hands," and a pure heart; 
who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor 
sworn deceitfully. 

5 He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, 
and righteousness from the God of his salvation." 

(i This is the generation of them that seek him, 
that seek thy face, Jacob.* Selah. 

7 Lift up your heads, ye gates ; and be ye lift- 
ed up, ye everlasting doors ; and the King of glory 
shall come in. 

8 Who is this King of glory? The Lord strong 
and might}', the Lord mighty in battle. 

9 Lift up your heads, ye gates ; even lift them 
up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory 
shall come in. 

10 Who is this King of glory? The Lord of 
hosts, he is the King of glory. Selah. 

PSALM XXV. 

1 David's confidence in prayer. 7 He prayetii for remission of sins, IG 
and for help in affliciioii. 

\ A Psalm of David. 

UNTO thee, Lord, do I lift up my soul. 
2 my God, I trust in thee : let me not be 
ashamed, let not mine enemies triumph over 
me.'' 

3 Yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed : let 
them be ashamed which transgress without cause. 

4 .Show me thy ways, Lord; teach me thy 
paths.'' 

5 Lead me in thy truth, and teach me : for thou 



a 


Psa 


IJ. 


• Heh 


T/i 


clean 


of Jiands. 


b Tsa 


. 33:15-1 


7. 


Or 


God of 


Jacob. 


" Fsa 


•2a:4, 


5' 


sa. 4<J 


■a. i Ua 


«■:); 


Jer. 50;. 


. t 


Hp 


. boweU; 


r.s.,. 


(i;l: 


5. e 


Job 13: ao 


f Ps 


1. 51:1. s 


Hos. 


14:9. h 


P.^a 


79 


U; Ezek. 


aii: 


ji,a 


i; IJohn-i: 


■i. 


i Rom 


5:15-31. 


Ji'sa 


3-2:8; 37 


■.■u. 


S Heb, loilge 



2. Founded it upon the seas— established it upon the floods; 
tlio allusion is to the fact that the dry land rises out of the 
depths of the ocean, as if it had this for its foundation. 
Psa. 13fi:6. 

3. W/io shall ascend — who shall stand; whom will God 
admit there as an acceptable worshipper? See note to 
Psa. 15:1. His hoi y place ; the place of his immediate pres- 
ence on mount Ziou. 

i. Lifted up his soul unto vanity; given to vanity his love 
and confidence. Vanity includes all earthly confidences, 
but especially trust in false gods. 

C. Him; the God of salvation. 

7. Lift up your heads; sung, it is supposed, when the ark, 
the symbol of God's presence, entered the gates of mount 
Zion. They are called everlasting because the true Zion, 
which the literal earthly Zion represented in David's day, 
is everlasting. In the same way the symbolical entrance 
of God into the earthly Zion through the ark of the cove- 
nant, may be regarded as prefiguring the entrance of Christ, 
the King of glorj', into the heavenly Zion. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. As Jehovah is the creator and preserver, so he is the 
owner of the world and all things therein ; and he has a 
perfect right to govern and dispose of all as seemeth good 
in his sight. 

4. Purity of heart and of life is essential to our enjoying 
the presence and favor of Jehovah, and is the evidence of 
our being interested in his salvation. 

8. The King of glory is mighty to sav-e and mighty to 
destroy ; his friends through his grace will be saved with 



art the God of my salvation ; on thee do I wait all 
the day. 

6 Remember, Lord, thy tender mercies* and thy 
loving-kindnesses ; for they have been ever of old. 

7 llemember not the sins of my youth," nor mv 
transgressimis : according to thy mercy remember 
thou me for thy goodness' sake, Lord.' 

8 Good and upright is the Lord : tlicreibrc will 
he teach sinners in the way. 

9 The meek will he guide in judgment : and the 
meek will he teach his way. 

10 All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth 
unto such as keep his covenant and his testimoiiies."^ 

11 For thy name's sake, Lord, pardon mine 
inicjuity ;'' for it is great.' 

12 What man is he that feareth the Lord? him 
shall he teach in the way that he shall choose.-' 

13 His soul shall dwell at ease;^ and his seed 
shall inherit the earth. "^ 

14 The secret of the Lord is with them that fear 
him;' and he will show them his covenant.' 

15 Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord; for he 
shall pluck' my feet out of the net.'" 

1 6 Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me ;" 
for I am desolate and afflicted. 

17 The troubles of my heart are enlarged:" oh 
bring thou me out of my distresses. 

18 Look upon mine affliction and my pain; and 
forgive all my sins. 

19 Consider mine enemies ; for they are many : 
and they hate me with cruel hatred.* 

20 Oh keep my soul, and deliver me : let me not 
be ashamed; for I put my trust in thee. 

21 Let integrity and uprightness preserve me; 
for I wait on thee. 

22 Redeem Israel, God, out of all his troubles.^ 



n gooilneis. k Psa. 37:11, a-2, 1 Prov. 3:3-2; John 7:17; Eph. 1 :9, 18. I Or, 
its covenant to make tkem know a. II Heh. bring forth, in Psa. 1-24:7, 8. 
■ Mic. 7:19. oHab. 3:17-19. • Heb. /lalred of violence. P Psa. 130:3. 



an everlasting salvation, and his enemies be utterly and 
for ever destroyed. 

PSALM XXV. 

This is the first of the alphabetic psalms ; that is, psalms 
where the verses correspond to the twenty-two letters of 
the Hebrew alphabet, each beginning with one of its let- 
ters in regular order. As the natural result of their struc- 
ture, such psalms consist rather of collections of pious 
thoughts and sentiments, than of connected trains of dis- 
course. 

8. In the way; the way of truth and of duty God will 
teach to all sinners who feel their need of being taught. 
and are disposed to learn of him. Matt. 11:28-30. 

10. Tlte paths of the Lord ; the ways in which he deals 
with his people are wise, faithful, and gracious, however 
trying and mysterious they may sometimes be. 

h! The secret of the Lord; his intimate friendship, with 
the blessedness and prosperity which it gives. 

1.5. Out of the net ; deliver him from his enemies. 

IS. My sins; the cause of his troubles. 

22. Israel; the people of God. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
4. Right views of ourselves will lead us to feel our need 
of being taught of God, and habitually to seek help from 
him. 

7. Sins committed in youth may, oven when repented of. 
greatly imbitter the comforts of age, and be felt in their 
effects to the end of life. 

631 



The psalmist'' s f (lit h 



rSALM XXVII. 



in God's protection. 



PSALM XXVI, 



David resortetli unto God in confidence of his integrity. 
H A Psalm of David. 

JUDGE me, Lord; for I have walked in 
mine integrity: I have trusted also in the 
Lord ; therefore I shall not slide. 

2 Examine me, Lord, and prove me;" try my 
reins and my heart.'* 

3 For thy loving-kindness is before mine eyes : 
and I have walked in thy truth. 

4 I have not sat with vain persons, neither will 
I go in with dissemblers.'' 

5 1 have hated the congregation of evil-doers; 
and will not sit with the wicked. 

I will wasli my hands in inuocency:'' so will 
I compass thine altar, O Lord: 

7 That I may publish with the voice of thanks- 
giving, and tell of all thy wondrous works. 

8 Lord, I have loved the hal)itation of thy house,' 
and the place where thine honor dwelleth." 

9 Gather not' my soul with sinners, nor my life 
with bloody men:* 

10 In whose hands is mischief, and their right 
hand is full of^ bribes. 

11 But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity : 
redeem me, and be merciful unto me. 

12 My foot standeth in an even place:'' in the 
congregations will I bless the Lord. 

PSALM XXVII. 

1 David sustaineth his faith by the power of God, 4 by his love to the 
service of God, 9 and by prayer. 

^ A Psalm of David. 

T'^'IIE Lord is my light and my salvation ;" whom 
JL shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my 
life; of whom shall I be afraid? 



.Psa 


13D:a. 


b Zech. 13:9. 


» Psa. I 


■1. 


i Ex. 3U 


19, 


■2U. 


ePsa. 


2- 


^-l; 


81:1. a. 


• Heb 


of t/ig tabernacle of tk 


tne 


honor, t 


Or 


Take not 


flM 


ay. 


1 Heb. 


men of 


Mood. J Heb 


filled w 


Ik. 


( Psi. 40:2 


« 


Mic. ' 


;'(' 




* Heb. appriMuked against, h I 


si.l>5:4. 


1 Or, dellghl 


■ 


I'm 


&.i:% 


J 


sa. 



11. The greatness of one's iniquities is no insuperable 
barrier to their being pardoned, and may, in some cases, 
be pleaded as a reason why the Lord, to the lionor of liis 
abounding grace, shoidd show mercy. Rom. 5:20. 

14. The blessedness of serving God is known only by 
being experienced, and can be known in no other way. 

18. Sin is viewed by the penitent soul as tlic cause of 
all his troubles ; and he is more anxious to be delivered 
from it than from all outward distresses. 

22. The benevolent soul desires and prays for the choic- 
est of heaven's blessings not only on itself, but on all who 
love and serve the Lord, throughout the earth. 

PSALM XXVL 

4. Vain persons ; persons of falsehood. Dissemblers; hyp- 
ocrites. 

6. JVask my hands; avoid all impurity. Compass thine 
altar; that I may there oflTer sacrifices to thee. 

9. Gather not my soiU with sinners; take not away my soul 
with sinners. 

12. Even place; on firm, solid ground. 

INSTRUC'I'K )\S. 

2. The humble and penitent lnlicvtr will not trust to his 
own heart, but knowing its dcccitfiiliHs.s he will habitually 
apply to God to search him and try him, to show him what 
wickedness there may be in him, and to lead him in the 
way everlasting. 

6. An indispensable preparation for worshipping God 
acceptably, is the putting away of iniquity iu heart and 
life. Matt. 6:23, 24. 

632 



2 When the wicked, even mine enemies and my 
fo.;s, came upon' me to eat up my flesh, they stum- 
bled and fell. 

3 Though a host should encamp against me. my 
heart shall not fear ; though war should rise 
against me, in this will I be confident. 

4 One t/iing have I desired of the Lord, that 
will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house 
of the Lord all the days of my life," to behold 
the beauty^ of the Lord,' and to inquire in his 
temple. 

5 For in the time of trouble he shall hide nie in 
his pavilion ; in tiie secret of his tabernacle shall 
he liidc mc; he sliall set me u]i upon a rock.J 

fi And now shall my head be lifted up above 
mine enemies round about me: therefore will I 
offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joy;' I will 
sing, yea, I will sing praises unto the Lord. 

7 Hear, Lord, ichen I cry with my voice: have 
mercy also upon me, and answer me. 

8 iV/un thou saidst, Seek ye my face,* my heart 
.<aid unto thee, Thy face. Lord, will I seek. 

9 Hide not thy face far from me ; put not thy 
servant away in anger: thou hast been my help; 
leave me not, neither forsake me, God of my 
salvation. 

10 When my father and my mother forsake me, 
tlicii the Lord will take me up.* 

11 Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in 
a plain path,* because of mine enemies.' 

12 Deliver me not over unto the will of mine 
enemies : for false witnesses are risen up against 
me, and such as breathe out crucify. 

13 / had faintid, unless I had believed to see 
the goodness of the Lord in the land of the liv- 



4:5, 6. • Heb. shouting, t Or, My heart said unto thee. Let my fate seek 
thy fau. I Heb. gather me; Isa. 40:11. » Heb. icay of plainness; Psa. 
i6:\i. I Heb. those which otserie me; Psa. 5:S. k Eph. 2:S. 



8. Tlie dwelling-place of God is peculiarly dear to his 
people, and their joy in the manifestations of his presence 
gives them reason to hope that they shall dwell with liim 
for ever. 

11. While the people of God are careful to be sincere, 
upright, and honest in their lives, and trust for salvation 
only in the mercy of (!od in Christ .lesns. they stand on 
firm ground, and may walk in safety through all the snares 
and dangers of life. 

PSALM xxvn. 

I. Ml/ salvation ; Saviour, author of salvation. 
i. Eat vp inyfcsh; Acstroy rm. 

3. In this ; even in this situation. lie conjitkut ; that (.od 
will be my salvation. 

4. May dwell in the Iwu-'se of the Lord ; as one of his house- 
hold, ver. r,. It is not merelv the public worship of God 
in his sanctuary which the jisalmist desires, but also that 
inward union and conuuunion with God, of which this is 
the visible earthly embodiment. 

5. JIis pavilion'; where he himself dwells, and where I 
shall bo safe from all the assaults of my foes. Secret; hid- 
ing-place, as the original word is elsewhere rendered. 
Psa. :H:7; 91:1. , 

8. Tliiifarf. Lord, will I seek; his inclinations correspond- 
ed with his duty. 

in. When my father and my mother forsake me; in times 
of the most complete desertion. He mentions father and 
mother, becausathey are the last to forsake one. 

II. Thy way; the "way of thine appointment, the sam* 



An appeal unto God. 



PSALM XXIX. 



His powerful profcclion. 



14 Wait ou tlic Lord : be of good courage, and 
he shall strengthen thy heart: wait, I say, on the 
Loud. 

PSALM XXVIII. 

1 DaviJ prayeth earnestly a^^inst his enemies. 6 He blesseth GoJ. 9 
He prayeth for the people. 

^ .4 Fsalm of David. 

UNTO thee will I cry, Lord, my rock ; be 
not silent to* me: lest, j/" thou be silent to 
me, I become like them that go down into the 
pit. 

2 Hear the voice of my supplications, when I 
cry unto thee, when I lift up my hands toward thy 
holy oracle.'"' 

3 Draw me not away with tlie wicked, and with 
tiic workers of iniquity," wiiicli speak peace to 
their neighbors, but mischiefs in their hearts. 

4 Give them according to their deeds, and ac- 
cording to the wickedness of their endeavors : give 
them after the work of their hands; render to 
them their desert. 

.5 Because they regard not the works of the Lord, 
nor the operation of his hands, he shall destroy 
tliem, and not build them up.'' 

() Blessed be the Lord, because he hath heard tiie 
voice of my supplications. 

7 Tlie Lord is my strength and my shield ; my 
heart trusted in him, and I am helped: therefore 
my heart greatly rejoiceth ; and with my song will 
I praise him. 



• Hcb. from, t Or, l/ie orade of thy s.,inrtiinty. a I'si. 13>!:-2. b P.-a. 
I-2.J:."i. c job 34:20, a*. I Or, /i/.s. %\\^'a. Mrtnt^lk of mlvalions. <M Kiiijs 
ti:.51, 5.3. I Or, rult; Mio. 7:14. H Heb. sons of the mighty; Psa. MJ:(i. 
e 1 Chr. lOrto, 29; Psi. 9li:7-9; Rev. .5:11-14. • Keb, honor of his name. 



as the ''plain path" mentioned in tlie next clause. It is 
both the way of duty, and the way of divine protection 
and safety. Plain piillt ; that is, as the original denotes, a 
level path, where there is no danger of stumbling. 

14. IFait on the Lord; by prayer and supplication, and in 
the use of all tlic appointed means of grace. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. Those who have God for their Saviour, Protector, 
and (jiiide, have no reason to fear, Init may walk through 
life and through the valley of the shadow of death unmoved 
by the enemies and danirers that may surround them. 

5. God's favor and friendship constitute a more eti'ectual 
protection than all earthly resources. The man whose 
feet (iod sets upon a rock cannot be cast down by the 
assaults of his enemies. 

(i. Though the believer will come off conqueror and 
more than conqueror over all his foes, yet it will be wholly 
through the grace of God, and to Him he will give all the 
glory. 

10. Though the believer should be forsaken of all earthly 
friends, and even have not where to lay his head, God will 
befriend him, provide for him, and bestow upon him all 
which he needs and which will promote his highest good. 

II. The believer who is surrounded by powerful and 
crafty foes has especial need to praj' for divine guidance, 
that he may be preserved from every false step and kept 
in the i)ath of duty. 

14. Waiting upon the Lord in the way of his appointment, 
his people will renew their strength, will mount up on 
wings as eagles, run and not be weary, walk and not faint. 

PS.VLM XXVIII. 

1. il/(/ rock; my firm and unfailing sujiport. 

2. T)iijholy oracle ; the inner sanctuary, where God dwelt 
between the cherubim. 



8 The Lord is their* strength, and he is the sav- 
ing strength'' of his anointed. 

9 Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance:* 
feed' them also, and lift them up for ever. 

PSALM XXIX. 

1 David eihorteth princes to give ylory to Lrod, .1 by reason of his 
power, 11 and protection of his people. 

^ A Psalm of David. 

C^ IVE unto the Lord, ye mighty,' give unto 
X the Lord glory and strength.'^ 

2 Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his 
name;* worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness.'*^ 

3 The voice of the Lord is upon the waters : the 
God of glory thundereth : the Lord is upon many* 
waters. 

4 The voice of the Lord is powerful ;^ the voice 
of the Lord is full of majesty." 

5 Tiie voice of the Lord breakcth the cedars; 
yea, the Lord breaketh the cedars of Lebanon. 

6 He maketh them also to skip like a calf; Leb- 
anon and Sirion like a young unicorn. 

7 The voice of the Lord divideth'' the flames of 
fire. 

8 The voice of the Lord shakcth the wilderness; 
the Lord .shaketh the wilderness of Kadcsh. 

9 The voice of tlie Lord maketh the hinds to 
calve,* and discovereth tlie forests: and in his 
temple doth every one speak of* his glory .'>' 

10 The Lord sitteth upon the flood;'' yea, the 
Lord sitteth King for ever.' 



t Or, his glorious sanctuary. < 2 Chr. 20:21; l>sa. 110:17. 1 Or, great, 
meh. in power. ^\}lfib. in majesty. 1 lieh. ailtelh out. * Or, >>e in pain. 
1 Ox,emryivhitofitutteretli. ePsa. 63:2. i (ien. b:l, '2. "Psa. 2:0-9. 



3. Draw me not away; take me not away to punishment. 

8. Their strength ; the strength of his people. His anoint- 
ed ; David, as the anointed head of God's jieople, repre- 
senting Clu'ist, who is in a higher sense the anointed of 
God. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Nothing but the grace of God and constant help from 
hini, can keep even believers from falling away to their 
own destruction. 

5. Disregard of God and his w.iys is the means of de- 
struction to those who continue in it. 

7. Trust in the Lord is the sure means of defence from 
all enemies, and a preparation for everlasting joy and 
praise. 

PSALM XXIX. 

This psalm describes the m;ijesty of God, especially as 
manifested in storms of thunder and lightning. 

1. Give; ascribe. Ye might i/; or, as the margin, Ye sons 
of the mighty; these words are most naturally understood 
of the hoTy angels. Compare Psa. 103:20; 148:2. 

.3. The voice of the Lord; as in a storm of lightning and 
thunder. 

6. Sirion; the Zidonian name of Ilermon, a summit of 
Anti-Lebanon. 

7. Diviikth the fames of fire; parteth the lightningK. 

8. Kadcsh ; a wilderness on the southern boundary of 
Palestine. 

9. Discovereth the forests ; strips them bare by tempests. 
In his temple; his heavenly temple, or his palace in tho 
skies, where he sits as king upon the flood. 

10. The flood; the waters above the firmament. Com- 
pare Psa. 101:3. But as the original word is everywhere 
else applied to the deluge of Noah, we may perhaps bet- 
ter render the clause, "Jehovah sat upon the deluge;" 

633 



David praisetk God, 



PSALM XXXI. 



and craveth his help. 



11 The Lord will give strength unto liis people;* 
the Lord will bless his people with peace.'' 

rSALM XXX. 

1 David praiselh <to(1 for his delu-erance. 4 He oxhorleth others to 
praise him by example of Crod's dealing with him. 

•i A Psalm and Song at the dedication of the house of David. 

I WILL extol thoc, O Lord ; for thou hast lifted 
me up, and hast not made my foes to rejoice 
over nie. 

2 Lord my God, 1 cried unto thee, and tliou 
hast healed me. 

3 Lord, thou hast brought up my soul from 
the grave : thou hast kept me alive, that I should 
not go down to the pit.'= 

4 King unto the Lord, ye saints of Ids, and 
give thanks at the remembrance" of his holiness. 

5 For his anger cndureth but a moment:* in his 
favor is life : weeping may endure for a night,* but 
joy * cometh in the morning. 

6 And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be 
moved. 

7 Loud, by thy favor thou hast made my moun- 
tain to stand strong:*'' thou didst hide thy face, 
and I was troubled. 

8 I cried to thee, Lord ; and unto the Lord 
I made supplication.'' 

9 Wiiat profit is there in my blood, when I go 
down to the pit? Shall the dust praise thee? 
shall it declare thy truth? 

10 Hear, Loud, and have mercy upon me: 
Lord, be tliou my helper. 

11 Tliou hast turned for me my mourning into 
dancing ; thou hast )iut ofi'my .sackclotii, and gird- 
ed me with gladness ; ' 

12 To the end that my glory* may sing prai.se 

» Im. WiaO-Sl. b Psa. fc5:M, 10. c Isi. :)s:|7. • Or, lo llic mcmoruil. 
t Heb. there is but a manuni in his anger. I Heb. in the erening. 1 Heb. 
singing. XHch. settled strength /or my mountain. J Psa. 18:.*35,:JG. c p^a. 
34:8. ( Pii. 1^0:1, 2; l»i, 01:3, • That is, tongue, or soul; Psa. l(i:9. 

that is, he presided, as tlie Judge of all the eartli, over that 
mighty catastrophe. The connection of thotight between 
a tempest of thunder and lightning and the deluge is easy 
and natural. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. All tlie blessings which are enjoyed even by the 
most niiglity of God's creatures, come from God. and lav 
them under peculiar obligations to love and adore him. 

4. The voice of the Lord in thunder, lightning, earth- 
quakes, and temjiests is omnipotent; nothing can stand 
before it. He speaks, and it is done ; accomplishing his 
pleasure in heaven, on earth, and througliout all ])laces of 
his vast dominion. None can stay his power, or say to him. 
What iloest thou ? 

10. Amidst all the convulsions of nature, the Lord 
reigns, King over all; giving strength, security, and joy 
to his people, and overruling all to work out fur them an 
exceeding and an eternal weight of glory. 

PSALM XXX. 

Title: others render this title thus: A Psalm, a Song of 
dedication for the limine, by Davitl ; and they suppose the 
reference to be to the threshing-lloor of Oman the .lebu- 
site, which David punliased upon the occasion of the 
pestilence with which Israel was visited for liis sin in 
numbering the people. Of this David said, " This is the 
house of the liOrd (iod," 1 Cliron. 22:1, and it seoms 
probable, from the verses that follow, tliat lie then dedi- 
634 



to thee, and not be silent. Lord my God, I 
will give thanks unto thee for ever. 

PSALM XXXI. 

1 David showing his confidence in God craveth his help. 7 He rejoiceth 
in his mercy. 9 He prayetb in his calamity. 19 He praiseth God 
for his goodness. 

Ij To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. 

IN thee, Lord, do I put my trust ;•■' let me 
never be ashamed: deliver me in thy right- 
eousness.'' 

2 Bow down thine ear to me; deliver mcspeedily: 
be thou my strong rock,' for a house of defence 
to save me. 

3 For tliou art my rock and my fortress ; there- 
fore for thy name's sake lead me, and guide me. 

•1 Pull me out of the net that they have laid 
privily for me: for thou art my strength. 

5 Into thy hand I commit my spirit:' thou hast 
redeemed me, O Lord God of truth. 

6 I have hated them that regard lying vanities:^ 
but I trust in the Lord. 

7 I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for 
thou hast considered my trouble ; thou hast known 
my soul in adversities:'^ 

8 And hast not shut me up into the hand of the 
enemy : thou hast set my feet in a large room.' 

9 Have niei-cy upon me, O Lord, for I am in 
trouble: mine eye is consumed with grief, yea, my 
soul and my belly. 

10 For my life is spent with grief, and my years 
with sighing: my strength faileth because of mine 
iniquity, and my bones are consumed."' 

Ill was a rcfu-oach among all mine enemies, 
but especially among my neighbors, and a fear to 
mine acquaintance :" they that did see me without 
fled from me. 



sPsa.7l:l-4. hPsa.H:!:!. 1 lUh. to me for a roek of strength, i I,ulc« 
•ja:40; AcU7:5a. j Jonah 2:S. k Psa. 142: a. iPsa. la:l<J. " "• — 
etc. n Job 19: la. 



. 10-2:3, 



cated that spot as the site of the future temple. AVith this 
supposition the contents of the psalm well agree. 

7. Made mij mountain to stand strong; given me steadfast 
prosperity. 

12. My glory; my soul, as tlie word is elsewhere used. 
Sec note to Psa. 7:5, where the word in the original is the 
same as here. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Prayer is the grand means of deliverance from trou- 
ble ; and wlien deliverance is granted, devout praises should 
be rendered to God, the author and giver of all good. 

6. Continued ]]rosperity often leads men to forget their 
dependeiKC on God, and makes affliction needful to teach 
them that all their blessings come from him. 

11. God brings his people out of trouble, that they may 
unite in praising and adoring him. 

PS.VL.M XXXI. 

4. Tlicy; his enemies. 

7. Known my smd ; acknowledged and delivered mo. 

8. A large room; a place where he might enjoy freedom 
and safety. 

10. Becatuicofminc initptily; though the persecutionB to 
which he was subjected by his enemies were unjust, he 
yet humbly acknowledges in them God's hand chastising 
him for his sins. My hones are ron.<iuined ; decayed, waxed 
old, and worn out willi distresses. 

11. Fled from mc ; lest they should be involved in his ruin. 



Safety of Go(Vs people. 



rSALM XXXII, 



Blessedness of forgiveness. 



12 I am forgotten as a dead man out of miml : 
I am like a broken vessel.* 

13 For I have heard the slander of many: fear 
was on every side: while they took counsel to- 
gether against mo. tliev devised to take away my 
life. 

U But I trusted in thee, Lord : I said, Thou 
art my God. 

1.5 My times are in thy hand : (h^liver me from 
the hand of mine enemies, and from them tliat per- 
secute me. 

1(5 Make thy face to shine upon thy servant:'' 
save me for tiiy mercies' sake. 

17 Let me not bo ashamed, Lord ; for I have 
called upon thee: let the wicked be ashamed, and 
let them be silent in* the grave. 

18 Let the lying lips be put to silence; which 
speak grievous things* proudly and contemptu- 
ously against the righteous. 

1'.) Oh how great is thy goodness, which thou 
hast laid up for them tliat fear thee; tvhich thou 
hast wrought for them that trust in thee before the 
sons of men!'' 

20 Thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy 
presence from the pride of man: thou shalt keep 
them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of 
tongues."^ 

2\ Blessed be the Lord : for ho hatli showed me 
his marvellous kindness in a strong* city. 

22 For I said in my haste, I am cut off from 
before thine eyes:'' nevertheless thou heardest 
the voice of my supplications when I cried unto 
thee. 

23 Oh love the Lord, all ye his saints : for the 
Loud preserveth the faithful, and plentifully re- 
wardeth the proud doer. 

24 Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen 
your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord. 



PSALM XXXII. 



• Hi'b. vtssd that perislielh. ' Num. 6:-2.5. 2R. t Or, cut off for. 1 Heb 
ilmrdtking. b ki. (i|:4. cJob5:ai. S Or,/«ire./. JJobJ5;14. I Or, 
•iiing instruction. eRom. 4:0, 8. f '2 Cor. J: 19. sljnhnl;9. H Hcb. 



l,j. Mij timet; the trials and changes of life and the hour 
of death. Though surrounded with enemies wlio souf^ht 
liis life, they could do nothing except what God suffered 
them. 

20. A pavilion ; a secure hiding-place. The strife of 
tongues ; the war which their enemies make upon them by 
the weapons of calumny and falsehood. 

21. Ill a strong citi/; by placing me in a fenced city, or 
by giving me protection like that which a fenced city 
furnishes. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. For the display of his own perfections, believers be- 
seech God to deliver them from their troubles, and daily 
the\' commit themselves, their lives, and all their interests 
to his disposal. 

y. Sin is the cause of every sorrow, and the penitent 
soul desires deliverance from this more than from outward 
troubles ; and for this mercy he looks to the rich grace of 
God in Jesus Christ. 

19. Confidence in God, manifested under great trials, 
honors him and inspires hope in his mercy. Those who 
exi)erience it, wish to have all unite in praising and 
adoring him for his wonderful love to the children of 



PSALM XXXII. 

The probable occasion of this psalm was the season 
of anguish and remorse through which David passed in 



1 Blessedness consisteth in remission of si 
givetli ease to the conscience. 8 God's 



-'i Confession of sins 
mises bring joy. 



^ A Psalm of David, Maschil.' 

BLESSED is lie whose transgression is forgiven, 
whose sin is covered.'' 

2 Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord im- 
putetli not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no 
guile.'' 

3 When I kept silence, my bones waxed old 
through my roariftg all the day long. 

4 For day and night thy hand was heavy upon 
nie: my moisture is turned into the drought of 
sunnner. Selah. 

.5 I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine 
iniquity have I not hid. I said, I will confess my 
transgressions unto the Lord ; and thou forgavest 
the iniquity of my sin." Selah. 

6 For this shall every one that is godly pray 
unto thee in a time when thou mayest be found ;'" 
surely in the floods of great waters they shall not 
come nigh unto him.' 

7 Thou «/•); my hiding-place;' tliou shalt preserve 
me from trouble ; tliou shalt compass me about 
with songs of deliverance.'' Selah. 

8 I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way 
which thou shalt go : I will guide thee with mine 
eye.' 

9 Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule, tchich 
have no understanding:' whose mouth must be 
held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near 
unto tiiee. 

10 Many sorrows .shall be to the wicked:"" but he 
that trustcth in the Lord, mercy shall compass him 
about." 

11 Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye right- 
eous : and shout for joy, all ye tliat are upright in 
heart. 



ofjindin?. 
15:1, etc.; R 
1 Prov. •Jfi:3. 



l;lli jPsa. 143:9. k E.\od. 
e, mine eye shall be upon thee. 



consequence of his sin in the matter of Uriah the Hit- , 
tite. 2 Sam. 11. 

1. Coiwci/,- blotted out, pardoned. 

3. Kept silence; refused to confess his sins. Wa.xcd ohl ; 
through the greatness of his distress. 

4. My moisture is turned into the ilrought of summer ; he 
became emaciated and dried up under the burden of his 
iniquities. 

«. For this; on account of God's readiness to p;irdon. 

9. The horse— the mide ; which refuse to be governed 
except by force. 

10. Tlie wicked; those 'ivho refuse to yield obedience to 
the divine 'svill. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. Forgiveness of sins is essential to happiness here 
or hereafter, and those who receive it may be iironounc- 
ed truly blessed, both in this world and the world to 
come. 

5. Ingenuous confession of sin and hearty turning from 
it are essential to forgiveness; and those who will not 
confess and forsake it, must suffer its dreadful conse- 
quences for ever. 

8, Those who by repentance of sin and faith in Jesus 
Christ have turned to God and found pardoning mercy, 
are exceedingly anxious that others should take the same 
blessed way, and thus obtain rest, peace, and joy to their 
souls. 

635 



God's goodness and pover 



PSALM XXXIV. 



call for confidence. 



PSALM XXX 11 1, 



1 God is to be pmised for his goodness, 6 for his power, 12 and for his 
providence. UO Conlidciice is to be placed in God. 

TDE.JOICE in the Lord, ye righteous:" /or 
JTV praise is comely for the upright. 

2 Praise the LoitD with harp : .«iiig unto him with 
the psaltery and an instrument of ten strings."" 

3 Sing unto him a new song ; " play skilfully with 
a loud noise. 

4 For the word of the Lord w right; and all his 
works are done in truth. * 

5 He loveth righteousness and judgment: the 
earth is full of the goodness" of the Lord.'' 

6 l>y the word of the Lord were the heavens made;' 
and ail the host of them by the breath of his mouth.'' 

7 lie gathereth the waters of the sea together as 
a heap:''' he layeth up tiio depth in storeliou.ses.'' 

8 Let all the earth fear the Lord:' let all the 
inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him. 

9 For he spake, and it was do?te/ he commanded, 
and it stood fast.-* 

10 The Lord bringeth* the counsel of the hea- 
then to naught : he maketh the des'ices of the 
people of none effect." 

11 The counsel of the Lord standeth for ever,' 
the thoughts of his heart to all generations.* 

12 Hlessed is the nation whose God is the Lord ; 
and the people whom he hath chosen for his own 
inheritance.'" 

13 The Lord looketh from heaven ; he bcliold- 
eth all the sons of men." 

14 From the place of his habitation he looketh 
upon all the inhabitants of the earth. 

1.5 He fashioneth their hearts alike;" he cou- 
sidereth all their works. 

10 There is no king saved by the multitude of a 
host : a mighty man is not delivered by much 
strength."* 

IT A horse is a vain thing for safety:'' neither 
shall he deliver ant/ by his great strength. 

Is Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them 
that fear him, ii])on them tiiat hope in his mercy ;'' 

ly To deliver their ,-oul from death, and to keep 
them alive in famine." 



» P.a. 97:1-J; Phil. -I;!. >> P«i. I5<1:3, -1. ' I'.a. 1-14:0; R«v. .'•.:9. * Or, 
merry, d Psi. llU:(i4 « Ueb. II ;.3. ' Hen. 2; I . t Job -Hi: 10. h .Fob 3l:n- 
II. i Jor. 10:7. J Gon. I :.!, etc 1 Hi:b. malcrlli /ruslrnle. k l<i •14;-i'>. 
1 Isa. 40: lU. t Heh. generation and geturalion. m I'na. (lo:4. n I'rov. 10::J. 
• Prov. 22;a. p P«a. 44::i-7. q Prov. al ::H ; Ho. 14:^. rl Pol. 3:12. 



PSALM xxxin. 

7. Lai/clh tip the depth ; restraiiietli the waters in their 
places. 

9. It was (lone ; tlie earth was created. 

10. The heathen ; the nations tliat kimw not fjoii. 

15. Fashioneth their hearts alike; that is, as the original 
means, the heart of one as well as of another. As he is 
the former of the hearts of all, so he knows the tlioiighls 
of all. 

18. Upon them ; for their jjooil. 

INSTRltTIONS. 

4. The Lord is worthy of universal praise and adoration, 
not only for what he is in hiinself, hut for what ho has 
manifested of himself to the children of men. All his 
works praise him, and his saints bless him. 

8. The manifestutions of (lod in cremation and in provi- 
dence show that he is infinite, and lay men under obliga- 
tions to worshij) him with reverence and holy fear. 

12. Those who choose tiod as tlicir portiiMi, his service 
G3G 



20 Our soul waiteth for the Lord : he is our help 
ajid our shield.' 

21 For our heart shall rejoice in him," because 
we have trusted in his holy name.*' 

22 Let thy mercy, O Loud, be upon us, accord- 
ing as we hope in thee. 

PSALM XXXIV. 

I P.ivid praiseth God, and exiiorteth others tliereto by his experience. 
8 They are blessed that trust in God. 11 He exhorteth to the fear 
of God. 15 The privileges of the righteous. 

^ A Psalm of David, when he changed his behavior before 
Abimelech ; * who drove him away, and he departed. 

I WILL bless the Lord at all times : his praise 
shall continually he in my mouth."' 

2 My sold shall make her boast in the Lord:" 
the humble shall hear thereof, and be glad.^' 

3 Oh magnify the Lord with me, and let us c.xalt 
his name together.'- 

4 I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and de- 
livered me from all my fears." 

5 They looked' unto him, and were lightened: 
and their faces were not ashamed. 

6 This poor man cried, and the Lord heard Aim," 
and .^avcd him out of all his troubles.'' 

7 The angel of the Lord encamjicth round about 
them that fear him, and dclivcreth them.'' 

8 Oh taste and see that the Loud is good:'' bless- 
ed it the man that trusteth in him."^ 

i) Oh fear the Lord, ye his saints: for there is no 
want to them that fear him. 

10 The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger: 
but they that seek the Loud shall not want any 
good thing. 

11 Come, ye children, hearken unto me: I will 
tcacli you the fear of the Lord. 

12 What man 2.9 he that desireth life, and loveth 
mantj days, that he may see good?^ 

l;5 Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from 
speaking guile. 

14 Depart from evil, and do good;" seek peace, 
and jiursiie it.' 

1,') The eyes of the Lord are upon the riirhfoous, 
and his ears are open unto their cry. 



■ P«i. 37:19. ' I'sa. nr,:<>-U. u Zech. 10:7; John IG:'.' 




» Or, Arliis/i; 1 Pam, 21 : la. «■ Eph. .i:20. i 1 Cor. 1:31, 


> 1'.., I1V:7I. 


I Luko 1:40. etc. »I.ukoll:0. 1 Or.yloltvrf. bPsa. 3:4. 


c 2 Sam. 22:1. 


JUcb. 1:14. olPet.2:3. n'sa.2:12. » 1 Pot. 3:10, etc. 


ha'r.m. 2:19. 


1 Matt. 5:9. 





as their employment, and his favor as their reward, wll 
be truly and for over blessed. 

19. Xo reliance can be placed on creatures for safety, 
without the protecting care and kindness of Jehovah, lie 
taketh jilcasurc in those that fear him and that hope in 
his mercy. 

PS.VLM XX.XIV. 

Title, rhnnireil his behavior ; or. more literally, changed hia 
understanding;, that is. feigned himself mad. 1 Pam. 21:13. 

2. Millie her boast in the Lord ; glory in him as my all- 
sufficient good. 

5. Thcii ; who seek the Lord iis their chief good. 

6. This poor tiian; David, who had been delivered from 
great and sore distresses. 

7. The angel of the Lord ; the minister of God's will, sent 
to deliver all who trust in him. 

9. No want ; of any thing which will conduce to their 
highest good. 

15. Upon the righteous ; for their benefit. 



Prix-ili'ffcs of the righteous. 



PSALM XXXV. 



A pnnjrr for safety. 



Ifi Tlic face of tlio Lord m airainst thcin that do 
evil," to cut ofl' tlio remembrance oi' them from tlic 
earth. 

IT The righteous cry, and the Lord licareth, and 
delivereth them out of all their troubles.'' 

18 The Lord w nigh unto them that areof abroken 
heart ;* and savetii such as be of a contrite spirit.* 

Ill llany are tlic afflictions of the righteous: but 
the Loud delivcrctii him out of them all. 

2(1 lie keepeth ail his bones : not one of them is 
broken. 

21 Evil shall slay the wicked: and they that hate 
the righteous shall be desolate.* 

22 The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants : 
and noncof them that trust in him shall be desolate.'' 

PSALM XXXV. 



1 David prayeth for his own safety, and his enemies' confusion. 11 He 
comphiiiieth of thtir wrongful dealing, 22 and pleadeth witll God ior 
deliverance. 

*\ A Psalm of David. 

I)LEAD my cause, Lord, with them that strive 
with me : fight against them that light against 
niC' 

2 Take hold of shield and Inicklcr, and stand up 
for niy help. 

3 Draw out also tlic spear, and stop the u-ay 
against them that persecute me: say unto my soul, 
I am tiiy salvation. 

4 Let them be confounded and put to shame that 
seek after my soul:° let them be turned back and 
brought to confusion that devise my hurt. 

5 Let them be as chaff before the wind :'" and let 
the angel of the Lord chase them. 

Let their way be dark and slippery :5 and let 
the angel of the Lord iiersecute theiu. 

7 For without cause have they hid for me their 
net in a pit, ivhich without cause tlicy have digged 
for my soul. 



» Ezeli. 11:7, S. 


tlsa. G3:J1. • ileb. lo Ihc bniUnof /lairl. lUehlhr 


conlrite of spirit. 


Or. guilty, c Psa. »1:||, 1-2. J l,am. :!:5S. e Psa. 


Il-.il, t Psi. 1:4. 


§ Ileb darkness and sitpperiness. II Hel,. whieli /if 


knowHh not of. S 


1 Thess. 5:3 h Prov. -JJ:*;, -il. H Heb. iVitnes.vs n{ 


teroiig. 1 Psa. 27: 


a; Matt. 26:59-81. • Ileb. asked me. J Jolm 1(I::J2. 



18. Of a broken heart ; hiinibletl and penitent for sin, and 
turned from the love and joractico of it to God. 

20. Not one nftltem is brolccn ; the meaning of this and 
other like promises is, that God continually watches over 
the bodies of his saints, as well as over their soula, so that 
no real evil can befall them. Whatever discipline he sees 
good to lay upon theh' bodies, he will make conducive 
to their highest welfare ; so that though it be in respect to 
its outward form an evil, it is turned by his providence 
and grace into a blessing. See introductory note to P.sa. 1. 

21, 22. Be desolate; the word in the original means, be 
held guilty, and, as such, be destroyed. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. We always have reason to bless God, whatever may 
be onr present condition; our mercies are great and mul- 
tijilied, and our suflerings less than we deserve. 

4. Jehovah can deliver his people not only from evil, 
but also from the fear of it; so that in seeking him they 
bIi.iU not want any good, but be kept in perfect peace and 
filled with joy unspeakable, their minds being stayed on 
hiiii. 

II. Those who know the blessedness of fearing, loving, 
and obeying God, are desirous that all others, especially 
the young, should experience the same benefit; and the 
earlier in life they liecome devoted to him, the greater 



S Let destruction come upon him at unawares;'^ 
and let his net that he hath liid catch himself: into 
that very destruction let him fall. 

9 And my soul shall l)e Joyful in the Lord: it 
shall rejoice in his salvation. 

10 All my bones shall say, Lord, who w like unto 
thee, which doliverest the poor from him that is 
too strong for him, yea, the poor and the needy 
from him that spoileth him?" 

11 False witnesses^ did rise up;' they laid to my 
charge" things that I knew not. 

12 They rewarded me evil for good,' to the spoil- 
ing* of my soul. 

13 But as for me, when they were sick, my ch)th- 
ing was sackcloth: I humbled* my soul with fast- 
ing ; and my prayer returned into mine own bosom. 

14 I behaved myself^ as though he had been my 
friend or brother:" I bowed down heavily, as one 
that mourncthybr his mother. 

15 But in mine adversity^ they rejoiced, and 
gathered themselves together : yea, the abjects 
gathered themselves together against me,'' and I 
knew it not ; they did tear me, and ceased not : 

16 With hypocritical mockers in feasts, they 
gnashed upon me with their teeth.' 

17 Lord, how long wilt thou look on? rescue 
my soul from their destructions, my darling" from 
the lions." 

18 I will give thee thanks in the great con- 
gregation : I will praise thee among much* peo- 
ple. 

19 Let not them that are mine enemies wrong- 
fully * rejoice over me : neither let them wink with 
the eye that hate me without a cause." 

20 For they speak not peace: but they devise 
deceitful matters against them that are quiet in the 
land." 

21 Yea, they opened their mouth wide against 
me, a7id said, Alia, aha, our eye hath seen it.^ 



t Ileb. 


deprivii 




I Or, affi 


rtrd. 


5 Heb. 


walked. 


II Heb 


asn 


fr 


end as a 


bratlter 


:o me. 


1 H 


b. Imltin 


■r. k 


Job 30: 


, 8, etc. 


ll.am 


2:11); J 


\.cts 7:54. 


• Heb 


only on 


e. " 


Psa. 2-. 


:ao. 


f Heb. 


strong. 


1 Heb. 


fah 


elv 


n John 


15:25. 


Matt 


12:24. P Ps 


I. 40 


15. 













ordinarily will be their excellence, usefulness, and happi- 
ness in future years. 

17. Supplication to God in trouble is the unfailing re- 
source of his people, and they have blessed experience 
from time to time of his willingness and power to save. 

PSALM XXXV. 

4. Let them be confounded; this form of expression is a 
prediction of what will take place with regard to those 
who continue in wickedness, and also implies denunciation 
uttered by inspired men against the enemies of God. 

,5. As cliaff; driven by the wind and utterly destroyed. 
Tlie angel of the Lord; the minister of God's will, sent to 
destroy his enemies. 

8. Him ; the chief persecutor, who had excited others to 
the same diabolical work. 

10. AUmybones; the bones are here put for the whole man. 

11. I knew not ; was ignorant of, because I had not com- 
mitted them. 

13. Returned into m rnc own bosom ; he experienced the ben- 
efit of his prayers, though they did not benefit his enemies. 
17. Ml/ darling; my soul. Psa. 22:20. 

19. iVink with the eye ; in malicious triumph. 

20. 2'liem that are quiet in the land; the meek and peace- 
able servants of God. 

21. Aha; an expression of triumph and contempt. 

631 



Prayer against emmien. 



PSALM XXXVII. 



Privileges of the upright. 



22 This thou hast seen, Loud : keep not si- 
lence:" Lord, be not tar from me. 

23 Stir up thyself, and awake to my Judgment, 
even unto my cause, my God and my Lord.'' 

24 Judge me,'' Loud my God, according to tliy 
righteousness;'' and let tliein not rejoice over nic. 

25 Let them not say in their hearts. All," so would 
■we have it : let them not say. We iiave swallowed 
him up. 

26 Let tliem be ashamed and brought to confn- 
siou together that rejoice at my hurt: let them be 
clotlied witii shame and dislionor that magnify 
themselves against me." 

27 Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favor 
my righteous cause : * yea, let them say continually. 
Let the Loud be magnified, whicii hath jilcasure 
in the prosperity of his servant.' 

28 And my tongue shall speak of thy righteous- 
ness and of thy praise all the day long.*-' 

PSALM XXXVI. 

1 The grievous estate of the wicked. .'J The excelleney of Goifs mercy. 
10 David prayeth for God's favor to tiie upright in heart. 

^ To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David the servant of the 

LOHD. 

''T^HE transgression of the wicked saith within my 
X heart, ^/ia^^/i^rcM no fear ofGod before his eyes. 

2 For he (latteretli himself in his own eyes, until 
his iniquity l)e found to be hateful.* 

3 The words of his mouth are iniquity and de- 
ceit: he hath left oif to be wise, and to do good." 



• Psa. 50:al; Isa. fiSrB. t 


Psa. 80:2. c 1 ] 


>ct. U:aX d 'JTh 


ss. 1:6. 


• Heb. Ak, ah, our .wul. e Vi 


a. 13a: IM. t Heb. 


righteousness. ' P 


a. 70:1. 


Bl'sa. 34:1. lH<-b.loJinU/ii 


inif/ui(t/ to /late. 


l> .Ier.l:aa. i Or 




> Prov. 4:\r,. ) Psa. 97:10. 


1 Heb. mountain 


of tlod. k Rora 


. ll:3;l. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. Those who pcrseveringly oppose God and his people 
will be confounded and i>ut to shame. They will be cast 
away as woitliless and lie destroyed. 

8. Leaders in persecution will be distinguished in their 
punishment, and the destruction which dicy sought to 
bring upon others will come on themselves. 

13. The people of (Jod should never be overcome of evil, 
but endeavor to overcome evil with good ; and in this 
way, if they do not benelit others, they will greatly benefit 
themselves. 

18. The friends of God desire his salvation, not only 
on account of its effects on themselves, but that God may 
be honored, and increasing multitudes be led to glorify 
him. 

26. The destruction of the ]ieoplo of God would bring 
great dishonor on him, while their deliverance and salva- 
tion will be greatly to his glory. 

PSALM XXXVL 

1. Saith within mij heiirl ; is conclusive evidence to me. 

2. Hejlatlercth himself; that he is good, notwithstanding 
all his iniquities. 

8. Ftiliie.'is ofthyhou^e; its abundant spiritual provisions. 
The meaning of the psalmist is, that he shall be admitted, 
as ainember of (iod's spiritual family, to dwell in his jires- 
ence, and be filled with joy from the light of his counte- 
nance. Of diis, communion with God in his earthly sanc- 
tuary is an earnest and a jiledge. 

9. The fountain ; God Is i\u: author of life, and all its 
blessings flow from him. In Ihij lipht shitll we see light ; (iod 
is the uncreated source of light; when he shines upon thi> 
souls of his people, they see light. Light is hero put for 
salvation in the widest sense. 

10. Know thee; in such a maimer as to trust in and obey 
thee. 

688 



4 lie deviselh nnschicf' upon his bed;' he.^ettcth 
himself in a way l/iat is not good ; he abhorreth 
not evil.' 

T) Thy mercy. Loud, win the heavens; and thy 
faitiil'ulness rtnehdh unto the clouds. 

G Tliy righteousness is like the great mountains ;' 
thy judguKMits (ue a great decj):'' LoKD, thou 
preservest man and beast. 

7 How excellent^ is thy loving-kindness, God! 
therefore the cliildren of men put their trust under 
tiie shadow of thy wings. 

8 They shall be abundantly satisfied' with the 
fatness of thy house;' and thou .slialt make them 
drink of the river of thy pleasures.'" 

9 For with thee is the fountain of life:" in thy 
light shall we sec light." 

10 Oh continue* thy loving-kindness unto them 
that know thee; and thy righteousness to the up- 
riglit in heart. 

11 Let not the foot of pride come against me, 
and let not the hand of the wicked remove me. 

12 There are the workers of iniquity fallen : they 
are cast down, and shall not be able to rise. 

PSALM XX XVII. 

I 'avid persuadeth to patience and confidence in God, by the ditferent 

cstiUe of llie godly and the wicked. 

H A Psalm of David. 

i^RRT not thyself because of evil-doers,'' neither 



1 



be tliou envious against the workers of in- 
iquity." 



1 Heb. precious; 1 Pel. -l-.l. • Heb. icateretl. I Psa (Xi:i. m Rev. •»:!, 
17 n Jer. 2:13; John 4:10, 14. « 2 Cor. 4:6. 1 Kch. draw out at Unglh. 
P 1 Sam. 1:0: Prov. 24:19. q Psa. 73:3. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The conduct of wicked men shows the state of their 
hearts, and none are the friends of God who do not make 
it their great object habitually to obey him. 

2. Wicked men live in constant self-flattery and self- 
delusion. Thus tlio_v keep themselves ignorant of their 
true character, and encourage themselves in a life of sin, 
till they i)erish without remedy. 

3. W'hen men neglect to do what they know to be right, 
they deliberately do what they know to be evil ; and unless 
restrained by the grace of God, will grow worse and worse 
till they perish. 

5. The glorious perfections of God infinitely surpass 
every thing in nature ; and are a sure foundation of confi- 
dence to all who trust in him. 

7. By the loving kindness of God manj" are led to trust in 
him, and thus to learn that in the keeping of his commands 
there is great reward. In his presence there is fulness of 
joy, and at his right hand there are pleasures for evermore. 

PSALM xxxvn. 

This i>salm is throughout an expansion of the original 
promise of God to his covenant i>cople, that, so long as 
they obeyed him, he would give them quiet possession 
and enjoyment of the promised land. Lev. 26: 3-13 ; Deut, 
28: 1-M. But the earthly inheritance of Canaan foreshad- 
owed a far higher and more spiritual inheritance ; namely, 
die iiossessiou of God himself as the soul's everlasting 
portion. They who have God for their inheritance, inherit 
with him the earth and all things in it, in the sense that 
he will iiiiike all things work together for dicir jircscnt 
:iMil evcrhi.stiiig welfare. Hom. 8:2S: ICor. 3:21-23; Rev. 
21:7. Ill this liigh spiritual sense our Lord has interpreted 
the eleventh verse of this psnlm. See Matt 5:5. 

1. Beaiiise of evil-doers — tmrkers of iniquity ; because they 
prosper in dieir sinful ways, ver. 7. 



The differmt estate of the 



PSALM XXXVII. 



godly and the wicked. 



2 For tlioy shall soon be cut down like the grass, 
and wither as the green herb. 

3 Trust in the LoiU), and do good ; soshaltthou 
dwell in the land, and verily' thou shalt be fed. 

4 Delight thyself also in the Lord; and he shall 
give thee the desires of thy heart." 

5 Commit thy way unto* the LoED ; trust also 
in him ; and he shall bring it to pass. 

(i And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as 
the light, and thy judgment as the noonday. '' 

7 R(>st in' the Loud, and wait patiently for him : " 
fret not thyself because of him who prospcreth in 
his way, because of the man who bringeth wicked 
devices to pass. 

8 Cease from anger, and forsake wrath : fret not 
thyself in any wise to do evil. 

9 For evil-doers shi^l be cut off: but those that 
wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth. 

10 For yet a little while, and the wicked shall 
noibe: yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, 
and it shall not he. 

11 But the meek shall inherit the earth;'' and 
shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace. 

VI 'l\.e wicked plotteth^ against the just, and 
gnashcth upon him with his teeth. 

13 The Lord shall laugh at him: for he secth 
that his day is coming. 

14 The wicked have drawn out the sword, and 
have bent their bow, to cast down the poor and 
needy, and to slay such as be of upright conver- 
sation.' 

1.5 Their sword shall enter into their own heart, 
and their bows shall be broken. 

IG A little that a righteous man hath is better 
than the riches of many wicked." 

17 For the arms of the wicked shall be broken r"^ 
l)ut tlie Loud u))holdeth the righteous. 

18 The Loud knoweth the days of the upright: 
and tiieir iidieritance shall be for ever.' 

19 They shall not be ashamed in the evil time : 
and in the days of famine they shall be satisfied. 



Heh. in IrulA, or stnilenessi. « Isa. ,5S:14. t Heb. RoU tliy %cnij upim; 

1. 2':3, l>Mic. 7:S, U. I Heb. Be siVent lo. i: Prov. •)0:a-2; Lam. :!:•>."), 

d Matt. 5:5. 5 Or, praUisHh. D Heb. the upright of way. e Prov. 

16. f Ezek.30:v>l, etc. elPct. 1:3,4. ^ Hib. precU 



3. Dwell in the land; be supplied with all needed good. 
Verdij thou shalt be fed; or, thou shalt feed on truth; that 
is, God's truth and faithfulness shall be thy support. 

5. He sliall bring it to pass; accomplish, in the best way, 
the most desirable ends for thy welfare. 

G. Bring fortli thy righteoiisness — thy judgment ; shall vin- 
dicate thy character, and deliver thee from the oppression 
of the wicked, in the most open and public way. 

9. Wait upon tlie Lord; in humble dependence on him, 
and diligent use of the means of his appointment. Ver. 34. 
S'tall inherit the earth; for this, and verses 11, 22, 29, 34, 
see the introductory note. 

13. His day; the sinner's day of ruin. 

15. Enter into their own lieart; their efforts to destroy 
others shall ruin themselves. 

18. Their iidieritance sliall he for ever ; see introductory note. 

20. As the fat of lambs ; which is burned upon the altar 
and goes up in smoke. Others render, " As the glory of 
the pastures ;" that is, as the grass, which withers and 
crumbles to dust under the summer's heat. 

21. The wicked borroweth — showeth mercy, and giveth; to 
the righteous, who has the disposition to do good, God 
gives the means ; from the wicked, who wants the dispo- 
sition, he takes away the means also. 



20 But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies 
of the Lord shall be as the fat ' of lambs : they shall 
consume; into smoke shall they consume awav. 

21 The wicked borroweth, and puyeth not agiun: 
but the righteous showeth mercy, and givetli. 

22 For such as be blessed of him shall inherit the 
earth ; and they that be cursed of him sliall be cut 
off. 

23 The steps of a good man arc ordered" liy the 
Lord:' and he dclightcth in his way. 

24 Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast 
down : for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand.' 

25 I have been young, and nov) am old ; yet have 
I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed 
begging bread.J 

26 He is ever* merciful, and lendeth ; and his 
seed is blessed. 

27 Depart from evil, and do good; and dwell 
for evermore. 

28 For the Lord loveth judgment, and forsaketh 
not his saints i^ they are preserved for ever ;' but 
the seed of the wicked shall be cut off."' 

29 The righteous shall inherit the land, and 
dwell therein for ever. 

30 The mouth of the righteous speaketh wisdom," 
and his tongue talketh of judgment. 

31 The law of his God is iu his heart ;" none of 
his steps* shall slide. 

32 I'he wicked watcheth the righteous, and scek- 
eth to slay him. 

33 The Lord will not leave him in his hand,'' 
nor condemn him when he is judged.'' 

34 Wait on the Lord,"' and keep his way. and he 
shall exalt thee to inherit the land : when the wick- 
ed are cut oif, thou shalt see if. 

35 1 have seen the wicked in great power, and 
spreading himself like a green bay-tree.*' 

36 Yet he passed away, and lo, he u-as not : yea, 
I sought him, but he could not be found. 

37 Mark the perfect mmi, and behold the upright : 
for the end of that man is peace.' 



InMislied. h Prov. 16:9. iMic.7:8. J Isa. 33:l(i; Heb. 13:.-), (i. tHeb.aii 
tliedai/. klsa.30:lS. liret.l:5. m Isa. 14: -JO. » Malt. It!,:!.), o Deut. 
6:8; lsa.51:7. tOr, goings, f iVet.-2:'J. qRnm.S:l,3l. r ver. 7. i Or, 
tree that grinvetk in hii own soil. sJob5:.T; Isa. 11:11-19. ' Prov. 14:3a. 



22. Him; God. 

2(5. Mercful, and lendeth; sec note to ver. 21. 

27. Dwell for evermore; in God's presence and under his 
protection. See introductory note. 

31. None of his steps shall slide; he shall not fall into sin, 
and therefore not into calamity. 

35. A green bay-tree; rttther, as the margin, a tree grow- 
ing in its native soil, and therefore vigorous and strong. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Uneasiness at the jirosperity of others is rebellion 
against the providence of God, and a source of sin aud 
misery to him who indulges it. 

4. Delight in the character, will, and ways of God is a 
means of increasing excellence, usefulness, and enjoyment. 

10. The prosperity of the wicked, however great, is of 
short continuance, and will soon come to a perpetual end. 

16. The blessing of God as a portion is more valuable 
than the possession of all earthly good, and it will continue 
for ever. 

25. Devotion to God is the best way to secure not only 
one's own good, but the good of his children and of his 
most distant posterity. 

34. Perseverance in the path of duty will in due time be 
lioiiored, aud meet with au abundant reward. 
639 



David implnrelh the 



PSALM XXXIX. 



compassion of God. 



38 But the transgressors shall bo destroyed to- 
gether: the end of the wicked sliall be cut off." 

39 But the salvation of the rigiiteous is of the 
Loud : he is tlieir strength in the time of trouble. 

40 And the Lord shall Iiclp tiioin, and deliver 
them : he shall deliver tlicni from the wicked, and 
save them, because they trust in him.'' 

PSALM XXXYIII. 

David imploreth God to take compassion on his pitiful case. 
^ A Psalm of David, to bring to remembrance.'^ 

OLORD, relnike me not in thy wrath : neither 
chasten me in thy hot displeasure. 

2 For thine arrows stick fast in me,'' and thy 
hand presscth mo sore. 

3 There is no soundness in my flesh because of 
thine anger ; neither is there any rest" in my bones 
because of my sin."* 

4 For mine iniquities are gone over my head:' 
as a heavy Ijurden they arc too heavy for me. 

5 .My wounds stink and are corrupt because of 
my Ibolishness.'-' 

6 1 am troubled;* I am bowed down greatly; I 
go mourning all the day long. 

7 For my loins are tilled with a loathsome disease: 
and t/wrc is no soundness in my flesh. 

8 I am feeble and .sore broken : I have roared by 
reason of the disquietness of my heart.'' 

9 Lord, all my desire is before thee; and my 
groaning is not hid from thee.' 

1(1 My heart panteth, my strength failcth me: as 
for the light of mine cyes,J it also is gone from' me. 

11 My lovers and my friends stand aloof from 
my sore;*'' and my kinsmen' stand afar off.' 

12 They also that seek after my life lay snares 
for me; and they that seek my hurt speak mis- 



" .\Ult. I.!:-.*), b Dan. 3:17. 2-5. c 


IVa. 


(i, tillu. ■I.Inb(J;J. • Heb. pmre, 


OTAiallh. 'Psa. 51:8. (Ezra 9:0. 


e Isa 


. 1 :•'.. 0. 1 Ueb. weaned, b I'.-a 


32::!. i John 1:48. J I.lin. 5:1G, 


17. 


I Hcb. not with, i Heb. slroke. 


I Matt. 20:50; Luke 10:.JI, 3-2. 1 Or 


mi/ n 


tighliors. 1 Luke 23:40. ni2.Sam. 



40. Trust in God through Clirist is tho grand means of 
peace and safety, and will secure eternal life. 

PSALM XXXVIIL 

"YMctn bring tn remembrance ; to bring himself to remem- 
brance before (Joel by recounting to Ilim his sorrows, and 
pleading before Ilim Mis promises. David wrote this psalm 
under a great pressure of sufl'cring, arising from the per- 
secution of his enemies and the desertion of liis friends. 
To this, in the opinion of some, was added a distressing 
disease; but others iniderstand verses :i, .5, 7, 11, as a fig- 
urative description of the calamities brought upon him by 
the persecution of his enemies. 

2. Tiiinearrows ; the atiiictions whichCod sent upon him. 
5. My wounds; those made by tlie arrows of the Al- 

miglity, ver. 2. 

11. iVore; more literally, stroke, the suffering which God 
had inllictcd on him. While his enemies took advantage 
of his ilistresses, his friends kept at a distance from him. 

i:{. Heard not; he was silent, as though he heard not. 
A description of meekness and patience. 

1(!. Slippeth ; falls into calamity. So also the words " to 
halt." in tlie following verse. 

18. Declare mine niiquity; confess it. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The righteous view their sins as the cause of all their 
calamities, and however great tlieir distresses, they feel 
that they suffer loss than their iniquities deserve. 

640 



chievous things, and imagine deceits all the day 
long. 

13 But I, as a deaf man, heard not;"" and I was 
as a dumb man that ojieneth not his mouth. 

14 Thus J was as a man tiiat hearcth not, and la 
whose mouth are no reproofs. 

15 For in thee, Loud, do I hope:' thou wilt 
hear,' Lord my God. 

IG For I said, Hear me, lest othericise they should 
rejoice over me: when my foot slippeth, they mag- 
nify themselves against me. 

17 For I am ready to halt,* and my sorrow is 
continually before me. 

18 For 1 will declare mine iniquity ; I will be 
sorry for my sin." 

19 But mine enemies are lively, and they are 
strong:' and they that hajp me wrongfully are 
multiplied. 

20 They also that render evil for good are mine 
adversaries ; because I follow the thin^ that good 
is. 

21 Forsake me not, Lord : my God, be not 
far from me. 

22 Make haste to help me," Lord my salvation. 

PSALM XXXIX. 

1 David's care for his thought*. 4 He prayelh for a sense of the brevity 
and vanity of life, 7 for pardon, 10 and for deliverance from G-od's 
judj^ments. 

^[ To the chief Musician, even to Jeduthun," A Psalm of David. 

J SAID, I will take heed to my ways, that .1 sin 
not with my tongue:'' I will keep my mouth 
with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.'' 

2 1 was dumb with silence; I held my ]ieace, 
even from good; and my sorrow was stirred.' 

3 My heart was hot within me ; while i was mus- 
ing the fire burned : then spake I with my tongue, 



l(i:l(l, elc; l9i. 42:1D. 2(1. y lleh. Ilitc do I wait for. • Or. nn.iiccr. » Heb. 
for hatting, n 2 Cor. 7:9, 111. ! Heb. being /loiii?. ore .t(ro;iff. » Heb. /or 
>;iy hvlf. o 1 Chr. 10:41. P Prov. •.'1:21; .tames 3:2, etc. I Heb.a bridle, 
ti! muzzle for my mouth, q Col. 4:5. 1 Heb. (roilft/i'rf. 



9. God is perfectly actpiainted with all the alllictions of 
his people, and lays no more upon lliem than he will enable 
them by his grace to bear and will overrule for their sanc- 
tilication and salvation. 

i:{. Silent and hearty submission to the will of God as 
manifested in his providence honors him, and prepares the 
way for deliverance from all evil and the enjciyment of 
great and everlasting good. The Lord Josus t'lirist, who 
was brought as a lamb to the slaughter, opened not his 
mouth. 

18. Penitence for sin, ingenuous confession of it, and 
hearty application to the blood of Christ for pardon, are 
essential to forgiveness with God, and to the experience 
of his salvation. 

PSALM XXXIX. 

1. Keep my mouth ; be silent. While the teickcd is before 
mc; luiiler the pressure of ])resoiit suffering, the psalmist 
was gre;itly tenijiti'd to impatient complaints respecting 
God's dealings with him. See ver. 9-11. To guard against 
these, he resolved to imjiose upon himself entire silence in 
the jiresence of the wicked. 

2. Even from poo<l ; from the fear of saying something 
wrong, he refrained from uttering any thing, even that 
which was right, and might have been ]irofitable. 

'i. While I was musing; in silence. The suppression of 
his feelings within his own bosom only made him more 
vehement, till he could no longer refrain, but spoke to 
God as in the following verses. 



Prayer amidst evils. 



rSALM XL. 



Obedience the best sacrifice. 



4 Lord, make rne to know mine end, and tlic 
measure of my days, what it is; that I may know 
how frail 1 am.' 

5 Behold, thon hast made my days as a hand- 
breadth ; and mine age is as nothing before thee r"" 
verily every man at his best state+ is altogether 
vanity. Selah. 

6 Surely every man walketh in a vain show:* 
surely they are disquieted in vain : he heapeth up 
riclies, and knoweth not who shall gatlier them.'" 

7 And now. Lord, what wait I for? my hope is 
in thee. 

S Deliver me from all my transgressions : make 
me not the reproach of the foolisli. 

9 I was dumb, I opened not my mouth ; because 
thou didst it. 

10 Remove thy stroke away from me : I am con- 
sumed by the biow^ of thy hand. 

11 When thou with rebukes dost correct man for 
iniquity, thou makest his beauty to consume away 
like a moth:' surely every man is vanity. Selah. 

12 Hear my prayer, Lord, and give ear unto 
my cry ; hold not thy peace at my tears : for I am 
a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my 
fathers were. 

13 Oh spare me, that I may recover strength, 
before I go hence, and be no more. 



PSALM XL. 

1 The benefit of confidence in GoJ. 6 Obedience is tlie best sacrifice. 

11 David's sense of evils excitetli iiim to prayer. 

^ To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. 

r WAITED^ patiently for the Lord; and he 
L inclined unto me, and heard my cry. 
•J He brought me up also out of a horrible pit,* 
out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock, 
and established my goings. 



• Or, urliat time I have here, a Psa. 90;4, etc. t Ileb. settled, t Heb. an 
imasce. b Ecd. 2:]8. etc.; Luke 12:20,^1. 5 Heb. mn/tict. I Heb. that 
which is to f)e desired in him to melt away. T Heb. Jn waiting 1 waited. 
• Heb. a pit of noise. cPsji.IStJ. J Psa. 12.3:5. ejobfl:10. tJer.29:U. 



6. They; who seek this world as their chief good. 
9. Thou didst it; his afflictions were sent by God. 

11. Like a moth; as a moth destroys a garment, so health 
and beauty are consumed by the afflicting hand of God. 

12. A stranger — a sojourner; one on a pilgrimage ; pass- 
ing quickly through this to the eternal world. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Great circumspection in conversation, especially in 
tlio presence of the wicked, is a duty ; but neither fear nor 
favor should hinder us from speaking that which is good, 
or making known our wants and offering our requests in 
prayer and supplication to God. 

6. Those who seek the world as their chief good, find 
that it leaves them when they most need support; while 
it may be the ruin of those who come after them. 

12. As the continuance of man upon the earth is like a 
vapor which appeareth for a little time and then vanisheth 
away, his treasure should be laid up in heaven and his 
aftections should be there ; then, when absent from the 
liody he will be present with the Lord, and the God whom 
lie has served will be his iuheriumce and his portion for 
ever. 

PSALM XL. 

This psalm has its fulfilment in the sufferings and deliv- 
erances of all God's people ; but more especially of those 
who are set over them, as was David, and thus act in their 
41 



3 And he liath put a new song in my mouth, even 
praise unto our God: many shall s(!e if, and fear, 
and shall trust in the Lord. 

4 Blessed is that man that maketh the Lord his 
trust, and respecteth not the proud,"" nor such as 
turn aside to lies.** 

5 Many, Lord my God, are thy wonderful 
works which thou hast done,'' and thy thoughts 
which are to us-ward:*^ they cannot be reckoned 
up in order unto thee:^ if I would declare and 
speak of thon, they are more than can be num- 
bered. 

(j Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire;'^ 
mine ears hast thou opened:' burnt-oflfering and 
sin-offering hast thou not required. 

7 Thon said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the 
book it is written of me,'' 

8 I delight to do thy will, my God:' yea, thy 
law is within my lieart.* 

9 I have preached righteousness in the great 
congregation:^ lo, I have not refrained my lips, 
Lord, thou knowest. 

10 I have not hid thy righteousness within my 
heart; I have declared thy faithfulness and thy 
salvation : I have not concealed tiiy loving-kind- 
ness and thy truth from the great congregation.'' 

11 Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from 
me, Lord : let thy loving-kinduess and thy truth 
continually preserve me.' 

12 For innumerable evils have compassed me 
about :'" mine iniquities have taken hold upon me," 
so that I am not able to look up ; ° they are more 
than the hairs of my head: therefore my heart 
faileth' me. 

13 Be pleased, Lord, to deliver me: Lord, 
make haste to help me. 

14 Let them be asliamed and confounded to- 
gether that seek after my -soul to destroy it ; let 



t Or, 7wne can order them vnto thee. E Psa. 51:10; Heb. 10:4-111. 1 Heb. 
dijfffd; Exod.21:fi. h Luke 34:4-1 ; John 5:39. iJohn4:34. iReh. inthe 
midst of my bowels. J Luke 4:10-22. k Acts 20:20, 27. I Psa. a5:10. 
niHcb. 4:1j. u Psa. 08:4, etc. o Luke 1S:13, 14. llleh. forsaketh. 



behalf. And since God has made our Lord Jesus Christ 
" head over all things to the church, which is his body," 
it is fulfilled in him in the highest sense, and is accord- 
ingly applied to him in the New Testament. 

2. Horrible pit — tniry dinj; great difficulties and dis- 
tresses. 

3. A new song; for new deliverance. See it; his deliver- 
ance and subsequent blessings. 

6. Sacrifice and offering; such external services as the 
law prescribed. Mine ears hast lliou opened; to hearken to 
and obey the Father's will. See Exod. 21:6; Heb. 10:5. 

7. io, /come; that is, to do thy will. These words apply 
in their highest sense to the Saviour. 

9. Preached righteotisness ; declared divine truth to the 
people. 

12. Mine iniquities have talcen hold upon rne ; these words 
apply, in their proper sense, only to the chastisements 
which God inflicts upon his people for their sins. In the 
Lord Jesus they are fulfilled only in the sense that God 
laid upon him tjfie iniquities of us all, so that, though guilt- 
less, lie suffered for us. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Those who continue to wait upon God by humble 
prayer and supplication, and in the diligent use of all the 
appointed means of grace, will find in the end that the 
Lord hears and answers, and does exceeding abundantly 
for them according to all their wants. 
041 



David complaincth 



PSALM XLII. 



nf his enemies. 



them be drivon backward and put to shame that 
wish me evil. 

15 Let them be desolate for a reward of their 
shame that say unto me, Aha, alia. 

16 Let all those that sock tiiee rejoice and be 
glad in thee: let such as love tlij' salvation say 
continually. The Lord l)e magnilicd. 

17 But lam poor and needy ; yet the Lord think- 
eth upon me ;^ thou art my help and my deliverer ; 
make no tarrying, O my God. 

PSALM XLI. 

1 The blessedness of the man who careth for the poor.^ 4 DaviJ coin- 

plainetli of his enemies' treachery. 10 He flccth to God for succor. 

^ To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. 

BLESSED is he that considcreth the poor;*'' 
' the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble.* 
•2 The Lord will preserve him, and keep him 
alive; and he shall be blessed upon the earth : and 
thou wilt not* deliver him unto the will of his 
enemies." 

8 The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed 
of languishing: thou wilt make^ all his bed in his 
sickness. 

4 I said, Lord, be merciful unto mo:'^ heal my 
soul;° for I have sinned against thee. 

5 Mine enemies speak evil of me. When shall he 
die, and his name perish? 

6 And if he come to see »?if, he speakcth vanity :' 
his heart gathereth iniquity to itself; ic/mi he goeth 
abroad, he tellcth it. 

1 All that hate mc whisper together against me: 
against me do they devise my hurt." 



a Ver. .'); 1 Peter 5:7. 


' Ileb. weaky o 


sick, b Pro». I4:-21; Heb. 


6:10. 


t Heb. the day of tvil. 1 


Or, do not tlioi 


. » Psa. a7:3a,:33. » Heb. 


turn. 


J Psa. 3-2i5. e Psa. 147;: 


; Hos. 6:1. ' 1 


rov. 2(i:24, '25. 1 Heb. evil 


me. 


1 Heb. A thing of Bdiat. 


• Heb. the ma 


n of my peace, t Heb. Wlag' 


vjied. 



3. The blessings which God bestows upon his people in 
answer to prayer, encourage many to pray and to put their 
trust in him. 

8. External service is nothing in the sight of God, with- 
out obedience of heart to his revealed will. 

12. The number and aggravations of our sins are such 
as would for ever shut us out from the favor of (Jud, and 
prevent our ever seeking him, were it not for his mercy 
and grace in Christ Jesus. 

17. The kind thoughts of God towards tlic poor and 
needy keep them from sinking into despair, load them to 
hope for deliverance, and prepare them to magnify the 
riches of his grace in tlieir salvation. 

rs A LM XLL 

This psalm is best cxi)lained upon the supposition that 
David wrote it when he was lying upon a bed of sickness, 
ver. 8. This encouraged his enemies to form miscliievous 
plots against him, ver. 7 ; though at the same time they 
paid him hypocritical visits of iiretended friendship. ver.«. 

1. Considcreth ; has comi)assion upon the poor, and as- 
sists them. David's own condition of distress and weak- 
ness seems to have been the occasion of this reflection. 

3. Make all Ins bed; comfort and support him. 

9. Mine own familiar friend ; those words refer to the 
conduct of Ahilhoplicl towards David, but had their most 
perfect fulfilment in the treaclicry of Jud;is, and were ap- 
plied to him liy the Saviour himself. .Tohii 13:18. 

10. Mil/ requite them ; in these words David, and in David 
Christ, speaks as the liead and representative of God's 
church. It is no private revenge whicli he (lesires, but 
the deliverance of God's people from their malicious foes, 
who in seeking liis destruction seek tlu'irs also. 

042 



8 An evil disease,^ say they, cleaveth fast unto 
him ; and now that he lieth he .shall rise up no more. 

9 Yea, mine own familiar friend." in whom I 
trusted, wliic-h did eat of my bread, hath lifted up* 
his heel against me." 

10 But thou, Lord, be merciful unto mc, and 
raise me up. that 1 may requite them. 

1 1 By this 1 know that thou favorest me, because 
mine enemy doth not triunqih over me. 

12 And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine in- 
tegrity, and settest me before thy face for ever. 

13 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from ever- 
lasting, and to everlasting. Amen, and Amen. 

PSALM XLII. 

1 David's zeal to serve God in the temple. 5 He encourageth his soul 
to trust in God. 

li To the chief MiLsician, Maschil, for the sons' of Korah. 

AS the hart panteth^ after the water-brooks, 
so panteth my soul after thee, God. 

2 My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God :'' 
when shall I come and appear before God?' 

3 My tears have been my meat day and night, 
while they continually say unto me, Where is thy 
God? 

4 When I remember these things, I pour out my 
soul in me: for I had gone with the multitude, I 
went with them to the house of God, with the voice 
of joy and jiraise, with a multitude that kcj)t holy- 
day.' 

5 Why art thou cast down," my soul? andw/(y 
art thou disquieted in mc? hope thou in God : for I 
shall yet praise hiin'^or the liclj) of his countenance.* 

f Job 10:19; John 1.'!:1S. 1 Or, A Psalm giving instruction to the sons, elc. 
5 Heb. 4rai/il/i. h Psa. 83:1; John 7;:J7. iJob23:3. j Psa. la-J:l. 1 Heb. 
bowed down. ^ Or, give t/ianks. ' Or, his presence is salvation. 



12. Settest me before thy face; makest me blessed in tliy 
presence. 

13. Amen, and Amen ; this doxology marks the conclu- 
sion of the first of the Ave books, or rolls, into which the 
Psalms have been from ancient times divided. See intro- 
ductory remarks to the book of Psalms. 

INSTRUCTION'S. 

I. Compassion to the poor and needy, and readiness to 
assist them for the Lord's sake and in imitation of his ex- 
ample, is an evidence of love to him and preparation for 
the reception of his mercies. 

4. The i)ardon of sin and deliverance from its guilt and 
power are more to be desired than deliverance from tem- 
poral suffering, or the possession of all earthly good. 

9. Confidence iu creatures maybe sadly disappointed; 
hut trust in the Lord, and expectation of good from him 
in the kceiiing of his commands, will be fully realized and 
meet an abundant reward. 

II. God's faithfulness to his covenant-people makes the 
destruction of their incorrigible enemies necessary and cer- 
tain. Though they may triumph for a season, lie will man- 
ifest his everlasting loving-kindness toward.s his church in 
their final overthrow. 

PSALM XLIL 

1. Ifurt ; deer. 

2. Appear before God; iu the place of his worship; from 
which tlie iisalmist was manifestly exiled when he wTote 
this and the following j)8alm. 

3. They; his unbelieving enemies. 

."■i. Iklp nfhis rouiileiwiice ; to see the light of God's coun- 
tenance is to enjoy his presence and favor; and that is 
salvation. Xuni. iJ:'-'5, 2t> ; I'sa. 1:0. The psalmist has 



Trust in God enroiiragcd. 



PSALM XLIV. 



BemcmhraiuT of former favort 



G my God, my soul is cast down within mc;" 
thcrelbre will I remember thee from the land of 
Jordan, and of tlicHcrmonite.s, from the hill Mizar." 

7 Deep calletii unto deep at tlic noise of thy 
water-spouts: all thy waves and thy billows are 
gone over me.'' 

8 Yet the Lord will oomnmnd his loving-kind- 
ness in the daytime, and in the uigiit his song shall 
be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my 
life. 

I) I will say unto God my rock, Why liast thou 
forgotten mo? why go I mourning because of the 
opjiression of the enemy? 

10 As with a sword^ in my liones, mine enemies 
reproach me ; while they say daily unto me, Where 
is tliy God? 

11 Why art thou cast down, my soul? and 
why art thou disquieted witliin me? hope thou in 
God: for I shall yet praise him, who w the health 
of my countenance, and my God. 

' PSALM XLIII. 

1 P:Lvid, prayino; to be restored to the temple, promisetli to serve God 
joyfully. 5 He eiicourageth his soul to trust in God. 

JUDGE me, O God, and plead my cause against 
an ungodly' nation: Oh deliver me from tiic 
deceitful and unjust man.^ 

2 For thou art the God of my strength : why 
dost thou cast mo off? wiiy go I mourning because 
of the oppression of the enemy? 

3 Oh send out thy light and thy truth: let them 
lead me; let them Ijring mc unto thy holy hill, 
and to thy tabernacles. 

■1 Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto 
God my exceeding joy :" yea, upon the harp will 
I praise thee, God my God. 



■:3-10. -Or, (/!«;/((& /ii«,- Tsa. 133:3. bPsa. 8S:7. \Or,k-ilUilg 
Tciful. ! Heb. a man of deceit and iniquity. II Heb. t/ie gl'idnes 



reference to those manifestations of God's presence which 
he had enjoyed in the sanctuary. Psa. G3:2. 

fi. The Hermonites ; the covmtry north-east of Palestine. 
T/tc hill Mizar; a little hill in the land of Hermon. Even 
if there, far away from mount /ion, he would still trust in 
God. 

7. Thy water-spouts ; the troubles with which David was 
afflicted. 

9. Forgotten me; delayed to deliver me. 

10. A sivoril in my bones; expressive of intense distress. 

11. The health of my countenance ; his deliverer, and re- 
storer to health, prosperity, gladness, and joy. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Piety will lead those who have it to desire the pres- 
ence and favor of God more than all earthly good. 

2. A characteristic of true religion is strong attachment 
to the public worship of God. They who undervalue and 
neglect the sanctuary, are unlike the behevers described 
in God's word. 

5. The scriptural way of finding relief from anxiety of 
spirit, is to pray, and trust in God's promises. 

9. Though God may long delay to answer the prayers 
of his people, or appear for their deliverance from trouble, 
they will not despair, but continue to call upon him, to 
hope in his mercy, and exjiect that in due time he will 
grant them complete and enduring relief. 

PSALM XLIII. 

This short psalm is entirely in the strain of the preced- 
ing, and seems to form a sort of supplement to it. 



5 Why art thou cast down, my soul? and why 
art tiiou dist|uieted within mo?'' hope in God: for 
I shall yet praise him, iclio is the health of my coun- 
tenance, and my God. 

PSALM XLIV. 

1 The church, in memory of former favors, 7 complaineth of her pres- 
ent evils. 17 Professing her integrity, 24 she fervently prayeth for 

•[ To the chief Musician for the sons of Korali, Masdiil. 

TTTE have heard with our cars, God, our 
V V fathers have told us, what work thou didst 
in tlieir days, in the times of old. 

2 How thou didst drive out the heathen with thy 
hand, and plantedst them; hoio thou didst afflict 
the people, and cast them out. 

3 For they got not the land in possession by their 
own sword, neither did their own arm save them :'' 
but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light 
of thy countenance, because thou hadst a favor 
unto them." 

4 Thou art my King, God : command deliver- 
ances for Jacob. 

5 Through thee will we push down our enemies: 
through tliy name will we tread them under that 
rise up against us. 

6 For I will not trust in my bow, neither shall 
my sword save me.' 

7 But tliou hast saved us from our enemies, and 
hast put them to shame that hated us.*-' 

8 In God we boast all tlie day long, and praise 
thy name for ever. ydah. 

9 But thou hast cast off and put us to phame;'' 
and goest not forth with our armies. 

10 Thou makest us to turn back from the enemy : ' 
and they which hate us spoil for themselves. 

of my joy. " Pal. 42:5. 11. <1 Josh. 24:1 
S Psa. 132:13. h Pja. 74:1; Lam. 3:31, 32. 



3. Thy holy lull ; Zion. Tliy tabernacles ; tha tabernacle 
which David pitched on Zion when he transferred the ark 
to that place. The plural " tabernacles " is elsewhere used, 
perhaps with reference to its various divisions into the 
court, the holy place, and the holy of holies. Psa. 84:1. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The piety or usefulness of any one, however great, 
will not in this world save him from trouble. 

3. The greatest desire of a pious man is to be led in 
the path of truth and duty, and to enjoy the ordinances 
and favor of God. In these he rejoices more than in all 
earthly good. 

5. In his greatest distresses the good man still trusts in 
God, and is' supported by the hope that he shall in due 
time be delivered from all trouble, and prepared to praise 
and enjoy Him for ever. 

rS.VLM XLIV. 

Tills j/salm is eminently national in its character, having 
been written in behalf of the suffering covenant people at a 
time when their enemies were triumphant over them. On 
the title, see the general introduction to the book of Psalms. 

3. Tlie land; the land of Canaan. 

4. Jacob; the children of Israel. 

.I. Through thy name; through thy perfections. The name, 
(if (iod expresses the sum of his revealed attributes. 

8. Boast ; acknowledge tlice as our only deliverer, and 
glory not in our strength, but in thine alone. 

10. Spoil for themselves ; for their own pleasure and ag- 
irraudizement. 

(M3 



An appcril unto God. 



PSALM XLV 



Majesty of Christ's kingdom. 



11 Thou liast irivon us liko pliocp appointed for 
meat;" and liast scattered ns aiiiimi!- thelicathen. 

Vl Thou sellcst thy people lor naught,* and dost 
not increase thy wealth by their price." 

13 Thou makestus a reproach to our neighbors, a 
scorn and a derision to them that are round aboutus. 

14 Thou makcst us a byword among the heathen, 
a shaking ot the head among the people.'' 

15 Myoonfasion /.v continually before me, and 
the shame of my face hath covered me, 

16 For the voice of him that reproacheth and 
blaspheme th ; by reason of the enemy and avenger.' 

17 All this is come upon us;'' yet have we not 
forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy 
covenant. 

18 Our heart is not turned back," neither have 
our steps' declined from thy way ; 

19 Thougli thouhast sore broken usin the placcof 
dragons,' and covered us with the shadow of death." 

20 If we have forgotten the name of our (xod, or 
stretched out our hands to a strange god;'' 

21 Sliall not Go<l search this out? forhoknow- 
eth the secrets of the heart. 

22 Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day 
long; we arc counted as sheep for the slaughter.' 

23 Awake, why sleepest thou, Lord? arise, 
cast MS not off for ever.-* 

24 Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest 
our affliction and our oppression? 

25 For our soul is liowed down to the dust: our 
belly cleaveth unto the earth. 

26 Arise for our help,^ and redeem us for thy 
mercie^' sake. 



PSALM XLV, 



• lleb.assliecpofnuiU. t lUb. without riclics. a Dcut. 32:30. b Jer. 
SM:9. c Psa. S:J. i Dan. 9:13. e Job 23:11. IS; Psa. 119:157. 1 Or, 
goings. flsa.35:7. sPsa-SS:"!. h .lobSl :26-iB. iRom.8:30. j ver. 9. 
i Heb.ahelpforus. k Pia. 69, til, tillc. I Or, ofinstrurliou. ^ Heb. boiUI/i. 



14. Byword — slialcing of t lie head; a subject of contempt. 

17. Not forgotten thee; not apostatized from God. 

19. Place of dragons; desolate place where wild animals 
dwell. The word liere rendered " dragons " does not mean 
8ea-monsters, which the Hebrew expresses by a diflerent 
word. Shadow of death ; great and dreadful darkness. 

22. Killed all tite day long ; continually exposed to mur- 
derous persecution. These words, in which the ancient 
church expressed her bitter experience, are applied by 
the apostle I^aul to the sufferings of Christians under the 
new dispensation. 

23. yVhij steepest thou ; God is represented as sleeping when 
he allows the enemies of his people to prevail against them. 

24. Forgettest our affliction ; dclayest to remove it. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The history of God's dealings with his people is full 
of instruction, and a knowledge of it should be communi- 
cated from parents to their children. 

3. The mercies which men enjoy come not through their 
own power and goodness, but through the power and 
goodness of God. 

9. In the discipline of his people, God sometimes for- 
sakes tliem "for a small moment." Isa. 54:8, 9. Then 
their enemies triumph over them. But no evil can come 
upon them except by his permission, and for the purpose 
of purifying them from sin. By this discipline he prepares 
his visible earthly church for greater enlargement and 
strength in this world, and the true spiritual members of 
it for glory everlasting. 

17. Whatever evils may come on the true people of God. 
they will imt forsake his service. 

21. All things are naked and open to the all-seeing eye 
of God. and the great concern of his people is to approve 
CM 



1 The majesty and grace of Christ's kin^'dom. 10 The duty of the 
church, and tile benelits thereof. 

•j To tlie chief Musician upon Shoshannim,' for the sons of 
Korah, Mascliil,' A Song of loves. 

MY heart is inditing^ a good matter: I speak 
of the tilings which I have made touching the 
king: my tongue is the pen of a ready writer. 

2 Thou art fairer than the children of men:' 
grace is jioured into thy lips :'" therefore God hath 
blessed thee for ever. 

3 Gird thy sword upon thy thigh," O most mighty, 
with tiiy glory and thy majesty. 

4 And in tliy majesty ride prosperously,*" be- 
cause of truth and meekness and righteousness; 
and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible 
tilings." 

5 Thincarrowsare sharp in the heart of the king's 
enemies;'' ichereby the people fall under thee. 

G Tiiy throne, God, is for ever and ever : the 
scejitre of thy kingdom is a right sceptre.' 

7 Thou lovest righteousness, and liutest wicked- 
ness: therefore God,* thy God, hath anointed thee 
w'ith the oil of gladness above thy fellows." 

8 All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, 
and cassia,' out of the ivory palaces, whereby they 
have made thee glad. 

y King's daughters were among thy honorable 
women :" upon thy right hand did stand the queen 
in gold of Opliir.^ 

10 Hearken, daughter, and consider, and in- 
cline thine ear ;'" forget also thine own jicople. and 
tiiy lather's house ; 

orbuMaliup. ISong5:9-15. m Luke 4 :■->■.>. n Ueb. 4:12; Rev. 1:16. •Heb. 
prospirl/,ou,Ti(le lliou. o Rev. 0:2. pPsa.C5:5. qPsa.3t':2. r Psa. 93:8: 
Heb. 1:5*. t Or, OGorf. • 1 Kings 1:39, 40; Isa. 61:1. > Song 1:3. "Song 
(J:S. V 1 Kiiit's2;I9. " Deut. 33:9; Matt. 10:37. 

themselves to him ; in their deepest troubles they feel 
that their help must come from him. 

PSALM XLV. 

The theme of this psalm is Jesus Christ the King of 
kings, and the espousal of his church to him. In tlic Old 
Testament, God is often represented as the husband of 
Zion, that is, of his church. Isa. 54:4-6; 62:4, 5. In like 
manner the New Testament church is called " the bride, 
the Lamb's wife,' and she is " arrayed in fine linen, clean 
and white," for the day of her marriage. Eph. .'>:23; Rev. 
19:7, 8; 21:9. The espousal of the J^aviour to his church 
is here represented under imagery borrowed from the 
marriage customs of eastern nations. 

1. Inditing; meditating in preparation to speak. Tlic 
king; Jesus Christ, The pen of a ready writer ; the fulness 
of his feelings makes his tongue fervent and rapid in its 
utterance, like the pen of a ready writer. 

2. Grace is poured into thy lips; he received the lloly 
Spirit without measure. 

5. 77je /cnig's f;ifm/f,«; the enemies of Christ. Compare 
Isa. 11:1; Rev. 19:21. 

«. O God; this is aii])lied by the Holy Spirit to Jesus 
Christ. Heb. 1:8, 9. 

8. Myrrh, and aloes, and cwssia ; put for sweet odors gen- 
erally. The aloes hero spoken of are the hgn-alocs, men- 
tioned Num. 24:6; Prov. 7:17; Song 4:14. It is a species 
of fragr;int wood. 

9. Gi>ld of Ophir ; Ophir is here mentioned as emphati- 
cally the gold-land of the ancient Hebrews. For its situa- 
tion see note to 1 Kings 9:2S. 

10. Forget — thine otni people; be wholly devoted to Jesus 
Christ, and love him more than father, mother, or any 
earthlv friend. 



The church's trust , 



PSALM XL VII. 



God\i foiccr and grace. 



11 So shall the king greatly desire thy l>oauty :" 
for he is thy Lord ; '' and worship thou Iiini."-' 

12 And the daughter of Tyre shall be there with 
a gift ; '' even the rich among the people shall en- 
treat thy favor.* ■= 

13 The king's daughter is all glorious within: 
her clothing is of wrought gold/ 

14 She shall be brought unto the king in raiment 
of needlework : ^ the virgins her companions that 
follow her shall be brought unto thee. 

15 With gladness and rejoicing shall they be 
brought;'' they shall enter into the king's ])alace. 

16 Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children," 
whom thou mayest make princes in all the earth.-' 

17 1 will make thy name to be remembered in 
all generations :'' therefore shall the people praise 
thee for ever and ever. 

PSALM XLVI. 

1 The confidence which the church hatli in God. 8 An exiiortation to 
behold the works of tlie Lord. 

^ To the chief JIusician for' the sons of Korah, A Song' upon 
Alamoth."' 

C^ OD is our refuge and strength, a very prcs- 
_X cut help in trouble. 

2 Therefore will not we fear, though the earth 
be removed, and though the mountains be carried 
into the midst of the sea:* 



» Sonj 4:0, etc. b Isa. 54:.5. c Psa. 9.3:8. <1 Isa. aj:lS: Acts 21:3-6. 
• Heb./are. elsa.(i0:3. f Isa. ()1:1U; Rev. 19:7, 8. SSongl:4. h Isa. 
35:10; Jude ei. ifsa. •J2::W. J Rev. 1:6. k Mai. 1:11. t Or, o/. 1 Psa. 



11. Thy beauty; the holiness and spiritual beauty of his 
church. 

12. The daughter of Tyre; that is, Tyro herself, repre- 
sented as a princely female. The Tyrians were celebrated 
for their extensive commerce and great wealth. The gen- 
eral idea is, that the rich and mighty should contribute 
their offerings to Clirist and his bride tlie church. 

13. The hng's daughter; Christ's redeemed and sanctified 
church. Within; witliin the king's palace. Her glorious 
apparel represents her spiritual beauty. 

16. Thy children; the children of the King: the church 
of Christ is here, as elsewhere, represented as the mother 
of a numerous and honorable offspring. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The thoughts of true believers are very much occu- 
pied about Clirist and his cause. 

3. Since God has given to Christ all power in heaven 
and in earth, and made liim " most mighty " in behalf of 
the church, they who love the prosperity of his kingdom 
shall see their utmost desires fulfilled. 

C. Jesus Christ is God over all; he is so addressed by 
the Father, and his works prove him to be divine. 

10. Those who would partake of Christ's salvation must 
love him supremely, and be ready, when called, to forsake 
all for his sake. 

13. Divine grace changes the heart and makes it meet 
to be a liabitation for God through his Spirit. 

16. Death is continually removing the fathers from 
Christ's church ; but the number and strength of Christ's 
spiritual offspring on eartli shall be increased, till they 
shall inlierit the world. In that liappy day the righteous 
shall be " princes in all the earth." 

PSALM XLVI. 

The occasion of the present psalm seems to have been 
some remarkable triumph of God's people over their ene- 
mies; perhaps their deliverance from the Assyrian army 
in the days of Hezekiah. 2 Kings 19:35; Isa. 37:36. In 
it the church rises above all human trust to simple faith in 



'■) Though the waters thereof roar and be troub- 
led, though the mountains shake with the swelling 
thereof. Selah. 

4 There is a river, the streams wiiercof shall 
make glad the city of God," the holy place of the 
tabernacles of the Most High." 

5 God is in the midst of her ; she shall not bo 
moved : God shall help her, a7id that right early.^ 

G The heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved : 
he uttered his voice, the earth melted. 

7 The Lord of hosts is with us ; the God of Jacob 
is our refuge.' Selah. 

8 Come, behold the works of the Lord, what 
desolations he hath made in the earth. 

9 He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the 
earth ; he brcaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear 
in sunder ; ho burnetii the chariot in the fire.'' 

10 Be still, and know that I ayn God ; I will be 
e.xaltcd among the heathen, I will be exalted in 
the earth.'' 

11 The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of 
Jacob is our refuge. Selah. 

PSALM XLVII. 

The nations are exhorted cheerfnlly to entertain the kinj^dom of Christ. 
•j To the chief Musician, A Psalm for' the sons of Korah. 

OH clap your hands, all ye people ; shout unto 
God with the voice of triumph. 



IS 


06. 


m 1 Chr. 


l.T 0| 




Heb 


heart of the ua 


,, 


n Rev 


•?.\- 


>.3. 


F,7.f 


It, 


47 


r-1-2 


S Heb. 


wlirn 


the 


morn 


iiig njipearttk , 


K 


tod. 14 


■u, 


■7; P=a 


.3(1 


h. 


1 Heb. n 


higkpta 


ejor 


"■ 


pK 


ek. 39 9, 10. 


ql 


a. -2:11 


17. 


11 Or, 


oj. 





God's almighty power and unchangeable love. The two 
following psalms are in the same general strain. 

Title, upon Alamoth; Alamoth, tliat is, virgins, probably 
denotes that the song was to be sung with treble voices. 

1. A very present help ; found by experience to bo ever 
ready and all-powerful to help his people. 

2. Though the earth be removed; the figures employed in 
this and the following verse denote violent, commotions 
and changes of every kind, physical and political. 

4. A river ; the river of tlie water of life proceeding from 
God's throne. Ezek. 47:1; Rev. 22:1. This is the symbol 
of his life-giving presence and power. The city of God; 
.lerusalem, the place of God's special presence under the 
Mosaic economy. This city of God is now his true church. 

5. Right early; in due season ; when help is most needed. 

6. The earth melted; showing its dependence on God, and 
that all things are entirely under his control. 

9. He maketh v:ars to cease; by the destruction of the 
hostile forces. This is the final issue of all assaults upon 
his people ; and while the conflict rages, he governs in the 
midst of it, and overrules it for his glory and their good. 

10. Be stilt; desist from yom- vain assaults upon my 
people. 

11. Us; the people of God. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Those who have God for their defender need fear no 
evil. 

5. The presence and favor of God arc at all times the 
security, support, and comfort of his people. 

9. In the midst of wars and tumults, it is a consolation 
to God's people to know that the issues of them are in his 
hand, and tliat lie will in the end make them subservient to 
their peace and prosperity. 

10. One great design of God in all his dispensations is 
to manifest his true character, and make himself known to 
all people as the one only living and true Jehovah. 

PSALM XLVII. 

1. All ye people; that is, as the original word means, aU ye 
645 



The praise of God. 



PSALM XLVIII. 



Zion's beauty dacribed. 



2 For the Loud most high is terrible; he is- a 
great King over all the earth. 

?, Il(! shall siibduo the people under us, and the 
nations under oiir feet. 

4 He shall choose our inheritance for us, the 
excellency of Jacob whom he loved. Selah. 

5 God is gone up with a shout," the JjORD with 
the sound of a trumpet. 

fi Sing praises to Clod, sing praises : sing praises 
unto our King, sing praises. 

7 For God is the King of all the earth i"" sing 
ye praises with understanding.*" 

8 God reigueth over the heatlien : God sitteth 
upon the tlirone of his holiness. 

9 The princes of tlie peo[)]e are gathered togeth- 
er, even tlie people of* tiie God of Abraham: for 
the shields of the earth belong unto God:'* he is 
greatly exalted. 



PSAL.AI XLVIII. 

The ornaments and privileges of the church. 
% A Song and Psalm for ' the sons of Korah. 

GREAT is the Lokd, and greatly to be praised 
in the city of our God, in the mountain of 
his holiness. ■= 
2 Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole 



» Psa. 6S:18, 33; Acts 1:5-11. b Zech. 14:9. * Or, every one l/iat hatk 
underslaruling. « 1 Cor. 14:15; Col, 3:16. t Or, The voluntary of the peo- 
ple art gathered unto the people of, etc. ; 2 Cor. S:5. d Prov. 30:5. 1 Or. of. 



nations. Here, as often elsewhere in the Psalms, the gen- 
file nations arc called upon to rejoice in God, in anticipation 
of their reception, thronsh faith, into the clinrch. 

3. Under us; under his covenant iieoplc. The victories 
of ancient Israel over the surrounding heathen nations 
foreshadowed the spiritual subjection of the nations to 
the church through faitli in Clirist. 

4. Oar inker ttance — iJie excellency of Jacob; designations 
of the goodly heritage which God conferred upon his an- 
cient people. 

5. God is gone up; from the conquest of his enemies to 
heaven. A sliout — tlie sound of a trumpet; the signs of 
rejoicing. 

7. Alithe earth; God is not a local deity, but a universal 
monarch. 

8. God reigneth over tlie heathen; they will one day all be 
brought to acknowledge and adore him as their King. 

9. Gathered togetlier ; to worship God and acknowledge 
him as their Lord. Those are the princes of the heathen 
mentioned in tlie preceding verse. The people of the God of 
Abraham ; whohad liocomesuchby tlioir submission to him. 
The nkiehls of the earth ; the same as the " j)rinccs of tlic peo- 
ple," Hosea 4:8. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. God is the joy of his people. In him they glory as 
their righteoiisness, wisdom, and strength. 

4. The condition of each individual is chosen for him by 
God, and with it he should be content, and thus by his 
conduct say, Not my will, but thine be done. 

6. Those who from the heart offer jiraises to God, glorify 
him. In this, the high and the low, the rich and the poor, 
persons of all descriptions may unite, and thus secure his 
approbation and blessing. 

8. The prophets of the Old Testament foresaw and pre- 
dicted the day when all heathen nations shall be brought 
to acknowledge and glorify God, and he shall bo greatly 
exalted throughout the whole earth. 

PSALM XLVIII. 

1. TItc city of our God ; Jerusalem. 
G46 



earth, is mount Zion,^ on the sides of the north,^ 
the city of the great King." 

3 God is known in her palaces for a refuge. 

4 For lo, tlie kings were assembled,' they passed 
by together. 

5 They saw if, and so they marvelled ; they were 
troubled, a?id hasted away. 

G Fear took hold upon them there, and pain, as 
of a woman in travail.^ 

7 Thou breakcst the ships of Tarshish with an 
east wind." 

8 As we have heard, so have we seen in the city 
of the Lord of hosts, in the city of our God : God 
will establish it for ever.' Selah. 

y We have thought of thy loving-kindness, 
God, in the midst of thy temple. 

10 According to thy name,'" O God, so is thy 
praise unto the ends of the earth : thy right hand 
is full of righteousness. 

1 1 Let mount Zion rejoice, let the daughters of 
Judah lie glad, because of thy judgments. 

12 AValk about Zion, and go round about her: 
tell the lowers thereof. 

13 JMark ye well-' her bulwarks, consider' her 
palaces ; tiiat ye may tell it to the generation fol- 
lowing. 

14 For this God is our God for ever and ever : 
he will lie our guide, even unto death." 



ePsi.C5:l. t Psa. 50:2; Lam. 2:l.'i. Klsa.l4:I3. hMatt.5:35. i 2 Sam. 
10:0-19. J Exoa. 15:14-10. k Ezek. 27:23. I Isa. 2:2. m Josh. 7:9; Psa. 
113:3. ilUb. Set your heart to. fOr,raiseup. ■> Psa. 73:21; J-a 5S:11. 



2. The Joy of the whole earth ,• as the seat of the true wor- 
ship of Jehovah, which was appointed to extend itself 
over the whole earth. Isa. 2:2-4. JMount Zion, on the 
sides of the north; '• the sides of the north " seem to include 
not only the northern slope of the hill of Zion, but also 
Moriah, which lay to the north-east, and upon which the 
tcmiile was built. 

5. They were troubled, and hasted away; the enemies of 
Jerusalem that had come up against it, were scattered and 
dispersed. 

7. Thoubreakest the ships of Tarshish; a particular instance 
of God's power, to represent his universal sovereignty. 
With an east wind; compare Acts 27:14. 

8. As we have heard, so have we seen ; the wonderful doings 
of God in past ages, of which wo have heard, have been 
repeated before our eyes. 

10. So is thy praise; or, so bo thy praise. The name of 
God is the sum of his perfections, as manifested to men. 
With this the praises rendered to him by men ought to 
correspond. 

11. Thy judgments; the retributions of God, especially 
with reference to his enemies. 

12. Tell the towers thereof; count the towers of Jerusalem, 
that ye may see her impregnable strength. 

INSTRUCTION'S. 

2. The true spiritual 7.wn is the light and glory of the 
whole earth. Uod administers the government of the 
world for her good, and he will make her a blessing to all 
nations. 

5. The enemies of God, in their assaults upon his people, 
bring ruin upon themselves. God is with those who love 
him, and they must prevail. 

i;i. It is the privilege and duty of God's people, in each 
successive generation, to record his glorious interpositions 
in their behalf, for the comfort and eiicourngement of those 
who come alter them. 

M. (iod will never forsake those who trust in him, but 
will guide them by his counsel, and afterwards receive 
them to glory. 



The vanity of rides. 



rSALM L. 



T/ic majc.'ily of God. 



PSALM XLIX. 



1 An earnest persuasion to hniU the failli of resurrection not on worldly 
power, but on Lfod. 10 Worldly prosperity is not to be admireil. 

«[ To the chief Musician, A Psalm for* the sons of Korah. 

HEAR this, all ye people ; give ear, all yc in- 
liabitants of tlic world: 
2 Botii low and high, ricli and poor, together. 
8 My mouth shall speak of wisdom ; and the 
meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. 
4 I will incline mine ear to a parable : I will 
ojieii my dark saying upon the harp. 

6 Wherefore sliould 1 fear in tlie days of evil," 
vhrn the iniquity of my iiecls shall compass me 
about ?^' 

(1 They that trust in their wealth, and boast 
themselves in the multitude of their riches; 

7 None of them can by any means redeem liis 
brother, nor give to God a ransom for him:"' 

8 (For the redemption of their soul is precious, 
and it ceaseth for ever:) 

[) That he should still live for ever, and not see 
corruption.'' 

10 For lie seeth that wise men die, likewise the 
fool and the Ijrntisli person perish, and leave their 
wealth to others." 

1 1 Their inward thought is, that their houses 
shall continue for ever, and their dwelling-places to 
all generations ;+ they call tlieir lauds after their 
own names. ^ 

1 2 Nevertheless man being in honor abideth not : '^ 
he is like the beasts that perish. 

13 Tliis their way is their folly: yet their pos- 
terity approve their sayings.* Selah. 



• Or. 


f. 


1 Rom. S 


83, 34. 




Uns 


-:•.>. 


.lob 30 


1?. <1 Act 


13 


: 33-37. 


e Eccl. • 


:1(J- 


21. tHe 


). geiicr 


nt 


on a 


d generation, f 


2 Sam. 15: 


s. 


e P>a. 


39;5. I 


Hch 


deli gilt 


in theiT 




until 


li Da 


. 7:a-2; 


Rev. 2:aii, 


2V 


( Or, 


Hrenglh 


' 


Ur, the g 


ave bei 


ig 


a liabitntion 


to every 


one of tlien 




1 Heb. 



PSALM XLIX. 

The theme of this psalm is the vanity of all earthly 
honors and possessions, in contrast with the righteous 
man's portion, which is everlasting life, honor, and bless- 
edness in God's presence. 

3. Wisdom ; that course which it is proper for frail man 
to pursue. 

4. Incline mine ear ; in the attitude of earnest attention, 
as I sing my song with the accompaniment of the harp. 
The psalmist receives from God the instructions which he 
communicates to others, and he, as well as his hearers, 
must reverently attend to them. A parable — dark saijing; 
here used of instruction communicated in a figurative and 
sententious style. 

5. The iniquity of my heels; his past offences; but some 
render the words, the iniquity of my oppressors, who fol- 
lowed him with their persecutions. 

7. Redeem his hrotlier ; save him from the grave. 

8. Redemption of their soul ; preservation of their life. 
Precious; it exceeds all price which men can pay for it. 
This is true alike of the redemption of the natural life and 
of the immortal spirit. 

12. Abideth not ; he must soon die. 

13. Approve their sayinsrs; imitate their example. 

14. r/icmoramg-; soon, HI the morning of the resurrection. 

15. Grjd will redeem my soul from the power of the grave; 
he will preserve the lives of his saints from dangers of 
every kind until their appointed time comes ; and will 
finally raise them from the dead, and receive them, soul 
and body, to himself. 

19. TAei/ shall never see light; tho wicked have all their 
good things in this life. 



14 Like sheep they arc laid in tlie grave ; death 
shall feed on them; and tlie ujiright shall have 
dominion over them in llie niDrniug;'' and their 
beauty^ shall consume in tlio grave from their 
dwelling.' 

l.'j But God will redeem my soul fi'om tlie power ^ 
of the grave:" for he shall receive me. Selah. 

1(5 Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, 
when the glory of his house is increased ; 

17 For when he dieth he shall carry nothing 
away :' his glory shall not descend after him. 

18 Though while he lived* he blessed his soul: 
and men will praise thee, when thou doest well to 
thyself: 

It) He shall go* to the generation of his fathers ; 
they shall never see light. 

20 Man that is in honor, and understandeth not, 
is like the beasts that perish.^ 

PSALM L. 

1 Tlie majesty of Crod in the church. 5 His order to gather his saints. 
7 The pleasure of God is not in ceremonies, 14 but in sincerity of obe- 
dience. 

^ A Psalm of > Asapli. 

THE mighty God," even the Lord, hath spoken, 
and called the earth from the rising of the 
sun unto the going down thereof. 

2 Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath 
shined.' 

3 Our God shall come,™ and shall not kec]) si- 
lence : a fire shall devour before him," and it shall 
be very tempestuous round aljout him. 

4 He shall call to the heavens from above, and 
to the earth, that he may judge his people. 



20. Understandeth not ; understandeth not his duty as a 
rational being, mortal and yet immortal. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. That wisddtn which is from above, and that under- 
standing which consists in the fear of the Lord, are equally 
essential to all classes of people. 

5. They that fear God and trust him for what they need, 
have no reason to fear any one else. 

8. No earthly treasures, however costly and abundant, 
can save the possessor or his friends from the stroke of 
death. 

13. Multitudes imitate tho folly and wickedness of those 
who have gone before them, in living for earth, and not 
for heaven. 

16. No one should be fearful or envious at the prosper- 
ity and wealth of others, for they will soon die, and go 
hence as destitute as if they had lived in poverty. 

18. Those who live only to gratify their appetites and 
passions, sink themselves in infamy; men may applaud, 
but God will condemn them. 

PSALM L. 

In this psalm God is represented as coming forth in 
majesty and glory from his dwelling-place in mount Zion, 
and summoning his covenant people to judgment for their 
hypocrisy and wickedness. 

2. The perfection of beauty ; Zion, as the royal abode of 
Jehovali, was to the pious Israelite the sum of all excel- 
lence and beauty. Psa. 48:2. 

3. Shall come; from Zion to judge his people. 

4. Call to the heavens— to the earth; to heaven and earth 
with all their inhabitants, to be present as witnesses. 

C4'I 



Siiuere oledknce rcijuiicd. 



PSALM LI. 



David confesseth his sin. 



5 Gather my saints togctlier unto mc;' tliose 
fliat have made a eovonant witli me hy sacrifice.'' 

6 And the heavens shall declare his righteous- 
ness : for God is judge himself." Selah. 

7 Hear,'' my people, and I will speak ; Israel, 
and 1 will testify against thee : 1 am God, even thy 
God. 

8 I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices or thy 
liurnt-oH'crings, to lian Imn continually before nie. 

y 1 will take no liullock out of thy house, nor he- 
goats out of thy folds : "" 

10 For every beast of the forest is mine, and the 
cattle upon a thousand hills. 

Ill know all the fowls of the mountains: and 
the wild beasts of the field are mine. 

12 If I were hungry, 1 would not tell thee : for 
the world is mine, and the fulness thereof. 

13 Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink tlielilood 
of goats ? 

It Offer unto God tlianksgiviug ; and jjay thy 
vows unto the Most High. 

1.") And call upon me in the day of trouljle: I 
will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify nie.' 

l(j But unto the wicked God saith. What hast 
thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou 
shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth?" 

17 Seeing thou liatcst instruction, and castcstmy 
words behind thee.'' 

18 When thou sawcst a thief, then thou con- 
scntcdst with him, and hast been jtartaker* with 
adulterers. 

rj Thou givcst* tliy mouth to evil, and thy tongue 
frameth deceit. 

20 Tliou sittcst and speakcst against thy brother ; 
thou slandorost thine own motfier's son. 

21 These tilings hast thou done, and I kept si- 
lence;' thou thoughtest that 1 was altogether such 
a one as thyself : but I will reprove thee, and set 
them in order before thine eyes. 



aMitt. 24:31. li llcb. 1-.':2I. « Rev. 20:12. ilMicj;:l-8. e Acts 17:25; 
Heb.lO:4,0. • lUb. wil/i me. f Psi. 107:0, etc. t la* 1 :ll-15; John 4:24. 
>> Prov. 5:12, 13. t Hcb. I/iy por(io;i was. t Heh. sentltsl. 1 Keel. S; 11, 12; 
Rom. 2:4; 2 Pet 3:9. )P». 9:17. " 1 Pet. 2:9. t Heh. di^oseth his wai/. 



5. Ml/ soiH/s; my visible, ])rofessed worshippers. Israel, 
as the peculiar people ot'(iotl,and consecrated to his ser- 
vice, is called "a holy nation," Exod. 1!):G. By sacrifice; 
the national covenant with Israel was originally ratified 
by Riicrifices and the sprinkling of blood, I'^xod. 24:5-8; 
and the stated sacrifices appointed under the law, may bo 
regarded as a i)erpetiial renewing of this covenant. 

6. His rif^lileousnesa; the correctness of his decisions. 

9. / wilt take no bullock; (lod does not require sacrifices, 
or any other services wliich men can render, for his own 
Bake, " as though lie needed any thing," nor will he accept 
them unless ottered in faith and love. Acts 17:25. 

14. Tkanhs^ivirif^ ; a spiritual service: not that thanks- 
giving should be substituted for sacrifice, but tliat these 
should be an expression of thanksgiving. 

10. Tlie wicked ; the open violators of God's law. 

21. SmhaonenslhijulJ'; one who would connive at wick- 
edness, and snfler it to go unpunished. 

22. Tear you in pieces ; suddenly and utterly destroy you. 
2:1. Offerelh praise ; offers sacrifices of thanksgiving. See 

ver. H. Conversation; conduct and life. 

INSTIIL'CTIOXS. 
3. A day is coming when all shall discern between him 
that scrveth God in truth, and him that servcth him not. 
8. Kxternal service merely, without tlio heart being 
engaged, will bo of no avail in the sight of God. 
G48 



22 Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I 
tear you in pieces, and thtre be none to deliver.'' 

23 Whoso oflercth praise gloriiieth me:'' and to 
him that ordereth his conversaiioa* aright will I 
show the salvation of God." 

PSALM LI. 

1 David praycth for remission of sins, whereof he maketh a deep con- 
fession. 6 He prayeth for sanrtification. 16 God delighteth not in 
sacrifice, but in sincerity. 18 He praycth for tlie church. 

^ To the chief Jlusician, A Psalm of David, when Nathan the 
prophet came unto him,"' after he had gone in to Buth-sbcba." 

ITAVE mercy upon me, God. according to 
1, thy loving-kindness : according unto the 
multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my trans- 
gressions." 

2 Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and 
cleanse me from my sin.'' 

3 For I acknowledge my transgressions:' and 
my sin is ever before me. 

4 Against thee,'' thee only, have I sinned and done 
this evil in thy sight:' that thou mightest be jus- 
tified when thou speakest, and be clear when thou 
judgest. 

5 Behold, I was shapen in iniquity ; and in sin 
did my mother conceive' me.' 

6 Behold, thou dcsirest truth in the inward parts : 
and in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know 
wisdom. 

7 Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean:" 
wash mo, and 1 shall be whiter than snow."*' 

8 Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the 
bones which thou hast broken may rejoice.'' 

y Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all 
mine iniquities. 

10 Create in mo a clean heart, God ;>' and re- 
new a right^ spirit within me. 

11 Cast me not away from thy presence; and 
take not thy Holy Spirit from me.' 



1 Phil. 1:27. m 2 Sim. 12:1, etc. o 2 Sam. 11:2,4. o ]sa. 43:25; 44:22; 
Acts3:l9. pRev. !:.'■>. lProv.2S:13. r2Sam. 12:13. •Lnkel5:21. I Hcb. 
warm. 1 Eph. 2:3. " Lev. 14:4-9; Num. l!i:IS; Hob. 9: 19. 'Inn. 1:16. 
".MlU. 5:4. iJer. 10:17. y Acts 15:9. 1 Or, coBJ/anf. • Luke tl:13. 



15. Humble, believing, affectionate prayer will always 
bo heard, and in God's own way and time be abundauUy 
answered. 

IG. God will not accept any service at the hand of the 
habitual violator.s of his law. 

22. God often waits ujion sinners with much long-suffer- 
ing, but will finally call them to account, and punish them 
according to their deserts. 

2:J. Without an upright life, all professions of godliness, 
and all claims to true religion and salvation arc vain. MatU 
7:15-23; James 1:20; iJohu 3:7. 

PSALM LI. 

1. Mytraiis^rressmus; especially his sins in the matter of 
Uriah, with which he was charged by the prophet Nathan, 
and of which he was now deeply sensible. 

4. Jgamst thee, thee only ; his sin was principally, or 
especially against God, and moat aggravated in his sight. 
Bcju.ttified — and he clear when thoujndgcst; clear from all 
wrong in condemning him. 

G. Ttulh in tlic inward parts; purity, sincerity, antl up- 
rightness of soul. 

7. niis.top ; a plant or shrub used in external cleansing, 
an emblem of internal purity. 

8. The linnes whtcli thmi hast broken; that the distresBCa 
brought upon him might be removed. 



Malice of Doeg reproved. 



PSALM LHI. 



Corruption of mankind. 



12 Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation ; and 
iiphold nie ivit/i thy free f'pirit." 

13 Then will 1 teach traiis.srresPors thy ways;'' 
and sinners shall be converted unto thee. 

14 Deliver me from bloodo-uiltiness,* God, thou 
God of my salvation : and my tongue shall sing 
aloud of thy righteousness.'' 

15 Lord, open thou my lips ; and my mouth 
shall show forth thy praise. 

IG For thou desirest not sacrifice ; else would I* 
give it: thou delightest not in burnt-offering.'' 

IT The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a 
broken and a contrite heart, God, thou wilt not 
des[)ise.'' 

1 8 Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion : 
liuild thou the walls of Jerusalem. 

19 Then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices 
of righteousness,'' with buriit-cilTcring and whole 
burnt-ofiering: then shall they oiler bullocks upon 
thine altar. 

PSALM LII. 

1 David, condemning the spitefulness of Doeg, prophesiefh liis destruc- 
tion. 6 The righteous shall rejoice at it. S David, upon his con- 
fidence in G-ods mercy, giveth thanks. 

^ To the chief Musician, Maschil, A Psalm of David, when 
Doeg the Edomite? came and told Saul,'' and said unto him, 
David is come to the house of Ahiraelech. 

WHY boastest thou thyself in mischief, 
mighty man? the goodness of God enclurctli 
continually.' 

2 Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs ; like a sharp 
razor, working deceitfully. 

3 Thou lovest evil more than good ; and lying 
rather than to speak righteousness.^ Selah. 

4 Thou lovest all devouring words, thoii' de- 
ceitful tongue. 



' i Cor. a:17. I> Zech. 3:1-^. • Heb. Moods. ' Psa. 7I:-J:i. 24. t Or, 
t/i<il rshaukl. d Hos. 6;6; Mic. G:7, s; Heb. 1U:'1-10. e Isa. (ili:a. t Psa. 
4:.t; Rom. 12:1. S 1 Sam. 21 :7 ; 22:9. ti Ezeli. 22:9. i Psa. 131!: 1, 2. 
i let. 9:4,5. 1 Or, and Mts. i Heb. beat Ikee down, k Prov. 10 5, 9. 



12. The joy of thy salvation; which he had lost by his 
sins. Uphold me; without this he would again fall into sin. 

14. Bloodguiltiness ; in procuring the deatli of Uriah. 

17. The sacrifices of God ; the offerings which are jjleas- 
ing to him and which he will accept. 

18. Zion; the clmrch of God. 

19. Sacrifices of righteousness ; such as God requires. 

INSTRUCTIONS, 

I, All the hope of the true penitent is in the free mercy 
and rich grace of God, and these form his only plea before 
him, 

4, However greatly any one injures his fellow-men by 
his sins, their chief guilt is in being committed against 
God, 

7, Purification from sin is the work of the Holy Spirit, 
and to him tlie believer looks for tliis inestimable blessing, 

II. Witliout the constant aid of the Holy Spirit, even 
the most eminent believers will be in constant danger of 
falling into the most aggravated sins. 

13. It is only when we have the joy of God's salvation 
in our own hearts, that we are qualified to guide sinners 
to repentance. The believer desires God's presence and 
the light of his countenance, not for his own sake alone, 
but for the sake of his fellow-men. 

15. For a heart to praise God men are dependent on 
him, and they should continually look up to him for this 
inestimable blessing. 

18. The sincere penitent desires spiritual blessings not 
only for himself but for others, especially for the people 
of God in every part of the world. 



.5 God shall likewise destroy thee^ for ever,'' he 
shall take thee away, and ])lu('k thee out of thy 
dwelling-place, and root thee out of the land of 
the living,' Helah. 

(') The righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall 
laugh at him : 

7 JjO, this is the man that nuide not f!od h.is 
strength ; but trusted in the abundance of his rich- 
es,'" and strengthened himself in his wickedness.' 

8 But I am like a green olive-tree in the house 
of God : " I trust iu the mercy of God for ever and 
ever. 

9 I will praise thee for ever, because thou hast 
done it: and I will wait on thy name;" for it is 
good before thy saints.'' 

PSALM LIII. 

1 David describeth tlie corruption of a natural man. 4 He convinceth 
the wicked by the light of their own conscience. 6 He glorieth in 
tiie salvation of God. 

*| To the chief Musician upon Mahalath, Maschil, A Psalm of 
David. 

'"T^HE fool hath said in his heart. There is no 
X God.'' Corrupt are they,"' and have done 
abominable iniquity:" there is none thatdocth good. 

2 God looked down from heaven upon the chil- 
dren of men, to see if there were any that did un- 
derstand, that did seek God.' 

3 Every one of them is gone back : they are 
altogether become filthy ; there is none that doeth 
good, no, not one. 

" 4 Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge? 
who eat up my people as they eat bread : they have 
not called upon God. 

5 There were they in great fear,' iche7-e no fear 
was:" for God hath scattered the bones of him 



Prov. 2:22. a I Tim. 6:17. 1 Or, ,(116.5(01 
) :2.i, 20. P Psa. 73:28. 1 Psa. 14:1, etc, 
Psa. 11:4. VlUh.theyfiandaJiar. "1 



n Psa. 1:3; 92:12. o Lam. 
■ Gen. G;5, 12, ' Eph. 5:12. 
V. 26:1. 



PSALM LII, 

Title, when Doeg the Edomite came; see the narrative in 
1 Sam, 21:1-7; 22:9-23, 

1, Mighty man; Doeg the Edomite, Enclureth continu- 
ally; as much as to say. It will protect me from thy mis- 
chievous designs. 

2. Like a sharp razor; wounding deep and suddenly. 

4, Devouring words; words that injure and destroy. They 
occasioned the death of all Ahimelech's house, with the 
exception of Abiathar, 

6, Fear; fear to sin. Laugh at him; rejoice at his ruin. 

8. Like a green olive-tree; prosperous and flourishing. 

9. I will wait on thy name; adore God for the manifesta- 
tions of his character, and exjiect from him all needed good. 

INSTRUt:TIONS. 
1. To boast in iniquity is the way to perdition. 

5, Slander and calumny are exceedingly heinous in 
God's sight. He will sooner or later destroy all who prac- 
tise them ; and will permit his servants to rejoice iu his 
righteous judgments, 

7, Ungodly men who trust in their power and wealth, 
will have speedj' and sore disappointment, 

8, The righteous, who put their trust in God, will never 
be disappointed ; they shall be like trees planted by the 
waters, ever green and fruitful, 

PSALM LIII. 

This psalm is, for substance, the same as Psalm 14. See 
the notes on that psalm. 

5. IVliere no fear was; no external cause of fear. 
C49 



David's appml to God 



PSALM LV. 



vken ill distress. 



that (Micaini)Ptli a<^ainsf tlioo: thou liast put them 
to shame, bocauso God liatli (Icr^piscd them.-' 

6 Oh that the salvation of Israel ircrc come' out 
of Zion! • Whcu God briiifrctli back tiio captivity 
of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall 
be glad." 

PSALM LIV. 

I David, complaining of ttie Ziphini, praycth for salvation. 4 Upon his 
confidence in God's help he promiseth sacrifice. 

^ To the cliief Musician on Ncginotli, Maschil, A Psalm of 
David, when the Ziphim came and said to Saul, Doth not 
David hide himself witli us?' 

SAVE me, God, by tliy name, and judge me 
by thy strength. 

2 Hear my prayer, God ; give ear to the words 
of my mouth. 

3 For strangers are risen up against me, and op- 
pressor? seek after my soul i** they have not set God 
before them. Seiah. 

4 Behold, God is my helper : the Lord is witli 
them that uphold my soul.'' 

5 He shall reward evil unto mine enemies :+ cut 
them oil" in thy trutii. 

6 I will freely sacrifice unto thee : I will praise 
thy name, Lord ; for it is good. 

7 For he hath delivered me out of all trouble:' 
and mine eye hath seen his desire upou mine ene- 
mies. 

PSALM LV. 

1 David in his prayer complaineth of his fearful case. 9 He prayeth 
against his enemies, of whose wickedness and treacliery he complain- 
eth. 16 He comfortcth himself in G-od's prest^rvation of him, and 
confusion of his enemies. 

5[ To the chief Musician on Neginoth, Maschil, A Psalm of 
David. 

IVE ear to my prayer, God ; and hide not 
thyself from my supplication. 



G 



aJer.0:3U. •lU\>.WhotoiUgivesalvatioiis,<:lc. b Psi. lai: ]-•!. c l Sain. 
23:19. iiP*a. 3(i:l. e P<a. IIH:?. t Heb. (Aosc (/m( oisfrpe ms,- P.sa. .i:S. 
f 1 Sam. 46:il. e 2Sam. 16;7,8. hPsa.Utf;.!. Mle\y. covered. iJer.B:7. 



6. Bringeth back live captivity of his people ; delivers them 
from trouble, and bestows upon them prosperity. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Those who say, There is no God, even in their liearts, 
are dupes of their own wickedness and folly. 

2. None naturally seek after God, nor will any ever tl<i 
it without the influences of his grace. 

5. God can fill tlie wicked with trembling; and conster- 
nation in the absence of all external appearances of dan- 
ger ; and in the end, more and greater evils than they 
feared will come upon them. 

6. Let the righteous wait patiently upon God, and their 
highest expectations will be more than realized. 

PSAL.M LIV. 

Title, when the Ziphim rnmr ; the Ziphim are tho same 
as the Zipliites. 1 Sam. 2:1:1!). 

1. liij lliij name; by thy glorious perfections; for tliese, 
as manifested to men, constitute God's name. 

3. Strangers; the Ziphites, as having the spirit of stran- 
gers, that IS, foreign enemies ; unless the reference be to 
foreigners in the service of Saul, such as Doeg the Edotn- 
ite, who were among the foremost in persecuting David. 

4. Tliem tluit uphold mij soul ; those in Israel wlio adhered 
to the cause of David. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Prayer is tho refuge of God's people. In every time 

650 



2 Attend unto me, and hear me : I mourn in my 
complaint, and make a noise; 

3 Because of the voice of the enemy, because of 
the oppression of the wicked: for they cast in- 
iquity upon me," and in wrath they hate me. 

4 My heart is sore pained within me : and the 
terrors of death are fallen upon me.'' 

5 Fearl'ulnoss and trembling are come upon me, 
and liorror iiath overwhelmed* me. 

6 And 1 said. Oh that 1 had wings like a dove! 
for then would 1 fly away, and Ije at rest. 

7 Lo, then would I wander far off, and remain 
in the wilderness. Selah. 

<S I would hasten my escape from thewiiuly storm 
and tempest. 

1) Destroy, Lord, and divide their tongues: for 
I have seen violence and strife in the city.' 

10 Day and night they go about it upon the walls 
thereof: mischief also and sorrow are in the midst 
of it. 

11 Wickedness is in the midst thereof: deceit 
and guile depart not from her street.-^. 

12 For it was not an enemy tliat rejjroached me; 
then I could have borne it: neither v:as it he that 
liated me that did magnify /a'msf//" against mc; 
then 1 would have hid myself from him: 

13 But // iras tliou,^ a man mine equal,* my guide, 
and mine acquaintance.'' 

14 We took sweet counsel' together, and walked 
unto the house of God in com])any.' 

15 Let death seize upon them, and let them go 
down quick into hell :'"' for wickedness is in their 
dwellings, and among them. 

IG As for me, I will call upon God;" and the 
Lord shall save mc. 

17 Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I 
pray, and cry aloud :" and he shall hear my voice. 

18 He hath delivered my soul in peace from the 

J Psa. 41 :!). 5 Hcb. artoriling to mi/ rank, k 2 Sara. 15:12. I Heb. Who 
sweetened counsel. I Psa. -12: -1. 1 Or, Me ^^aftf. m Num. lU:30-32. o fta. 
73:2-<. Dan. U:10: Acts 3:1. 



of trouble they look to liim, and tind him to be a very 
])resent and all sullicient helper. 

.'). The enemies of God are destined to destruction, while 
his people will behold and acquiesce iu his judgments. 

PSALM LV. 

This psalm probably refers to the rebellion of Absalom. 

3. Cast iniquity ttpon me; overwhelm luc with their wick- 
edness. 

5. Horror hath overwhelmed me; his liorror was in view of 
the ))lans devised by enemies for liis destruction ; l>ut it was 
aggravated by the consciousness of his own sinfulness. 

8. Windy storm atul tempest ; the trouble which surround- 
ed him. 

9. Divide their iong^ics; distract their counsels. This 
was strikingly fulfilled in the case of Ahitliophel's counsel. 
The citfi ; Jerusalem. 

10. T/ieij go about it upon the walls; violence and strife 
arc, as it were, tho watclimcn of the city night and day. 

12. An enemi/; that is, open and avowed. Then Iwould 
have hid myself from htm; guarded myself against his 
assaults. 

i:i. 77iou, o man wine cyiMii; Ahithophcl. My guide; or, 
my friend, as the original word is elsewhere rendered. 
I'rov. 10:28; 17:9. 

11. In cnmpany; with the festive throng. 

].'■>. On dvirn i/uick into hell ; go down alive into the jilace 
of the dead, like Korah and his company. Num. 10:33. 



Trust ill God's word. 



PSALM LVII. 



Fkcin" luito did. 



battle that was against me: for there were many 
with me.'* 

19 God sliall hear, and afflict them, even he that 
abideth of old. Selah. Because they have no 
changes, therefore tliey* fear not God.'' 

20 lie hath put forth his liands against such as 
be at peace with him : he hath broken^ his cove- 
nant. 

21 The words of his moutli were smoother than 
butter, but war was in his heart: his words were 
softer than oil, yet loere they drawn swords. 

22 Cast thy burden ' upon the Lnno, and he shall 
sustain thee:'' he shall never suffer tiic righteous 
to bo moved.'' 

23 But thou, God, shalt bring them down into 
the pit of destruction: bloody and deceitful men' 
shall not live out half ' their days ;'-' but I will trust 
in thee. 

PSALM LVI. 



nfiJence of his word, compl;Lineth of hi; 
is confidence in G-od's word, and prorn- 



1 David, praying to Crod in < 

enemies. 9 He professeth 

iseth to praise him. 
•j To the chief Musician upon Jonath-elem-rechokim, IMich- 
tum of David,' wlicn the Philistines tuoli him in Oath.' 

BE merciful unto me, God, for man would 
swallow me up:' ho fighting daily opprcss- 
eth me. 

2 Mine enemies* would daily swallow me up: 
for they be many that fight against me, thou 
Most High. 

3 What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee.'* 

4 In God I will praise his word, in God I have 
put my trust; I will not fear what flesh can do 
unto me.' 

5 Every day tliey wrest my words :^ all their 
thoughts are against me for evil. 

6 They gather themselves together, they hide 



» a Chron^ 3->:7, S; 1 John AA. * Or, Wilk wliom also there be no clinnges, 
yet l/uy. I> Psa. 73:5, etc. t Heb. profaned. 1 Or, si/l. ■= Matt. G:25, .iO; 
1 Pet. 5:7. <iPsa. 121:3. i Ueb. men of blood and tlereit. I Hei>. /la/re. 
e Prov. 10:27. 1 Or, A golden Psahn of David; Psa. Ifi, title. < 1 Sam. 



20. He ; the wiclied man spolcen of, verse 13. 

22. Cast Ihij burden upon the Lord; depend entirely on 
him for all needed good. 

23. //((//"Mcfcrfni/.s-,- half the natural term of life: a proph- 
ecy of the premature death of David's enemies. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. A conviction of sin as the cause of all our trouble fills 
the soul with anguish which is more distressing than any 
external trials. 

5. It is the lot of those whom God appoints to eminent 
stations in his church to endure great suffering in her 
liehalf, both from inward conflicts and outward opposi- 
tion. 

9. The hearts of the wicked, as well as the righteous, 
are in the hands of God, and he can at any time divide 
their counsels and bring their projects to naught. 

12. The defection of former friends is harder to bear 
than the opposition of those who have been open enemies. 

17. Regularity and constancy in prayer are essential to 
l")eace of conscience, and that joy in the Holy Ghost which 
is a safeguard antl support in trouble. 

22. Dejicndence on God will keep the soul in peace : 
when tlie wicked are cut off, the righteous will stand 
unmoved. 

PSALM LVI. 

Title, Jonath-elem-rechokim ; "the dumb dove of distant 
ones," most probably an enigmatical designation of David, 



themselves, they mark my stops,* when they wait 
for my soul. 

7 t^hall they escape by inii|uity?' in thine anger 
cast down the people, God. 

8 Thou tellcst my wanderings: put fhou my 
tears into thy bottle: are they not in thy book?'" 

9 When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies 
turn back : this I know; for God is for me." 

10 In God will I praise his word: in the Loud 
will I praise his word. 

11 In God have I put my trust: I will not be 
afraid what man can do unto me. 

12 Thy vows are ujiou me, O God: I will ren- 
der praises unto thee. 

13 For thou hast delivered my soul from death: 
vi/t not thou deliver my feet from falling, that I 
may walk before God in the light of the living? 

PSALM LVII. 

1 Pavid in prayer fleeing unto God complaineth of liis dangerous case. 
7 He encourageth himself to praise God. 

^ To the chief Musician, Al-taschitli, Michtam' of Daviii, when 
he tied from Saul in tlie cave." 

BE merciful unto me, God, be merciful unto 
me, for my soul trusteth in thee : yea, in the 
shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until 
these calamities be overpast.'' 

2 I will cry unto God most high ; unto God that 
performeth all thinsfs for me. 

3 He shall send from heaven, and save me from 
the reproach of* him that would swallow me up. 
Selah. God shall send forth his mercy and his 
truth. 

4 My soul is among lions : and I lie cvcii among 
them that are set on fire, even the sons of men, 
whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue 
a sharp sword.'' 



21:11; 29:4. 6 Hos. 8:8. • Heb. observers, h 1 Sam. 3I):6. iLukeia:4.5. 
J Luke 11:54. k Psa. 37:32. I Eccl. 8:S. mMal. 3:1G. n Rom. 8:31. t Or, 
Destroy not, A golden P.'salm. o 1 Sam. 22:1 ; Psa. 142, title. P Psa. G3:7. 
1 Or, /le rejiroacheth. <\ Psa. 52:2. 



as an innocent, defenceless man, in the hands of distant 
ones, that is, foreigners. 

4. In God; by God's mercy and gracious assistance. 
His vord ; his word of promise, as fulfilled to me in my 
preservation in the midst of enemies. 

5. Wrest; pervert. 

8. Tellest; numberest. Into thij bottle — in thij book; the 
meaning is, Carefully treasure them up in thy memory. 

12. Thy vows are upon me; the psalmist here anticipates 
his approaching deliverance, and promises to render to 
God the thank-offerings which he has vowed. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. The only hope for man in trouble is in the mercy of 
God ; to this his people look, and on it they depend for all 
they need. 

3. Trust in God is the grand support in adversity, and 
is one of the things which distinguish the righteous from 
the wicked. 

8. The various removals of the people of God are all 
ordered by him, and he never forgets their sufferings for 
his sake. Iiut will give a gracious and an abundant reward. 

II. CoiifKlciice in God is a safeguard against the fear of 
man. 

PSALM LVII. 

4. Lions; fierce and cruel men who sought to destroy 
him. Set on fire; inflamed by their passions, and inflaming 
others. Spears and arrows; instruments of destruction. 

651 



Wid-cd judges reproved. 



PSALM LIX. 



David ciitrcatelh dclkcrana. 



5 Be thou exalted, God, above the heavens; 
let thy glory be above all tlic cartli. 

6 Tiiey have prepared a net for my steps;" my 
soul is bowed down: they have digged a pit be- 
fore me, into the midst whereof tiiey are fallen 
themselves. Selah. 

7 My heart is fixed," God, my heart is fixed: 
I will sing and give praise. 

8 Awake up, my glory; awake, psaltery and 
harp: 1 ??i7/if//"wiil awake early." 

9 I will praise thee, Lord, among the people : 
I will sing unto thee among tiie nations. 

10 For thy mercy is great unto the heavens, and 
thy truth unto the clouds. 

11 Be thou exalted, God, above the heavens: 
let thy glory be above all the earth. 

PSALM LVIII. 

1 David reproveth wicked judges, 3 describeth tlie nature of the wicked, 
6 devoteth them to Gods judgments, 10 whereat the righteous shall 
rejoice. 
^ To the chief Musician, Al-tasebith, Michtam of David.t 

DO ye indeed speak righteousness, congre- 
gation? do ye judge uprigiitly, O yc sons of 
men ? 

2 Yea, in heart ye work wickedness;" yc weigh 
the violence of your hands in the earth. 

3 The wicked are estranged from the womb : they 
go astray as soon as they bo born,* speaking lies. 

4 Their poison is like the poison of ^ a serpent :'' 
they are like the deaf adder" that stoppeth her ear ; 

5 Wiiicli will not hearken to the voice of charm- 
ers, charming never so wisely.^ 



■■• Mic. 


7;«. • 


Or 


prepared. 


b P.w 


los 


1-.^. 


t Or, 


Destroy 


lot. 


A golden 


Psalm of Davia 




Psa 


21:11. 


1 Hi- 


,.rr 


,mth 


e betiv 


« lleb 


according to 


the tikeiu 


« nf. 


i Rom. 


3:13. 


lOr, n 


.«r> 


HOr, 


bo llu 


charmer 




r so run' 


nmg. e 


Exod. 


15: 


15. 


( Prov 


10:v!5 




lleb. 


as Uv 


ng as wr 


alh 


e Rev. 



5. Be thou exalted, God ; for the dcliveraucc vouchsafed 
to me; which the psahnist here anticipates. 

1. Fixed; settled on the foundation of the everlasting 
covenant ; determined, in tlie strength and by the grace of 
God, to trust in and praise him. 

8. My glory; the samo as, myaord, see note to Psa. ll>:9. 
10. Great unto tlie heavens ; immeasurably great. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The mercy of God forms the never-failing plea of his 
people; to him as a refuge lliey apjily in every season of 
calamity, and patiently wait for his salvation. 

4. However numerous the enemies, and however groat 
the danger of God's people, ho will protect them, and at 
length deliver them from all their troubles. 

6. The eB'orta of the wicked to destroy tho righteous 
often prove the means of their own ruin. 

9. The godly not only praise God themselves, but desire 
that he may be praised by all people throughout the earth. 

PSALM LVIIL 

1. Doyejudgetiprightly; the referenco is to the decisions 
of wicked rulers wlio were the enemies and persecutors 
of David. 

2. Ye weigh the violence of your hands ; dispense violence 
instead of justice. 

3. As soon as they he horn; at tho commencement of their 
course of moral action, they naturally depart from God. 
Gen. 8:21. 

4. Ld:e the deaf adder ; as this is insensible to all the 
words of th(! charmer, so are they to all attempts to recall 
them from tlieir wicked ways. 

ti. Uratk their teeth; disable them from doing mischief. 
052 



fi Break their teeth, God, in their mouth: 
break out the great teeth of the young lions, O 
Loud. 

7 Let them melt away as waters which run con- 
tinually:" when he bendeth his bow to shoot his 
arrows, let them be as cut in pieces. 

8 As a snail %vhich mclteth, let every one ef them 
pass away : like tiie untimely birth of a woman, 
that they may not see the sun. 

y Before your pots can feel tlie thorns, he sliall 
take them away as with a wjiiriwiiid,' liotli living, 
and in his wrath." 

10 Tho righteous shall rejoice when he scelh the 
vengeance:" he shall wash his feet in the Vilood of 
the wicked.'' 

1 1 So tiiat a man shall say. Verily there is a re- 
wiird ibr* tlie righteous: verily he is a God that 
judgetli in the earth.' 

PSALM LIX. 

1 David prayeth to be delivered from his enemies. 6 Ho complaineth 
of their cruelty. 8 He trusteth in G-od. 11 He prayeth against 
them. 16 He praiscth God. 

•[ To tlic chief Musici.-in, Al-t!ischifh, Michtam of David ; J 
when Satil sent, and they watched tlie house to kill hiiu." 

DELIVER me from mine enemies,' O my God : 
defend me* from them that rise up against 
me. 

2 Deliver mc from the workers of iniquity, and 
save me from bloody men.'" 

3 For lo, they lie in wait for my soul : the mighty 
are gathered against me; not /or my transgres- 
sion, nov for my sin, Loud." 

11:17,18. l>Psa.68:23. t Hcb./™i< o/; Isa. 3:10. il'sa.9:16. 1 Psa. 57, 
title, k 1 Sam. 19:11, etc. I Psa. 18:48. i Utb. set me on high, m Psa. 
139:19. m Sam. ai:ll, 17. 



7. T7icm ; the arrows, ^.fcw; hi /Pieces; broken, or blunted, 
so that they can do no execution. 

8. WItich mclteth ; probably an allusion to the slime se- 
creted from its own body which the snail leaves in its path. 

9. Feet the thorns; feel their heat. Kindling a lire of 
thorns under their pots is a figure for plotting wicked 
schemes, which God will carry away as with a tempest, 
before their accomplishment. Shall take them nuay; shall 
sweep away the thorns with a tempest, as the original 
word implies, and thus put an end, so to speak, to the 
cooking of their mischievous plots. Both living, and iti his. 
wrath; tlio literal meaning of the original, as expressed 
in the margin, seems to be that God's wrath will take 
away tho thorns while yet living, that is. yet green and 
luiburned, before the pots have felt the heat from their 
flame. Others prefer to render, Whether raw, or cooked ; 
in other words, whether their schemes are immature, or 
now complete and ripening to accomplishment. 

10. U'a.sh his feet in the blood of the wicked; in token of 
trinmi>li. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. No iniquity is more liatcful than that which is prac- 
tised under the cover of law. 

3. Wen are from the beginning of their moral existence 
]irone to evil as the sparks to fly upward, or tho waters 
to run downward. 

9. The destruction of tho ungodly will be sudden and 
complete; they will be taken away in the midst of their 
wicked plans. 

PS.VBM LIX. 

Title, when Said sent; sec I Sam. 19:11. 
3. Not for my transgression ; the opposition of the wicked 
to him was not caused by his sins against them. 



iJavid's prayer 



PSALM LX. 



for delivcrimce. 



4 Tlicy run and prepare themselves without my 
fault: awake to lielp" nie, and behold. 

5 Thou therefore, Lord (Jod of hosts, the God 
of Israel, awake to visit all the heathen: be not 
merciful to any wicked transgressors. Selali. 

G They return at evening: they make a noise 
like a dog, and go round about the city. 

7 Behold, they belch out with their mouth: swords 
arc in their lips:'' for who, so;/ they, doth hear? 

8 Dut thou, Loiui, shalt laugh at them;'' thou 
shall have all the heathen in derision. 

9 Ikcause of his strength will I wait upon thee : 
lor God is my defence.* 

10 The God of my mercy shall prevent me:'' 
God shall let me see my desire upon mine enemies.* 

11 Slay them not,"* lest my people forget: scat- 
ter them by thy power; and bring them down, 
]jord our shield. 

12 For the sin of their month and the Avords of 
their lips let them even be taken in their jn-ide: 
and for cursing and lying irhich they speak.' 

13 Consume them in wrath, consume them, that 
they may not he: and let them know that God rul- 
cth in Jacob unto the ends of the earth.' Sclah. 

14 And at evening let them return ; and let them 
make a noise like a dog, and go round about the 
city. 

15 Lot them wander up and down for meat,' and 
grudge if they be not satislied." 

10 15ut I will sing of thy power; yea, I will sing 
aloud of thy mercy in the morning: for thou hast 
been my defence and refuge in the day of my 
trouble."^ 



•Hcb.meel. aProv.I2:l8. bPsa,.2:4. 1 Heh. high place. cPsa.21:3. 
1 Uelj. observers; Psa. 56:2. d Gen. 4:12, 15; Rev. 9:6. e Prov. 12:13. 
f psa. 46:10, 11. « Heb. 10 raJ; Isa. 05: 13. I Or, if Ihei/ be not satisfied, 
tlien they will stay al! night. S Psa. 30:5. h Psa. 18:1. i Psa. 80, title. 



4. ney run ; that is, run upon me as enemies. 

5. Tlie heathen ; the enemies of God and his people. 

6. This verse, in the original, is the same as the four- 
teenth, word for word; and may, like it, be considered as 
either a prediction or a prayer. Return; hke hungry dogs 
th;i t have taken no prey. Make a noise ; howl from hunger. 
Go round about the city ; in search of food. 

9. Because of his strength; because of the strength of my 
enemy, who seeks my life. 

10. Prevent me; go before me and give me the victory 
over all my foes. 

1 1. Slay tliem not; but preserve them in such a way as 
to bo a warning to all others against continuing iu sin. 

1 2. Taken ; as by a net. 

Ki. In Jamb; among his people. 

14. See verse six. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. However numerous or mighty their enemies, God will 
protect his people, and eventually deliver them from all 
barm. 

7. The wicked often flatter themselves that no one takes 
notice of their transgressions, or will call them to account 
for their sins. But there is nothing covered that shall 
not be revealed, neither is there any thing hid, which is 
not seen, and shall not be made known. 

1 1. The condition of the wicked in this world is often a 
standing monument of their transgressions, and of the 
anger of God against them. 

\'A. God ruleth in all places throughout the earth, and 
especially among his chosen people, and will cause all 
tilings to work for good to those who love him. 

PKALM LX. 

Title. Aram-noharaim .• Hvria of the two rivers : that is, 



17 Unto thee, my strength,'' will I sing: for 
God is my defence, and the God of my raercv. 

PSALM LX. 

1 DaviJ, compl.^ining to God of fornii;r JmlHiiiont, A now, upon better 
hope, prayclh for deliverance. G Coiiirortiiiir liijii.self in (jud's prom- 
ises, he cravetli that help whereon he trnsLeth. 

*\ To tlie chief Musician upon Shu.'ihan-ednth,' Michtaml of 
David, to teach; when he strove with Arani-naharaim and 
witli Aram-zobah, when Joab returned, and smote of Edum 
ill the vallry of salt twelve thousand. J 

OGOD, tlion hast cast us off," thou hast scat- 
tered" us, thou hast been displeased; O turn 
thyself to us again.' 

2 Tluni hast made the earth to tremble ; thou 
hast broken it: heal the breaches thereof;"' for it 
shake til. 

fi Thou hast showed thy people hard things:" 
thou hast made us to drink the wine of astonish- 
ment." 

4 Thou hast given a banner to them that fear 
thee,'' that it may be displayed because of the truth. 
.Selah. 

5 That thy beloved may bo d(.'livcred : '■ save with 
thy right hand, and hear me. 

6 God hath spoken in his holiness; I will re- 
joice: I will divide Shechem, and mete out the 
valley of Succoth. 

7 Gilead w mine, and Manassehi.9 mine; E{)hra- 
im also is the strength of my head ; Judah is my 
lawgiver ; 

8 Moab is my washpot; over Edoin will I cast 
out my shoe: Philistia, triumph thou because of 
me.* 



T Or, A golden Psalm, i 2 Sam. 8:3-13; 1 Chron. 18:3-12. k Psa. 44:9. 
• Hel). broken. 1 Lam. 3:31, 32; Zeoh. 10:6. m 2 Chron. 7:14; .Icr. 30:17. 
n Psa. 71:20. o Isa. 51:17, 22. P Song 2:4. q Psa. 108:0, etc. t Or, ovn 
me: (by an irony.) 



Mesopotamia. Aram-zobah; that is, Syria Zobah. This 
country probably lay north-east of Damascus, on the west 
side of the Euphrates. Returned; from the expedition 
against Syria. Of Edom in the valley of salt ; probably the 
valley at the south end of the Dead sea, which is at the 
present day bordered on the west by a salt mountain. For 
the events referred to in this title, see notes on 1 Chron. 
1S:12. Compare also 2 Sam. 8:11-14. 

1. Thou liast cast us off ; the first three venscs of the psalm 
refer to the period before the victories celebrated in the 
remaining verses. 

3. 77io« liast showed thy people liard things; aiBictions, 
especially reverses in war. Drink the wine of astonish- 
ment; wine that produces giddiness and reeling; a fre- 
quent scriptural metaphor to express the amazement and 
perplexity produced by God's heavy judgments. Jer. 
25:15, 16, 27. 

4. A banner; as a signal and pledge of God's presence. 
The allusion is to a military standard elevated on the top 
of a mountain as a rallying point in time of war. Here 
God himself furnishes the baimer, and thus pledges his 
presence and help. 

6. Shechem — Succoth; two places of the land of Israel, 
the former on the west side of Jordan, the latter on the 
east. They stand here as representatives of all the cities 
of Israel. 

7. Gilcud — Manassch — Ephraim; three regions put to 
represent the whole land which should be subjected to 
David's power. Tlw strength of my head; my helmet, that 
is, my defence. Mi/ lawgiver; the seat of my kingdom. 
Gen. 49 : 10. 

8. My washpot; put to dishonorable service as a con- 
quered people. Cast ovt my shoe; probably ui token of 
possession. 

653 



David triLstcth 



rSALM LXTII. 



God's 



pro?mses. 



9 Who will brino' me itito tho strong city?' who 
will lead iiic into Edoiii? 

10 (17// not thou. Oddd, «•//(>■/( hadstra«tusoiT? and 
t/i(iii. () God, ir/iic/i did^t not iro out willi our aruiics? 

1 1 Give us iiclp I'roui trouble : Ibr vain wtlic hcl])* 
of man. 

12 Throuujh God wp sliall do valiantly: for he 
it is that shall tread down our enemies.'' 

PSALM LXI. 

1 David flecth to God upon his former experience. 4 He voweth per- 
petual service unfo him, because of iiis promises. 
•I To the cliief Miisicinn upon Xeginali, A Psalm of David. 

nK\ H my cry, God ; attend unto my ])rayer. 
2 From the end of the earth will I cry unto 
thee, when my heart is overwhelmed : '' lead me to 
the rock that is higher than I. 

3 For thou hast been a shelter for me, tnid a 
strong tower from the enemy."' 

4 I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever: I will 
trust' in tlic covert of thy wings. Selah. 

5 For thou, God, hast heard my vows: thouhast 
given me the heritage of those that fear thy name. 

6 Thou wilt prolong the king's life:^ and his 
years as many generations.' 

7 He shall abide before God for ever: Oh pre- 
pare mercy and truth,'' which may preserve him. 

8 So will I sing praise unto thy name for ever, 
that I may daily perform my vows. 

PSALM LXII. 

1 David professing his confidence in Crod disconni^etfi his enemies. -J 
In the same contidence he encourageth tiie godly. 1) No trust is to be 
put in worldly things. 11 Power and mercy belong to God. 
^ To the chief Musician, to Jeduthun,'' A Psalm of David. 

TRULY ^ my soul waiteth' n\)on God : from him 
Cometh my salvation. 



• Hub. citi, of sircngl/i. t Hcb. salvation, a lsa. &:3. 1> I<a. 5-1:11. 
c Prov. IS: HI. I Or, malie mi/ refuge. 6 Heb. .^halt add days to the days of 
the kin?. \ Ueh. neneralion and'generation. d I'sa, 4:!:3. e 1 Chr. a5:l, 1 
^0r, Only. • Ilcb. i.< ,v7f/i(,- l's.^. (W:! . 1 Hi-.h. hif:h place. fl'sa.3T:*l; 



9. The slronf; city; Petra, the capital of Edom. 
12. Tread down our enemies ; enalilc us to overcome tlicm. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Trials are tlic consequences of sin, and should lead 
us to self-examination, repentance, and hearty turning unto 
the Lord. 

3. Even the people of God, if they sin against him, arc 
often visited with great and sore troubles, from which 
nothing but liis grace can deliver them. 

7. Jehovah is king overall, and the rightful proprietor 
of all the kingdoms and nations of the earth, 

11. (lod is the onl}' cU'eetual helper in trouble, and to 
him alone men should look as their deliverer. 

PSALM LXL 

2. From the end of the earth; this psalm was probably 
written wlicn David was an e.\ile from tho sanctuary. 
Separation from (iod's presence scorned to him like ban- 
ishment to the ends of tho earth. 

3. A Mron^ lower; place and means of defence. 

4. I will abide in thij lahcrnaele; or, lot me abide in thy 
tabernacle. To abide in (iod's tabernacle is to bo admitted 
to communion with liim as a member of his household. 
Of this the visible tabernacle sorvico was a sign and a 
jjlodge. Koo notes (o I'sa, i'f.l; 27:4. 

5. The heritage of those that fear thy name ; tho presence 
and V>lessing of God. 

7, He shall abide l)efore God for cm ; probably ai\ allusion 
to the promise made by God to David through Nathan: 
"Thy house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever 
before thee." 2 Sam. 7:11). 

■s. My vown; his cngagemouts to servo tho Lord. 
CM 



2 ile only is my rock and my salvation ; he is 
my defence;* 1 siiall not be greatly moved.' 

8 How long will ye imagine misehief against a 
man? ye shall be slain all of you: as a bowing 
wall shall ye he, and as a tottering fence. 

4 Tiiey only consult to cast him down from his 
excellency: they delight in lies: tliey bless witii 
their mouth, but they curse inwardly.' Selah. 

5 My soul, wait thou only upon God; for my 
expectation is from him. 

6 He only is my rock and my salvation: /le is 
my defence; I shall not be moved. 

7 In God is my salvation and my glory : the rock 
of my strength, and my refuge, is in God. 

8 Trust in him at all times ; ye people, pour out 
your heart before him:'' God is a refuge for us. 
Selah. 

'.• Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men 
of high degree are a lie : to be laid in the balance, 
they are altogether^ lighter than vanity. 

10 Trust not in oppression, and become not vain 
in robbery : if riches increase, set not your heart 
iipon them. 

11 God hath spoken once; twice have I heard 
this; that power' belongeth unto God." 

12 Also unto thee, Lord, helongcth mCTcy: for 
thou rendcrest to every man according to his work.' 

PSALM LXIll. 

1 David's thirst for God, 4 His manner of blessing God. 9 His con- 
fidence of his enemies' destruction, and his own safety, 

\\ A Tsalm of David, when he \v;ls in the wilderness of Jud.tli.' 

OG OU, thou art my God ; early will I seek thee: '^ 
my soul thirstcth for thee,' my flesh longeth for 
thee in a dry and thirsty'' land, where no water is ;' 



Mic. 


'■». 


IHeb. 


in their 


inward parts 


K 


1 Sam. 1 


la 


SOr 


altk 




lOt. 




'Ih, 


h Rev. 


19:1. 


2 Cor. 3:10. 


> 


Sam. 2:, 


■■^\ 


U:);H 


-Hi. 


k 


I'rov. 


S:l- 


Son 


"3:1-1. 


U'sa. 


4-.>:a; John 7 


37. 


1 Heb. 


ceary. ' 


Ueb. 




ilhoul 


tt'ale 


r; ]s 


». 41:17 





















INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. God is a sure refuge, in all times of trouble, to those 
who pray to and put their trust in him. 

5. God witnesses the engagements and liears the sup- 
plications of his people, and none trulj' seek him in vain. 

7. However great or long continued their trials, the 
people of God are ripening for lieavon and preparing tji 
dwell with him for ever, 

I'S.VL.M LXn. 

Title, to Jcdathun ; or, over Jcduthim; that is, over Icic 
company of singers beltuiging to his family. 

4. Tliey; the wicked who persecuted David. His excel- 
lency; his kingly dignity. 

3. A lie; given to deception, they cannot bo trusted in. 
To be laid in the balance; the meaning is, that if they be 
weighed in the balances of truth, they will be fovuid lighter 
than vanity. 

11. That power; to raise up, or cast down 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. To wait upon God by ])rayer and supplication, sub- 
mission to his will, and devotion to his service, is tho way 
to experience his salvation. 

5. Expectations from men will be disappointed, while ex- 
pectations from God will be abundantly more than realizcil. 

10. Riches, when idolized, become a curso to tho pos- 
sessor. 

PS.VLM LXIH. 

Title, in the wdtlernes.i if Judah ; this wilderness lay 
along the eastern border of .ludah. 

1. A dry and thirsty land : at a distance from the tabor- 



Prayer for ddiirranu. 



PSALM LXV. 



Blessedness of Gcd's chosen. 



2 To see thy power and thy ghiry," so as I liavc 
seen thee in the sanctuary.'' 

3 Because (hy lovinsy-kindncss is better tlian life," 
my lips shall praise thee. 

4 Tlius will I bless thee while I live : I will lift 
up my hands in thy name. 

5 My soul shall bo satisfied as irith marrow* and 
fatness;'' and mv mouth shall praise <//«> with joy- 
ful lips: 

6 When I remember thee upon my bed," and med- 
itate on theo in the night watches. 

7 Because thou hast been my help, therefore in 
the shadow of thy wing's will I rejoice. 

8 My soul followeth hard after thee: thy right 
hand upholdetli me.' 

9 But those that seek my soul, to destroy it, shall 
go into the lower parts of the earth. 

10 Tlicy shall fall by the sword:' they shall be 
a portion for foxes.''' 

1 1 But the king shall rejoice in God ; every one 
that sweareth by him shall glory :'' but the mouth 
of them that speak lies shall )jc stopped. 

PSALM LXIV. 

1 David prayetli for deliverance, complaining of his enemies. 7 He 
promisetli himself to see such an evident destruction of ins enemies, as 
the righteous shall rejoice at it. 

^ To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. 

HEAR my voice, O God, in my prayer : pre- 
serve my life from fear of the enemy. 

2 Hide me from the secret counsel of the wicked ; ' 
from the insurrection of the workers of iniquity : 

3 Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend 
their hows to shoot their arrows, even bitter words :' 

4 Tliat they may shoot in secret at the perfect ; 
suddenly do they shoot at him, and fear not. 

5 Thevencourage themselves zft an evil matter:"" 



»Psa. 27:4. b Psi. 64:-), n ; 


I«a.OO:l:J. c Psa. 3U:5; 1 John 3:2. • Heb. 


fatness. J Song 1:4. e Song 5 
like water by the hands of the s 


•I. f Psa. 18:.35. t Heb. make him run out 


word, s Song 2:15. h Isa. 6.5:16. Gen. 


49:6. JJer. 9:3. 1 Or, .•ipirerA. 


k Prov. 1:11-13. « Heb. to hide. II Or, we 



nacle and ordinances of Uod. The moaning of tlie p.salm- 
ist is, that separation from the place where God manifests 
his presence is to his soul what a dry and thirsty wilder- 
ness is to the body. 

4. Lft up my hands; the attitude of prayer. 

5. Be satisfied ; with communion with thee, as the all- 
satisfying portion of ray soul. 

10. A portion for foxes; the Hebrew includes, under one 
word, foxes and jackals. Jackals are numerous in Palestine, 
and prey on dead bodies. To be a portion for jackals, 
is to be left unburied on the battle-field as the food of 
jackals. 

11. The king; David. Sweareth hy him; by the name of 
God, as a sign of allegiance to him. Shall glory; ghn-y in 
the salvation that God bestows upon him. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. To be deprived of the privileges of the sanctuary is 
a great calamity, and one which is severely felt by all who 
love God. 

0. No joys are so elevated, pure, and satisfying as those 
whicii spring from tlie service and enjoyment of God. 

9. Tlie peuple of God are his peculiar treasure, and those 
who seek to destroy them will themselves be destroyed. 

II. Lying loDgues shall be put to silence, and none but 
the lovers of truth and righteousness shall inherit the 
divine favor. 

PSALM LXIV. 

4. Shoot at htm; speak violent and l)itter words against him. 



they commune of laying snares privily ;5 they say, 
Who shall see them? 

G They search out iniipiities; they accomplish a 
diligent search :" both tlu; inward thought of every 
one of them, and the heart, is deep. 

7 But God shall shoot at them vrilh an arrow; 
suddenly shall they be wounded.'' 

8 So they shall make their own tongue to fall 
upon tiiemselves : all that see them shall flee away. 

9 And all men shall fear, and shall declare the 
work of God ; for they shall wisely consider of 
his doing. 

10 Tlie righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and 
shall trust in him; and all the upright in heart 
shall glory. 

PSALM LXV. 

1 David praiseth God for his grace. 4 The blessedness of God's chosen 
by reason of benefits. 

^ To the chief Musician, A Psalm and Song of David. 

T3RAISE waiteth* for thee, God, in Zion: 
X and unto thoc shall the vow be performed. 

2 thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all 
flesh come. 

3 Iniquities^ prevail against me : as for our trans- 
gressions, thou shalt purge them away.' 

4 Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and 
causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell 
in thy courts : Ave shall be satisfied with the good- 
ness of thy house, even of thy holy temjile.'" 

5 By terrible things in righteousness wilt thou 
answer us," C!od of our salvation; itho art the 
confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of 
them that are afar ofl' upon the sea : 

6 Which by his strength setteth fast the moun- 
tains ; being girded with power : 

are consumed by that irlnrh they have thoroughly searched; Heb. a search 
searrJied. t Heb. tlieir traund shall be. • Heb. is silent; Psa. 62:1. t Heb. 
Words, oc Matters of iniquities, lljohnl:?, 9. m Psa. 63:5. n Psa. 45:4. 



6. They search oid iniquities; devise wicked plans. 

8. TIteir own tongue; their bitter words. 

9. Shall fear; fear the judgments of God. 

10. S/iail glory; glory or rejoice in God, who has deliv- 
ered them. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. The wicked encourage each other in sin, and flatter 
themselves and one another that their evil deeds will never 
be brought to light. 

8. The evils which the wicked seek to bring upon the 
righteous often fall upon themselves. 

10. Uprightness of heart is essential to joy in a holy (Jod. 

PSALM LXV. 

Title, A Psalm and So-ng ; or, " A Psalm, a Song ;" that is. 
a psalm which is also a song of praise. See the general 
introduction to the book. This psalm is properly named ;i 
song, for it celebrates God's majesty, greatness, and for- 
giving love; especially his goodness, as manifested in the 
gift of "rain from heaven and fruitful seasons." 

2. Shall all flesh come ; all flesh is dependent on God i'or 
life and breath and all things; and shall come to God in 
prayer, in the day when all nations shall be enlighteneil by 
his word and vSpirit. 

3. Purge them away; forgive their sins and purify their 
souls through the great atonement. 

5. Terrible things; those which God accomplishes for 
ilie desti-uction of his enemies and the salvation of l:i^ 
peopi,.. 

(.5.5 



r raise fur God's goodness. 



PSALM LXVII. 



Fraycr for Ms kingdom. 



I "Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise 
of their waves," and the tiiniult of tlie people. 

8 Tliey also that ihvcll in the uttermost parts 
arc afraid ut thy tokens: thou makost the outgo- 
ings of the morning and evening to rejoice.* 

9 Thou visitest the earth, and watei-est it :* thou 
greatly cnrichcst it with tlic river of God, which 
is full of water: thou jtreparcst them corn, when 
thou hast so provided lor it. 

10 Thou watercst the ridges thereof abundantly, 
thou selllest' the furrows thereof: thou makcst it 
soft* with showers, thou blessest the springing 
thereof. 

I I Thou crownest the year with' thy goodness ; 
and thy jiaths drop fatness. 

12 They drop upon the pastures of the wilder- 
ness: and the little hills rcyoice on every side."" 

13 The pastures arc clothed with flocks ; the val- 
leys also are covered over with corn ; they shout 
for joy, tliey also sing.'' 

PSALM LXYI. 

1 David exhorteth to praise God, to observe his great works, 8 to bless 
him for his firacious benefits. VI He voweth for himself relijjious 
aervice to Go3. 16 He dcclareth God's special goodness to himself. 
^ To the chief Musician, A Song or Psalm. 

MAKE a joyfid noise unto God, all ye lands:" 
2 Sing forth the honor of his name: make 
his praise glorious. 

3 Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy 
works! through the greatness of thy power shall 
thine enemies submit them.selves* unto thee. 

4 All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing 
unto thee ; they shall sing to thy name. Selali. 

5 Come and sec the works of God : he is terri- 
ble in his doing toward the children of men. 

lie turned the sea into dry hind:' they went 
through the flood on foot : thcrcdid wcrejoiceinhim. 



• girded with Joy. 



Heb. iJie carlh. t Ileb. lie, or y«W 



8. Till) tokem ; the eigne of Uod's presence and almighty 
l)Owcr in nature. 

9. Tlie river of Goil ; God's incxhanstiWp store of waters, 
from which he sends upon the earth refrcsliing showers. 

U. Tliij pnllis drop fulness; tliat is, wherever thoti gocst 
thou scatterest fatness around thee. KatiKSS stands here, 
as often elsewhere, for a rich abinidance of the best gifts. 

12. T/icij drop; dro[i fatness. Hut wc may render more 
literally, '■ the pastures of the wilderness drop," that is, 
with fatness, in coiisequcnco of God'.s visit to them. 

INSTIUTCTIONP. 

i. No Hcssodnrss is so great as that wliicli results from 
heing chosen of l!od to salvation, through the sanctifica- 
lion of the Spirit, and belief of his truth. 

7. find rules in the kingdoms of nature and of provi- 
dence, as well ag of grace, and controls all things accord- 
ing to the wise and good counsels of his own perfect will. 

9. All the blessings of this life come from (iod, and are 
the fruit of his kindness, mercy, and grace to the children 
of nien. 

13. All the works of find praise him, and his saints bless 
him for the mercies of this life and of that which is to cnme. 

PSALM LXVI. 
Ill this psalm the writer takes occasion, from a personal 
deliverance vouehsafeil to him by (iod — or. as some think. 
II ilnliveranco granted to llod's people, in whose n.ime he 
spi'aks — to celebrate the wonderful dealings of (lod with 
his covenant people in all past ages. 



7 He ruleth by his power for ever ; his eyes 
behold the nations : let not the rebellious exalt 
tlieinselves. Sclah. 

8 Oh bless our God, ye people, and make the 
voice of his praise to be heard : 

y Which holdeth' our soul in life, and sulfcreth 
not our feet to be moved. 

10 For thou, God, hast proved us: thou hast 
tried us, as silver is tried.'' 

11 Thou broughtest us into tlie net:' thou laidst 
affliction upon our loins. 

12 Thou jiast caused men to ride over our heads; 
we went through fire and through water: but thou 
broughtest us out into a wealthy^ p!acc. 

115 1 will go into thy house with burnt-otVcrings : 
I will jiay tliee my vows, 

14 AViiich my lips have uttered,' and my mouth 
hath s])oken, when I was in trouble. 

15 I will offer unto thee burnt-sacrifices of fat- 
lings,' with the incense of rams: I will offer bul- 
locks witii goats. Selah. 

l(i Come and hear, all ye that fear God. and I 
will declare what he hath done for my soul.' 

17 1 cried nnto him witli my moutli, and he was 
extolled with my tongue. 

18 If 1 regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord 
will not hear me:' 

19 But verily God hath heard me: he bath 
attended to the voice of my prayer. 

20 Blessed be God, which hath not turned away 
my prayer, nor his mercy from me. 

PSALM L X \ 11 . 

1 A praj'cr for the enlargement of God's kingdom, 3 to the jo)' of the 
people, 6 and the increase of God's blessings. 

*| To the chief Musician on Ncginoth, A Psalra or Song. 

^OD be merciful unto us, and bless us j*" and 

" cause his face to shine upon* us;' Selah. 



G 



/tinned obtdimtt; Psn. M:15. c Exod. 1-1:21. I Hcb. fuUtlh. i Isa. 
•18:11): ll'ot 1:7. oHos. 7:12. » Hcb. moi'ji. \\\e\>. optntd. 1 Heb. wlor- 
Tow. rPsa. 34;a-ll. ItProT. 29:9. bNuni.(i:25. • Hcb. «n'(A. i Pia. 4:6. 



3. Submit themselves unto tlice; be forced to profess sub- 
jection and obedience to thee. 

6. He turned the sen into dry land ; at the time the chil- 
dren of Israel crossed the Red sea. 

10. Proved vs; by afflictions. 

12. Tlirov!^hfire and through wter; fiery trials and floods 
of temptation. Into a tccalt)i y place ; into circumstances of 
prosperitj'. 

18. Iniffiiily in my heart; such as he was charged ■with, 
or any known sin. 

IN.STRUCTIOXS. 

1. The friends of God arc desirous that all in every 
land may know, acknowledge, praise, and adore him. 

9. The preservation of our bodies and souls is the work 
of God, and the fruit of his kindness ; they should there- 
fore be devoted to his service. 

i:i. Pelivenincp from special troubles calls for special 
thanks<;iving to (iod, and tlic promises which wc made in 
aflliction should be conscientiously fulfilled. 

17. Jehovah is a God who hears praj'cr, .and supplica- 
tions offered to him in spirit and in truth will be abun- 
dantly answered. 

PSALM LXA'IT. 

Tliis psalm brcatlies tliroiighout the true missionary spir- 
it. The psalmist, in the exercise of lively faith and ardent 
love, anticipates the conversion of all nations to God. and 
calls npon them all to praise him for his gracious giiiilance. 

1. (';i/o ui; that is. unto us his covenant people; for it 



David's prayer at the 



PSALM LXVIII. 



removing of the ar!;. 



2 That thy ^ray may be known upon oarth, tliy 
saving licalth aniouu' all nations.'' 

3 Let the people praise thee, God ; let all the 
people praise thee. 

4 Oh let the nations be glad and sing for joy: 
for thou slialt judge the peo])le righteously, and 
govern* the nations upon earth. Selah. 

5 Let the people praise thee, God; let all the 
people praise thee. 

G Then shall the earth yield lier increase ; and 
God, even our own God, shall bless us.'' 

7 God shall bless us; and all the ends of the 
earth shall fear him.'-' 



PSALM LXVIIL 



1 A prayer at the 
CroO for his meri 



rk. 4 An exliortatinn to pr; 
of the church, 19 for his -i 



51 To tlie chiuf Musician, A Pealra or Song of David. 

IET God arise, let his enemies be scattered:'' 
J let them also that hate him flee before him.* 

2 As smoke is driven away, so drive them away :' 
as wax melteth before the fire, so let the wicked 
perish at the presence of God.' 

3 But let the righteous be glad; let them re- 
joice before God:^ yea, let them exceedingly 
rejoice.* 



Milt. 2S: 10. • l\eh. lend, b L.v 'Ji I ; Ezpk. 3J:-J 
sa. •2J:t>7. J Num. lll;35; Isa. 3:):3. t Heb ;ro»i /i» / 
r.c. 1:4. g 1 Thess. 5:10. I Heb. rejoin willi gladne. 



s. -I.-IX, a-2. 
r Hos. I3::3. 
Jer. 49:11. 



is fi'om Zion, as blessed by Jehovah, that salvation is to 
go fortli to all the gentile nations. Isa. 2:3; 25:6. 

2. Thy way; thy way of salvation, in which all thy glo- 
rious attributes are manifested. 

3. Let the people praise thee ; " all nations " spoken of in 
the preceding verse. This is the efi'ect of their knowing 
God's salvation. 

4. Govern the natiems; rather, as in the margin, lead the 
nations, that is, into the way of salvation. 

6. Shall bless us; with all needed temporal and spiritual 
good. 

7. All the ends of the earth shall fear him ; the effect of 
God's blessing his own people. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The light of God's countenance and the joys of his 
salvation, when granted to his people, tend to spread the 
knowledge of his name and lead all to ])raise him. 

4. The government of God is a subject of great joy to 
his people, and they earnestly desire that all the nations 
of the earth should submit themselves to it, and be happy 
under it. 

7. The prophets of the Old Testament were animated by 
the same spirit as the apostles under the New Testament. 
They earnestly desired and prayed for the conversion and 
salvation of all nations ; and they foresaw, with exceeding 
joy, the extension of the knowledge of God over all the 
earth. 

PSALM LXVin. 

The remarkable character of this psalm is best explained 
upon the supposition that it was written to be sung when 
the ark was carried in solemn procession to Jerusalem, 
either upon the occasion of its removal from the house of 
Obed-edom to Zion, 2 Sam. 0: 12-19, or, as some think, at a 
later period, when it was brought back at the head of 
David's victorious army, whom it had accompanied in one 
of his wars. The ark was the divinely appointed symbol 
of God's presence. Its entrance into Jerusalem, in tri- 
umphal procession, naturally recalled to tlie psalmist's 
mind the time when God came down from heaven to de- 
liver his covenaiit-jieople, Exod. 3:7, 8, went before them 
by the way ot Sinai and the Arabian wilderness to the 
42 



4 Sing unto God, sing praises to his name : extol 
liim that ridoth upon the heavens by his name 
JAH, and rejoice before him. 

5 A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the 
widows, is God in his holy habitation." 

C God setteth the solitary in families :' he bring- 
eth out those which are bound with chains:' but 
the rebellions dwell in a dry land. 

7 God, when thou wentcst forth before thy 
people, when thou didst march through the wil- 
derness ; Selah : 

8 The earth shook,* the heavens also dropped at 
the presence of God: even Sinai itself was moved 
at the presence of God, the God of Israel.'' 

9 Thou, O God, didst send a plentiful rain.' 
whereby thou didst confirm thine inheritance,^ 
when it was weary. 

10 Thy congregation hath dwelt therein: thou, 
God, bast prepared of thy goodness for the 
poor.'" 

11 The Lord gave the word : great teas the com- 
pany* of those that published //. 

12 Kings of armies did flee apace :* and she that 
tarried at home divided the spoil. 

13 Though ye have lain among the pots," yet 
shall ye be as the wings of a dove covered with 
silver, and her feathers with yellow gold. 



5 Heb. a /(OKSC i Psa. 107:11'. JHib.3:in. kExod.HI:lC. lUehs/inke 
out. I Deut. 11:11-14. 1 Heb. i(. 0111311.11:5. • Heb. army, t Heb. 
did fee, did flee, n Psa. f-l:lj. 



promised land, overthrew their enemies, and put them in 
possession of it. All this he celebrates in the loftiest 
strains of lyric poetry, with some marked allusions to the 
song of Deborah and Barak ; and, at the close, anticipates 
the day when this mighty God shall receive the homage 
of all nations. 

The writers of the New Testament regard God's descent 
from heaven for the salvation of his ancient people, as a 
prophetic type of the higher salvation which Jesus Christ 
wrought for his people, when he was made flesh and 
dwelt among men. See note to verse 18. 

I. Let God arise ; these are the words employed by Mo- 
ses when the ark set forward. Num. 10:35. They contain 
both a prayer ami a prediction. 

4. Upon the heavens ; rather, through the deserts ; in 
allusion to God's guidance of the covenant people through 
the wilderness of Arabia. Jah ; an abbreviation of the 
word Jehovah. 

C. Setteth the solitary in families; provides a home for the 
desolate and outcast. Dwell in a dry land; where tliey 
are destitute of the comforts which he gives those who 
love and obey him. 

7. Wentest forth before thy people; in bringing them out 
of Egypt. In this and the following verse the sacred 
writer agrees very closely with the words of Deborah and 
Barak's song. Judg. 5:4, 5. 

8. Dropped; as in a storm of thunder and lightning. 

9. A plentiful rain ; most probably an allusion to the 
manna and quails, which are elsewhere described under 
the figure of rain. Psa. 78:24, 27. Thine inheritance ; Israel.. 
as the heritage of God. 

10. Tiierein; in the promised land, to which the Israel- 
ites were brought through God's sustaining power in the 
wilderness. 

II. Gave the word; the word of victory, when Israel took 
possession of Canaan. Those that pvliltshed it ; the female 
singers that celebrated it. Tlie allusion is to the choral 
songs of the Israelitish women with wliich they celebrated 
the victories of God's people. Exod. 15:20; Judg. 11:34; 
iSam. 18:G. 

12. Did flee; the enemies of Israel. 

13. Lam among the pots; wroiniht in brick and mortar 

657 



I' raise to God 



PSALM LXVIH. 



for his great works. 



14 When the Almifjhty scattered kings in it," it 
was* lohilv as snow in Salmon. 

1.') Tlie liiii of God is as the hill of Bashaa; a 
iii'_'h hill as the iiili of Bashan. 

l(j Wliy leap ye, yo higli hills? this is the hill 
which God desireth to dwell in ; yea, the LoUD will 
dwell in it for ever.'' 

17 Tiie chariots of God are twenty thousand, 
njcn tliousands* of angels:"^ the Lord is among 
thcni, as in Sinai, in the holy place. 

15 Tiiou hast ascended on higli, thou hast led 
captivity captive:'' thon hast received gifts for 
men ;'" yea.ybr the rebellious also,"^ that the Lord 
God might dwell among them." 

19 Blessed be tlie Lord, who daily loadeth us with 
benefits, even the God of our salvation. Selah. 

20 //(■ that is our God is the God of salvation ; and 
unto Gni) the Lord belong tiie issues from death.'' 

21 But God shall wound tlie head of his ene- 
mies, and the hairy scalp of such a one as goeth 
on still in his trespasses.' 

22 The Lord said, I will bring again from 
Bashan,J I will In-ing mij people again from the 
depths of the sea:" 

23 That thy foot may be dipped^ in the blood of 
thine enemies,' and the tongue of thy dogs in the 
same. 

24 They have seen thy goings, God ; even the 
goings of my God, my King, in the sanctuary. 

25 The singers went before, the players on in- 



struments _/b//oMTd after;*" among them were the 
damsels playing with timbrels. 

26 Bless ye God in the congregations, evai the 
Lord, from" the fountain of Israel. 

27 There is little Benjamin with their ruler, the 
princes of Judali and their council,' the princes 
of Zebulun. and the princes of Naphtali. 

28 Thy God hath commanded thy strength: 
strengthen, God, that which thou hast wrought 
for us." 

29 Because of thy temple at Jerusalem shall 
kings bring presents unto tiiee. 

30 Rebuke the company of spearmen,* the mul- 
titude of the bulls, with the calves of the people, 
till (very one submit himself with pieces of silver: 
scatter thou* tiie jjcople that delight in war. 

31 Princes shall come out of Egypt;" Ethiopia 
shall soon stretch out lier liaiids unto God.'' 

32 Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of the earth; 
Oh sing praises unto the Lord ; Selah : 

33 To him that ridetli u[)on the heavens of heav- 
ens, which were of old ; lo, he doth send' out his 
voice, and that a mighty voice. 

34 Ascribe ye strength unto God : his excel- 
lency is over Israel, and his strength is in the 
clouds.^ 

35 God, thou art terrible out of thy holy 
places :'' the God of Israel is he that giveth 
strength and power unto his people.'' Blessed be 
God. 



> Jo«h. l'J:l, «tc. * Or^/or her. she wax. b I Kin^n 0::1. t Or. ttuwtf Ifioit. 
ioiirf.i. 'Deut. ;n;2. J Acts I :i-!l; Eph. 4:s I lUb. intli' man. e AiL« 
•J:4, 03. ' 1 Cor. «:9-ll; 1 Tim. I:l;i, 15. « Rev. 41 : i. I> Dent. 32::ln; 
R«T. I:l'j. iH>b.3:l3. J Num. 'Jl ::«. k Exod. I4:-Ji. t Or, rej, 1 I«i. 



in Esypt. But 8omo render the words, " when ye lie down 
aniouj; your folds ;" that is, rest in j)eace, after the con- 
(juest of tlie hind. 

H. Inil; ia the promised land. Wliite as snow ; accord- 
ing to some, the meaning is, that the fields were wliito 
with the hones of Uod's enemies. But the more probahle 
reference is to the s])lcndor of God's jiresence. 

15. The hill of God — lull of liasliui) ; or, as we may ren- 
der, '■ .V hill of Cod is the hill of Bashan; a hill of [lofty) 
peaks is tlio hill of Biushan." A hill of God means a very 
groat and majestic liill. The moaning of the jiHahnist is, 
that though Bashan may excel Zion in outward height and 
splendor, (iod has honored the latter by making it his 
peculiar abode. 

16. Leap yf; or, look askance; from envy at the honor 
conferrtMl oil the liill of Zion. 

. 17. Twenty lltowmiul ; )>ut for a vast multitude. The 
reference is to llio angelic hosts who were iiresent at the 
giving of the law on Sinai. Acts 7:5:1; (iai. 3: !!>. 

18. Reuived i^ifl.i; applied by the apostle Paul to the ascen- 
sion gifts bestowed liy Christ upon his church. Eph. 4:8. 

20. /.HUM,- deliverance. 

22. / If (// hriiit; apiiin ; according to some, I will bring 
my people homo again from their dispersion. But the con- 
nection favors the idea that the reference is rather to 
God's enumii-s, llius: Though they hide themselves from 
me in Bashan, or in the di|iihs of the sea, thence will 1 
brhig tliem, that I may inllict upon them tlie punishment 
of their sins. Compare Amos 9 : 2—1, where a similar (igure 
is used. 

23. Dipped in llie hitml of limit enemies; that they niiglit 
utterly overcome tluiii. 

24. They have .wen; ihy jieople. Tliy poings; in trium- 
phal procession. See the inlroduetory note. In tlie siinc- 
tunry; or, into the sanctuary mi mount Zion. 

2li. From the fountain of UrnH ; ye that ('ome from the 
fountain of Urael, tliat is, Uie descendants of Israel. 
G68 



63.1-0. »> Rev. 15:'i 3. I Or, ye Uiat i 

n Isa. 40:31. " Or, llit btasu of the reeds; 

I»a. I9:IJ-«. P Zepli. 3:IU; AcU S;a7. I H«b. g-itie. » Or, *«. 

q Exod. 13:11. risa. •(J:24. 



I of. 1 Or. with their company. 
Jer. 51:3-2. t Or, he seallereth. 



27. Little Benjamin; the youngest of Jacob's sons, and 
also the smallest of the tribes present at the triumphal 
procession. Judnh — Zelmlun — Naplilali; tribes liy which 
they had been ]>riiicipally delivered, here put to rciiresent 
the whole nation. 

30. The mtiltitude of the bidls, with the calves; the great, 
strong, and powerful ; young and old. 

31. Egypt; Ethiopia; representatives of the heathen 
world, especially .Vfrica. 

33. Heavens of heavens; the highest heavens. 

35. Out of thy holy places; literally, out of thj' sanctua- 
ries. The plural is used here, and in I'sa. 73:17, (in the 
Hebrew,) and Lev. 21:23, in reference to the various 
divisions of the sanctuary. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. Though God delay for a season to appear to his peo- 
]ile, in due time ho will arise and have mercy upon them, 
anil will confound and destroy those who rise up against 
them. 

7. The deliverance of God's people and his mercies to 
them in times |iast, are foretastes and earnests of what he 
will do for them in time to come. 

II. The words of truth and love which God gives to 
his people encnurago them to go forward in duly, putting 
their trust in him and expecting that he will finally give 
them the victory over all their foes. 

i;t. Whatever may have been their former character or 
employment, when made ])art;ikers of divine mercy and 
adorned with the graces of the Holy Spirit, saints become 
beaiililMl and lovely in the eyes of the Lord of hosts and 
of all good beings. 

17. God has multitudes which no man can number, who 
at his call are ready to engage in his cause and fight 
against his foes. 

2:!. Titer destruction is before the wicked ; except they 
re])ent. their ruin will be awful ami sure. 

20. The lieart« of kings and rulers are in the hands of 



The prayer of David 



I'SALM LXIX. 



in his afflidioTi. 



PSALM LXIX, 



1 David complaineth of his alliictiou. 13 He praveth for deli 
2"i He devotetli his enemies U> destruction. 30 He praiseth Crod with 
thanksgiving. 

^ To the chief Miisiciati upnu Shoshaninm/ .1 1'sulm of David. 

S.\.VE me, God ; I'or tlic waters arc come in 
unto my soul. 
2 I sink in deci) mire," where there is no staiid- 
iiiu': I am come into deep* waters, where tlie 
floods overflow me. 

o I am weary of my crying : my throat is dried : 
mine eyes fail while I wait for my God. 

4 They tiiat hate me without a cuuse are more 
tlian the hairs of my head:'' they that would destroy 
me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty : 
then I restored tliat which I took not away. 

5 God, thou kuowest my foolishness ; and my 
fe'ins* are not hid from thee. 

G Let not them that wait on thee, Lord God 
of hosts, be ashamed for my sake : let not those 
that seek thee be confounded for my sake, God 
of Israel. 

7 Because for thy sake I have borne reproach ; 
shame hath covered my face. 

8 I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and 
an alien unto my mother's children.' 

9 For the zeal of thy house hath eaten me up;* 
and the reproaches of them that reproached thee 
are fallen upon me." 

10 When I wept, and chastened my soul with fast- 
ing, that was to my reproach.' 

11 I made sackcloth also my garment: and I 
became a proverb to them. 

12 They that sit in the gate speak against me; 
and I was the song of the drunkards.^ 

13 But as for me, my prayer is unto thee, Lord, 
in an acceptable time i" God, in the multitude of 
thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy salvation.'' 



» Psi. 4.5, title. • Heb. the mire of the depth, t Heb. depth of. b John 
13:-i5. t Heb. g-Ki71in<!,«, ■= John 7:5. d John 2:17. e Rom. 1:5:3. f Psa. 
a3:l.:!,etc. iMeh. drinkers of strong drink, s Isa. 49:8; aCor. 15:2. h Heb. 
5:7. i Isa. 43:1,2. J Psa. 16:10; Acts 2:24, etc. k Psa. S6:1G; Mic. 7:19. 
tneh.makeliastetohearme. iPsa. 22:0,7; Isa.53:3: Heb. 12:2. II Heb. 



the Lord; and when he inclines them, they favor his 
people and become nursing fathers and mothers to his 
church. 

31. The dark and polluted places of the earth, which 
are now full of the habitations of wickedness and cruelty, 
shall one day all be enlightened and purified, and become 
a habitation for God through his Spirit. 

35. The God of salvation to his people will be the God 
of vengeance to those who continue to rebel against him. 
He is a light and glory to those who serve him. but tu his 
persevering enemies a consuming fire. 

P.SALM LXIX. 

This psalm is often quoted in the New Testament, and 
applied to our Saviour. It does not refer exclusively to 
Christ's person, as is manifest from the fifth verse ; but 
rather to the church of God in Christ her Head. It de- 
scribes the great conflict between the kingdom of God 
and the kingdom of Satan. In this conflict Christ, as the 
Head of the church, is the principal sufferer, but each of 
his members also suffers with him. In an especial manner 
were the sufferings of David, the divinely constituted head 
of God's covenant people, typical of Christ's sufferings. 

1. Tlie waters; an emblem of great troubles. Unto my 
soul; so that they are ready to destroy ray life. 

2. In deep mire; distressing aflliction. 

4. More tliaii tlie hairs; very numerous. Then I restored 



11 Deliver me out of the mire, and let inc not 
sink : let me be delivered from Ihem tlnit liale me, 
and out of the deep waters. 

15 Let not the water-flood overflow me,' neither 
let the deep swallow me up, and let not tlie pit 
shut her mouth upon me.J 

IG Hear me, Lord; for thy loving-kiiiilne.-s 
is good: turn unto me according to the iiiullilude 
of thy tender mercies.'' 

17 And hide not thy face from thy servant; for 
I am in trouble: hear me speedily.' 

IS Draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it: 
deliver me because of mine enemies. 

ly Thou hast known my reproach, and my shame, 
and my dishonor :' mine adversaries are all before 
thee. 

20 Reproach hath broken my heart ; and I am 
full of heaviness : and I looked for some to take 
pity,^"' but there was none ; and for comforters, but 
I found none." 

21 They gave me also gall for my meat; and in 
my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink." 

22 Let their table become a snare before them:" 
and that which should have been for their welfare, 
let it become a trap. 

23 Let their eyes be darkened, that they see 
not;'' and make their loins continually to sliako. 

24 Pour out thine indignation upon them, ami 
let thy wrathful anger take hold of them.'' 

25 Let their habitation" be desolate;'* and let 
none dwell* in their tents. 

26 For they persecute' him whom thou hast 
smitten;" and they talk to the grief of those 
whom thou hast wounded.' 

27 Add iniquity^ unto their iniquity: and let 
them not come into thy righteousness. 

28 Let them be blotted out of the book of the 
living, and not be written with the righteous.^ 



lament 


with me. 


■n Isa. (13:5 


„ 


Mark 


14 


.5(1. 


M 


itt. 27:34, 48 


John 


19:29, 


30. p Rom 


11:8-10. 


2 


2ar. 3 


14 


r 


1 The 


s. 2:15 


IS. 


Heb. 


priUire. 


' Matt. 2-3:3:*. t Heb. 


the 


re not be a 


dweller. 


1 Zech. 


1:1.5. 


■J Isa. 


53:4. 


t Heb. thy 


ivounded. 


o 




shment 


of in 


quity; 


Matt. 


23:38. 


IT Rev 


13:8. 





















that which I took not away; this psalm might literally ap- 
ply to David, but more fully in its spiritual meaning to 
Christ. 

6. For my sake; the highest application of these words 
is to Christ. Had he been overcome in the conflict with 
Satan, all the hopes of his followers must have been for 
ever put to shame. In a lower, and yet a true sense, they 
apply to all the faithful servants of God, and more esi)e- 
cially to those who are, like David, intrusted with imjior- 
tant offices in her behalf. 

8. A stranger unto mij brethren; they treated him with 
neglect and scorn. 

9. The zeal of thy home; zeal for the honor of thy house. 
Applied to Jesus Christ, John 2:17. Hath eaten me up; 
consumed me. 

12. Speak against me ; on account of his devotion to God. 

21. T/iey gave me vinegar; sea Matt. 27:34. 

22. Let their table become a snare; the prayer contained in 
this and the six following verses, is also a prophecy of the 
doom that should overtake the incorrigible enemies of 
God's people. It was fulfilled upon David's enemies, such 
as Ahithophel, but it has its highest fulfilment in the case 
of Christ's enemies. Compare Rom. 11:9-10. 

25. See Matt. 23:38. 

27. Add iniquity; punishment. Come into thy righteous- 
ness; be numbered among the righteous, or share in the 
blessings of their salvation. 

659 



Conflict of the Idngdom 



PSALM LXXr. 



of Christ and of Satnv. 



29 But I am poor and sorrowful : let thy s^alva- 
tion, O God, set me upon liigli. 

30 I will [)rai:;i> the name of Ood with a song, 
and will nuiirnily him witii thanksgiving. 

31 T/iis also shall please tlu; Loud better than 
an ox m- bulloek tliat hath horns and hoofs. 

32 The huniijle* shall see Mw, mid be glad : and 
your heart shall live that seek God. 

" 33 For the Lonn heareth the poor, and despis- 
eth not his ]irisouers. 

3-1 Let the heaven and earth jiraise him, tlie seas, 
and every thing that nioveth' tlierein. 

35 For God will save Zion, and will build the 
cities of Judah," that they may dwell there, and 
have it in possession. 

36 Tiic seed al.so of his servants shall inherit it: 
and they that love his name shall dwell therein.'' 

PSALM LXX. 

DaviJ soliciteth God to the speedy destruction of tlie wicked, and pros- 

erv;ition of the godly. 

•" To the chief Musician, .1 Psalm of DaviJ, to brins to rc- 

mcml)rancc.<: 

~\/r.lKE haste, God, to deliver me;'' make 
^yj_ haste to helj) me,' Loup. 

2 Let them l)e ashamed and confounded that seek 
after my soul : let them be turned backward, and 
put to confusion, that desire my liurt. 

3 Let them be turned back for a reward of their 
shame that say. Aha, aha. 

4 Let all those that seek thee*^ rejoice and be 
glad in thee:' and let sueli as love thy salvation 
say continually, Let God be magnified. 

5 But I am poor and needy; make haste unto 



• Or, rtutk. t Hcb. mrprlli. a Ezok. OCrK. .30. I> .lohn 11:2:): Rev, 
21:47. cp«. Ssiillo. <l I'«i. JO: 13-17. 1 Hcb. my AW;). • Lain. :i:'i). 
( I'll. 97:12; lu. G1:IU. f I'lia. HI :l-.3. liP«a.M:l5. » Hcb. (o me /or o 



32. The humhle shall see this, and be glad; the cause of 
Christ is tlic cause of the hiimlile ; tlicy sympathize with 
him ill liis sufferings, ami rejoice with him in liis trinniphs. 

Z5. God wUl save Zion; tlie deliverance of ('liiist, wlio 
is tlie cliief subject of this i)a;ilni, incluilos in itself the 
Uelivoraiico of Zion also ; that is, his church universal. 

INSTRUCTION'S. 

1. In the Krcat cnnllict between Christ and Satan, all the 
true members of Christ's body have a ]>art. Tliey cannot 
rcicn with him till tlioy have suffered with him. AVlien 
for his sake they sink in dcei> waters, they will, in imitii- 
tioii of liis exaiii]ile, earnestly cry to (led for hclj), and 
wait upon him till ho is pleased to appear for their sal- 
vation. 

fi. The people of (!od arc anxious not to dishonor him, 
or bo the occasion of injury to their fellow-men, especially 
to sueli as love his salvation. 

9. (rod is very dear to his people, and lends them to 
show much zeal, make <;reat sacrifices, and perform niimer- 
oug labors to promote his honor. 

12. Piety and (Ininkeiiness are in direct opposition to 
each other, and as one prevails the other will be done 
away. 

21. The miniitoness with which the treatment of the 
Saviour was foretold in the Old Testament, and the exact 
fulfilment of the ilesrriptioii in him, is proof that it was 
piven by inspiration, and that holy men of old wrote and 
spoke as they wen? directed by tlie Holy (!liost. 

;il. The offerings of the heart, as manifested in prayer 
anil praise, are more precious in the sinht of (Jml than 
any external service, and are essential tn true religion. 

33. Tho dclivcraneo of Christ in the hour of his trial, is 

660 



me, God : thou art my help and my deliverer 
Lord, make no tarrving. 



PSAL.M L.XXI. 

1 David, in confidence of faith, and experience of God's favor, prayeth 
both for himself, and against the enemies of his soul. 14 He prom- 



eth constincy. 17 He prayetli for perseverance. 19 He praiseth 
God. and proinisctll to do it cheerfully. 

IN thee, Lord, do I put my trust :*'' let me never 
be jiut to confusion. 

2 Deliver me in thy rightcou.sness, and cause me 
to escape : incline thine ear unto me, and save me.'' 

3 Be thou my strong habitation,^ ^hereunto I 
may continually resort:' thou liast given com- 
mandment to save me; for tiiou art my rock and 
my fortress. 

4 Deliver me, my God, out of the hand of the 
wicked, out of the hand of the unrighteous and 
cruel man. 

f) For thou art my hope, Lord God : thou art 
my trust from my youth .J 

(5 By thee have I been liolden up from the womb:" 
thou art he that took me out of my mother's bow- 
els: my praise shall be continually of thee.' 

7 I am as a wonder mito many;'" but thou art 
my strong refuge. 

8 Lot my mouth be filled with thy jiraise and 
with thy honor all the day. 

9 Cast me not ofl' in the time of old age; for- 
■sake me not when my strength faileth. 

10 For mine enemies speak against me ; and they 
tliat lay wait' for my soul take counsel together," 

11 Saying, God iialh forsaken him: persecute 
and take him ; for t/iere is none to deliver him. 



rack of hnhilation. i Prov. 18:10. i Jer. 17:7, 17. k Psa. •>>■.% 1(1; Isl. 
■10:3,4. 1 I'sa. 14J:1,2. niZeoh.3:3. I UA. waldi, m observe. ° 2 Sam. 
17:1, etc.; Matt. 27:1. 



a pledge of tho deliverance of all who put their trust in 
him. Since he was victorious over Satan, none of his 
true disciples can fail of victory. He conquered the pow- 
ers of hell for himself, and for all his followers. 

PSALM LXX. 

See notes to Psalm 40:13-17, with which this psalm 
sulistantially agrees. 

3. Aim ; an expression of contemptuous exultation. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Tho end of all who persist in persecuting God's ser- 
vants, shall be " shame and everlasting contempt." But 
they who seek God in sincerity and truth shall be, through 
gnice, rewarded with everlasting glory and blessedness. 

5. The iinworthiness and poverty of sinners forms no 
barrier against their acceptance with (!od: when their 
w.ints are duly felt, and they apjily to God for help, he is 
glorifieil in bestowing it upon them. 

PSALM LXXI. 

In its general character, this psalm agrees with Ps.tlms 
22. 40, «y, and is to be interpreted upon the same princi- 
ples. 

7. I nm as a wonder unto mnnii ; an object of astonish- 
ment from tho intensity of my siilTeringa. These words 
were strikingly fulfilled in the person of our Lord, the 
great Head of the church. Isa. ;>2:M. They are fulfilled 
also ill each of his members, according to the measiiro of 
"the aliliclioiis of Christ," which God lias appointed him 
to "fill up." Coh 1:24. 

11. (iod hath forsaken him; this they concluded from his 
distresses. 



David^s confidence of faith. 



PSALM LXXII. 



Glory of Christ's kingihm. 



12 Gorl, l)C not far from mc: my God, make 
luisto for my liclp. 

18 Let them be confounded and consumed tliat 
are adversaries to my soul ; let them be covered 
xoith reproach and dislionor tliat seek my liurt. 

14 But I will hope continually, and will yet 
praise thee more and more. 

15 My mouth shall show forth thy rig'hteous- 
ness and thy salvation all the day; for I know 
not the numbers thereof.^ 

16 I will go in the strength of the Lord God : 
I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of 
thine only.'' 

17 God, thou hast taught me from my youth : 
and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works. 

18 Now also when I am old and gray-hoaded," 
(.) God, forsake me not;"-' until I have showed thy 
strength* unto this generation, and tiiy power to 
every one that is to come. 

19 Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high,'' 
who hast done great things: God, who is like 
unto thee! 

20 Thou, which hast showed me great and sore 
troubles, shalt quicken me again,' and shalt bring 
me u|) again from the depths of the earth. 

21 Thou shalt increase my greatness, and com- 
fort me on every side. 

22 1 will also praise thee with the psaltery,*' 
even thy truth, my God: unto thee will I sing 
with the harp,- thou Holy One of Israel. 

23 My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto 
tlice ; and my soul, which thou hast redeemed. 

24 My tongue also shall talk of thy righteous- 
ness all the day long : for they arc confounded, for 
they are brought unto shame, that seek my hurt. 



»rsi.l39:17. b Isa. 4.5:.i4. 25; Phii.3:9. • HA. unto okl age ami grey 
hairs, cisa. 46:4. t Heb, lAine arm. d I.,a. 55:'J. eHos. G:l,2. 1 Heb. 
inslrument of psalteri/. ( Psa. 150:3. e Psi. 9-2:3. 8 Or, of; Psa. lv!7, 
litle. I> I Kings l::iti, .'i-. i Isa. II :-j-5; :ja: I, 17. JPsa. b5:ll. k Isi. 



13. Let them be confounded; see note to Psa. 69:22. 

15. The numbers; the number of his mercies. 

20. Shalt quicken me again; grant him deliverance from 
trouble and give him prosperity. From the depths of the 
eaiih ; from the deep waters of the earth, put liere as a 
symbol of great distress. Psa. 69:2; 130:1. 

22. Psaltery; a stringed instrument of music. 
IXSTRUCTIOXS. 

1. Trust in the Lord is the sure means of safely to his 
people, and their liabitual resort in time of trouble. 

6. God is our maker, oiu- preserver, and the giver of all 
our mercies. On him we ever have been and must be 
dependent for all good, and to him we should be habitu- 
ally devoted. 

9. Old age is a time when men peculiarly need the pres- 
ence and favor of God, and he will not cast off any who 
truly trust in him. 

15. The mercies of God are innumerable, and call for 
habitual thanksgiving. 

20. However great the present trials of God's people, 
they may rejoice in the anticipation of being one day de- 
livered, and made conquerors and more tlian conquerors 
over all their foes. 

PSALM LXXII. 

1. Til y judgments; thy righteous decisions. The king's 
son; literally, Solomon, so called as the son of David and 
his successor on the throne, in correspondence with the 
original promise of God to David, " He shall build a house 
for my name, and I will stablish the throne of his kingdom 
for ever," 2 Sam. 7:13; the words include the entire line 



PSALM LXXII 



1 David, praying for Solomon, siioweth the goodness and glory of liis in 

type, and in truth of Christ's kingdom. 18 He blesstth God. 

«[ A Pmlm for 8 Solomon 

r\ IVE the king thy judgments, God, and thy 
VT righteousness unto the king's son.'' 

2 He shall judge thy people with righteousness, 
and thy pO(ir with judgment.' 

3 The inouiit;nns shall bring peace to the peo- 
ple, and the little hills, by righteousness.' 

4 He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall 
save the children of the needy, and shall break in 
pieces the oppressor.'' 

5 They shall fear thee as long as the sun and 
moon endure, tlirougliout all generations. 

6 He shall come down like rain upon' the mown 
grass : as showers that water the earth." 

7 In his days shall the righteous flourish ; and 
abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth.' 

8 He shall have dominion also from sea. to sea, 
and from the river unto the ends of the earth."' 

9 They that dwell in the wilderness sliall bow 
before him ; and his enemies shall lick tlie dust." 

10 The kings of Tarslii.sh and of the isles shall 
bring presents:'' the kings of Slieba and Seba shall 
offer gifts. 

11 Yea, all kings shall fall down before him : all 
nations shall serve hiin.'' 

12 For he shall deliver the needy wlien he crieth ; 
the poor also, and him that hatli no helper.'' 

13 He shall sjiarc the poor and needy, and shall 
save the souls of the needy. 

14 He shall redeem their soul from deceit and 
violence: and precious shall their blood be in his 
sight. 



:-)I 


:ia 


13; Rev. 




:in. 


1 a Sam. 


2.1-4; 


Hos 


(i 


3. II 


Heh. 


till there be no 


tn 


OQIl 


n. 1 King» 


4 


■M--i 


:; Psa. f:9 


•.«. :)(i 


; Zech 


9:10. 


n Mi 


.7:17. o^chr. 


9: 


-t; 


Matt. 2:11 




P Isa 


49:7, -23. 


qlsa 


41 


17 


Heb 


7:25 





of Solomon's successors, which is perpetuated for ever in 
Christ. Thus Christ himself is the main suliji-et of the 
psalm. In Solomon it has only an iiiciiiii-nt fnilihnent. 

3. The mountains shall bring pence — /)// rii^liti'iiusncss; the 
mountains ami hills sii;ill,as it wnc, In in- forth a harvest 
of peace totiiHl's |ir(i|il,-. ;is tlir riiiri 1 1 1 ligliteousness. 
Peace includi-s in ilst-ll ;ill pi-o.spri ily, tcniporal and spir- 
itual. Piighteousncss is here the righteous government 
of the king whom this psalm celebrates, producing right- 
eousness among the people. 

6. He shall come down ; the effect of his righteous adnuuis- 
tration shall be like that of rain on meadows newly mown. 
Compare 2 Sam. 23:3, 4. The happy effects of Solomon's 
just and peaceable reign were typical of the nobler influ- 
ences of Christ's spiritual reign over his people. 

8. From sea to sea; over all the earth. Ver. 11, 17. 

9. Lick the dust; be utterly subdued. 

10. 11. Tarshish — the isles — Sheba and Seha ; Tarshish was 
a celebrated mart of trade in the south-west of Sjjain. 
The isles are, in general, the sea-coasts and islands of the 
Mediterranean. Sheba was a country of Southern Ara- 
bia, celebrated for its gold, spices, and pi-rciuiis stones. 
1 Kings 10:10. Seba is generally su|iimi-,. H i,. Ii:ivu been 
Merbe, a province of Ethiopia. Thesi- c-i.unh n-s stand 
here to represent all the nations of the earth, which shall 
in due time give their wealth and homage to Christ. Com- 
pare the sixtieth chapter of Isaiah. 

12, 13. He shall deliver the needy; the protection which 

Solomon as a righteous king gave to the poor and needy, 

represented the higher spiritual protection which Clirist 

gives to all the poor in spirit, who feel their need of him 

661 



Triumph of Christ's kingdom. 



I'SALM LXXm. 



Prosperity of Ihc wicked. 



15 And ho shall live," and to him shall be given* 
of the gold of Shcba:'' prayer also shall be made 
for him continually; and daily shall he be prais- 
ed .■■ 

It) There shall 1)0 a handful of corn in the earth 
upon the top of the mountains; the frnit thereof 
shall shake like Lebanon: and t/ny of the city 
shall flourish like grass of the earth.'' 

17 His name shall endure* for ever: his name 
shall be continued as long as the sun:* and men 
shall be blessed in him:" all nations shall call him 
l)|rwsed. 

IX Blessed he the Lord God, the God of Israel, 
wlio only doeth wondrous things/ 

10 And blessed be his glorious name for ever:"-' 
and let the whole earth be filled u-ith his glory.'' 
Amen, and Amen. 

2(1 The prayers of David the son of Jesse arc 
ended. 

rSALM LXXIU. 

1 The prophet, prevailing in a temptation, 2 showeth the occasion there- 
of, the prosperity of the wicked. 13 The wound given tliercby, diffi- 
dence. 1.3 The victory over it, knowledge of God's purpose, in de- 
ilroying of the wicked, and sustaining the righteous. 

•i A Psalm oft Asaph. 

'"P^RL^LY' God is good to Israel, even to such as 
A arc of a clean heart.'' 

2 But as for me, my feet were almost gone ; my 
stei)s had well-nigh slipped. 



• Rot. 1:18. • Hah. ont tliall give. l>aChr. 9:1. c Judo "iS. •! Hos. 
H:.-i-7. t Heb. At. t Heb. n.« o Jon (o rondnut Ais/al/irr't nnme/or f>-,r. 
«Kph.l:3. rExod. I.'i:ll. rRev.S:13 l> Num. N:-.>l ; Hab. ■J:I4. t Or, 
/or I Or, Vrl. t H.b. ritan o/hearl; r.a. ItjfJO; Matt. 5:S > Psa. .17:1 ; 



and como to him for help and salvation. Compare Matt 
1 1 : 28-30. 

l."). For him ; for the extension of liis blessed kingdom in 
the world, and in the heart of him who olTors the prayer. 

IC. Upon lite top of the mouutains; upon the most unlikely 
places, as well as others, the gospel shall take deep root 
an'l produce abundant fruits. 

20. Are ended; this is the close of the second of the 
books into which the I'salnis were anciently divided. 
IN.^TUI'fTIONa 

1. .Ml wise decisiiiMs ami all rinhteons conduct proceed 
frnm (loil their author; and to hini all should look that 
lie would prant thcin the inllucnce of his Rrace, and thus 
fit tliem for the various duties to which they are called. 

4. The kingdom of Christ, with the salvation which it 
briiiRs to the soul, is the heriUige of none but the j)Oor in 
spirit. The i)rouil anil self-sufticient are excluded from it, 
anri must stunjble and fall into perdition. 

7. Since the cause of the righteous is the cause of 
Christ, it must increase and jirosper until it becomes tri- 
umphant over the whnle earth ; and. during its conflict 
with the kingdom of Satan, all that are spiritually tinited 
to Christ, enjoy, in the midst of their outward trials, the 
peace of f!of| which passeth all understanding. 

12. Whatever may be the outward worldly conilition of 
Chrisfs diMci|i|cM,hi' will give them all needful protection, 
help, and comfort here, and eternal deliverance from all 
oppression and sorrow hereiiftcr. 

l."i. .Ml the true members t)f Christ's bo<ly are animated 
by his spirit, which is the sjiirit of love uud selfnlenial. 
They continu.illy pray for his honor and the enlargement 
of his kingdom among men; and to this end give liberally 
if Ihit which (loil has inlrusle.l to lh..m. 

r.«^AL.M Lxxm. 

The psalmist relates through wh.ii a severe inward eon- 
Hid he has passed in view of the pnisperitv of Uic wicked 
663 



3 For I was envious at the foolish, lohen I saw 
tlic prosperity of the wicked.' 

4 For there are no bands in their death : but their 
strength w firm.' 

5 They are not in trouble a,9* other mGn; neither 
are they plagued like* other men. 

6 Therefore pride compasseth them about as a 
chain ; violence covcreth them ax a garment.^ 

7 Their eyes stand out with fatness: they have 
more than lieart could wish." 

8 Tiicy are corru])t, and speak wickedly concern- 
ing opjiression: they speak loftily.'' 

y They set their mouth against the heavens, and 
their tongue walketh through the earth. 

10 Therefore his people return hither: and wa- 
ters of a full cup are wrung out to them. 

11 And they say, How doth God know? and is 
there knowledge in the ^lost High?' 

12 Bcliold, tliese arc the ungodly, who prosper 
iu the world ; they increase in riches. 

13 Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and 
washed my hands in innocency."" 

14 For all the day long have I been plagued, and 
chastened' every morning. 

l.'j If I say, I will speak thus; behold. I should 
oflend against tiic generation of thy children. 

10 When I thought to know this, it icas too pain- 
ful for mc;^ 

17 Until I went into the sanctuary t)f God ; then 
understood I tiieir end." 



.Ian. 4;5. • Heb. /o(. t Hi-b. Ihe trouble of. 
( \Uh pass Iht llioiighls of the luarl. k Jude 
m Job U;*.i7-31. I Ueb. my chastisement was. 
"Pia 37:3S. 



Hcb. with, i Psa. 100:18. 
ti. I Job-«:l.-3: Psa. W:7. 
1 Heb. tabor in mint eyes. 



and the afflictions of the righteous, and how lie has over- 
come it by a revelation in God's sanctuary of the different 
ends that await the two classes of men. 

I. To sitch as are of a dean heart; hy these words ho 
limits his declaration concerning Israel to such as aro 
Israelites indeed. 

4. No hamh ; no peculiar terrors or distresses. 
.5. Not in trouble; as many ])ious men are. 

6. As a chain ; that is, a chain worn for ornament. Gen. 
41:42; Pro v. 1:9; Dan. .i: 16, 29. 

7. More; of this world. 

9. Walketli throiitrh the earth ; is tised without restraint. 

10. Therefore; because of this disagreement between 
the character of men and their present lot. His people 
return hither; of this clause the original admits of two 
readings, and it is otherwise of dilticult explanation. Our 
English version follows one reading, the other is thus : 
'• lie maketh his people to return hither." Of the various 
interpretations that liave been prrijiosed, the following is 
perhaps as probable as any: God makes his people, after 
all their wanderings this way and that in searcli of an 
explanation of this mystery, to come b,ick hither, namely, 
to the point whence they set out — that gooil men are 
afflicted, and bad men prospered. Waters of a full eup are 
irriing out to them; they drink to the dregs a bitter eup in 
witnessing the jirosperity of the wicked, while they aro 
themselves filled with trouble, and their siitVcrings are 
aggravated bv the temptation to distrust Gotl's justice. 

II. Tlieij; the wicked. 

i:5 I hmv clenntrd mij heart in i-nin ; this was what the 
psalmist w:is temi>te<l to say, that his (liety was useless. 

14. Plairueil ; visited with distresses. 

1.1. / sliould offend; such doctrines expressed would 
grieve the people of God, as being contrary to their expe- 
rience, contrtiry to trulh. ami adapted to ilo mischief. 

Hi. Tit knmr this ; the reasons of the jirosperity of the 
wicked and the adversity of the righteous. 



Destruction of the wicked. 



PSALM LXXIV. 



Desolation of tliz sanctuary. 



18 Surely tliou didst sot thoiii in slippery places : 
thou castedst thcni down into destruction. 

1!) How are tliey brought into desolation, as in 
a niouient ! they are utterly consumed with terrors. 

20 As a dream when one awaketh ;^ w, Lord, 
wlicn thou awakest, thou shalt despise their ima,se. 

2 1 Tiius my heart was grieved, and I was pricked 
in my reins. 

22 So foolish was I, and ignorant:* I was as a 
beast before* thee. 

2:5 Xevertheless I am continually with thee : 
thou hast holdcn me by my right hand. 

24 Thou shalt guide mc with thy counsel, and 
afti'rward receive mc to glory.*' 

2') Wliom have I in heaven but thee? and there 
is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. 

20 My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is 
the strength* of my heart, and my portion for 
ever.*^ 

27 For lo, they that arc for from thee shall per- 
ish: tliou hast destroyed all them that go a whor- 
ing from thee. 

28 But it is good for me to draw near to God : 
I have put my trust in the Lord God, that I may 
declare all thy works. 



» Isa. •J9:7, 8. • Heb. I knew not. t Hfti. wUli. b Psa. J^: 14 : Heb 
rock, c Lim. 3:24. i Or, A Vmlm for Asnph lo givt inslriirtwn. I Or, 



18. Ill slippery places; where, notwithstiinding their pres- 
ent prrrspcrity, tjiey are on the brink of perdition. 
HI. Jirous:hl iiito desolation; perish at death. 

20. When, tliou awakext ; when God leaves the wicked 
for a season to triumph over the good, he is said to 
sleep. Psa. 44:2:i. Their image; tlieir vain show of hap- 
piness, which is as unsubstantial and fleeting as a night- 
vision. 

21. Tints my heart was grieved; before I understood the 
end of the wicked. The psalmist reviews his former feel- 
ings with deep repentance. 

23. Thou hast holdeii me; kept him from utter apostasy 
and ruin. 

24. Aftenrard; after the trials of the presentlife. Receive 
mc to glory ; the consciousness of union by faith and love 
with the eternal God, brings to the psalmist the assur- 
ance of a blessed immortality to be spent in God's pres- 
ence. 

25. But thee ; none in comparison with God. 

26. My flesh and my heart faileth ; these words describe 
his mortal body as suliject to decay and death. Strength 
of my heart ; the supporter of my soul. He uses the word 
"heart'' here of his spiritual and immortal nature. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Envy is as the rottenness of the bones. He who in- 
dulges in it, whetlier saint or sinner, will be wretched. 

C. The pride of the wicked is increased by their jiros- 
perity, which may be given them in wrath as a punish- 
ment for sins, and be the occasion of ripening them for 
ruin. 

10. Great afflictions are no certain sign of peculiar 
wickedness ; they may be sent in mercy, as fatherly chas- 
tisements, and bo designed to wean men from the world, 
quicken them in duty, and fit them for heaven. 

If). The ways of Providence with men often appear un- 
accountable, and the reasons of them will not Ise kn(jwn 
in thi.s \»-orld. We must keep in view the end of the right- 
eous and the wicked, and act with habitual reference to 
the closing scenes of life. 

22. To envy the wicked on account of their worldly 
prosperity is foolish and sinful. It is finding fault with 
the providence of God, and exposes those who indulge in 
it to his wrath. 

23. God holds up his people and keeps them, notwith- 



I'HALM LXXIV. 

1 Tlie prophet compliinetli of tlie Je.soliaion of the sanctuary. 10 He 
movcth G-oil to li(4p in consideration of his power, 18 of his reproach- 
ful enemies, of Ins children, and of liis covenant. 

^ Maschil of Asajih.! 

OGOD, why hast thou cast us off for ever? tchy 
dotli thino anger smoke against the sheep of 
thy pasture'.'' 

2 Remember thy congregation, which thou hast 
purchased of old; the rod' of tliinc inheritance, 
tvhich thou hast redeemed; this mount Zion, 
wherein thou hast dwelt. 

3 Lift up thy feet unto the perpetual desolations ; 
evc7i all that the enemy hath done wickedly in the 
sanctuary. 

4 Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congre- 
gations; they set up their ensigns /or signs.'' 

5 Jl man was famous according as he had lifted 
up axes uj)on the thick trees. 

6 But now they break down the carved work 
thereof at once with axes and hammers. 

7 They have cast fire into thy sanctuary ,"■ they 
have defiled by casting down the dwelling-place of 
thy name to the ground. 

8 They said in their hearts, Let us destroy* them 



the fin 



standing tlieir follies and sins ; and in drawing near to him 
in humble repentance and obedient faith, they find not 
only their greatest safety, but also their highest joy. 

PSALM LXXIY. 

Title, of Asaph; as this psalm must be referred to the 
destruction of the temple by the Chaldeans, many under- 
stand " Asaph " as standing for Asaph's family ; as several 
psalms are, according to one interpretation, ascribed to 
" the sons of Korah," that is, to some one of his descend- 
ants. 

1. The sheep of thy pasture; Israel, as the peculiar people 
of God, and csiN'cially the pious among this people. 

2. The mil if Ihtiic inheritance; or, as the margin, the 
tribe of tliinr iiihiTitance, the word tribe being used col- 
lectively for the whole people. 

3. Lift up thy feet; that is, march forth from tlnOiiding- 
place and look upon the desolations caused by the ene- 
my. 

4. Tliy congregations ; rather, thy places of assembly. 
The Hebrew word is the same that is rendered " syna- 
gogues," in verse 8, where see note. Their e7isig-ns for 
signs; they have set up their own heathenish ensigns, as 
tokens of their dominion, where once the symbol of God's 
presence and power stood. Ensigns ; tokens of author- 
ity. 

5. A man was famous — thick trees; the meaning of this 
and the following verse, according to our version, seems 
to be, that once men showed their power and skill in cut- 
ting down forest-trees for usefid purposes, such as build- 
ing ; but now they make themselves famous as destroyers. 
We may, however, render literally thus: "He [the enemy] 
makes himself known as one who lifts up axes upon thick 
trees. And now they break down," etc. That is, he pro- 
ceeds with the cedar-work of the temple as one does 
with the common trees of the forest, destroying without 
thought or care. 

6. Carved work; with which the place of worship was 
adorned. 

8. All the synagogues of— the land ; or, all the places of 
asseralily in tlie land. See notes to ver. 4. There is no 
necessity of understanding this of the Jewish synagogues, 
which were first built at a later date. None of the ancient 
versions so translate it. 

663 



Prayer fur help. 



PSALM LXXV. 



The proud rebuked. 



to<rctlier : they have burned up all the synagogues 
ol" God in the land. 

9 We ?ec not our signs : there is no more any 
propiic't : neitiier is there among us any that know- 
etii how long. 

10 O God, how long shall the adversary reproacli ? 
shall the enemy Ijlasphemc tliy name lor ever? 

11 Why witlidiawcst tliou thy hand, even thy 
right hand? pluck it out ol" tliy bosom. 

llJ For (!()d is my King of old," working salva- 
tion in the midst of tlie eartii. 

V■^ Thou didst divide' the sea by thy strength:'' 
thou brakest the heads of tlie dragons* in the 
waters.' 

14 Thou brakest the heads of Icviatlian in pieces, 
and gavest him to be meat to the people inhabiting 
tiie wilderness.'' 

1,5 Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood :"' 
tliou driedst up miglity rivers.'' 

It) The day is tldnc, the night also is thine: thou 
hast piepared the light and tlie sun. 

17 Tliou hast set all the borders of tlie earth: 
thou hast made summer and winter.'^ 

18 Remember this, that tlie enemy hath re- 
proached, LoKD, and thai the foolish people have 
blasphemed thy name." 

10 Oh deliver not the soul of tliy turtledove unto 
the multitude of the uic/ced:^' forget not the con- 
gregation of tliy poor for ever. 

20 Have respect unto the covenant:' for the dark 
places of tiie earth are full of the habitations of 
cruelty. 

21 Oil let not the oppressed return ashamed : let 
the poor and needy |)raisc thy name. 

22 Arise, God, plead thine own cause: remem- 
ber how tiic foolish man rcproacheth thee daily. 





1 P.a. 44:4. 


• H-h 


brenk. 


b Exod. 14. 


21. t 


Or 


wfiales. 


c I.n 


. 51:9, 


II 


; Eiok. iOia. 


i Nu 


Tl. 14:9. 


• Exod. V, 


•S, fi; 


Nil 


rti. 2U:1I. 


1 II 


•b, riv. 




of siTfimth. 


' Joih 


3:l:), 


rte. « Ileb. 


tliem 




P»». 91:7 


H 


li SoiiK 


■J: 


1. i Gen. 17:7, a; 


Lev. a0;45; -J Sim. 


2:1:5 


Pia. IUli:4J; 


Jor 


ai:20. 



9. Our siens ; tokens of UolVs presence, especially as 
manifestefl in the gift of projilieey. How long; how long 
our troiiWes will continue. 

11. Witlidrauvit tltim thy hnnd; delaying to deliver fliem. 

12. Working salvation ; in the deliverance of Israel from 
Egypt and from all their enemies. 

IS. Dragons; monsters of the deep; representing the 
great and powerful opposcrs of divine truth. So also 
leviathan in the following verse. 

19. Tliy turtledove ; an appellation of endearment, show- 
ing God's tender regard for his people. 

20. The covenant ; that he made with Abraham and his 
nosterily, especially with reference to the coming of the 
Messiah. The dark plnces of the earth; those not enlight- 
ened by revelation. The psalmist means that the cruelty 
of these dark jilaces is exercised against (Jod's covenant- 
people, which is a reason why he should ruraeubcr his 
covenant with them. 

IXSTHl'CTIONS. 

1. The fatherly cnrrecti<.ii.H which Cod inflicts on his peo- 
ple, and which arc indicalidii.s nf his love, may sonieliiiieH 
be misLakon by lliom for e.\)ircsHi()iis of anger; but in the 
end they will see that it waH in kiiiiliioss to their souls. 

8. Men may be so blinded and hardened by sin as to 
attempt the utter doHtrnction of the Lonl's people ; but 
in due time ho will arise, plead his own cause, and bring 
dc.itriirtion iiimn those who ciintiiiiie to oppose it. 

i;i. Past deliverances of (iod's people eiicoiirage Ihein 
to expect his interposition in future, and to look to him 
for the aid which thev need. 

664 



23 Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the 
tumult of those that rise up against thee increas- 
cth' continually. 

PSALM LXXV. 



1 The prophet praiselh God. 2 He promisetli to judge uprightly. 4 
He rebuKeth the proud by consideration of God's providence. 9 He 
praiseth God, and promuieth to execute justice. 



^ To the chief Musician, Al-tiscliith,' A Psalm or Song of* 
Asaph. 1 

TTNTO thee, God, do we give thanks, vnto 
J thee do we give thanks : for that thy name is 
near tiiy wondrous works declare. 

2 When I sliall receive the congregation* I will 
judge uprightly." 

3 Tlie earth and all the inhabitants thereof are 
dissolved: 1 bear u]) tlie pillars of it. Selah. 

■1 I said unto tlie fools. Deal not foolishly: and 
to the wicked. Lift not up the horn: 

f) Lift not u[) your horn on high : speak riot with 
a stiff neck.' 

6 For promotion cmncth neitiier from the east, 
nor from the west, nor from the south.* 

7 But God is tlie judge; he putteth down one, 
and sctteth up anotlier.'" 

8 For in the hand of the Loud there is a cup, 
and the wine is red; it is full of mi.xture; and he 
pourcth out of tlie same: but the dregs thereof, 
all the wicked of the earth shall wring i/iem out, 
a7id drink thmi." 

9 But I will declare for ever ; I will sing praises 
to the God of Jacob. 

10 All the Jiorns of the wicked also will I cut 
off;° but the horns of the righteous shall be ex- 
alted. 



21 : Ueb. 
J Pna. 5- 


8:10. IHeb. 


axe 


ideth 


Jon. 


1:2 


lOr. 


Deslrou not. ' 


Or,/or. 
23:8, 4. 


, title, i Or, 


Wli 


n I shall lalct 


a set II 


mf. k 2 


Sam. 


IZcoh. 1 


21. I Hob. dtserl 


ml 


Sam. 


■i:' 


1 8. « 


Rot. 14 


g, lU 


oPi». 


101:S. 





















IG. The vicissitudes of the seasons are all ordered by God, 
and he who can make day and night, summer and winter, 
can do all things which the good of his people requires. 

20. The covenant which God made with his people, 
with reference to the Kodccmer ami the lilessiiigs of his 
universal reign, is ordered in all things and sure ; and not 
one jot or tittle of it will fail till it is all completely 
accomplished. 

r.SALM LXXV. 

Ood's people praise him for his promised interposition in 
a time of great trouble and confusion, occofiioned by their 
subjection to the inscdence and oppression of the wicked. 

1. Thi/ name is near; thou art coming forth to display 
thy glorious perfections in the protection and deliverance 
of thy people. 

2. K hen I shall rtceivc the con/rrcgalion ; or, as the mar- 
gin. When I shall take a set time. In this and the follow- 
ing verse Jeh<ivah is the siieakcr. 

3. Are r/mo/iw/; order ami cipiity are overthrown by 
the triumph of the ungodly. / ttcar up the pillars of it: I 
who have established and now maintain the pillars of the 
earth, will reestablish order in it, 

•t. 1 said unto the fools; Uiis is the psalmist's admonition 
to the wicked, in view of God's promised interposition. 
Lift not lip the horn; indulge not in ]iriile or haughtiness. 

K. yl cup— fidl of mixture ; a clip drugged with spices to 
increase its intoxicating effect. This is a common scrip- 
tural figure to ivpreseut the elfecls of God's judgments 
upon the wicked. 



God's majesly in the cJiurch. 



I'SALM LXXVII. 



Conflic/ with wnldief. 



PSALM LXXVI 



1 A declaration of God's majesty in the cliiirch. U An .-xhonation to 

serve lilin reverently. 

•i To the chief Musician on Neginoth, A Vix\m or Song of 

Asaph. 

1"X Jiulah is God known:" \\\i luime is great in 
. Innu'l.'' 

2 III Saloni also is lii.s talicniaclc, and liis dwcll- 
ing-placo in Zion/' 

3 There brake lie tlic arrows of the bow, the 
.shield, and the sword, and the battle.'' Sclah. 

4 Thou art more glorious and excellent than the 
mountains of prey. 

5 The stout-hearted are spoiled," they have slept 
their sleep:'' and none of the men of might have 
found their hands. 

6 At thy rebuke, God of Jacob, both the char- 
iot and horse are cast into a dead sleep.''' 

7 Thou, even thou, art to be feared :" and who may 
stand in thy sight when once thou art angry'." 

8 Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from 
heaven ;' the earth feared, and was still, 

9 When God arose to judgment, to save all the 
meek of the earth. Selah. 

10 Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee:'' 
the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain.' 

11 Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God: let 
all that be rouud'about him bring presents unto 
him that ought to be feared.'' 

12 He shall cut off the spirit of princes: he is 
terrible to the kings of the earth.'" 



• Or. for. a Psa. ■t»:l, etc. b Dent. 


4:7. a c Psa. la-J;!:!. d I.a. 37:35, 


Sfi, e isa. 46:1-2. ( Jer. 5I:M. S Ze 


ch. 1-2:4. 1> Jer. 1U:7. i Nah. 1:6. 


J Exod. 19: 10. etc. k Dan. ;!: I'J. 28. 


Psa. (15:7. t Heb. (o fear '" ?sa. 


a:.-), 10. n P»a. 6-2, title. 1 Or, /or. 


Heb. /land, o K-i. 14:):4,o; I.ara. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The works of Jehovah, especially his protection of his 
people anil the blessings he bestows upon them, manifest 
the perfections of his character and show forth his glory. 

3. The earth and all things therein are dependent upon 
God, and are entirely under his control. 

6. No one is elevated to office or influence among men 
except such as God appoints. 

10. A great and eternal distinction will be witnessed 
between the righteous and the wicked, between him that 
serveth God and him that serveth him not. 

PSALM LXXVI. 

The reference of this psalm to the overthrow of Senna- 
cherib's array cannot be mistaken. See the history, 2 Kings 
chap. LS, 19 ; Isa. chap. 31!. 37. As to the title Asaph, see 
introductory note to Psa. 74. 

2. Salem ; the ancient name, as is generally believed, of 
Jerusalem, signifying peace. Gen. 14:18. 

3. The arrows of the bow; weapons of war. 

4. Than the mountains of prey ; mountains inhabited by 
beasts of prey, here used figuratively to represent the 
warlike heathen nations. Compare Dan. 7:3. 

5. They Itave slept their sleep; the sleep of death; as was 
the case with the Assyrians, when a hundred and eighty- 
five thousand were killed in anight. Found their liands ; 
been able to use them. 

6. A dead sleep ; the sleep of death. 

8. The earth feared ; on account of the wrath of Jehovah, 
as displayed in the salvation of his people and the destruc- 
tion of their enemies. 

10. Praise thee; be made the occasion of his praise. The 
remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain ; or, more literally, 
■n-ith the remainder of wrath shalt thou gird thyself; that 
is, tliat thou ijiayest use it as a weapon against those who 
indulge iu it. 



PSALM LXXVII. 

1 1 he 1 salmist shr.vveth whnt fierce combitt he h:,(l witli diffidence. 10 
Tlu- v.ctory which he had by consij.-tatir.n of IJod s (jr.at and gracious 

•] To the chief Miisici;in, to Jciluthun," A I'salm of Asaph. 

1 CRIED unto God with my voice, evin unto God 
with my voice; and he gave ear unto mo. 

2 In the day of my trouble I sought the I.(jrd : 
ni}' soro^ ran in the night, and ceased not; my 
soul refused to be comforted. 

3 I remembered God, and was troubled: I com- 
plained, and my spirit was overwhelmed.'' Se- 
lah. 

4 Thou holdest mine eyes waking: 1 am so 
troubled tliat I cannot speak. 

.5 I have considered the days of old, the years 
of ancient times.'' 

I call to remembrance my song in the night:" 
I commune with mine own heart:'' and my spirit 
made diligent search.'' 

7 Will the Lord cast off for ever?" and will he 
be favorable no more'? 

8 Is his mercy clean gone for ever'? doth Iris 
promise fail for evermore'?' 

9 Hath God forgotten to be gracious?" hath he 
in anger shut up his tender mercies'? Selah. 

10 And I said, This is my infirmity:^' hut 1 it ill 
nmcmbir the years of the right hand of the Most 
High. 

11 I ■will remember the works of the Loud: 
surely I will remember thy wonders of old.™ 



3:17. e 


tc. P Deu 


. 3-2:7 


Tsa 


03:11- 


q Psa. 4'2:S. 


rPsa 


4:4. s 


Lam 


3 


40. 


1 Psa. 


74:1; Lam 


. 3:31 


3-2. 


1 Heb. 


to generatto 


t and 


generat 


on. 


u 


sa. 


49:1.-.. 


V Tsa. 31 


'■'• " 


fsa 


111:4. 















INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. God is known only in those lauds which are enlight- 
ened by revelation ; all others are veiled in darkness and 
the shadow of death. Hence, those who are blessed with 
the word of God should communicate it to all people. 

6. Without the sustaining care of Jehovah no one can 
live, and when he ceases to support them his enemies 
sleep the sleep of death. 

10. God will not suffer any more of human wrath to 
exist than he can overrule for the advancement of his 
glory and the good of his people. 

il. Before the power of God, kings and princes are as 
helpless as the feeblest among their subjects. At his 
rebuke they perish with all their hosts. 

PSALM LXXVII. 

The psalmist, in deep distress, encourages himself by 
the remembrance of God's goodness and wonderful deal- 
ings towards his people in times past. According to the 
opinion of some, he speaks in the name of the afflicted 
people of God. 

Title, see note to the title of Psalm 62. 

2. My sore ran; rather, my hand, as the margin, was 
spread out; that is, in prayer. In the night ; his troubles 
continued while others were refreshed with sleep. 

5. The days of old ; when God appeared for the salvation 
of his peoiile. 

9. Forgotten to be gracious ; this the psalmist was tempted 
to believe. 

10. This is my infirmity; that is, as the original word 
implies, my affliction, laid upon me by God, and thtrel'ore 
to be borne with faith and patience. Accordingly the 
tone of the jisalm here changes from the spirit ol' despond- 
ency to that of hope. The years of the right hand if the 
Blast High; when he wrought wonders for tlie deliverance 
of his people. 

665 



The story of God's wrath 



rSALM LXXVIII. 



asainst the disohcdienl. 



12 I will meditate also of all lliy work, aiirl talk 
of thy doinj^s. 

13 Thy way, God, is in the sanctuary :' who is 
so preat a God as our God l** 

14 Thou art the Go<l that rloest wonders: thou 
hast declared thy strenirth aniouir the i)eoi)le. 

15 Thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy peo- 
ple, the sons of Jacob and Joso])h. Sclah. 

16 The waters saw tiiee, O God, the waters saw 
thee: they were afraid: the depths also were 
trouljlod.*^ 

17 The clouds poured out water :* the skies sent 
out a sound : thine arrows also went abroad. 

18 The voice of thy thunder ico^ in the heaven:'' 
the lightnings lightened the world : the earth trem- 
bled and shook. 

19 Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the 
great waters, and thy footsteps are not known. 

20 Thou leddest thy people like a flock by the 
hand of Moses and Aaron." 

PSALM LXXVIII. 

1 An exhortation both to learn and to preach the law of God. 9 The 
«tory of (jod's wrath against the incredulous and disobedient. 67 
The Israelites being rejected, (rod chose Judah. Zion, and David. 
% Maschil of Asaph.' 

C"^ IVE car, my people, to my law:*' incline 
X your cars to the words of my mouth, 
i; r will open my mouth in a p;irable: I will utter 
dark sayings of old:'' 

3 Which we have iieard and known, and our 
fathers liavc told us. 

4 We will not hide them from their children.' 
showing to the generation to come the praises of 
the Loud, and his strength, and his wonderful 
•works that he hath done. 

5 For he established a testimony in Jacob, and 
appointed a law in Israel, which he commanded 
our fathers, that they should make them known to 
their children.^ 



, l> 


1 0:/:-:\. 


I" Kxod. \:< 


ll.i-ic. t 


Ilab. 


:H, 


etc. • 


II 


,h 


tm, 


Jfourrij 


/orl* 


tcilJi irater 


i 


iSxm 


■il.M. 


«i. (U 


11. 


( Vnl 


. 't 


I, 


.n\'. 


f l-a. 


.Ml 


h .Mill. 13: la 


35. 


Exod. 1.1: 


-, 11. 


1 Dnut li 


7 ; 


1 


:l'l 


^ I*/ a 


102:1 


». I Euk 


•St: 


9. I" 


Kwk. 2:»- 


-. t 1 


eb 


prettartd 


HO 


their 


hrart ; 


a Chr 


20:S3. 1 


H«b 


Ihroii: 


ing/orll,. 


' l)cu 


. 1 


41-11. 


° 


•i 


King* 


17:15. 



l;(. In the sanctuury; llie place wliere (lod is worship- 
porl, ami where IiIh cliaractor anil the rcasuiis of his deai- 
in(;8 are best learned. 

Ifi. The waters saw thee; alluding to his womlcrs at the 
Rod sea. 

1!». Thijfoolfteps are not known; the works and ways of 
God are iiiHcrutalile, and surpaHa finite comprehension. 

IXSTUrCTIONS. 

1. While men of the world in their tronldeH look to 
croatiirCH for help, or sink down in diBCOuraf^ement, the 
people of (lod cry unto him, and ho iu duo time delivers 
them. 

.5. A consideration of the mercies of God in times past 
is well suited to raise the expeetalioii of his help in time 
t<) I'Oine. 

HI. Despair of the merey of God is highly sinful, and a 
ti'tnpliition of the devil for the purpose of ruining the 
souls of men. 

I:t. The house of Gml is the place where ho especially 
maiiifeNts hiniHeir to his people, and enables them so to 
cast their cares upon him as to lind that he lareth for them. 

16. No olistriK.'tions will hinder the salvation of (lod's 
people when ho appears for their deliveranco. lie can 
666 



G That the generation to come might know them, 
even the children ichich should be born;"" who 
should arise and declare them to their children: 

7 That they might set their hope in God, and not 
forget the works of God, but keep his command- 
ments : 

8 And might not be as their fathers,' a stubborn 
and reljellious generation;" a generation that set 
not their heart aright,' and whose spirit was not 
steadfast with God. 

y The ciiildren of Ephraim, being armed, and car- 
rying* bows, turned back in the day of battle." 

10 They kept not the covenant of God, and re- 
fused to walk in his law ;" 

11 And forgat his works, and his wonders that 
he had showed them.'' 

12 Marvellous things did he in the sight of their 
fathers, in the land of Egypt.'' in the lield of Zoan.'' 

13 He divided the sea, and caused them to pass 
through;* and lie made the waters to stand as a 
heap.' 

14 In the daytime also he led them with a cloud, 
and all the niglit with a light of lire." 

15 He (■lav(> the rocks in the wilderness, and 
gave them drink as out of ihc great depths.* 

16 lie brought streams also out of the rock, and 
caused waters to run down like rivers."' 

17 And they sinned yet more against him by 
provoking the Most Iligli in the wilderness.* 

18 And they tempted God in their heart by ask- 
ing meat for their lust.^' 

19 Yea, they spake against God ; they said. Can 
God furnish* a table in the wilderness? 

20 JJehold, he smote tlie rock, that the waters 
gushed out, and the streams overflowed ; can he 
give bread also? can he provide liesh for his peo- 
ple? 

21 Therefore the Lord heard this, and was 
wroth:'' so a fire was kindled against Jacob, and 
anger also came up against Israel; 



pP.a.lOn:m. q Exod. ch. 7-l->. r Isa. 19:11-13. • Exod. 14:21. t Exod. 
M-.a. u Exod. 13:21. « Exod. 17:6; Num. 20:11; I Cor. 1U::I.4. « Psa. 
IU.'i'4l. I Deut. 0:22; lleb. 3:10-19. r Exod. 16:2, etc. I Heb. ordtr. 
> Num. 11:1, etc. 



open the way for them through the sea, raise up leaders, 
and guide them safely to his heavenly rest. 

PSALM LXXVIII. 

A historic psalm, for the instruction of God's covenant- 
people. It was probably written in David's day, and ends 
with his elevation to the throne. 

2. Parable — dark saijinps; see note to Psa. 49:4. 

5. Make tliem known; the testimony and law just spo- 
ken of. 

t*. Set not their heart arif^ht ; did not heartily obey God. 

9. The diitdren of Ephraim ; here representing the whole 
people. They seem to be specially named because ihey 
Were tho leading tribes before the time of the kings. 
Tiirnril liark; the reference is not probably to any partic- 
ular recorded event, but to tlieir general unbelief and 
unfaithfidncss. 

12. Zona; one of the principal cities of Egypt. Nrnn. 
13:22. 

13. lie divided the sea; at the time of the deliveranco of 
Isniel from Kgypt. 

IH. Thri/ templed doil ; by distruHting his power, truth, 
and love. 

21. Afire was kindlett ; Hee Nmii. 11:1. 



The sins- of Israel 



PSALM LXXVITI. 



en use their rejection. 



22 Because they believed not in God, and trusted 
not in his salvation : 

2:5 Thous^li lie liad commanded the clouds from 
above, and opened the doors of heaven," 

24 And had rained down manna upon tlicra to 
eat. and liad trivcn tlieni of tlie corn of lieaven. 

25 ilan did cat angels' food :" he sent them meat 
to the full. 

2(j He caused an east wind to blow* in the 
heaven : and by his power he brought in the south 
■wind. 

27 He rained flesh also upon them as dust,'' and 
feathered fowls' like as Uw sand of the sea: 

28 And he let it fall in the midst of their camp, 
round about their habitations. 

29 So they did eat, and were wclbfiUed: for he 
gave them their own desire;*^ 

30 They were not estranged from their lust: but 
while their meat was yet in their mouths, 

31 The wrath of God came upon them, and slew 
the fattest of them, and smote down^ the chosen' 
7iien of Israel. 

32 For all this they sinned still, and believed 
not for his wondrous works. 

33 Therefore their days did he consume in van- 
ity, and their years in trouble. 

31 When he slew them,'' then they sought him : 
and they returned and inquired early after God. 

3i And they remembered that God icas their 
rock," and the high God their redeemer. 

30 Xevertheless they did flatter hiin with their 
nioutii. and they lied unto him with their tongues.' 

37 For their heart was not right with him, nei- 
ther were they steadfast in his covenant. 

38 But he, being full of compassion, forgave t/ieir 
iniquity, and destroyed them not:' yea, many a 
time turned he his anger away, and did not stir 
up all his wrath.'' 

3',) For he remembered that they wf re but flesh;' 
a wind that passeth away, and cometh not again.' 

40 How oft did they provoke' him in the wil- 
derness, and grieve him in the desert!'' 

41 Yea, they turned back and tempted God, and 
limited the Holy One of Israel.' 

42 They remembered not his hand, nor the day 
when he delivered them from the enemy :* 

43 How he had wrought* his signs in Egypt, and 
his wonders in the field of Zoan : '" 



» Mai. 3:10. • Or, Eoeri/one did eat t/ie brendiifihe mislily; P-sa. llH:-20. 
IHfh. go. bTium ilA-<. 1 Heb. /bicio/icmi,'. = Psa. lUB: l.j. § Hfb. 
vmtletobow. I Or, younj,- Isa. -lO.liU, :J1. d Isa. -JB: 16; Hos. 5:15. e Deut. 
3->:4, 15. f Deut. 5:-it^, 29, c Num. H:18, 20, 1> Isa 48:9. i Psa. 1(«:14. 
Jja,i.4:l4. ^ Ot. rebel ai^iiinat. k Psa 95:<-j(). 1 ver. 10, 20. 'Or.afflic- 



24. Corn of heaven; manna, which came from above. 

2.5. An^eW food ; the manna is so called from its excel- 
lence as coming from heaven. 

Wi. Their days did lie consume in vanity, and their years in 
trnuble; the reference is to the wearisome sojourn of forty 
years in the wilderness, during which time all the men 
who came out of Egypt were wasted away. Compare 
Psii. 90:7-9. 

34. Slew them ; many of them ; and visited others with 
sore calamities. 

3(i. Tliey lied; by an insincere profession of love and 
obedience. 

41. Limited the Holy One ; by ascribing bounds to his 
power. 

43. 77/c_^t'Wq/'Zoa/i,- the region about the city. Ver. 12. 



44 And had turned their rivers into blood :" and 
their floods, that tiiey could not drink. 

45 He sent divers sorts of flics among them, 
which devoured them ; and frogs, which destroyed 
them." 

46 He gave also their increase unto the cater- 
pillar, and their labor unto the locust.'' 

47 He destroyed' their vines with hail,'' and their 
sycamore-trees with frost.^ 

48 He gave up ' their cattle also to the hail, and 
their flocks to hot thunderliolts.' 

40 He cast upon them tiie fierceness of his anger, 
wrath, and indignation, and trouble, by sending 
evil angels amang them. 

50 He made a way* to his anger ; he spared not 
their soul from death, but gave their life over to 
the pestilence;* 

51 And smote all the first-born in Egypt ;■■ the 
chief of thdr strength in the tabernacles of Ham : 

52 But made his own people to go forth like 
sheep, and guided them in the wilderness like a 
flock. 

53 And he led them on safely, so that they feared 
not:* but the sea overwhelmed' their enemies. 

54 And he brought them to the l>order of his 
sanctuary, iven to this mountain, which his right 
hand had purchased. 

55 He cast out the heathen also before them, and 
divided them an inheritance by line,' and made the 
tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents. 

50 Yet they tempted and provoked the most 
high God, and kept not his testimonies: 

.57 But turned back, and dealt unfaithfully like 
their fathers: they were turned aside like a deceit- 
ful bow. 

58 For they provoked him to anger with their 
high places, and moved him to jealousy with their 
graven images." 

59 When God heard this, he was wroth, and 
greatly abhorred Israel : 

00 So that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, 
the tent u-hich he placed among men; 

61 And delivered his strength into captivity, 
and his glory inio t!io enemy's hand. 

62 He gave his people over also unto the sword;" • 
and was wroth with his inheritance. 

03 Thefireconsumed their young men; and their 
maidens were not given to marriage.^ 



lin 


„ 


t Heb. 


et. m 


ver. 12. 


n Kxod 


7:21 


Exod. 6:6, 24, 


Exiid, 


Id 


13 


1 Heb. 


killed. 


qE.x;nd. f 


2i-ii. 


Wlr, 


great hailstones. B H 


b. .5/1 III 




11 Or, lightnm^s. 


• Heb. w 


iglud a 


path. 


t Or, beaus to the m 


irrain • 


Exod. 


9:3-li. 


r Exoc 


12:29. ' 


Exod. c 


h.l4 


15. I Heb. covered. 


1 Josh, 


19 


51 


u Judg 


2:12, 


20. " 1 Sa 


11. 4:10 


11. 


% Heb. praised. 





47. With frost ; rather, as in the margin, with liailstones. 

51. The tabernacles of Ham ; the dwelling-places of the 
Egyptians, his descendants. 

.'54. The border of his sanctuary; the boundary of the 
holy land. This mountain; Zion, as now the central point 
of the nation. See ver. 68. 

57. Like a deceitful bow; not accomplishing the end for 
wliich they were made. 

tiO. SItiloh ; a place in the tribe of Ephraini in which had 
been kept the ark of God, the symbol of his presence. 

61. His strength — his glory; the ark, which was the em- 
blem of these, and which was taken captive by the Phil- 
istines. 1 Sam. 4:11. 

63. Not given to marriage ; literally, not praised, that is, 
in nuptial songs, according to tlie custom of the age. 
667 



Tht. desolation of Jcntuilrm. 



PSALM LXXIX. 



A 'praycT for ddiveronce. 



64 'I'lifir priests fell by the sword ; and their 
widftws iiiiidc no lanieiitation. 

O.J 'riioii the Lord awaked as oneoutof sleep," onrf 
likea iiiii.'lily iiian thalshoult'th by reason of wine.'' 

til) And hcsuu)t(,'hisenenues in tlie hinder parts i*^ 
lie put theni to a perpetual rc|)roach. 

(IT Moreover he refused the taltcrnaclc of Joseph, 
and chose not the trilie of Epiiraini: 

68 But ehose the tribe of .Judah,'' the mount 
Zion which ho love<l.'' 

tl'.t And he built his sanctuary like hifrh palaces, 
like the eiirth which he hath established' for ever. 

70 He chose David also his servant, and took 
him from the sheeplblds/ 

71 From following' the ewes great with younfr 
he brou^'ht him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel 
Ids inherilaiuM'." 

72 So he fed them according to the integrity of 
his heart;'' and guided them by the skilfulncss of 
his hands. 

PSALM LXXIX. 

I The pialmiat compliiinclh or the desolation ot Jerunalem. 8 He pray- 
ctli for tleliverancc, 13 and proiniiieth thankrulness. 



\ A Pcaliii of Asaph. 

OGOl), the heathen are come into thine inher- 
itance;' thy hi)ly temple have they dchlcd ;^ 
they have laid Jerusalem on heaps.'' 

2 The dead bodies of tliy servants have they given 
to be meat unto the fowls of the heaven, the ilesh 
of thy saints unto the beasts of the earth. 



• P.i. 7:0. b I..,. -I'J: 13. « 1 Sam. 3:0, la. d Gen 49:10. c P,a. t-?;'-'. 
•Wth/ouHdtd. l-lSxm.l:". t llnb. <i/Kr. » lii;i. 40:11. hlKng<i):l. 
I Or, /or. 1 I,im. 1:10. J P«n. 7l:>-7. k S Kin2« 'iJ:!!, 10; Mic. :I:1J. 
I J«r. I«:4; 34:ao. m Deul. •AJ:37. » Zt-pli 1 ■ ifl. o Jcr. lO:*'), Ilev. l(i:l. 



64. Their widows made no lamentation ; the meaning socms 
to be, tliat tlie bodies of tlio Klaiii were left to perish on 
the fielil of tiattle, so that tlieir willows coulJ not mourn 
over tliein, as was done at a rej;ular funeral. Compare 
Jcr. 10:0, 7; 25:33; and especially 22:18, IB. 

05. The Lord awaked ; arose for the deliverance of his 
people. 

ni. Uefuud the lalienincic nf Joseph ; refused to have his de- 
scendants, the trilie of Kphraiin, loiifjer ^roverii the people. 

08. Chose the tribe of Judah; to have the preeminence, as 
fiirnishinK the royal faniliy. The mount Xion ; as the site 
of the tiiliernaclc, and afterwards of the temple. Moriah 
WUH reckoned as a jiart of Zion. 

CD. Ills sanctuarij; the temjile, or place of public worship. 
IXSTKUCTIONS. 

2. .Many of the instructions and Irudis of the Bible are 
dark sayinj;s to those who reject them, while they are |>lain 
and highly useful to those who believe and obey them. 

4. A knowlcdj;r of the past denlinjts of (iod should be 
communirated by parents to their children, as a means of 
leadinj; them lo adore him, and preparing them to trans- 
mit the knowleil^e of liis perfections to those who come 
after them. 

H. Men must keep tlieir licartu with oil diliRence, if they 
woulil have their lives directed accordin;; lo his precepts. 

12. No displays of the mercies or judKini'nlH of IJod 
will lead men to love ami obey him ; but whatever may 
bn the manifeslations of hiniHt'lf, without his grace they 
will continue lo rebel anaiusl him. 

21. Unbelief of divlni! tesOmony is a ^reat sin. ond (iod 
is aiiKry with those who indulK'c>"il. They treat him as if 
be were, a liar, and cut ihemselves oil' from the bleHsin^'s 
of liis salvation. 

27. lllessiuKS greatly desired may be given in judgment, 
an>l be the occasion of ruin lo those wjio receive tlieni. 

33. Continuance in sin causes continuance of trouble. 



;j Their blood have they shed like water round 
about Jerusalem ; and tlurevas none to bury thm} 

4 We are become a reproach to our neighbors, 
a scorn and derision to them that are round about 
us.'" 

5 How long. Lord? wilt thou be angry for ever? 
shall thy jealousy burn like fire?" 

(1 Pour f)ut thy wrath u[)on the heathen that have 
not know'n thee, and ujiun the kingdoms that have 
not called upon thy name." 

7 For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste 
his dwelling-place. 

8 Oh remember not against us fornicr iniqui- 
ties:*'' let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us; 
for we are brought very low.i 

9 Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory 
of thy name; and deliver us, and purge away our 
sins, for thy name's sake. 

10 Wherefore should the heathen say, "Where is 
their God? Let him be known among the heathen 
in our sight by the revenging- of the blood of thy 
servants ichich is slied. 

11 Let tiie sigliing of the prisoner come before 
thee;'' according to tlie greatness of thy power'' 
preserve thou those that are appointed to die;* 

12 And render unto our neighbors sevenfold into 
their bosom their reproach, wherewith they have 
reproached thee. Lord." 

la So we thy peojile and sheep of thy pasture 
will give thee tiianks for ever: we will sluiw forth 
thy praise to all generations." 



» Or. Ihr. iniquilirs of thtm lliat wtrr brforr. us. P Taa. \W:3: Isa. M:0. 
iDeut •irf.f-l. t Hub. rra^raiKc. ' P«l. lO-.'r'.ll. 1 Hob. (Ainr nnn. " Heb. 
Tf:Sfri-r tlif rhilttren of tiealh. » Psa. 74:15. t Htb. generation and genera- 
lion. I 1m. 4.1: '.'I . 



and though great afflictions may produce external refor- 
mation, yet if the heart be not turned to God, the outward 
lirofession of love to him will be hypocrisy. 

38. (lod shows hia comjiaKsion l)y waiting long even 
upon flagrant transgressors, and often by removing from 
them temporal calamities and continuing to bless them, 
notwithstanding their sins, in proof that he desires not 
their death, but that they should turn and live. 

52. God will make a way for his chosen people, and 
grant them deliverance ; but his enemies, however numer- 
ous and powerful, will be destroyed. 

CO. The withdrawal of God's presence from a people on 
account of their sins, is a forerunner of drcadfid calami- 
ties, and oftin of approaching ruin. 

CO. God may permit Hie wicked to trinmpli for a time, 
as a i>unishmcnt of his people ; but their triumph will bo 
short, and their punishment without end. 

08. Civil power is the gift of God. He takes it from 
one and gives it to another, as seenieth good in his sight; 
and holds all who receive it accountable to him for its use. 

rSALM LXXIX. 

A psalm belonging lo the same period as the seventy- 
fourlli ; that is, tlie Habylonish invasion and captivity. 

'I. To our neiphlmrs; to the Hiirrouiuiing heathen nations, 
who rejoiced in their calamities. I'sa. 137:7 ; Obad. 12-14. 

7. Drroured yacoi ;' overcome the Israelites and sluiu 
them, or curried them away captive. 

y. Purfre away our sins; i'orgive them for Christ's sake. 

10. HevenfTingof the blood oj thy servants ; punishing those 
wlio slew them. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. For the sins of God's people, they are often brought 
into trouble; and they cannot (d)laiii deliverance till, by 
repent:ini'e slid reformation, they forsake Ibeir iniiiuitics 
aud luni lo hiiii. 



God's judgments on /lis clmrch. 



rSALM LXXXI. 



Exhiirtal'wn to praise dod. 



I'SALM LXXX 



1 The ps.'ilmist ill liis prayer corriplainetti of tlie miseries of the church. 
8 (jod's fo;iner favors arc turiu-U into judgments. 14 He praycth for 
deliverance. 

\ To the chief MuBiciun upon Shoshannim-Ediith," A r.siihn 
of Asapli. 

/"-< IVE rar, Shoplierd of I.-^niel, tlioii that 
VJ loailest JoHopli like a flock ;" thou that dwell- 
cst hi'tween tlie cliiM-iihiiu,'' shine t'ortli.'' 

2 Hi'forc Ephraiin and IJcnjaniin and Manasseh 
stir u]) thy strength,'^ and come and save us.* 

:5 Turn us again,' God, and causo thy face to 
shine;''' and we shall be saved. 

4 Loud God of hosts, how long wilt tliou bo 
angry' against the prayer of thy people? 

f) 'i'hou feedest them with the bread of tears;'' 
and i^ivest them tears to drink in great measure. 

t) Thou makest us a strife unto our neighbors:' 
and our enemies laugji among themselves. 

7 Turn us again, God of hosts, and cause thy 
face to shine; and we shall be saved. 

8 Thou hast brought a vine out of Euypt:* thou 
hast east out the heathen, and planted it. 

9 Thou preparcdst room before it, and didst cause 
it to take deep root, and it tilled the land. 

10 The hills were covered with the shadow of it, 
and the boughs thereof hv/v //Ay the goodly cedars.* 

1 1 She sent out her boughs unto the sea, and her 
branches unto the river. 

12 Why ha-;t thou fhcn broken down her hedges, 
so that all thcv which pass Ijy the way do pluck 
her?"- 

13 The boar out of the wood doth waste it, and 
the wild beast of the field doth devour it. 



' P.-^a. OQ, title. • Or. for. b Psa. ilri; ":W. c E.xod. -ij-.-m, ii; 2 Sam. 
0:2. •IDeut, M:2. e Num. 2:1S-2I. 1 Ufh. far .mlvalion la v.f. f ver. 
7, IB; Lam. .5:21, S Num. 8:2>. : Heb smoke; Psa. 71:1. Ii Psa. 42::); 
Isa. 3U:2U. i Psa. 79:4. J Isa. 5:1-7; Jer. 2.21. i Hi-b. redars of God. 



8. 'I'he only hope of sinners is in the mercy of God 
tliroMi^li our Lord Jesus ('hrist. and to him tliey should 
look for pardon, salvation, and all needed good. 

\1. While the Lord delivers his servants, he brings de- 
served i)unishnient upon his enemies. To the one he is a 
kind and merciful shepherd, and to the other a consumin-.; 
fire. 

PSALM LXXX. 

A prayer of God's people in deep distress occasioned 
by the oppression of foreign enemies, in which the trans- 
fer of Israel from Egypt to Canaan is beautifully set forth 
under the allegory of a vine. It belongs apparently to 
the later period before the Babylonish captivity. In the 
opinion of many, its occasion was the overthrow of the 
kingdom of Israel by the Assyrians. 

1. Joseph; the Israelites. 

2. Before Epkraim and lienjnmin and Manas-teh; during 
the sojourn of the Israelites in the wilderness of Ar.abia, 
these three tribes encamped together on the west side of 
the tabernacle, Num. 2:18-22; and in the order of march, 
they followed the Ivohathites who bore the ark of the 
covenant, tlie symbol of God's presence, Num. 10:21, 22; 
thus having " the ark of the covenant of the Lord of hosts, 
wliieli dwolleth between the cherubim," immediately be- 
fore them. Exod. 25:20, 22; 2 Sara. 6:2. 

5. Bread of tears; deep afflictions, causing many to weep. 
8. A vine; the church, as embodied in the nation of 
Israel. 

10. And tlie boiitrhs thereof ivere like the goodlij cedars; or, 
and with the boughs thereof, the cedars of God [were 
covered.] 

11. Tiiesea; the Mediterranean. Tiie river; Eujihrates. 



14 Return, we beseech thee, God of hosts: look 
down from heavcMi.anil behold, and visit this vine;' 

15 And the vineyard which thy right hand hath 
planted, and the branch that thou madest strong 
for thyself.'" 

16 It is burned with fire, it is cut down: tliej 
perish at the rebuke of thy countenance." 

17 Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right 
hand, upon the son of man whom thou madest strong 
for thyself." 

18 So will not we go back from tliee: (juicken 
us,'' and we will call ujion thy name. 

19 Turn us again, O Loun God of hosts, cause 
tliy face to shine ; and we shall be saved. 

PSALM LXXXI. 

I An exhortation to a solemn praising^ of God. 4 God chailengeth that 
duty by reason of his benefits. 8 God, e.xhorting to obedience, cora- 
plaincth of tlieir disobedience, which proveth tiieir own hurt. 

•f To the chief Musician upon Gittith.i A Psalm of Asaph. 

SING aloud unto God our strength: make a 
joyful noise unto tht; God of Jacob. 

2 Take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel, 
the pleasant harp with the jisaltery. 

3 Blow up the trumpet in the new moon, in the 
time a])pointcd, on our solemn feast day. 

4 For this tms a statute for Israel, and a law of 
the God of Jacob.'' 

5 This he ordained in Jost-ph for a testimony, 
when he went out through'' the land of Egypt: 
where I hoard a language that 1 understood not.' 

6 I removed his shoulder from the burden: his 
hands were delivered* from the pots.' 



11 Nah 2 


■■}.. 1 


Isa 


«:!: 


.■>. 




II 


1, etc.: Zech 


3:8. 


n Psa 


7(1-7. 





Isa. 


5^:6. P 


Kph. 


■i: 


. a. 


q 


'sa 8, 


tit 


e. « Or. for. 


r l,e» 


. 23: i. 


4, 20. 


1 


Or, 


against. 


» Ps 


a. 


14:1 




Ucb. 


im 


ssed away. ' 


Exod. 


1:14. 









'i'^. Tlie Imar-^and the ri'ild beast ; representing the hea- 
then by whom the Israelites were overcome. 

17. The ■inn of man; the Messiah, for whose advent God's 
people looked to deliver them from their troubles. 
IN'STKUCTIt)NS. 

3. The light of God's countenance is the greatest bless- 
ing that any can enjoy, and is most earnestly desired and 
sought liy his obedient people. 

8. For all her jirosjierity the diurch is dependent on the 
grace of tJod, while her sins are the cause of all her sorrows. 

15. Help for the guilty is laid upon One who is mighty 
to save, who came to take away sin by the sacrifice of 
himself, and who ever lives to make intercession for all 
who come unto God through him. 

PSALM LXXXI. 

A song for the festival of the passover. See note to 
verse 5. 

3. In the new moon; this was done at the beginning of 
every month, Num. 10:10. 15ut the begiiming of the month 
Abib, being also the beginning of the year, Exod. 12:2, 
would naturally be observed with jieculiar solemnities. 
In the time appointed; or, at the full moon, as the Helirew 
word seems to signify. The passover was eaten on the 
fourteenth day of the month Abib, consequently at the 
full motm. 

5. This; the solemn feast spoken of above, the feast of 
the passover. In Joseph ; among the Israelites. Testi- 
monij; a jieriietual witness of the deliverance of Israel. 
Alan-riiiuze llmt I understood not ; the language of a foreign 
people, the I'ygyptians. 

(i. The burden — the pots; the hard service in brick and 
mortar. 

669 



PSALM LXXXIII. 



A complaint to God. 



7^ judges reproved. 

7 Thou calledst in trouble, and I delivei-ed tliee : ' 3 Defend'' the poor and fatherless : do justice to 
1 answered tliee in the secret jihiee uf thunder: 1 the atliieted and needy.' 

proved thee at the waters of Merilmli."" Selah. 4 Deliver the poor and needy: rid t/iem out of 

8 Hear, my peoph', and i will testify unto | the hand of the wicked. 

thee: O Israel, if thou wilt hearken unto me: , 5 They know not, neither will they understand; 

9 There shall no strange god be in thee; neither they walk on in darkness:' all the foundations of 



shall thou worsiiip any strange god. 

10 1 am the Loiin thy God, wiiich brought thee 
out of the land of Egypt:" open thy mouth wide, 
and I will till it.^ 

1 1 But my people would not hearken to my voice ; 
and Israel would none of me."' 

12 So 1 gave them up unto their own hearts' 
lust:*'' and they walked in tiieir own counsels. 

13 Oh that my people had hearkened unto me, 
and Israel had walked in my ways!' 

14 1 should soon have subdued their enemies, 
and turned my hand against their adversaries. 

1.5 The haters of the Lord should have submit- 
ted themselves* unto him: but their time should 
have endured for ever. 

IG lie should have fed them also with the finest^ 
of the wheat: ami with honey out of the rock 
should 1 have satislied thee.'^ 

rSALM LXXXll. 

1 The psalmist, having exhorted the judges, 5 and reproved their ne<^li- 
gfuce, 8 pr:iyetli Gou to judge. 

•j A Psalm of Asaph. 

GOD standeth in the congregation of the mighty ; 
he jiidgcth among the gods.*" 
2 \lo\v long will ye Judge unjustly, and accept 
the persons of the wicked? Sclah. 



•Or, Siri/e. «EloJ. l7:'i-7. b ExoJ. SO-i. 


John 15:7. d Deut. 32:1.'>, 


18. t Or, 10 the kardness of Ihtir own hmrls. 


or imaginations, c Acts 


•t-M. ' li« iyilS; Diut. 3-J;a». XHcb.lUd.o 


yielded feii;ned ohedicnre; 


Psi. 0«:3. 1 Heb /.i(. It Dnul a>: 1.) 1 Or,/>.r 


. h-JChr. 1U:(1. 7. 1 Heb. 



7. Tli£ secret place of thunder; the cloud which encom- 
passes God's throne, whence proceed thuuderings and 
lightnings. 

to. Upen thy mouth ; enlarge thy desires. I will Jill it; 
give almndance of Ijlessi'ngs. 

15. T/ieir time; tlic time of his people's prosperity. 

11). Fed litem — with lite finest of tite wlieal ; given tliem tlie 
richest blessings. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The praise of (iod forms an important part of the 
business of liis people, and wliilc it honors him, it enlivens, 
invigorates, and Hancthies their own souls. 

7. (.lod is ever ready to liear and atiswer those who in 
Binccrily ami Irutli call upon him, and to grant them the 
blessings which they need. Let tliem hearken unto him. 
and they shall not want any goo<l thing. 

Vl. Tlic reason wiiy any are ever left of (tod to liardncss 
of heart and blindness of mind, to follow their own inclina- 
tion to their ruin, is, thi-y choose not to walk in his ways. 

lit. (iod sincerely and earnestly desires the salvation of 
men, and is greatly dishonored and grieved when they 
refuse to obey him, and thus cut themselves off from his 
blessing, when by obedience they might through grace 
uccuro all needed good for this life and the life to cume. 

PSALM LXXXll. 

A psalm in which unjust rulers and jmlges are rebuked, 
nnil their duties set forth. 

1. The givls; rulers: called godH on account of their 
having received from I iod authority to act as his repre- 
sentatives and in his behalf. K.\od. 2t:tf^. 

'L Accept the persons; be guilty of partiality and injus- 
tice. 

r,7() 



the earth are out of course."'' 

G I have said. Ye are gods;' and all of you are 
children of the Mo.st High. 

7 But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of 
the princes. 

8 Arise. God, judge the earth: for thou shalt 
inherit all nations.'" 

PSALM LXXXIII. 

1 A compl.-iint to God of the enemies' conspiracies. 9 A prayer against 

them that oppress the cliurch. 

\\ A Song or Psalm of .iV-saph. 

KEEP not thou silence, God : hold not thy 
peace, and be not still, God. 

2 For lo, thine enemies make a tumult :" and they 
that hate thee have lifted uf) the head. 

3 They have taken crafty counsel against thy peo- 
ple, and consulted against thy hidden ones." 

4 Th(;y have said. Come, aiul let us cut them off 
from being a nation; that the name of Israel may 
be no more in remembrance.'' 

5 For they have consulted together w^ith one con- 
sent:"' they are confederate against thee: 

6 The tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites ; 
of iloab, and the Hagarenes ;"■ 

7 Gebal, and Ammon, aiul Amalek; the Philis- 
tines with the inhabitants of Tyre ; 



Tiulge. iJer. 22:3. J John 12:3.5. 
I John 10:34, 35. m Rev. 11:15. 
pEslh. 3:0, 9. 1 Hcb. Arart. <1 1 



•Heh.moved. l!rsa.75:3; 2Tim.2:l9. 
t Or, /or. » Isa. :l7:-»). » Psa. 31:2U. 
!l. 2:2. r2Chr. 20:10. 



5. Walk on in darkness; continue to pervert justice in 
their administration. Out of course; society is disorgan- 
ized by their ignorance and iniquitj'. 

G. Ye arc gods ; the representatives of Gcxl. See note 
to ver. 1 ; also note to John 10:35. 

7. Like men ; like other men, they must die and give an 
account of tlieir stewardship. 

INSTRUCTIOXg. 

1. Ailhongh rulers are elevated to a resemblance in 
authority and power to the Most High, yet they are de- 
pendent upon (iod for their inllucnce, and to him must 
render an account for the manner in which they employ it. 

4. One great object of civil government is to deteml the 
poor, weak, and defenceless against the encroachments of 
the rich and the strong, and to award equal justice to all. 

7. It becomes rulers as well as ruled to keep in view 
their sins, and act with an habitual reference to the time 
when all will stand on a level before (Iod. and receive a 
retribution according to their works. 

PSALM LXXXIIL 

.\ prayer in view of a formidable combination of the 
enemies of (iod's people to di'strov them. Some refer it 
to the combination of the .\loabites. .\nunoiiltes, Edomitcs, 
anil others against Jehoshaphat, which is recorded in 
■i ("hron. 20. 

3. Thij hiilden ones; thy people, whom thou hidest in 
thy pavilion from the assaults of their enemies. I'sa. 27 : 5 ; 
3l':20. 

(i. Ihigarenex ; a people driven from their own hinds by 
the tribe of Simeon, In the days of Saul. 

7. Gclxd; 8Upi)08cJ to have been a part of Idumea. 



The blessedness of 



PSALM LXXXV. 



GocTs Siinciu-ary. 



8 Assur also is joined with them: they have 
holpen" the chiidreu of Lot. Selah. 

9 Do unto tliem as unlo the Midiauitcs;'' as to 
Sisera,'' as to Jabiii, at the brook of Kishou: 

10 Which perished at Eu-dor: they becouic as 
diuiii- for the earth. 

11 Make tlieir nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb:'' 
yea, all their princes as Zebah, and as Zaliuuuna:' 

12 Who said, Let us take to ourselves the houses 
of God in possession. 

13 O my God, make them like a wheel ; as the 
stubble before the wind." 

1-t As the lire burnetii the wood, and as the flame 
setteth the mountains on fire; 

15 8o persecute them with thy tempest, and make 
tliem afraid with thy storm. 

16 Fill their faces with shame; that they may 
seek thy name, Lord. 

17 Let tiiem l)e confounded and troubled for ever ; 
yea, let tliem jje put to shame, and perish : 

18 That men mav know that thou, whose name 
alone is JEllO VAII,f art the Most High over all 
tlie earth. 

PSALM LXXXIV. 

1 The prophet, longing for the communion of the sanctuary, 4 showeth 
how blessed they are that dwell therein. 8 He prayech to be restored 
unto it. 

^ To the chief Musician upon Gittith.s A Psalm for* the sous 
of Korah. 

HOW amiable are thy tabernacles, Lord of 
hosts! 
2 My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the 
courts of the Lord :" my heart and my flesh crieth 
out for the livins: God. 



• Heb. been an arm to 


a Num. 31:1-12. b Judg. 4 


:1.5, 24. cjudg. 7;.i5. 


i JuJg. 8, 1-2, 21. e Isa. 


17:1.1, 14; Matt 3:12. f Isa 


. 42:8. e Psa. 8, title. 


t Or, of. h Psi. 27:4. 


i Psi. (i5;4. 1 Or, miilberry- 


rees make him a well; 


2 Sam. S;2). S Heb. 


overetk. II Or, company to r 


ampany. J Job 17:9; 



8. Asiur; Assyria. Children of Lot; Moab and Aiumoii. 

9. Midianites — Sisera — Jabm; Judg. chap. 4, 5, 7. 

10. Endor ; near to mount Tabor, in the north part of 
Canaan. 

13. Ltke a wlucl ; whirling like stubble or chaff before 
the whid. 

14. The mountaim; their productions. 

IG. With shame; that is, dishonor, that by this chastise- 
ment they may be brought to seek thy name. But some, 
in view of the following words, supply in the last clause 
of this verse the word " men," as is done in the eighteenth 
verse, and render thus : " Fill their faces with shame ; that 
men may seek thy name, O Lord." 

INSTKrCTlOXS. 

3. The wicked have oflm s.iu;j;lit the destruction of the 
righteous, but their plans luivc bcin defeated, and the ruin 
which they thought to bring upon others came upon them- 
selves. 

10. However numerous or formidable the enemies of 
the church, or however extensive the combinations formed 
against her, in answer to her prayers they will be over- 
conie, scattered, and destroyed. 

l(i. The Lord will be known by the judgments whicli 
he executes, and the destruction of the wicked will be an 
eternal monument of his truth, his justice, and his power. 

PSALM LXXXIV. 

1. Amiable; lovely. Jliij tabernacles; the place where 
Jehovah was worshipped. 

5. In whose heart are the ways ; whose hearts are set on the 
ways that lead to the house, worship, and service of God. 

6. The valley of Baca ; a barren, desolate valley ; put here 



3 Yea, the sparrow hath found a house, and the 
swallow a nest for herself, where she may lay her 
young, even thine altars, Lord of hosts, my King 
and my God. 

4 Blessed are they that dwell in tiiy house:' they 
will be still praising thee. Selah. 

5 Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee ; 
in whose lieart are the ways of them. 

6 117(0 passing througii the valley of Baca make 
it a well ;* the rain also fillcth** the pools. 

7 They go from strength to sfrengt]i,'J ivery one 
oftimn in Zion appeareth before God." 

8 Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: give 
ear, God of Jacob. Selah. 

9 Behold, God our shield,' and look upon the 
face of thine anointed. 

10 For a day in thy courts is better than a thou- 
sand. I had rather be a door-keeper^ iu the house 
of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wicked- 
ness. 

11 For the Lord God is a sun and shield :'" the 
Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing 
will he withhold from them that walk uprightly." 

12 Lord of hosts, blessed m the man that 
trustcth in thee. 

PSALM LXXXV. 

1 The psalmist, out of the experience of former mercies, prayeth for the 
continuance thereof. 8 He promiseth to wait thereon, out of confi- 
dence of Cfods goodness. 

*\ To the chief Musician, A Psalm for' the sons of Korah. 

LORD, thou hast been favorable unto* thy 
land: thou hast brought back the captivity 
of Jacob. 



Prov.4:18. ltJohnlU;23. IGeii. l.'i:l. ^ Weh . I would clio. 
at the IhreshoU. m Isa. 00: IB. n I'lul. 4: lii. " Or, of; Psa. 
welt pleased with ; Psa. 77:7. 



as the emtilem of sufi'ering and want. Make it a well ; turn 
it into a fountain of water. The meaning is, that God's 
accompanying blessing opens a fountain for their refresh- 
ment, as was done for Israel of old, in the wilderness. 
Compare Isa. 43:1!), 20. 

7. From strength to strength; from one stage to another 
with increasing energy and vigor, through the refresh- 
ment they obtain. 

9. Thine anointed ; Christ, or David as the representative 
and type of t'hrist. 

10. Better; nmrc drsir;ilile iind ]nvcious. 

11. Sunanil shirhl ; ]ii utirior, Imih r:iLtor,and source of all 
good. Gran mid isliini: nnc :is ;i jurparation for the other. 

INt^TIMCTIoNS. 
1. The worship and s( r\ !■ .■ ..f Cod are inexpressibly 
dear to his people. His (irdiii;inr. s are as food to their 
s<nils ; and when deprived of tliom they become enfeebled 
and faint for want of spiritual food. 

5. Men must depend upon God and draw their support 
and strength from him, in order successfully to walk in 
his ways, or find that consolation which his service is 
suited to afford. 

6. When God requires any service of his people, he will 
give them the strength and the means necessary for its 
performance. 

10. In the spiritual worship of God is greater enjoyment 
to the spiritually minded, than in all the pleasures of sin. 
It is the fruit of divine grace, and a sure prej-iaration for 
endless glory. 

PSALM LXXXV. 

This psalm is referred by many to the time when the 
671 



The psalmlM's prayer 



PSALM LXXXVI. 



and c'lvfidence in God. 



2 Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people ; 
thou hast covered ail tiieir sin." .Selali. 

3 Thou liast talven away all thy wrath: thou 
hast turned t/iyxr/f from the lierceness of thine 
anger.* 

4 Turn us, God of our salvation, and cause 
tluiio anger toward us to cease. 

5 Wilt thou be angry with us for ever? wiltthou 
draw out thine anger to all generations? 

6 Wilt thou not revive us again: that thy people 
may rejoice in thee? 

7" Show us thy mercy, O Loiu), and grant us thy 
salviition. 

8 I will hear what God the Lord will speak: 
for he will s[)eak peace unto his [leople, and to his 
saints: but let them not turn again to folly.'' 

9 Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him ; 
that glory may dwell in our land. 

10 Mercy and truth are met together; righteous- 
ness and peace have kissed tach other." 

11 Truth sliall spring out of the earth; and right- 
eousness shall look down from heaven. 

12 Yea, the Loud shall give t/iat which is good ;'' 
and our land shall yield her increase. 

13 Righteousness shall go before him ■," and shall 
set us in the way of his steps." 

PSALM LXXXVI. 

1 DavlJ RtrcngtlK-'iictii his prayer by the oonscieiice of his religion, 5 by 
the goodness and power of O-od. 1 1 lie ilesireth the continuance of 
rornirr (jnicc. M Complaining of the proud, he cravetli some token 
of (JoJ's goodness. 

^ A prayer of Pavid. 

BOW down thine ear, LnitD,hcar mc : for I am 
poor and neeily. 
2 Preserve my soul ; for I am holy :* O thou my 
God, save thy servant that trustcth in thce.*^ 



« Col. 4: 11- ■ Or, lliint an^er from mtxhig hot; Drut. l.i:17. b I'sa. 
Hf):4. c I«. 34:17. <i I'm. tS-l; 1 1. « l'».-i. 8U; 14. U'm. lI'J:3o. t Or, boing 
a PmIiti of. 1 Or, one wlwm thou faroresl . f ha. -ihi. « Or, all Iht U:iy. 
h Jo,l 4:1:1. > P.:i. 5(l:l.'>. J l»i. H':!?. W. k Dout. 3:41. 1 Rev. 1.",: I. 



restoration of tlic Jcwisli Btate after the Babylonish cap- 
tivity WIS in iiroj^rcss, but not yet completed, anil nuiiiy 
trials ,an 1 dillicultics remained to be encountered. The 
writer first tliaiik.i God for the gooil work which he has 
begun, and then jir.iys that ho would remove the present 
severe pressure of trouble. 

2. Covered; tl>at is, by forKivenesH. 

4. I'uiii u<; restore us to our former prosperity. In the 
mind of a pious Israelite, such restoration always included 
the iiiea of repentance and reformation. 

G. Remve liMin-riui ; by thy life-giving presence and favor. 
The revivin;; lor which the ))salmist prays, includes both 
tlje spiritual anil the temporal jirosperily of Israel, which 
wore insi.'parably connected with each other. 

9. T) fiMij; especially to idolatry and its vices. 

10. M'Tcij anil IrtUli are met lugellier; lliey harmonize in 
the dealin;;s of ( iod, e8|ic-cially in his methoil of forgiving 
sin itiid saving sinners througli (he Hedeemer. 

11. Sprinfr out nf the rnrlh; like an abundant harvest. 
Ri^hleoasnen n'lnll look down /mm lieaven ; as a frieml and 
helper. The reference is to (iod's truth and righteous- 
ness, as maiiifi'steil in llio fullilmcnt of his engagements 
to his eovonant people. 

13. Tie way nf his .iteps; lead us to imitate his example. 

INSTIUCTlON.-t. 
2. All needed l)lesHings are thrdiigh grace connected 
with the forgiveness of sin, without which nothing will 
avail to salvation. 

0. (lud is the source of all prosperity, national and indi- 
072 



3 Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I cry unto 
thee daily. ^ 

4 R(\)oice ttie soid of thy servant : for unto thee, 
Lord, do 1 lift up my soul. 

5 For thou. Lord, art good, and ready to forgive ; 
and plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon 
thee." 

6 Give ear, Lord, unto my prayer ; and attend 
to the voice of my supplications. 

7 In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee:' 
for thou wilt answer inc. 

8 Among the gods t/ure is none like unto thee, 
Lord :' neither are there any vorl,-s like unto thy 
works.'' 

9 All nations whom thou hast made shall come 
and worship before thee, Lord ; and shall glo- 
rify thy name.' 

10 For thou art great, and doest wondrous things : 
thou art (Jod alone."' 

11 Teach me thy way, Lord ;" I will walk in 
thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy name." 

12 1 will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my 
heart: and I will glorify thy name for evermore.'' 

13 For great is thy mercy toward mo :'' and thou 
hast delivered my soul from the lowest hell.'' 

14 God, the proud are risen against me, and 
the assemblies of violent'' men have sought after 
my soul ; and have not set thee before them." 

15 But tliou, Lord, art a God full of compas- 
sion, and gracious, long-sufl'ering,' and plenteous 
in mercy and truth." 

16 O turn unto nie, and have mercy upon me; 
give thy strength unto thy servant, and save the 
son of thy handmaid.^' 

17 Show me a token for good ;"' that they which 
hate mc maj' see if, and be ashamed : because thou, 
Lord, hast liolpen me, and comforted me. 



lit :«::»; 1 Cor. b: I. ■> 
.145:1,2. qPna. 10:):11. 
• I'w. 10:4. iMeh. 9:17. 



r»a. 119::». < 
1 Or. grave. 
u r.a. IM:10. 



:flO, 41; 1 I'or. 0:17. 
,1:10. 1 Hob. lerri- 
i:-J4. "■ 4 Cor. 5:5. 



vidual, spiritual and temporal. .Men are dependent upon 
him for " every good and perfect gift ;" especially for the 
beginning and increase of true religion and the salvation 
connecteil with it. 

^. (iod will not spare the sins of his covenant people. 
If they would receive a gracious answer to their jirayers, 
they must repent of their folly and return to it no more. 

10. All the attributes of God harmoni/e in his dealings 
with men, especially in the way in which he delivers them 
from hell and prepares them for heaven. 

PSALM LXXXVI. 

1. Poor and needy; this, in a spiritual sense, is the case 
with all men. 

2. 1M>i; one consecrated to God. 
:i. Ihidij; literally, all the day. 

8. (i'fK/.<',- such as were worslii]>ped among the heathen. 

9. All nations — shall come and worsliip before thee; in the 
days of millennial glory. 

11. Unite my heart ; bring my affections and all my jiow- 
ers into sweet accordance with thy will. 

INSTItUCTKyNS. 

2. Consciousness of devotion to Cod gives great encour- 
agement to pray and to trust in him, with the expectation 
of receiving all needed good. 

T. Prayer is the unfailing resource of God's people in 
time of trouble, and the sure means of help. 

U. However small the number of those who now wor- 
shi]) God in spirit and in truth, tlie time is coming when 



Glory of the church. 



PSALM LXX XVIII. 



A ccmiplaint in dislicss. 



PSALM LXX XVI I 

glory of the cliurch. 4 The increase, 
fort of the members thereof. 

*\ A Psalm or Sniij^ for ' the sons of Korah. 

ITIS foundation is in tlic holy mountains." 
- .L 2 Tilt' LoiM) lovcth the gates of Zion more 
than all the dwt^llings of Jacob." 

:} Glorious things arc spoken of tlioc, city of 
Go,].'^ Holah. 

4 I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to 
thi'iu that know me:'' behold Philistia,' and Tyre, 
with I'lthiopia;'' this man was born there. 

5 And of Zion it shall be said, This and that 
man was born in her:"-' and the Highest himself 
shall establisli her. 

G The LoiiD shall count, when lie writeth up the 
people," that this man was born there. Sclali. 

7 As well the singers as the players on instru- 
ments shall be tliere:^ all my springs are in thee.-' 



PSALM LXXXVIII. 

A prayer containing a grievous comphiint. 

% A Sons or Psalm fort the sons of Korah, to the chief Musi- 
rian upon Mahalath Leannoth, Maschil of Ilemaii llie Mzra- 
hite.'" 

OLORD God of my salvation, I have cried day 
and night before thee:' 
2 Let my prayer come before thee : incline thine 
ear unto my cry ; 



• Or, of. » Psi. IS:!, b Psa. 78:67, 68. c Isa. 51:4 etc. ; Rev. 21 : 2, etc. 
dtsl.5l:9. elsi. 19:a:)-a5. ( Psa. 68:31 1 Acts 8:->7. «lsa. 00:1-9. !■ Ezek. 
1:3:9. i 1 Chr. -23:5. ) Jas. 1:17. t Or, of. 1 Or, A Psalm of Heman the 



the wliolo family of man shall unite in this blessed employ- 
ment. 

13. Deliverance from hell and preparation for heaven is 
a blessing which God in his rich mercy and grace grants 
to his people, and for which they are bound, and will be 
disposed, to adore and praise him for ever. 

PSALM LXXXVIL 

Apsalmwhicli predicts the conversion of all nations to 
Christ under the beautiful figure of their birth in Zion. 

1. His fniindation; God's foundation, that is, the temple 
which he has founded. 

2. Zion; Zion, as the centre of the ancient Jewish the- 
ocracy, is put by the inspired writers to represent tliat 
theocracy. Of this the Christian church is the true heir 
and successor, Rom. 4 : 16, so that all the promises made 
by God to Zion belong to her. 

4. / will make mention of Raliah and Babylon; I will name 
them as nations that have been converted to God, and 
thus become spiritually the children of Zion. Rahab; a 
name for Egypt. Tins man; in the Hebrew, simply this, 
referring to the various nations just enumerated. 

f). Was bom in her; has become spiritually her offspring. 
The reference is still to the conversion of the nations to 
Zion. 

6. When lie writeth up the people; when he enrolls the 
nations. 

7. Springs; sources of salvation in the widest sense. 
I'sa. 46:4. In thee; in Zion, as of the residence of God. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. The place of public worship is dear not only to the 
people of God, but to God himself. 

5. To be born under the gospel, and to bo spiritually 
a partaker of its salvation, is a greater honor and bless- 
edness than to have descended from the greatest kings, 
or be a partaker of all earthly good. 

6. God has given to liis Son all nations, as his inherit- 

4.3 



3 For my soul is full of troubles: and my life 
draweth nigh unto the grave. 

4 I am counted with them that go down into the 
pit: 1 am as a man that hath no strength : 

5 Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in 
the grave, whom thou rcmemberest no more: and 
they are cut olf from^ thy hand. 

6 Thou hast laid me in the lowest jiit, in dark- 
ness, in the deeps. 

7 Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, and thou hast 
afflicted me with all thy waves.'" Selah. 

8 Thou hast put away mine actjuaintance far 
from me ;" thou hast made me an abomination unto 
them: I am shut up, and I cannot come forth." 

9 Mine eye moiiriietli by reason of affliction : 
Lord, 1 havecallcd daily upon thee, 1 have streteiied 
out my hands unto thee. 

10 Wilt thou show wonders to the dead?'' shall 
the dead arise and praise thee? Selah. 

11 Shall thy loving-kindness be declared in the 
grave? or thy faithfulness in destruction? 

12 Shall thy wonders bo known in the dark? and 
thy righteousness in the land of forgetfuluess? 

13 But unto thee have I cried, Lord; and in 
the morning shall my prayer prevent thee. 

14 Lord, why easiest thou off my soul? Wiy 
liidest thou thy face from me? 

15 1 am afflicted and ready to die from my youth 
up : while I suffer thy terrors I am distracted.'' 

U) Thy fierce wrath goeth over me; thy terrors 
have cut me off."' 



Ezra/lite, givins inslrurtinn 
■n 1 Pet. -i-'U. n Job 19:13, 
rHev. 6:17. 



ance ; and in due time he will enroll them all as the spir- 
itual citizens of Zion. 

7. God's presence and the light of his countenance fill 
the true Zion with joy and gladness ; and through her lie 
dispenses to all nations the blessiftgs of his salvation. 

PSALM LXXXVIIL 

Whether this psalm describes the sufferings of an afflict- 
ed believer, or of the Jewish nation under the figure of an 
individual, is a question upon which commentators are 
not agreed. Upon the latter stipposition, it belongs, with 
the following psalm, to the later period of the Jewish 
kingdom. 'The ancient interpreters refer it to Christ. 
This agrees with the New Testament view, which con- 
siders the afflictions of Christ's servants, before and after 
his advent, as parts of one great conflict, in which he, as 
the Head of his church, is the central and chief sufferer : 
so that the .■inriow,-: .,f David and other ancient believers 
who lived In Inn ( 1,; ist, are conformed to his sorrows, as 
types to Ihrir :iiiii(\ pc. 

Title, upon Mahalath Leannoth; meaning, according tn 
some, upon, that is, concerning a sickness that afflicts : 
according to others, iiiion the tlute for Qnibhc] singing. 
Heman; see note on \hr lillr of Psalm 89. 

5. Free among: lln' <lird ; ciiiiiinoiily understood to mean, 
discharged from all lln' ;ilV;iirs of lii'e, like the dead. Bui 
some prefer to render the words, prostrate among the 
dead. Cut off from thytmnd; separated from the care and 
protection of thy hand, the care which God bestows upon 
men as inhabitants of this world, which ceases when they 
are laid in the grave. Vcr. 10-12. 

7. Tlvy waves ; the troubles that God brought upon Iiim. 

12. In the dark; the grave. 

13. PrcKcnt thee; meet thee, as one that goes before an- 
other in the way. This is the ancient meaning of the word. 

15. Ready to die; in view of the distress that he feared 
was coming upon him. 

613 



A amvphint in distress. 



PSALM LXXXIX. 



Praise to God. 



17 Tlicy camo round about mc daily' like water : 
thoy coinpasscd iiic about together. 

18 Lover and friend liast tlioii put far from me, 
and mine acquaintance into durkneis. 

rSALM LXXXIX. 

1 The psalmist praiseth GoJ for his covenant, 5 for his wonderful power, 
15 for the care of \m church, 19 for his favor to the kingdom of DaviJ. 



3S Then compln 
and blessetli God. 



; of contrary events, 46 lie cxpostulateth, prayeth, 



^ Maschil of Ethan the Ezrahite." 

TWILL sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever : 
witii my iiioutli will I make known thy faitli- 
fulness to all generations.' 

2 For I have said, .Mercy shall be built up for 
ever: thy faithfulness shalt thou establish in the 
very heavens. 

3 I have made a covenant with my chosen, I 
have sworn unto David my servant,'' 

4 Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build 
up thy throne to all generations. Selah. 

5 And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, 
Loiid:'= thy faithfulness also in the congregation 
of the saints. 

For who in the heaven can be compared unto 
the liOiiD? who among the sons of the mighty can 
be likened unto the Loud? 

7 God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of 
the saints, and to lie had in reverence of all tlitm 
that are about him. 

8 O Lord God of hosts, who is a strong Loud 
like unto theeV or to thy faithfulness round about 
thee? 

i) Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the 
waves thereof arise, tiiou stillest them." 

10 Thou hast broken llahab* in pieces, as one 
that is slain; thou hast scattered thine enemies 
witii thy strong arm.' 

1 1 Tiie heavens an- thine, the earth also is thine : 
(Lsfor the world and the fulness thereof, thou hast 
founded them. 



* Or, all tht day. t Or. A Pwtlm for Ethan the Ezrahite^ to give instrur- 
tion. » 1 Chf. 'J;0. I lleb. i;eneration and generation; so vcr. 4; P«a. 
119.00. I> aSara. 7:11, etc. ' Pki. 10:1. ' 1 Sam. 2:2. o Jiib .■«:ll ; 
Mirk4:39,41. »0r, fiyml. t Heb the arm of thy strength, fjudg. ■1:0, 
12. ff Jofh. 12:1. 1 lico. an arm toith might. ' Or, eitabtiahment ; Isa. 



17. Theij; tho terrors of the Lord with which he was 
aflliutcd. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Man is born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward, or 
as tho waters run downward. Happy thoy who improve 
it in Hurh a rnamior tli;it tlicir KuflcriiiKS sliall be in this life 
only, and perfect felicity bo their portion in tlie life to come. 

8. To bo deserted by friends and acquaintances in time 
of trouble adds Rrealiy to calamities, and shows that no 
dependence can safely bo jilacod upon any but the Lord, 
who will never forsake those who ])ut tlioir trust in him. 

1.1. The terrors of tho Lord on account of sin may be 
such as to destroy reason, and even life itself; and there 
is no security from them but in Christ, who died, tlie 
just for the unjust, and will save from sin and its conse- 
quences all who put their trust in him. 

PSALM LXXXIX. 

This psalm may be vie\vo<l as an amplification of Ihe 
ancient promise of (!od to David by Nathan, 2 Samuel 
7: 12-17, with a prayer that Cod would conform his deal- 
ings with his covenant pcoi)lo to it. It plainly belongs 
to tho later period of tho Jewish history, when calamity 
674 



12 The north and tlie south thou hast created 
them: Tabor' and Hermon" shall rejoice in thy 
name. 

13 Thou hast a mighty arm :^ strong is thy hand, 
and high is thy right hand. 

14 Justice and judgment are the habitation' of 
thy throne:" mercy and truth shall go before thy 
face. 

15 Blessed is the people that know the joyful 
sound:' they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of 
thy countenance.-' 

IG In thy name shall they rejoice all the day: 
and in thy righteousness shall they be exalted.'' 

17 For thou art the glory of their strength : and 
in thy favor our horn shall be exalted. 

1 8 For the Loud is our defence ; and the Holy 
One of Israel is our King.*' 

lit Then thou sjmkest in vision to thy holy one, 
and saidst, I have laid help upon one that is mighty f 
I have exalted one eho.sen out of the people. 

20 I have found David my servant;" with my 
holy oil have I anointed him : 

21 With whom my hand shall be established: 
mine arm also shall strengthen him." 

22 1'he enemy shall not exact upon him; nor the 
son of Avickedncss afflict him. 

2.3 And 1 will Ijeat down his foes before his face, 
and ])lagiie them that hate him. 

24 J>ut my faithfulness and my mercy shaR be 
with him: and in my name shall his horn be ex- 
alted. 

25 I will set his hand also in the sea,"" and his 
right hand in the rivers. 

26 He shall cry unto me. Thou art my Father, 
my God, and the Rock of my salvation. 

27 Also I will make him my lirst-born,'' higher 
than the kings of the earth.'' 

28 My mercy will I keep for him for evermore,' 
and my covenant shall stand fast with him.' 

29 His seed also will 1 make (o endure for ever, 
and his throne as the days of heaven. 



m.a. h Pja. 97:2. i l/!v. 25:9; P«s. 9.S:fi: Rom. 10:18 ) Num. 
k 1 Cor. 1 :3n. t Or, our shield is of Ihe LORD, and our Icing is of Ihe 


6:20. 


Holv 


One of Israel; P»i 47:9 1 Isa. Vi-.-ii m Im. 9:0. » 1 Sara 10: 


1, 12. 


2.';am. 7:S-10. PPsa.<a:8. 1 Col. 1:15, 10. rKov.l9;lG. • Iia 


.M :i. 


t 2 Sam. 23:5. 





upon calamity befell tho kings of David's lino, and with 
them the nation. 

2. Merry— fnithfulne.vi ; Ood's mercy ami faithfulness to 
David and his seed. Establis/i; make as permanent as tlie 
heavens. 

.■?. Mi/cliaten; applied to David, and through him to the 
Messiah, in whom the predictions of this iisalm and many 
oilier psalms have their full accomplishment. 

10. Raliab ; Kgypt, as a representative of the persecuting 
healhcn powers. 

12. Ttilmr ; a mountain and city on tho confines of Zeb»i- 
liin, in the north-east part of the |)lain of Esdraclon. Her- 
viou ; a mountain on Ihe northern border of Palestine. 

I. I. The joyful sound ; calling tho people to the worship 
of (jod. 

11). To thy holy one; to David, and in David to Christ, in 
whom alono the promise has its perfect fiiHilmcnt. 

20. Anointed hiin ; the holy oil l>y which David was con- 
secrated to the kingly ollice was a symbol of tho Holy 
Spirit, who camo uiion him from tho day of his anointing, 
1 Sam. 16:13; ami who was given to Christ without meas> 
lire at his ba|>tism. John :!.'3'l. 

25. Hi$ hand; his ruling hand. 



God's mercy to David. 



PSALM XC. 



A prayer of Closes. 



30 If his children forsake my law, and walk not 
in my judgments;'' 

31 If they break' my statutes, and keep not my 
commandments ; 

32 Then will I visit their transgression with the 
rod, and their iniquity with stripes. 

33 Nevertheless my loving-kindness will I not 
utterly take from^ him, nor suffer my faithfulness 
to fail.*" 

34 My covenant will I not break, nor alter the 
thing that is gone out of my lips.'' 

35 Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will 
not lie^ unto David. 

36 His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne 
as the sun before me. 

37 It shall be established for ever as the moon, 
and as a faithful witness in heaven. Selah. 

3S But thou hast cast off and abhorred, thou 
hast been wroth with thine anointed.'' 

39 Thou hast made void the covenant of thy ser- 
vant: thou hast profaned his crown by casting it 
to tlie ground. 

40 Thou hast broken down all his hedges ;' thou 
hast brought his strong-holds to ruin. 

41 All that pass by the way spoil him : he is a 
reproach to his neighbors. 

42 Thou hast set up the right hand of his adver- 
saries ; thou hast made all his enemies to rejoice. 

43 Thou hast also turned the edge of his sword, 
and hast not made him to stand in the battle. 

44 Thou hast made his glory' to cease, and cast 
his throne down to the ground. 

4.5 The days of his youth hast thou shortened: 
thou hast covered him with shame. Selah. 



» Jer.9:13-16. * Heb. pra/rms. flUh. I will not make void from. 1 Heb. 
lie. b Lam. 3;3I.3-J. c Jer. 33:80, S Heb. i/ / te. il 1 Oir. 3^:9; Psi. 
60;1, 10; Hos. 9:17. e Isa. 5:5, fi. ineh. briglilness. (Psa. S5:5. e Heb. 
9:-J7. h ver. 35. i Hab. 3: 17-19. H Or, being a Psalm o/. J Deut. 33:1. 



30. His children; David's children, who occupied the 
earthly throne on Zion. 

33. Utterly take from him ; by rejecting his house, as he 
did the house of Saul. 2 Sam. 7:15. 

3G. His seed s/iall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun; 
this is true of Christ and his people. 

39. Made void the covenant ; as it seemed to the psalmist, 
but not in reality; for God's present dealings with the 
family of David were in accordance with the threatening 
contained in the original promise, 2 Sam. 7 : 14, repeated 
afterwards by David in his last charge to Solomon, 1 Chr. 
28:9, and by God himself in a vision of Solomon, 2 Chron. 
7:19, 20. 

40. His hedges ; the hedges which God had built around 
David and his kingdom. 

47. How short my time is ; in view of the shortness of 
life and the approach of death, he beseeches God to man- 
ifest his loving-kindness, that life may not be filled with 
trouble and sorrow. This thought is prominent in the 
book of Job. 

52. Amen, and Amen; this doxology closes the third 
ancient division of the Psalms. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The children of God, even in the deepest trials, have 
cause to sing of the mercies of the Lord, and praise him 
for his kindness to the sons of men. 

7. God is to be adored with reverence and holy fear, as 
well as with confidence and filial affection. 

9. He who rules the waves of the sea is engaged for the 
protection of his people, and is able with perfect ease to 
control the movements of his and their enemies, and cause 



46 How long, Lord? wilt thou hide thyself for 
ever?*' shall thy wrath burn like fire? 

47 Remember how short my time is : wlicreforo 
hast thou made all men in vain ? 

48 What man is he that liveth, and shall not see 
death?' shall he deliver his soul from the hand of 
the grave? Selah. 

49 Lord, where are thy former loving-kindnesses, 
which thou swarcst unto David in thy truth ?** 

50 Remember, Lord, the reproach of thy ser- 
vants ; how I do bear in my bosom tlie reproach of 
all the mighty people; 

51 Wherewith thine enemies have reproached, 

Lord ; wherewith they have reproached the foot- 
steps of thine anointed. 

52 Blessed he the Lord for evermore.' Amen, 
and Amen. 

PSALM XC. 

1 Moses setting forth God's providence, 3 complaineth of human fragil- 
ity, 7 divine chastisements, 10 and brevity of life. 12 He prayeth for 
the knowledge and sensible experience of Orod's good providence. 

^1 A Prayer of Moses the man of God. J 

LORD, thou hast been our dwelling-place in all 
generations.*" 

2 Before the mountains were brought forth,' or 
ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world, 
even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God. 

3 Thou turnest man to destruction; and sayest. 
Return, ye children of men.™ 

4 For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yes- 
terday when it is past,^ and as a watch in the night. 

5 Thou carriest them away as with a flood ; they 
are as a sleep : in the morning they are like grass 
which groweth up.'" 



even their wrath to praise him and advance the good of 
his chosen. 

16. If sinners are ever exalted, it must be, not on account 
of their own righteousness, but through the righteousness 
of God, which is unto and upon all that believe. 

27. No earthly kings can be compared in excellence, 
dignity, honor, and glory with the Son of God. He is the 
chief among ton thousand, altogether lovely, the bright- 
ness of Jehovah's glory, and the express image of his per- 
son, in whom dwells the fulness of the godhead bodily. 

36. The covenant of God with Christ, and through him 
with his people, is an everlasting covenant, ordered in all 
things and sure. Those who become interested in it, 
though they may be in trouble, will nevertheless be kept 
by the mighty power of God through faith unto salvation. 

48. The time of man's continuance upon the earth must 
be short. He should therefore do the work assigned him 
with fidelity, and in such a manner that when absent from 
the body he may be present with the Lord. 

PSALM XC. 

This psalm is as peculiar in its character as in its author- 
ship. Its theme is the brevity of human life, and the sor- 
row that attends it, both being considered as the fruit of 
sin. It is very appropriate to the closing period of Israel's 
sojourn in the wilderness of Arabia, where Moses saw 
the evil generation which he had led out of Egypt con- 
tinually wasting away before his eyes ; while he and Aaron 
his brother were doomed to die in the same wilderness. 

1. Dwelling-place ; place of refuge, rest, and comfort. 

4. A thousand years; God does not estimate time as we 
do. To him no duration can be long. 2 Pet. 3:8. 
G75 



Breoiif/ of human lift. 



PSALM XCI. 



6 In tlie morning it flourisheth, and groweth I 
up; in the evening it is cut down, and witiier- j i xi, 
ctli." j 



Happy estate of the godly. 

PSALM XCI. 

of tlic godly. 3 Thi-ir safety. 9 Thoir liabilation. 11 
i-anls. 14 Their friends; with the cfTects of them all. 



7 For wc are eonsumcd by thine anger, and by j TTE that dwelleth in the secret place of the 
thy wrath arc we troubled. 'II L Mo.<t High'-' shall abide' under the shadow 

8 Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our ! of the Almighty." 

secret sins in the light of thy countenance." 2 I will say of the Loud, He is my refuge and my 

9 For all ourdays arc passed* away in thy wrath: fortress: my God; in him will I trust. 

we spend our years as a tale* that is told. | 3 Surely he sliall deliver thee from the snare of 

10 The days' of our years are threescore years j the fowler,' and from the noisome pestilence. 



and ten ;' and if by reason of strength they be four- 
score years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow ; 
for it is soon cut ofl", and we lly away.'' 

11 Who knoweth the power of thine anger? even 
according to thy fear, so is thy wrath. 

12 So teach vs to numljcr our days, that wc may 
apply* our hearts unto wisdom.'' 

13 Return, Lord, how long? and let it repent 
thee concerning thy servants. 

14 Oil satisfy us early witli thy mercy ; that we 
may rejoice and be glad all our days. 

15 Make us glad according to tlie days wherein 
thou hast afHicted us, and the years w/terein we have 
seen evil. 

16 Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and 
thy glory unto their children. 

17 And let tiic beauty of the Loiti) our God be 
upon us:'' and establisli thou the work of our hands 
upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish 
thou it.f 



• Job 14:3. 
tlte days of c 
to come. <l Prov. -I 



>Jcr. 2:22. • Hth lurntd. r Or, tntdilation. I Heb. As for 

years, in tkem are sevenlu years. ^ Jas. 4:1-1. f Heb. e/iusf 

"a.ll0:3. UobJ3:23; I'rov. 1G:3. »Psa.2J:3. 



8. In tlic light of thy countenance; our sina are all seen 
and duly appreciated by God. 

9. A.<i a tale thai is told; or, as a thought which flit.s 
througli the mind and then is gone. 

11. IVIio knoweth — thy wrath; this verse maybe literally 
rendered, "Who knoweth the power of thine anger; and, 
according to thy fear, tliy wrath?" that is, Who knoweth 
thy wrath, as true reverence for thine awful majesty 
demands? It is greater than all men's fears; they can 
never comprehend its terribleness nor extent. 

12. Wi.idom ; from above, and that will avail to salvation. 

13. Return, O Lord; cease from afflicting us, and visit 
lis anew with prosperity. 

Ifi. Thy work; of love and mercy. 

17. The beauty of tlic Lord ; the light of his countenance 
and the joys of his presence. Ettabtish thou the tcork of 
our ttandi; cause it to bo continued and to prosper. 

iNSTitutrrioNS. 

1. TIjc eternity and unchangcablcness of Jehovah, and 
the frconcss, richness, and abundance of his grace, are an 
unfailing refuge, siipjjort, and comfort to his people. 

7. Death is sent by .lehovali, anil is an expression of bis 
anger against the sins of men. Dust thou .irt, and unto dust 
shalt thou return, is the decision of the Almighty, and all 
generations have been an illustration of its truth. 

12. Divine teaching alone can give that wisdom which 
is essential to true Iriiipiness in this world, and to bless- 
■idnoss in the world to come. All should, therefore, habit- 
ually and carn<"Ktly seek it. 

17. God is the aullior and finisher of all good works. 
With his presence and blessing tliey will continue to pros- 
por. Men must die, and leave many things unfinisliud ; 
but God lives. Ilis canso will extend, and by such instru- 
ments as he shall raise up, will ultimately triumph. 

PSALM XCI. 

The present is the first of ten anonymous psalms which 
scom to belong to the sarao age. Thev are all of a joyous 
676 



4 He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under 
his wings shalt thou trust: his truth shall be thy 
sliield and buckler. 

5 Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by 
night ;' nor for the arrow that flicth by day ; 

C JW for tiic pestilence that walkcth in darkness ; 
nor for the dcstru('tion that wastoth at noonday. 

7 A thousand shall fall at tliy side, and ten thou- 
sand at thy right hand ; ivt it .shall not come 
nigh tlicc. 

8 Only witli thine eyes slialt thou behold and see 
the reward of the wicked.'' 

9 Because thou hast made the Loud, whichis my 
refuge, ci^en the Most High, thy habitation ; 

10 There shall no evil befall thee,' neither shall 
any plague come nigh thy dwelling. 

1 1 For he shall give his angels charge over thee, 
to keep thee in all thy ways.™ 

12 Tiiey shall bear thee up in their hands, lest 
thou dash thy foot against a stone. 



121:5,6. kPrOT. 3:25,S 



character, anticipating, in the language of faith and hope, 
the triumph of God's peojile over all evil. Their general 
character gives them a peculiar adaptation to the public 
worship of God in all ages. 

The change of persons in the psalm now before us is 
remarkable. The writer announces as his theme the safety 
of the believer who dwells under God's protection, verse 
1 ; he speaks of himself as such a believer, verse 2, (and 
in the original, verse 9, first clause ;) he addresses such a 
believer, verses 3-13; and finally, verses 11-16, God ad- 
dresses the believer. 

1. Secret place of the Most High; his pavilion, in which 
he hides his friends from all barm. Psa. 27:.'); :il:20. We 
dwell in the secret place of the Most High by faith in him 
and habitual communion with him. 

3. TVic .«)arc o/" Me /ou'/er; the plots of crafty foes. Psa. 
124:7. Noisome; destructive. 

."). Terror; danger that causes terror. liynipht — byday; 
they whom God protects shall be safe from every danger. 

7. A thousaiul — ten thousand; a definite for an indefinite 
number. 

9. liccmi-tc thou hast made — habitation ; this verse may bo 
literally rendered thus: "For thou, Lord, art my refuge; 
thou hast made the Most High thy habitation." As in 
verses 2, 3, ho first speaks of himself as a believer, and 
then addresses the believer. Wc make the Lord our 
dwelling-place, by habitually resorting to him for comfort 
and protection. 

10. There .■Jinll no rrd befall thee; this promise is not 
inconsistent with the rliastisemmt wherewith tiod visits 
his peo]>le for their profit, that they may bo " partakers 
of his holiness ;" this, though for the present " not joyous, 
lint grievous," is no evil, but a rich blessing. 

12. Dasli ; stumble by striking. To be kept from stum- 
bling, is to be kept in the way of truth and safety. Prov. 
3 : 2X These words contain no promise of protection when 
wc tempt God by needlessly exposing ourselves to dan- 
ger. JIatt. 4:5-7. 



Praise to God. 



PSALM xciir. 



Safety of Iht righteous. 



13 Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder;' 
the young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample 
under feet.* 

14 Because he hath set his love upon me, there- 
fore will I deliver him : I will set him on high, 
because he hatii known my name. 

15 lie shall call upon me, and I will answer 
him :" I inll be with him in trouble •/' I will deliver 
iiim, and honor him. 

IG With long life^ will I satisfy him,'' and show 
him my salvation. 

PSALM XCII. 

1 The prophet exhorteth to praise God, 4 for his great works, 6 for his 
judgments on the wicked, 10 and for his goodness to the godly. 

^ A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath-day. 

/Tis a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord,'" 
and to sing praises unto thy name, O Most High : 

2 To show forth thy loving-kindness in the 
morning,'' and thy faithfulness every night,* 

3 Ujion an instrument of ten strings, and upon 
the psaltery; upon the harp with a solemn sound. ^ 

4 For thou, Lord, hast made me glad through thy 
work : I will triumph in the works of thy hands. 

5 Lord, how great are thy works! and thy 
thoughts are very dcep.'^ 

6 A brutish man knoweth not; neither doth a 
fool understand this. 

7 When the wicked spring as the grass, and 



•Or.aap. aJob5:-i3. b ha. 65:24. c Isa. 43;2. ^ Kiib. length of days. 
jProv. :J:-2; 22:4. el'si.l47:l. ( Lam. 3:23. I B-eh. in the nights. 5 Or, 
upon the solemn sound with the harp; Heb. Higgaion; Psa. 0:16. S Isa. 



13. Tread upon; overcome. Lion — adder — t/ottng lion — 
dragon; enemies of all classes, the strong and the subtle, 
the fierce and the malignant. 

14. Known my name; been acquainted with my character, 
and confided in my care. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. Habitual access to God is a source of perpetual and 
perfect security. 

5. From the numerous evils by night and by day to 
wliich the wicked are exposed, those who trust in the 
Lord shall be delivered. 

II. To the heirs of salvation, angels are ministering spir- 
its ; in the path of duty God will protect them from all 
evil, or sanctify his dispensations to their highest good. 

15. God's people are not exempt from trouble ; but they 
have his promise that in all their trials he will be with 
them and deliver them and make them partakers of his 
everlasting salvation. 

PSALM XCII. 

4. Tliy work; thy providential dealings with the right- 
eous and the wicked, as shown in this psalm. 

6. A brutish man — a fool; one who is ignorant of God 
and estranged from him. Such men are short-sighted, 
and make the enjoyment of this world their chief good, 
not foreseeing the destruction which God is about to bring 
upon them. Ttiis; God's works and thoughts, especially 
as manifested in the salvation of the righteous, and the 
destruction of the wicked. 

7. Spring as the grass; have great present prosperity. 

10. Mij horn; my power and influence. Anointed with 
fresh oil; as was done on festive occasions. This is to be 
understood spiritually of the strength, comfort, and pros- 
perity which God imparts to the righteous through his 
providence, word, and Spirit. 

11. 31ine eye — shall see ; the destruction of my enemies. 

12. The palm-tree ; a tree which becomes very large, af- 
fords a refreshing shade, and bears abundance of fruit. A 
cedar in Lebanon; the most majestic and enduring of trees. 



when all the workers of iniquity do flourish; it 
is that they shall be destroyed for ever:'' 

8 But thou. Lord, art most high for evermore. 

9 For lo, thine enemies, Lord, fur lo, thine 
enemies shall perish ; all the workers of iniquity 
shall be scattered.' 

10 But my horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of 
a unicorn : I shall be anointed witii fresh oil.^ 

11 Mine eye also shall see 7nij desire on mine 
enemies, and mine ears shall hear my desire of the 
wicked that rise up against me. 

12 The righteous shall flourish like the palm- 
tree:" he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon. 

13 Those that be planted in the house of the 
Lord shall flourish in the courts of our God. 

14 They shall still briug forth fruit in old age; 
they shall be fat and flourishing;' 

1.5 To show that the Lord is upright: he is ray 
rock,' and there is no unrighteousness in him."" 

PSALM XCIII. 

The majesty, power, and holiness of Christ's kingdom. 

THE Lord reigneth," he is clothed with majes- 
ty ; the Lord is clothed with strength, where- 
ivith he hath girded himself: the world also is 
established, that it cannot be moved. 

2 Tiiy throne is established of old: '^ thou art 
from everlasting." 

3 The floods have lifted up, Lord, the floods 



55:9; Rora. 11:33. h Psa. 73:18-20; Mai. 4:1. i Matt. 7:23. J 2 Cor. 1:21 ; 
1 John 2:20. k Psa. 52:8; Hos. 14:5, 6. I Heb. green. > Deut. .32:4. 
n>Zeph.3:5. n Isa. 52:7; Rev. 19:6. 1 Heb. /rom Mem. oPsa.45:6. 



13. Planted in the house of tlie Lord; the righteous are 
figuratively described as planted in God's house, because 
they derive their strength and fruitfulness from commun- 
ion with him. 

14. Be fat and flouruliing ; be blessed with groat pros- 
perity. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. The righteous understand God's government, and tri- 
umph with holy gladness in the everlasting protection and 
salvation which it secures to them. 

6. The wicked understand not the ways of God's prov- 
idence, and are not aware that the present prosperity 
which they abuse will be the occasion of their ruin. 

10. They who put their trust in God shall continually 
receive from him new strength for the performance of the 
new services which he requires of them. 

11. Since God will, in his own time and way, destroy 
his enemies, the righteous have no occasion to envy their 
present greatness and power, or to be disquieted by the 
wicked devices which they bring to pass. 

14. Continued fruitfulness, extending into old age, is one 
of the "exceeding great and precious promises" which 
God gives to those who put their trust in him and are 
faithful in his service. 

15. The righteous and the wicked here dwell together, 
and appear in many respects alike; but in the end, God 
will make such a difference between them as shall mani- 
fest to all his uprightness in the administration of his 
government. 

PSALM XCIII. 

1. Established; the idea is, that He who has by his om- 
nipotence established the world and made it immovable, 
can sustain his people in all trials and dangers, and make 
them victorious over all their foes. 

3. The floods; the waters of the great deep, here repre- 
senting the tumultuous and angry resistance of the nations 
to God's authority. Psa. 2:1. 

677 



An appeal to GoiTs justice. 



PSALM XCIY 



Blessedness of affliction. 



have lifted up their voice ; the floods lift up their 
waves. 

4 The Lord on high is mightier than the noise 
of many waters, ym, tlum the mighty waves of 
the sea." 

5 Thy testimonies are very sure: holiness becom- 
eth thy house,'' Louu, for ever." 

PSALM XCIV. 

1 The prophet, cnlliiii; for justice, complaineth of tyranny and impiety. 
8 He teaclieth God's providence. \2 He showeth the blessedness of 
aflliotion. IC God is the defender of the afflicted. 

OLORD God, to whom vcngcancobclongeth -.^^ 
God, to whom veugeancc bclongeth, show 
thyself.' 

2 Lift up tliyself, thou judge of the earth : ren- 
der a reward to the proud. 

3 Loud, how long shall the wicked, how long 
shall the wicked triuinpli?'' 

4 How long shall they utter and speak hard 
things?" and all the workers of iniquity boast 
themselve.-!? 

5 Tlicy break in pieces thy people, Lord, and 
afflict thy heritage. 

6 They slay the widow and tlio stranger, and 
murder the fatlierless. 

T Yet tliey say. The Lord shall not see, neither 
sliall the God of Jacob regard it. 

8 Understand, ye brutish among the people ;'' 
and yo fools, when will ye be wise? 

y lie that planted the ear, shall he not hear ? 
he that formed the eye, shall he not sec?^ 



i P»a. «!):0. I> Hob. 12:14; Re 



Heb. to length of ilai/X ; P.<a 



fort/,: Psa. 80;1. if Job 2(1:5; Jer. 12:1, 2. • Psa. 73:8, etc.; Judo 15, 
' Paa. 92:U;Kom. 3:11. «Eio<i. 4:11. li Ezek. 39:21 ; Ilab. 3:12. ■ J'rov. 

4. Miglilicr than — many waters ; able to control alike the 
raging billows of the sea, anil the angry iKissions of men, 
for the accomi)lislnnent of his own glorious designs. 

5. Tliy teslmiomcs; the declarations of thy word. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. God is unchangeable; the same yesterday, to-day, and 

for ever Those who trust in him will never be disappointed. 

4. God's control over the angry passions of men is as ab- 
solute as over the fiercest eknients of nature. He overrules 
them as ho docs " fire and hail, snow and vapor," and " stormy 
wind," for the accomplislnnent of his glorious jiurposes. 

.■>. ,\s Jehovah is holy, ho requires his people to be holy ; 
and without holiness no man can worship him acceptably 
in this world, or be prepared for his presence in the world 
to come. 

P.<.\L.M XCI v. 
1. Sliow thyself; as the protector of thy people, able and 
ready to save them and punish those who rise up against 
them. 

5. Thy heritage; Israel, as "u peculiar treasure" unto 
God "above all iieople." Exod. 19:5. 

8. Brutwili— fools ; the persons mentioned in the preced- 
ing verse, whoso ignorance of God leads them to feel and 
act as thougli lie did not see them or their works. 

12. Clinstciieil ; the immediate reference is to the chas- 
tisement wliieh God administers through the agency of the 
wicked spoken of in the ])reteding verses ; but the words 
apply to chastisement in the widest sense. Tcacliest — out 
of thy law; in connection with thy chastening hand. 

14. IIi.s inheritanrc ; his people. 

U). Jwlgment sliall rclnrn unto riphteotumcss ; from which 

it Bcomed for a time to have ileparted. Whatever present 

api)oaranccs may be, all the dr:dings of (iod will in the end 

appear to bo righteous. Sluill follow it; shall wclcomo the 

678 



10 He that cliastiseth the heathen, shall not he 
correct?'' he that teachcth man knowledge, shall 
not he know /" 

11 The Lord knoweth the thoughts of man, that 
they are vanity.' 

12 Blessed is the man whom thou chastcnest, 
Lord, and teachest him out of thy law ;'' 

13 That thou maycst give hiin re,-t from the days 
of adversity, until the pit be diggi'd for the wicked. 

14 For the Lord will not cast oil' his people, nei- 
ther will he forsake his inheritance.' 

15 But judgment shall return unto righteousness : 
and all the upright in heart shall follow^ it. 

IG Wlio will ri.se up for me against the evil- 
doers? or wlio will stand up for me against the 
workers of iniquity? 

17 Unless tlie IjOkd had been my help,"" my soul 
had almost' dwelt in silence. 

18 When I said, My foot slippeth;" thy mercy, 
Lord, held me up. 

19 In the multitude of my thoughts within me 
thy comforts delight my soul." 

20 Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship 
with tlieo, which frameth mischief by a law?' 

21 Tliey gatlier themselves together against the 
soul of the righteous, and condemn the innocent 
blood. •• 

22 But the Lord is my defence ; and my God is 
the rock of my refuge. 

23 And he shall bring upon them their own in- 
iquity, and shall cut them off in their own wicked- 
ness ;"■ yea, the Lord our God shall cut them o£f. 



2:6. i 1 Cor. 3:19, 20. k Job 5:17; Prov. 3:11 ; Heb. 12:5, etc. ' 1 Sam. 
12:22; Rom. llll, 9. » Heb. be after, m Psa. 124:1, 2. I Or, yi.W7jl. 
'>Psa.3S:16. ■> P..>a. 03:5, 6; 2 Cor. 1:3, 4. p Isa. 10:1. 9 Prov. 1:11, l«; 
Matt. 27:1. rProv. 5:22. 

return of God's righteous judgment, and follow its path 
with joy. 

17. Almost dwelt in silence; would soon have died and 
been silent in the grave. 

19. Thoughts; anxious and distracting thoughts. Tliy 
comforts; the consolations which thou givest These come 
in to cheer and tranquillize my spirit. 

20. The throne of initjuity; of wicked rulers who enact 
unjust and cruel laws. 

23. Their omn iniquity; its destructive effects. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Jehovah is a Gixl of justice as well as mercy, and in 
tlio entl will treat every man according to his work. 

7. The wicked act as if there were no God, or ;>s if ho 
did not regard them or their doings. 

12. When God chastens his ]icoplc,ho teaches them by 
his Spirit out of his word. The teaching of his Spirit 
with his chastening rod makes them wise unto eternal 
life, and thus most blessed for evermore. 

13. They who meekly .submit themselves to God's chas- 
tisement, and learn the rich lessons of heavenly wisdom 
which it otTers, shall find in God a sure resting-place from 
trouble, anil sluiU see the overthrow of tlio wicked who 
sought their destruction. 

17. The pious ascribe tJio continuance of all tlieir bless- 
ings to the gr.icc of (iod, and give him the glory. 

19. Communion witli God is a sure relief from anxious 
and distracting cares. 

20. Laws of mischief and thrones of iniqnitj', though 
having transient power by God's permission, arc offensive 
to him, anil must receive his frown. 

22. 'fhe Lord will defend his people, and bring upon tlioir 
enemies tlio evils which thev thought to bring upon oth- 
ers; and though for a time the wicked may seem to pros- 
per, they will linally jieri.'ih, and have none to help them. _ 



Praise to God, for Ms 



rSALM XCVII. 



pratiicss, goodness, a7id justice. 



PSALM XCV 

I to pi 



5e God. 3 for his greatness, 6 and for his good- 
, S and not to tempt him. 

OH como, let us sing unto the Lord : let us make 
a joyful noise ^ to the rock of our salvation.'' 

2 Let us come before his presence* with tlianks- 
givinn-, and make a joyful uoise unto him with 
psalms. 

3 For the Lord /s a great God,'' and a great King 
above all gods.'' 

4 In his* hand are the deep places of the earth : 
the strength of the Iiills is his* also. 

5 The sea is his,^ and he made it :" and liis hands 
formed the dry land. 

6 Oh come, let us worship and bow down: let 
us kneel before the Lord our maker.' 

7 For he is our God ; and we are tiie people of 
his pasture, and the sheep of his hand. To-day 
if ye will hear his voice,"^ 

8 Harden not your heart, as in the provocation,' 
and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness : '' 

9 When your fathers tempted me,' proved me, and 
saw my work. 

10 Forty years long was I grieved with this 
generation, and said, It is a people that do err in 
their heart, and they have not known my ways: 

11 Unto whom I sware in my wrath tliat tliey 
should not cnter^ into my rest.^ 

PSALM XCVI. 

1 An exhortation to praise (>oil, 4 for his greatness, 8 for his kingdom. 
11 for liis general judgment. 

H sing unto the Lord a new song :^ sing unto 
the Lord, all the earth. 



o 



a I'sa. 100:1. b aSain. 2-J:47. * Ilcb. prereni his fare. " Psa. 97:S. 
Mai. 1:14. t Heb. wAose. i Or, heights of llu hills !s.'i his. i^Heh. Whose 
theseam. eGen. 1:9,10. ' Acts 21:5; Phil. '2:10. e Heb. 3:7, 1.5. I Heb. 
conUnlion. t EicoJ. 17:2,7; Num. 14:2, etc.; Deut. 6:16. ■ 1 Cor. 10:9. 



PSALM XCV. 

4. Deep places ; inmost recesses. 

7. People of his padure; whom he guides, guards, and 
nourishes. Hear his voice; obey his commands. 

8. Provocation — temptation; in the Hebrew, these words 
are Meribiih and Massah, die same as in Exod. 17: 7, which 
mean "chiding," and " tcin|itation." The conduct of the 
Israelites at Massati and Meribali is mentioned as an ex- 
amjile of their spirit of unbelief and rebellion. 

10. Err in their heart ; err from the path of duty through 
an unbelieving heart. 

11. My rest; the land of Canaan, an emblem of heaven. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. The service of God should be the employment, and 
the praises of God the joy of every heart. 

7. Nothing should hinder us from devoting the present 
time to God, lest, if we procrastinate, life should end, and all 
opportunity and inclination to serve him be lost for ever. 

II. Though God waits upon the wicked with much long- 
suffering and patience, if they continue in sin he will at 
last exclude them for ever from the rest of heaven, and 
punish them according to their deserts. 

PSALM XCVI. 

We have here another of those noble psalms in which 
the writer, under the illumination of the Holy Ghost, antic- 
ipates and predicts the conversion of all the nations to 
CJod. It constitutes, with sHght variations, a part of the 
jisalm that David delivered to Asaph to sing, when the 
ark was removed to Zion. 1 Chron. IC : 23-33. 

1. A new sons; ; for new displays of his glory. 

6. The nations; heathen nations. 



2 Sing unto the Lord, bless his name ; show 
forth his salvation from day to day. 

3 Declare his glory among the heathen, his won- 
ders among all peojile. 

4 For the Lord is great, and greatly to be 
praised :' he is to be feared aliove all gods. 

5 For all the gods of the nations are idols:"" but 
the Lord made the lieaveus." 

6 Honor and majesty are before him: strength 
and beauty are in his sanctuary." 

7 Give unto the Lord, ye kindreds of the 
peo])le, give unto tlie Lord glory and strength.^ 

8 Give unto the Lord the glory due unto' his 
name : bring an offering,'' and come into his courts. 

9 Oh worship tiie Lord in the beauty of holi- 
ness :* fear before liim, all the earth. 

10 Say among the heathen that tlie Lord reign- 
cth;"' the world also shall be established that it 
shall not be moved: he shall judge the people 
righteously.'' 

11 Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be 
glad;' let the sea roar, and tlie fulness thereof. 

12 Let the field be joyful, and all that is tliere- 
iu : tlien shall all tiie trees of the wood rejoice 

13 Before tlie Lord : for he cometh,for liecometh 
to judge the earth : he shall judge the world with 
righteousness, and the people with his truth." 



PSALM XCVII. 

1 The majesty of Crod's kingdom. 7 The churcli rejoicetli at (Tod's 
jndgmeiits upon idolaters. 10 An exlioitation to godliness and glad- 

fT^HE Lord reigneth;" let the earth rejoice;" 
J_ let the multitude of* isles be glad thereof.^ 



inA. if they enter. JHeh. 4:3, 5. k 1 Chr. 1G:21-.'J^. I Psa. 18. .3. m Jer. 
1011,12. nisa. 42:5. o Psa. 63:2. p Jude 2-"). • Heb. o/. q Heb. 13.15. 
^Ot, glorious sanrluary. 'Rev. 19:6. s Psa. 40:0, 10. iPsa.09:34. u Rev. 
1011;2013. vPsi.9'9:l. >vPsi.2:ll. 1 Heb. many, or grrat. iIsa.C0:9. 



6. Strength and beauty are in his sanctuary; it is there 
that he dwells and reveals himself to his worshippers in 
his strength and beauty. Psa. 63:2. 

9. Fear before him, all the earth; exhortations like this, 
given by the spirit of prophecy, contain in themselves a 
pledge of the future conversion of all nations. 

10. The world also shall be established; this includes both 
the right ordering of nature, and the right government of 
human affairs. As the powers of nature obey God from 
age to age, so will he finally bring allnations into a state 
of permanent obedience to his authority. 

13. To judge the earth; by saving the righteous and 
destroying the wicked. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The great business of all should be to embrace and 
make known the salvation which God has provided for 
lost and guilty men. 

4. They who love God earnestly desire that their fellow- 
men should know and serve him. 

8. The glory of all the good done or enjoyed in this 
world belongs to God, and should be publicly given to him. 

10. By the extension of true piety over the whole eartli, 
God will finally establish all that is good upon an endur- 
ing and unchangeable basis. 

"13. The coming of God to save his people and judge 
the world in righteousness and truth, is anticipated with 
great joy by those that love him. 

PSALM XCVII. 

In this and the following psalm God's sovereignty over 
all the earth is set forth, with special reference to the 
overthrow of his enemies. 

619 



Glory of God's kingdom. 



PSALM XCIX. 



A song of praise. 



2 Clouds and darkno?s arc round about him :" 
riglitcousnoss and judgment are tlio habitation* of 
his throne." 

^^ A iirc gocth before him, and Inirin'th up his 
oiicniios roinid about.'^ 

4 His liirhtuiiigscnlightencdthcworid: thccartii 
paw. and troiiibU'd. 

5 The iiills incited iiicc wax at tlie presence of tiic 
LoiiP, at tlie presence oftlic Lord of tiiewliolc earth/ 

G The lieavens declare his righteousness, and 
all tiie ]icopIe see his glory." 

7 Confounded be all they that serve graven 
images, that boast themselves of idols : worship 
him, all ye gods.*^ 

8 Zion heard, and was glad ; and the daughters of 
Judali rejoiced l)ccausc of thy judgments, Lord. 

9 For tiioii, Loiu), art higli al)ovc all the earth : 
thou art exalted far above all gods. 

10 Ye that love the Lord, hate evil:*-' ho prc- 
servcth tiio souls of his saints; he dclivcreth them 
out of the liand of the wicked.'' 

11 Light is sown for tlie righteous, and glad- 
ness for the upright in heart. 

12 Rejoice iu the Lord, ye righteous;' and give 
thanks at the remembrance* of his holiness. 

PSALM XCVIII. 

1 The psulmist cxliortctli tlie Jews, -l the Gentiles, 7 and all the crea- 
tures to praise (joil. 
^ A Psalm. 

On sing unto the Lord a new song; for he 
hath done marvellous tilings : his right hand, 
and his holy arm, hath gotten liiin the victory.^ 
2 The Lord hath made known his salvation:" 



" 1 Kings 8:12. • Or, eilablislimrnl. 
1-J;29. i Suiz. 5:5; M.c. 1-4. e Nur 
? Prov. 3:7; Rom. l-i:'J. b D.in. 3:28. 



I> Fsa, b<J:ll. c Dan. 7:IU; Hcb. 
H:2I; Matt. 'Xi-.-M. < Heb. l:(i. 
i Phil. .|:4. t Or, 10 the memorial. 



2. Clouds and darkiieas are round about him ; the allusioti 
is to the manifestation of Jehovah wlien lie gave the hiw, 
Dcut. 5:22. The clouils and darkness and devouring lire 
were symbols of (Jod's awful holiness, and of the destruc- 
tion that awaited the violators of iiis law. Compare lleb. 
12 : 29, and verse 3 of the present I'salm. The habitation of 
his throne; the home where it continually dwells. Some 
render, " the basis of his throne." The idea will then be, 
that it is built on righteousness and judgment. 

7. All ye gods; applied in the New Testament to the 
angels, as the psalm itself is to Christ. Ileb. 1:6. 

8. Daughters of Jitdah; the people of Judah, as repre- 
Bcnling Uod's church. 

9. All goih ; heathen gods. 

11. Light lisown; as seed destined to produce an abun- 
dant harvest. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The univcrs.ll and perfect government of God is a 
Boiiree of unspeakable joy to all who love him. 

2. Whatever may be the present appearance to us 
short-sighted rnorUtls, all the ways of God are true and 
righteous altogether. 

3. Tlie government of Rod is a source of terror and 
destruction to his enemies. 

f>. VVheti (ind appears, to fulfil his promises and execute 
his threateniiigH, all opposition vanishes before him and 
all dilBcidticH disappear. 

C. Though a groat portion of the earth is still ignorant 
of God and his ways, the time is eoniing when all bIuiH 
bcholil his glory and rejoice in his love. 

10. Though surrounded with enemies and exposed to 
numerous dangers, God will kee]) all who trust in him 
thro\i;;li faith unto salvation. 

11. .\s the seed which is sown with toil springs up from 



his righteousness hath he Openly showed' in the 
sight of the heathen. 

:{ lie hath remembered his mercy and his truth 
toward tlic house of Israel:' all the ends of the 
earth have seen the salvation of our God.'" 

4 Make ajoyful noise unto the Lord, all tlie earth: 
make a loud noise, and rejoice, and sing juaise. 

') Sing unto the Lord with the harp; with the 
harp, and the voice of a psalm. 

fi With trumpets and sound of cornet make a 
joyful noise before the Lord, the King. 

7 Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; the 
world, and they that dwell therein. 

8 Let the floods clap their hands: let the hills 
be joyful together 

!) 15efore the Lord ; for he cometh to judge the 
earth:" with righteousness shall he judge the 
work!, and tlie people with equity. 

PSALM XCIX. 

1 The prophet, selling forth the hingJom of Go.1 in Zion, .5 cxhortcth all, 
hy the e.wiiiplc of h.r.fathers, to worship (Jod at lus holy hill. 

f'T^IIE Lord reigncth;" let the people tremble:'' 
L he sitteth between the cherubim ; let the earth 
be inoved.^ 

2 The Lord is great in Zion ; and he is high above 
all the people. 

3 Let them praise thy great and terrible name;'' 
for i t is holy. 

4 The king's strength also loveth judgment; thou 
dost establish equity, thou e.Kecutest judgment and 
righteousness in Jacob.'' 

5 Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at 
his footstool ;' for ho* is holy. 



J Kxod. 15:0; Isi. 59:1(3. k Isi. 5J:I0. 1 Or, rerealed. 1 I.uke 1:54, 72. 
1" Uom. 1U:I2, 18. nllev. 1:7. oPsa. 9:!:1. P .Icr. 5:22. « Hcb. «Offfftr. 
q Deut. 2S:5S. rJob36:5-7. •lClir.2^:2. IOr,i(. 



beneath the clods and yields an abundant harvest ; so labor 
performed in the night of trouble is often, to the righteous, 
the beginning of great iirosperity and jov. 

12. The holiness of God is a terror to the wicked, but 
to the righteous a source of great joy. 

PSALM XCVIII. 

2. Made Icnotcn his salvation : his righteousness ; manifested 
his righteousness in the salvation of bis people. These 
words are fullillcd in every interposition of God for hie 
people, especially in the mission of bis Son. 

3. Remembered his memj and his truth; in the fulfilment 
of his promises. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The people of God praise him for his victory over sin 
and ile;ith, while they embrace and rejoice in his s;ilvation. 

3. The )ilaces most ilislant from Judea, including the 
remotest luatlun nations, shall one day hear of and expe- 
rience the salvation of God. 

9. The coming of God to judge the world by Jesus 
Christ, is an event to which the righteous look forward 
with unspeakable y<y. 

PS.VL.M XCIX. 

Jehovah, as the King who reigns iu Zion, is to be foared 
and obeyed by all. 

1. Let the people tremble; let all nations tremble before 
his nwjesty. and submit themselves to him. Between the 
cherubim ; that overshadowed the ark. This was the most 
holy place, from which God manifested his glory. 

3. Name; to praise Goil's name, is to praise his infinite 
perfections as manifested to men ; all these his name com- 
prehends. 

.1. His footstool; his earthly tabernacle. 1 Chron. 28:2. 



All should praise, the Lord. 



PSALM CII. 



ITis mercy and judgnujii. 



tt Moses and Aaron amon.ij his priests, and Sam- 
uel anionji them that call upon his name; they 
called upon the Loijd,'' and he answered them. 

7 He spake unto them in (he cloudy pillar :'' they 
kept his testimonies, and the ordinance that he 
gave them. 

8 Thou answeredst them, Lord our God: thou 
wast a God that fbriravest them, though thou took- 
est venjreance of their inventions.'^ 

9 Exalt the Lokd our God, and worship at his 
holy hill ;'' for the Lord our God is holy. 

PSALM C. 

1 All exliortation to praise God cheerfully, 3 for his greatness, 4 and for 

his power. 

*J A Psalm of praise.* 

MAKE a joyful noise unto the Lord, all y elands.' 
2 Serve the Lord with gladness: come be- 
fore his presence with singing. 

3 Know ye that the Lord he is God : it is he that 
iiath made us,*" and not we ourselves;* we ai-e his 
peo])le,' and the sheep of his pasture."^ 

4 Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and 
into his courts with praise :'' be thankful unto 
iiim, and bless his name. 

5 For the Lord is good : his mercy is everlast- 
ing; and his truth endtireth to all generations.^ 

PSALM CI. 

David niaketh a vow and profession of j;odIiness. 
\l A Psalm of David. 

TWILL sing of mercy and judgment: unto thee, 
Lord, will I sing. 





« Exod. 13 


25; 


ISi 


m. 7 


9. b 


Exod. :n:9. 


c Psa. 89 


.%■); 


Jer 


M: 


io, -Jii. 


<< 


?^.T 


•i;H, 


• Or 


tkanksg 


"in?, 


Psa. 143. till 


. t Heb 


Ike 


ennk. 


e Psa. 


n 


I'i 


I Or 


Am 


wt 


arc. 


1 Isa. 


63; 19. e Ezek. 34:11 


elf 


; 1 


IVt 


d:'i3. 


" 


I'SI 


«5:1; 


isi 


io 


lU. 


S Heb. generation 


and generatic 


n; 


i'aa 


89:1. 



6. Moses — amon^ his priests; Moses was of the family 
which God selected for the priesthood, and in the institu- 
tion of the Jewish ritual he performed some priestly func- 
tions, as that of consecrating Aaron and his sons with 
sacrifices. Lev. chap. 8. Samuel among them that call upon 
his name ,' the meaning of this verse is, Moses and Aaron 
and Samuel among his priests who called on his name. 
All three belonged to the priestly order, and are mentioned 
as eminent examples of men who called on God in inter- 
cessory prayer for his people. 

8. Inventions ; sinful deeds, as that of making the golden 
calf. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The holiness of God forms a just ground for loving, 
worshipping, and obeying him. Ver. 5, 9. 

4. All God's attributes are in harmony with each other. 
His omnipotence is the omnipotence of infinite righteous- 
ness. 

6. Jehovah has in every age been a praj'er-hearing God, 
and all who call upon him in spirit and in truth receive a 
gracious answer. 

8. Though Jehovah forgives tlie penitent, he often chas- 
tises them for their sins. 

. PSALM C. 

All nations are called upon to praise Jehovah as their 
creator, preserver, and benefactor. This psalm contains, 
like many others, a prophetic anticipation of the conver- 
sion of all the gentile nations. 

3. Not we; men must not take to themselves the glory 
of their own powers, or privileges. 

4. His gates; the place in which he is worsliipped. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 
1. As the Lord is good to all, all should unite in prais- 
ing and adoring him. 



2 I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way.' 
Oh when wilt thou come unto me? 1 will walk 
Avitliin my house with a jierfect heart.-i 

'.'> I will set no wicked tiling' liefore mine eyes:'' 
I hate the work of them that turn aside;' it shall 
not cleave to me. 

4 A froward heart shall depart from me: 1 will 
not know a wicked person."' 

5 Whoso ])rivily slanderetli his nciuiibor, him 
will I cut oil: hiin that hath a high look and a 
proud heart will not I suflcr. 

6 Mine eyes shall he u]ion the faithful of the land, 
that they may dwell with me: he that walketii in 
a perfect wnj'' he shall serve me. 

7 He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within 
my house: he that telleth lies shall not tarry* in 
my sight." 

8 I will early destroy all the wicked of the land ;" 
that I may cut off all wicked doers from the city 
of the Lord. 

PSALM CII. 

1 The prophet in his prayer maketh a grievous complaint. \2 He lak- 
eth comfort in the eternity and mercy of God. IS The mercies of 
God are to be recorded. 'i3 He sustaineth lus weakness by the un- 
cliangeableness of God. 

«T A Prayer of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, p and 
poureth out his complaint Ijefore the Lokd.i 

HEAR my prayer, Lord, and let my cry come 
unto thee. 
2 Hide not thy face from me in tlie day udicn I 
am in trouble ;"* incline thine ear unto me: in the 
day wlicn I call answer me speedily. 



i 1 Sam. IS 


14 J 


1 King 


9:4. 


1 Heb. th 


"r" 


of Belial 


kisa 


33 


15 




Psa. 


l-i.'5:5. ra 


Cor. 


15:33. 


1i Or 




Ih 


€ way; ] 


sa. 119 


1. 




He 


b te 


establiihed. 


■> h 


ev.al: 


n. 


Jer. 21: 1-2 




Or, for. 


P Psa 


Ul 


a. 


< 


Psa. 


6-2'». rPs 


1.143 


19. < 


sa. 4a 


■i; 1 Cor. 


lU 


13. 













3. The grace of God is the cause of all the distinctions 
among the children of men, whereby one has richer bless- 
ings and is more favored than another. 

0. Jehovah is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever ; 
none who put their trust in him will be disajipointed. 

PSALM CL 

1. Mercy and judgment ; God's mercy and judgment in 
exalting David's family to the throne in the place of Saul's. 
The psalmist then proceeds to show how he will execute 
his high office. 

2. Come unto me; as my helper in the discharge of my 
duties. He is conscious that he cannot execute his good 
intentions without God's aid. 

4. Know; regard with favor. 

0. The faithfid of t lie land; men who are trustworthy, 
and can be relied on to do tlicir duty. Dwell with rnc; as 
mv servants. 

"8. Early; literally, morning by morning, that is, with 
promptness and vigilance. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. They whom God has exalted to high staticms, should 
ascribe to him the praise of all their influence and oppor- 
tunities to do good. 

2. Pious rulers will endeavor, both in the family and in 
public life, to set a holy example which may be safely and 
usefully followed by all. 

R. Righteous magistrates will choose only the good and 
faithful for their councillors and helpers. 

8. It is the aim of every good ruler to favor righteous- 
ness and jiut down iniquity. 

PSALM CII. 

Title. The affliction which exhausts the p.salmist's 
strength, and threatens to shorten his days, is not simply 
681 



Prayer of the ajjl'tckd. 



PSALM CHI. 



The mercies of God. 



3 For mj' days arc consumed like' smoke, and 
my bones arc burned as a hoartli. 

4 My heart is smitten, and withered like grass; 
so that I forget to cut my bread. 

5 By reason of the voice of my groaning my 
bones cleave to my skin.' 

6 I am like a pelican of the wilderness: I am 
like an owl of tiic desert. 

7 I watch, and am as a sparrow alone upon the 
house-top. 

s Mini' enemies reproacli me all the day; and 
tlicy tluil are mad against me arcsworn agaiustme." 

9 For 1 liavc eaten ashes like bread, and min- 
gled my drink with weeping. 

10 Hecause of tiiine indignation and thy wrath: 
lor tliou iiast lifted me up, and cast m(! down.'' 

11 Jly days an- like a shadow that decliueth;' 
and I am withcrcil like grass.** 

12 But thou, O J^ORD, slialt endure for ever;" 
and tliy remembrance unto all generations. 

13 Tliou shalt arise, and iiave mercy upon Zion : 
for the time to favor her,'' yea, the set time, is 
come." 

14 For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, 
and favor tiie dust thereof. 

1.5 So tlie iieatiien siiall fear the name of the 
Loun, and all tlic kings of the eartli thy glory. 

IG When the Lord sIAU build up Zion, he shall 
appear in his glory. 

IT lie will regard l]u> prayer of the destitute, 
and not despise their prayer.'' 

18 This siiall be written for the generation to 
come : ' and tiie ])eoplc which shall be created 
shall praise tiie Lord. 

19 For he iiath looked down from the height of 
his sanctuary ; from heaven did the Lord behold 
the earth : 

20 To hear the groaning of the prisoner ;' to 
loose those that are appointed to death;* 



• Or, M loroo reid, tnlo. 1 Or. JItsh. « Acts 23:12. 1> l>sa. 30:7. c Ecol. 
n:l2. dJu. 1:10. cLam. S:IO. ' Isa. 60:1, etc. ; Zcch. 1:12, 13. s Isa. 
40;2. h Neh. 1:0, 11: 2:1-S. I Rom. 15:4; 1 Cor. 10:11. J Psa. 140:7. 



jjcrsonal sufferinK from sickness, but suffering which ho 
shares in common with Zion.iind which is caused, in part 
ut least, by the ic])roaclie8 that lie endures for her sake. 
Tliis explains why lie connects his own restoration with 
the cnlar;;einciit of (Jod's people. 

3. limned ; with inward heat. 

5. Mil hones cleave to nxij skin; a description of extreme 
emaciation. 

C. Of the tle.iert ; or, dwelling in desolate places. 

7. A spiirrnw; the Hebrew word is often used for the 
smaller l)irds generally. Alone; sitting solitary, as when 
deprived of its mate or its young. 

10. Lifted me up, and cast me down; lifted me up from 
the ground, that tliou miglitest dash me against it. 

11. Like a shadow that dechncth; that is stretched out at 
evening, a sign that it is soon to disappear in the dark- 
ness of night. 

14. Take pleasure in her stones; an affectionate interest in 
Zion, even in her desolations. 

15. So; as the effect oftiod's having mercy upon Zion. 
20. Thoie that are appointed to death ; the prisoners whom 

their enemies had ap|iointed to death. These words have 
their highest fullilin<-nt in the redemption which Christ 
brings to men from tlu> spiritual bondage of sin and death 
eternal; and to him, as one with the K;illicr, this psalm is 
applieil in the New Testament. Ileb. 1 : 10-12. 
27. Thuu art the same; the unchungeablo (jod. 
6&i 



21 To declare the name of the Lord in Zion, and 
his praise in Jerusalem;" 

22 AVhcn tlie jieoplc; are gathered together, and 
the kingdoms, to serve the Lord. 

23 He weakened* my strength in the way; he 
shortened my days. 

24 I said, my God, take me not away in the 
midst of my days:' thy years are throughout all 
generations. 

25 Of old hast thou laid the foundations of the 
earth : and the heavens arti the work of thy iuinds."" 

20 Tiioy siiall perish, Init thou slialt endure:' 
yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment; as 
a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall 
be changed : 

27 But thou art tlie same, and thy years shall 
have no end." 

28 Tiic children of thy servants shall continue, 
and tlicir seed shall be esiablislied before thee. 

PSALM cm. 

1 An exliortalion to bless God for his mercy, 13 ;iiiJ for Uie constancy 

thereof. 

^ A Psalm of David. 

r)LESS the Lord, my soul; and all that is 
) within me, bks.i his holy name. 

2 Bless the Lord, my soul, and forget not all 
his benefits : 

3 Who forgivethall tliine iniquities;" wlio hcal- 
eth all tiiy diseases;" 

4 Whoredeeiiioth tliy life from destruction ; who 
crowncth tlicc witii loving-kindness and tender 
mercies ; 

5 Who satisfieth thy mouth with good things; 
so that thy youth is renewed like the eagle's.'' 

G The Lord cxecutetli righteousness and judg- 
ment ibr all l/iat are oppressed. 

7 He made known his ways unto Moses, his acts 
unto the children of Israel. 



I lUh.lhrrliililrenofiltalk. k 1 Pet. 2:9. i Mfb. nfflirlrd. 1 Pw. 39:13; 
]ia.3i:10. "Hcb. 1:10-12. I Hcb. sluiid. o Mai. 3:0; Heb. ia!S. o Matt. 
9:2-0; Eph. 1:7. P Exod. 15:26. 1 Isi. 40:31. 



INSTRUCTION'S. 

I. Prayer is the unfailing resource of God's people in 
trouble, and by it they obtain from God the support and 
comfort which they need. 

10. Trials as well as mercies como from God, and his 
hand is to be acknowledged in both. 

II. Zion is dear to the friends of God, and when they 
truly mourn her low estate, the time of her deliverance is 
near. 

15. The prosperity of the church glorifies God and brings 
salvation to men. 

IS. It is God's design that his dealings with his people 
in one age, should be recorded for the adnioniliou and 
encouragement of all coming generations. 

22. God is moved with compassion in view of the sor- 
rows wliicli sin has brought upon the human race, and he 
will one day break the yoke of pataij and set the world 
free from his dominion. Then His service shall be the 
joyful employment of all men. 

28. The unclmngcableneKs of God insures the fulfilment 
of all his promises, and will ]ierpetuate the blessings of 
his i>eoplo for ever. 

PSALM nil. 

5. Is renewed like the caple's .• so that thon art made contin- 
ually vigorous and active, like the eagle, oven to old age. 
7. Ihs ti-aijs; his ways of dealing with his people. 



An exhortation to llcss 



PSALM ciy. 



Jchov ih for his 



8 The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to 
anger, and plenteous in" mercy. 

9 He will not always chide: neither will he keep 
his anger for ever." 

10 He hath not dealt with us after our sins; 
nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. 

11 For as the heaven is high* above the earth, 
so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. 

12 As far as the east is from the west, so far 
hath he removed our transgressions from us.*" 

13 Like as a father pitieth his children, so the 
Lord pitieth them that fear him. 

14 For he knowcth our frame ; he rcmembcreth 
thut we are dust."" 

1 .5 As for man, his days arc as grass : as a flower 
of the field, so he flourisheth." 

16 For the wind passethover it, and it is gone;* 
and the place thereof shall know it no more." 

17 But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting 
to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his 
righteousness unto children's children ; 

18 To such as keep his covenant, and to those 
that remember his commandments to do them.' 

19 The Lord hath prepared his throne in the 
iieavens;'-' and his kingdom ruleth over all." 

20 Bless the Lord, ye his angels, that excel iu' 
strength,' that do his commandments, hearkening 
unto the voice of his word. 

21 Bless ye the Lord, all yc his hosts; ye minis- 
ters of his that do his pleasure.' 

22 Bless the Lord, all his works in all places of 
his dominion:" bless the Lord, my soul. 

PSALM CIV. 

1 A meditation upon the mighty power, 7 and wonderful providence of 
'3-od. 31 G-od's glory is eternal. 33 The prophet vowelli perpetually 
to praise God. 

BLESS the Lord, O my soul. Lord my God, 
thou art very great ; thou art clothed with 
honor and majesty :' 



• Htb. grtat of. » Isa. 57;16; Mic. 7:18, 19. t Hub. according to the 
Iteightofliecwen. bjer. 50:20. "^Oen. 3:19. d Isa. 40:6-8; Jis. 1:10, U. 
I Heb. not. e Job 20:9. f Exod. 20:6; Beat. 7:9. E Psi. 11:4. h Dan. 
4:34.35. ifi^h.imglityin. i Joel 2:11. j Dan 7:111; Heb. 1: 14. k Psa. 
145:10. 1 Rev. 1:13, etc. m Dan. 7:9; 1 Tim 6: Hi. n Isa. 40:22. o Amos 



16. The wind; the scorching wind from the Arabian 
desert. Gen. 41:0; Ezek. 17:10. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The benefits which God bestows are daily renewed, 
and should be aclcnowledged with daily thanksgiving. 

10. Should the Lord deal with us according to our sins, 
and reward us according to our iniquities, all our blessings 
would be taken from us, and our souls be visited with in- 
dignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish for ever. 

15. The uncertainty and shortness of human life should 
lead us to place our affections on things above, and seek 
the durable riches and righteousness which shall never 
pass away. 

17. We must soon disappear and be known no more 
among men; but God's mercy and grace to his church 
shall endure for ever, and through her ministrations a 
multitude which no man can number shall bo fitted for 
glory everlasting. 

19. The government of God extends over all the works 
of his hands ; nothing is so high as to be above his con- 
trol, or so small and obscure as to escape his notice. 

22. Since all places of God's dominion are full of his 
glorious power and goodness, they ought to be fiUed with 
his praises. 



2 Who coverest thyself with light as v^'th a 
garment:'" who stretchest out the heavens like a 
curtain :" 

3 Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the 
waters:" who maketh the clouds his chariot:'' who 
walketh upon the wings of the wind:'' 

4 Who maketh his angels spirits;'' his udnisters 
a flaming fire:' 

5 117/0 laid the foundations of the earth,' /hat it 
should not be removed for ever. 

6 Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a 
garment: the waters stood above the moun- 
tains.' 

7 At thy rebuke they fled ;" at the voice of thy 
thunder they hasted away. 

8 They go up by the mountains; they go down 
by the valleys' unto the place which thou hast 
founded for them. 

9 Thou hast set a Imiind that they may not 
pass over; that they turn not again to cover the 
earth .^ 

10 He' sendeth the springs into the valleys, 
ivhich run^ among the hills. 

11 They give drink to every beast of the field; 
the wild asses quench* their thirst. 

12 By them shall the fowls of the heaven have 
their habitation, which sing^ among the branch- 
es. 

13 He watereth the hills from his chambers : the 
earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works. 

14 He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, 
and herb for the service of man : that he may bring 
forth food out of the earth ; 

15 And wine that maketh glad the heart of man,"' 
and oil to make his face to shine," and bread ivhich 
strengtheneth man's heart. 

16 The trees of the Lord are full of sap ; the 
cedars of Lebanon, which he hath planted;^ 

17 Where the birds make their nests : as for the 
stork, the fir-trees are her house. 



9:6. Pisa. 19:1. qPsa. 18:10. rHeb.l:7. .■! 2 Kings 2:11 ; fi: 17 


I Heb. 


He /lath founded the earth upon her basea. t Gen. 7:19. " Gen 


. 8:1-5. 


H Or, The mountains asrend, the valleys descend, v Job 3c*:10. 11. 


• Heb. 


Who. t Heb. imtt. X Yieh. break, i Reh. give a voire, w Prov. 


31:6, 7. 


II Heb. to make his /.Ke shine with oil, m more than oil. i P.»a. 92. 


2. 



PSALM CIV. 
In this psalm the majesty and goodness of God, as man- 
ifested in creation and providence, are set forth for the 
comfort and encouragement of his people. 

2. Light; the emblem of knowledge, truth, wisdom, 
purity, and blessedness. 

3. The waters; the waters above, that constitute the clouds. 

4. Spirits; or, winds; that is, God makes his minister- 
ing angels strong and mighty, like winds and lightning, 
to execute his wih. So the Greek version, which is fol- 
lowed by the apostle, Heb. 1:7. But many prefer to ren- 
der the Hebrew, " Who maketh the winds his messengers, 
and the flaming lire his ministers." 

6. The waters stood above the mountains ; at the creation 
and at the deluge. 

8. They go up — go down; or, as the margin. The moun- 
tains ascend, the vaheys descend. The reference wdl then 
be to the separation of the dry land from the sea, when, 
by God's command, the mountains and valleys took their 
appointed places. 

9. They; the waters. 

13. His chambers; his heavenly chambers in the clouds- 
Saltsjied; abundantly supplied, and made fruitful. 
IG. Trees if the Lord; of God's own planting. 
G83 



Poicer and glory of God. 



rSALM cv. 



His wondrous worlds. 



18 The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats ; 
and flie rorks for the conies. 

19 lie appointed the moon for seasons: the sun 
knoweth liis going down. 

20 Thou makcst darkness, and itisnighl: where- 
in all the boasts of the forest do creep for(/i.' 

21 The young lions roar after their prey, and 
seek their meat from G id." 

22 The sun ariseth, tliey gather themselves to- 
gether, and lay them down in their dens. 

23 Man goeth forth unto his work and to his 
labor until the evening.'' 

24 () Ldiiii, how manifold are thy works ! in wis- 
dom hast thou made them all:'= the earth is full 
of thy riches. 

25 So is this great and wide sea,'' wherein arc 
things creeping innumerable, both small and great 
beasts. 

26 There go the ships : there is that leviathan,'' 
whom thou hast made* to play therein. 

27 These wait all upon thee ; that thou mayest 
give them their meat in due season. 

28 That thou givest them they gather : thou open- 
est thy hand, they arc filled with good.' 

29 Thou hidestthy face, they arc troubled : thou 
takest away their breutli, tliey die, and return to 
tlicir dust. 

30 Thou sendcst forth thy Spirit,'^ they are cre- 
ated: and thou rcnewcst the face of the eartli. 

31 The glory of the Loud shall endure* for ever : 
the Lui!i> siiall rejoice in his works." 

32 He looketh on the eartli, and it trcmbletli;' 
he toucheth the hills, and they smoke.' 

33 I will sing nnto the Loud as long as I live: 
I will sing praise to my God while I have my being. 

34 My meditation of him shall be sweet:" I will 
be glad in the Lord.' 

35 IjCt the sinners be consumed out of the earth,"' 
and let the wicked be no more." Bless thou the 
LoKD, my soul. Praise ye tiie Lord. 



PSALM CV. 



' lUh. Ilierto/ ilo Iramplc on llie foreu. "JobOStM. I> Gen. 3: 19. » Prov 
3:10. ■! I'm. (»;5. e Job Jl:l, elc. t lleb./ormfi/. f Tu. 145:1(1. f l».l 
32:U, 15; Ezck. 37:9. I Ileb. 4e. h Ooii. 1:.11 ; Ua. 0>:S. iHab. 3:1(1 
JExod.lO:l8. k I"«a. 03:5, 0. I r«a. 3-J:ll ; Hab. 3:17, 18. m |>mv. •.■:•.>•.' 



21. Seek Iheir meat /mm God; arc dcpendcut upon him, 
and are supported by his can*. 

24. 77(1/ riches; the produces of thy power and kindnCNS. 

27. These wait all upon ihcc; look to thcc for the supply 
of their wants. 

30. Thij Spirit; the author of natural and spiritual life. 

32. // tremhklh ; hefore the power of tiod, as in volca- 
noes, earthiiuakcB, and tempests. Thcij smoke; as mount 
Binai at the giving of the law. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. Tlio perf(!etioiis of Ood as displayed in the works of 
his hands, call for the united and ilnceasiiij; praises of all 
intelligrht creatures, and will bo the theme of adoriiii; 
gratitude for ever. 

8. The sources aud supply of water with which the 
earth abounds, are a inaiiifcsl;itioii of the wisdom. i;ond- 
ncss, and power of (io<l, wliidi calls for the grateful and 
devout acknowled;;iinMitH of all bis people. 

II. The daily fooil and coiist.int support of all creatures 
comes from liod. He opeiieth his hand and supplieth the 
wantH of every living thing. 

19. Ill tlie control and order of the elements and of the 
heavenly bodies, and in tbo iiintincta of animals which 
adapt them to tho use and service of man, Uod shows his 
684 



1 An exhortation to praise (Jod, and io seek out his works. 7 The story 
of God's providence over Abraham, 10 over Joseph, 23 over Jacob in 
Effvpt, 26 over Moses delivering the Israelites, 37 over tlic Israelites 
broiight out of Egypt, fed in the wilderness, and planted in Canaan. 

OH give thanks unto the Lord;" call upon his 
name: make known his deeds among the 
people.'' 

2 Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye 
of all his wondrous works. 

3 Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of 
Ihein rejoice that seek the Lord. 

4 Seek the Lord,'' aud his strength : seek his face 
evermore. ■■ 

5 Remember his marvellous works that he hath 
done ; his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth ; 

6 ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye children 
of Ja(;ob his chosen. 

7 lie is the Lord our God: his judgments are in 
all the earth." 

8 lie hath remembered his covenant for ever,' 
the word ivhich he commanded to a thousand gen- 
erations. 

9 Which coveimnt he made with Abrahain," and 
his oath unto Isaac ]' 

10 And confirmed the same imto Jacob for a law, 
and to Israel _/or an everlasting covenant:"' 

11 Saying, Unto thee will I give the laud of 
Canaan, the lot- of your inheritance: 

12 Wlicn they were but a few men in number;" 
yea, V(^ry few, and strangers in it. 

13 When they went from one nation to another, 
from one kingdom to anotlicr people ; 

14 He sufl'ercd no man to do them wrong: yea, 
he reproved kings for their sakes ; 

15 Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my 
prophets no harm. 

16 Moreover he called for a famine upon the 
land:^ ho brake the whole staff of bread." 

17 He sent a man before them, eycTi Joseph," wAo 
was sold for a servant:" 



n Psa. 1:4. 


1 Chr. lfl;S-'2 


->. V Isa. l'>: 


. q Amos 5:4,0. ' Psa. 27:8. 


• l«a. 20:9. 


t Luke 1:73. « 


Gen. 17:2. 


« Gon. '26:3. " Gen. !H: 13-15. 


1 Ilrb. tord. 


iDeut. 7:7. y 


Gen. 41:53. 


• Is».3:l. "Gen. 45:5. b G,„. 


30:1,M. 









wisdom, power, and love, and lays men under special 
obligations to praise him. 

31. The works of the Lord are perfect and glorious, and 
a source of joy, not only to his people, but to himself. All 
his works praise him, and his saints bless him. 

:15. Tho same glorious attributes of Uod which have 
furnished the world to bo a residence for man, and pro- 
vided so richly for the wants of all its inhabitants, will bo 
manifested in the destruction of the wicked who oppose 
themselves to his righteous government. 

PSALM CV. 

This psalm contains an enumeration of God's wonderful 
dealings in behalf of his peo]ile, from .Abraham till their 
settlement in the land of Canaan. The first tifteen verses 
of it occur in the psalm sung on the removal of the ark to 
mount Zioii. 1 C'hron. lt):.S~22. 

K, Uis (ovrnant ; in which he promised to give to tlio 
seed of .Abraham the land of Canaan. 

14. Hrprmvil kiiipx; ilvii. 12:17; 20:fi, 7. 

1.1. Miiieanoinlril; set apart, endowed with Rpeci:il gifts 
to qualify them f>)r their ollice. Vmphcts; Gen. 20:7. 

Ifi. Uuikc the trhnle staff; cut ofl" the means of 8U|iport. 
The reference is to the famine which occasioinil the de- 
scent of Jacob and his family into Egypt. Gen. 41:53, etc. 



God's providence 



PSALM CVI. 



ever his people. 



1 8 Whof^o feet they hurt with fetters : he was 
hiid in' iron: 

19 Until the time tliat his word came : the word 
of tiie Lord tried him. 

20 The king sent and loosed him ; even the ruler 
of the people, and let him jxo free." 

21 lie made him lord of his house, and ruler of 
all his substance: * 

22 To hind his princes at his pleasure ; and teach 
his senators wisdom. 

23 Israel also came into Egypt; and Jacob so- 
journed in the land of Ham." 

24 And he increased his people greatly ; and 
made them stronger than their enemies.'^ 

25 He turned tlieir heart to hate his people, to 
deal subtilely with his servants. 

26 He sent Moses his servant ; a«d Aaron whom 
he had chosen.'' 

27 They showed his signs* among them, and won- 
ders in the land of Ham." 

28 He sent darkness, and made it dark;*^ and 
they rebelled not against his word. 

2S) He turned their waters into blood, and slew 
their fish." 

30 Their land brought forth frogs in abundance, 
in the chambers of their kings.'' 

31 He spake, and there came divers sorts of flies, 
and lice in all their coasts.' 

32 He gave them hail for rain,^ and flaming fire 
in their land.^ 

33 He smote their vines also and their fig-trees ; 
and brake the trees of their coasts. 

34 He spake, and the locusts came, and cater- 
jiillars, and that without number,'' 

35 And did eat up all the herbs in their land, 
and devoured the fruit of their ground. 

30 He smote also all the fii'st-born in their land,' 
the chief of all their strength."' 
37 He brought them forth also with silver and 



" Heb. hii soul came into 


a Gen. 41 :14, 40. t Heb. possession, b Gen. 


4r>:G, 7. c Exod. 1:7, etc. 
«■ Kxod. oh. 7-12. 1 Exod. 


•1 E.xod. 4:12, etc. 1 Ileb. words of his signs. 


1(1:21-23. 8 Exod. 7:20, 21. !■ Exod. 8:5, 0. 


i Hxod.SrH, 24. SHeb. I/i 


ir rain hail, i Exod. 9:2:!-25. k Exod. 10:12- 


II. 1 Exod. 12:29. "Gen 


49:3. n Exod. 12:35. " Exod. 12:33. P Exod. 



19. His word; that is, according to some, the effect of 
Joseph's word in interpreting the dreams of Pharaoli's 
liiitler and baker. Gen. 41:9-14. But others understand 
hy " his word," God's word of promise to Joseph in his 
early dreams. The word of the Lord tried him; God's 
Iiromise to Joseph tried him by its long delay. 

23. Tiie land of Ham; Y^'gyy^X, wliich was peopled with 
the descendants of Ham, one of the sons of Noah. 

28. Theij rebelled not; according to some, Moses and 
.Aaron rebelled not, but executed God's commands punc- 
tually. But it is better to understand these words of the 
Kgyptians, who when the plague came relented, as usual, 
and promised obedience. Exod. 10:24. 

38. Tlie fear of them ; the Israelites. Fell upon them ; the 
Kgyptians. 

40. The bread of heaven; given miraculously from above. 

42. His holy promise; to give their descendants the land 
of Canaan. 

44. Tlie labor of the people; the riches accumulated by 
tlieir labor. Deut. 6:10, 11. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The Lord is the source of all excellence and bliss, 
and those who seek him as their chief good have cause 
for perpetual gladness and joy. 

10. Jehovah is unchangeable, and when the word hath 



gold :" and there «•«.? not one feeble person among 
their tribes. 

38 Egypt was glad when they departed : for the 
fear of them fell u])on them." 

39 He spread a cloud for a covering; and fire 
to give light in the night." 

40 The pfop/e asked," and he l)rought quails,'' and 
satisfied them with the bread of heaven. 

41 He opened the rock, and the waters gushed 
out;' tliey ran in the dry places like a river. 

42 For he remembered his holy promise,' and 
Abraham his servant. 

43 And he brought forth his people with joy, 
and his chosen with gladness:' 

44 And gave them the lands of the heathen:" 
and they iniioritcd the labor of the people ; 

45 That they might ob.servc his statutes, and 
keep his laws.'' Praise ye the Lord.^ 

PSALM CVI, 

1 The psalmist exhorteth to praise God. 4 He prayeth for pardon of 
sin, as G.vd did willi the fathers. 7 The story of the people's rebellion, 
and iTod's mercy. 47 He concladetli with prayer and praise. 

PRAISE ye the Lord." Oh give thanks unto 
the Lord ; for he is good : for his mercy cn- 
diireth for ever."' 

2 Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord'?^ 
ivho can show forth all his praise'.^ 

3 Blessed are they that keep judgment, >' and he 
that doeth righteousness at all times.'' 

4 Remember me," Lord, with the favor that 
thou bearest unto thy people : visit me with thy 
salvation ; 

5 That I may see the good of thy chosen,'' that 
I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation," that 
I may glory with thine inheritance.'' 

G We have sinned with our fathers, we have 
committed iniquity, we have done wickedly." 
7 Our fathers understood not thy wonders in 



13:21; Neh 


9:12. qPsa. 78:18. r Exod. 16: 13, 14. > Exod. 17:6; Num. 


20:11; ICo 


r. 10:4. 1 Gen. 15:14. 1 Heb. sui=-i»§-, u Josh. 21:43. vBeut. 


4:1,40; 6:'- 


1. 25. \ Heb. Hallelujah. • Heb. Hallelujah. »■ 1 Chr. 16::}4. 


>iP3a.40:5. 


yl'sa. 15:2. ^Gal.U:!). a Psa 119:132. fEph. 1:4. c Isa. 


35:10; John 


16:22. liEph. 1:18. eDdn. 9:.5. 



gone out of his mouth it standeth for ever. Heaven and 
earth may pass away, but his word will never pass away. 

17. God raises up deliverers for his people, such as from 
time to time they need, and sends thein to fulfil his prom- 
ises and accomplish his purposes of love and mercy to his 
chosen. 

25. The condition of nations, as well as of individuals, is 
ordered by the Lord ; he sends prosperity or adversity 
according to his infinitely wise and good ])leasure, and as 
will promote his own glory and the good of his people. 

37. When God would fulfil his purposes of love and 
mercy, it is vain for men to oppose him. They may de- 
stroy themselves, but they cannot withstand the power 
of God. 

44. The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof, and 
when he takes any part of it away from one people on 
account of their sins, and gives it to another, he wrongs 
no one, but does what he will with his own. 

PSALM CVI. 

This psalm differs from the preceding in being princi- 
pally occupied with an enumeration of the sins of God's 
people. It is supposed to refer especially to the Babylo- 
nish cajjtivity, when the hope of speedy restoration had 
be^'un to animate the people. See ver, 47. 
G85 



IsracFs rebellion, and 



PSALM CVI. 



God's justice and mercif. 



Egypt; they remembered not the multitude of tliy 
mercies ; but provoked him at the sea, even at the 
Red sea." 

8 Nevertheless he saved them for his name's 
sake,'' that he might make his mighty power to be 
known." 

9 He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried 
up:'' so he led them through the depths, as through 
the wilderness. 

10 And he saved Ihem fiom the hand of him that 
hated them, and redeemed them from the hand of 
the enemy. 

11 And the waters covered their enemies :" there 
•was not one of them left. 

12 Then believed they his words ; they sang his 
praise.'' 

13 They soon forgat' his works ;^ they waited 
not for his counsel: 

14 But lusted^ exceedingly in the wilderness, 
and tempted God in tin; desert." 

15 And he gave them their request; but sent 
leaimess into their soul:' 

IG They envied Moses also in the camp, and 
Aaron the saint of the Lord.^ 

17 The earth opened and swallowed uj) Dathan, 
and covered the company of AViiram. 

18 And a fire was kindled in their company ; the 
flame burned up the wicked. 

19 Tliey made a calf in Ilorch, and worsliippcd 
the molten image." 

20 Thus they changed their glory into the simil- 
itude of an ox that eateth grass.' 

21 They forgat God their saviour, which had 
done great things in Egypt; 

22 Wondrous works in the land of Ham, and 
terrilde things by the Red sea. 

23 Therefore hcsaid thathe would destroy them,"' 
had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the 
breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should 
destroy thern. 

24 Yea, they despised the pleasant land,*" they 
believed not his word: 

2.") But murmured in their tents, and hearkened 
not mito tiic voice of the Loni). 

2(> Therefore he lifted up his hand against them, 
to ovei'tlirow them in the wilderness: 

27 To overthrow their seed' also among the 
nations, and to scatter them in the lands. 



• Kxnd, nil la. b Rzek. 20:14. eExnd. 9:10. d Exod. M:'<l, cic. 
• KxnA. 15:5. f Kxod. 15:1, oto. ' Hob. matte haste, Ifify forgat. g Exod. 
oh. 15-17. t lUh. lutlnl a lutl. ■> Num. H:'!, 31; I'm. 7.--: IH. IIm.1U:IU. 
J Num. 10:1, oto. » Exml. a-i-A. ' Jor. 4:11. "> Ezok. •^)■.^3. 1 Hob. n 
land o/ilriirr. « Pniii. >::7. t Hnb. make them fall. « Num. 25:2, oto. 



8. His name's sake; the (lig)ilay of his perfections. 

9. ne depths; the (h'ptlm of tlic sea. 

1.1. UVi/Ztt/ iwl for his cniiusrl ; did not quietly wait for 
frod to Kfiid tlieiii lielp in hi.s own time and way ; but 
when any trial rame, aH the want of water or food, were 
very impatient and reboUioiis. 

11. Lusted; an when tliey deHired flcah. Exod. 1G:3; 
Num. 11:1. 

IH. Afire vnskiiulM; Hee Xiim. Ifiin.'i. 

20. TTietr f^hrii; for .leliovah, their real Rlory, they sub- 
Rtitiited a calf, the Kf;yptian idol, a HJiarno to all who wor- 
shipped it. 

2X Stood — in Oie brmcli ; as a soldier Btands in tho breach 
to keep back tho enemy. See Mohch' inlerecBsory prayer 
to pri'vent tho destruction of Israel. Kxod. 32:30-34. 
68G 



28 They joined themselves also unto Baal-peor." 
and ate the sacriiices of the dead. 

29 Thus they provoked him to anger with their 
inventions : and the plague brake in upon them. 

30 Then stood up Phinelias, and executed judg- 
ment: and so the plague was stayed. 

31 And that was counted unto him for right- 
eousness unto all generations for evermore. 

32 They angered him also at the waters of strife,'' 
so that it went ill with Moses for their sakes: 

33 Becau.se they provoked his spirit, so that he 
spake unadvisedly with his lips. 

34 Tliey did not destroy the nations, concern- 
ing whom the Lord commanded them:'' 

35 But were mingled among the heathen, and 
learned their works. 

36 And they served their idols:'' which were a 
snare unto them. 

37 Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their 
daughters unto devils," 

38 And shed innocent blood, even the blood of 
tiieir sons and of their daughters, whom they sac- 
rificed unto the idols of Canaan: and the land 
was ])oliuted with blood.' 

3!) Tims were they defiled with their own works." 
and went a whoring with their own inventions.*' 

40 Therefore was the wrath of tlie Ii0i?D kindled 
against his people,'' insomuch that he abhorred 
ins own inheritance." 

41 And he gave them into the hand of the hea- 
tlien ; and they that hated them ruled over them. 

42 Their enemies also oppressed them, and they 
were brought into subjection under their hand. 

43 Many times did he deliver them; but they 
provoked ///m with their counsel, and were brought 
low' for their iniquity. 

44 Nevertheless heregardcd their affliction, when 
he heard their cry :■' 

45 And he remembered for them his covenant,and 
repented according to the multitude of his mercies. 

4() He made them also to be pitied of all those 
that carried them captives." 

47 Save us," Lonn our God, and gather ns 
from among the heathen, to give thanks unto thy 
holy name, and to triumph in thy ]iraise. 

48 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from ever- 
lasting to everlasting:'' and let all tIie]icoi)lc say. 
Amen. Praise ye the Lord.^ 



P Num. 20:3, oto. q Judc. 1:21, etc. ' Judg. J 
1 Num .15 JtJ. « Eiok. aOilS. » Lot. 17:7; Jor. 


■ • ;s lf.:20. 


\.i-V. « Judc. 2:14, 


clc; Noh. 11:27, oto.; Pm. 78:59. » Lim. 2:7. 


Or, imjtoverUhed, or 


u-eaktmd. y l.ov. •J«:40-44. « Em 9:9. • 1 Chr. 


16:35. b fa.. 41:13 


1 Mob. Ualltlujnh. 





urn of the 



2't. Despised the pleasatit land: 
spies. Num. 14:1-5. 

28. Baal-jKor; one of tho idol-Ruds of .Mi)ab. The dead; 
dead idols as opposed to tlie living (lod. iSce tho narra* 
five. Num. 2.'>:3, etc. 

30. Executed judgment; by slaying the transgressors, 
Num. 2;->:G-8. 

.'ST. I)cvds; demons, " unclean spirits." such as tho idols 
of the heathen represented. 1 Cm: 10:20. 

45. Ills covenant ; which he matlc with Abraham, to give 
his jiosterity tho land of Piinaan. 

4S. Allien; so bo it, or let it be. Iliis doxologj- marks 
the close of the fourth book into which the Psalms were 
anciently divided. Sec the: introductory note to the book 
of Psalms. 



Cod's providence over 



PSALM CVII. 



travellers, .fetniwn, and otltera 



PSALM CVIL 



1 Tile psalmist exhortetii the redeemed, in praising God, to observe his 
manirnid providence, 4 over travellers, 10 over captives, 17 over siclj 
men, '-J3 over seamen, 3lj and in divers varieties of life. 

OH give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good : 
for his mercy endureth for ever." 

2 Let the rodoemcd of the Lord say so, wliom 
ho hath redeemed from tlie hand of the enemy;'' 

3 And gathered tliem out of the lands,"' from tlie 
oast, and from the west, from tlie north, and from 
the south.* 

4 Tiiey wandered in the wihlerness in a solitary 
way;'' tliey found no city to dwell in. 

5 Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them. 

6 Then they cried unto tlie Lord in their trouble,'' 
and he delivered them out of their distresses. 

7 And he led them forth by the right way,*^ that 
they might go to a city of habitation. 

8 Oil that mm would praise the Lord for his 
goodness, audyb;- his wonderful works to the chil- 
dren of men ! 

9 For he satistieth the longing soul, and filleth 
the hungry soul with goodness.^ 

10 Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of 
death, being bound in affliction and iron;** 

11 Because they rebelled against the words of 
God,' and contemned the counsel of the Most 
High -J 

12 Therefore he brought down their heart with 
labor : they fell down, and there loas none to help.'^ 

13 Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, 
and he saved them out of their distresses. 

14 He brought them out of darkness and the 
shadow of death,' and brake their bands in sun- 
der. 

15 Oh that men would praise the Lord for his 
goodness, and /or his wonderful works to the chil- 
dren of men! 

16 For he hath broken the gates of brass, and 
cut the bars of iron in sunder.'" 



» Psa. 119:68; Matt. 19:17. b Psa. 100:10. c Isa. 43:5, 8; Ezek. 39:a5, 
etc. 'Heb. sea. <1 Deut. .32: 10. = ver. 13, 19, 38: Psa. 50:15; Hos. 5: 15. 
' Ezra 8:21 ; Isa. 30:21. e Luke 1:53, 79. h Job 36:8. 9. i Lam. 3:42; 
5:16, 17. j Luke. 7:3U. k J„b 9:13. 1 Psa. 146:7. m Isa. 45:2. " Psa. 
38.3,5 o Job 33: re, etc. P 2 Kings 20:4, 5; Matt. 8:8. 4 Psa. 30-2, 3. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Wliatever may be the state of the wicked, it will be 
well with those who fear the Lord and delight themselves 
in his commandments. 

8. God deals with his people not according to their 
deserts, but according to the greatness of his mercy in 
Jesus Christ. 

11. In the end men will return, and see the difference 
between the righteous and the wicked ; between him that 
serveth God, and him that serveth him not. 

15. What wicked men desire, God may give them in 
anger as well as in mercy ; his gifts may be perverted or 
abused to bring leanness into the soul. 

20. No absurdity, wickedness, or folly is so great that 
wicked men, when left to themselves, may not fall into it. 

26. The wickedness of men is the cause of their calam- 
ities, and God in this life punishes men less than their 
iniquities deserve. 

33. The most meek and patient of men may be provoked 
to feel, speak, and act wrong, so as to bring distress upon 
themselves and others. 

39. Men are prone to follow their own inventions, rather 
than the revealed will of God. 

45. The covenant of God aUmdeth sure, and though men 



17 Fools, because of their transsression, and 
because of their iniquities, are atllictod." 

18 Their soul abliorreth all niaiiner of meat; 
and they draw near unto the gates of death. 

19 Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble," 
and he savetli them oilt of their distresses. 

20 He sent his word," and healed tliem,i and 
delivered them from tlieir destructions. 

21 Oh that men would praise the Lord for his 
goodness, and/o?- his wonderful works to the chil- 
dren of men!"' 

22 And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanks- 
giving,'' and declare his works with rejoicing.* 

23 They that go down to the sea in ships, that 
do business in great waters; 

24 These see the works of the Lord, and his 
wonders in the deep. 

25 For he commandeth, and raiseth* the stormy 
wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof.' 

26 They mount up to the heaven, they go down 
again to the depths: their soul is melted because 
of trouble." 

27 They reel to and fro, and stagger like a 
drunken man, and are at their wit's end.^ 

28 Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, 
and he bringetli them out of their distresses. 

29 He maketh the storm a calm,'' so that the 
waves thereof arc still. 

30 Then are they glad because they be quiet ; 
so he bringeth them unto their desired haven. 

31 Oh that men would praise the Lord for his 
goodness, and/o/- his wonderful works to the chil- 
dren of men ! 

32 Let them exalt him also in the congregation 
of the people, and praise him in the assembly of 
the elders.™ 

33 He turneth rivers into a wilderness, and the 
water-springs into dry ground;'' 

34 A fruitful land into barrenness,'^ for the 
wickedness of them that dwell therein. 



r Psa 


06:5. 


Lev. 7: 


2; Heb 


13:15 


t 


H 


b. 


UHF 


'IS- 


1 H 


b. 


viak'^th to 


stand 


ijon. 


1:4, etc. 


u Nah. 


2:10. 


i Heb 


all the 




'sdom 


,^ 


^walloivr'd 


up. V 


Psa. 89 


9; Matt 


8:26. 1 


V Psa. 


22: 


-■■i; 


fiO 


Hi; 


111 


1. « 


1 h 


ings 17: t. 


7. tHeb.sallitess. y Gen. 13:10; 19 


25 

















may despise its blessings God remembers it, and in duo 
time will fulfil all its promises. 

48. AH the hope of God's people is in him, and it is for 
his glory that their hope in his mercy and grace should 
not be disappointed. 

PSALM cvn. 

The theme of this psalm is God's goodness in deliver- 
ing the afllicted of various classes. It may have special 
reference to the restoration of God's iieople from captiv- 
ity ; but is manifestly designed for general application. 

3. Gathered them ; from the lands in which they had been 
dispersed on account of their sins. 

10. Darkness and — shadovi of death; imprisoned in dark 
dungeons. Bound in affiiction and iron ; afiBicted by being 
bound in iron fetters ; referring to men whom God has given 
over to imprisonment as a chastisement for their sins. 

12. Labor; the original word denotes sorrowful toil. 

17. Fools; in the scriptural sense; that is, transgressors 
of God's law. Are afflicted; with sickness, ver. 18, 20. 
The holy Scriptures regarded sickness, as well as all other 
suffering, as the fruit of sin. 

33. Turneth rivers into a vilderness; the psalm closes 
with God's providential dealings with nations. 
G87 



Davit! praisel/i God. 



I'SALM CIX, 



lie tomjplaineth of enemies. 



35 He turncth the wilderness into a standing 
water, and dry fjround into water-springs.' 

30 And tiierc lie niaiicth tiic liunirry to dwell, 
that they may jjrejtarc a city for habitation : 

37 And sow thclields, and plant vineyards, which 
may yield fruits of iiicreas'e. 

38 He blessctii them also, so that they arc mul- 
tiplied greatly; and suffereth not their cattle to 
decrease. 

39 Again, they are minished and brought low 
through op])rcssion, alHiction, and sorrow."* 

40 He pourcth contempt upon princes,"^ and caus- 
oth them to wander in the wilderness,* u'/tereiAcrc 
is no way. 

41 Yet settoth lie the poor on high from* afflic- 
tion,'' and makcth him families like a flock. 

42 The righteous shall sec it, and rejoice :'' and 
all ini(|uity shall stop her mouth. 

43 Whoso is wise, and will observe these things,' 
even they shall understand the loving-kindness of 
the Lord. 

I' S A L M C VIII, 

1 David cncouragclh himself to praise God. 5 He prayeth for God's 
assiaUucc according to his promise. 11 His confidence in God's help. 

^ A Song or Psalm of David. 

OGOP, my lieart is fi.xed f I will sing and give 
praise, even with my glory. 

2 Awake, psaltery and harp: I mj/se/f will awake 
early. 

3 1 will praise thee, Lord, among the people : 
and I will sing praises unto thee among the 
nations. 

4 For thy mercy is great above the heavens: 
and thy truth reacheth unto the clouds.' 



• Pa. 114:61 Isa. 41:1«. b 2 Kingn 10:3-.>. « .Tob 12:21, 24. " Or, void 
flatts. t Hi-b. a//rT. ■! 1 Sam. 2:.'.-»; Psa. 113:7-3. c Job 5:15, 16; 23:19. 
' Jl>r.0:l2; Hos. M:!l. It Pja. 57:7-11. I Or, sAicj. h Paa. Ii0:5,ctc. i Gen. 



43. These tilings ; tlie course of God's providence. The 
loving-kindness of (he Lord ; towards tliose who truly repent 
of sin, and seek liim with the whole heart. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. All deliverances should be acknowledged with devout 
thanksgiving ; but they whom the Lord has redeemed 
from sin and death eternal, have the most abundant cause 
to bless him for his goodness, and for his wonderful works 
to the children of racn. 

II. Sin is the cause of all the troubles with which men 
arc afHicted.and their deliverance from it is often designed 
by Jehovah in bringing calamities upon them. 

Ifi. No calamities of men in this life arc so great that 
the Lonl cannot deliver them, even should they bo like 
those of .Manaaseli in chains, or Daniel in the dungeon, or 
.loiiali in the whale's belly. 

22. The blessings which Ood bestows should be acknow- 
lodf;cd with devout tlianksgiving, and bind tlic soul in 
Hwect and hearty obedience to his service. 

28. The deliver.ince of seamen and such as do business 
on the sea, should inspire them especially with a convic- 
tion of the goodness of (!o(l, their dependence on him, and 
their obligations to love and obey him. 

:J0. Men may be glad without being grateful, and rejoice 
in the gift without giving glory to the (Jiver. 

35. National, not less than individu.al prosperity de- 
pends upon God's blessing, which will rest only upon the 
people who acknowlc<lge his supremacy and obey bis 
word. 

38. The iucreuse of worldlv substance and of llie coiii- 



5 Be thou e.xalted, God, above the heavens: 
and thy glory above all the earth ; 

6 That thy beloved may be delivered:" save 
u-ith thy rigiit hand, and answer me. 

7 God hath spoken in his holiness; I will re- 
joice, I will divide Shechem, and mete out the 
valley of Succoth. 

8 Ciilead iv mine; Manasseh is mine; Epiiraim 
also M the strength of my head ; Judah is my 
lawgiver;' 

9 Moab is my washpot; over I']dom will I cast 
out my slioc; over I'hiiistia will I triumph. 

10 Wiio will l)ring me into the strong city ? who 
will lead me into Edom ? 

11 Will not thou, God, who hast cast us off? 
and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our 
hosts ? 

12 Give us help from trouble: for vain is the 
help of man.' 

13 Thi'oiigh God we shall do valiantly:" for he 
il is that shall tread down our enemies.' 



PSALM CIX. 

1 David, complaining of his slanderous enemies, under the person ot Jxf- 
das devoteth them. IG He showeth their sin. 21 Complaining of 
Uis own misery, he prayeth for help. 29 He promiseth Ihankfulneu. 

^ To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. 

OLD not thy peace,™ God of my praise;" 
2 For the mouth of the wicked and the 
mouth of the deceitful* are opened' against me: 
they have spoken against me witii a lying tongue." 

3 They compassed me about also with words of 
hatred ; and fought against me without a cause."* 

4 For my love they are my adversaries: but I 
give myself unto praj'cr.'' 



49:10. i Job 16:2; Isa. 2:2: 
2 Cor. 2:14. mPsa. S!:l. ■ 
themselves, o Matt. 2ti:«0; 



. k 2 Chr. 20:12; I«i. 45:24. I Rom. 16:20; 
.Icr. 17:14. i Heb. deceit. I Hcb. Aav« openecl 
Acts0:13. pjolin 13:25 q Luke 6:11, 12. 



fort derived from it is of the Lord, and lays the possessor 
under increasing (jbligations to learn and do his will. 

43. A careful altniticiii to the dealings of God with men 
will show his lnviiig-kiiuhicss and lender mercy to all who 
put their trust in him. 

PSAL.M CVlll. 
This psalm is a combination, with some variations, of 
Psa. .07:7-11, and I'sa. 00:5-12. See the notes on these 
passages. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. The most exalted employment of the tongue is in 
singing God's praises and showing forth his wondrous 
works. 

7. The providential dealings of God in enlarging a peo- 
ple, call for devout acknowledgment and tlianksgiving. 

II. I'ros|)erity and adversity are both the servitnis ol 
God. They go and come at his bidding, and accomplish 
his infinitely wise and benevolent designs. 

PSALM CIX. 

The full ap[ilic;ition of this ]isalin is toChrist. To David. 
!is the earthly head of (Jod's iieoph, acting in their behalf 
and persecuted for Ihcir sake, it had a real but subordi- 
nate application. The imprecations which it contains 
were uttered by Daviil in the full consciousness that he 
spokt^ by (iod's Spirit. 2 S;im. 23:2; Acts 2::(0. They 
are the denunciation of (Jod's vengeance upon the perse- 
cutors of hiu people, whose cause David represented in a 
lower sense, and which was to be afterwards represented 
in the fullest sense in the peraon of the proiuiseil Messiah. 



The ikstnidlon of 



PSALM ex. 



the enemies of God. 



5 And they have rewarded me evil for good, and 
hatred for my love." 

6 Set tliou a wicked man over him: and let Satan" 
stand at his right liand. 

7 When he sliall be judged, let him be condemn- 
ed:* and let liis prayer become sin." 

8 Let ]ii.-< days be few ; and let another take Ids 
office.'*'^ 

9 Let lii.s children be fatherless, and his wife a 
widow.'' 

10 Let his children be continually vagabonds, 
and bog: let them seek t/mr bread also out of 
tlicir desolate places. 

11 Let the extortioner catch all that he hath;" 
and let the strangers spoil his labor. 

12 Let there be none to extend mercy unto him : 
neitiier let there be any to favor his fatherless 
children. 

1:3 Let his posterity be cut off;' and in the gen- 
eration following lot their name be blotted out.^ 

14 Let the iniquity of his fathers be remember- 
ed Avith tlie LoRn;'' and let not the sin of his 
mother be blotted out.' 

15 Let tliem be before the Lord continually, 
that he may cut off the memory of them from the 
earth. 

16 Because that ho remembered not to show 
mercy, but persecuted the poor and needy man, 
that he miglit even slay the broken in heart. 

17 As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him :' 
as he delighted not iu blessing, so let it be far 
from him. 

18 As he clothed himself with cursing like as 
witii his garment, so let it come into his bowels^ 
like water,'' and like oil into his bones. 

19 Let it be unto him as the garment ichich 
coveretli him, and for a girdle wherewith he is 
girded continually. 



a Paa. .3.5-7, 12. • Or. an advermnj; Zech. 3:1. t Heb. go out guilty, 
wicked. bPrnv. -JSiO. XOj, charge. cActsl:2(J. i 'Exoi. •ii:i\. e X 
l.-i;9, 19. f Psa. ■n.ii: Un. 14:-'U. 
43:-,>.5. j Ezek. 33:6. 5 Heb. xoitlii 



6. Him ; probably referring to Ahithophel, whose treach- 
ery foreshadowed that of Judas, to wliom the words are 
applied in the New Testament. Acts 1:16-20. At his 
right hand; as an enemy and accuser. Zech. 3:1. The 
meaning is, that the traitor shall be given over to the 
power of Satan. The curses enumerated in this and the 
following verses, are those threatened in the law against 
the wicked and their posterity. 

14. The iniqiiitij of his fathers ; compare Exod. 20:5, and 
our Saviour's words. Matt. 23:34-3G; Luke 11:49-51. It 
is by consenting to and imitating the evil deeds of their 
fathers, that the children bring their iniquities upon them- 
selves. 

23. When it declinetk; is stretched out at evening, and 
ready to vanish. As the locust ; when driven before the wind. 

27. That this is thy liand; that this deliverance for which 
I pray comes from thee. 

30. Among the multitude; when I pay my vows for thy 
deliverance before the great congregation. See notes on 
Psa. 22:25-29. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. The unfailing resource of God's people in trouble is 
prayer. However they may be treated by men, his ears 
are ever open to their cry. 

5. The Saviour's love was rewarded with hatred and 
persecution, and his disciples shoidd not be siirprised or 
dismayed if thev are called to suffer in like manner. 

44 



20 Let this be the reward of mine adversaries 
from the Lord, and of them that speak evil against 
my soul. 

21 But do thou for me, God the Lord, for thy 
name's sake:' because thy mercy is good, deliver 
thou me. 

22 For I am poor and needy, and my heart is 
wounded within me. 

23 lam gone like the shadow when it dccliuctli :"' 
I am tossed up and down as the locust. 

2-1 My knees are weak through fasting;" and 
my flesh faileth of fatness. 

25 I became also a reproach unto them:" vhcn 
they looked upon me they shakcd their heads." 

25 Help me, Lord my God : Oh save me ac- 
cording to thy mercy : 

27 That tlicy may know that this is thy hand;" 
that thou. Lord, hast done it. 

28 Let them curse,'' but bless thou: when tliey 
arise, let them be ashamed ; but let thy servant 
rejoice.' 

29 Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame ;' 
and let tiiem cover themselves with their own 
confusion, as with a mantle. 

30 I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth ; 
yea, I will praise him among the multitude." 

31 For he shall stand at the right hand of the 
poor," to save kim from those that condemn' his 
soul. 

PSALM ex. 

1 The kingdom, 4 the priesthooJ. .') the conquest, 7 and the passion of 
Christ. 

•J A Psalm of David. 

THE Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my 
right han,d, until I make thine enemies thy 
footstool.™ 



■n Psa. 102:11; 144:4. oHeb. 12:13. oPsa. 22:6.7. P Matt. 27::!9. q Psa. 
17:13,14. r 2 Sam. 16:11, 12. sisa. 65:14. l Psa. 35:2S. "Psa. 111:1. 
V Psa. 73:2.3. 1 Heb. lie judges of. " Matt. 22:44; Acts 2:34; 1 Cor. 



6. The hatred and malice which men show towards 
Christ's faithful servants he will consider as shown tow- 
ards himself, and will recompense accordingly ; and a& 
there is no sin so great as that of persecuting Christ, wheth- 
er in his own person or that of his followers, so there is 
no sin which brings upon men such a terrible retributioru 

9. The rejection of Christ by one generation has often 
been a source of dreadful misery to many following gen- 
erations. This ai)iilies alike to families and nations. 

16. Persecution of the poor and needy is highly dis- 
pleasing to God, and brings down his curse on those wlio 
inflict it. 

21. The necessities of sinners furnish an occasion for 
God's glorifying himself in the display of his mercy and 
grace ; and this may be pleaded as a reason why he should 
interpose in their behalf. 

26. All the hope of the penitent is in the mercy of God 
through Jesus Christ, and to him they apply for the bless- 
ings which they need. 

28. When God blesses us the curses of the wicked can 
do us no harm. 

PSALM ex. 

1. The Lord; Jehovah. My Lord; Jesus Christ, of whom 
this psalm is a remarkable prediction. Sit thou at my right 
hand ; to sit at God's right hand, is to be invested by God 
witli universal dominiou. Matt. 28:18. 
689 



The reign of Christ. 



PSALM CXII. 



Praise to God. 



2 The Lord shall send the rod of tliy strenj^tli 
out of Zion : rule thou in the midst of tliiue oue- 
mies." 

3 Thy people shall be willin;,^ in the day of thy 
power,'' in the beauties of holiness from* the 
womb of the morning:'' thou hast* the dew of thy 
youth. 

4 The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent. 
Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Mel- 
chizodck." 

5 The Lord at thy riglit hand shall strike through 
kings in the day of his wratli." 

6 He shall judge among the heathen, he shall 
fill the places witli tlie dead bodies; he shall wound 
the lieads over nuiny* countries/ 

7 He shall drink of the brook in the way:^ 
therefore shall he lift up the head. 

PSALM CXI. 

1 The psalmist by his txamplc inciteth others to praise God for his 
glorious, 5 and gracious works. ID The fear of God breedeth true 
wisdom. 

PRALSE ye the Lord.* I will praise the Lord 
with my whole heart, in the assembly of the 
upright, and in the congregation.'' 

2 The works of the Lord are great,' sought out 
of all them tliat have pleasure therein. 

3 His work is honorable and glorious: and his 
righteousness cnduroth for ever. 

4 He liath made his wonderful works to be re- 
membered : the Lord is gracious and full of com- 
passion. 



• r«ll.J5;5. bjudff. 5:a; Gil. 1:15, in • Wuh more Ikati cPsa.OS:!). 
t Heb J*a/I Aaw. ■T Heb. S:li; 0:aO; 717. al «• Rom. a:*; Rev. 8; 17. 
1 Or. grtat. t Hab 3: 13. f Judg 1.5. (i. 1 Hcb Hallelujah, h Psl. 
109 30. I Job3S-41; Pii. 92:5; Rev. 15:3. MUh.prey. 1 Malt. 0;a«, 33 



2. The rod of thy strength; tlie rod by which thou exer- 
cisest thy strength. Out of Zion; the residence of God. 
Compare Psa. 20:2. When the Father invests the Son 
with universal dominion, he also gives him "all power in 
heaven and in earth." 

3. Be willing; willing to enlist under thy banner. From 
the womb of the morning; like dewdrops that spring out of 
the womb of the morning. Dew of my youth ; youthful 
vigor perpetuated from age to age like the morning dew. 
The perpetual youth of Christ manifests itself in the per- 
petual succession of his followers. 

i. Hath sworn; see Ileb. 7:20-22. The order of Melchn- 
edek; who w;is both king and priest without regard to 
priestly genealogy, and without any one like him to pre- 
cede or succeed him. See on the priesthood of Clirist, as 
compared with that of Aaron's family, Hebrews chaji. 7 
throughout. 

5. Strike through kings ; destroy those who continue to 
oppose thee. 

7. Drink nf the brook; probably, as the warrior drinks 
without halting and renews his strength. Lift vp the head ; 
in immortal vigor. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 

1. Christ is both '• the root and the offspring of David." 
He unites in himself a ]>ropcr human with a proper divine 
nature, and is thus (|uulified to be the " one Mediator be- 
tween God and men." 

2. As God has invested the Messiah with universal 
dominion and almighty power, no opposition can prevail 
against him. 

3. The perpetuation of Christ's ehunh from ago to age, 
depends nut on the will of miin, but on the power of God, 
who h.ts promised his Soli that he " shall sec his seed," 
and " shall justify many." 

690 



5 He hath given meat' unto them that fear him :' 
he will ever be mindful of his covenant. 

6 He hath showed liis people the power of his 
works, that he may give them the heritage of the 
heathen. 

7 Tlie works of his hands are verity and judg- 
ment ; all his commandments are sure.'' 

8 They stand fast' for ever and ever, and are 
done in truth and uprightness. 

9 He sent redemption unto ids people: he hath 
commanded his covenant for ever : holy and rev- 
erend is his name.' 

10 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of 
wisdom:'" a good understanding" have all they 
tliat do his commandments :* his praise endureth 
for ever. 

PSALM CXII. 

1 frodliness liath the promises of this life, 4 and of the life to come. 10 
The prosperity of the godly shall be an eyesore to the wicked. 

PRAISE ye the Lord.* Blessed is the man 
fliat fcareth the Lord, that delighteth greatly 
in his commandments." 

2 His seed shall lie mighty upon earth: the gen- 
eration of the upriglit shall be blessed. 

3 AVoaltli and riches shall be in his house: and 
his righteousness endureth for ever. 

4 Unto tlie upright there ariseth light in the 
darkness:" he is gracious, and full of compassion, 
and righteous. 

5 A good man showeth favor, and Icndeth:'' he 
will guide his affairs with discretion.^" 



k Psa 


19:7. 1 H 


b. are 


establiihed. ' 


Deut. 


as: 53. 


■» Job 28:28 


Pror. 


1:7; 


1:1(1; Eccl. 


|-J:13. 


• Or 


goods 




Prov. 


3:4. t Heb 


them. 


1 H.b 


Halltlujali 


-I'sa 


1:1-3; 


119:10 


oVs 


.97:11 


; Isa. 58:10. 


■ Luka 


U:35. 


i }Ub. jud^iunt 


q Eph 


5:15. 











4. In the Lord Jesus we have a Priest to make expiation 
for our sins, as well as a King to conquer sin within us 
and around us. 

5. The dominion of Christ is as terrible to his enemies 
as it is glorious to his friends. 

7. Since the power of Clirist can never fail, they that 
wait upon him shall continually renew their strength. 

PSALM CXL 

This and the eight following ))salinR probably belong to 
the earlier diij's of the restoration from the Babylonish 
captivity. 

2. Sought out ; carefully investigated and pondered, on 
account of the wisdom, power, faithfulness, and lovo dis- 
played in them. 

7. Sure ; trustworthy ; commandments which we can 
obey with full confidence in their truth and equity. 

in. The beginning nf wisdom ; that which constitutes the 
foundation of all true wisdom. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. In order duly to appreciate the works of God, their 
wisdom, e.xcellence, and lovo must bo sought out, 

.'i. The Lord will ever bo mindful of and supply the 
wants of his people. 

9. The redemption of Israel from their bondage in Egypt 
and in B;ibylon was an emblem of the deliverance of God's 
people from the slavery of sin, and their introduction to 
the liberty of the sons of God. 

10. The sum and substance of true wisdom is to fear 
God and keep his coniniandments. 

PSALM CXH. 

1. Light III the ilarkness ; help and deliverance in distress. 
.'). Discretion; in the original, judgment, that is, equity, 



It IS blessed to fear God, 



PSALM CXV. 



irnd confide in his mercy. 



6 Surely lie shall not be moved for ever:" the 
rifrhteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. 

7 He shall not be afraid of evil tidings:'' his 
heart is fixed, trusting in the Loi;d. 

8 His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, 
until he see his desire upon his enemies. 

9 He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor ;" 
his righteousness endureth for ever;'' his horn 
shall be exalted with honor. 

10 The wicked shall see it, and be grieved; he 
shall gnash with his teeth,'' and melt away: the 
desire of the wicked shall perish.' 

PSALM CXI II. 

I An exhortation to praise God for his excellency, 6 for his mercy. 

1J)RAISE ye the Lord.' Praise, ye servants 
of the Lord, praise the name of the Lord. 

2 Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time 
forth and for evermore. 

3 From the rising of the sun unto the going 
down of the same the Lord's name is to be praised.^' 

4 The Lord is high above all nations, and his 
glory above the heavens. 

5 Who is like unto 'the Lord our God, who 
dwelleth on high,+ 

6 Who humbleth himself to behold the things that 
are in heaven, and in the earth!'' 

7 He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and 
lifteth the needy out of the dunghill ;' 

8 Tiiat he may set him witli princes, even with 
the princes of his people.' 

9 He maketh the barren woman to keep* house, 
and to be a joyful mother of children. Praise ye 
the Lord. 



• Psa. 15:5. b Prov. 3;-J5, aci. c Dtut. 24:13. <iRev. -W:!!, e Luke 
13:28. fProv.ll:?. • Keh. Hallelujah. E Isi. 59:19; Mai. 1 :11. t H^li. 
txallelh himself to dwell l>Isa. 57:15. il Sam. 2:8. i Psa. 45:16. I Heb. 
dwelt ina. k Exod. 12:41. iPsa. Sl:5. m Deut. 27:9. 12. n Exod. 2o:a. 



6. Shall not be moved for ever ; shall have prosperity that 
is immovable and perpetual. For the principle upon 
which such ileclaratioiis concerning the righteous are to 
be interpreted, see introductory remarks to Psalm 1. 

8. Shall not be afraid; of the evils which threaten the 
wicked. 

9. Hts horn shall be exalted; his prosperity shall be in- 
creased. 

10. The wicked shall see it ; the salvation of the righteous. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The blessed effects of obeying God may descend to 
many and even to all generations. 

4. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the 
upright in heart Weeping may endure for a night, but 
light Cometh in the morning. 

0. A good man will be conscientious and faithful in the 
discharge of his secular as well as religious duties. 

8. Trust in God keeps the souls of his people in peace, 
while otliers are quaking with apprehension of evils that 
are coming upon them. 

10. The end will show the difference between the right- 
eous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and 
him that serveth him not. 

PSALM cxin. 

3. The Lord's name; his perfections, by the displays of 
which he is known. 

6. 1(7(0 humbleth himself to behold; or, as the original 
seems to mean, who looketh down deep upon; that is, 
who, though he is exalted so high above heaven and earth, 
yet with his omnipotent glance beholds every thing in 
them. Compare Psa. 33:13, 14. 



PSALM CXIV. 



An exliortation, by the example of the dumb creatures, to fear God in 
his churcK. 

TTTHEN Israel went out of Egyi)t,'' the house of 
V V Jacob from a people of strange language •' 

2 Judah was his sanctuary,™ and Israel his do- 
minion." 

3 The sea saw it, and fled:° Jordan was driven 
back." 

4 The mountains skipped like rams, and the 
little liills like lambs.'' 

5 What ai/cd thee, thou sea, that thou fled- 
dest? thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back? 

6 Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams ; and 
ye little hills, like lambs? 

7 Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the 
Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob ;"■ 

8 Which turned the rock into a standing water, 
the flint into a fountain of waters.' 



PSALM CXV. 

1 Because God is truly glorious, 4 and idols are vanity, 9 he exhorteth 
to confidence in God. V2 God is to be blessed for his blessinjrs. 



ATOT unto us, Lord, not unto us, but unto 
i.\| thy name give glory,' for thy mercy, arid for 
thy truth's sake. 

2 Wherefore should the heathen say. Where is 
now their God?" 

3 But our God is in the heavens:" he hath done 
whatsoever he hath pleased. 

4 Their iilols are silver and gold, the work of 
men's hands."' 

5 They have mouths, but they speak not : eyes 
have thev, but thev see not : 



Exod. 14:21. P Josh. :i;l3, 10 1 Hab 3:8, s. ' .M ic. 0:1, 2 > Kxnd. 
7:0: Num. 20:11. t Isa. 4-;l 1 ; Ezek 30:32. uJo«l2:17. v Dan. 4.35. 
' Psa. 135:15-18; Isa 40:19; Jcr. 10:3-7. 



7. Tlie dunghill ; from the deepest dej^ression and dis- 
tress. 

INSTRUCTIONS.- 

3. The time is coming when all nations shall worship 
and adore the Lord for what he is, and for what he has 
done among the children of men. 

7. The deliverance and enlargement which God grants 
to his afflicted servants in this world, are foretastes and 
pledges of the perfect salvation which he will bestow 
on them in the world to come. 

PSALM CXIV. 

2. His sanctuary; the place where God dwelt and was 
worshipped. His dominion; the people over whom ho 
ruled in a special sense. 

3. Fled; became dry. 

4. Skipped; leaped, that is, quaked. Exod. 19:18; Psa. 
29:6. 

8. Turned the rock into a .■standing water; as was the case 
in the wilderness. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
3. All nature is under the control of Jehovah, and is 
obedient to his will. 

7. Creation feels the presence of .lehovah, and is depend- 
ent on him for its existence and condition. 

8. The miraculous provision which God made for the 
wants of Israel in the wilderness, is an emblem of the 
inexhaustible supplies of grace which he has in store for 
all who put their trust in him. 



4. Tlieir idols 



PSALM CXV. 

the idols of the heathen 
691 



Vanity of idols. 



PSALM CXVII. 



Love and duty to God. 



6 Tlicy Iiavc car?, but they lioar not : nosps have 
tlioy, but tliey smell not : ' 

7 Tiiey havo hands, liut tlioy handle not: feet 
have they, but they walk not: neither speak they 
through their throat. 

8 They that make them are like unto them; so 
■is every one that trustcth in them. 

9 I.-^racl. tru.<t thou in the Lord : he is their 
help" and their siiicld." 

10 liouse of Aaron, trust in the Loud: he is 
their hel|) and their sliield. 

11 Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord : he 
is their help and their shield. 

12 Tiie Lord hath been mindful of us:*" he will 
bless u.i; he will bless the house of Israel; he 
will bless the house of Aaron. 

13 He will bless them that fear the Lord,'' both 
small and' great. 

11 Tlie Lord shall increase you more and more, 
you anil youi- children. 

l.j Ye are bl(!ssed of the Lord which made heav- 
en and earth.'' 

16 The heaven, even the heavens, are the Lord's : 
but the earth hath he given to the children of 
men: 

17 The dead praise not the Lord, neither any 
that go down into silence.' 

18 But we will bless the Lord from this time 
forth and for evermore.''' Praise the Lord. 

PSALM CXVI. 

1 The psalmist professcth his love .ind duty to CJod for his deliverance. 
IJ He stuJielh to be thankful. 

I LOVE the Lord, because he hath heard my 
voice and my supplications.'' 

2 Because he hath inclined his ear unto me, there- 
fore will I call upon /dm as long as I live.* 

3 The sorrows of death compassed mc, and the 
pains of hell gat hold upon me:*' 1 found trouble 
and sorrow. 



• P.». al.-JO. b p,i. 84:11; I'rov. 30:5. c I,a. 44:21. i P«a. 29:11. 
• Hob. loilA. • P»a 3.«; Eph. 1:3, 4. ' P«». 83:1(1-12; Isa. 3a: la, 19. 
» Dan. 2:-.>0. I> Pm. !»:l-0. t Hcb inmydays. \ \iti>. found me. I Jon. 
2:2, etc. J P«a. 3J:I1. k Pm. 103:8. I Ezra 0:15; N«h. 9:8; Dan. 9:7. 



8. Like unto litem; stupid and senseless as the objects 
of their worship. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Mercies are bestowed upon the people of God, not 
on account of their own nuTlts, but for the sake of his 
own glory tliroii;;li Jesus Christ. 

8. The stupidity anil folly of idolatry are exceeding 
great, and it.s univor.sality among nations uiieulighlcneil 
by (iod's word, is a terrible evidence of the desperate 
blindnesH and perverseiiess of the natural heart. 

13. Those wliii fi;ir the Lord and put their trust in him 
will receive fnim him all needed good, whatever may be 
their conditinn in life. 

17. As the dead cannot praise the Lord on earth, we 
should diligently employ life and health in his service. 

PSALM CXVI. 

2. Inrhiied /i;s car ; heard my supplications. 

3. Snrrowi of deiith — jxiins nflicH; the anguish occasioned 
by deadly perils. 

0. Simple; those who feel their ignoranco and nood of 
divine teaching. 

10. I hclirved ; in the promised faitlifulness of fJod. Have 
I .ipoken 1 of the deliverance and preservation which God 
has vouchsafeil to me. Ver. 6-8. 
G92 



4 Then called I upon the name of the Lord:' 
Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul. 

5 Gracious is the Lord,'' and righteous;' yea, 
our God is merciful. 

6 The Lord preserveth the simple: I was brought 
low, and he iiel])ed me. 

7 Return unto thy rest."' my soul; for the 
Lord iiath dealt bountifully with thee. 

S For thou hast delivered my soul from death, 
mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling." 

9 I will walk before the Lord in the land of 
the living. 

10 I believed," therefore have I spoken: I was 
greatly afflicted : 

11 I said in my haste, All men are liars. 

12 What shall I render unto the Lord for all 
hi.« benefits toward me'? 

13 I will take the cup of salvation, and call 
upon the name of the Lord. 

14 I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in 
the presence of all his people.'' 

15 Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death 
of his saints.'' 

IG Lord, truly I am thy servant; I am thy 
servant, and the son of thy handmaid: thou hast 
loosed my boiiiLs. 

17 I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanks- 
giving.' and will call upon the name of the Lord. 

18 1 will pay my vows nnto the Lord now in 
the presence of all his peopl(>,' 

19 In the courts of the Lord's house,' in the 
midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise ye the Lord. 

PSALM CXVII. 

An exhortation to praise G-od for his mfrcy and trutli. 

OH praise the Lord, all ye nations: praise him, 
all ye people," 
2 For his merciful kindness is great toward us : 
and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever." 
Praise ye the Lord. 



mJi!rG:IO; iMalt. 11:29; Heb.4:3. i>Jude24. o2Cor.4:l3. pJon.2:n. 
qP,a. 72:14. ■•Lev.7:12. •Eccl.5:S. I Pm. 90.8; UJ0:4. « Rom. 15:11. 
«l<a. 23:1 : John 14:0; 1 John S:li. 



11. In my haxic; in my dismay occasioned by the sor- 
rows of death and the ])ains of hell. I'sa. 31:22. Liars; 
undeserving of my contidence. In his trouble he turned 
away from all human help to God. 

13. Tliecupofsnlmtion; which commemorated his deliv- 
erance from trouble. 

16. Loosed my bonds; his bonds of affliction. 
INPTIU't'TIONS. 

1. The goodness of (Jod in hearing and answering jirayer 
lays us under special obligations to love and adore liim, 
anil to continue to call upon him as long as we live. 

7. Jehovah is the only sure and permanent rest of the 
soul, and those who reject him will remain restless for 
ever. 

10. Faith in God as a prayer-hearing and sin-forgiving 
God, affords great encouragement to continue to call upon 
him. 

1.5. The death of God's people, as well as their life, is 
under his control and an object of his special care. 

18. Those who in time of trouble have vowed unto the 
Lord, should be careful when he delivers them to acknow- 
ledge him with praise. 

PSALM CXVII. 

lu this short psalm all the gentile nations are called 



All exhortation to praise God. 



PSALM CXVIII. 



The coming of Christ. 



PSALM CXVIII. 

1 At! exhortation to praise (toJ for liis mercy. 5 Tlie psalmist by his 
experience showeth how good it is to trust in G-otl. 19 Under tfie 
type of the psalmist the coining of (>hrist in his kingdom is expressed. 

OH give thanks unto the Lord ; " for he is 
good : Ijecause hi.-i mercy endureth for ever.'' 

2 Let Israel now say, that liis mercy endunth 
for ever.'" 

3 Let tlic liouso of Aaron now say, tliat Ids 
mercy endtirct/i for ever. 

4 Let them now that fear the Lord say, that Iiis 
mercy endunth for ever. 

5 1 called upon the Lord in distress:'*' the Lord 
answered me, and set me in a large place. 

6 The Lord is on my sidc;**^ I will not fear: 
wlmt can man do unto me? 

7 The Lord taketh my part witli them that help 
me : therefore shall I see my desire upon them that 
hate me. 

8 It is better to trust in the Lord than to put 
confidence in man.*^ 

9 It is better to trust in the Lord than to put 
confidence in princes.''' 

10 All nations compassed me about: but in the 
name of the Lord will I destroy them.* 

11 They compassed me about; yea, they com- 
passed me about: but in the name of the Lord I 
will destroy tliem. 

12 They compassed me about like bees;"" they 
are quenched as the fire of thorns:' for in the 
name of the Lord I will destroy them.^ 

13 Thou hast thrust sore at me that I might 
f;ill : but the Lord helped me.J 



a IChv. 108,34. I> Psa. 103:17. c Psa. 115:9, elo. • Heb. ou! o/<//s(re.M. 
d Psa. 120:1. t Heb. for me. e Psa. 87:1; Heb. 13.(i f Jer. 17:5, 7. 
s Rsi. 14li:3. 1 Heb. cut ttiemotf. I> Dent. 1:44. i 2 Sam. 23:6; Nah. 
1:10 » Heb. cur dolon. JMic. 7:8. k Exod. 13:2, 6; Isa. 12:2. 1 Hab. 



upon to praise God for his goodness to liis covenant peo- 
ple. They all have an interest in the welfare of Israel, 
since it is from Israel that the knowledge of God is to go 
forth through all the earth. See note to Psa. C7 : 1. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. The unchangeable goodness and truth of Jehovah are 
a just foundation for confidence in him ; the greatness of 
his mercy towards tho.se who embrace it is beyond all 
finite comprehension, and calls for unceasing gratitude 
and praise. 

PSALM CXYIIL 

This psalm was evidently composed to be sung on the 
occasion of some national festivity, apparently in connec- 
tion with a solemn procession to the sanctuary; but the 
period to which it belongs cannot be certainly determined. 
Many refer it to the solemnities connected with the foun- 
dation of the second temple. Ezra 3:10-13. It might, 
perhaps, with still more propriety be referred to the dedi- 
cation of the second temple. Ezra C: 16-18. 

5. I called; the psalmist speaks here in the name of 
God's people, and so throughout the psalm. Set me in a 
large place; dehvered me from restraints and embarrass- 
ments. 

7. See ; the destruction of my enemies. 

10. Me; the psalmist, as the rejjresontative of God's 
people. 

12. The fire of thorns; which is soon extinguished. 

i:j. Thou; the enemy of Israel. 

20. This gate of tlie Lord; which led into the sanctuary, 
the place of his worship ; supposed to have been said as 
the solemn procession reached the sanctuary. 

21. My salvation; his dehverer from deatli. 



14 The Lord is my strength and song, and is 
become my salvation.'^ 

15 The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in tiio 
tabernacles of the liglitcous: the right hand of 
the Loud doeth valiantly. 

IG The riglit hand of the Lord is exalted: the 
right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly. 

17 I shall not die, but live,' and declare the 
works of the Lord.'" 

18 The Lord hath chastened me sore:" but he 
hath not given me over unto death. 

19 Open to me the gates of righteousness:" I 
will go into theni, and 1 will praise the Lord : 

20 This gate of the Lord, into which the right- 
eous shall enter. 

21 I will praise thee: for thou hast heard lue, 
and art become my salvation. 

22 The stone which the builders refused is be- 
come the head-.stote of the corner.'' 

23 Tills is the Lord's doing;' it is marvellous 
in our eyes. 

24 This is the day ichich the Lord hath made; 
we will rejoice and be glad in it. 

25 Save now, I beseech Ihce, Lord : Lord, 
I beseech thee, send now prosperity. 

26 Blessed iehe that cometh in the name of the 
Lord:'' we have blessed you out of the house of 
the Lord. 

27 God is the Lord, which hath showed us light :"■ 
bind the sacrifice with cords, evcti unto the horns 
of the altar. 

2S Thou art my God, and I will praise thee : 
thou art my God, I will exalt thee.' 



1:12. m Psa. 73.38. ii2Cor.6-9. o Isa. 26.2; Rev. 22: 14. pMatt.21:42; 
Acl.s 4:11; Eph 2:20; I Pet, 2:4,7. 1 Heb. /com the LORD, q Matt. 
21:0; 23:39. r Eslh. 8:16; 1 Pet. 2:9. ■Isa.25:l. 



22. Tlie stone which tlic builders refused; originally applied 
to Israel as despised and rejected by the heathen nations, 
but chosen of God and exalted by him to the most honor- 
able office: afterwards applied by Christ to himself as 
rejected by the Jewish builders, but exalted by God to 
be head over all things to his body the church. The first 
application includes the second, since Christ is the head 
and representative of the true Israel. The head-stoiie ; 
which unites the building together. 

23. This; which is done in the head-stone. 

24. This is the day ; the day of salvation to Israel. 

2G. He that cometh in the name of the Lord : ap])lied by the 
multitude to Christ with his ajiprobation, when he entered 
Jerusalem as the King of Israel. Matt. 21:9, 15, IB. 

27. Bind the sacrifice ; preparatory to ofl'ering it as a token 
of gratitude to God. 

28. My God ; he not only had ;i God, but by the spirit of 
adoption could say. My God. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

9. It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence 
in men, however honorable or exalted. 

12. The assaults of the wicked upon God's peojjle, how- 
ever formidable they may appear in the beginning, will 
end in their own overthrow. 

14. God is the source of defence and of joy to his peo- 
ple, and will not disappoint any who put their trust in him. 

18. God afflicts his people, not for their destruction, but 
for their profit: however great their sufferings, he will in 
the end deliver them. 

22. In selecting the means and instruments of establish- 
ing his kingdom in the world, God acts in a manner very 
contrary to human wisdom, '• that no flesh should glory in 
his presence. ' 

693 



The excellence of 



PSALM CXIX. 



GoiPs holy word. 



29 Oil give thanks unto the Lord;" for he is 
good : for his mercy endurcth for ever. 

I'SALM CXIX. 

This psftlm containeth sundry pmyert, praise, and professions of obedi- 
ence. 

ALKPH. 

BLESSED are tlic uiidcfiled' in the wa}', wiio 
walk in the law of the Lord." 

2 Blessed arc tliey that keep his testimonies, and 
that seek him with the whole heart." 

3 They also do no iniquity: tliey walk in his 
ways.'' 

4 Thou hast commanded w.s to keep thy precepts 
diligently.' 

5 Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy 
statutes! 

6 Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have re- 
spect unto all thy commandments.' 

7 I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, 
when I shall have learned thy righteous judg- 
ments.*'-' 

8 I will keep thy statutes : Oil forsake me not 
utterly. 

BETH. 

9 Wherewithal sliall a young man cleanse his 
way?" by taking heed thereto according to tliy word. 

It) With my wiiole heart have I sought thee:' 
Oh let me not wander from thy commandments. 

1 1 Tiiy word have I hid in my heart,^ that I 
migiit not sin against tiiee. 

12 Blessed art thou, Loud: teach me thy stat- 
utes." 

L3 With my lips have I declared all the judg- 
ments of thy mouth. 

14 1 have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, 
as much as in all riches. 

15 I will meditate in thy precepts,' and have 
respect unto thy ways. 

16 I will delight myself in thy statutes: I will 
not forget thy word. 

GIMEL. 

1 7 Di'al bountifully with thy servant,"" that I may 
live, and keep thy word. 



» Ver. I . * Or. jKr/ert^ or a 
3.20. •! 1 John .'1.9; 5: In. • 



inten. t Pio. lii-.l. c Prov. 23:48; I John 
DdUt. G:I7; Il;l3j:)2 'lJohn2:2«. t Hob. 

JmJgiiunit o/ lhi/rigiileoufnrs< t »cr. 171. hProv. 1:1. i 2 Chr. l.'i: 1.'). 

J P«i. 1:2. k I'.a. 2.j:l; Ter. 20, olo. I P«l. 1:2. m P«.a. 118:7. I Hob. 

Rcvmt. »P.».;ill:12, ll»b. 11:13; 1 Pot. 2:11. oPM.oa:!. P 1 Pet. 5:3. 



29. Tlio i^uudncss of Goil in licariiig uiul aii.swuring llie 
prayers of IiIh jicople slioiild ever bo acknowledged with 
gratitudu, tliaiiksgiviii]^, and praiBC. 

PSALM CXIX. 

This JR an alplialietic psahn of poculiar structure. The 
firHt eight vcrsett begin each with the lirHt letter of the 
Hebrew alpliabet, the next eight with tlic second letter, 
anil HO on. It is \vht)lly oieiipied with the coiniiiendation 
of (;od» word under varioiiH litleH, expres.five of the vari- 
ous aspects in which it may l)o vicwe<l. Thns it is called j 
his wont, ns that whicli he ha.s spoken to us ; his tnir, given 
as the rule of our life ; liis ammnmlmciili and prcrept.i, laid 
upon us to l)e kept; his .■</(i/ii/f.<. estabhslied as the hiws of 
his kingdom; \un Juilf;meiils. hh his decisions concerning | 
our d ity and destiny ; his Icslimonicx, as to his authorita- ' 
live ucclsra'.iou of Irutli ; and liis inii/, in which wo uro to j 
walk. I 



18 Open* thou mine eyes, that I may behold 
wondrous things out of thy law. 

19 I am a stranger in the earth:" hide not thy 
commandments from me. 

20 My soul breaketh for the longing Ma/ lY Aa/A 
unto thy judgments at all times." 

21 Thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed," 
which do err from thy commandments. 

22 Remove from me reproach and contempt; for 
I have kept thy testimonies. 

23 Princes also did sit and speak against me: 
Imt thy servant did meditate in thy statutes. 

24 Thy testimonies also are my delight,'' and my 
counsellors.^ "■ 

DALETII. 

25 My soul cleaveth unto the dust: quicken thou 
me according to thy word. 

26 I have declared my ways, and thou heardest 
me: teach me thy statutes. 

27 Make me to understand the way of thy pre- 
cepts: so shall I talk of thy wondrous works. 

28 My soul melteth' lor heaviness: strengthen 
thou me according unto thy word. 

29 Remove from me the way of lying:' and 
grant me thy law graciously. 

30 I have chosen the way of truth: thy judg- 
ments have I laid before me. 

31 I have stuck unto thy testimonies: Lord, 
put me not to shame.' 

32 1 will run the way of thy commandments, 
when thou shall enlarge my heart." 



33 Teach me, liORD, the way of thy statutes; 
and I shall keep it unto the end."' 

34 Give me understanding," and I shall keep thy 
law ;" yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart. 

35 Make me to go in the path of thy command- 
ments; for therein do I delight. 

36 Incline my heart unto thy testimonies,'' and 
not to covi'lousncss.'^ 

37 Turn'' away mine eyes from beholding van- 
ity;" n?irf quicken thou me in thy way. 

38 Stablish thy word unto thy servant,'' who is 
devoted to thy fear. 



<I vcr. 77, 02. » Heb. mta of coutisrt. ' Pror. 7:1-1. I Heb. dropprlh. 
• Prov. .Id:,-!, l Im. 49:2:1 » li». 00:5; 1 Cor. fl: II. « Re». 2:20. " l>ro». 
2:iS. iDeut.4:6. r £z«k. atzSl. i Luko 12:15; 1 Tim. C: 10; Heb. 13:5. 
1 Ilcb. jliaie 10 pau. >I>a.33:15. k 2 Sam. 7-25; 2 Cor. 1:20. 



I. l^or/f/i/oi ,- sincere, upright, /» Mc /air; according to 
its re'iuireinents. 

3. Do no iiiKiuily; allow themselves in no known sin. 
9. Tiikmp heal ; regulating his life according to the 
Scriptures. 

II. Uid ; as a precious treasure to bo carefully kept. 

19. A stroiif;er in the rorlli ; as a stranger has no inherit- 
ance in the land of his pilgrimage, so I am as a stranger 
on the eartli, having no inheritance but thy word. There- 
fore lake not away from me this precious treasure, but let 
it be before my eyes continually as my comforter, ver. .'>4. 

25. CImveth unto the dtixl ; lies prostrate; a description 
of doc|) depression. Psa. 11:2.5. 

26. Havcdeclaral; recounted before thee. Myvni/s; my 
goings out and comings in; my whole course of life, with 
all its cares and sorrows. 

2.S. Mehclh ; ])inctli away. 

37. Bdiolding ; beholiling with delight. Vanity; put 



The excellence of 



PSAL31 CXIX. 



GocPs holy word. 



?>!) Turn away ray reproach which I fear: for 
thy judgments are good. 

4o"Behokl, I have kinged after thy precepts: 
quicken me ia tliy righteousness." 
VAU. 

41 Let thy mercies come also unto me, Lord, 
evin thy salvation, according to tliy word. 

4'J So shall I have wherewith to answer him that 
rc])roaehetii mc:" for I trust in thy word. 

4:} And take not the word of truth utterly out 
of my mouth ;'' for I have hoped in thy judgments. 

44 So shall I keep thy law continually for ever 
and ever. 

45 And I will walk at liberty:^ for I seek thy 
precepts."^ 

46 I will speak of thy testimonies also before 
kings, and will not be ashamed.'' 

47 And I will delight myself in thy command- 
ments, wliich I have loved. 

48 My hands also will I lift up unto thy com- 
mandments, whicli I have loved; and I will medi- 
tate in thy statutes. 

ZAIN. 

49 Remember the word unto thy servant, upon 
whicli thou hast caused me to hope.® 

50 This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy 
word hath quickened me. 

51 The proud have had me greatly in derision: 
yd have I not declined from thy law.*^ 

52 I remembered tiiy judgments of old, Lord ; 
and liave comforted myself. 

5:^ Horror hath taken hold upon me because of 
the wicked that forsake thy law.*= 

54 Tiiy statutes have been my songs in the house 
of my pilgrimage. 

55 I have remembered thy name, Lord, in the 
night,'' and have kept thy law. 

55 This I had, because I kept thy precepts. 

CHETH. 

57 Thou art my portion, Lord : ' I have said 
that I would keep tliy words. 

58 I entreated thy favor* with my whole heart :^ 
be merciful unto me according to thy word. 

59 I thought on my ways, and turned my feet 
unto thy testimonies.'' 

()0 I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy 
commandments. 



» John 10:11). * Or, answer him thai reproachelk me in n thing, b Isa 
59:21. fHeh. large, c JoU,, 8::W, 36; Gal. 5:1, 13. d Matt. 10:1S, 19; 
Acts -'(kI, etc. e IPet. 1:l;i, -Jl. f Job-23: II ; Isa. 38:3. sEzra9;3. h Psa' 
63:1;; 77:6. i Jer. 10:16; Lam. 3:24. I Heb./«w.- Job 11:19. )Heb.lO:22. 
k Lara. 3:40, 41; Luke 15:17. 18. i Ot, companies. 1 Prov. 13:20. m Jer. 



here for all the vain objects of time and sense to which 
men look, instead of God, for happiness. 

43. Take not the word of truth utter! ij out of my mouth; 
deal not with me in such a way that I shall be unable to 
glory in thj^ word of truth before my enemies, as I have 
done heretofore. 

45. At liberty; literally, in a wide place, where I can 
walk safely and prosperously. 

48. My hands also will I lift up ; as a token of affection- 
ate desire. 

49. The word ; the word of promise. 

50. This; trust in thy word of promise. 
5:1 Horror; vehement disapprobation. 

51). This I had; the comfort mentioned above, ver. 54. 



61 The bands^ of the wicked have robbed me; 
bid I have not forgotten thy law. 

62 At midnight I will rise to give tlianks unto 
thee because of thy righteous judgments. 

63 I am a companion of all them that fear thee, 
and of them that keep thy precepts.' 

64 The earth, Lord, is full of thy mercy : teach 
me tliy statutes. 

TETH. 

65 Thou hast dealt well with thy servant, Lord, 
according unto thy word. 

66 Teach me good judgment and knowledge:™ 
for I have believed thy connnandments. 

67 Befbrel was afflicted I went astray :" but now 
have I kept thy word. 

68 Thou art good, and doest good:" teach me 
thy statutes. 

69 The proud have forged a lie against me : but 
I will keep thy precepts with my whole heart. 

70 Their heart is as f;it as grease: but I delight 
in tiiy law. 

71 It is good for me that I have been afflicted ;p 
that I might learn thy statutes. 

72 Tlie law of thy mouth is better unto mc than 
thousands of gold and silver.'' 

JOD. 

73 Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: 
give me understanding,'' that I may learn thy com- 
mandments. 

74 They that fear thee will be glad wlicn they 
see me;'' because I have hoped in thy word. 

75 1 know, O Lord, tliat thy judgments are right," 
and that tiiou in faithfulness hast afflicted me.' 

76 Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kimlness be for 
my comfort,^ according to thy word unto tliy ser- 
vant. 

77 Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I 
may live: for thy law is my delight. 

78 Let the proud be ashamed; for they dealt 
perversely with me without a cause:" but I will 
meditate in thy precepts. 

79 Let those that fear thee turn unto me, and 
those that have known thy testimonies. 

80 Let my heart be sound in thy statutes;''' that 
I be not ashamed.™ 

CAPH. 

8 1 My sold fainteth for thy salvation -.^ hitl hope 
in thv word. 



3 


l.S 


n Jer. 31:18 


19; 


Hph 


12:11. 


Psa 


a.'i:S 


. Matt 


19 


17 


P V 


r. 67. 




P^n 


19:10; Pro 


S: 


11, 1<J 


r Psa. 


III: 


10; V 


Br. 34, 


144 




» Psa. 


■.lA-.-l. 




HpH, 


righteousne 




Rev, 


3:19. 1 Heb 


to CO 


nfort 1 


ne. 


u 


IPet 


2:20. 


* 


Deut 


26:16; Eze 


k. 11 


:19, 


>vver 6. 


xP 


a. f4 


2. 











But some render the verse thus : " This I have, that I keep 
thy precepts ;" meaning, " This I have as my heritage, or 
the portion of my soul, that I keep thy precepts." Com- 
pare ver. 111. 

59. My ways; comparing them with thy law. 

61. The bands of the wicked liave robbed me; or, the snares 
of the wicked have encompassed me. 

04. Full of thy mercy: teach; do thou, whose goodness 
fills the earth, sliow thy goodness to me by teaching me 
thy statutes. Compare ver. 68. 

70. Fat; pampered in worldly pleasures, and insensible 
to spiritual good. 

79. Tnrn unto me; in love and confidence. This is the 
effect of their -ndtuessing God's bouiitifid dealings with him. 
695 



The excellence of 



PSALM CXIX. 



God's holy word. 



82 Mine eyes fail for thy word, saying, Wiien 
wilt thou comfort mc? 

83 For I am become like a Lottie in the smoke; 
yet do I not forget thy statutes. 

8-i How many are tiiedays of thy servant? when 
wilt thou execute judgment on them that persecute 
me?" 

85 The proud have digged pits for me,'' which 
are not after tliy law. 

86 All thy coniiiuUKlmcnts are faithful:*"' they 
persecute mo wrongfully ; hel]) thou mc. 

87 They had ahuost consumed me upon earth; 
but I forsook not tiiy precepts. 

88 Quicken me after tliy loving-kindness; so shall 
I keep tlie testimony of tliy mouth. 

LAJIED. 

89 For ever, Lord, thy word is settled in 
heaven.'' 

90 Tiiy faitlifulness is unto all generations :* thou 
hast cstablishcHl the earlli, and it abidcth.* 

91 Tliey continue this day according to thine 
ordinances:" for all are thy servants. 

92 Unless thy law /tad been my delights, I should 
then have peri-shed in mine affliction. 

93 I will never forget thy precepts: for with 
them thou hast quickened me. 

94 I am thine, save me;'' for I have sought thy 
precepts. 

95 Tiie wicked have waited for mc to destroy 
me: but I will consider thy testimonies. 

90 I have seen an end of all perfection : but thy 
commandment is exceeding broad. 

MEM. 

97 Oh how love I thy law! it is my meditation 
all tlie day." 

98 Thou through thy commnndments hast made 
me wiser than mine enemies : for they are* ever 
with me. 

99 I have more understanding than all my teach- 
ers:*' for thy testimonies are my meditation. 

100 1 understand more than the ancients,' be- 
cause I keep thy precepts. 

101 I have refrained my feet from every evil 
way.' tliat I might kee[) lliy word. 

102 I have not departed from thy judgments: 
for thou hast taugiit mc. 

103 How sweet arc thy words unto my taste!'" 
yea, sweeter tlian honey to my mouth. 



• a The... 1:11; Rnv. 8:10. b P«i. 35:7. • Hcb./ailA/u;ilM.l. « «r. LIS. 
'Matt. ■^I:3I 3j. t Hob. lo ?«n«m(ion o/id Kcntrolio/i; PslM).!. I Heb. 
tlandtlh. eje,. a):i5. ( Zonh. :t: 17. « P«a. 1:-J. » Hob i( «. h Deul. 
4:6. 8; 'jTim. 3;1S. i Job 3i.7-9. J Prov. 1:15. I Ileb. palalt. k Job 
ZiM, P«a. 19;1U. I Vmi. H:13. 1 Or, mmlk. ■» Prov. ti:a3. » Ncli. 



61. Fail for thy word; pine away in looking for the ful- 
fihiieiit of thy wonl of i)roiiii«e. 

83. liottle in tlie smoke; dried up and withered. 

84. How miiiiij arc the dnip of Ihij scrvnnt? the mcaninf; 
of this qucHlioii in the ori(;inal seems to be, To wliat do 
liis days amount? Ho pli'iuls the shortness of life as a 
reason why God siioiild speedily deliver him. Compare 
Job 10:20. 

89. Settled in heaven; estiiblished in God's presence be- 
yond the possibility of change. 

90. Ahideth; remaiiieth iiniiiovcd. The stability of the 
earth is the effect of God's mii,lmn^;oiiblenes8, and the 
same uncbungeableness is shown in tlie fulfilment of his 
word. 

G96 



104 Through thy precepts I get understanding: 
therefore I hate every false way.' 

KUN. 

105 Thy word is a lamp^ unto my feet, and a 
light unto my iiatii.'" 

106 I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I 
will keep thy rigiiteous judgments." 

107 1 am afflicted very much: quicken me, 
Lord, according unto thy word. 

108 Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill-ofl'er- 
ings of my mouth," Lord, and teach me thy judg- 
ments. 

10!) My soul is continually in my hand :'' yet do 
I not forget thy law. 

110 Tiie wicked have laid a snare for me :'' yet 1 
erred not from tiiy precepts. 

111 Thy testimonies have I taken as a heritage 
for ever: for tlicy are the rejoicing of my heart.' 

112 I have inclined my heart to perform' thy 
statutes always,' even unto the end.' 

SAMECH. 

113 1 hate vain thoughts :" but thy law do I love. 

114 Thou art my hiding-jilace and my shield:" 
I hope in thy word. 

115 Depart from me, ye evil-doers:" for I will 
keep the commandments of my God. 

110 Upliold me according unto thy word, that 
I may live : and let me not be ashamed of my 
liopc.'' 

1 17 Hold tliou mc up, and I shall be safe : and I 
will have respect unto thy statutes continually. 

118 Thou hast trodden down all them tliat err 
from thy statutes :^' for their deceit is falseiiood." 

119 Thou pattest away* all the wicked of the 
earth like dross:" therefore I love thy testimonies. 

1-20 My Ilesh trembleth for fear of" thee;" and I 
am afraid of thy judgments. 

AIN. 

121 I liave done judgment and justice: leave me 
not to mine oppressors.*^ 

122 Be surety for thy servant for good :*• let not 
the jirnnd oppress me. 

123 Mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the 
word of thy righteousness. 

124 Deal witii thy servant according unto thy 
mercy,'' and teach mc thy statutes. 

125 I am thy servant;' give mo understanding, 
that I may know thy testimonies. 



10:29. »Hcb. 13:1S. P Job 13:11. <1 ProT. 1 :11, 13. rj.r. 15:16. 
do. taChr. 10:3. iReY. 2:111. "Jcr. 4:14. >P«l. 3-.':7. » P.i. 


• n.b. 


I39:l»; 


1 Cor. Vo-.m. I Rom. 5:o. r Mai. 4:3. « 1 John 2:21. 1 H«b. a, 


ustst to 


rrase. •EMk.2-J:l8. bUab. 3:lfl. c P«. 37:32, 33. J U.b. 7:22 


• Pmu 


103.10. rPu. 110:10. 





96. An end of all perfection ; of human cxcellenco. Ex- 
ceeding broad ; searcliing the heart and motives, and requir- 
ing every thing that is excellent. 

105. A lamp unto mijfcet; showing the w.-iy in which I 
should go. 

109. Mij soul IS continuallij in mij hand; my life is coii- 
stiintly in danger. 

113. J'fiKi iTioughls; the original word, which occurs 
only here, seems to denote dividoil.or iiiconstjint thoughts, 
now inclining to obedience, and now to disobedience. 
Compare 1 Kings 18:21; James 1:8. 

122. lie .mretijfor lliii servant for good ; be surety for mo, 
that in the cause between me and my adversaries I shall 
receive justice. See note lo Job 17:3. 



The excellence nf 



PSALM CXIX. 



God's holy word. 



120 It is tiiiio for l/icc, Loud, to work: for (lioy 
liavo made void thy law. 

127 Therefore 1 love thy coniraandmcuts above 
gold ; yea, above fine gold." 

12S Therefore I esteem all ihy precepts concern- 
ing all (/lings lo be right ; and I liatc every false 
way. 

TE. 

129 Thy testimonies are wonderful:'' therefore 
doth my soul keep them. 

130 The entrance of thy words giveth light ;'^ 
it giveth understanding unto tlie simple.* 

131 1 opened my mouth, and panted : for I long- 
ed for thy commandments. 

132 Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto 
me, as thou usest to do unto* those that love thy 
name. 

133 Order my steps in thy word:" and let not 
any iniipiity have dominion over me.' 

134 Deliver me from the oppression of man: so 
will I keep thy precepts. 

135 Make thy face to shine upon thy servant;"^ 
and teach me thy statutes. 

13(5 Rivers of waters run down mine eyes,'' be- 
cause they keep not thy law. 

TZ.\DDI. 

137 Righteous art thou, Lord, and upright arc 
thy judgments.' 

i38 Thy testimonies that thou hast commanded 
a)-e righteous^ and very faithful.* 

139 My zeal hath consumed me,^J because mine 
enemies have forgotten thy words. 

140 Thy word is vei'y pure:' therefore thy ser- 
vant loveth it. 

141 I am small and despised: yd do not I for- 
get thy precepts. 

142 Thy righteousness is an everlasting right- 
eousness, and thy law is the truth.'' 

143 Trouble and anguish have taken hold on 
me:'' yet thy commandments are my delights. 

144 The righteousness of thy testimonies is ever- 
lasting: give me understanding, and I shall live.' 

KOPH. 

145 I cried with my whole heart; hear me, 
Lord : I will keep thy statutes. 

146 1 cried unto thee ; save me, and I sliall* keej) 
thy testimonies. 

147 I prevented the dawning of the morning,'" 
and cried: I hoped in thy word. 

148 Mine eyes prevent the nig/it watches, that I 
might meditate in thy word. 

149 Hear my voice according unto thy loving- 

» I'sa. 19:10; Prov.8;II. 1> ver. 18; Isa. 2.3: 1. ciCor. 4:4.0. d Prov 
I;4; (1:4-'".. * Heb nrrording to tilt custom toward, e P.sa. 17:5. f Psa 
19.1 ;, Rom. 0:1-.), 14 s Num. 6:a.>, 20. h Jsr. 13:17; 14:17; Ezek. !):4 
: Dill 9 7. t Heb, rigAlMwnf.M. I Heb./n/f/i/iWnMS. i lUh. citt me off . 
) Wi. Ii9:9. 1 Heb. tried, or refined, k John 17:17. 1 Heb. found me 
I Prov. 10:21. • Or, that I may. n. Psa. 1311,6. n Psa. 1392. etc. « Luk« 



127, 128. Therefore; because of the excellence of thy 
word, which the psalmist has been setting forth through- 
out the whole psalm. See ver. 129. 

130. The entrance of thy words; more literally, the open- 
ing of thy words, that is, the unfolding of Scripture to my 
soul through the illumination of thy Spirit. 

147. I prevented the ilawniiig of the tnorning:; cried unto 
God during the night season and before the dawn of day. 



kindness: Lord, (|nicken ine according to thy 
juilginent. 

150 They draw nigh that follow after ini,-;chief; 
they are far from thy law. 

151 Thou art near, Loud;" and all thv com- 
mandments are truth. 

152 Concerning thy testimonies, I liave known 
of old that thou hast founded them for ever." 

KEsn. 

153 Consider mine affliction, and deliver me:" 
for I do not forget thy law. 

154 Plead my cause, and deliver mc:"i quicken 
nie according to thy word. 

155 Salvation is far from the wicked:'' for they 
seek not thy statutes. 

156 Great* are thy tender mercies, Loud: 
quicken me according to thy judgments. 

157 Many are my persecutors and mine enemies ; 
yet do I not decline from thy testimonies. 

158 I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved ; 
because they kept not thy word. 

159 Consider how I love thy precepts: quicken 
me, O Lord, according to thy loving-kindness. 

160 Thy word is true from the beginning:* and 
every one of thy righteous judgments endurcth for 
ever. 

SCHIN. 

101 Princes have persecuted me without a cause:' 
Init my heart standeth in awe of tliy word. 

102 I rejoice at thy word,' as one that findeth 
great s])oil. 

163 1 hate and abhor lying: but thy law do I 
love. 

164 Seven times a day do I praise thee, because 
of thy righteous judgments. 

165 Great peace have they which love thy law :" 
and nothing shall offend tliem.^ 

160 Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation, and 
done thy commandments. 

167 My soul hath kept thy testimonies; and I 
love them exceedingly. 

168 I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies : 
for all my ways are before thee.'' 

TAU. 

169 Let my cry come near before thee, Lord : 
give me understanding according to thy word."' 

170 Let my supplication come before thee: de- 
liver me according to thy word. 

171 My lips slnill utter praise, when thou hast 
taught me thy statutes. 

172 My tongue shall speak of thy word: for all 
thy commandments are righteousness. 



21 -.33 Pl.am. .5:1. q Mic. 7:9; IJnIm 2: 1. r Luke 16:24. t Or, Many. 
I Heb The beginjiins of thij U'ord is true. > 1 Sam. 24:11, 17; 2H:21, 2.3. 
1 ver 111 u Prov. 3:2; Isa. 32:17; John 14:27; Phil. 4:7. S Heb. they 
.■.hntl have no stiimhlins-blo^k; 1 Pet. 2:S; 1 John 2:10. v Psa. 139:3; Prov. 
5:21. w Prov. 2:(i, 7; Jas. 1:5. 



ISO. Thy word !.« true from the beginning;; or, the sum of 
thy word is true ; that is, the whole of it taken as a body. 

164. Scoen times; many times, often. 

1G5. Nothing shall offend them; they shall have no stum- 
bling-blocks, their way shall be safe and prosperous. 

168. Alt my ways are before thee; thine omniscient eye i;s 
upon all my ways, so that if in any thing I depart from thy 
connnaiids, thou seest it, and wilt treat me accordingly. 
697 



Prayer in distress. 



PSALM CXXI. 



Safety of God's people. 



173 Let thy liaiul help mc; for I liave chosen 
thy prccejits." 

174 I have lonj^eil for thy salvation, Lord; 
and thy law is my delight.'' 

175 Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee; 
and let thy judgments helj) me. 

170 1 have gone astray like a lost sheep:" seek 
thy servant; for 1 do not forget thy command- 
ments. 

rSALM cxx. 

1 David prayeth against Doeg, 3 reproveth liis tongue, O complaineth of 
his necessary conversation with the wielded. 

^ A Song of degrees. 

IX my distress I cried unto the Lord, and lie 
heard mc.'' 

2 Deliver my soul, Lord, from lying lips, and 
from a deceitful tongue. 

3 What shall be given unto thee? or Avhat shall 
be done* unto tliee, thou false tongue?* 



a 


Josh. -Jlfja; Prov. l.W: Luke 10:42. b Tsa. 1:-J. c ha. .W:!!; I.ufce 


1.1- 


1, eic; 1 Pel. •2;-ii. d Jon. 2:3. • lUb atltM. t Or. What sl,a!U\ie 


dec 


eilful tonffue gire unto theej or What .^hali it profit theej I Or, It is as 


Mc 


ikarp arrotos of the mighty m3.ti c Gen. U):-.> 'Gen. 25:13. i Or, a 



175. Tliyjudements; by wlilch tliou sustaincst the right- 
eous and overtnrowest the wicked. See above iu verses 
149, 151). 

17C. Gone astray; wandered from the fold, and thus be- 
coine exposed to misery and ruin. Ezek. 34: (j. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The best way to be kept from all iniquity is to be 
diligently employed in learning and doing the whole will 
of God. 

C. Tliey wlio have respect to all God's commandments 
have the approbation of conscience, and their hope shall 
never be disappointed. 

9. He who takes the Bible for his guide will walk in 
safety, purity, and love ; and will be preserved from man- 
ifold dangers to which he would otherwise be exposed. 

15. Meditation upon the word and ways of Uod is a 
great safeguard to youth, and to those of riper years. 

18. The mind needs to be spiritually enlightened in 
order to behold ihe spiritual meaning, beauty, and excel- 
lence of the Scriptures. 

24. Those who take counsel of the statutes of God will 
be likely to be made wise to salvation. 

30. Alen must make their duty their delight, or they 
will not be likely to perform it. 

41). Those who love God will not be afraid to speak of 
him before the great and honorable of the earth. 

53. Pious men arc grieved when the wicked break God's 
law. 

S5. Serious thought and contemplation on the works 
and ways of God, and on our relations to him and obliga- 
tions to obey him, are essential to the hearty turning of 
the soul to his service. 

fi7. A 111 iet ions arc often made the moans of reclaiming the 
soul from bacUsliding.and thus promoting its highest good. 

72. No earthly good is so precious or useful as tlie 
keeping of the tlivine commands. 

74. The deliverance of a pious soul from trouble gives 
great joy to tlie people of fiod. 

8.3. ity great and long-continued afflictions Iho soul may 
be deprived of rest, peace, and joy ; yet it will still cleave 
to God's service. 

88. The effect of GikI's grace bestowed upon the right- 
eous is an increase of the fruits of cibedienco. 

91). Nothing nu-rely human is jierfect; perfection is 
att4iinpd only by perfect obedience to the revealed will 
of God. 

103. The law of God is the diOiglit of his people, and 
shows Ibein the path of duty, salVtv, and blessedness. 
698 



4 Sharp arrows of the mighty,' with coals of 
juniper. 

5 Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech,"^ that I 
dwell in the tents of Kedar!' 

6 My soul hath long dwelt with him that hateth 
peace. 

1 I am for peace : ^ but when I speak, they are 
for war. 

PSALM CXXI. 

The great safety of tlie godly, who put their trust in God's protection. 
^ A Song of degrees. 

I WILL lift uj) mine eyes unto the hills, from 
whence cometli my help.' 

2 J[y hidp Cometh from the Lord," which made 
heaven and earth. 

3 lie will not suffer thy foot to be moved:'' he 
that ki'opetli thee will not slumbor.' 

4 Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither 
slumber nor sleep. 



man of peare. I Or, Shall I lift up mi 
my help rome? Jer. S-.iH. 5 Hos. 1:);: 
i Isa. 27:3. 



• eyes to the hilU7 whenrr should 
h 1 Sam. 2:9; Prov. 3:25, 26. 



117. The only safety of believers is in being kept by the 
mighty power of God through faith unto salvation. 

130. The reception of divine truth illimiinates and puri- 
fies the soul. 

147. The way to the throne of mercy is alwaj'S open, 
and God sees the wants of his people amidst the darkness 
of midnight, as well as in the splendors of noonday. 

1.55. \Vitliout seeking for the pearl of great price we 
shall not be likely to obtain it. 

164. 'i'lie righteous pray with all prayer and supplica- 
tion in the Spirit, and watch thereunto with all persever- 
ance. 

ir)5. Obedience to God's law is the only way of peace 
and safety. 

PSALM CXX. 

Title, A Song of degrees ; or, A Song of asceitts, the title of 
this and the fourteen following psalms : probably so called 
because they were arranged to be sung on the occasion 
of the ascent of the Israelites to Jerusalem to keep the 
yearly festivals. Dent. 10:15. 

3. W'Uat shall he given unto ttiee? what reward shall God 
give unto thee for thy wickedness. 

4. Sluirp arrows — coats; ttod will give these to the false 
tongue. As it has wotnided others like sharp arrows, 
and burned them like coals of fire, so will God do to it. 
Arroics of the mighty; such as the mighty warrior shoots. 
Juniper; a shrub, different from our juniper, from the 
roots of which charcoal was made anciently, as it is at the 
present day. 

5. Maecli ; a barbarous people east of the Ttlack sea. 
Kedar; an Arabian tribe. Mesech and Kedar are put gen- 
erally for foreign and hostile nations. 

INSTHrCTlONS. 

2. When the slander of false tongues is directed against 
the faithful servants of (!oil, they ought to bear it ))atiently, 
remembering that he will in duo time deliver them, and 
punish their calumniators. 

7. The friends of God are friends of peace, and it is a 
great grief to them to be compelled to dwell with persons 
of a contentious spirit. 

I'S.VL.M CXXI. 
1. / wilt lift up mmc ci/rs; an expression of longing do- 
sire and faith. Unto the h ills ; the hills of .lerusalem, where 
GofI had his earthly abode. Lifting up (he eyes to these 
hills, was lifting tliem up to God. I'sa. 20:2. 



The house of the Lord. 



rSALM CXXIV, 



Ciinfide.nai vi God. 



5 The Lord is tliy keeper : the Lord is thy shade 
upon tliy rig-ht hand.-' 

(1 The" sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the 
inonn by night.'' 

7 The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil:' 
he shall preserve thy soul. 

S The Lord shall preserve thy going out and 
thy coming in from this time forth, and eveu for 
evermore.'' 

PSALM cxxn. 

1 David professeth his joy for the church, G and prayeth for the peace 
thereof. 

^ A Song of degrees of David. 

I WAS glad when they said uuto me, Let us go 
into the house of the Lord." 

2 Our feet shall stand within thy gates, Jeru- 
salem. 

3 Jerusalem is buildcd as a eity that is compact 
together : 

4 Wiiither the tribes go up, the tribes of the 
Lor.D, unto tlie testimony of Israel, to give thanks 
uuto the name of tiio Lord. 

5 For there are set* thrones of judgment,' the 
thrones of the house of David. 

6 Pray for the peace of Jerusalem : they shall 
prosper that love thee. 

7 Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity 
■witliin thy palaces. 



liiiah 2.5:4. b Isaiah 49.10; Rev. 7:10. c ■) Timothy 4:1eI. -I Deut. 
l>; Proverbs 3:3. e Isaiah a:-2, :J; Jer. 50:5; Zech. ii:-2l. • H.:biew 



5. 77(1/ sAaJe; thy proteotioii. Isa. 25:4. 

(!. The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night ; 
110 hurtful influence of the daj', wliicli the sun rules, nor 
of tlie night, which the moon rules, shall harm thee. 

8. Thy going out and thy coming m ; all the daily employ- 
ments of life, in the pursuit of which we go out and in. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Looking to God for help is a mark which distin- 
guishes the true believer from all other men. 

t). When God grants us his protection, we are safe in 
the midst of the greatest dangers. 

8. The righteous have an almighty Friend and Keeper 
ever present to help them in trouble, support them in 
temptation, guide them in perplexity, and defend them 
from all injury. For this reason it is both their privilege 
anil their duty to be always cheerful and tranquil. 

PSALM CXXII. 

1. Into the house of the Lord ; into the courts of the tem- 
ple ; for into the temple itself none but the priests could 
enter. 

3. Compact together ; having its fortifications and houses 
closely joined together. This describes its strength and 
populousness, and the close identification of interests 
among its inhabitants. 

4. Whither the tribes go up; to keep the annual festivals. 
Unto the testimony of Israel; more literally, [which is] a 
testimony for Israel"; that is, an ordinance which God gave 
to Israel, Deut. IG:16. 

.0. Thrones of judgment ; seats where judges dispensed 
justice. These are called the thrones of the house of David, 
because the judges who sat in llnin :i("|(m1 under David, or 
under the kings of his family wlh, .snrccded him. 

8. For my brethren and co/npanion^' snki-i; all the pious 
Israelites, whose peace lay in the peace of Jerusalem. 

9. Because of the house of the Lord our God; because Je- 
rusalem contained the house of the Lord, that is, because 
it was the seat of God's worship. 



8 For my brethren and cnmpanious' sakcs, I will 
now say. Peace be within tiice. 

9 Because of the house of the Lord our God I 
will seek thy good.'' 

PSALM C XX ITT. 

1 The godly profc&s their confidence in God, 3 and pray to be delivered 
from contempt. 

<|j A Song of degrees. 

UNTO tliee lift I up mine eyes," thou that 
dwellest in the heavens. 

2 Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the 
hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden 
unto the hand of her mistress; so our eyes wait 
upon the Lord our God, until tiiat lie have mercy 
upon us. 

'6 Have mercy upon us. Loni\ have mercy upon 
us: for we are exceedingly tilled with contempt. 

4 Our soul is exceedingly (illeil with the scornino- 
of those that are at ease, and with the contemjit of 
the proud. 

PSALM CXXIV. 

Tlie church blesseth God for a miraculous deliverance. 
^ A Song of degrees of David. 

IF if had not hrcn the Lord who was on our 
side,' now may Israel say ; 
2 If it had not been the Lord who was on our 
side, when men rose up against us : 

19.3. g Neh. 2:10. Ii PsaUn iai:l. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. All good men love the church of God and her ordi- 
nances, and \\ ill not fail to be found in their place in his 
sanctuary whenever he gives them an opportunity. 

4. Tlie public worship of God is expressly commanded 
in the Bible, and no family, community, or nation that neg- 
lects it can expect permanent prosperity, either temporal 
or spiritual. 

(1. They who pray for and seek the peace of God's church 
always have true prosperity. 

8. In the welfare of God's clmrcli is included the wel- 
fare of each one of God's children. For his own sake, 
then, and for the sake of his brethren and companions, he 
should seek her peace. 

9. The institutions of religion are to every city or nation 
its most precious and valuable possession. 

PSALM cxxin. 

2. Unto the hand of their masters — unto the hand of her 
mistress; because it is the hand upon which they are de- 
pendent; tlie hand which supplies, governs, and protects 
them. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. When affliction leads us to seek help and comfort 
from God, it has the effect for which it is sent. 

2. Since all our trials come upon us by God's appoint- 
ment for our profit, we should look to him alone for de- 
liverance, and use no means to this end but such as are 
consistent with his revealed will. 

4. " The Lord seeth not as man seeth." They whom he 
most loves and honors are very often the objects of scorn 
and derision to the proud and luxurious. 

PSALM CXXIV. 

2. ir7(('-i men rose up against us ; the men here spoken of 
are the enemies of Israel, the true visible church of (iod ; 
the men who sought to destroy the nation, and with it the 
institutions of religion. 

699 



Help in trouble. 



PSALM cxxvir. 



Return from aiptivity. 



3 Then they had swallowed us up (luick, wiicn 
their wrath was kindled ag:ainst us: 

4 Tlien the waters had overwhelmed us, the 
stream had gone over our soul : 

5 Then the |)roud waters liad gone over our soul. 

6 Blessed be the Loud, who hath not given us as 
a prey to their teeth. 

7 Our soul is cseaped as a bird out of the snare 
of tlio fowlers: the snare is broken, and wo are 
escaped. 

8 Our help ii in the name of the Loity, who made 
heaven and earth. 



PSALM CXXV. 

1 The safety of such as trust in God. 4 A prayer (oe the godly, and 
against the wicked. 

If A Song of degrees. 

''T^FIEV that trust in the Lord shall be as mount 
J_ Ziou, which cannot be removed, but abidcth 
for ever. 

2 Jls the mountains are round about Jerusalem, 
so the Lord is round about his people from hence- 
forth even for ever. 

3 For the rod of the wicked* shall not rest upon 
the lot of the rinhteous;" lest the righteous put 
fortli their hands unto ini(|uity. 

4 Do good, Lord, unto those that be good, and 
to them that are upright in their hearts. 

5 As for such as turn aside unto tlieir crooked 



Gal. (i 10 1 lleb. relurnrd llie 
giii/inl 10 ilo Willi them. J Or, sii 



3. Quick; alivc.as men arc devourcil by wild beasts, or 
swallowed up by earthquakes. Num. 16:33. 

5. Proud waters; 8wellin<5 watei's, but with an allusion 
to the pride of Israel's enemies. 

7. Our soul; our life; that is, we have escaped alive. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. God's church hath no power of her own to withstand 
the as.saults of Satan and wicked men. Were it not for 
his continual presence and protection, those would soon 
utterly destroy her. 

7. God can easily break all the snares which wicked 
men spread for the feet of his peojde; and he will do so, 
for the sake of his own glory and their {jood. 

8. Since God who made heaven and earth is the ITtlper 
of his people, their cause must prosper, until the whole 
world shall be brought to the knowledge and obedience 
of the gospel. 

PSALM CXXV. 

2. As the mnuntaitti are round about Jcru^rilcm ; Jerusa- 
lem is surroundc 1 by hills higher than itself. Round 
about his people ; protects them on every side. 

3. Tiu roil of the wicked; the sceptre of wicked rulers. 
The lot of the righteous; the inheritance which God has 
given to thcni. 

6. Leatl them forth ; to destruction. 

INSTItfCTIONS. 

1. God always rewards the confidence of Iiis i)oople, and 
will in due time deliver tlieni. They whose faith in him is 
unshaken, cannot he moved by any assaults of Ihe wicked. 

2. It is impossible llial any scheme for the oviTthrow 
of (lod's church sliould jirosper; fur his omnipotenco is 
round about hc-r frinii a;;e to ace. 

3. God will not allow the wiclsed perpetually to oppress 
the righteous, lest, through despair of his mercy, they 
should be driven into sin. 

5. They who choose to go with the wicked in life, must 
have their portion with them in death. 
700 



ways, the Lord shall lead tliem forth with the 
workers of iniquity : but peace shall be upon Israel." 

PSALM CXXVI. 

1 The church, celebrating her incredible retiffn out of captivity, 4 pray- 
elll lor, and prophesieth the good s^uccess thereof. 



^ A Song of degrees. 

TT/'HEX the Lord turned again* the captivity 
VV of Ziou,'' we were like them that dream. 

2 Then was our mouth filled with laugiitcr, and 
our tongue with singing : then said they among the 
heathen. The Lord hath done great things for them.* 

3 The Lord hath done great things for us ; where- 
of we are glad. 

4 Turn again our captivity, Lord, as the 
streams in tiie south. 

5 They that sow in tears .shall reap in joy .^'' 

6 He that goeth fortti and wecpeth, bearing pre- 
cious seed,' shall doubtless come again with re- 
joicing,'' bringing his sheaves with him. 

PSALM CXXVII. 

1 The virtue of G-od"s blessing. 3 Good children are his gift. 
^ A Song of degrees for' Solomon. 

EXCEPT the Lord build the house, they labor 
in vain that build it:* e.xcept the Lord keep 
the city, tlic watohiiian waketh but in vain.' 

2 It is vain for you to ri^e up early, to sit up late, 
to cat the bread of sorrows:- for so he givetli his 
beloved sleep. 



ler. 3\:0-U. I Or, seeil-basUt. ' Pf.3.. 31>:S. 1 Or, o/,- Psa. 74, 
■ Hcb. thatare4uiW<rso/i( in i< U Cor. 3:0. 7. 5 Gen. 3; 17, IB. 



PSALM CXXVI. 

1. 77ie m;)<(t'/(i/ o/" Zion; her captivity in Babylon. We 
were like them that dream ; our deliverance was so surpris- 
ing that it seemed to us a dieain, and not a reality. 

4. Turn again our caplii'itij; the work of restoring the 
captive Jews to their home had been begun, (ver. 1,) and 
here the psalmist praj-s that it ma^' be completed. As the 
streams in the south; the south of Palestine, bordering on 
the desert. These are, as in other hot and desert regions, 
dry during the summer ; but when the rainy season returns, 
they are again filled with water. The psalmist prays that 
(iod would work a like change in tlie condition of his 
people. 

TN.STRUCTIONS. 

1. It is an easy thing for God to grant to his people 
great and surprising deliverances, and he has often done 
so in the hour of their deepest distress. 

2. God will so order his dealings with his church that 
ungodly men shall be compelled to see and acknowledge 
his presence with her, and his wonderful uiterpositions 
in her behalf. 

4. tiod's past favors should encourage us to hope and 
pray for more. 

C. The most successful undertakhigs have often been 
conuuenceil in the midst of great dilliculties and with 
iMUch weei>iiig. The spiritual seed that is abun<lantly 
watered with godly tears, will bring forth a rich harvest 
of golden sheaves. 

rs.\i,.M (XXVII. 

2. The bread tf sorrows; bread earned bv hard and pain- 
ful toil. Gen. :i:l7. Si>; by aiding in building the house 
and keeping the city. His belnird ; the man whom he loves 
and takes under his protection. The meaning is, that 
they whom (lod loves and helps, accomplish easily and 
KiiiTcKsfully the business of the day, and enjoy tjuiet sleep 
alter it. 



It « blessed to fear God. 



PSALM CXXX. 



Hope ill prayer. 



3 Lo, cliildren are a hcritnjro of the Lord :" and 
the fruit of the womb is his reward. 

4 As arrows are in the liand of a mighty man ; 
BO ore children of the youth. 

.5 Happy is the man that hath liis quiver full of 
them: they shall not be ashamed, but they sliall 
speak with* the enemies in the gate.'' 

P S A L M C XXVIII. 

Tile sundry blessings wliich follow them that fear GoJ. 
^ A Song of degrees. 

BLESSED is every one that feareth the Lord :'' 
that walkcth in his ways. 

2 For thou shalt eat the labor of thy hands:" 
haiipy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee. 

3 Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides 
of thy house :° tliy children like olive-plants round 
about tliy talile.' 

4 Behold, tliat thus shall the man be blessed that 
feareth the Lord. 

5 The Lord sliall bless thee out of Zion:- and 
thou shalt see the good of Jerusalem all the davs 
of thy life. 

6 Yea, thou shalt see thy children's cliildren,'' 
and peace upon Israel.' 

PSALM CXXIX. 

1 An exhortation to praise Ood for savin;^ Israel in their great afflic- 
tions, o The haters of the church are cursed. 
\\ A Song of degrees. 
ANY a time* have they afflicted me from my 
youth,^ may Israel now say : 



M 



i Gen. -MiS; 1 .Sam. 2:5. • Heb. Jilleil Iris quiver u'llh. 1 Or. siib'lue, 
as Psi. 13:17, or dwfroy. b Job 5:4. c Psa. 11-2: 1. aha. .■):10. eEzek. 
1!):10. fPsa.l44:ia. 5 Psi. 134::3. t Gen. 50:4i; Job 49: 16. i Psa. l-25:j. 
1 Or, Much, i Exod. 1:13, 14: Lam. 1:3. k John 1G:.33. I I Cor. lS:-22. 



3. A heritage of the Lord; an inheritance given by the 
Lord. 

4. Chddren of the yovth ; born in the youth of tlie parents, 
and consequently ot'sufficient maturity and vigor to defend 
them in their old age. 

5. They shall not be ashamed; the children, when they 
defend their parents; for they shall be successful. In the 
gate ; where causes were heard and decided by the judges. 

INSTRUCTION'S. 

1. In all our undertakings it is our duty to use with 
diligence and prudence the means of success ; but unless 
God add his blessing, our labor will be in vain. 

2. Unbelief and practical atheism, by filling the mind 
with distracting anxiety, unfit it for wise effort ; true faith 
in God has a tranquillizing influence, which is equally 
conducive to comfort and success. 

5. Well-trained and virtuous children are the best earth- 
ly defence and comfort of old age. 

PSALM CXXYIII. 

2. For thou shalt eat the labor of thy hniids; what is earned 
by the labor of thy hand.'), thou shalt thyself enjoy ; others 
shall not plunder thee of it. 

3. By the sides of thy house; in the inner apartments. 
1 Sam. 24:3; Jonah 1:5. 

5. Ou< o/Zion; the earthly residence of God. Psa. 20:2. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. God withholds no real good from them that fear and 
obey him. With all spiritual blessings, he gives also 
every earthly comfort that is consistent with their highest 
welfare. 

3. A numerous offspring is one of the many temporal 
blessings promised to the righteous in the Old Testament. 
When God withholds this or any other earthly good from 



2 ]\rany a time have they afTlictod me from my 
youth: yet they have not prevailed against me." 

3 The ploughers ploughed upon my back: tliey 
made long their furrows. 

4 Tiie Lord is righteous: he hath cut asunder 
the cords of the wicked. 

5 Let them all be confounded and turned liack 
that hate Zion.' 

6 Let them be as the grass upcm the house-tops, 
which withereth afore it groweth up:'" 

7 Wherewith the mower filleth not his hand; nor 
he that bindeth sheaves his bosom. 

8 Neither do they which go by say, The blessing 
of the Lord be upon you:" we bless you in the 
name of the Lord. 

PSALM CXXX. 

1 The psalmist professeth his hope in prayer, 5 and his patience in hope. 

7 He exhorteth Israel to hope in God. 

\\ A Song of degrees. 

/ \UT of the depths have I cried unto thee, 

\_/ Lord." 

2 Lord, hear my voice : let thine ears be atten- 
tive to the voice of my supplications.'' 

3 If thou, Lord, shouldest mark iniquities, 
Lord, who shall stand ?■* 

4 But the7-e is forgiveness with thee,'' that thou 
mayest be feared.^ 

5 I wait for tiie Lord, my soul doth wait, and in 
his word do I hope. 

6 My soul waitetk for the Lord more than they 
tliat watch for the morning : / say, more than tliey 
that watch for tiie morning.^ 



m Malt. 13;G. Vt. n Riitb 2:4. o Lam. 3:,5.); Jon. 2:2. P 2 Chr. 6:40. 
q Psa. 143:2; Rom. 3:20-24. r Exod, 34:7; Dan. 9:9; Rom. S:l. > Jer. 
:i3:8,9; 2Tim.2;19. \ Or, which walch unto tlie viormng. 



his faithful servants, or takes it away after it has been 
enjoyed, he does so for the trial of their faith and patience. 
6. To the " Israelite indeed," God can promise no higher 
good, apart from his own favor and friendship, than to see 
" the good of Jerusalem " and "peace upon Israel." 

PSALM CXXIX. 

1. My youth; the youth of the nation. 

3. Ploughed upon my ftaci; furrowed my back with stripes. 

4. The cords of the wicked; the cords with which the 
wicked, the enemies of Israel, bound him. The tigure in 
this and the preceding verse is that of a captive bound 
and scourged. 

6. Upon the house-tops; the flat roofs, which in the East 
are often covered with earth. Isa. 37:27. Afore d grow- 
eth up; or, afore one plucks it; before it is fit to be gath- 
ered for use. 

5. Say; to the reapers, according to the custom of the 
age. See Ruth 2:4. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The history of God's church from the beginning is a 
continuous fulfilment of the primitive prophecy, " It shall 
bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel." She 
is always afflicted by her enemies, and always prevailing 
against them. 

6. The prosperity of the enemies of God's people is 
always short-lived. 

PSALM CXXX. 

1. Out nf the depths; of affliction. 

3. 3Iiirk iniqudies; for the purpose of punishing them. 

4. That thou mayest be feared; that is, with holy filial 
fear. Without the assurance that God will forgive the 
penitent, no man could approach him with such fear. 

701 



David's prayer at the 



rSALM CXXXII. 



removing of the ark. 



7 Let Israel hope in the Lord:' for witli the 
Lonn there is mercy, and witli liim is plenteous 
redemption.'' 

8 And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniqui- 
ties."^ 

PSALM CXXXI. 

1 David professing his humility, 3 exhorteth Israel to hope in God. 

•] A Son}; of degrees of David. 

LORD, my lieart is not hanjrhty, nor mine eyes 
lofty: neitiier do I exercise niyseir in great 
matters, or in things too liigli* for me. 

2 Sui'cly I Iiave beliaved and quieted myself,' as 
a child that is weaned of iiis mother: my soul is 
even as a weaned cliild.'' 

3 Let Israel hope in the Lohd from henceforth^ 
and for ever. 

PSALM CXXXII. 

1 I>avid in his prayer commendeth unto God the religious care he !iad 
for the ark. 8 His prayer at the removing of the ark, 11 with a rep- 
etition of God's promises. 

•[ A Song of degrees. 

LORF>, remember David, a«(/ all his afflictions: 
2 How lie sware unto the Lord, and vowed 
unto the miglity God of Jacob ;° 

3 Surely 1 will not come into the tabernacle of 
my house, nor go up into my bed; 

4 I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber 
to mine eyelids. 



• Pm. 71:5; Rom. 8:>l; H«b. 10:35. b Psa 
tcnilc. 1 lUh.womler/ul; ]o\ii2:-h 1 Hcb. i 
/rem now. o -J Sam. ";1, etc. I Heb. /laiii 



:l;s. t Matt. 1:-2I. • lleb. 
:i)k(. d .Matt. lS:i. i Heb 
■ns. ( I'sa. li!:l. f P.-a. 



8. From all his iniquities; from sin and the suflcring that 
follows sin. 

IKSTnUCTIOXS. 

1. The right effect of dislress, whether outward or in- 
ward, is to produce sincere and earnest prayer to God, 
and such prayer will always he heard and answered. 

3. No man can stand before God on the ground of his 
innocency. His only hope is in God's forgiving mercy. 

C. When deliverance is long delayed, it is good to wait 
upon God in quiet submission and humble obedience. 
When the right time has come, he will cause the morning 
to shine. 

8. God's work in behalf of his people will not he com- 
plete till he has abolished sin in their souls, and all the 
conseciueuees of sin in their souls, bodies, and estate. 

PSALM CXXXI. 

1. Exercise mtjself in; employ myself about. 

2. Behaved; composed. As a child that is weaned of his 
mother; as a weaned child lies quietly upon its mother's 
boaoiii. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Contentment in a humble sphere is a high attaininent. 
and one peculiarly pleasing to God. 1 Pet. .">:(;. 

2. When God withholds or takes from us comforts of 
any kind, it is good to loan our souls upon him in quiet 
faitli and submission, and let him do with us as seems 
good in his sight. 

PSALM rxxxii. 

.1. A plar^efor the Lord; a place for the ark of the Lord, 
the symbol of his presence. David transferred the ark 
from Kirjath-jearim to Zion, and had in mind to build a 
temple for it there. 

G. IVe heard of it ; of the ark. Those words are sup- 
posed to have been spoken by David and his associates 
702 



5 Until I find out a place for the Lord, a habi- 
tation' for tlic niigiity God of Jacob. 

6 Lo, we iieard of it at Ephratali: we found it 
ill the iichls of the wood. 

7 We will go into his tabernacles:'' we will 
worsliip at his footstool.'^ 

8 Arise, Lord, into thy rest; thou, and the 
ark of tliy strength.'' 

9 Let tliy priests be clothed with righteousness; 
and let tliy saints shout for joy.' 

10 For liiy servant David's sake turn not away 
the face of thine anointed. 

11 The LoKi) hatii sworn i/i truth unto David; 
he will not turn from it ; Of tiie fruit of thy body' 
will I set upon tliy tiirone.^ 

12 If tliy ciiildren will keep my covenant and 
my testimony that I shall teach tliem, their chil- 
dren shall also sit upon tiiy throne for ever- 
more. 

13 For the Lord hath cho.^cn Zion; lie hath de- 
sired i/ for iiis iiabitatiou. 

14 This is my rest for ever :" lierc will I dwell ; 
for I have desired it. 

15 I will abundantly' bless her provision : I will 
satisfy her iwor witii bread.' 

16 i will also clotlie iicr priests with salvation: 
and iicr saints shall sliout aloud for joy.™ 

17 Tliere will I make tlie horn of David to bud: 
I have ordained a lamp* for mine anointed." 

18 His enemies will I clothe willi .shame: but 
upon himself shall his crown flourish. 



09:5. h P.sa. 7s:ni. ilsa. 03:14. 1 lleb. «f«». J I Kings 8:35. k Ps«. 
(is: 16. -Or, JMrJy. I Luke 1:53. ■» vcr. 9. 1 Or, tandle. i>2Chr. 21:7. 



when the ark, of which formerly they had only heard, was 
now with them on mount Zion. Ephratali; cither Bcthle- 
licin Epiiratali, Micah 6:'J, the place of the hearers, or 
Ephraini, to which tribe belonged Shiloh, the place of tho 
ark in Eli's day. In tlie fields of the wood; in Kirjath-jearim, 
which signifies, " City of woods." 

8. Arise, O Lord, into thy rest ; thy resting-place on mount 
Zion. This verse and the two following coincide with 
Solomon's prayer at the dedication of the temple. Tho 
psalmist prays for a renewal of God's presence and power 
on mount Zion. 

10. Turn not atraij the face of thine anointed; refuse not 
his request. Anointed; a common term for David, as 
anointed by Gotl's appointment. 

17. Tlicre will I make the horn of David lo bxid; to make 
the horn of David to bud, is to coulinue the strength and 
prosi>erity of his kingdom. Ordained a lamp for mine 
anointed; given him always a successor ou the throne. 
1 Kings n:3G; 15:-1; 2King8S:10. 

The recital of God's i>romise to David, ver. 11-18, is in 
reality a prayer for its fullihuent. 

INSTHlTnONS. 
1. Good men prefer the glory of God and the welfare of 
his people lo their own ]iersonal ease and emojument. 

11. (!od is well pleased with the recital of his prom- 
ises, and when we comply with the conditions annexed 
to them, he will certainly fulfil them to us and our chil- 
dren. 

K>. In tho institutions of the gospel, God has made 
abundant provision for all the wants of his people, and 
he would have them always happy and joyful in his ser- 
vice. 

IS. In the Lord Jesus, the last and greatest of David's 
line, all the promises made to David's house are fulfilled 
in their highest sense. His enemies God will clothe with 
shame, but uiion himself shall his crown llourish. 



Praise to God for his 



PSALM CXXXVI. 



mercy and judgments. 



PSALM CXXXIII. 

The benefit of the communion of saints. 
^ A Song of degrees of David. 

BEHOLD, how good and how pleasant it is for 
' brethren to dwell together in unity!' 

2 It is like tlie precious ointment upon the Iiead, 
that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard : " 
that went down to the skirts of his garments; 

3 As the dew of Hernion,'' and as the dew that 
descended upon the mountains of Ziou : for there 
the Loud commanded the blessing, even life for 
evermoi'e. 

PSALM CXXXIV. 

An exhortation to blt-ss God. 
^! A Song of degrees. 

BEHOLD, bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of 
the Lord, which by night stand iu the house 
of the Lord. 

2 Lift up your hands in the sanctuary j*" and bless 
the Lord. 

3 The Lord that made heaven and earth bless 
thee out of Ziou. 

PSALM CXXXV. 

1 An exhortation to praise God for his mercy, .0 for his power, -S for his 
jud^'tnents. 15 The vanity of idols. 19 An exhortation to liless God. 

PRAISE ye the Lord. Praise ye the name of the 
Lord ;'' praise him, ye servants of the Lord. 

2 Ye that stand in the house of the Lord,'' in the 
courts of the house of our God, 

3 Praise the Lord ; for the Lord is good : sing 
praises unto his name; for it is pleasant. "^ 

4 For the Lord hath chosen Jacob unto himself, 
and Israel for his peculiar treasure.'^ 

5 For I know that tlie Lord is great, and that 
our Lord is above all gods. 

6 Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in 
heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and all deepplaces.*" 



• H 


ph. 




1 together 


' Exod 


.1( 


.25. 30. b 


Dp 


ut. 4:48. 


t Or, hoi 


„,„. 


I Chr 


IK 


■JO 


c 


1 Tinl 


.2:3. d Neh 


9;. 5; Psa. 


14.'- 


:1. e Psa. 92:13. 


I'^a 


117:1 


K 


Kxod. 


19;5; 


Deut. 7;0 


7; 


1 Pet 2:9 


h 


Psa. 33:! 


,11; Dan. 


4 :i.T 


i Jer. 


U: 


ii; 


Z 


ch. 11) 


I. i Jer. 


lU 


13. k Ex 


d. 


2:29. 1 


Heb./rom 


man 



PSALM CXXXIII. 

2. Tlie precious ointment; used at Aaron's consecration 
as hi^'h-priest. Lev. 8:12. 

3. Herman ; the high southern part of the range of moun- 
tains that runs east of Lebanon and nearly parallel with 
it. It lies around the sources of the Jordan. 

INSTRUCTION. 
In all the relations of life, harmony is equally pleasant 
and promotive of strength and prosperity. In the house- 
hold of God, it is the indispensable condition of his pres- 
ence and blessing. 

PSALM CXXXIV. 

In this last of the songs of degrees, the people caU upon 
the priests who minister in the temple at night to bless 
God, verses 1, 2; and the priests, in their turn, bless the 
people, verse 3. 

INSTRUCTION. 

The worship of God in the various forms of adoration, 
thanksgiving, confession, and supplication, is the most 
excellent employment in which a reasonable being can be 
engaged, and brings into the soul the divine presence 
and blessing. 

PSALM CXXXV. 

11. The Amorites — Bashan; these kingdoms lay on the 



7 He causeth the vapors to ascend from the ends 
of the earth;' he niaketh lightnings for tiic rain;^ 
he bringcth the wind out of his trea.'^uries. 

8 Who smote the first-born of Egypt." both of 
man and' beast. 

9 Wlio sent tokens and wonders into the midst 
of thee, Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his 
servants.' 

10 Wlio smote great nations, and slew mighty 
kings;'" 

11 Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of 
Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan : 

12 And gave their land/o/- a heritage, a heritage 
unto Israel his people." 

13 Thy name, Lord, endureth for ever;" and 
tliy memorial, Lord, throughout all genera- 
tions.^ 

14 For the Lord will judge his people," and he 
will repent himself concerning his servants. 

15 The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, 
the work of men's hands.'' 

16 They have mouths, but tliey speak not; eyes 
have they, but they see not; 

17 They have ears, but they hear not ; neither is 
there a7iy breath in their mouths. 

18 They that make them are like unto them: so 
is every one that trusteth in them. 

19 Bless the Lord, house of Israel: bless the 
Lord, house of Aaron : 

20 Bless the Lord, liouse of Levi : ye that fear 
the Lord, bless the Lord. 

21 Blessed be tlie Lord out of Ziou, which 
dwelleth at Jerusalem. Praise ye the Lord. 



o 



PSALJ[ CXXXVI. 

An exhortation to give thanks to God for particular mercies. 

H give thanks unto the Lord ; for he is good :' 
for his mercy endureth for ever.' 



unto. 1 Kxod. 7, etc. 


m Num. 21:24-35; Psa. 130:17. e 


c. n Jo=h. 12;7; 


Psa. 44:1-3; 78:35. 


a Exod. 3:15. » Heb. to gmeratio 


I and generation. 


P Deut. .32:36. q Psa 


1 IS ; 4, etc. ; Isi. 44 ; 12, etc. r Psa 


119;6i. > 1 Chr. 


10:34; 2 Chr. 20:21. 







east of the Jordan, and are therefore not reckoned to 
Canaan. 

13. Til y memorial ; the remembrance of thee; thymighty 
deeds will always be remembered and mentioned with 
praise and thanksgiving. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. God's church is pecuharly dear to him, because it is 
in her that he displays his glory, and through her that he 
overthrows the kingdom of Satan. 

7. Since God is the author of nature, all the powers of 
nature are under his control, aud through them he does 
whatsoever he pleases. 

12. The destruction of God's enemies always tends to 
the enlargement and comfort of his people. 

18. The folly of idolaters consists in their trusting for 
salvation to the work of their own hands. All who rely 
on their riches, wisdom, or alliances with the great and 
powerful, are guilty of the same folly with idolaters, aud 
will come to the same end. 

19. A heart full of praise and thanksgiving towards God 
is most excellent and becoming in all his servants. 

PSALM CXXXVI. 

The present psalm is pecuhar in its structure, the last 
half of each verse consisting of the burden or refrain, 
" for his mercy endureth for ever." 
703 



A psalm nf prnite. 



rSALM CXXXVIII. 



A lament in captiflty. 



2 Oh j^ive thanks unto the God of gods:" fur 
his inerc}' endureth for over. 

3 Oil f^ive thanks to the Lord of lords: for liis 
mercy mdurvth for ever. 

4 'I'd him wliu ahjuc doeth great wonders:'' for 
his mercy vndurvth for ever. 

5 To him that by wisdom made the heavens :" lor 
his mcr<\v endureth for ever. 

G Ti) him (hat stretched out tlie earth above tlie 
Waters:' for his mercy endureth for ever. 

7 To him that made gveat lights: for his mercy 
endureth for ever: 

8 The sun to rule" by day : for his mercy endureth 
for ever: 

i) Tlie moon and stars to rule by night: for his 
mercy endurith for ever. 

10 'I'o him tiiat smote Egypt in tiicir first-born:'' 
for liis iiiiM'cy endureth for ever: 

11 And Ijioiiglit out Israel from among them: 
for liis mercy endureth for ever. 

12 \\'itli a strong hand, and with a stretched out 
arm: for his mercy endureth for ever. 

13 To iiim which divided the Red sea into 
parts:' for his mercy endureth for ever: 

14 And made Israel to pass through the midst 
of it: for his mercy endureth for ever: 

1-5 But overthrew* Pharaoh and ins liost in the 
Red sea: for his mercy endureth for ever. 

10 To him which led his pcojile through the wil- 
derness:" for liis mercy endureth for ever. 

17 To him which smote great kings: for his 
mercy endureth for ever: 

18 And slew famous kings:" for liis mercy en- 
dureth for ever: 

l!) ."^ilioii king of the Amoi'ites;' for his mercy 
endureth lor ever: 

20 And Og the king of Bashan : for his mercy 
endureth for ever : 

21 And gave their land for a heritage:' for his 
mercy endureth for ever : 

22 Evena. heritage unto I m 1 li: -i>rvant: for 
his mercy endureth for ever. 



I. W:l. bp,a7.':|M, ■ IVr,v, :i I'J. •> Gen. 1 :9. plc; 
nllie ruUn^s. « Kxod. ISt'Jfl; l'«a. I35:H, etc. I I'.xoi. 
13. t Ilrb. slinkrJ off. IC Kxixl. 13 1»; Ueul. »:lo. 
l>Deul.'iU:7. itiumil-.-il,-^!- t ioth. t-i.\,et<:. k Dout. 3'J:30; Luke 1:18 

23. In our low estate ; when we were ciiptivcs in liabylon. 

21. From our enemies ; from those who carried us captive. 
INSTRUCTION.S. 

1. "God is love." All lii» acts arc done in mercy and 
lovin;;-kiiuliieHs ; and tlicy all work together for the good 
of those who love liim. 

1.'). God's mercy insures tho overthrow of his enemies, 
not kss than the salvation of his friends. 

PSALM CXXXVII. 

8. Cunning; skill to act. 

7. In the Jay of Jerusalem ; in the day of her overthrow. 
The sin hero laid to tlio charRC of the Edomitcs is lliat 
of rejoicing in and helping forward the destruction of 
Jerusalem. Oliad. lO-LI. 

8. Daugliirr nf Hahijlnn; the people of Babylon represented 
under the figure of a woman. Ilnpnij shall he he ; liecaiiso he 
lias executed tiod's purpose. Kzefe.'29: lH-20. That retmr<l- 
cth thee as thou hast served tis ; a prophetic announcement 
from God of the coming doom of Ivlom. Sec Obad. 1.5. 

instri:(;th:)Ns. 

1. When God puniitlica a nation for its sins, good men 
share in its calamities. 
70i 



23 Who remembered us in our low estate:" for 
Ills mercy endureth for ever: 

24 And hath redeemed us from our enemies : for 
his mercy endureth for ever. 

2.5 Who givetli food to all flesh:' for his mercy 
endureth for ever. 

2(j Oh give thanks unto tlie God of heaven : for 
Ids mercy endureth for ever. 

PSALM CXXXVII. 

1 Tile constancy of the Jews in capti\'ify. 7 Tiie prophet curseth Edom 
and Babfl. 

1) Y the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, 
y yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion. 

2 We hanged our liarjis upon the willows in tlie 
midst thereof. 

3 For there (hey that carried us away captive re- 
quired of us a song;'" and they that wasted us* required 
of us mirth,"' saying, H'lng us o«eof the songs of Zion. 

4 How shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange 
land'.'' 

5 If I forget thee, Jerusalem, let my right hand 
forget her cujuiing." 

G If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave 
to the roof of my mouth ; if 1 prefer not Jerusalem 
above my chief .joy.'" 

7 Remember, O Lotto, the children of Edom in 
the day of Jerusalem; who said, Rase* it, rase it, 
even (o the foundation thereof. 

8 daugliter of Babylon, who art to be de- 
stroyed ;*'' happy shall he be, that rewardetli thee 
as tiiou hast served us.* 

9 Happy shall he be, that taketh and dasheth thy 
little ones against the stones.^ 

PSALM CXXXVIII. 

I D.aviJ praistth trod for the truth of his word. 4 He prophcsirth that 
the kings of the earth sliali praise God. 7 He profcsseili his confi- 
dence in Ijod. 

•I A Psalm of David. 

I WILL praise thee witii my whole heart: before 
the gods will I sing ])raise unto thee. 



1 I'n. 1J3;15. 1 Urh. Ilit u-or,h of n son 


S- 1 lleb. M/rfuioii A<n;.i ". Pm 
ti 111, 11. 1 XUh.lkektadofmvjo!). 


70:1. 1 Hob. /npirfo/n.</rnnefr. n ll.in 


oI'.ii.Hl:l». •lIfb.jVni-f6.ir.'. t Mob. 


enfKit. Pl«a 13:1. nc; Rot lH:ru 


I Ilcb. rtromptnsfth unto thtt thy dftii 


vhtch thou ilidst to 11.1. 1 llvb. rork. 



C. The true children of God prefer the welfare of his 
people above their chief joy ; and are more grieved for 
the calamities that come upon his church, than for any 
private losses and sufferings of their own. 

9. t!od is displeased with all who rejoice in the afflic- 
tion of his servants, and will recompense their iniquity 
into their own bosom. 

PSALM CXXXVIII. 

We have hero the first of eight psalms composed by 
David and arranged together near the close of the book 
of Psalms. The lirst two celebrate tho glorious attributes 
of God as manifested in his dealings witli tho psalmist; 
the next four .are prayers for deliverance in the midst of 
deep distress; then follow two dosing psalms, in the first 
of which he anticipates, in the language of triumph, a com- 
plete victory overall his foes, and in the second celebrates 
the goodness of l!od afliT this victory is now achieved. 

In the psalm now before us Daviil anticipates, as tho 
result of (jod's merciful dealings with him and the cove- 
nant people of whom he is king, the conversion of all 
nations to (tod, verses -1, .I. 

1. liffore the gods; itrobably, in the face of all false gods. 



Praise to God for his 



PSALM CXXXIX. 



all-sceinir 'providence. 



2 I will worsliip toward tliy lioly temple, and 
{'raise tliy name for thy loviiiir-kindness and for 
tiiy truth : I'or thou iia.-t maa'nilied tliy word above 
all thy nanu".'' 

:} h\ the day wlieu 1 cried tliou answeredst me, 
and strcni;tlicncdst mc with streniith in my soul. 

4 All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O 
Lord, wlieii they hear tiic words of thy moulh. 

5 Yea, tiiey shall sing- in the ways of the Loun: 
for irrcat k tJie glory of (he Lord. 

tl 'i'hougii tlie IjOrd be high, yet iiath he respect 
tiiilo liie lowlv: but the proud he knowcth afar 
oflV' 

7 'I'iiough I walk in ilu; midst of trouble, thou 
wilt revive me:'-' thou shalt streteii fortii thy hand 
aL^aiiist tiic wrath of mine enemies, and thy right 
hand shall save me. 

8 Tiio Lord will perfect that which conccrnotli 
me:'' thy mercy, Lord, endureth for ever: for- 
sake not the works of thine own hands. 

PSALM CXXXIX. 

1 ll;\vitl praiseth God for his all-secin;; provitleiicp, 17 ami for his iiifi- 
Lc mercies. 19 Jiedcficth Uie wickcti. 23 He prayeth for sincerity. 

^ To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. 
LOR-D, thou hast scarcliod niCj and known 



o 



2 Tliou knowest my downsittiiig and mine up- 
rising;'' thou understandest my tliought afar off" 

3 Thou compasscst" my path and my lying down, 
and art acquainted loitk all my ways. 

4 For there is not a word in my tongue, but lo, 
O Lord, thou knowest it altogether." 

Msa. 4>:-il, b Ia,i. 57;15; C6:l,2j 1 Fet..5:;-|. cMic. 7:S.9. d Phil. 1:6; 
IThess. 2:24 e Jer. 17: 10; Rev. 2.23. ' 2 Kingi (i:12; 19:27. S Matt. 
!1 I; John 2:24, 2.'). • Or, winnowest. h Heb. 4:13. i Jer. 23:24; Jon. 
1:3. J Amos 9:2-1. k Job 2S:G; Prov. 15: 11 . t Hc-b. rfarAfne(/i. 1 Dan. 

2. T/ii/mml; tliy word of promise. Above all t/nj name; 
;ibovc ail hitherto known of thy ]jcrft;ctions. The name of 
Cod is the sum of his perfections as they arc manifested 
to us. 

8. Forsake not the works of thine own hands; tlic works of 
mercy which thou hast begun in my behalf, carry on to 
completion. 

INSTRUCTION'S. 

1. Every new mercy should excite us to new gratitude 
and praise; and on all suitable occasions we should pub- 
licly acknowledge God's goodness to us. Psa. 66:16. 

2. God will more than fulfil the higliest expectations of 
all who put their trust in him. 

3. God's servants never ask help from him in vain. 

5. The Old Tcst;iment prophets rightly anticipated the 
conversion of all nations as the final result of what God 
did for his ancient people. 

6. Nothing brings us so near to God as humility; noth- 
ing removes us so far from him as pride. 

7. Though (!od often suffers his people to be troubled 
by their enemies, he does not allow them to be destroyed, i 
He will interpose at the right time for their salvation and 
for the shame of their persecutors. 

8. God would have us urge his past mercies towards 
us as an argument why he should bestow more. 

PriALM CXXXIX. 

In this remarkable psalm the divine omniscience and 
(iinniprescnce are set forth with wonderful vividness and 
power; not, however, as abstract truths, but with partic- 
ular reference to the psalmist's own case. The all-seeing 
God. who formed him in the womb, has watched over and 
nhaped his course every moment, verses 13 18. lie knows 
4.") 



f) Thou hast beset me behind and before, and 
laid Ihy hand upon me. 

() Si/rh knowledge is too woiidrrfiil for mc ; it is 
higii, i cannot a/fain iinio it. 

7 Wiiitlier shall 1 go from thy spirit ? or whither 
shall 1 flee from thy presence'.'" 

8 If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there :J if 
I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art Ihtrr.'^ 

'.) If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell 
in the uttermost parts of the sea; 

10 Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy 
right hand shall hold me. 

11 if I say. Surely the darkness shall cover me ; 
even the night shall be light about me, 

12 Yea, the darkness liideth* not from thee;' 
but the night shineth as the day: the darkness 
and the light arrhoih alike to ihrcJ 

V,\ For thou hast possessed my reins: thou hast 
covered me in my mother's womb. 

14 I will praise thee; for 1 am fearfully and 
wonderfully made: marvellous are thy works; 
and that my soul knoweth right well.*' 

15 ^ly substance" was not hid from thee, when 
I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in 
the lowest parts of the earth.'" 

IG Thine eyes did sec my substance, yet being 
unperfect ; and in thy book all my members'' were 
written, ichich in continuance were fashioned," 
when as yet there was none of them. 

1 7 How precious also are thy llioiiglds unto me, 
() (!od! how great is the sum of thenil" 

18 Jfl should count them, they are more in num- 
ber than the sand : when I awake, I am still with 
thee. 



2:22. 1 Hob. as is tlie ,1,,1-kiifss, .so is ll,e l,i;lu. i Hpb. errnth/. I Or, 
sttenslli,o^ body, mjob ]():(•, 0. % lleh. all of them. " Or, what </ays Mey 
shoulU be fashioned, o Psa. 40:5. 



his servant's uiirightness of heart, and will distinguish 
between him and the wicked, verses l!)-22. He knows 
his servant's weaknesses and failings also; David therefore 
prays that God will reveal them to him, and lead him in 
the way everlasting, verses 23, 24. 

2. Afar off; to God's omniscience there is no limit of 
distance or time. 

3. Compasscst; or,as in the margin, ifvnnowrs/,- narrowly 
examinest, as one examines v/he;it by sifting it. 

9. If I take the wings of the morning; (ly westward on 
the beams of the morning sun. The uttermost parts of the 
sea; the most remote regions of the west, the same as 
"the islands of the sea." Isa. 11:11. From the position 
of the Mediterranean, the Hebrews were accustomed to 
speak of the west as the sea. Thus in Gen. 13:14, where 
the four cardinal points are enumerated, tlic last mention- 
ed is seaward, that is, westward. 

i;i. Ilast piMrsscil 1,111 riins; hast them in thy knowledge 
and control, ;is tiicir .\l;iker, 

14. Fcaifiil/i/ mill jnuiilcrfidli/ ; in a manner adapted to 
excite astonishment and awe. 

15. My substance; my frame. Curiously wrought; liter- 
ally, embroidered; a description of the delicate and com- 
plicated tissue of the human body. In the Unrest partsofthe 
earth; hid from view, as if in the dejiths of the earth ; the 
same as " in secret," and " in my mother's womb." Ver. 13, 

16. Yet being unperfect ; before my birth. Written; as 
an architect has before him a written description and 
plan of the house which he is building. Which in contin- 
uance were fashioned ; were fashioned by a continuous 
growth that went on day after day. 

18. lam still with thee; I am with thee, in thy care, and 
in iiiv iii'-ilitalioiit 

70.-) 



The psalmisVs prayer 



rSAl>M CXLI 



and confidence in God. 



19 Surelj' thou wilt flay the wicked. God: 
depart from me therefore, ye, bloody men. 

20 For they speak aj^ainst tlicc wickedly, and 
thine enemies take thy name in vain. 

21 Do not 1 hate them, Lord, that hate thee?' 
and am not I grieved with tliose that rise up 
against thee? 

22 I hate them witii perfect liatrod : J count 
them mine enemies. 

23 Searcli nie, God, and know my heart: try 
me, and know my tlioughts: 

24 And .see if there be any wicked way* in me, 
and lead me in the way everlasting. 

r S A L M C X L . 

1 David rrayrtli to be dclivi'rcd from Saul and Dopg. 8 He prayeth 

agiiinst them. \2 He cotnTortetll himself by contidence in God. 

•■ To the chief Jliisician, A Psalm of David. 

DELIVER me, Loud, from the evil man: 
preserve me from tlie violent man;* 
"2 Which imagine mischiefs in their heart; con- 
tinually are tiiey gathered togethcrybr war. 

Ij They have sharpened tlieir tongues like a ser- 
pent; adders' poison m under their lijjs." Selah. 

4 Keep me, Lord, from the hands of the wick- 
ed ; ])reserve me from tiic violent man ; who iiavc 
purposed to overthrow my goings. 

5 The proud have hid a snare for mo, and cord.s; 
they have spread a net by the way-side; they have 
set gins for me.*^ .Selah. 

6 1 said unto the Lord, Thou art my God: hear 
the voice of my supplications, Lord. 



'/, 



2Chr. 19:2. ■ Heb. way of pain, or gritf; 1 Chr. 1:10. t Heb. man 
Tio'.rnrts. I> Rom. 3:13. c Jor. 18:2'2. 1 Or, Itt Ihtm not be txalttd. 
Psa. 11:0. » llcb. a man of lon^'iic, or an evil speaker, a wicked man of 



24. Tlie. vay everlasting ; the old way appointed by God 
from ancient times; the same as "the old paths, where is 
the good way." Jer. C: IC. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. With Ood concealment and hyporrisy can have no 
place. All within ns and around ns is '•naked and opened 
unto the eyes of Ilim with wliom we have to do.'' 

10. (/od's power over us is as absolute as his know- 
ledge of ns. His omnipotence and omniscience alike com- 
pass ns about, so that there is no escape from cither. 

14. Our bodies arc such a wonderful exhibition of (Jod's 
incomprehensible skill, power, and goodness, as should 
inspire us with the deepest feelings of admiration and 
awe. 

17. Meditation on God's wonderful dealings with thcm- 
flelvcs and others, is one of the sweet and blessed employ- 
ments of the righteous. 

2'i. (iod hate.s the character and ways of the wicked, 
and the feelings of all righteous men are in harmony with 
his. 

24. Wicked men love self-delusion, and willingly- roniain 
ifpiorant of Iheniselves. Bill the good man earnestly ile- 
•BJrcs and prays that (Iod would search his heart, show 
liim all his bidden faults, and help bim to repent of them 
and forsake them. 

rs.\L.M rxL. 

2. Ima/rine misthirfs; devise wicked plans. 

7. Covered mij head; protecled it as with a shield. 

9. Let the mischief nf their nwn lips rnver them; let the 
niiscbief which their lips have done to me fall upon their 
■own heads, and cover them with shame. 

10. Burning coals — firt — pits; the tokens of divine wrath. 
Van. 11:0. 

706 



7 God the Lord, the strength of my salvation, 
thou hast covered my head in the day of battle. 

8 Grant not, Lord, the desires of the wicked : 
further not his wicked device; lest they exalt 
themselves.' Selah. 

9 ./Is for the head of those that compass me about, 
let tlie misciiief of tlieir own lips cover them. 

10 Let burning coals fall upon tiiem:'' let them 
be cast into the lire; into deeji pits, that they rise 
not up again. 

11 JjCt not an evil speaker be established in tlie 
earth : evil shall hunt the violent man to over- 
throw A/ffi." 

12 1 know that the Lord will maintain the cause 
of tiie afllictcd, and the right of the poor.* 

13 Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto 
thy name: the upriglit shall dwell in thy presence. 

PSALM CXLI. 

1 David prayctii tliat his suit may be acceptable, 3 his conscience sin- 
cere, 7 and his life safe from snares. 

*\ A Psalra of David. 

10RD, T cry unto thee: make haste unto me; 
J give ear unto my voice, Avhen 1 cry unto thee. 

2 Let my prayer be set forth' before thee as 
incense;' and the lifting up of my hands as the 
evening sacrifice. 

3 Set a watch, Lord, before my mouth ; keep 
the door of my lips. 

4 Licline not my heart to any evil thing, to prac- 
tise wicked works with men liiat work iniquit}': 
and let me not eat of their dainties.'' 



11. Shall hunt; as an avenging enemy. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The kingdom of Satan began in this world by false- 
hood and guile, and it is perpetuated by the same means. 
The men whom God raises as he did David, to eminent 
stations in his church, must be prepared to encounter cal- 
umny and crafty assaults of every kind. But if they put 
their trust in God, and go straight forward in the path of 
duly, he will defend and deliver them. 

8. If we commit our cause to God in true humility and 
faith, he will not suffer the wicked ultimately to triumph 
over ns: his glory is concerned in the exaltation of the 
humble and the overthrow of the proinl. 

10. Slander and malice fall at last, like hnrning coals, 
upon the head of tlieir authors, and consume them. When 
the righteous man falls, he rises again ; but the w'icked fall 
into deep ])its, to rise no more. 

13. Though for a season the course of events may seem 
to favor the cause of the proud and violent. Gods afllieted 
servants have only to wait in faith and patience till his 
time comes, and he will deliver them, and fill their lips 
with songs of iiraise. 

PSAL.M (XLl. 

2. .'(,■.• incense — the evening sarriftcc; sweet incense was 
linrneil every morning and evening on the altar of incense. 
Kxod. :iO:7, 8. The evening sacrifice was, like the morn- 
ing sacrifice, which it seems here to include, a daily offer- 
ing. The psalmist beseeches (lod that his prayer may bo 
like the daily incense and offering, iii both permanency 
ami acceptnbloncss. 

4. IJat nf I heir dainties; eating of the dainties of the wick- 
ed would imply that he bad been seduced by them, and 
was in fellowship with them. 



Comfort in prayer. 



PSALM CXLIII. 



An nppexil to God. 



5 Lot the riu:]itoous smite me; it shall be a kind- 
ness: and let hiiu reprove me; it shall be an ex- 
cellent oil, which shall not break my head:* for 
yet my prayer also shall be in their ealamities. 

{> When their judges are overthrown in stony 
])laces, they sliall hear my words; for they arc 
sweet." 

7 Our bones arc scattered at the grave's mouth, 
as when one cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the 
earth. 

cS But mine eyes are unto thee, God the Lord : 
in thee is my trust; leave* not my soul destitute.* 

9 Keep me from the snares ivhich they have laid 
for me, and the gins of the workers of iniquity.'' 

10 Let the wicked fall into their own ucts, whilst 
that I withal escape.^ 

PSALM OX LI I. 

DaviJ showeth that in his trouble all Ins comfort was in prayer unfn 
God. 

% Maschil of David ; ' A Prayer when he was in the cavc.= 

1 CRIED unto the Lord with my voice; with 
my voice unto the Lord did I make my sup- 
plication. 

'2 I poured out my complaint before him;'' I 
showed before him my trouble. 

3 When my spirit was overwhelmed within mc," 
then tliou knewest my path. In the way where- 



• Or, kindltj, and reprove vie: let not their precious oil break my head 
aSam. a:!;l. t Heb. wmtf. I Heb. 6(i« bProv. 13;1J. 5 Heb. ;m.v; 
fer. I Or, A Psalm of Lnvid, giving iiislruclion. e ] Sm,. -ii: I . <1 Psa 
■2:3; 10->, tille. e Psa. 1-13;4. tpsa. 140:5. 1 Or. Look on ttie riglit hanil 



5. Which shall not break my head; many prefer to render 
this clause, My head shall not refuse it; that is, the reproof 
of the riglitcous, which is compared to oil. 

6. Their Judges; the jml!j;es of David's enemies, their 
leaders. Uvcrtkrown in stony places; cast down among 
rocky precipices, and so destroyed. This is probably a 
figurative way of describing their destruction. They shall 
hear mi/ words ; my enemies shall then listen to my words. 
For they are sweet; pleasant to all the upright in heart, 
because they are conformed to truth and righteousness. 
The general idea is, that the overthrow of the leaders 
among David's persecutors shall bring them to reflection 
and a better state of mind. 

7. Our bones are scattered; by the persecution of the 
wicked. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 
2. It was an ordinance of the Levitical law, that sweet 
incense and sacrifices should be offered every morning 
and evening. By this God teaches us that wc should 
worship him daily and at stated seasons; and that our 
jirayers, offered through faith in the atonement of his Son, 
are fragrant and pleasant to him, like the incense offered 
by Aaron and his sons. 

4. To keep our lips from wicked words, and our hearts 
from the seduction of wicked tnen, are two verj- difficult 
undertakings. That we may be successful in them, con- 
stant watchfulness is necessary, with a plenteous supply 
of divine grace. 

5. Reproof administered by righteous men is most ex- 
cellent and precious in its effects. The Christian who re- 
ceives it will remember and requite it with his prayers, and 
if G od gives him the opportunity', with his benefactions also. 

6. The overthrow of ringleaders in wickedness is often 
made the means of bringing those whom they had seduced 
and misled to reflection and repentance. 

PSALM CXLII. 

Title, ifhen he vjos in the cave; probably the cave of 
Adullam, to which he fled from Achish king of Gath iu a 



in I walked have they privily laid a snare for 
me.'' 

4 I looked on tny right hand, and liehcld,' but 
thei-e was no man that would know me:'= refuge 
failed me;* no man cared for* my soul. 

5 I cried unto thee. Lord : I said. Thou art my 
refuge'' and my portion in the laud of the living.' 

6 Attend unto my cry ; for I am brought very 
low : deliver me from my persecutors ; for tliey 
are stronger than \J 

7 Bring my soul out of prison, that I may jn-ahsc 
thy name :" the righteous shall compass me about; 
for thou shalt deal bountifidly with me.' 

PSALM CXLIII. 

I David [irayeth for favor in judgment. 3 He comiilaincth of liis griefs. 
5 He strengtiieneth his faith by meditation and player. 7 He pray- 
eth for grace, 9 for deliverance, 10 for sanctihcation, 12 for destruction 
of iiis enemies. 

^ A Psalm of David. 

HEAR my prayer, Lord, give ear to my 
supplications : in thy faithfidnoss answer me, 
a7id in thy righteousness. 

2 And enter notinto judgment Aviththyservant:'" 
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.'^ 

3 For the enemy hath persecuted my soul ; he 
hath smitten my life down to the ground ; he hath 
made me to dwell in darkness, as those that have 
been long dead. 



ami see. f Psa. CO:-a). • Hcb. perished from me. t 


Heh. sought after. 


hP,a. 4G.1. iPsa. 7:!:28; Lam. ri:a4. JRom. »::«, 37 


kPsa. I4(i:7; Isa. 


01:1. ! Psa. 13:0; 119:17. ". Job 14:3. - Exod. 31. 


7; Job 9:2. 3; Paa. 


13U;3; Ecol. 7:20; Rom. 3:20; Gal. 2:10. 





friendless condition. It was there that he began to collect 
a band. iSam. 22:1, 2. 

3. Knewest my path; knewest it as a friend, able and 
willing to direct, defend, and help. 

4. Hooked tin inii n-jhl hand — cared for my soul ; or, adopt- 
ing the miir;.;in;il n inliiiiig of the first clause. Look thou 
on [my] right hand, :tiid see ; for there is no man who will 
know me : refuge has failed me ; no man careth for my 
soul. He mentions his right hand, because it is there 
that a helper should naturally stand. P.sa. 16:8; 110:5. 

7. Out of prison ; David was so hemmed in by his ene- 
mies that lie was like a man in prison. The righteous shall 
compass mc about ; as my sympathizing friends. 
INSTRUCTIOXS. 

2. The more our troubles are multiplied, the more car- 
nest and importunate should we be in our prayers. God 
loves to have us bring before his throne all our sorrows, 
perplexities, and dangers. 

5. ^Vhen all earthly succor fails, we are called to stay 
our souls upon God, who always cares for us and will 
help us. 

C. God's help makes the weakest of his servants sti-onger 
than the miehtiest among their foes. 

7. When God delivers a righteous man from trouble, all 
the good rejoice with him. 

PSALM CXLIII. 

1. In thy faith fulness — in thy righteousness ; God had en- 
tered into covenant engagements with David as his ser- 
vant; his faithfulness and righteousness bound him to 
fulfil these in delivering him from his persecutors. 

2. In thi/ sight shall no man living be justified; the best of 
God's servants are sinners, and can hope for acceptance 
and salvation only on the ground of Clirist's atonement. 

3. Hath persecuted my soul ; pursued me with the inten- 
tion of taking my life. Hath smitten my life down to the 
ground; as a wounded roe is smitten down by the hunter, 
and lies bleeding and ready to be destroyed. In darkness; 
in caves and desolate places, if the words are to be takeir 

707 



God is a refuge. 



PSALM CXLIV 



Ills mercy and prntedii 



4 Tlicrcforc is my spirit overwliclmod witliin 
me ; my iicart within me is desoiute. 

5 I remember tiie days of old:" I meditate on 
all tliy works ; I muse on the work of thy hands. 

I stretcii forth my iiands unto thee : my soul 
thirsteth after thee, as a thirsty land.'' t^elah. 

7 Hear me speedily, (3 Lord ; my spirit faileth : 
hide not thy face from me, lest I be" like unto them 
that go down into the pit. 

8 Cause me to hear thy loving-kindness in the 
morning:'' for in thee do I (rust: cause mc; to 
know the way wherein I should walk ;'' for 1 lift 
lip my soul unto thee. 

9 Deliver me, Loud, from mine enemies: I 
flee unto thee to hide me.* 

10 Teach me to do thy will ; for tliou art my 
God:"^ thy spirit is good:'' lead me into the huul 
of uprightness.'' 

11 Quicken mc, Lord, for thy name's sake:'' 
for thy righteousness' sake bring my soul out of 
trouble. 

12 And of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and 
destroy all them that afilict my soul : for I am thy 
servant. 

PSALM CXLIV. 

1 David blesscth God for his mercy both to him and to man. 5 He 
praycth thai God would powerfully deliver him from his enemies. 9 
He promiseth to praise God. 1 1 He prayeth for the happy state of 
the kingdom. 

^ A Psalm of David. 

BLESSED be the Lord my strength,*' which 
teachcth mv hands to war,^ and mv fingers to 
tight: 
2 Mygoodness,' and my fortress; my high tower, 



• Pia. 77:5, II. b r,a. 63:1. • Or. /or [am become; P»i. Sj: 1. c r.«a. 
.•)():5. <l Pii. n.iX. t Heb. hideme with thee, c Mic. i-.i: I John d:v.>7. 
' .Neh. 9:20. f Isi. 20:10. h Hab. .3:2; Eph. 2:1. I Heb. rock; Psa. l-:2, 



literally; but perhaps he put darkness for a desolate, 
lonely, and sorrowful condition. 

.'). Tlie days of old; when (Jod displayed his saving 
]iowcr. 

7. Into the pit; the grave. 

8. In the morning;; early, in good time. 

10. Into the land of uprightness ; or, in a level land, where my 
feet shall not stumble. Compare Psa. 27:11, " Lead me in a 
])lain patli," where the original word is the same as here. 

11. Quicken me; make mc live both spiritually and tcra- 
poriiUy. 

12. For I am th ii servant ; sincere and upriglit: since 
David was by Oou's appointment the head of his visible 
church, and was acting in her bch.tlf, the destruction of 
bis enemies was the destruction other enemies. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The true servants of God in all ages have been deeply 
conscious of both past and present sinfulness, and have 
rested their hope of acceptance and salvatiDn, not on their 
own goodness, but on Uod's forgiving mercy, which he 
bestows through Christ's atoning sacrifice. To be desti- 
tute of this fueling is to lie williout grace. 

5. When our spirit is overwhelmed within us, it is pood 
to encourage ourselves" by the remembrance of what Cod 
has done for us and for others in tlie days of old. What 
he was then, he is now— a (!od able and willing to bear 
and answer prayer. 

10. Two principal marks of the true believer arc pray- 
irful anxiety to learn the will of Cod, and depenilcncc 
on God's Spirit for strength to perform it. 

11. tiod's own glory and faithfulness arc concerned in 
delivering his people from trouble. Prayers that lay hold 
on thoHC always sooner or later prevail. 

70s 



and my deliverer ; my shield, and he in whom I 
trust; who subdueth my people under me. 

3 Lord, what is man, that thou takest knowledge 
of him ! or the sou of man, that thou inakest ac- 
count of him!^ 

4 Man is like to vanity:'' his days ore as a shad- 
ow that passeth away. 

5 Bow thy heavens, Lord, and come down : 
touch the mountains, and they shall smoke.' 

Cast forth lightning, and scatter them: shoot 
out thine arrows, and destroy them. 

7 Send thy hand^ from above; rid me, and de- 
liver me out of great waters, from the hand of 
strange children ; 

8 Whose mouth speakcth vanity, and their right 
hand is a right hand of falsehood. 

9 I will sing a new song unto thee, God : upon 
a [jsaltery and an instrument of ten strings will I 
sing praises unto thee. 

U) II is he that giveth salvation* unto Icings: 
who delivcreth David his servant from the hurt- 
ful sword. 

11 Rid nic, and deliver me frcun the hand of 
strange children, whose mouth spcntkcth vanity, 
and their right hand is a. right hand of falsehood : 

12 That our sons may be as plants grown u]) in 
their youth ; '" thai our daughters wo// be as corner- 
stones, polished' after the similitude of a ]ialace : 

13 That our garners may he full, ail'ordiug all 
manner of store;* that our sheep may bring iorth 
thousands and ten thousands in our streets: 

14 1'hat our o.xcn may be strong to labor;' that 
there be no breaking in, nor going out; that there 
be no complaining in our streets. 



31. ilsa. .|5:2J. i Heb. the war. 1 Or, nurrji. J Psa. .»:J. kP.<a. 39:c 
1 Isa. 01:1. t ilcb. ha>uls. • Or, victory, m I'si. 12>:3. f Iltb. eu. 
i llcb. from kind to kind. 4 Heb. aiU to bear burdens, nr taden with 0csh. 



12. The persecutors of God's servants place themselves 
in a dreadful situation; remaining such, they make it 
necessary that he should manifest his mercy in their 
destruction. 

PSALM CXLIV. 

This psalm was probably composed near the time of 
the eighteenth psalm, with which the first part of it has 
a striking agreement. 

2. Mijpcojilr; all the people subject to David, both Isra- 
elites and fureigncrs. 

3. Takcd knoicledgc of him — makeat account of him ; by 
bestowing upon him such wonderful mercies as I have 
received. Compare 2 Sam. 7: 18. 

5. lioiv thy licavcns ; bend them aside like a curtain, Psa. 
101:2, to make way for thy descent. The same as "rend 
the heavens," Isa. 01:1. 

7. Siransrc children; pcojde of foreign nations. 

8. Vanity; words destitute of righteousness and truth. 
A ri!:hl hand of falsehood ; whose oallis, made by raising 
the right hand, and pledges made by striking the Laud 
with another, are false. 

!). A nctc song; for new mercies received. 

12. 77/0/ our sons may lie: in this and the remaining 
verses of this psalm be draws a beautifid picture of a 
peaceful and well-ordered state, such as Israel shall be 
when (lod has granted to David its king deliverance from 
all his foes. Grown up; grown up strong and vigorous. 

11. lirrnking in; of the eiicmj-. Going out; into cap- 
tivity. Complaining ; literally, cry, that is. of distress. 

IXSTKICTIONS. 
2. .Ml the success of kings and military leaders is from tlic 
Lord, and he would have llieni acknowledge his hand in it 



The goodness of God. 



PSALM CXLVI. 



rerpHiial praii'es. 



15 Happy is that people, that is in such a case :" 
yea, hapj)}' is that people, whose God is the Lord." 

PSALM CXLV. 



1 David praisetli God for liis fni 
doiii, 14 for Ids providt 



. 8 for his goodness, 1 1 for hi> 
e, 17 for his saving mercy. 



•j David's Psalm of praise. 

1WILL extol thee, my God, O king'; and I will 
bless thy name for ever and ever. 

2 Every day will I bless thee; and I will praise 
thy name for ever and ever. 

3 Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised ; 
and his greatness is unsearchable."" 

4 One generation shall praise thy works to 
another, and shall declare thy mighty acts. 

.5 I will speak of the glorious honor of thy 
majesty, and of thy wondrous works.* 

fi And men shall speak of the might of thy ter- 
rible acts: and I will declare thy greatness.' 

7 They shall abundantly utter the memory of 
thy great goodness, and shall sing of thy right- 
eousness. 

8 The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion ;'' 
slow to anger, and"of grcat^ mercy. 

9 The Lord is good to all:" and his tender 
mercies are over all his works. 

10 All thy works shall praise thee, Lord ; and 
thy saints shall bless thee. 

11 They shall speak of the glory of thy king- 
dom, and talk of thy power; 

12 To make known to the sons of men his mighty 
acts, and the glorious majesty of his kingdom. 

i:^ Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom," "^ 
and thy dominion endureth throughout all genera- 
tions. 

14 The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth 
up all those that be bowed down. 

15 The eyes of all wait upon' thee; and thou 
givest them their meat in due season. 



a Deut. 33. -29. 1) Psa. 8'1: 


I J. • Heb. of his grea 


ness there is no search. 


'Rom. 11:3!. t Heb. (/j.n-t 


or iiwrds. i Heb. it. 


■1 Num. 14: IS. S Heb. 


grent in. cNah^ 1:7. « He 


.aliin^ilomofallagfn 


. f Dan. 2:44. 11 Heb. 


look unto, e Psa. UW.-tS. 


• Or, nuni/ul, or !/oin 


liful. h ExoJ. '20:0 



4. The consideration of our littleness and unworthiness 
enhances our view of God's wonderful loving-kindness 
towards us. 

12. The end which rulers should propose to themselves 
in all their undertakings, is the good of the people whom 
God has committed to their care. No victory is worth 
gaining that has not this for its object and result. 

14. The true glory of a nation is to be measured, not by 
its outward conquests, but by its inward peace and pros- 
perity. The proper business of "kings," and of "all that 
are in authority," is to take care that their people "may 
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and hon- 
esty." 1 Tim. 2:2. 

15. There is but one way for nations to be prosperous 
and happy ; that way is, to acknowledge and obey God. 

PSALM CXLV. 

This is one of the alphabetic psalms. See introduction 
to Psa. 25. The spirit of calm exultation in God's glorious 
government which pervades it is eminently appropriate to 
the period when God had " delivered him from the hand of 
all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul." Psa. 18, title. 
INSTRUCTIOXS. 

1. It is the nature of holy communion with God to fill 
the soul with a sweet and comforting assurance that God 
shall be its portion for ever. Thus the Old Testament 



16 Thou opencst thy hand, and satisficst the 
desire of every living thing." 

17 The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and 
holy' in all his works. 

18 The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon 
him, to all that call upon him in truth. 

19 Ho will fulfil the desire of them that fear 
him: he also will hear their cry, and \\ill i^ave 
them. 

20 The Lord prescrveth all them that love him :" 
but all the wicked will he destroy. 

21 My mouth shall speak the praise of the LoiiD:' 
and let all llesh bless his holy name for ever and 
ever. 

PSALM CXLVI. 

1 Tlic psalmi.st vowetli perpetual praises to God. 3 He exhorteth not 
fc trust in man. .5 God, for his power, justice, mercy, and kingdom, 
IS only worthy to be trusted. 

I)RAISE ye the Lord.* Praise the Lord, O 
my soul.J 

2 While I live will I praise the Lord: I will 
sing jjraiscs unto my God while I have any being." 

3 Put not your trust iu princes, nor in the son 
of man,' in whom there is r\o help.' 

4 His breath gocth forth, he returneth to his 
earth;'" in that very day his thoughts perish. 

5 Happy is he W\ixihath the God of Jacob for his 
help, whose hope is in the Lord his God : 

G Which made heaven, and earth, the sea, and 
all that therein w.-" which kecpeth truth for ever. 

7 Which c.xecuteth judgment for the o|:ipresscd: 
which giveth food to the hungry." The Lord 
looscth the prisoners:'' 

8 The Lord opencth the eyes of iha blind:'' the 
Lord raiseth them thatare boweddown :'' theLoRD 
loveth the righteous : 

9 The Lord preserveth the strangers : he reliev- 
eth the fatherless and widow:** but the way of 
the wicked he turneth upside down.' 



iRel 


.5:13. t Heb. HnJlelirjah. i P.sa 


103:1. k Psa. 101:33. 


1 lsa.2:22; 


,ler 


7:1), 7. I Or, salvation, m Eccl. 


1-2:7. n Rev. 14:7. 


Luke 1:53. 


PP.^: 


. Ga:l>; 107:14. q Matt. 9:30; .Toh 


i9:e,etc.; 1 Pet. 2:!). 


r Psa. 147:6; 


Luke 


13:l:J. sProv.l5:a5. tJob5:ia, 


13; Prov. 4:19. 





believers anticipated the clearer revelation of "life and 
immortality " which Christ made in the gospel. 

4. Our lips will soon be silent in death, but the work of 
praising God on earth will not cease with us. It will be 
perpetuated from generation to generation, and will in- 
crease more and more, till it fills the whole earth as the 
waters cover the sea. 

10. All God's works praise him ; but it is the preroga- 
tive of rational beings alone to bless him. 

16. God, who satisfies the desire of every living thing, 
is abundantly able to provide for all the wants of his chil- 
dren, lie invites them to put unlimited trust in himself, 
and he never disappoints their confidence. 

21. The true friend of God wishes to have all the world 
join him in praising His holy name; and so far as God 
gives him the opportunity, he will labor to bring all the 
world to do so. This is the true missionary spirit, having 
its foundation in love. 

PSALM CXLVI. 

4. His thoughts perish ; his plans and purposes are cut 
off by his death. 

9. Titc utransers — the fatherless and widow; these three 
classes of persons are mentioned together because they 
are peculiarly exposed to injury, and are therefore the 
special objects of God's care. 

*i09 



GoiPs providenlial care. 



rSALM CXLVIII. 



Universal praise to God. 



10 Tlic Loud shall rcisrn for ever, even thy 
God, Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the 
Lord. 

PSALM CXLVII. 

1 The prophet exhorteth to praise God for his care of the church, 4 his 
power, 6 anil his mercy ; lo praise hiin for liis providence; 12 to praise 
him for his blessings upon the kingdom, 1.5 for his power over the 
meteors, 19 and for his ordinances in the church. 

PRAISE ye tlie Lord : for it is good to sing 
praises "unto our God;" for it is pleasant; 
and prai.se is comely. 

2 The Lord doth'build up Jerusalem: he gath- 
ereth togetiier the outcasts of Israel." 

3 He heak'tli the broken in heart,"= and bindeth 
up their wounds.' 

4 He tolicth the number of the stars; he calleth 
tliem all t)y f/tcir iianies. 

.') Great is our Lor<l, ami of great power: his 
understanding w iniinito.*'' 

6 The Lord iifteth up tiic meek: he casteth the 
■wicked down to tiie ground.'^ 

7 Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving; sing 
praise upon tlio harp unto our God : 

8 Who covereth the heaven with clouds, who 
prei)areth rain for the earth, wiio maketli grass 
to grow upon tlic mountains. 

y He givcth to the beast his food, and to the 
young ravens which cry.*^ 

10 He delightcth not in the strength of the horse : 
he taketh not pleasure in tlic legs of a man. 

11 The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear 
him, in those that liope in Ids mercy.'' 

12 Praise the Lord. O Jerusalem: praise tiiy 
God, Zion. 

13 For he hath strengthened the bars of tliy 
gates: he hath bles.sed tiiy ciiildrcn within thee.'' 



, 


P«l. w 


1. 1> Deut. 


30:3,4. «I.a 


fil 


, 




llrb 


«"«•/>. t 


Hrb 


ofhh 


urn 






no numitr. J 


u 


■1(1 


* 


e 


I'sa. -23:9 


Mit 


. 5:3; 


1 r 


t. 3:4. 


1 Job.-)S:4 


; Matt. 6:20. 


( 


Ika 


fl 


i-4; 


Mai. 3:10, 


17. 


h I'«a. 


lis 


14. 1 


Heb Whom 


akfth tfiy f^ortli' 


' /' 


""■ 




« 11 


h. fat of \nhcat , 


Dcut. 



5. The luigliticst cartlily putroiis uflcn fail us in the time 
of our greatest need ; but llicy who jiut tlicir trust in God, 
have a friend who w'ill never disappoiiil their confidence. 
AU the resources of heaven and earth are at his disposal, 
and ho will provide for the wants of his servants. 

9. The poor, afllictcd, and defenceless aro the ohjccts of 
God's special regard, llcroin wo ought to imitate our 
heavenly Fulher. 

PSAL.M rxi-vii. 

4. Tellelh ; couiiteth. 

10. T/ie sirennth of the hnrv; the war-horse. TIk ktis of 
a man ; the strong and active legs of the warrior. Jeho- 
vah delights not in military forces, whether of cavalry or 
foot, because he has no need of their help, ("onipare Psa. 
3:J: 16, 17, which may serve as a commentary on this verse. 

13. T/ie bars cf th y piitci ; by which they aro defended 
against the assaults of enemies. 

15. His word runuclli very sicifltij ; God's word is a swift 
messenger sent forth to the elements, and the commands 
which it bears to them from God, they execute immedi- 
ately. 

17. /m; hailstones. Li/^mor.vr/.«; in bits, or small pieces, 
like morsels i>f food. 

18. And mellrth llirm ; the nnow, frost, and ice. His wind ; 
tho warm south wind, which melts the ice, and causes it 
to flow off in streams. 

710 



14 He maketli peace in thy borders,' and filleth 
thee with tlie liiicst of the wlieat.' 

IF) He sciidcth forth his commandment upon 
earth:' his word runneth very swiftly. 

IG He givclh snow like wool: he scattereth the 
hoar frost like ashes. 

17 He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who 
can stand before his cold? 

18 He scndcth out his word, and melteth them: 
he canscth his wind to blow, and the waters flow. 

19 Ho sliowcth Iiis word- unto Jacob,' his stat- 
utes and his judgnicuts unto Israel." 

20 He hath not dealt so with any nation :' and 
a-ffor his judgments, they have not known them. 
Praise ye the Lord. 

PSALM CXLVIII. 



: psahnist e.xhortctli the celestial, 7 th 
tional creatuics to praii 



trrrestrial, 1 1 and llit 
5 God. 



PRAISE ye the Lord.'' Praise ye the Lord 
from the heavens: praise him in the heiglits. 

2 Prai.se ye him, all his angels: praise ye him, 
all his iiosts.'" 

3 Praise ye him, sun and moon: praise him, a!l 
ye stars of light. 

4 Praise him, ye heavens of heavens," and ye 
waters that be above the heavens. 

5 Let tlicm praise tlie name of the Loud : for 
he commanded, and they were created." 

6 He hath also stablished them for ever and 
ever: he hath made a decree which shall not 
pass. 

7 Praise the Lord from the earth, ye dragons," 
and all deeps: 

8 Fire, and iiail; snow, and vapor : stormy winij 
fullilling his word: 



3->:14; P»a. SI:10. i Psa. lul:'."©. I Heb worth, i Dcut. 3,-!:3, 4: Rom. 
3:'J. k Mai. 4:4. I Dcut. 4:3-i-ai. 1 Heb. HalMujah. «i Psa. ill3:'>U. 
"IKingsS:-.*?; 3Cor. ia.2. o Gen. 1:1, etc. Pisa. 43:-J0. 



20. Tlicy have not known them ; that is, the otltor nations 
of the earth. 

IXPTHUCTIONS. 

1. When our hearts arc right, there is no cmi>loyment 
80 pleasant as praising God. That men so generally neg- 
lect this most excellent service, is a proof of their exceed- 
ing wickedness. 

2. Though tho Lord may suffer his people to be for a 
lime persecuted and scattered, ho will gather them to- 
getiier again and comfort them. 

3. The afllicteil can always find in God a gracious and 
almighty Comforter. 

4. He who gives names to all tho stars will not overlook 
any of his servants. 

9. The bounty of God provides for the bcast-s and the 
young ravens; how much, more for his own children. 

11. Outward pomp and power are vain in the sight of 
God; ho looks to the slate of the heart. 

20. The greatest blessing which God can confer on any 
nation is a knowledge of himself. 

PSALM CXLVIII. 

1. In the hei/^hts; the heavenly heights. 

4. Vf/i«ii'f/i.«o/"/ioifc)w,- tho highest heavens. Ye waters 
that lie almir the hnircm; tho same as tho waters " abovo 
the lirniameiit," (!en. 1:7. 

G. Shall not paai ; pass away, bo abolished. 

7. Dragons; large sca-auimals. 

8. Fire; ligbtuiug. 



God's love for his church. 



PSALM CL. 



Praise ye the Lord. 



9 Mountains, and all liills ; fruitful trees, and all 
cedars : 

10 Beasts, and all cattle; creeping things, and 
flying fowl:* 

11 Kings of the earth, and all people; princes, 
and all judges of the earth: 

12 Both young men, and maidens; old men, and 
children : 

13 Let them praise the name of the Loni): for 
ins name alone is excellent;*-' his glory is above 
the earth and heaven. 

1-t He also cxalteth the horn of his people, the 
praise of all his saints ; even of the children of Isra- 
el, a people near unto him." Praise ye the Lord. 

PSALM CXLIX. 

1 The prophet exhorteth to praise God for his love to the church, 5 jmd 
for that power wliich he hatli given to the church. 

PR.VISE ye the Lord.* Sing unto the Lord a 
new song, and his praise in the congregation 
of saints. 

2 Let Israel rejoice in him tliat made him;'' let 
the children of Zion be joyful in their King. 

3 Let them praise his name in the dance : ^ let them 
sing praises unto him with the timbrel and harp. 

•1 For the Lord taketh pleasure in his people;'' 
he will beautify the meek with salvation. 

• Hsb. birds ofwini;. t Heb. exalleil. a Psa. 8:1; Isa. 12;4. b Eph. 
2:13, 17. ! Heb. Hallelujah, c p^i. I(lO:3. i Or. wit/i the pipe, d Psa. 
147:11. I Heb. Ihroal. e Heb. 4:12. ^ lleb. Hallelujah. • Or, rorrepi; Psa. 



14. Tlie horn of his people; horn is here a symbol for 
strength. The praise of all his saints; supply fi-om the pre- 
ceding clause, " he cxalteth." To exalt the praise of his 
saints, is to give them still higher reasons for praising 
him. A people near vnto him; whom he has taken into 
jieculiar relations to himself. 

INSTRUCTION. 
To those who love God and live in habitual communion 
with him, every part of creation is full of his glory, and 
they see, with holy admiration and gladness, his wisdom, 
power, and goodness, in all the oi:)erations of nature. But 
of all his works, none are so precious to them, and so full 
of grace and truth, as his dealings with his own children — 
"a people near uuto him." 

PSALM CXLIX. 

2. la him that made him; God made Israel, not only as 
all men are his creatures, but also as " a people near unto 
him." 

3. In the dance — with the timbrel and harp; with sacred 
songs, accompanied, after the manner of the Hebrews, with 
musical instruments and dancing. 

4. Beautify; adorn. Salvation is here compared to a 
beauteous rolje. Isa. 61:10. 

5. Upon their beds ; a place for pious meditation. Psa. 
«3:G. 

6. And a two-edged sword in their hand; \\'hcn tJod's church 
had, by his appointment, a national form, conflicts sword 
in hand with surrounding enemies were a part of the duty 
of his people. So when the Jews were rebuilding the 
walls of Jerusalem under Nehemiah, " the builders, every 
one had his sword girded by his side, and so budded." 
Neh. 4:18. 

9. Written; appointed by God. This honor ; the honor 
of accomplishing the will of God upon his enemies. 



5 Let the saints be joyful in glory; let them 
sing aloud upon their beds. 

6 Let the high praises ot God he in their mouth,' 
and a two-edged sword in their hand;'' 

7 To execute vengeance upon the heathen, and 
punishments upon the people; 

8 To bind their kings with chains, and their 
nobles with fetters of iron ; 

9 To execute upon them the judgment writ-ten: 
this honor have all his saints. Praise ye tlic 
Lord. 

PSALM CL. 

1 An exhortation to praise God, 3 with all kind of instruments. 

PRAISE ye the Lord.' Praise God in hia 
sanctuary ; praise him in the firmament of his 
power. 

2 Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him 
according to his excellent greatness. 

3 Praise him with the sound of the trumpet :* 
praise him with the psaltery and harp.' 

4 Praise him with the timbrel and dance ;* praise 
him with stringed instruments and organs. 

5 Praise him upon the loud cymbals ; praise hiui 
upon the high sounding cymbals.'-' 

6 Let every tiling that hath breath praise tho 
Lord.'' Praise ye the Lord. 



1 Or, pipe; Psa. 1I0::S. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. "The Israel of God " have for their King one to wlioiii 
all power is given in heaven and in earth. Under hia 
government they are always safe, and have always abun- 
dant reason for rejoicing. 

4. The meek, who are conscious of their own weakness 
and unworthiness, and quietly commit their cause to God, 
always find that salvation of which the proud and self-suf- 
ficient, who rely on themselves, are sure to fail. 

9. The greatest honor which a man can receive, is to be 
employed by God as an instrument of advancing his cause 
in tho world. "This honor have all his saints," each in 
his proper station, and according to the measure of the 
gifts bestowed upon him by God. 

PSALM CL. 

1. In his sanctuarij ; his earthly abode. In the firmament 
of his power; his heavenly abode. The whole family of 
God, in heaven and on earth, is here called upon to praise 
him. 

INSTRUCTION. 

Amid the varied experience of (iod's servants recorded 
in tho Psalms, their sufferings hold a conspicuous place. 
But the book ends with songs of praise. Such shall be 
the final issue of aU the trials through w-hich his earthly 
church is passing. Tlie Lord shall "extend peace to her 
like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing 
stream;" and all her sons and daughters shall shout "as 
the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thun- 
derings, saying, Alleluia, for the Lord God omnipotent 
reigneth." Such also shall be the history of individual 
believers. Their tears and groans and prayers shall end 
in everlasting gladness. God shall bring them home, each, 
at the appointed time, to the heavenly Zion, ".with songs 
and everlasting joy upon their heads: they sliall obtain 
joy and gladness, and sorrow and sigliing shall flee away." 



711 



THE PROVERBS. 



In respect to outward form, the book of Proverbs may be divided into five parts. Of these the first 
nine chapters, consisting of exhortations addressed to the young in the form of discourse more or less 
connected, constitute one part. Tlie second part, introduced by the title " The proverbs of Solomon," 
extends from the beginning of the tenth chapter through the sixteenth verse of tlie twenty-second. This 
consists of proverbs strictly so called, each verse constituting a separate maxim of heavenly wisdom for 
the regulation of the heart and life. Then follows, to the end of the twenty-fourth chapter, what may be 
called the third part, in wliich the method of exhortation in discourse more or less connected is resumed. 
The fourth part, beginning witli tlie twenty-fifth chapter, bears the title, "These are also the proverbs of 
Solomon, which tiie men of Hozekiah king of Judah copied out :" sec note to chap. 2.5 : 1. Finally, the fifth 
part, wliich may be considered as a sort of appendix, contains " the words of Agur," chap. 30, and of " king 
Lemuel," chap. 31. 

This book contains a complete code of practical rules for the regulation of Kfe — rules lliat will make 
men wise for time and for eternity. The truths which they contain admit of endlessly new applications. The 
study of a life cannot exhaust them. The more they are pondered and prayed over, and reduced to prac- 
tice, the more will tiieir divine fulness appear. Tiiey are adapted to the actual world, not to some imagi- 
nary state of things ; and they contain those broad principles of practical wisdom which meet the wants 
of all men in all circumstances and conditions of life. AViioever gives liimself to the study of tlieso prov- 
erbs, and conforms Iiis life to the principles which they set forth, will be a truly happj"- and prosperous 
man. Whoever shapes liis conduct by different principles will be compelled in the end to acknowledge 
his folly. They are aflcctionately commended to the young as their constant manual of action. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 The use of llie proverbs. 7 An c.\hort.ilion to fear God. and believe 
his word. 10 To avoid the cnricin;;s of sinners. 20 Wisdom coin- 
plainetb of her contempt. 2\ She threatcnetli her contemners. 

'^r^HE Proverbs of Solomon the son of David, 
J^. kinir of Israel ;" 

'2 To know wisdom and instruction ; to perceive 
tlie words of understanding ; 

'i To receive tlie iiistriictiou of wisdom, justice, 
and judgment, and equity ;''' 

4 To give subtiity to the simple,'' to the young 
man knowledge and discretion.''' 

5 A wise Tnan will liear, and will increase learn- 
ing; anil a man of understanding shall attain 
unto wise counsels : 

fi To understand a proverb, and the interjjrcta- 
tion ;' the wonls of the wise, and their dark say- 
ings." 

7 The fear of the Loru) is the beginning^ of 



• I Kinni-I W; Krol. IJ n. • }Ub. ri/iiiliM. >> oil. 2: 1, 0. ' oh. 0:4, nlc. 
lOr, orfiiiJ'/<i-ii(. dl-u. IIV.O. t Or, an elm/uml apueh. • P«a. •IO:l ; -H:-,>. 



CHAPTKR I. 

2-4. Til knou) — to vcrcpivc — to receive; written that those 
who read them may Know, ]iercei vc, and receive. To give; 
written that they miiy t^iyc JVisdom — instruction, etc.; 
tlicse are all ilift'ereiit terms for doscrihing true wisdom 
and ri};liteousncss, which coimist in Uiiowiiii; and doing tlie 
will of (Jod, anil can never be Boparuted. To receive— jus- 
tice, ami jwlgment, ami equity; to learn in what they con- 
sist, and to conform our life to them. Siilitil'ij — discretion; 
a quick discernment between what is wise and foolish. 
712 



knowledge :'" hut fools despise wisdom and b ": iSoo! 
instru(!tion. 

8 1l Jly son, hear the instruction of lliy father, 
and forsake not the law of thy mother: 

9 For they s/iall he an ornament of grace unt6 
thy head, and chains about tliy neck. 

10 1i My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou 
not." 

1 1 If they say. Come with us, let us lay wait for 
blootl, let us lurk privily for the innocent without 
cause: 

12 Let us swallow llioni u]i alive as the grave; 
and whole, as those tliat go down into the pit: 

1,5 We shall find all jirccious substance, we shall 
(ill our houses with spoil : 

14 Cast iu thy lot among us ; let us all have one 
purse : 

15 My son, walk not thou in the way with them ;'' 
refrain thy foot from their path;' 



5, A wise man — a man of understanding; (inr wlio under- 
stands the worth of knowledge. S/iall attain; by hearing 
and learning. 

(i. Dark sai/ings; sayings expressed in an enigmatical 
or obscure way, and requiring study to understund their 
moaning. 

I. The beginning of knowMpe ; lying at its foundation. 
Fools; who^iavc no fear of (Joil. 

;i. Clutins ahout thy neck; worn as badges of honor. 
Chains of gold were common as decorations of princes. 
UcD. 41:42; Dan. 6:29. 



]]'Lf(lom's solemn warnings, 



PROVERBS II. 



imilallons, and promises. 



K.r'S' Ifi For their feet run to evil, and make 
iiaste to shed blood. 

17 Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight 
of any bird.* 

18 And they lay wait for their own blood ; they 
lurk privily i'or their own lives. 

11) So nre the ways of every one that is greedy 
of gain ;■' which taketh away the life of the owners 
thereof. 

20 1i Wisdom^ crieth without;'' she uttcreth her 
voice in the streets: 

21 She crieth in the chief place of concourse, in 
the openings of the gates: in the city she uttereth 
her words, saying, 

22 How long, ye simitlo ones, will ye love sim- 
plicity ? and the scorners delight in their scorn- 
ing, and fools hate knowledge V 

2:3 Turn yon at iny reproof: liehold, I will pour 
out my spirit unto you,'' I will make known my 
words unto you. 

24 *i Because I have called, and ye refused; I 
have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded ; 

2-5 l]ut ye have set at naught all my counsel, and 
would none of ray reproof:'' 

26 1 also will laugh at your calamity; I will 
mock when your fear cometh -"^ 

27 When your fear cometh as desolation, and 
your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when 
distress and anguish cometh upon you. 

28 Then shall they call upon me, but I will not 
answer;'' they shall seek me early, but they shall 
not find me: 

2'i) For that they hated knowledge, and did not 
choose the fear of the Lord :'^ 

30 They would none of my counsel: they de- 
spised all my reproof.'' 



' Heb- ey^s of every Ikh 
t Heb. Wixiloins, that is. 
t .roel-J:'iS; Luke 11:1.3. 
( Gen. G::i; Job -27:9; Isa 



g that kath a iiutig a Hab. a^O-l'J; 1 Tim 6:1(1. 

EzceUent wisilttm. b ch. 8:1, elc. ; J.ihn 7:.'J". 
Jlsi.(i5:12; Uli:); Zeoh. 7: 11-14. e l.uke 14:-i4. 

1:1.5; Jer. 11:11: l\:\-l\ Ezek. S:1S, .M-ic. 3:4. 



17, 18. Surely in vain the net is spread; the fowler does 
not expect a bird to be caught in a snare which he sees ; 
but these sinners, and all who go with them, are spread- 
ing a net for their own souls. The young should imitate 
the prudence of the birds in avoiding it. 

19. So are the ways; such is the issue to which they 
lead. Greedy of gam; unlawfully desires gain, and seeks 
it by unlawful means. Taketh away the life; by leading 
them into a snare. Ver. 18. 

20. Wisdom; the wisdom of God addressing men. It 
includes all the revelations of himself which God has 
made to men. And since these are all made through 
Christ, who spoke before his advent by the prophets, and 
afterwards by the apostles, we may say that wisdom 
speaks here as the eternal Word, who is tlie only revealcr 
of God to men. John 1:18. 

21. Chief place of concourse — the gates — the city; she cries 
in tlie most public and frequented places. 

23. I will pnur ont my spirit unto you; she speaks in 
God's name, and her spirit is God's Spirit. Compare 
Luke 11:49. 

24. Stretched out my liand ; the gesture of earnest en- 
treaty. 

31. The fruit of their own waij ; terror and destruction, 
the proper recompense of setting at naught the counsels 
of wisdom. 

INSTRUCTION'S. 

5. They who have wisdom understand the worth of 
knowledge, and earnestly seek it; but fools despise all 
instruction. 



31 Therefore shall they cat of the fruit of their 
own way, and be filled with (heir own devices.' 

32 For the turning away of the simple shall slay 
them, and the prosperity* of fools shall destroy 
them. 

33 But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell 
safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil, 

CHAPTER II. 

1 Wisdom proniiseth fiodliness to iler children, 10 and safety from evil 
company, 20 and d:rection in good ways. 

Y son, if thou wilt receive ray words, and 
hide my commandments with thee ;■' 

2 So that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, 
Mid apply thy heart to understanding;" 

3 Yea, if thou criest after knowledge, and lift- 
cst" up thy voice for understanding; 

4 If thou seekest her as silver, and searchestfor 
her asybr hid treasures;' 

5 Then shalt thou understand the fear of the 
Lord, and find the knowledge of God. 

G For the Lord giveth wisdom : out of his mouth 
cometh knowledge and understanding.™ 

7 He laycth up sound wisdom for the righteous: 
he is a buckler to them that walk uprightly. 

8 He keepcth the paths of judgment, and pre- 
serveth the way of his saints." 

'^ Then shalt thou understand righteousness, and 
judgment, and equity;" yea, every good path. 

10 1 When wisdom entereth into thy heart, and 
knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul ; 

1 1 Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding 
shall keep thee : 

12 To deliver thee from the way of the evil maii, 
from the man that speaketh froward things ; 



? Jobai;l4. 


h 


h (1: 


>3. iJe 


.2:19 


r. 


m. 





, ease. 


jPsa 


iin 


11. 


kisa. 


5o.:). i Heb. 


ff 


rest. 


1 .Matt 


13:44. 




nlKl 




3:9, 1: 


; Jas 


1:!j 


u 


ISam. 


2:9; JuJe 21. 




' I'si 


11U:89. 





















7. They who would be truly wise must begin by devot- 
ing themselves to God's service, and making his word the 
rule of their life. 

9. Reverence for parental instruction in the child makes 
the man prosperous and honored. 

10. They who choose the wicked for their companions 
become like them in character and end. 

19. Unrighteous gain has destroyed millions ; but has 
never made one man permanently prosperous and happy. 

20. God urges upon men his lessons of heavenly wis- 
dom in so many ways, that none can remain ignorant of 
them hut those who obstinately refuse to hear. 

28. There is a point in rebellion against God and neglect 
of his warnings, beyond which the sinner's destruction is 
certain and irremediable. 

31. The sinner is responsible for his own ruin. The 
destruction which comes upon him is the proper result of 
his perverseness in refusing to hear and obey God. 

CHAPTER IL 

1. Hide; as a precious possession. 

2. Incline thine ear unto wisdom ; listen to her voice. 

5. Understand the fear of the Lord ; by duly seeking, thou 
shalt know it, and appropriate it to thyself as a heavenly 
treasure. This includes the comprehension of its nature, 
and the experience of the blessedness and safety which it 
gives. 

6. Givelh wisdom ; to all who thus earnestly seek it. 

12. Froward things ; perverse things, contrary "to right- 
eousness, and judgment, and equity." 
713 



Benefits conferred on 



PROVERBS III. 



VKii by J]'isdom. 



13 Who leave tlic paths of uprightness, to walk 
in tlic ways of darkness;" 

14 Wiio rejoice to do evil, and delight in the 
frowardness of the wicked ;'' 

15 Wiiose ways are crooked,'' and they fro ward 
in their jjatlis: 

IG To deliver thee from the strange woman, 
even from the stranger ic/tich llatlcretli with iicr 
words;'' 

17 Wliicli I'orsaketli the guide of her youth, and 
forgettetii tiie covenant of licr God.'^^ 

18 For licr house inclinetli unto death, and her 
patiis unto tiie dead. 

19 None that go unto her return again, neither 
take tiioy iioid of the paths of life.'' 

20 That thou mayest walk in the way of good 
men, and keep tiie jiatlis of tiie righteous. 

21 For tlie uprigiit sliall dwell in the land, and 
the perfect sliall remain in it. 

22 But tiie wicked shall bo cut off from the earth, 
and the transgressors sliall be rooted out of it.' 

CI1A1»TER III. 

1 An exhortation to obt'iiit-nc', 5 to f;ii[ii. 7 to mortification. 9 to devo- 
tion, 11 to patit-nri'. irj The iiappy gain of wisiioni. 19 Tile power, 
21 and the benctits of wisdom. 21 An exhortation to charitablem-s.-;, 
3D peaceableness, 31 and coiitentedness. 33 The curiied state of the 
wicked. 

MY son, forget not my law; but let thy heart 
keep my comniandments:''' 

2 For length of days,'' and long^ life, and peace, 
shall they add to tliee. 

3 Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind 
them about tliy neck: write them upon the table 
of tliy heart:' 

4 So siialt tlion liml favor and good undcrstaud- 
jag' in the sight of God and man. 



• John ia:.').j. b Rom. 1:33. c INa. 125:5. J ch. 5:20. eMal. 2:H. 
' Kocl. 7:2«. • Or, plucked up. « Isa. 51 :7: Jer. 31:33. I> Dcut. 30: 16, 2il; 
I Tim. •!:•!. tHeb.yOTr.io/. i 2 Cor. 3::). t Or, sums.t. J Jor. 10:23; 
Horn. 12:18. « Hob. mtr/icinc. I Hcb. loaterm?, or moi'MfMi'ng-. k Exod. 
2i:2»; .Mil. 3:10-12. 1 Eccl. 11:1.2; Matt. 10:42. "> Heb. I2:.5, 0; Rev. 



Hi. Si range woman — stranger; adulterous woman. 

17. T/ie guide of her ijoutk; husband of her youth. Cov- 
enant of her God; tlio marriage covenant, of which Uod is 
the witness, and to wliich he requires lidelity. 

18. Iiicliiteth; sinkcth down with Iter and all who fre- 
quent it. Death; utter ruin, hero and hereafter. 

19. Neither take theij hold of the paths of life; they cannot 
regain the paths of life, because they ha.ve sunk down 
with her to the dead. 

20. This verse is iinmmcdiatcly connected with ver. 10, 11. 
22. Cut off; sudtlenly and prematurely. I'sa. 55:23. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. No man can c.vpeet to lind the true knowledge of 
trod and eternal life wlio does not seek them with supreme 
desire, and hold himself ready to part with every thing 
for their sake. 

5. God gives true wisdom to all who ask it of him in 
sincerity. 

11. The only effeclnal safognard from the ways of sin 
and ruin is the knnwleilgo and fear of (!od. 

19. Impurity in all its forms has a deadly influence ujion 
both body and soul. The hiui.se of the strange woman lias 
been in all a^i'S the highway to hell. 

22. The viidont destruction of tho wicked in this world 
is an earnest of the cvcrlasling (h'slniclion i>( llii'ir h.hiIs 
in tho world to come. 

CIIAI'Ti;!} III. 
3. Mercy and truth ; these include all true goodness. 
714 



5 1 Trust in the Loun with all thy heart ; ]i,l, JJSJ; 
and lean not unto tliine own understanding.-* 

6 In all thy ways acknowledge him, and lie shall 
direct tliy i>atiis. 

7 IT Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the 
Lord, and depart from evil. 

8 It sliall be health^ to thy navel, and marrow' 
to thy bones. 

!l Honor tiie Lord witli lliy substance, and with 
the first-fruits of all thine increase:'' 

10 So shall thy Ixiriis be filled with plenty, and 
thy presses shall burst out with new wine.' 

11 *i My son, despise not tho chastening of the 
Loud:'" neither be weary of his correction: 

12 For whom the Loud loveth he correcteth; 
even as a father the son in whom he deligliteth. 

13 *i Ilajipy is the man that lindeth wisdom,''and 
the man that gettetli' uiiderstandiiig: 

14 For the merchandise of it is better tlian the 
merchandise of silver," and the gain thereof than 
fine gold.'' 

15 She is more precious than rubies:'' and all 
the things thou canst desire are not to be com- 
pared unto her. 

1(5 Loiiglh of days is in her right hand; and in 
her left hand riches and lionor.^ 

17 Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all 
her paths are peace." 

18 She is a tree of life to them that lay hold 
upon her:' and happy is every one that retaineth 
her. 

19 The LoitD by wisdom hath founded the 
earth :" by understanding hath he establislied' the 
heavens. 

20 By his knowledge the dcjillis arc broken up,^ 
and the clouds drop down the dew." 



3.1!). n ch. 8:35, 3(1. 1 Heb. dralcelh cul. o Phil. 3:8, 9. P Psa. 19:10. 
q Job 3«:I3, etc. ' ch. 8:1S, etc. • P«a. 119:105; JIall. 11:29. ' Gen. 
3:22, 24; Rev. 22:2. ujer. 51:15. • Or, prepared. "Oen.lAl. "Job 
30:27. 



Bind them about thy neck ; as the noblest ornament. tVrtte 
them vpon the table of thy heart; that they may always 
remain there. 

4. In the sight of God and man ; thy good understanding 
shall be manifest to God and man, and gain for thee their 
favor. 

6. Acknowledge him; feel thy dependence upon him and 
seek his direction. 

8. Navel — hones ; put for the whole body. Marrow to thy 
bones; making them strong and vigorous, liodily health 
is here put for prosperity of every kind, temporal and 
spiritual. 

0. Honor the Lord with thy substance; by giving to hie 
service the due portion. First-fruits; which the Israelites 
were required to ofler to God. Exod. 23:19; Lev. 2:12; 
19:23, 24; Dent. 18:4. 

14. The merchandise of it; tho gaining of it by traffic. 
Wisdom is here regartlcd as a precious tre;isurc, to bo 
gained at whatever cost. Comp.iro .Matt. 13:41-40. 

Hi. Her right hand — her left hand ; slio dispenses bless- 
ings to her followers from both hands. 

\>*. A tree of life; she gives life to them that receive her 
instruction. 

19. Iliith founded — the heavens; the crowning praise of 
wisdom: by her God hath created the world. 

2(1. Depths; subterranean abysses. Broken vp; made to 
gush forth. Some understaiid these words of tlio division 
of tho great deep, into the waters umler tho firmament, 
and the waters above tho tirmaiucnt. Geu. 1:7. 



Justice and pec ce. 



ruovEuiJS i\^ 



Parenl. I inslrud'wr.s. 



thine eyes: keep sound wisdom and discretion 

22 So sliall tiiey be life unto thy soul, and grace 
to thy neck. 

23 Tlicn shall thou walk in thy way safely, and 
thy foot shall not stunilile. 

'li When thou liest down, thou shalt not be 
afraid :" yea, tliou shalt lie down, and Ihy sleep 
shall be sweet.'' 

25 Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the 
desolation of tiie wicked, when it comcth." 

20 For the Lord shall be thy conlidcuce, and 
shall keep thy foot from beinij,- taken.'' 

27 1! Withhold not good from them to whom it 
is due,'" when it is in the power of thy hand to 
do ?■/.' 

28 Say not unto thy neighbor. Go, and come 
again, and to-morrow I will give; when thou hast 
it by thee.''' 

29 Devise not* evil against thy neighbor, seeing 
he dwclleth securely by thee. 

30 1( Strive not witli a man without cause, if he 
have done thee no harm.'' 

31 T Envy thou not the opjiressor,' and choose 
none of his ways. 

32 For the froward k abomination to the Lokd : 
but his secret is with the righteous.' 

33 T[ The curse of the Lor.n is in the house of 
the wicked :J but he blesseth the habitation of the 
just." 

3-1 Surely he scorneth the scorners : but he giv- 
ctli grace unto the lowly. 

35 The wise shall inherit glory:' but shame 
shall be the promotion of fools.' 



iLev. ar>:5. b I'sa. lOT-J. crM.ll-J7. '1 
■^ lliertof. e Rom. 1:!:;. fG.U. 0:11). eI,( 
■il. t ch. 25; S. I Ileb. a man of violence. 



i.ri. -J U. • Ueb. Ilieown- 
U):13. t Or, practise no 
l'.sa. 25: ]4. J Zeoh. 5:4. 



25. Be not afraid; that is, when thou keepest sound 
■wisdom and discretion. Ver. 21. Sudden fear; sudden 
destruction from God, which overwlielms tho wicked 
with fear. 

31. T/ie oppressor; because of his present success in 
sinful practices. 

32. Secret; intimate friendship. 

35. Shame shall be the promotion of fools; wliile tlie wise 
are promoted to true glor}', the only jiromotion of fools 
shall be shame ; that is, they shall have sliame instead of 
glory. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. A prosperous and happy life is tho reward of obey- 
ing God's commandments. 

4. The possession of true wisdom secures the perma- 
nent favor of God and all good men. 

C. They who feel their need of God's protection and 
guidance, and humbly commit themselves to him in the 
way of duty, shall not be left to perplexity or error. He 
will mark out their path for them, and make them truly 
prosperous and useful. 

8. True health of soul and body lies in fearing God and 
departing from evil. 

y. W^ien we honor God with our property, he will bless 
us in the possession and use of it. 

12. God chastens his children because he loves them, 
and purposes to make them meet for eternal glory. Heb. 
12:5-14. 

15. The smallest measure of true wisdom is better than 
.ill the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them ; for 
it makes us blessed here, and prepares us for eternal 
blessedness hereafter. 



CnATTER IV. 

1 Solomon, to persuade obedience, ;! slmxwth wli:it inslruction he had of 
Ins piireiils, 5 to study wisdom. 14 and t' slum the path of the wicked. 
2U He exiiorteth to faith. 23 and sanclilication. 

nEAR, ye children, the instruction of a father, 
and attend to know understanding. 

2 For I give you good doctrine,'" forsake ye not 
my law. 

3 For I was my father's son, lender and only 
beloved in the sight of my mother." 

4 He taught me also, and said unto me. Let thy 
heart retain my words : keep my commandments, 
and live." 

5 Get wisdom, get understa.nding : forgot ■(< not ; 
neither decline from the words of my mouth. 

6 Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee: 
love her, and she shall keep thee. 

7 Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get 
wisdom: and with all thy getting get understand- 
ing. 

8 Exalt her, and she shall promote thee : she sliall 
brina' thee to honor, when thou dost embrace her. 

9 She shall give to thy head an ornament of 
grace : a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee.' 

10 Hear, ray son, and receive my sayings ; and 
the years of thy life shall bo many. 

11 I have taught thee in the way of wisdom; I 
have led thee in right paths. 

12 When thou goest, thy steps shall not be strait- 
ened ; and when thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble. 

13 Take fast hold of instruction ; let /icr not go : 
keep her; for she is thy life. 

14 1i Enter not into the path of the wicked, and 
go not in the way of evil men.^ 



t Job S:r,, 7. 1 Pan. 1-';:1. i Heb. fmllel/i tht fools, m Dcut. 3-2:3. 
i> I Clir. 20: 1, o 1 Clir. 2s:<J. II Or, she shall compass thee with a crown of 
glory. pPsa. 1:1. 



25. It is not only the privilege, but the duty of the 
righteous to be composed and free from fear amidst those 
judgments wliich destroy God's enemies. Psa. 46:1-3; 
Hab. 3:10-19. 

27. All who need our help have a claim upon us from 
God for it. We should give it promptly and cheerfully, 
and thank liim for tho opportunity. 

33. They who provide for their families wealth and 
power by wicked practices, lay up for them a curse in- 
stead of a blesshig. God's favor bestowed upon the 
children of the righteous is better than houses full of 
silver and gold. 

34. It is the unchangeable purpose of God to abase the 
proud and exalt the humble ; and he is abundantly able 
to accomplish it in respect to nations, families, and indi- 
viduals. 

CHAPTER IV. 

3. Mij father'.i son ; in an emphatic sense, a son tenderly 
beloved and cherished. Only beloved; loved like an only 
son, that is, very tenderly; for Solomon was not literally 
the only son of his mother. See 1 Chron. 3:5. 

4. He taug/d me also; Solomon commends his instructiona 
to the young as those which he had received from his 
father in childhood, and obedience to which had made 
him prosperous and honored. 

7. U'dh a'l thy getting get understanding ; cither, Among 
all thy other acquisitions be sure to get wisdom first; 
or better thus : Employ all thy worldly gain to get wis- 
dom : part with it all, if need be, for her sake. Matt. 
13:44-46. 

12. Shall not be straitened; thou shalt have a wide and 
plain path in which thou canst go safely. Psa. 18:36. 



The path of the just. 



15 Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it 
pass away. 

16 For tiicy sleop'not, except tlicy iiave done 
niischief; and their sleep is taken away, unless 
they cause some to fail. 

17 For they cat the bread of wickedness, and 
drink the wine of violence. 

18 But the jiatii of the just is as the shining light, 
that shinetli more and more unto tiie perfect day." 

19 Tlic way of tlic wicked is as darkness: they 
know not at wliat they stumbh;.'' 

20 1 My son, attend to my words; incline thine 
ear unto my sayings. 

21 Let them not depart from tliine eyes; keep 
them in the midst of thy heart. 

22 For tliey arc life unto those that find them, 
and health* to all their flesh. 

23 'i. Keep thy heart with all diligence;* for out 
of it arc the issues of life. 

24 Put away from thee a froward mouth, and 
perverse lips put far from thee.' 

25 Let tliine eyes look right on, and let thine 
eyelids look straight before thee. 

26 I'oudcr the path of thy feet, and let all thy 
ways be established.* 

27 Turn not to the right hand nor to the left: 
remove thy foot froui evil. 

CHAPTER V. 



PROVERBS V. 

and 



The stran/'e woman. 



] SMlomnn oxhortcth to the study of ' 
chit-f of whoredom anil riot. 1.1 Hei 
iiv, and i--h.is'jtv. 2"i The wicked a 



lorn. 3 He showclh the n 
rtcth to contentedness, libe 
vertaken with Uieir own si 



MY son, attend unto my wisdom, and bow thine 
ear to my understanding: 



" I'«a. tvIT; Phil. -'lis. b John |-.>:*5. • Web. mediciiu. t Heh. n'f.iv 
a'l keepin;;. I lith./rowardncsx of tnoutft. antt ptrverseness of itf^ ' 
alt thy way^ sh'tU be ordfred nri:;hl. c ch. (i:'i4. I Heb. paiale ' 

15. Avoidil — passawaij; thcaccumuktiouof atlraoini 
shows the extreme danger of the way. 

18. The shining light; of the morning sun. Perfect day; 
noon. Light is here tlic emblem of knowledge, holiness, 
and happiness. 

19. Know 710/ at what they stumble; they cannot see (he 
BtunihHng-blocks that lie in their way, and they fall over 
them unawares. 

23. /fsties-; fountains: wlicn the heart is well kept, and 
stored with heavenly wisdom, it sends forth life-giving 
streams. 

25. Rigid on — straight before thee; as one looks who is 
intent upon pursuing a straight path, the path of God's 
commandments. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. They wlio, by precept and example, teiuh llicir chil- 
dren to value licavciily wisdom above all earllily posses- 
sions, may liopo to see them made by God's gr.icr useful and 
honorable, and the instructors of the following generation. 

7. That men so universally yirefer wealth to wisdom, 
shows the blindness of the natural he.irt; but they whom 
God's Spirit has enlightoiicil. understand well that the 
knowledge of the truth is belter than all riches. 

10. Sin has a dreadl'nl power to perpetuate itself. They 
who enter upon a course of trunsgiession jiroceed from bad 
to worse, till their life becomes one continiiotisserics of sins. 

IH. How glorious is llie just man's course. In this life 
lie is increasing in knowledge, holiness, and usefulness; 
and he has before him an eternity of light and bliss. "The 
ungodly arc not so." Thoy walk in darkness and self-de- 
lusion, and slunible unawares into perdition. 

2:t. If men bestowed upon their hearts tliat caro which 
they give to their estates, they would be rewarded with 
716 



2 That thou maycst regard discretion, u,c:JlSJ: 
and //ia( thy lips may keep knowledge. 

3 *; For the lips oi" a strange woman drop as a 
honey-comb,'' and her mouth is smoother than oil : 

4 But her end is bitter as wormwood,'' sharp as 
a two-edged sword." 

5 Her feet go down to death ; her steps take hoM 
on hell.'' 

6 Lest lliou shouldest ])ondcr the path of life, 
her ways are movable, i/tat thou canst not know 
t/ion. 

7 Hear me now therefore, ye children, and 
depart not from tlie words of my mouth. 

8 Remove thy way far from her, and come not 
nigh the door of her house : 

9 Lest thou give thine honor unto others, and 
thy years unto the cruel: 

10 Lest strangers be filled with thy wealth;' 
and thy labors be in the house of a stranger; 

11 And thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh 
and thy body are consumed,'-' 

12 And say. How have I hated instruction," and 
my heart de.-;i)ised reproof;' 

13 And have not obeyed the voice of my teach- 
ers, nor inclined mine car to them that instructed 
me! 

14 I was almost in all evil in the midst of the 
congregation and assembly. 

15 1 Drink waters out of thine own cistern, and 
running waters out of thine own well.* 

16 Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, and 
rivers of waters in the streets. 

17 Let them be oidy thine own, and not stran- 
gers' with thee. 



s lleb. 1 J: 1. t Zech. 



I I I iy, instead of disappointment and con- 

smiiiiij^ au.xicly. 

25. Straightforward integrity lies at the foundation of 
all true excellence and permanent success. AVhcn men 
rely on crooked artifices, tlicy and their plans will in the 
end be carried headlong. 

21!. They who earnestly and pr.ayerfidly ponder their 
path, shall be guided in the right way ; but inconsiderate- 
iicBs always ends in shame and misery. 

CHAPTER V. 

2. Tltijlips; when the heart is stored with knowledge 
it dwells also on the lips, and is commnnicaled to others. 

4. Hcrenil : the final end of yielding to her enticements. 

5. Go down lo death — lake liotd on hell ; compare cha)). 2 : 18. 

6. Movable; changeable; she cunningly alters her de- 
meanor so as to retain her lioKl on those whom she has 
enticed. Or the verse may be rendered thus: Lest she 
should ponder the path of life, her waj's wander, she 
knows not where. Compare chap. 4: 19. 

9. Honor — years; the prime and vigor of thy life. Oth- 
ers — the criirl ; (liese words probably refer to the husband 
of the adulteress, who had a right, by the Levitical law, to 
deinand the death of the od'ender, but might content him- 
self with the exaction of heavy fines and hard servitude. 

10, 11. Filled with thy wealth — are ronsumed ; these words 
refer (o all llie ways in which illicit indiilgenco wastes 
the estate of the transgressor, destroys his health and 
characltr, mid exposes him to ignominious penalties. 

M. The congregation and a.tsembly; the ])ublic assembly 
before which the udiillerer was arraigned. 

15. Drink waters ; bo content with the wife of thy youth, 

16. Fountains — rivers of waters; (lowing from the well 



VkastUy and industry. 



PROVERBS VI. 



77(1' bh'ssinss nf vhcdience. 



u.r.S: 18 Let thy fountain bo blcsseil: and re- 
joice with the wife of thy youtli." 

19 Lrt her be as tiie lovinp- hind nn<l ])leasant 
roc:'' let iier breasts* satisfy tliccatall times; and 
be (hou ravislied always with' her love. 

20 And why wilt thou, my son, bo ravished with 
a stranpe woman, and embrace the bosom of a 
stranffcr? 

21 For the ways of man are before the eyes of 
the LoKn. and he jiondereth all his goings.'' 

22 * His own iniquities shall take the wicked 
liimself and he shall be holden with the cords of 
his sins.' 

2o He shall die without instruction ;'' and in the 
S!;rcatncss of his folly he shall go astray. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 Asainst suretvbhip. 6 ijleness. 12 and miscliievni.sness. )« St-vci 
'hings bateful'lo God. 00 The blessings of obedience. 2j The niis- 
(•luefs of whoredom. 

jX TY son, if thou be surety for thy friend, if 
jSL thou hast stricken thy hand with a stran- 
ger,' 

2 Tlinu art snared with the words of thy mouth, 
tl\ou art taken with the words of thy month. 

3 Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself, when 
thou art come into the hand of thy friend : go, 
luimble thyself, and make sure^ thy friend. 

-4 Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to 
thine eyelids. 

5 Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand nf the 
hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler. 

6 *[ Go to the ant, thou sluggard/ consider her 
ways, and be wise: 

7 Which having no guide, overseer, or ruler. 

8 Provideth her meat in the summer, and gather- 
eth her food iu the harvest. 

9 How long wilt thou sleep, sluggard? when 
wilt thou arise out of thy sleep? 



1 Mai. 2:1 1, b Song 2:9; 7:3-S. • llA. water. 1 Heh. err :hoii nhmi/s 
171. c-jChr. lli:<), Job31:4; .Ter. 16;!7; :!2:1U; Hos. 7:2; Heb. 4:13. 1 Heb. 
sin. <l cb. 10:21; ,Inb 1)6.12. e oh. 11:15; 17:18; 22-26. 8 Or. so shall 
Ihoujirevailioilli. f .Tnb 12:7. e ch. 24;a3, '^a. h Job 15:12. ilsa. 57:20; 
Mic. 2:1. \ nth. raslelh forth, j Rom. 10:17. tch. 1:27. IJer. 19:11. 
in 2Chr. 36:11). ^ Ueh. r,f his sold. • Kei. Haughty ei/es. n P..a. 1S:27. 



mentioned in the prccedmg verse. These may denote 
either the pure enjoyment which he has in her society, or 
their mutual oitsprin.s. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. When we are tempted to sinful indulgence, we should 
consider well its consequences. It is a sad exchange to 
give property, health, character, peace of conscience, the 
favor of God, and everlasting life, for a little momentarj- 
pleasure. 

8. The only safety of the young lies in avoidnig the 
heginnings of impurity in word, thought, and deed, and 
all solicitations thereto. He who needlessly places liira- 
Nclf in the way of temptation, is in imminent danger of 
tilling. And when he once yields, he gives sinful passion 
tile mastery over himself, and his course is rapidly down- 
ward, till it ends in the destruction of soul, body, and 
estate. 

12. They wlio -will not listen in youth to the admonitions 
of wisdom, must pay a dreadful penalty for their heedless- 
ness in old age. 

15. God has ordained marriage for the holiness, com- 
fort, and purit\' of the human family; and all who in aiij' 
wiiy dishonor it. by precept or example, are among the 
worst enemies of mankind. Eph. 5:. 5, 6; Heb. 13:4. 
■-'I. We can neither conceal from God any crime, nor 



10 Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little 
folding of the hands to sleep:- 

11 So shall thy poverty come as one that travel- 
letli, and thy want as an armed man. 

12 T A naughty person, a wicked man, walketh 
with a froward mouth. 

13 He winketh with his eyes,'' he speaketh with 
his feet, he teaeheth with his lingers ; 

14 Frowardness is in his heart, he deviseth mis- 
chief continually ;' he soweth' discord.' 

1.5 Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly ;" 
suddenly shall he be broken' without remedy.'" 

16 *u These six ihinsr.': doth the Loud hate; yea, 
seven are an abomination unto him:"' 

17 A proud look,*" a lying tongue," and hands 
that shed innocent blood," 

ISA heart that deviseth wicked imaginations,'' 
feet that be swift in running to mischief,'' 

19 A false witness that speaketh lies,' and he 
that sowetli discord among brethren.' 

20 'i j\[y son, keep thy father's commandment, 
and forsake not the law of thy mother:" 

21 Bind them continually upon thy heart, and 
tie them about thy neck. 

22 When thou gocst, it shall lead thee ; when 
thou sleepest, it shall keep thee ; and -vhen thou 
awakest, it shall talk with thee.'' 

23 For the commandment is a lamp:* and the 
law is light:"' and reproofs of instruction arc the 
way of life : 

24 To keep thee from the evil woman, from the 
flattery of the tongue of a strange woman.* 

25 Lust not after her beauty in thy heart :'' nei- 
ther let her take thee with her eyelids. 

26 For by means of a whorisli woman a 7nan is 
brought to a piece of bread:'' and the adulteress^ 
will liunt'- for the precious life." 

27 Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his 
clothes not be burned? 



I'ii. 11^). '.05. 1 Or. the stra 



nj;s'24::!.4; fc.l:15. q!\Iic.2.1. r Isa. 
uKph.e:!. V Dan. l:K-<-21. t Or, ain- 

«<•. » Matt.5:'33. r ch. •2<):3. 

2 Ezek. l.J 1^. » Gen. 39.14, 



prevent his exposing and punishing it. As certainly as 
he reigns in heaven, every iniquity, unless it be repented 
of and forgiven through the blood of Christ, will take the 
sinner in Us fatal cords, and hold luiu fast bound to all 
eternity. 

CHAPTER VJ. 

I. Stricken thy hand ; it was thus that a person pledged 
himself to be responsible for the debt of another. 

3. /(i(o the hand of thi/ friend; into his power. 

II. One that travctldh ; a traveller that comes unexpect- 
edly, as an enemy or assailant. 

12-15. These verses describe a cunning deceiver, who 
accomplishes his mischievous plans by hidden artifices. 
Winketh — apeakcth — teaeheth; the secret signs which he 
gives to his accomplices. 

16. Six thins;!! — yea, seven ; it is a frequent custom of the 
Hebrew writers, in making enumerations, to begin with 
one less than the whole number. Compare Job 5:19: 
Prov. 30:1.S, -21, 29: Eccl. 11:2; Amos 1:3, G, 9,11,13; 2:1. 
4, C. Thus force and emphasis are added ti> their dis- 
course. 

18. Imaginations-: plots, plans of mischief. 

23 Are'lhe iraijvf life; thev guide men into the way nf 
life. 

\\1 



Mischiefs of unchastity. 



PROVEIM'.S VII. 



Pollution and death. 



28 Can one go upon hot coals, and liis feet not 
be burned? 

29 So he tliat jrocth in to his neijrhbor's wife; 
whosoever touclietli her shall not be innocent. 

30 Men do not des[)ise a liiief, if he steal to 
satisfy his soul when lie is liiingry ; 

31 But if he l)e found, he shall restore seven- 
fold; he shall ti'ivc all the substance of his house. 

SSf Butw\\um conimitteth adultery with awoman 
lacketli understanding:* he that doeth it destroy- 
eth his own soul." 

33 A wound and dishonor shall he get; and his 
reproach shall not be wiped away. 

34 For jealousy is the rage of a man:" therefore 
he will not spare in the day of vengeance. 

35 lie will not regard* any ransom ; neither will 
he rest content, thougii tliou givest many gifts. 

CHAPTER VII. 



1 Solomon persuadeth to a sincere and kind familiarity with -wisdom. 
6 Iti an example of liis owii experience, he showeth 10 the cunniiii;: 
of a whore, 2*2 and the desperate simplicity of a young wanton. 2A 
He exhorteth from such wickedness. 

TY son, keep my words, and lay up my com- 
'J_ mandmcnts with tlice.'^ 

2 Keo]i my commandments, and live;'' and my 
law as the apple of thine eye.'' 

3 Bind tiiem upon thy fingers, write them upon 
the table of thy heart.' 

4 .Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister; and call 
understanding thy kinswoman: 

5 That tliey may keep tliec from tiic strange 
woman, from the stranger wliich flattereth with her 
words. 

6 1 For at the window of my house I looked 
through my casement, 

7 And beheld among the simple ones, I discerned 
among the youths,* a young man void of under- 
standing,'-' 

8 Passing through the street near her cdruor ; 
and he went the way to her house,'' 

• Wuh. heart, o Hob. 1.1:1. l>Soiig»:n. t Heb. nw/iM/. ' 
2jI, 7. (1 1,0V. IS:.'.; I»a. 5o:3. e Dnut. 3-J:)U. ( ch. lirjl : liiit. I.:-. 
1 lleb jioiM. « ch. 0:32; 0:^. 10. I> ch. .'1:9. M\<-\, ertnins of Ihr (lay. 
I ch. ii:l:J. J Jcr. 3:3. k 1 Tim. 5:13; Tit. 2:.'i. I Hob. she slreiigl/ieiud 



30. Despise; generally interpreted to nioaii, to overlook, 
to connive at. But we may retain the ordinary moaning 
of the word. Though men feel the necessity of piini.shing 
a thief who has stolen to satisfy his hunger, yet they do 
not look upon liim with such coiitemijt and abhorrence as 
upon the adulterer. 

32, lie that iluelh it destroijclh his own sold; more literally, 
The destroyer of his own soul, he will do it ; as much as 
to say, The man who is bent on ruining himself, he will 
commit this sin. 

34. T/ie rage of n man; in an emphatic Bcnsc, jealousy 
excites his fiercest rage, 

INSTRUCTIONS, 

1. lie who easily allows himself to become suroty for 
others, is likely to hecoinc the prey of weak or designing 
men, who make fil.Hi' representations of their circumsfancea. 
To make suretyship lawfid ami ])roper, we must bo fully 
able to meet the sum pledgerl without injury to others, 

U. Indolent procrastination is the i):ircnt of poverty 
and misery in tilings temporal ami K]iirilual, The divine 
law is, that wealth of every kind comes by (oil. 

1,5, The man who relies for siu-ce.ts upon crooked and 
deceitful ]>racticcs, is alike odious to God and man, and 
his end will be remediless ruin, 
718 



black and dark niglit: 

10 And, bcliold, there met him a woman with the 
attire of a harlot, and subtile of heart. 

11 .She is loud' and stubborn ;' her feet abide 
not in her house:" 

12 Now is she without, now in the streets, and 
lietli in wait at every corner. 

13 So she caught him, and kissed him, and with 
an impudent face said unto him,' 

14 ///OT'cpeace-oflerings withme;' this day have 
I paid my vows. 

1.5 Therefore came I forth to meet thee, dili- 
gently to seek thy face, and I have found thee. 

10 1 have decked my bed with coverings of tapes- 
try, with carved itw7c*, with fine linen of Egypt.' 

17 I have perfumed my l)cd witli myrrh, aloes, 
and cinnamon. 

18 Come, let us take our fill of love until the 
morning: let us solace ourselves with loves. 

19 For the goodman is not at home, he is gone 
a long journey : 

20 lie hath taken a bag of money witli him,* and 
will come home at the day appointed.* 

21 AVith her much fixir speech slie caused him 
to yield,'" with the Haltering of her lips she forced 
him." 

22 He gocth after her straightway,* as an ox 
goetii to tlie slaughter, or as a fool to tiie cor- 
rection of the stocks: 

23 Till a dart strike through his liver; as a liird 
luisteth to the snare," and knowctli not tliat it is 
for his life. 

24 Ti Hearken unto me now therefore, ye chil- 
dren, and attend to the words of my mouth. 

25 Let not thy heart decline to her ways, go not 
astray in lier paths. 

20 For she hath cast down many wounded : yea. 
many strong me?i have been slain by her.'' 

27 Her house is the way to hell, going down to 
the chambers of death.'' 



>liccl.a:12. pjudg. 10:19-30; Neh. 13:2C. 1 ch. 



I Hcb. suddenly. 



16. God estimates men, not from their outward circum- 
.ftances, but from their character. .Ml whose hearts and 
lives are defiled with wicked practices are abominable in 
his sight, however high their reputation among men. 

27, The penalty of sin is as certiiin as the laws of nature, 
and far more terrible in its power. The youth who enters 
upon a course of impurity, throws himself into a consum- 
ing fire, wliich will destroy both soul and body, 

CHAPTER VII. 

M. Pcacc-offcrings ; offered, as sho pretends, in fulfil- 
ment of her vows, A portion only of the peacc-ofTering 
Wiis burned upon the altar. Upon the rest, the offerer and 
his friends feasted. She means, that she has a sumptuous 
feast jirovided in her house, and has come out to seek him 
to slitire it Avilh her. 

2C. H'oundcd ; mortallj' wounded, as on the field of battle. 
IXSTUUITION. 

The way of all Beduecrs is to inflame the imagination of 
the young with glowing reiirosentations of the pleasures 
of sinful iudulgcnee. while they carefully keep out of view 
its guilt and misery, anil llallcr them with the hope of 
impunity. All books, discourses, and representations of 
every kind, that follow tbo method of this adulteress, aro 



Wisdom's invitation. 



I'ROVEUBS vin. 



Her eternal nature. 



^.^'S CHAPTER VIII. 

1 The fame, fi and evidence of wisdom. ]0 The excellenr-y, 12 the 
nature, 1-5 the power, IS the riches, 22 and the eternity of wisJonl. 
32 Wisdom is to be desired for the blessedness it brin^eth. 

DOTH not wisdom cry?* and understanding- 
put forth her voice? 

2 Slie standcth in the top of high places, by the 
\\ay in the places of the paths. 

3 She crieth at the gates, at the entry of the 
city, at the coming in at tln^ doors: 

4 Unto you, men, I call ; and my voice is to 
the sons of man. 

5 ye simple, understand wisdom:" and, ye 
fools, be ye of an understanding heart.'' 

6 Hear; for I will speak of excellent tilings; 
and the opening of my lips shall he right things." 

7 For my mouth shall speak truth;'' and wicked- 
ness is an abomination to* my lips. 

8 All the words of my mouth arc in righteous- 
ness ; thereis no thing fro ward* or perverse in them.'' 

9 They are all plain to iiim that understaudeth, 
and right to them that find knowledge. *■' 

10 Receive my instniction, and not silver; and 
knowledge rather than choice gold." 

11 For wisdom is better than rubies;' and all 
the things that may be desired are not to be com- 
pared to it.' 

12 I wisdom dwell with prudence,* and find out 
knowledge of witty inventions. 

13 The fear of the Lord is to hate evil :'' pride, 
andarrogancy, and the evil way, and the froward 
mouth, do I hate. 

14 Counsel wmine, and sound wisdom: I am un- 
derstanding; I have strength.' 

15 By me kings reign, and princes decree justice.'" 
10 By me princes rule, and nobles, even all the 

judges of the eartli. 

17 I love them that love me;" and tliose that 
seek me early shall find me.° 

18 Riches and honor are with me; yea, durable 
riches and righteousness." 



> Ch. I:ai); 9:3, etc. b Isi. 5.5; 1-3. i: | c,,r. i ;-27; |j:9_i 1. d ch. -J-JiiiU; 
Psa. 19;7-U. e John 17:17. • Rth. the abommatioiiof. t Heb. it>rfa(/ifrf. 
f I'.5a. 12:0. E.Mlc.S:?. h ch. a:3:-2.3. i ch. 3:14, 15; 10: IG. jPhil.3:8,9. 
1 Or, siM,lt:j. k ch. 1C:(); P.sa. 97:10; Horn. 1-J:9; 1 Thess. 5:2-2; 2 Tim. 
2:19. lE.:cl.7;19. m Dan. 221 ; Rom. 13: 1. n 1 Sam. 2:30; John 14:21 . 



justly to be regarded as her accomplices in the work of 
corruption and ruin; and their influence in a community 
is more to be dreaded than "the pestilence that walketh 
iu darkuess." Let all the young who hope to enjoy in this 
life, comfort, honor, and usefulness, and God's favor in the 
life to come, keep themselves at the greatest distance from 
uuchaste solicitations of every kind, and labor to maintain 
purity, ia thought, speech, and behavior. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1. In striking contrast with the strange woman described 
in the preceding chapter, heavenly Wisdom now addresses 
men, and invites them to receive at her hand the richest 
blessings. It is the essential Wisdom of God, which dwelt 
with him from eternity, or, the Word, by whom his wis- 
dom is manifested, that speaks. See note on chap. 1 : 20. 

2, 3. Ill the top of high places — at the coming in at the doors; 
in all the most public and frequented places. She contin- 
ually forces herself upon men's attention. 

9. Plain to him that xinderstandcth ; the words of wisdom 
are all right and plain of apprehension ; but it requires an 
understanding heart to receive them. Fools derive no 
benefit from them. Compare our Saviour's words, " Wis- 
dom is justified of all her children." Luke 7 : 35. 



19 My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine 
gohl ; and my revenue than choice silver. 

20 I lead^ in the way of righteousness, in the 
midst of the paths of judgment: 

21 That I may cause those that love me to in- 
herit substance; and I will fill their treasures. 

22 The Lord possessed me in the beginning of 
his way, before his works of old.'' 

23 I was set up from everlasting, from the b(^- 
ginning, or ever the earth was.'^ 

24 When f/iere were no depths, I was brought 
forth; when there were no fountains abounding 
with water, 

25 Before the mountains were settled, before tlie 
hills was I brought forth :" 

26 While as yet he had not made the earth, nor 
the fields," nor the highest' part of the dust of tlio 
world. 

27 When he prepared the heavens, I teas there :' 
when he set a compass* upon the face of the depth: 

28 When he established the clouds above : when 
he strengthened the fountains of the deep : 

29 When he gave to the sea his decree, that the 
waters should not pass his commandment :" when 
he a])pointed the foundations of the earth: 

30 Tiien I was tty him, as one brought up with 
him: and I was daily /(« delight,'' n^joicing always 
before him ; 

31 Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth: 
and my delights ^rcre with the sons of men. 

32 Now therefore hearken unto me, ye chil- 
dren: for blessed are they that keep my ways. 

33 Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it 
not. 

34 Blessed is the man that heareth me, watch- 
ing daily at my gates, waiting at tiie posts of my 
doors.''^ 

35 For whoso findeth me findeth life, and shall 
obtain* favor of the Loud. 

36 But he that sinncth against me wrongeth his 
own soul : all they that hate me love death. 



olsa. 45:19. p Matt. 0:.33. S Or, teaR-. q John 1: 1, etc. r I'sa. 2:0. », 
15:7, 8. 1 Or, ojmt places. H Or, rliief. t Heb. 1:2. * Or, circle. " , 
38:10,11; Jer. 5:22. v Halt. 3:17; Col. 1:13. >» .■\Utt. 7:24; Luke U: 
t Heb. bring forth. 



12. Wittij inventions; wise counsels. 

15, 16. Syme Icings reign — princes rule; she commends 
herself to men as the counsellor and guide of all rulers. 

18-21. Riches and honor arc with me— fill their treasures; 
she further commends herself as the only source of ti-ue 
riches and rigliteousness. 

22. The Lord possessed me ; the crowning commendation 
of wisdom: she is the eternal companion of God, his de- 
light, rejoicing always before him, and present at all his 
works. 

26. The highest part of the dust; the mountain tops; or. 
as the marginal reading. The chief part of the dust. 

27. Set a compass; formed the circular vault of heaven, 
or exactly framed all parts of the universe. 

30, 31. Then I was by him — delights were with the sons of' 
men ; see note on chap. 1 : 20. 

34. 31 y gates — posts of my doors; waiting at her royal 
palace to receive instruction. Compare chap. 9:1. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. God is exceedingly earnest in his endeavors to recall 
men from sin and folly to heavenly wisdom. Ilis calls to 
them are so many, so loud, and so varied, that none can 
fail to hear but those who wilfully neglect them. 
719 



The opposing calls 



PRO VKUr.S X. 



of wisdom and folly. 



CHAPTER IX, 



1 The discipline, 4 anil doctrine of wisdom. 13 The custom, 16 and 
error of folly. 

WISDOM hath buildca lior house," she halh 
hewn out her seven pillars: 

2 She hath killed her beasts,' she hath mingled 
lier wine ; she hath also furnished her table.'' 

3 She hath sent forth her maidens:'' she cricth 
upon the highest places of the city, 

4 Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: as for 
him that wanteth understanding, she sailli to 
him, 

5 Come, eat of my bread,'' and drink of the wine 
which I have mingled. 

6 Forsake the foolish, and live; and go in the 
way of understanding. 

7 Ho that rcprovcth a scorner gettuth to him- 
self shame: and he that rcbuketh a wicked man 
getleth himself a blot. 

8 Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee:'' 
rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. 

9 Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be 
yet wiser:'' teach a just man, and he will increase 
in learning. 

10 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of 



» Eph. -i-.m-tl. • Heb. htr tilling, b Matt. 2-':3, clc c Rom. 10: 15. 
■Ijohn0;-J7. e.Matt.7:0. f Hos. 8:3; Matt. 1U:1;!. S ch. 1 :7; Job *>:*!; 



8. The holy Scriptures, in which the wisdom of Gotl 
addresses men, contain the revelation of trutli unmixed 
with error; and all wlio commit tliemsclves to their guid- 
ance shall be led in the ways of peace, knowledge, holi- 
ness, and eternal lifb. 

9. The plainest and best instructions are of no avail 
unless there be an nndcrstandiuf; heart to receive tlicm. 
The doctrine of Christ was an olYonco to tlic scribes and 
I'harisces; but all who had an humble and obedient spirit 
received it gladly. 

17. God has a tender love for all who earnestly seek the 
truth; and if they persevere,, liis grace will make them 
successful. 

21. Wisdom is the most excellent of all possessions, 
having the promise of this life and that which is to come. 

22. In all God's revelations eternal wisdom addresses 
men, but in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Word made 
llesh, he has given us a full manifestation of that infnute 
:ind uncreated wisdom which he possessed " from everlast- 
ing, from the beginning, or ever the earth was." To hear 
and obey Christ, is to receive heavenly wisdom, and with 
her, eternal life. 

31. The love of God for men equals his almighty power 
to do them good. He earnestly desires that they should 
listen to his voice, that he may make them most blessed 
for ever. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1. Ikr seven pitlurs; which adorn lier palace and give it 
sUibility. 

2. Killed her bcwils — minplcd her wine; that is, she has 
lircpared a sumptuous feast. Compare Isa. 25:G; 05:1, 2; 
Matt. 22:4. 

7-9. He that reprnvelh a scortirr — increase in learning; wis- 
dom continues her address lo men, reminding them that 
it is only the wise who will be benefited by her calls, 
while scorncrs and wicked men will reject them. This is 
not inconsistent with the fmirth verse, in which she ad- 
ilresses "the simple," ami " him that wanteth understand- 
ing ;" for such may lie conscious of their ignorance, and 
this is the beginning of true wisdom. 

10. riiclMij; God. 

12. Wise for thyself — thou iilnne shall hear it; in an em- 
phatic sense. Thom/li our wisdom aji,l follv ali'i-cl others, 
:20 



wisdom:'^ and the knowledge of the Holy 'li.c.iSoJ: 
is understanding. 

11 For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and 
the years of thy lil'e shall be increased.'' 

12 If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy- 
self:' but //thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it. 

13 1 A foolish woman is clamorous :Js/«'w simple, 
and knowelh nothing. 

14 For she sitteth at the door of her house, on 
a seat in the high places of the city, 

15 To call passengers who go right on theirways: 

16 Whoso M simple, let him turn in hither: and 
as for liim that wanteth understanding, she saith 
to hin:, 

17 Stolen waters are sweet, and bi-cad eaten in 
secret* is pleasant. 

18 But he knoweth not that the dead air there ;'' 
and that her guests are in the depths of hell. 

CHAPTER X. 

From this chapter to the five and twentieth are sunJt)- obicrvations of 
moral virtues, and their contrary vices. 

T'^IIE Proverbs of Solomon. A wise son mak- 
JL cth a glad father:' but a foolish son is the 
heaviness of his mother. 



Psa. 111:10. h ch. 10:'J7. ■ Job 35:0, 7 ; Ezck. 18:20. Jell. 7:11. t Iteb. 
o/'.itcrmV.v, kch. 2:1S. 1 ch. 15:-i0; -.S): 15, 10; 29:3, 15. 



the principal harvest from them must bo reaped by our- 
selves. 

13. A foolish woman; the foolish woman described in the 
preceding chapters. 

15. Ri-^ht on theirways; who are attending to their law- 
ful employments. 

17. Stolen waters — bread eaten in secret; unlawful pleas- 
ures. 

18. Tlie dead arc there ; in her house. Those who have 
entered it are as good as dead, because " none that go 
nnio her return again, neither take they hold of the paths 
of life." CImp. 2:19. 

IXSTRUCTIGNS. 

1. They who listen to the wisdom of God. shall receive 
from her an abundance of all good things; but they who 
rofu.so to hear her voice, must perish in the greatuces of 
their folly. 

4. The" beginning of wisdom is to know our ignorance, 
and come to God for knowledge. 

7. They who most need instruction are least ready tt» 
receive it; because they understand not their own folly, 
and therefore hate and despise reproof. 

9. One of ihc blessed qualities of true wisdom is, that u 
little of it prepares men to seek and obtain more. Mutt- 
13:12. 

19. The foundation of all true wisdom is the knowledge 
and fear of God. A wicked heart separates men from God, 
and keejis them in darkness and self-delusion. 

12. Personal responsibility is always recognized iiiGods 
moral government. The counsels of the good cannot ben- 
efit us, nor the seductions of the wicked injure us. with- 
out our own free consent. Our wisdom ai»l folly are our 
own, and we must reap their fruits here and hereafter. 

17. I'nlawfnl pleasures promise much good, but thoir 
end is bitti Tiiess and death. 

CHAPTKU X. 

1. The Proirrlis ofMomon ; here begins the second divis- 
I ion of (his book, exteuding to the sixteenth verse of tlic 
twenty-second chapter. See the introduction to the book. 
A u-isf son : in this proverb, as in many of the following, 
the two clauses must be mutually supplied, each from tlie 
other, thus: A wise son niakcth glad both father and 
mollier : but a foolish sou is the heaviness of both. 



Mornl virtua and 



PROVERBS X. 



tk'ir contrary vices. 



n "S' 2 Treasures of wickedness profit notli- 
ing:" but righteousness deliverctli from death.'' 

3 The Lord will not suffer the soul of the right- 
eous to famish :'' but he casteth away the substance 
of the wicked.* 

4 He liocometh poor that doaleth vifh a slack 
hand :'' i)ut the hand of the diligeut makoth rich.'' 

■"i lie that gatheretli in suunncr is a wise son: 
but he that slce})eth iu harvest is a son that caus- 
eth shame. 

6 Blessings are upon the head of the just: but 
violeuce covereth the mouth of the wicked.'' 

7 The memory of the just is blessed:^ but the 
iiauie of the wicked shall rot.'' 

8 The wise in heart will receive conunandments : 
but a prating fool* shall fall.* 

9 He that walketh uprightly walketh surely:' 
but he that pervertcth his ways shall bo known. 

10 He that winketh with the eye causeth sor- 
row:' but a prating fool shall fall.^ 

1 1 The mouth of a righteous ma?i is a well of life : "^ 
but violence covereth the mouth of the wicked. 

12 Hatred stirrcth up strifes : but love covereth 
all sins.' 

13 In the li|is of him that hath understanding- 
wisdom is found : but a rod is for the back of him 
that is void of understanding."" 

14 Wise mfft lay up knowledge:" but the mouth 
of the foolish is near destruction. 

15 The rich man's wealtli is his strong city:" 
the destruction of the poor is their poverty. 

16 The labor of the righteous tendeth to life : the 
fruit of the wicked to sin. 



■1 Luke 12.19--J1. b Dan^ 4:-J7; Phil. 


i:!). c Psa. 37:-W. " Or, tvirked 


/or their IclVteAlMS. il ch. 11 :-JI. e ch. 


ZA\ 19:13. f E»lh. 7:8. ft P.~a. 


lliCi. hEccl.»:lU. ^ llah. foul of lips. 


t Or, be beaten. ' Isa. 3:3: 15. Hi. 


Jch.e:I3. SOr, be otatm. k I'sa. 37:30. 


1 Cor. 13:4-7; 1 Pet.4;S. 1 Heb. 



2. Treasures of wickedness; wciilth wrongfully gotten. 
Deliverctli from ileatk; from violent and premature death, 
which is often threatened as the punishment of the wick- 
ed, verse 27. The words also include the promise of deliv- 
erance from eternal death, of which all less deliverances 
are but pledges and earnests. 

(J. Covereth the mouth of the wicked; that is, his mouth is 
filled with violence, by which he brings upon himself the 
curses of his fellow-men. 

8. Wilt receive commandments — shall fall; here, as often in 
these proverbs, the first clause gives the character of a 
wise man ; the second, the end of a fool. Fill out the two 
clauses thus: The wise in heart will receive command- 
ments, therefore he shaD stand firm; but a prating fool 
will not hear advice, therefore he shall fall. 

9. Shall be knmvn ; exposed and punished. 

10. Winketh with the eye; a sign of malicious cunning. 

14. Lay up knowledge; which keeps them from speaking 
unadvisedly. Near destruction; constantly exposes them 
to destruction. 

15. Destruction of the poor; that which exposes them to 
much injury from wicked men. This is not inconsistent 
with the promise, that God will protect the pious poor 
who put their trust in him. 

20. As choice stiver; from the rich treasury of his heart 
he brin.gs forth words that are as choice silver. Heart — ■ 
ts Utile worth; and therefore his words also are destitute of 
worth. 

23. Hath wisdom; which leads him to abhor mischief. 

25. Is an everlasting foundation ; his blessedness rests 
on the immovable foundation of God's promises. Psalm 
15:5. 

29. The way of the Lord ; either God's way of acting, or 
the way which he prescribes to men. In the former sense 
46 



\1 Ho is in the wny of lifi> (Imt kccpoth instruc- 
tion:'' but he that rofuscth reiirnoi' crrctli.^'' 

18 He that hidcth hatred xi-itli lying lips, and he 
that uttereth a slander, is a fool." 

1!) In the multitude of words there wanteth not 
sin:'' but he that refraineth his lips is wi.<e. 

20 The tongue of the just is as choice silver: 
the heart of the wicked is little worth. 

21 The lips of the righteous feed many: but fools 
die for want of wisdom.' 

22 The blessing of the Loud, it makcth rich. 
and he addeth no sorrow with it.' 

23 It is a sport to a fool to do mischief: but a 
man of understanding hath wisdom. 

24 The fear of the wicked, it shall come upon him : 
but the desire of the righteous shall be granted.' 

25 As the whirlwind passeth, so is the wicked no 
more: but the righteous is an everlasting founda- 
tion." 

2G As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the 
eyes, so is the sluggard to them that send him. 

27 The fear of the Lord prolongeth* days:" but 
the years of the wicked shall be shortened." 

28 The hope of the righteous shall be gladness: 
but the expectation of the wicked shall perish. 

29 The way of the Lord is strength to the up- 
right: but destruction shail be to the workers of 
iniquity. 

3(J The righteous shall never bo removed: but 
the wicked shall not inhabit the earth. 

31 The mouth of the just bringeth forth wisdom : 
but the froward tongue shall be cut out. 

32 The lips of the righteous know what is ac- 

heart. mch.2li:3. n Matt. ia:3.5; 13;rv2. o Psi. 52:7; Ecol. 7:12. P2ret 
1:5-11. 1 Or, causetk to err. q ch. 1:25, 311. r Eccl. 5:2, 3; Jas. 3:2. 
• Heb. keart. • Gen. 21:35; Psa. 37:22. <■ Psa. H5:I9; Matt. 5:(i; John 
5:14,15. u Matt. 7:24,23. t Heb. (irfrfeiA. vch. 9:11. w Eccl. 7:17. 



the meaning will be, that God's providence protects the 
upright; in the latter, that obedience to God secures his 
protection. 

30. Lihabitthe earth; in its original meaning, dwell se- 
curely in the promised land. Exod. 20: 12. But the words 
contain a general promise of peace and prosperity to the 
righteous. See note to Psa. 37:11. 

31. Bringeth forth wisdom — sluitt be cut out; fill out the 
two clauses thus: bringeth forth wisdom, and therefore is 
acceptable to God and man ; speaketh folly, and therefore 
shall be cut out. See note to verse 8 above. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Since the happiness or misery of parents depends so 
much upon the character and conduct of their children, 
this should be an incitement to them diligently to train 
them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. 

2. The curse of God rests upon all unrighteous gain. 
It can confer upon its owners no true happiness in this 
world, and it exposes them to his everlasting displeasure 
in the world to come. 

4. The general law of God's moral government is, indus- 
try and plenty, poverty and want. 

5. A principal part of wisdom lies in discerning and 
improving passing opportunities. 

7. A permanent good name can be gained only by right- 
eousness. 

8. lie who is more ready to talk than to take advice i.-; 
near destruction. 

9. All crooked practices will in the end be detected and 
punished. 

12. Love is the great principle of harmony; it disposes 
men to cover the faults of their neighbors, and deal len- 
iently with them. 

721 



Suiulry : 



of 



I'ROVERliS XI. 



prudence and virtue. 



ccptablc:" but the mouth of the wicked spealcelh 
Irowarduess.* 



C II A TIE 11 XI. 

Sundry Proverbs. 

V FALSE balance* is abomination to the Lord :" 
but a jujt weigiit' is his delifrlit. 
'2 When pride cometh, liien coiucth shame r"^ but 
Avitli the lowly is wisdom. 

a The intci,M'ity of the upright shall guide them :'' 
Vuit the perverseuess of transgressors shall destroy 
tiicm. 

4 Riches profit not in the day of wrath :" but 
righteousness delivcrctli from death/ 

5 The righteousness of the jierfcct shall direct^ 
his way : but the wicked shall fall l)y his own wick- 
edness. 

Tlic righteousness of the upright .shall deliver 
them: but transgressors shall be taken in their 
own naughtiness. 

7 Wiien a wicked man dieth, his expectation shall 
perish : and tiie hope of unjust men pcrisheth. 

8 The rigiiteous is delivered out of trouble, and 
the wicked cometh in his stead. 

9 A hypocrite with his mouth destroycth his 
ucigiibor: but through knowledge shall tiic just 
be delivered. 

10 When it goeth well with the rigiiteous, the 
city rejoiccth:''' and when the wicked perish, there 
M shouting. 

1 1 By the blessing of the upright the city is 
exalted:'' but it is overthrown by the mouth of 
the wicked. 

12 lie tiiat is void of wisdom' despiseth his 
neighbor : but a man of understanding lioidelli his 
peace. 

13 A talebearer revcaleth secrets:'' but he that 
is of a fiiithfid .spirit coni'ealeth the matter. 

14 Where no counsel is, the people fall: but iu 
the multitude of counsellors there is safety. 



Ucb frf'tcardnessts. t Heb. Bnlanrrs of 
" I. 4::tU. .11. i ch. 
i:l;ll. • Ewk. 7:10; Zcph. I; 13 ' lion. 7:1. » Ilrb. tinifi). % K..tU, 
H:li. hch. 11:31. \\\A iln'titult of hinrl. 1 U;b llr llinl imlkrlH. bik- 
ini a latehfarer. ' Hob. be sore broken, t Ilitb. titose that AtnU haniln ; ch. 



\:i. lie who will not be corrected by God's word must 
fci'l IiIh rod. 

1". The iintcachable are in tlio road to certain ruin. 

111. Wisdiirri is shown not less in wliat we forbear to 
utt'T, tliuii in wliat wc say. 

22. True prosperity Hows from (lod's presence and 
blessing. Without this all apparent success will but 
Diulliply onr troiililcs. 

21. LiiiliT the righteous government of God, the highest 
hopes of the ri);lileoii8 aixl the worst fears of the wicked 
shull bo more than realized. 

CIIAI'TER XI. 

4. In thr itnij nf xrrnlh ; of (Jml's wrath. 

6. SlintI itirrri liu trnij; shall make his way plain, so that 
he shall have no occasion of stumbling. 

8. Comclh in his sletul ; cometh into trouble in his place. 
Luke IG:25. 

12. DapiMlh lii-t neip^MioT ; not only feels contempt in bis 
heart, but expresses it in his words and actions. 

111. A firaciou.^ voman; literally, a woman of grace, that 
is. a winning anil allnictivc woman. Her attractiveness 
includes mental as well as bodily accomplishments. She 
722 



15 He that is surety for a stranger shall b.i.uSo: 
smart'ybr iV.- and he that hateth suretyship* is sure. 

10 A gracious woman retaineth honor: and 
strong nu"n retain riches.' 

17 The merciful niandoeth good to his own soul :J 
but lie that is cruel troubleth his own flesh. 

18 Tiie wicked worketh a deceitful work: but 
to him that soweth righteousness shall be a sure 
reward." 

19 As righteousness tcndcth to life; so he that 
pursueth evil pursueth it to his own death. 

20 They that are of a froward heart are abom- 
ination to the Lord: but such as are upright in 
their way are his delight.' 

21 Though hand join iu hand, the wicked shall 
not be unpunished :'" but the seed of the righteous 
shall be delivered. 

22 jls a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is 
a fair woman which is without* discretion. 

23 'J'iic desire of the righteous is only good : but 
the expectation of the wicked is wrath." 

24 Tiiere is that scattereth, and yet incrcaseth ; 
and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, 
but it findtth to poverty." 

25 The liberal soul* shall be made fat: and he 
tiiat walereth shall bo watered also himself.'' 

26 He tliat withholdeth corn, tlic jiooide shall 
curse him : but blessing shall be upon the head of 
iiim tliat selleth it."^ 

27 He that diligently seeketh good procureth 
favor: but he that seeketh mischief, it shall come 
unto him. 

28 lie that trustcth in his riches shall fall:' but 
tiie righteous shall flourish as a brancli. 

29 He that troubleth his own house shall inherit 
tlie wind : and the fool shall be servant to the wise 
of licart. 

30 The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life; 
and he that winneth' souls is wise.' 

31 IJeiiold, tlie righteous shall be recompensed in 
the earth : much more the wicked and the sinner.' 



0:1. Ich 31:.10. ) M»lt. 


5:7; 45:31. etc. k Ho«. lli:li>; Gal. «:S. 9; Jm. 


3:1S. 1 I'm. 11:7. m l>a 


•27:4. t \Uh. dtpnrteth from. ■■ Rom. 4:S, 9; 


Ilfb. 10:37. oaCor. »:«. 


\ Or. soul o/bUs.ung. P l.l. 3-.':8. q.Inb29:l3. 
IHeb.laieth. • .Malt. 4:19; Jm. S:-JO. i Jrr. 


r Mirk 10:44; 1 Tim. 0:9. 


!»:«; 1 Pet. 4:17, 18. 





is a woman of discretion, for "a fair woman witliout dis- 
cretion " does not retain honor; ver. 22. Retaineth; gains 
and keeps. There is here a tacit comparison : As strong 
men gain riches, so a gracious woman gains honor. 

18. A ikccilfid work; a work which deceives and disap- 
points his hopes. 

21. Thnugh hand join in hand; tliongli every combina- 
tion and effort to escape punishment be resorted to. 

22. Ill II .twiiic'.'i snniil ; that is. very much out of place. 
2:i. Only pood; in its issue. His hopes of good arc all 

realized. Ii ■wrath; ends in wrath. Instead of the good 
for which he hoped, he receives wrath from God. 

21. Srtillcrtth ; distributes his wealth in deeils of kindness. 

2li. Withholilcth com ; hoards it up in time of famine, in 
order to seU it at a high price. 

27. Seeketh pood ; occupies himself in doing good. Pro- 
ciirclh favor ; from (lod and man. 

29. Troubleth his oten house; involves his family in mis- 
cry by his misconduct. The wind; emptiness and disap- 
pointment. 

30. Fruit of the righteous; the results which he j)roduce8. 

31. yiccomnm.wr'/,- chastised for his sins. The Greek ver- 
sion of the Seventy renders this verse thus: " If the right- 



^'iiturc and end 



PRO VERBS XII. 



of good and evil. 



CHAPTER XII. 



Sundry Proverbs. 

T T T^nOSO loveth instruction loveth knowledge : 
\ \ but he tliat hatctii reproof rs brutish. 

2 A g'ooil 7nan obtaiuetii favor of the Lord : but 
a man of wicked devices will he condemn. 

3 A man sluill not be established bywickednessr' 
but the root of tiie righteous sliall not be moved. 

4 A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband :'' 
but she that maketh ashamed is as rottenness in 
liis bones. 

The thoughts of tlie righteous a7-e right: but 
the counsels of the wicked are deceit. 

6 The words of the wicked are to lie in wait for 
blood: but the mouth of the upright shall deliver 
tliem. 

7 The wicked are overthrown, and are not:"" 
but the house of the righteous shall stand. 

8 A man shall be commended according to his 
wisdom : but he that is of a perverse heart* shall 
be despised. 

y He that is despised, and hath a servant, is bet- 
ter than he that honoreth himself, and lacketh 
bread. 

10 A righteous man regardeth the life of his 
beast : but the tender mercies* of the wicked arc 
cruel. 

11 He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with 



»Eccl.8:8. bl Sam. So:3.3; 1 Cor. 11:7. c Mat 
iv«e of heart. 1 Or. bowels, d Psi. l'2S:2. e J( 
< Hab.' 1:15, 16. i Heb. Tke snare of the wiclced i 



. 7:-M-a7. • Heb. per- 
1. 2:8. I Or. fortress. 



eous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the 
sinner appear ?" which gives the same general sense, and 
is followed by the apostle, 1 Pet. 4:18. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Dishonest practices in trade are so prevalent, that 
multitudes have but a feeble apprehension of their great 
wickedness. But God regards them all with abhorrence ; 
and unless repented of and forsaken, they will bring upon 
men his righteous indignation in this world, and will ex- 
clude tliem from heaven. 

2. A haughty spirit is a sure precursor of an ignomini- 
ous fall ; but humility is the highway to permanent honor. 

3. Integrity is a sure guide ; it leads men by a safe path, 
and brings them out in a safe place. 

9. All slanderers are hypocrites ; under the pretence of 
rebuking their neighbor's faults, they are gratifying their 
own envy and malice. 

11. Righteous men are the best defence of a city, and 
wicked men its most imminent peril. 

12. True self-knowledge makes us forbearing in speak- 
ing of the faults of others. The man who busies himself 
in pubHshing his neighl)or's failings, thereby proclaims 
his own folly. 

14. When God would destroy a nation, he takes away 
its wise counsellors, and gives it up to the control of 
wicked and weak men. 

17. The principal harvest of mercy and cruelty is reaped 
by those who exercise them. 

22. Beauty without discretion is a calamity instead of a 
blessing. 

24. True Christian liberality is the road to prosperity. 
It secures God's blessing upon our gain, and makes it 
profitable to ourselves and to others. 

2G. The worst extortioner is he who takes advantage of 
a public calamity to fill his own coffers at the expense of 
the poor. 

31. The severity with which God punishes his offending 
children, is a solemn warning to the wicked of the awful 
destruction which awaits them. 



bread:'' but he that followcth vain persons is void 
of understanding.'' 

12 The wicked desircth the net* of evil men:* 
but the root of the righteous yield(;th /n«7. 

13 The wicked is snared by the transgression of 
Az'slips:*' but the just shall come out of trouble." 

14 A man shall be satisfied with good by the 
fruit of his mouth : and t.jic recompense of a man's 
iuinds shall be rendered unto him.'* 

15 The way of a fool is right in his own eye.-: 
but he that liearkcneth unto counsel is wi,-o.' 

IG A fool's wrath is presently' known: but a 
prudent man covereth shame. 

17 He that speaketh truth showeth forth riglit- 
cousness: but a false witness deceit. 

18 Tliere is that speaketh like the piercings of 
a sword:' but the tongue of the wise is health. 

19 The lip of truth shall be cstablislied for ever: 
but a lying tongue is but for a moment. 

20 Deceit is in the heart of them that imagine 
evil: but to the counsellors of peace w joy. 

21 There shall no evil happen to the just:" but 
tlie wicked shall be filled with mischief. 

22 Lying lips are aljomination to the Lord:' 
but they that deal truly are his delight. 

23 A prudent man coiicealeth knowledge:" but 
the heart of fools proclaimeth foolishness." 

24 The hand of the diligent shall bear rule: but 
the slothful^ shall be under tribute. 



lips, s 'J Pet. 2:9. h Tsa. 3:111,11. i ch. 3:7. lUeh inlluit ticiy. J Psa 
.')7:4. tlPet^ailS- 1 ch. li:l(>. 17; Rev. Si: 15. ■» ch. 15:-2; Eccl. 10: IJ 
14. n Ecc!. UI:.X ^ Or, ilerrilful. 



CHAPTER XIL 

4, A virtuous woman; a woman of worth, one who pos- 
sesses both moral goodness and mental vigor. She t/ict 
maketh asliamed; by her baseness and worthlessness. As 
rottenness in his bones; very painful and ott'ensive. 

6. Deliver tliem ; from the wicked, who lie in wait for 
them. 

9. Despised, and hath a servant; occupying a humble sta- 
tion, yet living in a state of independence and comfort. 

10. Regardeth t!ie life; treats it kindly, and supplies it 
with needful food ami rest. Are cruel; consists of cruel- 
ty ; that is, in his heart cruelty takes the place of tender 
mercies. 

11. Vain persons; as Abimelech, Judges 9:4, Absalom, 
2 Sam. 15 : 1, and others, who promise their followers plenty 
without toil. 

12. The net of evil men; the net which evil men use, for 
the sake of the prey which it takes. 

13. Shall come out of trouble; his upright words shall 
deliver him. 

14. Fruit of his mouth ; tlic result of his wise and prudent 
discourse. 

16. Presently; immediately. He vents his indignation 
upon the spot in passionate words and deeds. Covereth 
shame; passes by shameful treatment in silence. 

17. He that speaketh truth; the man of truthful character. 
Showeth forth righteousness ; makes truthful statements, 
such as are in accordance with righteousness. The prov- 
erb shows the agreement between men's character and 
their testimony. 

18. 7s health ; heals instead of wounds. 

20. Imagine cvd; devise mischievous plans. It is im- 
plied that their mischievous plans bring them into trouble. 
See note to chap. 10:8. 

23. Concealeth knowledge ; does not vauntingly display 
himself, or publish all he knows. Proclaimeth foolishness; 
they have nothing in their heart to exhibit but folly, and 
they proclaim it everywhere, as if it were true wisdom. 
123 



Yirtufs awl vices 



PROVERBS XIII, 



placed in contrast. 



25 Heaviness in the heart of man maketh it 
stoop: but a {^ood word niakcth it glad." 

2() Tiie rigli toons is more excellent' than his 
neighbor: but the way of the wicked seduceth 
tlioin.'' 

27 'I'lie slothful man roasteth not tliat which he 
took in hunting: but the substance of a diligent 
man is precious. 

28 In the way of righteousness is life ; and in 
the pathway thereof there is no deatli. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

Sundry Proverbs. 

A WISE son hcareth his father's instruction: 
but a scorncr heareth not rebuke."^ 

2 A man shall cat good by tlic fruit oi his month: 
but the soul of tlio transgressors shaU.ent violence.'' 

3 He that kecpetli iiis mouth keejioth his life:'' 
hut he that openetli wide his lips shall have destruc- 
tion. 

4 The soul of the sluggard dcsireth, and hath 
nothing:'' but the soul of the diligent shall be 
made fat. 

r> A righteous man hateth lying :'^ but a wicked 
man is loatiisome, and cometh to shame. 

6 Righteousness keepeth him that is upright in 
the way:" but wickedness overthrowethtiie sinner.* 

7 There is that niakcth himself rich, yet hath 
nothing:' there is that maketh himself poor, yet 
hath great riches.^ 



" Oh. 1.5:43. • Or, a««m/(in(. b ver. 13. c Isi. 'i^: 14, IS. dPsa. 75:S; 
Jer «:-i;-:jl. ejas.a-2.oto. ' ch. 10:4. f Psa. 119: llM. h ch. 11:.'"., (i 
iHeb.jin. imr.ll. J Kcol. U :1, 2. lOt,eandU. k .lob 13:. 5, (i. loll. 
211:21. » lleb. with the hand. » l'.<a 128:2. » 2 Chr. UG: Hi; Luko 1G..J1 . 



27. T/iat which lie took in lamttng; that is, he takes noth- 
ing in liiinting to roast. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. True wisdom disposes men to seek instiuction; and 
the want of wisdom leads them to hate reproof. 

8. Wisdom and folly will in the end find each its proper 
level. 

9. None are more foolish and miserable than they who 
Bacrifiee comfort and independence to vain ostentation. 
The atfoctution of wealth and rank makes men li\']iocritic'al 
and dishonest, and its end is ignominy and contempt. 

10. Kindness to animals is a characteristic of good men, 
as cruelty is of the wicked. 

II. Tlic divine ordinance is, that he who would have 
bread must earn it by the sweat of Ills brow; and it can- 
not be set aside by any ingenuity of man. 

1.5. They who most need counsel arc often least ready 
to receive it. 

16. When a wise man receives an injury, he pauses and 
considers the matter well before he speaks. 

18. No woMiids are more painful tlian those which the 
cahimniator inlliets upon his neighbor's good name. lie is 
an object of JMsl abhorrence to (Jod and man; but blessed 
is the tongue tli:it is rinplf)yod in healing strife. 

19. Falsehood and duplicity promise ready success ; but 
in the end they overthrow all who employ them. 

'.!3. They who have the least wisdom are often the most 
forward to express their opinion. 

21. It is an ordinance of heaven wliich none can reverse, 
that the idle shall be snbjnt to the industrious. 

2!>. The best meilieine for soul and body is inward com- 
posure and cheerfulness; and this it is the Christian's 
duty and privilege to maintain; for in the midst of all his 
troubles and sorrows bis bravcnly Father has always "a 
good word" fnr liim. 

724 



8 The ransom of a man's life are his rich- 1^.; JJSJ; 
es : but the poor hcareth not rebuke. 

The light of the righteous rejoiceth: but the 
lamp* of the wicked shall be put out.'' 

10 Only by pride cometh contention: but with 
tiie well advised is wisdom. 

11 Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished :' 
but he that gathereth by labor"^ shall increase.'" 

12 Hope deferred maketh the heart sick: but 
iL'hen the desire cometh, it is a tree of life. 

13 Whosodcspisoth tlie word sliuU bedestroyed:" 
but he that t'earetli tlie conimaudment shall be re- 
warded.'" 

14 The law of the wise is a fountain of life,'' to 
depart from the snares of death." 

1.5 Good understanding giveth favor: but the 
way of transgressors i.s hard. 

16 Every prudent mrrndealetli with knowledge: 
but a fool layctli open*' his folly. 

17 A wicked messenger fallotli into mischief: Init 
a faithful ambassador" is health. 

18 Poverty and shame sha!/ be to him that re- 
fuseth instruction : but he that regardeth reproof 
shall be honored.'' 

19 The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul:' 
but it is abomination to fools to depart from evil. 

20 He that walketh with wise men shall be wise: 
but a companion of fools shall be destroyed.*' 

21 Evil pursueth sinners:" but to the righteous 
good shall be repaid. 

22 A good man Icavcth an inheritance to his 



I Or, in peare. o Rsa. ll.'):!:!. P ch. 14:27. q 2 .Sam. 22:6, 7. 1 H^b. 
sjtrendcth. ' Ileb. an atnbn.ssailor of faithfulness, r ch. 15:5. » ver. 12. 
t Heb. broken. ' 1 Cor. 13:31. " Psa. :i2:lU; 140:11. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

1. Scorner; a child who is "wise in his own eyes," and 
therefore despises his father's admonitions and counsels. 

2. The fruit of his mouth ; his wise words. Eat violence; 
be violently destroyed. 

3. Openeth wide Ins lips ; utters all his thoughts inconsid- 
erately. 

C. keepeth him that is upright ; is his guardian and guide. 

7. Makclh htm^lfrirh — maketh himxelfpoor; some under- 
stand these words of the atlectation of wealth, or poverty ; 
but they rather contrast with the vain show of wealth its 
opposite virtue, an humble and unostentatious spirit. 

8. Are his riches; he is often comiK'Hed to buy his life 
by giving up his riches to his opi)ressors. Hcarclh not 
rebuke; his poverty exempts him from the threat.s and 
spoliations to which the rich are subjected. This proverb 
is peculiarly applicable to tlio despotic governments of 
the East. 

10. Wisdom; to avoid contention. 

11. Fnn/yy,- dishonest practices of every kind. Labor; 
honest industry. 

13. The word; of divine admonition, 

14. Law; instructions and counsels. To depart ; teach- 
ing men to depart. 

l.'j. Hard; bringing upon them misery and ruin. 

17. A vicked messenger; one unfaithful to him who sends 
him. Ilealth ; gives prosperity and joy. 

19. Desire; the holy desire of the good. It is abomina- 
linn to fools to depart from eril ; evil is all their delight. 
They have no holy desires whose accomplishment can 
make them blessed. 

21. Puriiicth ; as an avenger. 

22. 7*0 his children's children ; which shall descend to 
them by (iod's blessing, h laid up for tlic just ; God will 
take it from tluiii and give it to the just 



The cxcelkncy 



PROVERBS XIV. 



nf righteousness. 



kahm. cliildrcn's cliildrcii : ami the wealth of the 
sinner is laid up for the Just.'' 

23 Mucli food is in the tillage of tlie poor: but 
there is that is destroyed for want of judgment. 

'24: He tliat sparetli his rod liateth his son: but 
lie tliat lovetli him chasteneth ium betimes.'' 

25 Tlio righteous eatetli to the satisfying of liis 
soul: but tlic belly of the wicked shall want.'^^ 

CHAPTER XIV. 

Sundry Proverbs. 

EVERY wise woman buildeth her liouse :'' but 
I the foolisli pluckctli it down with her hands. 

2 He that walketh in his uprightness feareth the 
Lord :'' but he that is perverse in his Avays despis- 
eth him.'" 

3 In the moutli of the foolish is a rod of pride: 
but tlie lips of the wise shall preserve them. 

4 Where no oxen arc, the crib is clean : but nuich 
increase is by the strength of the ox. 

.5 A faithful witness will not lie: but a false 
witness will utter lies. 

(■) A scornerseekcth wisdom, and_/?/?(W/i// not: but 
knowledge is easy unto him that understandcth.^ 

7 Go from the presence of a foolish man, when 
thou perceivest not in him the lips of knowledge. 

8 The wisdom of the jirudent is to understand 
his way : but the folly of fools is deceit. 



a Eccl. i-.-iCt. K ch. 19: IS; •>. 
Jch. -U-.S; Rulh4:ll. e Psi. \>5 
' Heb. tha bitterness of his soul. 



a:):13; ^9:15, 17. c i Tliess. .'MO. 

r Rom. 2:4. S ch. 8:9. hch. Hl:a3. 

.b 8: 1 5 ; Matt. 7: 30, 27. J Rom. (i: 21 . 



23. Tillage of the poor — want of judgment ; the poor man 
that tills the soil with patient industry shall have plentj' 
of food; but he who despi.ses honest labor, and seeks to 
live by unrighteous means, shall come to poverty and ruin. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Our comfort and prosperity in this world, and our 
eternal weU'are after death, are greatly dependent upon 
tlie use we make of the gift of speech. 

4. All riches, spiritual and temporal, are the price of in- 
dustry: they who will not toil fur them must ruiiiiiiu jioor. 

5. False and deceitful men it'im rally ciiiim- In .sliamc- in 
the present life, and tlieir reward hi iratier must lie ■• shame 
and everlasting contempt." 

6. Kighteiiusricss is a sure guide. She leads the soul 
to tiod and blessedness. But sin flatters men only to 
reward them with disappointment and ruin. 

10. Pride is the root of all contentions. 

11. Valuable possessions are gained by labor. They 
who seek wealth, place, or influence by cunning and dis- 
honesty, will in the end be disappointed. 

12. It is good to set our hearts on God's promises, and 
not on this world ; for he will fulfil the highest desires of 
those who put their trust in him. 

17. He who has proved himself worthy of being trusted 
will be trusted again, and thus he will rise to honor and 
influence; but they who betray the confidence reposed in 
them must come to speedy ruin. 

l.S. W^hen we see an ignorant, self-conceited youth mak- 
ing light of (Jod's words, and the counsels of his parents, 
we may know that he is on the road to a miserable and 
ignominious end. 

20. A great part of wisdom lies in the choice of our 
companions ; for what they are, they will make us also. 

22. Tlie best provision that a man can make for his 
fiuuily is to fear the Lord always, and to train them up in 
his fear. An estate gotten by wickedness has the curse 
of God upon it, and cannot be expected to benefit those 
who inherit it. 

24. Neglect of timely chastisement is cruelty to a child, 



y Fools make a mock at sin:'' but among the 
righteous there is favor. 

10 The iieart knoweth his own bitterness;' and 
a stranger doth not intermeddle with his jov. 

1 1 The house of the wicked shall be overthrown:' 
but the tabernacle of the upright shall flourish. 

12 There is a way which seemcth riglit unto a 
man; but the end thereof are the ways of death.' 

13 r]ven in laughter the heart is sorrowful ; and 
the end of that mirth is heaviness.'^ 

14 The backslider in heart shall be filled with 
his own ways:' and a good man shall he satisfied 
from himself. 

15 The simple believeth every word: but the 
prudent inari looketh well to liis going.'" 

1 1) A wise man feareth, and departeth from evil : "^ 
but the fool ragetli, and is confident. 

17 He that is soon angry dealeth foolishly :" and 
a man of wicked devices is hated. 

18 The simple inherit folly: but the prudent are 
crowned with knowledge. 

i;t The evil bow before the good;'' and the 
wicked at the gates of the righteous. 

20 The ])oor is hated even of his own neighbor :i 
but the rich hath many friends.* 

21 He that despiseth his neighbor sinueth : but 
he that hath mercy on the poor, happy is he.'' 

22 Do they not err that devise evil? but mercy 
and truth shall be to them that devise good. 



k Eccl. 2:2. I ch. 1 :31 ; Jer. 2:19. nich. •1:20. "ch. lG:(i. ojas. 1:19. 
pPsi. 49:14; Mai. 4:3. qch.l9:7. ^ lleh.viany 3.re Ike loi-ers of the rirh. 
rl'si. 41:1-3; Matt. 25:.34, etc. ; Hcb. G:12. 



for the want of early discipline ends in profligacy and 
misery. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1. Buildeth her hoxute ; figuratively ; she advances the wel- 
fare of her household by her good management. 

2. Feareth the Lord — despiseth him; uprightness and per- 
verseness are here referred each to its true cause ; the 
former to the fear of the Lord, the latter to contempt of 
his authority. 

3. A rod nf pride; a rod to chastise his own pride. 
Others explain it thus: an insolent scourge with which 
he smites his fellow-men. 

4. Clean; empty of fodder. An empty crib implies an 
empty barn. Much increase is by the strength of the ox; he 
requires a full crib for his nourishment. But he gives 
back to his owner more than he receives. 

(i. Findeth it not; because he neither understands what 
it is, nor how to gain it. 

8. The folly of foots is deceit; instead of occupying them- 
selves with understanding their way, which is true wis- 
dom, they are engrossed with plans of deceit, and this is 
their folly. 

9. Make a mock at sin; by which they incur God's wrath. 
Favor; God's favor.' 

10. His own bitterness — hisjoy; our joys and sorrows are our 
own, in an emphatic sense — matters of our own cx]ierience. 

13. Laughter; the noisy mirth of the light-minded and 
vicious. 

IC. Feareth; God. liagrlh. nml k confident ; he is under 
the control of passion ami seU-cnn lit.and resents reproof. 
Hence he rushes on headlnng t.. ruin. 

19. Bow before the good ; this jiroverb expresses the final 
issue of righteousness and wickedness, whieli is ulten 
foreshadowed in this life by God's providential dealings 
with men, as well as by the involuntary Inmiage which 
conscience compels the wicked to pay to virtue. 

21. Despiseth his neighbor; treats with neglect and con- 
tempt his poor neighbor who needs his services. 
726 



True, wisdom attd 



PROVERBS XV. 



folly contrasted. 



23 In all labor thorc is profit: but the talk of 
the lips tenddh only to penury. 

24 The crown of the wise is their riches : but the 
foolishness of fools w folly. 

25 A true witness delivcreth souls: but a deceit- 
ful wit-ness speaketh lies. 

26 In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence :" 
and his children shall have a place of refuge. 

27 The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to 
depart from the snares of death.'' 

28 In the multitude of peo])ln is the king's honor : 
but in the want of people is the destruction of tJie 
prince. 

29 He that is slow to wrath is of great understand- 
ing :"= but he that is hasty of spirit" exalteth folly. 

30 A sound heart is the life of the flesh: but 
envy the rottenness of the bones. 

31 He that opprcsseth tlie poor rcproacheth his 
Maker:'' but he that honoreth him hath mercy on 
the poor. 

32 The wicked is driven away in his wicked- 
ness: but the righteous luitii iiope in his death.'' 

33 Wisdom rcsteth in the heart of him that hath 
understanding: but that which is in the midst of 
fools is made known.' 

34 Righteousness exalteth a nation: but sin is 
a reproach to any peoi)lo.* 

35 The king's favor is toward a wise servant:'-' 
but his wrath is aminst him that causcth shame. 



A 



CHAPTER XV. 

Sundry Proverbs. 

SOFT answer turneth away wrath:'' but 
grievous words stir up anger. 



" tccl. 7: IS. b Isa. 33:li. « ch. ]l>::;->. • Heb. short of spirit, d ch. 
•n-.-i. tPsa. 2:J:4. fch.'«):n. 1 lle.h. nation!:. 5 Malt. ■.M:4'>. h.Iud2. 
b:l-3: 1 Sam. i5:al, etc. I H.'b. bdrhtlh. or iubbleth. < Job 34:21 ; .Icr. 
3-2;l9; Heli. 4:1.3. i Hcb. The hmlm-4 of the tonsue. J 1 Tim. G::i. k ch. 



24. Theirriches; their ornament and honor; because tlicy 
make a wise use of tlieni. hfolhj; remains folly under all 
circumstances. Riches and honor arc thrown away upon 
them. 

25. Speaketh lies ; by which he destroys souls. 
29. Exalteth folhj; makes his folly conspicuous. 

'AO. A sound heart ; a contented and tranquil heart, free 
from the disquietudes of envy. 

HI. Rcproacheth his Maker ; God, who made the poor man 
and ordered his condition. 

32. Hath hope in his dcnili ; hope respecting the life to 
come, resting on the continuance of God's favor. Those 
words show that believers undtr the Old Test;iment had 
a true hope of future blessedness. 

33. That v'htch is in the midst of fools; their boasted wis- 
dom, which is onlv folly. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The capacity to manage well the affairs of her house- 
hold the holy Scrii)turos uniformly represent as one of the 
chief ornaments of woman, and a principal part of her 
wisdom. No outward accom]ilishnicnts can save a waste- 
ful and improvident woman from the charge of folly; she 
canno' be wise who does nut uiidcrst;ind the duties thai 
peculiarly belong to her. 

2. The fear of (!od is the only sure foundation of an 
upright character. 

4. In religion, as well as in secular affairs, all outlays are 
wise that bring " much increase " to those who make them. 

(!. An humble an<i teachable sjiirit is an indispensable 
qualification for gaining true knowledge. 

7. 'Ihey who wonld be wise must avoid the company of 
the foolish. 

U. There is no surer mark of folly than a disjiosition to 
720 



2 The tongue of the wise useth know- Raiooo: 
ledge aright : but the mouth of fools poureth* out 
foolishness. 

3 The eyes of the Lord are in every place, be- 
holding the evil and the good.' 

4 A wholesome tongue* is a tree of life:' but 
perverscncss therein is a breach in the spirit. 

5 A fool despiseth his father's instruction: but 
he that regardoth reproof is prudent." 

6 In the house of the righteous is much treasure : 
but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble. 

7 The lips of tlie wise disperse knowledge: but 
the heart of the foolish doefh not so. 

8 The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination 
to the Loud :' but the prayer of the upright is his 
delight. 

9 The way of the -wicked is an abomination unto 
the LoiU) : but he loveth him that followeth after 
righteousness."" 

10 Correction' is grievous unto him that for- 
saketh the way : and he that hateth reproof shall 
die." 

11 Hell and destruction are before the Lord :" 
how much more then the hearts of th.e children of 
men?" 

12 A scorner loveth not one thatreproveth him:'' 
neither will he go unto the wise.'' 

13 A merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance: 
but by sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken.' 

14 Tlic heart of him that hatli understanding 
sceketli knowledge: but the mouth of fools feed- 
elh on foolishness. 

15 All the days of the afflicted are evil: but he 
that is of a merry heart hath a continual feast. 



l:i:ls 1 ch. a--:!); Isa. 


111- 


«1:S; Jer. C:;HI; Amos .';:22: John 4:84. 


m Isi. 20:7. 1 Or, Inslri 


rlion 


n ch. 5:11, 12. J,.b 20:0; P<a. 13!):8. 


P -J Chr. 1>::!U-, ^sa. 7:9 


.Inhr 


21:17; Acts 1:24. q Amos 5; lU; 2 Tim. 


4::3. rJobai:14. "ch. I 


2:2.5. 





make light of sin. They wlio turn wickedness into a jest, 
will certainly practise it to their everlasting ruin. 

12. Self-conceit has a dreadfully blinding intiucnce; it 
has led thousands to mistake tlie way to hell for the road 
to heaven. 

13. The noisy mirth of the ungodly but poorly conceals 
a heart troubled with the consciousness of guilt, and the 
apprehension of wrath to come. 

I"). Ill this world of imposture and error, no man can 
walk safely who does not try the opinions which he hears 
by (lod's word, and receive or reject them accordingly. 

ir>. lie who will not consider the dangers and tempta- 
tions that surround him. must soon be destroyed by them. 

lit. Since God is on the side of the righteous, they must 
in the end triumph over the wicked. 

20. The false importance which men so universally attach 
to wealth is a sad jiroof of their depravity an<l folly. 

20. The passionate man proclaims his own folly. 

."iO. A cheerful and contented heart, free from ])ridc and 
envy, is the beat modicino for soul and body. 

34. Righteousness is the only foundation of permanent 
national prosperity. No outward greatness can save a 
wicked people from ruin. 

CHAPTER XV. 

•t. A hrroch in the spirit ; inflicting upon it grievous wounds. 
S. The sacrifice of the irn ^nl ; the sacrifice which he olVers 
to God, put here for all his religious services. 

10. The way; the way of uprightness, 

11. Ilrll nml dc.ilriirlimi ; the invisible world. .lob 26:C. 
LI. The afflicted; the man who. under the pressure of 

outward trouble, yields to despondency and gloom. Mer- 
ry; cheerful and contented. 



The excellency of 



rPtOVERBS XVI. 



the fear nf the iMrd. 



little with the fear ol' tlie 
Lord, than great treasure and trouljle therewith.-' 

17 Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than 
a stalled ox and hatred therewith. 

18 A wratliful man stirrcth up strife : but 7ie that 
is slow to auger appeaseth strife. 

19 The way of the slothful 7nan is as a hedge of 
tliorns:'' but the way of the righteous is made 
]ilain.*'' 

20 A wise son maketh a glad father : but a fool- 
isli nuin despisetli his mother. 

21 Folly is joy to him that is destitute of wis- 
dom:* Ijut a man of understanding walketli up- 
rightly.'^ 

22 Witliout counsel purposes are disappointed : 
Vtut in the multitude of counsellors tliey are cstab- 
lisiied. 

23 A man hath joy by the answer of his mouth : 
and a word spoken in due season,^ how good is it! 

24 Tiie way of life is above to the wise,'' tliat 
lie may depart from hell beneath. 

25 The Lord will destroy the house of the proud : 
but he will establish tlic border of the widow. 

26 The thoughts of the wicked arc an abomina- 
tion to tlie Lord:'^ but the words of the pure arc 
pleasant words.^° 

27 He that is greedy of gain troubletii his own 
house;'' but he that hateth gifts shall live. 



» I Tim. fi;fi. b ch. 93 


;5, 13. * Heb. raised up as a causeway, c p^a. 


•27:11; ha. 35:8. t Heb. 


void of heart, d Eph. 5:15. I Heb. his stason. 


t .Tahtl 14:6. 1 ch. 6:l(i, 


n. i Weh. words oj pkasaiUmss. g Psa. 37:."JU. 


l> Isi. 5:H; Hab. 9:0,10. 


il Pet. 3:1.5. J ver 5. k Jolm 15::!, 1. II Or. 



16. Great treasure; tlie reference is to the treasures of 
the wicked. 

17. Stalled OX; fatted in the staU. 

1!). A.i a hedge of thorns ; he meets with perpetual diffi- 
culty and trouble. Blade plain ; it is a highway on which 
lie can walk without impediment. 

20. Dcspiseth his mother; and thus fills her heart with 
heaviness. 

24. h above; leads upward to God and blessedness. 

21). Pleasant; acceptable to God and men. 

27. Gfts; bril)es given to pervert justice. 

30. The light of the die's; either what is bright and pleas- 
ant to behold, or a frieudly look. Chap. 1U:15. A good 
report; good tidings. 

33. Is the imtruction of wisdom; it guides men into the 
possession of wisdom. Chap. 1:7. 

IKSTRCCTIONS. 

I. Mild and conciliatory words often win those whom 
harsli and irritating language would only have driven fur- 
ther from us. 

4. An ungoverned tongue is the source of misery and 
ruin to its possessor and to others. 

C. The blessing of God makes the possessions of the 
righteous man, be they great or small, a source of comfort 
and usefulness to him ; but a wicked man's troubles in- 
crease with his riches. 

7. " Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speak- 
eth," whether it be wisdom or folly. 

10. All presumptuous transgressors hate reproof, and 
for this reason they are in imminent danger of persisting 
in sin till it ends in their destruction. 

II. We may flatter and deceive our fellow-sinners, but 
with God hypocrisy and dissimulation can have no place. 

12. Since scorners are unwilling to receive correction 
from the wise, they must remain fools, and the compan- 
ions of fools. 

13. Cheerfulness is both the privilege and duty of every 
Christian; it contributes alike to his own comfort and 
usefulness, and to the welfare of those around liim. 



28 Thelieartof the righteous studictli to answer :' 
but tlie mouth of tlie wicked poiireth out evil things. 

29 The Lord is far from the wicketl: but he 
heareth the prayer of the righteous. 

30 Tlie light of the eyes rfyoieeth the heart: and 
a good report maketh the bones fat. 

31 The ear that heareth the reproof of life' abid- 
eth among the wise.'' 

32 He that refuseth instruction' despisetli hi.- 
own soul: but he that heareth' rc]n-oof gettoth 
understanding.* 

33 The fear of the Lord w the instruction of wis- 
dom : and before honor is humility.' 



CHAPTER XVI. 

Sundry Proverbs. 

''"pHE preparations* of the heart in man," 



and 



i the answer of the tongue," is from the Lord. 

2 All the ways of a man are clean in his own 
eyes; but the Lord wcigheth the spirits. 

3 Commit' thy works unto the Lord, and thy 
thoughts shall be established. 

4 The Lord hath made all thinfrs for himself: 
yea, even the wicked for the day of evil." 

5 Every one that is proud in heart is an abom- 
ination to the Lord:" though hand join in hand, 
he shall not be unpunished.^ 



correction. 1 Or, oieyet/i . ' Ueh. possesseth a heart; ch. 11:16. IJas.4:10. 
t Or, disposiims. m cb. 20:a-l ; Jer. IU:aj. n Matl. 10: 10, 90. t Heb. Roll; 
Psa. 37:5. o Rom. 9:99. Pch. 8:13. i Heh. held innocent. 



15. Since affliction is the lot of all men, we should place 
our happiness rather in a contented and believing spirit, 
than in the possession of outward good. 

18. He who would "live peaceably with all men," must 
first learn to govern his own spirit. 

19. God has so ordered the course of things in this 
world, that the industrious alone can enjoy life: the sloth- 
ful meet with difficulties and troubles on every side. 

22. The beginning of success is deliberation and wise 
counsels. 

23. In the timely and right use of speech lies an impor- 
tant part of our influence and usefulness. 

25. God's almighty power is as terrible to the proud 
oppressor and his house, as it is glorious to the poor and 
defenceless who put their trust in him. 

27. Unrighteous gain brings trouble and misery to its 
owner and his family. 

CHAPTER XYI. 

1. The preparations of the heart— the answer of the tongue ; 
both the inward disposing of our thoughts and the out- 
ward expression of them. So according to our version. 
But the literal rendering of the verse is, '■ To man [belong] 
the orderings of the heart: but from Jehovah is the an- 
swer of the'tongue." "The orderings of the heart" arc 
the plans which it forms: "the answer of the tongue" is 
the granting of the heart's desire in respect to these plans 
when expressed in words: that is, according to some, in 
words of prayer to God ; according to others, in arguments 
of persuasion addressed to men. 

4. Yea, even the wicked for the day of evil; "God cannot 
be tempted of evil, neither tempteth he any man." James 
1 : 13. But he appoints the wicked, who are " drawn away 
of their own lusts and enticed " to sin, to " the day of evil," 
for his own glory and the welfare of his everlasting king- 
dom. Most interpreters prefer to render the first clause 
of this verse thus: The Lord has made every thing for its 
corresponding end ; which gives substantially the same 
sense. 

727 



Preempts of icisdom, 



PROVERBS XVI. 



truth, and pkty. 



6 By mercy and truth iniquity is purtrcd:" and 
by the fear of tlie Loud men dei)art from evil.'' 

7 Wlien a man's ways please the Lord, lie mak- 
Cth even his enemies to be at peaee with him/ 

8 Better is a little with rigiiteousness, than great 
revenues without right. 

9 A man'.s heart devi.seth his way : but the Loed 
dirccteth Jus steps.'' 

10 A divine sentence* is in the lips of the king: 
his mouth transgresseth not in judgment. 

11 A just weight and balance are the Lokd's:'' 
all the weights* of the bag are his work. 

12 It is an abomination to kings to commit wick- 
edness: for the throne is established by righteous- 
ness.'' 

13 Righteous lips are the delight of kings; and 
they love him that speaketh right. 

14 The wrath of a king isas messengers ofdcath: 
but a wise man will pacify it^. 

15 In the light of the king's countenance is life; 
and his favor is as a cloud of the latter rain. 

16 How much better is it to get wisdom than 
gold ! and to get understanding rather to be chosen 
than silver!" 

17 Tiie highway of the upright m to depart from 
evil: he that keepeth his way ])rescrvetii his soul." 

18 Pride gocth before destruction, and a haughty 
spirit before a fall.' 

19 Better it is to be of an humble spirit with the 
lowly, than to divide the spoil with the proud. 



' Psa. S5:I0. 
n; Gen. 44: 15 
i ch. IU:U. 



cli. 14:27. cRom. S;:j|. dchl!):al. • ili-h. Vivina- 
e Lev. 19:36. 1 Ihb. slants, 'cli. 20:14. rch.^:ll, 
K.slh. G:G, etc. ; Dan. 4::J1. i Or, undersutntlttk a mat- 



6. Mercy and truth ; exercised by penitent sinners. Purg- 
ed; expiated. Tlie meritorious ground of forgiveness is 
not here considered, but the character to which (iod gives 
pardon and salvation. Compare Matt. 25 : 3t-4G ; Horn. 2 : 10. 

7. To be at peace with him ; that is, as fur as liis best good 
and that of the church of God require. 1 Pet. 3:13. God 
sometimes allows hia servants to be persecuted for right- 
eousness' sake. 

10. A divine sentence; God has appointed him to admin- 
ister justice in his behalf. Transgresseth not; or, should 
not transgress. Here and in tlie thirteenth verse the king 
is described according to the true nature of his oilice. 
When he acts in character, his mouth transgressctli not 
in judgment. 

11. The Lord's — his work; he has ordained them as the 
means of justice, and requires that they be true. The 
bag; in which travelling merchants anciently carried their 
weights. 

15. As a cloiul of tlie latter rain; acceptable and refresh- 
ing. The descriptions in this and the preceding verse are 
peculiarly ajiplicable to the governments of the East, where 
the power of the monarch is well-nigh unlimited. 

17. Higliwai/ of tlic upright ; in which they walk securely. 

21. Lips; the teacher's lips. Learning; the learning of 
those whom he instructs. 

22. T/ie instnulinn offnoln isfollij; if they undertake to 
teach, they can comnuuiicato nothing but folly. 

26. Cravelh i( of him ; men's bodily wants urge them on 
to hard toil. 

27. Diggeth up cvd ; industriously toils at hia mischiev- 
ous plans. 

30. Shutteth his eyes — moving his lips; signs of secret 
mischief. 

33. Cast into the lap — the whole disposing tliereof; mau 
casta tlio lot, but (lod decides the issue of it. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. Self-flattery ia the universal sin of fallen man. The 
728 



20 He that handleth a matter wisely* \i.^:^: 
shall iind good : and whoso trusteth in the Lord, 
hajipy is he. 

21 The wise in heart shall be called prudent: 
and the sweetness of the lips incrcaseth learning. 

22 Understanding is a wellspring of life unto him 
that liath it: but the instruction of fools is folly. 

23 'I'hc heartof the wise teacheth^ his mouth, and 
addcth learning to his lips. 

24 Pleasant words are as a honey-comb,' sweet 
to the soul, and health to the bones. 

25 There is a way that seemetii right unto a 
man ; but the end thereof are the ways of death." 

26 He that' laboreth laboreth for himself; for 
his mouth craveth it of^ him. 

27 An ungodly man* diggeth up evil : and in his 
lips there is as a burning lire. 

28 A froward man soweth* strife: and a whis- 
perer separateth chief friends. 

29 A violent man enticeth his neighbor, and 
leaueth him into the way that is not good. 

30 He shutteth his eyes to devise froward things : 
moving his lijis he bringeth evil to pass. 

31 The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be 
found in the way of righteousness. 

32 lie that is slow to anger is better than the 
mighty; and he that ruh-th liis spirit than he that 
taketJi a city. 

33 The lot is cast into the lap;' but the whole 
disposing thereof w of the Lord. 



Ut. i llA.miktthwist. J I'sa. 10:11). » ch. l->:'J(i. \ Ueb. Tht sout of 
him thai, t Heb. bowetk unto. * lleb. A man of Betiat. t Heb. semUth 
forth. IJonllll:-. 



best preservative against its power is, to remember that 
God sees us as we are, and that he will decide our eternal 
destiny not according to our opinion of ourselves, but 
according to his own infallible judgment. 

3. God gives permanent success to all who, in the dili- 
gent use of the appointed moans, humbly commit their 
labors to him. 

G. Though no good works can merit forgiveness of sin, 
God will bestow it only upon those who diligently prac- 
tise them, for they arc the certain fruits of repentance 
and faith. 

7. The good man's enemies are entirely in God's power. 
He has only to do his duty, and God will either turn their 
hatred into love, or overrule it for his good and that of 
his church. 

9. Our plans accomplish not what we intend, but what 
God sees to be best for us and his cause. 

11. Uprightness in our dealings with each other is a 
matter not of human convenience, but of divine require- 
ment, and God will punish tlio want of it by exclusion 
from heaven. 

12. There is but one law for rulers and private per- 
sons — righteousness aud prosperity, or wickedness and 
ruin. 

13. Upright rulers will surround themselves with men 
of truth. 

19. The conqueror who enriches himself by the spoils 
of nations is great in the eyes of sinners, but tlie meek 
and lowly Christian is groat in the eyes of God. 

21. A jileasant ami winning manner, not less than sound- 
ness of doctrine, ia the duty of every teacher, for his suc- 
cess depends mainly upon it. 

2S. No ])er80u is more abhorred and avoided than the 
slanderer and whisperer, whose course is marked by tho 
creation of strife ami dissension among brethren. 

32. The mighty conqueror who has not learned to rulo 
his own spirit leads a miserable life, aud will come to a 
miserable end. 



Sundry maxims 



PROVERBS XVII. 



of true wisdom. 



SJ'S CHAPTER XVT!. 

Su.ulry Proverbs. 

BETTER is a dry morsel, and quietness there- 
witli, tluiu a iiousc full of sacriliccs" with 
strilo. 

2 A wise servant sliall iiave rule over a son tliat 
causetli shame, and shall have part of the inherit- 
ance among the brethren. 

3 The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for 
gold : but the Lord trieth the liearts." 

4 A wicked doer giveth heed to false lips; aiid 
a liar giveth ear to a naughty tongue. 

5 Whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his Mak- 
er:" and he that is glad at calamities shall not be 
unpunished.**^ 

6 Cliildren's children arc the crown of old men ;'' 
and the glory of children are tlieir fathers. 

7 Excellent speech* beconieth not a fool: much 
less do lying lips^ a prince. 

8 A gift is as a ))recious stone' in the eyes of him 
that hath it: whitliersoever it turnetli, it pros- 
pereth. 

9 Ho that CO vereth a transgression seekcth "^ lo ve : 
but lie that repeateth a matter separateth vei-y 
friends. 

1(J A reproof en terctli more into a wise man than 
a hundred stripes into a fool.*" 

IL An evil man seeketh only rebellion: there- 
fore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him. 

12 Let a bear robbed of her wlielps meet a man, 
rather tlian a fool in his folly.'' 

I'.i Wiioso rewardeth evil for good, evil shall not 
depart from his hoiise.'^ 

14 Tiic beginning of strife is as wlien one letteth 



• Or. good cheer- ajer. 17:10. boh U:.'JI. i Hah. Iielil innorfnl. c ,I„1, 
31 :*J; OUid. 11-10. d Psa. 1-27:5. 1 Heb. A lip ofexcellenry S Heb. n lip 
ofhjinz- 1 Heb. stone of grace. 1 Or, procuretli. ' Or, fiiceth more a wiic 
man, limn, to strike a fool a hiimhed limes, ech. 15:5. fHos. l:i:i. s Psa. 



out water: therefore leave off eontentioii, before 
it be meddled with.'' 

15 He that justifietli the wicked, and he that 
ccndemneth the just, even tiiey both are abomina- 
tion to the Lord.' 

1(5 Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a 
fool to get wisdom, seeing he hath no licart to it? 

IT A friend loveth at all times, and a brother is 
born for adversity.^ 

18 Aman voidof imderstanding* strikctli hands, 
and beconieth surety in the presence of his friend. 

19 He loveth transgression that loveth strife:'' 
and lie that exalteth liis gate seeketh destruction. 

20 He that liatli a froward heart* findcth no 
good: and he that liatii a perverse tongue falleth 
into mischief. 

21 He tiiat begettctli a fool doeth it to his sor- 
row: and the father of a fool hath no joy. 

22 A merry heart doeth good like"^ a medicine : 
but a broken spirit drietli the bones.' 

23 A wicked man taketh a gift out of the bosom 
to pervert the ways of judgment. 

24 Wisdom is before him that liatli understand- 
ing;'" but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the 
earth. 

25 A foolish son is a grief to his fatlier, and bit- 
terness to her that bare liim. 

26 Also to pimish the just is not good, nor to 
strike princes for equity. 

27 He that liatli knowledge spareth his words:" 
and a man of understanding is of an excellent' 
spirit. 

28 Even a fool, wlien he holdetli his peace, is 
counted wise: and he tliat shutteth his li[is is es- 
teemed a man of understanding. 



CHAPTER XVn. 

1. Hicrifices; sumptuous fare from the flesh of slain 
beasts. 

2. S.'tall Iiave part of the inheritance; his master will give 
him a share with his own sons. 

7. E.i:c.ellent speech; such speech as belongs to men in 
eminent stations. He is not fit for a high place, and can- 
not adapt his language to it. 

8. A gift ; given to secure influence. Him that liath it ; 
its receiver. IVhitliersoever it turnetli it prospcrcth; as a 
precious stone reflects its lustre in every way, so a gift is 
successful in influencing men, whithersoever it is directed. 

9. Coverelh a transgression — repeateth a matter; he who 
covers a transgression which he has witnessed in another, 
seeks the peace and harmony of the community, but he 
who repeats an ill report separates friends. 

11. Rebellion; contumacy and sedition towards tlie mag- 
istrate. A cruel messenger; a messenger sent by the rul- 
ing power to execute vengeance upon him. Chap. 16:14. 
The proverb finds its most awful fulfilment in the case of 
those who rebel against God's righteous government. 

12. F(X)l in his folly; that is, a fool actuig out his folly in 
a jiaroxysm of rage. 

lU. A price; an opportunity afforded by Cod. 

17. Loveth at all times ; in adversity, as well as prosper- 
ity ; the character of a true friend. 

19. Exalteth his gate; the gate to his mansion: a lofty 
gate implies a sumptuous edifice, the product of ambition 
and vain-glory. 

22. A merry heart ; a cheerful heart, full of peace and joy. 



.Mla-lS. h ch. 20;.3. i Exoii. -23:7; Isa. 5.2.'t, -Jl. ) ,-h. l!::-J4. t Hfb. 
Iirarl. k.Ias. 3:1(>. i tUh. Tlir froward of heart, i Or, to. 1th. 1=;14. 
mEccl. a:U. ojas. l:lfl. I Or, a coo/. 



2'd. A u'lcked man; j.rivily receives a bribe from the 
bosom of him wlmsi' i;iusc is jicndiiig. 

24. Before him tliiil /mill nuihr^ln.uling ; so that he readily 
discerns it. In the cmh iflliv m^iili ; imrsuing folly, so that 
he never sees true wisdom. Eccl. 2:14. 

2G. For equity ; because of their equity. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Domestic comfort depends not on outward abundance, 
but on inward harmony and love. 

2. Wisdom is better than high birth to give influence 
and honor. 

4. Wicked and corrupt men choose the wicked and 
corrupt for their companions and accomplices. 

6. It is the ordinance of God that in well-trained fami- 
lies the parents and children sliall be a mutual comfort 
and honor to each other. 

9. Peace and harmony can be maintained only by mutual 
kindness and forbearance ; a tale-bearer may embroil a 
whole community in strife. 

10. Since fools can never learn from experience, their 
life must be one of perpetual disappointment and trouble, 
and their end destruction. 

12. Nothing is so unreasonable as folly. 

14. It is easier to maintain peace in a family or com- 
munitv, than to restore it. 

1,5. Rulers and judges act in God's behalf, and for the 
perversion of justice he will call them to an account. 

IG. Since men remain ignorant of God and his salvation, 
not from the want of opportunities to learn, but because 
they have no heart for it, the justice of God in their de- 
struction will be made manifold to all at the last great day. 
729 



Sundry maxims 



PROVERBS XIX. 



of true wisdom. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

Sundry Proverbs. 

THROUGH desire a man, liaving separated 
liiiiiself, sceketh and intcrincddleth with all 
wisdom.* 

2 A fool hath no dcliufht in nndcrstauding, but 
that his heart nmy discover itseli'. 

3 Wiieii the wicked comctli, then cometh also 
contempt, and with ignominj" reproach. 

4 The words of a man's mouth are as deep wa- 
ters, and the wellspring of wisdom as a flowing 
brook." 

5 i/wnotgood toaccepttheperson of the wicked, 
to overtiirow tlie righteous in judgment.'' 

6 A fool's lips enter into contention, and his 
mouth callcth for strokes. 

7 A fooFs mouth is his destruction, and his lips 
are tlic snare of his soul."^ 

8 The words of a talebearer* are as wounds,*'' 
and they go down into the innermost parts* of 
the belly. ' 

9 He also that is slotliful in liis work is brother 
to him that is a groat waster. 

10 'J'iic name of the Lord is a strong tower :'^ 
the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.' 

11 The rich man's wealth whis strong city, and 
as a higli wall in his own conceit. 

12 J5clbredestructiontheiicartofmanishaug]ity ; 
and before honor is humility.' 

13 He that answcrcth a matter^ before he hear- 
eth zV," liis follv and shame unto him. 



• Or, He that xrpinnli 
nudilUth ill evtry fjusiiu 
10:1-^. t Or, w/iispirtr. 



h kimfieify sefkntli arcoriUng to his desin, at 
.1. ach. 10:11. 1) Lev. 19: la; Dfut. 10:19. 
1 Or, like as when imn are ivouttdetf, <i ch 



22. "A merry heart" is alike honorable to God, in whose 
righteous governinent we have alway.s abundant reason 
to rejoice, and jjrofitable to ourselves; it streii},'t!iens the 
body, and invigorates the powers of tlic sonl. By indulg- 
ing ourselves in despondency and discontent we rcjjroach 
our Maker, impair our physical health, and \v;itlier up the 
noblest faculties of the so\il. 

27. A great part of wisdom lies in forbearing to speak, 
except when we liave something important to say. 

ClI-M'TMii XVIIi. 

1. Having separated liiinsdf ; from society, that he may 
give himself to study. [!nt many render ijiis verse thus : 
IJe \\\\\) separatetli himself from his fellow-men, sceketh 
after his own desire ; he opposeth himself to all wisdom. 

3. Comc/A,' into power and influence. Contempt, and with 
ignnmini) rcnroaJi ; contempt and reproach lieai)cd by him 
upon his fellow-men. 

•1. A tnait's moulh; that is, a wise man's mouth. Well- 
sprin:^ of wi.idnm ; which gushes forth from liis heart, and 
ia inexhaustible. 

5. To overtiirow; in order to overthrow. 

6. Callcth for strokes; provokes men to inflict stripes 
upon him. 

8. Into lli£ innermost purls of the belly; inflicting mortal 
wounds. 

1.!. Ansmrclh a matter; gives liia opinion on a matter. 

14. The spirU of a man— a wounded sptril ; the meaning 
is, that a courageous spirit will enable a man to bear up 
under the pressure of grief and pain; but a broken and 
desponding spirit, that has lo.st the power of endiu-auce, 
is an intolerable evil. 

17. First 1)1 his mvn camp; first in telling his own story. 
Ills nciglihor; his antiigoniHt. 

21. Tlicij titat love ;/ shall cat the fruit thereof; they that will 
730 



14 The spirit of a man will sustain his b.^iSSo: 
infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear?*" 

15 The heart of the prudent gcttetii knowh^dge;' 
and the ear of fiie wise seeketh knowledge. 

10 A man's gift maketh room for him, and bring- 
eth him before great men. 

17 He that is tlrst in his own cause seemcth just; 
but his neighbor cometh and se<ircheth him. 

18 The lot causeth contentions to cease, and part- 
eth Ijctween the mighty. 

19 A brother offended is /^arrfer to he iron than a 
strong city -J and their contentions are like the 
bars of a castle. 

20 A man's belly shall bo satisfied witli the fruit 
of his mouth ; and willi the increase of his lips shall 
he be liiied. 

21 Death and life are in the power of the tongue :^ 
and they that love it shall oat the fruit tiieroof.' 

22 Whoso findeth a wife iindeth a good thing, 
and obtaineth favor of the Lord.'" 

23 The poor useth entreaties; but the rich an- 
swcrcth roughly. 

24 A nuin that hath friends must show liimself 
friendly ; and there is a friend that sticketh closer 
than a brother. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

PuiKlry Proverbs. 

|:)ETTER is the poor that walketh iu his in- 
X3 tegrity, than he that is perverse in his lips, 
and is a fool." 



6 Ileb. r/ium/jerx. 
Tcturnelh a word. 
k -Malt. l-i:37. 1 I 



. \ Y\<-\,. M aloft. (],nkoH:n. 1 Hcb. 
. h I'sa. 147:.1. i ch. 15:14. J Gen. 27:41. 
lob. 19:14. "ch. aStO. 



exercise the gift of speech must reaji the consequences, 
be they good or evil. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. They who have least wisdom are most fond of utter- 
ing their opinions. 

3. When the wicked come into power they fill society 
with aliuse and contumely. 

6. The wonls of a foolish man are as calamitous to him- 
self as to others. They fill society with contentions, and 
bring upon him condign punishment. 

9. Sloth and prodigality lead to the same end, want and 
misery. 

11. It is natural to fallen man to trust in uncertain riches, 
rather than in the living God. This makes the salvation 
of the rich exceedingly difficult — harder than for a camel 
to go through the eye of a needle. 

12. A man's si)irit is a sure indication of the lot that 
awaits him: if he bo humble, honor; if haughty, ruin. 
Luke IS: 14. 

l;i. It is a good rule not to express an opinion t-ill we 
have had a full opiiortunlty to hear both sides, lie who 
pursues the opposite course proclaims his folly, and brings 
upon himself perpetual mortification. 

14. By courage and faith all evils are made tolerable. 
A pusillanimous spirit, that faints at the approach of 
trouble, is as distressing ;i8 it is sinful. 

22. God has ordaineil the marriage relation for the pu- 
rity, comfort, and usefiiliK'ss of man. Notwithstanding all 
the evils which human depravity has introduced into it, 
it is, in general, better IIkui to be alone ; and he who finds 
a wise and virtuous wife, receives from God the richest 
earthly blessing. 

23. The tendency of wealth to foster pride and haugh- 
tiness of spirit, is great. To be rich, and at the eauio time 
truly humble, is the fruit of diviue grace. 



Maxims of tcisdoii 



niOVERBS XIX. 



Irutk, and piety. 



id-:^: 2 Also, that the soul be without know- 
ledge, it is not good ; and he that hastetli with his 
feet sinneth. 

3 The foolishness of man perverteth his way : 
and his licart frettetli against the Lord. 

4 Wealth maketh many friends ; but the poor 
is separated from his neighbor. 

5 A false witness shall not be unpunished ;* and 
he that speaketh lies shall not escape. 

G Many will entreat the favor of the prince: 
and every man is a friend to him thatgiveth gifts.* 

7 All the brethren of the jjoor do hate him : how 
much more do his friends go far from him ? he pur- 
sueth them ivith words, yet they a7-e wanting to him. 

8 He that gctteth wisdom* loveth his own soul:" 
he that keepeth understanding shall find good. 

9 A false witness shall not be unpunished ; and 
he that speaketh lies shall perish. 

10 Delight is not seemly for a fool; much less 
for a servant to have rule over princes. 

1 1 The discretion^ of a man deferreth his anger ; 
and it is his glory to pass over a transgression." 

12 The king's wrath is as the roaring of a lion; 
but his favor is as dew upon the grass.'' 

l)j A foolisli son is the calamity of his father : and 
the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping.'' 

14 House aud riches are the inheritance of fa- 
tlicrs:'' and a prudent wife is from the Lord.'' 

15 Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep; and 
an idle soul shall suffer hunger.*^ 

10 Hethat keepeth thecommandment keepeth his 
owu soul ;" but he that despiseth his ways shall die. 



• H:ih. held innocent. 1 Heh. a man of gifts, t Reh. a lienrt. a oh. 2:10- 
}>. iOr, prmlence bch. 10:3-.;. c Hos. 14:5. dcli. 27:15. eaCor. 12:14. 
f cli. H:2i. e 2Thes5. :i:10. Ii Luki) 10:a-<. ■ Eccl. 11 :l ; 2 Cor. 8:0-9. 
I Or, his deed. I Or, to his destruction, or to cause him to die. i ch. 23:13, 



CHAPTER XIX. 

2. Hasteth with his feet; is rash and inconsiderate in his 
actions — a common result of the soul's being without 
knowledge. 

ID. Delight; dainty living, which implies ease and afflu- 
ence. Much less for a servant to have rule over princes ; that 
is, a servant retaining a low and servile spirit, which often 
happens through the favoritism of Eastern monarchs. 

11. Deferreth his anger ; makes him slow to anger. 

I'i. A continual dropping; of water through the roof in 
a rainy day; which is very common in oriental houses, 
and very annoying. 

14. The inlierilance of fathers ; received from fathers. 
From tlie Lord; the gift of his providence. She cannot, 
like houses and riches, be inherited. 

11). Despiseth his ways; despiseth attention to his ways, 
because he does not consider himself in danger of going 
astray. Chap. 14:16. 

18. Hope; of his being reclaimed. And let not thy soul 
spare for /lis crying; the original might be rendered. Desire 
not to slay him; that is, act not as if it were your desire 
to destroy him, which you will do if you withhold needed 
chastisement. 

22. Tiic desire of a man is his Icindness; a man's kindness 
is that which makes him an object of affectionate regard, 
to whom the afflicted and destitute look with longing de- 
sire. A poor man is better tlian a liar; that is, a poor man 
of kindness is better than a rich liar destitute of all good- 
ness. 

24. In his hnsom ; or, in the dish ; a figurative way of 
saj'ing he is too indolent to attend to his own wants. 

28. Scorneth judgment ; has no concern to give his testi- 
mony according to truth aud equity. Devoureth iiiii/uily; 
feeds upon it as upon a sweet morsel. Job 20:12, 13. 



17 He that hath pity upon the poor lendetli unto 
the Lord;' and that which he hath given" will 
Ih! pay him again. 

18 Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let 
not thy soul spare for his crying.''-' 

19 A man of great wrath shall suffer punish- 
nieut: for if thou deliver him, yet thou must do 
it' again. 

20 Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that 
thou mayest be wise in thy latter end.'' 

21 Th(re are many devices in a man's hourt ; 
nevertheless the counsel of the Lord, that shall 
stand.' 

22 The desire of a man is his kindness: and a 
poor man is better than a liar. 

23 The fear of the Lord tevdcth to life :"' and he 
that Iiath it shall abide satisfied; lie shall not be 
visited with evil. 

24 A slothful man liideth his hand in his bosom, 
and will not so much as bring it to his mouth again. 

25 Smite a scorner, and the simple will beware :* 
and reprove one that hath understanding, and he 
will understand knowledge. 

26 He that wasteth his father, and chaseth away 
his mother, is a son that causeth shame, and bring- 
eth reproach. 

27 Cease, my son, to hear the instruction tliat 
causeth to err from the words of knowledge. 

28 An ungodly witness* scorneth judgment: and 
the moutli of the wicked devoureth iniquity." 

29 Judgments are prepared for scorners, aud 
stripes for the back of fools." 



14. •Unh.mld. k Deut. 32:29; Psa. 9(1:12, 14. 1 cli. 10:1, 9; 21 ::)0; Job 
23:13; Psa. 33:10, 11; Isa. 14:20, 27; 40:10; Acts 5:.39. m 1 Tim. 4:B. 
t Heb. be cunning. I Heb. A witness of Belial. " Job 15:16; Hos. 4:S. 
Isi. 29:20. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The true worth of a man should be measured by his 
character, and not by his outward circumstances. A poor 
man of truth and wisdom is more honorable in the sight 
of God, and more useful to his fellow-men, than one of 
great rank and wealth whose life is made up of perverse- 
iicss and folly. 

2. Hasty and inconsiderate action comes from the want 
of true knowledge, and leads to sin. 

.S. Men too frequently lay to the account of God's provi- 
dence the calamities whicli their own perverseness brings 
upon them, and thus foolishly fret against the Lord. 

4. The unreasonable deference which is everywhere 
paid to wealth, is a sad proof of human selfishness and 
blindness. The mass of mankind prefer riches without 
either wisdom or righteousness, to the neglect which 
attends virtuous poverty. 

10. When wealth and patronage fall into the hands ot 
the foolish, and the base are exalted above the excellent, 
the true order of society is perverted, and confusion and 
misery ensue. 

11. Slowness to anger and a forgiving spirit are true 
marks of a noble soul. 

16. The man who thinks himself in no danger is near 
destruction. 

17. The best investment of our property is in deeds of 
loving-kindness. 

18. The rod is God's appointment; and the parent who 
uses it early and discreetly, manifests the truest kindness 
to his children. 

19. He that is under the control of his angry passions 
cannot be saved from ruin, either by his own discretion 
or by the advice and help of his friends. 

21. The subordination of all our plans to the wise couu- 
731 



Practical lessons in 



PROVERBS XX. 



wisdom and piety. 



CHAPTER XX. 



Sundry Proverbs. 

"YT/'INE is a mocker, strong drink is raging:" 
VV and whosoever is deceived thereby is not 
wise. 

2 The fear of a king is as the roaring of a lion : 
w/ioso provoketh him to anger siiineth against his 
own soul. 

3 Jt is an lienor for a man fo cease from strife:"' 
but eveiy fool will 1)0 mfdilling. 

4 The sluggard will not ])lough by reason of the 
cold;* therefore shall he beg in harvest, and have 
nothing. ■= 

5 Counsel in the heart of man is like deep wa- 
ter; but a man of understanding will draw it 
out. 

6 Most men will proclaim every one his own 
goodness:*'' but a faithful man who can find?' 

7 The just man walkcth in his integrity: his 
children are blessed after him. 

8 A king that sittotli in the throne of judgment 
scattcrcth away all evil with his eycs.*^ 

9 Who can say, I liave made my iieart clean, I 
am pure from my sin?""' 

10 Divers weights,* and divers measures,^ both 
of them are alike abomination to the LoisD.'' 

11 Even a child is known by his doings, whether 
his work he pure, and whether it be right. 

12 Tlie hearing car, and the seeing eye, the Lord 
hath made even both of them.' 

13 Love not sleep, lest tiiou come to poverty :' 
open thine eyes, and thou slialt be satislied with 
bread. 



> lu. 28:7; Has. 4:11. 
bounty. <1 Matt. C:2. ' 
IJohn 1:S. I Heb A St 



b ch. 16:33, 
Luke ls:». 



Ot,wmltr. c ch. 19:15 
I J Sam. -Si.i. e 2Ch 
i Heb. an epkak and ar, 



t Or, 
0:311; 
tphah. 



Bel of God, constitutes tlic only sure foundation for peace 
and tranquillity of spirit. It is only when we make God's 
will our will, that we can avoid perpetual disquietude and 
disapi)ointment. 

22. None V>ut the truly good can gain the true love of 
their fellow-men. 

25. Scorners arc smitten for the good of others; men of 
understjinding are reproved for their own benefit. 

2G. No course of conduct brings greater disgrace upon 
a young man, than to be guilty of squandering liis father's 
estate, and making his mother homeless. 

27. One of the most deadly perils to which the young 
are exposed, is false doctrine in respect to the principles 
of religion and morals. It meets them everywhere, in 
unprincipled associates, public teachers of error, and cor- 
rupt publications. Without constant vigilance and pray- 
erfuhicss, they cannot escape its fatal influence. 

CHAPTER XX. 

2. Fear of a king; liis wrath, which is an object of fear 
to his subjects. 

3. Meddling; embroiling himself in contentions. But 
we may better render, " Kvcry fool will be angry ;" that 
is, by giving way to a passionate spirit, will involve him- 
self in strife. 

5. Man; that is, a wise man ; his heart is an inoxliaust- 
ible reservoir of knowledge, from which the skilful can 
draw at all times. 

8. IVilh hi.i ei/c! ; by his vigilance and sagacity in detect- 
ing iniquity. 

12. The Lord halh made even both nflhem ; " He that plant- 
ed the car, shall ho not hear? he that formed the eye, shall 
he not see?" Psa. 84:9. 
732 



14 It is naught, it is naught, saith the li.r/JIUJ: 
buyer: but when he is gone his way, then he 
boasteth. 

15 There is gold, and a multitude of rubies : but 
the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel." 

16 Take hisgarnient that is surety_/or a stranger: 
and take a pledge of him for a strange woman. 

17 Bread of deceit- is sweet to a man ; but after- 
wards his mouth shall be filled with gravel. 

18 Enry purpose is established by counsel : and 
with good advice make war.' 

19 liii that goeth about as a talebearer revealeth 
secrets: therefore meddle not with him that flat- 
teretli' with his li])S. 

20 Whoso ciirseth his father or his mother, his 
lamp' shall be put out in obscure darkness. 

21 An inheritance maij he gotten hastily at the 
beginning ; but the end thereof .-^liall not be blessed. 

22 Say not thou, I will recompense evil; but 
wait on the Lord, and he shall save thee. 

23 Divers weights are an abomination unto the 
Lord : and a false balance* is not good. 

24 Man's goings arc of the Lord;'" how can a 
man then understand his own way? 

2o U is a snare to the man icho devoureth that 
which is holy, and after vows to make inquiry. 

2G A wise king scattcrcth the wicketl, and bring- 
eth the wheel over them. 

27 Thespirit of aman is the candle' of the Lord, 
searching all the inward parts of the belly. 

28 Mercy and truth preserve the king: and his 
throne is upholden by mercy. 

29 The glory of young men is their strength : 
and the beauty of old men is the gray head. 



Ii Dcut. 2.5:1.3. i r.<a. 91:9. J lioin 12:11. k ch. I 
fal.v/iood. I ch. 21:C; Luke 1.1:31. 1 Or, tnliatk. 
balances of deceit, m ,Ier. 10:2.3. I Or. tamp. 



14. Naught; that is, bad in quality. Boasteth; of his 
good bargain. 

1.0. Gold, 07k/ a multitude of rubies — a precious jetcel ; gold 
and precious gems are comparatively plenty, but the lips 
of knowledge are a much rarer and more valuable pos- 
session. 

l(i. Take hi.^ garment — a stranger ; as much as to say, If 
one is so foolish as to become surety for a stninger, he 
will have to pledge his garment to jon for money to meet 
the obligation thus incurred ; and you will have to take 
his g;uiiient, for he will be unable to redeem it himself. 
Take a pledge — strange woman ; nothing better can be ex- 
pected of tlie same foolish man. than that he should pledge 
ills garment to you for money to be used by him as tlio 
hire of a strange woman, and with the same result as 
before. 

17. S/io// hcfdied with gravel ; the bread will, as it were, 
turn to gravel in his mouth ; his fraud will end in sorrow. 

19. Flatterelh with his lips; literally, cqienelh wide his 
lips, that is, as a talebearer, for he will reveal your secrets 
also. 

21. Gotten hastily; that is, more hastily than it could 
have becm by righteous means. Chap. 2S:20. 

25. Who dcrourcth that which is hull/; :q>propriates to his 
own use that which, by the l;iw, should have been eoiiKO- 
crated to (iod's service. ISut it may be rendered, who 
rasldy nuikcs vows of consecration. To make inquiry; 
wlietiicr they shall be kept. 

2li. Ilringeth the wheel ; of the threshing-wagon ; that is, 
he destroys them. 

27. The candle of the Lord ; a candle which God has placed 
within him. Searcliing all the inward parts; taking cogni- 
zance of his most secret tiioughts. 1 Cor. 2: 11. 



The ways and ends 



I'UOVERBS XXL 



nj icisdom and folly. 



u " ifo* 30 The bluene.«3 of a wound cloan?etli 
away evil:* so do stripes the inward parts of the 
bellv." 



T 



CHAPTER XXI. 

Sundr)' Proverbs. 

'HE king's heart is in the hand of the Lord. 
as the rivers of water: he turneth it whither- 
soever he will. 

2 Ever}' way of a man h right in his own eyes : 
but the Lord pondereth the hearts. 

3 To do justice and judgment is more acceptable 
to tlie Lord tlian sacrifice.'' 

4 A high look.* and a proud heart, anrf the plough- 
ing* of the wicked, is sin. 

5 The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plcute- 
ousness ; but of every one that is hasty only to want. 

G The getting of treasures by a lying tongue is 
a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death."^ 

7 The robbery of the wicked shall destroy^ them ; 
because they refuse to do judgment. 

8 The way of man is froward and strange : but 
as for the pure, his work is right. 

9 It is better to dvrell in a corner of the house- 
top, than with a brawling woman- in a wide house. ^ 

10 The soul of the wicked desireth evil: his 
neighbor findeth no favor* in his e^-es. 

11 When the scorner is punished, the simple is 
made wise: and when the wise is instructed, he 
receiveth knowledge. 

12 The righteous man wisely considereth the 
house of the wicked:" but God overthroweth the 
wicked for their wickedness. 



' Heb is a purging medicine ngninsl evil. * Heb. 1 L 


:10. bl Sam. 15:2-'. 


^ n-b. Haifg/itinejs of eues. I Or, lishs. ' i Te! . -i-.S. 


»Heb. SOU), orrfifri/ 


wrji. I Hib. aoman of eontent'cms. t Heb. a Aoas 


e of soriety. ' Hpb. 


IS iml favored, i Psa. 107:43; Hcs. 14:!l. ' iMatt. 


ls::«, 34; 25:41-40; 



30. Blueness ; the reference is to the scars made by severe 
blows. We may paraplirase the verse thus: Severe blows 
inflicted upon the transgressor cleanse his soul fiom evil ; 
and stripes, his inward spirit. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. Since wine and strong drink darken the reason, bring 
the soul under the control of excitement and passion, and 
thus prepare it for folly and wickedness of every sort, no 
wise man wUl give himself up to their power. 

6. They who make the largest professions of goodness 
and love, are in general the least worthy of confidence in 
any work that requires patient and self-denying toil. 

7. The best inheritance which a man can leave to his 
children is his own holy life. 

9. The best men are most deeply conscious of their sin- 
fulness. It is only the blinding power of sin that leads any 
to claim that they are free from it. 

14. The habit of bu3'ers to depreciate, and of sellers to 
exaggerate the worth of articles of traffic, is a species of 
dishonesty as base and degrading as it is common. 

17. It is only in anticipation that dishonest gain is pleas- 
ant : its end is bitterness and vexation of spirit. 

19. The man who reveals to us the secrets of others, 
proves himself unworthy to be intrusted with our own. 

20. Go 1 returns the injiu-ious conduct of children upon 
their own heads. Filial ingratitude is the direct road to 
ruin, temporal and spiritual. Lev. 20:9. 

21. As " he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be 
innocent," so neither shall his prosperity be permanent. 

22. We always do well to leave vengeance in the hands 
of God, to whom it belongs. 

25. Rash vows, by which men bind themselves to cer- 
tain outward actions under the name of religion, are highly 



13 Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the 
poor, he also sliall cry himself, Imt shall not bo 
heard.* 

14 A gift in secret pacifieth anger: and a re- 
ward in the bosom, strong wrath. 

15 /^^sjoy to thejust to do judgment: butdestruc- 
tion shall be to the workers of iniquitv.*^ 

16 Tlie man that wandereth out of the way of 
understanding shall remain in tlie congregation 
of the dead.^ 

17 He that loveth pleasure* shall be a poor man: 
he that loveth wine and oil shall not be rich. 

18 The wicked .ihall be a ransom for the right- 
eous, and the transgressor for the upright. '' 

IQ It is better to dwell in the wilderness,* than 
with a contentious and an angry woman. 

20 There is treasure to be desired and oil in the 
dwelling of the wise;' but a foolish man spendeth 
it up.J 

21 He that followeth after righteousness and 
mercy findeth life, righteousness, and honor.'' 

22 A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, 
and casteth down the strength of the confidence 
thereof.' 

23 Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue, 
keepeth his soul from troubles. 

24 Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who 
dealeth in proud wi-ath.^ 

25 Tlie desire of the slothful killcth him ; for his 
hands refuse to labor. 

26 He coveteth greedily all the day long: but 
the righteous giveth and spareth not. 

27 The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination :™ 



Jas •2:1.-?. f Mati 7:-3:3. B ch. 13:-30. 1 Or. sporl. li ch. 11 :.■;; Isa. 4.'):.'), 
4. t lUh. land or I'le d'Sen. i Matt. 25:3, 4. JLu)ti'6:4o. k Rom. 2:7. 
lEccl. 9:14-11). iHth. the wrath of pride. n> Isa. 1 : ll-lj. 



pernicious in their influence. When the young and inex- 
perienced take upon themselves vows of celibacy and 
exclusion from society, they only spread a snare for their 
souls. 

30. That chastisement which cleanses the soul from sin 
is a rich blessing, however severe it may be. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

4. The ploughing of the wicked; their tillage; put here 
for all their plans, jiursuits, and pleasures. The marginal 
reading, " the light of the wicked," means that in which 
they glory. 

5. The diligent ; who seek wealth by honest industry. 
Hasty; impatient to amass wealth, and therefore employ- 
ing unlawful means. 

6. A vanity tof:sed to and fro; an empty and unstable 
possession. Some render, A fleeting breath, which gives 
the same idea. Seek death ; take the way to death. 

8. Strange; alienated from God. The pure; in contrast 
with the mass of mankind, whose way is froward and 
strange. 

12. Wisely wnsidereth; derives lessons of instruction 
from God's dealings with it. 

16. Remain in the congregation of the dead; be numbered 
and dwell with the dead. Compare chap. 2:22. 

IS. S'wil be a ransom for the righteous; God will make the 
destruction of the wicked a means of salvation to the right- 
eons, as is illustrated in the deliverance of Israel from 
Egypt. Isa. 43:3, 4. 

25. The desire of the slothful; his longing desire for good 
that cannot be obtained without labor. 

21). The righteous; who has g;iine(l an abundance by 
honest toil. Compare ver. 20. 

733 



The ways and ends 



PROVERBS XXII. 



of wi-'on and folly. 



how much more, wAra he brinsreth it witli a wicked 
mincir 

28 A false witness^ shall perish: but the mau 
that heareth speaketh constantly. 

29 A wicked man liardcncth liis face: but as /or 
the njjrisiht, he directeth' his way. 

oO T/K're is no wisdom nor understanding' nor 
counsel aj^ainst the Loud." 

31 The horse is prepared ajrainst the day ol' bat- 
tle: but safety^ is of tlie Lord. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

Sundry Proverbs. 17 The words of the wise. 

A GOOD name is rather to be chosen than jrreat 
riches, and loving favor rather' than silver 
and jrold. 

2 Tiie rich and poor meet too:ether:" (he IjORD 
is tlio maker of them all. 

3 A ])rudent mail foreseeth the evil, and hideth 
himself: but the simple pass on, and are punished. 

4 By humility ' and tlie fear of the Loud are riches, 
and liouor, and life. 

5 Tliorus and snares are in the way of the fro- 
ward:'^ he that doth keep his soul shall bo far 
from them. 

6 Train up* a child in the* way he should go: 
and wium he is old, he will not depart from it.'' 

7 The rich ruleth over the poor, and the bor- 
row(!r is servant to the; lender.' 

8 He that sowetii iniquity shall reap vanity:" 
and the rod of his anger shall fail.* 



• Heb. in wickedness; f Hcb. Witness 


of lies. I Or. ronsideretb ; Psa. 


J19:5!). » Isa. 8:9, HI; Ads 5::)9. » Or 


Victory, t Or, favor is better. 


b 1 Cor. \2:-tl, etc. 1 Or, The reuard of hu 


mility. c Job 1?:.M. • Or, Cale- 


chizt. tHeb. Ais. dEph.O;!. Wieb.nu 


n that lendelh. «Job4:S. S Or, 



28. Heareth; has an ol)edientanfl teachable spirit, which 
includes in itself tlie love of truth. Speaketh constantly; 
while "the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stoppou," 
he shall speak constantly with favor and credit. 

29. Hardeneth his face ; rejects all counsel, and obstinate- 
ly follows his own corrupt desires. Dircclclli his way; 
bestows serious consideration upon it, that it may be con- 
formed to God's law. 

IKSTKUCTIONS. 

1. God overrules all the plans of earthly rulers, be they 
righteous or wicked, for the accomplishment of his own 
wise and good designs. 

3. God will not accept the outward forms of religion as 
a substitute for its inward spirit, "judgment, mercy, and 
faith." 

C. Treasures obtained by fraud and falsehood conduct 
their owner down to perdition, and there forsake him. 

10. A wicked man cannot bo trusted wliere his own 
private interests arc concerned ; for he will not scruple 
for his own ends to sacrifice his neighbor's property, 
comfort, reputation, morality, aim everlasting welfare. 

13. We all need mercy at the hand of (Jod : but we shall 
not obtain it unless we show pity to our fellow-men ; for 
with the merciful, God will show himself merciful. 

17. Luxiirious living is the highway to poverty. 

20. When jiovorty comes from prodigality it is as igno- 
minious as Kiiitul. 

20. The righteous man values property and labors for it 
chiefly because of the means which it furnishes of doing 
good to his fellow-men. 

30. The Lord h.Ms all the resources of heaven and earth 
at his disposal, and he can with infinite case accomplish 
his own purposes in the face of all opposition from wicked 
men and fallen spirits ; nay more, he can make their elTorU 
to defeat bis counsels the direct means of fulfilling them. 

134 



9 He that hath a bountiful eye shall be ;,/!':;S 
blessed ;' for ho givcth of his bread to the poor. 

10 Cast out the scorner, and contention shall go 
out; yea, strife and reproach shall cease. 

11 Ho that loveth purcness of heart./or the grace 
of his lips' the king s/iall be his friend.*-' 

12 The eyes of the Lohd preserve knowledge:" 
and he overtliroweth the words' of the trans- 
gressor. 

13 The slothful man saith, T/irre is a lion with- 
out, I sliall be slain in the streets. 

14 Tiie mouth of strange women is a deep pit: 
he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein.^ 

15 Foolishness is bound in tlie heart of a ciiild ; 
hut tlie rod of correction shall drive it far from him. 

16 Ho that oppresseth the poor to increase his 
riches j and he that givcth to the rich, shaU surely 
come to want. 

n H Bow down thine car, and hear the words 
of the wise, and apply tiiy heart unto my know- 
ledge:'' 

18 For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them 
within thee; ^ they shall withal be fitted in tiiy lips. 

19 That thy trust may be in the Lord, 1 have 
made known to thee this day, even to tliee.' 

20 Have iu)t 1 written to tiiee excellent things 
in counsels and knowledge, 

21 That I might make thee know the certainty 
of tiie words of truth: tiiat thou mightest answer 
the words of truth to them that send unto thee'.'*' 

22 Rob not the poor, because he is poor : neither 
oppress the afflicted in the gate : 

ivith the rod of Ins anger Jte shall be consumed. I Heb Good of eye. '2 Cor. 
9:0. ^ Or. 3.iullia.tit grace in Ms tips. fMail. 5:S. I> Isa. 59:19-21. 'Or, 
mailers, i Eccl. /:a). 1 Mic. i-.i-'i. kch.a:2, etc. ; Psa. 90:12. f Hcb. in 
thy belly. I Or, trust lliou also, f Or, those ittat send thee. 1 1 Pet. 3: l.'i. 



31. Without God's favor the most formidable warlike 
preparations will be of no avail. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

2. Meet together; come into contact in the various rela- 
tions of life. The Lord is the maker of them all; he is their 
common lAiid, has placed them together in this world, 
and will call them to an account for their treatmcut of 
each other. 

8. ]'aitity; disappointment and misery. The rod of his an- 
ger ; the rod wherewith he smote his fellow-men in anger. 

11. The graccifhislips ;\ns pleasant and well-timed words. 

12. Preserve kiwii'lcdge ; watch over and jirotcct know- 
ledge, by protecting those who possess it and use it for 
the good of their fellow-men. 

14. Mouth ifslrniige women; their "much fair speech," 
chap. 7:21. Abhorred of the Lord; because he turns aside 
from the right way. 

Hi. Giccth to the rich; from selfish nuitives, to iiurchaso 
their favor. 

17. Here begins another division of the book, extending 
lo tlie end of the twenty-fourth eli;ipt<.'r. It has a general 
resemblance to the first nine chapters. 

li). Made known; that is, these words. 

20. In counsels and knowledge; containing counsels and 
words of knowledge. 

21. To them that send anto thee; to ask counsel of thee. 
Or, as the marginal reading, " To tiiose that send thee ;" 
that is. niayest make a true report to them of the business 
intrusted to thee. 

22. In the gate; where courts were anciently held, and 
public business was transacted. 

IN.^TIU'CTIOXS. 
1. Our comfort and usefuliuss depend on our character, 
rather thau on our outward posscssious. 



Tkc words (if the xcix. 



PROVERBS XXIII. 



Wholesome counsels. 



and spoil the soul of those tliat spoiled them, 
2i Make no friendship witli an angry man; and 

■u'ith a furious man thou shalt not go; 
25 Lest thou learn las wajs, and get a snare to 

thy soul. 
'i() Be not tliou one of them that strike hands, or 

of them that are sureties for debts. 

27 If thou hast nothing to pay, wliy should he 
take away thy bed from under thee? 

28 Remove not the ancient landmark,* which thy 
fathers have set. 

29 Seest thou a man diligent in his business? 
lie shall stand before kings;" he shall not stand 
before mean* mc/i. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

The words of the wise. 

TTTHEN thou sittest to cat with a ruler, con- 
V V sidcr diligently what is before thee: 

2 And put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a 
man given to appetite. 

3 Be not desirous of his dainties: for tiicy ai-c 
deceitful meat. 

4 Labor not to be rich:'' cease from thine own 
wisdom.'' 

5 Wilt thou set thine eyes* upon that which is 
not? for lic/tes certainly make themselves wings; 
they lly away as an eagle toward heaven. 

6 Eat thou not the bread of him that hath an evil 
eye, neither desire thou his dainty meats : 

7 For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he : Eat 
and drink, saith he to thee ; but his heart is not 
with thee. 

8 The morsel which thou hast eaten shalt thou 
vomit up, and lose thy sweet words. 

9 Speak not in the ears of a fool : for he will 
despise the wisdom of thy words. 



a Mil. 3:5. •OT,ioimd. boh. ia:24. 1 Heh- ii'j.mm. 'ITir 
dch. ^li;l-2. I Heh. cause thine ei/cs to JJy. iOc, bound, e ch. '22 
2-2:17. 5 1 Cor. 5:5. h ch. 2!):^. I Or, cren /will rejoice, i Ps 



.S. In the gospel of his Son, God has provided a refuge 
from the evil that is coming upon aU sinners. The liigh- 
est wisdom of men is to hide themselves in this refuge ; 
to neglect it, is their folly and ruin. - 

5. The way of those who oppose themselves to God's 
government must be filled with " thorns and snares." It 
is in the path of duty that we iind comfort and safety. 

6. In committing to parents the training of their chil- 
dren, God has, in a very important sense, committed to 
tliem the formation of their future character, and he will 
hold them responsible for the influence they exert. 

7. To contract debts beyond our ability to pay, is to rob 
ourselves of that manly independence which belongs to 
the righteous man's character, and to expose ourselves to 
innumerable temptations as well as annoyances. For this 
reason, as well as from regard to our own rejiutation and 
the rights of others, it is a cardinal Christian virtue to 
" owe no man any thing, but to love one another." 

8. They who occupy themselves with devising mischief 
to others, are preparing for themselves a harvest of shame 
and trouble. 

la. The slothful exaggerate the difficulties that lie in the 
way of duty. 

23. The more destitute one is of human protection, the 
greater is the guilt and the danger of wronging him; the 
Lord is the patron of the defenceless, and will avenge the 
injuries done to them. 

29. Diligence in business leads to preferment and honor. 



10 Remove not the old landmark;-" and enter 
not into the fields of the fatherless : 

11 For their redeemer w mighty ; he shall plead 
their cause with thee. 

12 Apply thy heart unto instruction, and thine 
ears to the words of knowledge.'' 

13 Withhold not correction from the child : for 
if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die. 

1-1 Tliou shalt Ijcat him with the rod, and shalt 
deliver his soul from hell.''' 

15 My son, if thy heart be wise,'' my heart .shall 
rejoice, even mine." 

16 Yea, my reins shall rejoice, when thy lips 
speak right tilings. 

17 Let not thy lieart envy sinners;' but be thmi, 
in the fear of the Lord all the day long. 

18 For surely there is an end;'' and thine ex- 
pectation shall not be cut off. 

19 Hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guide 
thy heart in tlie way.J 

20 Be not among winebibbers;'' among riotous 
eaters of flesh:* 

21 For the drunkard and the glutton shall cplne 
to poverty : and drowsiness shall clothe a man with 
rags. 

22 Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and 
despise not tiiy mother when she is old.' 

23 Buy the truth, and sell it not;'" also wisdom, 
and instruction, and understanding." 

24 The fatlicr of the rigliteous shall greatly re- 
joice : and he> that begetteth a wise child shall have 
joy of him. ° 

25 Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and 
she that bare thee shall rejoice. 

26 My son, give me thy heart, and let thine eyes 
observe my ways.P 

27 For a whore is a deep ditch; and a strange 
woman is a narrow pit.'' 



73:.3, 17. 1 Or, rcwnrrf. j ch. 4:'i'?. t Luke 21:34: Rom. 13:1.3. • Heb. 
Ouir flesh. 1 ch. 30:17; Eph. (5:l.-->. m isa. 55: 1 ; Matt. 13:44; Rev. 3:18. 
iioh.'4:3,7. o ch. 10:1 : 1.5:-J(). pPsa. 119:2. qai.-J-2:14. 



CHAPTER XXin. 

1. With a ruler; who has invited thee to a sumiituous 
entertainment. 

2. Put a knife to tliy throat; to prevent excess in eating; 
a figurative way of saying, Restrain thine appetite at all 
costs. 

3. Deceitful meat; they promise much pleasure, but end 
in pain and shame. The reference is to the immoderate 
indulgence of appetite at the tables of the great, which 
not only injures the guest, but degrades him in the eyes 
of all present. 

4. Til i lie own wisdom; the wisdom which makes riches 
the chief good, and thinks by prudent management to get 
and keep them. 

6. That liiilh till < ril rye; the grudging man, or the crafty 
and malieixus im:lii, who invites the unwary to his table 
only to decfivi- ;iiid msnare them. 

8. Vomit up; that is, it will end in bitterness. Sweet 
words; addressed by him to thee. 

11. Their redeemer; God, who defends the cause of the 
poor and fatherless. 

13. Shall not die; shall be reclaimed from sin, and so 
saved from death. 

18. An end; that is, in the present connection, a pros- 
perous end; or, as in the margin, a reward, namely, to 
those that fear God. Compare Job 6:11, note; 42:12; 
James 5:11. 

735 



The words of the wise. 



IMIOVERBS XXIV. 



Mliolesovic counsels. 



28 She alsolicth in wait as for a prey,*" and in- 
crcascth the trai)sgr(!ssors among men. 

2'J Wlio hath woe? wlio hatli sorrow? wlio liath 
contentions? wholiatli babbling? wliohatii wonnds 
without cause? wlio hath redness of eyes? 

30 They that tarry long at the wine: they that 
go to seek mixed wine.'' 

31 Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, 
when it giveth his color in the cup, when it mov- 
eth itsell' aright. 

32 At the last it ]>itctli like a serpent, and sting- 
ctli like an adder.' 

33 Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and 
thy heart shall utter jjerverse things. 

34 Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth down in 
the midst* of the sea, or as he that lieth upon the 
top of a mast. 

35 They have stricken me,"^ shalt thou say, and 1 
was not sick: they have beaten me, and I felt' it 
not : when shall I awake? I will seek it yet again.'' 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

The words of the -wise. 

BE not thou envious against evil men,"" neither 
desire to be with them : 
2 For their heart studicth destruction, and their 
lips talk of mischief.' 

.! Through wisdom is a house builded;'' and by 
undcu'standing it is established: 

4 And by knowledge shall the chanlbcrs be filled 
witli all precious and pleasant riches.'' 

5 A wise man is strong:" yea, a man of know- 
ledge iucreaseth strength.'' 

6 For by wise counsel thou slinlt make thy war : 



•0 


, n robber, a ch. " 


:12. l> 


Isa. 5:11 


•tl: Hab 


•2:o. t 


r. a cockatr 


re 


1 Hv\, 


heart 


tJer. 5:1 


SHob 


knew. 


dlsa. 50:12. ech.i 


;):17; 


ver 


li). 


1 ]\x. 


10:7. 


It ch. H:l 


. h ch. 


•s>:ir,. 


1 Heb. i, 


strength. 


J ch 


ai: 


.!•-'. 


1 Hob 


stren., 


Ihenethmi^ 


/•I. JI'.> 


i. 10:5. 


kcb. N:'J 


.'. IMatt. 


5: a*. 


niH 


cb. 



31. Moveth itself aright; goes down smoothly. 

34. Lieth down; to sleep on the deck of a ship, or at the 
mast's liead ; rciircacntiiig the disordered condition of the 
drunkard in soul and body, whicli causes him to reel, and 
makes all around and within him a troubled and heaving 
Bca. 

3.'>. Was not sick ; was not pained from the blows, because 
of my insensibility. /(,• the intoxicating cup. 

INSTItUCTIONS. 

1. When tempted to the immoderate indulgence of ap- 
petite, we should lay a severe restraint upon ourselves ; 
for it impairs the faculties of soul and body, stupefies the 
conscience, and degrades us in our own estimation and 
that of our fellow-men. 

5. The consideration of the uncertainty of all earthly 
possessions, leads evei-y wise and considerate man to pro- 
vide for himself "a treasure in the heavens that faileth 
not." 

fi. It is a common device of crafty dissemblers to flatter 
and bestow favors only iliat they may ensnare and phiii- 
dcr. Against the hoKpilality of sucli men the young shoulii 
guard as against thieves ami burglars. 

U. The man who treats with contempt the counsels of the 
wise, releases them from the obligation of further admo- 
nition, and makes his own ruin cc-rtain. 

1:5. Our heavenly Father prefers that we should weep 
now under his chastising rod, rather than perish at last 
through want of timely discipline. Herein every wise 
parent will imitate (iod's e.xami>le in his dealings with his 
children. 

29. The imbecilitv and loathsome disease which the 
"736 



and in ninllitudc of counsellors (here is u c iSSJ' 
safrty. 

7 \Visdoni is too high for a fool:^ he opcneth 
not his mouth in the gate. 

8 He that deviseth to do evil shall be called a 
mischievous person.'' 

!) The thought of foolishness is sin:' and tlie 
scorner is an abomination to men. 

10 If thou faint in the day of adversity,"" thy 
strength is small.' 

1 1 If thou foi-bear to deliver them that are drawn 
unto death, and tho.w that arc ready to be slain;" 

12 If thou sayest. Behold, we knew it not; doth 
not he that pondercth the heart consider it? and 
he that keepeth thy soul, doth not he know it? and 
shall 7iot he render to every man according to his 
works?" 

13 My son, eat thou honey, because it is good; 
and the honey-comb, w/(/c/t is sweet to thy taste:* 

14 So shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto 
thy soul:'' when thou hast found it, then there 
shall be a reward, and tliv expectation shall not 
be cut off." 

15 Lay not wait, wicked 77!fl7!,againstthedwell- 
iiig of the righteous: spoil not his resting place: 

1(5 For a just man falleth seven limes, and riseth 
up again:'' but the wicked shall fall into mischief.' 

17 Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let 
not thy heart be glad when he stiimblelh:' 

18 Lest the Loud see it, and it displease him,* 
and he turn away his wrath from him. 

19 Fret not thyself because of evil 7nen.^ neither 
be thou envious at the wicked ; 

20 For there shall lie no reward to the evil 
man; the candle' of the wicked shall be put trnt. 



IJ:.). • Heb. narrow. " Psa. 8a:J; Isa. 5^:0. 7. o Jcr. 3i:19. t Heb. 
upon thy palate, p Psa. in: 10; lU): 103. q J«r. 1-^: 16. rMic. 7:8. • Ainoi 
s:l4. t Job :JI:29. I Hob. 6e evil in his eyes. * Or, Keep not company 
with the wirked. I Or. tamp. 



habit of using intoxicating drinks produces, and the dread- 
ful power of this habit to perpetuate itself; the poverty, 
contention, and wretchedness with which it fills the family 
circle ; the quarrels, murders, deliaucheries, and crimes 
that follow in its train, are well understood at the present 
day. Whoever allows himself in this debasing habit, or 
furnishes to others the fntoxicating cup, is without cscuse. 
• 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

1. Envious against evil men — desire to be with them; be- 
cause of their present success. 

6. For bij wise counsel thou shalt make thy war; that is, 
with success ; an illustration of the declaration in the pre- 
ceding verse, that wisdom and knowledge give strength. 

7. In the gate; where causes are tried and deliberations 
lield on weighty matters. 

!). The thought of foolishness; the plans and pursuits of 
fo(dish men. Kill out the two clau.ses thus: The thoughts 
ami actions of fools ami scnrners are sinful, and therefore 
an abomination to men. 

U. Dnivn unto deiilh — rendij In lie slain; unjustly seized 
ami dragged to a violent deatli. This precept applies 
)iriniarily to magistrates, and als<i to private persons ac- 
cording to their ability to help the oppressed and unjustly 
eondenined. 

l:(, 14. Eat thou honey — .to shall the knoirledge ofwi.<!thm be 
unto thy soul; that is, I connneiKl thee for eating honey, 
Itecause it is good ; nnicli more, then, do thou gain the 
knowledge of wisdom, which is better than honey. 

Hi. The wicked shnll fall into miscliief; out of which ho 
shall never rise again. 



Slothfulness condemned. 



PROVERBS XXV. 



Of hasty contentions. 



nv.imt: 21 My son, fear tliou the Lord and the 
king:" and meddle not witli them that are given 
to change:* 

22 For their calamity sliall rise suddenly; and 
who knoweth the ruin of them botli? 

23 These tkhiffs also belong to the wise. It is 
not good to iiave respect of'])ersons in judgment.'' 

24 He that saith unto the wicked, Thou art 
rigliteous; him sliall the people curse, nations 
sliall abhor him: 

25 But to them that rebuke him sliall be delight, 
and a good blessing* shall come upon them. 

2C) Every man shall kiss his lips that giveth a 
right answer.* 

27 Prepare thy work witiiout, and make it fit 
for thyself in the field ; and afterwards build thy 
house. 

28 Be not a witness against tliy neigjibor with- 
out cause ; and deceive not witli tiiy lips. 

29 Say not, 1 will do so to him as he hath done 
to me : I will render to the man according to his 
work.'^ 

30 I went by the field of tlio slotliful, and by 
the vineyard of the man void of understanding ; 

31 And lo, it was all grown over with thorns, 
and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the 
stone wall thereof was broken down. 

32 Tiieu I saw, and considered it well :^ I looked 
upon it, and received instruction. 

33 Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little 
folding of the hands to sleep : 



'TS. b Lev. 19:15. t Hi- 
nis. c Matt. 5:39. 44; Koi 
I of shield, d Dcut. •-><):». 



blessing of 

1-,';17, lU 
•■ Job 119:10 



21. Them, that are given to cliange ; seditious men, lite 
Absalom, who seek to change the established order of 
government. 

22. The ruin of them both; the ruin which will come upon 
such men from both God and the king, whose wrath they 
liave incurred. 

23. These things also; the maxims that follow to the end 
of the chapter. Belong to the wise; either, should be ob- 
served by the wise, or, are sayings of the wise. In either 
case, these words introduce a short appendix to this part 
of the book. 

25. Him ; the " wicked " man mentioned in verse 24. 
Delight ; the pleasant favor of the good. 

27. Thy work loithout ; thy work which lies out of doors ; 
that is, thy work of agriculture. Blake it fit for thyself; or, 
prepare for thyself. Afterwards build thy house; a house 
for elegance and luxury seems to be intended, which 
should be postponed till other more important work is 
done. In the warm climate of Palestine a very slight 
structure serves for the necessary wants of a family. 
Another interpretation. Get the materials of thy house 
ready before thou buildest, is not favored by the original 
words. 

34. One tliat travelleth ; a traveller who comes as an enemy. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Since the prosperity of the ungodly leads only to 
ruin, no wise man will envy them, or wish to cast in his 
lot with them. 

4. Success comes not by chance , but by prudent counsels 
and actions. 

10. God sends upon men adversity for the purpose of 
exercising their faith and fortitude, and thus increasing 
these graces ; but he who faints under the discipline loses 
the benefit of it, and becomes weaker instead of stronger. 

12. It is the duty of all men, as they have opportunity, 
to succor and relieve the oppressed. And since the worst 
47 



34 So shall tliy poverty come as one tliat travel- 
leth; and thy want as an armed man.' 

CHAPTER XXV. 

1 Observ.ations about Icings, 8 and about avoiding causes of quarrels, 
and sundry causes theriof. 

THESE are also proverbs of Solomon, whicli 
tlie men of Hczekiah king of Judah copied 
out. 

2 It is the glory of God to conceal a thing :'' but 
tlie lienor of kings is to search out a matter.'' 

3 Tlie heaven for heiglit, and the cartli lor depth, 
and the heart of kings is unsearchable.'' 

4 Take away the dross from the silver, and 
there shall come forth a vessel for the tinei*. 

5 Take away the wicked /rom before the king, 
and his throne shall be established in righteous- 
ness. 

G Put not forth thyself* in the presence of the 
king, and stand not in the place of great men:' 

7 For better it is that it be said unto tliee. Come 
up hither ; than that thou sliouldest be put lower 
in the presence of the prince whom thine eyes 
have seen. 

8 Go not forth hastily to strive.^ lest thou know 
not what to do in the end thereof, when tliy neigh- 
bor hath put thee to shame. 

9 Debate thy cause with thy neighbor himself;" 
and discover not a secret to another:* 

10 Lest lie that heareth it put thee to shame, 
and thine infamy turn not away. 



bondage is that of sin and ignorance, no man may on any 
ground excuse himself from doing what lies in his power 
for the rescue of the millions who are held under its 
thraldom. 

14. No possession yields so precious a revenue as wis- 
dom. It makes men rich for time and for eternity. 

10. The just man falls for his discipline, and God will 
raise him up again ; but the wicked falls for his destruc- 
tion. 

17. Joy at the calamity of an enemy is a heinous sin, and 
one which God will visit with condign punishment. 

21. They who follow discontented innovators, do it to 
their destruction. 

27. The wise man will postpone works of mere elegance 
and luxury till he has attended to his more necessary 
business. 

30. In things spiritual and temporal, the slothful pro- 
crastinator may be known by the disordered and decaying 
condition of what is committed to his care. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

1. Copied out; here begins the fourth part of the book, 
containing a selection of proverbs collected and arranged 
from the writings of Solomon, probably by Hezekiah's 
command and for his use. It repeats a number of prov- 
erbs that have already appeared. 

2. To conceal a thing; he manifests his infinite perfec- 
tions by the unsearchableness of his ways in both nature 
and providence. To search out a matter; they show their 
qualification for their high office by sagacity in searching 
out and understanding every thing that concerns the ad- 
ministration of their government. 

3. The heart of kings; their secret counsels. 

4. A vessel for the finer ; a vessel of pure silver to reward 
the finer's labor. 

7. Come up hither ; see Luke 14:7-11. 
Til 



Of fidelity, peace, 



TROVERBS XXVI. 



charitii, and folly. 



11 A ■word fitly spoken' is like apples of gold in 
pictures of silver. 

12 ^1s an earring of gold, and an ornament of 
fine gold, so is a, wise reprover upon an obedient 
ear." 

13 As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, 
so is a faithful messenger to tliem that send him : 
for lie refresheth the soul of his masters. 

11 Wiioso boasteth liiniself" of a false gift* is 
like clouds and wiud without rain."^ 

15 By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, 
and a soft tongue l)reai<eth the bone. 

IC) llast tiiou found lioney? eat so much as is 
suflicieut for thee, lest thou ))0 lllled tliercwitii, 
and vomit it. 

17 Withdraw tliy foot from* thy neighbor's 
house ; lest lie be weary ^ of thee, and so hate thee. 

18 A man that bearetli false witness against liis 
neiglibor is a maul, and a sword, and a sharp 
arrow.'' 

19 Confidence in an unfaitliful man in time of 
trouble is like a broken tooth, and a foot out of 
joint. 

20 Jh he that taketh away a garment in cold 
weatlier, (uid as vinegar upon nitre, so is he that 
singctii songs to a heavy heart. 

21 If thine enfiny be liungry, give him bread to 
eat; and if lie be thirsty, give him water to drink :'' 

22 For tliou slialt heaj) coals of fire upon his 
head, and tiic Lord sliali reward thee.'' 

23 Tlie north wind driveth away rain: so doth 
an angry countenance a backbiting tongue." 

24 It is better to dwell in the corner of the 



• Heb. spoken upon his wheels. » ch. 1 :S, 9. l" Luke 1S:10, etc. t Heb. 
in a ^ift of falsehood, c Jude 12. I Or, Let thy foot be seldom in. 
i Heb. full, d Psi. 57:4. e Exod. 23:4, 5; Malt. .0:44; Rom. 12:20 



11. Apples of gold in pictures of silver ; golden apples em- 
broiderca in picture-work of silver. Some render, Apples 
of gold in baskets of silver network. 

13. Snow; brought from the mountains and used for 
cooling drinks. 

14. lioasteth himself nf a false gift ; makes a vain show of 
lii)erality, but gives iiotliiiig. 

Ifi. Eat so much as is svU'icicnt ; make a moderate use of 
every privilege that falls to your lot — as, for exami)lc, a 
neighbor's hospitality, ver. 17 — and do not spoil it by 
excess. 

20. Vinegar upon nitre ; Egj'ptian nitre, which efferves- 
ces with an acid, and loses its strength. The incongruity 
of ringing songs to a heavy heart is illustrated by two 
comparisons. 

22. lieapcoalsof fire upon his head; &\ him with shame, 
and thus bring him to repentance. 

26. Falling down before the wicked ; cither vohmtarily, 
from fcttr or interest ; or, falling under his power. Troub- 
led — corrupt; spoiled by the traiii])liiig of cattle. 
IXSTltfCTION.S. 

6. If rulers would have permanent pros])ority, they must 
banish the corniiit from their councils, and surround 
themselves with righteous men. 

G. Modesty is the road to true preferment. Those who 
ambitiously thrust themselves above their true position, 
will be, in the end, east down to the lowest place. 

8. The wise man will not engage in controversy till he 
is sure of his ground, and can see his way through it. 

12. Reproof wisely administered to the wise is most 
precious in its results. 

i:i, 19. Fidelity in (ho execution of a trust is a virtue 
which men are quick to perceive, and rcaily to reward ; 
tlie unfaitliful man. on the contrary, is with good reason 
738 



house-top, than with a brawling woman Vc.'tS: 
and in a wide iiouse. 

25 ./Is cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good 
news from a far country. 

2(') A righteous man falling down before the 
wicked is as a, troubled fountain, and a corrupt 
spring. 

27 It is not good to eat much honey: so for mm 
to searcli their own glory is not glory. 

28 He tliat hath no rule over liis own spirit is 
like a city that is broken down, and without walls. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

1 Observations about foolff, 13 about sluggards, 17 and about contentious 
busybodies. 

AS snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so 
honor is not seemly for a fool. 

2 As the bird by wandering, as the swallow by 
flying, so the curse causeless shall not come.'^ 

3 A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and 
a rod for the fool's back. 

4 Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest 
thou also be like unto him. 

5 Answer a fool according to his folly,'' lest he 
be wise in his own conceit.'' 

G He that sendctli a message by the hand of a 
fool cutteth ofi' the feet, and drinketh damage.* 

7 The legs of the lame are not equal:* so is a 
parable in the mouth of fools. 

8 As he that bindeth a stone in a sling,' so is 
he that givetli honor to a fool. 

9 Jls a thorn goetli up into the hand of a drunk- 
ard, so is a parable in the mouth of fools. 



f,2 Sam. IG: 12. I Or. bringelh forth min; so doth n backbiting longut ai 
angry cmtnlrname. e Num. 23:S. t Matt. 21:24. 1 Heb. cjm. 'Or, ci'o 
leitce. t Heb. lifted up. I Or, pulteth a precious .stone in a heap of stones. 



dreaded and shunned, for he is the ruin of all who put 
confidence in liim. 

15. Wise discourse, tempered by mildness and forbear- 
ance, is a more effectual weapon than implements of war. 

17. To abuse a neighbor's hospitality is the way to lose 
it. 

20. An ill-timed act is unseemly, if not offensive. 

22. lie who overcomes an enemy by kindness, gains a 
victory whicli makes both parties blessed. 

2(1. AVhcn the righteous yield to the wicked, the very 
fountains of virtue are corrui)ted. 

28. As a city without walls is e.Kposcd to every assault 
of the enemy, so a spirit without self-government is the 
prey of every corrupt passion. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

2. As the bird by leamlcring — .to the curse causctrs.i shcdl not 
come; God's curse will not come upon men at random, like 
the flight of birds. 

4. Answer not a fool according to his foil ij ; with such fool- 
lish words as he uses. 

."j. Ansteer a fool according to his folly ; in a manner adapted 
to rebuke it. 

G. Cutteth off the feet; his own feet, and thus cripples 
himself in respect to the business on hand. 

7. Are not eijual ; so that he has a linii>ing gait. Otliors 
render, " hang down ;" that is, as a useless weight. So is 
a parable in the mouth of fools; they have not skill to make 
a discreet use of it. 

8. Bindeth a stone in a sling; performs an absurd and 
useless act. The marginal reading is. " Putteth a precious 
stone in a heap of stones," among which it will be lost. 

9. Into the hand of a drunkard ; a reeling drunkard, who 
lays hold of it to support himself. A purable m lhemo\tt,h 



Sluggards and hu^yhodies. 



PROVERBS XXVII. 



Of love anil faithfulness. 



tc:m*- 10 Tlie groat God that formed all things 
both rewardeth the fool, and rcwardcth transgress- 
ors.* 

11 As a dog returncth to his vomit," so a fool 
returnetli to* his folly. 

12 Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit?" 
there is more hope of a fool than of him. 

13 TliC slothful vian saith. There is a lion in the 
way; a lion is in the streets. 

14 ./is the door turneth upon his hinges, so doth 
the slothful upon his bed. 

15 The slothful hideth his hand in his bosom; it 
grievcth him* to bring it again to his mouth. 

10 The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit than 
seven men that can render a reason. 

17 He that passeth by, and meddleth^ with strife 
belonging not to him, is like one that taketh a dog 
by the ears. 

18 As a mad ma?i who casteth firebrands," ar- 
rows, and death, 

19 So is the man that deceiveth his neighbor, 
and saith, Am not I in sport? 

20 Where no wood is,^ there the fire goeth out: 
so where there is no talebearer,* the strife ceaseth."* 

21 Jis coals are to burning coals, and wood to 
fire; so is a contentious ifian to kindle strife. 

22 The words of a talebearer are as wounds, 
and they go down into the innermost parts* of 
the belly. 

23 Burning lips and a wicked heart are like a 
potsherd covered with silver dross. 

24 He that hateth dissembleth^ with his lips, 
and layeth up deceit witliin him; 

25 When he speaketh fair,'' believe him not : for 
there are seven abominations in his heart. 

26 Whose hatred is covered by deceit,' his wick- 
edness shall be showed before the wMe congrega- 
tion. 



• Or, A greal mill griei'el/i nit, and he hireth the fool, he hirelh also trarns- 
XressoTS. a a Pet. a:-j-j. t lleb. zlcratef/i. b Revr. .3;17. I Or, he is weary. 
I Or, is enraged. U Heb. _//ame.^. or sparks. H Heb. without wood. ' Or, 
whisperer, t Heb. is .</&«!, 1 Heb. ehambers. i Or. is htown. I Heb. 
nnketh his voice gracious. H Or. hotred is covered in secret, c Psa. 7:15, Hi. 



of foots; by perverting it, tliey make it an injury to them- 
selves. 

IG. A reason; a good reason for a wise course of action. 
The sluggard's course is foolish and ruinous, yet he thinks 
himself wiser than all his advisers. 

17. Bfi Itie ears ; to his own hurt. 

21. Coats — lo burning coats ; coals added to a heap of 
Imrning coals, which makes the fire hotter. 

23. Burning lips; lips that make warm professions of 
love. Silver dross ; glittering, yet worthless. 

27. Rolleth ; in order that it may overwhelm others. Re- 
turn upon him; fall back upon him by the slipping of his 
hands. By some unforeseen turn of events, the mischief 
which he was preparing for others shall fall upon himself. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

4, 5. In dealing with the ignorant and self-conceited, 
great wisdom is necessary, lest, on the one side, we make 
ourselves like them, or, on the other, fail to put to silence 
their foolish words. 

8. All preferment is thrown away upon the foolish. 

9. It is the part of folly to pervert to its own injury that 
which was designed for its profit. 

16. They who have no good reason to give for their con- 
duct, are most inclined to despise the counsels of the wise. 

17. Interraeddlers always bring themselves into trouble. 
19. Falsehood and deception do not become either 

innocent or harmless because practised in sport ; the de- 



27 Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein:'' and 
he that rolleth a stone, it will return upon him. 

28 A lying tongue hateth those that are afflicted 
by it ; and a flattering mouth worketh ruin. 

CIIAriER XXVII. 



1 Observations of self-lo 



e, .') of true love, 11 of care to avoid offei 
id of the household care. 



BOAST not thyself of to-morrow;*'' for thou 
kiiowest not what a day may bring forth. 

2 Let another man praise thee, and not thine 
own mouth : a stranger, and not thine own lips." 

3 A stone is heavy,* and the sand weightj^; but 
a fool's wrath is heavier than them both. ' 

4 Wrath is cruel,* and anger is outrageous;- but 
who is able to stand before envy?'*' 

5 Open rebuke is lictter than secret love.*'' 

6 Faithful arc the wounds of a friend;'' but the 
kisses of an enemy are deceitful.'' 

7 The full soul loatheth* a honey-comb; but to 
the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.' 

8 As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so is 
a man that wandereth irom his place. 

9 Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so 
doth the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty 
counsel.'' 

10 Thine own friend, and thy father's friend, for- 
sake not; neither go into thy brother's house in 
the day of thy calamity : for better is a neighbor 
that is near than a brother far oflV 

11 My son, be wise, and make my heart glad,'' 
that I may answer him that reproacheth me. 

12 A prudent Wifm foreseeth the evil, and hideth 
liimself ;' but the simple pass on, mid are punished. 

13 Take his garment that is surety for a stran- 
ger, and take a pledge of him for a strange woman. 

14 He that blesscth his friend with a loud voice. 



• Heb. !(j-morrDio dni/. d Luke12:19; Jas. 4:13-16. = ch. a.5:27. t Hob. 
heaviness. X Heb. cruelty. § Heb. an overflowing. II Or, jealousy? ch. 
6:M. flJohn3;12. ech. 28:23. hPsi.l41:5. J Ox, earnest, ex frequent. 
' Heb. trtadeth under foot, i Job 6:7. t Heb. from the counsel of the soul. 
jch. 18:24. k ch. 23:15, 24. 1 Psa. 57:1-3. 



ceiverwho excuses himself on this ground, will find that 
at God's bar these are treated as heinous offences. 

20. Since talebearers exist in every community, the best 
way is to rebuke them, and close our ears to their words. 
Where the people have wisdom to do this, strife will 
cease. 

21. The contentious man's tongue is " set on fire of 
hell ;" and he sets on fire the whole community in which 
he dwells. 

24-26. The weapons of malice are flattery, hypocrisy, 
and deceit, but God's providence will strip oft' its disguises 
and expose its wickedness before the world. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

5. Secret love ; love allowed to lie hid in the bosom 
through false tenderness and fear of giving offence, an<l 
not manifesting itself, as it should, in reproving and cor- 
recting the faults of a friend. 

9. The sweetness of a man's friend ; his sweet words of 
friendship. 

10. Neither go into thy brotlier's house ; that is, as the pre- 
ceding and following words show, forsake not a tried family 
friend who is near at hand, for a brother who is far off. 

13. Take his garment ; see note to chap. 20:16. _ 

14. A curse to him; to the man who blesses his friend. 
Such praise will be suspected as insincere and selfish, and 
therefore reckoned as bad as a curse. 

739 



Diligence rewarded. 



PROVERBS XXVllI. 



Fruits of impiety. 



rising early in tlic morning, it shall be counted a 
curse to iiini. 

15 A continual dropping in a very rainy day 
and a contentious woman arc alike." 

IG Whosoever hideth her hideth the wind, and 
the ointment of his riglit hand, which bcwrayeth 
ifsilf. 

11 Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth 
the countenance of iiis friend. 

18 Whoso keef)eth the fig-tree shall eat the fruit 
thereof:'' so he tliat waiteth on his master shall 
be honored.'' 

19 As in water face answercth to face, so tiie 
heart of man to man. 

20 Hell and destruction are never" full;'' so the 
eyes of man are never satisfied." 

21 Jls the fining-])ot for silver, and the furnace 
for gold ; so is a man to his praise. 

22 Though thou sliouldcst bray a fiol in a mor- 
tar among wiicat with a poslle, yet will not his 
foolishness depart from him.' 

23 Be tliou diligent to know the state of thy 
Hocks, and look well* to thy herds: 

24 For riches* arc not for ever:'' and doth the 
crown endure to every generation?^ 

25 The hay appearctli, and the tender grass 
showeth itself, and herbs of the mountains are 
gathered .'■ 

26 The lambs are for thy clothing, and the goats 
are the price of the field. 

27 And thou shaft have goats' milk enough for 
thy food, for the food of thy household, and for 
the maintenance' for thy maidens. 



a Oh. ia:ia. b I Cor. fl:7. 13. c Mark IU:43; Col. 3:*i; 1 Pet. a:ia-2l. 
•\Ub.not. ilch..W:lG. cEcd.l:8. r Isa. l;."); Jer. 5:3. t Ileb. Jel (Ay 
heart. 1 Heb. 5tr«;iirM. It Jas. I: II), 11. Mlah. generation and generation. 
h P«a. 1UI:14. I Heb. life, i Lev. 20:17, 36; Psa. S3:X 1 Or, men of 



15. A cnnlinual dropping; see chap. 19:13. 

16. Ilidclh her ; 8CCKS to conceal within doors her un- 
seemly behavior. Ilidetli the wind ; that is, tries to hide 
it, which is a vain undertaking. Jiewrayetli il.ielf; betrays 
itself, proclaims its i)resence by its ocfor. His effort to 
conceal her folly is like attempting to conceal the fragrant 
ointment upon his right hand. 

17. S.'tarpenelh the countenance of his friend ; a sharpened 
rountenancc implies a sharpened mind, that is, a mind 
made more active and vigorous. 

21. A man to Ids praise ; praise is the crucible in which 
a man's character is tried and truly appears. 

22. liraij ,■ pound. 

24. Arc-not for ever ; are an uncertain possession, requir- 
ing vigilance and industry for their preservation. Doth 
the crown endure; even regal dignity is liable to be lost 
through want of vigilance and wise maiiagoinent. 

25. Are gathered ; by the prudent husbandman. 

2G. Ti'ie price of the field ; thou canst give them, or the 
produce tliat comes from them, in pay for a field purchased. 

27. S.'ialt have goat's mdk enough; that is, by complying 
with the precept given above, ver. 23. 
INSTItUCTIONS. 

1. He who makes confident plana for the future, forgets 
his dependence on divine providence, and prepares him- 
Bclf for bitter disappointment. 

2. The blinding inlluonce of sclf-lovo makes us poor 
judgC8.,of our own good finalities. For this reason self- 
commendation is always unseemly. 

3. A wise man's wrath is under the control of reason ; 
but a fool's rage has no bounds. 

■1. Mere anger is temporary ; but envy, like a poisonous 
serpent, is ever watching for an opportuuity to strike its 
victim. 

740 



CHAPTER XX VII I. Vc'?S;: 

General obsfrvations of impiety and religious inte;;ri(y. 

TIIE wicked flee when no man pursueth:' but 
the righteous arc bold as a lion. 

2 For the transgression of a land many are the 
princes thereof: but by a man of understanding 
and knowledge the state thereof shall be'' pro- 
longed. 

3 A jioor man that oppresseth the ))oor is like a 
sweeping rain which leaveth no food.*-* 

4 Tliey that forsake the law praise the wicked:'^ 
but such as keep the law contend with them.' 

5 Evil men understand not judgment :'" but they 
that seek the Lord understand all thinjrs." 

G Better is the poor that walketh in his upright- 
ness, than he that is perverse in his ways, though 
he be rich. 

7 Whoso kcepcth the law is a wise son : but he 
lliat is a companion of riotous me7i* shameth his 
father. 

8 lie that by usury and unjust gain' increaseth 
his substance, he shall gather it for him that will 
pity the poor." 

!) He tliat lurneth away his ear from hearing 
the law, even his prayei' .shall be abomination.'' 

10 Whoso causeth the righteous to go astray in 
an evil way, he shall fall himself into his own 
pit: but the upright shall have good things in 
possession. 

11 The rich man is wise in his own conceit;' 
but the poor that hath understanding searclicth 
him out. 



underMand 


ns and 


wisdom shall 


thfy lilcewise 


tie. • 


Hcb. u 


ithout 


food. 


J Malt. 


t<:as-:30. k 


P»a. 


10:3. 1 


Eph. 5:11. 


m Vi3. 


9J:li. 


n John 


7:17: 


1 Cor. « 


l.'i 


1 John 


i-.-M. 


■27. t ( 


r, feedetk gluttons. 


I Ileb. 


by increase. 


Job -27 


1« 


PZech 


7:11 


>Hcb 


his eyes. 











6. True love, properly exercised, will not withhold 
timely reproof through fear of giving offence. Lev. 
19:17. 

7. A deep sense of want makes men ready to ac- 
cept help upon any terms. The highest illustration of 
this is in tlie case of lost sinners, to wliom Christ's sal- 
vation is offered, through repentance, faith, and daily self- 
denial. 

11. The wisdom of children is the best defence of their 
parents. 

17. It is only by the contact of mind with mind that it 
can attain to its highest vigor and strength, as it respects 
cither the intellect or the affections. 

19. Since all hearts answer to each other as face to face 
in water, the foundation of a true knowledge of human na- 
ture is the knowledge of ourselves. 

22. Nothing is so incorrigible as human folly. 

23-27. The price of an honorable and comfortable com- 
petency is diligence and good management. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

2. For; because of Manij arc the princes thereof; it is 
continually changing rulers, as we see illustrated in the 
history of Israel after the revolt of the ten tribes: which 
is a sore calamity to a nation. 

3. A poor man; in eastern countries avaricious men, 
destitute alike of property and principle, often obtain the 
government of provinces, which they plunder at pleas- 
ure. 

.s. For him thai will pilti the poor; God will take it from 
him, and give it to liim that will pity the poor. 

10. CaiLvrt/j the righteous to go astray ; seeks to lead him 
astray. The upright; wliom he sought to mislead. 

11. Searclicth him out; finds out his folly. 



Righteous and widcd 



PROVERBS XXIX. 



rulers contrasted. 



B. C. 71KI 

■/.? great glory: but when the wicked rise, a man 
is liidden.* 

13 He that covcreth his sins shall not prosper: 
l)ut whoso coafcsseth and forsaketh them shall 
have mercy." 

14 Happy is (lie man that feareth always : but 
he that luirdeiieth liis heart shall fall into mis- 
cliief.'' 

15 .I'h a roaring lion, and a ranging bear; so is 
a wicked ruler over the poor people. 

16 The ))riucc that wanteth understanding is 
also a great oppressor: but he that hateth covct- 
ousncss shall prolong his days. 

17 A man that docth violence to the blood of any 
person shall flee to the ])it; let no man stay him. 

18 Whoso walkelh uprightly shall be saved:'' 
but lie that is jierverse in his ways shall fall at 
once. 

19 He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of 
bread: but he that followeth after vain persons 
shall h.avc poverty enough. 

20 A faithful man shall abomid with blessings: 
but he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be 
innocent.* 

21 To have respect of persons is not good: for, 
for a piece of bread that man will transgress. 

22 He that hasteth to be rich hath an evil eye,* 
and considereth not that poverty sliall come upon 
him.'' 

23 He that rebuketh a man, afterwards shall 
find UKU-e favor than he that flattereth with the 
tongue. 

24 Whoso robbeth his father or his mother, and 
saith. It is no transgression; the same is the com- 
panion of a destroyer.^ ■ 



• Or. sought for. a Ps 
^■|:U. \ Or, uiipiinhhfd. 
5:9- 5 Hel). man iknUay 



. 5; 1 Joliii l:t-l(l. b Rom. -i-.o. <: Psa. 
mill an ecU eyr Imsltth to bt rick, d 1 Tim. 
Heb. a man of re,noof^. e 1 Sam. 2:.M. 



12. Great glory; the state is prosperous and honored. 
A man is hidden; a good man is driven into obscurity. 

14. Feareth.; God. Hardeneth his lieart; against God's 
authority. 

IG. .-1 great oppressor ; it is implied that he shall also come 
to a violent end. 

17. Doetit violence to the blood of any person ; is laden with 
the guilt of shedding human Ijlood. Slialt Jlee to the pit; 
shall go down speedily to the dead. Stay him ; prevent 
his going to the pit. 

22. Hustelh to be rich; is greedy of gain, and uses unlaw- 
ful means to procure it. 

24. A tleslroyer ; a dissolute spendthrift. 

26. Wisely; with circumspection and self-distrust. 

27. Hideth his eyes; from their wants. Many a curse; 
from God and man. 

28. Rise; to power. Men hide themselves; good men re- 
tire into obscurity, that they may avoid the persecution 
of the wicked. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Guilt is timorous, and innocence bold. 

2. God punishes wicked and corrupt nations by giving 
them up to frequent and violent changes of government, 
with all the confusion and misery that follow in their train. 

4. Wicked men are naturally inclined to take part with 
those who are, like themselves, against the righteous. Hence 
there must be a perpetual conflict between the two classes. 

12. Upright rulers are the glorj' and strength of a na- 
tion ; and wicked men its shame and ruin. 

13. There is but one way to escape the ruinous conse- 
quences of sin, which is by confessing and forsaking it. 



25 He that is of a proud heart stirreth up strife : 
but he that puttcth his trust in the Lord shall be 
made fat. 

26 He that trusteth in liis own heart is a fool: 
but whoso walketh wisely, he shall be delivered. 

27 He that givcth unto the poor shall not lack : 
but he that hideth his eyes shall have many a curse. 

28 When the wicked rise, men hide themselves: 
but when they perish, the righteous increase. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

1 Observation,s of public government, 1') anJ of private. 22 Of anger, 
pride, tliievery. cowardice, and corruption. 

HE, that being often reproved,' hardeneth his 
neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that 
without remedy.'^ 

2 When the righteous are in authority,"' the peo- 
ple rejoice r*^ but when the wicked beareth rule, 
the people mourn.^ 

3 Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiccth his father:" 
but he that keepetli company with harlots speud- 
eth his substance.' 

4 The king by judgment establisheth the land: 
but he that receiveth gifts* overthroweth it. 

5 A man that flattereth his neighbor spreadeth 
a net for his feet. 

6 In the transgression of an evil man there is a 
snare:' but the righteous doth sing and rejoice. 

7 The righteous considereth thecauseof thepoor : 
but the wicked regardeth not to know it. 

8 Scornful men bring a city into a snare:* but 
wise meyi turn away wrath.'' 

9 7/" a wise man contendeth with a foolish man, 
whether he rage or laugh, there is no rest. 

10 The bloodthirsty* liate the upright:' but the 
just seek his soul. 



I 0,; inrren.Kd. tEsth.6:15. eEsth.-1:15. licli.IO:!. i Luke 15:13, 30. 
■ Ui-h. a man of oUathms. J Jnb l-i:8. lu. lOuKlactyonJire. k Ezck. 
M:3U. tReh.' Men of blood. I 2 Chr. 1.^:7; 1 John 3: 1'J, 13. 



IC. The highest wisdom of a jjrince is to seek the wel- 
fare of the people committed to his care, for in their pros- 
perity lie his own quiet and security. 

17. That the murderer shall die, is a divine ordi- 
nance. All who seek to set it aside, oppose themselves 
alike to the wisdom of God and the welfare of the com- 
munity. 

21. The elevation of selfish and unprincipled men to 
office is a great public calamity; they will pervert justice 
and sacrifice the highest interests of the people for pri- 
vate emolument. 

22. The avaricious man, who scruples not to use unjust 
means for the increase of his estate, is on the highway to 
final poverty and ruin. 

23. Honest deaUiig with offenders is the way to secure 
their respect. 

2G. The absence of self-distrust is a certain sign of folly 
and approaching destruction. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

4. Gifts, bribes to pervert judgment. 
6. A snare; to take his own feet. Doth sing andrejoice; 
because his path is free from snares. 

8. Bring a city into a snare; or, as the marginal reading, 
set it on fire; fill it with strife and faction. Turn away 
wrath ; appease the angry passions of the people, and 
avert God's anger. 

9. No re.it ; to the wise man. He will find it a bootless 
and uncomfortable contest. 

10. Seek his soul ; love him, and protect his life and in- 
terests. 

741 



Words of the trise. 



rUOVERBS XXX. 



Cottfession of Agur. 



11 A fool uttereth all his mind: but a wise man 
kccpctli it in till al'tcrwards. 

12 If a ruler hearken to lies, ali his servants are 
wicked. 

13 The poor and the deceitful man" meet to- 
gether: the Loud li<;:htcneth both their eyes." 

14 The kinj>; that faithfully judiretli the poor, his 
throne shall be established for ever." 

15 The rod and reproof uivc wisdom : but a child 
left to /imw//"bringeth his mother to shame. 

16 When the wicked arc multiplied, transgression 
incrcaseth: but the righteous shall see their fall. 

17 Correct thy sou, and he shall give thee rest; 
yea, he shall give delight unto thy soul. 

18 Where there is no vision, the people perish :^'' 
but he that keepcth the law, haiijiy is he,'' 

19 A servant will not be corrected by words: 
for thcugh he understand he will not answer. 

20 Scest thou a man that is hasty in his words?* 
thrre is more hope of a fool than of him. 

21 He that delicately bringeth up his servant 
from a child shall have him become /jw son at the 
length. 

22 An angry man stirreth up strife, and a furious 
man aboundelh in transgression. 

23 A man's pride shall bring him low:'^ but 
honor shall uphold the humble in s]iirit. 

24 Whoso is ]iartner with a thief liateth his own 
soul : lie heareth cursing, and bewrayeth it not. 

2.5 The fear of man bringeth a snare :' but whoso 
putteth his trust in the Lohd sliall be safe.^"' 



• Or, usurer; Matt. '.):9; 1 Cor. 6:10. aEph.2;l. l>Psa.89:2. t Or, i.i 
vvie imktd. c 1 Sam. 3:1 ; Amos 8:11-13. JPsa. 1IU:J. 1 Or, madJr.v. 
Dan .'5: 20, 21; Matt. 23:12: Acts 12:23; Ja.i. 4:10. I Gen. 12:12; 20:11. 



l:j. Deceitful man ; or as the marginal reading, "usurer;" 
who loans to the poor. Sec chap. 22:2. Ltghtenelh both 
their eyes; Matt, d-.iit. Since they both share (Sod's com- 
liion bounty, tliey are bound to regard and treat each other 
as brethren. 

18. Vision; revelation of divine truth. Perish.; or as 
the Hebrew may bo rendered, are made dissolute, Keep- 
eth the law; this implies that he lives where there is a 
" vision." 

19. Words; that is, mere words. Though he understand ; 
the commands and reproofs of his master. He will not 
answer; in a dutiful sjjirit; that is, ho will not render 
prompt obedience. The proverb inculcates the necessity 
of timely chastisement. 

21, Delicately bringeth lip ; spoils by indulgence. Become 
his son at the length; the servant will, in the issue, claim to 
bo treut<;d as a son, But we may undersliiiid lliis luoverli 
of tlie careful training of a servant of 8U])erior worth, so 
that in tlic end he takes tlio place of a son to liis master. 
Compare chap, 17:2, 

24. Heareth cursing, and bewrayeth it not; is privy to or 
conceals tlie false oaths of his companion, and thus shares 
with him the guilt of ])erjury. 

25. The fear of man bringeth a mare; leads us in many 
ways into sin, 

26. Every man's jiulgment cmneth from the Lord; it is to 
him alone that wo can confidently look for justice and 
deliverance, 

LVSTIUrCTIONS. 

1, Obstinate resistance lo reproof is an alarming indica- 
tion of approaching ruin, 

2, Since the welfare of a state depends upon the char- 
acter of its rulers, it is the duty of all who exercise the 
elective franchise to prefer the righteous above the wicked. 
and to elevate to office able men, such as fear God, men of 
truth, hating covctousncss, 

142 



26 Many seek the ruler's favor;' but 'j,",,^; 
everij man's judgment comeih from (he L(n;i).'' 

27 An unjust man is an abomination to the just: 
and he that is upright in the way is abominatiou 
to the wicked. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

1 Afrur's confession of his faith. 7 The two points of his prayer, 10 
The meanest are not to be wronged. 11 Four wicked generations, 
lo Four things insatiable. 17 Parents are not to be despised. IS 
Four thing's hard to be known. 21 Four things intolerable, 24 Four 
things exceeding wise. 29, Four things stalely, 32 Wrath is to be 
prevented. 

THE words of Agur the son of Jakch, even the 
projihecy : the man spake unto Ithicl, even 
unto Itliiel and Ucal, 

2 Surely I ajn more brutish than ani/ man, and 
have not the understanding of a man.' 

3 I neither learned wisdom, nor have' the know- 
ledge of the holy. 

4 Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descend- 
ed? who hath gathered the wind in his lists? who 
hath bound the waters in a garment? who halli 
established all the ends of the earth? what is his 
name, and what is his son's name,' if thou canst 
tell? 

5 Every word of God is pure:' he is a shield 
unto them that put their trust in him." 

6 Add thou not un(o his words,' lest he reprove 
thee, and thou be found a liar. 

7 Two things have I required of thee ; deny nic 
them not' before I die: 

« Heb. s« on A/?*, e Eccl. 7:18. i KA. fate of a rultr. I" Psa, 6a:li 
iPsa. 73:2;. H Hib. iiiow J Isa. .'■)3:3. " Heb. piir,></; Psa. 12:(>. » Psa. 
S4:ll; 115:9-11. I Kev. 22: 1>, 19. 1 Hch. witliliol'l not from me. 



i. No government or community can prosper in which 
the administration of justice is corrupted by bribery. 

9, No controversy is more profitless than that which 
is carried on with one who cannot feel the force of sound 
arguments. 

15, No child becomes wise and virtuous by pursuing 
his own inclinations, but only by faithful insti'uction and 
discipline, 

18. The faithful dispensation of divine ti-uth is the only 
hope of a nation. Where this is wanting the people will 
sink into ignorance and corruption, till their destruction 
becomes inevitable, 

25, Ho who is swayed by the opinions of his fellow-men, 
rather than by God's word, will be betrayed into innumer- 
able sins and errors, which will prove a snare to his soul. 
It is only by faith in God that we can overcome the fe.ir 
of man, and pursue with steadfastness a course of integ- 
rity. 

27. The whole history of the world from the beginning, 
is but a fulfilment of the original dcclaralioii in Eden : "I 
will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between 
thy seed and her seed." 

CHAPTER XXX. 

1, The vords nf Agar ; this and the following chapter 
constitute an aiipendix to the book of Troverbs. 

3, The holy; God, 

4. Ascended up into heavm, or descended — esiahlislied all the 
ends of the earth ; these are descriptions of the various 
operations of (lod. What is his name; lo know God's 
name is to know (rod himself, for his name expresses the 
sum of his attributes. What is his son's name: a very rc- 
markablo expression, in which the Spirit of ])rophccy 
seems to ]>oint to the future revtlaticm of God's only be- 
gotten Son, Jolni 3:13; Kph, 4:9, U), 

G, Found a liar; in thy udililions to his words. 
7, Before I die ; that is, until 1 die. 



Prayer and sayings of Agur. 



PROVERBS XXXI. 



Tlu: words of Lemuel. 



tam*' 8 Remove f\vr from me vanity and lies: 
i^ive me ncitlier poverty nor riches; feed mc with 
food convenient for me:" 

9 Lest I be full, and deny* thee, and say, Who is 
the Lord? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take 
the name of my God in vain.^ 

10 Accuse not' a servant unto his master, lest 
lie curse thee, and thou be found guilty. 

11 There is a generation that curseth their father, 
and doth not bless their mother. 

1 2 There is a generation that are pure in their own 
eyes, and yet is not washed from their iilthiness.'' 

13 There is a generation, Oh how lofty arc their 
eyes! and tiieir eyelids are lifted up. 

14 T/i«-eM a generation, whose teeth a;-ea« swords, 
and their jaw teeth as knives, to devour the poor 
from oft' the earth, and the needy from a}nong mcn.'^ 

15 Tlie horseleech hath two daughters, crying, 
Give, give. Tliere are three things that are never 
satisfied, yea, four things say not. It is enough:^ 

10 The grave ;"" and the barren womb ; the earth 
that is not filled with water ; and the fire that saith 
not, // is enough. 

17 The eye that mockoth at his father, and de- 
spisetli to obey his motiier, the ravens of the valley' 
shall ])ick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it.'' 

18 There be tiiree things which arc too wonder- 
ful for me, yea, four which I know not: 

19 The way of an eagle in tlie air ; the way of a 
serpent upon a rock ; the way of a ship in the midst ^ 
of the sea; and the way of a nmn with a nuiid. 

20 Such is the way of an adulterous woman ; 
she cateth, and wipeth her mouth, and saith, I have 
done no wickedness.'' 

21 For tliree things the oartli is disquieted, and 
for four which it cannot bear : 



• Heb. of 




ttlou 


aiir 




t Heb. 


belie. 


iNeh 


i):25 


2r,. 


1 Hpb 


hurt not 


with t/iy tor 




, b 


1.1 


ke 


18:11, 


etc. 


- Amos 


8:4 


Hab. 


.■i:l4. 


'i Heb. 


Wtalth. d Hab 


\'.:^ 


1 


Or 


, brook. 


ech 


20:-iO, 


(Jen 


!l:-2-> 


ti.i; 


.ev. a0:9. 


11 Hcb. Iitart 


f 


ch. 7 


14 


S 


2 King 


S:l-i 


•Heb 




made 


imse; 


Job 39:1, 



8. Vanity; folly and wickedness. 

9. Take the name of my God m vain; by false oaths in- 
tended to cover the sin of stealing. 

10. He; the servant. Guilty; of calumny, and so suffer 
punishment. 

11-lt. 6rcrterat(on; class of persons. Through the re- 
mainder of this chapter the number four prevails. Here 
we have four classes of sinners: the undutiful towards 
their parents, the self-righteous, the proud, and the ava- 
ricious. 

15. Two dau2:hters ; put here to represent her entire race. 
The mention of the horseleech introduces four other in- 
satiable things. 

17. Pick it out — eat it; a thing which happens to bodies 
that have been gibbeted, or left unburied on the battle- 
field. 

18. Too wonderful for me; that is, whose way I cannot 
trace, because they leave no mark behind. 

20. Eiiteth ; spoken figuratively of her sinful enjoyment. 
Wipeth her mouth; so that none can discern the fact that 
she has been eating. The meaning is, that she hides all 
the marks of her guilt, and passes herself for an innocent 
person. 

2C. Conies; a small animal different from our coney, liv- 
ing among the rocks, and distinguished for sagacity. 

28. The spider; or house-lizard, which is very frequent 
in Palestine. 

32. In lifting up thyself; with a haughty and contentious 
spirit. This seems to be a caution against the spirit of 
eelf aggrandizement, which is contentious and prone to 



22 For a servant when he roigueth;" and a fool 
wlien he is filled with meat; 

23 For an odious icoman when she is married; 
and a handmaid that is heir to her mistress. 

24 Tiicre be four things ivhich are little upon the 
earth, but they are exceeding wise:" 

25 The ants are a jieople not strong, yet they 
prepare their meat in the summer;'' 

26 The conies are but a feeble folk, yet make 
they their houses in the rocks;' 

27 The locusts have no king, yet go they forth 
all of them by bands;* 

28 The spider taketli hold with her hands, and 
is in kings' palaces. 

29 There be three things which go well, yea, 
four arc comely in going: 

30 A lion, which is strongest among beasts, and 
turneth not away for any ; 

31 A greyhound;* a he-goat also; and a king, 
against whom there is no rising up. 

32 If thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thy- 
self, or if thou hast thought evil, lay thy hand 
upon thy mouth.-' 

33 Surely the churning of milk liringelh forth 
butter, and the wringing of the nose bringeth forth 
blood : so the forcing of wrath bringeth forth 
strife.'^ 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

1 Lemuers lesson of rhastity and temperance. Tlit- afTlicted are to 
be comforted and defended. 10 The praises and proper! i.s of a "ood 
wife. 

THE words of king Lemuel, the prophecy that 
his mother tauglit him.' 
2 What, my son? and what, the son of my womb? 
and what, the son of my vows? 



p( 




h 


ch 


CvS, 


7, 


i 


?s 


a. 1U4:18. 


t H 


h 


gather 


frf 


together. 


1 Or 


horse; 


H 


h. 


?' 


rt 1 


lithe 


lo 


ns 




Job 40:4, 


Kom 


:) 


19. ' 


r.h 


17:14. 


1 -J T. 


m. 1:5; 


'J: 


lo 































evil devices. Lay thy hand upon thy mouth; be silent and 
humble thyself 

33. The forcing of wrath ; in a struggle for place and 
power. Bringeth forth strife; in which the ambitious man 
will be involved to his injury. Here we have a dissuasive 
from the sin mentioned in the preceding verse. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Those best qualified to instruct others are mosthmn- 
ble and diffident in respect to their own attainments. 

6. They who add to God's word, under whatever pre- 
test, substitute human wisdom for divine truth, and God 
will call them to an account for their folly and wicked- 
ness. 

8. The most desirable outward condition is tliat of a 
moderate competency, free alike from the. temptations of 
wealth and of poverty. 

18. There are innumerable deeds of darkness which 
elude all human vigilance ; but God will expose and pun- 
ish them at the last day. 

32. The spirit of ambition and self-aggrandizement is as 
foolish as it is wicked. It involves men in angry conten- 
tion, hyjjocrisy, falsehood, and dishonest artifices, often to 
their ruin, botli for this world and eternity. 

CHAPTER XXXL 

2. What, my son? this exclamation of Lemuel's mother 
implies apprehension in respect to the sins against which 
she warns him, if not remonstrance against the present 
practice of them. Son of my vows; 1 Sam, 1:27, 28. 

m 



Tht virtuous woman 



TROVERBS XXXI. 



described and praised. 



3 Give not thy strcnj^tli unto women, nor thy 
ways to tliat wliic'h dcsfroyeth kiimv." 

4 It is not for kings. O Lemuel, it is not for kings 
to drink wine; nor lor princes strong drink: 

5 Lest tliey drink, and forget the hxw,'' and per- 
vert' tlic judgment of any of the afflicted.' 

6 Give strong drink unto iiiin tliat is ready to 
perisli, and wine unto those that be of heavy 
hearts.* 

7 Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and 
remember iiis misery no more. 

8 Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of 
all sucii as are apjiointed to** destruction. 

9 Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead 
the cause of the poor and needy." 

10 ■ Wlio can lind'' a virtuous woman'."' for her 
price ?v far above ruliics. 

11 The heart of her husband doth safely trust in 
her, so that lie shall have no need of spoil. 

12 yiie will do him good and not evil all the 
days of her life. 

13 She seeketh wool, and flax, and workcth will- 
ingly with her hands. 

1-1 She is like tlu; merchants' ships; she bringeth 
her food from afar. 

15 She riseth also while it is yet night, and giv- 
cth meat to her household, and a portion to her 
maidens. 

IG She considercth a field, and buycth' it: with 
the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard. 



»H<w. 1:11. bllib. 2:3. • Uvh. allcr. 1 Heh. all l/ie sons of a fftirlion. 
I Hcb. tilltr of soul; 1 Sam 1:10. » llcb. //le sons of. « Job •2'j:l.5, 10; 
l>a. 1:17; Jcr. aj;IO. i Keel. 7:23. • ch. 12:4. I Heb. taktth t Heb. 



18. Perccivcth; well understands from her own expe- 
rience. 

20. Stretchelh out her hand to the pnnr ; lier industry has 
for its object not simply the accumulation of wcaltli, but 
the means of doing good. 

23. Known inthetrates ; where courts are held, and public 
busines.s is transacted. Her worth confers honor upon him. 

29. Many daughters— cxccllcsl them all; these are the 
words of her husband. 

30. Favor; outward grace. 

IN'STRUCTIOXS. 
3-5. Excessive indulgence is always unseemly and ruin- 
ous to both health and intellect ; but it is especially un- 
becoming in magistrates, whom (iod has appointed to 
administer justice in his name, anil to wliom tlio pcoi)le 
naturally look for an example of sobriety and uprightness. 



17 She girdeth her loins with strength, b.?.i?^- 
and strengtheiieth her arms. 

18 She perccivcth"' that her merchandiser good : 
her candle goetli not out by night. 

19 She laveth her hands to the spindle, and her 
hands hold 'the distaff. 

20 She stretchcth* out her hand to the jioor ; 
yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy.' 

21 She is not afraid of the snow for her house- 
hold : for all herhouseholdan' clothed with scarlet.* 

22 She makcth herself coverings of tapestry ; 
her clothing is silk and purple. 

23 Her husband is known in the gates, when he 
sittetli among the elders of the land. 

24 She makcth fine linen, and selleth it; and 
delivercth girdles unto the merchant. 

25 Strength and honor are her clothing ; and she 
shall rejoice in time to come. 

26 She opcneth her mouth with wisdom ; and in 
her tongue is the law of kindness.'"' 

27 She looketh well to the ways of her house- 
hold, and eatoth not the bread of idleness. 

28 lier children arise u]i, and call her blessed; 
her husband also, and he ]iraiseth her. 

29 ilany daughters have done virtuously,* but 
thou excellest them all. 

30 Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain: hut a 
woman t/iat feareth theLoiU), she shall be praised."" 

31 Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let 
her own works praise her in the gates.' 



lastellt. • Hch. sprrat/elli. r Psa. .ll:! ; lUb. 13: 10. } Or. tlouilr i^nmnls. 
f 1 Pet. 3:l-<i. I Or, golUn riches, b Eccl. 7:13; 12:13. ■ Mitt. 7:10, !». 



6. The use of wine and other intoxicating drinks as a 
beverage, may well be given up, as a measure of safety 
to ourselves and lienefit to others, on the principle stated 
by Paul in Kom. H:21. 

lU- 31. In the closing passage of the book of Proverbs, 
the pen of inspiration has given, for the instruction of all 
ages, tbo character of a " virtuous woman," such as every 
wise man will choose for his companion in life. It con- 
sists not in the fascination of outward acoomplislmiente, 
which are too often united witli idleness, prodigality, and 
a selfish, contentious spirit ; but rather in industry, good 
management, authority over her liouschold.and the spirit 
of love and kindness. Such a woman will confer honor 
U])on her husband, and nrake him pro.sperous and happy, 
however she may be undervalued by tliose wbo are too 
ignorant to understand in what female worth consists. 



744 



ECCLESIASTES; 

OR, 

THE PREACHER. 



The book of Ecclesiastes is coinmonly supposed to liavc been written by Solomon in his old ago, when 
he had made full trial of all that earth is able to give, and had found all empty and unsatisfying. His 
theme is the vanity of this world considered as a satisfying portion of the soul. He has tried it in all its 
forms, but has found in none of them a permanent and satisfying good, and comes to the conclusion that 
the cheerful enjoyment of God's present gifts is the part of wisdom, for thus we make the most of them ; 
but this enjoyment must be in the fear of God, who will bring all our works into judgment. He explicitly 
asserts a judgment to come ; but speaks of life as our Saviour does in the words, "The niglit cometh, when 
no man can work ;" implying, that God's service on earth, and the enjoyment of his earthly gifts, close at 
death. This is not a denial of the future life, as some have wrongly maintained, but rather implies a less 
full revelation of its glory than is given us in the Netv Testament. 

With the discussion of his great theme, the Preacher intersperses various directions for the right con- 
duct of life, so as to lessen as fur as possible its evils, and gain the greatest benefit from its blessings. 



tli?"- CHAPTER I. 

1 The Preacher showeth that all human courses are vain: 4 hecause the 
creatures are restless in their courses, 9 lliey bring forth nothintj new, 
and all olj things are forgotten, 1- and because he hath found it so in 
the studies of wisdom. 

THE words of the Preacher,'' the son of David, 
king in Jerusalem. 

2 Vanity of vanities, paith the Preacher, vanity 
of vanities; all is vanity.'' 

3 What profit hath a man of all liis labor whicli 
he taketli under the sun? 

4 One generation passeth away, and another gen- 
eration cometh : but the earth abideth for ever. 

5 The sun also arisetli," and the sun goeth down, 
and liasteth* to his place wiiere he arose. 

6 The wind goetli toward the south, and turneth 
about unto the north; it whirleth about contin- 
ually, and the wind returnetli again according to 
his circuits.'' 

7 All the rivers run into the sea;" yet the sea 



a Ch. l-i:--10. b Psi. 39;.'), 6; 144:4; Mark 8:;!6, 37. » Psi. 19:.'), (1. 
• Heb. pnn/d/i. d John 3:3. e Psa. 104:8, 9. Wleh. to go. t Prov. •27;-JII. 



CHAPTER I. 

2. Vamt 11 of vanities ; uttervanity. So "holy of holies," 
as it is in the original, means most holy, E.xod. 30: 3G ; and 
"revoltcrs of revolters," grievous revolters. Jer. G:28. 

3. Profit; solid and permanent good. Under the sun; an 
expression applied in this book to all earthly objects. 

4-7. One generation passeth — return again; all things run 
the same unvarying round from age to age ; so that the 
experience of one generation is the experience of all. 

8. All things ; all things in this unvarying round. It is 
a rouncl of wearisome and unsatisfying toil. T/ic eye — the 
ear ; these represent all the human faculties, which are 



is not full : unto the jilacc from wlience the rivers 
come, thither they return again.* 

8 All things «re full of labor; man cannot utter 
it: the eye is not t^atistied with seeing, nor the ear 
filled with hearing.' 

9 The thing that hath been, it is that which shall 
be ; and that which is done is that whicli shall be 
done: and there is no new tiling under tlie .^un.*-' 

10 Is there any thing whereof it may be said, 
See, this is new? It hath been already of old time, 
which was Ijefore us. 

11 There is no remembrance of former things; 
neither shall there be any remembrance of things 
that arc to come with those that shall come after. 

12 *, I the Preacher was king over Israel in 
Jerusalem." 

13 And I gave my heart to seek and search out 
by wisdom concerning all things tliat are done 
under heaven : this sore travail hath God given 
to the sons of man to be exercised therewith." 



Sch. 7:10. h 1 Kil 



1 Or, afflict the, 



I'onstantly occupied with the pursuit of good, but without 
being sati.sfiod. 

9. Tliere is no nev: thing; in science and art there may 
be many new discoveries and inventions ; but in the course 
of human experience, which is the Preacher's theme, 
there is nothing new. 

11. No remembrance of former things ; if any thing appears 
new, it is because the former things are forgotten: forget- 
fulness of the past is a characteristic of the human famiij'. 

13. Bij wisdom ; by philosophic inquiry, a sense in which 

the word wisdom is often used in this book. Sore travail; 

wearisome and unsatisfying toil. The reference is to " all 

the works that are done under the sun " by men. Ver. 14. 

745 



The vanity of a 



ECCLESIASTES II. 



life of pkasure. 



14 I have seen all the works that are done un- 
der tlic sun; and hcliold, all is vanity and vexa- 
tion of spirit. 

15 T/taiu'/n'c/iwerookodcannotljcmadestraighl:''' 
and that which is wanting" cannot b(! nuniborcd.'' 

16 I communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, 
I am come to great estate, and have gotten more 
wisdom than all l/ieij that have; been before me in 

• Jerusalem:'' yea, my heart had great experience* 
of wisdom and knowlcHlgc. 

17 And 1 gave my heart to know wisdom, and 
to know madness and folly :'' I perceived that this 
also is vexation of spirit. 

18 For in much wisdom is much grief: and he 
that increascth knowledge increaseth sorrow." 

CHAPTER 11. 

1 The vanity of human courses in the works of pleasure. 12 Though 
the wise be better than the fool, yet both have one event. 18 The 
vanity of human labor, in Icavin;; it they know not lo whom. 24 
is'otlung better than joy in our labor; but that is God's gift. 

rSAID in my heart, Go to now,'' T will prove 
thee with mirth ;*•' therefore enjoy jileasurc:" 
and behold, this also is vanity. 

2 I said of laughter, 11 is mad; and of mirth. 
What doelh it?' '" 

3 I sought in my heart to give myself unto* wine,' 
yet acquainting my heart with wisdom; and to 
Jay hold on folly, till 1 might see what iras that 
good for the sons of men, which they should do 
under the heaven all the days^ of their life. 

4 I made me great woi'ks ; 1 builded me houses ; 
I planted me vineyards : 



i Ch. 7. 13. • Heb. ile/ert. b Job II :li. ' 1 Kings -l;-")-!! ; 1U:«), 21. 
f Ileb. seen much. J ch. 7:3:), aS; 1 Tliess. 5:21. ' ch. la: 1-2. f Luke 
12:19,20. ech. 8:1.'). h Tit. ;i:3. i Prov. 14:13. \ Heb. draw my flesh 
with. J Prov. 211:1. I Heb. tlie number of the days. I Heb. sons o)' mi/ 
house, k 1 Kings 9:28; 10, lU, etc. U lleb. instrument and instruments. 



14. Vexation of spirit; OT, "iemViug on the vrind." Com- 
pare Hosea 12:1. 

15. Crooked; in the course of human affairs. Numbered; 
Buppliod, 80 as to be counted among the tilings tliat are. 
The vanity of life, growiii}; out of what is crooked and 
wanting in liunian affairs, is without remedy. 

17. To know wisdom — madness and folly; to understand 
their nature and effects. 

18. He that increascth knowledge increa-icth sorrow; he 
learns how many and groat are the evils of life, without 
linding on earth any remedy for them. Thus ended the 
Preaelior's first e.\i)eriniciit to find satisfaction iu tlio jjur- 
Buit of wisdom. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. God has exliibitcd to us the vanity of all ciirthly piir- 
BUltfl, that we may make him, and not tliis world, our jior- 
tion, and may place our haijpiucss in learning and doing 
his will. 

8. Christ alone can give rest to the soul. To weary 
ourselves and waste our ilay of grace in the vain endeavor 
to find in the world what lie only can bestow, is an uii- 
spcakable folly. 

9. The errors and follies of tho present day are but a 
repetition of tho errors and follies of past ages. One gen- 
eration after another gives itself up to the same vain un- 
dertaking, that of gaining from this world solid peace and 
happiness, and meets with the same bitter disappointment. 
The way of salvation remains also the same in all ages ; a 
way of holy watelifulness, prayerfulness, and self-denial. 
Thus the history of the past, recorded in God's word, be- 
comes a lamp to all succeeding generations. 

18. The mere knowledge of htinian character and hfo, 
however deep and full, cannot make men blessed. It can 
74G 



5 I made me gardens and orchards, and '^ji'c.'o??: 
I planteil trees in them of all kind (i/" fruits: 

G 1 made me pools of water, to water therewith 
the wood that bringeth forth trees : 

7 I got me servants and maidens, and had ser- 
vants born in my house;' also I had great jios- 
scssions of great and small cattle above all that 
were in Jerusalem before me : 

8 I gathered me also silver and gold, and the 
])eculiar treasure of kings and of the provinces:'' 
1 gat me men-singers and women-singers, and tho 
delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, 
and that of all sorts.^' 

y Ho I was great, and increased more than all 
that were before me in Jerusalem: al.-^o my wis- 
thuii remained with me. 

10 And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kejitnot 
from them, 1 withheld not my heart from any joy ; 
for my heart rejoiced in all my labor: and this 
was my portion of all my lalior.'" 

11 Then J looked on all the works that my hands 
had wrought, and on tlie labor that 1 liad labored 
to do:° and behold, all icas vanity and vexation 
of spirit," and there was no profit under the sun." 

12 ir And I turned myself to behold wisdom, and 
madness, and lolly :'' for what can the man do that 
Cometh after tiio king? even that which hath' been 
already dune. 

13 Then I saw that wisdom excelleth^ folly,'' as 
far as ligiit exccUeth darkness. 

14 The wise man's eyes are in his head;'' but 
the fool walkcth in darkness: and I myself per- 
ceived al.'so that one event happeneth to them all.' 



I aChr. 0:11. m ch. 3 
<\ ch. 7:23. • Or, in th 
in wisdom viore than i 
I Psa. 40; 10. 



I John 2:16. 17. o ch. 11:8. P 1 Tun. 6-6. 
igs wliirh have. 1 Heb. there is an exeelleney 
:h. 7:12: -Mat. 3:18; 4:1, 2. « Prov. 17:24. 



only show the desperate malady of sin, without providing 
any remedy for it. True happiness comes only from faith 
and communion with God. 

CHAPTER II. 

1. Enjoy pleasure ; the Preacher here records hia next 
experiment, which was lo find good in the pleasures of 
sense. 

3. Yet acquainting my heart with -wisdom ; chap. 1:13; 
that is, as ho says in the ninth verso following, " my wis- 
dom remained with me." lie pursued ))leasure with dis- 
cretion, as an earnest man who was seeking to find wliat 
is the true good. To lay hold on folly ; by lolly he means 
the pleasures of sense. On these he laid hold, that ho 
might learn what good they had to bestow. 

8. The peculiar trcnsure of kings and of the provinces ; that 
is, treasure contributed by kings and by the provinces. 
1 Kings 4:21; Exod. 1!):5. 

12. To behold wisilom, and madness, and foil II ; to compare 
them together. Tho I'reacher bad foiiiur both earthly 
wisdom luid folly to be vanity, ami he now inquires what 
advantage the former has over the latter. For what can 
the man do; as much as to say. None can be more compe- 
tent to make this comparison; for who that comes after 
me iu this in<|uiry will be able to add any thing new to my 
experience? Cometh after the king; comcth after a king 
like me in this investigation. 

i:i. Wisdom excellcth folly; in its proper nature. 

14. Arc in his head ; where he can use them to good pur- 
po.sc. This is the superiority of wisdom over follj'. One 
event happeneth to them all ; wise men and fools are alike 
subject to suffering and death ; so that here, >visdom has 
no advantage over folly. Wo must carefully remember 



The viimly of I ihor 



ECCLESIASTES III. 



A time fur all thini^s. 



It c'aw""' !•'> Tlif^n ^"i'l I i» '"J lieai't, As it liap- 
pencth to tlic fool, so it liapiiouetli even to mc;* 
and why was 1 then more wise? Then I said in 
my heart, tliat this also is vanity. 

it) For then is no remeinbranec of tlio wise more 
than of the fool for ever;" seeing that which now 
■/,s- in the days to come shall all be forgotten. And 
how dioth the wise man?'' as the fool. 

17 Therefore I hated life; because the work that 
is wrought under the sun is grievous unto mc : for 
all is vanity and vexation of spirit. 

IS \ Yea, I hated all my labor which I had 
taken* under the sun: because I should leave it 
unto the man that shall be after me. 

I'J And who knoweth whether he shall be a wise 
man or a fool? yet shall he have rule over all my 
labor wherein I have labored, and wherein 1 have 
showed myself wise under the sun.'' This /*■ also 
vanity. 

20 Therefore I went about to cause my heart to 
despair of all the labor which I took under the 
sun. 

21 For there is a man whoso labor is in wisdom, 
and iu knowledge, and in equity ; yet to a man 
that hath not labored therein shall he leave* ityw 
his portion. This also is vanity and a great evil. 

"22 For what hath man of all his labor, and of 
the vexation of his heart, wherein he hath labored 
under the sun?'' 

23 For all his days are sorrows, and his travail 
grief;" yea, his heart taketh not rest in the night.' 
This is also vanity. 

24 T There is nothing better for a man, than that 
lie should cat aud drink, and that he should nuxke 
his soul enjoy good' in his labor. This also I 
saw, that it was from the hand of God.^ 



•He 


b. lorn 


t, fitf 




m 




a 


Exod. 


•n, p 


b Heb 


9:27 


t Heb. 


fri/w 


red. 


■: I Ki 


igs 12: 


S etc 




H 


Bb 


K 


ve. i 


Matt 


16: -'0. 


= Job 5:7 


14 


1; 


\0tS 


14:22. 


1 Ps. 


1 27: 


,>■ 


■.h. 


H 


Hi 


i Or 


delight his s 


lenses 


e c 


1, h 


■Ih 


ni. 


i Heb 


bejore 


Aim, 


(i 






1; 


Luke 


1:6. 


h Job a 


7:16, 


17; 1 


■rov 


VJ 


22; 



that he is speaking of the earthly advantages of wisdom. 
Compare the words of the apostle : " If in this life only we 
have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable." 
1 Cor. 15:19. 

18. Labor; estate accumulated by labor. Becautse I 
should leave it; another sad disadvantage under which the 
wise man labors. He must leave all his estate to his suc- 
cessor, who may be a fool — as Rehoboam, Solomon's son, 
actually was in comijarison with his father. 

24. Nolhiii<i hiilcv fnr (I mitn ; that is, nothing better to 
be gained liuni In, r mlily fnil. When he enjoys it with 
a cheerful :iiid iniilciitiil spirit, he makes the most of it. 
T/tis also; the capacity thus to enjoy the fruits of our 
labor. 

2.5. Can hasten hereunto ; can ardently engage in the en- 
joyment of worldly good. lie confirms what he has just 
said by an appeal to his own experience, which was as 
full as any man's could be. 

26. This also is vanity ; what has been said of enjoying 
one's labor. It is the most that one can gain from it, yet 
it is unsatisfying. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

11. God gave to Solomon all of this world that heart 
could wish, with wisdom to enjoy it in the highest degree. 
Yet, after a full experience, he pronounced the whole to 
1)0 " vanity and vexation of spirit." From this we learn 
the folly of hoping to gain from this world a satisfying 
good, and the true wisdom of going to God for blessed- 
ness. 

15. Siuce wisdom, the most excellent of all earthly pos- 



25 For who can cut, or who clso can hasten 
hrnuvfo, more than ! ? 

2() For (Vod giveth to a man that /,v good in his 
sight' wisdom, and knowledge, and joy : but to the 
sinner ho giveth travail, to gather and to heap uj), 
that he may give to him that is good bcrorc (!od.'' 
This also is vanity and vexation of spirit. 

CIIAPTEll III. 

1 "By tlie necessary change of times, vanity is added to human travail. 
U Tliere is an excellency in God's works. 10 But as for man, God 
shall judge his works there, and here he sliall be like a beast. 

TO every thing there is a season, and a time to 
every purpose under the heaven : 

2 A time to be boni,^ aud a time to die;' a. tluio 
to plant, and a time to pluck up that wfiirh. is 
planted ; 

3 A time to kill, and a time to heal : a time to 
break down, and a time to build up ; 

4 A time to weep, and a time to laugh ;J a time 
to mourn, and a time to dance;'' 

5 A time to cast away stones, and a time to 
gather stones togi^ther; a time to embrace,' and a 
time to refrain* from embracing;"' 

6 A time to get,+ and a time to lose ; a time to 
keep, and a time to cast away ; 

7 A. time to rend, and a time to sew ; a time to 
keep silence," and a time to speak ;" 

8 A time to love, and a time to liate;'' a time of 
war, and a time of ]ieacc. 

U What prolit hath he that worketh iu that 
wlierein he laiiorcth? 

10 I have seen the travail, which God hath given 
to the sons of men to be e.verciscd in it. 

11 He hath made every thing beautiful iu his 
time: also he hath set the world in their heart, 



2S:8. 


11 Heb. 


bear. 


i 


H 


eh. 


9:27. J 


Rom. 


12:1.3. 


k 


P».1. 


150:4. 


1 1 Cor. 


7:3-3. 


•Heb. 


he (a 


ft 


07 




"Exod 


19:15; 


Joel 2:16 


t tJ 


r, ut:k. 


» Amos 


5:13. 


Job 3-. 


:4,et 




P 


i'si 


139:21 


Luke 


14:26 


H 


V. 2: 


'■ 





sessions, cannot exempt men from suffering, disappoint- 
ment, and death, which are also the lot of fools, it is man- 
ifest that God designs this world to be a place of trial for 
men, and not their final portion. It is only when we thus 
regard and use it, that it ceases to be vanity. 

24. It is our duty and privilege to receive with glad 
and thankful hearts the gifts of God's providence, and to 
enjoy them without anxious thought for the morrow. Thus 
we gain from them all the good which they are capable of 
yielding. But unless we lift our hearts upwards from tho 
gifts to God the infinite Giver, we shall find that "this 
also is vanity and vexation of spirit." 

CHAPTER III. 

1-9. To merij thing there is a season — wlierein he taborcth; 
in human affairs there is, by God's appointment, a constant 
alternation of opposite events, lying beyond the control 
of men. For the purposes of probation, this is a wise and 
good arrangement. But ibr the enjoyment of this world, 
which is what the Preacher has in view, it is an evil ; for 
it makes all present good uncertain and transient. To cast 
awaij stones ; either to mar a field by casting abroatl s tones 
ujion it, 2 Kings 3:19, 25, or to cast away stones in demol- 
ishing a building. To gather stones together; the ojiposito 
work. 

11. Also he hath set the world in their heart ; words of diffi- 
cult interpretation. A preferable rendering would be : 
"Also he hath set the world in their heart, because that 
no niiiii can find out," etc. The meaning would then bo 
that God, understanding the inability of mcu to attain, by 

747 



God uill judge all. 



ECCLESIASTES IV. 



Vanity and vexation. 



SO that no man can find out the work that God 
maketh from the beginning to the end.'' 

12 I know that there is no good in tliem, but for 
a man to rejoice, and to do good in his life."" 

13 And also that every man sliouhl eat and 
drink, and enjoy the good of all his labor, it is 
the gift of God> 

14 I know that, whatsoever God doetli, it shall 
be for ever:" nothing can be put to it, nor any 
thing taken from it:° and God doeth it, that men 
should fear before liini. 

15 Tiiat which hath been is now/ and that which 
is to be hath already been ; and God requireth 
that which is past.' 

16 • And moreover I saw under the sun the 
place of judgment, that wickedness teas there [" and 
the place of righteousness, that iniquity xvas there. 

17 I said in my heart, God shall judge the right- 
eous and the wicked :'' for there is a time there for 
every purpose and for every work. 

18 I said in my heart concerning the estate of 
the sons of men, that God might manifest them, 
and that they might see* that they themselves are 
beasts.' 

19 For that which befalleth the sons of men bc- 
falleth beasts; even one thing befalletii them as 
the one dieth, so dieth the other ; yea, tliey have 
all one breath ; so that a man hath no preeminence 
above a beast: for all is vanity. 



• Job 11:7 


8;Rom.n:3J. '>Pki.;j7:3 c ch. 2:'-'I. djas.l:17 


t Prov. 


30:6. ' ch. 


1:9. • He>>. driven away. S ch 5:S; Jer. 5: 1, 2. 


h .Mall. 


23:32; Rom 


■i.dS: 2 Cor. 5:10: SThcM. 1:6-10. t Or, Ihey m 
; Pa 81:4. ■ Psa. 49:12, 2U; W;-i-2. J Gen 3:19. 


i^hi clear 


God and .<« 


I Heb. of 



philosophic inquiry, to a full comprehension of his works 
and w;iys, lias wisely set the world in their heart ; that is, 
has occupied them to a large extent with its cares and 
labors, as a discipline that is good in its place and for the 
ends of probation. Their wisdom and haiipiness lie, then, 
not in vain endeavors to comprehend what is incompre- 
hensible, but rather in submitting themselves in faith and 
patience to the appointments of their heavenly Father. 
Our version gives the same idea in the form of a result 
instead of a reason: " He hath set the world in their heart, 
60 that no man can find out," etc. 

U. Wlmlsoever God docth ; in ordering the course of 
human affairs. His arrangements are unchangeable, and 
above human control. Should fear before him; in view of 
his su])reinacy over them. 

15. lieijuireth lluit which is post; looks it up, as it were, 
for the i)urpose of causing it to e.vist again. This includes 
both the natural succession of creatures, fruits, and sea- 
Bons, and the general course of hiiinuii events. 

17. There; at God's tribunal. For every j)urpose and fur 
every work; that is, for bringing them into judgment. 

18. Concerning the estate of the sons of men; or. It is in 
behalf of the sons of men; namely, that God deals with 
them as stited above, ver. 10. Tliat Oo'l mipht mamfat 
them; that is, try them, and make them known to tliem- 
Bclves. 

19-21. Tlial which hefnUclh — turn to duxl a pain ; tne sim- 
ple meaning of llicse words is, that men and beasts alike 
suffer bodily death. I'sa. -19:20. The "one thing " that 
befalls l)otb, is the death of the body; the "one breath" 
of both, is the breath of animal life; the " one place " to 
which both go is the dust. Who knotrelh ; who can dis- 
cern by his outward senses? At death the spirit of a 
man goes upward to God who gave it, elia)). 12:7, while 
the spirit of a beast goes downward to the earth. But 
this is something beyond the sphere of liumaii observa- 
tion. So far as this world is concerned, "as the one dieth 
80 dieth the other." 

22. To see wluU sliall be after him ; in the future of this 
748 



20 All go unto one place; all are of the "^b'c.^: 
dust, and all turn to dust again.^ 

21 Wiio knowetli the spirit of man* that goeth' 
upwiird," and the spirit of the beast that goeth 
downward to the earth ? 

22 Wherefore I perceive that there is nothing 
better, than that a man should rejoice in his own 
works;' for that is his jiortion: for who shall 
bring him to see what shall be after him ? 

CHAPTER IV. 

1 Vanity is increased unto men by oppression, 4 by en\'v, 5 by idleness, 
7 by coveLousness. 9 by solitariness, 13 by wilfulness. 

SO T returned, and considered all the oppres.sions 
that are done under the sun : and behold the 
tears of such as v-cre oppressed, and they had no 
comforter; and on the side of their oppressors 
there was power ; but they had no comforter. 

2 Wherefore I praised the dead which are already 
dead, more than the living which are yet alive. 

^ Yea, better is he than both they, which hath 
not yet been, who hath not seen the evil work 
that is done under the sun.™ 

4 Ti Again, I considered all travail, and every 
right' work, that for this a man is envied of his 
neiglibor." This is also vanity and vexation of 
spirit. 

5 The fool foldctli his hands together," and eatcth 
his own flesh. 



lilt sons of man. t Heb. is ascending, k ch. 12:7. 1 ch. 2:44. I Heb. 
hand, ni Job 3: II, etc. ; ch. 6:3. lUeb.alllheriglilnessof. * Heb. lAij 
is the envy of a man from, o Gen. 37:4, 11. o Prov. 6:10. 



world. Since no man can foresee what shall be after hira, 
he should with a cheerful spirit enjoy the present gifts of 
God's providence. The Preacher does not mean a disso- 
lute enjoyment of this world, without the fear of God, but 
an enjoyment which is in his fear. Chap. 11:9; 12 : 13. 

IXSTRUCTIOXS. 

1. Since it is God's plan tliat men should be subjected 
to constant changes in this world, and should have no 
permanent and sure possession of earthly good, we ought 
to bear with cheerful resignation the vicissitudes of life, 
while we look to the future world for " a city which hath 
foundations, wliosc builder and maker is God." 

19. Sin has brought death upon our bodies and placed 
them on a level with the bodies of beasts. But from this 
deep liumiliation Christ will deliver all his people, for he 
will raise them up at the last day, and present them before 
his Father's throne, made perfect iu soul and body, with 
everlasting joy. 

22. We can know no more of the future than what God 
has been pleased to reveal in his word. While then we faith- 
fully perform the duties of the present hour, we can safely 
leave in his hands all that awaits us here and hereafter. 

("II-VI'TER IV. 

1. Returned, and considered; considered again; took a 
80( ond view. 

2. :i. Wherefore I praised tlie dead — done under the sun; 
the Treacher is looking at this life simply as a scene of 
vanity and oppression, without reference to its connection 
with the life to come. Thus regarded, it seems to his 
earnest spirit an evil and not a good, so that the best thing 
is to have no experience of it. 

4. Kiirht work; skilful and successful undertaking. Is 
envied (if his neighbor; this is the trouble connected with 
successful activity. 

.1. Entclh his oir'n flesh ; wastes his estate, without renew- 
ing it l>y industry: one of the troubles of indolence. 



Vanity and vexation. 



ECCLESIASTES V. 



Vanities in worship. 



u. iliri^' 6 Better is a lianciful with quietness, than 
both the hands full with travail and vexation of 
spirit.^ 

7 1 Then I returned, and I saw vanitj^ under the 
sun. 

8 There is one alone, and there is not a second ; 
yea, he hath neither child nor brother : yet is there 
no end of all his labor ; neither is his eye satisfied 
with riches;'' neither saith he, For whom do I 
labor, and bereave my soul of good?" This is 
also vanity, yea, it is a sore travail. 

9 IT Two are better than one ; because they have 
a good reward for their labor. 

10 For if they fall, the one will lift up his fol- 
low : but woe to him that is alone when lie falletli ; 
for /ic hath not another to help him up. 

11 Again, if two lie together, then they have 
heat: but how can one be warm alone? 

12 And if one prevail against liim, two shall 
withstand him : and a threefold cord is not quick- 
ly broken. 

13 li Better is a poor and a wise child, than an 
old and foolish king, who will no more be* ad- 
monished. 

14 For out of prison he comeih to reign ; where- 
as also he that is born in his kingdom becometh 
poor. 

15 I considered all rhe living wliicli walk under 
the sun, with the second child that shall stand up 
in his stead. 

16 There is no end of all the people, even of all 
that have been before them : they also tliat come 
after shall not rejoice in him. Surely this also is 
vanity and vexation of spirit. 



»l'rov. 15;10, 17. bProv.ai:*; IJolma.lO. c 
eth not lobe. <i Exod. 3:5; •-> Chr. aOaC. e 1 S: 
Hoi. (i;G. t Or, loord. f Prnv. 10:19; Matt. 6:' 



e Num. 30:2; Deut. 



6. Both the hands full with travail; these words imply, 
that the increase of one's estate is usually the increase of 
his trouble. 

7. / returned, and I saw vanity; I considered another 
example of vanity, that of the miser who toils for wealtli 
without an heir. 

9-12. Two are better than one — a threefold cord is not quickly 
broken; examples to show the advantages of union in 
human affairs. Tliey have a good reward for their labor ; 
because by union they are able to accomi)lish it success- 
fully. 

14. He Cometh; the poor and wise child. His wisdom 
elevates him from a prison to the throne of the old king. 

15. The living winch walk; walk with tlie king as his 
subjects. With the second child ; with the wise child already 
named, who is called second, because he reigns next after 
the old king, in his stead. 

16. Tiiat have been before them; before these two kings 
as their subjects. Shall not rejoice in him ; because death 
has removed him from the throne ; or because the uext 
generation shall be alienated from him, so that to himself 
tho final issue of his wisdom shall be trouble. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. Although industry is better than idleness, yet we 
ought not to set our heart upon present enjoyment from 
the successful accomplishment of our worldly enterprises ; 
for prosperity brings in its train envy, opposition, and 
many other annoyances. 

9. In all human labors union is a chief source of strength 
and comfort. 

16. It is the high prerogative of wisdom to raise men 
from obscurity to eminent stations. Yet their greatness 
';annot continue by reason of death, and besides, it goner- 



CHAPTER V 



1 \ aiullcs in divine service, S in murnnuring ajainst oppression, 9 nnd 
in nchcs. 18 Joy in riches is the gift of God. 

KEEP thy foot wlien thou goest to the house 
of God,'' and be more ready to hear, than to 
give the sacrifice of fools:'' for they consider not 
that they do evil. 

2 Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy 
heart be hasty to utter any thing^ before God: 
for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth : there- 
fore let thy words be few.' 

3 For a dream conieth througli the multitude of 
business ; and a fool's voice is known by multitude 
of words. 

4 "When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not 
to pay it;^ for he hath no pleasure in fools:'' pay 
that which Ihou hast vowed. 

5 Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than 
that tliou shouldest vow and not pay.' 

6 Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin ; 
neither say thou before the angel,^ that it icas an 
error : wherefore should God be angry at thy 
voice, and destroy the work of thy hands? 

7 For in the multitude of dreams and many 
words there are also divers vanities: but fear thou 
God.'^ 

8 ^ If thou seest the oppression of the poor,' 
and violent perverting of judgment and justice in 
a province, marvel not at the matter :* for he that 
w higher than the iiighest regardeth;"' and there be 
liiglier than they." 

9 1 Moreover the profit of the earth is for all : 
the king himself is served by the field. 

10 He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied 



a3:-2l-23; Paa. G6:13, 14. h Heb. 1U::J8. i Prnv. 20:2.5; Acts 5:4. J 1 Cor. 
11:10; Heb. 1:14. kch. 12:1.3. lch.3:I6. I Heb. wit!, or purpose. » Psa. 
12:5; 58:11. nPsa. 95:3. 



ally brings to them more personal trouble than comfort ; 
so that they, in common with all other men, must place 
their final hope in the rest that remaiucth for the people 
of God. 

CHAPTER V. 

1. Keep thy foot; this and the six following verses con- 
tain a warning against inconsiderateness in God's service, 
in respect to sacrifices, prayers, and vows. To hear, than 
to give the sacrifice of fools; compare 1 Sam. 15:22. 

2. To utter any thing; in prayer. The thought of his 
majesty should make our words few and well pondered. 
Matt. B:7, 8. 

3. A dream cometh — and a fool's voice is known; that is. 
As a dream cometh, so a fool's voice is known. A fool's 
words poured out at random are like the confused images 
of a troubled dream. 

6. Cause thy flesh to sin; bring guilt and trouble upon 
thee by a hasty vow that will not be fulfilled. Before the 
angel; the word angel means messenger. Here we are 
probably to understand the priest, as appointed by God 
to e,xpound to men the Levitical law. It was an error; 
the matter of vowing. By saying this, he attempts to 
excuse himself from paying it. 

8. There be higher than they; the reference is plainly to 
God's tribunal. Chap. 12: 14. If there were no judgment 
to come, we might well wonder at the violence and oppres- 
sion with which tho earth is filled. The only adequate 
explanation is that which the Preacher himself gives at 
the close of the book: "God shall bring every work into 
judgment.'' 

10-12. Shall not be satisfied with silver— they are increased 
that eat them — will nrt suffer htm to sleep ; tliree of the van- 
749 



Vanity nf riches 



ECCLESIASTES VI. 



lost or unenjoyed. 



•with silver; nor he that lovcth abumlance witli 
increase." This is also vanit}'. 

11 When goods increase, they are increased that 
eat them: and what good is there to the owners 
thereof, saving tiic beholding of them with their 
eyes? 

12 The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether 
he eat little or much : but the abundance of the 
rich will not stilfer him to sleep. 

13 There is a sore evil ic/iick I have seen under 
the sun, namely, riches kept for the owners there- 
of to their iiurt.'' 

14 But those riches perish by evil travail : and 
he begettcth a son, and there is nothing in his 
hand. 

15 As he came forth of his motlier's womb, nak- 
ed shall lie return to go as he came, and shall 
take nothing of his labor, which he may carry 
away in his hand."^ 

1(5 And this also is a sore evil, that in all points 
as he came, so shall he go : and what profit hath 
he that hath labored for the wind?'' 

17 All his days also he eateth in darkness, and 
he hath much sorrow and wrath with his sickness.'' 

IS IT Behold that wliich 1 have seen : it is good 
and comely* for one to cat and to drink, and to 
enjoy the good of all his labor that he taketh 
under the sun all* the days of his life, which God 
giveth him:*^ for it is his portion. 

19 Every man also to whom God hath given 
riches and wealth, and hath given liim power to 
eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice 
in his labor; this is the gift of God." 

20 For he shall not much remember* the days 



• Matt. 6:19, ■2i. b 1 Tim. 0:9; Jas. 5:1, 2. c Job l-.H; Psi. 49:17. 
i Prnv. 11 :«; Hos. 8:7. » Prov. 1 :27-a9. • Heb. there is a ^ood vilmli is 
comtlij. \Hah. the number of . f 1 Tim. 0:17. S ch. 2;2'l; 3:12. 13. t Or, 



ities of wealth : it does not satisfy ; it brings an increase of 
retinue and expenditure ; it deprives its owners of sleep. 

13-17. There is a sore evil — wrath with his sickness ; a fourth 
double vanity of wealth: after a life of toil and care in ac- 
cumulating it, it is liable to be all lost to both the owner 
and his heirs, and must at all events be left behind at 
death. To their hurt ; to their final sorrow and vexation 
by tlio loss of them. Evil travail; misfortune. Naked shall 
he return; the loss of wealth by "evil travail" leads the 
Preacher's thoughts to its final and inevitable loss at 
death. 

18. It is good and comely for one to eat and to drink ; in view 
of the vanity of wealth, the Preacher again recommends 
the contented and cheerful enjoyment of God's present 
gifts. 

20. The days of his life; the evils that attend them. An- 
sweretlihim in the jny of /us heart; answers his desire in the 
joy with whidi he iills his heart. Tho thankful and con- 
tented enjoyment of God's present gifts causes him to 
forget tho ills with which life is checkered. 

IXSTIIUCTIONS. 

1. An obedient and teachable spirit is more acceptable 
to God than all outward services, which are often per- 
formed in .in inconsiderate and presum])tuous way. 

2. Many a prayer which men call eloquent is abominable 
in (iod's sight, because it comes from a spirit of levity 
and self-complacency. True roverencc for him will check 
the vain flow of words. 

6. tiod will not allow men to mock him by vain prom- 
ises. For this reason hasty vows are to bo discouraged, 
lest they who make them shouM repent of them, and 
neglect their fulfilment, and thus bring {;uill upon their 
nouls. 

T.'O 



of his life ; because God answereth him in Vc.'rf;: 
the joy of his heart. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 The vauity of rinljes without use. 3 Of children, 6 and old age with- 
out riclies. 9 Tlic vanity of sight and wandering desires. 11 The 
conclusion of vanities. 

THERE is an evil which I have seen under the 
sun, and it is common among men: 

2 A man to whom God hath given riches, wealtli. 
and honor, so that he waiiteth notiiing for his soul 
of all that he desircth," yet God giveth iiiin not 
power to cat thereof, but a stranger eatctii it.' 
This is vanity, and it is an evil disease. 

3 IF If a man beget a hundred children, and live 
many years, so that the days of his years be many, 
and his soul be not filled with good, and also that 
he have no burial ;' I say, that an untimely birth 
is bcttci' tiiaii he. 

4 For he conieth in with vanity, and departeth 
in darkness, and his name sliall be covered witli 
darkness. 

5 Moreover he hath not seen the sun.'^ nor known 
any thing: this hath more rest than the other. 

6 Yea, though he live a thousand years twice 
told, yet hath he seen no good : do not all go to 
one place? 

7 All the labor of man is for his mouth,' and yet 
the appetite'* is not filled. 

8 For what hath the wise more tlian the fool? 
what hath the poor, that knoweth to walk before 
the living? 

9 *ii IJctter is the sight of the eyes than tho 
wandering of the desire.' This is also vanity 
and vexation of spirit. 



though he give ttot much, yet hf. remembereth. h Job 21 :10. etc. ; Psa. 7.*}:". 
i Luke 12:20. J 2 Kings 9:3.'K57; Isa. 14:19. 2«; Jer. 22:19. k Psa. S8:8. 
1 Prov. 10:2fi. 5 Hob. .to«^ \ lUh. loalking of the soul. 



18. Since riches are unsatisfj'ing, uncertain, attended 
with an increase of trouble and anxiety, and must all bo 
left behind at death, the wise man will be contented with 
the 8up]ily of his daily wants, and will lay up his treasure 
in heaven. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1. Tliere is an evil; the Preacher has shown that the 
power to enjoy good aright is the gift of God, and is tho 
sum of earthly Idessings. Chap. 5:18-20. Ho now con- 
siders the o])posite case. 

2. Giveth htm not power to cat thereof; either through tlie 
influence of tormenting passions, as avarice and envy ; or 
through sickness and other calamities. A stranger; an- 
other than himself. 

3. Be not filled with good — Anir no burial; live without 
enjoying life, and come to a disgraceful end. 

4. Na?nc sitall be covered with darkness; none shall hear 
of it. 

6. 77ik; the untimely birth. For tho thought, tompare 
chap. 4:3. 

fi. Do not all go to one place 7 that is, since in his long life 
ho has seen no good, what is the profit of living long, as 
in tho cntl the aged must with all others go to the grave ? 

7. For his mouth ; to satisfy his bodily wants. Is not filled ; 
is ever craving more. 

8. What hath the wise more than the font 7 that is, in respect 
to what has just been named. In tlicir bodily wants, wise 
men and fools stand on a level. The poor; tho poor wise 
man. Knoirrth to walk; to walk wisely. 

9. The sight of the eyes; the sight and enjoyment 'if 
present good. The wandering oftlie desire; after absent 
good. 



Divers remedies 



ECCLESIASTES VII. 



against this vanity. 



B.c'wT^' 10 Tliat whicli hath been is named al- 
ready, and it is known that it is man: neitlier 
may he contend with him that ismiglitier than he.''' 

11 "i Secinix tliere be many things that increase 
vanity,'' what is man tlie better? 

12 For who I<noweth what is good for man in 
this life,'- all the days of his vain life* which he 
spendeth as a shadow?'' for who can tell a man 
what shall be after him under the sun ? 



CHAPTER VII. 

1 RemeJies against vanity are, a good name, 2 mortification, 7 patience, 
11 wisdom. 23 The difficulty of wisdom. 

A GOOD name is better than precious oint- 
ment ;"= and the day of death than the day 
of one's birth. 

2 • It is better to go to the house of mourning, 
tlian to go to the house of feasting: for that is 
the end of all men ; and the living -will lay it to 
his heart. 

3 .Sorrow ^is better than laughter: for by the 
sadness of the countenance the heart is made bet- 
ter.f 

4 The heart of the wise is in the house of moin-n- 
ing ; but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth. 

5 It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise,- 
than for a man to hear the song of fools : 

6 For as the crackling* of tiiorns under a pot, 
so is the laughter of a fool. This also is vanity. 

7 *ii Surely oppression maketh a wise man mad ; 
and a gift destroyeth the heart.'' 



» Job 40:2; [si. 45:9. b Psa. 73:6. <: Psa. 47:4. ■ Heb. the number of 
the day.': of Ihe life of his vanit!/. i Psa. 102:11; Jas. 4:14. e Frov. 22:1. 
t Or, Anatr. ( 2 Cor. 7:10. e Psa. 141:5. I Heb. sound, h Deut. 16:19. 
> Prov. 14:29. § Ueh. out of wisdom, i Or, a^ good as an inheritance, yea, 



10. That which liath been is named already; or, that which 
is hath been named aheady. Compare chap. 1:9; :3:15. 
Knou-n ; from all past experience. Tliat it is man : neither 
may he contend with him that is miglitier than lie; that is, 
weak, frail, and perishing man, who occupies this world 
subject to the sovereign appointment of (iod, and unable 
to change the course of human affairs which He has 
establi.'^hed. 

11. What is man the belter 7 literally, " What profit is there 
to man?" that is, what satisfying good has he? 

12. In this life — what shall be after him ; two reasons are 
given why there is no profit to man: first, no one can 
show any satisfying good ; secondly, no one can under- 
stand the future. 

INSTRUCTION. 
It is easy for God to unbitter to men all their earthly 
pos.sessions, so that while they are suiTounded by wealth 
their souls shall be in the deepest poverty. The time 
enjoyment of life lies not in the abundance of outward 
good, but rather in a cheerful and contented spirit; espe- 
cially in a humble resignation of ourselves to his all-pow- 
erful disposal, with unwavering faith in him for the pres- 
ent and the future. 

CHAPTER VII. 

2. Tliat is the end of all men; that is. the end of aU men 
is seen in the house of mourning. Will lay it to his heart; 
will meditate there on the vanity of life, and be thus led 
to prepare himself for death. 

5. The rebuJce of the wise; another painful thing which is 
better than mirth and flattery. 

6. ITie crackling of thorns ; their fiame is noisy and fierce, 
but soon over. 

7. Oppression ; suffered. Maketh a wise man mad; it tends 
to this result. The verse notices two opposite tcmpta- 



8 Better is the end of a thing than the beginning 
thereof: and the patient in spirit is better than 
the proud in spirit.' 

9 Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for 
anger resteth in the bosom of fools. 

10 Say not thou. What is the cause that the for- 
mer days were better than these? for thou dost 
not inquire wisely^ concerning this. 

11 'i Wisdom is good with an inheritance:' and 
by it there is profit to them that sec the sun. 

12 For wisdom is a defence,' and money is :i 
defence : but the excellency of knowledge is, that 
wisdom givetli life to them that have it.^ 

13 Consider the work of God : for who can maki- 
that straight, which he hath made crooked?" 

14 In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in th(^ 
day of adversity consider: God also hath set* the 
one over against the other,' to the end that man 
should find nothing after hira. 

15 All things have I seen in the days of my 
vanity : there is a just man that perisheth in lii.s 
righteousness,'" and there is a wicked man that 
prolongeth his life in his wickedness." 

16 Be not righteous overmuch, neither make 
thyself overwise:° why shouldest thou destroy 
tiiyself?+i' 

IT Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou fool- 
ish: why shouldest thou die before* thy time?" 

18 It is good that thou shouldest take hold of 
this ; yea, also from this withdraw not thy hand : 
for he that feareth God shall come forth of them 
all.' 



better too. ^ Heb. shadow. 1 Prov. S::i5. k Isa. 14:27. • Heb. made. 
1 John 10:33; Acts 14:22. m ch. 8:14; John 16:2; Acts 7:59. " Isa. 65:20. 
Rom. 10:2. t Heb. be desolate. V ch. 12:12. J Heb. not in. 1 Psa. 
55:33. rch. 8:12, 13; Mai. 4:2. 



tious to which the wise are exposed in this world of van- 
ity and crookedness. 

8. The end of a thing; its successful accomplishment, 
which requires patience and perseverance. "VVe must 
wait till an undertaking is through, before we can speak 
confidently of it. The patient in spirit — tlie proud in spirit ; 
the proud are properly contrasted with the patient, since 
pride is the root of anger. 

10. What is the cause ; the Preacher forbids a complaining 
spirit, which is alwaj's contrasting the evils of the present 
with the good of the past. This is a work of impatience 
and folly. 

11. Wisdom is good with an inheritance ; the marginal 
reading, "as good as an inheritance." seems to contain the 
true idea, which the following verse confirms. 

13. Consider tlie work of God ; his sovereign ordering of 
himian aflairs. Tliat which he tiath made crooked; see chap. 
1:15. 

14. Find nothing after him; find out nothing that shall 
be after him. God has so mingled prosperity and adver- 
sity, that no man can find out what awaits him in the future 
of this life. 

15. Perisheth in his rigliteou.sness; for righteousness' sake. 
Prolongeth his life in his wickedness; through his wicked- 
ness. 

IG, 17. Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thyself over- 
wise — be not overmuch wicked; be cautious against a false 
righteousness, on the one hand, which is corrupted by 
pride and self-conceit ; and on the other, against the out- 
Ijreakings of wickedness and folly, since both lead to 
destruction. 

IS. Take hold of this; namely, my counsel. Withdraw 
not thy hand; do not let it go; the opposite of taking hold 
upon' it. Come forth of them all; of the dangers above 
referred to. 

Tr.i 



Advantages of wisdom. 



ECCLESIASTES VIII. 



T/ic ways of Providcrut. 



19 Wisdom strcngtlieneth tlie wise more than 
ten inigiity men wiiieli are iu the city. 

20 For there is not a just man iijxm earth, tliat 
(locth good, and sinncth not." 

21 Also taivC no heed" unto all words that arc 
spoken;'' lest thou hear thy servant curse tliec: 

22 For oftentimes also thine own heart knoweth 
that thou thyself likewise hast cursed others. 

23 11 All this have 1 proved by wisdom: 1 said, 
1 will be wise; but it was far from mo.'' 

24 That whicli is far oil", and cxci'i'ding deep, 
who can find it out? 

25 I applied my heart* to know, and to search, 
and to seek out wisdom, and tlie reason of things, 
and to know the wickedness of folly, even of fool- 
ishness and madness : 

20 And I hnd more bitter than death the woman, 
whoso heart is snares and ne(s, and her iiands rt.y 
bands:'' whoso pleaseth' God shall escape from 
her;" but the sinner shall bo taken by her. 

27 Behold, this have J found, saitli the Preacher, 
counting one by one, to find out the account ;^ 

28 Which yet my soul seeketh, but I find not : 
one man among a thousand have I found; but a 
woman among all tliosc have 1 not found. 

29 Lo, this only have 1 found, that God hath 
made man upright;' but they have sought out 
many inventions.''' 



« 2 Ciir. 6:36; 1 John 1:H. • Hcb. give, „ot thy heart, b Isa. 29:21. 
«Rom.l:2-2; lCor.l:20. MU\>. I and my heart cowpasstd. d I'rov. 5::)- 
.■>. I Heb. he that ii ifoorf 6f/b«. eProv. 22:14. S Or. weishillR one lAing- 
afUr another, to Jind out the reason. 'Gen. 1:2". S Gen. 3:0, etc. h Prov. 



20. For tliere is not a just man — and sinnelh not ; he has 
just said, verse 19, " Wisdom strengtheneth the wise." He 
now shows wliy sucli strengthening is needed. It is 
because, in a world of universal frailty and sinfulness, 
wisdom alone guide.s us aright. 

21, 22. Alt worth that are spoken; words of reproach ut- 
tered against thyself. Trouble not thyself about finding 
them out, since thou art in the like condemnation with 
respect to others. 

23. All this; what the Preacher has recorded of his 
search after good. Ho had found out that " all is vanity ;" 
liut wisdom itself, that is, a comprehension of God's works 
and ways, remained far from him. 

24. Far off — exceeding deep ; as are the works and ways 
of God. (Compare chap. 3:11 ; 8:17. 

27. Counting one bijone; adding the result of one trial 
to that of another. 

28. A woman; a woman of true wisdom. Among all 
those; among all this number, that is, among a thousand. 
The reference seems to be to Solomon's experience of the 
women who belonged to his royal establishment. Among 
such a thousand, selected for their personal charms, and 
many of them from among the heathen nations, nourished 
in idleness and luxury, and intriguing with each other 
for the monarch's favor, no better result could have been 
expected, llero was not the place to find Ruths and 
Hannahs. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. God is continually opening to the living the house of 
mourning, that they may enter and consider what awaits 
ihom. "The heart of the wise willingly dwells there. It 
is only the foolish who seek by noisy mirth to exclude 
from their minds all Uioughts of death and judgment to 
eomc. 

6. The enjoyment of those who make earthly pleasure 
their chief good is turbulent and short-lived, and ends in 
darkness and sorrow. 

8. We should not be too much elated with the prosper- 
oiw beginning of an enterprise, but rather wait to sec the 



CHAPTER VIII. Vo.^: 

1 Kings are greatly to bo rcspcctetl. G The divine providence to be ob- 
served. Vi It i.s better with the godly in adversity. th;in with the 
wicked in prosperity. 10 The work of God is unsearchable. 

WHO is as the wise Tnan? and who knoweth 
the interpretation of a thing?" a man's 
wisdom maketli his face to shine, and the bold- 
ness' of his face shall be changed. 

2 I counsel thee to keep the king's commandment, 
and that in regard of tlie oatli of God.' 

;5 J5o not hasty to go out'of his sight:' stand not 
ill an evil thing; for he doeth whatsoever pleaseth 
him. 

4 W'iicre the word of a king is, there is power: 
and wlio may say unto him, Wiiat doest thou?'' 

5 Whoso keepeth the commandment shall fecn 
no evil thing:' and a wise man's heart discernetli 
both time and judgment. 

*\\ Because to every purpose there is lime and 
judgment, therefore the misery of man is great 
upon him. 

7 For lie knowc^th not that which shall be : for 
who can tell him when" it shall be? 

8 Th(rc is no man that hath power over tho 
spirit to retain the spirit;"" neither /m/A he power 
in the day of death: and there is no (liscliarge+ in 
that war; neither shall wickedness deliver those 
that are given to it." 

1:.5. li. 1 Hcb. .««nff(A. i Rom. 13:1-1). j ch. 10:4. k Job 34 : IS : Pror. 
30:31. ■% l\^h. know. 1 Psa. 119:0; 1 Pet. 3:13. ■ Hob. Aou7. i» Pm. 
49:6,7. » Or, mslingo^ weapons. ■" Psa. 73:18, etc. 



final issue ; since many a work commenced with gladness 
ends in sorrow, while " they that sow in tears shall reap 
in joy." 

I:i. To fret ourselves on account of those evils which 
God has made irremediable, is both foolish and wicked. 
They should bo quietly borne, as a part of the discipline 
wliich he has laid upon us as sinners, for our spiritual 
good. 

21. We should never go in search of uncharitable ru- 
mors concerning ourselves, but rather pass them by un- 
heeded, remembering how often we have spoken unchar- 
itably of others. 

29. .\11 that^is excellent in man is from God; hie sinful- 
ness and folly are his own. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1. Who Imoxivththe interpretation of a thing? that is, as 
the wise man. The boldness of his face shaJt be changed; 
his bold air shall be changed to the serenity and dignity 
of wisdom. Some render this clause thus: "The strength 
of his countenance," that is, his firm and assured look, 
'• shall be doubled." 

:5. lie not ha.it ij to go out of his sight; do not hastily with- 
draw thyself from his service. Chap. 10:4. To stand 
before a king, is to serve him, 1 Kings 12:6; hence, to 
leave his presence, is to quit his service. Stand not ; be 
not engaged. He doctli whatsoever pleaseth htm; and will 
therefore punish all evil deeds. 

5. Feel no evil thing; or, as the marginal reading, "know 
no evil thing;" that is, will not snfler for disobedience. 
Ver. 3. Time and judgment ; the right time and way of 
doing a thing. 

(1. Ikcausc to every purpose — great upon him; more liter- 
ally thus: " For lo every purpose there is time and judg- 
ment; for the evil of man is great upon him ;" that is, time 
and judgment are nccess-iry to every purpose, because of 
tlie evil and uncertainty which belong to human life, and 
make every good undertaking diflicult. 

8. Deliver Swse that art given to it ; namely, from death. 



The various mysteries ECCLESIASTES IX 

A \f ?l(127. n .4 11 il'- 1 T _„ ,1 lr_-l 



9 All this have I seen, and applied my 
heart unto every work that is done under the sun : 
there is a time wherein one man ruleth over an- 
other to his own hurt. 

10 And so I saw the wicked buried, who had 
come and gone from the place of the lioly, and 
they were forgotten in the city where they had so 
done." This is also vanity. 

11 Because sentence against an evil work is not 
executed speedil}',*" therefore the heart of the sons 
of men is fully set in them to do evil.'' 

12 1[ Though a sinner do evil a hundred times, 
and his days be prolonged,'' yet surely I know that 
it shall be well with them that fear God, whicli 
fear before him -^ 

13 But it shall not be well with the wicked, 
neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a 
shadow ; because he feareth not before God. 

14 There is a vanity which is done upon the 
earth; that there be just men, unto whom it liap- 
peneth according to the work of the wicked;' 
again, there be wicked men, to whom it happen- 
eth according to the work of the righteous. I 
said that this also is vanity. 

15 Then I commended mirth, because a man 
hath no better thing under the sun, than to eat, 
and to drink, and to be merry:''' for that shall 
abide with him of his labor the days of his life, 
which God giveth him under the sun. 

IG IF When I applied my heart to know wisdom, 
and to see the business that is done upon the 
earth: for also there is i/m< neither day nor night 
seeth sleep with his eyes : 

17 Then I beheld all the work of God, that a 



> Jer. |-;13; Heb. 10 :M. b Psi. 10:0: 5I):'J1 ; -J Pet. 3:3, 4. = 
i ch. lAo. e Psa. 37:18, 19; Isa. :!:10, 11. f Job 21:7, etc. ; 
Mai. 3:15. e oh. 5:18; <J:7; 1 Tim. 4:3, 4; 6:17. h Job 5:9; 



10. And SO I saw the uncked buried; the wicked who had 
been in power, ver. 9, and trusted in their wickedness, 
ver. 8, the Preacher sees buried and forgotten. From the 
place of the holy; probably from Jerusalem, the place of 
those consecrated to God's service. So done; been given 
to wicliedness, ver. 8, and ruled over men to their own 
harm, ver. 9. 

11. Is not executed speedily; in noticing the final end of 
the wicked, the Preacher also notices the delay of God's 
judgment, and its abuse by men. 

14. There is a vanity; though it will in the end be well 
with the righteous and ill with the wicked, yet, in respect 
to the course of events in this world, '• there is one event 
tn the righteous, and to the wicked." Chap. 9:2. Both are 
alike subject to "the sufferings of this present time," and 
to death itself The only possible reconciliation of this 
verse with the two preceding, is the doctrine of a judg- 
ment to come. This the Preacher asserts at the close of 
the book. 

1."). Then I commended mirth; see chap. 2:24; 3:22. 

17. Ciinnotfind out the work; the vanity of earthly wis- 
dom is shown from the impossibility of its accomplishing 
what it undertakes, namely, to comprehend God's ways 
and works. See chap. 7 : 23. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Obedience to the civil magistrate is a matter not of 
human expediency, but of divine authority. We are re- 
leased from it only when he requires what God forbids. 

7. Since it is the plan of God's providence that we 
should be ignorant of the future, and sulyect to disap- 
pointment in all our undertakings, we ought to unite, with 
the wise selection of times and means, a spirit of humble 
48 



of divine providence. 

man cannot find out the work that is done under 
the sun:"" because though a man labor to seek it 
out, yet he shall not find it: yea, further; though 
a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be 
able to find it. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 Like things happen to good and bad. 4 There is a necessity of death 
unlo man. 7 Comfort is all their portion in this life. 11 Gods provi- 
dence ruleth over all. 13 Wisdom is better than strength. 

rpOR all this I considered in' my heart even to 
declare all this, that the righteous, and the 
wise, and their works, are in the hand of God:' 
no man knoweth either love or hatred by all that 
is before them. 

2 All things come alike to all :' there is one event 
to the righteous, and to the wicked ; to the good 
and to the clean, and to the unclean ; to him that 
sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not:" as is 
the good, so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, 
as he that fearCth an oath. 

3 This is an evil among all things that are done 
under the sun, that there is one event unto all : 
yea, also the heart of the sons of men is full of 
evil,' and madness is in their heart while they 
live, and after that they go to the dead. 

■1 1 For to him that is joined to all the living 
there is hope: for a living dog is better than a 
dead lion. 

5 For the living know that they shall die : but 
the dead know not any thing,'" neither have they 
any more a reward ; for the memory of them is 
forgotten." 

6 Also their love, and their hatred, and their 



20: 10. 


Rom. 11:33. • Heh. guve, or .vl lo. i cli 


■3:14; 


3:1M. 1 Gen. 6:5; Jer. 17:9; Matt. 15:19. 


40:5; 


7:&-10; Isa. 28:14. 



dependence upon him and patient submission to his sov- 
ereign will. 

8. The great and the small are alike helpless in the day 
of death ; and ought therefore to be alike humble and 
diligent in preparing to meet God. 

11. Nowhere does the desperate wickedness of men 
show itself more clearly, than in the encouragement which 
they take from God's gracious forbearance, to harden 
themselves in iniquity. Thus they turn to their deeper 
damnation what he gave them for their salvation. 

17. Since God's judgments are unsearchable, and his 
ways past finding out, true wisdom lies not in endeavor- 
ing to comprehend that which is incomprehensible, but in 
the cheerful resignation of ourselves to his will with a be- 
lieving, loving, and obedient spirit. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1. Are in the hand of God; at the close of the preceding 
chapter it is said, " Xo man can find out the work that is 
done under the sun." The reason is now given: All is 
controlled by God, whose ways are unsearchable. Know- 
eth eitlier love or hatred by all that is before them; or more 
literally thus: "No man knoweth either love or hatred: 
all is before them." He cannot tell, from mere outward 
things, whether love or hatred is to be his lot: all is in 
the unkno%vn future. 

2. Sweareth ; that is, profanely. 

3. Tliey go to the dead; where there is no more hope. 
Ver. 4. 

4-G. Reward ; enjoyment of their earthly toil. Neither 

have they any more a portion ; these words contain the clue 

to the Preacher's meaning: The dead have done with earth 

and all its concerns ; they lie in the grave unconscious and 

753 



Excellence of icisdom, 



ECCLESIASTES X. 



in tonlrast with folly. 



envy, is now perished;" neither have they any 
more a portion for ever in any thirig that is done 
under the sun. 

7 f Go thy way, cat tliy bread with joy,*" and 
drink tliy wine witii a merry lieart;" for God now 
accepteth thy works. 

8 Let thy garments be always white;'' and let 
thy head lack no ointment.'^ 

9 Live joy fidly' with the wife; whom thou lovest 
all the days of the life of tliy vanity,' which he 
hath given thee under the sun, all the days of thy 
vanity :"■' for that is thy ])ortion in this life, and in 
thy labor which thou takcst under the sun. 

10 Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with 
thy might;'' for there is no work, nor device, nor 
knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou 
goest.' 

11 IF I returned, and saw under the sun, that the 
race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, 
neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to 
men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of 
skill {' l)ut time and chance happeneth to them all. 

12 For man also knowcth not his time: as the 
iishes tiiat are taken in an evil net, and as the birds 
that are caught in tlic snare ; so are the sons of 
men snared in an evil time, when it falleth sud- 
denly upon them.'' 

13 IT This wisdom have I seen also under the 
sun, and it seemed great unto me: 

14 There ivas a little city, and few men within 
it;' and there came a great king against it, and 
besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it. 

15 Now there was found in it a poor wise man, 
and he by his wisdom delivered the city ; yet no 
man remembered that same poor man. 

16 Then said I, Wisdom is better than strength:" 
nevertiicless the poor man's wisdom is despised, 
and his words arc not heard." 



• Exod. 1:8 


MiU. a:-.^. bch.8:15. 


cch. 11):I0. <iRev. l(i:15. e Matt. 


6:17. • Hcb. 


See, or Enjoy life. 1 Pro 


v. r>: 15-19. s ch. 5:18. h 1 Cor. 


9:34-->0. ich. 


11:U, Jobl4:7-l-.>. J Psa 


(5:0, 7; Jer. 9:23; Amos2:H, 1.'.. 


» Luke 21 :3-) 


1 Thesa. 5: a. 1 a Sam 


. 20:10. m p,„,. 21:22| 21:5, 6. 



forgotten. He confines what he hero says to the present 
life, not following the soul to the world of spirits. Com- 
pare our Saviour's words, John 9:4. 

7-10. Now accepteth tkij works; smiles upon thee, and 
gives thee the enjoyment of them. This implies that they 
are done in his fear. In view of the truth that "the dead 
have no portion" in this life, the living arc exhorted to a 
cheerful enjoyment of God's gifts and diligence in God's 
service. 

11. Relumed, and saw; took another view of God's sov- 
ereignty over men and their works. 

16. The poor man's wisdom if despised; his past manifes- 
tation of wisdom docs not secure present regard to his 
counsels. 

17. Ill quiet ; in the quiet counsels of the wise. " Wis- 
dom is ju.stified of her chihlreii." Matt. 11: 19. More tliiw 
the cnj — among fools; tlie counsels of wisdom are more 
regarded, and produce more salutary results. Yet a fool- 
ish multitude will follow the boisterous cry of a foolish 
leader, and despise the counsels of the poor wise man. 

18. One sinner destroueth ; by his folly, the effccta of which 
are here opposed to those oi" wisdom. 

INSTRUCTION. 
Our highest wisdom lies in conforming to the plan of 
Cod's providence, and making his will the law of our 
being. As the righteous and the wicked are alike sub- 
ject to suiTering, misfortune, and death, we should not set 
754 



17 The words of wise men are heard in ■*iji*'(:.^: 
quiet more than the cry of him that ruleth among 
fools." 

18 Wisdom is better than weapons of war : but 
one sinner dcstroyeth much good.'' 

CHAPTER X. 

1 Observations of -wisdom and folly. 16 Of riot, 18 slothfulness, 19 
and money. 20 Men's thoughts of kings ought to be reverent. 

DEAD flics* cause the ointment of the apoth- 
ecary to .send forth a stinking savor : so doth 
a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom 
and iionor.'' 

2 A wise man's heart is at his rigiit hand ; but 
a fool's heart at his left. 

3 Yea also, when he tliat is a fool walkcth by 
the way, his wisdom* faileth him, and he saith to 
every one that he is a fool.'' 

4 If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, 
leave not thy place ;^ for yielding paciiieth great 
offences.' 

5 There is an evil ichich I liave seen under the 
sun, as an error which proccodeth from^ the ruler: 

6 Folly is set in great dignity,-" and the rich sit 
in low place. 

7 I have seen servants upon horses," and princes 
walking as servants ujjon the earth. 

8 He that diggeth a pit siiall fall into it;"' and 
whoso breaketh a hedge, a serpent sliall bite him. 

9 Whoso removeth stones shall be iuirt there- 
with ; and he that clcaveth wood shall be endan- 
gered thereby. 

10 If the iron be blunt, and lie (h) not whet the 
edge, then must lie put to more strengtii : but wis- 
dom is profitable to direct.'' 

11 Surely the serpent will bite without enchant- 
ment; and a babbler' is no better. 

12 The words of a wise man's mouth are gra- 



n iM.ark 0:2, 3. ■> Prov. -is 


i3. P Josh. 7:1, 


etc. t Ucb. Flies of dealh. 


q .Matt. 5:13. 1 lleb. heart 


r I'rov. 13:10. 


• ch. 8:3. t 1 Sam. a):2l, 


etc. J Hcb. from before. 1 


Heb. heiglils. 


" Esth. 3:1. ' ProT, 30:22. 


wPsa. 7:15. HChr. 12:32 


1 Heb. tfie mas 


er of the tongite. 



our hearts on the uninterrupted enjoyment of earthly 
good I but cheerfully enjoy God's present gifts, while wo 
hold ourselves ready to part with them at his bidding. 
The result of all our labors is at his disposal, and wo 
ought to unite, with the diligent use of means, a spirit 
resigned to his will and prepared for disappointment. In 
this world, labor for the good of others, however well- 
directed, is not always ai)i)rcciateil, and we ought not to 
expect from our fellow-men too much for our services. 
Wo must soon bo done with time, and it becomes us to do 
the work which God puts into our hands with our might, 
and lay up for ourselves a treasure in heaven. 

CHAPTER X. 

2. //( his right hand; he uses it skilfully. 

.•?. Widkclh by lite waij; appears in public. Saith to every 
one; by his actions. 

.O. ^.s- an error which proccedcth; that is, an error such 
as proceedeth. The error consists in exalting the mean 
and unworthy to office, a eoniraou evil in the despotic 
governments of the Kast 

C. nc rictt; the same as "princes" in the following 
virsc, who unite wealth with nobleness and intelligence. 

S-IO. He that diggcth a ptt .shall fall into it — wisdom is 
tiriiftliilile to direct; general meaning: the dangers and dif- 
liitilties of life arc many; but wisdom is prolitablo to 
direct in them all. 

12. Gracious; acceptable and useful. 



Directions for charity. 



ECCLESIASTES XL 



Tin' juy/i^meiit to come. 



a "gf?^ cious ;"" but tlic lips of a fool will swallow 
up himself.'' 

13 TiiG beginning of the words of his mouth is 
foolisimess : and the end of his talk* is mischievous 
madness. 

14 A fool also is full of* words: a man cannot 
tell what shall be ; and what shall be after him, 
who can tell him? 

15 The labor of the foolish wearicth every one 
of them, because he kuoweth not how to go to the 
city. 

16 If Woe to thee, land, when thy king is a 
child," and thy princes eat in the morning! 

17 Blessed art thou, land, when thy king is 
the son of nobles, and thy princes eat in due sea- 
son, for strength, and not for drunkenness! 

18 "i By much slothfidness the building decay- 
cth ; and tlirough idleness of the hands the house 
droppeth through. 

19 % A feast is made for laughter, and wine 
maketh merry :^'' but money auswereth all things. 

20 T Curse not the king, no, not in thy thought;"' 
and curse not tlie rich in thy bedchamber: for a 
bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which 
hath wings shall tell the matter.' 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 Directions for charily. 7 Dcith in life, 9 and the day of judgment in 
tlie days of youth, are to be tbougiit on. 

CAST thy bread upon^ the waters :° for thou 
shalt find it after many days.*" 



• Heb. ^mce; Col. 4:0. 


aProv. lo:-;. bprov. l^:7. t Heb. moiK/l. 1 Heb. 


muUiptieth. c Isi. .3: J, 


12- S Heb. glail Ike life, d Psa. IU4:1.5. 1 (Ir, 


ronsaenct. e ExoJ. -ll-.i 


-1; Acvs -23:5. ' Lake 19:J(). 1 Heb. upun t/ie /"«'e 


of. 5 Ui. 32: -JU. 1. Df 


ul. lo;IU; Pa. 41:1, -2; Prov. 11:25^ 19:17; Isa. 



15. How to go to tlie cit y ; a j)articular instance of his igno- 
rance, which stands to represent all other cases. As much 
as to say, when he undertakes the simplest enterprise, he 
knows not how and where to find the means of success. 

18. The home droppeth through; lets water drop through 
the roof. Here, again, we have a particular case to illus- 
trate a general principle. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The higher a man's standing anil reputation, the more 
injurious to himself and others is the exhibition of folly. 
A little foolishness may overshadow great wisdom. 

3. When folly appears in public it always betrays itself. 

6. The elevation of unworthy men to offices of power 
and trust is a heavy calamity to the people. Whether it 
proceed from their rulers, or, as in the case of free gov- 
ernments, from themselves, the result will be corruption, 
misrule, and misery. 

14. It is often the case, that the less men have to say 
that will benefit themselves or others, the more they 
abound in words. " A wise head makes a short tongue," 
is the true Arabic proverb. 

16. The primary qualification for ruling others is ability 
to rule ourselves. They who destroy themselves by self- 
indulgence, will destroy also the people committed to 
their care. 

20. Vain is the hope of escaping punishment by the 
secrecy of our evd deeds. God is able, in numberless un- 
foreseen ways to bring them to light here, and he will ex- 
pose them all hereafter in the presence of men and angels. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1. Cast thy bread upon the waters; either bread given in 
alms, or seed-corn, in allusion to the practice of sowing 
upon land that has been overflowed. Labor and give 
cheerfully without any present prospect of reward, know- 
ing that iu due time the gracious recompense will come. 



2 Give a portion to seven, and also to eight;' 
for thou knowest not what evil shall be upon the 
earth. 

3 If the clouds be full of rain, they empty them- 
selves upon the earth : and if the tree fall toward 
the south, or toward the north, in the place where 
the tree falleth, there it shall be. 

4 He that observeth the wind shall not sow ; and 
he that regardeth the clouds shall not reap. 

5 As tliou knowest not what is the way of the 
spirit,^ nor how the bones do grow iu the womb of 
her that is with child :'' even so thou knowest not 
the works of God who maketh all. 

6 In the morning sow thy seed, and in the even- 
ing withhold not thy hand: for thou knowest not 
wliether shall prosper,* either this or that, or 
whether they both shall be alike good.' 

7 1i Truly tlie light w sweet, and a pleasant//; wo- 
it is for tlie eyes to behold the sun : 

8 But if a man live many years, and rejoice in 
them all; yet let him remember the days of dark- 
ness;"' for they shall be many." All tliat conicth 
is vanity. 

9 1 Rejoice, young man, in thy youth; and 
let thy lieart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, 
and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the 
sight of thine eyes:" but know thou, that for all 
these things God will bring thee into judgment." 

10 Therefore remove sorrow* from thy heart, 
and put away evil from thy flesh:'' for ciiildhood 
and youth are vanity. 



)-';S; 


Mai 


. Ul 


12: 2 


Cnr 


<J:?; H 


eb. ti 


Ul, 11. 


i M 


p. 5:5. 


i John 


3:fi. 


** P^a 


l:!!) 


1,). 


• Heb 


*-• 


'g/u. ' 


1 Cor 


:!:7. o 


lolin 


12 


:)5 


n Jnb |. 


Id 


Nil 


n. 1 


)::lil; 


Dent 


211 


19, 20. 


P ch 


12:14 


Heb. 


9 


7, 


t Or, ai 




1 2 I'l 


m. 2 


22. 























2. To seven, and also to eight ; to all who need thy char- 
ity. See Prov. 6:16. What evil slwtl be; evil that shall 
make the charity of others needful for thee. Compare 
Prov. 21:13. 

3. If the clouds be fxdl — where the tree falleth; in nature, 
and in the course of human history, there are fixed ten- 
dencies which the wise will regard. 

5. The way of the spirit; the mode of its union with the 
body. Some render, "the way of the wind." Compare 
John 3:8. In Hebrew, " wind " and " spirit " are expressed 
by the same word. 

7. The light is sweet; light and seeing the sun are here 
emblems of life. 

!). Rejoice, young man — God will bring thee into judg- 
ment; let thy pursuit of happiness and all thy, youthful 
enjoyments be in the fear of (!od, and with a constant 
remembrance of the account thou must give of them at 
his tribunal. Compare cliap. 9:7-9. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The best provision that we can m:ike for the future 
is, not to hoard up our property and withholil it from the 
needy, but to give liberally te all : for •' he that hath pity 
upon the poor, lendeth unto the Lord ; and that which ho 
hath given will he pay him again." 

2. The uncertainty hanging over the future, which some 
men give as a reason for getting and holding all they can, 
is truly a reason for bestowing freely. 

4. 6. We should keep diligently at work in God's ser- 
vice, disregarding present inconveniences and unfavorable 
appearances. Tlie duty is ours ; the reward God will give 
when and in what measure he pleases. 

5. When we meet with so many mysteries in nature, 
we should not be offended with mysteries in God's prov- 
idence and the work of redemption. 

9. A deep sense of God's presence, and habitual rever- 
ence for his authority, are the great security to the young 
755 



Sorrows of old age. 



ECCLESIASTES XII. 



Fear God and his judgment. 



CHAPTER XII. 

1 The Creator is to be remembered in due time. 8 The Preacher's care 

to eJify. I'J The fear of Hod is the chief antidote of vanity. 

r)EMEMBER now thy Creator in the days of 
V tliy youth," while the evil days come not, nor 
the years draw nij^li, when thou shalt say, I liave 
no pleasure in them;'' 

2 Wliile the sun, or the light, or the moon, or 
tlic stars, be not darkened, nor the clouds return 
after the rain : 

3 In the day when tlie keepers of tlie house shall 
tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, 
and the grinders cease because they are few,* and 
those that look out of the windows be darkened, 

4 And the doors shall be shut in the streets, 
when the sound of the grinding is low, and he 
shall rise up at tlie voice of the bird, and all the 
daughters of music shall be brought low ; 

5 AUo when they shall be afraid of Ma< ichich is 
high, and fears shall be in the way, and the aliuond- 
ti-eo shall flourish, and tlie grasshopper shall be a 
burden, and desire sliall fail: because man goeth 
to his long home, ami the mourners go about the 
streets : 

6 Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the gold- 
en bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at 



» Isa. aC;". k iSam. 19:3."i. ' Or, fail, because they gr'mi IHlle. 
3:1'J; Psa. 14(i:4. J Isa. 57:10. t Or, Tht more wise the Prcache. 



against the pursuit of sinful pleasure. They who fear 
God, and make him their portion, will enjoy all that this 
world is capable of giving, and bo prepared for the higher 
enjoyments of eternity. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1-6. These verses continue the admonition to the young 
begun in the preceding chapter, and add a figurative 
description of the sorrows of old age. Be not darkened, 
nor the clouds return after the rain; old age is represented 
as a season of clouds and rain, in which the light of the 
heavenly bodies is darkened. Keepers of the house — strons; 
men; the human body is compared to a mansion, of which 
the limbs are the keepers. The grinders cease; the teeth, 
compared to the women who daily grind at the mill in all 
eastern countries. Those that look out of the windows ; the 
eyes, represented as females looking out at the windows. 
The doors shall lie shut — the sound of the grinding is low; as 
the sound of the grinding gradually sinks into silence, the 
doors also that lead into the street are shut; that is, old 
age is inactive and keeps at home. Rise up at the voice of 
the bird; early rise up in his couch; the slightest sound 
shall break his slumbers. Daughters of music; singing 
women, who represent here the organs of speech and 
hearing. Afraid of that which is high— fears shall he in the 
waij; on account of their feebleness and liability to fall. 
The almond-tree; genertilly understood as an emblem of 
grey hairs. The grasshopper ; alighting on them; that is, 
the smallest weight. Lev. 11:22. Desire; the animal 
appetites. Or ever; before.. Silver cord — golden bowl ; of 
the hall lamp, as an emblem of life ; or the allusion may 
lio to the coril and bucket used in drawing water. The 
pitcher— the wheel; the means of drawing and carrying 
water: the drawing of water represents the activity of 
life. 

7. To God who gave it; it returns to its Creator, that its 
ileeds done in the body may be brought into judgment. 
Ver. It. Thus the Preacher teaches the conscious exist- 
ence of the spirit after death, as a subject of rewards and 
ponaltiea. 



the fountain, or the wheel broken at the '^ii'c.^:: 
cistern. 

7 Then shall the dust return to the earth as it 
was:" and the spirit shall return unto God who 
gave it.'' 

8 1 Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher ; all 
is vanity. 

9 And moreover, because the Preacher was wise,* 
he still taught the people knowledge; yea, he 
gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order 
many proverbs. 

10 The Preacher sought to find out acceptable 
words:* and that which was written was upright, 
fwn words of trutli. 

11 The words of the wise are as goads, and as 
nails fastened by the masters of assemblies, which 
arc given from one shepherd. 

12 And further, by these, my son, be admonish- 
ed: of making many books there is no end; and 
much study ^ is a weariness of the flesh. 

13 1 Let us hear the conclusion of the whole 
matter : ' Fear God, and keep ids commandments :" 
for tills is the whole duty of man. 

14 For God shall bring every work into judg- 
ment, with every secret thing, whether zV be good, 
or whether it be evil.'^ 



11. Goads; stimulating to right action. Nails fastened; 
they make a deep impression upon the memory ami con- 
science, and servo for the regulation of life. Compare 
Isa. 22:23, 24. Masters of assemblies; teachers of the peo- 
])\e. Which are given; namely, the words of the wise. 
From one shepherd; from (lod, the one great Shepherd. 

13. The conclusion ; the final result to which the Preach- 
er's observation and experience have brought him. 

14. Every work — every secret thing; since no such judg- 
ment takes place in the present life, it must be that which 
awaits men when "the spirit shall return imto God who 
gave it." All parts of the book must be interpreted in 
harmony with this its final declaration. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. They who devote to God's service the vigorous and 
joyful days of youth, will not be forsaken by him when 
they are old and grey-headed ; but they who forget God 
in their youthful prime, and give themselves up to sinful 
I>leasures, must, if not cut oft" prematurely- in their trans- 
gressions, come to a comfortless old age, and, continuing 
as they have lived, must die under God's wrath and curse. 

13. The way of happiness here and salvation hereafter 
is exceedingly plain and simple. It consists in fearing 
God anil keei)iiig his commandments, the chief of which 
is, that we believe on Jesus Christ his Son. 

14. Since God shall bring every secret thing into judg- 
ment, vain arc all attempts to hide our sins from our- 
selves, or from our fellow-men. To those who repent and 
believe in Christ, his blood will bo a covering, and this 
covering we all need. 

GENRRAL INSTRUCTION. 

In this book the Sjiirit of inspiration was manifestly 
jucparing the church for the fuller revelations of the gos- 
pel. Goti's promise to Abraham, and in him to all his 
seed, was, " I am thy exceeding great reward." This prom- 
ise cannot, as the Preacher shows, bo fulfilled in God's 
earthly gifts. Its fulfilment must be reserved for the 
world to come. 



156 



THE 



SONG OF SOLOMON 



The title of this book, The Song of soxgs, tliat is, tlic most excellent of songs, indicates its spiritual appli- 
cation to the heavenly Solomon, and his spouse the church. So Jews, from the most ancient times, have 
interpreted it. The ground-idea of the song is, "Thy Maker is thy husband;" or, what is identical with 
this, " the bride, the Lamb's wife." The germ of this idea exists in the Pentateuch, in those passages which 
represent idolatry as spiritual adultery, Exod. 34:15; Deut. 31:16; and we find it fully developed in 
Psalm 45, which probably belongs to Solomon's age, and which is expressly quoted in the epistle to the 
Hebrews as a description of the Messiah. The same figure occurs in many passages of the prophets that 
followed. Isa. 54 : 5 ; 62 : 5 ; Jer. 2:2; 3 : 14 ; IIos. 2 : 16, 19, 20. In the book of Revelation this imagery 
is repeated and amplified. 

This song is not a dramatic representation, in which the action constantly advances to the end, but a 
series of descriptive pictures, the great theme of which is, the separation of the bride from the Bridegroom 
for her sins, and her reunion with him by repentance. In the spiritual application of its rich images we 
should confine ourselves to the main scope, without dwelling too much on particulai's. Thus the fruitful- 
ness of the church is set forth under the image of a garden filled with spices and precious fruits. But we 
need not seek for a hidden meaning in each particular fruit, the iximegranate, the apple, the nut, the 
saffron, the spikenard, the myrrh ; and the same is true in respect to the descriptions of the bride and 
bridegroom with which the book abounds.* 



tl^^: CHAPTER I. 

1 The church's love unto Chri.';t. 5 She confesses her deformity, 7 
and prayeth to be directed to his flock. 8 Christ directeUi her to 
tlie shepherds tents, 9 and showing his love to her, 11 giveth her 
gracious promises. I'i The cliurch and Christ congratulate one an- 
other. 

THE Song of songs, which is Solomon's." 
2 Let him kiss me with the kisses of his 
mouth:'' for thy love* is bettor than wine. 

3 Because of the savor of thy good ointments'^ 
thy name is as ointment poured fortli," therefore 
do the virgins love tliee. 

4 Draw me,'' we will run after thcc: the king 
hath brought me into his chambers r*^ we will be 



» I Kings 4:3-!. b Psalm2: 1'J. • Hebrew, /o«s. c Proverbs 27:9. d Psalm 
45:17; 119:55. e John 6:44. f Ephesians 2:G. t Hebrew, they love tkre 



2. Let him kiss me; the spouse speaks of the king. 

3, 4. Tlie virgins; the bride's "companions that follow 
lier." Psa. 45:14. These are brought in with her into 
the king's palace. The bride is the church in her unity ; 
tlie retinue of honorable virgins that follow her, seems to 
represent the multiplicity of her members. 

5. Black; scorched by the sun. Ver. C. Blackness is 
an emblem of adversity and persecution. Job 30:30; 
Lam. 4 : 8. Daugliters of Jerusalem ; these arc in reality the 
same as the virgins that follow the bride, but under 
another figure; Jerusalem representing the church as a 
mother, and the " daughters of Jerusalem " as her mem- 

* In the explanatory notes much has been taken from the Com- 
mentary of Hengstcuberg, but with free variations from him. 



glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy 
love more than wine : the upright love thee.* 

5 I am black, but comely, ye daughters of Je- 
rusalem, as the tents of Kedar, as tlic curtains of 
Solomon. 

6 Look not upon mc, because I am black, because 
the sun hath looked upon iiic: my mother's chil- 
dren were angry with me;" they made me the 
keeper of tiic vineyards: but mine own vineyard 
have I not kept. 

7 Tell me, thou whom my soul loveth, where 
thou feedcst, where thou makest t/iy flock to rest 
at noon:'' for why should I be as one that turn- 
eth aside* by the flocks of thy companions? 



uprigluli/. e Matthew 10;'Ji, 



liPsalm2:i:i3. 1 Or, 



bers. As the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon ; that 
is, black, like the tents of Kedar, which were made of 
black goat's hair; but comely, as the curtains of Solomon. 
Kedar was an Arabian tribe. 

6. Look not uiion me; with amazement and abhorrence. 
The sun hath looked upon me; hath scorched me. Isa. 49 : 10. 
My mother's children; Edom, Moab, and Ammon, who here 
represent all the gentile nations. These were the breth- 
ren of the Israelites by descent, and so sprung from the 
bride's inotlier. See note on chap. 3:4. The vineyards; 
of her brethren. She has been in servitude to the Gen- 
tiles as a i)unishment for her sins. 

7. U thou, whom my sotd loveth ; the bride to the king, in 
her separation from him. One that turneth aside; or, one 

151 



Tht mutual love of 



SONG OF SOLOMON II. 



Christ and his church. 



8 T If thou know not, thou fairest among 
■women, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the 
flock, and feed thy kid.s beside the siieplierds' tents." 

9 I have compared thee, my love, to a com- 
pany of horses in Pharaoh's ciiariots." 

10 Tliy cheeks are comely with rows of jnvcls, 
thy neck with chains of gold." 

11 We will make thee borders of gold with studs 
of silver. 

12 T^ While the king sitteth at his table, my spike- 
nard sendeth forth the smell thereof. 

13 A bundle of myrrh is my well beloved unto 
mc; he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts. 

14 My beloved is unto me as a cluster of cam- 
pliire' in the vineyards of En-gedi. 

1.5 Behold, thou art fair, my love;* behold, thou 
art fair ; thou hast doves' eyes. 

16 Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea, pleas- 
ant : also our bed is green. 

17 The beams of our house are cedar, and our 
rafters* of fir. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 The mutual love of Christ and his church. 8 The hope, 10 and calling 
of the church. 14 Christ's care of the church. 16 The profession of 
the churcli, her fauh and hope. 

I JIM the rose of Sharon, and the lily of the 
valleys." 
2 As the lily among thorns, so is my love among 
the daughters." 



M. 2990. 

(.'. 1014. 

I 



• Heb. I>;12. b -j Clir. MBl 
cypress, ch. 4:13. t Or, compan, 



Ezek. 10:11-13; aPet. 1:.1, 4. "Or. 

t Or, galleria. d John 15:1. e Mitt. 

rO;lU-, Phil. S:!!). i iieb. I deHghled and sal down. IHeh. palate, f Rev. 



that is veiled. The veil is a sign of mourning and depres- 
sion. T/iij companions; the friends of the bridegroom. 
who are, spiritually considered, not different from the 
companions of tlic bride, being all who love Christ. 

8. Go till/ wail forth; the chief Shepherd walks among 
the undcr-sheplierds. If the spouse would find him, she 
must seek him in tho discharge of her duty, where he is 
to be found. 

9. / tuive compared thee; the spouse has now found the 
king. What follows, to the end of chap. 2:7, is a mutual 
discourse between tho two. Slie calls him her " beloved," 
and he addresses her as his "love." This distinction is 
observed throughout the book. To a company of homes; 
she is compared to the cavalry of Egypt, on account of 
her invincible might. Compare chap, (i: 10. 

10. II. Rows — chains — sliuls; the bride's ornaments are 
her spiritual graces. Psa. 45:13, 11; Rev. 19:8. 

12. Silletti at his table; to sup with his bride, a symbol 
of spiritual communion. Cliap. 5:1; Isa. 25:C; Rev". 3:20. 

11. Camphire; a shrub with large clusters of fragrant 
whitish flowers, very grateful to oriental women. En- 
gedi; a fountain on the western shore of tho Dead sea, 
where were gardens in ancient times. 1 Sam. 24 : 1. 

17. Cedar— fir ; the costliness of the palace which the 
king has provided for his spouse, represents her glory 
and excellence. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. God has given to Jesus "a name which is above 
every name." To all who have had a true discovery of 
their own emptiness and his infinite fulness, it is "as oint- 
ment poured forth ;" and it draws them to Christ in sweet 
confidence and love. 

5. "The bride, the Lamb's wife," is comely in the eyes 
of Gnl, even in her deepest humiliation. Though others 
m:iy ili'Spiso her, he will still honor her and have mercy 
upon her. 

0. The strength of tho church lies in her union with 
758 



3 As the apple-tree among the trees of 
the wood, so is my beloved among the sons 
sat down under his shadow with great delight,* 
and his fruit was sweet to my taste."' 

4 He brought me to the banqueting house,^ and 
his banner over me \L-as love."-' 

5 Stay me with flagons, comfort mc' with apples; 
for I am sick of love. 

G His left hand is under my head, and his right 
hand doth embrace me." 

7 I charge* you, ye daughters of Jerusalem, 
by the roes, and by the hinds of the field, that ye 
stir not up, nor awake my love, till he please. 

8 T The voice of my beloved! behold, he comcth 
lea])ing upon the mountains, skipping upon the 
hills. 

9 My beloved is like a roe or a young hart: 
behold, he standeth behind our wall, he looketh 
forth at the windows, showing' himself through 
the lattice.' 

10 My beloved spake, and said unto mc, Rise 
up, my love, my fair one, and come away. 

11 For lo, the winter is past,^ the rain is over 
and gone ; 

12 The flowers appear on the earth ; the time of 
the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the 
turtle is heard in our land; 

13 The fig-tree fiutteth forth her green figs, and 
the vines with the tender grape give a good smell. 
Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away. 



•J-J:l.*2. 1 Weh. house of ictne. ic John 15:0-15. ' Me'b. streip me. h ch. 

S::J-5. tHob. m/jure. 1 Heb./oumAi»lj. iLuke-J4:a3. J Kph. 5:S. 



Christ. When she forsakes him, he leaves her for a sea- 
son to the oppression of tho wicked, without any power 
to deliver herself. 

8. If we would find God, we must seek him in the ways 
of his ai)pointmont. 

9-17. The graces with which Christ has invested his 
people he regards with delight; and they rest with un- 
speakable satisfaction in his infinite uncreated cxoellcnco. 
llonce springs a blessed communion between tho Redeem- 
er and his redeemed. 

CHAPTER II. 

1. Rose of Sharon — lily; emblems of loveliness. 

3. The apple-tree among the trees of the vood ; the apple- 
tree is commended for its precious fruit, in contrast with 
the barren forest-trees. It probably includes the citron, 
and other trees with fragrant fruits. 

4. Ilis banner over me; the church is compared to an 
army, and the love of Christ is the banner under which 
she marches. Compare chap. 6:10. 

5. Sick of love; overpowered with the longing desires 
of love. For the spiritual meaning, compare Rsa. 42:1, 2, 
and I'sa. G3. 

7. By the rocs, and by the hinds; by all that is lovely. 
Ti// Ac /j/ca.sc; or, according to the Hebrew text, " till she 
please," as in the early English versions. It will then 
be the bridegroom's charge that his love, the church, be 
undisturbed. These words, which occur twice afterwards, 
always form the close of a scene. 

8. The voice of my beloved ; a now scene opens. Tho 
bride, in her winter retreat, hears the voice of her beloved 
coming in exultiition to call her forth. Winter, like tho 
scorching of the sun, is a symbol of adversity and depres- 
sion ; and spring, of returning prosperity. 

9. Behind our wall; behind the wall of the house 
where the bride and her comp.inions are. Christ comes 
to comfort his church. Liakrih forth ; rather, "looketh 
in." lie calls to his bride from without. 



The. church glorieth 



SONG OF SOLOMON III. 



in Christ her kins 



tr.i^: 1-i 1 my dove, that art iu tlic clefts of 
tlie rock, in the secret places of the stairs, let me 
see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for 
sweet is thy voice, and tliy countenance is comely." 

15 Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil 
the vines:" for our vines have tender grapes. 

16 1" My beloved is mine,'= and I am his:'' he 
feedeth among the lilies. 

IT Until tlie day break, and the shadows flee 
away,'' turn, my beloved, and be thou like a roe 
or a young hart upon the mountains of Bother. "'' 

CHAPTER III. 

1 The church's fight and victory in temptation. G The church glorieth 
in Christ. 

I~) Y night on my bed I sought liim wliom my soul 
3 loveth:" I sought him, Jaut I found him not.'' 

2 I will rise now, and go about the city in the 
streets, and in the broad ways I will seek him 
whom my soul loveth : I sought him, but I found 
him not. 

3 The watchmen that go about the city found 
me:' to whom I said, Saw ye him whom my soul 
loveth ? 

■i It was but a little tliat I passed from them,^ 



Psa. 6:J:1. d 1 Cor. 3;a;3 
a. 2li:9. hJoba3:S, 9. i ch 
. 29:1-.', 13. 1 Rev. 3;11, 1-i 



1-t. Secret places; crevices, or holes, where she hides. 
Stairs; shelving rocks, which are climbed like stairs. He 
compares his bride, in her retreat, to a dove that has 
taken refuge in the clefts of the rocks. Jer. 48:28. 

1.5. Take its the foxes ; the bride has listened to the call 
of the bridegroom, and come forth to active service. She 
now visits with him their common vineyard. Chap. 7:12. 
This must bo cleared of every thing that can injure it. 
In other words, all hinderances to the fruitfulness of Zion 
must be removed. 

16. Feedeth among the lilies; delights himself with the 
graces of his bride. 

17. f7n<;7 <^ rfai/ 6rcai; literally, "breathe." Chap. 4:6, 
marginal reading. This should, according to many, be 
understood of the cool evening breeze. Gen. 3:8. Shad- 
ow? jlee away; disappear at sunset. Psa. 102:11; 109:23. 
Turn, my beloved; return to the mountains whence thou 
camest. Verso 8. She consents to his departure till the 
evening. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
5. He who has once tasted the sweetness of God's love 
in Christ, can be satisfied with nothing short of its con- 
tinued manifestation. In its absence, his soul "longeth, 
yea, even fainteth " for its renewal ; and his heart and 
flesh "crieth out for the living God," 

7, The welfare of Zion is as the holiness of her indi- 
vidual members. The Saviour tenderly adjures all who 
love him and his church, not to do any thing which shall 
hinder her union and communion with himself, wherein 
lie her strength, comfort, and usefulness, 

8, After the winter of adversity, God always appears 
for the relief of his people. 

11-13. Christ's presence with his church fills her with 
the voice of gladness and singing, and makes every thing 
within her borders green and fruitful, 

15. If God's people would enjoy his presence and bless- 
ing, they must put away every iniquity and stumbling- 
block, 

CHAPTER III, 

1, I sought him, but I found him not ; the first five verses 
of this chapter describe the bride's longing desire after 



bnt I found him whom my soul loveth:" T liohl 
him,' and would not let him go, until I had brought 
him into my mother's house, and into tlie cliamber 
of her that conceived me. 

5 I charge you,'" ye daughters of Jerusalem," 
by the roes, and by the hinds of the field, that ye 
stir not up, nor awake ??)?/ love, till he please. 

6 1 Who is this that coraeth out of tlie wilder- 
ness like pillars of smoke," perfumed with myrrh 
and frankincen.se,P with all powders of the mer-' 
chant? 

7 Beliold liis bed, which w Solomon's: threescore 
valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel.'' 

8 They all hold swords, bcin^ expert in war: 
every man hath his sword upon his thigh"" because 
of fear in the night.* 

9 King Solomon made himself a chariot^ of the 
wood of Lelianon. 

10 He made the pillars thereof o/" silver, the bot- 
tom thereof of gold, the covering of it o/" purple, 
the midst thereof being paved with love, for the 
daughters of Jerusalem. 

11 Go forth, ye daughters of Zion, and behold 
king Solomon' with tlie crown" wherewith his 
mother crowned him in the day of his espousals," 
and in the day of the gladness of his heart.^" 



nch. 2:7; S:4,5. nMic..l:J. o Deut. !':a; Isa. 4319. P Phil. 4: 18; Re 
5:tJ q a Kings 0:17; Heb. 1:14. r Psa. 4.5::!. s Isa. ■27:3. 1 Or, bi. 
Rev.l:7. u Heb. 2:9. v John 3:SD; Rev. 21:9, 10. wlsa.(i2:5. 



her beloved in his absence, and her successful search for 
him. Jer. 29:12-14. 

4. Her that conceived me; spiritually interpreted, the 
bride's mother is not essentially different from the bride 
herself. The one is the church viewed spiritually, in her 
power to produce and perpetuate a holy seed, and the 
other, the church viewed as that seed, 

5. Till he please; see note to chap. 2:7. 

6. Who js this; a new picture. The bride comes out of 
the wilderness to meet the heavenly Bridegroom, glori- 
ously arrayed in wedding attire and fragrant with per- 
fumes. The wilderness; into which she has been banished. 
This is a symbol of persecution and distress, Rev. 12:6, 
14; the same as the winter season, chap. 2:11. Like pil- 
lars of smoke; surrounded with clouds of fragrant incense. 
Her graces are a sweet .savor to God. 

8. Because of fear in the night ; to guard against fear in 
the night. 

9. A chariot ; this is for his bride and her companions, 
the daughters of Jerusalem, Its precious materials rep- 
resent the dignity and excellence of those who ride in it. 

10. For the daughters of Jerusalem ; more literally, "from 
the daughters of Jerusalem." The midst of it is paved 
with tlieir love for the King. 

11. His mother crowned him ; the church is the mother of 
the heavenly Solomon, the greatest of all her sons, and 
also his bride. Compare Isa, 62:5, In the same way the 
church, viewed in one aspect, is the bride's mother ; in 
another, the bride herself See note on chap, 3:4, The 
Bridegroom and bride are also brother and sister. This 
blending of figures in allegory is both natural and beau- 
tiful. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. Christ will be found of all who earnestly seek him in 
the ways of his appointment. 

6. The church never appears so glorious as in her return 
to God by hearty repentance and faith, after the night of 
affliction and chastisement. 

8, The church is safe in communion with her omnipo- 
tent Redeemer, Zech, 2:5; 9:8, 

11, In his espousals to the church, Christ appears in 
heavenly glory, the object of unbounded love and admi- 
ration to all who belong to the household of faith. 
159 



Christ extolldh the 



SOXG OF SOLOMON V. 



graces of the. cJiurch. 



CHAPTER IV. 

1 Christ setteth forth the graces of the church. 8 He showeth his lo 
to her. 16 The church prayeth to be made fit for his pn 



BEHOLD, thou art fair," my love; behold, thou 
art fair ; thou hast (loves' eyes witliin thy 
locks: thy hair is as a flock of goats, that appear 
from' mount Gilcad. 

2*Thy teeth are. like a flock of sheep that are even 
shorn, which came up from the washing; whereof 
every one bear twins, and none is barren among 
tiiera. 

3 Thy lips are like a tiircad of scarlet, and thy 
speech is comely :'' thy tiMiiples are like a piece of 
a pomegranate witliin tiiy locks. 

4 Thy neck is like tlic tower of David builded 
for an armory, whereon there hang a thousand 
bucklers, all sliiclds of miglity men. 

5 Thy two breasts are like two young roes that 
are twins," which feed among the lilies. 

6 Until the day break,* and the shadows flee 
away,'' 1 will get mo to the mountain of myrrh, 
and to the hill of frankincense. 

7 Thou art all fair, my love; there is no spot in 
thee." 

8 IF Come with me from Lebanon, 7ny spouse,'' 
with me from Lebanon : look from the top of Am- 
ana, from tlie top of Slieuir and Hermon,'-' from the 
lions' dens, from the mountains of the leopards. 

9 Thou hast ravished* my heart, my sister, my 
spouse; thou hast ravished my heart with one of 
thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck. 

10 How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse! 
how much better is thy love tiian wine! and the 
smell of thine ointments than all spices I 



Ezek. 1G;14. -Or, eat of. b I'rov. 31 raO; Col. 4:6. « ch. 7:3; Prov. 

9. t Heb. irtaMc <lcb'. 2:17. e Kph. 5:27. f Isa. 54:5; Hos. 2; 19, 

e Dcut. 3:9. I Or, /oieuau'iii/ h cb. 5 :1 ; Prov. 24:13. 14. i G-n. 



CHAPTER IV. 

In this chapter the heavenly Solonion sets forth the 
beauty and majesty of his bride. 

1. As a Jhclc of goats ; tlie comparison respects the hair. 
Gilead; a region cast of the Jordan, celebrated for the 
excellence of its pasture-grounds. 

2. Like a flock of sheep ; in whiteness. What follows is 
added to show their soundness and vigor. 

4. Like the tower of David; for strength and majesty. 

6. Until the daybreak; see note on chapter 2:17. From 
the mountains of myrrh and the hill of frankincense ho 
gathers perfumes for his love, that she may be " perfumed 
with myrrh and frankincense." Chap. li:C. 

8. Here begins a new representation, in which, for the 
first time, the bride is addressed by the title of "spouse." 
Come with me from Lebanon ; these words seem to be 
spoken on the top of Lebanon, where Solomon, who reii- 
resents the heavenly Bridegroom, has been showing his 
bride the glory of his kingdom. He calls her to t;d;o a 
like survey of it from the top of Amana and llernion. 
Deut. 34:1; Rev. 21:10. The ridge of Hermon lies east 
of Lebanon. It was called Shenir by the Amorites. Pent. 
3:!). Amana was probably a peak of the same range, 
from which the river of the same name flowed. From Ihr 
Horn' deiis; that is, from the lops of the mountains, that 
abound in lions' dens. In showing his bride these goodly 
possessions, the king gives her a pledge that she shall 
share with him dominion over them. 

12. Inclosed — shut up — scaled; guarded from intrusion, 
and reserved for the king's enjoyment. For the spiritual 
meaning, compare 2 Cor. 11:2. 

15. A fountain of gardens; lying among gardens and 
7G0 



11 Tiiy lips, my spouse, drop as the aciiJu: 
honey-comb: honey and milk are under thy tongue ;'" 
and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of 
Lebanon.' 

12 A garden inclosed^ is my sister, my spouse ; 
a spring shut up, a fountain scaled. 

13 Thy plants are an orchard of pomegran- 
ates, with pleasant fruits; camphire,' with spike- 
nard, 

14 Spikenard and saffron ; calamus and cinna- 
mon, with all trees of frankincense; myrrh and 
aloes, with all the chief spices :J 

15 A fountain of gardens, a well of living wa- 
ters,'' and streams from Lebanon. 

16*1 Awake, O north wind: and come, thou 
south ; blow upon my garden, that the spices there- 
of may flow out. Let my beloved come into his 
garden, and eat his pleasant fruits. 



CHAPTER V. 

I Christ awakcth the church with his calling. 2 Tlic church having a, 
t,aste of Christ's love is sick of love. 9 A description of Christ by 
bis graces. 

I AM come into my garden, my sister, vty spouse :' 
I have gathered my myrrh with my spice; I 
have eaten my honey-comb wilh my honey ; 1 have 
drunk my wine with my milk: eat,'" O friends;" 
drink, yea, drink abundantly, beloved.''" 

2 11 sleep, but my heart waketh : it is the voice 
of my beloved that knocketh,'' saying. Open to me, 
my sister, my love, my dove, my undetiled: for my 
head is iilled with dew, a7id my locks with the 
drops of the night. 



27:27; Hos. 14:6, 7. I Heb Ixirred. I Or. rypresx. ch. 1:14. J ch. 5:1. 
k John 4:111, 14; 7:ai. lch.4:11.16. n> Isi. 55:1, 2. » John 3:89; 15:13- 
15. ^ Or, and Udrunktn wilh loves, o Rev. 22:17. P Rev. 3:20. 



watering them. Streams from Lebanon; cool and refresh- 
ing, .ler. 18:14. 

IG. Awake, O north wind; the wind is a sj-mbol of the 
ipiickening and life-giving power of the Iloly Spirit. 
Kzek. 37:9, 10. My garden; in ver. 12, the spouse was 
herself a garden, and its precious fruits her graces. Here 
she has charge of a garden. The meaning is tlie same. 
IXSTliUCTlONS. 

7. The heavenly bride, llio Lamb's wife, is " the perfec- 
tion of beauty, the joy of tlio whole earth." She embraces 
in herself :ill tlie true excellence that is found among men. 

12. Christ will not share with others the afl'ections of 
his people. If they would have him dwell in their gar- 
den, its fruits must be consecrated to him alone. 

l(i. The fruitfulness of Uod's people depends upon tlie 
presence and life-giving ))ower of the Holy Spirit, by 
whom ahuie they can bo made meet for communion with 
their Kedeemer. 

CHAPTER V. 

1. I am come into mi) parden; this is the King's answer 
to the invitation of his bride in the last verse of the pre- 
ceding chapter, from which it should not have been sep- 
iirated. Eat, fricnd.i; the friends of the bridegroom. 
See note on chap. 1 :7. 

2. A now picture begins here. The bride, for her sin- 
ful indolence, is forsaken of her beloved, and seeks him 
sorrowing. / .•:leep, hut my heart wnkcth ; the sleep of t^od's 
peo|ile is never total, like that of the world. Tliough the 
iiride is asleoji, yet her heart is awake to hear the call of 
her belove<l. ()pen to me; compare Rev. 3:20. My head 
IS filed wilh dew; he jileads what he has undergone for her 
sake. The dews of Palestine are very heavy. 



A description 



SONG OF SOLOMON VI. 



of Christ. 



Baiou'' 3 I have put off my coat; how shall I 
put it on? I have washed my feet; how shall I 
defile them ? 

4 My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the 
door, and my bowels were moved for him." 

5 I rose up to open to my beloved ; and my 
liands dropped with myrrh, and my fingers with 
sweet-smelling^ myrrh, upon the handles of the 
lock. 

I opened to my beloved ; but my beloved had 
withdrawn himself, and was gone: my soul foiled 
wlien ho spake: I sought him, but I could not find 
him ;•' I called him, but he gave me no answer. 

7 Tiie watchmen that went about the city found 
me, they smote me,'' they wounded me;" the keep- 
ers of the walls took away my veil from me. 

8 I charge you, daughters of Jerusalem, if ye 
find my beloved, that* ye tell him tliat I am sick 
of love. 

9 IT What is thy beloved more than another be- 
loved, thou fairest among women?'' what is 
thy beloved more than another beloved, that thou 
dost so charge us? 

10 My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest^ 
among ten thousand. 

1 1 His head is as the most fine gold : his locks 
are bushy,' and black as a raven : 

12 His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers 
of waters," waslied with milk, and fitly set : '' 

13 His cheeks are as a bed of spices, a? sweet 
flowers:* his lips like lilies, dropping sweet smell- 
inir myrrh : 

14 His hands are as gold rings set with the 



' Or, as some reid. in me. t Heb, passing, or running about, a ch. o. I, 
bP^i. Hl:5. cHos,6:.5. I Heb. w/£<;(. <1 ch. 1 :«: Psa. 4.5: 13. S Heb. 
indard-brarer. \-0r. curled, ech. 4:1. 1^ Ueh. silling in fulness; t\^3.\. 
I precious stone in the foil of a ring. ' Or, towers 



is, Jitlt/ placed, and s 



3. I have put off my coat; the church sunk in carnal ease 
and security, is reluctant to open to the Saviour. 

4. Put in hts hand; an earnest token of his desire to 
enter. In its spiritual application, it denotes all tlie ways 
in which Christ arouses his slumbering peojile. 

5. Dropped with mijrrh; her penitence is a sweet savor 
to God. 

6. Failed when he spake; spoke a reproving word in with- 
drawin,^. 

9. What IS thy beloved; this question of the daughters 
of ZioM gives the bride occasion to set forth the excel- 
lences of her beloved. 

12. By the rivers of waters; which doves love to fre- 
quent. Washed with milk; this denotes the wliiteness of 
their plumage. The dove is an emblem of innocence, 
guilelcssness, and purity. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Christ is prompt to answer the invitations of his 
friends, when they are made in sincerity; and his com- 
munion with them is "sweeter than honey and the honey- 
comli." It is a feast "o'f fat things, full of marrow, of 
wines on the lees well refined." Isa. 25:6. 

3. S|iiritual slothfulness has its foundation in the want 
of fervent love towards Christ, and is therefore exceed- 
ingly guilty and offensive in his sight. 

4. Christ is too faithful to leave his church slumbering 
in sinful inaction. By mingled judgments and mercies, 
accompanying his word and Spirit, he will arouse her to 
a sense of her duty, and bring her to repentance. 

5. The fingers of penitent believers drop with sweet- 
smelling myrrh. Their tears and confessions of sin and 
works meet for repentance, are most precious in God's 
sight, and will in due time be rewarded with his return- 
ing presence and favor. 



beryl : his belly is as bright ivory overlaid with 
sapphires : 

15 His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon 
sockets of line gold : his countenance is as Leb- 
anon, excellent as the cedars.'' 

16 His mouth^ is most sweet: yea, he is alto- 
gether lovely. This is my beloved, and this is 
my friend, daughters of Jerusalem. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 The church professeth her faith in Christ. 4 Christ showcth the 
graces of the church, 10 and his love towards her. 

"^T^^HITHER is thy beloved gone, thou foir- 

V V est among women? whitJier is thy beloved 

turned aside ?'^ that we may seek him with thee. 

2 My beloved is gone down into his garden, to 
the beds of spices, to feed in the gardens, and to 
gather lilies.'' 

3 I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine:' 
he feedeth among the iiiic.'^. 

4 H Thou art beautiful, my love, as Tirzali, 
comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an army with 
banners.-' 

5 Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have 
overcome me:* thy hair w as a ilock of goats that 
appear from Gilead : '' 

G Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up 
from the washing, whereof every onebeareth twins, 
and there is not one barren among them.' 

7 As a piece of a pomegranate are thy temples 
within thy locks. 

8 There arc threescore queens, and fourscore 
concubines, and vira:ins'° without number." 



ofprrfumes. f Rev. I :I4-16. 1 Weh. palate. 6 Jer. 14:8. h Matt l.'':aO. 
' ch. a;lG; 7:10. J ver. 10. I Or, puffed me up. k ch. 4:1-3. 1 Matt. 
•21:19; 20:30. DiPsa.45:14. nRev.T:!!. 



G. Those who have backslidden from God are often left 
for a season in darkness, that they thus may feel more 
deeply the evil of sin, seek Christ more earnestly, and set 
a higher value tipon his love. 

1. When for their sins the Redeemer withdraws his 
presence from his people, they are helpless, and exposed 
to injuries and insults from the world that lies in wicked- 
ness. 

8. Nothing can compensate the true believer for the 
loss of Christ's comforting presence, and he will not rest 
till he has recovered it. 

10-16. In our Redeemer all excellences meet: he is 
■• the chiefest among ten thousand ;" "yea, he is altogether 
lovely.'' 

CHAPTER VI. 

2. Is gone down into liis garden; the spouse in union 
with her beloved is herself "a garden inclosed," full of 
the jirecious fruits of righteousness. Chap. 4:12. Or, 
she stands in the midst of her garden and calls her beloved 
to partake of its fruit.s. Chap. 4:1(;. But, in leaving her 
beloved, she has left the heavenly garden also, and there 
she must seek him again. 

3. I am my beloved's; the separation is now ended, and 
in the following verses the bridegroom sets forth the 
excellences of his bride. 

4. Tirzah; a jileasant city, for a time the capital of the 
kingdom of Israel. 1 Kings 14:17; 15:21 ; 2 Kings 15:14. 
Terrible as an army with banners; see note on chap. 1 :9. 

8. Queens — concubines — virgins; here, as in Psalm 45, 
the queen is represented as preeminent above all her 
attendants. In the spiritual application, the words mean, 
tliat "the bride, the Lamb's wife," is loved and honored 
by all her Uiembers. 

161 



Lovdintss of the 



SONG OF SOLOMON VII. 



church of Christ. 



9 My dove, my undefilcd is but one; she is the 
only one of her mother, s^he is the choice one of her 
that bare her. The daughters saw her, and bless- 
ed her; yea, the queens and the coucubines, and 
they praised her. 

10 *l Wiio is she that looketh forth as tlie morn- 
ing, fair as tlie moon, clear as the sun," and ter- 
rible as an army with banners?'' 

Ill went down into the garden of nuts to see 
the fruits of the valley,'' and to see whether the 
vine flourished, and the pomegranates budded.'' 

12 Or ever I was aware,' my soul made me like 
the chariots of Amininadib.* 

13 Return, return. yiiulamito; return, return. 
that we may look upon thee. What will ye sec in 
the Shulamite? As it were the company of two 
armies.*'' 

CIIArTEI't VII. 

1 A further description of the ciiurcli's graces. 10 Tiie church pro- 
fesseth her faith and desire. 

HOW beautifid are thy feet with shoes,'' 
prince's daughter !« the joints of thy thighs 
are like jewels, the work of the hands of a cun- 
ning workman. 

2 Thy navel is like a round goblet, which want- 
eth not liquor:" thy belly is like a heap of wheat 
set about with lilies. 

3 Thy two breasts are like two young roes that 
are twins.'' 



» Uev. -JhiU, ir b vir. J; I'sa. 11:3. c .I„hn 15: l(i. d cli. 
7 knrw Hol. t Or. sel nu on l/ie rhariois of my wiliini; people 
1 Or. MnAiiiiaim; Gen. -H-.i e Gil. 5: 17. t Eph. li: 15. B 1' 



11. / went (town; this is probably tlic begiiiiiiiif^ of a 
new representation. The bridegroom has gone down into 
his garden, as in chap. 6:2. There he is seized with long- 
ing affection for his absent spouse, and calls upon her to 
return, that lie may behold her beauty. 

12. Like the chiriots of Amminadib; or, "the chariots of 
my willing people." In either case, the reference is to 
their rapid and impetuous motion, wliich is here a symbol 
of vehement atfcction. 

13. Return, O Shulamite; Shulamite seems to be a sym- 
bolic name of the bride, having a designed rcsemljlance 
to that of Solomon, who represents the heavenly Hrido- 
groom, in both form and meaning. This is more manifest 
in the Hebrew, thus: Slielomoh, Solomon, that is, the I'eaee- 
fiil, 1 Chron. 22:9; Shulammilh, Shulamite, tliat is, the 
Peaceful, or the Keeonciled. Tkat we mai/ look; the king 
and liis friends. Compare chap. 5:1. iV/iat will ye see; 
the words of tlie spouse, expressing a sense of her unwor- 
thiness. As it were the company of two armiei; or, "As it 
were the dances of iMahanaim ;" that is, the exidting liands 
of angels that met .Jacob on his return from Padanaram. 
Gen. 32:1, 2. This is the response of the bridegroom. 
Mahauaim means, two hosts. 

IXSTKUCTIONS. 

2. Christ dwells in his garden amid the fruits of holi- 
ness; and they who seek liim tlicre shall find him. 

.3. Christ's love for his i)eople remains strong even in 
their departure from him ; and when they return to him 
with all their lieart, he will graciously receive them, and 
restore them to their former union and communion with 
Iiimself. 

4-10. However men may despise Christ's churcli.slie is 
most precious in his eyes, and he will make her, by the 
gifts of his Spirit, "fair as the moon, clear as the sun," 
and to all her enemies, " terrilile as an army with banners." 

13. When the believer has the deepest sense of his 
tinworthiness, he is most excellent and honorable in the 
Bight of God. 

762 



4 Thy neck is as a tower of ivory ; thine ,;. "•; mJ: 
eyes like the iish-pools in Ileshlion, by tiie gate of 
Bath-rabbim : thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon 
which looketh toward Damascus. 

5 Thy head upon thee is like Carmel," and the 
hair of thy head like purple; the king is held^ in 
the sralleries.-' 

6 How fair and how pleasant art thou, love, 
for delights! 

7 This thy stature is like to a palm-tree,'' and 
thy breasts to clusters of grapes. 

8 I said, I will go up to the palm-tree, I will take 
hold of the boughs thereof: now also thy breasts 
shall be as clusters of the vine, and the smell of 
thy nose like apples; 

'J Antl the roof of thy mouth like the best wine 
for my beloved, thatgoeth duu-n sweetly," causing 
the lips of those that are asleep* to speak. 

10 'i I am my beloved's,' and his desire is tow- 
ard me.'" 

11 Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the 
field ; let us lodge in the villages. 

12 Let us get up early to the vineyards; let us 
see if the vine flourish, whether the tender grape 
appear,* and the pomegranates bud forth: there 
will I give thee my loves." 

13 The mandrakes give a smell, and at our 
gates are all manner of {ileasantyVui/.s-, new and 
old, wkich 1 have laid up for thee, my belov- 
ed." 



bound. J Psi. SSiaJ. kErh.4:l3. • Heb. Jlraig/il/y. ^ Ot. Ihe antitnt. 
I ch. 2:16; li:.!. mPsa. 43:11. 1 Hcb. open. " ExoJ. 25:-i!i l>sa. li':oj 
Heb. -1:10. o l Cor. 2;». 



CHAPTER VII. 

I. How beautiful; in the first part of this chapter the 
praises of the bride are repeated. With shoes; compare 
Ezck. 10:10. These, like all her other ornaments, are the 
gift of her heavenly Bridegroom. prince's daughter; 
she is of royal lineage, a "king's daughter." Psa. 45:13. 
This is a symbol of her dignity. 

4. Fish-pools; for clearness and ptirity. Heslibon ; a city 
east of the .Jordan. 

5. Like Carmel; which was filled with beautiful trees 
and fragrant plants. Held; fast bound with love. Gal- 
leries; of their common palace. Cliap. 1:17. But some 
render the word " locks." 

7. Like to a palm-tree ; majestic in height, and also fruitful. 

8. Go up to the palm-tree; ascend it to gather ius fruits, 
according to the oriental custom. The palm-tree is very 
lofty, with clusters of leaves and fruit at the top. 

9. And the roof — best wine; tip to this point the king 
speaks, then the bride takes up anil completes the com- 1 
[larison which he has begmi, and she continues her dis- ^ 
course to the end of the chapter. The term "beloved" ^ 
is a))plied only to the bridegroom. Cauxini; the lips — to 
speak; through the loveliness of their dreams. Tiiis is 
said to show its enlivening power. Spiritually applied, 

it denotes the quickening and animating nature of the 
mutual love that exists between Christ and his people. 

II. Tlie field — the vdlagcs; where our gardens and vine- 
yards lie. They go fortli to attend to their welfare, that 
is, to cultivate together the fruits of righteousness. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
8-13. The excellence and glory of God's people lie in 
their fruitfulness. When they abound in the inward 
graces and outward works of righteousness, they have 
blessed communion with their Lord, and are safe under 
the banner of his love. But when they neglect his vine- 
yard, ho will take it from them and give it to others; for 
he must see that it is under good culture. 



Zion's love to Christ. 



SONG OF SOLOMON VIII. 



Calling of the Gentiles. 



CHAPTER VIII, 



1 The love of the church to Christ. C Th. 
.•allin" of the CrL-ntiles. 11 The chiireh 



ehemency of love. S The 
ayeth for Christ's coniinir. 



(^ THAT thou ivcrt as my lirother," that sucked 
7 the breasts of my inotlier! whm I should 
find thee without, I would kiss thee ; yea, I should 
not be despised." 

2 I would lead thee, and bring thee into my 
mother's house, who would instruct mc: 1 would 
cause thee to drink of spiced wine of the juice of 
my pomegranate." 

3 His left hand should be upder my head, and his 
right hand should embrace me. 

4 I charge you, daughters of Jerusalem, that 
ye stir not up, nor* awake jiiy love, until lie please. 

5 Who is this that cometh up from the wilder- 
ness, leaning upon her licloved? I raised thee 
np under the apple-tree: there thy mother brought 
thee fortii; there she brougiit thee forth that bare 
thee. 

G 1 Set mc as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal 
upon thine arm :" for love is strong as death ; jeal- 
ousy is cruel ' as the grave:'' the coals tiiereof a?T 
coals of fire, which hath a most vehement flame. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

1. Ai my brother; the bride expresses in these words 
her desire for tlie most intimate union with her beloved. 
Should not be despised; as when separated from thee. 
Chap. 5:7. The presence and favor of her beloved woidd 
protect her from insult and injury. 

2. Into my mother's house; compare chap. 3:4. IVho 
■would instruct me; or, "Thou wouldest instruct me;" lier 
beloved is also her teacher. 

5. Cometh up from llie wilder?tcs'!; a new scene here opens. 
The bride is again seen coming out of the wilderness, 
that is, out of a state of weakness, barrenness, and de- 
pression. I raised thee up; roused thee np, calletl forth 
thy love. Here the spouse begins an address to her 
beloved, as is plain in the original Hebrew. Under the 
apple-tree ; the apple-tree in the .spiritual garden of Zion. 
One of its choice trees here represents the whole garden. 
By a beautiful allegory the heavenly Bridegroom is rep- 
resented as born in the garden of the church, and there 
also the bride wins his love. See note on chap. 3:11. 

6. A teal; a signet-ring, which is the symbol of insep- 
arable union and solicitous care. Jer. 22:24; Hag. 2:23. 
For love IS strong as death ; she pleads for this on the ground 
of his unconquerable and jealous love towards her. 

8. IVe have a little sister ; this seems not to be the Shulara- 
ite, who has all along been represented as in fidl matu- 
rity, but her younger sister. She corresponds to the 
"younger brother," Luke 15:12, and the "other sheep 
which are not of this fold." John 10: 16 ; that is, the Gen- 
tiles who are to be called into the fold of Zion. She hath 
no brcasti ; they are not yet grown to maturity ; she is not 
yet ready for her espousals. 

9. If she be a wall — (f slie be a door ; the meaning seems 
to be, To whatever she be likened, we will strengthen 
and ornament her accordingly. In other words, Christ 
will see that the gentile church is in due time adorned 
anil strengthened with all the graces of his Spirit. The 
reference is to a city wall, and to the door of a palace. 



7 Many waters cannot quench love, neither can 
the floods drown it: if a man would give all the 
substance of his house for love, it would utterly 
be contemned. 

8 IT We have a little sister,'' and she hath no 
breasts: what shall we do for our sister in the 
day when she shall be spoken for? 

9 If she be a wall, we will build uiion her apalace 
of silver : and if she be a door, we will inclose her 
witJt boards of cedar. 

10 I a7n a wall, and my breasts like towers: 
then was I in his eyes as one that found favor.^ 

11 Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-iiamon ;' he 
let out the vineyard unto keepers; every f)ne for 
the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of 
silver. 

12 Jly vineyard, which is mine, is liefore mc: 
thou, Solomon, wiw.vi have a thousand, and those 
that keep the fruit thereof two hundred. 

13 Thou that dwellest in the gardens, the com- 
panioits hearken to thy voice : cause me to hear it. 

14 If Make haste,' my beloved,^' and bo thou like 
to a roe or to a young hart upon the mountains 
of spices. 



Kzck. i!.33. S lleb. pc, 



10. I am a wall; the speaker is probably the gentile 
church anticipating her maturity, through what Christ 
shall do for Iter. Like towers ; upon the city wall. Then; 
when she had reached maturity. 

11. Solomon; the heavenly Solomon. Compare Lsaiah 
5:1, 2; Matt. 21:33. Unto keepers; those to whom Christ 
commits the interests of his church, are the keepers. 
These are to bring to their Lord the worth of the fruit in 
money. Compare Matt. 21:34, 43. 

12. Ml/ vineyard; the vineyartl of the spotise. Spiritu- 
ally applied, she is the same as the keepers in the preced- 
ing verse. A thousand — two hundred; while the keepers 
render to their Lord the appointed tribute, he grants 
them a reward for their services. 

13. Dwellest in the gardens; the words of the bridegroom 
to his spouse. The companions ; his iellows. See note on 
chap. .'> : 1 . 

14. 3Iake haste; the bride's parting response. See note 
on cliap. 2:17. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Christ's presence in his church makes her secure 
from injury, and honorable in the eyes of the world. 

5. God's people have no strength of their own, but their 
strength is in Christ. "While they by faith lean upon 
him, they are confirmed against all doubts, fears, dangers, 
difficulties, and temptations, and by union with him made 
partakers of all grace and comfort." 

C. Nothing is so strong as the love of Christ for his 
people. It overcomes all hinderances, and brings them 
safe home to heaven through floods of temptation within, 
and distress and persecution without. Rom. 8:35-39. 

8. .lewish saints prayed by anticipation for the gather- 
ing of the Gentiles to Christ. Gentile Christians should, 
in turn, pray for the restoration of Israel to their own 
Messiah. 

12. While we render to God the fruits of his vine3'ard 
in their season, he will abundantly refresh our own souls 
by his grace, and m.ake them "like a watered garden," full 
of the precious fruits of righteousness. 



763 



THE BOOK 



OF 



THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 



That we may have a clear understanding of the arrangement of the prophetical books, a brief survey 
of the Hebrew canon is necessary. The Jews divided the sacred Scriptures into three parts : the Law, 
including the five books of Moses ; the Prophets; and the Hagiographa, or sacred writings. The prophets 
they again distributed into the former, consisting of the historical books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and 
Kings ; and the latter, or prophets in the proper sense of the word. The latter prophets once more they 
divided, according to quantity of matter, into two classes : the greater, containing Isaiah, Jeremiah, and 
Ezekiel, arranged according to the order of time ; and the less, or the twelve minor prophets, also arranged 
according to their judgment of the order of time. The book of Daniel they reckoned to the Hagiographa, 
which comprises all the remaining books not above enumerated. 

Hence it happens that the book of Isaiah holds the first place among the prophets, although Ilosea, 
Amos, and Jonah, and in all probability Joel also, entered upon their proplietical office before him. See 
the introductions to these books. Isaiah was contemporary with Micah. If, with many, we suppose him 
to have entered upon his office in the last year of Uzziah — sec note to Isa. G : 1 — from this time to the 
fiftecntli year of Hezekiah, gives a period of about forty-eight years. So long he certainly' exercised the 
prophetical office, and probably through several, if not all of the remaining fourteen years of Hezekiah. 
The Jewish tradition is, that he was sawn asunder under tlie reign of Manasseh, to which it has been sup- 
posed that Heb. 11:37 refers. But this is uncertain. 

The book of Isaiah naturally falls into two great divisions. The first consists of chapters 1-39, and 
contains a variety of prophetic messages delivered on special occasions. The second, comprising the 
remaining twenty-seven chapters, seems to have had no special occasion, but to have been written, 
probably in the old ago of tiie prophet, after the overthrow of Sennacherib's army, for the comfort and 
encouragement of God's people in all coming ages. Its great theme is well expressed in the introductory 
verse, "Comfort ye, comfort yc my people, saith your God." See the introduction to chap. 40. 

Isaiah is distinguished for the rich variety of his themes, and especially for the fulness of his revelations 
respecting the glory of " the last days." No one of the ancient prophets foretold so much respecting the 
future kingdom of Christ, and no one is so frequently quot(^d in the New Testament. For this reason he 
has been well called the evangelical prophet.* 



C II ATT Kit I. 

1 Isaiah compUineth of J.id^ih for hor ribelhon. ■'i He lamcnl«th lifr 
juilgments. 10 He upbraiileth their whole service. Hi He exhorteth 
to repentance, with promiHis and threatenin;;s. 21 Bewailing their 
wickeJncHs, he denouricelh God's judgments. 2.') He promiseth (jrace, 
28 and threatenclh destruction to the wicked. 

''T'^HE vision of Lsaiah the son of Amoz," which 
J_ he saw concerning Judali and Jerusalem in 

• Numben Vi.n >> 2 Chrnnicica, chnptors iSUii. ' Deuteronomy Si:{; 

1. Tlie vi.iioH of Isaiah — kings of Judnh; this is tho (;cn- 
cral title of the whole book. Particular titles are prefi.xed 
to many of its sections, btit it is not probable that these 
are arranged in exact chronological order. Vision; pro- 

• In the prophetical books many pasNaces of dilTicnlt inierpretation occur, 
and here the best commnntators of this and othor counlrios liavu been consulted 
as aiixihdry guidos to a correct |ud(;mont. Tliis cfuera! acknowledgment 
trill supersede tho necessity ol referonce. in pArlii-ul4r nass.ii:eB, to tho authors 
whole opinioni have been followed, which indeed tlie brevity of thi 
lary will not allow. 

764 



the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, 
Hezekiah, kings of Judah.'' 

2 Hear, lieavcns, and give car. earth t"^ for the 
Loi!D lintii s])oken ; I have nourished and brought 
up children, and they liavc rebclicii agains^t me.'' 

3 Tlie o.\ kuowelii his owner, and the ass liis 
master's crib : but Israel doth not know, my people 
doth not consider." 



ih'J:lJi MicahOl, 2. J ohnpter tSMG. e Jeremiah b;7. 



jihotic revelation, with which are mingled liistorical tle- 
scriptions of the past and rejiroofs for present sins. Jti- 
dah and Jerusalem ; these are the great theme of the book. 
Other nations come into the view only as their history is 
connected with that of llod's people. In " .ludah and Je- 
niRalem" was enihosouicii the true church of God, which 
hail the jiromise of perpetual and universal dominion un- 
ilir the sceptre of David ami his sect) : and a large part of 
these prophecies have their complete fulfilment only in 



Judah exhorted and 



ISAIAH I. 



warned to rrpc/it. 



A.M.M44. 4 Ah Sinful nation, a people laden with 

B.C. »bout ...,,.. 1 <• -1 1 1-11 

760. iniquity, '' a seed of evil-doers, children 
that are corrupters : they have forsaken the Lord, 
they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto 
anger, they are gone away backward.^ 

5 1; Why should ye be stricken any more?'' ye 
will revolt more and more:* the whole head is 
sick, and the whole heart faint. 

6 From the sole of tlie foot even unto the head 
t/iere is no soundness in it ; but wounds, and bruises, 
and putrefying sores: they have not been closed, 
neither bound up, neitlier mollified witli ointment.^ 

7 Your country is desolate, your cities are burn- 
ed with fire:'' your land, strangers devour it in 
your presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown 
by' strangers. 

8 And the daughter of Zion is left as a cottage 
in a vineyard,'' as a lodge in a garden of cucum- 
bers, as a besieged city. 

9 E.xcept tiie Lord of hosts had left unto us a 
very small remnant,'' we should have been as Sod- 
om, a7idv,-e sliould have been like unto Gomorrah.' 

10 TT Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of 
Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye 
people of Gomorrah. 

11 To what purpose is the multitude of your 
sacrifices unto me?" saith the Lord: lam full of 
the burnt-offerings of rams, and the fat of fed 
beasts; and I delight not in tiie blood of bullocks, 
or of lambs, or of he-goats.^ 

12 When ye come to appear before me,* who 
liath required this at vour hand, to tread my 
courts? 

13 Bring no more vain oblations ;'' incense is an 
aliouiination unto me; the new-moons and snlj- 
batlis, tiic calling of assemblies, I cannot away 
with; it is iniquity,^ even the solemn meeting. 

14 Your new-moons and your appointed feasts 
my soul hateth : they arc a trouble unto me; I am 
weary to bear t/iein. 



• Heb ofhrnviness. a H 
5HM. b Jer. i-.m. I Hcb. 
Ilie overthrow of. d Lam. 
e Psa. JO:S, etc.: Amos 5: 



:'i?. \ Heh. ali^naled.nr srparoled; P.ia, 

•revolt, i Or, oil. c Dcut. a-J:51. Illeb. 

' Lam. .3;a2; Rom. 9:a9. f Gen. lU:a4. 

1 lleb. great /le-goats. • Heb. 4c .Ken. 



her history under Christ the Son of David. Uzziah; he 
reigned fifty-two years, from about 810 to 758 before 
Christ. Jotham. Ahuz, and Hezekiali ; the reign of these 
three kings includes a period of sixty-one years. 

4. Corrupters; of themselves, Judg. 2: 19, or of their way, 
Gen. 6:12. 

5. IV/iij shoiUd ye be stricken ; of what avail would it be ? 
Ye wdl revolt ; notwithstanding all the stripes inflicted 
upon you. Head — heart; of the nation compared to a per- 
son. Sick— faint ; from the blows already inflicted to no 
purpose. This idea is amplified in the following verse. 
The number of stripes inflicted shows the desperate wick- 
edness of the people. 

8. Tlie daughter of Zion ; Zion herself, as the metropolis 
of the kingdom. Chap. 37:22. Left; left remaining amid 
the desolation. Cottage — lodge; a temporary hut or booth, 
built to shelter a keeper. The point of resemblance is 
its loneliness. 

9. A very small remnant; of pious persons. 

11. I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs; God 
has no pleasure in sacrifices, except as they express the 
faith and obedience of the oiTerers. 

12. To tread my courts ; literally to trample — to profane 
them by hollow and hypocritical services. 

13. Bring no more vain oblations; God forbids not the 



1.5 And when ye spread forth your liaiids, I will 
hide mine eyes from you;' yea, when ye make 
many prayers,* I will not hear : vour hands are 
full of blood. s 

16 ^ Wash ye, make you clean ;J put away the 
evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease 
to do evil ; 

17 Learn to do well;'^ seek judgment, relieve' 
the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the 
widow. 

18 Come now, and let us reason together,' saith 
the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they 
shall be as white as snow ; tliough they be red 
like crimson, they shall be as wool."' 

19 If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat 
the good of the laml : 

20 But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be de- 
voured witli the sword : for tlie mouth of tlie Lord 
hath spoken it." 

21 H How is the faithful city become a harlot!" 
it was full of judgment; righteousness lodged in 
it; but now murderers. 

22 Tliy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed 
with water: 

23 Thy princes are rebellious, and companions of 
thieves: everyone loveth gifts, and folhiwcth after 
rewards: they judge not the fatliorless, neither 
dotli tlie cause of tiie widow come unto them. 

24 Therefore saith the Lord, tlie Lord of hosts, 
the Mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of 
mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies.'' 

25 And I will turn my hand upon thee, and pure- 
ly^ purge away thy dross, and take away all thy 
tin:'^ 

26 And I will restore thy judges as at the first, 
and tiiy counsellors as at tiie beginning: after- 
ward thou shalt be called. The city of righteous- 
ness, the faithful city. 

27 Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and 
her converts* with righteousness.'' 



h Luke 11:4-. 




t Or. grief. 


i Mie 


..1:4. 


1 Heb. 


null 


'phi 


prayer. 


! Heb. 


6/ooi/.<. J.Ter 


4 


14. klPet. 


:i:ii. 


lOr, 7 


ishten. 


(-h. 


4:i: 


Hi mPs 


a. 51:7. 


n Lev. ■itk-.i.i. 




Jer. 2:-i0. a 


. P 1 


eut. a 


<:&: Ez 


pk. . 


:|:) 


HHeb 


aecord- 


'"S 1" pimne 




q Mai. 3::j 


■Or 


Ikey t/tat return of 


her. 


r 1 Cor 


1::W. 



offerings prescribed in the law, but the liringing of them 
with hearts full of iniquity and hands full of blood. I can- 
not away — the solemn meeting; or, "I cannot bear iniijuity 
and a solemn meeting," that is, together. 

IG. Wash ye, make you clean; in all such precepts we are 
to understand an inward cleansing of the heart, with a 
corresponding outward cleansing of the life. 

17. Seek judgment ; diligently pursue justice. 

18. Shall he as ivhite as snow; that is, if you will thus 
repent and amend your ways. Tiie cleansing of the soul 
from sin includes both turgiveness and sanctification, 
which can never be separated from each other. 

22. Mixed with irater ; adulterated with water by those 
who sell it, Tlity had degenerated from the piety of their 
forefathers. 

23. Come unto them ; come before them ; they refuse to 
hear it. 

25. Purge away thy dross — take away all thy tin ; from the 
adulterated silver, and thus restore it to its orighial puri- 
ty. The meaning is explained in the following verse. 

27. JVdh judgment — with righteousness; liy the manifes- 
tation of God's righteous judgments upon the wicked. 
This is the constant doctrine of the prophets. The refer- 
ence here is to the wicked in Zion. Her converts; the 
remnant wlio survive these judgments and turn to God. 
7(55 



The coming of 



ISAIAH II. 



Christ's kingdom. 



28 T And the destruction" of tlie transgressors 
and of the sinners shall be together," and they that 
forsake the Lord shall be consuincd.'' 

29 For they shall be ashamed of the oaks which 
ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for 
the gardens that ye have chosen. 

30 For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, 
and as a garden that hath no water. 

31 And the strong shall be as tow, and the maker 
of it as a spark, and they sliall both burn together, 
and none shall (luoncii them. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 Isaiah prophesieth the coming of Christ's kingdom. 6 Wickedness is 
the cause of Gcd's forsaking. 10 He exhorteth to fear, because of 
the powerful effects of Gods majesty. 

THE word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw 
concerning Judah and Jerusalem. 

2 And it shall come to pass in the last days, that 
the mountain of tiie Lord's house shall be estab- 
lished* in the top of the mountains, and shall be 
exalted above the hills •," and all nations shall flow 
unto it.'' 

3 And many people shall go and say. Come ye, 
and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to 
the house of the God of Jacob ;" and he will teach 



• Heb. breaicing. a Psa. I 
pnrid. e Mic. 4:1, etc. d 
( Luke 21; 47. 1 Or, seijllirs 



5:5; Luke 12:45, 40. b Zeph. 1:6. t Or, pre- 
■sa. 2:S. ' Jer. 31:0; 50:5; Zech. Sril, ■£}. 
S Psa. 40:9; Hos. 2:18. h Eph 5:S. « Or, 



29. Oaks — gardens; where idolatrous rites were prac- 
tised. Chap. 57:5; 65:3. 

30. Ye shall be as an oak — as a garden; since the people 
have sinned against God under oaks and in gardens, he 
will make them like withered oaks and parched gardens. 

31. //(csd'on^,- the man of rank and power. The maker 
of it; ratlier, as in the margin, "his work;" that is, tlie 
idol which he has made, and in wliich he puts liis trust. 
This shall set him on fire and destroy him. Both; the 
strong man and liis work. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Our obligations to (iod our heavenly Father, are infi- 
nitely higher than to earthly parents. For this reason, 
rebellion and ingratitude towards him are more heinous 
than the same sins committed against them. 

5. When repeated and heavy jtidgincnts fail to reform 
nations or individuals, their wickedness is desperate and 
their destruction near. 

9. God often spares wicked nations from utter destruc- 
tion, for the sake of the pious remnant that is found in them. 

10. When men in high places sin openly, it is the duty 
of God's ministers to rebuke them in a bold and fearless 
manner. 

11-17. God abhors the multiplication of outward servi- 
ces, when the heart is full of wickedness, and the life of 
rebellion and iniquity. All who would render to him ac- 
ceptable otiorings must begin by putting away their sins 
and bringing forth fruits meet for repentance. 

18. To those who sincerely repent of their sins and 
come to God through Christ, his grace and mercy have no 
limits. He will [lardon the most guilty, and sanctify the 
most polluted. " Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable 

gift!" 

19, 20. God's almighty power and truth are pledged to 
give prosperity to the righteous, and to destroy the 
wicked. The welfare of his friends and the destruction 
of his enemies are as certain as his own existence. 

21-24. Wicked rulers, who op])ress and rob the people, 
and pervert justice for gain, may be above all human pow- 
er, but GoJ will hold them responsible at his tribunal, and 
punish them in such a way that it sludl be seen and ac- 
knowledged that lie is " the Judge of all the earth." 

25-2S. The terrible judgments of God, by which ho de- 
1(56 



us of his ways, and we will walk in his .*.m.3244. 
])aths : for out of Zion shall go forth the too. 
law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.' 

4 And he shall judge among the nations, and 
shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat 
their swords into ploughshares, and their spears 
into pruning-hooks:' nation shall not lift up sword 
against nation, neither shall they learn war any 
more."-' 

5 house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in 
the light of tiie Loud." 

G *i Tiicrefore thou hast forsaken thy people the 
house of Jacob, because they be replenished from* 
the east, and are soothsayers like the Philistines,' 
and they please' tiiemselves in the children of 
strangers.^ 

7 Their land also is full of silver and gold,'' nei- 
ther is there any end of their treasures; their land 
is also full of horses, neither is tliere any end of 
their chariots: 

8 Their land also is full of idols;' they worship 
the work of their own hands, that which their 
own fingers have made: 

9 And the moan man boweth down, and the great 
man humbleth himself: therefore forgive them 
not. 



.I:-:14. iOr,ab<mndK-ith. j .N'eh. 13:2.3. kDeut. 17:17. 



stroys the wicked, conduce to the purification and renewed 
prosperity of the true " Israel of God." 

29-31. The earthly objects to which sinners give their 
confidence, and for the sake of which they depart from 
the living God, not only disappoint them, but prove the 
occasion of their destruction. 

CHAPTER II. 

1. The word that Isaiah — saw ; the prophecy revealed to 
him in vision. This is the title of a particular section, 
extending through chap. 4. 

2-4. And it shall come to pass; these verses are found in 
Micah 4 : 1-3, with but little variation. The two prophets 
lived at the same time. Micah 1:1. In Micah, this proph- 
ecy stands in connection with the preceding and follow- 
ing context. Here it stands by itself, a bright picture 
before a dark scene, which however ends in glory. Chap. 
4:2-G. In the last days; an indefinite indication of tho 
distant future. The mountain of the Lord's home; Zion, 
including Moriah, on which the temple stood. In tlie top 
of the mountains—iibovc the hdls ; where all the earth can 
behold it. Shall go forth the Inir; (!od shall sit in Zion aa 
a lawgiver for ;dl nations. Judge among — rebuke ; judgo 
between them as umpire. Thus wars will become un- 
necessary. The pass;ige is a jirophecy of the extension 
of the true religion, from Jerusalem as a cciUre. over all 
the earth. It plainly belongs to the Christian dispensation, 
but is veiled under the form of Judaism, according to 
which the people of God literally went up from all quar- 
ters to worship God in Jerusalem. 

5. U house of Jacob ; in this exhortation the prophet adds, 
as it were, his " Amen " to the glorious prediction. 

(i. licplcnishcd from the cast; filled with superstitious and 
idolatrous practices coining from the east. Syria and .\8- 
syria seem to be especially intended. Compare 2 Kings 
Hi: 10. Please themselves; or. " abound," as in the margin. 
Children of strangers; foreigners whom Ihcy have willingly 
introduced, and whoso idolatrous practices they follow. 

7. Horses — chariots; a foreign custom forbidden to tho 
Hebrew kings. l)eut.l7:lG. Some understand the horses 
and chariots of their eastern allies. 

9. Boweth down — humbleth himself ; before bis idols. But 
the same words are, iu verse 11, translated, "shall bo 



The day of Iht Lord. 



ISAIAH III. 



God's judgments for 



AM 3214 10 1 Enter into the rock, and hide thee 
TOO."""" in tlie dust, for fear of the Lord, and for 
the jxlory of his majesty.^ 

11 Tlie lofty loolvs of man shall be humbled, and 
the hau<i-htiness of men shall be bowed down;'' 
and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.*^ 

12 For the day of the Loud of hosts shall be upon 
every o)ie that is proud and lofty, and upon every 
one that is lifted up ; and he shall be brought low : 

13 And upon all the cedars of Lebanon, that are 
high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Ba- 
sh an,'' 

14 And upon all the high mountains, and upon 
all the hills that arc lifted u]i, 

15 And upon every high tower, and upon every 
fenced wall, 

16 And upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon 
all pleasant pictures." 

17 And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, 
and tlie haughtiness of men shall be made low ;"' 
and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. 

IS x\.nd the idols he shall utterly abolish.^ 

19 And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, 
and iu;o the caves of the earth,* for fear of the 
Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he 
ariseth to shake terribly the earth.' 

20 lu that day a man shall cast his idols of sil- 
ver,^ and his idols of gold, which they made each 
one for himself' to worship, to the moles and to 
the bats; 

21 To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into 
the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord, 
and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth 
to shake terribly the earth. 

22 Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his 
nostrils:" for wherein is he to be accounted of? 



" Ver. 


19. 21 


Rev. 0:1.5, 16. b ver. 17; 


ch. 5:10; Psa. 18:2- 


. c Zcph. 


3:11,10 


Zech. 


9:16. d Ezek. .31:3; Zech 


11:1, 2. • Heb.p/f 


itres ofde- 


sirt e 


rar. 11 


t Or, .s/ialt utterly pass at 


■aij. 1 Heb. rf«s(. 1 


Hag. 2:0, 


21; Heb. 


l-i:aii 


27. ! Ueb. I/ie lUols of hi 


silver. 1 Or, for hi 


n. e Psa. 



bowed down," " shall he humhled," and so in verse 17. 
The verse may be rendered, The man of low rank shall be 
bowed down, and the man of high rank shall be Ijumbled ; 
and do not thou forgive tliem. 

10. The rock — the dust ; clefts of the rocks and caverns, 
to which the people were accustomed to flee before an in- 
vading army. The words contain a propliecy of impend- 
ing judgments. 

11. In that day; the day of God's vengeance upon the 
wicked ; the same as "the day of the Lord," in the follow- 
ing verse. 

13-16. Cedars — pictures; the various objects enumerat- 
ed in these verses denote generally all that in which the 
people put their delight and confidence. 

20. Cast his idols; cast them away in his fligtit into 
dark holes. 

22. From man ; from confidence in man. Breath is in li.is 
nostrils; who is frail and short-lived. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. God's infinite power, faithfulness, and love are pledg- 
ed to give to his Son " the heathen for his inheritance 
and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession;" 
so that in the darkest times his servants can labor for his 
cause with the assurance of final and complete success. 

4. In its spirit and principles the gospel is opposed to 
war, injustice, and oppression of every kind ; and its uni- 
versal prevalence will bring to all nations perpetual peace, 
harmony, and blessedness. 

6. When God's people seek deliverance from the trou- 
bles which their own sins have brought upon them, by 



CHAPTER III, 



1 The great confusion -which Cometh by sin. 9 The impudency of the 
people. 12 The oppression .^nli covetousness of the rulers. IG The 
jud^'inents whicli shall be for the pride of the u-omen. 

FOR, behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, doth 
take away from Jerusalem and from Jiidah 
the stay and the staff," the whole stay of bread, 
and the whole stay of water,' 

2 The mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, 
and the prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient, 

3 The captain of fifty, and the honorable man,^ 
and the counsellor, and the cunning artificer, and 
the eloquent orator. 'J 

4 And I will give children to be their princes, 
and babes shall rule over them.'' 

5 And the people shall be oppressed, every one 
by another, and every one by his neighbor: the 
child shall behave himself proudly against the an- 
cient, and the base against the honorable. 

6 When a man shall take hold of his brother of 
the house of his father, .tayinn-, Thou hast clothing, 
be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be under thy 
hand : 

7 Li that day shall he swear,* saying, I will not 
be a healer ;* for in my house is neither bread nor 
clothing: make me not a ruler of the peo])le. 

8 For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen:' 
liecause their tongue and their doings are against 
the Lord,™ to provoke the eyes of his glory." 

9 The show of their countenance doth witness 
against them ;° and they declare their sin as Sod- 
om, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul ! for 
they have rewarded evil unto themselves. 

10 Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well 
vith him:^ for they shall eat the fruit of their 
doings. 



m 


■3,4 


Jer. 


7:5. h 


f.ei 


. 20:26. i cb. 30 


!■- 


; Jer. 3 


•::9. 


1 He 


b. a man 


ftn 


iieiit 


in roiuitenanre 




Or, .<i 


Iful of>pe, 


h 


i-iK 


njts - 


4:14. 


k 


Keel. 


Id- 


hi. 


Heb. 


lift up 


tbf 


hand 


Gen. 14:2 




I Heb. 


binder up 




.Mic. 


J:l 


-'• ■" 


Lam. 


5:16, 17 




1 Cor. 


1U:2.>. »J 


'■ 


3:3. P 


Eccl 


(•:12 


13 





allyilig themselves to the men of this world, and following 
their evil ways, they only involve themselves in deeper 
misery and ruin. 

10-17. Before G od's judgments, the mightiest nations are 
weak as a little child. Upon the high in power and place, 
who have been leaders in rebellion against God, they fall 
with irresistible force, and grind them to powder. 

18. The end of all God's judgments is the purification of 
his people from their sins, and their restoration to com- 
munion with himself and fruitfulness in his service. 

22. They who trust for deliverance and salvation to man, 
instead of God, meet with speedy and utter disappointment. 

CHAPTER in. 

1. For behold, the Lord — doth take away ; the reason is here 
given why the people should cease from confidence in 
man. The stay and the staff; every kind of stay, including 
men and means in the widest sense. 

4. Children — babes; unworthy and incompetent men. 

5. Tlie people shall be oppressed ; this verse describes the 
confusion that follows from having for their rulers chil- 
dren and babes. 

6. When ; in the time of this confusion and distress. 
Tliouha.it clothing; decent raiment, such as a ruler is re- 
quired to wear. ' These words show how deep and gen- 
eral is the prevailing poverty. 

7. A healer ; a binder up of the state, in its broken and 
ruineil condition. 

9. The show oftlieir countenance; its bold and shameless 
look. 

767 



Female vanity condemned. 



ISAIAH IV. 



Chriit a sanctuary. 



11 Woe unto the wicked ! it shall he ill vifh him: 
for the reward of his hands shall be given* him. 

12 ^ .Is for my people, children arc their op- 
pressors, and women rule over them. O my peo- 
ple, they which lead thee cause thee to err,* and 
destroy* the way of thy paths. 

13 'I'he Lord standeth up to plead,^ and standcth 
to judsre the people. 

14 The Lord will enter into judgment with the 
ancients of his people, and the princes thereof: for 
ye have eaten* up the vineyard;'' the spoil of the 
poor is in your houses. 

15 What mean ye that ye beat my people to 
pieces,*' and grind the faces of the poor? saitli 
the Lord God of hosts. 

16 1i MoreoverthoLoRDsaith, Because thedaugh- 
tcrs of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched 
forth necks and wanton eyes," walking and minc- 
ing^ a,? they go, and making a tinkling with their feet: 

17 Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab 
the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, 
and the Lord will discover" their secret parts. 

18 III that day the Lord will take away the 
bravery oi their tinkling ornaments about their fat, 
and thiir cauls,* aud their round tires like the moon, 

19 The chains,' and the bracelets, and the muf- 
flers,* 

20 The bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs. 



* \\f:\\ . done to . t Oi, rnlt thee bltssed. 1 Hch swallow up. a Mic O.-i. 
^ Or, /tiirul. b Matt. 21::!!. t ch. 5rl;J. I lU-b. ilraiving with lluir eyes. 
1 Or, tripphts; tiictly. ' Heb. make naked, t Or. net-ivorks. 1 Or. sweet 
balls. S Ot,spaniiUd ornaments. \ Mrh. houses of the soul. dMic.'inO 



12. Theywkick lead tkce — destroy the way of lliij patli.i ; place 
in it, as it were, stumbling-blocks and pitfalls ; tliat is, 
hinder tlie people from walking in the right way, and thus 
destroy tliem. 

U. Ancients; elders, tliat i.s, nilcrs. Vineyard; put fig- 
uratively for the Lord's people committed to tlieir care. 

15. Grind tlie faces of the poor; citlier, griml llieir per- 
sons, tliat is, crush them ; or, grind tlieir faces upon the 
ground, by trampling them under foot- 
le. Making a ttnktinf^ ; witli the ankle-bands attached to 
their feet. Ver. 18. Tlicu; were pcrliaps set witli small 
bells. 

18-24. Bravery; show or splendor. Round tires; orna- 
ments for the head resembling tiie moon in shape. Chains; 
or i)endants. Mufflers; a species of veil consisting of two 
parts, the one thrown back over the liead, the other hang- 
ing down in front, with a space between lor the eyes. 
Ornaments of the leirs; ankle-chains, jiassing from one an- 
kle-band to tlie other, so as to ))roduce a short, mincing 
Step. They are still used in the Kast. Tablets; or.smell- 
ing-boxcs. Wimples; that is, hoods or veils; better, per- 
haps, robes. Crtspinir-pins ; for the hair. Most commen- 
tators render the original word purses. Glasses; ])ortable 
mirrors. Burning; from exposure to the sun, or i)erhai)s 
from disea-se. Some of the terms in these verses are of 
uncertain meaning, nor is it essential that we should know 
their exact form and use. They all pertained to female 
luxury and vanity. 

25. Thy men; Jerusalem is addressed. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. When God would chastise a nation for its sins, ho 
very commonly takes away its able and faithful men, and 
gives it up to the dominion of the weak and the wicked. 

6-8. Sin long persisted in, amidst God's warnings and 
judgments, will bring the mightiest nation to degradation 
and distress. 

12-15. All rulers, civil and spiritual, are entrusted with 
authority for the good of tlie people. When they abuse 
their power by leading the people into error, and bv op- 
768 



and the headbands, and the tablets,' and a. m. .i2«. 

. , . B. C. about 

the car-rings, iw. 

21 The rings, and nose-jewels, 

22 The changeable suits of apparel, and the man- 
tles, and the wimples, and the crisping-pins, 

23 The glasses, and the line linen, and the hoods, 
and the veils. 

24 And it shall come to pass, that instead of 
sweet smell there shall be stink: and instead of a 
girdle a rent; and instead of well set hair bald- 
ness;^ and instead of a stomacher a girding of 
sackcloth; and burning instead of beauty. 

25 Thy men shall fall by the sword, tind thy 
mighty^ in the war. 

2(j And her gates shall lament and mourn :'^ and 
she being desolate" shall sit upon the ground.' 

C II A P T E II I V . 

In tlie extremity of evils, Christ's kingilom shall be a s,"inctuary. 

AND in that day seven women shall take hold 
of one man, saying. We will eat our own 
bread, and wear our own apparel ; only let us be 
called by thy name,* to takeaway' our reproach. 
2 In that day shall the branch of the Lord be 
beautiful and glorious,^^ and the fruit of the earth 
shall be excellent and comely for them that arc 
escaped of Israel.' 



1 Ilcb. mii'/il. e l.am 1:4. • Or, emplieil; Heb. cttanvd ; 2Kings 21:13. 
i Lam. 2:10. t Heb. tltij name be called vpon us. I Or, take thou away, 
i Ueb brauly and glory. B Jer. 23:4, 6; Zech. 6: 12, 13. 1 .Ueb. Me escap- 
ins; of Israel. 



pressing and s])oiliiig the weak, God himself will execute 
judgment upon them. 

]l)-2(i. Female vanity and luxury are offensive to God. 
They contribute largely to tlie corruption of morals and 
the decline of vital religion, and God will pnnisli them with 
cxciniilary severity. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1. In that (lay; in the day of the calamities foretold at 
the close of the jircceding chapter. Seven women — our re- 
proach; the men have fallen in war, chap. 3:25, so that the 
surviving women cannot find husbands. Seven women 
ask from one man the privilege of being called each his 
wife, and voluntarily offer to resign all the usual advan- 
tages of that relation. Take away our reproach ; the re- 
proach of being unmarried anil childless, which the He- 
brew w^men regarded as a great calamity. Gen. 29:32; 
30:1; 1 Sam. l:U-8; Psa. 113:9. 

2. In that ilatj ; in the day of these judgments, including 
also the period that follows them. We are not to inquire 
here after a simple exact date. The prophecy belongs to 
that class which have a progressive fullilment. Its im- 
mediate reference prob ibly w'as to the Babylonish cap- 
tivity, which ended in the purification of the people from 
idolatry* and their restoration under K/.ra, Nehemiah, and 
others. l!ut it covered also " the great and terrible day 
of the Lord," Joel 2:31, when Jerusalem was destroyed 
by the Romans, as well as the mighty judgments yet to 
come, the final issue of which sliall be the triumph of 
Christ's kingdom over all the earth. The Branch if the 
Lord; the Messiah. See note on chap, 11:1; ami Jer. 
23:5; 33:15; Zech. 3:S; 6:12. It is not. however, the 
])crson of the Messiah alone, apart from his body the 
church ; but the Messiah in his church as her Head, and 
tlic author of all her friiitrnlness, both before and after his 
advent. For this reason God calls the church herself, as 
united to Christ, " the branch of my planting." Chap. 
(;o:21 ; compare John 15:1-7. The fruit nf the earth ; that 
is. of the promised lanil where the >tessiah should ap|)car. 
Them thai are escaped ; that escaped these judgments. 



Par able of a vimy.ird. 



ISAIAH V. 



Jadi^ments on siniie,' 



A.M. :«n. 3 And it shall come to pass, that he that 

It. C iibout . 1 p . r, . , , ,' . , . 

T6U. IS lett in Zion, and he that remaineth m 
.lenisalcm, sliall be called lioly,* even every one 
that is written anions' the livin,!^* in Jerusalem: 

4 When the Lord shall have washed away the 
lilth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purg- 
ed the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof 
l)y the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of 
Inirning.'' 

5 And the Lord will create upon every dwell- 
ing-place of mount Zion, and iiixin her assemblies, 
a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a 
flaming lire by night:" for upon* all the glory shall 
f)e a defence.* 

6 And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow 
in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of 
refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain.'' 

CHAPTER V. 

1 Under the- parable of a vineyard Grod excuaeth his severe judf^ment. 
8 His judgments upon covetousness, 11 upon lasciviousness, Vj ujtoii 
impiety, 2U and upon injustice. 20 The executioners oi" (JoJ's judjj;- 
ments. 

NOW will I sing to my well beloved a song of 
my tielovcd touching his vineyard. My well 
beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill:"'' 

2 And he fenced it,' and gathered out the stones 
thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine,' 
and built a tower in the midst of it. and also 
made^ a wine-press therein: and ho looked that it 
should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth 
wild grapes. 

3 And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men 
of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwi.\t me and my 
vineyard. 

4 What could have been done more to my vine- 
yard, that I have not done in it? wherefore, when 
I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought 
it forth wild grapes? , 

5 And now go to ; I will tell you what I will do 
to my vineyard : I will take away the hedge there- 



«Ch, 00:21-, Ileb. 1-,':14. • Or, (o /i/V; Rev. 21:U7. b Ze-li. 13: 1. c Zech. 
•i.r,, lOi.a'wm. I Heb. covering: J ch. 25:4. i lleh. the horn of tke son 
of ail. « Luke 211:0, etc. 1 Or. made a wall about il. fjer. 2:21. 1 Heb. 
kewstl. ePsa. S0:12, 13. ' lUh for a treadin:;. 1 Ueh. plant of his plms- 



3. Written among the living ; the living, are the "escajaed 
of Israel." Ver. 2. To be written among them is to be- 
long to their number. 

4. Blood of Jerusalem ; blood-guiltiness. Spirit of judg- 
ment — burning; the Holy Spirit, operating in ancltlirough 
judgments which, like fire, purify while they destroy. 

5. A cloud and smoke by daij^ire bij night ; as of old, when 
tsrael came out of Egypt, fixod. 13:21. Upon all the glory ; 
over all Zion, now rendered glorious in holiness. Ver. 3. 
./ defence; the defence of the cloud by day and fire by night. 

INSTRUCTION. 
God governs the world for the good of his church, and 
Ilia most terrible judgments have for their end her puri- 
fication and enlargement. In the darkest times we should 
not despond, but rather comfort ourselves with the assur- 
ance that they will in due time usher in a bright and joy- 
ous day for all that love Christ. 

CHAPTER V. 

1. Will I; the prophet. My xcell beloved ; God, or, which 
is the same, Christ the Lord of the vineyard. Chap. 27:2 ; 
I'sa. 80:8; Jer. 2:21; Matt. 21:33. A song of my beloved ; 
of his inditing. 

3. Inhabitants of Jerusalem — men of .Tudah ; thcv are 
4'j 



of, and it shall be eaten up;" and break down the 
wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down:* 

And I will lay it waste: it shall not be prun- 
ed, nor digged ; but tliere shall come up briars 
and thorns: I will also command the clouds tiiat 
they rain no rain ujwn it. 

7 For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the 
house of Israel, and the men of Judah his ])leasant 
plant:* and he looked for judgment, but behold 
oppression ;' for righteousness, but behold a cry. 

8 *\\ Woe unto th(;m tiiat join house to house, 
that lay tield to lield,'' till there he no ]ilace, lliat 
they** may bo placed alone in the midst of the 
earth ! 

9 In mine ears' said the Lord of hosts. Of a 
truth^ many houses shall be desolate, even great 
and fair, without inhabitant. 

10 Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one 
batli,and the seed of a homer shall yield an ephah.' 

11 1i Woe unto them that rise up early in the 
morning, that tliey may follow strong drink ; that 
continue until night, till wine inflame them !* 

12 And the harp and the viol, the tabret and 
pipe and wine, are in their feasts:^ liut they re- 
gard not the work of the Lord, neitiier consider 
the operation of his hands." 

13 1 Therefore my people are gone into captiv- 
ity, because they have no knowledge:' and their 
honorable men are famished,' and their multitude 
dried up with thirst. 

14 Therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and 
opened her month without measure: and their 
glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and 
he that rcjoiceth, sliall descend into it. 

15 And the mean man shall be brought down, 
and the mighty man shall be humbled, and the 
eyes of the lofty shall be humbled: 

IG But the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in 
judgment, and God that is holy* shall be sancti- 
iied in righteousness. 

17 Then shall the lambs feed after their manner. 



ures. I Heb. a scab, h Mic. 2:2. 5 Heb. ye. I Or, This is in m. 
U Heb. //"no!. ■ Has. 1:0-11. • Or, pursue them. jAmosU:S, U. 
2b:5. IHos. 4:(;; Luke 10:14. \ lUh. their glory 3.re rmn of famint 
the holy God; Heb. the God the holy. 



themselves the vineyard, and thus he calls upon them to 
pass sentence on themselves. 

4. More; m the way of care and cultivation. 

8. That join house to house, after a general denunciation 
of God's judgments upon the people for their degeneracy, 
the prophet proceeds to rebuke particular abounding sins. 
No place; no place more, not possessed by them; so that 
the poor are crowded out. 

9. In mine cars; see chap. 22:14. Many houses; the 
houses of these avaricious men. 

10. One bath ; of wine ; the bath contained between 
eight and nine gallons. A homer; about eight bushels. 
An ephah; about oiio bushel. Their punishment shall 
correspond with their sins. 

12. Work of the Lord — operation of his hands; his judg- 
ments upon the ungodly. Compare chap. 28:21 ; Hab. 1:5. 

IG. Exalted in judgment — sanctified in righteousness ; his 
power and hohness shall be gloriously displayed in his 
righteous judgments. Chap. 1:27. 

17. After their manner ; at pleasure from the abundance 
of pasture. The fat ones ; the rich sinners mentioned in 
verse 8. The prophet threatens a general devastation 
which shall convert Judah into pasture-ground for the 
surrounding people. 

169 



Woes pronounced hy God. 



ISAIAH VI. 



A vision of live J^lost High. 



and the waste places of the fat ones ?hall stran- 
gers cat. 

18 Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords 
of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope: 

19 That say, Let him make speed, and hasten 
his work, that we may see it ; and let the counsel 
of tlie Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, 
that we may know it!" 

20 *i Woo unto them that call evil good, and 
good evil;* that put darkness for light, and ligiit 

.for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet 
for bitter! 

21 Woe unto them that arc wise in their own 
eyes, and prudent in tlieir own sigiit!*" 

22 Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, 
and men of strength to mingle strong drink : 

23 Wliicli justify the wicked for reward, and take 
away tlie righteousness of the righteous from him! 

24 Therefore as the fire' dcvoureth the stubble, 
and the flame consumetii the chafl'," so their root 
shall be as rottenness, and their blossom shall go 
up as dust: because they have cast away the law 
of the Loud of liosts, and despised the word of 
the Holy One of Israel. 

25 Tiierefore is the anger of the Lord kindled 
against his people, and ho hath stretched forth his 
hand against them, and liath smitten them: and 
the hills did tremble,'' and their carcasses were 
torn* in the midst of tlie streets. For all this 
his anger is not turned away, but his hand is 
stretched out still.'' 



» 2 Pel. AM, 4. • Heb. say conarning evil. It is good, t Hcb btfore Iheir 
fan. I> Pro». •i6:\i. I Heb. tongue of fire, c Matt. 3:1-'. ■! Mab. :i:lj. 
iOr, asdung. « I-ev. 20:14, etc. t Joel 2:3-11. I Or, dfSlress. 1 Or, if/itn 



18. Draw iniquity; laboriously urge on their wicked 
schemes. Cords of vanity; cords of wickedness; that is, 
wicked means and measures. A cart rope; a strong rope, 
implying great exertion. 

19. His work — counsel; the threatened judgments of God. 
They are scorners, and say this in ridicule. 

20. Call evil good, and good evil; pervert all moral dis- 
tinctions. 

23. Take away tlic rightcmisncss of the righteous; condemn 
him when his cause is righteous. 

24. Go up as dust; wither and ascend like dust into the 
air. 

25. Did tremble; at the presence of God. For all this; 
notwithstanding all these judgments. Stretclied mU still; 
in wrath, because they still persist in sin. 

2G. Lift up an ensign ; on a mountain as a rallying point, 
in accordance with the custom of ancient warfare. To the 
nations ; to the heathen nations, that they may come for the 
punishment of his people. Hiss unto them ; call them as 
bees were anciently called, by a hissing or whistling noise. 

27. Lnoseil— broken ; nolliing shall interrupt their march. 

28. Counted ItkcJUnt ; in ancient times horses were not 
shod : hence, hardness of hoof was an essential quality of 
the war horse. 

30. // one look unto the land ; by a sudden change of fig- 
ure, alluding to " the roaring of the sea," they who were 
just now regarded as tlic helpless prey of roaring lions, 
are compared to tenipest-lossed mariners, who look to the 
land for light and hope, but all is darkness. 
INt^TllUCTIONS. 

2. The best religimis millurc will not of itself preserv(' 
nations, churches, or families from degeneracy ; a painful 
demonstration of the deep corruption and desperate wick- 
edness of the human heart. 

4. The barrenness and positive sinfulness of God's visi- 
ble people are not chargeable to any neglect on his part. 
He has bestowed upon them abundant labor, and has a 
770 



26 1' And he will lift up an ensign to the f, J'^'^J*; 
nations from far, and will hiss unto thcrii tw. 
from the end of the earth : and behold, they shall 
come with speed swiftly: 

27 Noneshall be weary nor stumble among them i*^ 
none shall slumber nor sleep ; neither shall the gir- 
dle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their 
shoes be liroken : 

28 Whose arrows are sharp, and all their hows 
lient, their horses' hoofs shall be counted like flint, 
and their wheels like a whirlwind: 

2y Their roaring shall be like a lion, they shall 
roar like young lions; yea, they shall roar, and 
lay hold of the prey, and shall carry it away safe, 
and none shall deliver it. 

W And in that day they shall roar against them 
like the roaring of the sea : and if one look unto 
the land, behold darkness a7id sorrow;' and the 
light is darkened in the heavens thereof.' 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 Isaiah, in a vision of the Lord in liis clory. 5 being tcrrififil, is con- 
hrmed .for his message. 9 He showeth the obstinacy of the people 
unto their desolation. 13 A remnant shall be saved. 

IN the year that king Uzziah died° I saw also 
the Lord sitting upon a throne,'' high and lift- 
ed uj), and his train* filled the temple. 

2 Above it stood the seraphim: each one had 
six wings: witii twain he covered his face, and 
with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he 
did flv.' 



(/ is liglil. it sluiti be dark in the destrurtions thereof. 
h 1 Kings 22. 1 9. ' Or, the skirls thereof . lEzek. 1:11. 



right to expect from them an abundant harvest of right- 
eousness. 

5, G. Nations and churches that despise and abuse their 
religious privileges will be given up to spiritual desola- 
tion, often accompanied with heavy outward judgments ; 
and the kingdom <if God will be taken from them and 
given to others. Matt. 21:43. 

8-10. Rich and powerful oppressors are not above the 
reach of God's judgments. With infinite ease he can take 
from them all their possessions, or turn tliem into barren- 
ness by his curse. 

12, 23. Indulgence in strong drink is naturally connected 
with forgetfulness of God and wickedness of every kind. 

13. Want of religious instruction is the ruin of nations 
and churches. 

18-21. rerverse scoffers, who in their pride and self- 
complacency mock atGod'a threatenings and confound sin 
with holiness, arc past reproof. They must loam their 
folly by feeling the power of that wrath which they have 
dared to challenge. 

2t-30. God has an infinite storehouse of judgments at 
his disposal. At his bidding they come forth armed with 
irresistible power, and fall upon the mightiest nations as 
devouring fire upon dry stubble. When he visits men to 
liunish them for their initpiities. there is no deliverance 
from his almighty hand. Repentance or ruin must be the 
certain issue. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1. In the year thai king I'zzinh died ; many regard tliis 
vision as the prophet's inauguration to his office. This is 
l>robable, though not altogether certain. The Lord; Je- 
hovah: applied to Christ, .lolin 12:41; and to the Holy 
(ihost. Acts 28:25, etc. His train; a wide train is the 
emblem of kingly dignity. 

2. ,'^raphim ; "burning ones:" here they represent tlie 
angelic host. Ctmcred his face; before the majesty of the 



The Lord seen in hb glcry. 



ISAIAH VII. 



Jii»g Aliaz is comforted. 



A M. S214 3 And one cried unto another,* and said, 
'tw""" Holy. holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts : the 
whole earth is full of his glory.* 

4 And the posts of the door' moved at the voice 
of him that cried, and the house was filled with 
smoke. 

5 "i" Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone;' 
because I ayn a man of unclean lips,'' and I dwell 
in the midst of a people of unclean li]3s: for mine 
eyes liave seen the King, the Lord of hosts. 

6 Then flow one of the seraphim unto me, having 
a live coal in his hand,' tvhic/i he had taken with 
the tongs from off the altar:" 

7 And he laid it upon' my mouth, and said, Lo, 
this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is 
taken away, and thy siu purged. 

8 T Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying. 
Whom shall I send, and who will go for us ? Then 
said I, Here am I;' send me. 

9 And he said, Go, and tell this people, Hear 
ye indeed,* but understand not, and see yc indeed,* 
but perceive not. 

10 Make the heart of this people fat, and make 
their ears heavy, and shut their eyes ; lest they see 
with their eyes, and hoar with their ears, and under- 
stand with their heart, and convert, and be healed. 



• Heb. t/ils rried to l/iis. 1 Heb- /lis gfort/ is tite fuinea-i of the ivkoU ea. 
Heb. thresholda. « Heb att off. > Zech. 3: 1-7. I Heb and in his hi 
1 (ire coal b Rev. s:i. 1 Heb. causid it to touch. * Heb. Behold : 



Lord. Covered his feet ; a.s a. sign of reverence. Didftj; 
to execute the Lord's commands. 

3. HAy, holy, holy; the threefold repetition denotes in- 
tensity. Jer. 22:2!) ; Ezek. 21:27. Some suppose an albi- 
sion to the Trinity. 

4. Moved at tlte voice— ^filled with smoke; the trembling 
and the smoke were symbols of God's presence. Exod. 
19:18; 40:34, 3.5; 1 Kings 8:10-12; Rev. 15:8. 

•5. A man of undean lips — people of unclean lips ; unfit to 
join in these lofty praises, or to utter God's holy name. 

6. The altar ; the altar of burnt-offering, which stood in 
the court of the temple, on which fii-e was kept continually 
burning. Lev. 6:12, 13. 

7. Taken away — purged; his sin is pardoned, and he is 
now prepared both to join in the praises of the seraphim, 
and to deliver God's messages to the people. 

10. Make the heart of this people fat ; the prophet makes 
the heart of the people fat, because, through their perverse- 
ness, this is the effect of his labor. Lest they see with their 
eye$ — and be healed ; these words express the result of 
their hardness and blindness as entering into God's uni- 
ver.sal plan, yet so that they are left free and responsible. 
These awful words are repeatedly quoted in the New Tes- 
tament, and applied to the Jews ofour Saviour's day: Matt. 
13:14,15; Mark 4: 12; Luke8:10; John 12:40; Acts 28:26, 
27; Rom. 11:8; but this does not exclude their previous 
fulfilment in the days of Isaiah and his successors. See 
note on chap. 4:2. 

11. 12. Until the cities be wa.'ited — a great forsaking ; ful- 
filled in the Babylonish captivity, and more awfully in the 
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, and the present 
condition of the Jews to this day. 

13. In it; in the desolated land. A tenth ; a small rem- 
nant. Shall return, and shall be eaten ; shall again be eaten, 
that is. shall be wasted by new judgments. Teil-tree ; 
terebinth, a large tree common in Palestine. Substance; 
that is. stock, or living root. Cast their leaves; rather, 
"are cast down." The holy seed; the surviving remnant 
of i)ious Israelites. The substance thereof; the living stock 
of the land. As the life of a tree, when cut down, is per- 
petuated in its root and may produce a new tree, so the 
holy seed shall survive all these judgments and again 
replenish the land. Compare Dan. 4:15, 26. 



11 Then said I, Lord, how long? And he an- 
swered, Until the cities be wasted witliout inhab- 
itant, and the houses without man, and tlie land 
be utterly desolate," 

12 And the Lord have removed men far awav, 
and f/ure be a great forsaking in the midst of tlie 
land."^ 

13 "i But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall 
return, and shall be eaten:' as a tcil-troe. and as 
an oak; whose substance' is in them, when they 
cast t/icir leaves: so the holy seed shall be the sub- 
stance thereof. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1 A'naz, being troubled with fe.\r of Rezin and Pekah, is comforted by 
Isaiah. 10 Akaz having liberty to choose a sig-n, and refusing it, iiath 
for a sign. Clirist promised. 17 His judgment is prophesied to come 
by Assyria. 

A ND it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the 
J^ son of Jotham, the sou of Uzziah, king of 
Judali, tJiaf Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah 
the son of Rcmaliah, king of Israel, went up tow- 
ard Jerusalem to war against it, but could not 
prevail against it.'* 

2 And it was told the house of David, saying, 
Syria is confederate with* Ephraim. And his 



hearing. : Heb. in seeing, i Heb. desolate 
■.2\. I Or. tchen it is returned, and hath been 
J 2 Kings lli;5. • Heb. reslelh on. 



IXSTRUCTIONS. 
5. A view of God's infinite majesty and holiness brings 
a deep and humbling sense of our own vileness. It is 
only they who remain ignorant of God, that are ignorant 
of their own wickedness. 

7. God discloses to us our exceeding sinfulness, that he 
may prepare the way for our pardon and sanctification 
through the blood of Christ ; and we generally find that 
the cleansing power of his Spirit follows his convicting 
power. A deep experience of guiltiness, and a corre- 
sponding experience of God's pardoning mercy, are espec- 
ially necessary to those who are called to preach Christ 
crucified to their fellow-men. 

8. True humility, however deep, will not hinder God's 
servants from undertaking the most arduous and respon- 
sible service to which he plainly calls them. 

9. God's ministers are responsible only for the faithful 
delivery of his message to their fellow-men. To many of 
them this may become the occasion of increased hardness 
and deeper condemnation: but such a result can only be 
through their o'wn wilful bhndness and cherished obdu- 
racy of heart. 

10. The most dreadful calamity which can befall men 
is, that God should give them up to their own hearts' 
lusts, and leave them to walk in their own counsels. They 
then go on hardening themselves in sin, under all the 
means of grace which he has appointed, and make them- 
selves "vessels of wrath fitted to destruction." Psa. 
81:12; Rom. 9:22. 

11. 12. As no nation ever enjoyed privileges like those 
conferred upon God's covenant people, so none ever suf- 
fered such terrible judgments for the abuse of these priv- 
ileges. Herein they are set forth as an example to the 
rest of mankind. 

13. Amid the most desolating judgments, God spares a 
"holy seed" for the perpetuation and increase of his 
church in coming ages. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1. Syria ; this kingdom, of which Damascus was the capi- 
tal, lay to the north-east of Israel, and east of Hermon. 
For this invasion, see 2Kings 16:5-9; 2 Clu-on. 28:5-8. 
7TI 



Christ promised 



ISAIAH VII, 



for a sign from heaven. 



heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as 
tlic trees of the wood are moved with the wind. 

3 Tiien said the Loud unto Isaiah, Go forth now 
to meet Ahaz, tiioii, and Shear-jasliub' tliy son, at 
the end of the conduit of llie upper pool, in the 
highway* of the fuller's field ; 

4 And say unto him, Take heed, and be quiet; 
fear not, neither be fainthearted' for the two tails 
of these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger 
of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of Remaliah. 

5 Because Syria, Epiiraim, and the son of Rem- 
aliah, have taken evil counsel against thee, saying, 

6 Let us go up against Judah, and vex'^ it, and 
let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king 
in the midst of it, evcii the son of Tabeal: 

7 Thus saith the Lord God, It shall not stand, 
neither shall it come to pass. 

8 For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the 
head of Damascus is Rezin ; and within threescore 
and five years shall Ephraim be broken, that it 
be not a' people. 

9 And the head of Ephraini is Samaria, and the 
head of Samaria is Renialiah's son. if ye will 
not believe, surely ye shall not bo established.' 

10 *i Moreover the Loud spake again" unto Ahaz, 
saying, 

il Ask thee a sign of the Loud thy God:" ask 
it either in the depth,* or in the height above. 

12 But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will 1 
tempt the Loud. 

13 And he said, Hear ye now, house of David ; 
Jsil a small thing for you to weary men, but will 
ye weary my God also? 



• Thai is, The rtmnant nhnll Tclarn ; ch. 1U:-J1. t Ut, camtwiiij. I Ht-n. 
let not tbtj heart be tetldtr. \ Or. weaken, » Ueb. from a. 1 Or, Do ye not 
believe? it is bicause ye are not stable. • Hcb. And the LORD nddcl to 



3. The upper pool ; on tho west of Jerusalem, at the head 
of the valley ot Hinnom. 

4. Two tailfi of these smokins; firebrands ; these two ends of 
smoking firebrands. The language implies that their fire 
was well-nigh spent; that is, that they could do little fur- 
tlier injury. 

5. Epiiraim ; put here for tlie ten tribes, of which it was 
the most important. 

C. Son of Tabeal; nothing further is known of him. 

8. TIte head of Sijria is Damascus; Damascus is and shall 
remain the head of Syria alone. So liczin shall be the 
head of Damascus alone, and not of Jerusalem also. Shall 
Ephraim be broken; by the power of Assyria. The subju- 
gation of Ephraim, or tho ton tribes, began soon after this 
prophecy, and was completed by Esar-liaddon, 2 Kings 
17:24, about sixty-five years after. 

12. I will not ask; the language of unbelief and worldly 
confidence under the form of reverence. 

13. He; tho propiict. Weary my God ; by refusing tho 
offered sign, in addition to all your other provocations. 

14. TIte Lord himself; the word " himself " is emphatic; 
tho Lord will do this without being asked, for liis own 
glory. Stall f^jvc ijou a sio;n; Aliaz had refused a sign 
addressed to sight. t!od now jjromises tho people a sign 
addressed to faith ; a sign tliereforc for tho believing ])or- 
tion of tho pcofile. A virgin shall conceive; compare Matt. 
1:23; Luke 1:31, .3.5. 

15. Butter atid honey sliall he eat; he shall live on the 
products of tho untillcd soil. Sec note on vor. 20. Thnt 
he may know; or, " until he know." See vcr. 10. 

16. To refuse the evil — choose the good ; to exercise discre- 
tion; that is, within a few years. This plainly refers to 
Iinmanuel. The prophet in vision sees tlie child already 
born, and makes his infancy the measure of tho lime that 
is to elapse before tho promised ileliverancc from Syria' 

772 



14 Therefore the Lord himself shall give a.m.s262. 

Kill • ■ III •!,"'' "'^"' 

youasign; l>cliold,avirginsiiallconceive." 712. 
and bear a son, and shall ' call his name Ininianuel." 
l.'j Butter and honey shall he eat, that lie may 
know to refuse the evil, and choose tiie good. 

16 For before the child shall know to refuse the 
evil, and choose the good, the land that thou ab- 
horrest shall be forsaken of both her kings. 

17 1 The Loud shall bring ujion thee, and upon 
thy people, and njiou Ihy father's house, days that 
have not come, from tlie day that E|)liraim de- 
parted from Judah; tvm the king of Assyria. 

18 And it shall conic to pass in that day, that 
the Lord shall hiss for the ily that is in the utter- 
most part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee 
that is ill the land of Assyria. 

19 And they shall come, and shall rest all of 
tlicni in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of tho 
rocks,'' and upon all thorns, and upon all bushes.* 

20 In the same day shall the Lord shave with a 
razor iliat is hired, namdy, by them beyond the 
ri\(r, by the king of Assyria, the head, antl the hair 
of the feet : and it shall also eon.«unie the beard. 

21 And it shall come to pass in that day, that a 
man shall nourish a young cow and two sheep; 

22 And it shall come to pass, for the abundance 
of milk that they shall give, he shall eat butter: 
for butter and honey shall every one cat that is 
left in' the land. 

2:5 And il shall come to pass in that day, that 
every {ilacc shall be, where there were a thousand 
vines at a thousand silvcrlings, it shall even be for 
briers and thorns. 



Kprnk. a ch. :tft!7, tl-i. t Or, make Ihy petition deep. I* Luke 1;3I~{5. 
1 Or, (Aon. O Virgin. Shalt, c Watt. I :aj. d Jcr. IC;1«. J Or, commendable 
trees. I Heb. in llir midst of. 



and Israel. But some suppose a double reference, first 
to some well-known virgin, probably already betrothed, 
the birth of whose son should be a pledge of deliverance 
to Israel; and then to the Messiah, who should be liter- 
ally born of a virgin. The land; Ephraim and Syria, con- 
sidered as one hostile confederacy. SItalt be forsaken of 
both her kings; or, "before whose kings thou art afraid 
shall be forsaken ;" that is, desolated. 

17. Shall bring upon thee; the present fear was ground- 
less ; bul greater distress should come from the .Assyrians, 
in whom Ahaz put his conlidcnce, and whom he hired to 
defend him against the kings of Syria and Israel. 2 Kings 
16:5-9; 2Chron. l'S:ir)-21. Days; days of calamity. Tho 
Assyrians reduced Ahaz to a state of vassalage, and this 
led to the invasion of Judah by Sennacherib, in Ilezekiah's 
day. 2 Kings 18:7, 13-lC. 

l.S. IlissforlheJIy — the bee; see note on chap. 5:26. Tho 
fly, which abounds in the marshes of Egypt, is the symbol 
for the Egyptian, and tho bee for the Assyrian armies, 
both of which disti-essed Judah in its decline. The figure 
intimates the great number of the enemy. 

l!t. Desolate valleys — upon all Aii.v/ir.s- ; the common resting- 
places of these inaecta. Tho meaning is, that they shall 
fill the land. 

20. A razorthat ishired; employed by flod as tho instru- 
ment of his wrath. The figure is here changed, licyond 
the nrer ; the Euphrates. Head — hair of the feet — beard; 
Judah shall be completely shorn, that is, desolated. 

21, 22. A man shall nourish — shall eat butler; that is, if a 
man have but a young cow and a couple of sheep, he shall 
from the abundance of milk eat butter, etc. In other 
words, the whole land shall be loft untilled, and shall 
become luxuriant paslnrr-groiind. Butter and honey shall 
everyone eat; he shall live ku tho i)roduet8 of the untilled 
soil, which few arc left to consume. 



Israel unci Jiulah (o he 



ISAIAH VIII. 



suhilaril by Assyria. 



ii' r ,'Tm,' ''^ Wi til ;irrows and witli bows sliall men 
;i-. "" come thitlier ; because all the land shall 
b('coiiie briers and thorns. 

'1') And on all hills that shall be digged with 
the mattock, there shall not come thither the 
fear of briers and thorns : but it shall be for the 
sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of 
lesser cattle. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1 In Mall. r-sl.ahi|.li;isli-baz. lie propliesieth that Syria and Israel shall 
be subJueil by Assyria. J) Judali likewise for her inlidclity. !) Qoi's 
jud^jMieiit shall be'unresislible. 1 1 Comfort shall be to them that fear 
(-Tod. 19 txreat afflictions to idolaters. 

MOREOVER the Lord said unto me, Take 
thee a great roll, and write in it with a 
man's pen concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz.* 

2 And I took unto me faithful witnesses to re- 
cord, Uriah the priest," and Zcchariah the son of 
Jebcrcchiah. 

3 And I went* unto the prnjihotcss ; and she 
conceived, ami bare a sou. 'J'iion said the Lord 
to inc, Call his name IMaher-shalal-hash-baz. 

4 For ijcfore the child shall have knowledge to 
cry, My father, and my mother,'' the riches of Da- 
mascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken 
away before the king of Assyria.' ° 

f) i The Lord spake also unto me again, saying, 
G Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters 

of Shiloah that go softly,'' and rejoice in Rezin 

and Remaliah's son; 
7 Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringoth up 



Make spsai, 
■ ■ >s6efc - 



* Hpb. In malcin^ spefd to Ike spoil, Ite hastenelk tlie prey, nr J^iaKe speai 
etc. ii-2 Kings lU: lU. t Heh. n/jpronc/nv/. Iich7:10. t Or, he thit is 6e/brc 
the kins; of A.wi/ria s/intl lake aimtj the riches, etc. » ch. 17:3; 2 KinfL 
15:-J!); lfi:'J. J Nell. 3: 15 ; John 9:7. ech.7:lG,17. i 11,-h. fulness of the 



24. With arrows and with bows ; to hunt wild game. 

25. Hills thai shall be dif;ged — there shall not come thither the 
fear; or, As to the hills now digged, or cultivated, men 
shall not come thither, for fear, etc. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. Confidence in God's presence and help is alwaj's the 
privilege of those wlio are in the way of duty; and this 
ought to give them steadfastness and composure in tlie 
midst of the greatest dangers. 

7. The mightiest preparations for war avitil imthiiig 
when they are contrary to God's purposes. 

12. They who, like .\haz, reject God's proffered aid, and 
put their trust in earthly resources, are near destruction. 

14. While God punishes the unbelief and rebellion of 
his people, he will, for his own glory, fulfil all his prom- 
ises to Zion, the sum of which is Jesus Christ, boru of a 
virgin for our redemption. 

17. Alliances with t!ie wicked may promise much at the 
beginning, but they end in disappointment and ruin. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1. A great roll; or, tablet to be publicly exhibited. With 
a mail's pen; in common characters, which all might read. 
Malier-s'ialal-haA-baz ; "hasten spoil, hurr}' phnider;" this 
is the inscription on the tablet, prophetic of the speedy 
spoiling of Syria and Israel. 

2. Fuillifiit witnesses; probably of the date of this pro- 
plictii- inscription, tliat its agreement with the event might 
be undeniable. 

3. Call his name; the inscription and the name make a 
double prophecy of the same event. 

4. Before the king of Assyria; 2 Kings 16:7-9 

(i. Shiloah ; a pool in the southern part of .Jerusalem, 
called in the New Testament Siloam. Go softly; their 
gentle flow was an emblem of the tranquil reign of Jeho- 



upon them the waters of the river, strong and 
many, even the king of Assyria, and all his glory :" 
and he shall come up over all his channels, and 
go over all his banks : 

8 And he shall pass through Judali ; he shall 
overllow and go over, he shall reach n-en to the 
neck ; and the stretching out of his wings shall fill 
the breadth of thy land," Immanuel.' 

9 *\\ Associate yourselves, ye people, and' ye 
shall be broken in ])ieces;S and give ear, all ye 
of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye shall be 
broken in pieces ; gird yourselves, and ye shall be 
broken in pieces. 

10 Take counsel together, and it shall come to 
naught: speak the word, and it shall not stand: 
for God is with us.'' 

11 H For the Lord spake tlius to nie with a 
strong' hand, and instructed me that I should not 
walk in the way of this people,' saying, 

12 Say ye not, A confederacy, to all them to 
whom this people shall say, A confederacy ; neither 
fear ye their fear, nor lie afraid.' 

lo Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and Id 
him be your fear, and let him be your dread.'' 

14 And he shall be for a sanctuary;' but for a 
stone of stumbling,'" and for a rock of oflcnce," to 
both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a snare 
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 

15 And many among them shall stumble, and fall, 
and be broken, and be snared, and be taken. 

IG Bind up the testimony," seal the law among 
my disciples." 



hreadtk of thy land shall lie the sirelchiiig out of his iviiigs. f ch. .Ili:!, etc. 
lOr, yet. B ch. .37::i(i. Ii Psa. 40: 1 , 7. V Heb. in strength of. iProv.l:15. 
J 1 Vet. .3:14, 15. k Luke !-2:5. IEzek.U:(). mlPet.2:S. o Matt. 13:.57. 
oRov. 5:1, 5. P Prov. 8:S, !l; i\latt. 13:11. 



vah, exercised through David's family. Rejoice in Rezin 
and Remaliah's son; a difficult passage. Some include in 
the words •' this people," all the twelve tribes ; others 
render, " rejoice concerning Rezin," etc., that is, rejoice in 
the prospect of their speedy destruction by the Assyrians. 
In either case God rebukes the worldly confidence of his 
people. 

7. The river; the Euphrates, whose waters are here an 
emblem of the hosts of Assyria. 

S. Jlis wings; his wide-spread armies. 

9. Associate yoiirselvrs; addressed to this invading host, 
and predicting the failure of all attempts to destroy God's 
chosen people. 

11. With a strong hand; with his hand strong upon me. 
Ezek. .S:14. The liand of the Lord denotes the constrain- 
ing power of his Spirit. 

12. Say ye not, A confederacy; talk not with terror of a 
confederacy among your enemies. Their fear; the fear of 
this people. 

13. Sanctifij the Lord; regard him with holy reverence 
and confidence. 

14. For a sanctuary; to such as thus sanctify him. To 
both the houses of Israel ; to the great mass of the people, 
who refuse to sanctify him. Compare 1 Pet. 2 : C-8, where 
Christ is at once " a tried corner-stone," and " a stone of 
stumbling." This prophecy had its fulfilment in the whole 
history of the seed of Abraham, but especially in their 
treatment of Christ. 

16. Bind up the testimony; the speaker is either Imman- 
uel, who is distinctly referred to, verses 8 and 10, or the 
prophet as his type and representative. " The law " and 
" the testimony " are God's messages. The binding up and 
sealing of these, as a roll, among his disciples, has a two- 
fold significancy : that they were to be hid from the appre- 
hension of the people at large, chap. 6-10, and that they 
773 



I'u miliar spirits forbidden. 



ISAIAH IX. 



Li"/tl in darkness. 



17 And I -n-ill wait upon the Lord," tliat hideth 
his face from the house of Jacob,"* and I will look 
for him. 

18 Behold, I and the children whom the Lord 
hath given me are for signs and for wonders in 
Israel from tlie Lord of hosts,*^ which dwelleth in 
mount Zion. 

I'J t And when they shall say unto you. Seek 
unto them tliat liavc familiar spirits, and unto wiz- 
ards that peep and that mutter: should not a peo- 
ple seek unto their God? for tlie living to the 
dead? 

20 To the law and to the testimony:" if they 
speak not according to this word, it is because 
there 1.9 no ligiit' in them. 

21 And they shall pass through it, hardly be- 
stead and hungry : and it shall come to pass, that 
when they shall be hungry they shall fret them- 
selves,'' and curse their king and their God,'' and 
look upward. 

22 And they shall look unto the earth ; and be- 
hold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish ; 
and they shall be driven to darkness. 



■- Hsb. a:13. d Luke lli:«; John 5:39. 
Rev. 10; 11. 1 Or, piipuluus. S .Mill. 



should be carefully treasured up and preserved among 
God's true worshippers. 

18. Behold, I and the children; applied to the Messiah, 
Ileb. 2:13. It may perhaps apply typically to Isaiah and 
his children also, l)ecauso their relation to the unbelieving 
Jews shadowed forth the relation of Christ and his disci- 
ples to the unbelieving world. The prophet's two chil- 
dren, moreover, bore typical names by God's appointment, 
namely, " Shear-jashub," " the remnant shall return," and 
" Maher-shalal-hash-baz," explained above, vcr. 1. 

19. Unto you; the disciples mentioned verse IC. Tliai 
have familiar smrits ; that pretend to have intercourse with 
the spirits ot the dead, that they may learn from them 
coming events. Peep — mutter; the reference is to the low 
slender voice in which the spirits were supposed to give 
their responses. See note on chap. 29:4. For the living 
to tlie dead? shall one consult the dead on behalf of the 
living? 

20. If they speak not; the wizards, or any other persons. 
/( IS because there is no light in them; or, as some render, 
" there shall be no morning to them ;" that is, no light of 
prosperity and salvation. 

21. And they;- those who seek to wizards. Shall pass 
through it ; through the land of Judca ; shall wander about 
in it or shall pass through it in fleeing from their enemies. 
llordhi bestead; liard pressed with evil. Their king and 
Ihcir 'God; that is, God their King. Psa. 81:3. Their 
afflictions lead them to blasphemy instead of repentance. 
Rev. 1G:9, 11, 21. 

22. Look unto tlie earth; this is the opposite of looking 
upward. They look in vain to heaven and earth for reUef. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

6-8. They who withdraw their confidence from God and 
give it to his eneuiies, are preparing for themselvcB speedy 
and irremediable destruction. 

9, 10. j\ll combinations, however formidable in numbers 
or resources, that have for their end tho destruction of 
God's church, shall be broken iu pieces and come to 
naught. 

13. They who have no living apprehension of God's pres- 
ence and power, arc liable to tho two extremes of pre- 
sumption and despondency ; now defying all danger in a 
vain reliance on earthly friends, and now trembling and 
dismayed in view of llioir enemies. Hut true faith stays 
tho soul on God, and keeps it in a holy composure, alike 
removed from foolish elation in prosperity, and undue 
anxiety in times of danger. 
774 



CHAPTER IX. 



1 What joy shall be in the midst of afflictions, by the kingJom and birth 
of Christ. 8 The judgments upon Israel for their pride, 13 for their 
hypocrisy, IS and for their impenitency. 

AJEVERTIIELESS the dimness shall not be 
J_\ su('h as was in her vexation, when at the first 
he liglitly alllicted the land of Zebidun, and the 
land of Xaphtali, and afterward did more griev- 
ously alliict her by the way of the sea, beyond Jor- 
dan, in Galilee of the nations.^ 

2 The people that walked in darkness have seen 
a great light: they that dwell in tlie land of the 
shadow of death, u])on them hath the light shiued.^' 

3 Thou hast multiplied the nation, a?td not' in- 
creased the joy : they joy before thee according to 
the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when they 
divide tlie spoil. 

4 For thou hast broken^ the yoke of his burden, 
and the stall" of his shoulder, the rod of his op- 
pressor, as in the day of Midian.'' 

5 For every battle of the warrior is with con- 
fused noise, and garments rolled in blood; but 
this shall be^ with burning and fuel* of fire. 



4:15, le I Or, 10 him. i Or, Whenllinu breaktsl. h Judg. 7:21, etc. I Or 
When Uic whole. ^ Or, and il was. ' Hub. mtat. 



14. The Lord Jesus is at once a sanctuary for the salva- 
tion of those who believe in him, and a stone of stumbling 
for the destruction of his enemies. 

IG. In every age of the world the spiritual truths of 
religion have remained unknown to " tho natural man," 
but have been understood and treasured up in the hearts 
of all who are taught of God. 

17. In times of darkness and spiritual declension we 
ought to stay ourselves upon God's promises, and not 
give way to despondency. 

19. The Bible forbids application in any form to the 
spirits of the dead for a knowledge of future events. The 
practice has its ground in " an evil heart of unbelief ir» 
departing from the living God ;" and they who resort to it 
" shall eat of the fruit of their own ways, and be fiUcd with 
their own devices." 

21. Aflliction has not in itself any sanctifying power. 
When not accompanied by the subduing influence of the 
Holy Ghost, it only stirs up in men's hearts the spirit of 
rebellion, and leads them to blaspheme the author of their 
sufferings. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1. Ncvcrllieless — Galilee of the nations; another rendering 
of this verse, preferred by many, is tho following : " Nev- 
ertheless the dimness shall not remain to her who is 
afllictcd. As the former time debased the land of Zcbu- 
lun and tho land of Nai)htali, so the latter has honored tho 
way of the sea beyond Jordan, Galilee of the nations." 
This must be immc<liatoly connected with the close of 
chaiiter 8. Bcijond Jordan ; or, on the side of Jordan, in 
the region bonlering on the Jordan. Galilee of the nations; 
so called because bordering on the gentile nations. 

2. Have seen a great light ; sec ilatt. 4 : !(!. 

3. Not increased the joy ; or, as iu tho margin, " the joy to 
it." Then joy before llicc ; the princijial reference is to tho 
siiiritual joy of God's people under the reign of the Mes- 
siah. 

4. Tlic yoke of his burdat; tho yoke laid uiion Israel as a 
burden. 'The staff of his shoulder; with which his shoulder 
was smitten. Israel hero represents God's church. Day 
o/3/iWkii.,- Judg. 7:22, '23. 

.I. Battle; or, "equipment." But this s/iall be with burn- 
ing; rather, "it shall even bo for burning." Wo may ren- 
der tho verso thus: "For as to tho whole cquinnient of 
the warrior, and the garment rolled in blood, it shall even 
bo for buruiug, fuel for the lire." All tho implements and 



The birth of Christ. 



ISAIAH X. 



Jiciti'-meii'!: on Israel. 



A. M :an. 6 For unto us a cliild is born, unto us a 
■ju." "" son is g-iven:-' and the government shall 
be upon his shoulder:" and his name shall be 
called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God," 
The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace.'' 

7 Of the increase of his government and peace 
there shall be no end," upon the throne of David, 
and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to estab- 
lish it with judgment and with justice from hence- 
forth even for ever. The zeal of the Loud of 
hosts will perform this. 

8 'i The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it 
hath lighted upon Israel. 

9 And all the people sliall know, ci^cn Ephraim 
and tlie inhabitant of Samaria, that say in the 
pride and stoutness of heart, 

10 The bricks are fallen down, but we will build 
with hewn stones: the sycamores arc cut down, 
but we will change the7n into cedars. 

11 Tlierefore the Lord shall set up the adversa- 
ries of Rezin against him, and join' his enemies 
together ; 

12 The Syrians before, and the Philistines be- 
hind ; and they shall devour Israel with open* 
mouth. For all this his anger is not turned 
away, but his hand is stretched out still. 

13 • For the people turncth not unto him that 
smiteth them, neither do they seek the Lord of 
hosts. 

1-1 Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel 
head and tail, branch and rush, in one day. 

15 The ancient and honorable, he is the head; 
and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail. 

16 For the leaders of this people* cause them to 
err; and they that are led of tliem» are destroyed.^ 



aLukea:ll. b Matt. &; IS. cn.-b. 1:S. d Kph. l.'; H. eDin. ^144; 
1 Cor. 15; -JS. • Heb. miiiglt. t Heb. whole. I Or, llieii that call them 
Olessed. 5 Or, tailed blessed. B Heb. swallowed up, H Or, villany. f Mai. 



symbols of war shall be burned up in the days of the Mes- 
siah, and universal peace shall prevail. Cha23. 2:4. 

7. Upon the throne of David ; compare Luke 1:32, 33. 

8. Jacob — Israel; that is, the ten tribes: tlie prophet 
returns to the subject of their punishment. 

9. Shall know; shall know the word ; shall feel its power. 

10. Bricks — hewn stones — sycamores — cedars; they boast 
that they can more than repair the calamities which have 
befallen them. Sycamore-wood was used for building, but 
was less valuable than cedar. 

11. The adversaries of Rezin; the Assyrians. Against 
him ; Ephraim. After destroying Syria, they shall deso- 
late Epliraim. 

12. Tlie Syrians ; now compelled to assist their conquer- 
ors against their former ally. Before; on the east, which 
to the Hebrews is always the front. Behind; on the west. 
For all this; see note, chap. 5:25. 

14. Branch and rush; more literally, " palm^branch and 
buUrush," that is, noble and base. 

18. Wickedness burnetii as the fire; the wickedness of tlie 
people consumes them as fire consumes briars and thorns. 
Tlieijsliall mount up; the thickets, in columns of flame and 
smoke. 

20. And lie; each man. In their famine and distress, 
the people shall plunder each other. The flesh of his own 
arm ; figuratively, each shall, as it were, devour his own 
lie.sh, that is, despoil his kindred. 

21. Manasseh, Ephraim ; Manasseh shall devour Ephraim. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. God has often visited the most ignorant and despised 
people with remarkable religious privileges, and the day 



17 Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their 
young men, neither shall have mercy on their 
fatherless and widows: for every one is a hypo- 
crite and an evil-doer, and every mouth .*peaketh 
folly."' For all this his anger is not turned away, 
but his hand is stretched out still. 

18 1 For wickedness burnetii as the firo :' it shall 
devour the briars and thorns, and .sliall kindle in 
the thickets of the forest, and they shall mount 
up like the lifting up of smoke. 

19 Through the wrath of the Lord of hosts ks 
tlic land darkened,^ and the people shall be as tlie 
fuel* of the fire: no man shall spare his brother."* 

20 And he shall snatch* on the right hand, and 
1)0 hungry ; and he shall cat on the left hand, and 
they shall not be satisfied:' they shall eat every 
man the flesh of his own arm : 

21 Manasseh, Ephraim ; and Ephraim, Manas- 
seh: and they together shall he against Judah. 
For all this his anger is not turned away, but his 
hand is stretched out still. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 The woe of tyrants. 5 Assyria, tlie rod of hypocrites, for his pride 
sliall be broken. 'JO A remiiant of Israel shall be saved. 24 Israel 
IS comforted with promise of deliverance from Assyria. 

WOE unto them that decree unrighteous de- 
crees,J and that* write grievousncss which 
they have prescribed ; 

2 To turn aside the needy from judgment, and 
to take away the right from the poor of my peo- 
ple, that widows may be their prey, and that they 
may rob the fatherless! 

o And what will ye do in the day of visitation,'' 
and in the desolation which shall come from far? 



4;1 


S Ai. 


ts-J 


■J(J 




Heb. 


men 


. 1> Mic. 


7: a, 11. 


t H 


-1. 


r 




■ 


.,-v 


■2i 


:»i; 


,ler. 


19;y. 


J 1 


sa 


il4 


•.',». 


(Ir 


to the wr 


Icrs that 


k 


,1 


b 


:|| 


14 


H 


s 


il-7; 


Rev 


.6:17 

































is coming when he will fill aU the dark regions of the earth 
with the light and salvation of his gospel. 

3-5. The hearty reception of the gospel liy any family 
or nation, brings to it peace, prosperity, and blessedness; 
and universal obedience to it will put an end to all tyran- 
ny, oppression, and war, and fiU the earth with holiness 
and joy. 

6. He who is "born of a woman" must be man; he 
whose name is " Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, 
the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace," must be 
" equal with God." Thus the union of a divine with a 
human nature, in the person of the Messiah, was clearly 
revealed to the prophets of the Old Testament. 

7. The divine character of Him whom God has made 
"Head over all things to the church," is a pledge that "of 
the increase of his government and peace there shall be no 
end." In the darkest days of adversity, the triumph of his 
kingdom is still certain. 

8-12. Before God's wrath, all the vain boasting of sin- 
ners vanishes like stubble in the devouring fire. 

13-17. They who are incorrigible under God's chastise- 
ments, will soon be destroyed by his judgments. 

20. Extreme distress only stirs up the wickedness of hard- 
ened transgressors, and makes them as unfeeling towards 
their fellow-men as they ax'e rebellious towards God. 

CHAPTER X. 

1-4. Woe unto them — his hand is stretched out still ;^ the 
first four verses of this chapter are a continuation of the 
preceding discourse, and should not be separated from it. 

3. Corne from far ? from a distant nation, meaning tlie 
Assyrians. Leave your glory? deposit it for safe-keeping. 
lib 



Assyria threatened. 



ISAIAH X. 



Deliverance for Israel. 



to wliom will yc flee for help? and where will ye 
leave your glory? 

4 Without inc they shall bow down under the 
prisoners, and they shall fall under the slain. For 
all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand 
is stretched out still. 

5 If Assyrian," the rod of mine anger,-' and* 
the staff in their hand is mine indignation. 

6 I will send him against a hypoeritical nation, 
and against the; people of my wrath will I give 
him a charge,'' to take the spoil, and to take the 
prey, and to tread them down* like the mire of 
the streets.'' 

7 Howbcit he meanelh not so, neither doth his 
heart think so;'' but it is in his heart to destroy 
and cut olV tuitions not a few. 

8 For he saith, j2re not my princes altogether 
kings ? 

9 7* not Oalno as Carchemish?'" is not Ilamath 
as Arpad?' M not Samaria as Damascus?' 

10 As my hand hath found the kingdoms of the 
idols, and whose graven images did excel them of 
Jerusalem and of Samaria; 

11 Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and 
her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols?'' 

12 Wherefore it shall come to pass, that, when 
the Lord hath performed his whole work upon 
mount Zion and on Jerusalem, 1 will ])tniisli-' the 
fruit of tiie stout heart' of the king of Assyria,' 
and the glory of his high looks.' 

13 For he saith. By the strength of my hand I 
have done it, and by my wisdom; for I am pru- 
dent: and I have removed the bounds of the peo- 
ple, and have robbed their treasures, and I have 
put down the inhabitants like a valiant man:'' 

14 And my hand hath found as a nest the riches 
of the people: and as one gathereth eggs that arc 
left, have 1 gathered all the earth ; and there was 
none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, 
or peeped. 



• Or, Woe to the Assyrian; Hob. Ashlir. a Jer 61 :-J). -Jl. t Or, thoic'li. 
K Jer. 4;:(i, 7. I Heb. lau them a treading. ' ch. ai-.-Ht. d Mic "IM'J. 
«2Chr. 3.);-20. I Amo» (i:-i. f 2 Kiims Ifi:!). >' 2 Kings lf:33; 10. CJ, ri. 
1 Heb. i'/,«/l apm. lUeh. urenljtess nflhc heart, ijcr. .i(l;1». i I'sa. 1B:2". 
1 Or. nuiiiif ptopie. ' Or, a rtid should shake them, t Or. tlial which is not 



4. lF((/iOH( mc; forsaken by me. Under tltc prisoners — 
fall under the slain; under their condition, that is, among 
them. 

5. Assyrian; or, "Woe to the Assyrian," as in tlie 
margin. Ilere a new prophecy begins. Rod of mine an- 
ger; rod which I use in my anger. Is mine indignation; 
while tliey use it, I direct it for the cxcciltion of my ven- 
geance upon the wicked. The judgments tlwcatened in 
the preceding cliapter were executed mainly by the As- 
syrians. 

9. Is not Calno as Cnrdiemish 7 have I not destroyed both 
alike? Calno; Ctosi|ihon of the Creeks, on the eastern 
bank of the river Tigris. Cnrdiemish ; C'ercusiuin, on an 
island in the Euphrates, at the mouth of the river Clie- 
bar. Hamnlh; a largo city of Syria on the river Orontcs. 
called by the Greeks Epii>hania. Arpad; another city of 
Byria. 

10. Found; found and plundered, as one finds a nest. 
Vcr. 11. Graven imapcs did excel; their guardian deities 
were stronger than those of .lerusalem and Samaria, yet 
they could not resist my jiowctr. 

12. Fndt of lite stoul licart ; proud actions proceeding 
from it. 

It. Moved the win;; — opened the mouth — peeped ; made any 
show of resistance. 

776 



l.'j Shall the axe boast itself against him ^^}-^^l^ 
that lieweth therewith? or shall the saw Tii" °" 
magnify itself against him that shaketh it? as if 
the rod should shake itself a<xainst them' that lift 
it u]), or as if the staff should lift up it.^e/f, as if it 
were no wood.* 

IG Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of hosts, 
send among his fat ones leanness;'' and under his 
glory he shall kindle a burning like the burning 
of a fire.' 

17 And flic light of Israel shall be for a fire, and 
his Holy One for a flame:"' and it shall burn and 
devour his thorns and his briars in one day;" 

18 And shall consume the glory of his forest, and 
of his fruitful iield,l)oth soul and body:* and they 
shall he as when a standard-bearer fainteth. 

li) And the rest of the trees of his forest shall 
be few,' that a child may write them. 

20 ^ And it shall come to pass in that day, that 
the remnant of Israel, and such as are escaped of 
the house of Jacob, shall no more again stay npon 
liim that smote them;" but shall stay upon the 
Loiti), the Holy One of Israel, in truth"." 

21 The remnant shall return, ei-en the remnant 
of Jacob, unto the mighty Ood.'' 

22 For though thy people Israel be as the sand 
of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall return :"■ 
the consuni|)tioa decreed shall overflow with' 
righteousness." 

2:> For the Lord God of hosts shall make a con- 
sumption, even determined, in the midst of all the 
land. 

24 'i Therefore thus saith the Lord Gor» of ho.sts, 
my ])eo]ile that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid 
of the Assyrian;' ho shall smite thee with a rod, 
and shall" lift up his staff against thee, after the 
manner of Egypt. 

25 For yet a very little while, and the indigna- 
tion shall cease," and mine auger in their destruc- 
tion.^ 



wood, k p.,a. Ulli:I5. lAclsl-iriJ ni Heb. l-ilSS. n ch. 37:38. I Heb. 
from the soul, and even to the Hesh. 8 Heb. nwinitr. o o Cbr. -JS;*!. P Hos. 
Il:.i. 1 oh 0.13; lias, y I Heb l«. or omon?. r Rom. 9:a7, aS. 1 Or, 
in. "ch af.22; Dan !);27. > ch. 37:1). ' Ot, but he shall. "Can. 11:31). 



•••2 Kings 19:35 



15. Lift up — no wood ; the marginal reading, " lift up that 
which is not wood," means.lift up the rational man ; that 
is, as if the stall" should wield the man, instead of the man 
the staff. 

Hi. Fat ones; strong warriors. 

17. The tight of Israd; that is, God. Hts IIolij One; 
Israel's Holy One. 

18. His forest— fruitful feld ; all his pomp and power. 
liotli soul and bodij; utterly, y/s when a slanilard-bearer 
fainteth; which is "the signal for Hight to the whole army. 
But we may better render, "as when a sick man i>ine8 
away." 

19. Write them; write their number. 

21. The remnant shall return; in the original, "Shear- 
.Ia,sliul),"an allusion to the prophetic name of Isaiah's son. 
Chap. 7 : :i. 

22. The consumption; the dostrnction of the wicked in 
Israel. 

21. Therefore; since God's purpose is to use the Assyr- 
ian not to destroy, but to purify his people. After the 
manner of Epijpt ; as the Egyptian t^iskmasters smote tlie 
Israelites of old. 

2.'). The indipnatton — and mine anger in their de.'itruetion ; 
in the destruction of tho Assyrians. Compare chapter 
37 : 32-38. 



Ddlvcrana for Zion. 



ISAIAH XI. 



ChrklU pencrful reig 



urJumi ""^^ "^'^'-^ ^'^^ Lord of hcsts shall stir up a 
Tu'. '" pcoui-gc for liiiii according to t!ic f^laiigh- 
tcr of Midiau at the rock of Orob:" and a.y his 
rod was upon tlic sea, so sluill ho lift it u[) after 
the manner of Egypt. 

27 And it shall come to pass in tliat day, (hat 
his burden shall be taken away" from otf thy 
shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and the 
yoke shall be destroyed because of the anoint- 
ing." 

28 Pie is come to Aiath. he is passed to Migron ; 
at Michmash he hath laid up his carriages: 

29 They are gone over tiie passage : they have 
taken up their lodging at Geba ; Ramah is afraid ;'' 
Gibeah of Saul is fled. 

30 Lift up* thy voice, daughter of Gallim: 
cause it to be heard unto Laisii, poor Ana- 
thoth. 

31 Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of 
Gehim gatiier themselves to flee. 

32 As yet shall he remain at Nob that day : he 
shall shake his hand against the mount of the 
daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem. 

33 Behold, the Lord, the Loud of hosts, shall 
lop the bough with terror: and the high ones of 
stature sha'l be hewn down, and the haughty shall 
be humbled. 

34: And he shall cut down the thickets of the 



a Judg. 7: Jo. • Hth. remove, b Dan. 9:-M. c Jer. 31:1.5 t Heb fry 
shrill wall. iOr.mii^kUly. doK.5:J:-J. e Acti I3:a3; Rev. «: 16. rZeclu 
(i;lJ. B Mat>. :i:l(i; Join 3::i4. h 1 Cor. 1:3U. I Hfl). srnit. or smell. 



2G. Rock of O rch ; .JLulg.7:25. Upon t:ie sea ; wlieu Israel 
came out of K^yt>t,fii-st to divide it, and then to overwhelm 
Pliaraoh's host in its waters. Exod. 14:21, 26. 

27. Because of the anointing ; of the Messiah to the office 
of Kin;.; over God's people, chap. 9:6 ; which implies their 
deliverance from the yoke of their enemies. But some ren- 
der," because of fatness ;" that is, of Israel's renewed vigor. 

28-32. H: is come to Aiath; the prophet in vision sees 
tlie Assyrian approaching Jerusalem from tlie north, where 
all tlie places liere mentioned were situated. Michma.sk; 
a city lying near Gibea, on the edge of a narrow passage 
or de.tile running east and west. Hath laid up his carriages ; 
as unable to transport them across tlie passage. Carriages 
is equivalent to the modern word " baggage." Nob; a city 
of priests. 1 Sam. 22 : 11. It probably lay in sight of Zion. 

33. The bough ; the pride and glory of the Assyrian king, 
who is compared to a lofty tree. High ones of stature; his 
strong warriors, represented in this and the following 
verse under the figure of a forest of tall cedars. 

31. A miglity one; a mighty hewer, probably the angel 
who smote the Assyrian camp. Chap. 37 : 36. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. The strength of nations, as of individuals, depends on 
(iod's presence and lielp. When he forsakes them they 
are without power, and fall an easy ])rey to their enemies. 

7. God overrules the actions of wicked men for the ac- 
complishment of his wise and good purposes, in such a 
way that they are left free to follow their own inclinations. 
Thus he glorifies himself and advances the interests of 
his kingdom, while their responsibility and guilt are in no 
way diminished. 

12. The mighty conqueror who makes the world trem- 
ble at the sound of his name, receives all his strength from 
above; and when God has through him accomp"shed his 
whole work of chastisement, he humbles him as easily as 
he had exalted him, and gives him up a helpless captive 
to the power of his enemies. 

20-24. It has been true of God's church in all ages, 
that " they are not all Israel, which are of Israel." She 
has needed and received from the hand of God many sore 
judgments ; but the effect of these has always been, not 



forest with iron, and Lebanon shall fall by a 
mighty one* 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 The peaceable kingdom of llie Bra.i.-li out of the root of Jesse. 10 
The vittorions restoration of Urael, and vocation of tlie Oeiitiles. 

AND there shall come forth a rod"^ out of the 
stem of .Jesse,'' and a branch shall grow out 
of his roots:' 

2 And the .'Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon 
Iiim,= the spirit of wisdom and understanding, llic 
spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge 
and of tlie fear of the Lord ;'' 

3 And shall make him of quick understanding* 
in the fear of the Lord: and lu' shall not judge 
after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after 
the hearing of liis ears: 

4 But with righteousness shall lie judge the 
poor,' and reprove' with equity for the meek of 
the earth: and he shall snute the earth with the 
rod of his mouth,J and with the breath of his lips 
shall he slay the wicked. 

5 And righteousness sliall be the girdle of liis 
loins, and faithfulness the girdle of liis reins." 

6 Tlie wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and 
the leo])ard shall lie down with the kid ; and the 
calf and the young lion and the falling together; 
and a little ciiild shall lead them.' 



her destruction, but iter punhcaliuu and increased jnos- 
perity. 

26. Every interposition of God for his jieople in past 
time, is a pledge of like interpositions in time to come, st) 
far as needful for their safety and welfare. 

33, 34. In the histtn-y of this world, Gotl has often ar- 
rested the proud conqueror in the very zenith of his 
power, and sent him back with shame to his own land ; 
and he will do so again, whenever the interests of his 
church .shall require it. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1. 77(6 stem ofJes.se — his roots; the royal family of Davitl 
the son of Jesse, which was, for centuries before the 
advent of Christ, like a tree hewn ilown, with only tlie 
roots remaining alive in the eartli. Wliile the Assyrian 
bough shall be lopped, this shall flourish. 

Here it is important to notice, that since all t'le parts 
of tlie plan of redemption are connected as one whole, of 
which Christ is the centre, it is the custom of the proph- 
ets, 1. To connect the present deliverances which God 
vouchsafes to his people, like that from the Assyrians 
in Ilezekiah's day, with the great future deliverance of 
Christ's redempti'on; 2. To pass immediately from the 
former to the latter, as in this chapter, making no account 
of the intervening ages ; 3. To exhibit the future glories of 
Christ's kingdom iii its entire progress and final triumph. 

2. The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him ; chap. 61:1; 
Matt. 3:16; Luke 4:1; John 1:32; 3:34: Acts 10:3S. 

3. Not judge after the sight of his etjcs— hearing of his ears ; 
from outward appearances and reports. He shall have 
an immediate and infallible knowledge of men's hearts and 
actions. 

4. Jfith the rod of his mouth — the breath of his lips; by the 
divine power of his word. His word includes his doc- 
trines, connnands, and judicial decisions. 

6-9. The wolf— dwell with the lamb — not hurt nor destraj/; 
the various noxious animals here enumerated represent 
wicked and rapacious men, as is plain from verse 9. 3Iy 
hohj mountain; mount Zion, which here represents the 
kingdom of Christ. 

in 



Jews and Gentiles saved. 



ISAIAH XII. 



Thanhs'rivin'' to God. 



I And tin; cow and the bear shall food ; their 
yoiinjr ones shall lie down togetlicr: and the lion 
shall eat straw like the ox. 

8 And the sucking cliild shall play on the hole 
of the asp, and the weaned cliild shall jjut iiis 
hand on the cockatrice's* den. 

9 They shall not hurt nor destroy in all ray 
holy mountain:" for the earth shall be full of tiic 
knowledge of the LouD, as the waters cover the 
sea.'' 

10 IT And in that day there shall be a root of 
Jesse,'' which shall stand for an ensign of tiie 
people; to it shall the Gentiles seek:'' and his 
rest shall be glorious.*'' 

II And it shall come to pass in that day, that 
the Lord shall set his hand again the second time 
to recover the remnant of his people, which shall 
be left, from Assyria,' and from Egypt, and from 
Pathros, and from Cash, and from Elam, aud from 
Shinar, and from llauuith, and from the islands 
of the sea. 

12 And he shall set up an ensign for thenations,"-' 
and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel.'' aud 
gather together the dis])ersed of Judah from the 
four corners* of the earth.' 

13 The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and 
the adversaries of Judah shall be cut olV: Eijliraim 
shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex 
Ephraim.J 

14 But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the 
Philistines toward the west ; they shall spoil them* 
of the east together: they shall lay their hand 

• Or, adders, a ch. 35:9; Job 5:2): Rev ■i\:-r,. b Psa. 7-J:l«; Uab. 
L';U. ever. 1. d Rom. 15:'J-I-.>. t Hob. g/ory. e Matt. IhaS: Heb. 4: 1, 
etc. fZcch. 10:11), II. ech.l8:.3. !■ ch. -.iT: |:]; 5(i;H: Psa. 14(:-2. : Hpb 
mn^s. i John 7:35; Jas. 1:1. J Jer. iMi; Ezek 37:17, 23; Hos. 1:11. 
S Heb. the children. I H.:b. Eilom and Moali shall be llie laying on of tluir 



10. Root of Jesse; the branch which grows out of liis 
root, ver. 1. An ensign; a standard around wliich the 
people may rally. To it ; to this ensign, that is, the 
Messiah. /f/sres<; his resting-place, his residence. Chap. 
66:1; Psa. 132:8, H. 

11. A second time; with reference to their first deliver- 
ance from Egypt. Pnlliwi; Upper Egypt. Jer. 44:1, 1.'); 
V]zek. 29:14. The word means, "region of tlie south." 
i'ush ; Ethiopia. Elam; Elymais, a region of Persia. Slii- 
nar ; tlic plain of B;il)ylon. Hamalh; a region of Syria 
north of Palestine, so called from its chief city. 

13. Ephraim; put here for the kingdom of the ten tribes, 
whicli had frequent wars with the kingdom of Judah. 
Judah and Ei)hraim here represent God's visible kingdom ; 
and their reconciliation, the harmony that is to prevail 
throughout all its parts in tlie glorious era of which the 
prophet speaks. Compare ver. 9. 

14. Tkcij shall Jlij; .Jnd;ih and Ephraim acting together. 
The ancient enemies of Israel enumerated in this verse 
represent the kingdom of Satan, as opposed to the king- 
dom of Christ. 

15. S'lall utterly dcstroij the tongue of the Egyptian sea; 
Bhall interpose for the redemption of liis ])eople, as when 
he brought them out of Kgypt. " The tongue of the Egyp- 
tian sea" is that arm of it which the Israelites crossed. 
The river ; the Euphrates. Shall smile it in the seven streams ; 
or, " smite it into seven strcaiiis ;'" that is, divide it, by smit- 
ing, into seven streams, so tliat each shall be easily passed. 
The meaning is, that tio I will remove all hinderances to 
the redemption of his people. 

Ifi. A highway; a safe and easy way. Compare chap. 
35:8. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. The preservation of David's roval line, after it had 
778 



upon Edoni and Jfoab;' and the children a.m.3»i. 
01 Amnion shall obey them." 7i3. 

15 And the Loud shall utterly destroy the tongue 
of the Egyjitian sea; and with his mighty wind 
shall he shake his hand over the river, and shall 
smite it in the i-excn streams, and make men go 
over dryshod." 

1() And there shall be a highway for the remnant 
of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; 
like as it was to Israel in the day that he came 
uj) out of the land of Egj-pt.' 

CHAPTER XII. 

A joyful thanksgiving of tlie fiithful for the mercies of God. 

AND in that day thou .^halt say, IjORD. I will 
])raise thee:'" though tiiou wast ansiry with 
me, thine anger is turned away, aud thou com- 
fortedst me." 

2 Behold, God is my salvation : I will trust, and 
not be afraid: for the Lord JI]H0VAII is my 
strength and my song ; he also is become my sal- 
vation." 

3 Therefore with joy'' shall ye draw water out 
of the wells of salvation.'' 

4 And in that day shall ye say. Praise the Lord,' 
call upon* his name, declare his doings among the 
people, make mention that his name is exalted. 

5 Sing unto the Loud;' for he hath done excel- 
lent things: this is known in all the earth. 

(j Cry out and shout,' thou inhal)itant' of Zion: 
for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst 
of thee." 

Anm/; Dan. 11:41 ^ lUh. iJulr obedience, k oh. 60:14. • Hcb. in Jt*OM. 
1 Kxod. 14:29. m Psa. 34:1, etc. n ch. 54:7, P; Psa. :!0.5, Iln.i (i: I. « Psa. 
llt^:14. P Oant. 2::3. >1 John 4:10. 14. r Psi. 145:4-0. t Or, proclaim. 
> Exod. 15:1, 21, Psa. !)!J:1. ' Zeph. 3:14. I Heb. intiabilnss. " Psa. 

tO:lS. 



ceased to reign through a period of almost six hundred 
years from Zedekiah to Christ, is a wonderful instance of 
God's faithfulness to his promises, and a pledge of faith- 
fulness in respect to all that remain to be fullillcd. 

3. In Christ's visible kingdom, hypocrites are so min- 
gled with sincere believers, that it is impossible to sepa- 
rate the former class from the hitter ; but at his judgment- 
seat there will be no concealment or deception. There 
the righteous will all be gathered into the heavenly gar- 
ner, and every tare cast into the fire aud burned. Matt. 
13:38-43. 

6-9. The gospel has power to subdue the fiercest hearts, 
and tame the most savage. When all nations shall have 
submitted themselves to its power, violence of every kind 
will cease, and the whole liuman family live togctlier in 
harmony and blessedness. 

11,12. Though "blindness in part is happened to Israel," 
the day is drawing near when "all Isniel shall he saved;" 
and their ingathering shall be "life from the dead "to tho 
gentile world. Rom. 11. 

\X In the millennial era, all the members of Christ's 
family shall dwell together in Imrmony and love. 

LI. 16. 'I'he wonderful interpositions of Cod for his pco- 
jile in ancient days, are earnests and pledges of more glo- 
rious deliverances in time to come. 

^ CHAPTER XII. 

1. And in that day thou .thalt .■tay; this chapter contains 
the millennial song of the church. 

3. The welh of salvation ; which Cod has opened for his 
people. Chap. 41:17. IS; 4:i:J(); .lohn 7:37-39. 
INSTP.rCTIONS. 

The final issue of all the siifterings aud conflicts of Cod's 
church shall be universal victory over her uucmies, and 



Babylon threatened. 



ISAIAH XIII. 



Her utter nun. 



5.5'Si;i2. CHAPTER XIII. 

1 God musteretli the aimits of his wrath, li He threatencth to destroy 
Bahyloii by the Medes. 19 The desohitioii of Bahyhii,. 

THE burden of Babylou,'* which Isaiali the sou 
of Amoz did see. 

2 Lift ye up a banner upon the liigh mountain, 
exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand, that 
they may go into the gates of the nobles. 

3 1 have connuanded my sanctified ones, I have 
also called my mighty ones for mine anger,'' even 
them that rejoice in my highness. 

4 The noise of a multitude in the mountains, 
like as* of a great people ; a tumultuous noise of 
ilic kingdoms of nations gathered together: the 
Lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle. 

5 They come from a far country, from the end 
of heaven, even the Loun, and the weapons of his 
indignation, to destroy the whole land. 

G % Howl ye; fortheday oftheLoKDMathand;'" 
it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty. 

7 Therefore shall all hands be faint,* and every 
man's heart shall melt: 

8 And they shall be afraid : pangs and sorrows 
shall take hold of them; they shall be in pain as 
a woman that travaileth: they shall be amazed* 
one at another ;^ their faces shall be as flames.' 

Beliold, the day of the Lord cometh,'' cruel both 
with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: 
and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it. 

10 For the stars of heaven and the constellations 
thereof shall not give their light : the sun shall be 
darkened iu his going forth, and the moon shall 
not cause her light to shine. 

11 And I will punish the world for their evil, 
and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will 
cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and 
will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible. 



» Ch. 21 


47; Je 


r. ch.50, 51 


b Joel •! 


11 


•Heb 


the 


likeness, c 2 


.ph 


1:7: 


Rev. 8:17 


t Or 


fait down. 


1 Heb 


wonder. 


5 Heb. every via 




Ins 


mighbor. 


1 Hsb 


faces of Ihe flmma. 


d 


Mai. 4 


1. 


e Hag. 2:(i. 


t a 


IVt. 


3:10, 11. 


6 I'sa. 


1.37:8, !). h 


nan. 5:28, 


31. H Heb 


tlie overt/iro 


wm 


?»/. 



permanent tranquillity and peace; " for great is the Holy 
One of Israel iu the midst of her." Chap. 54. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

This chapter and the one followinp; contain a remark- 
able pro|ihecy of the overthrow of Baljylon by the Medes 
and Persians, under the guidance of Cyrus, about five hun- 
dred and thirty-six years before Christ; but the prophecy 
includes the subsequent complete desolation that was to 
come upon that city and empire, and make it to the eixl of 
time an example of the punishment that awaits all the 
persecutors of God's people. 

1. Burden; divine oracle, generally of a threatening 
character. 

2. A banner; as a signal for calling the nations together. 
Unto them; the Medes and Persians. Slinlce ttie liand ; beck- 
on them onwards. Tiie nobles; of Babylon. 

3. Mij sanctified ones; those whom I have appointed to 
this work. For mine anger ; for the purpose of executing 
mine anger. Them tliat rejoice in niij liiglvness; literally, 
" the exulting ones of my highness ;" that is, the exulting 
warriors who execute my high purposes. 

5. Tlie Lord, and tlie weapons of his indi'siiiitKui ; Jehovah 
is represented as marching at the hi-:iil nl tlnsi' hosts, and 
using them to execute his vengeance uimii llaliylon. 

6, A destruction from the Atmiglitij; one that comes with 
resistless power. Joel 1 : 15. 

8. Tiieir faces .•ihnll be as flames ; shall burn with anguish. 
10. Tlie stars of lieaven — sludl not give tlieir liglit ; the dark- 



12 1 will make a man more precious than fine 
gold ; even a man than the golden wedge of Opiiir. 

13 Therefore I will shake the heavens,'^ and the 
earth shall remove out of her place,' in the wrath 
of the Lord of hosts, and in the day of his fierce 
anger. 

14 And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a 
sheep that no man takcth up: they shall every 
man turn to his own people, and flee every one 
into his own land. 

15 Every one that is found shall be thrust 
through ; and every one that is joined unto them 
shall fall by the sword. 

16 Their children also shall be dashed to pieces 
before their eyes;*-' their houses shall be spoiled, 
and their wives ravished. 

17 Behold,! will stir up the Medes against them,'' 
which sliall not regard silver; and as for gold, 
they shall not delight in it. 

18 Their bows also shall dash the young men to 
pieces; and they shall have no pity on tlie fruit 
of the womV) ; their eye shall not spare children. 

19 ^ And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the 
beauty of the Ohaldces' excellency, shall be as 
wlien God overthrew"' Sodom and Gomorrah.' 

20 It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it 
be dwelt in from generation to generation : nei- 
tlier shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither 
shall the shepherds make their fold tliere.^ 

21 But wild beasts of the desert' shall lie there ; 
and their houses sliall be full of doleful creatures ;* 
and owls' shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance 
there. 

22 And the wild beasts of the islands^ shall cry 
in their desolate houses," and dragons in (heir 
pleasant palaces: and her time is near to come, 
and her days shall not be prolonged." 



i Gen. 10:24. J Jer. 50:3. 39; .51:29, 02; Kev. lt^:2, etc. • Hi-b. Ziim. 
^ Heh. Oeliim. t Or, ostriches; llcb. daughters of the oivl. iKeh.Iim. « Or, 
palaces, t Deut. 32:35, 36. 



euing of the heavens is a symbol of great and general 
calamity, as the shaking of the heavens, in verse 13, is of 
revolution and overthrow. Chap. 24:19, 20, 23; 34:4; 
Ezek. 32:7,8; Joel2:lU; 3:15,10; Amos S: 9 ; Matt. 24:29; 
Rev. (i: 12-14. 

11. TItc world; here, the Babylonian empire. 

14. It shall be; tlie reference" is to the terror and flight 
that prevail in Babylon. Thei/ shall every man turn to his 
own people; the reference is to the multitude of foreigners, 
especially of merchants, that abounded in Babylon. Chap. 
47:15; Jer. 50:16, 37; 51:9. 

17. Silver — gold; offered by the captive Babylonians as 
a ransom for their lives. 

21. Doleful creatures ; animals or birds uttering doleful 
sounds. Sati/rs ; the satyr of the ancients was a demon in 
the form of a he-goat. The word in the original means 
" hairy," and some understand by it here, shaggy animals. 

22. Wild beasts of Ihe islands; better, "howling animals." 
Dracrons ; prol jably jackals. Her time — her days ; the time of 
her punishment. Prolonged; deferred to a remote period. 

The ruins of Babylon, lying on both sides of the Eu- 
phrates, present at the present day a scene of complete 
desolation, answering with terrible accuracy to this pic- 
ture, drawn almost twenty-three hundred years ago by 
the pencil of inspiration. They are at once a perpetual 
evidence of the truth of pmiiheiy, and a solemn symbol 
of the destruction that awaits all the ungodly. 
IXyTKUCTltiX^. 

3. Cod has all the movements of kings and armies under 

I7y 



IsraeTs restoration. 



ISAIAH XIV. 



T/ie king cf Babylon. 



CHAPTER XTV, 



1 GoJ's merciful restoration of Israel. 4 Tlit 
over Kabel. 24 God's purpose ajjainst Assyr 



triumplinnt insultalion 
2'J PalestiiKi is tliruai- 



P 



I'^Oll the Lord will have mercy on Jacob," and 



will yet choose Israel, and set tlicni in their 
own land :" and tlic strangers shall be joined with 
them, and they shall cleave to tlie house oC Jacob. 

2 And the people shall tak(! them, and brini'' 
thcni to their place:'' and the house of Israel sliall 
possess them in the land of the LoiU) for servants 
and handmaids : and they shall take them captives, 
whose captives they were;* and they shall rule 
over tlieir oppressors. 

3 ^ And it shall come to pass in the day that 
the L»)R[) shall sivo thee rest from thy sorrow, and 
from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein 
thou wast made to serve,'' 

4 Tiiat thou shalt take up this proverb* ap-ainst 
the king of Babylon,'' and say. How hath tlie op- 
pressor ceased, the golden city* ceased!' 

5 The Lord hath broken the statf of the wicked, 
and the sceptre of the rulers. 

6 He who smote the people in wratli with a con- 
tinual stroke,^ he that ruled the nations in anger,'^ 
is persecuted, and none hindereth. 

7 The wiiole eartli is at rest, and is quiet : they 
break forth into singing. 

8 Yea, the fir-trees rejoice at thee, and Ihe cedars 
of Lebanon,'' sai/ing, Since thou art laid down, no 
feller is come up against us. 

9 Help from beneath is moved for thee to meet 



iPsa. I(«:i:j. bZech, 1:17; 3;I2. c ch. llr:7; Gll:4, clc; G(i:'>n. • Hnb. 
that hnd taktnthtmcaptiets. d Ezek •i>:'il. ^ Or, Iriunting speerh. e Hab. 
2:0. \ Or, Ejcarlrtss of gold, f Rev. 18:10. S\leh. n stroke without Temon- 



his own wise control, and he overrules them for the accom- 
plishment of his purposes of mercj' towards his people. 

6-8. When God appoints one nation to be the execu- 
tioner of his vengeance upon another, he arms the former 
with invincible strength, and takes from the latter all 
power of effectual resistance. 

11. In the terrible judgments which God inflicts upon 
hauglity transgressors in this world, we sex- as through a 
glass the heinous nature of sin, and the awful punishment 
that awaits the finally impenitent in the world to come. 

14. God is able in a moment to change the strength of 
the mightiest empire to weakness, and compel all who 
have relied on its protection to seek safety in (light. 

15-18. \Var in its mildest forms is exceedingly cruel; 
but when wo consider the severities of ancient warfare, 
we have reason to be thankful for the mitigation which 
Christianity has brought to its horrors. We ought, more- 
over, earnestly to labor and pray for the reformation and 
holiness of our own co\intry, lest itsiniquitiesshould pro- 
voke God to visit it with desolating judgments like those 
here described. 

19-22. The awful fulfilment of this prophecy against 
Babylon, before the eyes of all nations, is both an earnest 
and a pledge of the fulfilment of all the otlicr promises and 
threatenings that are written in God's word. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

This chapter brings to view the end of God's judgments 
upon Baliy Ion, which is the deliverance of his chosen people. 

1, 2. Scl them in llicir owi> latul — shall rule over their op- 
pressors; these words had their incipient fulfilment in the 
return of the captive .lews to Talestiue under the procla- 
mation of Cyrus; but they also foreshadow still more glo- 
rious deliverances in the future. Stran<;crs; (ieiitilcs. 
The first fruits of this promise were the proselytes before 
Chrisfs coming ; but the full harvest can be no other than 
t80 



thee ixtihy coming:' it stirreth up the dead a m. ?:92. 
for thee, fuf« all tiui chief ones' of the ;i2 
earth ; it hath raised up from their thrones all the 
kings of the nations. 

10 Ail they shall speak and say unto thee, Art 
thou also become weak as we? art thou become 
like unto us? 

1 1 Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and 
tlie noise of lliy viols: the worm is spread under 
thee, and the worms cover thee. 

1'2 How art thou fallen from heaven, Lucifer,' 
son of the morning! /low art thou cut down to 
the ground, which didst weaken the nations! 

i;5 For thou hast said in thy heart. I will ascend 
into heaven, I will e.xalt my tiirone above Ihe stars 
of God:' 1 will sit also upon the mount of the 
congregation, in the sides of the north:'" 

14 I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; 
I will be like the Most High." " 

15 Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to 
the sides of the pit."' 

IC) They that see thee shall narrowly look upon 
lliee, and cinisider thee, sayinp:. Is this the nuui liiat 
made t he eartii to tremble, that did shake kingdoms? 

17 T/iat made the world as a wilderness, and 
destroyed the cities thereof; (hat opened not the 
iiouse of his prisoners?* 

IS All tiie kings of the nations, ci^cn all of them, 
lie in glory, every one in his own house. 

lU IJut lliou art cast out of tliy grave like an 
abominable branch, and as the raiment of those 
that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that 

iits. Bci..3J;l. hKzek.:il:lG. I Or, T*r gra«. i Ezek. 3321 . 5 Hob. 
Itaders; m, great goals. ' Or. Odni/slar, JDan.B:10. I< Psa. ■1S:2. I -i Tlie.<.«. 
•i:4. '» .Matt. 1 1 :*23. t Or, did not trt his prisoners hose homeward? 



the conversion of all the gentile nations to Christ. The 
people; the gentile people. J^hem; the house of Jacob, 
which here represents the church of God in her entiro 
history and final triumph over all her enemies. Skall pos- 
sess them — -for servants and hamimaids ; these words were 
fulfilled to the exiles who returned from Babylon only in 
a very limited sense. Tlieir full meaning is, that the 
church shall be finally exalted above all her oppressors, 
and all nations shall minister to her welfare. Compart> 
chap, 49 : 22, 23, and chap. 60, which may be regarded as 
an inspired exposition of the present passage. 

8. Thcjir-trecs — cedars of Lebanon ; mentioned as among 
the most conspicuous objects included iu "the whole 
earth," ver. 7. Compare Psa. 97:11-13. 

9. Hell from beneath is moved for thee; by a striking fig- 
ure the nations of the dead, with llicir kings and heroes, 
are represenleil as filled with amazement at the arrival of 
the king of liabylou among them. It is not simply his 
death that astonishes them, but the fall of his niiglity eni- 
I)ire in and with him. 

13. / will sit also upon the mount of the conpregation ; 
mount Zion, which included ^[oriall, where " the taberna- 
cle of the congregation," and afterwards the temjde, was 
located. To " sit upon the mount of the congregation" 
means, to fix his throne there, as one who has triumphed 
over the (jod of Israel, hi the sitlc.i of the north; probably 
on Moriah, which lay on the north-east of Ziou. See note 
on I'sa. 48:2. 

IS. His own house; his sepulchre. The ancient kings 
built f(M- their sepulchres vast and magnificent structures. 

19. Cast nut of th 11 prove ; denied a burial, the greatest, 
ignominy that could befall a man after his death. An 
nbominniile branch ; branch is i.robubly used here, as in 
clia|i. 11:1, to denote nlTs|iring. He is east out without 
burial as an alioniinablo braiuli of the royal family. At 
the raiment of those that are slain; stained with blood, and 



Assyria threatened, 



ISAIAH XV. 



and Pakstimi 



A. M. 3292. ro down to the stones of the pit ; as a car- 

II. <;. about ^ , 1 , 1 (• i 

712. cass trouiicn under loet. 

20 Thou shalt not be Joined with them in burial, 
because thou hast destroyed thy land, mid slain 
thy people: the seed of evil-doers shall never be 
renowned/ 

21 Prepare slau.irhter for Ids cliildrcn for the ini- 
quity of their fathers;'' that tliey do not rise, nor pos- 
sess the la ml, nor iill the face of t lie world with cities. 

22 For I will rise up against them, saith tiie 
Lord of iiosts, and cut off from Babylon the name, 
and remnant, and son, and nephew, saitli the Lord. 

23 I will also make it a possession for the bit- 
tern, and pools of water : and I will sweep it with 
the besom of destruction, saith the Lord of hosts. 

24 ^ The Lord of Iiosts hath sworn, saying. Sure- 
ly as I have tliought, so siiall it come to pass; and 
as I iiave purposed, so shall it stand: 

25 That I will break the Assyrian in my land, 
and upon my mountains tread him under foot: 
then shall his yoke depart from off them, and his 
burden depart from off their shoulders.'^ 

26 This is the purpose that is purposed upon the 
whole earth : and this is the hand that is stretch- 
ed out upon all the nations. 

27 For the Lord of hosts hath purposed, and who 



a Job ISlO^ P.-a. .37:-28. b Exod. -iUr.i. c di. 1(J:-J7. d -J Chr. 20:11; Job 
23:1J, Prov, 21:30; Dan. 4:35. e2KmgslO:20 f 2 Chr. 26:0. • Or, a,/- 
der. e 2 KiiiRS 18:8. 1 Or, he sliall nol. i Ot. assemblies, h Psi. &-:l-(i. 



therefore cast away as polluted. Many render, " As one 
covered with the slain ;" that is, covered in burial hencatU 
a heap of slain. Go douin to tke stones nf the pit ; probably 
a description of indiscriminate burial in a pit, which was 
afterwards covered with stones. Some understand sepul- 
chres hewn in the rock. 

21. For the iniquitij of their fathers ; Exod. 20:5. 

25. I will break the Assyrian; in themindof the projilict. 
the overthrow of Assyria and of Babylon are connected 
as parts of one great deliverance. Ilenco he naturally 
passes from the latter event to the former, which had 
been already predicted. Cliap. 10:5, etc. 

28. In the year — this burden ; this verse introduces a new 
prophecy, the first of a series of prophecies against foreign 
nations, extending through several chapters. 

29. Palestina ; the land of the Piiilistines. The rod of 
him that smote thee; probably the rod of David's royal line ; 
that is, the power of Judah. From this rod the Philis- 
tines had received many severe blows; but iuAhaz's time 
it was broken for his sins, so that the Philistines invaded 
and plundered Judah. 2 Chron. 28:18. The serpent's root ; 
the stock of David, which was to the Philistines as a de- 
stroying serpent. A cockatnrr ; an inlder, that is, a still 
more formidable enemy. This pv^pln cy had its incipient 
fulfilment in Hezekiah, 2 Kiii:.;s ls:s, Imt its complete ac- 
complishment is in Christ, who shall destroy all the ene- 
mies of his people, of whom the Philistines are here the 
representatives. 

30. T/ic/rs(-/)or)! o/";/(e;)oor, • the pree'mineiitly poor. The 
allusion is to the poor among God's people. Ver. 32. 

31. From the north ; Philistia lay on the south-western 
extremity of Palestine. A smoke; the smoke of God's 
wrath. Psa. 18:8. Slwll be alone; or shall wander out of 
his ranks. His appointed times; or, as in the margin, "his 
assemblies," the assemblies of God's hosts. 

32. Messengers of the nation; more literally, "messengers 
of a nation" — of any nation that may be sent to Jerusalem. 
Founded Zion ; firmly established her. Such adoclaration 
as this cannot be limited to any one outward deliverance. 
It contains a promise of God's continual presence and pro- 
tection through all ages. See note on verses 1, 2. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
4. Though God may chastise his people for their sins, 



shall disannul il? and his hand is stretched out, 
and wlio shall turn it back'.''' 

28 In the year that king Ahaz died was this 
burden.'' 

29 *[| Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, l)ecause 
the rod of him that smote thee is broken :'' for out 
of the serpent's root shall come forth a cockatrice,* 
and his fruit sliall be a fiery flying serpent."-' 

30 And tlie iirst-born of the poor shall feed, and 
the needy shall lie down in safety : and I will kill 
thy root with famine, and he shall slay thy remnant. 

31 Howl, gate; cry, city; thou, whole Pal- 
estina, ar( dissolved : for there shall come from the 
north a smoke, and none shalP b» alone in his ap- 
pointed times.* 

32 What shall one then answer the messengers 
of the nation'? That the Lord hath founded Zion,'' 
and the poor of his people shall trust in it.^' 

CHAPTER XV. 

The !ament;iblo state of Moab. 

'^piIE burden of Moab.-* Because in tlie night 
J_ Ar of Moab is laid waste, a?id brought to 
silence ;' because in the night Kir of Moab is laid 
waste, a7id brought to silence : 



5 Heb, betake themselvrs unto U. i Zeph. 3:\'i 
a5:b-U ; Amos 2:1-3. I Or, cut off. 



he will never forsake them, nor give them over to the final 
dominion of the wicked ; but will make their present dis- 
tresses the means of their purification and future enlarge- 
ment. 

3. The omnipotent power of Christ the church's Head, is 
a pledge of her final and complete triumph over all her foes. 

7. The overthrow of persecuting powers brings joy and 
thanksgiving to all the righteous. 

11. 'The mightiest monarchs must soon make their couch 
in the grave, with worms for their covering; and this is 
but ail emblem of the more terrible destruction that 
awaits haughty sinners beyond the tomb, " where their 
worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched." 

15. It is the revealed purpose of God to humble all the 
proud ; and he can execute it as easily upon mighty em- 
pires as upon an individual. 

20. The eiforts of evil-doers to establish their families 
in permanent power and honor, end in disappointment. 

24^27. The counsels of earthly kingdoms are continually 
changing and coming to naught; but ;iinid':ill llirir revolu- 
tions and convulsions, God is irresistiMy (buying i'orward 
his high purposes of love and meny Iciwunls lii.s ])eople. 

29. To nations persevering in iniquity, the removal of one 
calamity only prepares the way for another and a heavier. 

32. The Lord always has an answer of peace for his true 
Israel. 

CHAPTER XV. 

The country of Moab lay on the east of the Dead sea. 
Originally it included a large territory north of the river 
Arnon, but in Moses' day this belonged to Sihon king of 
the Amorites, who had taken it from Moab. Moses con- 
quered Sihon, and gave all his possessions, including this 
territory, to the Israelites. Num. 21:24-20. Of the cities 
mentioned in this and the following chapter, Dibon, Nebo. 
Medeba, Heshbon, Elcaleh, Nimrim, Sibmah, and Jazer, 
lay north of the Arnon, and were given by Mosos to the 
tribes of Reuben and Gad. Num. 32:34-:i8; Josh. 13:15- 
27. But in the decHne of the kingdom of Israel, the Moab- 
ites seem to have recovered all this region. 

1. Ar; the ancient capital of Moab on the south side of 
the Arnon, now in ruins. Kir; the modern Kerak, six or 
eight miles south of Ar. It is a strong fortress. 
781 



The lamentable 



ISAIAH XVI. 



state of Jloab. 



2 IIo is gone up to Bajitli, and to Dilmn, the 
liigli places, to wocp: Moab shall howl over Ne- 
bo, and over Medcba: on all their lieads s/iall be 
baldness, and every beard cut olT. 

8 Jn their streets they shall gird themselves with 
sackcloth: on the tops of their houses, and in 
their streets, every one shall howl, weeping abun- 
dantly.' 

4 And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealch ; their 
voice shall be heard even unto Jahaz: therefore 
the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out; his life 
shall be grievous inito him. 

5 My heart shall cry out forMoab ;" his fugitives 
shall flee unto Jioar, a heifer* of three years old: 
for by tiie mounting up of Luhith with weeping 
shall they go it up; for in tlie way of Horonaim 
they shall raise up a cry of destruction.* 

6 For the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate:* 
for the hay is withered away, the grass faileth, 
there is no green thing. 

7 Tiiereforo the abundance they have gotten, 
and that which tliey have laid up. shall they cany 
away to the brook of tlie willows.' 

8 For the cry is gone round about the borders 
of Moab; the howling thereof unto Eglaim, and 
the howling thereof unto Beer-elim. 

9 For the waters of Dirnon shall be full of blood : 
for I will bring more^ upon Dinion, lions upon 
him that escapcth of Moab, and upon the remnant 
of the land." 



' Hob. deseenilim; into icfrpi/ii:; or, coming down with weeping, a ch. 
16:11. 1 Or, lol/ie borders ihrreof, even la Zoar, it a heifer. 1 Hob. break- 
ing. » Hob. desolations. I Or, vaUei/ of the Arabians. 5 Heb. additions. 
!> a Kings 17:45. • Or, Petra; Heb. a rock. ' -J Kinss :i:4. t Or. a nest 



2. Ik; Moab. Bajitli — Dibon; high places where there 
were temples. To weep; before his gods and supplicate 
their favor. 

4. Jahaz; perhaps the same as Jahaza, which lay north 
of the Anion. Josh. i:J:18. But some understand by it 
Jahaz, south of the Arnon, where Moses smote Sihon. 
Num. 21 : 23. It is here named as lying in the very ex- 
tremity of Moab. 

5. Zoar; on the sontli-eastern border of the Dead sea. 
A heifer of three years old; like a heifer of throe years, 
strong and unUimed. The mounting np; the ascent. Lu- 
hith — flnronaim; cities in the southern part of Moab. 

6. Shall be deaolate; cither because Ihey have been stop- 
ped by the eiicmy, 2 Kings 3:19, or from drought added 
to the desolations of war. 

7. Therefore; because they can no longer remain in their 
own land. Brook of the willows ; on the southern border. 
They take refuge in the land of Edoni, on the south. 

8. Kslnim— Beer-elim ; on the southern liorder of Moab. 

9. Dimon ; some suppose this to be a stream in the south 
of Moab ; others, that it is the same as Dibon, north of the 
Arnon. FuWq/"6/oof/,- from the slain of Moab. 3/occ,- addi- 
tional calamities. Liom ; probably new and fierce enemies. 

IXSTIIUCTIONS. 

1-C. flod can in a moment turn the prosperity of any 
people into lamentiition and mourning; and he will visit 
with his judgments all who jiersist in despising his law, 
whether it be the law of revelation written in his word, 
or the law of nature written in men's consciences. 

7. The quiet possession and enjoyment of wealth is 
God's gift. When ho chooses, he can with infinite ease 
take it away from families and from nations. 

9. When one chastisement f:iils to reclaim a nation, 
more and heavier judgments are in reserve for it. 

CHAPTER xvr. 

1. Tlie Iamb; generally understood to me.an the tribute 
of lambs which the Moabites had formerly paid to the 
782 



CHAPTER XVI, 



1 Mo.ab is oxliorled to yiplJ obcilienoe to Christ's kingdom. 6 Moab is 
tlire:itcnpd for her prido. 9 The prophet bewailctli her. 12 The judg- 
ment of Moab. 

SEND ye the lamb to the ruler of the land from 
St'lii* to the wilderness, uuto the mount of the 
daughter of Zion.'' 

2 For it shall be, thai, as a wandering bird cast 
out of the nest,* .to the daughters of Moab shall be 
at the fords of Arnon.'' 

3 Take* counsel, execute judgment; make thy 
shadow as the night in the midst of the noonday ; 
hide the outcasts ; bewray not him that wandereth. 

4 Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, Moab; be 
thou a covert to them from the face of the spoiler : 
for the extortioner- is at an end. the spoiler ceas- 
eth, the oppressors' are consumed out of the land. 

5 And in mercy shall the throne be established :^ 
and he shall sit upon it in trnlh in the tabernacle 
of David," judging, and seeking judgment, aud 
hasting righteousness.'' 

6 "i Wc have heard of the pride of Moab ;« he v; 
very proud ; even of his haughtiness, and his pride, 
and his wrath: but his lies shall not be so. 

7 Therefore shall Moab howl for Moab, every 
one .shall howl: for the foundations of Kir-hare- 
seth shall ye mourn;" surely they are stricken.'' 

8 For the fields of Heshbon languish, and the 
vine of Sibmah: the lords of the heathen have 
broken down the principal plants thereof, they 



forsaken. dNum. il:i3. I ilcb. Bring, i Hah icringer. I Hch. IremUrs 
down. ^ Or, prepared, e Dan. 7:1-1, 27; Mic. 4:7; Luke 1 :3a, 33. ' VsL. 
-2:->. gZeph. 2:1U. • Or, mullcr. h 2 Kings 3:25. 

kings of Israel; but which, after the death of Ahab, they 
refused longer to pay. 2 Kings 3:4, 5. The ruler of tlu 
land; the ruler of Judea. Sela; now I'ctra, a celebrated 
place in the desert south of the Dead sea, whoso ruins 
attest its former magnificence. To tlic wilderness ; to and 
through the intervening wilderness. 

2. For it shall be ; the reason of the advice contained in 
the preceding verse is now given ; Jloab's fugitives shall 
soon need the protection of .ludah. A wandering bird cast 
out of the nest ; better, " a wandering bird, a nest" of young 
birds cast out of its place. At the fords of Arnon ; on the 
northern border of Jloab. as it existed in Mo.ses' day. 

:i-5. Some regard these versos as the supplicating words 
of Moab addressed to the Jews, thus: Take coun.vl ; or. as 
the margin, " Bring counsel " to us in our distress. Thy 
sliadmo; thy protection. Theoutwsts; of Moab. Bewray 
not; betray not. Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, Moab; 
or, considering Moab as the speaker, •• Let the outcasts of 
mo, Moab, dwell with thee." The extortioner is at an end; 
the oppressor of Juilah, so that he can now give the re- 
fjuired help to Moab. In mercy; through the exercise of 
mercy. The throne; of David's family. IIa.'<ting righteous- 
ness ; zealously executing it. 

Others rej!;ard these words as addressed by .ludah to 
the Moabites, thus: Take counsel ; take good counsel with 
respect to the Jewish exiles in thy land. The extortioner 
is at an end; the oppressor of us, the .lews, will soon be 
at an end, and David's throne bo estalilislied. This is a 
reason why the Moabites should fear the anger of the 
Jews, and conciliate their favor by deeds of kindness. 

fi. Wc have heard of the pride of Moab; the prophet re- 
turns to the description of Moab's sin and punishraent. 
Ills lies shiill not be so; not be established. 

7. For the foundations of Kir-liare^cth ; for their destruc- 
tion. Kir-harcscth is proUibly the samo as Kir-Moab, 
cliap. 1,1:1. 

s. They are come; or, which had como; that is, tlio 
plants or boughs of the vine of Sibmah, a place celebrat- 



T\Tonb, Syria, and 



ISAIAH XVII. 



Israel threatened. 



A. M. :i2;8. are come even unto Jazer, they wandered 
Ti'i;.'' ""' through tlio wilderness: her branches are 
stretched out," tliey are gone over the sea. 

9 Therefore I will bewail with the weeping of 
Jazer the vine of Sibmah :'' I will water thee witli 
my tears, Heshbon, and Elealeli : for the shouting 
for* thy summer fruits and for thy harvest is fallen. 

10 And gladness is taken away, and joy out of 
tlie iileutiful held ;'' and in the vineyards there 
shall be no singing, neither shall there be shouting : 
the trcaders shall tread out no wine in MejV presses ; 
I have made their vintage shouting to cease. 

11 Wiierefore my bowels shall sound like a harp 
for iloab, and mine inward parts for Kir-haresii.'^ 

1 2 'i And it shall come to pass, when it is seen that 
Moab is weary on the high place, that he shall come 
to his sanctuary to pray ;'' but he shall not prevail.'' 

13 This is the word that the Lord hath spoken 
concerning Moab since that time. 

14 But now the Lord hath spoken, saying. Within 
three years, as the years of a hireling,' and the 
glory of Moab shall be contemned, with all that 
great multitude; and the remnant shall be very 
email and feeble.* 



CHAPTER XVII. 

1 Syria and Israel are threatened. 6 A remnant sliall forsake idolatry. 
9' The rest sliall be pla-ued for their impiety. l'> The -vvoe of IsraePs 

THE burden of Damascus.'' Behold, Damascus 
is taken away from being a city, and it shall 
be a ruinous heap.'' 



' Ot, plurlifd lip. 4 Jer. 4S:3J. etc. 1 Or, tht alarm is fallen upon, b ch. 
21:3. <;ch.0:3;15. dch. 20:16. ^ Vroy. \ ■.•ii. fch. vil:fO. t Or, not many 



ed for its wine. The luxuriant growtli of this vine is here 
a symbol of the prosperity of the people, as the breaking of 
its bouslis is of their destruction. Compare Psa. 80: 10-13. 
9. Willi the weeping of Jazer; with such a weeping as 
•Jazer eniphiys. The prophet will unite his lamentations 
with tliose of Jazer over the vine of Sibmah. The shout- 
ing — !s fallen ; or, as the margin, " the alarm," battle- 
shout, has fallen upon thy summer fruits and upon thy 
harvest. 

11. Mij bowels; regarded by the ancients as the seat of 
compassion. Compare chap. 63:15 ; Gen. 43:30 ; 1 Kings 
3:2fi. Sound likeaharp; be agitated like the strings of a 
harp when struck by the player ; be disquieted, as the 
same word in the original is rendered. Psa. 42:6, 11. 
Kir-haresh ; tlic same as Kir-hareseth. 

12. On tlie high place; where he is gone to make suppli- 
cation to his gods. This verse may be literally rendered 
thus: "And it shall come to pass that Moab shall appear, 
shall weary himself upon the high place ; and shall come 
to his sanctuary to pray, and shaU not prevail." 

13. Since that time ; or, "of old." 

14. But now tlie Lord hath spoken; an addition made by 
the prophet at a later date. Js tlie years of a hireling ; com- 
puted with exactness. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. They who would enjoy the favor and protection of 
God must be at peace with his people. 

3. Cruelty and treachery towards those whom war, or 
oppression of any kind, has driven from their own homes, 
and reduced to a state of poverty and dependence, is a 
heinous sin, and one which God will severely punish. 

5. Mercy and righteousness, having their foundation in 
the fear and love of God, are the only true prosperity and 
stability of a nation. 

6-11. It is true of nations as of individuals, that "pride 



2 The cities of Aroer are forsaken: they sliall 
be for flocks, which shall lie down, and none shall 
make them afraid.' 

3 The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim, 
and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant 
of Syria: they shall be as the glory of the chil- 
dren of Israel, saith the Lord of hosts. 

4 And in that day it shall come to pass, that the 
glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness 
of his flcsli shall wax lean.J 

5 And it shall be as when the harvest-man gath- 
ereth the corn, and reapeth the cars with his arm ; 
and it shall be as he that gathereth ears in the 
valley of Repliaim." 

6 'i Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as 
the shaking of an olive-tree, two or three berries 
in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in 
tlic outmost fruitful branches thereof, saith the 
LoiiD God of Israel. 

7 At that day shall a man look to his Maker, 
and his eyes shall have respect to the Holy One 
of Israel.' 

8 And he shall not look to the altars, the work 
of his hands, neither shall respect that which his 
fingers have made, either the groves, or the images.^ 

9 1 In that day shall his strong cities be as a 
forsaken bough, and an uppermost branch, which 
they left because of the children of Israel: and 
there shall be desolation. 

10 Because thou hast forgotten the God of thy 
salvation,'" and hast not been mindful of the rock 
of thy strength, therefore shalt thou plant pleasant 
plants, and shall set it with strange slips : 



goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a 
Ikll." 

12. The idols in which the heathen put their trust can- 
not help them in the day of their calamity ; none but the 
living God can save ; and he demands rejjeutance, and 
works meet for repentance. 

CHATTER XVII. 

2. They shall be for flocks; desolated and converted into 
conunon pasture-ground. 

3. Ephraim is joined with Damascus in this prophecy, 
because the two kingdoms were confederate against Ju- 
dah. Chap. 7:2. They shall be as the glory of the children 
of Israel; their glory shall be brought low, like that of the 
children of Israel. Ver. 4. 

5. It shall be; with Israel and his glory. As when the 
harvest-man — he that gathereth ears; his enemies shall reap 
him as one reaps grain. In the valley of Rephaim ; a plain 
near Jerusalem on the south-west. It is probably men- 
tioned here because of its luxuriant fields of grain. 

6. Gleaning grapes: ; literally, gleanings; here, gleanings 
of olive-berries. Shall be left in rt — in the outmost fruitful 
branches; a remnant only of Israel shall be loft, like the 
scattered berries on the topmost boughs of an olive-tree 
after the fruit has been gathered. 

7. Look to his Maker ; in faith and obedience, the fruit of 
the chastisement inflicted by God on his people. 

8. Groves; or, "images of Ashtoretli," a female goddess 
worshipped by the Zidonians and other heathen nations. 

9. A forsaken bough. ; or, " the remnant of a forest." 
Chap. 10:19. An uppermost branch; on which a few ber- 
ries are left. Because of the children of Israel; or, " As the 
ruins in forests and on hills which they," the Canaanites, 
" left," in fleeing " before the face of the children of Israel." 

10. Pleasant plants— strange slips ; a figurative descrip- 



Destruction of the 



ISAIAH XVIII. 



enemies of God. 



11 In the day slialt thou make thy plant to 
grow, and in tlie morning sliall thou make tliy 
seed to flourisli : hut the harvest shall be a iieap in 
the day of grief and of desperate sorrow.'" 

12 •! Woe to the multitutk;* of many people, 
whicli make a noise like the noise of the seas; and 
to the rushing of nations, that make a rusluug like 
fjie rusliing of mighty' waters! 

13 The nations shall rusli like the rushing of 
many waters: Imt God shall rebuke them, and 
they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the 
chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like 
a rolling thing^ before the whirlwind.'' 

14 And boliold at evening-tide trouble; and be- 
fore the morning he is not. Tiiis is the portion 
of them that spoil us, and the lot of them tluit 
rob us." 

CHAPTER XVI II. 

1 God in care of liis people will dt-stroy the Ktliiopians. 7 An access 
thereby shall grow unto the church. 

WOE to the land shadowing with wings, 
■which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia:'' 
2 That sendcth ambassadors by the sea, even in 



Or, removed in the day of inheritance, and there shall be deadly sorroio. 
er. Si.ll. t Or, noise. I Or, many. » Or, thistle down. 1> i'^a. 9:). 
er a-3 dch iU-.i-S; Ezek. 30: 4-'J ; Ze^\\. i-.M; AAU. i Oi, outspread 



tion of idolatrous practices, as arising from forgetfulnesa 
of God. " Strange slips," arc slips from " a strange vine." 
.ler. 2:21. 

11. A luap; a ruinous heap ; that is, tbeir idolatrous 
observances shall bring to them "grief and desperate 
Korrow." 

12. Tke multitude of many people ; gathered against Zion. 
From the confederacy of Syria and Ephraim the prophet 
passes to a general denunciation of God's wrath upon the 
persecutors of his people. 

14. Trouble ; consternation falling upon the host of Zion's 
enemies. He is not; he has perished. This pro)>heey was 
strikingly fulfilled upon Sennacherib's arrny, but should 
not be restricted to that overthrow. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. They who are united in persecuting God's people, 
must also be in the destruction which he brings upon their 
enemies. 

5, 6. The mightiest among God's enemies are utterly 
feeble and helpless in his hands. They fall before his 
■wrath like the ears of corn before tlic reaper, and like 
olive-berries before the gatherer. 

7, 8. God's chastisements are adapted and designed to 
withdraw the confidence of his people from the vain ob- 
jects in which worldly men put tlieir trust ; and in respect 
10 the "remnant aceording to the election of grace," they 
always accomplish tiiis result. 

10, 11. They who forget the living God, and sock pros- 
perity and salvation from their own worldly devices, leap 
in the end a harvest of "grief and of desperate sorrow." 

12-11. Since God dwells among his people, they have 
no reason to fear the power of their foes, however formi- 
<lablc it may seem. He can destroy in a moment all their 
i:ombined hosts, as stubble is blown before the whirlwind. 

CHArTER XVIII. 

Of this difficult chapter two different views arc held by 
rummontators: fu'st, that it is an annuuc.intinn to the Ktlii- 
opians of the destruction of their enemies the AssjTians 
under Sennacherib, to which reference is made at tlic close 
• if the preceding chapter; secondly, tliat it is a. denunciation 
of the overthrow of their own warlike preparations. 

1. Woe to tlie iniul ; the word rendered "woe," may also 
1)0 translated "ho," as in chap. 55:1. Those who adopt 
the former of the abovenamed views, render, " Ho. land." 
7S1 



vessels of bulrushes upon the waters,. www o- a, m. wi. 

,, .,. ' , . ' -' f" II. e, about 

Go, ye swilt messengers, to a nation seat- "h- 
tered and ])eeled,' to a people terrible from their 
beginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trod- 
den down,' whose land the rivers have spoiled!* 

3 All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers 
on the earth, sec ye, when he lifletli up an ensign 
on tlie mountains f and when he bloweth a trum- 
pet, iicar ye. 

4 For so (he Lord said unto me, I will take toy 
rest, and 1 will consider in my dwelling-place* like 
a clear heat upon herbs,' and like a cloud of dew 
in the heat of harvest. 

5 For afore the harvest, ■when the liud is per- 
fect, and the sour grape is ripening in the flower, 
he shall iioth cut off the sprigs with pruning-hooks. 
and take away and cut down the branches. 

C They shall l^e left together unto the fo^nds of 
the mountains, and to the beasts of the earth ; and 
the fowls shall summer upon them, and all the 
beasts of tlie earth shall winter u]ion them. 

7 11 in that time shall the present be brought 
unto the Lord of hosts of a people scattered and 
peeled,-' and from a people terrible from their be- 



and polislud. 1 Or, that metelh out and treadelh down; Ucb. of tine, tine, 
and treadins under /oat. ' Or, despise, e ch. Cn-m. t Or, regard my set 
dwetlinf;. \ Or, after rain. 5 Or, outspread and polished., ver. 2. 



Shadowing with wings; or, "rustling with -wings." By 
wings, armies seem to be intended. The rivos of Ethiopia ,- 
the rivers which border it on the north, being branches 
of the Nile. Ethiopia lay south of Egypt. 

2. The sea; the Nile, which anciently, as in modem times, 
was called the sea. Some suppose the Hed sea to be in^- 
lended ; but " vessels of bulrushes" would be more ap- 
jiropriate to the Nile. Vessels of tiulru.slies; light boats, 
made of the Egyptian papyrus. Stiijiit'r; this word is not 
in the original, and it is better to omit it, and understand 
the prophet as addressing the messengers. Go, ye swifl 
messengers; according to the first of the above viewR, lo 
bear tidings to Ethiopia of the overthrow of Sennacherib ; 
according to the second, to bear to them the prophet's 
denunciation. Scattered and peeled; or, "spread abroad and 
smooth," that is, close shaven: see margin. A nation 
meted out and trodden dotvn ; or, as the margin, a nation "of 
line, line, and treading under foot ;" a nation that stretches 
out its nieastiring line over one conquered nation after 
another, and treads its enemies under foot. Tlie rivers; 
the Nile and its branches. Have spoiled ; by inundating it. 
But we may better render, " divide." 

;{. When lie lifteth. up an ensign; according to one vie-w, 
the Assyrian, to muster his forces against Jerusalem ; ac- 
cording to the other, the Ethiopian king, to prepare for 
some formidable warlike expedition, jirobably against 
Judea. 

4. Will take my rest — con.^ider ; will look on in quiotncsB. 
Compare Psalm 2:4. Like a clear heat — a thmd of dew; 
serene as the clear and warm stmshine, and calm as the 
dew-distilling cloud ; perhaps with the idea, also, that 
this inaction allows God's enemies to mature their plans 
against his people. 

5. Afore the linrrcst ; the harvest of their plans ; before 
thej' can accomplish what they have undertaken. The 
sotir grape is ripening in the Jlowcr ; or, " the (lower is be- 
coming a ripening grajie.'' Cut off the sprigs — eul down the 
branches; shall destroy all tlieir assembled armies. 

(1. Thrii stiall be left; their slaughtered hosts. The lit- 
eral now takes the place of the figurative. Fowls — beasts; 
fowls and beasts of prey. 

7. Stiall the present be brought ; from the Ethiopians. Ac- 
cording to one view, it is a jiresent sent to Jerusalem on 
the occasion of Sennacherib's overthrow ; according to the 
other, their own overthrow by the power of Jehovah 



Judgments of God 



ISAIAH XIX. 



against Egypt. 



B r'aS ginning hitherto ;* a nation meted out and 
-li. " trodden under foot, whof^e land the rivers 
have spoiled, to tlie place of the name of the Lord 
of hosts, the mount Ziou. 



1 The 



CHAPTER XIX. 

confusion of Egypt. 11 Tlie foolishness of their princes. 18 The 
;ng of Egypt to the church. 23 The covenant of Egypt, Assyria, 
and Israel. 

'' T^HE burden of Ef,n'pt." Behold, the Lord rid- 
X eth upon a swift cloud,*^ and shall come into 
Egypt: and the idols of Egypt shall be moved 
at his presence,'" and the heart of Egypt shall 
melt in the midst of it. 

2 And I will set* thcEgyptians against theEgyp- 
tians: and they shall fight every one against his 
brother, and every one against his neighbor ; city 
against city, and kingdom against kingdom. 

3 And the spirit of Egypt shall fail* in the midst 
thereof ;'' and I will destroy* the counsel thereof: 
and they shall seek to the idols, and to the charm- 
ers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to 
the wizards.' 

4 And the Egyptians will I give over' into the 
hand of a cruel lord ;s and a fierce king shall rule 
over them, saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts. 

5 And the waters shall fail from the sea, and 
the river shall be wasted and dried up. 

6 And they shall turn the rivers far away ; and 
the brooks of defence shall be emptied and dried 
up:'' the reeds and flags shall wither. 

7 The paper reeds by the brooks, by the mouth 
of the brooks, and every thing sown by the brooks, 
shall wither, be driven away, and be no more.'' 

8 The fishers also shall mourn, and all they that 



iiPsa. fiS;3l; 7a;I0; ch. 16:1. b Jer. 40:13; Ezek. cb. 2H, 30. c Psa. 
IS: 10; 104:3. d li.vod. l-.i: I'i; Jer. 43: 14 t Heb. Mi«s/e. I Meh. ht emp- 
tied. e Ezek. 2J: 14. illeh. sioallow up ' ch. 8: lU; 47: 12. I Or, shut up. 
gch. 20:4. h 2 Kings 19:24. ^ Keh shall nol ie. i 1 Kings 10:28. 'Or, 



brings them thus to acknowledge his authority. In either 
case the present is to be regarded as an earnest of their 
future spiritual conversion to Christ. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

4, 5. God sometimes leaves his enemies for a season to 
carry forward their plans against his church without in- 
terruption, until they seem to be on the point of triumph- 
ing over her, in order that his power and glory may be 
more conspicuously manifested in their final overthrow. 

7. God has given to Christ for his inheritance all na- 
tions of the earth, and he will, in his own time and man- 
ner, whether by mercies or judgments, bring them all to 
render to him willing obedience and homage. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

This chapter contains a projihecy of the downfall of 
Egypt, and its subsequent conversion to God. 

1. Rideth upon a swift cloud; compare Psalm 18:10,11; 
104:3. 

3. The spirit of Egypt ; that is, of the Egyptians ; aU the 
resources of their own wisdom and counsel. Tlieij shall 
seek to the idols ; in their perplexity, they shall go to their 
magicians and false gods for counsel and help, but shall 
finil none. 

4. A cruel lord — a fierce king ; this prophecy may have 
had its incipient fulfilment in some oppressive king, like 
Psammetiohus, who ascended the throne of Egypt during 
the reign of Manasseh ; but it manifestly covers the 
whole history of Egypt till the time of its final conversion 
to God. 

50 



cast angle into the brooks shall lament, and they 
that spread nets upon the waters shall languish. 

9 Moreover they that work in fine tla.x,' and they 
that weave networks," shall be confounded. 

10 And they shall be broken in the purposes* 
thereof, all that make sluices and ponds for fish.* 

1 1 ■[ Surely the princes of Zoan are fools,^ the 
counsel of the wise counsellors of Pharaoh is be 
come brutish : how say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the 
son of the wise, the son of ancient kings ? 

12 Where are they? where are thy wise men?^ 
and let them tell thee now, and let them know 
what the Lord of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt.' 

13 The princes of Zoan are become fools,'" the 
princes of Noph are deceived;" they have also 
seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay^ of the 
tribes thereof. 

14 The Lord hath mingled a jierverse spirit' in 
the midst thereof:" and they have caused Egypt 
to err in every work thereof, as a drunken vian 
staggereth in his vomit. 

1.5 Neither shall there be any work for Egypt, 
which the head or tail, branch or rush, may do. 

16 In that day shall Egypt be like unto women :p 
and it shall be afraid and fear because of the 
shaking of the hand of the Lord of hosts, which 
he shaketh over it. 

17 And tlie land of Judah shall be a terror unto 
Egypt, every one that maketh mention thereof 
shall be afraid in himself, because of the counsel 
of the Lord of hosts, which he hath determined 
against it. 

18 *r In that day shall five cities in the land of 
Egypt speak the language '^ of Canaan," and swear 
to the Lord of hosts; one shall be called. The city 
of destruction." 



white works, t Heb. fo 


mlntioiix IHeh. of living things, j Num. 13:22. 


t 1 Cor. 1.20. 1 ch. 44. 


■. N. m Rom. l:2-.>. u Jer. 2: 10. f Or. governors; 


Heb the rornfTS. 1 H 


b. spirit of perverseness. o 1 Kings 22: ai, 23. 


Pj=r.51:.3U; Nah.3:l:J. 


IIHeb. ;/>. qZeph. 3:U. • Or, Heres. or the sun. 



5-10. 77(6 waters shall fait — all that make sluices; a figura- 
tive description of the fall of Egypt, borrowed from the 
failure of the Nile. It cannot be the mere physical deso- 
lation of the country that is intended, since it is to endure 
till the conversion of the nation to God. ' The sea; the 
Nile. See note on chap. 18:2. Ttietj shall turn the rivers 
far away; and the brooks of defence ; or better, "the rivers," 
canals of tiie Nile, "shall stink; the streams of Egypt." 
They shall be broken in tlie purposes thereof; or, as the mar- 
gin, " her foundations shall be broken." All that make 
sluices and ponds ftrr fish ; or, as many prefer, "all the hired 
laborers shall be heavy of heart." 

11. Zoan; Tanis, a city lying in the eastern part of 
Lower Egypt, on one of the branches of the Nile. 

13. Noph; Jleniphis, an ancient and splendid city of 

EgJ-pt- 

14. Hath mmgled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof; 
hath mixed with the counsels of Egypt a perverse spirit, 
so that her rulers mislead her. 

15. Head or tail, branch or rush; men of high or low de- 
gree. Chap. 9:14. May do; that is, with success. All 
undertakings by men of all ranks shall come to naught. 

IH. The shaking of the Itand ; as a gesture of threatening. 

17. The land of Judah; not simply as an earthly king- 
dom, but as containing in itself the kingdom of God, to 
which perpetuity and universal donnnion are promised. 
To the literal Judah, this prophecy was fulfilled only in a 
very limited measure. Its complete fulfilment must be to 
the Israel of God. Compare chap. CO: 14. 

18. Five cities — speak the languase of Canaan; the lan- 

185 



Promises to Egypt. 



ISAIAH XX. 



Captivity of Ethiopia,. 



19 In that day shall thorn tc an altar to the 
Lord in tho midst of tlie land of Esrypt, and a 
pillar at the border thereof to tlie Lord." 

20 And it shall be for a sit^n and for a witness 
unto the Lord of liosts in the land of Egypt :'' for 
they shall cry unto the Lord because of the op- 
pressors, and he sliall send them a saviour, and a 
srreat one, and ho sliall deliver them. 

21 And tho Loud shall bo known to Egypt, and 
the Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, 
and shall do sacrifice and oblation;" yea, they 
shall vow a vow unto the Lord, and perform it. 

22 And tho Lord shall smite Egypt: he shall 
smite and heal it: and they shall return even to 
the Lord, and he shall be entreated of them, and 
shall heal them. 

23 1i In that day shall there be a highway out 
of Egypt to Assyria," and the Assyrian shall come 
into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria, and 
the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians. 

21 in that day shall Israel be the third with 
Egypt and with Assyria, even a blessing in the 
midst of tlie land : 

25 Whom the Lord of hosts shall bless, saying. 
Blessed be Egypt my people," and Assyria the work 
of my hands,'' and Israel mine inheritance. 



a Gen. -iiilS; Exnd. Sl:l. I> Josh. 4:au. t Mil. 1:11. ■Ich. 11:1(3. 
I Pet. -2:10. (Eph. -2:10. g 2 Kings 18: 17. • Heb. «y jAe/wnd o/. t Heb. 



guaj^e of God's people. Tlie city of dcslructton; doomed 
to destniotion; or, as the margin, "The city of tho sun;" 
tliat is, Hcliopolis, one of the chief cities of Egypt. Tliis 
diffi;ult verse is variously interpreted. Some suppose 
the prophet to mean, that where five cities of Egypt 
shall be convorte.l to the true religion, and thus saved, 
one shall, for its unbelief, bo doomed to destruction ; in 
other words, that five out of six of the Egyptian cities 
shall be converted to the true faith. Others suppose that 
tho five cities include that called "the city of the sun;" 
and those find the fulfilment of the proi)hccy in the set- 
tlement of large colonies of Jews in Egypt before tho 
Christian era. If this latter interpretation be adopted, we 
must not regard the fulfilment before oUr Lord's advent 
as final, but only as an earnest of a higher fulfilment under 
tho Christian dispensation, to which tho prophecy as a 
whole manifestly refers. 

19. An attar to the Lord; an altar for offering sacrifices 
to the Lord. A pillar ; as a memorial of God's interposi- 
tion. Compare (jlen. 28:18; 3;5:11. TIio meaning is, that 
the true God shall bo worsliipped in Egypt. 

20. A saviniir — a great one; tlie Messiah. If human de- 
liverers are included, it is only as ministers under Christ. 

22. Shall smite and heal it ; heal it after he has smitten it. 

23. A his^kway; denoting alliance and peaceful inter- 
course. Tiic Egyptians s'uill serve with tlie Assyrians; both 
nations 8h;dl servo Go 1 together. 

24. The third; tho third i)arty. Egypt and Assyria shall 
be in alliance with each other, and both with Israel, as 
tho third in tho confederacy. Tlie land; tho united land 
of Israel, Egypt, and Assyria. 

25. Whom; tlic united people of these three lands. The 
most prominent of tho gentile powers in Isaiah's day were 
Egypt and Assyria, both of them hostile alike to" God's 
covenant peojile and to each other. Under this pioi>hecy 
of their conversion and union with Israel, is foretold the 
gathering of Jews and Gentiles into the one fold of Christ. 
John 10:10. 

INSTRtTTION-.S. 
1. The favor and protoition of (lod arc tho only real 
bulwarks of a nation. Whin he visitK a peojdo in wrath 
for their sins, all counsels fail before him, and tho stout- 
est hearts melt with terror. 
78G 



CHAPTER XX. 



A type prefiguring the shameful c.aptivit)* of Egypt and Ethiopia. 

IN the year that Tartan came unto Ashdod,* 
(when Sargon tlie king of Assyria sent him,) 
and fought against Aslidod, and took it; 

2 At the same time spake the Lord by ' Isaiah the 
son of Anioz, saying. Go and loose the sackcloth 
from off thy loins, and put ofl' thy shoe from thy 
foot. And he did so, walking naked and bare- 
foot. 

B And the Lord said. Like as my servant Isaiah 
hath walked naked and barefoot three years for 
a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon Ethio- 
pia ; 

4 So shall the king of Assyria lead away the 
Egyptians prisoners,* and the Ethiopians captives, 
young and old, naked and barefoot, even with 
their buttocks uncovered, to the shame* of Egypt. 

5 And they shall be afraid and ashamed of 
Ethiopia their expectation, and of Egypt their 
glory. 

6 And the inhabitant of this isle^ shall say in 
that day. Behold, such is our expectation,'' whither 
we flee for help to be delivered from the king 
of Assyria : and how shall we escape 'I 



2-14. One w.ay in which Godi)unishes nations and com- 
munities for their pcrverseness and rebellion against him 
is by giving them up to discord, confusion, and the infat- 
uation of foolish counsellors. Thus the mightiest empires 
have often been broken in pieces, and have become an 
easy prey to their enemies. 

17. Since it is the counsel of the Lord of hosts that his 
church shall stand firm to the end of time, and triumph 
over all opposition, they who love her may comfort them- 
selves in the darkest hours of adversity with the assur- 
ance that litT enemies shall, in the end, be confounded, 
and led to seek her favor and friendship. 

23-2.5. God has api)ointed the true Israel to be the me- 
diator and bond of union between the nations of the earth. 
The tendency of the gospel is to unite them all in mutual 
friendly intercourse. When tho kingdoms of this world 
shall become the kingdoms of Christ, all war and oppres- 
sion will cease, and tho whole earth be at rest and break 
forth into singing. 

CHAPTER XX. 

1. Tartan; a general that served under both Sargon and 
Sennacherib. 2 Kings 18:17. .Stiig-OH; probably the im- 
mediate successor of Sennacherib. Ashdod ; a strong for- 
tress in riiilistia. It lay on the road to Egypt, and its 
capture opened the way for an attack on that country. 

2. Sackcloth ; jirobably a coarse garment which was worn 
as a badge of tho prophetic ofiice. Zech. 13:4. Naked; 
that is, comparatively naked, without his garnientof sack- 
cloth and shoes. John 21:7. This was a sign of the con- 
dition in which the Egyptian and Ethiopian captives 
should be led away. Ver. 4. 

.'"). Thrif ; tho Jews, who are often rebuked for putting 
tlieir trust in Egypt, Chap. 30:2 ; 31: 1 ; 3C:6. 

(). This isle ; or as the margin, " this country," or coast ; 
the Mediterranean coast, which included tho land of Judea. 
Such is our cxpcdation ; such is its issue; it has ended in 
ilisappointment. Whither vc flee for help; that is, from 
E'.;viit, whither wo have fled ibr help. 
IN.'^TIU'CTION. 

The expectations of all who forsake the living God, and 
the way of salvation wliich he has provided, to put their 
trust in man or any thing that man can do, shall end in dis- 
aiipointment and ruin. 



The fall of Babylmi. 



ISAIAH XXI. 



Bnnkn of Seir and Arabia. 



CHAPTER XXI. 



1 The prophet, bewailing the captivity of his people, seeth in a vision 
the fall of Babylon by the Medes and Persians. 11 Edom, scorn- 
ing the prophet, is moved to repentance. 13 The set time of Arabia's 
calamity. 

a^^lTE burden of the desert of the sea. As 
_ whirlwinds in the south pass througli ;" so it 
couietli iVoiu the desert, from a terrible land. 

2 A grievous* vision is declared unto me: The 
treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously,'' and 
tlie spoiler spoiletli. Go up, Elam : besiege, 
Media:" all the sighing thereof have I made to 
cease. 

3 Therefore are my loins filled with pain:'' 
pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of 
a woman that travaileth : I was bowed down at 
the hearing of it; I was dismayed at the seeing 
of it. 

4 My heart panted,* fearfulness affrighted me : 
the night of my pleasure hath he turned* into fear 
unto me.'^ 

5 Prepare the table, watch in the w'atch-tower, 
eat, drink: arise, ye princes, and anoint the shield. 

6 For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Go, set 
a watchman, let him declare what he seeth. 

7 And he saw a chariot udth a couple of horse- 
men, a chariot of asses, a7id a chariot of camels ; 
and he hearkened diligently, witii much heed : 

8 And he cried, A lion:'' My lord, I stand con- 
tinually upon the watch-tower in the daytime,' 
and I am set in mv ward whole nights : ' 



m;h (I.U. •Hfh.haril. l>ch. 3.1:1. c th. 13: 17 ; Jer. 4U:3I. 
t Or, My mintX icandertd. I Heb. put. e Dan. 5:5, etc. 5 C 
(Hib.-J;!. I Or, everynighl. 5 Jer. 51::<, etc. ; Rev. 14:S. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

1. The desert of the sea; an enigmatical name for Babylun, 
probably meaning that the plain of Babylon is destined to 
become what it was before the building of the city, an in- 
undated marsh ; " a possession for the bittern, and pools 
of water." Cliap. 14:23. " The sea," is here the Euphra- 
tes. Wkirlwinih in the south ; the southern desert is men- 
tioned as the region whence violent whirlwinds come. 
From the desert; according to many, the desert mountain- 
ous tract between Persia and Babylon. Or we may ren- 
der, "As whirlwinds in the soutli rush from the desert, 
so it," the calamity, " cometh," etc. 

2. Grievous vision; vision of grievous evil coming upon 
Babylon. The treacherous dealer ; or "the deceiver," that 
is, Cyrus, who took Babylon by stratagem. Elam; Persia. 
Cyrus governed the united empire of Media and Persia. 
Daniel 8:3, 20. The sighing thereof; the sighing which 
Babylon has caused. 

3,4. Are mij loins filled with pain; in these verses the 
jirophet speaks in the name of Babylon. Comijare ver. 4. 
Til e night of my pleasure; theso words were remarkably 
fulfilled in the capture of Babylon during a night of fes- 
tivity. Dan. 5:1, 30. 

ij. Prf/;a)-erteto6/e ,• the words of the Babylonians. They 
set their watch, and then give themselves up to revelling. 
Arise, i/e princes; the cry of alarm wliich comes to the king 
and his nobles at the banquet. Anoint the shield ; to pre- 
pare it for battle. Shields were covered with skins, 
which needed frequent anointings. 

(i. Go, set a watchman; this is represented to the prophet 
in a vision. 

7. And he saw — chariot of camels ; or, "And he saw rid- 
ers, pairs of horsemen, riders of asses, riders of camels." 
These are the invaders of Babylon, seen in vision. 

8. He cried, A lion ; or, as the margin, " as a lion." Com- 
pare Rev. 10:3. 

y. And behold — horsemen; or, as above, "men riding, 



9 And behold, here cometh a chariot of men, 
with a couple of horsemen. And he answered and 
said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen;- and all the 
graven images of her gods he hath broken unto 
the ground.'' 

10 my threshing, and the corn'' of my floor: 
that which I have heard of the Lord of hosts, the 
God of Israel, have I declared unto you.' 

Ill The burden of Dumah.' He calloth to me 
out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night ? Watch- 
man, what of the night? 

12 The watchman said. The morning cometh, 
antl also the night: if ye will inquire, iiit|uireye: 
return, come. 

13 1 The burden upon Arabia. In the forest in 
Arabia shall ye lodge, ye travelling companies 
of Dedanim. 

14 The inhabitants of the land of Tema brought* 
water to him that was thirsty, they prevented 
with their bread him that fled. 

15 For they fled from* the swords,'' from the 
drawn sword, and from the bent bow, and from 
the grievousness of war. 

16 For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Within 
a year, according to the years of a hireling,' and 
all the glory of Kedar shall fail :"' 

17 And the residue of the number of archers,' 
the mighty men of the children of Kedar, shall be 
diminished : for the Lord God of Israel hath spo- 
ken it. 



rM:-i. H Heb. son. i Ezek. 3:17-19; Acts ■.'ll:'>H, •J7, J 1 Chr. 1:31); Jcr. 
41) 7, etc.; Ezek. 3.):a, elc: Obail.l.etc. • Or, bring ije. ^ Or, fm Jmr of : 
Yieh. from Ihe face of . k Job 0: 19, -ill. lJob7;l. mch.OU:?. 1 Heb. ioii'S. 



horsemen in pairs." He aii'swered ; the watchman answered, 
giving the meaning of this vision of an invading army. 

10. 3Iy threshing, and the corn of m y floor ; that is, my 
crushed and afflicted people.- This is Isaiah's address to 
his people anticipating their captivity in Babylon, and 
promising them deliverance from it. 

11. Dumah; by some supposed to be a district in the 
soutli of Edom; by others, Edom itself Seir; the same 
as Edom, a mountainous tract extending south from the 
Dead sea to the eastern arm of tlie Red sea. What of the 
•night ? how much of it is passed? 

12. The morning cometh, and also the night; the morning 
comes to God's people, but the night to their enemies. 
If ye will inquire — come ; the prophet encourages them that 
earnest inquiry, in which repentance is implied, will gain 
for them a comfortable answer. 

13. Arabia; in the restricted sense, including the region 
bordering on the south and east of Palestine, that is, the 
north-western part of the great Arabian peninsula. For- 
est; the Arabs give this name to rugged tracts, such as the 
caravans of Dedan would naturally seek for safety. For- 
ests, in our sense of the word, are not found in Arabia. 
Shall ye lodge; they shall flee to them, from fear of the 
invading enemy. 

14. Tema; this, as well as the Dedanim, was a neighbor- 
ing Arabian tribe. To him that was thirsty; to the thirsty 
fugitives of Arabia. Prevented; met in a friendly way. 

16. Years of a hireling; see note on chapter 111:14. 
Kedar ; a tribe of the desolated region, put here for the 
whole country. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
5. Sinful security is the forerunner of sudden destruc- 
tion to nations, as well as to families and individuals. 

9. The utter and final overthrow of all persecuting pow- 
ers that oppose themselves to the kingdom of heaven is 
written among the counsels of Jehovah ; and at the ap- 
pointed hour he will find abundant means to execute his 
judgments upon them. 

787 



Invasion of Judea. 



ISAIAH XXII. 



The fall nf S/iebna. 



CHAPTER XXII, 



1 The prophet lanienteth the invasion of Jewry hy the Persians. 8 He 
reproveth their human wisdom :ind worhlly joy. 15 He prophesieth 
Shebna's deprivation, 20 and Eliakim, preiiguring the Kingdom of 
Christ, his substitution. 

THE burden of the valley of vision. What ail- 
eth thee now, that thou art wliolly gone up 
to the house-tops?" 

2 Thou that art full of stirs, a tumultuous city, a 
joyous city:'' thy slain men are not slain with the 
sword, nor dead in battle. 

3 All thy rulers are (led together,'' they are 
bound by the archers:* all that are found in thee 
are bound togetlier, lohich have fled from far. 

4 Therefore .'^aid I, Look away from me; I will 
weep bitterly,*'' labor not to comfort me, because 
of the spoiling of the daughter of my people. 

5 For it is a day of trouble, and of treading 
down, and of perplexity by the Lord Gon of hosts 
in the valley of vision, breaking down tiie walls, 
anil of crying to the mountains. 

6 Anil Ehun bare tlie quiver witli chariots of 
men and horsemen,'' and Kir uncovered * the shield. 

7 And it shall come to pass, that thy choicest* 
valleys shall be full of chariots, and the horsemen 
shall set themselves in array at" the gate. 

8 IF And he discovered the covering of Judah, 
and tliou didst look in that day to tlie armor of 
the house of the forest. '^ 

9 Ye have seen also the breaches of the city of 
David, that they are many:"* and ye gathered to- 
gether the waters of the lower pool. 



• Deut.2-J:8. bch..3-2:13. c 2 Kings 25:5, II. • Keb. of the bow. t Heb 
he biltcr in wrefing. i Jer. 4:19; 9:1; Lam. 1:2. e Jcr. •I9::!5. I Heb. 
fnadenaked. i Heh. ihe choice of thi/. t Ot, lowartt. f 1 Kings 7:2; 10: 17. 
(r2Chr. .•)2:4. h Joel 1:13. i Job 1:20; Mic. l:1li. J ch. .'■)G:12. k 2 Kinjs 



10. The threatening.s recorded in God's word against 
the enemies of his people, are all pledges of their deliv- 
erance and salvation. 

12. To those who ask counsel of God in the spirit of 
obedience and faith, he will, in the end, return an answir 
of peace ; but the unbelieving and rebellious shall liave 
no share in the good' which he bestows upon his friends. 

13-17. Neither numbers, nor bodily strength, nor secu- 
rity of position, can secure any jiooplc against the judg- 
ments of God. He sent of old desolation and destruction 
into the rough deserts of Arabia, as well as into the mighty 
cities of Xiueveh and Babylon. 

CITAPTEll XXII. 

1. The valley of vision; Jerusalem, as being surrounded 
by hills higher than itself, and also the i)lace where God in 
a special manner i-evealed himself. If, as is most natural, 
•we assume that this prophecy was uttered in immediate 
connection with that which follows against Sliebna, ver. 
15-25, its date must be jjlaced before Sennacherib's inva- 
nion. See note to ver. 1,5. It may refer not only to that 
invasion, but also to tlie one that followed in Manasseh's 
day, 2 Chron. 3H:11. Gone up to the hoiuse-tops ; to make 
observation, as was customary in the case of sudden 
alarms. The roofs of oriental cities arc nearly flat. 

2. Thou that art full ; that is, customarily. Not uliiiii 
with the sword — dead in battle; they perish from famine and 
pestilence accompanying the siege. 

3. hound; taken captive and bound. 

5. Crijing to the mounlnins; the cry of distress resound- 
ing to the neighboring mountains. 

6. Elam; Persia. Kir; the modern Georgia, lying be- 
tween the Black and the Caspian seas. These two coun- 
tries are named as sniijcct to the king of Assyria and fur- 
nishing troops for his service. 

7. Studl be full of chariots — at the gate; this ma v have been 

788 



10 And ye have numbered the houses of ^ '.'-^'m 
Jerusalem, and tlie houses have ye broken 712. 
down to fortify the wall. 

11 Ye made also a ditch between the two walls 
for the water of the old pool: but ye have not 
looked unto the maker thereof, neither had re- 
spect unto him that fashioned it long ago. 

12 And in that day did the Lord God of hosts 
call to weeping, and to mourning.'' and to bald- 
ness,' and to girding with sackcloth: 

13 And bcliold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, 
and killing slieep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: 
let us eat and drink ;^ for to-morrow we shall die. 

14 And it was revealed in mine ears by the 
Lord of hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not be 
purged from you till ye die, saith the Lord God 
of iiosts. 

15 11 Thus saith the Lord GOD of hosts. Go, 
get thee unto this treasurer, even unto Sliebna,'' 
which is over the house, and say, 

16 What hast thou here, and whom hast thou 
here, that thou hast hewed thee out a sepulchre 
here, as he'' that heweth him out a sepulchre on 
high, and that graveth a habitation for himself in 
a rock? 

17 Behold, the Lord will carry thee away with 
a mighty captivity," and will surely* cover thee. 

IS He will surely violently turn and toss thee 
like a ball into a large country :* there slialt thou 
die, and there thechariotsof thy glory s/ia//6e the 
shame of thy lord's house. 



18:37. lOr, OAe. • \ie\i, the mptivity of a man. 1 Ot, who covered the: 
with an exrellrnt covering^ and clothed thee gorgeously, shall surely; ver. 18 
I Heb. land large of spaces. 



in Sennacherib's day, or when the king of Assyria took 
.Manasseh captive and carried him to Babylon. 2 Chron. 
33:11. 

8. i/erf/,«offrf(i,- literally, "he uncovered." The covering 
of Judah ; her defences. Thou didst look; the king with 
liis princes. The house of the forest ; " the house of the for- 
est of Lebanon," built by Solomon, 1 Kings 7:2, and used 
as an armory. 1 Kings 10: 17. 

9. Seen aho; examined, for the purpose of repairing. 
Gathered together the waters; to cut them off from the ene- 
my. 2 Chron. 32 : 3, 4. The lower pool; lying in the valley 
of niniiom, south-west of Zion. 

11. A ditch; rather, "a reservoir." This was to shutofiF 
the water from the enemy. The old pool ; the upper pool 
of Gilion, lying west of the city, towards the head of the 
valley of Hinnom. The maker thereof — Ami that fashioned 
it ; that is, God, who of old ordained this calamity. Chap. 
37:2G. 

12. Baldness; the shaving of the hair as a sign of grief. 

13. Let lis cat and drink ; for to-morrow m shall die ; the 
words of the besieged, hardening themselves in carnal 
mirth against the approaching calamity. 

14. Purged from i/ou; expiated and forgiven. 

1,"). Slieima ; in the account of Sennacherib's invasion, 
we find Shebna already superseded by Eliakim, as " over 
the house." Isa. 36:;V; 2 Kings IS: IS," 37, etc. Hence this 
prophecy must have been uttered before that invasion. 
Ovirthe house; over the king's household. 

16. What hast thou — whom /»;,«/ thou; what right — wiiat 
man of thy kindred? The prophet reminds Shibna that 
he has no right to a sepulchre at Jerusalem, antl that his 
vanity shall be punished by disgrace and exile. The an- 
cients expended largo sums upon their seiiulchres, which 
were generally hewn out of rocks. 

15. The shame of Ihy lord's house; or, " thou shame of thy 
lord's house." 



Call of Eliakim. 



ISAIAH XXIII. 



The overthrow of Tyre. 



A. M 3202. 19 And I will drive tlicc from tliy station, 

B. t'. about ,- lilt 1111 

T12- and troni tliy state shall he pull thee down. 

20 T And it shall come to pass in that day, that 
I will call my servant Eliakim the sou of Hil- 
kiahr' 

21 And I will clothe him with thy robe, and 
strengthen him with thy girdle, and I will com- 
mit thy government into his hand : and he shall 
be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to 
the house of Judah. 

22 And the key of the house of David will I lay 
upon his shoulder;'' so he shall open, and none 
shall shut: and he shall shut, and none shall open." 

23 And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure 
place;'' and he shall be for a glorious throne to 
his father's house. 

2-1 And they shall hang upon him all the glory 
of his father's house, the ofi'spring and the issue, 
all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of 
cups, even to all the vessels of flagons." 

25 In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, shall 
the nail that is fastened in the sure place bo re- 
moved, and be cut down, and fall ; and the bur- 
den that iL-as upon it shall be cut ofi': for the Lord 
hath spoken it. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

1 The miserable overthrow of Tyre. 17 Their unhappy return. 

r-pHE burden of Tyre.<- Howl, ye ships of Tar- 
J_ shish ; for it is laid waste, so that there is no 



aKiiigs 1S:IS. b ch. 0:0. c J„b I-J:14 ; Rev. 3: 7. d Ezra 9:S. "Or, 
MunKnts of viols, ejtr ■io.ii; 47:4; Ezek.ch. 2G-28; Amosl:9, 1U; Zecli. 
i-t. f ver. 12; Jer. U:!!!. t Heb. 5;7e«(. Ech.lU:10. I Hcb./rom n/ar 



21. 77(1/ robe; the robe of office. 

22. Key; here used as a symbol of authority. Sliall 
open — none shall shut; shall have uncontrolled power. 

23. Fasten him — in a sure place; firmly fix him in his 
station. A filorions throne ; a seat where all the member.^ 
of his father's family may find honorable repose. 

24. They shall hang upon him; he shall support them, as 
a nail or pin supports the vessel hung upon it. The off- 
spring and the istuc ; tiie nol.ile and tlie base of his family, 
who are compared, in the remainder of the verse, to ves- 
sels of difi'erent sorts and sizes. 

25. The nail that is fastened ; that is, Shebna, who is now 
as a nail fastened. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. Special reli,a;ious privileges lay men under corre- 
sponding obligations to holiness, and the abuse of them 
will be punished witli exemplary severity. 

4. Good men bitterly grieve over the calamities which 
befall God's people. 

II. All outward means should be used in humble de- 
pendence upon God. When forgetting him, we give to 
these our chief confidence, we dishonor liis almighty power 
and supremacy, and he will make us feel that vain is the 
help of man. 

12-1-1. When God's judgments, instead of bringing men 
to repentance, become the occasion of their hardening 
themselves in sin, they are reprobate, and their destruc- 
tion is at hand. 

1()-19. All ostentation is offensive to God, but that which 
respects the resting-place of our ashes is in a peculiar 
degree foolish and wicked. They who indulge themselves 
in such vanity, may expect an ignominious instead of an 
honorable end. 

20-23. God will, in his own time and way, advance his 
humble and faithful servants to places of trust and honor, 
80 far as he shall see it to be for their own welfare and that 
of his people. 



house, no entering in : from the land of Chittim it 
is revealed to them.' 

2 Be still,* yc inhabitants of the isle ; thou whom 
the merchants of Zidon, that pass over the sea, 
have replenished. 

3 And by great waters the seed of Sihor, the 
harvest of the river,' is her revenue ; and she is a 
mart of nations. 

4 Be thou ashamed, Zidon : for the sea hath 
spoken, even the strength of the sea, saying. I trav- 
ail not, nor bring forth children, neither do I 
nourish up young men, 7ior bring up virgins. 

5 As at the report concerning Egypt," so shall 
they be sorely pained at the report of Tyre. 

G Pass ye over to Tarshish ; howl, ye inhabit- 
ants of the isle. 

7 Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity is of 
ancient days? her own feet shall carry her afar 
ofi* to sojourn. 

8 Who liath taken this coimsel against Tyre, the 
crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose 
traffickers are the honorable of the earth'? 

y The Lord of hosts hath purposed it, to stain^ 
the pride of all glory, a?id to bring into contempt 
all the honorable of the earth." 

10 Pass through thy land as a river, daughter 
of Tarshish: there is no more strength.' 

11 He stretched out his hand over the sea, he 
shook the kingdoms : the Lord hath given a com- 
mandment against the merchant citi/,'^ to destroy 
the strong-holds" thereof. 



off. i Heh. poltule. h 1 Cor. 1:28, 29. I Ueh. girille. 1 Or, 
merchantman ; Heb. Canaan. ' Heb. strengths. 



24. When a righteous man is prospered and honored he 
becomes a stay and support, not only to tlie good gener- 
ally, but in a sijecial sense to those of his own household. 

CHAPTER XXIIL 

1. Ti/re; the capital city of Phcenicia, and a celebrated 
emporium of trade. It lay on a rocky island about half a 
mile from the coast of the Mcdilerranciin. Tarshish; a 
celebrated commercial city and ri;.;i(iii,,uiiierally supposed 
to have been situated in the suiitii nl f^iiain, north-west of 
the straits of Gibraltar. It was a colony of Phoenicia. The 
land of Chittim ; Cyprus ; but " the land of Chittim " seems 
to have been used as an indefinite expression for the 
islands and coasts of the Mediterranean lying west of 
Palestine. It is revealed to them ; the desolation of Tyre 
revealed to the ships of Tarshish on their homeward 
voyage. 

2. Still; dumVi from amazement and grief. The isle; 
according to some. Tyre itself; according to others, the 
western coast of the Mediterranean with its islands, which 
had been enriched by the trade of Tyre. 

3. The seed of Sihor, the harvest of the river; " Sihor " and 
" the river " are both names for the Nile ; and the " seed " 
and " harvest" are the produce of Egypt, occasioned by its 
fertilizing waters. 

4. The sea — the strength of the sea ; the strong-hold of 
Tyre, lying in the sea. I travail not, nor — bring up virgins; 
she represents herself as childless, that is, desolate. 

5. Concerning Egypt ; when God overthrew Egyjit before 
Israel. 

6. Pass ije over ; in flight from the enemy. 

8. The crowning city; the city that dispensed crowns to 
the rulers of her colonies. 

10. As a river; freely, without constraint. Strength; 
literally, '-girdle," that is, band of authority, by which 
Tarshish was kept in subjection to Tyre. 

11. He; Jehovah. 

789 



Ti/re judi^ed and restored. 



IS AT All XXIV. 



Sore judi^m^nls of God. 



12 And he said, TIiou shalt no more rejoice," 
thou oppressed virgin, daugiitcr of Zidon : arise, 
pass over to Chittim;'' there also shalt thou have 
no rest. 

13 Behold the land of the Chaldeans; this peo- 
ple was not, till the Assyrian founded it for them 
tiiat dwell in the wilderness :"= tlioy sot up tlie 
towers thereof, tliey raised up the palaces thereof; 
and lie brought it to ruin. 

14 Howl, ye ships of Tarshish: for your strengtli 
is laid waste. 

15 And it sliall come to pass in that day, tliat 
Tyro shall be forgotten seventy years, according 
to the days of one king: after the end of seventy 
years shall Tyre sing as* a harlot. 

16 Take a harp, go about the city, thou harlot 
that liast been forgotten ; make sweet melody, 
sing many songs, tluit thou mayestbe rememberi'd. 

17 •[ And it sliall come to pass after tlic end of 
seventy years, that the Lord will visit Tyre, and 
she shall turn to her hire, and shall commit for- 
nication with all tlio kingdoms of tlie world upon 
tlie face of tlie earth.'' 

18 And her merchandise and her hire shall be 
holiness to the Lord:'' it shall not be treasured 
nor laid up ; for her merchandise shall be for 
them that dwell before the Lord, to eat suffi- 
ciently, and for durable* clothing. 

CHAPTER XXI Y. 

1 The doleful judgments of God upon tlie land. 13 A remnant shall 
joyfully praise him. 10 God in his judgments shall advance his kmg- 

^EIIOLD, the Lord niaketh the eartli empty, 
3 and makcth it waste, and turneth it upside 



I 



• Rev. lS:3-2. b ver. 1. « I'si. 7v!:!). • lUh. it slutU be vnto Tyre as the 
song of. J R-v. 17:-J. e Zcch. 14:^0,21. t Heb. oW. I \Wh. prrvtruik 
the fate thereof . » Or, priVf; Gen, 41:45. ' Hos. 4:9. S Kph. Ii:s, U. 



12. Arise, pass over to ChiUim ; in flight from the enemy. 
See note, verse 1. 

13. This people ; the Chaldeans, here named as the nation 
wliich God employed to destroy Tyre. Tliis city was 
taken by tlie (Jlialdoan monarch Nebuchadnezzar, after a 
severe siege, E/ck. 20:18. Founded it; the Chaldean land. 
For them lltat dwell in the wilder7iess; the -Assyrians seem 
to have planted a colony of rude mountaineers in the plain 
of Babylon, who afterwards made themselves masters of 
the whole region and foundeil the Chaldean empire. Set 
up the lowers — raised vp the palaces thereof; some refer these 
words to liabylon, others to Tyre. The latter render the 
clause thus: "they," the Chaldeans, " have set up their" 
besieging '• towers ;" " they have made naked her palaces." 
He hroii;rht it; the Chaldeans brought Tyre. 

15. Aci:ordin<r to the daijs of one king; the days of his 
natural life, I'.sa. 90:11); here taken as a measure of the 
duration of the Babylonian kingdom till its overthrow by 
Cyrus. Compare .ler. 25: 11, 12. Shalt Tyre sing as a har- 
lot; because she is resliircd to her former jirosperity. 
The commerce of Tyre with the nations is represented in 
this and the following verses under the figure of harlotry. 

18. Holiness to the Lord; the Lord will make her gains 
subservient to the welfare of his own people. Laid up ; 
without use, as a hoarded treasure. 

INKTItrCTION.S. 
8. AV'hen God intrusl.s to men princely wealth, ho re- 
quires them to use it in his fear and to his glory. If they 
makn it the minister of lu.Kury anil ostentation, he will 
eithtr take it from them, as he did from the merchants of 
Tyre, or in other ways make it a curse to them instead of 
a blessing. 

190 



down,* and scattcreth abroad the inhabi- a.m. 3291 
tants thereoi. T12. 

2 And it shall be, as with the people, so with 
the priest;^' as with the servant, so with his mas- 
ter;'-' as with the maid, so with her mistress; as 
witli the buyer, so with the seller; as with the 
lender, so with the borrower; as with the taker 
of usury, so with the giver of usury to him. 

3 The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly 
spoiled: for the Lord hath spoken this word. 

•1 Tlie earth mourneth and fadcth away, the 
world languisheth and fadcth away, the haughty' 
people of the earth do languish. 

5 The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants 
thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, 
changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting 
covenant." 

() Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth,' 
and they that dwell therein are desolate: there- 
fore the inhabitants of the earth are ljurned,J and 
few men left. 

7 The new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth,'' 
all the merry-hearted do sigh. 

8 The mirth of tabrets ceaseth,' the noise of 
them that rejoice endeth, the joy of the harp 
ceaseth. 

'J They .shall not drink wine with a song; strong 
drink shall be bitter to them that drink it. 

10 The city of confusion is broken down: every 
house is shut up, that no man may come in. 

11 There is a crying for wine in the streets; all 
joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone. 

12 In the city is left desolation," and the gate is 
smitten with destruction." 

13 II Wlicn thus it shall be in the midst of the 



llieb. height of the. h Gen. 3:17; Num. .■r>::i3, i Mai. 4:6. J-JPel.3:lU. 
k ch. 16:^, U; Joel 1:10, I'J. 1 Jer. 7:34; Hos. 2:11 ; Rev. IS:22. ■» Lun. 
1:1. n Lam. 2:9. 



9. The tendency of long-continued success is to nourish 
the spirit of pride and self-sufticiency. Thus the prosper- 
ity of cities and nations is often the occasion of lifting 
them up to their destruction. 

13. God has often raised a feeble and despised people 
to power and dominion, and made it the minister of his 
vengeance upon wicked nations. 

is. The wealth of all nations is the Lord's; and he will, 
in one way or another, make it subservient to tlie advancc- 
ineiit of his kingdom among men. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

This chapter is intimately connected with the three fol- 
lowing. Though it relates to God's covenant people, 
verse 5, its application should not be restricted to the 
literal Israel. In the desolations which God brought upon 
his chosen people for their sins, it had only its incipient 
fulfilment. It covers all the judgments by which he puri- 
ties his church from sin. and thus prepares the way for 
her future enlargement and peace, as foretold in the suc- 
ceeding chapters. 

I. The earth; or the land, hero the kind of Palestine, as 
the residence of God's covenant people. Compare ver. 5. 

5. Changed the ordinance; violated the ordinance of f!od. 
The civrlasting covenant ; the covenant made with Abraham 
and his seed for ever. Gen. 17:7. 

1(1. The citij of confusion ; or, "of emptiness;" that is, 
.lerusalein, so called because she is to be made desolate. 

II. Crying for vine; on account of the failure of wiiio. 
The failure of wine represents a general famine. 

13. As the shaking of an nlire-trce — the gleaning grapes; 
that is, a small remnant. Compare chap. 17:5, 6. 



Dreadful judgments from 



ISAIAH XXV. 



God upon I lie land. 



A M .1292. land among the jicople, there shall be as the 
71-'.'" " shaking- of an olive-tree, 0?!^ as the glean- 
ing grapes when tlie vintage is done." 

14 Tliey shall lift up tiieir voice,'' they sliall sing 
for tlie majesty of tlie Lord, they sliall cry aloud 
from the sea. 

15 Wlierefore glorify ye the Lord in tlie fires,*'' 
even tlie name of the Lord God of Israel in tlie 
isles of the sea.'* 

16 1 From the uttermost part* of tlie earth liave 
we heard songs, even glory to the righteous. But 
I said, My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me!* 
the treaclierous dealers have dealt treacherously; 
yea, the treacherous dealers have dealt very treach- 
erously.' 

17 Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon 
thee, inhabitant of the earth.'' 

18 And it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth 
from the noise of the fear sliall fall into the pit ; 
and he that cometh up out of the midst of the pit 
shall be taken in the snare: for the windows from 
on high are open,^ and the foundations of the earth 
do shake.'' 

19 The earth is utterly broken down, the earth 
is clean dissolved, the eartli is moved exceedingly.' 

20 The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunk- 
ard,^ and shall be removed like a cottage;'^ and 
the transgression thereof sliall be heavy upon it;' 
and it shall fall, and not rise again. 

21 And it shall come to pass in that day, that 



« rh. 8:l.Si 17:.),S: Mio. a:l-.>. b Zeph -J: 14, 15. • Or, vatleyR. clPel. 
31.5 dZeph. 2:11. WUh.toing. I Heh. Leaimfss to me ; or, Mij secret I o 
me. ech. 4S:8; Jcr. .1:11. f Jer. 4d;4:), 44. rGen. 7:11. Ii I'sa. 1^:7. 
i.lcr. 4:->3. jch. 10:14. kRev.ai:!. 1 Zech. 5:5--,. ilieh. visit upon. 



14. They; this remnant that is If ft, after God's judg- 
ments. 

15. The fires; or, "the sunrisings," that is, the east, as 
opposed to " the isles of the sea," in the west. The rem- 
nant of God's people are called upon to praise him from 
the different regions of their abode, because the mighty 
judgments described in this chapter are preparing the 
way fur tlieir redemption. 

1(!. We heard wngs; the songs of the ransomed remnant. 
Mil Uviinesi; tlie words of Jerusalem, contrasting her des- 
olate condition with this "glory to the righteous." Then 
follows a new picture of her desolateness, with new threat- 
enings of God's judgments. 

18. The windoifs from on high ; as at the deluge, to pour 
down God's wrath. 

20. Removed; literally, "shaken," made to swing to and 
fro. 

21. The host of the high ones — kings of the earth; all the 
host of heaven in a figurative sense ; wicked powers, that 
abuse the authority which God has intrusted to them for 
the good of his church. 

22. Visited ; having been for " many days " humbled on 
account of their sins, they shall be again visited in raercj'. 
This promise is fultilled, not to them personally, but to 
tlieir successors in office. The honor and authority con- 
ferred upon Ezra, Nehemiah. Zcrul>li;ilM.l. miil others, after 
the captivity, were only an eani'st mI its ■ f,iii|i|, te accom- 
plishment inClirist,and those whum he iippuints to admin- 
ister the affairs of his kingdom iu his name. Compare 
chap. t;0:17. 

23. Confoumh'd — ashamed; their splendor shall be lost 
in the glory of God on mount Zion. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-12. God has many times brought upon his people for 

their sins such desolations as seemed to threaten their 

utter destruction. But these have all been overruled for 

the purification and enlargement of the true Zion. Thus 



the Lord shall punish^ the host of the high ones 
that are on high, and the kings of the earth upon 
the earth.'" 

22 And they shall be gatliered together, as pris- 
oners are gathered" in the pit,*" and shall be shut 
up in the iirison, and after many days shall they 
be visited.* 

23 Then the moon shall be confounded, and the 
sun asiiamed," when the Lord oi' ho,-ts shall reign 
in mount Zion, and iu Jerusalem, and before liis 
ancients gloriously.* 

CHAPTER XXV. 



1 judgments, 6 for his saving benefits, 
ctorious salvation. 



1 The prophet pr.aiseth Gin\ foi 
9 and for hi 

OLORD, thou art my God ; I will exalt thee,° 
I will praise thy name; for thou hast done 
wonderful things; thy counsels of old a?-e faithful- 
ness and truth.'' 

2 For thou hast made of a city a heap ; o/" a de- 
fenced city a ruin:'' a palace of strangers to be 
no city ; it shall never be built. 

3 Therefore shall tlie strong people glorify thee, 
the city of the terrible nations sliall fear thee."' 

4 For thou hast been a strength to the poor, a 
strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from 
the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast 
of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall. 

5 Thou shalt bring down the noise of strangers. 



m Psa. 7li: 12 I Heb- wilh llie gathering of prisoners. H Or, diinge^ 
founfl imnting. o EzpIc. 32:7. t (Jr. there shall be giory be for 
cieius. oPsa.46:lU. PNum. 23:19. qjer.61:37. rRev. U:iJ. 



she has been from age to age steadily advancing, through 
fiery trials, towards that permanent peace and prosperity 
which av.'aits her in the latter-day glory. 

13-15. The terrible judgments which consume hypo- 
crites and sinners in Zion, bring salvation to "tlie Israel 
of God." 

18. How vain are all the efforts of wicked men to escape 
God's righteous judgments. When they fiee from one 
calamity, he can easily plunge them into another and a 
deeper ; and if they persist in impenitence, they must fall 
at last into the bottomless pit, whence they shall not rise 
again for ever. 

21, 22. When men persist in abusing the power which 
God has intrusted to them for the good of his church, he 
will take from them their authority and give it to others. 
So he dealt wilh the Jewish rulers at the Babylonian cap- 
tivity, and at our Lord's advent; and so he wUl continue 
to deal in all ages. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

1. / will exalt thee ; the prophet, in the name of the true 
Israel, praises God for the glorious issue of his judgments 
recorded in the preceding chapter. 

2. A cdi/; Babylon, in the primary application of the 
words, 'ihis city represents here, as often elsewhere, 
every great persecuting power. Strangers; foreigners 
and heathen. 

3. Therefore ; in view of thy judgments on Babylon. 
City of the terrible nations; a metropolis, like Nineveh, 
Babylon, or Rome, that rules over terrible nations. 

4. A shadow from the heat; in the burning desert, where 
such a shadow is rarely found. Chap. 4:6; 32:2. The 
blast of the terr i tile ones; an invasion of fierce enemies, com- 
pared to a violent storm. 

5. Bring down; make quiet. The noise of strangers; 
their battfe-shout. The branch ; the power of the enemy, 
compared, as in chap. 10:33, to a stately bough; but we 
nun' better render, " the song." 

191 



JcAovah praised for 



ISAIAH XXVI. 



as the heat in a dry place; even the heat with the 
sliadow of a cloud: the branch of the terrible 
ones shall be brou<rlit low. 

G 1 And in tliis mountain shall the Lord of 
hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things," 
a feast of wines on the lees," of fat tilings full of 
marrow, of wines on the lees well relined." 

7 And he will destroy' in this mountain tlie face 
of the covering cast^ over all people, and the veil 
that is S])read over all nations.'' 

8 He will swallow up death in victory f and the 
Lord God will wi|)o away tears from oil" all faces;' 
and the rebuke of his peoi)le shall he take away 
from off all the earth:" for the Lord hath spo- 
ken it. 

9 1 And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this m 
our God; we have waited for him, and he will 
save us: this is the Lord; wc have waite<l for 
him, we will be glad, and rejoice in his salva- 
tion." 

10 For in this mountain shall the hand of the 
Loud rest, and Moab shall be trodden down' 
under him, even as straw is trodden down for the 
dunghill.^ 

11 And he shall spread forth his hands in the 
midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreadeth 
forth his hands to swim : and he shall bring down 
their pride together with the spoils of their hands. 

12 And the fortress of the high fort of thy walls 
shall he bring down, lay low, and bring to the 
ground, even to the dust. 



a Matt. 2"^: 2. etc. b Song 5: 1, cch. 2:2. 3. ' Heh. sutaliow up. t Heb. 
covtTtd. il2Cor. 3:10, IS. e Hos. 13:14 ; 1 Cor. 15:.54. fRcv.21:4. e Mai. 
3:17, \8. >i Tit. 2:l:i. I Heb. thrtshrd. » Or, thrtshid in Madmrnnk. 
> P»a. 31:21. i ch. 60:18. k Psa. 11S:1!). I Heb. truths. 1 Heb. peart, 



6-8. This mountain; Zion, which here represents the 
chmeli of Christ. Wines on the Ices ; wines tliat liave been 
left to stand on their lees have a richer flavor. Face of the 
covering ; the veil of ignorance with its attendant sin and 
wretchedness. In victory; literally, "for ever." Rebuke 
of his people ; to which his people have been subject. The 
swallowing up of death is its abolition in the widest sense. 
The prophet's vision extends not only into, but beyond 
the era of millennial glory. lie has a view of the final 
issue of Christ's i-cdeniption in this world and in eternity. 

10. The hand (f the Lnal; his ciiinipnleiit power. Moah ; 
namedasaprouiiiiciit eiu-iiiy of Cod's piMiple in the proph- 
et's day, representing every hostili; power. 

11. He simll spread forth his hands in the midst of them ; 
Jehovah, to execute vengeance upon his enemies. As he 
that swimmeth ; widely and on all sides. Spoils ; or " plots." 

12. Thy walls; Moab's walls. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. All God's counsels towards his covenant people are 
" faithfulness and truth." It is only the narrowness of 
our vision that prevents our discerning his loving-kind- 
ness in the discipline to which he subjects his church, as 
well as in the deliverance and enlargement which he from 
time to time vouchsafes to her. 

2. Tlic efforts of mighty principalities and powers to 
destroy Cod's kingdom, end in their own utter and final 
overthrow. 

3. God will inflict upon the persecutors of his people 
such terrible judgments as shall compel all nations to fear 
him and acknowledge his almighty power. Exod. S:16; 
Rev. 11:13. 

4. In all times of distress Cod is a sure refuge to his 
people. Under the shadow of his protection, they can 
pass unharmed through the burning desert of affliction 
and persecution. 

792 



fiis saving jiidgmeyits. 

CHAPTER XXVI. n.c^^^l 

1 A song, irciting to confidence in '.rod, .5 for his jud^pnents, \2 and for 
his favor to his people. 20 An exhort.itlon to wait on God, 

XN that day shall this song be sung in the land 
of Jiidah: We have a strong city;' salvation 
will God ap])ointybr walls and bulwarks.' 

2 0])en ye the gates," that the righteous nation 
which keepcth the truth' may enter in. 

3 Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace,^' who.9e 
mind* is stayed on thee: because he trusteth in 
thee. 

4 Trust ye in the Lord for ever:"" for in the 
Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting strength.* 

5 1 For he bringeth down them that dwell on 
high; the lofty city, he layeth it low; he layeth 
it low, even to the ground; he bringeth it even to 
the dust. 

G The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of 
the ]ioor, and the steps of the needy." 

7 The way of the just is uprightness:" thou, 
most upright, dost weigh the path of the just.'' 

8 Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, 
have we waited for thee :'' tiie ilcsire of our soul ts 
to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.'' 

y With my soul have 1 desired thee in the 
night;' yea, with my spirit within me will I seek 
thee early : for when thy judgments are in the 
earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness.' 

10 Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will 
he not learn righteousness:" in the land of up- 



prart. 1 I'hil. 4:7. * Or, tliougkt, or imagination. ■» Psa. 62:8; 125:1. 
t Heh. the rork of ages, n Mai. 4:3. "Kph. 2.J11. P !>«. 37:23. q ch. 
61:4,5. rPsa. 63:1, 6. • Song 3:1. t Psa. 5S:11. " Eccl. S.ll ; Re». 
2:21. 



6. The power of the gospel to bless men passes all 
human comprehension. It fills the heart that receives it 
with light and peace and joy ; it makes every nation that 
obeys it prosperous and happy ; it will one day unite all 
the families of the earth in harmony and blessedness. 

7. The covenant made with Abraham was from the 
beginning designed to bless all nations ; and this design 
Christ will gloriously accomplish. He will make the liglit 
of his gospel sliine from mount Zion into every land, till 
the earth is filled with the knowledge of the iLrd as the 
waters cover the sea. Chap. 11:9. 

8. In the coming millennial age, a more glorious order 
of society a^vaits the world than our diirkcned understand- 
ings are able to conceive of; and this will be but an ear- 
nest of the perfect redemption of heaven, where (iod will 
in the fullest sense of the words swallow up death for 
ever, and wipe away tears from off all faces. 

10. The day is coming when the persecutors of God's 
church, who were once so terrible to her, shall be known 
and remembered only by the record of the judgments 
which have destroyed them. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

1. In that day; in the day referretl tn at the close of the 
preceding chapter. A .itron^ city; Zion, in contrast with 
the fortress of the enemy that has been destroyed. 

2. The sales; of this strong city. 

K. In the way tf thy judgments; God's judgments are 
here, as in the following verso, the judgments by which 
he destroys his enemies and saves liis own i)eople. To 
wait for him in the waj' of these judgments, is to wait in 
earnest expectation and prayer for tlieir manifcstiition, 
Kiiice thus the "inhabitants of the world will learn right- 
euusness." 

!i. Have I desired thee; desired thee to Dianifest tliysolf 
in thy judgments. 



A sons inciting to 



ISAIxVH XXVII. 



confidence in God. 



A. M. 32<i2. riglitness will lie deal unjustly,''' and will 
B.i,.^,.boui ^^^ behold the majesty oi' the Lord." 

11 Lord, when tiiy hand is lifted uji, tlicy will 
not see:*^ but they shall see," and be ashamed for 
their euvy at the' people; yea, the fire of thine 
enemies shall devour tiiem/' 

12 Lord, thou wilt ordain peace for us:'' for 
thou also hast wrought all our works in^ us. 

IH Lord our God, other lords l)esidcs thee 
have had dominion over us ;''' but by thee only will 
we make mention of thy name.'" 

1-1 They are dead, they shall not live; they are 
deceased, they shall not rise : therefore liast thou 
visited and destroyed them, and made all their 
memory to perish. 

1.5 Thou hast increased the nation, Lord, 
tiiou hast increased the nation ; thou art glori- 
fied : thou hadst removed it far unto all the ends 
of the earth. 

10 Lord, in trouble have they visited thee;' 
they poured out a prayer* when thy chastening 
was upon them. 

17 Like as a woman with child, that draweth 
near tlie time of her delivery, is in pain, and cri- 
eth out in her pangs; so have we been in thy 
sight, Lord. 

18 We have been with child, we have been in 
pain, we have as it were brought forth wind ; we 



" Eccl 3:16. b ch. 2:10. c Jer. 5:.3. i Rev. 1; 
e Dia. :):±J, 2-5. f ver. 3. 1 Or, for. e -JChr. -2^:5. 0; 
71 ; 15, 111. i Hos. 5: 1-5. I Heb. se(re[ speech, J Dan 



* Or. townrtl thy. 
n. 6: 16-lM. h Psa, 
2. k Judc 14, 13. 



11. The fire of thine enemies; the fire with which thou 
coiisiiniest thine enemies. 

12. In tw; rather, as the margin, "for us;" tliou hast 
heh"ied us, and given us success in all our works. The 
prophet teaches that salvation is from (Jod's hand. 

13. Other lords; the heathen rulers, with the additional 
idea, that they have also worshipped their fitlse gods. Bij 
thee only; by calling upon thee alone. Make mention; in 
the way of divine worship. 

14. TVifi/ ore rfead; the " other lords." Ver. 13. 

15. The nation ; Israel. Thou hadst removed — the ends of 
the earth; many prefer to render, "thou hast removed far 
off all the bounds of the land," that is, enlarged it on every 
side. 

18. Brought forth mind — not wrought any deliverance; 
God's people confess the vanity of all their endeavors to 
save themselves. Inhabitants of the world; the gentile 
nations that have oppressed us. 

13. Thy dead; the dead of God's people. The life-giv- 
ing power of Jehovah is now set in strong contrast with 
the impotence of man. Toi^ether with my dead body shall 
they arise ; or, " my dead bodies shall arise," God's people 
being the speaker. Thy dew; the dew, that is, the quick- 
ening power that descends upon God's people. Is as the 
dew of herbs; has, like the dew falling on herbs, a life-giv- 
ing power. 

iSoriie understand this verse of a spiritual resurrection, 
compare Ezek. 37:1-14; others, of the resurrection of the 
body, and this seems to have been the interpretation of 
the ancient Jews. We may reasonably believe that the 
Spirit of prophecy intended to give here an intimation of 
this great doctrine, which contains in itself the pledge of 
all needful previous help and deliverance. 

20, 21. Come, my people — untd the indignation be overpast — 
the Lard cometh out of his place; the prophet intimates that 
a season of affliction must first be passed through, while 
(Jod is executing his judgments upon tlie t-artli. From 
these he exhorts the people of God to liidr tln-iiiselves in 
their chambers, by a submissive and patient waiting upon 
him in faith and obedience. 



have not wrought any deliverance in the earth; 
neither have the inhabitants of tiie world fallen. 

19 Thy dead men shall live, to'^ether with my 
dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye 
that dwell in dust:-" for tliy dew is as the dew of 
herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. 

20 IT Come, my people, enter thou into thy cham- 
bers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide tliyself 
as it were ibr a little moment, until the indigna- 
tion bo overpast. 

21 For behold, the Lord cometh out of his place 
to punish the iuiiabitants of the eartii for their 
iniquity -.^ the eartli also shall disclose her blood,^ 
and shall no more cover her slain. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

1 The care of God over his vineyard. 7 His chastisements differ from 
judgments. 1*2 The church of Jews and Gentiles. 

IN that day the Lord with his sore and great 
and strong sword shall punish leviatiian the 
piercing serpent," even leviatiian that crooked 
serpent;' and he shall slay the dragon that is in 
the sea. 

2 In that day sing ye unto her, A vineyard of 
red wine."' 

3 I the Lord do keep it;" I will water it every 
moment: lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and 
day. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The same almighty power which overthrows the ene- 
mies of Zion, is to her an impregnable bulwark of defence. 

3. True faith in God brings assurance and peace to the 
soul in all circumstances of prosperity or adversity. 

6. The poor and needy who put their trust in God shall 
eventually triumph over theirpersecutors, however mighty 
the power which they array against them. 

10, 11. So incorrigifile is the human heart, that God often 
sees it needful to employ many and sore judgments, with 
the power of his Spirit, to bring it to consideration and 
repentance. 

12-15. If God's people cleave to him in faith and pa- 
tience, he will in due time destroy their foes, and make 
even their memory to perish from among men. 

16. It is a most blessed fruit of (iod's chastening hand, 
that it makes his children more frequent and earnest in 
their visits to his mercy-seat, and thus brings them into 
nearer communion with him. 

18. God sometimes leaves his people for a season to the 
s]iirit of self-reliance, that they may learn how vain are 
all efforts to obtain deliverance without his presence and 
power. 

19. As Christ triumphed over death and hell in his own 
resurrection, and will at the last day make all his people 
triumphant over both, he must be able to grant them all 
needed help and deliverance in theirpresent conflict with 
the powers of darkness. 

20. When God's church makes herself a partaker with 
the wicked in their sins, she must also share the judg- 
ments which God sends upon them. But all who hide 
themselves in the chamber of obedient and submissive 
faith, are safe in times of calamity. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

1. Leviathan; in the primary application of the proph- 
ecy, Baliylon, under the similitude of a sea-dragon. But 
Babylon stands here as the representative of all great 
persecuting powers. 

2. Unto her; unto Zion. 

793 



God's care of Israel. 



ISAIAJI X.WIII, 



IZphraim threatened. 



4 Fury is not in mc: who wonld set tlic briers 
and lliorns against ni(3 in battle? I would go 
tlirouuir them, 1 would burn them together. 

5 Or let liim take iiold of my strength," that he 
may make peaee with me; and lie shall make 
peaee with me.'' 

6 lie shall cause them that come of Jaeol) to 
take root:" Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill 
the iacc of the world with fruit.'' 

7 1 Hath he smitten him, as he smote^ those that 
smote him? or is he slain according to the slaugh- 
ter of them that are slain by him? 

8 In measure, when it shootetli forth,* thou wilt 
debate with it: he stayoth his rough wind^ in the 
day of the east wind." 

y By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob 
be i)urge<l;'' and this is all the fruit to take away 
his sin : when he maketh all the stones of the altar 
as chalk-stones that are beaten in sunder, the groves 
and images' shall not stand up. 

10 Yet the defcnced city shall he desolate, and 
the habitation forsaken, and left like a wilderness: 
there siiall the calf feed, and tiiere shall he lie 
down, and consume the branches tiiereof. 

11 When the boughs thereof are withered, they 
shall be !)roken off: the women come, and set them 
on lire; for it is a people of no understanding :'=' 

• Or, mnrch against. • ch. 45:34. b Job 22:41. '^ Psa. 92: i:j-l.'): Hos. 
14:5, li. <l Kom. 1 1 : 12. 1 Heh. according to l/i€ sirokt of . \ Or, l/iou sendest 
it forth, i Or, wUn he removetk it. « ch. 57: lU. ' Heb. 12:0. I Or, sun 



4. Farij U not in mc; my anger toward Zion is ovpr. 
Compare cliap. .54:8. Who would set ; or "who will stt :" 
ill these words God challenges his and Ziou's foes to the 
combat. 

5. Or let him take hold of my strength; that is, if the 
enemy, represented under the similitude of briars and 
thorns, would escape my vengeance, let him take hold of 
my strength. To take hold of God's strength, is to sub- 
mit ourselves to his almighty power in faith and obe- 
dience. 

7. Hiith he smitten him — smote him ? hath God smitten 
Israel as he smote those that smote Israel? Is he slam; is 
Israel slain? T/i^em titat are slain by him? literally, "his 
slain," which seems to mean those whom God has slain in 
Israel's l>ehalf 

8. In mcatiire; in moderation. When it shonteth forth ; 
or, as the margin, "when thou sendest it," thy wrath, 
"forth." Debate with it; rebuke it, as it were; check it, 
lest it should be too severe. Slaycth; moderateth. Many 
j)rcfer to render this verse thus: "In measure when he 
sendotli her,'' Zion, "away, will he contend with her: he 
taketh her away with his hard wind iu the day of his east 
wind." 

9. Jhj this; by the chastisements described in the pre- 
ceding verse. Miikcth all tlte stones — beaten m sitiuler ; de- 
molishes tlie idolatrous altar of Jacob. "Chalk-stones," 
or "stones of lime." which easily crumble. Groves; rather, 
images of .Vshtoreth. Images; the original word properly 
denotes images of IJaal. 

10. Yet; in the original, "for." The defcnced citii; Snn- 
saliMM. The prophet continues his account of God's puri- 
fying judgments upon his people. The branches thereof ; of 
.ludah, reitresented under the similitude of a tree. There 
is here a blending of the literal with the figurative 

11. Set them on fire ; luirn them for fuel. 

\l. Heat off; beat off olive-berries; that is, glean, as it 
were, his peoiile, by gathering them one by one from their 
dispersion. The river; the Euphrates. 

i:!. The great trumpet shall be blown; to call together 
God's people from their dispersion. How far this proph- 
ecy shall be literally fulfilled to " Israel after the llesh," 
camiot bo known beforehand, liut it covers a promise 
794 



therefore he that made them will not have j^ A'^fj*-- 
mercy on them, and he that formed them :i2 
will show them no favor. 

12 • And it shall come to pa.ss in that day, that 
the Lord siiall beat oil' from the channel of the 
river unto the stream of Egypt, and ye shall be 
gathered one by one,'' ye children of Israel. 

13 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the 
great trumpet shall be blown,' and they shall come 
which were ready to perish in tiic land of Assyria, 
and the outcasts in tiie land of Egypt, and shall 
worship the Lord in the holy nunnit at Jerusalem. 

CHAPTER XXVlll. 

1 The prophet threateneth Ephraim for their pride and drunkenness. 5 
The residue shall be advanced in the kingdom of Christ. He rebaketh 
their error. 9 Their untowardness to learn, 14 and their security. 
IG Christ the sure foundation is promised. 18 Their security shall be 
tried. *23 They are incited to the consideration of God's discreet 
providence. 

WJ OE to the crown of pride, to the drunkards 
\ V of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty is a 
fading flower, which arc on the head of the fat 
valleys of them that are overcome' with wine! 

2 Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and strong 
one, ichich as a tempest of hail and a destroying 
storm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing, 
shall cast down to the earth with the hand.J 



images, e Dent. 32:-»; Hos 4:0. I> .John G::l7. ■ Matt. 24:31: 1 Thess. 
4:ltJ; Rev 11:15. 1 Heb. iroim. JEzek.l3;ll. 



to the spiritual Israel of complete deliverance and salva- 
tion. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. All principalities and powers that oppose themselves 
to God's kingdom are contending against omnipotence, 
and their end must be utter destruction. 

3. Since God is himself the founder of the church, and 
has promised to her his presence and protection to the 
end of the world, his honor and faithfulness are pledged 
to guard her from all injury. 

5. The alternative which God presents alike to individ- 
uals and to nations is, that thej' may make their peace 
with him, or be destroyed by his judgments. 

7-11. God's incorrigible enemies shall have judgment 
without mercy, to their destruction ; but his covenant 
people he chastises in measure, for their purification and 
iiitnre enlargement. 

12, 13. The final result of God's judgments in this world 
shall be the establishment of Christ's kingdom over all the 
earth, and the deliverance of his people from violence and 
oppression of every kind. liut this will be only prepar- 
atory to a higher triumph •• at the resurrection of the 
just[" when Christ "shall send his angels with a great 
sound of a trumiiet, and they shall gather together his 
elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the 
other," to worship the Lord in the new Jerusalem for 
ever. 

CIIAPTHK" X.WIII. 

1. To the drunknrds of Ephraim ; ralliir. "of the drunk- 
ards of Ei>hraiiii ; " and so in verse 3. Which arc on the head ; 
for "are," which is supplieil by the translators, we may 
better put "is," making the clause refer to the "glorious 
beauty," and not to " the ilrunkards of Kphraim." Com- 
pare ver. 4. "The crown of pride" anil the "glorious 
beauty" of "the drunkards of Ephraim," is Samaria, the 
capitid of tlie kingilom of Israel. This city was "on the 
head of the fat vallej-s" of these drunkards, as it lay ou 
the summit of a hill surrounded by fertile valleys. 

2. A mighty and .tirnng one; a mighty comiueror whom 
he will send against Sanmria. With the hand; with a vio- 
lent hand. 2 Kings IS: 10, II. 



Their errors rehukcd. 



ISAIAH XXVIII. 



T/ie ^itre f(,iind(itli.ii. 



AM k:o 3 Tlio crown of pride, tlic drunkards of 
■723' "" Ephraim, sliall bo trodden under" feet: 

4 And the glorious beauty, wiiicli is on the head 
of the fat valley, shall be a fading flower, and as 
the hasty fruit before the summer;" which wlun 
lie that looketh upon it seeth, while it is yet in his 
hand he eateth+ it up. 

5 *: In that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a 
crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, unto 
the residue of his people, 

G And for a s])irit of judgment to liim that sit- 
tcth in judgment, and for strength to them that 
turn the battle to the gate. 

7 If But they also have erred through wine,'' and 
through strong drink arc out of the way ; the 
priest and the prophet have erred through strong 
drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they are 
out of the way through strong drink ;° they err 
in vision, they stumble hi judgment. 

S For all tables are full of vomit and lilthiness, 
so that there is no place clean. 

9 ^ Whom shall he teachknowledge?'' and whom 
shall he make to understand doctrine?' them that 
are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the 
breasts. 

10 For precept must be- upon precept, precept 
upon precept: line upon lin(\ line upon line; here 
a little, and there a little: 

1 ] For with stammering '' lips and another tongue 
will he speak^ to this peojile. 

12 To whom he said, This is the rest whcreu-ith 
ye may cause the weary to rest ; and this is the 
refreshing: yet they would uot hear. 

1:] But the word of the Lord was unto them 
precept upon precept, precept upon precept; line 
upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there 
a little;'' that they might go, and fall backward, 
and be broken, and snared, and taken.' 

l-t ^ Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ve 



■ UA with, a Psa. 73:I9,-.>U. t Heb. swaHoiofi/i. b Ho 


.4:11. ■: ch. 


5(1:1U-I2. djer. 6:m. i lleh. Ike ktarmg. S Or. hath been. 


1 H..b, .VtoOT- 


merin^^ of. H Or, he hath spoken, e Hos. 0:5; 8:1-J. f 


Matt. !:i:U. 


6 F.ecl s n h Psa. IIS-J-J; Matt. 91:4-2; Acts 4:U; Rom 


. !l::i.i; Eph. 



4. Hunt ij fruit ; the early figs, wliicli were cstcemcil a 
great flelicacy. 

5. Unto the residue of tiis people ; wliile Ephraim's " crown 
of pride" is destroyed, God will be himself "a crown of 
glory" and "a diadem of beauty," to the remnant of his 
people in Jerusalem. 

6. To the g;ate ; back to the gate of the enemy. 

7. But they also have erred; the people of Judah, as well 
as of Ephraim. 

9, 10. Whom shall he leach — there a little; it is generally 
agreed that these are the scoffing words of the Jews, com- 
plaining that the prophet multiplies his precepts to them 
as if they were liabes. 

11. With stammering lips; this is God's answer to the 
scotfers. Since they stammer, that is, scoff at the proph- 
et'.s message, God will teach them by stammering lips, 
that i.s, by giving them up to the power of stammering 
forci.;.;iiers. In the Hebrew, to stammer, to scofl', and to 
speak In a foreign tongue, are all expressed by the same 
verli. Compare chap. 33:19. 

12. This is the rest; faith in God and obedience to his 
law. 

l:i. The word of the Lord was unto them ; God has indeed 
multiplied his precepts to them as to children, but with 
no other result than their increased wickednes.s and more 
aggravated ruin. Compare chap. C:9, 10; lS:lt, 15. 



scornful men, that rule this people which is in 
Jerusalem. 

15 Because ye have said. We have made a cov- 
enant with death, and with hell are we at agree- 
ment; when the overflowing scourge shall pass 
througli, it shall not come unto us:" for we have 
made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have 
we hid ourselves : 

IG 1 Therefore thus saith tlie Lord God, Be- 
hold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a 
tried stoue, a precious corner-stone, a sure founda- 
tion:'' he that believeth shall not make haste.' 

17 Judgment also will I lay to the line, and 
righteousness to the plummet: and the hail shall 
sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall 
overflow the hiding-place. 

18 'ii And your covenant with death shall l>e 
disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall 
not stand ; when the overflowing scourge shall jjass 
through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.'J 

19 From the time that it goeth forth it shall 
take you: for morning by morning shall it pass 
over, l}y day and by night: and it shall be a vex- 
ation only to understand the report.^ 

20 For the bed is shorter than that a man can 
stretch himself on it: and the covering narrower 
than that he can wrap himself m it. 

21 For the Lord shall rise up as in mount Pcra- 
zim,'' he shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon,' 
that he may do his work, his strange work ;"' and 
liriug to pass his act, his strange act. 

22 Now therefore be ye not mockers, lest your 
bands be made strong : for I have heard from the 
Lord God of hosts a consumption," even deter- 
mined upon the whole earth. 

23 •[ Give ye car, and hear my voice; hearken, 
and hear my speech. 

2-1 l>oth the ploughman plough all day to sow? 
doth he open and break the clods of his ground? 



iti. 10:11. •ylph.nlrenilingiloiLmtoil. i Mai. 4:3. 
:ke you lo understantl. doetriite. ^ ti S.im 
14:16. mLam. 3:3:J. n Dan. 9:-27. 



1 Josh. 10: HI, 



15. Covenant with death — with hell — at agreement; the cov- 
enant is, that death and hell shall not injure theni. This 
they say not in word, but in spirit and action. They are 
confident that their lying devices will save them. 

IG. A sure foundation ; the Messiah, who is here con-' 
trasted with the vain refuges of these scoffers. Make 
haste; flee in terror, as the wicked must from their refuges 
of lies. 2 Pet. 2:6. 

17. Judgment— to the line — righteousness to the plummet ; 
proceed with exact justice, not sparing the guilty. 

19. From the time that it goeth forth; or "as often as it," 
the scourge, "passeth over." 

20. The bed— the covering; their lying devices, to which 
they trusted for deliverance. 

2"l. Mount Peraziin; see 2 Sam. 5:20; 1 Chron. 14:11. 
The valley of Giheoii; the reference is either to Josh. 10: 12, 
or to 1 Chron. 14: Hi. >^lni,rj:c; unheard of, extraordinary. 
What the " strange work " i.s.ihr lollowing verse explains. 

22. The whole earth; the wlii.lr Laid of Judea. The orig- 
inal word means both "earth" and "land." 

24-28. Doth the ploughman plough — bruise it with his horse- 
men; the husbandman does not always plough, he also 
sows ; his different seeds he arranges each in the right 
place ; in threshing he pursues different modes according 
to the nature of the grain : much more, then, must God, who 
gives to the husbandman all his skill, adapt his dealings 
195 



Judgments of God 



ISAIAH XXIX. 



upon Jcrusakm. 



25 When he hath made plain the face thereof, 
doth lie not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter 
the cummin, and cast in tlie principal wheat and 
the appointed barley and the rye" in their place?** 

20 For his God dotii instruct him to discretion, 
and doth teach him.* 

27 For the titciies are not threshed with a thresh- 
ing instrument, neither is a cart-wheel turned about 
upon tlie cummin; but the fitches are beaten out 
with a staff, and tlie cummin with a rod. 

28 Bread-cor?i is bruised ; because he will not 
ever be tlireshing it, mu- break ii with the wheel 
of his cart, nor bruise it villi his horsemen. 

29 Tiiisalso cometh fortli from theLoRD of hosts, 
which is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in 
working." 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

1 Crot!"s heavy judgment upon Jerusalem. 7 The unsatiableness of her 
enemies. 9 The senselessness. 13 and deep hypocrisy of the Jews. 18 
A promise of sanctification to the godly. 

WOE to Ariel,' to Ariel, the city** wAere David 
dwelt!'' add ye year to year ; let them kill 
sacrifices.* 

2 Yet I will distress Ariel, and there shall be 
heaviness and sorrow : and it shall be unto me as 
Ariel. 

3 And I will camp against thee round about, 
and will lay siege against thee with a mount, and 
I will raise forts against thee."' 

4 And thou shalt be brought down,"* and shalt 

* Or. spell, t U.ib. boulrr. I Or. tke wheat in iht principal place, and the 
bnrley in the appointed pUcfi. i Or, Ami he bimlnh it in such sort as his 
Cad doth Irarh him. » Tsa. <J-2;5i Jer. a-2:li); Rom. 11:33 I Or. O Ariel; 
th^l K. the Hon of God. ^ Or, of the city, b 2 Sam. 3:9. • lUh. cut off the 



with men to their different characters and circumstances, 
a.s the case may demand. The inference from this is, that 
the righteous will be finally saved, and the incorrigibly 
wicked in due time destroyed. 

29. Tkis also; this wisdom of the husbandman. How 
much deeper, then, must be the wisdom of God himself. 
INSTRUCTION'S. 

1, 3, 7. Crimes and abuses of every kind follow in tlie 
train of drunkenness. When the rulers of a people arc 
addicted to this sin, they will pervert truth and righteous- 
ness, and bring upon themselves and their country the just 
judgments of (Jod. 

l.>. In nothing does the desperate wickedness of men 
more clearly manifest itself than in the delusions which 
they practise upon themselves in resjieet to escaping the 
punishment of their sins. Every transgressor has some 
"refnge of lies" in which he hopes to be saved, though 
he neglects the only way of salvation which (jod has pro- 
vided for him. 

16-20. .Jesus Christ is the one foundation which fiod 
has laid in Zioii for sinners. Tlii^y who build upon him 
their hopes for eternity shall never be put to shame : but 
the hail and tinipe.sl of the last day shall sweep away 
every hiding-place of man's invention. 

22. They who scoll at God's judgments will soon find 
themselves entangled in them, with no power either to 
escape or endure tliem. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

This chapter cont^iiins prophecies of heavy judgments 
upon Jerusalem, mingled with promises of final sanctifi- 
cation and deliverance. These are arranged in two series, 
tlic first terminating with verse S. Its immediate occasion 
Beeins to have been the invasion of Sennacherib; but it 
looks beyond that event to the general course and final 
issue of God's dealings with his covenant people. Hence 
796 



speak out of the groimd, and thy speech a. .11.3292. 

1111 I , r.i 1 , 1 1 ' • H.I-. about 

siiall be low out 01 the dust, and thy voice 712 
shall be as of one tliat hath a familiar spirit, out 
of the ground, and thy speech shall wliisper* out 
of the dust. 

5 Moreover the multitude of thy strangers shall 
be like small dust, and the multitude of the ter- 
rible ones shall be as chaff that passe th away:" 
yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly. '^ 

6 Tliou shalt be visited of tiie Lord of hosts 
with thunder, and with eartliquake, and great 
noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of 
devouring fire.^ 

7 And the multitude of all the nations that fight 
against Ariel, even all that fight against her and 
her munition," and that distress her, shall be as a 
dream of a night vision.' 

8 It shall even be as Avlien a hungry ttiom dreain- 
cth, and l^ehold, he cateth; but he awaketh, and 
his soul is empty : or as when a thirsty man dream- 
eth, and behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh, 
and behold, he is faint, and his soul liath appetite: 
so shall the multitude of all the nations be, that 
fight against mount Zion. 

9 T Stay yourselves, and wonder; cry ye out, 
and cry:* they are drunken, but not with wine;^ 
they stagger, but not with strong drink. 

10 For the Lord hath poured out upon you the 
spirit of deep sleep,'' and hath closed your eyes: 
the proiihets and your rulers,^ the seers hath he 
covered.' 



Iieads. t 2 Kings 2.5:1, etc. J I.am. 1:9. t Heb. p«j), or rAirp. « Job 
21:1-. f 1 Thess. S:3. S ch. 30:30. h ch. 41:11, 12. ich.3;::l(i. I Or, 
take your pleasure and riot. Jch. 51:21. kRoni,ll:8. i Heb. Ae<uf.fy ch. 
1:5. U Sam. 9:9. 



both our Saviour and the apostle Paul apply its words to 
their own times. 

1. Ariel, a symbolical name for Jerusalem. According 
to some, "the lion of God," as denoting the invincible 
might with which God endowed her so long as she con- 
tinued faithful to him; according to others, "the altar of 
God," as in Ezek. 43:l.i — compare the marginal reading — 
with a double allusion to the altar of burnt-offering and 
the consuming fire of God's wrath. The latter view is to 
be preferred. Aild ye year to year; go on with your round 
of formal services. Ver. 13. Let tltem kill sacrifices; or, 
" let the feasts go their round." 

2. It shall be unto me as Ariel; an altar on which I will 
consume the wicked.' 

4. Brought down — whisper out of the dusl ; the allusion 
seems to be to the necromancers, who claimed that their 
call to the spirits of the dead was answered out of the 
ground in a low whispering tone. This was probably 
the voice of the necromancers themselves, through the art 
of ventriloquism. The prophet means, that Jerusalem 
shall be greatly humbled, and shall whisi)er in the tones 
of weakness and fear. 

."i-S. These verses describe the sudden dispersion of the 
enemy and the disappointment of their hopes. Thustron- 
pers; the foreign armies arraj'ed against thee. Like small 
3im( — as chaff; suddenly scattered. Vt.tiled of the Lord of 
liosis ; the visitation is for Jerusalem's deliverance. As a 
draun of a nii^ht vision; the hopes of Zion's enemies shall 
vanish like the dreams of the hungry and thirsty. 

!>. Slaij iinurselves; stand fixed in auuizement at the ca- 
lamities which shall soon come upon you. The proplut 
returns to his denunciations upon the i)eople of Jerus:dcm. 
Cry i/e out, and cry; from terror and anguish. Or, accord- 
ing to many, " take y(Uir pleasure, and be blind." But not 
Willi wine; it is a spiritual drunkenness. 

lu. Hath lu covered ; blinded. 



The hypocrisy and 



ISAIAH XXX. 



folly of Ihe Jews. 



A. >i .i»2. 11 And tlie vision of all is become unto 
712." °" you as the words of a book* that is sealed," 
which men deliver to one that is learned, sayina:. 
Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for 
it is sealed: 

12 And the book is delivered to him that is not 
learned, saying. Read this, I pray thee: and he 
saith, I am not learned. 

13 T^ Wherefore the Lord said. Forasmuch as 
this people draw near me with their mouth, and 
with their lips do honor me,'' but have removed 
their heart far from me, and their fear toward me 
is taught by the precept of men:'^ 

14 Therefore, behold, I will proceed* to do a 
marvellous work among this people, even a mar- 
vellous work and a wonder:'' for the wisdom of 
their wise men shall perish, and the understanding 
of their prudent men shall be hid.'' 

1.5 Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their 
counsel from the Lord,' and their works are in 
tlie dark, and they say. Who seeth us? and who 
knoweth us?' 

16 Surely your turning of things upside down 
shall be esteemed as the potter's clay : for shall 
the work say of him that made it. He made me 
not? or shall the thing framed say of him that 
framed it, He had no understanding?'' 

17 *i Is it not yet a very little while, and Leb- 
anon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the 
fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest?' 

18 And in that day shall the deaf hear the words 
of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall sec 
out of obscurity, and out of darkness.^ 

19 The meek also shall increase* /Mr joy in the 



• Or, tetttr. a Dan. ViA,'i; Rev. 5:1-0. b Ezek. 3:3:.'!l 


; Matt. 


5: (1-9. 


c Col. -l-.-ii. f Heb. a*/, d Hab 1;5. e Jer. 49:7; Ob.a<J. 


8; 1 Co 


.1:19, 


•■ Psi. 139:7, etc.; cb. 30:1. B Psa. 94:7. h ch. 45:9; Ro 


m. 9:20. 


1 ch. 


3J:15; Matt. 19:30, j ch. 35:5; Luke 7:2-2. 1 Heb. arfrf. k 


ch.61:l. 


■ Jas. 



11,12. The vision of all ; all the revelations of God through 
liis prophets. Is sealed — I am not learned; that is, none, 
whether learned or unlearned, can understand and inter- 
pret God's messages. 

13. Fear toward me; worship of me. Taught by the pre- 
cept of men; regulated by human authority. Compare 
Matt. 15:7-9; Mark 7: 6, 7. 

14. A marvellous work — shall be hid; marvellous judg- 
ments, such as shall make the wisdom of man of no avail. 

15. Seek deep to hide their counsel; seek to hide their 
counsel as it were in deep recesses, thinking that God 
does not see them. These are the men who make lies 
their refuge, and falsehood their hiding-place. Chap. 28 : 15. 

10. Surely your turning — shall the work say; or, "your 
perverseness. Shall the potter be esteemed as clay, that 
the work shoulil say," etc. 

17. Lebanon shall be turned — esteemed as a forest; that is, 
the high shall be abased and the lowly exalted, as ex- 
plained in the verses following. Matt. 20: 1(!. 

1«. The eyes of the blind shall see; compare Matt. 4:10; 
John 9:39. 

20. Munich for iniquity; for the opportunity of doing 
wrung. 

21. 3Iake a man an offender for a word; or, "condemn a 
mail," that is, a righteous man, "in a cause." Turn aside 
the just ; deprive him of justice. 

22-24. Jacob; the "Israel of God." They shall sanctify; 
.Jacob and his children ; that is, the church and her spir- 
itual offspring. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-8. God controls the movements of all nations for the 
good of his church. He can with equal ease subject her 



Lord,'' and the poor among men shall rejoice in 
the Holy One of Israel.' 

20 For the terrilile one is brought to naught.'" 
and tiie scorner is consumed, and all that watch 
for iniquity are cut off:" 

21 That make a man an offender for a word, and 
lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, 
and turn aside the just for a thing of nauglit." 

22 Therefore thus saith the Lord, who redeemed 
Abraham,'' concerning the house of Jacob, Jacob 
shall not now be ashamed,"" neither shall his face 
now wax pale. 

2.3 But when he seeth his children, the work of 
my hands,'' in the midst of him, they shall sanctify 
my name, and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and 
shall fear the God oi' Israel. 

24 They also tiiat erred in spirit sliall come to 
understanding,^ and tlicy that nnirnuired shall 
learn doctrine.^ 

CHAPTER XXX. 

1 The prophet threateneth tlie people for their confiJence in Egypt. 8 
and contempt of God's word. 18 God's mercies towards his ciiurch. 
'2' God's wrath, and the people's joy, in the destrui-lion of Assyria. 

WOE to the rebellious children, saith the 
Lord, that take counsel, but not of me;' 
and that cover with a covering, but not of my 
Spirit," that they may add sin to sin:^' 

2 That walk to go down into Egypt.'*" and have 
not asked at my mouth ; to strengthen themselves 
in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the 
shadow of Egypt! 

3 Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be 
your shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt 
your confusion. 



. 51:1:1; Rev. 1-2:1(1. n ^a. lil:0; Jer. ■'{1:10. ■> Amos 5 I U, 1-2. 
!. qcb.51:4. r cb. n(l:-2l ; Epb. -2: HI. i Keb. hiow «mltrr:l,md. 
;or. 0:11. 1 Deut- -29:19:20. uch. -29:15. v Rnm. 2:5. " ch. 



to their power, for her chastisement and purification, or 
make her victorious over them for her enlargement and 
the glory of his own name. 

9-12. When the teachers and rulers of the church are 
blind, the people will be sunk in vice and ignorance. 
Matt 15:14. 

13. God alone has the right to prescribe the way in 
which he is to be worshipped. All systems of religion 
that rest on human authority and tradition are empty and 
formal ; they lead to hypocrisy and wickedness, and bring 
upon men God's displeasure instead of his favor. 

14. Human wisdom is alike impotent to deliver men 
from God's judgments in this world, and to provide for 
them a way of justification and eternal life. 

IC. Since God is the author of human reason, his wisdom 
cannot be arraigned at its bar, any more than the potter 
can be called to an account by the clay which he fashions. 

17-24. The desolating judgments of God work together 
with his word and Sjiirit for the enlargement and peace 
of Zion. Amid the overthrow of empires without her 
borders, and the destruction of hj^ocrites within, the 
kingdom of Christ is steadily advancing towards universal 
dominion. 

CHAPTER XXX. 

In this and the following chapter, the prophet rebukes 
the Jews for resorting to Egypt, rather than to the living 
God, for help against the Assyrians. The occasion was 
the invasion of Sennacherib ; but here, as in the preceding 
chapter, he looks far beyond that event to the final issue 
of God's dealings with his covenant people. 

1. Cover with a covering ; protect themselves against their 
foes. Some render, "make a league." 
797 



Confidence in Egypt. 



ISAIAH XXX. 



Mercy to the church. 



4 For liis princes were at Zoan, and liis ambas- 
sadors came to Ilaiies. 

5 Tliey were all ashamed of a people that could 
not ])rolit them, nor bo a help nor profit, but a 
shame, and also a reproach." 

6 The burden of tlie beasts of the south. Into 
the land of troulde and anguish, from whence come 
the young and old lion, the viper and fiery flying 
serpent, they will carry their riches upon the 
shoulders of young asses, and their treasures upon 
the bunches of camels, to a people that shall not 
profit them. 

7 For the Egyptians shall help in vain, and to 
no purpose:'' therefore have 1 cried concerning 
this,* Their strength w to sit still.*^ 

8 1 Now go, write it before them in a table, and 
note it in a book, that it may be for the time to 
come* for ever and ever : 

9 That this is a rebellious people,* lying children, 
children that will not hear the law of the Lord: 

10 Which say to the seers, See not;° and to the 
prophets. Prophesy not unto us right things, speak 
unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits:' 

11 Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the 
path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from 
before us. 

12 Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel, 
Because ye despise this word, and trust in oppres- 
sion' and perverseness,"^ and stay thereon ; 

13 Therefore this iniijuity shall be to you as a 
breach ready to fall," swelling out in a high wall, 
whose breaking cometh suddenly at an instant. 

14 And he sliall break it as the breaking of the 
potters' vessel^ that is ))roken in pieces;' lie sliall 
not spare: so that there shall not be found in the 
bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth, 
or to take water irilha! out of the pit. 

l.S For thus saith tiie Lord God, the Holy One 
of Israel : In returning and rest shall ye be saved -^ 



" Jo 


r. 2:36. b Jer. 37:7. • Or, 


her. t ver. 1.5. t Heb. latter day. 


■i neu 


t. 32:20. e .ler. 11:21; .Amo 


2:1-.': 7:1:); Mic. 2:8, 11. r | Kings 


•2->:Vi. 


1 Ot, fraud. E I'sa. (i2:lU. 
2.9; Jer. 19:11. J ver. 7. k 


ti Psa.. 02: :l. « Heb. bottle of potters. 


' P«. 


2 Kings 25:5. I Dout. 32:30. 9 Or, a 



4. His princes — ambassadors ; Judah's princes and ambas- 
Badors. Zoan; in lower Egypt. Hanes; in middle Egypt. 

t). They were alt ashamed; Judah's ambassadors. 

fi. The burden of the beasts of the south ; " tlie beasts of the 
south" are the beasts which cany the treasures of Judah 
into the south, that is, into Egypt, for the purpose of se- 
curing the alliance and help of the Egyptians. In the 
word "burden" there is a double allusion, first to the 
load of treasures, secondly to the threatened wrath of God 
upon the undertaking. The land of trouble— fiery fijlinfr 
serpent ; a description of the southern desert, through 
which the road to Egypt lies. 

7. Their strcn<rtk is to sit stilt; their boasted help ends in 
their doing nothing. 

11. Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease; let us hear no 
more concerning him. 

13. litis iniijuity; the iniquity described in the preced- 
ing verses, the root of which is an unbelieving spirit. 
Sliall be to you as a breach — in a high wall; this sin shall 
make.Iudah like a falling w.ill, which swells out gradually 
more and more, and at last falls suddenly. The "breach" 
licre is the broken part of the wall. 

It. He .ihall break it ; (iod shall break the wall, which 
represents the Jewish stiito. A sherd ; a broken piece of 
the vessel. To take fire — to take water; large enough for 
these purposes. 

798 



in quietness and in confidence shall be a.m. 3291. 
your strcngtii : and ye would not. tu 

16 But ye said. No; for we will fiec ujion horses; 
therefore shall ye flee: and. We will ride ii)ion the 
swift ; therefore shall they that pur>ii(' you be swift." 

17 One tiiousand shall Jke at the ri^buke of one ;' 
at the rebuke of five .shall ye flee: till ye be left 
as a beacon" upon the top of a mountain, ami as 
an ensign on a hill. 

18 *l\ And therefore will the Loud wait," that he 
may be gracious unto you. and therefore will he 
be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you : for 
the Loud is a God of judgment : blessed are all 
they tiiat wait for him." 

lO For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusa- 
lem:" thou slialt weep no more: he will be; very 
gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry ; when 
he shall hear it, he will answer thee.'' 

20 And though the Lord give you the bread of 
adversity," and the water of aflliction,^ yet shall 
not thy teachers be removed into a corner any 
more, but thine eyes shall see thj- teachers:'' 

21 And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, 
saying, This is the way, walk ye in it,' when ye turn 
to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left. 

22 Ye shall defile also the covering of thy 
graven images of silver," and the ornament of thy 
molten images of gold: thou shalt cast* them 
away as a menstruous cloth ; thou shalt say unto 
it. Get thee hence.' 

23 Then shall he give the rain of thy seed, that 
thou shalt sow the ground withal; and bread of 
the increase of the earth, and it sliall be fat and 
plenteous : in that day shall tiiy cattle feed in large 
pastures. 

24 Tlico.xcn likewise and the young asses that ear 
the ground shall eat clcair provender, which hath 
been winnowed with the shovel and with the fan. 

25 And there shall be upon every liigh moun- 



tree be 


reft of bra 


lr/(?.* 


or boughs; 


or, n m 


St. 


m Hos. 5: 


1.). 


» P.sa 


3J;3. 


ch. 


B5:9, 21. 


p Jer 


29:1 


J-14. 


q Psa. 


&U:5. 1 Or. oppres 


sifin 


r Psa. 


74:9; 


Amos S: 11 


. 12. 


■ I'sa 


32. a 


• lleb 


the 


graven tm 


ages 


of thy 


silver. 


tHeb 


scatter. ' 


Hoa. 


U:S. 


lOr, 


savory f 


Hob. leavened. 









15. Returning and rest; returning to God and resting in 
his promises. 

16. We will flee; will escape from the enemy. Sliall ye 
flee; fly before the enemy. 

17. A beacon — ensign ; standing solitary and desolate. 

18. Therefore ; because in (lod is salvation, verse 15, and 
in man's help is only disapi)ointment and ruin, verses 1-7. 
M'ail, that he may be gracious — be exalted, that he may hove 
mercy; God's long-sunering, and the manifcst;ition of his 
greatness, both have for their end to briiig men, through 
repent;inco, to the enjoyment of his forgiving love. Judg- 
ment; righteousness and faithfulness. 

19. The people ; the pious remnant. The prophet, after 
his usual manner, turns from thrcatcnings to promises. 

21. A word behind thee; the voice of God following them 
in their wanderings from duly. 

22. Covering — ornament ; the overlaying of silver or gold, 
which is mentioned as the most vahr,il>lo part of the idol. 
They defile them by casting them away with abhorrence 
as unclean things. 

24. Ear; plough. Clean; or, as the margin, " savory." 
The abundance and good qu;dity of the provender are an 
emblem of the universal plenty (hat jirevails. 

25. Rivers and streams ; lilling them with verdure and 
fruitfulncss. In the day if the great slaughter; here, as else- 
where, this golden ago of the church is represented as 



Judgments on Assyria. 



ISAIAH XXXI. 



Tr listing in Egypt. 



A M ran. tain, and upon every hmh hilL rivers and 

B (■ about 1 .-' " 1 V i.1 i 

71:! streams ot waters in the day 01 tlie great 
slaug-Iiter, when tlie towers fall. 

26 Moreover the light of the moon shall be as 
tlic light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall 
Ijc sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day 
that the Loun bindeth up the breach of his people, 
and healeth the stroke of their wound." 

27 1 Behold, the name of the Lord cometh from 
far, liurning inth his anger, and the burden* there- 
of is heavy:* his lips are full of indignation, and 
his tongue as a devouring lire:'' 

28 And liis breath, as an overflowing stream, 
shall reach to the midst of the neck, to sift the 
nations with the sieve of vanity:" and there shall, 
he a l)ridlc in the jaws of the people,'' causing them 
to err. 

29 Ye shall have a song, as in the night ii^hen a 
holy solemnity is kept ;° and gladness of heart, as 
when one goetli with a pipe to come into the moun- 
tain of the Lord, to the Mighty One* of Israel. 

30 And the Lord sliall cause liis glorious voice' 
to be heard, and shall show the lighting down of 
his arm, with the indignation of his anger, and 
with the flame of a devouring fire, xoith scattering, 
and tempest, and hailstones. 

31 For through the voice of the Lord shall the 
Assyrian be beaten down, which smote with a rod. 

32 And in every place where the grounded staft"^ 
shall pass, which the Lord shall lay* upon him, «Y 
shall be with tabrets and harps: and in battles of 
shakinsr will he fiffht with it.* 



• n-h. lifted vp. » oh. 60:19. aO. 1 Or. zriei'oi'siu'is of fame. ! Ili'b. 
hmi-ines'i b Zeph. .3:8. t Luke •.W:31 . J ch :i7:a9. e Psa. 4-.>::J, 4. 5 Heb 
rork S Hpb. the glory of his voice. \ Heb. every passing of the rod found- 



introdiiced by the slaughter of God's foes. Towers; of 
the enemy. 

2(i. As the light of the .ntn — sevenfold ; this is tlie era of 
millennial glory, perhaps also with a rrfiri'iirc tn the per- 
fect blessedness of heaven. Compan' ■ li:i|i. lin: l'.\-Tl. 

28. Hishreath; his anger, which is CDiniKircil to an over- 
flowing stream. Reach to the mid.st of the neck; a jn-overbial 
exin-ession for imminent danger. Chap. 8:8. The sieve of 
vanity; the sieve of perdition. A bridle — catising them to 
err ; the bridle is the delusions which lead them astray, 
here represented as a judgment proceeding from God. 
Compare 2 Thess. 2:11. 

29. Ye shall have a song ; God's people, when he thus 
destroys their foes. Into the mountain of the Lord; to cel- 
ebrate there the yearly festivals. 

31. The Assyrian ; Sennacherib. See introductory note 
to this chapter. 

.'32. The grounded staff; the ordained rod. Shall pass; 
U]ion the Assyi'ian. With tabrets and harps; on the part 
of God's people. Battles of .shaking; tumultuous battles. 
He fight with it; God, against Assyria. 

;'.:!. Tophet ; the funeral pile for God's enemies, in allu- 
sion to Tophet, where the idolatrous Jews offered their 
chil.lren as burnt-sacrifices to Moloch. 2 Kings 23:10. 
For the king; for Jehovah. Under this terrible image is 
represented the final vengeance of God upon his foes, of 
which their temporal destruction is but the beginning. 
Compare Matt. 5:22; Mark 9:43-48. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-7. " An evil heart of unbelief in departing from the 
living God," is the great sin of the human race. This has 
in all ages led nations and families, as well as individuals, 
to seek help in trouble from man rather than from God, 
and always to their disappointment and ruin. 

8-14. Wicked men desire to hear not what is true, but 



33 For Tophet is ordained of old ; *' yea, for the 
king it is prepared; he hatii made it deep and 
large: the pile thereof w fire and much wood; the 
breath of tlie Lord, like a streum of brimstone,''' 
doth kindle it. 

CII.VPTER XXXI. 

1 The prophet showelh the cursed folly in trusting to Egypt, and for- 
snking of G-od. 6 He exhorceth to conversion. 8 He siioweth the 
fall of Assyria. 

TT yTOE to them that go down to Egypt for help ; 
V V and stay on horses, and trust in chariot,s, 
because they are many ; and in horsemen, because 
they are very strong ; but they look not unto the 
Holy One of Israel, neither seek the Lord!'' 

2 Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil, and 
will not call back* his words; but will arise 
against the house of the evil-doers, and against 
the help of them that work iniquity. 

3 Now the Egyptians are men, and not God; and 
their horses flesh, and not spirit. When the Lord 
shall stretch out his hand, both he that helpeth 
shall fall, and he that is liolpen shall fall down, 
and they all shall fail together. 

4 For thus hath the Lord spoken unto me. Like 
as the lion and the young lion roaring on his 
prey,' when a multitude of shepherds is called 
forth against him, he will not be afraid of their 
voice, nor abase himself for the noise' of them : so 
shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight for 
mount Zion, and for the hill thereof. 

5 As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts de- 



ed. 


• Heb. m 


n.'se t 


rest 


t Or 


nga 


iyiSt 


th 


m 




H 


b 


/■« 




terdny. 


1 .|p 


. 7:31. S 


Kbv 


U:S(, 


10. h 


Hns. 


7:7 


« 


H 


b. 


rfn 


or 




Hn, 


11:10. 


lOr 


multitude 





























what will flatter them in their sins. Thus they reject the 
only way of salvation, and bring upon themselves irreme- 
diable ruin. 

15. They who, in times of trouble and danger, honor 
(Jod with the fnll confidence of their souls, shall receive 
from him inward peace and comfort, and also outward 
deliverance, so far as their highest welfare requires it. 

16. When men refuse to give God their confidence, he 
makes their devices for obtaining deliverance tlie means 
of their destruction. 

20. The most prosperous daj's of God's peo])le have 
often been those of great temporal suffering. It is far 
better to have spiritual life and health with outward af- 
fliction, than worldly prosperity with spiritual darkness 
and deadness. 

21. They who faithfully attend to the monitions ofGod's 
word and providence, will not fall into dangerous error. 

22. 23. l!c)icHf:iiiri', and fruits worthy of repentance, 
bring a return nf ( I.hI's favor. 

2(i. The ui:i\rrs;d prevalence of the gospel among men 
will fill the world with such light and gladness as we are 
unable to conceive of, and all this will be but a foretaste 
of the eternal blessedness of heaven. 

27-32. The sann' iliviiic judgments which destroy the 
wicked, bring gtidms^ ;in(l salvation to the righteous. 

32. The terrilile ■ Hi' ts nf (Jod's wrath in this world are 
a solemn foreshadowing of its power in that prison of 
despair " where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not 
quenched." 

CHAPTER XXXI, 

4. So shall the Lord of hosts come dozen : having declared 
the vanity of all reliance on human aid, God now promises 
to defend Jerusalem by his own almighty power. 

5. As birds fttjing ; hovering over and protecting their 
young in the nest. Deut. 32:11. 

799 



The blessings of 



ISAIAH XXXII. 



ChrisVs kingdom. 



fend Jorusalem;" defendin": also lie will deliver 
it : and passing over he will preserve it. 

() *! Turn ye unto kim^' frmn whom the children 
of Israel have deeply revolted.'' 

7 For in that day every man shall cast away his 
idols of silver, and his idols of gold," which your 
own hands have made unto yon for a sin. 

8 Then shall the Assyrian fall with the sword, 
not of a miglity man ; and the sword, not of a mean 
man, shall devour him :'' but he shall flee from* the 
sword, and his young men sliall be disconilitcd.* 

9 And he shall pass over to his strong-liold'' for 
fear,' and his princes shall be afraid of the ensign, 
saitli the Loud, whose fire is in Zion, and his fur- 
nace iu Jerusalem. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

1 The blessings of Christ's kingdom. Desolation is foreshown. 15 
Restoration is promised to succeed. 

BEHOLD, a king shall reign in righteousness, 
and princes shall rule in judgment." 

2 And a man shall be as a hiding-place from the 
wind, and a covert from the tempest/ as rivers 
of water in a dry place," as the shadow of a grcat^ 
rock in a weary land. 

3 And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim, 
and the ears of them that hear shall hearken. 

4 The heart also of the rash' shall understand 
knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers shall 
be ready to speak plainly.' 

5 The vile person shall be no more called liberal, 
nor the cliurl said to be. bountiful. 

6 For the vile person will speak villany, and 
his heart will work iniquity, to practise hypocrisy, 
and to utter error against the Lord, to make 
empty the soul of the iiuiigry ; and ho will cause 
the drink of the thirsty to fail.'' 

7 The instruments also of the churl are evil : he 



• Psa. 46:3. bJer. 3:12. c Hos. 9:0. • Ueb llie iilols of /lis gold, d cli. 
37:36. t Or, for fear of. I Or, tributary; Heb. (or melting, or triliule. 
i Or, strength. I H^b. his rork shall pass away for fear, e Psa. 45:0. 7; 
Jer. 23:5,8; Zech. 9:9; Rom. 5:21. ■ ch 4:0. (r ch 44:3. 1 Heb. heavy. 
• Heb. An.s/y. 1 Or, elegantly, 1» Jer. 13:2:1. I Or, he .fpeakelh agfim&t the 



8. Not of a miglilij man — not of n mean man ; by the im- 
mediate stroke of (iod. Chap. 37 : 36. Frojn the swonl ; be- 
fore Jehovah's wrath, represented as a destroying sword. 

9. To his strong-hold ; to his own city, Nineveh. The en- 
sign ; Jehovah's ensign, tlie symbol of liis presence. Com- 
pare chap. 5:2G. Fire^urnace ; sec note on chap. 29:1. 

LVSTRUCTION. 
God deals with his covenant people in such a manner 
as to nianifost at once the vanity of all earthly resources, 
and his own oiiiiiipotent power and ininiutalilc faithfulness. 
When lie has witlidrawn tlieir confidence from every arm 
of flesh, he sends them salvation from his own presence. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

In this and the three following chapters promises and 
threatenings are mingled together. Jlighty judgments 
are coming upon sinners in Zion, and upon her enemies 
without; but amid all these, Christ's kingdom shall ad- 
vance to its final establishment over all the earth. Though 
the immediate occasion of lliese ]>rophecies may have been 
the invasion of Sennaelurib, lluy cannot bo restricted lo 
that event. They cover the whole history of the church. 

1. A king; the Messiah. The word applies to earthly 
rulers of the church, such as llezekiah, only so fiir as they 
have Christ's spirit, and exercise Iheir authority under 
him. Plinths; under the king. 

2. A man; the king spoken of in the preceding verse. 

800 



deviseth wicked devices to destroy the a. m 3291. 
poor with lying words, even when the ':i3.° 
needy spcaketh right.* 

S But the liberal deviseth liberal things; and by 
liberal things shall he stand.^ 

y 1[ Rise up, ye women that are at ease ;' hear 
my voice, ye careless daughters ; give ear unto my 
speech. 

10 Many days and years' shall ye be troubled, 
ye careless women : for the vintage shall fail, the 
gathering shall not come. 

11 Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be 
troubled, ye careless ones: strip you, and make 
you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins. 

12 They shall lament for the teats, for the pleas- 
ant fields,^ for the fruitful vine. 

13 Upon the land of my jieople shall come up 
thorns and briers ;J yea, upon' all the houses of joy 
in the joyous city : 

14 Because the palaces shall be forsaken; the 
multitude of the city shall be left; the forts and 
towers* shall be for dens for ever, a joy of wild 
asses, a pasture of flocks; 

1.5 Until the Spirit be poured upon us from on 
high,'' and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and 
the fruitful field be counted for a forest.' 

16 Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, 
and righteousness remain in tht; fruitful field. 

17 And the work of righteousness shall be peace; 
and the efi'cct of righteousness, quietness and as- 
surance for ever."" 

18 And my jieople shall dwell in a peaceable 
habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet 
resting-places;" 

19 When it shall hail, coming down on the for- 
est;" and the city shall be low in a low place.' 

20 Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters,' that 
send forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass. 



poor in itid^ment. S Or. be established. > Amos 0:1. I Heb. Days above a 
year. 1 Ilcb Jiekis ofilesire J Hos 10:S. " Or, burning upon. 1 Or, rliffs 
and watrhloiaers. l<Joel2:28. 1 Psl 1U7:33, etc. ■» Psa. 85: 10; Jaj. 3:18. 
uUcb. 4:9. °ch. 3U;3U. t Or. Utterly abased. P Eul. 11:1, 2. 



."J-S. SItall not be dim — shall he stand ; the general meaning 
is, that knowledge shall take the ]dace of ignorance, and 
men sliall no kuiger " call evil good and good evil." Chap. 
.5:20. The rash — the stammerers ; those who arc rash and 
stammer in their judgment of spiritual things. The churl; 
a man destitute alike of truth and mercy, aa is plain iiom 
the prophet's description of him. 

9-12. lii.'ie up, ije vomen — the fruitful vine; a threatening 
against " the daughters of Zion " similar to that in chap. 
3: 16-21. The vintage shall fail; liecaiise of the invasion of 
the enemy. Compare ver. 13, 14. They .v/io// lament for the 
teati; literally, "for the breasts," tli;it is, the full breasts 
which have supplied nourislniient to their infants. Food 
shall be wanting for mother and ofi'spriiig. 

13. Thorns and briers; because it is left desolate and 
untille<l. Compare chap. 7:23. 

14. Forts aiul towers; literally, "Ophel and tower," that 
is, Ophel and its tower. Ophel is a ridge extending south 
from the ancient temple area. For ever; not absolnlel}-, 
but through a long period of lime, as the next verse sliows. 

1.5. H'llderne'^ — afore.tt, see note on chap. 29:17. 

19 Coming iloxcn on the forest ; or. " in the fall of the for- 
est." "The forest" rei)resents the pride and strength of 
the enemy. Compare chap. 10:18, 19, 33,34. Tlie city; 
the city of the enemy- — Nineveh, liabylon, and all hke per- 
secuting powers to the end of lime. 

20. /f/essed are ye, that is, "my people." Ver. 18. The 



Tht enemies of 

SJ'Stns. CHAPTER XXXIII. 

I God's judgments against the enemies of the church. 13 Tiie privi- 
leges of the godly. 

TTTOE to tlicc that spoilest,'' and thou wast not 
V\ spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and 
they dealt not treacherously with thee! when thou 
shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled ;'' and 
when thou shalt make an end to deal treacherously, 
they shall deal treacherously with thee. 

2 Lord, be gracious unto us ; wo have waited 
for thee: be thou their arm every morning, our 
salvation also in the time of trouble. 

3 At the noise of the tumult the people fled ; at 
the lifting up of thyself the nations were scattered. 

4 And your spoil shall be gathered like the gath- 
ering of the caterpillar: as the running to and 
fro of locusts shall he run upon them. 

5 ThcLoRDisexaltcd;'-'forhedwellethonhigh: he 
hath hlled Zion with judgment and righteousness.'' 

6 And wisdom and knowledge shall be the sta- 
bility of tliy times, and strength of salvation :' the 
fear of the Lokd is his treasure."" 

7 Behold, their valiant ones^ shall cry without : 
the ambassadors of peace shall weep bitterly. 

8 The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man 
ceasetli: he hath broken the covenant, he hath 
despised the cities, he regardeth no man. 



ISAIAH XXXIII. 



Zion threalm^ed. 



' Ch. 21:3; Hib. 



3:10. cPsa. 97:i). dKom, 3:-'G. 


HBh 


messengers. X Or. waliered mvay. 


Hs.i, 


ngltleoasnesses. 1 Heb. i« upright} 


esses 



quiet and peaceful pursuit of agriculture is here a symbol 
for prosperity, temporal and spiritual. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. From the beginning to the end of time, Christ is to 
his church the source of life and strength and wisdom and 
holiness. From him alone are her rulers replenished with 
grace, and enabled to administer her affairs " in judgment," 
for the glory of God and her edification. 

3-5. The religion of Christ, by purifying the affections 
of the heart, removes the great source of error, and ena- 
bles men to judge correctly of moral principles and ac- 
tions. In this way the general prevalence of the gospel 
corrects public sentiment, and maintams it in a healthful 
condition. But whenovcr iiTcligion prevails, perverse 
o])inions and wicked practices go hand in hand. 

9-12. Luxury, idleness, and prodigality in females are 
lieinous sins in the sight of God. They exert a powerfid 
influence to corrupt public morals, and thus bring upon 
nations and families those heavy judgments in which 
woman has so large a share of suffering. 

13-18. The downward tendency of human nature mani- 
fests itself in the church of Christ, as well as in the world. 
But among his own people, God will not allow error and 
corruption to gain the victory. In the midst of his judg- 
ments he will from time to time pour upon thorn his Spirit 
from on high, renovating their faith, and producing a new 
and abundant harvest of the fruits of righteousness. 

19-20. The destruction of Satan's power, and the estab- 
lishment of Christ's kingdom, are inseparably connected 
in God's plan, and shall be effected Ify the same instru- 
mentalities. As the one falls the other must rise. 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

1. To thee; Assyria, as the representative of all perse- 
<uting powers. See introductory note to the preceding 
chapter. 

2. Unto us — their arm ; the prophet's prayer for his peo- 
jile in view of the coming trouble. In the second clause 
he passes, as is common with the prophets, from the fii-st 
to the third person. 

3. Tlie tumuli i caused by God's appearance in behalf of 
his people. 

.">1 



9 The earth moiirncth and languisheth : Lebanon 
is ashamed and hewn down:' Sharon is like a wil- 
derness; and Bashan and Carmel shake off their 

fruits. 

10 Now will I rise, saith the Lord; now will I 
be exalted ; now will I lift up myself.' 

11 Ye shall conceive chaft", yc shall bring forth 
stubble: your breath, as lire, shall devour you. 

12 Andthopeoplcshall beastheburningsof lime: 
as thorns cut up shall they be burned in the fire. 

13 H Hear, yc t/iat are far ofl", what I have done ; 
and, ye (hat are near, acknowledge my might. 

14 The sinners in Zion are afraid ; foarfulness 
hath surprised the hypocrites.'^ Who among us 
shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among 
us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? 

15 He that walkcth righteously,^ and speaketh 
uprightly;-" he that despiseth the gain of oppres- 
sions,' that shakcth his hands from holding of 
bribes, that stoppeth his cars from hearing of 
blood,* and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil;' 

16 He shall dwell on high :+ his place of defence 
s/ia/l be the munitions of rocks: bread shall be 
given him ; his waters shall be sure. 

17 Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty :> 
they shall behold the land that is very far ofif.* 

18 Thy heart shall meditate terror. Where is 



h Psi. 15:2. ^ Or. ilrreils. • Or, bloo'ls. iPsa. 119:37. f Ueb. Iicigkts, 
high places. J John 17:21. t lleb. of far distances. 



4. Your spoil shall be gathered ; the spoil of tiie Assyrian 
host by the Jews. Like the gathering of the caterpillar; as 
locusts gather and devour every thing. Shall he run upon 
them ; more literally, " shall one run upon it ;" that is, upon 
the spoil of the Assyrians. 

6. Thy times — his treasure; the reference is to the Jewish 
people. Compare note on verse 2. 

7. Shall crfi without; the reference probably is to tho 
event recorded in 2 Kings 18:37. 

8. He; the Assyrian. The covenant; 2 Kings 18:14-16. 
Despised the cities; 2 Kings 18:34, 35. 

9. Lebanon is ashamed — shake off their fruits ; a figurative 
description of the desolation caused by the Assyrian inva- 
sion. 

11. Ye; tho Assyrians. Your breath; your proud and 
impious spirit. 

12. The people ; the nations assembled against God's peo- 
ple. As the burnings of lime ; consumed as by the intense 
fire of a brick-kiln. 

13. What I heme done; what I, Jehovah, have done in the 
destruction of my enemies. The immediate reference is 
to the destruction of Sennacherib's host. But this repre- 
sents the vengeance that shall fall on all God's enemies to 
the end of time. 

14. Are afraid; the terrible judgment of God on their 
enemies fills them with awe. Who among us shall dwell; 
or, can dwell ; the words of the hypocrites and sinners. 
If such be the power of God's wrath, who can endure its 
fierce flame for ever? 

16. He shall dicell on high ; the same almighty power that 
has overthrown the enemies of God's people, and filled 
sinners in Zion with amazement, shall be to the righteous 
a munition of rocks. 

17. The king in his beauty; the King of Zion in his di- 
vine beauty and majesty. They shall behold— far off; the 
probable meaning is, that the righteous, no longer shut 
up and straitened, shall behold distant regions added to 
God's kingdom. Psa. 2:8. 

18. Shall meditate terror. Mliere is the scribe 7 shall call to 
mind the former days of terror, exultingly asking, Where 
is the scribe ? etc. The scribe— weigher, margin— and 
counter of the towers, are those of the Assyrian army. 

801 



The privikffes 



ISAIAH XXXIV. 



of the fiodlt/. 



the srribe? wlicre is the receiver?* where is he 
that counted tlie towers? 

19 Thou shalt not see a fierce peoph>, a people 
of a deeper speech than thou canst poi-ceivc; of a 
stammering* ton<riie, ^Aa/Z/wu cans/ not understand. 

20 Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities : 
thine eyes shall sec .Jerusalem a quiet habitation, 
a tabernacle (haf. shall not be taken down ; not 
one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, 
neitlier sliall any of the cords thereof be broken." 

21 But there the glorious LoKD u-iU be unto us a 
place of iiroad rivers and streams;' wherein shall 
go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant ship 
pass thereby. 

22 For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our 
lawgiver,' the Lord is our king; he will save us. 

23 Tiiy taekliiigs arc loosed;' they could not 
well strengtiicn their mast; they could not spread 
the sail : tlien is the prey of a great spoil divided : 
the lame take the prey." 

24 And tlio inhabitant shall not say, I am sick :" 
the people that dwell therein sha'lbe forgiven timr 
iniquity.'' 

CIIAPTKIl XX XIV. 

1 The judgments wherewith God revengcth his churcli. II The det^o- 
lation of her enemies. IG The certainty of the propiiecy. 

COME near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, 
ye people:" let the earth iiear, ' and all tluit 
is therein ;' the world, and all things that come 
forth of it. 
2 For th(! indignation of the Lord is upon all 

* Hell, wtiglirr. t Or, ridiruloun. ' Rfv. 3:12. 1 Heb. broad of sjiaus, 
or hands. S Heb. statute-maker. I Or, t/iey have forsaken tky tarktings. 
I> ICor. 1:27 cRev. ai:4. "l Jcr. 5U:20. cPsa. 49:1. (Dcut. 32:1. 
1 Heb. the fulness thereof, s Zeph. 3:8. •> Psa. 102:20; Ezek. 32:7, 8; 



19. Shalt not see; shalt no longer see. A stammering 
tongue; a foreign Ianf;naf;e. 

20. Shall ever he remni:ril ; tliis promise has its complete 
fulfilment to the spiritual .Jerusalem, the church of God, 
of which the earthly Jerusalem was the representative. 

21. Wilt be unto us a place of broad rivers; which give 
fertility and strength. Galley with oars — gallant ship; that 
is, galley or ship of the enemy. It shall be a safe river. 

23. Til II Incklings are loosed; the enemy are addressed 
under the figure of a dismantled ship. A great spoil ; the 
spoil of the Assyrian host. The lame; among God's peo- 
ple ; Ro powerless are their once victorious enemies. 

21. Inhabitant ; of the spiritual Zion. Shall be forgiven 
their inimtitij ; this promise was fulfilled to the Jews of 
lle/.ekiah's day only in a very imperfect sense. It mani- 
festly looks to the final issue of all (iod's interpositions in 
behalf of his church, of which the overthrow of Sennach- 
erib was an illustrious example. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. God uses wicked nations, like Assyria and Babylon, as 
" the rod of his anger," to chastise his people for their sins. 
But when he has accomplished this work, he destroys 
them as easily as ho had before rai.sed thcni to power. 

2. The repentance an<l supplication of God's people is 
the signal of his interpoHition in their behalf. 

3. The only stability of a nation is the prevalence among 
its citizens and in its counsels of wisdom, knowledge, and 
the fear of the Lord. 

14. The terrible judgments of God upon the wicked in 
this world, are such an earnest of the awful retributions 
of eternity as ought to fill all sinners with amazemcntand 
terror. 

15, IC. The man who makes God his confidence, and 

802 



he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath 7u. 
delivered thi'ui to the slaughter. 

3 Their slain also shall be cast out, and their 
stink shall come uj) out of their carcasses, and the 
mountains shall be melted with their blood. 

4 And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, 
and the heavens shall be rolled together as a 
scroll ;'■ and all their host .shall fall down, as the 
leaf falletli ofl" from the vine, and as a falling fig 
from the fig-tree. 

5 For my sword shall be bathed in heaven : be- 
hold, it shall come down upon Idumea,' and upon 
the people of my curse, to judgment. 

G The sword of the Lord is tilled with blood, it 
is made fat with fatness, and with the blood of 
lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of 
rams: for the Lord hath a sacritice in I5ozrah,J 
and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea. 

7 And the unicorns" shall come down with them, 
and the bullocks with the bulls; and their land 
sjnill be soaked* with blood, and their dust made 
fat with fatness. 

8 For it is the day of the Lord's Tengcance," 
and the year of recompenses for the controversy 
of Zion.' 

9 And the streams thereof shall be turned into 
pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and 
the land thereof shall become burning pitch.'" 

10 It shall rot be quenched night nor day; the 
smoke lliereof shall go up for ever:" from gener- 
ation to generation it shall lie waste; none shall 
pass through it for ever and ever. 



Joel 2:31 ; 3:15, 1«; Matt. 24:28; 2 Pet. 3:10; Rey. G;13, 14. i Jor. 49:7. 
i ch. fr}:l,elc. ' Or. rhinoceroses, t Ot^ drunken, k Jer. 46:10. I Mic 
6:1. m Beut. 20:23. ■■ Rev. 13:2. 3. 



obeys his law, is safe amid the most fearful convulsions 
and revolutions of nations. 

IS, 19. Every present deliverance which God vouch- 
safes to his people is a pledge of all needful future help ; 
and as such it should be remembered with devout thanks- 
giving and gladness. 

20-24. Whatever future trials await God's church, tho 
final issue of them all sliiiU be her establishment in per- 
petual holiness and tranquillity. 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

God is about to execute judgments upon the enemies 
of his people. Among these Edom is specified by name, 
because of its peculiar ournity to Judah. I'salm ]:!7:i; 
Ezek. 25:12; Ohad. 10-14. Its doom, like that of Moab, 
chap. 25:10, and that of Philistia, Edom, .Moab, and Am- 
nion, chap. 11:14, stands as a type of tho destruction 
which awaits all the foes of Zion. 

2. lie hath vltcrlij destroyed them ; tho prophet speaks 
of the future desolation as already past, because God had 
decreed it. 

4. The host of heaven sliall be dissolved ; sec note on chap. 
13:10. 

5. Bathed ; with the \)lood of Edom. In heaven; becaose 
God who wields it is in heaven. 

6. Lambs — goats — rams; like "unicorns" and "bul- 
locks" in the next verse, representing tho Idumeans un- 
der the figure of animals slaughtered for a sacrifice. 

7. Unicorns; probably wild bulTiilocs ; that is, the most 
fierce and mighty among tho people. Come down ; to tho 
slaughter. 

9.10. 77Kr«(/; of Edom. Slmll be turned into pitch — shall 
go up for ever ; a figurative description of complete deso- 
lation, drawn from the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah. 



IVoc-i of the ungodly. 



ISAIAH XXXVI. 



Gospel hlci 



AH. .pi. 11 But the cormoraut" and tlie bittern 
■13. shall possess it;' the owl also and tiie 
raven shall dwell in it: and he sliall stretch out 
upon it the line of confusion,'' and the stones of 
emptiness. 

12 They shall call the nobles thereof to the king- 
dom, but none shall be there, and all her princes 
shall lie notiiing. 

13 And thornsshall comeupin her palaces, nettles 
and brambles in the fortresses thereof: and itsluill 
be a habitation of dragons, and a court for owls.* 

14 The wild beasts of tiie desert* shall also meet 
wifii the wild beasts of the island,^ and the satyr 
sliall cry to his fellow; the screech-owl' also shall 
rest there, and find for herself a place of rest. 

15 There shall the great owl make her nest, and 
lay, and hatch, and gather under her shadow : 
there sliall the vultures also be gathered, every 
one witli her mate. 

16 H Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and 
read :" no one of these shall fail,'' none sliall want 
her mate: for my mouth it hath commanded, and 
his spirit it hath gatiiered them. 

17 And he liatli cast the lot for them, and his 
hand hath divided it nnto them by line: they 
shall possess it for ever, from generation to gen- 
eration shall tiiey dwell therein. 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

1 The joyful flourishing of Christ's kinsdoni. 3 The weak are encour- 
ageJ by the virtues and privileges of the gospel. 

THE wilderness and the solitary place shall be 
glad for them ; and the desert shall rejoice, 
and blossom as the rose."^ 

2 It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even 
with joy and singing: the glory of Lebanon shall 



• Or. pdiran 


>Zeph.a:l4i Eev.lS:-i. b a Kings -21 : l:). 


t Or, oslric/ies; 


Heb. (lattghter 


! of tlic owl; ch 13:21, 22. I Heb. Ziim 


S Heb. Ijim. 


X Or, niglH mc 


nsur. ' ch. 8:20; John 5::39i 2 Pet. 1:19. 


d Matt. 5:IH; 


Luke-Jl::J!. = 


ch. 55:12,1:1. f Hos. U:5, S. sHeb.l2:12 


H Heb. hashj. 



11-15. The cormorant — the vultures; compare notes on 
chap. 13:21, 22. He shall stretch out — the stones of emptiness ; 
he shall measure it with line and plummet for utter deso- 
lation. To the kingdom ; that is, to defend and maintain it. 

lf>. Seek ye out of the book of tlic Lord ; God challenges his 
people to compare the prophecy with its fulfilment. No 
one of these; these inhabitants of desolated places. 

17. Cast the lot for them — divided it — h\j line ; bath allotted 
it to them for their habitation. 

INSTRUCTION. 

The utter and perpetual desolation of the nations that 
anciently opposed themselves to God's covenant people, 
is at once a standing memorial of the truth of prophecy, 
and a terrible type of the destruction that awaits all the 
enemies of his church. If such be the power of God's an- 
ger in this world, who can endure that " furnace of fire " 
which " shall not be quenched night nor day," and whose 
smoke "shall go up for ever'?" 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

1. For thein ; for the judgments inflicted on the enemies 
of Zion, which prepare the way for her restoration to fer- 
tility and beauty. The desert shall rejoice, and blossom ; un- 
der this imagery is foretold the restoration of spiritual 
prosperity and fruitfulness to Zion. Ver. 7; chap. 41:17, 
19; 43:19, 20; 55:13. Compare also chap. 44:3-5, where 
the prophet gives the spiritual meaning of the figure. 

5, 6. The eyes of the blind shall be opened — the tongue of the 
dumb sing; these words have their highest fulfilment in 
the healing of men's spiritual maladies ; they include our 



be given unto It,'' the excellency of Carniel and 
Sharon ; they shall see the glory of the Lord, a/ut 
the excellency of our God. 

3 1[ Strengthen yo the weak hands, and confirin 
the feeble knees.*' 

4 Say to them that are of a fearful' heart, Be. 
strong, fear not:'' behold, your God will come 
irilh vengeance, even God %rit/i a recompense; Im 
will come and save you.' 

5 Then the eyes of the liliiid .shall be opened, 
and the ears of the deaf shall be uustopped.-i 

6 Then shall the lame wum leap as a hart, and 
the tongue of the dumb sing: for in the wilderness 
shall waters break out, and streams in the desert.'' 

7 And the parched ground shall become a pool, 
and the thirsty land springs of water :' in the hab- 
itation of dragons, where each lay, shall be grass 
with reeds and rushes.* 

8 And a highway shall be there, and a way, and 
it shall lie called The way of holiness ; the unclean 
shall not ]iassoverit ;'" but it shall he for those :* the 
wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein. 

9 No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast 
shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there;" 
but the redeemed shall walk there: 

10 And the ransomed of the Lord shall return," 
and come to Zion with songs'" and everlasting joy 
upon their heads:'' they shall obtain joy and glad- 
ness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away."' 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

1 Sennacherib invadeth Judah. 4 Rabshakeh sent by Sennacherib, by 
bla.spheiTious persuasions soiiciteth the people to revolt. '2'2 His -wortls 
are told to Hezekiah. 

OW it came to pass in the fourteenth year of 
king Hezekiah, that Sennacherib king of As- 



N 



h ch. 44:2. i ch. 2.5:9: Luke 21:2,^. 


i Matt. 11:5. k ch. 41:18; 4.3:19 


1 John 4:14; 7:3S. • Or, a court for 


reeils. rn ch. 52:1; Joel 3:17; Rev 


•21 ;27. t Or,/or lie .■>hall be loi(/i lliem 


oEzek. 34:25. och. 51:11. P Rev 


5:9. qjude24. rEev.7:17; 21:4. 





Lord's miracles only as parts of his whole work of re- 
demption. 

8. There ; in the wilderness, heretofore barren and path- 
less. For those ; for " the redeemed," ver. 10. 

10. Shall return, and come to Zion; shall return from their 
captivity by this highway, and come to their home on 
mount Zion. The return of God's people from captivity 
is here an emblem of all the deliverances which he vouch- 
safes to them in this world, and of their final introduction 
to the heavenly Zion. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-7, Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, and Rome, the ancient 
persecutors of God's church, were once in great power, 
and spreading themselves on every side. But they have 
passed away "for ever. So shaU it be with all her enemies, 
while she shall be built up on their ruins, and shall ex- 
tend her borders more and more, till the whole earth is, 
through her, fiUed with the fruits of righteousness. 

8-10. The highway of salvation, cast up by prophets 
and apostles under God's direction, is both plain and saf'. 
No honest inquirer after truth can fail to find it, or gi> 
astray after he has entered upon it. It is guarded on both 
sides by God's presence and power, and all who walk in 
it shall finally enter the heavenly Jerusalem "with songs 
and everlasting joy upon their heads." 

CHAPTER XXXVL 

1. Sennacherib — came up; the occasion of this invasion was 
Hezekiah 's refusal to serve the king of Assyria. 2 Kings 
18:7, compared with 2 Kings lC:7-9. 
803 



SennacAerib's invasion. 



ISAIAH XXXVII, 



Rahshakehh hiasphtmy. 



Syria came up against all the defenccd cities of 
Judah, and took tliem." 

2 And the king of Assyria sent Habshakoh from 
Lachif^Ii to Jerusalem unto king llezekiali with a 
great army. And lie stood by the conduit of the 
upper pool iu the highway of tlic fuller's field. 

3 Then came fortii unto him Eliakim, Ililkiah's 
son. whicli xoas over the house, and Sliebna the 
scribe,* and Joah, Asapli's son, the recorder. 

4 1 And Rabshakoh said unto them, Say ye now 
to Hczekiah, Thus saitli the groat king, the king 
of As.syria, What confidence is this wherein thou 
trustest? 

5 I say, sayest thou, (but they are but vain words,*) 
I have counsel and strength for war :* now on whom 
dost tliou trust, that thou rcbellest against mc? 

6 Lo, tliou trustest in tlic staiY of tliis broken 
reed, on Egy|)t: whereon if a man lean, it will 
go into liis liand, and jtierce it: so w I'liaraoh 
king of Egypt to all that trust in him. 

7 But if thou say to mc. We trust in the Lord 
our God : is it not he, whose high places and 
whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away," and said 
to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship be- 
fore this altar? 

8 Now therefore give pledges,^ I pray thee, to 
my master the king of Assyria, and I will give 
thee two thousand horses," if thou be able on thy 
part to sot riders upon tiiem. 

9 How then wilt thou turn away the face of one 
captain of the least of my master's servants, and put 
thy trust on Egypt for ciiariots and for iiorsemen V 

10 And am I now come up witiiout tlie Lord 
against tiiis land to destroy it? tiio Lord said unto 
me, Go up against this land, and destroy it.' 

11 •[ Then said Eliakim and Siiobna and Joah 
unto Rabshakeii, Speak, 1 jiray liiec, unto tiiy ser- 
vants in the Syrian language ; for we understand 
it: and speak not to us in the Jews' language, in 
the ears of tlic people tliat are on the wall. 

12 But Rabshakeh said. Hath my master sent me 
to thy master and to thee to speak these words?' 
hath he not sent me to the men that sit upon the 
wall, that they may cat their ow-n dung, and drink 
their own piss with you? 

13 1[ Then Rabshakeii stood, and cried with a loud 
voice in tiie Jews' language,*-' and said, Hear ye the 
words of the great king, tiie king of Assyria." 

14 Tiius saith tiie king. Let not llezekiali de- 
ceive you: for he shall not be able to deliver you. 

15 Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the 



• a Kini;< H: 13, flc. ■ 2 Chr. 3-i: 1, clc. * Or, scerelary. t Hob. n word of 
tips, i Or, h^aroiinxela/ul .itrenffth are for tfte war. I^'J Kinpii IS:4. I Or, 
hoslaga. ' l'«i. •J(l:7,8; H-)!!. 14:3. d Jor. 2:00. • ch. 37:'iS; Amo«3:ll. 
n. 4:37. iPn. 71:10, II* 



' Pm. 3l:l'! 



...... JJor - 

. 17:10-1:). hr«a. S2:0, 7; Dan. 



2. Tiic kin^ of Asxtjria sent Rabshakeh; between this in- 
vasion and mat recorded in tlio previous verse, ITcze- 
kiah liad endeavored to coneiliato the kinp of Assyria, as 
recorded 2 Kiii;:;s 18: M-IR. Tartan and Habsaris accom- 
panied Rabsliaiich. 2KinpslR:17. 7vic/h.5/i,- in the south 
of Judah. llic upper pool; see nolo on chap. 7:3. 

7. Wliosc liif^h places — UrzekinU hntli Inkcn nicny; he con- 
founds, either ij^norantly or designedly, the high places 
and altars of tlic false gods with those of Jehovah. See 
note to 2 Kings 18:22. 

8. Pledges; hostages, as eepurity against nnnilmr rebel- 
lion. 

804 



Lord,' saying. The Lord will surely de- g »',^- 
liver us: this city shall not be delivered "w* 
into till' liaiid of tlie king of Assyria. 

IC Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith the 
king of As.>yria. Make an agreement with me by a 
present,' and come out to me: and eat ye every 
one of his vine, and every one of his fig-tree,' and 
drink ye every one the waters of his own cistern ; 

17 Until I come and take you away to a land 
like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a 
land of liread and vineyards.'' 

18 Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying. 
The Loiu) will deliver us.' Ilatli any of the gods 
of the nations delivered his land out of the hand 
of the king of Assyria? 

19 Where are the gods of Hamatli and Arpad? 
wiiere are the gods of Sepharvaim? and have they 
delivered Samaria out of my hand?'" 

20 Wlio are they among all tlie gods of these 
lands, that have delivered their land out of my 
hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out 
of my hand?" 

21 But they held their peace, and answered him 
not a word : for the king's commandment was, 
saying. Answer him not." 

22 'i Then came Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, 
that was over the iiousehold.and Shebna the scribe, 
and Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder, to Hez- 
ekiah with their clothes rent, and told liira the 
words of Rabshakeh. 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 

1 llczehiah mournin:ison(leth to Is,^iah to pray for tlu-m. 6 Isaiah com- 
fortfth them. 8 Senn.iclierib, goiiiff to encounter Tirhakah, sendeth 
a blasphemous letter to Hezckiali. M Hezckjah's prayer. 'Jl Isaiah's 
prophecy of tlie pride and destruction of Sennacherib, and the ^ood of 
Zinn. 3G An angel slayeth tlie Assyrians. 37 Sennacherib is slain 
at Nineveh by liis own sons. 

A NO it came to pass, when king Hezekiah 
X V heard jV,'' that he rent his dotlies, and cov- 
ered himself with sackcloth,'' and went into the 
house of the Lord.' 

2 And he sent Eliakim, who w«,?over the house- 
hold, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the 
priests, covered with sackcloth," unto Isaiah the 
prophet tlie son of Anioz. 

3 And tiiey said unto him. Thus saith Hezekiah, 
Tills (hiy is a day of trouble,' and of rebuke," and 
of l)Ias])!ieniy :^ for tlie children are come to the 
birth, and there is not strength to bring I'ltrtli.'' 

4 It may be the Lord tJiy God will hear the 
words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria 



1 Or, Sfrk myhvorbya jirnenl ; Hub. Mnkr wilh mi n blcssinf;. I Zeeh. 
3:10. I< Prov. 12:10. I D»n. 3:15. ■» a Kingm l(<:10. o ch. :17:I8, 19: 
45:10,17. o Pmv. 20:4. P 2 Kinp 10:1, eto. qJobl:-JO. rvcr. 14. • Jo«l 
1:13. I P«ii. 5U:l.'i. u ch. 25:S; IUy. 3: 10. M3u tnovomlioH. » ch. 06:9. 



9. How then ; tliat is, if Uiou caust hardly place riders 
upon two thousand horses. 

19. Ilamath — Arpad; see note on chap. 10:9. Sepharva- 
im ; King on the eastern bank of the Euphrates, above 
liabylon. 

For Instructions on this and the following chapter, see 
2 Kings chapters 18, 19, where tlio same narrative is re- 
corded. 

CHAPTER XXXV 11. 

4. Tlte remnant that i.i left ; the reninant of .hulah whose 
cities Sennacherib was now ravaging. 



Message to Isaiah. 



ISAIAH XXXVII. 



The Assyrians warned. 



A « -iw*. liis niastor liath sent to reproacli tlic livino; 
71" God," and will reprove the words which 

the Lord thy God hutli heard: wherefore lift up 
thy prayer for the remnant that is left."'' 

5 So the servants of king llczekiah came to 
Isaiali. 

6 H And Isaiah said nnto them, Thus shall ye 
say unto your master. Thus saith the Lord, Be 
not afraid of the words that thou hast heard,*" 
wher(^with the servants of the king of Assyria 
have blasphemed me. 

7 Behold, I will send a blast upon him,* and he 
shall hear a rumor, and return to his own land; 
and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his 
own land. 

8 1l So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king 
of Assyria warring against Libnah:'' for he had 
heard that he was departed from Lachish." 

9 And he heard say concerning Tirhakah king 
of Ethiopia, He is come forth to make war with 
thee. And when ho heard it, he sent messengers 
to Hezekiah, saying, 

10 Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Ju- 
dali, saying. Let not thy God, in wiiom thou trust- 
est, deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be 
given into the hand of the king of Assyria. 

11 Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of 
Assyria have done to all lands by destroying them 
utterly;'' and shalt thou be delivered? 

12 Have the gods of the nations delivered them 
which my fathers have destroyed, as Gozan,'' and 
Haran,'' and Rezeph, and the children of Eden 
which were in Telassar?' 

13 Where is the king of Hamath, and the king 
of Arpad,' and the king of the city of Scpliarvaim, 
Hena, and Ivah? 

14 ' And flezekiah received the letter from the 
hand of the messengers, and read it: and Heze- 
kiah went up unto the house of the Lord, and 
spread it before the Lord.'' 

15 And Hezekiah })rayed unto the Lord, saying, 

16 O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, that dwellest 
bctirecn tlie cherubim,' thou art the God,™ cvm thou 
alone," of all the kingdoms of the earth : thou hast 
made heaven and earth. 

17 Incline thine ear, Lord, and hear;" open 
thine eyes, Lord, and see:" and hear all the 



» Vcr. 23.24; ch, 51:7, S. • Hi>l>. /o/rarf. b Rom. 9:27. Cch. 43:1.2; 
51 : 12, 13. t Or. put a spirU into /urn; 1 Kinss 2'.':23 d Num. 33:20, 21 ; 
Josh. 21:13; 2Clir. 21:10. e Josh. 10:31-31. t ch. 14:17. g2Klnssl7:0; 
18:11. h Gen. 12:4; 26:10. iAraoshS. J ch. 10:9; Jer. 49:33. k ver. I ; 
Joel 2:17-20. 1 Exo.l. 2.5:22; Psa. S0:1; 99:1. m ch. 43:10, 11. n Ps.a. 
S0:10. »Dan.9:18. P.Tob36:7. 1 Heb. /a>id,i. iUeb.given. qch. 40:19, 
20; 41:7; 44.9. etc.; Psa. 115:4, etc. r ch. 42:8; Psa. 40:10. • Prov. 



7. / Will send a blast upon him ; a destroying wind ; lit- 
erally, " I will put a spirit within him," that is, probably, 
a spirit of terror. He shall hear a rumor; according to 
some, the report of the destruction of the host before Je- 
rusalem. But this host seems to have departed with Rab- 
shakeh. Ver. 8. It may liave been the report of Tirha- 
kah's preparation to attack him, which, joined with the 
loss of one hundred and eighty-five thousand men of his 
own arm)', hastened his return to Nineveh. 

8. Rabshakeh returned ; apparently with his armj', finding 
his force insufiicient to take Jerusalem. Libnah ; another 
city in the south of Judah. 

9. When he heard ; this report increased his anxiety to 
bring Uezekiah to a speedy submission. 

12. Gozan, and Haran ; regions of Mesopotamia, the 



words of Sennacherib, which hatii sent to reproach 
the living God. 

18 Of a truth. Lord, the kings of Assyria have 
laid waste all the nations,* and their countries, 

19 And have cast^ their gods into the fire: for 
they ivere no gods, but the work of men's hands,'' 
wood and stone: therefore they have destroyed 
them. 

20 Now therefore. O Lord our God, save us 
from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the 
earth may know that thou ari the Loud, even thou 
only.'- 

21 IT Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto 
Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith the Lord God of 
Israel, Whereas thou hast prayed to me against 
Sennacherib king of Assyria:" 

22 This is the word which the Lord hath spoken 
concerning him : The virgin, the daughter of Zion, 
hath despised thee, a7id laughed thee to scorn ; the 
daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at 
thee. 

23 Whom hast thou reproached and Idasphemed? 
and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and 
lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the Holy 
One of Israel.' 

24 By thy" servants hast thou reproached the 
Lord, and hast said. By the multitude of my char- 
iots am I come up to the height of the mountains, 
to the sides of Lebanon ; and I will cut down the 
tall cedars thereof, ami the choice fir-trees there- 
of:^ and I will enter into the height of his border, 
and the forest of his Carmel.* 

2.5 I have digged, and drunk water ; and with 
the sole of my feet have I dried up all the rivers 
of the besieged places.* 

26 Hast thou not heard long ago, hoio I have 
done it ; and of ancient times, that I have formed 
it? now have I brought it to pass, that thou 
shouldest be to lay waste dcfenccd cities info ruin- 
ous heaps.'" 

27 Therefore their inhabitants were of small 
power,^ they were dismayed and confounded : they 
were as the grass of the field, and as the green 
herb, as the grass on the housetops, and as corn 
blasted before it he grown up. 

28 But I know thy abode,' and thy going out, 
and thy coming in, and thy rage against me. 



15:29; Luke 18:1. 1 Psa. 31:1S; 40:1,2. I Heb lltehntidofthy. T Heb. 
taltness of the cedars thereof; and the riioiee of the Jir-trees thereof. ' Or, 
and hi.ifrtdtf tit field. \ (Jr, fenced and elo.'ied. 1 Heb. how / /mre made /( 
long ago, and fonntd it of ancient times? should I now bring it to be laid 
lon'ste, and defenced cities to be ruinous heaps? " ch. 10:5, G. S Heb. short 
of hand. I Or, sating. 



former lying on the C'hcbar. 2 Kings 18:11. Rezeph; 
west of the Euphrates. 

24. / «v// cut down the tall cedars thereof ; the destructioai 
of the forests of Lebanon is put figuratively for the deso- 
lation of tiie nations, with every thing in them that was 
" high and lifted up." Compare chap. 2: 12-16. 

25. / have digged, and drunic water; where water was 
wanting for my host, I have provided it. Dried up alt the 
rivers of the besieged places ; or, " all the rivers of Egypt." 
I have, as it were, annihilated them with the feet of my 
armies: they have not beeu able to oppose to me any 
resislance. 

26. I have done it— formed it ; appointed in my eternal 
counsels what I have now brought to pass, namely, " that 
thou shouldest be to lay waste defenced cities." 

SOS 



The Assytians destroyed. 



ISAIAH XXXVIII. 



HezekiaKs sickness. 



29 Because thy racrc against mc, and tliy tumult, 
is come up into mine oars, therefore will I put my 
hook in thy nose, anrl my bridle in tliy lips," and 
I will turn thee back by the way by which thou 
camest. 

30 And this shall he a sign unto thee, Ye shall 
cat this year such as growcth of itself; and the 
second year that which sprinsreth of the same : and 
in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vine- 
yards, and oat the fruit thereof. 

31 And the remnant that is escaped of the house 
of Judah* shall again take root downward, and 
bear fruit u])ward: 

32 For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a rem- 
nant, and they tiiat escape out of mount Zion:* 
the zeal of the Loud of hosts shall do this. 

33 Therefore thus saitli tlie Lord concerning the 
king of xVssyria, lie sliall not come into this city, 
nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with 
shields,' nor cast a bank against it. 

3-1 By the way tliat he came, by the same shall 
he return, and shall not come into this city, saith 
the Lord. 

35 For I will defend this city to save it for mine 
own sake, and for my servant David's sake.'' 

36 Then tiie angofof the Loud went forth, and 
smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and 
fourscore and five thousand : and when they arose 
early iu the morning, behold, tiiey were all dead 
corpses." 

37 1 So Sennacliorib king of Assyria departed, 
and went and returned, and dwelt at Xineveii. 

38 And it came to pass, as he was worshipping 
in the house of Nisrocli his god, that Adramme- 
lech and Sharczcr his sons smote him with the 
sword;'' and they escaped into tlie land of Arme- 
nia:* and Esar-haddon his son reigned in his stead. 



C H A P T E li 

1 Hezekiahj having received 



X X X \ 1 1 1 



1 message of dc.ilh, by praytr halh Ins life 
lengthened. 8 The sun goeth ten degrees baekward, for a sign of thai 
promise. 9 His song of thanksgiving. 

IN those days was Ilezekiah sick unto deatli.'' 
And Isaiah tiie projihet tlie son of Amoz came 
unto him, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lokd, 
Set thy house in order:- for thou shalt die, and 
not live. 

2 Then Hezekiah turned his focc toward tlie 
wall, and prayed unto the Loud, 



• Ch. 3(l;aS; Ezek. 33:1. * Hob Ihe esraping of llie liouse of Jiitinli IhnI 
temaintth. t Heb llietxmping. I Ilib. shUlit. l>ch ;lS:li; .lor. I":U.'>. -M. 
«ch. 10:l-.>, clc. Och. 11;<)-1-.'. » Bob. /Irnrnl. • i King* •Jll; I , etc. ; 2 Chr. 
3'J:£I. I H«b. Gilt cJmrgrconctriiiilglliy house. IMch. i:):M: Uob. G:IU 

29. Therefore will I put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle 
in thy lips; referring to a ring or hook placed in tlio nose 
of luitamed aniniiil.s. 

30. A sifrn milo Ihcc; unto ITczckiah. This year; when 
tillage bail Ixen interrupted by tbe prcscncn of tbe ene- 
my ; 80 that there could be no seed-time for the 6eeond or 
following year. The second ijenr — and in the third year; the 
sign Becni-s to have consiKtcd in the extraordinary fertility 
of the earth during these two years, which shonld make 
its uncultivated productions suflicient for the wants of 
tho people. 

36. Theii arose; the Jews, and the Assyrians who were 
spared. They were alt dead corpses ; tho Ass^Tians that were 
smitten. 

806 



3 And said. Remember now, LonD,' I a-,','-^^;; 
beseech tlioe, liow I have walked before ':ii 
tlioc in trutli and with a perfect heart, and have 
done that which is good in thy sight. And Ilcze- 
kiali we])t sore.' 

4 1 Then came tho word of the Lord to Isaiah, 
saying, 

5 Go, and say to Ilezekiah, Thus saith the Lord, 
the God of David thy father, I have heard tiiy 
prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, 1 will add 
unto thy days fifteen years. 

And 1 will deliver thee and this city out of 
the hand nf the king of Assyria : and I will defend 
this city. 

7 And this shall be a sign unto thee from the 
Loud,'! that the Loud wili do this thing that ho 
hath spoken ; 

S Behold, I will bring again the shadow of the 
degrees, which is gone down in the sun-dial* of 
Ahaz, ten degrees backward. So the sun returned 
ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down. 

9 'i The writing of Ilezekiah kingof Judah, when 
he had been sick, and was recovered of his sickness : 

II) I said in tho cutting off of my days, I shall 
go to the gates of the grave:" 1 am deprived of 
the residue of my years. 

Ill said, 1 shall not see the Lord, even tlie Loud, 
in the land of the living:' I shall behold man no 
more with the inhabitants of the world. 

12 Mine age is dci)artod, and is romovod from 
mc as a sliephord's tent: I liave cut oft" like a 
weaver my life: he will cut me oft' with pining 
sickness:* i'roin day even to night wilt thou make 
au end of mo. 

13 I reckoned till morning, that, as a lion, so 
will he break all my bones : from day even to night 
wilt ttiou make an end of me. 

14 Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: 
I did mourn as a dove:-' mine eyes fail with loolc- 
»'«.'; upward: Lord, I am oppressed ; undertake 
for me.* 

15 What shall I say? ho hath both spoken unto 
mo, and himself hath done it : 1 shall go softly all 
mv years in the bitterness of my soul. 

10 O Lord, by these thinprs men live," and in all 
tiiesc things is "the life of my spirit: so wilt ihou 
recover mo, and make mc to live. 

17 Behold, for peace I had' great bitterness; 
but thou hast in love to mv soul dilirered it from 



1 Ilcb. Willi grinl tltrpiiig. t cV 
sun. It Job 7:7. etc. , Vsa. 77:.l. f 
J ch. 5'J: 1 1 . 1 Or, ras! mr . k Ma 



14. • Ucb ilrerrrs hij. or iril* iht 
's.i. -riA-l t Or. from Ihe Ihmm. 
I Or, on my prate canio. 



CHAPTER XXXA^II. 

12. From day even to ni;;lil ; day and night, that is, by a 
sickness that has no intermission. Compare (ien. 6:7, 
marginal reading. 

l.'i. \y hut shall I.'mii'l this verse refers to God's second 
message promising dim restoration from his present sick- 
ness. Ill llir h liter ne^s of my soid: in humility and contri- 
tion, from the remembrance of this chastisement. Ver. 17. 

16. Bii these things— in nil llicsc things; by Uod's forgiv- 
ing love and healing power. 

17. Ca.il alt my .tim hchind thy back; forgiven them. 
ITezekiah regards his sickness as a chastisement for hia 
sins. Compare verse 15. 



Embasty of Mcrodach. 



ISAIAH XL. 



Promulgut'um of the gospel. 



ui-'S ^^^ P'*"* '^^ corruption r'' for tliou liast cast 

713 ' all my sins beliiiul thy back. 

18 For the grave cannot praise thee,'' death can- 
not celebrate thee : they that go down into the pit 
cannot hope for thy truth. 

1!) The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as 
I do this day: the father to the children shall 
make known thy truth.'-' 

20 The LoiM) icas ready lo save me: therefore 
we will sing my songs to the stringed instru- 
ments all the days of our life in the house of the 

LOKH. 

21 For Isaiah had said, Let them take a lump 
of figs, and lay it for a plaster upon the boil, and 
he shall recover. 

22 Hezckiah also had said, What is the sign that 
I shall go up to the house of the Lord?'' 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

1 Merodarli-baladan, sendinj; to visit Hezekiah because of the wonder, 
hath iiotire of his treasures. 3 Isaiah, understanding thereof, foretell- 
eth the Babylonian captivity. 

AT that time Merodach-baladan, the son of 
Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letlcr.s and 
a present to Hezekiah:"^ for he had heard that he 
had been sick, and was recovered. 

2 And Hezckiah was glad of them, and showed 
them the house of his precious things,^ the silver, 
and the gold, and the spices, and the precious 
ointment, and all tlic house of his armor,' and all 
that was found in his treasures: there was noth- 
ing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that 
Hezekiah showed them not. 

3 " Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king 
Hezekiah, and said unto him. What said these 



• i\i:h. loved mij soul front the int. a I'si 40:2 b I'sa. (J;j. cPsa. '■^:3, 
4. if Psi S4:-J e 2Kmgi'j:i:l-J, etc.; -J Chr. :'2:3I. ^ Or, splarij. I Or. 
jewels; Heb vessels, or iiistrame7ils. t Proir. '25:5. e 2 Kings 2.5:0, etc 



IS. Cannot praise thee ; sec note on Psa. C:5. Hope for 
tlitj truth ; for the further manifestation of it in this world. 
"22. Had said; see 2 Kings 20:8-11. 
INSTRUCTION'S. 

12. No ap;p, nor strength, nor station can exempt us from 
liability to sudden death in the midst of our rlii lislii il t n- 
terinises. It is our wisdom to hold ourK: hr .s ;iKv:Lys 
ready to leave tli is life witli all its labors, at (iniJs liidiJiiig. 

l:i. The best relief in times of deep anguish, is to pour 
out our hearts to God in prayer. 

15. The remembrance of past afflictions should till us 
with humility in view of the sinfulness which made them 
necessary, and with gratitude in view of God's undeserved 
goodness in delivering us from them. 

18. Good men desire the continuance of life mainly for 
the opportunities which it gives of glorifying God bafore 
their fellow-men. 

Further instructions see in commentary on 2 Kings 
20:1-11. 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

1. Ulerndacli-baladan ; called also Berodach-baladan, 2 
Kiir^s 20: 12. Knig of Babijlon; Babylon was at this time 
a dependency of Assyria, and governed by viceroys. But 
Merodach-baladan, as history informs us, sought to make 
himself independent. For this reason, probably, he court- 
ed the friendship of Hezekiah. 

2. Was glad of them, and shou'ed them ; he was unduly 
elated in view of the attention shown him by the king of 
Babylon, as well as of his own power and riches. 2 Chron. 
32:25. 

7. Of thy sons — they shall be eunuehs ; this was fulfilled, 



men? and from whence came they unto thee? 
And Hezekiah said, 'J'hey arc come from a far 
country unto me, (mn from Babylon. 

4 Then said he. What have they seen in thy 
house? And Hezekiah answered, All that is in 
my house have they seen: there is nothing among 
my treasures that I have not showed them.' 

5 Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word 
of the Lord of hosts: 

() Behold, the days come, that all that is in thy 
house, and that which thy fatlicrs have laid up in 
store until this day, shall be carried lo Babylon:'-' 
nothing shall be left, saith the Lord.'' 

7 And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, 
which thou shalt beget, shall they take away ; and 
they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of 
Babylon.* 

8 Then said Hezckiah to Isaiah, Good is the 
word of the Lord which thou hast sjioken.' He 
said moreover, For there shall be jieace and truth 
in my days. 

CHAPTER XL. 

3 Tlie preachin? of John Baptist. 
12 The propliet by the oninipotency 
CSS, -6 coniforteth the people. 

COMFORT ye, comfort ye my people, saith 
your God.J 

2 Speak ye comfortably' to Jerusalem, and cry 
unto her, that her warfare"' is accomplished, that 
her iniquity is yiardoned: for she hath received 
of the Lord's hand double for all her sins." 

3 % The voice of him that crieth in the wilder- 
ness,' Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make 
straight in the desert a highway for our God."' 

h Jer. au.5. S Fullilled, Dan l:-_'-7 
II Ueb. to the heart. H Ur, appoiiiltcl tirm 



1 The promulgation of the gospel. 
9 Tlie preaching of the apostles 
of God, 18 and his incomparabl 



not in his immediate ofl'spring, but in their posterity. 
See Dan. 1 : 3, where by " the king's seed " are meant tho 
descendants of the Jewish kings. 

8. For there shall be peace; he expresses his gratitude to 
God for this mitigation of the threatened chastisement. 

For Instructions, see 2 Kings 20:12-19. 

CHAPTER XL. 

This and the remaining chapters of Isaiah were prob- 
ably written by the prophet at a later period. Their 
immediate design was to comfort true believers, in view 
of the heavy calamities with which God had visited his 
ancient covenant people for their sins, and the still heav- 
ier calamities that awaited tliem in the Babylonish cap- 
tivity, which he had already foretold. But since that cap- 
tivity was only one of a series of chastisements designed 
for the purification of God's church ; and her deliverance 
from it was to be but an earnest of higher deliverances in 
the more distant future, especially of the great spiritual 
deliverance from sin through the incarnation and death 
of Jesus Christ, we must understand this portion of Isaiah, 
which makes one connected whole, as covering the entire 
history of the cliurch to the end of time. Its great theme 
is expressed in the introductory verse : " Comfort yc, com- 
fort ye my people, saith your God." 

2. Double; double chastisement; that is, according to 
the ordinary measure of God's dealings with men. 

3. The voice of him that crieth in the wilder ness; see Matt. 
3:3; Mark 1:3; Luke 3:4; John 1:23. The mission of 
John the Baptist was a most striking fulfilment of this 
prophecy in a literal way. It is also fulfilled, more indi- 
rectly, in all those movements of God's providence and 

SOT 



The glory nf God 



ISAIAH XL. 



contrasted with idols. 



4 Every valley sliall be exalted, ami every moun- 
tain and hill shall bo made low: and the crooked 
shall be made strai.irlit,' and tlie rough places 
plain:*" 

5 And the glory of tlic LoKD shall be revealed, 
and all flesh shall see it together: for the mouth 
of the Lonn hath spoken it. 

6 The voice said, Cry. And he said, "What shall 
I cry? All flesii is grass, and all the goodliness 
thereof w as the flower of the field:'' 

7 Tiie grass witiiereth, the flower fadeth ; be- 
cause the spirit of the Loud bloweth upon it: 
surely the people is grass. 

8 The grass withcreth, the flower fadeth:'' but 
the word of our God .shall stand for over.'' 

9 10 Zion, that Ijringest good tidings,* get llico 
up into tlie iiigh mountain; Jerusalem, that 
bringest good tidings,^ lift up tiiy voice with 
strength; lift it up, bo not afraid; say unto tlie 
cities of .ludali, Beiiold your fiod! 

10 Behold, tiie Lord God will oouie with strong 
hand,' and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his 
reward is with him,'' and his work' before him. 

11 He shall feed his flock like a sheplierd:' he 
sliall gatlier the lauibs with his arm, and carry 
t/tem in his bosom, a/id shall gently lead those that 
are with yoiuig.* 

12 irWiio iiath measured the waters in tiie hol- 
low of his iiand, and meted out heaven witii the 
span, and {;omi)reliended the dust of the earth in 
a measure,- and weighed the mountains in scales, 
aud the hills in a lialance? 

13 Wlio liatli directed the Spirit of the Loud," 
or heirif^ his counsellor* hath taught him? 

14 Witii wiiom took he counsel, and ir/io in- 
structed liim,' and taught him in the ))ath of judg- 
ment, and taught iiim knowledge, and showed to 
him tlic way of understanding?' 

15 Behold, tiie nations arc as a drop of a bucket, 
and are counted as tlie small dust of tlie balance: 
beliold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing. 

Ifi And Lebanon is not sufficient to Imrn, nor 
the beasts tiiereof sufficient for a burnt-olTcring. 

IT All nations before him are as iiotliing;'' and 
they are counted to him less than notliing, and 
vanity.' 



• Or. a ■ilrnii-ht pltirr. t Or. a Jilain plate. » ch. 4.5:a. b IVa. Ii«: l.'i: 
Ja«.l:lU.ll t 1 Pot. 1:21, ai. •! Mark i:l;.')l. X Or, Ihou Ihat Irllat good 
liilins.1 to '/.loiii ch "ll-.a? i Or. thou IhnI lelln:! gomi liiliiis:s lo J' riiMletn. 
%0r. annin^t tlif Strom: e Rnv. 'J-iilS. ^ Or, rceompensf for himvork; ch. 
49 i I P«a -it I , .lolin 10:11. • Or. gil-e .!ii--jt. t Hcb. tierrr. f Rom. 
Il::)l. I Hob ni-i/i o//iiwoK)i.«;. i lUh. made liim iimlaslaiul. I Ilcb. 



Spirit, by wliich ho j)repares the way for the revival of his 
cause in regions of Kpiritiial darlcness and desolation. 

4. Every viillcij .iliall he exalted — the crooked shall be made 
straight, and the roit;rh places plain; all obstacles to the 
redemption of (IcxI'k people shall be taken outof the way. 

fi. The voice mid, Crij; the voice of .lehovah. He said ; 
the messenger to whom .leliovah's command was directed. 
All flesh is grass, ■ this, with the two following verses, con- 
tains God's answer to the (piestion, "What shall I cry?" 

8. The word of our fiod ; his word of promise to Zion. 
which is here contrasted with the frailty of man. 

9. Be not afraid; to announce the pood tidings, for thon 
shalt not disappoint the hopes of those that hear them. 

10. Ills work; m, as the margin, "his recompense for 
his work;" that is. the recompense which he liim,self 
receives in his redeemed people, ('ompare chap. 53:11, 
» ne shall see of the travail of his soul, and be satisfied." 

b08 



18 TTowhomthen will ve liken God? or \}ym2. 

, ... ., I *' .... IS. C uboui 

what likeness will ye compare unto liini:^ t'^. 

19 The workman melteth a graven image.'' and 
the goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold, and 
casteth silver chains. 

20 He that is so impoverished that he hath no 
oblation' chooseth a tree that will not rot ; he 
seeketh unto him a cunning workman to prepare 
a graven image, that shall not lie moved. 

21 Have ye not known?' have ye not heard? 
hath it not lieen told you from the bcginiiiiig?'" 
have ye not understood from the foundations of 
the earth? 

22 It is he that sittcth' upon the circle of the 
earth, and the inhabitants thereof areas grasshop- 
pers ; that stretchcth out the heavens as a curtain," 
and spreadetli them out as a tent to dwell in: 

2;' That bringoth tiie princes to nothing;" he 
niaketli the judges of the caiili as vanity. 

24 Yea, they shall not be jilanted ; yea, they shall 
not bo sown: yea, their stock siiall not take root 
in the earth: and he shall ahso blow upon them, 
and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall 
take them away as stubble. 

25 To whom then will ye liken me,'' or shall I 
be ecpial? saitii tlie Holy One. 

26 Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who 
Iiatli created these things, that bringcth out their 
host by number : he calleth them all by names 
by tiie greatness of his might,'' for that Ae is strong 
in power; not one fliilctli. 

27 Why sayest tiiou, O Jacob, and speakest, O 
Israel, My way is liid from the Lord, and my judg- 
ment is passed over from my God?" 

28 1 Hast thou not known? hast thou not-heard. 
that the everlasting God, the Lord, tlie Creator of 
tlieends of the cartli.faiiiteth not. neither is weary?* 
there is no searching of liis understanding.' 

29 He giveth ]iower to tlu; faint; oiid to them 
that have no miglit he increasetli strength." 

30 Even the youths shall faint and bi> weary, 
and the young men shall utterly fall: 

31 But they that wait upon the Loud'' shall re- 
new* thdr strengtli;" they shall mount up wiili 
wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary ;'' 
and they shall walk, and not faint.'' 

uiulrrstandings. hlUn. ■1:35. il'»a. «J:» 1 .\cla li:'JO. kch. 4l:«, 7; 
44:12, «to.; Jer. 10:3, olo. 1 llcb. it poor of otilnlion I Psl. 19:1; AcU 
14:17; Rran. 1:19,20. mRoTn.3:l,a. * Or, H>"1 f*<ll Sl"f lA. nJob9:H. 
"Job 12:21; P>.1. 107:40. P Deal. 4:21,eto. q Pm. 117:4. ' P.a. 77:7 «lo. 
>ch. .M:l. I P»a. 147:.'.; Rom. 11:33. »2Cor. I2.!l. ' Psa. S4;7; 92: 1, 
13. t lleb. <-/i<liii?«. "I'ja. ItVl:.'!. »H.-b. 12:1. r Mic. 4:5. 



22. Upon the circle of the earth; upon the vault of the 
heavens extended over the earth. 

2(i. Not onefailcth ; not one of the heavenly host fails to 
appear in its ajipointcd pliu-e. 

27. Whiisnijest thou, Jacob; from (lod's infinite perfec- 
tions, the'iirciphet argues that he cannot neglect his peo- 
|>le. Mil leai/; the way in which 1 go; that is, my situa- 
tion. } ltd from the Lord ; out of his sight and mind. Mij 
jtulginent ; my cause, which ought to come before him as 
" the Judge of all the earth." Is /)(i.v,vf(/ over from my Ooil ; 
has been neglected bv him. 

INSTlUrriONS. 

1. God has always a mess;igc of comfort for his people, 
oven in times of deep nftliction ; the end of all his dealings 
with (hem is their cstiiblishment in holiness and happi- 
ness. 

3-5. When the set time for Zion's enlargement has come, 



God mcouragcth 



ISAIAH XLI. 



his people's f. llh. 



CHAPTER XLI. 



1 God expostulatetli with his people, ahmit. his mercies to the churclu 
lU abouf. his promises, "21 and about tlie vanity of idols. 

KEEP silence before me," O islands ; and let 
the people renew their strengtli : let tliem 
come near; tiien let them sj)euk: let us come near 
together to judg-mcnt. 

2 Who raised up tiie rigliteous man' from the 
cast, called him to his foot,'' gave the nations bo- 
fore liini, and made him rule over Icings?'^ he gave 
them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stub- 
ble to his bow. 

3 He pursued them, and passed safely;* even by 
the way that he had not gone with his feet. 

4 Who hath wrought and" done it, calling the 
generations from tlie beginning? I the Lord, the 
first, and witli tlie last ;'' I am lie. 

5 Tlie isles saw it, and feared ; the ends of the 
earth were afraid, drew near, and came. 

C They helped every one his neighbor ; andciw?/ 
one said to his brotiicr. Be of good courage.* 

7 So tlie carpenter encouraged the goldsmith,^'^ 
and he tliat smootheth with tlie hammer him that 
smote the anvil,' .saying. It is ready for tlie solder- 
ing:^ and he fastened it with nails, that it should 
not be moved. 

8 But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom 
I have chosen,' the seed of Abraham my friend." 

9 Thou wJKjm I liave taken from the ends of tlie 
earth, and called tlioe from the chief men thereof 
and said unto thee, Thou art my servant; I have 
chosen tliee, and not cast thee away. 

10 'i Fear thou not;'' for I am with thee:' be 
not dismayed ; for lam thy God : I will strengthen 
thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold 
thee with the right hand of my righteousness.' 

11 Behold, all they tliat were incensed against 



» Zech. a:l:l. 


• Heb, r 


ighttoiis 


le.sj. b ch. 48:11. c Ezra. 1:2. t Heb. 


f« Jieare. <* Rev 


. 1;17; 


•J: 1 3. 1 


Heb. strong, i Or, the fnuniler. e ch. 


•1(1:1!). 1 Or, the 


smtttn^ 


. 1 Or, 


saying of the solder. It is good, f P^a. 


135;4. saChr. 


JU:7; J.i 


..2:2:). 


1' ver. I'i, 14; ch. 43:5. ' Ueut. 31:1), 8 



God provides men and means for the work, and removes 
all obstacles to its accomplishment 

C-8. The successive generations of men pass away like 
the flowers of spring ; but God's promise to his church 
stands fast for ever, and he will make her "an eternal ex- 
cellency, a joy of many generations." Chap. 00:15. 

11. Our covenant God and Saviour unites with tlie maj- 
esty of an omnipotent King the gentleness and tender care 
of a sheplierd. Chap. 42:3. 

12-22, 25-28. God's infinite perfections insure the fulfil- 
ment of all his promises to his people. His power is 
absolute, and can be hindered by no obstacles ; his under- 
standing is infinite, and he cannot err or be in perplexity 
in resju'ct to the means lie shall employ; his goodness 
and truth are eternal, and he will not alter his covenant 
with those who love him. In tlie darkest days of adver- 
sity they may rest assured that he is doing all things well 
in their behalf. 

23, 2t. The plans of men are under God's control, and 
he establishes or overthrows them according to his own 
pleasure, without interfering with their freedom and re- 
sponsibility as the accountable subjects of his government. 

29-31. Despondency in God's service is sinful and un- 
reasonable, for he is both able and ready to bestow upon 
his servants any measure of strength and wisdom which 
their necessities may demand. 2 Cor. 12:9. 

CHAPTER XLI. 

1. islands; the coasts and islands of the Mediterra- 



thee shall be ashamed and confounded :" they shall 
be as nothing ; and they that strive with thee* 
shall perish. 

12 Thou shall seek them, and slialt not find thorn. 
even them that contended willi tlico : ^ ihey tliat 
war against thee*' shall be as nothing, and as a 
thing of naught. 

13 For I the Loiiu thy God will hold thy right 
hand, saving unto thee. Fear not; 1 will help 
thee.' 

14 Fear not. thou worm .Tficob, a»d ye nien» of 
Israel; I will liel)) thee, saitli the Loud, and thy 
Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. 

15 Behold, I will make thee a new sharp thresh- 
ing instrument having teeth:" thou shalt thresli 
the mountains, and beat them small, and slialt make 
the hills as chafi"." 

It) Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry 
them away, and the whirlwind sliall scatter them :" 
and tliou shalt rejoice in the Loim," and shalt 
glory in the Holy One of Israel." 

17 Whe7i the poor and needy seek water, and 
there is none, ajid their tongue faileth for thirst, I 
the Lord will hear them, / the God of Israel will 
not forsake them. 

18 I will open rivers in high places, and foun- 
tains in the midst of the valleys:" I will make the 
Avilderness a pool of water, and the dry land 
springs of water.'' 

19 I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the 
shittah-tree, and the myrtle, and the oil-tree : I will 
set in the desert the fir-tree, and thejiine, and the 
bo.x-trec together:-^ 

20 That they may see, and know, and consider, 
and understand together, that the hand of the 
Lord hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel 
hath created it. 



ich.4():-i9. Itch. 4-5:24; Zech. 12:3. • llAt. llir men of tli^ s 


r,fe. 


tHeb. 


the mm of thij contention, t Heb. the men of thy war. ' De 


ut 3'' 


2"-29. 


i Or, few men. II Heb. mouths, m Mic. 4 : 13. " Matt. 3: 12. 


Rom 


. 5:11. 


Pell. 45:2.'i. qPsa. 105:41. r Psi. 107:35. !ich..55:13. 







nean, and generally the remote regions of the west. Let 
the people rcneio their strength ; God challenges the heathen 
natiinis to vindicate before him, if they can, the claims of 
their deities. 

2. IVho raised up — called him to his foot ; the reference is 
to Cyrus, whom God's righteousness, that is, his faithful- 
ness to his covenant people, called to execute its pur- 
poses. 

4. Calling the generations from the beginning ; calling them 
into being. With the last ; enduring while creation endures, 
that is, for ever. 

5. &iw it; the display of the attributes of God, men- 
tioned in verses 2, 3. Feared; for the cause of their idols. 
Drew near, and came; to encourage and help each other in 
the maintenance of idolatry. 

9. From the chief men thereof; or, "from the extremities 
thereof" The reference seems to be to the calling of 
Abraham. 

15. / wdl make thee ; in the Hebrew, make thee into ; 
that is, cause thee to be. A new sharp threshing instrument 
liaving teeth ; a threshing sledge, armed with points of iron 
or stone, which was drawn by oxen over the corn to sep- 
arate the grain from the ear. The threshing of grain is_ 
often, in the Old Testament, a symbol of the destruction of 
God's enemies. 

18, 19. I will open rivers — plant in the wilderness; the wil- 
derness is a symbol of adversity and affliction, as its con- 
version into well-watered and fruitful fields is of returning 
prosperity and comfort. 

809 



Vanity of idols. 



ISAIAH XLII. 



T/te office of Christ. 



21 Produce j-our cau?o,' saitli tho Lord ; bring 
forth your strong reasons, saith tlie King of Jacob. 

22 Lot tlieni liring f/iem forth, luiil show us wliut 
shall liappen:" let them show the former tilings, 
what they be, that wc may consider* them, and 
know the latter end of tlicni; or declare us things 
for to come. 

23 Show the things that arc to come hereafter, 
that we may know that ye are gods : yea, do good, 
or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold 
it together. 

24 Behold, ye are of nothing,' and your work of 
naught:^ an abomination is he that choosetli you. 

25 I have raised up one from the north," and he 
shall come: from tlie rising of the sun shall he 
call upon my name: and he shall conic upon 
princes as upon mortar, and as the potter treadeth 
clay. 

26 Who hath declared frain the beginning, that 
we may know? and bcforetime, that we may say, 
He is rigiiteous? yea, there is none that showeth, 
yea, thei-e is none that dcclareth, yea, there is none 
that heareth your words. 

27 The first shall say to Zion, Behold, behold 
them : and I will give to Jerusalem one that bring- 
eth good tidings.'' 

28 For 1 beheld, and there vas no man ; even 
among them, and there teas no counsellor, that, 
when I asked of them, could answer' a word. 



• Heb. Cause to come near, a John 13:19. t Hrt. ,' 
I Or. worse tlum nothing. 4 Or. worse than of a viper, b vei 
40:9; Lnke 2:10, U. 1 Heb. return. ■! Eph. 1:4. ' Matt. 1 



heart upon. 
<■ ch. 
1 Or, 



21. Produce your cause; another challenge to the wor- 
shippers of idols. 

22. The former things ; ancient prophecies. Know the 
latter end of them; compare the issue with tlie prophecies, 
so as to judge whether they have been fullilled. The 
prophet challenges the votaries of idols either to jiroducc 
their former prophecies that have been fulfilled, or to 
foretell the future. 

25. / have raised up; in purpose: this is a prediction 
of Cyrus. From the north—from the rising of the sun ; Cyrus 
came from the north with respect to Babylon, but his 
kingdom was eastward with resjicct to Jerusalem, towards 
which place his iuvcicatioii of Jehovah's name must be 
directed. S.'ia// tie mil upon my name; compare Ezra 1:1—1. 

2C. Who luilh declared ; the coming of Cyrus. Righteous; 
in his claim to be a true God ; or, " it is righteous," that 
is, true. Heareth your words; your words of proiiliecy ; 
none has ever heard from your lips true prophetic an- 
nouncements. 

27. Tiie first shall say; or, " I am the first who has said." 
Them; the predicted events. 

28. Among them ; among the patrons of idolatry. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. God invites men to the fullest investigation of his 
claims and the claims of his word. The cause of truth 
challenges free discussion. It is error that loves darkness 
and concealment. 

2. " Known unto (iod are all his works from the begin- 
ning of the world." To liim the victories of Cyrus, and 
the deliverance of Ilis covenant people through his instru- 
mentality, were as certain in the days of Isaiah as of /e- 
rubbabel ; and He therefore spoke of them by the prophet 
as already existing. 

7. Great indeed is the folly of idolaters, wlio trust for 
salvation to the gods which smiths and carpenters ii.ivo 
made ; but it is no greater than that of every worldly man 
who gives to earthly objects his supreme love and confi- 
dence. 

810 



29 Behold, they are all vanity; their am .1292. 
works are nothing: their molten images Tn 
are wind and confusion. 

CHAPTER XLII. 

1 The office of Christ, graced witli meekness and constancy. .') God's 
promise unto him. 10 An exhortation to praise God for his gospel. 
17 He reprovelh the people of incredulity. 

BEHOLD my servant, whom I uphold; mine 
elect,'' in ichom my soul de-lighteth ;'' 1 have 
put my Spirit upon him : he shall bring forth judg- 
ment to the Gentiles. 

2 He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his 
voice to be heard in the street. 

3 A bruised reed shall he not break, and the 
smoking' ila.\ shall he not (juench:* he shall bring 
forth judgment unto truth. 

4 He shall not fnil nor be discouraged,* till he 
have set judgment in the earth : and the isles shall 
wait for his law.'' 

5 1[ Thus saith God the Lord, he that created 
the heavens, and stretched them out ; he that 
s|)read forth the earth, and that which cometh 
out of it; he that givetli breath unto the people 
U])0ii it, and spirit to them that walk therein: 

(J 1 the LnitD have called thee in righteousness, 
and will hold thy hand, and Avill keep thee, and 
give tliec for a covenant of the people, for a light 
of the Gentiles;" 

ilimlii Uirnim;. • lleh. quench it. 1 HA. broken, f Gen. 49: 10 S Luke 
■i:ii; Actsia:47. 



15. Of herself the church of Christ is only an earthen 
vessel, but within her dwells the excellency of divine 
power. No array of human forces can stand against her, 
more than chatf can resist the whirlwind. 

17. Seasons of deep distress li,ave often been to God's 
lieople the dawn of a bright and glorious day ; they havo 
thus been withdrawn from every worldly confidence, and 
led to seek deliverance from God by deep repentance and 
earnest supplication. 

18-20. God is the fountain of life and power. It is easy 
for him to change tho wilderness into a fruitful field for 
his people, and he will do it for the glory of his own 
name. 

21-29. The numerous prophecies recorded in the Biblo 
which havo been fulfilled, or are now in fulfilment, are 
God's witness to the truth of Christianity — a witness which 
no other religion is able to produce. 

CHAPTER XLII. 

1. Mil servant; tho Messiah. .Matt. 12:18-21. The ref- 
erence to Cyrus in the preceding chapter naturally pre- 
pared the way for the mention of one greater than Cyrus. 

2. Lift up ; his voice ; he shall bo quiet and unassum- 
ing. 

3. A bruised reed; which the slightest violence might 
break. The smoking flax; the dimly burning wick, llo 
shall deal gently with the ignorant and feeble-minded. 
Compare chap. 40:11. Unto truth; in accordance witli 
truth. 

4. The isles; see note on chap. 41:1. fi'iall wait; in tho 
spirit of obedience. The general reception of the gospel 
by the western nations is a striking fulfilment of this 
prophecy. 

5. He that created — spirit to them, that walk therein ; tho 
divine power set forth in this verso is a pledge that the 
promise contained in tho following verso sliall bo fulfilled. 

6. A covenant of the people ; the mediation of God's new 
covenant with the people. Jer. 31:31-34, compared with 
Heb. 8:6-13. 



Joy in 



God's 



praise. 



ISAIAH XLII. 



TJnldlrf icprovcd. 



A.M.ffi)2. 7 To open the blind eyes, to bring out 
712. tlie prisoners from tlic prison,''' and them 
that sit in darkness out of the pi-ison-house.'' 

8 I am tiie Loud;'' tliat is my name: and my 
glory will I not give to another,'' neither my praise 
to graven images. 

9 Behold, tiie former tilings are come to pass, 
and new things do I declare: before they spring 
forth I tell you of them.'* 

10 Sing unto the LoUD a new song,'' and his 
praise from the- end of the earth, ye that go down 
to the sea, and all that is therein;* tlie isles, and 
the inliabitants thereof. 

11 Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift 
up their voice, the villages that Kcdar doth inhabit : 
let the inhabitants of the rock sing, let them shout 
from tlic top of the mountains. 

12 Let them give glory unto the Lord," and de- 
clare ills praise in tlie islands. 

13 The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, he 
shall stir up jealousy like a man of war :'' he shall 
cry, yea, roar ; he shall prevail ' against his enemies. 

M I have long time holden my peace; I have 
been still, and refrained myself: now will I cry 
like a travailing woman;' 1 will destroy and de- 
vour' at once. 

15 I will make waste mountains and hills,' and 
dry up all their herbs ; and 1 will make the rivers 
islands, and I will dry up the pools. 

IG And I will bring tlie blind by a way that they 
knew not;'' I will lead them in paths that they 



a 2Tiin.2:a6. b 1 Pet. 2 9. cPsa.83:lS. d ch. 4^i: 11 . e Acts IS: 1 8. 
<Rev. 5:!). • Reh. Ike fulness thereof . EPsa. 117:1. hExod.l5:3. t Or, 
kelmm himself migUtilij. i Job 32:l?--il). 1 Heb. swallow, or siqi up. 
Job. 49:11. t Hos. 2:14; Eph.. 5:8. 1 Hos. 2:6. i iUb. into straishtntss. 
«■ Bzek. U:^. ■> Heb. 13:5. oPsa. 97:7. Pi;h. fi:lU. q John 9::W; Rev. 



7. To open the blind cijc'i — out of the prison-hoiKC ; he is 
the Redeemer from spiritual blindness and bondage. 

8. Mij glory will I not give to another — to graven images ; 
by allowing the cause of idolatry to triumph. Thus God 
pledges his own glory for the success of the Messiah and 
his kingdom. 

9. The former thinn;s; the things formerly predicted. 

10. A new song; for the new things declared. 

11. Keclar; see note on chap. 21: 16. 

13. Jealousy; zeal; that is, his own zeal. Compare chap. 
9:7; 37:32, where the word in the original is the same. 

14. Holden my peace; not interposed in behalf of my 
people. 

15. Will make leaste mountains and hills; will make deso- 
late the enemies of Zion. This is the opposite of what God 
promises to his own people. See chap. 41 : 18, 19, and note. 

11). / ivdl bring the blind; compare verso 7. 

19. 3Iijserviint : I sr;u'l, the covenant people of God. "The 
servant of the Lord" signifies, in its widest sense, any 
minister of his will, though he be ignorant of God as Neb- 
uchadnezzar, Jer. 43: 10. Compare Ezek. 29:18-20. In a 
more special sense it is applied, particularly in this part 
of Isaiah, (1,) to God's visible covenant people, "Israel 
after the flesh," as in this verse, chap. 43:22, and often 
elsewhere; (2.) to the body of true believers, "the Israel 
of God," contained within the outward Israel, chap. 44: 1, 3, 
etc. ; (3,) to Christ the Head of the church, as in the pres- 
ent chapter, ver. 1-7, chap. 52:13-15, with the whole 53d 
chapter, and elsewhere. And as Christ and his true church 
are one body— John 15 : 1-7 ; 17 : 21, 23 ; Eph. 1 : 23— it is often 
both difficult and unnecessary to determine whether the 
words "my servant" apply to Christ alone, or to Christ's 
Ixidy as quickened and sanctified by its union with him. 
My messenger ; Israel, whom God appointed to make the 
Gentiles see and hear his truth, has himself become blind 



have not known:' I will make darkness light be- 
fore them, and crooked tilings straiglit.** These 
thines will I do unto them,'" and not forsake them." 

17^1 They shall be turned back, they shall be 
greatly ashamed, that trust in graven iniaiics, that 
say to the molten images. Ye arc our gods." 

18 Hear, ye deaf;'' and look, ye blind,'' that yo 
may see. 

I'J Wlio is lilind, but my servant? or deaf as 
my nif'-.-i'iigor that 1 sent? wlio is blind as he that 
is \irvl'frt. .■iiid blind as the Lop.d'.s servant? 

'20 .^eeiiig many things, but thou observest not; 
ojicning tlic cars, but he heareth not. 

21 The Lord is well pleased for liis righteous- 
ness' sake;"" he will magnify tiie law," and make 
if honorable. 

22 But this is a people robljed and spoiled;' 
they arc all of them snared in holes,'' and they arc 
hid in prison-honscs: they are for a prey, and 
none delivereth; for a spoil,' and none saitli. Re- 
store. 

23 Who among you will give car to this? who 
will hearken and hear for tlie time to come?* 

21 Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to 
the robbers? did not the Lord, he against whom 
wc have sinned?" for they would not walk in his 
ways, neither were they obedient unto his law. 

25 Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury 
of his anger, and the strength of battle : and it 
hath set liim on fire round about," yet he knew 
not ;" and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart. 



317,18. r P,a. 71:IG, 19; Rnm. 10:3, 4; Phil. 3:9. » Matt. 5: 17. 110 
hiin; John 17:1. 1 cli. I.'>:2. II Or, in snaring nit the young men of then 
• llcb. treading, t Heb. tlie iiflcr timet " JuJg. 2:14; Nfh. U:2lj, 2' 
»Deut. 32:22. w Hos. 7.9. 



and deaf. Perfect; in respect to his privileges and out- 
ward relations to God. Compare Matt. 11:23. 

20. Seeing — thou observest not; compare chap. C:9, 10. 

21. Is well pleased ; it is his good pleasure to do what is 
expressed in the last clause of the verse. For his right- 
eousness' sake ; his covenant people having forfeited all claim 
to his favor by their sins, he will do this for the glory of 
his own name and character. Wdl magnify the law; will 
put honor upon it by all his dealings with his people, and, 
in a most emphatic sense, by the mission and propitiatory 
death of his Son. 

22-25. These verses describe the character and ])iinisli- 
ment of the outward Israel. Compare chap. 6:11, 12. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-4. The kingdom of Christ " cometh not with observa- 
tion," but by the gentle and quiet influences of his word 
and Spirit operating within the soul. Great outward 
changes and revolutions accompany its progress in the 
world, but amid all these it remains " like leaven which a 
woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the 
whole was leavened." Lnke 13:21. 

5-8. God's glory is pledged to establish Christ's king- 
dom over all the earth, and to give deliverance and salva- 
tion to every sinner who commits his soul to His hands. 

10-16. The same mighty movements of God's provi- 
dence and Spirit which bring salvation and rejoicing to 
his church, carry desolation and destruction into the hosts 
of her enemies. While they weep and wail over the fall 
of Satan's kingdom, she shouts, "Alleluia," as its smoke 
rises up for ever and ever. Rev. chap. 18, and 19:1-6. 

17-25. The hope of God's people is his zeal for the glory 
of his own name. He will not give them over to final cor- 
ruption and ruin, but will, from time to time, purify them 
by severe judgments, and thus prepare the way for the 
extension of Christ's kingdom over all the earth. 
811 



God comforUth his 



ISAIAH XLIII. 



church with promises. 



CHAPTER XLIII 



1 The Lord comforteth the church with his promises. S He appealeth 
to the people for witness of his oinniijotency. M He foret^-lleth them 
the destruction of Babylon. IS And his wonderful deliverance of 
his people. 2"2 He reproveth the people ajj ine,\cusable. 

]^UT uow thus saitli the Loud tliat created thee, 
J Jacob, and he tliat formed flieo, Israel, 
Fear not: for I liave redeemed thee, 1 Iiave called 
thee by thy name; thou art mine.'' 

2 When thou pa.s.^est tliroii,<i-li the waters, I v:i!l 
be with thee;" ami tlirough the rivers, they shall 
not ovcrfiow thee: when thou \valke.-<t through 
the fire, thou shalt not be burned;'' neither shall 
the flame kindle upon thee/' 

3 For I am the Loud thy God, the Holy One of 
Israel, thy Saviour: I gave Egyptybr thy ransom, 
Ethiopia and Seba for thee.'^ 

4 Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou 
hast been honorable, and I have loved thee : there- 
fore will I give nieu for thee, and people for thy 
life.* 

5 Fear not; for I ain with thee: I will bring 
thy seed from the cast, and gather thee from the 
west: 

6 I will say to the north, Give up; and to the 
south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, 
and my daughters from the ends of the earth ;' 

7 Eve7i every one that is called by iny name:^' 
for I have created him for my glory, 1 have formed 
him: yea, I have nuide him.'' 

8 •[ Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, 
and the deaf that have ears.' 

9 Let all the nations be gathered together, and 
let the people be assembled: who among them 
can declare this, and show us former things? let 
them bring forth their witnesses, that they may 
be justitied : or let them hear, and say, It is 
truth. 

10 Ye are my witnesses,^ saitli the Lord, and my 
servant whom I have chosen;" that ye may know 
and believe me, and understand that I am he: be- 
fore me there was no God formed,*' neither shall 
there be after me. 

1 1 1, even I, am the LoiiD ; and besides me t/icre 
is no saviour.'" 

12 1 have ilr(l;iii :1 and have saved, and I have 



• Jer :B:-2l-ai. l ... ;. j. . j. i;. c Pia. IIU: 1-J. <1 Dan. :):«, -J?. « I'rr.v 
21:1-* • Or.ptr.'on. ( cli. Is,:, e Jj«. 'i:/. hEpli. J;IU. ■ Kzek. li:.'. 
Jch..H:8. k Phil •-'7. 1 Or. nothing fuTmal of Goil. ICol.l:17. m Uo». 
13:4; AcU4:lJ. 1 Heb. (urn iHnrt. » ch. 4(I;IU; Dan. -l:*. « Heb. AaM. 



•CII.\l'Ti:i! XLIII. 

1. Jacob — Israel; .liioub ;iiiil Israel " according; to the 
election of grace." 'I'he judgincnts upon the outward 
Israel, described at the close of the preceding cliapter, 
had for their end the sunclification and enlargement of the 
true Israel. Hence the transition from the former to the 
latter is both natural and beautiful. Such transitions are 
very frequent in the prophets. 

'A. Elhiopia and Scki ; regions adjacent to Egypt on tlie 
south. God sacrificed Kgypt, at the exodus, to the wel- 
fare of his people, and \n; lias often repeateil this sacrifice 
in the case of the nations tliat have arrayed themselves 
against his cluu-cli. 

7. Created him — made him ; in a spiritual sense. 

8. firing forth; that they may inainlain their cause be- 
fore (lod. Compare cliap. 11: 1. The blind people lluit have 
eyes; tlie patrons of iilolatry, as the ne.xt verse sliows. 

812 



showed, when there teas no stranse eod a.m. 3292. 

... . '^ t) jj. c. about 

among you : theretore ye are my witnesses, 712- 
saith the Loud, that 1 am God. 

13 Yea, before tlit! day teas I am he; and there 
is none that can deliver out of my hand: I will 
work, and who shall let it?'" 

14 If Thus sailh the Lord, your Redeemer, the 
Holy One of Israel : For your sake 1 have sent to 
Babylon, and have brought down all their nobles,* 
and the Ciialdeans, whose cry is in the ships. 

1.5 1 am the Lord, your Holy One, the Creator 
of Israel, your King. 

10 Thus saith the Lord, which maketh a way in 
the sea, and a path in the mighty waters;" 

17 Which bringelh forth the chariot and horse, 
the army and the power; they shall lie down 
together, they shall not rise: they are extinct, 
they are quenched as tow. 

18 *i Remember ye not the former things, neither 
consider the things of old. 

19 Behold, I will do a new thing; now it shall 
spring forth; shall ye not know if? I will even 
make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the 
desert. 

20 The beast of the field shall honor me, the 
dragons and the owls:' because 1 give waters in 
the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give 
drink to my people, my chosen. 

21 This ]ico]de have I formed for myself; they 
shall show forth my praise.'' 

22 I1 But thou hast not called upon me, Jacob ; 
but thou hast Ijcen weary of me, O Israel.^ 

23 Thou hast not brought me the small cattle^ 
of thy burnt-oflerings ; neither hast thou honored 
me with thy sacrifices. I have not caused thee to 
serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with in- 
cense.'' 

24 Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with 
money, neither hast thou filled* me with the fat 
of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to serve 
with thy sins, (hou hast wearied me with thine 
ini(]uitics.* 

25 1, (vcn I, am he tliat blotteth out thy trans- 
gressions' fin- mine own sake," and will not re- 
member thy sins.'' 

26 Put me in remembrance : let us plead togetli- 



o Exod. Il:l«, aj; I'.si. 77:19. 1 Or, oslrirlus; Urb. dausltlrri of Ih^ oirl. 
P Kph. 1 :l>, {■'. q Mai. 1:13. 1 Heb. lambs, or tids. ' .Man. II :au. • Heb. 
matte me drunk, or abundanttu mohtentd. • Mai. 2: 17. t Jer. 5U;*^; Acts 
3:19. u lizek.SG; 



' abundantly r 
■ii,:H. »Jer 



9. This; which I have predicted and brought to pass; 
that is, who can show like predictions? Former things; 
former prophecies. Witnesses ;-io their prophecies. Let 
them hear; my witnesses to my prophecies. 

II. Sent to Babijlon ; by the Persians and .Mcdcs. Brouglil 
down; humbled. Cry; the reference is to the shouts or 
songs of the mariners as they pursue their business. 

It), 17. Maketh a way in the sea — briniscth forth llie chariot 
and horse; as in the overthrow of Pharaoh. They shalt lie 
down together; all the opponents of Israel sliall perish as 
did Pharaoh's host. Tow ; a lla.xen wick. Chap. 42:3. 

18. Remember ye not the former things; because of the 
surpassing glory of the uew. Compare Jer. 16:14, 15; 
2 Cor. :i:10. 

20. Dragons; in tlie sense of wild animals, as jackals. 

22-25. Hast not called upon me— for mine own .inke; this 
great redemption is wholly undeserved. God does it for 
the glory of his own nauie. 



Fromhes to tlu church. 



ISAIAH XLIV. 



Fdhj of idol-mnlers.' 



A. M OT.'. cr : declare thou, that thou mavest be ius- 

B. C^ about ,.,,,, ' - ■' 

71:!. tmcd." 

27 Thy first father hatli sinned, and thy teachers' 
have transirresscd ajjainst me. 

•J8 Therefore I have profaned the princes* of the 
sanctuary, and liave given Jacob to the curse, and 
Israel to reproaches. 

CHAPTER XLIV. 

I God comfortcth the chiircli with his promises. 7 The vanity of idols, 
9 and folly of idol-makers. 21 He exhorteth to praise Crod for his 
redemption and omnipotency. 

YET now hear, Jacob my servant ; and Israel, 
whom I have chosen : 

2 Thus saith the Lord that made thee. and formed 
thee from the womb, uiliich will liclp thee:"' Fear 
not, Jacob, my servant; and thou, Jeshurun,'' 
whom I have chosen.'' 

3 For I will pour water upon him tliat is tliirsty, 
and floods upon the dry ground:'' I will pour my 
Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine 
offspring:'' 

4 And they shall spring up as among the grass, 
as willows by the water-courses.*-' 

5 One shall say, I avi the Lord's ;" and another 
shall call himself by the name of Jacob ; and an- 
other shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, 
and surname himself by the name of Israel. 

6 Tims saith the "Lord tlie King of Israel, and 
his Redeemer the Lord of hosts;' I am tlic first, 
and I am the last ;' and besides me thcreis no God.'' 

7 And who, as I, shall call, and shall declare it,' 
and set it iu order for mo, since I appointed the 
ancient people? and tlie tilings that arc coming, 
and shall come, let them show unto them. 

8 Fear ye not, neither be afraid:'" have not I 
told thee from that time, and have declared it? 



« Rom. 8:33. • Heb. !n/er7>r«ers; Mai. a:7. 8. \ Or, holy prinres. b Psa. 
46:5; Heb. 4:10. c Deut. 3-.2:15. A Rom. S::1U; Eph. 1:4; 1 Thess. 1:4. 
• John7:33. fch.5S:ai. EActia:41. h Jer. 50:5; 2Cor. 8:5. ich. 43:14. 
JRev. 1:3, 17. t Deut. 4:a3, 39; 32::19. Ich. 4G:U, 10. ■» Prov. 3:'J5, -20. 



27. Tliyjirst father; Adam. The meaning is, that Lsrael's 
teachers have imitated Adam's apostasy, and led the peo- 
ple also into apostasy. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. God will not allow any calamity, however great, to 
overwhelm his true children; but will graciously sustain 
and comfort them under it, grant them in due time deliv- 
erance from it, and make it subservient to their highest 
welfare. 

3, 4. God governs the world for the good of his church. 
For her, empires rise and fall, and battles are lost and won. 
Every power that arrays itself against her must perish 
for her sake. Ver. 14-17. 

7. It is for his o^vn glory that God begins and carries 
forward the work of redemption in men's souls, and he 
will make every ransomed spirit in heaven an eternal 
monument of his praise. 

11-13. All who give to God their supreme love and con- 
fidence receive from him abundant proofs, in their own 
blessed experience, that he has power to help in every 
ostreraity: all who depart from him shall be made to feel 
t'lat besides him there is no Saviour. 

18. The revelation of redemption is " as the shining 
light, that shineth more and more unto the ])erfect day." 
Tlie light under which we live excels in brightness that 
which was enjoyed by ancient patriarchs and prophets, 
yet we see but the dawn of the glory which is reserved 
for the latter days of Zion, and even that glory shall be 



ye are even my witnesses." Is tliore a God* be- 
sides me? yea, there is no God ; 1 l<now not ani/. 

9 "i They tiiat make a graven image are all of 
them vanity;" and their delectaT)le^ things shall 
not profit ; and they are their own witnesses : they 
see not, nor know ; that tiiey may be ashamed. 

10 Who hatii formed a god, or molten a graven 
image that is profitalde for nothing?'* 

11 Beliold, all his fellows sliall be asliiimcd;'' 
and tlie workmen, they are of men: let tliem all 
bo gathered together, let them stand up ; yet they 
shall fear, emd tiiey shall be ashamed together. 

12 Tiie smitli with the tongs' both workotii in 
the coals, and fashioneth it with hammers, and 
workcth it with the strength of his arms:'' yen, 
he is hungry, and his strength faileth : he drinketli 
no water, and is faint. 

13 The carpenter stretchcth out his rule; he 
marketh it out with a line; hetitteth it with planes, 
and he marketh it out with the compass, and mak- 
eth it after the figure of a man, according to the 
beauty of a man ; that it may remain in the house. 

14 ile hcwcth him down cedars, and takcth the 
cypress and the oak, which he strcngtheneth' for 
himself among the trees of the forest: he planteth 
an ash, and the rain doth nourish it. 

15 Tlien shall it be for a man to burn: for he 
will take thereof, and warm himself; yea, he kin- 
dleth it, and baketh bread ; yea, he maketh a god, 
and worshippcth it ; he maketh it a graven image, 
and fallcth down thereto. 

16 He burncth part thereof in the fire ; with part 
thereof he eateth flesh ; he roasteth roast, and is 
satisfied : yea, he warmeth himself, and saith. Aha, 
I am warm, I have seen the fire: 

17 And tlie residue thereof he maketh a god, 
even his graven image: he faileth down unto it, 



" John 


5:10. 


1 Hf 


h 




rk 


T)p 


t. 


W?.: 


. ■> 


ch 


41:2 


1, aa. 


4 Heb 


ihs 


rnf/U 


pHab. 


«:!«; 


1 Cor 


.■^ 


4. 


q 


I'.sa 


» 


■;7. 


I Or, 


an 


axe. 


rch 


40:19, 


etc. 


lOr, 


takttk 


courag 































swallowed up in the everlasting brightness of the new 
Jerusalem. 

22-25. Neither Zion, nor any one of her children, has any 
thing to mention before God but unfaithfulness, lukewarm- 
ness, and iniquities without number. He has mercy upon 
his people, not for their sake, but for his own name's 
sake ; so that to him belongs all the praise, and to them 
shame and confusion of face. 

26-28. The severest rebukes that come upon God's peo- 
ple are less than their iniquities deserve. They should 
therefore be borne with humility and submission, and deliv- 
erance from them sought by confession and repentance. 

CHAPTER XLIV. 

2. Jeshurun; a term of endearment applied to Israel. 
Deut. 32:15; 33:5. 

7. Call; command into being. Declare it; announce it 
beforehand. Set it in order for me; that is, as the original 
implies, state it to me in regular order. Jehovah both 
ordains and foretells the course -of coming events for his 
people ; he challenges the false gods to do the same. The 
ancient people ; either the ancestors of the human race or 
those of the Israelitish people. 

8. Fear ye not; the idol-gods, which have no power 
either to do or to foretell. From that time; that is, "since 
I appointed the ancient people." Ver. 7. Told — declared; 
the course of coming events. 

9. Delectable tilings; idols in which they delight. 

14. Stren<rtheneth for himself; has nourished by culture. 
813 



Wimders of God's icorks. 



and wor^hippcth if. and prayctli unto it, and 
Deliver me; lor thou art my god. 

IS They liave not known nor understood:" for 
lie hath shut' their eyes, that they cannot see; and 
their hearts, that tiiey cannot understand." 

19 And none considereth in* iiis lieart,'' neither 
is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I 
have burned part of it in the lire; yea, also I have 
liaked bread upon the coals thereof; 1 have roasted 
flesh, and eaten //.• and shall 1 make the residue 
thereof an abomination? .shall i fall down to the 
stock of' a tree? 

20 He feedeth on ashes: a deceived heart hath 
turned him aside,'' that he cannot deliver his soul, 
nor say, /v there not a lie in my right hand? 

21 1 Remember these, Jacob and Israel; for 
thou art my servant: I have formed tlice: thou 
art mv servant: Israel, thou .shalt not be for- 
gotten of me.'' 

22 I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy 
transgressions, and, as a cloud, thy sins:' return 
unto me ; for I have redeemed thee.*^ 

23 Sing, ye heavens;'' for the Loud hath done 
it: shout, ye lower parts of the earth : break forth 
into singing, yo mountains,' forest, and every 
tree therein : for the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, 
and glorified himself in IsraeLJ 

24 Thus saith the Loud, thy Redeemer,'' and he 
that formed thee from the womb,' I am the LoiiD 
that maketh all thinp;s: that stretchoth forth the 
licaveus alone;'" that sprcadcth abroad the earth 
by myself; 

2.5 That frustratcth the tokens of the liars," and 
maketh diviners mad ; that lurneth wise men back- 
ward, and maketh their knowledge foolish ; 

26 That confirmeth the word of his servant, and 



ISAIAH XLV. 

itl 



The ailliiig of Cynts. 



> Ch 4S:«) • 


Heb dnilhfil. I> ch. «:9. 1(1. t \Uh. Sttltth to. c Hos. 


7:2. I Hcb l/mt 


wUidifoim^of J Uo». i-M; Rom. \:i\: aThe«. a:ll. 


' ch. 491J, 15 


ch. 1:IS; Psa. 10.1:12. e I Cor. 0:20; 1 Pet. 1:1S; Rev. 


5:9. hPsl. 9611 


12; Rev. IS: 20. ■ Ezek. 30:1, 8. J ch. 5.5:13. t vcr. 0. 



18. He hath shut their eyes; God hath shut them. Chai). 
6:10; John 12:40. 

20. Deliver his soul ; from its delusion. Nor say; he has 
not understanding enough to ask himself the question that 
follows. Inmy right liinul; the right liand is mentioned 
as the instrument of action : to liave a lie in the riglit liand, 
is to be occupied witii a lie; that is, with the service of 
idols, which arc themselves false, and which deceive those 
who put their trust in them. 

21. The<ie; these proofs of the vanity of idols. 

24. Formed thee from the womb; Israel is here spoken of 
as God's child from the womb, that is from the infancy of 
the nation. 

25. Tokens; signs, pretended miracles. Mukctli diviners 
mad; shows tliein to be fools. 

26. Hit servant; the prophet with his fellow-messen- 
gers. 

28. Cyrus; who conquered Babylon, and released the 
Jews from their exile more than a century and a half 
after this prediction. Ezra 1 : 1-4. 

IXStlUJCTIOXS. 
I-.'). The i>romisod out])ouring of God's life-giving 
Spirit is the hope of Zion. In times of <lce|) declension 
within her borders, and abounding wicUedness without, 
God's faithful servants shoulil not despond, but seek from 
him this unspeakable gift by repentance, obedience, and 
earnest intercession, assureil tliat wlien he bestows it all 
will again become green and nourishing. 

9-20. The idolater fashions silver or wood into the form 
814 



T 



nerformeth the counsel of his messengers ;" -vi\' pi 

1 . t T 1 nil I 11 . 1 1 Ji. ( . Hboul 

that saith to Jerusalem, 1 lioii shalt be inhab- Tri 
ited ; and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, 
and I will raise up the decayed places^ thereof: 

27 That saith to the deep. Be dry, and I will 
dry up thy rivers: 

28 That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and 
shall perform all my jilcasure: even saying to 
Jerusalem, Thou shalt lie Vmilt; and to the tem- 
ple, The foundation shall )je laid.'' 

CHAPTER XLV. 

1 God c.alletli Cyrus for Iiis church's 8.11(6. 5 By his omnipotency he 
challen:,'eth obedience. '20 Ho convinccth the idols of vanity by his 

Lvil)^ power. 

^11 US saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, 
whose right hand I have liolden,' to subdue 
nations before him; and 1 will loose the loins of 
kings,'' to open before him the two-leaved gates; 
and the gates shall not be shut ; 

2 I will go before thee, and make tlie crooked 
places straight: I will break in pieces the gates 
of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron:'' 

3 And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, 
and hidden riches of secret places, that thou may- 
est know that I, the Lord, which call thee by thy 
name,'* am the God of Israel. 

4 For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine 
elect, I have even called thee by thy name : I have 
surnamed thee, though thou hast not known me. 

5 'i I am the Lord, and there is none else,' there 
is no God besides me:" I girded thee,"' though thou 
hast not known me; 

(') That they may know from the rising of the 
sun, and from the west, that there is none besides 
me."' I am the Lord, and there is none else. 



1 Gal, 1:15. m Psia. 11)1:2. n 2 Chr. 1S:11, 31: 


Jer. 50:36; 1 Cor. 3:19. 


" Zcch. 1:0; 2Pet. 1:19. i Ilcb. imslM. P Ezra 


1:1, cte. 1 Or. slrtnglh- 


ened. q Dan 5:0, 30. rPsi.l07:lG. -ch. 48:15. 


tver. 14,18, 22. "Dent. 


4:35,39. v Psa. 18: 32, 39. " ch. 37:20; Mai. 1:1 


'• 



of a god and then worships it, as if human workmanship 
could give life to that which is in its own nature dead and 
powerless. The same folly is manifested by all who think 
to make worldly objects a permanent and satisfying por- 
tion by any labor wliicli they can bestow upon them. 

22. It is by tlie offer of gratuitous pardon that God calls 
sinners to himself lie commands them to come, that they 
may receive through Christ the justifying righteousness 
which ho has provided for them ; not to establish their 
own righteousness before coming to him. 

23. Christ's redemption is the sum of all blessings. It 
fills every heart that receives it with gladness and thanks- 
giving. When all nations shall embrace it, the whole earth 
will resound with God's praises. 

2o. The progress of God's kingdom in the world is a 
perpetual manifestation of his own infinite power and wis- 
dom, and of the folly and weakness of all human systemij 
of religion. 

CII.Vl'TKR XLV. 

1. Anointed; as set ap:irt lu ihe work of redeemiii;.' 
God's people. The pales shnll not he slnil ; remarkably ful- 
hlled in the conquest of Babylon, the gates of the city 
having been left open during a night of feasting. 

4. Hast not known me ; when Cyrus look Babylon he was 
ignorant of Jehovah and of the designs which he purposed 
to accomiilish tlirough him, and Wiis only indulging his 
own ambitious desires. The knowledge which he after- 
wards had of (!od, Ezra 1:2, was doubtless received from 
the Jews residing in Babylon. 



Go(Vs almighty 



ISAIAH XLV. 



ami saving 



A. M. 3M2. 7 I form the light, and create darkness : "■ 
712""" I make peace,'' and create evil:'' J the 
Lord do all tiiesc things. 

8 Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let 
the skies pour down righteousness:'' let the earth 
open, and let them bring fortli salvation, and let 
righteousness spring up together :'' I the Lord 
have created it. 

9 Woo unto him that striveth with his Maker! 
Ld tlio potslierd strive witli the potsherds of the 
earth."' Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth 
it, Wliat makcst thou? or tliy work, He hath no 
hands? 

10 Woe unto him that saith unto his fatlier. 
What Ijcgettest tliou? or to tiic wouuin, Wiiat 
liast thou l)rouglit forth? 

11 Thus saith tlic Lord, tiic Holy One of Israel, 
and his Maker, Ask me of things to come con- 
cerning my sons,8 and concerning the work of my 
hands comuiand ye me." 

12 I have made the earth, and created nran upon 
it : I, even my hands have stretched out tlie heav- 
ens, and all their host have I commanded.' 

1:3 I iiave raised him up in righteousness, and I 
will direct' all his ways: he shall build my city,J 
and he shall let go my captives, not for price nor 
reward," saitli the Lord of liosts. 

14 Tlius saith the Lord, Tiie labor of Egypt, 
and merchandise of Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, 
men of stature, shall come over unto thee, and 
they shall be thine:' they shall come after thee; 
in ciiaius they shall come ovcr,"^ and tiiey shall fall 
down unto tlice, they shall make supplication unto 
thee, saying. Surely God is in thcc;" and the7-e is 
none else, there is no God. 

15 Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself," 
God of Israel, the Saviour. 

16 Tliey shall be ashamed, and also confounded. 



aGen. 1:3,4. l>P3a.29:U. «Amo33:G. dPsa.SS:!!. ePsa.7-2:3. f Jer. 
1«:6. eJer.:31:l; Gil. 3:26. h John 10:2:!. i Psa. 102:'>5: Heb. 11:3. 'Or, 
makestraighl. JSChr. 36-22; Ezra 1 :1, etc kch. 52:3. 1 ch. 49:23 ; 60:9- 
16; Psa. 6s:3l; 72:10,11; Zech. 8:22.2:3. mPsa. 149:8. n 1 Cor. 14:25. och. 
8:17; Psa. 44:24. P I'sa. 97:7. q Rom. 2:28, 29; 11 :28. r Jer. 31:3. » Psa. 



8. Drop (Inu-n; distil. Open; open her bosom to send 
forth a h:irvest of righteousness and salvation. Let tlicin 
bruiix fortli ; tliat is, the heavens and the skies. God's 
righteousness ;ind salvation are here compared to refresh- 
ing showers, and a harvest of precious fruits. 

9,10. Woe unto turn; God rebukes his people for arraign- 
ing his dealings with them at the bar of their own reason. 
The primary reference may l)0 their long-continued suf- 
ferings during the Babylonish captivity ; but the words 
have a general application to God'.s treatment of all men 
in all ages. 

11. Command ye me; in the way of petitioning, not of 
prescribing. 

14. Labor; wealth gained by labor. Men of stature; the 
Ethiopians and Sabeans were celebrated for their tallness. 
Sliall come after tliee — make supplication unto thee; compare 
Psa. 72:9-11 ; chap. 14:2 ; 49:23; and especially chap. 60. 
These passages are to be understood in a spiritual sense. 
The meaning is, that God will give his church, through 
Christ, universal dominion and honor. 

15. Hidest thyself ; hidest thy counsels in darkness. The 
prophet has in mind the sore afiiictions through which 
Zion must come to the fulfilment of the promises which 
he has just recorded. 

18. Not in vain; as God's purpose in creating the earth 
.shall be fulfilled, so shall all his counsels respecting liis 
c'losen people. 



!"■ power. 

all of them: they shall go to confusion together 
that arc makers of idols.'' 

17 But Israel shall be saved in the Lordi with 
an everlasting salvation : ■■ ye shall notbc ashamed ' 
nor confounded world without end.' 

18 For thus saith the Lord that created the 
heavens ; God himself that formed the earth and 
made it; he hatli established it, ho created it not 
in vain, he formed it to be inliabited : I avi t!ie 
Lord, and there is none else. 

19 I have not spoken in secret," in a dark place 
of the earth: I said not unto the seed of Jacob, 
Seek ye me in vain :" I the Lord speak righteous- 
ness, I declare things that are right. 

20 ^ Assemble yourselves and come: draw near 
together, ye that arc escaped of the nations :"' they 
iiavo no knowledge that set up tlio wood of their 
graven image, and pray unto a god that cannot 
save. 

21 Tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them 
take counsel together : who hatli declared this 
from ancient time? vfin hath told it from that 
time? have not I the Lord? and there is no God 
else besides me ; a just God and a Saviour ;'' there 
is none besides me. 

22 Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends 
of the earth:*" for I am God, and tlierc is none 
el.<e. 

2:5 I have sworn by myself,'' the word is gone 
out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not 
return, Tliat unto me every knee shall bow,'' every 
tongue sliall swear.'' 

24 Surely shall one say. In the Lord have 1 
righteousness*" and strength:*'' even to him shall 
men come;'^ and all that are incensed against him 
shall Ije ashamed. 

25 In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be 
justified,'' and shall glory. 



25:2,3 tlPet.ate. u Deut. 29:39; 30:11, etc. 


vPsa 9:10; 09:32. wEph. 


2:12-16. « Rom . 3 : 2S. y Psa . 22 : 27 ; John 3 : 1 4, 


15. z Gen. 22:10; Heb. 6:1:3. 


a PhU. 2: 10. b Deut. 0: 13. t Heb. righleomm 


,res; Rev. 19:S. "Jer. 33:6; 


1 Cor. 1::!0, 31. X Ot, he shall say (if me. In th 


e LORD \s alt rigliteousness 


andstrength. d Zeoh. 1U:8, 12; Bph. 0: 10. e 


Johiil2..12. f Rom. 5:1. 



19. Li secret, in a dark p/arc of the earth ; not uttering dark 
responses from caves, likr the ancient oracles. In vain; 
as did those who consult' d the heathen oracles. 

20. Esciijiril of ihr iiolioiis; the remnant of them who 
have esr;i|ir,l ( l.jil's jinlu'ini-nts. 

21. Tell Ije; rcrnuiil your arguments. Them; the pa- 
trons of idols. Declared this; the deliverance of my people 
through Cyrus, which I have foretold. From that time; 
sec note on chapter 44 :S. 

LW'^THUCTIONS. 

4. God lias often employed heathen princes, who were 
ignorant of him and his counsels, to accomphsh wonderful 
deliverances for his people. 

7. Since God is the author of all things, he governs and 
sets limits to all. The good and bad actions of men and 
angels are so under his control that he accomplishes 
through them his own wise counsels, while they are left 
altogether free and responsible to him for their conduct. 

9. All our capacity to reason concerning God's works 
and ways is his gift. How unspeakable the folly and 
wickedness of contending against his dealings with us ; 
as if the creature could sit in judgment on the infinite 
Creator. 

19. The many and explicit predictions of God's word 
constitute a proof of its divine origin, such as no pretend- 
ed revelation can offer. 

23. God jiosscsses absolute authority over all men: and 
81.5 



Folly of idolatry. 



ISAIAH XLVII. 



Judgments on Balylon. 



CHAPTER XLVl. 



1 Thf idols of Babylon could not save themselves. :! God savetli liis 
people to the end. 5 Idols are not comparable to (jod for power, I'J 
or present salvation. 

BEL boweth down," Nebo stoopeth ; '' their idols 
were upon the beasts, and upon the cattle:*^ 
your carriages were iieavy-hxden ; (hey are a bur- 
den to the weary hra.st. 

2 Tiiey stoop, tiiey bow down together ; they 
could not deliver tlie burden, but themselves* are 
gone into captivity. 

3 M Hearken unto me, liouse of Jacob, ant! all 
the remnant of the liouse of Israel, which are borne 
by me from the belly, which arc carried from the 
womb:'' 

4 And ciTn to your old age I am hc;° and even 
to hoar hairs will I carry you: I have made, and I 
will bear; even I will carry, and will deliver you. 

5 1 To whom will ye liken me, and make me 
equal, and compare me, that we may be like? 

6 They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh sil- 
ver in the balance, and hire a goldsmith;'' and he 
raaketh it a god : tlicy fall down, yea, they worship. 

7 They bear him upon the shoulder, they carry 
him, and set him in his place, and he standeth ; 
from his place shall he not remove : yea, one shall 
cry unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him 
out of his trouble. 

8 Remember this, and show yourselves men: 
bring it again to mind, ye transgressors. 

9 Remember the former things of old : for I am 
God, and there is none else; I am God, and thnr 
is none like me, 

10 Declaring the end from the beginning, and 
from ancient times thethinsrs that are noiyet done, 
saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all 
my pleasure : 



« Jcr. ch. .00, 51. l-Jer. -18:1, etc, cjer. 10:5. • Web. their soul. ■! Kxoil. 
19:4; Psa. 71;0, IS. c Psa. 82:1.1. ' ch. 41:7, etc. t Hcb. o/^ny. e Acta 



?:51. h Rom. 1:17. 



4«:1, 5; Hab. 2:3. j Psa. 14:7. k Psa. lB:a7; 



he ■will exercise it throughout eternity, for their salvation 
if righteous ; but if wicked, for their destruction. 

24. It is vain to look for justifying righteousness, or 
strength to overcome sin, to any thing that we can do, or 
that our fcllow-sinnors can do for us. Wc must receive 
botli from Uod as his free gift through Jesus Christ. 

CFIAPTER XLVI. 

1. Bel — Ncbo; Babylonian gods, noivetli down — stoop- 
eth; under the conqueror. The gods of liabyion have 
gone into captivity with their worshippers. T/icir idols; 
the images of Bel au<l Nebo. Carrian:cs; that is, Ihings 
carried, loads ; (he old English sense of the word. Ihtwi]- 
laden; literally, "lifted up," placed upon the beasts. Tlie 
images of your gods, which you have been accustomed to 
boar in solemn procession, are now packed upon beasts to 
be carried away. 

2. TVicj/ ,■ the gods. TVic Aurrfen; the load consisting of 
thoir own images. Bel and Ncbo cannot save their own 
images from this disgrace. 

3. 4. Home— carried ; the gods of the heathen must be 
borne by their worsliippcrs, hut Jehovah bears and car- 
ries his people. From llic womb— to hoar liairs; from the 
infancy of Israel to his old age ; that is, through his whole 
•ixistcnce. Hee note to chap. 11:24. 

8. T/iis; the contrast between Jehovah and the idol- 
gods. Show yourselves men; act like men, not like chil- 
dren, as do the worshippers of idols. 

9. The former things nf old; ancient prophecies that 
have been fultilled. 

SIO 



1 1 Calling a ravenous bird from the east, a. m. 3292. 
the man that executeth my* counsel from a 712." 
far country: yea, I have spoken it. 1 will also bring 
it to pass ; I have jjurposed it, 1 will also do it. 

12 'i Hearken unto me, ye stout-hearted,*-' that 
are far from righteousness: 

13 I bring near my righteousness;" it shall not 
be far otl", and my salvation shall not tarry :' and 
I will place salvation iu Ziou for Israel my glory .J 

CHAPTER XLVII. 

1 God's judgment upon Babylon and Chaldca, 6 for their unmerciful- 
ness, 7 pride, 10 and overboldness, 11 shall be irresistible. 

CI OME down, and sit in the dust, virgin daugh- 
J ter of Babylon, sit on the ground : ^ there is no 
throne, daughter of the Chaldeans : for thou 
slialt no more be called tender and delicate. 

2 Take the millstones, and grind meal : uncover 
thy locks, make bare the leg, uncover the thigh, 
pass over the rivers. 

3 Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy 
shame shall be seen :' 1 will take vengeance, and 
I will not meet thee as a man. 

4 Jlsfor our Redeemer, the Lord of hosts is his 
name, the Holy One of Israel.'" 

5 Sit thou siient, and get thee into darkness, O 
daughter of the Chahleaus: for thou shalt no 
more Ije called. The lady of kingdoms. 

G II I was wroth with my pco])le," I have polluted 
mine inheritance, and given them into thy hand : 
thou didst show them no mercy ;" upon the ancient 
hast thou very heavily laid thy yoke. 

7 And thou saidst, 1 shall be a lady for ever:'' 
so that tliou didst not lay these things to thy heart, 
neither didst remember the latter end of it. 

8 Therefore hear now this, thou that art given 

>Jer. 50:U1. o 2 Cbr. 2^:0; Zoch. 



\1. A ravenous bird ; Cyrus, represented as a bird of prey. 
13. Righteow^ness; as manifested in the deliverance of 
my people, and the destruction of their enemies. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The gods of the heathen need the constant care and 
protection of their makers. They cannot help themselves, 
much less their worshippers. So the objects to which 
worldly men give their supreme love and confidence — rich- 
es, honors, titles, pleasures — cannot save their jiossessors, 
but must themselves be watched over day and night, lest 
thev"make themselves wings," and " flyaway as an eagle 
toward heaven." Prov. 2.S:5; Luke 12:19, 20; 1 Tjm. 6: 17. 

3, 4. The salvation of nations, as well as of individual 
men. comes from God alone. When they depart from him 
and put their trust in vanity and lies, they must iierish. 

CHAPTER XLVII. 

1. virgin daughter of Rahijlou ; Babylon herself per- 
sonified as a female. No throne; that is, to thee. 

2. Tahc the millstones; grinding, in tlie East, is a menial 
office. The mistress of nations must now take the place 
of a servant. Uncover thij locks ; remove thy veil ; another 
sign of degradation. Make Imre the Irp — pa-ts over the rivers ; 
she is represented as fording streams ni the manner of a 
woman of the lowest condition. 

3. ii'ill not meet thee as a man ; not as a frail man, but as the 
omnipotent Uod. But some (irefer to render,"! will meet 
no man ;" that is, no one who can ofter me any resistance. 

7. The latter end of it ; of thy pride, luxury, and cruelty ; 
that is, the disgrace to which they would bring thee. 



God expostulates 



ISAIAH XLVIII. 



oilh his peopk. 



A. M. :c92. to pleasures, that dwellest carelessly," that 
' 7i2. '° sayest in tliy heart, I am, and none else 
beside me; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall 
I know the loss of children : 

9 But these two things shall come to thee in a 
moment in one day, the loss of children, and wid- 
owhood : tliey shall come upon thee in their per- 
fection for tiic multitude of thy sorceries, a7id for 
the great abundance of thine enchantments. 

10 "i For thou hast trusted in thy wickedness:'' 
thou hast said, None seetli me.'' Tliy wisdom and thy 
knowledge, it hath perverted thee ;" and thou hast 
said in thy heart, I am, and none else beside mc. 

Ill Thcrcfoi-e shall evil come upon thee; thou 
shalt not know from whence it riseth :* and mis- 
chief shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be able 
to put it off:' and desolation shall come upon 
thee suddenly,'' ■which thou shalt not know. 

12 f^tand now with thine enchantments, and 
with tiie multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou 
hast labored from thy youth; if so be thou shalt 
be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail. 

13 Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy coun- 
sels." Let now the astrologers,^'' the star-gazers, 
the monthly prognosticators,' stand up, and save 
thee from t/iese things tiiat shall come upon thee. 

14 Behold, they shall be as stubble;''' the lire 
shall burn them ; they shall not deliver themselves'' 
from the power of the flame: there shall not be a 
coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it. 

15 Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou 
hast labored, even thy merchants, from thy youth : 
tliey shall wander every one to his quarter ;'' none 
shall save thee. 

CHAPTER XLVIII. 

1 CrotI, to convince the people of their foreknown obstinacy- revealeth 
his prophecies. 9 He saveth them for his own sake. 1.2' He exliort- 
eth them to obedience, because of his power and providence. 16 He 
lameiiteth their backwardness. 20 He powerfully delivereth his out 

of F.ul.ylon. 

EAR ye this, house of Jacob, which are 
called by the name of Israel, and are come 



II 



aZepb.2:15. b Eccl. 8:S. cPsi. 94:7. • Or. mused thee to turn aimy. 
t Ueb, Ike morning lliereof. I Heb. expiate, i 1 Thess. 5::!. e Ezek. 'HA-l. 
i Hfb. viewers of tlie heavens, t Dan 2:-2. I Heb. that give knowledge ran- 
cerniiig the months. sMah. 1:11). ^ lUh. t/ieir souls. Iich.51>:ll. i IVi. 
e^-.'iH. JDeut.5:!i-,29; Jer.5:-2; John4:-J4. kch.5-J:l. lMio3:ll. * ll^b. 



11. From whence it riseth; or, as the margin, "its iiiorn- 
iiig." It shall be a night of calamity, without any morning 
of prosperity. Shalt not know; suddenly, and without no- 
tice bcforcli;ind. Compare Job 9:5. 

i:'. Muiillilij pnnzc'i^ticators; those who pretend to fore- 
tell events from the changes of the moon. 

14. Not he a coal — nor fire; the consumption shall be so 
complete that nothing shall be left. 

15. Thij merchants; the merchants whose trade had en- 
riched Babylon. Compare chap. 13:14. 

INSTRrCTIONS. 

1-5. No present degree of power, wealth, or splendor, 
can protect wicked and persecuting nations from the wrath 
of God. He has pledged himself to humble every oppress- 
or of his people, and for the fulfilment of his word all the 
resources of heaven and earth are at his disposal. 

6. It is no excuse to wicked men. that God employs them 
as the instruments of executing his i)urposes. They will 
be juHged acconlmg to the spirit and intention of their 
deeds, not according to the use which God's overruling 
wisdom makes of them. 

7-0. A proud, self-sufficient, and contemptuous spirit is 
52 



forth out of the waters of Judah,' which swear by 
the name of the Lord, and make mention of the 
God of Israel, hut not in truth, nor in righteous- 
ness.J 

2 For they call themselves of the holy city,*^ and 
stay themselves upon the God of Israel :' the Loup 
of hosts is his name. 

3 I have declared the former things from the be- 
ginning; and they went forth out of my mouth, 
and I showed them ; I did them suddenly, and 
they came to pass. 

4 Because I knew that thou art obstinate," and 
thy neck is an iron sinew,"' and thy brow brass : 

5 I have even from the beginning declared ?/ tiD 
thee; before it came to pass I sliowed it thee: 
lest thou shouldest say, Mine idol hath done them ; 
and my graven image, and my molten image, hath 
commanded them. 

Thou hast heard, see all this; and will not ye 
declare it ? I have showed thee new things from 
this time, even hidden things," and thou didst not 
know them. 

7 They are created now, and not from the be- 
ginning; even before the day when thou lieardest 
them not; lest thou shouldest say, Behold, I knew 
them. 

8 Yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest 
not; yea, from that time that thine ear was not 
opened : for I knew" that thou wouldest deal very 
treacherously,!' and wast called a transgressor from 
the womb.'' 

y 1i For my name's sake will I defer mine anger,'' 
and for my praise will I refrain for thee, that i 
cut thee not otf. 

10 Behold, I have refined thee," but not with" 
silver; I have cliosen tlice in the furnace of afilic- 
tion.' 

11 For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, 
will I do it : for how should my name be polluted '! " 
and I will not give my glory unto another."' 

12 t Hearken unto "me, Jacob and Israel, my 
called ; I am he* I am the first, I also am the last.'"' 



hiird 




nne 


It. 31:-- 


7 


nl Co 


r. -J: 9, 


10. 


3 Psi. 


39 


1- 


4. 


P Jer 


5:11; 


los. 


5:7; 


fi- 




Psa. 51 


5 


r Psa 


. 7il:9 


Illli 


s; K/ 


ek. 


au 


9, 


etc. • 


Psa. Bl 


:I0. 


t Or 


fo 


r: V 


zek. -w 


■id 




Zech. 


l:J:y 


IPet 


i 


la 




Deut 


32:20, 


2;. 


vch. 


4i 


d. 


"Rev. 


.•i 


13. 





















the harbinger of ruin to nations not less than to individ- 
uals. When a nation thinks itself most secure from dan- 
ger, it is often nearest to destruction. 

10-15. When a nation has cast ofl' the fear of God, and 
trampled under foot his holy law, no device of human 
wisdom can save it from speeily and utter ruin. 

CHAPTER XLVIII. 

1. Out of the waters of Judah; from the family of Judah. 
Compare 'Psa. 68:2«, margin. Swear by the name of the 
Lord; thus acknowledgnig him as your God. 

3. Former tilings; formerly predicted and now fulfilled. 

G. Hearil; the prediction. See all this; see the whole ac- 
complished. Declare it; be my witnesses to its fulfilment. 

7. Before the clai/ when thou heardest them not ; rather, " be- 
fore to-day thou lieardest them not." Thy idol gave thee 
no prophetic intimation of them. 

8. From that time; from of old. Thine car was not opened: 
it was not revealed to thee. For I knew that thou wouldest 
deal verij treacherously ; for the meaning, compare ver. 3-5. 

10. Not with silver; or " for silver," tlie refining produced 
no good result. Compare Jer. 6:28-30. 
817 



Deliverance of God's people. 



ISAIAH XLIX. 



Christ sent to the Gentiles. 



i:i My hand also hatli laid the foundation of the 
earth," and my right hand liath spanned* the heav- 
ens : ivken I call unto tliein,'' they stand up together. 

14 All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which 
among them hath declared these things ? The 
Loud hath loved him:'' he will do his pleasure on 
Babylon, and his arm shiiU be on the Chaldean?.'' 

15 I, even I, have spoken ; yea, I have called 
him: I have brought him, and he shall make his 
way prosperous." 

16 % Come ye near unto me, hear ye this ; I have 
not spoken in secret from the beginning ; from the 
time that it was, there am I : and now the Lord 
God, and his Spirit, hath sent me.*^ 

17 Thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy 
One of Israel: I am the Lord thy God whicii 
teachctii thee to profit," which leadeth tiiee by the 
way t/int thou shouldest go." 

18 Oh that thou hadst hearkened to my com- 
mandments!' then had thy peace been as a river,^ 
and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea: 

19 Thy seed also had been as the sand, and the 
ofifspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof; 
his name should not have been cut off nor de- 
stroyed from before mo. 

20 If Go ye forth of Babylon,*^ flee ye from the 
Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, tell 
this, utter it even to the end of the earth; say ye. 
The Lord hath redeemed his servant Jacob.' 

21 xVud they thirsted not when he led them 
through the deserts: he caused the waters to flow 
out of the rock for them: he clave the rock also, 
and the waters gushed out."' 

22 There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the 
wicked." 



■ Psa. 10'2:*25. ' Or, t/ie palm of my Tight hand hath spread out. b ch. 
40:26. cMarklO;21. d ch. 44:28: eEzral:a. f ch. 61 : 1 ; Zecli. 2.8-11 ; 
Luke 4:18-21. e Deut. 8:17, 18; Mio. 4:2. h Psa 02:8; 7:5:24. ■ Pfa. 
81:13-ir.. J Psn. 119:1(;.5. k Jer. .51:6, 4o. 1 2 Sam 7:2:1; Rev. 5:9. 
" Exod. 17:6; Num. 2(i:ll. n ch. .57:21. o Jer. 1:5; I.uke 1:15. HI; Gal. 



14. Assemble yourselves; another challenge to the patrons 
of idolatry. Compare cliap. 4 1 : 1 . These things ; concerning 
the redemption of God'.s people. Hinii Cynis, as the next 
verse shows. He will do his pleasure; God, through Cyrus. 

16. In secret ; my predictions have been open and unam- 
biguous. Fro?n the time thiit il was; from the time that these 
events began. There am I; as the doer. Ami now — halh sent 
me; the Messiah, wlio may be con.sidered as speaking in 
God's name through the remainder of the chapter, and 
■wlio speaks in the beginning of the following chapter. To 
the Messiah, as God, the whole of the present verse may 
be refeiTed. 

20. Hath redeemed; in this and the following verse the 
deliverance of Israel is spoken of as abeady accomplished 
in God's purpose. 

21. They tlursted not — gushed out; God provides for his 
people, as of old, when he delivered them from Kgypt. 
Allusions of this kind to the miraculous provision which 
God made for the wants of his people in the wilderness of 
Arabia, when on tlicir way to the promised land, iibound 
in this part of Isaiah, and arc to be understood not literally 
but figuratively. See chap. 42:17-19; 43:19, 20; 49:10; 
.5.5:13. Their spiritual application is given directly in 
chap. 44:3-5. 

INSTUrCTIONS. 
11. God continues to carry forward his work of redemp- 
tion in the hearts of his people, not from anj' goodness or 
faithfulness that he sees in them, but for the glory of his 
own name. Lest his and their enemies should triuni|ili in 
their destruction, he bears with their waywardness and 
folly, discipliuea them with much long-suffering.and makes 
818 



CHAPTER XLIX. 



B. C. about 712. 



1 Cliriirt, being sent to the Jews, complaineth of tlicm. 5 He is sent to 
the Gentiles witli gracious promises. 13 God's love is perpetual to 
his church. IS The ample restoration of Uie church. 2.1 The pow- 
erful deliverance out of captivity. 

LISTEN, isles, unto me; and hearken, ye 
people, from far: The Lord hath called me 
from the womb;° from the bowels of my niotlier 
hath he jnade mention of my name. 

2 And he hath made my mouth like a sharp 
sword ;'' in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me,'' 
and made me a polished shaft;'' in his quiver hath 
he hid me ; 

3 And said unto mo. Thou art my servant, 
Israel, in whom I will be glorified." 

4 Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have 
spent my strength for naught, and in vain: yet 
surely my judgiueiit is with the Lord, and my 
work* with my God. 

5 1 And now, saith the Lord that formed me 
from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob 
again to him. Though Israel be not gathered,' yet 
shall I* be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and 
my God shall bo my strength. 

(j And he said. It is a light thing that thou* 
shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of 
Jacob, and to restore the preserved' of Israel : I 
will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles," that 
thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the 
earth. 

7 Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, 
and his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth,''''' to 
him whom the nation abliorretii," to a servant of 
rulers. Kings shall see and arise," princes also 
shall worship, because of the Lord that is faithful, 



1:13. P 


H..» 


6:5; 11 


h 


4:12; Rev. 1: 


16 


q ch. 


51:16. ' 


•sa. 45:5. • ch. 


43:21; . 


ohn 


l:!:31; 


1' 


t. 2:9. t Or 


r 


eivard; 


ch. 40:10. 


1 Matt. 23:37. 


1 Or. Thai h 


net may 


ha 


gathered to hi 


m 


and I may. ♦ Or, 


Art thou hshter 


t/ian Iha 


ttho 


1, etc. 





r, df.solation.'i. 


u 


Acts 1:1 


47. 1 Or 


that is despised 


in .soul. 


vol 


. .5^:3. 


w 


Luke 2:1:18-21 




I r.^. ■ 


2:10,11. 





them at last eternal monuments of his almighty power and 
abounding grace. 

17-1'J. Nothing is more plain than that the happiness 
and prosperity of God's people lie in whole-hearted obe- 
dience and devotion to him ; yet nothing is so diilicult for 
them to learn. Sin and suflfering make up a large part of 
their history. 

22. In all the glorious promises which God makes to 
those who love him, the wicked have no share. Not i>eaco 
but destruction is their portion. 

CHAPTER XLIX. 

The subject of this chapter is Christ and his body the 
church. In the former part, Christ the Uead is especially 
exhibited ; in the latter, Christ's body. 

1. il/(i(/c mention of my name; Malt, 1:21; Luke 1:31; 
2:21. The name contains in itself a description of his 
character. 

2. Like a sharp sword; this describes the power and en- 
ergy of Christ's word and doctrine. Coni))arc chap. 11:4; 
Ileii. 4 : 12 ; and especially Hev. 1 : IG ; 19: 15, 21. Nid me; 
from the power of the enemy. Polished shaft; compare 
Psalm 45:5. 

4. In vain— for naught; compare chap. 53:1 ; John 12:38; 
Horn. 10:16. 

t>. Tliough Israel be not gathered; that is, "Israel after the 
flesh," be not gathered for a season. Rom. 11: 25. Glori- 
ous; as "a light to the Gentiles." verse 6. Many prefer 
the marginal reading, according to which we must under- 
stand by Israel, "the Israel of God." 

7. Him whom man despiseth ; the Messiah, chap. 53: 3 ; but 



GoiVs perpetual 



ISAIAH XLIX. 



love to his church. 



A. M. 3292. and tlie Holy One of Israel, and he shall 

B. <". about , , * 

712. choose thee. 

8 Thus saith tlie Lord, In an acceptable time 
have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have 
I helped thee:" and I will preserve thee, and give 
thee for a covenant of the people, to establish' the 
earth, to cause to inlierit the desolate heritages; 

9 That thou niayest say to the prisoners, Go 
forth;" to them that are in darkness," Show your- 
selves. Tliey shall feed in the ways, and their 
pastures shall be in all high places. 

10 Tlicy shall not hunger nor thirst ;'' neither 
shall the heat nor sun smite them: for he that 
hath mercy on tiiem sliall lead them," even by the 
springs of water siiall he guide them. 

11 And I will make all my mountains a way, 
and my highways shall be exalted.' 

12 Behold, these shall come from far: and lo, 
these from the north and from the west; and these 
from the land of Sinim. 

13 1 Sing, heavens; and be joyful, earth; 
and break forth into singing, mountains: for 
the Lord hath comforted his people, and will have 
mercy upon his afflicted. 

14 But Zion said, Tlic Lord liath forsaken me, 
and my Lord hath forgotten me." 

15 Can a woman forget her sucking child, that 
she should not have compassion^ on tlie son of her 
womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget 
thee." 

16 Beliold, I have graven thee upon the palms of 
my hands;' thy walls are continually before me. 

17 Thy children shall make haste; thy destroy- 
ers and they that made thee waste shall go forth 
of thee.^ 

IS IT Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold : 
all these gather themselves together, and come to 
thee." Jis I live, saith the Lord, thou shalt surely 



» Psa. (iO:I3; aCor. e:-J; Eph. 1:() • Ot, raise up. b Zech. 0:12. <• 1 Pet. 
2:9. <i Rev. 7:16. e Psa. £j:2. ' Psa. 107:4, 7. s Psi. 77:9, lU. 1 Heb. 
from having compassion, h ch. <ll:ai; Matt. 7:11. i Song t?;6. J Ezek. 
28:24; Matt. 13:41, 42; Rev. 22:15. k ch. ei):8; Zech 2:4; 10:10. 1 Rom. 



we need not wholly exclude his members. John 15:20; 
1 Peter 2:21. Shall see; his exaltation. Arise; to do him 
reverence. 

8. In an acceptable time ; in a time of favor, the appointed 
time for his exaltation. A covenant of tlie people; see note 
on chap. 42:6. To establish the earth; or, as the margin, 
" to raise up the earth," that is, to build U|) its ruins. To 
cause to inherit tlie desolate heritage.^; to restore thy people 
to the possession of their lost and desolate heritages. This 
is to be understood spiritually of the renovation of the 
church, and the extension of her borders through Christ. 

9. &i/?otte ^r?,soHe?-s,- see chapter 42:7. TItey shalt feed; 
Christ's flock shall feed. 

11. Exalted; cast up, so as to afford them a safe way. 

12. Sinim; these are probably the Chinese, or some na- 
tion on their western border. 

10. (Tpoti the palms of my hands ; as an object to be always 
remembered. 

17. Make haste ; to return from their captivity. 

21. Who hath begotten me these; there seems to be a ref- 
erence in these words to the great accession of gentile 
converts. 

23. Bow down to tliee — lick up tlie dust; see note on chap. 
45:14. 

24. Shall the prey betaken; mighty conquerors have taken 
God's people captive: can she hope for deliverance from 
them ? The question suggests a difhculty in the way of 
Ziou's redemption, which the next verse answers. 



clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, 
and bind them on thee, as a bride doeth. 

19 For thy waste and thy desolate places, and 
the land of thy destruction, shall even now be too 
narrow by reason of the inhabitants, and they 
that swallowed thee up shall be far away. 

20 The children which thou shalt have, after 
thou hast lost the other,' shall say again in thine 
ears. The place is too strait for me: give place to 
me that I may dwell. 

21 Then shalt thou say in thy heart, Who hatli 
begotten me these, seeing I have lost mycliildrcn, 
and am desolate, a captive, and removing to and 
fro'? and who hath brought up these? i3ehoh.l,I 
was left alone ; these, where had they been ? 

22 Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will lift 
up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my stand- 
ard to tlie people: and tliey shall bring thy sons 
in their arms,* and thy daughters shall be carried 
upon their slioulders.™ 

23 And kings shall be thy nursing fathers,^ and 
their queens' thy nursing mothers : they shall bow 
down to thee with their face toward the earth, and 
lick up the dust of thy feet;" and thou shalt know 
that I am the Lord : for they shall not be ashamed 
that wait for me." 

24 "H Shall the prey be taken from the mighty," 
or the'lawful captive' delivered? 

25 But thus saith the Lord, Even the captives* 
of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey 
of the terrible siiall be delivered : for I will con- 
tend with him that contendeth with thee, and I 
will save thy children. 

26 And I will feed tliem that oppress thee with 
their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with 
their own blood,'' as with sweet* wine: and all 
flesh shall know that I the Lord ain thy Saviour 
and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob. 



11:11 


^ 


^ 


1 Ileb 


hllSI 


m 


■ch, 06 


:'ll 


5 Heb. 


Wl, 


ishtr 




1 Hp 


h. p, 


iirm- 


(.•:. " 


\ 


SI 


72:9. c 


Ic. 


ollor 


1. y:3:j. 


P 


iMatt. 12 


21). 


1IH 


b 


Ike 


upUl 


itvot 


ikejt 


St 




Heb. ( 


apli 


ttij. 


qKev. 


lU 


6. t Or, 


neu 













INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. When Christ himself preached, his word was like a 
sharp sword, piercing men's consciences and revealing 
their inmost thoughts; and the same power he gives 
through the Holy Spirit to his gospel, whenever his ser- 
vants preach it in its simplicity and purity, " commending" 
themselves "to every man's conscience in the sight of 
God." But they who think to make it attractive to sinners 
by clothing it "with enticing words of man's wisdom," 
destroy its living energy, and make it dead and powerless 
for the salvation of the soul. 

4. The reward of Christ's labors and sufferings, though 
long delayed, is made sure to him by the promise of his 
Father ; and in like manner, he insures to all his faithful 
servants the reward of their toil in his cause. 

5. Ministerial acceptance depends not on outward suc- 
cess, but on fidelity. 

7. Christ's road to exaltation lay through the deepest 
humiliation. Chap. 50:6. Herein his servants should be 
content to follow in his footsteps. Rom. 8: 17 ; 2 Tim. 2 : 12. 

10. They who have Christ for their shepherd cannot 
want any needful provision for soul or for body. Psa. 23 : 1. 

14-17. In times of long-continued suffering, God's pieo- 
ple are often tempted to despondency, through "an evil 
heart of unbelief." But his love for them can never suffer 
any abatement. In aU their sorrows he bears tliem con- 
tinually on his heart, and will in due time grant them a 
glorious deliverance. 

819 



Christ comfortelh 



ISAIAH LI, 



his faithful people. 



CHAPTER L. 



1 Christ sliowetli that the dereliction of the Jews is not to be imputed 
lo hiiii, by his ability to save, 5 by his obedience in that work, 7 and 
by his confidence in that assistance. 10 An exhortation to trust in 
(rod, and not in ourselves. 

THUS saitli the Loud, Whero is the bill of your 
mother's ilivoroemont," wjiom I have put 
away? or which of my creditors is it to whom I 
have sold _vou? Beliold, for your iniquities have 
ye sold yourselves,'' and for your trans{,'rcssions is 
your mother put away. 

2 Wherefore, wlicn 1 came, u-an there no man? 
when 1 called, van there none to answer? Is my 
hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or 
have I no power to deliver? beliold, at my rebuke 
I dry up the sea, I make the rivers a -wilderness: 
tJicir iisli stinketh, because there is no water, and 
dieth for thirst. 

8 I clothe the heavens with Idackness, and 1 
make sackcloth their covering'. 

4 1 The Lord God hath triven me the tongue of 
the learned,"" that I shouhl know how to speak a 
■word in season to him that is weary :'' he wakencth 
niorniii<rby morning, he wakencth mine ear to hear 
as the learned. 

5 The Lord God hath opened mine ear,"" and 1 
was not rebellious, neither turned away back.'' 

(j I gave my liack to tiie smiters, and my cheeks 
to them tiiat jilucked off the hair: 1 hid" not my 
face from shame and spitting.'' 

7 IF For the Lord God will helj) me; therefore 
shall I not be confounded : therefore have I set 
my face like a fliut, and I know that I shall not be 
asliamed. 



" Jer. 3:.^; llos. 2:2. b ch. 5a:.3. 


t Matt. 13:5-1. <1 Mitt. 11:28. « Psa. 


4iP:(i--<. f .Matt. 28:39; John 14:31. 


S Matt. 2(i:(i7; 27:26. h Rnm. S;:J2- 


3J. • Heb. tht master of my muu. 


■ Zcch. 3:1, etc.: Rev. 12:10. J Job 


Vi.a. k ch. 51:8. 1 I'sa. 2:i:4| M 


c. 7:». "1 .Toh 13:15; P«a. 52:i; Nah. 



21. The experience of God's church in all ages has been, 
that every period of sharp conflict and persecution has 
brought to her a great enlargement of her spiritual off- 
si)ring. 

22-20. The more glorious the triumph which God has 
promised to Zion, the more terrible must be the overthrow 
of all who seek to destroy lier. Rev. 18:8. 

CHAPTER L. 

1. Wlicre is (lie bill of your mother's divorcement ; ]iroduce 
the l)ill, and it will sliow that slie, not Jehovah, lias been 
unfaithful. The "motiier" of tlie Jews is tlio iialioii itself, 
tiiat is, the visible church. U'liick of rnij creditors — sold iiou; 
the people are indeed sold into bondage, but it is by their 
own sinful acts. Tlie allusion is to the custom of a debt- 
or's selling his children to liis creditor to satisf}- his de- 
mands. 

2, 3. When I came; to call you to repentance and obedi- 
ence. Is mij hand shortened — sackcloth their ccfvering ; these 
words show that the divorce and captivity of God's peo- 
ple came from their own unfaitiifuhiess and perverscuess, 
not from want of power in God. 

4-9. lliilh piven me the ton/rue of the learned ; the Mes.siiih 
speaks here. 6ee introductory note to the preceding chap- 
ter. "The tongue of tlio learned" is the tongue of those 
who.beuig themselves leuriied in the Wiiys of God, are able 
to teach others. This tongue the Messiah has received 
from Jehovah. This accords with our Lord's constant 
teaching, that he had received his doctrine from the Fa- 
ther. John 7 :!.■>, in. 

10. Jlis servant ; the Mcssiali. The address is to afllleted 
believers. 

11. Kindle u fire — sparh; these words describe the vain 

820 



8 //f'/snear that jnstifieth me;'' who will a. m 3292. 
contend with nie? let us stand together: 'tk."""' 
who /,« mine adversary ?'' let him come near to me. 

•J IJehold, the Lord God will help me; who wlie 
that shall condemn me? lo, they all shall wa.\ old 
as a garment;' the moth shall eat them up.'' 

10 1 Who is among you that feareth the Lord, 
that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walkelh 
in darkne.-^s, and hath no light?' let him trust in 
the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.'" 

11 Ik'iiold, all ye that kindle a fire, that com- 
pass yourselves about with sparks: walk in the 
light of your lire, and in the sparks that ye have 
kindled." This shall ye have of my hand ; ye shall 
lie down in soitow." 

CHAPTER LI. 

1 An exhortation, after the pattern of Abraham, to trust in Christ, 3 by 
reason of his comfortable promises. 4 of his righteous salvation, 7 and 
man's mortality. 9 Christ by his sanctified arm dcfendetli his from 
the fear of man. 17 He bewaileth the afliictions of Jerusalem, 21 
and promiseth deliverance. 

HEARKE:^ to me," ye that follow after right- 
eousness,'' ye that seek the Lord: look unto 
the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of 
tiie pit whence ye are digged. 

2 jjook unto Abraham your father,' and unto 
Sarah that bare you ; for 1 called him aloue,' and 
blessed him,' and increased him. 

3 For the Lord shall comfort Zion:" he will 
comfort all her waste places ; and he will make 
her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the 
garden of the Loud; joy and gladness shall be found 
therein,' thanksgiving, and the voice of melody. 



1:7; Heb. 10:35-37. nEocl. 11:9. 
31. r Heb. 11:8-12. • (ien. 12:1,2 
Psa. 85;S. '• i Pet. 1:8. 



devices of unbelievers to save themselves, instead of seek- 
ing salvation from God. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 

1. God is true to his eng.igements with his people, and 
mighty to deliver them. Their sulTeriiigs come through 
their own unfaithfulness. 

4. Clirist came from the Father. and taught the doctrine 
the Fatlier committed to him. His wonl is infallible truth, 
every way adapted to the wants of perishing sinners, and 
will save all who receive it in a believing, loving, and obe- 
dient spirit. 

7-'J. God's power and faithfulness are pledged to make 
his Son Jesus (.'hrist victorious over every foe ; and in this 
victory, all who are united to him by living faith shall 
share. Because he triumphs, they shall triumph. John 
14:1!); Horn. 8:34. 

10, U. Quiet coaifidenco in God is the only way to obtain 
deliverance from <l:irkness. They who in times of distress 
forsake the mercy-seat, and rely on their own devices, 
must " lie down in sorrow." 

ClI.Vl'TKK LI. 

1. Hearken to me; the .Messiah seems to be still the 
speaker. Compare verses 4, ."i. The address is to God's 
people, who are thrioo described by their character and 
relations to God, in verses 1, 4. 7, :uid thrice encouraged 
by the iiromise of God's everlasting faithfulness and love. 
The rock — i/c are hctrn — the hole — ye are digged ; that is, your 
origin, as ex|)lained in the next verse. 

2. I called him atone; literally, "I called him one;" that 
is, when ho was but one. The power of God was shown 
by making of one man a great nation. 



The fea r of ina n. 



ISAIAH LI. 



Trust in God. 



AM . 1292. 4 ^ Hearken unto mc, my peoi)le; and 

B. C. about . yA ■ I* 1 

Ti: give ear unto mc, O my nation : lor a law 
shall proceed from me,'' and 1 will make my judg- 
ment to rest for a light of the people. 

5 My rigliteousucss w near;'' my salvation is 
gone forth, and mine arms shall judge the peo- 
ple;'' the isles shall wait upon me,'' and on mine 
arm shall they trust. 

(5 Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon 
the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish 
away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like 
a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die 
in like manner :° but my salvation shall be for ever, 
and my righteousness shall not be abolished.' 

7 IT Hearken unto me, ye that know righteous- 
ness," the people in whose heart w my law ;'' fear 
ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid 
of their revilings.' 

8 For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, 
and the worm shall eat them like wool :' but my 
righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation 
from generation to generation. 

9 T" Awake, awake; put on strength," arm of 
the Lord; awake, as in the ancient days, in the 
generations of old. Art thou not it that hath cut 
Rahab,' and wounded the dragon?'" 

10 Jirt thou not it which hath dried the sea, the 
■waters of the great deep ; that hath made the depths 
of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass over ?" 

11 Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall 
return, and come with singing unto Zioa;° and 
everlasting joy shall be upon their head:" they 
shall obtain gladness and joy ; and sorrow and 
mourning shall flee away.i 

12 I, even I, am he that comforteth you:'' who 
art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man 
that shall die, and of the son of man which shall be 
made as grass ; 

1.3 And forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that hath 
stretched forth the heavens, and laid the founda- 
tions of the earth; and hast feared continually 



a Rom. 8:4. bch. 5G:1. « Psa. <JS;9. J cli 45 
! Pet. i.V), 12. f Dan. 9:-J4. B ver. 1-1. h i 

,Iob 4:19-21. k Rev. 11:17. iPsa. bU:in. i 
lExoJ. 14;-21. o oh. 35:10. Pjiide'.M. q Rev. 



4; («l:9. e Heb. 1:11, 12; 
ia. 3;:.'J1. i Matt. M-rlS. 
I ch. 27:1; Psa. 74:13. H. 
11:4. r ver. 3; 2 Cor. 1:3. 



5. My righteousness; God's righteousness is manifested 
in the redemption of his people ; hence, it is naturally 
joined with "my salvation." So also verse 8. 

6. Lift up your eyes to the heavens ; nothing is so stable as 
the heavens ; yet these shall perish, while God's faithful- 
ness to his people shaU remain for ever. Compare Matt. 
5:18; 24:35; Luke 16:17. 

9. arm of tlie Lord ; the prophet calls upon God's arm 
to work as in ancient daj's. Cut ; hewn in pieces by thy 
plagues. BoAai; Egypt. Psa. 87:4; 89:10. Thedragmi; 
Egypt herself, under the symbol of the crocodile that 
inhabits the Nile. 

11. Therefore the redeemed of the Lord sltall return; thou 
ehalt repeat thy wondrous works of old in bringing thy 
redeemed to thyself. 

13. Wtiere is the fury of the oppressor? what has now 
become of it? This is said in anticipation of his destruc- 
tion. 

14. The captive exile hasteneth; the oppressor having been 
destroyed, the captive exiles whom he had imprisoned 
Iiasten to escape i'lom their dungeon. 

l(i. Ptay\t the heavens — lay the foundations of the earth; the 
same as, " create new heavens and a new earth." Chap. 
C5:17. 



every day because of the fury of the oppressor, as 
if he were ready* to destroy? and where is the 
fury of the oppressor?'* 

14 The captive e.xile hasteneth that he may bo 
loosed, and that he should not die in the pit,' nor 
that his bread should fail. 

15 But I am the Lord thy God, that divided the 
sea, whose waves roared : The Loud of hosts is his 
name. 

IG And I have put my words in thy mouth," and 
I have covered thee in the shadow of my hand,'' 
that I may plant the heavens, and lay the founda- 
tions of the earth,"' and say unto Ziou, Thou art my 
people. 

n IT Awake, awake, stand up, Jerusalem, 
which hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup 
of his fury ; thou hast drunken the dregs of the 
cup of trembling, and wrung than out.-'' 

18 There is none to guide her among all the sons 
whom she hath brought forth; ncHhcv is there any 
that taketh her by the hand of all the sous that she 
hath brought up. 

19 These two things are come* unto thee; who 
shall be sorry for thee ? desolation, and destruc- 
tion,* and the famine, and the sword : by whom 
shall I comfort thee ?^ 

20 Thy sons have fointed, they lie at the head 
of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net : they are 
full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God. 

21 1 Therefore hear now this, thou afllicted, and 
drunken, but not with wine:" 

22 Thus saith thy Lord the Lord, and thy God 
that pleadeth the cause of his people," Behold, I 
have taken out of thy hand the cup of trembling, 
even the dregs of the cup of my fury ; thou shalt 
no more drink it again:" 

23 But I will jiutTit into the hand of them that 
afflict thee;"" which have said to thy soul, Bow 
down, that we may go over: and thou hast laid 
thy body as the ground, and as the street, to them 
that went over." 



• Or, made himself readi/. > Job 2U:7. 


Zfch.9:ll. " John 3:34. 


V ch. 


49:2. w 2 Pet. 3:13. « ver. 22; Psa. 


7o:8. t ilt:b. happened. 




breaking, y Lam. 8:11-13; Amos 7:2. 


z Lam. 3:15. a Psa. 35: 


; Jer. 


50:34; .Mic. 7:9. bch. 54:7-9. ' Jer. 2" 


: 17-29. a Psa. 00:11,12. 





17. The cup of his fury ; God's judgments are often com- 
pared to an intoxicating cup, which causes those who 
drink to reel. Psa. 75:8; Jer. 25:15, le ; 51:7; Lam. 4:21; 
Ezek. 23:31-34. 

19. These two things; famine and the sword, producing 
desolation and destruction. Who shall be sorry for thee — 
comfort tlieel these words imply that Zion's griefs are 
beyond the reach of human sympathy and comfort. There- 
fore God himself will interpose to deliver and comfort her, 
verses 21-23. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-8. Heaven and earth are not so stable as the prosper- 
ity of the righteous: their helper and protector is the 
unchangeable God, who is faithful to fulfil all his promises 
to those who put their trust in him. 

9. God is well pleased when his children urge his past 
interpositions for Zion as a reason why he should now 
dehver her: by every such interposition he has pledged 
his infinite attributes to be with her, and help her, and 
give her the victory to the end of time. 

12-16. No array of human opio'sitinn. however formid- 
able, ought to dismay God's peoj.lr ; Ih.'v Imvc on their side 
the Maker of heaven and eartlj, lirlun- v, hnm themighti- 
est oppressors are but as chaff before the wliirlwind. 
821 



TIk welcome iicws 



ISAIAH LIII. 



of Christ's kingdom. 



CHAPTER LII. 



I Christ persuadeth the church to believe his free rejemption, 7 to 
receive the ministers thereof, 9 to joy in the power tltcreof. 11 and to 
free themselves from bondage. 13 Christ's kingdom shall be exalted. 

A WAKE, awake; put on thy strenj^'th, Zion : 
jS\. put ou thy beautiful garments, Jerusalem, 
the holy city:" for henceforth tiiere shall no more 
come into thee the uncircuinciscd and the unclean.'' 

2 Siiake thy.-ielf from tiie dust;" arise, and sit 
down, Jerusah'ni : loose thyself from the bands 
of thy neck, captive daughter of Zion. 

3 For thus saith the LoiU), Ye have sold your- 
selves for naught;'' and ye shall be redeemed 
without money. 

4 For thus saith the Lord God, My people went 
down aforetime into Egypt to sojourn there; and 
the Assyrian oppressed tlieni without cause. 

5 Now tliereibre, what have I here, saith the 
LoHD, that my jjcople is taken away for naught? 
tliey that rule over them make them to howl, saith 
the Lord ; and my name continually every day is 
blasphemed." 

() Therefore my people shall know my name : 
therefore they shall know in that day tiiat I am he 
that doth speak : behold, it is L 

7 IF How beautiful u])on the mountains arc the 
feet of him that bringeth good tidings,' that pub- 
lislieth peace f that bringetli good tidings of good,'' 
that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, 
Thy God reignethl 

8 Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice ; with tiie 



«Neh. 11.1; Rev, ai 


•-',27. l>Nah.l:15. c Zech. 2:7. d Rom. 7: I4--W, 


« Rom 2:21. fSonna 


:m; ch.25:r,, 7. f Nah. 1:1.5; Rom. 10:15. h Luke 


2:10, 11. i 1 Cor. l:J: 


2. i Psa. 9-i:2, 3. k Luke 3:(i. 1 Zech. 2:G, 7; 


2 Cor. 0:17i Rev. 18:1 


m Lev. 1.5:.0, etc.; Hag. 2:13. n Lev. 22:2, etc. 



18-20. When God would humble his people for their 
sins, lie takes awiiy from their leaders wisdom and 
Btrength, and leaves them no way of deliverance but that 
of a return to himself by repentance and renewed obedi- 
ence. 

21-23. The sufferings which God inflicts upon his cov- 
enant people arc designed for their purification, and he 
will in due time remove them. But their merciless per- 
secutors "shall have judgment without mercy." 

CHAPTER LIL 

I. Zinn — Jcriisahm; hero the representative of the true 
church. There slmll no more cnmc — the unclean; the words 
do not so much promise to the earthly Zion an absolute 
exemption from the presence of the wicked, as deliver- 
ance from tlieir dominion. Matt. 13:24-30, 3(>— 13. 

3. Sold yourselves for naught ; your captors have paid me 
nothing for j-ou. Compare Psa. 44:12. Witltmit money; 
I will pay your enemies nothing for your redemption. 
Comj)are chaj). 4,'>:13. 

5. What have I here; what is this case that comes before 
me ? The question implies that it is a case which demands 
bis intcrpo.sition for his people. 

7. How beautiful upon the mountains; the prophet sees in 
vision messengers running to amiounce to Zion the deliv- 
erance which God has accomi)lishu<l for his peojile. 

K. Thy watchmen; the watchmen of Zion catch the joy- 
ful tidings, and shout for joy. Ei/c to eye; "face to fai'c," 
as the same words arc rendered in Num. 14:14. The 
watchmen of Zion shall see God's glory face to face; that 
is, in open vision, as one sees a present friend. 

II. r/itncc; from Babylon. Compare chap. 48:20. But 
we mist understand deliverance from Babylon as an ear- 
nest and pledge of higher delivorenccs in the distant 
future. 

13. My servant; the Messiah. The remaining three 
822 



voice together shall they sing: for they a.m. sac 

^ . •' '^ * li i' about 

shall see eye to eye,' when the Lord shall 712 
bring again Zion. 

9 * Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste 
places of Jerusalem : for the Lord hath comforted 
his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem. 

10 The Lord hath made bare his holy arm in 
the eyes of all the nations ;J and all the ends of 
the earth shall see the salvation of our God.'' 

1 1 1i Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence,' 
touch no unclean thing;'" go ye out of the midst 
of her ; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the 
Lord." 

12 For ye shall not go out witii haste, nor go 
by fligiit: for the Lord will go before you; and 
tlie God of Israel icill he your rearward.' 

13 13ehoId, my servant sliall deal prudently,* he 
shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high. 

14 As many were astonished at thee ; his visage 
was so marred more than any man, and his form 
more than the sons of men : 

15 So shall ho sprinkle many nations ;" the kings 
shall shut their iiioiitlis at iiiiii : for t/int which had 
not been told tlieiii shall they see; and that which 
they had not heard shall they consider. 

CHAPTER LIII. 

1 The prophet, complaining of incredulity, exciiseth the scandal of the 
cross, 4 by the bent-tit ot his passion, 10 and the gocKl sncct-ss thereof. 

TTy^HO hath believed our report?**' and to 
VV whom is tlie arm of the Lord revealed?^ 



' Heb. gather you itp. t Or, prosper; ch. 5:J:10. o Ezek. 36:2.5. 1 Or. doe~ 
Irine; Heb. hearing, p John 1:7, 12; Epil. 1:IS, 19. q John 12:37; Kom. 
10:1(>. 



verses of this chapter belong to the following, and should 
not have been separated from it. 

14. Marred; by suffering, it wore the marks of deep 
sorrow. 

15. So shall he sprinkle ; as a priest, with the blood of 
his own propitiatory sacrifice. As his humiliation has 
been most deep, so shall its results be most glorious. 

IX.STRUCTIOXS. 

1. It has ever been the effort of the " wicked one " to 
introduce into Zion "the uncircumciscd and the unclean," 
and to pivo them the dominion over her. But though 
they may greatly aftiict and trouble her. Cod will in the 
end give her the victory over them. 

5-10. The destruction of Christ's cimrch would be a 
victory of Satan over the Redeemer, such as would fill the 
mouths of the wicked with exultation and blasphemy. 
But God will never allow any oppression from without, or 
corruption from within, to prevail against her. Though 
her enemies may trium])h for a season, he will send to her, 
as he did to the captive Jews in Uabylon. the joyful tidings 
of deliverance, filling the hearts of her children with glad- 
ness and thanksgiving. 

15. The prccei)ts of Christ and the living eflicaoy of his 
doctrine far transcend the wisdom of earth's most re- 
nowned sages ; and they arc destined to work such a 
glorious change in the condition of man, as never entered 
the heart of any heathen phil(iso|dicr or prince. 

CHAPTER LllL 

1. Our report ; what we have published concerning tho 
Messiah. Tho prophet, in the name of Cod's mesHcngers, 
laments men's rejeetiiui of tho gospel. The arm of the 
Lord; as nianifesteil in Ihr iierscui and work of Christ. 
Revenled ; by tho inward teaching of Cod's Spirit, so as to 
be understood. .Matt. 11:27; lt;:17. 



The, sufferings and 



ISAIAH LIV. 



reward of Christ. 



A.M. 3»i 2 For 1)0 shall grow up before liim as a 
■7.11 "" tender plant, and as a root out of a dry 
ground: lie hath no form nor comeliness; and 
when we shall see hiui, there is no beauty that we 
should desire him. 

3 He is despised and rejected of men i" a man of 
sorrows, and acquainted with grief:'' and we hid 
as it were our faces from him:* he was despised, 
and we esteemed him not. 

4 1 Surely he hath bm-ne our griefs, and carried 
our sorrows i"" yet we did esteem him stricken, 
smitten of God, and afflicted. 

5 But he was wounded* for our transgressions, 
he was bruised for our iniquities : the chastisement 
of our peace was upon him ; and with liis stripes* 
we are healed." 

6 All we like sheep have gone astray ; we have 
turned every one to his own way ; and the Lord 
hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.^° 

7 Ho was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he 
opened not his mouth : he is brought as a lamb to 
the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers 
is dumb, so he opcneth not his mouth. 

8 He was taken from prison and from judgment:'' 
and who' shall declare his generation? for he was 
cut off out of tlie land of the living:"^ for the trans- 
gression of my people was he stricken." 

> Luke 2!: IS. etc. b Hcb. J: 1.5. • Or, he hid as it wrre Wis, face f mm us; 
Htb. as a hiding of faces from him, or from us. ' Malt. 26:37. t Or. lor- 
vienled. 1 Heb. Iiruisc. i 1 Pet. 2: H, 25. S Heb. made the iniquities of us all 
to meet on him. e Rom. 4:25; I Pet. 3:18. f Acts bilii-TS. I Or, away by 



2. Before him; before God. The words imply God's 
deep interest in him. A tender plant; literally, "a suck- 
ling," that is, a young shoot springing up from an old 
stock. See Job 14:7, where the same word is rendered 
"tender branch." A root; that is, the root of a decayed 
tree springing up into a new tree. Compare chap. 11:1. 
Out of a dri/ ground ; whence no " plant of renown " can be 
expected to spring. The meaning is, that the Messiah 
shall be of humble origin, John 9:29 ; of a despised region, 
John 1:46; 7:41, .52; and that the beginnings of his king- 
dom shall appe.ar small and contemptible in the eyes of 
men. Matt. 13::il,32. Form — beauty; the reference is to 
Christ's spiritual excellence, for which the carnally-minded 
Jews had no discernment. 

5. The chastisement of our peace ; the chastisement which 
procures for us peace with God. Rom. 5:1; Eph. 2:13-18. 

(i. The jniquiti/ of us alt; Rom. 4:2.'); 2 Cor. 5:21; Gal. 
3:13; 1 Pet. 2:24; IJohn 2:2. 

7. As a lamb to the slaughter ; Acts 8:32-35. 

8. From prison and from judgment ; or, as the margin, 
" by distress and judgment." that is, by an oppressive and 
unrighteous judgment. Who shidl declare his generation? 
the number of his spiritual offspring. Psa. 22:30. Com- 
pare verse 10. Some understand these words of Christ's 
divine origin. 

9. He made — his death ; or, " he," that is, my people, 
" appointed his grave with the wicked, but he was with 
the rich in his death." Our Saviour was crucified as a 
malefactor, and would, in tlie natural course of events, 
have had his grave with the wicked ; but God gave him 
a burial in the tomb of a rich man. Matt. 27:57-00. 

10. He shall see liis seed; his spiritual children. Psalm 
22:30; 45:16; 09:36; 102:28; 110:3. He shall prolong his 
dai/a; though slain as a sin-offering, he shall live for ever. 

11. SkaJI see — of his soul; shall see the fruits of his toil 
and sufferings. By his knowledge; by the knowledge of 
himself, as the one who has borne the iniquities of men. 

12. Divide him a portion — the strong; the "portion" and 
the "spoil" which God will give to the Messiah, as the 
reward of his sufferings, is dominion over all nations, Psa. 
2:8; 22:27; 72:11; 110:6; and over all the heavenly prin- 



9 And he made his grave with the wicked, 
and with the rich in his death ;^" because he had 
done no violence, neither was any deceit in his 
mouth. 

10 1 Yet it pleased the Lorh to bruise him ; he 
hath put hi7n to grief: when thou shalt make his 
soul* an offering for sin,' he shall see his seed, lie 
shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of tlie 
Lord shall prosper in his hand.J 

11 He shall see of the travail of his soul, and 
shall be satisfied: by his knowledge" shall my 
righteous servant'justify many ;'" for he shall bear 
their iniquities. 

12 Therefore will I divide liiin a portion wilh 
the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the 
strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto 
death :" and he was numbered with the transgres- 
sors ; and he bare the sin of many, and made in- 
tercession for the transgressors." 

CHAPTER LIV. 

1 The prophet, for the comfort of the Gentiles, prophesieth the ampli- 
tude of their church, 4 their safety, 6 their certain deliverance out of 
iifTlielion, 11 their fair edification, 15 and their suie preservation. 

O ING, barren, thou that didst not bear ; break 
kJ forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that 
didst not travail with child:'' for more are the 



dislresf and judgment; but who. s Dan. i):2'). II Heb. the stroke upon him. 
' Heh. deaths, h Matt. 27:57. 1 Heb. when his soul shall make, i 2 Cor. 
.5:21 ; Heb. 9:24-26. J 2 Thess. 1 :1 1. k John 17:3; 2 Pet 1:2. .1. l,Iohn2:l. 
mRom.3:2t. nHeb.l2:2. o Heb. 7:25; lJohn2: 1. P Zeph.3:14; Gal. 4:27. 



cipalities and powers, Eph. 1:21; Phil. 2:10; Col. 2:10; in 
a word, all power in heaven and on earth. Matt, 28:18. 
Because he hath poured out his soul unto death ; compare chap. 
52:14, 15; and Phil. 2:8, 9. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I, 2. The inward illumination of the Holy Spirit, reveal- 
ing to the soul its lost condition and the all-sufficiency 
of Christ, can alone enable men to see his infinite excel- 
lence and glory. To the eye of natural reason, he must 
ever appear without comeliness. Matt. 16: 17 ; 1 Cor. 2 : 14. 

3. No one ever came on such an errand of love as the 
Saviour, and no one ever received such treatment at the 
hands of sinners. John 1:11. 

4-6. The only sinless being who ever endured suffering, 
ignominy, and death, is the Lord Jesus Christ; and he 
suffered for our sins, " the just for the unjust, that he 
mi.ght bring us to God." 1 Pet. 3:18. 

7. The Redeemer, who knew no sin, bore the ignominy 
of the cross with perfect meekness and submission to the 
will of his Father. How does a meek and submissive 
spirit under injurious treatment become us, who are all 
defiled with iniquity, and deserve nothing but evil at 
God's hands. 1 Pet. 2:21. 

10. Though the number of Christ's servants has hitherto 
been small, the day is coming when the earth shall be 
filled with the knowledge of his salvation. His redeemed 
shall constitute a " great multitude which no man can 
number, of all nations, and kindred, and people, and 
tongues." Chap. 11:9; Jer. 31:34; Rev. 7:9. 

II. The knowledge of Christ has a justifying and saving 
efficacy, because it is the knowledge of an atoning sacri- 
fice for sin. "When the doctrine that Christ " bare the sin 
of many " is left out of the gospel, it becomes " another 
gospel," and has no longer any power to sanctify and 
save the soul. 

CHAPTER LIV. 

This chapter may be regarded as an expansion of the 
words, " He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall 
be satisfied," in the preceding chapter. 

1. The desolate — the married wife; "the married wife" 
823 



Prnsperily of the clmrcJi. 



ISAIAH LV. 



Gospd invitations. 



diiklren of the desolate tlian the cjiildren of tlie 
married wife, saith the Loitn. 

2 Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let Ihcm 
.stretch forth the curtains of thy habitations: spare 
not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes ; 

3 For thou slialt lireak forth on the right hand 
and on the left ; and thy seed shall inherit the Gen- 
tiles, and make the desolate cities to he inhabited. 

4 Fear not; for thou shall not be ashamed: 
neither be thou confounded ; for thou .shalt not bo 
put to shame: for thou shalt forget the shame of 
thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach 
of thy widowhood any more. 

5 For thy Maker is thy husband;" the Lord of 
hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy 
One of Israel ; The God of the whole earth shall 
he be called. 

6 For the Lord hath called thee as a woman for- 
saken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, 
when thou wast refused, saith thy God. 

7 For a small moment have I forsaken thee;'' 
Imt with great mercies will I gather thee. 

8 In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for, 
a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I 
have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer. 

9 For this is as the waters of Noah unto me : for 
as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should 
no more go over the earth ; so have I sworn that 
I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. 

10 For the mountains shall depart, and the hills 
be removed; but my kindness shall not depart 
from thee,'^ neither shall the covenant of my peace 
Ijc removed,'' saith the Lord that hath mercy ou 
thee. 

11 ^0 thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and 
not comforted, behold, I will lay thy stones with 
fair colors, and lay thy foundations with sapphires.' 

12 And I will make thy windows of agates, and 
thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of 
pleasant stones. 

13 And all thy children sfiall be taught of the 



■i.I.r :i:14. b-.!Cor. 4:17. cljom. 11:^9 d ■> Sim. -Zi-.i. cRev.-JhlN. 
' Jolm r,;.l.i. f I'rov. 3:-i5, aO. h ch. 37:«, 27. i Kom 8:1. :)3. J P.sa. 
:l;](J, 1!); Phil. 3.1). k John 4:10, M; 7:37; Kov. ■2l:(i; 22:17. 1 Matt. 



seems to be the ancient Jewish church in her union with 
God ; " tlie desolate," the gentile church, which bcsan witli 
the rejection of the Jews, Acts 13:41), 47; Kom. 11:11, 12, 
30; but with which the Jews are to be again united. Kom. 
11:25, 26. 

11. Thij stones; the stones of Zion's walls and battle- 
ments. Sappltircs; compare Rev. 21: 18-21. The precious- 
ncsB of the materials shows the excellence and glory of 
the city. 

15. They shall surd ij gather together ; the enemies of Zion 
to seek her hurt. Nut by me; not only witliout, but agahist 
my autliority. 

li;. 1 Imve created the smith — the waster ; he who created 
tlie maker of deadly weapons, and tlie waiter who employs 
tjiein, can protect his people against all injury from them. 
INSTRUCTION'. 

God's love for his church is inlinite. His care over 
her from the beginning lias been unceasing. lie lias suf- 
!• red no afHictions to come ujjon lier, but such as were 
iicccHSary for lier ijurilication, and lie lias made them all 
subservient to licr enlargement and fnial trium]))i. lie 
lias appointed her to universal dominion over the hearts 
of men, and her progress is continually onward towards 
that blessed day when in righlcousiiess she shall be 
established. 

824 



Lord -.^ and great shall be the peace of thy a. m. 3252. 
children. :i2. 

14 In righteousness shalt thou be established: 
thou shalt be far from oppression: for thou shalt 
not fear : and from terror ; for it shall not come 
near thec.» 

1.5 Behold, they shall surely gather together, hut 
not by me : whosoever shall gather together against 
thee shall fall for thy sake. 

10 Behold, I have created the smith thatbloweth 
the coals in the fire, and that bringeth forth an 
instrument for his work ; and I have created the 
waster to desfroy.'' 

17 1 No weapon that is formed against thee 
shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise 
against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn.' 
This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, 
and their righteousness is of me,^ saith the Lord. 

CHAPTER LV. 

1 The prophet, with the promises of Christ, calleth to faith, 6 and to 
repentance. 8 The happy success of them that believe. 

HO, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the 
waters," and he that hath no money ; come 
ye, buy,' and eat;""- yea, come, buy wine and milk 
without money and without price. 

2 Wherefore do ye spend* money for that which 
is not bread? and your labor for that which satis- 
iictli not? hearken diligently unto me, and cat ye 
that witich is good," and let your soul delight itself 
ill fatness." 

3 Incline your car, and come unto me: hear, and 
your soul shall live ; and I will make an everlasting 
covenant with yow^ cvai the sure merciesof David.'' 

4 Behold, 1 have given him^/or a witness to the 
people," a leader and commander to the peo|ile.' 

5 Beliold, thou shalt call a nation that thou know- 
est not, and nations that knew not thee shall run 
unto thee," because of the Lord thy God, and for 
the Holy One of Israel ; for he hath glorified thee. 



13:44^18; Rev. 3:18. i»Song5:l. • Heb irti's/i. o Matt. •.>,':4. o Psi. 
(,-i:C>. p 2 Sam. 23:.'); .ler. 32;4U. q Acla 13:34. ' Ezck. 34:23. • John 
1S:37; Rev. 1:5. 1 Kph. 5:24. u ch. C(l:5; Zech. 8:23. 



CHAPTER LV. 

In the preceding chapter the triumph of Zion over all 
her foes is exhibited ; in the present, all the inhabitants 
of the world are invited to come and iiartako of the bless- 
ings which God gives to her true members. 

1. Buij — witlimil money and without price; the blessings of 
salvation are to be bought, because they must be earneslly 
sought after, and every thing forsaken for them. Mallhew 
13:44-46; Luke 14:33; they are to be bought "without 
money and without price," because they must be received 
as God's free gift through Christ. 

3. Tlic sure mercies of David ; the sure mercies promised 
to David. These are the contents of the everlasting cov- 
enant. Why they arc called " sure " is explained in Psa. 
89:34,35. The jiromise to David was, "Thy house and 
thy kingdom shall be est;il)lislied for ever before thee : 
thy throne shall bo established for ever." 2 Sam. 7:16, 
compared with Psa. 89:19-37. This promise is fulfilled in 
Christ, Luke 1 :32, 33; so that ho is the sum of " the sure 
mercies of David." 

4. Ilim ; the Messiah. A witness to tlie people, a leader and 
commander; see John 18:37. 

5. A nation thai thou hiowest not, atul nations that knew 
not thee; the Gentiles. 



Goxpd invita tiovs. ISAIiVII LVI. 

A. ■v^if-'^. G 1 Seek yc tlie Lord while he may be 
■ Hi. "' found, call yc upon liiui while he is near :'' 

7 Let the wicked forsake his way, and the un- 
righteous man* his thoughts:'' and let him return 
unto the Loud, and he will have mercy upon him ; 
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. *"' 

8 For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neitiior 
are your ways my ways, saith the Lonii. 

9 For as the heavens are higher than the car Hi,'' 
so are my ways higher than your ways, and my 
thoughts than your thoughts. 

10 if For as tlie rain cometh down,'' and the snow 
from heaven, and returneth not thither, but water- 
ctli the earth, and niaketh it bring forth and bud, 
tliat it may give seed to the sower, and bread to 
the eater: 

1 1 So shall my word be that goeth forth out of 
my moutli: it shall not return unto me void,' but 
it shall accomplish that which I please, and it 
siiall prosper in tlie thing whereto I sent it. 

12 For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth 
with peace: the mountains and the hills shall 
break forth before you into singing, and all the 
trees of the field shall clap their hands. 

lo Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir-tree, 
and instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle- 
tree:''' and it shall be to the Lord for a name, for 
an everlasting sign that shall not be cut ofl'.'' 

CHAPTER LVI. 

1 The prophet exhorteth to sanctification. 3 He promiseth it slt:ill be 
g'^neral, without respect of persons. 9 He inveigheth against blind 
«-atr.hinen. 

^'piIUS saith the Lord, Kecpyc judgment,* and 
I do justice: for my salvation i? near to come, 
and my righteousness to be revealed. 



Exhortation to hohnes 



>J.ilin7:34; Heb. 2:3. • Kth. manof iniquitii. l> Mark 7:-Jl-33. 


t Heb. 


mullip/i) to parilaii. ci'si. 1:J(I:7. il I'sa. 11)3: il . e Deal Siri 


f Matt. 


21::M. S Rom. «:19. b .I,r. 13:11. t Or, eiiuiti/. i Luke l-i:43 


J ch. 


5d:l3, i Num. 18:4, 7; Acts 10:31, 35. I Acts «:27. etc. " 1 Tin 


a. 3:15. 



12. 1> sW/ go OM/ ,• from yom- bondage. The promised 
redemption is to be taken in tlie widest sense, and not 
restricted to deliverance from the Babylonish cai)tivity, 
which was only one of the bright series of God's interpo- 
sitions in behalf of his cluirch. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. God makes a most free and gracious offer of salvation 
to all men, so that none need despair of his mercy who are 
willing to receive it as a free gift through Jesus Christ. 

2. All who make worldly good their portion, or who 
seek to save themselves by their own righteousness, are 
spending " money for that which is not bread," and their 
spirits must remain empty and unsatisfied. It is only 
Cud's salvation that can fill the human soul. 

.'>. God has pledged his own glorious perfections that 
all who seek salvation through Christ shall find it. Sooner 
shall heaven and earth pass away, than any soul be put 
to shame that makes Jesus its confidence. 

6. Gotl now tenderly calls sinners to himself, and if they 
seek him they shall find him. But if they refuse, the day 
is coming when he will no longer call, and can no longer 
be f<jund. 

7. God has no pleasure in the death of sinners. He 
waits with much long-suffering for their repentance, that 
he may pardon them, and receive them into his bosom of 
infinite love. 

10. To God's ministers, who are deeply conscious of 
their weakness and many infirmities, it is an unspeakable 
consolation that he has promised that his words shall not 
return unto him void ; so that, in delivernig their message 



2 Blessed is the man that doeth this, and the sou 
of man that layetii hold on it;' that kccjieth the 
sabbath from polluting it,^ and keepeth hi.-^ hand 
from doing any evil. 

3 1 Neither let the son of the stranger, that hath 
joined himself to the Lord, speak," saying. The 
Lord hath utterly separated me from his ]ioople : 
neither let the eunuch say. Behold, I am a dry 
tree.' 

4 For thus saith the Lord unto the eunuchs that 
keep my sabbaths, and choose the things that 
please me, and take hold of my covenant; 

5 Even unto them will I give in my house and 
witliin my walls a place and a name better than 
of sons and of daughters:'" I will give them an 
everlasting name, that shall not be cut off." 

6 Also the sons of the stranger, that join them- 
selves to the Lord," to serve him, and to love the 
name of the Lord, to be his servants, every one 
that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and 
taketh hold of my covenant ; 

7 Even them will 1 bring to my holy mountain," 
and make them joyful in my house of prayer : their 
burnt-oficrings and their sacrifices shall be accept- 
ed upon mine altar ;'' for my house shall be called 
a house of prayer for all people. "■ 

8 The Lord Gon which gathereth the outcasts 
of Israel" saith, Yet will I gather others to him,'' 
besides those that are gathered unto him.^ 

9 TT All ye beasts of the field, come to devoui", 
yea, all yc beasts in the forest. 

10 His watchmen are blind: they are all igno- 
rant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; 
sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.' 

1 1 Yea, they are greedy " dogs ivhich can never 
have enough,* and they are shepherds that cannot 



n .lohn l:l--'. » Jer. 50:5. p Eph. 2:11-13. q 1 Pet. 2:5. r Matt. 21:13. 
! r«a. 147:2. 1 J.4ui llhli;. ! lUh. to hix galliered. I Or, drmmnig. oi 
talking hi their sliep. 1 Heb. strong of appetite. • Heb. know not to be 
satisfied. 



to sinners, they can confldenfly leave with him the results, 
assured that it shall accomiilish that wliith he ]ilraKfs. 

12, 13. The deliverances which (iod vouelisafe.s to his 
children in this vale of tears, are earnests and pledges of 
that last perfect redemption when the mountains and the 
hills shall break forth before them into singing, as their 
ransomed spirits ascend to the new Jerusalem, there to be 
for ever with the Lord. 

CHAPTER LVI. 

,3. Tlie S071 of the stranger; the Gentile, whom the Mosaic 
law did not admit to the'full privileges of an Israelite. Tlie 
eunuch— dry tree; Dent. 23:1. These words indicate the 
approaching abolition of all outward and national distinc- 
tions among Gnil's ii.nple. 

4. Take ho/'l "f m i/n'mtant; embrace its privileges, which 
belonged to all true lielievers. Rom. 4:11. 

7. Mij holy mountain — my house of prayer ; Zion, with the 
temple, the seat of God's public worship mider the old cove- 
nant, and the representative of the true church in all ages. 

8. Others to him ; others to Israel than Israelites, that is, 
Gentiles, licsides those; that is, besides those of his own 
people. The words are a prophecy of the union of Jews 
and Gentiles in one church. John 10:16. 

9. Come to devour; to devour Israel, neglected by those 
whom God has appointed to be his watchmen, vcr. 10. 
Compare Ezek. 34:5; John 10:12. 13. Through the re- 
mainder of this chapter and the three following, the 
prophet rebukes the sins of God's visible church. 

10. Bark; that is, defend the flock. 

8-25 



Idolatry 



ISAIAH LVII. 



of the Jews. 



understand : tlicy all look to tlu'ir own way, every 
one for liis gain, from liir^ quarter. 

12 Come ye, say they, 1 wiil feleli wine, and we 
will fill ourselves with stronir drink ; and to mor- 
row shall be as this day, and much more abundant. 

CHAPTER LVII. 

1 The blessed death of the righteous. 3 God reproveth the Jews for 
their whorish idolatry. 13 tie giveth evangelical promises to the 
penitent. 

THE rigliteous pcrislicth, and no man layethiV 
to heart: and merciful men* are taken away, 
none considering that the rigliteous is taken away 
from the evil to come.* 

2 He shall enter into peace:* they shall rest in 
their beds, each one walking in his uprightness.^" 

3 IBut draw near iiitlier, ye sons of the sorcer- 
ess, the seed of the adulterer and the whore. 

4 Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against 
whom make ye a wide moutli, and draw out the 
tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a 
seed of falsehood, 

5 Inflaming yourselves with idols under every 
green tree,"" slaying the cliildrea in the valleys 
under the clefts of the rocks ?'^ 

6 Among tiie smooth stones of the stream is thy 
portion ; they, they are thy lot : even to tiicm bast 
thou poured a drink-olforing, tliou iiast olferod a 
meat-olToring. Sliouhl 1 receive comlbrt in tiicso ? 

7 Upon a lofty and iiigii mountain hast thou set 
thy bed : even thither wentest thou up to oU'cr 
sacrifice. 



* Heh. mm of kindnesx, 
in p'au. S Or, hfort him. 
b 2 Kings 17:10, etc. « -i 



incls, t Or. that whirh is 
V. 1 1- 13. I Or, nmoaa Iht c 
in:,t, 4. i Ez-k. lii:25, « 



IXSTRUCTIOXS. 

1-7. As no outward privileges can secure to any man 
the spiritual blessings of God's covenant with Abraliani, 
80 no outward disabilities can debar any man from the 
enjoyment of them. Kverywhcre, and in all ages of the 
world, it has been true, that " he that fcareth God and 
workcth righteousness is accepted of him." 

8. The union of Jews and (Jcntiles under Christ in one 
spiritual fold will be the fulfilment of the original cove- 
nant with Abraham, " In thee shall all families of the earth 
be blessed." Gen. 12:3. 

9-11. When the pastors of God's church are ignorant of 
their duty, indolent, self-indulgent, ami devoted to their 
own private ends, the neglected llock becomes an easy 
prey to the destroyer. Thus in all ages the iiiifaithfulness 
of the watchmen has been the chief cause of the desola- 
tions of Zioii. 

CHAPTER LVII. 

1. Pcrishelh; dies. Taken away from the cxnl to come; 
compare i Kings 22: '20. 

2. Shall rent m their beiU; that is, in their tombs. Job 
3: 17. The rest of the body in the grave, is an emlilcm of 
the higher rest of the soul in heaven. Rev. 11:13. 

3. Sons of the norreresi — seed of the adulterer; race of sor- 
cerers and adnlterers ; as wicked men are called the chil- 
dren of the devil. John H:ll. 

4. Draw out the tnnpue; thrust it out in derision. 

5. Slatjins' the children ; sacrificing them to idols. This 
sin, as well as sorcery and idolatry, was practised by 
Manasseh, to whose reign many refer the jirosent descrip- 
tion. See 2 Kings 21:3-7 ; 2 ("'liron. ;i3::t-y. 

6. Smooth stones ; these seem lo have been stones set up 
in the valleys as olijccts of iijolatroiis worship. Stream ; 
that is, torrent-bed, like tliat of the valley of lliiinom, which 

826 



8 Behind the doors also and the posts '^f^^ 
liast thou sot up tliy remembrance: for ««" 
thou hast discovered thyself to another than nie,* 
and art gone up ; thou hast enlarged thy bed, and 
made thee a covenant with them;^ thou lovedst 
their bed where thou sawest it.' 

9 And thou wentest to* the king with oint- 
ment,'' and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst 
send thy messengers far off, and didst debase thy- 
self even unto hell. 

10 Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy 
way ;'' yet saidst tliou not, There is no hope : tliou 
hast found the life' of thy hand ; therefore tliou 
wast not grieved. 

11 And of whom hast thou lioen afraid or fear- 
ed, that fliou hast lied, and hast not remembered 
me, nor laid it to thy heart? have not I held my 
peace even of old,''' and thou fcarest me not? 

12 I will declare thy righteousness, and thy 
works; for they shall not profit thee. 

13 1i When thou cricst, let thy companies deliver 
thee; but the wind shall carry them all away; 
vanity shall take them: but he that jiutteth his 
trust in me shall possess the land, and shall in- 
herit my holy mountain;*' 

14 And shall say. Cast ye up, cast ye up, pre- 
])are ye the way, take up the stumbling-block out 
of the way of my people.' 

15 For thus saith tlie high and lofty One that 
inliabiteth eternity, whose name wHoly : I dwell 
in the high and lioly^fecf,^ with him also that is of 
u contrite and humble spirit,'' to revive the spirit 



1 Or, hewed it for thyself larger than theirs. ' Or, thou providest room, t Or, 
resprrttdst. eHo.*IJ:l. f ]p.t. -i-Mli. tOr.living. fPsa. 50:21. h Psa. 
ai:;J-'J. ilCor.l;-ia. JZcch.2:13. k oh. 6n:l, 2; Psa. 34:18; 133:0. 



was the seat of idolatrous rites. 2 Chfon. 28:3; 33:6; 
Jer. 32:35. Thy portion — thy lot; thou hast chosen them 
and not God for tny portion. 

7. Lofty and high mountain; high places were selected 
by the ancients for sacrifices, whether to the true God, 
1 Sam. 9:12; 1 Kings 3:2, 4: 18:30; 2 Chron. 33:17 ; or, as 
here, to idols, Num. 22:41; 1 Kings 11:7; 2 Kings 17:32. 
Set thy bed ; idolatry is described as spiritual adultery ; a 
common figure with the prophets. 

8. Doors — posts; of thy house. Thy remembrance ; the 
image of fliy idol. Gone up; tipon thy lied. Ver. 7. 

9. To the king; probably the king of Egypt. Chapters 
30, 31. The mention of" messengers" shows that a heathen 
jirincc is meant, whose alliance Judah sought in an idola- 
trous spirit. iri(/i OKifmciif ; as a present. IIoseal2:l. 

10. In the greatness of Ihij iray; in the multitude of thy 
journeys to obtain foreign aid. Found the life of thy hand; 
found tliy hand still strong for further eflbrt. Grieved; 
rather, "weakened," exhausted with toil. 

H. Of whom; of what foreign foe. The fear of the Jews, 
which led tliein to seek help from the worship of false 
gods and the alliance of heathen kings, was unreasonable; 
since their covenant God was almighty, and faithful to bis 
engagements. Lied; lieen false to me. Held my peace; 
borne thy waywardness in silence. Thou fearest me not; 
the result of my forbearance is only thy continued sinful- 
ness. Keel. 8:11; Rom. 2:4, .5. 

12. Thi/ righteou-tncs.^; its true character, showing that 
it is no rlgliteousness. 

13. Companies; literally " gatherings," thy idol-gods and 
foreign alliances. 

14. And shall say; he shall see the highway for Israel's 
redemption in preparation, and shall exhort all God's ser- 
vants to cobpernto in the work of completing it. See 
note on chap. 55: 12. 



The fast which 



ISAIAH LVIII. 



God accepteth. 



A.M. aw,, of tlic humble, and to revive the heart of 

ms. the contrite ones." 

IG For I will not contend for ever, neither will 
I lie always wroth :*' for the spirit should fail be- 
fore me, and the souls ichich I have made. 

17 For the iniquity of his covetousness was I 
wroth,'' aud smote him : I hid me, and was wroth, 
and he went on frowardly ' in the way of his heart. 

18 I have seen his ways, and will heal him:'' I 
will lead him also, aud restore comforts unto him 
aud to his mourners. 

10 I create the fruit of the lips ;"= Peace, peace to 
/ilm that is far oft", aud to Mm that is near,' saith 
tiie LoKD ; and I will heal him. 

20 But the wicked are like the troubled sea, 
when it cannot rest,= whose waters cast up mire 
and dirt. 

121 There is no peace," saith my God, to the 
wicked. 

CHAPTER LVIII. 

1 The prophet, being sent to reprove hypocrisy, 3 expresseth a counter- 
feit fast and a true. S He declareth what promises are due unto god- 
liiK-s.s. 13 and to the keeping of the sahbath. 

C1RY aloud,^ spare not, lift up thy voice like a 
_l trumpet, and show my people their trans- 
gression, and the house of Jacob their sins. 

2 Yet they seek me daily,' and delight to know 
my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and 
forsook not the ordinance of their God : they ask 
of me the ordinances of justice ; they take deliglit 
ill ap])roaching to God. 



xxt.rrA. bPsa. 103:9; Mic. 7:18. cJer.O:^. • -Reh.turiung awmj. 

:!U;3: 33:6; Hos. 14:1. e Hos. 14:2; Heb. 1.1:15. f Epii. a: l:J, 17. 
V. 4:1(), 17. h a Kings 9:«. t Heb. loilA (A« (/iron(. i Deut. 5:3s, 

Mai. 3:14. k Lev. IU:a9. I Or, things whereion/i ije grieve others; 



IG. For the spirit should fad before mc; were I to deal 
with my people after their sins, they could not endure ray 
wnith. Job 9:3; Psiilra 78:3S, 39. 

IS. / have seen liis u-ai/s; his ways of perverseness. Henl 
him ; convert him, and thus restore him to my favor. The 
dcjL-trine here taught is, that God will have mercy upon 
his people for his own name's sake, and not for their sake. 
Ezek. 36:22, 31, 32. 

19. The fruit of the lips; thanksgiving and praise for 
salvation. Far off — near; to all the penitent of Israel, at 
home and abroad. 

20. The wicked; the wicked in Israel, such as have been 
deseribed in this chapter. But the words apply to all 
wicked men. 

IXSTRUCTIOXS. 

1. AVhen iniquity abounds in a nation, ami the righteous 
become few, it is a sign that evil days are at hand. 

4. God's faithful servants must be content to bear the 
scorn and derision of the migodly,for so did they treat the 
prophets and apostles of old, and Christ himself, the Lord 
of prophets and apostles. 

.0-12. The root of idolatry, with all its abominations, is 
"an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living 
Ooil." It is because men have neither love for God's 
service, nor faith in his presence and power, that they 
multiply their efforts to find salvation by their own de- 
vices — only to sink deeper in misery and ruin. 

1:'). Though heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot 
contain God, his chosen temple is the soul of the humble 
and coutrile ; and his blessed presence fills it with light 
and peace and strength. 

I(). The best of men could not endure God's wrath for a 
moment, were he to deal with them in strict justice. Our 
only liope is in his mercy through Christ. 

17. The shame aud guilt of men's wickedness belongs to 



3 1 Wherefore have we fasted.J say they, and 
thou seest not"? wherefore have we afBicted our 
soul,'' and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, 
in the day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact 
all your labors.* 

4 Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to 
smite with the fist of wickedness:' ye shall not 
fast as ye do this day,^ to make your voice to be 
heard on high. 

5 Is it such a fast that I have chosen?™ a day 
for a man to afflict his soul?' is it to bow down 
his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and 
ashes imder him?" wilt thou call this a fast, and 
an acceptable day to the Lord ? 

6 Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose 
the bands of wickedness," to undo the heavy bur- 
dens,' and to let the oppressed* go free,'' and that 
ye break every yoke ? " 

7 Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and 
that thou bring the poor that are cast out^ to thy 
house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover 
liim ; aud that thou hide not thyself from thine 
own flesh? 

8 Ti Then shall thy light break forth as the morn- 
ing,'' and thy health shall spring forth speedily: 
and thy righteousness shall go before thee; the 
glory of the Lord shall be thy rearward.* 

9 Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall an- 
swer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say. Here I 
am. If thou take away from the midst of thee 
the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speak- 
ing vanity : 



Heb. griefs. 1 1 i; 


11 1 -' § Or, fust not ns this day. m Zcch. 7:5. 


tOr.loajflirl hf 


'.,. ■iDan.U:3. o Jon. 3:5-10. 1 Heb. 6»n- 


dies of Ihe yok. ■ 1 


.' P Neh. 5:1U-Ia. q Jer. :54:8, etc. 1 Or, 


njftirieil. rJoS. M 17 


Ml :^atlttr thee up. 



them ; but the glory of their repentance aud obedience to 
God alone. 

19-21. God knows how to distinguish between the right- 
eous and the wicked in his visible church. To the former 
he will give peace and comfort in this life, and in the life 
to come glory everlasting ; but the latter shall have dis- 
quietude here, and inherit "shame and everlasting con- 
tempt." 

CHAPTER LVIII. 

3. Afflicted our soul; by such mortifications as are men- 
tioned verse 5. Find pleasure; indulge your lusts. Your 
labors; the oppressive services which you impose upon 
your dependents. This is the way of all Pharisees, who 
" disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to 
fast," and at the same time " devour widows' houses," and 
practise "extortion and excess." Matt. 6:16; 23:14, 25. 

4. For strife and debate; their fasting was a cloak for 
strife and debate. Compare Matt. 23:14. On high; in 
heaven. Such fasting as this will not gain for you ac- 
ceptance with God. 

7. From thine oii-n flesh ; thy brethren. Gen. 29:14; 37 : 27 ; 
Neh. 5:. 5. But this must be understood of all who need 
our help. Compare our Lord's answer to the question, 
" Who is my neiglil>or?" Luke 10:29-37. 

8. Thij righteon.sncss shall go before thee; before Israel, to 
remove all obstacles from his path. The reference is to 
the journey from Egypt to the land of Canaan. The glory 
of the Lord ; an allusion to the pillar of cloud and fire, which 
went behind the Israelites in their passage through the Red 
sea, and protected them from Pharaoh and his host. Ex- 
odus 14:19, 20. 

9. The putting forth of the finger; a sign of scorn, like 
in:iking a wide mouth, and drawing out the tongue. Chap. 
57:4. 

827 



Keeping the Sabbat A. 



ISAIAH LIX. 



Sills of tht Jews. 



10 And if tliou draw out tliy soul to tlic liungry, 
and satisfy tlic alllictcd .■^oul ; tlicn sliall tliy lijrlit 
rise iu obscurity, and tliy darkueasicus tiic noon- 
day : 

11 And the Loun sliall j^uidc tlice continually, 
and satisfy tliy soul in drouglit,'" and make fat thy 
bones: and tiiou shalt be like a watered f^arden, 
and like a spring of water, wlio»e waters fiiilnot.* 

1-2 And titnj thai shall he of tiiee sliall build the 
old waste places: thou shall raise up the founda- 
tions of many generations; and thou shalt be 
called. The repairer of the breach. The restorer 
of paths to dwell in. 

13 • If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath. 
from doing thy |)leasure on my holy ilay ; and call 

the sabbath a delight, the holy of tlir Loi;i>. hon- 
orable ; and shalt honor him, not doing thine own 
ways, nor (inding thine own jileasure, nor speak- 
ing thine own words: 

14 Then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord ; 
and I will cause thee to ride u])OU the liigh places 
of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of 
Jacob thy father : for the mouth of the Loud hath 
spoken it. 

CIIAPTKIl LIX. 

1 The damnable nature of sin. 3 The sins of the Jews. 9 Calamity is 
for sin. 16 Salvation is only of (jod. 20 The covenant of the Re- 
deemer. 

I REMOLD, the Lord'.s hand is not sliortened, 
J that it cannot save; neither his ear lieavy, 
that it cannot hear: 

2 But your iiii()uitie3 have separated between 
you and your God, and your sins have hid' his 
face froui you, that he will not hrar. 

3 For your hands are delileil with blood,'' and 
your fingers with initiuity ; your lips have spoken 
lies, your tongue hath muttered pcrverseness. 



• Heb droughts. » P.a 37.1!). t H<.b. lie. or tltreine. I Or, wmrf' lum 
hill, i)ch. 1:15. S Or, whirr's, t Or. Ilint wliirh is sprinUal tstv^ if llirre 
brake oul a viper. » .Malt 3.7; ia::W. <> Rom. 3: IS, etc. 1 Hob. ireatiwg. 



10. Draw out thy soul; let thy compassion go forth in 
deeds of love. 

13. From the sabbiith ; from treR))a.ssiiig upon its sanctity. 
The hiilij of the Lord, houonMc; that is, call tlio holy day of 
the Lord an honoralile day. 

11. liiile upon the high places of the earth ; have victory and 
doiniiiioii over tliinc enemies. Dent. 31^:13; 33:29. Com- 
pare Ezek. 30 : 2. 

I.\STI!l(TIl)NS. 

1. (lod's ainlia.saiidcirs mii.st not spare the sins of liis 
pcoph', whatever lie the rank and standing; of the trans- 
gressors, Imt iiiiist rebuke lliem with all plainness and 
fidelity. 

2. Ureal exactness and scnipiilousness in rcsiiect to the 
ontwaril ohservancett of rell^'ioti is often connected with 
great wickeilnesH of heart and life. 

3. When men n.inphiiii that their services are not no- 
ticed and rewarded hy (i.id, they sln.w clearly that their 
BUppnsed services are an alioininatioii in his sight, the 
frnit of formality ami self-riKhteousness. 

•1-7. The true spirit ..f fasting lies in inward sorrow for 
sin, and hearty reimiieialidii of it in every form. Outward 
mortiticatioiiH are of no value, except aslliey express the 
inward liiniiilintiori of the soul Xn-Utw V,m\. When men 
cleave to their wicked practices, and seek to cover tlieiii 
uiiiler the cloak of oiilward rites and penances, they 
jirovoke the wrath of Ilim who caiiiiut lie deceived and 
H28 



4 None calleth for ntstico, nor any plead- a. m .\toi;. 
eth lor truth: tliey trust in vanity, and 6*^. 
sjieak lies ; they couccive mischief, and bring forth 
inicpiity. 

5 They hatch cockatrice's^ eggs, and weave the 
spider's web : he I hat eateth of their eggs dicth.and 
that wjiicli is crushed breaketh out into a vijier.'" 

(') Their webs shall not become garments, neither 
shall they cover themselves with their works: 
their works are works of iniquity, and the act of 
violence is in their hands. 

7 Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to 
shed innocent blood:'' their thoughts are tlioughts 
of iniquity; wasting and destruction' are in their 
paths. 

8 The way of [leacc they know not ; and there is 
no judgment" in their goings: they have made 
them crooked patlis;"' whosoever goeth therein 
shall not know peace. 

9 ■! Therefore is judgment far from us, neither 
doth justice overtake us: we wait for light, l)ut 
behold obscurity; for brightness, but we walk in 
darkness.' 

10 We grope for the wall like the blind, ami wc 
grope as if ti'c liad no eyes:" we stumble at noon- 
day as in the night;'' we are in desolate places as 
dead imn. 

11 We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like 
doves:' wc look for judgment, but ihtre is none; 
for salvation, hut it is far off from us.-" 

12 For our transgressions are multiplied before 
thee, and our sins testify against us:"* for our 
transgressions are with us; and as for our inii|ui- 
ties, we know them ; 

13 In transgressing and lying against the Loud,' 
and departing away from our God, speaking op- 
pression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from 
the heart words of falsehood.'" 



• Or, nV*l. c P,i. ia>:5; Prov. 2S:18. (Lam. 5:16,17. g Dcul. t-.S. 
liAmo»»:9. i Kiek. 7:11). JJor.S;lS. k Dan. 9:5, etc. I ch. 4.f:S; Jer. 



will not I)C mocked. Chap. 1:11, 17; 1 Sam. 15:22; I'sa. 
50:8-15; .Joel 2:12,13; Amos 5:21-24; Micah«:«-S; .Matt. 
0:10-18. 

8-12. When fiod's people truly repent of their sins, and 
bring forth fruits meet for repentance, he does not delay 
to hear their prayers, and bless tliem with his preseiico 
and salvation. 

i;}, II. (!(k1 has appointed the Sabbath as a day of holy 
rest, not only from worldly lal>or, but also from worldly 
tlioughts and conversation. They only call it "a delight" 
and " honorable" who. with glad ami willing hearts, de- 
vote its sacred hours to communion with (Jod and spirit- 
ual lal)ors for the good of Iheir fellow-men; and all such 
receive an abundant rewani in the light of tiods counte- 
nance and the rich communications of his grace. 

r [I APT Ell LIX. 

5. Ualdi coitcnl rice's rgps. ami wave the s/iiilcr's iteb; form 
mischievous plans. Eateth of their ririr.s',- has any thing to 
do with their wicked devices. That irhich is cruAlieil hreuk- 
ilh (lilt lulo n viper: the operation of their plans is liko 
breaking o|ieli a cockatrice's egg, by which u venomous 
serpent is let loose. 

I': Shall not become garments; their iniquitous schemes 
shall not profit them. 

9. Jnilfuneiit — luslice; Ooil's judgment, as manifoKtcd in 
the H:ilvation of ills people and iho destl'Uctiou of his foua. 
Ver. II. 



Salvation in God on/i/. 



ISAIAH LX. 



Ingatluirinir of the Gentiles. 



A. M »)c. 14 And judgment is turned a'way back- 

'ra-"^" ward, and justice standotli afar off: for 
truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter. 

15 Yea, truth failelh ; and he that departelh 
from evil niaketh liiuiself a prey:" and the Ldim) 
puw il, and it displeased him* that there iras no 
judu'nient. 

Hi * And he saw that there icas no man," and 
wrindered that there icfis no intercessor: therefore 
his arm brought salvation nnto him;'' and his 
righteousness, it sustaiued hiu). 

It For he put on rigiiteousness as a breastplate, 
and a helmet of salvation upon his head ;"" and he 
put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, 
and vras clad with zeal as a cloak." 

18 According to their deeds,* accordingly he will 
repay, fury to his adversaries, recompense to his 
cneuiies ;'•■ to the islands he will re])ay recompense. 

r.t So shall they fear the name of the Lord from 
the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun.' 
Wiien the enemy shall come in like a flood,^ the 
Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against 
him. '' 

20 ■[ And the Redeemer shall come to Zion,' and 
unto them that turn from transgression iu Jacob,J 
saith the Lord. 

21 As for me, this ?'? my covenant with them," 
saith the Lord: My Spirit that w upon thee, and 
my words which 1 have put in t!iy mouth, shall 
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth 
of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's 
seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. 

CHAPTER LX. 

1 Ilie glory of tlie church in the abundant access of tlie Gentiles, 1.5 
and the great blessings .after a short ailbctinn. 

ARISE, shine; for thy light is come,"' and the 
glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. 
2 For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, 



• Or, 


is accounted 7no 


ft; Hn 


s. 9:7. f H 


>b. was e 


■H 


'n Ilia eyss. a E 


pk 


2i:.-!l). 


b Psa. Oa:l. 


Kph 


0:14,17. d 


John 2: 


7. 


1 Heb. 7 


croinpen 


sts. 


' Luke 


19:27. 1 Mai 


1:11. 


B Rev 12; 


5, 16. 


H 


-b- put III 


miofi 


'Ill 


h Jas. 4 


7. ■ Rom. 11: 


«. 1 


i-h. 12:14. 


k Heb. e 


.-1. 


ptc. 1 Or 


be eiiti 


'lit- 


cneit: f 


'jr thy light cor 


Iff/;. 


1 £ph. 5:S. 


m Mai. 


4: 


1] 2 Cor. 


4:0. n 


ch. 



11. Judgment — juntice; between man and man. 

11). He saw that there was no man; that is, as immediately 
explained, no man to intercede inbelialf of truth and eijnity. 
Brought salvation unto him; more exactly, "saved for him- 
self;" that is, saved his people for his own slory. Ilts 
righteottsness; which bound him to maintain tlic cause of 
truth. 

17. Vengeance ; to be executed upon the wicked. Zeal; 
fur his own cause and the glory of his own name. 

IS. Tlie islands; the remote heathen nations that are 
lianded together against him and his Anointed. These 
words describe the mighty judgments by which the king- 
dom of .Satan is to be destroyed, and the kingdom of Christ 
established over all the earth, as is plain from the verses 
that follow. Compare Rev. 19:11-21. 

21. With them ; them that turn from transgression in 
Jacob, that is, the true people of God. My Spirit — and my 
ironli ; God pledges to his church for all coming agej his 
word of truth, and his Spirit to give it efficacy. This glo- 
rious promise contains the secret of her unconquerable 
]iowcr. and thus the prophet returns again to the latter- 
dav glory of Zion. 

INSTP.UCTIOXS. 

1-5. 'When God withdraws from his people the light of 
liis countenance and leaves them in darkness and affliction, 
it is not from his unwilluigness to hear their prayers, or 



and gross darkness the people : but the Lord shall 
arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon 
thee.™ 

3 And the Gentiles shall comt; to thy light, and 
kings to the brightness of thy rising." 

4 Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: all 
they gather themselves together, they come to 
thee: thy sons shall come from far, and thy duiioh- 
ters shall be nursed at thy side. 

5 Tiien tlioti shalt see, and How together, and 
thy heart shall fear, and be enlarged ; because 
the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto 
thee,' the forces" of the Gentiles shall come unto 
thee." 

6 The multitude of camels shall cover thee, the 
dromedaries of Midiaii aud Ephah;'' all they from 
Sheba shall come:'' they shall bring gold and in- 
cense;'' and they shall show forth the praises of 
the Lord. 

7 All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered to- 
getlier unto thee, the rams of Nebaiotli shall min- 
ister unto thee: they shall come up with accept- 
ance on mine altar, and I will glorify the house of 
my glory.' 

8 Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the 
doves to their windows? 

9 Surely the isles shall wait for me,' and the 
ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, 
their silver and their gold with them," unto the 
name of the Lord thy God, and to the Holy One 
of Israel, because he hath glorified thee. 

10 And tlie sons of strangers shall build up thy 
walls,*' and tlioir kings shall minister unto thee: 
for in my wrath I smote thee,"' but in my favor 
have I had mercy on thee. 

11 Therefore thy gates shall be open continu- 
ally;" they shall not be shut day nor night; tliat 
men may bring unto thee the forces of the Gen- 
tiles, and that their kings may be brought. 



49:0, 03 


; Itev. 


2 


:24 


1 Or, Mc 


ise of the se 


1 shall be 


turjud t 


iward thee. 


• Or, we 


altli: V 




11 


ch. 01:0. 


Rom. 11 


2.). P (i 


n. 25:4, 


Ui 


q Psa. 


72:1(1. 


r Matt 


2 


II. 


» Hag. 2 


7, 9. t ch. 


2: 1. u Psa. lis:JU 


,:il 


Zech. 


14:14. 


V Zech. 





Id. 


w ch. 57: 


17. xRev. 2 


1:2J. 









want of power to .save them, but because of tlteir inicjuities 
unrepented of and unforsaken. 

6-14. All the devices of transgressors to deliver them- 
selves from trouble without forsaking their sins and 
returning to God in faith and obedience, are vain. That 
there shall bo no peace to the wicked is liis appointment, 
and men cannot alter it. 

15-21. When wickedness comes in like a flood upon 
God's church, and there is no human arm to stay it, he 
will interpose for the glory of his own name and the ful- 
filment of his promises to Zion. By his mighty judgments, 
working together with his word and Spirit, he will purify 
her from transgressors, and enlarge her borders until all 
nations are converted to her. 

CHAPTER LX. 

1. Arise, shine; the address is to Zion, that is, God's 
church, of which the literal Zion was the rej^resentative. 

.'). Shall fear; be filled with awe at this token of God's 
presence and power. Be enlarged; swell with joy. 

(i. Midian; east and south of the Moabites, who occu- 
pied the eastern border of the Dead sea southward from 
the Anion. Ephah; a. tribe of the Midianites. Sheba; iu 
the south of Arabia. 

7. Kedar — Nehaioth; northern tribes of Arabia. The 
different people here mentioned represent all nations. 
829 



Glories of the church. 



ISAIAH LXI. 



Offia of the Messiah. 



12 For the nation and kingdom that ■will not 
serve thee shall perish; yea, those nations shall be 
utterly wasted. 

13 The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee," 
the iir-tree, the pine-tree, and the box together, 
to beautify the place of my sanctuary ;'' and I will 
make the place of my feet glorious. "^ 

14 The sons also of them that aniiotcd thee shall 
come bending unto thee ; and all they that despised 
thee shall bow themselves down at Ih.e soles of 
thy feet;'' and they shall call tiiee. The city of the 
Loud, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel." 

15 Wiiereas thou hast been forsaken and hated,' 
so tliat no man went tlirough thee,' I will make thee 
an eternal excellency,'' a joy of many generations. 

IC Thou shaltalso suck the milk of the Gentiles,' 
and slialt suck the breast of kings: and thou shall 
know that I the Loud am thy Saviour and thy 
Redeemer,^ the Migiity One of Jacob. 

17 For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I 
will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for 
stones iron: I will also make thy officers peace, 
and thine exactors righteousness." 

18 Violence shall no more be hoard in thy land, 
■wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but 
thou shalt call thy walls Salvation,' and thy gate^ 
Praise. 

19 The sun shall be no more thy light by day ; 
neither for brightness shall the moon give light 
unto thee:'" but the Loud shall be unto thee an 
everlasting liglit, and thy God thy glory." 

20 Thy sun shall no more go down ; neither shall 
thy moon withdraw itself: for the Loud shall be 
thine everlasting ligiit, and the days of tliy mourn- 
ing .shall be ended." 

21 Thy people also shall be all righteous:'' they 
shall inherit'' the land for ever,'' tiie branch' of 



• Hoi. 14:0, 7. b Vxx.. lHi:0. c 1>ki. m-T, d R„v. 3:9. e Hcb. 12:2-2. 
f Psa. 78:60, 111. lLain.I:4. I> Rnv. 3: 12. i ch. lili: 1 1, 12. J ch. •l')::). 
kiPet. 3:l:l. Ich. al:l. ni Rev. 21 :\«; 22:5. » Zech. 2:5. o Rev. 21:4 
Poh. 4:3; Rev. 21:27. fl Matt. 5:.'). 'ch. «2:4. •.Tohnl5;2. ' P»a. 82:13. 



12. Serve thee; this is to be understood of a willing spir- 
itual subjection to Christ the Head of the church; not of 
an outward and forcible subjection, according to the false 
expectation of the ancient Jews. 

1 'i. To beautify the place of mij sanctuary ; the enlargement 
and glory of God's 8|)iritual tom[ile arc here described 
under an image drawn frnm h-oliiiiion'B temple, the wood 
of which came from Lebanon. 1 Kings 5:1-15. 

17. For lirasi I wilt bring cold— for stones iron; every 
thing shall be made more excellent. Compare chap. 9: 10. 

IN.STKUCTION. 
God's covenant with Zion is, that his word and Spirit 
shall dwell with her for ever. These arc mightier than 
the powers of darkness; so that in all her conflicts with 
them it is cerl^iin that she will, in the end, prevail. Thus 
her progress must be onward, until God shall at last bruise 
Sat;in under her feet, and give her a complete victory over 
him. Then will arise upon this world the long-promised 
day of millennial glory, whose brightness and blimsediiess 
shall far e.\<('eil what we in our darkness and ignorance 
ore ubio to conceive. 

CII.VI'TKR LXI. 

The Messiah, through whom alone the triumphs of Zion 
described in the preceding chapter arc achieved, is now 
again distinctly brought to view. We must not, however, 
restrict these words to our Lord's personal ministry. His 
Spirit dwelt in the prophets before, and in the upostles 
830 



my planting,' the work of my hands," that a m .•s.kic. 
1 may be glorincd. w. 

22 A little one shall become a thousand, and a 
.small one a strong nation : 1 the Loud will hasten 
it in his time. 

CHAPTER LXI. 

1 The office of Christ. 4 The forwardness, 7 anJ blessings of the faithful. 

^T^HE Spirit of the Lord God is upon ir.e;' be- 
.J_ cause the Loud hath anointed me to preach 
good tidings unto the meek ;" he hath sent me to 
bind up tlic broken-hearted,'' to proclaim liberty 
to the captives,'' and the opening of the prison to 
them that arc bound ;^ 

2 To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord," 
and tlie day of vengeance of our God ;'' to comfort 
all that mourn ;° 

?> To aijpoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to 
give unto them bctiuty for a.<l\cs, the oil of joy for 
mourning, the garment of i>raise for the spirit of 
heaviness;'' that they might be called Trees of 
righteousness. The planting of the Loud,'' that he 
might be glorified. 

4 'l And they shall build the old wastes, they 
shall raise up the former desolations, and tiiey 
shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of 
many generations.' 

5 And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, 
and the sons of the alien shaU be your ploughmen 
aud j'our vine-dressers. 

G Butycsiiallbe named the Priests of the Lord:* 
7m-n shall call you the Ministers of our God:'' ye 
shall cat the ridics of the Gentiles, and in their 
glory shall ye boast yourselves. 

7 1i For your shame ye shall have double;' and 
for confusion they shall rejoice in their portion: 



oEph.2:10. vLuko 4;1()-2I; John 1:32; 3:34. i«-P8a.45:7. «l"»a.147:3. 
y Jolm8:31-3fl. « Rom. 7:23-25. « Lev. 23:9, etc.; 2 Cor. 6-2. baThcsi. 
1:0. cMatt.S:!. "IJolm 18:20. ech. 00:21. fch. 58:12. « Excel. IS:!!; 
1 Pet. 2:5,0; Rev. 1:0. bEzek.44:ll ; Eph.4:ll,12. ich. 40:2; Zecli.0:12. 



after his advent; aud it dwells now in all his faithful min- 
isters : so that through them instrumcntally, not less tluin 
by his personal labors when he was on earth, he preaches 
good tidings to the meek, binds up the broken-hearted, 
and sets free the captives of Satan. 

1. Anointed mc; Acts 4:'27; 10:38. 

2. Tlic acceptable year; the year of God's favor to Zion; 
the same as the "year of my redeemed," chap. C:i:4, tind 
the "set time to favor Zion,"P8a. 102:13. The dayof ven- 
geance; ujion Zion's enemies. 

3. Tlic oil of joy; the allusion is to the use of oil on fes- 
tive occasions. 2 Sam. 14:2; Psa. 23: 5;. Matt. fi:17. 

4. Ttic old wastes ; of 7aoi\. Compare chap. 49:8; 58:12. 

5. Strangers stiail stand — vnic-drcsscrs ; see note on chap. 
14:2. 

6. Priests of the Lord; as oflTering to him spiritual sacri- 
fices. The reference is to Exod. l".i:C, where the Israelites 
arc called "a kingdom of jiriests." In this ami the pre- 
ceding verse, the distinction between ancient Israel and 
the surrounding "strangers" and "sons of the alien," is 
tran»ferred to the true spiritual Israel and those without 
her inclosiu-e. 

7. Double; a double reward. The recompense sluill ex- 
ceed the shiime. They shall rejoice ; the sons of Zion. The 
address changes, as often elsewhere, from the second to 
the third person. In their land ; in their own laml after 
Iheir restoration from captivity. Hut the deliverance of 
Israel from captivity represents here the redeiiiptiun of 
God's people in tlic widest sense. 



The prophtl^s zeal. 



ISAIAH LXII. 



Gospel promises. 



A. M. i306. therefore in their land they shall possess 
■ ml °" the double : everlasting joy shall be unto 
them. 

8 For I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery 
for burnt-oiferiug ; and I will direct their work 
in truth, and I will make an everlasting covenant 
with them.'' 

1) And their seed shall be known among the 
Gentiles, and their offspring among the people: 
all that see them shall acknowledge them, that 
they are the seed ivhich the Lord hath blessed. 

10 I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul 
shall be joyful in my God;'' for he liatii clothed 
me with the garments of salvation, he hath cov- 
ered me with the I'obo of righteousness,'' as a 
bridegroom dccketh himself* with ornaments, and 
as a bride adorneth herself witli her jewels.'' 

11 For as the earth liriugcth fortii her bud, and 
as the garden causeth the things that are sown in 
it to spring fortli; so the Lord God will cause 
righteousness and praise to spring forth before all 
the nations." 

CHAPTER LXII. 

1 The fervent desire of Uie prophet to confirm the church in God's prom- 
ises. 5 The otfice of the nnnisters (unto whicli they are incited) in 
preaching the gospel, 10 and preparing the people thereto. 

Ij^OR Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and 
for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest,'' until 
the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, 
and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burnetii. '^ 
2 And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, 
and all kings thy glory : and thou shalt be called 





Oh. 55:.3; 


Psa. 50:5 


b Neh. 8 


10; Hab 


3:17,13: Ror 


n. 14 


17. 


Rev. 


1!> 


s. • Heb 




est. i Re 


r. <i\:i. 


e Psa. 72:3; 


H.^:l 


; ch 


62:7. 


r V 


er. (5. 7. e 


Prov. 4:1 


S- hRev. 


2:17. i 


Zech. 9:16 1 


Hos, 


1:10 


Heb 


13 


5. t'Thit 


IS. My del 


■ghl is in h 


er. 1 Th 


at is. Married 


kR 


T. -21 


9, 10. 



8. Love judgment — burnt-offering; God's love of right- 
eousness, and hatred of hypocri.sy and wickedness, move 
him to interpose in behalf of his people. I will direct tlieir 
work in truth; rather, " I will give their reward in truth." 

10. / will greatly rejoice; the speaker seems to be the 
same as in the first verse of the following chapter, that is, 
the prophet speaking in the name of Zion's watchman. 
Compare chap. 62:6. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-3. The Lord Jesus came " to save that which was 
lost," and a true apprehension of our lost condition will 
make him a precious Saviour to our souls. To the self- 
righteous and worldly-minded, who " have their portion 
in this life," he has no beauty that they should desire 
him ; but to the sorrowful and broken-hearted, who mourn 
because of their bondage to sin, and feel that they have 
no power to deliver themselves, he is " the chiefest among 
ten thousand," and "altogether lovely." Luke 4:18, 19, 
compared with chap. 11:4; 57:15; 66:2; and Psa. 51:17; 
Matt. 5:3-5; 9:13; 18:11; Luke 18:13, U; John 16:20. 

7. The chastisement which God inflicts upon his people 
is often long-continued. But the harvest of righteousness 
and peace and joy that springs from it will be so abun- 
dant, that the suffering will be forgotten in comparison 
with the " far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory " 
that follows. 

9. God wiU not only save his people, but will compel all 
nations to see and acknowledge that their salvation is 
from himself. 

10. All " our righteousnesses " are loathsome and abom- 
inable, but the garment of Christ's righteousness and sal- 
vation, wherewith he clothes his people, is excellent and 
glorious in the view of all beholders ; it fills the hearts of 



by a new name,"^ which the mouth of the Lord 
shall name. 

3 Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the 
hand of the Lord,' and a royal diadem in the hand 
of thy God. 

4 Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken ;' 
neither shall thy land any more be termed Deso- 
late: but thou shalt be called Hephzi-bah,* and 
tliy land Beulali :* for the Lord delighteth in thee, 
and tliy land shall be married.'' 

5 For as a young man marrieth a virgin, so ■■•hall 
tliy sons marry thee : and as the bridegroom re- 
joiceth^ over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice 
over thee.' 

GUI have set watchmen upon thy walls, Jeru- 
salem, which shall never hold their peace day nor 
night: ye that make mention of the Lord,' keep 
not silence, 

7 And give him no rest,'' till he establish, and 
till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. 

8 The Lord hath sworn by his right hand, and 
by the arm of his strength. Surely Lwill no more 
give* thy corn to be meat for thine enemies; and 
the sons of the stranger shall not drink thy wine, 
for the which thou hast labored : 

9 But tliey that have gathered it shall eat it, and 
praise the Lord ; and they tliat have brouglit it 
together shall drink it in the courts of my holiness. 

10 *[ Go through, go througli the gates; prepare 
ye the way of the people;'" cast up, cast up the 
liighway ; gather out the stones ; lift up a standard 
for the people." 

11 Behold, the Lord hath proclaimed unto the 



» Heb. toilh l/le joy of the bridegroom. 1 Jer. 32:41. I Or, that are the 
LORD'Sremembranan. \ fish, silence. ' Heb. J/ 1 give. mch. 57:14. 
"Exod. 17:15; ch. 18.3. 



its possessors with " the peace of (iod, which passeth un- 
derstanding," with "joy unspeakable, and full of glory." 

CHAPTER LXII. 

1. Will I not hold my peace — will not rest; from interces- 
sion with God for Zion. Compare verses 6, 7. 

2. A new name; like that mentioned in verse 4, denoting 
her new and glorious character and condition. Compare 
Rev. 2:17. 

3. Croicn-diadem ; these figures denote her excellence and 
dignity. In the hand of the Lord ; under his safe-keeping. 

5. Thy sons marry thee; viewed in one aspect, the church 
is the mother of believers, for in her they are spiritually 
born ; in another, she is tlieir bride, for they have chosen 
her, and are devoted to her welfare. This blending of 
figures in metaphor is natural and beautiful. 

6. Watchmen ; the ministers of the church, which is 
here represented by Jerusalem. Make mention of the Lord; 
rather, as the marginal reading, " put the Lord in remem- 
brance," that is, of his promises to Jerusalem. Chap. 43 : 26 ; 
Jer. 14:21. 

10. Go through the gates; of Babylon, in escaping from 
captivity. Compare chap. 48:20; 52:11, 12. But we must 
not restrict the prophet's words to the literal deliverance 
from Babylon. This is rather to be considered as an ear- 
nest and pledge of greater deliverances in the coming days 
of the Messiah's kingdom. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. God will be inquired of by his people for the fulfil- 
ment of his glorious promises. It is in answer to their 
fervent prayers, that he appears for their salvation ; anti 
in this work of intercession, Zion's watchmen are called 
to take the lead. Verses 6, 7. 

831 



Christ shoiceth his 



ISAIAH LXIII. 



■power to save. 



end of the •n-orld, Say ye to tlie daujrlitor of Zion, 
Behold, thy salvation conieth ;•' bcjiold, liis reward 
is witli him,'' and his work* before him. 

12 And they shall call them, The holy people. 
The redeemed of the Lord : and tliou shalt be 
called. Sought out,' A city not forsaken. 

CHAPTER LXIII. 

1 Christ showeth who he is, 2 what iiis victory over Iiis enemies, 7 and 
what his mercy toward his church. 10 In nis just wrath he remein- 
bereth his free mercj. 15 The church in their prayer, 17 and com- 
plaint, profess their taith. 

THO is this that comcth from Edom, ^vith 



^ 



'V dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is 
glorious* in his apparel, travelling in the great- 
ness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, 
mighty to save. 

2 Wlierefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy 
garments like him that treadetii in the wine-fat?'' 

3 I have trodden the wine-press alone; and of 
the people there u-as none with me: for I will 
tread them \n mine anger, and trample them in 
my fury ; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon 
my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. 

4 For the day of vengeance is in my heart," and 
the year of my redeemed is come. 

5 And I looked, and /Acre wo5 none to help ; and 
I wondered that there iras none to uphold: there- 
fore mine own arm brought salvation unto me; 
and my fui'y, it upheld me. 

6 Aud I will tread down the people in mine 
anger, and make Ihem drunk in my fury,' and 1 
will bring down their strength to the earth. 

7 ^i' I will mention the loving-kindnesses of the 
Lord,- and the praises of the Lord,'' according to 
all tiiat the Loud hath bestowed on us, and the 



» Zech. 0:0; John 1J:H, I.i. Rev. •'■i:\-i. • Or, recompense. « 


Kzok. 


34:11-10; John Ua. t Heb. ilerkvl. J Kev. 19:13, 1.5. e Zcph. 3:S. 


' .lor 


23:-28,27. sHo<i.-J:19. >> Pia. 6:):3. I Judg 10:10; Ztch. 2:S; Malt. 


■i'):10. 


45;Acts9:l JExoJ.U:l9. k Deut. 32: 11, li. 1 Acts 7:51 ; Kph 


4:30. 



5. The true cliildrcn of Zion prefer her above their chief 
joj', anil are wilHii^ to pivo both their subst^xnee and thoir 
life to the advancement of her welfare. 

8-12. Though all the powers of darkness arc combined 
against Zion to desolate and destroy her, they cannot liin- 
der her triumph. This is made sure to her by the oath 
of .lehoviih ; what he lias promised lie will perforin in tlie 
eyes of ;ill nations, so that tlicy shall lie compelled to 
acknowledge that she is " the redeemed of the Lord." 

CHAPTER LXIIL 

1. Cometh from Edom ; conioth as a conqueror from 
Edom, wliere he has inflicted vengeance upon the foes nf 
Zion. The Edondtes were among the liiltcrcst enemies 
of the .lews, and they here represent all the enemies of 
(jod's peo|de. liozrah ; one of the principal cities of Edom, 
lying south-east of the Dead sea. 

3. Tiotltlcn the wiiic-pres.i; destroyprl my enemies, who 
arc compared to grapes lrod<lcn in the wine-press. The 
work which .Ichovali hero performs is elsewhere ascribed 

to Christ. Rev. l!»:l.'i. C pare John 5: l!l-23. Their 

blood; literiilly. their juice, in allusion to the juice of tram- 
pled grapes, which here represents tlic blooJ of God's 
enemies. 

4. TItc year of my redeemed ; the year of their deliver- 
ance; the same as "the acceptable year of the Lord." 
Chap. ril:2. 

6. I looked; compare chap. 5!l:lii. 

6. Tlieir streneth ; rather, " their blood," as the same 
word is rendered verse 3, where see note. 
832 



great goodness toward the house of Israel, a. m. vm. 
which he hath bestowed on them accord- V.m" 
ing to his mercies, and according to the multitude 
of his loving-kindnesses. 

S For he said. Surely they are my people, chil- 
dren that will not lie: so he was their Saviour. 

'J Jn all their aflliction he was afflicted,' and the 
Angel of his presence saved them :' in his love 
and in liis pity he redeemed them; and he bare 
them, and carried them all the days of old.'' 

10 1 But they rebelled, and ve.\cd his Holy 
Spirit:' therefore he was turned to be their ene- 
my, and he Ibiight against tliem."" 

1 1 'i'lieii lie remembered the days of old," Jloses, 
atid his people, saying, Where is he that brought 
them up out of the sea wfth the shepherd* of his 
flock? where is he that put his Holy Spirit within 
him?" 

12 That led them by the right hand of Moses 
witii his glorious arm, dividing the water before 
them,'' to make iiiinself an everlasting name? 

13 That led them through the deep, as a horse 
in the wilderness, that they should not stumble? 

14 As a beast goeth down into the valley, the 
Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest; so didst 
thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious 
name.'' 

15 •[ Look down from heaven, and behold from 
the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory:'' 
where is thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding* 
of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward nie?" are 
they restrained? 

l(j Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abra- 
ham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge ns 
not : thou, Lord, art our Father, our Kedeenier ; 
thy name is from everlasting.' 



m Lam 


2:5. 


i> Lev. 


20: J2. 


lOr 


shepherds 


Psa. 


77:20 


« -Xiin 


1.11 


17,35: 


Neh. 9 


20. 


pExod 


H:21, 


etc 


1 2 Sam. 7 


2:1. 


r2('h 


r. 30:27 


( Or. mul- 


lilude. 


• Jt 


r. 31:2( 


; Uos. 


ll:a. 


1 Or, ou 


Redeemer^ 


from e 


•erUi 




Ihy nal 


,e. 





















7. lu^ll mcidion the loving-kindnesses of the Lord ; through- 
out the remainder of this and the following chapter the 
l>ru|)hct, in the name of the pious remnant among the 
Jews, acknowledges God's great goodness to his covenant 
peojile, confesses their sins, and supplicates the return of 
his favor. 

!). The Angel of his presence ; the Angel, in whose person 
Jehovah was present, Exod. 14:1<J; 23:20-23; 32:34. 
Kroin a comparison of these passages with Gen. chap. 18 ; 
E.\od. :i3:14; Num. 22:22-35; Josh. 5:i:i-l,'i; Judges 
C: 11-23; chap. 13, we learn that the Angel of God's pres- 
ence was .lehovah himself. And since " no man halh seen 
God at any time." it must have been he who " w.is in the 
beginning with God." and '• was (iod." manifesting himself 
in vision as he was afterwanis " manifest in the ncsh." 

11. Then; in their adliction. lie rcmcnibcred ; Israel re- 
membered. Shepherd of his Jhck ; Moses. 

13. In the vdderiicss; that is, in the open desert, which 
oflVrs no obstruction to the course of the horse. 

II. I)ou'n into the valley; that is, to rest there in a quiet 
and safe retreat 

15. Look doini ; Uie prophet speaks in the name of the 
church. Sounding; yearning mution. See note on chap. 
16:11. 

Iti. Abraham be ignorant — achicnrledge us not; though we 
be not, "according to the flesh," the children of Abraham 
and Israel. We need not understand these words of Gen- 
tiles in coutri»st with Jews. They are rather the prayer 
of the whole church, Jewish and Gentile; and they con- 
lain an intimation that, in the days of the Messiah, " the 



Appeal of the 



ISAIAH LXV 



church unto God. 



A. MMw^ 17 H Lord, v!\\y ha?t thou made us to 
f.'js' "" err from tliy ways,-'' and hardened our heart 
from thy fear?" Return for thy servant's sake," 
the tribes of thine inlieritance. 

18 The people of thy lioliness liave possessed it 
but a little while: our adversaries have trodden 
down thy sanctuary.'' 

19 We are thine: thou never barest rule over 
them ; they were not called by thy name.* 

CHAPTER LXIV. 

1 The church prayeth for tlie illustration of God's power. .5 Celebrat- 
ing G-od's mercy, it maketh confessiou of their natural corruptions. 
9 It complauieth of their affliction. 

OH that thou wouldest rend the heavens,^ that 
thou wouldest come down, that the mountains 
miijfht flow down at thy presence,' 

'1 As when the melting fire* burneth, the fire 
causeth the waters to boil, to make tiiy name 
known to thine adversaries, that the nations may 
tremble at thy presence! 

3 When thou didst terrible things which we 
looked not for,*-' thou earnest down, the mountains 
flowed down at thy presence. '' 

4 For since the beginning of the world men luive 
not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath 
the eye seen, God, beside thee, what he hath 
prepared for hiui' that waiteth for him.' 

5 Thou mectest him that rcjoiceth and worketh 
righteousness, those that remember thee in thy 
ways :' behold, thou art wroth ; for we have 
sinned : in those is continuance,'' and we shall be 
saved. 



' Tsa. 119:10 


b 


ch. 


6:111; 


Rny, 


a. 9 


17 


IS. ' 


Psi. 9( 


:i:i 


d Psa. 7 


:0-,S. 


• Or, £/iy nanu 




not 


mlleil 


upo 


« tkem 


e Psa 


. HJ;5 


1 


Judg. 5:5; 


iVhc. 


1:1. tHeb. (4 


yr 


ot 


meUin 




Kl> 


S.T. 


55:5. 


h Hab. 


y:a 


0. I Or, 


een a 


God hesidt thee 


which doeth s 


ojo 


r hi 


n. 


1 ICor 


2:9. J 


Acts 10:. 35. k 


Mai. 



children of Abraham" shall no longer be reckoned accord- 
ing to outward descent. Compare Rom. 4:11, 12. 

17. Made us to err — hardened our heart; compare chap. 
6:9, 10; 29:10. 

IS. The people — have possessed it ; the promised land. 

19. Over tkem; over their enemies. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-6. God corrects his own people in measure, for their 
sanctification and future enlargement ; but their enemies 
are crushed and destroyed by his judgments, like grapes 
beneath the feet of them that tread the wine-press. 

7-19. The prayerful review of God's dealings with his 
covenant people is eminently profitable to believers. 
While it humbles them in view of man's weakness, way- 
wardness, and inconstancy, it encourages them in view of 
God's power and faithfulness, and the glorious manifesta- 
tions he has made of his purpose to destroy the kingdom 
of riatan,and establish the kingdom of his Son Jesus Chi'ist 
over all the earth. 

CHAPTER LXIV. 

1. Might flow down; compare Judg. 5:5; Psalm 97:5; 
Micah 1:4; Nahum 1:5. 

4. Seen, O God, beside thee ; or, as the margin, " seen a God 
beside thee who doeth so for him that waiteth for him ;" 
that is, doeth wonders. The apostle Paid applies these 
words to the wisdom of God as manifested in the plan of 
redemption, " which none of the princes of this world 
knew." 1 Cor. 2:6-10. 

5. Thou meetest ; with thy favor. Rejoiceth and worketh 
righteousness; worketh righteousness with holy gladness. 
In those ; probably, in thy ways. Continuance ; permanency ; 

53 



6 But we are all as an unclean thins^, and all our 
righteousnesses are as filthy rags ;' and we all do 
fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, 
have taken us away. 

7 And there is none that calleth upon thy name,"" 
that stirretii up iiimself to take hold of thee: for 
thou hast hid thy face from us," and hast con- 
sumed^ us, because' of our iniquities. 

8 But now, Lord, thou art our Father ; wo are 
the clay, and thou our potter ; and we all are the 
work of thy hand." 

9 % Be not wroth very sore, Lord, neither 
remember iniquity for ever:'' behold, see, we be- 
seech thee, we are all thy people. 

10 Thy holy cities are a wilderness, Zion is a 
wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation. 

11 Our holy and our beautiful house, where our 
fitthers praised thee, is burned up with fire:'' and 
all our pleasant things are laid waste. 

12 Wilt thou refrain thyself for these things, 
Lord? wilt thou hold thy peace, and afflict us 
very sore?"' 

CHAPTER LXV. 

1 The calling of the Gentiles. 2 The Jews, for their incredulity, idola- 
try, and hypocrisy, are rejected. 8 A remnant shall be saved. 11 
Judgments on the wicked, and blessings on the godly. 17 The blessed 
state of the new Jerusalem. 

I AM sought of them that asked not for me ; I am 
found of them that sought me not: I said, Be- 
hold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not 
called by my name.^ 
2 I have spread out my hands all the day unto a 



3:0. 1 Phil. 3:9. 
hnml; Job H: J. t 
sRom. 9: -24, 30. 



5 Heb. melteil. I Heb «y l/it 



that is, firm prosperity. Shall be saved; by continuing in 
them. 

7. Calleth upon thy name — to take hold of thee; earnestly 
intercedes with thee in behalf of thy peojjie. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-4. Every deliverance whicli God has vouchsafed to 
his people is not only a manifestation of his power to save, 
but a pledge that he will exert that power to make the 
cause of truth and righteousness triumphant. 

6. To see aud acknowledge our own utter vileness, emp- 
tiness, and weakness, is an indispensable preparation for 
receiving the righteousness " which is through the faith 
of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith." 

7. The want of a fervent spirit of intercessory prayer is 
one of the saddest proofs of God's absence from his peo- 
ple, and its return is a sure token that he is again among 
tliem and preparing to bless them. 

8. We have a right to plead our entire dependence upon 
God as a reason why he should interpose for our salvation ; 
but this must always be done in the spirit of repentance 
and active obedience. 

9-12. The depressed and desolate condition of Zion is a 
vahd argument with God why he should interpose for her 
salvation. lie has promised to make her "an eternal ex- 
cellency, a joy of many generations." Chap. CO: 15. 

CHAPTER LXV. 

1, 2. Them that asked not for me ; the Gentiles. A rebel- 
lious people; Israel. See the apostle Paul's exjilanation of 
these two verses, Rom. 10:20, 21. The prophet then pro- 
ceeds to rebuke the Jews for their sins, and to show them 
that the kingdom of God shall be taken from them and 
given to others. 

833 



Judgments mingkd inlk 



ISAIAH LXV. 



blfssivgs and promises. 



rebellious people," which walkcth in a way that 
was not jrood, after their own tlioughts ; 

3 A people that provokcth inc to an<i;er continu- 
ally to my face;'' that ^acriliceth in gardens,'^ and 
burneth incense upon altars of l)rick;* 

4 Which remain anion^^ tlie jiraves, and lodje in 
tlie monuments ; whicli cat swine's flesh, and broth* 
of abominable l/umrs i.? in tlieir vessels; 

5 Wiiich say. Stand by tliyself, come not near to 
me; for lam holier than tliou. These arc a smoke 
in my nose,* a fire that burneth all the day. 

6 Behold, it is written before me: I will not 
keep silence, but will recompense, even recompense 
into tlieir bosom, 

7 Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your 
fathers together, saith the Lord, which liave burned 
incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed me 
upon the hills: therefore will I measure their for- 
mer work into their bosom. 

8 'i Thus saith tlie Loiii), As the new wine is 
found in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not; 
for a blessing is in it : so will I do for my servants' 
sake, that I may not destroy them all. 

9 And I will "bring fortli a seed out of Jacob, 
and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains: 
and mine elect sliall inherit it,'' and my servants 
shall dwell there. 

10 And Sliaron shall bo a fold of flocks, and the 
valley of Aclior a place for the herds to lie down 
in, for my people that have sought me. 

Ill' But ye are they that for.«ake the Lord, that 
forget my holy mountain, that j)repare a table for 
that trooi),^ and that furnish the drink-offering 
unto that number.' 

12 Therefore will I number you to the sword, 
and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter :" be- 
cause when I called, ye did not answer;'' when I 
spake, ye did not hear; but did evil before mine 
eyes, aiid did cliofise t/iat whi'rein 1 ilclightcd not. 

13 Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, 



• Rom. 10:'JI. b Dcut. :W:-J1. o Lhv. 17:5 • lleh bricks, t Or, pierer. 
: Or, anger, d Rom. 11:5, 7. ( Or, Gad, I Or, Meni. ' Zeph. 1:1-1!. 
' aChr. :J6:15: I'rov. 1:31, etc. «Matt.S:12. 1 iUh. brtnking. k Zfch. 
3:13. ijcr.4:a. J I)eut. 0:13; P«a. n:j:ll . k aPcl. 3:1:); Rev. 21 :1. -neb. 



3. Sacrificeth; to idols. In gardens; whicli were a com- 
mon resort for idolaters. Upon altars of brick; literally, 
" upon bricks." Sonic suppose an allusion to the com- 
mand given, Exod. 20:24, 25, that God's altars should bo 
made of earth or unhewn stone. But it is more probable 
that the bricks themselves contained images or symbols 
of their gods. 

4. Among titc graves — in the monuments ; they used sepul- 
chral caves for their idolatrous rites. The word rendered 
" inonumenta " rather signifies recesses, caverns in the 
rocky cliffs. Eat swine's flesh; which was forbidden by 
the law of Jioscs, Lev. 11:7, and was undoubtedly con- 
nected with idolatrous observances. 

5. A smoke in my nose, a fire; they excite my wrath. 
Compare Psa. 18:8. 

8. New wine; that is, juice from which new wine can 
bo made. The duster; ])robably a good cluster among a 
mass of corrupt elustors which the vintagers are destroy- 
ing. A blessing is in il ; (iod has blessed it, anil thus made 
it valuable. Here, as often elsewhere, the prophet fore- 
tells the preservation of a pious remnant amid the general 
destruction of the people. Chap. 4:,'!; 0:13; 10:20-23; 
11:11; 17:(>-8; 24:13; :iO:17. 

11. Ye; the mass of the Jewish people. That troop — 
that number ; in the margin, "Gad" and "Meni," names of 
false gods. 

834 



mv servants shall cat, but ye shall be luin- * m ww. 

.111 1 n 1 • 1 1 '* ' «'■*»"* 

gry : behold, my servants shall drink, but eo? 
ye shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall re- 
joice, but ye shall be ashamed: 

ll Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of 
heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart,^ and 
shall howl for vexation "■ of spirit. 

15 And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto 
my chosen :" for the Lord God shall slay thee, and 
call his servants by another name: 

10 That he who blcsseth himself in the earth 
shall bless himself in the God of truth ;' and he 
that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the God 
of truth ;' because the former tronblcs are forgot- 
ten, and because they are hid from mine eyes. 

17 1 For, behold, I create new heavens and a 
new earth:" and the former shall not be remem- 
bered, nor come into mind.' 

18 But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that 
which I create :'' for, behold, I create Jerusalem a 
rejoicing, and her people a joy. 

19 And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in 
my people:"" andthe voice of weeping shall be no 
more heard in her, nor the voice of crying." 

20 There shall be no more thence an infant of 
days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: 
for the child shall die a hundred years old; but 
the sinner king a hundred years old shall be ac- 
cursed." 

21 And they shall build houses, and inhabit t/iejn : 
and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit 
of them.'' 

22 They shall not build, and another inhabit; 
they shall not plant, and another eat:'' for as the 
days of a tree arc the days of my people,'' and mine 
elect shall long enjoy* the work of their hands. 

23 They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth 
for trouble ; for they are the seed of the blessed of 
the Lord, and tlieir oflspring with them.' 

21 And it shall come to pass, that before they 



upon the heart. I ch. .^»l : 1 1 
S:l-i, i:). P Amos 9:11. q 
make them continue long, 


iThfsa. 5:18 iiich.03;5. n Rev. 7:17. 
Lev. 20:10; Deut. 2S:30. r Psa. 92:12. 
r wear out. • ch. Gl :U; Rom. 9:7, S. 


Keel, 
f H«b. 



14. Mtj servants; the true worshippers of Jehovah, men- 
tioned in verses 9, 10. 

l;->. Shall slay thee; the outward Israel. His servants; 
the true Israel ; the same as the seed which God will 
bring forth out of Jacob. Ver. 9. By another name ; the 
church of God shall no longer be named from Israel, but 
from Christ, without resjieet to outward descent. 

17. Netf heavens and a nnc earth; the new and glorious 
oriler of things under the Messiah. There is no necessity 
for limiting tliis promise to the beginning of the Christian 
dispensation, or even to this world. It includes the whole 
history of Christ's kingdom, to its final consummation in 
heaven. Compare Hev. 21:1. 

20. An infant of days; whose life is only a few days. 
An old man thai hath not filled his days; one who, though he 
has reached an advanced age, yet dies prematurely. The 
child shall die a hundred years old ; one who dies at that s^e 
sliall 1)0 considered as dying in childhood. 77m; sinrter being 
a hundred years old shall he acrtirsed ; shall be accursed by 
being prematurely cut off at the age of a hundred years. 
Compare ver. 22. Rut we need not interpret the words 
of this verse literally. They may be understood as a 
jiromise of great spiritual vigor under the figure of ex- 
treme longevity. 

22. As the daijs of a tree; such as an oak, which is sup- 
posed to live a thousand years and longer. 



The contrite spirit. 



ISAIAH LXVI. 



Consolation for Zlor,. 



A. M. mv,. call, I will answer : and while tliey are yet 

B. O. Rbuut , . ^ -111 

6ii8- speakiuiT, 1 will licar." 

25 The wolf and the lamb shall feed together,'' 
and the lion sliall eat straw like the bullock : and 
dust shall be the serpent's meat.'' They shall not 
liurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith 
the Lord. 

CHAPTER LXVI. 

1 The glorious Orod will be served in humble sincerity. 5 He comforteth 
the humble with the marvellous generation, 10 and with the gracious 
benehts of the church. 1-5 G-od"s severe judgments against the wicked. 
19 The G-entiles shall have a Jioly church, '2\ and see the damnation 
of the wicked. 

fT^HUS saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne, 
J_ and the earth is my footstool :'' where is the 
house that ye build unto me? and where is the 
place of my rest ? 

2 For all those things hath my hand made, and 
all those things have been, saith the Lord : but to 
this man will I look, even to him that is poor'' and 
of a contrite spirit,' and trembleth at my word.^ 

3 He that killcth an ox is as iflio slew a man; 
he that saerificeth a lamb,* as if he cut off a dog's 
neck; he that offereth an oblation, as if he offered 
swine's blood ; he that burnetii incense, as if he 
blessed* an idol. Yea, they have chosen their 
own ways, and their soul delighteth in their abom- 
inations. 

4 I also will choose their delusions,"' and will 
bring their fears upon them ; because when I called, 
none did answer;' when I spake, they did not 
hear : but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose 
that in which I delighted not. 



' Psa. 32:5; Dan. 9;a0, 21. b ch. 11:6-9. c Gen. 3:14. d 2 Chr. 6:1S; 
Matt. 5:.'n; Acts 17:21. » Matt. 5:3. tch. 57:15. r Ezra 9:4 ; 10:3; Prov. 
\M;14. -Or, itW. 1 Heh. mak-fth a memorial of; Lev. 2:-2. t Or, devices. 



25. T/ie wolf- — the bullock; see note on chap. 11:6-9. 
Dust sliall be the serpent's meat ; the original curse shall be 
executed upon the serpent and his seed. Gen. 3:14. The 
kingdom of Satan shall be crushed and prostrate. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1, 2. Christ will always have a seed to serve him. When 
the great body of the Jewish people rejected him, he 
took from them the kingdom of God and gave it to the Gen- 
tiles. So will he continue to deal with every branch of his 
visible church that proves unfaithful to its high caUing. 

5. Great wickedness and great self-righteousness are 
often found united in the same persons and communities. 

7. When the children sanction and perpetuate the sins 
of their fathers, God will recompense both together into 
their bosom. Gen. 15:16; Matt. 23:32, 34-36. 

8-lG. The same wind which blows away the chaff, 
cleanses the wheat and makes it ready for the garner ; so 
tlie same judgments of God which destroy the wicked 
from among his people, purify the righteous and prepare 
them for a more abundant increase. 

17-25. Many prophets and righteous men desired to see 
the Redeemer's wonderful works, and to bear his words 
of heavenly wisdom, but died without beholding him ; so 
thej' who come after us shall enjoy such manifestations 
of his glory as our eyes have not been permitted to wit- 
ness ; for the progress of his kingdom must be onward, 
from glory to glory, until it shall end in the everlasting 
light and blessedness of heaven. 

CHAPTER LXVL 

1. mere is the house that ye build unto me ? what house 
can ye build, that shall be worthy of my majesty ? Com- 
pare 1 Kings 8:27. 

2. All those things ; heaven and earth : they have been of 
old my temple, and I need uo dwelling-place made with 



5 1 Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble 
at his word:J Your brethren thathatcd you, that 
cast you out for my name's sake, said. Let the 
Lord be glorified : but he shall appear to your joy, 
and they shall be asliamed. 

6 A voice of noise from the city, a voice from 
the temple, a voice of the Lord that rendereth 
recompense to his enemies. 

7 Before she travailed, she brought forth ; before 
her pain came, she was delivered of a man-child. 

8 Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen 
such things? Shall the earth be made to bring 
forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at 
once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought 
forth her children.'' 

9 Sliall I bring to the birth, and not cause ^ to 
bring forth? saith the Lord : shall I cause to bring 
forth, and shut the womb ? saith thy God. 

10 Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with 
her, all ye that love her :' rejoice for joy with her, 
all ye that mourn for her : 

11 That ye may suck, and be satisfied with the 
breasts of her consolations ;'" that ye may milk out, 
and be delighted with the abundance' of her glory. 

12 For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will extend 
peace to her like a river, and the glory of the 
Gentiles like a flowing stream : then shall ye suck, 
ye shall be borne upon lur sides, and be dandled 
upon her knees." 

13 As one whom his mother comforteth, so will 
I comfort you ; and ye shall be comforted in Je- 
rusalem. 

14 And when ye see this, your heart shall re- 



li 2 Thess. 2:11. ' ch. U5:ia; Jer. 7:1:1, II. J ver. 2. k Acts 2:41, 47. i Or. 
beget. I Psa. 20:3; S4:l-4; 122:6. m 1 Pet. 2:2. I O^, brightness, n ch. 
eO:4, 16. 



hands. Compare Acts 7:48-50; 17:24. 25. To this man 
will Hook; with approbation ; the same as, " with him will 
I dwell," chap. 57 : 15. Jehovah shows what is the temple 
which he loves. 

3. Killcth an ox; in sacrifice. As if he slero a man; in 
sacrifice. The meaning is, that all the services prescribed 
by the Mosaic law are utterly abominable to God when 
offered by wicked men and in a wicked spirit. Compare 
chap. 1:13-15. 

4. Will choose their dclu.uons; will give them up to fatal 
delusions. 2 Thess, 2:11. 

5. Ye that tremble at his word ; " the Israel of God." Your 
brethren; "Israel after the flesh." The words of this and 
the preceding verses, though of general application, were 
remarkably fulfilled in the character and history of that 
generation of the Jews who crucified our Lord. While 
their hearts and lives were full of wickedness, they at- 
tached an inordinate value to the temple and its services, 
and hated and cast out the Saviour and his followers. 

6. A voice of noise — recompense to his enemies; fulfilled in 
the destruction of Jerusalem with its temple by the Chal- 
deans ; but more signally fulfilled in its destruction by 
the Romans. 

7. She travailed; Zion travailed ; this and the two follow- 
ing verses seem to refer to the large accession of Gentiles 
to the church in immediate connection with the rejection 
of the Jews. 

9. Bring to the birth — shut the womb ? shall God begin the 
work of multiplying Zion 's offspring, and not complete it? 

11. Suck— milk out; Jerusalem, the church, is " the moth- 
er" of true believers ; and from her, under God, they are 
nourished unto everlasting life. Gal. 4:26. 

12. The glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream ; I will 
bring the Gentiles with their glory to her like a flowing 
stream. Chap. 00:5-7; Rev. 21:24. 

835 



GotTs judgments 



ISAIAH LXVI. 



upon Ike widcul. 



joicc," and your bones shall flourish like an herb:'' 
and the liand of the Loud shall be known toward 
his servants, and his indignation towai'd his ene- 
mies. 

15 For, behold, the Lord will como with fire, 
and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render 
his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of 
iiro.'= 

16 For by fire and by his sword will the Loud 
plead with all llesh: and the slain of the Lord 
shall be many. 

17 They that sanctify themselves,'' and purify 
themselves in the gardens behind one tree' in the 
midst, eating swine's flesh, and the abomination, 
and tlic mouse, shall be consumed together, saith 
the Lord. 

18 For I know their works and their thoughts: 
it shall come, that I will gather all nations and 
tongues ; and tiicy shall come, and see my glory. 

19 And I will set a sign among them," audi will 
send those that escape of them unto the nations, to 
Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow, to 
Tubal and Javan, to tlie isles afar off", that have 
not iieard my fame, neither have seen my glory ; 



• John 10:-i-.>. bProv. 3:S; Eiek. 37:1-14. ' a Thei 
" Or, one after another. ' ch. U;3, 7; Luke 2:34. 
23:19. It Rom. 15: lU. t Or, coaches. 



1> R« 



I. 1:S. d ch. G.>:3, 4. 
' Mai. 1:11; Mitt, 
ch. 0.5:17. t Hob. 



17. Sanctifij themselves — purifij themsehes ; for idolatrous 
rites in the gardens. Behind one; literally, "after one;" 
that is, after one as their leader, following his directions. 
The word " tree " is not in the original. 

19. Set a sign; perform wonders. Some refer the sign 
directly to the appearance of Christ. Compare Luke 
2:34. Those that evjipe of them; the piou.s renniant of 
Israel ; remarkably fiilhllcd in the days of the apostles, who 
carried the gospel to the Gentiles, and thus declared God's 
glory among them. Pul — Lwl ; probably .\frican people. 
Tubal; a people of Asia .Minor. Javiin ; Greece. These 
countries stiind as representatives of all distant nations. 

20. Your brethren; probably, your brethren of the Gen- 
tiles. The address is to " the remnant according to the 
election of grace." Under the .Mosaic law, all God's i)eo|ili' 
were required to go up to Jerusalem to offer sacrifices and 
keep the yearly feasts. The extension of the true religion 
from Jerusalem over all the earth, is hero, as elsewhere, 
foretold under the figure of God's l)ringiiig all nations to 
Jorusalcrn to worship hira there, verso 23; and compare 
chap. 2:2-4; Micah 4:1-3; Zech. li:lti-VJ. For an offer- 
ing; see Kom. 15:16. 

21. For priests and for Lcvites; to offer spiritual sacrifi- 
ces. 1 Pet. 2:5. 



and they shall declare mv glory among a m. me. 
the Gentiles.' •!«*■ 

20 And they shall bring all your brethren _/or 
an offering unto the Loud out of all uatiuns.- upon 
horses, and in chariots, and in litters,* and upon 
mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy moun- 
tain Jerusalem, saith the Lord, as the children of 
Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the 
house of the Lord. 

21 And I will al.-o take of them for priests and 
for Levites,'' saitli the Loud. 

22 For as the new heavens and the new earth, 
wliicli I will make,' shall remain before me, saith 
the Lord, so shall your seed and your name re- 
main. 

23 And it shall come to pass, t/iat from one new 
moon to another, and from one sabbath to an- 
otlier,' shall all fiesli come to worship before me,-* 
saitii the Lord.'' 

24 And they shall go forth and look upon the car- 
casses of the men that have transgressed against 
me: for their worm shall not die,' neither shall 
their Ore be quenched ; and they shall be an ab- 
horrin'j unto all flesh.'" 



p his sabbath. J Psa. 05:2. 



24. They slmll go forth; God's worshippers of "all flesh" 
shall go forth from Jerusalem. They shall see with their 
own eyes that their enemies have perished. Their norm 
sliall not die — fire be quenched; the carcasses of God's ene- 
mies shall be consumed by a worm that dieth not, and a 
fire that is not quenched. This terrible imagery repre- 
sents tho everlasting destruction of the wicked. Mark 
9:43-48. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-4. God is not "worshipped with men's hands, as 
though ho needed any thing." No magnificence of out- 
ward rites can please him, when the heart and hands are 
polluted with iniquity. 

5-24. In all ages God's humble worshippers have been 
hated and cast out by tho proud and sill'-righteous. But 
he has never failed to ap|>oar in due time for their deliver- 
ance and the confusion of their jjersecutors. Amidst tho 
mighty judgments of God npon the enemies of his people, 
Christ shall continually go forth conquering and to conquer, 
until all nations have submitted themselves to his author- 
ity. Then the whole earth shall break forth into singing, 
and shout, "Alleluia, for the Lord God omnipotent reign- 
eth," while the smoke of Satan's kingdom shall go up for 
ever and ever. Amen. 



836 



THE BOOK 

OF 

THE PROPHET JEREMIAH 



The biographical notices of Jeremiah, contained in his writings, are so numerous that from them we can 
gather a pretty full account of his life and labors. His native place was Anathoth, in the land of Benjamin, 
some four miles north by east from Jerusalem, and he was of priestly descent. Chap. 1:1. He was called 
to the prophetical office in his youth, and exercised it in his native land from the thirteenth year of Josiah 
to the close of Zcdekiah's reign, through a period of about forty-one years, chap. 1:3; and afterwards in 
Egypt, whither he was carried with the rebellious remnant of the people, chapters 43, 44. 

Living in a very degenerate age, and commissioned by God to rebuke the wicked rulers and people of 
Judah for their sins, and to forewarn them of God's impending judgments, he was subjected to much per- 
secution, which he bore with exemplary meekness, feeling keenly the shame and contumely heaped upon 
him, but never swerving from the path of strict fidelity to God. His writings are occupied to a great 
extent with messages of rebuke and threatening, always delivered in a spirit of tenderness and love. If 
they do not contain so many animating visions of the distant future as are found in Isaiah, they are pecul- 
iarly rich in lessons of instruction as to the connection between national profligacy and national ruin. 
In this respect they are a mirror for all time, in which wicked nations may see their own coming ruin. At 
times, however, we find in Jeremiah joyous anticipations of the good reserved for God's people in the last 
days. See particularly chapters 30-33. 

The diflFerent messages of Jeremiah are not always arranged in chronological order ; this, however, occa- 
sions no serious diflBculty to the reader, so far as the lessons of instruction communicated through his 
writings are concerned. The last chapter, which is taken almost verbatim from 2 Kings 24:18-20 and 
chap. 25, seems to have been added by some later inspired man, as Ezra. See note to chap. 51 : 64. 



tlSi,2,. CHAPTER I. 

1 The time. 3 and the calling of Jeremiah. 11 His prophetical visions 
of an almond rod and a seething-pot. 1.') His heavy ntessage against 
Judah. 17 (rod encourageth him with his promise of assistance. 

THE words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiali," of 
the priests that ivere in Anathoth in the land 
of Benjamin :'' 

2 To whom the word of the Lord came in the 
days of Josiah the son of Anion king of Judah, in 
the thirteenth year of his reign." 

3 It came also in the days of Jehoiakim the son 
of Josiah king of Judah, unto the end of the elev- 
enth year of Zcdckiah the son of Josiah king of 
Judah,'' unto the carrying away of Jerusalem cap- 
tive in the fifth month." 

4 Then the word of the Lord came unto mc, 
saying, 

5 Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee ;'' 
and before thou camest forth out of the womb I 



CHAPTER I. 

1. Anathfjth; a town three or four miles north of Jeru- 
salem. 

10. 7b root out — to plant ; to declare my purpose to do so. 



sanctified thee, and I ordained* thee a prophet unto 
the nations. 

6 Then said I, Ah, Lord God ! behold, I cannot 
speak :'^ for I am a child. 

7 1 But the Lord said unto mc. Say not, I am a 
child : for thou shalt go to all that I shall send thee, 
and whatsoever I command thee thou shalt speak." 

8 Be not afraid of their faces ;' for I am with 
thee to deliver thee,^ saith the Lord. 

U Then the Lord put forth his hand and touched 
my mouth.'' And tlie Lord said unto mc, Behold, 
I have put my words in thy mouth. 

10 See, I have this day set thee over the nations 
and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to pull 
down, and to destroy, and to throw down,' to build, 
and to plant. 

11 TI Moreover the word of the Lord came unto 
me, saying, Jeremiah, what seest thou? And L 
said, I see a rod of an almond-tree. 



b Matt. 2S;20i Acts iQril. 
1 ch. 18:7; 2 Cor. 1U:4, 5. 



Ezek. a;li; 3:9. J Heb. 13:6. k Is: 



11, 12. All almond-tree — hasten; in the original Hebrew, 
the words "almond-tree" and "hasten" are the same. 
There is also an allusion to the fact that the almond- 
tree is the earliest tree to blossom and bear fruit in the 
spring. 

837 



Gracious exposlulaJians of 



JEREMIAH II 



God with his people. 



12 Then said tlic Lord unto me, Thou hast 
■well seen: for I will hasten my word to perform 
it. 

13 And the word of the Loud came unto me the 
second time, saviiiir, What seest thou? And I 
said, I sec a seething-pot;" and the face thereof 
is toward' the north. 

14 Then the Loisn said unto me, Out of the north 
an evil shall break forth* upon all the inhabitants 
of the land." 

15 For, lo, I will call all the families of the king- 
doms of the nortli, saith the Lord ; and they shall 
come, and they shall set every one his throne at 
the entering of the gates of Jerusalem, and against 
all the walls thereof round about, and against all 
the cities of .Tndah. 

16 And I will utter my judgments against them 
touching all tlioir wickedness, wlio have forsaken 
me," and have burned incense unto other gods, 
and worshipped the works of their own hands. 

17 1 Thou therefore gird up thy loins,'' and arise, 
and speak unto them all that I command thee: be 
not dismayed at their faces," lest I confound thee* 
before them. 

18 For, behold, I have made thee this day a de- 
fenced city,' anil an iron pillar, and brazen walls 
against the whole land, against the kings of Judah, 
against the princes thereof against the priests 
thereof and against the people of the land. 

1!) And they shall figlit against thee; but they 
shall not prevail against thee ; for I am with thee,''' 
paith the Lord, to deliver thee. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 G"oJ, having showed his former kindnesw, cxpostulntcth with the .Tews 
their causeless revolt. 9 beyond any example. 11 They are the causes 
of their own calamities. 20 The sins of Judaii. 31 Her confidence 
is rejected. 

MOREOVER the word of the Lord came to 
me, saying, 
2 Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, 
Thus saitli the Loud; I remember thee,* the kind- 
ness of thy youth,'' the love of thine espousals, 



lEzek. 11:3,7; ;i1:3 

:h. 4;(!; 0:1, ■>>. ' cl 
1 Or, irfoi Ihee lo pUna. I ch. 15:'JU. f Jd«. 1:9. t Or, far lAu salct. 
h Ho». -iiir). i Ddut a:7, J Exnd. l9:.->, 0; I Pet. 2:9. k Pm \U.',:U. 
I Jooll :3, 7, 3. m I.j. .'3:4. n -i KillRi I7:IS. ° lu. 03:11-13; Um. 13:4. 



13. A secthinix-pol ; literally, "a pot blown," that is, liav- 
inft under it a blown fire, which causes it to boil violently. 
This iu a figure of God's wrath to be executed on the Jews 
by the ISabyionians. Toward the north; the niarttinal road- 
ing, " from the face of the north," is ))refcrablo. This 
rcprcsciita the seelhiiig-pot it.sclf as coming from the 
nortli. 

14. Out of the north; though the Babylonians and their 
allies were to the east of Judea, yet they always entered 
the land from the north. 

INi^TRlTCTIONS. 

6. When the church lia.s need of any service. God raises 
up and qualifies men for it. 

fi. Humility is OHsontial aa a preparation for God's ser- 
vice; but we should be careful that it do not degenerate 
into timidity, and thus hinder us from discharging the 
work that he assigns to us. 

7-10. Goil's iiiiniatcrs should not shrink from any duty 
th;it ho lays upon them, however arduous and dangerous ; 
but faithfully perform it, assured of his constant presence 
and help. 

838 



when thou wentest after me in the wilder- a. nisna. 
ness,' in a land that v:as not sown. (^■^■ 

'i Israel was holiness unto the Li>RD.^ and the first- 
fruits of his increase: all that dcvmir iiiui shall 
otfcnd ;'' evil shall come upon them,' saith the JjORD. 

4 •[ Hear ye tlic word of the Lord, house of 
Jacob, and all the families of the house of Israel: 

.') Thus saith the Lord, What iniquity btive your 
fathers found in me, that they arc gone far from 
me,'" and have walked after vanity, and are be- 
come vain?" 

6 Neither said they, Where is the Lord that 
brought us up out of tlic land of Egypt," that led 
us tlirough the wilderness,'' through a land of des- 
erts and of pits, through a land of drought, and 
of the shadow of death, through a land that no 
man passed through, and where no man dwelt?'' 

7 And 1 brought you into a plenlifiil country,' 
to eat the fruit thereof and the goodness thereof; 
but when ye entered, ye defiled my land, and made 
my heritage an abomination.' 

8 The priests said not, Wliere is the Lord ? and 
they that handled the law knew me not:' the pas- 
tors also transgressed against me, and the proph- 
ets prophesied by Baal,' and walked after things 
that do not profit." 

9 1 Wherefore I will yet plead with you, saith 
the Lord, and with vour children's children will 
I plead.^- 

10 For pass over^ the isles of Chittira,'' and see ; 
and send unto Kedar,'' and consider diligently, 
and see if there bo such a thing. 

11 Hath a nation changed their gods,'' which are 
yet no gods? but my people have changed their 
glory for that u-hich doth not profit.'- 

12 Be astonished, ye heavens," at this, and be 
horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, saith the Lord. 

13 For my people have committed two evils; 
they iiave forsaken me tlie fountain of living wa- 
ters,'' and hewed tiiem out cistcrus, broken cisterns, 
that can hold no water." 

14 'tis Israel a servant?'' is he a home-born 
slave? why is he spoiled?" 



p Dcul 


. 3-.' 


10. q 


I'si. 


;<:5. 1 


Or 


the land 


or Cannel. 


r Pra. 1U6;38. 


• Mai. 


•J:« 


7. 1 


:h. 5:31. " Hab 


2- 


18. » 


EwW. 


aU:35. 


1 Or. o 


rtr to. 


* Imi. 


•<3: 


, 12. 


« Pra 


110: i. 


r 


Ml 


. 4:5. 


• Pn 


106:20; Rom 


1:33. 


» Im. 


■.■i. 


b Pa 


.•10: t); 


John 4 


14 




P<».8 


:11. 


Exod 


4:22. 


Hob. 


becoma 


a spoil? 





















17. To bo afraid of God's enemies is the way to bring 
ourselves into subjection to them. 

18, 19. Though the wicked may persecute and distress, 
they can never destroy those whom God protects and heli)8. 

CHAPTER II. 

2. Thy youth — thine espmimli ; the youth of the nation, 
when God espoused it to himself by entering into cove- 
nant with it. 

'.i. First-fruits; the first nation consecrated to God's 
service, and the first generation of that nation after the 
eatablisliinent of the covenant at Sinai. Increase; harvest 
or ingathi-ring of believers. 

8. Pn'!lors; shepherds of the people; that is, rulers, 
whose duty it was both to obey God's law, and require 
obedience in others. 

10. Chittim; to the west; see note on Isa. 23:1. Kedar; 
on the east, in Arabia. 

14. Is Israel a sermnl ? — why is he spoiM f since Israel is 
God's first-bomson, E.Tod. 'l:22.why is he spoiled as if he 
were a slave? Verse 17 contains the explanation. 



The unprecedented 



JEREMIAH II. 



mercy of God. 



A.M. 3375. 15 The young lions roared upon liiin," and 
'6--J. yelled,' and they made his land waste: his 
cities are burned without inhabitant. 

1(3 Also the children of Noph and Tahapancs" 
have broken the crown of thy head.*'' 

17 Hast thou not procured this unto thyself in 
tluit thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God,'' when 
he led thee by tlie way? 

IS And now what hast thou to do in the way of 
Egypt,"" to drink the waters of Sihor?' or what 
hast thou to do in the way of Assyria, to drink 
the waters of the river? 

19 Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and 
thy backslidings shall reprove thee i"^ know there- 
fore and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, tliat 
thou hast forsaken tlie Loud thy God, and that 
my fear is not in thee, saith the Lord God of 
hosts. 

20 1 For of old time I have broken tiiy yoke, 
and burst thy bands ; and thou saidst, I will not 
transgress ;''' when upon every high liill and under 
every green tree thou wanderest, playing the har- 
lot.' 

21 Yet I had planted thee a noble vine.J wholly 
a right seed : how then art tliou turned into the 
degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me?'^ 

22 For tliougli thou wash thee with nitre, and 
take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked 
before me,' saith the Lord God. 

23 How canst thou say, I am not polluted,™ I 
have not gone after Baalim? See thy way in the 
valley, know what thou hast done : thoa art a swift 
dromedary ^ traversing her ways ; 

24 A wild ass' used to^ the wilderness, that 
snuileth up the wind at her pleasure;* in her oc- 
casion who can turn her away?* all they that 
seek her will not weary themselves; in her month 
they shall lind her. 

25 Withhold thy foot from being unshod, and 
thv throat from thirst : but thou saidst, There is 



a Psa. 57:4. • Ueh. gave out their voice, bch. 4:i:7. X Or, feed on tliy 
crown; Deut. 33;2II. c Ui. 1:6, 7. d Hos. 13:9. e Isa. yU:l, ■_>. f Josh. 
13:3. s Isa. 5:5. 1 Or. Sfri-e; Josh. 21:lt<, 21. 1> Exod. 19:S; I Sam. 12:10. 
i Deut. 12:2; Isa. 1:21. J T.sa. ^0:8. k Deut. 32:32. 1 Psa. 90:8. m Prov. 
30:12,211. S 0<,Oiv>ift dromedary, t Or. O wild ass, eto. 1 Heb. tau'/K. 
' Yii:h.tke desire of lie'r heart. 1 Or, reverse it. I Or, Is the ease desperate! 



15. young- /(cm5 ,• the northern enemies. Chap. 1:14. 

16. Noph — Tahapanes; cities of Egypt. The Egyptians 
join with the nortliern invaders in destroying Judah. 

18. S»/ior,- the Nile. Isa. 23:3. T/iC rroer; the Euphra- 
tes. Drinking the water of these rivers seems to denote 
the vain efforts of tlie Jews to obtain help first from one, 
then from the other of these nations. 2 Kings 16:7; 
18:21; Isa. 30:1-3; 31:1-3. 

20. Playing the harlot; by serving false gods, which the 
prophets everywhere regard as spiritual fornication. 

22. IFo.s/( thee; endeavor to hide thy guilt. Nitre; not 
our nitre, but a mineral substance u.sed anciently as now 
for soap. 

23. The valley; the valley of Hinnom. where the idol- 
atrous .Jews sacrificed their children to Moloch. Chap. 
7 : 31. Traversing Iter ways; running hither and thither in 
her waTitonness. 

24. At her pleasure; in the excitement of her desire. 

25. Withhold thy foot — thy throat from thirst; do not wear 
out thy sandals and make thyself thirsty in the pursuit of 
false gods. Tliere is no hope; my case is desperate, and I 
must seek the help of idols. 

31. We are lorils; or, "we are free" to go where we 
please. Unto thee; unto Jehovah. 



no hope:*" no; for I have loved strangers, and 
after them will I go. 

26 As the thief is ashamed when he is found, so 
is the house of Israel ashamed ; tliey, tiieir kings, 
their princes, and their priests, and their proph- 
ets, 

27 Saying to a stock," Thou art my father ; and 
to a stone, Thou hast brouglit me forth :*• for they 
have turned their back' unto me, and not thiir 
face: but in the time of their trouble they will 
say. Arise, and save us."" 

28 But where are thy gods that thou hast made 
thee? let them arise, if they can save thee in the 
time of thy trouble:^ for according to the number 
of thy cities are thy gods, Judah. 

29 Wherefore will ye plead with me? ye all have 
transgressed against me, saitii the Lord. 

30 In vain have I smitten your children;" they 
received no correction : your own sword hath de- 
voured your prophets,"' like a destroying lion. 

31 *! generation, see ye the word of the Lord. 
Have I been a wilderness unto Israel? a land of 
darkness? wherefore say my people. We are 
lords ;*" we will come no more unto thee? 

32 Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride 
her attire? yet my people have forgotten me days 
without number.' 

33 Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? 
therefore hast thou also taught the wicked ones 
thy ways. 

31: Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the 
souls of the poor innocents:" I have not found 
it by secret search,* but upon all these. 

35 Yet thou say est. Because I am innocent, surely 
his anger shall turn from me.^ Behold, I will plead 
with tliee, because thou sayest, I have not sinned. 

36 Why gaddest thou about so much to change 
tliy way? thou also shalt be ashamed of Egypt," 
as thou wast ashamed of Assyria.'' 

37 Yea, thou shalt go forth from him, and thy 



» ch. 1S:12; Rom. S:24. o Isa. 41:19. i Or, begotten me. I Heb the 
hinder part of the neck, p Psa. 7b:31 ; Hos. 5: 15. 1 Heb. eiJlV. q Isa. 9:13, 
r 2 Chr. .30: 10; Mark 12:2-^. • Heb. have dominion, s Psa. 12:4. 'Hos 
8:14. uPsa. 100:33. UUb. digging. » Horn. 7:9; IJohn 1:8, 10. «■ Hos. 
12:1. x2Chr. 23:20. 



33. Trimmest — ?/((/ wa;/,- usest subtle artifices. Taught 
the wicked ones; the wicted women. Jerusalem has become 
a leader in idolatry. 

34. Blood of— the poor innocents; she has added murder to 
idolatry. '-The poor innocents" are not merely the chil- 
dren sacrificed to Moloch, but the righteous poor whom 
she lias slain. Upon alt these; probably, in open view, 
upon all thy skirts, to which God points as it were with 
the finger. 

36. Gaddest thou about— to change thy way; wanderest 
every way in search of idolatrous alliances. 

37. Thy hands upon thy head; a posture expressive of 
grief. 2 Sam. 13:19. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. The conduct of b:icksliders greatly dishonors God; it 
is a virtual declaration before the world that they have 
tried his service, and found it hard and unreasonable. 

6, 7. The beginning of departure from God is ingratitude 
and forge tfulness of his mercies; where the remembrance 
of these is warm and fresh in the soul, it keeps us near to 
God, and makes communion with him exceedingly sweet 
and precious. 

11. The constancy of the heathen in serving their idols 
839 



Juduh worst than Israel. 



JEREMIAH III. 



A call to penitence. 



hands upon thy head :" for tlie Loud hath rejected 
thy confidences, and thou shalt not prosper in 
them." 

CHAPTER 111. 

1 God's great mercy in Judah's vile whoredom. 6 Judah is worse than 
Israel. 12 The promises of the Kospel to the penitent. 20 Israel 
reproved, and called by God, maKetn a solemn confession of their 
sins. 

THEY say,' If a man put away hi.s "wife, and 
slie go from liim, and become another man's, 
shall he return unto her again ?° shall not that 
land be greatly polluted? but thou hast played 
the harlot with many lovers;'' yet return again 
to me,'' saith the Loud. 

2 Lift up thine eyes unto the high places, and 
see where thou hast not been lain with. In the 
ways hast thou sat for them,'' as the Arabian 
in the wilderness ; and thou hast polluted the 
land with thy whoredoms and with thy wicked- 
ness. 

3 Therefore the showers have been withholdcn, 
and there hath been no latter rain;'' and thou 
hadst a whoi-e's foreliead, thou refuscdst to be 
ashamed.'' 

4 Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me. 
My father, thou art the guide of my youth ?' 

5 Will he reserve /tis anger for ever? J will he 
keep it to the end? Belioid, tiiou hast spoken and 
done evil things as thou couldcst. 

6 ir The LoKD said also unto mo in the days of 
Josiah the king. Hast thou seen that which back- 
sliding Israel hath done? she is gone up upon 
every high mountain, and under every green tree,'' 
and there hatli played the harlot. 

7 And 1 said after she had done all these 
things, Turn thou unto me.' But she returned 

»2Sam. 13:19. b Isi. 2^:15-17 * Heb. Snying. «Deut.ai:4. J Ezcfc. 
16:a(i-i9. cZcch. l::l. ' Prov. 43: 23. J cli. »; 12; 14:4 ; Lev. •.'fi:19; Deul. 
2S:23, 24. h Ezck. 3:7. i I'rov. 2:17. J Psa. 77:7-9. k 1 Kmgs 14:2;). 



is a standing rebuke of the inconstancy of many worsliip- 
pers of the living and true God. 

13. God is the eternal and uncreated fountain of pood ; 
upon all who cleave to him he bestows life and strength 
and blessedness; but every device of those who forsake 
him, and put their confidence in earthly objvcts, is only a 
broken cistern that can hold no water, and its end must 
be disappointment and misery. 

21. The tendency of the human race to degeneracy is a 
sad and humiliating proof of its fallen condition ; so strong 
is this downward current in families and nations, that 
nothing but God's grace can preserve thcin from utter 
corruption and ruin. 

22. The vain endeavors of sinners to justify themselves, 
fail to satisfy cither their own consciences or tlie judgment 
of their fellow-sinners; how much more the judgment of 
God, who knoweth all things. 

27, 28. They who forget God in prosperity, and call upon 
him only in adversity, have no true love for him, and can- 
not expect deliverance. 

30. When a nation persecutes and destroys the messen- 
gers by whom God calls it to repentance, the measure of 
its iniquity is full, and it is near destruction. 

3.5. The sclf-tlelusion of sinners has no limits; it leads 
boltl and shameless tran.sgressors to deny their guilt, and 
persuade themselves that God is not angry with them and 
will not punish them. 

.^7. When God is against a people for thoir sins, their 
earthly confidences turn to their destruction. 
840 



not. 
saw if." 

8 And I saw, when for all the causes whereby 
backsliding Israel committed adultery I had put 
her away, and given her a bill of divorce ; yet her 
treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and 
played the harlot also. 

9 And it came to pass through the lightness of 
her wlun'odom,* that she dciilcd the land, and com- 
mitted adultery with stones and with stocks." 

10 And yet for all this her treacherous sister 
Judah luitii not turned unto me with lier whole 
heart, but feignedly,* saith the Lord. 

11 And the Loud said unto me. The backsliding 
Israel hath justified herself more than treacherous 
Judah. 

12 1 Go and proclaim these words toward the 
north, and say. Return, thou backsliding Israel, 
saith the Lord; and I will not cause mine anger 
to liill ii[)on you: for I atn merciful, saith the 
Loud, and 1 will not keep anger for ever." 

I'i Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou 
hast transgressed against the Loud thy God,'' and 
hast scattered thy ways to the strangers under 
every green tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice, 
saith the Lord. 

1-1 Turn,C) liacksliding children, saith the Lord ; 
for I am married unto you:' and I will take you 
one of a city, and two of a famil}', and 1 will 
bring you to Zion: 

If) And 1 will give you pastors according to my 
heart,"' which shall feed you with knowledge and 
understanding." 

1(1 And it shall come to pass, when ye be mul- 
tiplied and increased in the land, in those days, 
saith tiie Loud, they shall say no more. The ark 
of the covenant of the Lord: neither shall it 



I 2 Kings 17:11). 13. " Ezek 23:2, etc. fOr,/amf. nch.2:27. I Heb. in 
fahthood. o aChr. 30:9; l'.*i. 66:15. ? Deut. 3U:l-0. Ilsa. 51:5. ' Eph. 
4:11. 'John 21:15-17; Acts2U:2S; I Pel. 5:2. 



CHAPTER III. 

1. Played the harlot; by idolatry, which is spiritual for- 
nication. So it is represented throughout the book. Yet 
return ; God in his great mercy is ever ready to receive 
the true penitent. 

2. Sat for them ; waited for thy lovers. As the Arabian ; 
as ho lies in wait to rob travellers. 

5. Will he reserve his anger for ever? will not God par- 
don thine iniquity as soon as thou comest to kim in true 
penitence? 

8. Put her atrnij — given her a bill; by giving her over to 
captivity. 2 Kings 17:6-23. 

11. Jiackslidinf; Israel — treacherous Judah; .Tudah is more 
guilty than Israel, because she has failed to take warnioK 
from God's judgments upon her sister nation. Ezekioi 
I6:r,i,ry>. 

12, Toward the north ; where Israel was held in cap- 
tivity. 

11. One of a citij — tiro of a family; that is, a remnant of 
you shall be saved. This purpo.se of God respecting both 
.ludah and Israel is often repeated in the Old Testament. 
Isa. 10:22. 

Ifi. The ark — of tlu Lord ; the former glory of the ark 
shall 1)0 forgotten in comparison with the greater glory of 
tlie future. Compare chap. 10:14, i:> ; Isa. 6.5:17. At the 
Riinu' time the jirophet intimates the removal of this out- 
wiird symbol of God's presence, which took place at the 
captivity. 



Return from hacksliding. 



JEREMIAH IV. 



The judgments of God. 



A M .^'.w. come to mind ;"" neither sliall tlicy remem- 
.u^ubout j^^^_ .^_ neither shall they visit it; neither 
shall that be done any more/ 

17 At that time they shall call Jerusalem the 
throne of the Lord ; and all the nations shall be 
g'nthcred unto it, to the name of the Lord, to Je- 
rusalem : neither shall they walk any more after 
the imagination' of their evil heart."* 

18 In those days the house of Judah shall walk 
with^ the house of Israel,*^^ and they shall come 
together out of the land of the north to the land 
that I have given for an inheritance unto your 
fathers.' 

19 But I said, How shall I put thee among the 
children, and give thee a pleasant land,^ a goodly 
heritage' of the hosts of nations? and I said, 
Thou shalt call me. My father;'' and shalt not 
turn away from* me. 

20 IT Surely as a wife treacherously departeth 
from her husband,* so have ye dealt treacherously 
with me,° house of Israel, saith the Lord. 

21 A voice was heard upon the high places, 
weeping and supplications of the children of Isra- 
el:' for they have perverted their way,' and they 
have forgotten the Lord their God. 

22 Return, ye backsliding children, and I will 
heal your backslidings.'' Behold, we come unto 
thee; for thou art the Lord our God.' 

2:5 Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the 
hills, and from the multitude of mountains: truly 
in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel.^ 

21; For shame hath devoured the labor of our 
fathers from our youth ; their flocks and their 
herds, their sons and their daughters. 

2.5 We lie down in our shame, and our confusion 
covercth us : " for we have sinned against the Lord 
our God, we and our fathers, from our youth even 
unto this day, and have not obeyed the voice of 
the Lord our God. 



• Hel 


- upo 


t tht hmrl. ' Is 


1.65:17. 


to 


.\thf 


magnified. 


1 Or, 


stithborn- 


nes%. b 


Rom 


fi:U. SOr, (0. 


'Isa, 11 


i;); 


izek 


37:l(i--J 


i. D 


>r,ra 


ised your 


falhers 


lopo. 


sess. f Heb. la 


nd of ties 


re 


• Heb. a her 


tage 


ofgl 


ory, or of 


beamy. 


i Rom. 8:1.-). f H 


b. from 


a lie 


r. t 


Heb./ 


lend 


e 


sa. 4S:a. 


t 2 Cor. 


7:10. 


e Prov. 19:3. 


b Hos G 


:\. 


■ Hos 


13:4. J 


I'sa 


IJl: 


1,2; Isa. 



17. All the nations shall be gathered; a prophecy w}iich 
can have its complete fulfllraent only in " the last daj's " of 
the Christian dispensation. See Isa. 2:2-4; Micah 4:1-4; 
Zech. 14:16-19. 

18. With the house of Israel; in harmony with it. Isa. 
11:13; Ezek. 37:15-28. 

21-25. A voice was heard; in these words the prophet 
anticipates the repentance and supplication of Israel. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

11. When men refuse to take warning from the punish- 
ment of those whose sinful example they are imitating, 
they aggravate their guilt, and bring upon themselves 
severer judgments. 

12-15. God waits to be acknowledged in the calamities 
which he sends upon his people ; and when they return 
to him by hearty confession and repentance, he will gra- 
cidusly accept them, and restore them to more than their 
former prosperity. 

16. The glory of the gospel dispensation is such that, in 
comparison, there is no glory in the old dispensation which 
preceded it, and prepared the way for it. 2 Cor. 3:10. 

17. Though in the establishment of his church God began 
wilh one nation, it was from the beginning his jilan to ex- 
tend it from that nation over all the earth. The calling of 
the Gentiles is the fulfilment of the original promise, " In 
thee shall all families of the earth be blessed." Gen. 12:3. 



CHAPTER IV. 



1 God calleth Isrive! by liis promise. 3 He exhortelh Judah to repent- 
ance by fearful judgments. 19 A grievous l:imentation for the miser- 
ies of Judah. 

IF thou wilt return, Israel, saith the Lord, 
return unto me : and if thou wilt put away 
thine abominations out of my sight, then .shalt 
thou not remove. 

2 And thou shalt swear,' The Lord liveth, in 
trutli, in judgment, and in righteousness ;"" and the 
nations shall bless themselves in him," and in him 
shall they glory." 

3 1 For thus saith the Lord to the men of Judah 
and Jerusalem, Break up your fallow ground," and 
sow not among thorns.'' 

4 Circumcise yourselves to the Lord, and take 
away the foreskins of your heart,"' ye men of Judah 
and inhabitants of Jerusalem; lest my fury come 
forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it, 
because of the evil of your doings. 

5 Declare ye in Judah, and publish in Jerusalem ; 
and say, Blow ye the trumpet in the land: cry, 
gather together, and say. Assemble yourselves, and 
let us go into the defeuced cities. 

6 Set up the standard toward Zion : retire.^ stay 
not ; for I will bring evil from the north, and a 
great destruction." 

7 The lion is come up from his thicket,' and the 
destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way;' he is 
gone forth from his place to make thy land deso- 
late;" and thy cities shall be laid waste, without 
an inhabitant. 

8 For this gird you with sackcloth,^ lament and 
howl : for the tierce anger of the Lord is not turned 
back from us. 

9 And it shall come to pass at that day, saith the 
Lord, that the heart of the king shall perish, and 
the heart of the princes ; and the priests shall be 
astonished, and the prophets shall wonder. 



63:10. 


t V.} 


ra 9:0 


7; 


lom 





21. 


1 Deut. 


10:-'0. 


m 


sa. 48:1. 


n Gf 


n. 


22: la 


Ksa. - 


2:17. 


ol.sa 


. 4.'i 


a.i 


1 C 


ar. 1:31. 


PHos 


10: 


:2. <! Mat 


i:i 


7, 


22. r 


Deut. 


10:10 


K,o 


r. 2 


2.S 


29. 


5 Or, 


strength 


pn. 


1 Heb. bre 


akn 


g. 


sDan. 


7:4. 


t 2 Km 


gs24 


1 ; 


»: 


• " 


ch. 2j:9 


visa 


22: 


12. 







19. When we cleave to God, as children to a father, with 
a free and willing spirit, he fulfils to us his promises ; and 
when he sends forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, 
we cry, " Abba, Father ;'' to us belongs the childlike obe- 
dience, and to him the glory of it. 

CHAPTER IV. 

2. Shalt swear, The Lord liveth; swearing by Jehovah's 
name, when it is performed in sincerity, is an open profes- 
sion of allegiance to him in opposition to all false gods. 
Compare Isa. 48: 1. 

3. Break up your fallow ground; the hearts of the Jews 
are compared to unfilled ground, covered with thorns, and 
unfit to receive good seed. Matt. 13:3-8, 18-23. To break 
it up, is to put away their obduracy and their abomina- 
tions. Compare Ezek. 18:31, "Make you a new heart and 
a new spirit." 

4. Circumcise yourselves to the Lord; circumcision was 
the outward sign of consecration to God. The Jews are 
here exhorted to do that inwardly which the outward rite 
signified. Deut. 10:16. 

5. Declare ije; the approaching invasion of the Chaldeans. 
Inlo the defeuced cities; for protection against the invaders. 

6. Toward Zion; calling the people to flee to it as their 
strong-hold. 

7. The lion; the Babylonian conqueror. 

841 



The miseiies of 



JEREMIAH IV. 



Judith Inmenled. 



10 Then said I, Ah, Lord Gon! surely thou hast 
greatly deceived this peojjle and Jerusalem, say- 
ing, Yc shall have peace;" whereas the sword 
rcachetli unto the soul.'' 

11 At that time shall it be said to this people 
and to Jerusalem, A dry wind of the high ])laces 
in the wilderness toward the daughter oi" my peo- 
ple, not to fan, nor to cleanse, 

12 Even a full wind from those places' shall come 
unto me: now also will 1 give sentence* against 
them. 

13 Behold, he shall come up as clouds, and his 
chariots s/iall be as a whirlwind: his horses are 
swifter than eagles. Woe unto us! for we are 
spoiled. 

14: Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wicked- 
ness," that thou mayest be saved. How long shall 
thy vain thoughts lodge witiiin thee? 

i.5 For a voice declareth from Dan, and publish- 
eth affliction from mount Ephraim. 

16 Make ye mention to the nations; behold, pub- 
lish against Jerusalem, that watchers come from a 
far country, and give out their voice against the 
cities of Judah. 

IT As keepers of a field, are they against her 
round about; because she hath been rebellious 
against me,'' saith the JjORD. 

18 Thy way and thy doings have procured these 
things unto thee;° this is thy wickedness, be- 
cause it is bitter, because it reacheth unto thy 
heart. 

19 11 My bowels, my bowels! I am pained at my 
very heart;* my heart maketh a noise in me; I 
cannot hold my peace, because thou hast heard, 
my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of 
war. 

20 Destruction upon destruction is cried ;'' for 
the whole land is spoiled: suddenly are my tents 
spoiled, and my curtains in a moment. 



judgments, c J 
lU; Ua. 50:1. 



' Lim. ■i:2l. * Or, futlcr wind ilia 
1.4:8. il N»h. n:-Jll; l.am. 1:8; Da. 
Hcb. lAe walls of my htatt. f P 



1 ihmt t Heb. utUr 
. 9:7, elc. ' oh. 2: 17, 
a, 4-.':7: Ezek. 7:-ili. 



10. Thau hast deceived litis people; allowcil tlicin to be de- 
ceived by f;d.sc jirophets. 'I liis was :i judf;mcnt sent upon 
them bv <iod for loving falsehood rather than truth. Com- 
pare 2TI1CSS. 2:11, 12. 

11. Of the high places; coniinf; over the barren hills. The 
reference is to the hot and withering wind from the east- 
ern deserts. 

12. Unto me; unto Jehovah, that is, for the execution of 
his vengeance. 

13. lie shall come; the Chaldean monarch. 

15. Finm Dan; a city in the northern extremity of the 
land. Mount Ephraim; the mounUiinous region of Ephra- 
im also lay toward the north, through which the invader 
would ai>proach Jerusalem. 

IG. Watchers; that is, besiegers, as the following verse 
explains. 

17. Keepers of afield; persons set to guard it against 
robbers and beasts. 

19. Mij bowels; the bowels arc the seat of compa.ssi(>n. 
See note on Isa. 1C:11. In this and the two following 
verses Zion is the speaker, or the prophet personating 
Zion. 

22. For my people is foolish, they have not known me; in 
this verse (iod speaks. 

Ti. I heheld; the prophet has a vi.sion of the utter deso' 

lation of the land. The deseription is borrowed from that 

of the primitive chaos. Gen. 1:2. 

842 



21 Plow long shall I see the standard, f,f!^^ 
and hear the sound of the trumpet? eii 

22 For my people is foolish, they have not known 
me; they are sottish children, and they have none 
understanding: they are wise to do evil," but to 
do good they have no knowledge. 

23 I beheld the earth, and lo, it ivas without 
form, and void;'' and the heavens, and they had 
no light. 

24 1 beheld the mountains, and lo, they trembled, 
and all the hills moved lightly.' 

25 I beheld, and lo, there was no man, and all 
the bii-ds of tlie heavens were fled.^ 

20 I beheld, and lo, the fruitful place ivas a wil- 
derness, and all the cities thereof were broken 
down at the presence of the Lord, and by his fierce 
anger." 

27 For thus hath the Lord said. The whole land 
shall be desolate; yet will I not make a full end. 

28 For this shall the earth mourn,' and the heav- 
ens above be black: because I have spoken it, I 
have purposed it, and will not repent, neither will 
1 turn back from it. 

29 The whole city shall flee for the noise of the 
horsemen and bowmen ; they shall go into thickets, 
and climb up upon the rocks: every city shall be 
forsaken, and not a man dwell therein. 

30 And ivhcn thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do? 
Though thou clothest thyself with crimson, though 
thou deckcst thee with ornaments of gold," though 
thou rentest thy facc^ with painting, in vain shalt 
thou make thyself fair; thy lovers will despise 
thee," they will seek thy life. 

31 For I have heard a voice as of a woman in 
travail, and the anguish as of her that briugeth 
forth her first child, the voice of the daughter of 
Zion, that licwailcth herself, that spreadetJ! her 
hands," sai/ing, Woe is me now ! for my soul is 
wearied because of murderers. 



f Mic. 2 


1; Horn 


10:10. 


h Isa. -M 


m 


i 


Na 


■y.iS, Kl 


*-k. n^:-JI 


; Hab. 


:l:li. 


J Zeph. I 


3. kl'j 


a. 76:7 


1 Ho». ■! 


:3. 


m 


Kzo 


. •J3:4U. 


1 Hcb. 


tyts. 


ch. 


•ii:-iU--i-i 


1 Lain. 


:J, 19. 


Isa. 1: 


lii 


La 


in. I 


:17. 









24. Moved ligluly; quivered under God's wrath. Cora- 
pare Isa. 13:13. 

29. The whole city; rather, as the same words are ren- 
dered just below, "every city," that is, of Judea. They 
shall go into thickets ; the Jews shall go for shelter. 

30. lientest thy face; rather, as the margin, "thine eyes," 
by ai)plying a black paint to the eyeliiis. This is done by 
pas.sing an instrument smeared with the jiaint along the 
lids. .ludah is here compared to a harlot, who, in her 
eagerness to apply the paint, tears or furrows the lids. 
Thy lovers; the idolatrous allies to whom the Jews looked 
for help against the Chaldeans. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. True reformation must begin with i\n inward prepara- 
tion of the heart to receive and obey (!od's word; that 
obedience which is only outward and forced is short-lived, 
and generally ends in making a man's last state worse than 
the hrst. Matt. 12:43-45 ; 13:4-7,19-22. 

4. No outward rite has, in and of itself, any saving ofli- 
cacy. The inward gr.ice of which it is the sign can alone 
bring men into a state of salvation. 

7. Wicked kings and nations are under the control of 
God's providence, and he makes them at his pleasure the 
ministers of his purposes towards his people, wheOicr of 
wrath or mercy. 

[>. WIk'm (iud forsakes a nation for its sins, its wisdom 



Sins and judgments 



JEREMIAH V. 



of the. Jews. 



CHAPTER V. 



1 Tile judgments of God upon the Jew-s for their perverseness, 7 for thpir 
adiikery, 10 for their impiety, 19 for their contempt of God, 25 and fur 
thf-ir great corruption in the civil state, 30 and ecclesiastical. 

r) UN yo to and fro througli the streets of Jeru- 
\ salem, and see nov^', and know, and seek in 
tlic broad places thereof if ye can find o man,'' if 
there be any that executeth judi^ment, that seeketh 
tiie truth ; and I will pardon it. 

2 And though they say, The Lord livcth ; " surely 
they swear falsely. 

3 Lord, arc not thine eyes upon the truth?" 
thou hast stricken them, but tliey have not griev- 
ed;'' thou hast consumed them, b^tt they have re- 
fused to receive correction :" they have made their 
faces harder than a rock ; tliey have refused to 
return. 

4 Therefore I said, Surely these arc poor ; they 
are foolish : for they know not the way of the 
Lord, nor the judgment of their God.'' 

5 I will get me unto the great men, and will 
speak unto them; for they have known tlie way 
of the Lord, and the judgment of their God -.^ but 
these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst 
the bonds.'' 

6 Wherefore a lion out of the forest shall slay 
them,' and a wolf of the evenings* shall spoil them,^ 
a leopard shall watch over their cities : every one 
that goeth out thence shall be torn in pieces : be- 
cause their transgressions are many, and their 
backslidings are increased.* 

7 •; How shall I pardon thee for this ? thy chil- 
dren liave forsaken me, and sworn by them that are 
no gods:" wlien I had fed them to the full, they 
then committed adultery,' and assembled them- 
selves by troops in the harlots' houses. 

8 Tliey were as fed horses in the morning : every 
one neighed after his neighbor's wife. 

9 Sliall I not visit for these things?"' saith the 
Lord : and shall not my soul be avenged on such 
a nation as tiiis ? 

10 ■[ Go ye up upon her walls, and destroy ; but 
make not a full end :" take away her battlements ; 
for they are not the Lord's. 

11 For the house of Israel and the house of Judah 
have dealt very treacherously against me, saith the 
Lord. 



Gen, 18;a), etc.; Ezek.-J-2:WI. bTit. 1:10. c 2 Chr. 16;9. <lch. 7:aS; 
, 9:13.; Zeph. 3:1,2. ' Heli 12:0 t Matt. 11 i.l. eMio. 3:1. h Psi 
:. ' Hos. 1^:7; Amos.5:l,«, 19. • Or, deserls. ) Ezek. 2-2:-27; Zeph. 3:3. 
k Josh. '2:1:7; Zeph. 1 ' 



and strength fail, antl it becomes an easy prey to its ene- 
mies. 

10. The most dreadful judgment upon a people is, that 
(iod should give them up to the delusions of false teach- 
ers, wlio flatter them in sin, and promise them peace in 
the way of transgression. 

11-31. The terrible desolations which God brought upon 
Judah and Jerusalem for their rebellion against him, are 
a perpetual warning to nations who enjoy the light of 
Christianity, of the calamities which will overtake them if 
they depart from him. 

CHAPTER V. 

2. Though they saij, The Lord liveth ; see note to chap. 
4:2. 

10. Go ye up ; this is addressed to the enemies of Judah. 



12 They have belied the Lord," and said, It is 
not he; neither shall evil come upon us;"* neither 
siiall we see sword nor faiiiine: 

13 And the prophets shall become wind,'' and the 
word i« not in them: thus shall it be done unto them. 

14 Wherefore thus saith the Lord God of hosts, 
Because yc speak this word, behold, I will make 
my words in thy mouth fire,'' and tliis people wood, 
and it sliall devour them. 

15 Lo, I will bring a nation upon you from far,' 
house of Israel, saith the Lord: it is a miglity 
nation, it is an ancient nation, a nation whose lan- 
guage thou kuowest not, neither understandest 
wliat they say. 

16 Their quiver is as an open sepulchre, they ai-e 
all niightj- men. 

17 And they shall eat up thy harvest and thy 
bread,' which thy sons and thy daughters should 
eat : they shall eat up thy flocks and thy herds : 
they shall eat up thy vines and thy fig-trees: they 
shall impoverish tliy fenced cities, Avhercin thou 
trustedst, with the sword. 

18 Nevertheless in those days, saith the Lord, I 
will not make a full end with you." 

19 *r And it shall come to pass, when ye shall say, 
Wiierefore doeth the Lord our God all these things 
unto ns?^' then slialt thou answer them, Like as yo 
have forsaken me, and served strange gods in your 
land, so shall ye serve strangers in a laud that is 
not yours.''' 

20 Declare this in the house of Jacob, and pub- 
lish it in Judah, saying, 

21 Hear now this, foolish people, and without 
understanding;' wliich have eyes, and see not; 
which have ears, and hear not:" 

22 Fear ye not me ?^ saith the Lord : will ye not 
tremlile at my presence,'' which have placed the 
sand yor the bound of the sea by a perpetual de- 
cree, that it cannot pass it :" and though the waves 
thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; 
though they roar, yet can they not pass over it? 

23 But this people hath a revolting and a re- 
bellious heart;'' they are revolted and gone.'' 

24 Neither say they in their heart. Let us now 
fear the Lord our God, tiiat giveth rain, both the 
former and the latter, in his season :" he reserveth 
unto us the appointed weeks of the harvest." 



20:9, II. ' Deut. a'<:40; Isi. 5:20; 39:3, 0. I Lev. 2U:10; Deut. 28:31, 33. 
u ver. 10. V Deut. 2y:2J, etc.; 1 Kings 9:P. 9. " Deut. 2,S:-I8. 1 Heb. 
/leart; Hos. 7:11. « Isi. Ii;9; Ezek, 12:2; John 12:40; Rom. 11:8. y ch 
10:7; Rev. 1J:4. JPsa.99;l. " Job 38:11 ; Prov. t-:29. bHos.4:8. c Isa. 
31:0. J Deut. 11:13, 14. e Gen. H:22 



12. They have belied the Lord ; while they readily believed 
the false prophets, they refused to believe the true, and 
thus charged God liimself with falsehood. /( is not he; it 
is not Go(l that speaks by the prophet's lips. 

13. The prophets sliiill beame wind; the language of the 
unbelieving Jews, who deride the warnings of God's 
prophets, is continued. Thus .shall it be done unto them ; 
the evils which the prophets predict shall fall upon them- 
selves, not upon us. 

16. An open sepulchre; ready to swallow up and destroy. 
Compare Psa. 5:9. 

24. The former; which falls in autumn, and prepares 
the ground for ploughing and sowing. The tatter; whicli 
falls in the spring, and matures the crops. Reserveth unto 
us — Me harvest : gives us the harvest in its appointed 
weeks. 

843 



Enemies sent 



JEREMIAH VI. 



asrainst Judah. 



25 IT Your iniquities Iiave turned away these 
things, and your sins have witlilioldea good things 
from you." 

li(j For among my people are found wicked men: 
they lay wait, as he tiiat settcth snares;' they set 
a trap, they catch men. 

27 As a cage* is full of birds, so arc their houses 
full of deceit; therefore they are become great, 
and waxen ricli.'' 

28 They are waxen fat,'' they shine : yea, they 
overpass tlie deeds of tlie wicked : they judge not 
the cause, the cause of the fatlierless,'' yet they pros- 
per ; and the right of the needy do they not judge. 

2'J Sluill I not visit for these things ? saith the 
Loi;d: shall not my soul be avenged on such a 
nation as this? 

30 IT A wonderful and horrible thing* is commit- 
ted in the land ;" 

31 The prophets prophesy falsely ,'^ and thepriests 
bear rule^ by their means; and my people love to 
have, it so:'^ and what will ve do in the end there- 
of?" 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 The enemies sent against Jutlah 4 encourage themselves. 5 Grod set- 
teth them on work because of their sins. 9 The prophet lamenteth 
the judgments of *3-od because of their sins. 18 He proclaimeth Irod's 
wrath. 26 He calletli the people to mourn for the judgment on their 

OYE children of Benjamin, gather yourselves 
to flee out of the midst of Jerusalem, and 
blow the trumpet in Tekoa, and set up a sign of 
lire in Beth-haccerem :' for evil appearcth out of 
the north,J and great destruction. 

2 1 liave likened the daughter of Zion to a comely 
and delicate woman} 

3 The shepherds with their flocks .'^hall come unto 
her; they sliall ])itcli their tents against her round 
about;'' they shall feed every one in his place. 

4 Prepare ye war against her; arise, and let us 



« Ch. 3:3. • Or. pry 04 fowlers lit in wait. ^ Or, coop. bMic. 1:12. 
tDeul. 32:15. d ch. 22: 1.5-19 I Or. Aslonislimtnl and fillhitte.^s. e Hos 
6:1U. I Ezek. 13:0. 1 Or, takt into their hands. B Mic. 2:11. h Deul. 
32:29; Lam. 1:9. iNeh. 3:14. J Kzek. 2(i:7, etc. I Ur, woman rfiee/djiy 



25. The.<se things — good; the good gifts mentioned in the 
preceding verse. 

27. Full of birds; birds caught by stratagem. Deceit; 
wealth gained by deceit. 

28. Oucrpaxs the deeds of the wicked; go beyond ordinary 
siniicr.s in crime. 

31. What will ye do; what will ye sinners of Judah and 
Jerus;iloin do to avert destruction 1 In tlie end thereof; when 
God shall bring upon you tlic consequences of your sins. 
INSTRUCTION'S. 

1. God fifrcn liPiirs long witli wicked nations and cities, 
and withholds hi.s iii(l;;riirnls from them, for the sake of 
the frw rijilitcouH nirii which tlicy contain. (j!en. 18:23-.'i2. 

2-11. When corruption and profligacy have pervaded 
all classes of tlic cominuiiity.and God's repeated cliastise- 
lucnts have failed to bring Ihem to rei)entaiicc, then it is 
certain tliat their destruction is at band. 

12-17. Tlie self-flatteries of sinners cannot for a moment 
stay liod'a approaching vengeance ; at the appointed time 
it will fall upon them with resistless power, and sweep 
away them and their delusions together. 

18. Since God's judgments have for their end the puri- 
fication and not the dcatrnction of the true Israel, he will 
t:tke care that his church shall not only survive them, but 
receive from them new strength and enlargement. 

23-31. When iiii(|uity abounds among God's professed 
»44 



go up at noon. Woe unto us! for the day a.m. a'tsz. 
goeth away,' for the shadows of the even- cii." °" 
ing are stretched out.™ 

5 Arise, and let us go by night, and let us destroy 
her palaces. 

(5 ll For thus hath the Lord of hosts said. Hew 
yc down trees, and cast a mount' against Jerusa- 
lem: tins is the city to be visited; she is wholly 
oppression in tlie midst of her. 

7 As a fountain casteth out her waters," so she 
casteth out iior wickedness : violence and spoil is 
heard in her;" before mo continually is grief and 
wounds. 

8 Be thou instructed,'' Jerusalem, lest my soul 
depart' from thee;" lest I make thee desolate, a 
land not inhabited. 

9 1 Thus saith the Lord of hosts. They shall 
thoroughly glean the remnant of Israel as a vine: 
turn back thy hand as a grape-gatherer into the 
baskets. 

10 To whom shall I sjicak, and give warning, 
that they may hear ?'^ Bciiold, their ear is uncir- 
cumcised,^ and they cannot hearken: behold, the 
word of the Lord is unto tiiem a reproach;' they 
have no delight in it. 

11 Tiierefore I tim full of the fury of the Lord; 
I am weary with holding in : I will pour it out 
upon the children abroad, and upon the assembly 
of young men together:" for even the husband 
with tlin wife siiall be taken, the aged with hi7n 
that is full of days.'' 

12 And their houses shall be turned unto others, 
with their fields and wives together: for I will 
stretch out my hand upon the inhabitants of the 
land, saith the Lord. 

13 For from the least of them even unto the 
greatest of them every one is given to covetous- 
ness ; and from the prophet even unto the priest 
every one dealeth falsely." 



al home. 


k 2 Kings 23:1. 1 ch 


. 8:20 


n. S 


OH!" 2 


17. 1 Or, pour on 


the 




neat 


^hot. » Isa 


57:21). 


Ezek 


7:11 


23. 1 


Prov. 


:13 


Zeph. 


3:7. 


• H, 


b. be loosed, or dt 


yointed. 


q Kr^ 


k. 2:1: 


g. ' 


sa. 53: 


1. > 


Acts ■ 


:51. 


>ch 


211 :«, 


9. "ch. 9 


21. vch. 


i^-.W; 


Deut. 


2«:3D. 


" .Mic 


3:5 


11. 





people, and both teachers and taught are united in main- 
taining falsehood, they should expect that he will vindi- 
cate the cause of truth by terrible manifestations of his 
wrath. Isa. 59:16-18. 

CHAPTER VL 

I. Benjamin; Jerusalem lay on the southern border of 
the tribe of Benjamin. The Benjaraitcs in great numbers 
would naturally take refuge in her from the invaders. But 
they are here warned to escape, as she will fall into the 
hands of the enemy. 

3. Slipphcrds with their flocks ; kings with their armies. 
Sttallfced; shall desti'oy her, us flocks consume pasturage. 

•I, 5. Prepare yc war — de.itroy Iter palaces; the imiiatient 
language of the enemy. They regret that they cannot 
reach her before evening, and resolve to continue the 
march through the night. 

7. Griif and wounds; the grief and wounds caused by 
her oppression and violence. 

9. Turn back thy hand; persist in gleaning. Jehoviih 
here addresses the enemy. 

10. Shall I speak; the prophet says this. 

II. Full — veari) with holding in; I have forborne to 
ape.ak, because the people would not listen ; but 1 can 
refrain no longer. " The fury of the Lord " is the coming 
wrath of the Lord, which he was commanded to proclaim. 



Destruction folloics sin. 



JEREMIAH VII. 



A call to repentance. 



A M .TOi. 14 Tlic}' have healed also the hurt* of 
6i/ "" the daughter of my people slightly," say- 
ing, Peace, peace ; when there is no peace.'' 

15 Were they ashamed when they had committed 
abomination ?" nay, tliey were not at all ashamed, 
neither could they blush ; therefore they shall fall 
among them tlmt fall:'' at the time that I visit 
tliem tliey shall be cast down, saith the Lord. 

16 Thus saith the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, 
and see, and ask'' for the old patlis,' where is the 
good way,'^ and walk therein," and ye shall find 
rest for your souls.' But they said. We will not 
walk therein. 

17 Also, I set watchmen over you,^ saying, 
Hearken to the sound of the trumpet. But they 
said. We will not hearken.'' 

18 "i Therefore hear, ye nations, and know, 
congregation, what is among them. 

19 Hear, earth: beliold, I will bring evil upon 
this people, even the fruit of their thouglits,' be- 
cause they have not hearkened unto my words, nor 
to my law,"' but rejected it. 

20 To what purpose cometh there to me incense 
from Sheba, and tlie sweet cane from a far coun- 
try ? your burnt-offerings are not acceptable, nor 
your sacrific^es sweet unto me.° 

21 Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold,! will 
lay stumbling-blocks before tliis people," and the 
fathers and tlie sons together shall fall upon them ; 
the neighbor and his friend sliall perish. 

22 Thus saith the Lord, Behold, a people cometh 
from the north country,'' and a great nation shall 
be raised from the sides of the earth. 

23 Tiiey shall lay hold on bow and spear; they 
are cruel, and iiave no mercy ; their voice roareth 
like the sea;'' and they ride upon horses, set in 
array as men for war against thee, daughter of 
Zion. 

2-1 We have heard the fame thereof: our hands 



• lleh. bruist, or irearh. i ch. f<:ll, 12. bLam.anl. cch.3:.'i. d Prov. 
20:1. ech.5U:n. f ch. 1^:15; Mil. 4:4. SSoiljl:7. h Col. 2:6. i Milt. 
11:29. J Ezek.3:17; Hab. 2:11. kZech.7:ll. iPro».l::31. inProv.2S:a. 
n Psa. 60:7-9; Isi.l:ll; Amos5:21,22; Mic. 6:0-*. o Ezek. 3:20; Horn 



14. They have healed; the false prophets and priests. 
Chap. 5:31. Slightli/; they have covered over the fester- 
ing wound of her iniquity, instead of probing it. 

l(i. Stand ye in the ways; to examine and decide whicli 
is the right way. Tlt£ old paths; those prescribed of old 
by God. 

17. Watchmen ; prophets. Sound of the trumpet; warn- 
ing you of approaching danger. Compare Ezek. 33:1-9. 

18. What !.s among them; what wickedness demanding 
my judgments. 

20. S/ic6a,- a region of southern Arabia. Burnt-offerings 
not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet; because they are the 
offerings of the wicked. Isa. 1:11-14. 

21. I will lay stumbling-blocks ; see note on chap. 4: 10. 
27. I have set thee; God addresses the prophet. A tower 

and a fortress ; chap. 1 : 18. Knov! and try their way ; by the 
trutb which thou proclaimest from me. 

2!). The bellows — the lead ; these were destroyed in the 
vain effort to separate the silver from the dross ; that is, 
to j)urify the people from sin. Lead was anciently used 
in the process of refining. 

'M. Reprobate silver ; that cannot be refined, and is there- 
fore worthless. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

9. God is slow to inflict punishment upon his people; 
it is only after expostulation and warning have proved 



wax feeble: anguish hath taken hold of us, and 
pain, as of a woman in travail.'' 

25 Go not forth into the field, nor walk by the 
way ; for the sword of the enemy and fear is on 
every side.^ 

26 1 daughter of my people, gird thee with 
sackcloth, and wallow thyself in ashes : ' make thee 
mourning," as for an only son, most bitter lamen- 
tation : for the spoiler shall suddenly come upon us. 

27 I have set thee for a tower and a fortress 
among my people, tliat thou mayest know and try 
their way. 

28 Tiiey arc all grievous revolters, walking with 
slanders :"■ they are brass and iron;'" they are all 
corrupters. 

21) The bellows are burned, the lead is consumed 
of the fire; the founder melteth in vain: for the 
wicked are not plucked away. 

30 Reprobate* silver shall men call them,'' be- 
cause the Lord hath rejected them. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1 Jeremiah is sent to call for true repentance, to prevent the Jews' cap- 
tivity. 8 He rejecteth their vain confidence. 12 by the example of 
Shiloh. 17 He thre.^teneth them for their idolatry. 21 He rejecteth 
the sacrifices of the disobedient. 29 He exhorteth to mourn for their 
abominations in Tophet, 32 and the judgments for the same. 

^HE word that came to Jeremiah from the 
Lord, saying, 

2 Stand in the gate of the Lord's house, and 
proclaim there this word, and say, Hear the word 
of the Lord, all ye o/" Judah, that enter in at these 
gates to worship the Lord. 

3 Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Is- 
rael, Amend your ways and your doings,-' and I 
will cause you to dwell in this ]ilace. 

4 Trust ye not in lying w^ords,^ saying. The tem- 
ple of the Lord, Tiie temple of the Lord, The 
temple of the Lord, are these. 



T 



11-9. pver.l. qIsa.S:30. r ch. 13:21 ; Prov. 1 :2T, 3^ ; Lam. 1 : 12 
4:10; Isa. 1:20. t ch. 25:34 ; Mic. 1:10. "Lam. l:lti. v oh. 9:4. 
1:22,23. lOi, Refuse, i Matt. -5:13. y Isa. 1:16, 17; Matt. 3: = . 
3:11; Matt. 3:9, 10. 



vain, that he gives them over, as he did Jerusalem of old, 
to desolating judgments. 

14, 15. The aim of all false doctrine is to flatter men 
with the hope of impunity in sin; and its result is to 
make them impudent and hardhearted, and thus plunge 
them into irremediable ruin. 

20. When men's hearts are full of rebellion, and their 
lives of iniquity, no multiplication of outward rites can be 
acceptable to God, or avert his dipleasiire. Isa. 58 : 1-4 ; 
Luke 18:9-14. 

21. When men do not love the truth, God leaves them 
to embrace falsehood, which becomes a stumbling-block, 
to their destruction. 

27. The way in which men treat God's faithful servants 
and their messages, is a true touchstone of their own 
character. 

28-30. They who cannot bo purified by God's disciiiline, 
must be destroyed by his judgments. 

CHAPTER YIL 

4. The temple of the Lord are these; these buildings ; the 
temple properly so called, with its several courts. They 
said, These are " the temple of the Lord." and therefore 
he will ilefend them and all who worship in them from 
injury. Thus the Jews put their trust in outward priv- 
ileges, and not in holiness of heart and life. 
845 



God expostulates 



JEREMIAH VII. 



with his people. 



5 For if yc thorouglily amend your ways and 
your doings ; if ye llioroujj^hiy execute judgment 
between a man anc^ liis neiglibor; 

6 /fye oppress not tlic stranger, the fatlierless, 
and the widow, and slied not innocent blood in this 
place, neither walk after other gods to your hurt r'' 

7 Then will I cause you to dwell in this place, 
in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever 
and ever.'' 

8 *i Behold, yc trust in lying words, that cannot 
profit. 

9 Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, 
and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal. 
and walk after other gods whom ye know not;*^^ 

10 And come and stand before me in this house,'' 
which is called by my name,* and say, We are de- 
livered to do all these abominations? 

11 Is this house, which is called by my name,'' 
become a den of robbers in your eyes?' Behold, 
even I have seen it, saith the Lord. 

12 But go ye now unto my place which was in 
Shiloh,'^ where I set my name at the first," and see 
what I did to it for the wickedness of my people 
Israel.' 

13 And now, because yo have done all these 
works, saith the Lord, and I spake unto you, ris- 
ing up early and s[)eaking,J but yc heard not;" 
and I called you, but ye answered not;' 

14 Therefore will I do unto this house, which is 
called by my uani(!, wherein ye trust, and unto the 
place which I gave to you and to your fatiicrs, as 
I have done to Shiloh. 

15 And I will cast you out of my sight,'" as I 
have cast out all your brethren, even the whole 
seed of Ephraim." 

10 Therefore jiray not tiiou for this people, nei- 
ther lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make 
intercession to me:" for 1 will not hear thee.'' 

17 IT Scest thou not what they do in the cities 
of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem ? 

18 The children gather wood, and the fathers 
kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough, 
to make cakes to the queen* of heaven, and to 
pour out drink-offerings unto other gods, that they 
may provoke me to anger. 



• Dout. B:H, I,'). bDcul4:in. c Ho!. 4:1, S; Rom, 2:2, 17, etc. J F,a>k 
23:.1!). • Ueb whtreaponmynamtismlUd. e 2 Clir. 0:M. f .Malt. 21 : l:j. 
Ilji«h. I»:l. I> Deul 12:11. i ch. 2(l:«; I Sam. -1:11,610.; P.-a. 78:00, lil. 
J 2Chr. aii:l.j k Noh. «:2U, .1U. 1 Isa. 05: 12; «ii:4 m 2 Kiiiga I7:2:t. 
n P«a. 78:07; Hoj. S);J. » I John 5:10. Pch. 15:1. t Or,/raini!, or tt'ori- 



10. We arc delivered to do all these abominations; more 
exactly, " Wc are delivered ; in order to do all these abom- 
inations." The words, " We are delivered," are those of 
the people e.^jiressiii^ tlieir confidence that tlieir relation 
to («od and fiis tcriiple makes them safe from all fear of 
evil. The words tliat follow, " in order to do all these 
abomiiiatioiiN," arc tho.se of the prophet, sliowiug the fruit 
of this false conruleiiee. 

11. A den oj rohhers; a den to protect robbers, since 
they trusted to it for protection in tlieir robberies. Com- 
pare Matt. 21:13; Mark 11:17. 

12. Skiloh; norlh of .krus:ilem, in the tribe of Ephraim. 
From Joshua to Samuel it w;is honored as the abode of 
tlic tiibernaclc and ark. .losh. 18:1; 1 8am. 1:3. 

LI. Ephraim : that is, the kingdom of Israel, of which 
Ephraim was the chief tribe. 

18. The queen of heaven; the moon, worshipped as a 
female deity. 

846 



10 Do thcv provoke me to anger ?i saith -^ m. sw. 
the Loud: do thiy not provoke themselves ««■ 
to the confusion of their own faces? 

20 Therefore thus saith the Lord God : Behold, 
mine anger and my fury shall be poured out upon 
this place, u]ioii man, and upon beast, and upon the 
trees of the field, and ufion the fruit of the ground ; 
and it shall burn, and shall not be quenched. 

21 Tl 'J'lius sailh the Lord of hosts, the God of 
Israel; Put your burnt-ofl'eriugs unto your sacri- 
fices, and eat flesh.'' 

22 For 1 spake not unto your fathers, nor com- 
manded them in the day that I brought them out 
of the land of Egypt, conceruiug' burut-oflerings 
or sacrifices:' 

23 But this thing commanded I them, saying, 
Obey my voice,' and I will be your God, afid ye 
shall be my people:" and walk ye in all the ways 
that I have commanded you, that it may be well 
unto you. 

24 But they hearkened not, nor inclined their 
car,^' but walked in the counsels and in the imagi- 
nation- of their evil heart,"' and went' backward, 
and not forward." 

25 Since the day that your fathers came forth 
out of the laud of Egypt unto this day, I have 
even sent unto you all my servants the prophets, 
daily rising up early and sending them: 

2() Yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined 
their ear, but hardened their neck:-' they did 
worse than their fathers."^ 

27 Therefore thou shalt speak all these words 
unto them; but they will not hearken to thee: 
thou shalt also call unto them ; but they will not 
answer thee. 

28 But thou shalt say unto them, This « a nation 
that obeyeth not the voice of the Lord their God, 
nor receivelh correction:^" truth is perished, and 
is cut off from their mouth. 

29 *i Cut off thy hair," Jcrii.';ale)7i, and cast it 
away, and take up a lamentation on high places; 
for the LoitD hath rejected and forsaken the gen- 
erati(ni of liis wrath. 

30 For the children of Judah have done evil in 
my sight, saith the Lord; they have set their 



inaiisliip q 1 Cor. 111:22. ' Amos 5:21. I lUh. ronarniti!; l)lr nialirr of. 
' 1 Sam 15:22; P.si. 4U:ri; Ho» 0:6. I Exod. 15:20; Deut. 0:3. u Kxod. 
19:5; Lev 20::). 12. » Psa. ^^:ll, 12. I Or, sluMornntas. " ch. I1:7,tf. 
iHeb. U'fre. »Hos.4:I0. y Noh. 9:17, 29. »ch.lfl:12. 1 Or, inJlriuliVu. 
"ch. Si-.a. liJob 1:20; Mic. 1:1(1. 



19. Me— themselves ; does the damage fall on me, or on 
thcm.sclves? 

21. Put your burnt-offerings unto your sncrifccs ; by the 
Mosaic law the burnt-offerings were to be wholly con- 
sumed on the altar; but of the peace-offerings a portion 
only was Vmrned, and upon the remainder the offerer feast- 
ed with his friends. They arc here told to eat tlieir 
biirnt-offerings, if they will, with dieir peace-ofTcrings, for 
Jehovah will not accept them. 

22. / spake not — concerning burnt-offerings ; I made not 
those, b\it love and obedience your main duty. Compare 
1 S;mi. l.'):22; I'sa. 50:8-15. 

2'J. Cut off thy hair ; as a sign of deep grief. Isa. l.'i : 2 ; 
22:12; Mieah 1:1C. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-15. As the Israelites in Samuel's time thought that 
the presence of Coil's ark would give them victory over 
the Philistines, though they repeiite.l nut of their trans- 



The calamities and 



JEREMIAH VIII. 



impenitence nf the Jews 



A. M. 3401. abominations lu tlie house which is called 
m. by my namo;^ to pollute it. 

31 And tiiey have built tlie higli places of To- 
pliet,'' which is in the valley of the son of Ilin- 
iioiu, to burn their sons and their daughters in the 
fire;" whicii I commanded thtm not, neither came 
it into* my heart. 

32 1 Therefore, beliold, the days come, saith the 
Lord, tliat it shall no more be called Tophct, nor 
Tlie valley of the son of Hiniiom, but The valley 
of slaughter : for they shall bury in Tophet, till 
there be no place." 

33 And the carcasses of this people shall be meat 
for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of 
the earth f and none shall fray them away. 

34 Tlien will I cause to cease from the cities of 
Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the 
voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the 
voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the 
bride:' for the land shall be desolate." 



CHAPTER VIII. 

1 The calamity of the Jews, botli dead and alive. 4 He upbraideth 
their foolish and shameless impenitency. 13 He showeth their griev- 
ous judgment, 18 and bewaileth their desperate estate. 

AT that time, saith the Lord, they shall bring 
out the bones of the kings of Judah, and the 
bones of his princes, and the bones of the priests, 
and the bones of the prophets, and the bones of 
tlie inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves:*' 

2 And they siiall spread them before the sun, 
and the moon, and all the host of heaven, whom 
tliey have loved, and whom they have served, and 
after whom they have walked, and whom they 
have sought, and wiiom they have worshipped:' 
they shall not be gathered, nor be buried ; they 
shall be for dung upon the face of the earth.' 

3 And death sliall be chosen rather than life by 
all the residue of them that remain of tiiis evil 
family,'^ which remain in all the places whither I 
have driven tiieni, saith the Lord of hosts. 

4 'i Moreover thou shalt say unto them, Thus 



> 2 KincTs •i\ : 


4,7; Ezek. 8:5. 


b 2Kiiigs a:3:IU. c Psi. 11)0.38. • lleb. 


upon, tl ch. 19 


(i, 11; Ezek H;S. 


etc. = Deut. aS:26; Psa. 79:2. fisa. 24:7, 


8; Hos. 2:11 


g Lev. 2C:3:); 


sa. 3:2ri. h Ezek. 37:1. i 2 Kings 2:J:5. 


J 2 Kings 9:37. 


t Rev. 9:G. 


John 5:40. n-SonE2:12. n John 9:41; 


Rom. 2: 17, etc. 


Malt. 13:6. 


t Or, Uie false pen of the scrides worketli for 



gression.s against him ; so the Jew.s in Jeremiah's day who 
burned incense to idols, and their descendants who cruci- 
fied the Saviour and persecuted his apostles, believed 
that God's temple, with its divinely appointed services, 
would make them secure from danger. All who now put 
their trust for salvation in outward ordinances and privi- 
leges, without inward repentance and obedience, are guilty 
of the same folly, and must come to the same ruin. Rom. 
2:28, 29. 

10. There is a limit in sin, beyond which God will no 
longer hear intercessory prayer or delay his judgments. 

18. When the members of a family or community sin 
together, they must also suffer together. 

21-23. God values outward services only as they are 
expressions of inward love and obedience, and he will not 
allow the former to be substituted for the latter. 

2t-34. AVhen men refuse to receive the correction of 
God's word, he will make them feel the power of his anger. 
The awful desolation of ancient Jerusalem is a solemn 
w:irning to all cities and nations of what awaits them if 
they imitate her crimes. 



saith the Lord; Shall they fall, and not ari.se? 
shall he turn away, and not return? 

5 Why then is this people of Jerusalem slidden 
back by a perpetual backsliding? they hold fast 
deceit, they refuse to return.' 

6 I hearkened and heard, but they spake not 
aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, 
saying, What have I done? every oue turned to 
his course, as the horse rusheth into tlic battle. 

7 Yea, the stork in the heaven knowetli her ap- 
pointed times; and the turtle and the crane and 
the swallow observe the time of their coming;'" 
but my people know not the judgment of the Lord. 

8 How do ye say, Wo are wise, and the law of 
the Lord is with us?" Lo, certainly in vain made 
he (Y.-" the pen of tlie scribes is in vain.* 

9 The wise men are asliamed,* they are dismayed 
and taken : lo, they have rejected the word of the 
Lord; and what wisdom^ is in tliem?'' 

10 Therefore will I give their wives unto others, 
and their fields to tliein that shall inherit them: 
for every one, from the least even unto the great- 
est, is given to covetousness;'' from the prophet 
even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely. 

11 For they have healed the hurt of the daughter 
of my people slightly, saying. Peace, peace ; when 
there is no peace.'' 

12 Were they ashamed when they had committed 
abomination? nay, they were not at all asliamed, 
neither could they blush ; therefore shall they fall 
among them that fall: in the time of their visita- 
tion they sliall be cast down, saith the Lord.' 

13^1 will surely consume" them, saith tlic Lord : 
there shall be no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the 
fig-tree, and the leaf shall fade ; and the things that 
I have given them shall pass away from them.' 

14 Why do we sit still? assemble yourselves, 
and let ns enter into the defenced cities, and let 
us be silent tiierc: for the Lord our God hath 
])ut us to silence, and given us water of gall' to 
drink," because we have sinned against the Lord. 

15 We looked for peace,'' but no good came; and 
for a time of health, and behold trouble! 



filhehood; 


Isa 


10 


1,2. 


t Or 


, Have 


tliey be 


rnn 


hnmetl. 


§I1p 


b. tlie 


wistlom 


oftvlmt tki 


"g- 


I' 


sa. H: 


2U. 


q laa. 


5(i:ll, 


' h 


z-k 


!3 


HI. ! 


Deut 


32 


:;I5; 


Hos. 5:9. 


Or 


III 


gatlie 


iilg 


/ will 


:onsuin 


1 


Uo 


. 2 






po 


50/1. 


-ch. 23:15 


" 


ch. 


14:19 























CHAPTER VIII. 

1. Tliey shall bring out the bones of the kings— nut of their 
graves; the enemy shall do this, probably in their search 
for hid treasures. Such an exposure of the bones was a 
great indignity. 

4. Shalt they fall — not return? a lamentation over the 
incorrigible perverseness of the people. Shall the fall of 
my covenant people be final? Shall Judah turn away from 
her God, and never return ? 

1. Tlic time of their coming; their annual return in the 
spring. 

13. No grapes — the leaf shall fade ; the gleaning of the 
vine and fig-tree, and the w-ithering of their leaves, repre- 
sent the complete desolation of the land hy the armies 
of the Chaldettns. And the things — shall pass away from 
them; rather, " and I will appoint'those who shall overrun 
them." 

14. Why do we sit still? assemble yourselves; the words of 
the people, exhorting each other to flee into the defenced 
cities. 

847 



Tkt prophet lavientctk 



JEREMIAH IX. 



the sins of the people. 



16 The snorting of liis horses was lieard from 
Dan:" the wliole land trembled at the sound of 
the neighing of his strong ones;" for they are 
come, and have devoured the hind, and all that is 
in it;' the city, and those tliat dwell therein. 

17 For, behold, I will send serpents, cockatrices, 
among you, which will not be cliarmed,'^ and they 
shall bite you, saith the Loiu). 

18 'i When I would comfort myself against sor- 
row,'' my heart is faint in* me. 

19 Bciiold the voice of the cry of the daughter 
of my people because of them that dwell in a far 
country:'" Is not the Lord in Ziou?' is not her 
king in her?»' Why have they provoked me to 
anger with their graven images, and with strange 
vanities?" 

20 The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and 
■we are not saved.' 

21 For the hurt of the daughter of my people 
am I hurt; I am black;' astonishment hath taken 
hold on me. 

22 Is f/ure no balm in Gilead?'' is there no phy- 
sician there?' why then is not the health of the 
daughter of my people recovered ?* 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 Jeremiah lamenteth the Jews for their manifold sins, 9 and for their 
judgment. \2 Disobedience is the cause of their bitter calamity. 
17 He exhorteth to mourn for tiieir destruction, 23 and to trust not in 
themselves, but in God. 2-5 He threatenetii both Jews and Gentiles. 

On that my head were' waters, and mine eyes 
a fountain of tears, that I might weep day 
and night for the slain of the daughter of my peo- 
ple!™ 

2 Oh that I had in the wilderness a, lodging- 
place of wayfaring men ; that 1 nught leave my 
people, and go front them ! for they be all adulter- 
ers," an assembly of treacherous men." 

3 And they bend their tongues like their bow 
for lies:'' but they are not valiant for the truth 
upon the earth;'' for tlusy proceed from evil to 
evil,'' and they know not \w%' saith the Loiti). 

4 Take ye heed every one of his neighbor,'' and 
trust ye not in any brother: for every brother 



» Oh. 4:15. t Judg. 5:K. ' \Mi. Ilie fiiliuss tlierrof. e P»a. fe: I. .0. 
J Lam. l:l(i, 17. t Heb. upon. I Hcb. Ilu counlry of Ihcm llial are fur off. 
«I«a. :»:!. f i'sa. 13o:Jl. % U^.. S-V.-H. h Doul. :W:-J1. i Matt. WM-l-J. 
J .loel aii. k ch. 4I!:11; Gen. a7:-ij. 1 Matt. 9: 1 1, 1-J. % \U^. gont .ipj 
I H-b. Who viiU give my hentl. m |«a.«:l; I.am. '2:11; 'JHs. n ch 5:7, 



111. Hishorsca; the horses of tlie invader. From Dan; 
chap. 4 : 15. 

18. Wken I would comfort myself; the words of the 
prophet. 

19. Wliij have t lie y provoked me; Jehovah answers, that 
it is not liis absence from Zion, but her sins tliat have 
given the enemy power over lier. 

20. The harvest is past — we are not saved ; the worrls of the 
people lamenting that all their expectations of help and 
deliverance have passed away. 

22. No Ijalm — no phijsinnn ; has Judah no almiplity help- 
er? The balm of (iiliMil wiis cniplnyed in healing wounds. 
Why then — recovered/ the itniilied answer is, Not for want 
of balm or a physician, but because she persists in lur 
rebellion. 

INSTRUCTION'S. 

1-18. God's power to curse is as unlimited as his power 
to bless. With infinite ease he can brinj; upon the stron- 
gest of his enemies calamity after calamity, until death 
shall be chosen rather than life. 
848 



Will utterlv suiiplant, and every neighbor a. m. moi. 

•11 11 " -.1 1 1 ^- O. nbout 

will walk with slanders. m. 

5 And they will deceive* every one his neighbor, 
and will not speak the truth: they have taught 
their tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves 
to commit inicjuity. 

C Thy habitation is in the midst of deceit; 
through deceit they refuse to know me, saith the 
L(iiu). 

7 Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts. Behold, 
I will melt them,' and try them ; for how shall I 
do for the daughter of my people? 

8 Their tongue M a.s- an arrow shot out;" itspeak- 
eth deceit: one speaketh peaceably to his neigh- 
bor with his mouth," but in heart* he layeth his 
wait.* 

9 1 Shall I not visit them for these things ? saith 
the Lord: shall not my soul be avenged on such 
a nation as this ? 

10 For the mountains will I take up a weeping 
and wailing, and for the habitations* of the wil- 
derness a lamentation, because they arc burned 
up,' so that none can pass through them : neither 
can men hear the voice of the cattle: both the 
fowl of the heavens and'' the beast arc fled ; they 
are gone. 

11 And I will make Jerusalem heaps,'*' a/id a den 
of dragons : and 1 will make the cities of Judah 
desolate." without an inhabitant. 

12 "i Who is the wise man, that may understand 
this?'* and u'ho is he to whom the mouth of the 
Lord hath spoken, that he may declare it, for 
what the land perishetli and is burned up like a 
wilderness, that none jjasseth through ? 

13 And the Loud saith, Because they have for- 
saken my law which I set before them, and have 
not obeyed my voice, neither walked therein;*' 

14 But have walked after the imagination' of 
their own heart, and after Baalim, which their 
fathers taught them: 

lu Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the 
God of Israel ; Behold, I will feed them,'' rir« this 
people, with wormwood, and give them water of 
gall to drink." 



8. oMic.7:i-5. P l..a. .5B:;t, 4. q Judc 3. r 2 Tim. .1:13. ■ Hex. 4:1-0. 
1 Or, friend. 'Or, mark. ilsa. 1:35. u Tsa. (H::l, 4. « I'»a. 2^:3. t Hob. 
in Ihe midst of him. lOr.ti'ailforhim. »Or.pa.>Iiirtj. I Or, rfMototr. 1 Heb. 
from Ike fowl even lo. " Lam. 2:2, 7, 8. • Heb. desolation, i Ho«. 14:9. 
»Deut.2U:al-2S. t Or, JIuWorn/iMJ; ch.7:a4. iF«i.50:5. >Lam3:lS,19. 



20. To those who fail of God's great salvation, it will bo 
a most bitter reflection that they have misimproved abun- 
dant opportunities which will never return. 

22. t'lirist the great I'liysician is near to the uncon- 
verted, as well as to his church, with the lialm of salva- 
tion in his hand. If any remain unhealed, .ind die in their 
sins, it will be because they refuse his help, freely and 
graciously proflered. 

ClIAPTKB IX. 

2. A todfring-place of wnyfnniii; tnrn ; anciently, as now, 
such ludgiiig-places were erected for the accommodation 
of caravans. 

11. Thii linhilnlion is in the mid.it cf deceit ; Jehovah hero 
addresses the [iniphet. 

s. An arrow shot out ; rather, "a murderous arrow." 

10. For the mountain.s ; that is, on account of their im- 
pending desolation. The fowl — the beast arc fed ; a figure 
In exiiress utter desolation. Compare chap. 4:25. 

H. liaalim ; images of Baal. 



A call to mourning 



JEREMIAH X. 



God to bi feared, not iJuls 



A.M. 3501. 16 I will scatter them also amonn: tlie 

H. C, about. , , ... , °. .. 

m. heathen," whom neither they nor tlieir la- 
thers have known : and I will send a sword after 
them, till I have consumed them. 

17 1i Thus saith tlie Lord of hosts, Consider ye, 
and call for the mourning women, that they may 
come ; and send for cunning icomcn, that they may 
come : 

18 And let them make haste, and take up a 
wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with 
tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters. 

19 For a voice of wailing is iicard out of Zion, 
How are we spoiled! we are greatly confounded, 
because we have forsaken the land, because our 
dwellings have cast us out. 

20 Yet hear the word of the Lord, ye women, 
and let your ear receive the word of his mouth,'' 
and teach your daughters wailing, and every one 
her neighbor lamentation. 

21 For death is come up into our windows, a7ul 
is entered into our palaces, to cut off the chil- 
dren from without, and the young men from the 
streets. 

22 Speak, Thus saith the Lord, Even the car- 
casses of men shall fall as dung upon tlie open 
field, and as the handful after the harvest-man, 
and none shall gather theiji. 

23 If Thus saith the Lord, Let not the wise man 
glory in his wisdom, neither let tlie mighty man 
glory in his might, let not the rich ma7i glory in 
his riches: 

24 But let him that glorieth glory in this, that 
he understandeth and knoweth me,"= that I am the 
Lord which exercise loving-kindness, judgment, 
and righteousness, in the earth : for in these things 
I delight, saith the Lord.'' 

25 1 Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that 
1 will punish' all t/m7i which are circumcised with 
the uncircumciscd;'^ 

26 Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the chil- 
dren of Ammon, and Moab, and all that arc in the 
utmo.>t corners,^ that dwell in the wilderness : for 
all these nations are uncircumcised. and all the 
house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart.'' 



CHAPTER X, 



» Lev 


20:.33; Deut. 23:04. 


bis 


a. 32:9, l.^. 


c 1 Cor. 1 


:ni. 


d Mi 


. 7;1S. 


• Ileb. V 


isit upon, e Rom. 2 


H. !l. 


t Heb. cm 


off into corners. 


or hav 


ing the 


corners 


f their hair polled, f 


Rom 


2:28,29. 


s Lev. IH 


:i; 21 


:2t. 


1 Heb. 


statutes 


or ordinances are vat 


ity. 


blsa. 40:19,etc. i Ps 


1.115 


ii.etc 


; Hab. 



23. Glory in his wisdom — his might — his riches; all these 
resources would fail to deliver the Jews from the calami- 
ties which God was about to bring upon them. 

21. TImt he understandeth and knoweth me; because a true 
knowledge of God, which includes love and obedience, is 
tlie only salvation of individuals or of nations. 

25. Punish — circumcised with the uncircumcised ; make no 
distinction between the circumcised Jews and the uncir- 
cumcised Gentiles ; because, as the next verse explains, 
tlie Jews are " uncircumcised in the heart." 

26. Are in the utmost corners ; or, as the margin, "have 
the corners of their hair shorn;" a description of the 
Arabian tribes. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1, 2. While God's faithful servants abhor the ways of 
wicked men, and loathe their companionship, they feel 
deep compassion for them in view of the ruin which they 
are bringing upon themselves. 

3-9. In this perverse and fallen worLl il is hard to find 
■•il 



1 Tlie unequal romparison of God and iJfils. 17 The prophet cxhortctli 
to flee from tlie calamity to come. 19 He l:inunteth the spoil of the 
t.abernacle ly foolish pastors. 23 He maketh an humble supplication. 

HEAR ye the word which the Lord speaketh 
unto you, house of Israel. 

2 Thus saith the Lord, Learn not the way of 
the heathen,'-' and be not dismayed at the signs of 
heaven; for the heathen are dismayed at them. 

3 For the customs of tiie people are vain:'' for 
one cutteth a tree out of the forest, the work of 
the hands of the workman, with the axe." 

4 They deck it with silver and with gold ; they 
fasten it with nails and with hammers, that it 
move not. 

5 They arc upright as the palm-tree,' Init speak 
not : they must needs be borne, because they can- 
not go. Be not afraid of them; for they cannot 
do evil, neither also is it in them to do good. 

6 Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, 
Lord ;^ thou art great, and thy name is great in 
might. 

7 Who would not fear thee, King of nations?'' 
for to thee doth it appertain :^ forasmuch as among 
all the wise men of the nations, and in all their 
kingdoms, there is none like unto thee.' 

8 But they are altogether' brutish and foolish : 
the stock is a doctrine of vanities."" 

9 Silver spread into plates is brought from Tar- 
sliish, and gold from Uphaz," the work of the Avork- 
man, and of the hands of the founder : blue and 
purple is their clothing: they are all the work of 
cunning men. 

10 But tlie Lord is the true God,"' he is the liv- 
ing God,° and an everlasting King;*'' at his wrath 
the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not 
be able to abide his indignation. 

11 Thus shall ye say unto them,* The gods that 
have not made the heavens and the earth, even 
they shall perish from the earth, and from under 
these heavens." 

12 He hath made the earth by his power, he 
hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath 
stretched out the heavens by his discretion.'' 



2:19: 1 Cor. 12:2. jExod. 15:11. k Rev. 15:4. i Or, il likclk thrc 


iPsa. 


89:0. tKA,. in one. or at once. mlsa. 41:29. o Ban. 10:5. 1 Hfb 


God of 


(ru(/i,- Psa. 31:5. o 1 Tim. 0:17. • lUh. King of tternUy. P Ps» 


. IU:1«. 


t In the Chaldean language. qZech. 13:2. rch. 51: 15-19. 





any who are worthy of perfect confidence ; but when the 
mass of a people have become thoroughly false and treach- 
erous, their destruction is at hand. 

12-16. The Iiighest wisdom of statesmen and rulers is 
to understand that the prosperity of a nation lies in fear- 
ing and obeying God, and its destruction in forgetting him 
and trampling under font his laws. 

25, 26. When God's covenant people imitate the sins of 
the ungodly, they must expect to suffer punishment witli 
them. 

CHAPTER X. 

2. Ttie signs of heaven; the positions of the stars and 
planets, eclipses, etc., by which the heathen supposed 
tiiat the destinies of men were controlled. From the van- 
ity of these the prophet naturally passes, in the following 
verses, to consider the vanity of idolatry. 

3-5. One cutteth a tree— to do good ; compare Isa. 40:1». 
20; 44:9-19; 45:20. 

9. Uphaz; perhaps the same as Ophir. 
849 



Folly of id ok try. 



JEREMIAH XI. 



TTie covcrmnt uilh Israel. 



13 When he uttcrcth his voice," there is a multi- 
tude" of waters in t]ic lieavciis. ami he causetli the 
vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth ;'' he 
maketli ligiitnings with* rain, and bringeth forth 
the wind out of his treasures. 

14 p]vcry man is brutish in his knowledge:*'^ 
every founder is confounded by the graven image; 
for his molten image is falsehood, and there is no 
breath in them. 

15 They arc vanity, and the work of errors : in 
the time of their visitation they shall perish. 

16 The portion of Jacob is not like them:'' for 
he is the former of all things ; and Israel is the 
rod of his inheritance :'' The Lord of hosts is his 
name.'' 

17 *[ Gather up thy wares out of the land, 
inhabitant'' of the fortress. 

18 For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will sling 
out the inhabitants of the land at this once,''' and 
will distress them, that they may find it .w.'' 

19 "i Woo is me for my hurt! my wound is griev- 
ous : but I said, Truly this is a grief, and I must 
bear it.' 

20 My tabernacle is spoiled, and all my cords 
are broken : my children are gone fortii of me, and 
they are not; there is none to stretch forth my tent 
any more, and to set up my curtains. 

21 For the pastors are become brutish, and have 
not sought the Lord :' therefore they shall not 
prosper, and all their (locks shall be scattered. 

22 Beliold, the noise of the bruit is come, and a 
great commotion out of the north country, to make 
the cities of .Juduh desolate, and a den of dragons. 

23 1 Lord, I know that the way of man is not 
in himself: it is not in man that walketh to direct 
his steps." 

24 Lord, correct me, but with judgment; not 
in thine anger,' lest thou bring me to nothing." 

25 Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that 
know thee not,"' and upon the families that call 
not on thy name : lor they have eaten up Jacob, 
and devoured him, and consumed him," and have 
made his habitation desolate. 



CHAPTER XI. 



• Job n8:34. • Or, noise, b Psa. 135:7. t Or, /or. I Or, viore brutish 
thantolmow. c Tsa. fl-J:6; 04:8. <1 I'm. 18:5. o Dent. 32;9; Psa. 71:2. 
f Jga. 47:4. * Heb. inhabilresit. t 1 Sam. a5:'J9. h Ezok. 0:10. i Mic. 
7:9. j ch. 2:8; Ezflk. 34:'i-10; Zoch. 1U;3. k Prov. 10:1; 29:44. I Psl. 



H. Every man; that is, every idolater. 

17. Gather up thy wares; as one aliout to enter upon a 
journey. T lio people of .lorusalcni arc warned to prej)are 
for going into captivity. Of the fortress ; or of tlie bc- 
isicged city. 

19. Woe u me; Jerusalem now speaks. 

21. Tlie pastors; the rulers of .Tiidali and JcruRalem. 
Chap. 2:8. 

22. Bruit; rumor, report of the invading army. Drng- 
ons; the original word means wild animals of llic jackal 
family that inlial)it ruins. 

23. Is not III himself; in his own power. The prophet 
acknowledges God's supremo control over himself and his 
people. 

24. With judgment ; the same as " in measure." Isa. 2" : 8. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. In God's word we have a perfect rule of faith and 
practice, and have no occasion to look to signs and omens, 
as the heathen do, to learn citlier our duly or our destiny. 

3-l(i. Tlio living (lod alojie, wlio made heaven and earth, 
can help and save his worsliiiipcrs. All gods of human 
workmaiisliij) must iiorish witli tlnii- makers. 



1 Jeremin.h proclaimeth God's covenant 8 robnketh the Je\vs disobeying 
thereof, II prophesieth evils to come upon them, 18 and upon the men 
of .\na(tlotli, for conspiring to kill Jeremiah. 

'^piIE word that came to Jeremiah from the 
J_ Lord, saying, 

2 Hear ye the words of this covenant, and speak 
unto the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem ; 

3 And say thou unto them, Thus saith the Lord 
God of Israel ; Cursed be the man that obeyeth 
not the words of this covenant," 

4 Which I commanded your fathers in the day 
that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, 
from the iron furnace,'' saying. Obey my voice and 
do them, according to all wliich I command vou : 
so shall ye be my people, and I will be your 
Godi'i 

5 'i'hat I may perform the oath which I have 
sworn unto your fathers,'' to give them a land flow- 
ing with milk and honey, as it w this day." Then 
answered I, and said, So be it,^ Lord. 

6 Then the Lord said unto me. Proclaim all 
these words in the cities of Judah, and in the 
streets of Jerusalem, saying, Ilear ye the words 
of this covenant, and do them.' 

7 For 1 earnestly protested unto your fathers in 
the day that 1 brought them u]) out of the land of 
Egypt, eirn unto this day, rising early and pro- 
testing," saying. Obey my voice. 

8 Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their car. 
but walked every one in the imagination* of their 
evil heart: therefore I will bring upon them all 
the words of this covenant, which I commanded 
them to do; but they did them not. 

9 And the Lord said unto me, A conspiracy is 
found among the men of Juilah, and among the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem. 

10 They are turned back to the iniquities of 
their forefathers, which refused to hear my words ;'' 
and they went after other gods to serve them : the 
house of Israel and the house of .ludah have bro- 
ken my covenant which I made with their fathers. 



0:1; ch. 311:11. i Heb diminish me. " P«a. 79:0,7. n Lam. 2:22. o Doiit. 
27:2fi; Gal. 3:19. pDeut. 4:29. q ch. 7:21. r Dcut. 7:12, 13. • Pm. 195:S- 
11. 1 Hob. Ariun; Deut. 27:15-20. « Kom. 2:13; Jm. 1:22. u ch. 7:KI. 
etc. •Or, sru46or«ness; ch. 7:24; 9:14. v Kick. 80:27-30. 



19-22. God will not overlook the transgressions of his 
own pcdple, but will visit them with afilictions and chas- 
tisement uiilil tliey learn tliat in obeyhig him alono they 
can find lilcssediuas and salvation. 

2:j, 21. Kvery true child of God deeply feels his inability, 
williout (iod's help, to direct his slcjis. or to liear the just 
punishment of his sins. It is his con.stanf prayer that 
God would keep him in the ways of lioliucss, and chasten 
him wilh gentleness, ."SO that the discipline shall not over- 
whelm, l)ut i>urify him and prepare him for heaven. Cliap. 
46:28; I'sa. 38:1. 

25. The severity of the fatherly chastisements which 
God inllicts upon his own people, is a solemn warning to 
the ungodly of the utter destruction which awaits them. 
Luke 23:31; 1 Pet. 4:17, 18. 

CHAPTER XI. 

4. Dollicm; the "words of this covenant." 

5. So be it ; may they thus obey thy coveuant and inherit 
the hind. 

!l. A conspiracy; to break God's covenant, as the next 
verse shows. 



The cities of .Tudah threatened. 



JEREMIAH XII. 



Ruin of the wicked foretold. 



A. M. 339r. lit Tliorofore, thus saitli the Loud, Be- 
B.^aixiiii ]jy[|j^ J ^^jjj )j,.j,jg g^.ji yp„,j them, wliich 

they shall not be able to escape;' and though 
tliey shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto 
them. 

12 Then shall the cities of Judah and inhabitants 
of Jerusalem go, and cry unto the gods unto whom 
tlicy offer incense:-' but they sliall not save them 
at all in the time of their trouble.* 

13 For according to the number of thy cities 
were thy gods,'' Judah ; and according to the 
number of tiic streets of Jerusalem have ye set up 
altars to that shameful thing,* even altars to burn 
incense unto Baal. 

14 Therefore pray not thou for this people, nei- 
ther lift up a cry or prayer for them :'' for I will 
not licar them in the time that they cry unto mc 
for tiieir trouble.* 

15 What liath my beloved to do in my house,' 
seeing slie hath wrought lewdness with many,'' and 
tlie iioly flesh is passed from thee?'' when thou 
doest evil,^ then thou rejoicest.'' 

16 The Lord called thy name, A green olivc- 
tree,"-' fair, and of goodly fruit: with tiie noise of 
a great tumult he hath kindled fire upon it, and 
the branches of it are broken. 

17 For the Lord of hosts, that planted thee,'' 
hath pronounced evil against thee, for the evil 
of the house of Israel and of the house of Ju- 
dah, which they have done against themselves to 
provoke me to anger in oB'ering incense unto 
Baal. 

18 IT And the Lord hath given me knowledge 
of it,' and I know it: then thou showedst me their 
doings.' 

19 But I icas like a lamb or an oxi/iat is brought 
to the slaugiiter ; and I knew not that they had de- 
vised devices against me,'' sayi?ig, Let us destroy 
the tree with the fruit thereof,' and let us cut him 
off from the land of the living, that his name may 
be no more remembered.' 

20 But, Lord of hosts, that judgest right- 
eously, that triest the reins and tlie heart,'" let me 
see thy vengeance on them : for unto thee have I 
revealed my cause." 



• Heb. go forth of. • Deut. 32:37. t Heb. evil, b ch. a;a8. I Heb 
s4ame,- ch. 3:24; Hos. 9:10. c ch 7:16; Exod. 32:10. iMnh.evil. I Heb. 
is to my bdoved in my house, il Malt. 22:11. <= Hag. 2: 12-14. 1 Or, thy 
evil is. fProv. 2:U. 6 Rom. 11:17. h ch. 2:21. i Amos 3:7. J Ezek. 
8:6, etc. k ch, 1-<:13. • Heb. stalk with his bread. I Luke 20:10-1.5. 
ml Chr. 28:9; Rev. 2:23. iirsa..57:l. o ha. 30: 10; Amos 2:12; 7:13, 16; 



15. Tlie lioly flesh ; the flesh of the sacrifices. Ilag. 2: 12. 
h passed from thee; is rejected by God as unclean, with the 
accessory idea that it sliall cease to be offered during the 
approaching captivity. 

18. Tke Lord Imlli given mc knoiclcdgc; of the conspiracy 
of the men of Anathoth against my life. To this the re- 
mainder of the present chapter relates. 

19. A lamb — brought to the .slaughter; unresisting and un- 
conscious of its fate. / knew not ; that is, before Jehovah 
revealed it to me. 

21. Anathoth; the birthplace and home of Jeremiah. 
Chap. 1:1. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1-17. God never fails to fulfil his promises to such as 
keep his covenant, whether nations or individuals ; and 
he will certainly execute his threatenings upon all who 
break it. 



21 Tlicrefore, thus saith the Lord of the men 
of Anathoth, tliat seek tliy life, saying, Prophesy 
not in the name of tiie Lord," that thou die not 
by our hand : 

22 Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, Be- 
hold, I will punish* them : the young men shall 
die by the sword ; their sons and their daughters 
shall die by famine: 

23 And there shall be no remnant of them : for 
I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, even 
the year of their visitation.'' 

CHAPTER XII. 

1 Jeremiah, complaining of the wicked's prosperity, by faith seeth their 
ruin. 5 God ndmonisheth him of his brethren's treachery against 
iiim, 7 and lamentfth his heritage. 14 He promiseth to the penitent 
return from captivity. 

T;) IGHTEOUS art thou, Lord," when I plead 
1 \) with thee: yet let me talk* with thee oi thy 
judgments : Wherefore doth the way of the wicked 
prosper?'' wherefore are all they happy that deal 
very treacherously? 

2 Thou hast planted them, yea, they have taken 
root : they grow,^ yea, they bring forth fruit : thou 
art near in their mouth," and far from their reins. 

3 But thou, Lord, knowest me:' thou hast 
seen me and tried my heart toward" thee: pull 
them out like sheep for the slaughter, and pre- 
pare them for the day of slaughter." 

4 How long shall the land mourn, and the herbs 
of every field wither, for the wickedness of them 
that dwell therein?'' the beasts are consumed, and 
the birds; because they said. He shall not see our 
last end. 

5 H If thou hast run with tlie footmen, and they 
have wearied thee, then how canst thou contend 
with horses? and if m the land of peace, w/jf rem 
thou trustedst, they wearied thee, then how wilt thou 
do in the swelling of Jordan?" 

G For even thy brethren, and the house of thy 
father, even they have dealt treacherously with 
thee;" yea, they have called a multitude after 
thee:'y believe them not, though they speak fair 
words' unto thee. 

7 11 have forsaken my house,'- I have left ray 



Mio.2:6. MUb. visit upon. l>Luke 19:44. q Psa, 51:4 ; Dan. 9:7. 1 Or, 
reason the case, r Job 21:7, etc.; Psa. 73:.3, elc. 5 Heb. ^o on, >Tit.l:16. 
1 Psa. 17:3; 139:1,23. II Heb. iivM. " Jas. .5:5. v Psa. 107:34. "Josh. 
3:15. xMic.7:6. ^ Or, cried after thee fully, y Prov. 26:24, 25. "Heb. 
good things, z Psa. 78:59, 00. 



18-23. God understands all the secret plots of the wicked 
against the righteous, and he can easily expose them, and 
deliver his servants from them ; but they must not hesitate 
to declare his whole counsel, even at the hazard of life. 

CHAPTER XII. 

5. If thou hast run — the swelling of Jordan; Jehovah's an- 
swer to the prophet, rebuking his impatience, and bidding 
him prepare for severer trials. " The sweUing of Jordan," 
is literally, " the pride of Jordan." Whether we understand 
this of its swollen flood, which the traveller is compelled 
to ford, or of the thickets which line its banks and are the 
habitation of wild beasts, chap. 49:19, it is a figure for 
great difliculties and dangers. 

6. Even thy brethren ; the men of Anathoth. If even they 
have dealt treacherously with thee, prepare to encounter 
still greater trials fi'om the rulers of Jerusalem. 

851 



God^s care for his people. 



JEREMIAH XIII. 



hcritacrc ; I have j^ivcn the dearly beloved of ray 
soul into the hand of her enemies. 

8 My heritage is unto me as a lion in the for- 
est; it crieth out' against nic: therefore have I 
hated it. 

9 My heritage is unto me as a speckled bird,* 
the birds round about arc against her; come ye," 
assemble all the beasts of the field, come'' to 
devour. 

10 Many pastors have destroyed my vineyard, 
they have trodden my portion under foot, tiioy 
have made my pleasant portion' a desolate wil- 
derness. 

11 Tliey have made it desolate, and being deso- 
late it mourneth unto me ; the wliole land is made 
desolate, because no man laycth it to heart.*' 

12 Tlie spoilers are come upon all high places 
through the wilderness: for the sword of the 
Lord shall devour from the one end of the land 
even to the other end of the land : no flesh shall 
have peace. 

13 They have sown wheat, but shall reap thorns:'' 
they have put themselves to pain, but shall not 
profit: and they' sliall be ashamed of your reve- 
nues because of the fierce anger of the Lord. 

14 H Thus saith the Lord against all mine evil 
neighbors, that touch tlie inheritance which I have 
caused my people Israel to inherit ;'' l>ehold. I will 
pluck them out of their laml, and jiluck out tiie 
house of Judah from among tiiem. 

15 And it shall come to pass, after that I have 
))lucked them out I will return, and have corapas- 
isiou on them," and will bring them again, every 
man to his heritage, and every man to his land. 

IG And it shall come to i)ass, if they will dili- 
gently learn the ways of my people,' to swear by 
my name. The Lord liveth ; as tiiey taught my 
))eople to swear by Baal ; then shall they be built 
in the midst of my people.^' 

17 But if they will not obey,'' I will utterly pluck 
up and destroy that nation, saith the Lord. 



• Hob. lovt of. t Or, yelleth: Heb. givtih out hh voice. I Or, bird hav- 
ing talons. • Isi. 55:9. » Or. cause Hum to come. I Heb. portion of desire. 
>> hi. 4i:-i5. cLev. atillO. 1 Or, yc <1 Zcoh. a:8, 9. « D«ut. 30:3; Ezck. 



9. A speckled bird ; a bird of prey with variegated colors, 
which is an object of liatred and persecution to the otlicr 
birds. Come ye; a call to the nations to destroy Jerusalem. 

10. Pastors; hero heathen rulers, tlie same as "sjjoilcrs," 
ver. lii. 

13. T/tctj liave sown; that is, the Jews. These words 
describe tlie disappointment of all their hopes, especially 
their trust on alliances with the heathen. Your revenues ; 
the result of your vain endeavors. 

14. Mine evil neighbors; Jehovah calls the surroundinj;; 
lieathen nations his neiglibors, because his dwelling-place 
was in Jerusalem. / will pluck them out of their land; by 
causing them to be carried into captivity. From among 
them; from being among them: I will remove my people 
from the midst of these nations to Babylon. The captivity 
of Judah was followed by that of the surrounding nations 
that had hated and persecuted her. 

16. If they ; these lieathen nations. Ijxirn the ways of my 
jtioplc; become proselytes to their religion. Eph. 2: 15-21;. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. God does not forbid us to iilead with him concerning 
his dealings, if it be done in the spirit of deep reverence 
and childlike confidence. Exod. 32:11-11; Num. 11:13-21: 
l«a. 03:17-19; 01:9-12; Acts 22: 17-21. 

><52 



Type of a linen gird'.. 

CHAPTER XIII. n.c.^i'g^ 

1 In the type of a linen girdle, hidden at Euphrates. God prcfipurcth 
the destruction of his people. I'J Under the paniljle of the bottle* 
filled with wine he foretelleth their drunkenness in misery. 15 He 
exhorteth to prevent their future judymenta. 22 He showeth their 
abominations are the cause thereof. 

THU.S saith the Lord unto me, Go and get thee 
a linen girdle, and ])Ut it upon thy loins, and 
put it not in water. 

2 So 1 got a girdle according to the word of the 
Lord, and put it on my loins. 

3 And the word of the Lord came unto me the 
second time, saying, 

4 Take the girdle that thou hast got, which is 
upon thy loins, and arise, go to Euphrates, and 
hide it there in a hole of tlie rock. 

5 So I went, and hid it by Euphrates, as the 
Lord commanded mo. 

G And it came to pass after many days, that the 
Lord said unto me. Arise, go to Euphrates, and 
take the girdle from thence, which 1 commanded 
thee to hide there. 

7 Then I went to Euphrates, and digged, and 
took the girdle from the place where I had hid it: 
and behold, the girdle was marred, it was profit- 
able for nothing. 

8 Then the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, 

9 Thus saith the Lord, After this manner will I 
mar the pride of Judah, and the great pride of 
Jerusalem.' 

10 This evil people, which refuse to hear my 
words, which walk in the imagination" of their 
heart,^ and walk after other gods, to serve them, 
and to worship them, shall even be as this girdle," 
which is good for nothing. 

11 For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a 
man, so have I caused to cleave unto me tlie whole 
house of Israel and the whole house of Judah, 
saith the Lord;' that they might be unto me for 
a people, and for a name, and for a praise, and for 
a glory : but they would not hear. 



3. When we are tempted to envy the wicked for their 
prosperity, we should look beyond present apjicaranccs 
and consider their latter end. Psahn 73:17-20; Luko 
10:19-31. 

5. It docs not become those whom God has commis- 
sioned to preach his word, to faint and be discouraged on 
account of the persecutions which they endure for the 
trutli's sake. Rather should they make their present 
trials the occasion of fortifying tliemsulvcs for trials in 
the future. 

(!. In all ages of the world, the wiikedno.'is of the human 
heart has often overcome the ilnsost ties of blond, so that 
the bitterest foes of tlie servant of God have been they of 
his own household. 

11. Though God employs wicked men as the instruments 
of chasliBing his people, he will in the end remember and 
punish their iniquities. Isa. 10:5-19. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1. Put it n(^ in water; a ilirection signifying that God's 
covenant people arc unclean in their hearts and lives. 

i. Go to Euphrates — hide it there; a symbol of the hmnil- 
iation of God s people by their removal to Babylon in a 
state of captivity. 



Judgments ihrealcncd for sin. 



JEREMIAH XIV. 



A grifVOiitH fai 



\.y\M»2. 12 1 Tlicroforo thou slialt s])cak unto 

Kr.'""' tlieui tliis wonl ; Thus saith the Loud God 

of Israel, Every bottle shall be lilled with wiue : 

aud they shall say unto thee, Do we not certainly 

know that every bottle shall be filled with wine? 

13 Then shalt tliou say unto them. Thus saith 

the Lord, Beiiold, I will fill all the inhabitants of 

this land, even tiie kinpjs that sit upon David's 

throne, and the priests, and the jtrophets, and all 

the inhabitants of Jerusalem, witii drunkenness." 

1-1 And I will dash them one against another,*'' 

even the fathers and the sons together, saith the 

Loun : I will not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy, 

but destroy them.* 

15 1" Hear ye, and give ear; be not proud: for 
the Lord hath spoken. 

16 Give glory to the Lord your God," before he 
cause darkness,'' and before your feet stumble upon 
the dark mountains, and, while ye look for light,' 
he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it 
gross darkness. 

17 But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep 
in secret places for your pride;' and mine eyes 
shall weep sore, aud run down with tears, because 
the Lord's flock is carried away captive. 

18 Say unto the king and to the queen. Humble 
yourselves, sit down: for your principalities* shall 
come down, even the crown of your glory." 

19 The cities of the south shall be shut up, aud 
none shall open th<:m: Judah shall be carried 
away captive all of it, it shall be Avholly carried 
away captive.'' 

20 Lift up your eyes, and behold them that come 
from the north :' where w the flock that was given 
thee, thy beautiful flock ? 

21 What wilt thou say when he shall punish^ 
thee ? for thou hast taught them to be captains, and 
as chief over thee : shall not sorrows take thee, as 
a woman in travail? 

22 1[ And if thou say in thy heart. Wherefore 
come these things upon me?J For the greatness 
of thine iniquity are thy skirts discovered, and 
thy heels made bare." 



» Ch. -iSao. 37; Is 


. 51 :17, 21 ; 6.!:S. • Heb. a man against his brother. 


tP.a, 2:9. f Heb. /r 


omikstroyingtlitm. cJosh.7:19. dAmose:9. e [sa. 


.W:^ fch. 9:1; Psa. 


Il9:i:!e. tOt,hmd-tin$. S ch 22:20; 2 King32l;12; 


Jonah 3:6. h 2 Kings 


25:2fi. ich. 0:22-24. i Heb. n«i< upoK. irh. 16:10, 


il; Uo3. 12:8. 1 Or 


xhnll be vtotently taken away. H Heb taught; Prov. 



13. / will Jill all the inhabitants of this land — with drunken- 
ness; strong drink, which causes bewilderment and reel- 
ing, is a frequent figure for God's judgments. Chap. 25:15- 
28; Isa. 51:17. 

20. Them that come from the north; the invading armies of 
the enemy. Chap. 6:22. W/t£re is the flock; the rulers of 
Jerusalem are rebuked for causing the Lord's flock to 
perish through their sins. Compare Ezek. 34:4-G. 

21. Hast taught them; the heathen nations, liy seeking 
their aid and alliance, and imitating their idolatries. 

25. The portion of thy measures; the portion of punislunent 
measured out to thee by me. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-14. Those who put their trust in outward privileges, 
and neglect holiness of heart and life, God will disown and 
put to shame, both in this world and that which is to come. 
Matt. 21:43; 7:21-23. 

16. To nations, as well as individuals, God graciously 
gives a day of light and mercy, which they may improve 
for their salvation ; but if they neglect this, and harden 



23 Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the 
leopard his spots? t/un may ye also do good, that 
are accustouicd'' to do evil. 

24 Therefore will I scatter them as the stubble 
that passeth away by the wind of the wilderness." 

25 This is thy lot, the portion of thy measures 
from me, saith the Lord; because thou hast for- 
gotten me, and trusted in falsehood.' 

26 Therefore will I discover tliy skirts upon tliy 
face, that thy shame may appear." 

27 I have seen thine adulteries, and thy neigh- 
ings," the lewdness of thy whoredom, a7id thine 
abominations on the hills in the fields." Woo 
unto thee, O Jerusalem! wilt thou not be made 
clean ? when shall it once be?'^ 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1 Tlie grievous famine 7 causeth Jeremiah to pray. 10 The Lord will 
not be entreated for the people. 13 Lying prophets are no excuse for 
them. 17 Jeremiah is moved to complam for them. 

THE word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah 
concerning the dearth.* 

2 Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof lan- 
guish;* they are black unto the ground; and the 
ciy of Jerusalem is gone up. 

3 And their nobles have sent their little ones to 
the waters: they came to the pits, and found no 
water; they returned with their vessels emjity; 
they were ashamed and confounded, and covered 
their heads. 

4 Because the ground is chapped, for there was 
no rain in the earth, the plouglimen were ashamed, 
they covered their heads. 

5 Yea, the hind also calved in the field, and for- 
sook it, because there was no grass. 

6 And the wild asses did stand in the high places, 
they snuffed up the wind like dragons ; tiieir eyes 
did fail, because there was no grass. 

7 10 Lord, thougii our iniquities testify against 
us,'' do thou it for thy name's sake: for our back- 
slidings are many ; we have sinned against thee. 

8 the hope of Israel,^ the Saviour thereof in 
time of trouble,' why shouldest thou be as a stran- 



19:27. t Psa. 1:4; Hos. 1.3:3. lIsa.28:lS. ■" 1105.2:10. i.ch..5:S. <■ Isa. 

65:7; Ezek. 6:13. • Heb. after lohcmjet? P Hos. b:5. ^ lleh. nwrcls of 

the dearths, or restraints, q "Isa. 3:20; Lam. 2:9, etc. r Dan. 9:9. > ch. 
17:13; Joel 3:10; lTim.l:l. iPsa.46:l. 



their hearts in sin, the sun of their day of grace will set 
to rise no more. Luke 19:41, 42. 

17. God's faithful servants are deeply moved at the re- 
jection of their messages, for they foresee the ruin that 
must follow. 

18. As unfaithful rulers and teachers are first in leading 
God's people into sin, so shall they be first in suffering his 
judgments. 

23. Nothing but divine grace is strong enough to break 
the fetters of sinful fiaVnt which has from the first held 
sway in the soul, and to set it free from "the law of sin'' 
which is in the members. Rom. 7:24, 25. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

2. Tliei/ are black unto the ground; they lie upon the 
ground in a squalid and mourning condition. 

6. Tlicy snuffed up the wind ; in their endeavors to find 
water, the direction of which these animals ascertain by 
the scent. 

S. Astranger — away faring man; who only jiasses through 
a country without concerning himself with its interests. 
S53 



The prophet's prayer 



JEREMIAH XV. 



in hejwlf of Zion, 



ger in the land, and as a ■wayfaring man that turn- 
eth aside to tarry for a night? 

9 Why shouklest tliou bo as a man astonished, 
as a mighty man that cannot save?^ yet thou, O 
Loud, art in the midst of us,'" and we are called by 
tiiy name;* leave us not. 

10 H Tims saith the Lord unto this people, Thus 
have they loved to wander, tliey have not refrained 
their feet," tlierofore the Loud doth not accept 
them; he will now remember their iniquity, and 
visit their sins.'' 

11 Then said tlie Lord unto me, Pray not for 
this people for t/icir good. 

12 When they fast, I will not hear tlieir cry;'' 
and when they offer burnt-offering and an obla- 
tion, I will not accept tlieni: Ijut I will consume 
them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the 
pestilence. 

13 "[Then said 1, Ah, Lord God! behold, the 
prophets say unto them. Ye shall not see the sword, 
neither shall ye have famine;' but I will give you 
assured peace' in this place. 

14 Then the Lord said unto me, The prophets 
prophesy lies in my name:""' I sent them not, nei- 
ther have I commanded them, neitlier spake unto 
them : they prophesy unto you a false vision and 
divination, and a thing of naught,'' and tiie deceit 
of their heart.' 

15 Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the 
prophets that prophesy in my name, and 1 sent 
them not, yet they say, Sword and famine sliall 
not be in this land ; By sword and famine shall 
those prophets be consumed. 

16 And the people to whom they prophesy shall 
be cast out in tlie streets of Jerusalem, because of 
the famine and the sword ; and they shall have 
none to bury them,^ them, tlicir wives, nor their 
sons, nor their daughters: for I will pour their 
wickedness upon tliem.'' 

17 1 Therefore tliou shaft say this Avord unto 
them; Let mine eyes run down with tears night 



«l8i.59;l. b Exod. 29:45, 'l(i. • Heb. t/iy name is called uponlis; Dan. 
0:18,19. Cch.2:M, d Hos. 0:9. » Isa. 1 :15; Zcch. 7:13. t ch. 23:2, eic. 
1 \Uh. peace of truth, s ch. 27:10, 15, h Lam. 2:14. > Isa. •'30:10. J Psa. 
70::!. lioli.4:18. 1 Lam. 1:10; 2: IS. m ch. 8:21 ; Lam. 2:1, 13. ■> Lam. 
1 :20; Ezek. 7:15. t Or, make tnerchandise against a land, and men ncknow- 



9. A man astonished — a mighty man; who has heretofore 
wrought wonders, but whoso wisdom and strcugth now 
fail liim. 

11. Pray not; seo note on verso 22. 

IH. Go about ; wander into exile. 

21. Do not disgrace the throne of thy glory; by giving oc- 
casion to thine enemies to blaspheme thy name as unable 
to save thy people. Compare Num. 11:13-16. 

22. Can the heavens give showers? that is, of their own 
proper power. They arc God's workmanship, and he alone 
can control their action. Alt these tilings; heaven and eartli. 

In the last four verses of this chapter the prophet speaks 
in the name of tlic pious remnant. From this it is plain 
that God's command, "Pray not for this people for their 
good," verse 11, was not absolute, but a declaration that, 
while the mass of the peo])le continued impenitent, no 
prayer could avert his judgments. 

INSTRUCTION'S. 

1-6. God has all the powers of nature under his control. 
When ho chooses through them to jjiinish nations for their 
sins, they can neither resist nor eiiduro his hand. 

7-9. In the deepest distress (iod is able to hear and de- 
liver us ; and though on the ground of our own righteous- 
ness we can expect nothing but destruction, wc may for 
854 



and day,' and let them not cease: for the v M.3«ft 
virgin daughter of my people is broken '<>"' 
witli a great l)rcach,"' with a very grievous blow. 

18 If I go forth into the field, then behold the 
slain with the sword! and if I enter into the city, 
then bciiold tiicin that are sick with famine!" yea, 
both tlic ])ropliet and the priest go about into a 
land that they know not.* 

I'J Ilast thou utterly I'cjected Judah?" hath thy 
soul loatiied Zion "? wfiy hast thou smitten us, and 
there is no heafing for usV we looked for peace, 
and thrre w no good ; and for tlie time of healing, 
and behold trouble! 

20 We acknowledge, Lord, our wickedness, 
and the iniiiuity of our fathers: for wo have sin- 
ned against tiiee.'' 

21 Do not abhor us, for thy name's sake;'' do 
not disgrace the throne of tiiy glory : remember, 
break not thy covenant with us." 

22 Are tliere any among the vanities of the Gen- 
tiles that can cause rain?' or can the lieavens 
give showers? Jlrt not thou he," Lord, our 
God? therefore we will wait upon thee: for thou 
hast made all these thini^s. 



CHAPTER XV. 

1 The utter rejection and inanifolJ judgments of the Jews. 10 Jerp- 
miah, complaining of their spite, receiveth a promise for himself, 
1'2 and a tlireatening for them. 15 He prayeth, 19 and receivetb a 

gracious promise. 

''T^HEN said the Lord unto me. Though Moses 
J_ and Sainuel stood before me," yd my mind 
coidd not be toward this people:"' cast <Ae»i out of 
my sight, and let them go forth. 

2 And it sliall come to jkiss, if they say nnto 
thee, Wliitiicr shall we go forth? then thou shalt 
tell them, Tims saith the Lord ; riuch as are for 
death, to death ; and such as are for the sword, to 
the sword ; and such as are for the famine, to the 
famine; and suclt as are for the cajjlivity, to the 
captivity." 



ledge it not: ch. S::}1. •> Lam. 5:22. P oh. 1.>:1S. q P>a. 10«:6; Dan. 
9:'*. rPsa.51:ll. >Psa.74:l,2. I Zoch. 10:2. » Psa. 135:7; U«. 311:23. 
»Exod. 32:11; 1 Sam. 7:9; Psa. 99:0. wEMk.l4:14. i ch. 43:11 ; Ezck. 
5:2, 12; Zech. 11:9. 



his name's sake hope that he will save us, when we heaitily 
repent of our iniquities. Verses 20, 21. 

10-11. Both nations and individuals may go to such 
lengths in rebellion and iniquity, that God will hear nu 
intercessory prayer in theh behalf. Chap. 15:1; 1 John 
5:l(i. 

13-lC. Men's readiness, everywhere and in all ages, to 
listen to tliose who Hatter tJiem and i)romiso them peace 
and prosperity and sin. is a sad proof of tlie desperate 
deceitfulnoss and wickedness of lh(" human heart. 

17-19. The jirevalence of national ini(iuity tills the good 
man's soul with the deepest grief, both for the glory of 
God's name, and for the certain ruin, temporal and spirit- 
ual, which such iniquity occasions. 

22. To sin against the Author of nature, and then look 
to the powers of nature for help and deliverance, is the 
extreme of madness and folly. 

CHAPTER XV. 

1. Vicn said the Lord ; in answer to the prayer just pre- 
ceding. Stood hrfnrc mc; were now to stand before me, 
and intercede with mo, as thoy did of old. K.\od.;!2: 11-14; 
Num. 14: 13-19; 1 Sam. 7:8. 9. Cast them out of my sight; 
declare my purpose to cast lUcui out. Compare Isa. ti:llJ. 



Rejection of the Jews. 



JEREMIAH XV. 



Jeremiah's complaint. 



A.M. :wn. 3 And I will appoint ovnr them four 
' liiii'."'"'" kinds,'" saith the Lord : the sword to slay, 
and the dogs to tear, and the fowls of the heaven, 
and the boasts of the earth, to devour and destroy. 

4 And 1 will cause them to be removed^ into all 
kinijdoins of the earth,'' because of Manasseh the 
son of Ilezekiah king of Judah, for that which he 
did in Jerusalem.'' 

F> For who shall have pity upon thee, Jerusa- 
lem ?'' or who shall bemoan thee? or who shall 
go aside to ask how thou doest?* 

G Tliou hast forsaken me, saith the Lord, thou 
art gone backward: therefore will 1 stretch out 
my hand against thee, and destroy thee; I am 
weary with repenting. 

7 And I will f\^n tliem with a fan in the gates of 
the land ;'' I will bereave them of children,* I will 
destroy my })eoplc, «iHce they return not from their 
ways.' 

8 Their widows are increased to me above the 
sand of the seas: I have brought upon them 
against the mother of the young men a spoiler' at 
noonday: I have caused him to fall upon it sud- 
denly, and terrors upon the city. 

9 She that hath borne seven languisheth : she 
hath given up the ghost; her sun is gone down 
while it ivas yet day := she hath been ashamed and 
confounded : and the residue of them will I deliver 
to the sword before their enemies, saith the Lord. 

10 If Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne 
me a man of strife and a man of contention to the 
whole earth!" I have neither lent on usury, nor 
men have lent to me on usury; yet every one of 
them doth curse me. 

11 The Lord said, Yerily it shall be well with 
tliy remnant;' verily I will cause the enemy to 
entreat thee iveW in the time of evil and in the 
time of affliction.-' 



• Heb. families. iLev.26:ir>; Ezek. 14:21. 1 Heh. ^ive t/iem forn re- 
moving, b Deut. 23:2.'i. c 2 Kings 24:3, 4. il Isa. 51 :"l9. t Heb. of thy 
peate. o Matt. 3:12. S Or, whatsoever is dear. ' Amos 4:1(1, 11. II Or, 
motker city a youji^ man spoiling, etc.; or against the mother 3.nd the young 



3. Four kinds; of plagues: the first destroys life, and 
the other three devour the carcasses of the slain. 

4. Because of Manasseh; 2 Kings 21:1-10; 2 Chron. 
3:5:1-10. 

5. Go aside: turn from hi.s course, as one does to visit 
the sick. 

7. Tlie gates of tlie land ; these arc put figuratively for 
the paths which lead out of its borders. Ilere God will 
stand with his fan, and scatter them like chafl' into exile. 

8. A spoiler at noonday; one who spoils with open and 
resistless force. 

9. Her sun is gone down ; her hopes are extinguished by 
the loss of her sons. While it was yet day; prematurely, 
by their sudden death in youth. 

10. A man of strfe — of contention to the whole earth ; a 
man with whom all men strive and contend. / have 
neither lent — nor men have lent; I have lieen neither a 
hardhearted lender nor a fraudulent borrower ; no wrong- 
doing of mine has given occasion to my fellow-men to 
hate me. 

11. To entreat thee well in the time of evil; Jehovah en- 
courages his desponding servant by a promise. The ful- 
filment see in chap. .'59:11, 12; 40:1-4. 

12. Shall iron break the norttiern iron; or, "Shall iron be 
broken, even the northern iron?" Iron represents the 
warlike equipments and power of the enemy, which are 
invincible. 



12 Shall iron break the northern iron and the 
steel ? 

13 Thy substance and thy treasures will I give 
to the spoil without price, and thai for all thy sins, 
even in all thy borders. 

14 And I will make thcc to pass with thine ene- 
mies into a land which thou knowest not : for a fire 
is kindled in mine anger, which shall burn upon 
you.'' 

15 IF Lord, thou knowest: remember me, and 
visit me, and revenge me of my persecutors ;' take 
me not away in thy long-suttcring :'" know that for 
thy sake I have suffered rebuke. '^ 

16 Thy words were found, and I did eat them; 
and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of 
my heart;" for I am called by thy name," Lord 
God of hosts. 

17 I sat not in the assembly of the mockers, nor 
rejoiced ; I sat alone because of thy hand : for thou 
hast filled me with indignation. 

18 Why is my pain jierpetual, and my wound 
incurable, ichich refusetli to be healed ?'' wilt thou 
be altogether unto me as a liar, and as waters that 
M\V 

10 1l Therefore thus saith the Lord, If thou re- 
turn, then will I bring thee again, and thou shalfc 
stand before me:'' and if thou take forth the pre- 
cious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth : let 
them return unto thee; but return not thou unto 
them. 

20 And I will make thee unto this people a 
fenced brazen wall: and they shall fight against 
thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: for 
I am with thee to save thee and to deliver thee, 
saith the Lord. 

21 And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the 
wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the hand of 
the terrible. 



men. 5Amos8:9. hjob3:l.eto. i Eocl. 8:12. ^ Or, entreat the enemy 
for thee, i Psa. 100;4(;. k Deut. 32:22. 1 Loke 1»:7, H; liom. 12:19. 
m Psi. 102:24. n Psa. Iiy:7; Matt. 19:29. o Job 23:12. • Heb. thy name is 
called upon me. Poh. 30:15. Mleh. benot sure? qZech.y:7. 



13. Thy substance; addressed to Judah. 

15. Thou knowest ; my case. The prophet again prays 
for deliverance from his persecutors. 

10. Did eat them; received them with a willing and glad 
mind, as is exjilained in the next clause. 

17. Bcanisc of thy hand ; because thy hand was upon me ; 
that is, thy Spirit constrained me to deUver thy messages. 
Compare Ezek. 1:3; 3:22; 8:1; 33:22. With indignation; 
according to some, indignation here denotes the messages 
of wrath which the prophet was commissioned to deliver 
to the people. Compare chap. 6:11. According to others, 
it means the indignation of the people, which was excited 
against him by those messages. Thus he was made to 
sit solitary and oppressed with grief. 

18. Pain — wound; his suffering for the truth's sake. As 
a liar — waters tliatfail ; it seemed to the prophet as if God 
failed to fulfil to him his promise of help against his foes. 

19. If thou return; from thy impatience. This is God's 
answer to the prophet. Bring thee again; to thy prophet- 
ical work, and support thee in it. Take forth the precious 

from the vile; discriminate between the righteous and the 
wicked. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
5. When God is against a people for their multiplied 
transgressions, no human sympathy or help can deliver 
them. 

C-9. The terrible desolations which God brings upon 
855 



The utter ruin of 

CHAPTER XVI. 

1 The prophet, under the types of ahstaining from mairiagc, from houses 
of mourning and feastinij, foreshowi-th tlie utttT ruin of the Jews, JO 
because they were worse than their falliers. 11 Tlieir return from 
captivity shall be stranger than their deliverance out of Egypt. 10 
God w 11 doubly recompense ihcir iJolatry. 

THE word of the Loud came also unto me, say- 

2 Thou shalt not fake thcc a wife, neither shalt 
thou have sons nor thiu,!i;hters in tliis pUice. 

3 For thus saitli the Lord eonccrninj^ the sons 
and concerning the daughters that are born in tliis 
place, and concerning tlieir mothers that bare thcin, 
and concerning their fathers that begat them in 
this land ; 

4 They shall die of grievous deaths;" they shall 
not be lamented ; neither shall tjioy be buried ; hut 
they shall lie as dung ujion tlie face of the eartli : 
aiul they shall be consumed by the sword, and by 
famine; and their carcasses shall be meat for the 
fowls of heaven, and for the beasts of the earth. 

5 For Ihus saitli the Loim, Enter not into the 
Iwuse of mourning,' neither go to lament nor be- 
moan theni: for I have taken away my peace from 
this people, saith the Loud, even loving-kindness 
and mercies. 

6 Both the great and the small shall die in tiiis 
land: they sluiU not be buried, neither shall men 
lament for tliom, nor cut themselves, nor make 
themselves bald for tiiem: 

7 Neither shall 'incn tear themselves for them* in 
mourning, to comfort them for the dead ; neither 
shall men give tiiem the cujjof cousohition to drink 
for their father or for their mother.'' 

8 Thou shalt not also go into the house of feast- 
ing, to sit with them to eat and to drink.'^ 

y For tlius saith the Loud of hosts, tlie God of 
Israel ; Behold, I will cause to cease out of this 
place in your eyes, and in your days, the voice of 
iriirth;' and the voice of gladness, tlic voice of the 
hridrgroom, and the voice of the bride. 

10 "i And it shall come to pass, when thou shalt 
show this people all these words, and they shall 
say unto tliee, Wherefore hath the Loud pro- 
nounced all this great evil against us ? or what is 



JEREMIAH XVI. the Jews forcslwun. 

our initjuity? or what is our sin that we * V *""• 
havecfunniittedagainsttheLoRDourGod?'-' c)i.' 

11 Then shalt thou say unto them, Because your 
fathers have forsaken me, saith the Loud, and iiave 
walked after other gods, and have served them, 
and have worshipped them, and have forsaken uic, 
and have not kept my law ; 

12 And ye have done worse than your fathers; 
for behold, ye walk every one after the imagina- 
tion* of his evil heart, that they may not hearken 
unto me : 

13 Tiiereforc will I cast you out of this land into 
a land that ye know not,' neither ye nor your fa- 
thers ; and there shall ye serve other gods day and 
night; where I will not show you favor. 

1-1 1J Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the 
Loud, that it shall no more be said, The Lord liv- 
etii, that brought up the children of Israel out of 
the land of Egypt ; 

15 But, The Loud liveth, that brought up the 
children of Israel from the land of the north, and 
from all the lands whither he had driven them;''' 
and 1 will bring them again into their land that I 
gave unto their fathers.'' 

IG 11 Behold, I will send for many fishers, sailli 
the Lord, and they shall fish them ;' and after will 
I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them 
from every mountain, and from every hill, and out 
of tlie lioI(\s of the rocks. 

17 For mine eyes are upon all their waysr^ they 
are not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity 
iiid from mine eyes." 

18 And first I will recompense their iniquity and 
their sin double;' because Ihey have defiled my 
land, they have filled mine inheritance with the 
carcasses of their detestable and abominable 
things.'" 

19 Lord, my strength," and my fortress, and 
my refuge in tlie day of affliction," the Gentiles 
shall come unto thee from the ends of the earth,'' 
and shall say, Surely our fathers have inherited 
lies, vanity, and things wherein (here is no profit.' 

20 Shall a man make gods unto himself, and llicy 
are no gods?' 



»Ch.l5:l3. •Or. mourning frasl. t Ot, brfnk bread for Ihrm: Hot. 9:1. 
► Prov. 31 :B, 7. t r«a. 20:4; 1 Cor. 5:11. <lHo». i!:!!. • Deut. 2!):J1, 2.5. 
1 Or, stubbornness; ch. 13.10. f Doul. •l:2C-2tf; 2!):03-flJ. t ch. 23:7, S. 



wickcfl nations, are both a puVjlic maiiifi'.stiition of liis 
ili.s|il(HSure aj;ainst sin, and a solemn syinlml oltlio utter 
iiid everlastinK ruin wliicli awaits the souls of sinners 
alter doatli. Verses i:i, II; cliai>. 17:1, 27. 

10. He who faithfully delivers God's messages to sin- 
ners, must not expcet to escape their reproaclics and 
persecutions. Experience sliows that they who do not 
relent under (iod's rebukes, will seek to avenge thcm- 
Bclves on his messengers. 

12. God arms the executioners of his vengcanco with 
resistless power. 

1,^-21, God promises his servants help and support in 
persecution, not freedom from it. When Ihey allow their 
faith ,ind patience to be overcome liy the opposition of 
unreaso7iable men, they must expect to receive from liim 
sharp rebukes. 

CnAPTER XVI. 

2. !SiaU not take the a wife, neither slinit thou have sons nor 
daughters; because the days are corning when it will be 
better to be childless, than to have cliilJren to perish l)y 
Sic 



li ch. 2l:li; 3U:3; :)>:37. i Amc 
k Job 31:21, Oi. I lu. 40:2. ni 
Plia. 60:3; 02:2 qlsa. 41:10. 



12; Ilab. 1:1 
Ezek. 4:1:7,9. 
fl.a. 37:19. 



the sword and by famine. Compare Matt. 24:19; Luke 
23:29. 

5-7. Enter not into the house of mournins; — neither sliult 
men pive them the rup of const^lation ; he is forl)idileu to 
mourn for the dead of his people, as a sign that (Joil will 
destroy them, and the multitiule of the slain will bo so 
great that the customary funeral rites will bo impossible. 
Chap. 25:33. 

11. Jleholil, the dni/n come; after the usual manner of the 
))roi)licts, J-eremiah annexes to these terrible threalenings 
a glorious promise. It sJtall no more be said; sec note on 
chap. 3:l(i. 

Hi. Many fishers — manijhunters; the armies of their ene- 
mies. The prophet now returns to the denunciation of 
(iod's vengeance upon liis people. 

18. First; that is, lieforo 1 have mercy upon them aa 
promised. Vcr. H, 15. 

l!t. The Gentiles sliall rome unto thee; wilh the captivity 
of God's covenant iieople, and their sulisoipunt rtstora- 
tion, the prophet connects the conversion of the Gentileu. 
Coiniiare Itom. 11:12-15, 



C'aplicily of Judah. 



JEREMIAH XVI r. 



The prop/tcl's compla 



A. M.34n:!. 21 Therefore, behold, I will tliis once 

U. ('. about , . T • II I 

601. cause tlietn to know, 1 will cause lliem to 
know my liand and my might ; and they shall know 
that my name is The Loud."" 

CHAPTER XVII. 

1 The captivity of Judah for her sin. 5 Trust in man is curseJ, 7 in 
God is ulessed. 9 The deceitful heart cannot deceive G-pd. 12 The 
salvation of God. 1.5 The prophet complaineth of the mockers of his 
prophecy. 19 He is sent to renew the covenant in hallowing the 

''T'^lIK sin of Juihih is written with a pen of iron, 
J_ and with the point* of a diamond : it is graven 
upon tiie table of their heart,'' and upon the horns 
of your altars; 

2 Whilst their children remember tlieir altars 
and tlicir groves by the green trees upon the high 
hills.'- 

3 my mountain in the field,'' I will give tliy 
substance and all thy treasures to the spoil,"" and 
thy high places for sin, throughout all thy borders. 

i And thou, even thyself,* shalt discontinue from 
thy heritage that I gave thee; and I will cause 
thee to serve thine enemies in the laud which thou 
knowest not:*^ for ye have kindled a lire in mine 
anger, vj/iic/i shall burn for ever. 

5 1 Thus saith the Lord ; Cursed be the man that 
trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and 
whose heart departeth from the Lord.= 

G For he shall be like the heath in the desert, 
and shall not see when good comcth ; but shall 
inhabit the parched places iu the wilderness, in a 
salt land and not inhabited.'' 

7 Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, 
and whose hope the Lord is.' 

8 For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, 
and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and 
shall not see when heat coineth, but her leaf shall 
be green ;' and shall not be careful in the year of 
drought,* neither shall cease from yielding fruit. 

9 11 The heart is deceitful above all things!^ and 
desperately wicked:' who can know it? 

10 I the Lord search the heart,'"/ try the reins. 



• Or, 


JEHOVAH 


). 


a. SJilS. 


ch 


:B 


2; Amos 


S:S. 


t Heb 


nail. 


b Prov. 


:!:l 


; a Cor. :!: 


1, 


« a Chr. -24: 


.S; 1 


sn 


1:29. dLam.S 


17, !.■<. 


ech. 


I5:l:i 


IH 


=b. m Ihys 


If. 


fNeh.9:36 


sPsa. 


14U:.S-5; 


sa. :ill 


1,2. 1> 


■TiirV. 


!l:15. 


!■» 


I. 2:l\!; 34:8 


84:1-2; Prov. 10 


•2U 


J Psa. 


■:i, « 


Or. res 


rami. 


k Matt 


1j; 


19. 1 Kcc 


. 9:3. m 1 Chr 


as:u 


; Rom. 8:27 


Rev. 


2:23. 


nGal. 



21. Caunc them to know; cause my people to know. By 
his judgments God will teach his people tlie folly of idol- 
atry, and thus prepare them for deliverance and enlarge- 
ment. 

INSTRDCTIOX. 

When the Jews sinned against God, he did not spare 
them because they were outwardly his covenant people, 
but visited tbem with his desolating judgments. So will 
lie deal with every branch of his visible cliurch that 
proves unfaithful to its high calling ; but in such a way 
that his chastisements shall contribute to the purification 
and increase of tlie true Israel, until all nations come to 
the knowledge and obedience of Christ. Isa. 59: 16-21. 

CHAPTER XVn. 

1. Upon the horns of your altars ; your id(jlatrous altars. 
The allusion is to the blood of their idol-ofterings, sprin- 
kled upon the horns of their altars, which was a fit symbol 
cf tlieir inveterate inward love of idolatry. 

2. Groves; rather, '-images of Astarte," a female deity. 



even to give every man according to his ways, 
and according to the fruit of his doings." 

11 Jls the jiartridge sitteth on c/f/rs'. and hatchetli 
them not;' so he that getteth riches, and not by 
right, shall leave them in the midst of his days," 
and at his end shall be a fool.P 

12 T A glorious high throne'' from the beginning 
is the place of our sanctuary .'■ 

13 Lord, the hope of Israel, all that forsake 
thee shall be ashamed, and they that depart from 
me shall be written in the earth,'' because they 
have forsaken the Lord, the fountain of living 
waters.' 

14 Heal me, Lord, and I shall be healed ; save 
me, and I sliall be saved: for thou art my praise." 

15 1l Behold, they say nnto me, Where is the 
word of the Lord?" let it come now. 

IG As for me, I have not hastened from being a 
pastor to follow'' thee: neither have I desired the 
woful day ; thou knowest : that which came out of 
my lips was right before thee. 

17 Be not a terror unto me: thou art my hope 
in the day of evil.™ 

18 Let them be confounded tliat persecute me. 
but let not me be confounded: let them be dis- 
mayed, but let not me be dismayed: bring upon 
them the day of evil, and destroy them with double 
destruction.* 

19 1l Thus said the Lord unto me : Go and stand 
in the gate of the children of the people, whereby 
tlic kings of Judah come in, and by the which they 
go out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem ; 

20 And say unto them, Hear ye the word of the 
Lord, ye kings of Judali, and all Judah, and all 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter in by these 
gates: 

21 Thus saith the Lord ; Take heed to your- 
selves, and bear no burden on the sabbath-day, nor 
bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem ;'' 

22 Neither carry forth a burden out of your 
houses on the sabbath-day, neither do ye any work, 
but hallow ye the sabbatli-day, as I commanded 
your fathers. 



G;7, 8. II Or, satheretk younsj tvftirh she /talk not brouahl fnrth. o Hab. 
2:(i-ll. IJLiike 12:-2(1. qPsa. 1(B;19. r Psa. 9():i;. s Luke 10:2H. t ch. 
2:l:i; John 4:111, 14. u Dent. 111:31 . v-JPet. :i:4. 1 \hh. cfhr. w ch. 
1G:19. 'Heh. break them Willi a duuilebreacJi; cli. 11:17. s Neii. 13:19. 



These, as well as their idolatrous altars, were erected on 
high hills and under green trees. 

3. My mountain in the field ; Jerusalem, probably so called 
because it stands on a mountain, with valleys on either side 
and a plain on the south-west. 

4. Even th ijself; literally, " even in thyself," that is, through 
thine own fault. 

6. Shall not see when good cometh ; shall have no share in it. 

8. Shall not see when heat cometh; siiall not feel its with- 
ering power. 

11. Sttteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not; rather, " gather- 
eth " eggs " which she hath not laid :" thus she loses her 
labor ; for the young birds, when hatched, forsake her. 

13. Written in the earth ; in the dust of the grave ; that 
is, be enrolled as its inhabitants. 

14. Heal me, Lord; here begins the prophet's prayer 
against liis persecutors. 

16. Hastened; eagerly withdrawn myself. Fro7n hemg a 
pastor to follow thee; literally, as the margin, " from being a 
pastor after thee ;"' that is, from performing the duties of 
a prophet in obedience to thee. 

85T 



Hallowing the Sahhath. 



JEREMIAH XVIII. 



The poller's vessel. 



23 But they obeyed not," neither inclined tiieir 
ear, but made their neck stiil",'' tluit tliey might not 
hear, nor receive instruction. 

24 And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently 
hearken unto me, saitii tiic liORD, to bring in no 
burden tiirough the gates of this city on tlie sab- 
bath-day, but hallow the sabbath-day, to do no 
work therein ; 

25 Tiien shall there enter into the gates of this 
city kings and princes sitting upon the throne of 
David, riding in chariots and on horses, they, and 
their princes, tiic men of Judah,and the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem :" and this city siiall remain for ever. 

26 And tiiey shall come from the cities of Judah, 
and from the places about Jerusalem, and from tlie 
land of Benjamin,'' and from the phiin,'" and from 
the mountains, and from the south, bringing burnt- 
offerings, and sacrifices, and meat-offerings, and 
incense, and bringing sacrifices of praise, unto the 
house of the Lord.' 

27 But if ye will not hearken unto mo to hallow 
the sabbatli-day,*' and not to bear a burden, even 
entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the sab- 
bath-day; tlien will I kindle a lire in the gates 
thereof," and it siiall devour tiic ))alaces of Jeru- 
salem,' and it shall not be quenched. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1 Under ttie type of a potter is showed God's absolute power in disposing 
of nations. 1 1 Jud;^ments threatened to Judah for her strange revolt. 
18 Jeremiah praycth against his conspirators. 

which came to Jeremiah from the 



^T^ilE word whi 
_L LoiU), saying- 



say 1 

2 Arise, and go down to the potter's house, and 
there I will cause tiiee to hear my words. 

3 Then 1 went down to tlie potter's house, and 
behold, he wrought a work on tlie wheels." 

•i And the vessel that he made of clay was 
marred^ in the hand of tiie potter: so he made it 
again' another vessel, as seemed good to the pot- 
ter to make it. 



»CI 


. 7: 


il.-X. b 


Pr 


ov. 29:1. 


Isa. 59:ia, 


■1. J 


rh.n;> 


4.1. • Zcch. 7:7. 


< l-sa. 


11)7 


a; IIS: 


7; 


Heb. l:):15 


. f lizek. a 




Lam 


4:11; Amos 2:4, 


Cj. i 


.!K 


n"s •yy.O 




Heb. fran 


IM, or stals 


f IJ 


r. wvM 


marredy as clay. 


I Heb 


returned and made. J l8.%. 


4.j:9; Rom 


9:20, 


21. K 


Isi. (i4:S 1 ch. 


•M-.i; 


Eze 


k. 1S:21 


•M 


11, la; Jo 


ah3:lU m 


ch.7: 


J; 25: 


5; 26:13-, 35;15j 



2(i. The plain; the low country along the Mediterranean, 
from .luppa to Uaza. The meaning of these enumerations 
is, tliat lliey siiall come from all parts of the land. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I, 2. So deep and indeliljle is the handwriting of sin 
upon the human soul, that nothing can elTaee it but the 
power of divine grace. 

5, C. The original and universal sin of the human heart 
is departing from God and making flesh its conlidence. 
This idolatry of eartlily things is the source of the wick- 
edness and misery with which the earth is filled. Ver. 13. 

7, 8. They who put llioir tru.st in the living God, con- 
tinually receive from him light and life and prosperity. 
The heavenly joy and peace which fill their souls keeji 
them in the way of liolinesK.and prevent them from turn- 
ing aside after the sinful delights of the wicked. Ver. 14. 

9, 10. A deep and habitual distrust of ourselves, with 
earnest prayer to God to show iis what is in our hearts, 
and keep us from being deluded and destroyed by their 
desperate dcceitfulnoss and wickedness — this is the be- 
ginning of all true wisdom and safety. 

II. Unjust gain does not [U-ofit it.s owner: ho must soou 

«58 



5 Then the word of the Lord came to me, a. m. ms. 

' H. r. about 

saying, coi. 

house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this 
potter?^ saith tlie Lord. Behold, as "the (day is 
in the potter's hand,'' so are ye in my hand, 
house of Israel. 

7 .rJi iL-hat instant I shall speak concerning a na- 
tion, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and 
to pull down, and to destroy it: 

8 If that nation, against whom I have pro- 
nounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the 
evil that I thought to do unto them.' 

9 And at what instant I shall speak concerning 
a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and 
to plant it; 

10 If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my 
voice, then I will repent of the good, wherewith I 
said I would benefit them. 

11 1 Now therefore go to, speak to' the men of 
Jiiilali,and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, 
Thus saith the Lord ; Behold, I frame evil against 
you, and devise a device against you : return ye 
now everyone from his evil way>" and make your 
ways and your doings good. 

\'l And they said. There is no hope:" but we will 
walk after our own devices, and we will every one 
do tlio imagination of his evil heart. 

13 Therefore thus saith the Lord; Ask ye now 
among the heathen, Avho hath heard such tilings:" 
tlie virgin of Israel hath done a very horrible thing.'' 

14 Will a man leave the snow of Lebanon ichkh 
comclh from the rock of the field V or shall the 
cold flowing waters that come from another place 
be forsaken ?^ 

1.5 Because my people hath forgotten me.'' they 
have burned incense to vanity," and they have 
caused them to stumble in their ways from, the 
ancient paths,' to walk in paths, in a way not cast up; 

IG To make their land desolate," and a iicrpetual 
hissing;^ every one that passeth thereby shall be 
astonished, and wag his head.'" 



2 Kings 17:13. ■•ch.2;25. o ch. 2; 10; 1 Cor. 5: 1. Pch.5:30. ■lJohn6:«-. 
S Or, 7111/ ftelds for a rofk, or for ifie snow of Lebanon ? shall ih* runnint; 
waters be forimken for the strange eold ^vater«f ' ch. 2:32. ■ lia. 4l;2U. 
Ich. (>:16. uAIic. fi:lU. < 1 Kings 9:8; Lam. 2: IS. <• Dout. &J:S«. 



part with it, and go to receive the reward of his folly aud 
wickedness. 

18. God will consider the persecution which his faith- 
ful servants receive for the truth's sake as an injury done 
to himself; aud if it be uot repented of, will punish it 
accordingly. 

19. The Sabbath is an indispensable Imlwark of religion 
;ind good morals. Every nation that habitually profanes 
it must speedily sink into corruption, and become a vessel 
of wrath fitted for destruction. 

CHAPTER XVlil. 

12. There is no hope; our case is desperate: reformation 
can avail nothing. The words e.\press a desijerato deter- 
mination to persevere in sin. 

M. The snow of Lebanon ; that is, the cool refreshing 
waters which come from its melting. From the rock oftlu 
firlil ; from the rocky heights that overhang the adjacent 
fields. Vint come from another place ; literally, "foreign" 
water — water that has its origin on the remote heights of 
Lebanon. Many render this dilTioult verse thus: "Shall 
the snow of Lebanon fail from the rock of the field ? Shall 
the cold flowing waters that como from alar be dried up ?" 



Jercmiak's appad. 



JEREMIAH XIX. 



Judtih i.i threatened. 



A.M. 3309. 17 I will scatter them as with an east 
coj" °" wind before tlie enemy ;" I will show them 
the back," and not the face, in the day of their 
calamity." 

18 IT Then said they. Come, and let us devise 
devices against Jerenuah ;" for tlie law shall not 
perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, 
nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let 
us smite iiim witli* the tongue, and let us not give 
heed to any of las words. 

19 Give heed to me, Lord,*^ and heai'kcn to 
the voice of them that contend with me. 

20 Shall evil be recompensed for good ?'' for they 
have digged a pit for my soul.''' Remember tluit 
I stood before tiiee to speak good for them, a»(^ to 
turn away tliy wrath from tlicm. 

21 Therefore deliver up their children to the 
famine, and pour out their blood^ by the force of 
the sword; and let tlieir wives be bereaved of 
their cliildrcn, and be widows; and let their men 
be put to dcatli ; let their young men he slain by 
the sword in battle. 

22 Let a cry be heard from their houses, when 
thou slialt bring a troop suddenly upon tiiem : for 
they have digged a pit to take me, and hid snares 
for my feet. 

23 Yet, Lord, thou knowest all their counsel 
against me to slay mc.-*'' forgive not their iniqui- 
ty, neither blot out tlieir sin from thy sight, but 
let them be overthrown before thee; deal thus 
with them in the time of thine anger. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

Under the type of breaking a potter's vessel is foreshowed the desolation 
of tlie Jews for their sins. 

fJ^HUS saith tlie Lord, Go and get a potter's 
I earthen bottle, and take of the ancients of the 
people, and of the ancients of the priests ; 



»Psx. 4^:7. bch. 2:27. "Vinv.l 


:25, 20. dch. 11:19. ' Or,/or. e Psa. 


04:1-4. ' Psi. 109:4, etc.; Prov. 


7:13. a Psa. 35:7. t Heb. Ihem out. 


I Heb. for dealli. h Psa. 37:.32.33. 


i oh. 7:31 ; Josh. 15:.'*. S Heb. the sua 


gate. J ch. 17:20. k 2 Kings 21 


12. 1 ch. 2:13, 34; Deut. 2S:20; Isa. 



17. Will show them the back, and not the face; will turn my 
back upon their jjrayer.s ; that is, refuse to hear them. 

18. The law shall not perish — the word from the prophet; 
relying upon their own corrupt priests, counsellors, and 
prophets, they despise God's threatenings by the mouth 
ut Jeremiah. 

21-23. Deliver up their children- — deal thus with them; this 
is a prophetic imprecation, to be explained like those 
which occur in the book of Psalms. Sec note on Psa. 
35 : 4, and introductory note to Psa. 109. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

G. The mightiest nations, not less than the weakest indi- 
viduals, are at God's disposal, and he can prosper them or 
overthrow them. 

7-10. The sins of the fathers will not be reckoned to the 
nation that forsakes them, and turns to God with true 
obedience ; and the virtues of the fathers will not profit 
degenerate children who refuse to imitate them. 

12. When men have gone so far in sin that they obsti- 
nately refuse all invitations to repentance, their measure 
of iniquity is full, and their destruction is at hand. Prov. 
29:1. 

13-17. No folly is comparable to that of forsaking the 
living God, who is able and willing to bestow upon us all 
needful good, for earthly vanities, that cannot help us, and 
tliat flatter only to deceive and ruin us. 

18, Wicked men love those who flatter them with false 



2 And go forth unto the valley of tiie son of Hin- 
nom,' which is by tlio entry of the east gate,^ and 
proclaim there tlie words that 1 shall tell thee : 

3 And say. Hear ye the word of the Lord, 
kings of Judali, and inhabitants of Jerusalem ;J 
Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel ; 
Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, the which 
whosoever heareth, his ears shall tingle." 

4 Because they have forsaken me,' and have 
estranged this place, and have burned incense in 
it unto other gods, whom neitlier they nor their 
fatliers have known,™ nor the kings of Judali, and 
have filled this place with the blood of innocents ;" 

5 They have built also the high places of Baal, 
to burn their sons with fire ybr burnt-offerings unto 
Baal, which I commanded not, nor spake it, nei- 
ther came it into my mind :" 

6 Tiierefore, behold, the days come, saith the 
Lord, that this place shall no more be called To- 
])!iet, nor Tlie valley of the son of Hinnom, but 
The valley of slaughter. 

7 And I will make void the counsel of Judah 
and Jerusalem in this place ; and I will cause them 
to fall by the sword before their enemies, and by 
the hands of them that seek their lives :" and their 
carcasses will I give to be meat for the fowls of 
the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth.' 

8 And I will make this city desolate, and a hiss- 
ing;'' everyone that passeth thereby shall be aston- 
isiied and hiss," because of all the plagues thereof. 

9 And I will cause them to eat the flesh of their 
sons and the flesh of their daughters,' and they 
shall eat every one the flesh of his friend in the 
siege and straitness, wherewitii their enemies, and 
tiiey that seek their lives, shall straiten them. 

10 Then slialt thou break the bottle in the sight 
of the men that go with thee," 

11 And slialt say unto them. Thus saith the 



fi.'l 


11. 


„ 


Deut 


32 


17 


„ 


2 


Kin.TS 


21-10 


■ 24-4 




T.ev 


18:21. 


r Lev. 


20 


17; 


1) 


lit 


2d 


25. 


q 


I'.^a 




79:2. 


■■ ch. 


18:10 




1 Kit 


gs 9:8. 


1 Lev. 


20 


29 


JJ 


ut 


2B:53; 


Isa 


9: 


M 


Lam 


4:10. 


uch 


51 


00-01 







promises, and hate those who taithl'ully labor to show 
them their guilt and danger. 

20. None deserve so well of their fellow-men as faithful 
reprovers, and none are more liable to be rewarded with 
hatred ami persecution. 

21-23. They who persecute God's faithful servants for 
the truth's sake, array themselves against God himself, 
and expose themselves to his severest judgments. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

1. Ancients; elders. 

2. Valley of the son of Ilinnom : which borders Jerusalem 
on the south-west and south. The east gale; or, "the 
pottery gate." 

6. Tophet; this seems to have been the name of that 
part of the valley where human sacrifices were offered. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-4. No image is too strong to set forth God's absolute 
power over wicked nations, and the irremediable ruin 
which he will bring upon them if they persist in provok- 
ing him to anger by their iniquities. Ver. 10, 11. 

5, 12. The gods of the heathen are demons, cruel and 
licentious, and the services which they demand of their 
worshippers extinguish alike all purity and all natural 
affection. The services which God requires never violate, 
but always purify and ennoble the natural afl'ections. 
S59 



Persccutimi and 



JEREMIAH XX. 



complaint of the prcjtJtci. 



Lord of hosts; Even ?o will I break this people 
and this city,-' as om broakcth a ]ioltor's vessel, 
that canuot be made whole aj^ain:' and they shall 
bury them in Topiiet, till thei-e be no place to bury."" 

12 Thus will I do unto this place, saith the Lord, 
and to the inliabitaats thereof, and eye» make this 
city as Topliet : 

13 And llie houses of Jerusalem, and the houses 
of the kiufTS of Judah, shall be defiled as the place 
of Tophet," because of all the houses upon whose 
roofs they have burned incense unto all the host 
of heaven,'' and have poured out drink-offerings 
unto otlicr gods." 

14 Tiicn came Jeremiah from Tophct, whither 
the Loud had sent him to prophesy ; and he stood 
in the court of the Lord's house;' and said to all 
the people, 

15 Tims saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Is- 
rael ; Behold, I will bring upon this city and upon 
all her towns all the evil tiiat 1 have pronounced 
against it, because they have hardened their necks,*"' 
that they might not hear my words.'' 

CHAPTER XX. 

1 Pashur, smiting Jeremiah, rcceivetli a new name and a fearful doom. 
7 Jeremiah coniplaineth of contempt, 10 of treachery, M and of his 
birth. 

"VT OW Pashur the son of Immer the priest,' who 
_L\| vas also chief governor in the house of the 
LoiU), heard that Jcreniiali prophesied these things. 

2 Tlicn Pasliur smote Jeremiah the prophet, and 
put him in tlie stocks that were in the high gate 
of Benjamin, which myw by the house of the Lord. 

3 And it came to pass on tlie morrow, that Pa- 
shur brouglit forth Jeremiali out of the stocks. 
Then said Jeremiah unto him, The Lord hath not 
called thy name i'ashur, but Magor-missabib.* 

4 For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will make 
thee a terror to thyself, and to all thy friends: 
and they shall fall by the sword of their enemies, 
and thine eyes shall behold it: and I will give all 
Judah into the hand of \\\r. king of liabylon, and 
he shall carry them captive into Babylon, and shall 
slay them with the sword. 



•Psa. •J;9; I»a. 30:11; Lam. 4:'J. ' \ieh. heated. I> ch. 7:a->. <= 2 KiiiKS 
S):lll,la. <lch.M:29; Zcph. 1:J. och.7:IS. ' iChx. -Al-.S. tch.M-.ii. 
I" Psa. ;<a:i-5. i 1 Cbr. -ii-.U. t That is, Fmr romul about; vcr. 10; ch. 
6.-a\ 411:3; P«a. 31:13. J i Kin"s 20:17: 24:1J-10; 4J:l:t, etc. k ch. 



I):z.): Vi:'o; r«a. :il:ia. J a Kings a):17; a^:Ia-l(); -ii-.V-i, o 
U: 13-15; 29:21. 1 Or, enliMrf. Il,am.3:l4. "> ch. S: 1 ; G:7; 7; 



29. 



■Job 



CHAPTER XX. 

2. Tlic sloch; a wooden frame in which t)ie liands, feet, 
and neck were coiilined.and tlni.s the body kept in a bent 
and painful position. IIii^li gnle ; upper Rate. 

7. Deceived mc; ])orsnaded mo to undertake tlie pro- 
phetical ollicc, and thus bronsht upon me such contempt 
and BulTerinK as 1 did not foresee. These words arc incon- 
Biderate and impatient: (iod had fully forewarned him at 
the bcKiniiiii;; ol liis ministry of the persceution which he 
should cncoiuUer. Stronger limn I, and liast prevailed ; how, 
is explained in v(?rse 9. 

10. Report; inform against him to the rulers. Compare 
chap. 3G:ll-2(i. Enticed; led to take some false step. 

14-18. Cursed be the daij — consumed Willi sliame; a very 
remarkable transition from faith and thanksgiving to un- 
belief and irrational piission, such as is not uncommon in 
the experience of even eminent believers, and which they 
oidy can fully understand who have been tried as was the 
pru]>het for tlie truth's sake. 
800 



5 Moreover I will deliver all the strength a m 33m. 
of this city, and all the labors thereof, and "oui.""^"' 
all the }u-eci()us things thereof, and all the treas- 
ures of the kings of Judah will I give into the 
hand of their enemies, which shall spoil them, 
and take them, and carry them to Babylon.-" 

G And thou, Pashur, and all that dwell in thy 
house, shall go into captivity : and thou shall come 
to Babylon, and there thou shalt die, and shall be 
buried there, thou, and all thy friends, to whom 
thou hast prophesied lies." 

7 ITO Lord, thou liast deceived me, and I was 
deceived :* thou art stronger than I, and hast pre- 
vailed : 1 am in derision daily, every one mocketh 
me.' 

8 For since I spake, I cried out, I cried violence 
and spoil;"' because the word of the Lord was 
made a reproach unto me, and a derision, daily. 

9 Then 1 said, I will not make mention of him, 
nor speak any more in his name. But /lis uord 
was in my heart as a burning lire shut up in my 
bones," and I was weary with forbearing, and I 
could not s/(tij.° 

10 1l For I heard the defaming of many, fear on 
every side." Kcport, say they, and we will report 
it.'' All my familiars^ watched for my halting, 
saying, Peradventure he will be enticed, and we 
shall prevail against him, and we shall take our 
revenge on hiiii."" 

11 But the Lord is with me as a mighty terri- 
ble one:" therefore my persecutors shall stumble,' 
and they shall not prevail:" they shall be greatly 
ashamed; for they shall not prosper: their ever- 
lasting confusion sliall never be forgotten/ 

12 But, Lord of hosts, that triest the right- 
eous,™ aytd seest the reins and the heart,'' let me sec 
thy vengeance on them: for unto thee have I 
opened my causc.^ 

13 Sing unto the Lord, praise ye the Lord: for 
he hath delivered the soul of the poor from the 
hand of evil-doers.'' 

14 It Cursed be the day wherein I was born: let 
not the day wherein mv mother bare me be bless- 
ed." 



3>:1», 19; 1 Cor, HI-; IT • 


\ , 1:20; Is::'), p P.<a. 31 13. q Ptn*. 10:1". 


i Hcb. Every mun iij imj ;>' 


r. t ,lnb 19:19; P»a. 41:9; 53:11, 11; Luko 


11:.W. ■ ih. 1:S, 19. 1 Dei 


;.32:3J,3r.. uch. 13:20. » ch. 23:40. <• ch. 


17:10. I I'sa. 59:10. y Isa 


. .■W:I4; 1 Pot. 2:2:); 4:19. « Psa. 31:0; 3J:9, 


10; 109:30,31. • ch. 1-0:10; 


Job 3:1, etc. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. It is very common with wicked men to show llieir 
enmity to Goil's messages by persecuting those who de- 
liver them. 

4, 5. God's threatened wrath upon sinners can be avert- 
ed only by rcpeiUance and amendmont. To hate and mal- 
treat his servants, who forewarn them of coming judg- 
ments, will only involve them in docpor guilt and ruin. 

G. The malignant persecutors of (Iml's people generally 
come to an ignominious and miserable end. 

7, 8. To endure derision and abuse lor the truth's sake, 
with few or none to countonance and encourago us. is a 
sore trial. Under its pressure the best of men are liable 
to lose their patience, and indulge in unbecoming com- 
plaints ennceruing (Jod's providence. 

9. To withhold any part of Cod's counsel through fear 
of man causes a servant of (Iod deep distress, and lie can- 
not rest till he has failhfully dechircil it all, whether men 
will hear or whether they will forbear. 

10. A common artiliee of persecutors is, to entice tbo 



Siege and captivity 



JEREMIAH XXII. 



of Jerusalem fordohl. 



A.M. S399. 15 Cursed he. tlic man who brought tid- 
' ml "" ings to my father, saying, A man-child is 
born unto thee; making him very glad. 

16 And let that man be as the cities which the 
Lord overthrew, and repented not:'* and let him 
hear the cry in the morning, and the shouting at 
noontide ; 

17 Because ho slew nic not from the womb;'' or 
that my mother miglit have been my grave, and 
her womb to be always great with me. 

18 Wlierefore came I forth out of the womb to 
see labor and sorrow,"^ that my days should be 
consumed witli shame?'' 



CHAPTER XXI. 

1 Zedekiah sendeth to Jeremiali to inquire tiic event of Nebuchadrezzar's 
war. 3 Jeremiah foretcllcth a hard siege and miserable captivity. 
8 He counselleth the people to fall to the Chaldeans, 11 and upbraid- 
eth the king's house. 

THE word which came unto Jeremiah from tlie 
Lord, when king Zedekiah sent unto him 
Pashur the son of Melchiah," and Zephauiah the 
son of Maaseiah the priest,'' saying, 

2 Inquire, I pray thee, of the Lord for us ;^ for 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon raakcth war 
against us ; if so be that the Lord will deal with 
us according to all his wondrous works, that he 
may go up from us. 

3 1" Then said Jeremiah unto them, Thus shall ye 
say to Zedekiah : 

4 Thus saith the Lord God of Israel ; Behold, I 
will turn back the weapons of war that are in 
your hands, wherewith ye fight against the king 
of Babylon, and against the Chaldeans, which be- 
siege you without the walls,'' and I will assemble 
them into the midst of this city. 

5 And I myself will fight against you with an 
outstretched hand and with a strong arm,' even in 
anger, and in fury, and in great wrath.^ 

6 And I will smite the inhabitants of this city, 
both man and beast : they shall die of a great pes- 
tilence. 

7 And afterward, saith the Lord, I will deliver 



Zedekiah king of Judali, and his servants, and the 
people, and such as arc left in this city from tho 
pestilence, from tho sword, and from the famine, 
into the hand of Nebucliadrezzar king of Babylon, 
and into the hand of their enemies, and into the 
hand of those that seek their life:'' and lie shall 
smite them with the edge of the sword : he shall 
not spare them, neither iiave pity, nor have 
mercy.' 

8 11 And unto this people thou shalt say. Thus 
saith the Lord; Behold, I set before you the way 
of life, and the way of death. 

9 lie that abideth in this city sliall die by the 
sword, and by tho famine, and by tho pestilence :™ 
but he that goeth out, and falleth to the Chalde- 
ans that besiege yon, he shall live, and his life 
shall be unto him for a prey." 

10 For I have set my face against this city for 
evil, and not for good, saith the Lord:" it sliall 
be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, 
and lie shall burn it witli fire.'' 

11 IT And touching the house of the king of Ju- 
dah, say. Hear ye the word of the Lord ; 

12 house of David, thus saith the Lord; Ex- 
ecute* judgment in the morning,'' and deliver him 
that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor,'' 
lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that none 
can quench it, because of the evil of your doings. 

13 Behold, I am against thee, inhabitant* of 
the valley, and rock of the plain, saith the Lord ; 
which say, 'Who shall come down against us?^ or 
who shall enter into our habitations? 

14 But I will punish* you according to the fruit 
of your doings,' saith the Lord : and I will kindle 
a fire in the forest thereof, and it shall devour all 
things round about it." 

CHAPTER XXII. 

1 He exhorteth to repentance, with promises and threats. 10 Tlie 
judgment of Shallum, 13 of Jehoiakim, 20 and of Coniah. 

THUS saith the Lord ; Go clown to the house 
of the king of Judah, and speak there this 
word, 



.19;25. bEccl.C:5. cPsa.90:10. liLam..'!:!. ech.3S:l. f ch o ch. 44:11 ; Amos 9:4. Pch. 52:13. -Wnh. Judge, q Zeph. 3:5. r Zech. 

•2 Kings 25:18. s oh. 37:3, 7; Ezek. 14:4, 5. h ch. 52:7, 2S. i E.toa. 7:9,10. \ Y\eh. inkabitnss. » ch. 49:4, 5. I Heh. visit -upon. 1 Prov. 

jlsa. l:i:4; Lam. 2:5. k ch. 37:17; 39:5, etc. ; 52:9, etc. ; 2 Kings 1:31 ; Isa. 3:10, 11. u2Chr.3G:19. 
, etc. 1 Deut. 2^:50; 2 Chr. 36:17. " ch. 3S:2, 17. ■> ch. 39:9, 18. 



righteous from the path of duty, that they may thus pre- 
vail against them. 

11-13. In the deepest distress God's faithful servants 
have an almighty Helper ever at hand, who will not fail 
in due time to deliver them and overthrow their adver- 
saries. 

lt-18. To curse the day of our birth on account of any 
outward trials, is the extreme of rashness and folly. Yet 
it is a sin from which nothing but abundant supplies of 
divine grace can preserve even good men, in the hour of 
.strong temptation. Job 3:1. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

1. Zedekiah; the last king of Judah. This was during 
the final siege of the city by Nebuchadnezzar, near the 
close of his reign. 

12. In the morning; every morning; that is, promptly 
and habitually. The morning was the regular time for 
the administration of justice. 

13. O inhabitant of the valleij — rode of the plain ; the same 
as " my mountain in the field," chap. 17 : 3. Shall come down ; 



from the higher hills in the vicinity, where the armies of 
the enemy were encamped. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. God's wondrous works in days past afford no ground 
of encouragement to wicked and corrupt rulers in his 
visible church, since the effect of his interposition in her 
behalf must be not their salvation, but their destruction. 

3. God's servants must return to those who consult 
them, of whatever rank or station, not such answers as 
will be pleasing to them, but such as are in accordance 
with truth. To those who persist in sin there can be no 
message of peace. 2 Chron. 18:7. 

8-10. The only path of safety for nations or individuals 
lies in submission to God's declared will, however hum- 
bling it may be to their pride. 

12. For nders and people there is but one law — right- 
eousness and prosperity, or wickedness and ruin. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

According to some, the prophet addressed tho words 
of this chapter to Zedekiah, and embodied in them his 
801 



Tks Icing's household 



JEREMIAH XXII. 



exhorted to repent. 



2 And say, Hear the word of llic Lord, king 
of Judali, that sittcst upon the throne of David, 
thou, and thy servants, and thy people that enter 
in by these gates:" 

3 Tims saith the Louu ; Execute ye judgment 
and riglitcousncss, and deliver the spoiled out of 
the hand of the oppressor:'' and do no wrong, do 
no violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the 
widow, neither shed innocent blood in this place. 

4 For if ye do this thing indeed, then shall there 
enter in by the gates of this house kings sitting 
upon the throne of David,* riding in chariots and 
on horses, he, and his servants, and his people. 

5 But if ye will not hear these words, I swear 
by myself," saith the Loud, that this house shall 
become a desolation.'' 

6 For thus saith the Lord unto the king's house 
of Judali ; Thou art Gilead unto me, and the head 
of Lebanon : yet surely 1 will make thee a wilder- 
ness, and cities irhich are not inhabited. 

7 And I will prepare destroyers against thee, 
every one with his weapons: and they shall cut 
down thy choice cedars,' and cast them into th« 
fire.'' 

8 And many nations shall pass by this city, and 
they shall say every man to his neighbor. Where- 
fore hath the Lord done thus unto this great city?"-' 

9 Then they shall answei-, Because they have for- 
saken the covenant of the Lord their God, and 
worshipped other gods, and served them.'' 

10 1 Weep ye not for the dead, neither bemoan 
him;' but weep sore for him that goeth away: 
for he shall return no more, nor sec his native 
country. 

11 For thus saith the Lord touching Shallum the 
son of Josiali king of Judah.J which reigned in- 
stead of Josiah his father, which went forth out of 
this place; He shall not return thither any more: 

12 But he shall die in the place whither they have 



» Ch. 17:20. ptc. I> ch. 21 : 12. • IT<-b for David upon his throne. ' Hob. 
6:1.T 17. d 2Chr. 7:19, 22. <• Isa. 37:24. 'ch 21:14. E Deut. 29:21, 2.3; 
1 King« 0:8, 9. h 2 Kings 22. 17; 2 Cbr. 34:25. i Eccl. 4:2; Isa. r)7: 1. 
J2Kiiias2.3:20; IChr. 3:15. k vor. 18; 2KinE3 23:34 I Mic. 3:10; Hab. 
2:9. a Ler. 19:13; Deut. 21:14, 15; Jas. S:4. t Heb. throu^h-nired. 



former predictions concerning Shalhim, Jehoiakim, and 
Coniah. Thus the denunciation in the last verse would 
refer to Zedekiah. But we may bettor refer the proph- 
ecy, at least as far as verse 19, to the reign of Jehoiakim ; 
what follows concerning Coniah being cither spoken in 
anticipation of his disastrous reign, or written during it 
at a later date. 

6. (Jilead — the head of Lebanon; Gilead was the moun- 
tainous region on the east of Jordan, south of the river 
Jabbok. Like Lebanon it was celebrated for its majesty 
and beauty. The meaning is, that however precious to 
God is the royal house of David, with the kingdom intrust- 
ed to it, God will make both utterly desolate for their sins. 

10. Fertile dead; the reference seems to be to Josiah. 
Htm that piKlli awnij; that is, Shallum. Vcr. 11. 

11. SImllttm ; generally supposed to have been the same 
as Jehoahaz, whom Pharaoh-Neeho carried captive into 
Egypt, after a reign of three months. 2 Kings 23:31-34; 
2 Chron. 30:1-4. He was a younger brother, but "the 
people of the land " preferred him before Jehoiakim. His 
name was probably changed upon his accession to the 
throne, as was that of Jehoiakim, 2 Chron. 30:4; and Zed- 
ekiah, 2 Kings 24:17. 

13. Thnt huildclli his house by unrit^hteoujuiess ; the refer- 
ence is to Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah and successor of 
Johoahaz. That the reigning monarch is addressed is 
862 



led him captive, and shall see this land no a. m. 3395. 

1, ' li. <:. about 

more." ao. 

13 li Woe unto him that buildeth his house by 
unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong;' 
t/iat useth his neighbor's service without wages, 
and giveth him not for his work;"' 

14 That saith, I will build me a wide house and 
large* chambers, and cutteth him out windows:' 
and it is ceiled with cedar, and painted with ver- 
milion. 

15 Shalt thou reign, because thou closest thyself 
in cedar? did not thy father eat and drink, and do 
judgment and justice," o«(/ then tVu-os well with him? 

1() lie judged the cause of the poor and needy; 
then it vas well ivith hiTn:" icas not this to know 
me? saith the Lord. 

17 But thine eyes and thy heart arc not but for 
thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent blood, 
and for oppression, and for violence,'' to do itJ' 

18 Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning 
Jehoiakim tlio son of Josiah king of Judah ; They 
shall not lament for him,'' saying, Ah, my brother!'' 
or. Ah, sister! they shall not lament for him, say- 
ing, Ah, lord! or, Ah, his glory! 

19 He shall be buried with the burial of an as.s 
drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusa- 
lem." 

20 ^ Go up to Lebanon and cry ; and lift up thy 
voice in Bashan, and cry from the passages: for 
all thy lovers are destroyed.' 

21 I spake unto thee in thy prosperity;' but 
thou saidst, I will not hear. This tiath been thy 
manner from thy youth, that thou obeyedst not 
my voice." 

22 The wind shall eat up all thy pastors,^' and 
thy lovers shall go into captivity: surely then 
shalt thou be ashamed and confounded for all thy 
wickedness. 

23 inhabitanf of Lebanon, that makest thy 



I Or, my windows, n 2 Kin<;.i 2:1:25. o ha. 3:10. i Or. incursion. pEiele. 
19:U. ich. 16:4, 6. r 1 Kings 13:.TO. > ch. :ifi:30. Fulfilled 599. < ch. 
30:14. MUh. prosplrilies. " ch. 3:25; 7:23, elo. > ch. 23: 1, etc. 1 Hcb. 
inhabitress; ch. 21 : 13. 



plain, from verso 15. He was an avaricious, luxurious, 
and unrighteous king, who oppressed and plundered the 
people for his own aggrandizement. 

18. For him ; that is, for him and the members of his 
family, as the words, "Ah, sister," show. Ah, sister; this 
probably refers to his queen, who was afterwards carried 
cai)tive to Babylon with Jehoiachin her son. 2 Kings 
24:12. 

19. Buried with the burial of an ass; that is, shall be left 
unbnricd. Chap. 36:30. Drawn and cast forth; that is. 
which is drawn and cast forth, tlie words referring to the 
body of the ass, not to Jehoiakim, who probably died in 
Babylon. 2 Chron. 36:6. 

20. Go up to Lebanon — "i lia.ilian ; the address is to " the 
daughter of Zion," Let her cry from the mountain-tops, 
that all may hear her wailings. From the pa.^iac;es ; either, 
from the passages that lead out of the land to Babylon; 
or better, " from Abarim," a mountainous ridge cast of the 
lower Jordan and the Dead sea. Num. 27:12; Deut. 32:49. 
Thi/ lovers; the foreign uatioim to whom thou trustedst 
for help. 

23. Inhabitant of Lebanon — makest tliy nest in the udars; 
a double reference to the beauty of mount Zion, wliieh 
rivalled that of Lcb.anon ; and to the palaces built with 
cedar-wood from Lebanon, that adorned its heights. Hov 
graciom ; rather, " how much to be commiserated." 



The judgment of Coniah. 



JEREMIAH XXIII. 



Christ is j,romUed. 



A. M.3W5, nest in the cedars, how gracious shalt thou 
599. be when pangs come upon thee, tlic pam 
as of a woman in travail ! 

24 Jis I live, saith the Lord, though Coniah the 
son of Jehoiakim king- of Judah were the signet 
upon my right hand," yet would I pluck thee thence;'' 

25 And I will give thee into the hand of them 
that seek thy life," and into the hand of them 
whose face thou fearest, even into the hand of 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the 
hand of the Chaldeans. 

20 And 1 will cast thee out, and thy mother that 
bare thee, into another country, where ye were not 
born;'' and there shall ye die. 

27 But to the land whercunlo they desire* to 
return, tliithcr shall they not return. 

28 Is this man Coniah a despised broken idol? 
is he a vessel wherein is no pleasure?*" wherefore 
are they cast out, he and his seed, and are cast 
into a land which they know not? 

29 earth, earth, earlh, hear the word of the 
Louri.' 

30 Thus saith the Lord, Write ye this man child- 
less,''' a man that shall not prosper in his days : for 
no man of his seed shall prosper, sitting upon the 
throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

1 He prophesieth a restoration of the scattered flock. 5 Christ sliall 
rule and save them. 9 Against false prophets, 33 and mockers of the 
true prophets. 

WOE be unto the pastors that destroy and scat- 
ter the sheep of my pasture!" saith the Lord. 
2 Therefore thus saith the Lord God of Israel 







sr. 


Har. 


•?■■? 


3. b ch 


37 


1 ; 


•2 Kings 24 


fi-S 


1 Ch 


.3:16. 


cch. 


:!4 


•.W. d 


2K 


n.r, H4 


I."), 


•Heb. 


lifl 


wp 


the 


lr n 


md 


oh 


44:14 




Hos 


H:!<. 


1 


«. 1:'. 


B 


ch. ;«> 


.•id; 


Matt. 1 


11. 


1-.! 


h 


rh 


10: 


-!' ; 


Kzpk. 


■(4 


:>.. 1 


Ai-ts 


au 


au. i 


ch. 


32:37; 


Ue 


ut. 30:1 


-ij; 


Kz 


ek. 


34 


13, 


tc. 


k ch. 


3: 


15. 


1 ch. 



24. Coniah; elsewhere called Jecouiah, 1 Chron. 3:16; 
and Jehoiachiii, 2 Kings 24:8; 2 Chron. 30:8, 9. 

28. Idol; rather, " earthen vessel." The question of the 
prophet expresses astonishment at his fate. Wherefore 
are they cast out; the prophet leaves the people to infer 
the an.swer. 

29. O earth, earth, earth ; he solemnly calls upon the 
earth to witness his prediction. Compare Deut. 32:1; 
Isa. 1:2. 

30. This man : Coniah. See note introductory to this 
chapter. Childless; not in the absolute sense, for he had 
children, 1 Chron. 3:17, 18, one of whom is named in our 
Lord's genealogy, Matt. 1:12, and this is implied in the 
words following: "No man of his seed shall prosper." 
But he was childless in the sense immediately explained, 
that none of his seed should occupy the throne of David 
in Jerusalem. Zedekiah, who reigned after him, was his 
brother. The prophet here refers to the earthly throne 
of David. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

6. No outward nearness or sacredness of relation to 
God will screen men from his wrath when they persist in 
trampling under foot his laws. Rom. 2:1-11. 

8, 9. As God has distinguished his covenant people 
above all nations of the earth by his wonderful interposi- 
tions in their behalf, so will he make their punishment in 
like manner conspicuous when they sin against him, that 
the inhabitants of the world may see it and fear before 
him. 

10. The dead are beyond the reach of our prayers and 
sympathies, and immoderate grief for them is forbidden 
by the spirit of true religion ; the living who arc iu dis- 



against the pastors that feed my people ; Ye have 
scattered my flock, and driven them away, and 
have not visited them:' behold, I will visit upon 
3'ou the evil of your doings, saith the Lord. 

3 And I will gather the remnant of my flock 
out of all countries whither I have driven them, 
and will bring them again to their folds ;J and 
they shall be fruitful and increase. 

4 And I will set up shepherds over them which 
shall feed them : " and they shall fear no more, nor 
be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking, saith 
the Lord. 

5 1 Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that 
I will raise unto David a righteous Branch,' and 
a King shall reign and prosper,"' and shall exe- 
cute judgment and justice in the earth." 

G In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel 
shall dwell safely ■." and this is his name whereby 
he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHT- 
EOUSNESS.t 

7 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the 
Lord, that they shall no more say, The Lord liv- 
eth, which brought up the children of Israel out 
of the land of Egypt ;p 

8 But, The Lord liveth, which brought up and 
wliieh led the seed of the house of Israel out of 
the north country ,'i and from all countries whither 
I had driven them;"' and they shall dwell in their 
own land.'* 

9 T My heart within me is broken because of the 
prophets ; all my bones shake :' I am like a drunk- 
en man, and like a man whom wine hath overcome, 
because of the Lord," and because of the words of 
his holiness.'^ 



33:14-16; Isa. 4 


2; 11:1-5; 40:9-11 ; Zeoh. 3:8; 6:12; John 


1:4.5. mDan. 


9:24. n Psa. 72 


:2. Deut. 33:27, 2-i; Zcch. 14:9-11. ' 


Heb. Jehovah 


Tsidkenu; 1 Cor 


. 1:30. V ch. 16:14, 15. a Zeph. 3:20. 


T Isa. 43:5, 6. 


s Amos 9: 14, 15. 


Illab. 3:16. u Ua. 0:5. v Rom. 7:9. 





tress may rather claim our tears and supplications in their 
behalf. 

11. God will not spare wicked children for the piety of 
their fathers. Ezek. 18:10-13. 

13-19. Rulers who rob and oj^press the people for their 
own aggrandizement, are alike odious to God and man, 
and they generally come to an ignominious end, with none 
to mourn for them or honor them in death. 

22. The alliances of God's ancient people with their 
heathen neighbors ended in disappointment and ruin ; so 
will it ever be with those who forsake the living God for 
earthly confidences. 

30. The earthly kingdom of David began with righteous 
rulers, and gained strength and glory by obedience to 
God's laws ; it was destroyed by wicked and corrupt 
rulers, leading a wicked and corrupt people in iniquity 
and rebellion against God. Herein is it set forth as an 
example to all nations. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

1. Pastors; Jewish rulers and teachers. Compare Ezek. 
34, with which this passage strikingly agrees. 

5. A righteous Branch — a King; the Messiah. See Isa. 
4:2, and note. 

7, 8. Tliey shall no more say — dwell in their own land; com- 
pare chap. 3:lfi, and note. The return of the Jews from 
Babylon was an earnest of the higher fulfilment of this 
prophecy, which is reserved for " the last days." Compare 
Ezek. chap. 34, throughout. 

9. Is broken; in verse 3, the propliet had passed from 
threatenings to promises ; he now returns from promises 
to threatenings. This is the usual manner of the prophets. 
803 



Guilt of false j,ropkets, 



JEREMIAH XXIII. 



and their punishment. 



10 For the land is full of adultercr.-j;" for be- 
cause of swearing" the land mourneth ;•' the pleas- 
ant places of the wilderness are dried up, and their 
course* is evil, and their force is not right. 

11 For both propiict and priest are profane;" 
yea, in my house have I found their wickedness,'' 
saith the Loud. 

12 Wiierefore their ways shall be unto them as 
wlippery ?ra7/A' in the darkness :" they shall be driven 
on, and fall therein : for I will bring evil upon them, 
even the year of their visitation,' saith the Lord. 

13 And I have seen folly* in the prophets of 
Samaria ; they prophesied in Baal,^ and caused my 
people Israel to err. 

14 I have seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem 
a horrible thing :^ they commit adultery, and walk 
in lies: they strengthen also the hands of evil- 
doers," that none doth return from his wickedness : 
they arc all of them unto mc as Sodom, and the 
inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah.' 

15 Therefore thus saitli the Loud of hosts con- 
cerning the prophets; IJehold, I will feed them 
with wormwood, and make them drink the water 
of gall :' for from the prophets of Jerusalem is 
profaneness' gone forth into all the land. 

IG Thus saith the Loud of hosts, Hearken not 
unto the words of the prophets that prophesy unto 
you ; they make you vain : tliey speak a vision of 
their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the 
Lord. 

17 They say still unto them that despise me, The 
Lord hath said. Ye shall have peace;'' and they 
say unto every one that walketh after the imagi- 
nation^ of his own heart, No evil shall come upon 
you.' 

18 For who hath stood in the counsel* of the 
Lord, and hath perceived and heard his word? 
who hath marked his word, and heard it?"" 

19 Behold, a whirlwind of the Lord is gone 
forth in fury, even a grievous whirlwind :'^ it shall 
fall grievously upon the head of the wicked. 

20 The anger of the Lord shall not return, until 
he have executed, and till he have performed the 
thoughts of his heart:" in the latter days ye shall 
consider it perfectly. 



• Oh 


9:2. 


• 


Or, cur 


inn. '' n 


m. 4:2 


S. 


t Or, t 


io'ence 


c 


T 


n;4 


<lEzck 


H:l(!, 


17 


iSllSU 


Mitt. 21 


i;t. « 


l'ro7 


4:19. 


' Uxod 


n-.' 


: Or, 


«n absurd th 


nff 


nob. 


unsavory. 


C ch. 


2:H 


i Or, 


JilMm 




b V 


r, flfi, 


:>i; Ua 


41:0 


7. 


i I»a 


1:9, 10. 


Jch. 


):14 


1 Or 






k 


K7.nk. 


i:l:10; 


Zech. 


lU 


a. 1 


Or, siubbornness , 


cli. 


13:10. 


1 Mic 


■J 


11. 


• Or, 



Compare Isa. 4:1,2; 59:15, 16; Amos 9:10,11; Zeph. 3:7,8. 
Becau-sc of the Lord — tlie words of his holiness; that is, of his 
messaj;c8 of wrath committed to mc; these fill the proph- 
et's mind witli awe. 

1 0. Swearing ; tliat is, false swearing. But we may better 
roiidcr, " because of the curse ;" that is, the diviuc curse. 

13. InBaul; in Haal's name. 

18. M'/io; wlio among; these false prophets. Hath stood 
in the counsel of the Lord; hath been admitted to liis se- 
cret counsel, so as to hear his words and understand his 
win. 

20. In the latter days; when the promises of the false 
prophets have failed, and the threatcnings of tlio true 
proi)lict8 have been fulfilled. Shall consider it ; your folly 
in hearkening to lies. 

23. /J God lit hand; a Cod wlio can, like men, be present 
only in one place at a time, and see an<l act there only? 

28. A dream ; a true dream, a revelation received from 
l(od in a dream. Let him tell a dream ; as much us to sav, 



21 I have not sent these prophets, vet a. M.sioii 

. , I , . 1 , ' 1 ' ■' , U. ('. about 

they ran : 1 have not spoken to them, yet ««. 
they prophesied. 

22 ]3ut if they had stood in my counsel, and had 
caused my people to hear my words, tlien they 
should have turned them from their evil way, and 
from the evil of their doings.'' 

23 J]m I a God at hand, saith the Lord, and not 
a God afar oft'? 

24 Can any hide himself in secret places that J 
shall not .see him?'' saith the Lord. Do not I fill 
heaven and earth?'' saith the Lord. 

25 I have heard what the prophets said, that 
prophesy lies in my name, saying, 1 have dreamed, 
1 have dreamed. 

20 IIow long shall this be in the heart of the 
prophets that prophesy lies? yea, (hej/ arc prophets 
of the deceit of their own heart; 

27 Which think to cause my people to forget my 
name by their dreams, which they tell every man 
to his neighbor, as their fathers have forgotten 
my name for Baal.'' 

28 The prophet that hath* a dream, let liim tell 
a dream ; and he that hath my word, let him speak 
my word faithfully. What is the chaff to tho 
wheat? saith the Lord. 

2'J Is not my word like as a fire?' saith tho 
Lord ; and like a hammer that breaketh the rock 
in pieces? 

30 Therefore, behold, I am against the prophets, 
saith the Lord, that steal my words every one 
from his neighbor. 

31 Behold, I am against the prophets, saith the 
Lord, that use' their tongues, and say, He saith. 

32 Behold, I a)7i against them that prophesy 
false dreams, saith the Lord, and do tell them, 
and cause my people to err by their lies, and by 
their lightness:" yet 1 sent them not, nor com- 
manded them : therefore they shall not profit this 
people at all, sailh tlie Lord. 

33 T And when this people, or the prophet, or a 
priest, shall ask thee, saying, What is the burden 
of the Lord?" thou shalt then say unto them. What 
burden? I will even forsake you," saith the Lord. 

34 And as for the prophet, and the priest, and 



secret, m 2 Clir. 18:23. n cli. 30:2.3. 24. "Prov. 21:30. p 1 ThtM. 5:6. 
qAraos9:2, 3. rlKui!p8:27. • Judg. 3:7; 8::G, 34. t Hcb leif* ir*om 
is. I Hob. 4:12. I Or, smooth. ' In. 3:l2j Amos 2:4. ' Mai. 1:1. 
w2Chr. 15:2. 



Let him only that has received a dream from me tell it. 
What is the chaff to the wheat? or, "What has the chaff to 
do with the wdieat?" Why mingle human devices witlx 
my revelations? 

29. A fire — a hammer; God contrasts the clTicacy of his 
word with the powcrlcssncss of false revchitions. 

30. Steal my words cfcry one from his neighbor; tho refer- 
once seems to be to pretended prophets, who borrowed 
from their neighbors, tho true prophets, certain forms and 
phrases, which they mixed with their own vain imagin- 
ings. 

33. Wtat is the burden of the I^ord? in the original Hebrew, 
the same word means both " burden " and " oracle." The 
prophet's oracles were mainly occupied with denuncia- 
tions of God's wrath, which he laid upon the people as a 
heavy burden, llcnco thoy asked him. "What is tho bur- 
den of the Lord?" What lo:'d of i)unishnu'nt does he next 
lay u]ion us 1 HTiat burden 7 their question was scoflingly 
asked ; God will answer it carnestlv, with a true burden. 



Tlie type af gfiad 



.IKIIK.MIAH XXiV. 



and had Jiy^x. 



A. M.S10.'., tlio pc(t|ili', tli;il. :-liiill siiy, 'I'll'' liiinli'ii of 

.vjii" "" tli<; Loitli, I will (;v(;ii |)Ulii.-ir IIkiI. mimii 
and hi.s lioiisf. 

liS 'I'liiiH Hliiill yo say every one to liis nei^lilior, 
and every one to liis brotiu!!-, VVIiat lialli the JiOito 
aiiHwered ? and, What lialli ttie lir)iti) Hijoken? 

'Mi And the iiiirden of the liOiu; shall yo mention 
no inof;; for every nian'^ word sliali he his Ijiii'- 
(hii :" Cor ye have perverteij tlio woril:s of the liv- 
\\\<^ flod, of the JjOiti) of hoslH our God.'' 

I}7 'J'liiis Khalt tiiou Hay to the propiiet, What 
hath the JjOiM) answered theo? and, What hatli 
the liOiti) Hpoken? 

lis Hiifc since ye Bay, 'I'he hui'der] oC I he IjOriD; 
tliereCore thii« Haitli the LoitD ; Jieeaii.-e ye nay 
tliis word, 'J'he liurden of the Loud, and I liavt; 
Hcnt unto you, Kayinjr, Yo HJiail not say, 'J'he bur- 
<ien of the Loito ; 

W 'J'herefore, lielioid, f , evrni I, will utterly for- 
iTQi you, arid J. will forsake you, and the eity that, 
J f^ave you and your father;-), and cad you out of 
my pre.-enec:" 

10 And I will Jirinf^ an everlustin<,' reproaeh 
ujioii you, and a per[)Ctuai Klianie, whieli whall not 
' ha forgotten." 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

I UnJcT tlw type of ^oml and b;i<J lii4», •! \i<: forciiliowclli tin; r'-ntoralion 
of t!i*;rn tbat wcry m captivity, 8 and tlie d'*M>lalion of Zcdt'ltiah and 
the rent. 

THE Lour) showed mo, and Vjehold, two bawkcts 
of figs wxTc f-:et before the teiiij)!e ol'fhe Lortr>, 
;),fi,er that Ncbuehadrez/.ar king of JJabylon iiad 
carried away captive Jeeoniah the son of dehoia- 
kim king of Judah," and the prinees of Judah, 
witli the carpenters and smiths,' from .Jerusalem, 
and had brought them to Babylon." 

• ilcl). vitil ajmn. ' Gal, 0:.'.. •' UPol, 3:1(1, ' Vmv. 13:13, i llm. 
17. <!eh.-ii:'ii,eb:. I I Kim. in-AO. u 2 Kinm ii);li!, etc, 1 lle\j. ftir 
Owlnett. h Malt, •i.'r.Z'i, 33, I Il'jb, the mpUvUy. I ileb, ia:l«, J ch. 



Vi. Shall ye mention no more; bccauHC of tlio derlBlon to 
wliicli tliJH foriri, "The burden of the Lord," had been ck- 
posftd, Ood forl)idH tlie people itH use. Lvery man'n word 
shall he Im burden ; the scollirif; u«c of theHe wordH, "'i'fio 
burden of the Lord," <jliali brinj; upon every one who em- 
ploys thcni a burden of divine wratli. 
INSTIICCTIONH. 

1-4. The Lord knowH liow to 'ieliver his flock out of the 
hand of unfaithful pastorH, while he puniHheH them for 
their pride and HelfiHlmcHH. 

r>. The hope and Htrength and salvation of the church 
are in the I,,ord .Jcsuh Christ, "that j^reat Khephcrd of the 
sheep," whom Ood has raised up to lier aecordinj; to his 
ancient protnise. All power in heaven and earth is in his 
hands, and he will use it for the overthrow of all her ene- 
mies and her perpetual enlargement from age to ago. 

e. Christ is named "Thk lyOBD oun KioiiTKorjsNEHS," be- 
cause he alone gives justifying righteousness to us sin- 
ners, and thus restores us to peace with Cod. I'om. 5:J. 

7, 8. However great the glory of past deliverances which 
f lod has vouchHafed to his people, a tjrighfer glory remains 
for the latter days of their pr<;Hperity and triumph. 

13, H. When tlie spiritual guides of a people are v/icked, 
and tcichers of falsehood, the wliole community sinks rap- 
idly into corruption and ruin. 

ir>. Since none do so much as false teacliers to strengthen 
tli(! hands of evil-doers, none shall receive such punishment 
at Cod's hand. 

17. False teachers may be known l»y these two marks : 
their livca are corrupt, and their doctrines flatter men 



'2 Oiif l)a,-J<et /iiid very good figs, frrn, like tin; 
ligs (/ml art: first ripe: and the other li;i;diet ha/l 
very naughty lig,-', wliioli eould not bi; eaten, they 
wert! so bad.' 

15 'i'lien said the l;Oi:.i> unto ine, What ;-<'e-l. thou, 
.lei-f^rniah? And i said, l''igH; the good lig,-;, vtiry 
good ; and the evil, very evil, that eaiinid, be eaten, 
they are so evil.'' 

4 II Again tin; word of IIm' L(ii;i> eame iinlu me, 
saying, 

.1 Thus saitli the FiOliO, the God of (si'ael ; Likt; 
these good figs, so will I aeknowledge tliein that 
arc eai'ried a.way captive,' of .ludah, wlioiu I have 
sent out of this [dace into the buid of the (Jhal- 
dean;-( for- l/icir good.' 

G i''oi' I will set mine cyi\- upon Iheru for good, 
and I will bring them again to Ihi- land;' ami J 
will build them, and not jiull //iita down; ami i 
will jdarit them, a.nd not, |ilui|, ///rm, up. 

7 And J will give them a, heart to know nu;,'' that 
I am the IiOi!0; and they shall be my peopli;, and 
I will be their God:' for- they shall return unto 
me with their wdiole heart.'" 

8 1i And as the evil figs, which cannot be eatiMi, 
they are so evil; surely thus saith the Loito, So 
will J give Zedekiah the king of .Judah, and his 
princes, and the residue of J(.'rusalf'm, that remain 
in this land, and them that dwell irr the land of 
l<;gy|.t: 

i) And J will delivei- them to Jie removed'' into 
all the kingdoms of the ear'th for l/uir hurt," to be 
a retu'oach and a proverb, a taunt and a, curse, in 
all fdaces whither J shall drivt; them." 

10 And J will send the sword, the famine, anrj 
the pestilence, among them, till they be cou,-:umed 
from oil' the land that 1 gave unto them and to 
their fathers,'' 



•JO:UI-M), kch.S'^:;!!), 10; Dent, ;W:0; K/j,k. 11:10, :iU:-iU,-Zt. I (;li, 31 :,•)», 
m ch, .3;H(: K//m, «:17. ♦ llnh, far remiiiilng; or, ve/Mlian. " Ucot, 
■HM/.il; 1 KiMKB'J:?, " t'tv.. II-.U), H. I'di, 31:17, 

with the hope of unpunity and prosperity in sin. Matt, 
7:1.1, 1«. 

'/2. When Ood's ministers as a body are faidiful to 
their Idgli ofliee, his church is in a healthful condition, 
and abounding in the fruits of holiness. 

23,24. To Cod's omnipresence there can be no distance ; 
wherever we are, his omnipotence and omniscience com- 
pass us on <:vi:Ty side. 

28. It should he t,he chief aim of (lod's meHsengcrB to 
declare his word faithfully, without any a<lniixture of hu- 
man devices. 

29. Cod's truth, when feithfully preached and applieil 
by his Kpirit to men's hearts and r:onHciences, has adivine 
ellicacy, which distinguishes it from all human Hyst<;ms of 
religion, 'riiese last are powerless for convincing men of 
sin and turning them to righteousness. 

:y.',-4(>. They who deride Cod's lhrcat^■ningn will soon bo 
ma<]c to feel in their ov,ii perKons their irreBistihle and 
terrible power. 

CJiAj"i'i;ji XX J V. 

2. Veri/goodfi^n — very rumf;litijfigii; the two baskets of 
figs represent the two classes of .lews, in respect U> both 
condition and character. Nebuchadnezzar took away the 
better elans of the people. Those whom he left v/erc not 
merely the poorer, hut the baser sort. Isa. .'i: l-7,cornpare<l 
with 2 Kings LM : H ; ./er. 40:7. Moreover, Cod raised up 
for the captive^ in liatjylon eminent prophetii, as JJaniel 
and J'l/.ekiel, whose labors were greatly blessed ; so that 
at the expiration of their caplivity, they returned to Judea 



Jewish cnptiviti/ and 



JEREMIAH XXV. 



deslrudurii of Balyhn. 



CHATTER XXV, 



1 Jeremiah rcproveth the Jews' disobedience to the prophets, 8 foretelleth 
the seventy years' captivity, 12 and after tliat, the d>-struction of Baby- 
lon, l.'i Under the type of a cup of wine, lie foreshowetli the destruc- 
tion of all nations. 34 The howling of the shepherds. 

THE ■word that camo to Jeremiah concerning 
all the peopli! of Judah, in tiie iourth year oi" 
Jehoiakirn tiio son of Jo.siah kinw of Jiidali, that 
was the first year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Bab- 
ylon ; 

2 The which Jeremiah the prophet spake unto 
all the ))eo])lo of Jiidah, and to all tiie inhabitants 
of Jenisalein, saying', 

3 From the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of 
Anion kini;- ol' Juihdi, even unto this day, that is 
the three and twentieth year,* the word of the 
LoiU) hath come unto me, and I have spoken unto 
you, rising early and speaking;" but ye have not 
hearkened.'' 

4 And the Lord hath sent unto you all his ser- 
vants the prophets, rising early and sending them : 
but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined }'our car 
to hear. 

5 They said. Turn ye again now every one from 
his evil way, and from the evil of your doings,*^ 
and dwell in the land that the Lord hath given 
unto you and to your fatliers for ever and ever: 

G And go not after other gods to serve them, 
and to worship them, and provoke me not to anger 
with the works of your hands;'' and I will do you 
no hurt. 

7 Yet yc have not hearkened unto me, saith the 
]j0RD ; that ye might provoke ine to anger with 
the works of your haiiiis to your own hurt." 

8 'i Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts; Be- 
cause ye have not heard my words, 

Beiiold, 1 will scud and take all the families 
of the north, saith the Lord, and Nebuchadrezzar 
the king of Babylon, my servant,' and will bring 





From 


0-.>fl till 0118. 


• ch. 


7:i;). 


etc.; 11 


:7. etc. 


; 23 


Id. 


P.« 


81:13; 


T«:i 


SA 


•.!;.lo 


nS;J7. «ch 


1«;1 


; ;!.'>: 


o; -JK 


nuslT: 


;i. 


d Den 


.:):> 


21 ; 1 K 


ntrs 


14 


■li. « 


Prov. H:M. 


f Prov. -U : 


; Ua. 1 


1:5; 4 


•■.w 


t He 


>. ra 


ise to pnisk 


J'<- 


mikc 


m. t Ua. 21 


.7, f 


Ho., 


■2:11. 


h Eccl. 


12: 


.'-4. 


U 


. -M-.-n, 


3.3. 



thoroughly purificil from idolati-y. Tliose who remained 
in the land were, on the contrary, abandoned to wiclced- 
ncss, anarchy, and misery, as is manifest from Jeremiah's 
account of their proceedings. Chapters 40-41. 
INSTRUCTIO.M. 
The true cliaracter of men cannot always bo determined 
by tiod's outward dealings witli tlieiii. Tlio heaviest trials 
often prove the occasion of great pro.sperity, spiritn;il and 
temporal, and exemption from llicm to be a heavy judg- 
ment. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

I. The fourth year of Jehoiakirn — the frit year of Nebuchad- 
rezzar; tlie lirsl year of Nebuchadnezzar seems to have cor- 
responded partly with tlie thiril and partly with tlie ftinrlli 
year of Jehoialiim. Compare Dan. 1:1. This pro]ihicy 
was delivered e;irhcr than that recorded in the precethng 
chapter, the arrangement of tlie writings of Jeremiah, liere 
and clsowlierc, not preserving the clironological order. 

9. These naliotts round about ; tlie nations afterwards enu- 
merated, ver. I!l-^(i. 

10. The sound of Ihr millstone!:; the millstones of the 
hand-mill, in which the peojilo of the Kast daily grind 
their meal. 

II. Serpent ij years; generally reckoned from the first in- 
vasion of the land by Nebuchadnezzar during the reign of 

8G6 



them against this land, ami against the in- a. m.sss*. 
habitants thereof, and against all these na- op- 
tions round about, and will utterly destroy them, 
and make them an astonishmeut, and a hissing, 
and perfictual desolations. 

10 Moreover I will take from them* the voice 
of mirth,'-' and the voice of gladness, the voice of 
the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the 
soundof the millstones, and the light of the candle.'' 

11 And this whole land shall be a desolation, 
and an astonishment;' and these nations shall serve 
the king of Babylon seventy years.' 

12 If And it shall come to pass, when seventy 
years arc accomplished, that 1 will punish'' the 
king of Babylon, and that nation, saitli the LoUD, 
for their ini(]uity, and the land of the Chaldeans, 
and will make it perpetual desolations.^ 

13 And 1 will bring upon that land all my words 
which I have pronounced against it.'^fivn all that 
is written in this book, which Jeremiah hath proph- 
esied against all the nations. 

14 For many nations and great kings shall serve 
themselves of them also:' and I will recompense 
tliein according to their deeds, and according to 
the works of their own hands. 

15 II For thus saith the Lord God of Israel unto 
me; Take the wine-cup of this fury at my hand, 
and cause all the nations to whom I send thee to 
drink it.'" 

16 And they shall drink," and be moved, and be 
mad, bccau.se of the sword that I will scud among 
them. 

17 Then took I the cup at the Lord'.s hand, and 
made all the nations to drink, unto whom the 
Lord had sent me: 

18 To irif, Jerusalem, and the cities of Judali, 
and the kings thereof, and the princes thereof, to 
make them a desolation, an astonishment, a hiss- 
ing, and a curse;" as it is this day; 



1 BeeinnmgCOtJ; S Kincs U;l: ending 5)0; Ezra 1:1; Dan. 9:4. I HeL. 
visit upon. I ch. 50:.51; Isa. 14:23; 21:1, etc.; 47:1. k Dan. S:«», 31. 
Ich. 27:7. m Job 21:211; P»a. 75:8; I«a. 51:17; Kov. 14:10. ' Kitk. >a-M : 
Nah. 3:11. over. 9, 11. 



Jehoiakim, when the process of transportation to Babylon 
began. 

13. This booh — against all tlie nations; "this book" seems 
to refer to the whole collection of Jeremi;\h'8 writings. 
The more distinguished prophecies "against all the na- 
tions " now stand in the last part of the book. Wo must 
suppose cither that they were originally written at an 
earlier date, or, what is more probable, that the present 
clause was ailded in arranging the whole volume. 

1.5. The vine-cup of this fury; here, as often elsewhere, 
God's wrath is compared to an intoxicating wine-cup, 
which makes those who drink it mad. and causes them to 
stagger and fall. Psa. 75 : 8 ; Isa. 51 : 21-23 ; Zech. 12 : 2. 

Hi. Be moved; reel. 

17. Then I took the nip; this was plainly done only in 
lirophetic vision, lie makes the nations to drink by an- 
nouncing God's wrath that is coming upon them. 

ls-2t!. Jcrustilem — all the kings if the Medes; all these na- 
tions were to be dostroyeil by Neliiichadnezzar. The min- 
gled people; probably liere. as in Kzek. ;i0:5. the mixed mass 
of foreigners serving the Egyptians, t';.- probably situated 
ill the norlliern part of .\ral)ia. The isles — beyond the sea; 
the western islands of the .Mediterranean, with the adjacent 
coast-s. Drdan.nml Tenia, and Huz ; in the northern part of 
Arabia. All — mi the utmost corners; see note on chap. 9:26. 
Zimri; an unknown tribe, probably lying in the direction 



Jucli;mcnts cm many nations. 



JEREMIAH XXVI. 



A call to repentance 



A. M IN9. 19 Plmraoli king of Egypt," and liis sor- 
cos'.' ° vauts, and liis princes, and all his people; 

20 And all the mingled peo))lc,'' and all the kings 
of the land of Uz,'' and all the kings of tiie land 
of the Philistines,'' and Ashkelon, and Azzah, and 
Ekron, and the remnant of Aslidod,'^ 

21 Edotn, and Moab, and the children of Amnion,'' 

22 And all the kings of Tyrus, and all the kings 
of Zidon, and the kings of "the isles which are be- 
yond the sea,' 

2;} Dcdan, and Tenia, and Buz, and all tluit are 
in the utmost corners,'^ 

2-i And all the kings of Arabia, and all the kings 
of tlie mingled people that dwell in tiie desert,'' 

25 And all the kings of Ziniri, and all the kings 
of Elara, and all the kings of the Modes, 

26 And all the kings of the nortii,'' f;ir and near, 
one with another, and all the kingdoms of the 
world, which are upon the face of tlie earth : and 
the king of Shcshach shall drink after them.' 

27 Therefore thou shalt say unto them, Tims saith 
the Lord of iiosts, the God of Israel; Drink ye,J and 
be drunken," and spue, and fall, and rise no more, 
because of the sword which I will send among you. 

28 And it shall be, if they refuse to take the cup 
at thy hand to drink, then shalt thou say unto 
them. Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Ye shall cer- 
tainly drink. 

29 For lo, I begin to bring evil on tlic city 
which is called by my name,*' and should ye be 
utterly unpunished?'" Ye shall not be unpun- 
islied: for I will call for a sword upon all the 
inhabitants of the earth," saith the Lord of hosts. 

30 Therefore prophesy thou against them all 
these words, and say unto them, The Lord shall 
roar from on high," and utter his voice from his 
holy habitation ;'' he shall mightily roar upon his 
luibitation ; he shall give a shout, as they tiiat tread 
the grapes,'^ against all the inhabitants of the eartli. 

31 A noise shall come evc7i to the ends of the 
earth ; for the Lord hath a controversy with the 
nations : he will plead with all flesh ;"■ he Avill give 
them that are wicked to the sword, saith the Lord. 

32 Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, evil 



"Ch. 46;-J. etc. b Exoii. 1;!:SS ; Num. 11:4. cJobM. il ch. 47:1, etc 
' Neh. 13:*3-27. t ch. 4^:4!!. • Ot. region by Ihc seaside. 1 lleh rut off 
intocomers, 01 liaving tlie roraersofllie liair polled; ch. 9:a0; 4n:3->. S Ezek. 
30:5. hch.5():9. ich 51:41. JHab2:18. k Isi. 51 :-21 ; 63:0. I Heb. 
upon w/iie/i my name is called. 1 Ezek. 9:6. m ch. 49:1-2; Prov. 11:31 ; 
Luke a3:31: 1 Pet. 4:17. n Ezek. 3:j:21. o Isa. 42:13. P 2 Chr. 30:27. 



of Persia and Media. £/nm,- Persia. TAe il/«te; north- 
east of Persia, and south and west of the Caspian. Alt the 
^•^H^■.s■ of the north; the Scythian tribes north of the Euxine 
and Black sea. All the kingdoms of the icorld; in a general 
sense. Compare Luke 2 : 1. Sheshach ; a name for Babylon. 
Chap. 51 :41. After God has used the king of Babylon as 
the minister of his wrath upon these nations, he shall in 
turn be destroyed. Compare what is said of Assyria, Isa. 
10:12. 

;^1. A noise sliall come; the tumult of warlike hosts, under 
the marshalling of Jehovah. Compare Isa. 13:4. 

34. Sheplierds — principal of the flock; the nobles and rulers 
of the nations, .^re acco»7y)/!sAed; have fully come. Luke 
2 : G. Like a pleasant vessel; as a costly vessel falls and is 
dashed in pieces. 

36. Spoiled their pasture; destroyed their land and people. 

37. Cnt diiiun ; desolated. 

38. He hath forsaken; Jehovah, as the leader of the con- 
quering hosts, who is here compared to a lion. Ver. 30. 



shall go forth from nation to nation," and a great 
whirlwind shall be raised up from the coasts of 
the earth. 

33 And the slain of the Lord shall be at that 
day from one end of the earth even unto the other 
end of the earth:' tiiey sliall not be lamented, 
neither gathered, nor buried ; they shall be dung 
upon the ground. 

34 "il Howl, yc shepherds, and cry ; and wallow 
yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the llock :" 
for tlie days of your slaughter^ and of your dis- 
persions are accomplished; and ye shall fall like 
a pleasant vessel." 

35 And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, 
nor^ the principal of the flock to escape. 

36 A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and a 
howling of the principal of the flock, shall be heard: 
for the Lord hath spoiled their pasture. 

37 And the peaceable habitations are cnt down 
because of the fierce anger of tiie Loud. 

38 He hath forsaken his covert, as the lion i"' for 
their land is desolate* because of the fierceness of 
the oppressor, and because of his fierce anger. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

1 Jeremiah by promises and threatenin^rs ex}iortct!i to repentance. 8 
He is therefore apprehended, 10 and arraigned. 12 His apology. Ki 
He is quit m judgment by the example of Micah, '20 and of IJrijah. 
24 and by the care of Ahikam. 

IN the beginning of the reign of Jchoiakim the 
son of Josiah king of Judah came this word 
from the Lord, saying, 

2 Thus saith the Lord; Htand in the court of 
the Lord's house, and speak unto all the cities of 
Judali which come to worship in the Lord's house, 
all the words that I command thee to speak unto 
them ; diminish not a word i^" 

3 If so be they will hearken, and turn every man 
from his evil way, that I may repent me of the 
evil, which I purpose to do unto them because of 
the evil of their doings.'^ 

4 And thou shalt say unto them. Thus saith the 
Lord ; If ye will not hearken to me, to walk in 
my law, which I have set before you,^ 



q Isa. 16:9. r Isa.. 66:16. s Zcph. 3:3. t Rev. 14:10. '.'n '. - 
iKeh. your dn7js far slaugllter. t ileh. ves.f el of desire, 'ill' /':: 
perish from the ihepherds. and escaping from. etc. ; Amos 'J I 1 ' \ '.- 
Zech. 2: 13. ' Ueb. a desolation. " ch. 23:23; Ezek. 3 10. 1 1 \l,,ti 
X 1 Kinirs 21:27, 29: Jonah3:S-10. Y Lev. 26:14, etc.; Diui. 2::lo 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

8, 11. Though God's judgments be long delayed, they 
will come at last upon the incorrigibly impenitent, and 
their severity will be in proportion to the exhortations 
and warnings that have been despised. 

12. However sore the chastisement which God inflicts 
upon his people, he remembers them at the appointed 
time in mercy ; and their cruel and relentless persecutors 
he destroys. 

29. The judgments which God bruigs iiiion his offending 
people arc a solenni warning to the wirknl ni the more ter- 
rible vengeance which will one day fall uimii them. 1 Pet. 
4:17,18. . 

15-28, 30-33. God's power over the human family is 
unlimited; it is as easy for him to send forth desolating 
calamities from nation to nation over all the earth, as to 
punish the weakest transgressor of his laws. 

34-38. It is a righteous rule of divine Providence, that 
wicked leaders of the people, who are first in crime, should 

mi 



Tht ^rojphii seized end 



JEREMIAH XXVII. 



arraigned, but acquillcJ. 



5 To hearken to the words of my servants the 
prophets, whom I sent unto you. botli rising up 
early, and sending them,'' but ye have not heark- 
ened: 

6 Tiicn will 1 make this house like Shiloh,'' and 
will make this city a curse to all the nations of 
the earth." 

7 So the priests and the prophets and all the 
people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in 
the house of the Loud. 

8 1 Now it came to pass, when Jeremiah had 
made an end of speaking all that the Lokd had 
commanded him to speak unto all the people, tliat 
the priests and th(> prophets and all the people 
took him, saying, Tiiou shalt surely die. 

9 Why hast tliou prophesied in tiic name of the 
Lord, saying, This house shall be like Shiloh, and 
this city shall be desolate without an inhabitant? 
And ail the people were gathered against Jere- 
miah in flie house of the Loud. 

10 IT When the ])rinces of Judah heard these 
things, then they came up from the king's house 
unto the house of the Lord, and sat down in the 
entry* of tlic now gate of the Lord's howsc. 

11 Then spake the priests and the proplicts unto 
the princes and to all the people, saying. This 
man is worthy to die;^ for he hath prophesied 
against this city,'' as ye iiave heard with your ears. 

12 If Then spake Jeremiah unfo all the princes 
and to all the people, saying, Tiic Lord sent me 
to prophesy against this house and against this 
city all the words that ye have heard. 

1.3 Therefore now amend your ways and your 
doings, and obey the voice of the Lord your God ;'' 
and the Lord will repent him of the evil that he 
hath pronounced against you. 

14 As for mc, behold, 1 am in your hand: do 
with mc as secmeth good and meet unto you.* 

15 But know ye for certain, that if ye put me to 
death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon 
yourselves, and upon this city, and upon the in- 
habitants thereof: for of a truth the Lord hath 
sent mc unto you to speak all these words in your 
ears. 

16 IT Then said (lie princes and all the people 
unto the priests and to the prophets; This man is 



• Ch. a.jrS.'l. b 1 .S.im.'l:10-l'i. cIsa.U5;l5. ' Or, at the (laoT. t Hfb. 
Tilt judgment of dtalkW for this man. ■• ch. ."Wil, ."i. cch.7::!, 7. I Ili-b. 
it 11 f;ood and rinltt in your eyes, t Acta 5:'3i, etc. e Mic. 1:1. h IMic. 



be first also in suffering, wlicu ho punishes nations for their 
Bins. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

6. Like Shiloh ; sec note on cliap. 7 : 12. 

18. Zion sitall be ploup^hcd; Micah 3:13. 

19. Did Ihzekiali — put him at all to death? this case is 
adduced by the princes as an argument wliy the king 
Hhould spare Jeremiah. 

20. Urijah; this case is adduced by the prophet to show 
the disposition of Jciioialcini, and the danger to wliich lie 
was exposed. 

INSTIIUCTIONS. 
11. God's faithful servants generally receive the bitterest 
jiersecution from false mid corr\ipt religious teachers. 

1 1. The true messenger of tiod will commit liis cause to 
his divine Master, and prefer death rather than unfaithful- 
ness. 

868 



not worthy to die: for he hath spoken to a. m.ssss. 

ii f .11 f /■< 1 H. ('. about 

us in the name ot tiie Lord our God. ti'J 

17 Then rose up certain of the elders of the land, 
and spake to all (he assembly of the ])eople,'' saying, 

18 Micah the Morasthite prophesied in the days 
of Ilczekiah king of Jiidah,^' and spake to all the 
people of Judah, saying. Thus saith the Lord of 
hosts; Zion shall be plougiied like a held, and 
Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain 
of the house as the high places of a forest.'" 

19 Did Ilczekiah king of Judah and all Judah 
put him at all to death? did he not fear the Loud,' 
and besought the Loi:d,' and the Lord repented 
him (if the evil which he had pronounced against 
them ?' Thus might we procure great evil against 
our souls. 

20 And there was also a man that prophesied 
in the name of the Lord, Lh-ijah the son of Shem- 
aiah of Kirjath-jearim, who prophesied against 
this city and against this land according to all 
the words of Jeremiah : 

21 And when Jehoiakim the king, with all his 
miglity men, and all the i)rinces. heard his words, 
tlic king sought to put him to death:" but when 
Uiijah heard it, he was afraid, and lied.' and went 
into Egypt ; 

22 And Jehoiakim the king sent men into Egypt, 
iiamcly, VAivMhun tiie son of Achbor, and certain 
men with him into h^gypt. 

2B And they fetched" forth Urijah out of Egypt, 
and brought him unto Jehoiakim the king; who 
slew him with the sword, and cast his dead body 
into the graves of the common jieople.' 

24 Nevertheless, the hand of Aliikam the son of 
Shaplian was with Jeremiah,'" that they should not 
give him into the hand of the people to ))ut hiiu 
to death." 

CHAPTER XXVIl. 

1 Under the typu of bonJs and yokes he prophcsieth the suhduing of the 
ncighljor kings unto Nebuchadnezzar. H lie cihorlelh them to yield. 
and not to believe the false prophcU. I'J The like ho doeth to Zedt- 
kiali. 19 He forctclleth, the rciniiant of the vessels sliall be carried to 
Babylon, and there continue until the day of visitation. 

IN the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the 
son of Josiah king of Judah came this word 
unto Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, 



:):IX i '.'Chr. 32:20. iUrh.fa'eoflheLORD. J 2 Sam. 24:16. k P««. 
U«:ltW. 1 Matt. 10:2:). I llcb. sons of the people. <•> ch. 39:11; S KiDg» 
22:12,11. nisa. 37:J2. 33. 



15. God regards the injury whicli his servants receive 
for the truth's sake as done to himself, and he will punish 
it accordingly. 

lG-19. True nobleness of clianictor is sliown by listening 
to faithful reproofs and profiting by them; to hate and 
persecute those wiio administer Ihern betrays equal base- 
ness and wickedness. 

20-23. To show fciir of wicked men who are higli in of- 
fice and power, is oftentimes tiie most certain way to give 
tiiem tiie mastery over us. 

21. It is easy for God to raise up friends and protectors 
for tlio defenceless, and lie will do so for those wlio put 
their trust in him, as far as their good and the interests of 
his cause demand it. 

CITAPTER XXVTL 

1. Jchniakim ; m.iny suppose that this should read, "Zcde- 
liiah," as in verses 3, 12, and in chap. 28:1. iSce verse 20. 



God's message to the lira's. 



JEREMIAH XXV ill. 



llananialis false prophecy. 



A. M J40C. 2 Thus saith the Lord* to mc; Make 
'ais" "" thee bonds and yokes, and [lut them upon 
thy neck," 

3 And send them to the king of Edom, and to 
the king of Moab, and to the king of the Ammon- 
ites, and to the king of Tyrus, and to the king of 
Zidon, by the hand of tiie messengers which come 
to Jerusalem unto Zedckiaii king of Judah ; 

4 And command them to say unto their masters,* 
Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel ; 
Tims shall ye say unto your masters ; 

5 I have made the earth," the man and the beast 
that are upon the ground, by my great power and 
by my outstretclicd arm, and liavc given it unto 
whom it seemed meet unto me.'' 

G And now have I given all these lands into the 
hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon,'' my 
servant ;" and the beasts of the licld have I given 
him also to serve him.'' 

7 And all nations sliall serve him,'' and his son, 
and his son's son, until the very time of his land 
come:'' and then nmny nations and great kings 
shall serve themselves of him.' 

8 And it shall come to pass, that the nation and 
kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuciiad- 
nezzar the king of Babylon, and that will not put 
their neck under the yoke of the king of Baliylon, 
that nation will I punish, saith the Lord, with the 
sword, and with the famine, and with the pesti- 
lence, until I have consumed them by his liand. 

'.I Therefore hearken not ye to your prophets, 
nor to your diviners, nor to your dreamers,' nor 
to your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers,^ which 
speak unto you, saying. Ye shall not serve the 
king of Babylon: 

10 For tiiey proplicsy a lie unto you,'' to remove 
you far from your land ; and that I should drive 
you out, and ye slionld perish. 

11 But the nations tliat bring their neck under the 
yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him, those 
will I let remain still in their own land, saith the 
Lord; and they sliall till it, and dwell therein. 

12 ^f I spake also to Zedekiah king of Judah 
according to all tliese words,' saying, Bring your 
necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and 
serve iiim and his people, and live.'" 

13 Why will ye die, thou and thy people, Ijy the 
sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as the 
Lord hath spoken against the nation that will not 
serve the king of Baljylon ? 

1-1 Therefore hearken not unto the words of the 
proplietsthat speak unto you," saying. Ye shall not 
serve the king of Babylon : for they prophesy a lie^ 
unto you. 

15 For I have not sent them, saith the Lord, yet 
they prophesy a lie^ in my name; that I might 



• Or, hath llir LOKD said. »Ezek.'l:l; \-2:.S. t Or,tionrerHi,ii! their >m 
lers,sayin?. li Pfia. U(i;6; Isi. 45:1-.'. c Deut. 32:8, fl- Tsi. 115:10; D; 
4:17,:!,!. dch. 2^:14. e ch. 25:9; 43:10; Ezek. ;>0:18--J0. ' Dan. •2::)8 
saCiir. ar.:-iO; Dm. 5:10. h ch. aS:l->; 50:27 
.M:9, 10; 51:27, 2^, I Heb. dreams, i Is: 
1J:9-11. 1 ch 2.S:1; 33:17. ""Prov. 1:3J 



; Dan. 5:20. 31. 'ch. 25:14: 
47:12-14 k vpr. 14; Ezck. 
i> ch. 14:14; 2!:21 : 29:Nfl. 



19. The pillar.^— the bases; see 1 Kings 7:15, 21, 23, 27; 
2Chroii. 4:2, 12, 14. 

INSTRUCTION. 



iut 



For the accomplishment of his own ends, God sometimes 
trusts wicked and impious rulers with great power and 



drive you out, and that ye might perish, ye, and 
the prophets that prophesy unto you." 

16 Also I spake to the priests and to all this 
people, saying. Thus saith the Lord ; Hearken not 
to the words of your prophets that prophesy unto 
you, saying. Behold, the vessels of the Lord's 
house'' shall now shortly be brought again from 
Babylon:" for they prophesy a lie unto you. 

17 Hearken not unto them; serve the king of 
Babylon, and live: wherefore shoidd this city be 
laid waste ? 

18 But if they be prophets, and if the word of the 
Lord be witii them,'' let them now make interces- 
sion to the Lord of hosts, that the vessels which 
are left in the house of (lie Lord, and in tlie house 
of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not to 
Babylon. 

19" t For thus saith the Lord of hosts concern- 
ing the pillars, and concerning the sea, and con- 
cerning the bases, and concerning the residue of the 
vessels that remain in this city," 

20 Which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took 
not, when he carried away captive Jeconiah the 
son of Jehoiakim king of Judah from Jerusalem 
to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and Jeru- 
sa.lem ;' 

21 Yea, thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of 
Israel, concerning the vessels that remain in the 
house of the Lord, and in the house of the king of 
Judah and of Jerusalem ; 

22 They shall be carried to Babylon," and there 
shall they be until the day that I visit them,'' saitli 
the Lord ; then will I bring them up, and restore 
them to this place." 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

I H,^^ani.^h prophesieth falsely the return of the vessels, and cf Jeconl:il . 
,'i Jeremiah, wishing it to be true, showeth that the event will declare 
who are trm prophets. 10 Hananiali breaketh Jeremiah's yoke. 1";! 
Jeremiah telleth of an iron yoke, 15 and foretellcth Hananiali's death. 

AND it came to pass the same year, in the be- 
ginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of 
Jtidah, in the fourth year, and in the fifth month, 
that Hananiah the son of Azur the prophet, which 
vas of Gibeon, spake unto me in the house of the 
Lord, in the presence of the priests and of all the 
people,'' saying, 

2 Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, the God of 
Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king 
of Baljylon.'' 

3 Within two full years' will I bring again into 
this place all the vessels of the Lord's house, that 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took away from 
this place, and carried them to Babylon:'- 

4 And I will bring again to this place Jeconiali 
the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, with all the 



i Ucb in a lie, ot hiinaly. oMatt. 15;14. P 2 Chr. 36:7, 10; Dan. 1 :2. 
1 ch a-i-S r 1 Kiiiffs 1S:24, 2li; Jas. 5;ir)-18. » ch. 52:17-23; 2 Kings 
23:13-17. t ch.21:l; 2Kings24:14,15; 2Chr.30:10. u ch. 32.5. v ch. 
29:10. " Ezra l:7j 7:19. J'ch.27:l. ych.27:12. I Ueh. years of days. 
2ch. 27:16. 



authority ; and then all resist;mce on the ]iart of the neigh- 
boring nations proves vain. But when he has fulfilled his 
purposes by them, he humliles them as easily as he had 
before exalted them. Compare chap. 18: G-10 ; and Daniel, 
chapters 7, 8. 

869 



llananiali's death. 



JEREMIAH XXIX. 



Leltcr to the cjptices. 



captives' of Judah, that went into Babylon, saith 
the Lord : for I will break the yoke of the king 
of Babylon. 

5 1 Then the prophet Jeremiah said unto the 
prophet Uananiali in the presence of the priests, 
and in the presence of all the people that stood in 
the house of the Lord," 

6 Even the jjrophet Jeremiah said. Amen:"' the 
Lnni) do so: the Loud perform thy words which 
tliou hast prophesied, to brinij; again the vessels 
of the Lord's house, and all tiiat is carried away 
captive, from Babylon into this place." 

7 Nevertheless, hear thou now this word that I 
speak in thine ears, and in the ears of all the pco- 
ple;- 

8 The prophets that have been before me and 
before thee of old prophesied both against many 
countries, and against great kingdoms,'^ of war, 
and of evil, and of pestilence.'' 

9 The prophet winch propliesiethof pcacc,'^ when 
the word of tlie prophet sliall come to pass, (hen 
sliall the prophet be known, that the Lord hath 
truly sent him.'' 

10 "f Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke 
from off the prophet Jeremiaii's neck,' and brake it. 

11 And Ilununiali spake in the presence of all 
the people, saying, Tlius saitii the Lord; Even so 
will I brake the yoke of Nebucliadnezzar king of 
Babylon from the neck of all nations within the 
space of two full years. And the prophet Jere- 
miah went his way.J 

12 ■' Then the word of tlie Lord came unto Jer- 
emiah (/ic prophet, after that Hananiah the propjiet 
had broken the yoke from oil" the neck of the 
propliet Jeremiah, saying, 

13 Go and toll Hananiah, saying, Tims saitli the 
Loud; Tiiou hast broken tiie yokes of wood; but 
tliou shall make for them yokes of iron. 

14 For thus saith tlie Loud of hosts, the God of 
Israel; I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck of 
all these nations," that they may serve Nebuchad- 
nezzar king of Babylon ;' and they shall serve him : 
and I have given iiini the boasts of the held also.'" 

1.5 1 Then said liic pniphcL .Irreniiah unto Han- 
aniah the prophet. Hour now, Hananiah ; the Lord 
hath not sent thee;" but thou niakcsl this people 
to trust in a lie." 



• Hcb. Mplimly. »ch.a(i:3. 


b 1 Kingj 1 :3a. cch.ll:3; 17:10; 1-*:20. 


<l 1 Kinci ii:i*. ' Jonah 1:2. 


'Ii!a. 13:18; Ainosoh. 1,2. ( Ezck 13:111, 


etc. Ii Dout. 11:2.!. i ch. 27:2. 


J Proy. H:7. k Dout. 2H:4?. 1 ch. 27:«, 7. 


m Dan. 2;:^. n ch. 29:31, 32 


o Lam. 2:11. t llcb rtl-oU; ch ^"J::^. 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

8. Of war — nf pestilence ; tho prediction of Gofl's ap- 
proaching^ judgments, with the view of bringing the peo- 
ple to repentance, was one of tiio signs of a tine prophet ; 
while the false proidiets occupied themselves with (piiet- 
ing the consciences of the people in tho practice of sin. 

9. Sliall come to pass ; see Deut. 18:22. 

13. For them; in their stead. By encouraging tho peo- 
ple in sin, Ilan-iniah is malting for them iron instead of 
wooden yokes ; tliat is, aggravating tho severity of their 
bondage. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. It is a common custom of false teachers to (latter men 
with the assurance of impunity in tho |)ractice of sin. 

6. God's servants should manifest a tender and compas- 
sionate spirit, such as shall make it manifest to all that 
870 



[ 16 Therefore thus saith the Lord; Be- a.m. 3109. 
hold, I will cast thee from olf the face of »;."""' 
the earth: this year thou shalt die, because thou 
hast taught reliellion * against the Lord.'' 

17 So Hananiah the prophet died the same year 
in the seventh month.'' 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

1 Jeremiah sendcth a letter l« the captives in Babylon, to be quiet there. 
S and not to believe the dreams of their prophets, 10 and that they 
shall return with grace after seventy years. He forctellelh the destruc- 
tinn of the rest for llieir disobedience. 20 He showelh tlie fearful end 
of Aliab and Zedekiah, two lying prophets. 21 Shemaiah writeth ll 
letter a;;ainst Jeremiah. 30 Jeremiah rradeth his doom. 

"VTOW these are the words of the letter that 
_L\ Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem 
unto the residue of the elders which were carried 
away captives, and to the priests, and to the proph- 
ets,and toallthc pcoplewhom Nebuchadnezzar had 
carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon ; 

2 (After tiiat Jeconiah the king, and the queen, 
and the eunuchs,' the princes of Judah and Jeru- 
salem, and the carpenters, and the smiths, were 
departed from Jerusalem;'') 

3 By the hand of Elasah the sonof Shaphan,anrl 
Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, whom Zedekiah king 
of Judah sent unto Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar 
king of Babylon, saying, 

4 Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Is- 
rael, unto all tiiat are carried away captives, whom 
I have caused to be carried away from Jerusalem 
unto Babylon : 

5 Build ye houses, and dwell in than : and plant 
gardens, and cat the fruit of them ;" 

6 Take ye wives, and beget sons and daughters ; 
and take wives for your sons, and give your daugli- 
ter.s to husbands, that they may bear sons anil 
daughters; that ye may be increased there, ami 
not diminished. 

7 And seek the peace of the city whither I have 
caused yon to be carried away captives,' and pray 
unto the Lord for it:" for in the peace thereof 
shall ye have peace. 

8 ^1 For thus saitii the Loud of hosts, the God 
of Israel ; Let not y(uir i)rophelsand your diviners, 
that be in tlie midst of you, deceive you,'' neither 
hearken to your dreams which ye cause to bo 
dreamed. 



p Dcul. 13:5. 1 Ina. 44:25, 20. I Or, rhnmhrrlait 
• ver. !». • Dan. 4:27; 0:5. u Ezra U:IU; 1 Ti 



they tako no delight in the messages of wrath which they 
deliver to the people in his name, and tliat it is the earnest 
desire of their hearts that by re])entance and reformation 
the fullilment of these threalonings may be averted. 

9. Tho .iwfnl destruction of tlio wicked will soon make 
manifest tho folly of tlioso who have llatterod them with 
the hope of peace and safety in a course of iniquity. 

13-17. God will not accommodato the course of liis gov- 
ernment to the wishes of corrupt rulers and fal.so proph- 
ets who strengthen their hands in wickedness, but will 
destroy both together. 

CHATTER XXIX. 

5. Build ye liowie.i; the expectation of a speedy restora- 
tion to their own land would have prevontid tho captives 
from settling themselves in their new abode, and thus 
have proved an injury to tLcm. 



The prophet's letter. 



JEUEMIAII XXIX. 



r unishincnl of Shemalah. 



A.}.{.3?m. 9 For they prophesy falsely* unto you 
eoe" "" in my name: I have not sent them, saith 
the Lord. 

10 \ For tlms saith the Loud, That after seventy 
years be accomplislied at Babylon I will visit you," 
and perform my good word toward you, in causing 
you to return to this place.*" 

11 For I know the thoughts that I think toward 
you,'' saith the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not 
of evil, to give you an expected end.*'' 

12 Then shall ye call upon me,'' and ye shall go 
and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you.' 

13 And ye shall seek me,'' and find me,'' when ye 
shall search for me with all your heart.' 

14 And I will be found of you.J saith the Lord : 
and I will turn away your captivity,'' and I will 
gather ynu from all the nations, and from all the 
places whither I have driven you, saith the Lord ; 
and 1 will bring you again into tiie place whence 
I caused you to be carried away captive.' 

15 1i Because ye have said, The Lord hath raised 
us up prophets in Babylon ;"' 

16 Ktiow that thus saith the Lord of tlie king that 
sittetli upon tlie throne of David, and of all tlie peo- 
{)le that dwelleth in this city, and of your brethren 
tliat are not gone forth with you into captivity; 

17 Thus saith the Lord of hosts ; Behold, I will 
send upon them the sword, the famine, and the 
pestilence, and will make them like vile figs, tliat 
cannot be eaten, tliey are so evil." 

18 And I will persecute them with the sword, 
with the famine, and with the pestilence, and will 
deliver them to be removed to all the kingdoms 
of the earth," to be* a curse, and an astonishment, 
and a hissing, and a reproach, among all the na- 
tions whitlier I have driven them :■' 

19 Because they have not hearkened to my words, 
saith the Lord, which I sent unto them by my ser- 
vants the prophets, rising up early and sending 
them:'^ but ye would not hear, saith the Lord. 

20 *\ Hear ye therefore the word of the Lord, 
all ye of the captivity,'' whom I have sent from 
Jerusalem to Babylon.'* 

21 Tlius saith the Lord of hosts, the "God of Is- 
rael, of Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and of Zedekiah 



• Heb. in a lie: ch. il: 15. a ch. •>1:-i!: 2 Chr. 3(j:--il-il; Ezra 1:1; Dan. 
9:2. I> ch 32:42-14. « Isa. 5o:S, 9. ^ Ueb. e?id ami txprctalion. d Lam. 
3:26. e Neh. 2:4, etc.; Dan. 9:3, etc. t Isa. 63:24. f Lev. 26:40, etc.; 
Deut. 3(1:1, etc. h Deut. 4:7. i ch. 24:7. J Psa. 32:6; 46:1 ; Isa. 45: 19; 
5o:S. k Psa. 126:1. 4. 1 ch. -23:3; 311:3; 32:37; Ezek. 36:24; Amos 9:14; 
.Mic. 4:12; Zcph. 3:20. mEzek. 1:1,3. nch. 21:5-10. o ch. 15:4; 3.|: 17; 



11. An expected end ; that happy issue which is the object 
of your hopes. 

15. Prophets in Babijlon ; these were the false prophets 
who promised the captives a speedy return. 

24. Tkua sltalt thou also speak; this prophecy was evi- 
dently deUvered after the return of Zedekiah 's messengers 
from Babylon. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5, G. The true teacher will inculcate upon men cheerful 
submission under the afiBictive dispensations of God's 
providence, and the diligent performance of duty. Thus 
present suffering will be greatly mitigated, and the way 
be prepared for future enlargement and deliverance. 

7. Since civil government is an ordinance of (jod, we are 
bound to seek the peace and welfare of the nation in which 
God's providence in any way appoints our residence, and 
to yield a willing obedience to all its laws, except only when 
they command what God forbids. Rom. 13:1; Acts 41:9. 



the son of Maaseiah, which prophesy a lie unto 
you in my name; Beliold, I will deliver them into 
the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon : and 
he shall slay them before your eyes; 

22 And of them shall be taken up a curse by all 
the captivity of Judaliwhicli are in Babylon,' saying. 
The Lord make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, 
whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire ;" 

23 Because they have committed villany in Isra- 
el, and have committed adultery with their neigh- 
bor's wives, and have spoken lying words in my 
name, wliich I have not commanded them;"' even 
I know. a7id am a witness, saith the Lord. 

24 'i Thus shalt thou also speak to Shemaiah the 
Nehelamite,^ saying, 

25 Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, the God of 
Israel, .'laying. Because thou hast sent letters in 
thy name unto all the people tliat arc at Jerusalem, 
and to Zeplianiah the son of Maaseiah the priest." 
and to all the priests, saying, 

26 Tlie Lord hath made thee priest in the stead 
of Jehoiada the priest, that ye should be officers 
in the house of the Lord,'' for every man that is 
mad,-^' and maketh himself a prophet, that thou 
shonldest put him in prison,'' and in the stocks. 

27 Now therefore why hast thou not reproved 
Jeremiah of Anathoth, which maketh himself a 
prophet to you? 

28 For tliereforc he sent unto us in Baliylon, 
saying. This capiivity is long : build ye iiouses and 
dwell in them; and plant gardens, and eat the 
fruit of them." 

29 And Zephaniah the priest read this letter in 
the ears of Jeremiah the prophet. 

30 1 Then came the word of the Lord unto 
Jeremiah, saying, 

31 Send to all them of the captivity,'' saying. 
Thus saith the Loud concerning Shemaiah the 
Nehelamite ; Because that Shemaiah hath proph- 
esied unto you, and I sent him not, and he caused 
you to trust in a lie:° 

32 Therefore thus saith the Lord ; Behold, 1 will 
punish Shemaiaii the Nehelamite, and his seed: he 
shall not have a man to dwell among this people; 
neither shall he behold the good that 1 will do for 



Lev. 26:33; Deut. 25!:25. : Heb. /or. P 
r Kzek. 3:11. 15. s ch. 24:5. 1 Isa. 65:15. 
5 Or, dreamtr. w ch. 21 : 1 ; 2 Kings 2.3: IS. 
Acts 26:24. 2 ch. 3=:6, 28; 2 Chr. 18:26. a 



;h. 26:6. q ch. 25:4; 32:33. 
" Dan. 3.6. » ch. 23:14.21 
«ch.20:l,2. .v2Kmgs9;ll; 
ler.5. bver. 20. <: d,. 28:15, 



8, 9. The way of those who prophesy lies has always 
been, first to quiet men's consciences in sin until they fall 
into trouble, and then to encourage them to seek deliver- 
ance from it in some other way than by repentance and 
submission to God's will. ' 

10. If we bear with patience and meekness the trials 
which God lays upon us, he will, at the appointed time, 
grant us a glorious deliverance from them. 

13. Heartiness and sincerity in seeking God insure a 
gracious answer. 

15-19. They who desire to be flattered in rebellion 
against God, will find false prophets ready to flatter them ; 
but it will only be for their utter and irremediable ruin. 

22. None do so much as false teachers to corrupt and 
ruin a nation ; and against none does God threaten such 
severe judgments. Ver. 30-32. 

23. Lying words in doctrine, and villany in practice, gen- 
erally go together, as in the case of Ahab and Zedekiah. 

811 



77c return of 



JEIIEMIAII XXX. 



ike Jews forcldd. 



my pooplc, saitli tlieLoRD; because he liath tauglit whitlicr I Iiavo 
rebellion' asraiust tlie Lord. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

1 God siiowcth Jeremiah the return of tile Jews. 4 After their trouble 
they shall have deliverance. 10 1\c coinforteth Jacob. 18 Their 
return shall be gracious. 20 Wrath shall fall on the wicked. 

'"pi IE word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, 
1, ^^aying■, 

2 Tim,? spcaketh tlie Lord God of Israel, saying. 
Write thco all the words that I have spoken unto 
thee in a book." 

3 For lo, the days come, saith the Lord, that I 
will bring again the cajitivity of my people Israel 
and .Jiidali/' saith the Lord : and I will cause them 
to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, 
and they shall possess it.*^^ 

■1 ir And these arc the words that the Lord spake 
concerning Israel and concerning Jiidali. 

.j For thus saith the Loud ; We have heard a 
voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace.^ 

G Ask ye now, and see whether a man* doth 
travail with ehild? wherefore do I see every man 
with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, 
and all faces are turned into paleness? ■ 

7 Alas! for that day w great,'" so that none is 
like it: it is even the time of Jacob's trouble;'' 
but he shall be saved out of it. 

8 For it shall come to pass in that day, saith the 
Lord of hosts, that 1 will break his yoke from oQ' 
thy neck, and will burst thy bomls, and strangers 
shall no more serve themselves of him: 

i) But they shall serve the Lord their God, and 
David their king,' whom I will raise up unto them.'-' 

10 'i Tliei'efore fear thou not,'' O 1113' servant 
Jacob, saith the Lord; neither Ite dismayed, 
Israel: for lo, I will save thee from afar, and thy 
seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob 
shall return, and shall be in rest, and be tpiiet, and 
none shall make him. afraid. 

11 For J am with thee, saith the Lord, to save 
thee: thoujrh 1 make a full end of all nations 



• Hcb.rei-o/..- ch.a-!:l(i. a 2 Pet. 1 :•.>! ; Rev.l:l9; 1(1:4. b vcr. 18; ch. 
:W:n7; Ezek. .'lU:a5, 20; Amos!):l-l, 15. c ch. Hi: 15; Ezra :i:1.8, 12; Ezek. 
:M:2I. 1 Or, there is /iar, nn</ no( pcocf . 1 Hob. mn/e. d Joel 2:11, ;il ; 
Zeph. 1:14; Rev. tt-At. • Dan. 12:1. ' Hiw. S;.'). « Luke 1:09. h ch. 
4li;27, 28; Isi. 411;j; 44:2. iAniot9:8. J2Chr.30:10. klTim2:5,(); 



CHAPTER XXX. 

2. All the words llwt I have spnkcn unto thee; namely, the 
words l)CKinninjj with the fourth verso, and cxtondiiig 
tliroiigli this ami the followiiij; chapter. In a book; for 
the instruction and encouragement of those future ages 
to which llicy refer. 

3. / viH Itrin^ a^ain the captivity nfmij people ; we are to 
undcr.st;inil hcru,.ii.s in other like predictions, the restora- 
tion from the Ualiylonish Ciiptivity, witli all the hijchor 
deliverances that follow it to the end of time, and of wliich 
it is both an earnest and apledj^e. See note on Isa. .'>.■>: 12. 

5. A voice of tremhtinir ; in Jacob. (lonipaVe verse 7. 

7. The time of Jiicoh'^ troiiUe; compare Dan. 12:1. Tlie 
great deliverances of (lod's church have been effected in 
" troublous times." So it w:is at the restoration from tlie 
Baliylonish captivity, as we U^irn from tlie books of ly/.ra 
and Neheniiah; and the Scriptures freipieiitly intiiii;ile 
that her final deliverance shall be connected with such 
times. Isa. 20:7,8; Matt. 21:21 ; Hev. 1G:1:!, 14; 19:l!t. 

12. Thy bruise — woiiiul ; the calamities which thy sins 
have brought upon thee. 

872 . 



cattcrcd thee, yet will I ,'J ,1',^^, 
not make a full end of thee;' but I will 



correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee 
altogether unpunished. 

12 For thus saith the Lord, Thy bruise is incur- 
able,-' and thy wound is grievous. 

13 There is none to plead thy cause,** that thou may- 
estbe iKMind up:^ thou hast no healing inedifines.' 

14 All thy lovers have forgotten thee; they seek 
thee not;"' for I have wounded thee with the 
wound of an enemy,'' with the chastisement of a 
cruel one, for the multitude of thine iniquity; be- 
cause thy sins were increased." 

15 Why criest thou for thine afniction ? thy sor- 
row is incurable for the multitude of thine- iniqui- 
ty: because thy sins were increased, I have done 
these things unto thee. 

IG Therefore all they that devour thee .«hall be 
devoured; and all thine adversaries, every one of 
them, shall go into captivity; and they that spoil 
thee shall bo a spoil, and all that prey upon thee 
will I give for a proy.'' 

IT For 1 v.ill restore health unto fhi^c, and 1 
will heal thee of thy wounds,'' saith the Lord ; be- 
cause they called thee an Outcast, saying, This is 
Zion, whom no man seeketh after. 

IS ITlius saith the Lord; Behold, I will bring 
again the captivity of Jacob's tents, and have 
mercy on his dwelling-places;'' and the city shall 
he builded upon her own heap,' and the palace 
shall remain after the manner thereof. 

19 And out of them shall proceed thanksgiving 
and the voice of them that make merry:" and 1 will 
multiply them, and they shall not be few;' I will 
also glorify them, and they shall not be small. 

20 Their children also shall be as at'oretime," 
and their congregation shall be established before 
me, and I will punish all that oppress them.' 

21 And their nobles .shall be of themselves, and 
their governor shall proceed from the midst of 
them;"'' and I will cause him to draw near, and 
he shall approach unto me;" for who is tins that 

1 J.*n 2:1. S lleb. fur liiiiiliin; up, or pressing. ' ch. S:-22; l<a. l:(l. 
m Lam. 1:2; Ho*. 2:5, 7 o Lain. 2:5. o Lam. 3: 10, 17. P KxoJ. a3:-«; 
Isa. a^^):l; 41:11,12. ■Ich.;i3:0; Ps». *l::l: !«);«; H)T:-JIP. r I'm. 102 l;). 
lOr, Wd/eAW,- l'sa.OS;lj, 10. « Psa. 42:4 ; Isa. 51:11. i Zoch. 1U:S. u Isa. 
1:20 vch. 2:13. »Gcn. 4!):IU. i Num. 10:5. 



14. Thy tcrvcrs; the gentile nations, to whose alliance 
the .lews trusted for salvation. 

16. Therefore; because the end which 1 have had in 
view in alilictiiig thee for thy sins was thy juirilieation, 
not thy destruction. The prophets often employ this 
word in passing from threateiiings of present evil to 
promises of future good. 

18. Heap; or, as the margin, "hill."' Remain after (lie 
manner thereof ; more exactly, '• be iiiliabilcd after its man- 
ner;" that is, its former manner. 

21. Their nobles ; in the Hebrew." their noble," or, "their 
glorious one," in the singular number, like the word that 
follows. The reference is to the Messiah, as in the re- 
mainder of the verse, and to the .Jewish rulers after the 
captivity only so far as their oflice, like that of David 
before the captivity, was typical of Christ's reign, 0/ 
themselrc.t; of their own iialioii, and not of foreign conquer- 
ors. This promise had only a jiartial and limited fulfil- 
ment in the restoration of the .Jewish state after the cap- 
tivity. Its comjilele fnllilmeiit is in Christ, the son of 
David, wliom (!od li;is nuido Head over all things to the 
church. lie in an emphatic sense draws near lo God as 



Israel, Ephraim, and 



JEREMIAH XXXI. 



R .did comforkd. 



A.M. 3398. ensraired Ins heart to approach unto me? 

li, (■. about P^,^., T 

I"*;. saith tlic Lord. 

22 And ye shall be my people, and I will be your 
God." 

23 Behold, the -whirlwind of the Lord goeth 
forth with fury, a continuing* whirlwind : it shall 
fall* with jtaiu upon tlie iiead of the wicked. 

24 The herce anger of the Loud shall not return, 
until ho have done it, and until he have performed 
the intents of his heart : in the latter days ye shall 
consider it. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

1 The restoration of Israel- !0 The puhlication tliereof. 15 Rachel 
mourning is comforfed. 18 Ephr.aim repeiuinj^ is brought home ai^ain. 
2-3 Christ is promised. 27 His care over the ehurcli. 31 His new 
covenant. 3-5 The stability, 38 and amplitude of the church. 

AT the same time, saith the Lord, will I be the 
God of all the families of Israel, and they 
shall be my people. 

2 Tims saith the Lord, The people lohich were 
left of the sword found grace in the wilderness; 
even Israel, when I went to cause him to rest." 

3 The Lord hath appeared of old^ unto me, say- 
ing, Yea, I have loved thee'^ witii an everlasting 
love : '^ therefore wi th lo vin.g-kindncss have I drawn 
thee.^° 

4 Again I will Ijuild thee, and thou shalt be 
built, virgin of Israel : thou shalt again be 
adorned with thy tabrets,' and shalt go forth in 
the dances of tliem that make merry. 

5 Thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountains 
of Samaria : the planters shall plant, and shall eat 
them'' as common things. 

G For there shall be a day, that the watchmen 
upon the mount Ephraim shall cry. Arise ye, and 
let us go up to Zion unto the Lord our God.'" 

7 For thus saith the Lord; Sing with gladness 
for Jacob, and shout among the chief of the na- 
tions : publi.sh ye, praise ye, and say, Lord, save 
thy people, the remnant of Israel. 



a Ezek. :iT; 


>-,. •tieh.ntmng. t Dr. r^ww/n D .Nii.ii lU; f i; Uc-ui- 1 lU i 


t Heb friim 


I'fjr. cMat. 1;'J. li Rom. n:-iS, liW. i Or, hai-e I txtemlcd 


tuLnn^-i.inttu 


^s :nUo Ihee. e Hos 11:4. i Or, timOrels. V Huh. profane 


them; Deiir, 


as;:j(l. t Mic. 4:2. S Ezck. 2 .:i4, 41. h Isa. 411: 1 1. i ch. 


.^11:4; Psi. r. 


i. •>, G: Malt. 5:4. • Or, favors; Zeeli. 12:10. ; Dan. 0:17; 



the one Mediator between Uoil and man. Who is this ; an 
expression of admiring wonder. Compare Isa. 00:8. En- 
gaged his heart ; literally, " pledged his heart." These words 
are pecuharly applicable to the Redeemer, who has solenni- 
ly given himself to the work of intercession for men, and 
who continnally approaches God in their behalf. Heb. 7 : 25. 

23. The whirlwind — goelhfortli; the deliverance of Zion 
is here as elsewhere connected with desolating judgments 
upon tlie wicked within and without her pale. 
INSTIIUCTIOXS. 

3. Since every chastisement which God sends upon his 
covenant people is designed not for their destruction, but 
their purification, he will certainly deliver them from it, 
and make it in the end conducive to their increase and 
prosperity. Ver. 10, 11. 

7. The seasons of sharpest conflict to Zion have been, 
in a peculiar sense, those of her spiritual enlargement and 
deliverance. 

12-17. God's visible church has more than once been in 
the condition of an outcast: within diseased by sin and 
error, and without despised and trodden under foot by 
her enemies. But for the glory of his own name he has 
interposed in her behalf, bound up her wounds, and 
restored her to spiritual health and strength. 



8 Behold, I will bring them from the north coun- 
try, and gather them from thecoastsof the earth," 
and with them the blind and tlie lame, the wf)man 
with child and her that trav:iiloth with child to- 
gctiicr:'' a great company shall return thitlier. 

9 Tiicy shall come with weeping,' and with sup- 
plications* will I lead th3ra:J I will cause them to 
walk by the rivers of waters in a straight way. 
wherein they shall not stumble:'^ for lama father 
to Israel," and Ephraim ismy first-born.'" 

10 *i Hear the word of the Lord, ye nations, 
and declare it in the isles afar oif, and say. He 
that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep 
him, as a shepherd doth ids flock." 

11 For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob," and ran- 
somed him from the hand of him that was stronger 
than he.P 

12 Therefore they shall come and sing'' in the 
height of Zion,'' and shall flow together to the 
goodness of the Lord, for wJieat, and for wine, 
and for oil, and for the young of the flock and of the 
hei:d : and their soul shall be as-a watered garden -^ 
and they shall not sorrow any more at all.' 

13 Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, 
both young men and old together: for I will turn 
their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, 
and make them rejoice from their sorrow. 

14 And I will satiate the soul of the priests with 
fatness, and my people shall be satisiied with my 
goodness, saith tlie Lord. 

" 15 t Thus saith the Lord ; A voice was heard in 
Ramah, lamentation, and bitter weeping; Rachel 
weeping for her children refused to be comforted 
[or her children, because they icere not." 

16 Thus saith tlie Lord ; Refrain thy voice from 
weeping, and thine eyes from tears : for thy work 
shall be rewarded, saith the Lord ; and they shall 
come again from the land of the enemy.'' 

17 And there is hope in tliine end, saith the 
Lord, that thy children shall come again to their 
own border. 



Rom. S-'JO. k Psa. 2;!:2; Isa. :i.):7, 8; 4.'):19i 4'.1:I0. 11; Ri'v. 7:17. ! ch. 
:l:4, 19; Isa. 63:16; G4:S; Matt. 0:9. >" Exod. 4:22. ■> Ezek. 34:12-14. 
o Isa 44:23; 4t<:20. P Isa. 49:24, 25; Matt. 22:29. q Isa. :i'>: 11). r Ezek. 
I7:2:i; 2U:40. sJsa.SS:!!. t Rev. 21:4. iiMatt.2:17. v Ezra 1:5; Hos. 
1:11. 



18-24. The future overthrow of the wicked is as certain 
as the perpetual increase and joy of God's people. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

1. All the families of hracl ; all its tribes, whose r(?sto- 
ration and conversion the prophets often foretell. Ezek. 
chap. 37. 

2. Which were left of the sword; whom the sword had 
spared. 

C. Let us go up lo Zion ; these words predict the hcahng 
of the great scliism between Judah and Israel. Compare 
1 Kings 12:26-28. 

9. By the rivers of waters; compare Isa. 35 :C, 7; Rev. 
7:17. , . ^ 

15. Ramah — Rachel weeping ; Rachel was "buried in the 
way to Ephrath, wliich is Bethlehem," as Jacob journeyed 
from the north. That her grave was near Ramah, which 
lay a few miles north of Bethlehem, is plain from 1_ t^am. 
10:2. Here she is represented, by a beautiful iigure, 
as weeping from her tomb over her lost children. The 
words aiiply to any desolation of that region, and are pecul- 
iarly applicable to that which Herod made by the slaugh- 
ter of the children in Bethlehem and its borders. Matt. 
2:10-ls. 

873 



GoiVs new and 



JEREMIAH XXXI. 



eve/lastiiiir covcn::nt. 



18^1 have surcl}' heard Ephraim yjemoaning 
himself thus ; Tliou hast cliastiscd mc, and I was 
chastised," as a bullock unacetistomcd to the yolce:'' 
turn thou nie, and I shall be turned ;" for thou art 
the Loiii) my God. 

19 Surely after that I was turned, I repented;'' 
and after that I was instructed, I smote upon viy 
thi^h : I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, be- 
cause I did bear the reproach ofmy youth."^ 

20 Is Epiiraim my dear son ? is he a pleasant child ? 
for since 1 spake airainst him J do earnestly re- 
member him still:' therefore my bowels arc troub- 
led* for him; 1 will surely have mercy upon him, 
saith the Lord. 

21 Set thee up waymarks, make thee high heaps : 
set thy heart toward the highway, fw/i the way 
which thou wen test:" turn again, virgin of Is- 
rael, turn again to these thy cities.'' 

22 T How long wilt thou go about, thou back- 
>lidingdaughter ?' fortlie Lord hath createdanew 
thing in the earth, A woman shall compass a man. 

2:i Thus saith thcr Lord of hosts, the God of Is- 
rael ; As yet they shall use this speech in the land 
of Jiidah and in the cities thereof, when I shall 
bring again their cai)tivity ; The Lord bless thee, 

habitation of justice,^ and mountain of holiness.'' 
21 And there shall dwell in Jiidah itself, and in 

all the cities thereof together, husbandmen, and 
they that go forth with (locks. 

25 For I have satiated the weary soul,' and I 
have replenished every sorrowful soul.'" 

20 Upon this I awaked, and beheld ; and my 
sleep was sweet unto me. 

27 1; Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that 

1 will sow the house of Israel and the house of 
Judah with the seed of man, and with the seed of 
beast." 

28 And it shall come to pass, that like as I have 
watched over them, to pluck up, and to break 
down, and to throw down, and to destroy, and to 
ufllict; so will I watch over them, to build, and 
to plant, saith the Lord. 



' P»ii. 39:8.9. b Hof. 1U:II. e I>»a. &U::J. 7, 19; I,am. 5:21. i 2 Cor. 
10,11. cJobl3:ai. f Lam. 3:31, 32. " lleb. Jolim/; Isa. 03:1.1. Bell. 
11:5. Iich.3:ll; Zcch. IU:U. i ch. 2:18, :)U. J P.a. 122:5. S. k Zcch. H:3. 
Ul.-W:!; Matl. 11:2^. m Luke 1:51); John 4:H. n Ezck. 35:9-11 ; IIos. 
SI. » Kzpk. 37:20; lUh. fc:S-12; 1U:I0. 17. t Or, should I hare ton- 



l>i. Kphraim; that is, Israel, so named from one of the 
l)riiicii)al tribes. 

1!). After that I was turned; turned by God's grace from 
rebellion to obedience. 1 repented; thoupfh conversion 
begins in repentance, and is always cfl'ectcd by God's 
grace, tlie deepest repentance comes after it. 

21. Wuijmiirh; to mark out the road tliat leads from 
captivity home iigain. 

22. Go tiboiil ; wander aliout in the service of false gods. 
A woman shall cnmpasi a man ; commonly interpreted of 
our Lord's miraculous conception in the womb of the vir- 
gin Mary; and this agrees well with the context, for his 
incarnation was the highest pledge that God could give 
the church of his love for her, and his purpose to redeem 
her from the power of her enemies. 

2fi. i4«.'aA:«/; from prophetic vision. i?c/icM; considered 
the vision. My deep ; that is, what was revealed to mc in 
my sleep. 

31. A new fovenanl ; the gospel economy in contrast 
with the Mosaic. This new eovunant is the carrying out 
of the original covenant made with .\braham. Compare 
thap. 32:38-10; Ezok. 37:24-2»; Ileb. 8:8-13. 
874 



29 In those davs they shall say no more, a. y.sm. 
1 he lathers have eaten a sour grape, and too. 
the children's teeth are set on edge. 

30 But every one shall die for his own iniquity : 
every man that eateth the sour grape, his teeth 
shall be set on edge. 

31 ITBehold, the days come, saith the Lord, that 
I will make a new covenant with the house of Is- 
rael, and with the house of Judah:" 

32 Not according to the coven;\nt that I made 
with their fathers, in the day that I took them by 
the hand to bring them out of the land of Kgypt'; 
which my covenant they brake, although 1 was a 
lui.*band unto them,* saith the Lord: 

33 But this shall be the covenant that I will make 
with the house of Israel after those days, saith the 
Lord; I will put my law in their inward parts, 
and write it in thcirheai-ts ; and will be their God, 
and they shall be my people.'' 

34 And they shall teach no more every man his 
neighbor, and every man hislirolhcr, saying. Know 
the Lord: for they shall all know mc, from the 
least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the 
Lord :'' for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will 
reincmlK'r their sin no more."' 

3.5 ^Thus saith the J.,ord, which giveth the sun 
for a light by day, and the ordinances of the moon 
and of the stars for a light by night, which divid- 
etli the sea when the waves thereof roar ;'' the 
Lord of hosts is his name: 

36 If those ordinances depart from before me, 
saith the Lord, then the seed of Israel also shall 
cease from being a nation before me for ever.' 

37 Thus saith the Lord; If heaven above can 
be measured, and the foundations of the earth 
searched out beneath, I will also cast oil' all the 
seed of Israel for all that they have done, saith the 
Lord. 

38 1 Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that 
the city shall be built to the Lord from the tower 
of Hananecl, unto the gate of the corner." 

39 And the measuring line shall yet go forth 



tinutd a hushand itnlo ttiem.' p eh. 2-1:7; Rom. 7:22. <1 Ira. 54:13; John 
fl:45; 1 .lohn 5:20. rch. 3:1:8; 5U:20; Mic. 7:13; Acn 10:13; 13:39; Eph. 
1 :7. » Exod. 14:21, 22; I>a. .'.1:15. i cli. 33:20-22; Psa. 146:0; I«a. 54:9, 
10. u Noh. 3:1; Zcch. 14:10. 



37. Can lie meastired — searched out — / will also cast off; 
God's faithfulness to bis covenant engagements is as infi- 
nite as his works. 

38. From the tmver of Ilananccl ; the site of this, and of 
most of the other places named in connection with it, is 
uncertain. But the general meaning is, that .lerusalem 
shall be greatly enlarged. Wo may well believe that this 
sh;dl be literally fulfilled when " all Isniol shall he saved ;" 
yet the enlarging of the literal .lerusalem must still be a 
sign of the enlargement of the iluinh universal. 

ixsTitrrrioN.'s. 

3. Our assurance of the perpetuity of God's church, and 
her continued increase from ;ige to age. rests not on the 
sUibilit^' of human counsels, but on God's everlasting lovo 
for her. AVhat ho has undertaken, self-moved, for the 
manifestation of his own glory, ho will carry on to per- 
fection. 

9-14. When God's people rojiont of their sins, and seek 
his face with weef)ing and supplic ution, ho will turn their 
to:irs to songs of joy. Their condition is never so des- 
perate that he eannol with infinite ease restore to them 
more than their former i>rospcrily, and make their souls, 



Jeremiah bui/c'./i 



JEREMIAH XXXII. 



II .wnicd's field. 



A M. 3,TO8. over aa'ainst it upon thn hill Gareb, and 

\y. (". about 111*" 1 y-> 1 -1 

f*». shall compass about to Goath." 
40 And the whole valley of the dead bodies, and 
of the ashes, and all tiie fields unto the brook of Ki- 
dron, unto the corner of the iiorse gate toward the 
east.'' shall be holy unto the Lord f it shall not be 
plucked up, nor thrown down any more for ever. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

1 Jeremiah, being imprisoned by Zedekiah for liis prophecy, 6 buyeth 
Hanameel's field. 13 Barucli must preserve the evidences, as tokens 
of the people' .'i return IC Jeremiah in liis prayer complaiueth to G-od. 
26 God confirmeth the captivity i'or their sins, 3(3 and promiseth a 
gracious return. 

rHE word that came to Jeremiah from the 
Lord in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of 
Jiidah, which u-as the eighteenth year of Nebuchad- 
rezzar.'' 

2 For then the king of Babylon's army besieged 
■ Jerusalem : and Jeremiah the prophet was shut up 

iu the court of the prison,** which was in the king 
of Judah's house.' 

3 For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him up, 
saying. Wherefore dost thou prophe.-^y, and say, 
Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will give this city 
into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall 
take it;" 

4 And Zedekiah king of Judah shall not escape 
out of the hand of the Chaldeans, but shall surely 
be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon, 
and shall speak with him mouth to mouth, and his 
eyes shall behold his eyes;** 

5 And he shall lead Zedekiah to Babylon, and 
tliere shall he be until I visit him,' saith the Lord : 
though ye light with the Chaldeans, ye shall not 
]iros])erVJ 

tj 1i And Jeremiah said, The word of the Lord 
came unto me, saying, 



aZech.2:l,a. liNeh.3:a3. cJoel3:17. d ch. ;J9:1, 2; 2 Kings 25:1, 2. 
Neh. 3:25. ( ch. 33:1 ; 37:21 ; .3s:(i; 39:13, 14. e ch, 34:2, 3; 38:1?, 23. 
ch. 39:4-S; 52:U-11. i ch. 27:22. J ch. 21 :4, 5; .33:5. t Lev. 23:24-32; 



by his grace, like a watered garden full of the fruits of 
righteousness. 

15-17. Great and bitter bereavements often befall the 
church, and make her hke a tender mother weeping for 
lier lost children. But God restores to her a spiritual 
offspring more abundant than the former, and thus her 
vouth and vigor are renewed from age to age. Psa. 22 : 30 ; 
110:3; Isa. 49:20, 21; 53:10, 11. 

IS, 19. In the beginning divine chastisements commonly 
stir up the rebellion and opposition of the human heart; 
hut in God's children, their final effect is to produce deep 
liumiliation and self-abasement before liim. This is the 
signal that they have accomplished their object and will 
be speedily removed. 

20. In the severest trials which God sends upon his chil- 
dren, he feels a fatherly compassion for them; lie afflicts them 
for their profit, that they may be partakers of his holiness, 
and will in due time grant them a merciful deliverance. 

26. God's precious promises concerning Zion have ever 
been the support and consolation of all her true children. 

28. God breaks down the kingdom of Satan to destroy 
it for ever; but when he breaks down the walls of Zion, 
it is that he may afterwards build them again of wider 
dimensions and in a nobler form. Ver. 38-40. 

31-34. The new covenant made by God in Christ is spir- 
itual in its nature, and the evidence of our personal inter- 
est in it is to be sought, not in our outward relations, but 
in the inward statu of our affections. If God's law be 



7 Behold, Hanameel the son of Shallum thine 
uncle shall come unto thee, saying. Buy thee my 
field that is in Anathofli : for the right of redemp- 
tion is thine to liuy it.^ 

8 So Hanameel mine uncle's son came to me in 
the court of the prison according to the word of 
the Lord, and said unto me. Buy my field, I pray 
thee, that is in Anathoth, which is in the country 
(jf Benjaniim : for the right of inheritance is thine, 
and the redemption is thine: buy it for tliyself. 
Then I knew that this xras the word of the Lord. 

9 And I bought the field of Hanameel my uncle's 
son, that was in Anathoth, and weighed him the 
money,' even seventeen shekels of silver.* 

10 And I subscribed the evidence,* and sealed it. 
and took witnesses, and weighed him the money in 
the balances. 

11 So I took the evidence of the purchase, both 
that which was sealed according to the law and 
custom, and that which was open : 

12 And I gave the evidence of the purchase unto 
Baruch the son of Neriah," the son of Maaseiah, 
in the sight of Hanameel mine uncle's son, and in 
the presence of the witnesses that subscribed the 
book of the purchase," before all the Jews that sat 
in the court of the prison. 

Vi 'i And I charged Baruch before them, saying, 

14 Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Is- 
rael ; Take these evidences, this evidence of the 
purchase, both which is sealed, and this evidence 
which is open; and put them in an earthen vessel, 
that tiiey may continue many daj's. 

15 For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of 
Israel ; Houses and fields and vineyards shall be 
possessed again in tliis land." 

16 li Now when I had delivered the evidence of 
the purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah, I 
pi'ayed unto the Lord, saying, 



Ruth 4:4. 1 Oen. 23:lli; Zech. 11:12. • Or, .wen sliekels and te7l pieces 
of silver, t Heb. wrote in the book, m ch. 3li;4. " Isd. 8:2. « ver. 37, 
43,44. 



written in our hearts, then its blessings are ours, but not 
otherwise. 

35-37. Nothing is so stable as God's promises. The 
ordinances of heaven he established, and he can remove 
them. But his word nothing can remove. It stands fast 
for ever and ever. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

1. The tenth year of Zedekiah ; within about a year of the 
final capture of the city. (hap. 39:2. 

2. Shut up in the court of the prison; see chap. 37:21; 
38:28. 

5. There shall he be ; that is, as a captive. I visit htm ; 
see note on chap. 34:5. 

7. The right of redemption is thine; the lands of the Isra- 
elites were inalienable ; when a man had occasion to sell 
a field, his nearest kinsman had the right of purchasing it, 
and it returned to its former owner or his children at the 
year of jubilee. Lev. 25:23-34. 

11. Scaled — open; two evidences of sale were prepared : 
the one sealed and carefully laid up for future use, in case 
of doubt or litigation; the other a copy not sealed and 
left open, that its contents might at any time be read. 

15. Shall be possessed again ; that is, by the Jews in the 
way of regular sale and purchase, as was explained in verse 
44. This implied the peaceable repossession of iheir own 
land, from which Nebuchadnezzar was about to carry 
them into captivity. 

815 



The propheCs prayer, 



JEREMIAH XXXfl, 



a'nd its aiisicer. 



17 Ah, Lord God! behold, thou hast made the 
heaven and the earth by tliy great jiower and 
stretclied out arni,'^ and there is uotliinir too hard 
for* thee:'' 

18 Thou sliowest loviiifj-kindness unto thousands, 
and rccompensest the ini(]uity of the fathers into 
tlic bosom of their ciuhh'en after them:"^ Tiie 
Great, The Mighty God,'' 'i'lic Loud of hosts," is 
his name; 

19 Great in counsel/ and mighty in work:* for 
tliinc eyes arc Ofjcn upon all the ways of the sons 
of men,' to give every one according to his ways, 
and according to the fruit of his doings:" 

20 Wliich iiath set signs and wonders in the 
land of Egypt, even unto tliis day, and in Israel, 
and anif)ng other men ; and hast made thee a name,' 
as at this day; 

21 And hast brought forth thy people Israel out 
of the land of Egypt with signs, and with won- 
ders, and with a strong hand, and with a stretclied 
out arm, and witii great terror; 

22 And hast given them this land, which thou 
didst swear to their fatiiers to give them,-' a land 
flowing witli milk and honey;" 

23 And they came in, and possessed it; but they 
obeyed not thy voice, ncitiier walked in thy law;' 
they have done nothing of all that thou couimand- 
edst them to do: therefore thou hast caused all 
this evil to come upon tiiem.'" 

2-1 IJeliold the mounts,' they are come unto the 
city to take it; and the city is given into the hand 
of the Chaldeans that fight against it. because of 
the sword, and of the famine, and of the pesti- 
lence : and what thou hast spoken is come to pass ; 
and behold, thou seest it. 

25 And thou hast said unto me, Lord God, 
Buy thee the field for money, and take witnesses; 
for^ the city is given into the hand of tiic Chal- 
deans. 

26 1[ Then came the word of the Lord unto Jere- 
miah, savins, 

27 Boliohi, I am the Loun, the God of all flesh:" 
is there any thing too hard for nieV 

28 Therefore thus .saith tiic Loud ; Behold, I will 
give this city into tiie hand of the Chaldeans, and 
into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, 
and he shall take it:° 

2U And the Chaldeans, that fight; against this 
city, shall come and set fire on this city,'' and burn 
it wiih the houses, upon whose roof's they have 
offered incense unto Baal, and poured out drink- 
oQ'erinirs inito other gods, to provoke me to anger.'' 

30 For lh(! children of Israel and the children 
of Judah have only done evil before nie from their 



• 2King. lO:!.'.. • Or, hidftOM; In. 40:0, lU. b Vdr. 27; Gck. I,x:14; 
Lukol::i;. cDoul. 5:Ip. ■! Ina 9:0. ech.IO:lfl. M«. 2£':-J9. t lUh. 
doinx. KH-b 1:1:1. I" ■ili 17: 10; Rot. «:■». > Exod. U:IO; I Chr. K:-,'! ; 
lu. (i:):l'J; Dan.g:l.'>. i fVn. 17:7, H; 2-:l'(-l.'). k Exnd. :i:S, I J. I Noh. 
»:2«. mJaih.23.IIS. I Or, .-nyinc.. oAj/ioI; ch. 33 1. SOt.Hiough. » Num. 
10:22. ovor.3. Pch. .3T:-., Ill; 52:l:l. q ch. 18: l:t. r ch. 3:2.i; Gen. t-::;!. 
• Ezok 20:43 « ll«b. fnr my. I 2 Ki«g. 23:27; 24::t, 4 " l«.-i. 1:4,0; 



25. For tite city is pivcn; rather, "and yet tho city is 
given." See the murginal reading. Tho present condition 
of alVairs ueems to the prophet inconsistent with Uod's 
promise. 

.S3. Turned unto me the back, and not tlie/ace; goao away 
fiorii me instead of coming to me. 

876 



youth:'' for the children of Israel have a. si. sin. 
only provoked me to anger with the work aw.' 
of their hands," saith the Loud. 

31 For this city has been to me oi a' provoca- 
tion of mine anger and of my fury from the day 
that they built it even unto this day, that I should 
remove it from before my face;' 

32 Because of all the evil of the children of Is- 
rael and of the children of Judah, which they have 
done to ])rovoke inc to anger, they', their kings, 
their princes, their priests, and their prophets, and 
the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusa- 
lem." 

33 And they have turned unto mo the back,^ and 
not the face:"' though I taught them, rising up 
early and teaching them; yet they have not heark- 
ened to receive instruction. 

34 But they set their abominations in the house 
which is called by my name, to defile it."' 

35 And they built the high places of Baal, which' 
are in the valley of the son of Ilinnom, to cause 
their sons and their daughters to pass through the 

fire unto Molech;" which I commanded them not, 
neither came it into my mind, that they should do 
this abomination, to cause Judah to sin. 

3G ^ And now therefore thus saith the Lord, the 
God of Israel, concerning this city, whereof ye .=ay. 
It shall be delivered into the hand of the king 
of Babylon by the sword, and by the famine, and 
by the pestilence;-^ 

37 Behold, I will gather them out of all coun- 
tries, whither I have driven them in mine anger, 
and in my fury, and in great wrath;'' and I will 
bring them again unto this place, and 1 will cause 
thein to dwell safely:" 

38 And they shall be my people, and I will be 
their God:" 

39 And I will give them one heart,'' and one 
way, that they may fear ne for ever," for the good 
of them, and of their children after them: 

40 And 1 will make an everlasting covenant 
with them,'' that I will not turn away from* them, 
to do them good; Init I will put my fear in their 
hearts, that they shall not depart from inc. 

41 Yea, I will rejoice over them to do them 
good." ami I will phiiit them in this land assur- 
edly,"' with my whole heart and with my whole 
soul. 

42 For thus s;iiih the Loud: Like as I have 
brought all this great evil ujion this jieople, so 
will I firing upon them all the good that 1 have 
proinisetl them." 

43 And fields shall be bought in this land," 
whereof ye say, U is desolate without man or 



Din U:S. 1 Hob. mdi. » ch. 7:'.1. w ch. 33:11 ; 2 Kingi 21:4-7; Ewk. 
8:0. 0. « L-v. IW;21. J vor. 21. 2^. » ch. 20:14; Dent. 3U:.')-0; Kiok. 
.37:21,22. •Jn<l3:20; Zooh. 14:11. I>ch.:il:33. c |m, 5j:9; ({xok. 11:10, 
VO. • \\e\i att ilayi. d ch. :ll :3l-t3; l«a. .V>:3. t Hob. /rom o/i«r ■■ Dout. 
311:0; X'^ph. 3:17. I Uob. in IrulA, nr ifaAi/ity. 'Ama>S:lS. Cch. 33:10, 



.15. 



:J6. Ye say, It sItaJl be delivered into the hand of llie king of 
nahi/lon; tlio threatened delivery of .lernsaleni into tho 
liiind of Neliiichrtdnezzar seenicil to tlio people to he llio 
extinclion of all tlirir hopes for the fiitnre. God a.ssures 
them tliiit, tliongli this sliall take place, there shall be a 
future restoration. 



A gracious return promised. 



JEREMIAH XXXIII. 



Chris/, the Eriinch. 



AM .',111 beast; it is given into the hand of tlie 

»i" "" Chaldeans. 

44 Men shall buy fields for money, and subscribe 
evidences, and seal tkem,'^ and take witnesses in 
the laud of Benjamin," and in the places about 
Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, and in the 
cities of the mountains, and in tlie cities of the 
valley, and in the cities of the south ; for I will 
cause their captivity to return,'' saith the Lord. 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

i Cfotl promiseth to the captivity a gracious retiirn, 9 a joyful state, 12 
a settled government, 10 Christ the Branch of rigliteousness, 17 a con- 
tinuance of kingilom and priestliood, 20 and a stability of a blessed 
seed. 

MOREOVER the word of the Lord came unto 
Jeremiali the second time, while he was yet 
shut up in the court of the prison,'' sayinji, 

2 Tims saith tiie Lord tlic maker thereof, the 
Lord that formed it,"* to establisli it; The Lord' 
is his name;' 

3 Call unto me, and I will answer thee,^ and 
show tliee Lrreat and mighty* things, which thou 
knowest not. 

4 For thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, 
concerning the houses of this city, and concerning 
the houses ofihe kings of Judah, which are thrown 
down by the mounts,'' and by the sword ; 

5 Tiiey come to fight with the Chaldeans, but ii 
is to fill them with the dead bodies of men,' whom 
I have slain in mine anger and in my fury, and 
tor all whose wickedness I have hid my face from 
this city. 

6 Behold, I will bring it health and cuTe,J and 
I will cure them, and will reveal unto tliem the 
abundance of peace and truth. '^ 

7 And I will cause the captivity of Judah and 
the captivity of Israel to return, and will build 
them, as at the first.' 

8 And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, 
whereby they have sinned against me ;'" and I will 
pardon all their iniquities, whereby they have sin- 
ned, and whereby they have transgressed against 
me." 

9 If And it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise 



a Ve 


. lll-l-i. b 


ch 


17;2. 


>. t Psa. I-Ai 


1-4. 


d ch.3-. 


..> 


3. 


e Isa 


37:311. 


• Heb. 


JEHO VAN. 


f Amos 5:8; 9:6. 


e ch 


au:i->; 


Hs 


.91 


15. 


t Heb. 


hidden 


Isa. 48:6. 


h 


ch. :!> 


■.■21. ich.'Jl 


4,5. 


J ch. 31 


:I7 


k 


I'lxn, 


. 34:6; 


Isa. 55 


7; John III 


II 


; Tit 


3:5, 6; Heb. 


Ii:l7, 


13; 1 Pet. 


:3. 


1 l.S.l 


. 1:26. 


"Ezek 


36;*3; Ze 


h. 


13:1: 


IJohn 1:9; B 


CT. 1 


5. »ch 


31 


34. 


och. 


13:11; 



44. Buy fields — subscribe evidences; tliese words, as also 
verse 15, explain the import of the symbolic transaction 
between Jeremiah and Ilanameel in verses 6-14. It was 
in tact a prophecy in the shape of a symbol. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-15. The purchase which Jeremiah made of Hanameel 
was a pledge from God to his covenant people, that thou2;h 
for a season excluded from the land of Canaan, they should 
yet be restored to the possession of it; so all the present 
partial and limited victories which God grants to his 
church over the kingdom of Satan, are earnests and 
pledges of the universal victory that is reserved for her 
in coining ages. 

25. We should not judge of the prospects of God's 
cause by present appearances, but by his promises. The 
darkest nights of the church's affliction lead to a glorious 
da\vn. 

2(>-44. God knows how to pour out his wrath upon his 



and an honor before all the nations of the earth," 
which shall hear all the good that I do unto them : 
and they shall fear and tremble for all the good- 
ness and for all the prosperity that I procure unto 
it.t- 

10 Thus saith the Lord ; Again there shall be 
heard in this place, which ye say shall he desolate 
without man and without beast, eveyi in the cities 
of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, that are 
desolate, without man, and without inhabitant, 
and without beast, 

11 The voice of joy and the voice of gladness;'" 
the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the 
bride ; the voice of them that shall say. Praise the 
Lord of hosts:"' for the Lord is good; for his 
mercy cndurcth for ever: and of them that shall 
bring the sacrifice of praise into the house of the 
Lord. For I will cause to return the captivity 
of the land, as at the first, saith the Lord. 

12 Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Again in this 
place, which is desolate without man and without 
beast, and in all the cities thereof, shall be a hab- 
itation of shepherds causing their flocks to lie 
down.^ 

13 In the cities of the mountains,' in the cities 
of the vale, and in the cities of the south, and in 
the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jeru- 
salem, and in the cities of Judali, shall the flocks 
pass again under the hands of liim tliat tollcih 
Umn, saith the Lord. 

14 Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that 
I will perform that good thing which I have prom- 
ised unto the house of Israel and to the house of 
Judah. 

15 1 In those days, and at that time, will I cause 
the Branch of righteousness to grow up unto 
David;" and he shall execute judgment and right- 
eousness in the land."' 

16 In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jeru- 
salem shall dwell safely:"' and this is the name 
wherewith she shall be called, The Lord our 
righteousness.'-'' 

17 IT For thus saith the Lord ; David shall never 
want^ a man to sit upon the throne of the house 
of Israel -J 



Isa. 62:7 


Pisa 


lid -5 


qch 


.25:111; Hev. 18:2^3 


. r2Chr.5:13; 


Ezra 3:11; 


Psa. 136 


I ; Is:i. 


I-.M 


« 1 


a. 65:10. 


ch. 50:19. 2U 


>■ Isa. 


4:2; 11:1; 


Zech. 6: 


!•-', 13. 


V I 


a 4:' 


:2I. w ch 


23:6. 


1 Heb 


Jeh ovah-t.'n'dkenu . 


I 1 Cor. 


1:3(1. 


Ileh 


. The 


re shall not 


be cut 


off .iron 


David 


y 2 Sam. 


7:14-16; 


1 King 


2:4; 


Psa. 


69:29,38; Is 


a. 9:7; 


tukel: 


32, 33. 





visible church for her sius in such a manner that her 
present overthrow shall be the means of her purification 
and renovation, and the introduction of a new and more 
glorious era in her history. Chap. 33:1-14. 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

2. Tlie maker thereof — that formed it; the words "there- 
of" and "it" seem to refer to God's gracious purpose 
concermng his covenant people that is revealed in the 
present chapter. 

5. To fill them; the houses mentioned in verse 4. 

6. I will, bring it health and cure; God will not abate his 
present judgments upon Jerusalem, but he gives the gra- 
cious assurance of a future restoration. 

15. The Branch — unto David; the Jlessiah. Compare 
Isa. 11:1. 

17. David shall never want a man; literally, "there shall 
not lie cut off to David ;i man;" that is, his royal line 
S"1 



The ccruenanl of God. 



JEREMIAH XXXIV. 



Transient reformatio:i 



18 Neither ?liall the priests the Levites want a 
man before me to ofTcr burnt-offeriiiirs, and to 
kindle mcat-ofterings, and to do sacrilieo contin- 
ually." 

19 1 And the word of the Lord came unto Jere- 
miah, sayinjr, 

20 Thns saitli tlie Loud ; If ye can break my 
covenant of the day,'' and my covenant of the 
night, and that there .-^hould not be day and night 
in their season ; 

21 Then may also my covenant be broken with 
David my servant, that he should not have a son 
to reign upon his throne;*^ and with the Levites 
the priests, my ministers. 

22 As the host of heaven cannot be numbered, 
neither the sand of the sea measured;'' so will I 
multiply the seed of David my servant, and the 
Levites that minister unto me."^ 

23 Moreover tlic word of the Lord came to Jere- 
miah, saying, 

24 Considerest tliou not wliat this ]ieoplc have 
spoken, saying, 'i'he two families which the Lord 
hath chosen, he hatli even cast them ofl".'"' thus 
they have despised my people, that they should 
be no more a nation before them. 

25 Thus saith the Lord; If my covenant be not 
with day and night,'-' ayid if I have not appointed 
the ordinances of heaven and earth ; 

26 Then will I cast away the seed of Jacob, and 
David my servant, so that I will not take any of 
his seed to be rulers over the seed of Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob: for I will cause their captivity 
to return, and have mercy on them." 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

1 Jeremiah prophesieth the captivity of Zedekiah and the city. 8 The 
princes and tne people having dismissed their bondservants, contrary 
to the covenant of God, rt'assnnie them. 12 Jeremiah, for their diso- 
bedience, giveth them and Zedekiah into the hands of their 



T 



HE word which came unto Jeremiah from the 
Lord, when Nebuchadnezzar king of Baby- 
lon, and all iiis army, and all the kingdoms of the 
earth of his dominion,' and all the people, fought 



, 




. 


r,.10; 1 


Pet. a 


y' 


Rev. 1:0. b Psa 


69.37; 


Isa. 54 


9, 


in 


c ■. 


.«,im 




1.5,11) 


<! ch. 3: 


» Rev. 7:9. 10. ( vc 


r. 21,a-2 


f Gen 


H 


'ii; 


INa 


. 7J: 


10, 


17. h 


Ezra ■-> 


1, 7". 


• Heb. the domin 


onofh 


is hand. 


i 


rh. 


as: 


l,etc 




5J. I, et 


. ; 2 K.n 


gi-Ji: 


l,eto. Jch.ahlU 


■i-i.-ii, 


iS). tH 


ob 


his 



shall not become extinct bo that his kingdom can never 
be restored and perpetuated in his olTspring. For their 
chastiaeinent, Cod prohibited David's children from the 
exercise of the kingly office through a long period of 
time, 2 Sam. 7:1-1; but the kingdom itself was reserved 
for Christ the son of David. Luke 1:32, 33. Compare 
verse 2(i. 

18. Neither shall the priests the Lrviles want a man ; after a 
temporary suspension, the Levitical priesthood was re- 
stored and continued till it was suiierseded by the perfect 
priesthood of Christ, which it typified. Heb. 7:1-3, 11, 
12, 15, If). 

24. This people; probably the Chaldeans, who were be- 
sieging the city. The two f am Hies ; Judah and Israel. 

INSTRUCTION'. 
To the Old Testament church, the promise of a coming 
Saviour was the highest ])ossible |)lcdgc that the gates of 
hell should never prevail against her. She could not per- 
ish, because of her was to come the Kedc^emor of men. 
The victory gained by Christ over the prince of this world, 
;\i d his exaltation to the right liand of Uod, are, in like 
878 



against Jerusalem, and against all the cit- a. m.smix 

. ^' , ,, . . ~ B. i: about 

les thereof,' saying, wi. 

2 Thus saith" the Lord, the God of Israel ; Go 
and s[)eak to Zedekiah king of Judah, and tell 
him. Thus saith tlie Lord; Behold, I will give 
tills city into tlie hand of the king of Babylon, and 
he sliall burn it with fire:^ 

3 And thou shalt not escape out of his hand, but 
shalt surely be taken, and delivered into his hand : 
and tiiine eyes shall behold the eyes of the king 
of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee mouth 
to mouth,* and thou shalt go to Babylon. 

4 Yet hear the word of the Lord, Zedekiah 
king of Judah ; Thus saith the Lord of thee, Thou 
siialt not die by tlie sword ; 

5 Bid thou slialt die in peace: and with the burn- 
ings of thy fatiicrs, the former kings which were 
lii'forc thee, so shall they burn odors for thee ;'' and 
they will lament thee, saijmg. Ah, lord!' for I have 
pronounced the word, saith the Lord. 

G Then Jeremiah the prophet spake all these 
words unto Zedekiah king of Judah in Jerusalem, 

7 Wiicn the king of Babylon's army Ibiight 
against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of 
Judah that were left, against Lachish, and against 
Azekah : for tiiese defenccd cities remained of the 
cities of Judah.'" 

8 'i This is the word that came unto Jeremiah 
from the Lord, after that the king Zedekiah had 
made a covenant with all tlic people which were 
at Jerusalem, to jiroclaim liberty unto them;" 

9 That every man .should let his man-servant, 
and every man iiis maid-servant, bdng a Hebrew 
or a Hcbrewess, go free;" that none should serve 
himself of them, to u-it, of a Jew his brother.P 

10 Now when all the jirinces, and all the people. 
which had entered into tlie covenant, heard that 
every one should let his man-servant, and every 
one his maid-servant, go free, that none should 
serve themselves of them any more; then they 
obeyed, and let them go. 

11 But afterwards tliey turned, and caused the 
servants and the handmaids, whom they had let 



mouth shall speak to Ihy mouth. » -i Olir. lfi:H; 21:10. I ch. 22:1^. 
ma Kings IS: 13; 19:S. ■> Lov. 25:10. oNch.5:lI. r Lev. 25:39-10; 1 Co- 



manner, a perfect pledge to the Christian church that God 
will make her triumphant over all opposition. Sooner 
shall heaven and earth pass away than Christ, to whom 
the Father has given all ])ower in heaven ami earth, fail 
of subduing all things to liimsclf. 1 Cor. 15:24-26. 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

5. From a comparison of this verse wilh chap. 32:5, il 
appears that Zedekiah, though never restored to his throne, 
was after some time released from close confinement, anil 
treated with the honor due to his former dignity. The 
same was true of Jehoiachin. 2 Kings 25:27-30. 

7. Lachish — Azekah ; cilies in the plain coimtry of Judah. 
south-west of Jerusalem. 

R. To proclaim libertij unto them ; that is, to the Flebrew 
man-servants ami mald-servanis, in compliance with the 
law of Moses, lixod. 21:2. This proclamation seems to 
have been made under the pressure of (he siege. But 
afterwards, when the Chaldean army hatl temporarily 
doi)arted from Jerusalem, verses 21, 22, the princes and 
people again reduced to bondage their scrvauta whom 
tliev had set free, Vcr. U. 



Captivity foretold. 



JEUEMIAII XXXV. 



Ohcditnce of tlic llcckilil'. 



A. M, 34H. go free, to return, and brouglit tlioni into 
' m. subjection for servant^; and i'or handmaids. 

12 IT Therefore the word of tlic Loud came to 
.lereniiali from the Lord, saying, 

13 Tims saith tlie Lord, tlie God of Israel ; I 
made a covenant with your fatiiers in the day tiiat 
I brought tiiem forth out of tlie land of Egypt, 
out of tlie house of bondmen, saying, 

14 At the end of seven years let ye go every 
man his brother a Hebrew, which hath been sold* 
unto thee ; and wlien lie hath served thee six 
years, thou shalt let him go free from thee:'' but 
your fathers hearkened not unto me, neither in- 
clined their ear. 

15 And ye were now* turned, and had done 
right in my sight, in proclaiming liberty every 
man to his neighbor ; and ye had made a covenant 
before me in the house which is called by my 
name:''' 

16 But ye turned and polluted my name,"^ and 
caused every man his servant, and every man his 
liandmaid, whom he had set at liberty at their 
pleasure, to return, and brought them into subjec- 
tion,'' to be unto you for servants and for hand- 
maids. 

17 Tlicrcfore thus saith the Lord; Ye have not 
liearkoned unto me, in proclaiming liberty, every 
one to his brother, and every man to his neigh- 
bor: behold, I proclaim a liberty for you,'' saith 
the Lord, to tiie sword, to the pestilence, and to 
the famine ;'' and I will make you to be removed^ 
into all the kingdoms of the earth.''' 

18 And I will give the men that have trans- 
gressed my covenant, which have not j)erformed 
the words of tlie covenant which they had made 
before me, when they cut the calf in twain, and 
passed between the parts thereof," 

li) Tlie princes of Judali, and the princes of 
Jerusalem, the eunuchs, and tlie priests, and all 
the people of the land, which passed between the 
jiarts of the calf; 

20 I will even give them into the hand of their 
enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their 
life: and their dead bodies shall be for meat unto 
the fowls of the heaven, and to the beasts of the 
earth.' 



• Or, sold himself. 


a Exod. 21:2; Deut. 1.1:12. t Heb. to-day. ! Ileb. 


iclteretipon my name 


scalUa. b 2Kings23:3; Neh. 1U:29. « Exod. 20:7: 


Lev. 19:12. d Matt. 


18:2-:-:34. t Matt. 7:2; Gil. 6:7; Jas. 2:13. r cl,. 


3-2-.-!S. 5 Heb. /or a r 


moving, sell. 29:18; Deut. 28:2,3,64. h Gen 15:10, 



21 And Zedekiah king of Judah and his jirinccs 
will I give into the hand of tiicir enemies, and 
into the hand of them that seci< I heir lile, and 
into the hand of tlie king of BabyKjiTs army, whicii 
are gone up from you.J 

22 Behold, I will command, saith the Lord, and 
cause them to return to this city; and they shall 
fight against it,'' and take it, and burn it with 
fire:' and 1 will make the cities of Judah a deso- 
lation without an inhabitant.'" 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

1 By the obedience of the Rechabitcs, 12 Jeremiah condemneth the tli.'io- 
bcdience of the Jews. 18 (iod blesseth the Rechabites for their obedi- 

I^HE word wliicli came unto Jeremiah from the 
. Lord, in the days of Jehoiakim the son of 
Josiali king of Judah, saying, 

2 Go unto the house of the Rechabites," and 
speak nuto them, and bring them into the house 
of the Lord, into one of the chambers," and give 
them wine to drink. 

3 Then I took Jaazaniali the son of Jeremiah, 
the son of Ilabaziniah, and his brethren, and all 
his sons, and the whole house of the Rechabites; 

4 And I brought them into the house of the Lord, 
into the chamber of the sons of Hanan, the son of 
Igdaliah, a man of God, which iras by the chamber 
of the princes, which teas above the chamber of 
Maaseiah the son of Shallum.P the keeper of the 
door:''' 

5 And I set before the sons of the house of the 
Rechabites pots full of wine, and cups; and I said 
unto them. Drink ye wine. 

6 But they said. We will drink no wine: for 
Jonadab the son of Rechab our father commanded 
us, saying, Ye shall drink no wine, neither ye, nor 
your sons for ever : 

7 Neither shall ye build house, nor sow seed, 
nor plant vineyard, nor have any: but all your 
days ye shall dwell in tents;'' that ye may live 
many days in the land where ye be strangers.' 

S Thus have we obeyed the voice of Jonadali 
the son of Rechab our father in all that he hath 
charged us, to drink no wine all our days, we, 
our wives, our sons, nor our daughters ; 



16. Polluted my name; by violating their covenant made 
bi't'ore God in his house; an act of shameless perjury. 

l.S. Passed between the part-'! ; compare Gen. 15:10, 17. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-7. They who persist in acting contrary to God's de- 
clared will, involve themselves in irremediable ruin. 

11. Those acts of duty upon which men enter unwill- 
ingly, under the influence of fear,, are generally abandoned 
as soon as the outward pressure is removed. Ver. 21. 
No engagements will bind those who have neither the fear 
of God nor the love of their fellow-men in their hearts. 

13, 14. By the law of Moses the Hebrews were forbidden 
to oppress their brethren, and reduce them to perpetual 
bondage. The Christian religion has abolished the dis- 
tinction between Jews and Gentiles. It teaches us to re- 
gard all men as brethren, Luke 10: 36, 37, and to treat them 
accordingly. 

15-22. Perfidy incur dealings with men is a heinous sin, 



17. ■ ch. 7;.33; 10:4; 19:7. J ch. 37:5-11. kch. 40:2.3. 


1 oh. ,'J2:7, 13. 


m ch. 44:9, 0; Lam. 1:1. o 2 Kings 10:15; 1 Chr. 2:55. c 


1 Kings li:5. 


p 1 Chr. 9:18, 19. 1 Heb. thresliold, oivissd. q Psi. 84:10. 


r Heb. ll:!l. 


13. si Pet. 2:11. 





which God will punish; but its guilt is greatly aggravated 
when they whom we deceive by false promises are wctik 
and unable to defend themselves. Of all such God is thr 
protector and avenger. Prov. 22:22, 23. 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

6. Jonadab the so7i of Rechab; contemporary with Jcliu 
king of Israel, 2 Kings 10:15, and a descendant of tlic 
Kenites. 1 Chron. 2:55. He was not an Israelite, ver. 7. 
but a worshipper of the true God, and an eminently wi.se 
and good man. Ye shall drink no wine — nor your sons far 
ever ; thus he took the best and most effectual means to 
secure his posterity against intemperance with all its 
attendant evils. 

7. Neither shall ye build house — ye shall dwell in tents; lie 
wished them not to affect wealth' or luxury, but to live in 
tents after the manner of shepherds, which was favorable 
alike to independence and simplicitv of manners. 

8T9 



Promise lo the Jlcchahites. 



.lEREMIAII XXXVI. 



Barudis roll of prophecies. 



9 Nor to build houses for us to dwell in ; neither 
have wc vineyard, nor field, nor seed: 

10 Hut wc have dwelt in tents," and have obey- 
ed, and done according to all that Jonadab our 
father commanded us. 

11 But it came to pass, when Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon came up into the land, that we 
said. Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for fear of 
the army of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the 
army of the i^yrians: so we dwell at Jerusalem. 

12" •[ Tlicn came the word of the Lord unto Jere- 
miah, saying, 

13 Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Is- 
rael ; Go and tell the men of Judah and the inhab- 
itants of Jerusalem, Will ye not receive instruc- 
tion to licarken to my words?'' saith tlio Lord. 

14 Tiic words of Jonadab the son of Rechab, 
that he commanded his sons not to drink wine, 
are performed ; for unto tliis day they drink none, 
but obey their fatiicr's commandment: notwith- 
standing, I have spoken unto yon, rising early and 
speaking," but ye hearkened not unto me. 

15 I have sent also unto you all my servants the 
prophets,'' rising up early and sending them," say- 
ing, Return ye now every man from liis evil way, 
and amend your doings,' and go not after other 
gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the land 
which I have given to you and to your fatlicrs : 
but ye have not inclined your car, nor hearkened 
unto ma.'^ 

IG Because the sons of Jonadab tlie son of Re- 
chab have performed the commandment of tiieir 
father, which he commanded tliem ; but this peo- 
ple hath not hearkened unto me: 

17 Tlicreforo thus saith the Lord God of hosts, 
the God of Israel ; behold, 1 will l)i'ing upon Ju- 
dah and upon all tlio inhabitants of Jerusalem ail 
the evil that I have pronounced against them:" 
because I have spoken unto tlicm, but tliey have 
not heard ; and 1 have called unto them, but they 
have not answered. 

18 ^ And Jeremiah said unto the house of tlie 
Recliabites, Thus saitii the Lord of hosts, the Cind 
of Israel ; Because yc- iiave obeyed llie connnand- 
racnt of Jonadab your father, and l;i'])lall his pre- 
cepts, and done according unto all tiiat he iialh 
commanded you ;' 

V.) Tlierefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the 
God of Israel ; Jonadab the son of Rechab siiall 
not want a man to stand before me" for cver.^ 



• Vor.T. IJch.3J:33. c -JCIir. 30:15. IB. d oh. 7:13, 43; 25:3-0. "Luke 
10:10; 1 The... 4:S. ( ch. 1-^:11. K Lnko 13:34, :«. !■ Prov. 1:21, clc; 
13:13; 16:2; 151,05:12; m-A. i Exod. 2(1: 19; Eph.0:a,3. • llcb. Thrrr 
ikall not a man U rut off from Jonnilab llir .ion of Rtr/iab. I ch. 15:10; 



l'«a. S:S; Luke 21:.%. 



1; Uaik. 2:9; Zwh. «:1,2. ' ch. 30:2; 



14. Unto this day; a period (if about two liunilrcd and 
•ishty years. 

IMSTRDCTIONS. 

•L God employs every variety of method to bring men 
III repentance ; not only Iiis own direct autliority, Vnit also, 
an in this chapter, examples of obedience to parental com- 
mands. 

6, 7. Temperance, frugality, and simplicity of manners, 
arc a far better portion for this world than large estates 
and sumptuous maiisions ; and all wise parents will do 
what lies in their power lo secure tln<ir children in the 
possession of such a noble iidieritanei'. 
S80 



CHAPTER XXXVI. n c'.^'uS 

1 Jeremiah causeth Rariicli to write his prophef y. .'i and publicly to re.id 
it. II The princes. h:iviii2 intelligence thereof by Michaiah, tend 
Jehudi to fetch the roll, and read ii. 19 They will liarnch lo hide 
himself and Jeremiah. '20 The king Jehoiakim, being certified thereof, 
hcareth pan of it, and burneth tlic roll. 27 Jeremiah dcnounceth his 
judgment, ^'i Baruch writeth a new copy. 

AND it came to pass in the fourth year of 
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Ju- 
dali, that this word came unto Jeremiah from tlie 
Lord, saying, 

2 Take thee a roll of a book,'' and write therein 
all the words that I have spoken unto thee against 
Israel, and against Judah,' and against all the 
nations,'" from the day I spake unto thee, from 
the days of Josiah, even unto this day. 

3 It may be that the house of Judali will hear 
all the evil which I purpose to do unto them ;" that 
they may return every man from his evil way;" 
tiiat I may forgive their iniquity and their sin." 

4 Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of Neri- 
ah;i and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jere- 
miah all (ho words of tiie Lf)RD, wliich he had 
spoken unto him, upon a roll of a book.'' 

5 And Jeremiah commanded Barucii, saying, lam 
shut up: I cannot go info the house of the Lord: 

G Tlierefore go thou, and read in tiie roll,' which 
thou hast written from my mouth, the words of 
the Lord in the oars of the people in the Lord's 
house upon the fasting day:' and also thou shalt 
read them in the ears of all Judah that come out 
of their cities. 

7 It may be they will present their supplication^ 
before the Lord, and will return every one from his 
evil way :" for great is the anger and the fury that 
the Lord hath ju-onounced against this people." 

8 And Barucii the son of Neriah did according 
to all that Jcreiiiiali the prophet coniniandcd him, 
reading in the book the words of the Lord in the 
Lord's house." 

9 And it came to pass in the fifth year of Jehoi- 
akim the son of Josiah king of Judah, in Ihc 
ninth month, that they prochiiiiied a fast before the 
Lord to all the people in Jerusalem, ami to all 
the people that came from the cities of Judah unto 
Jerusalem." 

10 'J'hen read Baruch in the book the words of 
Jeremiah in the house of the Lord,' in the cham- 
ber of Gcmariah the son of Shaphan the scribe, in 
the higher court, at the entry' of the new gate of 
the Lord's house,'- in the cars of all the people. 



it-M. m ch.25:15, etc. n vor. 7; ch. 20:3. 

P Acta 3: 19. ilch. 32:12; 45:1,12. 



ch.l!<:S; Jonah 3:8.0. 



lO^. ^:1S. "' Cll. ^.j: 1^, ClU. " »U1. ■, v.l. m/.w. - ^%i.t~r.^, wvux. w.u. .>• 

Act33:l9. "ich. 32:12; 45:1, li. r vcr. 21 , 23, 32. ■ v«r. S; Emit. 2:3-7. 
Lev. 10:29-11 ; 23:27, 32; AcU27:9. t Hob. Ilirir suppliration ikattfalL 
vor. 3. » 2 Kings 22: 13, 17. " Noh. 6:3; Luko 4:10, etc. > Joel 2: 1.% 



V vor. 0, H. I Or, door. ' oh. 20: 10. 



12-17. Since God's authority is infinitely higher than 
that of earthly parents, rcbelliini against him is beyond 
measure more heinous, and will be punished with corre- 
sponding severity. 

18, lo! Tilial obediciico is a virtue with which God hati 
in a iieenli;ir degree connected the reward of temporal 
prosperily. 

CIIArTHR XXXVI. 

;>. In the fifth year — in the ninth month; this delay of so 
iii;iiiy months seems to have had for it« object to secure 
the most convenient time I'ur reading the roll. 



The kin" burns the roll. 



JEREMIAH xxxvr. 



A vew roll IS writlui. 



I! ",S ^^ T When Michaiah the son of Goma- 
fti?'. " riah, the son of Sliaplian, had heard out of 
tlic book all tlu; words of tiie Loito, 

12 Tiien he went down into th(> king's house, into 
llie scribe's charnbcr: and lo, all tiie princes sat 
there, even Klishania the scribe, and Delaiah the 
son of Sheniaiah, and Klnathan the son of Achbor, 
and Gemariali the son of Shaphan, and Zcdekiah 
the son of llananiah, and all the princes. 

llj 'J'heu Michaiah declared unto them all the 
words that he had heard, when Baruch read the 
book in the ears of the people. 

14 Tiiereforo all the princes sent Jehudi the sou 
of Nethaniah, the son of Shelaniiah, the son of 
('ushi, unto Baruch, saying, 'I'ake in thy hand the 
roll wherein thou hast read in the cars of the peo- 
ple, and come. So Baruch the son of Neriah took 
the roll in his haml, and came unto them. 

15 And they said unto him, Sit down now, and 
read it in our cars. So Baruch read it in their 
oars. 

16 Now it came to pass, when tliey had heard 
all the words, they 'were afraid both one and 
other, and said unto Baruch, We will surely tell 
the king all these words. 

17 And they asked Baruch, saying. Tell us now, 
How didst thou write all these words athis mouth? 

18 Then Baruch answered them, He pronounced 
all these words unto me with his mouth, and I 
wrote t/i£7n with ink in the book." 

19 Then said the princes unto Baruch, Go, hide 
thee, thou and Jeremiah ; and let no man know 
whore ye be.'' 

20 And they went in to the king into the court, 
but they laid up the roll in the chamber of Elisha- 
ina the scribe, and told all the words in the ears 
of the king. 

21 So the king sent Jehudi to fetch the roll ; and 
lie took it out of Elishama the scribe's chamber. 
And Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, and in 
the ears of all the princes which stood beside the 
king.'' 

22 Now the king sat in the winter house in the 
ninth month:'' and there u-as afire on the hearth 
buruinof before him. 



« Ver 2.4. baChr. 25:1.5,10; Prov. 28:12; Acls5:40. cch. 2.3:28; 26:2; 
Uzek. 2:4, 5. i AmosS: \r>. e I'sl. 50: 17; Prov. 13:1.3; 19:21 ; 21:30; Rev. 
23:19. ' 2Kings22:lI ; Isa. 36:22; 37:1. E ch. 13:15-17. h Prov. 21:29. 



IC. Were afraid both one and other; literally, " they feared 
one to another;" that is, looked upon one another with 
;istonishment and fear. 

11). Go, hide thee, thou and Jeremiah; though Jeremiah was 
under some sort of confinement, ver. 5, yet with the favor 
:ind countenance of the princes, it would be easy for him 
;iiid Baruch to secrete themselves. 

22. In tlie ninthmonth; answering nearly to our January. 
A fire nn tlie hearth burning; more exactly, "the pot was 
liurning before him." The people of tlio East warm their 
rooms by means of a pot containing burning wood or char- 
coal. 

2."?. Leaves ; that is, columns into wliich 'the roll was di- 
vided. 

30. None to sit upon the throne of David; his son Jechoniah 
reigned only three months, and he had no succession of his 
own children. See note on chap. 22 : 30. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2, 3. All God's dealings with his people are marked by 

sinceritv and openness : he multiplies his endeavors to 

56 



23 And it came lo pass, that when Jehudi had 
read three or four leaves, he cut it with the pen- 
knife, and cast it into the fire that vas on the 
hearth, until all the roll was consumed in the lire 
that vns on the hearth.'' 

24 Yet they were not afraid, nor rent their gar- 
ments,' neither the king, nor any of his servants 
that heard all these words. 

25 Nevertheless Elnathan and Delaiah and Gem- 
ariali had made intercession to the king that he 
would not burn the roll f but he would not hear 
them." 

26 But the king commanded Jerahmecl the son 
of Hamelecli,* and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and 
Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to take Baruch the 
scribe and Jeremiah the prophet : but the Lord 
hid them.' 

27 1i Then the word of the Lokd came to Jere- 
miah, after that the king had burned the roll, and 
the words which Baruch wrote at the mouth of 
Jeremiah, saying, 

28 Take thee again another roll, and write in it 
all the former words that were in the first roll, 
which Jehoiakim the king of Judah hath burned.-' 

29 And thou slialt say to Jehoiakim king of Ju- 
dah, Thus saith the Loun ; Thou hast burned this 
roll, saying. Why hast thou written therein, say- 
ing, The king of Babylon shall certainly come 
and destroy this land, and shall cause to cease 
from tlience man and beast? 

30 Therefore thus saith the Lord of Jehoiakim 
king of Judah ; lie shall have none to sit upon the 
throne of David : and his dead body shall be cast 
out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the 
frost. '^ 

31 And I will punish^ him and his seed and his 
servants for their iniquity ; and I will bring upon 
them, and u|)on the inhaliitants of Jerusalem, and 
upon the men of Judah, all the evil that 1 have 
pronounced against them;' but they hearkened 
not.'" 

32 "IT Then took Jeremiah another roll, and gave 
it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah; who 
wrote therein from the mouth of Jeremiah all the 
words of the book which Jehoiakim king of 



• Or, tlie king, i Psa. 27:5; 32:7; M:2. J Matt. 24:3.5. k c 
t Heb. visit upon,- ch. 23:34. 1 Deut. 28:15, etc.; Prov. 29 
23:37. 



bring them to repentance, and sends not his chastisements 
upon them until he has abimdantly warned them of their 
approach. 

5, G. Outward constraint does not hinder the faithful 
servant of God from continuing his labors as he has op- 
portunity ; and a prison has often afforded a most profit- 
able field of activity. 

8. They who are not themselves preachers can often 
render most important aid to those who liold this oftice ; 
and it is their duty to do so as they have opportunity. 

lG-19. The workings of conscience in tlie minds of irre- 
ligious men often second the preachers of the truth in so 
powerful a way that they are willing, to a certain extent, 
to countenance their labors and protect them from their 
enemies. 

23-26. Men in high stations, who are fully set in their 
sinful ways, will not bear faithful reproof; but will, so far 
as lies in their power, persecute its j)reachcr8. and destroy 
both them and their messages. 

27-31. Opposition to God's awful tlnciitcniiigs cannot 
881 



Siege of Jerusalem 



JEREMIAH XXXVII. 



raised for a season. 



Judah Iiad burned in the fire: and tliere were 
added besides unto them many like words.* 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 

1 The Egyptians having raised the siege of thp Chaldeans, king Zede- 
kiah sendeth to Jeremiah to pray for the people. G Jeremiah proplie- 
sieth the Chaldeans' certain return and victory. 11 He is taken for a 
fugitive, beaten, and put in prison. IG He assureth Zedekiall of the 
captivity. 18 Entreating for his liberty, he obtaineth some favor. 

AND kins: Zedekiah the son of Josiah reiirnod 
instead of Coniali tlio son of Jehoiakim, 
whom Nebiieliadrrzzar king of Uabylon made king 
in the laud of .Judali.'' 

2 But neither he, nor his servants, nor the peo- 
ple of tiie land, did Iicarken unto the words of the 
Loud,'' which he spake by* tlie propliet Jeremiah. 

3 And Zedekiali tlie kin<r sent Jciuical the son 
of Sheleiniah and Zcphaniah the son of Maaseiali 
the priest to tlie pro{)het Jeremiah,'' saying, Pray 
now unto tiic Lord our God for us.'' 

•1 Now Jeremiah eame in and went out among 
tlio people: for they had not put liim into prison. 

') Then Pharaoh's army was come forth out of 
Egypt:'' and when tlie Clialdeans that beseiged 
Jerusalem heard tidings of them, they departed 
from Jerusalem. "^ 

1 Then came the word of the LoiiD unto tlie 
prophet Jeremiah, .«aying, 

7 Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel ; Thus 
shall ye say to the king of Judali, that sent you 
unto me to inquire of me;" Behold, Pharaoii's 
army, which is comcfortli to lielp you, shall return 
to Egypt into tluur own land. 

8 And the Chaldeans shall come again, and fight 
against this city, and take it, and burn it with 
fire." 

9 Thus saith the Lord ; Deceive not yourselves,*' 
saying. The Clialdeans shall surely depart from 
us: for they sliall not depart. 

10 For tiiough ye had smitten the whole army 
of the Chaldeans "that fight against you,^ and there 
remained but wounded men* among them, yd 
should they rise up every man in ids tent, and 
burn this city with fire." 

11 1 And it came to pass, that when the army of 



•Keb. words as Ihci/. « a Kings al: 17; 'Z Chr. M-.Ul. b -j Uhr. :j(i: l-'-lli. 
t Heb. by ththandof. « ch. »:25; 54:i4. i ch. 3:1>7; 21:1,2; 42:2.20. 
• a Kings 24:7; Ezck. 17:15. ' vcr. 11 ; ch. 34:21. S vcr. .3; ch. 21 :2. !> oh. 
•11:21,22. iilxh. your souls. iJobl5:31. Jch. 21:4-7. » Hcb. men (/iriMl 
tifroush. It Jool 2:11. I Hcb. madf to ascend. 1 Or, slip away. ' Heb. 



hinder their execution; it can only provoke his anger, and 
involve us in deeper ruin. 

.32. In all ages of the world, wicked rulers and false 
teachers liave combined to suppress and hinder the know- 
ledge of God's word. lint he will in the tinal issue over- 
throw all who array themselvos against it, and give it free 
.course through the earth. 

C II APT Ell XXX VII. 

12. To srpnmic liimxtif thence ; or, according to some, to 
take his portion tin nee ; that is, to receive from his patri- 
mony in Analhoth what belonged to him. In the midst of 
Uhe people; along with the rest of the people. 

13. Tallest nwaij to the Chaldeans; his predictions of the 
success of the Chaldeans, and liis exhortations to tlie 
people to submit to their yoke, gave plausibility to this 
slander. 

INSTRCOTIONS. 
1-3. To consult God's servants can profit us nothin;;, 
882 



the Chaldeans was broken up' from Jeru- a M.mtB. 
salem tor fear of Pharaoii's armv, .',!i9.°*'°°' 

12 Tiien Jeremiah went ibrtliOut of Jerusalem 
to go into the land of Bcnjainiu, to separate him- 
self' thence in the midst of the people. 

13 And when he was in the gate of Benjamin, a 
captain of the ward was there, whose name was 
Irijah, the son of 8helemiah, the son of Hananiah : 
and he took Jeremiah the pro])liet, saying, Thou 
fallest away to the (.'haldeans. 

14 Then said Jeremiah, It is false;*' I fall not 
away to the Chaldeans. But he hearkened not to 
him : so Irijah took Jeremiah, and brought him to 
the princes. 

15 Wherefore the princes were wroth with Jer- 
emiah, and smote him,'" and jiut iiim in ))rison in 
the house of Jonathan the scribe; for they had 
made tliat the jirison. 

If) •[ When Jeremiah was entered into tlie dun- 
geon," and into the cabins,* and Jeremiah had re- 
mained there many days ; 

17 Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took him 
out ; and the king asked him secretly in his iiouse, 
and said. Is there a/iy word from the Loud'' And 
Jeremiah said, Tiien^ is: for, said he, tlioii shalt 
1)0 delivered into the hand of tiie king of Baby- 
lon. 

18 Moreover .leremiah said unto king Zedekiah, 
What have I offended against thee, or against thy 
servants, or against this jieople, that ye have put 
me in prison'?" 

19 Where are now your prophets which proph- 
esied unto you, I' saying. The king of Babylon shall 
not come against you, nor against this land?'' 

20 Thereibre hear now, I pray thee, O my lord 
the king: let my supplication, I pray thee, be ac- 
cepted* before thee; that thou cause me not to 
return to the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I 
die there. 

21 Then Zedekiah the king commanded that they 
should commit Jeremiah into the court of the pris- 
on,'' and tliat they should give him daily a piece 
of bread out of the baker's street,' until all the 
bread in the city were spent.' Thus Jeremiah re- 
mained in the court of the prison. 



fttlsrhoad, or a lie. 1 Matt. 5:11, 12. «• Acts S:aS, 40; 33:2, 3; 2 Cor. 
\\:-a--r,. nch.3rt:6. tOr,««J. o ch. 20:19; I'rov, 17:13, 28; AcU 25:11, 
25;2li::)l. Pch.a:*^. q ch. 26:2, etc. ; 29:31. I Hcb./n/<. rch. 32:2; 33:13, 
■a. iPsa. 37:19; Isa. 33:16. t ch. 38:9; S2:G. 



unless we obey the counsels which they deliver to us in 
his name. 

5-10. While men continue to practise iniquity, all their 
plans to obtain deliverance and salvation through their 
fellow-sinners will prove vain. Isa. :!0:3; 31:3. 

ll-I.'). Hatred and prejudice nv.ike men ready to enter- 
tain unfounded susjiicions against their neighbors, and to 
construe as crimes their most innocent acts. 

17. Wicked men are often driven in their distress to 
seek counsel from those whom they are afraid openly to 
countenance and protect. 

19. False teachers may flatter tlieir patrons with tho 
hope of imiuinity in sin, l>ut they c.inuot help tlicm hi the 
day of trouble. 

'20. '21. Whatever perils and sufferings come upon us in 
the disehargo of our duty, we should meet with courage 
and alacrit}-. At the same time, we ought to use all proper 
means to avoid needless exposure, since suffering for its 
own sake has neither goodness nor merit. 



The prajihd imprisoned. 



JEREMIAH XXXVIII. 



Cuiifcrcnce with the king. 



/5 .'^Sm CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

1 Jcreniiih, by a false suggestion, is put into the dungeon of Malchiali. 
7 Ebed-meiecli, by suit, getteth him some enlargement. 14 Upon 
secret conference he counselletli the king by yielding to save his life. 
*2\ By the king's mstructions he concealeth the conference from the 
prini-('-s. 

•''T'^HENSliephatiah the son of Mattan, and Geda- 
JL liah the .-^on of Paslmr, and Jucal the son of 
Shelemiah," and PashurthesonofMalchiah,''heard 
the word,s that Jeremiah iiad spoken unto all the 
people, saying, 

'1 Thus saith the Lord, He that remaincth in 
this city shall die by the sword, by the famine, 
and l>y the pestilence: but he that goetli forth to 
the Clialdeans shall live ; for he shall have his life 
for a prey, and shall live. 

3 Thus saith the Lord, Tiiis city shall surely be 
given into the hand of the king of Babylon's army, 
whifh shall take it. 

4 Therefore the princes said unto the king, We 
beseech thee, let this man lie put to death:'' for 
thus ho weakeneth the hands of the men of war 
that remain in this city, and the hands of all the 
people, in speaking such words unto them : for this 
man seeketh not the welfare* of this people, but 
the hurt. 

5 Then Zedekiah the king said. Behold, hois in 
your hand : for the king is not lie that can do any 
tiling against you. 

C Then took they Jeremiah, and ca<?t him iuto 
the dungeon of Malchiali the son of Hammclech,* 
that vas in the court of the prison :'' and they let 
Aown Jeremiah with cords. And in the dungeon 
there was no water, but mire : so Jeremiah sunk in 
the mire. 

7 " Now when Ebed-melech the Ethiopian,'^ one 
of the eunuchs which was in the king's house, heard 
that they had put Jeremiah in the dungeon ; the 
king then sitting in the gate of Benjamin ; 

S Ebed-melech went forth out of the king's house, 
and spake to the king, saying, 

Vi ily lord the king, these men have done evil in 
all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet, 
wliom they have cast into the dungeon ; and he is 
like to* die for hunger in the place where he is: 
for there is no more bread in the city.*^ 

10 Then the king commanded Ebed-melech the 
Ethiopian, saying, Take from hence thirty men 
with thee,^ and take up Jeremiah the prophet out 
of the dungeon, before he die. 

11 So Ebed-melech took the men with him, and 
went into the house of the king under the treas- 
ury , and took thence old cast clouts and old rotten 



» Ch. 37:3. b <;h. 21:1, 10. e ch. '26:11. • Heh. peace, t Or. (Ar ti«?,- 
nh. 3«:-'6. <1 ch. 37:ai ; Psa. 100:5 ; Luke 3:19, 20. =ch. 30:10. t Heb. 
tnill. ' ch. .37:21. 5 Heb. in tky hand. I Or, principal; 2 Kings 16:18. 
e 2 Kings 2:2. h Num. 16:22; 27:16; Isa. 57:10; Zech. 12:1. i Psi. 80:7, 



CHAPTER XXXVin. 

9. Lilte tn die for tiunger — no more bread in the city; the 
famine in the city being extreme, and .Jeremiah out of 
sight, no one would carry him food, and tlius he would 
die of himger. 

22. Brouglii forth; as captives. Tltose women sliall xny; 
Zedelviah feared the reproach of his princes, lint he should 
become an object of derision to the women of his palace. 
Thy friends ; thy false advisers. Have set thee on; urged 
thee to contend with the king of Babylon, instead of sub- 



rags, and lot them down by cords into the dun- 
geon to Jeremiah. 

12 And Ebed-niielech the Ethiojiian said unto 
Jeremiah, Put now these old cast clouts and rot- 
ten rags under thine armholcs under the cords. 
And Jeremiah did so. 

13 So they drew up Jeremiah with cords, and 
took him up out of the dungeon: and Jeremiah 
remained in the court of the prison. 

14 1 Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took Jer- 
emiah the prophet unto him into the third ' entry 
that M in tlie house of the Lord : and the king 
said unto Jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing; hide 
nothing from me. 

15 Then Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah, If I de- 
clare it unto thee, wilt thou not surely put me to 
death ? and if I give thee counsel, wilt thou not 
hearken unto me? 

16 So Zedekiah the king swarc secretly unto 
Jeremiah, saying, Jls the Lord livetli,'^ that made 
us this soul,'' I will not put thee to death, neither 
will I give thee into the hand of these men that 
seek thy life. 

17 Then said Jcremiahunto Zedekiah, Thus saith 
the Lord, the God of hosts,' the God of Israel ;J 
If thou wilt assuredly go fortli unto the king of 
Babylon's princes," then thy soul shall live, and 
this city shall not be burned with tire; and thou 
shalt live, and thy house:' 

18 But if thou wilt not go forth to the king of 
Babylon's princes, then shall this city be given 
into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they shall 
burn it with fire, and thou shalt not escape out of 
their hand.™ 

19 And Zedekiah the king said unto Jeremiah, 
I am afraid of the Jews that are fallen to the 
Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their hand, 
and they mock me." 

20 But Jeremiah said, They shall not deliver 
thee. Obey, I beseech thee, the voice of the Lord, 
which I speak unto thee :" so it shall be well unto 
thee, and thy soul shall live." 

21 But if thou refuse to go forth," this is the word 
that the Lord hath showed me: 

22 And behold, all the women that are left in 
the king of Judah's house 5/?n//&' brought forth to 
the king of Babylon's princes, and those tcomen 
shall say. Thy friends'' have set thee on, and have 
prevailed against thee:'' thy feet are sunk in the 
mire,^ and they are turned away back.' 

23 So they shall bring out all thy wives and thy 
children to the Chaldeans:" and thou shalt not 



1 4 ; Amos 5 


27. 


J 1 Ch 


1 


7:21; 


Ezra 


B:4 


k 


h. .30:3. 1 V 


er. 2; 2 


Kin^s 


24:12. 


m ve 


:>:■ 


; ch. 32 


4: 


34:3. 


n 1 Sam 


31:4 


2 Chr. 20 


20; Jas 


1:22. 


P Tsa. 


,'i.'>:3. 


t 


Prov. 1 


30 


31: 


sa. 


;1!), 


20. 


l Heb. Mm 


of tky 


peace. 


*■ Lam 


1:2; 


iUic 


.7:5. 


Psa. 00: 


2,14 


11 


>a. 4;. 


:17. ach. 39:0; 41: 


10. 



mitting to him. They are turned away back; thy friends 
have led thee into ruin, anil then forsaken thee. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1-4. Not they who encourage men in rebellion against 
God, but they who advise submission to his revealed will, 
are the true friends of their country ; yet such men are 
often denounced and persecuted as its enemies. 

.5, 0. When weak and irresolute men, who have not cour- 
age to resist the importunities of wicked counsellors, are 
exalted to high stations, the enemies of good men have a 
883 



Jerusalem taken and burned. 



JEREMIAH XXXIX. 



77k people carried captive. 



escape out of their liand, but shalt be taken by the 
liand of the king of Babylon:" and thou shalt 
cause tliis city to be burned* with fire. 

24 ^ Then said Zedekiah unto Jeremiah, Let no 
man know of these words, and thou shalt not die. 

2") Hut if tlic princes hear that I have talked 
with tliee, and they come unto thee, and say unto 
thee, Declare unto us now what tliou hast said unto 
the king, hide it not from us, and wo will not put 
thee to death ; also wiiat the king said unto thoc : 

2() 'J'hen tiiou shalt say unto them, 1 ])resented 
my supplication before the king, that he would 
not cause me to return to Jonathan's house, to die 
there.'' 

27 Then came all the princes unto Jeremiah, and 
asked him: and he told tiicm according to all 
these words that the king had commanded. So 
they left off^ speaking witli him ; lor the matter 
was not perceived. 

28 So Jeremiah abode in the court of the prison 
uutil the day that Jerusalem was taken:'' and he 
■was there when Jerusalem was taken. 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

1 Jerusalem is taken. 4 Zedekiah is made blind and sent to Babylon. 
8 The city is ruined, 9 the people led captive. 11 Nebuchadrezzar' -s 
charge for the good usage of Jeremiah. 15 God's promise to Ebed- 
melech. 

rX the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in 
the tenth month, came Nebuchadrezzar king 
of Babylon and all his army against Jerusalem, 
and they besieged it."* 

2 Jlnd in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the 
fourth month, the nintii day o^ the month, the city 
was broken up. 

3 And all the princes of the king of Babylon 
came in, and sat in the middle gate, even Nergal- 
sharczer, Sanigar-nebo, Sarscchim, Rab-saris, Ner- 
gal-sharezer, Rab-raag, with all the residue of the 
princes of the king of Babylon.'' 

4 1 And it came to pass, that when Zedekiah the 
king of Judah saw them, and all the men of war, 

• Ch. 52:8-1-1. • Heb. turn b oh. .■57:15, 20. ^ \Uh. u^efC siUnlfrom. 
c cti..')U:14. il ch. 52:1, etc. ; 2 Kings 23:1, etc. e ver. 13; ch. S--:!?. iLam. 
I::i. « oh. 32:4;3:i:18, 23. 1 lleb. spake with him judgmrnls; oh. 4:12. 
b ch. 52:11 ; Ezek. 12:13. i Ili'b. two brazen chains, or fetters. I l,am. 

great advantage over them, wliich they Jo not fail to im- 
prove for persecuting, and, if possible, destroying them. 

7-13. In the greatest extremities God is able to raise up 
for his Horvanis efficient friends, by whom they arc deliv- 
ered, and their enemies frustrated. 

17-20. The unbelief of Zedekiah prevented him from 
taking the way of salely wliich God by his ]irophet had 
pointed out to him; and so he perished with his familv 
and nobles. Herein he is set forth as an example for the 
instruction and warning of all who imitate his want of 
faith. 

21-2.S. They who are deterred from doing their duly 
through fear of men. generally bring upon themselves the 
very evils whirli thoy dread, in more aggravated forms. 

27. Though falsehood and deceit are always wrong, we 
are yet not bound to reveal all the truth to those who have 
no right to know it, and who seek it from malicious mo- 
tives. 1 Sam. lG:2-5. 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

2. The city vn.'- broken up; a breach was made in it.-; 
walls : probably in the northern wall of the lower citv. 
884 



then they fled, and wont forth out of the city A.M.3416. 
by night, l)y the way of the king's garden. :^' 
by the gate betwixt the two walls: and he went 
out the way of the plain. 

!j But the Chaldeans' army pursued after them, 
and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho:' 
and when they had taken him. they brought him 
up to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Riblali 
in tiic land of Hamath,*>' whore he gave judgment 
u])on liiiu.' 

(■) Then the king of Babylon slew the sons of 
Zedekiah in Riblah before his eyes: also the king 
of Babylon slew all the nobles of Judah. 

7 Moreover he put out Zedckiah's eyes,*" and 
bound him with chains,'* to carry him to Babylon. 

8 *; And the Chaldeans burned the king's house, 
and the houses of the people, with lire, and brake 
down the walls of Jerusalem.' 

9 Then Neliuzar-adan the captain of the guard' 
carried away captive into Babylon the remnant 
of the people that remained in the city, and those 
that fell away, that fell to him, with the rest of the 
people tluit remained. 

10 But Neluizar-adan the captain of the guard 
left of (he poor of tiie pcojile, which had nothing, 
in the land of Judah, and gave them vineyards 
and fields at the same time.^ 

11 T Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave 
charge concerning Jeremiah to* Nebuzar-adan 
the captain of the guard, saying, 

12 Take him. tind look well to* him, and do him 
no harm ;J but do unto him even as he shall say 
unto thee. 

13 So Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard 
sent, and Nebushasban, Rab-saris, and Nergal- 
sharezer, Rab-mag, and all the king of Babylon's 
princes;" 

1-1 Even they sent, and took Jeremiah out of the 
court of the prison,' and committed him unto Gcd- 
aliah the son of Ahikam tlie son of Shaphan,'" 
that ho should carry him home : so ho dwelt among 
the people. 



2:2, 


1 Or 


f/11 


e/ma 


r.t/ra/; 


IIf 


1). r* 


ef of the ex 


eeut 


on 


rrj or 


staiitthterrnen ; 




vrr 


10, 


11; Gen, 3; 


:3(l 


1 lieb. in thai 


day 




Hcb. 


bu the hand of. 


t lleh 


.«: 


Ihit 


e eyes 


upon 


J 


Psa. 


105:15. k 


vcr. 


3. 


1 ch 




20:21 


40. 


0. 





















whicli itself lay north of the upper city or Zion, for this 
was the side on which Jerusalem was most open to as- 
sault. 

3. T/te middle gate; probably the gate of the wall which 
separated Uie upper city from the lower, 

4. The king's garilcn; in the 80Utli-e;ist. near the place 
where the two valleys of Kedron ;uid lliiinom meet. 77if 
wnij of the plain; the way toward the plain of the .Jordan. 

6. Riblah in the land of Ilamalh ; noilh of Palestine, on 
the route from that country to Uabylon. 

10. The poor of tlic people ; compare Isa. :i:l-3. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-10. Though God's threatened judgments be long de- 
layed, they will come at last upon those who persist in 
their impenitence ; and then the reality will be as terrible 
as the previous announeenieut of them. 

11-U. In the overthrow of the wicked, God will provide 
for the safety of his faithful servants who put their trust 
in him, 

Ir>-18. No act of faith and love can escape the notice of 
Jehovah, In the ]ire8ent life God will generally reward it 
openly, and always in the life to come. 



Remnant of the Jews 



JEREMIAH XL. 



u>ider Gedaliah. 



Bc fbo'u't ■''^ 1 Now the word of the Lord came 
^i. "' unto Jercmiab, while he was shut up in 
the court of the prison, saying, 

10 Go and speak to Ebed-melech the Ethiopian," 
saying, Tims saith tiie Lord of hosts, the God of 
Israel; Beliold, I will bring my words upon this 
city for evil, and not for good ;" and they shall be 
accomplished in that day before thee. 

17 i>ut I will deliver thee in tiiatday,'' saith the 
Lord ; and thou shalt not be given into the hand 
of the men of wiiom thou art afraid.'' 

18 For 1 will surely deliver thee, and thou shalt 
not fall by the sword, but thy life shall be for a 
prey unto thee;'' because thou hast put thy trust 
in me.' saith the Lord. 



CHAPTER XL. 

1 Jeremi.ih, being set free by Nebuzar-adan, goetli to Gedaiiab. 7 Tbe 
dispersed Jews repair unto him. 13 Johanan revealing Isiirnacl's con- 
spiracy is not believed. 

''T^HE word which came to Jeremiah from the 
X Lord, after tiiat Nebuzar-adan the captain of 
the guard had let him go from Ramah,^ wiien he had 
taken him being bound in chains* among all that 
were carried away captive of Jerusalem and Judah, 
wiiich were carried away captive unto Babylon. 

2 And the captain of the guard took Jeremiali, 
and said unto him. The Lord thy Go^ hath pro- 
nounced this evil upon this place. '^ 

3 Now the Lord hatli brought it, and done ac- 
cording as he hath said : because ye have sinned 
against the Lord, and have not obeyed his voice, 
therefore this thing is come upon you." 

4 And now, behold, I loose thee this day from the 
chains which loere'' upon thy hand. If it seem good 
unto tliee to come with me into Babylon,-' come ; and 
I will look well unto * thee : Init if it seem ill unto 
tlice to come with me into Babylon, forbear: be- 
hold, all the land m before thee: whither it seemeth 
good and convenient for thee to go, thither go. 

5 Now while he was not yet gone back, he said, 
Go back also to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the 
son of Shaphan," whom the king of BaViylon hath 
made governor over the cities of Judah, and dwell 
with him among the people: or go wheresoever 
it seemeth convenient unto tliee to go. So the 
captain of the guard gave him victuals and a re- 
ward, and let him go. 

G Then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah the son of 



' Ch. 3S;7, 12. b Dan. 9:12. <= Job .5:19-21; P.-i. 50:15; Dan. 6:16. 
J 2 Sam. 2J:14. e ch. 21:9; 4.5:5. f I Chr 5:20; Fsa. 37:39, 40. e cli. 
:»: 14. • Or. mnnades. h ch. 50:7. i Deut. 29:24. 2:5; Nch. 9:2», 33; Dan. 
9:11. f Or. are. ich. 35:12. 1 Heb. se( mine eye wpon. kcli.41;2. 1 Judg. 



CHAPTER XL. 

1. Tlie word which came to Jeremiah ; these words refer to 
flic prophecies that follow in the forty-second chapter, the 
hi.story of the remnant of the Jews being first given by 
way of introduction. 

5. Willie he was not yet gone back; the prophet seems to 
have hesitated respecting his future course, which gave 
occasion to Nebuzar-adan to put his proposition in a dif- 
ferent form. 

7. Captains of the forces; leaders of the scattered bands 
of the Jews. 

S. Mizpak; in the land of Benjamin, a short distance 
north-west from Jerusalem. 



Ahikam to Mizpah;' and dwelt with him among 
the people that were left in the land. 

7*! Now when all the captains of the forces 
which were in the fields, even they and their men, 
heard that the king of Babylon had made Geda- 
liah the son of Ahikam governor in the land, and 
had committed unto him men, and women, and 
children, and of the poor of the land, of them that 
were not carried away captive to Babvlon ; "' 

8 Then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, oven 
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah," and Johanan" and 
Jonathan the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the son 
of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Neto- 
phathite,!' and Jczauiah the son of a Maachathite,'' 
they and tiieir men. 

9 And Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of 
Shaphan sware unto them and to their men, say- 
ing. Fear not to serve the Chaldeans: dwell in 
the land, and servo the king of Babylon, and it 
shall be well with you. 

10 As for me, behold, I will dwell at Mizpah, 
to serve 5 the Chaldeans, whicli will come unto us : 
l)ut ye, gatiicr ye wine, and summer fruits,'' and 
oil, and put them in your vessels, and dwell in your 
cities that ye have taken. 

11 Likewise when all the Jews that were in 
Moab,'^ and among the Ammonites,"^ and in Edora, 
and that u-erc in all the countries, heard that the 
king of Baliylon had left a remnant of Judah, and 
tiiat he had set over them Gedaliah the son of 
Ahikam the son of Shafihan ; 

12 Even all the Jews returned out of all places 
whither they were driven, and came to the land 
of Judah, to Gedaliah, unto Mizpah, and gathered 
wine and summer fruits very much. 

13 1 Moreover Johanan tiie son of Kareah, and 
all the captains of the forces that icere in the fields, 
came to Gedaliali to Mizpah, 

14 And said unto him, Dost thou certainly know 
that Baalis the king of the Ammonites hath sent 
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah" to slay thee? ' But 
Gedaliah the sou of Ahikam believed them not. 

15 Then Johanan the son of Kareah spake to 
Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, saying. Let me go, 1 
pray thee, and I will slay Ishmael the son of 
Nethaniah, and no man shall know //.■ wherefore 
should he slay thee, that all the Jews which are 
gathered unto thee should be scattered, and the 
remnant in Judah perish? 



20:1. 


m ch 


39:10 


52:10. 


n ch. 


41:1, etc. 


ch. 43: 


-',4,5. 


pEzra 


2:22. 


q .Tnsh. 


12:5 


§ He 


b. stand brfore 


; Deut. 1:33 


■■ch. 


39:10. 


' Isa. 


16:4. 


1 Ezek 


2o:2 


uch 


41:10. 


IHeb 


strike thee in 


soul. 









IXSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Great and long-continued disobedience in his people, 
God often punishes in such an exemplary way that even 
the unconverted are compelled to see and acknowledge his 
hand. 

4. When the visible church of God hates and persecutes 
his messengers, he often raises up for them defenders from 
without, under whose protection they are enabled to pros- 
ecute their labors in safety. 

13-16. Those who are conscious of their own integrity, 
are sometimes too unsuspecting with regard to their fel- 
low-mon, and thus, by neglecting the warnings of friends, 
become involved, with those under their care, in calamity 
and death, 

885 



Gtdidiah Ircachtrouslij 



JEREMIAH XLIl. 



slain hy Ishniad. 



16 But Gedaliali tlio son of Aliikain said unto 
Johanan the sou of Kareah. Tliou shalt not do 
this tiling: for tliou spcalcest falsely of Islmiacl. 

CHAPTER XLI. 

1 Ishmael treacherously killing Gedaliali and others, purposeth with the 
residue to flee unto the Ammonites. 11 Johan;in recovercth the cap- 
tives, and mindeth to ilee into ilgypt. 

NOW it came to pass in the seventh month, 
that Ishniacl the sou of Netiianiah the son of 
Elishama," of the seed royal, and the jji-inces of 
the king, even ten men with him, came unto Ged- 
aliah tiio son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and there 
they did cat bread together in Mizpah. 

2 Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and 
the ten men that were with him, and smote Ged- 
aliali the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan with 
the sword, and slew him, whom the king of Baby- 
lon had made governor over the land. 

3 Ishmael also slew all the Jews that were with 
him, even with Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chal- 
deans that were found there, and the men of war. 

4 And it came to pass the second day after he 
had slain Gedaliali, and no man knew <7,'' 

.5 That there came certain from Shechem, from 
Shi loll, and from Samaria, even fourscore men, hav- 
ing their beards shaven, and their clothes rent, 
and having cut themselves,*-' with offerings and in- 
cense in their hand, to bring tlmii, to the house of 
the Lord.'' 

6 And Islimael the son of Xcthaniah went forth 
from Mizj)ali to meet them, weeping all along' as 
he went: and it came to pass, as he met them, he 
said unto them. Come to Gedaliah the son of Ahi- 
kam. 

7 And it was so, when they came into the midst 
of the city, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah 
slew them, and cast them into the midst of the pit, 
he, and the men that were with him. 

8 But ten men were found among them that said 
unto Ishmael, Slay us not: for we have treasures 
in the field, of wheat, and of barley, and of oil, 
and of honey.'' So he forbare, and slew them not 
among their bretliren. 

9 Now the pit wherein Ishmael had cast all the 
dead bodies of the men, whom ho had slain because 
of' Gedaliah, %vas it which Asa the king had made 
for fear of Baaslia king of Israel : ' and Ishmael tiie 
son of Nethaniah filled it with them that were slain. 

10 Tlien Ishmael carried away caiitive all the 
residue of the ])Coi)le tliat ivcrc in Mizpah,'-' even 
the king's daughters,'' and all the people that re- 

« Ch. 40.0, 8; aKinBS-i?:^. b 1 Sam. 27:11. c Ley. 19:27, W; Dout. 
14:1: 2 Sam. I0:-1; I»a. 15:2. d I Sam. 1:7; 2KinB«a5:!l. * lUh. in going 
and weeping; 2 Sam. .3:10. • Job 2:1; Prov. 13:8; Matt. 6:25. t Or, 
near/ Hob. by Ike luinil, or hy the side of. ' I Kingj 15:22. ( 2 Clir. 10:0. 



CHAPTER XLI. 

1. In the seventh month; of the year in whiili JiTUsulom 
w;is taken. Chap. :»:2. 

5. Their beards shaven — cut themselves; these were signs 
of moiiriiiii}; for the (lostruction of tlio holy city anil tcin- 
plo. To tlie hotise of the ImH ; that is, to tlio place when- 
it had stood, and wliicli tliey regarded as still holy. 

6. Weeping — as lie went; in protended sympathy with 
them. 

12. The great waters — in Gibeon; acopioiia fountain witli 
88G 



mained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzar-adan a.m.jiis. 

, . ,.1 111 • I 11. 0. about 

the ea[)tain of tlie guard had committed iss. 
to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam; and Ishmael the 
son of Nethaniah carried thcrn away captive, and 
departed to go over to the Ammonites.' 

11 1 But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and 
all the captains of the forces that were with him, 
heard of all the evil that Ishmael the son of Neth- 
aniah had done,' 

12 Then they took all the men, and went to fight 
with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him 
by the great waters that are in Gibeon.'' 

13 Now it came to pass, that when all the peo- 
ple which tvere with Ishmael saw Johanan the son 
of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that 
were with him, then they were glad. 

14 So all the jicople that Ishmael had carried 
away captive from Mizpah cast about and returned, 
ami went unto Johanan the son of Kareah. 

1") But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped 
from Johanan with eight men, and went to the 
Ammonites. 

10 Then took Johanan the son of Kareah, and 
all the captains of the forces that xarc with him, 
all the remnant of the; people whom he had recov- 
ered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Miz- 
pah, after that he had slain Gedaliah the son of 
xlhikam, even mighty men of war, and the women, 
and the clnldrcii, and the eunuchs, whom he liad 
brought again from Gibeon: 

17 And they departed, and dwelt in the habita- 
tion of Chimham,' which is by Beth-iehem, to go 
to enter into Egypt, 

18 Because of the Chaldeans: for they were 
afraid of them, because Ishmael the sou of Neth- 
aniah had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, whom 
the king of Babylon made governor in the land.'" 

ClIAl'TKIt XL 11. 

1 Johanan desireth .Tercmi;ih to inquire of God, promising obedience to his 
will. 7 Jereiniall .assuretli him of safely in Judea, 13 and destruction 
in Egypt. 19 He nprovith their hypocrisy, in requiring of 'he Lord 

that wliioh they me;int not. 

THEN all the captains of the forces," and Jo- 
hanan the son of Kareah, and Jozaniah the 
son of Iloshaiah, and all the people fnnii the least 
even unto the greatest, came near, 

2 And said unto JertMiiiah the proiihet. Let, we 
beseech thee, our supplication be aeeepted' before 
thee, and pray for us unto the Lokd thy God," 
even for all this remnant; for we are left but a 
few of many,'' as tiiine eyes do l)ehold us; 



1> oh. 43:0. I Neh. 2:10, 19; ch. 40:14 I vcr. 2, :!, 7. k 2 Sam. 2:13. 
I a Sam. 19:37, 33. n. ch. 40:.5. » oh. 40:8. I Or, fall. ' ell. 17:1S, 10; 
lSam.7:8; 12:10,23; Isa. 1:15, pLey.2(i:22; l.ain.l:l. 



largo reservoirs, one of which, and the ruins of tho otlier, 
still remain. Compare 2 Fsim. 2:13. 

17. To go to enter into KgiJl't ; they made a temporary 
sojourn at Uhimham, on tlieir way to Egypt. 
INSTIil'CTION. 

Times of anarchy and confusion are prolific in crime. 
When tlie outward restraints of civil government aro re- 
moved, no limit can ho set to the atrocities which wicked 
men will commit for the sake of jiower anil plunder. Yet 
even in sneh dark days Cod is aldo to limit tho wrath of 
man, and raise up for his people deliverers and defoudcra. 



The people ask direction 



JEREMIAH XEIII. 



f 10711 God, and reject it. 



A. M. M16. 3 That tlic Lord thy God may show us 
588. tlie way wherein wc may walk," and the 
thiii,2: that we may <h).'' 

4 Tlien Jeromiali the propliet said unto them, I 
have lieard yuu ; behold, I will pray unto the 
LoR!) your God according to your words j*^ and it 
shall come to pass, that whatsoever thing the Lord 
shall answer you,'' I will declare it unto you ; I 
will keep nothing back from you." 

5 Then they said to Jeremiah, The Lord Ijc a 
true and faithful witness between us,' if we do not 
even according to all things for the which the 
Lord thy God shall send thee to us. 

6 Whether it be good, or whether it he evil, wc 
will obey the voice of the Lord our God," to whom 
we send thee; that it may be well with us, when 
we oliey the voice of the Lord our God." 

7 IT And it came to pass after t-en days, that the 
word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah. 

8 Then called he Johanan the son of Kareah, 
and all the captains of the forces which vere with 
him, and all the people from the least even to the 
greatest, 

9 And said unto them. Thus saith the Lord, the 
God of Israel, unto whom ye sent me to present 
your supplication before him; 

10 If ye will still abide in this land, then will I 
build you,' and not pull ymi down ; and I will 
plant you, and not pluck you up: for I repent mo 
of the evil that I have done unto you.-' 

11 Be not afraid of tlic king of Babylon,'"' of 
whom ye arc afraid; be not afraid of him, saith 
the Lord: for I am with you to save yon, and to 
deliver you from his hand.' 

12 And I will show mercies unto you,"' that he 
nmy have mercy upon yon, and cause you to re- 
turn to your own land. 

13 1 But if ye say. We will not dwell in this 
land, neither obey tlie voice of the Lord your 
God," 

14 Saying, No ; but we will go into the land of 
Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the 
souml of the trumpet, nor have hunger of bread ; 
and there will we dwell:" 

1.5 And now therefore hear the word of the 
Lord, ye remnant of Judah ; Thus saith the Lord 
of hosts, the God of Israel; If ye wholly set your 
faces to enter into Egypt," and go to sojourn there ; 

16 Then it shall come to pass, that the sword, 
which ye feared,'' shall overtake you there in the 



"Ezri8;2l. b Deut. 5:28, 29. c Exod. 9:29. <1 1 Kings 22: 14. e 1 Sam. 
.■!: IS; Acts 20:20. ' Gen. 31:.5(l; Exod. 20:7. e Dent. 5:27. hch. 7;2:J; 
Deut. B::l. ' ch. 31:2S. j ch. 13:8; Deut 32:3G. k Matt. 10:2S. 1 Isa. 
4.1:5; Rom. S::!U m Psa. lll():4.5. 011.44:10. o Deut. 2il:19, 20. p Deut. 
17:15. qEzek. 11:8. rch. 44:13. • Keh. cleave. 1 Reb. all llie men be. 



CHAPTER XLII. 

12. Cawe you to return to your own land; most of the 
people whom Jeremiah addressed had been dispersed 
among the surrounding nations, and they were now in an 
unsettled state and on their way to Egypt. The prophet's 
meaning is, that if they will obey God, Nebuchadnezzar 
shall give them quiet possession of their own land. 

14. We wilt go into the land of Egypt; the spirit that 
prompted them to this course was sinful reliance on the 
help of man, rather than on God's promises. Compare Isa. 
30:1-5; 31:1-3. 



land of Egypt;'' and the famine, whereof ye were 
afraid, shall follow * close after you there iuEgypt : 
and there ye shall die. 

17 So shall it bo with all the men^ that sot their 
faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there ; tliey shall 
die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pes- 
tilence ;^ an.d none of them shall remain or escape 
from the evil that I will bring upon them. 

18 For thus saitl; the Lord of hosts, the God of 
Israel ; As mine anger and my fury hath been 
poured forth upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem;' 
so shall my fury be poured forth upon you, when 
ye shall enter into Egypt: and ye shall bo an exe- 
cration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a 
reproach ;" and ye shall see this place no more. 

19 1i The Lord hath said concerning you, ye 
remnant of Judah; Go ye not into Egypt: know 
certainly that I have admonished you' this day. 

20 For yc dissembled in your hearts,""*' when ye 
sent me unto the Lord your God, saying, Pray for 
us unto the Lord our God;'" and according unto 
all that the Lord our God shall say, so declare 
unto us, and we will do H. 

21 And now I liave this day declared it to you ;^ 
but ye have not obeyed the voice of the Lord your 
God, nor any thing for the which he hath sent me 
unto you. 

22 Now therefore know certainly that ye shall 
die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pesti- 
lence,^ in the place whither ye desire to go and to 
sojourn.'^ 

CHAPTER XLIII. 

1 Johan.Tn, (liscreditinj; Jeremiah's prophecy, carrieth Jeremi,ih and others 
into Eoypt. 8 Jeremiah prophesieth bya type the conquest of Egypt 
by the Babylonians. 

AND it came to pass, that when Jeremiah had 
made an end of speaking unto all the people 
all the words of the Lord their God, for which 
the Lord their God had sent him to them, even all 
these words, 

2 Then spake Azariah the son of Iloshaiah," and 
Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the jiroud 
men," saying unto Jeremiah, Thou speakest falsely: 
the Lord our God hath not sent thee to say. Go 
not into Egypt to sojourn there: 

3 But Baruch the son of Ncriah setteth thee on 
against us, for to deliver us into the hand of the 
Chaldeans, that they might put us to death, and 
carry us away captives into Babylon. 



' vcr. 22; ch. 24:10. t ch. 7:20; ch. .30:2; Lam. 2:5. u cli. 24:9; 29: IS, 
22; 42:1H; Zech. 8:13. 1 Heb. trslijitd again.':! you. i Ot, Aave vaeil 
clecfit against your souls; Num. 10::)-. v ch. 17:10; Gal. 0:7. w ver. 2. 
I Deut. 11:20, 27. y vtT. 17; Ezek. 0:11. t Or, to go to sojourn. 2 Hos. 
9:0. ich. 42:1. b Prov. 8: 13; 10:5; Isa. 9:9, 10; Jas. 4:0. 



INSTRUCTION. 
Wicked men have a general conviction of the necessity 
of God's favor and protection, that they may be safe from 
danger and prospered in their undertakings ; and they aro 
often ready to seek counsel from his servants with much 
apparent earnestness and humility, and with many pro- 
fessions of an obedient spirit. But they have no true 
regard to Goil's authority, and when his commands in- 
terfere with their cherished desires and purposes, they 
will rebel against him, saying, " "VVho is the Lord, that we 
should obey his voice ?" 

881 



Jercnwi/i carried to Egypt. 



JEREMIAH XLiy. 



Chastisement of the Jews. 



4 So Jolianan the son of Kareali, and all flic cap- 
tains of tlic forces, and all tlie jjcoplc, olieyed not 
the voice of the Lord, to dwell in tin; land of 
Judali. 

5 ButJohananthesonof Kareali, and all ttiocaj)- 
tains of the forces, took all the remnant of Judali, 
that were returned from all nations, whither they 
liad been driven, to dwell in the land of Jndah;" 

6 Even men, and women, aiitl children, and the 
king's daughters,'' and every i)crson that Nebuzar- 
adan the captain of the guard had h'I't with Geda- 
liah thcsonof Ahikam the son ofSliai)liaii, and Jer- 
emiah tlio [irophet, and Barucii the son of Neriah."^ 

7 So they came into the land of Egypt t*^ for 
they obeyed not the voice of the Lord : tiuis came 
they ereii to Taiipanhes.*^^ 

8 M Then came the word of the Lord nnto Jere- 
miah in Tahpanhes, saying, 

9 Take great stones in thy hand, and hide them 
in the clay in the brickkiln, which is at the entry 
of Pharaoh's house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of 
the men of Jndah; 

10 And say nnto them, Thus suith the Lord of 
liosts, llie God of Israel; Behold, I will send and 
take Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my ser- 
vant,' and will set his throne upon these stones 
that I have hid; and he sliall spread his royal |ia- 
vilion over tiieni. 

11 And when lie cometh, he shall smite the land 
of Kgypt,'-' and cldivcr such as arc for death to 
death ; and such as are for ca])tivity to captivity; 
and such as are for the sword to the sword." 

12 And 1 will kindle a fire in the houses of the 
gods of Egypt ;' and he shall burn them, and carry 
them away captives: and he shall array himself 
with the land of Eirypt, as a shepherd puttetii on 
his garment ; and he shall go htrtli from thence in 
peace. 

13 He shall break also the images" of Beth-she- 
mesh,UhatMin llu; landof Egypt ; and the houses of 
the gods of the i'lgyptians sliall he liurn willi lire. 

CHAPTEIl XLIV. 

1 Jeremiah eipresseth Ihc desol.itioii of Judali for their iilohtry. 1 1 

He prophesifth their destruction, who commit idolatry in Ej^ypt- l-'J 

The obstinancy of the Jews. ^0 Jeremiah thrcateneth them for the 
same, 29 and for a sign prophcsieth tlie destruction of K^ypt. 

T"^HR word that came to Jeremiah concerning 
J_ all the Jews which dwell in tlie land of Egypt, 



•Ch. 1( 


11. la 


t. 


ch 4 


•1 




ch 


39: in. il a c 


„ 


•r.:ll! 


e ch 


2:U!; 


44:l;ciU 


il //fin 


•'i I 


a.:KI 




'ch 


•i". 


!): 


27:n;E7.ck. 


21 


18.20. 


sch 


40:13. 




: Z«cl. 


II 


11. I 


ch 


40:25. 




Ueb. statue 




r itaiui 




t Or, The 


hoH^e 1 


III. 


c sun 


J 


ch 


40 


14 


Exod. 14: 


.>. 


kch 


|:17 


1 !«. 




ch. :H 


.il 


L:m 


. 1 


:I, 


Hi. 




ch 19:4. 


° 


Dent. 


l:J:«; 


.12:17. 



CIIAPTEIl XLITI. 

7. Tahpanhes; on the frontier of Egyj)!, towards Pales- 
tine. 

10. My servant ; ■j.ti cxccutin;; Gods purposes, though ho 
knew it not. 

IXSTRCCTIOXti. 

1-7. They wlio best midcrslaiid (he dcceitfulness and 
desperate wiekedness of the human lieart, will be slow to 
rely upon the promises of wicked men to receive and obey 
Clod's counsels, and will prepiire Iheniselvcs to eiieounte'r 
reproach and persecution wlienever their answers are not 
agreeable to the feelings and wishes of wicked inou who 
consult them. 

i-88 



which dwell at Migdol,^ and at Tahpanhes," g- *',^Ji 
and at Xopii,' and in the country of Patii- wi. 
ros, saying, 

2 Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Is- 
rael ; Ye have seen all the evil that I have brought 
upon Jerusalem, and upon all the cities of Jndah ; 
and behold, this day they are a desolation,"" anil 
no man tlwelletii therein; 

3 Because of their wickedness which they have 
committed to provoke me to anger, in that they 
went to burn incense, and to serve other gods," 
whom they knew not, mither they, ye, nor your 
fathers." 

4 Howbeit I sent unto you all my servants the 
projiiiets, rising early ami sending t/ieyn." saying, 
Oh, do not this abominable thing that 1 hate.'' 

5 But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear 
to turn from their wickedness, to burn no incense 
unto other gods.'' 

G Wherefore my fury and mine anger was jioured 
forth, and was kindled in tlie cities of Judali ami 
in the streets of .Icrusalem ; and they are wasted 
and desolate, as at this day.'' 

7 Therefore now thus saith the Lord, the God of 
hosts, the God of Israel; Wherefore commit yc 
t/iis great evil against your souls,' to cut oif from 
you man and woman, child and suckling, out of^ 
Judali, to leave yon none to remain ; 

8 In that ye provoke nw nnto wrath with the 
works of your hands," burning incense unto o'.lier 
gods in the land of Egypt, whither yc be gone to 
dwell, that ye might cut yourselves off, and that 
ye might be a curse and a reproach among all the 
nations of the earth ? 

9 Have ye forgotten the wickedness' of your 
fathers,'' and the wickedness of the kings of Judah, 
and the wickedness of their wives, and your own 
wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives, 
which they have committed in the land of Judah, 
and in the streets of Jerusalem? 

10 They arc not humbled' even nnto this day. 
neither have they feared," nor walked in my law, 
nor in my statutes, that I set before you and be- 
fore your fathers. 

11 *! Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the 
God of Israel : Behold, I will set my face against 
you for evil," and to cut off all Judah. 

12 And I will take the remnant of Judah, that 
have .set their faces to go into the land of Egypt 



P ch. 29:19; 2 Chr. .10:15. q Hzck. ll!:10. 47. r Rov 2:21, 22. t rh. 
42:1S. tch. 7:19; 25:7; Num. l«:S8; Prcv. !-:M. I U.'b. of the midsl 
of. "ch. 25:6. 7; I«i. 3:r; 1 Cor. 10:22; Hcb. 3:10. » Ucb. wicLtdntsus. 
or punislmmts. v Ezra 9:13, 14. I Hcb. rontrilr; Va. 51:17. w Prov. 
14:10; Kcol. 8:12, 13; Mat. 4:2. iLct.nid. Kzck. 14:7,f; Amos 0:4. 



8-13. It is vain to seek safely by disobeying God's com- 
m.inds. llis wrath will follow sinners into all their false 
refuges,aiid destroy them and their hiding-places together. 

CHAPTER XLIV. 

1. Mifrdol; on the nortli-o;islern frontier of Egypt tow- 
ards Palestine. Exod. M : 'J. Tulipnnhcs .• see note on chap. 
43:7. Nnph ; the same as '■ .\Iopli,"{ English version," .Mem- 
phis,") llosea 9:0. A large cily of ancient Egypt on tho 
west bank of the Nile, a lillle above Cairo. 

U. Have ye forgotten the wickeitncss — in the Uiml of Jiulah, 
and in Ihc streets of Jcru.'ialim ? have ye forgotten the judg- 
ments which I brought upon you for your wickeducsB 
there 1 



Desolation threatened lo 



JEREMIAH XLIV. 



Jfws and Egijpliunf: 



A M •!4i:. to sojourn there," and they shall all be 
■w'.' °" consumed, and fall in the land of Egypt; 
they shall even be consumed by the sword and by 
the famine : they shall die, from the least even unto 
the greatest, by the sword and by the famine:'' 
and they shall be an execration, and an astonish- 
uieat, and a curse, and a reproach. 

13 For I will punish them that dwell in the 
land of Egypt, as I have punished Jerusalem, by 
the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: 

14 So that none of the remnant of Judah, which 
are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there,*^ 
shall escape or remain, that they should return 
into the land of Judah, to the Avhich they have a 
desire* to return to dwell there: for none shall 
return l)ut such as shall escape.'* 

15 1 Then all the men which knew that their 
wives had burned incense unto other gods," and all 
the women that stood by, a great multitude, even 
all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt, in 
Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying, 

16 Jl.',- for the word that thou hast spoken unto 
us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken 
unto thee.'' 

17 But we will certainly do whatsoever thing 
goeth fortii out of our own mouth," to burn incense 
unto the queen* of heaven, and to pour out di'ink- 
ott'erings unto her, as we have done, we, and our 
fathers," our kings, and our princes, in the cities 
of Judah, anil in tiie streets of Jerusalem : for f/u/i 
liad we plenty of victuals,* and were well, and saw 
no evil.' 

18 But since we loft off to burn incense to the 
queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings 
unto her, we have wanted all things, and have been 
consumed by the sword and by tlie famine. 

19 And when we burned incense to the queen of 
heaven, and poured out drink-offerings unto her, 
(lid we make her cakes to worship her, and pour 
out drink-offerings unto her, without our men ?^ 

20 ^ Then Jereaiiah said unto all tiie people, to 
the men, and to the women, and to all the people 
which had given him that answer, saying, 

21 "J'lie incense that ye burned in the cities of 
Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye and 
your fathers, your kings and your princes, and the 
people of the land, did not the Lord remember 
them, and came it not into his mind '! 

22 So that the Lord could no lonser bear,^ be- 



' Ch. 4-2:15. etc. b Hos. 4:0. <: Isa. 30:1-3. • Heb. Lift up their soul. 
J ver. as. e Neh. 13:26. f ch G:\6. S ver. •2.'); Pfa. l-.>:4. t Or. /mm.-,- 
2 Kings 17:10. hch. 7:18. 1 Heb. 6rc^. i Ho5. 2:5-9. i (Jr. liuslMmh. 
>lsi.43:-21; Mai. 2:17. tch. 25:11. 1 ver. 0. m 1 Cor. 10:20; 2Cor. Ii:l(i. 
nPsa.llO:lJO oPsa.ll9;155. P Psa. 7S.50. q 1 Kings 9:U: Neh. 13: Is ; 



15. T/'ieir wives had burned incense; their wives were lead- 
ers in idolatry. Probably some of them were of heathen 
origin. Compare Deut. 17:17; 1 Kings 11:1, 4; 15:13. 

26. Sliall no more be named tn the mouth of any man of Ju- 
dah ; because all shall be destroyed e.Kcept a small rem- 
nant. Ver. 27, 28. 

30. Pliaraoh-liophra ; the reigning monarch of Egypt, 
caUed "Apries" by the Greeks. He was defeated by 
Nebucliadnezzar at Carcheniisli, and afterwards dethroned 
and strangled by his own troops. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2-10. When wicked men refuse to take warning from 



cause of the evil of your doings, and because of 
the abominations which ye havc'committcd ; there- 
fore is your land a desolation, and an astonish- 
ment," and a curse, without an inlial)itan(,as at tliis 
day.' 

23 Because yc have burned incense,"' and because 
ye have sinned against the Lord, and have not 
obej-ed the voice of the Lord, nor walked in iiis 
law," nor in his statutes," nor in iiis testiuionics:i' 
therefore tiiis evil is happened unto you, as at this 
day.*" 

24 Moreover Jeremiah said unto all the people, 
and to all the women, Hear the word of the Lord, 
all Judah that arc in the land of Egvpt:'' 

25 Thus saith the Lord of hosts, die God of Is- 
rael, saying ; Yc and your wives have both spoken 
with your mouths, and fulfilled with your liaiid.^ 
saying. We will surely perform our vows that we 
have vowed, to burn incense to tliequeen of heaven, 
and to pour out drink-offerings unto her: ye will 
surely accomplish your vows, and surely perform 
your vows.' 

26 Therefore hear ye the woi'd of the Loim, all 
Judah that dwell in the land of Egypt ; Behold, 1 
have sworn by my great name," saith the Lord, 
that my name shall no more be named in the 
mouth of any man of Judah in all the laud of 
Egypt,^' saying, The Lord God liveth. 

27 Behold. 1 will watch over tiicm for evil.'"' and 
not for good: and all the men of Judah that are 
in the land of Egypt shall be consumed by the 
sword and by the famine, until tliere be an end of 
them.^ 

28 Yet a small number that escape the sword 
shall return out of the land of Egypt into tlie land 
of Judah;'' and all the remnant of Judah, (hat 
are gone into the land of Egyjat to sojourn there, 
shall know whose words shall stand, mine, or 
theirs.'^ 

2'J 1i And this 5/(0// be a sign unto you, saith the 
Lord, that I will punish you in this place, that yo 
may know that my words shall surely stand against 
vou for evil : 

" 30 Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will give 
Pliaraoh-hophra king of Egypt into the hand of 
his enemies, and into the iiand of them that seek 
his life;" as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into 
the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, his 
enemy,'' and that sought his life. 



J:in.9 11. 12. r ch 43:7. s ver. 15. ' .Tob 34:22; Jas. 1:14, 15. u Gen. 
'2- 10- Heb. 8:13. v Kzek. 20:39; Amos (i:10. iv ch. 3I:2S; Ezek. 7:0. 
: ver 12- 2 Kin-s 21 -14. V ver. 14 ; Isa. 27: 13. « Heb. from me, or t/iem. 
: Psa. 33:11. ' ch. 40:25, 20; Ezek. 29:3, etc.; 30:21, etc. b ch, 39:5. 



the punishment of those who have practised the same sins 
before them, it is a great aggravation of their guilt. 

11-14. God's wrath follows the wicked into every placo 
whither they flee for safety, and overthrows all their vain 
confidences. It is only by repenting and returning to him 
that they can escape destruction. 

15-23. Wicked men are prone to impute their misfor- 
tunes to every other cause, rather than the true one ; nay, 
more, to seek a return of prosperity from those very prac- 
tices which have brought ruin upon them. 

24-30. They who will no longer hear reproof ai'e in the 
road to speedy destruction : God will fight against them 
and their helpers, and both shah perish together. 
SS9 



Conqiusl of Egypt 



JEREMIAH XLVI. 



by jVebucJuidnczzar. 



CHAPTER XLV. 

1 Earuch being dismaytd, 4 Jeremiah instnictcth aiiJ comfortetli )iim. 

THE word that Jeremiah the prophet spake 
unto Baruch the sou of Neriali,-' when lie liad 
written tlicsc words in a book at the moutli of 
Jeremiah, in the fourtli year of Jciioiakim the son 
of Josiah king of Judah, saying, 

2 Thus saith the Loud, the God of Israel, unto 
tlioe, Baruch ; 

3 'J'hou didst say, Woe is me now ! for the Lord 
hath added grief to my sorrow;'' I fainted in my 
sighing,'^ and I find no rest.'' 

4 *d Tlius shall thou say unto him, The Lord saith 
thus ; Behold, thai which I have built will I break 
down, and that wliich 1 have jilantcd I will pluck 
up, even this whole land.'' 

.5 And scckest thou great things for thyself? 
seek t/iem not:'' for behold, I will bring evil upon 
all flesh,'-' saith the Lord: but thy life will I give 
unto thee for a prey in all places whither thou 
goest." 

CHAPTER XLVI. 

1 Jeremiah prophesieth the overthrow of Pharaoh's army at Euphrates, 
13 and the ertnquest of E^ypt by Nebuchadrezzar. 27 He comfortetli 
Jar-ob in their chastisement. 

THE word of the Lord which came to Jeremiah 
the pro])het against the Gentiles;' 
2 Against Egy])t, against the army of Pharaoh- 
iiecho king of Egypt,^ which was by the river 
Euphrates in Carchemish, which Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon smote in the fourth year of Je- 
hoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah. 

:i Ortler yc the buckler and shield,'' aud draw 
near to battle. 



» Ch. 3li:l,-l,3-'. b Job 23:2. « Psa. 27:13. <1 Psa. 77: 3. 4. elKl.5:r,. 

iMalt. 0:'.!5-32; I.uko 12:15. S ch. 25:28; Zeph. 3:3. !• ch. 39:18. i oh. 
.'.5:15,otc. j2Chr.35:20. FulfllM presently, k ch. 51:11, 12; Nah. 2:1. 

Huh. broken in pieces. I Rev. 6:15. 1 Heb. ajliglil. " ch. 6:25; 49:29. 
> Keel. »: 11; Amos 2:14. » Dan. 1 1 :19, 22. P ch. 47:2. q Exod. 15:0. 



CHAPTER XLV. 

1. lit the fmitih ymr of Jchninkim ; kcp chapter 3C. This 
jiiopliecy belongs to an euilicr date than those recorded 
in the (ireceding eight cliaptcia. 

3. Woe (.s me now; Barucli was dismayed in view of the 
sufferings to which he was exposed in consequence of 
writing tlio roll mentioned in chap. 3G, as well as of the 
cidarnitoiis condition of his country. 

.5. And seekext thou great things for thyself? in a time of 
general desolation, Baruch must not set his heart on tem- 
poral ease, honor, and affluence. 

IXSTIIUCTION. 

It is well to count beforehand the costof Ood's service, 
and to hold ourselves ready to endure hardships in the 
perfonnaiirn of it. We ought never to set our hearts on 
personal e:ise and preferment ; but in times of general 
public calamity this is peculiarly improper: we should 
then be content with the continuance of our lives, and 
our opportunities to labor in behalf of God's cause. 

CHAPTER XLVI. 

1. Tlie word ff the [,or<l — against the Gentiles ; here begins 
a series of prophecies ag;iinst the heathen nations, extend- 
ing through the remainder of the book, with the exception 
of the liist cha)>tcr. The ])rescnt verso constitutes a pre- 
face to the whole series. 

2. Against Egypt ; that is, as immediately explained, 
against I'haraoh's expedition against the Chaldees. He 
made two expeditions against Carchemish ; in tlio first of 

890 



4 Harness the horses; and get up, yc :^ i' ^397. 
horsemen, and stand forth with ymir liel- w' 
mets; furbish the spears, o/id put on the biigandines. 

5 Wiierefore have I seen them dismayed and 
turned away back? and their migiity ones are 
beaten down,'' and are fled apace,' and look not 
back: for fear was round about,'" saith the Lord. 

6 Let not the swift flee away, nor the mighty 
man escape;" they shall stumble," and fall toward 
the north by the river Euphrates. 

7 Who is this that eoineth up as a flood,'' whose 
waters arc moved as the rivers ? 

8 Egypt riseth up like a flood, and his waters 
are moved like the rivers; and he saith, I will go 
up, and will cover the earth;'' I will destroy the 
city and the inhabitants thereof. 

y Come 111), ye horses ; and rage, ye chariots ; 
and let the mighty men come forth ; the Ethiopi- 
ans,' and the Libyans,^ that handle the shield ; and 
the Lydians, that handle and bend the bow."^ 

10 For this is the day of the Lord God of hosts,' 
a day of vengeance, that he may avenge him of his 
adversaries: and the sword sliall devour, and it 
shall be satiate and made drunk with their blood :' 
for the Lord GoD of hosts hath a sacrifice in the 
north country by the river Euphrates." 

11 Go up into Gilead, and take balm,"' virgin,* 
the daughter of Egypt: in vain shalt thou use 
many medicines; for thou shalt not be cured.' '^ 

12 The nations have heard of thy shame, and thy 
cry hath filled the land; for the mighty man hath 
stumbled against the mighty, and they arc fallen 
both together. 

13 ^ The word that the Lord spake to Jeremiah 
the prophet, how Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon 
should come and smite the land of Egypt.^ 



t Heb. Cinti. S Hcb. Put. ' Isi. 6li:l». • I.o. 13:6; :|J:0,»; (13:4; Joel 
1:15. tDeul.32:12. u Ezek. 3'J:I7; Zeph. 1 :7. v di. 8:-22; SI :8. "Is*. 
47:1. I Hcb. no rur< shall be iinfo (/lie. i tizek. 3U.21. > ch. 43:10, 11 ; 
Isa. 19:1 ; Bzok. oh. 29, 30, 32. Fulfilled 571. 



these he slew Josiah, 2 Chron. 35:20-24, and afterwards 
defeated the Chaldciuis and took the city ; in the second, 
his army was defeated with great loss, as here predicted. 

3. Order yc the buckler; addressed to the Egyptians, as 
much as to say. All your preparations for war shall end iu 
your own destruction. 

4. Get xtp, yc horsemen ; go up against AssjTia. Verse 7. 
But many rentier, "Alount, ye horsemen." Brigandines; 
coats of mail. 

.5, 6. Wherefore have I seen — theyslinll stumble and fall ; the 
prophet sees in vision the terror and liight of the Egyp- 
tians by the iMiphrates. 

7, 8. Whoistkis — «•/// cover the earth ; the prophet returns 
now to the preparations of the Egyptians. He compares 
their vast armies to the overllowing waters of the Nile. 

9. Li/diiins; here probably an African tribe. Compare 
Ezek. 30:5. 

10. The day of the Lord Gnd of hosts; when he gathers 
together the armies of Egyi>t to destroy them. A sacri- 
fice; a great shuighter of the Egyptians. In the north 
country; iu the land of the Chaldeans. See note on chap. 
1:14. 

11. Gi/corf,- the lanil of lialm. Chap. 8:22. The meaninR 
is, Tlnuigh thou gather the balm of liilead, thou canst not 
be healed of thy wounds. 

13. T/ic word that the lAird sjxike; these words inlroduco 
a second prophecy against Egypt, referring lo the invasion 
of the laud by Nebuchadnezzar, which took place some 
j'ears after Pharaoh-iiecho's disastrous expedition against 
the Chaldees. 



hi all chastisements 



JEREMIAH XLVII. 



Jacoh is preserved. 



A.M. 3397. 14 Declare ye in Ejjypt, and publish in 
'ai?" °" Migdol, and jniblir-h in Noph and iu Tah- 
panlies: say ye, Stand fast, and prepare tlieo; for 
the sword sliall devour round about thee. 

15 Why are tliy valiant 7nc7i swept away? they 
stood not, because tlie Lord did drive them." 

16 He made many to fall,' yea, one fell upon an- 
other:'' and they said. Arise, and let us go again 
to our own people, and to the land of our nativity, 
from tlie o])pressing sword. 

17 They did cry there, Pharaoh king of Egypt 
is but a noise; he hath passed tlie time appointed. 

18 Jls I live, saith tiie King, whose name is the 
Lord of hosts, Surely as Tabor is among the 
mountains, and as Carmel by the sea, so shall he 
come. 

11) thou daughter dwelling in Egypt, furnish 
thyself to go into captivity:*'' for Nopli shall be 
waste and desolate without an inliabitant. 

20 Egypt is like a very fair heifer," but destruc- 
tion Cometh ; it cometli out of the north. "^ 

21 Also her hired men a?-e in the midst of her 
like fatted bullocks;* for they also are turned 
back, and are (led away together : they did not 
stand, because the day of their calamity was come 
upon them, and the time of their visitation.' 

22 The voice thereof shall go like a serpent; for 
they shall march with an army, and come against 
lier with axes, as hewers of wood. 

23 Tiicy shall cut down her forest, saith the 
Lord, though it cannot be searched; because they 
arc more than the grasshoppers, and are innumer- 
able. 

2-i The daughter of Egypt shall be confounded; 
she shall be delivered into the hand of the people 
of the north. 



> Psi. 18:14. .39. 'llrh. multiplied the fallir. b Lev. ■J0:;i7. \ Yieh. make, 
t/ie instruments of caplivili). c Isa. 30:4. ^Hos. 1U:I1. e oh. 47:-i. 1 Heb. 
bullorks of the stall. tch.S0:->7i Deut.3a:35: Psi. 37:13. 5 Or, nourw/itr,- 
lUh. Amon. e Nah. 3:8. t ch. 44:30. ilsi. 43:1, 5. t Oi, utterly cut 



14. Stamlfast — prepare thee ; a mighty conqueror is com- 
ing: let Egypt prepare to resist him. if she can. 

16. Thetj said; the hired troops of the Egyptians. 

17. There; in the land of their nativity, after their re- 
turn home. Passed; that is, has let pass. The time ap- 
pointed; or, the set time. By this, some understand tlio 
time set for meeting and sustaining his allies ; others, the 
opportunity of success. 

18. As Tabor — as Carmel — shall he come; Nebuchadnezzar 
shall come with tlie strength and majesty of Tabor and Car- 
mel, the two most prominent mountains in north Palestine. 

19. Daughter dwelling in Egypt ; Egypt is personified as 
a delicate female. 

21. Her hired men; see note on verse 16. Like fatted 
bullocks; they are well fed and lusty, but flee in wild con- 
fusion before the enemj'. 

22. The voice thereof; literally, "her voice," Egypt's voice. 
Sliall go like a serpent; asaserpent retreats with hissing and 
terror before the woodman. Against her; against Egypt. 

23. Her forest; her armies and people. Though it can- 
not be searched; though its trees are of vast extent and in- 
numerable. 

25. No ; the celebrated capital of Egypt, in Upper Egypt, 
on botli sides of the Nile. Nahum 3:8. 

26. Afterward it shall be inhabited; the desolation of 
Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar was only temporary. Com- 
pare Ezek. 29:11-15. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. Nations that know not God are subject to his provi- 
dential control. He makes all their movements subservi- 



2.5 The Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saith; 
Behold, I will punhsh the multitude'^ of No," and 
Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their gods, and their 
kings ; even Pharaoh, and all them that trust in 
him : 

26 And I will deliver them into the hand of 
those that seek their lives, and into the hand of 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the 
hand of his servants;'' and afterward it shall be 
inhabited, as in the days of old, saith the Lord. 

27 "i But fear not thou, my servant Jacoli, tuul 
be not dismayed, Israel :' for behold, I will save 
thee from afar off, and thy seed from the land of 
their captivity; and Jacob shall return, and be in 
rest and at ease, and none shall make him afraid. 

28 Fear thou not, Jacob my servant, saith the 
Lord : for I am with thee; for I will make a full 
end of all the nations whither I have driven thee : 
but I will not make a full end of thee, but correct 
thee in measure; yet will I not leave thee wholly 
unpunished.''^ 

C H A P T E II XLVII. 

The JestrucUon of the Philistines. 

THE word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah 
the prophet against the Philistines,*" before 
that Pharaoh smote Gaza.'' 

2 Thus saith the Lord; Behold, waters rise up 
out of the north,'" and shall be an overflowing 
flood, and shall overflow the land, and all that is 
therein;* the city, and them that dwell therein: 
then the men shall ciw, and all the inhabitants of 
the land sliall howl. 

3 At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his 
strong horses,^ at the rushing of his chariots, and 



thee, off. i Isa. 27:7, 9; Heb. l-2:.j-UI; Rev. 3:10. k Ezek, 2.3:1.); Zeph. 
2:4,5. 1IHeb.yl:zn/i,- oh. 2.3:20. I Amos 1:0-3. m cb. 40.20. • Heb. (/;e 
fulness thereof, n ch. H; 10; Nah. 3:2. 



ent to the interests of his church, exalting one to power 
and overthrowing another, according to his pleasure. 

5. When God fights against a people, no an-ay of human 
might can avail; he will turn all its plans for conquering 
others to its own destruction. 

17. Since all the power of kings and rulers comes from 
God, none of them can shield transgressors against his 
wr.ath. Sinners who confide in their promises of help, 
will find them to be "but a noise" without substance. 

27, 28. The nations of the world rise to power and per- 
ish in rapid succession ; but in the midst of all these 
changes, God's kingdom is continually advancing under 
his own immediate superintendence. All the aifiictions 
which befall his people have the effect, not to destroy, but 
to purify them, and tlius prepare them for increased pros- 
perity. 

CHAPTER XLVII. 

1. Before that Pharaoh smote Gaza; this is mentioned sim- 
ply as a date ; for the prophecy relates to the desolation 
of Philistia, not by Pharaoli, but by Nebuchadnezzar. 

2. Waters; a symbol of overflowing and desolating ar- 
mies. Ovt of the north; out of Babylon. Chap. 1:14. 
Nebuchadnezzar besieged and took Tyre, chap. 27:3, 6 ; 
Ezek. 26:7-14; and afterwards conquered Egypt. Ezek. 
29 : 17-20. It was during this expedition that his armies 
overran Philistia. Compare ver. 4. 

3. The fathers shall not took back to their children ; shall not 
concern themselves about their safety. Feebleness of hands; 
the efi'ect of extreme terror. 

b9i 



The judgment of God 



JEREMIAH XLVII 



against 3Tcab. 



at the rumbling of his wheels, the fathers shall 
not look back to f/tcir children for feebleness of 
hands ; 

4 Because of the day that cometh to spoil all the 
Philistines, mid to cut oil" from Tyrus and Zidon 
every helper that remaineth : for the Lord will 
spoil the Philistines, the remnant of tiie country* 
of (ja]»iitor." 

5 Baldness is come upon (laza ;'' Ashkc^lon is cut 
off with the remnant (if their valley: how long 
wilt thou cut tliy.-clf? 

6 tlion sword of the Lord,'' how long u-illitbe 
ere thou be quiet? put uj) ■ thyself into thy scab- 
bard, rest, and be still. 

7 How can it* be quiet, seeing the Lord hath 
given it a charge against Ashkelon,'' and against 
the sea-shore? there hath he appointed it." 

CHAPTER XL VI II. 

1 The judgment of Moab, 7 for tlieir pride, 11 for (heir security, 14 for 
their carnal confidence, 26 and for their contempt of God and his 
people. 47 The restoration of Moab. 

AGAINST Moab thus sailli the Loud of hosts, 
the God of Israel;'' Woe unto N'ebo! for it 
is spoiled: Kiriathaiin is confounded and taken: 
Misgab^ is confounded and dismayed. 

2 T/iere shall be no more praise of Moab: in 
Heshbon they have devised evil against it;''' come, 
and let us cut it off from beinp: a nation. Also 
thou shalt be cut down,' Madmen ; the sword 
shall pursue'' thee. 

3 A voice of crying shall be from lloronaim, 
spoiling and great destruction. 

4 Moab is destroyed: her little ones have caused 
a cry to be heard. 

5 For in the going u]) of Luhith continual weep- 
ing' shall go U]); for in the going down of lloro- 
naim the enemies have heard a cry of destruc- 
tion. 



• Hcb. ;j(e. a Gfn. 10:14. b Zech. !):.'>. « Dcut. 32:41 : Ezek. SI ::!- 
1 Heb. eatktr. I Heb. canst thou? d Ezek. 14:17. c M|c. (j:9. f l.<: 
cii. 15, l«; -a-AO; Ezek. 'ij::-, 9: Amos 2: 1. 2. iOt, Thr liighp'.nrt. e Nun 
34:3". lOr.liroiightto sUtme: Ua.\5:\. ^ lU-h. uo after. • Hcb. MK-cpin 
wilkwttpittS- l> ch. 51:l'i; IVIark 13:14-10. t Ot,anaktd tree, i 1 Tin 



4. From Tijrui and Zidon; sco note on vcr. 2. Every 
Iielper that remaineth; every one who could help them 
against the common invader. Cnplitor ; the original coun- 
try of the I'hilistincs: according to some, Cappadocia; 
according to others, the island of Crete. 

5. Cut tkijself; as a sign of deep distress. 

INSTRUCTION. 
Goil'a judgments it])oii wicked nations often come like 
an overflowing flood which nothing can resist, and which 
sweeps away every thing. JJcfore them the great and the 
mighty find tlieinselves utterly helpless, having no power 
either to resist or to escape. IIow terrible will be that 
great day of judgment which shall destro3' for ever "all 
the proilil.yoa.and all that do wickedly, that it shall leave 
them neither root nor branch." 

CHAPTER XLVIII. 

1. Against Moiil) ; in this pro])hecy .loreiniah makes a 
free use of the earlier yiropheey of Isaiah. The reader 
may consult the notes on Isaiah, chapters 1.5 and 16, where 
will be found an account of many of the jilaees mentioned 
in this chapter, and also an explanation of many of its jie- 
culiar expressions. The overthrow of Moab, however, 
which Isaiah predicted, was not the same as that which is 
here foretold. The former look jilaee in connection with 
the captivity of the ten tribes, and in Isaiah's day, Isa. 
892 



G Flee, save your lives,* and be like the a. m. ;mw. 
heath' in the wilderness. om' 

7 1 For because thou hast trusted in thy works 
and in thy treasures,' thou shalt also be" taken: 
and Chemosh shall go forth into captivity^ with 
his priests and his princes together.'' 

8 And the spoiler shall come upon every city, 
and no city shall escape: the valley also shall 
perish, and the plain shall be destroyed, as the 
Loud liath spoken. 

9 Give wings unto Moab, that it may flee and get 
away : for the cities thereof shall be desolate, with- 
out any to dwell therein. 

10 Cursed be he that doeth the work of the Lord 
deceitfully,'' and cursed be he that kceiK'th back 
his sword from blood. 

Ill Moab hath lieen at ease from his youth, and 
he hath si^ttled on his lees,'" and hath not been 
emptied from vessel to vessel, neither hath he 
gone into captivity : tlierefore his taste remained* 
in him, and his scent is not changed. 

12 Therefore, behold, the days coine, saith the 
Lord, that I will send unto him wanderers, that 
shall cause him to wander, and shall empty his 
vessels, and br(-ak (lieir bottles. 

13 And Moal) shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as 
the house of Israel was ashamed of Beth-el their 
confidence." 

14 *.i How say ye. We are mighty and strong men 
for the war? 

1 5 Moal) is spoiled, and gone up out of her cities, 
and his chosen^ young men are gone down to the 
slaughter," saith the King, whose name wTlie Lord 
of hosts."" 

IG 'I'hc calamity of Moab is near to come, and 
his adliction hastcth fast. 

17 All ye that are about him, bemoan him; and 
all ye that know his name, say. How is the strong 
staff broken, and the beautiful rod!" 



li-.n. J Num ai:2<J; JudL'. 11:31. k ch. 4'J:3. 1 Or, nr^/ieMl/y. I laig- 
:,r2^i; 1 Sam. 13:3, !); 1 Kings 20:4-.'. n Zoph. 1 : 13. i lltb. ilood. o 1 Kingil 
I3:»J. I Heb. Me rAoi« o/. o Isa. 40:30, .31. P cli. Sl:5;: Jis. 5:4. 4 Isa. 
9:4; 14:4,5, 12. 



16:14; the latter, as also that of the nations mentioned in 
the following chapters, was accomiilisheil by Nebuchad- 
nezzar. Kiriathaim ; in the northern part of Moab, west of 
Medebah. 

2. TItey have devised evil ; the -enemies of Moab liavo de- 
vised ; in allusion to the signification of the word Heshbon, 
that is, "device," as it is rendered in Eecl. n:10. 

6. lie like the heath in the wilderness; that is, solitary and 
desolate. Chap. 17:6. 

7. Chemosh; the national god of the Moabitcs. 1 Kings 
11:7; 2 Kings 2:i:13. 

10. Cursed be he; he among the exeeulioncrs of Gods 
wrath upon Moab. 

11. Sritird on his lees; as the flavor of wine is increased 
bj' leaving it to stand on the lees, so long tiaimuillity had 
increased the strength and riches of Moab, and with these 
his |>ri(le. 

12. Watidcrcrs, thai slinll cause him to ivandcr; better, 
" emptiers, that shall empty him." The original word 
niciuis to empty by laying a vessel over on its side. 

13. Of Bcth-cl; that is, of the golden calf which they 
worshipped there. 1 Kings 12:29. 

l.'i. done up out of licr ciltcs ; or, "licr cities are gone up," 
that is, in smoke. 

17. The strong staff— beautiful rod; the sceptre of his 
power. 



Tlie. juclgvieni of God 



JEREMIAH XLVIII, 



against Jloah. 



A.iyMot. 18 Thou dauglitor that dost inhabit Di- 
■»"" "'" bon, come down iVom thy glory, and sit in 
tliirst;" for the spoiler of Moab shall come upon 
lliec, and he shall destroy thy strong-holds. 

19 inhabitant" of Aroer,'' stand by the way, 
and espy ; ask liim that Heeth,and her thatcscap- 
eth, and say, What is done? 

20 Moab is confounded ; for it is broken down : 
howl and cry; tell yc it in Anion, that Moab is 
spoiled, 

21 And judgment is come upon the plain country ; 
upon Holon.audupon Jahazah.and uponMei)haath, 

22 And upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon 
Both-diblathaim, 

23 And upon Kiriathaim, and upon Beth-gamul, 
and upon Beth-meon, 

24 And upon Kerioth, aud upon Bozrali, and 
upon all the cities of the land of Moab, far or near. 

25 Tiic horn of Moab is cut ofl'," and his arm is 
broken,*^ saith the Loud. 

26 H Make ye him drunken ;'' for he magnified 
himself against the Lord:' Moab also shall wal- 
low in his vomit, and ho also shall be in derision.^ 

27 For was not Israel a derision unto thco?'' 
was he foundamong thieves? for since thou spakest 
of him, thou skippedst^ for joy. 

28 ye tliat dwell in Moab, leave the cities, 
and dwell in the rock, and be like the dove that 
maketh her nest in the side of the hole's mouth. 

29 We have heard the pride of Moab, (he is ex- 
ceeding proud,) his loftiness, and his ari-ogancy, 
and his pride, and tlic haughtiness of his heart.' 

30 I know his wrath, saitii the Lord ; but it shall 
not be so ; his lies * shall not so effect it. 

31 Therefore will I howl for Moab, and I will 
cryout for all Moab ; my heart shall mourn for the 
men of Kir-heres. 

32 vineofSibmah,! will weep for thee with the 
weeping of Jazer : thy plants are gone over the sea, 
they reach even to the sea of Jazer : the spoiler is 
fallen upon thy summer fruits and upon thy vintage. 

33 And joy and gladness is taken from the plen- 
tifid field, and from the land of Moab ; and I have 
caused wine to fail from the wine presses : none 



a Ch. 46:19. • Tinh. inhabitre.ss. b Deut. 2:36. cPsa. 75:10. ci Ezok. 
■X):->\. e oh. 25:15,17. fJob>):4. g Lam. 1:21. b Zeph. 2:6^10. t Or, 
movedxl Ihjxelf. iProv. S;13; Isa. 13:11. t Or, tliasf omiihom lie slayet/i; 
Ueb. l^ars. S Heb. desolations. J ch. 47:5. n Heb. diminisked. k Gen. 



18. Daughter ; a metaphor for the inhabitants of Dibon, 
as ■' virgin daughter of I5abylon," etc. Isa. 47 : 1. 

19. Aroer; on the northern bank of the Arnon. Its in- 
habitants come out to inquire of the fugitives that pass 
through it in their flight, " What is done ?" 

24. Bozrah; this seems to liave been Bozrah in the 
1 lauran, on the border of the Arabian desert, and not the 
IJozrah which is mentioned in the following chapter, verse 
!,■?, as belonging to Edom ; the latter lay south-east of the 
Dead sea. 

26. Malcc ye Mm drunken ; with the wine-cup of God's 
wrath. Chap. 25 : 15-27. He also ; that is, as well as Israel. 
Ver. 27. 

27. A derision unto thee; when carried into captivity by 
the Assyrians. Was li£ found among thieves? that is, was 
he detected by Moab in such a crime as made him a just 
object of his derision? Compare chap. 2:26. Spakest of 
him; of his calamities. 

28. Be like the dove ; hide yourselves in dens and caves 
from the enemy. Compare Isa. 2:19-21. 



shall tread with shouting; thdr shouting shall he 
no shouting. 

34 From the cry of Heshbon even unto Elealeh. 
and even unto Jahaz, have they uttered tlieir voice, 
from Zoar even unto Iloronaim, as a heifer of tlircc 
years old : for the waters also of Nimrim shall be 
desolate'.* 

35 Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab, sailh 
tlie Lord, him tliat offereth in the high places, and 
him that burneth incense to his gods. 

3f) Therefore my heart shall sound for Moab 
like pipes, and my heart shall sound like pipes for 
the men of Kir-heres: because tlie riches that ho 
hath gotten are perished. 

37 For every head shedl he l)ald,' and every beard 
clip))ed:' upon all the hands shall be cuttings, and 
upon the loins sackcloth." 

38 There shedl he lamentation generally upon all 
the housetops of Moab, and in the streets thereof: 
for I have broken Moab like a vessel wiiercin is 
no pleasure,' saith the Lord. 

39 They shall howl, saying, How is it broken 
down! how hath Jloab turned the back'* with 
shame! so shall Moab be a derision and a dismay- 
ing to all them about him. 

40 For thus saith the Lord; Behold, he shall 
fly as an eagle,'" and shall spread his wings over 
Moab." 

41 Kerioth* is taken, and the strong-holds are 
surprised, and the mighty men's hearts in Moab at 
tliat day shall be as the heart of a woman in her 
pangs." 

42 And Moab shall lie destroyed from being a 
people, because he hath magnitied himself against 
the Lord.'" 

43 Fear, and the pit, and the snare, shall be upon 
thee, inhabitant of Moab,'' saitli the Lord. 

44 He tiiat lleeth from the fear shall fall into 
the pit ; and he that getteth up out of the pit shall 
be taken in the snare : for I will bring upon it, 
even upon Moab, the year of their visitation,' saith 
the Lord. 

45 They that fled stood under the shadow of 
Heshbon because of the force : but a fire shall come 



.17:. 34 


. 1 


cb. 2.2 


:2.S; 


Rom. 


O'Sl. 


t Heb 


neck. 


m ch 


40: 


» 


Dent 


28:49; 


Dan. 
P ver 


7:4 
20. 


Hab. 
qlsa 


1:8. 
2): 


■> Isa 
17, IS. 


S:8. 
rch 


• Or, 
11:23, 


The cit'u 




Isa. 


21 


:3i M 


0. 4:«. 



30. 'Not be so ; as he purposes. Compare Isa. 16:C. 

31. Kir-heres; the same as Kir-hareseth. Isa. 16:7. 

32, 33. / will weep for thee — no shouting ; see notes on Isa. 
16:8,9. The sea of Jazer ; of this nothing further is known. 
Their shouting shall be no shouting; their joyous vintage- 
shout shall become a battle-shout, shall become a cry of 
distress. 

34. From the cry of Heshbon — uttered their voice; the cry 
of distress which begins at Heshbon e.\tends to Elealeh 
and Jahaz. From Zoar even unto Horonaim ; supply, " they 
have uttered their voice." A heifer of three years old; see 
note on Isa. 15:5. Tlie waters — of Nimrim shall be desolate; 
see note on Isa. 15:6. 

38, Like a vessel wherein is no pleasure; compare chap. 
22:28. 

40, He shall fly; the conqueror. 

45. They that fled ; the Moabites who fled before the in- 
vading army. Stood under the shadow of Heshbon ; sought 
protection within its walls. Because of the force; because 
of the invading force ; but manv render these words, " with- 

sor. 



Tke jiulgmenl of 



JEREMIAH XLIX. 



t/ie Ammoiiiles. 



forth out of Iloslibon, and a flamo from the midst 
of Sihon, and sliall devour tlic corner of Moab, and 
the crown of tlic head of tlic tumultuous ones.* 

46 Woe be unto tlioe, Moab! th(^ people of 
Chemosli ]wrishetli: for thy sous are taken cap- 
tives,* and lliy dauirlitors captives. 

47 *! Yet will I bring a.i^aiu the captivity of Moab 
in the latter days," saith the Lord. Tlius far is 
the judgment of Moab. 

C II A r T E 11 XLIX. 

1 The jud^jment of the Ammonites. 6 Their restoration. 7 The judg- 
ment of Edom, aa of IMmascus, 38 of Kedar, 30 of Hazor, 34 and «f 
Elam. 39 The restoration of Elam. 

("^ONCERNlNGf the Ammonites,"thus saith the 
J Lord ; Hath Israel no sous? hath he no heir? 
why then doth their king'' inherit Gad, and liis 
people dwell in his cities?'' 

2 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the 
Lord, that I will cause an alarm of war to be 
heard in Rabbali of the Ammonites; and it shall 
be a desolate heap, and her daughters shall be 
burned with fire: then shall Israel be heir unto 
them that were his heirs, saith the Lord. 

3 Howl. O Jieshbon, for Ai is spoiled: cry, ye 
daughters of Kabbah, gird you with sackcloth: 
lament, and run to and fro by the hedges; for 
their king" shall go into captivity, and his priests 
and his princes together. 

4 Wherefore gloriest thou iuthevalloys, thy flow- 
ing valley," backsliding daugliter? that trusted 
in her treasures,'' .voy/«o-, Who shall come unto me?'' 

5 Behold, I will bring a fear upon thee, saith the 
Lord God of hosts, from all those that be about 
thee; and ye shall be driven otit every man right 
forth ; and none shall gather u[> him that wauder- 
cth. 



• Heb 


c/tildren of noise, t Heb. in captivity. 


ch. 49:0, .39. 


Or, 


Af^ainxl. 


f> I'lMk. al:as; •2.'i:-!. etc.; Amos 1:13-15; 


Zcph. 2:S-10. 


Or, 


M'tcom. 


c P«a, 8:6. 1 Or, Melcom,- 1 Kmgs 11:5, 3: 


t Or. valley Jlo 


Oflh 


away. ^ 


ch. 4d:7. c oh. •21:13. ( ver. 39; ch. 4S:I7. 


cEzck. •ib.li, 


stc; 



out strength." Afire — outof HeMon; the conqueror shall 
send forth thence his bands to ravage the country. Silion ; 
that is, the city of Silion ; the same as Ileshbun. Sec the 
liistory of this city. Num. 21:26-30, from which passage 
this and the following verse are taken. Tlic tumuhuoiis 
ones; the boastful warriors of Moab. 

47. Bring again lite caplivitij of Moab ; the desolation of 
Jfoub and several other countries involved in the general 
overthrow by Nebuchadnezzar, should be but temporary, 
chap. i'Jit), 39; but of others jierpetual, chap. 49:33. 
INSTRIX'TION. 

The sins of the Moabitcs which lirought upon them 
God's displeasure were their great pride and arrogance, 
manifested in trusting to their own defences and treasures, 
and in magnifying themselves against the Lord, ver. 7, 11, 
29, 42 ; also their hatred and contempt of God's jieople, 
leading them to help forward and exult over their calam- 
ities. Ver. 27, 30. For these sins God made Moab "a 
derision and a dismaying to all them about him." Ver. 
20, ,39. Since the priiici|ilcs of God's government are un- 
changeable, all who fiillow the example of Moab, whether 
nations or individuals, ninst expect to receive the punish- 
ment at God's hand. 

CHAPTER XLIX. 

1. Hath Israel no sons — no heir? the Ammonites aro re- 
proached for taking possession of the territory of Israel 
east of the Jordan, after its contpicst by the Assyrians. 
Their king; or, "Milcom," the !;od of the Ammonites. 

sot 



6 And afterward I will bring again the a. m.3<ih. 
captivity of the children of Ammon,' saith coo." 
the Lord. 

7 If Concerning Edom,'^ thus saith the Lord of 
hosts; Is wisdom no more in Teman?'' is counsel 
perished from the prudent?' is their wisdom van- 
ished? 

8 Flee ye, turn back,* dwell deep, inhabitants 
of I)cdan;J for I will bring the calamity of Esau 
upon him, the time that I will visit him. 

y If grape-gatherers come to thee, would they not 
leave some gleaning grapes ? if thieves by night. 
they will destroy till they liavc enough.* 

It) But I have made Esau bare,'' I have uncov- 
ered his secret places, and he shall not be able to 
hide himself: his seed is spoiled, and his brethren, 
and his neighbors, and he is not.' 

11 Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve 
t/icm. alive ; and let thy widows trust in me. 

12 For thus saith the Lord ; Behold, they whose 
judgment was not to drink of the cup have assur- 
edly drunken ; and art thou he that shall alto- 
gether go unpunished? thou shalt not go unpun- 
ished, but thou shalt surely drink (fit. 

i;i For I have sworn by myself,'" saith the Lord. 
that Bozrah .shall liecomea desolation, a reproach, 
a waste, and a cnr.se;" and all the cities thereof 
shall be perpetual wastes. 

14 I have heard a rumor from the Lord," and an 
ambassador is sent unto theheathen, saying, Gather 
ye together, and come against her, and rise up to 
the battle. 

15 For lo, I will make thee small among the 
heathen, and despised among men.'' 

16 Thy terribleuess hath deceived thee,'' and the 
pride of thy lieart, thou that dwellest in the 
clefts of the rock, that holdest the height of the 



Amos 1 


K, 


r2. h Obad. 8 


etc. 


i .lob 


i: 


•2, 1.3 


• 


Or 


tkeyar 


turned bad: 


i eh 


•AI 


■■£< 


t Heb. their 


^ujfieieney. 


» 


,1al. 


1:3. 


1 


Isa. 17: 


14. m 


Amo< 


l):H. 


n 


Isa 


.34:0; 03:1. o 


K,fM 


i:-a 


•20 


P 1 


'Jam 


•J 


3U; Psa 


.VI:. 5 


Obad. 


i. 1 


Is 


a. '25:4, 5; -K.-ZS. 





















1 Kings 11:5. Gad; whose lands lay on the east of Jor- 
dan, adjacent to Amnion. Num. 32:33-36. 

2. RiibhaJt ; the capital of the Ammonites. 

3. Hoti^l, O Heshbon; Heshbon belonged to Moab. It is 
here exhorted to howl for the taking of Ai, because thus 
the way was prepared for invading it. Ai ; here a city of 
the Ammonites, different from the .^i mentioned in Hie 
eighth chapter of Joshua. 

4. In the valleijs; the fertile valleys of thy territory. 

7. Concerning Eilom ; com^iare the pro]ihecy of Ohadiali. 
between which anil this there is a remarkable agreement. 
Teman; a city and region on the eastern border of Edoni. 
The Temanites were celebrated for their wi.sdom, but thit; 
should avail tliem nothing in the present cahmiity. 

8. Dwell deep; that is, take refuge from the enemy in 
deep caverns. Dcdan; an Arabian tribe bordering on 
Edom. 

9. Leave some gleaning grapes ; not utterly destroy thoe, 
as thy foes shall now do. Till Ihcy have enough ; that is. 
only till their wants are satisfied. 

11. Leave thii fatherless children — let thy iridows trust in 
me; a solemn intimation that all the adult m:»le8 of Edom 
should be destroyed, so that their widows and orphans 
should 1)0 throwni upon God's mercy alone for protection. 

12. Tliei/ whose judgment trns not lo drink; the covenant 
people of (jod, who might have hoped for exemption from 
the general calamity. Comparo chap. 25:28; Obad. 16. 

l(i. In the clefts of the rock; in the rocky fortresses for 
wliich Edom was celebrated. Compare Obad. 3, 4. 



Tl.c judgment of Edun 



JEREMIAH XLIX. 



Kcdiir, find Elam. 



A. M. MM. hill : thoug-li thou shouldest make thy nest 
■ tiio" '"" as liigli as the eagle, I will bring thee down 
from thence;' saitli the Lord. 

17 Also Edom shall be a desolation: every one 
that goetli by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss 
at all the plagues thereof.'' 

18 As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomoi'- 
rali and the neighbor cities thereof,'^ saith the Loud, 
no man sliall abide there, neither shall a son of 
man dwell in it.'' 

lit Behold, lie shall come up like a lion from the 
swelling of Jordan against the habitation of the 
strong :" but I will suddenly make him run away 
from her : and who is a cliosen man, that I may 
a]ipoint over her? for who is like me?' and who 
will a])point me tlic time?' and who is that shep- 
herd tiiatwill stand licforeme?" 

20 Therefore hear the counsel of the Lord,'' that 
he hath taken against Edom ; and his purposes, 
that he hath purposed against the inhabitants of 
Tcman:' Surely the least of the flock shall draw 
(licm out; surely he shall make their lialjitations 
dosohite with them. 

21 The earth is moved at the noise of tlieir fall; at 
flie cry the noise thereof was heard in the Red sea.+ 

22 Behold, lie shall come up and fly as the eagle, 
and spread his wings over Bozrali : and at that 
day shall the heart of the mighty men of Edom be 
as the heart of a woman in her pangs. 

23 IT Concerning Damascus:' Hamath is con- 
founded, and Arpad \^ for they have heard evil 
tidings: they are faint-hearted;* there is sorrow 
on^ the sea; it cannot be rjuiet. 

24 Damascus is waxed feeble, and turneth her- 
self to flee, and fear hath seized on her : anguish 
and sorrows have taken her, as a woman in travail. 

25 How is the city of praise not left, the city of 
my joy ! ' 

26 Therefore her young men shall fall in her 
streets, and all the men of war shall Ije cut oft' in 
that day,'" saith the Lord of hosts. 

27 And I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damas- 
cus, and it shall consume the palaces of Ben-hadad. 

28 T Concerning Kedar," and concerning the 





» A 


no< 


<)-a. 


b ch. IS: 16; 50 


!.■). 


c Gen. 


19 


24, 25. 


i nh 


50:40 


n 


.■lit. 


V.f 


:2:! 


A 


nos4 


11. e ch. 12:5. 


( Exod. 


l.S- 


11 


Isa. 40: 


2.'). 


• Or, 


on 


•fn( 


in 




iw 


smtnt. e Job 41:10; 


Psa, 


71): 7 


; K 


PV 


6:17. h 


l's:i 


31:11. 


1 


.lob 


n-. 


9.2(1, 


t H 


b. Wef.dysea. 


l.sa 


17: 


, " 


c. 


Amos 1 


:j-,5 


Zech. 


!): 


, a- 


k 


Isa. 


;)- 


l:i. 


neb. melled. 


4 Or, 


asc 


«. 


1 


b. 3:i:9; 


Isa. 


1:20. 


m 


ch. 



19. He shall come up; Nebuchadnezzar. The swelling of 
Jordan; see note on chap. 12:5. The strong; the strong 
tihcpherd; that is, the king of Edom. The reference is 
to the great natural strength of the country. But I wdl 
siiddenhj ; rather, "for I will suddenly." Make him run; 
tlic strong one just mentioned. From her ; from his land. 
Who is a chosen man — appoint over her? or, "him wlio is a 
cliosen one." tliat is, Nebuchadnezzar, "I will appoint over 
her," over Edom. Appoint me the time; for trial; that is, 
call mo into judgment. 

20. The least of the flock shall drair them out ; the feeblest 
of the invading host shall drag out the Edomites to slaugh- 
ter. But many render, "he," the enemy, "sliall drag them 
out like weak sheep." 

23. Hamath — Arpad; see note on Isa. 10:!). On the sea; 
in Damascus, which is compared to an agitated sea. 

25. How is the city— of my joy ; this is the exclamation of 
Damascus, bewailing the desolation of lier capital. 

28. Kedar; see note on Isa. 21:16. Hnznr ; there were 
several places of this name: one in the north of I'alestine, 



kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadrezzar king 
of Babylon shall smite, thus saith the Lord ; Ari.se 
ye, go up to Kedar, and spoil tlic men of the 
east. 

29 Their tents and their Hocks shall they take 
away:" they shall take to themselves their cur- 
tains, and all their vessels, and their camels; and 
tiiey shall cry unto them. Fear is on every side. 

30 "il Flee, get you far oft"," dwell deep, ye in- 
habitants of Hazor, saith the Lord ; for Nebuchad- 
rezzar king of Babylon hath taken counsel against 
you, and hath conceived a purpose against you. 

31 Arise, get you up unto the wealthy nation, 
that dwelleth without care,'' saith the Lord, which 
have neither gates nor bars,'' which dwell alone.'' 

32 And their camels shall be a booty, and the 
multitude of their cattle a spoil: and I will scat- 
ter into all winds them that are in the utmost cor- 
ners;* and I will bring their calamity from all 
sides thereof, saith the Lord. 

33 And Hazor shall be a dwelling for dragons,' 
and a desolation for ever : there shall no man abide 
there, nor any son of man dwell in it. 

34 1 The word of the Lord that came to Jere- 
miah the prophet against Elam in the beginning 
of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah," saying, 

35 Thus saith the Lord of hosts ; Behold, I will 
break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might. 

36 And upon Elam will I bring the four winds 
from the four quarters of heaven, and will scatter 
them toward all those winds; and there shall b'.' 
no nation whither the outcasts of Elam shall not 
come. 

37 For I will cause Elam to be dismayed before 
their enemies, and before them that seek their life : 
and I will bring evil upon them, even my fierce 
anger, saith the Lord; and I will send the sword 
after them, till J have consumed them : 

38 And I will set my throne in Elam, and will 
destroy from thence the king and the princes, saitli 
the Lord. 

30 IT But it shall come to pass in the latter days, 
that I will bring again the captivity of Elam,' saith 
the Lord. 



.50::)0. n Isa. 21:1.1-17. oV.,a. 120:5. tW.e\>. flit grenlly. 1 Or. Ihat is , 
ease. pEzek. 3S:11. q Num. 23:9; MIc. 7:14. • Heb cut nff into rorner 
or Ikat have the corners of their hair polled, r Mai. 1 :3. » ch. 25:25; Is; 
22:6. t ver. 6. 



Josh. 11:1 ; and one in Benjamin, Neh. 11:33. But Hazor 
here seems to have been an Arabian tribe bordering on 
Kedar. 

31. Arise; an exhortation to the Chaldean armies. Unto 
the wealth 1/ nation ; that is, to Hazor. Dwelleth without care — 
alone; as Ijriug remote from the common path of armies. 

34. Elam ; Persia, which lay east of Babylon. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1, 2. God is greatly displeased with those who take ad- 
vantage of the weakness of their neighbors to rob them of 
their just possessions, and he wiU not fail to reward them 
according to their deeds. 

7. The highest wisdom of men is to fear God and do 
righteousness; when they depart from him, and put their 
trust in wickedness, no sagacity or skill can shield them 
against his anger. 

12. The severity with which God chastises his ofifending 
people, is a solemn warning to his enemies of the utter 
destruction that awaits them. If he spare not his own 
895 



Babylon juJguI, 



JEREMIAH E 



and Israel saved. 



CHAPTER L. 



1, 9, 21, as The judgment of B;ibvlon. 4, 17, 33 The redemption of 

Isrkfl. 

""■piIE word tliat tlip Lord spake asainst Baby- 
X Ion and against the land oi' the Clialdeans by" 
Jeremiah the prophet." 

2 Declare ye among tlie nalion.-^, and publisli, and 
set up* a standard ; pulilisli, «?(</ conceal not: say, 
Babylon is taken, Bc^l is confounded,'' Merodach is 
broken in jiiccos ; licr idols are couibiinded, her 
images are broken in pieces. 

8 For out of tiic north tliere cometli uj) a nation 
against her, which shall make her land desolate, 
and none shall dwell therein : they shall remove, 
they shall depart, both man and beast. 

4 It in those days,'' and in that time, saith the 
Lord, tiie cliildren of Israel shall come, they and 
the childxen of Judah together,'' going and weej)- 
ing:'' they shall go, and seek the Lord their (Jod."^ 

5 They shall ask the way to Zion with their 
faces thitherward," sayinf;, Come, and let us join 
ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant that 
shall not be forgotten.'' 

6 My ])eoplc hath been lost sheep : ' their shep- 
herds have caused them to go astray, they have 
turned them away on the mountains: they have 
gone from mountain to hill,^ they have forgotten 
their resting place.'" 

7 All that found them have devoured them:' 
and their adversaries said, We olfendnot,'" because 
they have sinned against the Lord," the habitation 
of justice," even the Lord, the hope of their fathers.'' 

8 Remove out of the midst of Babylon,'' and go 
Ibrth out of the land of the Chaldeans, and be as 
the he-goats before the flocks. 

9 11 For lo, I will raise iuid cause to come up 
against Babylon an assembly of great nations from 
the north country : and they shall set themselves in 
array against her ; from thence she shall be taken : 
their arrows shall be as of a mighty expert man ;^ 
none shall return in vain. 

10 And Chaldea shall be a spoil: all that s\)0\\ 
her shall be satislied, saith the Lord. 

11 Because ye were glad, because ye rejoiced. 
ye destroyers of my heritage, because ye are 



• Heb. by the hand of. • Isa. ch. 13, •Jl,47. » Hcb. /i/( wp. bch. 51:44: 
lia 4«:1. c Rom. 11:1, etc. •'Hos. 1:11. « ch. 31:9; Ezra 3:12, 13: Psa. 
12(>.,5, 6; Zfch. 12:10: Act.H a:.")?, f Hos. 3:5. 5 Psa. 84:7. hch. 31:33, 
34; Sone8:6; I«a. 55:.3; Acts 11:23; 2 Cor. S:5. i Isa. 53:8; 1 Pet. 2:25. 
J ch. 3:a. a I Ilcb. vlaee to lie down in; Psa. 23:2. k Song 1:7, 8. 1 Psa. 
-11:7. inch, 2:3. n Ban. »:«. oP,a.9U:l. p I'sa. 22:4. qch.51:6,45; 



liouseliold, what shall be the end of those who are stran- 
Rors and foreigners to it? 1 Pet. 4:17, 18. 

15. IG. It is God's unuUcraWe purpose to abase all the 
proud, wlielhcr tiicy be nations, families, or individuals. 

:4I, 32. The security that iullows long-continued pros- 
I)crityi3 often the occasion of men's destruction, as it leads 
llicm to neglect the necessary means of protection. 

CHAPTER L. 

2. Set up a standard; the tidini;s of liabylon's fall are to 
l>tt spread by signals as well as words. Bel — Merodach; 
idols of Babylon. Jler idols are confounded; they are put 
lo shame, because they could not save those who trusted 
In them. 

3. A nation; the Modes and Persians, whose country lay 
to the north-cast of lialiylon. 

4. The chddren of Israel shall come, thei/ and the children of 
Jitdiih topethei' ; the ten tribes who had been carried caji- 

806 



grown fat' as the heifer at grass, and bel- a. m.3«». 

P 1 1 1 • D ' BO. >boiil 

low as bulls ; ' w. 

12 Your mother shall be sore confounded ; she 
that bare you shall be ashamed : bciiold. the liind- 
erinost of th(^ nations shall be a wilderness, a dry 
land, and a desert. 

13 Because of the wrath of the Lord it.«liall not 
be inhabited,'' but it shall be wholly desolate:' 
every one that goetli by Babylon shall be aston- 
ished, and hiss at all her plagues. 

14 Put yourselves in array against Babylon round 
about : all ye that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare 
no arrows : for she hath sinned against the Lord. 

15 Shout againsthcr roundabout: she hath given 
her hand:' her ibundations are fallen, her walls 
are thrown down : for it is the vengeance of the 
Lord:" take vengeance upon her; as she hath 
done, do unto her." 

IG Cutoff the sower from Babylon, and him that 
handleth the sickle" in the time of harvest: for 
fear of the oppressing sword they shall turn every 
one to his people, and they shall flee every one to 
his own land. 

\1 *i\ Israel is a scattered sheep; the lions have 
driven him away : first the king of Assyria hath 
devoured him;"' and last this Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon hath broken his bones.'' 

18 Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the 
God of Israel ; Behold, 1 will punish the king of 
Babylon and his land, as I have punished the 
king of Assyria.'' 

19 And 1 will bring Israel again to his habita- 
tion,^ and he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan," 
and his soul shall be satislied upon mount Ephra- 
im and Gilcad.'' 

20 hi those days, and in that time, saith the 
Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for.'" 
and there shall be none;'' and the sins ol' Judah, 
and they shall not be found: for 1 will pardon 
them whom I reserve.' 

21 1l Go uj) against the land of Mei'athaim,' even 
against it, and against the inhabitants of Pekod:' 
waste and utterly destroy after them,'' saith the 
Lord, and do according to all lliat 1 have com- 
manded thee." 



Zcch.l:15. >ch.!»:12. i 1 Chr. 29:24. «l8«.(i3:4. < R«». l,^:(i. •Or, 
scythe, w a Kings 17:6. i 2 Kings 24:10, etc. T Ina. 37::)(^fci. s ch. 
.33:12: Isa. 63:9, 10; Kztk. 34:13, 15. > Mic. 7:14. IS. bSonf:G:5. « Rom. 
8:3.3,34. <" Psa. 103:12; Rom. 5:16. e Iki. 6:13; 2 IVl. 3:15. t Or, l*» 
rebels: t Or, Vhiintion. ' Ezsk. 2:1:33. irch. 48:10. 



tive by the Assyrians, at least a remnant of them, united 
themselves with the Jews on their return to Palestine 
under Cyrus. Thus was fulfilled the prophecy of Ezckiel, 
chap. :47 : 15-22 ; though a still higher fultilmcnt of it may 
be reserved for the future. 

8. At the hc-ponts before the flock.'!; this is addressed espe- 
cially to the .lewish rulers and leaders. 

12. Your mother — slie thai hare you; that is, Babylon, 
considered as the mother of tlie people. 

15. Slic hath given her hand; surrendered herself ;is van- 
quished. 

Hi. Thei/ shall turn; llie foreigners in Babj'lon. 

18. As 1 have jmni.'ihril the king of Assi/ria ; Assyria, with 
-Nineveh its capital, liad alre;idy fallen m the days of .Icrc- 
miah. and w:>8 now subjccl to tlie ('haldeans. 

21. Mcmlhaim — Pekod ; symbolical names: the first, rfoii- 
I hie n/jf//;on, indicating the character; the second. fi.<i/nfioii. 
the f;ile of Babvlon. 



Bahylon judged, 



JEREMIAH L. 



and Israel saved. 



A. M.Mw. 22 A sound of battle is in tlie land, and 
■ ,m' " of great destruction." 
28 How is the hammer of the whole earth cut 
asunder and broken!" how is Babylon become a 
desolation among the nations! 

24 I liave laid a snare for thee," and thou art also 
taken, Babylon, and thou wast not aware:'" thou 
art found, and also caught, because thou hast 
striven against the Lord. 

25 The Lord hath opened his armory, and hath 
brought forth tlie weapons of Iiis indignation:" 
for tliis is the work of the Lord God of hosts in 
the land of the Chaldeans. 

26 Come against her from the utmost border,* 
open her storehouses : cast * her up as heaps, and 
destroy her utterly : let nothing of her be left. 

27 Slay all her bullocks;' let them go down to 
the slaugliter: woe unto them! for their day is 
come, the time of their visitation. 

28 The voice of them that flee and escape out of 
the land of Babylon, to declare in Zion the ven- 
geance of the Lord our God,^ the vengeance of his 
temple." 

29 Call together the archers against Babylon : 
all ye that bend the bow, camp against it round 
about; let none thereof escape : recompense her 
according to her work ; ' according to all tliat 
she hath done, do unto her: for she hath been 
proud against the Lord, against the Holv One of 
Israel. 

30 Therefore shall her young men fall in the 
streets, and all her men of war shall be cut off in 
that day, saith the Loud. 

31 Behold, I am against thee, thou most proud,* 
saitli the Lord God of hosts : for thy day is come, 
the time that I will visit thee. 

32 And the most proud' shall stuinljje and fall,J 
and none shall raise him up: and I will kindle a 
fire in his cities,'' and it shall devour all round 
about him. 

33 "H Thus saith the Lord of hosts ; The children 
of Israel and the children of Judali were oppressed 
together: and all that took them captives held 
them fast ; they refused to let them go. 

34 Their Redeemer is strong;' The Lord of 
hosts is his name : he shall thoroughly plead their 
cause,"' that he may give rest to the laud, and dis- 
quiet the inhabitants of Babylon. 

35 ^ A sword is upon the Chaldeans, saith the 



» Cii. 51:54. b ch. 51;20; Isi. 14:6. = Eccl. 9:12. il Dan. ot-ld. .31. 

e Psa. 45:3-5; Isa. 1:):5. • Hcb. enrf. t Or, (rra(i. f i-h. 46:-.'l ; Isa. 34:7. 

5 ch. 51:10, 11. li Lain. 1:10; 2:6, 7. i ver. IS. 1 Heb. pride, i Prov. 

16: IS; IS: 13. kRev.l8:S. Usa. 47:4. m|sa.51:-M. nIsa.47:lS. 5 Or, 

chief slat/s; Heb. tiars. o ha. 44:a5. p 2 Tliess. 2:11. q ch. 25:20, 24; 



26. Cast her up as heaps,- heaps of sheaves at the thresh- 
ing-floor. 

34. To the land; the land of Israel. 

36. Liars; diviners, who deceived the people with lies. 

37. Minified people; mingled mass of foreigners made up 
of men of different nations. Chap. 25 : 20, 24. 

44. Behold — before me; see note chap. 49:19. 

45. SImll draw them ov,t; see note chap. 49:20. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
4. It is when God's people seek his face with weeping 
and supplication that he interposes for their deliverance, 
accomplishing with infinite ease the mightiest overthrows 
in their behalf, and restoring them to more than their for- 
mer prosperity. Dan. 9:20, 21. 
57 



Lord, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and 
upon her princes, and upon her wise mra." 

36 A sword is upon the liars ;^° and they shall 
dote :'' a sword is upon her mighty men ; and they 
shall be dismayed. 

37 A sword is upon their horses, and upon tlieir 
chariots, and oipon all the mingled people tliat are 
in the midst of her;i and they shall become as 
women : '' a sword is upon her treasures ; and they 
shall be robbed. 

38 A drought is upon her waters ; and they shall 
be dried up:'' for it is the land of gi-aven images, 
and they are mad upon their idols. 

39 Therefore the wild beasts of the desert with 
the wild beasts of the islands shall dwell there, 
and the owls shall dwell therein : and it shall be 
no more inhabited for ever;' neither shall it be 
dwelt in from generation to generation. 

40 As God overtlirew Sodom and Gomorrah 
and the neighbor cities thereof," saith the Lord ; 
so shall no man abide there, neither shall any son 
of man dwell therein. 

41 Behold, a people shall come from the north,'' 
and a great nation, and many kings shall be raised 
up from the coasts of the earth. ^'' 

42 They shall hold the bow and the lance : they 
are cruel," and will not show mercy : their voice 
shall roar like the sea, and they shall ride upon 
liorses, every one put in array, like a man to the 
battle, against thee, O daughter of Babylon. 

43 The king of Babylon hath heard the report 
of them, and his hands waxed feeble : anguish took 
hold of him, aiid pangs as of a woman in travail.-*' 

44 Beliold, he shall come up like a lion from the 
swelling of Jordan unto the habitation of the 
strong: but I will make them suddenly run away 
from her : and who is a chosen 7nan, that I may ap- 
[loint over her? for who w like me? and who will 
appoint me the time?' and who is that shepherd 
that will stand before me?^ 

45 Therefore hear ye the counsel of the Lord, 
that he hath taken against Babylon ; and his pur- 
poses, that he hath purposed against the land of 
the Chaldeans :" Surely the least of the flock shall 
draw them out : surely he shall make their habi- 
tation desolate with them. 

46 At the noise of the taking of Babylon the 
earth is moved, and the cry is heard among the 
nations." 



Ezek. 30:5. rch.ril::lO. s Isa. 44:27; Rev. 16:12. l ch. 25: 12; Isa. 13:20. 
u Gen. 10:24,25. v ch. 6:22. w ch. 51 :27. 2S; Rev. 17:16. x Isa. 13:17, 
18. yDan.5:6. I Or, convent me to plead? 2job41:10. a Isa. 14:24, 27. . 
bllev. 18:0, 15. 



7. Since wicked men are moved by hatred and malice to 
persecute God's church, he will hold them guilty for all 
the sufferings which they inflict upon her; while at the 
same time he uses them as a rod for chastisement and 
correction. Isa. 10:5-12. 

9. All the nations of the earth move in accordance with 
God's eternal counsels : while they are intent upon the ac- 
complishment of their own selfish schemes, he is bringing 
to pass, through their instrumentality, his wise and good 
purposes for the chastisement of Zion, or for her deliver- 
ance and enlargement. 

20. The outward deliverance of God's people is connect- 
ed with their inward penitence and return to duty. Neh. 
1:4-11; 2:1-8. 

897 



The purposes of God 



JEREMIAH 



concerning Babylon. 



CHAPTER LI. 



1 The severe judgment of God against Babylon in revenge of Israel. 59 
Jereniiah dehvereth the book of this prophecy to Seraiah, to Le cast 
into Euphrates, in token of the perpetual sinking of Babylon. 

'"T^IIUS saith the Lord : Boliold, I will raise up 
J_ against Bab_vloii, and a<j;aiiist them that dw-ell 
in the midst' of them that rise up against me, a 
destroying wind ;" 

2 And will send unto Babylon fanners, that shall 
fan her, and shall empty her land : '' for in the 
day of trouble they shall be against her round 
about. 

3 Against him, that bendeth let the archer bend 
his bow, and against him that lifteth himself up 
in his brigaiidine : and spare ye not her young 
men ; destroy ye utterly all her host. 

4 Thus the slain sliall fall in tin; land of the 
Chaldeans, and they that arc thrust through iu lier 
streets. ° 

5 For Israel hath not been forsaken,'' nor Judah 
of his God,'' of the Lord of hosts ; though their 
land was filled with sin against the Holy One of 
Israel.' 

6 Flee out of the midst of Babylon." and deliver 
every man ins soul : be not cut oft' in her iniquity ; 
for this is the time of the Lord's vengeance; he 
will render unto her a recompense." 

7 Babylon hath been a golden cup in the Lord's 
hand,' that made all the earth drunken: the na- 
tions have drunken of her wine ;' therefore the 
nations are mad." 

8 Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed:' 
howl for her ;"' take balm for her pain, if so be she 
may be healed. 

9 We would have hca!i'(l IJabylon, but she is not 
healed :" forsake her, and lei us go every one into 
his own comitry: for lier judgment reacheth unto 
heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies. 

10 The Lord hath brought forth our righteous- 
ness:" come, and let us declare in Zion the work 
of the Lord our God.'' 

1 1 Jlakebright^thc arrows; gathcn- tlie siiields :'' 
the Lord hath raised up the spirit of the kings of 
the Medes: for his device is against Babylon, to 



•Heb./uarl. » ch. 4: II, I'J; '2 KinRS li):7 
A9:-ia. <l Isa. 44:21; 4n:l4, IS; Hos. I:1U. 
31;:)7; Mic. 7:lS-'20. f ch. 5U:8, etc.; (Jci 
1 Rev. 17:4. j Rev. 14:S; IS:.'), etc. k ch S 



bch. 15:7; MaU.3:ia. <: ch. 
e Zcch. a:l2; \-2:liS. ' ch. 
10:1(1, 17. h ch •Jj:14, ifi. 
:10. 1 Dan..5:24-'!1. m I,a. 



23-31. Sometimes God allows wicked nations to accu- 
mulate vast power and wealth, 80 that it seems as if they 
would be aide to traiii])le under foot and break in pieces 
the wliole earth without end. But lie can at any moment 
open his armory against them, and overwhelm them with 
the weapons of his indignation. The examples on record 
of the sudden fall of mighty monarchies, arc a standing 
manifestation of (iod's supreme power over all that is 
called powerful among men. 

42. They wlio have oppressed and destroyed their fel- 
low-men witliout mercy, whether nations or individuals, 
shall be destroyed in like manner. James 2: 13. 

■in. Haughty and powcrfid oppressors shall be visited 
Viy Uod with terrible judgnients, such as shall fill the in- 
habitants of the earth with awe and terror. 

CIIAI'TKR LI. 

5. Tltou^h titeir land was filled with sin; more literally, 
"for their land," the land of the Babylonians, " is filled." 
898 



destroy it; because it is the vengeance of a.m. 3409. 
the Lord, the vengeance of his temple.'' 055" °°' 

12 ^et up the standard upon the walls of Baby- 
lon, make the w^atch strong, setup the watchmen, 
prepare the ambushes:' for the Lord hath both 
devi.«ed and done that which he spake against the 
inhabitants of Babylon. 

13 thou that dwellest upon many waters,' 
abundant in treasures, thine end is come, and the 
measure of thy covetousness.' 

14 The Lord of hosts hath sworn by himself,* 
saying. Surely 1 will fill thee witli men, as with 
caterpillars;" and they shall lift up' a shout 
against thee. 

15 He hath made the earth by his power," he 
hath established the world by his wisdom, and 
hath stretched out the heaven by his understand- 
ing.'" 

1() When he uttereth his voice, there is a multi- 
tude^ of waters in the heavens;'' and he causeth 
the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth :^ 
he maketli lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth 
the wind out of his treasures. 

17 Every man is brutisii by his knowledge;'' 
every founder is confounded by the graven image : 
for his molten image is falsciiood, and there is no 
breath in them." 

18 They are vanity, the work of errors: in the 
time of their visitation they shall jierisii. 

19 The portion of .Jacob is not like them;'' for he 
is the former of all things : and Israelis tlie rod of 
his inheritance;'^ The Lord of hosts is his name. 

20 Thou art my battle-a.xc and weapons of war : 
for with* thee will I break in pieces the natious, 
and with thee will 1 destroy kingdoms;'' 

21 And with thee will 1 lireak in pieces the 
horse and his rider ; and with thee will I break in 
pieces tiie chariot and his rider; 

22 Willi thee also will I break in pieces man and 
woman; and with thee will I break in jiieces old 
and young; and with thee will 1 break in pieces 
the young man and the maid ; 

23 I will also break in pieces with thee the 
shepherd and his flock ; and with thee will I break 



15. IHab. 2:9. lU » Heb. his soul. « Nih. 3:15:17. I Heb. utier. 
vGcn. 1:1,0. " .Iob9:8; I'm. 1U1:'J; Pn>v.3:10; Ira. 4U:ad. 1 Or. iMnM. 
I ch. 1U:12, etc.; P»a. lU?:'.**. r Pn.l3S:17. • Or, « more tru(i.tA lAan 
lahtow. «Rnm. I:*). « P«a. 115:5, etc. b Pn, 10:5; rJ:26; Lam. 3:24. 
c Beut. 32:9; Pia. 74:2. t Or, tit, or iy. d lu. 41:15, IC; .Mic. 4:13. 



7. Babylon — a golden nip; the wine-cup of God's wrath. 
She is called a golden cup to indicate Iter great wealtli. 
Have drunken of her wine ; have suffered divine inflictions 
through her agency. In Hcv. I" : 4, the figure is used in 
a diflerent way, to express the intoxication of error and 
sin. 

9. We would have heated Babylon; the allies of Babylon 
speak. 

12. Upon tlte walls of Babylon ; or, "against the walls of 
Babylon." 

l:i. The measure of thy covetousness; it is full for punish- 
ment. Compare Gen. 15:1(1. 

M. With men; that is, troops of enemies. 

I')-in. He hath made — his name; repeated from chap. 
10:12-lfi. 

20. r//oi« art my baltlc-nxe ; that is, Babylon, as the in- 
strument which (!od has employed to piuiish the nations, 
ver. 2,'); but some understand these words of Cyrus. Will 
1 break in pieces; or, " I have broken in pieces." 



Babylon -punished 



JEREMIAH LI. 



fur njfliding Zion. 



A. M 3m. in pieces the Imsbandman and his yoke of 
•ws" "" oxen ; and with tliee will I break in pieces 
captains and rulers. 

24 And I will render unto Baliylon and to all 
the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they 
have done in Zion in your sight," saith the Lord. 

25 Behold, I am against thee, destroying 
mountain,'' saith the Lord, wliich destroyest all 
the earth: and I will stretch out my hand upon 
thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will 
make thee a burnt mountain.'' 

20 And they shall not take of thee a stone for a 
corner, nor a stone for foundations ; but thou shalt 
be desolate for ever,* saith the Lord.* 

27 Set yc up a standard in the land, blow the 
trumpet among the nations, prepare the nations 
against her, call together against her the king- 
doms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz ; appoint a 
captain against her ; cause the horses to come up 
as the rough caterpillars.'' 

28 Prepare against her the nations with the 
kings of the Medes,' the captains thereof, and all 
the rulers thereof and all the land of his dominion. 

29 And the land shall tremble and sorrow : for 
every purpose of the Lord shall be performed 
against Babylon, to make tlic land of Babylon a 
desolation without an inhaliitant. 

30 The mighty men of Babylon have forborne 
to tight, they have remained in their holds : their 
might hath failed ; they became as women i*-' they 
have burned her dwelling-places; her bars are 
broken.'' 

31 One post shall run to meet another, and one 
messenger to meet another, to show the king of 
Babylon that his city is taken at owe end, 

32 And tiiat the passages are stopped, and the 
reeds they have burned with tire, and the men of 
war are affrighted. 

33 For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of 
Isi'ael; the daughter of Babylon is like a thresh- 
ing-floor, it is time to thresh her:*' yet a little 
while, and the time of her harvest shall come.J 

34 Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath de- 
voured me, he hath crushed me," he hath made me 
an empty vessel,' he hath swallowed me up like a 
dragon, he hatii filled his belly with my delicates, 
he hath cast me out. 



»Ch. 50:15,29. b Isi. 13:2; Zech. '1:7. c Re 


». 1?:S. • 


Heb. everlasting 


desolations, d ch. 50:40, 41. e ver. 14. f yer 


11. E 


sa. 19:10. h ch. 


50:30; Lam. 2:9; Amos 1:5; Nah. 3:13. t Or. 


n the tim 


that he tkreshetli 


her. > Hib. 3:12. J Isi. 17:5; Joel 3:13; Ma 


tt. 13:39 


Rev, 14:15, Is. 



25. destroying mountain; Babylon is here compared 
to a volcanic mountain, which has sent forth rlesolathig 
streams of fire over all the nations. But she shall be 
thrust down from her high position, and made a mass of 
burnt and broken fragments. 

27. Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz; provinces of Armenia, 
or of adjacent regions. 

31. At one end; literally, "at the end." The armies of 
Cyrus marched into Babylon at both ends, through the 
channel of the Euphrates, the waters of which they had 
turned off while the Babylonians were engaged in feasting. 

32. The passages ; probably those which connected the 
two parts of the city. The reeds ; literally, " the marshes ;" 
probably marshes covered with tall reeds, that impeded 
the inarch of the enemy. 

34. Cast me out ; from my own land. Zion is the speaker. 
Ver. 35. 



35 The' violence done to me and to my flesh ^ be 
upon Babylon,'" shall the inhabitant' of Zion sa.y ; 
and. My blood upon the iulialiitants of Chaldea, 
shall Jerusalem say. 

3G Therefore thus saith the Lokd ; Behold, I will 
plead thy -cause, and take vengeance for thee ; and 
I will dry up her sea, and make her springs dry. 

37 And Babylon shall become heaps, a dwelling- 
place for dragons, an astonishment, and a hissing, 
without an inhabitant. 

38 Tliey shall roar together like lions : they shall 
yell'^ as lions' whelps. 

39 In their heat 1 will make their feasts, and I 
will make them drunken, that they may rejoice, 
and sleep a perpetual sleep, and. not wake," saith 
the Lord. 

40 I will liring them down like lambs to the 
slaughter, like rams with he-goats. 

41 How is Sheshach taken ! and how is the praise 
of the whole earth surprised!" how is Babylon 
become an astonishment among the nations ! 

42 Tiie sea is come up upon Babylon : she is 
covered with the multitude of the waves thereof." 

43 Her cities are a desolation, a dry land, and 
a wilderness, a land wherein no man dwelleth, 
neither doth any son of man pass thereby. 

44 And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I will 
bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath 
swallowed up : and the nations shall not flow to- 
gether any more unto him ; yea, the wall of Baby- 
lon shall fall.'i 

45 My people, go ye out of the midst of her,'' and 
deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger 
of the Lord. 

46 And lest" your heart faint, and ye fear for 
the rumor that shall be heard in the land;^ a ru- 
mor shall both come one year, and after that in 
another year sha!l come a rumor, and violence in 
the land, ruler against ruler. 

47 Tiierefore, behold, the days come, that I will 
do* judgment upon the graven images of Baby- 
lon : and her whole land shall be confounded, and 
all her slain shall fall in the midst of her. 

48 Then the heaven and the earth, and all that 
is therein, shall sing for Babylon :' for the sjioil- 
ers shall come unto her from the north," saith the 
Lord. 



k ch. 50:17. 1 I.im. 1:15. 1 Heb. Wy. 5 Or. remainder. 


"1 Paa. 137:8, 9. 


a Heb. inhabitress. 1 Or, shake Ihemse/ves. a ver. 57. o 


Dan. 5:4, etc. 


Pl?i. 8:7. q ver. 5S. r ch. 50:S; Rev. ltf:4. 'Or. let not, 


Prov. 3:25,26. 


s Mark 13:7. t Heb. visit, t Hev. 1»:20. <■ ch. 50:3, 41. 





36. Dry up her sea; this seems to be a prophetic allusion 
to the way in which the city was taken, by the drawing off 
of tlie waters of the Euphrates, so as to afford a passage 
to the army of Cyrus through its channel. 

39. In their heat ; while they are inflamed with wine. See 
note on ver. 31. I will make their feasts; Jehovah will him- 
self prepare for them another banquet, even a deadly cup ; 
that is, destruction by the armies of Gyrus. Rejoice; rave, 
after the manner of the drunken. 

41. Sheshach; see note on chap. 25:2G. 

42. The sea; the desolating armies of the Medes. Com- 
pare Isa. 8:7, 8. 

46. And lest your heart faint, and ye fear ; better as the 
margin. " And let not your heart faint, that ye should fear." 
In such a time of confusion many discouraging rumors 
would reach the ears of the returning exiles ; these they 
are exhorted to disregard. 

899 



A sign against Babylon. 



JEKHMIAII LI I. 



Jerusalem is taken. 



49 As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to 
fall, so at Babylon" shall fall the slain of all the 
earth.* 

50 Yc that have escaped the sword,* go away, 
stand not still : remember the Lord afar off, and 
let Jrrusalcm come into your mind.*" • 

51 We are confounded, because we have heard 
reproach : shame hath covered our faces ; for 
strangers are come into the sanctuaries of the 
Loun's house." 

5- Wherefore, behold, the days come, saith the 
Loud, lliat 1 will do judgment upon her graven 
images:'' and through all her land the wounded 
shall groan." 

53 Tiiough Babylon should mount up to heaven, 
and though she should fortify the Jicight of her 
strength, yet from me shall spoilers come unto her, 
saith the Lord.'' 

54 A sound of a cry cometh from Babylon, and 
great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans:''' 

55 Because the Lord hath spoiled Babylon, and 
destroyed out of her the great voice; when her 
waves do roar like great waters, a noise of their 
voice is uttered : 

50 Because the spoiler is come upon her, even 
upon Babylon, and her mighty men are taken, 
every one of their bows is broken :" for the Lord 
God of recompenses shall surely requite.' 

57 And I will make drunk her princes, and her 
wise men, her captains, and her rulers, and her 
mighty men:^ and they shall sleep a perpetual 
sleep, and not wake, saith the King, whose name 
is Tlie Lord of hosts." 

58 Tiius saith the Lord of hosts : The broad 
walls of Babylon* shall be utterly broken,^ and 
her high gates shall be burned with fire; and the 
people shall labor in vain, and the folk in the fire, 
and they shall lie weary.' 

59 1 The word whicli Jeremiah the prophet com- 
manded Seraiah the son of Neriah, the son of Maa- 
seiah, when he went with' Zedekiah the king of 
Judali into Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. 
And this Seraiah was a quiet prince.' 

tiO So Jeremiah wroti; in a l)ook all the evil that 
should come upon Babylon, even all these words 
that are written against Babylon. 



• Or, Bollt Batyton ia to fall, O i/e slain of hrati, niul with Babylon. 
t Or, roumry. » ch. lli'Ja. b Pia. l.ii:6; 131:5, (I. cLim. 1:10. Over. 
47. = 1m. |:l:15, 18: Dm. 5:30, 31. ' ch. 4a:l«i P«a. 13»:»-10; I»i. 14:13; 
Amo« 1):-J; Obad. 4. » ch. 50:a2, 20. Ii 1 Sam. 2:4. i P»a. 94:1 ; 137:8. 



51. We are confouiuled ; the prophet here speaks in the 
name of (iod's covenant people. 

55. The great voice ; the tumult of her vast population, 
which is compared to the roaring of the waves of the sea. 
Rev. 17 : 15. 

58. The broad walls — high gates; according to Ilcrodotus, 
tho walls of Babylon were four-square, three hundred and 
fifty feet hijjh, and eighty-seven thick, with twenty-live 
gates of solid br.iaa on each side. Intlteftre; or, "for the 
tire." They shall gather wealth only to bo consumed by 
lire. 

(il. Reoil all these wor<li; to tho captive Jews residing 
there. 

r.l. Ttieij shall lie weary ; the Babylonians shall sink down 
exhausteil and powerlcHS. Ver. 58. Thus far are the icords 
of Jeremiah; the following chapter seems to have been 
added to tho book by sonio inspired writer, perhaps 
Ezra. 

900 



61 And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When a.m.. 1409. 
thou comest to Babylon, and shalt see, and ibs. 
shall read all these words: 

62 Then shalt thou say, Lord, thou hast spo- 
ken against this place, to cut it off, that none shall 
remain in it, neither rnan nor beast, but that it 
shall be desolate" for ever. 

63 And it shall be, when thou hast made an end 
of reading this book, that thou shalt l)ind a stone 
to it, and cast it into the midst of the Euphrates:"' 

64 And thou shalt say, Thus shall Bahylon sink, 
and shall not rise from the evil that I will bring 
upon her : and they shall be weary." Thus far 
are the words of Jeremiah. 

CH.VPTER Lll. 

1 Zedekiiih rebcUeth. 4 Jerusalem is besieged and taken. S Zedelciah's 
sons killed, and his own eyes put out. 12 Nebuzar-adan burneth and 
spoilt-th the city. 34 He sendeth away the captives. 31 Evil-mero- 
il:ich advanceth Jchoiachin. 

ZEDEKLiH was one and twenty years old 
when he began to reign,* and he reigned 
eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's 
name was Ilamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of 
Libnah." 

2 And he did that which was evil in the eyes of 
the Lord, according to all that Jehoiakim had 
done. 

3 For through the anger of the Lord it came to 
pass in Jerusalem and Judah, till he had east them 
out from his presence, that Zedekiah rebelled 
against the king of Babylon. 

4 H And it came to pass in the ninth year of his 
reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the 
month, that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylmi came, 
he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and ])itrhed 
against it, and built forts against it round about.'' 

5 So the city was besiegeil unto the eleventh year 
of king Zedekiah. 

6 And in the fourth month, in the ninth day of 
the month, the famine was sore in the city, so that 
there was no bread for the people of the land. 

T Then tho city was broken up. and all the men 
of war fled, and went forth out of the city by night 
by the way of the gate between the two walls, 
which was by the king's garden ; (now the Chal- 



J ch. •2ri:-31; Hab. 2:1(1. ' ch. 4fl:lH; 48:1.'>. 1 Or. icoH.i of broad Bahylon. 
i Or, nmilr nakril. I Hab. 2:13. I Ot, on Ihe bthnlf of . ^ Or, printr of He- 
nucha,mchitfehailibfrtain. 'VloXi.dtsolaUons. "n Rev. 1^:21 . nver.5;;Pi*. 
70:12. t Hub. rfrgTlol. » 2 King" 24: IS. p ch. 30:1. plc. ; 2 Kirg.9.'S:l,fto. 



INSTRUtTION. 
Babylon was ono of tho mightieat empires which tho 
world ever saw, and it made itself conspicuous abovo all 
other nations of ancient times by persecuting God's cove- 
nant people. For this reason it stands in tho Scriptures as 
the re]iresciitative of all organized forms of persecution, 
whether secular or spiritual. Its terrible overthrow, so 
complete and so jierpetual. is both ajiroof of (iod's power, 
and a pledge of his purpose to destroy and break in pieces 
every thing that exalts itself against the kingdom of his 
Son, however great may be its jiowcr and resources. All 
who join themselves to his enemies shall perish ; but 
" blessed are all they that put their trust in him." 

CHAPTER LIL 

This chapter is mostly a repetition of 2 Kings from 
chap. 24:18 to the end of chap. 25, where see the notes 

and instructions. 



Judah i.? carried 



JEREMIAH LII. 



captive tu Bahylo 



A M 3)11!. deans were bv tlie city round about :) and 
•■'•V* they went by the way ol the iihiin. 

8 T But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after 
the kiasr, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of 
Jericho ; and all his army was scattered from him. 

9 Tiien they took tlie kinj;-, and carried him up 
unto the king of Babylon to Rililali in the land of 
Hamath;" where he gave judgment upon him. 

10 Ami the king of Babylon slew the sons of 
Zedekiah bolbre his eyes: he slew also all the 
princes of Judali in Riblali. 

11 Tiicn he put out* the eyes of Zedekiah; and 
the king of Babylon bound him in chains/ and 
carried iiim to Babylon, and put him in prison* 
till the day of his death." 

12 IF Xow in the fiftli month,"' in the tenth day 
of the month, which loas tiie nineteenth year of 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon,'' came Nebuzar- 
adan, captain of the guard,* w/iicA served' the king 
of Babylon, into Jerusalem, 

13 And burned the house of the Lord, and the 
king's house ; and all the houses of Jerusalem, and 
all the houses of the great men, burned he with 
fire. 

14 And all the army of the Chaldeans, that Mvre 
with the captain of the guard, brake down all the 
walls of Jerusalem round about. 

1-5 Then Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard 
carried away captive certain of the poor of the 
people, and the residue of the people that remained 
in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to 
the king of Babylon, and the rest of the multitude. 

16 But Nebuzar-adan the captain of tiie guard 
left certain of the poor of the land for vine-dress- 
ers and for husbandmen." 

17 Also the pillars of brass that were in the 
house of the Lord, and the bases, and the brazen 
sea that was in the house of the Lord, the Chal- 
deans brake, and carried all the brass of them to 
Babylon. "^ 

18 The caldrons also, and the shovels,"' and the 
snuffers, and the bowls,' and the spoons, and all 
the vessels of brass wherewith they ministered," 
took they away. 

19 And the basins, and the firepans,* and the 
bowls, and the caldrons, and the candlesticks, and 
the spoons, and the cups ; that which was of gold 
in gold, and that which was of silver in silver, took 
the captain of the guard away. 

20 The two pillars, one sea, and twelve brazen 
bulls that were under tlie bases, which king Solo- 
mon had made in the house of the Lord: the* 
brass of all these vessels was without weight. 

21 And concerning the pillars, the height of one 
pillar wo? eighteen cubits; and a fillet^ of twelve 



«Ch. 3e:4.S. • Weh. blindtd. \ Or. fetters, i Heh. Iit,ine of tl,e u-anh. 
b Kzpk. li:13. ■: Zech. 7:5; 8:19. d ver. 'JO. S Or, chief marshal; lleb. 
chitf of the executioners^ or slaughtermen ; and so ver, 14, etc., and Dan. 
•J:14. iV.eh. stood before. eoh.39:10. t ch. '27: 19-'2a; 1 Kings 7:15, etc. 
T Or, instruments to remove the ashes. * Or, ba.iins. f Exod. 27:3. t Or, 
censers, t Heb. their, i Bfh. thread. h-JChr. 3:15. i 2 Kings 25:18. 



27. This Judah was carried away captive; in the three 
captivities mentioned in tlie next three verses. 

28. Three thousand — three and twenty; to tliese must be 
added seven thousand soldiers, making the wliole number 
of captives in this first captivity, in round numbers, ten 
lliousaud, as in 2 Kings 24:14 compared with verse 16. 



cubits did compass it ; and the thickness thereof 
iras four fingers; it was hollow. 

22 And a chapiter of brass was upon it;'' and 
the height of one chapiter teas five cubits, with 
network and pomegranates ujion tlie c]ia[)iters 
round about, all of brass. The second pillar also 
and the pomegranates were like unto these. 

23 And there were ninety and six pomegranates 
on a side ; and all the pomegranates upon the net- 
work were a hundred round about. 

2-4 % And the captain of the guard took Seraiah 
the chief priest,' and Zephaniah the second priest,^ 
and the tliree keepers of the door:' 

25 He took also out of the city a eunucli, wliicli 
had the charge of the men of war ; and seven men 
of them that were near the king's person,^ which 
were found in the city ; and the principal scribe 
of the host,* who mustered the people of the land ; 
and threescore men of the people of the land, that 
were found ia the midst of the city. 

26 So Nebuzar-adan the captain of tlie guard 
took them, and brought them to the king of Bab- 
ylon to Riblah. 

27 And the king of Babylon smote them, and 
put them to death in Riblah in the land of Ha- 
math. Thus Judah was carried away captive out 
of his own land.'' 

28 This is the people Avliom Nebuchadrezzar car- 
ried away captive:' in the seventh year three 
thousand Jews and three and twenty : 

29 In the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he 
carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hun- 
dred thirty and two persons:* 

30 In the three and twentieth year of Nebuchad- 
rezzar, Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard car- 
ried away captive of the Jews seven hundred forty 
and five persons : all the persons were four thou- 
sand and six hundred. 

311 And it came to pass in the seven and thir- 
tieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachiu king of 
Judah, in the twelfth month, in the five and twen- 
tieth day of the month,™ that Evil-merodach king of 
Babylon, in the Jirst year of his reign, lifted up 
the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and brought 
him forth out of prison." 

32 And spake kindly unto him,* and set his 
throne above the throne of the kings that u^ere 
with him in Baljylon, 

33 And changed his prison garments:" and he 
did continually eat bread before him all the days 
of his life." 

34 And /or his diet, there was a continual diet 
given him of the king of Babylon, every day a 
portion** until the day of his death,i all the days 
of his life. 



jch. 21:1 ; 29:25. i Heh. threshold. 1 Heh. .saw the face of the king. 'Or, 
.scritx: of the captain of the host, k Lam. 1 :1, 3. 1 2 Kings 24:1, etc. t Heb. 
souls. " 2 Kings 25:27, etc. » Gen. 40:13, 20. I Heb. good things U'ilh 
him. oZech. 3:3-5. p 2 Sam. 9:13; 1 Kings 2:7. i Seh. the 7mtter of the 
day in his dat/. qLulieli:3. 



30. Seven hundred forty and Jive — nil the persons were 
four thou.fand and six hundred; adding the seven thousand 
soldiers, we have, for the total number of adult males, 
eleven thousand six hundred. Keckoning women and 
children, the number may have been fifty thousand or 
more. 

901 



THE 



LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 



The book of Lamentations was written in view of the desolation of Judah and Jerusalem by the Chal- 
deans, and in it the feelings of a tender-hearted and compassionate man, a sincere patriot, and a devout 
worshipper of God are beautifully blended. 

The structure of tlie book is peculiar. The first, second, and fourth chapters consist each of twenty- 
two verses, arranged iu the order of the Hebrew alphabet, that is, the first verse beginning with the first 
letter, the second with the second, and so on. Each of the verses, moreover, contains three clauses. The 
third chapter contains sixty-six short verses, the first three beginning with the first letter of the alphabet, 
the next three with the second, and so through. The fifth chapter contains twenty-two short verses not 
an-anged alphabetically. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 The miserable esbite of Jerusalem by reason of her sin. 12 She com- 
plaineth of her grief, 18 and confesseth Ood's judgment to be right- 

HOW doth the city sit solitary, that was full 
of people!'^ how is she become as a widow!'' 
she that was great among the nations, and princess 
among the provinces,'' how is shebecome tributary ! 

2 8he weepeth sore in the night, and her tears 
are on licr checks : among all her lovers she hath 
none to comfort /«■/•;'' all her friends have dealt 
treaeherou.sly with her, they are become her ene- 
mies. 

3 Judah is gone into cajjtivity because of afflic- 
tion, and because of great" servitude: she dwcU- 
elh among the heathen,'' she liudeth no rest : all 
her persecutors overtook her between the straits. 

4 The ways of Zion do mourn, because none come 
to the solemn feasts : all her gates are desolate : 
her i>riests sigh, her virgins are afflicted, and she 
is in bitterness. 

.') Her adversaries are the chief,'' her enemies 
prosi)er; for the LoiiD hath afflicted her for the 
multitude of her transgressions :*•' her children are 
gone iTito captivity before the enemy. 

() And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty 
is departed : her princes arc become like harts 
that iind no jiasture,'' and tliey are gone williout 
strength Ix-fore the pursuer. 

7 Jerusalem rememt)ered in the days of her af- 
fliction and of her miseries all her pleasant* things 



that she had in the days of old, when her am»<i6- 
people iell into the hand ol the enemy, sw. 
and none did help her: the adversaries saw her, 
and did mock at her sabbaths.' 

8 Jerusalem hath grievously sinned ; therefore 
she is removed : '' all that honored her despise 
her, because they have seen her nakedness :^ yea, 
she siglu'tii, and turnetii backward. 

9 Her filthiness is in her skirts; she rcmember- 
ctli not her last end;' therefore she came down 
wonderfully : she had no comforter. Lord, be- 
hold my affliction : for the enemy hath magnified 
himself. 

10 The adversary hath spread out his hand upon 
all her pleasant** things: for she hath seen that 
the hcatiien entered into her sanctuary,'" whom 
thou didst command that they should not enter 
into thy congregation." 

11 All her i)e()ple sigh, they seek bread; they 
have given their pleasant things for meat to re- 
lieve the soul : ' see, Louu. and consider ; for I 
am become vile." 

12 H L' iT nothing to you, all ye tliat pass by ?* 
behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto 
my sorrow,!' which is done unto me, wherewith the 
Lord hath afflicted mc in the day of his fierce 
anger. 

13 From above hath he sent lire into my bones, 
and it prevaileth against them: he hath spread a 
net for my feet,'' he hath turned me back: he hath 
made me desolate and faint all the day. 



, 


J«r. 


V2:'>7. 


b I. a 


■17 H 


c . 


Chr 8:20: 


Ezra^ 


•». d Jcr. 


:.TO; 


30:11. 


I.'i. 


•Hob. /or 


the icrentne 


nor. 


• Dnut. !M:(H. ' 


Deut. »:«. 


44. 


CDan. 


9:1 


in 


h Jor 


52:8 


11. 


I Or, 


dfsirahte; 


v.r. U 


. i F«a. 137 


:3, 


1 Hob. 


beromf. a 


removing, o 


wan 


Itrinn 


. i 1 King. 


8:40. 


kEzek. 10:37; H 


M. 2:9, 



CHAPTER I. 

2. Her lovers; her heathen allies. 

3. Between lite straits ; where escape was impossible. 

902 



10. 1 Dniit. 3-J '^l Rom. H:-.!l i Or. tIeximMf. n. J,r 51 :.'.!; 5-J- 13. 
n Doul 23 3 I Or, mnit the tout to rome nuain. o Job 4U:4. 1 ur, 11 u. 
■ Hob. 6y the icay. P Din. 9:12. q Eiek. 17:-J0; Ho«. 7:12. 



7. Vic ailversnries sntr her. nml did mark at her sabbaths; 
raflicr, mockpri .-it her dosolations. The word in the 
original is not the same as that elsewhere used for 
" sabbath." 



Z'wns trricvous case. 



LAMENTATIONS II. 



Misery of Jerus ilem. 



AM. 3411! 14 Theyokeofmytransgressionsisbound 
5»t by his hand:" tliey are wreathed, a/;d come 
up upon my neek : he l\atli made my strength to 
fall, the Lord hath delivered me into their hands, 
from tv/iom I am not able to rise up." 

15 The Lord hath trodden under foot all my 
mighty men in the midst of me: he hath called an 
assembly against me to crush my young men: the 
Lord hath trodden the virgin, the daughter of Ju- 
dah, as in a winepress.*" 

IG For these things I weep ;'' mine eye, mine eye 
runneth down witli water, because tlie comforter 
that should relieve* my soul is far from me: my 
children are desolate, because the enemy prevailed .'' 

17 Zion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is 
none to comfort her : ^ the Lord hatli commanded 
concerning Jacob, that his adversaries should be 
round about him:^ Jerusalem is as a menstruous 
woman among them. 

18 11 Tlie Lord is righteous ;." for I have rebelled 
against his commandment:* hear, I pray you, all 
people, and beliold my sorrow: my virgins and 
my young men are gone into captivity. 

19 I called for my lovers, but they deceived mc:' 
my priests and mine ciders gave up the ghost in 
the city, while they sought their meat to relieve 
their souls. 

20 Behold, Lord ; for I am in distress : my 
bowels are troubled ; my heart is turned within 
me ; for I have grievously rebelled :' abroad the 
sword bereavetii, at home there is as death.'' 

21 They have heard that I sigh ; there is none to 
comfort me: all mine enemies have heard of my 
trouble; they are glad that thou hast done it: 
thou wilt bring the day that thou hast called,^' 
and they sliall lie like unto me. 

22 Let all their wickedness come before thee ;"" 
and do unto them, as thou hast done unto me for 
all my transgressions:" for my sighs are many, 
and my heart is faint." 



, 


Deut 


2S:48 


b Ho 


s. 3:14 


• Or, 


hf 


U'iite-press of the v 


rgin. 


« Isa. 


rei-. 


d 


Tit. 


l:j 


17: U 


17. t 


Heb. bri 




bnrk. e Hos. 9:12. 




r. a, 9. 


f H 


ns H- 


n. 


1 Neh. 9:31 


; Dan 


9:7, 14. 


I 


Heb. mouth, i Jer. 


2:a.'<; 


30:14. 


J p 


a. .'51 


.■). • 


. 


k Deut. 


3-2:25; 


Ezek. 7 


IS 


S Or, proclaimed. 


1 Isa 


. 13: r>. 


etc. 


Jer 


4B 


lU 


.5«:15, 


31. ■» Psa. 13 


''■ 


-9; Jer. 51:33. ■> 


Luke 


23:31. 



14. They are wreathed ; that is, niy transgressions, as a 
chain. 

20. h turned within mc; is writhed with anguish. 

21. Tlte day that thou liast called; the day of tlieir punish- 
ment. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The great and terrible reverses that have so often 
befallen nations for their sins, are standing memorials to 
the world of God's supreme control over human aifairs, 
and his determination to punish all, however high and 
powerful, that persist in disobeying him. 

2. When God turns to be our enemy, all human helpers 
and comforters fail us. 

4. Those calamities are especially to be deplored which 
interrupt the stated worship of God, and cause the ways 
of Zion to be unfrequented. 

5, 6. It is easy for God to take away, from both princes 
and people, all strength and counsel, and make them a 
prey to their enemies. 

8. The way of transgression ends in ignominy ; and the 
dishonor and derision which God brings upon his ene- 
mies here, is but an earnest of the " shame and everlast- 
ing contempt " which awaits the impenitent in the future 
world. 



CHAPTER II 



ah lamenteth tlu 



ery of Jfrus 
rcorio(Toa. 



20 He compla 



HOW hath the Lord covered the daugliter of 
Zion with a cloud in his angcr,^ and cast 
down from heaven unto the eartii the beauty of 
Israel,'' and remembered not his footstool in tlie 
day of his anger I'' 

2 The Lord hath swallowed up all the iialiita- 
tions of Jacob, and hath not pitied:' lie hath 
thrown down in his wrath the strong-holds of the 
daughter of Judah ; he hath brought the7n down to' 
the ground:' he liath polluted the kingdom and 
the princes thereof 

3 He hath cut off in his fierce anger all the horn 
of Israel : he hath drawn back his right hand 
from before the enemy," and he burned against 
Jacob like a flaming fire, which devoureth round 
about.'' 

4 He hath bent his bow like an enemy:" he 
stood with his right hand as an adversary, and 
slew all that were pleasant to^ the eye in the tab- 
ernacle of the daughter of Zion : he poured out 
his fury like fire. 

5 Tlie Lord was as an enemy : he hath swallowed 
up Israel, he hath swallowed up all her palaces: 
he hath destroyed his strong-holds, and hath in- 
creased in the daughter of Judah mourning and 
lamentation. 

6 And he hath violently taken away his taber- 
nacle," as if it wereqfa. garden ;'' hehath destroyed 
his places of the assembly : the Lord hath caused 
the solemn feasts and sabbaths to be forgotten in 
Zion,^ and hath despised in the indignation of his 
anger the king and the priest. 

7 The Lord hath cast ofl' his altar, he hath ab- 
horred his sanctuary,'' he hath given up* into the 
hand of the enemy tlie walls of her palaces ; they 
have made a noise in the house of the Lord," as 
in the day of a solemn feast. 



ch.S 


17 


P 


Joel 2:2 




q a San 


. 1:19. 


r 1 Ch 


r. as 


.>. 


Psa. 13 


2:7. • Jer, 


13:14. 


n 


Heh 


. made t 




ouch. 


Psa. ^a 


39. u 


Rsa 


74 


11. V 


Psa. 89:46. 


w Isa. 


IW 


III; 


Jer. 30 


IJ 


1 He 


b. the de 


irnbte 


ot. 


• 


, hedae 


; Job 1:10. 


X Isa. 5 


:5 


y 


ch. 1:4. 


^ 


Lev. 26 


31-44. 


tHeb. 


shut 


up. 


a Psa 


74:4, etc. 



12-17. God attaches supreme value to the holiness of 
his people, and he regards no infliction of suflering upon 
churches or individuals as too great which has the effect 
of purifying them from sin, and making them abound in 
the fruits of righteousness. 

18. In all our sorrows it is both our duty and our priv- 
ilege to acknowledge our ill desert, and justify God's deal- 
ings with us before our fellow-men. 

21, 22. Wicked men, instead of exulting over the humil- 
iation which God brings upon his people for their sins, 
ought to see in it the manifestation of his infinite holiness, 
which makes their own destruction inevita.ble. 1 Pet. 
4:17,18. 

CHAPTER II. 

3. Hath draum back hi.'i right liand from before the enemy; 
refused to use it against them, and thus allowed them to 
prevail. 

6. Of a garden ; which is only temporary, and is taken 
away when the fruit is gathered. Isa. 1 : 8. 

7. As m the day of a solemn fea.^t ; the number and tumul- 
tuous shouting of the enemy is compared to that of the 
Israelites assembled at Jerusalem to celebrate their sol- 
emn feasts. 

903 



Tlie. miseries of 



LAMENTATIONS III. 



Jerusalem lewailtd. 



8 The Lord liatli purposed to destroy the wall 
of tiie daughter of Ziou: lie hatli stretched out a 
line,''' lie hath not willidrawnhii hand from destroy- 
ing : ' therefore he made the rampart and the wall 
to lament; they languislied together. 

9 Her gates are sunk into the ground ; he hath 
destroyed and broken her bars:'' her king and 
lier princes are among the Gentiles:'^ the law is 
no more; her prophets also find no vision from 
tiie Lord. 

10 The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon 
the ground, and keep silence : '' they have cast up 
dust upon their heads; they have girded them- 
selves with sackcloth : the virgins of Jerusalem 
liang down tlicir heads to the ground. 

11 Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are 
troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth, for 
the destruction of tlic daugliter of my people ; be- 
cause the children and the sucklings swoon* in the 
streets of the city. 

12 They say to tlieir mothers, Wjicre is corn 
and wine? when they swooned as tlie wounded in 
the streets of the city, when their soul was poured 
out into their mothers' bosom. 

1.3 What thing shall I take to witness for thee? 
what thing shall I liken to tliee, O daughter of 
Jerusalem? what shall I equal to thee, that I may 
comfort thee, virgin daugliter of Zion? for thy 
breach is great like the sea: who can heal thee? 

14 Thy prophets have seen vain and foolish 
things for tliee:" and they have not discovered 
thine iniquity,'' to turn away thy captivity; but 
have seen for thee false burdens and causes of ban- 
ishment. 

15 All that pass by' clap thnr hands at thee; 
they hiss and wag their head at the daugliter of Je- 
rusalem, saybur;. Is this tiie city that nun call The 
perfection of beauty. The joy of the whole earth? 

16 All thine enemies have opened their mouth 
against thee :^ they hiss and gnash the teeth : they 



» 2 Kings 21: 13, M. * Heb. sion/tou'inff up. bjcr. 51:30. c Deut. 28:30; 
2 Kings 21:1.1; 25:7. i Ua. i-.-iO. \ Or, faint. « Jer. 27:14, 15. ' I»a. 
58:1; Jer. 23:22. 1 Heb. by llie way. g I'sa. 35:21. I> Lev. 26:10, etc.; 



8. Stretched out a line; measured out Jerusalem for de- 
struction. 2 Kings 21:13; Isa. 34:11. 

11. My liver is poured; that is, my gall; the effect of 
excessive grief. Job 1G:13. 

13. Wliat iking — witiic.i.i for thee ; what example can I 
brint; tliat sliall meet thy case, and thus bo a source of 
consolation to thee ? 

14. Not discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy captivity; 
not declared to thee faithfully thine iniquity, that so, by 
bringing thee to repentance, they might prevent thy cap- 
tivity. False burdens and causes of banishment ; pretended 
communications from God, that flattered men in sin by 
lying words, and so became causes of banishment. But 
others render, " false burdens and seductions," that is, 
seducing prophecies. 

22. lta.it called — my terrors round al>out ; liast called to- 
gether terrors against mo on every side, as men are called 
togetlier in a solemn feast 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 
1-10. None can know tho power of God's anger. The 
nation that presumes to provoke liim by persisting in 
tiaiiRgrcssion will find th:it ho is able to visit it with 
calamity upon calamity, till its resources are utterly ex- 
hausted, and it sinks in hopeless misery and ruin. 

11. As good men are the first to lift up their warning 
904 



say, Wc have swallowed /ier up : certainly ^^.'jj"'- 
this is the day that we looked for; we '•'*<• 
have found, we have seen it. 

17 The LoHU hath done that which he had de- 
vised ;'' he hath fulfilled his word that he had com- 
manded in the days of old : he hath thrown down, 
and hath not pitied: and he hath cau.sed</;(7i« ene- 
my to rejoice over thee,' he hath set up the horn 
of thine adversaries. 

18 Tlieir heart cried unto the Lord, wall of 
the daughter of Zion, let tears run down like a 
river day and night :J give thyself no rest; let 
not the apple of thine eye cease. 

19 Arise, cry out in the night: in the beginning 
of the watches pour out thy heart like water be- 
fore the face of the Lord :'' lift up thy hands tow- 
ard him for the life of thy young children, that 
faint for hunger in the top of every street.' 

20 1i Ik'hold, O Lord, andconsider to whom thou 
hast done this. Shall the women eat their fruit," 
and children of a span long?^ shall the priest and 
the prophiit be slain in the sanctuary of the Lord? 

21 The young and the old lie on the ground in 
the streets:" my virgins and my young men are 
fallen by tho sword ; thou hast slain t/mn in the 
day of thine anger ; thouhast killed, a7Jt/ not pitied. 

22 Thou hast c;illed as in a solemn day my ter- 
rors roimd about," so that in the day of the Lord's 
anger none escaped nor remained : those that I 
have swaddled and brought up hath mine enemy 
consumed." 

CHAPTER III. 

1 The faithful bewail their calamities. 22 By the mercies of God they 
nourish their hope. 37 They acknowledge God's justice. 55 They 
pr;iv for dL'Iiver:ince. 6-1 and ven«;eance on their enemies. 



1 ,}J\f tilt; man that hath seen affliction by the 
A rod of his wrath. 

2 He hath led me, and brought me into darkness, 
but not into light.'' 



Dcut. 2S:15, etc.; Jer. 18:11 
«2:S. 1 Ezck. 5:10, 10. "> 
t/ieir hands, n 2 Chr. 30: 17 



Mic. 2:3. il'«a. 89:42. J Jer. 14:17. » Pra. 

Deut. 2S:S3; Jer. 19:9. 1 Or, swadiltxl u-itk 

oJcr.6:23. pHos. 9:12,13. <lAmo«5:20. 



voice against the sins which destroy men's bodies and souls, 
so are they the first to mourn over the misery whicli men 
bring upon themselves by refusing to listen to reproof: 
thej' who have been most hated and persecuted for their 
faithful reproofs, often shed most tears over tho calami- 
ties which these reproofs were intended to avert. 

12. It is a universal law of God's providential govern- 
ment that none sin for themselves alone: they involve 
those who arc connected with tbeni in tho consequences 
of their transgressions. Especially does this law hold 
good in the relation of parents to cliildren. Exod. 20:5. 

14. The worst enemies of both nations and individuals 
are " false prophets." who flatter sinners with the hope of 
impunity in sin, instead of faithfully warning them of its 
guilt and ruin. 

15-19. Good men mourn over the calamities which be- 
f;dl God's people, and pour out their hearts in pra^-cr for 
their removal : Init wicked men exult over them, and make 
them the occasion of blaspheming God's name. My this 
test the friends and the eiieiiiies of (!od may be known. 

CH.VPTHR III. 

Tho subject of this ehajiter is the prophet's own afllic- 
tions in connection with his prophetical office, and the 
calamities which befell his country. 



Jeremiah mouriiclh 



LAMENTATIONS III. 



A.yy-im. 3 Surcly against me is he turned; he 
' •■>fi."' turneth his band against me all the day. 

4 3Iy flesh and ray skin hath he made old; " he 
hatli broken my bones." 

5 lie hath builded against me, and compassed 
mc with gall and travail. 

He hath set me in dark places, as they that he 
dead of old." 

7 He hath hedged me about, that I cannot get 
out:' he hath made my chain heavy. 

S Also when I cry and shout, he shuttcth out 
my prayer." 

i) lie hath inclosed my ways with hewn stone ; 
he liath made my paths crooked. 

10 He was unto me as a bear lying in wait, aiid 
as a lion iu secret places.' 

11 lie hath turned aside my ways and pulled me 
in pieces:" he hatli made me desolate. 

12 He hath bent his bow, and set me as a mark 
for tlie arrow.'' 

13 He hath caused the arrows* of his quiver to 
enter into my reins. 

1-1 I was a derision to all my people ; and tlieir 
song all tlie day.' 

15 He liath filled me with bitteruess,^ he hath 
made me drunken with wormwood. 

16 He hath also broken my teeth with gravel- 
stones,' he hath covered me with* ashes. 

17 And thou hast removed my soul far off from 
peace: I forgat prosperity.'* 

18 And I said, My strength and my hope is per- 
ished from the Lord:" 

1-1 Remembering" mine affliction and my misery, 
the wormwood and the gall.' 

20 My soul hatli them still in remembrance, and 
is humbled' in me. 

21 This I recall to my mind,* therefore have I 
hope."" 

22 It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not 
consumed," because his compassions fail not." 

23 They are new every morning: great is thy 
faithfulness. 

24 The Lord is my jiortion,'' saith my soul ; 
therefore will I hope in him.'' 

25 The Lord is good unto them that wait for 
hira,'' to the soul that seeketh him. 

26 It is good that a man should both hope and 
quietly wait for the salvation of tlie Lord. 

27 It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in 
his youth.' 



» J -b 1C;9, etc. b Psa. .■)] :8i .Ter. 50: 17. c Psa. \Vi:Z. d Hos. 2:C. ' Job 
30:-2(J. (Hos. 5:14; l3;T:ti. eHo3.6:l. hji.b7:'«l, • Heb. sons, i Psi. 
09:12. t Heb. iiltertwsSM. iProv.2U.17. I YLeh. rolled me in the. S Heb. 
good : Job 7:7. t Psa. .ii .^n, j Qr. Remember. I Jer. il: 15. 1 Heb. bowed. 
' Heb- make to return to my luart. ■» Psa. 77:5, eic. n Ezra 9:S, 9; Neh. 
9:31. o Mai. 3:0. p Psa. 73:20. q Psa. 13U:7. r Isa. 30:1S; Mic. 7:7. 



4. Hath broken my bones; crushed and overwhelmed my 
spirit with affliction. Compare Isa. 38:13. 

5. Bmlded against me; builded ramparts against me as 
against a liesieged city. 

8. SImtteth out my prayer; delays answering it, as if he 
had refused to hear it. 

9. Inclosed mif ways with hewn stone; imjjrisoned me 
within walls of hewn stone ; that is, shut up every way of 
escape. Made my paths crooked; led me into perplexity 
and difficulty. 

11. Turned aside my ways; see note on verse 9. 



over his ctlamities. 

28 He sitteth alone and keopeth silence,' because 
he hath borne it upon him. 

29 He putf eth his mouth in the dust ; if so be 
there may be hope. 

30 Hegivetli /;« cheek to him that smiteth him:" 
he is filled full with reproach. 

31 For the Lord will not cast off for ever :^' 

32 But though he cause grief, yet will lie have 
compassion according to the multitude of his mer- 
cies."^ 

33 For he doth not afflict willingly,* nor grieve 
the cliildren of men." 

34 To crush under his feet all the prisoners of 
the earth, 

35 To turn aside the right of a man before the 
face of the Most Higli,' 

36 To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord ap- 
provoth not.^ 

37 1 Who is he tliat saith, and it cometh to pass, 
u-hen the Lord commandeth it not? 

38 Out of the mouth of the Most High proceed- 
eth not evil and good?^' 

39 Wherefore doth a living man complain,' a 
man for the punislimcnt of his sins?"" 

40 Let us search and try our ways," and turn 
again to the Lord. 

41 Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto 
God in the heavens. 

42 We have transgressed and have rclielled:" 
thou hast not pardoned. 

43 Thou hast covered with anger, and persecuted 
us: thou hast slain, thou hast not pitied. '^ 

44 Tliou hast covered thyself with a cloud, that 
our ])rayer should not pass through. 

45 Thou hast made us as the offscouring and ref- 
use in the midst of tlie people. 

46 All our enemies have opened their mouths 
against us. 

47 Fear and a snare is come upon us," desolation 
and destruction.'' 

48 Mine eye runneth down with rivers of water 
for the destruction of the daughter of my people. 

49 Mine eye trickleth down, and ceaseth not, 
without any intermission, 

50 Till the Lord look down, and behold from 
heaven.' 

51 Mine eye affecteth my heart,' because of* all 
the daughters of my city. 

52 Mine enemies chased me sore, like a bird, 
without cause. 



« JIatt. 11:29. ' Jer. 15:17. " Is.i. 511:0. v Psa. 91:14. w Psa 
f Heb. from his heurl. i Jer. 31. aU; Kzek. 33:11; Heb. 12:10. 
superior. 5 Or, set/A »iof ; Hab. 1 :13. y Ua. 45:7. I Ot, murmur. 
7:9. » Hag. 1:5, 7. 1> Dan. 9:5. c 2 Chr. 38:17. i Isa. 24:17. 
51:19. (Isa. 03:15. ^ Heb my soul. • Ur, more than. 



14. A derision; Jer. 20:7. 

19. Remembering ; rather, as the margin, " Remember 
thou." 

21. This; that the Lord's mercies fail not, Ter. 22, 23. 

27. Bear the yoke ; have trials laid upon him for his dis- 
cipline, and the purification of his corrupt nature. In his 
youth; this was the case with Jeremiah. Compare Jer. 
1:6-8. 

28-30. He sitteth — he is filled ; or, "that he should sit," 
etc. ; that is, it is good that he should bear the trials enu- 
merated in these verses. 

905 



An appeal unto God. 



LAMENTATIONS IV 



7, ion mounuth her sorrows. 



53 They have cut off my life in the dungeon, and 
cast a stone upon me." 

54 Waters flowed over my licad ;" then I said, I 
am cut off. 

55 IT I called upon thy name, Lord, out of the 
low dungeon." 

56 Thou hast heard my voice : hide not thine 
car at my breathing, at my cry. 

57 Thou drewcst near in the day that I called 
upon thee : thou .«aidst, Fear not.'' 

58 Lord, thou ha.st pleaded tlio causes of my 
soul;" thou hast redeemed my life. 

59 Loud, thou hast seen my wrong : judge thou 
my cause.'' 

60 Thou hast seen all their vengeance and all 
their imaginations against me.'' 

61 Thou hast heard their reproach, Lord, and 
all their imaginations against me; 

62 Tiic lips of tiiose that ro.sc up against me, and 
their device against me all tiie day. 

6.3 Beliold their sitting down, and their rising 
up ; I arn. their music. 

64 II Render unto them a recompense, IjORD, 
according to the work of tlieir hands. 

65 Give them sorrow* of heart, thy curse unto 
them. 

66 Persecute and destroy them in anger from 
under the heavens of the Loud. 



CHAPTER IV. 

1 Zion bew.ailoth her pitiful estate. l.T She confesseth her sins. 21 
Eiiom is threatened. 22 Zion is comforted. 

HOW is the gold l)ecomc dim! howK the most 
fine gold clianged! the stones of the sanc- 
tuary are poured out in the top of every street.'' 
2 Tlie precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine 
gold, how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers, 
the work of the hands of tiie potter!' 



»Dan.():l7. b Jonah 2::1, 4, 7. c Psa. l:ilJ: I . d |,a. 4:): 1,2. c Jer. 31 rWi. 
' Pm. 3-5;l, 2-1. S Jer. ll:l!l, 20. • Or, obstinacy; I«a. G:IO. h 2 Kings 
25:9,10. i 2 Tim. 2:20. f Or, Ma-co/tM. J Job aa:13-l6. k Deut. .12:24. 



53, 54. In the dungeon — I am cut off; Jcrpiiiiah probably 
refcrs to liis various inipri.soniiK!iit.s. Jer. 37:15, Iti; 38:6. 
Yet his language must be, in part at least, figurative. 

50. At my lircutliins; ; or, " for my cnlargemctit." 

G3. Their silting down, and their rising up; that is, their 
■whole demeanor towards mc, Psa. 139:2, which is that 
of mockery and derision. Mtisic; an object of derisive 
songs. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

l-.3fi. In times of great corruption and accompanying 
public calamity, they whom (Jod has set for the defence 
of the truth, are often exposed to ])erfieoiiti(m and re- 
proach; and when they receive no present fruit of their 
faithful labors, but only j)rotracted suffering, they are 
strongly temptofl to indulge in despondency and unavail- 
ing lamentations: but in such <lark times (Jod is accom- 
plishing his own wise and good ends through the minis- 
try of his woril, and his servants who "hope and quietly 
wait" for him, shall see his salvation. 

.17. (Jod'fl control over all human affairs is unhmitotl ; 
no counsel of men can be accomplished which is contrarj' 
to his high purposes. 

•10. U. In the deepest affliction it is good to remember 
tliat (Jod chastens us less than our iniquities deserve, and 
that we have occasion, not for coiiq)laint, but for ailoring 
gratitude. This view will lead to eiirnest self-examination 
and repentance, and thus to the restoration of Uod's favor. I 
906 



3 Even the sea-monsters* draw out the a. m 34i6. 
breast, they give suck to their young ones : -'•^■*° 
the daughter of my people is bicoine cruel, like the 
ostriches in tiie wilderness.^ 

4 Tiie tongue of the sucking child cleavcth to 
the roof of his mouth for liiirst: tlie young chil- 
dren ask bread, and no man breaketli it unto 
them." 

5 Tliey that did feed delicately are desolate in 
the streets : they that were brought up in scarlet 
emi)race dunghills.' 

6 For the punishment' of the iniquity of the 
daugliter of my fieople is greater tiian the pun- 
isliiuent of the sin of Sodom, that was over- 
thrown as in a moment.'" and no hands stayed on 
her. 

7 Her Nazarites were purer than snow, they 
were wliiter than milk, tlicy were more ruddy 
in body than rubies, their polishing was of sap- 
phire: 

8 Their visage is blacker than a coal ;^" they are 
not known in tlie streets : their .skin cleavcth to 
their bones;" it is withered, it is become like a 
stick. 

9 Thcij that be slain with the sword are better 
than th(7/ that he slain witli hunger : for tiiese pine 
away,' stricken through for ivant of the fruits of 
tlie iield. 

10 The hands of the ])itiful women have sodden 
their own children:'' they were their meat in the 
destruction of tlie daughter of my people.'' 

11 The Loiu) hath accom]ilisli(Mi his I'ury ; he 
hatii i)oured out his fierce anger,' and hath kindled 
a tire in Zion, and it hath devoured the founda- 
tions thereof.* 

12 Tlie kings of the earth, and all the inhab- 
itants of the world, would not have believed that 
the adversary and the enemy should have entered 
into the gates of Jerusalem. 



I Job 2I:«. : Or. iniquiltj; Ro 
bttukiuss. " ch. 5:1(1. o I'sa. 1 
2J: 5t>, 57 ; 2 Kings G: 2i, 2!>. r 



I.I. m Gtn. 19:25. » H. b. ilnrk-rr iknn 
I Ilcb. /oio out. Pl». 4!>:1S. 4 Deul. 



42-47. In our meditations and prayers, we should not 
separate the sufferings which come upon us and upon 
God's people, from the sins which have been the occasion 
of them, but should unite humble confession with our 
complaints and supplications for deliverance. 

48-51. Good men do not confine their prayers and com- 
plaints before God to their own personal trials and suffer- 
ings : with them the common welfare of their country, 
and especially of God's church, are objects of the deepest 
solicitude. 

5.')-57. In times of the deepest gloom, when earthly help- 
ers have failed us, God is present to hear and save, and 
we never call upcm him in vain. 

58-(i(;. All the injuries which God's servants receive for 
the truth's sake he regards as done to himself, and he will 
visit them with a heavy retribution. 

CIIAI'TKR IV. 

1. Ihir IS the gold lytromr dim ' how is tho glory of Jeru- 
salem, and the honor in which her people were once held, 
turned to shame. 

.3. hliccomccriut; hunger has driven her to cruel deeds. 
Ver. 10. 

7. Nn:nrilrs; persons specially consecrated or set apart. 
For the law of the Nazarites. see Num. (>: 1-21. They were 
in high honor with the people, and paid especial attention 
to purity of person. 



Zion confissdh her sins, 



LAMENTATIONS V. 



and appcale.th untn God. 



A.M.^34ifi. 13 1 For the sins of her prophets, and 
5S8 " the iniquities of her priests," that have 
shed the blood of the just in tlie midst of her,'' 

14 They iiave wandered as blind vien in the 
streets, they have polluted tiiemsclves with blood, ° 
so that men could not* touch their garments.'^ 

15 They cried unto them. Depart ye;^ it is un- 
clean; dej)art, depart, touch not: when they fled 
away and wandered, they said among tiie heathen, 
They shall no more sojourn there. 

10 The anger* of the Lord hath divided them ; 
ho will no more regard them : they respected not 
the persons of the priests, they favored not the 
elders. 

17 As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our vain 
help:" in our watching we have watched for a 
nation that could not save us. 

IS They hunt our steps, that we cannot go in 
our streets : our end is near, our days are fuUilled ; 
for our end is come.' 

19 Our persecutors are swifter than the eagles 
of the lieaven:"-' they pursued us u])on the moun- 
tains, they laid wait for us in the wilderness. 

20 Tlie breatli of our nostrils, the anointed of 
the Lord, was taken in their pits,'' of whom we 
said. Under his shadow we shall live among the 
heathen. 

21 IT Rejoice and be glad,' daughter of Edom, 
that dwellest in the land of Uz ; the cup also shall 
pass through unto thee:' thou shalt be drunken, 
and shalt make thyself naked. 

22 'i The punishment of thine iniquity^ is accom- 



" .Inr. 5:31 ; Ezek.a->:-i(i, 28; Zeph. 3:4. b Matt. a3;3I, 37. « Jer. ■J:34. 
' Or, in that they could not but. tt Num. 19:II». t Or, ye polluted, t Or, 
fare e Isa. 30:0, 7; 31:1, 3; Jer. 37:7, 8. t Ezek. 7:-.', 3, «. f Dout. 
25:49; Jer. 4:13. h Jer. 52:9. i Eccl. 11:9. j Obad. lU, 15. » Or, 



14. They have wandered ; the prophets and priests, with 
the people whom they had seduced into sin. With blood; 
the blood of the people of Jerusalem slaughtered by the 
enemy to avenge the righteous blood which they had 
shed. Compare Rev. 16:6. The city was so filled with 
this, that the living could not avoid polluting their gar- 
ments with it. 

15. They cried; all whom they met. Depart yc; that is, 
keep at a distance from us as unclean. Fled away and 
wandered; from their own land into captivity. Sojourn 
there; dwell in their own land. 

11). Divided; dispersed. Gen. 19:7. They respected tiot ; 
that is, the enemy. 

17. A nation; Egypt. Jer. 37:7. 

20. The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord; our 
king. He is called the breath of their nostrils because 
their life as a nation is bound up in his. Taken in tlieir 
pits; like a wild beast. Jer. 52:9. Under his shadow — 
among tlie heathen; there had been two previous captivi- 
ties, and many of the Jews were already dispersed among 
the heathen. So long as Zedekiah remained at peace with 
Nebuchadnezzar, they trusted to his influence to secure 
them from oppression. 

21. Rejoice and be glad ; that is, if thou wilt ; but thy joy 
shall be short. The cup; tlie cup of God's wrath. 

22. Is accomplished ; that is, shall soon be accomplished. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1, 2. They who honor God by obeying his commands, 
shall be exalted by him to true honor and strength; but 
all who despise him, and trample under foot his law, he 
will make weak and contemptible before their fellow-men. 
1 Sam. 2:30. 

5. The ease and frequency with which God's judgments 
reach the high and luxurious, reducing them to a condi- 



plished,'' daughter of Zion; he will no more 
carry thee away into captivity : he will visit thine 
iniquity, daughter of Edom;' he will discover' 
thy sins. 

CHAPTER V. 

A pitiful complaint of Zion in prayer unto GoJ. 

r)EMEMBER, Loud, what is come upon us: 
V consider, and behold our reproach."' 

2 Our inheritance is turned to strangers," our 
houses to aliens. 

3 We are orphans and fatherless, our mothers 
are as widows. 

4 We have drunken our water for money; our 
wood is sold' unto us. 

5 Our necks are under persecution:" we labor, 
and have no rest." 

6 We have given the hand /o the Egyyitians, a/irf 
to the Assyrians, to be satisfied witli bread. 

7 Our fathers have sinned, and are not; and we 
have borne their iniquities. 

8 Servants have ruled over us:'' there is none 
that doth deliver us out of their hand. 

9 We gat aur bread with the peril of our lives, 
because of the sword of the wilderness. 

10 Our skin was black like an oven, because of 
the terrible* famine. 

11 They ravished tlie women in Zion, and the 
maids in the cities of Judah.'' 

12 Princes are hanged up by their hand: the 
faces of elders were not honored. 



Thine iiiiqu 


ty. k Isa. 


40:2. 


1 Psa. 137:7. 1 Or, carry thee captive 


for. m Psa. 


y9:.5n, 51. 


Psa. 


79:1, etc. ^ Heb. Cometh for price. "Or, 


On our necks 


are we ferse 


nted. 


oNeh. !.>::36,:J7. pNeh. 5:15. 1 Or, terrors. 


or storms of. 


qZech. 14: 


-■ 





tion of extreme want and wretchedness, ought to be a 
warning to all parents against the common error of bring- 
ing up children in habits of luxury and self-indulgence. 
Such haliits not only tempt to sin in many ways, but dis- 
qualify them for the endurance of those hardships which, 
amid the many vicissitudes of life, will very probably fall 
to their lot. 

10. The unnatural cruelty to which the horrors of fam- 
ine so often impelled Jewish mothers, was a striking ful- 
filment of God's prophetic denunciations by Moses, Lev. 
26:29; Dent. 28:53-57; at the same time it showed the 
weakness of mere natural affection to resist the pressure 
of extreme suffering. 

21, 22. God chastises his own people for their profit, 
not for their destruction ; the calamities that come upon 
them will be in due time overpast; but the enemies of 
Zion, who desire her destruction, and rejoice in her mis- 
fortunes, shall fall to rise no more. 

CHAPTER V. 

6. Given the hand; yielded up ourselves. Assyrians; 
here used for the Chaldeans, of whose empire Assyria 
was now a part. The Jews were at this time partly in 
Egypt, and partly under the Chaldeans. Jer. 44:1. 

7. Our fathers — borne their iniquities ; a common proverb 
among the Jews, Jer. 31:29; Ezek. 18:2; here used of 
the children who had imitated the sins of their fathers. 
Compare Exod. 20:5. 

INSTRUCTION. 
In the darkest days of adversity, when all around us is 
gloom and desolation, we ought still to maintain our con- 
fidence in God, and to seek his presence and salvation by 
humble confession and supplication, united with sincere 
907 



Zion's sorrowful 



LAMENTATIONS V. 



appeal unto God. 



13 Tliey took the 3'oung men to grind, and the 
cliildreu fell under the wood. 

14 Tlio elders liave ceased from the gate, the 
young men from their music. 

15 Tlic joy of our lieart is ceased ; our dance is 
turned into mourning. 

l(j The crown is fallen yVom our head:* ■woe 
unto us, that we have sinned ! 

17 For this our heart is faint;" for these things 
our eyes are dim. 

•Heb. of our head is fallen. » Mic. 6:13. t>Hab.M2. 1 Heh. for len^'l/i 



repentance and obedience. If we do this, wo may rest 
assured that our present sorrows, and those of God's 
people, will end in joy and gladness, even as God, at the 
appointed time, turned again the captivity of the Jews 
and restored them to their own land. 



18 Bec<iuscofthemountainofZion,whic]i a. m.jjic. 
is desolate, the foxes walk upon it. 56s°'°" 

19 Tiiou,0 JjuiiD, remaiucst forever ; tliy throne 
from generation to generation.'' 

20 Wherefore dost tliou forget us for ever, and 
forsake us so long time?' 

21 Turn thou us unto tliee, Loud, and we shall 
be turned;" renew our days as of old.'' 

22 But tliou hast utterly rejected us;* thou art 
very wroth against us. 



of days 



• Psa. 80:3, etc. d Hab. 3:2. 1 Or, For will thou ulttrly rtjecl i 



GENERAL INSTRUCTION. 
The darkest eras in the history of both churches and 
individuals, often prove to be the seed-time of a glorious 
future harvest of holiness and prosperity. 



908 



THE BOOK 

OF 

THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 



EzEKiEL was especially the prophet of the captivity. Daniel, his contemporary, received in Baliylon 
glorious revelations respecting the future history of his people and of the kingdom of God in the world ; 
but he was a statesman, and exercised the prophetical oflBce, like David, only in an incidental way. Ezekiel, 
on the other hand, was expressly called and consecrated, like his predecessors Isaiah and Jeremiah, to the 
work of delivering to the people God's messages, and warning them from him. 

Of the particulars of his personal history we know almost nothing, except that he was the son of Buzi, 
and of priestly descent ; and that he belonged to a company of Jewish captives who had been located on 
the river of Ghebar, chap. 1 : 1-3. He was called to the prophetic office in the fifth year of Zedekiah's reign — 
see notes to chap. 1 : 1 — and consequently exercised it for some years along with Jeremiah. Called to 
prophesy to " a rebellious house," " impudent and hardhearted," he was endowed by God with a bold and 
unliinching spirit, and a burning zeal for Jehovah's glory, which carried him vrithout wavering through all 
the opposition and contumely to which his work exposed him. His style is at once recognized by every 
reader as peculiar to himself It is vehement and copious, abounds in the enumeration of particulars, and 
is distinguished for its method of returning again and again to the inculcation of the same great truth. 
In common with the other later prophets, he abounds in allegories and symbols. A few words respecting 
the nature of these, and the principles upon which they are to be interpreted, are here subjoined. 

An allegory is a narrative of a past, or a prophecy of a coming event, expressed in figurative language. 
Thus, in chap. 17:1-10, the two great eagles are Nebuchadnezzar and Pharaoh; the highest branch of 
the cedar is Jehoiachin ; the cropping off and carrying away of this branch, is his removal by Nebuchad- 
nezzar to Babylon, etc. Here we have an allegorical description of a jiast event. Again, in chap. 24 :11, 
under the figure of heating a brazen vessel, for the purpose of burning out its filth, we have a prediction 
of the romwn- judgments of God upon Jerusalem for her purification. 

A symbol is an action, or a material object, intended to represent some great truth in a vivid and 
striking way. Prophetic symbols are of two kinds : 

First, actual, where the prophet himself performs some act before the eyes of his countrymen, as in 
chap. 37 : if), 17, where he joins together two sticks to represent the reunion of the two kingdoms of Judah 
and Israel. 

Secondly, seen only in vision, like the appearance of the cherubim in the first and tenth chapters ; the 
prophesj'ing to dry bones, chap. 37 : 1-10 ; the measuring of the new Jerusalem with its temple, chap. 40, etc. 

It may sometimes be difiScult to determine to which of these two classes symbols belong, as, for exam- 
ple, those in the fourth chapter ; but in either case their meaning, and the instructions which they furnish, 
are the same. 

In interpreting symbols, we are to be guided first of all by the writer's own explanations : where these 
are wanting, we must carefully study the nature of the figures used, and the connections in which they occur. 



^^^Sm CHAPTER I. 

1 The time of Ezekiel's prophecy at Chebar. 4 His vision of four living 
creatures, 1.5 of the four wheels, 20 and of the glory of Goil. 

OW it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in 
the fourth month, in the fifth day of the 



N 



' chajiler 3:15, aj. b Re 



CHAPTER I. 

1. Ill the thirtieth year; this was also "the fifth year of 



month, as I was among the captives' by the river 
of Chebar," that the heavens were opened,'' and I 
saw visions of God.'' 

2 lu the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth 
year of king Jchoiachin's captivity,'' 



8:3. da Kings 24: 12, 15, 



o:.). " ;; ivings -^t: i~, il». 

king Jehoiachin's captivity," verse 2, and consequently 
the fifth year of Zedekiah's reign, or five hundred and 
ty-five years before Christ. Reckoning back from 
909 



nine 



EzckiePs visio7i of 



EZEKIEL I, 



four living creatures. 



3 The word of the Lord came expressly unto 
Ezekiel* the priest, the son of Bii/.i, in the land of 
the Clialdeans by tiie river Chebar ; and the hand 
of the Lord was there upon him." 

4 t And I looked, and behold, a whirlwind came 
out of the nortii, a f^reat cloud, and a fire infold- 
ing* itself, and a brightness icas about it, and out 
of the midst thereof as the color of amber, out of 
the midst of the iire. 

5 Also out of the midst thereof ca?nc the likeness 
of four living creaUires.'' And this was their ap- 
pearance; they iiad the likeness of a man/ 

6 And every one iiad four faces, and evei'v one 
had four wings. 

7 And their feet were straight feet ;' and the sole 
of their feet u-as like the sole of a calfs foot: and 
they sparkled like tiie color of burnished brass. '' 

8 And they had the hands of a man under their 
wings, on tlieir four sides; and tliey four had their 
faces and their wings. 

9 Tiicir wings irwr joined one to another; they 
turned not when they went; they went every one 
straiglit forward. 

10 As for the likeness of their faces, tliey four 
had the face of a man, and the face of a lion, on 
the riglit side: and tiiey four Iiad the face of an 
ox on the left side; they four also had the face of 
an eagle. 

11 Thus were their faces: and their wings ivere 
stretched upward;^ two wings of every one icere 



• Heb. JMeitr/. » 1 Kings l.S:40. lUeb. ciitMns. b Rev. 4:0, etc. = ch. 
10:S, etc. 1 Heb. a siraiglil fool, d Dan. 1U;6; Rev. 1:15. i Or, divided 



this date thirty years, wc come to the eighteenth year of 
Josiah, when he repaired the temple and solemnly renewed 
the worship of God ; and also to the first year of Nabopo- 
lassar, the father of Nebuchadnezzar, who made Babylon 
independent of the Assyrian monarchy, and thus estab- 
lished a new era. It is uncertain from which of these 
events the prophet reckons, but the latter is the most 
proliable. Among the captives; whom Nebuchadnezzar had 
carried away with Jehoiachin. 2 Kings 24:10-11!. The 
river of Chehar ; generally s\ipposed to be the stream which 
now bears the name of Khabour, a river of Mesopotamia 
flowing into the Euiihrates from the north-east. But this 
is not al)Solutcly certain. The heavens were opened; to 
impart divine revelations. Compare Matt. 3:1G; Acts 
10:11; Bev. 4:1; 19:11. 

3. The liand of the Lord — upon him; the same as, "the 
Spirit of God came upon him, enabling him to prophesy." 
Compare 2 Kings ;i:15. 

4. Whirlwind — great cloud— fire; the symbols of God's 
presence, Exod. 19: lG-18 ; Job 38:1 ; P8ar50:3. Infolding 
itself; forming a continuous rolling mass. Amber; here a 
compound metiil of great brilliancy. 

5. Came; that is, appeared. The word is supplied by 
the translators. They had the likeness of a man ; their gen- 
eral form was that of a man with four faces. 

7. Like the sole of a calf s foot ; rounded on every side 
alike, so that no one part was more front than another, 
and they could move in every direction without turning. 
Compare verses 9, 12, 17. Burnished brass; compare Rev. 
1:15. 

8. The liands of a man — on their four sides; each had four 
hands, one under cacli of liis four wings. 

3. Joined one to another; tlieir position was four-square, 
each having one wing opposite to the wing of his fellow 
on two sides ; these two opjiosite wings wore stretched 
forth 80 as to meet each other. Tliei) turned not u-hen 
they went; they went every one straight foricard ; they had 
each four fronts, and the figure which tliey formed had 
910 



joined one to another, and two covered a. si. 3409. 

■,.,,. ^ U. C. about 

their bodies.' w.v 

12 And they went every one straight forward: 
whither the spirit was to go, they went; and they 
turned not when they went. 

13 As for the likeness of the living creatures, 
their appearance was like burning coals of fire, and 
like the aiipearance of lamps: it went up and 
down among the living creatures;'' and the fire 
was bright, and out of the iire went forth light- 
ning. 

14 And the living creatures ran and returned as 
the appearance of a flash of lightning.^ 

15 ^ Now as I beheld the living crcatnres, be- 
hold one wheel upon the earth by the living crea- 
tures, with liis four faces. 

If) The appearance of the wheels and their work 
iras like unto the color of a beryl: and they four 
had one likeness: and their appearance and their 
work was as it were a wheel in the middle of a 
wheel. 

17 When they went, they went upon their four 
sides: and they turned not when they went. 

18 As for their rings, they were so high that 
they were dreadful ;'' and tlieir rings' were full of 
eyes round about them four.' 

19 And when the living creatures went, the 
wheels went by them: and when the living crea- 
tures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels 
were lifted up. 



117:15: Zecll. ■I;1U. h Isa 



also four fronts, so that they could move alike in every 
direction without turning. This denotes their absolute 
readiness to execute the divine will, whithersoever it 
required them to go. 

10. They four had the face of a man — the face of an eagle; 
by a change of punctuation this passage will be made 
clearer, thus: "Tluy four had the face of a man; and the 
face of a lion on the right side : and they four had the face 
of an ox," etc. All four had the face of a man in fi-ont, 
that is, on the south, since the vision came from the north ; 
the face of an eagle in the rear ; the face of a lion on the 
right side, and of ;in ox on the left. The four faces, cor- 
responding to the four principal divisions of living crea- 
tures among the Hebrews, seem to represent the fulness 
of their emlowmonls. 

11. Covered their bodies; a token of reverence. 

12. Whither the spirit teas to go, they went ; one spirit ani- 
mated both the living creatures and the wheels, so that 
they all moved together. 

14. Ran and returned; that is, moved all together with 
the wheels and firmament above them. As the appearance — 
lightning; in respect to both brightness and velocity. 

15. By the living creatures; that is, by each of the four. 
With his fimr faces ; see note on verse 10. 

Ki. A wheel in the middle of a wheel ; a second wheel at 
right angles with the first Thus the four half circles 
made four faces or sides. 

17. Went upon their four sides ; went in Uic direction of 
any one of their four sides, whithersoever the spirit 
directed them. Turned not ; the prophet docs not mean 
that they did not revolve, but that having four sides, they 
moved every way without the necessity of turning about 
to change their course. 

IS. Rings ; rims, felloes. Full of eyes ; denoting intelli- 
gence. The wheels were pervaded by the spirit of the 
living creatures, verse 20. The meaning is, that all the 
movements of divine IVovidcnco are pervaded and direct- 
ed by infinite intelligence. 



The glory of the. Lord. 



EZEKIEL II. 



The prop/wl'.i commission. 



A.M. 3109. 20 Wliitbcrsoever the spirit was to go, 

B. C. about ,, i il -il ,7 ■ • -ij a 1 

595. they went, tlutherM'flw</i«/-spirit togo , aim 
the wheels were lifted up over against them: for 
the spirit of the living creature' was in the wheels. 

21 When those went, these went; and when 
tho.se stood, these stood; and when those were 
lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted 
u)) over against them : for the spirit of the living 
creature" was in the wheels. 

22 And the likeness of the firmament upon the 
heads of tiie living creature was as the color of 
the terrible crystal," stretched forth over their 
heads above. 

23 And under the firmament ivez-e their wings 
straigiit, the one toward the other : every one had 
two, whicli covered on this side, and every one 
had two, which covered on that side, their bodies. 

2-t And when they went, I heard the noise of 
their wings, like the noise of great waters,"^ as the 
voice of the Almighty,'' the voice of speech, as the 
noise of a host:'' when they stood, they let down 
their wings. 

25 And there was a voice from the firmament 
that irns over their heads, when they stood, a?id 
had let down their wings. 

26 "i And above the firmament that ivas over 
their heads was the likeness of a throne,' as the 
appearance of a sapphire stone :^ and upon the 
likeness of the throne was the likeness as the ap- 
pearance of a man above upon it.'' 

27 And I saw as the color of amber, as the ap- 
pearance of fire round about within it: from the 
appearance of his loins even upward, and from the 
appearance of his loins even downward, 1 saw as 
it were the appearance of fire, and it had bi'ight- 
ness round about. 

28 As the appearance of the bow that is in the 
cloud in the day of rain,' so was the appearance of 
the brightness round about. This was the appear- 
ance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord.^ 



»Ve 


1 


2; 1 C 


nr 


14 ••■!•.> 


•Or. 


lifr.. 


b Job 37: 2- 




ch. 43:^2; Dnn 


10 


li; 


Rev. 1 


!.■> 


d Job3 


-■.■i-s 


Psi. ^9:3. 4 


6ti::33. e 


>Ki 


ncs7;li (Psa. 


4.') 


i>; 


Dm. 7 


li- 


Mm 


9i 


31; Heb. S:l 


; \>. 


2. S Exod. 


•24:10. hRev. 3:-2l 


; ^ 


:'2, 


3. i G 


en 


9; 13; 


He 


V. 4:.' 


; 10:1. 


1 Kx 


nd. 1B:7. 10 


•24 


111.17; IKing 


t^: 


0, 


11. t 


ch 


3:-i:i; 


Ua 


n. »: 


7; Acts 


9:4; 


Rev. 1:17, 


Ij. 


1 Dan. 10:11. 


m 


Cll. 



22. Living creature; here used collectively of the four. 
The terrible crystal; dazzling and amazing by its splendor. 

23. Straight; stretched out horizontally so as to touch 
each other, verse 9. 

24. Let down their wings; as ceasing to fly. 

26. Above the firmament — appearance of a man; compare 
Exod. 24:10. 

28. The bow; Rev. 4:3; 10:1. The glory of the Lord; 
the prophet saw in vision the Lord enthroned in glory 
upon the firmament above the cherubim. The cherubim 
with their wheels, moving every way like a flash of light- 
ning, seem to denote all the agencies by which God admin- 
isters his government over the world, which are abso- 
lutely at his command, and execute with unerring cer- 
tainty all his high purposes. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-3. God was with his ancient people in captivity, and 
revealed himself to them there for their warning, instruc- 
tion, and consolation ; so he is with his churches now in 
the darkest days of adversity and sorrow, preparing them, 
if they will listen to his voice, for returning prosperity 
and gladness. 

4-28. All the powers of heaven and earth are from God 
as their author, and at his absolute disposal as their gov- 



And when I saw if, I fell upon my face,'' and I 
heard a voice of one that spake. 



CHAPTER II. 



of his heavy 



1 Ezekiel's cominission. 6 His instruction. 
propliecy. 

AND he said unto me. Son of man, stand upon 
thy feet,' and I will speak unto thee. 

2 And the spirit entered into me when he spake 
unto me, and set me upon my feet,™ that I heard 
him that spake unto me. 

3 And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thee 
to the children of Israel, to a rebellious nation + 
that hath rebelled against me: they and their fa- 
thers have transgressed against me," even unto this 
very day. 

4 For they are impudent children* and stifi"-heart- 
ed. I do send thee unto them;" and thou shalt 
say unto them. Thus saith the Lord God. 

5 And they, whether they. will hear, or whether 
they will forbear,^ (for thev are a rebellious 
house,) yet shall know that there hatli been a 
prophet among them.'' 

6 % And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them,"" 
neither be afraid of their words, though briers^ 
and thorns be with thee,^ and thou dost dwell 
among scorpions: be not afraid of their words, 
nor be dismayed at their looks,' though they be a 
rebellious house. 

7 And thou siialt speak my words unto them, 
whether they will hear, or whether they will for- 
bear: for they are most rebellious.' 

8 But thou, son of man, hear what I say unto 
thee; Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious 
house:" open thy mouth, and eat that I give thee.'' 

9 ll And when I looked, behold, a hand ivas sent 
unto me;'" and lo, a roll of a book was therein;^ 

10 And he spread it before me; and it icas writ- 
ten within and without: and there icas written 
therein lamentations, and mourning, and woe. 



3 


■>4 


t Heb. liar 


„„,, 


n ch. 


■20:18-30; Deut 


9 


fl7 


J 


er. 3: 


2S; 


Acts 7:51. 


I 


He 


3. hard of fa 


rt. 


iMatt. 


10:16. 


P ch. 3 


11 


■27 




q ch. 


3a 


*). 


r Jer. 


1 


s, 


17; Luke 1-2 


4; Acts 4: '29, 31. 


Or, rthds 




•2 


Sam 


•23:6, 7 


; Isa. 


n 


IS 


Mic. 7:4. 


1 Pet 


3:14 


HHeb 


Ttbellio 




" 1 


^a. 


M:b 


\ 


Kev. 


10:9, 


10. 


"eh. 8:3. x 


ch. 3: 


1. 





















ernor, to do whatsoever he will : nothing can thwart or 
hinder the execution of his pui'iioses. Psa. 115:3; 135:C; 
Matt. 26:53. 

CHAPTER II. 

1. Infill speak unto thee; the prophet now receives his 
commission. 

9. A roll of a book; a book in the form of a roll, after the 
ancient custom. 

10. Spread it; by unrolling it. Within and without; that 
is, on both sides, to denote the fulness of its contents. 
Compare Rev. 5:1. Rolls were generally written only on 
the inner side. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3-5. God's servants must deliver his messages to the 
rebellious and stifl-hearted, as well as to the obedient; 
not omitting any part of them through fear of persecution, 
but holding themselves ever ready, after the example of 
their great Master, to suffer reproach and persecution for 
their fidelity to the truth. 

6. Wicked men show their enmity to God's truth by 

persecuting those who proclaim it : the faithful preacher 

must expect to find them briers and thorns in his side and 

scorpions in his path ; but if he puts his trust in God and 

911 



The roll and change 



EZEKIEL III. 



given to the prophet. 



CHAPTER III. 



1 Ezekicl eateth the roll. 4 ijod encouragpth Iiim. \') God showeth 
him the rule of prophecy. 22 GoJ shutteth and openeth the prophet's 
mouth. 

MOREOVER he said unto me, Son of man, eat 
that thou findest; cat this roll," and go 
speak unto the house of Israel. 

2 So I opened my mouth, and he caused mc to 
eat tiiat roll. 

3 And he said unto me, Hon of man, cause thy 
belly to cat, and fill thy bowels with this roll that 
I give thee. Then did I eat it :^ and it was in 
my mouth as honey I'or sweetness." 

4 IFAnd he said unto me. Son of man, go, get 
thee unto the house of Israel, and speak with my 
words unto them. 

5 For thou art not sent to a people of a strange 
speech and of a hard language,* hut to the house 
of Israel ; 

6 Not to many people of a strange speech and of 
a hard language," whose words thou canst not 
understand. Surely, had I sent thee to them, 
they would* have hearkened unto thec."^ 

7 But the house of Israel will not hearken unto 
thee; for they will not hearken unto me:" for 
all the house of Israel arc impudent and hard- 
hearted.' 

8 Behold, I have made thy face strong against 
their faces, and thy forehead strong against their 
foreheads. 

9 As an adamant harder than flint have I made 
thy forehead :'' fear them not, neither be dismayed 
at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.'' 

10 Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, all 
my words that I shall speak unto thee receive in 
thy heart, and hear with thine cars.** 

11 And go, get thee to them of the captivity, 
unto the children of tiiy people, and speak unto 
them, and tell them, Tlius saith the Lord God ; 
•whether they will hear, or whether they will for- 
bear. 

12 Then the spirit took me up,' and I heard be- 
hind mc a voice of a great rushing, saying, Blessed 
be the glory of the Loud frtmi his jjlacc. 

13 / heard also the noise of the wings of the liv- 
ing creatures that touched^ one another, and the 



»Ch ■J:», 9. kJer. 15:10. t P*a. 19:10; 119: 111.). • llA. tierp of lip and 
heavy of tongue, t Or, 1/ I had Sfnt thee to them^ would they not. i Matt. 
ll:-J:f; 12:41. » John 1S:2I). I Hcb. stiff of forehead, and hard of heart. 
t Iso. 50:7; Mic. 3:tj. $ 2 Tira. 2:3. !■ 2 Tim. 2:7. i ch. S:3; 1 Kings 



does his duty, ho will be delivered from all their evil 
devices. 

10. For those who persist in sin, God has no messages 
but those ol'evil. 1 Kind's 22:8; Psa. 11 :G; Lsa. 6:11. 

CHAPTER III. 

1. Eat this roll; this symbol denotes the inward willing 
reception of the prophetical messages committed to liim. 
Compare verso lo. 

3. A.^ honci/for sircclnc.'!.'! ; he received the divine reve- 
lations witli lioiy dcliglit, although their contents of " l.tm- 
cntations, and mourning, and woe " were bitter to him. 
Compjire Rev. 10:9, 10. 

5. Ufa strange speech — a hnril laniriinfre ; that is, speak- 
ing a foreign tongue unintoUigiblo to him. 

6. Tlieij would have hearkened ; compare Matt. 11:21-24. 
12. Took me up ; " lifted mo \\\t between the earth and 

the heaven," ana took me away to Tel-abib ; compare ver. 
912 



noise of the wheels over against them, and a. m. 34m. 
a noise 01 a great rushing. .wi. 

14 So the spirit lifted me up,J and took me 
away, and I went in bitterness,' in the hcat^ of my 
spirit; but the hand of the Loud was strong upon 
me.'' 

15 ^ Then I came to them of the captivitv at 
Tel-abil), that dwelt by the river of Chebar,"and 
1 sat where they sat, and remained there astonish- 
ed among them seven days.' 

1(3 And it came to pass at the end of seven days, 
that the word of the Loud came unto me, saying, 

17 Son of man, I have made thee a watchman 
unto the house of Israel:" therefore hear the word 
at my mouth, and give them warning from me. 

18 When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt 
surely die ; and thou givest him not warning, nor 
speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, 
to save his life ; the same wicked man shall die in 
his iniquity;" but his blood will I require at thy 
hand." 

19 Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not 
from his wickedness, nor from his wicket! way. he 
shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered 
thy soul." 

20 Again, When a righteous man doth turn from 
his righteousness,* and commit iniquity, and I lay 
a stumbling-block before him,'' he shall die : be- 
cause thou hast not given him warning, he shall 
die in his sin, and his rightCDUsness which lie hath 
done shall not be remembered : "■ but his blood will 
I require at thy hand. 

21 Nevertheless, if thou warn the righteous man, 
that the righteous sin not, and he doth not sin. he 
shall surely live, because he is warned ;" also thou 
hast delivered thy soul. 

22 "[ And the hand of the Loud was there upon 
me; and he said unto me, Arise, go forth into the 
plain, and I will there talk with thee. 

23 Then I arose, and went forth into the jdaiu: 
ami behold, the glory of the Loud stood there, as 
the glory wliich I saw by the river of Chcbar : and 
I fell on my face. 

24 Then the spirit entered into me, and set me 
upon my feet, and spake with me, and said unto 
me, Go, shut thyself within thy bouse. 



It':12; 


2K 


ir' •■' 


Hi; Acts 


.s:W 


t Heb 


ii.wd 




vr 


r. 12. 1 


Hob. 


bitter. 


1 Hcb 


hot 




k 2Ki 


^CS.I 


15. 1 Ps, 


I. 137: 




m 1 


sa. 52: S 


50:10; Jor. 


10:7; 


deb. 


13:17 


n John 


H:21, 


24. och 


33:6. 


P 


Ira 


40:4,5 


AcU 


20:26. 


•Hob. 


Tighteousnesies. q 


I'et. 


2:r>-8. r 


di. I«: 


J4 


33:12,13. 


•I'm. 


10:11. 



14 and chap. 8:3. This, however, was not bodily, but in 
prophetic vision ; for he afterwards went thither by his 
own proper act. as is plain from verses 11, 15. Tlie vision 
indicated a duly which he immediately performed. A 
voice of a great rushing; the sound of the cherubim and 
wheels in motion, for " whithersoever the spirit was to 
go, they went." Chap. 1 : 20. 

13. The noise of the irings; compare chap. 10 :.''>. 

14. I u-enl in hitterncss. 111 the heat of mij spirit; full of 
grief and holy anger. The spirit oi' projihccy brought 
his feelings towards his countrymen into harmony with 
those of tiod. 

l."). Astonished; in view of the solemn office committed 
to me. 

16. At the end of seven ilaij.i; Ezekicl, like Saul of Tarsus, 
was left, for a jierioil after his call, to his own meditations. 

20. A stnmhling-lilock ; any occasion of sin which comes 
to men through Uod's providence for their trial. 



The siege of Jerusalem 



EZEKIEL IV. 



portriiyc-d on a tili: 



shall put bands upon thee, and shall bind thee 
with them, and thou shalt not go out among them : 

26 And I will make thy tongue cleave to the 
roof of thy mouth, that thou shalt be dumb," and 
shalt not be to them a reprover:"'" for they arc a 
rebellious house. 

27 But wlien I speak with thee, I will open thy 
mouth, and thou shalt say unto them. Thus saith 
the Lord God ; He that heareth, let him hear ; and 
he that forbcareth, let him forbear : for they are 
a rebellious house. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1 Under the type of a siege is shown the time from the defection of Jero- 
boam to the captivity. 9 By the provision of the siege, is shown the 
iiardness of the famine. 

'"T^HOU also, son of man, take tlice a tile, aud 
_L lay it before thee, and portray upon it the 
city, even Jerusalem : 

2 And lay siege against it, and build a fort 
against it, and cast a mount against it;'' set the 
camp also against it, and set battering rams* 
against it round about. 

3 Moreover, take thou unto thee an iron pan," 
and set ii for a wall of iron between thee and the 
city: and set thy face against it, and it shall be 



Luke 1:20, 22. • lUh. vmn repToving. b Psa. 33:13, 14 : Amos 8:11, 

c Luke 19: -13, 41. t Or, r/ii>/ /coders,- oh. 21;a-2. X Or, a flat plate, Ol 

t d oh. 12:G, a. 5Beginning975; 1 Kingsl2:23; endingSsJ. e Num. 



25. r/iS!/ slmll put bands upon thee ; that is, thou shalt be 
bound at my command. This is probal:)ly to be under- 
stood figuratively of a divine restraint at certain times 
from the exercise of the prophetical office, as is explained 
in the following; verses. 

26, 27. Will make thy tongue cleave — when I speak; he is 
to keep silence, except when God's Spirit moves him to 
speak ; the perverseness of the people makes this reserve 
necessary. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
3. That we may be prepared to proclaim God's truth to 
others, we must first receive it with holy obedience and 
joy into our own hearts, and make it our daily food and 
strength. 

5. In the work of making known God's truth to our own 
neighbors and countrymen we enjoy many advantages 
above the foreign missionary, who goes to people of 
strange customs and a strange speech : these advantages 
ought to excite us to great zeal and diligence in the per- 
formance of this duty. 

6, 7. None are so hardhearted and desperately wicked 
as those who have enjoyed and abused great religious 
privileges. Matt. 11:20-24. 

8, 9. When God appoints his servants to any work, he 
gives them the strength and grace which they need for 
its performance. 

14. A burning zeal for the glory of God, united with 
" great heaviness " of heart in view of men's perverseness 
and rebellion, have been in all ages the marks of God's 
true servants. Exod. 32:19, 20, 31, 32; Psa. 119:136; Jer. 
9:1, 2; 20:9; John 2:17; Rom. 9:1-3. 

15. Silent meditation and prayer are among the best 
means of preparation for a great and difficult service. Acts 
9:8,9, 11, 15. 

17-21. God holds the preacher responsible for the faith- 
ful delivery of his messages : when this is done, it is both 
the preacher's duty and his privilege to leave the conse- 
quences with God. 

26. God' sometimes, in his displeasure, withdraws his 
admonitions from the perverse and incorrigible, and leaves 
them to their own ways. Isa. 1 :5. 
.58 



besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against it. This 
shall be a sign to the jiousc of Israel.'' 

4 Lie thou also upon thy left side, aud lay the 
iniquity of the house of Israel upon it: according 
to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon 
it thou shalt bear their iniquity. 

5 For I have laid upon thee the years of their 
iniquity, according to the number of the days, 
three hundred and ninety days:^ so shalt thou 
bear the iniquity of the house of Israel." 

6 -\nd wlien thou hast accomplished them, lie 
again on thy riglit side, and thou shalt bear the 
iniquity of the house of Judah forty days : I have 
appointed thee eacii day for a year.' 

7 Therefore -thou shalt set thy face toward the 
siege of Jerusalem, and thine arm shall be uncov- 
ered, and thou shalt prophesy against it. 

8 Aud behold, I will lay bands upon thee,'' and 
thou shalt not turn thee from one side to another,^ 
till thou hast ended the days of thy siege. 

9 "Ii Take thou also unto thee wheat, and barley, 
and beans, and lentiles, and millet, and fitches,' 
and put them in one vessel, and make thee bread 
thereof, according to the number of the days that 
thou shalt lie upon thy side ; three hundred and 
ninety days shalt thou eat thereof. 

10 And thy meat which thou shalt eat shall be by 



14:31. I Heh. a day for a i 
side to thy side. 'Or, spelt. 



1 day for a year. I ch. 3:25. H Hcb. thy 



CHAPTER IV. 

1. A tile; the large tiles of Babylon were commonly 
used for inscriptions and drawings. 

2. Lay siege against it; that is, portray a siege. The 
final siege of Jerusalem is here meant. Ezekiel began to 
prophesy in the fifth year of Zedekiah ; consequently six 
years before the last capture of the city by Nebuchadnez- 
zar. With the exception of his vision of the temple, 
chapters 40-48, the great body of his prophecies was de- 
Uvered during the intervening period. It is not till chap- 
ter 33:21 that he records his reception of the news that 
the city was smitten. 

3. For a wall of iron ; this seems to be a symbol of God's 
wrath arrayed against Jerusalem in the form of a siege. 
For the meaning of iron as a sjTnbol, see Dan. 2:40. 

4-6. Lie thou; the prophet himself now represents the 
people of Israel and Judah. The years of their iniquity — 
the number of the days; the meaning is, that each day rep- 
resents a year. Three hundred and ninety days— forty days ; 
the interpretation of these numbers is uncertain. Accord- 
ing to some, the forty days correspond to the forty years' 
wandering of the Israelites in the wilderness, and the sum 
of the two numbers, four hundred and thirty days, to the 
four hundred and thirty years of servitude in Egypt. 
Exod. 12:40; meaning that" God will repeat to his cove- 
nant people the chastisements inflicted upon their fathers. 
Others understand by the three hundred and ninety days, 
the three hundred and ninety years from the establish- 
ment of idolatry in Israel by Jeroboam to the destruction 
of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar ; and by the forty days, 
forty of the last years of the kingdom of Judah, when 
idolatry abounded in it. 

7. Uncovered; as ready for hostile action against Jeru- 
salem. Here, as in verses 1-3, the prophet acts as God's 
representative. 

8. Lay bands upon thee; to signify that Judah and Israel 
cannot esc^apc the coming judgments which the prophet 
thus represents. 

10, 11. By weight— by measure; a scanty allowance of 
food aud drink, dealt out by weight and measure, as in 
913 



The sore famine and 



EZEKIEL V. 



misery of the dlij. 



weii^lit, twenty shekels a day : from time to time 
shalt thou eat it. 

11 Thou slialt drink also water by measure, the 
sixth part of a hin: from time to time shalt thou 
drink. 

12 And tliou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and 
thou shalt bake it with dung that cometli out of 
man, in their sight. 

13 And the Loud said, Even thus shall the chil- 
dren of Israel cat their defiled bread among the 
Gentiles, whither 1 will drive them.'' 

14 Then said I, Ah Lord God! behold, my soul 
hath not been polluted:'' for from my youlli up 
even till now have 1 not eaten of that which dietli 
of itself, or is torn in pieces ;"= neither came there 
abominable flesh into my mouth.'' 

15 Then lie said unto me, Lo, I have given thee 
cow's dung for man's dung, and thou shalt prepare 
thy bread therewith. 

16 Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, be- 
hold, I will Ijreak the staft" of bread in Jerusalem :'' 
and they shall eat bread by weight, and with 
care ; and they shall drink water by measure, and 
with astonishment:' 

17 That they may want bread and water, and 
be astonished one with another, and consume 
away for their iniquity." 

CHAPTER V. 

1 Under the type of }iair, •'> is shown the judgment of Jerusalem for their 
rebellion, 12 by famine, sword, and dispersion. 

AND thou, son of man, take thee a sharp knife, 
take thee a barber's razor, and cause it lo 
pass upon thy head and upon thy beard : then take 
thee balances to weigh, and divide the hair. 

2 Thciu shalt burn with fire a third part in the 
niiilst of the city, when the days of the siege are 
fulfilled:'' and thou shalt take a third part, and 
smite about it with a knife : and a third part thou 
shalt scatter in the wind; and 1 will draw out a 
sword after them. 

3 Thou shalt also take thereof a few in number,' 
and bind them in thy skirts.* 

4 Tiien take of them again, and cast them into 
the midst of the lire, and burn them in the iire;-* 

for thereof shall a lire come forth into all the 
house of Lsrael. 



• Hos 


9:3. bAcUlO:14. t Exod. *!:31 ; Lev. 17:15. il Dcut. 14 


3; Isa. 


«.;:i. « 


ch. 5:1»: 14:13; Lev. 20:28; Psa. 105:16; Isa. 3:1. ' ch. 


12:19. 


( ch. -IX 


21; L«v. 20:39. li oh. 4:1, 8, 9. iJor.52:I0. * Hcb. will?,? 
k Judo 4. 1 ch. 16:47; 1 Cor. 5:1. "> Noh. 9:16, 17; Je 


jjer. 


41-.I1I. 


r. 5:3. 


" Lim. 


4:0; Dan. 9:12; Amos 3:2. o Lev. 26:29; Deut. 2S:Ga 


Lam. 



time of famine. A shekel was something more than lialf 
an ouoce ; a hin was about ten pints. 

12. Willi (litiig ; that is, (hinp; for fuel; indicating the 
extreme scarcity of fuel in tlie city. By using this unclean 
Bubstance for fuel, the broad itself would become defiled, 
that is, unclean, according to the distinctions of the Mosaic 
law. Compare verse It. 

15. Coii's (hinir; a common fuel in eastern countries. 

In reference to the symboliciil actions of this chapter, 
SCO the general ruriuuks at the beginning of the book. 
IXSTIUICTION. 

When nations and cities refuse to bo corrected by God's 
chastiBcments, he will innltiply his judginents ajiiiinst them 
until they are utterly destroyed. " No human power can 
avail to loose the l)andH whiih be l;iys upon the workers 
ofiniquitv. 

'.)U 



.5 t Thus saith the Lord God; This w ^-^'i^Z. 
Jerusalem: I have set it in the midst of the 
nations and countries (hat are round about her. 

G And she hath changed my judgments into 
wickedness more than the nations,'' and my stat- 
utes more than the countries that are round about 
her:' for they have refused my Judgments and my 
statutes, they have not walked iu them.'" 

7 Therefore thus saith the Lord GoD; Because 
ye multiplied more than the nations that are round 
alxuit you, and have not walked in my statutes, 
neither have kept my judginents, neither have 
done according to the judgments of the nations 
that aj-e round about you; 

8 Therefore thus saith the Lord God ; Behold, 
I, even I, am against thee, and will execute judg- 
ments iu tiio midst of thee in the sight of the na- 
tion--. 

9 And I will do in thee that which I have not 
done, and whereunto I will not do any more the 
like, because of all thine abominations." 

10 Therefore the fathers shall cat the sons ia 
the midst of thee," and the sous shall eat their fa- 
thers; and I will execute judgments in thee, and 
the whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all 
the winds.'' 

11 Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord God, 
surely, because thou hast defiled my sanctuary 
with all thy detestable things,'' and with all thine 
abouiiuations,'' therefore will I also diminish t/ite;' 
neither shall mine eye spare, neither will I have 
any pity.' 

12 'i A third part of thee shall die with the pes- 
tilence, and with famine shall they be consumed 
in the midst of thee:" and a third part shall fall 
by the sword round about thee; and I will scat- 
ter a third jiart into all the winds, and I will draw 
out a sword after thein.^' 

13 Thus shall mine anger be accomplished,"' and 
I will cause my fury to rest upon them,^ and I will 
be comforted:^' and they shall know tiiat 1 the 
Lord have spoken it in my zeal, when 1 have ac- 
complished my fury in them. 

11 Moreover I w ill make thee waste,'' and a re- 
proach among the nations that are round about 
thee, ill the sight of all tiiat jiass by. 

15 So it shall be a reproacii and a tauut, an iu- 



2:20; 4:10. P ch. 12:14; Dout. 23:64; Zoch. 2:0. q ch. 8:5, olo.j S Chr. 
30:14. r ch. 11:21 ; Jcr. 44:4. ■ Psi. 107:39. I L.\ni. 2:21. " vor. S; ch. 
6:12; Jer. 15:2; 21:9. v Jcr. 9:16. " ch. 6:12; 7:H; Lim. 4:11. « Ch. 
21:17. ych. 16:03; Isa. 1:24. «Neh.2:l7. 



CHAPTER V. 

2. Burn with fire — smite ahovt it — scalier in the xvind; the 
meaning of these symbols is explained in verse 12. 

3. Jiiiiil them lit Ihij skirts ; a sign of God's jircserving care. 

4. Tnkc of them tij^iiiii; take some of the hairs bound in 
thy skirt. The renuiant that is spared needs a uow puri- 
fication. See note on Isa. 0: i:t. 

fi. Changed VMJ jiidpmeiits into wickedness; or, " wickedly 
rebelled against my juilgments." 

7. Accordin!; to the jwlf;nicnti of the nations; tlicy had not 
adhered as 8lc;idfastlv to the worship of the true God, us 
the nations did to their idols. rom))arc Jcr. 2:11. 

13. Be comforted; by the manifestation of my justice 
towards tlieni. 

1.1. It ilinll he: that is. my dealing with thee shall make 



The judgment of Israel 



EZEKIEL VII. 



for tlm.r Idolalry. 



ii ".w."' structioii and an astonishment unto the 
nations that are round about thee," when I sliall 
execute judgments in thee in anger and in fury and 
in furious rebukes.'' I the Lord liave spolcen it. 

16 Wlien I shall send upon them the evil arrows 
of famine, wliieh sliall be for their destruction, and 
whieli I will send to destroy you:"^ and I will in- 
crease the famine upon you, and will break your 
staff of brea.d : 

17 So will I send upon you famine and evil 
beasts,'' and they shall bereave thee; and pesti- 
lence and blood shall pass through thee;" and I 
will bring the sword upon thee. I the Lord have 
spoken it. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 The judgment of Israel for Ihfir idolatry. 8 A remnant shall be 
blessed. 11 The faithful are exhorted to Lament their calamities. 

ND the word of the Lord came unto me, say- 



A 



2 Son of man, set thy face toward the mountains 
of Israel, and prophesy against them,'' 

3 And say. Ye mountains of Israel, hear the 
word of the Lord God f Thus saith the Lord God 
to tlie mountains and to the hills, to the rivers and 
to the valleys ; Behold, I, even I, will bring a sword 
upon you, and I will destroy your high places.'' 

■4 And your altars shall be desolate, and your 
images* shall be broken: and I will cast down 
your slain men before your idols. 

5 And I will lay'' the dead carcasses of the chil- 
dren of Israel before their idols ; and I will scat- 
ter your bones round about your altars.' 

(3 In all your dwelling-places the cities shall be 
laid waste, and the high places shall be desolate ; 
that your altars may be laid waste and made des- 
olate, and your idols may be broken and cease, 
and your images* may be cut down, and your 
works may be abolished. 

7 And the slain shall fall in the midst of you, 
and ye shall know that I am the Lord.j 

8 i Yet will I leave a remnant," that ye may 
have some, that shall escape the sword among the 



» Deut. 25:37; 1 Kings 9:7; Psa. 7'J:4; Jer. 24:9; Lam. 2 


i.-i-lT. b ch. 


2j;17; Nah. 1:2. c D«ut. 3-2:2:1. <■ Lev. 2U:22. « ch. 38:22. 


f ch. 20:40. 


c oh. 36:1; Mic. 6:1,2. h Lev. 26:30. • Heb. .lunijMjes. 


f Heb. give. 


1 1 Kings 13.2; 2 Kings 23:14, IS. 1 Heb. s«7t umges. i ve 


r. 13. k Isa 



thee a reproach, etc., thus manifesting the evil of sin, and 
how fearful a thing it is to faU under God's displeasure. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3, 4. In the severity of God's dealings with the remnant 
of his ancient people, we have at once an affecting proof 
of the desperate wickedness of the human heart, which 
makes so much suffering necessary, and also a solemn 
pledge of God's purpose to purify his church from time to 
time, and make her fruitful in righteousness to the glory 
of his own name. 

5-17. God has set his people for the light of the world ; 
he would have them, by their holy example, bring their 
fellow-men to the knowledge and obedience of the truth. 
When they change his judgments into wickedness, and 
become leaders in sin to the world without, he will punish 
them with a severity proportioned to their guilt, and make 
them " a reproach and a taunt, an instruction and an aston- 
ishment" to those who are about them, that all may learn 
to fear his holy name. 



nations, when ye shall be .scattered through the 
countries. 

9 And they that escape of you shall remember 
me among the nations M'hither they shall be car- 
ried captives,' because I am broken with their 
whorish heart,'" which hath departed from me," and 
with their eyes, which go a whoring after their 
idols:" and they shall loathe themselves for the 
evils which they have committed in all their 
abominations.'' 

10 And they shall know (liaf I nm the Lord, euvi 
that I have not said in vain that I would ilo lhi~ 
evil unto them. 

11 ITlius saith the Lord God; Pinitc with thy 
hand,'' and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas for 
all the evil abominations of the house of Israel ! 
for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, 
and by the pestilence.'' 

12 He that is far otT shall die of the pestilence; 
and he that is near shall fall by the sword ; and 
he that remainetli and is besieged shall die by the 
famine : thus will I accomplish my fury upon them. 

13 Then shall ye know that I am the Lord, when 
their slain men shall be among their idols round 
about their altars, upon every high hill, in all the 
tops of the mountains, and under every green tree, 
and under every thick oak, the place where they 
did ofl'er sweet savor to all their idols.' 

14 So will I stretch out my hand upon them,' 
and make the land desolate, yea, more desolate 
than the wilderness^ toward Diblath, in all their 
habitations: and they shall know that I am the 
Lord. 



CHAPTER VII. 

1 The final desolation of Israel. 16 The mournful repentance of them 
that escape, 20 The enemies defile the sanctuary because of the Is- 
raelites' abominations. 23 Under the type of a chain is shown their 
miserable captivity. 

n\ TOREOVER the-^vord of the Lord came unto 
JAJ. me, saying, 

2 Also, thou son of man, thus saitli the Lord 
God unto the laud of Israel ; An end, the end is 
come upon the four corners of the land." 



6:13; .Ter. 44:28 


1 Psa. 137:1; Dan. 9:2, 3. ■» Psa. 


78:40; Isi, 43:24. 


n Jer. 3:0, 13. 


oh. 14:4-7; 20:7,24; Num. 15::39. P 


ch. 20:43; 36:31; 


.Tob 42:6. q ch. - 


1:14. rch. 5:12, 13. > Isa. 57:5, 7 ; Je 


.2:20; Hos. 4:13. 


1 Jsi. 5:25. 5 Or 


desolate Jrom the ictlclerne^s. u Ldin. 1 


:9. 



CHAPTER VI. 

3, Rivers; beds of torrents, wliich are dry except in the 
rainy season. High places ; for sacrificing to idols, 

6. Your idols maybe broken — abolished ; the object of these 
severe judgments is here given, the extirpation of idolatry. 

12. Far off; from the invading army. Rcmaineth; in the 
city. No situation shall secure the sinful people from God's 
wrath. 

14. Diblath; perhaps the same as Diblathaim, Jer. 48: 22 ; 
according to some, Riblah, on the north-eastern border of 
Palestine. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. In the punishment of sinners, God will so order events 
as to make the folly of their vain confidonces manifest t!p 
all men. "V'er. 13. 

9, 10. 'When God's chastisements have brought us to 
see ourselves as he sees us, and to loathe ourselves for 
the evils which we have done, they have accomplished 
their proper object, and he will soon remove them. 
915 



LiraeVs fiivd dcsulation. 



EZEKIEL \ II. 



TTie sanctuary desecrated. 



3 Now is the end come upon tlicc, and I will 
send mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee 
according to thy ways, and will recompense* upon 
thee all thine abominatioup. 

4 And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither 
will I have pity:" but 1 will recompense thy ways 
upon thee,'' and thine abominations shall be in the 
midst of theo: and ye shall know that 1 am the 
Lord. 

5 Thus sailh the Lord God; An evil, an only 
evil, behold, is come. 

6 An end is come, the end is come : it watcheth 
for* thee; behold, it is come. 

7 The morning is come unto thee, thou that 
dwellest in the land : the time is come, the day of 
trouble is near,'' and not the sounding again* of 
the mountains. 

8 Now will I shortly pour out my fury upon thee, 
and accomplish mine anger upon thee: and I will 
judge thee according to thy ways, and will recom- 
pense thee for all thine abominations. 

9 And mine eye shall not spare, neither will I 
have pity: I will recompense thee*' according to 
thy ways and thine abominations that are in the 
midst of thee;'' and ye shall know that I am the 
Lord that smiteth.'' 

10 Behold the day, behold, it is come : the morn- 
ing is gone forth ; the rod hath blossomed, pride 
hath budded. "^ 

11 Violence is risen up into a rod of wicked- 
ness:" none of tliem shall remain, nor of their mul- 
titude," nor of any of theirs :' neither shall there be 
wailing for them. 

12 The time is come, the day draweth near: let 
not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn : for 
wrath is upon all the multitude thereof. 

13 For the seller shall not return to that which 
is sold, although they were yet alive:" for the 
vision is touching the whole nndtitude thereof, 
w/iic/t shall not return ; neither shall any strengthen 
himself in the iniquity* of his life."' 

14 They have blown the trumjjct, even to make 



•Heb. ffii-«. ach. ,' 


:11. bHr 


8. 9:7. 


t Heb. 


awaketh against. « 


Zeph. 


1:14, 


15. 1 Or, echo. 


S Heb. vpon thee. 


d Gil 


8:7; Rev. ■-'0 


l:l. 


e Mio. 


(i!) 


fProv. 16:18. 1 


Jer. (i:7. 


I Or, tumult. 


1 Or, their tumultuous per- 


sons. 


' Heb. though their life \v 


ere yet a 


mo„^ tl 


e living, t H 


•.h.h 


s into- 


itity. 


J Or, whose life 


ts in his in 


ifjuity. 


li Eccl. 


S:S. iLim. 1 


:lilJ. 


5 Heb. 



CHAPTER VII. 

•1. T/ii lie abominations .tlinll he ; that i.s, the reconipcnsc 
of thine abominations shall conic. 

6. Walchclk for llicc ; or, wake Ih up against tlicc, as an 
enemy intent on thy destruction. 

7. Tlie mornin"; the morning of the day of trouble. So 
also verse 10. Not the sounding again of the mountains ; the 
resounding of the mountains with joyous shouts. It is a 
cry of trouble, and not of gladness. 

10. Pride hiilh hudilcd ; into a rod. The pride and vio- 
lence of tlie people have grown into a rod which Jehovah 
will use to punish their wickedness. Compare I'rov. ^f.'Z'i. 

12. Buyer rejoice — seller mourn ; because in the approach- 
ing day of captivity buyer and seller will be alike poor 
and miserable. 

13. Return to that which is sold; return at the year of (lie 
jiibiloo to the possession of his inheritance which ho has 
sold. Lev. 25:10, 2.')-28. Although thcij were yet alive; 
:dtliough the sellers were yet alive at the year of jubilee ; 
ibr the land shall be in the possession of the enemy. This 
i.i added to made the pictiU'e of the desolation of the land 

91G 



all ready : but none goeth to the battle : ■''[("•.^m?: 
for my wrath is upon all the multitude thereof. 

15 The sword is without, and the pestilence and 
the famine within:' lie that is in the field shall die 
with the sword ; and he that is in the city, famine 
and pestilence shall devour him. 

IC 1 But they that escape of them shall escape, 
and shall be on the mountains like doves of the 
valleys, all of them mourning, every one for his 
iniquity. 

17 All hands shall be feeble, and all knees shall 
be weak cw^ water. 

18 They shall also gird themselves with sack- 
cloth,J and horror shall cover them; and shame 
shall be upon all faces, and baldness upon all their 
heads. 

19 Tliey shall cast their silver in the streets, and 
their gold shall be removed:" their silver and 
their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the 
(lay of the wrath of the Loud :'■ they shall not sat- 
isfy their souls, neither fill their bowels : because 
it is the stumbling-block of their iniquity.'' 

20 1[ As for the beauty of his ornament, he set it 
in majesty: but they made the images of their 
abomiiuxtious and of their detestable things there- 
in:" therefore have I set it far from tlu^m.* 

21 And I will give it into the hands of the stran- 
gers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for 
a s])oil ; and tliey shall pollute it. 

22 My face will I turn also from them, and they 
shall pollute my secret place: for the robbers* 
shall enter into it, and defile it. 

23^ Make a chain: ibr the land is full of 
bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence." 

21 Wherefore I will bring the worst of tho 
heathen," and they siiall possess their houses: I 
will also make the pomp of the strong to cease; 
and their holy places shall be defiled."' 

25 Destruction* cometh; and they shall seek 
peace, and there shall be none. 

26 Mischief shall come ujion mischief,'' and ru- 
mor shall be upon rumor; then shall they seek a 



go into, i Amos S:10. I Heb. /or a srpnrnlion, or unrleanness. k I'ror. 
11:4. 1 Or, l/i«r iniijlii/y IS Ihoir .!IMm4//n?-Wo.i. I ch. 14:3, 4. "let. 
7:30. ' Ott mode it untottiemnn unrlean lltiitl;. 1 Or, burglars. "2 Kings 
•21:1G. o I'sa. 100:41. t Or. they sliaU inherit their holy flaas. p 2 Clir. 
7:20; F.sa. m-.Vi. » Hob. Cutting off. <1 Doul. :1'.!:'.'-J; Jer. 4:'.H). 



complete. Is touching the whole multitude thereof ; threatens 
not a partial, but a universal devastation of the land. 

11. Theij have blown tlie trumpet ; the .Icwish leaders, to 
summon the people to battle against their enemies. None 
gncth to the battle; God's wrath has taken from the people 
all their courage. Vcr. 17. 

1(1. Like doves of the vallcijs; with allusion to the mourn- 
ing noise of doves. Isa. 38:11; 5'J:11. 

19. Cast their sdver in the streets; in their flight. Shall be 
removed ; or, "shall beeomo an unclean thing:' that is, be 
cast away as an unclean thing. Sal i.fi/ their soids; with 
their wealth. God's judgments shall reduce rich and poor 
to a common level. 

20. The bcautii of his ornament; the temple, or the land 
of Palestine, which was "the glory of all lands." He set 
it; God set it. Set it far from them; or, "made it to thcin 
an unclean thing." Coiiiparo verse 22. 

22. From them; from my people. Tliey .diall pollute ; the 
robbers immediately mentioned; that is, foreign enemies. 
My -tecret place; my sanctuary. 

23. Mate a chain; for binding the rebellious Jews and 
leading them into captivity. 



Chambers of imagery. 



EZEKIEL VIII. 



Worship of the sun. 



B c'-wV."' vision of the [iropliet ; but the lawshallper- 
ish from the priest," and counsel from the ancients. 
27 The king- shall mourn, and the prince sliall 
be clotlied with desolation, and the hands of the 
people of the land shall be troubled : I will do 
unto them after their way, and according to their 
deserts* will I judge them ; and they shall know 
tliat I am the Lokd. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

] Ezekiel, in a vision of (joil at Jerusalem, 5 is sho\^Ti tite image of 
jealousy, 7 the chambers of imagery, 13 the mourners for Tammuz, 
1.5 the worshippers towards the sun. 18 God's wrath for tfieir idolatry. 

AND it came to pass in the sixth year, in the 
sixth month, in the fifth day of the month, as 
I sat in my house, and the elders of Judali sat be- 
fore me," that the hand of the Lord God fell there 
upon me.'= 

2 Then I beheld, and lo, a likeness as the ap- 
pearance of fire :'' from the appearance of his loins 
even downward, fire ; and from his loins even up- 
ward, as the appearance of brightness, as the color 
of amber.'' 

'i And he put forth the form of a hand,'' and took 
me by a lock of my head ; and the spirit lifted me 
up between the earth and the heaven, and brought 
me in the visions of God to Jerusalem,^' to the 
door of the inner gate that looketh toward the 
north ; where icas the seat of the image of jeal- 
ou.^y,'' whieli provoketh to jealousy.' 

4 And behold, tlie glory of the God of Israel icas 
tliere, accoi-ding to the vision that I saAv in the 
plain. J 

5 'i Then said he unto me. Son of man, lift np 
thine eyes now the way toward the north.'' So I 
lifted up mine eyes the way toward the north, and 
behold northward at the gate of the altar this im- 
age of jealousy in the entry. 

6 He said furthermore unto me, Son of man, 
seest thou what tliey do ? even the great abomina- 
tions that the house of Israel committeth here,' 
tiiat I should go far off from my sanctuary ?" but 



a 


Ch. 20:3.; Psa. 7-4:9; Lam. 2:9. • Heb. witli l/ieir judgmenls; Luke 


l!l 


a-J; Jas.2:l.'). bch.«i:l. = ch. :j: U, •«. d ch. 1 :aU, 27. =ch.l:4. fDan. 


.■i:; 


. Ech. 40:2. h.Ter. 32:34. i Deut. 32:16, 21. J ch. 3:22, 2.3. k Psa. 


4s: 


2. iProv.5:14. m Pi,a. 78:00. n ch. 20:8. oJer.23:ll. pRora.l:23. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-13. God bears long with sinners, "not willing that 
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance ;" 
yet if they persist in disregarding his warnings, he will 
execute upon them aU his threatened judgments without 
mitigation. 

14. When God will destroy a people for their iniquity, 
he takes from them courage and counsel in the day of 
trouble, and gives them up to terror and confusion. Ver. 17. 

19. The wealth of wicked men is no protection against 
God's judgments. With infinite ease he can destroy them 
and their possessions together. 

22-25. God would not spare his ancient people when 
they sinned against him, on account of their " holy and 
beautiful temple,'' with its divinely appointed ordinances ; 
neither will he spare unfaithful churches now, on account 
of their outward relations and privileges. .ler. 7:4, 12-15. 

2G. The_y who will not hsten when God graciously calls 
them to repentance and obedience, shall call upon him in 
the time of trouble, but receive no answer. Prov. 1 : 24-28. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1. In tlie sixth year; of Jehoiachin's caj)tivity. chap. 1:2. 



turn tiiec yet again, and thou shalt see greater 
abominations. 

7 11 And he brought me to the door of the court ; 
and when I looked, behold a hole iu tlie wall. 

8 Then said he unto me. Son of man, dig now in 
the wall: and when I had digged in the "wall, be- 
hold a door. 

9 And he said unto me. Go in, and behold the 
wicked abominations that they do here." 

10 So I went iu and saw;" and behold evcrv 
forra of creeping things, and abominable beasts, 
and all the idols of the house of Israel,'' portrayed 
upon the wall round about. 

11 And there stood before them seventy men of 
the ancients of the house of Israel," and in the 
midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shapliaii, 
with every man his censer in his hand;'' and a 
thick cloud of incense went up. 

12 Then said he unto me. Son of man, hast thou 
seen what tiie ancients of the house of Israel do iu 
the dark,'' every man in the chambers of his im- 
agery? for they say. The Lord seeth us not;' the 
Lord hath forsaken the earth. 

13 IF He said also unto me. Turn Ihco yet again, 
and thou shalt see greater abominations that thcv 
do. 

14 I'hen he brought me to the door of the gate 
of the Lord's house which was toward the north ; 
and bcliold, there sat women weeping for Tammuz. 

15 M Then said he unto me. Hast thou seen this. 
son of man"? turn thee yet again, and thou shalt 
sec greater abominations than these." 

16 And he brought me into the inner court of 
the Lord's house, and behold, at the door of the 
temple of the Lord, between the porch and the 
altar, ^ urre about five and twent}' men,"' with their 
backs toward the temple of the Lord,"" and their 
faces toward the east; and they worshipped the 
sun toward the east.^ 

17 1 Then he said unto me. Hast thou seen this, 
son of man ? Is it a light thing to* the house 
of Judah that they commit the abominations which 



q .Ir 


r 


19:1 


r N 


im. 10: 


17. 


s Eph. 


5:12. 


1 


eh. 


9:9; Psa. 


73:11 


94:7. 


u 2 


Ti 


m. :{ 


13. 


Joel 2 


■17. 


weh. 


11:1. 


X 


.let 


. 2:27. y 


Deut. 


4:19; 


2K 


"" 


.2:J:. 


; Jer. 


44:17. 


tOr 


Is the 


re any 


thi 


'gl 


ghler than 


to. 





2. A lilcencss; "a likeness as the appearance of a man," 
chap. 1:26. Amber; see note to chap. 1:4. 

3. In the visions of God; he was carried to Jerusalem 
only in a vision, not bodily; but the idolatrous rites there 
represented to him actually existed. T/te inner gate; next 
to the temple lay the inner court, or court of the priests ; 
then the outer, or court of the Israelites. The gate here 
named seems to have led from the inner to the outer court 
on the north side ; but the exact determination of the va- 
rious localities named in this chapter is difficult. 

11. Ancients; elders, who ought to have been foremost 
in maintaining the purity of God's worship. 

14. Women weeping for Tammuz; Tammuz answers to 
the Adonis of the Greeks, a deified mortal, whose death 
the women annually lamented with idolatrous rites. 

16. The inner court; that of the priests, whence it ap- 
pears that these men were priests. Their bach Inu-nrd the 
temple — worshipped the sim; the priests were a|iii<iintud by 
God to minister at his altar, and intercede with him for 
the people. Joel 2:17. That these should worship the 
sun. with their backs towards God's temple, was the 
crowning act of wickedness. 

17. Put the branch to their nose; after the manner of the 

917 



Tlu icn.th of God 



EZEKIKL X. 



upon idvldlcrs. 



tUcy commit here? for tlicy have filled the land 
witii violence, and have returned to provoke me 
to anger: and lo, \\\vy put tiie branch to their 
nose. 

18 Therefore will 1 also dt'al in fury: mine eye 
shall not spare, neitiier will I have pity:" and 
though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, 
yet will I not liear them." 



CHAPTER IX. 



1 A vision, whereby i 
structiun of tile 



erviition of some. .5 and the dc- 
not be entreated for them. 



H God 

HE cried also in mine cars with a loud voice, 
saying, Cause them that have charge over 
tiie city to draw near, even every man with his 
destroying weapon in his hand. 

2 And behold, six men came from the way of the 
higher gate, which lieth* toward the north, and 
every man a slaughter weapon* in his hand ; and 
one man among them was clothed witli linen,"^ 
Avith a writer's inkhorn by his side:' and they 
went in, and stood beside the brazen altar. 

3 And the glory of the God of Israel was gone 
up from the cherub,'' whereupon he was, to the 
threshold of the house. And he called to the man 
clotiied with linen, which had the writer's inkhorn 
by his side; 

4 And the Lord said unto him. Go through the 
midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, 
and set a mark^ upon the foreheads of the men'' 
that sigh and that cry for all the abominations 
that be done in the midst thci'cof.'' 

5 *I[ And to the others he said in my hearing,' Go 
ye after him through the city, and smite :">' let not 
j'our eye spare, neither have ye pity : 

G Slay utterly^ old and young, both maids, and 
little children, and women : but come not near any 
man upon whom is the mark;" and begin at my 

>Ch.5:ll. b Prov. I:i9; MIc. 3:1; Zech. 7:13. • Meh. is turned, t Heb. 
weapon of his breaking in pieces, c Rev. ]5;(i. i Heb. upon his loins. 
■Ich.3:a3. iHiA. markamark. e Exod. 12:7; Rov. 7:3. f Psa. 119: 130; 
Jor.l3:17. I Heb. (ars. s Eiod. 32:27; Num. 25:7,B; 1 Kings 18:40. 1 Heb. 



ancient i'arsoes, who worshipped the rising sun holding 
in their loft hand a bundle of twigs. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-11. God's holy eyes continually behold all the abomina- 
tions which are practised by the wicked in secret places ; 
and 80 far as he chooses, he reveals them to the view of 
others. 

17, 1«. When they who arc sot for the defence of true 
religion become leaders of the people in superstition and 
wickedness, the community becomes speedily corrupted 
in every part, and ripe for God's desolating judgments. 

CnAPTER IX. 

1. Cause them that have charcrc ov?r the city — weapon in 
his hand; that is, the destroying angels charged to exe- 
cute my wrath upon it; those, however, represent here 
not 80 m\icli literal angels, as all the ministries ami agen- 
cies which God employs to execute punishment upon the 
wicked. 

i. Toward the north ; where the seat of idolatry is, there 
also the punishment begins. One man among t/um; a sev- 
enth man among those six. 

3. Waf! gone up; the temple was Jehovah's earthly dwell- 
ing-place ; and hero ho presides over the execution of his 
judgments. The chcruli; here, and in chap. 10:2, •!, used col- 
lectively of the four cherubim. These are the same as the 
"living creatures," chap. 1. 
918 



sanctuary.' Then they began at the an- ^^' *""• 
cient men which ivere before the house. 'a>i- 

7 And he said unto them. Defile the house, and 
fill the courts with the slain: go ye forth. And 
they went forth, and slew in the city. 

8 ir And it came to pass, while they were slaying 
them, and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and 
cried, and said. Ah Lord God! wilt thou destroy 
all the residue of Israel in thy pouring out of thy 
fury upon Jerusalem?J 

9 Then said he unto me. The iniquity of the 
house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great," and 
the land is full of* blood,' and the city full of per- 
vcrseness:* for they say, The Lord hath forsaken 
the earth, and the Loud seeth not.'" 

10 And as for me also, mine eye shall not spare, 
neither will I have pity, but I will recompense 
their way upon their head. 

11 And behold, the man clothed with linen, 
which had the inkhorn by his side, reported the 
matter,* saying, I have done as thou hast com- 
manded me. 

CIIAPTEU X. 

1 The vision of the coals of fire, to be scattered over the city. 8 The 
vision of the nhecubini. 

''T^'IIEN I looked, and behold, in the firmament 
J_ that was above the head of the cherubim there 
appeared over them as it were a sapphire stone, as 
the appearance of the likeness of a throne." 

'2 And he s])ake unto thcnu\n clothed with linen," 
and said. Go in between the wheels, fvui under the 
cherub, and fill thy-' hand with coals of fire from 
between the cherubim,'' and scatter them over the 
city.'' And he went in in my sight. 

3 Now the cherubim stood on the riglit side of 
the house, when the man went in ; and the cloud 
filled the inner court. 



lodestrunian. h Rev. 0:4. i Jcr. 35:30; I Pot. 4:17. J Gen. 18:23, etc. 
kJer.5:l. • Unh.fillcil with. I 2 Kings 24:4. 1 Or, ujr«slmff of judgment. 
m Psa. lU: II ; Ua. 2il: IS. t Heb. returned the icoret. ii eh. 1 :22. 26. o oh. 
8:2,3. Mloh. the hollow of thy. Pcb.I:13. 1 Eicod. 9:8-10; Rev. 8:5. 

4. Set a mark; that the destroying angels may recognize 
them and spare thorn. There seems to bo an allusion hero 
to the mark of blood on the houses of the Israelites in 
Egypt, Exod. 12:22,23. 

0. liegin at mi/ sancltiarij; the sanctuary was the dwell- 
ing-place of God's holiness ; thence the judgment proceed- 
ed, and it fell first upon those who were nearest to God in 
their official character, and also first in guilt. Compare 
1 Pet. 4:17 

INSTRUCTION. 

In the most corrupt periods, tiod has a faithful remnant 
who sigh and cry for the abominations that surround them ; 
ho knows the names of all of these, and is abundantly able 
to protect and deliver them while he destroys his onomics. 
Rut the i)erfoct separation of the righteous from the wicked 
is reserved for the last great day, when every one of his 
friends shall receive complete and cterntil salvation, and 
all his cneiiiios be destroyed utterly and for over. 

CIIAPTEU X. 

The prophet has a now vision of the glory of the Lord 
described in the first ch;iptrr, where see the notes. 

2. Uiuler the clienib ; that is, under the wings and hands 
of the four cherubim which wore above the wheels. Coals 
of Jirr. — .icattcr them ; a synibid of the jiouring out of God's 
wrath upon .lerusalom. Comparo Hov. S:."). 

3. Tlie right. 'side; that is, llic south, as the temple faced 



Vision of the chcruhlm. 



EZEKIEL XI. 



rr:sumplion of iLc princes. 



li. r'm" 4 Then tlic o'lory of tlio Lord went" iip 
iVom the clieruli, and stood over tlie threshold of 
the house;'"' and the house was filled with the 
(■loud, and the court was full of the brightness 
of the Lord's <>lory.'' 

5 And the sound of the cherubim's wings w^as 
heard even to the outer court, as the voice of the 
Almighty God when he speaketh.'^ 

(') vVnd it came to pass, that when ho had com- 
manded the man clothed with linen, saying, Take 
fire from between the wheels, from between the 
cherubim ;'' -"hen he went in, and stood beside the 
wheels. 

7 And 07!f cherub stretched forth Mi is hand from 
between the cherubim unto the lire that was be- 
tween the cherubim, and took t/iercof and put it 
into the hands of /(///( f/iaf v:as clothed with linen ; 
who took if, and went out. 

8 1[ And there appeared in the clierubini the form 
of a man's hand under their wings." 

9 And when I looked, behold the four wheels by 
the cherubim, one wheel by one cherub, and another 
wheel by another cherub i"^ and the appearance of 
tlie wheels ivas as the color of a beryl stone. 

10 And as for their appearances, they four had 
one likeness, as if a wheel had been in the midst 
(if a wheel. 

11 When they went, they went upon their four 
.-ides; they turned not as they went, but to tlic 
place whither the head looked they followed it ; 
they turned not as they went. 

12 And their whole body,* and their backs, and 
their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, M-fre 
full of eyes round about, even the wheels that they 
four had. 

1:3 As tor the wheels, it was cried unto them in 
my hearing, wheel.* 

14 And every one had four faces: the first face 
iras the face of a cherub, and the second face was 
the face of a man, and the third the face of a lion, 
and the fourth the face of an eagle.*-' 

1.5 And the cherubim were lifted u]). This is the 
living creature that I saw by the river of Chebar.'' 



• Heb. iras lifted. « Num. lfi:19. b cli. 4:):.'); 1 Kings 8:10, II. c ch. 
l:-i4. d Rsa. hl):l; 09:1. t Hah. sent fnrtk. ever. -21. f oh. 1 : 15, etc. 
: Heb. flesh, i Or, t/itij were railed in my hearins;, wheel, or galgal. e ch. 
l;(i, lU. heb. 1:3. t Heb. life, i ch. II :a-J ; Gen. :i:-,>4. J ch. ?:3. t ch. 



the east. Thus the prophet's view of the tlireshold was 
unobstructed. 

4. Went up from the cherub; see note on cliap. 9:3. Jlie 
court ; the inner court, ver. 3. 

.'). To the outer court ; where the prophet was stationed, 
for lie could not stand in the inner court by reason of the 
cloud. Compare 1 Kings 8:11 ; Rev. 15:S. 

8. Under their wings ; one under each wing. 

13. O wheel; they were addressed as possessing intelli- 
gence, and able to obey God's commands. Compare chap. 
1:21. 

14. Every one; of the cherubim. The face of a dwruh; 
this answers to "the face of an ox," in chap. 1:10. Hence 
some have inferred that the cherubim over the ark of the 
I'ovenant had the face of an ox. These cherubim were 
symbolic beings, and not real angels. 

20. The living creature; that is, the fourfold living crea- 
ture. 

INSTRUCTIOX. 

God is ever present among his people, disposing all 
the events which befall them to his own gloiv and the 



16 And when the cherultim went, the wheels went 
by tliem: and when the cherubim lil'led up their 
wings to mount up from the earth, the same wheels 
akso turned not from beside tliein. 

17 When they stood, iftee stood ; and when they 
were lifted up, tliese lifted up themselves «/^o.- for 
the spirit of the living creature' u-as in them. 

18 Then the gJory of the Lord departed from 
off the threshold of the house, and stood over the 
cherubim.' 

19 And the cherubim lifted up their wings, and 
mounted up from the earth in my sight: when 
they went out, the wheels also trcre bcsid'e them, 
and every one stood at the door of the east gate 
of the Lord's house; and the glory of the God of 
Israel was over them above. 

20 This is the living creature that I saw under 
the God of Israel by the river of Chebar; and 1 
knew that they tcere the cherubim. 

21 Every one had four faces apiece, and every 
one four wings ; and the likeness of the hands of 
a man vas under their wings. 

22 And the likeness of their faces vas the same 
faces which I saw by the river of Chebar, their 
appearances and themselves : they went every one 
straight forward. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 Tiie presumption of the princes. 4 Their sin and juJgnnent. 13 
Ezekiel complaining, God showeth hini his purpose in saving a rem- 
nant, -21 and punishing the wicked. 22 The glory of God teaveth the 
city. '24 Ezelciel is returned to the captivity. 

OREOVER the spirit lifted me up,' and 
/_L brought me unto the east gate of the Lord's 
house," which looketh eastward : and behold at 
the door of the gate live and twenty men ;' among 
whom I saw Jaazaniah the son of Azur, and Pela- 
tiah the son of Benaiah, princes of the people."' 

2 Then said he unto me. Son of man, these are 
the men that devise mischief, and give wicked 
counsel in this city:" 

3 Which say, // is not near :" let us build houses :'' 
this city is the caldron,'' and we be the flesh. 



M 



11) 


19 


1 


h 


8:10. n 


ch. a-2: 


>7 ; Tsa 


1:1U 


a:! ; 


Ho 


5 


10. 


nMic 


■.>:1. 


och. 


l'.> 


:>.■?. 


■27 




Pel. 3:^ 


. 1 Or, 


for us 


to bu 


Id h 


ous 


s n 


ear. 


P ch 


•H::i, 


etc.; 


Je 


. 1 


VJ. 



























advancement of the cause of righteousness ; the most 
terrible calamities come immediately from his hand, and 
are directed by his providence. It is his will that we 
recognize him alike in mercies and judgments, and act 
habitually under a sense of his presence and absolute 
power to save or to destroy. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1. Five and twenty men; these seem to represent the 
rulers of Judah. 

3. It is not near; the destruction of Jerusalem threatened 
by Jeremiah. But we may better render the first clause 
of the verse thus: "The time is not near to build houses," 
that is, in Babylon, according to the advice of Jeremiah. 
Jer. 29:5. They scornfully reject the idea of a long cap- 
tivity in Babylon. Tliis city is the caldron, and we be the 
flesh; as tlio tiesh remains in the cahlron till cooked, bo 
we shall remain till death in Jerusalem. W^e shall not 
be removed prematurely by captivity. Com|)are verses 
7, 9, 11, where God threatens to bring them out of 
Jerusalem. 

919 



VcrUh of Pdatlah. 



EZEKIEL XI. 



A remnant to he saved. 



4 1' Therefore prophesy against them, prophesy, 

son of man. 

5 And the Spirit of the Lord fell upon me, and 
said unto me, Speak;" Thus saith the Lord; 
Thus have ye said, house of Israel : for I know 
the things that come into your mind, every one of 
them." 

6 Ye liave multiplied your slain in this city, and 
ye have filled the streets thereof with the slain." 

7 Therefore thus saith the Lord God ; Your 
slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they 
are the flesh, and this city is the caldron: but I 
will bring you forth out of the midst of it. 

8 Ye have feared the sword ; and I will bring a 
sword upon you, saith the Lord God. 

9 And I will bring you out of the midst thereof, 
and deliver you into the hands of strangers,'' and 
will execute judgments among you.'' 

10 Ye shall fall by the sword ;'' I will judge you 
in the border of Israel;" and ye shall know that 

1 am the Lord.'' 

11 This city shall not be your caldron, neither 
shall ye be the flesh in the midst thereof; but I 
will judge you in the border of Israel : 

12 And ye shall know that I am the Lord: for 
ye* have not walked in my statutes,' neither exe- 
cuted my judgments,-' hut have done after tlie man- 
ners of the heathen that a?-e round about you." 

13 IT And it came to pass, when J prophesied, 
that Pelatiah the son of Bonaiah died.' Then fell 
I down upon my face,'" and cried with a loud voice, 
and said. All Lord God! wilt thou make a full 
end of the remnant of Israel? 

14 Again the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, 

is Son of man, tliy brethren, even thy brethren, 
the men of thy kindred, and all the liouse of Israel 
wholly, are they unto whom the inliabitants of Je- 



> Oh. 2:7; Isa,. 5S:1. b Psa. 13!!:a, 3; John 2i-24, 45; Heb. 4:13; Hev. 
2:23. t ch. 7:23; 22:3, 4; 2 Kings 24:4; Isa. 1:15; Jer. 2:34; Hos. 4:2; 
Mic. 3:2, 3. d Dcut. 2S::18; Neh. 9::26, 37; Psa. 100:41. c ch. 16:3d. 
f Jer. 52:10. g 2 Kings 14:25. hPsa. 9:18. • Or. whirji. i Ezra 9:7; 
Noh. 9:34. i 2 Kings lb:12. k ch. S:10, etc. ; Lev. 1M:3, etc. ; Dent. 12:;!0, 
31; Psa. 106:35. 1 ver. 1 ; Deut. 7:4 ; Prov. 0:13; Acts 3:5, lU. m ch. 9:S. 



7. Your slain — arethejiesh; Jehovah gives a new turn to 
their figure. The city boiling with violence and bloodshed 
is the caldron, and the murderod arc the llcsh in it. Bring 
you forth; that is, violently and prcniutiiroly. 

10. In the border of Israel; the princes of Judah were 
slain at Riblali, on the borders of Palestine. Jer. 52: 10. 

13. Died; the prophet sees in vision the death of Pela- 
tiah, a leader among the Jewish princes — a sure token 
that they shall all be destroyed. 

1.5. Thy brethren — the men of thy kindred ; thy fellow-cap- 
tives of the Jewish nation. Get you far from the Lord; 
literally, " Br far from the Lord." Those who remain in 
Jerusalem despise tlieir countrymen who have gone into 
captivity, as far removed from God's jirosence, and no 
longer tlie objects of his care. But Ood assures the 
prophet that lie will bless the latter, while he destroys 
the former. Coni])are Jer. chap. 24. 

16. A little sancluarij ; little, answering to the fewness of 
their number. Some render, " a sanctuary for a short time," 
that is, till their return from captivity. 

20. Mypeople; the remnant, to whom the promises con- 
tained in verses 17-21 are made, represent " the Israel of 
(Jod." The fulfilment of these promises belongs not to 
any one i>criod of lime. It begiiii in the restoration under 
Ezra, Zerubbabel. and others, but its full accomplishment 
belongs to "the last davs" of Zion's glorv. 
920 



rusalem have said, Get you far from the 'Vc.^": 
Lord : unto us is this land given in possession. 

16 Therefore say. Thus saith tlie Lord GoD; 
Although I have cast them far off among the 
heathen," and although I have scattered them 
among the countries, yet will I be to them as a lit- 
tle sanctuary in the countries where they shall 
come." 

17 Therefore say. Thus saith the Lord God; I 
will even gather you from the people, and assem- 
ble you out of the countries where ye have been 
scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel.'' 

IS And they shall come thither, and they shall 
take away all the detestable thinsrs thereof and all 
tiie abominations thereof from tlicnce.'' 

19 And I will give them one heart,"' and I will 
put a new spirit witliin you:' and I will take the 
stony heart out of their flesh,' and will give them 
a heart of flesh:" 

20 That they may walk in my statutes,^' and keep 
mine ordinances, and do fhcm :"' ant] they shall be 
my people, and I will be their God.'' 

21 But as for them whose heart walketh after the 
heart of their detestable things and their abomi- 
nations,'' I will recompense their way upon their 
own heads,'- saitli tlie Lord God. 

22 T Then did the cherubim lift up their wings, 
and tlie wheels beside them ; and the glory of the 
God of Israel w«i- over them above." 

23 And the glory of the Lord went up from the 
midst of the city, and stood upon the mountain 
whicli is on the east side of the city." 

24 *1 Afterwards the spirit took me up,'' and 
brought me in a vision liy llie Spirit of God into 
Clialdoa, to tlieiu of tlie captivity. So the vision 
that 1 liad seen went up from me. 

25 Then I spake unto them of the captivity all 
the tliin<?s that tiio Loud had showed me.'' 



nLev.2r):44; D6Ut.30:3,4. oPsa.9U:I; 91:9. P ch. 2S:2.3; 34:13; 30:24 ; 
Jer. 30:18; Amos 9:14. 'q ch. .■}7:23; Col. 3:5-9; Tims 2:12. r Jer. 32:39; 
I Cor. 1:10. » ch. 1S:31; P.sa. 51:10; Luke 11:13; John 14:20. I Zech. 
17:12. u oh. 30:20; 2 Kings 22:19. v Psi. 105:45; Rom. 16:26. "Luke 
1:0; 1 Cor. 11:2. X Jer. 21:7; Hos. 2:23. 7 Ileb. I0:3S; JuJe 19. « ch. 
22:31. .-"ch. 10:19. bZech.l4:4. 'ch.3:12. <l ch. 2:7. 



23. The mountain — on the cast side of the city; the mount 
of Olives. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2, 3. Carnal security and contempt of God's thrcatenings 
prepare the way for wicked counsels and mischievous 
devices. 

C-12. God has appointed rulers for the defence of the 
innocent and the punishment of the guilty. When they 
become the oppressors and destroyers of the people, ho 
will take the cau.se of justice into his own hands, and de- 
stroy them and their possessions together. 

13. Wo ought to be filled wilh fear and trembling in 
view of God's thrcatenings, knowing that he will execute 
them upon all who persevere in sin, without respect of 
persons. 

15, 16. The Jews who remained at Jerusalem in Ezekicl's 
day, gloried in their outward privileges and relations to 
God, and despised their brethren who had gone into cap- 
tivity ; but God destroyed the former, while he blessed tlio 
latter, and restored them at the appointed time to their 
own home. So he deals with man, abasing Iho proud 
and exalting the humble. 

17-21. God's own glory is concerned in the perpetuation 
from age to age of liis true worshippers. The same jiidg- 
meiit.s which destroy the wicked he will make ellicaciouB 
for the purification of the "remnant according to the elec- 



The capiivUy of 



EZEKIEL XII. 



Zalekiah forcsho wn. 



CHAPTER XII. 



1 The type of EzekieFs removing. 8 It showed the captivity of Zede- 
kiah. 17 Ezekiel's trembling showeth the Jews' desolation. 21 Tile 
Jews' presumptuous proverb is reproved. 26 The speediuess of the 

THE woi'd of the Lord also came unto mo, say- 
ing, 

2 Sou of man, thou dwellest in the midst of a 
rebellious house,^ 'wliich have eyes to see, and see 
not; they have ears to hear, and hear not:'' for 
they are a rebellious house. 

3 Therefore, thou sou of man, prepare thee stuff* 
for removing, and remove by day in their sight ; 
and thou shalt remove from thy place to another 
jjlacc in their sight: it may be they will consider,'" 
though they be a rebellious house. 

4 Then shalt thou bring forth thy stuff by day in 
their sight, as stuff for removing: and thou shalt 
go forth at even in their sight, as they that go 
forth into* captivity. 

5 Dig thouHIirough the wall in their sight, and 
carry out thereby. 

6 in their sight shalt thou bear if upon t/iy shoul- 
ders, and carry i( forth in the twilight : thou shalt 
cover thy face, that thou see not the ground : for 
1 have set thee for a sign unto the house of Israel.'' 

7 And I did so as I was commanded: I brought 
forth my stuff by day, as stuff for captivity, and 
in the even I digged through^ tlie wall with my 
hand ; I brought if forth in the twilight, and I bare 
it upon mij shoulder in their sight. 

8 II And in tlio morning came the word of the 
Lord unto me, saying, 

9 Son of man, hath not the house of Israel, the 
rebellious house, said unto thee, What doest thou?" 

10 Say thou unto them, Thus saith the Lord 
God ; This burden conr.erneth the prince in Jeru- 
salem,'' and all the house of Israel that are among 
them.''' 

11 Say, I am _your sign: like as I have done, so 
.shall it bo done unto them : they shall remove and 
go into captivity."' 

12 And the prince that is among them shall bear 
upon his shouWer in the twilight, and shall go 
forth:' they shall dig through the wall to carry 

a Ch. 2:3-S; 3:30, 27. b Jer. 5:21. • Or, ■iiislruimiils. =2 Tim. 2:25. 
t Heb. the goings fortk of. I Heb. /or tliee. d ch. 21:24. 8 Heb./or me. 
ecb. 24:19. (Mj.I. 1:1. Sch. 17:12. iYlA,.b,j removing go inlo cajnivily. 



tion of grace," and their uicrease in the fruits of right- 
eousness. 

CHArTER XII. 

3. Stuff for removing; literally, "equipments for exile," 
such as the king and his princes will presently prepare 
in their ilight from Jerusalem, ver. 10-12. 

.1. Dig thou t/irotigh t/w wall ; to represent the flight of 
tlie king and his princes. They fled " by night, by the 
way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the 
king's garden," Jer. 52:7, doubtless by opening a passage 
there that had been kept closed during the siege. 

6. Ill the twilight ; in the darkness of night. See note 
on ver. 5. Cover thy face; as a sign of mourning and hu- 
miliation. 

13. My net — ii'ill I spread upon him ; God's net was the 
army of the Chaldees, which pursued after him and over- 
took him. Jer. 52:8. Bring him to Babylon — yet shall he 
not ,s-fe it; remarkably fulfilled in the case of Zedekiah, 
whose eyes were put out before he was carried to Baby- 
lon. Jer. 52:11. 



out thereby : he shall cover his face, that he see 
not the ground with his cjea. 

13 My net also will I spread upon him,' and he 
shall be taken in my snare:" and 1 will bring him 
to Babylon, to the land of the Chaldeans; yet 
shall he not see it, though he shall die there.' 

14 And I will scatter toward every wind all that 
are about him to help him, and all his bauds; and 
I will draw out the sword after them.'" 

15 And they shall know that I am the Lmu'. 
when I shall scatter them among the nations, ami 
disperse them in the countries. 

l(j But I will leave a few men' of them from the 
sword," from the famine, and from the pestilence: 
that tlicy may declare all their abominations among 
the heathen whither they come; and they shall 
know that I a??i the Lord. 

17 f Moreover the word of the Lord came to me, 
saying, 

is Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking, and 
drink thy water with trembling and with careful- 
ness ; " 

19 And say unto the people of the land. Thus 
saith the Lord G(.iD of the inhabitants of Jerusa- 
lem, and of the land of Israel : They shall eat their 
bread with carefulness, and drink their water with 
astonishment, that her land may be desolate from 
all that is tliereiu,*'' because of the violence of all 
them that dwell therein.'' 

20 And the cities that are inhabited shall be laid 
waste, and the land shall be desolate ; and yo shall 
know that I am the Lord. 

21 f And the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, 

22 Sou of man, what is that proverb f/iai ye 
have in the land of Israel, saying. The days are 
prolonged, and every vision faileth?'' 

23 Tell them therefore, Tims saith the Lord 
God ; I will make this proverb to cease, and they 
shall no more use it as a proverb in Israel ; but 
say unto them. The days are at hand, and the 
effect of every vision. 

24 For there shall be no more any vain vision 
nor flattering divination within tlic house of Is- 
rael. 



li2Kings 2.5:4, etc i Jer. 39:4. i Lam. 1:13; Hos. 7:12. k .Ter. .52:g, etc. 
1 eh. 17:10. m ch. 5:10, 12. 1 Heb. men of number, n ch. (i:S-lU. o cb. 
4:10. • M^h. llie fulness thereof . pZch. 7:14. q Psa. 107:34. r Amos 6:3. 



16. May declare all their abominations; the abominations 
of their brethren whom God has destroyed, and on account 
of which they themselves have been carried captive, that 
thus the heathen may understand the reason of their de- 
struction. 

22. The days are prolonged ; the day* for executing the 
judgments threatened by the prophets. Faileth; proves 
false. From God's delay they take encouragement to dis- 
believe his threatenings. 2 Pet. 3:4. 

24. Vain vision — -flattering divination ; the flatteries of the 
false prophets were the chief cause why the predictions 
of the true prophets were disregarded. Wliile God de- 
stroys the former, he will fulfil the words of the latter. 
INSTUrcTION^^. 

2. It is not from the \v:iiii .if ni(:iiis to know God's will 
that sinners perish, but trum unwillingness to use the 
means which he furnishes them. Their ignorance is vol- 
untary and inexcusable. 

3. When one method of admonition fails, we must em- 
ploy others; not intermitting our efforts to reclaim and 

921 



The desolation near. 



EZEKIEL XIll. 



Reproof of Itfing prophets. 



'2o For I am the Lord : I will speak, and the 
word that I shall speak shall come to pass;" it 
shall 1)0 110 more proionsred : for in your days, () 
rebellious house, will 1 say the word, and will 
perform it, saith the Lord (!oi). 

26 ^ Again the word of liic Lord came to mc, 
saying. 

27 Son of man. bcliold, thiy of i\w house of Is- 
rael say, Tlie vision that he sectli is for many days 
to come, and he jn-ophcsieth of the times t/iat are 
far off." 

2S Therefore say unto them. Thus saith the Lord 
fJoD ; There shall none of my words be prolonged 
any more, luit tlie word which I have spoken shall 
be done, saith the Lord God." 

CHAPTER XIII. 

I The reproof of lyini^ prophets, 10 and their untempcretl mortar. 17 
Of prophetesses and tlieir pillows. 

A NI) the word of the Lord came unto mc, 
.^'\. saying, 

2 Son of man, ]irop]ic.<y against the proydiets of 
Israel that ])rophesy, and say tliou unto them that 
j)ropliesy* out of tiicir own licarts,'' Hear ye the 
word of the Lord ; 

3 Thus saith the Lord God; "Woo unto the fool- 
ish proplicts, that follow' their own spirit, and 
have seen nothing! ' 

4 Israel, thy jtrophets are like the fo.xcs in the 
deserts. 

5 Ye have not gone up into the gaps,^° neither 
made' up the hedge for the house of Israel to 
stand in tiie battle in the day of the Lord.'' 

() Tliey iiave seen vanity and lying divination,- 
saying, Tiic Lord saitli : and the Lord hatli not 
sent tliem : and they have made ofhas to hope 
that tlicy would eoniirm tlie word. 

7 Have ye not seen a vain vision, and have ye 
not sjjokeu a lying divination, wdiereas ye say, The 
Lord saitii it : albeit I have not spoken?'' 

8 Tiierefore tliiis saitli tiie Lord (Jod; Because 
ye have spoken vanity, and seen lies,' therefore, 
behold, I am against you, saitli the Lord God. 



- I«. 1-1:34; ,')5:ll; l,;im 2rl7; Dan. 'J:l'.'; Luko 3l;3;t. b SPet. 3:1. 
tJor. 44:28. • Hcb. are prop/it(3. d vor. 17; Jcr. l-hM ; ■i-|:in, 20. t Hob. 
natk after. I Or. things which Ikcy haoe not .vtn. \ Or, irraches. c p«i. 
I'lii-rt. I Heb. Iitdiftd. I Kph. U:l:l. M; Rev. 0: Hi. B Lam. 2:11. 
' Matt. 24:2:1, 24. i 1 Tim. 4:1, 2. 1 Or, secret, or rouncii; Gen. 4y:U. 



save sinners, so long as God prolongs to thera the day of 
grace. 

l:!. Zcdckiah enjoyed the faitliful instructions of Jere- 
miah, but he would not listen to them, and therefore all 
the calamities wliich the prophet had foretold came upon 
him. Led in chains to Habylou with his eyes put out, he 
became a sail and awful example of the end of lliose wlio 
harden themselves against CJod's reproofs. 

H. When (iod is against a sinner, all liis human eonfi- 
dcnces fail him. 

22-28. God delays the execution of his thrcatcnings, that 
men may have time fur repentance ; but they t;ike occiisidii 
from this to hanlcn themselves in uulielii'f and rebellion 
U) their destruction. Kcclcis. S: II ; Ilnm. 2:4, 5. 

Cir.M'TKR XIII. 

I. Deserts; rather, "niins." as of walls. 

■>, The praps ; of the liiul;en walls. Iletlfrc; hero in the 
sensi- of a fence, or rampart. T/ie tlnt/oflhe Lord; of his 
wrath upon Israel for their sins, instead of repairing the 
922 



9 And my hand shall be upon the prophets ^i)\'?«L 
that see vanity, and that divine lies: they shall not 
belli tlie assembly' of my people,' neither shall they 
be written in the Avriting of the house of Israel," 
neither shall they enter into the land of Israel;' 
and ye shall know that I am the ].,ord God. 

10 Because, even because they have seduced my 
people, saying, Peace; and t/nre was no peace;'" 
and one built up a wall," and lo, others daubed it 
with untempered viortar:" 

1 1 Say unto them which daub it with untempered 
mortar, that it shall fall: there shall be an over- 
flowing shower ; and ye, great hailstones, shall 
fall; and a stormy wind shall rend it." 

12 Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be 
said unto you, "Where is the daubing wherewith 
ye have daubed it? 

1:5 Therefore thus saith the Lord GoD; I will 
ev(!ii rend it with a stormy wind in my fury; and 
there shall be an overflowing shower in mine an- 
ger, and great hailstones in my fury to consume it.^ 

14 So will I break down the wall that ye have 
daubed with untempered /iwrtar.aud bring it down 
to the ground, so that the foundation thereof .«hall 
be discovered, and it shall fall,'' and yc shall be 
consumed in the midst thereof: and ye shall know 
that I am the Lord.^ 

15 Thus will I accomplish my wrath iijiou the 
wall, and upon them that have daulied it, with 
unlenipercd mortar, and will say unto you. The 
wall is no more, neither they that daubed it; 

IG To wit, the prophets of Lsracl which prophesy 
concerning Jerusalem," and which see visions of 
peace for her, aiul there is no peace,' saith the Lord 
God. 

17 "i, Likewise, thou son of man, set thy face 
against the daughters of thy people, which proph- 
esy out of their own heart; and prophesy thou 
against them, 

18 And say. Thus saith the Lord God ; Woe to 
the women that sew ])illows to all arniholes,' and 
make kerchiefs upon the head of every stature to 
hunt souls! Will ye hunt the souls of my people," 
and will ye save the souls alive that come unto you? 



j Fsa. 1UI:7. k I;2ri2;li2; Nch. 7:.'.; Pta. (i'J:-.N; liev. 2():I2. I lias. 9:0; 
R<!V.22:lo. m Jer. fi:14; S:ll. * Or. .(/ig/il wwW. i>ch.22:2-'. och.3S:!K; 
Isn. aS:2, IS. P Uj. 30::)U; Hag. 2: 17. t .Matt. 7:2«. 27. r vor. 9, 21, 23. 
• Jcr. 5:31; 23:1, etc.; 29: 31. i wr. 10. t Or, f/*oiM. o21'ct.a:l4. 



broken walls, and standing there for the defence of Israel, 
they have used them as foxes use ruins, to burrow in ; that 
is, instead of laboring to reform the people, and thus avert 
from them God's judgments, they have made themselves 
rich and powerful by flattering them in their sins, 

C. Ihvc matte otiicrs to /io/k tliiit tlirij vintlit ronfinn llieinrd; 
or, "have made men to hojie for the establisliment of tlio 
word ;" that is, of the flattering jiromises made by them to 
the people. 

9. Slittll not he in the n.fsembltj; because they shall bo 
destriiyed by God's judgments. U'nilen in tlic uriling; 
enrolled among those who rtturn from captivity. 

10. Wall—mortiir; the w;i]l and the mortar denote tho 
vain jilans of tho peo|de In escape destruction without 
repent:ince and faith in .lelmvah, ami tho encouragement 
which the false prophets g;ivc to them. 

17, T/ic (Inii^lilm of llitj people; tho false prophetesses 
are now addressed, 

18. Ti> all armhnles^upnn the liead of every stature ; rather, 
"for all armholes," "for the heads of every stature, " that 



False pro<p/ietc.iscs. 



EZEKIEL XI\t. 



JaJiSMints <yi: deceivers. 



people for liaud fills of barley ami for jjieccs of 
brcad,^ to slay the souls that should not die, and 
lo save the souls alive that should not live, by 
vour lying to my people that hear your lies?" 

20 VVherefore" thus saith the Lord God; Behold, 
I am against your pillows, wherewith ye there 
hunt the souls to make them fly,* and I will tear 
them from your arms, and will let the souls go, 
even the souls that ye hunt to nuake them fly. 

21 Your kerchiefs also will I tear, and deliver 
my people out of your hand, and they shall be no 
more in your hand to be hunted ; and ye shall 
know that I am the Lord. 

22 Because with lies ye have made the heart of 
the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad ; and 
strengthened the hands of the wicked,"^ that he 
should not return from his wicked way, by prom- 
ising him life;* 

23 Therefore ye shall see no more vanity, nor 
divine divinations:'' for I will deliver my people 
out of your hand:'' and ye shall know that I am 
the Lord. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1 LroJ answereth idolaters according to their own heart. 6 They are 
exhorted to repent, for fear of judgments, by means of seduced proph- 
Pt5. 12 God's irrevocable sentence of famine. 1.5 of nnipome beasts, 
17 of t!ie sword, 19 and of pestilence. 'J- A remnant shall be reserved 
f. . xampU- of others. 

' T"^11EN came certain of the elders of Israel unto 

1_ me,'' and sat before me. 

2 And the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, 

o Son of man, these men have set up their idols 
ill their heart, and put the stumbling-block of their 
ini(iuity before their face:"-' should I be inquired 
of at ail by them?'' 

■t Therefore speak unto them, and say unto them. 



» 1 Sam. 8:10, 17; Prov. 2S:ai ; Mi 


.3:5; Mai. I :10; 1 Pet. 5:2. b Prov. 


19:27. • Or. inio gardens, c Jer. 2: 


: 14. f Or. tJiat I should safe his life; 


Heb. quickening him. d ch. 12:24 


Mic. .3:6. e Mark 13:22; Juile 24. 


f oh. M:l. « ch. 7:19; Psa. I01:.'3; 


sa. 33:13. h 2 Kings 3:13, 14; Jer. 



is, of men of every stature. The pillows and kerchiefs, 
(according to some, bolsters,) seem to denote figuratively 
the flatteries with which they quieted tlie minds of those 
who consulted them. Hunt the sott/.s ; tiieir false prophecies 
destroyed souls. Save the souls alive — unto you; or, " save 
your own souls alive." 

19. Pollute me ; bring me into dishonor by pretending to 
propliesy in my name. For handfuls of barley — pieces of 
bread ; the wages of these parasites. To slay the souls — 
/))/ your lying; their prophecies strengtliened the wicked, 
:iiid stirred up deadly persecutions against the righteous. 
Compare ver. 22. 

20. To make them fly; perhaps, to make thera fly away 
to the other world ; but some explain the whole clause 
thus: I am against your pillows, etc., that I may deliver 
them, namely, tlie souls which ye hunt. This interpreta- 
tion is favored by tlie following verso. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2-7. In all ages of the church, God's true messengers 
have exposed themselves to reproach and persecution for 
die truth's sake ; while false teachers have made them- 
selves rich and powerful by flattering men in their sins, 
l.uke 6:22, 23, 26. 

8-16. No flatteries of corrupt teachers can hinder the 
execution of God's threatenings against the wicked ; and 
when his judgments come like an overflowing stream, they 
will sweep away together both the prophets of lies and 
those who put their trust in them. 



Thus saith the Lord God : Every man of the house 
of Israel that setteth up his idols in his heart, and 
putteth the stumbling-block of his iniquity before 
his face, and cometh to the jirophet ; I the LoitD 
will answer him that cometh, according to the 
multitude of his idols;' 

5 That I n-ay take the house of Israel in their 
own heart, because they are all estranged from me 
through their idols. 

6 M Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus 
saith the Lord God ; Eepent, and turn yourselves' 
from your idols ; and turn away your faces from 
all your abominations. 

7 For every one of the house of Israel, or of the 
stranger that sojourneth in Israel, which scparat- 
eth himself from me, and setteth up his idols in his 
heart, and putteth the stumbling-block of his in- 
iquity before his face, and cometh to a prophet to 
inquire of him concerning me ; I the Lord will 
answer him by myself: 

S And I will set my face against that ma!i,J and 
will make him a sign and a proverb,'' and I will 
cut him ofl" from the midst of iny people;' and ye 
shall know that I am the LoRU. 

9 And if the prophet be deceived when he hath 
spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that 
prophet,"" and I will stretch out my hand upon 
him, and will destroy him from the midst of ray 
people Israel. 

10 And they shall bear the punishment of their 
iniquity: the punishment of the prophet shall be 
even as the punishment of him that seeketh unto 
h im ; 

11 That the house of Israel may go no more 
astray from me," neither be polluted any more 
with all their transgressions ; but that they may 
be my people, and I may be their God," saith the 
Lord God. 



4_':20, 21. i Gal 0:7. 1 Or, olhers. J Lev. 20:3-0. k Num. 26:10; Deut, 
28:.37; 1 Cor. 10:11. 1 Psa. 37:22; Rom. 11:22. m 1 Kings 22:23; Job 
12:10; 2Tliess 2:11, 12. n Psa. 119:07; 1 Pet. 2:25. o ch. 37:27. 



17-21. The flatteries and seductions of ungodly women 
exert a great influence to corrupt the faith and practice of 
communities, and God will punish them in a way corre- 
sponding to their sins. Isa. 3. 

22. The false teacher may be distinguished from the true 
by the effect of his doctrine, which is to make the heart of 
tlie righteous sad, and strengthen the hands of the wicked. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

I. Came certain of the elders of Israel; that is, " to inquire 
of the Lord.'' Compare chap. 20:1. 

3. In their heart — before their face; they loved their idols, 
and continued to worship them. Stumbling-block of their 
iniquiti/; this was their idolatry, over which they stumbled 
to their destruction. 

4. According to the multitude of his idols; with punishment 
answerable to his multiplied idolatries. 

5. Take; detect and punish. 

7. By mi/self; not by a message of words alone, through 
the prophet, but by deeds, that is, by judgments proceed- 
ing from myself. 

'9. The prophet be deceived ; tho ia.\se -piroiihei. I the Lord 
have deceived ; given over him and his followers to delusion. 
Compare Psa. 81:11, 12; 2 Thess. 2:10.^12. 

II. That the house of Israel may go no more astray; the 
destruction of the false prophets and tlieir followers shall 
result in the purification and prosperity of the surviving 
remnant. 

923 



The irrevocable sentence. 



EZEKIEL XV 



T/ie useless vine-branch. 



1 2 IT The word of the Lord came again to me, 

sayini;:, 

18 Son of man, when the land pinncfh against me 
by trespassing grievously, then will I stretch out 
my hand upon it, and will break tlio staff of tlio 
bread thereof,* and will send famine upon it, and 
will cut off man and beast from it: 

14 Tiiougli these three men,'' Noah,'' Daniel,'' and 
Job," were in it, they should deliver hut their own 
souls by tlieir righteousness,'" saith the Lord God. 

15 Tl If 1 cause noisome beasts to pass through 
the land." and they spoil it,* so that it be desolate, 
that no man may pass through because of the 
beasts: 

16 Tkoufrh these three men iccre in it,* as I live, 
saith the Lord God, they shall deliver neither 
sons nor daughters ; they only shall be delivered, 
but the land shall be desolate. 

17 1 Or if I bring a sword upon that land,'' and 
say, Sword, go through the land ; so that I cut off 
man and beast from it:' 

18 Tiiough these three men urj-e in it, as I live, 
saith the Lord Gon. they shall deliver neither 
sons nor daughters, but they only shall be deliv- 
ered themselves. 

19 "' Or if I send a pestilence into that land,' and 
])Ourout my fury upon it in blood, to cut off from 
it man and beast: 

20 Though Nouh, Daniel, and Job, icnr in it, as 
I live, saitli tlie Lord God, they shall deliver nei- 
ther son nor daugliter ; they siiall but deliver tiieir 
own souls by their righteousness.'' 

21 For thus saith the Lord GoD ; How* much 
more when I send my four sore judgments upon 
Jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the noi- 



» Lev, 2«:2fi. b Jor. 15:1. » Gen. 7:1. d Da. 


n. 10:11. c Job 42:5. 


' I'rov. 11:4. g Lev. 20: 22. * Or, bereave it. f Heb 


lite midst of it. hLev. 


20:25. iZeph. 1:3. j 2 Sam. 24:15. k vcr. 14. 


Or, Also. 1 ch. 5:17: 


33:27. m ch. 0:8; Deut. 4:31. nch. 20:43. o Isi 


40:1,2; Heb. 12:G-11. 



14. Daniel; he had now been fourteen years in captivity, 
from tlio third year of Jchoiakim, who reigned eleven ycar.s, 
to the sixth of Zcdekiah. Chap. 8:1; nan. 1:1; 2 Kings 
23:3G. All the prophecies from the eighth to the nine- 
teenth chapter, were delivered during the sixth year of 
Zedekiah. Deliver but llicir own souls; the people must not 
hope for deliverance in their imi)enitence and rebellion 
against God for the sake of the few eminently pious 
among them. 

19. In blood; that is, in the destruction of life. 

22. lie brouf^lit forth; from Jerusalem, to join the cap- 
tives among whom Ezekicl dwells. Comforted conccrninf; 
the evil — upon Jerusalem ; by seeing its justice, and acqui- 
escing in it. 

23. Comfort you ; be the occasion of your being com- 
forted. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

.3-8. God takes no pleasure in the outward form of wor- 
ship when it is connected with a wicked heart and life, 
lie cannot be deceived by those who come to inquire of 
him, and he will not sutler them to mock liim by serving 
himself and idols at the same time. If they love iniquity 
and secretly practise it, ho will answer them in wrath, ;uiil' 
not in mercy. 

9, 10. (lod punishes those who love falsehood rather 
than truth, by leaving them to believe and follow it to 
their destruction. Thus false teachers and their disciples 
perish together. 

12-21. It is only by hearing and obeying the instructions 
of righteous men, that either nations or individuals can be 
proQted by tliem. They who reject their holy example 
924 



some beast, and the pestilence, to cut off am. 3«o. 
from it man and beast?' ''f,w.°''°°' 

22 t Yet, behold, therein shall be left a remnant 
that shall be brought forth, both sons and daugh- 
ters:'" behold, they shall come forth unto you, and 
ye shall see their way and their doings:"' and ye 
sliall be comforted concerning the evilthat 1 have 
brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning all that 
I have brought ui)on it." 

23 And they shall comfort yon, when ye see 
tlicir ways and their doings: and ye shall know 
that I have not done without cause all that I have 
done in it,'' saith the Lord God.i 



CHAPTER XV. 

1 By the unfitness of the vine-bntncli for any work, 6 is shown the re- 
jection of Jerusalem, 

AND the word of the Lord came unto me, say- 
ing, 

2 Son of man. What is the vine-tree more than 
any tree,'' or than a branch which is among the 
trees of the forest ? 

3 Shall wood be taken thereof to do any work ? 
or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel 
thereon ? 

4 Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel ;' the 
fire dcvoureth both the ends of it, and the midst 
of it is l>urned. Is it meet for any work?* 

5 Behold, when it was whole, it was meet' for 
no work : how much less st-.all it be meet yet for 
any work, when the fire hath devoured it, and it 
is burned ? 

6 1i Therefore thus saith the Lord God; As the 
vine-tree among the trees of the forest, which I 



P Prov. 20:2. q Deut. f :2; Jer. 22:8, 0; Din. 9:7. t Psa. b0:8, etc; T«l. 
5:2, 7; Jer. 2:21; Hos. 10:1. • John 15:6. i Hob. Will it prosper? I Heb. 

made fit. 



and wise counsels, bring upon themselves deeper guilt 
and severer punishment. Hence we see the folly of trust- 
ing to the merits of saiiit.s on earth or in heaven, as if these 
could ttike the place of our own personal repentance and 
faith in ('hrist. 

22, 23. Sinners are generally blind to their own wicked- 
ness, and therefore disposed to justify themselves, and 
complain of God's severity; butall whose hearts are right 
can see in their character and conduct the justice of God's 
dealings. 

CnATTER XV. 

2. JVliat is the vine-tree more tlian any tree; the value of 
the vine lies in its fruit. AVhen this ceases, or is changed 
into " wild grapes," Isa. 5 : 2, it becomes the most worthless 
of all trees. So the excellence of (iod's people consisted 
in their fruits of righteousness. When these were changed 
to iniquity, they became as fuel fit for the burning. Com- 
pare Joiin 15:1-G. 

5. When it was witole; when fsriiel remained tinbrokoii, 
as in the days of David aiul Solomon. IVas meet for no 
work; was valuable only as bearing fruit, fVhcn tite fire 
hath devoured it; an allu,sioii to the destruction of Israel, 
which was already complete, and that of Judah, which 
was now in progress, 

INSTHrCTION. 

God values his churches, not for their worldly wealth, 
rank, or influence, but for their fruits of holiness, AVhen 
these fail, they liecomo abominable in his sight, and he 
casts them out of his favor, and gives them over to weak- 
ness and ruin. 



Jcrusaknis original 



EZEKIEL XVr. 



state described. 



\. M. 3110. have given to tlie fire for fuel, so will I give 
W4. " the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 

7 And I will set my face against them ; they 
shall go out from one fire, and another fire shall 
devour them;" and ye shall know that 1 am the 
Lord, when I set my face against them.'' 

8 And 1 will make the land desolate, because 
they have committed* a trespass, saith the Lord 
God. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

1 Under the similitude of a wretched infant is shown the natural state 
of Jerusalem. 6 0-od"s extraordinary love towards her. 15 Her mon- 
strous whoredom. 35 Her grievous judgment. 44 Her sin, matching 
her mother, and exceeding her sisters Sodom and Samaria, calleth for 
Judgments. 60 Mercy is promised her in the end. 

AGAIN the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, 

2 Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know hor 
abominations,'' 

3 And say, Thus saith the Lord God unto Jeru- 
salem ; Thy birth and thy nativity* is of the land 
of Canaan; thy father was an Amorite, and thy 
mother a Hittite.'' 

4 And as for thy nativity, in the day thou wast 
i)orn thy navel was not cut," neither wast thou 
washed in water to supple thee;* thou wast not 
salted at all, nor swaddled at all. 

5 None eye pitied thee, to do any of these unto 
thee, to have compassion upon thee; but thou 
wast cast out in the open field, to the loathing of 
thy person, in the day that thou wast born. 

6 ii And when I passed by thee, and saw thee 
polluted^ in thine own blood, I said unto thee 
when thou wast in thy blood, Live; yea, I said 
unto thee lohcn thou xcast in thy blood. Live.'' 

7 I have caused thee to multiply' as the bud of 
the field,' and thou hast increased and waxen 
great, and thou art come to excellent' ornaments : 
thy breasts are fashioned,'' and thy hair is grown, 
whereas thou icast naked and bare. 

8 Now when 1 passed by thee, and looked upon 
thee, behold, thy time was the time of love ; and I 
.spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy naked- 
ness:' yea, I sware unto thee, and entered into a 
covenant with thee,J saith the Lord God, and tliou 
beeamest mine.'' 

9 Then washed I thee with water ; ' yea, I thor- 
oughly washed away thy blood' from thee, and I 
anointed thee with oil. 



a r.a. 21:1S; Aino-i5:lS, 10. b 


ch. 14:8. ■ Hpb. iTF-S-pasfied. c Isa. 5S:1. 


t Heb. cutting out, or kabitatioyi. 


d Gen. U:-2n, -JO; Neh. 9:7. e Hos. *2:3. 


I Or, token 1 looked upon ihee. 


Or. irodfien under foot, f Exod. 3:7, S. 


I Heb. made Ihee a million. P Ej 


od. 1 : 7 ; Lteut. 1:10. t Heb. ornament of. 


h Song 4:5. > Ruth :i;<J. J Exoc 


.19:J. kJer-2:-2. 'lJohn5:S. 'Heb. 



CHAPTER XYI. 

In this chapter Jerusalem is set forth under the allegory 
of a lewd woman. Her history represents the whole his- 
tory of God's covenant people from the beginning. 

3. Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan; the 
■lews gloried in their descent from Abraham ; but their 
history proved them to have been from the beginning 
Canaanites in character. Thy father was an Amorite, aiid 
thy mother a Hittite; .Jerusalem is described as a Ca- 
naanite on the side of lioth parents, that is, of unmixed 
(^anaanitish descent. Tlie Canaanitish tribes are chosen 
to represent her origin, because these were the vilest of 
the heathen, and devoted by God to destruction. The 



10 I clothed thee also with broidered work, and 
shod thee with badgers' skin, and I girded thee 
about with fine linen, and I covered thee with silk. 

Ill decked tlico also with ornauients, and I put 
bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain on thy neck. 

12 And I put a jewel on thy forehead,* and ear- 
rings in thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon 
thy head. 

13 'J'hus wast thou decked with gold and silver; 
and thy raiment was o/'fine linen, and silk, and 
broidered work;'" thou didst cat fine flour, and 
honey, and oil;" and thou wast exceeding beauti- 
ful," and thou didst prosper into a kingdom. 

14 And thy renown went forth among the heathen 
for thy beauty:'' for it iras perfect through my 
comeliness, which I had put upon thee,'' saith the 
Lord God. 

15 1' But thou didst trust in thine own beauty,'' 
and playedst the harlot because of thy renown,'' 
and pouredst out thy fornications on every one 
that passed by ; his it was. 

IG And of thy garments thou didst take, and 
deckedst thy high places with divers colors,' and 
playedst the harlot thereupon: the lihc things ^\\iA\ 
not come, neither shall it be so. 

17 Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of my 
gold and of my silver, which I had given thee, 
and niadcst to thyself images of men,* and didst 
commit whoredom with them. 

18 And tookcst thy broidered garments, and 
coveredst them : and thou hast set mine oil and 
mine incense before them. 

19 My meat also which I gave thee, fine flour, 
and oil, and honey, wherewith I fed thee, thou hast 
even set it before them for a sweet savor :'^ and 
thus it was, saith the Lord God. 

20 Moreover thou hast taken thy sons and thy 
daughters, whom thou hast borne unto me, and 
these hast thou sacrificed unto them to be devour- 
ed."" Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter, 

21 That thou hast slain my children, and deliv- 
ered them to cause them to pass through the f re 
for them?''' 

22 And in all thine abominations and thy whore- 
doms thou hast not remembered the days of thy 
youth,"' when thou wast naked and bare, and wast 
polluted in thy blood. 

23 And it came to pass after all thy wickedness, 
(woe, woe unto thee! saith the Lord God.) 



bloods, t Heb. nose; Isa. 3:21. m Psa. 45:13. 14. o Deut. 32:1.1, 14: Psa. 
81:16; 147:14. oPsa.48:2. p2Chr.9:2:3. q Deut. 4:7; Psa. 6U:2; 'Lam. 
2:15. rjer. 7:4. » Isa. 1 :21 ; Jcr. 2:20; 3:1, 2, 6; Hos. 1, 2. I ch. 7:30; 
Hos. 2:S. iHeb. amafe. 5 Ileb. .Wl'or o/rcsf. I Heb. rfesour. " 2 Kings 
16:3; 2 Chr. 33:6; Isa. 57:5. v Psa. 106:37. " Jer. 2:2. 



great truth which this allegory teaches is, that no human 
descent can give holiness of heart and a title to God's 
favor. " That which is born of the flesh is flesh." John 
1:13; 3:0. 

4. Thy nativity — nor simidled; the words describe the 
birth of a wretched infant, cast out and ready to perish. 

5, 6. None eye pitied thee — I said unto thee — Liiy; in them- 
selves, the Israelites were from the beginning utterly 
helpless; all the privileges which distinguished them 
from their heathen neighbors were God's free gift. Deut. 
7:7, 8; 8:17, 18. 

15. Plaijedd the harlot; by the worship of the gods of the 
heathen, which is spiritual fornication, and was generally 
connected with literal impurity-. 

92.T 



JadaKs "ross idolatries 



EZEKIEL XVI. 



judged and puidsficd. 



24 T/iat thou liast also huilt unto tlicc an emi- 
nent place,* and hast made thee a higli place in 
every street." 

2') Thou hast built thy hif^li place at every head 
of the way,"" and hast made thy beauty to be ab- 
horred, and hast opened thy feet to every one that 
passed by, and multiplied thy whoredoms. 

26 Tiiou hast also committed fornication with the 
Egyptians thy neiglibors,'' great of flesh ; and liast 
increased thy whoredoms, to provoke me to anger. 

27 Behold, therefore I have stretched out my 
hand over thee, and have diuiinishcd thine ordi- 
nary /borf,'' and delivered thee unto the will of 
them that hate thee,'' the daughters* of the Philis- 
tines,' whicli are ashamed of thy lewd way. 

28 Thou hast played the whore also wuth the 
Assyrians,' because thou wast unsatiable ; yea, 
tliou hast played the harlot with them, and yet 
couidest not be satisfied. 

29 Thou liast moreover multiplied tliy fornica- 
tion in the land of Canaan unto Chaldca; and yet 
thou wast not satisfied herewith. 

30 How weak is thy heart, saith the Lord God, 
seeing thou doest all these things, the work of an 
imperious whorish woman ;'' 

31 In tiiat thou buildest thine' eminent place in 
the head of every way,' and makest thy high place 
in every street; and hast not been as a harlot, in 
that tiiou scornest Iiire; 

32 But as a wife that committeth adultery, u'hich 
taketh strangers instead of her husband ! 

33 They give gifts to all wiiores : but thou giv- 
est thy gifts to all thy lovers,' and hirest^ them, 
that they may come unto thee on ever}' side for 
tliy whoredom. 

34 And tlie contrary is in thee from o/Arr women 
in tliy whoredoms, whereas none followeth thee to 
commit whoredoms: and in that thou givest a re- 
ward, and no reward is given unto thee, therefore 
thou art contrary. 

35 1 Wiierefore, harlot, hear the word of the 
Loiin : " 

30 Thus saith tlie Lord God; because tliy fillhi- 
ness was poured out, and thy nakedness discovered 
through thy wlioredoms witli thy lovers,' and witii 
all tlic idols of thy abominations, and by tlie blood 
of thy cliildren,'" which thou didst give unto them ; 

37 Behold, therefore I will gatliei- all tity lovers, 
with whom thou hast taken pleasure, and all them 
that thou hast loved, Avitli all them that thou hast 

• Or, hrothfl-house. a .ler. r):a. bProv. 9:14. t ch. 20:7. S; Isi. 30:2, 3. 
J Hon. 2:9. e Pia. 106:41. t Or. CT(i«. f 2 Chr. 2,n: IM. J nh. 2:1: 13, etc.: 
2 Kings 10:7; Jer. 2:18, 36. h l'rov.7:ll. i Or, In thy dauglUers \tthint. 
ijer.2:2a. J Uoj. t<:!), 10. » Hob. 4ri«M(. k John 4:10, IS. ir»a.I39:ll, 
12. "• Jer. 2:34. « Jer. 13:22, 28; ham. 1:8; Hos. 2:3, 10. I Hcb. with 
judgmtnls of o Lev. 20: 10; Dcut. 22:22. P Exod. 21 :12. iNah. 1:2. 

24. An eminent place; selected for prostitution, that is, 
idolatrous worship. See note on ver. 15. 

26. With tlie Es;iiptians; here, as in verse 28, there is an 
allusion to tlie unlawful alliances of the .Jews with K^ypt 
and Assyria, which were made in the spirit of idolatry, 
and connecte<l with idolatrous practices, and for which 
they were often reproved by the prophets. Isa. 30:1, 2; 
31:1; 2 Kings IB:"; Hosea .'■):13; 7:11; H:."!. 

41. In the sight of mani/ women; meaning, in the sight of 
the surrounding heathen nations, who are, like God's cov- 
enant people, represented under the symbol of women. 

42. M)/ fury — to rest; by satisfying my justice in thv 

■ 926 



hated ; I will even gather them round about ^i-^\:^^\ 
against thee, and will discover thy nakedness unto 
tliem, that they may see all thy nakedness." 

38 And I will judge thee, as women that break 
wedlock" and shed blood are judged ;■" and I will 
give thee blood in fury and jealousy.'' 

39 And I will also give thee into their hand, 
and they shall throw down thine eminent place. ^ 
and shall break down thy high places: they shall 
strip thee also of tliy clothes," and shall take thy 
fair jewels,' and leave thee naked and bare. 

40 They shall also bring up a company against 
thee, and they shall stone thee with stones, and 
thrust thee through with their swords.' 

41 And tliey sliall burn thy houses with fire," 
and execute judgments upon thee in the sight of 
many women :"■ and I will cause thee to cease 
from playing the harlot, and thou also shalt give 
no hire any more. 

42 So will I make my fury toward thee to rest, 
and my jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will 
be quiet, and will be no more angry. 

43 Because thou hast not remendiered the days 
of thy youth,"' but hast fretted me in all these 
things ; behold, therefore I also will recompense 
thy way upon thy head,'' saith the Lord God: and 
thou shalt not commit this lewdness above all 
thine abominations. 

44 1 Behold, every one that useth proverbs shall 
use this proverb against thee, saying. As is the 
mother, so is her daughter. 

45 Thou art thy mother's daughter, that loatheth 
her husband and her cliildren ; and thou art the 
sister of thy sisters, which loatJied their husbands 
and their cliildren : your mother was a Hittite, and 
your father an Amorite. 

46 And thine elder sister is Samaria, she and 
her daughters that dwell at thy left hand : and 
thy younger sister,' tiiat dwellelh at thy right 
hand, is Sodom and her daughters.-^ 

47 Yet hast thou not walked after their ways, 
nor done after their abominations: but, as if that 
tcere a very little thing,^ thou wast corrupted 
more than liiev in all thy ways.'- 

48 Jls J live", saith the' Lord Gon, Sodom thy 
sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as 
thou hast done, thou and thy daughters." 

49 Behold, this was the inicjuity of thy sister 
Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of 
idleness was in her and in her daughters, neither 



rver. 24, 31. • Ho«. 2:3. 1 Heb. itt:ilriimeii!s of lliinc ornnmtnl. > Jer. 
25:0. u2Kings25:9. » ch. 5:(<, 13; Job 31:20; ITim. .5:20. »• I'si. 78:42 
» oh. 9:10; 11-21. * Heb. sister laser than thou, y Deut. 32:32. t Or, 
that was loathed ai a small thing. ' 2 Kings 21:9; 1 Cor. 5:1. > Matt. 
10:15; 11:24. 

punishment. This verse contains not a promise, but a 
threatening, as the following verses show. 

46. Thine elder luster is Samaria — thy younger sister- — 
Sodom ; S;imaria represents the ten tribes, who apostatized 
from God's service in the days of .leroboam,as Sodom does 
the heathen world. Doth these arc sisters to .lerusalem 
in character. The terms " ehler " and " younger " refer not 
to age, but to relative dignity. At Ihy left hand; to the 
nortli of Jerusalem, the c;ist being the Iront. At thy rigitt 
luind; to the south-cast. i)robabIy where the southern bay 
of the Dead sea now lies. 

•17. Corrupted more than they; compare Matt. 11:21-24. 



Jerumlem thratemd. 



EZEKIEL XVII. 



GocFs covenant mercy. 



u.c ff""' did slie strengthen the hand of tlic poor 
and needy/ 

50 And tliey -were hauglity," and committed 
abomination before me : therefore 1 took them 
away as I saw good.'^ 

51 Neitlier liatli 8amaria committed half of thy 
sins; but tliou hast multiplied tiiine abominations 
more than they, and hast Justified thy sisters in all 
thine abominations which thou hast done.'' 

b'l Tliou also, which hast judged thy sisters,'' 
bear thine own shame for thy sins that thou hast 
committed more abominable than they:' they are 
more righteous than thou : yea, be thou confounded 
also, and bear thy shame, in that thou hast justi- 
lied thy sisters. 

5)i When I shall bi'ing again their cajitivity,'^ 
the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and 
the captivity of Samaria and her daugiitcrs, then 
u-ill I bring again the captivity of thy captives in 
the midst of them: 

54 That thou mayest l)ear thine own shame, and 
mayest be confounded in all that thou hast done,'' 
in that thou art a comfort unto them. 

55 Wlien thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, 
shall return to their former estate, and Samaria 
and her daughters shall return to their former 
estate, tlicn thou and thy daughters shall return 
to your former estate. 

5G For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by 
thy mouth* in the day of thy pride,^' 

57 Before thy wickedness was discovered, as at 
the time of (ky reproach of the daughters of 
Syria,*J and all that are round about her, the daugh- 



, 


G 


n. 13:10, 


in 


; I'': 


20; Deut. 


32:15. b 


Prciv 


Hi 


18; 18 


1; 




t Gen. 


1!) 


21 


Jer. 211:1 G. 


d.)e 


r.3:U. c 


Rom. ):32 


2:1 


-10. 


fjer. 


i:i: 


40. 


Sjer. 


4S 


■1- 


J9;39. 


b V 


r. (i:i 


• Heb. / 


or a report. 


or*c 


anr 


g. t I: 


eb 


prides, or 


excellennes. ' 


>a 


;1S:^ 


Luke IS 


11. 1 Heb 


Arn 


m. 


i 2 Kil 


"s 


1(> 


5; Isi 


7:1 




Or, spo 


I. 


k Je 


. M:24. 


1 Heb. them. 1 


ftla 


It. 7:1, 


- 


" 


Deut. 



51. Half of thy sins; in comparing the guilt of Jerusalem 
witli that of Samaria, God has regard to the greater privi- 
leges and mercies bestowed upon the former city. Com- 
pare John 15:22, 24. Hast justified thy sisters; liast shown 
them to bo comparatively innocent. 

52. Hast judged thy sisters ; compare Rom. 2:1. 

5:1 The captivity of Sodom and her daughters; not literally, 
but figuratively, by the conversion of the heathen nations 
whom she represents. Even in the restoration of Jeru- 
salem, God humbles her by likening her to Samaria and 
Sodom. This prophecy is fulfilled in Christ, who has abol- 
ished the distinction between Jew and Gentile. Rom. 10: 12. 

56. Was not mentioned by thy mouth; thou disdainedst to 
mention her. 

57. Reproach of the daughters of Syria; proceeding from 
them, 'fhe terrible judgments of God upon Jerusalem 
exposed her wickedness, and made her a byword to the 
surrounding nations. Chap. 5:14, 15. 

GO. / will remember my covenant with thee; this promise is 
made to the true Zion, the church of God, which Jerusa- 
lem represents. 

61. Give them unto thee for daughters ; by their conversion 
and incorporation into the church. Not by thy covenant; 
not for thy faithfulness in keeping thy covenant with me. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
5. The C'hristian should continually remember that all 
which distinguishes him from the vilest of men he owes 
10 the grace and providence of God, and not to any good- 
ness or merit of his own. So also those nations which 
God has made great and powerful, should glory, not in 
their own wisdom and might and riches, but in God's 
unmerited favor, which has raised them fmm small be- 
ginnings to their present eminence. 



ters of the Philistines, which despise^ thee round 
about.'' 

58 Thou hast borne thy lewdness' and thine 
abominations, saith the Lord. 

59 For thus saith the Lord God ; I will even 
deal with thee as thou hast done,' which hast de- 
spised the oath in breaking the covenant." 

60 1 Nevertheless, I will remember my covenant 
with thee in the days of thy youth," and I will es- 
tablish unto thee an everlasting covenant." 

Gl Then thou shalt remember thy ways,"* and be 
ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine 
elder and thy younger: and 1 will give them unto 
thee for daughters,'' but not by thy covenant.'' 

r>2 And I will establish my covenant with thee :' 
and tlifui slialt know tliat I am the Lord: 

0:} That tliou mayest remember, and lie ccnfound- 
od,' and never open thy mouth any more because 
of thy shame," when I am pacified toward thee for 
all that thou hast done, saith the Lord God. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

1 UnJer the parable of two eagles and a vine, 11 is shoi»-n God's judg- 
ment upon Jerusalem for revolting from Babylon to Egypt. 22 G-od 
promisetli to plant tlie cedar of the gospel. 

AND the word of the Lord came unto me, say- 
ing, 

2 Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak a 
parable unto the house of Israel; 

3 And say. Thus saith the Lord God ; A great 
eagle with great wings,"' long winged, full of feath- 
ers, which had divers colors,'' came unto Lebanon, 
and took the highest branch of the cedar :''' 



29:12-1.5. n Psa.. 106:4.5. o 2 Sam. 23:5 ; Jer. -32:40 ; 811:5. p Psa. 119:59. 
q I*a. 51:1; 60:4; Gal. 4:26-31. r Jer. 31:31 ; John 15: 16. s Hos. 2:19, 211. 
> Kzra.9:6; Dan. 9:7, 8. uRom.3:19. vHo3.8:l. ^ Hch. emliroidering. 



6. No language is too strong to describe the vileness 
and wretchedness of that state in which Christ found the 
believer, and from which his grace has raised him to wliat- 
cver holiness and blessedness he now possesses. 

8-14. The consideration of the unspeakable goodness of 
our Redeemer, in bestowing upon us so many and so great 
mercies, is well adapted to make us ashamed of our past 
inconstancy, and to unite us more closely to him in the 
bonds of love and gratitude. 

15-34. The history of God's ancient people is a sad but 
true picture of the course of events in those Christian na- 
tions that have been most highly favored with the means 
of grace ; every Christian also will see in it, with decji 
shame and godly sorrow, much that agrees with his own 
past life and conduct. 

35-43. God will turn all the vain confidences of those 
who forsake him against themselves, and make them the 
means of their destruction. 

48. God estimates the guilt of transgressors by the light 
which they have enjoyed, and the means which have been 
used to bring them to repentance. At the last day he will 
regard and treat as the greatest sinners those who have 
rebelled against the most faithful instruction and reproof 

61. God will assuredly save his church, and gather all 
nations into her. But this work he will accomplish in 
such a way that his own name shall be glorified, and she 
deeply humbled in view of her past inconstancy and un- 
faithfulness. 

CHAPTER XVn. 

3. A great eagle; Nebuchadnezzar. Tlie highest branch 
of the cedar; Jehoiachin, whom Nebuchadnezzar dethroned 
and carried to Babylon. 

9-21 



The. parahle of two 



EZEKIEL XVII. 



tngles and a vine. 



4 Kc cropped off the top of his younsr twigs, and 
carried it into a land of traffic ; lie t^et it in a city 
of merchants. 

5 lie took also of the seed of the land, and 
planted it in a fruitful field;"" ho placed it by 
great waters, and set it as a willow-tree." 

6 And it grew, aud became a spreading vine of 
low stature,"^ whose brandies turned toward him, 
and the roots thereof were under him : so it he- 
came a vine, aud brought forth branches, aud shot 
forth sprigs. 

7 There was also another great eagle with great 
wings and many feathers: and behold, this vine 
did bend her I'oots toward him, and shot forth her 
branches toward him, that he might water it by 
the furrows of her plantation.'' 

8 It was planted in a good soil * by great waters, 
that it might bring forth branches, and that it 
might bear fruit, that it might be a goodly vine. 

9 Say thou. Thus saitii the Lord God; Shall it 
prosper? shall lie not pull up the roots thereof, 
and cut off the fruit thereof,'^ that it wither ? it 
shall wither in all the leaves of her spring, even 
without great power or many people to pluck it 
up by the roots thereof. 

10 Yea, behold, being planted, shall it prosper ? 
shall it not utterly wither,'" when the east wind 
toucheth it?° it shall wither in the furrows where 
it grew. 

Ill Moreover the word of the Lord came unto 
me, saying, 

12 Say now to the rebellious house," Know ye 
not what these things Jiican ? Tell them., I3ehold, 
the king of Babylon is (;omo to Jerusalem, aud 
hath taken the king thereof, and the princes there- 
of, and led them with him to Babylon ;' 

13 Aud hath taken of the king's seed, and made 
a covenant with him, and hath taken' an oath of 
him :'' he hath also taken the mighty of the land : 

14 That the kingdom might be base,'' that it 
might not lift itself up, but that by keeping of his 
covenant it might stand.'' 

15 But he rebelled against him in sendins: his 



• Heb 


viil it in afield of seed, a 


Dfut 


8:7, 9. b Isa. u 


4. 


c ver. 14. 


■i vei. 1. 


. t ileh. field, e 2 Kings I 


4:7. 


fch. 19:12. e Ho 


.12 


:!: 13:13. 


k oh. 2 


5. i VCT. 3; 2 Kings 24:11- 


17. 


Heb. brought kin 


to 


i 2 Chr. 


:)6:13. 


k ch. 29: 14. i Heb. to kcef 


his e 


ovenant to stand to 


It. 


1 2 Kings 


24:20. 


m Isa. 31 : 1-3. n vcr. 9. 


ch. 


12:13; Jcr. .V2:ll. 


P 


Jer. 37:7. 



4. A land of traffic; Chaldea. A city of merclmnts; Bab- 
ylon. 

5. Of the seed of the land; that is, of "the kind's seed," 
ver. 13,moaninj;; Zedckiah, .son of .Josiah, whom Nebuchad- 
nezzar made king in the [dace of Jchoiachin. Seo the nar- 
rative, 2 Kings 24:8-17, and the explanation below, verses 
12-15. 

6. Of tow stature; not a lofty cedar, as before, but a low 
vine ; that is, a tributary king. Compare versos 12, 1.3. 
Turned toward him; towards Nebuchadnezzar, as depend- 
ent upon bini. 

7. Another great cap;lc ; Pha.Ta.6h. Did bend Iter roots toward 
him ; turning away its confidence from Nebuchadnezzar to 
I'haraoh. 

9. Shall he notpidl; that is, the first eagle. All the leaves 
of Iter spring; literally, all tlie fresh leaves of her spring- 
ing ; that is, all her fresh and green foliage. Without great 
[lower — roots thereof; or wilhout [the cinploymcnt of] great 
power, and many people to phuk her uji from her roots. 
The work of phieking up the vine of Judah from the place 
whore it grew shall not require a numerous force. 
928 



ambassadors into Egypt,' tiiat tliev mi'rht a m s^m. 
give lum horses and much people.'" Miall iw- 
he prosper?" shall he escape that doeth such things? 
or shall he break the covenant, and be delivered ? 
IG ./Is I live, saith the Lord God, surely in the 
place ivhc7-e the king dwelkth that nmde him king. 
whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he 
brake, even with him in the midst of Babylon he 
shall die." 

17 Neither shall Pharaoli with his mighty army 
and great coni])any make for him in the war,"" by 
casting up mounts, and building forts, to cut off 
many persons: 

18 Seeing he despised the oath by breaking the 
covenant, when, lo, he had given his hand," and 
hath done all these things, he .shall not escape. 

19 Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Jls I 
live, surely mine oath that he hath despised, and 
my covenant that he hath broken, even it will I 
recompense upon his own head. 

20 And I will spread my net upon him,'' and ho 
shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him 
to Babylon, and will j^lead with him there for his 
trespass that he hath trespassed against me. 

21 And all his fugitives with all his bands shall 
fall by the sword, and they that remain shall be 
scattered toward all winds:" and ye shall know 
that I the Lord have spoken it. 

22 t Thus saith the Lord God ; I will also take 
of the highest branch of the higli cedar, and will 
set it;^ I will crop off from the top of his young 
twigs a tender one," and will plant if upon a high 
mountain and eminent:^' 

23 In the mountain of the height of Israel will I 
plant it : and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear 
fruit, and be a goodly cedar: and under it siiall 
dwell all fowl of every wing; in the shadow of 
the branches thereof shall they dwell."' 

24 And all the frees of the field shall know that 
I the IjORD have brought down tlie high tree, have 
exalted the low Irce,^ have dried up the gi-cen tree, 
and have made tiie dry tree to flourisli -J 1 the 
Lord have spoken and have done it. 



n I Chr. 29:24. ' ch. 32:3. • Amos 9:9, 10. t Ua. 11:1 ; Jer. 23:.'>. » Isa. 
S3:2. V ch. 20:40; Psa. 2:0; 72:16; Isa. 2:2, 3: Mic. 4:1, 2. w ch. 31:0: 
Dan. 4:12; M.-itt. 13:47, 49; Luke 14:21-23. ' hvkc 1:52, 53; 1 Cor. 1:27. 
23. yLuk6SJ:31. 



10. Tlie enM wind ; a symbol of tlic Chaldean invasion, 
bringing with it desolation. 

13. Taken the mishty of the land; taken them away to 
Babylon. 2 Kings'24:12. 

ir>. Rebelled ai^ainst him; 2 Kings 24:20; 2 Chron. '.W-.n. 

IC. In the midst of Babylon he sliall die; 2 Kings 25:7: 
Jer. 52:11. 

21. Toward all winds ; 2 Kings 2.''i:,'>. 

22. Of the highest branch of the high cedar — a tender one: 
the Messiah, as the context shows, who is here, as else- 
where, compared to a branch of tlod's planting. 

24. Brought down the high tree; abased Zedckiah and his 
princes, who are here the representatives of all who exalt 
themselves against God. Kxalted the low tree — made the dry 
tree to flourish; that is, exalted the Messiah in his stead. 
Compare Isa. 53:2. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I-lfi. Every covenant which we make with others in law- 
ful things must bo faithfully kept, though they be wicked 
and unreasonable men, and though it seem greatly for our 
present interest to break our word, (iod will listen \» no 



Parable of sour grapes. 



EZEKIEL XVIII. 



Eqii'ty of Goa's de lings. 



I G-od reprovetli tile unjust parable of sour grapes. 5 He showeth how 
he dealeth with a just father; 10 with a wicked son of ajust father; 
14 with a just son of a wicked father; 19 with a wicked man repent- 
ing: 24 with a just man revolting. 25 He defendeth his justice, 31 
and exhorteth to repentance. 

THE word of tlie Lord came unto me again, 
saying, 

2 Wliat mean ye, that ye use this proverb con- 
cerning the land of Israel, saying, The fathers 
have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth 
are set on edge?" 

3 Jis I live, saith the Lord God, ye shall not 
have occasion any more to use this proverb in 
Israel. 

4 Behold, all souls are mine; as the soul of the 
father, so also the soul of the son is mine : the 
soul that sinneth, it shall die."* 

5 1 But if a man be just, and do tliat which is 
lawful and right,* 

6 .dnd hath not eaten upon the mountains, nei- 
tiier hath lifted up his eyes to tlic idols of the 
house of Israel, neither liatli defiled his neighbor's 
wife," neither hath come near to a meustruous 
woman,'' 

7 And hath not oppressed any,'' bid hath restored 
to the debtor his ])ledge,'" hath spoiled none by 
violence, hath given his bread to the hungry, and 
hath covered tlie naked with a garment;''' 

8 He that hath not given fortli upon usury, nei- 
ther hath taken any increase,'' that hath withdrawn 
his hand from iniquity, hath executed true judg- 
ment between man and man,' 

9 Hath walked in my statutes, and hath kept 
my judgments, to deal truly;-' he m just, he shall 
surely live, saitli the Lord God. 

10 IF If he beget a son that is a robber,* a shed- 
der of blood,'' and that doeth the like to any one 
of these things,^ 

11 And that doeth not any of those duties, but 
even hath eaten upon the mountains, and defiled 
his neighbor's wife, 

12 Hath oppressed the poor and needy, hath 
spoiled by violence, hatii not restored the pledge. 



» Jer. 3I:a9; Lira. 5:7. b Rom. 6:43. 


' Heb. jud2:nutit and justice. 


' Lev. -20; lU. i Lev. 18:10, etc. « Exod. 22 


21, etc.; Prov. 3:31. < Deut. 


24:12. 1.3. s Deut. 1.5:7, S; Isi. 58:7; Matt. • 


5:35. hLev. 25:3li, 37; Neh. 


5:7; Psa. 15:5. i Lev. 19: 15. 35; Zech.8:16 


J Psi. 119:l-li. ^ Or. breaker 


vp of a house, k Num. 35:31. 1 Or, to hi 


brother besides any of these. 



plea of expediency, but will punish perfidy towards our 
fellow-men as falsehood to himself: for he is the God of 
truth, and demands of us truth in all our dealings. 

17-21. They who violate their obligations to God and 
their fellow-men, in the hope of some present advantage, 
generally meet with disappointment and shame in the 
present life, and they must incur God's wrath and curse 
in the life to come. 

22-24. God exalts and abases earthly kingdoms as he 
chooses ; but his kingdom of grace stands fast amid all 
the changes of time, and shall in the end cover the world 
with its glory. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

6. Eaten upon the mountains ; eaten sacrificial offerings to 
idols. Lifted tip his eye.':; in worship, with confidence and 
)onging desire. Compare Psa. 121:1. 

7. Restored — his pled jre; see Exod. 22:26, 27. 

8. Usury—increase ; see Exod. 22 : 25. 

20. The son shall not bear ; be punished for. Shall be upon 
him; he alone shall be rewiirded or punished for it. 
59 



and hath lifted up his eyes to tlie idols, hath com- 
mitted abomination, 

13 Hath given forth upon usury, and hath taken 
increase; shall he then live? he shall not live: he 
hath done all these abominations ; he shall surely 
die; his blood^ shall be upon him.' 

14 1^ Now, lo, if he beget a son, that seeth all 
his father's sins which he hath done, and consider- 
ctli.'" and doeth not such like, 

15 That hatli not eaten upon the mountains, nei- 
tlier hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house 
of Israel, hath not defiled his neighbor's wife, 

16 Neither hatli oppressed any, hath not with- 
holden the pledge,' neither hath spoiled by vio- 
lence, but hatli given his bread to the hungry, and 
hath covered the naked with a garment, 

17 That hath taken off his hand from the poor, 
that hath not received usury nor increase, hath 
executed my judgments, hath walked in my stat- 
utes ; he shall not die for the iniquity of his father, 
he shall surely live. 

1 8 Jlsfor his father , because he cruelly oppressed . 
spoiled ills brother by violence, and did that wiiich 
is not good among his people, lo, even he shall 
die in his iniquity." 

19 1 Yet say ye. Why? doth not the son Vicar 
the iniquity of the father?" Wlien the son hatli 
done that which is lawful and right, and hath kcjit 
all my statutes, and hath done them, he shall 
surely live. 

20 The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son 
shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither 
shall the father bear the iniquity of the son :p the 
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him," 
and the wickedness of tlie wicked shall be upon 
him."" 

21 But if the wicked will turn from all his sirs 
that he hath committed,^ and keep all my statutes, 
and do that which is lawful and right,' he shall 
surely live, he shall not die. 

22 All his transgressions that he hath commit- 
ted," tliey shall not be mentioned unto him:" iic 
his righteousness that he hath done he shall live. 



s 

to 
2 


Hfb. bloods. 1 ch 
pledge, n John S 
:I6; 2 Kings 14:5, 
14-26. uch. 33:16 


33:4; Acts 18:6. m vpr. 28. 1 
24. Exod. 20:5; 2 Kings 23 
6. q Isi. 3:10, 11. r Rom. 2:9. 
. vpsa. 103:12; Rom. 8:1. 


H 
20 


b pledged, o 
; 84:3, 4. P 
Prov. 28:13. 


taken 
Beut. 
tJas. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

2, 3. God will in the end make the justice of his deal- 
ings with men so apparent that "every mouth shall be 
stopped, and all the world become guilty " before him. 
Rorn. 3:4, 19. 

4-23. God bestows upon children many blessings through 
the piety of their fathers, and sends upon them many evils 
through their wickedness, Exod. 20:5, 6; but no sinner 
will be saved for the goodness of his forefathers, nor any 
righteous man condemned for their wickedness. At the 
final reckoning, every one will be called to an account for 
the deeds he has himself done, whether they be good or 
bad. 2 Cor. 5:10. 

2(i. It is only perseverance in holiness to the end that 
can secure eternal life. Past deeds of righteousness can- 
not benefit the man who turns from them to the practice 
of iniquity. Matt.24:12, 13; Gal. 6:9; Ueb. 6:4, 6, 11, 12; 
10:36; Rev. 2:26. 

27, 28. No sinner, who is willing to repent and turn to 
God, need be discouraged on account of his past trans- 
gressions. Isa. 55:7. 

929 



A lamentation for 



EZEKIEL XX. 



the princes of Israel. 



23 Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked 
shoulil die ?" saitli tlu; Lord Gon : and not that he 
slioiild return from his ways, and live? 

24 1" But wlien the righteous turneth away from 
his righteousness, and committetii iniquity, and 
docth accordiug to all tlu; abominations that the 
wicked man doetli, shall he live?'' All his right- 
eousness that he hath done sluill not be mentioned : 
in iiis trespass that he hath trespassed, and in his 
sin tiiat he hath sinned, in them shall he die. 

25 11 Yet ye say. The way of the Lord is not 
equal. Hear now, house of Israel ; Is not my 
way equal? arc not your ways unequal? 

2(5 When a righteous man turneth away from his 
righteousness, and committetii iniquity, and dicthin 
them; forhis iniquity that lie hath done shall he die. 

27 Again, when the wicked man turneth away 
from his wickedness that he hath committed, and 
doctJi that which is lawful and right, he shall save 
his soul alive. 

28 Because he con sidercth, and turneth a way from 
all his transgressions that he hath committed, he 
shall surely live, he shall not die.''- 

29 Yet saith the house of Israel, The way of the 
Lord is not equal.'' house of Israel, are not my 
ways equal ? are not your ways unequal ? 

30 Therefore I will judge you, house of Israel, 
every one according to his ways, saith the Lord 
God. Repent,'' ami turn yourselves' from all your 
transgressions; so iniiiuity shall not be your ruin. 

31 1 Cast away from you all your transgres- 
sions,'' whereby ye have transgressed ; and make 
you a new heart and a new spirit:- for why will 
ye die, house of Israel? 

32 For I have no pleasure in the death of him 
that dieth, saith the Lord God: wherefore turn 
yourselves,' and live ye. 

C II \ V T K It XIX. 



1 A lamentation fir tlu? princes of Ls 
t;iken in a pit, 10 and for Jerusale 



el, under tlie parable of lions' whelps 
, Uiitler the parable of a wasted 



MOREOVER, take thou up a lamentation for 
the princes of Israel,'' 

2 And say, What is thy mother? A lioness: 
she lay down among lions, she nourished her whelps 
among young lions. 

3 And she brought up one of *her whelps : it be- 



« 1 Tim. 2:4; 2 I'ot. .1:9. b Hob. 0:4-0; 10:20, 27; 2 Pol. 2:20. c I.uko 
1.5:17, etc J I'rov. 10::t. • Rev. 2:5. • Or, others; Psia .Ohiri; Luke 
22::i2. f Kph. 4:32, '.'3. f l'«a. 51:10; Jer. ;)2:3tl. I> ch. 20:17; 27:2. 
I aKingn 23:31-M; 2Chr. 30:1-4: Jer. 22:11-18. t Or, wMims. J Lam. 



CnAPTER XIX. 

2. 77jiy mother; Joruaalein, as representing the Jewish 
state ; the address is to Israel in the general sense, not to 
tlic ten tribes alone, as distinct from the two. A lioness; 
compare Gen. 49 :y. 

:i. One of her whelps; Jehoahaz, whom Pharaoh-r.ocho 
deposed and carried into Egypt. 2 Kings 23:30-34; 
2 Chron. 3« : 1-4. 

5. Another of her whelps ; tlic three kings who succeeded 
Jelioahaz were all earned to IJaljylou by Nebuchadnezzar. 
Of tlieso some underst.-ind hero Johoi:ikim, as the iniiiie- 
diatc successor of Jolioalia/, ; otliers .lelioiacliin, because 
he alone of the three was r;iised to the tlirono by the peo- 
ple. Hut probably the late of this second wliolp represents 
that of "the princes of Isrurl" generally after Johoahaz. 
930 



came a young lion, and it learned to catch '^jj'c.'/iS: 
the prey;' it devoured men. 

4 The nations also heard of him ; he was taken 
in their pit, and they brought him with chains 
unto the land of Egypt. 

5 Now when she saw that she had waited, and 
her hope was lost, then she took another of her 
whelps, and made him a young lion. 

6 And he went u]) and down among the lions, 
he became a young lion, and learned to catch the 
prey, and devoured men. 

7 And he knew their desolate palaces,* and he 
laid waste their cities ; and the land was desolate, 
and the fulness thereof, by the noise of his roaring. 

8 Then the nations set against him on every 
sidp from the provinces, and spread their net over 
him : he was taken in their ])it.J 

9 And they put him in ward in chains,* and 
brought him to the king of Babylon : they brought 
him into holds, that his voice should no more be 
heard upon the mountains of Israel. 

10 ^ Tliy mother is like a vine in thy blood.' 
planted liy the waters:'' she was fruitful and full 
of branches by reason of many waters.' 

11 And she had strong rods for the sceptres of 
them that bare rule, and her stature was e.xalted 
among the thick branches, and she appeared in her 
height with the multitude of her branches. 

12 But she was plucked up in fury, she was cast 
down to the ground, and the east wind dried up 
her fruit:'" her strong rods were broken and with- 
ered; the fire consumed them. 

13 And now she is planted in the wilderness, in 
a dry and thirsty ground." 

14 And fire is gone out of a rod of her branches," 
u-hic/i hath devoured her fruit," so that she hath 
no strong rod to he a sceptre to rule.'' This is a 
lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation. 

C II .VI' TEH XX. 

1 God refuseth to be consulted by the elders of Israel, 5 He showcth 
the story of their rebellions in Ji-^'pt, 10 in the wilderness, 27 and in 
the land. 311 He proiniselh to g:itlicr them by the cospel. 45 Under 
the name of a forest he showetli the destruction of Jerusalem. 

AND it came to pass in the seventh year, in 
the fifth month, the tenth datj of the month, 
that certain of the elders of Israel came to inquire 
of the Loud, and sat before me."' 



4:20. 1 Or, hooks. » Or, quielntss, or likeness, k ch. 17:0, etc. I Deut. 

S:7-D. m ch. : " ' "•-"•'-- 

24:20; Paa. KO; 



10. Is like a vine; or, " was like a vine," prosperous and 
flourishing. Jn Mi/ Woorf; in thy vigor and strength. Tho 
prophet here repeats what he has just said, under a new 
ini.age. 

14. Out of a rod of her branches; Zedekiah's rebellion 
ai'ainst the king of Babylon became a consuming fire, 
which destroyed his kingdom and " the princes of Israel" 
together. 2 Kings 24:20. 

INSTRUCTION. 

When wo compare the weakness and helpless depend- 
ence of the royal family of Judah in the days of Jeremiah 
and Ezekiel, with its glory a|id strength in the time of 
David and Solomon, we have an afl'ecting proof of tiod's 
supreme power over nations, as well as of his unalterablo 
determination to destroy every people tliat persists in 
transgressing his laws. 



The privileges and 



EZEKIEL XX. 



sins (if Israel. 



X. M. S4I1. 2 Then came the word of the Lord unto 

If. C. nbout 

mi- me, saying, 

3 Son of man, speak unto the elders of Israel, and 
say unto them. Thus saith the Lord God ; Are ye 
come to inquire of me? ./is I live, saith the Lord 
God, I will not be inquired of by you." 

4 Wilt thou Judge* them, son of man, wilt thou 
.jud'ic them? cause them to know the abominations 
of tlicir fathers :^ 

5 1 And say unto them. Thus saith the Lord 
God ; La the day when I chose Israel,*" and lifted 
up my hand* unto the seed of the house of Jacob, 
and made myself known unto them in the land of 
Egypt,'' when I lifted up my iiaud unto them, say- 
ing, I am the Lord your God ; 

6 In the day that 1 lifted up my hand unto them, 
to bring tiiein forth of the land of Egypt into a 
land that I had espied for them, flowing with milk 
and honey," which is the glory of all lands:' 

7 Then said I unto them. Cast ye away every 
man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not 
yourselves witli the idols of Egypt:" I am the 
Lord your God. 

8 But they rebelled against me, and would not 
hearken unto me : they did not every man cast away 
the abominations of their eyes, neither did tliey 
forsakethe idols of Egypt:" then I said, I will \m\\v 
out my fury upon tliein,' to acconiplisli my anger 
against them in the midst of the land of Egypt. 

9 But I wrought for my name's sake,* that it 
should not be polluted before the heathen, among 
whom they were, m whose sight I made myself 
known unto them, in bringing them forth out of 
the land of Egypt.'' 

10 ^ Wherefore I caused them to go forth out 
of the land of Egypt,' and brought them into the 
wilderness. 

11 And I gave them my statutes,™ and showed 
theui' my judgments, which if a man do, he shall 
even live in them." 

12 Moreover also I gave tliem my sabbaths, to 
be a sign between me and them," that they might 
know that I am the Lord that .sanctify them. 

13 But the house of Israel rebelled against me 
in the wilderness :'' they walked not in my stat- 
utes, and they despised ray judgments, which if a 
man do, he shall even live in them ; and my sab- 
baths they greatly polluted :i then I said, I would 
pour out my fury upon them in the wilderness to 
consume them.'' 

1-1 But I wrought for my name's sake, that it 
should not be polluted before the heathen, in 
whose sight I brought them out. 



!tc. ; .lohn4;v!4. ' Ox. fktul fm. boh. Hi:'.'. « Deut. 7: 
. ClExod. B:9. d Exod. 3:8.elc. ; Beiit. 4:.i4, 3.5. e Deut 



" Ch. H:l,3. 
t Or, stuare; ver. o; rjxoa. dix. a CiXnd. ^:s.elc.; ueiu. HM-*, .in. = ueut 
8:7, etc. f Psa. iS-.-l. 8 Lc». 18:3; Deut. 29:18-18; Josh. 24:14. h Judg 
2:12-15; 1 Kings 11:5-8; 2 Kings 21 :3, elc. i 2 Kincs 22: 16, 17. J ch 



k Nu 



14:13, 



I Exod. 13: It 



3():2I,2*2; Deul. 9:ao. - i^um. i4;io, eic. ■ cxoa. 

Neh. 9:13, 14; Psi. 147:19. 1 Heb. mnrfe Mfm (o tnoio. iiLev.l«:a; 19:3, 

',1, r. T? 1 Ot.l'J n 1.= ^ rO.Kl r. Xr~u i -, . i ui t- M . ■>(;.6.^ S Psa 



iiBii. ».!■», i^t , I an.. i..ti . i-.j. * nKU. 7/itttic inrin lu Ki 
30. o Exod, 31:1.3. Pisa. r3:10, ^iNeh. 13:18. 



Nun 



CHAPTER XX. 

7. Ami defile not yourselves with the iilols of Egypt ; when 
God came to deUver his people from Kgypt, he found 
them polluted with the worship of its idols, and deserv- 
ing of his wrath. How deep was this moral infection 
appears from the nurrative of the golden calf, in Exodus 
chapter 32. 



15 Yet also I lifted up my hand unto them in the 
wilderness, that I would not bring them into the 
land which I had given Mtm," flowiii<^ with milk 
and honey, which is the glory of all lands; 

IG Because they despised my judfiinents, and 
walked not in my statutes,' but polluted my sab- 
baths : for their heart went after their idols." 

17 Nevertheless mine eye spared them from de- 
stroying them, neither did I make an end of tlicm 
in the wilderness.'' 

18 But I said unto their children in the wilder- 
ness. Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers,'" 
neither oliserve their judgments, nor defile your- 
selves with their idols:'' 

19 1 am the Lord your God ;'' walk in my stat- 
utes, and keep my judgments, and do them;^ 

20 And hallow my sabbaths;" and they shall be 
a sign between me and you, that ye may know that 
I am the Lord your God. 

21 No twithstanding,thechildreii rebelled against 
rne:'' they walked not in my statutes, neither kept 
my judgments to do them, which ?/' a man do, he 
shall even live in them ; they polluted my sab- 
baths:" then I said, I would pour out my fury 
upon them, to accomplish my anger against them 
in the wilderness. 

22 Nevertheless I withdrew my hand,'' and 
wrought for my name's sake." that it should not 
be polluted in the sight of the heathen, in whose 
sight I brought thein forth.'' 

23 I lifted up my hand unto them also in the 
wilderness, that I would scatter them among the 
heathen, and disperse them through the countries ;'^ 

24 Because they had not executed my judgments, 
but had despised my statutes, and had jiollutcd my 
sabbaths, and their eyes were after their fathers' 
idols." 

25 Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were 
not good, and judgments whereby they should not 
live;' 

26 And I polluted them in their own gifts,* in 
that they caused to pass through the fire all that 
openeth the womb,'' that I might make them des- 
olate, to the end that they might know that I am 
the Lord. 

27 'i Therefore, son of man, speak unto the 
house of Israel, and say unto them, Thus saitii the 
Lord God ; Yet in this your fathers have blas- 
phemed me,' in that they have committed^ a tres- 
pass against me. 

28 For when I had brought them into the land, 
for the which I lifted up my hand to give it to 

them, then they saw every high hill, and all the 



95:11. t Frov. 1:3U, 31. 
" Jer. 9:14; Amos 2:4. 
2 Psa. 119:3. » Jer. 17:2: 
1:). I(). d ver. 17. e ver. 9, H 
Psa. I()r>:26, 27. h ch. 6:9; Ps: 
Rom. 1:21; 2 Thess. 2:11. J 
1 Rom. 2:24. 5 Heb. trespns.Kil 



bN 



i. 7,^:37; Amos .'5:2.5, 2(i. v Psa. 78:3S. 
. oh. 5-12. y Exod. 20:2; I,ev. 19:4, etc. 
urn a>:l,2; Deut 9:2:1,24; 31:27. t ver. 

I Psa. 98:2. « Lev. 20::i3; Deut. 2-:r>4; 

119:.37. 'ver.39; Psa. Sl;12; Mos.b:ll; 
1. 1:11-15. k 2 Kings 17:17; Jer. 32;:J5. 



TA. Would scatter them among the heathen; see Lev. chuji. 
26, and Deut. chap. 28. 

25. I gave them also statutes — not good; in a pcrrnissivo 
sense. Psa. si : 12 ; Acts 7 :42. 

26. Caused to pass through the fire; as burnt-offerings to 
their gods, ver. 31. Alt tlint openeth the womb; all their 
first-born children; a horrid perversion of the divine or- 
dinance, Exod. 13:2. 

931 



TTic rebellions and 



EZEKIEL XX 



idolatries of Jsrifl. 



thick trees, and they offered there their pacri- 
fices," and there tliey presented the provocation 
of their offerinfj:" tliere also they made thcnr 
sweet savor,'' and poured out there their drink- 
offerinp:s. 

29 Then I said unto them, What is the hijrh 
[)laco' whereunto ye pro ? And the name thereof 
v.i called Bamah unto this day. 

30 Wherefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus 
saith the Lord God ; Arc ye polluted after the 
manner of your fiithcrsV and commit yc whore- 
dom after their abominations? 

31 For when ye offer your pifts, when ye make 
your sons to pass through the fire, ye pollute your- 
selves with all your idols, even unto this day : and 
shall I he inquired of by yoii,'' O house of Israel? 
As 1 live, saith the Lord Gon, I will not be in- 
quired of by you. 

32 And that which cometh into your mind shall 
not bo at all,' that ye say. We will be as the hea- 
then, as the families of the countries, to serve wood 
and stone.^ 

33 1l Jls I live, saith the Lord God, surely with 
a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and 
with fury poured out, will I rule over you:*" 

34 And I will bring you out from the people, 
and will gather you out of the countries wherein 
ye are scattered,' with a mighty hand, and with a 
stretched out arm, and with fury pourefl out. 

35 And I will bring you into the wilderness of 
the people,-' and there will 1 plead with ytm face 
to face.'' 

36 Like as I pleaded witli your fathers in the 
wilderness of the land of Egypt,' so will I plead 
with you, saitJi the Lord God. 

37 And I will cause you to pass under the rod,'" 
and I will bring you into the bond* of the cove- 
nant : 

38 And I will purge out from among you the 
rebels, and them that transgress against me :" I 
will bring them forth out of the country where 
they sojourn, and they shall not enter into the land 
of Israel :" and ye shall know that I am the Lord. 

39 As for you, house of Israel, thus saith the 



>Iu 


.1 


•5, etc 


Jer. .3: 6. b 


|)(^Ul 


31:21) 


1 Cor 


10:22. 


cri.lU 


19 


• Or, 


told Ih 


fm 


w/iat the high place 


Tio 


r Kam 


ah. ' 


Tor. 13. 


e ver. 


:!. 


t ch. 


11:5. 


f 


or. AU. 


hJer. -.'IrS. 


ut. :ill: 


5. J Ho.1. 2:1'!, 


15. k 


xa 


I:l3; 


Jer. 2:9. 


1 Num 


ch. 14, etc. 


m Lov. -il 


:t2i .l« 


r. ai:13; 


Lam. 


1:1 


, Mic. 


7:11. 


t Or, a dtli 


verini;. " ch 


.M: 


7; Ma 


It. 2i: 


2, :M; Rev. 21:2 


•__ 


« Jor. 



29. What is the high place (Ileb. Bamah) wliereunto ye go? 
a question of indignant remonstrance. 

3;'). The wilderness of the people; ligiirativcly spoken, a 
wilderness consisting of exile and oi)])ression anion;; for- 
eigners, in which the wheat shall lie sifted from the chaff. 
In restoring his people from captivity, God will repeat to 
them the discipline to which he subjected their fatiiers in 
the literal wilderness, and by which he destroyed the re- 
bellions from among them. 

37. Tu vnss under llie rod; as Bhejlherds do their flocks, 
thus numbering and reviewing each sheep of the fold, and 
separating the evil from the good. 

3K. / wilt brtnp them forth — shnll not enter into the land of 
Israel ; another allusion to the exodus from Kgypt: (iod 
will deal with the rebels among the captives as he did 
with the rebellious generation whom he brought out of 
Egypt. Compare Num. M:'22, 23. 

39. Go ye, serve — with i/our idols ; bo wholly devoted to 
your gods, or serve mo wholly: mix not your idolatrous 
rites with my worship. 1 Kings Is: 21. 
932 



Lord God ; Go ye, serve ye every one his ^B^'o.'iM 
idols,!' and hereafter also, if ye will not hearken 
unto me:'' but pollute ye my holy name no more 
with your gifts, and with your idols.'' 

40 For in my holy mountain, in the mountain of 
the height of Israel, saith the Lord Gon, there 
shall all the house of Israel, all of them in the 
land, serve me:" there will I accept them, and 
there will iTcquire your offerings,' and the lirst- 
fruits' of your oblations, with all your holy things. 

41 I will accept you with your sweet savor,*" 
when I bring you out from the people, and gather 
you out of the countries wherein ye have been 
scattered;*' and I will be sanctified in you before 
the heatiicn.*' 

42 And ye shall know that I am the Lord,* when 
I shall bring you into the land of Israel, into the 
country /or the which I lifted up my hand to give 
it to your fathers. 

43 And there shall ye remember your ways, and 
all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled •/ 
and ye shall loathe yourselves in your own sight 
for all your evils that ye have committed.'- 

44 And ye shall know that I a7n the Lord, when 
I have wrought with you for my name's sake," not 
according to your wicked ways, nor according to 
your corrupt doings,"" ye house of Israel, saith 
the Lord God. 

45 1 Moreover the word of the Lord came unto 
me, saying, 

40 Son of man, set thy face toward the south, 
and drop t/n/ u-ord toward the south, and prophesy 
against the forest of the south field ; 

47 And say to the forest of the south, Hear the 
word of the [..drd; Thus saith the Lord God; J3e- 
hold, I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall de- 
vour every irrecn tree in thee, and every dry tree :'' 
the flaming flame shall not be quenched, and all 
faces from the south to the north shall be burned 
therein.'' 

48 And all flesh shall see that I the Lord have 
kindled it: it shall not lie quenched." 

49 Then said I, Ah Lord God! they say of me, 
Doth he not speak parables ? 



44:11. pjuds. 1(1:14; Amos 4:1. q l'«a. !-l :l:l. 


riM. 1:1.1. 'l-a. 2:2,3; 


2.5:6, 7. 1 ]<a. 611:7; Zoch. •<:21l. otc ; .Mai. 3:4. 


1 Or, chief. « Hob. saror 


o/K.<f. uPhil. 4:IM. »l Pet. 2:9. "'Isa5:IO. 


Ich 3S:23. T ch. 10:«l. 


xJob4a:8. "Psa 45:11; 115:1; IJohn 2:12, b 


I'm. 103: lU. 'Jor. 21:14. 


■Ich. 21:4. •iMarl<«:44. 





40-44. For in my holy mountain — jour corrupt doings ; a 
promise to the purified remnant, to be iirogressively ful- 
filled from ago to age. Sec note on chap. 11:20. 

4.'). The word of the Lord came unto me; the remainder of 
this chapter properly belongs to the following. 

46. The forcit of tlie south field ; .lenisalem, with the re- 
gion dependent upon her, cluip. 21:2. The multitude of 
her people is represented under the similitude of a forest. 
Compare Isa. 9:18, 19; 10:18, 19; .ler. 21:14. 

47. Green tree — dry tree; explained below, chap. 21:3. 
Compare Luke 23:31. 

INSTRDCTIONS. 
1-44. Though God will be inquired of by his people for 
the blessings which he promises, yet the hope of his cause 
rests not on their conslanc}', but upon his own uiichange- 
able fidelity to his promises and zeal for his great name. 
For his own glory he h;is begun and will carry forward 
the work of redemption, separating the wicked who are 
among his pcoi)le from the righteous by his repeated 



ThreaUnings 



EZEKIEL XXI. 



against Jerusalem. 



CHAPTER XXI. 



I Ezekiel prophesieth against .Ternsalem with a, sign of sighing. 8 Tlic 
sharp and bright) sword, 18 against Jerusalem, 25 against the king- 
dom, 28 and against the Ammonites. 



A 



ND the word of the Lord came unto mc, say- 



2 Son of man, set tli}- face toward Jerusalem, 
and drop thy word toward the holy plaees,'^ and 
prophesy against the land of Israel, 

3 And say to the land of Israel, Thus saith the 
LoKD ; Behold, I am against thee, and will draw 
forth my sword out of his sheath, and will cut off 
from thee the righteous and the wicked.'' 

4 Seeing then that I will cut off from thee the 
rigiiteous and the wicked, therefore shall my sword 
go forth out of his sheath against all flesh from 
the south to the north :" 

5 That all flesh may know that I the Lord have 
drawn forth my sword out of his sheath : it shall 
not return any more.'' 

6 Sigh therefore, tliou son of man, witli the 
breaking of thy loins; and with bitterness sigh 
before their eyes." 

7 And it shall be, when they say unto thee. 
Wherefore sighest thou? that thou shalt answer. 
For the tidings, because it cometh:' and every 
heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and 
every spirit shall faint, and all knees shall be weak 
as' water: behold, it cometh, and shall be brought 
to pass, saith the Lord God. 

8 1 Again the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, 

'J Son of man, prophesy, and say. Thus saith the 
Loud ; Say, A sword, a sword is sharpened, and 
also furbished :» 

10 It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter ; it 
is furbished that it may glitter: should we then 
make mirth ? it contemneth the rod of my son, as 
every tree.* 



JDeut. 32:2. b Job 9:22. cPsi. 45:3. dlsa. .55:11. tjsi. 22:4. 'Isa. 
28:19. • Heb. go inio. E Deut. .12:41 . \ Ot.'is therodof my $m, it dtijiis- 
erh every tree, h ver. 19. J Or, they are thrust down to the sword with iiii/. 
• Deut. 32:25. j Jer. 31:19. k Mai. 3:2, «; 1 Cor. 3:13. i Or, When the 



judgments, and thus continuint; and enlarging his king- 
dom from age to age. 

45-48. God would not spare his own chosen city Jern- 
Balem from the devouring flame and from captivity, when 
she persisted in rebelling agahist him ; neither will he 
spare any of his churches at the present day who follow 
her example, on account of the greatness of the privileges 
which he has conferred upon them in times past, or on 
account of the piety of their forefathers. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

3. Cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked; that is, 
take away from thee every class of persons. Such men 
as Jeremiah and Baruch, Ezekiel and Daniel, were among 
the removed. 

4. From the south to tlie north ; of tlie land of Israel. 
7. The tidings; of God's avenging sword. 

9. Furbished; made bright. 

10. Then make mirth; instead of mourning for our sins. 
Compare Isa. 22:12, 13. It contemneth — ever ij tree; or, "the 
Bceptre of my son disdaineth every tree." The sceptre 
of (jod's Son is the reigning family of Israel, represented 
by Zedekiah and his princes. " Every tree," is put meta- 
phorically for the princes of other kingdoms. These the 
king and princes of Jerusalem disdain, as not able to 
destroy the holy city. 



11 And he hath given it to be furbished, that it 
may lie handled: this sword is sharpened, and 
it is furbished, to give it into tin; hand of the 
slayer.'' 

12 Cry and howl, son of man; for it shall be 
upon my people, it sliall he upon all the princes of 
Israel: terrors by reason of the sword shall be 
upon myf ])eo|)le:' smite therefore u]ion thy thigh.-* 

13 IJecaiLse // is a trial,'' and what if tlic sword 
contemn even the rod?' it sliall be no j/torc, saith 
the Lord God. 

14 Thou therefore, son of man, prophesy, and 
smite thy hands together,' and let the sword be 
doubled tlic third time, the sword of the slain : it 
is tlie sword of the great men that are slain, which 
entereth into their privy chambers. 

15 I have set the point' of the sword against all 
their gates, that their heart may faint,' and their 
ruins be multiplied: ah! it is made bright, it is 
wrapped up* for tiie slaughter. 

10 Go thee one way or other, eitlier on the right 
hand, or on the left,* whithersoever thy face is set. 

17 I will also smite my hands together, and I 
will cause my fury to rest : I the Lord have said 
it. 

18 \ The word of the Lord came unto me again, 
saying, 

19 Also, thou son of man, appoint thee two 
ways, that the sword of the king of Babylon may 
come: both twain shall come forth out of one 
land : and choose thou a place, choose it at the 
head of the way to the city. 

20 Appoint a way, that the sword may come to 
Rabbath of the Ammonites,'" and to Judah in Je- 
rusalem the defenced. 

21 For the king of Babylon stood at the part- 
ing* of the way, at the head of the two ways, to 
use divination : he made his arrows^ bright, he 
consulted with images,' he looked in the liver. 



trial hath been, what then? shall they not also helong to the despising rod? 
>Heb. hand to hand. ^0:, glittering, or fear. Ich.22:14. ' Or, sharpened. 
t Ueb. set thyself, take the left hand, m Jer. 49:2. t Heb. mother, 5 Or, 
knives. I Heb. ieraphim. 



12. Terrors — mij people; rather, they arc delivered to the 
sword with my people. 

13. Because it is a trial — shall be no more; or, " For a trial 
is made ; and what if the disdainful sceptre," that is, of 
Israel, "should be no more?" The trial consists of God's 
judgments through Nebuchadnezzar. 

16. One way or other; the verse contains a command to 
the sword to ravage in every direction. 

19. Appoint thee two ways; represent them by a picture 
or drawing. Compare chap. 4:1. That the sword— may 
come; that is, it may come by either of these ways. One 
land; Babylon. Choose; more literally, "make," that is, 
mark in the picture. At the head of the way to the city; 
where the road to Jerusalem leaves that to Rabbath, both 
being the same for a certain distance from Babylon. The 
words intimate that Nebuchadnezzar shall first assail Je- 
rusalem, afterwards Animon. Compare verse 28. 

20 May come; may come to either city, according to 
the route upon which the king of Babylon shall decide. 

21. To use divination; for the purpose of determining 
which road he should take. Probably he was on his way 
to Egypt, and wished to take cither Jerusalem or Rabbath 
on the road. Made his arrows bright ; or, " shook his 
arrows ;" that is, in the urn, that when they flew out their 
direction miglit decide his course. Looked in, the liver; a 
common mode of taking auguries. 

933 



The Ammonites judged. 



EZEKIEL XXII. 



A catalogtic of sins- 



22 At his riglit liiiiid was the divination for Je- 
rusaleni, to appoint captains,* to open the mouth 
in tlie shiugliter, to lift up the voice with sliouting, 
to appoint battering rams against the gates, to 
cast a mount, and to bnihl a fort. 

28 And it shall 1)C unto them as a false divina- 
tion in their sight, to them that have sworn 
oaths:* but he will call to remembrance the in- 
iipiity," that they may be taken. 

24 Therefore tims saith the Lord God; Because 
ye have made your iniquity to be remembered,'' in 
that your transgressions are discovered, so that in 
all your doings your sins do appear; because, / 
say, that ye are come to remembrance, ye shall be 
taken with the liand." 

25 *i And thou, profane wicked prince of Israel,'' 
whose day is come,"^ when inicpiity shall have an end, 

26 Thus saith the Lord God ; Remove the diadem, 
and take off the crown : this shall not be the same : 
exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high.' 

27 1 will overturn, overturn, overturn it:* and 
it shall be no more, until he come whose right it 
is; and 1 will give it him." 

28 1l And thou, son of man, ])rophesy and say. 
Thus saith the Lord God concerning the Ammon- 
ites, and concerning their reproach ; even say thou. 
The sword, the sword /,s- drawn: for the slaughter 
it is furbished, toconsume becauseof the glittering : 

29 While they see vanity unto thee, while they 
divine a lie unto thee, to bring thee upon the 
necks of them that are slain, of the wicked, whose 
day is conic, when their iniijuity .ihall have an end. 

HO Shall 1 cause it to^ return into his sJieath ? 1 
will Judge thee in the place where thou wast cre- 
ated, in the land of thy nativity. 

HI And I will ])our out mine indignation upon 
thee; 1 will blow against thee in the fire of my 
wrath, and deliver thee into the hand of brutish' 
men, and skilful to destroy. 

H2 Thou shalt be Ibr fuel to the fire; thy blood 



• Or, battoring rams; Heb. rams, t Or, for the oaths made unto them. 
• Num. 3e;«. b Ho.. 7:-.>. ' Isa. M:6. i Jer. ii-X. ' ch. 17:19, H. 
f Luke 1 ;5*2. I Ilcb. Perverted, perverted, perverted, will I vmke it. K Gen. 
49:10; Luke l:a->, 3.x t Or, Cause \t to. t Or, hurning. 1 Or, plead far. 



22. At his right hand was the ilivination for Jerusalem ; 
that is, the lot which fell upon the right hand road, which 
led to Jerusalem. To appoint captains — to Intild a fort ; 
these words give the result to .lerusiilern of liis decision. 

23. Unto them; to the people of .leiusalem. As a false 
divination ; they shall treat the report of it as false. Oaths ; 
of alle;;ianco to the kinp; of liabyloii. 2 Chroii. :i(!:i:i. He 
will call ; Ncbucliadnezzar will call. The iniquity; of the 
king and princes of Judah in breaking their oath. 

25. Prince nf Israel ; Zodekiah. When iniqititij uluill have 
an end; literally, "in the time of the iniquity of the end;" 
that is, iniiiuity whicli brings an en<l to his kingdom. 

2G. This shall not be the same ; this dignity shall not remain 
unchanged. 

27. He come whose right it is; the Messiah. Will give it ; 
will give liim the diailcm and crown. Vcr. 2(i. 

28. The Ammonites; though for tlio present passed by, 
tlieir turn will soon come. Their reproach ; upon Jerusa- 
lem, over whose de8tru(-tion they exulted. 

29. Theij see vanil !i ; the false prophets of Ammon. Upon 
the necks if them ttuU arc slain; to cause thee to lie pros- 
trate upon them in death. This was the result to Ammon 
of tlioir flatteries. 

IXSTRDCTIONS. 
C, 7. God's resources to bless and to curse are alike ini- 
934 



shall be in the midst of the land : thou ■*! ".-'JJa: 
shalt be no more remembered: for I the Loed 
have spoki^n it. 

C II APT Ell XXII. 

1 A c.it.alogue of sins in Jerusalem. 13 God will bum them &s dross 
in his fiirnnce. 23 The general corruption of prophets, priests, princes, 
and people. 

"\ T OREOVER the word of the Lord came unto 
Wl me, saying, 

2 Now, thou son of man, wilt thou judge,' wilt 
thou judge the bloody city '?' yea. thou shalt show 
her' all her abominations. 

3 Then say thou. Thus saith the Lord (ion: 'I'lie 
city sheddeth blood in the midst of it, that her 
time may come, and maketh idols against herself 
to defile herself. 

4 Thou art become guilty in thy blood that fhou 
ha.st shed ;" and hast defiled thyself in thine idols 
which thou hast made: and thou hast caused thy 
days to draw near, and art come even unto thy 
years: therefore have I made thee a reproach unto 
the heathen, and a mocking to all countries. 

5 Those that be near, and those that be far from 
thee, shall mock thee, which art infamous and 
much ve.xed.* 

Behold, the princes of Israel, every one were 
in thee to their power'- to shed blood. 

7 In thee have they set li<rht by father and moth- 
er: in the midst of thee have they dealt by op- 
})ression with the stranger: in tliee have they 
vexed the fatherless and the widow. 

8 Thou hast despised my holy things, and hast 
jirofaned my sabbaths. 

'.) In thee are men that carry tales'' to shed 
blood: and in thei; they eat upon the mountains: 
in the midst of thee they comniit lewdness.' 

10 In thee have they discovered their fathers' 
nakedness: in thee have they iiuinbletl her that 
was set apart for pollution. 



• ]Jeh.rit</ of Moods, t Heb viakt her know ; ch. lli:-J. I" 2 Kinp -.'1:16. 
I Heb. poUuted of name, mueh in vexation. ^ Heb. arm. I Or, dereit. 
^ lieb. of slanders. > ch. lS:ti, etc. 



limited. When he draws his sword of vengeance against 
a people for their sins, resistance is vain, nor can any 
endure its terrible power. 

10. Sin has a dreadful power to blind men's minds so 
that they fail to discern the ajiproach of God's judgments, 
and are overtaken liy them, like the generation before tho 
tlood, in the midst of their mirth and revelry. 

18-21. God's ])rovidence extends to all events, so tliat 
nothing takes place but in accordance with his wise and 
holy counsels. Even the foolish divinations of heathen 
kings are sooverruled by him. that through them he accom- 
plishes his own purposes, whether of wrath or of nierey. 

27. God is in all the conunotious and revolutions of tho 
world, and through thorn he is sto:idily preparing the way 
for the universal dominion of his Son, to whom ho has 
given all power in heaven and on earth. 

28-32. The piniishmont of sinners may be long delayed 
by the course of (iod's providence; but, if they persist in 
their transgressions, it will come at last with overwhelm- 
ing power, and destroy iheiii root and branch. -Mai. 1:1. 

CHATTER XXll. 

4. Thy tlai/s — thy years; to be destroyed. 
10. For pc^tutioit ; that is, on account of her uncleannesa. 
Lev. 18:19. 



General comtption of 



EZEKIEL XXIII. 



all orders of irwn. 



K ".w" 11 And one'hath committed aboininalinn 
with hisneiglibor's wife ; and another* hath lewdly* 
defiled his daughter-in-law; and another in thee 
hail) humbled his sister, his father's daughter. 

\'l In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood ; 
thou hast taken usury and increase, and thou hast 
greedily gained of thy neighbors by extortion, and 
hast forgotten me," saith the Lord God. 

13 •[ Behold, therefore I have smitten my hand 
at thy dishonest gain which thou hast made, and 
at thy l)lood which hath been in the midst of thee. 

14 Can thy heart endure, or can thy hands be 
strong, in the days that I shall deal with thee?" I 
the Lord have spoken it, and will do it. 

15 And I will scatter thee among the heathen, 
and disperse thee in the countries,'^ and will con- 
sume thy filthiness out of thee.'' 

16 And thou shalt take thine inheritance* in 
thyself in the sight of the heathen, and thou shalt 
know that I am the Lord. 

17 And the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, 

IS Son of man, the house of Israel is to me be- 
come dross:" all they are brass, and tin, and iron, 
and lead, in the midst of the furnace ; they are 
even the dross^ of silver. "^ 

19 Therefore thus saith the Lord God ; Because 
ye are all become dross, behold, therefore I will 
gather you into the midst of Jerusalem. 

20 Jh they gather' silver, and brass, and iron, 
and lead, and tin, into the midst of the furnace, to 
blow the fire upon it, to melt it: so will I gather 
yn\L in mine anger and in my fury, and I will leave 
you there, and melt you.'' 

21 Yea, I will gather you, and lilow upon you 
in the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in 
the midst thereof. 

22 As silver is melted in the midst of the fur- 
nace, so shall ye be melted in the midst thereof; 
and ye shall know that I the Lord have poured 
out my fury upon you.'' 

23 'I And the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, 



• Or. every one. ^ Or, by lewdness. > Deut. 33:18. b ch. 2S:!); Job 9; J ; 
Isa. Sia. c Deut. 4:a7. d oh. !!3:a7. I Or.beprofaned. e Psa. 119: 119; 
Isa. l:-i-.'. 2.5. 1 Heb. drosses; Jer. 6:30. t Isi. l:2.'j. I Heb. Aeoording to 
the gathering of. s Zeoh. 13:9. h oh. 20:8, 33. i Hos. C:9. J oh. 13: IS- 



IS. Smitten my liand ; as a sign of indignation. 

10. Take thtne inheritance; the words in the margin are 
to be ])referred. 

IS. Become dross ; in my efforts to refine them I have found 
tliein to be only dross, and as dross I will consume them. 

28. Daubed them with untempercd mortar; see chapter 
13:Ii)-lfi. 

30. Make up the hedge — the gap; see note on chap. 13:5. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The messengers whom God sends to men must deal 
honestly with their consciences, not withholding the truth 
through fear or favor, but faithfully setting forth before 
them all their sins. 

4. When we see a community giving itself up to the 
practice of iniquity of every kind without restraint, we 
may be certain, from the sure testimony of God, that its 
days of punishment are near. 

7. The oppression of the weak and defenceless is a most 
heinous sin. In the present catalogue God places it by 
the side of Sabbath-breaking, extortion, bribery, murder, 
and adultery. 



24 Son of man, say unto her. Thou art the land 
that is not cleansed, nor rained ujion in the day 
of indignation. 

25 There is a conspiracy of her prophets in the 
midst thereof,' like a roaring lion ravening the 
prey : they have devoured souls ;' they have taken 
the treasure and precious things;'' they have made 
her many widows in the midst thereof. 

26 Her priests have violated' my law,' and have 
profaned my holy things: they have put no dilfer- 
ence between the holy and profane, neither have 
they showed difference lietwecn the unclean and 
the clean,'" and have hid their eyes from my sab- 
baths, and I am profaned among them. 

27 Her princes in the midst thereof are like 
wolves ravening the prey, to shed blood, and to 
destroy souls, to get dishonest gain. 

28 And her prophets have daubed them with un- 
tempercd mortar, seeing vanity," and divining lies 
unto them, saying. Thus saith the Lord God, when 
the Lord hath not spoken. 

29 Tlie people of the land have used oppression,* 
and exercised robbery, and have vexed the poor 
and needy:" yea, they have oppressed the stran- 
ger wrongfully.*'' 

30 And I sought for a man among them, that 
should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap 
before me for the land, that I should not destroy 
it:'' Vjut I found none.'' 

31 Therefore have I poured out mine indignation 
upon them; I have consumed them with the fire 
of my wrath : their own way have I recompensed 
upon their heads,'* saith the Lord God. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

1 The whoredoms of Aholah and Aholibah. 22 Aholibali is to be pl.Tjued 
by her h.vers. 36 The prophet reproveth the adulteries of them both, 
'!■") and showeth their judgments. 

^"PHE word of the Lord came again unto me, 



T 



saying, 

2 Son of man, there wore two women, the daugh- 
ters of one mother:' 



20. lich.34:3: Mio. 3: 11 ; Zeph. 3:3, ■!. ^ HA. offend violence to; iVet. 
3:16. 1 Mai, 2:7, M. m Lev. 10:1(1. n Lam. 2:11. • Or, deceit, o Jer. 
5:2(j-ai. t Heb. without right, p Exod. 21:9. q Isa. 03:5. r Jer. 5:1. 
>Prov. 1:31. I Jer. 3:7-11. 



13-16. The curse of God rests upon wealth gained by 
sinful practices. It brings upon its owners trouble and 
misery instead of profit in this life, and exposes them to 
his wrath in the life to come. 

17-22. When men grow worse instead of better under 
God's chastisements, it is a token that they are reprobate, 
and that their destruction is nigh at hand. 

24-31. When wicked princes unite with wicked proph- 
ets and priests to spoil a nation and corrupt its faith and 
practice by false doctrines, ungoilliness and iniquity will 
soon pervade the mass of the people, and they, with their 
rulers and teachers, will become like briers and thorns 
ready to be consumed by the fire of God's wrath. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

In this chapter the adulteries of the two sisters, Aholah 
and Aholibali, represent not only the idolatrous practices 
which Samaria and Jerusalem borrowed from the heathen 
nations, but also, and especially, their unlawful alliances 
with them ; for these were formed in an idolatrous spirit, 
and they led to literal idolatry. 

935 



The. adulteries of 



EZEKIEL XXIII. 



Aholah and Aholibah. 



3 And tho}' committed whoredoms in Egypt;" 
tlieycoiimiitted whoredoms in their youth:" tliere 
were their breasts pressed, and tliere they bruised 
the teats of tlieir virfjiuity. 

4 And the names of' tiiem were AhoJah the elder, 
and Aholibah her sister : and they were mine, and 
they bare sons and daughters. Thus mre their 
names; Samaria is Aholah," and Jerusalem Aho- 
libah.* 

5 And Aholah played the harlot when she was 
mine ; and she doted on her lovers, on the Assyr- 
ians lier neighbors," 

6 Which icere clothed with blue, captains and 
rulers, all of them desirable young men, horsemen 
riding upon horses. 

7 Thus she committed her whoredoms with them,' 
with all them that were the chosen men of Assyria,* 
and with all on whom she doted: with all their 
idols she defiled herself. 

8 Neitiier left she her whoredoms brought from 
Egypt: for in her youth they lay with her, and 
they bruised the breasts of her virginity, and 
poured their whoredom upon her. 

9 Wherefore I have delivered her into the hand 
of her lovers, into the iiand of the Assyrians, upon 
whom she doted.'' 

10 These discovered her nakedness: they took 
her sons and her daughters, and slew her witii the 
sword: and she became famous' among women; 
for they had executed judgment upon her. 

11 And when her sister .\holibah saw this, she 
was more corrupt in her inordinate love'' than 
she, and in her whoredoms more than her sister 
in her wlioredoms.*" 

12 She doted upon the Assyrians her neighbors,'' 
captains and rulers clothed most gorgeously, 
horsemen riding upon horses, all of them desira- 
ble young men. 

1 'i Then I saw that she was defiled, that tiiey took 
bolli one way, 

14 And that she increased her whoredoms: for 
when slie saw men portrayed upon the wall,'' the 
images of the Chaldeans portrayed with vermilion, 

15 Girded with girdles upon their loins, exceed- 
ing in dyed attire ui)on their heads, all of them 
princes to look to, after the manner of the Baby- 
lonians of Chaldea, the land of fiieir nativity: 

IG And as soon as she saw them with her eyes,* 
she doted upon tliem,'' and sent messengers unto 
them into Chaldea. 



» Ch.20;8; Ler. 17:7; Josh. 24:14. b ch. 16:8. etc. ' That ij, Herlrnl, or 
tabernaelt. t That is. Mij laUrnatU in her; 1 Kings 8;iK). = 2 Kings 1.5:19; 
18:7; 17:.3; Ho«. 8:9. 1 Hcb. besloti-td her whortdoms uponllum. » Hob. 
choiaoftheehildrenofAsskiir. d 2 King* 13:9-11. I Hob. a name. 1 Ucb. 
eoTTUpted her inordinate love more. ' Hcb. the whoredoms of her sister. 



3. Committed whoredoms in Egypt; worshipped tlie gods 
of tho E;;yptian8. 

4. Altotali ; that is, " hor tent," namely, that of Samaria. 
Alwlibali; tliat is, "my tent is in lier." Tho meaning is, 
that Samaria lias lier own idolatrona tabernacle, while 
God's tabernacle is in Jerusalem. Were mine ; espoused 
to mc, chap. 16:8. 

11. Men — ima);cs; tliesc seem to have been the images 
of pods and deified heroes portrayed upon the walls of 
thi' IJabylonian palaces. The description agrees lierfectly 
with the figures now found graven upon the stono slabs 
that abound in the ruins of Nineveh and liabylon. 
936 



17 And the Babylonians* came to her '^h^c.^wJ: 
into the bed of love, and they defiled iier with 
their wiioredom, and she was polluted witli them, 
and her mind was alienated* from them. 

IS .So she discovered her whoredoms, and dis- 
covered her nakedness : then my mind was alien- 
ated from her,' like as my mind was alienated from 
her sister. 

19 Yet she multiplied her whoredoms, in calling 
to remembrance the days of her youth, wherein 
she had played the harlot in the land of Egypt. 

20 For she doted upon their paraiuours, whose 
flesh is as the flesh of asses, and whose issue is like 
the issue of horses. 

21 Thus thou calledst to remembrance the lewd- 
ness of thy youth, in bruising tliy teats by the 
Egyptians for the paps of thy youth. 

22 % Therefore, Aholibah, thus saith the Lord 
God ; Behold, I will raise up thy lovers against 
thee,' from whom tiiy mind is alienated," and 1 will 
bring them against thee on every side;' 

23 The Babylonians, and all the Chaldeans, 
Pekod,"' and Shoa, and Koa, and all the Assyrians 
with them : all of tliem desirable young men, cap- 
tains and rulers, great lords and renowned, all of 
tliem riding upon horses. 

24 And they shall come against thee with char- 
iots, wagons, and wheels, and with an asseml)ly of 
people, ichich shall set against thee buckler and 
shield and helmet round about: and I will set 
judgment before them, and they shall judge thee 
according to their judgments. 

25 And 1 will set my jealousy against thee, and 
they shall deal furiously with thee:" they shall 
take away thy nose and thine cars; and thy rem- 
nant shall fail by the sword : they shall take thy 
sons and thy daughters; and thy residue shall be 
devoured by the lire. 

20 They shall also strip thee out of thy clothes, 
and take away thy fair jewels. " 

27 Thus will I make thy lewdness to C(\ase from 
thee,'' and thy whoredom hroin'ht from the land of 
Egyiit:*" so that thou slialt not lift up thine eyes 
unto thein, nor remember Egvpt any moi'c. 

28 For thus saith the Lord God : Behold, I will 
deliver thee into the hand of than whom thou 
hatest, into the hand of them i'rom whom thy mind 
is alienated :'' 

29 And they shall deal with thee hatefully, and 
shall take away all thy labor, and shall leave thee 



o2Chr.33:9. f 2 Chr. 28:10. «ch.S:ICMl. Mieb. at the sight of her 
eyes, h 2 KinRS 2(1:12. clo. I Heb. ehildren of Babel i Hcb. loosed, ot 
disjointed, i Jor. 15:1. J Jor. 11:11, 12. » 2 Sam. 13:15. I Lam. 1:3. 
m Jor. 50:21. •> Jer. 52:6, oto. i He.\>. inltrununts of thy decking. <> Isl. 
39:4-7. Pch. 10:41; 22:15. q vor. 3, 19. r vcr. 17. 



10, 17. Sent messengers — the Babi/lonians came; she intro- 
duced the worship of these Chaldean deities into Jerusa- 
lem. Was alienated from them ; tho Chaldeans, whose idol- 
atrous images she had learned to worship, became to her 
objects of terror and aversion when she turned from them 
to Kgypt. 

19. Calling to remembrance the days of her youth, vhercin 
.<:/»; had played the harlot ; renieinbcring and renewing her 
early fornications with the Egyptians. The prophet re- 
fers to tho alliances which the Jews sought with tho 
Egyptians against tho power of tho Chaldeans. See in- 
troductory note. 



Judah and Samaria 



EZEKIEL XXIV. 



reproved and jmli^cd. 



u. llwl^' naked and bare : and the nakedness of thy 
whoredoms shall be discovered," both thy lewd- 
ness and thy whoredoms.'' 

30 I will do these Mi'no-^ unto thee, because thou 
hast gone a whoring after the heathen, a7id be- 
cause thou art polluted with their idols." 

31 Thou hast walked in the way of thy sister; 
therefore will I give her cu]) into thy hand.'^ 

32 Thus saith the Lord God ; Thou shalt drink of 
thy sister's cup deep and largo : thou shalt be laughed 
to scorn and had in derision ;" it containeth much. 

33 Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness and 
sorrow, with the cup of astonishment and desola- 
tion, with the cup of thy sister Samaria. 

3-1 Thou shalt even drink it and suck it out,'' and 
thou shalt break tlie sherds thereof and pluck off 
thine own breasts : for I have spoken it, saith the 
Lord God. 

3-5 Therefore thus saith the Lord God ; Because 
thou hast forgotten me,''' and cast mo behind thy 
back,'' therefore bear thou also thy lewdness and 
thy whoredoms. 

3C * The Lord said moreover unto me; Son of 
man, wilt thou judge* Aliolah and Aholibah? yea, 
declare unto them their abominations;' 

37 Tiiat they have committed adultery, and 
blood is in their hands,-' and with their idols have 
they committed adultery, and have also caused 
their sons, whom they bare unto me, to pass for 
them through the fire, to devour thein.^ 

38 Jloreover this they have done unto me : they 
have defiled my sanctuary in the same day,' and 
have ])rofaned my sabbaths. 

39 For when they had slain their children to 
their idols, then they came the same day into my 
sanctuary to profane it; and lo, thus have they 
done in the midst of my house.'" 

40 And furthermore, that ye have sent for men 
to come* from far, unto whom a messenger was 
sent;" and lo, they came: for whom thou didst 
wash thyself, paintedst thy eyes, and deckedst 
thyself with ornaments," 

41 And safest upon a stately* bed,'' and a table 
prepared before it, whereupon thou hast set mine 
incense and mine oil.'' 

42 And a voice of a multitude being at ease was 
with her: and with the men of the common sorf* 
were brought Sabeans' from the wilderness, which 



a Lam. 1;3. b I Tim. .5:i;4. c ch. 6:9. <i Jer. 2-):I."i, etc. = ch. 22.-4, .5, 
etc. fPsi, 75;8; Isa. 51:17. E Deut. 8.11, 14; Jer. i:i:45. 1 1 Kings 14:9; 
Neh. 9:-.;ii. • Or, plead for. i ch. 20:4. JHos. 4:2. k Psa. 106:37. 1 ch. 
5:11. ■" 2 Kings 21:4, 7. t Heb. co/ntnj. n Isa. 57:9. " 2 Kings 9:30; 
.rer.4:.-iO. XUeh. konorablc PAmos2:H. q Prov. 7:17: Hos. 2:8. S Heb. 
inuUitiult of men. I Or, drunkards. 1 Hei). her whoredoms, r Jer. :J:I, 



32. Thy sister's cup; cup of my wrath which she has 
druak. 

34. Break; here in the sense of gnawing, as a wild beast 
a bone. Pluck off thine own breasts; tear them, from anguisli 
and madness. 

40. Sent for men to come from far — deckedst thyself; made 
friendship with foreigners, and adopted their idolatrous 
practices. 

41. Bed; here a couch for reclimng at meals. A table 
prepared before it; this table was spread in Iionor of the 
idols worshipped, and afterwards the worshippers feasted 
upon its provisions. 

INSTRUCTIONS, 
t For instructions on this chapter the reader is referred 



put bracelets upon their hands, and beautiful 
crowns upon their heads. 

43 Then said I unto lav that vns old in ailiiltc- 
rics. Will they now comiiiit v.horedoius with her,'' 
and she with them '/ 

44 Yet they went in unto her, as they go in unto 
a woman that playeth the harlot :"■ so went tliey in 
unto Aholah and unto Aholibah, the lewd women. 

45 It And the righteous men. they shall judge 
them after the manner of adulteresses, and after 
the manner of women that shed blood;'* because 
they are adulteresses, and blood is in their hands. 

4G For thus saith the Lord God; I will bring 
up a company upon them,' and will give them to 
be removed and spoiled.*" 

47 And the company shall stone them with 
stones, and dispatch them* with their swords; 
they shall slay their sons and their daughters, and 
burn up their houses with fire.^ 

48 Thus will I cause lewdness to cease out of 
the land,"' that all women may be taught not to do 
after your lewdness." 

49 And they shall recompense your lewdness 
upon you, and ye shall bear the sins of your idols -J 
and ye shall know that 1 am the Lord God. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

1 Under the parable of a boiling pot, 6 is sho-wn the irrevocable tb-struc- 
tion of Jerusalem. 15 By the sign of Ezekiel not mourning for the 
death of his -wife, 19 is shown the calamity of the .Tews to be beyond 
all sorrow. 

AGAIN in the ninth year, in the tenth month, 
in the tenth day of the month, the word of 
the Lord came unto mo, saying, 

2 Son of man, write thee the name of the day, 
ciTn of this same day: the king of Babylon set 
himself against Jerusalem this same day.'' 

3 And utter a parable unto the rebellious house, 
and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God ; Set 
on a pot," set it on, and also pour water into it: 

4 Gather the pieces thereof into it, even every 
good piece, the thigh, and the shoulder ; fill it with 
the choice bones. 

5 Take the choice of the flock, and burn* also 
the bones under it, and make it boil well, and let 
them seethe the bones of it therein. 

6 IF Wherefore thus saith the Lord God ; Woe 
to the bloody city, to the pot whose scum is therein, 



6.6; Hos. 2:5. s Psa. 149:5-9; Matt. lU:aS; 1 Cor. 6:2; Rev. 20:4. t ch. 
16:40, etc. ■ Heb. /or a removing anil spoil. "Isa. 6:11. 12; Jer. 4:l:3::iO. 
f Or, single them out. - ch. 24:21 ; 2 Chr. 36:17, 19. " ver. 27. -t Deut. 
13:11; 2Pet.2:6. yNum. 14:34; 18:2:1; Isa.63:ll; XPet.2:24. 2 2 Kjngs 
25:1; Jer. 39:1; 52:4. a Jer. I:l.-i. 1 Or, heap. 



to those on the sixteenth, the contents of which are very 
similar. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

2. Set him.srif aprainst Jerusalem; by laying siege to it. 
This was made known to the prophet in captivity liv im- 
mediate revelation. He writes the name of the day in the 
presence of the people, as a testimony to them when they 
shall hear of the event by human report. 

3-5. Set on a pot — seetlie the bones; the pot is Jerusalem, 
the pieces in it are the inhabitants, and the fire under it 
is God's wrath. 

6. Scum; rather, filth, adhering to the pot itself, as is 
plain from verse 11, polluting it and all in it. Bring it 
937 



Tlie doom of Jerusak 



EZEKIEL XXIV. 



T)e:th of I he prophet's wife.. 



and wlioso ?cnm is not jrono out of it !* bring it out 
piece by piece; let no lot fall upon it."" 

7 For hor blood is in the midst of her ; she set 
it upon the top of a rock ; she jjoured it not upon 
the irround, to cover it with dust;*^ 

8 That it miirht cause fury to come up to take 
Tengoance;'' I have set her blood upon the top of 
a rock, that it should not be covered. 

9 Therefore thus saitli the Lord God; Woe to 
the bloody cityl'' 1 will even make the pile for 
fire great. 

10 Jleap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the 
fle.sh, and spice it well, and let the bones be 
burned." 

11 Then set it empty upon the coals thereof, that 
the brass of it may bo hot, and may burn, and thai 
the filthiness of it may be molten in it,"-' that the 
scum of it may be consumed. 

12 She hath wearied herse'f ^vhh lies," and her 
great scum went not forth out of her : lier scum 
shall he in the tire. 

IS In thy tilthiiiess is lewdness: because I have 
purged tiiee, and thou w;ist not purged,' thou 
shalt not be purged from thy lilthiness any more, 
till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee.J 

14 I the LoKi) have spoken it ; it shall come to 
pass, and I will do it: 1 will not go back, neither 
will 1 spare, neither will I repent;" according to 
thy ways, and according to thy doings, sliall they 
judge thee, saitli the Lord God. 

15 1[ Also th(; word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, 

16 Son of man, behold, I take away from thee 
tlie desire of thine eyes with a stroke:' yet nei- 
ther shalt thou mourn nor weep,'" neither shall thy 
tears run* down. 

17 Forljcar to cry,* make no mourning for the 
dead," bind the tire of thy head upon thee," and 



a Prov. 30:12. b 2 Sam. H: 

tRom.-i:i. coh. 2i:|j. I> L 

10:42. k I Sim. 15:28. 1 Job 1:21 



Lev. 17:1.1. i Gen. -1:10. e Nah. 3:1. 

41:20. iRev. 2:21,22. J ch. 5; 1:!; 8:1.^; 

Isi 57:1. • Ileb. g». f Hcb. £< 



1U:4.;. » I cam. loriv. ' jod i:ai. "« isi D4:i. tieo. S'>- i ncD. x>e 
sUenI; Vii. 39:9. n Jer. 10:.9-7. o Lev. 10:G; 21 :10, I tiah. tijiper lip; 
imlmver. 22; l^ev. 13:45; Mio.3:7. P Psa. 1)0:5, 0. q 1 Kings S):tf; Jur. 



out; the ficsb. This signifies the removal of tlic people 
from .leriisiilem liy deatli and captivity. Let no tdt fall 
upon it; lot to determine wlio sliall be destroyed, and 
who saved: the meaning is, that all shall perish without 
distinction. 

7. Iter blood; the blood which she lias shed. Set it upon 
the top of a rock; shed it in the most open way. 

8. I have. let her blood — not be covered ; as she has shed blood 
openly, (iod will avenge it openly. 

10. Spice it well ; some prefer to ren<lcr, "stir it well." 

11. Tiieii set it emptij ; after the pot is emptied of its 
contents, it is still further to be exposed to a fierce heat, 
that its tilth may be molten out of it. The meaning is, 
that after .lerusalcm has been emptied of her inhabitants, 
the city itself is to be burned to the ground. 

13. Purged thee; that is, assayed to ])urge thee. 

16. The desire of thine ei/es; the propliet's wife, verso 18. 

17. Tire; that is, turban. This and the shoes were laid 
aside in mourning. Lips; or beard, as the word is ren- 
dered in 2 Siim. 19:21. This was covered as a sign of 
mourning. The bread of men; of common men, that is, 
coarse bread, as in a time of mourning. 

21. Pitielh; hero in the sense of loveth with tenderness. 

22, 2.'i. Sliall not cover — shnll not mourn; the calamity will 
be so general :ind ovcrwhelniing, that all the customary 
signs of mourning will be omitted. 

2G. To hear it; the desolation which I have made in 
938 



put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover '^ii't.^: 
not thy lips,' and cat not the bread of men. 

18 So 1 spake unto the people in the morning: 
and at even my wife died ;" and I did in the morn- 
ing as I was commanded. 

19 1i And the people said unto me. Wilt thou 
not tell us what these things are to us, that thou 
doest so ? 

20 Then I answered them. The word of the Lord 
came unto me, saying, 

21 Speak unto the house of Israel, Thus saith 
the Lord God; Behold, I will profane my sanc- 
tuary,'' the excellency of your strength,"' the desire 
of your eyes,' and that which your soul pitieth;' 
and voiir sons and your daughters whom ye have 
left shall full by the sword." ^ 

22 And ye shall do as I have done : ye shall not 
cover your lijis," nor eat the bread of men." 

23 And your tires shall be upon your heads, and 
your shoes upon your feet : ye shall not mourn nor 
weep ;'*' but ye shall pine away for your iniquities,^ 
and mourn one toward another. 

24 Tims I']/.ekicl is unto yon a sign : according 
to all that ho hath done shall ye do: and when 
this Cometh, ye shall know that I a>7i the Lord 

GOD.^' 

25 Also, thou son of man. shall it not be in the 
day when I take from tlicm their strength,'- the 
joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes, and that 
wlieieupou they set their minds,' their sons and 
tlicir daughters, 

20 That he that cscapeth in that day shall come 
unto thee, to cause thee to hear it with thine 
cars ? 

27 In that day shall thy moutli be opened to him 
which is escaped, and thou shalt s|)eak, and be no 
more dumb ;" and thou shalt be a siirn unto them: 
and they shall know that I am the Lord. 



7:11; Lam. 1:9, 10. r Psa. 4S:1-). ■ P..a. 27:4 ; S4:2, 10. > Heb. Mr pily 
of your soul. <2Chr. 30:17. " Jer. 10:0, 7. "Lara. 4:10. w P«a. 78:64. 
«ch.:J3:10, 11; Lev. 2(!::». y John 14:29. «Tor. 21. MUh. the lifling up 
oflhtir soul. « ch. 33:21, etc. 



.Jerusalem: this expresses the certainty of the event in 
tiod's purpose. 

27. lie opened — be no more dumb; Ezekiel now closes, by 
divine direction, his prophecies to his own people till the 
capture of Jerusalem shall be reported to him, chapter 
33:21, 22. His intervening prophecies were directed 
against the Gentiles. 

INSTRUCTIONB. 

7, 8. God will make the punishment of bold transgress- 
ors as conspicuous as their crimes. 

3-13. No amount of sulTering inflicted upon transgress- 
ors is suflicient of itself to remove the desperate wicked- 
ness of the human heart. Though God send upon them 
judgment after judgment, they will still continue to rebel 
against him. The ])ower of his .'Spirit alone can change 
the lie:irt of stone to flesh and purify the inner man. 

IG. God sometimes inflicts U|)on his most faithful ser- 
vants great suflerings for the inslriutioii of others. 

17, 18. The interests of truth often recjuirc us to sup- 
press those outward signs of grief which would be in 
other circumstances right ami proper. 

23. Public calamity, long continued and general, has a 
tendency to harden the feelings of wicked men, so that 
they omit the customary exjiressions of grief and sympa- 
thy, and pine away in sullen despair. From so dreadful 
a chastisement let every community seek deliverance from 
God by earnest prayer joined with hearty repentance. 



The Ammanitcs, Monh, 



EZEKIEL XXVI. 



and Edom Ihrminwd. 



^IIS;' CHAPTER XXV. 

1 'rod's ven''eance, for their insolency against the Jews, upon tlie Am- 
monites; 8 upon Moab and Seir; 12 upon Edom, 15 and upon tije 
Philistines. 

fy^HE word of the Lord came again unto mc, 
_L sayiiiiT. 

2 Son of man, set thy face against the Ammon- 
ites, and proi)hesy against them;^ 

3 And say unto the Ainnionitcs, Hear tlic word 
of the Lord God : Thus saith tlie Lord God ; Be- 
cau.so tliou saidst. Aha, against my sanctuary, wiien 
it was profaned; and against the land of Israel, 
when it was desolate; and against the house of 
Judah, when they went into captivity;'' 

4 Behold, therefore I will deliver thee to the 
men" of the east for a possession, and they shall 
set their palaces in thee, and make their dwellings 
in thee: they shall eat thy fruit, and they shall 
drink thy milk. 

•J And I will make Rabbah a stable for camels, 
and the Ammonites a couching place for flocks : 
and ye shall know that I am the LoRD.'^ 

6 For thus saith the Lord God ; Because thou 
hast clapped thy hands,* and stamped with the 
feet.' and rejoiced in heart* with all thy despite 
again.st the land of Israel ; 

7 Behold, therefore I will stretch out my hand 
upon thee, and will deliver thee for a spoil' to the 
heathen ; and I will cut thee off from the people, 
and 1 will cause thee to perish out of the coun- 
tries : I will destroy thee; and thou shalt know 
that I am the Lord. 

« 1i Thus saith the Lord God ; Because that 
Moab and ."^eir do say. Behold, the house of Judah 
is like unto all the heathen ; 

9 Therefore, behold, I will open the side^ of 
Moab from the cities, from his cities which are on 
his frontiers, the glory of the country, Beth-jeshi- 
motli, Baal-meon, and Kiriathaim, 



aCh. 21:2S-1;>; Jcr. 49: 


,etc.; Am 


si: 1.3-1.3; Zenh.2:»-ll. bch.SO:'?, 


etc.; Psa. 7U;->, .■); Prov. 


\-:h. -24:1 


, Xt. • Heb. rhildren. ' ch. ^5:9. 


Mieh. hand. 1 Heb./ool. 


S Heb. sou 


. 1 Or, meat. ^ Heb. shoulder. • Or. 


agatnsl the children of Ai 


nmon. <1 I 


SI. ch. 15, 16; Jer. 48:1, etc.; Amos 



CHAPTER XXV. 

Tlie four nations mentioned in this chapter all lay on 
the borders of God's covenant people ; they had been 
from the beginning their enemies, and now exulted in 
their captivity. 

4. Tlie men of the east; the Arabian tribes of the desert, 
which lay east and south of Palestine. 

.'i. Rabbah. i the same as " Rabbath of the Ammonites," 
chap. 21 : 20, in the mountainous region east of the Jordan. 
Its ruins are used by the Arabs at the present time as a 
lod;;ing-place for camels. 

s. And Seir ; he first mentions the common sin of Moab 
and Seir, or Edom, and then utters a separate prophecy 
asiiiiist each. Like unto all the lieathen ; has perished like 
all the other nations, notwithstanding the peculiar protec- 
tion of .Jeliovah which it enjoyed. Thus they reproach 
tlie (jod of Israel. 

9. I will oj)en the side of Moab from the cities — the glory 
of the country, Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon, and Kiriatluitm ; 
render, " I will open the side of Moab in the region of 
the cities, of the cities on his frontier, which are the 
glory of the country; namely, Beth-jeshimoth," etc. The 
three places named all lay on the northern frontier of 
Moab, north of the Arnon. This region has been from 
ancient times a celebrated pasture-ground. 



10 Unto the men of the east with the Ammon- 
ites," and will give them in possession, that the Am- 
monites may not be remeinlicrrd among the nations. 

11 And I will execute jiidLiiJiciits upon Moab; 
and they shall know that I am the Lord.'' 

12 1 Thus saith the Lord (JoD; Because that 
Edom hath dealt against the house of Judah by 
taking vengeance,* and hath greatly oU'endeil, and 
revenged himself upon them;'' 

13 Therefore thus saith the Lord God; I will 
also stretch out my hand upon Kdom, and will 
cut off man and beast from it; and I will inakn it 
desolate from Teman ; and they of Dedan shall fiill 
by the sword.* 

14 And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom liy 
the hand of my yieople Israel: and they shall do 
ill Edom according to mine anger and according 
to my fury; and tliey shall know my vengeance, 
saith the Lord God. 

1.5 IThus saith the Lord God; Because the 
Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have taken 
vengeance with a despiteful heart, to destroy it 
for the old ' hatred ; 

IC) Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Bi-liold, 
I will stretch out my hand upon the I'liilistiiies, 
and I will cut off' the Cherethim, and destroy the 
remnant of the sea-coast.' 

17 And I will execute great vengeance^ upon 
them with furious rebukes; and they shall know 
that I am fJic Lord, when I shall lay my ven- 
geance upon them. 



CHAPTER XXVI, 



1 Tyrus. for 
of Nebuchadreicza 



Iting aijainst Jerusalem, is threatened. 7 The power 
amst her. \3 The niourniji^ and astoiiishment 
of the sea at her fall. 



AND it came to pass in the eleventh year, in 
the iirst day of the month, that the word of 
the Lord came unto me, saying, 



2:1-3. t Heb revenging revensemrnl. e 2 Cl.r. 2^:17, IH; ObaJ. 10. etc. 
I Or. sliallfall hy the sword unto Dedan. J Or, with perpetual. I Or, haven 
of the sea. ^ Hi^tt. vengeances. 



10. 37ie men of tlie east with the Ammonites ; that is, at the 
same time that I open the country of the Ammonites to the 
men of the east, I will also open to them the land of the 
Moabites. 

13. Temnn; a district of Edom on the south-east. Of 
Dedan ; better, as tlie margin, '■ unto Dedan." This was 
apparently on the north-east of Edom. There was, as is 
generally thought, another Dedan on or near the Persian 
gulf, mentioned below, chap. 27:15. 

IB. The Cherethim; another name for the Philistines. 
Compare 1 Sam. 30:I4-lfi. The remnant of tlie sea-mast; 
the Philistines lay along the sea-coast at the south-west 
of Palestine. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3-7. They who exult with malicious joy over the calam- 
ities of others, will soon be compelled to mourn and weep 
over their own calamities. Prov. 17:5; 24:17,18. 

8-11. God is jealous for his own glory. He will not 
give over his people to final weakness and ruin ; but 
will in due time appear for their deliveranc(% and the 
destruction of those who have rejoiced in their humiliar 
tion. 

12-17. Hatred and revenge are at all times heinous sins, 
which provoke God to wrath ; but they are peculiarly 
offensive to him when exercised towards others in times 
of deep distress. 

939 



Tyrt threatened. 



EZEKIEL XX\ I. 



Ilcr fall lamented. 



2 Son of man, because that Tyrus hath said 
against Jerusalem, Aha," she is broken that was 
the f^atcs of tlie people; she is turned unto me ; 
I shall be replenished, now she is laid waste: 

3 Therefore thus saith the Lord GuD; JJehold, 
I am against thee,'' Tyrus, and will cause many 
nations to come up against thee, as the sea causeth 
his waves to come up."-' 

4 And they shall destroy the walls of Tyrus, and 
break down her towers : I will also scrape her 
dust from her, and make her like the top of a i-ock. 

5 It shall be a place fo)- the spreading of nets in 
the midst of tiie sea;'' for I have spoken it, saith 
the Lord God : and it shall become a spoil to the 
nations.'^ 

6 And her daughters which are in the field shall 
be slain by the sword ; and they shall know that 
I am the Lord. 

7 *! For thus saith the Lord God ; Behold, I 
will bring upon Tyrus Nebuchadrezzar king of 
Babylon, a king of kings,' from the north, with 
horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and 
companies, and much people. 

8 He shall slay with the sword thy daughters in 
the field: and he shall make a fort against thee,'-' 
and cast a mount" against thee, and lift up the 
buckler against thee. 

9 And he shall set engines of war against thy 
walls, and witii his axes he shall break down tliy 
towers. 

10 By reason of the abundance of his horses their 
dust shall cover thee : thy walls sliall sliake at the 
noise of the horsemen, and of the wheels, and of 
the cliariots, wlien he shall enter into thy gates, 
as men enter into a city wherein is made a breach.* 

11 With the hoofs of his horses shall he tread 
down all thy streets: he shall slay thy people by 
the sword, and thy strong garrisons shall go down 
to the groinid.'' 

12 And they shall make a spoil of thy riches, 
and make a prey of thy merchandise : and they 
shall break down tliy walls, and destroy thy pleas- 



• Ch.'.'fliS; Psa. 33:-.'l. bch.3!<:^. c l,a .'>::)U. a ch. ■.'-::«. e cli. •J7:3.i; 
Isi. -iM.eto.; Jer. -iS-.ti; •17:1; Amrs 1:0. 11); Zech. 0:J, <l. 'Ezra 7:12; 
Din. S:37. S ch. 2\ -.ii. ' Or, puur out l/ie en:(ine of s/iol. 1 }leb. aaorditig 
to the entering!, of a cilij brokm up. I" I.«i iC-.K I Hi-b. liouKS of Ihij 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

2. Tijrm; the celebrated emporium of ancient Phoenicia. 
It was originafly a long roclvy island, parallel to the shore 
of the Mciliterranean, and loss than half a mile distant 
from it. When Alexander the Gre;it besieged it he ex- 
tended a causeway to it, and thus made it a peninsula. 

7. Nchucliadrczzar ; he besieged Tyre for thirteen years. 

8. Tktj daughters in the field; the cities dependent upon 
Tyre. 

14. Like the top of a rnck — a place to spread nets ; the pres- 
ent condition of Tyre answers exactly to this description. 
Nebuchadnezzar's assault was followed by a series ofother 
calamities, which finally reduced it to utter desolation. 

lo. The isles; the islands and coast.s of the Mciliterra- 
nean on the west of Tyre, and then the western regions 
generally. They are named on account of the rich com- 
merce which Tyre carried on with them. Sliake; tremble 
from terror and amazement. Compare verse 18, and chap. 
27:3.->. 

1(>. All the princes of the sea; the princes of the colonics 
founded l>y Tyre, and enriclie<l by her merch;iudi8e, seem 
to be especially intendeil. See note on Isa. 23:8. 
940 



ant houses:' and they shall lay thy stones '^i*'(\^^ 
and thy timber and thy dust in the midst of the 
water. 

13 And I will cau.?e the noise of thy songs to 
cease; and the sound of thy harps shall be no 
more heard.' 

1-1 And I will make thee like the top of a rock : 
thou shalt be a place to spread nets upon ; thou 
shalt be built no more: for I the Lord have spo- 
ken il,> saith the Lord God. 

15 'i Thus saith the Lord God to Tyrus; Shall 
not the isles shake at the sound of thy fall,'' when 
the wounded cry, when the slaughter is made in 
the midst of thee? 

IG Then all the princes of the sea shall come 
down from their thrones, and lay away their robes,' 
and put ofl' their broidered garments : they shall 
clothe themselves with trembling ;■' they shall sit 
upon the ground,"' and shall tremble at every mo- 
ment," and be astonished at thee." 

17 And they shall take up a lamentation for thee,'' 
and say to thee, How art thou destroyed, that wast 
inhabited of seafaring men,' the renowned city, 
which wast strong in the sea, she and her inhabi- 
tants, which cause their terror to be on all that 
haunt it! 

18 Now shall the isles tremble in the day of thy 
fall;'' yea, the isles that arc in the sea shall be 
troubled at thy departure. 

10 For thus saith the Lord God; When I shall 
make thee a desolate city, like the cities that are 
not inhabited; when 1 shall l)ring up the deep 
upon thee, and great waters shall cover thee ; 

20 When I shall bring thee down with them 
that descend into the pit,'' with the people of old 
time, and shall set thee in the low parts of the 
eai'th, in places desolate of old, with them that go 
down to the jiit, that thou be not inhabited ; and 
I shall set glory in the land of the living; 

21 1 will make thee a terror,' and thou shall be 
no more:^ though thou be sought for, yet shalt 
thou never be found again,' saith the Lord God. 



desire, i l>a. iJ:S, IJ; .l-r. lli:9. J Job 40::^; 


Isa. 14:-.>7. 


Uch. 31:16; Jer. 


J'J:21. 1 Jonah :J:li. i Ileb. IrtmUiiig.'^. m 


Job 2: 13. n 


ch. 33:10. ch. 


37:35. P Rev. n<:9, llUb.mtnofHesias 


q Ter 15. 


r ch. 3->:18, H; 


Num. 10:30,33; Psa. 4^:1. 1 licb. terrors. 


• ch. a*:^. 


1 Psa. 37:30. 



19. Bring up the deep upon thee; the meaning is, that 
God will destroy her as by a deluge. We need not inter- 
pret these words altogether in a literal sense, j-et it is 
remarkable that the western coast of the ]ieiiinsula of Tyre 
is strewed with the ruins of the ancient city lying beneath 
the waves. 

20. Shall bring titec down — into the pit; Tyre is repre- 
sented as descending like an individual into the regions 
of the dead. The low parts — places dciolale of old ; a poetic 
description of the abode of the dead, as one of darkness 
and desolation. Comjiare Job 1(1:21, 22. Set glonj ; make 
Jerusalem again an orniinient ;ind a luaisc. 

INSTIfl'CTlUN.-^. 

2. It is unlawful for us to seek our own aggrandizement 
by the ruin of our neigliburs, or to rejoice in the calami- 
ties which befall others, because they bring profit to our- 
selves. 

5. The wonderful accuracy with which the ancient 
prophets of Judah foretold the present condition of cities 
anil empires that were then great and powerful, is a sure 
[iriiof that thev sjioke not of themselves, but as they were 
moved by lhe"lloly Ghost. 

7-M. God makes use of the agency of wicked as well 



The riches and 



EZEKIEL XXVII. 



commerce of Tyre. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 



1 The rich supply of Tyrus. 26 The great and unrecoverable fall thereof. 

' T~^HE word of the Lord came again unto mc, 

L saying, 

2 Now, thou son of man, take up a lamentation 
for Tyrus;* 

:5 And say unto Tyrus, thou that art situate at 
the entry of the sea, which art a merchant of the 
]>eoplc for many isles,'' Tims saith the Lord God ; 
Tyrus, thou hast said, I ain of perfect* beauty. 

4 Thy borders are in tlie midst* of the seas, thy 
builders have perfected thy beauty. 

5 They have made* all tliy ship-hoards of fir-trees 
of Senir:'^ they have taken cedars from Lebanon 
to make masts for thee. 

6 Of the oaks of Bashan have they made thine 
oars ;" the company^ of the Ashurites have made thy 
benchesofivory,' fr/w/g-A^outoftheislesofChittim.'" 

7 Fine linen witli broidered work from Egy]5t 
Avas that whicli tliou spreadest forth to be thy sail : 
blue and purple' from the isles of Elishah was 
that which covered thee. 

8 Tiie inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were thy 
mariners: thy wise men, Tyrus, that were in 
thee, were thy pilots. 

9 The ancients of GebaF and the wise men 
thereof wore in thee thy calkers:" all the ships of 
the sea with their mariners were in thee to occupy 
thy merchandise. 

iO Tiiey of Persia and of Lud and of Phut were 
in thine army,^ thy men of war:'' they hanged 
the shield and helmet in thee ; they set forth thy 
comeliness. 

1 1 The men of Arvad with thine army loere upon 
thy walls round about, and the Gammadim were 
in thy towers : they hanged their shields upon thy 
walls round about; they have made thy beauty 
perfect. 



1 Ch. aOilT. b Isi. 23:3, etc. • Ileb. ;,cr/frt n/. t Heb /irarl. 1 Heb. 
buitt. cDeut. 3:9. d Lsa. •.!:13; Zech, 1 1 :-J. i Ueb. daughters. iOr.thry 
have made thy hatches of ivory ivHl trodden, e Jer. 2: 1 0. U Or, purple and 
scarlet, f Psa. fc3:7. ' Or, stoppers of chinks f Heb. strengtheners. s ch. 
33'::5. h Jer. 46:9. i 2 Clir. 2J:3'). j Gen. 10:2, etc. t Or. OTCTr/injjrfiV. 
t Rev. 1S:13. 1 cli. 3S:(i. m I Kings ll):2i I Unb. thy works, i Heb. 



as of good men for the accomplishment of bis purposes, 
and when he has any work for man to perform, he gives 
him strength and resources sufficient for its execution. 

15-21. By his great and might}' judgments, God is con- 
tinually humbling haughty and stnuig nations, and all who 
put their trust in them ; and teaching the world tliat he 
reigns supreme over all men, and that in himself alone 
are to be fomid prosperity and salvation. 

CHAPTER XXVn. 

In this chapter the countries that have traded with Tyre 
and been enriched by her are enumerated, with their vari- 
ous articles of merchandise, verses 1-2.5 ; then their ter- 
ror and distress for her destruction are described, verses 
20-36. 

6. T7ie company of the Ashuriles — ivorij; rather, "they 
have made thy benches of ivory inlaid in box." See the 
margin. The k/cs of Chitlim ; Cyprus, with the adjacent 
islamls and coasts. Gen. 10:4. 

7. The isle^ nf Elishah; the southern peninsula of Greece 
with its adjacent islands. 

8. Arvad; a small rocky island of the Mediterranean 
north of Tripolis, and about two miles from the shore. 

i). Gebal ; a city and district of Phoenicia on the shore 
of the Mediterranean under mount Lebanon. 



12 Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of the 
multitude of all kind of riches ;' with silver, iron, 
till, and lead, tiiey traded in thy fairs. 

13 Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy 
merchants :J they traded the persons of men and 
vessels of brass in thy market.* " 

14 They of tiie house of Togarmah traded in thy 
fairs with horses and horsemen and mules.' 

15 The men of Dedaniwre thy merchants; many 
islestwrethemerchandiseof tliy iiand: theybi'ouglit 
thee^br a present, horns of ivory and ebony.'" 

16 Syria was thy merchant by reason of the 
multitude of the wares * of thy making : they oc- 
cupied in thy fairs with emeralds, purple, and 
broidered work, and line linen, and coral, and 
agate.^ 

17 Judah, and the land of Israel, they rvere thy 
merchants: they traded in thy market wheat" of 
Minnith" and Pannag, and honey, and oil, and 
balm.'P 

18 Damascus u-as thy merchant in the multi- 
tude of the wares of thy making, for the multi- 
tude of all riches: in tlie wine of Helbou, and 
white wool. 

19 Pan also and Javan going to and fro occu- 
pied' in thy fairs: bright iron, cassia, and cala- 
mus, were in thy market. 

20 Dedan leas thy merchant in precious cloths* 
for chariots.'' 

21 Arabia, and all the princes of Kedar,"' they 
occupied with thee* in lambs, and rams, and goats : 
in tliese u-ere they thy merchants. 

22 The merchants of Sheba and Eaamah,' they 
were thy merchants : they occupied in thy fairs 
with cliief of all spices, and with all precious stones, 
and gold. 

23 Haran,' and Cannch, and Eden, the mer- 
chants of Sheba, Asshur, and Chilmad, u-ere thy 
merchants. 



chri/soprnse. n 1 Kings 5:9, 1 1 ; Ezra 3:7; Acts 12:20. n Judg. 11 :3:l. 1 Or, 
ro.s'in. P.Ier. t^:22. ^ Ot, trad>'d with spun work. ' Heh. cloths of freedom. 
q Gen. 2.'5:.3. t Gen. 25:13; Isa. 011:7. t Heb. were the merchnnts of thy 
hand. > Gen. 10:7; 1 Kings 10:1,2; Psa. 72:1U, 15; isa. G0:6. t Gen. 11:31; 
2 Kings 19:12. 



10. Lvd — Phut; African tribes. 

12. Tarshish; see note on Isa. 23:1. 

13. Javan; Ionia, and in a more general sense Greece. 
Tubal and Meshech; between the Black sea and the Cas- 
pian. This region has always been celebrated for its 
trade in slaves. 

14. Togarmah ; probably Armenia. 

15. Dedan ; probably an island of the Persian gulf Hornx 
of ivory ; that is, tusks of elephant, so called from their 
resemblance to horns. 

17. Minnith; a city on the borders of the Ammonites, 
Judg. 11:33. 

18. Helbon; the city now called Aleppo; or, a large 
valley on the east of Anti-lebanon. 

19. Dan also and Javan; generally considered to be Ara- 
bian tribes, the Javan here mentioned differing from that 
in verse 13. Some render, " Wedan and Javan." 

20. Dedan; probably an Arabian tribe, different from 
the Dedan mentioned verse 15. 

21. Kedar; an Arabian tribe, as were also those men- 
tioned in the following verse. 

2,3. Haran — Canneh — jEdcn; cities of Mesopotamia. Can- 
neh seems to be the same as Calneh. See note on Isa. 
10:9. Asshur; Assyria proper, lying east of the Tigris. 
Chilmad is unknown. 

941 



Tyres dreadful and 



EZEKIEL XXVIII. 



irrecoverable fall. 



24 Those were thy merchants in all sorts of 
things' in blue clothes/ and l)roidercd work, and 
in chests of rich apparel, hound with cords, and 
made of cedar, anionif thy ni('i('liandi>c. 

25 The sliips of Tarshish did siii;f ol' thee in thy 
market:" and thou wast replenished, and made 
very glorious in the midst of the seas. 

26 if Thy rowers iiave hrouaht thee into great 
waters : the east wind hath broken thee in the 
midst' of the seas.'* 

27 Thy riches,'' and thy fairs, thy merchandise, 
thy mariners, and thy pilots, thy calkers, and the 
occupiers of thy merchandise, and all thy men of 
war, that are in thee, and in all^ thy conijiany 
which is in the midst' of thee, shall fall into the 
midst of the seas in the day of thy ruin. 

28 The suburbs^ shall shake at the sound of the 
cry of tliy jjilots. 

29 And all that handle the oar, the mariners, 
and all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from 
their ships, they shall stand upon the land; 

30 And shall cause their voice to be hoard 
against thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast 
u]) dust upon their heads,'' they shall wallow them- 
selves in the ashes:" 

31 And they shall make themselves utterly bald 
for thee,' and gird them with sackcloth, and they 
shall weej) for thee with bitterness of heart and 
bitter wailing.'-' 

32 And in their wailing they shall lake up a 
lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, sail- 
ing, What city is like Tyrus, like the destroyed in 
the midst of the sea? 

33 When thy wares went forth out of the seas, 
thou filledst many people; thou didst enrich the 
kings of the earth with the multitude of thy riches 
and of thy merchandise.'' 

34 In the time when thou shalt be linikenby the 
seas in the depths of the waters, thy merchandise 
and all thy company in tiic midst of thee shall 
fall. 

3.5 All the inhabitants of the isles shall bo as- 
tonished at thee, and their kings sliall be sore 
afraid, they shall be troubled in their counte- 
nance. 

36 The merchants among the people shall hiss at 
thee;' thou shalt be a terror, *J and never shalt be 
any more.* 



•Or, emtltnt things, t lUh. foldings. • 1 Kincs 10:22; lai. 2:10; 
23:14; C0:0. lIIcb./iMr(. bp,i.48:7. <:Pro».ll:4. I Or,«t)en«>.(/i. I Hob. 
ktart. lOr.MiatM. d Rev. lH:0. 19. e Jor. «:-J«; Jonah :):U. r Mic. 1 :1(!. 
t listh. 4. 1-1. h ver. 27; ch. 21:111. ' .lor. \>t:\R. • Hcb. terrors, i cli. 
20:21. I H«b. shalt no( bo /or foer. k Hab. 2:4. 1 Hcb. Ararl. I|«a. 31::). 



26. Thy rowers; that is, thy rulers, Tyro being compared 
to a ship. 

30-30. Shall cause their voice to be heard a<rainsl thee, and 
shall cry bitterly; compare tlie passage, Ilcv. 18:15-19, 
where the fall of the mystic Babylon is described in simi- 
lar terms. 

INSTRUCTIOX. 

The strength and safety of a nation lie not in the extent 
of its commerce, the vastness of its treasures, and the 
multitude and variety of luxuries which its citizens can 
command, but in that rij;liti;oU8ness which secures the 
divine presence and bleasin;;. That prosperity and splen- 
dor which have not their foundation in justice and trutli 
will soon vanish away, and want, ignominy, and despair 
come in their stead. 

942 



1 God's jud^'ment upon Tyrus. 11 A lameni-ation of its great glorv cor- 
rupiiai,y.sin. 20 The jud-niciitof Zidort. 24 The restoration of fsr-iel. 

''T'^ilE word of the Lord came again unto me, 
.1- saying, 

2 Son of man, say unto the prince of Tyrus, 
Thus saith the Lord God; Because thy heart is 
lifted up," and thou hast said, I am a God, I sit in 
the seat of God, in the midst* of the seas ; yet thou 
art a man, and not God,' though thou set thy 
heart as the heart of God:'" 

3 Behold, thou art wiser than Daniel;" there is 
no secret that they can hide from thee: 

4 With thy wisdom and with thine understand- 
ing thou hast gotten thee riches, and hast gotten 
gold and silver into thy treasures:" 

5 By thy great wisdom* and by thy traffic hast 
thou increased thy riches,"' and thy heart is lifted 
up because of thy riches :'' 

6 Therefore tlius saith the Lord God : Because 
thou hast set thy heart as the heart of God; 

7 Behold, therefore I will bring strangers upon 
thee, the terrible of the nations:' and they shall 
draw their swords against tlie beauty of thy wis- 
dom, and they shall defile thy biightness. 

8 They shall bring thee down to the pit, and thou 
.shalt die the deaths of them that are slain in the 
midst of the seas. 

y Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee, 
I am (iod?" but thou shalt be a man, and no God, 
in the hand of him that slayeth' thee. 

10 Thou shalt die the deaths of the uncircum- 
cised by the hand of strangers:' for I have spo- 
ken it, saith the Lord GoD. 

1 1 1. Moreover the word of the Loud came unto 
me, saying, 

12 Son of man, take up a lamentation upon the 
king of Tyrus. and say unto him, Thus saith the 
Lord God; Thou sealest up the sum, full of wis- 
dom, and perfect in beauty." 

13 Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; 
every precious stone teas thy covering, tlie sardius,^ 
topaz, and the diamond, tlu^ beryl,* the onyx, and 
the Jasper, the sap]ihire, the emerald,' and tlie car- 
buncle, and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets 
and of thy pipes was jnepared in thee in the day 
that thou wast created. 

14 Thou art the anointed cherub that covercth ;" 



IT. aThons 2:4. 110,10.5:11.12. o Zcch 0:2, :1. i IWb. the gnalntss of 
thuwisilom. pP«a.02:lU. q Prov. II :2P; Jm. 1 :U. r ch. 3U:I1 ; 31 :l J; 
32:12. • ver. 2. 1 Or. ifOiindelA. 1 ch. 32:19, oto. "ch. 31:8, 9, t Or, 
rufttf. ' Or, clirt/sotite. t Or, c/trysoprast. * Exod. 25:20, 



CHAPTER XXVin. 

10. The unciretimcised ; the uncircumcised here represent 
those who are aliens from God's covenant, and unclean in 
heart and life, and as sucli doomed to destruction. Com- 
pare ch;ip, 31:18; 32:21, etc.; and Isa. 52:1, 

12, Scatc.'it up the sum ; rather, " sealest >ip the measure ;" 
that is, makest the measure of thy wisdom and beauty 
comiilcte, A seal is set to th;it which is finished, 

l:i, //«.</ been in Eden ; thy abode has been as it were in 
Eden, where all was beauty and excellence. Erery pre- 
cions stone — gold; there seems to be an iiUusion here to 
the precious stones and gohl of Eden, Uen, 2: 12. 

14. Anointed; consecrated to the kingly office, of which 
anointing was the sign, 1 Sam, 10:1 ; 10: 13, Cherub ; tho 



Judgment of Zidon, 



EZEKlEL XXIX. 



B.u.'S*"' and I have set thee so: tliou w^ast upon 
the lioly mountain of God ;'^ thou hast walked up 
and down in the midst of the stones of fire. 

15 Tiiou wast perfect in tiiy ways from tlic day 
tliat thou wast created, till iniquity was found in 
thee." 

II) By the multitude of thy merchandise they 
have filled the midst of thee with violen(;c, and 
tliDU hast sinned : therefore I will cast thee as 
profane out of the mountain of God : and I will 
destroy thee, covering cherub,"' from the midst 
of the stones of fire. 

17 Thy heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, 
thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of tiiy 
brightness:'' I will cast thee to the ground, I will 
lay thee before kings, that they may behold thee. 

18 Thou hast defiled tliy sanctuaries by the mul- 
titude of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy 
traffic;" therefore will I bring forth a fire fioni 
the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and I will 
bring thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight of 
all them that behold thee. 

19 All they that know thee among the people 
shall be astonished at thee: thou slialt be a tei-- 
ror." and never shaft thou be any more. 

'20 IT Again the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, 

'21 Son of man, set thy face against Zidon,*^ and 
prophesy against it, 

22 And say, Thus saitli the Lord God; Behold, 
I am against thee, Zidon ; *■' and 1 will be glori- 
fied in the midst of thee:'' and they shall know 
that 1 am the Lord, when I shall have executed 
judgments in her,' and shall be sanctified in her. 

23 For I will send into her pestilence, and blood 
into her streets ;' and the wounded shall be judged 
in the midst of her by the sword upon her on ev- 
ery side ; and they shall know that I am the Lord. 



» Oh. -211:40. b Eccl. 7:29; Rom 7:9. 


c ver. H. i Rom. Irii. 


= Mark 


8:.3li. • Heb. terrors. ' ch. 3i:30; Isi. 


•SiA, 12; Jer. ■ir,:->i- ■J7-3. 


S ch. 


29:3,1.'!. h Exod. U:4, 17. iPsa. 9:18. 


Jch. 3B:-.'-3. k Num. 33:53 


Josh 


a):l:); Isa. 3.5:9; 53:13; Rev. ■>\:t. 1 


Isa, ll:ia. 13. m ch. 3S: 


», -21. 



king of Tyre setms to bo called a cherub in respect to the 
fulness of gifts which Goil bestowerl upon him. Sec note 
on chap. 1:10. T/iat covcreth ; tlie allusion is to the cheru- 
bim that covered the mercy-seat with their wings. Exod. 
25:20. Upon the holy mouiitam; Zion, where the ark with 
its cherubim abode. Tlie meaning is, tliou wast e.xaltcd 
to the higliest dignity. Stones of fire ; the precious sparli- 
ling stones mentioned in verse 13. 

15. Wast perfect in thy ways ; acting uprightly as a nation 
and enjoying continual i)rosperity. Wast created; founded 
as a nation. Till iniqmty was found in tlice; till, through 
the corruption of thy wealth, thou ceasedst to act upright- 
ly. This was the occasion of the ruin which the prophet 
now foretells. 

16. 1 will cait thee — out of the inountain nf (lod; see note 
to verse 14. 

21. Zidon; the most ancient town of Phix-nicia, north of 
Tyre. 

23. Shall be judged; rather, " shall fall." 

24. Shall be no more a pricking brier; the design of God's 
judgments on the heathen nations around Israel, is the 
peace and prosperit}' of his covenant people. This prom- 
ise, with those which follow in the ne.xt two verses, is 
made not to " Israel according to the flesh," but to " the 
Israel of God." (Jal. 3:9. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1-10. God is jealous for his own glory, and will be ac- 
knowledged as supreme over nations, as well as families 



anrl of Pharaoh. 

24 % And there shall be no more a pricking 
brier unto the house of Israel," nor any grieving 
thorn of all that are round about them, that de- 
S|)iscd them; and they shall know that I am the 
Lord God. 

25 Thus saith the Lord God ; When I shall have 
gathered the house of Israel from the jicople 
among whom they are scattered,' and shall be 
sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen,'" then 
shall they dwell in their land tiiat I have given to 
my servant Jacol)." 

26 And they shall dwell safely* therein, and 
shall build houses, and plant vineyards ;" yea, they 
shall dwell with confidence, when I have executed 
judgments upon all those that despise* them round 
about them;'' and they shall know that 1 am the 
Lord their God. 

CHArTER XXIX. 

1 The jmljment of Ph:ir.xoh for his trrachery to Israel. 8 The desola- 
tion of Egypt. 13 The restoraiion thereof after forty years. 17 Egypt 
the reward of Nehuohiwirezzar. 21 Israel shall be restored. 

T N the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the 
Jl. twelfth day of the month, the word of the Lord 
came unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh king 
of Eayjit,'' and jirophesy against him,'' and against 
all Egypt:'* 

3 Speak, and say. Thus saith the Lord God ; 
Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, 
the great dragon that licth in the midst of his 
rivers,' which hath said. My river m mine own, and 
I have made it for myself." 

4 But I will ]iut hooks in thy jaws,'' and I will 
cause the fish of thy rivers to stick unto thy scales, 
and I will bring thee up out of the midst of thy 
rivers, and all the fish of thy rivers shall stick 
unto thy scales. 



n Gen. 2^:13. H; Jer. '23:0. t Or, wall 


oiifidem 


. Isa. (55:21. t Or. 


spoil. pLam. 1:H. q Jer. '25:19; 4-l::J0. r 


ch. i-i;'2 


,22. 'ch. 3-2; Isa. ch. 


19; Jer. ch. 4H. t Psa. 74:13, 14; Isa. '27:1 


; .51:9. 


" Dan. 4:30,31. v ch. 


.3^:4; Isa. 37:-29. 







and individuals. When any people become proud of their 
wisdom and skill to get wealth, of the vastness of their 
resources, or of the strength of their armies and fleets, 
and vainly imagine that their destiny is in their own hands, 
God will teach them by his mighty judgments, coming 
upon them irresistibly and in unexpected ways, how easy 
it is for him to break them in pieces as a potter's vessel ; 
and will turn all their boasting into shame and confusion. 

11-19. Great and long-continued prosperity has a ten- 
dency to lift up the hearts of nations with pride, and thus 
make it necessary that God should humble them in the 
sight of all men. 

20-23. God will so order the chastisements which he 
inflicts upon men that his justice shall be thereby mani- 
fested, and his great name glorified. 

24-26. God governs the world for the good of his own 
people. All the calamities which he sends upon the 
nations, he will make subservient to their welfare and 
enlargement; and will put honor upon them in the pres- 
ence of all those who have depised them. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

3. Dragon ; that is, crocodile, here used as a symbol of 
the king of Egypt. His rivers; the various arms of the 
Nile. Mil river ; he boasts of his river, because upon that 
the fertility of Egypt depends. 

4. The fish of thy rivers;, these represent the i^eoplc over 
whom the king of Egypt ruled. 

943 



Desolation, return, and 



EZEKIEL XXIX. 



abasement nf Egypt. 



5 And I will loave tlioo thrown into the wildor- 
noss, thee and all the lisli of tliy rivers : thou slialt 
fall u|)on the oj)en fields •,' thou shalt not be 
brou<^lit together, nor gatiiered:" 1 have giv(Mi 
thee for meat to the beasts of the field and to the 
fowls of the heaven." 

6 And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know 
that I am the Loiin, because they have been a stall' 
of reed to the house of Israel.*^ 

7 When they took hold of thee by thy hand, thou 
didstbrcak, and rend all their shoulder :'' and when 
they leaned upon thee, thou brakcst, and niadest 
all their loins to be at a stand." 

8 1 Therefore, thus saith the Lord God ; Behold, 
I will bring a sword upon thee, and cut off man 
and boast out of thee. 

9 And the land of Egypt shall be desolate and 
waste; and they shall know that I am the Lord: 
because he hath said. The river is mine, and I have 
made it.' 

10 Behold, therefore I am against thee, and 
against thy rivers," and I will make the land of 
Egypt utterly waste* and desolate, from the tower 
of Syene* even unto the border of Ethiopia.'' 

11 No foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot 
of beast shall ])ass through it,' neither shall it bo 
inhabited forty years. 

12 And I will make the land of Egypt desolate 
in the midst of the countries /Aa< «;t desolate, and 
her cities among the cities that are laid waste 
shall be desolate forty years: and I will scatter 
the Egyptians among the nations, and will dis- 
perse tiiem through the countries. 

13 1[ Yet thus saith the Lord Cioo; At the end 
of forty years will I gather the Egy])tians from the 
people whither they were scattered:^ 



• Hpb. face of tlie fidd. ' Jer. •i5::U. 
I«a. J0;-J-7; Jor. 37:5, etc. » Jer. i-.m. 
t Heb. 



34:-.>U. t a Kings 18:21. 
J ch. 30:12; Hab. 3:8. 



a lita. iiU:"J-/ ; Jer. :*i:D, etc. e jer. j;->o. « ver. j. 8 en. ju:i-j; naD.o:n. 
t Heb. wnsus o/wmle. 1 Or, Migdol to Syem; Exod. 14:2; Jer, 41:1; 
Hth. Seoenrh. hch. 30:8. ich. 32:13, j I.sa. 19:2:!. i Or, birlh. 1 Heb. 



6. A staff of real ; disappointinf; those who tru.st m it ; 
compare i Kings 18:21. The prophet dwells at such 
length upon the punishment of E.;;ypt and her khigs, be- 
cause the Jews relied on their help against Nebuchadnez- 
zar. Sec chap. 17:15-17. 

7. Rend; that is, tear by piercing. To be at a stand ; or, 
" to shake," as in Psa. C9:23. 

10. From tlie tower of Si/ene; the marginal reading is 
preferable: "from Migdol to Syene." Migdol was in the 
extreme north of Egypt, Exod. 14:2, and Syene in the 
extreme south. Ethiopia; which lay south of Egypt. 

14. Patkros; Upper Egypt. 

1.5. Basest of the kingdoms; a prophecy which has been 
strikingly fulfilled to the present lionr. 

16. lirintreth their iniquity to rememhranee ; their old in- 
iquity, of leaning on Egypt instead of .Jehovah. So long 
as Egypt was in a llourisliing condition, it brought their 
iniquity to remembrance; that is, excited the Israelites to 
practise it anew. Look after them; when the Israehtes 
should look after the Egyptians, as their allies and helpers. 

17. In the seven and twentieth year ; seventeen years after 
the date of the preceding proplicey, and sixteen years 
after that recorded in chapter :50:20-2B. It is therefore 
an appendix to the first of these prophecies, made by the 
prophet himself. 

15. A great service; the siege of Tyre, foretold in chap- 
ter 26:7-14, which had now l)cconie history. This cost 
Nebuchadnezzar thirteen years of toil. Yet had he no 
wages; the spoils of Tyre furnished no adequate reward 
for his trouble. 

944 



14 And 1 will bring again the captivity V'. .'?89: 
of Egypt, and will cause them to return into 
the land of Pathros, into the land of their habi- 
tation;* and they shall be there a base' king- 
dom."^ 

15 It shall be the basest of the kingdoms ; nei- 
ther shall it exalt itself any more above the na- 
tions: for I will diminish them, that they shall no 
more rule over the nations. 

1(5 And it shall be no more the confidence of 
the house of Israel,' which bringeth their iniqui- 
ty to remembrance, when tliey shall look after 
tliem: but they shall know that 1 ain, the Lord 
God. 

17 1i And it came to pass in the seven and twen- 
tieth year, in the first month, in the first day of 
the mouth, the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, 

18 Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon 
caused his army to serve a great service against 
Tyrus:" every head ii-as made bald, and every 
shoulder was peeled : yet had he no wages, nor his 
army, for Tyrus, for the service that he had served 
against it: 

19 Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Behold, 
I will give the land of Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon ; and he shall take her multitude, 
and take her spoil, and take her prey;^ and it 
shall be the wages for his army." 

20 I have given him the land of Egypt ybr his 
labor* wherewith he served against it, because 
they wrought for me, saith the Lord God. 

21 1 In that day will I cause the horn of the 
house of Israel to bud forth," and I will give thee 
the opening of the mouth in the midst of them ; 
and they shall know that I am the Lord. 

hw. k ch. 17:11; Dm. 11:42.43. 1 Isa 31:1. 3; 3G:4. 6; Jer. 2:36,37; 
Lam. 4:17; llos. 7:11. in ch. 26:7. etc.; Jer. 27:G. 1 Heb. spoil her .'poil, 
and prey her prey. njer. 2o:9. 'Or, hire. oPsa. 132:17. 



21. In that day; in connection with these judgments 
upon botli tlie enemies of God's church and her heathen 
allies in whom she puts confidence. This prophecy, like 
many others relating to the progress of God's kingdom, 
has a progressive fulfilment, and should not be limited to 
any one exact date. See note on Isa. 4:2. The horn of 
the house of Israel to bud forth; more literally, "a horn to 
bud forth for the house of Israel ; " that is, the Messiah, 
liut under him are included the human deliverers also 
whom (lod raises up from time to time for his church; 
for these all receive from Clirist the Head their life and 
strength. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-10. God will not suffer his jieople to withdraw their 
confidence from himself, and give it to any arm of flesh; 
but will destroy all their vain alliances, as ho did Egypt 
of old when the Jews looked to it instead of himself for 
help and salvation. 

11-16. The times for the exaltation and humiliation of 
nations are appointed by God with reference to the wel- 
fare of his kingdom of grace; he will nuike manifest liis 
sovereign power over them both in lifting them np to 
strength and honor, and in abasing them, that all maj' learn 
to fear him, and feel their dependence upon him. 

17-21. God overrules the plans of wicked nations for 
the accomplishment nf his own holy and good purposes, 
often raising one of them to great power, and subduing 
others before it; but all his counsels shall in the end 
advance the welfare of his true Israel. 



Invasion of Egypt 



EZEKIEL XXX. 



by Nehuck'idnezzar 



Tlie desolation of I^pypt and her helpe 
shall be strt-iigthened to break I 



CHAPTER XXX. 

20 The arm of Bahvlon 
arm of Egypt. 

'T^HE word of the Lord came again unto me, 
.1. saying, 

2 Son of man, propliesy and say, Thus saith the 
Lord God ; Howl ye, Woe worth tlie day ! 

3 For the day is near, even tlio day of tlie Lord 
is near,'' a cloudy day ; it shall be the time of the 
heatlien. 

4 And the sword shall come upon Egypt, and 
groat pain* shall bo iu Ethiopia, when the slaiu 
sluill fall in Egypt, and they shall take away her 
multitude, and her foundations shall be broken 
down. 

5 h]thiopia, and Libya,* and Lydia, and all the 
mingled people,'' and Chub, and the men' of the 
land that is in league, shall fall with thciu by the 
sword. 

6 Thus saith the Lord; They also that uphold 
Egypt shall fall;" and the pride of her power 
shall come down: from the tower of Syenc" shall 
they fall in it by the sword,'' saith the Lord CtOD. 

7 And they shall be desolate in the midst of the 
countries that are desolate, and her cities shall be 
in the midst of the cities that are wasted. 

8 And they shall know that. I am the Lord,'" 
wlu>n I have set a fire in Egypt, and when all her 
helpers shall be destroyed.' 

'.) h\ that day shall messengers go forth from me 
in ships to make the careless Ethiopians afraid,' 
and great pain shall come upon them, as in the 
day of Egypt:''' for lo, it cometh. 

10 Thus saith the Lord God; 1 will also make 
the multitude of Egypt to cease by the hand of 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon.'' 

1 1 He and his people witli him, the terrible of 
the nations," shall be brought to destroy the land ; 
and they shall draw their swords against Egypt, 
and fill the land with the slain. 

12 And 1 will make the rivers dry ,^ and sell the 
land into the hand of the wicked:^ and I will 
make the laud waste, and all that is therein," by 



»Joel3:l. -Or, ftar. t Heb. PAul; ch. aT^O. b Jer. 25:20, 24. I Heb. 
i-hildren. ':Job9;13. iOt, Migdol to Syene. >1 ch. 29:10, lii. ePsa. 58:11. 
1 Heb. broken. I Isa. 32:9-11. e Isa. 18:1, 2. b ver. 24. 25. i ch. 23:7. 
1 Heb. drought, i Isa. 19:4-6; Rev. 16:12. * Heb. the fulness thereof. 



2. Woe worth the daij ; literally, " Woe to the day ;" that 
is, the day of vengeance upon Et^ypt. 

.S. The time of the heathen ; tlie time of their punishment. 

5. Lydia; here an African people. Mingled people; for- 
eigners of different nations, perhaps employed as hired 
soldiers in tlie Egyptian armies. Compare chap. 27:10. 
In league; in league with Egypt; tlie allies of Egypt are 
meant. 

C. From tlie tower of Sycne; see note on chap. 29:10. 

!1. From me; as the author of Egypt's destruction. Jeho- 
vah sends tlieni, not directly by revelation, but indirectly 
liy his providence. In ships ; ascending the Nile in light 
ships or boats. Compare Isa. 18:2, with the note. 

12. Make tlie rivers dry; figuratively spoken of the de- 
struction of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar's armies, because 
the fertility of the country depended on the waters of the 
Nile. 

i:i-18. Noph ; Memphis, the ancient capital of Lower 
I'vgypt. It was situated not far from the modern Cairo. 
Znan ; Tanis, on the eastern side of tlic delta of the Nile. 
No: Tliebes, the ancieiil capital of Vpper Ejvpt. a city 

t;o 



the hand of strangers: I the Loud have spoken 
if. 

13 Thus saith the Lord God ; 1 will also destroy 
the idols,'' and I will cause their images to cease 
out of Noph ; and there shall be no more a prince 
of the land of Egypt :' and 1 will put a foar in the 
land of Egypt. 

14 And 1 will make Pathros desolate,'" and will 
set fire in Zoau,* and will execute judgments in 
No." 

15 And I will pour my fury upon Sin,* the 
strength of Egypt; and I will cut ofl' the multi- 
tude of No." 

16 And 1 will set fire in Egypt: Sin shall have 
great pain, and No shall be rent asunder, and 
Noph shall hair distresses daily. 

17 The young men of Aven^ and of Pi-b?seth' 
shall fall by the sword: and these cities shall go 
into captivity. 

18 At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be dark- 
ened,^'' when I shall Vireak there the yokes of 
Egypt: and the pomp of her strength shall cease 
in her: as for her, a cloud shall cover her, and 
her daughters shall go into captivity. 

19 Thus will I execute judgments in Egypt: and 
they shall know that I am the Lord. 

20 % And it came to pass in the eleventh year, 
in the first month, in the seventh day of the month, 
that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, 

21 Son of man. I have broken the arm of Pha- 
raoh king of Egypt;'' and lo, it shall not be 
bound up to be healed,'' to put a roller to bind it, 
to make it strong to hold the sword. 

22 Therefore thus saith the Lord God : Behold, 
I am against Pharaoh king of Egyjit, and will 
break his arms," the strong,' and that which was 
broken: and I will cause the sword to fall out of 
his hand. 

23 And I will scatter the Egyptians among the 
nations, and will disperse them through the coun- 
tries. 

24 And I will strengthen the arms of the king 
of Babylon, and put my sword in his hand : but I 



k Isa. 19:1, etc.; Jet. 43:12; 46:25; Zcch. 13:2. 1 Zech. 10:11. m ch. 
29:14. t Or, Tanis. " Psa. "8:12, 43. 1 Or, Pelusium. » Nah. 3:8-10. 
i Or, Heliopolis. \ Ot, Pubastum. ^ Or. restrained, p Jer. 2:16. q Jer. 
4S:25. r Isa. 1:6; Jer. 46:11. >Psa.37:17. lch.31:lG. 



of vast extent and splendor, whose ruins are yet visible. 
Sin; Pelusium, on the eastern branch of the Nile, near the 
sea, which now covers its site. Avert; the same as On, 
upon the eastern shore of tlie Nile, a few miles below 
Memphis. Pi-hcseth; in Lower Egypt, on tlie eastern 
branch of the Nile. Tcliaphnehcs ; the same as Tahapa- 
nes, Jer. 2:16. It lay near Pelusium. All these ancient 
cities of Egypt are now in ruins, according to the proph- 
et's word. 

21. A roller; that is, a bandage. 

22. The strong, and that which was broken; the breaking 
of one arm has been already foretold, ver. 21 ; God will 
complete his destruction by breaking the other : that is, 
he will utterly destroy his power. 

INSTRUCTION. 
"When God has determined to overthrow a people for 
their sins, no human alliances can save them. His wrath 
will consume them and their helpers together, and put 
to shame all who have looked to them, instead of their 
Maker, for help and deliverance. 

94.5 



The greatness, pride, 



EZEKIEL XXXI. 



and fall of Assyria. 



will break Pliaraoli's arms, and he shall groan be- 
fore him with the groanings of a deadly wounded 
man. 

25 But I will strengthen the arms of the king of 
Babylon," and the arms of Pharaoh shall fall down, 
and they shall know that I am the Loud, when I 
shall put my sword into tlie luuid of the king of 
Babylon,'' and he shall stretch it out upon the land 
of Egypt.'' 

2() And T will scatter the Egyptians among the 
nations, and disperse them among the countries;'' 
and they shall know tliat I am the Lokd.'^ 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

1 A relation unto Pliaraoli, 3 of the glory of Assyria, 10 and the fall 
thereot' for pride. 18 The like destruction of E;^pt, 

A ND it came to ])ass in tlie eleventh year, in 
_Z A. the third month, in the first daij of the month, 
that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, speak unto Pharaoh king of 
Egypt, and to his multitude ; Wiiom art thou lilce 
in thy greatness?'' 

3 Behold, the Assyrian vas a cedar in Lebanon 
with fair branches," and witli a sliadowing shroud, 
and of a high stature; and liis top was among the 
thick bouglis.^ 

4 The waters made him great,* the deep set* him 
up on iiigh with her rivers running round about 
his plants," and sent out her little rivers^ unto all 
the trees of the field. 

5 Therefore his height was exalted above all the 
trees of tiie field, and his bouglis were multiplied, 
and his branches became long because of the mul- 
titude of waters, when he shot forth.' 

G All the fowls of heaven made their nests in his 
boughs,' and under his branches did all the beasts 
of I he field bring forth their young, and under his 
shadow dwelt all great nations. 

7 Thus was he fair in his greatness, in the length 
of his branches: for his root was by great waters. 

8 The cedars in the garden of God could not 
hide him:J the fir-trees were not like his boughs, 
and the chestnut-trees were not like his branches; 



• Jer. 27:6-8. l>I«alH<|.5, c ver. 2-1; ch. 29: 12. <l Dm. 11:42. ever. 
8. f ver. IS. ' MA. fair of branrhrs. J Dan. 4:20-2>. \ Or, nourished 
him. IOt, brought bjer. 51;:J0. h Or,rondHits. \ Or, it aentiiicm forth. 
Ich. 17:2:1. J (jcn. 2:8; 13:11); I«a. 51 ::!. kch.l(i:U I MiU.2:): IJ. "Dan. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

In this chapter the power and glory of AsBjTia and its 
subsequent fiill arc set forth, under tlie figure of a stately 
cedar, as a warning for Pharaoh. 

3. Siirnud ; liere used of a mass of dark foliage. 

4. Set him up on high; made him a lofty tree by sup- 
plying water for his roots. 

«. Alt the fowls of heaven — great nations; the fowls and 
beasts repri'scnt tliemultitu<les of people that were under 
his care and protection. ('(Piiii)are Dan. '1:12. 

8. In the garden of God; in Kdcn, where the loftiest ce- 
dars may be supposed to have flourished, ('omparc ver. 9. 
Hide him; that is. cDMccal liim by overtopping him. 

10. Thou; the Assyrian king, who is directly addressed 
in this clause. 

11, 12. The might ij one of the heathen — the terrible of the 
nations; the conquerors and destroyers of Nineveh, the 
capital of the Assyrian cinpirc ; namely, Cyaxares king 
of Media, assisted by the viceroy of Babylon, tlien a 

946 



unto him in his beauty. 

9 I have made him fair by the multitude of his 
branches ;" so tliat all the trees of Eden, that were 
in the garden of (bid, envied him. 

10 1 Therefore thus saitli the Lord God; Be- 
cause thou hast lifted up thyself in height,' and he 
hath shot up his top among the thick boughs, aiid 
his heart is lifted up in his height;'" 

111 have therefore delivei-ed him into the hand 
of the mighty one of the heatlien : he shall siii-ely 
deal with him:^ I have driven him out for his 
wickedness." 

12 And strangers, the terrible of the nations," 
have cut him off, and have left him : upon the 
mountains and in all the valleys his brandies arc 
fallen, and his boughs are bi'oken by all the rivers 
of the land;'' and all the people of the earth arc 
gone down from his shadow, and have left him. 

13 Upon his ruin shall all the fowls of the heaven 
remain, and all the beasts of the field shall be upon 
his branches:'' 

14 To the end that none of all the trees Viy the 
waters exalt themselves lor their height,'' neither 
shoot U|) their top among the thick boughs, nei- 
ther their trees stand up in' their height, all that 
drink water: for they are all delivered unto 
tleath," to the nether parts of the earth, in the 
midst of the children of men, with them that go 
down to the pit.' 

1.5 Thus saith the Lord GoD; Li the day when 
he went down to the grave 1 caused a mourning:" 
I covered the deep for him, and I restrained the 
floods thereof, and the great waters were stayed : 
and 1 caused Lebanon to mourn* for him, and all 
tlie trees of the field fainted for him. 

10 I made the nations to shake at the sound of 
his fall,' when 1 cast him down to hell with them 
that descend into the pit: and all the trees of 
Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, all that 
drink water, shall be comlbrted in the nether 
parts of the earth."'' 

17 They also went down into hell with him, unto 
them that be slain with the sword ; and th(y that 



ry.-M. 1 Hcb. in doing ht shall do unto hit 


B. n Lam. 1:12. «; N»h. 3:1^ 


19. och. 2S:7. Pch, 32:4, .'.; 35:5. lis 


1. IS:0. 'Dan. 4:32. ' Or. Kpoil 


themselves for. "Psa. S2:7. 'ch. 32:lt^. 


• RcT. 18:11. t Il,b. be btatk; 


Mai. 3:14. vch. 28:15. w ch. 3-.':31 ; Isa 


14:15. 



province of Assyria, who had revolted against his mas- 
ter. This happened about six hundred years before 
Christ. 

14. All that drink water; imbibe water from the eartli, 
ver. IG; that is, prosper by God's blessing. They are alt 
delivered; all the trees that exalt themselves us did this 
Assyrian cedar. In the 7nidst of the children of men; that 
is, along with all other mortals, notwithstanding their 
greatness and power. 

1."). Covered the deep; with mourning apparel. Restrained 
the foods thereof — were sinijeit ; dried up the streams of tho 
great deep, so that they ceased to flow. The waters here 
dried up are those which had made the Assyrian cedar 
great. Ver. I, 5. 

16. All the trees of Eden ; that is, all the mighty men of 
the earth who have descended into the jiit before him. 
Shall he comforted; liecause he is reduced to the same con- 
dition with themselves. 

17. With him; that is, in like manner as he. His arm; 
his allies and dependencies. 



A lamentaticm for 



EZEKIEL XXXII. 



thifall of Egypt. 



y.'.c:^' lofrfliis arm, that dwelt under his shadow 
in the midst of the hoatheii.'* 

18 *ir To whom art thou thus like in gtory and 
in greatness among the trees of Eden?" yet shalt 
tliou be bronglit down with the trees of Eden unto 
the nether parts of the earth : thou shalt lie in the 
midst of the uncircumcised witli them that be slain 
by tiie sword." This is Pharaoh and all Ins mul- 
titude, saitii the Lord God. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

1 A lamentation for the fearful fall of Egypt. 1 1 The sword of Babylon 
shall destroy it. 17 It shall be brought down to hell, among all the 
uncircumcised nations. 

AND it came to pass in the twelfth year, in the 
twclftli month, in the first day of tlie month, 
that the word of the Lokd came unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, take up a lamentation for Plia- 
raoh king of Egypt,'' and say unto him. Thou art 
like a young lion of'thc nations,'' and thou art as 
a whale' in the seas: and thou camcst forth with 
thy rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy 
feet, and foulodst their rivers.' 

3 Thus saith tiie Lord God; I will therefore 
spread out my net over thee with a company of 
many people ;° and they shall bring thee up in my 
net. 

4 Then will I leave thee upon the land, I will 
cast thee forth upon the open ticld,'' and will cause 
all the fowls of the heaven to remain upon thee, and 
I will till the beasts of the whole earth with thee.' 

5 And I will lay thy flesh upon the mountains, 
and fill the valleys with thy height. 

6 I will also water with thy blood the land 
wherein thou swimmest,*^ even to the mountains; 
and the rivers shall be full of thee. 

7 And when I shall put thee out,* I will cover 
the heaven, and make the stars tiioreof dark; I 
will cover the sun with a cloud, and the moon 
shall not give her light." 



a Lam. 4:20. I> ver. 2; ch. 32:19. ' 2 Sam. 1:20; J.r. 9:23. 20. <1 ver. 
I6;ch. 27:i. « ch. 19:3. 6; 33:13. * Or, dragon, ch. 29:.). fch. 34:1S. 
5ch. 12-I3; Eccl.9:12. l'Joel3:19. ich. 31:13. 1 Or, o/lhi/ su'imming. 
J Exod. 7:17; Rev. 1B:G. I Or. e:ctinguish l/iee. k Isa. 13: 111; Joel 3:l.i-, 
Malt. 24:29. t Heb- ligliU of the light in. I Heb. them dark. 1 Exnd. 



18. To whom art thou thus lilcc; the prophet, addresses 
these word.s to I-'liaraoh, to whom he now makes the ap- 
phcation of what has been said concerning the Assyrian 
king. The implied answer to the question is: Thou art 
like to this Assyrian cedar in glory and greatness, and 
shalt fall as he has fallen before thee. 
INSTRUCTION. 

When God destroys great and mighty empires for their 
pride and wickedness, he sets them forth as an example 
to those that come after them, that they may fear his 
power and depart from evil ; but if they will not give 
heed to the oft-repeated warning, they also must perish 
in like manner. We of the United States ought to con- 
sider this, and tremble ; remembering that if we make 
ourselves like Assyria and Egypt in character, God will 
make us like them in shame and ruin. 

CHAPTER XXXn. 

2. A vhate in the .s-ras ,■ see note on chap. 29 : 3. With thy 
rivers ; rather, " in thy rivers." 

3. With a company of many people; as my servants to 
draw the net. 

5. With thy height ; with the mass of thy dead carcass. 

6. Full of thee ; of thy blood. 



8 All the bright lights of' heaven will I make 
ilark' over thee, and set darkness upon thy land,' 
saitii tlie Lord God. 

9 I will also vex^ the hearts of many people, 
when 1 shall bring thy destruction among the 
nations, into the countries which thou hast not 
known. 

10 Yea, I will make many peo]:)le amazed at thee, 
and their kings shall Ije horribly afraid hir thee,™ 
when I shall brandish my sword bci'oie (hem:" 
and they shall tremble at every moment, every man 
for his own life, in the day of thy fall. 

11 If For thus saith the Lord God: The sword 
of tlie king of Babylon shall come upon thee." 

12 By the swords of the mighty will I cause thy 
multitude to fall,'' the terrible of the nations, all 
of them : and they shall spoil the pomp of Egypt," 
and all the multitude thereof shall be destroyed. 

13 I will destroy also all the beasts thereof from 
beside the great waters; neither shall the foot of 
man trouble them any more, nor the hoofs of 
beasts trouble them.'' 

14 Then will I make their waters deep, and 
cause their rivers to run like oil, saith the Lord 
God. 

15 Wlicn I shall make the land of Egypt deso- 
late, and the country shall be destitute of tlwt 
whereof it was full," when I shall smite all them 
tliat dwell therein, then shall tliey know that I am 
the Lord." 

1() This is the lamentation wherewith they shall 
lament her:' the daughters of the nations shall 
lament her: they shall lament for her, even for 
Egypt, and for all her multitude," saith the Lord 
God. 

17 f It came to pass also in the twelfth year, in 
the fifteenth day of the month, that the word of the 
Lord came unto me, saying, 

18 Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt,'' 
and cast them down, even her. and the daughters 



10:21-23 1 Heb. provoke to an^er. or grief, m ch. 27:3.3. » Deut. 32:41 
o Jer. 4G:24-2(i. P ch. 23:7; 30:4.' q Isa. 2.5: 2, 3. rch. 29:11. 'Heb. 
desolate from the fulness thereof. ' Exod. 7:5; 14:4, IS. ' 2 Sam. 1:17; 
2Chr. 35:23. » ver. 2. v ver. 2. 



7, 8. Put thee out — set darkness upon thy land ; the destruc- 
tion of kingdoms is often compared in Scripture to the 
darkening "of the heavens, and the extinction of their 
lights. See Isa. 13:10, with the note and references. 

9. Bring thy destruction — into llie countries; either the 
report of Pharaoh's destruction, or the broken fragments 
of his people. 

10. For thee; in view of my judgments upon thee. 

13. Trouble them; trouble "the waters of Kgypt by pass- 
ing through them. 

14. Make their waters deep ; rather, " settle their waters." 
The waters of Egypt, being left without man or beast, shali 
flow clear and smooth ; that is, the land shall be utterly 
desolated. Chap. 29:8-12. Others, however, understand 
these words as a promise of returning quiet and prosperity 
to Egypt when by God's chastisements she shall have been 
made to know that he is the Lord, ver. 15. Compare chap. 
29:13, and Isa. 19:25. 

16. The daughters of the nations; that is, the nations them- 
selves. Compare the expressions, " daughter of Jerusalem," 
" daughter of Babylon." etc. 

n.'Ofthe month; apparently of the twelfth month, ver. 1 : 
that is, fourteen days after the preceding prophecy. 

15. Cast them down; to the i)it, that is,declare their cast- 

947 



Downfall nf Esijpt and 



EZEKIEL XXXII. 



ot/ier Ac liken nutions. 



of the famous nations, unto the nether parts of the 
cartli, with thcni that go down into tiio pit.'' 

19 Wiioiii (lost thou pass in beauty? go down, 
and lie thou laid with the uncircuinciscd.'' 

20 They shall fall in the midst of them that are 
slain by the sword : she is delivered to the 
sword:* draw her and all her multitudes. 

21 The strong among the miglity sliall speak to 
him out of the midst of hell with them that hclj) 
him:'' they are gone down,'' they lie uucircumcised, 
slain by the sword. 

22 Asshur is there and all her company: his 
graves are about him : all of them slain, fallen by 
the sword: 

23 Whose graves are set in the sides of the pit,'' 
and her company is round about her grave ; all of 
them slain, fallen by the sword, which caused ter- 
ror* in the land of liie living. "^ 

2-1 There in Elam and all her multitude round 
about iier grave;'' all of them slain, fallen by the 
sword, which are gone down uucircumcised into 
the nether parts of the earth, which caused their 
terror in the land of the living; yet have they 
borne their shame with them that go down to the 
pit." 

25 They liavc set iier a bed in the midst of the 
slain with all her multitude : her graves are round 
about him : all of them uncircuinciscd, slain by the 
sword : though their terror was caused in the land 
of the living,' yet have tiiey borne their shame 
with them that go down to the ]iit: he is put in 
tiie midst of them that be slain. 

26 There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her multi- 



• Ch. 


31- 


14. b 


vpr. 


21, 24. 


• Or, 


the swont / 


Uaid. c 


Isa. 14:9, 10 


■ilsa. 


1:31. 


e 1 


a. U: 


.). 


1 Or, rf 


smaijing, f I 


1. 51:1-2 


13. 


f Jer. 


49:. 34, 


etc. I> 


.)« 


. 3:-2l 


•a 


, Hib. 


J: Hi 


i Luke 


ia:4, 5. 


J oh 


•il:\i 


38:2: 


Oen. 10 


■•i- 


k \sa. 


U: 


IS, 19. 


1 lie 


b. weapons 


of their \ 


mr. 


1 Psi. 92:7, 9. 



ing down in a solemn lainentation. Her, and the dauglUers 
of tlic famous nations; in the lamentation, or sonj;, that 
follows, Pliaraoli with his people is represented as going 
down to the pit, to join the great multitude of princes and 
warriors that Iiavc descended thither before liim. By a 
bold poetic ligure, the spirits of tliese are represented as 
gathered in tlic lower world, while the graves of their 
bodies stand around them. Compare Isa. M:9-ll. 

19. Whom, dost thou pass in beauty? in this question God 
rebukes Egypt for glorying in her snjicrior beauty, and 
at tlio same time intimates that this shall not save her 
from perishing with the other uncireuincised nations. 

20. Thci/ sliall fall; the Eg^'ptians. Draw her; drag her 
down to the pit. 

21. Shall sprak; in amazement at his fall. Compare Isa. 
14:10. To him — with them timl help him; to Pharaoh and 
liis allies. Thcij are f^iine down; "the strong among the 
nations," whom the prophet afterwards enumerates. 

22. His graves are about him ; the spirits of the king of 
Assyria and his warriors arc in the pit, by the graves of 
their bodies. See note on ver. 18. 

23. Caused terror in the land of the living; the prophet 
contra-stK thoir present weakness with the ttTror they 
caused while yet alive. 

21. Elam ; \\TH\n.. florne Mfir.t/mmc; the shame of being 
slain and sent down to the pit. IVilh them ; that is, along 
with the rest of the nations : they are reduced to a common 
level with them. 

25. Have set her ; have appointed for Elam. Round about 
him ; about her king ; and so ver. 20. He is put; the king 
of Elam. 

26. Meshech. Tubal; see note on chap. 27:1,"?. 

27. They shall not lie — the land of the living ; more plainly 
thus: "They shall not lie with the miglitv that are fallen 

'.Its 



tude:J her graves are round about liim: ^'c-.l": 
all of them uucircumcised, slain by the sword, 
though they caused their terror in the land of the 
living. 

27 And they shall not lie with the mighty that 
are fallen of tiic uncircumci.sed,'' which are gone 
down to hell with their weapons of war:' and 
they have laid their swords under their heads, but 
their iniquities shall be upon their liones,' though 
they trerc the terror of the mighty in the land of 
the living. 

28 Yea, thou shalt be broken in the midst of the 
uucircumcised, and shalt lie with them that are 
slain with the sword. 

29 There is Edom,'" her kings, and all her princes, 
which with their might are laid' hy them that xcere 
slain by the sword: they shall lie with the un- 
circumcised, and with them that tro down to the 
pit. 

30 There he the princes of the north," all of them, 
and all the Zidonians," which arc gone down with 
the slain ; with their terror they are ashamed of 
their might ; and they lie uucircumcised with them 
that be slain by the sword, and bear their shame 
with tiiem that go down to the pit. 

31 Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be comfort- 
ed over all his multitude,'' (vcn Pharaoh and all 
his army slain by the sword, saitli the Lord God. 

32 For I have caused my terror in the land of 
the living:'' and he shall be laid in the midst of 
the uncircumcised with them that are slain with the 
sword, even Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith 
the Lord God. 

m ch. 25:12, etc.: Obad. 1, etc. i Heb. given, or put. i> ch. :t!-:n, 15; 
:!9:2; Jer. l:14j 4:0. o ch. 2S:2l. Pch. ai:l«. "I (Jen. 35:5: Job31:23: 
2 Cor. 5:11. 



of the uucircumcised, who have gone down to hell with 
their weapons of war, and they have laid their swords 
under their heads: but their inifpiities .shall be upon their 
l)ones, because they were the terror of the mighty in the 
land of the living." Shall not lie; Meshech and Tulial shall 
not lie in their graves honorably buried. A poetical burial 
in the lower world has been ascribed to them. ver. 26; but 
here a literal burial on earth is denied them. With their 
weapons of war; there is here a blending of the literal with 
the figurative. Because their weapons of war have been 
deposited with them in their gr.wcs. they are lig\iratively 
represented as having taken them with them to the lower 
world, just as their graves are figuratively represented as 
being there with their souls. lUit their luiqniltcs; tlie ini- 
quities of Meshech and Tubal. Sliall lie upon their bones; 
their bones shall be leftunl)uried,us a punishment for their 
violence in the land of the living. 

31. Slinll be comforted; see note on chap. 31:16. 

32. / have caused my terror; another reading of the orig- 
inal is, " I have canaed his terror," that is, I have permitted 
Pharaoh to spread terror. 

INSTRUCTION. 
Time and death arc mighty levellers. IIow do they 
bring down into the dust the str<.'ngth and riches and 
beauty in which men pride themselves. Great and ter- 
rible enii>ires, like Assyria, Babylon, and Rome; rich and 
noble families that have long surrounded themselves with 
pomp and luxury ; renowned warriors, statesmen, and 
orators ; these, with every thing else on which the men 
of this world set their lu-irts.siuk into the earth together, 
uncared for and forgotten. The immortal soul alone, with 
the deeds which it Iia.s done in the body, survives, and 
goes to God's tribunal, to l)e rewarded according to its 
works. 



A watclimanh duly. 



EZEKIEL XXXIII. 



The justice of Gi d. 



1 According lo the dutv of a watolmi.in, in warning the people. 7 Ezekicl 
is admonished of his dniy. 10 (-Sod shovveth the justice of his ways 
towards the penitent, and towards revoiters, 17 He maintaineth his 
justice. •-'! Upon the ne^vs of the taking of Jerusalem he pro|.he.sieth 
the desolation of the land. 30 God's judgment upon the ii.ockers of 
tile prophets. 

A GAIN the word of tlie Lord came unto nic, 
jTA- saying, 

2 Son "of man, speak to the children of thy peo- 
ple, and say f)nto them, When I bring the sword 
upon a land,*" if.the people of the land take a man 
of their coasts, and set him for their watchman:'' 

3 If wiien he seeth the sword come upon tlie 
land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the people; 

4 Then whosoever heareth* the sound of the 
trumpet, and taketli not warning; if the sword 
come, and take him away, his blood shall be upon 
his own head. 

5 He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took 
not warning ;'^^ his blood shall be upon him.'' But 
he that taketh warning shall deliver his soul. 

6 But if the watchman sec the sword come, and 
lilow not the trumpet, and the people be not 
warned ; if the sword come, and take any person 
from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity ; 
but his blood will I requireat the watchman's hand. 

7 "^ So thou, son of man, I have set tliee a 
watchman unto the house of Israel ;= therefore 
thou shalt hear the word at my mouth,'' and warn 
them from me." 

S When I say unto the wicked, wicked man, 
thou shalt surely die;'' if thou dost not speak to 
warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man 
shall die in his iniquity;' but his blood will I re- 
quire at thy hand. 

9 Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his 
way to turn from it; if he do not turn i'rom his 
way, he shall die in his iniquity;' but thou hast 
delivered thy soul." 

10 Tlierefore, thou son of man, speak unto the 
house of Israel; Tims ye speak, saying, If our 
transgressions and our sins he upon us, and we 
pine away in them,' how should we then live?"' 

11 Say unto them. As I live, saith the Lord 
God, I iiave no pleasure in the death of the wick- 
ed;" but that the wicked turn from his way and 
live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for 
why will ye die, house of Israel ? 

12 Therefore, thou son of man, say unto the chil- 
dren of thy pco))le. The righteousness of the right- 
eous shall not deliver him in the day of his trans- 



' Uftb. A land wlun I bring a rn-ard upon /( 
18:-J4 ; 2 Kings 9: 17; Hos. 9:,-. t Heb. lie that h 
6; He b. -2: 1-3. d ch. 18;13, etc. =ch. 3;n, etc 
Col. 1:4?. I" Gen. 2:17; Rom. S:ia. i Num. 
8:24. k Acts 20:28. 1 ch. 21 
»2Sim. 14:14; Lam. 3:3); H. 



•T. " ch. 14:17. b -i gam. 

taring hearclh. cpja., g5;7, 

. fch.2:7. s2Chr. 19:10; 

27:3. ) Prov. 15:10; John 
1. m ch. 37:11; Psa. 130:7; Isa. 49:14. 
11:8; 2 Pet. 3:9. o ch.3:-i0; ls:24,etc. 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

10. Bevponvs; if punishment be exacted of us for them. 
In tliein ; in suffering the punishment of them. They rep- 
resent tliemselv'es as doomed to dcstrnction, without any 
liope of forgiveness or restoration. Tlie propliet had de- 
clared that they should pine away for their iniquities, 
chap. 24:23; but this presupposed tlieir continuance in 
sin. 

22. In the evening: — until he came to me in the vmrnins ; the 
spirit of prophecy fell upon Kzekiel the evening before the 



gression :° as for the wickedness of the wicked, he 
shall not fall thereby in the d;iy that he turnctli 
from liis wickedness;" neitiier sliall the righteon? 
be able to live for his righteousness in the day thai 
he sinncth.'' 

13 When I shall say to the righteous, that he 
shall surely live; if he trust to his own righteous- 
ness,'' and commit iniquity, all his righteousnesses 
siiall not be remciiil.iored ; but for his iniquity that 
he hath committed, he shall die for it. 

14 Again, when I say unto the wicked, Tliou 
shalt surely die; if he turn from his sin," and do 
that which is lawful and right;* 

15 7/" tlie wicked restore the pledge,' give again 
that he had rolibed," walk in the statutes of life," 
without committing iniquity ; he shall surely live, 
he shall not die. 

IC) None of his sins that he hath committed shall 
be mentioned unto him :'" he hath done that which 
is lawful and right; he shall surely live. 

17 *1 Yet the cliildren of thy ])eople say, The 
way of the Lord is not equal: but as for tlicm, 
their way is not equal. 

18 When the righteous turuoth from his right- 
eousness, and committeth iniquity, he shall even 
die thereby.'' 

19 But if the wicked turn from his wickedness, 
and do that which is lawful and right, he shall 
live thereby. 

20 Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal.'' 
ye house of Israel, I will judge you every one 
after his ways.^ 

21 1 And it came to pass in the twelfth year of 
our captivity, in the tenth month, in the fifth datj 
of the month, that one that had escai>ed out of Je- 
rusalem came unto me," saying, Tlie city is smitten. 

22 Now the hand of the Lord was upon me in 
the evening, afore he that was escaped came ; and 
had opened my mouth, until he came to me in the 
morning; and my mouth was opened, and I was 
no more dumb. 

23 Then the word of the Loiin came unto me, 
saying, 

24 Son of man, tliey that inhabit tliose wastes of 
the land of Israel speak, saying, Abraham was one, 
and he inherited the land:" but we are many; the 
land is given us for inheritance. 

2.5 Wherefore say unto tlicm. Thus saith the 
Lord God ; Ye eat with the blood, and lift up your 
eyes toward your idols, and shed blood: aud 
shall ye possess the land T"^ 



p2Chr. 7:14, Rom. :i:-i3. plJohn2:l. r Rom. 10:3; Phil. 3:9. s Prov. 
2S:13; Acts 3:19. \ Yleh. judgment and justice, t ch. 18:7, etc. u Exod. 
22:1,4; Lev.(i:2-5; Luke 19:S. v |,ev. lf:5; Psa. 119:93. " Mic. 7:18, 
19; Rom. 5:10, 21. «Heb.lO:38. y Prov. 19:3. z 2Cor. 5:10; Rev. 20:13. 
:ich. 24:20. 27. b Isa. 31:2; John tj:39. cjer. 7:9, 10. 



arrival of the escaped, so that he began again to speak to 
the people ; but the special message that follows was re- 
ceived after the news of tlie taking of the city. See note 
on chap. 24:27. 

24. They that inhabit those wastes ; the remnant of Israel 
and Judah, that had not yet gone into captivity. Abraham 
was one — we are many ; if Abraham, who was but one, in- 
herited the land, much more shall we inherit it, seeing we 
are many. But they forgot that the land of Canaan was 
given to Abraham for his faith, not for his might. 

25. Eat with the blood; Gen. 9:4; Lev. 7:26, 27. 

949 



God's judgment upon 



EZEKIEL XXXIV. 



unfailliful s/icp/tcrds. 



26 Yc stand upon your sword, yc work abomi- 
nation, and ye defdc every one iiis neiglibor's 
wife: and shall ye possess the land? 

27 Say thou thus unto thein.Tlius saith tlicLord 
God; Jls 1 live, surely they lluit arc in the Avastes 
shall fall by the sword, and him that is in the 
open field will I give to the beasts to be devoured,* 
and they that he in the forts and in the caves shall 
die of the pestilence. 

28 For I will lay the land most desolate,*^ and 
the pomp of her strength shall cease; and the 
mountains of Israel shall be desolate,'' that none 
shall pass through. 

29 Then shall they know that I am the Lord, 
when I have laid the land most desolate, because of 
all their abominations which they have committed. 

30 1 Also, thou son of man, the children of thy 
people still are talking against* thee by the walls 
and in the doors of the houses, and speak one to 
another, every one to his bi-other, saying. Come, 
I pray you, and hear what is the word that Com- 
eth forth from the Loud. 

31 And they come unto thee as the people com- 
cth,*'' and they' sit before thee as my people, and 
they hear thy words, but they will not do them : 
for with their mouth they show much love,' but 
their heart goctli after their covctousness." 

32 And lo, thou n7-t unto them as a very lovely 
song" of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can 
play well on an instrument: for they hear thy 
words, but they do them not. 

33 And when this cometh to pass, (lo, it will 
come,) then shall they know that a prophet hath 
been among them.'' 



CIIAPTEll XXXTV. 



1 A reproof of Iho shepherds. 7 God's judgrr 
His providL-iice for his flock. 20 file kii 



nt against them, 
doiu of Christ. 



A 



ND the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, 



• ileb. devour hint, t Heb. desolnlion and desolation, a .ler. 44:'J, etc. 
b ch. (i:'J-(). t Or, of. i ileh. arrordin^ to llie coming; of the peapU. ' ch. 
14:1; 2U:I. I Or. my people. ^ tUh. make loves, or jests. <i Deut. 5:28, 
29; Paa. 7.«:3B; Isa. 211:1:1. * Hcb. son!; of loves, e i Sam. 3:19. I Jcr. 
2:3:1; Zech. 11:10. (!lsa. S0:11. Ii Mio. 3:1. .3. i Jer. S:-J2; Heb. 12:12. 



26. Stand upon your sword; rely on violence. 

'M). Against thee; rather, as in the margin, "of tliee." 

31. As I lie people cnmeth; as the people come to worship 
God antl bo instructed iu his will : they have the form of 
godliness. 

33. Wli.cn this cometh to pass; the evil threatened. 

INSTIIUCTIONS. 

1-9. frod's government is one of personal responsibility. 
No man can i)erform his neighbor's duty for him, and no 
man will be exensed for neglecting his own duty because 
Ids neighbor li;is failed in his. Tlie preacher will be called 
to a strict account for the manner in which he has deliv- 
ered the message intrusted to him by God; and if any 
have perished thro\igh his unfaithfulness, their blond will 
be upon him; but this will not excuse the sinner hiinsolf, 
who had God's law written on his conscience, and knew 
that he was doing wrong. Rom. 2:15. 

10, 11. It is alike wicked on the one hand to flatter our- 
selves with the liopc of going unpunished while wo per- 
severe in sin, and on the oHier, to t:ike a despairing view 
of God's mercy, as if he were determined to destroy us how- 
ever wo humbled ourselves before him. Presumption and 
despondency grow out of the same evil root of unbelief. 
950 



2 Son of man, prophesy against the shep- ■*i)"r'JK; 
herds of Israel, prophesy, and say unto them, Thus 
saith the Lord God unto the shepherds ; Woe be to 
the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves!' 
should not the shepherds feed the flocks V 

3 Ye eat the fat,*-' and yc clothe you with the 
wool, ye kill them that are fed:'' but yc feed not 
the Hock. 

4 The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither 
have yo healed that which was sick,' neither have 
yc bound up f/iat which teas broken, neither have 
ye brought again that which was driven away, 
neither have ye sought that which was lost;' but 
with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them." 

5 And they were scattered,' because there is no 
shepherd:*'" and they became meat to all the 
beasts of the field," when they were scattered. 

G My sheep wandered through all the mountains, 
and upon every high hill :" yea, my Hock was scat- 
tered upon all the face of the earth, aud none did 
search or seek after themJ' 

7 1 Therefore, yc shepherds, boar the word of 
the Lord ; 

8 Jls I live, saith the Lord God, surely because 
my flock became a prey, and my Hock became meat 
to every beast of the field, berause there vas no 
shepherd, neither did my shepherds search for my 
Dock, but the shepherds fed themselves, and fed 
not my ilock ;'' 

9 Therefore, yc shepherds, hear the word of 
the Lord ; 

10 Thus saith the Lord God; I^chold, I am 
against the shepherds ; and I will require my flock 
at their hand,'' and cause th(!m to cease from feed- 
ing the flock;'' neither shall the shc|)lierds feetl 
thcnr^elves any more; for I will deliver my flock 
from their mouth, that they may not be meat for 
tliein. 

11 IFor thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I, 
even I, will both search my sheep, aud seek them 
out' 



J Luke \5:\. k 1 Pel. 5:2. 3. 1 Mall. U :3«. t Or, without a shepherd. 
mZoch. 10:2, 3. n ler. 12:9-12; John 10:12. o 1 Pet. 2:25. pJohnlU:16. 
q Acts 20:33; 1 Cor. 9:15. ' ch. 3:18, 20; Heb. 13:17. • 1 Sam. 2:2»-30. 
I Psa. 119:170; Luko IS): 10. 



12-20. No man has a right to consider himself in tho 
way to heaven any farther than lie is rendering to God 
present obedience ; and no man who is willing to turn 
with hearty repentance from his past transgressions, need 
despair of forgiveness and salvation. 

24-29. The children of believers have no right to en- 
courage themselves on account of God's favors shown to 
their fathers, any further than they follow their holy ex- 
ample. 

30-33. To praise tlio preacher for his fervor and elo- 
quence, and show much love to his person, instead of 
obeying his words, is a very common practice. Hut God 
will reckon all such luiircrs among the rebellious and 
perverse ; and will tc;ich them, by tho fulfilment of his 
threatened judgments, that they havo rejected not his 
nicssongers, but himself. I^uke 10: IG. 

CIIAPTEll XXXIV. 

"The shepherds of Israel" spoken of in this chapter, 
are all their rulers and guides, as well in jiolitical as in 
religious matters. 

10. Keijiiirc mij flock at their trnttd; call tliem to an account 
for its deslructioii. 



Evil shepherds reproved. 



EZEKIEL XXXV. 



The gvod tihrphcrd. 



b; c 6^-7.' ■ 12 As a slioplicrd sceketli* out liis flock 
in the day that lie is among his sheep that are 
scattered ; so will I seek out my sheep, and will 
deliver them out of all places where they have 
been scattered in the cloudy and dark day." 

13 And I will brino; them out from the people, 
and gather them from the countries, and will 
bring them to their own land, and feed them upon 
the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and in all 
the inhabited places of the country.'' 

14 1 will feed them in a good pasture," and upon 
the high mountains of Israel shall their fold be : 
tiicre shall they lie in a good fold,'' and in a fat 
]iasture shall they feed upon the mountains of 
Israel. 

15 I will feed my flock,'^ and I will cause them 
to lie down, saith the Lord God. 

1(5 I will seek that which was lost,'' and bring 
again that which was driven away, and will bind 
up that which was broken, and will strengtlien that 
which was sick : but I will destroy the fat and the 
strong;^ I will feed them with judgment.'' 

17 And as for you, my flock, thus saith the 
Lord God ; iJehold, 1 judge between cattle and 
cattle,* between the rams and the he-goats-' ' 

18 Scemdh it a small thing unto you to have 
eaten up the good pasture, but ye must tread down 
with your feet the residue of your pastures ?j and 
to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must 
foul the residue with your feet? 

10 And as for my flock, they eat that which ye 
have trodden with your feet ; and they drink that 
which ye have fouled with your feet. 

20 "i Therefore thus saith the Lord God unto 
ihem ; Beho'ld, I, even I, will judge between the 
fat caltlc and between the lean cattle. 

21 Because ye have thrust with side and with 
shoulder, and pushed all the diseased with your 
horns," till ye have scattered them abroad; 

22 Therefore will I save my flock, and they 



• Heb. AcrOTding 


olhc stfking. a [sa. 50:10; Joel •->:l-;l. b Isa. 03:9, 


10; Jer. •J:):3. 4. = 


Psa. 2:!:1,2; Isa. 40:11. d Jer. :!3: 12. e Jer. .■!: 13; 


Jnhnai:l5. < Mic. 


4:0; Matt 18: 1 1-U ; Mark 2: 17; Luke 5:32, S Amos 


1:1, 2. 1> Jer. 10:-' 


1; Mio. 7:14. t Heb. small cattle uf lambs and kids. 



17. / judge — he-goats; more exactly, I judge cattle 
against cattle, against rams and he-gouts ; I judge and pro- 
tect the lean cattle against the fat ciitllr ; iiiiiiicly, against 
the rams and he-goats: that is, I defend my humble wor- 
shippers against their proud oppressors. See ver. 20. 

23. One Skcpherd — mij servant David; the Messiah, who 
is "the good shepherd," John 10: 14. 

29. A Plant of renown ; the same as " a righteous Branch," 
Jer. 23 : 5 ; that is, the Messiah. The fulfilment of the prom- 
ises recorded in this chapter extends through the whole 
history of the true church to the end of lime. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2, 3. It is the business of rulers and religious teachers 
to seek the welfare of those committed to their care, not 
their own jjleasure and emolument. They who use the 
holy office of the ministry as a means of advancing their 
worldly interests, and are more anxious to find good pla- 
ces for themselves than to "feed the flock of God," are 
hirelings, and not true shepherds. God will be against 
them, and will give their work to others who will perform 
it faithfully, ver. 10. 

4. Christ's ministers ought, after the example of their 
great Master, to bestow special labor upon "men of low 
degree," carefully seeking out the poor and friendless, the 
feeble-minded, the ignorant, and the erring ; remembering 



shall no more be a prey ; and I will judge between 
cattle and cattle. 

23 And I will set up one Shepherd over them,' 
and he shall feed them, even my servant David; 
ho shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd. 

24 And I the Lord will be their God,'" and my 
servant David a prince among them;" 1 the Lord 
have spoken it. 

25 And I will make with them a covenant of 
peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out 
of the land:" and they shall dwell safely in llie 
wilderness,'' and sleep in the woods. 

26 And I will make them and the places round 
about my hill a blessing;'' and I will cause the 
shower to come down in his season; there shall 
be showers of blessing. 

27 And the tree of the field shall yield her fruit, 
and the earth shall yield her increase, and they 
shall bo safe in their land, and sliall know that I 
am the Lord, when I have broken the batids of 
their yoke, and delivered them out of the hand of 
those that served themselves of them. 

28 And they shall no more bo a prey to the 
heathen, neither shall the beast of the land devour 
tiiem; but they shall dwell safely, and none shall 
make them afraid. 

29 And I will raise up for them a Plant of' re- 
nown,'' and they shall be no more consumed' with 
hunger in the land, neither bear the shame of the 
heathen any more. 

30 Thus shall they know that I the Lord their 
God am with them, and that they, even the house 
of Israel, are my people, saith the Lord God. 

31 And ye my flock, the flock of my ])asturo,' 
are men, and I am your God, saith the Lord God. 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

The judgment of mo.mt Seir for their hatred of Israel. 

ORECVER the word of the Lord came unto 



M 



me, saymg. 



1 Heb. great lie-goats i Milt. 2o::32. i Luke 11:52. k Luke l:!:n-l«. 
1 Jer, 2:S:4. 5; John 10:11 ; Heb. i:):20. m Exod. 29:45; L-a 4:1:2. 3; Rev. 
21:.). n Luke 1:32. 3). o Isa. 35:9. p Jer. 23:0. 4 Psa, 133:3; Zech. 
»:I3. iOr, for. r isa. 11: 1, etc. \ Heh. taken aioay. « Luke J2;32. 



in all their ministrations that Christhas sent them " to seek 
and save that which was lost." 

ii, G. When ]iastors are unfaithful, " seeking their own, 
not the things which are Jesus Christ's," their flocks are 
soon scattered, a prey to the destroyer. 

7-22. God will see that his church is provided with 
faithful shepherds. If those whom he has set over her 
neglect their work, and seek their own pleasure, profit, 
or honor, he will take from tliem the kingdom of heaven, 
and give it to pastors after his own heart. Jer. 3:15; 
Matt. 21:43. 

23, 24. The Lord Jesus is the great Shepherd and Prince 
of the churches. From him alone all the undcr-sheplierds 
receive grace to perform their sacred office aright ; and to 
him alone musthis people look, in times of declension and 
destitution, for a supply of faithful pastors. 

2.5-31. Whatever may be the general state of Christ's 
church, he supplies all the wants of those who make him 
the Shepherd and Bishop of their souls ; defends them 
from every enemy, makes all their trials work together 
for their good, and finally gathers them into his heavenly 
fold, where they shall no more hunger or thirst for ever. 
He will in due time extend his church universal over all 
the earth, and fill all nations, through her, with light and 
peace and blessedness. 

951 



Judgment of mount Seir. 



EZEKIEL XXXVI. 



Israel comforted. 



2 Son of man, set thy face again?t mount Seir," 
antl prophesy against it,"* 

5 And say unto it, Thus saith the Lord God; 
Bcliokl, O mount Seir, J am against thoe, and I 
will stretcii out my hand against thee, and I will 
make thee most desolate." 

4 1 will lay thy cities waste, and thou slialt be 
desolate, and thou slialt know that J am the I^OUD. 

r> Because thou hast had a iicrpotual hatred,* and 
hast shed the blood of the children' of Israel by the 
force^ of the sword in the time of their calamity, 
in the time that their iniquity had an end :'^ 

6 Therefore, as I live, saith the I^ord God, I 
will prepare thee unto blood,'' and blood shall 
pursue thee: since thou hast not hated blood, 
even blood shall ])ursue theo.'' 

7 Thus will I make mount Seir most desolate,' 
and cut oil" from it him that passeth out and him 
that rcturnotli.' 

8 And I will lill his mouutainswilhhis slain men:'^ 
in thyhills, and in thy valleys, and inall thyi'ivcrs, 
shall they fall that are slain with the sword. 

9 I will make thee perpetual desolations, and 
thy cities shall not return:'' and ye shall know 
that I am the Loud. 

10 Because thou hast said. These two nations 
and these two countries shall be mine, and we will 
possess it; wdiereas^ the Loud was there:' 

11 Tiierefore, as I live, saith the Lord God, I 
will even do according to tiiiuc anger, and accord- 
ing to thine envy, whicli thou hast used out of thy 
hatred against them;J and I will make myself 
known among them, when I have judged thee. 

12 And thou shalt know that 1 atn the Loud, 
and that I have heard all thy blasjihemics which 
thou hast spoken against the mountains of Israel,'' 
saying, They arc laid desolate, they arc given us 
to consume.*' 

13 Thus with your mouth yc have boasted* 
against me, and have multiplied your words against 
me:'" [ have heard them. 

\\ Thus saith the Lord God; When the wlioh' 
earth rejoiccth, I will make thee desolate." 

15 As tliou didst rejoice at the inheritance of 
the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so 



• Dciie. 2:3. b ch. 25:l-.>, etc.; Jer. 4»:7,ftc.i Amos 1:11, \i; Obad. 10, 
etc. • Heb. drMtalion ami desolation, t Or, Imtrtd of old i cli. 25:15. 
I H'rb. poured out the (hildren. i Heb. hands, e ch. 21:*i'», •„*!>. d Psa. 
|:17:7. c p.^a. U)<l:17. I Heb. desolation and desoJation ; vcr. .1 ' Judg 
5:0,7. «ch.32:3. h Mai. 1:.1, 4. 1 Or, f/ioilsA. i ch. 4»:35; Psn. 4.1: 1- 
3; 13-.';i:l. lJa.s. 2:ia. k I'm. 91:9, 111. • \U\>. devour. I ch. :!li:-'; P.*a. 



CILVrTER XXXV. 

,5. Had a pcrpctuiU hatred; the hatred of Eiloni tnward.s 
Israel and .IikIhIi, and his malicious e.xultatioii over tlic 
calamities wliich came upon them, is the chief sin laid to 
the charge of tliis nation. Compare chap. 25:12; Amos 
1:11; Obad. 10-15. Tlieir iniquity liad an end; see note 
on chap. 21 :25. 

6. T/iou luLft not hated blood; hast loved to shed blood, 
vcr. 5. 

10. TViGse /jfo nn/ioji.s; .Iiidah and Israel. Tlic Lord vxt.i 
there; made the land of .Imlah and Israel, which ho had 
given to Abraham's seed, his jieculiar dwelling-place. 

15. Idumea; the same as "Kdom. 

INSTI!i:(TION. 

When God's people fall licloro their enemies, he will 
raise them up again; but wlu-n he destroys the enemies 
of his peojile, they perish utterly and for ever. Where 

a52 



will I do unto thee: thou siialt be dcso- ^,*',\'58t: 
late, mount Seir, and all Idumea, even all cf 
it ; and they shall know that 1 am the Loi:!'. 

ClIAriER XXXVI. 

1 Tlie land of Israel is comforted, both by destruction of tlie heathen, 
who spitefully used it, 8 and by theble.<sin;:s of G-od promised unto ii. 
Iti Isniel was rejected for their sin, 21 and shall be restored without 
their de.'iert. 2-3 The blessings of Christ's Iclngdom. 

ALSO, thou son of man, prophesy unto the 
mountains of Israel, and say. Ye mountains 
of Israel, hear the word of the Loud: 

2 Thus saith the Lord (jOD; Because the enemy 
hath said against you. Aha, even the ancient high 
places are ours in possession;" 

3 Therefore prophesy and say. Thus saith the 
Lord God; Because' they have made you deso- 
late, and swallowed you up on every side, that ye 
might bo a po.ssessioii unto the re,- 'due of the hea- 
then, and ye are taken up in the lips of talkers,^** 
and are an infamy of the people; 

4 Therefore, ye mountains of Israel, liear the 
word of the Lord Got); Thus saith the Lord God 
to the mountains and to the hills, to the rivers' 
and to the valleys, to the desolate wastes and to 
the cities that are forsaken, which became a prey 
and derision to the residue of the heathen that arc 
round about;'' 

5 Therefore thus saith the Lord God ; Surely in 
the lire of my jealousy have 1 spoken against the 
residue of the heathen,'' and against all Idumea,' 
which have appointed my land into tiicir po.sscs- 
sion with the joy of all their heart,' with despite- 
ful minds, to cast it out for a prey. 

6 Prophesy therefore concerning the land of Is- 
rael, and say unto the mountains and to the hills, 
to the rivers and to the valleys. Thus saith the 
Lord (JoD : Behold, 1 have spoken in my jealousy 
and in my fury, because ye have borne the shaiue 
of the heatiien :" 

7 Therefore thus saith the Lord God; I have 
lifted up my hand,'' Surely the heathen that are 
about you, they shall liear their shame. 

8 *i But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot 
forth your branches, and yield your fruit to my 
people of Israel ; for they arc at hand to come." 



i'J:ia, 13. t lUb. m<i?/ii/i£</. m 1 Sam. 2:3; I'm. 73:S, 9. ■> l«a. r>5: 1:}, 14. 

Deut, 3i:l:); ch, :i,i:lU I llcb. Becaust for bemuse. « Or, mnrft 10 
tome upon the tip of the tonf^tte. P I'sa, 71hlO. I Or, tjoltoms. or daUs. 
<I Fsa. 7!):4; Jor. 25:9, 13: 29: lU. ' /c|>h. 3:8, • Ua. 31:5,11; Lam, 4:21, 

1 ch.35:lU, 11, u Psa. 12:):3, 4. 'ch, 2U:o. " Anioji 9:13, 14, 



aiK'ieiil Kdom now is, there will be all who hate and per- 
sccule Christ's disciiiles, and think to enrich themselves 
by their calamities. 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

This and the following chapter iimtaiii a prophecy of 
the restoration of (he ri'iimant of both houses of Israel to 
Iheir own land. Hut with this the spirit of prophecy con- 
nects the whole future increase and prosperity of the 
church, of which the deliverance from Babylon was tho 
sure i>ledge. In :ind through that deliverance, God re- 
vealed t(i the prophet still higher blessings reserved for 
"the last d:iys," 

2, The eiiemij hath said ; see chap, 35:10, 

6, Shame; reproach, ver, X 

8. Are at haiiil In cnmr ; shall speedily return from their 
captivity. In respect to promises of this kind, compare 
2 I'et, li-s, 9, 



God comfortdh Israel. 



EZEKIEL XXXVI. 



Blessings of Christ's kingdom. 



tl^:^- 9 For, behold, I am for you, and I will 
turn unto _vou,'' and yc shall be tilled and sown : 

10 And 1 will nHilti])ly men upon you, all the 
house of Israel, even all of it ; and the cities shall 
be inhabited, and the wastes shall be builded :'' 

11 And I will inuUi])ly upon you man and beast;'' 
and they shall increase and bring fruit; and I will 
settle you after your old estates, and will do bet- 
ter m«<o you than at your beginnings :'' and yc shall 
know that I am the Lord." 

12 Yea, I will cause men to walk upon you, even 
my ])ooplo Israel ; and they shall possess thee,'' 
and thou shalt be their inheritance, and thou shalt 
no more henceforth bereave them of men. 

13 Thus saitli the Lord Gon ; Because they say 
unto you. Thou land devourcst up men,' and hast 
bereaved thy nations ; 

14 Therefore thou shalt devour men no more, 
neither bereave* thy nations any more, saith the 
Lord God. 

1,5 Neither will I cause men to hear in thee the 
shame of the heathen any more, neither shalt 
thou bear the reproach of the people any more," 
neither shalt thou cause thy nations to fall any 
more, saith the Lord God. 

16 T^ Moreover the word of the Lord came unto 
me, saying, 

17 Hon of man, when the Iionse of Israel dwelt 
ill their own land, they defiled it by tlioir own 
way and by their doings:' their way was before 
mo as the uncleanness of a removed woman.J 

15 Wherefore I poured my fury upon them for 
the blood that they had shed uiKjn the land, and 
for their idols ivhcrewith they had polluted it:'' 

IS) And 1 scattered them among the heatlicn, 
and they were dispersed through the countries : 
according to their way and according to their do- 
ings I judged them. 

20 And when they entered unto the heathen, 
whither they went, they profaned my holy name,' 
when they said to them. These are the people of 
the Lord, and are gone forth out of his land. 

21 *ii But I had pity for my holy name, which the 
house of Israel had profaned among the heathen, 
wdiither they went.™ 

22 Tliereforc say unto the house of Israel, Thus 
saith the Lord God ; I do not this for your sakes, 
house of Israel," but for my holy name's sake," 
which ye have profaned among the heathen, whith- 
er yc went. 

23 And I will sanctify mygTcatname,P which was 
profaned among the heathen, which yc have pro- 
faned in the midst of them ; and the heathen shall 



33:1.; 



a I'si. ml-.S. li Isa. 01:4. ' Jer. :i\:i 
sel-'j. fObad. 17, ew. S Num. l:J::iJ. • Or. cause to UM. 
51: Zep'i. -i:-*. ' Lev. 18:->5--iS; Jer. -i:!. i Lev. 15:1U, etc 
■i-i;->a:n. IRom. •i:l!4. mPsa. 71:1S. nPsa.. 115:1. o Psa 
4S.1U. t Or, your, q ch. 211:41; 23:22; 1 Pet 



.J4: 



1U7:' 



1 Isi. 52:15; John 3:5; Heb. 10:22. t Jer. 3.3:8; Zech. 



13. Demurest up men ; thy people are continually wasted 
by war, pestilence, and famine. 

23. Sanctify; make lioly and honorable. 

25. T/ten will I sprinkle; the glorious promise that fol- 
lows is fulfilled to tlie church from ago to aj;c, in the 
sanctifvinsr p;race which God bestows upon her. Its 
luehfs't fulrdmont belonss to the Christian dispensation. 

'as. llihj flock; brought to Jerusalem for sacrifice. 



know that I am the Loud, saith the Lord GoD, when 
1 shall bo sanctilied in you before their* c} es.'' 

2-1 For I will take yon from aiiiong the heathen, 
and gather you out of all countries, and will bring 
you into your own land.'' 

25 ' Then will I s[)rinkle clean water iiiion you, 
and yc shall be clean:" from all your fiithiuess, 
and from all your idols, will I cleanse you.' 

2(1 A new heart also will I give you, iiiid anew 
spirit will I put within you;" and 1 will take 
away the stony heart out of your flesh,' and I will 
give you a heart of flesh.™ 

27 And I will put my Spirit within you,"- and 
cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall 
keep my judgments, and do them.^ 

28 And ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to 
your fathers ; and yo shall be my people, and I 
will bo your God.'' 

29 1 will also save you from all your unclcan- 
ncsses:" and I will call for the corn, iind will in- 
crease it, and lay no famine upon you.'' 

30 And I will multifily the fruit of the tree, and 
the increase of the field, that ye shall receive no 
more reproach of famine among the heathen. 

31 Then shall ye remember your own evil ways," 
and your doings that icere not good, and shall 
loathe yourselves in your ow-n sight for your in- 
iquities and for your abmninations.'' 

32 Not for your sakes do 1 this,''' saith the Lord 
God, be it known unto you : be ashamed and con- 
founded for your own ways. house of Israel. 

33 Thus saith the Lord God ; In the day that 1 
shall have cleansed you from all your iniquities, I 
will also cause you to dwell in the cities,' and the 
wastes shall be builded. 

34 And the desolate land shall lie tilled, whereas 
it lay desolate in the sight of all that passed by. 

35 And they shall say. This land that was deso- 
late is become like the garden of Eden ;° and the 
waste and desolate and ruined cities are become 
fenced, and are inhabited. 

3G Tiien the heathen that are left round about 
you shall know that I the Lord build flic ruined 
places, and plant that that was desolate: I the 
Lord have spoken it, and I will do it.'' 

37 Thus saith the Lord God; I will yet /or this 
be inquired of by the house of Israel,' to do it 
for them; I will increase ihem with men like a 
flock.J 

38 As the holy flock,' as the flock of Jerusalem 
in her solemn feasts; so shall the waste cities be 
fliled with flocks of men : and they shall know 
that I am the Lord. 



1!:!; 1 Cor. 0:11. o ch. 11:19; Psi. 51:10; Jer. 32:39. v Zech. 7:12. 
"Deut. 311:6; aCor.3:3. xRom.>:0,15; )Cnr.3:lG; Eph. 1 :1.3, 14 ; 1 John 
3:24. yGal.5:10; Col.2:B;l Jnhnl:C.7;2John6. iHos 1:10. aMall.l:21; 
Rom. 0:14; 1I:2R. bH'S 2:21,22. c ch. 10:01, 63. <! Rom. 0:21 . » Drut. 
ll:.'>. fZech.H:7, 8. sJo..l2:3. hHo=. 14:4-9. i ch. 20:31 ; Heb. Ill 21, 22. 
i Zech, 10:0,9; 13:9; Heli. 4:10; 1 John 5:14. 1 Heh. fock of Iwlij lliings. 



IXSTRUCTIONS. 
1-15. When God's people are unfaithful to him, he will 
chastise them and humble them before the world ; yet he 
will not allow their enemies to trimnph in their destruction, 
but will, for his own name's sake, have mercy upon them, 
restore them to more than their former prosperity and 
stren.cth, and put to shame all who hate them. 

lC-24. When God visits and revives his people after a 
053 



The vision of 



EZEKIEL XXXVII. 



the dry bovcs. 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 

1 By the resurrection of dry bones, 1 1 the deat] liope of Israel is revived. 
15 By thf uniting; of two sticks, 18 is shown the incorporation o! Israel 
into Judah. '.^O The promises of Christ's kingdom. 

THE hand of the Lord was upon mc, and car- 
ried mc out in the Spirit of tho Lord," and 
set mc down in tiic midst of tho valley which ivas 
full of bones, 

2 And caused mc to pass by them round aliout : 
and behold, tkcri' iccre very many in the o])en val- 
ley;* and lo. f/icy were very dry. 

3 And he said unto mc. Son of man, can these 
bones live? And 1 answered, Ijord God, thou 
knowcst.'' 

4 Again he said unto nic, Prophesy upon these 
bones, and say unto thcin, yc dry bones, hear 
the word of the Lord. 

5 Thus saith the Lord Goi) unto Iheso bones: 
Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and 
ye shall live:'' 

6 And J will lay sinews upon you, ami will bring 
up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and 
put breath in you, and ye sliall live ; and ye shall 
know that I am the Lord.'' 

7 So 1 pro])hcsied as 1 was commanded : and as I 
prophesied, there was a noise,'' and behold a shak- 
ing, and the bones came together, bone to his bono. 

8 And when 1 beheld, lo, the sinews and the ilesh 
came up upon them, and the skin covered them 
above: but there was no breath in them. 

9 Then said hi; unto me, Prophesy unto tlie wind,* 
prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind. Thus 
saith the Lord God: Come from the four winds. 
breath,' and breathe upon these slain, that they 
may live. 

10 So I prophesied as ho commanded mc, and the 
breath came into them, and llicy lived, and stood 
up upon tlieir feet, an exceeding great army." 

11 'i Then he said unto me. Son of man, these 
bones arc the whole house of Israel :'' behold, they 

» LukB 4:1 ; Acts 8::!9. • Or, eliampnign. b Dout. 33:30; John .'>:il ; 
11:2), :iU: Rom. 4:17. ' ver. 9. lU. d Jopl ■2:->7. e Acts i:'>. etc. t Or. 
i.realh. fSong4:l(i. S P.sa. I04:3il; Kev. 1 1 : 1 1 . !■ -J Cor .9: 14 : Eph. 'J: 1. 



season of declension ami weakness, they should remember 
that he docs this, not for their sake, but for the glory of 
his own name. They have deserved only evil at his hand. 
He has mercy upon them, because he will magnify himself 
in tlieir salvation. Ver. 33. 

2.)-i7. The beginning of all true reformation is the in- 
ward cleansing of the soul by God's Spirit. His power 
alone can change tho heart of stone to ilesh. When this 
is done, men will render willing obedience to all Gods 
statutes and judgments. It is by "the washing of regen- 
eration and renewing of the Holy Ghost,'' that God con- 
tinues to his church, from age to age, a seed of spiritual 
worshippers. 

28-30. Hearty rejicntance, with works meet for repent- 
ance, brings a return of peace and prosperity to churches 
and to individuals. Ver. 33-3.').* 

31. The cfl'ect of (iod's forgiving love upon true believ- 
ers is not to lift them up with ])ri(le, but to hiunble them. 
Tho more mercies he bestows upon them, the more they 
loathe themselves in view of their vilencss and unworthi- 
ness. 

36. God will make his presence and power so manifest 
in his church, that her enemies without shall be compelled 
to see and acknowledge that he is with her,as her almighty 
Kriend and Helper. 

37. It is through fervent prayer alone that God's people 

954 



say, Our bones arc dried, and our hope is -v. m. 3417. 
lost:' we are cut oti lor our parts. ;»;. 

12 Therefore jirophesy and say unto them, Thus 
saith tiie Lord God; IJchold, my ])eoplc, I will 
open your graves, and cause you to come up out of 
your graves,Jand i)ring you into the land of Israel. 

13 And ye shall know that 1 am the Lord, when 
I have opened your graves, my people, and 
brought you up out of your graves,'' 

11 And shall put my i^pirit in you, and yc shall 
live, and 1 shall iiliice you in your own land: then 
shall yc know that 1 the Lord have spoken j<, and 
performed it, saith the Lord. 

15 'i The word of the Lord came again unto me, 
saying, 

1g Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one 
stick, and write upon it. For .Judah, and for the 
children of Israel his companions: then take an- 
other stick, and write upon it. For Joscpii, the 
stick of Fphraim, and for all the house of Israel 
his companions: 

17 And join them one to another info one stick; 
and they shall become one in thy hand.' 

IS II And when the children of thy people shall 
speak unto thee, saying. Wilt thou not show us 
wiiat thou meanest by these'? 

19 Say unto them. Thus saith tlie Lord God ; Be- 
hold, 1 will take the stick of Joseph, which is in 
the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his 
fellows, ami will put thein with him,ft'm with the 
stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they 
shall be one in my hantl.'" 

20 % And the slicks whereon thou writcst shall 
be in thy hand before their eyes. 

21 And say unto them. Thus saifh flic Lord 
God; Behold, 1 will take the children of Israel 
from among the heathen, whither they be gone, 
and will gather them on every side, and bring 
them into their own land : 

22 And I will make thcni one nation in the land 



i r.ia. 77:7-9; Isi. 49:14. J Isa. 28:19; Hos. 13:14; 1 Then. 4:16: ReT. 
20:13. k Job :J9: 14, 15. 1 2 Chr. 3U: 11-18. m Zeoh. 1U:0. 



can obtain of him the rich blessings which he hai> promised 

them. 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 

By a vision of the resurrection of dry bones, God repre- 
sents to the prophet the restoration of his jieoplo from 
their present de])ravcd condition, vor. 1-1-1 ; by another 
symbol, he sets forth tho reunion of Judah and Israel in 
one body, ver. 15-22. From this event he then passes 
immediately to the future eiilargeinent of the spiritual 
Israel under the reign of the Messiah, of which the res- 
toration of the literal Israel was an earnest, and for which 
it prepared the way. 

1 1. Wc arc cut off for our parts ; more literally," as for us, 
we are cut off." 

K). For Juilnh — his compnnion.t ,- that is, for the kingdom 
of .Judah and that part of Israel Ihatbchuigs to it, namely, 
the two tribes of Judah and IJiiijamin. For Joseph ; a mode 
of designating the kingdom of Israel, after the separation 
of tho ten tribes, because its principal tribes, Ephraim and 
Manasseh, were descended from Joseph. Amos 5:15; 6:6. 

17. One stick — in thij hand; the healing of the great 
schism between tho kingdoms of Judah and Israel, by 
the reunion, after the captivity, of the remnant of tho ten 
tribes with the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin, is hero 
foretold. Compare ver. 19, 22. But Ezekiel does not stop 



Union of Judah and Israel. 



EZEKIEL XXXVIII. 



God's judgment on Gog. 



A.M. 3^l7. upon the mountains of Israel ;•'' and one 
'A-""" kingsliall be king to tlicm all: and tliey 
shall be no more two nations, neither shall they 
be divided into two kingdoms any more at all: 

23 Neither sliall they defile themselves any more 
with their idols, nor with their detestable things, 
nor with any of their transgressions:'' but I will 
save them out of all their dwelling-places," wherein 
they liave sinned, and will cleause them :'' so shall 
they be my pcojile, and I will be their God." 

24 And David my servant shall be king over 
them;' and they all shall have one shepherd:" 
tliey shall also walk in my judgments,'' and ob- 
serve my statutes, and do them.' 

25 And they shall dwell in the land that I have 
given unto Jacolj my servant, wherein your fa- 
thers have dwelt; and they sliall dwell therein, 
iveji they, and their children, and their children's 
children for ever:-' and my servant David shall be 
tlieir |irince for evcr.'^ 

26 Moreover I will make a covenant of peace 
with them;' it shall be an everlasting covenant 
with tliem:'" and I will place tiicm, and multiply 
them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of 
them for evermore." 

27 My tabernacle also shall bo with them:" yea, 
] will be their God, and they shall be my people. 

28 And tiie heathen shall know that I the Lokd 
do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in 
the midst of them for evermore. 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

I The army, 8 and malice of Gog. 14 God's judgment against him. 

AND the word of the Lord came unto me, say- 
ing, 
2 Son of man, set thy face against Gog, the land 



» Ua. Il:l-J, 1-3; Jer :):18; 5I):4; Hos. 1:11. b oh. 3li:2.i 


etc. « Lev. 


20:7. .S; Mie. 7:19. d Eph. .'j:-jli, 27; Heb. U:i:i, U; 1 John 1 


7, 9. eRev. 


•JI:3,4. fch. 34:23, 24. E John 10:16; Eph. 4:4-li. I> 1 John 


2:(i. ilCor. 


11:2 J Isa. Iil):2l; Amos 9:15. t Luke 1 :32, 33. 1 cli. 34:2:3 


; John 14:27. 


■n Isa. 55:3; Jer. 32;4U. n 2 Cor. 6: II). o ch. 43:7; Rev. 21 :3. 


V Rev. 20:8, 



with this auspicious event. He goes on, after the usual 
manner of the prophets, to foretell the glorious days that 
shall follow in the distant future. 

24. David my servant; the Messiah, of David's line, and 
of whom David was an eminent type. John 10: 11, IG. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-14. God is the eternal and uncreated source of all life, 
natural and spiritual. No condition, this side of theprison 
of despair, is beyond the reach of his saving power. He 
who will restore the bodies of all his saints to life and im- 
mortality '-in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the 
last trump," and grant them everlasting victory over death 
and the grave, is well able, here on earth, to deliver them 
in every extremity, however desperate it may apjjear in 
the judgment of man. 

iJ-'iS. Schisms and divisions in the household of faith 
are not of God, but of the wicked one. Our Saviour's last 
prayer for his disciples was, that all might be one in him- 
f;elf and the Father, as the Father and he are one. This 
prayer must be fiilfiUed in the reunion of God's divided 
family, before she can reach that glorious state of enlarge- 
ment and prosperity which is promised in the last days. 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

This and the following chapter contain a prophecy of 
the invasion of " the mountains of Israel " by an immense 
multitude "out of the north parts," assisted by many al- 
lies. It shall take place " in the latter years," after Israel 



of Magog,P the chief prince* of Meshecii and Tu- 
bal, and prophesy against liim, 

3 And say, Tiius saith the Lord God ; IJcliold, I 
am against thee, Gog, the chief prince of Me- 
shecii and Tubal :i 

4 And I -will turn thee back, and put hooks into 
thy jaws,'' and I will bring thee forth, and all 
thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them 
clothed with all sorts of armor, ^ even a great com- 
pany xcith bucklers and shields, all of them hand- 
ling swords : 

5 Persia, Ethiopia, and Libya* with them ; all of 
them with shield and helmet: 

Gomer,' and all his bands ; the house of To- 
garmali of the north quarters," and all his bands: 
and many people with tiiee. 

7 Be thou prepared," and prepare for thyself, 
thou, and all thy company that are assembled 
unto thee, and be thou a guard unto them. 

8 T After many days thou slialt be visited :""' in 
the latter years thou slialt come into the land that 
is brought back from the sword, and is gathered 
out of many people, against the mountains of Is- 
rael,-"^ which have been always waste: but it is 
brought forth out of the nations,^ and they shall 
dwell safely all of them.^ 

9 Thou shalt ascend and come like a storm, thou 
slialt be like a cloud to cover the land, thou, and 
all thy bands, and many people with thee. 

10 Thus saith the Lord GoD ; It shall also come to 
pass, that at the same time shall things come into 
thy mind, and thou shalt think an evil thought:** 

11 And thou slialt say, I will go up to the land 
of unwalled villages; I will go to them that are 
at rest,'' that dwell safely,^ all of them dwelling 
without walls, and having neither bars nor gates, 

12 To take a spoil, and to take a prey ;' to turn 



9. • Qi. prince of Ihe chief, q ch. .39:2. r ch. 29:4; 2 Kings 19:28. « ch. 
23:12. t Or. /"««/,• ch. 27:10: 30:5. t Gen. 10:2. uch. 27:14. v Amos 
4:12. »'Isa.29:0. « ch. 30:1, 4, 8. ylPet.2:9. z ch. 2S:2B. lOr. comeivt 
a mischievous purpose, i Isa. 8:9. 10. b Jer. 49:31. % Or, confidently. 
B Heb. To spoil the spoils and to prey the prey; ch. 29: 19. 



has been " brought back from the sword, and is gathered 
out of many people," and is dwelling safely in " unwalled 
villages;" and the invaders shall be overthrown with im- 
mense slaughter. It is generally agreed that the fulfilment 
of this prophecy is yet future. Perhaps it is tlie same 
assault as that predicted in Fie v. 20 : 8, 9, which takes place 
after the binding of Satan for a thousand years. 

2. Gog, the land of Magog; Gog seems to be here the 
leader, and Magog the people. Magog was descended from 
Japheth, and is named with other northern tribes, Gen. 
10:2. 

4. Hoohs into thij jaws; see note on Isaiah 37:29. Bring- 
thee forth; out of my land. 

5, 6. Persia — Togarmah; these are the allies of Gog. 

7. Be thou prepared; God is here represented as calling 
forth Gog, tliat he may meet hi^final overthrow, ver. 16. 

8. Visited ; punished ; for his invasion of Israel is the 
occasion of his overthrow. But many render, " shall be 
made chief," that is, of all the invading hosts. Laml that 
is brought back; land whose people are brought back. _ Al- 
wai/s waste; during the long exile of God's people Irom 
the'm. It is brought forth; the same as, "the land that is 
brought back," that is, the people belonging to it are 
brought forth. 

11. Landof unwalled villages; these words indicate a long 
period of peace and security, in which walls have been 
omitted as unnecessary. 

12. Desolate places ; once desolate, ver. 8. 

955 



God's judgment on Gcg. 



EZKKIEL XXXIX, 



The victory rf Isrcd. 



thy liand upon the desolate places tliat are novj in- 
habited, and upon tlic people that are gathered out 
of the nations, which have gotten cattle and goods, 
that dwell in tiic midst' of the land. 

13 Sheba, and Dedan,and the tnerchants of Tar- 
shish, with all the young lions thereof,'' siiall say 
unto thee. Art thou come to take a spoil? hast 
thou gathered thy conif)any to take a prey ? to 
carry away silver and gold, to take away cattle 
and goods, to take a grciat spoil ? 

14 1 Therefore, son of man, ))rophesy and say 
unto Gog, Thus saith the Lord God ; In that day 
when my people of Israel dwelleth safely,'' shalt 
thou not know it'.'"' 

15 And thou shalt come from thy place out of 
the north parts, thou, and many people with thee, 
all of them riding upon horses, a great company, 
and a mighty army : 

16 And thou shalt come up against my people of 
Israel, as a cloud to cover the land ; it shall be in 
the latter days, and I will bring thee against my 
land, that the heathen may know me, when I shall 
be sanctified in thee, O Gog, before their eyes.'' 

17 Thus saith the Lord God; ./7/-/tliou ho of whom 
I have spoken in old time by' my servants the 
prophets of Israel, wiiich prophesied in those days 
many years, that I would bring thee against them? 

18 And it shall come to pass at the same time 
when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, 
saith the Lord God, i/iat my fury shall come up 
in my face. 

19 For in my jealousy and in the fire of my 
wrath have I spoken,'' Surely in tiuit day there 
shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel ;' 

20 So that the iishes of the sea, and the fowls of 
the heaven, and the beasts of tlie field, and all 
creeping things tiiat creep upon the earth, and all 
the men that are ui)on tlic face of tlio earth, shall 
shako at my presence, and the mountains shall be 
thrown down, and the steep ])laces* shall fall, and 
every wall shall fall to the ground. 

21 And I will call for a sword against him 
throughout all my mountains, saith the Lord God : 
every man"s sword shall be against his Ijrollier. 

22 And I will plead against iiim with pestilence 
and with blood ; and i will rain upon liim, and 
upon his bands, and upon the many pco])lo that 
are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hail- 
stones,'-' lire, and brimstone. 



• H.b. rncrf,- Jiiilg. 9::n. » ch. I!);:l, .')■ I'iil .')?: 1. li .lor. SMi. cell 
37:43. <! KxrO. 14:1. t lUh. Iii/ llie hands of. cJncl2:lH, (Jot! .3: Hi 
Zech. 14: I. etc. 1 Or, lowrrx, or Mairs. t Rev. lt">:al. I> oh. 3<:-i, etc. » Oi 
striiie t/ire with sije ptu^ues, or draw I/tee bark with a hook of six terth 



13. S'lelm — Dedan — Tarskish; these 8eem to be the allies 
of Gop;. Ynung lions; princes. 

17. Of w'lom I have spoken in old time; compare Isaiiih 
29:5-8; Jod :5:9-ni; Zcph. 3:8. All those prophct.s rop- 
rescnt the final dolivcnnuro of God's pcoi)lc as iirocedcil 
by a Kciieral as.sault of all their enemies upon them. 

19-22. A great sWi/nir — kailslones, fuc, and hrimalonc; 
compare Isa. 29:C; :iO::iO; Uev. 1G:18, 21. Such descrip- 
tions are generally to be understood fij;urativcly of the 
effects of God's wrath. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

So far as the powers of darkness are left at liberty, they 
will stir up wicked men to persi'Liite fJod's people. Here- 
after, as ill past a^es, wo may e.xpect mighty combiiia- 
956 



23 Thus will I magnify myself, and sane- a. m. .m?. 
tify myself; and 1 will be known in tiic 'sw." 
eyes of many nations, and they shall know that I 
am the Loud. 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

i <ToiPs judgment upon Gog. 8 Isr.iel's victory. 11 G-o"-*s burial in 
Hamon-^'og. 17 Tlie fc:ist of the fowls. 23 Israel, having been 
phigueil for their sins, sliall be gathered again with eternal favor. 

q^HEREFORE, thou son of man, propliesy 
J„ against Gog, and say. 'J'hus saith the Lord 
God; Behold, I am against thee, Gog, the chief 
prince of Mesheeh and Tubal :'' 

2 And I will turn thee back, and leave but the 
si.xth ])art of thee,* and will cause thee to come up 
from th(! north parts,' and will bring thee upon 
the mountains of Israel : 

3 And I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, 
and will cause lliino arrows to fall out of thy 
right hand. 

4 Thou shalt fall u]ion the mountains of Israel, 
thou, and all thy bands, and the people that is 
witli tiiee: I will give thee unto the ravenous 
birds of every sort," ' and fo the beasts of the field, 
to be devoured." 

5 Thou shalt fall upon the open field:' for I 
have spoken if, saith the Lord God. 

6 And 1 will sentl a fire on Magog.J and among 
them that dwell carelessly* in the isles:" and 
tliey shall know that I am. the Lord. 

7 So will I make my holy name known in the 
midst of my peo])le Israel; and I will not/if them 
pollute my holy name any more:' and the hcatlien 
shall know that 1 am the Lord, the Holy One in 
Israel. 

8 1 IJehold, it is come, and it is done, saith the 
Lord God ;" this wthe day whereof I have spoken. 

9 And they that dwell in the cities of Israel shall 
go forth, and sliall set on fire and burn the weap- 
ons, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows and 
tlie arrows, and tlie hand-staves,^ and the spears, 
and they shall burn them with fire' seven years:" 

10 So that they shall take no wood out of the 
field, neitiier cut down any out of tlie forests; for 
they shall burn the weapons with lire: and they 
shall s])oil thos(! tiiat spoileil them, and rob those 
that robbed them," saith the Lord God. 

Ill And it shall come to pass in that day, that 
I will give unto Gog a place there of graves in 

I nch. sidts of Iht north. 1 lleb. icmff. ' Rev. I«; I7--.'I. • lUh. detour. 
1 Heh.fareo/thtjirld. J Amojl ;J,eic. I Or.ronjtdnill;,. k tsa. (i«:l»; Jer 
«:«; Zeph 2:11. I ExoJ, -JO:?; Lev. l.-:-.'!. ■» Hi... Iti: 17: ai :a. I Or, 
javelins. I Or, make a fire of them. » Pja. ■10:9. ■> l«l U:2. 



tions of ungodly rulers and corrupt teachers to hinder, 
and if possible extinguish the light and liberty of the 
gospel. But (jod will turn their counsels into foolislmesB, 
and make their mischievous plots the means of their own 

destruction. 

C II AFTER XXX IX. 

8. It is come; the dostniction of Gog and his hosts. 

9. Burn them willi fire; lietter, as the margin, kindle 
"fire with them, using them" for fuel. Seven years; this 
denotes their immense quantity. 

11. I'alleii of the pn.itcnt^crs; for the reason of this name. 
S'.^c verses 11, l.'>. On the ca-tl of the ."ea; tlie Dead sea; so 
that it shall be without the limits of the Holy Land. 



Feast of the fowls. 



EZEKIEL XL 



Israel to he resloreJ. 



A.M. -117, Israel, tho valley of the pappen,Q;ers on tlio 
' .w" "' cast of the soa ; and it shall stop tlie noses' 
of the passensrers : and there shall they bury Goi:; 
and all his multitude, and they shall call U, The 
valley of Hamon-gog.* 

12 And seven months shall the house of Israel be 
biiryino; of them, that they may cleanse the land.'^ 

IH Yea, all the people of the land shall liury 
tluni: and it shall be to them a renown the day 
that I shall be glorified,'' saith the Lord God. 

14 And they shall sever out men of continual 
em])loyment,* passing through tlic land, to bury 
with the passengers those that remain upon the 
face of the earth, to cleanse it: after the end of 
seven months shall they search. 

15 And the passengers that pass through the 
land, when any sceth a man's bone, then shall he 
set 5 up a sign by it, till the buriers have buried it 
in the valley of Ilamon-gog. 

16 And also the name of the city shaU be Ilamo- 
nah.' Thus shall they cleanse the land. 

17 IF .\nd, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord 
God; Speak unto every feathered fowl,"^ and to 
every beast of the field,'^ Assemble yourselves, and 
come ; gather yourselves on evei-y side to my sac- 
rilice' that I do sacrifice for you,'' even a great 
sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may 
eat fie.sh, and drink blood, 

18 Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink 
the blood of the princes of the earth, of rams, of 
lambs, and of goats,* of bullocks, all of them iat- 
liugs of Bashan.'' 

1!) And ye shall eat fat till yc lic full, and di-ink 
blood till yc be drunken, of my sacrifice which I 
have sacrificed for you. 

20 Thus yo shall be filled at my table with horses 
and chariots, with mighty men, and with all men 
of war,*' saith the Lord God. 

21 And I will set my glory among the heathen, 
and all the heathen shall sec my judgment that I 



• Or, mouths, f That is, The multitude of Gon. ' ver. 14, IG; D.-iit. 
21:2.3 b ch, 2^:M. 1 Heb. continuance.' 5 Heb. build. I That i.<, Tlte 
multitude, t Heb. to the fowl of every wing. ' Isa. 18:li; Rev. 19;17, IS. 
• Or, slaughter, d Zeph. 1:7. t Heb. great goals, e Deut. 33:14; Psa. 
23:12. f Psa. 70:5, 0. s Exod. 7:4. hPsi. 9:10. i ch. 36: 18, etc. ; Lam. 



13. A renown ; for ttie burial of Gog is a sign of the vic- 
tory which God has given them over him. 

14. Pas.fin^ through the land — with the pa.^sengers ; two 
classes of persons arc employed, one to go through the 
land and set up signs where they find bones ; the other, 
to bury them. The reference here is to the scattered 
bones that shall remain after the seven months in which 
the whole house of Israel has been employed. The '■ pas- 
sengers " arc not travellers, but men appointed to pass 
through the land, some as discoverers, others as buriers. 

17. May eat flesh, and drink blood; before the Israelites can 
bury the slain of Gog, the beasts and birds of prey shall 
1)0 feasted upon their caixasses. Compare Rev. 19: 17, 18. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-7. God sometimes allows wicked men to mature their 
plans against his people, and to proceed very far in the 
accomplishment of them, that in the end they may thus 
receive a more complete and terrible overthrow, and his 
own power and justice be more gloriously manifested. 

8-10. They who openly seek to destroy and spoil God's 
people, shall be themselves destroyed and spoiled in the 
sight of all men. 

11-16. After that the counsels of wicked men have been 
effectually overthrown, a great work still remains to God's 
people to purify society from the pollution which their 



have executed, and my hand that I have laid iipoa 
them.'' 

22 Ho the house of Israel shall know that I am 
the Lord their God from that day and forward.'' 

23 T And the heathen shall know that the house 
of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity:' 
because they trespassed agaifist me, therefore hid I 
my face from thein,J and gave them into the hand 
of their enemies;" so fell they all by the sword. 

24 According to their uncleanness and accord- 
ing to their transgressions have I done unto them, 
and hid my face from them. 

25 Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Now 
will I bring again the captivity of Jacob,' and 
have mercy upon the whole house of Israel,""- and 
will be jealous for my holy name; 

26 After that they have borne their shamc,'^ and 
all their trespasses whereby they have trespassed 
against me," when they dwelt safely in their land, 
and none made tke7n afraid. 

27 When I have brought them again from the 
people, and gathered them out of their enemies' 
lands, and am sanctified in them in the sight of 
many nations ; 

28 Then shall they know that I am the Lord 
their God, which caused* them to be led into cap- 
tivity among the heathen: but I have gathered 
them nnto their own land, and have left none of 
them any more there.'' 

29 Neither will I hide my face any more from 
them :'' for I have poured out my Spirit upon the 
house of Israel,'' saith the Lord God. 

CHAPTER XL. 

1 The time, manner, and end of the vision. G The description of the 
east gate, 20 of the north gate, 24 of the south gate, 32 of the east 
gate, 35 and of the north gate- 39 Eight tables. 44 The chambers. 
4S The porch of the house. 

X the five and twentieth year of our captivity, 
in tlic beginning of the year, in the tenth day 



I 



l:.•^; .'■):ll!, 17. J Deut. 31:17; Isa. 1:1.5; H:I7; 59:3. k Lev. 2liao; Psa. 
106:41. 1 ch. 34:13; Jer.30:.'!, 18. mHos. 1:11. a Psa. «9:S; Jcr. 30:11. 
o Deut. a--:47, 4S; 32:14, 15. I Heb. iy mi/ causing nf. P Deut. 30:3, 4; 
Neb. 1:S-10. q Isa. 54:S. r Zech. 13:10; Acts 2:17; I John 3:a4. 



corrupt example and doctrine have introduced. This 
seems to be symbohzed here by the care with which tiie 
fallen hosts of Gog are buried. 

17-22. The terrible destruction which God often brings 
upon wicked men in this world, is at once an earnest and 
a solemn emblem of that wrath beyond the tomb which 
awaits all the Ihially impenitent. 

23, 24, God will so deal with his otFendjng people that 
all shall understand that their calamities have come upon 
them because of their own iniquities, and not through any 
want of power or faithfulness in him. 

25-29. It is not for us to determine beforehand " the 
times and seasons " for the fulfilment of the great events 
foretold in prophecy. Curious computations respecting 
these are in general unsatisfactory and unprofitable. But. 
of this we may be sure, that God will gloriously fulfil all 
his promises to his people at the appointed time, give 
them the victory over all their foes, and establish them 
in perpetual peace and prosperity. 

GENERAL REMARKS ON THE LAST NINE CHAT- 
TERS OF THIS BOOK. 

The proi)het with Iiis countrymen has now been in cap- 
tivitv a (piarter of a ccntnrv : Jerusalem, with its holy 



The vision 



EZKKIKL XL. 



of a tempk. 



of the month, in the fourteenth year after that the 
city was smitten," in the selfsame (hiy the liand of 
tlu^ Lord was upon me, an<l brouirlit me tliitlier. 

2 In the visions of God brousht ho mo into tiie 
land of Israel,'' and set me upon a very lufrli moun- 
tain,'^ by" whicii luas as the irame of a city on the 
south. 

;-5 And he brought me thitlier, and beliold, there 
icas a man, whose appearance v:as like tiie appear- 
ance of brass,** wifli a line of flax in his liand, and 
a measuring reed ; and lie stood in the gate. 

4 And the man said unto me. Son of man, behold 
with thine eyes, and liear with thine ears, and set 
thy iieart npon all that I shall show thee; for to 
the intent that I might sliow fhem unto tliee art 
thou brought liither: declare all that thou seest 
to tiie house of Israel." 

T) And behold a wall on the outside of the house 
round about, and in the man's hand a measuring 
reed of six cubits long by tlie cubit and a hand- 



>Cli. 33:21. boh 8:3. c Rev. -ihlO, 



•Or, upon, d Dan. 10:1 



and beautiful temple, and the whole land of Israel, have 
lain desolate for fourteen years, and all around looks dark 
and di.scouraging. In this situation he sees in vision 
a new Jerusalem, with its temple, priests, and altar, rise 
out of the ruins of the former, of a larger extent and in a 
more glorious form ; and the land is again divided out to 
the returning captives by lot, as it was at the beginning 
by Joshua. 

The general plan of the temple is after the model of 
Solomon's, yet this vision is not to be understood as a 
more prophecy of the rebuilding of Solomon's temple with 
the city in which it stood, and the repossession of the 
land after the Babylonish captivity. Several particulars 
in the description make it plain that it was not intended 
to be literally understood. See chap. 42:15-20; 45:1-8; 
47 : 1-12, and the whole of chap. 48. It is rather a symbol- 
ical re|)resontation of the coming deliverance and enlarge- 
ment of the true spiritual Zion, which is God's church, 
the same in all ages. The resettlement of the land of 
Canaan, and the rebuilding of the city and temple after 
the captivity, were only a part, and a very small part of 
the " good things to come " which the vision shadowed 
forth. Its fulfilment belongs to the whole history of the 
church from Ezekiel's day onward, and it will be com- 
pleted only in her final triumph over the kingdom of Sa- 
tan, and her establishment in permanent peace and holi- 
ness. 

As the time had not yet come for the old covenant to 
pass away, Ezekiel, who was himself a priest under the 
law of Moses, saw the future revival and enlargement of 
God'.s kingdom under the forms of this covenant. The 
new Jerusalem which God revealed to him had its temple, 
priests, altar, and sacrifices. All these were shadows of 
Christ's perfect priesthood, of the spiritual temple of which 
he is tlie chief corner-stone, and of the spiritual priest- 
hood of his people. 1 Pet. 2:.5-9. 

In interpreting this vision, we should not curiously 
inquire after the meaning of every particular chamber 
and pillar and door, but rather look to the general mean- 
ing of the whole. The angel measures, and the prophet 
records all the parts of the building. This signifies, in 
general, that God's care extends to all parts of his spir- 
itual temple, and that he will see that they arc all in due 
time made perfect. 

The new Jerusalem described by the apostle John has 
much in common with this. It is in truth a vision of the 
same spiritual city. " whose builder and maker is God." 
But it differs from Kzekiel's vision in two respects. First, 
it belongs apparently to the glorified stsito of the churcli 
after the final resurrection ; secondly, it has nothing Jew- 
ish in it, neither temple nor altar! All these shadows 
have passed away for ever. 
958 



breadth : so he measured the breadth of *b"c.*?,?5; 
the building, one reed ; and the iieight, one reed. 

G ' Then came he unto the gate which looketh 
toward the cast,^ niul went up the stairs thereof, 
and measured the threshold of the gate, which was 
one reed broad ; and the other threshold of the gate, 
which was one reed broad. 

7 And eivry little chamber was one reed long, 
and one reed broad ; and between the little cham- 
bers were five cubits; and the threshold of the 
gate by the porch of the gate within was one reed. 

S He measured also the porch of the gate within, 
one reed. 

9 Then measured he the porch of the gate, eight 
cubits : and the posts thereof two cubits;'' and the 
porc'h of the gate was inward. 

10 And the little chambers of the gate eastward 
iirre three on this side, and throe on that side;"-' 
they three were of one measure : and the posts had 
one measure on this side and on that side. 



4:!:10. t Heb. 



€/a, 



s the way toward the 



fch. 45:19. 5 ver. 7. 



CHAPTER XL. 

2. A very high mountain; it answers to the hills of Zion 
and Morian, on which Jerusalem with its temple stood ; 
yet it is not the literal Zion, nor any other actual moun- 
tain. It exists only in vision, and answers to " the moun- 
taiu of the Lord's house," which is to be in the last days 
"exalted above the hills," Isa. 2:2; and to the "great and 
high mountain" which John sees. Rev. 21:10. On titr 
soulli ; on the south to the prophet, as he comes in vision 
from the north. 

3. Liic the appearance of brass ; compare ch. 1 : 7, and note. 
5. T/ic house; that is, the temple with its courts. Jiy 

the cubit and a handbreadth ; that is, reckoning the cubit 
and a handbreadth as one cubit, chap. 43: 13. This makes 
the "great cubit," chap. 41:8, of seven handbreadths. 
whicli seems to have been used for sacred purposes, and 
to be the same as the eubit"aftcr the first measure," 2 Chr. 
3:3. The common cubit contained but six hand-breadths, 
or about twenty-one inches. The building; that is, the 
structure of the wall. It was one reed broad. and one high. 

(). Unto the gate which looketh toward the cast ; the general 
plan of this temple with its courts is as follows: 

First, there is an outer court, lying four-square, and of 
great extent, ver. 17; chap. 42:16-20; with rows of cham- 
bers round about, tliirtj' in number, verse 17. This court 
has three outer gates, one on the east side, one on the 
north, and one on the south, from each of which a passage- 
way leads inward with three little chambers on each side 
of it, verses C-26. 

Secondly, there is an inner court, in front of the temple, 
with various chambers on its sides. This has also three 
gates and passage-ways, opposite to and corresponding 
with those of the outer court. The altar of burnt-otfering 
stands in this inner court, and in the north passage-way 
are eight tables with implements for sacrificing. The 
ascent from the outer to the inner court is by eight stops. 
From the inner court a way leads to the temple through a 
porch twenty cubits by eleven, verses 27-49. 

Thirdly, tlie temple consists of two divisions: the holy 
place, forty cubits long by twenty wide ; and the most 
iioly, twenty cubits square, chap. 41:1-4. 

Fourthlv, around the temple without, on all sides except 
the front, are rows of side-chambers, three stories in 
height, chap. 41:5-11. 

Fifthly, in the rear of the temple, westward, is a struc- 
ture ninety cubits by seventy, with a "separate place" 
apparently between it and the temple, chap. 41:12. 

The brevity of this commentary docs not allow a de- 
tailed account of the various structures and apartment* 
described by Ezekiel. respecting some of which there is 
much obscurity and difficulty. 



The measurins 



EZEKIEL XL. 



of Ike temple. 



a ("'57"" 11 And he measured the bread tli of the 
entry of the gate, ten cubits; and the length of 
tlie gate, tliirteen cubits. 

12 Tlie space* also before the little chambers 
was one cubit on this side, and tlie space u-as one 
cul)it on tlnit side: and the little chambers were 
six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side. 

13 He measured then tiie gate from the roof of 
one little chamber to the roof of another: tlie 
breadth icas live and twenty cubits, door against 
door. 

14 He made also posts of threescore cubits, even 
unto the post of the court round about the gate.'"' 

15 And from the face of the gate of the entrance 
unto the face of the porch of the inner gate were 
fifty cubits. 

16 And there were narrow* windows to the little 
chambers,'' and to tlieir posts within the gate 
round about, and likewise to the arches:* and 
windows wvre round about inward:' and upon 
each post icere palm-trees. 

17 Then brought he me into the outward court,'' 
and lo, there were chambers,'' and a pavement made 
for tlie court round about: thirty chambers were 
upon tlie pavement." 

IS And the pavement by the side of the gates 
over against the length of the gates icas the lower 
pavement. 

19 Then he measured the breadth from the fore- 
front of the lower gate unto tlie forefront of the 
inner court without," a hundred cubits eastward 
and northward. 

20 ^ And the gate of the outward court that 
looked' toward the nortli, he measured the length 
thereof, and the breadth thereof. 

21 And the little chambers thereof wp?-e three on 
this side and three on that side; and the posts 
thereof and the arches* thereof were after the 
measure of the first gate : the length thereof vms 
fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty 
cubits. 

22 And their windows, and their arches, and 
their palm-trees, were after the measure of the 
gate that looketh toward the east ; and they went 
up unto it l)y seven steps; and the arches thereof 
vierv before tiiem. 

23 And the gate of the inner court was over 
against tlie gate toward the north, and toward 
the east; and he measured from gate to gate a 
hundred cubits. 

24 "i After that he brought me toward the south, 
and behold a gate toward tiie south : and he meas- 
ured the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, ac- 
conling to these measures. 

2.") And there were windows in it and in the 
arches thereof round about, like those windows: 
the lengtii icas fifty cubits, and the breadth five 
and twenty cubits. 

26 And there ivere seven steps to go up to it, and 
the arches thereof were before them: and it had 



• Heh. iimi I. 01 bound. " ch. 4->:l ; Exod 27;9. 1 Hch. clo.<:td. b 1 Kings 
ii:4. t Or, gallerie.!, or porrhts. f Or, within. '^Rev. 11;-J. dl Kings 6:5; 
John 14:2. e ch. 45:5, I Or, from without. 1 Heb. ivhose fare was. • Or, 
galleries, or porches. ' 1 Chr. •2S:11, 12; aChr. 31:11 ; Neli.i:i:9; Jer. 3,i;2, 



19, 23. 27. .-J hundred cubits; see note on chap. 42:15-20. 



palm-trees, one on this side, and another on tliat 
side, upon the posts thereof. 

27 And there was a gate in tlic inner cinirt tow- 
ard the south : and he measured from gate to gate 
toward the south a hundred cubits. 

28 And he brougiit me to the inner court by the 
south gate: and he measured the south gate ac- 
cording to these measures; 

29 And the little chambers thereof,' and the 
posts thereof, and the arches thereof, according to 
these measures: and there were windows in it and 
in the arches thereof round about: it teas fifty cu- 
bits long, and five and twenty cubits broad." 

30 And the arches round about loere five and 
twenty cubits long, and five cubits broad.* 

31 And tiie arches thereof we;'e toward the outer 
court ; and palm-trees were upon the posts thereof: 
and tlie going up to it had eight steps. ' 

32 1 And he brought me into the inner court 
toward the east : and he measured the gate accord- 
ing to tliese measures. 

33 And the little chambers thereof, and the posts 
thereof, and the arches thereof, ivere according to 
these measures : and there were windows therein 
and in the arches thereof round about : it was fifty 
cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad. 

34 And the arches tliereof wvre toward the out- 
ward court; and palm-trees ice7-c upon the ]iosts 
tlicreof, on this side, and on that side: and tiie 
going up to it had eight steps. 

35 1 And he brougiit me to the north gate,'' and 
measured it according to these measures ; 

36 The little chambers thereof, the posts thereof 
and the arches thereof and the windows to it 
round about: the lengtii ivas fifty cubits, and the 
Ijrcadtli five and twenty cubits. 

37 And the posts thereof wct-c toward the outer 
court ; and palm-trees were upon the posts thereof 
on this side, and on that side : and the going up 
to it had eight steps. 

38 And the chambers and the entries thereof 
were by the posts of the gates, where they washed 
the burnt-oflering. 

39 1 And in the ]30rch of the gate were two ta- 
bles on this side, and twp tables on that side, to 
slay thereon the burnt-oifering' and the sin-oflfer- 
ingj and the trespass-offering." 

40 And at the side witliout, as one gocth up* to 
the entry of the north gate, were two tables; and 
on the other side, which ivas at the porch of the 
gate, were two tables. 

41 Four tables were on this side, and four tables 
on that side, by the side of the gate ; eight tables, 
whereupon they slew their sacrifices. 

42 And the four tables xrere of hewn stone for 
the Ijiirnt-olTering, of a cubit and a half long, and 
a cubit and a half broad, and one euljit liigh : 
whereupon also they laid the instruments where- 
with they slew the burnt-offering and the sacrifice. 

43 And within were hooks,^ a hand broad, fast- 



4; .01): 10. r ver. 21, a5, M, 30. t Heb. irearfl/i. h ch. 44:4 ; 47:2. i Lev. 
1:3, etc. J Lev. 4:2, .3. k Lev. 5:G, etc. ; (i:6; 7:1, etc. : Or, at the .Mep. 
5 Or. andirons, ozthe two hearthstones. 



To the north gate ; of the inner court. 
'.)5Vt 



Gates oTid c/iamhers 



EZEKIEL XLI. 



of the temple. 



ened round about : and upon the tablc:s was the 
flesh of llio oflerinfT. 

44 II And without tlie inner urate ji-crc tlic cliam- 
bors of tlie singers in tlie inner eourt,'' which ivas 
at tlie side of the north gate : and tlieir prospect 
was toward the soutii: one at tin.' side of tiie east 
gate having the prospect toward the north. 

45 And he said unto nie, Tiiis chamber, whose 
prospect is toward the south,'' is for the priests, 
the keepers of the cliargc' of tlie house.'' 

40 And the chamber whose prospect is toward 
the north is for the priests, the keepers of the 
charge of the altar:'' these are the sons of Zadok 
among tiie sons of Levi.'' which come near to the 
Lord to minister unto him. 

47 So he mcasuretl the court, a liundred cubits 
long, and a hundred cubits broad, foursquare; and 
the altar that icas before the house. 

48 1 And he brouglil me to the jiorcli of the house, 
and measured each post of the porch, iivc cubits 
on this side, and five cubits on that side: and the 
breadth of the gate w^as three cubits on this side, 
and three cubits on that side. 

49 The length of the porch v;as twenty cubits, 
and tiic breadth eleven cubits;'' and he brought 
me by the steps whereby they went up to it: and 
there were ])illars by the posts, one on this side, 
and another on that side.'' 

CHAPTER XLI. 

Tlie measures, parts, chambers, and ornaments of the temple. 

AFTERWARD he brought mc to the temple, 
and measured the posts," six cubits broad on 
the one side, and six cubits broad on the other 
side, which was the breadth of the tabernacle. 

2 And the breadth of the door* u-as ten cubits; 
iind the sides of the door were live cubits on the 
one side, and fivo cubits on the other side: and 
he measured the length thereof, forty cubits ; and 
the breadth, twenty cubits. 

3 Then went he inward, and measured the post 
of tlic door, two cubits; and the door, six cubits; 
and the breadth of the door, seven cubits. 

4 So he measured the Jength thereof, twenty cu- 
bits; and the breadth, twenty cubits, before the 
temple:' and he said unto nic, 'I'liis -is the most 
holy p'.acc. 

5 After hc measured the wall of the house, six 
cubits; and the breadth of tvery side-chamber, 



• 1 Clir. 0:SI, etc. 6 ch. «:.5. • Or, ward, or oriliimnct; vi-r. •«). ' Lov. 
1:35; Num. 3:27-13; 18:5; tChr. 0:SJ; -JChr. 13:11; I'sa. 131:1; Mai. 2:1- 
7; 1 Tim. 11:4(1. d ch. 44:15; Num. 1S:5. c di. 43: 19; 44: 15, 1«; 1 Kings 
2:35. fl Kings 0:3. g I Kingn 7:21 ; Ucv. 3:12. k Rev. 21:15. t Or, f n- 
Irana. M KinE«0:20; 2Chr. 3:9. J 1 Kings fi:5. 0. I lleb. side-i-AamUr 



47. Tiie court ; that is, the inner court. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1, 2. Many of tlio most Rlorious revelations recorded in 
llic Bible were made liy (Jnd in tlio darkest days of tlie 
idiurch's history, that hi- miKlit thus encourage the hearts 
■>f his servants, and sliow tliat hc is always present with 
his people, and atteiidinuj to their interests. 

4. Whatever God sees good to reveal in any way coii- 
lerning hi.<i kingdom of grace, is a matter of the deepest 
interest to all his people ; and they who receive it should 
declare it to others with the utiriost fidelity. 

.'i-49. God never destrov.-* anv thing Itclongiiig to his 
'.tfiO 



four cubits, round about the house on every '^u" w,*: 
side. 

(i And the side-chambers were three,' one over 
another,* and thirty-' in order, and they entered 
into the wall which was of the house for the side- 
chambers round al)Out, that they might have hold,' 
but they had not hold in the wall of the house. 

7 And thxre was an enlarging, and a winding^ 
about still upward to the side-chambers;'' for the 
winding about of the house went still upward 
round about the house: therefore the breadth of 
the house ira.i still upward, and so increased y)-07/i 
the lowest c/;«/n6fr to the highest by the midst. 

8 I saw also the height of the house round about : 
the foundations of the side-chambers were a full 
reed of six great cubits.' 

9 The thickness of the wall, which u-as for the 
side-chamber without, teas live cubits : and that 
which was left icas the place of the side-chambers 
that wc7-e within. 

1 And between the chambers teas the wideness 
of twenty cubits round about the house on everj- 
side. 

11 And the doors of the side-chambers ircre tow- 
ard the place that was left, one door toward the 
north, and another door toward the south : and the 
breadth of the j)lace that was left 7ras live cubits 
round about. 

12 \ow the building that icas before the sepa- 
rate place at the end toward the west icas seventy 
cubits broad:'" and the wall of the building was 
live cubits thick round about, and the length there- 
of ninety cubits. 

13 So he measured the house a hundred cnbits 
long; and the separate place, and the liuilding. 
with the walls thereof, a hundred cubits long; 

14 Also the breadth of the face of the house and 
of the separate place toward the east, a hundred 
cubits. 

15 7\.nd hc measured the length of the building 
over against the separate place which iras behind 
it, and the galleries' thereof on the one side and 
on the other side, a hundred cubits, with the inner 
tein|ile, and the jiorches of the court; 

Hi The door-posts, and the narrow windows," 
and the galleries round about on their three sto- 
ries, over against the door, ceiled vrilh* wood 
round about, and from the ground u]> to the win- 
dows,' and the windows were covered ; 

17 To that above the door, even unto the inner 



nvrr sitU-rltanibrr. I Or, three and thirty tiine^, or ftrt. I Hob. bt hotden. 
\ Hob. it was made broader, and iurnt round, k 1 Kings 0:f. 1 ch. 40:.^. 
■"ch. V2:l; Rev. 81:7; 22:14,15. • Or, several tnaiks, or UMtks Kith pillars. 
1 vor. 2(i ; ch. 40: Iti. t Uob. ctiling of, 1 Or, the ground unto the windoiti. 



church except for the purpose of rebviildiiig it again in a 
nobler and more enduring form. His earthly tcmplcB. 
built by human hands, may perish ; but his spiritual tera- 
ide, not made with h;inds, which is Christ and his body 
the church, shall outlast all cluingoB, and become more 
beautiful and glorious from age to age. 

CHAPTER XLI. 

- 1. Tn the temple ; the temple itself, in distinction from its 
courts and porch. Tlieimxt!;; here, as elsewhere in this 
description, the '• posts " seem to denote an ornamental 
front with pillars and carved work. 



Ornaments of the iempk. 



EZEKIEL XLII. 



Chambers for priests. 



uvJ-T house, and without, and by all the wall 
round about within and without, by measure." 

18 And it was made with cherubim and palm- 
trees," so that a palm-tree tvas between a cherub 
and a cherub ; and every cherub had two faces ; 

19 So that the face of a man icas toward the 
palm-tree on the one side, and tlie face of a young 
lion toward the palm-tree on the other side:'' it 
ims made througii all the house round about. 

20 From the ground unto above the door were 
cherubim and palm-trees made, and on the wall of 
the temple. 

21 Tiie posts^ of the temple ivere squared, and 
till' face of the sanctuary ; the appearance of the 
one as the appearance of the other. 

22 The altar of wood icas three cubits high, and 
the length thereof two cubits;"^ and the corners 
tlicreof, and the length thereof, and the walls 
tiiereof icere of wood : and he said unto me. This 
is the table that is before the Lord.'^ 

23 And the temple and the sanctuary had two 
doors." 

24 And the doors had two leaves apiece, two 
turning leaves: two leaves for the one door, and 
two loaves for tiie other door. 

25 And there were made on them, on the doors of 
the temple, cherubim and palm-trees, like as wrre 
made upon the walls ;' and there icere thick planks 
upon the face of the porch without. 

26 And there were narrow windows and palm- 
trees on the one side and on the other side,- on 
the sides of the porch, and upo7i the side-chambers 
of the house, and thick planks. 

CHAPTER XLII. 

I The chambers for the priests. 13 The use tiiereof. 19 The meas- 
ures of the outward court. 

f'T^HEX he brought me forth into the outer court, 
L the way toward the north: and he brought 
me into the chamber that tms over against the 
separate place,'' and which ivas before the build- 
ing toward tlie north. 

2 Before the length of a hundred cubits ivas the 
north door, and the breadth was fifty cubits. 

3 Over against the twenty cubits which 2vere for 
the inner court, and over against the pavement 
which ivas for the outer court, icas gallery against 
gallery in three stories.' 



■ Heb. meaSLms. « 1 Kmg^ 


6:29; 2 Chr. 3; 


. t ch. 


:l(l. t Heb post. 


c Exnd.3l:l. d Exod. 3ll:S; 


ch. 44:16; Mai. 


1:7, 1-J. 


e 1 Kinjs 6:3>-tr>. 


( ver. 17, l^. E oh. 40:10. 1 


ch.41:ia. 1.5. 


ch. 4l;|i 


; SoiiK 1-17; 7:5. 


J ver. U. t Or, did cat of these 


8 Or, and the b 


aiding en 


nsisted of the lower 



18. It was made with — palm-trees ; this, witli what follows, 
belongs to the description of the interior of the temple. 
Compare 1 Kings G:29. 

22. TIte altar of wood ; for burning incense in the holy 
place. It was doubtless to he overlaid with gold, as in 
Solomon's temple. 1 Kings 6:22. Before the Lord; that 
is, in front of the ark within the holy of holies, where God 
dwelt between the cherubim. 

INSTRUCTION. 

The Jewish temple had many different apartments, each 
having its own form and use, but all for one end, the wor- 
ship and glory of God ; and they all constituted one whole. 
In like manner God's spiritual temple, which this vision 
of Ezekiel's shadows forth, has many members with many 
different offices, but they are all one in Christ Jesus. 
iCor. 12:12-27; Eph. 2:20-22; 4:15, IG ; Col. 2:19. 
61 



4 And before the chambers ims a walk of ten 
cubits breadth inward, a way of one cubit; and 
their doors toward the nortli.J 

5 Now the upper chambers tuere shorter : for the 
galleries were higher than these,* than the lower, 
and than the middlemost of tiie building.^ 

6 For they ^vere in three stories, but had not pil- 
lars as the pillars of the courts: therefore the 
buildinf^ was straitened more than the lowest and 
the middlemost from the ground. 

7 And the wall that was without over against 
the chambers, toward the outer court on the fore- 
part of the chambers, the length thereof was fifty 
cubits. 

8 For the length of the chambers that icere in 
the outer court was fifty cubits : and lo, before the 
temple we7-e a hundred cubits. 

9 And from under' these chambers ivas the entry ^ 
on the east side, as one goeth" into them from the 
outer court. 

10 The chambers were in the thickness of the 
wall of the court toward the east, over against 
the separate place, and over against the building. 

11 And the way before them tvas like the ap- 
pearance of the chambers which were toward tiie 
north," as long as they, and as broad as they : and 
all tlieir goings out were both according to their 
fashions, and according to their doors. 

12 And according to the doors of the chambers 
that u'fre toward the south was a door in the head 
of the way, even the way directly before the wall 
toward tiic east, as one entereth into them. 

13 1[ Then said he unto me. The north chambers 
and the south chambers, which are before the sep- 
arate place, they be holy chambers, where the 
priests that approach unto the Lord shall eat the 
most holy things:' there shall they lay the most 
holy things,"' and the meat-offering," and the sin- 
oft'cring," and the trespass-oflcring ;p for the place 
is holy. 

14 When the priests enter therein, then shall 
they not go out of the holy place into the outer 
court, but there they shall lay their garments 
wherein they minister ;i for they are holy; and' 
shall put on other garments,'' and shall approach 
to those things which are for the jieople. 

1.5 TTNow when he had made an end of measur- 
ing the inner house, he brought me forth toward 









II (1r 


the 


plac 


of. 


I Or. 


he that 


brought 1 


le. 


• Or, 




k ver. 4 




r,ev 


61 


-.'(i 


10: 


1^ 14. 


"> Neh 


13:5. n 


Lev 


2; a, 


10. Nil 


m. 18:9, 


10 


PL 


V. 6 


U, e 


to. 


qch. 44 


:19. r 


Zeeh. 3:4 


i>. 





CHAPTER XLII. 

15-20. Five hundred reeds; that is, three thousand cubits. 
From this it is plain that the distance of one hundred 
cubits " from gate to gate," mentioned chap. 40:19, 23, 27, 
cannot have been the whole distance from the gates of 
this outer wall to the corresponding gates of the inner 
court. "The lower gate," chap. 40:19, seems to have 
been some gate within the outer court connected with its 
chambers, and so of the corresponding gates on the north 
and south. The proposul of smn.^ to read " cubits " here 
instead of "reeds," is witliuut sulli.iunt authority. 
INSTHUCTIUNS. 

13, 14. All things connected with the worship of God 
should be done decently and in order ; the places and the 
forms appropriated to his service should not be profaned 
961 



The glory of God 



EZEKIEL XLIII. 



comcth to tht temple. 



the jiatc wliosc prospect is toward tlie cast, and 
measured it round about. 

10 He measured the east si(h'' with the measur- 
ing reed, five liundred reeds, with tlic measuring 
reed round about. 

17 He measured the north side, five liundred 
reeds, witli tiie measuring reed round about. 

IS He measured tlie soutli side, five hundred 
reeds, with the measuring reed. 

I'J He turned about to tlie west side, and meas- 
ured live hundred reeds, with the measuring reed. 

20 He measured it by the four sides:" it iiad a 
wall round about," five hundred reeds long, and 
five hundred broad," to make a separation between 
the sanctuary and the profane placC* 

CHAPTER XLIII. 

1 The returning of the glory of God into the temple. 7 The sin of Israel 
hindered God's presence. 10 The prophet exhortetii them to repent- 
ance, and observation of the law of the house. 13 The measures, IS 
and tlie ordinances of the altar. 



AFTERWARD he brought me to the gate, even 
the gate that lookctii toward the east:" 

2 And behold, tlie glory of the (Jod of Israel 
came from the way of the east:' and his voice 
was like a noise of many waters:''' and the earth 
shincd with his glory.'' 

3 And it was according to the appearance of the 
vision which I saw,' even according to the vision 
that I saw when I came to destroy the city:*-' 
and the visions icere like the vision that I saw by 
the river Chebar;'' and I fell u|)on my face. 

4 And the glory of the Lord came into the 
house by the way of the gate whose prospect is 
toward the east. 

5 So the spirit took me up, and brought mo into 
the inn<;r court ; and behold, the glory of the 
Loud filled the house.' 

6 And I heard him speaking unto me out of the 
house ; and the man stood by me.'" 

7 1 And he said unto me, Son of man, the ))lace 
of iny throne," and the place of the soles of my 
feet," where 1 will dwell in the midst of the chil- 
dren of Israel for ever,'' and my holy name, shall 
the house of Lsrael no more defile,'' neither they, 
nor their kings, by their whoredom, nor by the 
carcas.ses of their kings in their high places."' 



• Hob. aind. » Rev. ai:lrt. b ch. 40:,'>; Song 2:9; I»l. ■26A- 00:1S; 
Mio. 7:11. c ch. 4o;i. J Luko 10:-,>0. o ch. 10:10; 44: 1 : 48:1. t ch. 
11:2:). « oh. 1;'2I; Rov. 1:15. h ch. 10:4 ; Rct. 18:1. i ch. 8:4. t Or, 
pr.iphmy lluit Ike city should be de.tlroi/eil ; ch. (1:1, .'). I Jnr. 1:10. k ch. 
I:'). I 1 Kiiii;jS:10, II. n> ch. 40:.'j. n Acts 7:4S, 4'.'. o 1 Chr. iW:'J; Psa. 



by iinliallowed usfs; and those to whom aro committed 
tlie puljlic ministrations of the sanctuary, sliould so (li"]iort 
themselves tliat the sanctity of tlicir olficc may be mani- 
fest to all men. 

15-20. From a^e to age God is continually enlarging the 
dimensions of his si)iritual temple. The old Jewish econ- 
omy was too narrow for the wants of the church; (Joil 
therefore abolishcil it, and gave in its stead the Christian 
dispensation, whicli is wide enough to contain all nations, 

CHAPTER XLIII. 

7. The place; that is, this is the place, TTie carcasses of 
their kiii^s; prol)al)ly, a contcmptuom) expression for Ihoir 
idols, " kings " being used in tlic sense of false gods. 

8. Tlieir Ihreihold ; the thrcHliold of their iilolatroils struc- 
tures. And the mail; better, as the margin, "and there 

902 



8 In their setting of their threshold by \%^^t. 
my thresholds, and their post by my jjosts, and the 
wall' between me and them, they have even defiled 
my holy name by their abominations that they 
have committed:'' wherefore I have consumed them 
in mine anger. 

9 Now let them put away their whoredom,' and 
the carcasses of their kings, far from me, and 1 will 
dwell in the midst of them fi)r ever," 

10 li Thou son of man, show the house to the 
house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their 
iniquities: and let them measure the pattern.* 

11 And if they be ashamed of all that they have 
done, show them the form of the house,*' and the 
fiishion thereof and the goings out thereof and the 
comings in thereof and all the forms thereof and 
all the ordinances thereof,"' and all the forms there- 
of, and all the laws thereof: and write it in their 
sight, that they may keep the whole form thereof, 
and all the ordinances thereof, and do them.'' 

12 This is the law of the house; Upon the top 
of the mountain the whole limit thereof round 
about shall he most holy. Behold, this is the law 
of the house. 

13 1 And these are the measures of the altar 
after the cubits: The cubit is a cubit and a hand- 
breadth; even the bottom' shall be a cubit, and 
the breadth a cubit, and the border thereof by 
the edge^ thereof round Ahowt shall be a span ; and 
this shall be the higher place of the altar. 

14 And from the bottom upon the ground even 
to the lower settle shall be two cubits, and the 
breadth one cubit; and from the lesser settle CTfn 
to the greater settle shall be four cubits, and the 
breadth one cubit. 

15 So the altar* simll he four cubits; and from 
the altar* and upward sltall he four horns, 

16 And the altar shall be twelve mbits long, 
twelve broad, square in the four squares thereof. 

17 And the settle shall be fourteen cubits long 
and fourteen broad in the four squares thereof; 
and the border about it shall be half a culdt ; and 
the bottom thereof shall be a cubit about; and his 
stairs shall look toward the east,-*' 

18 1 And he said unto me, Son of man, thus 
saith the Lord God; These are the ordinances of 
the altar in tlie day when they shall make it, to 



Oil:.?, p Exod. 29:43; Joel 3:17. <lch. 39:7. rJcrlC:lS. I Or, /orlhere 
washuta icnH. • ch. 23::i9; 2 Kingi 21:1-7. t llnj. 2:2. u 2 Cor. (I:l«. 
i Or. sum. ornumUr. » Ucb. B:5. "I Cm. 11:2. « Milt. 4f':20. Mich. 
to.iom. 1 llpb. lip. ' Hcb. Harel, that i«. (Ar mounlnin of God. 1 Ariel, 
that 18, lAr //on o/Gorf,- lsa.29:l. Tl King!.0:S; Ni!h,8:4. 



was only a wall," See chap. 8:.'>-16; 2 Kings 16:10-10; 
21:4-7; 23:C, II, 12; 2 Cliron. :«:-t-7. 

10. That thcij may be asliamed ; a view of God's goodness 
to his chosen people, of which this house is the Bymbol, 
is to fill them with shame. 

11. Ifthci/ he ashamed — all the lavs thereof; if the general 
view, verse 10, has the desired effect of humbling them, 
then he is to enter into all the details of the temple and 
its ordinances. 

13. The altar; of burnt-oA'cring. This stood in tlie inner 
court. 

14. Settle; ledge for widking around the altar. Of these 
there were two. The iipjier seems to be called the greater, 
as the more conspicuous. 

18-2fi. The rites for couscuraling the altar aro here de- 
scribed. 



The trmplc offci 



EZEKIEL XLIV. 



Ctrlain priests reproved. 



n.i\y*i''' offer burnt-offerings thereon, and to t^prin- 
klc blood thereon.'' 

11) And tlioii shalt give to the priests tlic Lc- 
vites that be of the seedof Zadok,''wliielia])proach 
unto nie, to minister unto me, sait'i the Lord God, 
a young bullock for a sin-offering/' 

20 And thou shalt take of the blood thereof, and 
put it on the four horns of it, and on the four cor- 
uers of the settle, and upon the border round 
about: thus shalt thou cleanse and ])urgc it. 

21 Thou shalt take the bulloek also of the sin- 
offering, and he shall burn it in the appointed 
place of the house, without the sanctuary.'' 

22 And on the second day thou shalt offer a kid 
of the goats without blemish for a sin-offering ; 
and they shall cleanse the altar, as they did 
cleanse it with the bullock. 

23 When thou hast made an endof cleansing «i, 
thou shalt offer a. young bullock without blemish, 
and a ram out of the (lock without blemish. 

21: And thou shalt offer them before the Lord, and 
the priests shall cast salt upon them,' and they shall 
offer them nyfor a burnt-offering unto the Lord. 

2.5 Seven days shalt thou prepare every day a goat 
for a sin-offering : ' they shall also prepare a young 
bullock,andaram outof the flock, without blemish. 

26 Seven days shall they purge the altar and 
purify it; and they shall consecrate themselves.*''' 

27 And when these days are expired," it shall 
be, that upon the eighth day, and so forward, the 
priests shall make your burnt-offerings upon the 
altar, and your peace-offerings ; * and 1 will accept 
you,' saith the Lord God. 

CHAPTER XLIV. 

1 The east gate assigned only to the prince. 4 The priests reproved for pol- 
luting the sanctuary. 9 Idolaters incapable of the priest's office. 15 
The sons of Zadolc are accepted thereto. 17 Ordinances for the priests. 

THEX ho brought me back the way of the gate 
of the outward .sanctuary which lookcth tow- 
ard the east;^ and it ^vas shut. 



«Le» 


1:5; H 


cb Ifl- 


'4 


b 


h. 44: 


.5. c ch 


.45: IS. etc. 


Kxod 


•2!l:in 


etc.; 


Lev. H: 


J, etc. 


<i Heb 


i:i 


n. 


1-2. e 


:,ev. 2: 


.■!. 


1 Exod. 


•29:3 •, 


:)0. • 


Heb. 


fill Ikei 


hands ; 


Kxod 


aa 


•24 


f Le 


r H:3:j. 


h 


Lev. 9:1 


tOr, 


thank- 


n^er- 


insa. 


ch. -20:40, 41 


: Hos 


«:13; 


Eph. 


:l) 


1 Pet. -2 


5. J 


ch. 43 


1, 4. 


k 1 Cor 


10:18, e 


tc. 1 


ch. 


4H: 


-• ■"■ " 


ch 43 


.■J. 


t Heb. s 


( Ihij 1 


nirt. 


ch. 



iNsri;i("riii.\s. 

1-6. The church is (hkIs .-;|iiritii;il temple where he 
continually dwells, reveaiiirj; tln'n- liis power and glory 
to those who love him and executing his judgments upon 
the impure and rebellious. Eph. 2:22 ; 1 Cor. 3:1G, 17. 

7-9. No sins are so heinous in God's sight as those com- 
mitted within his church, and as it were before his eyes, 
by such as minister to him in holy things. 

10. A view of God's unmerited goodness is well fitted 
to humble his people, and it has this effect upon all who 
arc " Israelites indeed." 

11. They who make a right nse of the mercies bestowed 
upon them, shall receive greater mercies. Matt. 13:12. 

12. The continual indwelling of the Holy Spirit makes 
God's church, and all that belong to her service, holy and 
honorable ; and he will not hold guiltless the man who treats 
her, or any of her ordinances, with levity and contempt. 

13-27. The blood of the Jewish altar, flowing from age 
to age, was Goil's perpetual testimony that " witliout 
shedding of blood is no remission " of sins ; and since " it 
is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should 
take away sins," the sacrifices of the Old Testament point- 
ed to the all-perfect sacrilice of Christ, who abolished them 
by fulfilling that which they typified. 



2 Then said the Lord unto me; This gate shall 
lie shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall 
enter iu by it; because the Lord the God of Israel 
hath entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut. 

3 // is for the prince ; the prince, he shall sit in 
it to eat bread before the Lord;" he shall enter 
by the way of the porch of //(a<gate, and shall go 
out by the way of the same.' 

4 li Then brought he me the way of llir north 
gate before the house: and 1 looked, and bcliold, 
the glory of the Lord filled the house of the Lord:'" 
and 1 fell upon iny face. 

5 And the Lord said unto me, Son of man, mark 
well,* and behold with thine eyes, and hear with 
thine ears all that 1 say unto thee concerning all 
the ordinances of the house of the Lord, and all 
the laws thereof;" and mark well the entering in of 
the house, with every going forth of the sanctuary." 

6 And thou shalt say to tlierebellious,^ ewento the 
house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God ; ye house 
of Israel, let it suffice you of all your aboininations,i 

7 In that ye have brought into my sanctuary 
strangers," ' uncircumcised in heart,'* and unc-ircum- 
cised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to ]iollute it, 
even my house, when ye offer my bread, the fat 
and the blood, and they have broken my covenant 
because of all your abominations.' 

8 And ye have not kept the charge of my holy 
things;" but ye have set keepers of my charge' in 
my sanctuary for yourselves. 

9 IThus saith the Lord God; No stranger, un- 
circumcised in heart,^ nor uncircumcised in flesh, 
shall enter into my sanctuary, of any stranger that 
is among the children of Israel. 

10 And the Levites that are gone away far from 
me,'"' when Israel went astray, which went astray 
away from me after their idols ;^ they shall even 
bear their iniquity. 

11 Yet they shall be ministers in my sanctuary, 
having charge at the gates of the house, and minis- 
tering to the house :^ they shall slay the burntof- 



40:4. o 


ch. 43 


11 ; Psa. 90 :S 


9 


119:4. 


P 


ch 


•2:5 


q ch 


43:- 


; 1 Pet. 4:. 3. 


S Heb. rl 




of a stmiiarr 


■ 1 


sa. 50:0 


7 




Lev 


. -^i:-- 


% < 


Lev. ••20:41; 


Rom. i-.-i 


■*, '29. 


t Lev. •21:«, 


K, 


" Lev. 


•a 


», 


etc. ; 


Acts 


■:53. 


Or, ward^ 


or ordiTia 




Mark IC: 10. 


w 


■2 Kings 


■i-i 


H, 


Etc. 


I 1 Ti 


m. 5: 


22. y 1 Chr. 


aB:l,etc. 























CHATTER XLIV. 

2. Shall be shut — no mmi ahall enter in bij it ; that is, shall 
be shut on ordinary occasions ; shall not be opened except 
to the prince, verse 3. Hatk entered in by it; and thus 
sanctified it, chap. 43:4. 

3. T/ie prince; this temple, like that of Solomon, stands 
at the head of a well-ordered city and state ; it has there- 
fore its prince as well as priests. The prince seems to 
represent the shepherds whom God will set over his future 
church under the Messiah. Jer. 23:4. That he is not 
directly the Messiah, appears from the fact that he offers 
for himself sin-offerings, chapter 45:22, and is warned 
against using oppression, chap. 46:18. Sliall sit in it to eat 
bread; compare chap. 46:1, 2, 12. 

7. Have brought into my sanctuary strangers; see note on 
the next verse. Have brolcen my covenant; which forbade 
the entrance of strangers into God's sanctuary. Deut. 
23:3; Lam. 1:10. 

8. Keepers; that is, uncircumcised strangers. 

10-15. T/ie Levites— done tlierein ; the Levites of the ton 

tribes, who fell into idolatry with the people, are to be 

excluded from the priesthood, and to perform menial 

offices for the priests. When hraci tvent astray; at the 

9C3 



Ordinances concerning 



EZEKIEL XLV. 



priests and I.eiiles. 



fcrinj^ and tho sacrifice for the people," and tliey 
shall stand before them to niinistrr unto them.'' 

12 Because they ministered unto tiieni before 
their idols, and caused the house of Israel to fall 
into iniquity i*"^ thensfore have I lifted up my hand 
against them, saith tiie Lord God, and they shall 
bear tlicir iniquity. 

13 And they sliall not come near unto me, to do 
the office of a pi-iest unto me, nor to come near to 
any of my holy things, in the most holy place: but 
they sliall bear their shame, and their abomina- 
tions which they Imve committed. 

14 But I will make them keepers of the charge 
of the iiouse, for all the service thereof, and for 
all that shall be done therein. 

15 1i But tJio pri(?sts tlu; Levites, the sons of Za- 
dok, that kept the ciiarge of my sanctuary when 
the children of Israel went astray from me,'' they 
shall come near to me to minister unto mt;,'' and they 
shall stand before me to offer unto mo the fat and 
the blood,' saitli the Lord God: 

16 They shall enter into my sanctuary, and they 
shall come near to my table, to minister unto me, 
and they shall keep my charge.'^' 

17 1l And it shall come to pass, that when they 
enter in at the gates of the inner court, they shall 
be clothed witli linen garments;'' and no wool 
shall come upon them, while they minister in the 
gates of the inner court, and within. 

18 They shall have linen bonnets upon their 
heads, and shall have linen breeches upon their 
loins; they shall not gird themselves with any 
thing that causeth sweat.* 

19 And when they go fortli into the outer court, 
even into the outer court to tin; people, they shall 
put off their garments wherein they ministered, 
and lay them in the holy chambers, and they shall 
put on other garments;' and they shall not sanc- 
tify the people with their garments.^ 

20 Neither shall they shave their heads," nor 
suffer their locks to grow long; they shall only 
poll their heads. 



«aChr i0;31. b Num. 10:9. ' Heb. icen for a slumlMng dloclc of inig- 
uity unto Iht liousr of Israel; ch. 14;:), 4. « Num. l-f:3, 4; 2 KiiiRS Slr'J. 
'1 I Sam. -l-.i-t. c Deut. Il);». I Lev. 3:IG| 17:5, li. t Rev. 1:8. h ExoJ. 
'J8:*.i0, etc. t Or, in sweating places; Heb. in, or tcit/i su^rat. i ch. 4'J: N ; 
Uv. 0:J7. J 1 Cor. 3:.0, li. k Lev. 21:.1, olc. I Lev. 10:9; 1 Tim. 3:3. 
1 Heb. lArujl /or(A. i Heb. from a priest . m 2 Chr. 19;.i, 10. n 1 Tira. 



time of Jeroboam's revolt. See 1 Kings 12:2G-33. At this 
time, Buch of the Levites as rciiiained faithful to God 
retired into tho land of Juilah. 2 Chron. ll:i:i, 14. 

la. TIte sons of Zadolc; see 1 Kings 2:35. 

17. And it shall come to pass; the rules for tho priesthood 
arc now given, corresponding in general with those of tlie 
Mosaic law. See the marginal references. 

28. It sliall be unto them ; tlie service just described, with 
the portion of llie offerings and first-fruits assigned to 
them for its iierformanec, verses 29, 30. I am their inher- 
itance; they .sliall have their maintenance from mo, that is, 
from the offering.s and first-fruits which I have assigned 
to them. No possession in Israel; no possession of land 
with the other tribes. See Num. 18:20-24. 

INSTIiUCTIONS. 
2, 3. Christ is the only liiail ol' the chureh, and he alone 
can demand of us unlimited honor and obedience ; l)Ut it is 
his will tliat they who are appointed under him to teacli 
and govern his people, should receive all those tokens of 
respect and deference which become their higli ollice. 
6-9. No outward forms of sanctity can iimku men accepts 
964 



21 Neither shall any jiriest drink wine, *ii*'c'i*: 
when they enter into the inner court.' 

22 Neither shall they take for their wives a 
widow, nor her that is put away:' but they shall 
take maidens of the seed of the house of Israel, or 
a widow that had a priest before.* 

23 And they shall teach my people the difference 
between the holy and profane, and cause them to 
discern between tin- unclemi and the clean. 

24 And in controversy they shall stand in judg- 
ment;'" and they shall judge it according to my 
judgments: and they shall keep my laws and ray 
statutes in all mine assemblies;" and they shall 
hallow my sabbaths." 

2.5 And they shall come at no dead person to defile 
themselves:'' but for father, or for mother, or for 
son, or for daughter, for brother, or for sister that 
hath had no husband, they may defile themselves. 

26 And after he is cleansed, they shall reckon 
unto him s(!ven days.*" 

27 And intheday thathegoethintothesanctuary, 
unto the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, 
he shall oR'er his sin-of}(M-ing,'' saith th(> Lord GoD. 

28 And it shall be unto them for an inheritance; 
I am their inheritance:" and ye shall give them 
no possession in Israel; I am their possession. 

29 They shall eat the meat-ofTering. and the sin- 
ofl'ering. and the trespass-offering ;' and every ded- 
icated thing in Israel shall be theirs." 

30 And tiie first"" of all the first-fruits of all 
things, and every oblation of all, of every sort of 
your oblations, shall be the priest's :"' ye shall also 
give unto the priest the first of your dougii,'"' that 
he may cause the blessing to rest in thy house.'' 

31 The priests shall not eat of any thing that is 
dead of itself, or torn, whether it be fowl or beast/ 

CHAPTER XLV. 

1 The portion of land for the sanctuary, 6 for the city, 7 and for the 
prince. 9 Ordinances lor the princes. 

OREOVER, when ye shall divide by lot the 
land* for inheritance,'- ye shall offer an ob- 



3:1,5. o ch. 22:26; Ina. 58:13, 14. P Lev. 21:1. oto. 1 Num. 6:10, «tc.; 
ll):lt, do. r Lev. 4:3. • Num. IS:2U; Deul. IS:I. 2; Jo»h. 13:14, :I3. 
1 Lev. 6:18, 29; 7:0. I Or, derated. " Num. 18:14. 1 Or, fAi>/. v Kxod. 
22:29,30. w Num. 15:21); Neh. 10:37. x Prov, 3:9, 10; M«l. 3:10. y Lot. 
22:8. * Heb. muse the land lofaU. i ch. 47:22. 



able worshippers of God. lie requires in all who draw 
nigh to him tho circumcision of the heart, and he has made 
it tlie duty of his people to exclude from Iheir fellowship 
;i,ll such as are manifestly impure in heart and life. 

10-11. When God's ministers dishonor him by unfaitk- 
fnlness to his cause, he will dishonor ihom before all men 
by taking from them their ollice and giving it to others. 
1 S;im. 2:30-3G. 

17-31. Those who minister to the people in God's name, 
should be ever mindful of the solemnity and dignity of 
their work, and shoulil :iv(>id every thing that is unbe- 
coming or irreverential in wonl or conduct. That their 
ollice excludes them from secular cmiiloyments, and thus 
from those avenues to wcallh which lie open to others, 
should lie no grief to them, since Jehovah liimself is their 
inheritance, and, while they remain faithful in his service, 
will certainly provide for all their wants. 

CHAPTER XLV. 

1. Shall offer an oblation; a portion of land which is to 
be set apart for tho uses of the sanctuary and those who 



rnrtictis of land. 



EZEKIEL XLV. 



Onlinanas fvr Ihc ■prince. 



B.c'sH™ lation unto the Lord, a lioly portion' of 
tiicland:" the Icnatli shall be tlio Icngtli of five 
and twenty tliousand j-«;rf.s', and the breadth .shall 
be ten tliousand. This shall be holy in all the bor- 
ders thereof round about. 

2 Of this there shall be for the sanctuary five 
hundred in length, with iive hundred in breadth, 
square round about;'' and fifty cubits round about 
for the suliurbs' thereof. 

3 And of this measure shalt thou measure the 
length of five an<l twenty thousand, and the 
breadth of ten thousand : and in it shall be the 
sanctuary and tin; most holy place.'' 

4 The holy portion of the land shall be for the 
priests the ministers of the sanctuary, which shall 
come near to minister unto the Lord : and it shall 
be a place for their houses, and a holy jdacc for 
tiie sanctuary.'' 

5 And the five and twenty thousand of length, 
and the ten thousand of breadth, shall also the 
Levites, the ministers of the house,'' have for them- 
selves, for a possession for twenty chambers.' 

(') ^ And ye shall appoint the possession of the 
city fivG thousand broad, and five and twenty 
thou.sanil long, over against the oblation of the 
holy portion: it shall be for the whole house of 
Israel. 

7 M And a portion shall be for the prince on the 
one side and on the other side of the oblation of 
the holy portion,'' and of tiic possession of the city, 
before the oblation of the holy portion, and before 
the possession of the city, from the west side west- 
ward, and from the east side eastward : and the 
lengtli shall be over against one of the portions, 
from the west border unto the east border. 

8 In the land sliall be his possession in Israel: 
and my princes shall no more oppress my people ;" 
and the rest of the land shall they give to the house 
of Israel according to their tribes.' 

9 ^ Thus saith the Lord God;^ Let it suffice 
you, princes of Israel : remove violence and 
spoil," and execute judgment and justice,' take 
away your exactions* from my people,'" saith the 
Lord God. 

10 Ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, 
and a just bath." 

11 The ephah and the bath shall be of one meas- 
ure, that the bath may contain the tenth part of a 



• Heb. holintss. ach. 48:8. b ch. 4^:20. 1 Or. vo„t places, ceh. 4rt:10. 
etc. <1 ver. 1. e 1 Cor. 9:13, 14. fch. 40:17. Sch. 4^:ai. h ch. *>:27; 
46:H; Prov. -23:10; Jer. ai:!?. i Josh. 11:23. J oh. 44:(i. k Jcr. 22:3. 
luh. 3i:14-lG. 1 Heb. expufsiMW. ■>> Neh. 5: 1-13; 1 Oor. 0, 7. S. » Lev. 
19:35, 30; Prov. 11:1. o Exod. 30: 13; Num. 3:47. iOr.kid. I Or, i/mni- 



minister to it ; as also for the city and prince. See notes 
oachap. 48:8-22. 

3. Of this measure ; that is, according to the measure 
just given. This verse is virtually a repetition of the 
preceding. 

5. And the five and twenty thousand; more literally, "a 
five and twenty thousand ;" that is, another five and twenty 
thousand. 

8. And my princes shall no more oppress my people; hav- 
ing a sufiBcient portion assigned them for their mainte- 
nance. 

13. 77i!.s is the oblation that ye shall offer ; nainely, to the 
prince, verse 16 ; a very reasonable amount, considering 
the greatness of his prescribed charges for the public 
offerings. 



iHuncr, and the ephah the tcnlli ])art of a homer: 
the measure thereof siiall be uflcr the homer. 

12 And the shekel shall be twenty gcrahs:" 
twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, fil'teeu 
shekels, shall bo your maneh. 

13 This is the oblation that ye shall offer ; the 
sixth ])art of an ephah of a homer of wheat, and 
ye siiall give the sixth part of an ephah of a liouior 
of liariey : 

14 Concerning the ordinance of oil, the bath of 
oil, ye siiall offer the tenth part of a batli out of the 
cor, which is a homer of ten baths ; for ten baths 
are a homer : 

I.') And one lamb' out of the flock, out of two 
hundred, out of the fat pastures of Israel ; for a 
meat-oflering, and for a burnt-offering, and for 
peace-ofl'erings,' to make reconciliation for them," 
saith the Loi'd God. 

1() All the people of the land shall give^ this 
oblation for" the prince in Israel.'' 

17 And it shall bo the prince's part to give 
burnt-otlerings, and meat-oflferings, and drink- 
oftcrings, in the feasts, and in the new moons, and 
ill the sabbaths, in all solemnities of the house of 
Israel:'' he shall prepare the sin-offering, and the 
meat-offering, and the burn t-o fieri ng, and the 
peacc-oflerings,* to make reconciliation for the 
house of Israel. 

18 Thus saith the Lord God ; In the first month, 
in the first day of the month, thou shalt take a 
young bullock without blemish, and cleanse the 
sanctuary:" 

19 And the priest shall take of the blood of the 
sin-oflcring, and ])ut it upon the posts of the house, 
and upon the four corners of the settle of the 
altar, and upon the posts of the gate of the inner 
court.' 

20 And so thou shalt do the seventh day of the 
month for every one that erreth, and for him that 
is simple:" so shall ye reconcile the house. 

21 In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the 
month, ye shall have the passover, a feast of seven 
days;^ unleavened bread shall be eaten.™ 

22 And upon that day shall the prince prepare 
for himself and for all the people of the land a 
bullock ybr a sin-offering." 

23 And seven days of the feast he shall prepare 
a burnt-offering to the Lord, seven bullocks and 



ojfrrings. p Lev. 1:4; Heb. 9:22, 2i. 1 Heb. 4p /or. • Or, with, q Exod. 
30:14,1:5. r2Chr. 5:0; 30:24; 3.3:7; Ezra 1:5; l:5;0:«,9. 1 Or, llmnk- 
offcrings. 'Lev. 16:10. t ch. 43:20, u Lev. 4:27. v Exod 12: IS; Lev, 
23:5, etc; Num. 9:2, 3; Deut. 10:1, etc. w ICor. 5:7, 8. xLev,4:l4, 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-5. It is the ordinance of Christ, that they who devote 
themselves to the service of his people in word and doc- 
trine, should receive from them a support. The churches 
that neglect to provide for their pastors a suitable worldly 
maintenance, incur their Master's displeasure, and bring 
upon themselves spiritual leanness and weakness, 

7-lG. The rulers of God's household must be patterns 
of justice and inte,s;rity in all their dealings ; and that they 
may not be tempted to dishonest practices and oppression 
for filthy lucre's sake, the people are bound to make pro- 
vision for their reasonal)le wants. 

17, They whom God has elevated to stations of honor 
and influence, should be foremost in maintiuning the ordi- 
nances of his sanctuary, 

965 



Ordinances for the prince, 



EZEKIEL XL VI, 



and his inheritance. 



seven rams without blemi?h daily the seven days ; 
and a kid of the jroats daily /or a sin-ofl'erinsr." 

24 And he sliall ])rc])are a nioat-olTering of an 
cpliah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and 
a hin of oil for an ephah.'' 

25 In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of 
the month,'= shall he do the like in the feast of the 
seven days,** accordinu' to tiie sin-offerinu;, accord- 
ing to the l)urnt-ofl'('rin.£c, and according to tlie 
meat-offerin'T, and accordiiii^ to the oil. 



CHAPTER XLVI. 

1 Ordinances for the prince in his worship, 9 and for the people. Hi 
An order for the prince's inheritance. 1*J The courts for uoiling and 
baking. 

THUS saith the Lord God ; The gate of the 
inner court that looketh toward the east 
shall be shut the six working days; but on the 
sabbath it shall be opened, and in tiie day of the 
new moon it shall be opened. 

2 And the prince shall enter l)y the way of the 
porch of that gate without," ancl shall stand by 
the post of the gate, and the priests siiall prepare 
liis burnt-offering and his peace-offerings, and he 
shall worship at the threshold of the gate:"^ then 
he shall go forth; but the gate shall not be shut 
until the evening. 

3 Likewise the pco])lc of the land shall worship 
at the door of this gate before the LoiiD in the 
sabbaths and in the new moons.''' 

4 And the Ijurnt-offering that the prince shall 
offer unto the LoiU) in the sabbath-day shall be six 
lambs without blemish, and a ram witliout bieni- 
isii." 

T) And the meat-offering shall he an cphaii for a 
ram, and tiic meat-offering for the himbs as he 
shall be able to give," and a hin of oil to an 
e})hah.' 

6 And in the day of the new moon it shall he a 
young bullock without blemish, and six lamljs, and 
a ram: they shall be without blenush. 

7 And he shall prepare !i meat-offering, an ephah 
for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and for the 
lambs according as his hand shall attain unto, and 
a hin of oil to an e|>hah. 

8 And when the prince shall enter, he shall go 
in by the way of the porch of that gate, and he 
shall go forth by the way thereofV 

9 H Hut when the iieojile of the land shall come 
before the Loito in the solemn feasts," he that en- 
tereth in by the way of the north gate to worship 
shall go out by the way of the south gate ; and he 
that cntereth by the way of the south gate shall 
go forth by the way of the north gate : he shall 



• Num. *»:!?, tMc. b rfi. 10;.',. 7. c ^um aiMJ. d Dout. 10: 1,"), o vpr. 
8; oh. 11:3; John 10:1-:). f Col. 1:48. »JohnlO:9. hoh. 45:1". * Heb. 
llitKiflo/MsltaHil: Dout. 10:17. I oh. 45:21. J vor. 2. k Kxod. -IVW- 
I7i deut. I«:10; Mil. l;!. 1 vor. 5. m ver. 2; oh. 44:3. t Heb. n jon n/ 



CIIAl'TER XLVI. 

1. T/ie sabbath — tlie day nfthc new moon; on these ilayB, 
wlicii the law of Moses rui[iiiieil special religious services, 
tlie 1 1'.nce was to be present ;it the sanctuary. 
INSTHUCTION. 
Goil has established the public worship of the sanctu- 
966 



not return by the way of the gate whereby ^ii^V.'ifi 
he came in, but shall go forth over against it. 

10 And the prince in the midst of them, when 
they go in, shall go in ; and when they go forth, 
shall go forth. 

11 And in the feasts and in the solemnities the 
meat-offering shall be an ephah to a bullock, and 
an cphali to a ram, and to the Iambs as he is able 
to give, and a hin of oil to an ephah.' 

12 Now when the prince shall prepare a volnn- 
tary burnt-offering or peace-offerings voluntarily 
unto the Lord, 07ie shall then open him the gate 
that looketh toward the east,™ and he shall pre- 
pare his burnt-offering and his peace-offerings, as 
he did on the sabbath-day: then he shall go forth; 
and after his going forth (inr shall shut the gate. 

I'.i Thou shalt daily prepare a burnt-offering 
unto the Lord nfa lamb of the first year* without 
blemish :" thou shalt ))re])are it every morning.* 

14 And thou shalt prepare a meat-offering for it 
every morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and 
the third ]iart of a hin of oil, to temper with the 
fine flour; a meat-offering continually by a perpet- 
ual ordinance unto the LoiiD. 

15 Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and the 
meat-offering, and the oil, every morning for a 
continual burnt-offering. 

16 1 Thus saith the Lord God ; If the jirince 
give a gift unto any of his sons, the inheritance 
thereof shall be his sons'; it shall be their posses- 
sion by inheritance. 

17 IJut if lie give a gift of his inheritance to one 
of his servants, then it shall be his to the year of 
liberty;" after, it sliall return to the prince: but 
his inheritance shall be his sons' for them. 

18 Moreover the prince shall not take of the 
])('ople's inheritance by opiiression,''to thrust them 
out of their possession; hut he shall give his sons 
inheritance out of his own possession ; that my 
peojile be not scattered every man from his pos- 
session.'' 

19 1i After he brought me through the entry, 
which vas at the side of the gate, into the holy 
chambers of the priests, which looked toward the 
north: and behold, there teas a place on the two 
sides westward. 

20 Then said he unto me. This is the place where 
the priests shall boil the trcs|iass-ollV'riiig and the 
sin-offering,'' where they shall bake tin' meat-i>irer- 
ing;" that they bear t/wm not out into the outer- 
court, to sanctify the people." 

21 Then he brought mc forth into the outer 
court, and caused me to jiass by the four corners 
of the court ; and behold, in every corner of the 
court there teas a court.* 



Ill 


tyrar n Exod. a9:3S; 


Nil 


n. -i-::! 


1 Hob. 


momi 


igbut 
2Ch 


norn 


nf. 


'Uy. 


Ai 


111 


P ch. 45:8. 


ich. 


•14: 


'1,6. r 


1 Sam. a 


la. 14 


.35: 








1-7. 


t oh. 41:19 


( Hob. 


a court 


in a com 


rola 


court, 


and 


a court in a 




ntr 


of a rollrt. 





















ary as a means of intercourse between himself and his 
people ill every ape of llio world ; it is his will that all its 
parts should be arranj;ed in an orderly and decent man- 
ner, that shall impress the wor.shippers with the idea of 
its sanctity, and enable them to commune with their heav- 
enly Father without distractiou. I'sa. 93:6; Eccl. 5:1, 2; 
1 Cor. 11:10. 



Tision of the holy waters. 



EZEKIEL XLVII. 



Borders of the land. 



b.'(:'n4*' 22 In the four corners of the court there 
were courts joined' of forty cubits long and thirty 
broad: these four corners* were of one measure. 

23 And there was a row of huildins; round about 
in them, round about tiieni four, and it was made 
with boiling places under the rows round about. 

24 Then said he unto me, These are the places of 
them that boil, where the ministers of the house 
shall boil the sacrifice of the people." 

CIIAriER XLVII. 

1 Tlie vision of tlie holy waters. 6 The virtue of them. 13 The bor- 
ders of tlie land. 22 The division of it by lot. 

A FTERWARD he brought me again unto the 
_/a_ door of the house; and behold, waters issued 
out from under the threshold of the house east- 
ward -.^ for the forefront of the hou.se stood toward 
the east, and the waters came down from under, 
from the right side of the house, at the south side 
of the altar." 

2 Then brought he me out of the way of the 
gate northward, and led me about the way with- 
out unto the outer gate by the way that looketh 
eastward; and behold, there ran out waters on 
the right side. 

3 And when the man that had the line in his 
hand went forth eastward,'' he measured a thou- 
sand cubits, and he brought me through the 
waters ; the waters u-ere to the ankles.* 

4 Again he measured a thousand, and brought me 
through the waters ; the waters were to the knees. 
Again he measured a thousand, and brought me 
tlirough ; the waters ivere to the loins. 

5 Afterward he measured a thousand ; and it was 
a river that I could not pass over; for tlie waters 
were risen, waters to swim in,^ a river that could 
not be passed over." 

6 *\\ And he said unto me. Son of man, hast thou 
seen this ? Then he brought me, and caused me 
to return to the brink of the river. 

7 Now when I had returned, behold, at the 
bank' of the river loere very many trees on the 
one side and on the other.^ 

8 Then said he unto me, These waters issue out 



• Or, Tnade with rhimnei/s. t Heb. cornered, a ver. 20. b ver. 1*2; Isa. 
2:n. c Isa. 55:1; Jet. -JilS; Joel 3:18; Zech. 13:1; 14:8; Rev. 22:1, 17. 
<lcli.40:3. X\leh. waters of tlie ankles. Mieh. of swimming. el5a.ll:9; 
Hab. 2:14; Matt. 13:31, -32. I Heb. lip. ' ver. 12. 1 Or, plain: Deut. 
3:17; 4:49; Josh. 3:18. elsa. 35:1, 7. h John 3: 16; II :2(). • Heb. lico 
rivers. ■ Exod. 15:2S; Psi. 103:3; Isa. 30:2(i. JMatt.4:19. kNum.3l:(>; 



CHAPTER XLVII. 

1. Waters issued; this noble symbol of a living stream 
of water issuing out from under tlie threshold of the tem- 
ple, continually growing wider and deeper as it advances, 
and filling every place where it comes with life and health, 
represents the presence and blessing of God, especially 
the life-giving power of God's Spirit, and through it the 
constant increase of his kingdom of grace from age to age. 
Psa. 4G:4. There is perhaps an allusion here to the living 
fountain under Solomon's temple. The stream comes forth 
from the temple, because that is God's dwelling-place. 
Compare Rev. 22: 1, where the river proceeds " out of the 
throne of God and of the Lamb." Tlie altar; which stood 
in the inner court before the temple. 

2. Tlie gate northward; because the east gate was shut, 
chap. H:2. On the rigid side; namely, from under the 
wall of the outer court. 



toward the east country, and go down into the 
desert,^''' and go into the sea; which being brought 
forth into the sea. the waters shall be healed. 

9 And it shall come to pass, that every thing 
that livetli," which moveth, whithersoever the riv- 
ers* shall come, shall live: and there shall be a 
very great multitude of lisli, because these waters 
shall come thither: for they shall be healed ;' and 
every thing shall live whither the river comcth. 

10 And it shall come to pass, that the fishers 
shall stand upon it from En-gedi even unto En- 
eglaim ;' they shall bo a place to spread forth 
nets; their fish shall be according to their kinds, 
as the fish of the great sea,'' exceeding many.' 

11 But the miry places thereof and the marshes 
thereof shall not* be healed ; they shall be given 
to salt."' 

12 And by the river upon the bank thereof," on 
this side and on that side, siiall grow* all trees for 
meat, whose leaf shall not fade, neither shall the 
fruit thereof be consumed:" it shall bring forth 
new^ fruit according to his months, because their 
waters they issued out of the sanctuary: and the 
fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf thereof 
for medicine.'"' 

13 1 Thus saith the Lord God ; This shall be the 
border, whereby ye shall inherit the land accord- 
ing to the twelve tribes of Israel: Joseph shall 
have two portions.' 

14 And ye shall inherit it, one as well as an- 
other: concerning the which I lifted up my hand^ 
to give it unto your fathers ; and this land shall 
fall unto you for inheritance. "■ 

15 And this shall be the border of the land tow- 
ard the north side, from the great sea, the way of 
Hethlon," as men go to Zedad;' 

16 Hamath, Berothah," Sibraim, which is be- 
tween the border of Damascus and the border of 
Hamath ; Hazar-hatticoo," which is by the coast of 
Haurau. 

17 And the border from the sea shall lie Hazar- 
cnan,^ the border of Damascus, and the north 
northward, and the border of Hamath. And this 
is the north side. 

18 And the east side ye shall measure from* 



.104:2.5. 1 Isa. 49:12, 20. t Or, o/irf that wliich 5/inH not. m Jer 17:6. 
ar. 7. 1 Heb. rome tip. " Psa. 1:3; Jer. 17:S. S Or, prinripal. 1 Or, 
ises and sores; Isa. 1:6. P Rev. 22:2. q cli. 4S:5; Gen. iH-.S; 49:26. 
r, swore,- Gen. 26:3. rch.4S:29. !ch.4S:l. tNum.34:8. u 2 Sarn. 
, ' Oi, T/is middle milage, v Num. 34:9. 1 Oi, from lielween. 



10. En-gedi; on the western shore of the Dead sea about 
midway between its northern and southern end. En- 
eglaim ; probably at the northern end. 

11. Mirij places — marshes; where this river does not 
come. This seems to intimate that there will always be 
some who do not receive the grace of God. 

12. liij the river — medicine; compare Gen. 2:9; Rev. 22 : 2. 
The grace of God in the gospel is the tree of life. It gives 
food and healing to the soul, and in the end a glorious 
resurrection to the body. 

13. Tins sluill be the border; the boundaries of the land 
here given are nearly the same as those marked out by 
Moses, though the northern part was never actually pos- 
sessed by the Israelites. See Num. 34:1-15. 

15, 16. Hethlon — Hauran; of these places Hamath lay on 
the Oroutes, far north of the actual possessions of the 
Israelites before the captivity or afterwards, and Hauran, 
east of Basliau beyond the Jordan. 

967 



TTie portions of 



EZEKIEL XLVIII. 



t/te itcelce triLes. 



Hauran, and from Damascus, and from Gilcad, 
and I'rom tlio land of Israel by .Jordan, from tlu; 
border unto tlie east sea. And (his is the cast side. 

19 And tlie soutli side soutliward, from Tamar 
even to the waters of strife" in Kadesli, the river ^ 
to tlie great sea." And this is the south side south- 
ward.' 

20 The west side also shall he the great sea from 
the border, till a man come over against Hamath. 
This is the west side. 

21 So shall ye divide this land unto you accord- 
ing to the tribes of Israel. 

22 ir And it shall come to pass, that ye shall di- 
vide it by lot for an inheritance unto you, and to 
the strangers that sojourn among you,'' which shall 
beget children among you: and they shall be unto 
you as born in the country among the children of 
Israel;"^ they shall have inheritance with you 
among the tribes of Israel. 

2'S And it shall come to pass, that in what tribe 
the stranger sojourneth, there shall ye give him 
his inheritance, saith the Lord God. 

CIIArTEPt XLVIII. 

1, 23 The portions of ihe twelve tribes, 8 of the sanctuary, 15 of the 
city and suburbs, 21 and of the prince. 30 The dimensions and gates 
of the city. 

ATOW these are the names of the tribes. From 
J_\ the north end to the coast of the way of 
Hethlon, as one goeth to Hamath, Hazar-enan, the 
border of Damascus northward, to the coast of 
Hamath Z for these are his sides east and west; a 
portion^ for Dan. 

2 And by the border of Dan, from the cast side 
unto the west si(l(\ a portion fir Asher. 

3 And by the border of Ash^r, from the east side 
even unto the west side, a portion for Naphtali. 

4 And by the border of Naphtali, from the cast 
side unto the west side, a. portion for Manasseh. 



• Or, ttUribah. t Or. valkij. ' ch. iS:ii; Num. •>0:13i Dcut. 32:51 ; 
-)1:7. 1 Or, toward Teman. b Kph. 2:18, 1»; 3:0; Rev. 7:9, 10. c 
1.5:0; Horn. 10:12; Gal. 3:->S; Col. 3:11. d ch. 47:15, etc. « Heb. 



19. Kadesli; Kadcsh-barnca, in the valley soutli of the 
Dead sea. The river; that is, along the river. " The river 
of Egypt" is meant. Num. 34:5. 

2'1, 23. To the stran/^er.i that sojourn among you— shall ye 
give him his inheritance; this is an intimation of the future 
admission of the Gentiles to equal rights in God's ehurch. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. The IToly Spirit dwells continually in Christ's church 
as a fountain of living waters. lie gives to all her mem- 
bers life and sanctification, and comfort, and victory over 
the world ; and from one generation to another ho raises 
up for her a spiritual seed from among those who were 
by nature "dead in tresiiaases and sins." Isa. 44:3-5; 
59:21; .lohn 7:37-39; Eph. 2:22. 

3-5. The course of God's kingdom of grace, like tliat of 
a river, continu;tlly grows wider and deeper as it advances, 
and it shall finally Ki)read its life-giving waters over all the 
earth. Dan. 2:31, 3.">, 14, 45; Matt. 13:31-33. 

7-10. Wherever the grace of God is received, it heals 
the maladies whic'h sin has produced, fills the soul with 
light and strength and comfort, and makes nations and 
individuals alike prosperous and fruitful in works of right- 
eousness. Ver. 12. 

II. Miry places and niarslies given to salt, which can 
neither bo ploughe<l nor sown, are a true emblem of all 
nations, families, and individuals that reject the gospel of 
Christ. 

968 



5 And by the border of Manasseh, from the "^h'c.'itS: 
east side unlo the west side, a portion fir Ephraim. 

tj And by the border of Ejihraim, from the east 
side even unto the west side, a portion for Reuben. 

7 And by the border of Reuben, from the east 
side unto the west side, a portion for Judali. 

8 1i And by the border of Judali, from the east 
side unto the west side, shall be the offering which 
yo shall offer of live and twenty thousand riots in 
breadth, and in length as one of the olhir parts, 
from the east side unto the west side: and the 
sanctuary shall be in the midst of it.° 

9 The oblation that ye shall offer unto the Lord 
shall lie of live and twenty thousand in length, and 
of ten thousand in breadth. 

10 And for them, even for the priests, shall be 
this holy oblation ; toward the north five and 
twenty thousand in length, and toward the west 
ten thousand in breadth, and toward the east ten 
thousand in breadth, and toward the south five 
and twenty thousand in length : and the sanctuary 
of the Lord shall be in the midst thereof. 

\\ It shall ic' for the priests that arc sanctified 
of the sons of Zadok;' which have kept my 
charge,' which went not astray when the children 
of Israel went astray, as the Levites went astray.* 

12 And this oblation of the land that is offered 
shall bo unto them a thing most holy by the border 
of the Levites. 

13 And over against the border of the priests, 
the Levites shall have five and twenty thousand in 
length, and ten thousand in breadth : all the 
length shall be five and twenty thousand, and the 
breadth ten thousand. 

14 And they shall not sell of it, neither ex- 
change," nor alienate the first-fruits of the land:' 
for it is holy unto the Lord. 

15 1 And the five thousand, that arc left in the 
breadth over against the five and twenty thou- 



1 Or. The sanrtified portion shall bo. ' ch. 44 : 15. 1 Or, ward. 
8 ch. 44:10. >> Lev. 27:10, 2;, 33. > Exod. 22:29. 



22, 23. The gospel has broken down " the middle wall 
of partition" between Jews and Gentiles, and made tliem 
one in Christ Jesus. John 10:16; Eph. 2:14-19; Col.3:ll. 

CHAPTER XLVin. 

1. East and west; a portion is assigned to each tribe 
directly across the Holy Land from cast to west, begin- 
ning with Dan. 

8-22. J'Ac q/fcnn^,- of territory. See chap. 45:1-8. It 
extends directly across the land from east to west, being 
twenty-five thousand reeds in width. Midway between 
cast and west, in the region around the holy city, is taken 
a square of twenty-five thous.and reeds, occn])yiiig its 
whole breadth. This again is divided cast and west into 
three parallel portiims, the two first being ten thousand 
reeds each in width, and tlie third live thousand. Of these 
three portions, the iiortherniiiost, containing the sanctu- 
ary, is assigned to the priests, the second to the Levites, 
and the third to the city. The city lies in the midst of 
the portion belonging to it, making, with its suburbs, a 
square of five thousaml reeds, or more than eleven miles. 
Tlie immense extent of" Ihe offering" in all its parts, the 
river flowing from the ti-nqile. and the manner of assign- 
ing the land to the tw.'lvc tribes, shows that the whole 
vision is to be understooil, not literally but figuratively, 
like the apostle John's vision of the new Jerusalem. 

15. Profane place ; not holy, as the sanctuary was. 



Portions of the tribes. 



EZEKIEL XLVIII. 



Gules of ike city. 



tti-.^T' sand," shall be a profane pfocc for the city, 
for dwelling;, and for suburbs;" and the city shall 
be in the midst thereof. 

Ifi And these shall be the measures thereof; the 
north side four tliousand aud five hundred, and the 
south side four thousand and five hundred, and on 
the east side four thousand and five hundred, and 
t!ie west side four thousand and five hundred. 

17 And the suburbs of the city siiall be toward 
the north two Inmdred and fifty, and toward tlie 
south two liundred and fifty, and toward the east 
two luuidred and fifty, and toward the west two 
hundred and fifty. 

18 And the residue in length over against the 
oblation of the holy portion shall be ten thousand 
eastward, and ten thousand westward : and it 
sliall be over against the oblation of the holy por- 
tion , and the increase thereof shall be for food 
unto them that serve the city. 

19 x\.nd they that serve the city shall serve it 
out of all the tribes of Israel." 

20 All the oblation shall be five and twenty thou- 
sand by five and twenty thousand : ye shall oflfer 
the lioly oblation foursquare, with the possession 
of the city. 

21 H And the residue shall be for the prince, on 
tlie one side and on the other of the holy oblation, 
and of the possession of the city, over against the 
five and twenty thousand of the oblation toward 
the cast border, and westward over against the 
five and twenty thousand toward the west border, 
over against the portions for the prince:'' and it 
shall be the holy oblation; and the sanctuary of 
the house shall be in tlie midst thereof.'^ 

22 Moreover, from the possession of the Levites, 
and from the possession of the city, beinp; in the 
midst of that which is the prince's, between the 
border of Judah and the border of Benjamin, shall 
be for the prince. 



:19. e oh. 47:14, al, 22. 



21. The residue; cast and west of the twenty-five thou- 
sand reeds. Ver. 20. 

22. Judali — Benjamin; in this assignment the tribe of 
Judah lies north of " the offering," and that of Benjamin 
south, contrary to .Joshua's assignment, which placed 
Benjamin north of Judah. 

31-34. T/ie gates of tlie city; compare Rev. 21:12, 13. 



23 As for the rest of the tribes, from the cast 
side unto the west side, Benjamin shall have a" 
portio7i. 

24 And by the border of Benjamin, from the 
east side unto the west side, Simeon shall have a 
portio7i. 

25 And by the border of .Simeon, from the east 
side unto the west side, Issachar a portion. 

2G And by the border of Issacliar, from tlie east 
side unto the west side, Zebnlun a portion. 

27 And by the border of Zebulun, from the cast 
side unto tlie west side, Gad a portion. 

28 And by tiie border of Gad, at the south side 
southward, the border shall be even fi om Tamar 
unto the waters of strife m Kadesh,* and to the 
river toward the great sea.' 

29 This is the land which ye shall divide by lot 
unto the tribes of Israel for inheritance, and these 
are their portions, saith tlie Lord GoD.'^ 

30 11 And these are the goings out of the city on 
the north side, four thousand and five hundred 
measures. 

31 And the gates of the city shall be after the 
names of the tribes of Israel :'' three gates north- 
ward ; one gate of Reuben, one gate of Judah, one 
gate of Levi. 

32 And at the east side four thousand and five 
liundred : and three gates ; and one gate of Joseph, 
one gate of Benjamin, one gate of Dan. 

33 And at the south side four thousand and five 
liundred measures: and tliree gates; one gate of 
Simeon, one gate of Issachar, one gate of Zebu- 
lun. 

34 At the west side four thousand and five hun- 
dred, with their three gates ; one gate of Gad. one 
gate of Asher, one gate of Naphtali. 

35 It iras round about eighteen thousand meas- 
ures: and the name of the city from that day shall 
be, The Lord is there." 



INSTRUCTION. 
The literal Canaan, which God gave to Abraham and 
his seed, was a type of the more noble spiritual inherit- 
ance which he bestows upon all his children in tliis world, 
and of the " inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and 
which fadeth not away, reserved in heaven " for their 
everlasting possession. 



969 



THE BOOK OF DANIEL. 



Daniel belonged to the royal family of Judah, and his captivity was a fulfilment of the prophecy recorded 
in Isa. 39:7. But God graciously turned this into a rich blessing, by raising him up to be an eminent 
prophet and statesman in Babylon. The prophecies of Daniel naturally fall into two series. The first, 
occupying chapters 2-1, is Written in Chaldee. This unfolds the relation which Uod and his kingdom hold 
to the heathen powers, as seen in the two visions of an image consisting of four parts, and of a succession 
of four beasts, chapters 2, 7 ; in the protection of God's faithful servants from the oppression of heathen 
kings and princes, chapters 3, 6 ; and in the humbling of heathen monarchs for their pride, idolatry, and 
profanation of the sacred vessels belonging to God's sanctuary, chapters 4, 5. The second series, occu- 
pying the remaining five cliapters, is written in Hebrew. This also exhibits the confiict between God's 
kingdom and the world that lies in wickedness, but with some special details relating to the more imme- 
diate future, and also some remarkable revelations respecting the time of the Messiah's advent and expiatory 
death, the destruction of the holy city by the Romans, and the final resurrection. , 

The intimate connection between the book of Daniel and the Revelation of John must strike every 
reader of the holy Scriptures. They nmtually interpret each other, and both together coiistitute one grand 
system of prophecy extending down to the end of the world. Botli also contain predictions the exact 
interpretation of which is extremely difficult, perhaps impossible, till they shall be made clear by their 
fulfilment in the last days. 



C II APT Kit I. 

1 Jehoiakim's captivity. 3 Ashpcnaz taketh Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, 
and -iVzariali. 8 They refusins the king's portion, do prosper with 
pitlse and water. 17 Their excellency in wisdom. 

IN the third year of tlic reign of Jolioiakim king 
of Judah came Nebuchadnezzar king of Baby- 
lon unto Jeru.salem, and besieged it." 

2 And the Lord gave Jclioiakim king of Judah 
into his hand, with part of the vessels of the house 
of fJod, wiiicli he carried into tiie land of Sliinar 
to the liousc of ills god : and he brought the ves- 
sels into th(! treasure-house of his god. 

'■i •; And the king spake unto Ashpcnaz the mas- 
ter of his eunuchs, that he should bring certain of 
tlie eliildrcn of Israel,' and of the king's seed, and 
of the ])rinees; 

4 Children in whom wan no blemish, but well- 
favored, and skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in 



! Kings 'Jl:!, 1.1; aChr. 30:0, 7. * Foreiold 2 Kings 2U;17, 1 



CHAPTER I. 

1. In the third year; Hce nolo on Jer. 25:1. 

2. Gave Jekoiakim — into hit hand ,■ ho became the servant 
of Nebuchadnezzar, but continued to reign in Jcrnsalom, 
for hia reign lasted eleven years, 2 Kings 23:36; 2 Cliron. 
3r>:.i. After reigning tliree years, ho revolted against 
Nebuchadnezzar, and the remaining years of his reign 
were rendered miserable liy the invasion of the Chaldeans. 
Syrians, Moabites, and Ammonites. From 2 Chron. 3fi:G, 
it seems probable that liis reign was terminated by a 
second invasion of Nebuchadnezzar, who carried him cap- 
tive Ix) Habylon. 

3. Mnster of his eunuchs ; a great number of eunuchs arc 
employed now, as anciently, in eastern courts ; they have 

970 



knowledge, and understanding science, and jj- *.',^ 
suclias /(orf ability in them to stand in the a»- 
king's palace, and whom thcyniight (each the learn- 
ing and tlie tongue of tlic Chaldeans. 

5 And the king appointed them a daily provision 
of the king's meat, and oi the wine which he 
drank:* so nourisiiing them three years, tliat at 
the end thereof they might stand before the king. 

6 Now among tliese were of the children of Ju- 
dali, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariaii: 

7 Unto whom the |)rince of tlie cunuciis gave 
names: for he gave unto Daniel ffir name of Beltc- 
shazzar;'' and to Ilananiaii, of Slmdraeh: and to 
Mishael, of Mesbach; and to Azariah, of Abed- 
nego. 

8 *r But Paniel purposed in Ids licart that he 
would not deliie iuinself with the portion of the 
king's meat, nor witii the wine wliicli he drank:" 



tUtb. o/Ai..rfrini. l>ch. -Iiti; 5:fJ. t Dciil. :1J A«; Kwk. 4:13; Ho.. 9:3. 



charge of the monarch's househohl, and all its arrange- 
ments. 

4. Children in whom vns no hirmixh ; in eastern courts, it 
is the custom now, as of old, to select the fairest and most 
noble among the captive yonth to wail njion the nionarrh. 
These are carefully trained up under the chief of the 
eunuchs, but are not themselves made eunuchs. Ability; 
strength of body and mind. 

.1. A daili/ provision ; for the puri)080 of making them 
full fleshed,' and of good aiipeanuire. Sec note on yer. 4. 

7. (rave iinmcs; new names ; a practice still retained in 
oriental courts. 

8. Defile himself; the food and drink prepared by the 
heathen he regarded as unclean, according to the distinc- 
tions of the Mosaic law. It is probable tli;it he wished 



The temperance and tcisdom 



DANIEL ir. 



of Daniel and his friends. 



A. V, S.W. therefore he requested of the prince of the 
"■&«;"'""" eunuchs that he might not defile himself. 
!) Now God iiad brouglitDanicl into favor and 
tender h)ve with the prince of the eunuchs." 

10 And tlio prince of tlie eunuclis said unto Dan- 
iel. 1 fear my lord the king, who hath appointed 
your meat and your drink: for wliy should he see 
your faces worse liking' than the children which 
arc of your sort?* then shall ye make me endan- 
ger my head to the king. 

11 Then said Daniel to Melzar,' wliom the 
prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, Ilana- 
niah, Mishael, and Azariah, 

12 Prove thy servants. I beseech thee, ten days; 
and let them give us pulse to cat,* and water to 
drink. 

i:^ Then let our countenances be looked upon 
before tiiee, and the countenance of the children 
that eat of the portion of the king's meat : and as 
thou seest, deal with thy servants. 

11 So he consented to them in this matter, and 
proved them ten days. 

1.5 And at the end often days their countenances 
appeared fairer and fatter in flesh than all the 
children which did eat the portion of the king's 
meat. 

1(5 Thus Melzar took away the portion of their 
meat, and the wine that they should drink ; and 
gave them pulse. 

17 T As for these four children. God gave them 
knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom : 
and Daniel had understanding in' all visions and 
dreams. 

18 Now at the end of the days that the king had 
said he should bring them in, then the prince of 
the eunuchs brought them in before Nebuchadnez- 
zar. 

19 And the king communed with them; and 
among them all was found none like Daniel, Han- 
aniah, Mishael, and Azariah: therefore stood they 
before the king. 

20 And in all matters of wisdom and'^ under- 
standing," that the king incpiired of them, he found 
them ten times better than all the magicians and 
astrologers that were in all his realm. 



a Gen. 39:-Jl ; Prov. l(i:7. * Heb. saddtr. t Or, term, or continuance. 
1 Or, The steward. § Heb. of pulse that we tnay eat. n Or, ke made Daniel 
understand 1 Heb. o/. b l Kings 111: 1-.3; Psa. 1)9:99 = ch. «:-J8; 19:1. 
He livrd to see that glorious time of the return of his people from the Babylo- 



also to avoid a luxurious and efi'eminate style of living ill 
becoming the servants of Jehovah. TIte king's meat ; liter- 
ally, " the king's dainties." 

12. Pulse; the word in the original seems to denote any 
vegetable food. 

21. Unto tlie first year of king Cyrus; that is, he lived to 
see the termination of the Babylonian empire. The words 
must not be understood to mean that he did not continue 
longer. Com|iaro chap. 6:28; 10:1. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3-5. Wlien God punishes nations for their sins, he is 
able to protect and provide for his faithful servants; and 
times of great public calamity often become to them occa- 
sions of high preferment and usefuhiess. 

8. The true believer will value purity of heart and life, 
and visible conformity to God's law, above all earthly 
delights and honors. 

12-16. It is by temperance and simplicity in food and 



21 And Daniel continued (vcn unto the first year 
of king Cyrus.'' 

CHAPTER II. 

1 Nebu'ihadnezzar, forgetting his dre.am, reqviircth it of the Chaldeans, 
by promises and threatening-s. 10 They acknowledging their inabil- 
ity are judged to die. 14 Daniel obtaining some respite lindeth the 
dream. liJ He blesseth God. 31 He staying the decree is brought 
to tlie king. 31 The dream. 36 The interpretation. 46 Daniel's 
advancement. 

AND in the second year of the reign of Nebu- 
. chadnezzar, Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams 
wherewith his spirit was troubled,'' and his sleep 
brake from him. 

2 Then the king connnanded to call the magi- 
cians, and the astrologers, and the sorcerers, and 
the Chaldeans, for to show the king his dreams. 
So they came and stood before the king. 

3 And the king said unto them, I have dreamed 
a dream, and my spirit was troubled to know the 
dream. 

4 Then spake the Chaldeans to the king in Syr- 
iac, king, live for ever:"" tell thy servants the 
dream, and avc will show the interpretation. 

5 The king answered and said to the Chaldeans, 
The thing is gone from me: if ye will not make 
known unto me the dream, with the interpretation 
thereof, ye shall be cut* in pieces,' and your houses 
shall be made a dunghill.^ 

() But if ye show the dream, and the interpreta- 
tion thereof, ye shall receive of me gifts and re- 
wards* and great honor:'' therefore show me the 
dream, and the interpretation thereof. 

7 They answered again, and said. Let the king 
tell his servants the dream, and we will show the 
interpretation of it. 

8 The king answered and said, I know of cer- 
tainty that ye would gain* the time, because ye 
see the thing is gone from me. 

9 But if ye will not make known unto me the 
dream, there is but one decree for you : for ye have 
prepared lying and corrupt words to speak be- 
fore me, till the time be changed : therefore tell 
me the dream, and I shall know that ye can show 
me the interpretation thereof.' 



nian captivity, though he did not die then. So till is used. See Psa. 110:1 ; 
lri:8. J ch. 4:5; Hen, -11:8; Esth. 6:1 ; Job :j:t:l.'i-n. «1 Kings l::il. 
• Chald.mnrfe. f ch. 3ria. 6 Ezra 6:11. t Or, fee; ver. 4i; ch. .i:17. 
hch.5:16. I Or, 6ui/,- Eph. 5:16. ilsa.41:'J3, 



drink, and not by luxury, that both body and mind are 
preserved in the highest health and vigor. 

20. They who choose their attendants from those who 
have been trained in the knowledge and fear of God, will 
be best served. 

CHAPTER II. 

2. Chaldeans'; that is, astrologers, because the Chaldeans 
were preeminent in this science. 

4. In Syriac; that is, in the Chaldee tongue. From this 
jilace to the end of the seventh chapter the original is in 
the Chaldee language. 

8. Gain the time; improve to your own advantage the 
opportunity afforded you by my forgetfulness. Compare 
verse 9. 

9. Till tlie time be changed; probably, till my kingdom passes 
into other hands. Compare verse 21. This is the language 
of jealousy and suspicion, as if the wise men foresaw ca- 
lamity coming upon him which they refused to declare. 

971 



Nebuchadnezzar's dream 



DANIEL II. 



reveakd to DavM. 



10 11 TIic Chaldeans answered before tlie king, 
and said, Tliere is not a man upon the cartli that 
can show the king's matter: tliercforc there is no 
king, lord, nor ruler, that asked such things at 
any magician, or astrologer, or Chaldean. 

1 1 And it is a rare thing that the king requireth, 
and there is none other that can show it before 
the king, except the gods," whose dwelling is not 
witli flesh." 

VI For this cause the king was angry and very 
furious, and commanded to destroy all the wise 
mfii of Babylon.'' 

13 And the decree went forth that the wiser/iMi 
should be slain; and they sought Daniel and iiis 
fellows to be slain. 

14 '^ Tiicii Itanicl answered* with counsel and 
wisih)ui to Ariocii the captain of the king's guard,^ 
which was gone forth to slay tlie wise men of ijab- 
ylon : 

15 lie answered and said to Ariocii the king's 
captain, Why is the decree so hasty from the king? 
Then Ariocii made the thing known to Daniel. 

l(j Then Daniel went in, and desired of tlie icing 
that he would give him time, and that he would 
show the king tlie interpretation. 

17 Then Daniel went to his house, and made the 
thing i<nown to Hananiali, Mishael, and Azariaii, 
his companions : 

IS Tliat tiiey would desire mercies of* the God 
of heaven concerning this secret,'' lliat Daniel and 
his fellows should not perish* with the rest of the 
wise mm of Babylon. 

11) ITlien was the secret revealed unto Daniel 
in a night vision." Then Daniel blessed the God 
of heaven. 

20 Daniel answered and said. Blessed be the 
name of God for ever and ever : ' for wisdom, and 
mightiirc his -.^ 

21 And he changeth the times and the seasons:'' 
he removetii kings, and setteth up kings:' he giv- 
eth wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge to them 
that know understanding :J 

22 He revealeth the deep and secret things:" 
he knowetli wliat is in the darkness,' and tlie ligiit 
d\v(.'lletli witii liim."' 

2:> 1 tiiauk thee, and praise thee, thou God of 
my fatliers, wiio hast given me wisdom and migiit, 
and hast made known unto me now what we de- 
sired of tliee : for tiiou hast now made known unto 
us the king's nuitter. 

24 •' Therefore Daniel went in unto Arioch, 
whom the king had ordained to destroy the wise 
men of Babyloti : he went and said tiius unto luin ; 
Destroy nut the wise mtti of Babylon: bring nie 
in before the king, and I will show unto the king 
the interpretation. 



• Ver. 83. b Im. (i6: 1 , J. c Mm. 4:10, • Chald. r«ilrn«d. tOr.fAif/ 
marshal; Chald. rhiff nf the executioners, ox staughtermtn; Gen. 37:3)(; 
J«r 5J:li, II. 1 ChM. from brforr. d oh. 3:17; I S— '■'■"• " '^— 
4:17, IH. i Or. thet/ should not destroy Daniel. 

«J«r. .I'iria hPu. 31:14, IS '"- 

I I'u. |:I9:11, 1'^; Hob. 4:IX 



., 17::)7; 3 Ti. , 

• Num. 12:0. I Pm. 5t\:-J:l 
. 75:0, 7. J I'roY. 4:«, 7. k Pn. 85: 14. 
. 0:10; 1 Jolin 1;5. I Chald. That I. 



34. CtU out; of the mountuin, verse 45. IVillwul liands; 
by 110 limiian .1^;^'llcy. 

.'i8. TliDu art this head; that ih, the kinplnin over which 
thuu reigiiest, and wliich is ri-presentuJ iu thy person. 
972 



2o Then Arioch brought in Daniel before ''h'';..^^- 
the king in haste;, and said tiius unto him, I' have 
found a man of the captives' of Jiidaii, that will 
make known unto the king the interpretation. 

2G The king answered and said to Daniel, whose 
name icas Belteshazzar, Art thou able to make 
known unto me tlie dream which I have seen, and 
the interpretation thereof? 

27 Daniel answered in tlio presence of the king, 
and said. The secret wiiicii the king hath demanded 
cannot the wise men, the astrologers, the magi- 
cians, the soothsayers, show unto the king ;" 

28 But there is a God in heaven that revealeth 
secrets," and maketh' known to the king Nebu- 
chadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. Thy 
dream, and the visions of thy head upon thy bed, 
are these ; 

29 As for thee, king, thy thoughts came* into 
thy mind upon thy bed, what should come to pass 
iiereafter: and he that revealeth secrets maketh 
known to tiiee what shall come to pass."" 

:)0 But as for me. this secret is not revealed to 
me for any wisdom tiiat I have more than any liv- 
ing,'' but for their sakes that sliall make known 
the interpretation* to tlie king, and tiiat thou 
mightest know the tiioughts of thy heart. 

31 Tf Thou, king, sawcst,^ and behold a great 
image. This great image, whose brightness was 
excellent, stood before thee ; and the form thereof 
was terrible. 

32 Tills image's head was of fine gold, his breast 
and his arms of silver, his belly and ids thighs' 
of brass, 

33 His legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part 
of clay. 

34 Tiiou sawest till that a stone was cut out 
witlioul hands,' "■ which smote the image upon his 
feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to 
pieces. 

35 Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, tlie 
silver, and the gold, brolccii to jiieccs together, 
and became like the chaH" of the summer thresh- 
ing-floors;" and the wind carried them away, that 
no place was found for them:' and the stone that 
smote the image became a great inoiintaiii," and 
filled the whole earth." 

30 'i This is the dream ; and we will IcU the in- 
terpretation thereof before the king. 

37 Tliou, king, art a king of kings:"' for the 
God of heaven iiath given thee a kingdom, power, 
and strength, and glory." 

38 And wheresoever the children of men dwell, 
the beasts of the field and the fowls of the heaven 
hath he given into thy hand, and hath made thee 
ruler over them all.' Thou art this liead of gold. 

39 And after thee shall arise another kingdom 



1 Chald chiMrtn of the raptifily. n I« 47:13, 14. o Gen. 40 8; 41:10. 
• C\\.M. hnlh maile. t Chald tame up pAmo«4:l3. qAel«3:l8. 10r,6ul 
for th'- intent that the tnterpretation mnyhe made knoten, S Chald. tcasi ste- 
ins. 10r,.i"/'« ^Or,Khichvrxltnot in hands. rZ»rh. 4:0; Jnhn 1 :I3. • I'm. 
1:4; Ho.. 13:3. I P«». 37:30. ulsa. 8:8,3. ' I Cor. 15:85. •rEtra7:18; 
l«a. 47:5; EMlt.!W:7; Ho«. 8:10. >Ezral:8. yj«r. 87:0. 



3n. Aixntlier kinetlom ; the Persian, founded by Cyrus. 
Inferior to thee; that is, in splendor. Amither third kiuff- 
dmn ; tlio Grecian empire, of which Alexander was Uie 
founder. 



The draim interpreted. 



DANIEL III. 



Daniel is promoted. 



B.flm^' inferior to thee," and another third king- 
dom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the 
earth."" 

40 And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as 
iron : forasmuch as iron breaketh in pieces and 
siibdueth all things : and as iron that breaketh all 
these, shall it break in pieces and bruise. 

41 And whereas tiiou sawest the feet and toes, 
part of potters' clay, and part of iron, the king- 
dom shall be divided ; but there shall be in it of 
the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest 
the iron mixed with miry clay. 

42 And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, 
and part of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly 
strong, and partly broken.* 

4:5 And wliereas tiiou sawest iron mixed with 
miry clay, tliey shall mingle themselves with the 
seed of men : but they shall not cleave one. to an- 
other,* even as iron is not mixed with clay. 

44 And in the' days of these kings shall the God of 
heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be de- 
stroyed :" andtlie kingdom^ shallnotbelefttoother 
people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all 
these kingdoms,'' and it shall stand for ever. 

45 Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was 
cut out of tlie mountain without hands,' and tliat 
it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, 
the silver, and the gold ; the great God hath made 
known to the king what shall come to pass hcre- 



. 7:7. «. • Or, krillle. t Chald. M/s ic/r/i (/i/s 1 Child. 
Luke 1 -Sa, 3). « Cliild. kingdom thtrtof. <l Psa. -i-.V. 
<t in hands. 1 Chahl. after this, e vet. U. f oh. 4:U; 



40. T/ie fourth kingdom ; this kingdom is at the begin- 
ning " strong as iron ;" afterwards it is " jiartly strong, and 
partly broken," verse 42 ; it is on its decline when the 
God of heaven sets up his kingdom, for the stone cut out 
of the mountain without hands smites it on its feet of 
iron and clay, and it is the last great monarchy that op- 
presses the world. All these characters point to the Ro- 
man empire, which would not be omitted in a comprehen- 
sive view, like this, of the future history of the world. 
See notes on the seventh chapter. 

41. Divided; in character ; that is, " partly strong, and 
partly broken," verse 42. 

43. Titey shall mingle themselves; the native stock of this 
iron kingdom. Wtththe seed of men; with men of a!!0ther 
sort, making a mixture that cannot be united into one 
whole. According to some, the reference is to the Rom.in 
custom of giving to the nations whom they conquered the 
privilege of citizenship, thus making the empire a medley 
of different people, with diB'erent languages, ideas, and 
customs. We may better, perhaps, understand these 
words of the mixture of the northern nations, who con- 
quered Rome in the fourth and following centuries, with 
the old inhabitants of tlie empire. Out of this grew a 
number of kingdoms that could never unite into one whole, 
and yet they constituted a continuation of the old I^oman 
empire. See notes on the seventh chapter. 

44. Set up a kingdom ; that called in the New Testament 
" the kingdom of heaven," of which Christ is the head. 

4fi. Worshipped Daniel — sweet odors; we have no reason 
to think that Daniel failed to protest against any honors 
paid to him as a divine person, or as one who was the 
dwelling-place of deity. 

49. In the gate of the king; that is, in the gate of the 
king's palace, where public Isusiness was transacted. He 
was plainly the chief minister of state. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
10, 11. None but the living God can reveal the secrets of 
the future. All who pretend to a supernatural knowledge 
of coming events from any other sovirce, are deceivers ; 



after :"• and the dream is certain, and the interpre- 
tation thereof sure. 

4() 1[Then the king Neliuchadnczzar fell upon 
his face, and \vorshii)ped Daniel, and commanded 
that they should oficr an oblation and sweet odors 
unto him. 

47 The king answered unto Daniel, and said. Of 
a truth it is, that your God is a God of gods, and 
a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, seeing 
thou couldest reveal this secret. 

48 Tiicn the king made Daniel a great man, and 
gave him many great gifts," and made him ruler 
over the whole province of Babylon, and chief of 
the governors over all the wise 7nc7i of Babylon.'' 

49 Then Daniel requested of the king, and he 
set Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, over the 
affairs of the province of Babylon :° but Daniel 
sat in the gate of the king.'' 

CHAPTER III. 

1 Nebuchadnezzar dedicateth a golden image in Dura. S Shadrach, 
Heshach, and Abed-nego are accused for not. worslupping the image. 
}3 They, being threatened, make a good confession. 19 God deliver- 
eth tiiem out of the lurnace. 26 Nebuchadnezzar seeing the miracle 
blesseth (rod. 

ATEBUCHADNEZZAR the king made an im- 
_L\| age of gold,' wiiose height was threescore 
cubits, and the breadth tliercof six cubits: he set 
it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Bab- 
ylon. 

:!:■-'. i -iKingsiga?, 18; Psa. 115;4, etc.; 



and when their powWs once fairly tested, they will, like 
the Chaldean magicians, be confounded and put to silence. 

12. It is natural that he who makes unreasonable de- 
mands of his fellow-men should manifest unreasonable 
rage at their inability to comply with his desires. 

Vi. The angry man is sure to act in such a way as will 
hurt others without benefiting himself. 

14. The truly wise man is known by his ability to calm 
the excitement of the passionate, and thus gain for himself 
and them time for prudent action. Prov. 16:14. 

17, 18. In times of great difficulty and danger, we should 
seek not only the counsels, but also the intercessory pray- 
ers of our fellow-believers. 

19. God does not disappoint the hopes of his people when 
they seek him unitedly in fervent and believing prayer. 

20, 23. God is the only source of wisdom and power. 
In all the gifts and endowments which any of his servants 
possess, he should be gratefully recognized, and all the 
glory of them be ascribed to him alone. Ver. 30. 

31-43. To the eternal mind of God, the whole history of 
the world lies open from the beginning to the end ; and 
it is proceeding from age to age, in arr.irdaiici' with his 
infinitely holy and wise purposes, always m sulMirdii.ation 
to his glorious plan of redemption through .li sus Christ. 

44. All the empires which human hands have establish- 
ed shall be destroyed ; but the kingdom which God has 
established "without hands" shall increase continually, 
till the earth is filled with its glory and blessedness. 

48. It is the part of wisdom to advance to stations of 
power and influence those who have given proof of their 
ability to fulfil in a proper manner the weighty responsi- 
bilities connected with them. 

49. The good man in office will desire and seek to sur- 
round himself by those who are of like character with 
himself. 

CHAPTER III. 

1. Of sold ; probably so called because it was overlaid 
with gold. 

9T3 



The king's idol of gold. 



DANIEL HI. 



Delicerancefrom the furticce. 



2 Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather 
together the priiiees, tlie governors, and the cap- 
tains, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, 
tlic slicrifis, and all the rulers of the provinces, to 
conic to the dedication of the image which Nebu- 
chadnezzar the king hud set up. 

'd Tiien the princes, tlie governors, and captains, 
the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the 
slieriifs, and all the rulers of the provinces, were 
gathered together unto the dedication of the im- 
age that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up ; 
and they stood bcibrc the image that Nebuchad- 
nezzar had set up : 

4 Then a herald cried aloud,' To j'ou it is com- 
manded,* people, nations, and languages," 

5 That at what time ye hear the sound of the 
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer,* 
and all kinds of music, ye fall down and worsjiip 
tlie golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king 
hatii set up: 

(i Ami whoso falleth not down and worshippeth 
shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a 
burning fiery furnace.'' 

7 Therefore at that time, when all the jieople 
heard the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, 
psaltery, and all kinds of music, all tlie people, 
the nations, and the languages, fell down and wor- 
shipped the golden image tiiat Nebuchadnezzar 
the king had set up. 

8 1 Wherefore at that time certain Chaidoans 
came near, and accused the Jews. 

9 They spake and said to the king Nebuchad- 
nezzar, king, live for ever." 

10 Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that every 
man tiiat shall hear the sound of the cornet, flute, 
harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all 
kinds of music, shall fall down and worship the 
golden image: 

11 And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, 
that he should be cast into the midst of a burning 
fiery furnace. 

ri There are certain Jews whom thou hast set 
over the affairs of the province of Babylon, Sha- 
drach, Meshach, and At)ed-nego ;'' these men, 
king, have not regarded' thee:" they serve not 
thy gods, nor worship the golden image which 
thou hast set up. 

13 •[ Then N((buchadnezzar in his rage and fury 
commanded toliriiigShadrach, Meshach, and Abed- 
ncgo.'' Then they brought these men before the 
kintr. 



• Chald ii'K/i »i/s/i(; ch.4:U. t ChalJ. lAey rommaiid. » ch. 1; 1 ; 0:25. 
I Or, sinking: Cliild. Sj/m/iliony. b Jor. a9:-«; Rov. 13:15. ' ch. 2:1; 
6:41; Rom. 13:7. ■) ch -2:49. » Chalil. set norrgard upon. ' ch. 0:13. 
frer. 1U I Or. »/"p«r;i(,v, ai Kxod. 21 : 13. rLuko4:7. S. h Exoil. 32:32; 
Luko 13:9. i Exod. 5:2; 2KinB« 1»:35. J Mall. 11): 19. kPsa. 121:5-7; 



2. Sheriff's; rather, "men learned in the law." 

fl. SackmU ; the original word seems to denote a stringed 
instrument like the lyre. Yc fall down ami worship ; this 
was in accordance with the universal belief of heathen 
nations, that it belonged to tlie state to regulate the wor- 
sliip of the gods. Of the rights of conscience they liad no 
clear ideas. 

16. Are not careful; or, "have no need." Their minds 
were made up to refuse the worshij) deiiiaiuled of tlicin, 
and they knew that arguing tlic iiialter would do no good. 

21. Their coats — garments; or, " tlieir lioseii, tunics, maii- 
974 



14 Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said unto a.m. 3*24. 
thein, Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, 'sai.""" 
and Abed-nego? do not ye serve my gods, nor 
worship the golden image wiiicli I have set up? 

15 Now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear 
the sound of the cornet, flute, liaip. sackbut, psal- 
tery, and dulcimer, anil all kinds of music, ye fall 
down and worship the image which 1 have made,' 
well:'' but if ye worship not. ye shall be cast the 
same hour into the midst of a burning fiery fur- 
nace; and who is that God that shall deliver you 
out of my hands?' 

16 .Slia(lrach,Me.=hach, and Abed-nego. answered 
and said to the king, Nebuchadnezzar, we are 
not careful to answer tlu'C in this matter.-' 

17 If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to 
deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he 
will deliver us out of thy hand, king." 

18 But if not,' be it known unto thee, king, 
that we will not serve thy go<is, nor worship the 
golden image which thou iiast set up.'" 

19 'i Then was Nebuchadnezzar fulF of fury," 
and the form of his visage was changed against 
Siiadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego: therefore he 
spake and commanded that they should heat the 
furnace one seven times more than it was wont to 
be heated." 

20 And he commanded the most mighty men* 
that were in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, 
and Abed-nego, and to cast than into the burning 
fiery furnace. 

21 Then these men were bound in their coats,* 
their hosen. and their hats,' and their other gar- 
ments, and were cast into the midst of the burn- 
ing fiery furnace. 

22 Therefore because the king's commandment' 
was urgent, and the furnace exceeding hot, the 
flame' of the fire slew those men that took up 
Hhadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego.'' 

2:5 And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abed-nego, fell down bound into the midst of the 
burning fiery furnace. 

24 Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was aston- 
ished, and rose up in haste, and sjiake, and said 
unto his counsellors,' Did not we cast three men 
boimd into the midst of the fire? They answered 
and said unto the king. True, king. 

25 He answered and said, Lo, I see four men 
loose, walking in the midst of the fire,'' and they 
have no hurt;* and the form of the fourth is like 
the Son of God."' 



AoU 27al, 25. I Jnh 1J:15; Aot« 4:1<I. "> Kx«l. 20:3-5; Lbt. 19:4. 
1 Ck!i\i.filM. nlM. 51:13; Luko 12:4,5. o Prov. 10:14; 21:21; 27:3,4. 
• Child. misliKJ iifilTtnglh. I Or, manllts. 1 Or. (i/rAaii.«. * Chald. trard. 
lOr. .«pnr<:. I'ch. n:-J4. 1 Or, sowmorj. q Isa 43:2. ' ChM. Ihcrt is no 
Aurl in Ihem. ' I'rov. .10:4; Luko 1:35; Rom. 1:4. 



ties, and garments." " Hosen " are wide pantalooDS, such 
as are worn now in eastern coimtries. 

•2.1. Like the Son of God ; or, "like a son of the gods," 
that is, a superhuman being. The same personage Nebu- 
chadnezzar afterwards calls an "angel," vcr. 2t>. Compare 
chap. G:22. 

IXSTRUCTIOXP. 

1-23. Since rulers arc ordained of God, wo are bonnd to 
.submit ourselves to all their requirements, except when 
lliey command tliat which God forbids, or forbid that 
which God commands; and then we must obey God, 



Nebuchadnezzar's confession. 



DANIEL IV. 



Tie rdaleth his (lrc:m. 



5»o" "" the month'oftlie burning ticryfiiriiacc,a?irf 
spake, and said, Shadracli, Meshacli, and Abcd-ne- 
go, ye servants of the most high God," come forth, 
and come hither. Then Siiadrach, Meshach, and 
Abed-nego, came fortli of the midst of the fire. 

27 And tlie princes, governors, and captains, and 
the king's counsellors, being gathered togetlicr, 
saw these men, upon whose bodies the fire had no 
power, nor was a hair of their head singed, nei- 
ther were their coats changed, nor the smell of 
fire had passed on them.'' 

28 Then Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, Blessed 
be the God of Shadrach, jVIeshach, and Abed-nego, 
who hath sent his angel,*" and delivered his ser- 
vants that trusted in him,*' and have changed the 
king's word, and yielded their bodies,'' that they 
might not serve nor worship any god, except their 
own God. 

29 Therefore I make a decree,^'' Tiiat every peo- 
ple, nation, and language, which speak any thing 
amiss* against the God of Shadracli, Meshach, and 
Abed-nego, shall be cut- in pieces, and their houses 
shall l)e made a dunghill;*'' because there is no 
other god that can deliver after this sort. 

30 Then the king promoted' Shadracli, Meshacli, 
and Abed-nego, in the province of Babylon. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1 Nebuchadnezzar confesseth God's kingdom, 4 maketh relation of his 
dream, which the magicians could jiot uiterpret. S Daniel heareth 
the dream. 19 He iiiterpreteth it. 28 The story of the event. 

^|EBUCHAPNEZZAR the king, unto all pec- 
S pie, nations, and languages, that dwell in all 
the earth :'" Peace be multiplied unto you.' 

2 I tliought it good' to show the signs and won- 
ders that the high God hath wrought toward me.-" 

3 Ho w great are his signs !'' and how m igh ty are his 
woiulers!' his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,™ 
anil Ills dominion is from generation to generation." 

4 IF I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in my house, 
and flourishing in my palace: 

5 I saw a dream wliich made me afraid, and 
the tlioughts upon my bed and the visions of my 
head troubled me. 



•ChM.dooT. "Gen. 14:18; Gal. 1:10. b Isa. 4.3:2; Heb. 11 :34. c Gen. 
10:15, 10; Psi. 34:7, 8; 103:20; Heb. 1:14. d cli. Ii:22, 23; Jer. 17:7. 
e Rom. 12:1; Heb. 11:37. t Cliald. a decree is made by me . I oh. 6:26. 27. 
I Chald. error. 5 Chald. morfe. ech. 2:5. ^Ch^Xi. viade to prosfer. h ch. 
3:4; 6:25, 27. I I Pet. 1:2. T Child. It was seemly before me. 3 ch. 
3:2ii. S Deut. 4:.34; Psi. 103:27; Heb. 2:4. 1 P.sa. 72:18; sO;IO; Isa. 25:1 ; 



though it be at the peril of our lives, llom. 13:1-5, 
comi)ared with Acts 4 : 19, 20. 

24-28. God is able with infinite ease to deliver his ser- 
vants in the most terrible extremities. Though he may 
not see good to save their bodies from present death, as 
he did thiJse of Daniel's three companions, he will grant 
to their spirits a perfect triumph over the rage of their 
enemies; and "in the resurrection at the last day" he 
will restore their bodies also in a glorified state, so that 
throughout eternity they shall "have no hurt" from the 
wicked, in body or soul. 

CHAPTER IV. 

This chapter contains an edict of Nebuchadnezzar after 
his recovery from the calamity to which it refers. 

8. According to the name of my god; for Belteshazzar 
signifies "Prince of Bel." Bel was the chief deity of the 
Babylonians. Compare Isa. 46:1. Though Nebuchadiiez- 



G Therefore made I a decree to bring in all the 
wise men of Babylon before me, that tliey migiit 
make known unto me tlie interpretation of tlie 
dream. 

7 Then came in the magicians, the astrologers, 
the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers : " and I told 
the dream before tliem ; but tliey did not make 
known unto me the interpretation thereof. 

8 1i But at tlie last Daniel came in before me, 
whose name was Beltesliazzar,f according to the 
name of my god, and in whom is the spirit of the 
holy gods:" and before him I told the dream, 
saying, 

9 Belteshazzar, master of the magicians, be- 
cause I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in 
thee, and no secret troubleth thee,"' tell me the 
visions of my dream that I have seen, and the in- 
terpretation thereof. 

10 Thus were the visions of my head in my bed ; 
I saw,* and behold a tree in tlie midst of the earth, 
and the height thereof was great." 

11 Tlie tree grew, and was strong, and the height 
thereof readied unto heaven, and the sight thereof 
to the end of all the earth : 

12 The leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit 
thereof much, and in itwas meat for all : the beasts 
of the field had shadow under it,' and the fowls 
of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all 
flesh was fed of it." 

13 I saw in the visions of my head upon my lied, 
and behold, a watcher and a holy one came down 
fi-om heaven : ■■■ 

1-1 He cried aloud,* and said thus. Hew down the 
tree,'" and cut ofi' his branches, siiake off his leaves, 
and scatter his fruit: let tlie beasts get away 
from under it, and the fowls from his branches: 

15 Nevertheless, leave the stump of his roots in 
the earth," even with a band of iron and brass, in 
the tender grass of the field ; and let it be wet 
with the dew of heaven, and kt his portion be with 
the beasts in the grass of the earth : 

16 Let his heart be changed from man's,y and 
let a beast's heart be given unto him ; and let 
seven times pass over him.'' 

17 This matter is by the decree of the watchers, 



28:29. T-ch. 2:44; Rev. 11:13. n Job 23:2; 1 Pet. 4:11 . och.2:l,2. Pch. 
1-7 q Num. 11:17, etc.: Isa. 63:11. r ]sa. :J3:1S; 54:14. • Chald was 
seeing. ' Ezek. 31 :3. etc. ' Lam. 4:20. uEzek. 17:23. v ,er. 17, 23; Matt. 
25:31; Rev. 14:10. t Chald. ivitk might; ch. 3:4. w Matt. 3:10; Luke 
13:7. sJob 14:7-9. ylsa.6:10. zch. 12:7. 



z;ir acknowledges the power of Jehovah, he yet continues 
to acknowledge Bel as his god. This mixture of lieatlien 
with Jewish ideasappears in several parts of the edict, and 
is entirely natural for one in Nebuchadnezzar's position. 

11. The tree grew; compare Ezek. 31:3-14, where the 
king of Assyria is described under the same figure. 

13. ^ watclier and a holy one; that is, a watcher who was 
also a. holy one. " Watcher " seems to have been an epi- 
thet applied by the eastern nations to a class of angels 
who watched over the affairs of this world. 

15. With a band of iron and brass ; to preserve it from 
injury till the time shall come for it to grow again. Let it 
be wet — let his portion he; the dream passes from the symbol 
to the person symbolized. 

16. iSewnfracs; probably seven years. See note on chap. 
7:25. 

17. The demand; the thing required to be done, that is, 
the business. The word ; the command. 

9:5 



TTie king's dreim interpreted. 



DANIEL IV 



He glorifies the true God. 



and the demand by the word of the lioly ones :" to 
the intent that the livinfr niay know that the Most 
High ruleth in the kingdom of men,'' and giveth 
it to whomsoever he will,'' and sctteth np over it 
the basest of men.'' 

18 This dream I king Nebucliadnczzar have seen. 
Now thou, O Jjelteshazzar. drchii'c (he inter])i-('ta- 
tion thereof, forasmuch as all the wise mc7t ol' my 
kingdom are not able to make kuown unto me the 
interpretation: but thou a?-< able ; for the sjjiritof 
the liidy gods is in thee.'' 

11) 'i Then Daniel, whose name u-as Beltesliaz- 
zar, was astonished for one hour, and his thoughts 
troubled him.' The king spake, and said, Belte- 
shazzar, let not the dream, or the interpreta- 
tion thereof, trouble thee. Beltesliazzar answered 
and said, My lord, the dream be to them that 
hale thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine 
enemies.'-' 

20 'I'he tree that thou sawest," whieh grew, and 
was strong, whose height reaehed unto the heaven, 
and the sight thereof to all the earth ; 

21 Whose leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof 
much, and in it was meat for all ; under whieh the 
beasts of the field dwelt, and upon whose branches 
the fowls of the heaven had their habitation: 

22 It is thou, O king, that art grown and be- 
come strong:' for thy greatness is grown, and 
rcacheth unto heaven, and thy dominion to the end 
of the earth.-' 

1^3 And whereas the king saw a watcher and a 
holy one coming down from heavcMi, and saying. 
Hew the tree down, and destroy it;'' yet leave the 
stump of the roots thereof in the earth, even with 
a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of 
the field ; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, 
and t(t his portion be with the beasts of the field, 
till seven times pass over him ; 

24 This is the interpretation, () king, and this is 
the decree of thi; Most High, which is come upon 
my lord the king : 

2.') That they shall drive thee from men, and thy 
dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field,' and 
they shall nnike thee to eat grass as oxen,'" and 
they shall wet thee with the dew of heaven, and 
seven times shall pass over thee, till thou know 
that the Alost High ruleth in the kingdom of men, 
and giveth it to whomsoever he will." 

2l) And whereas they commanded to leave the 



« Vcr. l;t, II. b vtT, -i'), 32, 3.5; r»a.fl:18. so. c r.a. 7J:G, 7. ■! Uxoa. 
9;I«; 1 King. 'il-.-iS; i KinE» 21:0, ntc. ; a Clir. 2S:2i. ' vcr. S. ' vcr. ». 
I i Sam. I«:.|i: Jcr. 20:7. h vcr. lll-l-.'. i ch. v;:3s. J Jor. 27.0-9. k vcr. 
13.14. ' vcr .'ia, n p,a. lon:v.>ll. nP»a. 8.'i:H. o Man. 5:31 ; Luke 15: l.-J, 
21. I'l«a. .M:7. 'Or, alienliiiaofthimtrror. q I'm. .11 : 1, 2. tOr.iijmn. 



19. Astonished; in view of the terrible calamity coming 
upon the monarch wlioso dream he was called to interpret. 
One hour ; or, " for a season," probably a sliort season. 

25. Theiishiill drive thee,- a Clialdoe mode of say inp," thou 
shalt be driven," Tlie agents are not named, rrobably 
we are to understand "tlio watclicrs," acting tlirougli his 
ma<hicss. Compare vcr, :i3, 

28, All this came ; some suppose that verses 28-33, wliich 
speak of Nebucliadnczzar in the third person, were uddeil 
by tlie inspirerl penman ; lnU proliably the king chose to 
describe the humiliating evenls of his insanity, when he 
was not himself, in Die third ju-r.-^on rather than the first. 

33. Was driven from men — ilid rut /rrass; liis madness im- 
pelled him to forsake the abodes of men, and to eat grass 
976 



stum]) of the tree roots ; thy kingdom shall a. m um. 
be sure unto tliee,al'ter that thou shalt have ^to.'"""' 
known that the heavens do rule." 

27 Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be accept- 
able unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteous- 
ness," and thine iniquities by .showing mercy to 
the poor: if it may be a lengthening of thy tran- 
quillity."'' 

28 1i All this came upon the king Nebuchadnez- 
zar. 

29 At the end of twelve months he walked iu* 
the ]ialace of the kingdom of Babylon. 

30 The king spake, and said. Is not this great 
Babylon, that I have built ibr the house of the 
kingdom by the might of my power, and for the 
honor of my majesty V 

31 While the word wax in the king's mouth, there 
fell a voice from heaven, saying, O king Nebuchad- 
nezzar, to thee it is spoken ; The kingdom is de- 
parted from thee." 

32 And they shall drive thee from men, and thy 
dwelling s/ial! be with the beasts of the field :' they 
shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and seven 
times shall jiass over thee, until thou know that 
the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and 
giveth it to whomsoever he will. 

33 The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon 
Nebiu^hadnezzar: and he was driven i'rom men, 
and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet 
with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown 
like cnglea' fcaf/iers, and his nails like birds' clans, 

34 And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar 
lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, anil nunc under- 
standing returned unto me, and I blessed the 
Most High, and I jiraised and honored liim that 
liveth for ever," whose dominion is an everlasting 
dominion,* and his kingdom is from gencratiou to 
generation :"' 

35 And all the inhabitants of the earth are re- 
puted as nothing :" and he doeth according to his 
will in the army of heaven, aiul among the inhab- 
itants of the earth :' and none can stay his liaiul,'- 
or say unto him, What doest thou?" 

36 At the same time my reason returned unto 
me ; and for the glory of my kingdom, mine honor 
and brightness returned unto nie ; and my coun- 
sellors and my lords sought unto me: and I was 
established in my kingdom, and excellent majesty 
was added unto me.'' 



rl.iiko 12:11), 2U. ■ I Tliess. 5:3. > inr. iS,-X. " oh. 12:7; Rut, 4:10. » ch. 
2:41; 7:H; P.-a. 10:10; Jcr. 10:10; Mio. 4:7: Luke 1:33. " P««. OO.-l. 
< laa. 411:15, 17. r Pn. 115:3; 13S:S, >Isa.43:ia > Job 9:12; lu. 45:0, 
Rom. 9:20. b Job 42: 12. 



as the cattle. Was wet; from spending his nights in tho 
open air. Like ea^^les' feathers ; tlie jjoint of contj>arison is 
that of length, and perhaps roughness. Like birds' daws; 
that is, long, like l)irds' claws. 

31, Lifted up mine eyes; in an act of adoration. This was 
a sign tliat his reason had returned. 

3(1. Ml/ counsellors — I t/vr.s rtlalilislicd in my kinpdom; as 
his restoration was manifestly jierfect, his counsellors 
hesitated not to restore to him the kingdom. 
INSTI!i:('T10N8. 

2. Trno humility makes men willing to speak of their 
own abasement, whenever it will be for IJod's glory and 
the instruction of their fellow-men. 

17. The mighty iiieu of this world, who are above all 



ndshazz" r's impio u s feist. 



DANIEL V. 



TAc wriliiti' on Ike wall. 



A.M wji- 37 Now I Ncbucliadnozzar praise and 

W3. " extol and honor tlic Kin,;! of heaven, all 

whoso works arc trulli, and his ways jiulsi'ment:" 

and those that walk in pride he is aljle to abase.'' 

CHAPTER V. 

I Belshazz:ir"s impious feast. .1 A haiidwritino;, unknown to the magi- 
cians, trouhUHh tlic king. 10 At tin; connnendation of the queen, Dan- 
iel is brought. 17 He, reproving the king of pride and idolatry, 25 
readeth and interpreteth tlie writing. 30 The monarchy is translat- 
ed to the Modes. 

I^ELSHAZZAR the kino; made a great feast to 
3 a thousand of liis lords," and drank wine be- 
fore the thousand. 

2 Belshazzar, while he tasted tlic wine, command- 
ed to bring tlie golden and silver vessels wliich liis 
father* Nebuchadnezzar had taken* out of the tem- 
ple which was in Jerusalem ;'' that the king and his 
princes, his wives and his concubines, might drink 
therein. 

3 Then they brought the golden vessels that 
were taken out of tlie temple of the house of (iod 
wliicli was at Jerusalem ; and the king and liis prin- 
ces, his wives and his concubines, drank in them. 

4 They drank wine, and praised the gods of 
gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and 
of stone." 

5 1 111 the same hour came forth fingers of a 
man's hand,'' and wrote over against the candle- 
stick upon the plaster of tlic wall of the king's 
palace: and the king saw the part of tlie hand 
that wrote. 

Then the king's countenance* was changed,^ 
and his thoughts troubled him,' so that the joints" 
of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one 
against another.'' 

1 The king cried aloud '^ to bring in the astrolo- 
gers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers." Jlnd 
the king spake, and said to the wise men of Bab- 
ylon, Whosoever shall read this writing, and show 



• Dent. 32:4: Psa. 3.3: 


1; Rev. 15:3. 1> ch. 5:^0; Exod. 18:11; Job 40:11, 


12. c Usth. 1:3. • Or, 


grandfallur, as ver. 11, IS; Jer. 27:7; 2 Sam. 9:7. 


t Chald. iraught forth. 


<1 oh. 1:2; Jer. 52:11). e Rev. 9:20. t ch. 4:31. 


I Child, irig/itiuxses,- \ 


er. 9. i Ch^\.i. changed it. elsa. 21:2-4. 11 Or, 


girdles; Chald. bindtng 


5, ori-MoW; Isa 5:27. hNah. 2:10. 1 Chald. wi(/i 



human law, are wholly at God's disposal ; and he deals with 
them ia such a way as to make it manifest that he has the 
supreme control of human alTair.s. 

19. Wo ought neither to withhold the truth from men 
of high place, through fear of incurring their displeasure, 
nor give any unnecessary oifonce in the manner of uttering 
it. To them, as to all others, our rule sliould be to declare 
the whole counsel of God with meekness of wisdom. 

27. The divine purposes do not interfere with human 
freedom and responsibility ; and correct views of tliem 
give us full liberty to urge upon men the duty of repent- 
ance, with the hope that it will avail for their welfiiro here 
and hereafter. 

30. Pride is a direct affront to God: it claims for our- 
selves the honor and power that belong to him alone, and 
he will abase till who thus rob him of his glory. Prov. 
It;: IS. 

31-33. How easy is it for God to reduce men of exalted 
intellect and eminent place to a level with the brutes of 
the field; driving them out from human society, and 
making them incapable alike of knowing him or of un- 
derstanding the simplest of human affairs. Let all who 
are lifted up with pride, in view of their gifts or achieve- 
ments, humble themselves before Him who gives honor 
to whomsoever he will, and takes it awav at his pleasure. 



me the interpretation tliereof, shall be clothed 
with scarlet,* and have a cliaiii of gold about his 
neck, and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.^ 

8 Then came in all tlie king's wise men: but 
they could not read tlie writing, nor make known 
to the king the interpretation tliereof. 

!) Then was king Belshazzar greatly troubled, 
and his countenance* was cJianged in him, and his 
lords were astonisiied. 

10 1 Jfow the queen, by reason of the words of 
the king and iiis lords, came into the baiujuet 
house: and the queen spake and said, king, live 
for ever: let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor 
let tiiy countenance be changed : 

11 There is a man in tiiy kingdom, in whom is 
the spirit of the holy gods;'' and in tiie days of 
thy father* light and understanding and wisdom, 
like the wisdom of the gods, was found in him; 
whom the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father,* the 
king, / say, thy father,* made master of the magi- 
cians, astrologers, Chaldeans, and sootlisayers ; 

12 Forasmuch as an excellent spirit,' ami know- 
ledge, and understanding, interpreting^ of dreams, 
and showing of hard sentences, and dissolving' of 
doubts,'' were found in the same Daniel, whom the 
king named Belteshazzar : now let Daniel be 
called, and he will show the interpretation. 

13 Then was Daniel brought in before the king. 
Jlnd the king spake and said unto Daniel, Art 
tiioii that Daniel, which art of the children of the 
captivity of Judah, whom the king my father' 
brought out of Jewry ? 

14 1 have even heard of thee, that the spirit of 
the gods is in thee, and that light and understand- 
ing and excellent wisdom is found in thee. 

15 And now the wise men, the astrologers, have 
been brought in before me, that they should read 
this writing, and make known unto me the inter- 
pretation thereof: but they could not show the 
interpretation of the thing : 



might, i ch. 2:2; Isa. 47:1:1. 'Oi. purple. J oh. 0:2. t Chald. brightnesses; 
ver. e. k ch. 4:8, 9. I Or, grandfather ; vcr. 2. 1 ch. (i:3. i Or, of an 
interpreter. I Or, of a dissoloer. 1 Chald. knots. ' Or, grandfather ; 



34. The acknowledgment of God's personal presence and 
supreme control over us is the clearest mark of reason, 
and when we humbly and thankfully own his hand in our 
afflictions and humiliations, it is a sign that our hearts are 
right with him. 

36. As there is no condition so lofty that God cannot 
cast us down from it, so there is no humiliation so deep 
that he cannot raise us from it to enjoy the richest bless- 
ings. 

37. However heavy and humiliating are God's chastise- 
ments, if their effect is to abase our pride, and produce 
in us the spirit of true submission to him, we shall have 
abundant reason to praise him for them here and through- 
out eternity. 

CHAPTER V. 

1. Belshazzar ; the last king of Babylon, of whom little 
is known. He was probably a grandson of Nebuchad- 
nezzar. 

2. Commanded to bring — silver vessels; see note to ver. 23. 
10. 37(6 qwen ; probably the queen-mother, who had been 

the wife of Evil-merodach, Nebuchadnezzar's successor. 
She was well acquainted with Daniel, while Belshazzar 
had never concerned himself to learn his history and 
merits. 

977 



Danid explainelh the 



DANIEL VI. 



wrilins on the wall. 



16 And I have heard of thee, that thou canst 
make interpretations," and dissolve doubts: now 
if tiiou canst read the writinjr, and make known 
to me the interpretation thereof, tliou shalt bo 
clothed with scarlet, and /mve a chain of gold 
about thy iwck, and shalt be the third ruler in 
the kinirdom. 

17 1i Then Daniel answered and said Iwforc the 
kin?. Let thy srifts be to thyself, and Rive thy re- 
wards' to another;" yet I will read the writinsr 
unto the king, and make known to him the inter- 
pretation.'' 

18 O tiiou king, the most high God gave Nebu- 
chadnezzar thy father a kingdom, and majesty, 
and glory, and honor: 

ly'Vnd for the majesty that he gave him, all 
people, nations, and languages, trembled and 
feared before him :" whom he woidd he slew ; and 
whom he would he kept alive ; and whom he would 
he set up; and whom ho would he put down. 

20 r>ut when his heart was lifted up, and his 
mind hardened in pride,' he was deposed ' from his 
kingly throne, and they took his glory from him: 

2i And he was driven from the sons of men; 
and his heart was made like' the beasts, and his 
dwelling was with the wild asses: they fed him 
with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with 
the dew of heaven; till he kn(!w that the most 
high God ruled in the kingdom of men, and that 
he appointelh over it whomsoever he will. 

22 And thou his son, Belshazzai', hast not 
humbled thy heart,*" though thou knowcst all this; 

23 But hast lifted up thyself against the Lord oi' 
heaven f and they have brought the vessels of his 
house before thee, and thou and thy lords, thy 
wives and thy concubines, have drunk wine in 
them; and thou hast praised the gods of silver, 
and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone,' which 



• ChilJ. 


titer pret. 


t Or,/«. isch. a:«. » Gen. 14:23. b Psa. 110:40. 


« ch. 4:*2, 


etc. ; Jer 


27:7. t Or. 10 deal prauilly I ExrA 1S:11. S Chald. 




e down. 


1 Or, hf mnde kis lienrt equal, i 2 Clir. ;):i:a3; 30: 12; 


Ja.. 4:8. e 


vcr. 3, 4 


t JuJg. IU:23. K P-a. 115o-S; Isa. 37:19. 1> Acts 



23. Hast lifted up tliij^elf against the Lord of heaven; by 
puttiii}; to a profane use the sacred vessels of his temple. 

24. Then ; when thou wast thus treating liini witli con- 
tempt. TIte part of the liand ; the " fingers of a man's hand," 
ver..'>. Thatnotliing except these appeared made the vision 
more mysterious and terrible. 

2"). Aicne, meite, tekel, unhnnin; that is, "numbered, num- 
bered, weighed, and divuled." 

28. Peres; that is, "divided," or broken into parts. 
"Peres," in the original, is the singular, and "upharsin" 
the pliind of the same word, with "and" prefixed, as if 
the writing liad said, "and divided are the parts of tliy 
kingdom." 

30. Slain; by Cyrus king of Persia, who was at tlie head 
of the united armies of Media and Persia. He had turned 
the waters of tlic Euphrates out of their course, and en- 
tered the city throiigli its channel (hiring a night of feast- 
ing and revelry, about .'iSK before Christ. 

31. Darius the Median took the kingdom ; Darius is snii- 
poscd to be the "Cyaxares ' of profane historians. Jle 
was the uncle of ("yrus and Ihe king of Media. Upon Ihe 
death of Darius, Cyrus united Ihe kingdoms of Media and 
Persia in his own person. 

l.NSTUfCTIOXS. 
1-3. When carnal security, pride, and contempt of (7oil 
and hia service are united in a community, its destruction 
is near. 

y"8 



see not, nor hf^ar, nor know ;" and the God v >' ■''««■ 
in whose hand thy breath is'' and whose '^■ 
are all tliy ways,' hast thou not gloritied :' 

24 Then was the part of the hand sent from him ; 
and this writing was written. 

2.') 'j .\nd this is the writimr that was written. 
MKXK, MEXK, TllKEL, UPH.MISIX. 

2t) Tills is the inter))reIatioii of the thing: 
ilEXL; God luitli nunibcred thy kingdom, and 
finished it. 

27 'i'l']Kl'][i; Thou art weighed in thebiilances,'' 
and art I'ouiid wanting.' 

28 I'LRES; Tliy kingdom is divided, and given 
to the iM('d(;s'" and Persians.^" 

29 Then commanded Belshazzar, and they cloth- 
ed Daniel with scarlet, and put a chain of gold 
about his neck, and made a proclamation concern- 
ing him, that he should be the third ruler in the 
kingdom." 

:50 *! In that night was Belshazzar the king of 
the Chaldeans slain.'' 

31 And Darius the Jledian took the kingdom,'' 
bein^ about* threescore and two years old.* 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 D.'iniel is made chiff of the presiili-nts. *1 Thpy conspiring ngninst 
him obtain im iJol;ttrous decree. 10 Daniel, .accused of die breach 
thereof, is c;tst into the lions' den. IS Daniel is saved. 2i >li» 
advers;iries devoured. 2-5 and God ma^iGed by a de-.Tee. 

IT pleased Darius to set over the kingdom a 
hundred and twenty princes/ which should be 
over the whole kingdom:' 

2 And over these three presidents; of whom 
Daniel vas first: that the princes might give ac- 
counts unto tlieni, and the king should have no 
damage.' 

3 Then this Daniel was preferred above the 
presidents and princes, beeau.se an excellent spirit 



17:2S, 29. ■ Jer. 10:2:t. J Rom. 1:21. k .lob 31:0; Psa. 02:9. I MaK. 

22:11, 12; ICor.S:]:). invor.31. 1 Foretold Isa. 21 : 2. »eh.0:2!<. o vor. 7. 

p Jer. 51:31, :j!). <lch.9:l. • Or. now. t Chald. he as l/mo» o/. r EsUl. 
1:1. «lPot.2:14. t Luke 10:13, etc ; 1 Ciir. 4:2. 



4. Jehovah is nigh to all his true worshippers, to hear 
and save them ; but every false confidence deceives and 
destroys those who put their trust in it, at the very time 
when they are loudest in its praises. 

,5. In scenes of revelry and sinful mirth God is ever 
present as a witness; and he can in a moment change 
them into anguish and terror. 

6. A guilty conscience makes wicked men tremble before 
every token of (jod's presence ; for they rightly interpret 
it as being to them a sign of coming wrath. 

1:5. In seasons of outward security good and wise men 
are commonly forgotten, with all the services which they 
have rendered in past times; and too often their aid an<l 
counsel are not sought again till it is too late to avert im- 
pending ruin. 

22. They who know (^od's judgments upon others for 
(heir sins, and yet fail to be ;idiniinishod by them, iire 
iloubly guilty, and will be punished with proportional 
severity. 

2.'). Presumptuous sinners can expect no mess.igc fruiii 
Cod but one of evil tidings. 1 Kings 22:8. 

27, 28. (!od will soon takt^ from us our earthly steward- 
ship; then we shall be weighed in the balances of his 
word, and if found wanting, our doom will be like that of 
Helsha/./.ar — exceedingly terrible. 

;iO. In the midst of ixunp ami splendor and apparent 
security, men are often un the very briuk of destruction. 



Daniel ast into the 



DANIEL VI. 



lions' den, mid ddimcd. 



A. M.w,. y-as in liim;" and tlio king thought to set 
s-s liiui over tlic whole reiilni. 

4 If Tlicn the i)rcsidents and princes sought to 
find occasion against Daniel concerning the king- 
dom;'' but they could find none occasion nor 
fault; forasmuch ar, he vas faitiiful, neither was 
there any error or fault found in him. 

5 Then said these men, Wo shall not find any 
occasion against this Daniel, except we find it 
against him concerning the law of his God. 

(5 Then these presidents and princes assembled' 
together to the king, and said thus unto him ; King- 
Darius, live for ever.'^ 

7 All the presidents of the kingdom, the gov- 
ernors, and the princes, the counsellors, and the 
captains, have consulted together to establish a 
royal statute,'' and to make a firm decree,^ that 
whosoever shall ask a petition of any god or man 
for thirty days, save of thee, king, he shall be 
cast into the den of lions. 

8 Now, king, establish the decree, and sign 
the writing, that it be not changed, according to 
the law of the Medes and Persians, which alter- 
ctlr not." 

9 Wherefore king Darius signed the writing and 
the decree. 

10 'f Now when Daniel knew that the writing- 
was signed,'' he went into his house; and, his win- 
dows being open in his chamber toward Jci-usalem,'-' 
he kneeled upon his knees tlii-ee times a day,'' and 
prayed, and gave thanks before his God,' as he 
did aforetime. 

11 Then these men assembled, and found Daniel 
praying and making supplication before his God. 

12 Then they came near,' and spake before the 
king concerning the king's decree : Hast thou not 
signed a decree, that every man that shall ask a 
pdi'ion of any god or man within thirty days, save 
of thee, king, shall be cast into the den of lions? 
The king answered and said. The thing is true, 
according to the law of the Medes and Persians, 
which altereth not." 

13 Then answered they and said before the king, 
That Daniel, which « of the children of the cap- 
tivity of Judaii,' regardeth not thee,'" king, nor 
the decree that thou hast signed, but makcth his 
petition three times a day. 

1-1 Then the king, when he heard these words, 
was sore displeased with himself," and set his heart 
on Daniel to deliver him : and he labored till the 
going down of the sun to deliver him. 

15 Then these men assembled unto the king, and 



« Ch. 5:1-2; Prov. 17:-J7. b Psa. .37:1-2, etc.; Eccles. 4:4. ' Or, ramr. tu- 
muUuoustij. c veT. -21 ; Neh. -2::). d Psa. -ZM. t Or, interdict. 1 ChalJ. 
passeth. e Estli 1 ;19; .S:S. f Luke 14:-26; Acts 4: 17-19, S 1 Kings t<:4), 
43; Psa. 5:7; Jonah '2:4. h ver. 1:3: Psa. .55:17; Acts -2.15; 3:1; 10:9 
iPhil.4:6. jch.3::-. k ver. 8. Ich.i5:13. m ch. 3:1-2; Acts 5:-29. n Mark 



CHAPTER VI. 

7. Wliosoever shall ask — into the den of lions; a most absurd 
proposal ; but the king's vanity blinded him to its unrea- 
sonableness and wickedness. It may have been urged upon 
him that some test of the loyalty of his new subjects was 
needed. 

8. Which altereth not; no royal edict of the Persian mon- 
archs could be changed, and the same seems to have been 
uue of the Medes. Thus .Vhasuerus, instead of repealing 



said unto the king. Know, king, that the law of 
the Medes and Persians is, That no decree nor 
statute which the king establisheth may be changed. 
1() Then the king commanded, and "they brought 
Daniel," and cast him into the den of lions. JVow 
the king spake and said unto Daniel Thy God 
whom thou servest continually, he will deliver 
the(-.|' 

17 And a stone was brought, and laid upon the 
mouth of the den;'' and the king sealed it with 
his own signet, and with the signet of ins lords;'' 
that the purpose might not be changed concern- 
ing Daniel. 

18 H Then the king went to his palace, and 
passed the night fasting ; neither were iustruraents* 
of music brought before him : and his sleep went 
from him. 

19 Then the king arose very early in the morn- 
ing, and went in haste unto the den of lions. 

20 And when he- came to the den, he cried with 
a lamentable voice unto Daniel: ajid the king 
spake and said to Daniel, Daniel, servant of 
tlie living God, is thy God, wliom thou servest 
continually, able to deliver thee fi-om the lions? 

21 Then said Daniel unto the king, (_) king, live 
for ever. 

22 My God hath sent his angel,' and hath .shut 
the lions' mouths, that they have not hurt me:' 
fin'asmuch as tiofoie him innocency was found in 
me;" and also before thee, king, have I dom- 
no hurt. 

2;> Then was the king exceeding glad for him. 
and commanded that they should take Daniel up 
out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of 
the den, and no manner of hurt was found upon 
him, because he believed in his God. 

24 If And the king commanded, and they brought 
those men which liad accused Daniel," and they 
cast them into the den of lions, them, their chil- 
dren," and their wives ; and the lions had the mas- 
tery of them, and brake all their bones in pieces 
or ever they came at the bottom of the den.*' 

25 *I Then king Darius wrote unto all people, 
nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth ; 
Peace be multiplied unto you.^ 

20 I make a decree. That in every dominion of 
my kingdom men tremble and fear before the God 
of Daniel:' for he is the living God,^ and stead- 
fast for ever, and his kingdom that which shall not 
be destroyed, and his dominion shall be even unto 
the end.'' 

27 He delivereth and rescucth,'' and he worketh 



U:-2li. Jer. -20:14; Acts -25:11. p ch 3- 15, 17: Psa. 37:.')9, 4U q Lam. 
3:5-3. rMatt -27:lili. i Or, tnMe. < ch. 3.-2-. IHeb. Il:!3. u Psa. lS:-20. 
-2);ae:(i. « Deut. Iill9. w Deut 21: Hi; -2 Kings 14:6; Eslh. 9:IU. x Psa. 
54-5. ych. 4:1. z Psa. 99:1. »cli. 4:34. bcli. -2:44. c Psa. 18:50; 32:7. 



the edict which Haman had procured for the destruction 
of the Jews, made a new edict empowering them to destroy 
their enemies. Esther 8:8-11. 

10. Toward Jerusalem, he directed his prayers towards 
Jerusalem as God's chosen dwelling-place. Psa. 5:7. 

14. Was sore displeased with himself; he now saw, for tiie 
first time, the base design of those who had procured the 
decree. 

17. Sealed it; that it might not be secretly removed. 
Compare Matt. 27:06. 

9'; 9 



The. ^ro]p}i£lic vision 



DANIEL VII. 



ofthefuur leasts. 



signs and wontlers in heaven and in earth," wlio 
hath delivered Daniel from the power* of the lions. 
28 So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Da- 
rius, and iu the reign of Cyrus the Persian.'* 

CHAPTER VII. 

1 Daniel's vision of four beasts. 9 Of God's kingdom. 15 Tlic inter- 
pretation tliereof. 

IN the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon, 
Daniel had* a dream and visions of his head 
upon his bed :'= then he wrote the dream, aiid told 
the sum of the matters.* 

2 Daniel spake and said, I saw in my virion by 
night, and beliold, the four winds of the heaven 
strove upon the great sea. 

3 And four great beasts came up from the sea, 
diverse one from another.'' 

4 The first iras like a lion.'' and had eagle's 
■wings i*^ I beheld till the wings thereof were 
plucked, and'' it was liftcil up from the earth, and 
made stand upon the feet as a man, and a man's 
heart was given to it. 

5 And behold another beast,'' a second, like to a 
bear, and it raised up itself on one .side, and it 
had three ribs in the mouth of it between the 
teeth of it: and they said thus unto it, Arise, de- 
vour much fiesli. 

6 After this I beheld, and lo another, like a leop- 
ard, which had ujion the back of it four wings of 



« Ch. 4:3. • Heb. hand, b cti. 


1 : al ; Ezra 1 : 1 , 2. t CtiaM. smo. 


c ch. 


a;2S: Num. 12:(i; Amos 3:7. 


Or, words, d Rev. l:i:l. c Je 


r. 4:7. 


f Deut. ad:49; Ezek. 17:3; Hib. 


:S. h 0!,wherewHh. e ch. 2:39. 


1 Or, 


one dominion, h ch. S:b, 2i. ' ve 


r. 19, 2:^1 ch. 2:J0. J ch. 2:41, 42. 


k ver. 



28. In live reign of Darius ; this is said to have lasted two 
years. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. The promotion of a man of crainEiit merit to a hijjh 
station naturally excites the envy of base and ignoble 
minds, and tlicy will sock his ruin by means correspond- 
ing with their character. 

7. When men appeal to our vanity, we should suspect 
both ourselves and the object which they propose. 

9. We should consider well the consequences of a pro- 
posed measure before we give our assent to it. 

10. When the honor of God is concerned, we ought not 
to conceal our religious services, but openly and boldly to 
perform them, even at the hazard of our lives. 

15. Neither human statutes nor ancient usages can make 
that right which is in itself wrong ; and to persevere in a 
course of action after its wickedness has been made mani- 
fest, from a false regard to custom or consistency, is only 
adding sin to sin. 

16. lie who acknowledges a man to be righteous at the 
very moment when he condemns him, as did Darius and 
Pilate, thcrcl)y betrays his moral weakness, and his unfit- 
ness to occupy the tribunal of justice. 

18. The compunctious visitings of a guilty conscience, 
banishing sleep from the eyes and comfort from the soul, 
are but a poor substitute for a courageous adherence to 
truth and justice. 

23. When fidelity to God brings us into deadly perils, 
we need give ourselves no disquietude, being assured that 
ho is able to deliver us, and will do so if his own cause 
and our highest welfare demand it. 

21. It is the usual cour.se of God's jirovidence to turn 
the malice of wicked men against themselves. 

CHAPTER VII. 

2. &rove; or, "burst forth," an apt emblem of the fierce 
passions of unsanctificd men contending with each other 
for Buprcmacv. 

980 



a fowl; the beast had also four heads;'' a.m sud. 
dominion was given to it. .'•« 

7 After this I saw in the night visions, and be- 
hold a fourth beast,' dreadful and terrible, and 
strong exceedingly; and it had great iron teeth: 
it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the 
residue witii tiio feet of it : and it wax diverse from 
all the beasts that were before it; and it had ten 
horns.-' 

8 I considered the horns, and behold, there 
came up among them another little liorn,'^ before 
whom there were three of the first horns plucked 
up by the roots: and behold, in this horn were 
eyes like the eyes of man,' and a mouth speaking 
great things.'" 

9 II I beheld till the thrones were cast down," 
and the Ancient of days did sit," whose garment 
was white as snow,'' and the hair of his head like 
the pure wool:'' his throne iras lilcc the fiery 
flame,'' and his wheels a.? burning fire." 

10 A fiery stream issued and came forth from 
before him:' thousand thousands ministered unto 
him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood 
before him : " the judgment was set, and the books 
w(!re opened.^' 

Ill beheld then, because of the voice of the 
great words which the horn sjiake, I beheld even 
till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, 
and given to the liurnine; flame."' 



20,21.21. lRev.9:7. m Rev. 13:5. » ch. 2:41 ; I Cor. 15:2-1, 25. over. 
22; Isa.9:0. V I'sa. 45:8; Phil. 3:9. qRev.l:14. r Aols 2:30, 3:!. • lizck. 
1:1.5.16. I Psa. 50:3; Isa. «0:15, IG. n I Kings 22:19; Psa. 6S:17; Hib. 



3. Fmir great beasts; the symbols of four great mon- 
archies that were successively to rule the world, ver. 17. 
From the sea; from the tumult produced by this conflict 
of human passions, ver. 2. Compare l!cv. 13:1. 

4. The first — a Hon ; the Chaldean empire. Eagle's tvings; 
a symbol of the swiftness and great extent of its victories. 
Were plucked; so that it could extend its conquests no fur- 
ther. Flow the earth ; that is, from moving upon its four 
feet. A man's heart was given to it; the beast is changed 
to a man ; that is, the monarchy wliich it represents loses 
its fierceness and becomes mild. 

5. A bear ; fierce and cruel. This symbolizes the empire 
of the Modes and Persians. See Isa. 13:18. Raised iin 
il.ielf on one side; its hinder parts rested on the ground, 
while it stood erect with one of the fore legs and kneeled 
with the other. This is the posture exhibited on one of 
the stones found in Uabylon; and it seems to indicate that 
the bear is in the act of raising himself up to attack his 
prey. T/irce ribs; a symbol of the prey which it had al- 
ready t;iken. 

6. Like a leopard; which excels in swiftness, chap. S:!i. 
This was the empire of Alexander the Great, which, after 
his death, was divided into four parts, symbolized by the 
four wings and lioails. Compare ihaj). 8:8. 

7. A fourth beast; the Roman empire. See note to ver. 
23. 

8. Eiies like the eijcs of man ; the Ryml)ols of sagacity. 

9. The thrones were cast down ; the thrones of the king- 
doms rei>resented by the ten horns. Btit many prefer , 
to render, " till thrones were set :" that is, set for judg- 
ment upon the beast. The Ancient of dai/s; J Awvait. 
The same language is applied elsewhere to Christ Rev. 
1:14, 1.5. 

II). A fury stream; the symbol of his \VTath. 77ioh- 
saml thousands — stood before him ; these seem to be all his 
attending angels, accompanviiig him to the judgment of 
the beast. Compare Ucut."33:2; Matt. 25:31; 2 Thess. 
1:7. 



The. cstdUishtmnl of 



DANIEL VII. 



tie li.ngdom of God. 



A. M.3U9. 12 As concerning the rest of tlie beasts, 
■555. they had their dominion taken away: yet 
tlieir lives were jtrolonsed for a season and time." 

13 I saw in the ni<;-lit visions, and behold, one 
like the Son of man came with the clouds of heav- 
en,-'' and came to the Ancient of days,*" and they 
brought him near before him. 

14 And there was given him dominion, and 
glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and 
languages, should servo him:" his dominion is an 
everlasting dominion,'' wiiich shall not pass away, 
and his kingdom that whieli shall not bo destroyed.'' 

15 1 I Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the midst 
of my body,* and tiie visionsof my head troubled me. 

1() I came near unto one of them that stood by, 
and asked him the trntli of all this. So he told me, 
and made me know the intcr]iretation of the things. 

17 These great beasts, which are four, are four 
kings, ichich shall arise out of the earth. 

18 But the saints of tiie Most High* shall take 
the kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, 
even for ever and ever.' 

19 Tlien I would know the truth of the fourth 
beast, which was diverse from all the otliers,^ ex- 
ceeding dreadful, whose teeth were of won, and his 
nails 0/" brass; u-hkh devoured, brake in jiieces, 
and stamped the residue with his feet; 

20 And of the ten horns that were in his head, 
and of the other whicli came up, and before whom 
three fell ; even of that liorn that had eyes, and a 
mouth that spake very great things, whose look 
was more stout than his fellows. 



' Chald. a prolonging in life h 
26:G4; Rev. 1:7, l:J; 14:14. b v( 
3:35; 1 Cor. 15:-i7; Eph. l:-20-'>-2. 



: given tlum. » Matt. 24:30; 25:31; 
9. » Piia. 2:G-,S; Matt. 23:18; John 
Psa. 145:13. « Heb. 12:SS. t Chald. 



12. Tkeir lives were prolonged ; that is, after their domin- 
ion was tak'jn away. Each of them continued to exist for 
a season in its character as a beast, after it liad been sub- 
jected to the power of the succeeding beast. But the 
fourth beast is destroyed. 

13. Like the Son of man; this is a vision of the Messiah 
appearing in Iruman form. Tkey brought him ; the minis- 
tering angels brought liim to be invested by the Ancient of 
days with universal dominion. See Psa. 2:8; Matt. 28:18. 

16. One of them that stood by; one of the ministering an- 
gels. 

23. The fourth Icingdom ; that this is the Roman empire 
appears [ilaiii from the following considerations. 1. Both 
here and in the second chapter a succession of four great 
monarchies is represented, of which the first three are ad- 
mitted to have been universal. It is altogether reasonable, 
therefore, to look for a universal empire in the fourth ; but 
that empire can be no other than the Roman. 2. The fourth 
beast is represented as the strongest and most terrible of 
them all, which cannot apply to any other than the Roman 
power. 3. All its characters agree with those of the Roman 
empire. 4. These characters cannot be made to agree with 
those of any other power. Those who understand by the 
little horn Antlochus Epiphanes, must consider the fourth 
beast as representing the Syrian monarchy, or perhaps 
Syria and Egypt. But these belong to the third beast. 
They are two of the four divisions into which his empire 
was broken, and which have just been represented by the 
four wings and the four heads of the leopard. 5. No per- 
secuting power comes after this beast. Its dominion is 
destroyed by that of the Messiah, who takes the kingdom 
and holds it for ever. Tliis can apply only to the Roman 
power as perpetuated in its horns. Diverse from all king- 
doms; how peculiar was the constitution of the Roman 
Btate is well known to all students of history. 



21 1 beheld, and the same horn made war with 
the saints, and prevailed against them;" 

22 Until the Ancient of days came, and judg- 
ment was given to the saints of the Most High ; 
and tlie time came tbat the saints possessed the 
kingdom. 

23 Tims he said, Tlie fourth beast shall be the 
fourth kingdom ujion earth, which shall be diverse 
from all kingdoms, and shall devour the wliole 
earth, and sliall tread it down, and break it in 
pieces. 

24 And the ten horns out of this kingdom are 
ten kings that shall arise: and another shall rise 
after them ; and lie shall be diverse from the first, 
and he shall subdue three kings. 

25 And he shall speak great words against the 
Most High, and shall wear out the saints of the 
Most High, and tliink to change times and laws: 
and tlie}^ shall be given into his hand until a time 
and times and tiie dividing of time. 

26 But the judgment shall sit, and they shall 
take away his dominion, to consume and to de- 
stroy it unto the end. 

27 And the kingdom and dominion, and the 
greatness of tlie kingdom under the whole heaven, 
shall be given to the people of the saints of the 
Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting king- 
dom, and all dominions' shall serve and obey him. 

28 Hitherto is the end of the matter. As for 
me Daniel, my cogitations much troubled me, and 
my countenance changed in me: but I kept the 
matter in my heart. 



24. Ten kings; that is, in the language of prophecy, ten 
kingdoms. Shall arise; they shall arise out of this fourth 
beast and exist together, as is plain from the fact that the 
first three of them shall be plucked up by the littk' horn, 
while the rest shall remain. These ten kingdoms seem to 
be those into which the Roman empire was broken upon 
the invasion of the northern nations. See note, chap. 2 : 43. 
Another shall rise ; see ver. 8, 20, 21 ; 2 Thess. 2:3-10; Rev. 
13: 11-18. All the characters of this little horn agree with 
those of the Papal power ; and considering the vast influ- 
ence which this has wielded over God's church, we should 
naturally expect that it would be included in a comprehen- 
sive view like this of the world's history. Shall sidtdue three 
kings ; three of the ten kingdoms. These the Pope over- 
threw by the aid of France, and erected his temporal power 
upon their ruins. For the details of these ten kingdoms, 
and the three that were overthrown by the little horn, the 
reader may consult the Commentaries on Daniel, in which 
this question is discussed at large. 

25. Shall speak great words; of blasphemy, claiming for 
himself the prerogatives of God. Compare 2 Thess. 2:4; 
Rev. 13:5, 6. Wear out; by long continued and bloody 
persecutions. Times and lairt; times and laws which have 
respect to religion. He shall usurp God's authority in 
matters of religion. A time and times and the dividing of 
time; probably here, and in chap. 12:7, a year and two 
years and half a year ; that is, three years and a half, the 
same as "forty and two months," Rev. 11:2; 13:5; and "a 
thousand two hundred and threescore days," Rev. 11:3; 
12:6; each day representing a year, as in Ezek. 4:6. 

2(1. Unto the end; utterly and for ever. 
28. Hitherto is the end of the matter; that is, thus far the 
vision extends, and that closes "the mystery of God." 
INSTRUCTION. 
The history of the world proceeds from beginning to end 
981 



Prrpheli: vi ion of i 



DANIEL VIII. 



ram and the hegoal. 



CHAPTER VIII, 



1 D.mi.l's vision of thp ram and hc-soat. 13 The t«o thousand Ihrep 
hundred days of sacrifice 10 Gabriel coinfortfth Daniel, and inter- 
prctetU the vision. 

IN the third year of the reign of king Belshazzar 
a vision appeared unto mo, ivcn unto me Daniel, 
after tiiat which appeared unto me at the first. 

2 And I saw in a vision; and it came to pass, 
when I saw, tliat I way at Sliiishan in the palace," 
wiiich is in tiie province oi' Klain: and 1 saw in a 
vision, and I was by the river of Ulai. 

3 Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and be- 
hold, there stood before the river a rain wincii 
had two horns: and the two horns were hiiih ; but 
one was liighor than the other," and tiie iiighcr 
came up last. 

4 1 saw the ram pusliing westward, and north- 
ward, and southward ; so that no boasts might 
stand before him, neither was there any that could 
deliver out of his hand; Init lie did according to 
Ills will,'' and becairc great. 

5 And as I was considering, belioid, a he-goat 
came IVotn the west on the face of tlie whole earth,'' 
and touched not tiie ground :* and the goat had A 
notable horn* between his eyes. 

6 -Vnd he came to tiie ram that had two horns, 
which I had seen standing before tiie river, and 
rail unto him in the fury of ids power. 

7 And I saw him come close unto tlic ram, and 
he was moved witli clioler against iiim, and smote 
the ram, and lirake his two horns: and there was 
no power in the ram to stand before him, but he 
cast him down to the ground, and stamped upon 



"ii»th, l:v>. • Mnh scrond. •> ch. 5: lU; II :3, IG: Isa. Hi: la, II. ever. 
21. t Or, none (oiirAed him i/i lAcenrWi. t lUh. a horn of sight, d oh, 7:0, 
etc. e ch. Il:i5, etc. ' I'sa. 'IH;-J; Ezek. -.'U:!.'). S llr. a?n/n.v(, « Isa. 
14:13. t Rev. I-.!:l. I Or, n?<ii««. ■ ver -25 1 Or,/rom. J Kxod. •J9::J«. 



in accordance with God's wise appointment. No groat 
persecuting power can arise without his permission. He 
will overrule its rage and malice for the final triumph ol' 
his own kingdom of righteousness and truth, and will, in 
the end, destroy it by such irresistible and terrible judg- 
ments as shall be a true image of the last great day when 
all iniquity shall be for ever overthrown. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1. At the first; in the first year of Belsliazzar's reign, 
chap. 7:1. 

2. Shushan; Siisa, the winter residence of the Persian 
kings. It lay on the river Ulai, now called Kerah, which 
enters the united stream of the Ku|ihrates and Tigris from 
the north-east. Elcm ; between Babylonia and Persia 
proper, having Media on the north, and the Persian gulf 
on the south. 

3. A mm; the united kingdoms of Media and Persia, 
which are represented by the two horns. One was lusher 
tliantlie oilier, and the higher came up last; Persia, though the 
younger, became under Cyrus the ruling power. 

4. WeMward, and northvard, and southuvrd; the direc- 
tions in which the Persian empire extended its con(|ncsts. 

6. A he-f^oat ; the ( ; recian empire. Touched not the firoiind ; 
these words denote the incioilible swiftncsH of .Alexander's 
conquests, who is th(,- "notable horn between his eyes." 

7. Stamped upon him ; Alexander utterly domolislicil the 
Persian iiionareliy. 

8. IVa.^ broken ; Alexander died at Babylon in the zenith 
of his power. Came up four; upon his death his kingdom 
was dividi'd into four. 

9. Out of one of them ; out of Syria, which was one of the 
four kingdoms. A little horn ; it ia generally agreed that 
this represents the power of Autioehns Epiphanes. About 

982 



liiin: and there was none that could dc- a.m. S4.a. 

,. . , !• 1 • 1 1 h. <'■ about 

liver tiie ram out ot Ins hand. ^■ 

8 Therefore the hc-goat wa.\cd very great : and 
when he was strong, the great horn was broken ; 
and for it came up four notable ones toward the 
four winds of heaven.'' 

9 And out of one of them came forth a little 
horn," whicli waxed exceeding great, toward the 
soutli, and toward the cast, and toward the pleas- 
ant la)id.' 

10 And it; waxed groat, even to^ the host of 
heaven;'^ and it cast down some of the host and 
of tlie stars to the ground," and stamped upon 
tliem. 

11 Yea, he niagniiied //7msr//'cven to' the prince 
of tiie host,' and by' him the daily saerifee was 
taken away,-' and the place of Ids sanctuary was 
(•ast down. 

12 And a host was given him against tlie daily 
saerificc by reason of transgression.' and it cast 
down the truth to tlie ground; and it practised, 
and prospered. 

1:5 • Then 1 lieard one saint speaking,'' and an- 
otiier saint said unto tliat certain saint* which 
spake, IIow long shall be the vision eonccrning the 
daily .s«cr//7cr, and the transgression of desolation,* 
to give botii the sanctuary and the host to be trod- 
den under foot? 

1-1 And he said unto me. Unto two thousand 
and tlirce hundred days;^ then shall the sanctu- 
ary be cleansed.' 

lo 1 And it came to pass, Avhon \,cvcn I Daniel, 
had seen the vision, and sought for the meaning, 

• Or. the host tints given ofer furtltt trttuSi^rrsstott iiiiitinM theilailynicTtik^. 
^ 1 Pel. 1:12. 1 t)r, the nitmheier of strrtts. or titt leoniltffitt uutniertr; 
Hob Pttlmoni. 1 Or. «Mt/«g </Mo/o(e; cli. II :31 ; I--': II. t Hob. rcfnilis 
tltorning I lUh.jusliJlril. 

the year 171 before Christ he commenced a bloody perse- 
cution against the .Jews, in the progress of which he plun- 
dered Jerusalem, slanghtereil an iiiniiense laimbcr of its 
inhabitants, profaned ihe temple and altar with swine's 
ticsh, and finally took away the daily sacrifice, stilistitiiting 
in its stead idolatrons rites. T/tc soi/rt; Kgypt, another of 
the four monarchies, which sprung out of the ruins of 
Alexander's empire. The end; Persia. The pltasanl land; 
Palestine. Kzek. '20:0, l.'i. 

10. The host of henven — Ihe stars; probably a figurative 
description of the .lewisli princes and spiritual rulers. 

11. The prince of Ihe hott ; this seems to mean tied him- 
self, who had established the Jewish stale. 

12. A host was p^iven — theilatli/ sacrifice ; that is, according 
to our version, power was given him to take away the 
daily sacrifice, vor. 11 ; lint many jirefer lo render, " A host 
was given up to him, along with Ihe daily sacrifice;" that 
is, the Jewish host mentioned in (ho luecoding verses. 
lit/ reason of transgression; literally, "by transgression;" 
either by reason of the transgression of (iod's people, or 
in the little horn's transgression against (lod. 

l:i. The transgression of desolation ; or, as Ihe margin, " Iho 
desolating tran.sgression ;" that is, the heathen in Ood's 
sanctuary, polluting and desolating it. Compare chap. 
11::U. 

M. Two tlionsnnd and three httndretl ila>is; literally, "two 
thousand and three hundred evenings and mornings," vcr. 
2ii. This peculiar form of expression seems to have been 
chosen here lo reiu'esent so many literal days, which in- 
clude the wlnde jioriod of Aniiochus' i>er8eeutions. Tho 
time when the <laily sacrifice was suspended wstM. accord- 
ing to Joseplius, three years. Cleansed; by a new ilrdiea- 
ti<m to God. This was by Judas Maccabasus, befoie Cbritit 
11)5. 



Gabriel interprcls 



DANIEL iX. 



Uankl's umfessli.n of sin. 



5.a. appearance ol a man. 

U> And 1 heard a man's voice between the hanks 
o/Ulai, wliicli called, and said, Gabriel," make this 
riKvi to understand the vision. 

17 So h(! came near where I stood: and wlien 
he came, I was afraid, and fell upon my face: but 
lie said unto \\k, Understand, son of man: for 
at tin; time of the end shall be the vision. 

IS Now as he was speaking with me, I was in a 
deep sleep on my face toward the ground :'' but 
he touched me. and set me u])right.* 

19 And he said, Jjehold, I will make thee know 
what shall be in the last end of the indignation: 
fur at the time a])poiuted the end shall be.'' 

20 The ram which thou sawest having iifoliorns 
are the kings of Media and Persia." 

21 And the rough goat is the king of Grecia: 
and the great horn that is between his eyes is the 
lirst king. 

22 Now (hat being broken, whereas four stood 
up for it, four kingdoms shall stand up out of the 
nation, but not in his power. 

23 And in the latter time of their kinadom, 
when the transgi'essors are come to the full,* a 
king of fierce countenance, and understanding 
dark sentences, shall stand up. 

24 And Lis power shall be mighty, but not by 
his own power:" and he shall destroy wonder- 
fully, and shall prosper, and practise, and shall 
destroy the mighty and the holy people.'' 

2.3 And through his policy also he shall cause 
craft to prospei- in his hand ; and he shall magnify 
himself in his heart, and by peace- shall destroy 
many: he shall also stand up against the Prince 
of princes; but he shall be broken without hand. 

2tj And the vision of the evening and the morn- 
ing which was told is true: wherefore shut thoti 
up the vision ;" for it shall be for many days. 

27 And I Daniel fainted, and was sick certain 



Liiko, l:l9:2r.. b ch, 1U:9, 10. 

r. « Hib. i:-i: Rev. 10:7. d ve 

I Heb. people of the holy on 

.11. IU:1. li ch. .5::)1. I Or, m 



' Heb. made n 


e stntul upon tni/ stand- 


r. 3. tHeb. arro 


7rjdishe'!. e Rev 17: |:J, 


es. f ver. lU, IL 


, etc. § (ir, prosper iiy. 


wliirh he. » Jer 


:i5:ll. 1-J. J Neti. 1:4. 



16. Between the banh of Ulai; the voice called from the 
river itself. Chap. 12: fi. 

17. At tlie tims of the end ; the same as, " the last end of 
the indignation," ver. 19, and " tlie latter time of their 
kingdom," ver. 23. The vision refers to a great crisis in 
the history of the Jews, and which is in itself a type of a 
still mightier crisis in the distant future. See notes on 
chap. 11:36; 12:11. 

18. I was in a deep sleep ; or, " I fell into a deep sleep," 
overpowered by the lirightness of the vision. 

23. Transgressors; this seem.s to mean the transgressors 
among God's people. Dark sentences; wily plots and strat- 
agems. 

24. Not by his own power; either, not by his proper 
might, but by craft and policy ; or, by a power given him 
from on high. 

25. By peaxe; by attacking them unawares under pre- 
tences of friendship. Without hand ; without human hand. 
Ue perished b}' a violent and distressing sickness inflicted 
liy Uod's hand. 

26. 27. Vi.'iion of the evening and the morning; see note 
ver. 14. S'lut Ihnn up the vision — none understood it; he was 
not then to make known the interjjretation of the vision, 
which still presents many dilficulties to the ablest com- 
mentators. 



days; afterward I rose up, and did the king's 
business: and I was astonished at the vision, but 
none understood it. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 P™id, considering the time of the captivity, 3 m,^l:elh confession of 
SIMS, IG anil prayeth for the restoration of Jenisaieni. '2ii Gjibriel 
informeth iuui of ihe seventy weeks. 

LN the first year of Darius the son of Ahasiierus, 
of the seed of the Medes,'' which' was made 
king over the realm of the Chaldeans; 

2 In the first year of his reign, I Daniel under- 
stood by books the number of the years, whereof 
the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the 
prophet, that he would accomplish seventy years 
in the desolations of Jerusalem.' 

3 li And 1 set my face unto the Lord God, to 
seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting, 
and sackcloth, and ashes :J 

4 And I prayed unto the Lord my God, and 
made my confession, and said, Lord, the great 
and dreadful God,'' keeping the covenant and mer- 
cy to them that love him, and to them that keep 
his commandments;' 

5 We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, 
and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even 
by departing from thy precepts and from tliy judg- 
ments:'" 

G Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants 
the prophets, which spake in thy name to our 
kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to all the 
people of the land." 

7 Lord, righteousness belongeth unto thee,' but 
unto us confusion of faces, as at this day;" to the 
men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusa- 
lem, and unto all Israel, that are near, and that are 
lar oft", through all the countries whither thou hast 
driven them,i' because of their trespass that they 
have trespassed against thee. 

8 Lord, to us belonseth confusion of face,"! to 



etc.; 


•ler 


2a: 10 


-l:). 


k Neh. 


9 


:i2, 


etc' 


1 Exod. 


211:0 




n p 


a 


100:0; Isa. 


lilTii 


7. 


n -iQS 


r. :<(> 


15, 16. 


1 


Or 


thou 


hast. 


Csa 


r.i 


■1. 


P 


T,ev. 


■X:Si, 


M. 


qK2 


ek. 10 


U:J. 

























INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-8, 20-22. When God has purposes to be accomplished 
by a nation, he arms it with invincible strength; when the 
work assigned is done, he takes away its strength and gives 
it up to the power of otiiers ; and these, in like manner, 
execute his high counsels, while they may be intent only 
upon carrying out their own schemes of ambition and 
conquest. Isa. 10:5-19. 

9-14,23-25. The wisdom of God has often permitted his 
church to be wasted by fierce and bloody persecutors, who 
had all the advantages for destroying her that power and 
policy could command ; yet the result has been, that his 
l)eople have been purified and made more prosperous by 
their suiferings, while their persecutors have miserably 
perished. 

27. A glimpse of the sufferings that were coming upon 
his people overcame the prophet's strength, and unfitted 
him for business. How merciful, then, is that arrangement 
which hides from God's children the future troubles that 
ure appointed for them and the church. Yet wlun the 
hour for undergoing them arrives, they receive strength 
both to bear them and to triumph over tliem. 

CHAPTER IX. 

2. Boofa; the writings of Jeremiah. Jer. 25:11,12; 29:10. 
983 



Prayer for Jerusaleti 



DANIEL IX. 



Coming of the Messiah. 



our kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, be- 
cause we have sinned a,<rainst tliee. 

9 To the Lord our God belong mercies and for- 
givenesses," though we have rebelled against iiim; 

10 Neither have we obeyed the voice of the 
Lord our God, to walk in liis laws, which he set 
before us bv liis servants tlie prophets. 

11 Yea, all l.-^rael have transgressed thy law,'' 
even by departing, that they miglit not obey tiiy 
voice; therefore the curse is poured upon us, and 
the oath that is written in the law of Moses the 
servant of God, because we have sinned against 
him. 

12 And he hath confirmed his words, which ho 
spake against us, and against our judges that 
judged us, by bringing upon us a great evil : for 
under tlie whole heaven liath not been done as 
hath been done upon Jerusalem. 

13 As it is written in tlu; law of Jloses," all this 
evil is come upon us: yet made we not our prayoi- 
before" the Loud our God. that wo might turn 
from our iniipiities, and understand tliy trulli. 

14 Therefore hath the LuiiD watched upon the 
evil, and brougiit it upon us: for the Lord our 
God is righteous in all his works wiiich he doeth:'' 
for we obeyed not his voice. 

15 And now, Lord our (!od, that hast brought 
thy people I'ortli out of the land of Egypt with a 
mighty hand, and hast gotten thee renown,'* as at 
this day ; we have sinned, we have done wickedly. 

16 1 Lord, according to all thy righteousness, 
I beseech thee, let tliinc anger and thy fury be 
turned away from thy city Jerusalem, tliy lioly 
mountain : because for our sins, and for the iniqui- 
ties of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are 
become a reproach to all i/iat are about us. 

17 Now therefore, our God, hear the prayer 
of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause thy 
face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, 
for the Lord's sake. 

18 O my God, inclino^ thine ear, and hear ; open 



»P«a. 130:4, 7. bIsi.l:4-0. c Lev. 'JO: 11, etc. ; Dcut. 2S:15, cic. ; Lam 
2:1.')-17 • Hebi-alreateJ wt not llir /an of. J Nell. flSW. t Heb. mnrfir 
IA« a name. I Heb. wktreupoii l/nf name is called. S lleb. cause to fall. 
I Heb. with wtariness. ot fli!;lu. 1 Ileb. make thee skilful of. • Heb. icon/, 
t Heb. a man of desires. I They began from the Iwcnticlh of Artaxerxc*. 
« Num. U;3l; Ezek. 4:0. I Or, restrnin. I Or. seal up. < Heb. 2:12. 



IG. Thtj riglUeousness ; in fulfilling thy promises to thy 
people. 

24. Seventy weeks; of this most interestirif; prophecy the 
following is a summary view. 1. The weeks should be 
understood as weeks of years, making four hundred and 
ninety years. 2. This period is divided by the angel into 
three parts, seven weeks, sixty-two weeks, and one week. 
3. As the angel reckons by weeks of seven years caeli, wo 
are not to seek in the fulfdnient for any more exact suli- 
divisions of time. 4. We should begin to reckon from 
the decree for the rebuilding of the cily and walls by 
Artaxer.xcs. Neh. 2:4-8; the former decrees of Cyrus and 
Darius having respect only to the rcbnilding of the tem- 
ple. Ezra 1:2; (i: 1-12. The date of this decree is placed 
by learned men somcwhore from four hundred and lifly- 
four to four hundred and f(jrly-foMr years before Christ. 
6. The last of the sevenly weeks, Vieing that in which the 
Messiah is cut off, has respect not to his birth, but to his 
appearance as a public teacher. To finish the transgres- 
sion — everlaslinp righteousness; all these expressions most 
naturally refer to the expiation and removal of siu by our 
Lord's propitiatory death on the cross. 
'JS4 



thine eyes, and behold our desolation?:, and a. m. .■mss. 
the city which is called by thy name:' for s^*" 
we do not present* our su[)plications before thee 
for our righteousnesses, but for thy great mercies. 

19 Lord, hear; Lord, forgive; O Lord, 
hearken and do; defer not, for thine own sake. 
my God : for thy city and thy people are called by 
thy name. 

20 1i And while I was speaking, and praying, and 
confessing ray sin and the sin of my jieople L<rael, 
and presenting my supplication before the Lord 
my God for the holy mountain of my God ; 

21 Yea, while I vas s]>eaking in prayer, even the 
man Gabriel, whom 1 had seen in the vision at 
the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly,' touched 
mo about the time of the evening oblation. 

22 And he informed vie, and talked with me, 
and said, Daniel. I am now come forth to give 
tlioo skill and' understanding. 

2;5 At the beginning of thy su|i)ilications the 
commandment' canu' forth, and I am come to show 
thee; for thou art greatly beloved:' therefore un- 
derstand the matter, and consider the vision. 

24 Seventy weeks* are determined upon thy peo- 
ple and upon thy holy city," to iinislr' the trans- 
gression, and to make an end of' sins, and to make 
reconciliation for iiii(]uity, and to bring in ever- 
lasting righteousness,' and to seal up the vision 
and prophecy,' and to anoint the most Holy. 

2.5 Know therefore and understand, t/tat. from 
the going forth of the commandment to restore 
and to build* .Jerusalem, unto the Jlessiah the 
Prince, skaU be seven weeks, and threescore and 
two weeks: the street shall be built again,* and 
the wall,' even in troul)lous^ times." 

26 And after threescore and two weeks shall 
Messiah 1)0 cut ofl','' but not for himself:' and the 
people of the prince that shall come shall destroy 
the city and the sanctuary;^ and the end thereof 
s/ia// be with a flood, and unto the end of the war 
desolations are determined.' 



^ Ueh prophet . ' Or. build again 1 }Uh. return and he built. > Or breach, 
or ditch, i Heb. strait of . It Neh. 4:?, elc i 6: 15 * Luke S):-*. 40. I Or, 
and .'hall have nothing; John \I:M. 1 t)r. and they ^the Jeics) shall bt no 
more his people, Hog. . -9, or the princess {MessiaJi^s, vet. H) future people, 
' Or, ir shtttt be cut off by desolations. 



2r>. Seven weeks; the first division of the seventy weeka, 
seeming to be that in which the rebuilding of the city and 
its walls shall be com|)letcd. It includes tlie whole period 
of Nehemiah's administration, which some think extended 
through forty -nine years. In troublous times; amid the 
continued opposition recorded in the book of Nehcmiah. 

26. After threescore anil two weeks; that is, the threescore 
and two weeks that follow the seven weeks ; in other 
words, after sixty-nine weeks, and during the seventieth 
week. If we reckon, as some eminent chronologisis do, 
the date of .\rtaxerxes' decree to rebuild Jerusalem from 
the year before Christ 454, sixty-nine weeks of years bring 
us to A. D. 29, which is about the time of our Lord's en- 
trance u|)on his public ministry. If, with others, we reckon 
from the year 419 before Christ, this liriiigs us to A. 1).34, 
or about the time of his death. This is as near as we can 
hope to come, considering that neither the time of Arta- 
xerxes' decree, or of our I.ord's birth and baptism, is ex- 
actly settled. BiU not for himself; that is, not for his own, 
but for our sins. Isn. 5:i:l, :i, .-i, 6. 10; 1 Pet. 2:24. Tht 
people of the prince; the armies sent hy the Roman em- 
peror. 



The prnphd scelh 



DANIEL X, 



a sloricus vision. 



A-M.^3iM. 27 And Iio shall confirm the* covenant 
MS. with many for one week : and in the miilst 
of tho 'VFeck ho shall canse the sacrifice and the 
oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of 
abominations he shall make it desolate,* even 
nntil the consummation, ainJ that determined shall 
bo poured upon the desolate.' 



CIIAPTEU X. 

1 Daniel having humbled himself, seeth a vision. 19 Being troubk'tl 
with tear, he is coiiiforted by the angel. 

IN the third year of Cyrus kin^: of Persia a thing 
was revealed unto Daniel, whose name was 
called Belteshazzar ; and the thing %cas true, but 
the time appointed was long:^ and he understood 
the thing, and had understanding of the vision. 

2 In those days I Daniel was mourning three full 
weeks.' 

3 I ate no pleasant bread,^ neither came flesh 
nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint my- 
self at all, till three whole weeks were fulfilled. 

4 And in the four and twentieth day of the first 
month, as I was by the side of the great river, 
which is Hiddokel ; 

.5 Then 1 lifted up nunc eyes, and looked, and 
behold a* certain man clothed in linen, whose 
loins were girded witii fine gold of Uphaz : 

6 His body also was like the beryl, and his face 
as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as 
lamps of Hre, and his arms and his feet like iu 



' Or, a. t Or, upon ihf- brittlnjlents Shalt be t/ie idols of Ihe desolatoT. I C 
defotntor. i H-b snnt. I Heb. weeks of days. H Hub, brend of desir: 
• Heh. one. » Re». I : K!-I7. t Or, t-iVor. i Bub. moi-ed. i Heh. of desir, 



27. Tae coveniuit; the new covenant of grace which was 
ratified by his death. Jer. 21:31, compared with Heb. 
8:6-13. Witk many; these are his spiritual seed in all 
ages. Psa. 22:30; Isa. 53:11. Fo)- one Jirei ,• that is, with- 
in the one week. The words of the angel assert simply, 
that this transaction takes place in the seventieth week. 
To cease; by the one offering of himself, he accomplished 
that which the daily sacrifice and oblation typified. Tlius 
he made tliem no longer necessary, and God soon after- 
wards abolished them by the hand of the Romans. And 
for the overspreading — desolate; the marginal reading is to 
be preferred. -The desolator" of which it speaks is the 
Roman power. Our Saviour himself interpreted these 
words of the Roman hosts standin,g in the holy place, 
itatt. 21:15; Mark 13:U. Comiiare Luke 21:20. 'Tlie con- 
summation, and that determined; the completion of Jerusa- 
leni'.s overthrow as determined by God. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The certainty of God's revealed purposes cannot set 
aside the necessity of fervent prayer and earnest labor, 
since it is God's good pleasure to accomplish them by 
these instrumentalities. Ezekiel 36:37; Acts 27:24, 31, 
42-44. 

4-in. That God may remove the discipline which he has 
laid upon his people, it is necessary that they deeply hum- 
ble themselves at his footstool, justifying him in all his 
dealin2;s with them. 

20-23. "The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man 
availeth much." It can draw down from heaven great 
blessings, not only upon himself, but upon his people 
also, and obtain for him glorious discoveries of God's 
gracious purposes for the redemption of man. 

24. The " reconciliation for iniquity," and the " everlast- 
ing righteousness " which " the Messiah the Prince " ac- 
complished by his expiatory death on the cross, are the 
great central fact of redemption. It was this that Gabriel 
revealed to Daniel, in answer to his fervent prayer for 



Cidor to polished brass, and the voice of his words 
like the voice of a multitude." 

7 And I Daniel alone saw the vision : Ibr the 
men that were with me saw not the vision; Ijuta 
great quaking fell upon them, so that they tied to 
hid(! themselves. 

S Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great 
vision, and there remained no strength in me: for 
my comeliness* was turned in me into corruption, 
and 1 retained no strength. 

9 Yet heard I the voice of his words : and when 
1 heard the voice of his words, then was I in a 
deep sleep on my face, and my face toward the 
ground. 

10 H And behold, a hand touched me, which 
set* me u()on my knees and upon the palms of my 
hands. 

1 1 And he said unto me, Daniel, a man greatly 
beloved,-^ understand the words that I speak unto 
thee, and stand upright:' for unto thee am I now 
sent. And when he had spoken this word unto 
me, I stood trembling. 

12 Tiien said he unto me. Fear not, Daniel : for 
from the first day that thou didst set thy heart to 
understand, and to chasten thyself before tliy God, 
thy words were heard,'' and I am come for thy 
words. 

13 But tho prince of the kingdom of Persia with- 
stood me one and twenty days: but lo, Michael, 
one of the chief" princes, came to help me ; and 1 
remained there with the kings of Persia. 



I Heb. upon tinj standing. 1> Acts 10l:JU, 31. D Or, the first ; Jude 



God's people; and it was of this that Moses and Elias 
spoke with the Saviour on the mount of transfiguration. 

25-27. " Troublous times " have ever been connected 
with the progress of God's cause. The salvation of the 
true Israel is accomplished in the midst of terrible judg- 
ments upon hypocrites and unbelievers. 

CHAPTER X. 

The scene of this chapter is laid in the spiritual world. 
It represents angels of the highest rank, good and evil, as 
taking an active part in the aSairs of earthly kingdoms : 
and this view corresponds with the teachings of the New 
Testament. Eph. 2:2; 6:12. 

1. But the time appointed was long ; or, " and it was a great 
warfare ;" that is, the prophecy related to a time of great 
trial. 

2. Was mourning; in view of the calamitous condition 
of his people. Compare chap. 9:3. Three full weeks ; Wt- 
erally, "three weeks of days," that is, of literal days. 

7. Saw the vision ; that is, remained to see the angel and 
hear his revelations. Saw not tlie vision ; they fled in terror 
at its first appearance, so that they had no distinct ai)pre- 
hension of it. 

9. Then was lin a deep sleep ; or ," I fell into a deep sleep." 
See note on chap. 8:18. 

10. Set me ; literally, " set me tottering." 

13. The prince of tlie kingdom of Persia; this seems to 
have been an evil angel of high degree. Witlistuod me; 
probably by influencing the counsels of Persia against 
tho Jews. 'Michael ; he is called in the New Testament, 
" the archangel," Jude 9. He ajipears as an angel of the 
highest order, and having a special charge over the Jew- 
ish people. Ver. 21; chap. 12:1. Some have supposed 
that he symbolized Christ himself. Remained there ; to 
give a right direction to the counsels of Persia. The k.-iT.": 
of Persia; probably a general name for the whole royal 
family. 

985 



A71 ange! comforts him. 



DA^'IEI. XI. 



GrcrthrcK of Pcrsii. 



14 Now I am como to mako thcc undfrsfand 
wluit sliall boiull thy ])Ooplc in the latter ilaysf' 
for yet the vision is lor manii days.'' 

15 And when lie liad spoken such words unto 
me, I set my face toward tlie ground, and I be- 
came dumb. 

10 And behold, one like the simiiitudo of the 
sons of men touched my lips:'' then I opened my 
month, anil spake, and said unto him that stood 
before me. O my lord, by the vision my sorrows 
are turned upon me, and 1 have retained no 
strength.'' 

17 For how can the servant of this* my lord 
talk with this my lord? lor as for me. straiiihtway 
there remained no streng-th in me, neither is there 
breath left in me. 

18 Then there came again and touched me ovf 
like the appearance of a man. and he strengthened 
me, 

19 And said, O man greatly beloved, fear not: 
peace be unto thee; \n\ stronsi', yea, be strong. 
And when Le had sjjoken unto me, 1 wasstrengtii- 
cned, and said. Let my lord speak ; for thou hast 
strengthened me.'' 

20 Then said he, Knowest thou wherefore I come 
unto thee? and now will 1 return to fight with 
the prince of Persia:' and when 1 am gone forth, 
lo, the jn-ince of Grecia shall come. 

21 But I will show thee that which is noted in 
the Scripture of truth : and there is none that hold- 
cth* with me in these things, but Michael your 
prince.* 



CHAPTER XI. 



1 The ovcrtlwow of Persia \>y tin- king of Orccia. .') Le.igiirs and con- 
fiicUs between the liinus of llie soutli iind of (lie rorth. VM The inva- 
sion iinti tyranny of the Romans. 

ALSO I in the first year of Darius the Mede,'' 
even Lstoodtoconiirm and to strengthen him. 

2 And now will I show thee the truth.' Behold, 
there shall stand up yet three kings in Persia ; 
and the fourth shall be far richer than they all : and 
l)y his strength tlirough liis ricdies he shall stir up 
all against the realm of Grecia. 

3 And a mighty king shall stand up. that shall 
rule with great dominion, and do according to his 
will. 

4 And when lie shall stand up, his kingdom shall 
bo bi'oken, and shall be divided toward the four 
winds of heaven ;J and not to his posterity, nor 
according to his dominion which he ruled : for his 
kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others be- 
sides those. 

5 1i And the king of the south .«hall be strong, 
and one of his jjrinces: and he shall be strong 
above him, and have donunion ; his dominion shall 
he a great dominion. 

G And in the end of years they shall join* them- 
selves together; for the king's daughter of the 
soutli shall come trv the king of the noi'th to make 
an agreement:' butsheslniU not retain the power 
of the arm ; neither shall he stand, nor his arm : 
but she shall bo given up, and they that brought 
her, and l.'e that begat her,' and he that. strength- 
ened her in these times. 



. I> oh. S.aO; Hab. -i:^. ' Isa. (iw.^l; .ler, 1:!!. 
tof. 'i Cor. \-i:\). I vtT. 13. t Heb. slrenglhm- 



I ell, himxclf. s vcr. I:i. h vh. S):l. i Amos :i:7. ) oh. 8:-t, etc. 1 Heb. 
nsaociate. 5 Heb. rights. I Or, whom sht brotfjibl forth. 



15. Ssl mji face toward the ground ; again overpowered by 
the majesty of the angel's presence. { 

IG. L- Ice the ximilitiide; it .sconis to be the same angel, j 
but now appearing like a man, that Daniel might not be 
overpowered by his presence. 

20. Gone forth ; prol)al)ly from Persia. The prince of 
Grecia; probably tlie angel wliom God had set over the 
aflairs of Grecia, who would come l)y influencing the coun- 
sels of Grecia to malic war upon Persia. Alexander greatly 
favored the Jewish people. 

21. T.'te Scripture of truth; the heavenly book in which 
God'a counsels are written. Compare Rev. 5: 1. None that 
holilel'i w'th me in these Ihingfi; not, is friendly to my cause, 
for doubtless there were multitudes of such ; but assists 
ine against the prince of Persia. The passage seems to 
teaeli tliat the lioly angels have cacli his particular post 
iissi,'nod to him by God, which ho may not leave for an- 
other licld of labor. 

INSTIUTCTION. 
There is an invisible worl I of mighty power and activ- 
ity, that continually tiikcs part in t!io affairs of men. Over 
this, as overall cartlily potentates, God rules with supreme 
power; and he lias subjected it all to tlie dominion of 
Clirist, exalting him " far above all principality, and jiower, 
and might, and dominion, an<l every name that is named, 
not only in this world, but also in that which is to come;" 
putting "all tilings under his feet;" and giving him to be 
"tlio head over all tilings to the cliurch." Eph. 1:20-22; 
(i:U, 12; Col. 2:10-ir). 

CII.VPTKIJ XI. 

1. /,• the angel sjieaking in llio prccedincc chapter. 

2. The fourth xhnll be far richer than Ihci/ nil ; Xerxes, who 
was celebrated for his wealth and his unsuccessful war 
against Greece. 

98G 



3. Amightijliing; Alexander of Macedon. His invasion 
of Asia took place about 329 years before Christ, and 140 
years after the death of Xerxes. 

4. He liroken ; see chap. 8:8. Not to his posterity; Alex- 
ander's empire fell into the hands of his generals, wlio 
divided it among themselves. Besides tliosc; besides his 
posterity'. 

5. The king of the south ; Ptolemy Lagi, called also Ptol- 
emy Soter, king of Egypt, which was one of the four king- 
doms into which Alexander's cm]>ire was broken, and 
which included Judea. And one of his princes; this was 
Seleucus Nicator.who served for a period under Ptolemy. 
Anil he shall be strong above him ; that is, Seleucus shall bo 
strong above Ptolemy. Uc was the founiler of the Syrian 
kingdom, and his successors on the throne of Syria arc 
the kings of the north spoken of in this jiropheey. Tho 
reason whv the historv of these two kingdoms is given at 
sncli lengih is doubdess that Palesline. lying between 
them, was an object for the possession of wliioh they both 
contended, and was thus involved in all t'-cir wars, and 
suftorcd greatlv, to which ever side victory inclined. 

(1. In the cnd'of i/cars; that is, after llie laiiso of certain 
years. The eveiits next iircdictcd occurred after tho 
death of these two kings. Thcii shall join thcm.vlvcs; that 
is, the king of the south and the king of the north. I'tole- 
mv Philadelphusking of Kgyjit.aiid AntiochusTlieos king 
of Svria, made an alliance upon the coiulilion that Antio- 
chus should divorce his wife baoclice.and marry liercnicc, 
daughter of Ptolemy, ^hnll not retain the m.vcr rflhe arm ; 
siiafi not lel.ain her'influence with Antiochus. Her father 
died soon afterwards, when Antiochus put away ISerenico 
and took ba<;k baodice. Laodice lirst caused licrenico 
and lier infant child to be destroyed, ami tlien murdered 
her husband. She was herself afterwards slain by Ptole- 
my Kuergotes, Tints all tho parties to this alliance per- 
ished. 



King.-: of the north 



DANIEL XI. 



and of the soalJi. 



A. ji. vr.o. 1 But out of a branch- of her roots shall 
"aij.""" one stand up in his estate/ which shall 
come with an army, and shall enter into the for- 
tress of the kinii' of the north, and shall deal 
against thoui, and shall prevail: 

8 And shall also carry captives into Egypt 
their gods, with their ]irinccs, and with their 
precious vessels* of silver and of gold; and he 
shall continue more years than the king of the 
north. 

9 So the king of the south shall come into his 
kingdom, and shall return into his own land. 

I 10 But his sons shall be stirred up,* and shall 

• assemble a multitude of great forces: and one 

shall certainly come, and overflow," and pass 

through: then shall ho return, and be stirred up," 

even to his fortress.'' 

11 And the king of the south shall be moved 
with choler, and shall come forth and fight with 
him, even with the king of the north : and he shall 
set forth a great multitude; but the multitude 
shall be given into his hand." 

\1 And when he hath taken away the multitude, 
his heart shall be lifted up; and lie shall cast 
down many ten thousands: but he shall not be 
strengthened hy if. 

13 For tlie king of the north shall return, and 
sliall set forth a multitude greater than the for- 
mer, and shall certainly come after certain years'' 
with a great army and with much riches. 

11 And in those times there shall many stand 
lip against the king of the south : also the robbers^ 



• Or, p'are. or office; vpr. aO. t Heb. vessels of tkeir iksire. I Or, H'cir. 
1 ch. «:-ii; Im. tiiS. » Or. be slirreil up tiaain. b vsr. 7. t Psa; ;i:i:lli; 
Eccl. 0:11. li. I Heb. at' tlie end of times, even year.s ; ch. 4:11); l'J:7. 
Illch. cliiUlren of roMers. dHev. 17:17. •lleh.cilijofmimitiaiis. t Heb. 
feop'e i-fhis choires. I Or, goodly land; }hb. llie Irinil of ornnmnit; ver. 



7. A branch of her roots; that is, one of the mcmljers of 
her lUiiiily. This was Ptolemy Euergetes, the l)rotlier of 
BLTeiiiee, and successor of Ptolemy Philadclphus, wlio 
invaled and plundered Syria, as here foretold. In his 
estate ; in the place of his father on the throne of Egypt. 
Tiic kitif^ of Ike north ; Seloucus Callinicus, the sou and 
successor of Antiochus Tlieos. 

10. His sons ; tlie two sons of Seleucus Callinicus. One 
shall — come; this was Antiochus the Great; the other died 
liariy. Stall he return — be stirred xip; or, as the margin, 
•' he stirred up again," make a second attack on tlie king 
of the south. A'ue/i to his fortress; that is, penetrating 
even to the fortress of the Egyptian king. This is gener- 
ally supposed to have been Raphia, a strong-hold on the 
Mediterranean, at th3 entrance of Egypt. 

11. T'te king of the south; Ptolemy Philopater, son of 
Ptolemy Euergetes, a dissolute and effeminate king. lie 
shall set forth; Antiochus, who mot Ptolemy with a vast 
army. S'lall be given into his hand; into Ptolemy's hand. 
He utterly routed the forces of Antiochus, but made no 
good use of liis victory, as is predicted in the next verse. 

14. S'lalt man ij stand up; among these was Philip king of 
Alacedon, who ma le an alliance with Antiochus against 
I'lgypt. The king of the south; Ptolemy Epiphanes, the son 
iif Ptolemy Philoiiator, who was then a minor in the guar- 
dianship of weak and corrupt jiersons. The robbers ofthtj 
people ; that is, the violent among thy people. The refer- 
ence is to that party of the Jews who sided with Antio- 
elins.and heljied liim to expel tlie Egyptian garrison from 
.(criisalem. To establish the vision; tliat is, that thus this 
vision of trouble about to come upon thy people may be 
fulfilled. Through their .influence, Judea'passed from the 
dominion of Egypt to that of Syria; and thus the way was 
jnepared for the terrible sufferings which afterwards came 



of thy people sliall exalt themselves to establish 
the vision ; but they shall fill.'- 

I.') So the kiug of the north shall come, and cast 
up a mount, and take the most fenced cities :" and 
the arms of the south shall not withstand, neither 
his chosen jieople,* neither s/ia/l there he any 
strength to withstand. 

16 But ho that cometli against him shall do ac- 
cording to his own will, and none shall stand be- 
fore him: and he shall stand in the gloriiius laud,* 
which Ity his hand shall be consumed. 

17 lie shall also set his face to enter with the 
strength of his whole kingdom,'' and upright ones^ 
with him ; thus shall he do : and ho shall give him 
the daughter of women, corrn]>ting" her: but she 
shall not stand on his side, neither be for him. 

18 After this shall he turn his face unto the 
isles, and shall take many : but a prince for his 
own behalf^ shall cause the reproach* ofl'ercd by 
him to cease; without his own reproach he shall 
cause it to turn upon him. 

19 Then he shall turn his face toward the fort 
of his own land: but he shall stumble and fall, 
and not be found.' 

20 Then shall stand up in his estate^ a raiser of 
ta.xes in* the glory of the kingdom: but within 
few days he shall be destroyed, neither in anger,^ 
nor in battle. 

21 And in his estate' shall stand up a vile per- 
son, to whom they shall not give the honor of the 
kingdom : but he shall come in peaceably, and ob- 
tain the kingdom by flatteries. 



Jl, 45. e Prm-. 19:-il. ! 
lororriijil. ^ Heb. him. 
I Heb. one that rnuseth c 
angers. 1 Or, place; vei 



Or, ttiur/i iiprightnes! 
Heb. his reproach, t 
1 exactor to pass over 



upon the Jews, as revealed in vision to Daniel. Ihil they 
shiillfall; their plans sliall be frustrated, and bring ruin 
upon themselves and their country. 

l(i. He shall stand; Antiochus. In tlie glorious land ; in 
Palestine. Be consumed; drained of its means, and wasted 
by the conflict between him and the Egyptian king. 

17. To enter with the strength of his whole Icingdom ; or, 
" to enter into the strength of his whole kingdom ;" that 
is, to possess himself of the whole kingdom of the king of 
the south. Upright ones with hiin ; or, " he shall make a 
compact with him ;" that is, with the king of Egypt, hop- 
ing thus to gain influence in Egypt. This was niado 
necessary by the power of the Romans, who had assumed 
the guardianship of Egypt. Give him; give the king of 
Egypt. The daughter c/u'CTnen,-' Cleopatra, his daughter. 
Corrupting Iter; literally, as the margin, " to corrupt her ;" 
that is, to corrupt Cleopatra, by making her the instru- 
ment of his perfidious designs upon Egypt. The king of 
Egypt was still a minor, under the control of guardians. 

is. 17(6 isles; Greece and the neighboring regions upon 
which he waged war. A prince; a lionian general, name- 
ly, Scipio. For his own bchiilf; literally, " for himself," that 
is, for his own honor and that of Rdine. 

1!). Stumble and full; Antiochus was slain by the jieople 
of Elymais, a province beyond the Tigris, while attempt- 
ing to plunder their temple. 

20. A raiser of taxes; Seleucus Philopator. The taxes 
were probably designed to meet the enormous expenses 
w licli his father had incurred. Neither in anger, nor in 
battle ; he was destroyed by poison. 

21. A vie person; Antiochus Epiphanes, the brother of 
the preceding king, and a cruel persecutor of the Jews. 
Not give the honor of the kingdom ; he was neither the regu- 
lar heir, nor did they account him worthy of it. 

9aT 



Kings of the north 



DANIEL XI. 



and. of the south. 



22 And witli (lie arms of a flood sliall they bo 
overllou'ii IVoiii hcforo liiin, and shall be broken;" 
j'ca, ahso the prince of the covenant. 

23 And ai'ter the league made with him ho shall 
work deceitfully:'' for he shall come up, and shall 
become strong with a small people. 

24 Ho shall enter peaceably even upon the fat- 
test* places of the province; and he shall do titat 
wliicdi his fathers have not done, nor his fathers' 
fathers; he shall scatter among them the i)rey, 
and spoil, and riches: yea, and he shall forecast his 
devices* against the strong-holds, even for a time. 

25 And he shall stir np his power and his cour- 
age against the king of the south with a great 
army; and Ihn king of the soutii shall 1)0 stirred 
up to battle with a very great and mighty army; 
but he shall not stand: for they shall forecast de- 
Tices against him. 

26 Yea, they that feed of the portion of his meat 
shall destroy him, and his army shall overflow: 
and many shall fall down slain. 

27 And both these kings' hearts' xhall be to do 
mischief, and they shall speak lies at one table; 
but it shall not prosper: for yet the end shall he 
at the time appointed.'' 

28 Then shall ho return into his land with great 
riches ; and his heart sludl be against the holy cov- 
enant; and he shall do exploits, and return to his 
own land. 

2!) At the time appointed he shall return, and 
come toward the south : but it shall not be as the 
former, or as the lattei'. 

30 1 For the ships of Ciiittim shall come against 



» Ver II). Fulfilled 170 B 
fat. t Heb. think Ins llwii^li, 



l> ch. 8:45. * Or, im 

I Hob. their hearts. ' 

•24:21. « ruimied lli.^, 109. B. C. I Or. 



> the penctafjU and 
■er. -jy, :J.'), 40 : ch. 
stonislielh. II Or, 



22. S'uiU lliey be overflown; the lipjyptians, upon whom 
ho had raaile an assault, as liere foretold. Tke prince oj 
tlie covenant; the young Egyptian king, with whom he 
made a league, ver. 23. 

2H. Come tip; ascend into Upper Egypt. Willi a .imall 
people ; ho took with liimseH' only a Kinall force, and under 
pretence of acting as the young king's guardian, made 
himself master of all Egypt. 

21. Peaceabhj; professing to act as the friend of the 
Egyptian king. Shall do — his fathers' father.^ ; in thus ob- 
taii)ii)g possession of Egypt, he did what none of his fure- 
fathers could accomplish. 

2.j. lis shall not .'ilanxl ; that is, the king of the south. 

21). Taeij that feed — his meat ; the ministers and guardians 
of the young king, who proved faithless to his interests. 
Sliall overflow— fall down slain; the meaning seems to ho 
that his army, though overflowing in numbers, shall be 
routed, and many shall perish. 

27. Spetk lies at one table ; though Ptolemy king of Egypt 
was in the power of Aiitiochus, the latter professed to be 
his friend, and entertained him at his table. Here both 
kings made to each other false i)rofcssioiis of friendship. 

28. S!iaU Ite return; Antioehiis, taking Palestine on his 
way. Against the holij covenant ; lie pliuiilenul the temple 
at Jerusalem, and niiissacred many of the pcopje, as de- 
scribed in the lirst liciok of Maccabees, chap. 1. 

2!). Tic time appointed ; tliat is, in (iod's ])urposeB. As 
the former, or as the latter ; that is, as the former or the lat- 
ter of his prtivioiis invasions of Egypt. They were both 
Buccosst'iil ; this shall bo iinsuceossful. 

30. Tiie ships of CJiillim ; l)euring the Roman ambassa- 
dors. The Egyptians had Hulieited the aid of Home 
against Antioehiis, and their ambussiulors ordered him to 
leave Egypt. Ciiittim; see note on Isa. 23:1. Have intcl- 
988 



him:'' therefore he shall be jrrieved, and a. m ^470. 

. 1 , ■ !• i- • . .1 li «' about 

return, and have indignation against the ^• 
holy covenant: so sliall he do;* ho shall even 
return, and have intelligence with them that for- 
sake the holy covenant. 

81 And arms shall stand on his part, and they 
shall ]iollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall 
take ;i\vay the daily sacrifice, and they shall place 
the abomination that maketh desolate.' 

32 And such as do wickedly against the cove- 
nant shall he corrupt by llatteries:^ but the peo- 
ple that do know their God shall be strong, and 
do exploits. 

33 And they that understand among the people 
shall instruct many: yet tiiey shall fall by the 
sword, and by flame, by cajitivity, and by ^-poil, 
many days. 

3i Now when they shall fall, they shall be holpen 
with a little help: but many shall cleave to them 
witli llatteries. 

35 And some of them of understanding shall fall, 
to try them,*'' and to purge, and to make i/if7n 
white, cvcji to the time of the cud : because it is yet 
for a time appointed.' 

31) And the king shall do according to his will ; 
and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself 
above every god, and shall speak marvellous 
things against the God of gods, and shall prosper 
till the indignation be accomplished:^' for that, 
that is determined, shall bo done.'' 

37 Neither shall he regard the god of his fa- 
thers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any 
god: for he shall magnify himself above all.' 



cause to dissemble. ' Or, 6y them. 
14:13, 14; Rev. ia:5,G. I>ch.0:a7. 



I llib: -J::!, f Im. 



licence; liave an nnderstanding with them and favor their 
designs. Them that forsake — covenant; the apostate Jews, 
of whom there were many. 

31. Pollute — tale awai/; see note on chap. 8:9. 

32. The people that do know their God; this refers to Judas 
Maccabajus and his associates, whose exploits are record- 
ed in the books of the Maccabees. 

33. Thciithat understand; the same as "the people Uiat 
do know their God." verse 32. Tliey shall fall; Antioclrus 
cruelly persecuted them, and put many of (hem to death 
in the ways here foretold. 

34. Shalt be holpen; this refers to the successful efTorls 
of the small band of valiant men who defended the true 
religion. To them; to Judas and his party. 

35. To In/ them; God allows this in order to jiurify the 
body of tliose " that do know their God " from hypo- 
crites. The end; the end which God lias appointed to 
these persecutions. 

36. Marvellous things; great swelling words of blas- 
phemy. Daniel everywhere exhibits Antioehiis as lln- 
type of the groat antichrist of the fourth empire. He 
assumes the same power over the Jewish, that this does 
over the Christian church, and is described in the same 
terms. 

37. The pod of his fathers; or, as the Hebrew may be 
rendered, "the gods of his fathers;"' that is, the Syrian 
gods of his ancestors. Antioehiis affected the worship of 
foreign gods, especially thnse of the Greeks and Romans ; 
banishing and introducing gods at his own pleasure, and 
thus magnifying himself above all gods. The dc-tirc of 
iromen ; words of dillicult interpretation. Some under- 
stand them of children, the same as " the desires of their 
womb," llosea !l: 1(1. margin ; the idea biiiig, that he should 
slay tiicm without pity. But the couuecliou seems to 



The king of the north. 



DANIEL XII. 



Mich id delivers Israel. 



if ",u>Jut ^^ ^^^ '" ''^^ estate sliall lie lioiior the 
511. God of forces:* and a n;od whom his fa- 
tlicrs knew not sliall he honor* with gold, and sil- 
ver, and ■with precious stones, and pleasant things.' 

39 Thus shall he do in the most strong holds'" 
with a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge 
and increase with glory : and he shall cause them 
to rule over many, and shall divide the land for 
gaiiiJ 

40 And at the time of the end shall the king of 
the south push at him : and the king of the north 
sliall come against him like a wliirlwiud," with 
chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships ; 
and he shall enter into the countries, and shall 
overflow and pass over. 

41 lie shall enter also into the glorious land,'"" 
and many countries shall be overthrown : but these 
shall escape out of his hand, even Edoin, and Moab, 
and the chief of the children of Amnion." 

42 lie shall stretch forth* his hand also upon 
the countries: and the land of Egypt shall not 
escape. 

1-i But he shall have power over the treasui-es 



• l)r, munitions; Hpb. Mauzzim. t Hub. n.s for the Almiglittj God, in 
hii S'-tit ke sliall honor, ifea^ he shall honor a sod itiho/n his fathers kneiv not, 
etc. IHeb. (/ims'jrff.ViVeJ; Isi. 44:9. i Knh fortressesof munitions. I Heb. 
a fTi':e. a Zeoh. 9:14. H Or, goodly land; Heb. land of delight, or orna- 



show tliat tlie angel means some Syrian goddess particu- 
larly worshipped by women. 

38. Tiie God of forces ; probably the Roman Jupiter, 
whose altar Antiochus placed on the altar of Jehovah. 

39. Tlius shall he do — loith a strange god ; thus shall he 
place his strange god as an object of worship in the 
strong fortresses. Divide the land; the land of Judea to 
tax-gatherers. 

40. The time of the end; the end of this sore persecution, 
so often referred to in this prophecy. Against him ; against 
" the king of the south." 

41. The glonous land; Palestine. 

41. Tidings out of the east — the north; of the rebellion of 
the Parthians in the east, and the Armenians in the north. 
Sliall go forth; to subdue these revolted provinces. 

45. Between the seas in the glorious holy mountain ; appar- 
ently at mount Zion, between the Mediterranean and the 
Dead sea, on his march to the east ; but many understand 
these words of some sacred mountain in the east, between 
the Caspian sea and the Persian gulf. Shall come to his end ; 
Antiochus was attacked with a distressing disease on his 
return from this eastern expedition, of which he died. 

The prophecies contained in this chapter cover a period 
of about three hundred and seventy years, from the third 
year of Cyrus to the death of Antiochus Epiphanes, one 
hundred and sixty-three years before Christ. For fuller 
details of the history to which they refer, the reader may 
consult the various commentaries on the book of Daniel. 
Only a brief outline has been here given. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. The numerous examples on record of mighty con- 
querors who have not been able to transmit to their chil- 
dren either their power or their possessions, are an affect- 
ing proof, as well of the vanity of all human greatness, as 
of God's purpose to carry headlong the counsels of proud 
and ambitious men. 

.i-2!). How full of cruelty, periidy, and corrupt intrigue 
is human history, all to accomplish nothing valuable for 
those who thus strive together for the mastery of this 
world. But in all this troubled sea of earthly passions, 
the devout believer sees the hand of God steadily prepar- 
ing the way for the universal triumph of the cause of 
truth and righteousness. 

.SO. Disappointed ambition makes the proud man furi- 
ous, and disposes him to wreak his vengeance upon all 
llie weak and defenceless who may come in his way. 



of gold and of silver, and over all the precious 
things of Egypt: and the Liliyaus and the Ethi- 
opians sha'l be at his steps. 

44 But tidings out of the cast and out of (he 
north shall trouble him: therefore he shall go 
forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to 
make away many. 

45 And he shall plant the tabernacles of his pal- 
ace between the seas in the glorious* holy moun- 
tain;' yet he shall come to his end, and none 
shall help him." 

CHAPTER XII. 

1 Michael shall deliver Israel from their troubles. 5 Daniel is informed 
of the times. 

A ND at that time shall Michael stand up, the 
j' A, great prince which standeth for the children 
of thy people:" and there shall be a time of trou- 
ble, such as never was since there was a nation 
even to that same time :'' and at that time thy peo- 
ple shall be delivered,*-' every one that shall be 
found written in the book.'' 

mrnl. b ver. 10, 45. t Isi. 11:14, 15. • Heb. send forth, t Or. goodly. 
t Heb. mountain of delight of holiness, d ■> Thess. '2:8. e ch. 1U:13, 'Jl ; 
JudeO. tMitt. 24:21. E Jer. 30:7; Rom. 11:28. t Kev. 1:1:8. 



32. Persecution is a sieve which separates the chaff in 
God's church from the wheat, and exhibits each man in 
his true character. 

33. Persecution, even to death, has often been the lot of 
those who stood for the defence of the truth. But God 
has made their cause to triumph, and through their suffer- 
ings has given deliverance to his people. 

34. False friends, who have joined themselves to God's 
church from earthly motives, arc a great dishonor to her, 
and one of the chief hinderances to her prosperity. 

3fi. Whoever exalts his own authority in the church 
above the authority' of Christ, has the spirit of antichrist; 
and if he be not himself the "man of sin" foretold by the 
pro])hets, he is his type, and shall come to the same end 
with him. 

CHAPTER XII. 

Of this difficult chapter very different views are taken 
by commentators. It probably contains a glance at the 
final struggle with antichrist, the victory of tJod's cause, 
and the consummation of all things. 1. It is the custom of 
the prophets to annex to prophecies of nearer events such 
general views of "the last days," particularly at the close 
of their writings. Isa. 4:1-C"; 11:1-9; 32:1-.''); 60:19-24; 
compared with the preceding context. Also Jor. 32 : 36-41 ; 
Ezek. 28:24-26; 34:23-31; 48:35; Hosea 14:4-8; Joel 
2:28-32; Amos 9:11-15; Micah 7:15-20; Zeph. 3:14-20; 
Zech. 14:10-21 ; Mai. 4:2, 3; and many like passages. 2. 
The words, "in that day," and "at that time," are fre- 
quently used by the prophets in passing from the nearer 
to the remote future. They intimate that the more remote 
events have an intimate connection in God's plan with the 
nearer, and do, as it were, spring out of them, though they 
may be separated from them by vast intervals of time. 
Compare Isa. 4:2; 29 : IS ; Jer. 33 : 15 ; Amos 9:11, and other 
like passages. 3. The language of the angel cannot be 
applied to the events connected with the reign of Antio- 
chus Epiphanes. 4. The remarkable similarity between 
the descriptions of the little horn of the third beast (Anti- 
ochus) and that of the fourth beast, shows that the former 
was designedly exhibited as the type of the latter. It 
was natural then for the angel to pass from the type to 
the antitype. 

1. Michael; see note on chap. 10:13. A time of trouble; 
that connected with the final overthrow of Satan's power. 
Compare the troubles of the seventh vial, Rev. 16:17-21; 
The booh; the book of hfe. 

989 



The •general resurrection. 



DANIEL XII. 



T/te lime of the end. 



2 And many of them lliat slcop in tlie dust of 
the earth shall awake, some to everla^^ting life," 
and some to shame and cvorlastiujr contempt.'' 

3 And they that be wise* shall shine as the 
bria'htness of tlie iirmamcnt ;•■ and they that turn 
many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and 
ever.'' 

4 JJnt thou, Daniel, shut up the words, and 
seal tlie book, even to the time of the end:^' many 
shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be in- 
creased. 

5 '1 Then I Daniel looked, and behold, lluu-e 
stood other two, tlie one on this side of the bank* 
of the river, and the other on that side of the bank 
of the river. 

6 And one said to the man ch)thed in linen, 
■whieii was upon' the waters of the river, How 
long sha'l it be to the end of these wonders ? 

7 And I hoard the man clothed in linen, which 
was u|)on tlie waters of the river, when he lield 
up his rigiit hand and his left hand unto heaven, 
and sware by him that liveth for ever,'' that it 



2. Many of tliem that sleep; pi'obably the same as (lie 
multiluile of them that sleep: compare Kom. 5:19. The 
angel passes immediately from the last great struggle with 
antichrist to the final resurrection and judgment. 

4. S.'ait up — sent; as a sign both that the propliccy is 
closed, and tliat its fullilment alone can make it plain. 
Muiiij s'uilt run — be increased; a general prediction of the 
progress of knowledge and holiness in the earth, as verse 
10 is of the struggle between lioliness and sin. 

6. ?//)Ort</«; «)a(cr.<,- standing on the waters. Chap.8:lG. 
Tlie end of these wonders; all the worriers that liavo been 
revealed in this vision, including the '■ time of trouble," 
verse 1. 

7. Held up — sware ; the solemnity of this oath seems to 
show that it has reference not merely to the end of the 
persecution under .Antiochus. but to the time in the dis- 
tant future when " the mystery of God sliould be finished." 
Compare Rev. 10:7. A time, times, and a half; the same as 
"a time and times, and the dividing of time," chap. 7:25, 
where see the note. W/ten lie; the enemy. Sliall Itave 
accomplished to scatter; shall liave finished the work of 
scattering, and be himself destroyed. The Iwlij people; 
the Jews, as the representatives of (Sod's church in all 
ages. All these thin^rs shall he finished; the whole mystery 
of God in respect to antichrist shall be fullilled. 

8. IVIiat shall be the end of these lhinjj;x? lie has had a rev- 
elation of the end of Antioclius, Itut here is a further mys- 
tery, tlio meaning of which he does not understand, nor 
does the angel explain it. 

II. Tlie daily sacrifice — taken away; this is proViably an 
allusion to the removal of the daily sacrifice liy Antiochus 
already i)rcdicted, chap. 11:31, but with reference to a 
higher event prefigured by it. The numbers mentioned 
in this and the following verse seem to include the " time, 



shall he for a time, times, and a lialf;^ and a m. mto. 
when he shall have accomplished to scat- .'v;i° 
ter the power of the holy people, all these things 
shall be iinishe<l. 

8 And I heard, hut I understood not: then said 1, 
my Lord, what sha'l be the end of these things'.' 

9 And he said. Go thy way, Daniel: for tin- 
words are closed up and scaled till the time of the 
end. 

10 JIany shall be purified, and made Avhite, and 
tried; but the wicked shall ilo wickedly :•= and 
mine of the wicked shall understand; but the 
wise shall understand. 

1 1 And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall 
be taken away, and the abomination' that maketh 
desolate' set up, there shall he a thousand two hun- 
dred and ninety days. 

12 Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometli to the 
thousand three hundred and iive and thirty days?. 

Vi But go thou thy way till the end be: for' 
thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the cud of 
the days. 



; 1 1 . i llnh. to set up ttu abomii 



1 Or, aitonishtHi. 



times, and a half," verse 7, and to extend beyond it, the 
former thirty days, the latter seventy-five days. Thus 
understood, they intimate that the overthrow of antichrist. 
and tlie delivery of (lod's people, will be accomplished by 
three successive interpositions. 

13. Go thou thy way till the end; the angel dismisse>i 
Daniel with an intimation that he must wait till the time 
of the end for a clear understanding of the vision. Shnil 
rest ; with God, after his departure from this life. In thy 
let; in the possession of thy heavenly inheritance. Com- 
pare verse 3. At the end of the days; at the time referr>^<i 
to in verse 2. 

INSTRUCTION'.^. 

1. Satan, "the strong man armed," will not willingly let 
go his dominion over the world ; hence every great inroad 
of the gospel upon his dominion is accompanied with great 
opposition from him. As the last conflict with him will 
be the most terrible, so also will his overthrow be the 
most comidete. 

2. The final resurrection and judgment will complete on 
the one hand the triumph of Christ and his church, and 
on the other the destruction of Satan and his followers. 

3. No work is so excellent and glorious as that of turn- 
ing sinners to righteousness, and none shall receive so 
high a reward at the last day. 

•1-12. Time is the only perfect revealcr of God's plans: 
we know all of them that is necessary for our encomage- 
ment, and of the rest we should bo content to remain 
ignorant till their fulfilment makes them plain. 

13. It is of comparatively little imiiortance in what part 
of the world's history our lot is cast, since, when the glo- 
rious cud comes, all who are in ('hrist shall be ))rcBcnt to 
rejoice in it "with joy imspcakable and full of glory." 



HOSEA. 



The Jews arranged the twelve minor prophets according to their judgment of the time when the y 
flourished. In regard to some of tlicm, who do not give the dates of their propliecies, the correctnos el' 
this judgment has been called in question by one portion of the commentators, but defended by anotlier. 

As it is generally agreed that Isaiah began to prophesy either in the last year of Uzziah's reign, or but 
a few years before his death, while Hosea prophesied in the reign of Jeroboam second, the great-grandson 
of Jehu, 2 Kings 14:23, who died about twenty-six years before Uzziah, it follows that Hosea, though 
partly contemporary with Isaiah, was called to the prophetical work at an earlier period. 

If wo suppose him to have commenced prophesying two years before the death of Jeroboam, and then 
add the twenty-six remaining years of Uzziah's reign, the sixteen of Jotham, the sixteen of Ahaz, and two 
of the first years of Hezekiah, wo shall have a period of sixty-two years. To Israel this was a calamitous 
period, embracing four usurpations and murders of the reigning sovereigns, and three invasions of the 
Assyrians. See the. history, 2 Kings 15 :8-31, and 17 : 1-3. In the last of tliese Iloshea king of Israel 
became tributary to Shalmaneser king of Assyria, but he proved unfaithful to his master, and sought the; 
alliance of So, king of Egypt, 2 Kings 11 -A. For this the Assyrian king besieged him in Samaria, and 
after a siege of three j'ears, took him with the city, and put an end to the kingdom of Israel, ver. 5, (>. 
This was in the fifth year of Hezekiah king of Judah. 2 Kings 10:2, compared with 11:1. Hosea closed 
his writings wiien Iloshea was seeking the help of Egypt while he had at the same time a covenant with 
Assyria, chap. 12 : 1, consequently somewhere in tlie first two years of Hezekiah's reign. 

Of the origin and history of the prophet nothing is known ; though he occasionally mentions the king- 
dom of Judali, his prophecies are directed chiefly to that of the ten tribes. His style is very concise and 
sententious, and his diction impresses even the casual reader as original and peculiar. One remarkable 
feature of his book is the constancy with which he sets forth the relation of Israel to Jehovah under the 
figure of the marriage-covenant ; thus making unfaithfulness to God, and especially idolatrj^, to be spiritual 
whoredom and adultery. 



^:^S785. CHAPTER I. 

1 Hosei, to show- God's judgment for spiritual whoredom, taketh Go- 
iner, i and hath hv h*^r Jezreel, 6 Lo-fuhainah, 8 and Lo-ainnii. 10 
The rest..rati(in of 'Judah and Israel. 

f I'^HE word of the Lord thatcame unto Hosea, tlie 
J._ son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotliaiii, 
Ahaz, ari llezckiali, kings of Judah, and in tlie 
days of Jeroboam the son of Joasli, king of Israel. 
2 The beginning of the word of the Lord by 
Hosea. And the Lord said to Hosea, Go, take 
unto thee a wife of whoredoms and children of 
wliorcdoms:^ for the land hath committed great 
whoredom,'' departing from the Lord. 

» C!i. :1J. b Deu 
ch. Ill, II ; 1.5:10, etc 



, 31:16; Ezek. ch. IG. Si. • Heb. 
t That is, Not li 



c a Kings 

obtained mfrcij. X Heb. / 



CHAPTER I. 

2. A wife of whoredoms ; many jmlicious expositors sup- 
pose that Hosea was commanded to take such a wife, not 
in fact, but in prophetic vision. See introductory note to 
Ezekiel. 

4. Jezreel ; a pleasant city on the south-east border of 
tlie plain of Esdraelon, where Ahab had bis palace. 1 Kings 
18 : 4.5 ; 21:1. Tke blood of Jezreel — the house of Jehu ; Jehu 
and his descendants reigned in Samaria, and not in .Jezreel. 
2 Kings 10:36; 13:1,10; 14:23; 15:8. For this reason we 
are probably to understand by " the blood of .le/.reel," that 
shed liy -Ichu in destroying the house of Ahab and the 



3 So he went and took Goinor the daughter of 
Diblaim ; which conceived, and bare him a son. 

4 And the Lord said unto him, Call his name 
Jezreel; for yet a little luhile, and I will avenge* 
the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu,"-' and 
will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of 
Israel. 

5 And it shall come to pass at that day, that 1 
will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jez- 
reel. 

6 1 And she conceived again, and bare a daugh- 
ter. And God said unto him. Call her name Lo- 
ruhaniah:^ for I will no more have mercy upon* 



will not add any more t 



worshippers of Baal, 2 Kings chapters 9, 10. Although 
in this he obeyed God's express command, and receiveil 
for it an earthly reward, 2 Kings 10 : 30, yet bis subsequent 
imitation of Ahab's sins showed that he had acted from 
no true regard to God's honor, but in the spirit of pride, 
cruelty, and self-aggrandizement, and his sin was to be 
punished by the Hke destruction of his house. 

.'). Tlie valley of Jezreel; a valley with a fountain runniii},' 
down east from Jezreel to the Jordan. Here Jehu slew 
Jchoram, Ahab's son. It is probable that the Assyriaii.s 
hero overthrew the forces of Israel. 

6. Will no viore have mercy; God would destroy \\\f 
kingdom of Israel, to be no more restored, the surviving.' 
;i'.)l 



The. mercy of God. 



IIOSEA II. 



Judgments on Zw people. 



the house of Israel; but 1 will utterly take them 
away.'" 

7 But I will have mercy upon tlie house of Ju- 
dah,"' and will save them by the Lord their God,'' 
and will not save tliein by bow, nor by sword, uor 
by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen. 

8 1i Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she 
conceived, and bare a son. 

9 Then said God, Call his name Lo-ammi:+ for 
ye are not my people, and I will not be your God. 

10 T" Yet the number of the children of Israel 
shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be 
measured nor immbered ; and it shall come to 
pass, t/iat in the' place where it was said unto 
them, Ye air not my people," there it shall be said 
unto tiicra, Ye are the sons of the living God." 

11 I'lien shall the children of Judah and the 
children of Israel be gathered togetlier, and ap- 
point themselves one head, and they shall come up 
out of the laud :' for great shaH be the day of Jez- 
reel. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 Tlie idolatry of tiie ptople. 6 God's judgments against them. 14 
His promises of reconciliation with them. 

SAY ye unto your brethren, Ammij^ and to 
your sisters, Ruhamah.' 

2 Plead with your mother, plead ; for she is not 
my wife, neither am. 1 her husband: let her there- 
fore put away her whoredoms out of her sight, and 
her adulteries from between her breasts;- 

3 Lest I strip her naked,'' and set her as in the 





•Or 


t/iat I should 


alto^ 


t/ur pardon tli 


m. =■ 


2 King, 


17:6. 


•J!, b Isa. 


ch. 


:l: 


,;t- 


eZech 


4:«. 


t'I'l 


at is. A'or 71UJ peopk. 


I Or, i 


tsUad 


of that. J 


ch. 


..i 


•"; 


1 Pet. -2: 


lU. e 


.lohn 


l;l->; Rom. <J 


■a,ia. 


1 Isi. 


11; 1-2, 


13: Jer. 3 


i«; 


K 


zek. 


.1-:11>-2I 


. i That 


s, My pfopU. 


1 That 


is, Ha 


ving obtained mercy. 



remnant of it being incorporated after the captivity with 
.ludah. Compare verse 11 and Ezck. 37:19. 

10. TIte children of Israel ; not as a distinct kingdom, but 
in their union with the cliihhen of Judali, verse 11. This 
promise, in its outward form, referred to the " grafting in 
again" to God's churcli of the remnant of Israel; but in 
its spirit it included the calhng in of the Gentiles, who 
become Abraham's seed by faith in the promises made to 
Abraham ; and so the apostle I'aid applies it, Rom. 9 : 24-2G. 

11. Unehead; Zerul)babol. Ezra 2:2. Out of the land; 
of their captivity. Hut their union under an earthly leader, 
and their deliverance from an earthly captivity, are both 
earnests and pledges of a higher spiritual deliverance 
under Clirist the great Head of the church. The daij if 
Jezreel; the allusion is to the name of the prophet's eUlest 
son, chap. 1:4, but with a new application of it according 
to its signification in the original, " (lod shall sow." In 
the following verse, chap. 2:1, God changes the names of 
his two other children to those that are in like manner 
significant of mercy, omitting " Lo," that is, " not," at the 
beginning of eadi ; and the meaning of the three names 
in their new application is given, chap. 2:23. The ))r(>])li- 
et, by divine dirci-tioii, first gives liis children names pro- 
phetic of coming wrath, and afterwards changes them — 
iho first in application, the other two in both form and 
application — to names prophetic of mercy ; thus signifying 
that in God's dealingn with his people, wrath prepares 
the way for mercy, (,'onipare chap. 2:i;, 7. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. God is the husband of Ids church, and she is " the 
lirlde, the Lamb's wife." Every believer is, in both eoul 
and body, a member of Christ, " of his body, of his flesh, 
and of his bones." Christ regards unfaithfulness to liim- 
Holf like the unfaithfulness of a wife to her liusband, and 
will manifest bis abhorrence of it by the severest rebukes. 



day that she was born, and make her as a a. m. sns. 
wilderness,' and set her like a dry land, "«■ 
and slay her with thirst.' 

4 And I will not have mercy upon her children ; 
for they be the children of whoredoms. 

5 For their mother hath played the harlot:'' she 
that conceived tliein hath done shamcrully ; for 
she said, I will go after my lovers, that give me 
my bread and my water, my wool and my fla.x, 
mine oil and my drink." 

6 1 Therefore, behold, I will hedge up thy way 
with thorns, and make a wall," that slic shall not 
find her paths.'" 

7 And siic shall follow after her lovers, but she 
shall not overtake them; and she shall seek them, 
but shall not hud thein: then shall she say, I will 
go and return to my first husband;" for then was 
it better witli me tJian now. 

8 For she did not know that I gave her corn, 
and wine,' and oil, and multiplied her silver and 
gold, which they jireparcd' lor Eaal. 

9 Therefore will 1 return, and take away my 
corn in the tiiue thereof, and my -wine in the sea- 
son thereof, and will recover^ my wool and my 
flax given to cover her nakedness. 

10 And now will 1 discover her lewdness- in 
the sight of her lovers, and none ^liall deliver her 
out of my hand. 

Ill will also cause all her mirth to cease, her 
feast-days, her new moons, and her sabbaths, and 
all her solemn feasts. 

12 And I will destroy"' her vines and her fig- 



EEzek. 10:ao,eto. h Jer. 13:±!,'2G. i Kzek. I!l: 13. J .\moj>:ll, la. k J»». 
1 : 21 ;.Tcr. 3:1-9. 1 Hcb.rfrinAs. I Jer. 11:17. •\Uh.wult aicall. "JoblS:?; 
Lam. 3:7, 9. ■> J.uke 15; IS. 1 Heb. nrw wint. 1 Or. wherewilh Ikty maie; 
ch. t!:4. » Or, (oi-J airny. I Ueb. folly, or rillanu. 1 Uib. maU desolatt. 



Isa. 54 : C> ; Jer. 3:14; Ezek. 10 : 8 ; 1 Cor. (i : 17 ; Eph. 5 : 23-32 ; 
Rev. 19:7, 8; 21:9. 

4. In every action God looks at the heart. No external 
conformity to his commands can make that work accept- 
able to him which is performed in the sjiirit of pride and 
self-righteousness. Though he may give to the outward 
deed an outward reward, he will regard and treat as sin 
whatsoever is done ip a sinful spirit. 

C. The kingdom of Israel had its origin in apostasy from 
God, and it was perpetuated in the same spirit. For this 
reason God utterly destroyed it, while at the same time 
ho had mercy upon the remnant of its tribes. Thus will 
he deal from age to age with all in his church who oppose 
themselves to tlio supreme authority of Christ, and corrupt 
her worship and doctrines by opposing to the conmuuid- 
ments of t>od the traditions of men. 

7. God will save his peoide, but in such a way as to 
exclude boasting. The faithful use of moans is right and 
necessary; yet, if we idolize our chosen instrumentalities, 
making thciii, instead of God, our confidence, he will reject 
them, and save his churcli by other agencies, that all the 
glory n\ay be his alone. 

11. The removal of disunion from the household of God 
must prepare the way forita enlargement and final triumph 
over the kingdom of Satan. 

CHAPTER n. 

2. Void- mollicr; the kingdom of Israel, personified as a 
wife unfaithful to Jehovah her husband. 

5. 3/(/ /oirr.s-; the idolatrous nations in whose help she 
tnisted, and whoso superstitions she imitated. 

7. 7'n mijfir.'it htL'sltand; to Jehovah. 

8. Prcmrcd for Baal; used in his worship. 

12. Hill make tlicm a forest ; that is, ilcsolate and uncul- 
tivated. 



(jO(/'s gracious promises. 



IIOSEA III. 



Desolation of Israel. 



A. M. 3219. trees, whereof slie liatli paid, These arc my 

It. r. nltiiut 1 A\ 1 1 1 

Tss rewards tliat uiy lovers have given me: 
and I will make them a forest, and the beasts of 
the lic^ld shall cat them." 

113 And I will visit npou her the days of Baalim, 
wherein she burned incense to them, and she 
decked herself with her earrings and her jewels, 
and she went after her lovers, and forgat me, saith 
the Lord. 

14 II Therefore, behold, I will allure her, and 
bring her into the wilderness,'' and speak comfort- 
ably" unto her.* 

15 And I will give her her vineyards from 
thence, and the valley of Aelior for a door of 
hope -^ and she shall sing there, as in the days of 
her youth, and as in the day when she came up 
out of the land of Egypt. 

IG And it shall be at that day, saith the Lord, 
that thou shalt call me Ishi;* and shalt call me 
no more Baali.^ 

17 For I will take away the names of Baalim 
out of her mouth, and they sliall no more be re- 
menibcred liy their name.'' 

18 And in that day will I make a covenant for 
them with the beasts of the field, and with the 
fowls of heaven, and u-ith the creeping things of 
the ground: and I will break the bow and the 
sword and the battle out of the earth,'' and will 
make them to lie down safel}'. 

I'J And I will betroth thee unto me for ever;' 
yea, 1 will betroth thee imto me in righteousness, 



alsa. 5.5, 0. bEzek. 20:31. 'Ot, friendly. MU\>. tt> lu'r krart. t Jnsh. 
7:20; Isi 6o;10. I That is, Wy AasSand. S that is. My torii. <lZech.ia:2. 



13. Baalim ; the jjlural of Baal, and used of the images 
of Baal before which they burned incense. Decked herself; 
after the manner of a harlot. 

14. Tkerefore; that is, in accordance with my gracious 
design in the chastisements just threatened, wliich is not 
tlie destruction of Israel, but her reformation, and thus 
licr future enlargement. See note on chap. 1 : 10. This 
word is often used by the prophets in passing from tlireat- 
enings to promises. Isa. 10:24; Jer. 16:14; 30:10; Ezek. 
39 : 2.'). Brinp: her into the wilderness ; an allusion to tlie first 
great drlivnMiiic of Israel from Egyptian bondage, when 
Gi»l lin.iij;h( his people into the wilderness, and there 
trained thcin Inr tlie future possession of Canaan. Com- 
pare verse 1."). This discipline God will repeat to his 
people. Ezek. 20:35. 

15. Fmci/ards,- in the land of Canaan. From thence ; {vom 
the wilderness ; assigning them to her by anticipation 
from tlic wilderness, before she enters the promised land. 
The valleij of Achor ; a fertile vale of Palestine. See Isa. 
CJ: 10. For a door of hope; as an earnest and pledge of the 
full possession of the promised land, which here repre- 
sents the spiritual inheritance bestowed by God upon the 
true Israel. Compare Matt. 5:5. According to some, the 
valley of Achor is referred to simply as lying at the en- 
trance of the promised land. Others think there is also 
an allusion to the meaning of the word Achor, that is, 
trouble, and to the history of Achan, who troubled Israel, 
and was destroyed there ; as if the prophet had said. The 
valley of trouble sliall bo changed to you into a door of 
hope. .Josh. 7:24. 

16. Ishi ; " my husband," a term of affection and confi- 
dence. Baali; ''my lord," a term of reverence and fear. 
Compare Rom. 8:15. There is, perhajis, a reference also 
to the abuse of the word " Baal," that is, " lord," in the 
worship of the " Baalim," or images of Baal, verse 17. 

IS. With the beasts — creeping things ; that these shall not 
hurt them, but minister to their good. 
63 



and in judgment, and in loving-kindness, and in 
mercies.^ 

20 I will even betroth thee unto me in faithful- 
ness : and thou shalt know the Lord. 

21 And it shall come to pass in that day, I will 
hear, saith the Lord, I will hear the heavens, and 
they shall hear the earth ; 

22 And the earth shall hear the corn, and the 
wine, and the oil ; and they shall hear Jezreel. 

23 And I will sow her unto me in the earth ; 
and I will have mercy upon her that had not ob- 
tained mercy ;** and I will say to them which were 
not my people. Thou art my people; and they 
shall say. Thou art my God.' 



CHAPTER II L 



1 By the expiatii 



.n adultt ress, 4 is shown the desolation of Isi 
before their restoration. 



'T'^HEN said the Lord unto me. Go yet, love a 
J_ woman beloved of her friend,' yet an adulter- 
ess,'^ according to the love of the Lord toward the 
children of Israel, who look to other gods, and 
love flagons of wine.' 

2 So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of sil- 
ver, and_/(ir a homer of barley, and a half homer" 
of barley : 

3 And I said unto her. Thou shalt abide for nie 
many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, and 
thou shalt not be for another man : so unit 1 also be 
for thee. 



Zech. 9:10. t Isa. 54:5. c Eph. 5:2.1-27. hcl..l;(i. 
:-.;. t Jer. 3:1, 20. i Heb. grafcs. I Heb. Uthrrk. 



21, 22. Hear; literally, "answer;" a beautiful personifi- 
cation, in which Jezreel calls upon the fruits of the earth 
to bo present, these call upon the earth to produce them, 
the earth calls upon the heavens for showers, and the 
heavens upon God. God answers the heavens by giving 
showers, these answer the earth in rain, and so down till 
Jezreel is filled with plenty. 

23. I will soiu her ; an allusion to the meaning of the word 
Jezreel, God shall sow. See note on chap. 1:10. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-5. God's unchangeable covenant of mercy with his 
church makes the destruction of her Mm members cer- 
tain. He prepares the wheat for his garner by separating 
the chaif from it, and burning it with fire unquenchable. 
Luke 3:17. 

G, 1. God often hedges up the way of those whom he 
would save by overthrowing their worldly plans and con- 
fidences, that he may thus compel them to return to him- 
self, and make him their portion. 

14-23. Though God begins with rebukes, the end of his 
dealings with the true Israel will be mercies and loving- 
kindness ; he will lietroth her to himself for ever, and sow 
her for his own glory throughout all tlie earth. 

CHAPTER III. 

1. Love a woman — an adulteress ; she is spoken of as 
" beloved of her friend," that is, the prophet himself. See 
note on chap. 1:2. Thus was represented the love of the 
Lord towards the children of Israel, who looked to other 
gods. 

2. Bought her; espoused her anew to himself. Sdver — 
barley; the dowry given, in accordance with the custom of 
the times, to the wife. 

3. Shall abide for me; in a state of separation from both 
the prophet and all her former lovers. Wilt — be for thee : 
in a like state of separation. 

993 



T/irmtmings against 



ROSEA IV. 



Israel and Judah. 



4 For the children of Israel shall abide many 
days without a king," and without a prince, and 
witliout a sacrifice, and without an imago,* and 
witlioiit an opiiod, and irilliout tcraphim: 

5 Afterward siiall the children of Israel return, 
and seek tlie Lord their God,'' and David their 
king;^ and shall fear the Loud and his goodness 
in the latter days.'' 

CHAPTER IV. 

1 God's judgments against the sins of the people. 6 and of the priests, 
V2 and against their idolatry. 15 Judah is exhorted to take warning 
by Israel's calamity. 

I "TEAR the word of the Lord, ye children of 
1 Israel : for the Lord hath a controversy with 
the iiiiiabitantsoftheland,'' because thereiswo truth, 
nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land.'' 

2 By swearing, and lying, and killin.g,'-' and steal- 
ing, and committing adultery, they break out, and 
blood* toucheth blood. 

3 Therefore shall the land mourn,'' and every 
one that dwelloth therein shall languish, with the 
beasts of liie iiehl, and with tlie fowls of heaven ; 
yea, tiie fishes of the sea also sirall be taken away.' 

4 Yet let no man strive, nor re])rove another: for 
thy people arc as they that strive with the priest.J 

5 Therefore shalt thou fall in tlie day, and the 
propiiet also shall fall with thee in tlie night, and 
I will destroy' thy mother. 

G "I My people are destroyed' for lack of know- 
ledge:" bet'ause thou hast rejected knowledge, I 
will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no ])riest 
:to me: seeing thou liast forgotten the law of tliy 
God, I will also forget thy children. 



» Ch. 10:3; Jer. 15:4,5. • Heb. o.ilanrfin?. orJWItte, or pi'/tar; Isi. Ifl:19, 
20. bell. 5:15. » Jer. .'J0:0; Ezek. 34:2.1, 24. Jlsa. 2:2, 3. e Mic. 6:2. 
' Jer. 4:22,28. 8 Isa. 59:7. t Hob. blnvls. li Amos 5:10. i Zsph 1:3. 
i Deut. 17:12. 1 Hob. cut off. k Isi. 5:13. 1 ch. 13:0; Deut. 32:15 



4. For the children of Israel shall abide; the propiiet now 
shows liow tliis symbolic act represents tlie future condi- 
tion of Israel, The words are a striking prophecy of the 
present condition of Israel, without distinct national ex- 
istence, without the sacrifices and other worship pre- 
scribed by the law, and without any idolatrous substitute 
for them. An ephod ; as this contained the breastplate 
with the Urim and Thummini, K.iod. 28:26-30, some sup- 
pose tliat the absence of the Urim and Tlinmmim is here 
predicted. An image; an idolatrous jiillar. Tcraphim; 
liouseliold gods. 

0. David their king; the \fessiali. 
INSTRUCTION. 

In the present condition of Abraham's posterity, God is 
wonderfully fullilling his threatening uttered by the proph- 
et llosea more than twenty-six centuries ago; and this is 
a sure pledge thiit the promise annexed to it shall be also 
gloriously rullilled at the appointed time ; " and so all Israel 
shall be saved." Rom. 11: '2(1. 

CHAPTER IV. 

2. Blood toucheth blood ; it is a scene of continuous blood- 
shed. 

3. Ttte beasts — tlie fowls — the fishes ; a poetic way of de- 
scribing the universal desolation of the laud. Compare 
Zeph. 1:3. 

4. Strive— reprove another ; lot no man lay the fault of the 
present calamitous state of Israel upon his neighbor ; lei 
him rather take the blame to himself and reju'iit. Thai 
strive vilh the priest; this is named as the highest degree 
of contumacy. 

6. Shalt t/mi/all; Israel. The prophet ; the false prophet. 
094 



7 As they were increased, so they sinned a. m.ssm. 
against me:' therefore will I change their Tai."™"* 
glory into shame.'" 

8 They eat up the sin of my people, and they set 
their heart on* their iniquity." 

9 And tlierc shall be, like jieople, like priest: 
and I will punisii' them for their ways, and J'C- 
ward them^ their doings. 

10 For they shall eat, and not have enough : 
they shall commit whoredom, and shall not in- 
crease: because they have left off to take heed to 
the Lord. 

1 1 Whoredom and wine and new wine take away 
the heart." 

12 1 My people ask counsel at their stocks, and 
their staff' declareth unto thein: for the spirit of 
whoredoms hath caused them to err, and they have 
gone a whoring from under their God. 

13 They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, 
and burn incense upon the hills, under oaks and 
poplars and elms, because the shadow thereof is 
good: therefore your daughters shall commit 
whoredom, and your spouses shall commit adul- 
tery.'' 

14 I will not" puni.sh your daughters when they 
commit whoredom, nor your spouses when they 
commit adultery: ibr themselves are separated 
with whores,'! and they sacrifice with harlots: 
therefore tlie people that doth not understand 
shall fall.f 

15 1 Though thou, Israel, play the harlot, yet 
let not Judah offend ; and come not ye unto Gil- 
gal,' neither go ye up to Beth-aven, nor swear, 
The Lord livetli.' 



m Mai. 2:9. > Heb. lift up their soul to. ' Ezck. 14:3, 7. I H»b. rilil 
upon. 1 Heb caust to return, o I'rov. 31:3; Isa. *■:?. p Amos 7:17. "Or, 
Shall I not. 1 I Cor.O:l(i. 1 Or^ be punisned. r ver. 1, 5, 6. >AmDs4:4; 
5:5. I Zeph. 1:5. 



In the day — in the niglU ; people and prophets shall fall hj 
day and by night ; that is, no time shall bo exempt from 
calamity. 

C. No priest to me; compare Exod. 19 :G, "a kingdom of 
priests." Of this spiritual iiriesthood the outward priest- 
hood was a sign: both should be taken away. 

8. Etit up the sin of my people; thrive upon their sin. in 
this and the following clause there is a special reference 
to the coriU])t rulers, prophets, and priests. 

9. Like people, like priest ; as they are like in character, 
so shall they be in punishment. 

11. Whoredom; throughout this book literal whoredom 
and spiritual whoredom, that is, idolatry, are constantly 
Bjioken of together: compare the next verse. In practice 
they were always united. 

12. Staff; divining-rod. 

14. Will not punish ,• that is, inflict upon them any pecul- 
iar punishment, as if they exceeded others in guilt For 
themselves; the fathers themselves. 

1,5. Gilgal ; generally supposed to be the same as the 
(lilgal mentioned .losh. 4:19, which was the first sojourn of 
the Israelites after crossing the Jordan. In the prophet's 
day it was one of the places devoted to idolatrous wor- 
ship. Chap. 9:15; 12:11; .•\nios4:4; ty-.Ti. Bclh-aven ; that 
is, " house of vanity;" )iroperly a small ]ilace by Ai. east 
of Beth-el, Josh. 7:2; but lure it seems to be put, by way 
of cjntempt, for Bcth-el itself, which latter name signi- 
fies "house of God," because this had became a "house 
of vanity" by the establishment of idolatry there. See 
1 Kings 12:29, 32, 33; and ( iimpare Ilosea 10:15, and Amos 
3:14 ; 4:4 ; 5:5. Nor simir. The Lord livcth; not join the 
name of Jehovah with idol-worship. 



Jiulsvicnts asainst the 



HO SEA V. 



priests and princes. 



A. M 3224 16 For Israel slidsth back as a backslid- 
7s«"""" ini;; heifer: now the Lord will feed them 
as a lamb in a large place. 

17 Ei)liraini m joined to idols: let him alone. 

18 Their drink is sour:* they have committed 
wliorndom continually: her rulers* ivith shame do 
love, Give ye. 

11) Tim wind hath bomid her u)) in her wings, 
and tiicy siiall be ashamed because of their sacri- 
fices. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 G-oJ's judgments against the priests, the people, and the princes of 
Israel, for their manifold sins, l.") until they repent. 

I TEAR yc this, priests; and hearken, ye 
1 iiouse of Israel; and give ye ear, house 
of the king ; for judgment ?'.v toward you, because 
ye have been a suarc on Mizpah, and a net spread 
upon Tabor. 

2 And the revolters are profound to make slaugh- 
ter," though' I have been a rebuker^ of them all. 

3 I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from 
ine : for now, Ephraim, thou committest whore- 
dom, and Israel is defiled. 

4 They will not frame ' their doings to turn uuto 
their God:'' for the spirit of whoredoms is in the 
midst of them, and they have not known the Lord. 



•Heb.gone. t Heb. sAifWs; Psi. 47:«. a laa. 20: IT), t Or. und. t Ueh. 
renion. I Heb. give. \ Or, Tlitir doings will nut suffer tliera. b I'sa. 



16. SUdetli hack; stubbornly refuseth God's yoke. A 
bacJcdidiiig heifer ; an untamed heifer that refuses to bear 
tlie yoke. Feed them; pasture them. A large place ; a 
wide uninclosed region. The meaning is, that God will 
scatter Israel in foreign lands. 

17. Ephraim; the kingdom of the ten tribes. See note 
on chap. 7:1. 

19. Hath bound her ; the state or nation represented as 
the mother of the people. //( tier wing.-:; to carry her 
away to destruction. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-3. Ignorance of God is naturally accompanied by vice 
and crime, tilling the community with violence and blood- 
shed, and making it ripe for the vengeance of heaven. 
Verse 6. 

4. In times of public calamity we ought each to confess 
his own sins before God, and seek deliverance by hearty 
reijer.tance and works meet for repentance ; but the proud 
and unhuiubled will lay the fault each upon his neighbors, 
and become more fierce and contentious in proportion as 
they become more miserable. 

5. When a blind peojile are led by blind teachers, all 
shaU perish together. Ver. 9; Isa. 9:14-16; Matt. 15:14. 

7. When men abuse God's goodness by multiplying 
tbeir sins against him as he multiplies his gifts to them, 
becoming more wicked as they become stronger and rich- 
er, they have the sure mark of reprobation upon them, 
and are nigh destruction. 

8. Sad indeed is the condition of a people when they 
who should be its examples and teachers in holiness thrive 
upon its ignorance and wickedness, and hinder the know- 
ledge of the truth, lest their gains and pleasures should 
be diminished. 

11. The dominion of fleshly lusts stupefies the under- 
standing and deadens the moral feelings. No man who 
is under the control of his appetites can be either wise or 
good. 

12. Literal and spiritual whoredoms are natural com- 
panions. Nothing better can be hoped from those who 
give themselves to drunkenness and uncleanncss, than 
that they should ask counsel of their own hearts instead 
of the living God. Ver. 14. 



5 And the pride of Israel dolli testify to his face: 
therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their 
inirjuity; Judah also shall fall witli them. 

They shall go with their flocks and with their 
herds to seek the Lord ; but thoy shall not find 
him:'- he hath withdrawn himself from them. 

7 They have dealt treacherously against tlie 
Lord;'' for they have begotten strange children: 
now shall a month devour them with their portions. 

8 Blow ye the cornet in Gibcah, a7id the trumpet 
in Ramah : cry aloud at Beth-aven, after thee, 
Benjamin. 

9 Ephraim shall lie desolate in the day of re- 
buke :° among the tribes of Israel have I made 
known that which shall surely be.'' 

10 Tiie princes of Judah were like them that 
remove the bound : therefore I will pour out my 
wrath upon them like water. 

11 Ephraim w oppressed ami IjrokciL in judgment, 
because he willingly walked afler llio i-Dinmaiid- 
ment. 

12 Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth, 
and to the house of Judah as rottenness.* 

13 When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah 
saw his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyr- 
ian, and sent to king Jareb:* yet could he not 
heal you, nor cure you of your wound. 



t Or, Ike king o/Jareb, 



• Or, t 



13. God punishes wickedness in heads of families by 
giving up the members also to the dominion of sin, which 
is a more terrible infliction than sickness, poverty, captiv- 
ity, or death itself. 

15. The unfaithfulness of multitudes in God's visible 
church, instead of excusing our imfaithfulness, furnishes 
a new and strong argument for increased fidelity. 

17. The most awful judgment which God can send upon 
sinners is to let them alone in their sins: at the thought 
of this they ought to fear and tremble, for it will make 
their doom certain. 

18, 19. When rulers and people are united in the prac- 
tice of iniquity the wrath of God will sweep them away 
together. 

CHAPTER V. 

1. A snare on Mizpah — a net spread upon Tabor; an allu- 
sion to the practice of hunting birds upon mountains like 
Tabor and Mizpah. These were mountains of Northern 
Palestine, Tabor on the west, and Mizpah on the east of 
the Jordan. 

2. Tliough; better, as the margin, "and;" that is, be- 
cause of their slaughters. 

6. Tfieir flocks— their herds ; these are taken for sacrifices. 

7. Strange children; idolaters like their parents. Now 
shall a month devour them ; they shall be destroyed in the 
apace of a month ; that is, in a short period of time. Por- 
tions; possessions. 

8. Blow yc—the trumpet ; as a warning of the enemy's 
approach. ' Ezek. 33:3. After thee; that is, the enemy 
cometh. 

10. Like them that remove the bound ; as men that unlaw- 
fully remove landmarks, so they have removed the ordi- 
nances of God. 

11. Broken in judgment ; crushed and robbed of his rights 
by usurping tyrants and foreign invaders. Ttie command- 
ment; the idolatrous ordinances of Jeroboam. 

13. Jareb; a symbolical name for the Assyrian king, 
meaning "an adversary." Judah and Israel both souglit 
him as an adversary to their enemies, but he proved thc.r 
own worst adversary. 2 Kings 15:19, 20; 16:7-9 ; 2 Chroi;. 
28:10,20,21. 

995 



An exhortation 



HOSEA VII. 



to repentavce. 



14 For I uill be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as 
a young lion to the house of .Indah : l,evm I, will 
tear and go away ; I will take away, and none 
shall rescue him. 

15 1 I will go and return to my jilace, till they 
acknowledge their offence,' and seek my face : in 
their affliction they will seek me curly." 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 An cxliortation to repentancp 4 A complaint of their untowardness 
ami iniquity. 

COME, and let us return unto the Loun : for 
he hath torn, and he will heal us; he hath 
smitten, and he will hind us up.'' 

2 After two days will he revive us: in the third 
day he will raise us up,'' and we shall live in his 
sight. 

3 Then shall we know,'' if wo. follow on to know 
the I^iOUD:' his going forth is prepared as the 
morning; and he shall come unto us as the rain,' 
as the latter and former rain unto the earth. 

4 10 Ephraim, what shall 1 do unto thee? 
Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your good- 
ness* is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew 
it gocth away. 

T) Therefore have 1 hewed t/inn liy the pro])liets; 
I have slain them by the words of my nu)uth:'-' 
and thy judgments arc' as the light that goeth 
forth." 

() For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice;' and 
tlie knowledge of God more than burnt-offerings. 



• ]leb. bt guilly. a Psa. 78:34. b I.arn. 3:3-', :H. c | Cor. 15:1. d Mic. 
4-2. eHeb. 3:14. ' Deut. :W:a. 1 Or, merrij, m kimlntss. e Jcr. •23:-29; 
Hcb. 412. I Ot.thal Ihyjmlgmentsminhlb' li Wa. II9:H(I. i Mall. 
9:l:|. » Or, /Irfojn,- .lob 31 ::i3. \ Or. rtinnim; for. 1 Msb. u'iM one .</lo«/- 



INSTKUCTIONS. 

I. When nilers and ministers of religion, who ought to 
tie (Tiiides to the people in righteousness, are corrupt in 
life and doctrine, they lead the ma.s8 of the people into 
wickedness, and thus become a fat;d snare to their souls. 

4. Ignorance of God, a carnal mind, and perseverance in 
sin — these three things always go together. 

6, 7. When our lieart is fal.se and treacherous towards 
God, no multiplication of outward services can gain for us 
his favor. 

II, 12. The nation that allows the commandments of 
men to be imposed ui)on it in opposition to God's word, 
set.s the seal to its own rnhi. It must become miserably 
oppressed and broken, both outwardly and inwardly — a 
decayed and moth-eaten state, whoso greatness and 
strength exist only in history. 

13-15. In the alliances of wicked nations no help nor 
salvation can be found. God will execute upon them his 
immutable decree, " Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill 
with him," until they acknowledge their ofl'eucc and seek 
his face by hearty repentance. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1. Come — ht us return ; the language of the people when 
their affliction leads them to seek God. Chap. 5: 15. 

2. After two dnyt—in the third day; that is, speedily. 
Compare Luke 13:32, .33. 

3. Then shall wc kiwtv, if we follow; more literally, " And 
let us know, let us follow." //« goitip forth — as the mom- 
/ng'; he rises upon the souls of those who seek him as 
the morning. Mai. 4:2. 

6. Mercij—not sacrifice ; God rebukes his iieople for put- 
ting outward rites in the pkice of inward holiness. So 
our Paviour uses the words. Matt. 9:13; 12:7. 
906 



7 But they like men* have transgressed a.m. ssjt 
the covenant : there have they dealt treach- ?». 
crously against me. 

8 Gilcad is a city of them that work iniquity, 
and is polluted with' blood. 

9 Anil as troops of robbers wait for a man, so 
the company of priests murder in the way by 
consent:'' for they commit lewdness.' 

10 1 have seen a horrible thing in the house of 
Israel : there is the whoredom of Ephraim, Israel 
is detiled.J 

11 Also, Judah, lie hath set a harvest for 
thee, when I returned the cajitivity of my people. 



CHAPTER VII. 

1 A reproof of manifold sins. 11 God's wrath against them for their 
hypocrisy. 

WHEN I would have healed Israel, then the 
iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and 
the wickedness* of Samaria: for they commit 
falsehood ; and the thief cometh in, and the troop 
of robbers spoileth* without. 

2 And they consider not in* their hearts that I 
remember all their wickedness; now their own 
doings have beset them about;'' they are before 
my face. 

3 They make the king glad with their wicked- 
ness, and the princes with their lies.' 

4 They are all adulterers,'" as an oven heated by 
the baker, vho cease th ' from raising'' after he hath 
kneaded the dough, until it be leavened. 



Kncaaeu inc uougn, uniii ii uo leaveueu. 

tier; or, to Sherhtm. • Or, rnotmili/. j Ezfk. 24:13. ) Heb. «ci7.>. I Heb. 
slripptth. J Hcb. say noMo. k Isa. '2(>:lli. I Psa. G'2:4. "Jer.a:^. I Or, 
the raisur will cease. 1 Or, waking. 



8. Gilcad; probably Uamoth-gilcad beyond the Jordan. 
It was a city of refuge. Deut. 4:43; Josh. 20:8. 

11. yd harvest; a visitation of divine wrath. Compare 
Rev. 14:15. When I retimed ; literally, " in my returning." 
The meaning is, that divine judgments shall be connoiled 
with the purification and restoration of God's people. 
Compare Isa. 1:25-28; 4:4-6. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1,2. When affliction leads us to repent and seek God's 
help, the day of our deliverance is near : he who is al- 
mighty to smite, is almighty to bind up; whether it be 
individuals, families, churches, or nations. 

:5. God rises upon the souls of his sincere worshipjiers 
like the morning liglit, " which shineth more and more 
unto the perfect day :" his grace, like the rain of heaven, 
waters their souls, and makes them abound in the fruits 
of righteousness. 

4, 5. The inconstancy of God's people in his service 
deprives them of the light ami Mossednoss of his i>res- 
ence, and makes it necessary that ho should rebuke tluin 
and multiply his chastisements upon them. 

6. The true design of all outward rites in religion is to 
nourish and increase in the soul love towards God and 
man. How vain the idea of putting the outward sign of 
holiness in place of its inward substance! 

CHAPTER VII. 

1. Ephraim — Samnrin; Ephraim is often put for the 
kingdom of the ten tribes, because !?ainarin, the royal 
citv, lay in the tribe of Kphraim. 

•i. As nn oven heitird ; here. :ind in verses C, 7, the hearts of 
the people, inflamed with sinful passions, are compared to 
burning ovens. From raising; or, " from stirring up ;" that 
is, the fire. Unttl it he leaveiied ; when he kindles the oven 
into a fierce heat. Soo note on verse 6. 



Various crimes and 



nOSEA VIII. 



follies of Ike petjplc. 



A. M. 3224. 5 In the day of our king, the princes have 
■780" °"' made Am sick with l)Ottles of" wine ; he 
stretclied out his hand with scorners. 

For tliey have made ready ^ their heart like an 
oven, while they lie in wait : their baker sleepcth 
all the night ;"iu the morning it burneth as a 
flaming fire. 

7 They are all hot as an oven, and have devoured 
their judges; all their kings arc fallen:* there is 
none among them that callcth unto me. 

8 Epliraiin, he hatli mixed himself among the 
people ;■' Ephraim is a cake not turned. 

•J Strangers have devoured his strength, and he 
knoweth i< not; yea, gray hairs are here and 
there ■• u])on him, yet he knowetli not. 

10 And the pride of Israel testifieth to his face :'' 
and tlicy do not return to the Loed their God, 
nor seek him for all this.'' 

11 ![ Ephraim also is like a silly dove witliout 
heart: they call to Egypt, they go to Assyria." 

12 Wiien they shall go, I will spread my net upon 
tiiem;' I will bring them down as the fowls of the 
heaven ; I will chastise them/ as their congrega- 
tion hatii lieard. 

13 Woo unto them! for they have fled from me: 
destruction' unto them! because they have trans- 
gressed against me : though I have redeemed tiieni, 
yet they have spoken lies against me. 

1-1 And they have not cried unto me with tlicir 
heart, when they howled upon tlieir beds: tlicy 
assemble themselves for corn and wine, and they 
rebel against me. 



• 0,, heal Ihrougk wall 1 Ur, applied. 1 FulflUed B. C 77:J. a Psa. 10I);:J5. 
I Hfb. JprmifeJ. tjer.3:3. t Isa. 9:13. d Kings 15:1(1; 17:3, 1. = E<;cl. 
9:rJ. 'Rev. 3:19. I Heb. .tpolV. 1 Or, cAasIened. • Heb. the roof of Ihij. 



5. The day of our king; probably liis birthday. 

C. Made readij tlieir heart; applied themselves to their 
wicked plots. Lie in wait; to destroy their judges and 
kings. Ver. 7. Their baker — a flaming Jire ; here, and in 
ver. 4, we should probably understand the figure thus : 
the baker, having kneaded his dough, leaves in the oven 
a smothered fire, sufficient to keep it warm through the 
night, while it is rising, and then rests till morning, wlien 
he kindles it into a blazing fire for the purpose of baking. 
So the impure and murderous passions of the people 
smoulder in their hearts till a fit occasion arrives, when 
they blaze forth like a heated oven. 

7. Judges — kings; the history of the kingdom of Israel 
in its later years, when one royal house was murdered to 
make way for another, is the best commentary on this 
verse. 

8. Mixed himself among the -people; the people are the 
heathen nations. Compare Psa. 106:35. A cake; in the 
original, a cake baked in the embers. Not turned ; burned 
on one side and raw on the other, and hence worthless. 

9. Gray hairs; a sign that the nation was in its old age, 
and near its end. 

11. Call to Egypt — go to Assyria; for help, instead of to 
Jehovah. Menahommade a covenantwith Assyria,2 Kings 
15:19; and Iloshea sought aid from Egypt against the 
king of Assyria at the very time he was in covenant with 
him. 2 Kings 17:1. It is probable that his predecessors 
also sought the alliance of Egypt against their enemies. 

12. As their congregation liath heard; namely, from the 
law of Moses and the messages of the prophets. 

14. Howled upon their beds; for the failure of corn and 
wine. For corn and wine ; to supplicate God for it. They 
come with insincere and rebellious hearts. 

!(!. A deceitful bow; that sends the arrow aside from the 
mark. ITie rage of tlieir tongue; against God and his proph- 



15 Though I have bound' and sti-cnglliencd their 
arms, yet do they imagine ini.-chicf against mc. 

If) f hey return, but not to the Mustlligh : tiiey 
are like a deceitful bow : their princes shall fall 
by the sword for the rage of tlieir tongue: this 
shall be their derision in the land of Egypt. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1, 12 Destruction is threatened for their impiety, .'i and iJoUtry. 

SET the trumpet to thy* mouth. He shall 
come as an eagle against the house of the 
Lord, because they have transgressed my cove- 
nant, and trespassed against my law. 

2 Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we know 
thee. 

3 Israel hath cast off the thing that is good : the 
enemy shall pursue him. 

4 They have set up kings,* but not by me: they 
have made princes, and I knew it not: of their 
silver and their gold have they made them idols, 
that they may be cut off. 

5 ^ Tliy calf, Samaria, hath cast Mce off: mine 
anger is kindled against them: how long?H// it be 
ere they attain to innocency ? 

6 For from Israel was it also: the workman 
made it ; therefore it is not God : )jut the calf of 
Samaria shall be broken in pieces. 

7 For they have sown the wind, and they shall 
reap the whirlwind: it hath no stalk:* flie bud 
shall yield no meal : if so be it yield, the strangers 
shall swallow it up. 



t ShaUu7n, Meimhem, Pehahiah; 



15:13, 17, 23. : Or, standin 



ets. Tliis shall be tlieir derision; the fall of their princes. 
In the land of Egypt ; they looked to Egypt for help against 
their enemies, but there they shall have derision instead 
of help. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-10. The history of the kingdom of Israel furnishes a 
true illustration of the tendency and effects of apostasy 
from God. It began by substituting for the worship of 
Jehovah that of the golden calves ; it ended in a universal 
corruption of morals, extending alike to rulers and sub- 
jects ; filling the land with drunkenness, adultery, fraud, 
violence, murder, sedition, and anarchy, and making it an 
easy prey to its enemies. 

11-lG. They who in times of calamity persevere in sin 
and seek help from men instead of God, only bring upon 
themselves deeper ruin, and have derision from those to 
whom they looked for salvation. 

CHAPTER YIII. 

1. Set the trumpet ; compare chap. 5:8. The prophet is 
addressed. He sliall come; the enemy. The house of the 
Lord; as this prophecy is directed against Israel, "the 
house of the Lord " should be understood here figurative- 
ly of the land of Israel, as God's chosen dwelling-place. 
Compare chap. 9:15. 

2. ShaJl cri/ unto me — we know thee; in his distress Israel 
shall claim God's help, on the ground that he is his cove- 
nant people. The next verse shows what answer he shall 
receive. Compare Matt. 7:21-23. 

4. Knew it not; did not acknowledge the act. The ref- 
erence is to the usurping kings of Israel, who were mur- 
derers of their predecessors. See the history, 2 Khigs 
15:8-26. 

6. Was it also; the calf. 

7, It hath no stalk; the harvest which they have sown. 

997 



The idolatries and 



HOSEA TX, 



jxrils of Israel. 



S Israel is swallowed up: now sliall they be 
among the Gentiles as a vessel wherein is no pleas- 
ure. 

i) For they are gone up to Assyria, a wild ass 
alone by himself: Epliraim liuth hired lovers.' 

10 Yea, (hougli they have hired among the na- 
tions, now will I gather them, and they shall sor- 
row* a little* for the Inirden of the king of princes. 

11 Because Ei)liraiin hatli made many altars to 
sin, altars shall be unto him to sin. 

12 I have written to him the great things of my 
law, but they were counted as a strange thing. 

13 They sacrifice flesh yor the sacrifices of mine 
offerings, and* cat it ; hut the Lord acccpteth them 
not; now will he remember their iniquity, and 
visit their sins : they shall return to Egypt. 

1-1 For Israel hatli forgotten his Maker, and 
buildeth temples: and Judah hath multiplied 
fenced cities : but I will send a fire upon his cit- 
ies, and it shall d(!vonr the palaces thereof. 

CHAPTER IX. 

The distress .and captivity of Isr.ael for their sins and idolatry- 

TV)EJOICI<] not, Israel, for joy, as other pco- 
Vi pie : for thou hast gone a whoring from thy 
God, thou hast loved a reward upon' every corn- 
floor. 



• Heh. loufs. tor, iejin. t Or in a lilllc wliiU. ^ Or, In Ihc sacrificrs 
ofmine offerings, lhty,eic. I Or, m. 5 Or, wine-/nf. > ch. 8:13; 11 :5. 
Not intoLgypt itself, but into another bondage as bad as that, b Kzek. 4:13. 



8. A vessel wherein is no pleasure; see Jer. 22:28; 48:38. 

9. Gone up to Assyria; to hire lier help, chap. 7:11. A 
wild ass — by himself; Ephraim is as untamable as a wild ass 
of the wilderness. Lovers; idolatrous allies. 

10. Gather them; gather against Israel the lovers whom 
he has hired. Ttie burden; the load of servitude, witli a 
sjiecial reference to the tribute imposed upon them. Com- 
pare 2 Kings l.'):19, 20. Tlie kinp; of princes; the Assyrian 
monarch. Compare Ezek. 2G : 7, where the king of Babylon 
is called "a king of kings." 

11. Studl be unto him to sin; shall be the occasion of their 
being destroyed as simiers. 

13. Tliey shall return to Egypt ; this threat seems to have 
been fulfilled partly in a literal way by the flight of many 
Israelites into Egypt before the king of Assyria, and partly 
by a bondage in Assyria like that of their forefathers in 
Egypt. Compare chap. 9:3, G. 

14. Buildeth temples; to his idols. Mxdtiplied fenced cities ; 
relying on them, and not on (lod. l-^ee 2 Chron. 2G:9-15; 
27:4. Though the words of the jirophet are mainly di- 
rected against Israel, he occasionally glances at the sins 
of Judah. 

INSTRUCTION'S. 

2. That we aro the visible members of God's church can 
avail us notliing in the day of trouble, so long as wo con- 
tinue to tian.s;.;ress his covenant. He will answerour cries 
for help by somling upon us new cliastisements. 

4. When a nation conducts its government in the spirit 
of practical atheism, without acknowledging God's pres- 
ence and supreme control in human affairs, or seeking to 
conform its actions to his will, it can have neither stability 
nor true prosperity. One violent change will follow ail- 
other, until it is cut off in its inicpiity. 

."i-ll. The folly of those who first make an idol and then 
trust to it for salvation is manifest to all ; but equally vain 
is the confidence of those who, in times of distress, for.sake 
the living God, and put their trust in alliances with men 
as w'cked, weak, and ignorant as themsidves. 

12-14. True and hearty obedience to God's law makes 
our religious services acceptable to him through Christ, 
and secures for us his almighty aid ; but when his coni- 
998 



2 The floor and the wine-press'' shall not a m km. 
feed them, and the new wineshall fail in her. T'^* 

3 They shall not dwell in the Lord's land ; but 
Ephraim shall return to Egypt,' and they shall 
eat tniclean things in Assyria." 

4 They shall not offer wine o^mno-j to the Lord, 
neither shall they be pleasing unto him:'' their 
sacrifices shall he unto them as the bread of mourn- 
ers ; all that eat thereof shall be polluted: for 
their bread for their soul shall not come into the 
house of the Lord.** 

5 What will ye do in the solemn day, and in the 
day of the feast of the Lord"? 

6 For lo, they are gone because of destruction:' 
Egypt shall gather them up, Memphis shall bury 
them: the pleasant p/orra' for their silver, nettles' 
shall possess them : thorns shall be in their taber- 
nacles. 

7 The days of visitation are come, the days of 
recompense are come; Israel shall know it : the 
prophet is a fool, the spiritual man-' is mad, for the 
multitude of thine iniquity, and the great hatred. 

8 The watchman of Ephraim icas with my God :° 
but the prophet is a snare of a fowler in all his 
ways, and hatred in' the house of his God. 

9 They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in 
the days of Gibeah:^ therefore he will remember 
their iniquity, he will visit their sins. 



<■ Isa. 1:11-15. d Amosb:lI,13; John C:5I. * Hob. j;>oi(. 
1 Or, thtir silver shall ht (Jtstrtd, tht nellU, etc, » Heb. ma 
« Jer. 6:17. I Or, agaiiisr. ' Judg. 19:-ja. 



t Heb. drsire 
\ of Iht spirit. 



mandments are " counted as a strange thing," he will ac- 
count our worship as sin, and put to shame aU our earthly 

confidences. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1. As other people; like the heathen nations. 77ioii hasi 
loved a reward upon every corn-Jloor; the jieople ascribed 
their abundant harvests to their folse gods, and otVered 
gifts to them upon all their threshiug-lloors, tlius plajing 
the harlot with them there. 

2. In tier; in Israel, here compared to an adulterous 
woman. 

3. Return to Egypt — eat unclean things in Assyria; see 
note to chap. 8:13. 

4. They shall not offer; that is, in .\ssyria. The meaning 
of this verse is, that in their captivity, being without cither 
temple or altar, they can offer to God no acceptable drink- 
otfering or sacrifice, Tlicir sncrifces shall he; iiny sacrifices 
which they might attempt to ofl'er. Tlie bread of mounters; 
persons mourning for the dead, with all that they ate, were 
regarded as unclean. No offering could be made from their 
food for any holy purpose, Deut. 2(i: 14, Their bread — the 
Lord; rather, "their bread shall be for their own soul;" 
that is, to satisfy their appetite : " it shall not come into the 
house of the Lord." 

5. Wluit u-ill ye do ; how will ye he able in captivity to 
celebrate your feasts? 

6. Are gone; into exile. Bfm»i.«c of destruction; before 
the desolations of AssjTia. Gather them; into the grave. 
Memphis; the same as Noph. See note on Ezek. 30:13. 
Ttie pleasant places for their sdrrr ; their pleasant homes in 
Palestine, where they stored their silver. 

7. Prophet — spiriltial man ; false prophets are meant, to 
whose tlehisions the people were given uji as a punish- 
ment for their iniquity. Haired ; that is, an abomination 
which excites God's hatred. 

8. The watchman— u-ith my God; rather, "Ephraim look- 
eth out with my tiod;" tliat is, for help; while he yot 
allows false proi)liet8 to be a snare in all his ways. Ha- 
tred; see note on ver. 7. 

a.'Gibcah; sec the narrative. Judges chap, 19. 



IsraeFs distress 



HOSEA X. 



and c'iplirily. 



A. M. .rjn 10 I found Israel like ffrapes in the wil- 

B. C. about o 1 . 1 .■ i 

:« derness;" 1 saw your lathers as the hrst 
ripe in the fig-tree at her tirst time: but tlicy Avcnt 
to i>aal-peor, and separated themselves unto t/iaf 
shame ;'' and f/uir abominations were according as 
they loved.'' 

11 As for Ephraini, their glory shall fly away 
like a bird, from the birtli, and from the womb, 
and from tiie conception. 

12 Though they bring up their children, yet will 
I bereave them, that there shall not be a man left: 
yea, woe also to them when I depart from them!'' 
. 13 Epiiraim, as I saw Tyrus,'^' is planted in a 
pleasant place : but Ephraim shall bring forth his 
children to the murderer. 

1-t Give tliem, Lord: what wilt thou give? 
give them a miscarrying womb' and dry breasts. 

15 All their wickedness is in Gilgal/ for there 
I hated them : for the wickedness of their doings 
I will drive them out of my house,^ I will love them 
no more : all their princes are rcvolters. 

l(j Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up, 
they shall l.irar no fruit: yea, though tlicy bring 
forth, yet will I slay even the beloved fruit* of 
their womb. 

17 My God will cast them away, because they 
did not hearken unto him: and they shall be wan- 
derers among the nations.'* 

CHAPTER X. 

Israel is reproved and titreatened for their impiety and idolatry. 

ISRAEL is an empty vine,* he bringeth forth 
fruit unto himself: according to the multitude 
of his fruit he hath increased the altars;' accord- 
ing to the goodness of his land they have made 
goodly images.^ 



»Deut. 3J:I(I. b Num. 25:3. cjer. S:31. d Beat. 31 : 17. « Ezek. 27:-2. 
' Heb. a toomb Ihnt cuslflli tlie fruit, fch. 12:11. 5 Psa. 7f:(iU. t Heb. 
desires; Ezek. 21:21. b Deut. 28:1)4, 65; Jis. 1:1. : Or, a vine emplying 
the fruit whirh it giveth. i Jer, 2:2^ 4 Heb. statues^ or standing images. 
I Or, He hatk divided their heart. ^ Heb. behead; 1 Sam. 5:4. J ch. 



10. I found Israel — cs the first ripe in the fig-tree ; Israel 
was tlien to me an object of love and desire. The early 
fig is regarded as a peculiar delicacy. Jer. 24:2. Baal- 
peor; Num. 25:3. 

13. As I saw Tyrus; compare Ezek. 28:13. 

14. A miscarrying immh — dry breasts; as the best thing 
that the prophet can ask for them, in view of approaching 
calamities. Compare Luke 23:29. 

1.5. In Gilgal ; see note on chap. 4:15. My house; sec 
note on chap. 8:1. 

IXSTRUCTION. 

Sad indeed is the contrast between the early and latter 
history of the Israelites. In the beginning they adhered 
steadfastly to God's service, and he gave them in return 
peace, plenty. and victory over all their enemies. In their 
latter years they became continually more helpless and 
miserable as they departed from their covenant God, till 
at last he made them, as they are this day, "wanderers 
among the nations." Such shall be the contrast between 
the early and latter history of our own nation, if it imitates 
the example of Israel in departing from the living God ; 
for he is ever the same, and deals with men upon the same 
immutable principles of truth and righteousness. 

CHAPTER X. 

1. Empty; many interpreters prefer to render "luxuri- 
ant," and this agrees best with what follows. Tlie altars; 
erected to false gods. 

3. A'oictAeys/iaWsai/; be forced by their calamities to say. 



2 Their heart is divided;' now shall they be 
found faulty: he shall break down^ their altars, 
he shall siioil their images. 

?) For now they shall say. We have no king, be- 
cause we feared not the Lord ;' what then should 
a king do to us? 

4 They have spoken words, swearing falsely in 
making a covenant : thus judgment spriugcth up 
as hemlock in the furrows of the field. 

5 The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear because 
of the calves of Bcth-aven : for the people thereof 
shall mourn over it, and the priests" thereof that 
rejoiced on it, for the glory thereof, because it is 
departed fi-om it. 

6 It shall be also carried unto Assyria for a pres- 
ent to king Jareb : Ephraim shall receive shame, 
and Israel shall be ashamed of his own counsel." 

7 As for Samaria, her king is cut off as the foam 
upon the water.* 

8 The high places also of Avcn, the sin of Israel,' 
shall be destroyed : the thorn and the thistle shall 
come up on their altars ; and they shall say to the 
mountains. Cover us; and to the hills. Fall onus.'" 

9 Israel, thou hast sinned from the days of 
Gibeah: there they stood: the battle in Gibeah 
against the children of iniquity did not overtake 
them. 

10 It is in my desire that I should chastise them ; 
and the people shall be gathered against them, 
when they shall bind themselves in their two fur- 
rows.* 

11 And Epiiraim is as a heifer that is taught, 
and loveth to tread out the corn; but I passed over 
upon her fair neck :' I will make Ephraim to ride; 
Judah shall plough, and Jacob shall break his 
clods. 



13:11. • Or, Chemarim; 2 Kings 2.3:; 
face of the water. I 1 Kings 12:3U. m 
them for their ttvo transgressions, or i 
beauty of her neck. 



:4 k Jer. 2:37. t Heb. 

t Or, when I shall bind 

r habitations, i Heb. the 



4. Judgment — hemlock; justice in the observance of cov- 
enants and the administration of law is perverted, and 
thus turned into a poisonous weed. Compare Amos 6:12. 

5. The calves ofBeth-aven; literally, " the heifers of Beth- 
aven," a contemptuous expression for the gods of Jeroboam, 
of which that at Beth-aven was a specimen. Beth-aven is 
Beth-el. See note chap. 4: 15. 

6. /( shall be — carried; the golden calf of Beth-el. Jareb; 
see note chap. 5:13. 

7. Her king; this seems to be a prophecy of the captiv- 
ity of Hoshea, and the extinction in him of the kingdom of 
Israel. Compare ver. 15. 

8. Aven; Beth-aven, that is, Belh-el. Cover us — Fall on 
vs; shelter us from the vengeance of God. The people 
say this when pressed by their enemies, with no means of 
escape. Compare Isa. 2:19; Luke 23:30; Rev. 6:15, 16; 
9 : 6. The most terrible application of these words will be 
at the final judgment. 

9. From the days of Gibeah; see Judges 20. There they 
stood ; the Benjamites stood determined to defend the chil- 
dren of iniquity, and so Ephraim now persists in sin. Judg. 
20:12,13. i);d?iof,- or, "shall not;" it shall be one of a more 
destructive character. From that battle a remnant escap- 
ed who perpetuated the tribe. Judges 20:47, and chap. 21 ;. 
but Israel shall be utterly taken away. Chap. 1 : 6. 

10. Ulten they shall bind — two furrows; the margin is 
preferable: the "two transgressions " are the two calves 
in Beth-el and Dan. 

11. Loveth to tread ; because then she can have abundance 

999 



Israel's ingratitude for 



HOSEA XI. 



the divine goodness. 



12 Sow to yourselves in rightcousnot^s, reap in 
mercy ; break up your I'allow ground : for it is 
time to seek the Lord, till lie conic and rain right- 
eousness upon you. 

13 Ye have ploughed wickedness, yc have reaped 
iniriuity ; ye have eaten the fruit of lies: because 
thou didst trust in thy way, in the multitude of thy 
mighty men. 

11 Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy peo- 
ple, and all tiiy fortresses .shall be spoiled, asShal- 
mau spoiled Beth-arbcl in the day of battle: the 
mother was dashed in pieces upon Aer children. 

15 So shall Beth-el do unto you because of your 
great wickedness:* in a morning shall the king 
of Israel utterly be cut off. 



CHAPTER XI. 

1 The ingratitude of Israil iii.to GoJ for his benefits. .5 His judgment. 
b Crod's mercy toward them. 

WHEN Israel icas a child, then I loved him, 
and called my son out of Egypt.'' 
'2 Jls they called them, so they went from them: 
they sacriticcd unto Baalim, and burned incense 
to graven images. 

3 I taught E])liraim also to go,'' taking them by 
their arms ; but they knew not that I healed them. 

4 I drew them with cords of a man, witJi bands 
of love : and 1 was to them as they that take off* 



' Heb. the evil of your 
t Heb. lift up. I They bee 



of food. Deut. 25:4. Passed over upon her fair neck; put 
a yoke upon it, that she might be suDJeoted to harder ser- 
vices. Make Ephraim to ride; the meaning seems to be, 
"1 will yoke Eijhraim," namely, to a plough or harrow; 
tliat is, put him to hard service. 

12. Sow to yourselves; if the people would escape the 
pimishment threatened in the preceding verse, let them of 
their own accord sow righteousness, that they may reap 
mercy. Break up your fallow ground ; the same as, '• make 
you anew heart and a new spirit," Ezek. 18:31. Compare 
Jer. 4:.S, 4; Matt. i;j:4-7. 

14. S!w.lmaii; Shalmaneser. 

15. Ill a morning; speedily. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. It is commonly the case, that in proportion as God 
multiplies his outward gifts to men, they multiply llieir 
rebellions against him. This is a most painful evidence 
of the deceitfulnesB and desperate wickedness of the hu- 
man heart. 

2. They whose heart is not steadfast in God's service 
will be reckoned among his enemies, and perish with 
them. 

3. When men cast off the fear of God, no earthly re- 
sources can avail to make them prosperous and hui)py. 

4-11. When integrity and truth in the ob.servance of 
compacts have i)erished from a conununity, and the seat 
of justice is made the instrument of violence and oppres- 
sion, the measure of its iniquity is full, antl God's deso- 
lating judgments will speedily fall upon it, as upon Israel 
.of old. 

12. It is vain to hope for any permanent reformation 
which does not begin with thorough humiliation of the 
heart before God, huiIi as shall prepare it to receive with 
meekness the seed of divine truth. 

13-15. "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shidl ho also 
reap," is a principle of God's government which holds good 
alike of communities and of individuals. When the seed 
is iniquity, the harvest must be wrath; nor can the power 
and wealth of any people exempt it from this righteous 
rule of retribution. 

1000 



the yoke on their jaws, and I laid meat a.m. sast 
unto them. ;io 

o 1 He shall not return into the land of Egypt, 
but the Assyrian shall be his king,' because they 
refused to return. 

G And the sword shall abide on his cities, and 
shall consume his branches, and devour the7n, be- 
cause of their own counsels. 

7 And my people arc bent to backsliding from 
me: though they called them to the Most High, 
none at all would o.xalt him.^ 

8 How shall I give thee up, E)ihraim? how shall 
I deliver thee, Israel ? how shall I make thee as 
Adniah'.' how shall 1 set thee as Zeboim? my heart 
is turned within me, my repentings are kindled 
together. 

1 will not execute the fierceness of mine an- 
ger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim : for I 
am God,'' and not man ; the Holy One in the 
midst of thee: and I will not enter into the city. 

10 Tliey shall walk after the Lord : he shall roar 
like a lion : when he shall roar, then the children 
shall tremble from the west. 

11 They shall tremble as a bird out of Egypt, 
and as a dove out of the land of Assyria: and I 
will place them in their houses, saith the Lori>. 

12 Ephraim compasscth me about with lies, and 
the house of Israel with deceit:'' luit .Judah yet 
ruleth with God, and is faithful with the saints.' 



.Mai 3:0. I.Psa. 76:30. I Or, urilh We most 



CHAPTER XI. 

1. Called my son out of Egypt ; namely, by the hand of 
Moses. What the jrropliet here says of Israel, the visible 
body of Christ, the evangelist JIatthew applies to Christ 
himself, it having been the plan of God that in this re- 
sjiect there should be an agreement between the body 
and the Heail. 

2. As they called; as tlie prophets called. 

4. Cords of a man; gentle cords. Compare "the rod of 
men," 2 Sam. 7: 14. 

5. Shall not return into the land of Egypt ; that is, to find 
a quiet home there under Pharaoh's protection, which was 
what they sought. Chap. 12:1. They should come under 
the dominion of As.syria, and whether in Egypt or else- 
where, should be oppressed and " wanderers among the 
nations." Chap. 9:17. lief used to return ; to }eho\ah. 

8. My repentings ; compare Exod. 32 : 12, 14 ; Psa. 106 : 45 j 
Jonah 3:10. 

0. I wdl not execute — God, and not man; though God will 
chastise his peojile, his infinite mercy and unchangeable 
faithfulness to his promises will prevent him from utterly 
destroying them. Enter into the city; as a destroyer, to 
make an utter end of it. The city here represents the 
whole people. 

10. Shall M-alk aflcr the Lord; this shall be after their 
chastisement, when he again gathers them in mercy. Ver. 
11. Sliall roar like a lion; "out of Zion," .Tool 3: IB, or, 
"from on high," Jer. 25:30. This is his voice of majesty 
when he interposes for his jieoplo. The cJiddren; the 
children of his exiled people. Shall tremble; shall como 
with trembling haste. From the weit ; connect this with 
the following verso, where it is said that they shall come 
trembling out of Egypt in the south, and Assyria in the 
east; that is, they shall como home to their own land 
from all directions. 

12. Rulrfh with God; holds llic sovereignty in union with 
God. In the days of Ilosea this was true in a comparative 
sense, especially luidcr such kings as Ilezekiah. Kut many 
render the last clause, "and Judah is vet inconstant with 



Reproof of Ephraim, 



HOSEA xir. 



Jud,h, and Jacob. 



CHAPTER XII. 



1 A reproof of Eph 
exliorteth to r 



JuJah. and Jacob. 3 By former favors he 
nee. 7 Ephraiiii's sins provoke God. 

T "^rilRAIM feedcth on wind, and followeth after 
\2j the cast wind : he daily increaseth lies and 
desolation ; and they do make a covenant with the 
Assyrians, and oil is carried into Egypt.'' 

2 The Lord hath also a controversy with Judah,'' 
and will punish* Jacob according to his ways; ac- 
cording to his doings will he recompense liini.'^ 

3 IT lie took his brother by the heel in the womb," 
and by his strength he had power with God: + ° ■ 

4 Yea, he had power over the angel, and prevail- 
ed: he wept, and made supplication unto him: he 
found him in Beth-el,'^ and there he spake with us; 

5 Even the Lord God of hosts; the Lord is his 
memorial.'^ 

6 Therefore turn thou to thy God : keep mercy 
and judgment, and wait on thy God continually. 

7 1l He is a merchant,* the balances of deceit are 
in his hand : he lovetli to oppress.^ 

8 And Ephraim said, Yet I am become rich,** I 



" Isa. .57:9. b Mjc 


.G:a. -Heb. f 


sit upon c 


Gal B: 


,8. d Ge 


n. a5:-2e. 


t H«b. ims a prince. 


OT behaved hints 


etf princely. 


= Gen. 


K; -24, etc 


tGen. 


•2:5:11-19; 3.):9-15. 


e Exod. 3:l.n- 


I Or, Cann 


i;l; Rze 


:. 10:3. 


S Or, de- 


ceive. h Rev. 3:17 


1 Heb. ivkirh 


1 Or, all t 


ny labors 


suffice m 


nut; he 



tioil, and with the holy faithful One." Compare chap. 5:5, 
10, 14; 8:14; 12:2. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1, 2. To our nation, as to ancient Israel, God was very 
gracious in the days of its childhood, when it was weak 
and dependent, and granted it many surprising deliver- 
ances. Now that he has made us great and strong, he 
calls us to himself; but how ready are we to depart from 
him, and to put our trust in the work of our own hands 
rather than in his grace. 

S. In the affairs of this world, men do not commonly un- 
derstand that their success is from God, nor acknowledge 
his hand in it ; and even the Christian, in the beginning of 
his spiritual life, does not always know who it is that is 
healing his soul, and leading him into the paths of right- 
eousness. 

4. The memory of God's unspeakable goodness and ten- 
derness towards us in the days of our spiritual darkness 
and weakness, ought to keep us very humble and very 
near to his mercy-seat. We cannot depart from him 
without sundering the cords of love wherewith ho has 
drawn us to himself. 

7. The constant disposition of Israel to backslide from 
the God who had redeemed him, is a true jjicture of what 
exists in every believer's heart, except so far as divine 
grace keeps him steadfast with his Redeemer. 

8. God looks with tender compassion upon perishing 
sinners, and does not give them up to destruction until 
he has done all that infinite wisdom allows to recall them 
to himself. 

9-11. God's people deserve no good at his hand ; shoidd 
he utterly destroy them, he would deal with them accord- 
ing to their desert. A regard to his own infinite perfec- 
tions, and not to their merit, moves him to carry forward 
his unchangeable purposes of mercy concerning them, 
until he has finished the work of their redemption, and 
placed them in everlasting habitations. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1. Oil is carried into Egypt , see note on chap. 1:1. 

?j. Took his brother by the Iteel; Gen. 25:26. This was a 
divinely appointed sign of what had been already revealed 
to Rebekah, that the younger should seek and obtain the 
preeminence over the elder. Gen. 25:23. The prophet men- 
tions it here, as also his wrestling and prevailing with the 
angel, to illustrate God's unmerited favor to Israel above 



have found me out substance: in all my labors 
they shall lind none iniquity in me that' were 
sin.^ 

9 And I that am the Lord thy God from the 
land of Egypt will yet make thee to dwell in tab- 
ernacles, as in the days of the solemn feast. 

10 I have also spoken by the prophets,' and I 
have multiplied visions, and used similitudes, by 
the ministry* of the prophets. 

11 Is there iniquity in Gilead ? surely they are 
vanity: tliey sacriiice bullocks in Gilgal;' yea, 
their altars are as heaps in the furrows of the 
fields. 

12 And Jacob fled into the country of Syria, 
and Israel served for a wile, and for a wife he 
kept sheep.^ 

13 And by a prophet the Lord brought Israel 
out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved. 

l-t Epliraim provoked him to anger most bit- 
terly:* therefore shall he leave his blood' upon 
him, and his reproach shall his Lord return unto 
him.' 



Esau, Mai. 1:2, Rom. 9:11-16, and as a motive to grateful 
obedience. Thus the way is prepared for the exhortation 
in vcr. 6. Had power with God ; for the angel with whom 
he wrestled was God. See the narrative. Gen. 32 : 24-30. 

4. IVcpt — 7nade supplication; this, though not stated, is 
fairly implied in the narrative, especially in the prayer 
recorded Gen. 32:9-12. He found him in Beth-el ; God found 
Jacob, Gen. 28:10-22; another and an earlier instance of 
God's undeserved favor. He spake with us; God spoke 
with the Israelites in speaking to Jacob, for the promises 
made to him were made to all his posterity. 

7. He IS a merchant; Ephraim is likened to a merchant 
who is intent on di-shonest gain. 

8. I am become — that were sin ; he deludes himself with 
the idea that nothing deserving of punishment can be found 
in his dealings with others. 

9. As in the days of the— feast ; namely, the feast of taber- 
nacles, which was kept in commemoration of this sojourn 
in the wilderness. Lev. 23:39-43. 

11. In Gilead; see chap. 6:8. As heaps; as numerous 
as stone-heaps. 

12. Jacob fled — served; in this and the following verse 
the people are reminded of God's goodness to their fathers 
in the time of their feebleness and distress. 

14. Leave his blood upon him ; leave his bloodguiltiness to 
rest upon him without expiation. His reproach ; namely, 
with which he has reproached his JIaker by forsaking him 
and worshipping idols. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. All our efforts to obtain help and deliverance from 
our fellow-men while we persevere in wickedness and 
apostasy from God, are but feeding on the wind, and must 
end in shame and ruin. 

4-6. The remembrance of past deliverances obtained 
from God through earnest intercession, should encourage 
us to seek help from him in present trials, by repentance, 
humiliation, and hearty obedience. 

7, 8. The exceeding deceitfulness of sin is especially 
manifest in the fact that while men are in the very act of 
amassing wealth by deceit and oppression, they find ways 
to justify themselves, and boast that none can convict 
them of iniquity. 

9-14. If we fail to profit by either the remembrance of 
God's goodness to us, or by all the multiplied means which 
he employs for our reformation, he will make us feel the 
severity of his judgments. 

1001 



Tkreatenitigs against sinners. 



HOSEA XIV. 



A uill to rejientunce. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



1 Epiiraim's glory, by reason of idolatry, vi 
f.ir their unkimlntss. 9 A promise of (j.kIs 
for rebellion. 



slieth. 5 God's anger 
lercy. 1.3 A judgment 



WHEN Epiiraim spake treinliliiig, lie e.xaltcd 
liiinself in Israel; but when he offended in 
Baal, ho died. 

2 And now they .sin more and more,*" and have 
made them molten images of their .silver, and idols 
act'ording to their own understanding, all of it the 
work of the craftsmen : they say of tliem, Let the 
men that sacrifice* kiss the calves.'' 

'.i 'J'lu'rofore they shall bo as the morning cloud, 
and ;is the early dew that passoth away, as the 
chiiiY that is driven with the whirlwind out of the 
floor," and as the smoke out of the chimney. 

4 Yet I am the Lord thy God from the land of 
Egypt, and thou shalt know no god but me: for 
there is no savior besides mo. 

5 IF I did know thee in the wilderness, in the 
land of groat drought.*'' 

6 According to their pasture, so wore they filled ; 
they were filled, and their lieart was exalted; 
therefore have they forgotten me. 

7 Therefore I will be unto them a? a lion: as a 
leopard by the way will I observe them: 

8 1 will moot them as a Ijear thar is bereaved of 
fur irhelps, and will rend the caul of their heart, 
and there will I devour them like a lion: the 
wild beast* shall tear thorn. 

9 T Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself; but 
in mo is thy ' help. 



• Heb.o!W(o.wn, > Isa. 1:5. lOl.sacriJiresofimn. >> 1 Kings 1»: 18. 
e Dan. •2:.^5. 1 Heb. droughts, i Psa. (i3:l. i Hcb. beast of Ike JiM. 
I Heb. in thy. 1 Or, Where is thy king? King Hoshea being then in prison ; 



CHAPTER XIII. 

10. Of whom thou saidst; in the spirit of unbelief and 
worldly confidence, the people originally demanded a 
kin;; ; see the narrative, 1 Sam. 8:.'), 19, 20. The ten tribes 
afterwards repeated the same sin in rejecting the family of 
David and setting over themselves Jeroboam. The prophet 
now asks. Of what avail has this been to you ? 

11. Gave — in mine anger; in the case of both Saul and 
Jeroboam, God, in his displeasure, allowed the people to 
follow their own counsels. Took — in mu wrath; for this 
was connected with the destruction of the kingdom of 
Israel, and the captivity of the people. 

12. Hound up — hid; sealed up and reserved for the day 
of |>unishnicnt. 

i:i. The sorrows of a travailing woman; the snlTerings by 
which God's covenant people are to be regenerated. An 
unwise son; by a change of figure, the people that have 
just been compared with the mother are now compared 
with the child. For he should not staij long in the place; 
rather, "for he does not timely come to the place;" that 
is, by (lolaying repentance he prolongs and increases the 
period of natimr.il angiiisli. 

It. / will ransom — thij deslruction ; the Spirit of inspira- 
tion passes, after tlio usual manner of prophecy, from the 
threatened inlliclioii to its glorious results in the future. 
This jiromise has a progressive fullihncnt to the true Israel 
in its whole history to the final resurrection. Compare the 
use made of it in 1 Cnr. 15 : Ft^. Repentance shall he hid from 
mine ei/es; my purpose to destroy deatli and the grave is 
unchangeable. 

1.5. An eaut wind; which in those regions has a parching 
and withering effect. Ezck. 17:11); 19:12; Jonah 4: 8. The 
proplict now returns to the Ihreatoned vengeance of Jeho- 
vah u)ion Kphraim and Samaria. 

10. Samaria — ripped up; this awful threatening was 
1002 



10 I will be thy king:^ wlicre is any am. 3379. 
othir that may save tlioe in all thy cities? t.:^" 
and thy judges of whom thou saidst, Give me a 
king and princes? 

Ill gave thee a king in mine anger,*" and took 
him away in my wrath.' 

12 The iniquity of Kphraim is bound up; his sin 
is hid. 

13 The sorrows of a travailing woman shall 
come upon him: he is an unwise son; for lie 
siiould not stay long* in the place o/"the breaking 
forth of children. 

1-i I will ransom thom from the power* of the 
grave ;'^ I will redeem them from death: death, 
1 will bo thy jilaguos: O gr;ivo. 1 will be thy de- 
struction: repontanco shall be iiid Irom mine eyes. 

15 'i Though he be fruitful among his brethren, 
an oast wind shall come, the wind of the Lord 
shall come up from the wilderness, and his s])ring 
shall become dry, and his fountain shall be dried 
up : he shall spoil the treasure of all pleasant ves- 
sels.* 

16 Samaria shall become desolate;^ for she hath 
rebelled against her God: they shall fall by the 
sword: their infants shall bo dashed in pieces, and 
their women with child shall be ripped up. 

(' II A FT Kit XIV. 

1 An exhortation to repentance. -1 A promise of God's blcssinff- 

O ISRAEL, return unto the Lord thy God : for 
thou hast fiillen by thine iniquity. 



1 Heb. vessels of desin 



.:!l:->-l. • Heb. (I lemf. t H«b AaiiJ. 
JFuiniled B. C. 721; 2 Kings 17; 16. 



fulfilled upon Samaria within less than five years, when 
Shalmaneser took Samaria. Sec 2 Kings 17 :«, and note on 
chap. 1:1. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. The holy fear of (Jod is the way of exaltation for both 
nations and individuals, while presumptuous transgression 
ends in speedy destruction. 

4-8. When men proceed from one degree of sin to an- 
other, regardless alike of God's jmst favors or his present 
gifts, he will at last meet them "as a bear that is bereaved 
of her whelps," and they will be able neither to escape nor 
to endure his awful vengeance. 

9, 10. The indispensable preparation for a true return to 
God, is the conviction that we have destroyed ourselves 
by our iniquity, and that God alone can help us. Chap. 
11:1. 

II. With the perverse and rebellious, God is angry when 
he gives and when hp takes away the objects of their de- 
sire, and both modes of dealing become to them occasions 
of increased wickedness and misery. 

12. We may forget or deny our iniquity, but it is bound 
up in the book of God's remembrance, and at the day of 
judgment wo must meet it and answer to the dread rec- 
ord. 

14-lfi. The awfid visitations of God's wTath which 
destroy the wicke<l from among his jieople, purify the 
righteous. Thus the church on earth is steadily carried 
forward towards the day of her universal triumph over 
Satan's kingdom, and her true members are preparoil for 
a complete and everlasting victory over sin and deatli "at 
the resurrection of tlie just." 

CHAPTER XIV. 

The prophet closes his message with a gracious invita- 
tion to repentance, and a glorious iiromise of the future 
sanctification and enlargement of God's iieople. 



A promise of 



HO SEA XIV 



God's blessim 



A.M. 3279. 2 Take with yon words, and turn to the 
■72I" °" Lord : say unto him, Take away all in- 
iquity, and receive m graciously:* so will we 
render the calves of our lips." 

3 Assluir shall not save us; we will not ride 
upon horses : neither will we say any more to the 
work of our iiands, Ye are our gods: for in thee 
tlie fatherless findeth mercy. 

4 11 will heal their backsliding, I will love 
tliein freely : for mine anger is turned away from 
him. 

5 I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall 
grow* as the lily, and cast* forth his roots as 
Lebanon. 



' Or, give good, «Heb. 13:15. 1 Or, blossom. I Beh. strike, i Heh. go. 



2. The calves of our lips; "the sacrifice of praise;" tliat 
is, " the fruit of our lips," Heb. 13: !.'>. The version of the 
Seventy has in Hosea, " the fruit of our lips," which the 
apostle follows. 

3. Will not ride upon horses; making them our confidence. 
Compare Isa. 31:1, 2. 

7. f/ndcr /iK .s/iat/ow; under Israel's shadow. The peo- 
ple of God, in their new state of holiness and prosperity, 
are compared to a spreading tree, which furnishes shelter 
and sliade. Compare Ezek. 17:23; 31:6; Dan. 4:12. 

S. I have kearil htm ; I Jehovah have heard his suppli- 
cations. Aiul observed him ; more literally, " will observe 
him;" that is, watch over him. Like a green fir-tree ; I 
will give Israel protection like an evergreen fir, or cy- 
press ; but as this tree furnishes only shade, God adds 
that from him Ephraim shall find fruit also. 

9. These things; the whole course of God's dealings 
with men. The ways of the Lord; both his requirements 
of men and his dealings with them. Shalt walk in them ; 
iu safety and prosperity. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1, 2. God is infinitely gracious, and only waits for our 
return to him by hearty confession and repentance, to 
have mercy upon us and save us from the ruin iuto which 
we have fallen by our iniquity. 



6 His branches shall spread,^ and his beauty shall 
be as the olive-tree, and Ins smell as Lebanon. 

7 They that dwell under his shadow shall re- 
turn;'' they shall revive as the corn, and grow' as 
the vine: the scent'' thereof «/;«// be as the wine of 
Lebanon. 

8 Epliraijn shall say, What have I to do any 
more with idols? I have heard him, and observed 
him : I am like a green fir-tree. From mo is thy 
fruit found. 

'.) Who is wise, and he shall understand these 
things? prudent, and he shall know them? for the 
ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk 
in them : but the transgressors shall fall therein. 



> Song 2:3. IOt,Uos! 



3. The renunciation of all false confidences prepares the 
way for true faith in God. 

4. The return of backsliders to God is itself a fruit of 
the operation of his Spirit, and he will own it by imme- 
diate and free forgiveness. 

5-7. The blessing of God gives prosperity of every kind. 
It makes nations and families strong and happy; it fills 
the visible church with the fruits of righteousness, and 
makes her glorious and honorable in the eyes of the world ; 
it brings to the soul of the believer light, gladness, vic- 
tory over sin, and preparation fur the inheritance of the 
saints in light. This is the blessing which our country 
needs, which all the churches of Christ need, which every 
one of us needs. Without it we must be poor and miser- 
able ; with it we shall be rich for time and eternity. 

8. The moment we heartily renounce our idols, God be- 
comes to us an all-sufficient helper, and from his infinite 
fulness we receive whatever we need for soul or for body, 
for time or for eternity. 

9. The tokens of God's presence and supreme contiol 
in human aflairs are so many and so manifest, that nothing 
but the blindness of sin can prevent our seeing them. 
The ways of his providence and those which he has pre- 
scribed to men, are alike righteous ; they are the salvation 
of the just, and the destruction of transgressors. 



1008 



JOEL. 



Joel was evidently a native of Judea, and his prophecy has respect entirely to that kinj^dom. Tlie 
occasion is a grievous devastation of the land by locusts. In view of this, he calls the people to repent- 
ance, and threatens a still more terrible visitation, chap. 1:15; which he describes at length in the second 
chapter, ver. 1-27. The remainder of the book is occupied, after the manner of the prophets, with prophecies 
relating to the distant future. He doubtless wrote before the A.ssyrian invasion recorded in 2 Kings 18 : 13, 
etc. ; probably in the reign of Uzisiah. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 Joel, declaring sundry jud;;ments of God, exliortetli to observe Uieni, 
8 and to mourn. 14 He prescribi-th a fast for complaint. 

THE word of the Lord that came to Joel the 
son of Pethucl. 

2 Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye 
inhabitants of tlie land. Hath tiiis been in your 
davf!, or even in the days of your Withers ? 

3 Tell ye your children of it, and let your cliil- 
dreu tdl "their children, and their eiiildren another 
generation. 

4 That wliicli the palmer-worm hath left' liatli 
the locust eaten;" and tiiat wiiich the locust liath 
left hath the canker-worm eaten ; and that which 
the canker-worm hath left hath the cater})illar 
eaten." 

5 Awake, ye drunkards, and weep ; and howl, 
all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine; 
for it is cut off from your mouth.'" 

6 For a nation is conn- u]) upon my land, strong, 
and without number,'' whose teeth are. the teeth of 
a lion, and he hath the check teeth of a great lion.'' 

7 He hath laid my vine waste, and barked my 
fig-tree:* he hath made it clean bare, and cast it 
away; the branches thereof are nuvdc white.' 

8 H Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth 
for tlie husband of her youth. 

•J The meat-offering ami the drink-olTcriiig is cut 
off from the house of tin' Ldimi; the priests, the 
Lord's ministers, mourn. 

10 The field is wasted, the land monrneth ; for 
the corn is wasted : the new wine is ilricd up,* the 
oil languisheth. 

11 Be ye ashamed, yc husbandmen; howl, 



' \U\i. The rentlur of iIk palnuTworm » Dout. aSiM. b ch. 2:a.'). ' Isa. 
32:10. dch. a:-2, II. "Rev. 0:7-10 \ nrMAM my fig-tree for a barking. 
Miui.5:fi. 1 Or.a.t/inmerf,- ver. IS. « Uab .'1: 17, 1,1. I>l«i.a4:ll. i .Icr. 
4:S. i oh. •i:\-i, 10; a Chr. 20::), 4. i Or, day nf renlraint ; Noh. 8; IS. 



CHAPTER L 

4. Palmer-worm — loaist — canker-worm — caterpillar; tliosp 
Bcein to hiivo been fuiir IdiiiLs of locust, l)Ut tlio e.\act 
dilTorciico between tlieiii eaimot bo (Icteriiiiiieil. 

(1. A nation: compare Pro v. 'M:2'. 

l.'>. Is nl hand; the preflint vittiUition is but an earnest 
of more terrible judgmeiil.s, which can bo averted only by 
repentance. 

17. Rotten under tlteir clods ; from cxtrcmo drynesa. In 
seasons of droujrht, locusts arc most destructive. 
1004 



ye vinedressers, for the wheat and for the a.m..i3m. 
barley ; because the harvest of the field is '^'■' 
perished. 

12 The vine is dried up. and the fig-tree lan- 
guisheth;'-' the pomegranate-tree, the palm-tree 
also, and the ajiple-tree, iven all the trees of the 
field, are withered: because joy is withered away 
from the sons of men.'' 

13 Gird yourselves, and lament, ye jiriests: 
howl, ye ministers of the altar: come, lie all night 
in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God:' for the 
iiioat-offcring and the drink-offering is withholdcn 
from tiio liou.se of your God. 

14 *i .Sanctify ye a fast,^ call a solemn a.ssem- 
bly,* gather the elders and all the inhabitants of 
the lanil info the house of the Lord your God, and 
cry unto the Lord, 

i5 Alas for the day !" for the day of the Lord is 
at hand, and as a destruction from the Almigjity 
shall it come.' 

l(j Is not the meat cut off before our eyes, y(a, 
joy and gladness from the house of our God ?"' 

17 The seed' is rotten under their clods, the 
garners are laid desolate, the barns arc broken 
down; for the corn is withered. 

1 8 How do the beasts groan ! the herds of cattle 
are perplexed, because they have no pasture; yea, 
the Hocks of sheep arc made desolate." 

19 Lord, to thee will I cry :" for the fire hath 
devoured the pastures' of the wilderness.'' and the 
flame hath l)urned all the trees of the field. 

'20 The beasts of the field cry also unto thee:'" 
for the rivers of waters arc dried up, and the fire 
hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness.' 



kjer 3.1:7. I Isa. 13:0. 9. ■» P.«». «:4. 1 Hob. prruiK "Hos. J:M. 'Pa. 
50:li; Luke lS:l-7. 1 Or, Aatilalionj. Pjir.a:10. ll'sa.iah'Jl. 'IKiiigi 
1S:5. 



19. Ttiefirc — the flame; spoken figuratively of the scorch- 
ing rays of the sun in a season of extreme drought. 
INSTRITTION'S. 

:). The dealings of God with his poojile in one age con- 
tain lessons of instruction for all succeeding ages, and 
the memory of them should lit carefully peri>etualyd. 

■1-12. Cod's resources to chastise men are unlimited; 
he can send upon them one calamity after another, which 
no human wisdom or foresight shall be able to avert or 
remedy, till joy is departed, and despair and misery aro 
universal. 



Still sortr judgments. 



JOEL ir. 



Fasting and penitence. 



CHAPTER II, 



1 He showelh unto Zion the terribleness of CroJ's judgment. 12 Ho ex- 
horteth to repentance, 14 (.lescrlbeth a. fast, 18 promiseth a blessing 
thereon. 'Jl He cuinfotteth Zionwitli present, 28 and future blessings. 

r')LOW ye the trumpet* in Zion, and sound an 
) alarm in my holy mountain:^ let all the in- 
habitants of the land tremble: for the day of the 
Lord Cometh, for it is nigh at hand ;'' 

2 A day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of 
clouds and of thick darkness,'^ as the morning 
spread upon tlie mountains: a great people and a 
strong ;'' there hath not l)een ever the like, nei- 

.ther shall be any more after it,*" even to the years 
of many generations.'' 

3 A fire devoureth before them ; and behind 
them a flame burneth: the land is as the garden 
of Eden before them,' and behind them a desolate 
wilderness ;^ yea, and nothing shall escape them. 

4 The appearance of them is as the appearance 
of horses; and as horsemen, so shall they run. 

5 Like the noise of chariots on the tops of moun- 
tains shall they leap, like the noise of a flame of 
fire that devoureth the stubble, as a strong people 
set in battle array. 

G Before their face the people shall be much 
pained: all faces shall gather blackness."' 

7 Tliey shall run like mighty men; they shall 
climb the wall like men of war; and they shall 
march every one on his ways, and they shall not 
break their ranks: 

S Neither shall one thrust another ; they shall 
walk every one in his path: and when they fall 
upon the sword, ^ they shall not be wounded. 

9 They shall run to and fro in the city; they 
sliall run upon the wall, they shall climb up upon 
the houses; they shall enter in at the windows 
like a thief.' 

10 The earth shall quake before them; ^ theheav- 



• Or, conift. » Nun 


n. 10:5,9. b oh. 1 :15; Zeph. 1:14, 15. <:Am035:18, 


'in. d ch 1 :0. = Ex 


nd, 10:14. t Heb. generation and generation, f Isa. 


r,l:X eZeoh. 7:14, 


1 Heb. /leat. glow, h Jer. 6:21 ; Lam. 4:8; Nah. 2:10. 


iOi, darl. ijer. U:-J 


;.IohnlO:l, J Psa. 18:7. k Isa l:!: 10; Ezek. 32:7. 



13, 14. The design of pubHo calamities is to liumble 
natinii.s lii'fdro God in view of their sins; the}' should be 
acl^nowled.^eil by public as well as private fastings and 
prayer, antl the removal of them sought by hearty confes- 
sion and repentance. 

15-20. Wc are prone to forget God's goodness in be- 
stowing upon ua fruitful seasons: the withholding of this 
great blessing is well adapted to make us feel more deeply 
our dependence upon hira, and to prize more highly the 
gift when he is pleased to restore it. 

CHAPTER II. 

Some commentators suppose that this chapter predicts 
an invasion of enemies under the tigure of locusts — com- 
pare Isa. 7:19 and Rev. 9:3-11; while others suppose 
that future devastations of locusts are foretold, but in 
language designed to intimate that they are the forerun- 
ners of more terrible desolations from foreign nations. 
See verses 17, 20. 

2. Ai the morning spread upon the motmtains ; the calam- 
ity spreads itself with the rapidity of the morning dawn. 

3. Afire devoureth — nothing shnll escape them; locusts, 
when very numerous, devour every green thing ; for this 
reason their course is compared to that of a devouring 
flame. 

4-9. The appearance of them — like n thief: ii most strik- 
in-:; de.<!rription of the progre.ss of a sw;u-m of locusts. 
As t/te uppeurance of horses; many writers have noticed the 



ens shall tremble : the sun and the moon shall be 
dark, and the stars shall withdraw their shining:'' 

11 And the Lord shall utter his voice before his 
army : for his camp is very great ; for he is strong 
that executeth his word : for the day of the Lord 
is great and very terrible, and who can abide it?' 

12 1 Therefore also now, saith the Lord, turn ye 
evni to me with all your heart,'" and Avith fasting, 
and with weeping, and with mourning: 

13 And rend your heart, and not your garments, 
and turn unto tlie Lord your God :" for he is gra- 
cious and merciful," slow to anger, and of great 
kindness, and i-epenteth him of the evil. 

14 Who knoweth if he will return and repent,^ 
and leave a lilessing behind him; even a meat-offer- 
ing and a drink-offering unto the Lord your God?i 

15 II Blow the trumpet in Zion,'' sanctify a fast, 
call a solemn assembly : 

16 Gather the people, sanctify the congregation, 
assemble the elders, gather the children, and those 
that suck the breasts :^ let the bridegroom go forth 
of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet. 

17 Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord, 
weep between the porch and the altar, and let 
them say. Spare thy people, Lord, and give not 
thy heritage to reproach,' that the heathen should 
rule over' them : wherefore should they say among 
the people, Where is their God?" 

18 Ii Then will the Lord be jealous for. his land," 
and pity his people.'" 

19 Yea, tlio Lord will answer and say unto hia 
people, Beliold, I will send you corn, and wine, and 
oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith : and I will 
no more make you a reproach among the heathen : 

20 But I will remove far off from you the north- 
ern army, and will drive him into a land barren 
and desolate, with his face toward the cast sea, 
and his hinder part toward the utmost sea, and his 



I Mai. 3 


2; Rev. (>:17. m La 


m. 3:40,41; Hos. 12:0; 14:1. 


n Psa 


31:1!^; 


Isa. 00:2 


Psa. M:5, 15. P 


2 Kings 19:4, <\ ch. 1:9. r ve 


. 1. 


2 Chr. 


20:1.?. 


Exod. ^2:11, 12. 


Or, use a by-word against. 


u Mr 


. 7:10, 


V Zech. 1 


:I4. wDeut. :!2::3r.. 









general resemblance of the locust's head to that of the 
horse, yet the point of comparison here seems to be that 
of their swiftness. They fly in immense clouds, darken- 
ing the air by their multitudes, moving straight forward 
in the direction of the wind, and pouring into windows 
and doors like hail. Neither walls, nor fires, nor human 
weapons of any kind can arrest their progress. When 
they have alighted they also move directly forward, the 
hinder parts of the swarm continually rising and flying 
to the front; and the sound which they give forth in 
their work of devastation may well be compared to the 
crackling of flames. 

10. Tlie earth shall qvalcc — the stars shall inthdraw their 
shining; a common figure among the Hebrews to express 
the approach of great calamity. See note on Isa. 13:10. 

16. The people — the bride; as this visitation extends to 
all classes, all classes must appear before God in solemn 
fasting and humiliation. 

17. The priests; to whom it belonged to make interces- 
sion with God for his people. Between the porch and the 
attar; the altar of burnt-offering is meant, which stood in 
the court of the priests directly in front of the porch of 
the temple. That the heathen should rule over them; see 
verse 20. 

20. The northern arm;;; this is best explained of the 
Assyrian host, represented under the figure of a swarm 
of locusts. The Assyrians, as well as the Chaldeans, in- 
vaded Palestine from "the north, .Icr. 1:14; •!:«; C:l; while 
1005 



Blessings promised. 



JOEL III. 



Gift of the Sfirit. 



Stink shall come up, and his ill savor shall come 
up, because he hatii done* great thinus. 

21 1i Fear not, land ; l)e glad and rejoice: for 
the Loud will do great thing--^." 

22 Be not afraid, ye beasts of tiic fichl : for the 
pastures of the wilderness do spring, for tlie tree 
beareth her fruit, the fig-tree and the vine do 
yield their strengtli. 

23 Be glad tiien, ye children of Zion, and re- 
joice in the Loiu> your God:" for he hath given 
you the former rain moderately/ and he will cause 
to come down for you the rain, the former rain, 
and the latter rain in tiic first month. 

24 And th(' floors sliall be full of wheat, and the 
fats shall overflow with wine and oil. 

25 And 1 will restore to you the years that the 
locust iiath eaten, the canker-worm, and the cater- 
pillar, and tlie palmer-worm, my great army which 
I sent amotig you.'' 

26 And ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, 
and praise the name of tlie Luitn your God, that 
hath dealt wondrously with you: and my people 
shall never be ashamed.'' 

27 And ye shall know that I am in tlio midst of 
Israel, and that I am the Loiu) your God, and 
none else : and my people shall never bo ashamed. 



real locusts came from the desert region south and east. 
Wttli his face; his front. Toward the east sea; that is, car- 
ried toward the east sea, which is the Dead soa. The ut- 
most sea; the hinder sea, that is, the Mediterranean. The 
moaning is, I will drive this swarm into desert regions, yet 
BO that its front part shall be carried into the Dead sea, 
and its rear into the Mediterranean. To the Hebrew the 
east was front, and the west rear. The Assyrians being 
compared to locusts, they arc represented as perishing 
after the manner of locusts. See Exod. 10:19. This proph- 
ecy was fulfilled in the destruction of Sennacherib's host, 
2 Kings 19:35; yet this is to be regarded as only one 
example of the vengeance which God will inflict upon all 
the enemies of his people when they seek him by hearty 
repentance. His stink shall come vp ; when swarms of 
locusts perish by drowning or otherwise, their stench is 
exceedingly olTensive. Hath done great things; acted in a 
haughty and blasphemous way: 2 tings 18:32-35, com- 
pared with chap. 19:6. 

21. Wdl do great things; by his divine power and maj- 
esty. The great deeds of Jehovah are set in contrast 
with the great deeds of the northern army, verse 20. 

28. Afterward; the same as, " in the last days," Isa. 2:2 ; 
an indefinite expression for the dist;int future. Sec the 
apostle Peter's explanation. Acts 2:17. 

30. / will show wonders; this glorious outpouring of 
God's Spirit is to be accompanied with terrible judgments 
upon his incorrigible enemies, of which these wonders 
are the harbingers. Luke 21:11. So far as they relate to 
the destruction of .Jerusalem Ijy the Itomans, they arc 
mainly figurative. See note on Isa. 13:10. Another ter- 
rible fulfilment of them is in reserve for the future. Com- 
pare Rev. 10:17-21. 

32. Shall be delivered; in " the great and terrible day of 
the Lord," when .Icnisalom was overthrown l>y the Ro- 
mans, all the Jews who believed in Christ were delivered ; 
and this was a symbdl of the higher spiritual salvation 
which he will bestow in the last d:iy upon all who put 
their trust in him. /« the remmml ; the "remnant accord- 
ing to the election of grace." Rom. 11:5. 
INKTltUCTIONS. 

1-11. To those who i)er8cvere in sii, Cod's milder judg- 
ments will l)e but the liarbingers of others more terrible, 
by which they will l)e >ittcrly destroyed. 
1006 



28 ^ And it shall come to pass after- a m saw. 
ward, that 1 will pour out my Spirit ui.on "tl»i"'°"" 
all flesh ;' and your sons and your daughters shall 
propiiesy,' your old men shall dr'eam dreams, your 
young men shall see visions: 

29 And also upon the servants and upon the 
handmaids in those days will I pour out my 
Spirit.*^ 

30 And I will show wonders in the heavens and 
in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke.'' 

31 The sun shall be turned into darkness, and 
the moon into blood, before the great and the ter- 
rible day of the LoiU) conic.' 

32 And it shall c((me to pass, that whosoever 
shall call on the naim; of the Lord shall be deliv- 
ered :' for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall 
be deliverance, as the LoitD hath said, and in the 
remnant whom the LuHD shall call." 



CHAPTER III. 

1 God's judgments against the enemies of tiis people. 9 God will be 
Icnown in his judgment. 18 His blessing upon t!ie church. 

FOR, behold, in those days, and in that time, 
when I shall bring again the captivity of Ju- 
dah and Jerusalem, 



>>MaU. ■^:a9. 



12, 13. The outward signs of fasting avail nothing with- 
out a broken spirit. It is the inward humiliation of soul 
which God desires, and when we thus hiuiible ourselves 
he will graciously listen to our petitions, and in due time 
withdraw from us his chastising hand. 

lij-17. Calamities which extend to all classes of the 
community should be publicly acknowledged by all be- 
fore God. On such occasions it is suitat>le that rulers set 
apart days of fasting and prayer ; and it belongs to tlie 
ministers of religion to lead the people in their supplica- 
tions, and with all plainness of speech set before them 
their sins, and exhort them to hearty repentance. 

18-20. In the case of nations as well as of individuals, 
God waits for sincere repentance, that he may remove 
from them his judgments. If the people of these United 
States were more ready to acknowledge (iod's hand in 
their troubles, and seek deliveraiRO from them by a return 
to him in the way of his ap])ointment, they would liavo 
more abundant experience of his readiness to forgive, and 
his almighty power to hcl]) and save in every difficulty. 

21-27. AVhatever may be the fate of particidar nations 
that have been reckoned as Christian, the true church of 
God will survive all revolutions and convulsions, and 
praise the name of the Lord her God for his wondrous 
goodness to her. She is heir to the blessings promised 
to Abraham, and shall never be put to shame. 

28, 29. The glorious jiromiso of the Holy Spirit " upon 
all flesh," given by the prophet Joel, began to be fulfilled 
on the day of Pentecost. This is Christ's ascensi(m-gift 
to his church, John 16:7, and it shall contintic with her to 
the end of the world, Isa. 59:21, making her perpetuatioii 
from age to age, and her final triumph over the kingdom 
of SatjHi, as sure as the word of Jehovah. 

30-32. Great mercies to God's church have ever been 
connected with terrible judgments upon the false and hyp- 
ocritical among her visible members. Thus the cliafT has 
been separated from the wheat, and both have gone to 
their appointed place. Mai. 3:3-5; Matt. 3:12. 

CHAPTER in. 

The prophecies of this chapter relate to " the last days," 
but with glances at the confiict of God's people with their 
enemies in the prophet's time, verses 3-8. The restora- 
tion of the Jews to their own land which it predicts, must 



Judgmmts of God upo 



JOEL 111. 



t/ie foes of his people. 



A. M. san. 2 I will also gather all nations, and will 
soo"'""' Iji-ing tiu-ni down into the valley of Jeliosh- 
apliat, and will plead with them there for my peo- 
ple aud/i/;- my heritage Israel," whom they have 
scattered among the nations, and parted my land.'' 
o And they have cast lots for my people;"^ and 
have given a boy for a harlot, and sold a girl for 
wine, that they might drink. 

4 Yea, and what have ye to do with me, Tyre, 
and Zidou, and all the coasts of Palestine ? Will 
yc! remler me a recompense ? and if yc recompense 
nie, swiftly and speedily will I return your recom- 
pense upon your own head ; 

5 Because ye have taken my silver and my gold, 
und have carried into your temples my goodly 
pleasant* things:'' 

6 The children also of Judah and the children of 
Jerusalem have ye sold unto the Grecians,* that 
ye might remove them far from tlieir border. 

7 Behold, I will raise them out of the place 
whither ye have sold them,'' and will return your 
recompense upon your own head : 

8 And I will sell your sons and your daughters 
into th.i hand of the children of Judah, and they 
shall sell them to the Sabeans, to a people far otf : 
for the Lord hatli spoken it. 

9 *i Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles ; Pre- 
pare* war, wake up the mighty men, let all the 
men of war draw near ; let them come up : 

10 Beat your ploughshares into swords, and 
your pruning-hooks" into spears; let the weak 
say, I a/n strong. 

1 1 Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye heathen, 
and gather yourselves together round about : thith- 
er cause thy mighty ones to come down, O Lord." 



»Isa. 00:16. b Zech. 14: 


2-A. = Nah. 3:10. • Heb, desmUe; Dan. 1 1 :yti. 


d Dan. 5:2,3. t Hcb. sons 


of the Grecians, e ba. 43:5 ; Jer. a:i:8. 1 Heb. 


Sanaify. i Or, scythes. 


1 Or, the LORD shall bring down thy mighty 


ones, f Psa. in;i:-.>«. ever 


.2. hMic. 4:3. i Eev. 14:15, IS. ^ Or, conris- 


lOrt, or threshing, j Jer. 12. 


5:30,31. k Hag. 2:0. • Heb. p/are o/ repair, or 



include also the gathering into God's church of '• the ful- 
ness of the Gentiles," who become, by faith in Christ, 
"Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise." 
Rom. 11:12,15; Gal. 3:29. 

2. The valley of Jehoshapliat ; that is, " the valley of Jeho- 
vah's judgment," because there he judges "all nations:'' 
with perhaps an allusion to the valley in which king 
Jehoshapiiat assembled his array after his victory over 
Ammon, Moab, and Edom. 2 Chron. 20:26. That the val- 
ley of Kedron, between Jerusalem and the mount of Olives, 
is meant, we have no reason to believe. In Joel's day it 
had not yet received the additional name of " valley of 
Jehoshaphat," which it now bears. 

:i Cast lots for my people; divided them among them- 
selves by lot. Obad. 11. God's purpose to restore the 
captivity of his people in the latter day, verse 1, is a sure 
pledge thab their present enemies and oppressors shall 
be punished. Hence the propliet naturally returns from the 
future to the present. For a harlot ; tliat is, as her hire. 

4. What have ye to do with me ? that is, with my people. 
What right have ye to plunder, oppress, and enslave 
them? Pafes/mg; that is, Philistia. Ho Esod. 15:11; Isa. 
14:2a, 31. 

G. Unto the Grecians; literally, "the sons of the Javan- 
itcs," who traded in "the persons of men." Ezek. 27:13. 

8. The Sabeans; a people of Arabia. The enemies of 
God's people in Joel's day represent, in both their guilt 
and punishment, all the enemies of his church in future 
ages. 



12 Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to 
the valley of Jehoshaphat:" for there will I sit to 
judge all the heathen round about.'' 

13 Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe:' 
come, get you down; for the press is full, the fats 
overflow ; for their wickedness is great. 

1-1 Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of de- 
cision:'' for the day of the Lord is near in the 
valley of decision. 

15 The sun and the moon shall be darkened, and 
the stars shall withdraw their shining. 

16 The Lor.D also shall roar out of Zion, and 
utter his voice from Jerusalem ;' and the heavens 
and the earth shall sliake:" but the Lord ivill be 
the hope* of his people, aud the strength of the 
children of Israel.' 

17 So shall ye know that I am the Lord your 
God dwelling in Zion, my holy mountain:'" then 
shall Jerusalem be holy,* and there shall no stran- 
gers pass through her any more." 

18 "l[And it shall come to pass in that day, that 
the mountains sliall drop down new wine," and the 
hills shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of 
Judah shall flow* with waters, and a fountain 
shall come forth of the house of the Lord," and 
shall water the valley of .Shittim. 

19 Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall 
be a desolate wilderness, for the violence against 
the children of Judah, because they have shed in- 
nocent blood in their land. 

20 But Judah shall dwelP for ever, and Jerusa- 
lem from generation to generation.'' 

21 For I will cleanse their blood that I have not 
cleansed :'■ fur the Lord" dwelleth in Zion." 



harbor. 


1? 


<a 


40 


l,el. 




.,1 


ver. 


n. tHeb.lwl 


(less. 


> Is.i. : 


.):■', 9 


Nah. 


1- 


15; Z 


eh 


14 


21 


; K. 




i\ 


27. 


Amos 0:1:3. 


1 Heb 


go. 


f Isa. 


30:2i; 


K 


zek. 4- 


■.!, 


etc 


. 


Arr.h 


14 


!^ 


Ke\ 


. 22:1. i Or, 


abide. 


q iFa. 


):!:20 


Arao8 


9: 


15. r 


Isa 


4: 


1. 


I Ur 






I the LORD that. 


s Ezek. 


48:35 


Kev 


21:3. 



9. Prepare war; this is the last great conflict, in which 
the enemies of God's people are to be finally overthrown. 
Compare Rev. 19:19. 

13. Put ye ill the sickle; a harvest of divine vengeance is 
described. Rev. 14:15, 18. 

14. Decision ; that is, God's decision of the cause in favor 
of his people. 

18. New wine — milk ; after this conflict comes a period 
of peace and abundance. A fountain; see note on Ezek. 
47:1-12. Tlie valley of Shittim ; some barren vale to the 
east of Jerusalem, which is to be made fertile by the wa- 
ters of this fountain. Ezek. 47 : 9. The whole is a figure 
of the lifegiving power of God's grace. Isa. 35 : 1, 2, (i, 7. 

19. Egypt — Edom; their fate, as the enemies of God's 
church, represents that of all her enemies in the latter 
day. See note on verso 4. 

INSTRUCTION. 
Every new enlargement of God's kingdom has been 
introduced by a new conflict with the powers of darkness. 
The word of prophecy teaches us that a mighty struggle 
yet remains, in which God will shake the heavens and the 
earth, and overthrow the thrones of kingdoms. Hag. 2:22. 
But the issue shall be destruction to the enemies of Zion ; 
and to her, perpetual peace and prosperity. Isa. 29:5-8; 
30:30-32; 32:18,19; 66:12-16,23,24; Jer. 30:18-24 ; Ezek. 
39: 17-22; Dan. 12:1; Ilosea 11:10, 11 ; Amos 9: 9-15; Obad. 
18-21; Micah 7:15-20; Hab. chap. 3; Zeph. 3:8, 9; Hag. 
2:21-23 ; Zech. 10:5-12, and chap. 14; Mai. 4:1-3. 



1007 



AMOS. 



Amos was one of " tlic hordmcn of Tekoa," a town suutli-east of Betlilehem, on the borders of "the wil- 
derness of Judali," 2 Chron. 20:20. It belonged to Jiidali, and consequently Amos was a Jew. Of his 
mission to prophesy against Israel in Beth-el, he himself gives an account in chap. 7:14, 15, where he 
describes himself as "a herdman, and gatherer of sycamore fruit." His style has not the flowing fnlness 
of Joel, but charms the reader by its simplicity and freshness. His writings abound in images drawn from 
rural employments, and some of them are very unique and striking in their character. Sec chap. 2 :13 ; 
3 : 12 • 5 : 19 ; 6 : 12 ; 9 : 2, 3 ; 9 : 9. As he prophesied in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and Jeroboam 
the son of Joash king of Israel, he appeared earlier than Isaiah, and was contemporary with Hosea, 
though it is generally thought that he continued a much shorter time in the prophetical office. 



CHAPTER I 



1 Amos showeth God's judgme 
upon Tyrus, 1 1 upon 



nt upnn Syria, 6 upon tlie Pliilistinps, 9 
EdoHi, 13 and upon Ammon. 



f'pHE words of Amos, who was among the herd- 
_L men of Tekoa," which lie saw concerning Is- 
rael in the day.s of Uz/.iah king of Judah, and iu_ 
the days of Jeroboam the son of Joasii king of 
Israel,'' two years before tlic earthquake.'^ 

2 And he said. The Lord will roar from Zion, 
and utter his voice from Jernsalem;'' and the 
habitations of the shepherd shall mourn, and the 
top of Carmcl shall wither. 

3 Tiius saith the Lokd ; For throe transgres- 
sions of Damascus, and for four,' I will not turn 
awav the punishmrnt thereof; ^'^ because they have 
threshed Gllcad with threshing instruments of 
iron:' 

4 But I will send a fire into the house of Ila- 
zaol, which shall devour the palaces of Bcu-ha- 
dad. 

;j I will Ijreak also the bar of Damascus," and 
cut off the inhabitant from the plain of Aven,* and 



a Ch. 7:11; aClir. 20:il). bHos. 1:1. c Zoch. 1 1:.'). <l J,.r. aj:3(l ; Joi 
3- 10. • Or, yen, for four, t Or, convert i(, or let it be quiet: and »o ver. ( 
etc. e Jer.4l(:2:i. r a Kings 10:^4; 13:7. tJcr. 51:30. t Or, Biliathacei 



CHAPTER I. 

1. The earthquake ; a very severe earthquake, as appears 
from Zcch. 11:5. We know not its date. 

2. Will roar — utter his voice ; that is, pronounce his awful 
juilKnients. From Zion— Jerusalem ; because this was liis 
earthly dwclIiiiK-placo. The lop of Carmcl; celebrated for 
its beauty and fertility. Isa. 35:2. 

3. For three— ami for four; that is, for oft-repeated trans- 
gressions. Sec note on Prov. C:1C. Damamis; the caj)- 
ital city of Syria, north-east of Palestine. Threshed Gilcad; 
these cruelties were exercised by Mazael king of Syria, as 
foretold by the prophet Elisha, 2 Kings «:12, and by Bcn- 
hada.l his son. 2 Kings 10::i2, 33; 13:3,4. With thresh- 
ing instruments of iron ; that is, liy dragging over them 
threshing sledges, sot with sliar]) iron teetli. Compare 
2 Sam. 12:31. 

5, The plain nf Aven ; a v;dl'-'v near Damascus. 77ic 
1008 



him that lioldcth the sceptre from the '^/.■';" 
house of Eden:* and the people of Syria shall go 
into captivity unto Kir," saith the Loud. 

6 1 Thus saith the Loun: For tiiree transgres- 
sions of Gaza,' and for four, 1 will not turn away 
t/ie punishment thereof: because they carried away 
captive the whole captivity," to deliver them up to 
Edom : 

7 But I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, 
which shall devour the palaces thereof:-' 

8 And 1 will cut oif the inhabitant from Ash- 
dod, and him that lioldcth the sceptre from Ash- 
kelon, and I will turn my hand against Ekron: 
and the remnant of the Philistines shall perish," 
saith the Lord God. 

9 1i Tims saith the LoKD ; For three transgres- 
sions of Tyrus, and for four, I will not turn away 
the pvnishment thereof;' because they delivered uj) 
the wiiolc captivity to Edom, and remembered not 
the brotherly covenant:^ 

10 But 1 will send a fire on the wall of Tyrus, 
which shall devour the palaces tiiercof. 



^ Or, Betk-rilrn. h 3 Kings 10:9. ' 2 Chr. «: 13. I Or. carried them aimy 
wilh nil entire eaptii-ily. I Zeph. 2:4. k Jcr. 47:4. I Kick. ch. 20-**. 
t Hth. covenanlofirelhreHl I Kings 5:1; 9:11-14. 



house of Eden ; or " Betli-cdcn," a royal city of Syria, on 
tlie licbanon range. Kir; a river, now called Kiir, empty- 
ing into the Caspian sea, with the adjacent region. Seo 
2 Kings 16:9. 

G-8. Ga:a; Gaza, and the three other places named in 
connection with it, were tlie chief cities of I'hilistia. Tlie 
whole captivity ; probably referring to the invasion record- 
ed 2 Chron. 21:16, 17. To ilclivrr them up to Edom; the 
Edomites were the bitterest enemies of the Jews. Send 
a fire— shall perish; see 2 Chron. 26:6; 2 Kings 18:8; .lor. 
diap. •!", where also the punishment of Tyre, verso 9, is 
foretold. 

!). Delivered up the whole captivitij; they seem to have in- 
viuled >ludah in alliance willi I'hilistia. The two nations 
arc named together by Joel as selling the children of the 
Jews for slaves. .loel 3:4-6. The hot herlij covenant ; be- 
tween David and Hiram, which was renewed by Solomon. 
2Sam. 5:tl; I Kings 5: 1-12. 



Judgmmt of Edum, Amnion, 



AMOS II. 



Muah, Judah, end Israel. 



B.aw','- 11 ^ Thus saith the Lord; For three 
transgressions of Edom, and for four, I will not 
turn away the punishment thereof;" because he did 
pursue his brother witli tiic sword, and did cast 
off all pity," and his anger did tear perpetually, 
and ho kept his wrath for ever:" 

12 But 1 will send a fire upon Teinah, which 
shall devour the palaces of Bozrali. 

13 TI Thus saith the Lord; For three transgres- 
sions of the children of Amnion, and for four, I will 
not turn away the punhhmrnt thereof;'' because 
they have ripped up the women with child,*'' of 
Gilead, that they might enlarge their border: 

14 But I will kindle a fire in the wall of Kab- 
bah, and it shall devour the palaces thereof, with 
shouting in the day of battle, with a tempest in 
the day of the whirlwind : 

15 And their king shall go into captivity, he 
and his princes together, saith the Loud. 

CHAPTER II. 

I G-od"s wraih against Moab, 4 upon Judah, 6 and upon Israel. 9 God 
coniplaineth of tlieir unthankfulness. 

• ^T^IIU S saith the Lord ; For three transgressions 
1. of Moab, and for four, I will not turn away 
the punishment tliereof;" because he burned the 
bones of the king of Edom into lime: 

2 But I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall 
devour the palaces of Kirioth : and Moab shall die 
with tumult, with shouting, and with the sound of 
the. trumpet : 

3 And I will cut off the judge from the midst 
thereof, and will slay all the princes thereof with 
Iiim, saith the Lord. 

4 H Thus saith the Lord ; For three transgres- 
sions of Judah, and fortfour, I will not turn away 



er. 4'J:7; Obad. l.etc. • Meh. corrupted his compassions, b Ezek. 35:5 
.49:1-3; Kzek. 23:2, etc. ^ Or, divided tlie mountains. J Hos. 13:10. 
. cli. 15, 10; Jer. 48:1; Ezek. a5:S, etc. f cli. 3.2. g Ezek. 22:11. 



II. Did pursue fiis brother — kept his wrath ; see Ezek. 25 : 12 ; 
chap. 35 ; Obad. 10-14. 

13. Gilead; a region east of the Jordan, south of Bashan. 
assigned by Moses to the tribes of Gad and Reuben. Num. 
chap. 32. Amnion lay to the east of it. 

14. Rabbah ; the chief city of Ammon. According to 
Josephus, the Ammonites, as also tlie Moabites, were 
conquered by Nebuchadnezzar five years after the de- 
struction of Jerusalem. Compare Ezek. 21:28-32. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. God is infinitely holy, and hates all iniquity; he is 
infinite in power, and able to punish the mightiest sinner ; 
he is infinitely true, and will fulfil all his threatenings to 
the wicked. None that break his laws can escape his 
wrath, be they nations or individuals. 

3-15. The divine declaration, "he that is cruel troubleth 
his own flesh," holds good alike of mighty conquerors, and 
of the meanest among their subjects. God will deal with 
unmerciful nations as they have dealt with their fellow- 
nations. Chap. 2:1-3. 

CHAPTER IL 

4. Judah ,• from the six idolatrous nations the prophet 
passes to Judah, on his way to Israel, to which latter king- 
dom he was especially sent. Their lies-; their idols and 
the whole system of idolatrous worshiii. It ehould be 
carefully noticed that while the prophet rebukes the gen- 
tUe nations for sins against the dictates of natural religion, 
lie specifies in the case of Judah only their despising the 
divine law and imitating the idolatrv of their fathers : he- 
64 



the punishment thereof;'' because they have de- 
spised the law of tiie Lord, and have not kept his 
commandments, and tlieir lies caused them to err, 
after the which their fathers have walked : 

5 But I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall 
devour the palaces of Jerusalem. 

G 1 Thus saith the Loud; For three transgres- 
sions of Israel, and for four, I will not turn away 
the punishment thereof; because they sold the right- 
eous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes; 

7 That pant after the dust of the earth on the 
head of the poor, and turn aside the way of the 
meek: and a man and his father will go in unto 
the same maid,"-'* to j)rofane my holy name:'' 

S And they lay themselves down upon clothes laid 
to pledge by every altar, and they drink the wine 
of the condemned^ in the house of their god. 

t) 1[ Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them,' 
whose height u-as like the height of the cedars, 
and he icas strong as the oaks; yet I destroyed 
ids fruit from aljove, and his roots from beneath. 

10 Also I brought you up from the land of 
Egypt, and led you forty years through the wil- 
derness, to possess the land of the Amorite. 

11 And I raised up of your sons for prophets, 
and of your young men for Nazarites. Is it not 
even tiius, ye children of Israel? saith the Loud. 

12 But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink ; and 
commanded the prophets, saying. Prophesy not.^ 

13 Behold, I am pressed under you, as a cart is 
pressed that is full of sheaves.' 

14 Therefore the flight shall perish from the 
swift, and the strong shall not strengthen his 
force, neither shall the mig'hty deliver himself:^ 

15 Neither shall he stand that liandlcth tiie 
bow ; and he that is swift of foot shall not deliver 



I Or, younaioomail. ti Lev. 2(1:3. i Or. the Jined, nr tite mukled. i Josh. 
24:S. J Isa. :J0:1U. I Or, / wil/ press your place, as a carl full of sheaves 
pres.iet/t. fl Ueb. his soul, or life. 



cause, where a nation enjoys the light of revelation, the 
rejection of this is the sura of all rebellion and wickedness. 

6. Israel; the prophet, having reached Israel, proceeds 
to enumerate at length the sins of both rulers and people. 
Thcij sold the rightenus; creditors sold the righteous poor 
who were their debtors. Compare chap. 8:C; 2 Kings 
4:1; Neh. 5:8; Matt. 18:25. A pair of shoes; that is, a 
trifling sum. 

7. Pant after the dust — the poor; arc eager to .spoil the 
poor man, so that he shall cover his head with dust as a 
sign of mourning. 2 Sam. 15:32; Neh. 9:1; Job 2:12; 
Lam. 2:10; Ezek. 27 : 30 ; or, as some suppose, grudge him 
even this handful of dust. 

8. Upon clothes hul to pledge; deposited by the borrower 
as pletlges of payment. Such pledges were to be returned 
at sunset. Exod. 22:2C. v4ftn/-,i(l"l:itnms altar. The 
wine of the condemned; wine puri'liasrd with the money of 
those whom they have unjustly fined, thus uniting oppres- 
sion and drunkenness with idolatry. 

9. Yet destroyed I the Amorite ; the most powerfiU people 
of the Canaaiiites, living on both sides of the Jordan. 
Num. 13:29; 21:21-211. The height of the cedars; Num. 
13:2, 3:{. 

11. Nazarites; a class of men particularly consecrated to 
God, some for life, and some for a limited time. During 
the period of their consecration they were forbidden to 
drink wine or strong diink, or eat any produce of the 
vine. See Num. e:I-21. Samson and Samuel were Naz- 
arites from their birth. Judges 13:5; 1 Sam. 1:11. 

13. Pressed under you: weary with bearing tfie load of 
vour sins. 

1009 



Tht sins of Israel 



AMOS III. 



dem.iTid judgment. 



kimsr/f:" noitlier shall he that ridcth tlie liorse 
deliver liiniself. 

1(1 AikI /ic that is couraireous* iiinon,2: tlic mighty 
shall (lee awav naked in that day, saith the Loud. 



CHAPTER HI. 

1 The necessity of Gods judgment ag.iinst Jsr:iil. 9 The publication 
fif it,"\viUi the causes thereof. 

T T EAR this word that the Lord hath spoken 
I JL against you, children of Israel, against 
ilie wliolc family which I brought up from the land 
of Egypt, saying, 

2 You only iiave I known of all the families of 
the earth:'' "therefore I will punisli+ you for all 
your iniquities. 

^i Can two walk together, except they be agreed ?■■ 

4 Will a lion roar in the forest, when he iuith no 
prey ?'' will a young lion cry* out of his den, if he 
ha\e taken nothing? 

5 Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, 
where no gin is for him ?'' shall one take up a snare 
from the earth, and have taken nothing at all ? 

G Siiall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the 
])eople not be afraid ?^ shall there be evil in a 
city, and the Lord hath not done it Y-' 

i Surclv the Lord Goo will do notliing, but he 
reveali'tliliis secret unto his servants thciirophets." 

8 The lion hath roared,'' who will not fear? the 






Heel 0:11 


• Heb. !lT 


oag of 


hi^ html 


b 


Psa. 147:20. 


t Hcb. 


visit 




. c 2 Cor. 


G:14, 15. i Psi. 1U4 


•i\. IH 


b.S 


iitfoith Ills 


Olf<. « 






» Or, Tu 




1 Or, 


nd slidU 


not 


the LORD do somewhat? 


' 1*. 


. 45:7. S 


Gen. 0:13; 


18:17; 


Psi. as 


H; 


John 15:15. 


li Rev 


6:5. 



16. In that day; in the day mentioned in ver. 6, 
INSTRUCTIONS.- 

4, 5. Tlie rejection of Uod's revpulcd word is the most 
Iieiiious sin of wliich a nation can be guilty; and it leads 
to Uic shameless practice of every initiuit.v. 

C- K. Cruelty, fraud, and licentiousness cling together as 
kindred vices. Tlicy wlio make merchandise of the poor 
and defenceless for gain, maybe expected also to oppress 
and defraud as they have opportunity, and to indulge 
thcmstlvos in shameless impurities. Ciui)). 8:4-(i. 

9-11. The distinguished mercies conferred by (Jod upon 
a peojile in times past, greatly aggravate the guilt of pres- 
ent unfaithfulness. Let the peojile of the United States 
remember this, and humble themselves before God in 
view of ])resent aboimding wickedness. 

12-lG. To corrupt the professors of godliness, and sup- 
press their testimony against sin, is the main effort of 
wicked men ; but if they succeed in this, they will destroy 
both themselves and those who yield to their wishes. (Jod 
cannot be changed, nor liis judgments upon the wicked 
hindered by ignorance and delusion. Chap. 3:11-15. 

CHAPTER in. 

2. Kitoirn ; as the objects of my especial care and favor. 
Comjiaro Hxod. .•i:i:12; Rom. 8:20. 

3-8. ('nil two wnllc — can Intt prn/iliesii? the general mean- 
ing of this series of (piestions is, that nothing can take 
place without a sunicient reason, and we ought to trace 
effects to their true cause. Ucasrccd; meet by agreement. 
Unless the people will return to God and walk with him. 
they must remain Rtparatcd from liim. Done it; that is. 
as an expression of his wrath. Their calamities oiiglit to 
lead the |)eoplc to see that (rod is angry with them. Do 
notltiii<;; execute no judgment. Secret ; counsel ; jjurposed 
judgment, lie reveals it Vieforehand to his prophets, that 
the people may have space for repentance. 

9. Aslidod — E/^ifpt; these are called as witnesses of the 
crimes coniniitted in Israel. MouiUaius of Samaria ; Sama- 
1010 



Lord God hath spoken, who can but proph- ^ij*',-';if 
esy?' 

^ Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the 
palaces in the land of Egypt, and .^ay. Assemble 
yourselves upon the mountains of Samaria, and 
beliold the groat tumults in the midst thereof ami 
the op]ifessc<P in the midst tlicreof. 

10 For they know not to do right,* saith thi- 
Lord, who store up violence and robbery' in their 
palaces. 

11 Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Aji ad- 
versary f/icre shdll be even round about the land ;'' 
and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, 
and thy i)alacos sliall be sjioilcd. 

12 Thus saith the Lord; As the shepherd tak- 
eth* out of the mouth of the lion two legs, or a 
piece of an ear; so shall the children of Israel be 
taken out that dwell in Samaria in the corner of 
a bed, and in Damascus in a couch.*' 

13 Hear ye, and testify in the house of Jacob, 
saith the Lord God, the God of hosts, 

U That, in tlie day that I shall visit^ the trans- 
gressions of Israel upon liim, I will also visit the 
altarsof 13eth-e! :'" and the liorns of the altar shall • 
be cut off, and fall to the ground. 

15 And I will smite tlie winter-house with the 
summer-house;" and the houses of ivory shall per- 
ish," and the great houses shall have an end, saith 
the Lord. 



i Jer. 20:0 


1 Cor. 0:10. 1 Or, opprtssions. J Jer. 4:22. ' Or, rpoil. 


k 2 Kinjs 1 


7:3, fi; 1S:0. 11. t lUb. lUUvmth. 1 Or. on the UdTi Jut. 


1 Rom. 11:J 


5. i 0,, punish Ismtl for. " Hos. 10:14, 15. »Judg. 3:«; 


Jer. 36:22. 


1 Kings 22:30. 



ria, the capital of the kingdom of Israel, was surrounded 
by mountains. Tumults; occasioucd by lawfess and unjust 
conduct. 

12. Takcth out o/,- rescue thjfrom. Tb/rfn oi(f ; rescued : 
as the shepherd rescues only a few fragments of the sheep. 
so only a small remnant of them shall he saved from the 
general destruction. Dwell — in the corner of a bed — in <i 
couch; that is, recline in luxury. Compare chap. (1:4. The 
bed is hero the divan, or cushioned scat against the walls 
of the room ; and the corner is named as a ])lace of bolh 
case and honor, as it is at the present day in eastern houses. 
Damascus; Jeroboam second had conquered this city and 
added it to the possessions of Israel. 2 Kings 14:25-2n 
According to another reading, the last clause of this verse 
may be rendered. " and on the damask of a couch," that is, 
on a rich couch covered with damask cloth. 

14. 'Ilie altars of lictliel ; erected to the golden tulf. 
1 Kings 12:28,29. 

15. Tlic u-intcr-housc — the summer-house ; the king's win- 
ter and summer jialaces. Iloiuvs of ivory ; that is. adorned 
with ivory, like that of Ahab. 1 Kings 22 : 3'.i. Their proud 
and sumptuous dwellings were doomed to destruction. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Privilege and responsibility always go side by side ; 
they who have received at God's hand peculiar favors, will 
be ))unished with peculiar severity if they prove unfaithful 
to him. 

,"$(;. The blinding and stupefying power of siu is very 
dreadful. It makes men contented to live in estraugemcul 
from C.od, hardens their Inarts alike to his promises and 
thrcatcniiigs, and discpialilies them to juilge correctly of 
the causes of their present misery, or the true means of 
escaping it. 

7. In making to men so clear a revelation of his wili, 
and of the principles upon which he will deal with them. 
God has been very merciful ; if, with this light for their 
guide, they mistake the w.-iy of siilvatiou,and stumble into 
perdition,'tliey will be witliout excuse. 



The oppression and 



AMOS V. 



idolatry of Israel. 



CHAPTER IV. 



1 lie rcprovetli Israel for cppression. 4 foi»tlieir idolatry, 6 and for their 
incorrjgiblenfss. 

IT EAR lliis word, ye kine of Bashan," that are 
1 in the inouiitaiii of Samaria, which oppress 
tlio poor, which crush the needy, which say to 
their masters, Bring, and let us drink. 

2 The Lord God hath sworn by his liolincss,'^ 
that lo, the days shall come upon you, that he Avill 
take you away with hooks, and your posterity 
with li:ihhooks.° 

'A And ye shall go out at the breaches," every 
cow at that xvhich is before her ; and ye shall cast 
them into* the palace, saith the Lord. 

4 IF Come to Beth-el,° and transgress ; at Gilgal 
multiply transgression/ and bring your sacrifi- 
ces every morning," and your tithes after three 
years :^'' 

5 And offer a sacrifice' of thanksgiving with 
leaven,' and proclaim and publish the free oft'er- 
ings-.J for this liketh you,* ye children of Is- 
rael," saith the Lord God. 

6 *!' And I also have given you cleanness of teeth 
in all your cities, and want of bread in all your 
jtlaces;' yet have ye not returned unto me, saith 
the Lord. 

7 And also I have withholden the rain from you, 
when there urre yet three months to the harvest: 
and I caused it to rain upon one city, end caused 
it not to rain upon another city: one piece was 
rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained 
not witliered. 

8 So two or three cities wandered unto one city, 
to drink water; but they were not satisfied: yet 
have ye not returned unto me, saith the Lord. 

9 I have smitten you with blasting and mildew :™ 
when' your gardens and your vineyards and your 



a I'si. 22:1-2. bPsa. S9::!5. « Jer. 1():16. d Ezek. 12:5, 12. 
away the things of. ' oh. 3:14. t Hos. 4:15; 12:11. e Nurr 
t Heb. years of ilkys. h Deut. 14:2::-. 1 Heb. by burning, i 1 
J Lev. 22:1s, 21. i ileb. so ye lai-t. k Matt. 2.3:2:! lEzek. 1C:27 



8. God never threatens in vain : his wrath is infinitely 
more terrible than all other evils, and they who have a 
true apprehension of it cannot but faithfully warn sinners 
to escape from it in the only way which God has provided. 

9, 10. God will justify himself for all the chastisements 
wliich he inflicts upon his covenant people before the eyes 
of even wicked men. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1. Kine of Bashan; according to some, the luxurious and 
profligate women of Samaria, who instigated their husbands 
to cruelty and oppression ; according to others, the princes, 
so called on account of their effeminacy. Bashan was a re- 
gion east of the Jordan, celebrated for its luxuriant pastures. 

2. With hooks; as fish are taken out of their home in the 
water. 

3. Atthebreacltes; the walls of the city being thrown down, 
they shall go out, each one by the nearest breach. Ye shall 
cast — into the palace ; a difficult passage. According to the 
margin, it means that they cast away in their flight their 
treasures taken from the palace. Others propose to render, 
" Ye shall be cast out of the palace." 

4. Beth-el — Gilgal; see note on Hosea 4:15. In cutting 
irony the prophet bids them go on in their idolatrous 
worship at Beth-el and Gilgal, since they are bent upon 
doing 80. Your tithes after three years; the allusion is to 
the law of Moses, Deut. 14:2S, 29. which the idolatrous 
Israelites seem to have imitated. 



fig-trees and your olive-trees increased, the palm- 
er-worm devoured the?7i: yet have ye not returned 
unto me," saith the Lord. 

10 1 have sent among yon the pestilence after 
the manner^ of Egypt:" your young men have I 
slain with the sword, and have taken away* your 
horses ; and I have made the stink of your cam])3 
to come up unto your nostrils: yet liave ye noi 
returned unto me, saith the Lord. 

Ill liave overthrown some of you, as God over- 
threw Sodom and Gomorrah,P and yc were as a 
firebrand plucked out of the burning:'' yet have 
ye not returned unto nic, saith the Lord. 

12 Tiierefore thus will I do unto thee, Israel : 
a7id because I will do this unto thee, prepare to 
meet thy God,"" Israel. 

13 For, lo, he that formeth the mountains, and 
createth the wind,^ and declaretli unto man what 
is liis thought,'* that maketh the morning darkness, 
and treadeth upon the liigh places of the earth, 
The Lord, The God of hosts, is his name. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 A lamentation for Israel. 4 An exhortation to repentance. 21 G-od 
rejecteth their hypocritical service. 

HEAR ye this word which I take up against 
you, even a lamentation, iiouse of Israel. 

2 Tlie virgin of Israel is fallen;' she shall no 
more rise : she is forsaken upon her land ; there is 
none to raise her up. 

3 For thus saith the Lord God ; The city that 
went out by a tiiousand shall leave a hundred, and 
that which went forth by a hundred shall leave 
ten, to tlie house of Israel. 

4 \ For thus saith the Lord unto the house of 
Israel, Seek ye me, and j'e shall live:" 

5 But seek not Beth-el, nor enter into Gilgal," 



2s:22. i Or. the multitude of . n.Ier. 5:3. ^ Or, in the ii-ay. o Deut. 2S:27, 
GO. • Heb. witA (Ae caplifKy o/,- 2 Kings 13:7. P Gen. lil:24, 25. q Zech. 
3:2;Jude2:3. r Ezek. 13:5; Matt. 25:13. 1 Or, spirit. »Dan.2:2S. t Lam. 
2:13. "Isa. 55:0, 7. vch. 4:4. 



5. With leaven; another allusion to the Mosaic law, Lev. 
7 : 12, 13. The leavened bread itself went to be the priests' 
portion, but the frankincense that accompanied it was 
burned on the altar. 

6-11. / also have given you; the prophet enumerates 
God's judgments in past years, which had failed to bring 
the people to repentance. 

12. Tims icill I do; in accordance with my threateninga. 
Chap. 3:lHa; 4:1-3. 

13. He that formeth the mountains — the God of hosts; the 
prophet designs, by this enumeration of the divine attri- 
butes, to forewarn the people with whom they have to 
deal. Maketh the morning darkness; see chap. 5:8. 

INSTRUCTION. 
God is very merciful, and will not destroy any till he 
has tried the efficacy of judgments often,repeated; but if 
they harden themselves against the means he uses to re- 
claim them, he will at last plunge them into remediless 
ruin, and thus make them feel that they have to do, not 
with feeble man, but with the omnipotent Creator of 
heaven and earth. Let all flee to Christ, and thus be pre- 
pared to meet this holy God when he shall bring them into 
judgment for their sins. 

CHAPTER V. 

5. Beer-sheha; in this city, on the southern border of the 
holy laud, as well as at Belh-el and Gilgal, idolatrous rites 
were practised. See chap. 8: 11. 

1011 



Exhortation to repent. 



AMOS V. 



Hypocrisy reproved. 



and pa?s not to Becr-shcba: for Gil,<:jal shall surely 
go into ('ai)tivily, and Bot!i-ol sliall coine to naught. 

6 Seek the Loud, and yo shall live; lest lie 
break out like lire in the house of Joseph, and de- 
vour it, and there be none to quench it in Bcth-el. 

7 Ye wJio turn judgment to wormwood, and 
leave off righteousness in the earth, 

8 Seek him that inaketh the seven stars and 
Orion, and tiirncth tlie shadow of death into the 
morning, and niaketii the day dark with nigiit: 
that callclh for the waters cf the sea, and poureth 
them out upon the face of the earth : The Lord is 
his name: 

9 Tiiat strengtheneth the spoiled* against the 
strong, so that the spoiled shall come against the 
fortress. 

10 They hate him that rebukcth in the gate," and 
they abhor him that speaketh ujirightly. 

11 Forasmucli therefore as your treading is upon 
the poor, and ye take from him biu'dcns of wheat : 
ye have built iiouscs of hewn stone, but ye shall 
not dwell in them ; ye have jdanted pleasant vine- 
yards,* but ye shall not drink wine of them. 

12 For I know your manifold transgressions and 
your mighty sins : they afflict the just," they take 
a bribe,*'- and they turn aside the i)oor in the gate 
from their right."^ 

13 Tliereforo the prudent shall keep silence in 
that time;" for it is an evil time. 

14 Seek good, and not evil, that ye may live:' 
and so the Loud, the God of hosts, shall be with 
you, as ye have spoken. 

15 Uate the evil, and love the good, and estab- 
lish judgment in the gate: it may be that the Loud 
God of iiosts will be gracious unto the remnant of 
Joseph.^ 



•Heb. spoil. »Isa. 20:21. t Hcb. ti 
ransom. ' Psa. 2(!:9, 10. 15129:21. 
( Exod. 32:30; 2 Kings 19:4; Joel2:14. 



eyurds of desire, bjas, 5:C. I Or, 
ecli.6:IU; Eocl. 3:7. ' Isi. 55:2. 
h Jcr. 9:17-19. i Joel 2:2; Zcph. 



7. Tarn judgment to wormwood; pervert justice to op- 
pression, as in chap. 6:12; Hosea 10:4. 

8. Maketh the seven stars — calleth for the waters ; controls 
the whole course of nature. Compare Job 9:.')-9. 

9. TJiat strengtheneth — the fortre.Hi ; rather, " that causoth 
destruction to shine," like a tlasli of lightiiing, "upon the 
strong, and destruction cometli upon tlie fortress." Com- 
pare Job 12:17-21. 

10. Theij; the people of Israel. Him that rcbnkclh in the 
gate; the upright judge who condemns the wicked. 

13. SItaU keep silence; because men will not listen to their 
words. 

IC. The hii-ibandman to mourning ; because the fruits of 
the eartli are cut off. See next verse. 

18. The (Inij of the Lord ; the day when God shall inter- 
pose in behalf of his people. Such a day wouhl not bring 
deliverance to ihi wicked, but inevitable destruetion. Com- 
pare Mai. 3:2. This prophecy was fultilled in the judgments 
by which God destroyed the kingdoms of Israel iindJudah, 
and more terribly in those which followed the advent of 
Christ. 

21. Smell in your solemn assemblies ; or, " smell your solemn 
assemblies ;" the savor of their sacrifices ; that is, take de- 
light in them. 

2*. Jmlgment ; jnsticc in the administration of law. If 
tlio people will be acceptable to (iod, they must begin by 
tliorough repentance, and works meet for repcuUince. 
Compare Isa. l:lfi, 17; Ilosea C:fi. 

25. Have ijc offered unto me mr.rifices and offerings ? that is, 
haveyo on'cred to me alone, with imdivided love and obe- 
dience? The question reproaches them not for omittiii'j; 
1012 



10 Tlierefore the Loud, the God ofliost?, '^ii'',:.'fJJ: 
the Lord, suitli thus ; Wailing,s7(n//6e in all streets ; 
and tliey siuill say in all the highways, Alas! alas! 
and they shall call tlie liusbandman to mourn- 
ing, and such as are skilful of lamentation to 
wailing.'' 

17 And in all vineyards shaU he wailing: for I 
will jioss tlirough thee, saith the Loud. 

18 Woe unto you that de.-ire the day of the 
Loi:d! to what end is it for you? the day of the 
Loud w darkness, and not light.' 

19 As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear 
met him; or went into the liouse. and leaned his 
hand on the vrall, and a serpent bit him. 

20 Shall not tlie day of tlie Lord he darkness, 
and not light? even very dark, and no briirhtncss 
in it? 

21 1i I hate, I despise j^our feast days, and I will 
not smell in your solemn assemblies.* 

22 Tliough yc offer nie burnt-offerings and your 
meat-offerings, I will not accept them:' neither 
will I regard the pcaccofferings' of your fat 
beasts. 

23 Take thou away from me the noise of thy 
songs: for 1 will not hear the melody of thy viols. 

24 But let judgment run^ down as waters, and 
righteousness as a mighty stream." 

2.5 Have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offer- 
ings in the wilderness fortv vears, O house of Ls- 
racl?' 

20 But ye have borne the tabernacle of 3-our 
Moloch* and Ciiiun your images, the star of your 
god, which yc made to yourselves. 

27 Therefore will I cause you to go into captiv- 
ity beyond Damascus,"' saith tiic Loud, whose name 
is The God of iiosts. 

1:H, 15. » Or. your holy days. J Isa. llll-LI; Uos. H.Vi. I Or, tkink- 
offrrmss. 1 Hcb. roH. k Mic. 0:8. 1 Deut. 32:17-19; Ezek. 20:8, 34. 
" Or, Sirculh yoitr kiiii:. "> 2 Kings 17:6. 



sacrifices in the wilderness, of which there is no proof, 
but for uniting with them their own superstitions. See 
Acts 7:42, 43. 

20. Chiun your images; according to some, "the statue 
of your images." The star of your god ; probably the planet 
Saturn, symbolized by a star. 

27. JVill I cawie—beyond Dnmasnis; see 2 Kings 17:6. 
.Vssyria lay beyond Dama.scus. 

INSTI!U(TIf)N'S. 

2, 3. When God has forsaken a people or an individual, 
no earthly help can avail. 

4-6. They who in times of calamity resort for deliver- 
ance to sinful practices, instead of seeking tiod's help by 
repentance and holy obedience, only plunge themselves 
into speedier and more terrible destruction. 

7-10. \ true aiiiuehcnsioii of (iod's glorious character 
and attribute."!, and his supreme control over nature and 
the course of human affairs, prepares the way for faith in 
him, and tliat holiness of heart and life which is insepara- 
ble from faith. But they who are ignorant of God and 
alienated from him, will give themselves up to worldlinoss 
and sin, and hate those who vindicate the cause of truth 
and righteousness. 

11. They who seek to be rich by spoiling the poor, bring 
on themselves misery and ruin; God will take part with 
the weak against their oppressors, and "spoil the soul of 
those that spoiled them." Prov. 22:22, 23. 

13. When the character and conduct of a people are 
such that the wise and g^iorl feel constrained to keep si- 
f'nce, it is a sign that tln'ir ruin is near. 



Israel's wantonness 



AMOS VL 



and desolation. 



t^:^'- CHAPTER VI. 

1 The wantonness of Israel, 7 shall he placed with desolation. 12 and 
their incorngihleness. 

^TTOE to tliein that are at ease* in Zion.^ and 
V V trust in the mountain of Samaria, which are 
naniod chief* of tlie uations,'' to whom tlie house of 
Israel came ! 

2 Pass ye unto Calneh, and see ; and from thence 
pro ye to Hamath the great:'' then go down to 
Gath of the Philistines: be thiy bettor than these 
kingdoms? or their border greater than your 
border ? 

3 Ye that put far away the evil day/' and cause 
the scat* of violence to come near; 

4 'J'liat lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch them- 
selves upon their couches,^ and eat tlie lambs out 
of tlie flock, and the calves out of the midst of the 
stall; 

5 That chant' to the sound of the viol." and 
invent to themselves instruments of music, like 
David;' 

6 Tliat drink wine in bowls,' and anoint them- 
selves with the chief ointments; but they arc not 
grieved for the affliction* of-Joseph." 

7 1[ Therefore now shall they go captive with 
the first that go captive, and the banquet of them 
that stretched themselves shall be removed. 



d Ezek. la:->7. 



t Ot,f.rsl-fniits. b Lam. 1;I. = Isa. 1U;<>. 
'.ion. 5 Or. a^jotind witk superJJuUies. B Or. 
■ii:'>. ^ Or, in howls of wine. ' Keb. breach. 



14-17. In all times of trouble, repentance and hearty 
oljedience to God's law are the divinely appointed and 
sure way of obtaining relief; but for those who reject 
this way and continue to rebel against God, nothing re- 
mains but lamentation and woe. 

lS-20. When the day of promised deliverance comes to 
the righteous, it will consume the wicked. Such was the 
result of Christ's coming, to the proud .and rebellious 
among the Jews. JIalachi 4 : 1-3. 

21-24. God will accept no observance of religious rites, 
though they be those of his own appointment, in place of 
a holy heart and a righteous life. Though wicked men 
multiply ever so much the outward forms of religion, they 
and their services still remain abominable in his sight. 
Psa. 50:8-23; Pro v. 15:8; 28:9; Isa. 1:11-20; Jer. 6:20; 
Micah 6 : 6-8. 

25-27. God will not share our service with idols ; he 
■will have our luidivided love, confidence, and obedience, 
or reject us as unclean and abominable. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1. Zinn ; the head of Jiidea. S'lmaria; the liead of Is- 
rael. The princes of Judah and Israel are addressed to- 
gether, because they were guilty of the same sins, and 
should suffer the same punishment; Amos, like Hosea, 
though sent to Israel, occasionally glances at the sins of 
Judah. Came; for direction and the administration of 
justice. 

2. Calneh — Hamath; see note on Isa. 10:9. Be they better 
than these kingdoms? or, "Were they better?" that is, did 
God bestow upon them, while yet flourishing, a better 
condition and larger territory than upon you'? Yet, for 
their abuse of his goodness, God punished them, wliich 
should be a warning to you. Calneh and Hamatli were 
conquered by the Assj'rians. For the conquest of Gath, 
see 2 Kings 12:17; 2 Chron. 26:6. 

4—6. Beds of ivory — chief omtments ; the reigns of Uzziah 
in Judah, and Jeroboam second in Israel, were externally 
very prosperous. See 2 Chron. 26:5-15 ; 2 Kings 14:25-28. 
Hence came the false security and luxury which the prophet 
rebukes. 



8 The Lord God hath sworn by himself,'" saith 
the LoKD the God of hosts, I abhor the excellen- 
cy of Jacob,' and hate his palaces ; therefore will 
1 deliver up the city with all that is therein.* 

9 And it sliall come to pass, if tliere remain ten 
men in one house, timt they shall die. 

10 And a man's uncle shall take liim up, and he 
that burnetii him, to bring out the bones out of 
the house, and shall say unto him that is by the 
sides of the house, Is there yet any with thee ? and 
he shall say. No. Then shall he say. Hold thy 
tonguo-:J for we may not* make mention of the 
name of the Loud. 

11 For behold, the Lord comniandoth, and he 
will smite the great house witii breaciies,* and the 
little house with clefts. 

12 ^ Shall horses run upon the rock? will one 
plough there with oxen ? for ye have turned judg- 
ment into gall," and the fruit of righteousness into 
iicmlock :' 

13 Ye which rejoice in a thing of naught, which 
say. Have we not taken to us horns by our own 
strength ? 

14 But behold, I will raise up against you a na- 
tion,"" house of Israel, saith the Lord the God of 
hosts ; and they shall afflict you from the entering 
in of Hamath unto the river' of the wilderness." 



f Gen. 49:43. hjer. 51;14. i P.sa. 47:4; Psa. IUli:40. \ \le:b. tlie fulness 
thtrtof. jch. 5:13. I Or, l/ietj will not, or liave not. i Or, ciroppinss. k ch. 
5:7. lHos.lO:4. nijer.5:15. lOr.valley. n Num. 34:8; 1 Kings S;(i5. 



9. Shall die; one by one, as described in vcr. 10. 

10. A man's uncle; the uncle of the dead man, who is the 
last but one of the ten. He attends to liis burial, or the 
burning of his body, as the nearest surviving relative. 
Him that is by the sides of tlie hoii.se ; the one survivor who 
lies sick in a remote corner of the house. Then shall lie 
say, Hold thy tongue; the uncle of the dead man shall say 
to the survivor. Bear thy lot in silence, since lamentation 
and despair are alike unavailing. This is the language 
of despair. 

12. Shall horses run — oxen? will one think to make horses 
run with safety upon craggy rocks, or jilough there with 
oxen in the hope of reaping from them a harvest? As well 
may you hope to be prospered while you pervert justice 
and judgment. Gall — hemlock; see notes on chap. 5 :7 and 
Hosea 10:4. 

13. A thing of naught; their idols, and all their other 
vain confidences. 

14. The entering in of Hamath ; the northern limit of Pal- 
estine. Num. 34:8 ; 2 Kings 14:25. The river of the wilder- 
7iess; probably the deep valley of the Kidron, where it 
empties into the northern part of the Dead sea, at the 
southern limit of the kingdom of Israel. See 2 Kings 
14:25, where the word rendered "plain" is the same that 
is here rendered " wilderness," and denotes the long deep 
valley in which the Dead sea lies. 

INSTRUCTION. 
Times of continued worldly prosperity are full of danger 
to the cause of religion ; their tendency is to bring into the 
church luxury, pride, vain show, and indifference to God's 
service, with all the gross sins that naturally follow in their 
train. Thus the professors of godliness dishonor Christ 
before the world, lose their power over men's consciences, 
and make it necessary that God should purify his church 
by his judgments, the numerous examples on record of 
great and often very sudden changes from a state of ease 
and comfort to one of deep affliction, ought to be a solemn 
warning to us of the present day not to abuse the great 
prosperity which God is bestowing upon us, lest he cause 
our Sim also to go down at noon, and darken our land in 
the clear day, as he did with ancient Israel. Chap. 8:9. 
1013 



The plumh-line. 



AMOS Vli, 



T/ie prop/iet's vindicalicn. 



CHAPTER VII. 



1 The jndgments of the grasshoppers, 4 and of the fire, are diverted by 
the prayer of Amos. 7 By tde wall of a plumb-line is signified the 
rejection of Israel. 10 Amaziah coniplainetK of Amos. 14 Amos 
showeth his calling, 16 and Amaziah's judgment. 

^T^HUS lialh the Lord Gov showed unto me: 
X and behold, lie ioniied gra.s.shoppcrs* in tlic 
beginning ol' tiio shooting up of tiie latter growth ; 
and lo, it was the latter growth after the king's 
mowings. 

li And it came to pas.'^ t/iat when they had made 
an cnil of eating the grass of the land, then I said, 
<) Lord Gon, forgive, T beseech thee:" by whom 
shall Jacob arise?* for he is small.'' 

3 The L(iKi) repented for this:*" It shall not be, 
saith the Loitn. 

4 IT Thus hath the Lord God showed unto me: 
and behold, the Lord (iod called to contend by 
fire,'' and it devoured the great deep, and did eat 
up a part. 

5 Then said I, Lord Gon, cease, I beseech 
thee: by whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small. 

6 The Lord repented for this: This also shall 
not be, sailh the Lord God. 

7 IThus ho showed me: and behold, the Lord 
stood upon a wall made by a plumb-lino, with a 
l)lumb-line in his hand. 

8 And the Lord said unto me, Amos, what secst 
thou? And I said, A plumb-line. Then said the 
Lord, Behold, 1 will set a plumb-line in the midst 
of my people Lsracl:' I will not again pass by 
them any more:'' 



' Or, green worms, a Dan. 9: 19. t Or, who of, or for,s7aco* shall stand? 
bZoch.J:!!!. e Dciit. 32:30; Jonah 3; 111. dHi-bl:". f Lam. a-.S. '.\lic 
T-.IH. sBccr-shcba; Gen. 26:25; 40:1. 1 Fulfilled. 2 Kings 15:10. h I Kings 
12:32; 2 King.H 14:2.3. i 1 Kings 12:.32; 13: 1, i Or, sanctuarj/. I Or, housi 



CHAPTER VIL 

1. Gnd showed unto me ; the symbolical acts contained in 
this and tUo twu fuUowinf; chapters are not actual, but 
represented in vision to the prophet's mind. See intro- 
ductory note to Ezekiel. Formed gras'ihopperx ; this symbol, 
like the following, represented the destruction of Israel by 
foreign eiiemii's; for these arc signified by grasshoppers 
and the fire. The latter growth ; the second growth of grass, 
after the first has been mowed. After the king's moivings; 
probably of the early crop for his own use ; implying that 
the Israelitish nation, which, like a meadow newly mown, 
was beginning, under Jeroboam, to recover its strength, is 
about to be utterly destroyed for its sins. See 2 Kings 
14:25-27. 

2. By whom—arise ? or, " Who is .lacob, that ho should 
arise?" Small; reduced by repeated calamities. 

3. Repented; upon the intercession of the prophet, God 
graciously averts the threatened destruction. This signi- 
tios thatlic bears long with his rebellious people, delaying 
and mitigating tli(;ir punishment in answer to tlio prayers 
of his faithful servants. 

4. To contend ; against Israel. A part ; or, " the portion ;" 
that is, the inh^'ritunce of Israel. 

7. A plumb-line; the symbol of exact and discriminating 
justice, which destroys the wicked, while it saves the 
righteous remnant, ('omjiare 2 Kings 21:13; Isa. 21:17; 
Lam. 2: 8. See also 2 Sam. 8:2. Con.scrpiently, the proph- 
et docs not seek to avert the judgment foretold by this 
symbol. 

8. Pass hy them ; forgive them, or spare them as hitherto. 

9. The high places of Isaac; compare ver. 16, where " the 
house of Isaac" is the same sis "the house of Israel." 

13. The king's cliapel ; or, as in the margin, "his sanctu- 
arv,"as the place consecrated by him and, his predecessors 
lOM 



9 And the high places of Isaac shall bo *i(*c.^-: 
desolate," and the sanctuaries of Israel shall be 
laid waste ; and I will rise against the house of 
Jeroboam with the sword.' 

10 ^ Then Amaziah the priest of Beth-el sent to 
Jeroboam king of Israel,'" saying, Amos hath con- 
spireil against tlicc in the midst of the house of 
Israel : the land is not able to bear all his words; 

11 For thus Amos saith, Jeroboam shall die by 
the sword, and Israel shall surely be led away 
captive out of their own land. 

12 Also Amaziah said unto Amos, thou seer, 
go, flee thee away into the land of Judah, and 
there eat bread, and prophesy there: 

13 But pro])he.>y not again any more at Beth- 
el :' for ilis the king's chapel,* and it /^ the king's 
court.' 

14 T Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, 
I iras no prophet,^ neither ivas I a prophet's son : but 
I was a herdinan," and a gathererof sycamore fruit :^ 

15 And the Lord took me as 1 followed' the 
flock, and the Lord said unto me, Go, prophesy 
unto my people Israel. 

16 'i Now therefore hear Ihou the word of the 
Lord : Thou .sayest. Prophesy not against Israel,' 
and dro]) not thy word against the house of Isaac."' 

17 Therefore thus saith the Lord;" Thy wife 
shall be a harlot in the city." and thy sons and 
thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy 
land shall be divided by line; and tiiou shalt die 
in a polluted land : and Israel shall surely go into 
captivity forth of his land. 



of the kingdom, i Zech. 13:5. kch. 1:1. ^ Or, wild Jigs. • Or, /re 
hind. 1 Mic. 2:0. luEiKk. 21:2. p Jcr. 3;:12, etc. ; 29:21, etc. • 
4:13; Zech. 14:J. 



to the golden calf and its worship. The king's court; lit- 
erally, as the ntargin, " a house of the kingdom," that is, a 
royal place, because there the public religious worship of 
the kingdom was maintained. Perhaps the king had also 
a residence there. 

14. No prophet, neither — a proplieVs son ; not trained to tho 
prophetical office, like the companies of prophets midcr 
Samuel and Elisha, I Sam. 19:20; 2 Kings 6:1. who were 
called "sons of tho projihets." 1 Kings 20:35; 2 Kings 
2:3, etc. God had taken him immediately from following 
the herd, and given hira a message to Israel which he must 
deliver. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-C. Great judgments have often been averted by the 
earnest intercessions of holy men. This should encourage 
us to offer for our nation and the church " the effectual 
fervent prayer," which "availetlt much" with God. Exod. 
32:11-14; Nimi. 14:13-20. 

8. (ioil's judgments are so ordered, through his infinite 
wisdom and righteousness, that their effect is to destroy 
the kingdom of Siilan. while thcv enlarge and build up the 
kingdom of Christ, bsa. l:25-2"7; 10:22. 

10, II It is the custom of wicked men to accuse those 
who faithfully reprove them for tluir sins, of seditious con- 
<luct,and to reiiresenl them as llie enemies and disturbers 
of the public pe.ace. 1 Kings 18: 17 ; .Icr. 38:4. 

12-17. (lod's authority is higher than that of all earthly 
rulers. These have no right to prescribe where his nies- 
seiigers shall preach, nor what Ihey shall say. The hum- 
blest man lo wlioin (Iod li;is committed a message, is bound 
to proclaim it boldly, however contrary it may be to tho 
feelings and wishes of sinners; and if ho does this, God 
will be with him ami vindicate his character, while he puts 
to shame his accusers. 



Oppression reproved. 



AMOS IX. 



A famine of the iter. I. 



SJ'tI" chapter VIII. 

1 By a basket of summer fruit is sliowir the nearntss of Israel's end. 
\ Orpres3ion is reprovcJ. ! 1 A nimine of the word threatened. 

"T^IIUS hath the Lord God showed unto me: 
X and bcliohl a basket of summer fruit. 

2 And he said, Amos, wliat seest thou? And I 
said, A basket of summer fruit. Then said the 
L(»i;d unto mc, The end is come upon my people of 
Israel ;^ I will not ajrain pass by them any more.'' 

3 And the songs of the temple shall bo howl- 
inijs* iu that day," saith the Lord God : there shall 
be many dead bodies in every place;*" tlicy shall 
cast them forth with silence.* 

4 1[ Hear this, ye that swallow up tlio needy, 
even to make the poor of the land to fail,'-' 

5 Saying-, When will the new moon' be gone,'' 
that we may sell corn ? and the sabbath,"-' that we 
may set forth^ wheat, making the ephali small,'' and 
the shekel great, and falsifying the balances by' 
deceit?' 

6 That we may buy the poor for silver, and the 
needy for a pair of shoes; yea, and sell tiie refuse 
of tlie wiieat? 

7 The Loud hath sworn by the excellency of Ja- 
cob, Surely I will never forget any of their works.-i 

8 Shall not the land tremble for this, and every 
one mourn that dwelleth therein?" and it shall 
rise up wholly as a flood ; and it shall be cast out 
and drowned, as by the flood of Egypt. 

9 And it shall come to pass in tiiat day, saith 
the Lord God, tliat I will cause the sun to go 
down at noon, and I will darken the earth iu the 
clear day:' 

10 And I will turn your feasts into mourning, 



> Ezell. '-.i. b ch. 7:8. • Heb shi, 
t Hcb. he silent. « Prnv. aO:14. 1 Or. ; 
16. i Heb.opcn. t Deut. aj- 13-10; Ji 
balances of; Hos. \\>:1. ' Piov. •JU-.-Ji. 



ITiowl. c ch. 5:23. ■! ch. 6:9. 10. 
mnlk tMal. ):i:J. r Neh. 1:): 1-5, 
ic. 6:10. 11. 1 Heb. percfrliiig l/ie 
I Jer. 17:1; Hos. B:1J. k Hos. 4:3. 



CHAPTER Vin. 

1. Summer fruit ; such as the iig, which was harvested 
in the latter part of summer. 

2. Tiie end is come upon — Israel; like the fruit in this 
basket, they are ripe for the harvest. In the original, the 
two words renilered " summer fruit " and " end " are similar, 
as if it were said. "A basket of ripe fruit;" "my people Is- 
l-ael is ripe for the end." 

5. New moon; oneof the holy days, in which secular labor 
was suspended. Compare Num. 10:19 ; Neh. 10:31. The 
ephah; the measure used in selling their grain. The shekel; 
the weight of money received in return. Deut. 25: 13, 14. 

6. Buy the poor ; for servants. See Lev. 25 : 39, and note 
on chap. 2:6. 

8. Rise up; with water; that is, be covered. Compare 
Prov. 24:31, where the sluggard's field is said, in the He- 
brew, to be "all risen up with thorns." Sluill be cast out; 
its inhabitants shall be carried away by the flood. 

11, 12. The words of the Lord; in their distress they shall 
seek counsel from God, but receive no answer. Psa. 74:9; 
Lam. 2:9; Ezck. 7:26. 

14. Taij god — Beersheba livetk ; that is, " As thy god, 
Dan, liveth ;" " .\s the manner of Beer-slieba liveth." These 
are forms of swearing. "The manner of Beer-sheba" is the 
idolatrous form of worship there established. 

LVSTRUCTIONS. 

1-3. Though God is long-suffering, not willing that any 
should perish, his forbearance has a limit; and when this 
is reached, his wrath will destroy without remedy. 

5. The Sabbath was made for man, and all good men love 



and all your songs into lamentation ; and I will 
bring up sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness 
upon every head;'" and 1 will make it as the 
mourning of an only son," and the end thereof as 
a bitter day. 

11 1 Behold, the days come, saith the Lord 
God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a 
famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of 
hearing the words of tlie Lord:" 

12 And they shall wander from sea to foa, and 
from tiie north even to the east, they shall run to 
and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and sliall 
not find it. 

13 In that day shall the fair virgins and young 
men I'aint for thirst.'' 

14 Tiiey tliat swear by the sin of Samaria,i and 
say, Tiiy god, Dan, livetli ;"■ and. The manner' of 
Beer-sheba liveth ; even they shall fall, and never 
rise up agaiu.' 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 Tlie certainty of the desolation. 11 The restoration of the tabernacle 
of David. 

I. SAW the Lord standing upon the altar: and 
he said. Smite the lintel* of the door, that the 
posts may shake: and cut* them in the head,' all 
of them ; and I will slay the last of them with the 
sword : he that fleeth of them shall not flee away, 
and he that escapeth of them shall not be deliv- 
ered. 

2 Though they dig into hell, thence shall my 
hand take them;" though they climb up to heaven, 
thence will I bring them down :" 



1 Isa.59:9, 10. m Ezek. 7 


18. njer. G:ai. o Psa. 74:9. P Psa. (VJ: 1 ; Isi. 


41:17--JO. q Dei:t. 9:21. 


r Hos. 4:15. 1 Heb. u-ay; Acts 9:i; 1U:U, ii. 


sch. 5:5. ' Or. chapiter, 


htop. t Or, K'oum/. 1 Psa. 6b:-'l. " Psa. 139:8- 


10. V Obid. 4. 





its holy rest. But they who are intent upon unrighteous 
gain must be expected to hate the interruption which it 
brings to the pursuit of mammon, and to use their influenco 
agauist its sanctity. 

7. When the rich and powerful oppress and spoil their 
fellow-men, and no earthly tribunal can be found to maintain 
the cause of truth and justice, Cftd himself will interpose 
inbebalf of the poor and defenceless, and thrust down their 
oppressors from the height of their prosperity into remedi- 
less ruin. Prov. 15:25; 22:22, 23. 

11-14. When men will not listen, in the time of their 
prosperity, to the messages of God's word, they shall seek 
from him in their calamity some message of comfort, but 
receive no answer ; then all their vain confidences will fail, 
and they perish with none to heliJ them. 

CHAPTER IX. 

:. The altar; the brazen altar in the court of the temple 
at Jerusalem; for the vision has respect to the whole cov- 
enant people of God. Yer. 11. The altar is the seat of 
God's justice, and thence his commands go forth against 
the workers of iniquity. Compare Ezek. 9:2. Smite t/ig 
lintel; ratber,as the margin, " the chapiter," or ornamented 
head of the pillars in front of the temple. The posts; or, 
"the thresholds," as the Hebrew word is elsewhere ren- 
dered. Judg. 19:27; 1 Sam. 5:4, 5, etc. The blow shakes 
the temple from top to bottom. Cut them ; smite so as to 
break them in pieces. The reference is to the pillars of 
the temple. The demolition of the temple is a symbol of 
the destruction which God is about to bring upon both 
parts of his covenant people, ver. 8, 9. The last of them; 
the remnant that escapes the first blow. 
• 1015 



Desolation of Israel. 



AMOS IX, 



T7ie taberntde restored. 



3 And thougli they hide tliemselves in the top of 
Carmel, I will S' arch and take them out tlience; 
and though they be liid from my siglit in the bot- 
tom of the sea, thence will 1 command the serpent, 
and he shall bite them: 

4 And tiiough they go into captivity before their 
enemies, thence will 1 command the sword, and it 
shall slay them:-' and I will set mine eyes upon 
tliem for evil, and not for good. 

5 And the Lord Goo of hosts is lie tliat touchotii 
the land, and it sliall melt,'' and all that dwell 
therein slniU mourn : and it shall I'ise up wliolly 
like a flood ; and shall be drowned, as by the Hood 
of Egypt. 

G It is he that buiidoth his stories' in the heaven, 
and hatli founded his troops in tiic earth; he that 
calletii for the waters of the sea, and poureth tliem 
out upon the face of the earth ; The Lord is his 
name. 

7 .''Ire ye not as cliildrcn of the Ethiopians unto 
me, children of Israel? saitii the Lord. Have 
not I brought up Israel out of tiie land of Egypt? 
and thi^ Philistines from Caphtor,'' and the Syrians 
from Kir? 

8 Ijchold. the eyes of the Lord God are upon the 
sinful kingdom, and I will destroy it from off the 
face of the earth; saving that I will not utterly 
destroy the house of Jacob,'' saith the Lord. 



a Deut. 2S:e.".; Ezek. 5:1-J. b Mic, 1:4. • Or, iplier's; Heb. nsrenjions. 
1 Or, bimdlt. t Jer. 47:4. i Dcut. 4:31. 1 Heb. muse lo move. 1 Heb. 
stone. ' Acts 15:15-17. I Heb. Iiedge, or icatl. T Hcb. upon whom mi/ 



3. Ill the top of Carmel; the reference seems to be to the 
innumerable caves on the top o£ Carmel. Be lad; rather, 
"hide themselves." 

t>. S'uill rise up; see note on chap. 8:8. 

Ci. His troop ; or, " his arch ;" that is, the arch of heaven. 

7. Are ije not as children of the Elhiopiam unto me, O chil- 
dren of Lraell the Israelites gloried that they were God's 
peculiar people, and thought that on this account he could 
never cast them off. But ho teaches them that since they 
have made themselves like the Iioathen in character, he 
will treat them as sucli. Have not 1 brought up Israel out 
of the land of Ef^ijpl I—from Kir ? thoy might reason that, 
since (loil had brought them out of Egypt into the land of 
Canaan, he would never sutler their enemies to dispossess 
them of it; but he rcmintfs them that he has dealt in alike 
manner with the Pliilistines and the Syrians. No outward 
privileges or past favors can save from punishment those 
who transgress God's law. Caphtor; according to the 
ancients, Oappadocia : some understand the word of Crete. 
Kir ; between the Black sea and the Caspian. See note on 
Isa. 22 :C. 

8. The house of Jacob ; here, like " the house of Israel," 
vcr. 9, used in a general sense for the whole posterity of 
Jacob, including all the twelve tribes. 

9. S'lall not the leait pram fall; while God, by ca])tivity 
and dispersion, sifts his covenant ])eople, he will save all 
the righteous among them. 

11. In that day; that is, in connection with these judg- 
ments, and as a consequence of them ; their effect is to 
purify the church, and thus prepare her for a glorious 
enlargement. W'e must not limit these words to one par- 
ticular period of time. The restoration of the .lews under 
Cyrus was only the dawn of their fuUilment, which belongs 



9 For lo, I will command, and I will sift' ^i":-.' ?«: 
the house of Israel among all nations, like as ccm 
is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain' 
fall upon the earth. 

10 All the sinners of my people .shall die by the 
sword, which say, The evil shall not overtake nor 
prevent us. 

11 11 In that day will I raise u\> the tabernacle of 
David that is fallen,'' and close' up the breaches 
thereof; and I will raise up his ruins, and I will 
l)uild it as iu the days of old: 

12 'J'hat they may possess the remnant of Edom, 
and of all the heathen, which are called by my 
name,' saitli the Lord that doeth this. 

lo Beliold, the days come, saith the Lord, that 
the plongliman shall overtake the reaper, and the 
trcader of grapes him that soweth* seed ;' and the 
mountains shall drop sweet' wine,"-' and all the 
hills shall melt. 

14: And 1 will bring again the captivity of my 
people of Israel, and they shall build the waste 
cities, and inhabit ihcm:^' and they shall plant 
vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; thoy shall 
also make gardens, and eat the frnit of Ihom. 

1-5 And I will plant tiiem upon their land,' and 
they shall no more be [luUed up out of their land 
which I have given them, saith the Loud thy 
God. 



especially to the gospel dispensation. See notes on Isa. 
4:2; Dan. 12:1. 

12. Possess the remnant of Edom ; take possession of tlieir 
inheritance. This is to be understood spiritually of the 
conversion of the Gentil* to Christ. The Edomites are 
named as the most prominent among the enemies of the 
covenant people. Their subsequent conquest by John 
riyrcanus, and incorporation into the .Jewish nation, was 
only an earnest of a higher spiritual fulfilment of the 
prophecy. 

13. Slmll overtake the reaper; compare Lev. 26:5. Shall 
melt ; be dissolved by the streams of new wine ; a poetical 
description of great fruitfulness and plenty. Compare Joel 
3:18. The outward peace and abundance of that lia|ipy 
dav,as it is the effect, so is it also the sign of the spiritual 
frviitfulness and prosperity of God's people. 

14. 15. Bring an;ain the captivity of mij people — plant tliem ; 
God's people are here the universal church, into which all 
nations are to be gathered. Isa. G0:3-U:. The grafting in 
again to the visible church of ancient Israel, is not to be 
understood as the main fulfilment of this projdicey, but 
rather as that mighty event which in a special manner 
hastens its fulfilment. See Rom. 11:12, 15, 25, 26. 

INSTHL'CTION. 
No outward privileges and relations to God can exempt 
the wicked from punishment. Again and again has judg- 
ment begun at the house of God. and proceeded till his 
visible followers were sifted "like as corn is sifted in a 
sieve." But the result has been the salvation and enlarge- 
ment of the true Israel. Thus shall God continue to carry 
forward his work from age to age, till that hai)py time fore- 
told by the ancient prophets, when Ziou shall bo established 
in perpetual peace and prosperity. 



1016 



OBADIAH. 



Concerning the date of Obadiah's prophecy, expositors are not agreed. There is no decisive reason for 
supposing that he does not belong to the age of Jeroboam second. He has much in common with Jere- 
miah. See Jcr. 49 -.1-11. Yet, as we know that Jeremiah made use of the earlier prophecies of Isaiah — 
compare Isa. chaps. 15, 16, with Jer. chap. 48 — so he may have done also in respect to this short proph- 
ecy of Obadiah. The Edomites were conspicuous for their hatred against God's covenant people. See 
Ezek. 25:12; 35:5-1-5; Joel 3:19; Amos 1:11, and the parallel passage in Jeremiah. Accordingly 
they stand here, in respect to both their guilt and punishment, as the representatives of Zion's enemies 
in all ages. In like manner, the promised victory of Israel over them represents the universal triumph 
of the church which is reserved for " the last days." 



1 The destruction of EJom. 3 for their pride, 10 .^nd for their wrong 
unto Jacob. 17 The salvafion and victory of Jacob. 

''T'^HE vision of Obadiah. Thus saith the Lord 
X God concerning Edom;" We have heard a 
rumor from the Lord, and an ambassador is sent 
svmong the heathen. Arise ye, and let us rise up 
against her in battle. 

2 Behold, I have made thee small among tlic 
heathen : then art greatly despised. 

3 •[ The pride of thy heart hath deceived thee, 
tliou tliat dwellest in the clefts of the rock, wiiose 
habitation is high; tliat saith in his heart, Who 
shall bring me down to the ground?'^ 

4 Tiiongh thou exalt thyself as the eagle, and 
thougli tliou set thy nest among the stars, thence 
will I bring thee down,"^ saith the Lord. 

5 If tliievcs came to thee, if robljers by night, 
(how art thou cut oif !) would they not have stolen 
till they liad enough? if tlie grape-gatherers came 
to thee, would they not leave some grapes?" 

6 How are the things of Esau searched out!'' how 
are his hidden things sought up!" • 

7 All the men of thy confederacy have lirouglit 
thee even to the border: the men that were at 
peace* with thee have deceived thee, and prevailed 
against thee; they that tat'' thy bread have laid a 



» Isa. -Jl:!! ; 34:5, etc.; Jer. -19:7. etc.; Ezek. aorl-i; Joel :):I9; Mai. 1:3, 

b Isi. U;l:W.i; Rev. lb:?. cJobaihG. • Or, gleaning!:, d Psi. 1:80: 1 . 

Dan. a:-J-J. t Heb. o/ lAi/ peiKe. 1 Heb. the men o/. i Or, of it. (Isa 



OBADIAH. 

1. hsent among the heathen ; to sth' them up to war against 
Edom. His words follow immediately. 

2. / have made thee small; the future punishment of EJom 
is spoken of as if it had already taken place. Compare 
ver. 6, 7. Some think the sins of Edom, described ver. 
10-14, are in like manner future, though the spirit wliich 
prompts to them already exists, and manifests itself as it 
has opportunity. 

3. 4. The pride of thy heart — bring tliee down ; see note on 
Jer. 49:1G. 

5. Tilt they had enough ; that is, only till they had enough, 
leaving the rest. Grape-gatherers ; a symbol for " thieves " 



wound under thee: there is none understanding 
in hiin.^' 

8 Shall I not in that day, saith the Lord, even 
destroy the wise mm out of Edom, and under- 
standing out of the mount of Esau? 

9 And thy mighty 7nen, Tcnian, shall be dis- 
mayed,''' to the end that every one of the mount 
of Esau may be cut off by slaughter. 

10 "1 For thy violence against thy brother Jacob, 
shame shall cover thee, and fliou shalt be cut off 
for ever." 

11 In the day that thou stoodcst on the other 
side, in the day that the strangers carried away 
captive his forces,' and foreigners entered into 
his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem,' even thou 
vast as one of them. 

12 But thou shouldest not have looked^ on the 
day of thy brother in the day that he became a 
stranger;^ neither shouldest thou have rejoiced 
over the children of Judah in the day of their 
destruction ; neither shouldest thou have spoken 
proudly* in the day of distress. 

13 Tliou shouldest not have entered into the 
gate of my people in the day of their calamity; 
yea, thou shouldest not have looked on their afflic- 
tion in the day of their calamity, nor have laid 



9:11-14. e Psa. 70:5. b Psa. 137:7; Ezek. .13:5. I Or, /lis substance 
3:3; Nah. 3:10. ^ Or, do not ieliold. J Mic. 4:11 ; 7:b-10. 'Heb. 
Jied thy mouth. 



and " robbers," Edom being the plundered vine. The mean- 
ing of these questions is, that the enemies of Edom havo 
ravaged her more than thieves and robbers. Compare 
Jer. 49:9. 

6. Searched out — sought vp ; by his enemies. Jer. 49:10. 

7. Men of thy confederacy ; Edom's allies, to whom he trust- 
ed for help. A wound ; or, " a snare." In him ; in Edom. 

8. 9. Wise men^mighty men — Teman ; see Jer. 49:7. 

11. His forces — his gates; those of God's people. Wast 
as one of them; see Psa. 137:7; Ezek. 3.5:15. 

12. Thou shouldest not have looked ; rather, as the margin, 
"do not behold;" and so of all the oilier expressions to 
the end of ver. 14. Thus the prophet warns Edom against 
indulging his hatred towards God's people. 

ion 



Edom destroyed, 



OBADIAII. 



and Zion delivered. 



hands on their substance" in the day of their 
calamity ; 

14 Neither shouklcst tliou Iiavc stood in the 
crossway, to cut oil' those of his tliat did escape; 
neither shouldest tliou iiavc delivered up* those 
of Ins tiiat did remain in tlie day of distress. 

15 For the day of the Lord is near upon all the 
lieatiien :" as tliou hast done, it shall be done unto 
thee: thy reward shall return upDU tliiue own 
licad.'" 

16 For as ye have drunk upon my holy moun- 
tain, so sliall all the heathen drink continually ; 
yea, they shall drink, and they shall swallow down,' 
and they shall be; as though they had not been. 

17 11 But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance,-'' 
and there shall be holiness;' and the house of 
Jacob shall possess their possessions. 

18 And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and 



• Or, /orrti. ^O!. shut lip; 
sup up. 5 Or, they that escape. 



vzek. »):■■!. b Hab. -J-.S. I Or, 
I Or. it shall be Iwly; Joel 3:17. 



14. Delivered up; to the enemy. 

l(i. As ye have drunk upon my holy mountain; as ye, my 
people, who dwell upon my holy mountain, liave drunk; 
that is, drunk the cup of my wratli. Compare Jer. 
25:27-29; 49:12. For the doctrine here taught, compare 
1 Pet. 4:17. 

17. Tkeir possessions ; the possessions of the Edoraites. 

19. Tiiey of the south ; they of Judali, who occupy the 
south of Palestine, sitall possess the moutil of Esau ; which 
extended south and cast of the soutliern border otMudah. 
They of tlie plain; of .ludali, towards tlic Mediterranean, 
shall possess the land of tlu: Philistines; which lay on the 
western border of this plain: they shall possess Ephraim 
and Simaria ; that is, the territory of the kingdom of Isra- 
el. Thus llie whole of Canaan is given to Judah. Gilead ; 
on the east of the Jordan, opposite to the territory of Ben- 
jamin. 

20. The captivity — of Israel; the remnant of the ton tribes 
are assigned a portion out of Palestine, adjacent to their 
ancient territory in Palestine. That of the Canaanites; the 
territory of the Canaanites, north of the ancient possessions 
of Israel. Zarephuth ; on the sea-coast of Phenicia, between 
Tvre and Zidon. The captivity — in Sepharad; captives from 
.'ernsalom, then dwelling in Sepharad ; of these and of 
Sepharad we know nothing. The cities of the .south ; heathen 
cities, apparently beyond '-the mount of Esau," which has 
been given to the south of Judah, ver. 19 ; justas the captivi- 
ty of Israel has a possession north of that given to Judah. 

In interpreting this and the preceding verse, we arc not 
to insist on particulars. The meaning is, that the remnant 
of Judah and Israel shall possess the huul of their enemies ; 



the house of Joseph a flame,'' and the house a. m. hxi. 
of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle '."*t' 
in them, and devour them ; and there shall not be 
any remaining of the house of Esau ; for the Lord 
hath spoken it. 

19 And they of the south shall possess the mount 
of Esau;" and they of the ])lain, the Philistines: 
and they shall possess the fields of Ephi'aim, and 
the fields of Samaria: and Jkuijamin shall possess 
(iilcad. 

20 And the captivity of this host of the children 
of Israel shall possess that of the Canaanites. even 
unto Zarephath ; and the captivity of Jerusalem, 
which is in Scj)harad,' shall possess the cities of 
the south.'' 

21 And saviors shall come up on mount Zion to 
judge the mount of Esau;*-' and the kingdom shall 
bo the Lord's." 



i 9:1-2. 1 Or. shall possess that which is in Sepharad. 
.4:1C. hZech. 14:9; Luke 1:33. 



and this, again, represents the universal spiritual triumph 
of God's people. 

21. Salvors,- in the temporal saviors after the Babylonish 
captivity, who contpicred the Edoraites, we have only the 
earnest of the true fulfilment of this promise iu Christ. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2-4. No wisdom, riches, military power, or natural 
strength of position, can secure a people against God's 
judgments. When a nation puts its trust in these, instead 
of its Maker, and is thus lifted up with pride and sclf-con- 
lidence, God v/ill make it "small" and "greatly despised" 
before the eyes of all men. 

7. The confederacies which one wicked nation makes 
with neighboring nations as wicked as itself, will in the 
end bring destruction instead of salvation. 2 Chron. 28:20. 

8, 9. When God purposes to destroy a nation for its sins, 
he conmionly removes from it the wise and prudent, and 
gives it over to weak and foolish counsels. 

10-lC. To rejoice over the calamities which befall our 
enemies is a heinous sin, which God will not suffer to go 
unpunished ; but when the wicked c.\ult in the sufferings 
which he sends upon his own jieople for their correction, 
and aggravate them by deeds of cruelty and perfidy, he 
will put to their lips the cup of wrath, and compel them 
to drink it to the dregs. Prov. 24:1.')-18. 

17-21. When God alllicts his covenant people, it is al- 
Avays for tlieir purification and salvation; in due time ho 
giants them, through Christ, a glorious deliverance from 
their troubles, and makes them victorious over all that 
hated aud i)urseciftcd them. 



1018 



JONAH. 



From 2 Kings 14 :25 wo learn that Jonah was of Gath-hcphcr, a town of the tribe of Zebulun in the 
north of Palestine. See Josh. 19 : 13, where Gittah-hepher is undoubtedly the same as Gath-hcphcr. We 
further learn from the same passage that he prophesied at least as early as the days of Jeroboam second, 
when Amos also flourished. Some place him at an earlier date, but of this there is no decisive proof. Of 
his personal history we know nothing beyond what is contained in the present book. Our Saviour com- 
l)arcs the event which befell him in his flight, to his own burial and resurrection. Matt. 12 : 39, 40. In 
like manner, his mission to Nineveh, then the head of the gentile world, seems to have been a sign of the 
future calling of the Gentiles. 



I!.' C.'iibout 862. C H A P 1 ti U I . 

1 Jon:ih, sent to Nineveli, fleeth to Lirshish. 4 He is overtaken by a 
tempest, 11 thrown into the sen, 17 and swallowed by a great tisli. 

NOW the word of the Lord came unto Jonah* 
tiie son of Amittai,'' saying, 

2 Arise, go to Nineveh," that great city, and cry 
against it ; for their wickedness is come up before 
me." 

3 But Jonah arose up to flee unto Tarshish from 
the presence of the Lord,'' and wont down to Jop- 
pa ;' and he found a sliip going to Tarshish : so he 
paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to 
go with them unto Tarshish from the presence of 
the Lord. 

4 1l But the Lord sent out* a great wind into 
the sea, and there was a mighty tempest in the 
sea.'' so that the ship was like* to be broken. 

5 Thea the mariners were afraid, and cried 
every man unto his god, and cast forth tiie wares 
tha^V were in the sliip into the sea, to lighten it of 
them.*-' But Jonah was gone down into the sides 
of the sliip ; and he lay, and was fast asleep. 

6 So the siiipmaster came to him, and said unto 
liim, What meanest thou, sleeper? arise, call 
upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon 
us, that we perish not. 

7 And they said every one to his fellow, Come, 
and let us cast lots, tiiat we may know for whose 



J JonaJ, Matt. 1S::!9. i -2 Kin;s 14:3.5. I> Gen. 10:11, 12 
sa. 1:19:7. eActs9:36. 1 Hcb. ca,«/or/A. f Psa. 107:2.3. 
e Acts •>7:18, etc. h Josh. 7; 14, IG; I Sam. 14:41, 42. 5 



CHAPTER L 

2. Nineveh, thiit great city; the capital of the Assyrian 
empire, which was then in the heiKht of its power. Its 
ruins, on the eastern bank of the Tigris, opposite to the 
modern Mosul, attest its ancient magnificence. Cry agaimt 
>t; he receiverl at this time his commission to foretell its 
overthrow. See chap. 3:2. 

3. Rose up lo fee ; see note on chap. 4:2. Joppa; now 
Yafa, on the Mediterranean. It lies north-west of Jerusa- 
lem, and is its port. Tarshish; in the south of Spain, 



cause this evil is upon us.'' So they cast lots, and 
the lot fell upon Jonah. 

8 Then said they unto him, Tell us, we pray thee, 
for whose cause this evil m upon us? Wliatw thine 
occupation? and whence comcst tiiou? what w thy 
country? and of what people art thou? 

9 And he said unto them, I am a Hebrew ; and 
I fear the Lord,'' the God of heaven, which hath 
made the sea and the dry /a7id.' 

10 Then were the men exceedingly afraid," and 
said unto him. Why hast thou done this? For the 
men knew that he fled from the presence of the 
Lord, because he had told them. 

11 *![ Then said they unto him. What shall we 
do unto thee, that the sea may be calm unto us?' 
for the sea wrought,* and was tempestuous.* 

12 And lie said unto them. Take me up, and cast 
nie forth into the sea; so shall the sea be calm 
unto you : for I know that for my sake this great 
tempest is upon you.' 

13 Nevertlieless the men rowed' hard to bring 
77 to the land; but they could not: for the sea 
wrought, and was tempestuous against them. 

14 Wherefore they cried unto the Lord, and 
said. We beseech thee, Lord, we beseech thee, 
let us not perish for this man's life, and lay not 
upon us innocent blood:" for thou, Lord, hast 
done as it pleased thee. 



HO VA H. 
IM. • Heb. 
Eccl. 9:13. 



I'sa. 146:fi I Heb. afraiil will, ureal ftar. T Heb. silenlfrom 
vent, t Or, firew more and more tempestuous. J Josh. 7:12; 
1 Heb. digged, t Drtit. 21 :8. 



north-west of the straits of Gibraltar. See note on Isa. 
23:1. 

S. For whose cause; probably, for what crime, and to 
wliom done? 

14. HorSt domas it pleased thee; they plead, in vindication 
of the act which they are about to do, the necessity laid 
upon them by the sovereign will of Jonah's God. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. The true servant of God should he prepared to go, not 
where he would choose to labor, V)ut where his Master 
1019 



J.-nih is rescued. 



JONAH III. 



. lie "odh to Kinciek. 



15 So they took up Jonali, and cast liim forth 
into the sea; and the sea ceased* from her raging. 

16 'JMien the men feared the Lord exceedingly," 
and offered a sacrifice* unto the Loi;u, and made 
vows.* 

17 1[ Now tlic LoiU) had prepared a great fisli to 
swallow up Jonah. And Jonaii was in the belly ^ 
of the lish three days and three nights.'' 

ciiArTKU n. 

1 The prayer of Jonah. 10 He is deiivereJ from the fish. 

'"I'^riEN Jonali i)rayed unto the Lord his God 
_l. out of the fish's belly, 

2 And said, 1 cried by reason of iiiiiio afilitition 
unto tli(! Loud, and he heard me;'' out of the belly 
of iieli,' cried I,'' and tliou heardest my voice." 

3 For thou hadst cast me into the deep,' in the 
midst* of the seas; and tiie Hoods compassed me 
about : all thy bi 1 lows and tiiy waves passed over me.^ 

4 Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight;'' yet 
I will look again toward thy iioly temple.' 

5 The watei's compassed me about, even to the 
Boul :' tlie depth closed me round about, the weeds 
■were wrapped about my head. 

6 I went down to the bottoms* of the mountains ; 
the earth witli her bars iceis about me for ever : vet 



• Hob 


slood. -I Isa. •.!(J:'Ji Acl.i .'i: 11. 


1 Hcb. mcrijicd a aum/irt. 1 llcb. 


voiced V 


ows. 1 Heb. boweh. b Matt. 


2:40. 1 Or, oul of. ' Psa. 1-J0:I ; 


l-:0:li 


..am. 3:.5.1, 50. 1 Or, the grav 


',• Isa. 14. U. d l>sa. 01:2. o l>sa. 


3l:l>. f 


I'sa. 8-:i-8. • Hfb. heart, e 


I'sa. 42:7. 1" I'sa. :)1:22. i 1 Kings 



sends )iim ; and faithfully to deliver God's messages in 
the sphere assigned to him. 

4. The way of duty is the only way of peace and safety. 
They who seek to escape trouble by ilisobcyiiig God's 
commands, plunge themselves into deeper trouble. 

5. When the believer has departed from the i)ath of 
obedience, God's judgments often overtake him in the 
midst of his insensibility and worldly security. 

6. In times of great peril, backsliders from God are 
generally the last to see and understand their situation. 
God sometimes employs even unconverted men to arouse 
them to a sense of their guilt and danger. 

10. A frank and hearty confession of sin is one of the 
marks by which a penitent believer may be distinguished 
from a hypocrite. 

12. The true child of God prefers to bear in his own 
person the calamities which his sins have occasioned, even 
to death itself, rather than that his fellow-men should suf- 
fer for them. 1 Chron. 21:17. 

14, 1'). The taking of human life is a most solemn act, 
and to be avoided as far as possible ; but when it becomes 
a plain duty, and is iierformed in the fear of God and in 
accordance with his revealed will, he will approve the 
transaction, and not reckon it to us as a sin. 

17. God, who brought again from the grave our Lord 
Jesus Clnist, is able to preserve the lives of his servants 
in all possible circumstances of peril ; and he will pre- 
serve them so far as is needful for his own glory, and the 
execution of his infinitely wise counsels. 

CIPAPTER IL 

4. Look df^ain; seldom or never does a good man fall 
into absolute despair. 

5. Even to the soul; to the taking away of my life, which 
must have perished but for God's miraculous preservation 
of it. 

6. For ever; (his expresses his feeling as he fell into 
the abyss, and was swallowed up by the fish. He con- 
sidered Iiimself as alre.irly in the lower world, whence 
there is no return. Yd ImM llioit hrnus^ht; here begins the 
language of confidi'iit faith; he speaks of his deliverance 
as already accomplishod. 

1020 



hast thou brought up my life from corrup- a. m snz. 
tion,*" Loud my God. '' U*'""' 

7 When my soul fainted within me I remember- 
ed the Loud : and my prayer came in unto thee, 
into tiiy holy temple.' 

8 They that observe lying vanities forsake their 
own mercy.'" 

9 But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice 
of thanksgiving ;" 1 will ]ia,y that that Ihave vowed. 
Halvation is of the LouD. 

10 1 And the Lord spake unto the fish," and it 
vomited out Jonah upon the dry land. 

(' II APT Ell III. 

1 Jonah, sent again, preachcth to tiic Ninevites. Ty Upon their repent- 
ance, 10 God .spareth tliim. 

AND the word of the Lord came unto Jonah 
the second time, saying, 

2 Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and 
preach unto it tlie preaching that I liid thee. 

3 So Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh, ac- 
cording to the word of tlie Lord. Now Nineveh 
was an exceeding greatcity'-of three days\journey. 

4 And Jouaii began to enter into the city a day's 
journey, and he cried, and said. Yet forty days, 
and Nineveh shall be overthrown.'' 



a:3S, M. J Psa. U9;l; Lam. 3:54. t Heb. ratling J o^ iOt, the pit. k li». 
3S:17. 1 I'sa. 1^:0. m 1 Sam. 12:21 ; 2 Kings 17:15. n INa. 51J:I4, 23; 
Rom. 12 1; Ilcb. 13:15. o Ua. 5U:2. I Heb. a city great of God; Gen. 

3U:H. p Jer. le:7-10. 



8. Lying vanities; all the vain confidences of those who 
forsake God, with allusion to his own conduct in fleeing 
from the Lord. ForsaJcc their own mercy; forsake God, the 
source of all mercy, and bring upon themselves his wrath. 

9. Jhit I; he speaks as one penitent and forgiven. Wilt 
sacrifice; that is, when restored to the dry land. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Affliction drives the erring child of God to earnest 
prayer and confession of sin. 

2-10. God can hear and answer prayer in the most 
desperate circumstances. The preservation of Jonah's 
life in the midst of deadly perils was infinitely easy to 
almighty power, and should encourage us to hope and 
])ray for a full deliverance from our trials upon repentance 
and confession, even though they may have been brought 
upon us by our sins. 

CHAPTER III. 

3. Of three daip' joxirueij ; probably, three days' journey 
in circuit; for this agrees with the account of the ancient 
historians, who assign to Nineveh acircuitof -ISO furlongs, 
and reckon 150 of these— about seventeen and a (quarter 
English miles — as a day's journey. This was, moreover, 
the usual mode of estimating the size of cities. Nineveh, 
like Babylon, enclosed within its walls much cultivated 
ground. 

4. A dai/s journeij; that is, probably, what ho could 
accomplish in a day, proclaiming his message as he pro- 
ceedetl. 

INSTHUCTIONS. 

3. In true believers, the sure fruit of aflliction is obedi- 
ence to (iod's word. I'sa. 110:07. 

!>. They who have grown up in ignorance uf God arc 
often ready to hear and obey the solemn messages of his 
word, which men educated tinder the light of revelation 
reject. Matt. 11:20-24; 14:21. 

7. When i)ublic calamities threaten a people, it is tlie 
duly of its rulers to acknowledge God's hand by the ap- 
poiiitmcnt of days for solemn lasting and prayer. In this 
respect, the example of the Ninevites is a rebuke to many 
communities that are called Christian. 

10. God is no respecter of persons. His mercy and lov- 



The Ninnitcs repent. 



JONAH IV. 



Jon.ih's mnrmuis reproved. 



A. M. 3H2. 5 ?[ So the people of Nineveh believed 
'862"°" God, and proclaimed a f;)st, and put on 
sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to tiie 
least of Ihcm. 

6 For word came iinto the king of Nineveh, and 
lie arose from his throne, and he laid his robe from 
him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in 
ashes. 

7 And ho caused it to be proclaimed and pub- 
lished' through Nineveh by the decree of the king 
and his nobles,* saying. Let neither man nor beast, 
herd. nor flock, taste any thing: let them not feed, 
nor drink water: 

8 But let man and beast be covered with sack- 
cloth, and cry mightily unto God:'" yea, let them 
turn every one from his evil way, and from the 
violence that is in their hands. 

9 Who can tell 7/ God will turn and repent, and 
turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish 
not ? 

10 "^ And God saw their works,'^ that they turned 
from their evil way;" and God repented of the 
evil, that he had said that he would do unto them ; 
and he did it not. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1 Jonah, repining at G-od's mercy- 4 is rep'-oved by the type of a gourd. 

T7)UT it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he 
3 was very angry. 

'J And he prayed unto the Loed, and said, I pray 
thr:^, Lord, was not this my saying, when I was 
yet ill my country ? Therefore I fled before unto 
Tarshish : for I knew that thou art a gracious God, 



• Heb. said, t Heb. great men. a Joel 2:1.5 10. b 1 Kings ■il-.-n. 39. 
'Lukr^ 11:32, d Jer. 20: 14-lf . 1 Or. Art thou greathj angri,.' i Or, pahn- 
crUt ; Heb. Kikajon. i Weh. rejoiced wUk great joy. 1 Or, silent. ' Or, 



ing-kindness extend to all nations, and he is ever ready to 
hear the prayer of the penitent, and forgive their trans- 
gressions. 

CHAPTER IV. 

2. Wc:< not this my saying — / knew that thou art a gracious 
God; according to some, he feared lest the event should 
falsify his prediction, and thus bring discredit upon him- 
self and the prophetical office. According to others, he 
rightly understood the design of the warning to be that 
the Niiievites might be brought to repentance, and thus 
saved from the impending destruction ; while he regarded 
them, ill common with all heathen nations, as the natural 
enemies of God's people, and unworthy of his mercy. The 
latter is the preferable view. Compare Acts 10:28, 45; 
1 1:2-1 S. 

4. Loest thou well to be angry J a severe rebul;o to his 
narrow-minded and uncharitable feelings. 

6. A gourd; a plant of the gourd family, which grows 
abundantly on the Tigris, and is trained at the present daj' 
to run over booths, that it may protect them from the 
scorching rays of the sun. 

8. A vehement east mind; which in that region is hot and 
suffocating. 

11. Cannot discern; the reference is to young children. 
The prophet would have God's mercy limited to his own 
covenant people ; but he is here shown that " the Lord is 
good to all ; and his tender mercies are over all his works." 
I'sa. 145:9. 

INSTRUCTIPXS. 

1. Even good men are sometimes displeased with the 
mercy which God shows to others, when they tiiink it will 



and merciful, slow lo anger, and of great kindness, 
and repentest thee of the evil. 

3 Therefore now, O Loun, take, I beseech thee, 
my life from me; for it is licttcr for me to dio 
than to live.'' 

4 "if Then said the Loud, Doost thou well to be 
angry ?* 

ri So Jonah went out of the city, and sat on the 
east side of the city, and there made liiiu a booth, 
and sat under it in the shadow, till he might sec 
what would become of the city. 

6 And the Lord God prepared a gourd," and 
made it to come up over Jonah, that it might be a 
shadow over his head, to deliver him from his grief. 
So Jonah was exceeding glad ' of the gourd. 

7 But God prepared a worm when the morning 
rose the next day, and it smote the gourd that it 
withered. 

8 And it came to pass, when the sun did arise, 
that God prepared a vehement' cast wind; and 
the sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that lie 
fainted, and wished in himself to die, and said. It 
i.i better for me to dio than to live. 

9 And God said to Jonah, Doest thou well to be 
angry* for the gourd '! And he said, 1 do well to 
be angrv,* even unto death. 

10 Then said the Lord, Thou hast had pity on* 
the gourd, for the which thou hast not labored, 
neither niadest it grow; which came up in a 
night,* and perished in a night: 

11 And should not 1 spare Nineveh, that great 
city, wherein are more than sixscore thousand per- 
sons that cannot discern between their right hand 
and their left hand; and also much cattle? 



Art thou greattij angrij? t Or, / < 
was the son of the night. 



Or, spared, i Iltb. 



operate to their own injury, or that of their country or 
party ; but all such feelings are narrow, selfish, and abom- 
inable in God's sight. It should be our earnest endeavor 
to stand on the gospel platform of love and good-will 
towards all men, being ever ready to rejoice in the true 
spiritual increase of others, though it may be the occasion 
of our outward decrease. 

3. As long as we are willing humbly to serve God in 
the sphere which he has assigned us, we have no occasion 
to pray that he would take away our life. From the ex- 
ample of Jonah, we see that it is only a discuntented and 
rebellious spirit which leads men to desire death before 
the appointed time. 

4. God's forbearance with his servants in their way- 
wardness and folly is unspeakable. Because he is God 
and not man he does not consume them, but kindly and 
patiently leads them to a knowledge of their unreason- 
ableness and of his infinite.goodncss. 

9. Jonah was greatly afflicted at the loss of his gourd, 
but he had no pity for the mightj' city of Nineveli. Here 
we see, as in a mirror, the malignant and. debasing nature 
of sin. It h^ads men to exalt their own private interests 
above the life and welfare of their fellow-men. 

11. How humiliating to the great men of Nineveh was 
the reason which God assigned for sparing their city ! 
Not for their sake did he have pity upon Nineveh, but 
for the sake of the unoffending children and cattle within 
its walls. Were he now to proclaim, in like manner, the 
grounds of his forbearance with the wicked cities of our 
day, the proud and self-confident who throng their streets 
would find tliat they are spared for the sake of those whom 
they despise as greatly inferior to themselves. 



1021 



MTCAII. 



MiCAn is called the Morasthite, probably because lie was a native of Morcsheth-gatli, a town south-west 
of Jerusalem, near the border of the Philistine territory. From the date given in chap. 1 :1, we learn that 
he was contemporary with Isaiah. It is generally thought that this book contains only a summary of his 
prophecies, which were addressed chiefly to the people of Judah. Besides one remarkable passage which 
is common to him with Isaiah — chap. 4:1-3, compared with Isa. 2:2-4 — there is a general agreement 
between the two prophets in their representations of the moral condition of the people ; and especially in 
the manner in which they perpetually mingle stern rebukes and tlu'catenings with glorious promises relat- 
ing to the Messiah and his kingdom. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 Micah showeth llie wr.Ttli of G-od ag.ainst Jacob for idolatry. 10 He 
exhortctli to mourning. 

''T^HE word of tlie Loud tliat came to Micah the 

1 Morasthite in tlic days of Jothara, AJiaz, and 
Ilezeliiah, kings of Judali, which lie saw concern- 
ing Samaria and Jerusalem." 

2 Hear, all yc peoph;;" hearken, earth,'' and 
all that therein is:* and let the Lord God he wit- 
iic.<r^ against you,"' the Lord from his lioly temple. 

3 For behold, the Lord cometh forth out of liis 
place, and will come down, and tread upon the 
high places of the cartli. 

4 And the mountains shall be molten under liini, 
and the valleys shall be cleft, as wa.\ before the 
fire, and as the waters t/ial are poured down a 
steep place.* 

5 For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and 
for the sins of the house of Israel.'' What m tiic 
transgression of Jacob? is it not Samaria? and 
what are the high places of Judah ? are they not 
Jerusalem ? 



«Jer. 21:18. • Heb. yt people, all of lliem. bjga. 1:2. 1 Heb. the fulness 
thereof. « P«a. 50:7. I \Ub. desanl. J Lam. 5:10. i lleh. daughters of 
the owl. I Or, she is grievously sirk of her wounds, c 2 Kings 18:13. 

CHAPTER L 

2. Be witness a^ain.st you; that is, by his judgments upon 
you. Compani Mai. 3:5. j 

6. Is it not Samaria ? is not Pamaria its chief seat and 
centre ? bi tlio same way is the ioUowinj; clause, " ."Vre 
they not .lerusalom ?" to be explained. The hi/r/i places nf 
Judali; high places for the worship of idols. Num. 22: 11, 
otc. 

C. Samaria; tlic capital city of the kingdom of Israel, 
lying on a beautiful liill surrotindod liy higher hills. Tlie 
threatening coiitairie<l in tliis wnse liiis been literally ful- 
filled. The hill itself is ciiltivat.Ml at the i)rc8ent day, and 
all its ancient foundations have been cast <lown into the 
Burroiniding valley, or carried away. 

7. Hires; wages of prostitnl ion, meaning the treasures 
accumulated by the idolatrous city, idolatry being spirit- 
ual fornication. She /gathered it; rather, "gathered tbem ;" 
that is, all the things that have been enumerated. Tlicij 

1023 



6 Therefore T will make Samaria as a a m. ssm. 
heap ol the iieJd, and a.-; planting,-; ol a vine- vm. 
yard : and 1 will ]>our down the stones thereof into 
the valley, and I will discover -the foundations 
thereof. 

7 And all the graven images thereof shall be 
beaten to ])ieccs, and all the hires thereof sh:ill be 
burned with tiic fire, and all the idols thereof will I 
lay desolate : for she gathered it of the hi re of a har- 
lot, and they shall return to the hire of a harlot. 

8 Therefore I will wail and howl, I will go 
stripped and naked : I will make a wailing like 
the dragons, and mourning as the owls.^ 

9 For iier wound is incurable;' for it is come 
unto Judah; he is come unto the gate of my peo- 
ple, even to Jerusalem." 

10 "i Declare ye it not at Gath, weep ye not at 
all: in tliehouscof Aplirah'' roll thyself in the dust. 

11 Pass ye away, thou inhabitant* of Sapliir,* 
having thy sliamc naked: the iiiJiabitant of Zaa- 
nan' came not i'ortii in the mourning of ikth-czel :' 
he shall receive of vou his standing. 



1 That is. /)«,<(. ■ Hcb. inhabitress. 
The country of flocks, f Or, A place : 



1 Or, thou thai diMllal fairly. I Or. 



shall return; all these possessions shall return ; they shall 
fall into the hands of other idolaters — the Assyrians — to 
be used as she has used them. 

8. I will wail; the prophet speaks in the name of his 
people. Drafrons; see note to Isa. l.'):22. 

9. Her wouTul; the wound inlliclod upon God's peoplu 
by the Assyrian invasion, which, alKT overrunning Israel. 
comes to .ludah. 

10. Declare yc tt not ; tell not this calamity of my people, 
f'ompare 2 Sam. 1:20. Galh ; a city of the Philistines. 
The prophet names several places to which the invadiii;: 
army shall come, always with an allusion to their nieati- 
ing "or sound in the original, which cannot be given in 
English. t 

11. Pass ye awaij; that is, flee before the invaders. Tht 
inhabitant of Zaaiian — his sinndins; ; or, the inhabitint of 
Zaanan wont not forth (IVnin fear of the invading enemy:] 
the mourning of lieth-ezil shall take from you lye inhabi- 
tants of Zaatmn] its standing: in other words, the mourning 



Tht u-ralk of God 



MICAII 11. 



asainst Jccoh. 



ucS ^'^ ■^°''' *'^^ iiilialiiiaiit of Marotli -waited 
750. carefully* for good: but evil came down 
from the Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem. 

13 tiiou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the char- 
iot to the swift beast: she is the beginning of the 
sin to the daughter of Zion : for the transgres- 
sions of Israel were found in thee. 

14 Therefore shalt thou give presents to^ More- 
sheth-gath: the houses of Achzib* shall be a lie to 
the kings of Israel. 

15 Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, inhab- 
itant of Mareshah : he shall come unto Adullam 
the glory of Israel.^ 

16 Make thee bald, and poll thee for thy deli- 
cate children i" enlarge thy baldness as the eagle ; 
for they arc gone into captivity from thee. 



CHAPTER II. 

1 Against oppression. 4 A lamentation. 7 A reproof of injustice and 
idolatry. Vi A promise of restoring Jacob. 

TT ^''OE to them that devise iniquity, and work 
VV evil upon their beds!'' when the morning 
is liglit, tlu\v practise it, because it is in the power 
of their hand. 

2 And they covet fields, and take fhem by vio- 
lence; and houses, and take Ihem away: so they 
oppress ' a man and his house, even a man and his 
heritage. 

3 Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, against 
this family do I devise au evil, from which ye shall 
not remove your necks ; neither shall ye go haugh- 
tily : for this time is evil.'^ 



•Or,tmsgrin-td. t Or,/or. 1 Tliat is, .4 i/e. i Or, the glory of Israel shall 
nme,a<i. » Lim. 4;5-'?. bHos.7:0. tOc.cle/raud. = Amos 5: 13. II Heb. 
lamenlatioH of lamentations. ' Or. instead of restoring, d Psa. 16:6; Hos. 
9:3. t Or, Prop/iery not ajs tkey prophesy ; Ueb. Drop; Ezek. 20:46. I Or, 



of Beth-czel shall become deeply seated, while its people 
behold the calamities which the invaders have brought 
upon you, in anticipation that their turn will come next. 
There is in the original an allusion to the meaning of 
Beth-ezel ; that is, house, or place of firm root. 

13. Lachish; in the plain of the Mediterranean, south- 
east from Jerusalem. See 2 Kings 18:14; Isa. 36:2. The 
beginning of the sin to the daughter of Zion; a leader to 
Judah in introducing "the trangressions of Israel;" that 
is, the idolatrous practices of Israel. 

14. Give presents to Moresheth-gath; better, "give a re- 
lease upon Moresheth-gath ;'' that is, resign thy right to it. 
Achzib; that is, lie ; a town on the sea-coast, north of Car- 
inel. Sliall be a lie — Israel ; shall disappoint their hopes. 

15. An heir; a conqueror who shall possess himself of 
thee. Mareshah, as well as Adullam, lay in the plain of 
Judah, snuth-west from Jerusalem. 

16. Po!t thee; cut off thy hair, as a sign of grief. As the 
eagle; which sheds its feathers in the spring, unless the 
reference be to the bald-eagle. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2-4. Two things should be firmly established in our 
belief: first, that when men persist in sin, God will not 
let them go unpunished ; secondly, that when he comes to 
punish them, they will not be able either to escape or 
endure his wrath. This is as true of communities and 
individuals now, as it was in the days of Micah. 

5-9. The capital cities of states and nations ought to 
be centrt?s of religious influence. When, instead of this, 
they become centres of corruption and wickedness, God 
will make their punishment as conspicuous as their crimes. 

10-16. The utter desolation of the Holy Land by the 
Assyrians and Chaldeans, and afterwards by the Romans, 
is set forth as a warning to the world in all ages. It 



4 1 In that day shall one take up a parable 
against you, and lament with a doleful lamenta- 
tion,' and say. We be utterly spoiled : he hath 
changed the portion of my people: how hatli he 
removed it from me! turning away' he hath di- 
vided our fields. 

5 Therefore thou shalt have none that shall cast 
a cord by lot in the congregation of the Lord.'' 

(J Prophesy ye not, say they to ihem that prophe- 
sy:* they sliall not prophesy to them, t/iat they 
shall not take shame. 

7 II thou that art named The house of Jacob, is 
the Spirit of the Lord straitened?* are these his 
doings ?= do not my words do good to him that 
walketh uprightly ?^'' 

8 Even of late' my people is risen up as an ene- 
my: yc pull oS' the robe witlr the garment from 
them that pass by securely as men averse from war. 

9 The women* of my people have ye cast out 
from their pleasant houses; from their children 
have ye taken away my glory for ever. 

10 Arise yc, and depart ; for this is not your rest : 
because it is polluted,'^ it shall destroy you, even 
with a sore destruction. 

11 If a man walking in the spirit and falsehood 
do lie,* saying, I will jirophesy unto thee of wine 
and of strong drink ; he sliall even be the prophet 
of this people. 

12^1 will surely assemble, Jacob, all of thee ; 
I will surely gather the remnant of Israel ; I will 
put them together as the sheep of Bozrah, as the 
flock in the midst of their fold : they shall makt^ 
great noise by reason of the multitude of men. 



shortened, e Isa. 59:1,2. i Heh. upright, f Hos. 14:9. I Heh. ye.'iterday. 
% Heb. over against. • Or, wives. S LeT. 19:25, 23. 1 Or, walk with, the 
iL'ind, and lie falsely. 



teaches nations that righteousness is the only road to true 
prosperity, and shows the visible church of God that her 
unfaithfulness will be visited with the severest judgments. 

CHAPTER II 

I. Work evil ; lay evil plans. 

3. Do I devise; since they devise iniquity, God devises 
evil against them. 

4. He hath changed the portion of my people ; God has taken 
from his people their inheritance and given it to the hea- 
then. Turning away; that is, alienating from us. 

5. Thou; Israel and Judah. None that shall cast a cord 
by lot ; an allusion to the original division of the land by 
lot. The land shall be taken from them, so that they can 
no more divide it among themselves. 

6. Say they ; the people say to the true prophets. That 
they shall not take shame; or, "shame shall not depart;" 
that is, since they will not hear God's prophets, he will 
give them up to ignominy. 

7. Arcthe.se his doings? are these threatenings the things 
in which he delights ? do not your sins force him to utter 
them? Compare 1 Kings 18:17, 18; 21:20. 

9. My glory ; literally, "my ornament;" that is, the pos- 
sessions wherewith I, as their coveuantGod, have honored 
them. 

10. Depart; out of this land into captivity. Is not your 
rest ; shall not be your resting-place. 

II. Of wine — strong drink; promising the people an 
abundance of these. 

12. Itmlt surely assemble; a sudden transition from threat- 
ening to promise, after the maimer of the prophets. Com- 
pare chap. 4:1 with the last verse of the preceding chap- 
ter; also Isa. 4:2; 9:1,2; Jer. 30:16; Hosea2:14; 14:1; 
and other like passages. All of thee; that is, all the rem- 
1023 



Evil princes and prophets. 



MICAII IV. 



13 Tlie breaker is come up before llicm : lliey 
have broken uj), and liave passed throiigli the pate, 
and are jrone out by it; and tlieir kinir sliall pass 
before tlieni, and the Loud on tin; heail of them." 

CHAPTER HI. 

] The cruelty of the princes. •'> The falseliooil of the prophets. S The 
security of thciii both. 

A ND I said, Hear, 1 pray you, heads of Ja- 
Jrx. cob, and ye princes of the house of Israel: 
/i" it not for you to know judgment? 

2 Who hate tlie good, and hive the evil ; who 
pluck otT their skin from of!" them, and their flesh 
from oil" tlieir bones; 

3 Who also eat the flesh of my peojde, and flay 
their skin from olT tiiem ; and t!i(>y break their 
bones, and elio]) them in jiieces, as for tlic pot, and 
as flesh within the caldron. 

4 Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will 
not hear them:'' he will even hide his face from 
them at that time, as they liave behaved them- 
selves ill in their doings. 

5 II Thus saitli the Jjord concerning the proph- 
ets that make my people err, that l)ite with their 
teeth, and cry, Peace ;" and he that putteth not into 
their mouths, they even prepare war against him: 

6 Therefore night shall be unto you, that yc shall 
not have a vision ;* and it sliall Ik; dark unto you, 
that ye shall not divine;* and the sun shall go 
down over the i)rophcts, and the day shall lie dark 
over them. 



Glory of Christ's charch. 



• Isi. 5J:ia. b Prov. l:-a. c Kz^k. 13: 10, etc. • llch. from a vision. 
t Hab./rom divining. 1 Hcb. upperlip. d l,cv. 13:1.0. c Psa. 71:U; Amos 
■i-.tl. t Mark 3:17. 5 Isa. 58:1. 1 lleb. Uood.f. h Jcr. 2-i:13. i Mai. 



nant of Jacob, as is immediately exjilained. Bozrah; a 
chief city of the land of Edom. Some assume two Boz- 
rahs, one of Edom south-east of the Dead sea, the oilier 
of Moab in the llauran on the bordcia of the Arabian 
doBCrt. Serf note on Jcr. 48:24. Others think that the 
latter is in all cases the Bozrah of Scripture. 

13. The hrealccr ; he who lircalcs in pieces the enemies 
of Israel. Jicfnrc Ihcnt ; hc.foru God's \icop\ii. TI>cg/itc;o{ 
the hostile city, whore they have been hold in bondage. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The plana that occupy men's minds at nipjht upon 
their beds are a good test of character. They who perform 
a wicked act " because it is in the power of their hand," 
have neither fear of Cod nor love of justice ; and will 
nommit aily crime when opportunity offers. 

2-5. Oppression and robbery never profit those who 
practise them. God's curse is upon unrighteous gain of 
every kind. In the lieginniiig it may promise much good ; 
but in the end fJod will spoil its possessors, and they will 
have none to help thnrn. 

6,7,11. The upright love God's words, and by believ- 
ing anil obeying them are made prospiuous anil hajipy ; 
while' they who lovo and iiraetiso iniiiuity choose for 
religious teacher.i men like themselves, who will not dis- 
turb tlieir consciences by a faithful exhibition of their 
sins, but will ratlier countenance their excuses, and flatter 
thorn with promises of impunity only to ilestroy them. 

12, 13. In all the calamities wliich God inllicts U))oii his 
visible church for her sins, he is evir ndndful of llie 
pious " remnant of Israel ;" and will so order the course 
of his providence that this remnant shall be ]>reserved and 
increased from ago to age, till the kingdoms of this world 
bncomo the kingdoms of Ghrist. 

CITAPTKR 111. 

2. Their skin; the skin of my people ; a figurativi- de- 
Boription of cruel onproasion and rol.l.erv. 

"1024 



7 Tlieti shall the seers be ashamed, and '*i," .'ft'r 
the diviners confounded: yea, they shall all cover 
their lips;''' for there is no answer of God."" 

8 1i J]ut truly I am full of power liy the i^pirit 
of the L(iui),' and of judgment, and of might, to 
declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Is- 
rael his sin.'-' 

U Hear tliis, I pray you, ye heads of the house 
of .Jacob, and princes of the house of Israel, that 
abhor judgment, and pervert all equity. 

10 'i'iiey luiild up Zion with blood,' and Jerusa- 
lem witli inic(uity.'' 

11 'i'he heads thereof judge for reward, and the 
priests thereof teach for liire, and the pro|)hets 
thereof divine for money :' yet will they lean upon 
the LoKD, and say,' Is not the Loud among us ?' 
none evil can come upon us. 

12 TJierefore shall Zion for your sake be plough- 
ed a.i a held, and Jerusalem shall become heaps,'' 
and the mountain of the house as the high places 
of the forest.' 

CHAPTER IV. 

1 The ylory, .3 peace, 8 Idngtlom, 11 and victory of the church. 

I^UT in the last days it shall come to pass, that 
) the mountain of the house of the Loud shall 
lie establi.«lied in the top of the mountains,'" and it 
shall be exalted above the hills; and people shall 
flow unto it." 

2 And many nations shall come, and say. Come, 
and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and 



1:10; 1 Pet. 5:'J. \ Hoh. saying . j Matt. 3:9; Rom. 3: 17, etc. kPs».:9:l. 
1 Psa. 107:31. m I'sa. 72: 10. ' Isa. a:a, etc. ; Ezek. 17:2-.'-a4. 



4. Then ; in the time of their calamity, which has been 
foretold, chap. 2 : 10, and is again brought to view in verses 
(i. 7, 12. 

.5. T/iat hilc — and cry. Pence; that is, prophesy peace to 
him who will supply their mouths with food. 

C. Night ahalt be unto you — not hare a vision; God will 
so expose their falsehood, that their pretended visions 
shall cease, 'fhis ho did by his judgments, in direct 
o]iposition to their prophecies of peace. Compare Jer. 
;37:1!). 

7. Cover their I ip.i; or, " beard," as a sign of mourning. 
See note to Ezck. 21:17. 

8. Hut truly 1 am full of poiccr by the Spirit of the Lord ; 
the projihet contrasts his spirit and messages with lliose 
of the false prophets. 

12. lie ploughed as afield; this awful threatening was 
fulfilled by the Cluddeans, and more fully by the Bomans. 
who destroyed the city to its very foundations. The moun- 
tain of the house; Moriali, on which the tomjile stood. 
INSTRUCTION. 

Corrupt rulers and corrupt leachora generally go to- 
gether, and they strengthen each other in wicketlness. 
When they who are appointed to iidminister justice to 
the people think only of phiiuliring them, and when they 
whose office it is to rebuke sin llatler all who will feed 
them plentifidly, wo have the state of society described 
by the pro|diet in this chapter, and may know that terri- 
ble c;ilamitie!'. are at hand — calamities for which tlod will 
hold the rulers and teachers ivsponsilde, who liave turned 
ju.stiie into robbery, and truth into falsidiood. But even 
in such dark times (jod will r;iise up some bohl re|irover8 
of sin, whoso labors in behalf of truth and rightdousnoss 
shall not be in vain, 

CIFAPTER IV, 

1-4. Itut 1)1 the last days it shall come topa.is; see notes on 
Isa. 2:2-1. 



El'ii iigcUcal fredictinns. 



MTCAH V 



Birth vf Christ. 



nr' T'lf to the house of the God of Jacob ; and lie 
will teach us of his ways, and wc will walk in his 
paths:" for the law shall go ibrlli of Zion, and 
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. 

;5 11 And he shall judge among many peo[)le, and 
rebuke strong nations afar oft'; and they shall beat 
their swords into ploughshares, and their spears 
into pruning-hooks:* nation shall not lift up a 
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war 
any more.'' 

-I J)Ut they shall sit every man under Ins vine 
antl under his fig-tree;'' and none shall make Uwm 
afraid: for the mouth of the LoRi> of hosts hath 
spoken it. 

5 For all people will walk every one in the name 
of his god,'' and av(> will walk in the name of the 
LoiU) our (!od for ever and ever.'' 

t) In that day. saith the Lord, will I assendile 
her that halteth,'' and I will gather her that is 
driven out,^' and her that I have afiflieted ;'' 

7 And I will make her that halted a remnant, 
and her that was cast far off a strong nation : and 
tli(' Lord shall reign over them in mount Zion from 
henceforth, even for ever.' 

S 1i And thou, tower of the flock.'' the strong- 
hold of the daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it 
come, oven the first dominion;'' the kingdom shall 
come to the daughter of Jerusalem. 

9 Now why dost thou cry out aloud ? is there no 
king in thee?' is thy counsellor perished? for 
pangs have taken thee as a woman in travail. 



1 II 


)S. 0:3. 


• Or. sci/lhes. 


!• Psa 


7-2-7 


c 1 


Kinps 


4:2.5 


i Zech 


3: 


10. 


•1 .I.r. 


■i:\\. e 


Zech. 10:12; Col. 


•.Mi. 


( Psa. I 


S:17 


Heb. 


)2:l 


J. 13. 




sa. 


1-1- ■,■ 


hEze 


i. 34:13-17; Zeph 


:Mi; 


i Isa. 


!l:li, 


7; [>!i 


n 7 


M. -27 


1, 


ike 


!:3:J; 


Rev. a 


15. 10r,Edar; 


Gen. 


35:81. 


Jj'sa 


4.^;1- 


,13 


kRcv 


.2- 


:a. 



r>. All people will walk — we will walk ; wliilc the heathen 
follow tlieir blind superstitions, we will iKmvl- to our cov- 
enant God. 

jiii]i;u'od to a feeble and Kcattered flock. 

its (he true cliurch of God from age to age. 

' billing nation; a remnant whence shall 



(;. Her; Zion, 

Zionhcrc r(|iri\ 

7. -■/ rem.unil 



spnn;,' a siiihil; 

S. Tairer Kjilu 
7. The first ilnm 

'.). n1, II (tost III, 



■ //(.( /. ,' /ion, the citadel of God's flock, verse 
iiiiiiii; the supreme dominion, verses 1-3. 
Ill cry out — is tliij counsellor perished t thouj^h 
the dominion shall 'bo given to Zion "in the last days," 
she must in the mean time pass through a period of humil- 
iation for her sins, without king or counsellor. 

10. Be in pain; irntil the coming of the Messiah, Zion is 
as a woman in travail ; that is, she is in a depressed and 
suiiering state, anxiously waiting for her promised Re- 
deemer. See chap. 5:3; and compare Rev. 12:2. Out of 
the city; out of Jerusalem into captivity. Go even to Bab- 
ylon — be delivered; a remarkable prophecy of the Baby- 
lonish captivity, and subsequent deliverance of God's 
peoide. 

11. Jjinkupon Zion; look with delight upon her humili- 
ation. 

12. Knoti: not the thoughts of the Lord — he shall gather Ihnii ; 
here, as often elsewliere, God declares that bis ]iiiipiisr, 
in allowing the nations to assemble against '/Ann. is llicir 
own destruction. Compare Isa. 29:7, 8; Ezek. 38:14-23; 
Joel 3:12-16; Zech. 12:2-4. As the sheaves into the floor; 
the assembled nations are compared to sheaves gathered 
into the threshing-floor, and Zion is exhorted to arise and 
thresh them. 

13. Thy horn — thy hoofs; an allusion to the practice of 
thrcshhig wheat Ijy driving oxen over it. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. For the sins of God's ancient people, the literal Zion 
has long been " trodden down of the Gentiles ;" but God 
65 



jORD, 
shall 



lor I 



10 Be in pain, and labor to bring forth, daugh- 
terof Zion, like a woman in travail :'" for now shall 
thou go forth out of the city, and thou shall dwell 
in the field, and tliou shnit go even to Babylon; 
there slialt thou be delivered;" there the Lord 
shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies. 

11 II Now also many nations are gathered against 
thee," that say. Let her be di^lilcd, and let our eye 
look upon Zion.'' 

12 lint they know not the thoughts of tin 
neither tuidcrstand they his counsel :'' for I 
gather them as the slicaves into the floor.'' 

13 Arise and thresh, () daughter of Zion 
will make thy horn iron, and I will make thy 
hoofs lirass:' and thou slialt beat in pieces many 
people:" and I will consecrate their gain unto the 
Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the 
whole earth. 

C n \ V T E I! V . 

1 The birtli of Christ. 4 lbs kingdom. 8 His conquest 

NOW gather thyself in troops, daughter of 
troops: he hatli hiid siege against us: they 
shall smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon 
the cheek.'' 

2 But thou, Beth-lehciu Ephratah, thovgh thou 
be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of 
thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler 
in Israel;'" whose goings forth have been from of 
old, from everlasting.''' 



1 Jer. 8: 


9. 


mTs 


a. 6S:7 


8. n 


Hos. 


1:10 




■> 


,:im 


., 


in. 


V 


Obail. 


2. qTsa. 


5.-,:S; Je 


r I'd 


U 


Rom 


ii::i;i 


:)4. 


rLl 


ke 


3 


17. 


9 


Isa 


41 


I.'"), 16. 


1 Deut. 


33:25. 


>i Da 


™. 2:44. > 


Matt. 


■.i7:)(: 


w 


ti 


n 


4il 


10 


Matt 


2:(i. 


Hcb. the 


days of 




ty. 


«Prov. b:2-. 


.'•i'i; 


lohi 


1 


1 


Uc 


1. 


:17 









has been ever mindful of his spiritual Zion, and he will, 
at the appointed time, give her dominion over all the earth. 

3. The prevalence of Christian jirinciples among the 
nations of the earth will put an end (o the custom of war; 
and this is the only w:iy in wliiih we can hope for its 
abolition. 

4. 'When the fear and love of (iod shall prevail among 
all nations, they will enjoy perpetual quiet and prosper- 
ity. 

0. 7. With God, it is alike easy to abase those who are 
in high stations for their sins, and to exalt the lowly in 
spirit. However depressed may be the condition of his 
people, if they look to him in penitence and faith, he will 
grant them a gracious deliverance and enlargement. 

8-10. Though the history of God's church is one of per- 
petual conflict, the eml shall be redemption from the hand 
of all her enemies ; for " the kingdom shall come to the 
daughter of Jerusalem." 

11-13. When God afflicts his people, their enemies re- 
joice ; not understanding that he is thus purifying them 
'from sin, and preparing the way for their triumph over 
those who hate and persecute tliom. 

CHAPTER V. 

1. Now gather thyself; Zion is exhorted to prepare for 
times of trouble. Though God will grant her a final vic- 
tory over all her foes, he will, in the iii(;inliiiii . chastise 
her for her sins, verse 3. Daughter of li-""ii-< ; lli:ii i-;, mis- 
tress of ti'oops. Zion is addressed umlcr Ihr li;.;\ue of a 
military city. He hath laid; the enemy, to whom there is 
reference, verse 3. The judge of Israel; the chief ruler, 
who represents the whole people. 

2. Beth-lehem Ephratah ; Ephratah, or Ephrath, was the 
ancient name of Reth-lchem, Gen. 48:7, a small village 
five or six miles south of Jerusalem. Thousands ; that is, 
families, or divisions of tribes ; probably so called from 

1025 



The Messiah's conquests. 



MK'AH VI, 



GocTs controversy xrlth Judtih. 



3 Thercforo will he give thorn up, until the time 
that she which travuileth hath brought forth : then 
the remnant of his brethren shall return unto the 
children of Israel. 

4 ' And he shall stand and feed" in the strength 
of the Lord, in the majesty of the name of the 
Loud his God; and they sliall abide: for now 
shall lie be great unto the ends of the earth. 

5 And this man shall be the jieaee, when the 
Assyrian shall come into our land :" and when he 
shall tread inour])alaces,thcnshall we raise against 
him seven slieplun-ds, and eight principal^ men. 

6 And they sliall waste* the land of Assyriawith 
the sword, and the land of Nimrod in the entrances 
thereof:^ thus shall he deliver us from the Assyr- 
ian, when he eometh into our land, and when he 
treadeth within our borders. '' 

7 And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst 
of many people as a dew from the Lord, as the show- 
ers upon the grass,"" that tarrieth not for man, nor 
waiteth for the sons of men. 

8 IT And the remnant of Jacob shall be among 
the Gentiles in the midst of many people, as a lion 
among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion 
among the flocks of sheep:- who, if he go through, 
both treadeth down, and teareth in pieces, and 
none can deliver. 

9 Thy hand shall be lifted up upon thine adver- 
saries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off. 



• Or. rule. » Ztch. 9:10; Kpli. 2:11. t Ueb. princisof. 1 Heb. tal 
up. i Or. with htr own naked. 'words, b Luke 1 :7.|. « Dcut. 3-'::;. I Or, 
eoat.t. i Lsi. i-.a, S; Rev. :i.':l5. e Zecli. 13;v.>. 1 Or, slalitts. • Or, 



the average number of men belonging to tlicm. See Num. 
10:t; Jcsh. 22:14-21; Judg. 0:15, margin, etc. Shall he 
come forth; the Messiah, Matt. 2:6 ; Jolm 7: -12. The quo- 
tation in Matthew gives tlic first part of this verse, with 
free variations not affecting its general meaning. Whose 
goings forth— from everlasting ; these words assert the eter- 
nity of the Messiah. The opening words of Jolm's gospel 
arc the best commentary on them. 

3. Therefore; in accordance with God's purpose, inti- 
mated in chap. 4:9-11. Give them xip; leave them, that i.s, 
the covenant people, in a depressed condition. She which 
travaileth; sec Isa. 7:14. The remnant of his brethren; tlie 
scattered remnant of the Messiah's people. For the mean- 
ing of tlicse words, see John 11:52. 

4. He sliall stand; the Messiah. They shall abide; his 
people sliall abide safely under his rule. 

5. And this man — then shall we raise; a preferable point- 
ing of this verse is the following: " And this man shall be 
the peace. When the Assyrian shall come into our land, 
and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we 
raise," etc. T/ie peace; before his advent the pledge of 
peace, and the bestowor of it afterwards. TItc Assyrian; 
the Assyrian is here the representative of Zion's enemies 
in all coming ages. Seven — eight; a Hebrew mode of ex- 
pressing riiliicts. Compare Eccl. 11:2, and note on Prov. 
6:1G. Principal men; literally, " anointed of men." These, 
with the slR-plicrds, represent the helpers whom (ioil 
raises up for Zion. 

6. T/ie /«)irf (/i'Vimroci; another name for Assyria. Gen. 
10: 11, margin. 

7. At a lie w from the Lord; these words describe (he 
benign influence of the gospel as carried by the Jews 
among the Gentiles. Tlint tarrieth not for man ; that springs 
np by the divine blessing without man's help. For tlie 
idea, comii.ire Mark 4 : 2(1-28. 

8. S'lall he — as a lion ; that is, shall overcome and destroy 
all the enemies of Zion. 

10. In that day; the day of chastisement already de- 
scribed, which lias for its object the purification of Zion. 
1026 



10 And it shall come to pass in that day, ^iv',"??;!: 
saith the Lord, that I will cut off thy horses out 
of the midst of thee, and 1 will destroy thy char- 
iots : 

11 And I will cut olV the cities of thy land, and 
throw down all thy strong-holds: 

12 And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thy hand ; 
and thou shalt have no more soothsayers:'' 

13 Thy graven images also will 1 cut off,'' and 
thy st;uiding images'^ out of the midst of thee ; and 
thou shalt no more worship the work of thy hands. 

1-1 And I will ]iluck up thy groves out of the 
midst of thee: so Avill I destroy thy cities." 

1.5 And I will execute vengeance in anger and 
fury upon the; hi;athen,' such as they have not heard. 



CHAPTER VI. 

1 God's controversy for unkindncss, for ignor.tncc, 10 for injustice, 16 
and for idolatry. 

jyEAR ye now what the Lord saith ; Arise, 
contend thou before* the mountains, and let 
the hills hear thy voice.'' 

2 Hear ye, mountains, the Lord's controversy, 
and ye strong foundations of the earth : for the 
Lord hath a controversy with his people,'' and he 
will jilead with Israel. 

3 O my people, what have I done unto thee? and 
wherein have I wearied thee'?' testify against me. 

enemies. (2Thess.l:S. t Or, toK/i. » Ezek. 36:1, S. bHos.4:l. i Jer. 



and ends in her enlargement and the destruction of all her 
foes. The prophet then enumerates the vain confidences 
of the people, which shall l)e desti-oyed by God's judg- 
ments. Compare the very similar passage, Isa. 2:12-21. 
IXSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The Saviour of the world had his birth in a feeble 
village, and he was brought up in a despised town of 
Galilee. Thus God, in the very beginning of the gospel, 
taught his church to rely not on worldly rank and splen- 
dor, but on the power of his Spirit. 

3. (lod prepared his church for the coming of Christ by 
a long period of humiliation ; and then it was only the 
remnant of humble Israelites that received him. Through 
pride the Jews as a nation rejected him, and thus •• tJio 
kingdom of God " passed from them to the Gentiles. Malt. 
21:43. 

•t-9. In the gift of his Son Jesus Christ, God has given 
his people the highest possible jilcdge of help in all their 
troubles, and victory in all their eontlicts with the wicked. 
Since to him is given " all power in heaven and in earth," 
he must " be great unto the ends of the earth," and all his 
enemies " be cut off" before him. 

10-15. From age to age, Christ sits among his people 
"as a refiner ami purifier of silver." He is continually 
cleansing the hearts of the truly pious from sin, and Ke|i- 
arating from among them hypoerili'S and unbelievers. In 
proportion as the visible church advances in holiness, she 
advances in strength also ; and when her people shall be 
" all righteous," they shall inherit the earth for ever. -Mai. 
3:3; Isti. 60:21. 

CRAl'TER VI. 

1. Arise, contend thou; addressed by God to (he prophet. 
Before the mountains — the hills; these are summoned as 
witnesses to the controversy. See Deut. 32:1 ; Psa. .50:4; 
Isa. 1:2. 

3. Wherein have I wearied thee? that thou shouldest for- 
sake me. 



God's cuntroversy 



MIC A II VII 



icilh his peiiph. 



tr-fw*' 4 Fori brought thee up out of tlie laud 
of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of tlie liouse of 
servants;'' and I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, 
and Miriam. 

5 my peopU\ remember now what Balak king 
of Moab consulted and what Balaam tlie son of 
Beor answered him, from Shittim unto Gilgal;" 
that ye may know the righteousness of the Lord." 

6 IT Wiierewitli shall I come before the Lord, a?id 
bow myself before the higii God? shall I come 
before him with burnt-offerings, with calves of a 
year old ?* 

7 Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of 
rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil ?'' shall 
I give my first-born_/br my transgression,'^ the fruit 
of my body^ybr the sin of my soul? 

8 He hath showed thee, O man, what is good ; 
and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to 
do justlv, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly* 
wit'i thy God?"' 

i) Tlic Lord's voice crietli unto the city, and the 
man of wisdom shall see thy name:^ hear ye the 
i-od, and who hath appointed it. 

10 "i Are there yet the treasures of wickedness 
ill the house of the wicked,' and the scant measure^ 
that is abominable?^ 

il Shall I count them pure" with the wicked 
balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights? 

\i For the ricii men thereof are full of violence, 
and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and 
tlieir tongue is deceitful in tlieir mouth. 

13 Tiierefore also will I make thcc sick in smiting 
thee, iu making tliec desolate because of thy sins.'' 

14 Thou shalt eat, but not be satisfied ; and thy 
casting down shall be in the midst of thee ; and 



> Deut. 4:20. b Num. ch. 


2->--i5. cjudg. 5:11, • lUh. sons of a ym. 


aPia. 51:16. ' IKm^ttirin. 


t Heb. belly 1 Heb, humhle thyself to walk. 


t Dout. 10: J-J. S Or. lliij namt 


shall see l/ial which is. 1 Or, Is there yet unto 


every 7ylan a house of lite wiekr 


1, etc. 1 Heb. measure of leanness; Amos 8:5. 



5. What Balaam — answered him; pronouncing, by my 
command, blessings, instead of the curses which he had 
been hired to utter. From Shittim unto GUgal ; that is, on 
the way from Shittim unto Giigal. Shittim was the last sta- 
tion of the IsraeHtes east of the Jordan, Num. 25:1; 33:49; 
and Giigal the first station west of it, Josh. 4:19. The 
righteoumiess of the Lord; as manifested in his faithfulness 
to his promises, notwithstanding your many provocations. 

6. Wherewith shall I come ; the prophet rebukes the spirit 
of formality, and shows that God requires inward holiness 
and obedience. 

12. Thereof; of Zion. 

l(j. Ye shall bear the reproach of my people ; addressed to 
the rich and noble, verse 12. When God gives up his 
people to the reproach of captivity, they shall bear the 
lieaviest part of the suffering. 

' , . INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. God's service is most reasonable and excellent; when 
we grow weary in it, the fault is in our own hearts. 

4. The remembrance of God's innumerable favors to us 
and our fathers in days past, ought to bind us to his ser- 
vice with the cords of love and gratitude. 

6-8. God does not require us to purchase heaven for 
ourselves by costly gifts. ' He asks only for himself a 
humble and broken heart, that gladly accepts the free 
salvation which he has provided for us through Christ; 
and for our fellow-men a just and merciful spirit. Where 
these are wanting, the most costly offerings and the most 
gorgeous rites are abominable in liis sight. 

9. To see and acknowledge God's hand in the aCBictions 
which come upon us, is the mark of true wisdom. 



thou shalt take hold, but shalt not deliver ; and 
that which thou deliverest will I give up to the 
sword. 

15 Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt not reap ; thou 
shalt tread the olives, but thou siialt not anoint 
thee with oil ; and sweet wine, but shalt not drink 
wine.' 

16 ^ For the statutes of Omri are kept,*J and all 
the works of the house of Aliab, and ye walk in 
their counsels ; that I should make thee a desola- 
tion,' and the inhabitants thereof a hissing : there- 
fore ye shall bear the repi'oach of my people. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1 Thp. church, complaining of her small number, 3 and the general cor- 
ruption. 5 putteth her confidence not in man, but in God. 8 She tn- 
umpheth over her enemies. 14 G-od coinforteth her by promises. 10 
by confusion of the enemies, IS and by his mercies. 

TT TOE is me ! for I am as when they have gath- 
V V ered the summer fruits,^ as the grape glean- 
ings of the vintage:'^ there is no cluster to eat: 
my soul desired the first ripe fruit. 

2 The good' man is perished out of the earth ;' 
and there is none upright among men: they all lie 
in wait for blood ; they hunt every man his brother 
with a net. 

3 TTTiiat they may do evil witii lioth hands 
earnestly, the prince asketli, and llie judge asketh 
for a reward ; and the great 7nan, he uttereth his 
mischievous desire:' so they wrap it up. 

4 The best of them is as a brier: the most up- 
right is sharper than a thorn hedge : the day of thy 
watchmen and thy visitation cometh ; now shall be 
their perplexity. 

5 IT Trust ye not in a friend,™ put ye not confi- 



5 Prov. 20:10. 2-3. • Or, Shall I be pure xoilh, etc. h Hos. 5:9. i Dent 
a3:3;-40. t Or, Ac doth murh keep the, etc. J 1 Kings 10:25-30. 1 Or, 
astonishment. iUeh. the satlierings of summer, k Hos. 9:10. lOi.godty, 
ormerciful. 1 Isa. 57:1. t lleh. the misrhief of his soul. "161.9:4. 



10, 11. Fraud in business is a common sin, and there is 
reason to fear that some practise it who wish to be thought 
pure and holy. But the religion that carries in its hand a 
scant measure and deceitful balances, is alike abominable 
with God and men. 

12-16. The prosperity of cities and nations is from God. 
When they abuse it by making it the means of violence 
and fraud he will take it aw;iv, and all their labor and 
planning will end in disappointment. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1. Woe is me; the prophet laments the absence of good 
men, and the universal corruption that abounds in the 
land. The jjicture suits well the reign of Aliaz. Tliere is 
no cluster; no gleaning left after the vintage. I can find 
no good man with whom to commune. 

2. The earth ; here used with reference to the prophet's 
own people. 

3. So thcij vrap it up; rather, " so they pervert it ;" that 
is, so they pervert judgment. 

4. The day of thy watchmen and thy visitation cometh; 
either, the day of calamity foretold by thy watchmen, 
that is, the true prophets ; or the day of punishment 
appointed for thy watchmen ; meaning the unfaithful 
watchmen of Judali. 

5. 6. Trust ye not — his ov;n house; truth and righteous- 
ness have disappeiu'i'd, sn th;it no one can trust his near- 
est friends. Our F;i\inui- iipi.lied the words of verse 6 to 
the persecutions wlii.h liis disciples were to suffer froin 
the ungodly members of their own household. Matt. 10:21, 
35, 36, etc. 

1027 



The church puis 



MIC All VII, 



Air trust in God. 



dence in a guide: keep the doors of thy mouth 
from her that licth in thy bosom. 

G For the son dishonorcth the father, tlie daugh- 
ter riseth up against licr mother, the daughter-in- 
law against her motlier-in-law ; a man's enemies 
are the men of his own house. 

7 Therefore I will look unto tlio Lord : I will 
wait for the God of my salvation:" my God will 
hear me. 

S T Rejoice not against me, mine enemy : when 
I fall, I shall arise;'' when I sit in darkness, the 
Loud s/mll he a light unto nie.'^ 

9 I will l)(;ar the indignation of the Loud, be- 
cause 1 have sinned against him,'' until he plead 
my cause, and execute judgment for mo: he will 
bring mc forth to the light, a?id I shall behold his 
righteousness." 

10 Then s/ie that is mine enemy shall see it, and 
shame shall cover her* which said unto me, Where 
is the IjOrd thy God? mine eyes shall beliold her: 
now shall she be trodden down* as the mire of the 
streets/ 

11 In the day that thy walls are to be built, in 
that day shall the decree be far removed. 

\2 In that day also he shall come even to thee 
from Assyria, and froni^ the fortified cities, and 
from the fortress even to the i-iver. and from sea 
to sea, and from mountain to mountain. 



»1ni.8:17. bPsi. 37:al; Prov. ahlG. cFsa.27:l. d Hub. 12; (i. 7. e Psa. 
37:6. • Or, Ami thou loiU see her that is mine enriny, and cover her with 
shame, lileh.sheshallbeforatreadiiis'lown. t Mai. 4:3. \ Or, even to. 

8. Rejoice not against me, mine enemy; the daughter of 
Zion is the speaker, and her enemy is the iieathen perse- 
cutors, represented in like manner as a female. Compare 
the expressions, " daughter of Babylon," Psa. 137:8, etc.; 
"daughter of the Chaldeans," Isa. 47:1, 5; and "daughter 
of Edom," Lam. 4:21, 22. 

11. Shalt the ilecree be far removed ; "the decree" seems 
to be here the oppressive enactments of the heathen per- 
secutors. 

12. He shall come ; rather, "one shall come;" that is, col- 
lectively, tliey shall come to thee from Assyria and all the 
surrounding regions; shall come to submit themselves to 
thy authority. See Isa. 60:5-14. 

l?>. Sliall he desolate; shall first be desolate before the 
promise can be fulfilled. Chap. 4:10; 5:3. 

14. Feed I liy people ; the prophet's prayer to Jehovah in 
the name of his people. Thi/ rod; tliy shepherd's rod, 
I'sa. 23:4. IVIiick dwell — Carmcl; Carmel is the image of 
fertility, 2 Chron. 21! : 10 ; Isa. 35 : 2. In E-/ck. 34 : 25, dwell- 
ing in the wilderness, that is, " solitarily," and .sleeping in 
the woods, arc images of unmolested i)uiot, shelter, and 
security. See also Deut. 33:28. 

15. Accnrilingtotliedai/s — marvelloiis things; this is God's 
answer to liis people's prayer. 

16. Al alt llieir might ; at the impotency of all their boast- 
ed power against (iod's people. Shall he deaf; stunned 
and confounded at the hearing of God's wondrous works 
for his people. 

17. Shall lick the ditst ; crouch before God's people. Psa. 
72:9; Isa. 49:2:i. Their liiiles ; their fastnesses. Sec Psa. 
18:45, where the same Hebrew word is rendered " close 
places." Like worms; creeping away with terror. It is a 



13 Notwithstanding,^ the land shall be \,",..^,. 
desolate because of them that dwell therein, for 
the fruit of their doings. 

14 11 Feed' thy peoph' witli thy rod.'-' tlie flock of 
thy heritage, whicii dwell solitarily in the wood, in 
the midst of Carmel : let them feed in Bashan 
and Gilead, as in the days of old. 

15 According to the days of thy coming out of 
the land of Egypt will I show unto him marvel- 
lous things. 

16 1 The nations shall see and be confounded at 
all their might: they shall lay thdr hand upon 
their mouth, their ears .shall be deaf. 

17 Tiun- shall lick tlie dust like a serpent,'' they 
shall move out of their holes like worms ^ of the 
eartii : they shall be afraid of the Lotto our God, 
and sliall fear because of thee. 

18 AVho is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth 
iniquity, and passeth by tlie transgression of the 
remnant of liis heritage '.''he retaincth not his anger 
for ever, because he dclighteth in mercy.-' 

19 lie will turn again, he will have compassion 
upon us; he will subdue our iniquities;" and thou 
wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the 
sea.' 

20 Thou wilt jicrform the truth to Jacob, and 
the mercy to Abraham, wiiicli tlioii hast sworn 
unto our fathers from the days of old.'" 



i Or, After that it hath been. I Or, Rule, f Psa. SJ:^. ti Psa. 72:9. 1 Or, 
cr/epiag things, i Exod. 31:6, 7. J Lam. 3:31, 32. k Rom. 6:14. 1 J»r. 

50:-J0. m Luke 1:72, 7.3. 



characteristic of the prophets, that they close with glori- 
ous promises to God's people. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2-4. When good men are removed from a nation and 
the wicked take their place, filling the land witircriraes, 
it is a sign that the day of divine visitation draws near. 

5, 6. The tendency of sin is to destroj' all truth and con- 
fidence in the tenderest relations of life. This was most 
fully manifested in the Jews of our Saviour's day, who not 
only rejected .him thomsclves, but persecuted to the death 
those of their own household who embraced his gospel. 
Thus they showed themselves to be " vessels of wratli 
fitted to destruction," and wrath came upon them to the 
uttermost. 1 Tliess. 2:16. 

7. In the darkest and most degenerate times, we may 
always wait on God with confident assurance tliat he will 
hear and save us. 

8-13. For her unfaithfulness and multiplied ti-ansgres- 
sions the church of God must patiently bear his chastise- 
monts, though they be severe and long continued ; assured 
that in the end he will bring her forth to the light, and 
put to shame all her enemies. 

14-17. God's faithfulness and truth are pledged to sub- 
due the nations of the world to his Son Jesus Clirist. They 
must either willingly receive him. or be broken in pieces 
by his iron rod. Ver. 20; Psa. 2:8-12. * 

18, 19. The time is coming, even in this world, when 
God shall take away the rebuke of his people from off the 
earth, and grant them a universal victory over the king- 
dom of Satan; and "at the resurrection of tlie just," the 
whole redeemed church shall obtain a complete and ever- 
lasting deliverance from sin ui all its cflects. 



1028 



NAIIUM. 



Op the personal history of Nahum we know nothing except what is indicated in the title of his book. 
He is called "tlie Elkoshite" probably from Elkosh, a village of Galilee, which Jerome mentions as pointed 
out to him by his guide. The tradition which assigns for the place of his birth and residence the modern 
Elkosh, on the east side of the Tigris, a few miles above the site of ancient Nineveh, rests on no good 
foundation. 

The prophecy of Nahum is directed against Nineveh, the capital of the Assyrian empire. When he 
wrote, this city was still in the height of its power, chap. 1:12; 2 :8 ; oppressing the nations, and pur- 
posing the conquest of Judah, chap. 1 : 9, 11 ; 3 : 1, 4. From chap. 1 : 12, 13, it appears that the Assyrians 
had already afflicted Judah, and laid their yoke upon her. All these particulars point to the reign of 
Ilezckiah as the date of the book. In energy and force of diction, and in the riclmess and variety of his 
images, Nahum is not excelled by any of the prophets. 



S:J'S7n, CHAPTER I. 

The majesty of God in goodness to his people, and in severity against his 

''T^HE burden of Nineveh. The book of the 
JL. vision of Nahum the Elkoshite. 
'2 God w jealous," and the Lord rcvenpjetli ;* the 
Lord reventrctli, and is furious;^ the Lord will 
take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserv- 
eth wrath for his enemies.'' 

3 The Lord is slow to anger, and great in power, 
and will not at all acquit ^Ae wicked: the Lord 
hath his way in the whirlwind and in tlic storm, 
and tlie clouds arc the dust of his feet. 

4 lie rebuketh tlie sea, and maketh it dry, and 
dricth up all the rivers: Bashan languisheth, and 
Cannel, and tlie flower of Lebanon languisheth. 

5 The mountains quake at hirn,*^ and the hills 
melt, and the earth is burned at his presence, yea, 
tlie world, and all that dwell therein. 

6 Wiio can stand before his indignation? and 
who can abide' in the fierceness of his anger? his 
fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are 
tlirown down by him. 



» Exod. 2U:5. • Or. The LORD is a jealous God, and a revenger, t Heb. 
Ihat hiilh fury, b Psa, 0-1:1. i= Psa. 63:8. 1 Heb. stand up; Rev. ():17. 
J Heb sirenglli. d Psa. 21:5. e l Thess. 5:2, 3. tlleh. couusellor of Belial. 



CHAPTER I. 

2. God is jealous ; the prophet begins with describing 
God's awful attributes of righteousness and omnipotent 
power, because it is from these that the destruction of 
Nineveh comes. 

4. BaAan — Carmel — Lebanon; the prophet's familiar 
reference to these places indicates clearly that Palestine 
was his home. 

8. The place thereof; literally, " her place ;" that is, the 
place of Nineveh. 

9. What do ye imagine; what is this evil device which 
ye are purposing ? Against the Lord ; they opposed Jeho- 
vah in assaulting his people, and so Rab.sliakeh himself 
understood it. 2 Kings 18:30, 35. An utter end; of Nin- 
eveh. Sliall not rise up the second time; tlie destruction of 



7 Tlie Lord is good, a strong-hold^ in the day 
of trouble;'^ and he knoweth them that trust in 
him. 

8 But with an overrunning flood he will make 
an utter end of the place thereof, and darkness 
shall pursue his enemies. 

9 What do ye imagine against the Lord? he will 
make an utter end: affliction shall not rise up tlie 
second time. 

10 For while they be folden together as thorns, 
and while they are drunken as drunkards, they 
shall be devoured as stubble fully dry." 

11 There is one come out of thee tliat imaginetli 
evil against the Lord, a wicked counsellor." 

12 Thus saith the Lord ; Though they be quiet, 
and likewise many, yet thus shall tlicy be cut 
down,*" when he shall pass through.* Though I 
have afflicted thee, I will afflict tliee no more. 

13 For now will I break his yoke from off thee, 
and will burst thy bonds in sunder. 

14 And the Lord hath given a commandment 
concerning thee, that no more of thy name be sown : 
out of the house of thy gods will 1 cut off the 



1 Heb. shorn. ' Or, If they -wnuld have been at peace, so should they have 
been many, and so should they have been shorn, and he should have passed 
away. 



Nineveh shall be so complete that it shall not need to be 
repeated. 

10. Folden together as thorns — drunken; sunk in vice and 
sensuality, they are as a mass of thorns twisted together, 
or a heap of dry stubble, ready fuel for the fire of God's 
wrath. 

11. There is one come ovt; Sennacherib, who here repre- 
sents the power and malice of Assyria. 

12. Quiet; literally, "whole;" that is, in a prosperous 
and uninjured state. Tlius shall they he cut down; cut down 
in the midst of their prcsperity. Thee; Judah. 

14. Concerning thee; concerning the Assyrian. In the 
original, Judah and the Assyrian are distinguished by a 
difference in gender ; the former being feminine, the latter 
masculine. 

1029 



Fearful arviies of 



NAHUM II. 



God against XinereA. 



pfravcn image and the molten image : I will make | 
tliy grave; for thou art vile. ; 

15 Behold upon the mountains tlie feet of liim ' 
that bringeth good tidings, tliat [uihlisheth jjeace!" ■ 
O Judah^ keep' tiiy solemn feasts, perform tliy 
vows: for tlie wicked* sliall no more pass through 
thee; he is utterly cut oft'.'' 

CHAPTKll II. 

The fenrful anJ victorious armies of God against Nineveh. 

HE that daslieth in pieces' is come up before 
tliv face : keep the munition, watch tlic way, 
make t/nj loins strong, fortify thy power miglitily. 

2 For tlie Lord hatli turned away the excellen- 
cy^ of .Jacob, as the excellency of Israel: for tlie 
ciuptiers have emptied them out, and marred their 
vine branches. 

:i The shield of his mighty men is made red, the 
valiant men are in' scarlet: the chariots shall be 
with flaming' torches in the day of his prepara- 
tion, and the fir-trees shall be terribly shaken. 

4 The chariots shall rage in the streets, they shall 
jostle one against ant)ther in the broad ways: they 
shall seem' like torches, tli(\v shall run like tiie 
lightnings. 

5 He shall recount his -worthies:* they shall 



alsa, 5->:7. • Heb. /;o.<(. t Hnh. iVm(. 1> I«. .20:7, >. I Or, T/if rfiJ- 
ptrser. or hammer. ( Or, pi-irfj. I Hub. di/cj. ^ Or, fiery. • }U-b. their show. 
t Or, g't/lants. ! Hob. covering, or cocerer. * Or, molten. I Or, that whieh 



15. Bringetk good tidings; of the overthrow of the As- 
syrian. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-8. The glorious attributes of .leliovuh miike tlie pros- 
perity of the righteous and the overthrow of the wicked 
alike certain, lie is oiimiscient, and no sin can escape 
his knowledge ; he is omnipotent, and able to punish sin- 
ners however liigh may be their rank and power; he is 
infinite in righteou.sness, and must bo the everlasting ene- 
my of all \inrighteousness ; ho is infinite in goodness and 
truth, and cannot fail to bo on the side of tliose who love 
him aiid trust in him; he is the governor and judge of the 
universe which he has created, and must see that obedi- 
ence is rewardcil and .'^in punished. 

9-14. Often in the history of this world have vast em- 
pires arisen under the control of wicked men, whieh threat- 
ened to destroy God's chiucli ; but lie has always stood 
by her, and sufiTered lior persecutors to proceed only so 
far as was needful for her chastisement ; and then he 
has overthrown them by the hand of other and mightier 
nations. 

15. In times of trouble let Piod's people be steadfast in 
faith ; at the appointed time the glad tidings of deliver- 
ance will come, filling their hciirls with gladness and their 
lips with praise. 

CIIAPTKIl II. 

From the overthrow of the .Vssyrian host.Xahura passes, 
after the manner of the pro|iliets, to the more distant event 
of the utter destruclion of Nineveh. 

1. 2. lie tliiil ilii-ihrlh III -pieces; these verses admit of a 
twofold interpretation. Some suppose "he that dasheth " 
is the Assyrian, against whom .Iiidali is exhorted to fortify 
herself; and it is added that .lehovah has turned away. 
that is, humbled the ixciUcncy of .ludah by allowing tlie 
Assyrian to overrun Ihr land, as he had before humbled 
the cxcclletiiy of Israel by giving up that kingdom to his 
power. Olhcrs snpiiose " lie that dasheth in pieces" is 
the conqueror of Nineveh, against whom slie is challenged 
to St. ngthen herself, if she can ; comjiare eha]i. :i: 11 ; and 
they render the first clause of the second verse as a pro- 
phetic announcement, thus: "Tor the Lord hath restored 
1030 



stumble in their walk; they shall make j^ ,*• 5^' 
haste to the wall thereof, and the defence' iii' 
shall be prepared. 

(■) The gall's of the rivers sliall be opened, and 
the palace shall be dissolved.* 

7 And iluzzali' shall be led away captive,^ she 
shall be brought u]). and her maids shall lead her 
as with the voice of doves, tabering upon their 
breasts. 

8 But Nineveh w of old* like a pool of water ; 
yet they shall llee away. Stand, stand, shall tluy 
cry; but none shall look back.* 

y Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of 
gold : for there is none end of the store' and glory 
out of all the pleasant furniture.^ 

10 She is empty, and void, and waste:" and the 
lieart meltelli, and the knees smite together, and 
much pain is in all loins, and the faces of them all 
gather blackness. 

11 Where is the dwelling of the lions, and the 
feeding place of the young lions, where the lion, 
even the old lion, walked, and the lion's whelp, and 
none made them afraid? 

12 The lion did tear in pieces enough for his 
whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled 
his holes with prey, and his dens with ravin. 

13 Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of 



was eMiitilished, or there i 
the ttays ihal fhe halh bf.e... 
nitt store * lleb. vessels of desi 



itiintl miitle. 1 Or. discorered. ' Or, froin 
tiiein to turn. 1 Or, and their inji- 



the excellency of Jacob, as the excellency of Israel ;" that 
is, restored tioth alike. Compare Ezek. 37:18-22. Tlio 
last clause of the verse will then assign the reason why 
God should restore his covenant people — because their 
enemies have grievously oppressed them. 

3. His mighty men; the mighty men of the conqueror of 
Nineveh. The fir-trees ; that is, the lances made of them; 
unless we understand the fir-trees figuratively of the As- 
syrian nobles. 

4. The chariots; of the conquering armj'. 

r>. He shall recount his worthies; this verse is best under- 
stood of the king of Nineveh mustering his chiefs against 
the invaders. Stumble in their u-alk ; in their way to the 
walls of Nineveh: the stumbling intiicates confusion and 
trepidation. 

(i. Opened — dissolved; some suppose that this verse de- 
scribes a flooding of the palace by the opening of guartl- 
gates. Others, that '• the gates of the rivers " are gates 
protected against the iuvailers by rivers, that is, canals, 
drawn from ihe Tigris. The enemy having foimtl iiieaiui 
to ojien these, the palace is dissolved with terror. 

7. IIii::ah; that is, " the established;" perhaps a sym- 
I bolical name for Nineveh in reference to her former 

strength and security. She is compared to a noble woman 
leil captive with her maidens. Brought tip; carried off 
into captivity. Her maith shall lead her ; rather, " her maids 
mourning." Tal>ering ; beating. 

8. Like a pool of voter ; filletl with men. as a pool with 
water. Compare JJev. 17 : 15. Stand, sinnd ; the fruitless call 
of the king and his nobles to the defenders of Nineveh. 

9. Take i/e the sjwd ; an exhortation to the conipierors to 
plunder Nineveh. And glorij out of; rather. " there is a 
glory of;" that is, a splendid store of. 

11. The dicclling of tlie linns; that is, Nineveh, as of olil 
the abode of conquering warriors. 

13. Thij messengers ; probttbly an allusion to the messen- 
gers which Sennacherib sent to llezekiah. 2 Kings 18:17; 
19:9. 

iNSTnrcTiox. 

God's resources to bless and to curse .ifP infinite. From 
him nations receive all their strength. When they abiiso 
the power which he has given them by oi>preBsiiig and 



Jiuhment and ruin 



NAIIUM HI. 



of Xin:.th fuitl Id. 



A.M. 3291. hosts, and I will burn hor chariots in the 
:i:i" "" smoke, and the sword shall devour thy 
young lions : and I will cut off thy prey from the 
earth, and the voice of thy messengers shall no 
more be heard. 

CHAPTER III. 

The miserable ruin of Nineveh. 

AT7"0E to the bloody city!*" \iis all full of lies 
\ V and robbery ; the ])rey departeth not ; 
'2 The noise of a whip, and the noise of the rat- 
tling of the wheels, and of the prancing horses, 
and of the jumping chariots. 

\\ The horseman liftetli up both the bright sword 
and the glittering spear :* and there is a multitude 
of slain, and a great number of carcasses; and 
there is none end of tJieir corpses ; they stumble 
upon their corpses : 

4 Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of 
the well-favored harlot, the mistress of witch- 
crafts, that selleth nations through her whore- 
doms, and families througli her witchcrafts. 

5 Behold, I am against thee, saith the Loud of 
hosts; and I will discover thy skirts upon thy 
face, and I will show the nations thy nakedness, 
and the kingdoms thy shame. 

G And I will cast abominable filth upon thee, and 
make thee vile, and will set thee as a gazing-stock. 

7 And it shall come to pass, that all they that 
look upon thee shall flee from thee, and say, Nine- 
veh is laid waste: who will bemoan her? whence 
shall I seek comforters for thee? 

8 Art thou better thau populous No,* that was 
situate among the rivers, that had the waters round 
about it, whose rampart icas the sea, and her wall 
was from the sea? 

9 Ethiopia and Egypt icere her strength, and it 
was infinite ; Phut and Lubim were thy helpers.^ 



* Heb. rily of bloods, a Ezek. 2-1:!). t Heb. the fame of the sword, nnd 
th'. lightning 6f the spear, t Or, nourishing Ko ; Heb. No-Amon. S Heb, 
inthyhdp. 1> Psj. li)7:S, i), c Joel 3::i. d Jer. 25: 17-'J7. =Rev. G:l:i. 



spoiliug tlie weak, he will raise up against them men 
fiercer and mightier than themselves, who will show :io 
mercy to them as they have shown no mercy to others. 

CHAPTER III. 

2. Tiie noise of a whip ; a new description of the invading 
hosts, vvith the slaughter which they make in Nineveh. 

4. Because of the multitude — through her ivitchcrafti ; this 
verse assigns the reason of God's judgments upon Nine- 
veh. She is compared to a beautiful harlot, who is also a 
potent enchantress. Her lovers are her dependent kings 
and princes ; her hire is the price which they pay her for 
the right of oppressing and plundering the nations she 
has conquered ; and her enchantments are all the arts by 
which she attiiches them to herself. 

8. Populous No; rather, as the margin, " No-Araon," the 
celebrated metropolis of Upper Egypt, also called Thebes, 
lying on both sides of the Nile, whose waters served at 
once to enrich and defend it. According to Homer it had 
a hundred gates, through each of which issued two hun- 
dred warriors in chariots. In the time of Nahum it seems 
to have been recently destroyed, and he exhorts Nineveh 
to take warning from its fate. Tiie rivers; the Nile and its 
canals. The sea ; that is, the Nile, which the Arabs at the 
present day call "the sea." See note on Isa. 18:2. 

9. Phut and Lubim; African nations: the latter are sup- 
posed to have been the Libyaus. Thy helpers; \o-Amon 
is addressed. 



10 Yet was she carried away, she went into cap- 
tivity: her young children also were dashed in 
pieces at the top of all the streets :'' and they cast 
lots for her honorable men,'' and all her great men 
were bound in chains. 

11 Thou also slialt be drunken:'' thou ^halt be 
hid, thou also shalt seek strengtii because of the 
enemy. 

12 All thy strong-holds shall be like fig-trees with 
the first ripe figs:" if they be shaken, they shall 
even fall into the mouth of the eater. 

13 Beliold, thy ]jeople in the midst of thee are 
women:' the gates of thy land shall be set wide 
open unto thine enemies : the fire shall devour thy 
bars.'' 

14 Draw thee waters for tlie siege, fortify thy 
strong-holds : go into clay, and tread the mortar, 
make strong the brick-kiln. 

15 There shall the fire devour tliee; the sword 
shall cut thee off, it shall eat thee up like the 
canker-worm, make thyself many as the canker- 
worm, make thyself many as the locusts.'' 

16 Thou hast multiplied tliy merchants above 
the stars of heaven: the canker-worm spoileth.' 
and fleeth away. 

17 Thy crowned are as the locusts, and thy cap- 
tains as the great grasshoppers, which camj) in the 
hedges in the cold day, but when the sun ariseth 
they flee away, and their place is not known where 
they are. 

18 Thy shepherds slumber,' king of Assyria :' 
thy nobles' shall dwell in the dust: thy people is 
scattered upon the mountains,*^ and no man gatli- 
eretli thein. 

19 Thtre is no healing' of thy l.iruise ; thy wound 
is grievous : all that hear the bruit of thee shall 
clap the hands over thee: for upon whom hath 
not thy wickedness passed continually?' 



fJer. 51:30. P Psa. 147:13. hJ„el2:2o. t Oi, sprendeth himself . i Psi. 
-e-.a. i Ezek. 31::J, etc. 1 Or, valiant ones, k 1 Kii.gs «;17. • Ueb. 
wrinkling. 1 Rev. IS:^. 3. 



11. Brwiken ; with the cup of God's wrath. Shalt he hid ; 
or, "shalt hide thyself." Nineveh is addressed. Seek 
strength ; seek in vain a defence against the enemy. 

12. First ripe figs; see note on Hosea 9:10. If they be 
shaken, tlicy shall even fall; the fortresses of Nineveh shall 
fall into the hands of her enemies, as easily as early figs 
into the mouths of those who shake them. 

15. Tlicre ; that is, even in the midst of thy preparations 
for defence. The canker-worm ; the word in the original 
denotes a species of locust. Make thyself many; that is, 
do this, yet shalt thou vanish, like swarms of locusts. 

16. Spoileth, and fleeth away ; supply. So shall it be with 
thee. Compare the following verse. 

17. Thii crotcned; or, thy princes. It is the princes and 
captains of the Ninevites, with their vast an ay of follow- 
ers, of which the prophet speaks. 

18. Thy shepherds; his chiefs, who ought to have been 
watchful for the defence of Nineveh. Slumber; give them- 
selves up to indolent security. Dtcell ; rather, "lie inac- 
tive." 

19. The bruit of thee ; the report of thy destruction. 
About the year before Christ 625, and almost a century 
after the date of this prophecy, Nineveh was taken by 
Nabopolassar of Babylon and Cyaxarcs of Media. After 
this the city continued to decline, until nothing remained 
but a mass of ruins to attest its ancient greatness. 

INSTRUCTION.'^. 
1-3. 'When a city is fuU of robberv and murder within, 

losi 



HABAKKUK. 



Op Habakkuk's personal history wc have no information. The thomo of his prophecy is the over- 
throw of Judah by the Chaldeans. From the sixtli verse of the first chapter it appears that he wrote 
shortly before the bej^iiining' of tliat series of invasions which ended in the destruction of Jerusalem and 
the captivity of the people. The first of these took place about six lunidred and three years before Christ. 
For boldness and sublimity of style, Xahum and Ilabakkuk are not surpassed even by Isaiah. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 Unto Habakkuk, complaining of the iniquity of tlie land, 5 is shown 
the fearful veneeance by the OlialJeans. \2 He complainelh that ven- 
geance should he executed by tlieni who are far worse. 

T"^HE burden which Habakkuk the proplict did 
.L see. 

2 LoiUJ, how long shall I cry, and thou wilt 
not hearl" even cry out unto thee o/' violence, and 
thou wilt not save! 

3 Why dost thou show me iniquity, and cause 
me to behold grievance? for spoiling and violence 
a)-e before me: and there are that raise up strife 
and contention. 

4 Therefore the law is slacked, and judgment 
doth never go forth : for the wicked doth compass 



aLam. :):S. • Or, wnsleU. b Isa. a!):14. 1 Ihb. Ima-illix. I Fulfilled 
•2 Chr. 36:6. J Or, from them shall proceed the judgment of these, and the 



God will bring upon its inhabitants robbery and murder 
from without, and take away from them all power of 
resistance. 

4-7. Rich and powerful nations have many and great 
means at their disposal, and are able to offer great induce- 
ments to the weaker nations that surround them to pur- 
chase their favor by becoming their allies in wickedness. 
Their aftiiirs are often managed with consummate policy. 
and for a long time they are very prosiierous. But if, as 
in the case of Nineveh, injustice and fraud lie at the foun- 
dation of their system, they must in the end be overthrown 
and put to shame before the whole world. God's word, 
and the facts of history, combine to show that cunning 
management can never bo a substitute for justice and 
truth in procuring for a nation permanent prosperity and 
strength. 

8-10. The many instances on record of the sudden over- 
throw of rich and powerful cities, should be a warning to 
all cities and states that their prosperity depends njion 
God, who is able at any moment to take it away ; and will 
take it away, if it bo made the minister of pride, injustice, 
and " lleshly lusts which war against the soul." 

11-15. It is easy fur Cod, when he purposes to destroy 
a peo[)lo for its sins, to take from it counsel and strength ; 
thus making the nation tliat has long been a terror to the 
world, as defenceless as Wdiuen, and giving it over an 
unresisting prey to its destroyers. 

16-19. The pomp and riches and thronging mtdtitudcs 

of Nineveh have passed away utterly and for ever. Otdy 

a few mounds of nibViish remain to tell where she once 

stood. So shall all wicked cities and empires pass away 

1032 



about the ritrhteous : tliorofore wronir* iudff- a. m. .ws. 
ment proceedeth. g26. 

5 1 Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, 
and wonder marvellously : for I will work a work 
in your days, which ye will not believe, though it 
be told ymt}' 

6 For lo, I rai?c u]) the Chaldeans, that bitter 
and liasty nation, wiiicii shall march tlirough the 
breadth* of tiie land, to possess the dwelling-places 
that are not theirs.* 

7 Tlioy arc tcrrilile and dreadful: tlicir judgment 
and their dignity siiall proceed of themselves.* 

8 Their horses also are swifter than tlic leopards, 
and are more fierce than the evening wolves: and 
their horsemen shall spread themselves, and tlieir 



captivity of these, I Ileb. sharp. 



that are built on injustice and oppression. Men shall clap 
their bands at the report of their overthrow, and God's 
cause shall triumph from generation to generation. 

CHAPTER I. 

2. Violence; of the riialdces,as some suppose: but it is 
lietter to understand verses 2-4 as the prophet's complaint 
of abounding wickedness among his own coiuitrvmen; 
compare .Jer. 5:26-'29 ; while in verse 5, God answers him 
by deuoiuicing upon the Jews his vengeance through the 
Chaldees. 

5. Behold ije among the heathen ; the Jews are called upon 
to behold with amazement and consternation the migiity 
power that is preparing to come upon them from among 
the heathen nations. A vork; namely, the utter desola- 
tion of the land, and the captivity of the surviving rem- 
nant. Which ije vill not believe ; they trusted lo their false 
lirophcts, who promised them deliverance. Comparo Jer. 
;■>: 12-17; 14:13. etc. The apostle Paul quotes this verse 
from the Greek version of the Seventy, and applies it to 
his countrymen, who were alike presumptuous, and des- 
tined to a like destruction by the Horaans. Acts 13: 11. 

6. Jfa.-ili/; impet\ions. 

7. Their jtidtrmeiil and their difrnily — themselves ; they shall 
be independent of all earthly i>ower, managing their affairs 
in their own way. The Chaldeans were at (irst a province 
of Assyria, but" they afterwards made themselves inde- 
pendent. 

s. Are more fierce than the evening valves; wolves tli;it 
come forth in tho evening hungry and fierce, to hunt for 
their prey. 



The prop/iet^s e.rpostulaiiffn, 



HABAKKLK II. 



and God's reply. 



A St :b7s. horsemen shall come from far ; they shall 
ci"""' fly as the eagle f/iat liasteth to cat. 
9 Tliey shall come all for violence : their faces 
shall sup up as tlie cast wind,* and they shall gather 
ihc ca[)tivity as the sand. 

Itl And they shall scoft' at tlic kings, and the 
princes shall be a scorn unto them: tliey shall de- 
ride every strong-hold; for they shall heap dust, 
and take it. 

11 Then shall his mind change, and he shall pass 
over, and offend, imputing this his power unto his 
god. 

12 "l jfrt thou not from everlasting, Lord my 
God, my Holy One? We shall not die. Lord, 
tiiou hast ordained them for judgment; and, 
mighty God,^ thou hast established* them for cor- 
rection. 

Vi Thou art of purer eyes tlian to behold evil, 
and canst not look on iniquity :* wherefore look- 
est thou upon tliem that deal treaclierously, and 
holdest thy tongue Avhen the wicked devoureth 
the man that is more righteous than he? 

14 And makest men as the fishes of the sea, as 
the creeping" things, that have no ruler over them? 

15 They take up all of them with the angle, they 



• Or. t/te supping vp of their fates, etc.. or their faces shall luok toward the 
east; Keh. the opposition of their faces toward the east, t Heb. roci. I Heb. 
founded, i Ox, grievame. i Or, moving. ■S0r,flue7iet. a Isa. 10;13-15. 



9. Their faces shall sup up as the cast wind ; that is, their 
fierce countenances are hke a vehement east wind, which 
destroys every thing that comes in its way. But some 
prefer to render, " The host of their faces is forwards ;" in 
other words, they all march straight forward, intent on 
their work of conquest. 

10. Dust ; that is, a mound of earth, such as besiegers 
ill ancient times raised against a city. 

11. S'lall klf mind change ; be filled with fresh confidence 
and pride. Shall pa.'ts over; over the laud as a conqueror. 
Offend; provoke God by his pride. Imputing this his 
power unto kis god; or," this his power becomes his god." 

12. We shall not die ; the language of faith. God will not 
utterly destroy, but only chastise his jieople by the Chal- 
deans. In the verses which follow, the prophet, in the 
name of his people, pathetically pleads with God that he 
would not perpetually abandon them to the pride and 
cruelty of their conquerors. 

13. The wicked; the heathen invader. More righteous 
than he; the Jews, as God's covenant iieople and wor- 
shippers. 

14. No ruler over them ; that is, no protector. 

15. J7ie!/,- the Chaldeans. ^W of (Aem ,• men of all nations. 

16. By them ; by the help of their net and drag. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1-4. In times of great and general wickedness, it is right 
to plead with God that he would interfere for the mainte- 
nance of his cause and the deliverance of his people ; but 
we should be careful that our expostulations have in them 
no mixture of impatience and unbelief. 

5. Wlien men are most presumptuous in sin, and most 
uiiVielieving in respect to God's threatenings, their destruc- 
tion is near. 

6. When God will punish a nation for its sins, the in- 
struments of his vengeance are at hand ; he knows how to 
use those who are ignorant of him for the accomplishment 
of his threatenings against his disobedient people. 

7-10. When men will not submit themselves to God's 
easy and good yoke, he often gives them over to the iron 
yoke of cruel enemies. 

11. The influence of great prosperity upon wicked men 
is to fill them with pride and self-sufficiency, and alienate 
them still further from the true God. 

12. However great and long continued the calamities 



catch them in their net, and gather them in their 
drag:' therefore they rejoice and are glad. 

IG Tiierefore they sacrifice unto their net, and 
burn incense unto their drag;-'' because by them 
their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous." 

17 Shall they therefore einjity their net, and not 
spare continually to slay the nations? 

CHAPTER II. 

1 Unto Habakkuk, waiting for an answer, is shown that he must wait 
by faith. 5 The judgment upon the Chaldean for insatiableness, 9 for 
covctousness, 12 for cruelty. 15 for drunkenness. 18 and for idolatry. 

iWILL stand upon my watch, and set me upon 
the tower,* and will watch to see what he will 
say unto me,*'' and what I shall answer when I am 
reproved.^ 

2 And the Lord answered me, and said. Write 
the vision, and make it plain upon tables, that he 
may run that readeth it. 

3 For the vision is yet for an appointed time, 
but at the end it shall speak, and not lie : though 
it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, 
it will not tany. 

4 Behold, his soul which is lifted up is not up- 
right in him: but the just shall live by his faith.'^ 



• Or, dainti/; Heb. fat. t Heb. fenced place, t Or, i 
5 Or, w/ien I am argued with; Heb. upon my reproof, 
3;3B, 



John 



which come upon God's people, we may comfort ourselves 
with the assurance that God has ordained them for their 
correction, not for their destruction ; and that he will at 
the proper time grant them a gracious deliverance. 

13-15. We may lawfully plead with God that he will 
deliver us from the oppression of .wicked men ; but we 
can never charge him with injustice, however long he 
allows them to triumph over us, since we deserve, as sin- 
ners, all evil at his hand, and no good, and he alone is 
competent to judge what degree of chastisement is need- 
ful for our humiliation and correction. 

IG. It is the universal foUy and weakness of fallen men 
to exalt the means by which they have accomplished their 
plans above the power and providence of God, who gives 
to means all their efficiency. Thus we continually see 
successful warriors and statesmen forgetting their depend- 
ence on 'God, because they have persuaded themselves 
that they have in their own hands all that is necessary to 
insure perpetual prosperity. 

CHAPTER n. 

1. 0/)0/j mi/ ^('a/c/^ ; upon my watch-tower. The prophet, 
anxiously looking for an answer to his prayer just recorded, 
compares himself to a watchman upon his tower. What 
he will say; what word of promise God will give. Wiat I 
shall answer when lam reproved; or, " What answer I shall 
return [to the people] concerning my arguing ;" that is, 
my expostulation with Jehovah recorded at the close of 
the preceding chapter. He waits to hear how God will 
answer his expostulation, that he may communicate it to 
his people. 

2. Tlie Lord answered me; this is the vision which he 
saw on his watch-tower. Make it plain ; as it concerns all, 
it is to be written plainly, so that all may read it. 

3. The vision; that of the overthrow of the Chaldean 
king, which the prophet proceeds to record. Is yet for 
an appointed time; its fulfilment is reserved for the set 
time of God's appointment. These words intimate that 
the time is distant, and that its delay will try the faith of 
God's people. Shall speak; by its fulfilment. Will not 
tarry; that is, not tarry beyond the appointed time. 

4. Lifted up; with pride. Shalt live by his faith; his 
faith sliall be the cause of his salvalion. the apostle Paul 
apijlies these words to all believers. Rom. 1 : 17. 

1033 



The judgment of Gcd 



IIABAKKUK 11. 



upon the Chaldeans. 



b ir Yea al-o,' because he transgrcssctli by wine, 
he is a proud man, neither koopoth at home, wlio 
enlargeth liis desire as hell, and k as deatli. and 
cannot be satished, but gatlu'rcfli unto him all na- 
tions, and licajictli unto liini all people : 

6 Shall not all these take up a parable against 
him, and a taunting proverb against him, and say, 
Woe to him* that incrcaseth that tvhic/t is not his! 
how long? and to him that ladeth himsell' with 
thick clay ! 

7 Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite 
thee, and awake tliat shall vex thee, and thou 
shalt be for booties unto them? 

8 Because thou hast spoiled many nations, all 
the remnant of the people shall spoil thee;" be- 
cause of men's blood,* and for tiie violence of the 
land, of the city, and of all that dwell therein. 

9 M Woe to him that covctctli an evil covetous- 
ness^ to his house, that lie may set his nest on high, 
that he may be delivered from the power of evil ! ' 

10 Thou hast consulted shame to thy house by 
cutting off many people, and hast sinned against 
thy soul. 

11 For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and 
the beam' out of the timber shall answer it.' 

12 "i Woe to him that buildeth a town with 
blood,* and establishcth a city by iniquity! 

13 Behold, is it not of the Lord of hosts that the 



' Oc, How murh more. 1 Or, Ho. he. »lsa. 33:1. I Hub. bloods. 5 Or, 
gaineth an evil gahl. I Hi^h. palm of the hand. II Or, piere, or fastening. 
• Or, witness against it. t Ueb. blooch. I Or. in vaiit * Or. «y knowing the 



5. Yea also — transgrcasetk hij wine ; or, " Yea also, wine is 
a transgressor;" thai is, makes the Babylonian king a 
transgressor. Throughout the remaindor of tliis chapter 
he is deiiouuced as an ambitious, rapacious, and bloody 
idolater. 

6. Take up a parable; that is, a taunting song at the time 
of his overthrow. fVitk thick clay; or, "with pledges."' 
Thus the king of Babylon is coiii|jarcd to a hard-heart- 
ed usurer, who heaps together pledges taken from the 
poor. 

7. Bite thee; rather, " take usury of thee ;" that is, spoil 
thee, as thou hast spoiled others. 

8. Men's blood; shed by thee. The violence of the laud; 
the violence done by tliec to the land, etc. 

9. Coveteth an evil covetousness ; rather, as the margin, 
"gaineth an evil gain ;" that is, a gain which shall turn to 
his own destruction, verse 10. His home — his ne.^t; the 
roj'al palace of Babylon, including perhaps Baliylon itself, 
which Nebuchadnezzar enlarged and beautified by i>hui- 
deriiig the nations. May he delivered from the power of cvii ; 
may raise himself above all liability of evil. 

10. 11. S'lame; this, and not glory, shall be the issue of 
his rapacious counsels. Stone — beam; \\\ the king's palace. 
These bear witness to each other of his violence and 
bloodshed. 

12. A town — a cdij; Babylon: Init the words hold good 
of all who imitate the example of Nebuchadnezzar. 

13. h it not if the Lord oftioxtfi ; is it not by his decree ? 
Tiie people; who build a city by blood and iniquity, verse 
12. In the very fire; rather, "for the very fire;" that is, 
oidy that their work may be roiisumed by firo. 

14. For the earth slmli hr filled with the knowledire — of the 
Lord, <« tlie w.itrri rover the xm; it must be that all who 
build a city by iniquity and blood shall labor in vain ; for 
God has purposed that righteousness and holiness, which 
come by the knowledge of himself, shall be triumphant 
over all the earth. 

1.^. Givclh hii neighbor drink; the violence of the Chal- 
dean nu>narcli towards the ncighVioring nations is here 
compared to an intoxicating cup, which produces drunk- 
enness and indecent exposure. 
1034 



people shall labor in the very fire, and a. m..33;& 
the people shall weary themselves for very c!».° 
vanity?' 

14 For the earth shall be filled with the know- 
ledge of the glory of the Loiu),' as the waters 
cover the sea. 

15 Woe unto him that giveth his neighbor drink, 
that pnttest thy bottle to him, and makest him 
drunken also, that thou mayest look ou their na- 
kedness! 

10 Thou art filled with sliame for glory : "" drink 
thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered: the 
cup of the Lord's right hand shall be turned unto 
thee, and shameful spewing shall be on thy glory." 

17 For the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee, 
and the spoil of beasts, ichirk made tliem afraid, 
because of men's blood, and for the violence of the 
land, of the city, and of all that dwell therein, 

18 ir Wiiat i>rofitetli the graven image that the 
maker thereof hath graven it; the molten image, 
and a teacher of lies, that the maker of his work' 
trusteth therein, to make dumb idols? 

19 Woo unto him that saith to tiio wood, Awake ; 
to the dumb stone. Arise, it shall teach! Behold, 
it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is uo 
breath at all in the midst of it. 

20 But the Lord is in his holy temple:*' let all 
the earth keep silence" before him. 



glorg of the Lord. I Or, more with shame than with glory 6 Pi.il. 3:19. 
c Jer. Uor^l-^.t. ^ Heh. fashioner of his fashion. di>:,a. 11:4. ' Heb. 6« 

silent all the earth. 



l(i. Art filled— dory ; shalt be filled with shame instead 
of thy present glory. Drink thou also; the wine-cup of 
God's wrath. 

17. The violence of Lebanon ; the violence done to Leba- 
non. Ijcbanon here represents the princes and warriors 
whom the king of Babylon has destroyed. Compare Isa. 
10 : 18, 19 ; 14:8; 37 : 24. Shall cover thee ; shall return upon 
thyself. The spoil of beasts; the destruction of the beasts 
of Lebanon is also to l)e taken figurativel}' of the slaughter 
and pillage of the cimquered nations. 

18. What piofleth ; to finish the iii<-ture, ITabakkuk ex- 
poses the vanity of the idols to which the Babylonians 
trusted for the maintenance of their power. The molten 
image, and a teacher of lies ; the idol and the teacher of idol- 
atry are put together as equally vain and impotent. 

20. The Lord is in his holy temple; the jirophet closes his 
message to the people 1)3* contrasting with the dunib idols 
of Bal)ylon the power and majesty of the living .Ichovah, 
which fill the whole earth. 

LNSTKUCTIONS. 

1-3. Though God may long delay the fulfilment of his 
promises, they are not thereby the less certain. The ac- 
complishment of them will surely come at the set time, 
and it will make manifest to all his veracity, and tlie rea- 
sonableness of faith in his word. 

4. Pride excludes faith from the soul, and lifts it up to 
its destruction ; but the humble believer in God is always 
safe. 

5-8. There is but one law for those who seek lo make 
themselves great by violence, fraud, and injustice, whether 
they bo nations, families, or individuals; (iod will deal 
with them as they have dealt with others, and make tliem 
desolate fin- their sins. 

9-17. The experiment of building a town with blood, 
and establishing a city by iniquity, has often been made ; 
but the result has been shame and ruin to those who 
attempted in this way to set themselves on high: so it 
must always be ; for God is on the side of the truth, and 
it is his purpose to make it triumphant throughout the 
earth. 

18, 19. The lifeless wood and ihe dumb stone to which 



The prophd's prayer. 



IIABAKKUK III. 



The m jesly of God. 



CHAPTER III. 



1 ll.-ib:ikkuk in his 



r ircmbleth at GoJ-s iiiajcstv. 17 Tlie confi- 
dence of Ins faitli 

A PRAYER of Habakkuk the proplict upon 
Shigionoth.* 
2 Lord, I have heard tliy speech,* and \yas 
afraid : Lord, revive* thy work in the midst of 
tlio years," in the midst of the years make known ; 
ill wrath remember mercy. 

H God came from Teman.^ and the Holy One 
from mount Paran. Selah. Ilis glory covered the 
heavens, and the earth was full of his praise. 

4 And his brightness was as the light ; he had 
horns coming out of his hand:' and there mas the 
hiding of his power. 

5 Before him went the pestilence, and burning 
coals' went forth at his fent. 

6 He stood, and measured the earth: he beheld, 
and drove asunder the nations ; and the everlast- 
ing mountains were scattered, the perpetual hills 
did bow: his ways are everlasting.'' 

7 I saw tlie tents of Cuslian* in affliction:* and 
the curtains of the land of Midian did treinlile. 

8 Was the Lord displeased against the rivers ? 
vas thine anger against the rivers ? mas thy wrath 



• Or 


accord 




to variable 


son^s. or tui 


es. 


alle.l 


in Hf 


brew, 


Shiginii 


oil 


t Ileb. 


rtport 




/tearing. 





, preserc 


all 


•e a 


.lohn 


10:11 


i Or 


tl,e 


sinill,. 


1 Or, 


hri 


^/it beams 


out 


of his side. 


1 Or, 


rf/.wn 


ses. Dent. 3-. 


:-Jl 


1' Mic. 


5:2. 


U 


, Etiiiopia 


t 


Or. tinder 


"i// 


ction 


or va 


nit!j. 


I Or, ^^ 


ere. 



idolaters pray, are a true emblem of all the vain things on 
which sinners who depart from the 'living God rely to 
make them happy and prosperous. 

20. God's presence ami giory fill the earth ; he would 
have all nations with willing hearts reverence and obey 
liira ; they who refuse his authority must be broken in 
pieces by his almightj' power. 



CHAPTER IIL 

1. Apratjer ; the prophet, in vi^w nf l)ofh lln 

' llis rnlllitr\ll 



jiiil,:;n 



wliicli God liad denounced U] 

tlie Chaldees, chap. 1:6, etc., and tiir iinnciisi.'d (irli\ t i:iiirc 
from them at a future period, cliap. 2:8, etc., cclelirates 
the future interposition of Jehovah for the redemption of 
his people in language borrowed from their past history. 
Thus this sublime song is both a prayer for the renewal 
of God's wondrous works in the days of old, and a proph- 
ecy of such a renewal. Shigionoth; probably the name of 
a tune of a lyric character. 

2. I have heard tliij speech; or, as the margin, '• thy report ;" 
that is, the report of the judgments which thou art about 
to send upon thy people, chap. 1:6. Revive thy work; thy 
work of salvation. In the mi/ht of the years; that is, of 
tliese years of calamity. Make known; thy mercy and 
salvation. 

3. God came from Temaii; compare Deut. 33:2; Judges 
5:4, 5; Psa. 68:7, 8. It was in the wilderness of Arabia 
that God first appeared to Moses, Exod. 3:2; there ho 
revealed himself in awful splendor at the giving of the 
law ; there also he manifested himself for forty years to the 
children of Israel. Hence, before the establishment of the 
t;ibernacle in Canaan, this wilderness and the bordering 
mountains are considered as his pecidiar dwelling-place, 
and he is poetically represented as coming thence in divine 
glory for the salvation of his people. Teman — Paran; 
regions south of Palestine bordering upon Edom. 

4. Horns ; beams of light. There ; that is, in the midst 
of ■' the light which no man can approach unto." T/ie hid- 
in<x of his power ; the pavilion where he hides his power 
and majesty from mortal vision. Compare 1 Tim. 6:16. 

T). Before him went the pestilence — burninf; coals ; he comes 
in awful majesty and holiness to destroy his enemies, and 



against the sea, that thou didst ride upon thy hor- 
ses and thy chariots of* salvation ? 

9 Thy bow was made (jiiit(! naked, according to 
the oaths of the tribes, (vm thy word. Selah. 
Thou didst cleave the earth with rivers.-* 

10 The mountains saw thee, and they trembled: 
the overflowing of the water passed by: the deep 
uttered his voice, and lifted up his hands on 
high. 

11 The sun and moon stood still in their habita- 
tion :'' at the light of thine arrows they went,' 
and at the shining of thy glittering spear. 

12 Thou didst march through the land' in indig- 
nation, thou didst thresh the heathen in anger. 

13 Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy 
people, even for salvation with thine anointed ; 
thou woundedst the head out of the house of the 
wicked.'' by discovering' the foundation unto the 
neck. Selah. 

14 Thou didst strike through with his staves the 
head of his villages: they came out* as a whirl- 
wind to scatter me: their icjoicing icas as to de- 
vour the ])oor secretly. 

1.") Thou didst walk through the sea with thy 
horses, titrcugh the heap* of great waters. 
16 When I heard, my belly trembled ; my lips 



S Or, 


the ri 


vers of tlie 


earth. 


' .losh 


in:12. 


13. 1 


Or, 


thine a 


-rows wc 


Iked 


in III 


liallt 


i Fsi. 11U:8. 


I Heb. 


making 


naked 




Heb. ic 


ere temp 


■stu~ 


oits. 


t Or, 


mud. 



















the pestilence and death are his attending ministers. Com- 
pare Psa. 18:12-14; 50:3; 97:3. 

6. Measured; surveyed with his ej-e ; but some render, 
•' shook," which agrees well with the following context. 
His ways are everlasting ; literally, " ways of old are to him," 
that is, he works wonderfully, as in the days of old. 

7. Cushan; probably the same as Cush. Cush and Mid- 
ian stand here as representatives of all the heathen pow- 
ers, and they tremble at Jehovah's presence. 

8. Was the Lord displeased against the rivers ? why were 
the rivers and seas dried up ? was it because God was 
angry with them ? The answer is, " No ; it was that he 
might save his people." Compare Psa. 114. which is the 
best commentary on this verse. Upon thy horses and thy 
chariots; that is, through the sea and the rivers, drying 
them up before thee, verse 15. 

9. Made quite naked; taken from its cover, that it might 
be used against thine enemies. According to the oaths of the 
tribes, even thy word; this very difficult clause has been 
variously translated and explained. According to our 
version it means, that God employed his bow against the 
enemies of his people, in accordance with the oaths which 
he had sworn to the tribes of Israel, jiromising them pro- 
tection and deliverance. Didst cleave the earth with rivers; 
Exod. 17:6; Num. 20:11; Psa. 78:15. 

10. The overf owing of the water, literally, "a flood of 
water ;" that is, bursting from the clouds. Pa.9.<:ed by; or, 
" overflowed." Floods of rain, with attending thunder and 
lightnhig, are elsewhere rejiresented as accompanying the 
manifestation of Jehovah. Judg. 5:4; Psa. 68:8. 

11. .5/001-/ still; in awe and astonishment. There is prob- 
ably an allusion to Joshua 10:12, 13. At the light of thine 
arrows they went ; some render, " at the light of thine ar- 
rows which flew." 

13. Thy people — thine anointed; the covenant people of 
God, with their anointed Head. By disrorermg the founda- 
tion ; by laying bare the foundation of his house in demol- 
ishing "it. Unto the neck; this is probably a proverbial 
expression for complete destruction. 

14. IFiM A« sfaycs; with the enemies' own spears. Vil- 
lages ; or, " captains." 

16. When I heard ; "thy re]Jort." verse 2. The prophet 
1035 



Confiding 



IIABAKKUK III 



faitk in God. 



quivered at tlic voice : rottenness entered into 
my bones, und I trembled in myself, that I might 
rest in the day of troiil)le : when he cometh up 
unto the people, he will invade them" with his 
troops. 

17 ^Although the fig-tree shall not blossom, 
neither s/iaU fruit be in the vines; the labor of the 
olive shall fail,+ and the fields shall yield no meat ; 



l« pieces, t Hebrt 



' Job 13: 15. 1 Hebrew, Ne, 



now returns to the theiiic with which he began, the threat- 
ened desolation of the land hy the Chaldees. T/tal I might 
rest; concisely spoken for '■ anxionsly lookin": that I might 
find a resting-place." This resting-place he found in Ciod, 
as he proceeds to state in the verses followinp;. Wlien he 
cometli up unto tite people, Im will invade liicm with liis troops; 
or, " when the people cometh up that shall invade us with 
his troops ;" that is, the Chaldeans, whose invasion has 
been predicted. 

17-19. Alt/wugh the Jig-tree — high places; the prophet's 
faith rises above all possible calamities that can come 
upon his people through the Chaldeans, or in any other 
way, and fastens itself on the infinite goodness and faith- 
fulness of Jehovah. Like hinds' feet ; swift to escape dan- 
ger. He will make me to walk upon my high places; my 
fastnesses in the mountain heights, where I am free from 
danger. To the chief singer ; this dedication shows that 



the flock shall be cut off from the fold, a. .m. .■ws. 
and there shall he no herd in the stalls: 'eas.' 

18 Yot 1 will rejoice in the Loui), I will joy in 
the God of my salvation." 

19 The Lord God w my strength, and he will 
make my feet like hinds' feet, and he will make 
me to walk upon my high places. To the chief 
singer on my stringed instruments.' 



notk ; Psahn -J, title. 



the ode was to be used in the solemn worship of God. 
My stringed instruments ; the words seem to imply instru- 
ments that cither belonged to the prophet, or were under 
his special charge. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-lC. In times of great calaniit}' it is suitable tliat we 
call to mind God's wonderfid interpositions for his people 
in days of old, and slay our souls ui)on his everlasting 
power am! faithfulness ; assured that the final resnlt shall 
be, as it always has been heretofore, the increased pros- 
perity of his own cause, and the higlier i)cace and bless- 
edness of those who love and trust him. 

17-19. God is himself the portion of his people, and 
though all earthly possessions fail them, he remains an 
infinite and all-sufficient good, able to make them victori- 
ous over all evil, and to pour through their souls an over- 
Howing tide of holy peace and gladness. 



lOllfi 



ZEPHANIAII. 



The genealogy of Zeplianiah is traced back through Cushi, Gedaliah, and Amariah, to Hezekiah, for, in 
the original Hebrew the words Hizkiah and Hezekiah are the same. As it is not usual that the descent 
of prophets should be given witli much care, some have supposed that this was on account of his noble 
origin, Hezekiah being assumed to bo the king of that name. This, however, is not certainly determined. 
Zephaiiiah, prophesying in the days of Josiah king of Judah, was contemporary with Jeremiah. He fore- 
told the utter desolation of the land of Judah by the Chaldeans, and also that of the neighboring regions ; 
sharply rebuked his countrymen for their sins, and promised a glorious purification and enlargement of 
God's people in the distant future. 



S;S'S,«. CHAPTER I. 

God's severe jutlginent against Judah for divers sins. 

'' T^HE word of the Lord which came unto Zopha- 
J_ niah tlic son of Cushi, tlie son of Gedaliah, 
the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiali, in the 
days of Josiah the sou of Ainon, king of Judah. 

2 I will utterly consume* all things from off the 
land,* saith the Lord. 

3 I will consume man and beast; I will consume 
the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea, 
and tlie stumbling-blocks* with tlic wicked ; and 1 
will cut olY man from oft' tlie land, saith the Lord. 

•1 I will also stretcli out my hand upon Judah, 
and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem ; and I 
will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place, 
and the name of the Chemarim with the priests ;^ 

5 And them that worship the host of heaven 
upon the house-tops ; " and them that worship'' and 
that swear by" the LoRD,'^ and that swear by Mal- 
cham ;'' 

6 And them that are turned back from the 



• Heb. By takim; away, I will make an. end. t Heb. the face of tlie land. 
< Or, idoh. 5 Fullilled, A. M. :5380. B. C. 6->4; 2 Kings ai:-l, 5. » 2 Kings 
21 12. Jer 19.13. b 2 Kings 17:33, 41. 1 Or, lo. = Isa. 4S:1 ; Ho-i. 4:15. 



CHAPTER L 

3 The fou'l'i^fishes ; a figurative way of dcscrihina; the 
utter desolation of the land by the invaders. Coin]iare 
Ezek. 38:20; Rosea 4:3. The shimbling-bloch ; the idols, 
wliieh were stumbling-blocks to those who worshipped 
them. Compare Ezek. 14:3, 4. 

4. The remnant of Baal; the remnant of the worship of 
Baal that remained after the reformation under Josiah. 
2 Kings 23:4, 5. The Chemarim ; " idolatrous priests," as 
the word is rendered in 2 Kings 23:5. Priests; priests of 
Jehovah who were unfaithful to their office, and encour- 
aged, or at least tolerated idolatry. 

5. Upon the house-tops; see 2 Kings 23:12; Jer. 19:13; 
32:29. By the Lord — by Malcham ; mixing the worship of 
Jeliovah with that of idols. Malcham "signifies "their 
king," that is, Moloch, which also means " king." 

7. Hold thy peace ; keep silence with reverence and fear. 
A sacrifice; a slaughter of his enemies. Isa. 34:6; Jer. 



LoRD;° and those that have not sought the Lord, 
nor inquired for him.' 

7 Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord 
God:*-' for the day of the Lord is at hand:'' for 
the Lord hath prepared a sacrifice, he hath bid' 
his guests.' 

8 And it shall come to pass in the day of the 
Lord's sacrifice, that I will punish* the princes, 
and the king's children, and all such as are clothed 
with strange apparel. 

9 In the same day also will I punish all those 
that leap on the threshold, which fill their masters' 
houses with violence and deceit. 

10 And it shall come to pass in that day, saith 
the Lord, that there shall be the noise of a cry from 
the fish-gate, and a howling from the second, and 
a great crashing from the hills. 

11 Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktcsli, for all the 
merchant people are cut down ; all they that bear 
silver are cut off. 

12 And it shall come to pass at that time, that 
I will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish 



d 1 Kings 11:3:). e Heb. l(l:.33. f Heb. 2:3. s Zech. 
1 Heb. xannifitd, or iireliared; Col. 1:12. • iMatt. 22:t! 
• Heb. visit upon. 



46:10; Ezek. 39 : 17. He hath bid his guests ; to the sacrifice. 
Ezek. 39:17; Rev. 19:17. But some render, "He hath 
consecrated his called ones ;" that is, the Chaldeans, as 
his ministers in this sacrifice. 

8. Clothed with strange apparel; the foreign apparel is a 
sign that they have adopted the religion and habits of 
foreigners. 

9. Leap on the threshold; some suppose the threshold of 
their heathen temples, as a superstitious rite. 1 Sam. a : 5. 
Others think that the reference is to the servants of the 
Jewish princes, who dance in exultation upon the threshold 
of their masters' palaces, in vie w of their successful rapine. 

10. The fish-gate ; probal)ly in the north-castorn quarter of 
Jerusalem. The second ; rendered " college," 2 Kings 22 : 14 ; 
2 Cliron. 34:22. It was some newer section of Jeru.salein. 

11. Maktesh ; that is, " mortar," as the word is rendered in 
Prov. 27 : 22. It seems to have been some valley devoted to 
merchandise in or near Jerusalem, so called from its form. 

12. Settled on their lees; for this figure, see note on Jer. 

1037 



All erhnrtulion 



zi:riiAisiAii II, 



to repent anu. 



tho moil tlmt are settled' on tlieir lees:" that say 
ill their heart, The Lord will not do good, nei- 
ther will he do evil." 

13 Therefore their goods s^hall beeome a booty, 
and tlieir houses a desolation : tliey shall also 
build houses, but not inhabit //«"m .• and they siiall 
plant vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof. 

14 The great day of tlie Loud m near, jY w near, 
and liasteth greatly, even tiie voice of the day of 
the Lord:" the niigh ty man shall cry tiiercliitterly.'' 

1 ') That day is a day of wrath, a ihiy (jf trouble 
and distress,'' a day of wasleness and desolation. 
a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds 
and tiiick darkness,*^ 

16 A day of tiie trumpet and alarm against tiic 
fenced cities, and against the high towers.*-' 

17 And I will bring distress upon men, that they 
shall walk like blind men,'' )>e<'ause they have 
sinned against tiic Lord : and tlieir blood shall be 
poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung.' 

18 Neither their silver nor their gold shall be 
able to deliver them in the day of the Lord's 
wrath ;J but the whole land shall be devoured by 
the lire of his jealousy -.^ for he sliall make even a 
speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 An cxhortatinn to repentance. 4 The jucJ;;inent of the Philistines, 8 
of Moab and Amnion, 12 of Ethiopia and Assyria. 

C^ ATIIER yourselves together,' yea, gather 
J together, nation not desired ;* 

2 Before the decree bring forth, before the day 
pass as the cliafl','" before the licreo anger of the 
Lord come upon you," before the day of the 
Lord's anger come upon you." 

3 Seek ye tho Lord,'' all ye meek of the earth, 



■ \le\>.rur,ltil.i<rtltirkrncd. " Jer. 4-<: 11 ; .\ 


noslKl ; Rev. 3:3). 1) I'sa. 


fl);7. c Joel -i; 1,11. d Rev. 0.15-17. c Til. 'J- 


:3; Jer. o0:7. f Amos5:l». 


»J»r.4:lU. hlsl. .59:10. i I'si. 79:3; Jer. 9:-2 


.'. iProv. 11:4: Ezek.7:l9. 


kch.3:rt. 1 Joel 2:1(1. t Or, rfw/roiw. ™ Hos 


13:3. n a Kings 32: 13, 17; 



which have wroueht his judgment ;i seek a.m. 5374. 
... ', 1 -1 1 u. r. •Unit 

righteousness, seek meekness: it may be fso. 

yc shall be hid in the day of the Lonii's anger.' 

4 '[ For Gaza shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon 
a desolation: they siiall drive out Aslidod at the 
noonday, and Ekron shall be rooted up.' 

5 Woe unto the inhabitants of the sea-coast, the 
nation of the Cherethites!' the word of the Lord 
is against you ; Canaan, the land of the Philis- 
tines, I will even destroy thee, that there shall be 
no inhabitant. 

6 And the sea-coast shall be d. veilings and cot- 
tages for shepherds, and folds for flocks. 

7 And the coast shall bo for the remnant of the 
house of Judah;" tli(!y shall feed thereupon: in 
the houses of Asiikclon shall they lie down in the 
evening: for* the IjORD their God shall visit them,'' 
and turn away their cajitivity.'"' 

8 "^ I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the 
revilingsof the children of Ammon. whereby they 
have reproached my people, and magnified them- 
selves against their border. 

9 Therefore, 0.9 I live, saith the Lord of hosts, 
the God of Israel. Surely Moab shall lie as Sodom, 
and the children of Aiiimon as Gomorrah," even 
the breeding of nettles, and .salt-pits, and a per- 
petual desolation : the residue of my people shall 
spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall 
possess them. 

10 This shall they have for their pride, because 
they have re])roaclied and magnified themselves 
against the people of the Lord of hosts. 

11 The Lord will be terrible unto them: for he 
will famish* all the gods of the earth; and mai 
shall worship him, every one from his place, even 
all the isles of the heathen. 



3)30; 3 Chr. :)fi:lG, 17. « Psa. 9.5:7. S. p Amos 5:0, 15. q Zech. P:19. 
r Jonah 3:9. • Jer.47:.1; Zech. 9:5, 6. 1 £zek.3S:lC. u I.«. 11:11; .Mio. 
,1.7 . n. ...1... . Luke 1 ;(>•(. " Psa. 13«:l, 4; Jer. 29: 14. i Jer. 4tj:l, 



48:11. Long tranquillity had not only increased their 
strength and riches, but hardened their hearts in carnal 
security. 

IN.STRUCTIONS. 

1. The agreement of so many iirojihets in foretelling 
the approaching desolation of .Iiulali and Jerusalem, is a 
striking proof tliat they all spoke by the same Spirit of 
inspiration, and it left that wicked generation without 
excuse. 

3-9. God's chastisements never proceed in a blind and 
indiscriminate way, but are alw.ays so directed as to sep- 
arate from his people the false and hypocritical, who 
vainly endeavor to unite the service of (joil with that of 
mammon, and to have a standing in his church while tlieir 
lives are iiolluted with violence and deceit. 

10, U. It is ail easy thing for (Jod to take from "men of 
the world, which have their portion in this life," all the 
possessions which they have accumulated by years of 
anxious toil. Then they must be filled with vexation and 
bitter lamentation, for they have no treasure in heaven. 

12. When the cfToct of long prosperity and (luiet is to 
nourish in men's hearts the spirit of .V theism, so that they 
learn to despise alike the ])roniises and tlireatcnings of 
God's word, ho will compel them by terrible ))Uiiishments 
to feel tliat he rules over the aflairs of this wtirld. tuid 
makes a distinction lictween the righteous and the wickeil. j 

13. Wo are alike dependent on God for power to gain , 
property, and li> kee]) and enjoy it when it is gained. | 
Without his blessing all our possessions will slide out of 
our own hands into those of our neighbors. 

1038 



17, 18. When God purposes to destroy a people for their 
sins, neither counsel nor riches avail them any thing ; 
their plans are overthrown, their wealth given to others, 
and they perish miserably without any tu help them. 

CHAPTER n. 

1. Gather yourselves; for confession and supplication. 
The Jews are solemnly exhorted to repentance before tho 
threatened evils come upon them. Not desired; or, as some 
render, •' without shame." 

2. The decree; God's decree to make the land desolate. 
Bring forth; go into effect; produce its progeny of mis- 
cry. Before the day pans as the chaff; before tho day of 
God's forbeiirance pass quickly away. 

4. For Gaza shall he — a desolation ; the devastation shall 
be universal, including all the nations bordering on Jud(>a. 
The four towns mentioned here were the four chief cities 
of the Philistines. Gath, tlio fifth, seems to have previ- 
ously perished. 

5. Tlic Chcrclhilcs: the same as Chcrcthim, Ezek. 25:16; 
another n.ime for tho I'liilistines. 

«. Cottages for shepherds— folds for fochs ; uncultivated 
pasture-ground. 

7. The const shall be for the rrmnant of the house of Judah ; 
that is, the coast of the I'liilistines after its desolation, 
(iod shall reinstate his people in their ancient posses- 
sitnis, and they shall be victorious over all their ene- 
mies, of wliom the I'liilistines, Moabites, and Animonites 
were among the most bitter and formidable. Compare 
Isa. 11:14. 



Jernsakm reproved 



ZEPHANIAH III. 



for divers sins. 



A. M. .wi. 12 T" Ye Ethiopians also," yc shall be slain 

B. I', about , ,1 ' •' 

"1. by my sword. 

13 And ho will stretch out his hand against the 
north, and destroy Assyria;'' and will make Nine- 
veh a desolation, and dry like a wilderness. 

1-1 And flocks shall lie down in the midst of her. 
all the beasts of tiic nations: both the cormorant* 
and the bittern shall lodge in the upper lintels* 
of it; their voice shall sing in the windows; deso- 
lation sha/l. be in tiie thresholds: for he shall un- 
cover* tiie cedar work. 

15 This w the rejoicing city that dwelt carelessly, 
that said in her heart, I am, and ihii-e is none be- 
sides me : " ho w is she become a desolation, a place 
for beasts to lie down in! every one that passeth 
by her shall hiss, and wag his hand. 

CHAPTER III. 

1 A sliarp reproof of Jerusalt-ni for iUv-er.s sins. S An exhortation to 
wait fur the restoration of Israel, 14 and to rejoice for their salvation 
bv God. 

■\T70E to her that is filthy^ and polluted, to 
VV the oppressing city ! 

2 Sh" obeyed not the voice ; she received not 
correction;' she trusted not in the Lokd; she 
drew not near to her God. 

3 Her princes within her are roaring lions; her 
judges are evening wolves; they gnaw not the 
bones till the morrow. 

4 Her prophets aj-e light and treacherous per- 
sons:'' her priests have polluted the sanctuar}^, 
they have done violence to the law. 

5 The just Lord is in the midst thereof;" he 
will not do iniquity: every morning^ doth he 
bring his judgment to light, he faileth not; but 
the unjust knowctli no shame.' 



a Isa. UU:!. b Isa. 10: la, Hi. • Or, pelimn. t Or, knnpx. m rhapiters. 
I Or. vjheii lit halk umortrtd. = Isa. 47:3; Heir. l,s:7. i Or, glutlonous; 
lli-h. rmw. I Or, instruction, d Jer 2:i: 11, 3-J, e Eccl. 3:18. 17. 1 Heb. 
morning iy morning, tjor. .S:1S. • Or, corners, r Isa. G3:S: hMio. -itl. 



12. Ethiopians; these, in connection with Egypt, were 
at that time the rivals of Assyria, 2 Kings 19:9. 

13. Will make Nineveh a desolation, and drtj like a wilder- 
ness; the prophet foretells the utter desolation of Nineveh 
in language agreeing closely with that of Isaiah in refer- 
ence to Babylon and Edom. Compare Isa. 13:21, 22 ; 34: 13- 
15. The present ruins of this renowned city arc the best 
comment on his words. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 

l-?i. God graciously delays his threatened judgments, 
th;it we may have oiiiioi-tuiiity to escape them by repent- 
ance; but if we despise his long-suffering kindness, the 
day of mercy will soon pass away, and escape will be no 
longer possible. 

4-11. When God afflicts his people, he intends not their 
destruction, but their correction; he will not allow their 
enemies, who exult over their calamities, and take advan- 
tage of them to oppress and spoil them, to go unpunished ; 
his own servants he will restore to more than their former 
prosperity, while those who hated and persecuted them 
perish without remedy. 

CHAPTER III. 

1. FiWvj; or, " rebellious." Jerusalem is meant. 

3. Gnaie not the bones tUl the morrow ; or, " gnaw not on 
the morrow;" that is, devour them immediately, leaving 
nothing till the morrow. Others render, "they lay up 
nothing for the morrow," which comes to the same sense. 

5. Titereof; of -lerusalom, beholding all her iniquities. 



G I have cut off the nations: their towers" are 
desolate; I made their streets waste, that none 
passeth by: tiieir cities are destroyed, so that 
there is no man, that there is none inhabitant. 

7 I said, Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt re- 
ceive instruction ;" so their dwelling should not be 
cut off, howsoever I punished them ; l)ut they rose 
early, and corrujited all their doings.'' 

8 li Therefore wait ye upon me,' saifh thr Lokd, 
until tlie day that 1 rise up to the prey ; lor my 
determination is to gatlier the nations,-' tiiat 1 may 
assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine 
indignation, (vtn all my fierce anger: for all the 
earth shall bo devoured with the fire of my jeal- 
ousy.'' 

9 For then will I turn to the people a pure lan- 
guage,* that they may all call upon the name of 
the Lord,' to serve him with one consent.* 

10 From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia my sup- 
pliants, ei'fn the daughter of my dispersed, shall 
bring mine offering.'" 

11 Li that day shalt thou not be ashamed for all 
thy doings, wherein thou hast transgressed against 
me :" for then I will take away out of the midst of 
thee them that rejoice in thy pride, and thou shalt 
no more be haughty because of* my holy mountain. 

12 1 will also leave in the midst of thee an af- 
flicted and poor people," and they shall trust in the 
name of the Lord. 

13 The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity," 
nor speak lies;'' neither shall a deceitful tongue 
be found in their mouth : for they shall feed and 
lie down, and none shall make thein afraid. 

14 T[ .Sing. daughter of Zion ;■■ shout, Israel ; 
be glad and rejoice with all the heart, daughter 
of Jerusalem. 



2. i Trov. a0:-.'2; Lam. 3:a.5, 20. J Jncl n-.-i; Matt. 25:.3a. k 2 Pet. .'!:10. 
f Heb. //p lActsa:4,etc t llA. shoulder . m Psa. GS:31 ; Isa. IS: I, '. 
1 Psa. 49:5; Joel 2:2G, 27. S Heb. in. o Jas. 2:5. P Matt. 13-41. <1 Rev. 
21:27. i-Zech. 2:1U; 9 <J. 



and continually exercising his power in her as a righteous 
judge. 

6. The nations ; around Jerusalem, for their wickedness, 
as a warning to her. 

7. Their dwelling; literally, "her dwelling," tlie dwelling 
of Jerusalem. He changes from the second to the third 
person. 

8. Therefore xvait ye upon me; the prophet now addresses 
the pious remnant of the people, and encourages them to 
wait patiently upon God until the impending calamities 
are overpast, when he will gloriously interiiose for their 
salvation and the destruction of their enemies. On this use 
of the word "therefore," in passing from threatenings to 
promises, see note on Hosea 2 : 14. To gather the nations ; 
providentially, that this may be the occasion of their de- 
struction. Compare Isa. 29 : 3-8 ; Ezek. 38:7-9, IG; Joel 
3:2, 9-17; Rev. 19:19, 20.' 

9. To the people; that is, to the nations, as the original 
word implies; for this is a projjliecy of the introduction 
of the Gentiles into God's church. A pure language; lit- 
erally, as the margin, " a pure lij) ;" a lip not defiled with 
the name of false gods. 

10. The daughter of mij dispersed; my dispersed people. 
Compare the expression, " the daughter of Zion ;" that i.s, 
Zion's people. 

11. Not he ashamed for all thy doings; because they liavo 
all been repented of, put away, and forgiven. These words 
are not inconsistent with such passages as Ezek. 3G:32 : for 
there the shame of holy sorrow and gratitude is meant; 
here, the shame of God's contuiucd rebuke. 

1039 



rromises of mercy 



ZEPHAXIAH Iir. 



atid restoraiini. 



15 The Loud liatli takeu away tliy juclgmcnts, bo 
hath cast out thine ciieiiiy:'' the King of Israel, 
even the Loud, is in tlie midst of thee : thou shalt 
not see evil any more. 

10 In that day it shall be saiil to Jerusalem, 
Fear thou not: and to Zion, Let not thy hands be 
slack.' 

17 The Loud thy God in the midst of thee is 
raiglity; he will save, he will rejoice over thee 
with joy;"" he will rest* in his love, he will joy 
over tlieo with singing. 

18 I will gatiier t/iem that are sorrowful for the 



aRom. 8:a3,»l; Rev. 12:10. •Or,/amt. b Isi. 62:5; Jer S'iHl. t Heb. 
be silent. 1 Heb. the burden upo7i it was reproach. S Heb. I tviU set them 



18. / will gather — a burden; this verse may be more 
clearly rendered thus : " The afflicted, far removed from the 
solemn assembly, I have gathered," that is, I will gather : 
" they are of thee," belong to thee : " reproach resteth upon 
her," that is, collectively, Zion's dispersed ones, "as a bur- 
den." 

INSTRUCTIOX. 

Ood has established the visible church for the glory of 
his own name and the maintenance of the cause of truth 
in the world, and he will not suffer her to be destroyed by 



solemn assembly, who are of thee, to whom a. m. sa*. 
the reproach of it icas a burden.* ' sso' 

19 Bcliold, at that time I will undo all that 
afflict thee: and I will save her that halteth, and 
gather her that was driven out; and I will get 
them praise* and fame in every land where they 
have been put to shame.' 

20 At that time will I bring you again, even in 
the time that I gather you:" for I will make you 
a name and a praise among all people of the earth, 
when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, 
saith the Lord. 



for a praise. I Heb. of their shame. 
23:25; 34:13; 37:21; Amos 9: 14. 



Isa. 11:12; 2?:12; 86:8; Ezak. 



either inward corruption or outward persecution. "Wicked 
men, rising up in the midst of her, have often usurped do- 
minion over her, and filled her ^\nth violence and crime ; 
but he knows how to separate proud transgressors from 
her, and to reserve for himself "an afflicted and poor peo- 
ple." Thus will he proceed, purifying his people by his 
manifold judgments from age to ;ige, and overthrowing all 
the devices of their outward enemies, till he makes them 
" a name and a praise among all people of the earth." Luke 
12:32. 



lOiO 



IIAGGAI. 



Haggai is the first of the three prophets of the restoration. By comparing the title of his prophecy 
with that of Zcchariah, we learn that he entered upon his prophetical office two months earlier than the 
latter. The several messages of Hag'gai were delivered within the short space of three months, and they 
all had reference to the work of rebuilding the temple. By the slanderous representations of the Jews' 
enemies this had been interrupted, as we learn from the fourth chapter of Ezra. Meanwhile the Jews, 
having yielded to the spirit of unbelief, had grown cold and indifferent to the work ; for which the 
prophets Haggai and Zechariah reproved thorn. Ezra 5:1, 2. 



B.' C. liboiit 520. CHAllERIt 

1 Haggai reproveth the people for neglecting the building of the house. 
7 He inciteth them to the building. 12 He promiseth G-od's assist- 
ance to them being forward. 

IN the second year of Darius the kinp;,''' in the 
si.xtli month, in the first day of the month, came 
the word of the Lord by* Haggai the prophet 
unto Zerubbabcl tlie son of Shealtiel,'' governor* 
of Judali, and to Joshua the son of Josedccli, the 
high-priest,'^ saying, 

2 Thus Bpcaketh tlie Lorp of hosts, saying, Tiiis 
people say, The time i^^ not come, the time that 
tlie Lord's house should be built. 

3 Then came the word of the Lord by Haggai 
the prophet, saying, 

4 Is it time for you, ye, to dwell in your ceiled 
houses, and this house lie waste?* 

5 Now therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts; 
Consider* your ways.'' 

G Ye have sown much, and bring in little;'' ye 
eat, but ye have not enough;^ ye drink, but ye 
are not filled with drink ; ye clothe you, but there 
is none warm ; and he that earneth wages, earn- 
cth wages to put it into a bag with holes.^ 

7 IT Thus saith the Lord of hosts ; Consider your 
ways. 

8 Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and 
build the house; and I will take pleasure in it, 
and I will be glorified, saith the Lord. 



,2. ' Heb by tlie hand of . b Ezra 3: -2. ^ Or, mptntn. 
im. 7:2. \ Rfh. Set your heart on. e Lam. .3:^0. f Dent. 



!ra 4:24; 5:1, 
r. Ii:l5. i Sam. .... 
6 Ho3.4;10; Mic.6:14. ! Heb. pierrerf. hch.2:lG,17. I Or. 6/011 



CHAPTER I. 

2. Tlie time is not come; they doubtless excused them- 
selves on the ground of Artaxerxes' decree, which remained 
yet in force. Ezra 4:23. But God saw that indifference, 
and tlio love of worldly ease, were the true cause of tlieir 
in.action, ver. 4, 9. 

12. Obeyed the voice nf the Lord; compare Ezra 5:2. 

13. I am with i/ou; as soon as they set themselves in ear- 
nest to rebuild tlie temple, God removed all outward hin- 
derances to the work. Ezra 5:3; 6:12. 

IXSTRtTTIOXS. 
2. It is a bad sign when difficulties and hinderancea in 
God's service, instead of increasing our zeal and earnest- 
ness, lead to coldness, indifference, and vain excuses ; for 
66 



9 Ye looked for much, and lo, it came to little;'' 
and when ye brouglit it home, I did blow upon it.' 
Why? saith the Lord of hosts. Because of my 
house that is waste, and ye run every man unto his 
own house. 

10 Therefore the heaven over you is stayed from 
dew, and the earth is stayed^TOm her fruit.' 

11 And I called for a drought upon the land, 
and upon the mountains, and upon the corn, and 
upon the now wine, and upon the oil, and upon that 
which tiicgroundbringeth forth, and upon men, and 
upon cattle, and upon all the labor of the hands.J 

12 ^ Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and 
Joshua the son of Josedech, the high-priest, with 
all the remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of 
the Lord their God, and the words of Haggai the 
propiiet, as the Lord their God had sent him, and 
the people did fear before the Lord. 

13 Then spake Haggai the Lord's messenger in 
the Lord's message unto the people,'' saying, I am 
with you, saith the Lord.' 

14 And the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerub- 
babel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and 
the spirit of Joshua the son of Josedech, the high- 
priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the peo- 
ple ;™ and they came and did work in the house of 
the Lord of hosts, their God," 

15 In the four and twentieth day of the sixth 
month, in the second year of Darius the king. 



away. ■ Dent. 33:23; Hos. 2:9. J I Kings 17:1 ; 2 Kings 8:1. tMil.2:7; 
2 Cor. 5:20. I iVIatt. 2d: 20. m l Cor. 12:4-11. o Ezra 5:2, 8. 



it shows that we are willing to labor in God's cause only 
when it costs us no inconvenience or sacrifice. 

4. When we can find both time and means to build for 
ourselves ceiled houses, but neither for the Lord's house, 
it is plain that we love our own private interests better 
than God's cause. 

5. Serious consideration is the beginning of amendment. 
Psa. 119:59. 

6. We cannot defraud God and prosper. 

8-11. The best way to succeed in our worldly enterprises 
is to go steadily forward in God's service, promptly mak- 
ing all the sacrifices which his cause demands of us, and 
trusting him for the supply of our temporal wants. He 
Itas tlie resources of heaven anil earth at his disposal ; to 
him it is alike easy to increase or diminish our earthly 
1041 



Encouragement to 



ilAGGAI 11. 



rchuUd the temple. 



CHAPTER II, 



1 He encourageth the people to the work, by promise of (jreater glory 
to the second temple than was in the tirst. 10 In the type of holy 
things and uncle.m he showetli their sins hindered the work. 20 G-od's 
promise to Zerubbabel. 

IN the seventh month, in tlie one and twentieth 
day of the month, came the word of the Loud 
hy" the prophet Hafrrrai, saying, 

2 Speak now to Zerubbabel tlie son of Shealtiel, 
jEfOvenior of Judali, and to Joshua tiie son of Jose- 
dech, the liigli-priest, and to the residue of the peo- 
ple, saying, 

3 Wiio is left among you that saw this house in 
her first glory ?" and how do ye see it now ? is if 
not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing ?'' 

4 Yet now be strong,'' Zerubbabel, saith the 
Lord ; and be strong, Joshua, son of Josodcch, 
the high-priest; and be strong, all ye people of 
tiie laud, saith the Lord, and work : for 1 atii with 
you,'' saith the Lord of iiosts: 

5 According to the word that I covenanted with 
you when ye came out of Egypt," so my Spirit re- 
maineth among you :' fear ye not. 

6 For thus saitli tlic Lord of hosts ; Yet once, it 
is a little while, and I will sliakc the heavens, and 
the cartli, and the sea, and tlie dry land:^ 

1 And I will shake all nations, and the desire of 
all nations shall come:'' and 1 will iill this house 
with glory, saith the Lord of hosts. 

8 The silver is mine, and the gold is mine,' saitli 
the Lord of hosts. 

9 The glory of this latter house .shall be greater 
than of tlie former,^ saith the Loud of hosts: and 
in tins place will I give peace,'' saitli the Lord of 
hosts. 

10 1 In the four and twentieth day of the ninth 
■month, in the second year of Darius, came the word 
of the Lord by Ilaggai the prophet, saying, 



' Hub. bu Ihe hand of. » Kzra 3:l-.>. >> Zech. 1: 10. c Zcoh. «:9. d ch. 
l:l:). e Exod. •>'JAr>,46. < Neh. O.-JO: Psa. 51:11, Vi; Isa. 03:11, 14. 
sJoel3:l(i; Ileb. I'2:i6. liGon.40:lU; Mai. 3:1; Luke 2:27, 46. M Chr. 
2:):14. J John 1:14; 2 Cor. 3:!). 10. k I'sa. 85:S; Luke 2:14; Eph.2:M. 



possessions ; and he will see tliat they who believe and 
obey him have all needful good. 

13. God is always with those who obey his commands, 
and go cheerfully forward in his service. 

H. The prompt obedience of God's people, aftcra season 
of inaction, greatly cheers tlie hearts of his messengers ; 
it is at once a proof of the genuineness of their religion, 
and of its increase in their souls. 

CIIAPTEll IL 

3. IVIm is left among you — as nothing; see tlic narrative, 
Ezra 3:12, 13. 

6. Sluilce the heavens — the dnj land; by the oming of tlie 
Messiah, and the establishment of his kingdom upon the 
ruins of Satan's kingdom. Compare Kzek. 38:19-23; Joel 
3:11-17; Ileb. 12:20-28. 

7. TIte desire of all nations:; the Messiah, in whom "all 
families of the earth shall bo blessed." Many render, 
more literally, " the ihings desired by all nations," that is, 
the blessings of the Messiah's reign, which amomits to tlie 
same thing. 

9. Greater than of the former ; though this may have been 
literally true of the second temple as renewed by Ilcrod, 
yet the reference here is to its spiritual glory. It was 
honored by the presence of the Son of God, who is the 
brightness of the Father's glory. Give peace; thnuigh the 
Messiah's work. Compare Eph. 2: 14. 

12, 13. If one bear — unclean; this is a sort of parable, and 
1042 



11 Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Ask a. m. .'mw. 

.1 • . • ii 1 1 • a. <'. about 

now the priests concfrning the law,' saying, ■■■at 

12 If (me boar holy flesii in the skirt of his gar- 
ment, and with his skirt do touch bread, or pot- 
tage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? 
And the priests answered and said. No. 

13 Then said PLiggai, If on* that is unclean by a 
dead body tout-h any of the.^e,"' shall it be unclean ? 
And the priests answered and said. It shall be 
unclean. 

14 Then answered Haggai, and said, So is this 
people, and so is this nation bcibre me," saith the 
Lord; and so is every work of their Lands; and 
that which they offer there is unclean. 

15 And now, I pray you, consider from this day 
and u])ward, from before a stone was laid upon a 
stone in the temple of the Lord : 

1() Since those days were, when one came to a 
heap of twenty measures, there were but ten : when 
one came to the press-fat for to draw out fifty ves- 
sels out of the press, there were but twenty." 

17 1 smote you with blasting and with mildew 
and with hail in all the labors of your hands;'' yet 
ye tunud not to mc>, saith the Lord. 

18 Consider now from this day and upward, from 
the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, (ven 
from the day that the foundation of the Lord's 
temple was laid,"" consider it. 

19 Is the seed yet in the barn? yea, as yet the 
vine, and the fig-tree, and the pomegranate, and 
the olive-tree, hath not brought forth:'' from this 
day will 1 bless you. 

20 'l And again the word of the Lord came unto 
riagirai in the tour and twentieth day of the month, 
saying, 

21 Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, say- 
ing, I will shake the heavens and the earth:" 

22 And I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, 



1 hcv. 10:10, 11; Deut 33:10; Mai. 2:7. n> Nii 
Jude23. och. 1:(>. !l; Zech. S:IO. P Deut. «<:22 
1 Zeoh. 3:9, 12. r Hab. 3: 17, 18. • ver. 0, 7. 



. 19:11. ■> Tilus 1:15; 
1 Kings 8:37; Amoi4:9. 



its meaning is, holy flesh, such as was offered in sacrifice, 
cannot make the ol)jects which it touches holy, but a dead 
body will defile all that it touches ; so no outward observ- 
ance of sacred rites can make you holy, while your hearts 
and lives arc unclean, but these, on the contrary, will de- 
file all your otl'orings, and every work which you under- 
take. 

11. So IS this people; that is, while they continue worldly- 
minded and remiss in duty. Though the people had begun 
to move in the work of building the house, they needed 
further reproof as well as encouragement. 

Ifi. Alwap of twenty measures; probably, a heap of sheaves 
which from it,s size might yield twenty measures. Fifty 
vessels; so many having been expected from the amount of 
the vintage gathered. 

10. Is the seed yet in the barn ? these words liave been 
variously interpreted. Some suppose they mean, " Has 
not all the seeil you have sown lieen committed to the 
ground, while as yet there are no signs of the future har- 
vest '?" The ninth mi>iith began with the new moon of 
December, which, in Palestine, is one of the months for 
sowing. But perhaps we may better fake the whole verse, 
except the hist clause, as a recital of past calamities, thus : 
"Ibis there remained," in the past years of famine, "tho 
seed in the barn?" that is, seeel enough for sowing.'etc. 

21, 22. I will shake— his brother ; a prophecy extending to 
the ilistant future, the fulfilment of which could be only 
begun under Zerubbabel. See note ou ver. C. 



God 



s promise 



HAGGAI ir. 



to Zcrubbabd. 



A. M ;usi and I will destroy the strength of the king- 
■ .v-v" '"" (loins of the iieathen ; •' and I will overthrow 
the chariots, and tliose that ride in thcni ;" and the 
horses and their riders shall come down, every one 
by the sword of his brother. 



.2:44. bMio. S:10; Zech. 9:10. 



23. A signet; a seal-ring, which was worn on one of tlie 
fingers of the right hand, or carried in the bosom. The 
meaning is, that God will preserve Zerubbabel, as a pre- 
cious treasure, from all the assaults of the wicked. But 
since tlie propliecy reached far beyond his day, the prom- 
ise made to him extends, in like manner, to all whom God 
sets over his church, and can have its perfect fulfilment 
only in Christ. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3-5. The present smallness and feebleness of a good en- 
terprise should never discourage us. If God has clearly 
commanded it, we may go courageously forward, assured 
that he will be with us, as he has been with his people 
from the beginning, and give us all needful hel]i. Many 
of the most successful undertakings in behalf of Christ's 
church have been small and despised in the beginning, and 
struggled for a long time with such difficulties as God's 
help alone could enable his servants to overcome. 

G. If we could comprehend at a glance the whole plan 
of redemption as God is gradually unfolding it from age 
to age, the delay of his promises, which now seems very 
long, would appear, as it is in reality, only " a little while." 
We should then see that God helps his people "right 
early." Psa. 46:5. 

7. The extension of Christ's kingdom through the earth 
must shake all nations, because they are under the do- 
minion of Satan ; his power must be destroyed, that the 
power of Christ may be established on its ruins, vs. 21, 22. 



23 In that day, saith the Lord of liosts, will I 
take thee, Zerubbabel, my servant, the sou of 
Shcaltiel, saith tlie Lord, and will make thee as a 
signet i"^ for I have chosen thee, saith the Lord of 
hosts. 



9. The presence of Christ gave to the second temple 
such glory as no outward adornments of silver and gold 
and precious stones could confer.' 

11-14. No external religious services, though they be 
those which God has commanded, can make a wicked 
heart holy and acceptable to God ; but such an uuclean 
heart will pollute all our outward good works, and make 
them abominable in God's sight. 

15-19. The review of our past history will show that we 
have enjoyed true prosperity only when we have been 
diligent and faithful in the service of God : and that when- 
ever we have been drawn away from this by the hope of 
worldly gain, the result has been disappointment and vex- 
ation. 

22. All institutions and forms of government that are 
opposed to the principles of Christ's gospel must be over- 
thrown ; and all combinations to oppose its progress in 
the earth must come to naught. In this work of over- 
turning, God employs the wicked to execute his counsels 
upon each other ; but it is only by his word and Spirit 
that the kingdom of Christ can arise upon the ruins of 
Satan's kingdom. 

23. God preserves as a precious jewel every one who is 
in Christ, and when Christ has completed his triumph over 
Satan, and sat down on the right hand of God, he will 
bring with himself to the new Jerusalem all his faithful 
servants, to rejoice for ever ui his own immediate pres- 
ence. 



1043 



ZECHARIAH. 



Zechariah was the son of Bprechiah, and the grandson of Iddo, who is mentioned as one of tlie priests 
tliat went up with Zerubbabcl from Babylon to Jerusalem. Neh. 12:4. In Ezra he is twice spoken of 
as "the son of Iddo," the word son being used in the general sense of descendant. Ezra 5:1; 6 : 14. 

The book of Zechariah may be distributed into several portions, according to its contents. Tlie first 
six chapters contain a very remarkable series of visions relating to the reCstablishment of the Jews in 
their own land, and the future dispensations of God towards them. This part of the book closes with a 
symbolic prophecy of Christ as both priest and king upon the throne of David. Chapter 6 :9-15. 

The seventh and eighth chapters constitute the second part, the special occasion of which was a 
question proposed to the prophet concerning the observance of a certain fast. After administering to the 
people a sharp rebuke for their formality, he proceeds to direct and encourage them in the way of duty. 

The remaining six chapters appear to have been written at a later period. They contain a prophetic 
portraiture of the destiny of God's covenant people to the end of time, including the advent of the 
Messiah, and the extension of the true religion over all the earth. In these last chapters are some 
prophecies of difficult interpretation, and which perhaps can never be fully understood till the mystery 
of God contained in them sliall have been fulfilled. One thing, however, they clearly reveal to us : that 
the future triumph of God's kingdom is certain, and that all the great movements in the history of the 
nations, however unpropitious they may seem at the time, are a part of the mighty plan of divine Provi- 
dence which shall enil in making the kingdoms of this world the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Chkist. 



CHAPTER I. 



1 Zechariah exhorteth to 
At the prayer of th 



entance. 7 The vision of the horses. 12 
ani^el, coinfortal)le promises are made to Jerusa- 
of the four liorns, and the four carpenters. 



leni. 18 Xh. 

IN the eighth month, in thcs^ceond year of Darius," 
came the word of the L(iri> uutoZcchariali,'' tlio 
son of Bcrocliiali, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying, 

2 The LoiU) hath been sore displeased' with 
your father.-*.'' 

3 Therefore say thou unto them, Thus saith the 
LoRO of hosts; Turn ye unto me,'' saith the Loun 
of hosts, and I will turn unto you,"' saith the Loiti) 
of liosts. 

4 Be ycnotasyour fathers, unto whom the former 
prophets have cried, saying, Thus saith the Lord 
of hosts; Turn ye now from your evil ways, and 
from your evil doings: but tlicy did not hear, nor 

liearkoti unto ine, saith the Loud. 

5 Your fathers, where are thoy V and the proph- 
ets, do they live for ever ? 

• Hag. 1:1. I>1 
30:16; Pm. 00:1. 



nlh dispUaxure. o -i Chr. 
. 7:10; Luke I5:!i0; Jas. 



CHAPTER I. 

5, C. Your fatlters, where arc tlieij?—my words and my 
statutes — did tluy not take hold nf your fathers ? your fatherH 
and the prophets wlio reproved tlicm have passed away 
together; but my words which the prophets uttered have 
not passed away. 

8. A man riding ■upon a red horse; lie is " the angel of the 

Lord," ver. 11 ; thiit is. the iingcl in whose person Jehovah 

was present, or the Word, that was in the liegimiing with 

God, and was God, .lolin 1:1. See note on Isa. 63:9. Many 

1044 



6 But my words and my statutes, which I a. m. ww. 
commanded my servants the jjrophets, did 520 
tliey not take hold of* your fatlicrs ?' and they re- 
turned and said, Like as the Loun of hosts thought 
to do unto us," according to our ways, and accord- 
ing to our doings, so hatli lie do:ilt with us.'' 

7 ^\ Upon tiic four and twentieth day of the elev- 
enth mouth, which is the month Scbat, in the sec- 
ond year of Darius, came the word of the Lord 
unto Zcciiariah, the son of Bcrechiah, the son of 
Iddo the prophet, saying, 

8 I saw by night, and behold a man riding upon 
a red horse,' and he stood among the myrtle-trees 
that were in the bottom ; and behind him were 
there red horses,^ sjieckled,* and wiiite. 

9 Thou said I, O my lord, what are these? And 
the angel that t;ilked with nic said unto me, I will 
show tliee wliat these he. 

10 And the man that stood among the myrtle- 
trees answered and said, These arc they whom the 



commentators think tliat lie is different from the interpret- 
ing augcl that talked witli the prophet, ver. 9, etc. This 
opinion ia favored by chap. 2:1, where the iiiterprctuig 
angel receives a command from aiiotlier angel. The red 
horse exliihits him as a niiglity warrior, prepared to 
deliver liis pcojjle from their heathen oppressors. The 
different colors of the horses that follow liim denote tho 
different offices of the ministering angels that sit upon 
tliem. 

10. Answered; answered the interpreting angel in tho 
propliet's behalf. 



Comforting promises. 



ZECHARIAH II. 



The four horns. 



A. M 3JS.-, Lord hath Bont to •walk to and fro throii!i;h 

B. »'. about , ^ 

6i'j the earth." 

1 1 And tliey answered the angel of the Lord that 
stood among the myrtle-trees, anil said, We have 
walked to and fro through the earth, and behold, 
all tlic earth sitteth still, and is at rest. 

I'J 1 Then the angel of the Lord answered and 
said, Lord of hosts, how long wilt thou not 
have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of Ju- 
dali," against which thou hast had indignation these 
threescore and ten years'?*^ 

13 And the Lord answered the angel that talked 
with me with good words and comfortalile words.'' 

14 So the angel that communed witli me said 
unto mc. Cry thou, saying, Tims saith the Lord 
of liosts ; I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion 
with a great jealousy ."^ 

15 And I am very sore displeased with the hea- 
then that arc at ease: for I was but a little dis- 
pleased, and they helped forward the affliction.'' 

16 Tiierefore thus saith the Lord; I am returned 
to Jerusalem with mercies := my iiouse shall be 
built in it, saith the Lord of iiosts, and a line 
sliall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem. 

17 Cry yet, saying, Tlius saith the Lord of 
hosts; My cities through prosperity* shall yet be 
spread abroad ; and the Lord shall yet comfort 
Zion,** and shall yet choose Jerusalem.' 

18 H Then lifted I up mine eyes, and saw, and 
behold four horns. 

19 And I said unto the angel that talked witli 
me, What be these? And he answered me. These 
are tlic liorns wiiich have scattered Judah, Israel, 
and Jerusalem. 

20 And the Lord showed me four carpenters. 

21 Then said I, What come tiiese to do? And 



>r 


1. 103:20 


, ai 


Heb. 1:14. b 


Psi. lU 


M.T 


Kpv 





10. = Jer. 25 


11, 12; 


Dan. 


1:2; ch. 


7:5. 


■i.T* 


r. 29:10. 


= Joel -2 


IH; 


ch.X 


2. 


3. f Isi. 47:0 


Obad. 


15, 17 


5 Isa. 


\i:\ 


; ■''J 


S. • Hel 


. good. 


h 1 


,a 51 


:i 


i Isa. 14:1. 


J Dan. 


iai7. 


k Psl. 7 


i:4. 


5. 1 


Ezek. 40 


%i. m 


Kev 


. 11:1 


■' 


.1:15,10. »Is 


I. 2li:l, 



11. All the earth; all the heathen world. Their quiet is 
contrasted with the affliction of God's people, ver. 15. 

12. 2V)ea)!,ge/q/"(/(eLonia)!.s«'ererf;ashiterceding with God 
the Father in his people's behalf. Compare Kom. 8:34. 

13. Answered the angel tliat talked with me; since the an- 
swer was designed for the prophet's instruction and con- 
solation, it was given to the angel who talked with him. 

17. 3Iy cities; the cities of my covenant people. 

18. Four horns; the horns are symbols of heathen per- 
secutors, and the number four denotes that they liad scat- 
tered God's people in all directions. Compare " the four 
winds," chap. 2:6. 

20. Carpenters; the word in the original denotes men 
who work in lirass and iron, as well as in wood. 

21. Fray; drive away in terror. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The chastisement which God inflicts upon his people 
in one age, is designed for the instruction of all future 
generations ; and if they will take warning from it, they 
will be spared its repetition. 

3. God waits for the repentance of hispeoplc,thathe may 
remove their trials and grant them renewed prosperity. 

4-6. Wicked men and the prophets whom God sends to 
reprove them pass away together. But though the preach- 
er's voice ceases, his words remain, and every one of them 
is fulfilled upon the ungodly. 

8-10. Though it seems at times as if the Lord had for- 
saken his people, and delivered them over to the power of 
the wicked, yet is he always present with tliem, ordering 
the manifold affairs of the world for their good. 



he spake, saying, These arc the horns wliicli have 
scattered Judah,^ so that no man did lift up his 
Iiead : but these are come to fray thera, to cast out 
tlie horns of the Gentiles, which lifted up their 
horn over the land of Judah to scatter it.'' 

CHAPTER II. 

1 (joJ, in the care of Jerusalem, sendeth to measure it. 6 The redemp- 
tion of Zion. 10 The promise of G-od's presence. 

X LIFTED up mine eyes again, and looked, and 
behold a man with a measuring line in his 
hand.' 

2 Then said I, Whither goest thou? And he 
said unto me, To measure Jerusalem, to see what 
is the breadth thereof, and what is the length 
thereof."' 

3 And behold, the angel that talked with me 
went forth, and another angel went out to meet 
him, 

4 And said unto him. Run, speak to this young 
■man, saying, Jerusalem sliall be inhabited as towns 
without walls for the multitude of men and cattle 
therein :" 

5 For I, saith the Lord, will be unto her a wall 
of fire round about," and will be the glory in the 
midst of hcr.P 

6 t Ho, ho, come forth, and floe from the land of 
the north,'' saith the Lord: for I have spread you 
abroad as the four winds of the heaven,'' saith the 
Lord. 

7 Deliver thyself, Zion, that dwellcst loith the 
daughter of Babylon.' 

8 For thus saith the Lord of hosts; After the 
glory hath he sent me unto the nations which spoil- 
ed you: for he that toucheth you, toucheth the 
apple of his eye.' 



I, 11. o Isa, 4:.5; uli. !I:S. P Psa. :):3; Isa. 60:10; Rev. 
19:17. rDeut. 2--:G4, Ezek. 17:21 ; Arnns 9:9. sl.^a. 45:20; 
3; 51:0,45. tDeut. 32:10; Psa, 17:b; .Matt. 25:40, 45. 



11-13. They who love God are often in deep affliction, 
while wicked men prosper and are quiet; but he gracious- 
ly remembers them in their sorrow, and will in due time 
answer them " with good words and comfortable words." 

14, 15. Though God uses ungodly men as his instruments 
in chastising his people, this does not excuse their wick- 
edness. They mean it for evil, and will be dealt with ac- 
cordingly. Isa. 10:7. 

16,17. God afflicts his people only " for a smah moment," 
that he may have mercy upon them "with everlasting 
kindness." All their trials end in increased prosperity'. 
Isa. 54:7, 8. 

18-21. God gives to the persecutors of his church all 
their strength ; and it is an easy thing for him, when he 
has accomplished his holy purposes liy them, to raise up 
others mightier than they, who shall deliver her from their 
power. 

CHAPTER II. 

1. A man; that is, an angel. The measuring of Jerusa- 
lem is a sign that it is to be rebuilt, since in building men 
use measuring lines. Compare Ezek. 40:3. 

4. As towns without walls; this denotes both the abun- 
dance and security of the inhabitants ; they shall spread 
themselves in peace and quiet beyond the limits of her 
walls. 

6. From the land of the north; from Babylon. See note 
on Jer. 1:14. 

5. Hath he sent me; the Messiah, who is the speaker in 
this and the following verses. 

1045 



Tht restoration of Z'u 



zi:ciiAi;iAii J 11. 



Christ, tilt Brandt. 



9 For behold, I will sliako my hand upon them," 
and they shall be a spoil to their servants: and ye 
shall know that the Lord of hosts hath sent nie. 

10 H Sing and rejoiec, daughter of Zion: for 
lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee,'' 
saith tlio Lni:p. 

11 And many nations shall bo joined to the Lord 
in that day, and siiall be my people :"= and I will 
dwell in the midst of thee," and thou shalt know 
that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto thee. 

12 And the Loud shall inherit .Judali his ])ortion 
in the holy land,'' and shall ehoose.Ieriisalom again.'' 

13 Be silent, all flesh, before the Lord : for he 
is raised uj) out of his holy habitation." 

CHAPTER III. 

1 Under the type of Joshua, the restoration of the church, 8 Christ the 
Branch is promised. 

AND he showed me Joshua the high-priest 
standing before the angel of tlio Lord,'-' and 
Satan* standing at his right hand to resist him.*'' 

2 And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord re- 
buke thee, Satan;' even the Lord tliat hath 
chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee ■) is not this a brand 
plucked out of the tire?" 

3 Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments,' 
and stood before the angel. 



» Isa 1916. I> Isi. l-.':0. c I<a. 54:1-1. i 2 Cnr. 0:10; 


Rev. 21:3. 


« DoDt 32:9. fl3a.41:9. • Ki-.h. l/ic habilation of /i is holiness 


Isa. (53: 15 


e Hag. 1:1. t Tiiat is, nn arfcer-t-iry. 1 Heb. bt his ndrersarij 
Tsa. 109:0. 1 Rev. I'J:U, 10. JJiiJeB. It Amos .1:11 ; JiiJe i3. 







9. Will skake my hand upon them; as a sign of the inflic- 
tion of vengeance. To their servants; that is, to God's 
people, wlio have been their servants. 

10, 11. / come— saith the Lord— the Lord of hosts hath sent 
me; in this remarkable passage it is the Lord wlio comes 
to Zion, and lie is sent by the Lord. It could liavo been 
fulfiUcil only in Christ. 

13. He is raised vp; to deliver his people and execute 
vengeance upon their enemies. 

IXSTKUCTION. 

Nothing in the world is so dear to God as his church ; 
nothing is guarded by him with such jealous care ; nothing 
so offends him as the injuries inflicted upon her by her 
enemies. Though at times he may seem to liave abandoned 
her to the power of those who hate her, it is only for her 
needful correction. Mo will certainly return to her again, 
rebuild her with more than her former strength and beau- 
ty, and make her lionorable in the eyes of those who have 
(iespised and jiersecuted her. 

CHAPTER in. 

1. Standint; before the ajiffc/ of the Lord; as his minister 
in holv things. Dent. 10:8; 2 Chron. 29:11; I'J/.ck. 4t:ir>. 

2. The Lord; that is, " the angel of the Lord ;" for he is 
the Lord. See note on chap. 1:8. The Lord rebuke tlue ; 
the angel of tlio Lord calls upon the Lord who lias sent 
him to rebuke .Satan. See note on chap. 2:10, II. 

3. Fdlkij <;iirmeiits; the prophet in vision sees Joshua 
clothed witli filthy garments. These are a symbol of the 
pollution of sin, which made him and the people in whose 
Vinhalf he ministered unclean, and gave Satan occasion to 
wilhsland him and accuse him before God. The l<ord 
does not deny Joshua's luiworthincss, but of his free love 
rebukes vSatan, and clothes his servant with change of 
raiment. The whole is a beautiful symbol of justification 
and sanctification by free grace. 

•1. Camed thine iniquity to pnxi from thee; this includes 
both pardon for sin, and inward inirification from its 
jiower; for these two things arc never separated. 

5. / said; the prophet. Thus lio expresses his warm 
1046 



4 And he answered and spake unto these •*ii"(-.'J?j 
that stood before him, saying. Take away the filthy 
garments from him. And unto him he said. Behold, 
I have caused thine ini(|uity to pass from tiiec,"" 
and I will clothe thee with change of raiment." 

5 And I said. Let them set a fair mitre upon his 
head." So they set a fair mitre upon his head, 
and dotiied him with garments. And the angel 
of the Lord stood by. 

6 And the angel of the Lord protested unto 
Joshua, saying, 

7 Thus saith the Lord of hosts; If thou wilt 
walk in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my charge,' 
then thou shalt also judge my house, and shalt also 
keep my courts, and I will give thee places' to 
walk among these that stand by. 

8 Hear now, Joshua the high-priest, thou, and 
thy fellows that sit before thee: for they are men 
wondered at:^ for behold, I will brintr forth my 
servant the BRANCH." 

9 For behold the stone that I have laid liefore 
Joshua; upon one stone shall be seven eyes;"" be- 
hold, I will engrave the graving thereof, saith the 
Lord of hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of 
that land in one day. 

10 In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, shall ye 
call every man his neighbor under the vine and 
under the fig-tree. 



Matt. 2-2:11; Rey.-:13. 14; 19:S. »> 2 Sam. 12:13; Isa. 6:5-7: Rom.6:23. 
n Isa. 01:10. och. 0:11. » Or, ordinanre. I Hth. mxiks. 1 Heb. a/mn- 
(/er. nr.ii>n,- Isa. =:1B. Pisa. 11:1. qRev.5:0. 



sympathy with the high-priest and tlie people whom he 
represents. 

7. Places ; according to many, " leaders ;" that is, angelic 
guides. 

8. Thy fellows; the lower priests associated with liim. 
Men wondered at ; better, as the margin, "men of sign " — 
men whose priesthood typified that of Christ. Compare 
Isa.8:18; 20:3; also Ezek. 12:6, 11 ; 24:24; where the word 
in the original is the same that is here used. The 
BRANCH; the Messiah, that great Iligh-priest whom 
Joshua and his fellows typified. See notes on Isa. 4:2; 
11:1. 

9. The stone that I have laid before Joshua; Christ, under 
the symbol of the foundation-stone of the temple, which 
had been laid by Zerubbabel some years before. Cha]i. 
4:9. As the material temple was a type of the spiritual, 
so was its corner-stone a type of Christ the " precious cor- 
ner-stone," Isa. 28: 111 ; Uom. 9:33; 1 Pet. 2:6. Upon one 
stone — seven ei/es ; tlie stone represents Christ, and the seven 
eyes the fulness of wisdom that dwells in Christ. Seven is 
the symbol of perfection. / will engrave the proving thereof; 
probably an allusion to the custom of engraving inscrip- 
tions upon corner-stones. Cominire 2 Tim. 2:19. The en- 
graving sets forth the excellent nature and oflico of the 
stone. Of that land ; of the land of Canaan as a typo and 
representative of God's church. Li one day; in the day 
when Christ "put away sin by the sacrifice of himself." 
Heb. 9:26. 

10. Under the vine and under the fig-tree; dwelling under 
these is a sign of peace and abundance. 1 Kings 4:25; 
.Micah 4:4 

INSTRFCTIONS. 

1. The most eminent among God's servants are defiled 
with sin; and if they stood on the ground of their own 
righteousness, iSabm would have abuiulant occasion to ac- 
cuse them before Gorl as unworthy of his favor. 

2. (Jod will rebuke Satan, and refuse to hear his accusa- 
tions against true believers, not on account of their merit, 
but of his own free love, which has begun the work of 
their redemption from hell, and will carry it forward to 



Tlic sioldcn candlestick. 



ZECIIAKIAII IV. 



The two olive-trees. 



CHAPTER IV, 



1 Bv the golJen candlestick- iis fnresiwwn the -ood success of Zerubba- 
bels foundation. 11 By the two olive-tree>; the two anointed ones. 

AND the angel that talked with me came 
again, and waked me, as a man that is wak- 
ened out of liis sleep, 

2 And said unto me. What seest tliou ? And I 
said. I luive looked, and behold a candlestick all 
o/'gold, witli a* bowl upon the top of it, and his 
seven lamps thereon, and seven pipes to the seven 
lamps,* which are upon the top thereof: 

3 And two olive-trees by it, one upon the riglit 
,v/f/(' of the bowl, and the otlier upon the left side 
thereof. 

4 k^^o I answered and spake to the angel that 
talked with me, saying, Wiiat are these, my lord? 

5 Then the angel tluit talked witli me answered 
and said unto me, Knowest thou not what these 
be? And I said, No, my lord. 

6 Then lie answered and spake unto me, saying. 
This is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel, 
saying, Not by might,* nor by power, but by my 
Spirit,'' saith the Lono of hosts. 

7 Who art thou, great mountain? before Ze- 
rubbabel thou shalt become a plain: and he shall 



■ Heb. /i(?r. \ Qr, seven seveTal pipefilo the Inntps. t Or, nrwjy, aHus, 1:7. 
b Ezra .•!:S-13. » Ezra li:14, 15. S Or, sinre the seven ei/rs of the LORD 
shall rejoice. I Heb. stone of tin. ^ Heb. by the haml of. ' Heb. the gold. 



the glory of his own name. Especially are they whom 
God has set over his church encouraged to hope that he 
will accept their imperfect services, because he has " cho- 
sen Jerusalem," and it is his purpose to build up her walls 
by human instrumentality. 

3. Joshua standing before the angel of the Lord clotlicd 
with filthy garments, well represents the condition of all 
God's ministers and the congregations intrusted to their 
care, except so far as they are justified by Christ's atoning 
blood, and sanctified by his Spirit. How much out of 
place are pride and vain-glory in preachers or people. 

4. When Christ's servants are overwhelmed with a sense 
of their own vileness, it is an unspeakable comfort to know 
that their Master is able both to forgive sin and to cleanse 
the soul from its pollution, antl that he will do this for all 
who humbly ask it of him, and thus prepare thoni to ren- 
der to him acceptable service. Isa. 6:7. 

5. Christ's servants have a deep sympathy one for an- 
other, and they rejoice in each other's spiritual welfare ; 
especially do they desire to see those who are set over 
God's house adorned with the graces of his Spirit. 

7. Christ's love for his servants is not weakness. Though 
he will grant them all needful help, he will not connive at 
their sins. Only by faithfulness in his service can they 
expect to enjoy his favor. 

8. The rulers antl teachers of God's spiritual house are 
in a humble, yet true sense, the representatives of Christ 
the heavenly "Branch," and it should be tlieir earnest 
endeavor by their lives and doctrine truly to exhibit his 
spirit and teachings. 

9. 10. Since Christ is the corner-stone of the church, laid 
and engraved by God himself, she can never be shaken, 
but must stand, and fill the earth with hght and peace and 
blessedness. 

CHAPTER IV. 

2. A candlestick; after the pattern of that in the sanctu- 
ary. Exod. 25:31-39. Sewn pipe? ,- literally, " seven ahd 
seven pipes," that is, seven proceeding from each olive- 
tree, one to each lamp. 

6. Ntit by might, rmr hij power, but by my Spirit; the can- 
dlestick is a symbol of God's churcli. which he has ap- 
pointed to be the light of the world, Rev. 1:20; and the 
two ohve-trees with their pipes, of the Holy Ghost, as 



bring forth the headstone thereof vith shoutings, 
crying, Grace, grace unto it. 

8 Moreover, the word of the Loiii) came unto me, 
saying, 

y The liands of Zerubbabel liave laid the foun- 
dation of this house:" his liands shall also finish 
it;° and thou shalt know that the Lord of hosts 
hath sent me unto you. 

10 For who hath despised tlie day of small 
things? for they shall rejoice,^ and shall see the 
plummet' in the hand of Zerubbabel vith those 
seven ; they are Die eyes of the Lord, whicii run 
to and fro through the whole earth. 

11 If Then answered I, and said unto liim. What 
are these two olive-trees upon the riglit side of the 
candlestick and upon the left side thereof? 

12 And I answered again, and said unto him. 
What be these two olive branches, which through'' 
the two golden pipes empty the golden oil out of 
themselves?* 

13 And he answered me and said, Knowest thou 
not wliat these be? And I said. No, my lord. 

14 Then said lie, Tliese are tlic two anointed 
ones,''' that stand by the Lord of the whole 
earth.'' 



t Heb. empty out of the. 



. the gold. 1 IIcL. 



given through the ministration of his servants. The 
whole teaches that God's people conquer the world, not 
by outward might, but by inward strength received from 
above. 

7. mio art thou; God's Spirit will help his people to 
overcome all obstacles. O great mountain; the symbol of 
difficulties which human strength cannot overcome. Com- 
pare Isa. 41 : 15 ; Jer. 51 : 25. The headstone ; of the temple, 
which is a symbol of Christ, " the headstone of the corner." 
Psa. 118:22; Matt. 21:42, etc. With shoutings; these are 
the shoutings of all who love Zion, ascribing the comple- 
tion of her temple to God's grace. 

9. Thou s/ialt know that tlie Lord of hosts hath sent me; the 
angel of the Lord, who is himself the Lord, addresses the 
prophet. See note on chap. 2:9, 10. 

10. The day of small tilings; the feeble beginnings of the 
Jews in rebuilding tlie temjile. Compare Ezra 3:12, 13; 
Hag. 2:3. N/»/// re/'ini; and shall see; that is, shall see with 
joy. Tlw pill, mini In tlir hand of Zerubbabel ; that is, Zerub- 
babel prospeiuusly l)uilding. The plummet, like the 
measuring line, chap. 2:1, is a symbol of the work of 
building. With those seven; or, making a period at the 
word Zerubbabel, w-e may render, " Those seven, they are 
the eyes of the Lord," etc. "Those seven" are generally 
miderstood of the seven eyes upon one stone, chap. 3:9. 

14. Anointed ones; these seem to denote Christ's Spirit 
dwelling in his ministers, whom Zerubbabel and Joshua 
represented, and replenishing them, and through them his 
church, with grace and strength. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 

1-9. Human might and power did not establish God's 
church. ai[d they cannot destroy it. From age to age his 
Spirit is an overflowing fountain of life and strengtli to his 
servants ; it makes them victorious over all opposition, 
and enables them, under his superintending care, to carry 
forward the work of his spiritual temple in the face of 
mighty foes. This glorious work shall never cease till its 
completion amid shoutings of " Grace, grace unto it." 

10. The way of the world is to begin with pomp and 
boasting enterprises which generally come to naught. But 
God's way is to make the daj' of small things the begin- 
ning of a glorious triumph of truth and righteousness. 
For this reason we ought not to be elated by a prosperous 
beginning, nor cast down by present feebleness. 
1041 



Thejly'mg roll. 



ZKCIIAHIAII VI. 



TIte four chariots. 



CHAPTER V. 



1 By the flvin? roll is shown the curse of thieves and swearers. 5 By 
a womai. jjress. J iji an epiiali, tl.i- final tiamiiat.on of Babylon. 

THEN I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and 
looked, and behold a liyiniz; roll." 

2 And he said unto me, WJiat soe.st thou? And 
I answered, I see a flyini; roll ; the length thereof 
is twenty cubits,and tlie breadth thereof ten cubits. 

3 Then said he unto me, This is the curse that 
goeth fortli over tlie face of tiie whole eartii : for 
every one tliat stcalclli sliall be cut off as on this 
sideaccording to it;* and every one thatswearcth 
shall be cut off as on that side according to it. 

4 I will bring it forth, saitli the Lord of hosts, 
and it shall enter into the house of the thief,'' and 
into the house of him that sweareth falsely by my 
name:'= and it siiall remain in the midst of his 
house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof 
and the stones thereof.'' 

5 IT Then the angel that talked with me went 
forth, and said unto mo. Lift up now thine eyes, 
and see what is this tiiat goeth forth. 

6 And I said, Wiiat is it? And he said, This is 
an ephah that goeth forth. He said moreover, 
This is their resemblance through all the earth. 

7 And behold, there was lifted up a talent* of 
load : and this is a woman tliat sittctli in the midst 
of the ephah." 

8 And he said. This is wickedness. And he 
cast it into the midst of the ephah; and he cast 
the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof. 



» Ezek. a:9. * Or, everijonc of this people lliat steaUth holilcth himself 
guiltUss, as it ioth. b Mai. :i;5. c Lev. 19: !■-'. d Lev. 14:4 J. 1 Oi,mi?ht,j 
piere. t Rev. 17:1, etc. t Gen. 1(1:1(1. e ch. l:s; Rev. 0:2-5. : Or, 



CHAPTER V. 

1. A flying roll; a roll written over with curses against 
evil-doers. Its tliglit indicates both the universality of its 
curses, and the speed with which they overtake the wick- 
ed, ver. 3. Its size equalled that of tlie porch in Solomon's 
temple, 1 Kings 6:3. This may signify that Uod's judg- 
ments upon the wicked proceed according to the rule of his 
sanctuary. In Kzek. 9:3, it is upon the threshold of the 
temple, in the rear of the porch, that Uod exercises his 
judgments. 

3. Stealeth — sweareth; those two sins represent all trans- 
gressions against (lod's law. As on this side according to 
it; according to what is written on this side, etc. The roll 
is written on both sides. Compare Exod. 32: 15; Ezek. 2: 10; 
Rev. 5:1. 

6. An ephah ; this seems to bo named as a largo ITobrcw 
measure. This is their resemblance through all the earth; this 
measure is a true representation of the Israelitish people, 
in their sin and punishment, everywhere. See note on 
ver. 8. 

7. There was lifted up; from the mouth of the ephah, ver. 
8. A talent of lead ; the word in the original signifies a 
round piece of lead. This served as a cover to the ephah. 
And this is a woman; as the cover of lead is lifted up, the 
angel shows him a woman sitthig in the ephah. 

8. Tills is wickedness; the woman in the ephah signifies 
the wicked .lewish people filling up the measure of their 
ini(iuity. lie cast it; literally, "ho cast her;" that is, cast 
down the woman that rcprcsontetl wickedness. 

9. Two women; these represent the instrument-s of God's 
vengeance. The wind was in their wings; their wings had 
the speed of the wind. Wmgs of a stork ; that is, largo and 
strong. 

11. To build it a liottse; ratht^r, "to build her a house;" 
that is, for a permanent abode. The land of Shinar ; the 
place of the seventy years' captivity. It stands hero to 
1048 



9 Then lifted I up mine eyes, and looked, "^b^c^^. 
and liehold, there came out two women, and the 
wind teas in their wings; for they had wings like 
the wings of a stork : and they lifted up the ephah 
between the eartli and the heaven. 

10 Then said I to tlie angel that talked with 
me. Whither do these bear the ephah? 

11 And he said unto me, To build it a house in 
the land of Shinar:' and it shall be established, 
and set there upon her own base. 



CHAPTER VI. 



n of the four ehai 
the temple anil I 



9 By the crowns of Joshua is shown 
mi cf Christ the Branch. 






A ND I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and 
!rV looked, and behold, there came four chariots 
out from between two mountains; and the moun- 
tains icere mountains of brass. 

2 In the first chariot uei-e red horses;^ and in 
the second chariot black horses; 

3 And in the thirtl chariot white horses ; and 
in the fourth chariot grizzled and bay* horses. 

4 Then 1 answered and said unto the angel that 
talked with me. What are these, my lord? 

5 And the angel answered and said unto me, 
These are the four spirit.s^ of the heavens, which 
go forth from standing before the Lord of ail the 
earth.'' 

G The black horses which are therein go forth 
into the north country ; and the white go forth 



i Or, winds. Ii ch. 4:14; 1 Kings 2-2:19; Dan. 7:1U; Luke 1:19; 



represent generally a residence among strangers. The 
language of this verse implies that the woman, retaining 
her character as " wickedness," shall have a long residenco 
among strangers ; and it is awfully fulfilled in the present 
character and condition of God's ancient people. 
IXSTRUCTIONS. 

1-4. God's curse upon the wicked proceeds according to 
the law of his sanctvrary ; it is swift to overtake transgress- 
ors of every class, and resistless to destroy them ; when 
it enters a house, however great and mighty are its occu- 
pants, it will "consume it with the timber thereof and the 
stones thereof." 

5-11. The ministers of God's wrath stand ready to exe- 
cute his vengeance upon simiers ; and in their hands the 
mightiest transgressors find themselves helpless, whether 
they be nations or individuals. The present long-contin- 
ued dispersion of the Jews is a standing memorial to tho 
world of God's power and truth in the fnlfilmcnt of his 
thrcatenings ; and it terribly shadows forth that final act 
of justice bv which he shall send forth his angels to con- 
vey the wicked to the prison of despair, whence there 
shall bo no return for ever. Matt. 13:41, 42. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1. Four chariots ; these represent the various providen- 
tial instruments of mercy and justice which (Jod employs. 
Two moHii/niji.s— «/ bra.is; those arc generally untlerstood 
as a symbol of (Jod's firm and immutable decrees. 

2. X Red— hlack-^whitc— grizzled ; SCO notes on chap. 1 : 8, 
and ver. 6, 7. 

•5. Spirits of the heavens ; or. as the margin, " winds of the 
heavens;" here, as in Dan. 7:2, Uev. 7:1, a symbol of the 
agencies that produce overlurnings and revolulions in the 
earth. If we retain the idea of heavenly spirits, tlie mean- 
ing will be substantially the same. 

(i. Into the north counl'nj; the seat of both the Habylonian 
empire and tho Persian that succeeded it. See note on 



Christ, the Branch. 



ZECIIARIAH VII. 



Hypocrisy in fasting. 



H.r'.-il'f aftf^r thorn ; and the grizzled go forth tow- 
ard tlic south country. 

7 And tlie bay went fortli, and souglit to go tliat 
thry might walk to and fro througli the earth:" 
ami lie said, Got you honco, walk to and fro 
through the earth. So they walked to antl fro 
through the earth. 

8 Then cried he upon me, and spake unto mo, 
saying, Behold, those that go toward tiie north 
couutry have quieted my spirit in the nor til country.'' 

9 TT And the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, 

10 Take of them of the captivity, even of Heldai, 
of Tohijah, and of Jedaiah, wliich are come from 
Babylon, and come thou the same day, and go 
into the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah ; 

11 Then take silver and gold, and make crowns,'' 
and set them upon the head of Joshua the sou of 
Joscdech, the high-priest; 

12 And speak unto him, saying. Thus speakcth 
the Lord of hosts, saying. Behold the man whose 
name is The BRANCH;'' and he shall grow up 
out of his place,' and he shall build the teuiple of 
the L();jD :"' 

V.\ Even he shall build the temple of the Lord; 
and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule 
upon his throne;^ and he shall be a priest upon 
his throne r^ and the counsel of peace shall be be- 
tween them both."* 

14 And the crowns shall be to Helem, and to To- 
bijah, anil to Jedaiah, and to Hen the son of Zeph- 
aniah, for a memorial in the temple of the Lord.' 

15 And they that are far off shall come and build 
in the tem])le of the Lord,j and ye shall know 
that tiie Lord of hosts hath seat me unto you. 



>Ch. 1:10; Job 1:7. 


b Isa. l:-il 


Ezrk. lli:-l-i (il. c Lev. «:<1. d ch. 


3:9. " Or, brnnc/i tip fror 


n ttrulpr /tit 


n. t 1 Cor. :l:n; Eph. •J:'.'!!-*!; Heb. 


3:3; 1 Pet. -2:4, .5. f Ina. 


■l-i-.ii: Re 


V. 5:11-13. s P-a 1IU:4; Heb. 4:11- 


18; 7:il, 45. h Rom. 5:1 


Col. 1:J. 


i Mark 11:9. i Eph. -2:13. 19. k Rom. 



Jer. 1 : 13. The black horses seem to denote the calamities 
which God will send upon the persecutors of his people, 
especially the Chaldeans, whose destruction had been only 
begun by the conquest of Cyrus ; the white, those victories 
which contribute to the deliverance and enlargement of 
God's people. Tfie south country; probably Egypt and 
the adjoining region. The color of the horses signifies 
the mixod nature of their office. 

7. The bat/; their office is general. 

8. Have qn.tcted mi/ spirit; by executing my wrath on the 
persecutors of my people. 

11. Make crowns, and set them upon the head of Joshua; 
Josliua is crowned, that he may thus represent the union 
of the kingly and priestly office in our Saviour's person, 
who is "The BIIAXCH " here spoken of. 

13. Tlie counsel of peace ; the plan of reconciling men to 
God. Between them both; generally understood to mean, 
between Christ's kingly and priestly offices. The counsel 
of peace is accomplished by the union of these two in one 
divine person. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-8. God's purposes are like mountains of brass, firm 
and immutable. They extend to all the affairs of this 
world, and will all be executed at the appointed time. 
Thiiugh for a season the enemies of the church may seem 
to have power in their own hands, he is still using them 
for the accomplishment of his gracious purposes concern- 
ing her ; and can with infinite ease destroy them whenever 
her welfare shall require it. 

9-15. The kings and priests of ancient Israel were types 
of the Lord Jesus Christ, who unites in his person both 



And this shall come fo pass, if ye will diligently 
obey the voice of the Lord your God.'' 

CHAPTER VII. 

1 The captives inquire of Hi.'itmi;. 4 Zecliarinli reproveth their fasting. 
8 Sill the cauiie of their captivity. 

AND it came to pass in the fourth year of king 
Darius, that the word of the Lord came unto 
Zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth month, 
even in Chisleu ; • 

2 When they had sent unto the house of God 
Sherezor and Regem-melech, and their men, to 
pray before the Lord,^ 

3 ./Ind to speak unto the priests which v:ere in 
the house of the Lord of hosts, and to the prophets, 
saying, Should I weep in the fiftli month, separat- 
ing myself, as I have done these so many years? 

4 *i Then came the word of the Lord of hosts 
unto me, saying, 

5 Speak unto all tlie people of the land, and to 
the priests, saying. When ye fasted and mourned 
in the fifth and seventh 7no?i/A, even those seventy 
years,' did ye at all fast unto me, even to me?"" 

6 And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did 
not ye* cat for yourselves, and drink /"or yovrselves? 

7 Should ye not hear the words** which the Lord 
hath cried by ' the former prophets, when .Jerusa- 
lem was inhabited and in prosperity, and the cit- 
ies thereof round aliout her, when 7ne7i inhabited 
the south and the plain? 

8 1 And the word of the Lord came unto Zech- 
ariah, saying, 

1) Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying, E.xe- 
cute true judgment,^ and show mercy and compas- 
sions every man to his brother : 



li;:l>r., WUh.loenlrmtlheJiirrafllieLont. I 
1 Or. he not ye they tlial. etc. i Or'. Arc not tlies 
hand of, etc. 1 Heb. Jud^e judgment of truth. 



offices. As a priest, he has expiated the sins of his peo- 
ple by his own blood ; as a king, he has received from the 
Father all power in heaven and on earth, and he orders 
all things for their good. Under his reign the spiritual 
temple must be builded from age to ago, till all nations 
shall come and worship him. 

CHAPTP]R VII. 

3. In the fifth month ; in commemoration of the destruc- 
tion of the temple and city by fire, 2 Kings 2.'j:8, 9. Sep- 
aratinp; mijself ; from food and customary business. 

5. Seventh jnonth ; to commemorate the murder of Geda- 
li.ah and his companions, 2 Kings 25:25; Jer. chap. 41. 
They seem to have thought that the rebuilding of the tem- 
ple was now so far advanced that the fast on the fifth 
month was no longer necessary or proper. But God, who 
knew their hearts, sharply reproved them for the spirit in 
which they had fasted. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5, (i. Days of fasting are appointed that men m.ay hum- 
ble themselves before God by heartily confessing and 
forsaking their sins. But too often they degenerate into 
empty forms in which God is forgotten, while the world 
is loved and sin indulged as on other rlays. Such fasts 
God will reckon to men as solemn mockery, and he will 
deal with them accordingly. 

8-14. Fasting must begin with inward sorrow for sin, 
and the renunciation of all evil works; otherwise it will 
lie reckoned to us as iniquity, and bring upon us aggra- 
vated punishment. Isa. 58:6, 7. 

1049 



The restoration of 



ZECIlAinAlI VIII. 



Jerusalem, encouraged. 



B-'aMif' 10 And oppress not the widow, nor the 
fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor ; and let none 
of you imagine evil against his brother in your 
hcaVt. 

1 1 IJut they refused to hearken, and pulled away 
the sliouldor,* and stopped* llieir ears, that tiioy 
sliould not hear. 

12 Yea, they made tlieir hearts as an adamant 
stone," lest they should hear the law, and the words 
■whicii the Loud of hosts«hath sent in his Hpirit 
by* tiie former jiroiihets: therefore came a great 
wrath from tlie Lord of hosts.'' 

L3 Therefore it is come to pass, Ma/ as he cried, 
and they would not hear; so they cried, and 1 
would not hear, saith the Lord of hosts:'' 

14 But I scattered them witli a whirlwind among 
all the nations whom they knew not.'' Thus the 
land was desolate after them, that no man passed 
through nor returned: for they laid the pleasant 
land" desolate.^ 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1 The restoration of Jerusalt- m. They are encoura^jed to the buildincj 
by God's favor to them. 16 Good works are required of them. IS 
Joy and enlargement are promised. 

AGAIN the word of the Lord of hosts came 
to me, saying, 
2 Thus saith the IjORD of hosts; I was jealous 
for Zion with great Jealousy, antH was jealous for 
her with great fury.' 

;j Thus saith the Lord; lam returned unto Zion, 
and will dwell in the midst of .JiM-usalem: and Jeru- 
salem shallbc called Acity of truth ;''and the moun- 
tain of the Lord of hosts," The holy mountain.' 

4 Thus saith the Lord of hosts; 'I'liore shall yet 
old men and old women dwell in the streets of 
Jerusalem,^ and every man with his stall in his 
hand for very age.' 

5 And the streets of the city shall be full of boys 
and girls playing in the streets thereof. 

fi Thus saith the Lord of hosts; If it be mar- 
vellous^ in the eyes of the remnant of this people 
in these days, sliould it also be marvellous in 
mine eyes?" saith the Lord of hosts. 

7 Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Behold, I will 
save my people from the east country, and from 
the west country ;'' 

<S And I will bring them, and t!i(>y shall ihvell 
in the midst of Jerusalem :'" and they shall bt^ my 
peo|)lc, and I will be their God," in truth and in 
righteousness." 



■ iltjb liavfnharkxlidiiig shoulder, t Hob. mculf.htnvy; l8a.(>:IO. a Nell. 
0:29; Eztk I1;I9. I Hob. by Hit hand of. i> Dan !):11. = Jt. \V.\i\ 
Mio. a-.-l. J B.ut. 4:27; *<:J3, Ii4. S Wuh. Uind of drsirt. o Dan. fc:'J. 
roh. I:l4-Hi. S iKi. l:ai,2li. h Isa. •:>:a. 3. ijer. 3l:'ja. J I«a. Ii5;a(l. W. 
With. muUilude of days. ^ OT,/iard,riT diffiiill. k Uom. 4;iiO. -Jl. 'Hob. 
rounlry of Ihc noing down of the mn; Mai. 1:11. I l»a. 11:11, 13; 43;.7, li. 
m ch. l-'5:». n Jer. 31:1, .1:). o .I,.r. 4:->. P Mac- 2:4, ole. q Eznl5:l, i. 



CHATTER VIII. 

6. Marvellous; a thiiiK tliat seems too wonderful to bo 
expected. 

10. No hire for man — hire for beasts ; no profit from the 
labor of man or beast. 

111. Jiiilirmenl nftriUh nnil pence ; jiidKnient in accordance 
with truth, the efTt^ct of wliicli is to cstabhsh peace. 

19. Thefnvrlh month ; when .leru.sah'm was taken. 2 Kings 
25:3,4. Tenth; the month when the siege of Jerusalem 
1050 



9 1 Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Let your hands 
be strong,!' ye that hear in these days the.se words 
by the mouth of tlie pro])hets, which vcrc in t'le 
day that the foundation of the house of the Lord 
of hosts was laid,'' that the temple might be built. 

10 For before these days there was no hire for 
man,* nor any hire for beasts ; neither was there 
any peace to him that went out or came in, because 
of the afQietiou: for I set all men every one 
against his neighbor."' 

1 1 But now 1 ?/■/// not be unto the residue of this 
people as in the former davs,' saith the Lord of 
hosts. 

12 For the seed shal! he prosjierous :♦ the vine 
shall give hor fruit, and the ground shall give her 
increase,' and the heavens shall give their dew; 
and I will cause the remnant of this people to pos- 
sess all these things."^ 

13 And it shall come to pass, that as ye were a 
curse among the heathen,^' house of Judah, and 
house of Israel; so will I save you, and ye shall 
■be a blessing: fear not, but let your hands be 
strong. 

14 For thus saith the Lord of hosts; As I 
thought to jiunish you, when your fathers pro- 
voked me to wrath, saith the Lord of hosts, and 
I repented not: 

1.5 So again have 1 thought in these days to do 
well unto .Jerusalem and to the house of Judah :" 
fear ye not." 

IG *[ These are the things that ye shall do ; Speak 
ye every man the truth to his neighbor ;^ execute 
the judgment of truth and peace in your gates :^ 

17 And let none of you imagine evil in your 
hearts against his neighbor;^ and love no false 
oath : for all these are things that I hate, saith the 
Lord. 

18 1^ And the word of the Lord of hosts came 
unto me, sayinc:, 

li) Thus saitli the Lord of hosts ; The fast of the 
fourth month, and the fast of the lifth," and the fast 
of the seventli,'' and the fast of the tenth,'' shall be 
to the houseof Judah joy and gladness,'' and cheer- 
ful' feasts; therefore love the truth ami peace. 

20 Thus .«aith the Lord of hosts; // shall yet 
come to pass, that there shall come people, and the 
inhabitants of many cities: 

21 And the inhabitants of one city shall go to 
another, saying. Let us go sjiecdily^ to ]u-ay before 
the Loud," and to seek the Loim' <'[' IkwIs:"^ I will 
go also. 



Im. 11:13, 



t Or, tht hire of man became nothing. ' :.,..... I. , 

I Hrb.of peace; Vs3. Ti::l. I Paa. 07:0 7. u 1 Cor. .>:;i. > .irr. la: i.-. 
"Jor. 31:>. I Luke 14:3-.'. y Eph. 4:-J.>. i Heb. judge Irulh, and ihl 
judgment of peate • Pro». 3:39. • Jcr. 53:0. 13 >> Jor. 41:1,3. ' Jor. 
53:4. ■! E«lh. 8:17. 1 Or. solemn, or set times. 1 Or, continually; H«b. 
going; Hos. 0:3. * Heb. fo entreat the face of the Lord; oh. i;3. • P««. 
133:1, etc. 



began. 2 Kings 25:1. Sliall be — joi/aiid iilatlncss; shall be 
(iirned into jo.v and gladness. AflVr rebuking the people 
for their sins, .leliovah returns a gracious answer to their 
in(]uiry. Chap. 7:5. 

20. People ; in the original, peoples, that is, nations ; for 
this is a prophecy of the conversion of the nations to .lo 
hoviili in the latter liays. It was fulfilled only in a liniitoi 
manner while the second temple was standing. Its higl 
est fulfilment is under the C'liristiaii disiicusatiou. Luke 
24:47; Uev. 7:9, 10. 



God dcfmdcth his church. 



ZECIIARIAII IX. 



The Saviour fare: o'd. 



B.'o'vi^'f' 22 Yea, many people and strong nations 
shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, 
and to pray before the Lord.''' 

23 Thus i^aith the Lord of hosts; In those days 
it shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold 
out of all languages of the nations, even shall take 
hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We 
will go with you : for we have heard that God is 
with you. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 God dffcmleth his churcli. 9 Zion is exhorted to rejoice for the com- 
ing of Christ, and his peaceable kingdom. 12 God's promises of vic- 
tory and defence. 

THE burden of the word of the Lord in the 
land of Hadrach. and Damascus sha'l be the 
rest thereof:" wlien the eyes of man, as of all the 
tribes of Israel, shall be toward the Lord. 

2 And Hamath also shall border thereby; Tyrus, 
and Zidon, though it be very wise.'^ 

3 And Tyrus did build herself a strong-hold, and 
heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the 
mire of tiie streets. 

4 BiMiold, the Lord will cast her out, and he will 
smite her power in the sea; and she shall be de- 
voured witli fire. 

5 Ashkelon shall see it, and fear; Gaza also 
shall see it, and be very sorrowful, and Ekron ; for 
her expectation shall be ashamed ; and the king 



nself- 



23. Him that is a Jew; instead of being despised and 
persecuted, the Jew shall now be honored by all nations, 
and they shall seek his God as their God. The true heirs 
of this promise are the children of Abraham by faith in 
Christ, who are Jews, not outwardly, but inwardly, in the 
spirit, and not in the letter. Rom. '2:28, 29. 
INSTRUCTION'S. 

2, S. Though God will chastise his people for their sins, 
he will not suffer their enemies to triumph over them per- 
petually; but will save them fur the glory of his own 
name, and that he may fulfil to them his gracious promises. 
Ver. 7-15. 

4, 5. God's blessing fills a community with health, peace, 
and joy, and brings its citizens to a vigorous and cheerful 
old age ; but these temporal effects are only a sj'mbol of 
that nobler spiritual life, strength, and joy which his gos- 
pel brhigs to the souls of all who receive it. 

6. Nothing is too hard for the Lord. With infinite ease 
he brings to pass the most surprising changes in the con- 
dition of his afflicted people. Psa. 12G:1, 2. 

If), 17. God's promises are connected with the obedi- 
ence of his people, and cannot be fulfilled except they 
hearken to his voice, and walk in the ways of his appoint- 
ment. 

19. It is God's way, first to rebuke his people for their 
sins, that he may humble them; and then grant them a 
gracious answer to their requests. Chap. 7:4, 5. 

20-23. When God forsakes his people because of their 
sins, they are weak and despised by the world ; but the 
moment they return to him, his blessing makes them 
strong and prosperous ; and then multitudes of those 
without, seeing that God is with them, join themselves to 
their number. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1. The burden of the word of the Lord ; the immediate ref- 
ence of verses 1-8, seems to be to the conquests of Alex- 
ander the Great, and the favor which he showed to the 
Jews. But these must be regarded as only earnests and 
pledges of higher blessings in the more distant future. 



shall perish from Gaza, and Ashkelon shall not 
be inhabited. 

G And a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod, and I 
will cut off the pride of the Philistines. 

7 And I will take away his blood* out of hia 
mouth, and his abominations from between his 
teeth : but he that rcmainetli, even he, shall be for 
our God, and he shall be as a governor in Juduh, 
and Ekron as a Jebusite. 

8 And I will encamp about my house because of 
the army, because of him that passeth by, and be- 
cause of him that returneth :'' and no oppressor 
shall pass through them any more: for now have 
I seen with mine eyes. 

9 H Rejoice greatly, daughter of Zion ; shout, 
daughter of Jerusalem : l)rliold, thy King com- 
eth unto thee: he w just, and having salvation ;*^ 
lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the 
foal of an ass.' 

10 And I will cut off the chariot froniEphraim, 
and the horse from Jerusalem : and the battle-bow 
shall be cut off; and he shall speak peace unto 
the heathen : and his dominion shall be from sea 
CIH71 to sea, and from the river evcji to the ends of 
the earth. 

11 As for thee also, by the blood of thy cove- 
nant' I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the 
pit wherein is no water.^ 

12 1 Turn you to the strong-hold, ye prisoners 



, bybluod; Exod. 21:S| Heb. 10:-J9; 13:20. E Isa. 42: 



51:14; 



That the promises here recorded can have had their final 
and complete fulfilment only in the Messiah's reign, is 
plain from the concluding words of verse 8. Hadrach; 
according to some, a place east of Damascus ; according 
to others, a symbolical name for Damascus itself. Shall 
be tlie rest thereof; that is, a place on which this burden 
shall rest. Alexander took Damascus, and then all the 
towns along the sea-coast from Tyre to Egypt, as here 
described. 

2. Hamath ; north of Damascus on the Orontes. Sliall 
border thereby ; shall shaie the punishment of Damascus, 
as bordering upon it. Tyrus avd Zidon ; shall border 
thereby. For Tyre, see note on Ezek. chap. 2()-28. 

5. Ashkelon shall see it ; the destruction of Tyre to which 
he trusted. 

6. A bastard; a foreign rabble, having no legitimate right 
m the place. 

7. I u'ill take away liis blood — his abominations ; the blood 
and abominations of tlie Philistines ; probably, the blood 
and flesh of the victims offered by him to idols : that is, 
I will abolish his idolatrous worship, and concert the 
remnant of his people to myself. As a governor in Jwlah; 
on equal footing with him as a worshipper of the true 
God. As a Jebusite; the Jebusites were the original 
inhabitants of Jerusalem. David conquered them, and 
the remnant of them seems to have been incorporated 
into Israel. 

9. TA// A'mg-; the Messiah. Matt. 21:5, etc. The beast 
on which he rides denotes his peaceful and lowly char- 
acter. 

10. Iirill cut off the chariot— the battle-bow ; under his reign 
all the implements of war become unnecessary. Isa. 2:4; 
Micah 5:10, 11. 

11. As for thee; the address is to Zion, as is plain in the 
original. The blood of thy covenant ; the covenant made 
by God with Zion anil ratified by the blood of Christ, of 
which the blood of the Mosaic sacrifices was a type. The 
mt; the dimgeon in •n-hich Zion and her captive children 
have been confined. Compare Isa. 42:7. 

12. The strons-hold; see Pruv. Is: 10. Prisoners of hope ; 

1051 



The promises of God 



ZECHARIAH X. 



to Hi people. 



of hope: even to-day do I declare that I will ren- 
der double unto thee;" 

13 When 1 have bent Judah for nic, filled the 
bow with Ephraim, and raised u]) lliy sons, Zion. 
against thy sons, Greece, and made thee as tlie 
sword of a mighty man. 

1-1 And tiie Loud shall be seen over them, and 
his arrow -shall go forth as the lightning:'' and 
the Lord GoDsliall bhiw the trumpet, and shall go 
with wliirlwinds of the south.'' 

15 Tlio LoitL) of liosts shall defend tliem ; and 
they shall devour, and subdue with sling-stones;' 
and they shall drink, and tiuike a noise as through 
wine ; and they sluill be filled like bowls,^ a7id as 
the corners of the altar.'' 

16 And the Lord their God shall save them in 
that day as the flock of his people: for t/uy shall 
be as the stones of a crown," lifted up as an ensign 
upon his land.' 

IT For how great is his goodness, and how great 
is his beauty! corn shall make the young men 
cheerful,* ami new wine the maids. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 GoJ is to be sought unto, and not idols. 5 As he visited liis flock f"r 
sin, so he will save and restore them. 

ASK ye of the Lord rain in the time of the 
latter rain;^ so the Loud shall make bright 
clouds,^ and give them showers of rain, to every 
one arrass in the field. 



.1-1 4U: a. bp.a. m 


:0. 'I 


i. -21:1. 


' Or, the stones of the 


ling. tOr, 


ikallJilU 


oth tlu howls, d 


Lev. 4: 


8, -25. «: 


sa. 62::}. 


f Isi. 11:1'2. 


1 Or, gTov.\ 




SDeut. 11:11, 


14. «C 


r, lightni 


xgs; Jer 


10:13. 10 


, teraphim; 


Jol-. 17 


5. 1> Job 13:4. 


1 Or, a, 


swertd that, etc. 


Ezek. 34:7, 





prisoners to wfiom tlie hope of deliverance is ofTerod 
through the blood of (Jod's covenant with tliem. Double; 
that is, an abundant supply of blessitij^s. Isa. 61:7. 

13. Beiti Judah for me, filled tlic bow with Ephraim ; by a 
beautiful figure Judah is represented as the bow, and 
Ephraim, that is, the remnant of tlic ten tribes now incor- 
porated with Judah, as tlie arrow wliieh God will use 
against Greece. The literal fulfilment of this propliecy is 
recorded in the books of the Maccabees ; but this is to be 
regarded as only an earnest of a higher spiritual fulfibnont. 
See note on verse 1. 

15. Filled like bowls ; probably sacrificial bowls, filled with 
the bl<in;l of the victim. Ah the corners of the altar; which 
were sprinkled with the blood of the victim. Lev. -1:18, 
25. The iru:aning is, that they shall shed the blood of their 
persecutors. 

16. Tl^e .itones of a crown; its precious sparkling gems. 
An ensign; arouud wfiich God's people nray rally. Upon 
his land ; upon God's land. 

17. Hts fxoodness—his beauty ; God's goodness and beauty 
as manifested in his loving-kindness towards his people. 

INSTIUJCTIOXa. 

3-6. All who depart from (he living God, and trust to 
their own power and riches, shall be overthrown ; and 
they who looked to them instead of their Maker, for sal- 
vation, shall be put to shame. 

8. With God's presence and favor, his jieople are safe, 
though surrounded by the armies of the ungodly. 

!). Christ came without earthly i)omp and power : the 
meek and lowly received him, and he bestowed s.ilvation 
upon them; but the proud and worldly-minded rejected 
him to their own destruction. As it was then, bo it is 
now, wherever his gospel is faithfully preached. 

10. \Vhon the nations of the world shall receive the 
Lord Jesus as their king, "and his dominion shall bo from 
8ca even to sea, and from the river even to the ends of 
1052 



2 For the idols ' have spoken vanity, and a. m. hit. 

, 1. . 1 ». 11*11 B. e. »bom 

the diviners have seen a lie, and have told »^■ 
false dreams : they comfort in vain : " therefore they 
went their way as a flock, they were troubled, be- 
cause^ there iras no shc[)lierd. 

o Mine anger was kindled against the sheplierd.-.' 
and 1 jjunished* the goats: for the Loud of hosts 
hath visited his flock the house of Judah, and 
liath made them as his goodly liorse in the bat- 
tle.J 

4 Out of him came forth the corner," out of him 
the nail,' out of him tlie battle-bow, out of him 
every oppressor together. 

5 1 And they shall be as mighty ynfn, which tread 
down their enemies in the mire of the streets in the 
battle:'" and they shall fight, because the Lord is 
with them, and the riders on horses shall be con- 
founded.* 

6 And I will strengthen the house of Judah, and 
I will save the iiouse of Josepli, and I will bring 
them again to place them ; for I have mercy upon 
them :" and they shall be as though I had not cast 
them off: for I am the Loud tlifiir God, and will 
hear tlicin. 

7 And they of Ephraim shall be like a mighty 
man, and their heart shall rejoice as through 
wine :" yea, their children shall see it, and be glad ; 
their heart shall rejoice in the Lord. 

8 I will hiss for them, and gather them; for I 
have redeem(>d them: and they shall increase as 
they have increased. 



visited upon, j Song 1:9. k Num. 24:17, 19. I Isa. ii:^. n Mai. 4:3. 
t Or, Iketj shall make the riders on horses ashamed. " Isa. M:7-10. o ch. 
9:15. 



the earth," the implements of war will become unneces- 
sary, for " he shall speak peace unto the heathen." 

11. No dungeon is so terrible as that of sin. but Christ 
has power, through the blood of his covenant, to open its 
doors, and set free its prisoners. 

12. None need despair of relief, however desperate their 
case, who are willing to come to Christ for help ; he is a 
" strong-hold " to all who put their ti-ust in him, and will 
reward them with identeous salvation. 

i:!-lfi. Though the victory over Satan's kingdom comes 
from (iod, it must be won by the faith and courage of his 
people, lie waits for their full consecration to his ser- 
vice, that he may fill his bow with them, and make them 
in his hand " as the sword of a mighty man." 

CHAPTER X. 

1. Ask ye — the Lord shall make bright clouds ; a promise 
of 8i)eedy answer to prayer. Itain here represents all 
needful blessings. 

2. Went their way as a flock; wandered like a lost flock. 
The reference is to God's people. 

:t. The goats; literally, " the he-goats:" that is, the un- 
faithful rulers and teachers. Compare Ezek. 34:17-22. 
Ifath made them as his goodly horse in the battle; that is, hath 
richly ornamented them. 

4. 'Out of him ; out of Judah. Came forth ; in the original 
it is future, " shall come forth." The corner— the nail; fig- 
urative ways of describing a prince. For the meaning of 
the latter figure, see Isa. 22:23, 24. Oppressor; the van- 
cpiisher of Judah's enemies. Isa. 14:2. 

6. Tlie him.-ic of Judah ; the two tribes that remained 
faithful to David's family. The home of Joseph : the ten 
tribes that revolted, i^ee note on Ezek. 37:16. Will bring 
them again to place them ; to reunite them with my people. 
See note to chap. 3:13: and also Ezek. :}7: 16-19. 

8. Hiss for them; call them. See note ou Isti. 5:26. 



Judah's punis/iment. 



ZECHARIAH XL 



T/iestiii'cs Bc'iuty and Bands. 



A. M.3te7. 9 And I will sow thorn amona; the peo- 
':;.'7'°" pie:* and they shall rcuueuiber mc in far 
countries;'' and they shall live with their chil- 
dren and turn again. 

10 I will bring them again also out of the land 
of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria; and 1 
will bring them into the land of Gilead and Leb- 
anon; and place shall not be found for them.'' 

11 And he shall pass through the sea with afflic- 
tion, and shall smite the waves in the sea, and all 
the deeps of the river shall dry up : and the pride 
of Assyria shall be brouglit down, and the sceptre 
of Egypt shall depart away. 

12 And I will strengthen them in the Lord ; and 
tliey shall walk up and down in his name,'' saith 
the Lord. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 The destruction of Jerusalem. 3 The elect being c.ired for, the rest 
are rejected. 10 The staves of Beauty and Bands broken by the re- 
jection of Christ. 1-5 The type and curse of a foolish shepherd. 

OPEN" thy doors, Lebanon, that the fire may 
devour thy cedars. 

2 Howl, fir-tree ; for the cedar is fallen ; because 
the migiity* are spoiled: liowl, ye oaks of 
Bashan ; for the forest of the vintage* is come 
down. 

3 H There is a voice of the liowling of the shep- 
herds ; for their glory is spoiled : a voice of the 



9. Sow them among the people; disperse them through 
flistant nations, but with the purpose of again restoring 
them to their own land. 

11). Egypt — Assyria; named as the two countries in 
which God's people have suffered oppression ; and here 
representing all the lands tlirough which they shall lie 
dispersed. 

11. He shall pass ; Jehovah, afflicting the enemies of his 
people. The sea; the Red sea. The river; the Nile, as 
the original word shows. God will repeat the miracles 
which he performed for ancient Israel, drying up all oj)- 
posing seas and rivers. Compare Isa. 11:16. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1, 2. They who in a believing and obedient spirit look 
to God for help, always receive it; but shame and disap- 
pointment must be the lot of such as forsake him, and 
trust for salvation to the work of their own hands. 

4. God is the inexhaustible fountain of wisdom and 
strength, and he will from age to age raise up for his 
church all the human helpers and defenders she needs in 
her conflict with Satan's kingdom. 

5-7. V/hen God is with his servants they are "mighty 
men " in the spiritual warfare, and prevail over all their 
enemies. 

8-12. Every past redemption which God has granted to 
his people, is a sure pledge of other and more glorious 
deliverances ; for he who has begun to save them with a 
strong hand and a stretched out arm, will not cease till he 
has given them the earth for their possession. 

CHAPTER XI. 

This chapter contains a prophecy of the destruction 
that was to come upon the Jews for their reiection of 
Clirist. 

1. Open thy doors; Lebanon is commanded to allow the 
fire a free passage into his forests ; these, as well as the 
oaks of Bashan, verse 2, and the rich pastures, verse 3, 
represent all that was excellent and glorious in the land. 
Compare 2 Kings 19:2.3; Isa. 2:13; 10:18, 19; Amos 1:2. 



roaring of young lions: for the jjride of Jordan 
is spoih'd. 

4 Thus saith the Lord my God ; Feed the flock 
of till' slaughter;" 

5 Whose possessors slay tiieni, and hold them- 
selves not guilty : and they that sell them say, 
Blessed be the Lord; for I am rich:*^ and their 
own shei)herds pity them not. 

() For I will no more pity the inhabitants of the 
hind, saith the Lord: but lo, I will deliver* the 
men every one into his neigidjor's iiand, and into 
the hand of his king-, and tliey shall smite the 
land, and out of their hand I will not deliver 
t/ie7n. 

7 And I will feed the flock of slaughter, even you, 

poor^ of the flock.*-' And 1 took unto me two 
staves ; the one I called Beauty, and the other I 
called Bands;' and I fed the flock. 

8 Three shepherds also I cut off in one month ;'' 
and my soul loathed them,'' and their soul also 
abhorred me. 

9 Tiien said I, I will not feed you : that that 
dieth, let it die ; and that that is to be cut oft', let 
it be cut oft'; and let the rest eat every one the 
flesh of anotlicr.* 

ion And I took my staff, even Beauty, and cut 
it asunder, that I might break my covenant which 

1 had made with all the people. 

11 And it was broken in that day: and so the 



ke to Ae found. 


S Or, 


eerily the poor 


e Mdtt. 11 :.■-). 


l05. 5;7. llleb t 


'as sir 


liteiifdfor Ihn 


. • Hpb^ hisfello 



•igfihor. 



2. Forest of the vintage; rather, as the margin, "the de- 
fenced forest ;" that is, which has hitherto been inacces- 
sible to the foe. 

3. Their glory; the luxuriant pastures in which they 
gloried. The pride of Jordan ; the trees and shrubs that 
adorned its banks. 

4. Thus saith the Lord ; the Lord commands the prophet 
in vision to feed his flock, that is, the people of Israel. 
Thus he is made a type of Christ " the Chief Shepherd," 
and in this character he performs, not literally, but in 
prophetic vision, the symbolical luls aftiTwards recorded. 
The fori: of the slarigliter; the flork (ln(.ni(.,l to ^laughter. 

.5. Whose possessors — they that sell thnn ; the corrupt and 
rapacious rulers of the Jews at the time of Christ's advent 
are intended. 

C. / wdl no more pity the inhabitants of the land ; this is 
said in anticipation of their rejection of Christ, as after- 
wards recorded. Every one into his neighbor's hand ; the 
reference is to tlie cruel factions among the Jews by which 
they destroyed each other. His king; the Roman power. 

7. And I will feed ; more literally, "I fed." The prophet, 
as a type of Christ, now enters upon his commission. You, 
poor of th£ flock; he addresses himself to these, because 
they received him and listened to his words. Compare 
verse 11. Two staves; the staff is here, as in Psa. 23:4, a 
symbol of the shepherd's office. Beauty; rather, " favor," 
namely, the Lord's favor towards his people ; for this staff 
is a symbol of God's gracious covenant with them. See 
verse 30. Bands ; a symbol of the brotherly union of the 
people under Christ. See verse 14. 

8. Three shepherds ; these difficult words have been vari- 
ously understood: they probably denote the three orders 
of men which God had" set over his people, namely, rulers, 
priests, and prophets. These all perished in the over- 
throw of the Jewish state by the Romans. Loathed them ; 
for their unbelief and rejection of me. 

10. Which I had 7nade with all the people; a covenant, 
namely, that they should not injure my ])eople Israel. 
Thus he gave them over to the power of cruel oppressors. 
Ver. 15, 16. 

1053 



The idol shepherd. 



ZECHARIAH XII. 



Deliverance of Jerusalem. 



poor of the flock that waited upon me knew' that 
it tvas the word of tlic Lokd. 

12 And I said nnto them, If ye think good/ give 
me my price ; and if not, forbear. So they weighed 
for my price tliirty pifir.i of silver." 

13 And tiic Lord said nnto me, Cast it unto the 
potter: a goodly price that I was prized at of 
them. And I took the thirty pieces of silver, 
and cast them to tlie potter in the house of the 
Lokd.'' 

14 Then I cut asunder mine other staff, ei-en 
Bands,' that I inigiit break the brotherhood be- 
tween Jndah and Israel. 

15 1 And the Loud said unto me, Take unto 
thee yet the instruments of a foolish shepherd. 

16 For lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land, 
which shall not visit those that be cut off,* noitiier 
shall seek the young one, nor heal tliat that is 
broken, nor feed' that that standetJi still: Init he 
shall cat the flesh of tiie fat, and tear their claws 
in pieces. 

17 Woe to the idol shepherd that loaveth the 
flock I*^ the sword shall he upon his arm, and upon 
his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried up, 
and his right eye shall be utterly darkened. 



CHAPTER XII. 



• Or, the poor, etc., certainly knetv. t Heb. // il bp grtotl in your eyes. 
«Ex(id. 2I:3i; Matt. a6:15. b Matt. 37:3-10. 1 Ur, B/nrftrJ. i Or, hidden. 
I Or, bear. *= Jobn 10: 12, 13. 1 Or, stumi/er, or poison. • Or, and also 

11. Tlie poor of I lie flock; tlie same as tlio •' afflictcMl and 
poor people," ilepli. :5:12; that is, the believing remnant 
of Israel. By witnessing the excLiition of Clirist's awful 
threatenings upon their countrymen, they were assured 
that what he spoke was the word of tlie Lord. 

12. My price; my hire for feeding the flock. If ye think 
good — if not, forbear ; as mucli as to say, You have rejected 
me as your shepherd ; now, if you choose, set a price upon 
my services. They value him at thirty pieces of silver. 
This symbolical valuation of the prophet by his country- 
men was a prophecy of the actual valuation of Christ by 
Judas and the chief priests. 

13. The poller; the potter's house was in a valley, Jer. 
18:2, 3, probably that of Ilinnom without the city, and 
seerns to have been regarded as an unclean ])lace. A good- 
hj price; spoken ironically; a price which expressed their 
contempt and rejection of him. To tlie potter in the lioti.ie 
of the Lord; that is, cast them down in the house of the 
Lord, to be carried thence to the potter. For the striking 
fulfilment of this propliecy, see Matt. 27:7-9. 

It. Break lite brolherhood between .ludah and Israel; give 
them over to faction and discord, like that which formerly 
existed between the kingdoms of Judah and Israel. The 
internal strifes of the Jews after our Lord's ascension be- 
came continually more bitter, till the very day that Jeru- 
salem was destroyed ; and it was by means of the factions 
among the citizens that the Romans were enabled so soon 
to ])rcvail over them. 

15. The instruments nfafooli.ih shepherd; the people hav- 
ing rejected the good shepherd, the i)rophet is now com- 
manded to ty|iify sheiiherds of a different character, name- 
ly, the cruel rulers of the Jews, who shall plunder and 
destroy them without mercy. The word "shepherd" is 
here used collectively. 

17. The idol shcphnrd ; or, "the worthless shepherd." 
Leiivelh the flock; conip;ire John 10:12, 13. U/iOn hts arm — 
upmt his right eye; he slrdl be given over lo weakness anil 
blindness, and thus jHrish miserably. This threatening 
was awfully executed by the R<iman3 upon the wicked 
and blind rulers who had rejeitcd Christ. 
INSTIUtTIONS. 

1-fi. Christ, the heavenly Shepherd, came at the appoint- 
ed time to feed his own flock ; but the false shepherds who 
had usurped dominion over it, rejected and slew him. For 
1054 



1 Jerusalem a cup of trembling to herself, 3 and a burdensome stone 
to her adversaries. 6 The victorious restoring of Judiih. 9 The re- 
pentance of Jerusalem. 

I^HE burden of the word of the Lord for Israel, 
. saith the Lord, which stretchetJi forth the 
heavens, and layclh the foundation of the earth, 
and formeth the spirit of man within him. 

2 Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trem- 
bling' unto all the people round about, when they 
shall be in the siege both jgainst Judah and 
against Jerusalem.' 

3 1i And in that day will I make Jerusalem a 
burdensome stone for all people :"* all that burden 
themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though 
all the people of the earth be gathered together 
against it. 

4 In that day, saith the Lord, I will smite every 
horse with astonishrat^nt, and his rider with mad- 
ness:'' and I will open mine eyes upon the house 
of Judah, and will smite every horse of the people 
with blindness. 

5 And the governors of Judah shall say in their 
heart. The inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my 
strength* in the Lord of hosts their God. 



against Judah shall he be xMi-h shall be in siege ag 
•il :4t. • Ezek. 3»:4. t Or, TiierB is strength lo r 
etc.; Jo6l3:lU. 



this sin both rulers and people, except the remnant who 
received him, were given over to terrible destruction. The 
doom of these unbelieving Jews will be that of all who 
despise Christ's authority, be they nations or individuals, 
for all power in heaven and earth is given into his hands. 
Psa. 2:8-12. 

7. The true members of Christ's flock are the objects of 
(jod's continual favor, and they are joined in holy love to 
the Saviour and to each other. 

8-10. 15y rejecting Christ, the Jewish church broke God's 
gracious covenant with their fathers, and brought upon 
themselves destruction without remedy; herein they are 
set forth as a warning for all nations to whom the gospel 
is preached. 

11. By the fulfilment of his awful threatenings upon those 
who reject his Son Jesus Christ, Ood coiitirms the faith of 
the humble remnant who receive him as their Saviour. 

12, 13. The thirty pieces of silver for which our Lord 
w-as sold, are a true sign of the price which the ungodly 
world set upon him and his great salvation. And all in his 
visible church who betray his cause for "the mammon of 
unrighteousness,'' act over again in spirit the part of Judas 
and the high-priests. 

It. When tlie union between Christ and his visible fol- 
lowers is broken, their mutual union with each other is 
also broken, and they become the prey of discord and fac- 
tion ; thus the Jews who crucified Christ went on destroy- 
ing one another, till all parties fell together into the hands 
of the Romans. 

15, IC. When a people to whom Christ has been offered 
reject his gentle rule, he will give them over to the domin- 
ion of cruel and rapacious masters. 

17. None are more guilty in (hmI's sight than the unfaith- 
ful shepherds whom he has set over his spiritual fold, and 
none will be iiuiiished with more terrible severity. 

CHAPTER XII. 

The threatenings of the ]ireceding chapter are followed 
liy glorious promises to " Jerusalem," whioh here represents 
the whole church of Christ. 

2. A cup oftremhimg ; a cup that produces trembling and 
reeling. Compare I'sa. 75:8; Isa. 51: 17. 21, 22. 

3. That burden themsrlrcs trdh it; in attemiiting to lift it 

4. Every horse; of the enemies of Jerusalem. 



RepeiUance of Jiiduh. 



ZECllAKlAll Xlll. 



The ojicned foaidcnn. 



A M :us-. 6 1 In that day ^vill I make tlic govern- 
" M?"''""' ors ol" Judali like ahcartli of fire among the 
wood, and like a loreh of fire in a sheaf; and they 
shall devour all the people round about, on the 
riglithand and on the left: and Jerusalem shall he 
inhaltitcd again iu her own place, even in Jerusalem. 

7 The Lord also shall save the tents of Jtulah 
fii-st, that the glory of the house of David and the 
glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem do not mag- 
nifv themselves against Judah. 

8 In that day shall the Lord defend the inhalii- 
tauts of Jerusalem ; and he that is fcelile* ainong 
them at that day shall be as David ;•' and the house 
of David shall be as God," as the angel of the Lord 
before them. 

9 T And it shall come to ])ass in that day, that 
I will seek to destroy all the nations that come 
against Jerusalem.'^ 

10 And I will pour upon the house of David, 
and upon the iidiabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit 
of grace and of supplications :** and they shall look 
upon me whom they have pierced,'' and they shall 
mourn for hiui,' as one mourneth for his only son, 
and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is 
iu bitterness for his first-born. 

11 Iu that day shall there be a great mourning 
iu Jerusalem,''' as the mourning of Hadadriuimon 
in the valley of Megiddon.'' 

12 And the land shall mourn, every family* 
apart; the family of the house of David apart, 
and their wives apart ; the family of the house of 
Nathan apart,' and their wives apart ; 





• n 


, a^jec 


,■ Heb. 


ralUn 


Mic. 


7:> 




» Heb. 11 


:34. I 


•To 


hn 17: 


i\-2:i. 


e 


Isa. 


Si-.n. 


i Psa 


51, Ij, 


Jer. 3 


■0; 


H 


Dm. S:'2U. 


e John 


111 


34, :)7 


Rev. 


1 


7 


■ Matt 


24:311. 


« Acts -J:.)? 


h 


;> 


3hr. 35: 2- 


-35. 


H 


•D. ti^T 


lilies. 


f 


mil 




2 Sim. 


5:14. 


1 Or, 


Si,r 




1, as the 


Seventy 




I'rov. 


U:12. 



7. The tents of Judah ; as feebler and more exposed than 
those of Jeru.salem, shall be first saved, that it may be maiii- 
fest to all that the salvation comes from tlie Lord alone. 

10. Upon me; the Messiah. Whom they have pierced; this 
is a reference to the piercing of Christ's side with the 
spear, Joliu 19 : 34 ; but it includes also all the sufferings 
inflicted upon him in his crucifixion, which took place at 
the instigation of the Jews. They shall mourn for him; the 
mourning of the three thousand at the day of Pentecost 
was but an earnest of that universal mourning which slrall 
take place hereafter among all classes of the Jews, wlieu 
they shall turn to Christ whom their fathers crucified. 

11. Megiddon; wliere Josiah was slain. 2 Kings 23:30; 
2 Chron. 35 : 22-25. 

12. Every family apart; as all classes have been partak- 
ers in the sin of crucifying Christ, all shall separately mourn 
over it. The house of Nathan; a branch of the ro^-al family. 
2 Sam. 5:14. Nathan was our Lord's ancestor in one line. 
Luke 3:31. 

13. 77m; famdy of Shimei ; a branch of the house of Levi. 
Num. 3: is, 21. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. God's character, as the Creator and Lord of heaven 
and earth, is a sure pledge that every one of his promises 
to his people shall be fulfilled at the appointed season. 

2, 3. The spirit of prophecy teaches us that the last and 
fiercest eftbrt of Satan to destroy the church shall result in 
his most complete overthrow. Iu the case of individual 
believers it often happens, in hke manner, that their se- 
verest temptations are followed by seasons of peculiar 
spiritual joy and fruitfulness. 

4-C. The cause of God's church is God's own cause ; he is 
against all who array themselves against her, and will make 
her " like a torch of fire in a sheaf" to all her enemies. 

7. God will not only save his people, but he will do it in 
I 



13 The family of the house of Levi apart, and 
their wives apart; the family of Shimei' apart, 
and their wives apart ; 

1-1 All the families that remain, every family 
apart, and their wives apart.' 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1 The fountain of purgation for .Icrusalem, 2 fiotii iduhilry, anJ false 
propliocy. 7 Tiie death of Clnlst, and tlie trial of ri third part. 

XN that day there shall be a fountain opened to 
the house of David and to the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness.^'' 

2 U And it shall come to pass in that day, saith 
the Lord of hosts, that I will cut off the names of 
the idols out of the land,' and they shall no more 
be remembered :'" and also 1 will cause the proph- 
ets and the unclean spirit to ])ass out of the land." 

3 And it shall come to pass, that when any shall 
yet prophesy, then his fatiicr and his mother that 
begat him shall say unto him. Thou shalt not live; 
for thou speakest lies in the name of the Lord : 
and his father and his mother that begat him shall 
thrust him through when he prophesieth." 

4 And it shall come to pass in that day, ttiat the 
pro])hets shall be ashamed every one of his vision, 
when he hath prophesied ;" neither shall they wear 
a rough garment' to deceive:^ 

5 But he shall say, I am no prophet, \,am a hus- 
bandman ; for man taught me to keep cattle from 
my youth. 

6 And one shall say unto him, What are these 



iRfh. separation for undmniits.^. kHeb.!):U; Rev. 1 :5; 7:13. 14, I E.\od. 
2:J:13; Psa. 1G:4. m Isa. 2: IS, 2U. "Luke 11:2(1. u Deal. 13;ti, !1. p Mic. 
3;G, 7. \iie\t. gamuntofhair. ^ Heb. /ie. 



such a way, and by such instrumentalities, that the glory 
shall belong to himself alone, and all boasting of his ser- 
vants shall be excluded. 

8. The abundant grace of God makes the feeble among 
Christ's disciples mighty in his cause, and increases the 
power of the strong more than all ii;itnr:d cnilowiiiciits. It 
is upon this, and not upon mere huiii:iii l(:iiiiin,L;. ,L;'iiius,aiid 
eloquence, that the church must rely lur power In conquer 
the world. 

10, 11. True repentance is the fruit of the Holy Spirit. 
Wherever he is poured out, there is groat mourning for 
sin. Thus will God one day cause his covenant people to 
look upon Christ whom their fathers crucified, and to be 
in bitterness for their rejection of him ; thus, also, will he 
bring all the gentile nations to moui-n for him, ami to re- 
ceive him as their Lord and King. 

12-14. A self-righteous spirit makes men censorious in 
respect to the sins of their neighbors, but true penitence 
leads them to mourn, every one apart, for their own sins. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1. A fountain; see Ileb. 9:14; 1 John 1:7; Rev. 1:5; 
7:14. 

2. The propMs and the unclean spirit; the false prophets, 
who spoke by an unclean spirit. 

3. Shall yet prophesy; that is, as a false propliet. Shall 
thrust him through ; according to the law against religious 
deceivers. Deut. 13:6-11. 

4. A rough garment ; worn by the false prophets in imi- 
tation of the true, for the purposes of deception. 2 Kings 
1:8;' Isa. 20:2; Matt. 3:4. 

5. Shall sat;, lam no prophet; shall confess that he has 
neither calling nor qualification for the prophetical office. 

6. Wa-1 u-oundcd in the house of my friends; hi; probably 
means, for his ialse assumption of the prophetic office, ver. 

1055 



Christ's death foretold. 



ZEC 11 A 111 A II XI\', 



His future coming. 



wounds in thy hands? Then he shall answer, 
Those with which 1 was wounded in the house of 
my friends. 

7 • Awake, sword, against my Slieplierd, and 
against tlio man (hat is my fellow," saith tlie Loud 
of liosts: smite the Sheiiherd, and the slieep shall 
bo scattered:" and 1 will turn my hand upon the 
little ones. 

8 And it shall come to pass, tfiat in all the land, 
saith tiie Loud, two parts therein shall be cut ofl" 
and ilie: but the tiiird shall be lift tliercin. 

9 And 1 will bring tlie third pari tlirongh the 
fire, and will refine tliem as silver is relined, and 
will try them as gold is tried r"" they shall call on 
my name, and I will hear them : I will say. It is my 
people: and they shall say, The Louu is my God. 

c II A 1' r i: 1! XIV. 

1 The Jcstroyers of Jeriisalt'iii destroyed. 4 The coming of Christ, and 
the 'Tiict-s of his kingdom. 12 The plague of Jerusalem's enemies. 
IC The remnant shall turn to the Lord, 20 and their spoils shall be 
holy. 

I')E1I0LD, the day of the Lord cometh, and thy 
) spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee. 
2 For Iwill gatherall nations against Jerusalem 
to battle; and tlie city shall be taken, and the 
houses rifled, and the women ravished ; and half of 
the city shall go forth into caiitivity, and the residue 
of the people shall not be cut ofl' from the city.'' 



» I'l.il. 2:0, b Matt. aii::!l. <: Joba.!:10; 1 I'.t. l:li,7. •< .Matt, ili-.yi, 
3?-. ' »Jr. tny. I Or, teften he shttU toueh t/i^ valteij of the vumntaiits to the 
plan ht separated. « Isa. a!l;«; Arans I ; I. ' .lujo U, 13. I Heb. precious. 

3 ; for where chastisement is sutBcierit, death is not inflicted. 
But some uiHlcislaiid hy the wounds in the liauils, wiiuikIb 
■whiclihe liad iiillirtc<l ii|)oii himself, aftt-r the lashiini of tlie 
false projihet.s, "in the house of his friends," that is.anionp; 
his companions in idolatry and falsehooil. Udiers still 
apply these words to Christ, who is distinctly sjjoken of in 
the ne.xt verse. 

7. Awake, sword; a direct prophecy of Christ's cruci- 
fixion "by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of 
God." God is the speaker, and his "fellow" is his Son, 
who dwelt in his bosom from eternity. Iwdl turn mijliand; 
in mercy, gatherin}:; the little ones of the Hock after their 
dispersion. Malt. 26:31; Mark 14:27. 

8. T/ie third sliall be left ; the believing remnant of God's 
people, after the mass has perished by the hand of Home. 

U. I wttt brinf^ the tin rd part throiii/h the fire ; a striking 
prediction of the liery trials through which the remnant of 
the Jews who received Christ should pass. 
INSTltUCTIOXS. 

1. None can be prepared for heaven, except they wash 
themselves in the fotnitaiii of Christ's Itlood, which tiod 
has opcneil for sin and for uneleanness; and none are so 
vile tliat they need despair of being made clean, if they arc 
■willing to come to that fountain. 

2-C. False teaching and sinful practice go hand in hand. 
It is the duty of (iod's people to set themselves resolutely 
against both, and by all projjcr means to c^cludo them from 
Christ's spiritual body. 

7. When man's redcm])tion was to be wrought out, God 
commanded his sword to awake against his Son, who dwelt 
from eternity in his bosum. He was wounded by it for our 
transgressirins, and if we hmnbly receive him as our Sav- 
iour, we shall never feel its awful power. But if we reject 
him, it will come down from heaven upon us and be batlied 
in our blood. 

y. We ought not to be either surprised or dismayed 

when tiery trials coino upon us, knowing that it is Goil's 

plan to bring his people tiirougli the furnace of aOliction, 

that ho may Uius refine them, and prepare them for his 

1056 



3 Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight ,a m.s48t, 
against those nations, as when he iought in. 

in the day of battle. 

4 Ti And his feet shall stand in that day upon the 
mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the 
east, and the mount of Olives shall cleave in the 
midst thereof toward the east and toward the 
west, and there shall be a very great valley : and 
half of the mountain shall remove toward the 
north, and half of it toward the south. 

5 And ye shall llee to the valley of tlie* moun- 
tain.-^; for the valley of the monntains shall reach 
unto Azal:* yea, ye shall flee, like as ye fleil from 
before the earthquake in the days of L'^zziah king 
of Judali :" and the Loud my God shall come, and 
all the saints with thee.' 

6 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the 
light shall not be clear,* nor dark:*' 

7 But it shall be one day' which shall be known 
to the Loud, not day, nor night: but it shall come 
to pass, that at evening time it .shall be light, 

8 And it shall be in that day, that living waters 
shall go out from Jerusalem ; half of them toward 
the former' sea, and half of them toward the 
hinder sea: in summer and in winter shall it be. 

9 And the Loud shall be king over all the earth: 
in that day shall there l)e one Lokp, and his name 
one, 

10 All the land shall be turned' as a plain from 



» Hcb. IhichteM. 1 That w. it shall not be cl.-ar in 
other places, of the world, t Or, the day shatl be i 
*J:'20. t Or. eompassed, 

service here and for the everlasting rest of heaven here- 
after. 

CllArTKR XIV. 

This chapter describes the last great conflict of God'a 
church with her enemies. Much of the description — as 
die descent of the Lord upon the mount of Olives, with 
the accompanying earthquake, ver. 4, 5; the twilight, ver. 
6,7; the living waters from Jerusalem, ver. 8; the conver- 
sion of the land into ajdain. ver, 10; the annual assemblage 
of all nations at Jerusalem to keep the feast of tabernacles, 
ver, 16 ; and the use of "every )iot in Jerusalem and Juilali " 
for sacrifice — must be understooti syiidiolically, 

2. / will gather alt nations; compare Isa. 2i):3-S; Ezek. 
38:7-16; Joel :i; 11-14; Rev. 16:):{-16; 19:19. 

4. Toward the east and toirard the west ; that is, opening a 
chasm that runs east and west. 

5. To the valleij of the mountains ; the " very great valley," 
ver. 4, which seems to have been opened for the escape of 
God's pcojjle, while he is executing his judgments upon 
their enemies assembled at Jerussdem. 

6. The lipht shall not be elear, nor dark; it shall be a twi- 
light, ver. 7. Hut some prefer to render. "Ihere shall not 
be light: the bright " lights of heaven "shall bo with- 
drawn," 

7. One day— known to the Lord: that is, one period of 
time, the limits of which are known only to the Lord. Not 
daij, nor nig/i^ ; that is, a tlim twilight, signifying that mix- 
ture of spiritual light and darkness that jirecedes the day 
of millennial glory. At eveninp tune tt shall be light; when 
this day of twilight closes there shall conic, instead of dark- 
ness, a period of clear light, 

S. Living waters; sec notes on Ezek. 47 : 1-12. Former — 
hinder; see note on Joel 2:20. 

10. Turned as a plain ; made like the plain of the Jortlan. 
(uha ; in the northern \)order of Judah, Riminun ; in tho 
southern border. // sliall lie lifted up; Jerusalem shall be 
lifted up. From Benjamin's ?<i/e— uii/o the king's wine-press- 
cs ; see note on Jer. 31 : 38-40. 



Punishmenl of 



ZECHARIAH XIV 



I he foes of Zion. 



A. M. .W7. Geba to Rimmon south of Jorusalera : and 
" 517"''°'" it sliall be lii'ted up, and inhabited* iu her 
place, from Benjamin's gate imto the place of the 
lirst gate, unto the corner gate, and from the tower 
of Hanancel unto the king's wine-presses. 

1 1 And 7nen sliall dwell in it, and there shall be 
no more utter destruction;" but Jerusalem shall 
lie* safely inhabited. 

12 •[ And this shall be the plague wherewith the 
Lord will smite all the ]ieople that have fought 
against Jerusalem : Their llesii shall consume away 
wliile they stand upon their feet, and their eyes 
shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue 
shall consume away in their mouth. 

13 And it shall come to pass in that day, that a 
great tumult from the Lord shall be among them ;'' 
and they sliall lay hold every one on the hand of 
his neiglibor, and his hand shall rise up against 
the hand of his neighbor.*^ 

U And Judah also* shall fight at^ Jerusalem; 
and the wealth of all the heathen round about 
shall be gathered together, gold, and silver, and 
apparel, in great abundance.'' 

15 And so shall be the plague of the horse, of 
the mule, of the camel, and of the ass, and of all the 
beasts that shall be in these tents, as this plague. 



• Or,slmUahide. "Rev. ai:4. t Or, a4«/(!. b 1 Sam. 14:15, 20. c Ezek. 
rB:21. I Or, thou also, O Judah. i Or, against, d Ezek. 39: 10, 17. e Isa. 
li6;->3. t Lev. 23:33, etc.; Neh. 8:14, etc. slsa.60:ia. I Heb. uponivhom 



14. Shalt Jight at Jerusalem; as her helper. Gathered to- 
gether; as spoil. 

15. So shall be the p/agnc of the horse; that is, correspond- 
ing to the plague of its owner, ver. 12. As this plague; as 
this plague upon the men, ver. 12. 

16. Every one that is left — shall even go up; the remnant 
of the heathen who escape tliese judgments shall go up 
annually to Jerusalem to celebrate the feast of tabernacles. 
This is a figurative way of describing their conversion and 
incorporation into the church, borrowed from the usage of 
(iod's people under the Mosaic law. Lev. 23:39-43. 

20, 21. Upon the bells of the horses; inscribed upon them, 
as a sign that they are consecrated to God's service. The 
pot.t in the Lord's house ; employed to boil the flesh of the 
.sacrifices. Compare 1 Sam. 2:13, 14. Like the bowls before 
the altar; that is, as holy as the bowls before the altar, 
whicli were used for receiving the blood of the victims, 
and therefore esteemed especially holy. The meaning is, 
that all things connected with God's service shall become 
holy. Shall be holiness unto the Lord; all common vessels 
shall become holy, and be used for sacrifices; in other 



1 6 H And it shall come to pass, f/tat every one 
that is left of all the nations which came against 
Jerusalem, shall even go up from year to year to 
worship the King, the Lord of hosts," and to keep 
the feast of tabernaelSs.'' 

n And it shall be, that whoso will not come up 
of all the families of the earth unto Jerusalem to 
worship the King, the Lord of hosts, even upon 
them shall be no rain.'' 

18 And if the ftimily of Egypt go not up, and 
come not, that have no rain: '' there shall Ijc the 
plague wherewith the Lord will smite the heatheH 
that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles. 

19 This shall be the punishment^ of Egypt, and 
the punishment of all nations that come not up to 
keep the feast of tabernacles. 

20 H In that day shall there be upon the bells* 
of the hor.^es, HOLLXESS UNTO THE LORD;' 
and the pots in the Lord's house shall be like the 
bowls before the altar. 

21 Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah 
shall be holiness unto the Lord of hosts; and all 
they that sacrifice shall come and take of them, 
and seethe therein : and in that day there shall be 
no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord 
of hosts.' 



4:3; 35:8; Joel 



liDeut. 11:10. 1 Or, sin. • Or, bridles, i Isa. '23:18. 1 
3:17; 1 Cor. 0:9-11; Eph. 2:19-22; Kev. 21:27; 22:15. 



words, every thing being consecrated to God, the distinc- 
tion between common and holy things shall be done away. 
This intimates the abolition of the Mosaic distinctions of 
clean and unclean. That sacrifice; sacrificing here repre- 
sents the spiritual service of the Christian church, Rom. 
12:1; for literal sacrifices were abolished by the perfect 
sacrifice of Clrrist, which they prefigured. Heb. 10:18. 
The Canaanite; the Canaanite is a .symbol of profane and 
wicked men. The house of the Lord; the church of Christ. 
Eph. 2:19-22. 

INSTRUCTION. 
Many distressing conflicts await God's people, but he 
will be with them and make them victorious in all. In the 
darkest times there is no ground of despondency in respect 
to Christ's church. God orders all things for her good, and 
it is his immutable purpose that all nations who will not 
submit to his Son shall be destroyed by his judgments. He 
will "overturn, overturn, overturn," till there shall be no 
longer any distinction between the church and the world ; 
for all nations shall be " holiness unto the Lord of hosts," 
and shaU consecrate to his service all their possessions. 



BT 



1051 



MALACIII. 



Of the personal history of Malachi, the last of the Hebrew prophets, wc have no information. The 
Jewish tradition, that he was contemporary with Nelieiiiiah, agrees perfectly with the contents of the 
book, and is generally received as correct. The spirit which he everywhere rebukes is that of pharisaical 
Belf-rightcousness, which led the people to set a high value upon their religious services, defective as they 
wore, and to complain of the severity of God's dealings with them. Of the abuses which he censures, 
several, as the marrying of foreign wives and the withholding of tithes, are expressly referred to in 
Nehemiah, and the rest would be naturally connected with them. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 Malachi complainetli of Israel's unkinilnoss. fi Of iheir irreligious- 
ncss, 12 and profaneiu'ss. 

''pHE burden of the word of the Loud to Israel 
X by* Malaohi. 

2 I have loved you," saitii the Lord. Yet ye 
say. Wherein hast thou loved us? Was not E?au 
Jacob's brother? saith the Lord: yet I loved Ja- 
cob, 

3 And I bated Esaii,'' and laid his mountains and 
his heritage waste for the dragons of the wilder- 
ness.'= 

4 Whereas Edom saith, Wc are impoverished, 
but we will return and build the desolate places; 
thus saith the Lord of hosts, They shall iniild, but 
I will throw down; and they shall call tliem,The 
border of wickedness, and, Tiic people against 
whom the Lord hath indignation for ever. 

5 And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, The 
Loud will be magnified from* the border of Israel. 

6 1 A son honoreth his fatlier, and a servant his 
master: if tiien I 6c a father,'' where is mine hon- 
or? and if I 6e a master, where is my fear? saith 
the Loud of hosts unto you, priests, that despise 
my name. And ye say, Wherein have we despised 
thy name?" 

7 Yc olTor* polluted bread upon mine altar ; and 
ye say. Wherein have wo polluted thee ? In that yc 
"say, The table of the Lord is contemptible.' 



•Heb. 6«(*<*<inrfo/. • Deut. 7:7, 8; Jer. .11 :3. tiRomO:!!. «Jtr.4n:l7, 
IB; Kzek. 35:3, etc. ; OUd. HI, etc t Or, u/ion; Ucb. from upon. ■! I.ukp 
r,:'J6. ' ch. 3:7, 0, 13. 1 Or, kriilK unlo. ' I Cor. 1U;'J1. 



i Heb. to. r I^T 



CHAPTER I. 

2,3. limbed Jacob— I lulled Exnn; Ood contra.-ft.s his nn- 
descrvcd Invo towaril.M.Iiuoli with IiIb just jmlgmcnt« upon 
Esau; tliiiH ('xhil)iliii;^ liin j;racL' lowarils thu otic, and liis 
juHtico towards llio other, lioiii. 9: l.*!. 

7. Pollulcd hrend; tlio hrcad in licro the (IphIi of the sacri- 
fici'.i. How it w.as pollutod ai>pi'arH from vor. 8. 

'J. Will he rrpnrd ijoiir persons 7 aceeiit your olTiTiiiKS, or 
listcu to your iiit*.Tci'S8ioii8 ; that irt.wliiluyou continue to 
ft«rve him in Bucb a spirit, and with such polluted gifta. 
1058 



8 And if yc offer the blind for' sacrifice, ^^^, 
is it not evil ? and if ye offer the lame and w.' 
sick, is if not evil?*' offer it now unto thy govern- 
or; will lie be pleased with thee, or accept thy 
jjcrson? saith the Loud of hosts. 

9 And now, I pray you, beseech God' that he 
will 1)0 gracious unto us: this hath been by your 
means:' will he regard your persons?" saith the 
Lord of hosts. 

10 Wiio is there even among you that would shut 
tiie doors /(;r nmight'.'' neither do ye kindle _/?/•? 
on mine altar for naught. I have no pleasure in 
you, saith the Lord of hosts, neither will I accept 
an offering at your hand. 

11 For, from the rising of the sun even unto the 
going down of the same, my name shall he great 
among the Gentiles ;' and in every place incense 
sludl l)e offered unto my name, and a pure offer- 
ing:" for ray name shall be great among the hea- 
then, .saith the Loud of hosts. 

12 1i 13ut yc have profaned it, in that yc say. The 
table of the Loud is polluted ; and the fruit thereof, 
even his meat, is contemptible. 

13 Ye said also. Behold, what a weariness is it! 
and yc have snuffed at it,* saith the Loud of hosts; 
and yc brought that irhieh was torn, and the lame, 
and the sick ; thus yc brought an offering: should 
I accept this of yoiir hand? saith the Lord. 

14 But cursed be the deceiver, which hath in his 



■ti-.-X-ti; Dcut 15:31. I llcb, Ihr fan of God. 1 llpb. /i 
bRom. 2:11; I Pol. 1:17. I I Cor. 9: 13. J In .'.9:la; ri«:3 ' 
20; John 4:21, 23; Ruv. 8:3. ' Or, vkinai 



I your hand. 

_. k' In. 00:19, 

\iRhl hnvt bloicn it dtray. 



10. Slivt the doors for naught ? that would do the smallest 
sprvico even in the temple without pay? 

11. For, from lite rhtn/; of llie .<:iin — n pure offer inf;; as 
much as to say, "I will t.nko no such polluted offerings; 
for it is my purpose tliat piire offerings shall bo presented 
to me l>y all nations." 

12. The tiihle of the Lord; figuratively spoken: the table 
spread, as it were, for Cod in the sacrifices and offerings 
of tlic sanctuary. This tliey treated as polluted and con- 
temptible. 

1). A male; wliieli the law ro'iuired in many cases. Lev. 



Priests end people 



MxVLACIII II. 



sharply rcprorerL 



A.M. 3607. flock" a malo, and vowetli, and sacrificeth 
■397* °" unto the Lord a corrupt tluri!>:: for I am a 
great King, saitli the Loun of lio.st.'^, iuul my name 
is dreadi'ul among the heathen. 



C 11 APT E It II. 

] He sharply reproveth the priests for neglecting tlieir covenant, 11 and 
the people for iilolatry, 14 for adultery, 17 and for infidelity. 

\ND now, ye i)ricsts, thi.s coininandment is 
for you. 

2 If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to 
heart, to give glory unto my name, saitli the Lord 
of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and I 
will curse your blessings:" yea, I have cursed 
them already, because ye do not \ay if to heart. 

3 Behold, i will corrupt* your seed, and spread* 
dung upon your faces, cve7i the dang of your sol- 
emn feasts ; and 07ic shall take you away with it.^ 

4 And ye shall know that I have sent this com- 
mandment unto you, that my covenant might be 
with Levi, saith the Lord of hosts. 

5 My covenant was with him of life nnd peace ;'' 
and I gave them to him for the fear wherewith he 
feared me, and was afraid before my name. 

6 The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniqui- 
ty was not found in his lips : he walked with mo 
in peace and equity, and did turn many away from 
iniquity.'^ 

7 For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, 
and they should seek the law at his mouth :'' for 
he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts." 

8 But ye are departed out of the way ; ye have 



' Oi, in whose flock is. a Deut. 23:15, etc. t Or, rcpTOre. t Heb. scalier, 
i Or, it shall take you away to it. b Num. 25:12, 13; Deut. 3:J:S-10. " Jer. 
2.3:a-X d Lev. 10:11. e Acts 16:17; 2 Cor. 5:20. I Or, fall in. f 1 Sam. 
2:17, 30; Luke 11:45, 46. e Neh. 13:29. H Or, lifted up the face against; 



1 : 3-10. A corrupt thing; such a victim as the law did not 

allow, while he had in his flock "a male without blemish." 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. When men undervalue the favors which God has be- 
stowed upon them, and murmur at his dealings, it is certain 
that they are under the influence of a proud and self-right- 
eous spirit. 

3-5. That we may understand and feel the extent of God's 
unmerited mercy towards us, it is well that we often contrast 
our condition with that of less favored nations, who are by 
nature no more undeserving of his love tlian ourselves. 

6-8. They who give to God their supreme love, will 
honrir him with their best offerings. When men devote 
to their own use the choicest of their possessions, and can 
spare for God's cause only the refuse, which they would 
lie ashamed to offer to an eartlily ruler, it is plain that they 
lidiior themselves above their Maker, and contemn his ser- 
vice and glory. Ver. 13.. 

10. God can be pleased only with wiHing services. Tliey 
who, in ministering at his altar, think more of their own 
jirivate emolument than of his lionor, have the true spirit 
of hirelings, and will be rejected, with their services, as 
abominable in his sight. Ver. 14. 

CHAPTER II. 

1. This commandment; this charge to the priests with 
the accompanying rebukes. 

3. Of your solemn feasts ; that is. of the victims ofifered in 
your solemn feasts. This is a clear intimation that all the 
services of these feasts were abominable to God, and should 
be rewarded with ignominy instead of honor. 

4. That my covenant might be with Levi; that it might be 
confirmed and faithfully observed on your part. " Levi " 
stands here for the family of Levi. 



caused many to stumble at' the law;'' ye have 
corrupted the covenant of Levi,''' saith the Lord of 
hosts. 

It Therefore have I also made you contemptible 
and base before all the people, according as ye 
have not kept my ways, but have been partial in' 
the law. 

10 Have we not all one father?'' hath not one 
God created us? why do we deal treacherouslv 
every man against his brother, by profaning the 
covenant of our fathers? 

UTTJudah hath dealt treacherously, and an 
abomination is committed in Israel and in Jeru- 
salem ; for Judah hath profaned the holiness of 
the Lord which he loved,* and hath married the 
daughter of a strange god.' 

12 The Lord will cut off the man that doetli this.' 
the master and the scholar,* out of the taliernacles 
of Jacob, and him that offereth an offering unto 
the Lord of hosts. 

13 And this have ye done again, covering the 
altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and 
with crying out,'' insomuch that he rcgardeth not 
the offering any more, or receiveth it with good 
will at your hand. 

14 ^1 Yet ye say, Wherefore? Because the Loud 
hath been witness between thee and the wife of 
thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt treacher- 
ously: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of 
thy covenant. 

i5 And did not he make one ?' Yet had he the 
residue* of the spirit. And wherefore one ? That 
he might seek a godly seed.^"" Therefore take 



Heb. accepted faces. l> 1 Cor. .S:6. • Or, ought to love, i Ezra 9:1, •>. 
i Josh. 23:12, "13. t Or, liim tliat waktth, and him that answereth. k Ps.x. 
78:34-37. I Matt. 19:4, 6. I Oc, excellency, i 'Heb. seed of Qod. m 1 Cor. 
7:14. 



5. My covenant — of life and peace; there is a reference here 
to the promise made toPliinehas for his zeal in God's cause. 
Num. 25:10-13. Compare Deut. 33:9, 10. 

10. Ham we not all one father ? the prophet proceeds to 
rebuke the sin of marrying foreign wives, which was con- 
nected with that of putting away wives of Hebrew origin. 
Compare Neh. 10:30 ; 13:23-30. He regards this, first, as 
a sin against the national covenant, verses 10-12; second- 
ly, as a sin against the repudiated Hebrew women. Why 
do we deal treacherously — by profaning the covenant of our 
fathers ? the marriage of foreign women was an act of treach- 
ery against God, and against the common brotherhood of 
the Jews, who were bound to help each other in sustain- 
ing the covenant made with their fathers. 

12. The master and the scholar; a proverbial expression, 
like "root and branch." See margin, where llic reference 
probably is to the priests that kept watch in Ihc li'iii|iJe, 
and answered to each other's call. Tliat offffiih an ujfer- 
ing ; that is, while he allnw.'i liiinself in this sin. 

13. Again; perhaps willi rdrri'iice to the same sin com- 
mitted under Ezra's aclniiiiistratinn. Ezra 9:1, 2. But 
some render, " This again have ye done ;" that is, to the 
sin of jirofaning my covenant, you have again added cru- 
elty to your Hebrew wives, whom you have put away to 
make room for heathen wives. Covering the altar ; the altar 
at which the priests ministered is represented as covereil 
with the tears and groans of their repudiated wives. 

15. Make one; that is, "one flesh," by the union of one 
man with one woman. The prophet refers to the original 
institution ofmarriage, which alike excluded polygamy and 
divorce. Gen. 2:23, 24. The residue of the spirit; the crea- 
tive power remained with him. and he could have made more 
women had he seen good. A godly seed ; the design of the 
maiTiagc institution.as originally established, is here giver. 
1059 



Christ's jit'ijesly (mil grace. 



MALACJll ill. 



Sacrilege of the pecplc. 



heed to your spirit, and let none deal trcat-licr- 
oiisly* ajrainst the wife oThis youlli. 

IG For the Loud, tlic God of I.-rael, saitli that 
lie hutcth puttiiif;' away:'" for one coverotii vio- 
lence with iiis garment, saitli tlic Loud of hosts: 
therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal 
not treacherously. 

IT 'i Yo have wearied tlic Lord with your 
words.'' Yet ye say, Wiiercin have we wearied 
/lim'.'' When ye say, Every one that doeth evil is 
good in the sight of tlio Loun, and he deliglitetii 
in tiieni : or, Wiierc is the God of Judgineut ? 



CHAPTER III. 

I Of the messenger, majestv, and grace of Clirisl. 7 Of the rebellion, 
8 sacrilege. 13 anil iniidelily of the people. 10 The promise of bless- 
ing 10 tliem that frar Goil. 

BEHOLD, I will send my messenger, and he 
shall prepare the way before me:'' and the 
Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his 
temple,'' even tlic messenger of the covenant, whom 
ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saitli the 
Lord of hosts. 

2 But who may abide the day of his coming? 
and who shall stand when he appeareth?*' for he 
is like a refiner's fire,'' and like fullers' soap: 

3 And he sliall sit as a refiner and ))nrifier of 
silver: and he shall purii'y tlie sous of Levi, and 
purge them as gold and silver, that they may ofier 
unto the Lord an otToring in rigliteousncss.'-' 

4 Then shall the oiToring of Juduh and Jerusa- 
lem be pleasant unto tiie I^iord, as in the days of 
old, and as in former' years. 

5 And 1 will come near to you to judgment; and 
I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and 
against the adulterers,'' and against false swearers, 
and against those that oppress* the hireling in his 
wages,' the widow, and the fatherless, and that 



• Or, unfaithfully, t Or, if he hale her, pu< hor away, Matt. I«:^ ; Ilcb. 
> put awaij. » Dcul. 24:1. b Isa. 43:21; Amos 2:13. e Luko 1:70; 
127. ■! Luke 2:47. e Malt. 25:10; Rev. 0:17. i 1 Cor. 3:13-15 s 1 Pet. 
;5. tOr,aneienl. Mleb. 13:4. i Or, defrauil. ijas. 5:1. J P.a. 7S::», 



16. Covcrctli violence with his f^armcnl; tliat is, cloaks his 
violence towards his wife uiitlcr variouH prctonccs. But 
Homo render, " hcapeth violence upon his garment," gar- 
ment being taken tiguiatively lor wile. 

17. Every one tltal iloeth evil — where is the God of judg- 
ment? see note on cliaj). 3:U, l.'i. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1-9. A solemn rcsi)on8ibility rests npon religious (e.toh- 
ers and rulers. Their oi)portiinities to do good or evil are 
great. If fiiithful to tiieir Master and the souls of men, 
they may turn many from iniquity; but if unfaitlifnl, Ihiy 
will corrupt God's worship, and cause many to stunddo 
info perdilion. God will call them to account for their 
stewardship: if they have been true to thi^ir charge, he 
will lionor them b.lorc all; but if they have betrayed his 
cause, and thus ilcslioyed the souls of their fellow-men, 
lie will make them i:ontem])tible and base in this world 
ami in that which is to eonie. 

U. The .Iow8 were forbidden to take wives from hca- 
llien nations, lest God's service should be corrupted by 
the intermi.\turo of idolatrous rites; and the experience 
■ •f all ages has shown that alliances of this kind are emi- 
nently disastrous to the cause of piety. When believers 
unite themselves with those who reject Christ's gos])el, 
ihey cannot reasonably Jiopc for the blessing of a godly 
need. 

13- l(i. Polygamy and divorce are opposed alike to the 
lOfiO 



turn aside the stranger ^/wn Ms right, and a. m. aw. 
fear not me, saith the LoitD of hosts. '':'.i7° 

(J For I «»?i the Lord, I change not; therefore 
ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.^ 

7 *i. Even from the days of your fathers ve arc 
gone away from mine ordinances, and have not 
kept the7n. Return unto me. and I will return 
nnto you," saith the Lord of hosts. Uut ye said, 
AVhercin shall we return?' 

8 •[ Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed 
me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? 
In titiics and offerings."' 

9 Ye arc cursed witli a curse: for ye have robbed 
me, even this whole nation. 

10 Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, 
that there may be meat in my liou.«e, and prove 
mo now herewitli, saith the Lord of hosts, if I 
will not open you the windows of lieaven, and 
pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be 
room enongli to receive it. 

11 And 1 will rebuke the devourcr for your 
sakcs, and he shall not destroy^ the fruits of your 
ground ; neither sliall your vine cast her fruit bo- 
fore the time in the fieid, saith the LtiRD of hosts. 

12 And all nations shall call you blessed: foryc 
shall be a delightsome land, saith the Lord of 
hosts. 

13 1 Your words have been stout against mc.° 
saith the Tj0I!D. Yet ye say, What have wc spo- 
ken so much against thee? 

14 Ye have said, It is vain to serve God: and 
wliat profit w it that we liave kept liis ordinance,' 
and that we have walki^d mournfully' before the 
Lord of hosts ? 

1.5 And now we call the proud happy; yea, they 
tliat work wickedness arc set up;* yea, they that 
temiit God are even delivered.'' 

IG 1 Then they that feared the Lord spake often 
one to another:'' and the Lord hearkened, and 

.J7; ham. 3:22. k Zcoh. 1:3. I Matt. 23:27. "» Nch. J3: IU-12. I Hcb. 
tmptyout. ii2Chr. 31:10. 1 Heb. cori-u/jl. o Pga. 7:1:11, 12; Zeph. 1 : 12. 
' Ileb. observation, t Ileb. inlilaci. 1 Hob. Iiuilt. I> Pn. 05:9. 4 Eph. 



original institution of marriage, to domestic ])eace and 
piuity, and to the ))rogress of true jiiety ; wherever they 
prevail, they bring vice .ind mi.'Jerv in their train. 

17. The present prosperity of the wicked has been in all 
ages a trial to the faith of Goil's iieoplo; but no true be- 
liever will allow himself to be seduced by it into the ways 
of sin; it is only they who have no faith in "the God of 
judgment," that will join themselves to the side of evil- 
doers. Chap. ;i :!.'), !(!. 

rii.\p'n:ij iii. 

1. Mijme.<i.ienf;cr; see Matt. 11: 10; M;irkl:2; I,ukel:7i!. 
Before me ; before the Messiah, who is •• the Lord. " and the 
" messenger of the covenant," as the '■ mediator of Ihe new 
covenant," Ileb, 12:21, 

;!. Shall ptirifij Ihr sons of Lcri ; this was fulfilled in the 
spiritual priesthood which Christ established in their stead. 
1 I'et. 2:5. 

14. 15. It js rain to serve Gml — \re call the proud happy; 
lit ciiuse tiod does not notice iind reward their empty and 
he;irtless forms of religion, they eom]ilain that his service 
is v;iin, and represent him a,-* lavoring Ihe jiroud and wiek- 
eil. This is Ihe genuine spirit of Phariseeism in all ages 
and nations. 

li;. Then; at this very lime when the ungodly were ut- 
tering their impious speeches. Spake often otie to another; 
enc<iuragiiig each other in God's sorvicc. 



Blaisings on the failhful. 



MA LA CHI IV 



The romiiiu; of Klijnh. 



A. M M)7. licnril //, ami a hook of remembrance was 
.TJ7. " written l)ef'oi-(' liim for tliem tliat feared 
the Lord, and that Ihouylit upon his name." 

17 And tiicy siiall bo mine,'' saith tlie I^oim of 
liosts, in that (Uiy when 1 mai<(^ up my jewels;"'' 
and 1 will spare tiiem, as a man sparelh his own 
son tliat servcth him. 

18 Then shall \'e I'eturn, and discern between 
the rin'iiteous and the wicked, between him that 
serveth God and him lliat serveth him not.'' 

CIIAI'TKR IV. 



I God's judgment on the wicUod, "^ 
He exiiorteth to the study of the U 



id his blessing on flie good. 4 
-O and telleth of Elijah's corning 



Ii^OR behold, Ihe day comcth, that shall burn as 
an oven;' and all the proud, yea, and all 
that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day 
that Cometh shall burn them up,'' saith the Lord 



IS. Return; that is, from j'our delusion, and see that 
(lod does in reality make a difference between the riKhl- 
eons and the wicked. 

INSTRUCTION?. 

1, 2. The .Ifw.s earnestly desired tlie comiiii; of llicir 
long-promised Messiah, but when ho ajipeared tiiey could 
not endure the searcliinj? purity of Ins doctrines, and so 
tliey rejected and crucified him. In hke manner many 
now pray for the spiritual ])reseiice of Christ in their as- 
sembUes, who are yet uiiwilUnp: to liave those sins pointed 
out a?id exposed which liindcr liis coming and power. 

;i, 4. (iod will have a spiritual priesthood, "that they 
may offer unto the Lord an offeriiii; in righteousness." If 
they whom he has set over his visil)le church persist, like 
the ancient scribes and Pharisees, in rejecting tlie truth, 
he will take from them the kingdom of God and give it to 
others. Chap 1:11. 

.'). The true doctrine of Christ is opposed to all forms 
of sin, and it is only those who receive and obey it that 
he will acknowledge as his disciples. To all workej-s ot 
iniquity, however high their pretensions, he will say, " I 
never knew you." Matt. 7:23. 

8, 9. All that we have and are belongs to God. When 
we withhold from him our full love and obedience, we 
are living in tlie practice of robbery, however decent may 
Ije ou'i' oiitward deportment. Thousands who have a f;\ir 
name in God's church, thus rob God by withholding from 
him the time or service or property which his cause de- 
mands, and brini; ii|)oii llicir souls his withering curse. 

10-14. When i;..ds p,'u|,lc meet him with all (lie tithes 
in their hands, \\>- mcis llicin with his abundant Idessing. 
The reason why they so often walk miiurnfully before him 
for a long time and receive no answer, is. that tliey have, 
like Ananias and ftquihira, kejit back part of tlie price. 

K;. When iiilid.lity;iMil wick. -iliMss most abi. mid in the 
community, llicn is thr line' fir ili.isc who fear (!od to be 
most ililigciit ill spcaldir^ olicn one to another, and encour- 
aging each other in his service. 

17. God does not overlook or forget the prayers and 
labors of his faithful servants, however humble their sta- 
tion. He will own every one of them at the last day in 
tlie presence of men and angels, and bestow upon them 
glory everlasting, 

18, Though it may seem for a season as if God put no 
difference between the righteous and the wicked, he will 
one day make an everlasting separation between them, 
such as all beings in heaven and hell shall well under- 
stand. 



of hosts, that it shall leave them neilher root nor 
branch. 

2 'i Bat unto you that fear my name" shall tlu! 
Sun of riohteousncss arise with healina: in his 
win.u's;" and ye shall go forth, and grow up as 
calves of th(! stall.' 

:* -And ye shall tread down the w ickcd ; for tliey 
shall lie iislies under the soles of your feet in the 
ilay that, J shall do tith, saith the Loimi of hosts. 

4 "i liememlier ye the law of Mosi's my servant, 
whi(^h I coinnuiiidcd unto him in llorcb for till 
Israel, villi till' sinliitcs and jiidLiiiii'iits. 

5 IBcliolil. I will send you Klijah the ])ro])hct 
before the I'oniin^ of the great and dreadful day 
of the LuKii:' 

G And he shall turn tlie heart of the fathers to 
the children, and the heart of the children to their 
fathers, lest I cmne and smite the earth with a 
curse. 



J Matt. 11:14; 17:10-13. 



CHAPTER TV, 

1, liiluild, li'ic liaij comclli, Ihat shall hum ».< an oven; the 
Old Testament closes with the annunciation of a coming 
day of judgment, when the rigliteous shall be triumphant, 
and the wicked shall be utterly destroyed. This is one 
of the many pro])hecies that are ju'ogressivcly fulfilled in 
God's judgments ujion the wicked, and the deliverances 
which he vom-hsafcs to the righteous in this worlrl, but 
which will have llicir perfect fuUilnicnt nnly at the last 
great day, 

4, Remenilicr ye the Imp of Mnncx ; as the revclalions of tlu^ 
Old Testament arc now closing, God admonishes his jieo- 
pie to take for their directory the law of Moses, till the 
Mediator of the new covenant shall ajipear. 

5, I v'ill send you Elijah the prophet; that is, one coming 
"in the spirit and power of Elias," Luke 1:17, See Matt. 
11:14; 17:10-13; Mark 9:11-13. Before the cominfr of Ihe 
Cerent and dreadful diiij of the Lord; the day of dreadful 
judgment upon the wicked connected with Christ's advent. 
Compare Joel 2 : 31. 

6, The fathers to the children ; the pious forefathers of the 
Jews to their children. The children of Abraham are here 
regarded as constituting one family through all ages. By 
turning the hearts of the children to the God whom their 
fathers served, fathers and children are united in holy love 
to God and to each other. Lest I come; these words imply 
that the unbelief of men would resist Elijah in this niider- 
taking. The earth ; or, " the land," as the original word i.s 
often rendered, A curse; the awful curse which has rested 
on the land of jiromiso and its former possessors since 
their rejection of Christ. 

INSTRUCTION. 
The judgments of God which fall from time to time ujion 
the wicked in this world, and sweep them away with irre- 
sistible power, are all precursors and signs of that great 
day of wrath when " the Son of man shall send forth his 
angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things 
that offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast 
them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and 
gnashing of teeth. Then shall the righteous shine forth 
as the sun in the kingdom of the Father." Matt. 13:41-43. 
We have the words of ("hrist aivd his apostles, as well as 
of Moses and tlie jirophets. to warn us of these coming 
realities. If we will remember and obey them, we shall 
sit down with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the king- 
dom of heaven ; but if we refuse and rebel, we shall have 
our part with God's enemies in the outer darkness. 



lOGI 



Piii 







