






V / A ': 






I, A 

r A 





Di-i.w;i .V: I'.i.i;.' I'v ^li.-n,.:.u .V SnUI'.i.^.Y. 






FAMILY BIBLE 



CONTAINING 



THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS 



BRIEF NOTES AND INSTRUCTIONS, 



BY REV. JUSTIN^EDWARDS, D. D. 



INCLUDING 

THE REFERENCES AND MARGINAL READINGS OF 
THE POLYGLOT BIBLE. 



VOLUME I. 



GENESIS TO JOB. 



PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

NEW YORK: 150 NASSAU-STREET; BOSTON: 28 CORNHILL . 



The object of this work is to assist common readers to understand 
the meaning of the Holy Spirit in the Bible, and to draw from it such 
instructions as they may need. 

The second volume, to include the remainder of the Old Testament, 
is in preparation. 

The New Testament is already issued. 



Enteiied according to Act of Congress, in the year 1S53, by 0. R. Kingsbury, in the 
Clerk's office of the District Court for the Southern District of New York. 



NAMES AND ORDER 



ALL THE BOOKS 



THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS 

WITH 

THE NUMBER OF CHAPTERS IN EACH BOOK. 



THE BOOKS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 



No. Cliap. 

GENESIS 50 

EXODUS 40 

LEVITICUS 27 

NUMBERS 3G 

DEUTERONOMY 34 

JOSHUA 24 

JUDGES 21 

RUTH 4 

I. SAMUEL 31 

II. SAMUEL .......... 24 

I. KINGS . . ...'..,..■.. 22 

II. KINGS ...*■■;...... 25 

I. CHRONICLES 29 

II. CHRONICLES • . 36 

EZRA 10 

NEHEMIAH 13 

ESTHER 10 

JOB 42 

PSALMS 150 

PROVERBS 31 



No. Chap. 

ECCLESIASTES 12 

SONG OF SOLOMON 8 

ISAIAH 66 

JEREMIAH 52 

LAMENTATIONS . 5 

EZEKIEL 48 

DANIEL . . . . , 12 

HOSEA 14 

JOEL 3 

AMOS 9 

OBADIAH 1 

JONAH 4 

MICAH 7 

NAHUM 3 

HABAKKUK 3 

ZEPHANIAH 3 

HAGGAI 2 

ZECHARIAH 14 

MALACHI 4 



MATTHEW 

MARK 

LUKE 

JOHN 

THE ACTS 

EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS 

I. CORINTHIANS . . . . 

II. CORINTHIANS . . . 

GALATIANS 

EPHESIANS 

PHILIPPIANS 

COLOSSIANS 

I. THESSALONIANS . . , 

II. THESSALONIANS . . 



THE BOOKS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

I. TIMOTHY 

ir. TIMOTHY .... 



TITUS 3 

PHILEMON 1 

TO THE HEBREWS 13 

EPISTLE OF JAMES 5 

I. PETER 5 

II. PETER 3 

I JOHN 

II. JOHN 

III. JOHN 

JUDE 





1 

1 

1 

REVELATION 22 



THE FIRST BOOK OF MOSES, 



GENESIS. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 The creation of heaven and earth, 3 of the light, 6 of 
the firmament, 9 of the earth separated from the 
■waters, 11 and made fruitful, 14 of the sun, moon, 
and stars, 20 of fish and fowl, 24 of beasts and cattle, 
26 of man in the image of God. 29 Also the ap- 
pointment of food. 

AnnoMun. -r]\j ^|^g abe£tinnin£; God *> created 






the heaven and the earth. 



the world 

Before Christ » t i • i 

4004. 2 And the earth "was without 

form, and void ; and darkness ivas upon 
the face of the deep. And the ''Spirit of 
God moved upon the face of the water.s. 

3 And God "said, Let there be "^light: 
and there was light. 

4 And God saw the light, that it luas 
good : and God divided * the light from 
the darkness. 

5 And God called the slight Day, and 
the darkness he called Night. tAnd the 
evening and the morning were the first 
day. 

6 If And God "^ said. Let there he at firma- 
ment in the midst of the waters, and let 
it divide the waters from the waters. 

7 And God made the ' firmament, and di- 
vided the waters which tvere under the 
firmament from the waters which ivere 
aboveJ the firmament : and it was so. 

8 And God called the firmament Heaven. 
And the evening and the morning were 
the second day. 

9 *[[ And God said, ^ Let the waters under 
the heaven he gathered together unto one 
place, and let the dry land appear : and 
it was so. 





« Prov.8 


23 ; John 1 : 


,2; Heb.l 


10. b Job 38 


4; P6a.33 


•6; 


Is 


a. 40 : 26 ; 


.ler. 51:16, 


Zech. 12 : 


; Acta 14 : IS 


Rom. 1 : 


20; 


r 


3l. 1 : 16. 


c .Tob 26: T.- 


.ler. 4 : 23. 


<1 Job 26:13 


Pfla. 104 


30. 


e 


P8.->.33:9 


Mat. 8: 3. 


2Cor.4:6 


Eph. S : 14. * Heb. between 


Ch 


e liffht, and betioeen the darkness 


B Psa. 74: 


6; Isa. 45 


:7. 



CHAPTER 1. 
Geiiesis ; the generation, origin, or beginning. 
This book is so called because it describes the ori- 
gin or beginning of the world. 

1. Tlie hegitming : the beginning of time,- or 
of the period -which God here speaks of. Created; 
made or caused what before did not exist. Heaven, 
— earth ; created the matter out of -which these, 
as described, -were afterwards formed. 

2. Witho'itt form ; the materials e.xisted, but the 
different kinds had not been separated or put into 
shape. Void ; empty, and destitute of the vege- 
tation and living creatures which were afterwards 
brought forth. How long the earth remained so, 
God has not revealed, and we do not know. The 
deep; the mass of unformed matter. Moved ; in 



10 And God called the dry land Earth ; 
and the gathering together of the waters 
called he Seas : and God saw that it was 
good. 

11 And God said, Let the 'earth bring 
forth ^ grass, the herb yielding seed, and 
the fruit-tree '"yielding fruit after his 
kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the 
earth : and it was so. 

12 And the earth brought forth grass, 
and herb yielding seed after his kind, and 
the tree yielding fruit, whose seed u'as in 
itself, after his kind : and God saw that 
it was good. 

13 And the evening and the morning 
were the third day. 

14 IT And God said. Let there "be lights 
in the firmament of the heaven, to divide 
the II day from the night ; and let them be 
for signs," and for seasons, and for days, 
and years : 

15 And let them be for lights in the fir- 
mament of the heaven, to give light upon 
the earth : and it was so. 

16 And God made two great lights ; the 
greater light *to rule the day, and the 
lesser light to rule the night : he made the 
stars also. 

17 And God set them in the firmament 
of the heaven to give light upon the earth, 

18 And to Prule over the day and over 
the night, and to divide tlie light from the 
darkness : and God saw that it was good. 

19 And the evening and the morning 
were the fourth day. 



f Heb. and the evening teas, and the morning was 
t Heb.' expansion, i Jer. 10: 1-2. j Prov.8: -28. 


h Job 37: 18. 


k Job .38:8. 


1 Mat. 6:30. ^ Heb. tender ijrass. m Luke 6: 44. 


B P.sa. 1 36 : 7. 


H Heb. between the day, arid between the night. 
* Heb. fur the rule of the dan. P Jer. 31 : 35. 


o Psa. 104:19. 





the original, brooded or hovered over the mass of 
matter, and thus prepared it to bring forth, at the 
command of God, various productions. 

6. Firinaineiit ; in the original, expansion, above 
and around the earth. Divide the waters; the 
waters in the clouds from the waters on tlie earth. 

9. Waters — dryland; the earth and water had 
before been mixed together, but now they were sep- 
arated. 

11. Yielding seed; to perpetuate by natural 
growth the same kind. 

14-19. Lights; light and heat had been made 
before, on the" first day, v. 3-5; but now there were 
two great bodies in the heavens to occasion, through 
the m.otions of the earth, day and night, summer and 
winter, seed-time and harvest. 

1 



27u' creation. 



GENESIS II. 



The first Sabbath. 



20 And God said, Let the waters bring 
forth abundantly the •moving creature 
that halh ^lifc, and ^fowl that may fly 
above the earlli in the * open firmament 
of heaven. 

•2\ And God created great whales, and 
every living creature that moveth, which 
the waters brought forth abundantly af- 
ter their kind, and every winged fowl 
after his kind : and God saw that it icas 
good. 

22 And God blessed them, saying, Be 
fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters 
in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the 
earth. 

23 And the evening and the morning 
were the fifth day. 

24 Tf And God said. Let the earth bring 
forth the living creature after his kind, 
cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of 
the earth after his kind : and it was so. 

25 And God made the beast of the earth 
after his kind, and cattle after their kind, 
and every thing that creepeth upon the 
earth after his kind : and God saw that 
it was good. 

2G ^ And God said, Let us make man 
in our image, after our likeness : and let 
them have dominion over the fish of the 
sea, and over the fowl of the air, and 
over the cattle, and over all the earth, and 
over every creeping thing that creepeth 
upon tlie earth. 

27 So God created man in his own "im- 



• Hch. rrrcping. IKinc", * : ^■t■ t Heb. a liviniitoiil. ver. :!0 ; Hcrl. 
S:!!l. tlU\, Ut/owt/ly. ^Hyh.faccoflhejirmamtnlofheavrn. 
»er. 7, M. • KccL 7 : ••'<> ; F.pli. ^ : .!4 ; Col. 3 : 10. |j Heb. creepeth. 



20, 21 . Life ; vogetable life, as that of plants and 
;r<es, liad beon given before, v. 11, 12, but now a 
II, .tier kinJ, animal life, was given. 

■J'l. llra.^t of the earth ; -wild beasts. 

26. TJf ; such are tlie nature and manifestations 
of God, that he can properly speak of himself as I or 
we, me or uk ; tlius our Saviour said, We will come 
unto him, and make our abode with him. John 11: 23. 
Our imarrc — oitr likeness ; like his Creator a ra- 
tional and pure spirit, exercising dominion. 

29. Evrnj herb ; f,o far a« it would proniote their 
benefit. Meal ; food. 

31. Very good ; perfectly suited to the wise and 
benevolent ends for which Uod made them. 

msTnucTioNs. 

1. The niitcnce. wisdom, and greatness of God 

AT' ' ' ■■ ■' •' ' ii'h he has made, even 

li: 'd ; so that those who 

>'■' 'I adore him, are with- 

.. ]• . ^.- ••. l;..in. 1: -JO. 

'! 1.1 ;lit exi.st* independently of the sun, as in 
• •■'.r. i*y. lit,'htnin;j. and fire. God caused the 
li)(ht to shine out of d.irkness, and he can shine into 
dark hearlJi, and give them the light of the knowledge 
of hill glory in the face of Jesus (Jhrist. 2 l>or. 4 :6. 

10. In separating or combining the elenient«, as- 
signing to carh ita appropriate place, and uphold- 
ing it tliorc. no less really than in its creation. God 
showed his infinite power, wisdom, and goodiie.ss. 
He spake, and it was done; he comiiianded. and it 
»tood fast. I'sa. 3:3 : ; Heb. 1:3. 



him ; male and female created he them. 

28 And God blessed them, and God said 
unto them, Be fruitful, and multipl)^, and 
replenish the earth, and subdue it; and 
have dominion over the fish of the sea, and 
over the fowl of the air, and over every 
living thing that !i moveth upon the earth. 

29 H And God said. Behold, I have given 
you every herb * bearing seed, which i.? 
upon the face of all the earth, and every 
tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree 
yielding seed ; to you '' it shall be for meat. 

30 And to every beast of the earth, and 
to every fowl of the air, and to every thing 
that creepeth upon the earth, wherein 
there is tlife, / have given every green 
herb for meat : and it was so. 

31 And God saw every thing that he 
had made, and behold, it was very good. 
And the evening and the morning were 
the sixth day. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 The first sabbath. 4 The manner of the creation. 8 
The planting of the garden of Eden, 10 and the river 
thereof. 17 The tree of knowledge only forbidden. 
19, 20 The naming of the creatures. 21 The mak- 
ing of woman, and institution of marriage. 

THUS the heavens and the earth were 
finished, and all the host of them. 
2 And "^ on the seventh day God ended 
his work which he had made ; and he 
rested on the seventh day from all his 
work which he had made. 



P8a.fi9:3-I. * Heb.»«dmj7S«rf. b chap. 2: 16; 9:3; Job36: 31; 
Acta 14: 17. \ neh. a livins soul. c Ex. 20:11; Isa. 58:13; 
Heb. 4:4. 



12. In the continuance of the great law which God 
at first gave, that each seed should produce its kind in 
allfuture time, we have evidence that he sees and gov- 
erns throughout the vegetable creation — is of one 
mind, and none can turn him. Job 23: 13; Isa. 46: 10. 

18. The sun, moon, and stars are bright m.mifes- 
tations of the wisdom, power, and goodness of God. 
We can see and enjoy them without being able to 
understand their nature, or how they produce their 
effects. So we can believe truths, and enjoy the 
benefits of faith, without comprehending how those 
truths exist, are related, or operate so usefully on us. 

28. The fear of man manifested by fishes, fowls, 
and beasts, testifies to his dignity as the represent- 
ative of his Makers and by yielding to him to whom 
God gave dominion, they acknowledge God's au- 
thority, and thus honor him. They also suiter in 
consequence of man's sin. Gen. 6:7; Rom. 8 : 20. 

31. All that God does is very good; like its Au- 
thor, perfect. Nothing could be better ; and in 
our treating all tilings according to his will there is 
great reward. 

CHAPTER rt. 

1. Thus ; as described in the previous ch.apter. 

2. llested ; not in the sense of weariness, or eiise 
from fatigue ; God is never weary. Isa. 40 : 28. But 
he ceased from the work of the six days. He rested, 
a.s men should, after six days of labor; and as the 
friends of God, who rightly understand their duly, 
will. Having made man in his ov\-n image, he now 
sets him an example. 



Tke garden of Eden. 



GENESIS II. 



The making of woman. 



tc.'iiai. 3 And God blessed the seventh 
day, and sanctified it ; because that in it 
he had rested from all his work which God 
created* and made. 

4 T[ These are the generations of the 
heavens and of the earth when they were 
created, in the day that the Lord God 
made the earth and the heavens, 

5 And every plant of the field before it 
was in the earth, and every herb of the 
field before it grew : for the Lord God 
had not caused it to rain upon the earth, 
and there ivas not a man to till the ground. 

6 But t there went up a mist from the 
earth, and watered the whole face of the 
ground. 

7 And the Lord God formed man J of 
the "dust of the ground, and ''breathed 
into his "^ nostrils the breath of life ; and 
man*^ became a living soul. 

8 ^And the Lord God planted" a gar- 
den eastward in Eden ; and there he put 
the man whom he had formed. 

9 And out of the ground made the Lord 
God to grow every tree that is pleasant 
to the sight, and good for food ; the ""tree of 
life also in the midst of the garden, and 
the stree of knowledge of good and evil. 

10 And a river went out of Eden to 
water the garden ; and from thence it was 
parted, and became into four heads. 

1 1 The name of the first is Pison : that 
is it which compasseth the Avhole land 
of ''Havilah, where there is gold ; 

12 And the gold of that land is good: 
there is bdellium and the onyx-stone. 



* Heb. created to make. f 


Or, a mist 


which went up from. 


X Heb. dust of the grottnd. a 


chap. 3:1!) 


Paa. 103:14; Isaiah 


64:8; 1 Cor. 15:47. b .lob.TT 


4. c Isa. '. 


:■:■.'. i 1 Cor. 15:4S. 


e Kiek. 31:8,9. f chap. .T: -Ji ; 


Prov. 3:18 


Kev.2:7. B ver. 17. 


h chap. 25: 18. % Heb. Cttsh. 


i Dan. 10: 


4. II Or, tastxoard to 



3. The seventh day ; that which succeeds the 
six working days ; and which was made to be a day 
of rest from secular employments and of devotion 
to religious duties. Sanctified it; set it apart 
from other days for sacred employments. 

4. Tlie generations; the true history of the origin 
of the heavens and the earth. Lord; in the origi- 
nal, Jehovah. This is the first time this word is used 
in the Bible. It is the peculiar name of Him, who 
is, and was, and is to come, the Almighty; and im- 
plies eternal, independent, unchanging self-exist- 
ence, and infinite perfection. 

When the word Lord in the Bible is printed in 
small capitals, it is in the Hebrew, Jehovah. 

5. Before it was in the earth — before it greiu ; 
things did not at first grow gradually from the earth 
by natural laws, as they did afterwards ; but God 
formed them in a state of maturity and perfection. 
Not a man to till the ground; it did not, at first, 
produce by cultivation, but spontaneously, by the 
power of God. 

7. Formed man; chap. 1:27. He was not 
born as men now are, and did not grow up gradually; 
but as other things were formed by the power of (3rod 
at once, he was created full-grown and perfect. 

8. Eden ; a country east or north-east of Pales- 
tine, near the rivers Tigris and Euphrates. 

9. The tree of life ; whose fruit would be to 



1 3 And the name of the second river is 
Gihon : the same is it that compasseth 
the whole land of ^ Ethiopia. 

14 And the name of the third river is 
Hiddekel :' that is it which goeth II toAvard 
the east of Assyria. And the fourth river 
is Euphrates. 

15 And the Lord God took * the man, 
and J put him into the garden of Eden, to 
dress it and to keep it. 

16 And the Lord God commanded the 
man, saying. Of every tree of the garden 
thout mayest freely cat : 

17 But of the tree of the knowledge of 
good and ^ evil, thou shalt not eat of it ; 
for in the day that thou eatest thereof 
thou t shalt surely die. 

18 TfAnd the Lord God said. It is not 
good that the man should be alone : ' I 
will make him a help ^meet for him. 

i 19 And out of the ground the Lord 
God formed every beast of the field, and 
every fowl of the air; and "'brought them 
unto II Adam to see what he would call 
them ; and whatsoever Adam called every 
living creature, that was the name there- 
of. 

20 And Adam * gave names to all cattle, 
and to the fowl of the air, and to every 
beast of the field ; but for Adam there 
was not found a help meet for him. 

21 And the Lord God caused a "deep 
sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept ; 
and he took one of his ribs, and closed 
up the flesh instead thereof : 

22 And the rib, which the Lord God had 



Assyria. * Or, Adam, j ver. 8. f Heb. eating thou shatt eat. 
k chap. 3:1.3,11,17; Romans fi:23; 1 Cor. 15:, W. t Heb. 
dying thou shall die. I 1 Cor. 11:9; 1 Tim. 2 : 13. % Heb. an 
before him. m Psa. 8:6. || Or, the man. * Heb. called, n chap. 
15:12. 



man, if obedient, a pledge of endless life. Tree of 
knowledge ; by man's treatment of which his 
character would be known ; and concerning which 
he knew by express revelation the will of God : by 
obeying that will, he would know good and good 
only ; and by disobeying, he would know evil, and 
tran.smit it to his posterity. 

10. Four heads ; four different streams, some of 
which it is difficult to identify. 

13. Ethiopia ; in the Hebrew, Gush ; not the 
Ethiopia in Africa, hut a country in Asia, inhabited 
by descendants of Gush the son of Ham, and father 
of Nimrod. Gen. 10 : 6, 8. 

14. Hiddekel ; supposed to be the river Tigris, 
which empties into the Euphrates. Euphrates; a 
river which rises in Armenia and flows south into 
the Persian Gulf. 

1-5. Dress; cultivate. 

16. Of every tree; except the tree of know- 
ledge, v. 17. 

17. Tliou shalt 7iot eat of it; this was a test 
of his obedience to the known will of God. Surely 
die; in the original, dying thou shalt die. He 
would lose the moral image and the favor of God ; 
become mortal and exposed to endless sinfulness and 
misery. 

18. tIZows; without a human companion. ]\[eet 
for him ; suited to his nature, condition, and wants. 

3 



The serpent deccivcth Eve. 



GENESIS III, 



Man's shameful fall . 



taken from man, ' made he a woman, and 
brought* her unto the man. 

23 And Adam said, This is now bone of 
my bones, '■and flesli of my flesh: she 
shall be called t Woman, because she was 
taken out of » Man. 

24 Therefore shall a man leave ''his 
father and his mother, and shall cleave 
unto his wife : and they shall be one flesh. 

"2.5 And they were both naked, the man 
and his wife, and were not ashamed. 

CHAPTER III. 

1 The verpont deceivcth Eve. 6 Man"s shameful fall. 
9 Go<i arraipneth them. 14 The serpent is cursed. 
1.5 The promised .seed. 10 The punishment of man- 
kind. 21 Their first clothing. 22 Their casting out 
of paradise. 

~|VrOW the ''serpent was more "subtle 
J_N than any beast of the field which the 
Lord God had made. And he said unto 
the woman, * Yea, hath God said. Ye shall 
not eat of every tree of the garden ? 

2 And the woman said unto the serpent. 
We may eat of the fruit of the trees of 
the garden : 

3 But of the fruit of the tree which is 
in the midst of the garden, God hath said. 
Ye'' shall not eat of it, neither shall ye 
touch it, lest ye die. 

4 And the ^serpent said unto the •■ wom- 
an, Ye shall not surely die : 



- Hrl>. fcuiWfrf. • Prov. I8:;5. bKiili. 5:na f Heb. /«Aa. 
t Hch. /<A. c.MarklO:7. ailev.lS:!). e2Cor.U:3. % Heb. 
fta, bteaiut. ric. fcbiip. 5:17. (John 8: 44. klTim. 2:H. 



23. Woma7i — ma/i ; in Hebrew, man is Ish ; 
woman. Isha, the feminine of man. 

24. There/ore; on account of her likeness to 
man, her suitablene.ss lo be his companion, the ap- 
pointment of GoJ with regard to it, and the mutual 
affection wliich lie would cause to subsist between 
them. One flesh; united in bonds more tender and 
strong than those which unite relatives by birth. 

25. Not ashamed ; shame is the fruit of sin, and 
a* thev had never sinned, they felt none of its evils. 
How Ion;; they continued in this state, God has not 
told us ; and we do not know. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. A.% God made one day in seven for rest and 
•piritunl duties, set it ap.irl to be devoted not to sec- 
ular but to sacred employments, and enforced the 
obller^•anre of it by his own example and his com- 
mand, it is manifestly his will that men should re- 
fard it ; and no man in this respect does his will who 
oe» not remember the Sabbath-day to keep it holy. 

7. As the body of man was at first formed from the 
dust, and all our \-r>,\'\f, nnist soon return to dust, our 
chicfroni': ' ' I'.r the soul; that it may be 

filtrd, wIm . body, to enter into the pres- 

ence, ami • .r of God. 

l'). Piligiiicf 111 l.iisincss during the six working 
days, as well as rest from it on the Sabbath, was 
needful to man in a slate of innocence. He was 
made for employment; and no man can indulge in 
idleness or sloth, without committing sin. 

18. As God has told us that it is not good for man 
to live unmarried, those who contend that it is best 
for ministers of the gospel to live unmarried, set up 
their wisdom in opposition to his, deprive them- 
selves of many blessings, and set an evil example to 
their fellow-men. 



5 For God doth know, that in the bc'.tom: 
day ye cat thereof, then your eyes shall be 
opened; and ye shall be as gods, knowing 
good and evil. 

6 And when the woman saw that the 
tree ivas good for food, and that it was 
pleasant II to the eyes, and a tree to be 
desired to make one wise, she took of the 
fruit thereof, and did eat ; and gave also 
unto her husband with her, and he did 
eat. 

7 And the eyes of them both were open- 
ed, and they knew that they were ' nalc ed ; 
and they sewed fig-leaves together, and 
made themselves * aprons. 

8 And they heard the voice of the Lord 
God walking in the garden in the tcool 
of the day : and Adam and his wife Jhid 
themselves from the presence of the 
Lord God amongst the trees of the gar- 
den. 

9 And the Lord God called unto Adam, 
and said unto him. Where art thou ? 

10 And he said, I heard thy voice in the 
garden, and I wa,s afraid, ''because I was 
naked ; and I hid myself. 

11 And he said. Who told thee that thou 
u'ast naked ? Hast thou eaten of the tree, 
whereof I commanded thee that thou 
shouldest not eat ? 



K Heb.orfcjiVf. ichap.2:2S. ' Or, things to girdabout. f Htb. 
inind. j Jer. 23 : 24 ; Amoa 9:2,3. k IJolin, 3 : 20. 



23. The manner in which, and the object for which 
woman was made, show that the husband and wife 
should love each other with tender affection; culti- 
vate union of views, interest, and effort ; and mu- 
tually seek each others highest good. 

24. Marriage, according to the will of God, is a 
union for life of one man with one woman, and with 
one only ; and the fact that it is a divine institution, 
shows that men should enter into it for the glory of 
God in the promotion of their own happiness and 
usefulness. 

CHAPTER III. 

I. iS«i</«; cunning, deceitful. J/f ; the serpent, 
or Satan speaking by him. 

3. The tree; the tree of knowledge of good and 
evil. Chap. 2:0. 

4. Ye shall not — die ; this is the first lie record- 
ed in the Bible. Satan was its author, and he is 
justly called the fither of lies. John 8: 44. 

5. Be as gods ; be greatly ennobled, dignified, and 
exalted. 

6. Good for fi'od ; as she thought from its looks. 
To make one wise ; according to the testimony of 
Satan ; but according to God's testimony, the sure 
means of death. ' She took of the fruit ; showing 
that she believed Satan and not God. 

7. Were opened; to see something of the evil 
which they had committed. Knew that they were 
naked ; and experienced shame as the fruit of sin. 

8. Heard the voice of the Lord God; per- 
ceived evidence of his presence. Hid themselves; 
through conscious guilt, and fearful expectation of 
coming evil. 

II. Who told thee; how didst thou become 
ashamed and fe.\rful ? This was asked, not for the 
information of God, but for the conviction of Adam. 



Tlie jxidgmcnts of God. 



GENESIS IV. 



Man cast out of Eden. 



kc.'mi. 1 2 And the man said, * The wom- 
an "whom thou gavest to be with me, she 
gave me of the tree, and I did eat. 

13 And the Lord God said unto the 
woman, What is this that thou hast done ? 
And the woman said. The serpent be- 
guiled me, and I did eat. 

14 And the Lord God said unto the ser- 
pent. Because thou hast done this, thou 
art cursed above all cattle, and above 
every beast of the field : upon thy belly 
shalt thou go, and ""dust shalt thou eat all 
the days of thy life : 

15 And I will put enmity between thee 
and the woman, and between "^thy seed 
and ''her seed ; ^it shall bruise thy head, 
and thou shalt bruise his heel. 

1 6 Unto the woman he said, I will greatly 
multiply thy sorrow and thy conception : 
in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children ; 
and thy desire * shall be to thy husband, 
and he shall '^rule over thee. 

17 And unto Adam he said, Because 
thou hast hearkened unto the voice of 
thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree of 
which I commanded thee, saying. Thou 
shalt not eat of it : cursed is the grovind 
for thy sake ; in sorrow shalt thou eat of 
it all the days of thy life ; 

1 8 Thorns also and thistles shall it bring 
forth t to thee ; and thou shalt eat the 
herb of the field : 



a .Tob;il:33; Prov. 28:13. b Isa. e'liM; Micall7:17. o Mat. 
13:38; John 8: 44; IJoIin, 3t8. i Isa. 7:14; Mat. 1 : 23 ; I.uke 
nS."!. e Rtim. 16:20; Kpli. 4:8; Rev. 12:7, 8. * Or, subject to 
thy husband, f I Cor. 14:34. f Heb. cause to b«d. J Heb. C/ia- 



12. She gave me ; this was true, but it did not 
excuse liim. 

13. Beguiled ; deceived. 

14. The serpent ; the instrument through which 
Satan acted. Cursed ; he would be greatly de- 
graded, and detested. 

15. It ; the seed of the woman, or, as it might 
be rendered, He, referring especially to Christ, who 
in due time would come to destroy the works of the 
devil. 1 John, 3: 8. Bruise thy head ; overcome 
him and destroy his power. Bruise his heel ; in- 
flict upon him temporary evil. 

16. And thy conception ; in thy conception. 
Thy desire — to thy husband; he should control 
her, and she be subject to him. 

IS. The herb of the field ; for which he must labo- 
riously toil, instead of living any longer in paradise. 

20. Eve; meaning life. 

21. Skins; supposed to be of animals offered in 
sacrifice to God, pointing forward to the great aton- 
ing sacrifice of Christ, the promised Conqueror of 
Satan. Through faith in Christ, God would forgive 
men. sanctify, and save them. 

22. One of us ; chap. 1 : 26. Man had vainly at- 
tempted to elevate and bless himself, by taking his 
own way, in compliance with Satan's temptation, 
and in opposition to the known will of God; thus 
he knew good and evil, by losing the one and suffer- 
ing the other. 

24. Cheruhims ; guards of angels. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. The great means of s.afety to man is continued, 
hearty belief in the truth of God's declarations. 



19 In the sweat of thy face shalt thou 
eat bread, till thou return unto the 
ground ; for out of it wast thou taken : 
for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt 
thou return. 

20 And Adam called his wife's name 
Eve ;t because she was the mother of all 
living.^ 

21 Unto Adam also and to his wife did 
the Lord God make coats of skirls, and 
clothed'" them. 

22 TfAnd the Lord God said, 'Behold, 
the man is become as one of us, to know 
good and evil : and now, lest he put forth 
his hand, and take also of the tree of 
life,' and eat, and live for ever : 

23 Therefore the Lord God sent him 
forth from the garden of Eden, to ''till 
the ground from whence he was taken. 

24 So he drove out the man : and he 
placed at the east of the garden of Eden 
eherubims,' and a flaming '"sword which 
turhed every way, to keep the "way of 
the tree of life. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1 The birth, trade, and religion of Cain and Abel. 8 
The murder of Abel. 11 The curse of Cain. 17 
Enoch the fir.~t city. 19 Lamech and his t-wo wives. 

25 The birth of Seth; 26 and Enos. 

AND Adam knew Eve his wife ; and 
she conceived, and bare ^ Cain, and 
said, I have gotten a man from the Lord. 



vah, that 


s, living, g 


Act 


17:26. h 


Isaiah 61 : 10 


Phil. 3 


9. 


i Ter. .S. J 


Reve 


ition 


:7. 


k -ver. 19. 


1 Psalm 80 : 1 


etc.; 99 


1. 


m 1 Chronicles 21 


:16. 


n Hebrews 10: 


20. \ That is 


, gotten^ 


jr, 


acquired. 

















Hence Satan tries to prevent this, that by their own 
voluntary transgressions, he m.ay destroy them. 

4. Satan tries to make men disbelieve God's dec- 
larations, in order to lead them to break his com- 
mands. Liars resemble Satan, do his work, and 
will partake of his torment. Rev. 21 : 8. 

9. Sin makes men ashamed of themselves, afraid 
of God, and desirous to escape his notice. But 
their efforts to hide themselves or their sins are 
vain, and only show the reality of their guilt and 
the dreadfulness of their condition. 

13. Impenitent men try to cast the blame of their 
sins on others; while those who are penitent, take 
it to themselves. Luke 15: 21. 

17. Duty, safety, and interest sometimes require 
us to refuse compliance with the wishes of our dear- 
est friends ; and if we do not, we shall bring upon 
ourselves a dreadful curse. 

19. The evil of sin surpasses all finite conception. 
Every instance of death is an evidence of its power, 
and of the truth of God. When the word hath gone 
out of his mouth, it standeth for ever. All who dis- 
believe his known declarations, demonstrated in the 
universal mortality of men, are without excuse. 

24. There is nothing in tlie nature of holiness 
which is a security against apostasy and ruin. 
Those that are perfectly holy may commit sin ; and 
thus change their character, condition, and prospects 
for eternity. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1. Cain; meaning possession. A man; man- 
child, a son. 



Cain slayelh Jlbel, 



GENESIS IV. 



and bccomcth a fugitive. 



2 And she again bare his brother * Abel. 
And Abel was t a keeper of sheep, but 
Cain was a tiller of the ground. 

3 And tin process of time it came to 
pass, that Cain "brought of the fruit of 
the ground an offering unto the Lord. 

4 And Abel, he also 'brought of the 
lirstlings of his ^ flock, and of the ''fat 
thereof. And the Loud liad "^respect unto 
Abel and to his offering : 

5 But unto Cain, and to his offering, he 
had not respect. And Cain was very 
wroth, and his countenance fell. 

6 And the Lord said unto Cain, Why 
art thou wroth? and why is thy coun- 
tenance fallen ? 

7 If thou doest well, shalt thou not "be 
accepted ? and if thou doest not well, ""sin 
lieth at the door. vVnd * unto thee shaU be 
his desire, and thou slialt rule over him. 

8 And Cain talked with Abel his broth- 
er : and it came to pass, when they were 
in the field, that Cain rose up against 
Abel his brother, and ''slew liim. 

9 1[And the Lord said unto "^Cain, 
Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, 
I know not : Am I my brother's keeper? 

10 And he said. What hast thou done? 
the voice of thy brother's ^ blood ^crieth 
unto mc from the ground. 

11 And now art thou cursed from the 
earth, which hath opened her mouth to 
receive thy brother's blood from thy hand. 

12 When thou tillest the ground, it 
shall not henceforth yield unto thee her 
strength ; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt 
thou be in the earth. 

13 And Cain said unto the Lord, My 



• Htb.Htb€l. f Hfb. o /m/cr. % Hvb. at Ihe tnd of dayt. 
• Num. 1»:IJ. J U'-h.shtrp,i>r, goals, b Lev. 3:16. 17. c Heb. 
11:4. \\ Or, Marr Ihr rmlltnty. <l 1 .lolin, 3: IJ. ' Or, ruhject 
«iU«M». • l.lolin,3:li!; .ludell. f I'lin.d: li. f Hcb. Wood*. 



2. Abel; signifying vanity; short continuance; 
that wliich quickly passes away. Psa.39:5; James 
4 : 14. 

3. In process of time ; at the end of the days; 
the time npjxjintcu to worship G-od. 

4. Had respect; received it with fr.tor, and 
showed that he accepted it; because it pointed for- 
ward to the atoninp blood of Christ, and showed 
faith in what God liad revealed concernin"- him. 
Chap. 3: l.'i, 'JI. notes; Heb. 11:4. 

r*. IIa4 111)1 rtfjirct ; he did not accept it. It 
WM not an cxprrR.sion of faitli in a coming Saviour, 
and was not otfcrfd with a right spirit. It regard- 
ed not the fall, or the promised deliverer from its 
effect*. Jlis coiintciuiHcc fell ; ho looked sad, an- 
gry, and sullen. 

7. Sin lieth at the iloor ; itji punishment, or as 
lome think an ofiViing for it, is near. Thou shalt 
rule over him ; Cain, being (lie eldest son. accord- 
ing to his birthright would liave preeminence over 
Abel. 

9. My brother's keeyer ; one whose business it 
is to watch over and take care of him. 

10. Blood crieth ; calleth for the punishment of 
him who shed it. 

11. From the earth : or ground, which would 

6 



punishment + is greater than I can -'* ,.^.^ "'•"'" 
bear. ' "'-•=«"• 

1 4 Behold, thou hast driven me out this 
day from the face of the earth ; and from 
thy face shall I be hid ; and I shall be a 
fugitive and a vagabond in the earth : 
and it shall come to pass, ^ that every one 
that lindeth mc shall slay me. 

15 And the Lord said unto him. There- 
fore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance 
shall be taken on him seven-fold. And 
the Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any 
iinding him should kill him. 

16 If And Cain ' went out from the pres- 
ence of the Lord, and dwelt in the land 
of Nod, on the cast of Eden. 

17 And Cain knew his wife; and she 
conceived, and bare ^ Enoch: and he 
builded a city, and called the name of the 
city after the name of his son, Enoch. 

18 And unto Enoch was born Irad : and 
Trad begat IMehujael : and Mehujael begat 
Mcthusael : and Methusael begat I! La- 
mech. 

19 If And Lamcch took unto him two 
wives : the name of the one icas Adah, 
and the name of the other Zillah. 

20 And Adah bare Jabal : he was the 
father of such as J dwell in tents, and of 
such as have cattle. 

21 And his brother's name was Jubal : 
he was the father of all such as handle 
the harp and organ. 

22 And Zillah, she also bare Tubal-cain, 
an * instructor of every artificer in brass 
and iron : and the sister of Tubal-cain 
was Naamah. 

23 And Lamech said unto his wives. 



B Heb. 12:24; Rev. 6:10. ^ Or , mine iniiiuity is grtater than 
Viat\tan\y be forgiven. M.it. 12:31. h .Toh 15:20-24; Prov.28:l. 
■ 2King9, 13:23; 24:20; I's.a. 61:11. \ Hcb. Chanoeh. \\ Heb. 
iiemecH. i ver. 2 ; cUnp. 2.'i : 27 ; Jer. 35 : 9, 10. * Heb. whetter. 



not yield him its increase as before, and would thus 
testify against his sin. 

12. A fugitive — a vagabond; wandering from 
place to place. 

14. Face of the earth ; the land where he had 
dwelt. From thy face; from the place where 
God manifested his special presence, he would be 
expelled. Shall slay me ; he knew they would 
think that he deserved to die for killing his brother, 
and was afraid they would treat him accordingly. 

15. Seven-fold; he shall be more severely pun- 
ished. Set a mark ; showed that no one should be 
permitted to kill him ; but he should live a vaga- 
bond, a monument of the guilt of murder, and of 
the wrath of God against it. 

16. JjatidofNod; of vagrancy, or of vagabonds. 

17. Ills wife ; it is supposed that Cain was mar- 
ried before he murdered Aoel. 

19. Two wives ; this is the first instance men- 
tioned of a violation of the law of marriage, by tak- 
ing more than one wife. It shows that men had be- 
come very corrupt, and this course tended to make 
them worse. 

20. The father ; the inventor of a business, or 
he who makes great improvements in it, is, in He- 
brew, called the fath»r of those who pursue it. 



The genealogy 



GENESIS V. 



of the Patriarchs. 



*iJJ: ='"'°"" Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice; 
B. c. 3875. yg -wives of Lamccli, hearken unto 
my speech : for * I have slain a man to my 
wounding, and a young man tto my hurt. 

24 If Cain shall be avenged seven-fold, 
truly Lamech seventy and seven-folS. 

25 T[ And Adam knew his wife again ; 
and she bare a son, and called his name 
Seth :+ For God, said she, hath appointed 
me another seed instead of Abel, whom 
Cain slew. 

■ 26 And to Seth, to him also there was 
born a son ; and he called his name 5 Enos : 
then began men II to call upon the name 
of the Lord. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 The genealogy, age, and death of the patriarchs, from 
Adam unto Noah. 21 The godliness and translation 
of Enoch. 

THIS is the book of the generations of 
Adam. In the day that God created 
man, in *the likeness of God made hehim ; 

2 Male ''and female created he them; 
and blessed them, and called their name 
Adam, in the day when they were created. 

3 TfAnd Adam lived a hundred and 
thirty years, and begat a son in his own 
likeness,*^ after his image ; and called his 
name Seth : 

4 And the days of Adam after he had 
begotten Seth were eight hundred years : 
and ''he begat sons and daughters : 

5 And all the days that Adam lived 
were nine hundred and thirty years : " and 
he died. 

6 And Seth lived a hundred and live 
years, and begat ''Enos : 

7 And Seth lived after he begat Enos 



* Or, I would slay a man in my t 


vound, etc. f Or, in my hurt. 


J Heb. Sheth, timt is, appointed, or 


put. \ Heh. Enosh. \\ Or, 


to rait themselves bv the name of 


«c Lord. Deut. 26:17; Psa. 


116:17; Isa.44:5; .Joel -2 : :i-2 ; IC 


jr. 1:2. a cliap. 1:27; 1 Cor. 


11:7; 2Cor.3:18. b Mal.2:I5. c 


Job 2.5:4; .Iolin3:6; 1 Cor. 



24. Liainech seventy and seven ; it is supposed 
that Lamech wished to convince his wives that he 
should not be put to death. God had said, v. 15, 
that should anv one kill Cain, his death should be 
avenged seven-fold ; and Lamecli saj's liis would be 
avenged seventy and seven ; implying that in his 
own estimation he was much less guilty than Cain ; 
and that he who should kill him, would be punished 
much more severely than he who should kill Cain. 

25. Seth ; meaning appointed, or substituted, as 
Eve thought, in place of Abel. 

26. To call iijion ; or be called bv, the name of 
the Lord ; the liord's people : sons of God, in dis- 
tinction from the openly wicked, called sons of men. 
Chap. 6 : 2. They separated from the wicked, 
maintained the public worship of God, and were 
thus recognized as his visible people. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
4. In the declaration that the seed of the woman 
should bruise the serpent's head, and in the appoint- 
ment of sacrifices, chap. 3: 15, 21. God revealed the 
certainty of a coming Saviour, and laid a foundation 
for faith, by the exercise of which men might be 
justified, and for Christ's sake, be accepted as right- 
eous. Heb. 11:4. 



eight hundred and seven years, and begat 
sons and daughters : 

8 And all the days of Seth were nine 
hundred and twelve years : and he died. 

9 ^And Enos lived ninety years, and 
begat * Cainan : 

1 And Enos lived after he begat Cainan 
eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat 
sons and daughters : 

1 1 And all the days of Enos were nine 
hundred and five years : and he ^died. 

12 ^And Cainan lived seventy years, 
and begat t Mahalaleel : 

13 And Cainan lived after he begat Ma- 
halaleel eight hundred and forty years, 
and ''begat sons and daughters : 

1 4 And all the days of Cainan were nine 
hundred and ten years : and he ' died. 

1 5 Tf And Mahalaleel lived sixty and five 
years, and begat t Jared : 

16 And Mahalaleel lived after he begat 
Jared eight hundred and thirty years, and 
begat sons and daughters : 

17 And all the days of ^Mahalaleel were 
eight hundred ninety and five years : and 
he Jdied. 

18 TfAnd Jared lived a hundred sixty 
and two years, and he begat Enoch : 

1 9 And Jared lived after he begat Enoch 
eight hundred years, and begat sons and 
daughters : 

20 And all the days of Jared were nine 
hundred sixty and two years : and he died.'' 

21 TfAnd Enoch lived sixty and five 
years, and begat ^ Methuselah : 

22 And Enoch 'walked with God after 
he begat Methuselah three hundred years, 
and begat sons and daughters : 



15:39. i 


ver. 7, 


10, 13, 


19,22 


26,30 




e Heb. 


en-s9:27. 


cliap. 


4:26. * 


V 


eb. Kenan. 


g V 


er. S. 


t 


Heb. Mateleel. k 


ver. 4. 


i ver. 5. 


t 


Heb 


Jered 


i V 


5r. 5. 


c 


'er. 5. 


% Gr. Malhusala. 


1 cli.ip. fi : 




17: 


1; Deut. 13: 


1; 2K 


"r 


,, 20 ; 3 


Psa.l6:8; 


Amoe 


3:3; Ma 


2 


B. 

















5. Faith in what God has revealed with regard 
to the Redeemer, and the way of life through him. 
is, to those who know this revelation, essential to ac- 
ceptable worship. He that rejects the Son rejects 
also the Fatlier, and will be rejected by him. John 
15:23; 1 John, 2:23. 

9. Sins have a close connection, and the commis- 
sion of one leads to the commission of others. He 
who will commit murder will also tell lies. 

14. A murderer feels that he deserves to die ; and 
when he is put to death, often acknowledges that 
it is just. 

25. If men would possess the character and re- 
ceive the reward of God's people, they must sepa- 
rate from his enemies, publicly maintain his wor- 
ship, and show themselves to be his friends. Mark 
8 : 38 ; John 14 : 21 ; 1 Cor. 7 : 19 ; 2 Cor. G : 17. 

CHAPTER V. 

1. Booh of the gc7ierations ; history of Adam 
and his posterity. 

2. Their name Adam, ; that is, man. 

' 3. In his own Hl-cness; a human being, and 
depraved ; who, without the renewing grace of God, 
would never be holy, but would live and die in sin. 



Tlie wickedness of men. 



GENESIS VI. 



Noah findcth grace. 



23 Anil all the days of Enoch were three 
hundred sixty and live years : 

24 And Enoch walked with God : and 
he teas not ; "for God took him. 

25 And Methuselah lived a hundred 
eighty and seven years, and begat *La- 
mcch : 

26 And Methuselah lived after he begat 
Lamech seven hundred ciglity and two 
years, and begat sons and daughters : 

27 And all the days of Methuselah were 
nine hundred sixty and nine years: and 
he died. 

28 ^ And Lamech lived ahundred eighty 
and two years, and begat a son : 

29 And he called his name tNoah, say- 
ing, This .wz/ie shall comfort us concern- 
ing our work and toil of our hands, be- 
cause of the ground ''which the Lord 
hath cursed. 

30 And Lamech lived after he begat 
Noah five hundred ninety and five years, 
and begat sons and daughters : 

31 And all the days of Lamech were 
seven hundred seventy and seven years: 
and he died. 

32 And Noah was five hundred years old: 
and Noah begat "^^Shem, IIam,and Japheth. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 The wickedness of the world, which provoked God's 
wrath, and cauned the flood. 8 Noah flndeth grace. 
II The order, form, and end of the ark. 

AND it came to pass, ''when men began 
to multiply on the face of the earth, 
and daugliters were born unto them, 

2 That the sons of God saw the daugh- 
ters of men " that they tvcre fair ; and they 
took*^ tliem wives of all which thev chose. 



■ HW> 


\\:h. • 


Hi!b 


Lemech. 


f 


Or, 


Not; 


tlint l9 


, rett, or, 


nmfart. 


k rlisp. 


3:17 


; H.ll. 


cimp. 


R.'IO; 


7:13; 


1 Cliron. 


l:-i-3'». 


* clinp. 1 


■J8. 


• Job 31 : 




r ti 


CULT: 


3, ■«; Ezra 9:2: 




St^;7; aror.rt: 


H. 1 NpI 


.0 


30 




:*•. M 


10; Jer. 




I Peter, 3 


:'J0. 


k P«ll.78: 


•w. 


t 


PWL M 


J; 53 


2; Horn. 



24. Waited with God ; was cordially reconciled 
to liiin. Amos '.i:[\\ Boiijjiit his <juidance, believed his 
(leclarationK, obeyed his commands, and enjoyed his 
preHence. Was not ; was nol found on the earth ; nor 
did hedie, liutGod tooli him to heaven. Hcb. 11:5. 

2<>. Noah; si^'nifyins: rest, comfort; expressive 
of the liope and expectation that he would be a great 
bleHNing. 

.TJ. Japheth ; he was the eldest ; but Shem is 
mentioned first, because from iiim would descend 
tlie MeEsiah. 

TNSTRVCTIONS. 

24. To walk with God is the highest duty, the 
greatent honor, excellence, and blctsedness of man. 
Jnde 14, 13; Heb. 11:5,6. 

IK). ParenU often hope for great comfort from 
their cliildren ; and if children are pious, especially 
if they become preacher* of rijihteousness, and are 
instrumental in the salvation of men, parents have 
reason to rejoice with great joy. 

CHAPTER VI. 
2. Sons of God ; his visible people; professors* 
of true religion. Of men ; the visibly and openly 
wicked. All which they chose ; being governed 



3 And the Lord said, eMy Spirit ''ri.'2;JSS: 
shall not always strive with man, for that 
he also i.s flesh :'' yet his days shall be a 
hundred and twenty years. 

4 There were giants in the earth in 
those days ; and also after that, when the 
sons of God came in unto the daughters 
of men, and they bare children to them : 
the same became mighty men, which were 
of old, men of renown. 

5 T[ And God saw 'that the wickedness 
of man urns great in the earth, and that 
every -imagination J of the thoughts of 
his heart iva.'i only evil ^ continually. 

6 And it repented the Lord that he had 
made man on the earth, and it grieved 
him at his heart. 

7 And the Lord said, I will destroy man 
whom I have created from the face of the 
earth ; H both man, and beast, and the 
creeping thing, and the fowls of the air ; 
for it rcpcntcth me that I have made them. 

8 But Noah found grace in the eyes of 
the Lord. 

9 T[ These arc the generations of Noah : 
Noah was a just man and * perfect in his 
generations, and Noah walked with God. 

10 And Noah begat three sons, Shem, 
Ham, and Japheth. 

11 The earth also was corrupt before 
God, and the earth Avas filled with a^o- 
lence. 

12 And God looked upon the earth, and 
behold, it was corrupt ; for all flesh had 
corrupted his way upon the earth. 

13 And God said unto Noah, ''The end 
of all flesh is come before mc ; for the 
earth is filled with violence through 



3:0. i Or, the what', imagination : The Hebrew word signifies 
not only the imagination, but also the purposes and desires, j chap. 
8:21; Dent. 29:19; Klek. 8 : 9, 12 ; M:.t. 1.5:19. i Heb. every 
dan. II Heb. from man unto beast. * Or, upright, k 1 Peter, 
4:7. 



in this matter by their own wills, not by the will of 
God. 

3. Strive with man; to bring him to repent- 
ance and salvation. Is Jlesh ; corrupt, John 3 ; 6. 
A hundred and twenty years; so long would 
God wait before he would destroy the world. 

4. Giants; men of great stature and wickedness. 
Men of renown ; famous for their deeds of rapine. 

6. Repented the Lord — grieved h ini ; he would 
change his conduct towards men, as men change 
their conduct when sorry for what they have done ; 
and instead of continuing them on the earth and 
granting them his favors, as he had done, he would 
destroy them. 

7. See Instruction, chap. 1 : 28. 

8. Found ^race ; was truly pious, and graciously 
accepted as righteous. Heb. 11:7. 

0. Perfect ; not in the sense of being sinless ; 
but in t!ie .sense of being sincere, upright, and truly 
devoted to God. 

11. Filled with violence; cruelty, oppression, 
robbery, murder, and other kinds of wickedness. 

12. All Jlesh ; the whole human family ; though 
grace, in cases like that of Noah, had produced a 
change. 1 Cor. 1.5 : 10. 



Noah buildcth an ark. 



GENESIS VII. 



The deluse cometh. 



tc.'nm: them ; and behold, I will destroy 
them * with the earth. 

14 T[ Make thee an ark of gopher-wood : 
rooms t shalt thou make in the ark, and 
shalt pitch it within and without with 
pitch. 

1.5 And this is the fashion which thovx 
shalt make it of: The length of the ark 
shall be three hundred cubits, the breadth 
of it fifty cubits, and the height of it 
thirty cubits. 

16 A window shalt thou make to the 
ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it 
above ; and the door of the ark shalt thou 
set in the side thereof: with lower, sec- 
ond, and third stories shalt thou make it. 

17 And behold, I, even I, *do bring a 
flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy 
all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, 
from under heaven ; and every thing that 
is in the earth shall die. 

18 But with thee will I establish my 
covenant ; and thou shalt come into the 
ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, 
and thy sons' wives with thee. 

19 And of every living thing of all flesh, 
two ""of every sort shalt thou bring into 
the ark, to keep them alive with thee : 
they shall be male and female. 

20 Of fowls-after their kind, and of cattle 
after their kind, of every creeping thing 
of the earth after his kind ; two of every 
sort shall come unto thee, to keep therii 
alive. 

21 And take thou unto thee of all food 
that is eaten, and thou shalt gather it to 
thee ; and it shall be for food for thee, and 
for them. 

22 Thus did Noah; "= according to all 
that God commanded him, so did he. 



* Or, from the earth, f Heb. nests, a Psa. 93 : 3, 4 ; Amos 
9:6. b chap. 7 : 8, 9. c Heb. U : 7. J 1 Peter, 3 : iO ; 'i Peter, 3 : .S. 



14. Gopher; a species of resinous wood; sup- 
posed to be the cypress. 

1.5. Length ; about four hundred and fifty feet. 
Breadth ; seventy-five feet. Height ; forty-five 
feet: proportions according to vrhich the best ships 
are now built. 

17. All flesh ; except what should be in the ark. 

18. My covenant ; his engagement for the pres- 
ervation of Noah and his family, when the rest of 
the world should be destroyed. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 

2. Intimate connections with the wicked are 
sources of great moral corruption and danger. 

7. When God, instead of preserving and blessing 
men, turns against and destroys them, he is said in 
the Bible to repent, because he changes his conduct 
as men do when they repent. Not that he alters 
his purposes, or does what he did not always intend 
to do. In this sense he is of one mind, and none can 
turn him, Job 23 : 13 ; he is not a man that he 
should lie, nor the son of man that he should repent. 
Num. 23 : 19. There is no contradiction in these 
texts ; they refer to different things, and express dif- 
ferent truths. In studying the Bible, we should not 
regard simply the sound of the word.s, but become 



CHAPTER VII. 

1 Noah, with his family, and the living creatures, enter 
into the ark. 17 The beginning, increase, and con- 
tinuance of the flood. 

AND the Lord said unto Noah, Come 
thou and all thy house into the ark ; 
for "^thee have I seen righteous before 
me in this generation. 

2 Of every "^ clean beast thou shalt take 
to thee by ^ sevens, the male and his fe- 
male ; and of beasts that are not clean by 
two, the male and his female. 

3 Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the 
male and the female ; to keep seed alive 
upon the face of all the earth. 

4 For yet seven days, and I will cause 
it to rain upon the earth forty days and 
forty nights ; and every living substance 
that I have made will I * destroy from off" 
the face of the earth. 

5 And Noah did according unto all that 
the Lord commanded him. 

6 And Noah was six hvxndred years old 
when the flood of waters was upon the 
earth. 

7 H And Noah went in, and his sons, 
and his wife, and his sons' wives with 
him, into the ark, because of the waters 
of the flood. 

8 Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are 
not clean, and of fowls, and of every 
thing that creepeth upon the earth, 

9 There went in two and two unto Noah 
into the ark, the male and the female, as 
God had commanded Noah. 

10 And it came to pass, H after seven 
days, that the waters of the flood Avere 
upon the earth. 

1 1 ^ In the six hundredth year of Noah's 
life, in the second month, the seventeenth 



' Lev. ch. U. X Heb. wtiere «iieM. % Heb. 6/i/« out. || Or, on 
the seventh day. 



acquainted with and believe their meaning. In no 
other way can we receive benefit from them. 

9. The cause of the difference between a good 
man and the openly wicked is, not their natural dis- 
position, but divine grace ; and the fruits of this 
grace are piety towards Grod, integrity, uprightness, 
and benevolence towards men. 

12. The corruption of men proceeds from them- 
selves ; they are the authors of all their wickedness, 
and the cause of their own ruin. Prov. 1 : 31 ; Ho- 
sea 13 : 9 ; James 1 : 14. 

22. That faith in Grod which he accepts, and 
which is the means of justification and salvation, 
leads those who exercise it to obey his commands. 

CHAPTER VII. 

2. Clean beast ; suitable for sacrifice. 

10. After seven days ; on the seventh day it be- 
gan to rain. 

11. The second month ; the year began in Sep- 
tember : and the second month, called Marchesvan, 
answered to the last part of October and the first 
part of November. Fountains of the great deep 
— windows of heaven ; the waters rushed up from 
below and poured down from above. 

9 



The mountains covered. 



GENESIS VIII. 



The waters assuage. 



day of the month, the same day were all 
the ' fountains of the sreat deep broken up, 
and the * windows of heaven were opened. 

12 And the rain was upon the earth forty 
days and forty nitihts. 

13 In the self-same day entered Noah, 
and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons 
of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three 
wives of his sons with them, '' into the ark ; 

14 They, and every beast alter his kind, 
and all the cattle after their kind, and 
every creeping thins that creepeth upon 
the earth after his kind, and every fowl 
after his kind, every bird of every tsort. 

1 5 And tlicy went in unto Noah into the 
ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein is 
the breath of life. 

16 And they that went in, went in male 
and female of all flesh, as God had com- 
manded him : and the Lord shut him ''in. 

17 And the flood was forty days upon 
the earth : and the waters increased, and 
bare up the ark, and it was lifted up 
above the earth. 

18 And the waters prevailed, and were 
increased greatly upon the earth ; and the 
ark went upon the face of the waters. 

19 And the waters prevailed exceeding- 
ly upon the earth ; ""and all the high hills 
that were under the whole heaven were 
covered. 

20 Fifteen cubits upward did Hie waters 
prevail: and the mountains "were cov- 
ered. 

21 And all flesh died that moved upon 
the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and 
of beast, and of every creeping thing that 
creepeth upon the earth, and every "^man : 

22 All in whose nostrils u'as ^ the breath 
of life, of all that iras in the dry huul, died. 

23 And every living substance was de- 
stroyed wliich Avas upon the face of the 



• rlinp. 8:2: Pn.v. 11:28: Mnt.2<:38; 1 TliPs.i r. : 3. *0r, 
Aoodgattt. kclnip.fi: la \ WrXt.wing. <■ Doiil.:t:):27; Pi)a.4fi:2; 
tU:»; rrov,:i :•::!. il .lob 12: Ki; 1'i.n. 101:11; 2 IVlnr,3:«. e Jer. 
3 : «l. » J(.b J." : I .-.- 1 7. % lleb. tht breath itf the ipirU (if life. 
( Ewk. I4:M, 2U: Miil.3:l7, 18. hchnp. 8:3. i cbnp. I'J : 20 ; 



20. Fifleen cubits; about twenty-two and a half 
feet. 

2-1. A hviulred and fifty tlays; so long, it is 
supposed, the watcri" did not scniiibly abate. 
INSTRICTIONS. 

1. It is not neccKsary for a msin to be wicked be- 
cause otliers around him are wicked. Anyone may, 
if he will, be righteous, even in the midst of abound- 
ing iniquily. And cvrry one whom God sees to be 
ri^teou.s tlirou^jh failli, will be saved when the 
wicked are destrfyrd. 

T). If men would be saved, thry must not only be- 
lieve G(x1"k derlnrationM, but also make it their great 
object to obey all his coiuni.-inds. 

\^^. God h.is power not only over men, but also over 
beast*, and all the works of his hands. Ho can inllu- 
ence, direct, and control them, us seemclli liim good. 

Ifi. Those who believe God"s declarations and 
obey his commands, will receive his ciroctual pro- 
tection and care. 
10 



ground, both man, and cattle, and *b.?:23«: 
the creeping things, and the fowl of the 
heaven ; and they were destroyed from 
the earth : and Noah e only remained alive, 
and they that were with him in the ark. 

24 And ""the waters prevailed upon the 
earth a hundred and fifty days. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1 The waters assuage. 4 The ark resteth on Ararat. 
7 The raven and the dove. 15 Noah, being com- 
manded, 18 goeth forth of the ark. 20 He buildeth 
an altar, and ofTercth sacrifice, 21 which God accept- 
eth, and promiseth to curse the earth no more. 

AND God 'remembered Noah, and 
every living thing, and all the J cat- 
tle that was with him in the ark : and 
God made a wind '' to pass over the earth, 
and the waters assuaged ; 

2 The fountains 'also of the deep, and 
the windows'" of heaven were stopped, 
and the rain from heaven was restrained ; 

3 And the waters returned from off the 
earth * continually : and after the end of 
the hundred and fifty days the waters 
were abated. 

4 And the ark rested in the seventh 
month, on the seventeenth day of the 
month, upon the mountains of ° Ararat. 

5 And the waters H decreased continu- 
ally until the tenth month : in the tenth 
month, on the first day of the month, were 
the tops of the mountains seen. 

6 ^[And it came to pass at the end of 
forty days, that Noali opened ° the Avindow 
of the ark which he had made : 

7 And he sent forth a raven, which went 
forth *to and fro, until the waters were 
dried up from off the earth. 

8 Also he sent forth a dove from him, 
to see if the waters were abated from off 
the face of the ground ; 

9 But the dove found no rest for the sole 



Ex. 2:24; Psa. 10fi:4. jPsa.3<>:P. kE.T.H:2l. irr<iv.8:28. 
m .lob .IS: 37; M.ittlicvv 8: 27. % Heb. in going and reluming. 
n Jer. 51 : 27. \l Heb. were in going and decreasing. o cbap. 
6 : 16. * Heb. in going forth and returning. 



21. Men who know the declarations of God but 
do not believe them, will be convinced of their truth 
by their fulfilment ; and when he undertakes to pun- 
ish, there is no possibility of escape. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1. Remembered; showed that he remembered. 
Assuased ; began to abate. 

3. Hundred and fifty days ; horn the time it 
began to rain. 

■1. Seventh mouth ; called Nis.^n, and answering 
to the last part of March and the first part of April. 
Mountains of Ararat ; in Armenia. 

3. Tenth inonth : called Thamuz, and answer- 
ing to the Last part of June and the first part of July. 

C. Forty days ; from the time when the moun- 
tains were seen. 

9. Funnd no rest; though the tops of some 
mountains could be seen, these were not the re- 
gions wliich the dove would visit. 



T7iey go out from the ark. 



GENESIS IX. 



Noah offereth a sacrifice. 



B. C. 2349. 

him into the ai-k, for the waters locre on 
the face of the whole earth : then he put 
forth his hand, and took her, and * pulled 
her in unto him into the ark. 

1 And he stayed yet other seven days, 
and again he sent forth the dove out of 
the ark ; 

11 And the dove came in to him in the 
evening; and lo, in her mouth ivas an 
olive-leaf plucked off: so Noah knew that 
the waters were abated from off the earth. 

12 And he stayed yet other seven days, 
and sent forth the dove ; which returned 
not again unto him any more. 

13 T[ And it came to pass in the six hun- 
dredth and first year, in the first month, 
the first day of the month, the waters 
were dried up from ofl' the earth : and 
Noah removed the covering of the ark, 
and looked, and behold, the face of the 
ground was dry. 

14 And in the second month, on the 
seven and twentieth day of the month, 
was the eartli dried-. 

15 % And God spake unto Noah, saying, 

16 Go forth of the ark, thou, and thy 
wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives 
with thee. 

17 Bring forth with thee every living 
thing that i.<! with thee, of all flesh, both 
of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creep- 
ing thing that creepeth upon the earth ; 



* Heb. caused her to come, a chap. 1:22. f Heb. families. 
b Lev. ch. U. % Heb. a savor of rest, c Lev. 1:9; Isa. ^b:b; 
Ezek. 20:41; 2 Cor. 2 : 15. d cliap. 3 : 17; 6:17. ^ Or, t/iour/h. 



13. The first mo7ith ; called Tisri, and answer- 
ing to the last part of September and the first part 
of October. This was the first month of the civil 
year. Afterwards, in the days of Moses, the eccle- 
siastical year of the Jews began in the month 
Abib or Nisan, ans^^•ering to the last part of March 
and the first part of April. 

14. The seven mid twentieth day ; reckoning 
the day he entered and the day he left, this was 
twelve months and eleven days from the time the 
fountains of the great deep were broken up, and the 
windows of heaven opened. Chap. 7: 11. Theirs 
were lunar months, measured by the changes of the 
moon. Six of these consisted of thirty days each, 
and six of twenty-nine. Twelve months and eleven 
days would therefore make a solar year, or three 
hundred and sixty-five days. 

20. Altar ; an elevated place on which to ofl^er 
sacrifices. Biirnt-offeriiigs ; offerings that were 
consumed by fire ; expressive of the conviction of the 
offerers, that they, as sinners, deserved to be eon- 
sumed ; also of their gratitude for sparing mercy, 
their need of pardoning grace, and their hope of ob- 
taining it, through the sacrifice of Christ as a pro- 
pitiation for the sins of the world. Eph. 5:2; Heb. 
9:14; 1 John, 2:2. 

21. A srveet savor ; God was pleased with, and 
accepted the offering, as a suitable expression of a 
penitent, believing, and grateful heart. Said in his 
heart ; determined, and made known his determi- 
nation. Not again curse tlie ground ; by bring- 
ing upon it a flood. For : tliough men would con- 
tinue to be naturally as wicked after the flood as be- 



that they may breed abundantly in the 
earth, and *be fruitful and multiply upon 
the earth. 

18 And Noah went forth, and his sons, 
and his wife, and his sons' wives with him: 

19 Every bea.st, every creeping thing, 
and every fowl, and whatsoever creepeth 
upon the earth, after their t kinds, went 
forth out of the ark. 

20 IfAnd Noah builded an altar unto 
the Lord, and took of ''every clean beast, 
and of every clean fowl, and offered 
burnt-offerings on the altar. 

21 And the Lord smelted a t sweet sa- 
vor ;•= and the Lord said in his heart, I 
will not again ^ curse the ground any more 
for man's sake ; ^ for the "^ imagination of 
man's heart is evil from his youth : neither 
will I again ''smite any more every thing 
living, as I have done. 

22 While II the earth remaineth, s seed- 
time and harvest, and cold and heat, and 
summer and winter, and day and night, 
shall not cease. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 God blesseth Noah. 4 Blood and murder are forbid- 
den. 8 God's covenant, 13 sig-nified by the rainbow. 
IS Noah replenisheth the world, 21) planteth a vine- 
yard, 21 is drunken, and mocked of his son, 25 curs- 
eth Canaan, 26 blesseth Shem, 27 prayeth for Ja- 
pheth, 29 and dieth. 

AND God blessed Noah and his sons, 
and said unto them, ''Be fruitful, and 
multiply, and replenish the earth. 



e cb.lp.6:.'>; Jobl.'>:14; .Ter.l7:9; Rom.I:21. f chap. 9: II, 16. 
IJ neh. as yet all the days of the earth, g Isa. 54:9; Jer. 33:20,08. 
li ver. 7, 19; chap. 10:32. 



fore, yet God would not again interrupt the regular 
course of the seasons, and of day and night, to the 
end of time. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. However great or long-continued the trials of 
God's people, he never forgets them; nor does he 
continue those trials any longer than will promote 
his glory and their highest good. Let them place 
implicit confidence in him ; in due time all his prom- 
ises will be fully accomplished. 

12. In the days of Noah, as at the creation and 
in the days of Adam, time was divided into weeks 
or periods of seven days ; marked, not by the revo- 
lutions of heavenly bodies, .as were months and years, 
but by the return of the Sabbath, a day of rest from 
secular, and of devotion to sacred duties. This di- 
vision of time was carried into all parts of the world, 
and has been observed by the people of God in all 
ages. 

18. As soon as trials have accomplished God's 
wise and benevolent ends, he delights to deliver 
his people from them, and to fill their hearts with 

joy- 

21. "Whatever destruction God brings upon the 
wicked, and however extensively it may be known, 
without the grace of God those who survive will con- 
tinue to be wicked ; neither judgments nor mercies 
will lead them to love and obey God. 

22. The regular return of day and night, summer 
and winter, seed-time and harvest, is a constant me- 
morial of the truth of Jehovah ; that when the word 
hath gone out of his mouth it standeth for ever. 
Num. 23:19; Mat. 24:35. 

11 



God's covenant with man. 



GENESIS IX. 



Noah fallcth into sin. 



2 And the fear of you, 'and the dread of 
you, shall be upon every beast of the 
earth, and upon every fowl of the air, 
upon all that inovcth upon the earth, and 
upon all the fi.«hes of the sea; into your 
hand are they delivered. 

3 Every '' moving thing that livcth shall 
be meat for you ; even as the "^ green herb 
have I given you ''all tilings. 

4 But flesh "with the life thereof, which 
is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat. 

5 And surely your blood of your lives 
will I require : at the hand of every beast 
will I require it, "^and at the hand of man ; 
at the hand of every man's brother will 
I require the life of man. 

6 Whoso sheddeth man's blood, ^by 
man shall his blood be shed : ''for in the 
image of God made he man. 

7 And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply ; 
bring forth abundantly in the earth, and 
multiply therein. 

8 ^ And God spake unto Noah, and to 
his sons with him, saying, 

9 And I, behold, I establish ' my covenant 
with you, and with your seed after you ; 

10 And J with every living creature that 
is with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and 
of every beast of the earth with you, 
from all that go out of the ark, to every 
beast of the earth. 

1 1 .\nd I will establish my covenant with 
you ; neither shall all flesh be cut ofi" any 
more by the waters of a flood ; neither shall 
there any more be ""a flood to destroy the 
earth. 

12 And God said, This is the token 'of 
the covenant wliich I make between me 
and you, and every living creature that 
15 with you, for perpetual generations : 

13 I do set ""my bow in the cloud, and 
it shall be for a token of a covenant be- 
tween me and the earth. 



. P.K.Hifi; Ho.,-,>:ig; Jn/..3:7. b Dcut. 12:15; 14:4, etc.; 
Artiiin:H-14; ITiin. 1::i,4. cclinp.l:29. ■IRom.l4:» « Lev 
17:10-M; l«:M; DeoL12:K(; 1 .Snm. 14 :34. (Kl. 21:li2« 
f I.«>r. ■.'4;17; 1 King", 2: B, R, 32. b clinp. 1 : 27. I<er. U 17; 
cl»p.«:l8.' iclmp.srl; Pan. 14.'>:9. k 2 Peter, 3:7. 1 rlmp 
17!ll. n Eiek.UW: npr.4:3: 10:1. ■ Lev. 2H: 42, 45; Dent. 
7:B; I Kiiig».8:a3; Neb. 9:32; P.n. 106:45; Eiek. 1 li : 00 ; Luke 



CHAPTER IX. 

2. Into your hatul; tliey sliall be subject to you, 
to be Hied for your benefit. 

3. Brr.ry iiioviiig thing ; that is good to eat. 

4. Thf hlood — shall ye uot eat ; it would not be 
unefiil, and it was to typify the blood which was to be 
offered to God as an atonement for tlie sins of men. 

5. At the hand of every brast will I require 
it ,• this was to impress upon them the sacredness 
of human life, and thus prevent one man from kill- 
ins another. Ex. '21 : '28, 29. 

6. If is hlood he shed; the murderer of man 
should by man be put to death. This was designed 
to be another safeguard of human life. The mur- 
deier w,v<t t/> die, to prevent others from committing 
murder. In the image of God; a rational, ac- 
countable, mor;il, and immortal being; to exercise 
by God's appointment a portiort of his authority; 

12 



14 And it shall come to pass, ^B.asm 
when I bring a cloud over the earth, that 
the bow shall be seen in the cloud : 

15 And "I will remember my covenant, 
which is between me and you and every 
living creature of all flesh ; and the 
waters shall no more become a flood to 
destroy all flesh. 

16 And the bow shall be in the cloud; 
and I will look upon it, that I may re- 
member "the everlasting covenant be- 
tween God and every living creature of 
all flesh that is upon the earth. 

17 And (jod said unto Noah, This is the 
token of the covenant which I have es- 
tablished between me and all flesh that 
is upon the earth. 

18 If And the sons of Noah that went 
forth of the ark, were Shem, and Ham, 
and Japheth : and Pllam is the father of 
Canaan.* 

19 These are the three sons of Noah: "iand 
of them was the whole earth overspread. 

20 And Noah began to be a husband- 
man, and he planted a 'vineyard : 

21 And he drank of the wine, ' and was 
drunken ; and he was uncovered within 
his tent. 

22 And Ham, the father of Canaan, 
saw *the nakedness of his father, "and 
told his two brethren without. 

23 And Shem and Japheth took a gar- 
ment, and laid it upon both their shoul- 
ders, and went backward, ^'and covered 
the nakedness of their father : and their 
faces ivere backward, and they saw not 
their father's nakedness. 

24 And Noah awoke from his wine, and 
knew what his younger son had done 
unto him. 

25 And he said, "Cvxrscd be Canaan ; a 
servant of servants shall he be unto his 
brethren. 



1:72. o rh.ip. 17:l:l, I!l; 2Sam. 2.1:5; Isni«h.55:3; .Ier..32:40; 
Heb. 13:20. p cbnn. 10 : 1 , 6. * Ueh Chenaan. qrbnp.lD:32; 
ICbroii. 1:4. r I)eilt20:6; 28:30; Prov, 24:30; C;int.l:6; 
lCor.!):7. • Prov. 20:1; Luke2l:34; I Cor 10: 12 ; Titus 2:2. 
I Hab.2:15; Rev.3:18. u Pan. .15: 20; 40: 1.5 : 70:3; Ob. 12, 13. 
» Exoilus 20:12; Gnl.ll:l; lPeter,4:8. w Deut. 27:16; Josh. 
9:2.1,27; Ju>lg. 1:28,30; 2 Chron. 8: 7,8. 



and with a right to life, till God. or some one in obe- 
dience to or in accordance with liis will, should take 
it away. 

9. Establish my covenant ; confirm a solemn 
promise or engagement. 

13. My bow; the rainbow. A toI:en; a vis- 
ible assurance of the certain fulfilment of what God 
promised, and bringing it to remembrance. 

15. I will remember m7i coveiiaut ; the rain- 
bow was to be a means of leading men in all ages 
to remember God's covenant, and to feel that he re- 
members it, and that what he has promised, he will 
accomplish. 

19. Overspread; repeopled with inhabitants. 

20. A hiishaiiilmaii ; a cultivator of the earth. 

2-j. Cminaii ; he was the son of ILim, and fa- 
ther of the Canaanites, whom, as a just punishment 
for their sins, God in after-ages directed the Israel- 



27(c generations of Noah. 



GENESIS X, 



The sons of Ham. 



kc.'^l' 26 And he said, Blessed be the 
Lord God of Shem ; and Canaan shall 
be * his servant. 

27 God shall t enlarge Japheth, "and he 
shall dwell in the tents of Shem ; and 
Canaan shall be his servant. 

28 IfAnd Noah lived after the flood 
three hundred and fifty years. 

29 And all the days of Noah were '' nine 
hundred and fifty years : and he died. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 The generations of Noah. 2 The sons of Japheth. 
6 The sons of Ham. 8 Nimiod the first monarch. 
21 The sons of Shem. 

IVrOW these are the generations of the 
_L\ sons of Noah : Shem, Ham, and Ja- 
pheth ; and unto them were sons born 
after the flood. 

2 The "sons of Japheth; Gomer, and 
Magog, and ]Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, 
and Meshech, and Tiras. 

3 And the sons of Gomer ; Ashkenaz, 
and Riphath, and Togarmah. 

4 And the sons of Javan ; Elishah, and 
Tai'shish, Kittim, and + Dodanim. 

5 By these were the isles'' of the Gen- 
tiles divided in their lands ; every one 
after his tongue, after their families, in 
their nations. 

6 11 And the sons of Ham ; Cush, and 
Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan. 

7 And the sons of Cush; '^Seba, and 
Havilah, and Sabtali, and Raamah, and 
Sabtecha : and the sons of Raamah ; 
Sheba, and Dedan. 

" Or, servant to them, f Or, persuade, a E))!]. 2 : 13. b chap. 
fi:,=i. c ver. 21. f Or, qs some reiul it, Jioilanim. rt Jer. 2: 10; 
Zeph. 2:11. e Pea. 72:10. fMic-ali5:0. gMicah7:2. % Gr. 

ites to destroy. Ex. 34 : 10-14 ; Deut. 7 : 17-24. 
Servant of servants ; the meanest of servants. 

27. Enlarge Japheth ; greatly extend the ter- 
ritory of his descendants. Divell in the tents of 
Shem; partake of the blessings enjoyed by him. 
The Jews came from Shem. The chief civilized 
and Christian nations of modern Gentiles are from 
Japheth. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. With the increase of the human family by the 
marriage of one man with one woman, God is well 
pleased, that all parts of the earth may be inhab- 
ited, cultivated, and filled with his praise. 

3. The fear of man in beasts, birds, and fishes, is 
evidence of the truth and goodness of God. With- 
out his permission we should have no right to use 
them for food; and all wanton destruction of them, 
or putting them to pain, is sinful. 

6. God is the riglitful disposer of human life, and 
as he directs that the murderer shall by man be 
put to death, it is morally wrong for government not 
to do it. It is a violation of duty to God and to men. 

lo. Whenever we see the rainbow we have evi- 
dence of the truth of God"s declarations, and that he 
remembers them ; and we should feel that not one 
jot or tittle of what he has said will fail, but that 
all will be fulfilled. 

21. Wine is an intoxicating liquor. Those who, 
at home or abroad, on ordinary or on festive occa- 

2 



8 And Cush begat ''Nimrod : he began 
to be a mighty one in the earth. 

9 He was a mighty hunter s before the 
Loud ; wherefore it is said, Even as Nim- 
rod the mighty hunter before the Lord. 

10 And the beginning of his kingdom 
was ^ Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and 
Calneh, in the land of Shinar. 

1 1 Out of that land H went forth Asshur, 
and builded Nineveh, and *thc city Rc- 
hoboth, and Calah, 

12 And Rcsen between Nineveh and 
Calah : the same is a great city. 

13 And Mizraim begat Ludim, and An- 
amim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim, 

14 And Pathrusim, and ''Casluhim,(out 
of whom came Philistim,) and Caphtorim. 

1 5 ^ And Canaan begat t Sidon his first- 
born, and Heth, 

16 And the Jebusite, and the Amorite, 
and the Girgasite, 

17 And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and 
the Sinite, 

18 And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, 
and the Hamathite : and afterward were 
the families of the Canaanites spread 
abroad. 

19 And the border 'of the Canaanites 
was from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, 
unto +Gaza; as thou goest unto Sodom 
and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, 
even unto Laslia. 

20 These are the sons of Ham, after 
their families, after their tongues, in their 
countries, and in their nations. 

21 ^Unto Shem also, the father of all 



Babylon. (( Or, he toent out into Assyria. * Or, the streets of 
the city, h 1 Chron. 1 : 12. f Heb. Tzidon. i chap. 15: 18, 21 ; 
Num. 3-« : 2, 12 ; Josh. 12 : 7, 8. X Heb. Azzah. 



sions, drink it, are in danger of becoming drunken ; 
nor is piety towards God, nor benevolence to men, 
nor a long course of successful resistance of temp- 
tation, a sure safeguard against it. All, therefore, 
who think they stand, should take heed lest they fall ; 
praying, '■ Lead us not into temptation," and show- 
ing the sincerity of their prayers by their conduct. 

CHAPTER X. 

5. The isles of the Gentiles ; countries which 
from Palestine were bej'ond the waters ; including 
Asia Minor and Europe. 

9. Mighty Itunter before the Lord; distin- 
guished for his bold and successful exploits, in over- 
coming and controlling beasts and men. 

10. Babel; afterwards called Babylon, a city on 
the river Euphrates. The land of Shinar; a 
country between Mesopotamia and Persia, through 
which ran the river Euphrates. It was six or seven 
hundred miles east of Canaan. 

11. Asshicr ; from this came the name Assyri.a. 
Nineveh; a city on the river Tigris, about three 
hundred miles north of Babylon. 

11). Sidon; acity in the north-west corner of Ca- 
naan on the Mediterranean sea. Gerar — Gazn ; 
cities of the Philistines. Sodom — Gomorrah — Ad- 
mah — Zeboim; cities in the valley of Siddim,whic!i 
afterwards, on account of the wickedness of the in- 
habitants, were destroyed by fire. Chap. 19 : 21, 2-5. 

13 



The sotis of Shcm. 



GENESIS XL 



The confusion of tongues. 



the children of Ebcr, the brother of , unto heaven; andlet us make us a Vsv"""" 



JaphcTh the elder, even to him were chil- 
dren born. 

22 The children of Sheni ; Elam, and 
Asshiir, and 'Arphaxad, and Lud, and 
Aram. 

23 And the children of Aram ; Uz, and 
llul, and Gether, and Mash. 

24 And Arphaxad begat t Salah ; and 
Salah begat Ebcr. 

25 And unto Eber » were born two sons : 
the name of one was Peleg,* for in his 
days was the earth divided ; and his 
brothcr\s name was Joktan. 

26 And Joktan begat Almodad, and She- 
leph, and Hazarmavcth, and Jcrah, 

27 And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah, 

28 And Obal, and Abimacl, and ^ Slieba, 

29 And Ophir, and llavilah, and Jobab : 
all these were the sons of Joktan. 

30 And their dwelling was from Mesha, 
as tliou gocst unto Scphar, a mount of 
the east. 

31 These are the sons of Shcm, after 
their families, after their tongues, in their 
lands, after their nations. 

32 These arc the families of the sons of 
Noah, after their generations, in their 
nations : and by these were the nations 
divided in the earth after the flood. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 One lui^a'e in the world. 3 The huilding of Babel. 
5 Th« confiision of tongues. 10 The generations of 
Shem. 27 The generations of Terah the father of 
Abrain. 31 Terah goetli from Ur to Haran. 

AND the whole earth was of one * lan- 
guage, and of one II speech. 

2 And it came to pass, as they jour- 
neyed from the 'cast, that they found a 
plain in the land of Shinar; and they 
dwelt there. 

3 And t (licy said one to anotlicr. Go to, 
let US make brick, and -burn them thor- 
oughly. And they had brick for stone, 
iuid sliine had they for mortar. 

4 And tlicy said. Go to, let u.s build us 
a city, and a tower, "^ whose top may reach 



' Hi'b. Arpaehihad. 
. divuhn. W fhnp. 
thranj, f Hph. a mai 

a burnina. e Dpitt. I 



f Hrk Shtl„h. > 1 Cliron. 1:19. J Thnt 

\::\. \Hvh. lip. || Hpb. nwrrf». * Or, 

laid lo hit nrighhar. ^ Heb. bum them 

.'H. i I'xn.H'.lMI-IS; I'rov. 10:7; Dnn. 



25. Pelep; nie.inin;;divi.sion. The eartkdivid- 
ed; nmon;; thodifrercnt Irihcsof men. Chap. 11:8. 

30. A 7noiiiit of the. east ; supposed to ue in or 
near Armenia. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

32. A« all n.itions hatl one common orijjin and 
sprung from one family, tht-y should all love each 
oiher as brethren, and seek to promote each other's 
good ; doing in all things to others as they ought to 
wish that others should do to them. 

CHAPTER XI. 

3. Go to ; come now. Slime — for mortar ; 
bitumen ; a glutinoiu substance which tlu-y used 
for cement. 

14 



name,'' lest we be scattered "= abroad '• '^- ^'■ 
upon the face of the whole earth. 

5 And the Lord came down '"to see the 
city and the tower, which the children 
of men builded. 

6 And the Lord said, Behold, the peo- 
ple is one, and they have all one lan- 
guage ; and this they begin to do : and 
now nothing will be restrained from them, 
which they have s imagined to do. 

7 Go to, let us go down, and there con- 
found "^ their language, that they may not 
understand one another's speech. 

8 So the Lord scattered them abroad 
from thence upon the face of all the 
earth : and they left off to build the city. 

9 Therefore is the name of it called 
Babel,^ bceau.se the Lord did there con- 
found the language of all the earth : and 
from thence did the Lord scatter them 
abroad upon the face 'of all the earth. 

10 T[ These are Jthe generations of 
Shcm : Shcm ivas a hundred years old, 
and begat Arphaxad two years after the 
flood: 

11 And Shem lived after he begat Ar- 
phaxad five hundred years, and ''begat 
sons and daughters. 

12 And Arphaxad lived five and thirty 
years, and 'begat S.ilah : 

13 And Arphaxad lived after he begat 
Salah four hundred and three years, and 
begat sons and daughters. 

14 And Salah lived thirty years, and 
begat Ebcr : 

1 5 And Salah lived after he begat Eber 
four hundred and three years, and begat 
sons and dnughtcrs. 

16 And Ebcr lived four and thirty 
years, and begat liPeleg: 

17 And Ebcr lived after he begat Pcleg 
four hundred and thirty years, and begat 
sons and daughters. 

18 And Peleg lived thirty years, and 
begat * Reu : 

19 And Peleg lived after he begat Reu 



■4:30. t vpr.9; re.i.(i::9; Liikel:5l. f clinp. 18:21. (:l'9a.2:l. 
h P8H.6.5:!t; Acl<i-2:6; lCor.l4:l«. % That is, con/""""- ' AfU 
17:i!fi. j ver.27i elmp. 10:21,22. V i-iinp. 1:28. 1 Luke 3 : .la. 
II I.iike3:35; PItalte. » Luke 3: 35; Ragau. 



4. Reachnnto heaven ; be very high. 

5. Came doivu lo see ; showed that he saw what 
they were doing. 

fa. Nothing will be restrained ; if permitted 
to go on, (hey will accomplish their designs. 

7. Go down ; exert divine power. Confound 
thrir language ; destroy their power of under- 
standing each other. 

8. Scattered them abroad; led them to .sepa- 
rate and go to different countries ; and thus the 
sooner to people the earth. 

9. Babel ; meaning confusion. 

10. Shem; the progenitor of Abraham, whose 
history Moses, the writer of this book, is about to 
give. 



The kindred of Abratn. 



GENESIS XII. 



God callelh Abram. 



kc^ml' two hundred and nine years, and 
begat sons and daughters. 

20 And Ren lived two and thirty years, 
and begat * Serng : 

21 And Reu lived after he begat Serug 
two hundred and seven years, and begat 
sons and danghters. 

22 And Serug lived thirty years, and 
begat t Nahor : 

23 And Serug lived after he begat Na- 
hor two hundred years, and begat sons 
and daughters. 

24 And Nahor lived nine and twenty 
years, and begat - Terali : 

25 And Nahor lived after he begat Terah 
a hundred and nineteen years, and begat 
sons and daughters. 

26 And Terah lived seventy years, and 
begat ^Abrain, Nahor, and Haran. 

27 1[ Now these are the generations of 
Terah : Terah begat Abram, Nahor, and 
Haran ; and Haran begat Lot. 

28 And Haran died before his father 
Terah in the land of his nativity, in ''Ur 
of the Chaldees. 

29 And Abram and Nahor took them 
wives : the name of Abram's wife urns 
Sarai f and the name of Nahor's wife, 
Milcah,'' the daughter of Haran, the father 
of Milcah, and the father of Iscah. 

30 But Sarai was "^barren; she had no 
child. 

3 1 And Terah took Abram his son, and 
Lot the son of Haran his son's son, and 
Sarai his daughter-in-law,his son Abram's 
wife ; and they went forth with them 





Luke 3 : 35 


Sarucli. t Joal 


. 24: 


•2: Ndcho 


r. 


t 


T.uk 


p3 


:i4; 


Thara. 


« Josl. 


24 


2 ; 1 Cliron. 


:2fi. 


27. b cli 


ip. 


1.^1 


:7. 


c 


lap. 


17: 


\b. 


A chap. ^ 


:20: 24: IS 


e 


oh.lp. 16 


1 


2 


IH 


11, 


12; 


'2\. 


l>'-2 


Ps.llm 


H3 


9; Luke I: 


30. 


f cl.ap. 1 


2: 


1. 


% 


ver. 


32; 



26. Lived seventy years ; and after that, be- 
gat Abram, Nahor, and Haran; but not, it is 
supposed, in this order. Haran was the first-born, 
and Abram was the youngest. He is mentioned 
first as Shem was. chap. 5:32, because from him 
was to spring the Messiah. See chap. 5, and Mat. 1. 

28. JJr of the Chaldees ; a pl.aoe it is supposed 
between the Tiijris and Euphrates, about four hun- 
dred miles north-east of Canaan. This is the first 
time the Chaldees are mentioned in Scripture. They 
lived in the north part of Mesopotamia, now Koor- 
distan. Afterwards they went south into the land 
of Shinar, which was afterwards called Chaldea and 
babylonia. Chap. 10 : 10. 

29. Sarai — Milcah ; these are both supposed to 
have been daugjiters of Haran, the elder brother of 
Abram and Nalior. If so, these two brothers mar- 
ried their nieces; but it seems that Haran and Abra- 
ham, though both sons of Terah, had not the same 
mother. Chap. 20 : 12. 

31. Into; towards. Canaan; a country on 
the eastern shore of the Mediterranean sea. Ha- 
ran ; a place in Mesopotamia between the rivers 
Euphrates and Chebar. It is called in the New 
Testament, Charran. Acts 7: 4. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. It is natural for men to seek to be distinguished, 
and as natural to seek it in a wrong way and for a 



from ^Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the 
land of Canaan ; and they came unto 
Haran,^ and dwelt there. 

32 And the days of Terah were two 
hundred and five years : and Terah died 
in Haran. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1 God calleth Abram, and blesselh him with a promise 
of Chri.st. 4 He departe4:h with Lot from Haran . G 
He jounieyeth ttiroush Canaan, 7 which is promised 
him in a vision. 10 He is driven by a famine into 
Egypt. 11 Fear maketh him feign his wife to be his 
sister. 14 Pharaoh, having taken her from him, by 
plagues is compelled to re.store her. 

"IVrOW the Lord had said sunto Abram, 
-LN Get thee out of thy country, and from 
thy kindred, and from thy father's house, 
unto a land that I will show thee : 

2 And I will make of thee a great ■• na- 
tion, and I will bless thee, and make thy 
name great ; ' and thou shalt be a bless- 
ing : 

3 And I will bless them J that bless thee, 
and curse him that curseth thee : and in 
thee shall all families of the earth be 
blessed.'' 

4 So Abram departed, as the Lord had 
spoken unto him ; and Lot went with him : 
and Abram teas seventy and five years 
old when he departed out of Haran. 

5 And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot 
his brother's son, and all their substance 
that they had gathered, and the souls that 
they had gotten in Haran ; and they went 
forth to go into the land of Canaan ;' and 
into the land of Canaan they came. 

6 ^ And Abram passed through the land 



Charran. g chap. 11:31; I.t:7; Neh. 9:7; Isa. 41:2; Acts 7:3; 
Heb. 11:8. h chap. 17:6; 24:35. i chap. 18: 18; 28 : 4. j Num. 
24:9. k Psa. 72:17; Acts3:25; Gal.3:8. lHeb.ll:8. 



wrong end. In doing this they will be disappointed. 
Would they be truly great, and permanently honored, 
which they may and ought to desire, they must seek 
these blessings, not in the indulgence of selfish grati- 
fication, but in learning and doing the will of Grod. 

9. The effects of the confusion of tongues are 
seen down to the present day, in the variety of lan- 
guages which are spoken, and in the diliiculty tlius 
occasioned of holding intercourse and communicat- 
ing freely the knowledge which multitudes need, and 
without which they are exposed to perish. 

31. The statements of the Old Testament are in 
various ways confirmed by the New, and thus they 
mutually support and illustrate e.ach other; while 
both throughout have special reference to, and in nu- 
merous ways proclaim the dignity and show forth 
the glory of Jesus Christ. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1. Abram; this is composed of two Hebrew 
words ; Ah, signifying fiither, and ram, meaning 
high or distinguished. 

2. 13e a blessing: by his faith, and his being a 
progenitor of Jesus Christ. 

3. Be blessed ; especially in his seed, which is 
Christ. Gal. 3 : $-16. 

6. Sichem; called also Shechem ; and in the 
New Testament, Sychar. John 4: 5. It L%y between 

15 



Abrmn sojourncth in Ei;ypt, 



GENESIS XIII. 



and in the south country. 



unto the place of •Sichem, unto the plain 
of Moreh. And the '' Canaanite was then 
in the land. 

7 And the Loud " appeared unto Abram, 
and said, Unto thy .seed will I give ''this 
land: and there builded he an "^altar 
unto the Lord, -svho appeared unto him. 

8 And he removed from thence unto a 
mountain on the east of ""Beth-el, and 
pitched his tent, having Beth-cl on the 
vest, and " Hai on the east : and there 
he builded an altar unto the Lord, and 
called s upon the name of the Lord. 

9 And Abram journeyed, t going on still 
toward the south. 

1 % And there was a famine in the land : 
and Abram went down into Egypt to 
sojourn there ; for the famine was griev- 
ous in the land. 

1 1 And it came to pass, when he was 
come near to enter into Egypt, that he said 
unto Sarai his wife. Behold now, I know- 
that thou art a fair woman to look upon : 

12 Therefore it shall come to pass, 
when the Egyptians shall see thee, that 
they shall say. This is his wife : and they 
will kill me, but they will save thee alive. 

1 .3 Say, I pray thee, thou art my '' sister : 
that it may be well with me for thy sake ; 
and my soul shall live because of thee. 

14 ^ And it came to pass, that when 
Abram wa.s come into Egypt, the Egyp- 
tians beheld the woman that she ivas 
very fair. 

15 The princes also of Pharaoh saw her, 
and commciuled her before 'Pharaoh: 
and the woman was J taken into Phara- 
oh's house. 



■ DcuL II :3n; Juil/;. 7:1. k rlinp. 10: 18, 19. cclinp.l7:I: 
18:1. i rlmn.l3:lA; 17:8; 86:3; 28:13; Psalm 1 Or.: 9-11 ; 
Hnni.9:8; Gl>l3:ir.: 4:28. e clinp. 13:4, 18 ; gfi:.2.5; Xi:iO. 
f chiip. 48: 19. ♦ Hrb. y*l; Jo»li. 7:«. 8 chiip. 21 :.33. f Heb. 
in ffninff and Journeying. h chap. 20:2; 2G:7. i Mat. .t: 28. 



C. J921. 

and 



for her sake : and he had sheep 
oxen, and he-asses, and men-servants, 
and maid-servants, and she-asses, and 
camels. 

17 And the Lord plagued Pharaoh and 
his house with great plagues because of 
Sarai, Abram's wife. 

18 And Pharaoh called Abram, and 
said. What is tliis that thou hast done 
unto me ] "^ Why didst thou not tell me 
that she was thy wife 1 

19 Why saidst thou, She is my sister'? 
so I might have taken her to me to wife : 
now therefore, behold thy M'ife, take her, 
and go thy way. 

20 And Pharaoh commanded 'his men 
concerning him ; and they sent him away, 
and his wife, and all that he had. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1 Abram and Lot return out of Egypt. 7 By disagree- 
ment they part asunder. 10 Lot goeth to wicked 
Sodom. 14 God renevveth the promise to Abram. 1^ 
He removelh to Hebron, and tiiere buildeth an altar. 

AND Abram w^ent up out of Egypt, he, 
and his wife, and all that he had, 
and Lot with him, into the '"south. 

2 And Abram was very rich "in cattle, 
in silver, and in gold. 

3 And he went on his journeys from the 
south even to Beth-el, unto the place 
where his tent had been at the beginning, 
between Bcth-cl and Hai ; 

4 Unto the place of the "altar, which he 
had made there at the first : and there 
Abram called Pon the name of the Lord. 

5 11 And Lot also, which went with 
Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents. 



j rs:u 10.-.: H; Prn 


V. (i : 2rt ; Heb. 13:4. k chap. 20 : 1 ; 20 : 1 ; 


Exa<lu9 3i:21. > 


'roverbs21:I. m chap. 12: 9, etc. n chap, 
.lob 1:10; Psalm 112:3; Proverbs 3:9, 10; 


24 : .^'i ; 1 Sam. 2 : 7 


10:22; Mat.K:a3. 


o chap. 12:7, 8; Psa.42:I,2; 84:10. V Psa. 


115:17; 143:18. 





mount Ebal on the north, and G-erizim on the south. 
It is now called Naplonse or Nabnhis, and is about 
forty miles north of Jerusalem. Phitii.; the origi- 
nal word means terehintli, a turpentine \i-»e or grove. 
8. Urthel ; the meaning of this word is house of 
G-od. This name was afterwards given to this place 
by Jacob. Chap. 28:19. The city was before called 
Luz. and is about thirty miles south of Shechem. 
Ilai ; called Aj, Josh. 8: 1; a few miles east of 
Bethel. 

10. Eeypt ; n country two or three hundred 
miles south-west of Canaan, through which ran the 
river Nile. 

1.3. Sister; this term is used in the Bible, not 
only as now for the daughter of one's parents, but 
aUo for a niece, or near female relative: as brother 
is used for a nepliew or n^ar male relative. Chap. 
11:11. My soul shall live; my life shall be 
spared. 

17. Plagued Pharaoh; showed him by some 
calamity that it w.-w wrong for him to keep Sarai, 
for she was Abram's wife. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Though God calls his peojile to make great 
sacrifices for his sake, he promises th 



greater than those they relinquish ; and in believing 
and obeying him, they will find abundant reward. 

8. When called to remove from one place to an- 
other, it is a great comfort to take with us our 
friends. Wherever we are we should worship God, 
and commit ourselves and our friends to his merci- 
ful guidance and care. 

10. Though obedience to God will not, in this 
world, secure us from trials, it will prepare us to 
meet them, make them blessings, ana fit us, when 
we leave this world, to be freed from all trials and 
receive uuiningled and everlasting joys. 

12. The best of men are far from being faultless ; 
they do many things in which it is neither wise, nor 
safe, nor right for us to imitate them ; and whenever 
we trust to hum.an expedients instead of trusting in 
God, we may expect to be punished for our folly. 

l-'3. Great beauty is a source of gre;it danger, 
and often the means of great evil to its possessor. 

20. The Lord watches over his people for good, 
and takes much belter care, of them than they do 
of themselves. 



them blessings 1. 



CHAPTER XIII. 
The south ; the south part of Canaan. 



Mram and Lot separate. 



GENESIS XIV. 



The battle of the kings. 



S.aira- 6 And the land was not able Mo 
bear them, that they might dwell togeth- 
er : for their substance Avas great, so that 
they could not dwell together. 

7 And there was a strife between the 
herdmen of Abram's cattle, and the herd- 
men of Lot's cattle : and the Canaanite and 
the Perizzite dwelled ''then in the land. 

8 And Abram said unto Lot, Let there 
be no strife, "^I pray thee, between me 
and thee, and between my herdmen and 
thy herdmen ; for we he * brethren.'' 

9 Is not the whole land before ''thee'? 
Separate thyself, I pray thee, from me : 
if thou wilt take the left hand, then I will 
go to the right ; or if thori depart to the 
right hand, then I will go to the '"left. 

10 And Lot lifted up his eyes, and be- 
held all the plain of Jordan, that it ivas 
well watered every where, before the 
Lord destroyed s Sodom and Gomorrah, 
even as the '■garden of the Lord, like the 
land of Egypt, as thou comest unto ' Zoar. 

1 1 Then Lot chose him all the plain of 
Jordan ; and Lot journeyed east : and 
they separated J themselves the one from 
the other. 

12 Abram dwelled in the land of Ca- 
naan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the 
plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom. 

13 But the men of Sodom ivere wicked and 
sinners ''before the Lord exceedingly. 

14 T[And the Lord said unto Abram, 
after that Lot was separated from him, 



« cliap. 36:7. b chap. 34:30. 


c Phil. 2:14; Hebrews 12:14. 


* Heb. men brethren, d chap. 11; 


27. e rbap. 20: 1:). f ] Peter, 


3:8-1-2. 6 rhap. 19:2S; 1 .lolin, 2 


IS. h chap. 2:10; Isa. Bl : 3 ; 


Joel 2: 3. iclia^. H:2. j Prov. 


27:10. k chap. 18:20; Ezek. 



6. Not able to bear them ; the pasturage was 
not sufficient for their flocks. 

7. Dwelled tlieii in tJie land; and the quarrels of 
the herdmen would make a bad impression on them. 

8. Brethren ; near relatives, and professors of 
the same religion. 

10. Jordan ; rising near mount Lebanon, and run- 
ning south into the Dead sea. The plain of Jordan 
was the region bordering on the river. Sodom — Go- 
tnorrah — Zoar ; cities in the south of Canaan, and 
near the Jordan. Garden of the Lord; the scenery 
of p.aradise may harbor a population ripening for hell. 

1.5. To thee will I gice it ; not to him person- 
ally, but to his descendants. Acts7:5. Forever; 
for a perpetual inheritance, should they continue to 
obey him. 

16. As the dnst of the earth ; very numerous. 

IS. Plain; chap. 12:6. Hebron; a city about 
twenty miles south of Jerusalem, called originally 
Kirjath-Arba, or the city of Arba, a famous giant 
who lived there. Josh. 11: 1.5. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. Habitual communion with God is essential to 
a life of faith ; and necessary in order rightly to use 
the blessings, meet the trials, and discharge the 
duties of life. 

6. Increasing riches may part old and tried 
friends. 

7. Contentions among the friends of God, the 
members of their families, or persons in their em- 
ployment, are e.xceedingly injurious to his cause; 



Lift up now thine eyes, and look from 
the place where thou art, northward, and 
southward, and eastward, and westward : 

15 For all the land which thou seest, to 
thee will I give it, and 'to thy seed for 
ever. 

16 And I will make thy seed as the du?t 
of the earth : so that if a man can num- 
ber the dust of the earth, then shall thy 
seed also be numbered. 

17 Arise, walk through the land in the 
length of it and in the breadth of it ; for 
I will give it unto thee. 

18 Then Abram removed his tent, and 
came and dwelt in the t plain of "" Mamre, 
which is in Hebron, and built there an 
altar unto the Lord. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1 The battle of four kings against five. 12 Lot is taken 
prisoner. 14 Abram rescueth him. 18 Melohizedek 
blesseth Abram. '20 Abram giveth him tithe. '2'i 
The rest of the spoil, his partners having had their 
portions, he restoreth to the king of Sodom. 

AND it came to pass, in the days of 
Amraphel king °of Shinar, Arioch 
king of EUasar, Chedorlaomer king of 
Elam, and Tidal king of nations ; 

2 That these made war with Bera king 
of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Go- 
morrah, Shinab king of °Admah, and 
Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king 
of Bela, which is PZoar. 

3 All these were joined together in the 
vale of Siddim, •• which is the salt sea. 



16:49; 2 Peter, 2:7, 8. I chap. 12:7. \ Yleh. plains, m chap. 
3.t:27. n chap. 11:2; Isa. 11: 11; Zech. .1: II. o Dent. 29:23 ; 
Hoseall:8. p chap. 19:22. q Deut. 3 : 17; Josh. 3: 16. 



they tend to prejudice men ag.ainst religion, and to 
prevent their salvation. 

9. A wise and good man will be kind, accommo- 
dating and peaceful ; will seek to avoid strife, es- 
pecially with his relatives ; and will often relinquish 
his rights rather than contend for them. 

13. When men, in selecting their place of abode, 
regard the opportunities for making money more 
than they do the means of intellectual and moral 
improvement, they commit sin, and will have reason 
to be grateful if they escape ruin. 

1.5. God requires faith in promises, the fulfilment 
of which is future and distant. 

18. Men who, from regard to God, make sacri- 
fices for peace, will be kept from many evils into 
which others will fall. They will receive much 
good themselves, and be instrumental in communi- 
cating much to others. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1. Shhiar ; chap. 10 : 10. EUasar; supposed 
by some to be in Arabia, and by others in Media. 
Elam ; Persia. 

2. King of Sodom; the word king is used in 
the Bible for the ruler of a city or small district ; 
and for the chief of a clan or tribe, as well as for 
the ruler of a nation. 

3. Joined together; assembled their forces. 
Vale of Siddim ; the southern part of the valley 
of the Jordan, in which were the cities above men- 
tioned, and where is now the Dead sea. 

17 



Lot taken captive, 



GENESIS XIV. 



and released by Abram. 



4 Twelve years llicy served Chedorlao- 
mer, and in the thirteenth year they re- 
belled. 

5 And in the fourteenth year came Che- 
dorlaoiner, and the kings tiiat were with 
liim, and smote "the llcphaims ''in Ash- 
terotii-karnaini, and nhe Zuzims in Ham, 
and the Emims in *8haveh Kiriathaim, 

6 And tiie Horites in their mount Seir, 
unto t El-paran, '' which is by the wilder- 
ness. 

7 And they returned, and came to En- 
mishpat, which is Kadesh, and smote all 
the country of the Amalekites, and also 
the Amorites, tliat dwelt ''in Hazezon- 
tamar. 

8 And there went out the king of Sod- 
om, and the king of Gomorrah, and the 
king of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, 
and the king of Bela, (the same is Zoar ;) 
and they joined battle witli them in the 
vale of Siddim ; 

9 With Chedorlaomer the king of Elam, 
and with Tidal king of nations, and Am- 
raplicl king of Sliinar, and Arioch king of 
Ellasar; four kings with live. 

H) And the vale of Siddim icas full of 
slime-pits ; and the kings of Sodom and 
Gomorrah fled, and fell there : and they 
that remained lied "^to the mountain. 

1 1 And they took all the goods of Sodom 
and Gomorrah, and all their victuals, 
and went their way. 

12 And they took Lot, Abram's broth- 
er's son, who dwelt ^\\\ Sodom, and his 
goods, and departed. 

13 II And there came one that had es- 
caped, and told Abram the Hebrew ; '' for 
he dwelt in tlie plain of Mamre the Am- 
orite, brother of Eshcol, and brother of 
Aner: and these were confederate with 
Abram. 



»cllnp.l^:^0. b Jonli. IQ:-!. e Deut.3: lO.'JO. * Ox. the plain of 
Kiriuthnitn. \ Or, plnin of Paran. d clmp. 21 :S1 ; Num. 1-2 : Iti. 
• jriiroii. iO:«. f rlinp. I»:l7,;i0. I cbrip. 13: li; Num. l(i:-26; 
ITim.S;!!. brlmp. I3;18. ^Or.Udforth. TiOr.imtnicred. i DeuU 



14 And when Abram heard that *B.c:m3: 
his brother was taken captive, he i armed 
his drained servants, born in his own 
house, three hundred and eighteen, and 
pursued them 'unto Dan. 

15 And he divided himself against them, 
he and his servants, by night, and J smote 
them, and pursued them unto Hobah, 
which is on the left hand of Damascus. 

16 And he brought back ''all the goods, 
and also brought again his brother Lot, 
and his goods, and the women also, and 
the people. 

17 T[ And the king of Sodom 'went out 
to meet him (after his return from the 
slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the 
kings that were with him,) at the valley 
of Shaveh, which is the king's "'dale. 

18 And " iNIelchizedek king of Salem 
brought forth bread and wine : and he 
was the ° priest of the most Phigh God. 

19 And he blessed him, and said. Bless- 
ed be Abram of the most high God, i pos- 
sessor of heaven and earth : 

20 And blessed be the most high God, 
which hath delivered thine enemies into 
thy hand. And he gave him ''tithes of all. 

21 And the king of Sodom said unto 
Abram, Give me the H persons, and take 
the goods to thyself. 

22 And Abram said to the king of Sod- 
om, I 'have liflcd iip my hand unto the 
Lord, the most high God, the 'possessor 
of heaven and earth, 

23 That "I will not take from a thread 
even to a shoe-latchet, and that I will not 
take any thing that is thine, lest thou 
shouldest say, I have made Abram rich : 

24 Save only that which the young men 
have eaten, and the portion of the men 
which went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and 
Mamre ; let them take their "portion. 



4. Served Chedorlaomer; by paying him trib- 
ute. Rebelled; refused lon-jer to pav tribute. 

.'). Asliteroth — Ham — Shaveh kiriathaim; 
places east of the JorJiin. 

G. Mount Seir; goutli of the Dead sea. El- 
para/i ; west of mount Seir. 

7. liii-mishpat — Ilazezou-tamar ; places be- 
tween the Jordan and the south-east part ol the Med- 
iterranean bea. 

10. Slime-nilg ; places wliere bitumen, a glu- 
tinous and inllammahle subst^ince, oozed out of the 
pround, or where bitumen hail been du^ out to be 
used for mortar. Chap. 11 : ;i. Fell there ; ^vere 
mired, or were overcome, ami many perished. 

13. The Jlehrew ; a name ^iven lo Abram, as 
some suppose, because lie descended from Eber, or 
Heber ; and as others think, because he came from 
beyond the river Euphrates; the word signifying 
one wlio h.is p;uised over. Plain of Mamre; 
chap. I'i.Ct. Confederate with Abram; united 
with him in opposing his enemies. 
18 



34:1. i l8H.41:-2,3. k 1 Sam. 30:8. 18. I 1 Sum. 18:6. ni iSiUii. 
18:18. iiHeb.7:l. o Psa. 1 10:4: Hel).5:fi; 7:3. 1 1. vMicalifi:K. 
1 ver.M; I'8a.-24:li r>0:10. rHcb.7:l-I0. || Heb.»nu/«. • E.x. 
6:8. I TIT. 19; rbap. -21:33. n Ksth. 9: 16, IB. vlTim.S:I8. 



14. Brother; here used for nephew. Chapter 
12 : 13. Ban ; a place in the north part of Canaan, 
first called Laish. Judg. IS : 7-29. 

1;1. Jjefthand; to the north. Damascus; the 
capital of ancient Syria; on a plain east of Anti- 
Lebanon. 

17. Shaveh — dale; a valley near .Terus.^lem. 

18. Melchizedek; aname meaningKing of right- 
eousness Salem; meaning, in Hebrew, peace, 
Heb. 7:2; supposed to iiave been the place after- 
wards called Jerusalem. 

20. He gave him tithes ; Abram gave to Mel- 
chizedek a tenth part. lleb. 7:1-17. This was 
done as an e.xpression of gratitude to tjrod, whose 
priest Melchizedek was. 

21. Persons and — goods; which Abr.%m had 
taken from the enemy. 

22. Lifted up my hand ; taken an oath, or made 
a solemn promise. 

21. Auer, Eshcol, and Mamre ; the confeder- 
ates of Abram, mentioned v. 13. 



God encourascth Abram 



GENESIS XV. 



with the promise of a son. 



CHAPTER XV. 



1 God encourageth Abram. 2 Abram complaineth for 
■want of an heir. 4 God promiseth liim a son, and a 
multiplying of his seed. Abramis justified by faith. 
7 Canaan is promised again, and confirmed by a sign, 
12 and a vision. 

AFTER these things the word of the 
Lord came unto Abram in a "vision, 
saying, ""Fear not, Abram: I am thy 
shield,'^ and thy exceeding "^ great reward. 

2 And Abram said, Lord God, what wilt 
thou give me, seeing I go "^childless, and 
the steward of my house is this Eliezer 
of Damascus ? 

3 And Abram said, Behokl, to me thou 
hast given no seed : and lo, one born in 
my house ""is mine heir. 

4 And behoki, the word of the Lord 
came unto him, saying, This shall not be 
thine heir ; but he that shall come forth out 
of thine s own bowels shall be thine heir. 

5 And he brought him forth abroad, and 
said, Look now toward heaven, and tell 
the stars, ''if thou be able to number 
them: and he said vmto him, 'So shall 
thy seed be. 

6 And he believed in the Lord ; and he 
countcdJ it to him for righteousness. 

7 And he said unto him, I am the Lord 
that brought thee ''out of Ur of the Chal- 
dees, to give thee this land to inherit it. 



a chap. 46:2; Num. 12;6; Diin. 10:1; Acts 10:11,22. 1) I-uke 
\:13. c Dent. .%■! : 29 ; Psa. 3 : 3 ; 84:11; 91:4; 119:114; Trov 
an-.r,. <1 Psa. 142:.'j; Lam. S:24; Heb. I3:.S. e cliap. .30: 1 ; Isa 
.W : 5 ; Acts 7 : .=>. fProv. 29:21. g chap. 17: 16. h Deut. 1 : 10 
Heb. 11:12. i Rom. 4:18. j Rom. 4:3, 6, etc.; Gal. 3 :6; .liis 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

IL Erer since tlie apostasy, there have been men 
who acted as if might gave right; who, if they could, 
would rob others ; and, to obtain their property, put 
them to death : sins as odious and hateful, when 
committed by rulers and nations, as when commit- 
ted by private individuals. 

12. When men, for worldly purposes, choose to 
dwell in places distinguished for wickedness, they 
expose themselves to share in the calamities which 
that wickedness brings upon the people. 

16. When men have been robbed of what .justly 
belongs to them, those who are right-minded will 
abhor the crime, and be disposed, when they can, to 
take right and elfectual measures, that what has 
been taken away may be restored. 

20. Though Grod often suffers wicked men to take 
possession of what does not belong to them, such 
possession gives theiu no just title to it; and when, 
in his providence, lie restores it, his goodness should 
be acknowledged, and the praise given to him. 

23. (.rood men, who do right, will be careful to 
avoid the reality and the appearance of covetous- 
ness, and of every thing selfish, niggardly, and mean. 

CHAPTER XV. 

1. Shield; protection. 

2. Give me; as a token that the promises will 
be fulfilled, or to show me how they will be accom- 
plished. Chap. 12 : 1-3 ; 13 : 14-17. Steward of 
tny house; his head-servant. 

3. Born in -riiy house ; a house-servant. 

5. So shall thy seed be ; exceedingly numerous. 
Chap. 13:16. 

6. Counted it to him for righteonsness ; ac- 



8 And he said, Lord God, 'whereby 
shall I know that I shall inherit it 1 

9 And he said unto him, Take me a 
heifer of three years old, and a she-goat 
of three years old, and a ram of three 
years old, and a tiirtledove, and a young 
pigeon. 

10 And he took unto him all these, and 
divided "them in the midst,-and laid each 
piece one against another : but "the birds 
divided he not. 

1 1 And when the fowls came down upon 
the carcasses, Abram drove them away. 

12 And when the sun was going down, 
a deep sleep "fell upon Abram; and lo, a 
horror of great darkness fell upon him. 

13 And he said unto Abram, Know of a 
surety that thy seed shall be a stranger 
in a land that is not theirs, and shall 
serve them ; and they shall afflict Pthem 
four hundred years ; 

14 And also that nation whom they shall 
serve, will I ijudge: and afterward shall 
they come out with great ■'substance. 

15 And thou shalt go to thy fathers in 
peace ; thou shalt be buried in a good 
old " age. 

Ifi But in the fourth generation they 
shall come hither again : for the iniquity 
of the Amorites is not yet 'full. 



2:23. kchap.l2:l. ! Judg. 6: 17 ; 2 Kings, 211:8 ; I.uke 1 : 1". 
m .Jer. 34 : 18, 19. n Lev. 1:17. o chap. 2:21; 1 Sam. 26 : 12 ; .Toh 
4:13. pEx.l2:40. qEx.6:B. rEx.l2:36. »chap.25:8; 
Job 5 : 26. t Mat. 23 : 32 ; 1 Tlicss. 2 : 1 6. 



cepted him as righteous, through faith, or the exer- 
cise of that confidence in God which led him to fol- 
low his directions. Rom. 4 : 4, 21, 22 ; Gal. 3 : 6-9, 
29 ; James 2 : 21-24. 

7. Ur of the Chaldees ; chap. 11:31. Give 
thee this land ; not him personally, but his pos- 
terity. Acts 7 : 5. 

8. Whereby shall I know ; by what token or 
visible sign. 

10. One against another ; the carcass was di- 
vided lengthwise, and each half placed opposite the 
other, with a space wide enough for those who in 
this way made a covenant, to pass between them. 
They approaoiied at opposite ends and met in the 
middle, where they took the oath of the covenant. 

11. Fowls ; ravenous birds, accustomed to feed 
upon flesh. 

12. Great darkness ; emblematical of the afflic- 
tion which would come upon his posterity in Egypt. 

13. Fo7ir hundred years ; this is suppcsed to 
extend from about the time Isaac was mocked, or 
as the apostle calls it, persecuted by Ishmael, to the 
time when the Israelites left Egypt. This event was 
lour hundred and thirty years from the time the prom- 
ise was first made to Abraham ; about half of which 
his posterity spent in Canaan, and the rest in Egypt. 
Gen. 12 : 1-3 ; Ex. 12 : 40, 41 ; Gal. 3 : 17 ; 4 : 29. 

14. Judge; visit with judgments, in punishment 
of their sins. Substance; riches. Psa. 105:37. 

16. In the fourth generation ; after four hun- 
dred years from the time above mentioned ; or the 
fourth generation from the time they went into 
Egypt, Moses and Caleb being the fourth genera- 
tion from Levi and Judah. Amorites ; one of the 
principal nations that was to be destroyed by the 

19 



The promise confirmed. 



GENESIS XVr 



Hagar Jlcclh from Sarai. 



17 And it came to pass, that when the j slie conceived : and when she saw *b.?;^: 
sun wont down, and it was dark, behold that she had conceived, her mistress was 
a smokintr furnace, and 'a burning lamp | despised"' in her eyes. 

5 AndSaraisaiduntoAbram, My wrong 
be upon thcc : I have given my maid into 
thy bosom ; and when she saw that she 
had conceived, I was despised in her 
eyes: the Lord judge ''between me and 
thee. 

6 But Abram said unto Sarai, e Behold, 
thy maid is in thy hand ; do to her i as it 
pleaseth thee. And when Sarai ^ dealt 
hardly with her, she fled from her face. 

7 H And the angel of the Lord found 
her by a fountain of water in the wilder- 
ness, by the fountain in the way to '' Shur. 

8 And he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, 
whence earnest thou ? and whither wilt 
thou go? And .'^he said, I flee from the 
face of my mistress Sarai. 

9 And the angel of the Lord said unto 
her. Return to thy mistress, and 'submit 
thyself under her hands. 

10 And the angel of the Lord said unto 
her, I Avill multiply thy seed exceedingly, 
that it shall not be numbered for multi- 
tude. 

1 1 And the angel of the Lord said unto 
her. Behold, thou art with child, and 
shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name 
Ishmael ;ll because the Lord hath heard 
thy afilietion. 

12 And he. will be a wild Jman; hi.'? 
hand will he against every man, and 
every man's hand against him ; and he 
shall dwell ''in the presence of all his 
brethren. 



tliat jtassed between those pieces. 

18 In the same day the Loud made a 
covenant witli Abram, saying, Unto thy 
seed have I given this land, from the 
river of Esypt unto the great river, the 
river Euidirates : 

19 The Kcnites. and the Kenizzites, 
and the Kadinouites, 

20 And tiie Hittites, and the Terizzites, 
and the Rephaims, 

21 And the Aniorites, and the Canaan- 
ites,andtheGirgashites,andthcJebusites. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

1 Sarai, being barren, giveth Hagar to Abram. 4 Ha- 
par, being afflicted for despising her mistress, runneth 
away. 7 An angel sendeth her back to submit her- 
self, 11 and telleth her of her child. 15 Islunael is 
bom. 
"VrOW Sarai, Abram's wife, bare him 
_L\ no children : and she had a hand- 
maid, !tn "Esvptian, whose name was 
Hagar." 

2 And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold 
now, the Lord "^hath restrained me from 
bearing: I pray thee, ''go in unto my 
maid ; it may be that I may t obtain chil- 
dren by her. And Abram hearkened to 
the voice of Sarai. 

3 And Sarai, Abram's wife, took Hagar 
her maid the Eayptian, after Abram had 
dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, 
and gave her to her husband Abram to 
be liis wife. 

4 1[And he went in unto Hagar, and 



' Ur\,.a lamp !•/ fire. • clii<n,:i :>(. b Gal. 4: '24. < 
<l cliilp.30:n,9. \ Ht^.bcbuililtithy/htr. r 1 Sniiu I 
30:23. f rli.i|). 31:Mj 1 Snm. 24 : IB ; JChron. '24 : Ji 



clmp.'20: IS. 

;(>,«; l*rov. 

e 1 Peter, 



3:7. t Heb. tlmt wliicli is good 
her. h chap. 23: 18. il Peter, 2: 
j cli^p. 21 : '.'0. k cliap. 2.'>: 18. 



Israelites, after tliey should leave Eg)'pt. Deut. 
•JO: 17; Josh. 3:10; 10:5-11; 2-1:15. 

17. A smoking furnace., and a burning lamp; 
indications of the divine presence. 

IH. River of Egypt; supposed to be Sihor, 
whicli einplicd into the Mediterranean between Gaza 
and the eastern branch of the Nile. Num. J}t:5; 
Josh. 13:3; 1 Chron. 13:5. Its preseni name is 
El-Arish. Euphrates; Gen. 2:11. 

19-21. Keiiites — Jebiisites ; tribes that dwelt 
in Canaan. Cliap. 9 ; 25-27. 

INSTRrCTlON.S. 

1. Tliose wlio are protected by God have no rea- 
son to fear, and those who receive his gracious re- 
ward will not want any good thing. 

6. That confidf-nre in God which Ic.ids men to 
believe and oliey him is counted to them for right- 
eousness ; and those who exercise it will, for Christ's 
sake, be jiistitied, sanctified, and saved. Rom. -1:3; 
James 2: 2 1-21. 

13. God graciously communicates to his people 
as iiiurh knowledge of the future as will best fit 
them for the discharge of their duty; and what 
would not be useful to them he kindly withholds. 

IH. When ''od in his providence has given to a 

people a good land, and they abuse his mercicii. 

break his laws, .and live in rebellion against him, he 

may justly take it from them and give it to others. 

20 



CHAPTER XVI. 

I. A handmaid; a female servant. 

3. His vife ; this was a violation of the great 
Law of marriage, and was followed by great domes- 
tic troubles. Mat. 19 : 5-9. 

5. My wrong be iipo7i thee ; thou art the cause 
of this evil, and thou oughtest to prevent it. 

7. The Angel of the Lord; supposed to be the 
Messenger of the covenant, the Messiah. Mai. 
3:1; Luke 1 : 76. Shnr ; the wilderness or desert 
between Canaan and Egypt. 

9. Retnr/i to thy mistress ; she would be more 
exposed to hardship, suffering, and death, in going 
forward, than in going back. 

II. Ishmael; a Hebrew name, meaning God 
will hear ; it was given as a memento that God had 
heard and gr.anted her relief, and an encour.Tgemeiit 
to her and others to call upon him. Psa. 50 : 15. 

12. He will he a ivild man ; his posterity would 
be rude, unsubdued, and opposed to the restraints 
of city life; as the Arabs in their native country 
always have been. His hand — against every 
man ; they would be robbers and plunderers of such 
as should fall in their way. Direll in the presence ; 
though opposed to all nations, they would never be 
exterminated or dispossessed ; and they have contin- 
ued to inhabit Arabia down to the present day. 



God reneu-eth the covenant. 



GENESIS XVII. 



Tlie seal of circumcision. 



B. c-mo.' 1 3 And she called the name of the 
Lord that spake unto her, Thou ^ God seest 
me : for she said, Have I also here looked 
after him that sceth me 1 

14 Wherefore the well was called Beer- 
lahai-roi:* behold, it is between Kadesh 
and Bered. 

1 5 1[ And '' Hagar bare Abram a son : 
and Abram called his son's name, which 
Hagar bare, Ishmael. 

16 And Abram was fourscore and six 
years old, when Hagar bare Ishmael to 
Abram. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

1 God reneTS-eth the covenant. 5 Abram his name is 
changed in token of a greater blessing. 10 Circum- 
cision is instituted. 15 Sarai her name is changed, 
and she blessed. 17 Isaac is promised. i23 Abraham 
and Ishmael are circumcised. 

AND when Abram was ninety years old 
and nine, the Lord appeared to Abram, 
and said unto him, •= I «?n the Almighty God ; 
walk •* before me, and be thou t perfect. 

2 And I will make my •= covenant be- 
tween me and thee, and will multiply 
thee exceedingly. 

3 And Abram fell on his face : and God 
talked with him, saying, 

4 As for me, behold, my covenant is 
with thee, and thou shalt be ""a father of 
many t nations. 

5 Neither shall thy name any more be 
called Abram, but ^thy name shall be 
Abraham ;^ for '' a father of many nations 
have I made thee. 

6 And I will make thee exceeding fruit- 
ful, and I will make ' nations of thee ; 
and kings shall come out of thee. 



a Prov. 5 : 21. * Tli.it ie, the well of him that liveth ami secth me. 
!> cliap. 2fl:12. c ohap. 18:14; Ex. 6 : 3 ; Dan.4:3,T: Kph..3:'20. 
A chap.48:1.5; 1 King.s, 2 : 4 : 2Kinss,20:3. t Or, upright, or, sin- 
cere. cliap.6:9; Deut. 18:13; Job 1:1. o rliap. 9:9; Psalm 
in.i:8, II ; Gal.3:17, 18. f chap. 13: Ifi; 22 : 17. f Heh. multi- 
tude of nations, g Neh. 9:7. % Tliat is, father of a great multi- 



13. The Lord ; in the original, Jehovah, "who 
spoke to her. 

14. Beer-lahai-roi ; the ■vrell of the livinp; one 
who seetii ine. Kadesh and Bered ; places about 
forty miles south of Hebron. 

16. Fourscore ; eighty. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 

2. Abraham was not perfect. In all things he 
came short, and in many things offended. It is not 
wise, safe, or right for us to imitate any mere man 
in all things. There is hut one perfect example. 

6. Such is human nature, that irresponsible power 
is very likely to be abused ; and nothing but the 
grace of God will teach masters and mistresses so to 
treat servants as to fulfil the great law of lore. Mat. 
7:12. 

11. The Lord tenderly sympathizes in the afflic- 
tions of servants as well as of masters. His ears 
are ahvays open to the cries of those who heartily 
call upon him, and he is ready to help them. 

15. Mementos of divine kindness are highly prop- 
er, and may be very useful. They remind us of the 
unmerited goodness of G-od, tend to awaken new 
gratitude, and lead to increasing devotion to his 
service. 



7 And I will establish my covenant be- 
tween me and thee, and thy seed after 
thee, in their generations, for an everlast- 
ing covenant; Jto be a God unto thee, 
and to thy seed after thee. 

8 And I will give unto thee, and to thy 
seed after thee, the land II wherein thou 
art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, 
for an everlasting ''possession; and 'I 
will be their God. 

9 Tf And God said unto Abraham, Thou 
shalt keep my covenant therefore, thou, 
and thy seed after thee, in their genera-* 
tions. 

10 This is my covenant, which ye shall 
keep, between me and you and thy seed 
after thee ; Every man-child among you 
shall be circumcised. 

1 1 And ye shall circumcise the flesh of 
your foreskin ; and it shall be a token "" of 
the covenant betwixt me and you. 

12 And *he that is eight days old shall 
be circumcised among you, every man- 
child in your generations, he that is born 
in° the house, or bought with money of 
any stranger, which is not of thy seed. 

13 He that is born in thy house, and he 
that is bought with thy money, must needs 
be circumcised : and my covenant shall be 
in your flesh for an everlastiiig coA^enant. 

14 And the uncireumcised man-child, 
whose flesh of his foreskin is not circum- 
cised, that soul shall be cut oft' ° from his 
people ; he hath broken my covenant. 

15 T[And God said unto Abraham, As 
for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call her 
name Sarai, but Sarah+ shall her name be. 



tude. hRom.4:17. i ver. IK, 20; diap. a'):ll. j cliap. 2S: 13; 
Lev. 2(i:12; Heb. 11:16. i| Heh. of thv sojoumingt. k cliiip. 
48 : 4 ; Deut. 32 : 8. I Exodus 6:7; Jer. 24 : 7 ; Eiek. 37 : 23 ; Rev. 
21:3. mActo7:8; Roman84:ll. * Heb. a son of eii/ht days. 
n Exodus 12 : 44. o Exodus 4: 24; Joshua 5. 2, etc. f Tlwt «, 



CHAPTER XVII. 

I. Almighty God ; one who is infinitely pow- 
erful, and can do all his pleasure. Perfect; sin- 
cere, upright, wholly and perseveringly devoted to 
the service and glory of God. 

f). Abram; this word means a high or distin- 
guished father. Gen. 12:1. Ahraham ; by this 
change in the Hebrew word, it means a father of 
great multitudes. 

7. Thy seed; Gal. 3:7,29. 

8. Everlasting possession ; perpetual ; to the 
end of time, if perseveringly obedient to God. 

10. This is my covenant ; the token or seal of 
it which they should continue to observe. Ver. 11 ; 
Rom. 4:11-22. 

II. Circumcise ; this word means, to cut around. 

13. My covenant; the token or sign of it. Ev- 
erlasting covenant ; its spiritual blessings to the 
obedient would be without end. Gal. 3: 14-17. 

14. Cut off; by wilfully neglecting God"s cov- 
enant, they would be cut off from the privileges of 
his people. Brolcen my covenant ; refused to com- 
ply with its conditions. , 

1-5. Sarai ; meaning my princess. SaraJi; 
princess of a multitude. Ver. 16. 

21 



Abraham is circutnriscd^ 



GENESIS XVIir. 



and visited by three angels. 



16 And I will bless her, 'and give thee 
a son also of her : yea, I will bless her, 
and * she shall be a mother of nations ; 
kinus of people shall be of her. 

17 Then Abraham fell upon his face, 
and '•lauahcd, and said in his heart, Shall 
a child be born unto him that is a hun- 
dred years old? and shall Sarah, that is 
ninety years old, bear ? 

18 And Abraham said unto God, that 
Ishmael might live before thee ! 

19 And God said, Sarah thy wife shall 
icar thee a son indeed; and thou shalt 
call his name Isaac : and I will establish 
my covenant with him for an everlasting 
covenant, and with his seed after him. 

20 And as for Ishmael, I have heard 
thee : Behold, I have blessed him, and will 
make him fruitful, and will multiply him 
exceedingly : "^ twelve princes shall he be- 
get, and i will make him a great nation. 

21 But my covenant will I establish 
with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto 
thee at this set time ''in the next year. 

22 And he left off talking with him, and 
God went up from Abraham. 

23 ^And Abraham took Ishmael his 
son, and all that were born in his house, 
and all that were bought with his money, 
every male among the men of Abraham's 
house ; and circumcised the flesh of their 
foreskin in the self-same day, as God 
had said unto liim. 

24 And Abraham ivas ninety years old 
and nine, when he was circumcised in 
the flesh of his foreskin. 

2') And Ishmael his son was thirteen 
years old, when he was circumcised in 
the flesh of his foreskin. 



• dup. 18 


:10. 


* Heb. the ihalt become natioi 


~ 




II ; 


Oiiliitiiin»4i 


2«-.1l 


; IPel-r 


,1:K. b rlmp. 18:12 


2 


■fi 


c rb 




iM:13, etc. 


<• rli 


up. 21 : 2. 


• rhnp. ir):18; M: 


a. 


f 






chap. 19: t ; 


Heb. 


13:2: 1 


I'eter, 4:9. k cbap 


2.1 


:7; 


33:. 3 


-7; 



17. Laughed; expressing his gratitude and joy. 

IS. Miplit live ; pro.sper and be blessed in his 
person and posterity. 

11*. Isaac; meaiiinK l.-uighter — joy in view of the 
blessings bestowed on him. 

2i. God ; the visible token of liis presence. 

INSTHUCTION.S. 

1. Though the fulfilment of divine promises may 
be long delayed, yet in due time they will all be ac- 
complished ; for God is almighty, he can do all his 
pleasure ; and none who continue patiently to trust 
in, and obey him, will in the end be disappointed. 

10. Circumcision wa.H a seal of the rightoousiie.ss 
of fnitli ; a visible sign that by failh man may be 
justified, snnctilied, and saved. It was designed to 
impress en the mind the nece.ssity of obeying God, 
not outwardly merely, but in heart; of serving 
him who is a Spirit, in spirit and in truth. Rom. 
2:2.V,'0; 4 : 11 ; Phil. 3: 3. 

1.3. It is the will of God that servants, as well as 
masters and their children, should have the means 
of grace, be instructed in the way of lifr. and be 
treated in all respects as rational, accountable, and 
immortal bein^, for whom Christ died, and who, 
22 



26 In the self-same day was Abra- b.c.'iJSS: 
ham circumcised, and Ishmael his son. 

27 And all the men of his house, born 
in the house, and bought with money of 
the stranger, were circumcised with him. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1 Abraham entertaineth three angels. 9 Sarah is re- 
proved for laughing at the strange promise. 17 The 
destruction of Sodom is revealed to Abraham. "23 
Abraham maketh intercession tor the men thereof. 

AND the Lord appeared unto him in 
the * plains of Mamre : and he sat in 
the tent-door in the heat of the day ; 

2 And he lifted up his eyes and looked, 
and lo, ''three men stood by him : and 
when he saw them, he ran to meet them 
from the tent-door, and showed himself 
toward the ground, 

3 And said, My Lord, if now I have 
found favor in thy sight, '■ pass not away, 
I pray thee, from thy servant : 

4 Let a little 'water, I pray you, be 
fetched, and wash your feet, and rest 
yourselves under the tree : 

5 And I will fetch a morsel of bread, 
and t comfort ye your hearts ; after that 
ye shall pass on : for therefore t are ye 
come to your servant. And they said, 
So do, as thou hast said. 

6 And Abraham hastened into the tent 
unto Sarah, and said, ^ Make ready quick- 
ly three measures of fine meal, knead it, 
and make cakes upon the hearth. 

7 And Abraham ran unto the herd, and 
fetched a calf tender and good, and gave 
it unto a young man ; and he hasted to 
dress it. 

8 And he took J butter, and milk, and 
the calf which he had dressed, and set it 



43:26,28; 44:14; Kiitb2:lO; 2 Kiiiga, 2: 15. h Hebrews 13:2; 
1 Peter, 4:9. i rbap. 43 : 24. f Heb. itay. ^ Heb. you have 
pasted. \ Heh. Hatten. j Juilg. 5:2A. 



through faith in him, may shine as the brightness 
of the firmament and as the stars for ever. Ex. 
20:9-11. 

18. As God is the author of parental afTection, he 
delights in its exercise, and in answering the hearty, 
fervent prayers of parents for their children. 

2.3. True and lively faith not only trusts the prom- 
ises of God, but yields prompt, implicit, and hearty 
obedience to Gods commands. It thus shows itself 
by works, and by works is faith made perfect. James 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

1. The Lord; Jehovah. Plat us of Mamre ; 
chap. 14: 13. 

3. Ml/ Lord ; a token of respect, addressed to one 
who appeared to be chief. 

4. Wash 7/011 r feet ; as the feet were then pro- 
tected only with sandals, or soles fastened on with 
straps, it was customary with travellers, when they 
stopped, to wa.-ih their feet. 

■). Therefore are ye come ; intimating that they 
h.id been providentially directed there, that he might 
thus entertain them.' 



Abraham interccdcth 



GENESIS XVIII, 



with God for Sodom. 



S: "S' before tliein ; and he stood by them 
under the tree, and they did eat. 

9 ^And they said unto him, Where is 
Sarah thy wife ? And he said, Behokl, 
in the tent. 

10 And he said, I will certainly return 
unto thee '^ according to the time of life ; 
and lo, ''Sarah thy wife shall have a son. 
And Sarah heard it in the tent-door, 
which v:as behind him. 

11 Now Abraham and Sarah vcre '^old 
and well stricken in age ; and it ceased to 
be with Sarah '' after the manner of women. 

12 Therefore ''Sarah laughed within 
herself, saying. After I am ^waxed old 
shall I have pleasure, sniy lord being 
old also ? 

13 And the Lord said unto Abraham, 
Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall 
I of a surety bear a child, which am old ? 

14 Is any thing too hard for the '' Lord 1 
At the time appointed I will return unto 
thee, according to the time of 'life, and 
Sarah shall have a son. 

15 Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed 
not ; for she was afraid. And he said. 
Nay ; but thou ■' didst laugh. 

■ 1 6 And the men rose up from thence, and 
looked toward Sodom : and Abraham went 
with them to bring them on the ""way. 

17 1[And the Lord said, Shall I 'hide 
from Abraham that thing which I do ; 

18 Seeing that Abraham shall surely 
become a great and mighty nation, and 
all the nations of the earth shall '"be 
blessed in him 1 

19 For I know him, that he will com- 
mand his " children and his household 



aver.H; 2Kin.TS, 4: 16. li chap. 17 : 19, 21; Rom.9:9; Gal. 
4:23. cnom.4:'i9; Heh. II : 1 1, 1-2. d cliap. 31 : 35. e chap. 
21:6; Psa.l'26:2. f Luke 1: IS. gl Peter, 3: 6. hNum. ll:-23; 
Jer.:i2:17; Mat. 19:26. i 2 Kings, 4 : Hi. j Psa. 44 : 21 ; Prov. 
12:19. k Acts l.'>;3: Homnns 15:24; 3.ToIin, 6. IPsa. 25:14; 
Amos3:7; .lohn 15:15. m chap. 12:3; 22:18; P8a.72:I7; Acts 
3:25; Gal.3:8. n Deut.4:9,10; 6:7; Psa. 78:5-8; Eph.6:4. 



10. / will — return ; he here speaks as if he had 
made, and would fulfil, the promise mentioned chap. 
17 : 16-21. According to the time of life ; sup- 
posed to mean the usual time from the conception 
to the birth of a child. 

12. Sarah laughed; as if the thing promised 
■was impossible. 

13. The Lord ; Jehovah. 

16. Lioohed toward Sodom ; as if they would go 
that way. Tohrivgthcmou theway ; assist them 
on their journey. Rom. 15:24; ICor. 16:6; 3John.6. 

20. The cry of Sodom ; tlieir sins, crying to 
God for vengeance. G-en. 4:10; Jas. 5 : 4. 

21. I will knoiv ; act with knowledge, and treat 
them as their case may require. 

22. The men ; the two beings in human form, 
who accompanied Jehovah, and who at evening en- 
tered Sodom. Chap. 19:1. The Lord; Jehovah, 
who had been speaking to Abraham. Ver. 13-20. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
5. A pious mind is accustomed to recognize the 
hand of God in all the events of providence, and to 
glorify him by doing good to men. 



after him, and they shall keep the way 
of the Lord, to do justice and judgment ; 
that the Lord may bring upon Abraham 
that which he hath spoken of °him. 

20 And the Lord said, p Because the cry 
of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and 
because their sin is very grievous, 

21 I willgo down*! now, and see whether 
they have done altogether according to 
the cry of it, which is come unto me ; and 
if not, 'T will know. 

22 And the men turned their faces from 
thence, and went toward Sodom : but 
Abraham stood yet before the Lord. 

23 lyAnd Abraham 'drew near and said. 
Wilt' thou also destroy the righteous with 
the wicked 1 

24 Peradventure there be fifty righteous 
within the city : wilt thou also destroy 
and not spare the place for the fifty 
righteous that are therein 1 

25 That be far from thee to do after 
this manner, to slay the righteous with 
the wicked ; and that the righteovis should 
be as the wicked, that be far from "thee : 
Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? 

26 And the Lord said, "If I find in Sod- 
om fifty righteous within the city, then 
I will spare all the place for their sakes. 

27 And Abraham answered and said, 
Behold now, I have taken \ipon me to 
speak unto the Lord, which am but "dust 
and ashes : 

28 Peradventure there shall lack five of 
the fifty righteous : wilt thou destroy all 
the city for lack of five 1 And he said, 
If I find there forty and five, I will not 
destroy it. 



a lSani.2:30. p chap. 13:13; 19:13. q chap. 11:5; Kx.3:8. 
r ,7oshua22:22; P8ahnl39:l; Jer. 17:10; I.nke 16:15. « Jer. 
.30:21; Heb. 10:22; Jas. 5:17. t Numbers 16: 22. i>Joh8:3; 
34:17; Psalm .58: 11 ; 94:2. v Isaiah 10: 22 ; .ler. 5 : 1 ; E7.ekicl 
22:30. w chap. 2:7; 3:19; .lob 4: 19; Psa. 8:4; 144:3; Ei-cl. 
12:7; Isaiah 6:5; 64:8; Luke 5:8; 1 Cor. 15 : 47, 48 ; 2 Cor. 
5:1,2. 



■8. We should not be forgetful to entertain stran- 
gers, for thereby some have entertained angels, and 
also the Lord of angels ; and acts of kindness done 
for his sake, even to 'the least of his disciples, he 
will remember and reward, .is if done to himself. 
Mat. 10:42; 25:40; Heb. 13:2. 

15. The commission of one sin makes way for the 
commission of another; and the disbelief of God's 
word is a fruitful source of manifold and aggravated 
transgressions. 

19. Family religion is peculiarly pleasing to God, 
and he requires that parents not only counsel and 
advise, but command their children to keep the way 
of the Lord; and there is an intimate connection 
between their doing this, and his bestowing upon 
them and their children the richest spiritual and 
temporal blessings. 

24. Those who love God love their fellow-men, 
and earnestly supplicate for them the mercies which 
they need. 

32. Prayer has great influence with God ; and 
those who rightly ofier it are eminently benefactors 
of mankind. From regard to them, God may delay 

23 



Tiro angih visit Lot, 



GENESIS XIX. 



071(1 bring him mtt of Sodom. 



29 And he spake unto him yet an;ain, 
and said, Pcrad venture there shall be 
forty found tlicre. And he said, I will 
not do it for forty's sake. 

30 And he said vnfo him, Oh, let not 
the Lord be angry, and I will speak : 
Peradventure there shall thirty be found 
there. And he said, I will not do it, if I 
find tliirty tlierc. 

31 And he said. Behold now, I have 
taken upon me to speak unto the Lord : 
Peradventure there sliall be twenty found 
there. And he said, I will not destroy 
it for twenty's sake. 

32 And he said. Oh, let not the Lord 
be angry, and I will speak yet but this 
once :' Peradventure ten shall be found 
there. And he said, I will not destroy 
it for ten's ''sake. 

33 And the Loud went his way, as soon 
as he liad left communing with Abraham : 
and Abraham returned unto his place. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

1 Lot entertaineth tn-o anjrels. 4 The vicious Sodom- 
ites are stricken with blindness. 12 Lot is sent for 
safety into the mountains. I'i He obtaineth leave 
to go into Znar. 24 Sodom and Gomorrah are de- 
str-yed. 20 Lot's wife is a pillar of salt. 30 Lot 
dwelloth in a cave. 31 The incestuous original of 
Moab and Ammon. 

AND there = came two angels to Sodom 
at even ; and Lot sat in the gate of 
Sodom : and Lot, seeing them, rose up to 
meet tlicm; and lie bowed himself with 
his face toward Ihe ground. 

2 And lie said, Pciiold now, my lords, 
turn'' in, I pray you, into your servant's 
house, and tarry all nigiit, and wash 
your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and 
go on your ways. And they said, •'Nay ; 
but wc will abide in the street all night. 

3 And he pressed upon fhem greatly, 
and they turned in unto him, and entered 
into his house ; and he made them a 
feast,'' and did bake unleavened bread, 
and they did cat. . . 

4 1[But before they lay down, the men 
of the city, even the mcTi of Sodom, com- 
passed the house round, both old and 
younir, ail (he people from every quarter : 

5 .\iid llii'v called unto Lot, and said 
unto him, Where nrc Ihe men which came 
in to thee this night? «bring them out 
unto us, tliat wc may know (hem. 

• .Iii.lEr. «.:).(. ti .lol, ;i"»:i-l. e Hinn. 18:M. ilHvb. 13:9. 
' l.uk' ;4 : 'in. r chap. lH:fl-H; ai:H; Luke I, : 19 ; Joliill2:2; 
Hi'li. 1.1 :i. ( rlmp. 4:1 ; !.«.». 1(1:M; 50:l:i; Juilr. Ill ■•.•J- Un. 
\:9; S:i»; .lrr..1:3; <l:ir.; Kvklfl l)l:4tl,Al; IHuL 1 1 : 'jn U- 
IlnmniM M 2fl, 84, '2(1, 27 : ICnr. «:«; I Tim. 1:10; 2Tilll. 3: i:i j 
•J "J* 7. Ii l.rv. I8;2J; 20:13; I)riiL23:l7; Kom. I : 24 ; 1 Cor 



hii jmlKments, and in annwer to tlieir priiyers brin" 
the wicked to repentance and salvation. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

\. Tvo ail gelt ; two of the three spoken of in 
the preceding chapter. 
24 



6 And Lot went out at the door aciiwe! 
unto them, and shut the door after him, 

7 And said, I pray you, brethren, do not 
so ''wickedly. 

8 Behold now, I have two daughters 
which have not known man ; let me, I 
pray you, bring them out unto 'you, and 
do ye to them as is good in your eyes : only 
unto these men do nothing; for therefore 
came they under the shadow of my roof. 

9 And they said, Stand back. And they 
said again. This one fellow came in to 
sojourn, and he will needs be a ■> judge : 
now will we deal worse with thee than 
with them. And they pressed sore upon 
the man, cve7i Lot, and came near to break 
the door. 

10 But the men put forth their hand, 
and pulled Lot into the house to them, 
and shut to the door. 

11 And they smote the men that were 
at the door of the house with ''blindness, 
both small and great : so that they wea- 
ried themselves to find the door. 

12 T[And the men said unto Lot, Hast 
thou here any besides ? son-in-law, and 
thy sons, and thy daughters, and what- 
soever thou hast in the city, bring them 
out of this place : 

13 For we will destroy this place, be- 
cause the 'cry of them is waxen great 
before the face of the Lord; and ""the 
Lord hath sent us to destroy it. 

14 And Lot went out, and spake unto his 
sons-in-law, which marrictl his daugh- 
ters, and said, "Up, get you out of this 
place ; for the Lord will destroy this 
city : but he seemed as one that "mocked 
unto his sons-in-law. 

15 T[ And when the morning arose, then 
the angels liastened Lot, saying, Arise, 
take thy wife, and thy two daughters 
which * are here, lest thou be consumed 
in the t iniquity of the city. 

16 And while he lingered, the men laid 
hold upon his hand, and upon the hand 
of his wife, and upon the hand of his two 
daughters ; the Lord being p merciful unto 
him : and they brought him forth, and 
set him wi(hout the city. 

17 ^f And it came to pass, when (hey 
had brought them forth abroad, that he 
said, 1 Escape for thy life ; ■'look not be- 



6; 9-11 


Jude 7 




Iloin. 3 


8. j ExcmIii 


«2:14; 


2 


Peter. 


2 : 7, 8. 


k 2 Km 


g», 8:18 


A 


'ta 13 : 1 1 


1 clinp. 18: 


•20. in 


1 Chroii. 


21:15; 






Nu 


11. lli:28 


Jcr. 61:6; lev. 18 


4 


Ex 


. !l:il: 


2Cliron. 3fi:l6; 


)<. 


1. 2«:22; 


Luke 17:28 


; 24:11. 


' H 


•1>. are 


fuund. 


t <lr, punuhmint. 


P l'»n.34:12 




«) 


16. q 








ly 


3. r ve 


.26. 











8. Bring them out ; this proposal was wicked, 
and should not have been made. 

10. The nieti ; the two angels; tliey were mes- 
sengers sent from God. 

1-1. As one that mocked; they did not believe 
what he said. 



Sodom and Gomorrah destroyed. GENESIS XIX. Origin of Moah and Ammon. 

29 1[ And it came to pass, when God de- 
stroyed the cities of the plain, that God 
remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of 
the midst of the ' overthrow, when he over- 
threw the cities in the which Lot dwelt. 

30 TIAnd Lot went up out of Zoar, and 
dwelt in the '"mountain, and his two 
daughters with him ; for he feared to 
dwell in Zoar: and he dwelt in a cave, 
he and his two daughters. 

31 And the first-born said unto the 
younger, Our father is old, and there is 
not a man in the earth to come in unto 
us after the manner of all the earth : 

32 Come, let us make our father drink 
wine, and we will lie with him, that wo 
may preserve seed of our father. 

33 And they made their father drink 
wine that " night : and the first-born went 
in, and lay with her father ; and he per- 
ceived not when she lay down, nor when 
she arose. 

34 And it came to pass on the morrow, 
that the first-born said unto the younger. 
Behold, I lay yesternight with my father : 
let us make him drink wine this night 
also ; and go thou in, and lie with him, 
that we may preserve seed of our father. 

35 And they made their father drink 
wine that night also : and the younger 
arose, and lay with him ; and he per- 
ceived not when she lay down, nor when 
she arose. 

36 Thus were both the daughters of 
Lot with child by their ° father. 

37 And the first-born bare a son, and 
called his name Moab : the same is the 
father of the PJNIoabites unto this day. 

38 And the younger, she also bare a 
son, and called his name Ben-ammi : the 
same is the father of the "^ children of 
Ammon unto this day. 



the plain : escape to the mountain, lest 
thou be consumed. 

18 And Lot said unto them. Oh, not so, 
my Lord ! 

19 Behold now, thy servant hath found 
grace in thy sight, and thou hast "mag- 
nified thy mercy, which thou hast showed 
unto me in saving my life ; and I cannot 
escape to the ''mountain, lest some evil 
take me, and I die : 

20 Behold now, this city is near to flee 
unto, and it is a little one : Oh, "^let me 
escape thither, {is it not a little one 1) and 
my soul shall ''live. 

21 And he said unto him. See, I have 
accepted'' *thee concerning this thing 
also, that I will not overthrow this city, 
for the which thou hast spoken. 

22 Haste thee, escape thither ; for "^I 
cannot do any thing till thou be come 
thither. Therefore the name of the city 
was called t Zoar. 

23 T[ The sun was t risen upon the earth 
when Lot entered into Zoar. 

24 Then the Lord rained upon Sodom 
and upon Gomorrah s brimstone and fire 
from the Lord out of heaven ; 

2.5 And he overthrew those cities, and 
all the plain, and all the inhabitants of 
the cities, and that which '' grew upon the 
ground. 

2G 1[ But his wife looked back from be- 
hind him, and she became a'pillar of salt. 

27 *\ And Abraham gat up early in the 
morning to the place where Jhe stood 
before the Lord : 

28 And he looked toward Sodom and 
Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the 
plain, and beheld, and lo, the smoke of 
the country went up as the ''smoke of a 
furnace. 



a ITim. 1:14. b 1 S.im. 27: 1. c Pro 


V. 3:5-7. d Psa. 119: 17.i; 


Ismah M : 3. e cliap. 4:7: .Tob 42 : 8, 9 


.ler. 14:10. * Heb. tinj 


face, t clinp. M : 2S ; Ex. 3-2 : 10 : Deut. 


9:14; Markli:.5. t Tliat 


1^, little, t Heh. gone fi)?-lh. g Deut. 


:H:23; .lob IS: 15; Psalm 


n:r>; Isa. 13:19; .Jer. 49:18; M-.W; 


I.am. 4:6; Ezek. 16:49; 



22. I cminot do any thing; not for -want of 
power, but because it would not be best. Zoar ; 
little. It was called Zoar, as a memento of this 
event. Its name before was Bela. Chap. 14 : 2. 

26. A pilhir of salt ; as a monument of the 
wrath of God against her for breaking his com- 
mand. Ver. 17. 

27. Where he stood ; on the day before. Chap. 
18:22. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 

•1. Though God bestow upon men a good land, 
and surround them with unnumbered mercies, if left 
without his grace they will grow worse and worse, 
till they become too wicked longer to live 

8. Of two natural evils, it is often proper to choose 
the least ; but of two moral evils we should choose 
neither, and should never commit sin to avoid any 
supposed evil, or obtain any supposed good. . The 
only course of wisdom and safety is to trust in God 
and do light. 



Amo9 4:ll ; Zeplianiali 2:9; 


Mat. 1 1 : 23 ; 2 Peter, 2 : 6 ; .1 lule 7. 


h Psalm 107:. 34. i I.uke 17 


.32. i rhap. 18:22. k Rev. 19:3. 


1 P8a..l4.i:20. m ver. 17, 19. 


n Prov. 23: 31-3.3. »Lev.l8:6,7; 


Hab. 2:15. p Deut. 2:9, 19 


23:3. q Keli. 13:1; Isa. 11:14; 


Zi^pb. 2:9. 





11. AM men are dependent upon God. With him 
for their protector his people will be secure, and his 
enemies, in perseveringly opposing them, will be de- 
stroyed. 

14. Faith in God is needful to salvation; and 
when he foretells the destruction of the wicked, if 
they do not believe him and escape, they will perish. 

16. God is more merciful to his people than they 
are to themselves ; if he were not, they would all 
perish. 

21. From regard to one righteous man, though he 
be imperfect, God may save many from destruction. 
2 Peter, 2 : 7-9. 

2.5. Jehovah is a God of justice as well as mercy ; 
and tliough he bear long with transgressors, if they 
turn not from their sins, he will in due time bring 
upon them overwhelming destruction. 

26. One act of wilful disobedience to God may 
prove the occasion of immediate and irretrievable 
ruin. 

25 



.ibiahain clcniclh his iv'/c- 



GENESIS XX. 



Abimckch rcstorcth Sarah. 



CHAPTER XX. 



1 Abraham Bojourneth at Gerar, 2 dcnieth his'wife, and 
lo»*th her. U Afiimi-'lecli is reproved for her in a 
dream. 9 He r''l>iik«>th Abraham, 14 restoreth Sarah, 
Ki and rcproveth her. 17 He is healed by Abraham's 
jirayer. 

AND Abraham journeyed from thence 
toward the south country, and dwelled 
between Kadesh and " Shur, and sojourned 
in ''Gerar. 

2 And Abraham said of Sarah liis wife, 
She "is my sister: and Abimelech king 
of Gerar sent and took Sarah. 

3 But ''God came to Abimelech in a 
dream by night, and said to him. Behold, 
tliou art but a dead man, for the woman 
wiiieh thou hast taken; for she is * & 
man's wife. 

4 But Abimelech had not come near 
her: and he said. Lord, "wilt thou slay 
also a righteous nation? 

5 Said he not unto me, She is my sister? 
and she, even she herself said. He is my 
brother: In the t integrity ■" of my heart 
and innocency of my hands have I done 
this. 

6 And God said unto him in a dream. 
Yea, I know that thou didst this in the 
integrity of thy heart; for I also ^ with- 
held tlioe from sinning '' against me : there- 
fore suffered I thee not to touch her. 

7 Now therefore restore the man his 
wife ; for he is a prophet, and he 'shall 
pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and 
if thou restore her not, know thou that 
tiiou shalt surely die, thou and all that 
arc tliinc. 

8 Therefore Abimelech rose early in 
the morning, and called all his servants, 
and told all these things in their ears : 
and the men were sore afraid. 

9 Then Abimelech called Abraham, and 





rl, 


«li. 16:7. 
Pm. 105 


4. 


b rlinp. 


:«:ti. 


c .ll 


p. li: i:i: i 


fi: 


7. ll .Job 


m 


■Ah 


14 


• HH. 


tnat-ritd to 


a hutband 




« ICliron. 


■Jl 


:17 


t."r.. 


imptieilv, or 


, itnce 


ritv. 


( S Kings, 


50 


3; 2 Cor. 


'•' 


1^; 


1 Tim. 1 : 


13. 


1 rliap. 


SI: 7 


as-.r,. 


h run. 51 


:4 


i 1 Snm. 



29. It is a great blessing to have pious relatives, 
and to be the subject of their prayers, from how 
many evils ihi.y iiave been and inay be the means 
of saving us, none but God can tell. 

3G. In solitude we are often more exposed to temp- 
tation, niul in greali-r danger of complying with if, 
than in the crowded city ; and the use of intoxicat- 
ing drinks exciti-s to the greatest abominations. 

CHAPTER XX. 

1. From theuee ; the groves of Hebron, where 
he had for some time resided. Chap. 13:18; 18:1. 
Gerar ; a city of the Phiiisiineg. 

n. A dcdil m'nii ; he would be, should he not re- 
turn Sarah to Jut husband. 

4. A ri^htniiti nation ; one that was not giiiltv 
in this matter. 

7. Shalt surrly die; this shows God's abhor- 
rence of the crime of adultery, and his indignation 
against those who commit it. 

9. Brought on me and on my kingdom; ex- 
posed us lo commit a great sin. 
26 



said unto him, What hast thou done ^b. o^ leS- 
unto us ■? and what have I offended thee, 
that thou hast brought on me and on my 
kingdom J a great sin ? thou hast done deeds 
unto me that ought not ''to be done. 

10 And Abimelech said unto Abraham, 
What sawest thou, that thou hast done 
this thing? 

1 1 And Abraham said. Because I thought, 
Surely the fear of ' God is not in this 
place ; and they will slay me for my 
wife's sake. 

12 And yet indeed she is ""my sister; 
she is the daughter of my father, but not 
the daughter of my mother : and she 
became my wife. 

13 And it came to pass, when God 
cavtsed me to wander from my father's 
house, that I said unto her. This is thy 
kindness which thou shalt show unto me ; 
at every place whither we shall come, 
say of me. He is my brother. 

14 And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, 
and men-servants, and women-servants, 
and gave them unto Abraham, and re- 
stored him Sarah his wife. 

15 And Abimelech said. Behold, "my 
land is before thee: dwell t -where it 
pleaseth thee. 

16 And unto Sarah he said. Behold, I 
have given thy brother a thousand pieces 
of silver : behold, he is to thee a covering 
of the eyes unto all that are with thee, 
and with all other : thus she was ° re- 
proved. 

17 It So Abraham prayed unto God: and 
God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and 
his maid-servants ; and they bare children. 

18 For the Lord Phad fast closed up all 
the wombs of the house of Abimelecliy 
because of Sarah, Abraham's wife. 



7: 




Job 4-2 


8 


.Ir 


me 


S: Itl. 


J K 


\. s: : CI 


.loah 


7 


in. k 


cli 


>!'• 


14 


7 


1 Nel 


.r. 


• 1,5 


: P 


,ilm3< 


:l ; 1 


roverh.s 16: fi. 


m 


chap. 


II: 


M. 


n 


l> 


up. 47 : h 




t 


Heh 


as is 


ffnod 


in thine 


eyes. 


o 


Pruv 


12 


1; 


25 


' 


i; KfV. 


3: 


h(. 


P 


cli.ip. 


i: 17 


1 S,-\in. 


:6. 











12. Sister; niece. Daughter ; granddaugh- 
ter, or de.scendant. Not of my onother ; Terah, 
Abraham's father, is supposed to have had two 
wives ; Haran. Sarah's father, to have been a son of 
Terah's first wife, and Abraham to have been a son 
of the second ; jo that Sarah was his niece, and grand- 
daugiiter of his father, but not of his mother. The 
term sister w:is then often given to a niece, and 
brother to a nephew, uncle, or near relative, ver. 5, 
13 ; chap. 11 : 29 ; yet this use of these terms, in this 
case, was designed to deceive, and was wrong. 

1(5. She vas reproved; for her deception, and 
instructed to appear henceforward, wherever she 
went, not as the sister, but as tlie wife of Abraham. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The best of men are entirely dependent for 
perseverance in holiness, for integrity, uprightness, 
and even external morality, upon the {jrace of God. 
If left to themselves they will distrust Jehovah, give 
way. to temptation, commit sin, and bring disgrace 
on religion, and distress, if not destruction, on them- 
selves and others. 



Isaac is born. 



GENESIS XXI. 



Ha gar sent forth. 



tc-S.- CHAPTER XXI. 

1 Isaac is bom. 4 He is circumcised. 6 Sarah's joy. 
9 Hagar and Ishmael are cast forth. 15 Hagar in 
distress. 17 The angel comtbrteth her. 2'2 Abime- 
lech's covenant with Abraham at Becr-sheba. 

AND the Lord * visited Sarah as he had 
said, and the Lord did unto Sarah 
a'S ""he had spoken. 

2 For Sarah '^conceived, and bare Abra- 
hani a son in his old age, at the set time 
of which God had spoken to him. 

3 And Abraham called the name of his 
son that was born unto him, whom Sarah 
bare to him, ''Isaac. 

4 And Abraham circumcised his soii 
Isaac, being eight days old, as God had 
commanded "^him. 

5 And Abraham was a hundred years 
old, when his son Isaac was born unto him. 

6 ^ And Sarah said, God hath made me 
to ''laugh, 50 thai all that hear will laugh 
with me. 

7 And she said, Who would shave said 
unto Abraham, that Sarah should have 
given children suck? for I have borne 
him a son in his old age. 

8 And the child grew, and was weaned : 
and Abraham made a great feast the same 
day that Isaac was weaned. 

9 1[And Sarah saw the son of Hagar 
the *" Egyptian, which she had borne unto 
Abraham, mocking. 

10 Wherefore she said unto Abraham, 
Cast out this bond-woman and her 'sou : 
for the son of this bond- woman shall not 
be heir with my son, even with Isaac. 

1 1 And the thing was very grievous in 
Abraham's J sight, because of his son. 

12 TfAnd God said unto Abraham, Let 
it not be grievous in thy sight, because of 
the lad, and because of thy bond- woman ; 
in all that Sarah hath said unto thee, 
hearken unto her voice : for ''in Isaac 
shall thy seed be called. 



a 1 Sam. 2:21; Luke 1:68. b cUap. 17: 19; 18: 10, 14. c Heb. 
11:11. d chap. 17:19. e Exodus 12 : 48; Lev. 12:;); Acts 7 : 8. 
f Psa.l2fi:2; Isa.54:l. g Num. 2.'!: 23; Pan. 86:10; Epli.3:20. 
h cliap. lfi:l,15; Gal. 4:22. iGaI.4:30. j chap. 17: 18. k Rom. 
9:7,8; Heb. 11:18. 1 ver. 18; chap.l6 : 10. m John8: 33. n E^. 



3. Before men had the Bible to guide them, God 
often made known his will in dreams ; but now we 
have no reason to expect a revelation of his will in 
this way. as all needful directions in duty may be 
obtained from prayerful study of the scriptures. 

7. Adultery is a sin which exposes all who com- 
mit it to the wrath of God, both in this world and 
in the world to come. 

13. The guilt of sin is greatly increased when it 
is made a part of a settled plan, or committed with 
forethought, deliberation, and fixed purpose; and 
were it not for the boundless grace of (.rod. those 
wlio so sin would never be brought to repentance, 
but would inevitably perish. 

16. The conduct of worldly men is often a re- 
proof to professed Christians ; such as ought to make 
them ashamed, and arouse them to greater confi- 
dence in God and greater devotion to his service. 
Luke 16:8. 



13 And also of the son of the bond- 
woman will I make a 'nation, because 
he is thy seed. 

14 And Abraham rose up early in the 
morning, and took bread, and a bottle of 
water, and gave it unto Hagar, putting it 
on her shoulder, and the child, and sent 
her ■" away : and she departed, and wan- 
dered in the wilderness of Beer-sheba. 

15 And the water was spent in the 
bottle, and she cast the child under one 
of the shrubs. 

16 And she went, and sat her down 
over against him, a good way off, as it 
were a bow-shot : for she said. Let me 
not see the death of the child. And she 
sat over against hivi, and lifted up her 
voice, and wept. 

1 7 And ° God heard the voice of the lad ; 
and the angel of God called to Hagar out 
of heaven, and said unto her. What aileth 
thee, Hagar? Fear "not; for God hath 
heard the voice of the lad where he is. 

18 Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in 
thy hand : for pI will make him a great 
nation. 

19 And God opened her "leyes, and she 
saw a well of water ; and she went, and 
filled the bottle with water, and gave the 
lad drink. 

20 And God was with the ''lad ; and he 
grew, and dwelt in the wilderness, and 
became an 'archer. 

21 And he dwelt in the wilderness of 
Paran :* and his mother "took him a wife 
out of the land of Egypt. 

22 ^Aiid it came to pass at that time, 
that Abimelech and Phichol the chief cap- 
tain of his host spake unto Abraham, say- 
ing, God is with "'thee in all that thou 
doest : 

23 Now therefore '^ swear unto me here 
by God, *that thou wilt not deal falsely 



3:7. P.salm 107:4,6. p ver. 13. q N 


inibera 22 : 31 ; 2 King.s, 


6:17,20; Luke 24: 16.3I. r chap. 1 7 : 2(1. 


s chap. 25 : 27 ; 27 : .3. 


t Num. 10:12. »chap.24:4; 27:46; 28:2. 


Tch.-ip.2fi:2.'<; -if!: In; 


39 : 2 ; Josh. 1 : .■>, 9. •* chap. 24 : 3 ; Josh. 


2:12. »Heb. i/rtu« 


Shalt lie unto me. 





CHAPTER XXI. 
2. At the set time; chap. 17 : 19-21 ; IS : 10. M. 
4. As God had comma nded ; chap. 17:10-12. 
6. To laugh ; in token of joy. 
9. Itlockivg ; opposing, afflicting, and persecut- 
ing Isaac. Gal. 4 : 29. 

11. His sou ; Ishmael. 

12. I^i Isaac; from him was to proceed the 
Messiah, to bless all nations. Chap. 12 : 3. 

14. A bottle ; the skin of some animal was then 
generally used for this purpose. Beer-sheba ; this 
means, the well of the oath, ver. 31. It was in the 
south-west part of Canaan. 

17. The 071 gel of God; chap. 16:7. 

19. Opened her eyes ; showed her. 

20. With the lad ; to bless and prosper him. 

21. The unlderness of Paran ; a desolate re- 
gion south of Canaan. 

22. Abimelech ; chap. 20 : 2. 

27 



Covenant with Abimchck. 



GENESIS XXIL 



Mraham' s faith tried. 



witli me, nor with my son, nor ^A"ith my 
sou's son : but according to tlie kindness 
that I have done unto thee, thou slialt do 
unto me, and to the land -wherein thou 
hast sojourned. 

24 And Abraham said, I will swear. 

2'i And Abraham reproved Abimelech 
because of a well of water, which Abime- 
Icch's servants " had violently taken away. 

26 And Abimelech said, I wot not who 
hath done this thing: neither didst thou 
tell me, neither yet heard I of it, but to- 
day. 

27 And Abraham took sheep and oxen, 
and gave them unto Abimelech ; and both 
of them '■made a covenant. 

28 And Abraham set seven ewe-Iambs 
of the flock by themselves. 

29 And Abimelech said unto Abraham, 
What "^mean these seven ewe-lambs, 
which thou hast set by themselves 1 

30 And he said, For these seven ewe- 
lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that 
they may be ''a witness unto me that I 
liave digged this well. 

3 1 Wherefore he called that place Beer- 
shcba;* because there they sware both 
of them. 

32 Thus they made a covenant at Beer- 
sheba : then Abimelech rose up, and Phi- 
clinl the chief captain of his host, and they 
returned into the land of the Philistines. 

33 ■[ A nd Abrnhnm planted a t grove " in 
Bcer-sheba, and '^callcd there on the name 
of the Lord, the everlasting sGod. 

34 And Abraham sojourned in the Phi- 
listines' land many days. 



• rlinp. 20: 15-22. h clmp. SI :44; I Sam. 18:3. c chap. 13:8. 
<1 (■liap.ni:4a; Joi.li.B2:27. " ■nmlm.lliewtll o/the oalh. t Or, 
tree, e Dent in:2l; .liidg. 3 : 7 ; 2 Kinsn, 17 : Ifi. f chap, i : 26. 



21. Swear ; covenant to deal truly and kindly 
with Aliimelech and his people. 

•2C. Wot; know. 

'J7. Ma/le a covenant ; to treat each other kind- 
ly, and that each sliould have wliat rightfully be- 
lon;;ed to him. 

30. A vitiiess ; evidence which should te.stify 
ftf^inst Abimelech and his people, should they lay 
claim to that well. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. To prevent all doubt, evidence is often repeated 
that however long God may delay to fulti} his prom- 
isen, at the set time they will be perfectly accom- 
plished, and not a jot or titlle of whal he has said fail 
till it all comes to pass. 

5-8. God's way and time of fnlfiUinjj his prom- 
ises are such as to bring the hi>,'hest glory to him- 
self, and the greatest good to his people. 

11. Seasons of great joy are ofti-n followed by 
season.s of great aiigui.sh, and our choicest comfort's 
may prove the occision of j)eculiar sorrow. 

II. In cheerful and prompt obedience to God, and 
hearty roumiitment of ourselves and our friends to 
him, he will keep us in peace, and provide for us 
according to all our wants. 

18. God hears and tenderly sympathizes not only 
with the voice of supplication, but with that of dis- 
tress. Not a groan, a tear, or a si^;!! escapes his no- 
2S 



CHAPTER XXII. *.^:=^f[ 

I Abraham is tempted to offer Isaac. 3 He giveth proof 
of his faith and obedience. 11 The angel stayeth 
him. 1.3 Isaac is exchanged with a ram. 14 The 
place is called Jehovah-jireh. 15 Abraham is bless- 
ed again. 20 The generation of Nahor unto Rebekah. 

AND it came to pass after these things, 
that God did tempt ''Abraham, and 
said unto him, Abraham : And he said, 
- Behold, here I am. 

2 And he said, Take now thy sonjlliine 
only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and 
get thee into tlie land of 'Moriah; and 
offer him there for a burnt-offering upon 
one of the mountains which I will tell 
thee of. 

3 % And Abraham rose up early in the 
morning, and saddled his ass, and took 
two of his young men with him, and 
Isaac his son, and clave the wood for the 
burnt-offering, and rose up, and went unto 
the place of which God had told him. 

4 Then on the third day Abraham lifted 
up his eyes, and saw the place afar off. 

5 And Abraham said unto his young 
men. Abide ye here with the ass, and I 
and the lad will go yonder and worship, 
and come again to you. 

6 And Abraham took the wood of the 
burnt-offering, and J laid it upon Isaac his 
son ; and he took the fire in his hand, 
and a knife ; and they went both of them 
together. 

7 And Isaac spake unto Abraham his 
father, and said. My father : and he said, 
^ Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold 
the fire and the wood : but where is the 

II lamb for a burnt-offering'? 



(!r8a.90:2; Isa. 40:28. li neut.S:2; iChron. 32:.^l ; Prov.l7:3; 
Heb.ll:I7;.Iaa.l:12; 1 Peter,l:7. i Heb.neholdme. i 2 Chroii. 
3:1. j John 19: 17. ^ H^b. Belwld 7ne. || Or, Airf/ ver. 2, 8, 13. 



tice, or fails to reach his heart. He hears the young 
ravens when tliey cr)', and delights to feed them. 
Job 38 : 41 ; Ps». 117 : 9 ; Lnke 12 : 24. 

2G. They who would lire in peace should not only 
avoid contention themselves, but e.xercise a diligent 
supervision and a wi.se control over those under their 
care, lest wrong and injury should be done of which 
they are ignorant. When injured, it is wise to go 
directly and kindly to those who can give redress, 
rather than publish the injury to others. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

1. Te7npt Abraham ; try him ; prove the genu- 
ineness and strength of his faith. 

2. The land of Moriah ; in which Jerusalem 
and the temple were afterwards built. Offer h im — 
for a It irr lit -offer ill g ; kill hiiTi, and consume his 
bo«ly with fire. 

3. Clave the ivood ; which he intended to use 
in burning the body of Isaac. Went unto the 
place : towards it. 

5. / and the lad will — come again; he 
thought that God would raise Isaac fiom the dead. 
or in .some way restore him, even if oflered as a sac- 
rifice. Heb. 11:17-19. 

7. Where is the lamb; Lsaac it seems knew 
that Abraham was going to ofl'er a burnt-offering, 
but did not know that he intended to sacrifice him. 



A sacrifice provided. 



GENESIS XXIII. 



The death of Sarah. 



B. C. 1S71!. 

will provide himself a *lainb for a burnt- 
offering : so they went both of them to- 
gether. 

9 And they came to tlie place which 
God had told him of; and Abraham built 
an altar there, and laid the wood in order, 
and bound ''Isaac his son, and "-"laid him 
on the altar upon the wood. 

10 And Abraham stretched forth his 
hand, and took the knife to slay his son. 

1 1 And the angel of the Lord called unto 
him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, 
Abraham : ''and he said, Here am I. 

12 And he said. Lay not thy hand 
upon the lad, neither do thou any thing 
unto "him : for now I know that thou 
fcarest "^God, seeing thou hast not with- 
held thy son, thine only son, from me. 

13 And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and 
looked, and behold, behind Jiim a ram 
caught in a thicket by his s horns : And 
Abraham went and took the ram, and 
offered him up for a burnt-offering in the 
stead of his son. 

14 And Abraham called the name of 
that place *Jehovah-jireh : as it is said to 
this day. In the mount of the Lord it 
shall be ''seen. 

15 ^And the angel of the Lord called 
unto Abraham out of 'heaven the second 
time, 

16 And said, By myself have I J sworn, 
saith the Lord, for because thou hast 
done this thing, and hast not withheld 
thy son, thine only son : 

17 That in blessing I will bless thee, 
and in multiplying I will multiply thy 
seed as the ''stars of the heaven, and as 



a .lolinl;-2il: Rev.5:i;. b rsa.U8:i7; Joli 


U0:17,l.s. 


c Heb. 


11:17; .las. -Ziil. d Ex.3:4; 1 Siim.3: lU. e M 


tab 6:7,8. 


f cli,ip. 


■2li:5; I Siim. 15 : 2-2 : I'sa. 25:1-2; U7 : 1 1 ; M.-iI. 4 


-2. g 1 Co 


.10:13; 


•2 Cor. 1 : 9, 10. * That is, the Lobd will see. o 


, provide. 


h I'sa. 


22:4,5; Dan. 3 : 17, etc-.; 2 Cor. 1 : 9, 10. ■ ver 


11. j Vm 


105:9; 



12. Now I know ; it had been made evident that 
Abraham regarded G-od more than he did Isaac, or 
any creature. Let God command what he might, 
Abraham \Yould obey. 

14. Jeliovah-jireh ; meaning, the Lord will 
provide. It uliall be seen ; that God will provide. 
Hence the proverb, "Man's extremity is God's op- 
portunity." 

15, IC. A ns,el of the Lord — By myself have 
I su-orn ; Heb. 6 : 13-20. 

17. As the savd ; exceedingly nvtmero-as. Pos- 
sess th e gate ; ultimately be victorious over all their 
Toes. 

18. Th?/ seed; Chnst. Gal. 3:16. 
20. Nahor; chap. 11:27. 

23. Rebekah ; her father was Abraham's neph- 
ew, and cousin to Isaac whom she afterwards mar- 
ried. Chap. 24 : 15, 67. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The children of (rod, while in this M-orld, must 
expect trials ; and often, the most severe come last. 
But they need not despond. If they trust in God, 
he will sustain them and caiise them to triumph. 
Rom. 5:3-5- Jas. 1:2-4; 1 Peter, 1 : 6-9. 

3 



the sand which is upon the t sea-shore ; 
and thy seed shall possess the gate of 
his enemies ; 

18 And in thy seed shall all the nations 
of the earth be 'blessed; because thou 
hast "'obeyed my voice. 

19 So Abraham returned unto his young 
men ; and they rose up, and went to- 
gether to Beer-sheba ; and Abraham dwelt 
at Beer-sheba. 

20 T[ And it came to pass after these 
things, that it was told Abraham, saying. 
Behold, Milcah, she hath also borne 
children unto thy brother Nahor ; 

21 Huz" his first-born, and "Buz his 
brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram, 

22 And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash. 
and Jidlaph, and Bethuel. 

23 And Bethuel P begat ^Rebekah: these 
eight did Milcah bear to Nahor, Abra- 
ham's brother. 

24 And his concubine, whose name was 
Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Ga- 
ham, and Thahasli, and JMaachah. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

1 The a^e and death of Sarah. 3 The purchase of 
Machpelah, 19 where Sarah was- buried. 

AND Sarah was a hundred and seven 
and twenty years old : these were the 
years of the life of Sarah. 

2 And Sarah died in i Kirjath-arba ; the 
same is ■'Hebron in the land of Canaan ; 
And Abraham canie to mourn for Sarah, 
and to weep for her. 

3 If And Abraham stood up from before 
his dead, and spake unto the sons of Ileth. 
saying, 

4 I am, a " stranger and a sojourner with 



Isa.-15:23; 


Luke 1:73; Heb. ei : 13, U. k Deut. 1 :10; Jer. 33:2-:. 


\ Heb. Hv. 


1 chap. 12::!. m 1 S:iin. 2 ::10 ; .Ier.7:23. n .Iobl:l, 


o .lob 32: -2. 


p cUap.24:15.' i Rehecca. Rom.9:10. q .Josh. 14:15 : 


ludg. 1:10. 


r chap.l3:18; ver.l9; 2S:im.5:3. s 1 Chron.-2y: 15 . 


Ps,-l..39:l-2 


106:12; Heb. 11:9; 1 Peter, 2:11. 



2. As God is the giver and preserver of life, he 
has a perfect right to direct when and how it shall 
be taken away. Though to take life in oppositioi\ 
to his known will is murder, and subj"cts the mur- 
derer to his curse, to do it in obedienf i to his com- 
mand is a duty, and will receive fro;ii him a gra- 
cious and glorious reward. 

5. To believe heartily and fully the divine decl.a- 
rations, and expect their fulfilment, it is not neces- 
sary to know, or be able to conceive, how they can 
be accomplished. 

8. A permanent conviction that God will pro- 
vide, is an anchor to the soul, sure and steadf;v.st. 
Under its influence, though the winds rage and the 
tempests roar, men may outride the storm, and ia 
due time calmly and joyfully enter the port. 

18. Fidelity vinder great trials is peculiarly plo.i-s- 
ing to God and useful to men. It will receive spe- 
cial tokens of divine favor, and be followed by a rich 
and lasting reward. 

CHAPTER XXIIl. 

3. Heth ; the son of Canaan, and grandson o{ 
Ham. His descendants were called Hittites. 

2'J 



Abraham purrhaseth 



GENESIS XXIV. 



the cave of Machpelah. 



you : give me a possession of a burying- 
place with you, that I may 'bury my 
dead out of my sight. 

5 And tlic children of Ilcth ansAvered 
Abraham, saying unto him, 

fi Hear us, my lord; thoua>7 *a mighty 
prince'' among us : in the choice of our 
scpiilclircs bury thy dead; none of us shall 
withhold from thee his sepulchre, but 
that thou mayest bury thy dead. 

7 And Abraham stood up, and bowed 
himself to the people of the land, even 
to the children of Heth. 

8 And he communed with them, say- 
ing. If it be your mind that I should bury 
my dead out of my sight, hear me, and 
entreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar, 

9 That he may give me the cave of 
Machpelah, which he hath, which is in 
the end of his field ; for + as much money as 
it is worth he shall give it me, for a pos- 
session of a burying-place among you. 

10 And Ephron dwelt among the chil- 
dren of Heth. And Ephron the Ilittite 
answered Abraham in the t audience of 
the children of Heth, even of all that went 
in at the "^gate of his city, saying, 

1 1 Nay, my lord, hear me : the Held give 
I thee, and the cave that is therein, I give 
it thee ; in the presence of the sons of my 
people give I it thee : bury thy dead. 

12 And Abraham bowed down himself 
before the people of the land. 

1.3 And he spake unto Ephron in the 
audience of the people of the land, say- 
ing, But if thou wilt give it, I pray thee, 
hear me : I will give thee ^ money for 
the field : take it of me, and I will bury 
my dead there. 

14 And Ephron answered Abraham, 
saying unto liim, 

l.*) My lord, hearken unto me : the land 
is worth four hundred shekels of silver; 



• Ait-.7:fi. *H.-\,.apimet„/Gud. b cliap. 13 :2; 14 : 14. 
iHr\>./ull money. | Hi-li.«ar>. c cliii|i. 34:20. «. d C Sam. '4 : 24. 
• clinp. •;.'.: ■!; 4'i;30; 60: 13; A<-t»7:lii. f .ler. SJkIO. % Heb. 



9. Mtic/ipt 'ah ; a tr.-ict of land owned by Epliron, 
in wliicli was a. cave. Ver. 17-20. 

10. Aiiilieiicf ; hearing. 

12. Bowed down ; nsed the customary forms of 
politeness. 

IT). Four hundred shclcis ; about two hundred 
dollar.s. 

16. Weighed — I he silver; that was the way, 
in those days, of determining; the value of money. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The longest life must come to an end, the 
dearest connections be sundereil, and the most inti- 
mate friends part to meet no more on earth. 

A. The bodies of (liose we most love must soon 
be buried out of our sight. 

'J. A burial-place, as a memento of the evil of sin, 
should lead us to abhor sin, and by believinp; in Him 
who is " the resurrection and the life," to obtain de- 
liverance from its power. John 11 rS."), 26. 

12. True politeness, and a courteous, gentlemanly 
30 



what is that betwixt me and thee ? b. c- iwo^ 
bury therefore thy dead. 

l(j And Abraham hearkened unto 
Ephron, and Abraham weighed to Ephron 
the silver which he had named in the 
audience of the sons of Heth, four hun- 
dred shekels of silver, current money with 
the merchant. 

17 1[And the field of ''Ephron, which 
ii:ns in Machpelah, which ^cas before 
Mamre, the field, and the cave which 
icas therein, and all the trees that u-ere 
in the field, that were in all the borders 
round about, were made sure 

18 Unto Abraham for a possession in 
the presence of the children of Heth, be- 
fore all that went in at the gate of his city. 

19 And after this, Abraham buried Sa- 
rah his wife in the cave of the field of 
Machpelah, before Mamre : the same is 
Hebron in the land of Canaan. 

20 And the field, and the cave that is 
therein, were made '^sure unto Abraham 
for a possession of a burying-place by 
the sons of Heth. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

1 Abraham sweareth his servant. 10 The servant's 
journey: 12 His prayer: 14 His sign. 15 Rebekah 
meeteth him, 18 lulfilleth his sign, '22 receiveth jew- 
els, 23 showeth her kindred, 2.5 and inviteth him 
home. 26 The servant blesseth Ood. 29 Laban en- 
tertaineth him. 34 The servant showeth his mtssage. 
50 Laban and Bethuel approve it. 58 Rebekah con- 
senteth to go. 02 Isaac meeteth her. 

AND Abraham was old«)u/ ^ well strick- 
en in age : and the Lord had blessed 
Abraham s in all things. 

2 And Abraliam said unto his eldest 
servant'' of his house, that ruled 'over 
all that he had. Put, J I pray thee, thy 
hand under my thigh: 

.3 And I will make thee ''swear by the 
Lord, the God of heaven, and the God of 
the earth, that thou shah not 'take a 



Qone into dnvt. g cliap. 1:1:2; vcr.35; PBa.ll2:l-3. h cbRp.lS:'2. 
i ver. 10; liiap. 3<):5. j chap. 47: 29; I Cliron. 29:24. k DeuL 
6:13. 1 cliap. 6:2, etc.; Deut.7:3; 2Cor.6:14. 



demeanor are the indispensableduty of all, especial- 
ly of the friends of God ; and the more distinguished 
men are. the greater is the importance of their being 
patterns of discretion, propriety, and good manners. 

16. Perfect honesty in making bargains, and strict 
punctuality in fulfilling them, .are duties sacredly 
binding upon all ; and those who do not thus act, 
violate the first principles not only of morality, but 
of religion. 

20. All conveyances of property from one person 
to another should, at the time, be made sure, and 
thus occasion of contention be prevented. 

CHArTER XXIV. 

1. Was old ; aged one hundred and forty years. 

2. Eldest servant; supposed to be Eiiezer. 
Chap. \!S: 2. Under my thigh ; a form of mak- 
ing solemn engagements, (jhap. 47 : 29. 

.3. Make thee swear ; put thee under oath, or 
make thee enter into a s,icred engagement. 



Abraham sendeth his servant 



GENESIS XXIV. 



to seek a wife for Isaac. 



B. C. 1857, 

of the Canaanites among whom I dwell : 

4 But thou slialt go unto my ''country, 
and to my kindred, and take a wife unto 
my son Isaac. 

5 And the servant said unto him, Per- 
adventure the woman will not be willing 
to follow me unto this land : must I needs 
bring thy son again unto the land from 
whence thou earnest? 

6 And Abraham said unto him, Beware 
thou, that thou bring not my son thither 
again. 

7 The Lord God of ''heaven, which 
took me "^from my father's house, and 
from the land of my kindred, and which 
spake unto me, and that sware unto me, 
saying, Unto thy seed will I give this 
land: he shall send his angel ''before 
thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my 
son from thence. 

8 And if the woman will not be willing 
to follow thee, then thou shalt be "^ clear 
from this my oath : only bring not my 
son thither again. 

9 And the servant put his hand ixnder 
the thigh of Abraham his master, and 
sware to him concerning that matter. 

10 ^ And the servant took ten camels, 
of the camels of his master, and departed ; 
(* for all the goods of his master loere in 
his hand ;) and he arose, and went to 
Mesopotamia,'^ unto the city of s Nahor. 

1 1 And he made his camels to kneel 
down without the city by a well of water, 
at the time of the evening, even the time 
that t women go out to draw ^ water. 

12 And he said, Lord God of my 
master 'Abraham, I pray thee, send me 
good J speed this day, and show kindness 
unto my master Abraham. 

13 Behold, I stand here by the ''well of 
water ; and the daughters of the men of 
the city come out to draw water : 

14 And let it come to pass that the dam- 
sel to whom I shall say. Let down thy 
pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink ; 
and she shall say. Drink, and I will give 
thy camels drink also : let the same be she 
that thou hast appointed for thy servant 
Isaac ; and ' thereby shall I know that 
thou hast showed kindness unto my 
master. 



• ehap.lI:2o,etc; 2i:-20; 28:2. 1> Ezra 1 :2: Dan.2:44; Jonah 
1:9; Rev. 11:13. c chap. 12:1,7; lS:l.i: Deut.l:8; 34:4; Arts 
7 : a. i T.x. 2.3 : 23 ; 33 : 2 ; Psalm 34 : 7 ; Isaiah 63 : 9 ; Heh. 1 : 1 4. 
« Josh. 2 : 17-20. ' Or, and. f Deut, 23 : 4 ; Judg. 3 : 8, 1 ; Acts 
2:9. R chap. 11:31. f Heh. that women which draw vi:iteT go 
forth, h E.T.2:I6; 1 Sam. 9: 11. i ver. 27; chap. 26:24; Ex. 3: 6; 



4. My country ; Mesopotamia. Kindred ;rel- 
a. lives. 

7. Send his an.^cl ; make thv ■way prosperous. 

10. The city of Nahor; Haran'. Chap. 11 :27-3-2. 

11. Kneel down; the posture in which camels 
take their rest. 



15 If And it came to pass, before he had 
done ""speaking, that behold, Rebekah 
came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of 
Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's bro- 
ther, with her pitcher upon her shoulder. 

16 And the damsel teas +very fair to 
look upon, a virgin, neither had any man 
known her : and she went down to the 
well, and filled her pitcher, and came up. 

17 And the servant ran to meet her, 
and said. Let me, I pray thee, drink a 
little water of thy pitcher. 

18 And she said. Drink, my lord: and 
she hasted, and let down her pitcher 
upon her hand, and gave him drink. 

19 And when she had done giving him 
drink, she said, I will draw tuater for 
thy camels also, "until they have done 
drinking. 

20 And she hasted, and emptied her 
pitcher into the trough, and ran again 
unto the well to draw water, and drew 
for all his camels. 

21 And the man, "wondering at her, 
held his peace, to wit whether the Lord 
had made his journey prosperous or not. 

22 And it came to pass, as the camels 
had done drinking, that the man took a 
golden ^ ear-ring of half a shekel weight, 
and two p bracelets for her hands of ten 
shekels weight of gold , 

23 And said. Whose daughter art thou ? 
tell me, I pray thee : is there room in thy 
father's house for us to lodge in ? 

24 And she said unto him, I am the 
daughter of i Bethuel the son of Milcah, 
which she bare unto Nahor. 

25 She said, moreover, unto him. We 
have both straw and provender enough, 
and room to lodge in. 

26 And the man ''bowed down his head, 
and worshipped the Lord. 

27 And he said, 'Blessed he the Lord 
God of my master Abraham, who hath 
not left destitute my master of 'his mercy 
and his truth : I being in the way, the 
Lord led me to the house of my master's 
brethren. 

28 And the damsel ran, and told them of 
her mother's house these things. 

29 lyAnd Rebekah had a brother, and 
his name u-as " Laban : and Laban ran 
out unto the man, unto the well. 



Mat22:32. i Neh. 1 : II ; Prov.3:6. k ver. 43. IJudg. 6: 17,37; 
lSam.2n:7. m Isa.65:24; Dan.fl:2l. XHeh.goodnfcnunlenance. 
nlPeter,4:9. o Luke 2: 19, .-il. \ Or, Jeicrl for the /orduad. 
P Ezek. 16:11. 12; 1 Peter, 3:3. q chap. 22:2.3. rverS2;Kx. 
4:31; 34:8; Neli.8:6; P».a.93:6. » Exodus 18:10; Kuth4:14. 
t chap. 32:10; Psa.98:3; Luke 1:68. <" chap. 29:.'5. 



12. Send me good speed ; prosper me m my un- 
dertaking. 

lo. Rehelali; chap. 22:23. 

21. Wondering at her ; to see how exactly his 
prayer was answered. To wit ; to know, from the 
indications of Providence. 

31 



The servant is prospered, 



GENESIS XXIV. 



and obtaineth Rebekah. 



30 And it came to pass, when he saw 
the ear-ring, and bracelets upon liis sis- 
ter's hands, and when he heard the words 
ol'Hebekali his sister, saying, Thus spake 
the man unto mc ; tliat he eame unto the 
man, and behold, he stood by the camels 
at tlie well. 

31 And he said. Come in, Hhou blessed 
of the Lord; wherefore standest thou 
without ■? for I have prepared the house, 
and room for the camels. 

32 H And the man came into the house : 
and he uniiirded his camels, and gave 
straw and provender for the camels, and 
water to wash his feet, and the men's 
feet that were with him. 

33 And there was set meat before him 
to eat : but he said, ''I will not eat until 
I have told mine errand. And he said, 
Speak on. 

34 And lie said, I am Abraham's servant. 

35 And the Lord hath ■= blessed my mas- 
ter greatly, and he is become "^ great : and 
he hath given him flocks, and herds, and 
silver, and gold, and men-servants, and 
maid-servants, and camels, and asses. 

36 And Sarali, my master's wife, bare 
a son to my master when she was old : 
and unto him hath he given all that he 
hath. 

37 And my master made "me swear, 
saying. Thou shall not lake a wife to my 
son of tiie daughters of the Canaanites, 
in wliosc land I dwell : 

38 Hut thou shall go unto my father's 
house, and to my kindred, and take a 
wife unto my son. 

39 And 1 said unto my master, Perad- 
venture the woman will not follow me. 

40 And lie said unto me. The Lord, be- 
fore whom I walk, will send his angel 
with thee, and prosper thy way ; and 
thou shah take a wife for my son of my 
kindred, and of my father's house. 

41 Tlien shall thou be clear from this 
my oath, when thou comest to my kin- 
dred ; and if they give not thee o?ic, thou 
shall be clear from my oath. 

42 And I came tliis day unto the well, 
and said, () Lord "^(iod of my ma.stcr 
Abraham, if now thou do ^ prosper my 
way whieli I go : 

43 Behold, I stand by the well of water ; 
and it shall conne to pass, that when the 



• cli»p. «6 : W i JuJjc. 17:9; Kutli3:in; Prinlm I IS: IS. b P«a. 
LMrS-ft: Jolin<:n4: Epli.6ift-7. e vcr. I ; clinn. 1!."2: 13:2; Prov. 
10:M:M:4. "I P"nlm IH: ;10. • Trrne X f ver««- 1 J. I! clinn. 



32. IJe iiiigirded ; that is, Lnban. 

4.5. SpeaAiiig in my heart; offering silent 
prayer. 

48. Brother^s daughter ; slie was the daughter 
i>f Abraham's nephew. 
32 



and I say to her, Give me, I pray thee, a 
little water of thy pitcher to drink ; 

44 And she say to me. Both drink thou, 
and I will also draw for thy camels ; let 
the same be the woman whom the Lord 
hath appointed out ''for my master's son. 

45 And before I had done speaking in 
my 'heart, behold, Rebekah came forth 
with her pitcher on her shoulder ; and 
she went down unto tlie well, and drew 
water : and I said unto her, Let mc drink, 
I pray thee. 

46 And she made haste, and let down 
her pitcher from her shoulder, and said. 
Drink, and I will give thy camels drink 
also : so I drank, and she made the camels 
drink also. 

47 And I asked her, and said. Whose 
daughter art thou 1 And she said. The 
daughter of Bethuel, Nahors son, wliom 
Mileah bare unto him : and I put the 
ear-ring upon her ■" face, and the bracelets 
upon her hands. 

48 And I bowed down my ''head, and 
worshipped the Lord, and blessed the 
Lord God of my master Abraham, which 
had led me in the right 'way to take my 
master's brother's daughter unto his son. 

49 And now if ye will "'deal kindly and 
truly with my master, tell me : and if 
not, tell me; that I may turn to the right 
hand, or to the left. 

50 Then Laban and Bethuel answered, 
and said. The thing proeeedeth from the 
Lord:" wc cannot "speak unto thee bad 
or good. 

51 Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take 
her, and go, and let her be thy master's 
son's wife, as the Lord hath spoken. 

52 And it came to pass, that, when 
Abraham's servant heard their words, lie 
worshipped the PLord, boiving himself io 
the earth. 

53 And the servant brought forth "jew- 
els of silver, and i jewels of gold, and 
raiment, and gave ihcni to Rebekah : he 
gave also to her brother and to her mother 
precious ■■ things. 

54 And they did cat and drink, he and 
the men that tvcre with liim, and tarried 
all night; and they rose up in the morn- 
ing, and he said, Send mc away unto my 
master. 



k Ter.Sa 1 Panllli:i2:8; 4H:14; 107:7: Prov.3:fi; 1»«.'(8:17. 
B chnp.H7:20: .1o»ll.S:14. n P«n. 1 1 8 : 2.1. o rlinp. 31 : « ; 2Slim. 
13:2.;; Acti 11:17. f vcr. 2B, 48 ; Pnnim 9.'> : 6. ' Heb. veMtcJt. 
q F.xoilu»3:22; 11:2; 12:35. r Deut. 33: 13-16; 2 Clirun. 21 :.1; 



1 l:fi. 



49. Deal kiiuUy ; in permitting Rebekah to be- 
come Isaac's wife. 

52. lie u'orshipped the Lord ; as tlic author of 
hi.1 succos.s. 

5i. Scud mc away ; permit mc to go. 



Juaac mccteth Rcbekah 



GENESIS XXV. 



Children of Abraham. 



t: c.'mi.' 55 And her brother and her moth- 
er said, Let the damsel abide with us * a 
few days, at the least ten ; after that she 
shall go. 

56 And he said unto them, Hinder *me 
not, seeing the Lord hath ''prospered my 
way : send me away, that I may go to 
my master. 

57 And they said. Wo will call the 
damsel, and inquire at her mouth. 

58 And they cSlled Rebekah, and said 
unto her. Wilt thou go with this *^man? 
And she said, I will go. 

59 And they sent away Rebekah their 
sister, and her '^ nurse, and Abraham's 
servant, and his men. 

60 And they "blessed Rebekah, and said 
unto lier. Thou art our sister ; be thou 
the mother of thousands of millions, and 
let thy seed possess the gate of those 
which hate them. 

61 TfAnd Rebekah arose, and her dam- 
sels, and they rode upon the camels, and 
followed the man : and the servant took 
Rebekah, and went his way. 

62 And Isaac came from the way of the 
well "^Lahai-roi ; for he dwelt in the south 
country. 

63 And Isaac went out t to ^ meditate in 
the field at the eventide : and he lifted 
up his eyes, and saw, and behold, the 
camels ^vere coming. 

64 And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and 
when she saw Isaac, she *" lighted off the 
camel. 



* Or, fl fitll year^ or, ten months, a cliap. 45:9. *> ,Toph. 1:8: 
Isa. -18:1.=.. cP8a.45:10. d chap. 35 : 8. f chap. 22: 17 : Kulh 
<:11,I2. f chap. 16:14; 2S: 11. f Or, topray. g.Tosh.l:8; 
I'salm 1:2; 77: 12; 119:1.5; 14^:5. h Josh, l.i: 18; Judg. 1 : 14. 



SO. Her nurse ; Deborah. Chap. 3.5 : 8. 

60. Possess the gate; be victorious over their 
enemies. 

C'2. Lahai-roi ; chap. 16 : 14. South couiitri/ ; 
Ihe country south of Canaan. 

65. Covered herself; according to the custom in 
that country. 

67. SaraWs tent ; which was hers when living, 
she having been dead about three years. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. A wise parent will take a deep interest in the 
marriage of his children, as aflecting not only their 
usefulness and happiness, but that of their po.sterity. 

V2. Those wlio in all the ir ways acknowledge '.rod 
.Tnd seek iiis blessing, may expect that he will make 
plain before them the path of duty, and enable them 
successfully and gratefully to walk in it. 

14. Industry, kindness, economy, and beneficence 
are virtues which every prudent man will seek in 
a wife, as upon these the happiness, respectability, 
and usefulness of families very much depend. 

21. Believing prayer is often so speedily and abun- 
dantly answered as to astonish those who offer it, 
and lead them in every thing by prayer and suppli- 
cation witli thanksgiving, to make known their re- 
quests unto Grod. Isa. 6.5 : 24 ; Phil. 4 : 6. 

27. All the kindness which we receive from men, 
and all our success in business, we should acknow- 
ledge as coming from God. and be excited by it to 
new iidelitv in learning and doing his will. 



65 For she had said unto the servant. 
What man is this that walketh in the 
field to meet us ■? And the servant had 
said. It is my master: therefore she took 
a 'veil and covered herself. 

66 And the servant told Isaac all things 
that he had done. 

67 And Isaac brought her into his moth- 
er Sarah's J tent, and took Rebekah, and 
she became his wife ; and he loved her : 
and '' Isaac was comforted after his moth- 
er's death. ' 

CHAPTER XXV. 

1 The sons of Abraham by Keturah. 5 The division of 
his goods. 7 His a^e, and death. 9 His burial. 12 
The generations of Ishmael. 17 His a^p, and death. 
19 Isaac prayeth for Rebekah, bein-r barren. 22 The 
children strive in her womb. 24. The birth of Esau 
and Jacob. 27 Their difference. 29 Esau selleth 
his birthright. 

THEN again Abraham took a wife, and 
her name was 'Keturah. 

2 And she bare him Zimran, and Jok- 
shan, and Medan, and "Midian, and Ish- 
bak, and "Shuah. 

3 And Jokshan begat "Sheba, and p De- 
dan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshu- 
rim, and Letushim, and Leummim. 

4 And the sons of Midian ; lEphah, and 
Epher, and Hanoch, and Abidah, and El- 
daah. All these xoere the children of 
Keturah. 

5 T[ And Abraham gave all that he had 
unto Isaac. 

6 But unto the sons of the concubines 
which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, 



i 1 Timothy, 2:9. ich,ip. 18:6. k chap. .18: 12 ; 1 Tlie»s. 4 : 13. 
I 1 Chron. 1 : 32. m Num. 22:4; 25: 17; Judg. 6. n Job 2:11. 
o 1 Kings, 10 : 1 ; Psa. 72 : 10. p Jer. 25 : 23. q Isa. 60 : 6. 



33. A faithful man will regard his appropriate 
business as more important than his personal grati- 
fication, and will endeavor so to conduct it as shall 
be most likely to insure success. For this purpose, 
while he will habitually pray for the divine blessing, 
he will use all suitable means that his prayers may 
be answered. 

48. When we have learned, by experience, the 
right way to secure the divine guidance and bless- 
ing, and G-od has given us success, it is proper to 
make kno^^•Tl this way to others, tliat they may be 
induced to do likewise. 

.52. New favors will draw forth from a grateful 
heart new thanksgivings, till the habit become fixed 
of giving thanks always, for .all things, unto G-od. 
E ph. 5:20. 

58. It is happy, when one's inclinations and the 
indications of providence coincide ; and a readiness 
promptly to do right, and make any sacrifices which 
duty requires, is a good preparation to be blessed, 
and to become a blessing. 

63. Stated and devout meditation upon the char- 
acter, works, and ways of God, communion with him, 
and commitment of our interests to his care, are of- 
ten followed by his special favors. Prov. IS : 22. 

CHAPTER XXV. 
6. Concribines ; Hagar and Keturah. 1 Chron. 
1 : 32. East country ; Arabia, which lay south- 
east of Canaan. 

33 



Death of Mraham. 



GENESIS XXV. 



Birth of Esau and Jacob. 



and sent them "away from Isaac his son, 
while he yet lived, eastward, ""unto the 
east country. 

7 And tlicse arc tlic days of the years 
of Abraham's life which he lived, a hun- 
dred threescore and (ificcn years. 

8 Then Abraham i,'ave up the ghost, and 
died in a "^good old age, an old man, and 
full of years ; and was "'gathered to his 
people. 

t) And his sons Isaac and Islimacl buried 
him in the cave of Machpclah, in the 
field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hit- 
titc, which 25 before Mamre ; 

10 The field which Abraham purchased 
of the sons of "^ llcth : there was Abraham 
buried, and Sarah his wife. 

1 1 *\ And it came to pass after the death 
of Abraham, that God blessed his son 
Isaac : and Isaac dwelt by the well La- 
hai-roi. 

1 2 T[ Now these are the generations of 
Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar 
the P2gyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bare 
unto Abraham. 

1.3 And these are the names of the sons 
of Ishmael, by their names, according to 
their generations : The first-born of Ish- 
mael, Ncbajoth ; and Kedar, and Adbeel, 
and Mibsam, 

1 4 And INIishma, and Dumali, and Massa, 

15 Iladar,* and Tenia, Jctur, Naphish, 
and Kc'dcmah : 

16 These arc the sons of Ishmael, and 
these are their names, by their towns, 
and by their castles ; "^twelve princes ac- 
cording to their nations. 

17 And these arc tiic years of the life of 
Ishmael, a liundred and thirty and seven 
years : and he gave up the ghost and died, 
and was gathered unto his people. 

18 And they dwelt from sHavilah unto 
Shur, that is before Egypt, as thou goest 
toward Assyria : and he t died in the pres- 
ence of all his brethren. 

19 HAnd these are the generations of 



• Pm. 17:H. b .ludg.ri:X c cliiip. 15:15; -19:29; Job»:2fi. 
d clm|)..^^: 29; 49:33. » rhnp. 23 : 1(1 » Or, i/adod. 1 Cl.ron. 
1:00. r rliiip. 17:20. ltlSam.l5:7. f Hrb./«/;. k rliKp. 2'< : S7. 
I clinp. 28:5. i I SomucI, I : II ; Luke I : 13. k I Cliron. 5 : 20 ; 
2Chron.33:l3; Eira H:2;i; l>riii.HS:l9; rroT.10:»; Koni.9:10. 



7. T/trfcscore and Jifteeu; seventy-five. This 
was ttiirty-tiyht vcars .-li'ii-r tlio death of Sarah, and 
thirty-five after tnc niarria;^e of Isaac. 

9. Cave of Machiielah; chap. 2.3 : 11-20. 

11. Lahni-roi; chap. 10:11; 21:62. 

16. Tirelve princes ; rliap. 17:20. 

18. They ; the desccndaiit.s of Ishmael. From 
Ilavilahunto Shur; thocomitrv between tlie Per- 
sian {jiilf and the Red sea. In the presence of all 
his hrithrcn; chap. 16: 12. 

20. Pddan-arnm ; meaning the plains of Aram, 
one of (lie Ilrbrew names of Mesopotamia, more es- 
pecially the level part of it. 

23. Tiro 7iations ; those from whom shonid de- 
scend two nations, the Edomites and the Israelites. 
34 



begat Isaac : 

20 And Isaac was forty years old when 
he took Rebekah to ''wife, the daughter 
of 'Betliuel the Syrian of Padan-aram, 
the sister to Laban the Syrian. 

21 And Isaac entreated the Loud Jfor 
his wife, because she %vas barren : and 
the Loud was entreated of ''him, and Re- 
bekah his wife conceived. 

22 And the children struggled together 
within her : and she said. If it he so, why 
07/1 I thus? And she went to 'inquire of 
the Lord. 

23 And the Lord said unto her. Two 
nations are in thy womb, and two man- 
ner of people shall be separated from thy 
bowels : and the one people shall be stron- 
ger than tlic other people ; and the elder 
shall"' serve the younger. 

24 *[[ And when her days to be delivered 
were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in 
her womb. 

25 And the first came out red, all over 
like a hairy garment : and they called his 
name Esau. 

26 And after that came his brother out, 
and his hand took hold on Esau's "heel ; 
and his name was called .lacob : and Isaac 
was threescore years old when she bare 
them. 

27 And the boys grew : and Esau was 
a cunning "hunter, a man of the field; 
and Jacob icas a plain man, p dwelling in 
tents. 

28 And Isaac loved Esau, because the 
did eat of his i venison: but Rebekah 
loA^ed Jacob. 

29 1[ And Jacob sod pottage : and Esau 
came from the field, and he was faint. 

30 And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I 
pray thee, ^with that same red pottage; 
for I am faint : therefore was his name 
called II Edom. 

31 And Jacob said. Sell me this day 
thy birthright. 



1 ISnm. 22:15; E7.ck. 20:31; 36:37. ni cli.ap. 27 : 29 ; Psn.fin:8; 
Isa. r>3 :!-(<; Obadmli 1-lR; Mill. 1 : 3-1 ; Rnin. 9: 10-12. n Ho:<ea 
12:3. a clLip. 27 : 3. P Heb. 11:9. 1 Hvb. venison vrns in hit 
mouth, q dinp. 27 : 19. ^ Hcb. loiM that red, with tliat red pot- 
Uige. II That i», red. 



Serve the younger ; the descendants of Esau would 
be subject to the descendants of Jacob. 

26. Jacob ; meaning a supplanter, as by taking 
hold of the heel one causes another to fall, or over- 
comes him. 

29. Sod; boiled. Pottage; a nutricious soup 
or broth. 

.30. Jidoin ; which means red. 

31. Jh'rthright ; that right which belonged to 
the first-born, of succeeding, on the death of his 
father, to the government and spiritual instruction 
of the family, officiating as their priest, offering 
sacrifices, and thus securing the tlessings with 
which the performance of these duties would be 
connected. 



Isaac is blessed of God. 



GENESIS XXVI. 



He dwelleth in Gerar. 



at * the point to die : and what ^profit shall 
this birthright do to me 1 

33 And Jacob said, Swear to me this 
day; and he sware unto him: and he 
sold his birthright ''nnto Jacob. 

34 Then Jacob gave Esau bread and 
pottage of lentiles ; and he did eat "^ and 
drink, and rose up, and went his way : 
thus Esau ^ despised his birthright. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

I Isaac because of famine ■went to Gerar. 2 God in- 
structeth, and blesseth him. 7 He is reproved by 
Abinielech for denying his wife. 12 He groweth rich. 
18 He diggeth Esek, Sitnah, and Rehoboth. 2(i 
Abimelech maketh a covenant with him at Beer- 
sheba. 3-1 Esau's wives. 

AND there was a famine in the land, 
besides the first "famine that was in 
the days of Abraham. And Isaac went 
unto Abimelech ''king of the Philistines, 
unto Gerar. 

2 And the Lord appeared unto him, and 
said, Go not down into Egypt : dwell in 
the land which I shall tell thee of. 

3 Sojourns in this land, and I will be 
with •'thee, and will bless thee : for unto 
thee, and unto thy seed, I will give all 
these 'countries, and I will perform the 
oathJ which I sware unto Abraham thy 
father ; 

4 And I will make thy seed to multiply 
as the stars of heaven, and will give unto 
thy seed all these countries : and in thy 
seed'' shall all the nations of the earth be 
blessed ; 

5 Because that Abraham obeyed my 
voice,' and kept my charge, my com- 
mandments, my statutes, and my laws. 

6 ^ And Isaac dwelt in Gerar : 

7 And the men of the place asked him 
of his wife ; and he "' said. She is my sis- 
ter : for he " feared to say. She is my wife ; 
lest, said he, the men of the place should 



* Heb. going to die. a .Tob 1\:\h; Mai. .3 : 14. b chap. 27 : K6; 
SR:6: Heb. 12;lfi. c l8.->.22: 13 ; 1 Cor. 1.1: 32. <l Psa. I0f;:24 ; Mat. 
22:fi; Acts 13:41. e chap. 12 : 10. f ch.ip. 20 : 2. gPsa. 39:12; 
Heb. 11:9, 13, IB. h chap. 28 : 1 5 ; I.sa. 43 : 2, .1. i chap. 13: 15; 



33. Sivear to me ; make a sacred engagement. 

34. Lentiles; a kind of pulse or coarse grain 
resembling peas and beans. Despised his birth- 
right ; by giving up its temporal and spiritual bless- 
ings for the gratification of his appetite. Heb. 
12:15-17. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 

8. No degree of faith in G-od. or fidelity in his 
service, can prevent the approach of death; but as 
sin has entered, and death by sin, so the sentence of 
death hath passed upon all men, because all are 
sinners. 

18. The declarations of God, with regard to this 
world as well as the future, and with regard to bad 
men as well as good, will, in due time, all be ac- 
complished. 

23. The Lord sees the end from the beginning, 
and can describe events which are future, with as 
much minuteness and accuracy as those which are 



kill me for Rebckah ; because she icas 
fair to look upon. 

8 And it came to pass when he had 
been there a long time, that Abimelech 
king of the Philistines looked out at a 
window, and saw, and behold, Isaac ivas 
sporting with Rebckah his wife. 

9 And Abimelech called Isaac, and said. 
Behold, of a surety she is thy wife ; and 
how saidst thou. She is my sister? And 
Isaac said unto him, Because I said, Lest 
I die for her. 

10 And Abimelech said, What is this 
thou hast " done unto us 1 one of the 
people might lightly have lain with thy 
wife, and thou shouldcst have brought 
guiltiness upon us. 

1 1 And Abimelech charged all his peo- 
ple, saying. He that Ptoucheth this man 
or his wife shall surely be put to death. 

12 Then Isaac sowed in that land, and 
received t in the same year a hundred- 
fold : and the Lord blessed him : 

1 3 And the man waxed great, and - went 
forward, and grew until he became very 
great : 

14 For he had possession of flocks, and 
possession of herds, and great store of ^^ ser- 
vants ; and the Philistines ''envied him. 

15 For all the wells wHiich his father's 
servants liad digged in the days of Abra- 
ham his father, the Philistines had stop- 
ped them, and filled them with earth. 

16 And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go 
from us; for tliou art much "^ mightier 
than we. 

17 1[And Isaac departed thence, and 
pitched his tent in the valley of Gerar, 
and dwelt there. 

18 And Isaac digged again the wells of 
water which they had digged in the days 
of Abraham his father; for the Philistines 
had stopped them after the death of Abra- 



15:18. j chap. 22:16; Pea. 105:9; Mie.ahr:20. k cbap.22: 18; Ps». 

72:17. lchap.22:lfi. m chap. 20:2, 13. n Prov. 29 : 2.'i. o chap 

20:9. p Paa. lO.-i: I.t; Prov. fi:-29. ^ Heb. found. J Heb. KJ««/ 

going. \ Or, hitsbandt^. q Eccl. 4:4. r Ex. 1:9. 



past ; and the truth of his declarations is abundantly 
proved by the dispensations of his providence. 

28. Partiality of parents towards their children 
is a fruitful source of manifold evils, and will be 
conscientiously avoided by all who duly regard the 
comfort and welfare of their families. 

31. To disregard spiritual privileges and blessings, 
and treat them as less valuable than personal grat- 
ifications, is a great sin. It is viewed by God as 
profane, and exposes the soul to the loss of his fa- 
vor. Heb. 12 : 17. 

CHAPTER X-XVI. 
1. The frst faini?ie ; chap. 12: W. Gerar ; a. 
city of the Philistines in the south part of Canaan. 
3. The oath ; chap. 22: 16-18. 

12. A hundred-fold ; a hundred times as much 
as he had sowed. 

13. Very great ; rich and powerful. 

35 



^ibiinchrh makclh 



GENESIS XXVII. 



a covenant with Isaac. 



ham: and he called their names after the 
names by which liis father had called 
them. 

19 And Isaac's servants digged in the 
valley, and found there a well of * spring- 
ing water. 

20 And the herdmen of Gcrar did strive 
with Isaac'.s herdmen, saying, The water 
is ours : and he called the name of the well 
Esek ;t because they strove with him. 

21 And they digged another well, and 
strove for that also : and he called the 
name of it +Sitnah. 

22 And he removed from thence, and 
digged another well ; and for that they 
strove not : and he called the name of it 
Rehoboth -J and he said. For now the 
Lord hath made room for us, and we 
shall be fruitful in the land. 

23 And he went up from thence to Beer- 
sheba. 

24 And the Lord appeared unto him the 
same night, and said, I am the God of Abra- 
ham thy father : fear not, *for I am with 
thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy 
seed for my servant Abraham's sake. 

25 And he ''builded an altar there, and 
called upon the name of the Lord, and 
]>itclK'(l his tent there: and there Isaac's 
servants digged a well. 

26 •[ Then Abimcleeh went to him from 
Gcrar, and Ahuzzatli one of his friends, 
and'' I'hiehol the chief captain of his army. 

27 And Isaac said unto them, Where- 
fore come ye to me, seeing ye hate ''me, 
and have ""sent me away from you? 

28 And they said, II We saw certainly 
tliat tlie Lord was with thee : and we 
5aid, Let there bo now an ""oath betwixt 
us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us 
make a covenant with thee : 

29 That * thou wilt do us no hurt, as 

* H.-li. (ir(ji^. i Thai 'u,ciinUntwn. tThnlir.hatred. » Tlint 
i»,ti>om. • l'B»lini7:l.»; Isniah 41:10; fil:12. b di.ip. 35 : 1 
<■ fhnp. ei : 22. a .ludg. 1 1 : 7. • ver. Hi. || Heb. Setinf we tmo. 
I rlnp. '.■! : ■»■ * Heb. If Ihcnuhalt, etc. t clia)). 21 : 31 ; P«,llm 



2.'J. Ih^er-shcha; ver. 33; chap. 21 : 14, 22-31. 

20. Went to him ; to make with him a covenant 
of pcafc and friendship. 

M. ITe viaile them a fedft ; showing that he 
was willing to live in peace with them. 

31. Hvarc uiie to another ; entered into a sol- 
emn eii:;;it:ement with e:ich other to live in peace. 

:n. fihehah : Beer-sheha. Chap. 21 : 311 

31. The llitlite ; the Hittites were descendants 
of Hfth the son of Canaan, and one of the nations 
that were afterwards to be destroyed. Chap. 23:3. 
INSTRI'CTIOX.S. 

lO. As great blessings often come upon children in 
consequence of the piety ami faithfulness of p.irents, 
hv the exercise of like piety and faithfulness children 
sfionid endeavor to confer similar blessings on their 
posterity'. 

10. The Bible describes men as they are; records 

not only their virtues but their vices, and often witli- 

cnt commending the one or condemning the other. 

Whether an action is right or wrong must be de- 

36 



we have not touched thee, and as *b.c:^; 
we have done unto thee nothing but good, 
and have sent thee away in peace : thou 
art now the ^blessed of the Lord. 

30 And he made them '' a feast, and ihey 
did eat and drink. 

31 And they rose up betimes in the 
morning, and sware one to another : and 
Isaac sent them away, and they departed 
from him in peace. 

32 And it came to pass the same day, that 
Isaac's servants came and told liirn con- 
cerning the well which they had digged, 
and said unto him, We have found water. 

33 And he called it t Shebah : therefore 
the name of the city is +Beer-sheba unto 
this day. 

34 T[And Esau was forty years old 
when he took to wife Judith the daughter 
of Beeri the Hittite, and 'Bashemath the 
daughter of Elon the Hittite : 

35 Which were ^a grief of mind unto 
Isaac and to Rebekah. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

1 Isaac sendeth Ksau for venison. 6 Rebekah instruct- 
eth .lacob to obtain the blessinisf. 15 Jacob under the 
person of Esau obtaincth it. liO Esau bringeth veni- 
son. 3.3 Isaac trembleth. .31 Esau coraplameth, and 
by importunity obtaineth a blessing. 41 He threat- 
eneth Jacob. 42 Rebekah disappointeth it. 

AND it came to pass, that when Isaac 
was old, and his eyes were ' dim, so 
that he could not see, he called Esau his 
eldest son, and said unto him, My son : 
and he said unto him. Behold, lierc am I. 

2 And he said, Behold now, I am old, I 
know '' not the day of my death : 

3 Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy 
weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and 
go out to the field, and II take me some 
venison ; 

4 And make me savory meat, such as 
I loA-e, and bring it to me, that I may eat ; 



ii.<; 


Ifi. li c-hnp. 


19 


3; 31 


:54. 


t TIlR 


ia. an oath. % 


That ia, 


the 


tvell of the 01 


th. 


1 cl 


an. .■(« 
Eccl. 


■-•• » 


Heb. hittemest 


of tpirit. 


1 rl 


np. 48: 10; 1 Sam 


3:2; 


•::3. 


k I'roverba 27 : 


1; Lnke 


12: 


10; Jkh. *:\\ 


II 


Heb. 


hunt. 









termined not from the fact of its being recorded in 
the Scriptures, but from its agreement or disagree- 
ment with the requirements of G-od. 

14. God deals with men in this world not accord- 
ing to their sins, but according to the greatness of 
his mercy ; and every new blessing lays them under 
new obligations to love and obey liim. 

22. Men who cannot live near each other without 
contention, luod better separate and live further .apart. 
There is room enough for all ; and let all do to others 
as they ought to wish that others should do to them, 
and all m.ay live in peace. 

31. A wise man, when he has ^een injured, will 
not be disposed to take revenge, but will be ready to 
overlook and forgive past transgressions. 

CHAPTER. XXVII. 
1. Old: about one hundred and thirty-six years, 
.3. Qiiifcr ; a case or sheath for arrows. 
■I. Stironj nieat ; seasoned with spices and other 
things to give it a ple;u?ant taste. 



Jacob obtaincth 



GENESIS XXVII. 



his father s blessing. 



fore I die. 

5 And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake 
to Esau his son. And Esavx went to the 
field to hunt for venison, and to bring it. 

6 ^And R,ebekah spake unto Jacob her 
son, saying, Behold, I heard thy father 
speak unto Esau thy brother, saying, 

7 Bring me venison, and make me sa- 
vory meat, that I may eat, and bless thee 
before the Lord, before my death. 

8 Now therefore, my son, ""obey my 
voice, according to that which I com- 
mand thee. 

9 Go now to the flock, and fetch me 
from thence two good kids of the goats ; 
and I will make them savory "^meat for 
thy father, such as he loveth : 

1 And thou shalt bring it to thy father, 
tliat he may eat, and that he may bless 
Ihee before his death. 

1 1 And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, 
Behold, Esau my brother is a '' hairy man, 
and I am a smooth man : 

12 My father peradventure will ^feel 
me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver ; 
and I shall bring a ""curse upon me, and 
not a blessing. 

13 And his mother said unto him, s Upon 
me be thy curse, my son ; only obey my 
voice, and go fetch me them. 

14 And he went, and fetched, and brought 
them to his mother : and his mother made 
savory ''meat, such as his father loved. 

15 And Rebekah took * goodly raiment 
of her eldest son Esau, which icere with 
her in the house, and put them upon Ja- 
cob her younger son : 

16 And she put the skins of the kids of 
the goats upon his hands, and upon the 
smooth of his neck : 

17 And she gave the savory meat and 
the bread, which she had prepared, into 
Ihe hand of her son Jacob. 

18 11 And he came unto his father, and 
said, My father. And he said, Here am 
I ; who art thou, my son ? 

19 And Jacob said unto his father, I am 
Esau thy ' first-born ; I have done accord- 
ing as thou badest me : arise, I pray thee, 
sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul 
may bless me. 



a ver 


■25; cbap. 48: 


9; 49 


:28; Deut 33:1. 


b ver 


13. c 


ver. 4. 


J chap. 


25 : 25. 


e ver 


■22. 


f chap 


9:25; Deut. 27 


18. 5 


1 Sam. 


■:.T : 'M : 


2 Sum 


14:9: 


Mat. 


27:25: 


h chap 


25 : -28 


Prov 


■23 : 3 ; 


I.uke -2 


:34. 


* Heb 


desh 


able. 


1 Kings, 


13: 18; 


14:2; 




•28:15; 


Zech. 


13:4. 


1 JEx 


20:7; 


Job 13:7 


t H 


»b. bc/t 





13. Th7/ curse ; the evil that would come in con- 
sequence of Jacob's deceiving his father. 

19. I am Esau ; anutteranddeliberatef;ilsehood. 

'20. Tlie Lord tJiy God broitght it ; this was 
an aggravation of his falsehood, implying that God 
had countenanced him in his deception. 

'l\. He said, I am ; a repetition of his sin per- 
severed in. 



20 And Isaac said unto his son. How is 
it that thou hast found it so quickly, my 
son? And he said. Because Jthe Lord 
thy God brought it tto me 

21 And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come 
near, I pray thee, that I may ^ feel thee, 
my son, whether thou he my very son 
Esau, or not. 

22 And Jacob went near unto Isaac his 
father; and he felt him, and sa-id. The 
voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are 
the hands of Esau. 

23 And he discerned him not, because 
his 'hands were hairy, as his brother 
Esau's hands : so he blessed him. 

24 And he said. Art thou my very son 
Esau? And he said, '"I am. 

25 And he said, Bring it near to me, 
and I will eat of my son's venison, that 
my soul may bless thee. And he brought 
it near to him, and he did eat : and he 
brought him wine, and he drank. 

26 And his father Isaac said unto him, 
Come near now, and kiss me, my son. 

27 And he came near, and kissed him : 
and he smelled the smell of his raiment, 
and " blessed him, and said, ° See, the smell 
of my son is as the smell of a field Avliieh 
the Lord hath p blessed: 

28 Therefore God give thee of i the dew 
of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, 
and plenty of corn and wine . 

29 Let people serve thee, and nations 
bow down to thee ; be lord over thy 
brethren, and let thy mother's sons ''bow 
down to thee : cursed he every one that 
curseth 'thee, and blessed he he that 
blesseth thee. 

30 1[And it came to pass, as soon as 
Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob, 
and Jacob was yet scarce gone out from 
the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau 
his brother came in from his hunting. 

31 And he also had made savory meat, 
and brought it unto his father; and said 
unto his father. Let my father arise, and 
eat of his son's venison, that thy soul may 
bless me. 

32 And Isaac his father said unto him. 
Who flri thou 1 And he said, I am thy son, 
thy first-born, Esau. 

33 And Isaac t trembled verv exceed- 



t ver. 


2. 


1 ver. 16. 




.. 


Sar 


n. 14:5 


Prov. 13: 19,22 


F. 


<li 


4:-2.^ 


n Heb 


11 


■20. Cant. 


4 


11 


Ho.sea 


I4:fi. P Heb.B 


7. 


q 


Deut. 


33; 13, 


2S 


2 Sam. 1 


2 




I'ss 


. 133:3 


Mirali5:7. r 


rl. 


ip 


49:8. 


» Num 


■24 


:9; Zeph 


2. 


8. 


t 


Heb. trembled with a great t 




nbling 


greatly 























27. His raiment; which belonged to Esau. 
Ver. 15. 

29. Be lord over thy brethren ; here the bless- 
ings of the birthright were confirmed to Jacob, with 
great worldly prosperity, e.xtensive dominion, and 
family preeminence. Chap. 25 : 31-34. 

33. He shall be blessed; Isaac saw that al- 
though he had been deceived, yet it was the purpose 

37 



Esau thrcatcnclh 



GENESIS XXVri. 



Jacob his brother. 



ingly, and said, Who? ^Yhcrc is he that 
hath 'taken venison, and brou£;ht it me, 
and I have eaten of all •before thou 
earnest, and have blessed him ? yea, ^and 
he shall be blessed. 

34 And when Esau heard the words of 
his father, he cried with a great and ex- 
ceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, 
Bless me, even me "^also, my father! 

35 And he said. Thy brother came with 
subtlety,'' and hath taken away thy bless- 
ing. 

36 And he said. Is not he rightly named 
Jacob V for he hath supplanted me these 
two times : he took away my ''birthright; 
and behold, now he hath taken away my 
blessing. And he said, Hast thou not 
reserved a blessing for me? 

37 And Isaac answered and said unto 
Esau, Behold, I have made him thy ""lord, 
and all his brethren have I given to 
him for servants ; and with corn and 
wine have I t sustained him: and what 
shall I do now unto thee, my son? 

38 And Esau said unto his father. Hast 
thou but one blessing, my father? bless 
me, even me also, my father! And 
Esau lifted up his voice, and ^wept. 

39 And Isaac his father answered, and 
said unto him, Behold, thy dwelling shall 
be Hhc fatness of the earth, and of the 
dew of heaven from above ; 



40 And by thy sword shalt thou b.c"™: 
live, and ''shalt serve thy brother : and it 
shall come to pass w^hen thou shalt have 
the dominion, that thou 'shalt break his 
yoke from off thy neck. 

41 T[ And Esau J hated Jacob because of 
the blessing whererwith his father blessed 
him : and Esau said in his heart. The 
days of ''mourning for my father are at 
hand, then will I slay 'my brother Jacob. 

42 And these words of Esau her elder 
son were told to Rebekah : and she sent 
and called Jacob her younger son, and 
said unto him. Behold, thy brother Esau, 
as touching thee, doth ""comfort himself, 
purposing to kill tliee. 

43 Now therefore, my son, obey my 
voice : and arise, flee thou to Laban my 
brother" to Haran ; 

44 And tarry with him a few days, 
until thy brother's fury turn away ; 

45 Until thy brother's anger turn away 
from thee, and he forget that which thou 
hast done to him : then I will send, and 
fetch thee from thence. Why should I 
be deprived also of you both in one day? 

46 And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am 
W"eary of my "life, because of the daugh- 
ters of Heth : if Jacob take a wife of the 
daughters of Heth, such as these which 
are of the daughters of the land, what 
good shall my life do me ? 



* Heb. Aun/^rf. « ver. in. b Ilnni. 1 1 : 39. c Pruv. 1 : 31 ; Heb. 
W:I7. d iKiligs, I0.1<); Mnl.2:10; ITIiefs 4:6. f That is, 
aiupplanter. e clmp. M : 2h, 34. f ver. 2<); 2Sam. 8: 14. t Or, 
tupjMrlid. t lea. 6.'i:14. \ <Jt, of the fatncn. Ii chap. 25 : 23 ; 



Psalm 60:9, 10; Obaiiiah 18-20. i 2Kin{ 
j chap. 4:6; 37:4,8. k cb.ip. 60:3. 
m Job 20 : 12 ; l'«a. 64 : 5. n ch.ip. 11:31. 



9, 8 : 20 ; 2 Cliron. 21 ; 8. 
chap. 33:6: Obad. 10. 
a chap. 26:35. 



of God that the blessings whicli he had pronounced 
should come upon Jacob, according to what was said 
of him before he was born. Chap. 25 : 23. 

35. Suhttety ; cunning, deceit. 

36. Jacob; a supplanter ; one who by artifice 
gets into tlie place of another, lie took away ; 
bought that which Esau despised and chose to sell 
for a me.ss of pottage. Chap. 25 : 33. 

37. Sif.stai/ied Htm ; foretold that he should be 
sustained. 

40. J]y thy sirord shall thou live ; his poster- 
ity would be warlike, and make plundering excur- 
sions upon tlioir neighbors. Serve thy brother ; 
they would be in subjection to the posterity of Ja- 
cob. 2 Sam. 8 : 14. Bnak his yoke ; after a time 
tlie Edomilts would revoh from their subjection to 
the Israelites, and become independent. 2 Kin"-s, 
8 : 20-22. 

•I 1 . Days of mourning ; on account of the death 
of Iwuic, which Esau thought would soon take place 
and f;ivor his designs. 

43. Laban; chap. 24:29. 

45. Diprivfd — of yon both ; chap. 9 : 6. 

40. The daughters of llcth ; the Hittite fe- 
males, especially the two whom Esau had married. 
Chap. 26 : 3-J, 35. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. By depriving us of the use of our senses, or 
dimini.shing their power a« age advances, God ad- 
monishes us that we are not at home in the body, 
and that what our hands find>to do in serving him, 
we should do with our might ; for in the grave, to 
which we are hastening, there is no work. 
38 



10. When parents tempt their children to sin, they 
lay the foundation for great and lasting sorrow. 

13. To imprecate on one's self the curse of evil- 
doing is high-handed iniquity ; it is assuming a load 
which may be found too great to bear. It is sowing 
the wind to reap the whirlwind. Hos. 8: 7. 

24. The telling of one lie often leads to the tell- 
ing of a second; and that to a third. The begin- 
ning of iniquity is like the letting out of water from 
a dam, which may sweep every thing before it. 

29. Through the evil-doing and the well-doing of 
men God fulfils his infinitely wise, holy, and benev- 
olent designs, causing even the evil which is com- 
mitted to be overruled for good. 

33. Men are often the means of accomplishing 
what they did not intend. They mean one thing 
and God means another. Chap. 50 : 20 ; Prov. 16 : 9 ; 
19:21. 

36. Wicked men are prone to ascribe their calam- 
ities to other men's sins rather than to their own, 
and to exercise pride, envy, and revenge, rather than 
humility, repentance, and forgiveness. 

40. The foretelling of wickedness which men will 
commit does not force them to commit it; nor does 
it lessen their power or obligation to refrain from it, 
or iheir guilt in committing it. 

41. There is an intimate connection between ha- 
tred and murder, and the indulgence of the one often 
produces the intention to commit the other. 

46. To commit known sin and tempt others to 
commit it, is the way to make life a burden ; and 
those who lead their children into sin, must expect 
through their children to be punished. 



Journey to Padan-aram. 



GENESIS XXVIII. 



Vision of the ladder. 



B.aim CHAPTER XXVIII. 

1 Isaac blesseth Jacob, and sendeth him to Padan-aram. 

6 Esau marrieth Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael. 
10 The vision of Jacob's ladder. 18 The stone of 
Beth-el.' 20 Jacob's vow. 

AND Isaac called Jacob, and blessed 
him, and charged him, and said unto 
him. Thou shalt not take a wife of the 
daughters of ''Canaan. 

2 Arise, go to '' Padan-aram, to the house 
of "^Bethuel thy mother's father; and take 
thee a -wife from thence of the daughters 
of "Tjaban thy mother's brother. 

3 And God Almighty bless thee, and 
make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that 
thou mayest be * a multitude of people ; 

4 And give thee the •'blessing of Abra- 
ham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; 
that thou mayest inherit the land t where- 
in thou art a stranger, which God gave 
unto Abraham. 

5 And Isaac sent away Jacob : and he 
went to Padan-aram unto Laban, son of 
Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebek- 
ah, Jacob's and Esau's mother. 

G H When Esau saw that Isaac had ""bless- 
ed Jacob, and sent him away to Padan- 
aram, to take him a wife from thence ; 
and that as he blessed him, he gave him 
a charge, saying, Thou shalt not tp-ke a 
wife of the daughters of Canaan ; 

7 And that Jacob s obeyed his father, and 
his mother, and was gone to Padan-aram ; 

8 And Esau seeing that the daughters 
of Canaan ^ pleased not Isaac his father ; 

9 Then went Esau unto Ishmael, and 
took unto the wives Avhich he had, * Ma- 
halath the daughter of Ishmael, Abra- 
ham's son, the sister of Nebajoth, to be 
his wife. 

10 1[And Jacob'' went out from Beer- 
sheba, and went toward II Haran. 

11 And he lighted upon a certain place, 
and tarried there all night, because the 
sun was set : and he took of the stones 
of that place, and put them for his pillows, 
and lay down in that place to sleep. 



« cliHp. •24:ri. b Hosen 12: 1-2. c clinp. 25: -20. (1 clKip. 24: 2;). 
* tlvh. amemblij of people, e rliap.l2;2. f Heb. <?/ M,v *();« wrn- 
ingt. r rliap. 27::i:i. s rliap. 27 :4:t. % Heh.vere evitih the eyes. 
% chap. :tH::t, IS called BoiAfmnM. h Hosea 12: 12. || calleil, Acts 
7:2, C/iar7iin. i clmp. 41 : 1 ; Kum 1-2:6; Job 4: 13. j John 1 :.'il ; 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

2. Padan-aram ; chap. 2-") : '20. 

4. TJie b/essiiig of Abraham ; that vchich was 
promised to him. Chap. 12 : 2, 3 ; 15 : 5-7 ; 17 : 8 ; 
22:17, 18; Gal. 3:!^'29. 

9. U^ito Ishinael ; the family of Ishmael, he 
being- dead. Chap. 25 ; 17. 

14. Ill thy seed; Gal. 3:16. 

16. The Lord is in this place ; in a special 
manner. 

17. Hoiiseof God — gate of heaven; a place in 
which God held special communication with men. 

18. Poured oil iipon the top of it ; in token 
of its being consecrated to God as a memorial of 
what there took place. 



12 And he 'dreamed, and behold, a lad- 
der set up on the earth, and the top of it 
reached to heaven : and -i behold, the an- 
gels of God ascending and descending on it. 

13 And behold, the Lord stood above ir, 
and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham 
thy ''father, and the God of Isaac: the 
land whereon thou liest, to thee will I 
give it, and to thy seed. 

14 And thy 'seed shall be as the dust of 
the earth; and thou shalt * spread abroad 
to the west, and to the east, and to IJie 
north, and to the south : and in thee and 
in thy '"seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed. 

15 And behold, I am with "thee, and 
will "keep thee in all places whither thou 
goest, and will bring thee p again into 
this land : for I will not i leave thee, until 
I have done that which I have spoken to 
thee of. 

16 ^And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, 
and he said. Surely the Lord is in "^this 
place ; and I knew it not. 

17 And he was afraid, and said. How 
dreadful is this place ! this is none other 
but the house of God, and this is the gate 
of heaven. 

1 8 And Jacob rose up early in the morn- 
ing, and took the stone that he had put 
for his pillows, and set it up /or a pillar, 
and poured "oil upon the top of it. 

19 And he called the name of that place 
Beth-el :t but the name of that *city icas 
called Luz at the first. 

20 And Jacob vowed a vow, saying. If 
God will be with " me, and will keep me in 
this way that I go, and will give me bread 
to eat, and raiment to put on, 

21 So that I come again to my father's 
house in peace ; then shall the ^Lord be 
my God : 

22 And this stone, which I have set /or 
a '"pillar, shall be God's house: and of 
all that thou shalt give me, I will surely 
give the ^ tenth unto thee. 



Hell. 1 : 14. k limp. '26:24: Ex. 3:6; Mat. 22:33. 1 chap. 13: 16. 
* Heb. break forth, m cbap. 18: 18. n Josh. 1:5: Juilg. 6:16. 
o Psa. 121:5-8. p rhap.3.-.:(i. qHeb.l3:5. r Ex.3:o; .losh .5: Ifi. 
»Num.7:l. ^neh. the house of God. t Juil?.l :23,-26; Hosea 12:4. 
n 2 Sam. 15:8. t Deut. -26: 17. w cliap..3.i: 7, 14. lU.ev. -27:30. 



19. Beth-el; meaning, tho house of God. That 
city ; a city that stood near this place. Chap. 
12:8; Judg. 1 : '23-26. 

21. Be my God; I will consecrate myself to him. 

22. God's house ; a place where I will publicly 
acknowledge and adore him. Give the tenth ; 
devote a tenth part of what he should have to acts 
of piety and mercy. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. Parents who rightly regard the good of their 
children, for this life or the future, or that of their 
descendants, will especially desire that they be con- 
nected with pious companions. 

9. When persons undertake to cure or to lessen 
one evil by the commission of another, they must 

39 



Jacob marricth 



GENESIS XXIX. 



Leah atid Rachel. 



niAPTER XXIX. 

1 Jacob cornpih !n ihp well of Haran. 9 lie taketh ac- 
quaintance of Rachel, in Laban enteriaineth him. 
IH Jacob covenftnteth for Rachel. 23 He is deceived 
with Leah, 'ii He marrieth also Rachel, and serveth 
for her seven years more. ;?2 Leah beareth Reuben, 
33 Simeon, 34 Levi, 35 and Judah. 

THEN Jacob * went on lii.s journey, and 
eamc into the land of the + people of 
the east. 

2 And he looked, and behold, a well in 
the field, and lo, there vere three flocks 
of^sheep lying by *it ; for out of that well 
they watered the flocks : and a great stone 
was upon the well's rnouth. 

3 And thither were all the flocks gath- 
ered : and they rolled the stone from the 
well's mouth and watered the sheep, and 
put the stone again upon the well's mouth 
in his place. 

4 And Jacob said unto them, My breth- 
ren, whence be ye? And they said, Of 
Ha^an'' are we. 

5 And he said unto them. Know ye La- 
ban the son of Nahor? And they said, 
We know him. 

6 And he said unto them, t I.s he ■= well? 
And they said, He is well : and behold, 
Kaehel his daughter cometh with the 
sheep. 

7 And he said, Lo, ^ it is yet high day, 
neitlior is it time that the cattle should 
be iiathcred together : water ye the sheep, 
and 20 (iiid feed them. 

H And they said, We cannot, until all 
the flocks be gathered together, and till 
ihcy roll the '' stone from the well's mouth ; 
then we water the sheep. 

9 H And while he yet spake with them, 
Rachel came with her father's sheep; for 
she kept them. 

10 And it came to pass, when Jacob 
saw Rachel the daushter of Laban his 
mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban 
his mother's brother, that Jacob went 
near, and rolled the stone from the well's 



' n 


•Ii. 


u/iurh, 


. /•.,/. 


f Hch. 


children. 


• P. 


n.23: 


■2; Cnn 


.1:7; 




M 


14. 


b ,• 


inn. '11 


VS. t 


In thr 


re 


peace 


tnhi 


m? c 


rliap. 


*9:n. 


} 


Hi-I. 


yttthediiy 


in great 


■t.M 


irkli;:3 


I.iik 


e24:2. 


eF.r. 


2:17. 


rhnp 


.33 


4; <:■ 


14. It 


cimp. 


13 


:8; M:M. 


16. k 


cliap. 



expect to be <li.»:ippointcd. The further they go in 
transgrcKsion the gp-ater the inisohief, and the 
greater the danger of utter ruin. 

11. If men, Ihrou^'h their own fault, are deprived 
of nuineroiis bloKsiiigs, and are left desolate and 
alone, they sniiietimes, during' the silence and dark- 
nenH of night or in icene.s of Boliiiide. gloom, and 
peril, reflect on their condition, and are brought into 
«uch a state of inind as to be prepared, through 
grace, for new and glorious inanircstations of divine 
favor. 

1(). God i.s much nearer lo iis than we are apt to 
imagine. Wherever we go and whatever we do, we 
are surrounded eontinually with his presence. He 
keeps tlie breath in our nostrils, t!ie blood flowing 
in our veins, and it is in him that wc live, move, 
and have existence. 
40 



mouth,* and watered the flock of B.c.neo: 
Laban his mother's brother. 

1 1 And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted 
up his "^ voice, and wept. 

1 2 And Jacob told Rachel that he ivas her 
father's s brother, and that he was Rebek- 
ah's '' son ; and she ran and told her father. 

13 And it came to pass when Laban 
heard the H tidings of Jacob his sister's 
son, that he ran to meet him, and em- 
braced him, and 'kissed him, and brought 
him to his house. And he t6ld Laban all 
these things. 

14 And Laban said to him, Surely thou 
art my Jbone and my flesh. And he 
abode with him *the space of a month. 

15 IT And Laban said unto Jacob, Be- 
cause thou art my brother, shouldest thou 
therefore serve me for naught? tell me, 
what shall thy wages be 1- 

16 And Laban had two daughters : the 
name of the elder u-as Leah, and the name 
of the younger was ''Rachel. 

17 Leah was tender-eyed, but Rachel 
was beautiful and well-favored. 

18 And Jacob loved Rachel ; and said, 
I will serve thee seven years for Rachel 
thy younger daughter. 

19 And Laban said, It is better that I 
give her to thee, than that I should give 
her to another man : abide with me. 

20 And Jacob 'served seven years for 
Rachel ; and they seemed unto him but 
a few days, for the love '"he had to her. 

21 ^ And Jacob said unto Laban, Give 
me my wife, for my days are fulfilled, that 
I may go in unto her. 

22 And Laban gathered together all the 
men of the place, and made a " feast. 

23 And it came to pass in the evening, 
that he took Leah his daughter, and 
brought her to him ; and he went in 
unto her. 

24 And Laban gaA'e unto his daughter 
Leah, "Zilpah his maid, for a handmaid. 

24 : -28. 11 Heh. hearing, i Uom. 16: Hi. j Jud;;. 9:2: 2 Sum. 5:1; 
19:12. * Heh. a month of davi. k Ruth 4: 11. lHo8eal2:12. 
in Canticles 8 : 7. u Judges 14: 10; Julm 2: 1,2. - ocbnp.30:9; 



22. Whenever we receive special favors, we should 
feel under special obligations to acknowledge and 
adore God, the author and finisher of all good ; and 
should, without delay, consecrate ourselves and all 
that we have to his service. 

CHAPTER XXJX. 

.3. Itolhd the stove from the veil's 7>iOHth ; 
after all the flocks had arrived. Ver. 8. 

7. Iliizh tiny ; early in the day. 

12. Her father's hrotlier ; Jacob was Laban's 
sister's son; of course not his brother in our sense 
of the word, but his nephew. Ver. 15. 

14. My hone and my flesh ; my near relative. 

2.3. He took heah ; it was then cu.stoinary for a 
bride to be Uikcn at night to her husband covered 
with a veil. 



Children of Leah, 



GENESIS XXX. 



Bilhnh, and Zilpah 



b.c'i7m!' 25 And it came to pass, that in 
the morning, behold, it teas Leah : and he 
said to Laban, What is this thou hast 
done unto me 1 did not I serve with thee 
for Ilacliel 1 wherefore then hast thou 
beguiled me? 

26 And Laban said, It must not be so 
done in our * country, to give the younger 
before the first-born. 

27 Fulfil her *week, and we will give 
thee this also, for the service which thou 
shall serve with me yet seven other years. 

28 And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her 
M'eek : and he gave him Rachel his daugh- 
ter to wife also. 

29 And Laban gave to Rachel his daugh- 
ter, *" Bilhah his handmaid, to be her maid. 

30 And he went in also unto Rachel, 
and he loved also •= Rachel more than 
Leah, and served with him yet scA'cn 
other years. 

31 TI And when the Lord saw that Leah 
was hated, he "* opened her womb : but 
Rachel teas "barren. 

32 And Leah conceived, and bare a son ; 
and she called his name t Reuben : for 
she said. Surely the Lord hath "^ looked 
upon my affliction ; now therefore my 
liusband will love me. 

33 And she conceived again, and bare 
a son ; and said, Because the Lord hath 
heard that I 2oas hated, he hath therefore 
given me this son also : and she called 
his name t Simeon. 

34 And she conceived again, and bare 
a son ; and said, Now this time will my 
husband be joined unto me, because I have 
borne him three sons : therefore was his 
name called ^ Levi. 

35 And she conceived again, and bare 
a son : and she s*iid. Now will I praise 



* Heb. p/a«. ■ Judg. 14 : 12. b c-hap. 35:2-3 : 37: 3. ever. 20; 
Deut. 21 : 15. il Psa. 127 : 3. e chap. 30 : 1. f Tl'-it is, tee a son. 
fDeut.26:7; I Samuel, 1 : 20; Luke 1:25. J That is, /learinjj. 
i^Tliat is, joined. Num. 18; 2, -J. || That is, j>fa(K. " Heb. stood 



25. Beguiled ; imposed on, deceived. Jacob had 
deceived liis father, and now his ^yife■s father deceived 
him. 

27. Fiiljil her weelc ; a week of feastin";, accord- 
ing to the custom at weddinjrs, after which Rachel 
would be given to him. on condition of his serving 
Laban seven years more. 

31. Was hated; regarded les.s than Rachel. 
JIal. 1:3; Rom. 9 : 13. 

.32. Reuben ; meaning, see a son. The Lord 
hath seen my affliction and given me a son. 

33. Simeo?? ; that is, hearing. 

34. Levi; joined — thinking that her husband 
would now be joined in affection to her, as he was 
to Rachel. 

3-'J. Judah ; praise — she being disposed to praise 
the Lord for his goodness. 

INSTRUCTIO>fS. 

4. A kind and courteous behavior is most likely 
to receive kindness in return; and a disposition to 
be useful, most likely to make a man welcome, and 
give him success. 



the Lord : therefore she called his name 
Judah,ll and * left bearing. 

CHAPTER XXX. 

1 Rachel, in grief for her barrenness, giveth Bilhah her 
maid unto Jacob. 5 She beareth I)aii and Xaphtali. 
9 Leah giveth Zilpah her maid, who beareth Gad and 
Asher 14 Reuben findeth mandrakes, with which 
Leah buyeth her husband of Rachel. 17 Leah bear- 
eth Issachar, Zebulun, and Dinah. 22 Rachel bear- 
eth Joseph. 25 Jacob desireth to depart. 27 Laban 
stayeth him on a new covenant. 37 Jacob's policy, 
whereby he became rich. 

AND when Rachel saw that she bare 
Jacob no ^children, Rachel '' envied 
her sister ; and said unto Jacob, Give me 
children,' or else I die. 

2 And Jacob's anger was kindled against 
Rachel ; and he said. Am I in God's stead, 
who hath J withheld from thee the fruit 
of the womb ? 

3 And she said. Behold my maid Bilhah, 
go in unto her; and she shall bear upon 
my knees, that I may also + have children 
by her. 

4 And she gave him Bilhah her ''hand- 
maid to wife : and Jacob went in unto her. 

5 And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob 
a son. ' 

6 And Rachel said, God hath 'judged 
me, and hath also heard my voice, and 
hath given me a son : therefore called she 
his name t Dan. 

7 And Bilhah, Rachel's maid, conceived 
again, and bare Jacob a second son. 

8 And Rachel said. With ^ great wrest- 
lings have I wrestled with my sister, and 
I have prevailed : and she called his name 
Naphtali.il 

9 When Leah saw that she had left bear- 
ing, she took Zilpah, her maid, and gave 
her Jacob to wife. 

10 And Zilpah, Leah's maid, bare Jacob 
a son. 



from bearing, g chap. 29:31. h 1 Cor. 3:3; Jas. 4:.5. i Joh 
.5:2. j ISam. 1:.5. f Heb. be built by her. k cUap. IB : :t. 
1 Psa. 35:24; 43:1; Lam. 3:59. % TbaX ie, judging. % Heb. 
wrestlings of God. \\ That is, my wrestling. 

11. Men sometimes weep' for joy, and few things 
are more affecting to a truly thankful heart, than the 
great goodness of God. 

15. Our relatives, as well as otjiers, should be 
fairly paid for their services ; and we ought not to 
wish any to labor for us without receiving a just 
compensation. Col. 4 : 1. 

20. One of the most prompt, cheerful, pleasant, 
and persevering springs of action, is love. Under 
its influence, labor, sacrifices, and self-denials often 
give great delight. 

25. Those who have wickedly deceived others, 
should not wonder if others deceive them, and they 
experience the evils of it through life. Is.-v. 33: 1. 

3-5. God often regards those whom men wrong- 
fully disregard, and graciously bestows such favors 
upon them as to fill their hearts widi gratitude, 
and open their mouths in praise. 

CHAPTER XXX. 

2. Jacob's anger teas I: indled ; because Rachel 
seemed to find fault, not with him only, but also 
with God. 

41 



Rachd bcareth Joseph. 



GENESIS XXX 



The change of wages. 



and 



1 1 And Leah said, A troop cometh 
she called his name * Gad.* 

12 And Zilpah, Leali's maid, bare Jacob 
a second son. 

13 And Leah said, t Happy am I, for the 
dausliters'' will call nic blessed : and she 
called his name +Asher. 

14 ^ And Reuben went in the days of 
wheat-harvest, and found mandrakes in 
tlie field, and brou2;ht them unto his 
mot lie r Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, 
Give me, I pray thee, of thy son's 'man- 
drakes. 

1 5 And she said unto her. Is it a small 
matter"* that thou hast taken my husband 1 
and wouldest thou take away my son's 
mandrakes also 1 And Rachel said. There- 
fore he shall lie with thee to-night for 
thy son's mandrakes. 

16 And Jacob came out of the field in 
the evening, and Leah went out to meet 
him, and said. Thou must come in unto 
me ; for surely I have hired thee with my 
son's mandrakes. And he lay with her 
that night. 

17 And God *= hearkened unto Leah, and 
she conceived, andbarc Jacob the fifth son. 

18 And Leah said, God hath given me 
my hire, because I have given my maiden 
to my husband : and she called his name 
Issachar.^ ^ 

19 And Leah conceived again, and bare 
Jacob the sixth son. 

20 And Leah said, God hath endowed 
me with a good dowry ; now will my 
husband dwell with ^me, because 1 have 
borne him six sons : and she called his 
name HZcbulun. 

21 .And afterwards she bare a daughter, 
and called her name * Dinah. 

22 Ij And God '' remembered Rachel, and 
God hearkened lo her, and opened her 
womb. 

23 And she conceived, and bare a son ; 
and said, God hath taken 'away my re- 
proach : 

24 And she called his name t Joseph; 
and said. The Lord shall add to me an- 
other son. 

25 •; And it came to pass, when Rachel 
had borne Josepli, that Jacob said unto 
Laban, Send nic 'away, that I may go unto 
mine own ''place, and to my country. 

26 Give me my wives and my children. 



» Tlint 


in, a trottp, 1 


r, company 


. 


clmp. <» 


l'.». \ 


Hrh 


In 




fiappinest 


h Ca/it. li 


9: 


I.tik 


c 1 


<H. 


i Thnl 
Kirk. 1 


1., happf. 


c r 


nt 


7:13. d 


Num. 10:!i 


i:i 


1< 


. 7 


i;i 


iM7. 


• y 


X. ^ 


■7- 


1 Sum. 1 : 


0; l.i.k- 1 


i:i. 


4 


111 


It 1 


, an hir 


e. 1 




4'1- 


11- 


Driit n.l : 


IM: 1 Clirnn 


I'J 


:i'2. 


( < 


M.n| 


. V.> : M. 


II Tim 


\n, dwetlintj. 


' Tll.1t Ik 


Judgment. 


h Cl..ip. 


'i!t 


Ul ; 


1 Snm. 1 


M9. 1 


1S« 


m. 1 


:(i; 



14. Mandrakes ; pi<!asing flowers or fruits. 
V>. My country ; tiie hind of Ciinaan. 
30. House ; family. 

33. So shall my righteousness austver for 
vie; by his having none in his possession, except I 
42 



let me go : for thou knowest my 'service 
which I have done thee. 

27 And Laban said unto him, I pray 
thee, if I have found '"favor in thine 
eyes, tarry: for I have learned by expe- 
rience that the Loud hath blessed "me for 
thy sake. 

28 And he said. Appoint me thy ° wages, 
and I will give it. 

29 And he said unto him, Thou know- 
est how I have served Pthee, and how 
thy cattle was with me. 

30 For it ivas little which thou hadst be- 
fore I came, and it is now t increased unto 
a multitude ; and the Lord hath blessed 
thee * since my coming: and now, when 
shall I provide for mine own "5 house also? 

31 And he said, What shall I give thee? 
And Jacob said. Thou shalt not give me 
any thing : if thou wilt do tliis thing for 
me, I will again feed and keep thy flock : 

32 I will pass through all thy flock to- 
day, removing from thence all the speck- 
led and spotted cattle, and all the brown 
cattle among the sheep, and the spotted 
and speckled among the goats : and of 
such shall be my Miire. 

33 So shall °my righteousness answer 
for mc II in time to come, when it shall 
come for my hire before thy face : every 
one that is not speckled and spotted among 
the goafs, and brown among the sheep, 
that shall be counted stolen with me. 

34 And Laban said, Behold, I would it 
might be according to thy word. 

35 And he removed that day the he- 
goats that were ring-streaked and spotted, 
and all the she-goats that were speckled 
and spotted, and every one that had some 
white in it, and all the brown among the 
sheep, and gave them into the hands of 
liis sons. 

36 And he set three days' journey be- 
twixt himself and Jacob: and Jacob fed 
the rest of Lnban's flocks. 

37 ^1 And.Jiicob took him rods of green 
poplar, and of the hazel and chesnut- 
tree ; and pilled white streaks in them, 
and made the white appear which rvas 
in the rods. 

38 And he set the rods which he had 
pilled before the flocks in the gutters in 
the watering-troughs when the flocks 



Ismail 4:1. f Thnl i«, adding. j clmp. 24 : B4. k clmp. SI : .Vi. 
I cliiip. 31 : 6. i»Ex..T:2l; IVeli. 1 : U ; Pnniel I : 9 ; Arti 7 : 10. 
n limp. :«l : 3, 6 ; Psiilm 1:3; Isa. 61 : 9. o clmp. 2!) : 15. p MaU 
24:4'. ; Titus 2:10. i Heb. broken forth. l^ Hvh. at mv fool. 
1 I Tim. r. : 8. r rh.ip. 31 : 8. • Paalni 18: 24 ; 37 :6. \[ Heb. to- 
morroiu. Kxoduii 13: 14. 



such as Laban had agreed to give him, it would be 
seen that he was honest. Erery one that ?'.< itot 
speckled— shall be coujited stolen; should Jacob 
have any of one color in his possession, it would 
be seen that they did not belong to him. 



Jacob deparleth 



GENESIS XXXI. 



with his household. 



*„.^a!"'°"' came to drink, that they should 
B. c. 1745. conceive when they came to drink. 

39 And the flocks conceived hefore the 
rods, and brought forth cattle * ring- 
streaked, speckled, and .spotted. 

40 And Jacob did separate the lambs, 
and set the faces of the flocks toward the 
ring-streaked, and all the brown in the 
flock of Laban ; and he put his own flocks 
by themselves, and put them not unto 
Laban's cattle. 

41 And it came to pass whensoever the 
stronger cattle did conceive, that Jacob 
laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle 
in the gutters, that they might conceive 
among the rods. 

42 But when the cattle were feeble, he 
put them not in : so the feebler were La- 
ban's, and the stronger Jacob's. 

43 And the man "^ increased exceedingly, 
and had much "^ cattle, and maid-servants, 
and men-servants, and camels, and asses. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

1 Jacob upon displeasure departeth secretly. 19 Ra- 
chel stealeth her father's images. 22 Laban pursu- 
eth after him, 26 and complaineth of the wrong. 34 
Rachel's policy to hide the images. 36 Jacob's com- 
plaint of Laban. 43 The covenant of Laban and 
Jacob at Gaieed. 

AND he heard the words of Laban's 
sons, saying, Jacob hath taken away 
all that ivas our father's ; and of that 
which ivas our father's hath he gotten all 
this ''glory. 

2 And Jacob beheld the ^countenance of 
Laban, and behold, it tvas not "^toward 
him * as before. 

3 And the Lord said unto Jacob, Return 
unto the land of thy fathers, and to thy 
kindred ; and I will be ^with thee. 

4 And Jacob sent and called Rachel and 
Leah to the field unto his flock. 



" chap. 31 : 8-12. b ver. 30. c chap. 13:2; 24: 35 ; 26: 13, H ; 
.loh 42 : 12. i Ps.-u 49 : 16 ; Eccl. 4:4:1 Tim. fi : 4. o chap. 4 : 5. 
f Ueut.28:54. * Heh. as yesterday and the day before. K chap. 
28:1.=!. hver.2,3. iver.41. j ver. 41 ; Num. 14: 22; Neh. 4: 13; 



43. The man ; Jacob. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Grief at another's prosperity is a n^reat sin, and 
a source of torment to all who indulge it. Prov. 
14 : 30. 

S. Those who are discontented with their condi- 
tion, often take wicked measures to change it; and 
if successful, they are tempted to justify their course. 
But success in iniquity is no proof of divine ap- 
probation. 

13. Success in iniquity tempts to its repetition; 
and desired objects obtained blind the mind to the 
guilt of wrongfully seeking them. 

18. The reasons which men assign for the dispen- 
sations of Providence, are often very different from 
tiie true ones. 

24. Events anticipated with joy are often the oc- 
casion of e.\quisite sorrow. Chap. 35 : 16-20. 

27. Men of the world are often convinced that 
true piety is profitable, and employ pious persons to | 
promote their own temporal advantage. i 



5 And said unto them, I see your father's 
countenance, that it is not toward me as 
before : but the God of my father hath 
been with ""me. 

6 And ye know that with all ray power 
I have 'served your father. 

7 And your father hath deceived me, 
and changed my J wages ten times ; but 
God sufl'ered him not to hurt ''me. 

8 If he said thus, The speckled shall 
be thy wages ; then all the cattle bare 
speckled : and if he said thus. The ring- 
streaked shall be thy hire ; then bare all 
the cattle ring-streaked. 

9 Thus God hath taken away the cattle 
of your father, and given them to me. 

10 And it came to pass at the time that 
the cattle conceived, that I lifted up mine 
eyes, and saw in a dream, and behold, 
the t rams which leaped upon the cattle 
U'ere ring-streaked, speckled, and 'griz- 
zled. 

1 1 And tne angel of God " spake unto 
me in a dream, saying, Jacob : And I 
said, Herg am ° I. 

1 2 And he said, Lift up now thine eyes 
and see, all the rams which leap upon 
the cattle are ring-streaked, speckled, and 
grizzled : for I have "seen all that Laban 
doeth unto thee. 

13 lam the God of p Beth-el, where thou 
anointedst the pillar, and where thou vow- 
edst a vow unto me : now arise, get thee 
out from this land, and return "Junto the 
land of thy kindred. 

1 4 And Rachel and Leah answered, and 
said unto him. Is there yet any portion or 
inheritance for us in our father's house 1 

1 5 Are we not counted of him strangers "? 
for he hath sold ''us, and hath quite de- 
voured also our money. 

16 For all the riches which God hath 



Job 19:3; Zech. 8 : 23. k chap. 20 : 6; Job 1 : 10; Ps;ilm 37 : 28; 
10.t:14. ^ Or,he-goats. 1 chap. 30: 39. m chap. 48: Hi. iiEx.3:4; 
ISam. 3:4, etc.; Isa. .W:9. o Ex. 3:7; Psa. 139:3; Eccl. 5:8. 
P chap. 28:18. q ver. 3 : chap. .32 : 9. r chap. 29: 27; Neh. 5: 8. 



.30. Those who have families should use all suit- 
able means comfortably to provide for them ; and 
while they daily seek the blessing of God, they 
should wisely and diligently use proper means to 
obtain it. 

43. Persons who have been wronged by others 
need not, and should not, do wrong to obtain redress. 
Property, and all earthly blessings, are the gifts of 
God, and he will grant all that will in the end be a 
blessing to such as continue to obey him. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 
2. Not toicard him ; not favorable, but mani- 
fested dislike and opposition to him. 

7. Ten times ; meaning very often. 

8. All the cattle ; the great portion of them. 

9. God hath taken — and given them to me; 
so ordered things in his providence that Jacob ob- 
tained them. 

13. The God of Beth-el ; he who there appeared 
to him. Chap. 28 : 13-22. 

43 



Laban piirsueth and 



GENESIS XXXI. 



overtake th him. 



taken from our father, tliat is ours, and 
our children's : now Ihcn, "whatsoever God 
hath said unto thee, do. 

17 ^ Then Jacob rose up, and set his 
sons and his wives upon "camels; 

18 And he carried away all his cattle, 
and all his goods which he had gotten, 
the cattle of his getting, which he had 
gotten in Padan-aram ; for to go to Isaac 
his ''father in the land of Canaan. 

19 And Laban went to shear his sheep : 
and Uachel had stolen the 'images "^that 
were her father's. 

20 And Jacob stole away t unawares to 
Laban (he Syrian, in that he told him not 
that he fled. 

21 So he fled with all that he had; and 
he rose up, and passed over the ''river, 
and set his "^ face toward the mount Gilead. 

22 And it was told Laban on the third 
day, that Jacob was fled. 

23 And he took his brcthen with him, 
and pursued after him seven days' jour- 
ney ; and they overtook him in the mount 
Gilead. 

24 And God came to Laban the Syrian 
in a "^dream by night, and said unto him, 
Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob 
either + good or bad. 

25 ^ Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now 
Jacob had pitched his tent in the mount : 
and Laban with his brethren pitched in 
the mount of Gilead. 

26 And Labau said to Jacob, What hast 
thou done, that thou hast stolen away un- 
awares to me, and carried away my daugh- 
ters, as captives ^ taken with the sword? 

27 Wherefore didst thou flee away se- 
cretly, and ^ steal away from me, and didst 
not tell me, that I might have sent thee 
away with mirth, and with ''songs, with 
tabret, and with harp? 

28 And hast not suffered me to 'kiss my 
sons and my daughters? thou hast now 
done foolishly in so doing. 

29 It is in the power of my hand to do 
you hurt : but the God of your father 
spake unto me yesternight, saying, Take 
thou heed tlint thou speak not to Jacob 
cither good or bad. 

30 And now, though thou wouldest needs 
be gone, because thou sore longedst after 



• eliap. 21 ; 10. b clinp. '28;-21. * Heb./fro;>/iim. r .Tutlg. 17:5; 
ISam. l>.l:l:1i HOKO.'IIIH. \ \it\t. the heart of l.aban. 3 clinp. 
l.i:li*. • cimp. ir,:!!8i QKins«, r2:17; Luke9:r>l. fclinp.W;'l. 
Job33:15. f Hcb. fiom good to had. t 1 Snin.30:2. ^ Hati.hatt 



19. linages; idols that her father worshipped. 
Ver. 30. 

20. Stole away ; departed privily. 

21. Orrr the river; Euphrates, which lay be- 
tween Padan-aram and Canaan. Mount Gilead ; 
a rang(! of high land east of the Jordan and south 
of Biishan. 

21. Good or had ; or, as in the margin, from good 
44 



thy father's house, yet wherefore *B.c:K?i 
hast thou J stolen my gods ? 

31 And Jacob answered and said to La- 
ban, Because I was afraid : for I said, 
Peradventure thou wouldest take by force 
thy daughters from me. 

32 With whomsoever thou findest thy 
gods, let him not ''live : before our breth- 
ren discern thou what /.s thine with me, 
and take (7 to thee : for Jacob knew not 
that Rachel had stolen them. 

33 And Laban went into Jacob's tent, 
and into Leah's tent, and into the two 
maid-servants' tents ; but he found them 
not. Then went he out of Leah's tent, 
and entered into Rachel's tent. 

34 Now Rachel had 'taken the images, 
and put them in the camel's furniture, 
and sat upon them. And Laban II search- 
ed all the tent, but found them not. 

35 And she said to her father. Let it 
not displease my lord that I cannot rise 
up '"before thee ; for the custom of women 
is upon rae. And he searched, but found 
not the images. 

36 T[ And Jacob was "wroth, and chode 
with Laban : andJacob answered, and said 
to Laban, What is my trespass ? what is my 
sin, that thou hast so hot ly pursued after me ? 

37 Whereas thou hast searched all my 
stutf, what hast thou found of all thy 
household stuff"? set it here before my 
brethren, and thy brethren, that they may 
judge" betwixt us both. 

38 This twenty years have I been with 
thee ; thy ewes and thy she-goats have 
not cast their young, and the rams of thy 
flock have I not eaten. 

39 That which was torn of beasts, I 
brought not unto thee ; I bare the loss of 
it; of Pmy hand didst thou require it, 
whether stolen by day, or stolen by night. 

40 Thus I was ; in the day the drought 
consumed me, and the frost by night , and 
my sleep departed from mine eyes. 

41 Thus have I been twenty years in 
thy house : I served thee i fourteen years 
for thy two daughters, and six years for 
thy cattle: and thou hast changed my 
wages ''ten times. 

42 Except "the God of my father, the 
God of Abraham, and the "Fear of Isaac 



ttnUnme. h .lob 21 : 1 1, 1-2. i 1 Kinji, 1<1:20. j ver. 19; .luJj. 
I8:'2J. k cbiip.4J:!l. I ver. 19. || Heb./<rtt. m Kx. 20: 12; I,pv. 
19:32. nKpli. <:26. ol Cor. 6:8. p Exoilus 22 : 10. <1 cbnp. 
29 : 18, 30. r ver. 7. a Pun. 124 : 1, 2. I ver. Kl. 



to bad : while you pretend to be friendly, see that 
you do not injure him. Ver. 29. 

2S. Sons ; grandsons. 

31. I wa,.<i afraid; this wns Jacob's answer to 
the first of Laban's questions, why he h.id gone away 
privately; not, to the last, as to the gods. 

42. The Fear of Isaac; the God whom Isaac 
feared, loved, and obeyed. 



The covenant of 



GENESIS XXXII. 



Laban and Jacob. 



sent me away now empty. God hath seen 
nnine '' affliction, and the labor of my hands, 
and "^rebuked thee yesternight. 

43 TfAnd Laban answered, and said unto 
Jacob, These daughters are my daughters, 
and these children are my children, and 
these cattle are my cattle, and all that 
thou seest is mine ; and what can I do 
this day unto these my daughters, or unto 
their children which they have borne 1 

44 Now therefore come thou, let i^s 
make a ''covenant, I and thou ; and let it 
be for a * witness between me and thee. 

45 And Jacob took a '^ stone, and set it 
up /or a pillar. 

46 And Jacob said unto his brethren, 
Gather stones ; and they took stones, and 
made a heap : and they did eat there 
upon the heap. 

47 And Laban called it * Jegar-sahadu- 
tha ; but Jacob called it t Galeed : 

48 And Laban said. This heap is a wit- 
ness between me and thee this day. There- 
fore was the name of it called Galeed ; 

49 And t Mizpah ; s for he said. The Lord 
watch between me and thee, when we 
are absent one from another. 

50 If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or 
if thou shalt take other wives besides my 
daughters, no man is with us ; see, God 
is ''witness betwixt me and thee. 

51 And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this 
heap, and behold tJiis pillar, which I have 
cast betwixt me and thee ; 

52 This heap be witness, 'and this pillar 
be witness, that I will not pass over this 
heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass 
over this heap and this pillar unto me, for 
harm. 



a Exodus 


3:7. b ICl. 


roil 


cles, 12:17 


.h 


liH 


9. 


C. ( 


hap. 


■26: 


28. 


i .loslma 2 


;:27: 24: '27. 


e 


clinpter28: 


18. 


^ 


Ch;iliiee, the heap 


of witness. 


t Heb. the heap of luitness. 


t 


Th 


It 1 


. ** 


fieac 


on 


nr, 


watch-towe 


'. fJuJg. 11 


'2!J 


1 Siim. 7 : n 


■ B 


.li 


il,'- 


11 


: lU: 


ISa 


in. 


VI: b; .ler. 


•12 :S. b ver 


4S 


48. i Jos 


lua 


24 


■-• 


J 


.■hap 


. IB 


6. 



44. A covenant ; an agreement of mutual peace. 

•in . Jegar-sahadutha ; Chaldee : in Hebrew, 
Galeed ; both meaning, the heap of witness. 

49. Mizpalt, ; a watch-tower. 

51. This pillar ; ver. 45. 

53. The Fear of his father ; ver. 42. 

5-5. His sons ; grandsons. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Covetousness contracts! and debases the soul, 
lessens natural affection, and tends greatly to in- 
jure those wiio e.xercise it, and those who feel its 
influence. 

9. Things which take place in the course of di- 
vine providence are often, in the Bible, ascribed to 
G-od. Good men receive all their blessings as com- 
ing from him, and give him the glory. 

16. When husbands and wives agree in doing 
what G-od commands, they may expect that he will 
be with them, and bestow upon them and their fam- 
ilies all needed good. 

24. That protection of G-od which is secured by 
obeying him, is a better safeguard than all human 
aid. Prov. 16 : 7. 

4 



53 The God of Abraham, and the God 
of Nahor, the God of their J father, judge 
betwixt ''us. And Jacob sware by the 
Fear' of his father Isaac. 

54 Then Jacob 5 offered sacrifice upon 
the mount, and called his brethren to eat 
bread : and they did eat bread, and tar- 
ried all night in the mount. 

55 And early in the morning Laban rose 
up, and kissed his son^and his daughters, 
and "'blessed them : and Laban departed, 
and returned unto his "place. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

1 Jacob's vision at Mahainaim. 3 His message to Esau, 
fi lie is afraid of Ksau's coming. 9 He prayeth for 
deliverance. 13 He sendeth a present to Esau. 24 
He wrtstleth with an angel at Peniel, where he is 
called Israel. 31 He halteth. 

AND Jacob went on his way, and the 
angels of God "met him. 

2 And when Jacob saw them, he said, 
This is God's Phost: and he called the 
name of that place II INIahanaim.i 

3 And Jacob sent messengers before 
him'' to Esau his brother, unto the land 
of 'Seir, the * country of Edom. 

4 And he commanded them, saying. 
Thus shall ye speak unto my Mord Esau : 
Thy servant Jacob saith thus, I have 
sojourned with Laban, and stayed there 
until now : 

5 And I have oxen, and asses, flocks, 
and men-servants, and women-servants : 
and I have sent to tell my lord, that I 
may find "grace in thy sight. 

6 T[ And the messengers returned to Ja- 
cob, saying, We came to thy brother Esau, 
and also he cometh to meet thee, and four 
hundred men with him. 

7 Then Jacob was greatly afraid and 



k 


■er. 


42. % 


Or. killed beasts. I cl 




28 


1. m chap 


30 : 2:-, : 


Ni 


in. 


24 : S.'j. 


n Psalm 91 


:ll 


Heb. 1 


:!4. 


' .losh. .S: 14 




■M 


7; 


103:21 


148:2: Lu 


le2 


:i:!. II 


Th 


It if 


, two hosts. 


P ,Io»h. 


-'1 


:i8 


q Luke 14:31,32. 


r 


Deut. 2 


■f,. 




Heb. field. 


■ Pror. 


15 


1. 


t chap 


.33:8, 1.^ 















36. Good men are sometimes angry with others, 
when, if they knew all the circumstances, they 
would see that the case requires explanation and 
apology rather than censure ; and while ready to 
forgive, they would also feel the need of being for 
given. 

55. When men are disposed, difficulties can be 
amicably settled ; and when they are .settled, both 
parties should unite in praising (xod, who is the au- 
thor, not of contention but of peace, and who, in the 
settlement of difficulties, ordin.arily confers upon 
both parties more blessings than could be gained by 
strife. 1 Cor 14 : 33 ; James 3 : 16. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

2. Mahanaim ; this was east of the Jordan. 
and north of the river Jabbok. 

.3. Country of Edom ; south and south-east of 
Canaan. 

5. Grace ; favor. 

7. Jacob was greatly afraid ; lest Esau should 
take vengeance on him for having obtained the birth- 
right and the blessing. Chap. "27 : 36, 41. 

45 



Tlie kindness of 



GENESIS XXXII. 



Jacob and Esau. 



distressed :* and he divided the people 
that was with him, and the flocks, and 
herds, and the eaniels, into two bands ; 

8 And said, If Esau come to the one 
company, and smite it, then the other 
company which is left shall escape. 

9 ^And Jacob said, ""O God of my 
father Abraham, and God of my father 
Isaac, the Lord which saidst unto me, 
Return'' unto thy country, and to thy 
kindred, and I will deal well with thee : 

10 I *am not worthy of the least of all 
the ''mercies, and of all the 'truth, which 
thou hast showed unto thy servant; for 
with my statT I passed over this Jordan ; 
and now I am "^become two bands. 

11 Deliver sme, I pray thee, from the 
hand of my brother, from the hand of 
Esau : for I fear him, lest he will come 
and smite me, and the mother twith the 
children.'' 

12 And thou 'saidst, I will surely do 
thee good, and make thy seed as the sand 
of the sea, which cannot be numbered 
for multitude. 

13 IT And he lodged there that same 
night, and took of that which came to his 
hand a J present for Esau his brother; 

14 Two hundred she-goats and twenty 
ne-goats, two hundred ewes and twenty 
rams, 

1 5 Thirty milch camels with their colts, 
forty kine and ten bulls, twenty she-asses 
and ten foals. 

16 And he delivered ^Acrn into the hand of 
his servants, every drove by themselves ; 
and said unto his servants. Pass over be- 
fore me, and put a space betwixt drove 
and drove. 

17 And he commanded the foremost, 
saying, When Esau my brother meeteth 
thee, and askcth thee, saying, Whose art 
thou ■? and whither goest thou ? and whose 
arc these before thee? 

18 Tiien thou shalt say, They be thy 
servant Jacob's : it is a present sent unto 
my lord Esau : and behold also he is be- 
hind us. 

19 And so commanded he the second, 
and the third, and all that followed the 





3fi 


3 


IVnlm 


07 


li. 


h I'm 


Ini 


Ml 


\!t; Ml 


ir.. 


Clliip. 


nil 3, 13. 


* 


Hi 


h. /am 


W» than all, 


ic. 


d 


rlmp. 24 : -27 : 


Ponim 


«i : f: ' 


r« 




•.1; Sn 


10 


f 


.lob H 


T. 


IN 


aim 18: 


■IS. s 


Piinlni 


Wl:l,2. 


f 


H 


•b. upnt 




h 


Hii.en 


Ill 


M 


1 cli 


np. •!« 


13-lfi. 


j Prnv. IH: 1 


8. 


k ProT 


21 


H 


t H 


nh 


myMe. 


1 Deu 


.3: IB. 


i Hrb. <v 


iiutd to pail. 


.1 


H 


M-H li 


:). 


■4. 


II Heb 


aactnding of 



droves, saying. On this manner *b.c.^' 
shall ye speak unto Esau, when ye find 
him. 

20 And say y6, moreover. Behold, thy 
servant Jacob is behind us. For he said, 
I will ''appease him with the present that 
goeth before me, and afterward I will see 
his face ; peradventure he will accept of 
me.- 

21 So went the present over before him ; 
and himself lodged that night in the com- 
pany. 

22 And he rose up that night, and took 
his two wives, and his two women-ser- 
vants, and his eleven sons, and passed 
over the ford 'Jabbok. 

23 And he took them, and ^ sent them 
over the brook, and sent over that he had. 

24 ^And Jacob was left alone; and 
there ""wrestled a man with him until the 
breaking II of the day. 

25 And when he saw that he prevailed 
not against him, he touched the hollow 
of his thigh : and the hollow of Jacob's 
thigh was out of joint, as he wrestled with 
him. 

26 And he said, Let me go, for the day 
breaketh : And he said, I will not "let 
thee go, except thou bless me. 

27 And he said unto him. What is thy 
name? And he said, Jacob. 

28 And he said, Thy name shall be called 
no more "Jacob, but * Israel: for as a 
prince hast thou power with PGod, and 
with imcn, and hast prevailed. 

29 And Jacob asked him, and said. Tell 
me. I pray thee, thy name: And he said, 
Wherefore is it ihat thou dost ''ask after 
my name ? And he blessed him there. 

30 And Jacob called the name of the 
place t Pcniel ; for I have seen God face- 
to 'face, and my life is preserved. 

31 And as he passed over Penucl, the 
sun rose upon him, and he halted upon 
his thigh. 

I 32 Therefore the children of Israel eat 
not o/the sinew which shrank, which /.•> 
[upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this 
' day ; because he touched the hollow of 
; Jacob's thigh in the sinew that shrank. 

I Mfuioriiinj/ ~n~Lukel8:l; l^or.lA:.^8. o cUnp^TiS; 10; ikingn, 
17:.1<. » Heb. a princt of Gud. p Hnwa l'2:3. 4. n clinp. 
Sl.W; .13:4. r .ludg. 13: 18. \ IhnX'w, the face of God. • F,.T 
24:11: 33:20; Dent. fi:24; 34:10; Judaea 6:32; J3:S2,'23, 
Isa.e:6; John 1:18; Cnl. I:IA; Heh. 11:27. 



21. A vian ; one in the form of a man. 
28. Israel ; meaning, a princely prevailer with 
God. 

30. Peiiicl; meaning', the fivoe of God. This .Ta- 
oob says he had seen, showinij that the one with 
whom lie h.ad wrestled was <rod in liuinan form, the 
An^el of the covenant, the Messiah. Hos. 12 : ."i— 5. 

31. PeiinrJ ; meaning tlie same as Peniel. Ver. 
;iO. Jle halted; limped. -or wa.s laine, in conse- 
quence of the touch of the angel. Ver. 25. 

46 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Angels are ministering spirits sent forth by 
God to minister to those who are heirs of salvation. 
Psa. 9:11; Mat. 4:11; Heb. 1:11. 

7. Pjist transgressions are often remembered, and 
cause deep and pungent distress long after they have 
been committed. 

12. Supplication to God isone of the most sure and 
powerful means of influencing men and obtaining 
from them what we desire. Prov. 16 : 7 ; 21 : 1. 



The meeting of 



GENESIS XXXIII 



Jacob and Esau. 



i:c.\^: CHAPTER XXXIII. 

I The kindnessof Jacob and Esau at theirmeeting. 17 
Jacob Cometh to Sucooth. IH At Shalem he buyeth 
a field, and buildeth an altar called El-Elohe-Israel. 

AND Jacob lifted up his eyes, and 
looked, and behold, Esau "came, and 
with liim four hundred men. And he 
divided the children unto Leah, and unto 
Rachel, and unto the two handmaids. 

2 And he put the handmaids and their 
children foremost, and Leah and her chil- 
dren after, and Rachel and Joseph hind- 
ermost. 

3 And he passed over before them, and 
bowed himself to the ground ** seven times, 
until he came near to his brother. 

4 And Esau ran to meet him, and em- 
braced "^him, and fell on his ''neck, and 
kissed him : and they wept. 

5 And he lifted up his eyes, and saw 
the women and the children ; and said. 
Who are those * with thee 1 And he said. 
The children which God hath graciously 
given® thy servant. 

6 Then the handmaidens came near, 
they and their children, and they bowed 
themselves. 

7 And Leah also vritli her children came 
near, and bowed themselves ; and after 
came Joseph near and Rachel, and they 
bowed themselves. 

8 And he said, t What meaner? thou by all 
this drove which I met 1 And he snid,These 
arc to find '^grace in the sight of my lord. 

9 And Esau said, I have enough, my 
brother ; t keep that thou hast unto ^ thyself. 

10 And Jacob said. Nay, I pray thee, if 
now I have found grace in thy sight, then 
receive my present at my hand ; for there- 
fore I have seen thy ''face, as though I 



a chap. 32 : fi. b cliap. 18:2 H2:6; 43: ifi. c cliap.33:28. d rhap. 
4F,:U. * Heb.lothec. e chap. 48: 0; Psa. 127:3. iUeb.Whatia 
all this band to thee ? f chap. 32 : 5, 1 6. t Heli. be that to thee that 
iathine. gProv.lH:7. h chap.43:3 ; 2S:uii.3: 13. iISam.25:27; 
2King»,S:I5. ^Heb.nll things. jrhil.4:l«. k iKiriRS.S: 16,2.3. 
I lChron.22:5. || Heb. accoidiitg to the foot of the wa7k,etc., and 



20. Pr.iyer does not render needless the most dil- 
igent use of appropriate means, but encourages it, 
and is instrumental in its success. 

28. Fervency and perseverance in penitent, be- 
lieving prayer, has great influence with God : it 
prepares the way for deliverance from present trials, 
and furnishes the best preparation for all which are 
future. 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

•3. Bowed himself; according to the custom of 
inferiors to their superiors. 

4. T/iei/ wept ; for joy, at meeting each other 
in such a kind manner. 

8. Grace; favor, by their being presented to Esan. 

10. As though I had seen the face of God; 
under circumstances of great and peculiar favor. 

11. il7y hlessi>ig : his present as a token of his 
kindness and desire to promote Esau's good. 

12. He; Esau. 

13. He; Jacob. All the floclc ; the young, and 
those tliat could not bear the fatigue. 



had seen the face of God, and thou wast 

pleased with me. 
I 11 Take, I pray thee, my 'blessing that 

is brought to thee ; because God hath 
I dealt graciously with me, and because I 
1 have * enough: J and he urged ''him, and 
■ he took it. 

12 And he said, Let us take our journey, 
and let us go, and I will go before thee. 

1 3 And he said unto him. My lord know- 
eth that the children are ' tender, and the 
flocks and herds with young are with me ; 
and if men should overdrive them one 
day, all the flock will die. 

14 Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over 
before his servant; and I will lead on 
softly, II according as the cattle that goeth 
before me and the children be able to en- 
dure, until I come unto my lord unto 
Seir." 

15 And Esau said. Let me now * leave 
with thee some of the folk that are with 
me : And he said, t What needeth it"? Let 
me find grace in the "sight of my lord. 

16 1[So Esau returned that day on his 
way vxnto Seir. 

17 And Jacob journeyed to "Succoth, 
and built him a house, and made booths 
for his cattle : therefore the name of the 
place is called t Succoth. 

1 8 T[ And Jacob came to p Shalem, a city 
of ^ Shechem, which is in the land of Ca- 
naan, when he came from Padan-aram ; 
and pitched his tent before the city. 

19 And he ^ bought a parcel of a field, 
where he had spread his tent, at the hand of 
the children of II Hamor, Shechem's father, 
for a hundred * pieces of money. 

20 And he erected there an 'altar, and 
called it t El-Elohe-Isracl. 

according to the foot of the children, m chap. 32 : 3. ' Heh. tet, 
itr.place. \ Heb. Wherefore is this ? n chap. 34 : U ; Ruth2: 13; 
2S:ini.lfi:4. o Josh. 13: 27; .ludg. 8:3. t Tbalift, booths, r John 
3 : 23. \ called, Act« 7 : Ifi. Sychem. q chap. 23 : 17 ; Josh. 24 : 32. 
|| called, Acts 7:lh,Bm'nor. * Or, lamia. rchap.35:7. f That 
IS, God the God of Israel. 



15. Let me find grace; be permitted to pro- 
ceed without any of Esau's men to accompany him. 

17. House; or tent. Chap. 27:15. Booths; 
shelters, coverings. Succoth. ; tents ; a place east 
of the Jordan, and south of the Jabbok. 

18. Shalem; on the west of Jordan, and north- 
east of Shechem. Shalem means peace ; and some 
have rendered this, he came in peace to the city of 
Shechem. Shechem; or Sychar, John 4 : 5, about 
forty miles north of Jerus.ilem, in the part of Ca- 
naan afterwards called Samaria. 

20. El-Elohe-Israel ; God the God of Israel. 
Chap. 32 : 24-30. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. A soft answer turneth away wrath ; and vield- 
ing pacifieth great offences. Prov. 15:1; 'Eccl. 
10:4. 

11. Men who feel and act right, will in all their 
ways acknowledge God, and adore him as the giver 
of all their mercies. In so doing, they may liope 
for wisdom to .idopt such measures as he will crown 
with success. Prov. 3:6; Psa. 25 : 9. 

47 



The Shechcmiles 



GENESIS XXXIV. 



arc circicmcised. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

1 Dinah is ravished br Shpchom. 4 He supth to marry 
her. 1.3 The sons of Jacol) oiler the condition of cir- 
cumcision to the Shecheiiiitf s. 20 Hamorand She- 
chem persuade them to accejit it. 3-> The sons of 
Jacob upon that advanta<;e slay them, 27 and spoil 
their city. .30 Jacob reproveth Simeon and Levi. 

AND "Dinah the daughter of Leah, 
which she bare unto Jacob, went out 
to ""see the daughtcr.s of tlie land. 

2 And when Shechcm the son of Hamor 
the Hivite, prince of the country, saw 
her,"^ he took her, and lay with her, and 
deliled'* her. 

'i And liis soul "'clave unto Dinah the 
daughter of .Jacob, and he loved the dam- 
.•<el, and .spake + kindly unto the damsel. 

4 And Shechcm spake unto his father 
Hamor, .saying, Get me this *damsel to 
wife. 

5 And Jacob licard that he had defiled 
Dinah his daughter : now his sons were 
with his cattle in the field : and Jacob 
held his ^peace until they were come. 

6 lyAnd Hamor the father of Shechcm 
went out unto Jacob to commune with him. 

7 And the sons of Jacob came out of the 
field when they heard it : and the men 
were grieved, and they were ^A-ery wroth, 
because he had wrought ''folly in Israel 
in lying with Jacob's daughter; which 
thing ought not to be 'done. 

8 And Hamor communed with them, 
saying. The soul of my son Shechem long- 
eth for your daughter: I pray you give 
her him to wife. 

9 And make ye marriages with us, and 
give your daughters unto us, and take 
our daughters unto you. 

10 And ye shall dwell with us: and 
the land shall be before J you ; dwell and 
trade ye therein, and get you possessions 
therein. 

11 And Shechcm said unto her father, 
and unto her brethren. Let me find grace 
in youreyes, and what ye shall say unto 
me, I will give. 

12 Ask me never so much ''dow^y and 
gift, and I will give according as ye shall 
say unto me : but give mo the damsel to 
wife. 

13 x\nd the sons of Jacob answered 



. 


rh 


up. 30: 


■21. bTitU(i2:A. 


C.I 


u,1f 


14:1: 


2Sn 


11.11:2. »Heb. 


kumbltd htr. 


neiil.21:U; 11: 


M, 


W:. 


Ull". 1>1 


•24 


2.1; Kwk.ea: 10, 


11. 


d 


Ruth 


:H; l.Snin. IS:1 


t 


Hctj, «u tilt 


hea 


'/ of the dttnuct. 


2a 


ini. 


19:7; 


2Clirrin.a):22; 


\n. 


HO: 


2. • .1 


lA- 


14:2. fl.Sam. 


10 


27 


iSttin 


.13:22. » clinp 


Vi 


7. 


h Joul 


. 7: 


1.5; .ludg. 20:6: 



20. When GoJ, in fulfilint'nt of iiis promises, be- 
.stow.s on men speci:il favor.s, thiy should render spe- 
cial thanksgiving; and wherever they reside, should 
have a place consecrated to public worship. 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 
13. Deceitfully : pretending one thing and mean- 
ing another. And said ; to justify the crime they 
were plotting. 
4S 



Shechem and Hamor his father"' de- ^B.ciirm: 
ceitfuUy, and said. Because he had defiled 
Dinah their sister : 

14 And they said unto them, We cannot 
do this thing, to give our sister to one that 
is uncircumcised; for that were a '"re- 
proach unto us : 

15 But in this will we consent unto 
you : If ye will be as we be, that every 
male of you be "circumcised; 

16 Then will we give our daughters 
unto you, and we will take your daugh- 
ters to us, and we will dwell with you, 
and we will become one people. 

17 But if ye will not hearken unto us, 
to bo circumcised; then will we take our 
daughter, and we will be gone. 

18 And their words pleased Hamor and 
Shechem Hamor's son. 

19 And the young man deferred not to 
do the thing, because he had "delight in 
Jacob's daughter : and he icas more p hon- 
orable than all the house of his father. 

20 T[And Hamor and Sliechem his son 
came unto the gate of their city, and com- 
muned with the men of their city, saying, 

21 These men are peaceable with us; 
therefore let them dwell in the land, and 
trade therein : for the land, behold, it is 
large enough for them : let us take their 
daughters to us for wives, and let us give 
them our daughters. 

22 Only i herein will the men consent 
unto us for to dwell with us> to be one 
people, if every male among us be cir- 
cumcised, as they are circumcised. 

23 Shall not their cattle, and their sub- 
stance, and every beast of Uheirs he ours? 
only let us consent unto them, and they 
will dwell with us. 

24 And unto Hamor and unto Shechem 
his son hearkened all that 'went out of 
the gate of his city ; and every male was 
circumcised, all that went out of the gate 
of his city. 

25 1[And it came to pass on the third 
day, when they were sore, that two of 
the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Di- 
nah's brethren, took each man his sword, 
and 'came upon the city boldly, and slew 
all the males. 



2.S 


lin. 


13. 


12. 1 ncut.23 


:17. jcl 


ap. 


13:9. 


V Ex.22 


17 


1 Pr<.T. 


2B 


•.'fi. 


ni 


.lost). 5 


9. n 


Gh1.4:12 




clinp. 
; 2Ki 


29:. 30. p r 


mp. 4 : 9 : 


41 


•20 


N 


imbera 2 


•:1:-.: 


1 Kin^, 2 


:2- 


ng», fi : I ; 


I.S 


R. :l : 'A-h ; 


fi: 


3; 


2:! 


8,!1; A 


■t!l 13 


ftO; 17: 


2. 


q ver 


. 15, 17. 


r 


Proverb* 


1: 


■2, 13. 


• cli.ip. 


23:18. 


t cli.ip. 


49: 


6-7. 









14. TT'c cainwt ; this shows the mannei in whicii 
tlie word cannot is often used in the Bible, referring, 
not to power, but choice. 

Ifi. Then will we g-ive ; tliis was false, and 
designed to deceive Hamor and Sheciiem. 

19. Brfrrred not ; did not hesitate to do what 
they proposed. 

20. Simeoji, niid Levi ; they were the leaders, 
thougli others in:iy have assisted them. 



God scndeth Jacob to 



GENESIS XXX^. 



Bclhcl. and blcssclh him. 



Sliechem his son with the *edge'' of the 
sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem's 
house, and went out. 

27 The sons of Jacob came upon the 
slain,"* and spoiled the city, because they 
had defiled their sister. 

28 They took their sheep, and their oxen, 
and their asses, and that which luas in the 
city, and that which ivas in the field, 

29 And all their wealth, and all their little 
ones, and their wives took they captive, 
and spoiled even all that was in the house. 

30 And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, 
Ye have "^ troubled me to make me to 
stink ''among the inhabitants of the land, 
among the Canaanites, and the Perizzites : 
and I being ^few in number, they shall 
gather themselves together against me, 
and slay me ; and I shall be destroyed, I 
and my house. 

31 And they said. Should ho deal with 
our sister as with a harlot ? 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

1 God sendeth Jacob to Beth-el. -2 He purgeth his 
house of idols. 6 He buildeth an altar at Beth-el. 8 
Deborah dieth at AUon-bachuth. 9 God blesseth Ja- 
cob at Beth-el. 16 Rachel travaileth of Benjamin, 
and dieth in the ■n'ay to Edar. '2-2 Reuben lieth with 
Bilhah. 23 The sons of Jacob. 27 Jacob oometh to 
Isaac at Hebron. 2a The age, death, and burial of 
Isaac. 

A ND God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up 
XjL to Beth-el, and dwell "^ there : and 
make there an altar unto God, that ap- 
peared unto thee when thou sfleddest 
from the face of Esau thy brother. 

2 Then Jacob said unto his ''household, 
and to all that were with him. Put away 
the strange 'gods that are J among you, and 
be '^clean, and change your garments : 

3 And let us arise, and go up to Beth-el ; 
and I will make there an altar unto God, 
who answered me in the 'day of my dis- 
tress, and was with ""me in the way which 
I went. 

4 And they gave unto Jacob all the 



* Heb. mouth. « Deut. Si : 42. b cliap. 49 : 7. c .Josh. 7 : Jo. 
J Ex.5:2l: lSam.lS:4: 27:12. eDeut.4:27; Psalm Itti: 12. 
fPsa.47:4. B chap. 27: 4:i; 28: 13, 19. h chap. 18: 19. i .losh. 
24:15; Psa. 101:2-7. j chap. 31:19; Josh. 24:23; 1 Sam. 7 : 3. 
k E.xodus 19:10. 1 chap. 32 : 7, 24 ; Psa. 107 : ti. m chap. 2.S : 20 ; 



29. T/ie hoji.^e ; the houses of the Shechemites. 

30. Stink ; become odious, hateful. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Ne.vt to the fear and love of God, (he guardi- 
anship of parents is the great safeguard of children. 

5. In this life, trials often succeed trials like the 
waves of the sea ; the passing away of some being 
quickly followed by the coming of others. 

13. The deceitfulness of parents is often dread- 
fully punished by the deceitfulness of their children. 

24. Pecuniary considerations have great influence 
with men. and they will readily submit to much 
^elf-denial for the sake of making money. 

29. Deceit, hypocrisy, and a profane use of divine 
ordinances, blind the mind, harden the heart, sear 



strange gods which were in their hand, 
and all their " ear-rings which were in thei r 
ears ; and Jacob hid them under the oak 
which tvas by "Shechem. 

5 And they journeyed : and the terror 
of PGod was upon the cities that were 
round about them, and they did not pur- 
sue after the sons of Jacob. 

6 H So Jacob came to Luz, which is in 
the land of Canaan, that is, Beth-el, he 
and all the people that were with him. 

7 And he built there an altar, and called 
the place t El-beth-el ; because there God 
appeared 1 unto him, when he fled from 
the face of his brother. 

8 But Deborah, Rebekah's nurs^e, died, 
and she was buried beneath Beth-el, un- 
der an oak : and the name of it was called 
Allon-bachuth.t 

9 T[ And God appeared unto Jacob again 
when he came out of Padan-aram, and 
blessed him. 

10 And God said unto him. Thy name 
is Jacob : thy name shall not be called 
any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy 
name ; and he called his name ■■ Israel. 

1 1 And God said unto him, " I am God Al- 
mighty : be fruitful and multiply ; a nation 
and a company of nations shall be of thee, 
and kings shall come out of thy loins. 

12 And the land which I gave * Abra- 
ham and Isaac, to thee I will give it, and 
to thy seed after thee will I give the land. 

13 And God went up from "him in the 
place where he talked with him. 

14 AndJacob set up a^pillar inthe place 
where he talked with him. even a pillar 
of stone : and he poured a drink-offering 
thereon, and he poured oil thereon. 

15 And Jacob called the name of the 
place where God spake with him, Beth-el. 

16 Tf And they journeyed from Beth-el; 
and there w-as but ^ a little way to come 
to Ephrath : and Rachel travailed, and 
she had hard labor. 

17 And it came to pass when she was 



31:3.42. 


n Ex.3 


!:3.4; 


Ho 


sea2:13. « 


.1 


ud" 9 : 6. 
f That 


P Ex. 


23 : 27 ; 


Dent. 11 


:25; .los 


1. 2 : 9 


; 2Cbron. 14: 


4. 


is, the G«d of 


BetheL 


q chap. 


28:13. 


t 


That 18, th 


oc 


* of weepine. 


r cbap. 


32:28. 


1 chap. 17 


1 ; 48 


3,4 


;Ex.6:3. 


c 


ap.l2:7; 


13: l.i 


28:l:i. 


u chap. 


7 : 22. » 


chap. 


28: 


18. 4 Heb 


« 


litlU piece 


ofyro 


unit. 



the conscience, and prepare the \A-ay for the most 
abominable crimes. 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

1. Beth-el; chap. 12:8; 28:19-22. 

2. Strange gods ; idols. Be clean ; cleanse or 
purify yourselves. 

3. The day of onij distress; chap. 28:20; 32:7, 
24-28. 

7. EI-beth.el; God of Bethel. 

8. Deborah; chap. 24:59. Allon-hachnth ; 
the oak of weeping. 

l."). Beth-el; house of God. Chap. 28: 19. 
Tfi. Epiirnth, afterwards called Bethlehem, 
about si.\ miles south of Jerusalem. Ver. 19. 

49 



Death of Rachel and Isaac. 



G'ENESIS XXXVI. 



Generations of Esau. 



ill hard labor, that the midwife said unto 
her, Fear not; *thou shalt have this son 
also. 

18 And it came to pass, as her ''soul 
was in departing, (for she died,) that she 
called his name * Ben-oni : but his father 
called him t Benjamin. 

19 And Rachel "^ died, and was buried in 
the way to ■' Ephrath, which 2s Beth-lehem. 

20 And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave : 
that is the pillar of Rachel's " grave unto 
this day. 

21 11' And Israel journeyed, and spread 
his tent beyond the 4ower of Edar. 

22 And it came to pass, when Israel 
dwelt in that land, that « Reuben went 
and lay with Bilhah his father's concu- 
bine : and Israel heard it. Now the sons 
of Jacob were "^ twelve : 

23 The sons of Leah ; Reuben, Jacob's 
first-born, and Simeon, and Levi, and Ju- 
dah, and Issachar, and Zebulun : 

24 The sons of Rachel ; Joseph, and 
Benjamin : 

25 And the sons of Bilhah, Rachel's 
handmaid ; Dan, and Naphtali : 

26 And the sons of Zilpali, Leah's hand- 
maid ; Gad, and Asher. These are the 
sons of Jacob, which were born to him 
in Padan-aram. 

27 % And Jacob came unto Isaac his 
father unto 'Mamrc, unto the city of J Ar- 
ba, which is Hebron, where Abraham and 
Isaac sojourned. 

28 And the days of Isaac were a hun- 
dred and fourscore years. 

29 And Isaac gave up the ghost, and 
died, and was ''gathered unto his people, 
being old and full of days ; and his sons 
Esau 'and Jacob buried him. 



I CHAPTER XXXVI. 1,.?;sS. 

1 Esau's three wive«. 6 His removing to mount Seir. 
i) His sons. 1.5 The dukes which descended of his 
sons. 20 The sons and dukes nf Seir. '24 Anah find- 
eth mules. .'Jl The kings of Edom. 40 The dukes 
that descended of Esau. 

"IVrOW these are the generations of Esau, 
-L\ who is ™Edom. 

2 Esau took his wives of the daughters 
of Canaan ; "Adah the daughter of Elon 
the Hittite, and Aholibamah the daugh- 
ter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon the 
Hivite, 

3 And Bashemath, Ishmael's daughter, 
sister of Nebajoth. 

4 And Adah bare to "Esau, Eliphaz ; 
and Bashemath bare Reuel ; 

5 And Aholibamah bare Jeush, and Jaa- 
1am, and Korah : these arc the sons of 
Esau, which were born unto him in the 
land of Canaan. 

6 And Esau took his wives, and his 
sons, and his daughters, and all the + per- 
sons of his house, and his cattle, and all 
his beasts, and all his substance which 
he had got in the land of Canaan ; and 
went into the country from the face of 
his brother Jacob. 

7 For their riches were more than that 
they might dwell together : and the land 
wherein they were strangers could not 
bear Pfhcm, because of their cattle. 

8 Thus dwelt Esau in mount i Seir : 
Esau 15 Edom. 

9 *\ And these are the generations of 
Esau the father of * the Edomites, in mount 
Seir : 

10 These are the names of Esau's sons; 
Eliphaz "■ the son of Adah the wife of 
Esau ; Reuel the son of Bashematli the 
wife of Esau. 



« rhap. 30 : 24 i 1 Sam. 4 : 20. b I.nin. 2 : 1 2. * That is, tht ton 
of my lorrmo. f Tlint is, the ton of the right hand, c cliap. 48 : 7. 
<l Until 1: 2; 4:11; Micaliftrl; Matthew 2 : 6. e 1 Sam. 10:2. 
f Mic-ah 4:8. ( chap. 4M:4; ICIirnn. 5: I; 1 Cor. 6: I. h chap. 



IS. Bcji-0711 ; son of my sorrow. Benjamin; 
meanini;, son of the right hand, one greatly beloved. 

20. Unto this day ; the time when Moses wrote 
tills history. 

21. Tower of Edar ; called, Micah 4 : 8, tower 
of the flock, and supposed to have been not far from 
Bethlehem. 

27. Hebron; chap. 13:18; 23:2, 19. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. When God has graciously appeared for us in 
trouble, answered our prayers, and visited us in 
mercy, we should hasten to acknowledge his good- 
ness, and render the praise and thanksgiving which 
are his due and our reasonable service. 

8. Domestics who perforin with fidelity their ap- 
propriate duties to God and to men, add greatly to 
the comfort and uscfuliie.ss of families, and are justly 
entitled to confidence, atlection, and respect. By the 
wise .^nd the good they will be greatly beloved while 
they live, and deeply lamented when they die. 

14. Whenever God especiallv blesses men, pious 
gratitude should lead them publicly to acknowledge 
and adore him. 
50 



4R:8. 


i chap. 1.1: \». i .losh. 14:15: 


15:13. k chap. 25:8: .Too 


i-.:2B. 


1 chnp. 25 : 9. m chap. 25 : 30. 


B chap. 26: 34. » I Chron. 
11. qI>eut.S:S. \Heb. 


1 ; SI). 


t Heb. touts, p chap. 13:6, 


Edom. 


r ver. 3, 4 ; I Chron. 1 : ?6. 


. 



19. Not a thought, word, or action escapes the 
notice of God, or ever passes from his remembrance. 
Give me children, said Rachel, or else I die. Chap. 
30: 1. God gave her children, and she died. More 
wise, more safe, more blessed is it to say. Not my 
will, but thine be done. Mat. 26:39-42; Luke 
22 : 42. 

29. The death of a parent should ever awaken 
new .affection and kindness in children ; and while 
they unite in paying respect to his memory, they 
should be grateful for his virtues, and so far as he 
obeyed God, imitate his example. 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

1. Generatiims of Esau; a notice of his de- 
scendants. Edom; chap. 35:30. 

2. Esau took his vdves; chap. 2G:. 34; 2.8:9. 
In the different .accounts his wives and their parents 
are called by different names, more than one name 
being often applied to the same person. 

7. Could not hear them ; they needed more pas- 
turage for their flocks. 

8. Mount Seir; chap. 32:3. 



The sons of Seir. 



GENESIS XXXVI 



The dukes of Edam. 



B.c.'nw*: 11 A.iid the sons of Eliphaz were 
Teman, Omar, * Zepho, and Gatam, and 
Kenaz. 

12 And Timna was concubine to Eli- 
phaz, Esau's son ; and she bare to Eli- 
phaz, *Amalek: these were the sons of 
Adah, Esau's wife. 

13 And these are the sons of Reuel ; 
Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah, and Miz- 
zah : these were the sons of Bashemath, 
Esau's wife. 

14 ^And these were the sons of Aho- 
libamah, the daughter of Anah the daugh- 
ter of Zibeon, Esau's wife : and she bare 
to Esau, Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah. 

15 Tl These were dukes of the sons of 
Esau : the sons of Eliphaz the first-born 
son of Esau ; duke Teman, duke Omar, 
duke Zepho, duke Kenaz, 

16 Duke Korah, duke Gatam, and duke 
Amalek : these are the dukes that came of 
Eliphaz, in the land of Edom : these were 
the sons of Adah. 

17 ^ And these are the sons of Reuel, 
Esau's -son ; duke Nahath, duke Zerah, 
duke Shammah, duke Mizzah : these are 
the dukes that came of Reuel, in the land 
of Edom : these are the sons of Bashe- 
math, Esau's wife. 

18 i[ And these are the sons of Aholi- 
bamah, Esau's wife ; duke Jeush, duke 
Jaalam, duke Korah : these were the dukes 
that came of Aholibamah the daughter of 
Anah, Esau's wife. 

19 These are the sons of Esau, who is 
Edom, and these are their dukes. 

20 '[[These are the sons of '•Seir the 
Horite, who inhabited the land ; Lotan, 
and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, 

21 And Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan : 
these are the dukes of the Horites, the 
children of Seir in the land of Edom. 

22 And the children of Lotan were Hori 
and t Hemam ; and Lotan's sister was 
Timna. 

23 And the children of Shobal ivere 
these ; + Alvan, and Manahath, and Ebal, 
Shepho,^ and Onam. 

24 And these are the children of Zibe- 
on ; both Ajah, and Anah : this was that 
Anah that found the mules in the wil- 
derness, as he fed the asses of Zibeon his 
father. 

25 And the children of Anah «"ere these ; 

* Or, Zephi. 1 Cliron. 1:36. • Ex. 17:8, 14; Numbers 24 : -20 ; 
I Samuel, l.T : 2. b chan. 14: 6; Deut. -2 : 12, M. f Or, Homam. 
i Or, Alian. % Or, Shephi. || Or, Amram. * Or, Jakan. 



1.5. Dukes ; leaders, or princes. 
20. Sons of Seir ; these were the former in- 
habitants, called Horites. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

7. In this world, as to temporal things, God treats 
the righteous and the wicked in many respects alike. 



Dishon, and Aholibamah the daughter of 
Anah. 

26 And these are the children of Dishon ; 
Hemdan,ll and Eshban, and Ithran, and 
Cheran. 

27 The children of Ezer are these ; Bil- 
han, and Zaavan, and * Akan. 

28 The children of Dishan are these ; 
Uz, and Aran. 

29 These are the dukes that came of the 
Horites ; duke Lotan, duke Shobal, duke 
Zibeon, duke Anah, 

30 Duke Dishon, duke Ezer, duke Di- 
shan : these are the dukes that came of 
Hori, among their dukes iu the land of 
Seir. 

31 ^And these arc the kings that reigned 
in the land of "^ Edom, before there reigned 
any king over the children of Israel. 

32 And Bela the son of Beor reigned in 
Edom : and the name of his city xcas 
Dinhabah. 

33 And Bela died, and Jobab the son of 
Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead. 

34 And Jobab died, and Husham of the 
land of Temani reigned in his stead. 

35 And Husham died, and Hadad the 
son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the 
field of Moab, reigned in his stead : and 
the name of his city ivas Avith. 

36 And Hadad died, and Samlah of Mas- 
rekah reigned in his stead. 

37 And Samlah died, and Saul of ^ Re- 
hoboth bij the river reigned in his stead. 

38 And Saul died, and Baal-hanan the 
son of Achbor reigned in his stead. 

39 And Baal-hanan the son of Achbor 
died, and tHadar reigned in his stead: 
and the name of his city loas Pau ; and 
his wife's name ii'as Mehetabel, the daugh- 
ter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab. 

40 And these are the names of the 
^ dukes that came of Esau, according to 
their families, after their places, by their 
names ; duke Timnah, duke t Alvah, duke 
Jetheth, 

41 Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke 
Pinon, 

42 Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke 
Mibzar, 

43 Duke Magdiel, duke Iram : these be 
the dukes of Edom, according to their 
habitations in the land of their possession : 
he 15 Esau the father of ^ the Edomites. 



c 1 Chron. 1 : 43. d chap. 10: U. f 1 Chron. 1 : 50. Hadad Pa,. 
After his death w.is an aristocracy. « Exodus 15 : 15. t Or, 
Aliah. % Heb. Edom. 



He makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, 
and sends his rain on the just and on the unjust. 
But in the future world, each will receive according 
to his works. 

43. Enough of the history of Esau's descendants 
is given in the Bible to show that tlie promises of 
God concerning him were accompli.sheil. 

51 



Joseph^s two dreams. 



GENESIS XXXVII. 



He visits his brethren. 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 

2 Joseph is hated of his brethren. 5 His two dreams. 
i:i Jacob sendeth him to visit his brethren. IS His 
brcthrea conspire his death. 21 Reuben saveth him. 
26 They sell him to the Ishraaelites. 31 His father, 
deceived by the bloody coat, mourneth for him. 36 
He is sold to Potiphar in Kgypt. 

AND Jacob dwelt in the land * wherein 
his father was *a stranger, in the 
land of Canaan. 

2 These are the generations of Jacob. 
Joseph being seventeen years old, was 
feediiii; the flock with his brethren ; and 
the lad was with the sons of Bilhah, and 
with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives : 
and Joseph brought unto his father ''their 
evil report. 

3 Now Israel loved Joseph more than 
all his children, because he wa.? the "^son 
of his old age : and he made him a coat 
of many t colors.'^ 

4 And when his brethren saw that their 
father loved him more than all his breth- 
ren, they •" hated him, and could not speak 
peaceably unto him. 

5 ^ And Joseph dreamed a dream, and 
he told it his brethren : and they hated 
him yet the more. 

6 And he said unto them, Hear, I pray 
you, this dream which I have dreamed : 

7 For behold, we were binding sheaves 
in the field, and lo, my sheaf arose, and 
also stood upright ; and behold, your 
sheaves stood round about, and made 
obeisance "^ to my sheaf. 

8 And his brethren said to him, Shalt 
thou indeed reign sovcr us? orshaltthou 
indeed have dominion over us ? And they 
hated him yet the more for his dreams, 
and for his words. 

9 1[ And he dreamed yet another dream, 
and told it his brethren, and said, Be- 
hold, I have dreamed a dream more : and 
behold, the sun and the moon and the 
eleven stars made ''obeisance to me. 

10 And he told it to his father, and to 
his brethren : and his father rebuked 
him, and said unto him, What is this 
dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I 
and thy mother and thy brethren indeed 



* lieh. of hi* /ather^t tojourningi. a cli.ip. 17:8: 2.1:4; 28-4: 
n6:7; Hcb. ll:i>-lfi. b 1 Sam. 2:M--24 ; 1 Cor. 1:11; fi:!; II : 18. 
c chap. 44: M. f Or, pUcei. 4 Judg.f.: 30 ; 2Snm. 13 : 18; Ezek. 
16:16. • chnp. 49:23; Pen1m38:iy; 69:4; Titu(..'):3. r clian. 
42:6-9; 43:2«; 44: 14. i: Pun. 118:22; I.iike 19: 14,27. k cliap. 
44:14:46:29:60:18. I chnp. 27 :29. jAct»7:9. kl)an.7:28: 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 

2. Sonj of Bilhah, ayid — Zilpah ; Dan and 
Naphtali, Gad and Asher. Chap. 30 : 4-13. Their 
rvtl report ; Joseph made known to Jacob their evil 
conduct. 

3. Coat of mavy colors ; a mark of distinction, 
and an expression of his father's love. 

4. Contd not ; for want of disposition, not of 
power ; they chose not to do it. 

7. Made obeisance ; bowed down; a common 
mode of expressing subjection. 
52 



come to bow 'down ourselves to a":?™: 
thee to the earth? 

1 1 And his brethren J envied him ; but 
his father ''observed the saying. 

1 2 T[ And his brethren went to feed their 
fathers flock in Shechem. 

13 And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not 
thy brethren feed the jloclc in Shechem? 
Come, and I will 'send thee unto them. 
And he said to him. Here am I. 

14 And he said to him, Go, I pray thee, 
see t whether it be well with thy brethren, 
and well with the flocks ; and bring me 
word again. So he sent him out of the 
vale of '" Hebron, and he came to Shechem. 

15 ^ And a certain man found him, and 
behold, he was wandering in the field : 
and the man asked him, saying. What 
seekest " thou ? 

16 And he said, I seek my brethren: "tell 
me, I pray thee, where they feed their flocks. 

17 And the man said. They are depart- 
ed hence ; for I heard them say. Let us 
go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his 
brethren, and found them in p Dothan. 

18 And when they saw him afar off, 
even before he came near unto tJiem, they 
conspired 1 against him to slay him. 

19 And they said one to another, Behold, 
this ^ dreamer cometh. 

20 Come now therefore, and let us slay 
him, ""and cast him into some pit, and Ave 
will say, Some evil beast hath devoured 
him ; and we shall see what will become 
of his dreams. 

21 And Reuben heard it, and he deliv- 
ered him out of their hands ; and said, 
Let us not kill him. 

22 And Reuben said unto them. Shed 
no 'blood, but cast him into this pit that 
is in the wilderness, and lay no hand 
upon him ; that he might rid him out of 
their hands, to deliver him to his father 
again. 

23 ^ And it came to pass, when Joseph 
was come unto his brethren, that they 
stripped 'Joseph out of his coat, his coat of 
many H colors" that was on him ; 

24 And they took him, and cast him 



T.iikc2:19,5l. 1 1 Sam. 17: 17; I-uke 20: 13. t Hfh. tte the peace 
of thy brethren, etc. m chnp. 3ft : 27. n Juilp.4: 22 ; 2Kiiipi,li: 19. 
oCant.l:7. P 2King«,6: 13. q Psa. 31 : 13; 37: 12,32 ; 94:21 ; Mat. 
21:38; 27:1; .Iohnll:63; Acl,t23:12. % Heb.malter of dreamt. 
r Prov. 1:11,16; 27:4. • chap. 42: 52. I Mat, 27: 28. \\Or,piecet. 
n verse 3. 

9. Sun — moon and — eleven stars; supposed 
to refer to Joseph's father, mother, and eleven 
brethren. 

11. Ohserved the saying; remembered it. and 
reflected much upon its meaning. 

12. Shechem; chap. 33:18. 

17. Dotha7i ; twelve or fifteen miles north of 
Shechem. 

22. That he mi ght rid him out of their haiid.i; 
prevent their killing him, and restore him again to 
his father. 



Joseph is sold 



GENESIS XXXVIII. 



to the Ishmadites. 



Re's*' into a *pit : and the pit ivas empty, 1 
there was no water in it. 1 

25 And they sat down to eat ''bread: 
and they lifted up their eyes and looked, 
and behold, a company of "^ Ishmaelitcs 
came from Gilead, with their camels bear- 
ing spieery and '^balm and myrrh, going 
to carry it down to Egypt. 

26 And Judah said unto his brethren. 
What profit is it if we slay our brother, 
and '^conceal his blood'? 

27 Come, and let us sell him to the Ish- 
maelitcs, and let not our ''hand be upon 
him ; for he is our brother and our flesh : 
and his brethren *were content. 

28 Then there passed by sMidianites, 
merchant-men ; and they drew and lifted 
up Joseph out of the pit, and sold ''Joseph 
to the Ishmaelitcs for twenty pieces of sil- 
ver : and they brought Joseph into Egypt. 

29 1[ And Reuben returned unto the pit ; 
and behold, Joseph teas not in the pit ; 
and he 'rent his clothes. 

30 And he returned unto his brethren, 
and said. The J child is not ; and I, whither 
shall I go 1 

31 And they took Joseph's ''coat, and 
killed a kid of the goats, and dipped the 
coat in the blood ; 

32 And they sent the coat of /»««?/ coloi's, 
and they brought it to their father ; and 
said. This have we found : know now 
whether it be thy son's coat or no. 

33 And he knew it, and said. It is my 
son's coat; an evil 'beast hath devoured 
him ; Joseph is without doubt rent in 
pieces. 

34 And Jacob rent his clothes, and put 
sackcloth'" upon his loins, and mourned 
for his son many days. 



a 


P 


,aln 


i:!5:7i 


T.ain 


.4 


: 20. h 


Pi 


o: 


r.0 : 20 


; An- 


09fi 


6 


t 


ver. 


M, 


•M 


d 


.ler. 8 


■2-: 


e 


chap. 4: 


10 


: . 


nb Ifi: 


R. 


1 Sam 


18 


17; 


2S 


ni 


12 


:9. " 


Hfh 


h, 


arkened 




E 


ludg. 6 


::). 


h Ps 


a. 


Ids 


17; 


Zee 


li. 


11 : 


1-2; M: 


t. 97 


H 


Acts 7 


9 




i Num. 


Hrti 


; .In 


I" 


II 


:«; 


.l(ib 1 


iO 


.Toel 2 


:13. 


J 


rhup. 4 


''•■■ 


13 


a>; .Je 


r. M . 


15. 


k 


ver 


2:!. 



25. Ishmaelites ; descendants of Ishmael. Gil- 
end: ch.-ip. 31 :21. 

26. Slay our brother ; by leaving liiin to die in 
the pit. 

29. Midiaiiites ; descendants of Midian, Abra- 
ham's fourth son by Keturah. They and descend- 
ants of Ishmael were probably in tlie same com- 
pany. 

29. Rent his clothes; a common way of e,\- 
pressing grief. 

30. TliP child is not ; Reuben was probably ab- 
sent when they sold Joseph. 

33. Joseph is — rent in pieces ; Jacob, who de- 
ceived his father, is now himself wofully deceived 
by his children. 

34. Sackcloth ; a kind of coarse cloth worn by 
mourners. 

mSTRUCTIOXS. 

3. Parents in the treatment of their children need 
■wisdom from above, and should carefully avoid 
making invidious distinctions between them. 

8. Children who are especially favored need 
much wisdom, in order not needlessly to increase 



35 And all his sons and all his "daugh- 
ters rose up to comfort him ; but he re- 
fused to be comforted; and he said. For 
I will go down into the grave unto my son 
mourning. Thus his father wept for him. 

36 And the Midianitcs sold him into 
Egypt unto Potiphar, an t officer of Pha- 
raoh's, and t captain of the guard. 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

1 Judali tegetteth Er, Onan, and Phelah. C Ermarrl- 
eth Tamar. 8 The trespass of Onan. 11 Tamar 
stayethfor Shelah. 13 Shedeceiveth Judah. 27 Slie 
beareth twins, Pharez and Zarah. 

A ND it came to pass at that time, that 
J_A- Judah went down from his brethren, 
and turned in to a certain AduUamite, 
whose name tvas Hirali. 

2 And Judah saw there a daughter of a 
certain Canaanite, whose name iras Shu- 
ah ; and he took her, and went in unto her. 

3 And she conceived, and bare a son ; 
and he called his name "Er. 

4 And she conceived again, and bare- a 
son ; and she called his name PQnan. 

5 And she yet again conceived, and bare 
a son ; and called his name '' Shelah : and 
he was at Chezib when she bare him. 

6 And Judah took a wife for Er his first- 
born, whose name was Tamar. 

7 And Er, Judah's first-born, was wicked 
in the sight of the Lord ; ''and the Lord 
slew him. 

8 And Judah said unto Onan, Go in 
unto "thy brother's wife, and marry her, 
and raise up seed to thy brother. 

9 And Onan knew that the seed should 
not be his : and it came to pass, when he 
went in unto his brother's wife, that he 
spilled it on the ground, lest that he should 
give seed to his brother. 



1 chap. 44 : 28. m 2 KiiiKS. 19:1; K.sther 4:1; Isa. .•i2 : 1 1 : .lonah 
:i:^. n 2 Sam. 12:17. t Heh. eunuch, chamf/erlain, or, courtier, 
Esth. 1:10. f Or, chief marshal. Heh. chief of the slaughtermen 
OT executioners, ochap. 4fi:12. p chap. 4fi : 12. qver. U,2t>. 
r 1 Chron. 2 : 3. » Deut. iti : ri : Mat. 22 : 24. 



the difficulty which the partiality of parents occa- 
sions. 

11. God's dealings with children are full of in- 
struction, and worthy of being carefully observed 
and seriously pondered by parents. 

18. Envy tends to make men hard-hearted and 
cruel, to root out even natural affection, and awak- 
en the most malignant and murderous passions. 

24. Great favors of Providence are often accom- 
panied or followed by great trials. 2 Co.-. 2:7; 
Heb. 12 : 6. 

32. Under the influence of envy or covetousness, 
men may sell even their own brother into perpetual 
bondage, and rend the heart of an affectionate fa- 
ther with exquisite anguish. But in doing it, they 
are preparing for exquisite anguisli themselves. 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

1. Advllamite; belonging to Adullam, a place 
north of Hebron, and south-west from Jerusalem. 

2. Shiiah; the name, not of the daughter, but 
of her father. Ver. 12. 

9. Give seed to his brother; Deut. 25:5, 6. 
53 



Tamar dereiveth 



GENESIS XXXIX. 



her father-in-law. 



1 Ami the tliini!; whicli he did * displeas- 
ed the Lord ; wherefore he slew him also. 

1 1 Then said Judah to Tamar his daugh- 
ter-in-law, Remain a widow at thy fa- 
thers house, till Shelah my son be grown : 
for he said, Lest peradvcnture he die also, 
as his brethren did: and Tamar went 
and dwelt in her father's house. 

12 TfAnd tin process of time the daugh- 
ter of Shuah, Judah's wife, died ; and Ju- 
dah was eomforted, and went up unto his 
sheep-shearers to Timnath, he and his 
friend Hirah the AduUamite. 

13 And it was told Tamar, saying, Be- 
hold, thy father-in-law goetli up *to Tim- 
nath to shear his sheep. 

14 And she put her widow's garments 
off from her, and covered her w"ith a veil, 
and wrapped herself, and sat in -an open 
place,*" which is by the way to Timnath ; 
for she saw that Shelah was grown, and 
she was not given unto him to wife. 

1 5 When Judah saw her, he thought her 
to be a harlot ; because she had covered 
her face. . 

16 And he turned unto her by the way, 
and said. Go to, I pray thee, let me come 
in unto thee ; for he knew not that she 
7/v;.'; his daughter-in-law : and she said. 
What wilt thou give me, that thou may- 
cst come in unto me ? 

17 And he said, I will send thee ^a kid 
from the flock. And she said, Wilt thou 
give mc a pledge, till thou send if? 

18 And he said. What pledge shall I 
give thee? And she said. Thy "^signet, 
and thy bracelets, and thy staff that is in 
thy hand : and he gave it her, and came in 
unto her, and she conceived by him. 

19 And she arose, and went away, and 
laid by her veil from her, and put on the 
garments'' of her widowhood. 

20 And Judah sent the kid by the hand 
of his friend the AduUamite, to receive 
his pledge from the woman's hand : but 
he found her iiot. 

21 Then he asked the men of that place, 
saying. Where is the harlot that was 
openly H by the way-side? And they said, 
There was no harlot in this place. 





* H.-b. U)a. 


<i;i7 in 


the 


rye* of the 1 


0*0 


t Hcb. 


the daya were 


m 


uttiptied. • 


J.wli. 


!.=>: 


10: Jliili;. U: 


1- t 


Hfb. th 


e door of eyee. 


() 


,of Ennjim 


bPr 


ov. 


:12. %H.b. 


a kill 


^fthegontt. cv»*r. 2.'i. 


d 


.•.S.iln. U:i 


n. II 


Or 


in Enaiim. 


• H. 


b. becoin 


e n contempt. 


• 


Prov.s.st: 


R(>in.A:2l; Kpli. />: 12. 


f Ji 


(Ig. 19: 


I: Ho«-n.1:3. 



12. Timnath; south-west of Jerusalem. 

I.'). Covered her face; as was the custom of 
harlots. 

18. Signet; seal. Bracelets; ornaments for 
the wrists. 

S.*?. Let her take it ; let her keep the pledjje. 

26. More righteous ; less wicked. 
INSTRITCTIONS. 

2. Although it is ordinarily best for young men to 



said, I cannot find her ; and also the men 
of the place said, that there was no harlot 
in this place. 

23 And Judah said, Let her take it to 
her, lest we * be * shamed : behold, I sent 
this kid, and thou hast not found her. 

24 T[And it came to pass about three 
months after, that it was told Judah, say- 
ing, Tamar thy daughter-in-law hath 
played the "^harlot ; and also, behold, she 
is with child by whoredom. And Judah 
said, Bring her forth, and let her be s burnt. 

25 When she u-a.'s brought forth, she 
sent to her father-in-law, saying. By the 
man whose these are. am I with child : 
and she said, '' Discern, I pray thee, whose 
are these, the 'signet, and bracelets, and 
staff. 

26 And Judah acknowledged them, and 
said. She hath been more J righteous than 
I ; because that I gave her not to '' Shelah 
my son. And he knew her again no ' more. 

27 T[ And it came to pass in the time of 
her travail, that behold, twins were in 
her womb. 

28 And it came to pass when she trav- 
ailed, that the one put out his hand : and 
the midwife took and bound upon his 
hand a scarlet thread, saying. This came 
out first. 

29 And it came to pass, as he drew back 
his hand, that behold, his brother came 
out ; and she said, t How hast thou broken 
forth ? this breach be upon thee : there- 
fore his Utame was called tPharez."" 

30 And afterward came out his brother, 
that had the scarlet thread upon his hand ; 
and his name was called Zarah. 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

1 Joseph advanced in Potiphar's house. 7 He resisteth 
his mistress' temptation. 13 He is falsely accused. 
20 He is cast in prison. 21 God is with him there. 

AND Joseph was brought down to 
Egypt; and "Potiphar, an officer of 
Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an Egyp- 
tian, bought him of the hands of the Ish- 
maelites, which had brought him down 
thither. 



t I.ev.21:9; l)eut,22:'21 ; JS.im.lirS. b clisp. 37 : 3-2. i vrr.l«. 
J 1 Sum. J-*:!?, k ver. U. I Ji.b 3-1 : 31, 32; Koni. 13: i: ; Tilu» 
2:11,1-2. t Or, MTierefore hatt thou made tliin breach ngaimt thee f 
X Thai is, a breach, m Numbers 26:20; 1 Cbton. 2:4; Mat 1:3. 
n cliap. 37:3S: I'ea. lOS: 17. 



without earnest prayer to God for his guidance and 
blessing, that the connection may be a source of 
happiness and usefulness. 

10. Secret as well as open sins are all known to 
God, and unless repented of and forgiven, will be 
visited with his curse. 

20. Judah had been instrumentiil in deceiving 
his father, and now he is himself deceived. 

24. Those who are most guilty themselves are 



married early in life, ytt it should not be done j often most ready to denounce vengeance on others. 
51 



Joseph is advanced, 



GENESIS XXXIX, 



and cast into prison. 



B.'^ira/' 2 And the Lord was with »Jo- 
seph, and he was a prosperous man ; and 
he was in the house of his master the 
Egyptian. 

3 And his master saw that the Lord luas 
with him, and that the Lord made all that 
he did to ''prosper in his hand. 

4 And Joseph found "^ grace in his sight, 
anc^ he served him : and he made him 
overseer** over his house, and all that he 
had he put into his hand. 

5 And it came to pass from the time that 
he had made him overseer in his house, 
and over all that he had, that the Lord 
blessed the Egyptian's •■ house for Joseph's 
sake ; and the blessing of the Lord was 
upon all that he had in the "^house, and 
in the field. 

6 And he left all that he had in Joseph's 
hand ; and he knew not aught he had, 
save the bread which he did eat. And 
Joseph was a e goodly person, and well- 
favored. 

7 1[ And it eame to pass after these things, 
that his master's wife ea.st her '' eyes upon 
Joseph ; and she said, 'Lie with me. 

8 But he J refused, and said unto his 
master's wife. Behold, my master wotteth 
not what is with me in the house, and he 
hath committed all that he hath to my 
hand ; 

9 There is none greater in this house 
than I ; neither hath he kept back any 
thing from me but thee, because thou art 
his wife : how then can I do this great 
wickedness,'' and 'sin against God? 

10 And it came to pass, as she spake to 
Joseph day by ""day, that he hearkened 
not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with 
her. 

1 1 And it came to pass about this time, 
that Joseph went into the house to do his 
business ; and there icas none of the men 
of the house there within. 

1 2 And she caught ° him by his garment, 



« ISiim. IB: IS; 18: U, 28; Acti 7:«. b Josh. 1 : T, 8; I Chron. 
2:: l:i; Psa. 1:3. c ver.il ; 1 Sam. IB: OJ. li cli.ip. 24 : 2. e chap. 
■50:'-'7. f Deut. 28 : .3-H. s 1 Sam. Ifi : 12 ; 17 : 42. "h Job 31 : 1 ; 
P8a. 119:37. i2Snm. 13:11. j Prcnerbs 1 : 10. lcLev.20:10; 
Prov. tj: 29,32. 1 2Sam. 12: 13; Psa. 51 : 4; Jer. 28: 16. m Prov. 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 
2. A 2>rosperoits man; succeeded well in his 
business, and thus promoted his master's inter- 
ests. 1^ 

4. Grace ; favor. 

6. lie knew not aught ; he did not take the 
care of any thing himself, but left all to Joseph. 
Good/// — irefl-favored ; beautiful in person. 

8. Wotteth ; knoweth. 

12. Got him out ; escaped out of the house. 

20. In the priso)! ; chap. 41 : 14 ; Psa. 10") : IS. 

22. He va.f the doer; he gave directions, and 
things were done accordingly. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. The Lord vi-ill not forsake any who put their 
trust in him; and fidelity in the discharge of duty 



saying. Lie with me : and he left his gar- 
ment in her hand, and " fled, and got him 
out. 

13 And it came to pass, when she saw 
that he had left his garment in her hand, 
and was fled forth, 

14 That she called unto the men of her 
house, and spake unto them, saying. See, 
he hath brought in a Hebrew unto us to 
mockP us ; he came in unto me to lie with 
me, and I cried with a * loud voice : 

15 And it came to pass, when he heard 
that I lifted up my voice and cried, that 
he left his garment with me, and fled, and 
got him out. 

1 6 And she laid up his garment by her, 
until his lord came home. 

17 And she spake unto him "i according 
to these words, saying, The Hebrew ser- 
vant which thou hast brought unto us, 
came in unto me to mock me : 

18 And it "came to pass, as I lifted up my 
voice and cried, that he left his garment 
with me, and fled out. 

19 And it came to pass, when his mas- 
ter heard the words of his wife, which 
she spake unto him, saying. After this 
manner did thy servant to me ; that his 
wrath "■ was kindled. 

20 And Joseph's master took him, and 
put him into the ''prison, a place where 
the king's prisoners iverc bound : and he 
was there in the prison. 

21 H But the Lord was with Joseph, 
and t showed him mercy, and gave him 
favor' in the sight of the keeper of the 
prison. 

22 And the keeper of the prison com- 
mitted to Joseph's hand all the prisoners 
that were in the prison ; and whatsoever 
they did there, he was the doer of it. 

23 The keeper of the prison looked not 
to any thing that uvi.s- under his hand ; be- 
cause the Lord was with him, and that 
which he did, the Lord " made it to prosper. 



22:14 


2.3 : 27 


n Proverb.s 7 


1.3. 


o F.c 


cl. 7 


:2fi. 


P F.iek. 22 : .1. 


■^ Heb 


tjreat. 


q ExoJus -23: 


; 


',sa. .17 


14 


I.'O 


3: Prov 


12:19. 


r Vrm 


.6:34, 


15 ; Cant 8 : r>. 


cl 


ap.41: 


4; 


Psa. 


10.-,: 18. 


t Heb. 


extended kindness unto him. 


1 


Ex. 12 


3H 


Pna 


. 106:41) 


ProT 


lt>:7; 


Dan. 1 


9; Acts 7: 10. 


" ' 


er. 2, 3 











in lower situations is the best preparation for. and 
the surest way of advancement to those that are 
higher. 

9. The fear of the Lord is the surest pledge of 
fidelity, the best safeguard .against temptation, and 
the most powerful means of promoting all the great 
interests of men. 

13. Tempters to sin will turn accusers, and when 
they have power, will become persecutors and tor- 
mentors. 

21. No evils which men can inflict can shut out 
the presence and favor of God from those who trust 
in him ; and a servant in a dungeon m.ay be more 
happy than a king on his throne. Though he may 
suffer for righteousness' sake, in due time he will be 
delivered, and his sorrow turned into joy. 
'55 



Pharaoh's butler 



GENESIS XL. 



and baker in j)rison. 



CHAPTER XL. 

1 Thp biitler and baker of Pharaoh in prison. 4 Joseph 
hath charge of Ihem. 5 He interpreteth their dream.s. 
'■Ht They come lo pas* accnr'ling to his interpretation. 
23 Tlio ingratitude of the butler. 

AND it came to pas.s after these things, 
lliat the "butler of the king of Egypt 
and his baker had offended their lord the 
king of Egypt. 

2 And Pharaoh was ** wroth against two 
of his oflicers, against the chief of the 
butlers, and against the chief of the ba- 
kers. 

3 And he put them in ward in the house 
of the captain of the guard, into tlie "^pris- 
on, the place where Joseph rvas bound. 

4 And the captain of the guard charged 
.Joseph with them, and he served them : 
and they continued a season in ward. 

5 1 And they dreamed a dream both of 
them, each man liis ''dream in one night, 
each man according to the interpretation 
of his dream, the butler tynd the baker of 
the king of Egypt, which were bound in 
the prison. 

6 And Joseph came in unto them in the 
morning, and looked upon them, and be- 
hold, they ^t'erc "sad. 

7 And he asked Pharaoh's officers that 
luere with him in the ward of his lord's 
house, saying, Wherefore * look ye so sad- 
ly '^to-day'? 

8 And they said unto him, \Vc have 
dreamed a dream, and there is no e inter- 
preter of it. And Joseph said unto them, 
Do not interpretations ^belong to God? 
tell mc them, I pray you. 

9 And the chief butler told his dream to 
Joseph, and said to him, In my 'dream, 
l)ehold, a vino was before mc ; 

10 And in the vine ivcrc three branches : 
and it was as though it budded, and her 
blossoms shot forth ; and the clusters 
thereof brought forth ripe grapes : 

1 1 And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand : 
and I took the grapes, and pressed them 



• N.'li. 1:11. b Proir.l(i:14; 19:19. c rhnp.39: i0,2.1. d .lob 
3.1: I.VI7. «I)nn.4:5. • Heb. are vour/<i«« f ui7 .» fNeli.i:2. 
« (•liii|i.4l:IR. I> Dan.2: 11,28. i .)ii(l?.7:l:l. j ilinp.41 :-2/-.; D:in. 
S:»i. tOr,rM*un. k 2Kiiigi.,2.'i:27: .Tcr..V2:31. i Heh. retntmbcr 
mewiUithee. I lSam.2n: M, ll>; lKing<<,2:T; Luke2U:'«'j. n 1 S.tm. 



CHAPTER XL. 

1. Jiiitler ; a cnp-bearer; one who preisented to 
the king his wine. Baker; the one who furnished 
the kini{ iiis bresul, or h;ul the direction of others 
who did it. 

3. Ward; prison. 

4. Charged Joseph ; ^ave him the care of them. 
Served tliem ; supplied their wants. 

5. According to the interpretatio7i ; answer- 
ing to the events which Joseph explained them to 
mean. 

6. Sad; looking .sorrowful and trouhled. 

8. Interpreter; one who could tell the menning 
of the dream. 

12. Three branches are three days ; not liter- 
56 



cup into Pharaoh's hand. 

12 And Joseph said unto him. This is 
the interpretation of J it : The three 
branches are three days : 

13 Yet within three days shall Pharaoh 
liftt up thy ''head, and restore thee unto 
thy place ; and thou shalt deliver Pha- 
raoh's cup into his hand, after the former 
manner when thou wast his butler. 

14 But -think on me when it shall be well 
with thee, and show kindness, 'I pray thee, 
unto me, and make mention of me unto 
Pharaoh, and bring me out of tliis house : 

15 For indeed I was stolen away out of 
the land of the Hebrews : and here also 
have I done "' nothing that they should put 
me into the dungeon. 

16 When the chief baker saw that the 
interpretation was good, he said unto Jo- 
seph, I also was in my dream, and behold, 
I had three Hvhite baskets on my head: 

17 And in the uppermost basket there 
was of all manner of H bake-meats for Pha- 
raoh : and the birds did eat them out of 
the basket upon my liead. 

18 And Joseph answered and said. This 
is the interpretation thereof: The three 
baskets" are three days: 

19 Yet within "three days shall Pharaoh 
lift* up thy head from off thee, and shall 
hang tliee on a tree ; and the birds Pshall 
eat thy flesh from off thee. 

20 T[ And it came to pass the third day, 
ivhich urns Pharaoh's i birthday, that he 
made a feast Tinto all his servants : and 
he t lifted up the licad of the eliief butler 
and of the chief baker amon^ his servants. 

21 And he restored tlic chief butler un- 
to his butlership nsain, and he gave the 
cup' into Pharoah's hand; 

22 But he lianged the chief baker, as 
Joseph had "interpreted to them. 

23 Yet did not the chief butler remem- 
ber Joseph, but 'forgat him. 



21:11; Psii. ■>9:3,4; Dan.fi: W. % Or. full of holet. || Heh.ment 
n/Pharaoli.theworko/n linker, orcook. n rliR|>.41 :2fi. >> ver. 13. 
* Or, reckon thee, and take tliv "(Bee from thee, p 1 Sam. 17:44; 
2Satn.21:in. q M:it. 14:rt; .Mark fi:21. ^ Or, reckoned, r Neh. 
2:1. ■ ver. 19. t Pga. 31 : 12 ; Errl. 9: 1.1, 16; Amos 6:6. 



ally, hut they represent or mean three days. Ver. 
18 ; Mat. 26 : 26. 

13. Lift lip thy head ; take thee out of prison. 

14. T/ii.i house ; the prison. 

15. Stole?! ; his brethren, in selling him, took 
what was not theirs, and appropriated it to their 
own use. This, Joseph called ste:iling. 

16. Good; favorable, ple.isant. 

23. Did not — rememher Joseph ; did not so re- 
member as to comply with his request. 
INSTRl'CTIOXS. 

.3. The present condition of men is no certain in 
dication of their character. In the same dungeon 
may be very different men, and from very different 
causes — men who are serving different masters, ;ti.J 
preparing to dwell for ever iu different places. 



The two dreams 



GENESIS XLI. 



of Pharaoh. 



B:c.\Xft CHAPTER XLI. 

1 Pharaoh's two dreams. 25 Joseph interpreteth them. 
33 He giveth Pharaoh counsel. -iS Joseph is ad- 
vanced. 50 He begetteth Manasseh and Ephraim. 
54 The famine beginneth. 

AND it came to pass at the end of two 
full years, that * Pharaoh dreamed: 
and behold, he stood by the river. 

2 And behold, there came up out of the 
river seven well-favored kine and fat- 
fleshed ; and they fed in a meadow. 

3 And behold, seven other kine came 
up after them out of the river, ill-favored 
and lean-fleshed ; and stood by the other 
kine upon the brink of the river. 

4 And the ill-favored and lean-fleshed 
kine did eat up the seven well-favored 
and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke. 

5 And he slept and dreamed the second 
time : and behold, seven ears of corn came 
up upon one stalk, * rank and good. 

6 And behold, seA'cn thin ears and blast- 
ed with the east wind sprung up after 
them. 

7 And the seven thin cars devoured the 
seven rank and full ears. And Pharaoh 
awoke, and behold, it was a dream. 

8 And it came to pass in the morning, 
that his '' spirit was troubled ; and he sent 
and called for all the *= magicians of Egypt, 
and all the wise men thereof: and Pha- 
raoh told them his dream ; but there ivas 
none that could ''interpret them unto Pha- 
raoh. 

9 % Then spake the chief butler unto 
Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my faults 
this day : 

10 Pharaoh was "^ wroth with his ser- 
vants, and put me in ward in the captain 
of the guard's house, both mo and the 
chief baker : 

1 1 And we dreamed a dream in one 
night, I and he ; ""we dreamed each man 
according to the interpretation of his 
dream. 

12 And there iras there with us a young 
man, a Hebrew, servant to the captain of 
the guard ; and we told him, and he in- 



» Esther 6:1; D.in. 2:1. * Heb. fat 


. h D:.n. 4:.'i,19; 7:28; 


8::7. c Ex. 7:11; Isa.-2i»:14: Dan i:-2 


. d ICor. 1:19. e chap. 


4(1 : -2. f cha)). 40 : 5. f Heli. made hii 


J >iin. e 1 Samuel, 2:8; 


P.'.a. 105 : 20. h I>.,a. 2.". : 1 4 ; Dan 5 : 1 (j. 


t Or, when thou henrcU 



8. Those who receive their blessings as the 
gift of God, and gratefully acknowledge him, 
will sympathize in the distresses of others, and be 
disposed, as far as may be consistent, to relieve 
them. 

12. To insist on a literal interpretation where the 
meaning is evidently figurative, is a gross perver- 
sion of Scripture. 

1-3. The selling of a brother into bondage is not 
only palpable dishonesty, but aggravated theft. Ex. 
21:16. 

2-3. In prosperity men are apt to overlook and for- 
get those who have aided tliem in adversity, and thus 
to show that their hrarts are deceitfiil and despe- 
ratelv wicked. Jer. 17 : 9. 



terpreted to us our dreams ; to each man 
according to his dream he did interpret. 

1 3 And it came to pass, as he interpreted 
to us, so it was ; me he restored unto 
mine office, and him he hanged. 

14 11 Then Pharaoh sent and called Jo- 
seph, and they t brought him hastily out 
of s the dungeon: and he shuved himself, 
and changed his raiment, and came in 
unto Pharaoh. 

15 And Pharaoh said unto '■Joseph, I 
have dreamed a dream, and there is none 
that can interpret it : and I have heard 
say of thee, that t thou canst 'understand 
a dream to interpret it. 

16 And Joseph answered Pharaoh, say- 
ing, It is not in me : God shall give Pha- 
raoh an answer of peace. 

17 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In 
my dream, behold, I stood upon the bank 
of the J river : 

18 And behold, there came up out of 
the river seven kine, fat-fleshed and well- 
favored ; and they fed in a meadow : 

19 And behold, seven other kin<e came 
up after them, poor and very ill-favored 
and lean-fleshed, such as I never saw in 
all the land of Egypt for badness : 

20 And the lean and the ill-favored kine 
did eat up the Ikst seven fat kine : 

21 And when they had * eaten them up, 
it could not be known that they had eaten 
them ; but they were still ill-favored, as 
at the beginning. So I awoke. 

22 And I saw in my dream, and behold, 
seven ears came up in one stalk, full and 
good : 

23 And behold, seven ears, H withered, 
thin, and blasted with the east wind, 
sprung up after them : 

24 And the thin ears devoured the seven 
good ears : and I told this unto the '' ma- 
gicians ; but there tvas none that could 
declare it to me. 

25 T[And Joseph said unto Pharoah, 
The dream of Pharaoh is one : God hath 
showed Pharaoh what he is ' about to do. 



anst interpret it. i chap. 40 : 8 ; Dan. 2 : 30 ; i Cor. 
% Heb. came to the inward parts of them. |J Or, 
?;Dan.4:7. 1 Dan. 2:29, 45 ; Rev. 4: I. 



CHAPTER XLI. 

1. The river ; Nile. 

2. Kine ; cows. 

8. Maglcia7is ; persons who pretended to super- 
natural power in explaining signs, interpreting 
dreams, and revealing hidden things. 

9. All/ faults ; probably not so much in neglect- 
ing Joseph, as in displeasing Pharaoh. 

13. Me he restored ; foretold that I should be 
restored, and that the baker would be hanged. 

16. It is not ill me ; he could not of himself in- 
terpret the dream, it must be by divine aid. An 
cutswer of peace ; one that would remove his fears 
and promote his good. 

25. Is one ; both dreams mean the same thing. 
57 



Joseph intcrprcteth 



GENESIS XLI. 



Pharaoh's dreams. 



26 The seven good kinc are seven years ; 
and the seven good ears are seven years : 
the dream is one. 

27 And the seven thin and ill-favored 
kine that eame up after them arc seven 
years ; and the seven empty ears blasted 
with the east wind shall be 'seven years 
of famine. 

28 This is the thing wliich I have spoken 
nnto Pharaoh : what God is about to do 
lie showeth unto Pharaoh. 

29 Behold, there eome '' seven years of 
great plenty throughout all the land of 
Egypt : 

.30 And there shall arise after them seven 
years of *= famine ; and all the plenty shall 
be forgotten in the land of Egypt ; and 
the famine shall ''consume the land; 

31 And the plenty shall not be known 
in the land by reason of that famine fol- 
lowing; for it shall be very * grievous. 

32 And for that the dream was doubled 
unto Pharaoh "^ twice; it is because the 
thing is t established by God, and God 
will shortly bring it to "^pass. 

33 Now therefore let Pharaoh look out 
a man discreet and wise, and set him over 
the land of Egypt. 

34 Let Pharaoh do this, and let him ap- 
point -officers over the land, and take up 
the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the 
seven plenteous ^ years. 

3.5 And let them gather all the food of 
those good years that come, and lay up 
corn under the hand of Pharaoh, and let 
them keep food in the cities. 

36 And that food shall be for store to 
the land a gainst the seven years of famine, 
which shall be in the land of Egypt ; that 
the land ^perish not through the famine. 

37 'i And the thing was good in the eyes 
of Pharaoh,'' and in tlie eyes of all his 
servants. 

38 And Pharaoh said unto his servants, 
Can we find such a one as this ts, a man 
in 'whom the spirit of God is? 



• aKinjn, 8: I. b ver. *7. c rer. M. i rliap. 47; 13. * Heh. 
htavy. ' clmp. »7 : 7, M. \ Or, prrpared of Ood. fNiim 23:19; 
l.'«a.4K:10. X Ot,ovtrteeri. « l'ro».6: r.-«; 2-2:3. iHeh.btnot 
cutoff, h Acta 7: 10. 1 Nuin.C7 : 18; J<ib 3-2:8; ProT.2: H; Dan. 
4:8,l8;r>:ll. J Pbh. 10S:21. || Hcb.ftrar»Krf,nr.*iM. kIlan.H:3. 
I £atli.3:IO; 8:2,K,1A. • Or,«i7*. m Dan. 5: 7,29. f Or,/«nrf«r 



26. Are seven years; represent them. Chap. 
40:12,18. 

30. Forgotten — consume the land; in the sev- 
en years ol famine tlie people would consume the 
produce of the seven years of plenty. 

■52. Doubled; to show the certainty and near- 
ness of the events foretold. 

34. Of the land ; the prodiice of the land. 

36. the land perish not ; tiie inhabitints of it. 

37. The thing was good ; it met the approba- 
tion of Ph.araoh and his servants. 

42. Pnt it vpon Joseph's hand; in token of 
his being clothed with authority. 

44. Lift It]) his hand or foot ; a proverbial ex- 
OS 



39 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, 'V.c.f?!?: 
Forasmuch as God hath showed thee all 
this, there is none so discreet and wise as 
thou art : 

40 Thou shalt be over my J house, and 
according unto thy word shall all my 
people 11 be ruled : only in the throne will 
I be greater than thou. 

41 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, 
I have set thee '' over all tlie land of Egypt. 

42 And Pharaoh took off his 'ring from 
his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand, 
and arrayed him in vestures of *fine linen, 
and put a '"gold chain about his neck; 

43 And he made him to ride in the sec- 
ond chariot which he had ; and they cried 
before him, t Bow + the knee : and he made 
him ruler over all the "land of Egypt. 

44 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am 
Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man 
lift up his hand or foot in all the land of 
Eg>'pt. 

45 And Pharoah called Joseph's name 
Zaphnath-paaneah ;^ and he gave him to 
wife Asenath the daughter of Poti-phe- 
rah II priest of On. And Joseph went out 
over all the land of Egypt. 

46 % And Joseph was thirty years old 
when he .stood "before Pharaoh king of 
Egypt. And Joseph went out from the 
presence of Pharaoh, and went through- 
out all the land of Egypt. 

47 And in the seven plenteous years the 
earth brought forth by handfuls. 

48 And he gathered up all the food of 
the seven years, which were in the land 
of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities : 
the food of tlie field which u-as round about 
every city, laid he up in the same. 

49 And Joseph gathered corn as the sand 
of the P sea, very much, until he left num- 
bering; for it vas without number. 

50 And unto Joseph were born two 
sonsi before the years of famine came: 
which Asenath the daughter of Poti- 
pherah * priest of On bare unto him. 



father. ^ Heb. Abrec/i. n cimp. 4.1:8,20 ; AcL« 7: 10. ^ Wliirli in 
llje Coptic Bignifiefi, « rcveater of secrets, or, the man to whom 
secrets are revealed. || Or, prince. F.xodim2:16; 2Snm.8:18. 
o ISamuel, I(k21; n.tnici 1:19; Luke 21:36. P t-liap. 2-2: 17; 
.Iud|;ea7:l2; ISain. I3:S; Panlm 78:27. q diap. 46 : -.'0 ; 48 : 6. 
* Or, prince, vrr. 4;".. 



pression, denoting that a.11 the people should be un- 
der Joseph's control. 

4-5. 2^])hiiath-paaneah ; supposed by some to 
mean, revealer of secrets ; by others, saviour of the 
people. Priest ; a priest at that time, in l*^gypt. 
was a civil as well a.s an ecclesiastical ruler; and 
by this marriage Joseph became connected with one 
of the great men of tlie kingdom. 0)1, ; called by 
the Greeks Ileliopolis, or the city of the sun. It 
was on the east oi' the Nile, in the land of Goshen, 
and not far from the modern Cairo. 

47. ]iy handfnls; in great abundance. 

48. Laid lip the food ; that which was not 
wanted for present use. 



Jacob sendcth his sons 



GENESIS XLII. 



to buy corn in Egypt. 



B-'aiTii' 51 AndJoscph called the name of 
the first-born * Manasseh. For God, .said 
he, hath made me forget all my toil, and 
all my father's house. 

52 And the name of the second called 
he tEphraim: For God hath caused me 
to be "fruitful in the land of my afflic- 
tion. 

53 T[ And the seven years of plenteous- 
ness, that was in the land of Egypt, were 
ended. 

54 And the seven years of dearth began 
to come, according as Joseph had ""said: 
and the dearth was in all lands ; but in 
all the land of Egypt there was bread. 

55 And when all the land of Egypt was 
famished,'' the people cried to Pharaoh 
for bread : and Pharaoh said unto all the 
Egyptians, Go unto Joseph ; what he saith 
to you, do. 

56 And the famine was over all the face 
of the earth : and Joseph opened + all the 
storehouses, and ''sold unto the Egyp- 
tians ; and the famine waxed sore in the 
land of Egypt. 

57 And all countries came into Egypt 
to Joseph for to buy corn; because that 
the famine was so sore in all lands. 

CHAPTER XLII. 

1 Jacob sendeth his ten sons to buy corn in Egypt. 16 
They are imprisoned by Joseph for spies, lb They 
are set at liberty, on condition to brinj^ Benjamin. 
21 They have remorse for Joseph. 24 Simeon is kept 
for a pledj;e. 25 They return with corn, and their 
money. '29 Their relation to Jacob. 3G Jacob refus- 
eth to send Benjamin. 

"IVrOW when "Jacob saw that there was 

_L\ corn in Egypt, Jacob said unto his 

sons. Why do ye look one upon another'? 

2 And he said. Behold, I have heard that 



* That isjorgetting. f That \s. fruitful. 
■ Jer. 14:1,2; Lam. -1:4. f Heh. all whcr 



chap. 49 : ij. b ver. .10. 
n wan. A chap. 42 ; fi ; 



51. Manasseh ; forgetfulness, or causing to for- 
get. 

52. Ephraim ; fruitful. 

55. Egypt was famished ; the people had con- 
sumed all their food, .and were in want. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

7. All future things are known to Grod, and as far 
as he sees best he makes them known to men. Be- 
fore men had the Bible, God often communicated 
information to them in dreams and visions. But 
now we are not to expect information in those ways, 
but to give heed to the Bible, which is able to make 
us wise unto salvation, and furnish us thoroughly 
for every good work. 

]4. God never overlooks the trials of his people, 
or suffers them to continue a moment too long. 
When the right time comes he delivers them, often 
suddenly, in ways, by means, and for purposes which 
they never expected. 

25. Those who in all their ways acknowledge 
God, will find that he directs their paths; and those 
things which they thought to be against them, they 
will see were ordered in such a way as to promote 
their highest good. 

33. The fact that men are dependent on God does 
not supersede the necessity, on their part, of wisdom 



there is corn in Egypt : get you down 
thither, and buy for us from thence ; that 
we may ""live, and not die. 

3 T[ And Joseph's ten brethren went 
down to buy corn in Egypt. 

4 But Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Ja- 
cob sent not with his brethren ; for he 
said, Lest perad venture s mischief befall 
him. 

5 And the sons of Israel came to buy 
corn among those that came : for the fam- 
ine was in the land of Canaan. 

6 And Joseph was the ''governor over 
the land, and he it was that sold to all the 
people of the land : and Joseph's brethren 
came, and bowed down themselves be- 
fore him u'ith their faces to the earth. 

7 And Joseph saw his brethren, and he 
knew them, but made himself strange 
unto them, and spake ^ roughly unto them ; 
and he said unto them, Whence come yel 
And they said. From the land of Canaan 
to buy food. 

8 And Joseph knew his brethren, but 
they knew not him. ' 

9 And Joseph remembered the dreams 
which he 'dreamed of them, and said 
unto them, Ye are spies ; to see the naked- 
ness of the land ye arc come. 

10 And they said unto him, Nay, my 
lord, but to buy food are thy servants 
come. 

1 1 We are all one man's sons ; we are 
true men, thy servants are no spies. 

12 And he said unto them. Nay, but to 
see the nakedness of the land ye are come. 

13 And they said, Thy servants arc 
twelve brethren, the sons of one man in 
the land of Canaan ; and behold, the 



47:14.24. <iAct.i7:12. f chap. 43: 8; Psa. 118: 17. g ver. 38. 
•> chap. 41 :41. ^ Hub. hard things u-ith Ihtm. i chap. 37 : .1, 9. 



and discretion ; and those who have most of these 
qualities, will be most likely to be successful. 

39. Those who know most of God and his ways 
will be the more wise and discreet. 1 hey can be 
more safely trusted, and in great and difficult ser- 
vices may be expected to do the most good. 

44. He who shows the most kindness, patience, 
compassion, and benevolence in a dungeon, may be 
expected to show tiie most humilitv, meekness, 
equanimity, and loveliness on a throne. 

52. God can, in this world, cause his people to 
forget their sorrows, or so to remember them as to 
heighten their joys, and make them feel that their 
sharpest trials were not worthy to be compared with 
the glory which shall follow. 

CHAPTER XLII. 

1. Saw; was informed. Loo/j one tepoit an- 
other ; in indolence and despondency. 

6. r/i(Zt «oZ<^; directed as to the selling. Hawed 
down ; chap. 37 : 7, 8. 

7. Made himself strange ; appeared not to know 
them. 

9. The dreams; chap. 37 : 5-9. The naked- 
ness of the land; its defenceless condition, where 
and how a successful attack might be made upon it 

59 



Joseph's brethren return 



GENESIS XLir. 



to Jaeob their father. 



youngest is this day ^Yitl^ our father, and 
one* is not. 

1 4 And Joseph said unto them, That is it 
that I spake unto you, saying. Ye are spies : 

15 Hereby ye shall be proved: By the life 
of ''Pharaoh yc shall not go forth hence, 
except your youngest brother come hither. 

IG Send one of you, and let him fetch 
your brother, and ye shall be *kept in 
prison, that your words may be proved, 
whether there be any truth in you : or else, 
by the life of Pharaoh, surely ye are spies. 

17 And he tput them all together into 
ward three days. 

18 And Joseph said unto them the third 
day. This do, and live ; for I fear '^God : 

19 If ye be true vicn, let one of your 
brethren be bound in the house of your 
prison : go ye, carry corn for the famine 
of your houses : 

20 But ''bring your youngest brother 
unto me ; so shall your words be verified, 
and ye shall not die. And they did so. 

21 ^And they said one to another, We 
are verily ''guilty concerning our brother, 
in that we saw the anguish of his soul, 
when he besought us, and we would not 
hear ;■" therefore is this distress come 
upon us. 

22 And Reuben answered them, saying, 
Spake I not unlo ^you, saying, Do not sin 
against the child ; and ye would not hear? 
tlierefore, behold, also his blood is ''re- 
(juired. 

2,3 And they knew not that Joseph un- 
derstood them; for the spake unto them 
by an interpreter. 

24 And he turned himself about from 
tlicin, and wept; and returned to them 
again, and communed with them, and 
took from them Simeon, and bound him 
before their eyes. 

25 1[ Then Joseph commanded to fill 
their sacks with corn, and to restore every 
man's money into his sack, and to give 
tliem provision for the 'way: and thus 
did he unto them. 



• (liap.STinOi .ler. .11 : in ; I,ain.fi:7; Mat.2:l8. * neiit.6: IS; 
ISiim. 1 :iii; 17:55; .Ian. f.: I?. * Heb.lwund. f Heb.galliercil. 
r .liai.. 20:11; Lev.'i6:«; Nell.r>:IS; LukelH:2,4. d vfrr. S4 ; 
r'li.l|.. 43:11; 44:23. « Nuin.M:23; 1 KinjCT, 17: 18 ; .lobSlKS.S; 
H'JbimR:!/); Mal.27:n,4; .Act«l!l:18. f Trov. 21 : H: 24 : 11, 1-2; 
Jer.34:l7; Mat.7:2. « chnp.:l7:21. b clinp.9: ft ; 1 King3,2:32; 

M. That is it ; what you have said sho\Vs the 
truth of what I declare, tliat you are spies; for a 
mail who had eleven sons would not send all but 
one so far away from hiin. 

15. By the life of Pharaoh ; as surely as Pha- 
raoii lives. 

17. TFirzn/; prison. Three days ; i\ns ^a.xt them 
time to rellect upon their past conduct, their treat- 
ment of Joseph and Jacoh, and upon tlieir present 
condition and prospects. This was what Josepli in- 
t' uded, and he no doubt prayed that it iniglit be for 
their good. 

20. lie verified ; proved to be triie. 

eo 



26 And they laded their asses *b.c;??S: 
with the corn, and departed thence. 

27 And as one of them opened his J sack 
to give his ass provender in the inn, he 
espied his money ; for behold, it was in 
his sack's mouth. 

28 And he said unto his brethren, My 
money is restored; and lo, it is even in 
my sack : and their heart * failed them, and 
they were afraid, saying one to another, 
What is this t]iat God hath done unto us? 

29 If And they came unto Jacob their 
father unto the land of Canaan, and told 
him all that befell unto them; sayins, 

30 The man who is the lord of the land, 
spake il roughly'' to x;s, and took us for 
spies of the country. 

31 And we said unto him, We are true 
men ; we are no spies : 

32 We be twelve brethren, sons of our 
father ; one is not, and the youngest is 
this day with our father in the land of 
Canaan. 

33 And the man, tJie lord of the country, 
said unto us. Hereby shall I know that 
ye are true men : leave one of your breth- 
ren here with me, and take food for the 
famine of your households, and be gone : 

34 And bring your youngest brother 
unto me: then shall I know that yc are 
no spies, but that ye are true men : so will 
I deliver you your brother, and ye shall 
tratlic' in the land. 

35 1[ And it cainc to pass as they emp- 
tied their sacks, that behold, every man's 
bundle of money iras in his '"sack: and 
M'hen both they and their father saw the 
bundles of money, they were afraid. 

36 And Jacob their father said unto 
them, Me have ye "bereaved of mi/ chil- 
dren: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not. 
and ye will take Benjamin away : all these 
things" are against me. 

37 And Reuben spake unto his father, 
saying, Slay my two sons, if I bring him 
not to thee: deliver him into my hand, 
and I will bring him to thee again. 



SCliron. 24:22; P.iiilm 9: 12 ; Ezek.3:18; Luke 11 :ftO, SI ; Acta 
2S:4; Rev. 13:10. | Hi-h. an interpreter w.is between them. 
i Mat. 5:44; Rom. 12:17, ■»; Epli. 4:2. j diap. 43 : 21. % Heb. 
went fiirth. || Heh. with vs hard things. I vi-r. 7, 12. 1 ctmp. 
34:10. ni rhnp. 43:21. n chap. 43: 14. ■> 1 Sam. 27: 1 ; Job 7 : 7; 
Keel. 7:8; Rojii. 8 : 28. 



21. Guilty concerning our hrother ; conscience 
condemned them for their treatment of Josepl . more 
tlian twenty years before. Therefore is thi.f dis- 
tress ; they viewed it as a punishment of their sins. 

25. Money ; what each one had paid for his corn. 

27. Inn; where they stopped for the nif^ht. 

28. They were afraid; lest they should be 
charjjed with havinjj stolen the money, and be 
treated as thieves, (rod hath done ; in his provi- 
dence caused to come upon us. 

.36. Bereaved ; deprived. 

37. Slay vty ttvo sons; th9,t is, you may slay 
tiieiii, if 1 brin^ not Benjamin back again; a rash 



The sons of Jacob 



GENESIS XLIII 



go again into Egypt. 



h. C. 1707. 

go down with you ; for his brother is 
dead," and he is left alone : if mischief 
befall him by the way in the which ye go, 
then shall ye bring down my gray "^ hairs 
with sorrow to the grave. 

CHAPTER XLIII. 

1 Jacob is hardly persuaded to send Benjamin. 15 Jo- 
seph entertainetli his brethren. 31 He maketh them 
a feast. 

AND the famine ivas "^sore in the 
land. 

2 And it came to pass, when they had 
eaten up the corn which they had brought 
out of Egypt, their father said unto them, 
Go again, buy us a little food. 

3 And Judah spake unto him, saying. 
The man * did solemnly protest unto us, 
saying. Ye shall not see my face, except 
your brother be with you. 

4 If thou wilt send our brother with us, 
we will go down and buy thee food : 

5 But if thou wilt not send him, we will 
not go down : for the man said unto us, 
Ye shall not see my face, except your 
brother be with you. 

6 And Israel said. Wherefore dealt ye 
so ill with me, as to tell the man whether 
ye had yet a brother'? 

7 And they said. The man t asked us 
straitly of our state, and of our kindred, 
saying. Is your father yet alive? have ye 
another brother "? and we told him accord- 
ing to the t tenor of these words. ^ Could 
we certainly know that he would say. 
Bring your brother down 1 

8 And Judah said unto Israel his father. 
Send the lad with me, and we will arise 
and go ; that we may live, and not die, 
both we, and thou, and also our little ones. 

9 I will be ''surety for him ; of my hand 
fihalt thou require him : if I bring him 
not unto thee, and set him before thee, 
then let me bear the blame for ever: 

10 For except we had lingered, surely 
now we had returned II this second time. 



• chap. 37:33; 44:20,28. b rliap. 37:. 35; 44:29,31; Isai.ali 
38:10. c cliap. 41 : ."v*; Lam. .5:10. * Heh, protesting protested. 
t Heb. asking asked us. % Heb. mouth. 5 Heh. knowing could 
Keknowf d chap. 44 : 32 ; Psa. 119: 122 : Phile. 18, 19. \\ Or, twice 



expression, but it showed Reuben's earnestness and 
sincerity. 
38. His brother ; Joseph. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 

2. In seasons of danger and distress nothing is 
piined by despondency. The question should be. 
What shall we do? and having ascertained, we 
should, without delay, ami in dependence on God, 
attempt to do it. He helps those who, in the right 
way, attempt to help themselves. 

9. The efforts of men to thwart the plans of God 
are the means of fulfilling them : yet they are as 
wicked in opposing him, as if he did not make what 
t'ley do the occasion of promoting his cause. 



11 And their father Israel said unto 
them. If it ^mist be so now, do this ; take 
of the best fruits in the land in your ves- 
sels, and carry down the man a ''present, 
a little ''balm, and a little honey, spices 
and myrrh, nuts and almonds : 

12 And take double money in your 
hand ; and the money that was s brought 
again in the mouth of your sacks, carry 
it again in your hand ; peradventure it 
U'as an oversight. 

13 Take also your brother, and arise, 
go again unto the man : 

14 And God Almighty give you mercy 
before '' the man, that he may send away 
your other brother, and Benjamin. If* I bo. 
bereaved' of my children, I am bereaved. 

1 5 ^And the men took that present, and 
they took double money in their hand, 
and Benjamin ; and rose up, and went 
down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph. 

16 And when Joseph saw Benjamin 
with them, he said to the J ruler of his 
house. Bring these men home, and t slay, 
and make ready ; for these men shall tdine 
with me at noon. 

17 And the man did as Joseph bade; 
and the man brought the men into Jo- 
seph's house. 

18 And the men were afraid, because 
they were brought into Joseph's house ; 
and they said. Because of the money that 
was returned in our sacks at the first time 
are Ave brought in; that he may *seek 
occasion against us, and fall upon us, and 
take us for bondmen, and our asses. 

19 And they came near to the steward 
of Joseph's house, and they communed 
with him at the door of the house, 

20 And said, O sir, II we came indeed 
down at the first time to buy food : 

21 And it came to pass, when we cams 
to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and 
behold, every man's money was in the 
mouth of his sack, our money in full 
weight : and we have brought it again 
in our hand. 



/)!/ this 


, 


Pr 


OT. 18 


Ifi. 


f rhap. 37:2 


1. s ch 


•ip. 42 : 


Ir,. h Kch. 


1:11; 


P.sa 


37 


:!i. * 


Or, 


and I, as fha 


ve been 


etc. i 


E-ith 4 : 16. 


i chap 


4t 


1. 


t Heh. kill a killing, t 


Heb. ea 


t. 5 t 


eb. roll him. 


self upon 


us. 


.Job .30 


:I4 


II Heh.com 


ing dot 


n we 


came *.u»n. 



16. Men are often strongly tempted to do evil that 
good may come, but it is never right; and the suc- 
cess of a plan is no sure evidence of the righteous- 
ness of the means used in prosecuting it. 

28. When men have done what they know to be 
wicked, and evils oome upon them, conscience link."! 
the two together, and vfews the one as a punishment 
for the other. 

CHAPTER XLIII. 
7. Straitly; carefully, particularly. The ten- 
or of these words ; truly answered his inquiries. 

12. Double money ; that which they brought 
back, and enough more to buy the corn which yh.ej 
needed. 

61 



Joseph tnakelh a 



GRXESIS XLIV. 



yeast for his brethren. 



22 And other money have we brought 
down in our hands to buy food : we can- 
not tell who put our money in our sacks. 

23 And he said, "Peace be to you, fear 
not : your God, and the God of your 
father, hath given you treasure in your 
sacks : * I had your money. And he 
brought Simeon out unto them. 

24 And the man brought the men into 
Joseph's house, and gave them ^ water, and 
they washed their feet; and he gave their 
asses provender. 

25 And they made ready the "^present 
against Joseph came at noon : for they 
heard that they should eat bread there. 

26 T[And when Joseph came home, they 
brought him the present which teas in 
their hand into the house, and "'bowed 
themselves to him to the earth. 

27 And he asked them of their t welfare, 
and said, i Is your father well, the old 
man of whom ye "spake? Is he yet alive? 

28 And they answered, Thy servant 
our father is in good health, he is yet 
alive : and they bowed down their heads, 
and made obeisance. 

29 And he lifted up his eyes, and saw 
his brother Benjamin, his "^mother's son, 
and said. Is this your younger brother, of 
whom ye spake unto me ? And he said, 
God be gracious unto thee, my ^son. 

30 And Joseph made haste ; for his 
bowels did '■yearn upon his brother : and 
he sought where to weep ; and he entered 
into his chamber, and wept there. 



• Juiig.6:23; 19:20; 1 Sam. 25 : 6 : I.iike 24:36. * Heb. your 
monev came lo me. b clian. 18 : 4 ; 24:35. c verse U. (i cbap. 
37:7, 10. t Ht-b.pMM. f Heb. Is tbere peace to your father^ 
• cliap.42:ll,13. f cb.ip.35: 17, 18. g Jok1i.7: 19; 2Cliron. 29: 11 ; 



2.3. God — hath given yon treasure ; not -with- 
out human agency ; but he had so ordered things in 
his providence that they had their money. / had 
your money ; it was paid to me, and I acknow- 
ledge the receipt of it; of course you need not fear. 
He had himself, at the command of Joseph, without 
their knowledge, put it into their sacks. 

24. Washed their feet ; according to the custom 
of travellers in those days. Chap. 18:4. 

2.'). The present ; that which they had brought 
from the land of Canaan. 

26. Bowed themselves ; chap. 37:7. 

31. Refrained; from weeping, and appeared as 
usual. 

33. They sat before him ; they were seated ac- 
cording to their different ages. Marvelled ; that 
he who seated them should know, in e.ach case, 
■which was oldest. 

31. Messes; portions of food. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. As to the future doing of things which are left 
to our discretion, it is ordinarily not best to s.ay pos- 
itively what we will or will not do, but to feel our 
dependence on God ; and when the time to act comes, 
decide as truth and duty may then require. 

7. When things seem to go against us, M-e are 
apt to overlook the controlling hand of God, and re- 
gard only the instruments ; but in blaming them, 
we often find fault with him. 
62 



31 And he washed his face, and ^b.cI?"' 
went out, and refrained himself, and said, 
Set on bread. 

32 And they set on for him by himself, 
and for them by themselves, and for the 
Egyptians which did eat with him by 
themselves : because the Egyptians micht 
not eat bread with the Hebrews ; for that 
is an 'abomination unto the Egyptians. 

33 And they sat before him, the first- 
born according to his birthright, and the 
youngest according to his youth : and the 
men marvelled one at another. 

34 And he took and sent J messes unto 
them from before him : but Benjamin's 
mess was five times so much as any of 
theirs. And they drank, and * were'' merry 
with him. 

CHAPTER XLIV. 

1 Joseph's policy to stay his brethren. 14 Judah's hum- 
ble supplication to Joseph. 

AND he commanded II the steward of his 
house, saying, Fill the men's sacks 
with food, as much as they can carry, and 
put every man's money in his sack's mouth. 

2 And put my cup, the silver cup, in 
the sack's mouth of the youngest, and his 
corn-money. And he did according to the 
word that Joseph had spoken. 

3 As soon as the morning was light, the 
men were sent away, they and their 
asses. 

4 And when they were gone out of the 
city, and not yet far off, Joseph said unto 



Mat.9:2. h lKings,3:26; Jer.31:20; Pbil.l;8; 2:1; Col.3:IJ. 
j cbap. 46:34; Ex. 8:26. j2Sam.ll:8. ^ Web. drank largely. 
kProv.31:6; Eccl.9:7; 10:19; Cant.5:l; M;lt. 11:19; Jobn 
2:10. II Heb. him that wa.i oner hit house. 



11. When a man has promised to do what is wrong, 
instead of feeling that he is bound to fulfil his prom- 
ise, his duty is to acknowledge his sin in making it, 
repent, and do what is right. There is always a law 
higher than any mere human promise, namely, the 
law of God. If a man does wrong because he has 
promised or sworn to do it, he adds sin to sin, 
and ripens for an aggravated condemnation. Mat. 
14:9, 10. 

18. A guilty conscience, when awakened, natu- 
rally forebodes evil, producing a certain fearful look- 
ing for judgment and fiery indignation ; and unless 
men find the way of deliverance, it will make them 
wretched. 

22. Property that has come into our hands by 
oversight or mistake, as well as that which we have 
wrongfully obtained, should be carefully and prompt- 
ly returned to its rightful owners. 

26. When events, long before made known, are 
accomplished by the voluntary actions of free moral 
agents, it shows that such actions were beforehand 
certain ; though that certainty docs not lessen men's 
freedom, nor diminish their praise or blameworthi- 
ness in performing tliose actions. Acts 2 : 23. 

30. Family ties are tender and lasting; and de- 
lightful, after long absence, is the meeting of affec- 
tionate family friends. As their forcible and violent 
separation causes the intensest anguish, so their 
kind, providential restoration gives inexprccsiblf 

joy- 



Joscph^s device to 



GENESIS XLIV. 



stay his brethren. 



BcliTcrt'' his steward, Up, follow after the 
men ;* and when thou dost overtake them, 
say unto them, Wherefore have ye re- 
warded ''evil for good? 

5 Is not this it in which my lord drink- 
eth, and whereby indeed he * divineth 1 
ye have done evil in so doing. 

6 ^And he overtook them, and he spake 
unto them these same words. 

7 And they said unto him, Wherefore 
saith my lord these words'? God*^forbid 
that thy servants should do according to 
this thing : 

8 Behold, the money, which we found 
in our sacks' mouths, we brought again 
unto ''thee out of the land of Canaan: 
how then should we steal out of thy 
lord's house silver or gold? 

9 With whomsoever of thy servants it 
be found, both let "him die, and we also 
will bo my lord's bondmen. 

10 And he said. Now also let it be ac- 
cording unto your words : he with whom 
it is found shall be my ""servant ; and ye 
shall be blameless. 

1 1 Then they speedily took down every 
man his sack to the ground, and opened 
every man his sack. 

12 And he searched, aud began at the 
eldest, and left at the youngest : and the 
cup was found in Benjamin's sack. 

13 Then they rent their e clothes, and 
laded every man his ass, and returned to 
the city. 

14^ And Judah and his brethren came 
to Joseph's house ; for he ims yet there : 
and they fell before ''him on the ground. 

15 And Joseph said unto them. What 
deed is this that ye have done ? wot ye 
not that such a man as I can certainly 
divine ?t 

16 And Judah said. What shall we say 
unto my lord ? what shall ' we speak ? or 



» r)eut.2:13. h Prov. 17:13. * 
2C!:22; 2King9,8:13. d chap.«:22 
E cliap. 37:29,34 " ■ ■ •■ - " 



maketk trial, e .Joshua 
v.im,..,.,.^i. . rhap.31:32. fEs.22:3. 
14:6; 2 Sam. 1:11. h cliap. 37 : 7. f Or, 



CHAPTER XLIV. 
5. Whereby ; by which, or concerning which. 
Divineth ; maketh search and ascertaineth. 

13. Rent their clothes ; as was the custorft in 
great distress. 

14. Fell before him; in token of suhmission. 
Chap. 37 : 7, 10. 

Id. Divine ; ascertain the facts. Ver. .'). 

16. The iniquity of thy servants ; he might 
not mean by this to confess that they had stolen the 
cup, but tliat God in his providence was righteously 
punishing them for their sins, and that they meant 
to accept whatever he should lay upon them. 

18. Even as Pharaoh ; having full power to do 
as he should choose. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

9. Hasty decisions, and strong, conMent asser- 
tions are often wrong, and bring those who make them 
into great perplexity and distress. ProV. 29 : 11. 

16. Hearty acknowledgment of the justice of God 



how shall we clear ourselves ? God hath 
found J out the iniquity of thy servants: 
behold, we are my lord's servants, both 
we, and he also with whom the cup is 
found. 

1 7 And he said, God forbid that I ^ should 
do so : bvt the man in whose hand the 
cup is found, he shall be my servant ; 
and as for you, get you up in peace unto 
your father. 

18 T[ Then Judah came near unto him, 
and said, O my lord, let thy servant, I 
pray thee, speak a word in my lord's 
ears, and let not thine anger ' burn against 
thy servant : for thou art even as Pha- 
raoh. 

19 My lord asked his servants, saying, 
Have ye a father, or a brother? 

20 And we said unto my lord, We have 
a father, an old man, and a child of his 
old age, a little one ; and his brother is 
dead, and he alone is left of his mother, 
and his " father loveth him. 

21 And thou saidst unto thy servants. 
Bring him down unto " me, that I may set 
mine eyes upon him. 

22 And we said unto my lord. The lad 
cannot leave his father: for ?/he should 
leave his father, his father would die. 

23 And thou saidst unto thy servants, 
Except your youngest brother come down 
with you, ye shall see my face no more. 

24 And it came to pass when we came 
up unto thy servant my father, we told 
him the words of my lord. 

25 And our father said. Go "again, and 
buy us a little food. 

26 And we said. We cannot go Pdown : 
if our youngest brother be with us, then 
will we go down ; for we may not sec the 
man's face, except our youngest brother 
be with us. 

27 And thy servant my father said 



make trial, yer. n. i Ezra 9 : 10; Job 40:4. j Num. 32 : 23 ; Josh. 
7:1S; Prov.28:17; Luke 12:2. k Prov. 17: 1.1. 1 chap. 18:30,3^. 
■n chap. 37 : 3. n chap. 42 : 15, 20. o chap. 43 : 2. p Luke 11:7. 



in our trials, and humble submission to his will, in- 
dicate a preparation for appro.aching deliverance. 

18. It is never wise or right, in a world of mercy 
and grace, to despair, or cease to use appropriate 
means ; however dark to human appearance may 
be the prospect, or feeble the means used, God can 
give speedy and triumphant success. 

3'2. The most touching and efficacious eloquence 
is often a simple narration of facts. God's ways 
are great, and a true recital of them is suited to 
produce great effects. His ways, like himself, are 
perfect, and a knowledge of them is suited to make 
men perfect, and lead them, in their measure, to im- 
itate him. 

34. An affectionate and lender regard for one's fa- 
ther, a readiness to sacrifice, and if need be suffer, to 
prevent evils from coming upon him, and to prolong 
his life, promote his comfort, and cheer him in old 
age, is peculiarly pleasing to God, and is often fol- 
lowed by some of his richest blessings. 

63 



Joseph maketh himself 



GENESIS XLV. 



known to his brethren 



unto US, Ye know that my wife bare me 
two* sons : 

28 And the one went out from me, and 
I said, Surely he is ''torn in pieces ; and 
I saw him not since : 

29 And if ye take this also from me, 
and mischief befall him, ye shall bring 
down my gray hairs with sorrow to the 
grave. 

30 Now therefore when I come to thy 
servant my father, and the lad be not 
with us; seeing that his life is ''bound 
up in the lad's life ; 

31 It shall come to pass, when he seeth 
that the lad is not U'ith its, that he will 
die: and thy servants shall bring down 
the gray hairs of thy servant our father 
with sorrow to the grave. 

32 For thy servant became '' surety for 
the lad unto my father, saying, If I bring 
him not unto thee, then I shall bear the 
blame to my father for ever. 

33 Now therefore, I pray thee, let thy 
.servant abide instead of the ""lad a bond- 
man to my lord ; and let the lad go up 
with his brethren. 

34 For how shall I go up to my father, 
and the lad be not with me 1 lest perad- 
venture I see the ""evil that shall *come 
on s my father. 

CHAPTER XLV. 

1 Josfiph maketh h'mself known to his brethren. 5 He 
comforteth them in God's providence. 9 He sendeth 
for his father. 16 Pharaoh confirmeth it. 21 Joseph 
furnisheth them for their journey, and exhorteth them 
to concord. 25 Jacob is revived with the news. 

THEN Joseph could not refrain himself 
before all them that stood by him ; 
and he cried. Cause every man to go out 
from me. And there stood no man with 
him, while Joseph made himself known 
unto his brethren. 

2 And he t wept '' aloud : and flie Egyp- 
tians and the house of Pharaoh heard. 

3 And .lospph said unto his brethren, I 
am Joseph ; dotli my father yet live 1 And 
his brethren could not answer him; for 
they were ^troubled 'at his presence. 

4 And Joseph said unto his brethren, 
Come near to me, I pray you : and they 
came near. And he said, I am Joseph 
your brother, whom ye J sold into Egypt. 



• clinp.m:3.1; 36: 18; IK: 19. b cliiip. 37 ::» ; 42 ::l<i. c I Sam. 
18:1; JSi-ia. d rli;i|>. H:1 : 9. • Kxoiluil 3i :3i; Kom.fi: 7-10; 
9 1 3. » i Cliron. .'H : J8. ' Hrh. Jimt my futhtr. jEx. m:8; 
J*b3l:2*ls PmlIIH::!; II9:M.'I. t Ht\i. gave forth hit voice in 
wteping. b Numbers M : I. % Or, ten ifitd. i Job 4 : 6; 'i3: 15; 
M»t.l4:*). J (Jin|>. 37:28. k 2 Cor. 1:7. 4 Web. neither let 



CHAPTER XLV. 

5. Be iiot grieved; indulge not excessive an- 
guish, nor .sink into despair, lor God is to be seen 
and acknov Icd^i'd in all these things. 

6. Earitig ; an old English word for ploughing, 
or tilling. 

8. Not yon ; that is, not you merely, or prjnci- 
61 



5 Now therefore be not ^ grieved, B.c,nM 
nor * angry with yourselves, that ye sold 
me hither; for God did send me 'before 
you to preserve life. 

6 For these two years ""hath the famine 
been in the land : and yet there are five 
years, in the which there shall neither be 
earing" nor harvest. 

7 And God sent me before you II to 
preserve you a posterity in the earth, 
and to save your lives by a great "deliv- 
erance. 

8 So now it was not you that sent me 
hither, but p God : and he hath made me 
a "i father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his 
house, and a ruler throughout all the land 
of Egypt. 

9 Haste ye, and go up to my father, 
and say unto him, Thus saith thy son 
Joseph, God haih made me lord of all 
Egypt : come down unto me, tarry not : 

10 And thou shalt dwell in the land of 
Goshen,'' and thou shalt be near unto me, 
thou, and thy children, and thy children's 
children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, 
and all that thou hast : 

11 And there will I nourish thee; for 
yet there are five years of famine ; lest 
thou, and thy household, and all that thou 
hast, come to poverty. 

12 And behold, your eyes "see, and the 
eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is 
my mouth that speaketh unto you. 

13 And ye shall tell my father of all 
my glory in Egypt, and of all that yc 
have seen ; and ye shall haste and bring 
down' my father hither. 

14 And he fell upon his brother Ben- 
jamin's "neck, and wept; and Benjamin 
wept upon his neck. 

1.5 Moreover, he kissed all his brethren, 
and wept upon them : and after that his 
brethren talked with him. 

1 6 T[ And the fame thereof was heard in 
Pharaoh's house, saying, Joseph's breth- 
ren are come : and it * pleased Pharaoh 
well, and his servants. 

17 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say 
un^o thy brethren, This do ye ; lade your 
beasts, and go, get you unto the land ol 
Canaan ; 

18 And take your father, and your 



there be anger in your eyei. I chap. 60: iO; Psalm lO.i: 16,17 
m cli:ip. 47 : 18. n Kx. 34 : 21. |I Heb. to put for ^ou a remnant- 
o 1 Chron. II :14; P»B 18:60; 44:4. p John 19: II. 'lcli«p.41 :4:1; 
.luijg. 17: 10; Job 2!1:16. r chap. 46l29 ; 47:l-ti; Ex. S : 2J ; 9:2<v 

42: 23; Luke 24: 39. lAcLi7:l4. u tliup. 33 : 4 ; 4G: M. 

ivat yooti in the eyet of Pharauh. 



• il,:,p. 
' Heb. 



pally. You were instruments in fulfilling the iu- 
linilely wise and gracious purposes of God. 

9. God halh made vie lord ; though men had 
been the ii\(p,ns, God had been tlie cause, and to him 
belonged the glory. 

10. Goshen; the north-east part of Egypt, near- 
est to the land of Canaan. 

11. Nourish; support and comfort vou. 



Jacob goeth urith his 



GENESIS XLVI, 



family into Egypt. 



B.c!'S' households, and come unto me : 
and I will give you the good of the land 
of Egypt, and ye shall *eat the fat of the 
land. 

19 Now thou art commanded, this do 
ye ; take you wagons out of the land of 
Egypt for your little ones, and for your 
wives, and bring your father, and come. 

20 Also * regard not your stuff; for 
the good of all the land of Egypt is 
yours. 

21 And the children of Israel did so : 
and Joseph gave them wagons, according 
to the t commandment'' of Pharaoh, and 
gave them provision for the way. 

22 To all of them he gave each man 
changes of raiment ; but to Benjamin he 
gave three hundred pieces of silver, and 
tive"^ changes of raiment. 

23 And to his father he sent after this 
manner; ten asses * laden with the good 
things of Egypt, and ten she-asses laden 
with corn and bread and meat for his 
father by the way. 

24 So he sent his brethren away, and 
they departed : and he said unto them. 
See that ye fall not out by the way. 

25 TfAnd they went up out of Egypt, 
and came into the land of Canaan unto 
Jacob their father, 

26 And told him, saying, Joseph is yet 
alive, and he is governor over all the 
land of Egypt. And Uacob's heart faint- 
ed, for he ''believed them not. 

27 And they told him all the words of 
Joseph, which he had said unto them : 
and when he saw the wagons which Jo- 
seph had sent to carry him, the spirit of 
Jacob their father "revived. 

28 And Israel said, It is enough ; Joseph 
my son is yet alive : I will go and see 
him before I die. 



, 


rl.a 


P- 


27 


2R 


47:6 


Ni 


m. IS: 


:<i 


Dent. 32 


14. 


* Heb. 


ut 


not 


your 


rve 


spare. 


elc. 


t Heb 


n 


outh. b Num 


jers 3 


Ifi. 


< chap 


4.! 


:34. 


t Heb 


carrying. 


* 


Heb. his. 


d 


lob 9: 


i«; 


39 


M; 


Hs 


I. 


■2H: 


i; Luk 


e24 


11,41. 




'«a. 8.^:1;. 


f chap. 21 


;«; 


•m 


10. 


S 


cl 


ap. 


31 : 42, 


53. 


h chap. 


15 


: 1 ; Job 33 


14. 


i IS 


am. 



20. Stuff; furniture ; such things as could not 
be easily carried. 

24. Fall 7iot out ; not get into any dispute as 
to who was most guilty in selling Joseph, or deceiv- 
ing his father, or about any thing else. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. A wise and good man will sometimes act tow- 
ards those whom he loves in a way which he knows 
will give them pain, not because he takes pleasure in 
distressing them, but for the purpose of doing them 
good; and he will remove their sorrow as soon as he 
sees that he can do it consistently with their highest 
benefit. 

8. God is not to be overlooked in any of the ac- 
tions of men, but is to be acknowledged and adored 
as over all. perfect and blessed for evermore. How- 
ever wicked those actions, or great the evils they 
occasion, he intends so to counteract and overrule 
tliem as to accomplish unspeakable good. 

9. Whatever good we receive, and in whatever 



CHAPTER XLVI. 

1 Jacob is comforted by God at Beer-sheba. 5 Thenc« 
he with his household goeth into Egypt. 8 Thenom- 
ber of his family that went into Egypt. 29 Joseph 
meeteth Jacob. 31 He instructeth his brethren how 
to answer to Pharaoh. 

AND Israel took his journey with all 
that he had, and came to "^ Beer-sheba, 
and offered sacrifices unto the sQod of his 
father Isaac. 

2 And God ''spake unto Israel in the 
visions of the night, and said, Jacob, 'Ja- 
cob : and he said. Here am I. 

3 And he said, I am God, the God of thy 
father : fear not to go down into Egypt ; for 
I will J there make of thee a great nation. 

4 I will go down with thee into Egypt ; 
and I will also surely bring thee * up 
again : and Joseph shall put his ' hand 
upon thine eyes. 

5 And Jacob rose up from Beer-sheba . 
and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their 
father, and their little ones, and their 
wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had 
sent" to carry him. 

6 And they took their cattle, and their 
goods, which they had gotten in the land 
of Canaan, and came into "Egypt, Jacob, 
and all his seed with him : 

7 His sons, and his sons' sons with him, 
his daughters, and his sons' daughters, 
and all his seed brought he with him into 
Egypt. 

8 T[ And these are the names of the chil- 
dren of ° Israel, which came into Egypt, 
Jacob and his sons : Reuben, Jacob's 
first-born. 

9 And the sons of Reuben ; IIanoch,and 
Phallu, and Hezron, and Carmi. 

10 11 And the sons of Simeon ; HJemuel, 
and Jamin, and Ohad, and * Jachin, and 
Zohar,t and Sliaul the son of a Canaan- 
itish woman. 



3:4,10. j chap. 12:2; DeuLifi:.";. k chap. Li): 16 ; 50:13,'i'>; 
Ex. 3:8. 1 chap. .^0:1; Acts 7: 15. m chap. i(5: 19, 27. nNum 
20:15; Deut. 26 : ."i ; Joshua 24: 4; Psalm 1 05 : 23 ; Isai.ah 52 : 4 
o Ex. 1 : 1 ; 6: 14. |( Or, Ntmucl. * Or, Jarib. f Or, ZcraA. 



way, Grod is its author, and to him we should give 
the praise. 

22. It is sometimes right and best to bestow more 
of undeserved favors upon one than upon another ; 
and a truly penitent, grateful, and benevolent heart 
will not repine at seeing this : it will not blame the 
giver nor envy the receiver, but will admire the one 
and rejoice with the other. 

24. Criminations and contests among brethren 
are exceedingly injurious, and the truly wise and 
benevolent earnestly desire to prevent them. 

28. When the friends of God see the ends he had 
in view, the ways he took to accomplish them, the 
results which have followed and are to follow, it 
will be enough — enough for life, enough in death, and 
enough for eternity. 

CHAPTER XLVI. 
4. Bring thee up ; his body, for burial, and his 
posterity to possess the land of Canaan. Put his 

65 



JTie children of Israel. 



GENESIS XLVII. 



His meeting with Joseph. 



1 1 II And the sons of Levi ; * Gershon, 
Kohatli, and Merari. 

12 1[And the sons of Judah ; Er, and 
Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez, and Za- 
rah : but Er and Onan *died in the land 
of Canaan. And the sons of Pharez were 
Hezron and Hamul. 

13 ^f And the sons of Issachar ; Tola, 
and t Phuvah, and Job, and Shimron. 

14 ^ And the sons of Zebulun ; Sered, 
and Elon, and Jahleel. 

15 These be the sons of Leah, ■which she 
bare unto Jacob in Padan-aram, with his 
daugliter Dinah : all the souls of his sons 
and liis daughters were thirty and three. 

16 1] And the sons of Gad; ^^Ziphion, 
and Haggi, Shuni, and ^ Ezbon, Eri, and 
Arodi,!! and Areli. 

17 II And the sons of Asher ; Jimnah, 
and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, and 
Serah their sister : and the sons of Beriah ; 
Heber, and JVIalchiel. 

18 These are the sons of Zilpali, whom 
Laban ''gave to Leah his daughter; and 
these sire bare unto Jacob, eve7i sixteen 
souls. 

19 The sons of Rachel, Jacob's wife; 
Joseph, and Benjamin. 

20 ^And unto Joscpli in the land of 
Egypt were born "^ Manasseh and Ephra- 
im, which Asenath the daugliter of Poti- 
pherah * priest of On bare unto liim. 

21 H And the sons of Benjamin were 
Bclah, and Becher, and Ashbcl, Gera, and 
Naanum, t Ehi, and Ilosh, +Muppim, and 
Iluppim,^ and Ard. 

22 These are the sons of Rachel, which 
were born to Jacob : all the souls tvcre 
fourteen. 

23 Tf And the sons of Dan ; II Ilushim. 

24 ^[And the sonsof Naphtali ; Jahzeel, 
and (lUni, and Jezer, and Shillcm. 

25 These are the sons of Bilhah, wliich 
Laban ''gave unto Rachel his daughter, 
and she bare these unto Jacob: all the 
souls were seven. 

26 All the souls that came with Jacob 
into Egypt, which came out of his * loins. 



' Or. G'rih.tm. « rlinp. M : 3, 7, 10. f Or, /'un/i 




t Zephon. Kam.2e.:\f,. % Or, Ox/i>. I| Or, .■fr-.rf. I 


t-lmp. JO : .'4. 
± Shupham. 
Num. 'JB::t9. 


f ch.ip.'drM). *(ir, prince, f Miram. Kum.H.-.nS. 


Kum. 'if, : :» ; Shuppim. 1 Cliron 7 : 1 i. % Huphaht. 



hand ; Joseph would be with his father, and close 
his eyes when he should die. 

27. Threescore and ten ; s>>venty ; namely, the 
sixty-six mentioned ver. 12G, with Jacob, .Joseph, and 
his two soris. If to these seventy we add Joseph's 
five grandsons, mentioned 1 Chron. 7: M-'23, or if 
to the sixty-six mentioned ver. 26 we add the nine 
wives, who are supposed to have been living, of nine 
of Jacob's sons, it will make seventy-five, the num- 



30. Let me 



ber mentioned by Stephen, Acts 7 : M. 
lie ; Luke 2 : 20. .■} 
INSTRUCTION.^. 
1. In undertaking a journey, or entering upon any 
new plan, we should feel our dependence upon G-oa, 
66 



besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the B'.c.no8: 
souls were threescore and six. 

27 And the sons of Joseph, which were 
borne him in Egypt, were two souls : all the 
souls of the house of Jacob, which came 
into Egypt, were threescore and ''ten. 

28 11 And he sent Judah before him unto 
Joseph, to direct his "^face unto Goshen; 
and they came into the land of s Goshen. 

29 And Joseph made ready his chariot, 
and went up to meet Israel his father, to 
Goshen, and presented himself unto him ; 
and he fell on his '' neck, and wept on his 
neck a good while. 

30 And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let 
me 'die, since I have seen thy face, be- 
cause thou art yet alive. 

31 And Joseph said unto his brethren, 
and unto his father's house, I will go up, 
and show Pharaoh, and say unto him, My 
brethren, and my father's house, which 
were in the land of Canaan, are come unto 
me ; 

32 And the men are shepherds, for t their 
trade hath been to feed cattle ; and they 
have brought their flocks, and their herds, 
and all that they have- 

33 And it shall come to pass, when 
Pharaoh shall call you, and shall say, 
What Ji.v your occupation? 

34 That ye shall say. Thy servants' 
trade hath been about ''cattle from our 
youth even until now, both we, and also 
our fathers : that ye may dwell in the 
land of Goshen ; for every sheplierd is an 
abomination' unto the Egyptians. 

CHAPTER XLVII. 

1 Joseph presenteth five of his brethren, 7 and his 
father, before Pharaoh H He giveth them habita- 
tion and maintenance. Vi He getteth all the Egyp- 
tians' money, 16 their cattle, 18 their lands to I'ha- 
raoh. 'ii The priests' land was not bought. 'Zl He 
letteth the land to them for a fifth part. 2S Jacob's 
age. 29 He sweareth Joseph to bury him with his 
fathers. 

THEN Joseph came and ""told Pharaoh, 
and said, My father and my brethren, 
and their flocks, and their herds, and all 
that they have, are come out of the land 



II Or.iAuAam. Num.2iir4.'. ilclinp.i9:-29. *Heb.Mij;A. e Deut 
I0:J:; Art97:H. f dmp. 31 :21. t cliap. 47 : 1. h chap. 4.'>: 14. 
i Luke -J : 'I'.-l, 30. f Hfb. they are men of cuttle, i rlinp. 47: 3. 
k cli:ip. :W:;i.T; .37:12. I chap.4!:3:; Ejl.8:26. m cbl<p.46:3t. 



seek his blessing, and commit ourselves to his guid- 
ance and care. 

4. With the blessing of God we need not fear to 
undertake any service, make any sacrifice, or endure 
any trial to which he may call us. 

30. Men may receive such blessings as to desire 
no more on earth, and be willing at any time to 
leave it, and enter into heaven. Phil. 1 : 23. 

34. A wise regard for our friends will ordinarily 
lead us to wish them to continue in the employ- 
ment in which they have been educated and with 
whicli they are acquainted, as promising greater 
happiness to themselves and greater usefulness to 
others. 



Jacob blesseth Pharaoh. 



GENESIS XLVII. 



The years of famine. 



B'c.'vm.' of Canaan ; and behold, they are in 
the ^land of Goshen. 

2 And he took some of his brethren, even 
Ave men, and ''presented them unto Pha- 
raoh. 

3 And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, 
What is your "^ occupation 1 And they said 
unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are ''shep- 
herds, both we, ayid also our fathers. 

4 They said moreover unto Pharaoh, 
For to "sojourn in the land are we come; 
for thy servants have no pasture for their 
flocks, for the famine is sore in the land of 
Canaan : now therefore, we pray thee, let 
thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen. 

5 And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, say- 
ing, Thy father and thy brethren are come 
unto thee : 

6 The land of Egypt is before thee; in 
the best of the land make thy father and 
brethren to dwell ; in the land of Goshen 
let them dwell ; and if thou knowest any 
men of activity among them, then make 
them rulers ''oA^er my cattle. 

7 And Joseph brought in Jacob his fa- 
ther, and set him before Pharaoh : and 
Jacob blessed s Pharaoh. 

8 And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How 
old * art thou 1 

9 And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The 
days of the years of my pilgrimage are a 
hundred and thirty years : few and evil 
have the days of the years of my life been, 
and ''have not attained unto the days of 
the years of the life of my fathers in the 
days of their pilgrimage. 

] And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went 
out from before Pharaoh. 

1 1 TT And Joseph placed his father and 
his brethren, and gave them a possession 
in the land of Egypt, in the best of the 
land, in the land of Rameses, as 'Pharaoh 
had commanded. 

12 And Joseph nourished his father, and 
his brethren, and all his father's household, 
with bread, t according to their families. 

13 ^And 'there was no bread in all the 
land ; for the famine vras very sore, so 
that the land of Egypt and all the land of 
Canaan fainted by reason of the famine. 

1 4 And Joseph gathered up all the money 
that was found in the land of Egypt, and 



■ chapter 45: 28. bActs7:13. c John I : 8. dAmos7:M. 
e chap. 15: 13; Deat.26:S; Psa.lO,i:23; l9a.r.2:4. fl Cliron. 
27:29; Prov. 22:29. g 1 Sam. l.i : .30; 1 Chron. 29 : 20 : 1 Peter, 
2:17. * Heh. many are the days of the years of thy life, h chap. 



CHAPTER XLVII. 

4. Sore ; general, and grievous. 

7. Blessed Pharaoh ; sought a blessing on him 
from Grod. 

9. Pilgrimage ; journey through this world. 

11. Best of the land: most fertile, and best 
adapted to their wants. Rameses; the capital of 
Goshen, about half way from the Nile to the Red sea. 



in the land of Canaan, for the corn which 
they bought : and Joseph brought the 
money into Pharaoh's house. 

15 And when money failed in the land 
of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, all 
the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said, 
Give us bread : for why should we die in 
thy presence'? for the money faileth. 

16 And Joseph said. Give your cattle; and 
I will give yon for your cattle, if money fail. 

17 And they brought their cattle unto 
Joseph : and Joseph gave them bread in 
exchange for horses, and for the flocks, 
and for the cattle of the herds, and for tho 
asses; and he tfed them with bread for 
all their cattle for that year. 

18 When that year was ended, they 
came unto him the second year, and said 
unto him, We will not hide it from my 
lord, how that our money is spent ; my 
lord also hath our herds of cattle ; there 
is not aught left in the sight of my lord, 
but our bodies, and our lands : 

19 Wherefore shall we die before thine 
eyes, both we and our land? buy ''us and 
our land for bread, and we and our land 
will be servants unto Pharaoh: and give 
us seed, that we may live, and not die, 
that the land be not desolate. 

20 And Joseph bought all the land of 
Egypt for Pharaoh ; for the Egyptians 
sold every man his field, because the 
famine prevailed over them : so the land 
became Pharaoh's. 

21 And as for the people, he removed 
them to cities from one end of the borders 
of Egypt even to the other end thereof. 

22 Only the land of the ^ priests bought 
he not ; for the priests had a portion as- 
signed them of Pharaoh, and did eat their 
portion which Pharaoh gave them : where- 
fore they sold not their lands. 

23 Then Joseph said unto the people. 
Behold, I have bought you this day and 
your land for Pharaoh : lo, here is seed 
for you, and ye shall sow the land. 

24 And it shall come to pass in the in- 
crease, that ye shall give the fifth jmrt 
unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall bo 
your own, for seed of the field, and for 
your food, and for them of your house- 
holds, and for food for your little ones. 



2.5:7,8:35:28. i ver. 6; E.xoJus 1 : II. fUeh. according to the 
tittle ones; or, as a little child is nourished, j ihap. 41 :30, 31. 
t Ueb.led. i Job 2:4; Lam. 1:11. % Ot, princes. 



13. The land— fainted ; the people in it. 
18. Alight ; any thing. 

21. Removed thevi to cities ; where the food was 
stored, for the greater convenience of supply i ng them. 

22. Priests ; these were princes and maffistrates, 
as well as ecclesiastical officers. Chap. 41 : 45. 

23. Sow the land; as the seven years of famine 
were now drawing to a close. 

67 



Sickness of Jacob. 



GENESIS XLVIII. 



Joseph visitcth him. 



25 And they said, Thou hast saved our 
lives : let us find grace in the sight of my 
lord, and we will be Pharaoh's servants. 

26 And Joseph made it a law over the 
land of Egypt unto this day, that Pharaoh 
should have the fifth part; "except the 
land of the * priests only, which became 
not Pharaoh's. 

27 *! And Israel dwelt in the land of 
Egypt, in the country of Goshen ; and 
they had possessions therein, and grew, 
and '"multiplied exceedingly. 

28 And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt 
seventeen years : so the t whole age of 
Jacob was a hundred forty and seven 
years. 

29 And the <^time drew nigh that Israel 
must die : and he called his son Joseph, and 
said unto him, If now I have found grace in 
thy sight, "* put, I pray thee, thy hand under 
my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with 
me ; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt : 

30 But I *= will lie with my fathers, and 
thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and 
bury me in their burying-place. And he 
said, I will do as thou hast said. 

31 And he said, Swear unto me. And he 
sware unto him. And '^Isracl bowed him- 
self upon the bed's head. 

CHAPTER XLVIII. 

1 Joseph Tvitli his sons visiteth his sick father. 2 Jacob 
strengtheneth himself to bless them. 3 He repeateth 
the promise. .'5 He taketh Ephraira and Manasseh 
as his own. 7 He telleth Josepliof his mother's grave. 
9 He blesseth Ephraim and Manasseh. 17 He pre- 
ferreth the younger before the elder. 21 He prophe- 
sieth their return to Canaan. 

AND it came to pass after these things, 
that one told Joseph, Behold, thy fa- 
ther is sick : and he took with him his 
two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim. 



• Eira 7:24. * Or, prinets. b Exodus 1 :7, 12; Deut. 10:22; 
■eh.9:2.3. i Web. dayt of tlie ytaii of hu lift. cDent.3I:H; 
I King«, 2:1; Job 7:1; H;H. ilchap.24:2. e chap. .'iO: 5-13; 
Ueb.ll:22. f 1 Kings, 1:47; Heb. 11:21. K chap. 28 : 13-19; 



26. The fifth part; this is supposed to have 
bepn the tax which they paid for the use of the land 
and the support of tlie government. 

30. Their Imryi7ig-]>lace ; chap. 23 : 20 ; 25 : 9. 
This Jacob did, not merely because he wished to be 
buried by the side of his fathers, bat also as an 
••xpression of his faith in the promise of God that 
bis posterity should inherit that land. 

.31. The bed's head; the word here translated 
bed's head, means also the head or top of a staff. 
Heb. 11:21. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. Notwithstanding our dependence on God for all 
the blessings we enjoy and hope for, it is as needful to 
nse all suitable means to obtain these blessings, as it 
would be if success depended solely on our efforts. 

9. The longest life is but a journey through this 
world to another; and as character is the chief thing, 
our great concern should be that it may be such as 
»hall render us most u-seful and fit us fiir heaven. 

20. Men will cheerfully give up their property to 
save the life of the body; and yet, for tne sake of 
property, they will sacrifice the Life of their souls. 
68 



2 And one told Jacob, and said, b. ":?««.■ 
Behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto thee : 
and Israel stiengthened himself, and sat 
upon the bed. 

3 And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Al- 
mighty 6 appeared unto me at Luz in the 
land of Canaan, and blessed me, 

4 And said unto me, Behold, I will make 
thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I will 
make of thee a multitude of people ; and 
will give this land to thy seed after thee 
for '"an everlasting possession. 

5 ^And now thy two sons, Ephraim and 
Manasseh, 'which were born unto thee 
in the land of Egypt, before I came unto 
thee into Egypt, are mine ; as Reuben and 
Simeon, they shall be mine. 

6 And thy issue, which thou begettest 
after them, shall be thine, Ja?id shall be 
called after the name of their brethren in 
their inheritance. 

7 And as for me, when I came from 
Padan, ^ Rachel died by mc in the land of 
Canaan in the way, when yet there was 
but a little way to come unto Eplirath : 
and I buried her there in the way of Eph- 
rath; the same is Beth-lehem. 

8 And Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and 
said, Who are these 1 

9 And Joseph said unto his father, They 
are my sons, whom God hath 'given me 
in this place. And he said, Bring them, I 
pray thee, unto me, and I will ■" bless them. 

10 Now the eyes of Israel were J dim 
for age, so that he could not see. And 
he brought them near unto him ; and he 
kissed them, and embraced them. 

11 And Israel said unto Joseph, °I had 
not thought to see thy face : and lo, "God 
hath showed me also thy seed. 



35:6. eti-. h cliap. 17 : 8 ; Deut 32: 8 ; Amos 9: 14, IS. I cliRp. 
41:60-.'i:. j Joshua 14: 4. k cbap. 3.=i : 16-19. 1 chap. 33 : .S. 
m chap. JT : 4 : Heb. 11:21. J Heb. /leavy. n chap. 37 : 33, 35 ; 
45:26. u Eph. 3:20. 



2.'5. To he ungrateful to one who had saved our 
life, would ho base ; how much more so not to be 
grateful to Him who, by suffering and death for us, 
has opened a way to save the undying soul. 

30. The pious at death wish to have such dispo- 
sal made of their bodies as shall be most useful to 
survivors, and, if consistent, to have them laid with 
the bodies of pious ancestors ; that at the trump of 
the arch.angel they may rise and ascend together, 
and complete in body and soul, be ever with the 
Lord. 1 Cor. 15 : 51-55 ; 1 Thess. 4 : 16, 17. 

CHAPTER XLVIII. 

3. L7iz; chap. 28:13, 19. 

5. Thei/ shall be mine; be heads of distinct 
tribes, like the other sons of Israel. 

6. After the vame of their brethren; they 
should not be he.ods of distinct tribes, but should 
be reckoned as belonging to the tribe of Ephraim 
or of Manasseh. 

7. Rachel died; chap. 35:9, 16, 19. 

8. Beheld; perceived or understood that they 
were present. Ver. 10. 



Jacob blesseth 



GENESIS XLIX. 



Joseph'' s soTis. 



S:ai^'' 12 And Joseph brought them out 
from between his knees, and he "bowed 
himself with his face to the earth. 

13 And Joseph took them both, Ephra- 
im in his right hand toward Israel's left 
hand, and Manasseh in his left hand tow- 
ard Israel's right hand, and brought them 
near unto him. 

14 And Israel stretched out his right 
hand, and laid it upon Ephraini's head, 
who was the younger, and his left hand 
upon Manasseh's head, guiding his hands 
wittingly ;'' for Manasseh was the first- 
born. 

15 TfAnd he blessed Joseph, and said, 
God, before whom "^my fathers Abraham 
and Isaac did walk, the God ^ which fed 
me all my life long unto this day, 

16 The '^ Angel which •" redeemed me 
from all evil, bless the lads ; and let my 
name be named on them, and the name 
of my fathers Abraham and Isaac ; and 
let them *grow into a ^ multitude in the 
midst of the earth. 

1 7 And when Joseph saw that his father 
laid his right hand upon the head of Ephra- 
im, it displeased him : and he held up his 
father's hand, to remove it from Ephra- 
im's head unto Manasseh's head. 

18 And Joseph said unto his father, Not 
so, my father : for this is the first-born ; 
put thy right hand upon his head. 

19 And his father refused, and said, I 
know it, my son, I know it: he also shall 
become a people, and he also shall be 
great: but '"truly his 'younger brother 
shall be greater than he, and his seed 
shall become a t multitude of nations. 



• Exodus 20: 1-2; Lev. 19:32. b ver. \9. c cliap. 17:1; 24:40. 
J Psalm 103:4, 5. I' chap. 31: 11; Isaiali 63:9. f I'salm 34:23. 
* Heb. at Jishes do increase, s Num. 2fi : :!4. 37. li Num 1:33, 
3,1; Deut. 33:17. i chap. 2.i : 23. f Hfh. fulness. j Ruth 
•4:11,12. k chap. 50:24; Josh. 23:14. I .Tosh. 17 : 14. mlJeut. 



12. His k7iees ; the knees of Jacob. Boived 
himself ; in token of reverence for his father. 

14. Witliiigly ; knowingly, designedly. 

16. T/ifi Angel; chap. 17 : 1 ; 28: 15; 31 : 11, 
13, 24. My nayne — and the name of my fa- 
thers ; let them be called not Egyptians, but Isra- 
elites, descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 

18. Not so ; he thought his father had made a 
mistake. 

19. Be greater ; have a more numerous and pow- 
erful posterity. 

22. One portion ; to belong to Joseph's posterity, 

in addition to what would fall to them when the land 

of Canaan should be divided among the tribes. Chap. 

33 : 18-20 ; Josh. 24 : 32 ; 1 Chron. 5:2; John 4 : 5. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. In sickness it is well gratefully to recount the 
past goodness of God to us and our families, and 
earnestly to recommend him and his salvation to all 
around us. 

11. God is often better to us than our fears, and 
Joes more for us than we, in our ignorance and 
we;vkness, had dared to hope. This should lead us 
to trust in him at ail times, and in well doing, pa- 
tiently wait for his salvation. 



j 20 And he blessed them that day, say- 
1 ing. In J thee shall Israel bless, saying, 
' God make thee as Ephraim and as Ma- 
! nasseh : and he set Ephraim before Ma- 
, nasseh. 

I 21 And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, 
!l die; but ''God shall be with you, and 

bring you again unto the land of your 

fathers. 
22 Moreover, I have given to thee one 

portion 'above thy brethren, which I took 

out of the hand of the Amorite with my 

sword and with my bow. 

CHAPTER XLIX. 

1 Jacob calleth his sons to bless them. 3 Their bless- 
ing in particular. 29 He chargeth them about his 
burial. 3:3 He dieth. 

AND ""Jacob called unto his sons, and 
said. Gather yourselves together, that 
I may tell you that "which shall befall 
you in the last °days. 

2 Gather yourselves together, and hear, 
ye sons of Jacob ; and hearken unto Is- 
rael your father. 

3 ^ Reuben, thou art my first-born, my 
might, and the p beginning of my strength, 
the excellency of dignity, and the excel- 
lency of power : 

4 Unstable as water, tthou shalt not 
excel ; because "ithou wentest up to thy 
father's bed ; then defiledst thou it : * he 
went up to my couch. 

5 ^Simeon ""and Levi are brethren; 
instruments II of ' cruelty are in their habi- 
tations. 

6 *my soul, come not thou into their 
secret ; unto their assembly, mine honor, 
be not thou united : for in their anger 



33:1, etc. n Num. 24:14; Dput. 4:30. o Isa. 2:2; .Ter. 23:20. 
P Deut. 21:17. t Heb. do not tkau. q chap. 3.t: 22 ; Dent- .'> : 21. 
% Or, my couch is gone, r diap. 29: 33, .34. || Or, their swordt 
are weapons of violence. ■ chap. 34:25-29. tPaa. 26:9; PrOT. 
1 : ir>, 16. 



15. However much we may have of this world, 
and however many may minister to our wants, our 
daily bread comes from God, and he is the giver of 
all the common as well as special mercies of life. 

21. Strong confidence in the promises of God, and 
good hope through grace that when absent from the 
body we shall be present with the Lord, and that he 
will be the God of our children and children's chil- 
dren, to coming generations, gives peace and joy in 
death. 

CHAPTER XLIX. 

1. Last days ; future generations. 

3. Excellency of dignity, and — of power; as 
the first-born, the blessings of the birthright belonged 
to Reuben, but on account of his sin it was taken 
from him. 

4. Unstable as boater ; easily overcome by 
temptation, and rushing headlong into iniquity. 
Shalt not excel ; neither he nor his posterity would 
ever be dis-inguished. Chap. 35:22. 

5. Are bretliren ; not merely descended from 
the same parents, but alike in cruelty of disposition. 
Instruments of cruelty ; chap. 34 : 25-2iD. 

6. Come not thou; in this verse Jacob expresses 
his deep abhorrence of their crimes. 

69 



The sons of Jacob 



GENESIS XLIX. 



receive his blessing. 



they slew a man, and in their self-will 
they 'digged down a wall. 

7 Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce ; 
and their wrath, for it was cruel: I will 
divide =" Ihem in Jacoh, and scatter them 
in Israel. 

8 1[ Judah,''thou art he whom thy breth- 
ren shall praise: thy hand shall be in 
the neck of thine enemies ; tliy father's 
children shall bow "^down before thee. 

9 Judah ?'.5 alien's whelp : from the prey, 
my son, thou art gone up : he stooped 
down, he couched as a ''lion, and as an 
old lion ; who shall rouse him up ? 

10 The "^ sceptre shall not depart from 
Judah, nor a ''lawgiver from ^ between 
his feet, until ''Shiloh come; and unto 
him' shall the gathering of the people be. 

1 1 Binding his foal unto the vine, and 
his ass's J colt unto the choice vine; he 
washed his garments ''in wine, and his 
clothes in the blood of grapes : 

12 His 'eyes shall be red with wine, and 
his teeth white with milk. 

13 1[ Zebulun "'shall dwell at the haven 
of the sea; and he shall be for a haven 
of ships; and his border shall be unto 
Zidon. 

14 1[ Issachar is a strong ass couching 
down between two burdens : 

15 And he saw that rest teas good, and 
the land that it was pleasant ; and bowed 



* Or, houghed oxen, a ,7osli. 21:3. b chap. 29 : 35 ; Ps.l. 76 : 1 . 
e tCliron..'i:i; nev.S:9. i Num. 2.'!:24 ; Rev..-,:S. t Num. '2-1: 17. 
f Piia.60:7; l8a.3:l:i2. k Deut 28: f>7. li Isa. 1 1 : 1 -S; Ejek.21 :27. 
i JolinU:iV2; 12:32. iM;iU21:2. k Is.i.t«: 1-3. 1 CiintS: 10-16. 



7. / vnll divide them ; tliis was a prophecy 
from (.>o(J, that their posterity would be scattered 
amoii^ tlie other tribe.s. 

8. rhij brethren shall praise ; his descendants 
would be highly distinguished and honored by all 
the other tribes. In the neck ; they would over- 
come tlu-ir enemies. 

9. A lion; as the lion is the king of the forest, 
and terrible to other beasts, so the tribe of Judah 
would govern the other tribes, and be a terror to 
their foes. 

10. The sceptre; an emblem of power and au- 
thority. Shiloh; the Messiah, Prince of peace, 
sent as a Saviour. Isa. 7:14; 9:6,7; 11 : 1-10- 
Jer. 23 : T), 6 ; Dan. 9 : 2-5-27 ; Mat. 1 : 21-23. The 
gathering of the people ; they shall choose him 
as their King, and he shall reign over them. 

12. Red with wine — white with viiUc ; his 
posterity would have a very fruitful country, and an 
abundance of ihe good tliing.s of life. 

13. At the haven of the sea; his posterity 
would live near the sea, and be distinguished as a 
mercantile people. 

11. 15. Strong ass — bowed his shoulder to 
bear ; his posterity would be distinguished for their 
ability and readiness to labor, for their quiet, pa- 
tient, and industrious habits, and their preferring to 
live at home rather than engage in wars or puolic 
affairs. 

1(5. Judge his people ; they would h.ave a head 
or ruler like the other tribes, or would furnish one 
like Sampson for all the tribes. Judg. 15 : 7-20 ; 
16:27-31. 

70 



his shoulder to bear, and became *b'.c:^ 
a servant unto tribute. 

16 ^ Dan "shall judge his people as one 
of the tribes of Israel. 

1 7 Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an 
adder t in the path, that biteth the horse's 
heels, so that his rider shall fall backward. 

18 I "have waited for thy salvation, O 
Lord. » 

19 ^Gad, a troop shall overcome him: 
but Phe shall overcome at the last. 

20 11 Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, 
and he shall yield royal dainties. 

21 II Naphtali is a hind let loose : he giv- 
eth goodly words. 

22 If Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a 
fruitful bough by a well ; whose t branches 
run over the wall : 

23 The "i archers have sorely grieved 
him, and shot at him, and hated him : 

24 But his 'bow abode in strength, and 
the "arms of his hands were made strong 
by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob ; 
(from thence is the 'shepherd, Ihe "stone 
of Israel ;) 

25 Even by the God of thy ''father, who 
shall help thee ; and by the Almighty, 
who shall bless thee w^ith blessings of 
heaven above, blessings of the deep that 
lieth under, blessings of the breasts and 
of the womb : 

26 The blessings of thy father have pre- 



■n .losh. 19:10. n .ludg. 13:2, etr. f Heb. nnoiwnntt. o Van- 
40:1; l8n.2.'S:9;2K:8. |. lCliron.,T: 18. % Heh.dalightert. q rliap. 
37 : 4, etc. ; 39 : 20. r Job 29:20; I'sa. 37: 14, I.V > Hsa, 18 : 32,3-1. 
1 cbal". 45: 10, 11; 50:21. u 183.28:16. vDeut.33:27. 



17. A serpent — an adder; they would overcome 
their enemies by subtlety, stratagem, and surprise, 
ratlicr than bycour.-vgeand open force. Judg. 18:27. 

18. For thy salvation ; Jacob would expect de- 
liverance, not from men, but from God. 

19. Shall overcome him ; his posterity, from 
their situation, would be peculiarly e.\'posed to the 
incursions of enemies, who would often overcome 
them, but in the end they would conquer and sub- 
due their foes. Deut. 33:20; Judg. 10:8; Jer. 
49 : 1 ; 1 Chron. 5 : 18-22 ; 12 : 8. 

20. Fat — royal dai?! ties ; the inheritance of his 
posterity would yield in abundance, not merely the 
necessaries, but also the luxuries of life. 

21. A hind; a female deer, distinguished for its 
beauty and fleetness. Let loose ; fond of liberty, 
timorous, and disposed to fly from its enemy, not. 
like the lion, to encounter him. It seeks elevatea 
places for security, and walks s.afely on high, crag- 
gy rocks. 2 Sam. 22 : 34 ; Psa. 18 : 3:i ; Hab. 
^i:19. Giveth goodly words ; is friendly, suppli- 
ant, and courteous. Some give a different transla- 
tion, and render this verse in such a manner as would 
foretell for Naphtali unusual health and prosperity, 
according to Deut. 33 : 23. 

22. A fruitful bough ; he would have a very 
numerous posterity. 

23. Hated him ; chap. 37 : 4. 20, 24. 

^ 2-1. Made strong; chap. 41:39^5; 45:5-13. 
The shepherd, the stone; one who prolectedj 
nourished, and supported his people. 

25, 26. Jilessings — above — wider — andof tht 
womb — the utmost bound of the everlastifig 



Jacob's death, and 



GENESIS L. 



burial in Canaan^ 



B.'c!imj^' vailed above the blessings of my 
progenitors * unto the utmost bound of the 
everlasting ''hills: they shall be on the 
head of Joseph, and on the crown of the 
head of him that was "^separate from his 
brethren. 

27 1[ Benjamin shall ^ raven as a wolf : 
in the morning he shall devour the prey, 
and at night he shall divide the "spoil. 

28 "T[A11 these are the twelve tribes of 
Israel : and this is it that their father 
spake unto them, and blessed them ; every 
one "^ according to his blessing he blessed 
them. 

29 And he charged them, and said unto 
them, I am to be gathered unto my peo- 
ple : bury me with my ^ fathers in the 
cave that is in the field of Ephron the 
Hittite, 

30 In the ''cave that is in the field of 
Machpelah, which is before Mamre in 
the land of Canaan, which Abraham 
bought with the field of Ephron the 
Hittite, for a possession of a burying- 
place. 

3 1 There they buried Abraham and Sa- 
rah his wife ; there they buried Isaac and 
Rebekah his wife ; and there I buried 
Leah. 

32 The purchase of the field and of the 
cave that is therein icas from the children 
of Heth. 

33 And when Jacob had made an end 
of commanding his sons, he gathered up 
his feet into the bed, and yielded up the 
ghost,' and was J gathered unto his peo- 
ple. 

a Epli. 1:3. 1) Hab. 3:6. c iBalah 66 : .1. i .Tudges 20 : 21, 2.i. 
• E7.pk. 39 : a-IO. f Rom. 12:6, etc. B chap. 47 : .30; 2 .S.nmuel, 
19:37. li cliap. 23 : 3, etc. i Job 14:10. j ver. 29. Vver.26; 

hills ; Joseph's posterity would have a mild, genial 
climate, a fruitful soil, treasures from land and wa- 
ter, a healthful and numerous progeny, and blessings 
permanent and lasting. 

27. Raven as a wolf; His posterity would be war- 
like, fierce, and cruel. Judg. 19 : 22-27 ; 20 : 14-25. 

28. Blessed them; foretold the blessings God 
would bestow upon them, and what would take 
place in future times with regard to their posterity. 

29. In the cave; chap. 47:30; 23:19; 25:9; 
35 : 27 29. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. We should desire not only to be useful in life, 
but in death to inculcate such truth, communicate 
such instruction, and set such an example as shall 
be most useful to coming generations. 

7. We may feel the effects of our sins long after 
they have been committed. Even if they have been 
repented ofandforgiven,we and our posterity may suf- 
fer evils in consequence of them to the end of time. 

10. The fact that the sceptre has long ago de- 
parted from the tribe of Judah, who have ceased to 
govern Israel, shows that the Messiah has come, and 
that the expectation of a future Messiah is vain. 

IS. The fulfilment of the prophecies uttered by 
Jacob on his death-bed shows that he spoke as di- 
rected by the Holy Ghost. But however highly fa- 
vored a good man may be on earth, however numer- 



CHAPTER L. 

1 The mourning for Jacob. 4 Joseph getteth leave of 
Pharaoh to go to bury him. 7 The funeral. 1.5 Jo- 
seph comforteth his brethren, who craved his pardon. 
22 His age. 23 He seeth the third generation of his 
sons. 24 He prophesieth unto his brethren of their 
return. 2-5 He taketh an oath of them for his bonea. 
26 He dieth, and is embalmed. 

AND Joseph fell upon his father's face, 
and wept upon him, and kissed him. 

2 And Joseph commanded his servants 
the physicians to '' embalm his father : 
and the physicians embalmed Israel. 

3 And forty days were fulfilled for 
him ; for so are fulfilled the days of those 
which are embalmed: and the Egyptians 
mourned* for him 'threescore and ten 
days. 

4 And when the days of his mourning 
were past, Joseph spake unto the house 
of Pharaoh, saying. If now I have found 
grace in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in 
the ears of Pharaoh, saying, 

5 My father made me ""swear, saying, 
Lo, I die-: in my grave which "I have 
digged for me in the land of Canaan, 
there shalt thou bury me. Now therefore 
let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my 
father, and I will come again. 

6 And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury 
thy father, according as he made thee 
swear. 

7 H And Joseph went up to bury his 
father : and with him went up all the 
servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his 
house, and all the elders of the land of 
Egypt, 

8 And all the house of Joseph, and his 
brethren, and his father's house : only 



2Cliron. 16:14; Maltliew 26 : 12 ; Mark 14:8; 16:1; .Iolml2:7. 
* Heb.wept. I Numbers 20:29; Deut. 34:8. m chap. 47:29. 
n Isa. 22: 16; M.at. 27:60. 



ous his blessings or those of liis posterity, nothing 
will fully satisfy him but the salvation of God. 

26. The measures which men take in opposing 
God, are made the means of fulfilling his designs ; 
and tliose which are adopted to prevent the exalta- 
tion and glory of his people, are made the occasion 
of promoting them. 

33. Men who have finished the work which God 
gave them to do, and are, through grace, gathered 
in peace — their bodies to the grave and their souls 
to the assembly of just men made perfect — are in- 
deed truly and unspeak.ably blessed. Rev. 14: 13. 

CHAPTER L. 

2. Embalm; prepare the body with spices, drugs, 
and gums, in order to preserve it. 

3. Forty days ; the time it took to embalm the 
body. Threescore and ten; seventy; the forty 
days in which they were embalming him, and thirty 
besides. 

4. House of Pharaoh ; his chief servants or 
princes. 

5. I have digged; it was common for men to 
prepare their burial-place long before their death, 
and Jacob is supposed to have prepared his in the 
cave of Machpelah, before he left Canaan. 

7. All the servants of Pharaoh; ihe elders; 
his principal men ; a great company. Ver. 9. 



Joseph comforteth 



GENESIS L. 



his suppliant brethren. 



their little 'ones, and their flocks, and 
their herds, they left in the land of Go- 
shen. 

9 And there went up with him both 
chariots and horsemen : and it was a very 
great company. 

10 And they came to the threshing-floor 
of Atad, which is beyond Jordan ; and 
there they mourned with a great and very 
sore lamentation : and he made a '' mourn- 
ing for his father seven days. 

1 1 And when the inhabitants of the land, 
the Canaanites, saw the mourning in the 
floor of Atad, they said, This is a grievous 
mourning to the Egyptians : wherefore 
the name of it was called * Abel-mizraim, 
which is beyond Jordan. 

12 And his sons did unto him according 
as he *= commanded them : 

13 For his sons carried him into the 
land of Canaan, and buried him in the 
cave of the field of Machpelah, which 
Abraham ''bought with the field'for a pos- 
session of a burying-place of Ephron the 
Hittite, before Mamre. 

14 1[ And Joseph returned into Egypt, 
he, and his brethren, and all that went 
up with him to bury his father, after he 
had buried his father. 

15 TI And Avhen Joseph's brethren saw 
that their •■ father was dead, they said, Jo- 
seph will pcradvenfure hate us, and will 
certainly requite us all the eifil which we 
did unto him. 

16 And they tsent a messenger unto 
Joseph, saying. Thy father did command 
before he died, saying, 

17 So shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I 



• ExoJus 10:9, 2fi. bDcut.34:«; I Sam. 31 : IS; 2 Sam. 1 : 17: 
Job 2 : 13 ; AcU 8:2. * That i«, tht mourning of Hit Egijptians. 
t chap. 49 : 29. i chap. 23 : 10. e chap. 27 : 41 ; Lev. 2H : 36 ; .lob 
IS: 21; Prnv. 28:1. f Heb. chaiutd. f Proverbs 28 : 13; Mat, 
6:12,14; 18:3.t; Luke 17:3,4; Eph.4:32; Col.3:13; James 



10. Beyoiid Jordan ; on the west side ; Moses 
having written this on the east of Jordan. 

11. Afiel-mizraitn ; mourning of the Egyptians. 
17. The trespass of thy brethren ; in selling 

Joseph into Egypt. Chap. 37 : 28. 
IS. Fell down; chap. 37:7, 10. 

19. Am I in the place of God? it was not his 
business to punish them; that belonged to G-od. 
Rom. 12:19; Heb. 10:30. 

20. Ye tlions^ht evil ; in intending that Joseph 
should live and die a slave, and that his father should 
think that he had been torn in pieces. God meant 
it wito ffood ; that he should be greatly exalted, 
and be the means of saving his father, his brethren, 
and multitudes of others from death, and of illus- 
trating to all future generations the wonderful prov- 
idence of a wonder-working God. 

23. Brought 11)1 vpojiJosepli's knees ; he lived 
to see and enjoy them. 

2-1. Visit yon. ; mercifully interpose in their be- 
bulf. He sware ; chap. l.T : 14 ; 46 : 4 ; 48 : 21. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Divine grace does not destroy or lessen natural 
affection, but regulates, purifies, and exalts it. 



brethren, and their sin ; for they did unto 
thee evil : and now, we pray thee, forgive 
the trespass of the servants of the God of 
thy father. And Joseph wept w^hen they 
spake unto him. 

18 And his brethren also went and fell 
down before his face ; and they said. Be- 
hold, we be thy servants. 

1 9 And Joseph said unto them, Fear not : 
for am I in the ^ place of God? 

20 But as for you, ye ""thought evil 
against me ; but God 'meant it unto good, 
to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save 
much people alive. 

21 Now therefore fear ye not: I will 
nourish -"you, and your little ones. And 
he comforted them, and spake t kindly 
unto them. 

22 H And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, and 
his father's house : and Joseph lived a 
hundred and ten years. 

23 And Joseph saw '' Ephraim's children 
of the third generation : the children also 
of 'Machir the son of Manasseh were 
brought* up upon Joseph's knees. 

24 And Joseph said unto his brethren, 
I die; and God will surely visit "you, 
and bring you out of this land unto the 
land which he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, 
and to Jacob. 

25 And Joseph took an " oath of the chil- 
dren of Israel, saying, God will surely 
visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones 
from hence. 

26 So Joseph died, being a hundred and 
ten years old : and they embalmed him, 
and he was put in a coffin in Egypt. 



.1:16. B Dent. .12 : 3.1 : 2Kinss, .1 : 7; Job34:29; Rom. 12:19: 
Heb. 10:30. li P.ialm ."iB : 5. "i chap. 4:> : 5, 7. i M.lttlievr .1 : 44. 
t Heb. to their heart: k Job 42 : IH. I Num. 32 : 39. % Heb. 
home, m Exodus 3 : 16. n Ex. 13: 19; Jo3h. 34:32; Acta 7: 16: 
Heb. 1 1 : 22. 



3. The removal of the righteous, especially those 
who have had great influence, is not only a private, 
but a public loss, and may well occasion public 
grie'f. 

13. Decent and afTectionate respect should be paid 
to the mortal remains of departed friends, and their 
dying requests, so far as may be consistent, should 
be faitiifully complied with. 

18. A guilty conscience naturally forebodes evil ; 
and duty, as well as interest, requires that suitable 
measures should be taken to escape it. Lev. 26 : 36, 
40^.5: Prov. 28:1. 

20. The object of God in suffering men to com- 
mit wickedness is very different from their object in 
committing it. Whenever they intentionally do 
wrong their object is evil, and they are evil. His 
design in suffering it to be committed is good, and 
he is good. 

25. Living faith in God gives good hope, through 
grace, that when the soul is absent from the body it 
will be present with the Lord ; that in due time the 
body will be r.^ised, immortal and glorious, to be 
united with the soul, and both be perfect in his 
likeness for ever. 



72 



THE SECOND BOOK OF MOSES, 



EXODUS. 



S.c"S CHAPTER I. 

1 The children of Israel, after Joseph's death, do multi- 
ply. 8 The more they are oppressed by a new king, 
the more they multiply. 1 5 The godliness of the mid- 
wives, in saving the men-children alive. 22 Pharaoh 
oommandeth the male children to be cast into the river. 

nyrOW these are the names of the children 
J_\ of Israel, which came into * Egypt ; 
every man and his household came with 
Jacol). 

2 Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, 

3 Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin, 

4 Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher. 

5 And all the souls that came out of the 
loins * of Jacob were '' seventy souls : for 
Joseph was in Egypt already. 

6 And Joseph "^died, and all his breth- 
ren, and all that generation. 

7 ^ And the children of Israel were fruit- 
ful, and increased ^ abundantly, and mul- 
tiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty ; and 
the land was filled with them. 

8 Now there arose up a new king over 
Egypt, which ""knew not Joseph. 

9 And he said unto his people, Behold, 
the people of the children of Israel are 
more and mightier than we : 

1 Come on, let us deal "^ wisely with them, 
lest they multiply, and it come to pass, 
that, when there falleth out any war, they 
join also unto our enemies, and fight against 
us, and so get them up out of the land. 

11 Therefore they did set over them 
taskmasters, to afflict sthem with their 
burdens. And they built for Pharaoh 
treasure-cities, Pithom and '' Raamses. 

12 Butt the more they afflicted them, 
the more they multiplied and grew. And 
they were grieved because of the children 
of Israel. 



> Gen. 


46 :f 


. * Heb. thigh 


b Deut. 10:22 


c Gen. 50:26. 


i Gen. 46 


::i; 


Dent. 26: 5; 


Fs^ 


105:24. Eccl.2:19; Arti 7:18. 


f Psa.83 


3,4 


Prov. 1:11 


•21 


30; Acts 23:12 , • 


LCor.3: 1!); Ja?. 


S:I5. e chap. S: 7; Ge 


esis 


15: 13; Deut. 26 


: 6 ; Psalm 81 : 6. 


h Gen. 47 


11. 


fHeb.^nd 


asth 


ey affiicttd them,s 


they multiplied. 



CHAPTER I. 

Exodus ; meaningr, departure — a name given to 
this book because it describes the departure of the 
Israelites from Egypt. 

5. Seventy sutils ; including .Tacob himself, Jo- 
seph, and his two sons. Gen. 4G : 27. 

8. Knew not Joseph ; did not reg.ard his emi- 
nent services, or favor the Israelites. 

10. Deal wisely ; cunningly, in such a manner 
as to diminish their number and power. 

11. Burdens; e.xactions of labor and money. 
Treasure-cities ; fortified places for the keeping of 



13 And the Egyptians made the children 
of Israel to serve with rigor : 

14 And they made their 'lives bitter 
with hard bondage, in mortar, and in 
brick,^ and in all manner of service in 
the field : all their service, wherein they 
made them serve, %vas with ^ rigor. 

15 T[ And the king of Egypt spake to the 
Hebrew midwives, of which the name of 
the one was Shiphrah, and the name of 
the other Puah ; 

16 And he said. When ye do the office 
of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and 
see them upon the stools, if it be a son, 
then ye shall kill him ; but if it be a 
daughter, then she shall live. 

17 But the midwives 'feared God, and 
did not as the king of Egypt command- 
ed them, but stved the men-children 
alive. 

18 And the king of Egypt called for the 
midwives, and said unto them. Why have 
ye done this thing, and have saved the 
men-children alive "? 

19 And the midwives said unto "" Pha- 
raoh, Because the Hebrew women are not 
as the Egyptian women ; for they are 
lively, and are delivered ere the midwives 
come in unto them. 

20 Therefore God dealt "well with the 
midwives : and the people multiplied, and 
waxed very mighty. 

2 1 And it came to pass, because the mid- 
wives feared God, that "he made them 
houses. 

22 And Pharaoh charged all his people, 
saying. Every son that is born ye shall 
cast into the river, and every daughter ye 
shall save alive. 



i chap.2:2.3; 6:9; Num.20:i:i; RutUl:20; Acts7:lVI,34. 


iPM 


81:6; Nahum3:14. k Lev. 25; 43; Is.T.58:6; Jer.50:S3. 


Nell. 


5:15; ProT.16:6; r)an.3:18; 6:13; Acl95:29. m .losl 


.2:4; 


2Sam.l7:19. n Prov.U:18; F.ccl.8:12; In.i.3:10; Heb 


6:10. 


ISam. 2:35; 2 Sam. 7:11; 1 Kings, 2: •24; Ps.-l. 127: 1. 





military or other stores. Pithom and Raamses ; 
cities in the north-east part of Egypt, in or near 
Goshen. Gen. 4-5 : 10 ; 47 : 11. 

13. With rigor ; with great cruelty. 

20. God dealt well with the midwives; bless- 
ed them because they would not obey the command 
of Pharaoh. 

21. Made, them houses; increased and pros- 
pered their families. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
6. No excellence of character, and no degree of 
authority, influence, or usefulness among men can 

73 



Moses is born. 



EXODUS II 



He fleeth into Midian. 



CHAPTER II. 



1 Moses is born, 3 and in an ark cast into the flags. 5 
He is found, and brought up by Pharaoh's daughter 
11 He slayeih an Egyptian, lit He reproveth a He- 
brew. 15 He fleeth into Midian. 21 He marrieth 
Zipporah. 22 Gershom is born. 23 God respecteth 
the Israelites' cry. 

AND there went a "man of the house 
of Levi, and took to wife a daughter 
of Levi. 

2 And the woman conceived, and bare a 
son : and when she saw him that he ivas a 
goodly child, she ''hid him three months. 

3 And when she could not longer hide 
him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes, 
and daubed it with slime and with pitch, 
and put the child therein ; and she laid it 
in the flags by the river's brink. 

4 And his sister stood afar off, to wit 
what would be done to him. 

5 ^ And the daughter of Pharaoh came 
down to wash herself at the river ; and 
her maidens walked along by the river's 
side: and when she saw the ark among 
the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it. 

6 And when she had opened it, she saw 
the child : and behold, the babe wept. 
And she had "= compassion on him, and 
said. This is one of the Hebrews' children. 

7 Then said his sister to Pharaoh's 
daughter, Shall I go and call to thes a 
nurse of the Hebrew women, that she 
may nurse the child for thee'? 

8 And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, 
Go. And the maid went and called the 
child's mother. 

9 And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her, 
Take this child away, and nurse it for 
me,"* and I will give thee thy wages. And 
the woman took the child, and nursed it. 

10 And the child grew, and she brought 
him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and he be- 
came her son. And she called his name 
Moses:* and she said. Because I drew 
him out of the water. 

1 1 IT And it came to pass in those days, 

• cImp.R:!:0. b Arts 7:20; Hcb. 11:23. c Nell. 1 : 11 ; Psn. I0ri:4fi. 
* Pea. 27 : 1 0, * Tlml i», drawn out. « ch.ip. 1 : 1 1 ; 3:7; 6:9-14; 
I««.68:6; I.ukp4:J«; Act* 7 : 2:|, 2< ; Heb. 11 : 24-26. f Heb. o 



keep ofT death. It becomes all, therefore, to prepare 
for it, by setting their affections on things above, and 
laying up trea.sure not on earth, but in heaven. 

10. Tyrants often pretend that their unrighteous 
decrees are needful to the welfare of the state. 
Were tliis true it would not excuse them, for the 
end does not justify the means. But it is not true ; 
the permanent good of individuals or communities 
is never promoted by doing wrong. 

11. The providences of God often alarm men; 
and to prevent evils, real orimaginary, and obtain 
good, they frame and execute M-ickcd devices. 

CHAPTER 11. 
1. There went ; had gone. Amram the father 
of Moses had been married a number of years, and 
had at least two children, Miriam and Aaron, when 
Moses was born. Ver. 4 ; C : 20 ; 7:7. 
74 



when Moses was grown, that he *b.c S 
went out unto his brethren, and looked on 
their "^ burdens : and he spied an Egyptian 
smiting a Hebrew, one of his brethren. 

12 And he looked this way and that way, 
and when he saw that there ^i:as no man, 
he slew the Egyptian, and hid him in the 
sand. 

13 And when he went out the second 
day, behold, two men of the Hebrews 
strove together : and he said to him that 
did the wrong. Wherefore smitest thou 
thy fellow 1 

14 And he said. Who made thee a t prince 
and a judge over us? intendest thou to 
kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian? 
And Moses feared, and said. Surely this 
thing is known. 

15 Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, 
he sought to slay Moses. But Moses fled 
from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the 
land of Midian : and he sat down by a well. 

16 Now the t priest of Midian had seven 
daughters : and they came and '"drew wa- 
ter, and filled the troughs to water their 
father's flock. 

17 And the shepherds came and drove 
them away : but Moses stood up and help- 
ed them, and watered their flock. 

18 And when they came to ^ Reuel their 
father, he said, How is it that ye are come 
so soon to-day ? 

19 And they said. An Egyptian deliv- 
ered us out of the hand of the. shepherds, 
and also drew water enough ifor us, and 
watered the flock. 

20 And he said unto his daughters. And 
where is he 1 why is it that ye have left the 
man ? call him, that he may ^eat bread. 

21 And Moses was "^ content to dwell 
with the man : and he gave Moses 'Zip- 
porah his daughter. 

22 And she bare him a son, and he call- 
ed his name II Gershom ; for he said, I have 
been a stranger in a strange land. 



irtn. a prince. J Or, prince. 
Called niso Jclhro, ..r, Jcthe 
Fllil. 4:11. i chap. IS: 2. || 



< Gen. 24:11; 29:10; I Sam. 9:11. 
•. Numbers 10:29. c Gea31:64. 
That iff, a itranger here. 

2. Goo(f/y c/j/W; beautiful, well-favored. Acts 
7:20. 

3. Slime and — pitch ; to fasten it together and 
keep out the water. Riveras brink ; the border of 
the river Nile. 

10. Became her S07i; was treated as her son. 
Moses : signifying one drawn out. 

11. Was grown, ; had become great, not in stature 
merely, but in wisdom, reputation, and influence ; be- 
ing forty years old. Acts 7 : 22-2r); Heb. 1 1 : 23-26. 

15. Midian; a country south of Canaan and 
near the Red sea. 

16. Priest of Midiaji ; the Hebrew word for 
priest signilies also prince. Gen. 41 : 45. 

18. Renel ; probably the same as Jethro; or, as 
some think, the father of Jethro. Chap. 3:1: 
Num. 10:29. 

22. Gershom ; meaning, a stranger there. 



God sendeth Moses 



EXODUS III. 



to deliver Israel. 



cess of time, that the king of Egypt died: 
and the children of Israel ^sighed by reason 
of the bondage, and they cried, and their 
cry came up unto ''God by reason of the 
bondage. 

24 And God heard their groaning, and 
God remembered his "^ covenant with Abra- 
ham, with Isaac, and with Jacob. 

25 And God looked upon the children of 
Israel, and God * had rsspect unto them. 

CHAPTER III. 

1 Moses keepeth Jethro's flock. 2 God appeareth to him 
in a burning bush. 9 He sendeth him to deliver Israel. 
14 The name of God. 15 His message to Israel. 

■jVrOW Moses kept the flock of Jethro 
_LN his father-in-law, the priest of Midi- 
an : and he led the flock to the backside 
of the desert, and came to the mountain 
of "^God, even to Horeb. 

2 And the Angel of the Lord appeared 
unto him in a flame of fire out of the 
midst of a "bush; and he looked, and 
behold, the bush burned with fire, and 
the bush. was not consumed. 

3 And Moses said, I will now turn aside, 
and see this great sight, why the bush is 
not burnt. 

4 And when the Lord saw that he turn- 
ed aside to see, God called unto him out 
of the midst of the bush, and '^said, Mo- 
ses, Moses : and he said, Here am I. 

5 And he said. Draw not nigh hither : put 
off" thy s shoes from off" thy feet ; for the place 
whereon thou standest is holy ground. 

6 Moreover he said, ''I am the God of 
thy father, the God of Abraham, the God 
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And 
Moses hid his face ; for he was ' afraid to 
look upon God. 

7 TfAnd the Lord said, I have surely 
seen the affliction of my ' people which 
are in Egypt, and have heard their ''cry 
by reason of their taskmasters ; for I 
know ' their sorrows ; 



a Num. ioafi; Deut. '26:7; Psa. 12:5. b cliaii.3:9; 22:2.3,27; 
Gen. 18:20; Deut 24: 1.5; Isa. 5:7. c Gen. 15: 14; 46:4; Luke 
1:72-74. "Heb-knew. d chap. 18:5; 1 Kings, 19: 8. e Deut. 
33:16; Isa.63:9; Acts7:30. f Gen.22: 1,1 1 ; 46:2. g cliap. 19:12. 
Jo9h.6:15; Eccl.5:l. h Gen.28:13; 1 Kings, 18: 36; Mat.22:32. 



24. His covenant ; Gen. 15 : 14 ; 46:4. 

25. Had respect ; viewed with compassion, and 
resolved to deliver them. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

15. The efforts of men to perpetuate oppression may 
prepare the way for the deliverance of the oppressed. 

22. God ha.s a work for each one of his people ; 
and he bestows upon them suclr mercies, and leads 
tliem through such trials as are best suited to fit 
them to perform it. 

24. The measures which men adopt to thwart 
the purposes of God for the good of his people, are 
often made the means of fulfilling them. 

CHAPTER III. 
1. Jethro; chap. 2:18. Horeb; a mountain 
in Arabia between the two arms of the E,ed sea. 



8 And I am come down to deliver them 
out of the hand of the "Egyptians, and to 
bring them up out of that land unto a 
good ° land and a large, unto a " land flow- 
ing with milk and honey ; unto the place 
of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and 
the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the 
Hivites, and the Jebusites. 

9 Now therefore, behold, the cry of the 
children of Israel is come unto me : and 
I have also seen the oppression where- 
with the Egyptians oppress them. 

1 Come now, therefore, and I will p send 
thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring 
forth my people the children of Israel 
out of Egypt. 

11 "TfAnd Moses said unto God, Who 
am "il, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and 
that I should bring forth the children of 
Israel out of Egypt ? 

12 And he said, Certainly I will be with 
thee ;'■ and this shall be a token unto thee, 
that I have sent thee : When thou hast 
brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye 
shall serve God upon this mountain. 

13 And Moses said unto God, Behold, 
when I come unto the children of Israel, 
and shall say unto them. The God of your 
fathers hath sent me unto you ; and they 
shall say to me. What is his name 1 what 
shall I say unto them? 

14 And God said unto Moses, I AM 
THAT I » AM : and he said, Thus shalt 
thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM 
hath sent me unto you. 

15 And God said moreover unto Moses, 
Thus shalt thou say unto the children 
of Israel, The Lord God of your fathers, 
the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac, and 
the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you : 
this is my name for ever, and this is my 
memorial^ unto all generations. 

16 Go, and gather the elders of Israel 
together, and say unto them. The Lord 
God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, 



i Juiig. 13:22 


• l8a.fi:.5. j Neh.9:9; Psa. 106:44; lsa.63:9. 


k rli:i|..22:Q3 


Psa.l45:19. lPsa.l42:3. m chap, fi: (V8; 12: 51. 


n Num. 13:19 


Deut. 1 : 25. Deut. 26 : 9 ; .ler. 11:5: Eiek. 20 : 6. 


p Psa. 105:26; 


Mic.6:4. ilJer.l:6. r Gen.3I :3; .loeh. 1 :5; Rom. 


8:31. » chap 


6:3; Heb.l3:8. 1 Psa.HJ2:12; 135:13; Hos.l2:5. 



2. All gel of the Lord; ver.4,6; Gen. 16: 7-14; 
22:8-12; 24:7. 

5. Holy ground ; to be treated with peculiar 
reverence, because of the manifestation of .lehovah 
there. 

6. Look itpon God ; John 1:18; 14:9. 

8. Floiviiig with milk and honey ; abounding 
in these things, fruitful and pleasant. 

11. Who am I? e.xpressLng a sense of his in- 
sufficiency. 

12. A token; the event foretold would prove 
that God was with him. 

14. / am that I ain ; the self-existent, eternal, 
unchangeable Jehovah. John 8:58; Heb. 13:8; 
Rev. 1 : 8. 

16. Elders of Israel ; their most respected and 
influential men. Surely visited; he was per- 

75 



GocTs message to Israel. 



EXODUS IV. 



He ^vclh signs to Moses. 



of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared unto 
me, saying, I have surely 'visited you, 
and seen that which is done to you in 
Egypt : 

17 And I have said, I will ''bring you 
up out of the affliction of Egypt unto the 
land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, 
and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and 
the Hivitcs, and the Jebusites, unto a 
land flowing with milk and honey. 

18 And they shall hearken to thy voice : 
and thou shalt come, thou and the elders 
of Israel, unto the king of Egypt, and ye 
shall say unto him. The Lord God of the 
Hebrews hath "^ met with us : and now 
let us go, we beseech thee, three days' 
journey into the wilderness, that we may 
sacrifice to the Lord our God. 

19 1[And I am sure that the king of 
Egypt will not let ""you go, *no, not by a 
mighty hand. 

20 And I will stretch out my hand, and 
smite Egypt with all my ''wonders which 
I will do in the midst thereof: and after 
that Hie will let you go. 

21 And I will give this e people favor in 
the sight of the Egyptians : and it shall 
come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall 
not go empty : 

22 But every woman shall ''borrow of 
her neighbor, and of her that sojourneth 
in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels 
of gold, and raiment : and ye shall put 
them upon your sons, and upon your 
daughters : and ye shall ' spoil the t Egyp- 
tians. 



CHAPTER IV. 



« Gen. 50:24; Luke 1:68. b Gen. Ifi: 13-20; 46:4. c Num. 
23:3, etc. dclinp. 5:2. ^ Or, but by a stronff hand. « cliap. 
7:3; 11:9; Deut6:22; Neh. 9:10; Psa. 105:27; Jer. 32:20; 

fectly acquainted with their condition, and -n-oiild 
certainly deliver them. Gen. 15: 14, 16; 50:24. 

18. Met mil h vs ; appeared and given us direc- 
tions. Sacrifice to the Lord ; worship Jehorah 
.according to his appointment. 

19. Not let you go; not at first; nor till he 
had seen many stupendous miracles. 

20. Let yon go; chap. 12:31-33. 

21. Give this jteojile favor ; lead the Egyp- 
tians to furnish them the things they should ask 
for, and which they had doubtless earned. Chap. 
12:35,36. 

22. Borrow; the word rendered borrow, means 
also, to request or demand, not expecting to make 
a return. Josh. 15: IS; 1 S.-vm. 8: 10; Psa. 2:8. 
Jewels ; the word rendered jewels means also fur- 
niture, utensils, and goods of various descriptions. 
Gen. 24:53; 27:3; Deut. 22:5; 1 Kings, 0:7; 
2Chron. 34:12. Spoil the Egypt ia}is : carry 
away the rich treasures which they shall give you. 
Chap. 12:36; Gen. 15:14. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
5. The, place where God manifests himself has 
a peculiar sanctity; and if we would approach him 
acceptably, it must be with reverence and godly 
fear. 

9. Jehov.^h is a just, and also a kind, compassion- 
ate, and merciful God. He tenderly sympathizes 
with all the distressed, especially such as wrong- 
76 



1 Moses' rod is turned into a serpent. 6 His hand is 
leprous. 10 He is loath to be sent. 14 Aaron is ap- 
pointed to assist him. 16 Moses departeth from J»-- 
thro. 21 God's message to Pharaoh. 2t Zipporah 
circumciseth her son. 27 Aaron is sent to meet Mo- 
ses. 31 The people believeth them. 

AND Moses answered and said. But 
behold, they will not believe me, nor 
hearken unto my voice : for they will say. 
The Lord hath not appeared unto thee. 

2 And the Loru said unto him. What in 
that in thy hand? And he said, A rod. 

3 And he said. Cast it on the ground. 
And he cast it on the ground, and it be- 
came a serpent; and INIoses fled from be- 
fore it. 

4 And the Lord said unto Moses, Put 
forth thy hand, and take itby the tail. And 
he put forth his hand, and caught it, and 
it became a rod in his hand : 

5 That they may J believe that the Lord 
God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, 
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, 
hath appeared unto thee. 

6 1[ And the Lord said furthermore unto 
him, Put now thy hand into thy bosom. 
And he put his hand into his bosom : and 
when he took it out, behold, his hand ii*a.v 
leprous'' as snow. 

7 And he said. Put thy hand into thy 
bosom again. And he put his hand into 
his bosom again ; and plucked it out of hi.s 
bosom, and behold, it was turned again 
as his other flesh. 

8 And it shall come to pass, if they will 
not believe thee, neither hearken to the 



Acts7:36. f chap. 12 : 31. e chap. 1 1 : 3. hthap.l2:36. "Job 
27:17; Prov. 13 : 22 ; Isaiah 33: 1. f Or, jEjypt. j chap. 19:9. 
k Num. 12:10; 2 Kings, 5:57. I Mat 8:3. 



fully suffer ; and in due time he will deliver the 
oppressed, and punish the oppressor. 

12. However unworthy men may be, and how- 
ever insufficient in themselves for services to which 
God calls them, if he grant them his presence they 
may fearlessly go forward, expecting to be crowned 
with success. Psa. 71 : 16; Phil. 4: 13. 

15. The eternal, unchanging perfections of Jeho- 
vah are a proper ground for implicit confidence in 
him, and prompt, persevering ooedience to all his 
commands. 

20. Neither the power of God, nor the truth of 
his promises, nor the certainty that they will be 
accomplished, renders the use of means unneces- 
sary, or furnishes any ground to expect his blessing 
in the neglect of them. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1. Moses — said; stated what he feared would 
take place. 

2. A rod ; a shepherd's crook or staff. 

5. That they may believe ; this was the object 
of the miracle, to lead the people to believe what 
Moses should say, and that God had truly sent him. 

C. Leprous as snow; white with leprosy, a 
loathsome and obstinate disease. 

8. Believe tlie voice; its testimony to the fact 
that God had sent Moses to deliver his people from 
bondage. 



Aaron is sent loith Moses. 



EXODUS IV. 



TTicy meet the elders of Israel. 



B ai'i9L' voice of the first sign, that they 
will believe the voice of the latter sign. 

9 And it shall come to pass, if they will 
not believe also these two signs, neither 
hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt 
take of the water of the river, and pour 
it upon the dry land : and the water 
which thou takest out of the river * shall 
become * blood upon the dry land. 

10 1[ And Moses said unto the Lord, 
my Lord, I am not t eloquent, neither 
heretofore, t nor since thou hast spoken 
unto thy servant ; but I am slow of speech, 
and of a slow tongue. 

1 1 And the Lord said unto him, Who 
hath made man's '' mouth? or who mak- 
eth the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or 
the blind "? have not I the Lord 1 

1 2 Now therefore go, and I will be with 
thy mouth, and teach thee "^what thou 
shalt say. 

13 And he said, my Lord, send, I pray 
Ihec, by the hand of him whom thou ^ wilt 
send. 

14 And the anger of the Lord was 
kindled against Moses, and he said. Is 
not Aaron the Levite thy brother'? I know 
that he can speak well. And also, be- 
hold, he Cometh forth to meet thee : and 
when he sceth "^thee, he will be glad in 
his heart. 

15 And thou shalt speak unto him, and 
put "^ words in his mouth: and I will be 
with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and 
will teach you what ye shall do. 

16 And he shall be thy spokesman unto 
the people : and he shall be, even he shall 
be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou 
shalt be to him "^instead of God. 

17 And thou shalt take this ^rod in thy 
hand, wherewith thou shalt do signs. 

18 *[ And Moses went and returned to 
Jethroll his father-in-law, and said unto 
him, Let me go, I pray thee, and return 



" Heh. shall be and shall lie. a dmp. 7 :-20; Psa. 78: 44. t Heb. 
a man of words. ^ Heb. since yesterday, nor since the third 
dnv. 1> Psa. 94 : 9 ; .Ter. 1 : 6-9. c Isa. SO: 4 ; Milt. 10: 19. % Or, 
shouldest. li ver. 27. o Num. 23 :38: •£! : ."i, etc. ; Deut. 18 : 18 ; 
Isii. .'■>I : 16: Jer. 1:9: Luke 21 :!.'>. f clmp. 7: 1 : 18: 19. g ver. 2. 
l\ Ueh. Jether. h rimp. 2: l.i, 23; Matthew 2 : 20. iciiap. 17:9; 



10. Not eloquent; not of ready utterance, or 
persu.asive power of speech. 

1.3. Send. I frray ; by some one else, not by me. 

14. Jgaijist ]\lo.<:es ; on account of his great and 
unreasonable reluctance to Jo what God commanded. 

1.5. P/'t words in his mouth ; tell him what 
to say. 

16. Instead of God ; make known to him the 
will of GroJ. and direct him what to Jo. 

17. /)o s/o'?;5; work mir.acles. Chap. 7: 10, 20. 

20. His sons; Gershom and Eliezer. Chap. 
18:3.4. Keturned ; &etoni to ret\xT-a. The rod 
of God; ver. 2, 17. 

21. Put in. thy hand ; directed, and would en- 
able him to perform. TT7// harden his heart ; by 
making known to him his duty and the reasons for 
doing it, and yet suffering him to take his own way. 



unto my brethren which are in Egypt, 
and see whether they be yet alive. And 
Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace. 

19 And the Lord said unto Moses in 
Midian, Go, return into Egypt : for all the 
men'' are dead which sought thy life. 

20 And Moses took his wife and his 
sons, and set them upon an ass, and he 
returned to the land of Egypt : and MosCvS 
took the 'rod of God in his hand. 

21 And the Lord said unto Moses, 
When thou goest to return into Egypt, 
see that thou do all those > wonders before 
Pharaoh which I have put in thy hand : 
but I will ''harden his heart, that he shall 
not let the people go. 

22 And thou shalt say ixnto Pharaoh, 
Thus saith the Lord, Israel is my 'son, 
even my first-born : 

23 And I say unto thee. Let my son go, 
that he may serve me : and if thou refuse 
to let him go, behold, I will ■" slay thy son, 
even thy first-born. 

24 TI And it came to pass by the way in 
the inn, that the "Lord met him, and 
sought to "kill him. 

25 Then Zipporah took a sharp * stone, 
and Pent off the foreskin of her son, and 
castt it at his feet, and said. Surely a 
bloody husband art thou to me. 

26 So he let him go : then she said, A 
bloody husband thou art, because of the 
circumcision. 

27 T[ And the Lord said to Aaron, Go 
into the wilderness to meet Moses. And 
he went, and met him in the i mount of 
God, and kissed him. 

28 And Moses told Aaron all the words 
of the Lord who had sent him, and all the 
signs which he had commanded him. 

29 1[ And Moses and Aaron went and 
gathered together all the elders of the 
children of Israel : 

30 And Aaron ''spake all the words which 



Num. 20 : 8, 9. j cliap. 3 : 20. k chap. 7 : ."!, etc. : Deut. 2 : 30 ; 
.Tcishua 11:20; lsaiah6:10; 83:17: .John 12:40; Romans9:18; 
2Tliess. 2:10-12. 1 Deut 14:1; .Ier.31:9: Hoseall:!: Koni. 
9:4. m chap. 11:5; 13: 29. n Numbers 22 : 22. o Gen. 17:14. 
* Or, knife, p Josh. 5: 2, 3. i Ueb. made it touch, q chap. 3:1. 
r ver. 16. 



and thus obstinately and wickedly refuse to obey 
God's most wise, just, and reasonable commands. 

22. Ml/ son — my jirst-born ; greatly beloved, 
and greatly favored. 

23. Slay thy son ; chap. 12:29,30. 

24. Inn ; the place where they stoppeJ for the 
night. Kill him ; threatened Moses with death, 
should he still continue to neglect to circumcise 
his son. 

2.5. Shaiy stone; sharp flints were then used 
for knives. 

26. lie let him go; the Lord ceased to threaten 
him with death for neglecting his duty. 

27. /w the mount; at mount Horeb. Chap. 
3 : 1 ; 4 : 14. 

28. Signs; miracles which God had commanded 
him to perform. 

77 



Pharaoh increascth 



EXODUS V. 



the Israelites^ task. 



the Lord had spoken unto Moses, and did 
(he signs in the sight of the people. 

31 And the people "believed : and when 
Ihey heard tliat the Loiiu had visited the 
children of Israel, and that he had looked 
upon their afllietion, then they bowed 
their ''heads and worshipped. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 Pharaoh chidcUi Moses and Aaron for their message. 
5 He increascth the Israelites' task. 15 He derideth 
their complaints. 2!) They cry out upon Moses and 
Aaron. 22 Moses complaineth to God. 

AND afterward Moses and Aaron went 
in, and told Pharaoh, Thus saith the 
Lord God of Israel, Let my people go, that 
they may hold a *= feast unto me in the 
wilderness. 

2 And Pharaoh said, ""Who is the Lord, 
that I should obey his voice to let Israel 
go ■? I know not the Lord, neither will I 
let Israel go. 

3 And they said, The God of the He- 
brews'' hath met with us: let us go, we 
pray thee, three days' journej' into the 
desert, and saerifice unto the Lord our 
God; lest he fall upon us with ""pesti- 
lence, or with the sword. 

4 And the king of Egypt said unto them. 
Wherefore do ye,. Moses and Aaron, let 
the people from their works 1 get you unto 
your burdens. 

5 And Pharaoh said. Behold, the peo- 
ple of the land now are many, and ye 
make them rest from their burdens. 

6 And Pharaoh commanded the same 
day the taskmasters of the people, and 
their officers, saying, 

7 Ye shall no more give the people straw 

• clinp.3:IS; ver.8,9. b Genonis 17:3; 24:26; chap. 12:27; 
iClirnn. 2H: 20; 2Chron. 20:18. ediap.l0:9. d SKinga, 18::lB; 
Ji>b21: l.'i; Pealm 12:4. e cliap. :): 18. f Dent 28:21 ; Ezekiel 



them go and gather straw for themselves. 

8 And the tale of the bricks which they 
did make heretofore, ye shall slay upon 
them ; ye shall not diminish aught there- 
of: for they be idle; therefore they cry, 
saying, Let us go and saerifice to our God. 

9 Let * there more work be laid upon 
the men, that they may labor therein ; 
and let them not regard '' vain words. 

10 ^And the taskmasters of the people 
went out, and their officers, and they 
spake to the people, saying. Thus saith 
Pharaoh, I will not give you straw. 

1 1 Go ye, get you straw where ye can 
find it: yet not aught of your work shall 
be diminished. 

12 So the people were scattered abroad 
throughout all the land of Egypt to gather 
stubble instead of straw. 

13 And the taskmasters hasted them, 
saying. Fulfil your -works, your '^ daily 
tasks, as when there was straw. 

14 And the officers of the children of 
Israel, "vvhich Pharaoh's taskmasters had 
set over them, were beaten, a7)d demand- 
ed. Wherefore have ye not fulfilled your 
task in making brick both yesterday and 
to-day, as heretofore 1 

15 iy Then the officers of the children of 
Israel came and cried unto Pharaoh, say- 
ing. Wherefore dealest thou thus with thy 
servants ? 

16 There is no straw given unto thy 
servants, and they say to us, Make brick : 
and behold, thy .servants are beaten ; but 
the fault is in thine own people. 

17 But he said, Ye are idle, i/e are idle: 



6:11. B r«a. 106:41. * Heb. Let the work tie heavy upon tht 
men. 1" 2 Kings, 18: 20. f Heb. a matter of a day in hU day. 



31. Visited the children of Israel ; appeared 
for tliem in mercy, and was about to deliver them 
from bond:ii^e. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1 . It is often exceedinj^ly difficult to induce even 
the best of men in all things heartily to believe 
God ; and were it not for his boundless compassion 
and {jrace, instead of being saved by faith, they 
would perish through unbelief. 

8. God in his mercy furnishes his people with all 
needful aid for the services to which he calls them ; so 
that in reliance on him tliey may safely follow his di- 
rections, expecting that he will give them success. 

13. Men arc very apt to start objections against 
doing what they dislike, and to desire that others 
may perform the labors and bear the trials of diffi- 
cult services, rather than themselves. 

14. God is angry with men when they are afraid 
or ashamed to obey him. or seek to excuse them- 
selves iVom doing their duty. 

18. In doing the will of God we should endeavor 
not needlessly to exasperate men, and should aise 
8.11 suitable means to secure their approbation and 
aid. 

'2'\. Those who are called to guide others in the 
pall) of duty should be careful to walk in it them- 
78 



selves, and in all things to set an example which 
others may safely follow. 

31. God is often better to his people than (heir 
fears, and always bettor than (heir deserts. Difficul- 
ties in the way of duty, which may seem insuperable, 
when they engage in it disappear or are readily over- 
come. The yoke which appeared to be so galling is 
easy, and the burden which seemed so heavy is light. 
Mat. 11:29,30. 

CHAPTER V. 

3. The desert ; (he desert of Shur. lying be- 
tween Egypt and Canaan. Fall npoit its with 
pestilence ; punish us with death for neglecting to 
obey his command. 

4. Let the people ; hinder their working. 

6. Tffslma.<!ters ; Egypli;uis appointed to exact 
of the Israelites the required labor. Officers ; Is- 
raelites appointed to execute the directions of the 
taskmasters. Ver. 14-16. 

7. Straw; to be mixed with the clay to make 
the bricks more firm and durable. They were not 
burned, but dried in the sun. 

8. The tale of the bricks ; the full amount 
which was required. 

9. Vain irords ; false pretences, about being 
required by God to go and worship. 



God reneivcth his 



EXODUS VI, 



promise unto Israel. 



B.clifa'' therefore ye say, Let us go and do 
sacrifice to the Lord. 

18 Go therefore now, and work; for 
there shall no straw be given you, yet 
shall ye deliver the tale of bricks. 

19 And the officers of the children of 
Israel did see that they were in *evil case, 
after it was said, Ye shall not minish 
aught from your bricks of your daily 
task. 

20 TI And they met Moses and Aaron, 
who stood in the way, as they came forth 
from Pharaoh : 

21 And they said unto them. The Lord 
look upon you, and judge ; because ye 
have made our savor * to be ''abhorred in 
the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of 
his servants, to put a sword in their hand 
to slay us. 

22 And Closes returned unto the Lord, 
and said. Lord, wherefore hast thou so 
evil-entreated "^ this people'? why is it that 
thou hast sent me 1 

23 For since I came to Pharaoh to speak 
in thy name, he hath done evil to this 
people ; t neither hast thou delivered thy 
people at all. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 God reneweth his promise by his name JEHOVAH. 
14 The genealogy of Reuben, 15 of Simeon, 16 of 
Levi, of whom came Moses and Aaron. 

niHEN the Lord said unto Moses, Now 
JL shalt thou see what '' I will do to Pha- 
raoh : for with a strong * hand shall he 
let them go, and with a strong hand shall 
he drive "^them out of his land. 



« Deut.32:3fi; Eccl.4:l; 5:8. '^ Hgh. lo stink. bGen.34:30; 
ISain.l3:4; 27:1-2: 2S;im.lO:6; 1 Clirnn. 19 : 6. o Jer.20:7; 
Hab. 2:3. j Heb. delivering tkou hast not dtlivtrtd. <l 2 Cliron. 
20:17; Pa:!. 12:. 5. ePsa.89:13. fch.ip.U:!. J Or, jEnov»n. 
e Gen.l7:l; 3,1:11; 48:.3. h chap.3:I4; Ps,x68:4; 83:18; Isa. 



21. Judge; punish you for the evil you have 
brought upon us, in occasioning an increase of our 
burdens. Made our savor to be abhorred ; set 
Pharaoh and his people more cruelly and violently 
against us. Put a sword in their hand ; giving 
them a pretext for killing us. 

22. Retnrned unto tlie Lord; expressed to him 
his feelings, which were as unreasonable towards 
Jehovah as those of the Israelitish officers were 
towards him ; and much more inexcusable, as he 
had been expressly forewarned that Pharaoh would 
for a time resist his efforts. Chap. 3 : 19, 20. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The commands of God are reasonable and bind- 
ing on all who know them. If men do not obey them, 
it is because they liave no disposition to obey. 

8. Wicked men often imagine that the friends of 
Jehovah have no real regard for him ; that their 
professions are mere pretence, and that if they were 
not hypocritical, selfish, and idle, they would not 
wish to spend time in worshipping him. 

23. Good men in pursuing a good object in the 
right way, if not immediately successful, are liable 
to become discour.aged, and to complain not merely 
of men, but also of God. 

CHAPTER VI. 
1. Strong hand ; under the judgments of God 



2 And God spake urito Mo.scs, and said 
unto him, I am tthe Lord: 

3 And I appeared unto Abraham, unto 
Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name o/God 
Almighty ,e but by my •'name JEHOVAH 
was I not known to them. 

4 And I have also established my ' cov- 
enant with them, to give them the land 
of Canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, 
wherein they were strangers. 

5 And I have also heard the J groaning 
of the children of Israel, whom the Egyp- 
tians keep in bondage ; and I have '' re- 
membered my covenant. 

6 Wherefore say unto the children of 
Israel, I a7n the Lord, and I Avill bring you 
out' from under the burdens of the Egyp- 
tians, and I will rid you out of their bond- 
age, and I will "" redeem you with a stretch- 
ed-out arm, and with great judgments : 

7 And I will take you to "me for a peo- 
ple, and I will be to you a God : and ye 
shall know that I am the Lord your God, 
which bringeth you out from under the 
burdens of the Egyptians. 

8 And I will bring you in unto the land, 
concerning the which I did ^ swear to give 
it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob ; and 
I will give it you for a heritage : I am the 
Lord. 

9 And Moses spake so unto the children 
of Israel : but they hearkened not "unto 
Moses for il anguish of spirit, and for cruel 
bondage. 

10 ^And the Lord spake unto ]Moses, 
saying. 



42:8; John 8:58; Re^ 


.1:4. i Gen. 17:7,8. j chap. 2: 24; Psa. 


10H:44. k Psa. 105:8. 


1 Deut.26:8; Psa. SI : 6. m chap. 15:13; 


Deut.7:8; 1 Chron. 17 


21; Neh. 1:10. n Deut. 4 : 20 : 7 : li ; 2 Sam. 


7:24; Jer. 31:33; Hii 


ea 1 : 10; Rev. 21 : 3, 7. % Heb. lift up my 


hand, o chap. 5 : 21. 


1 Heb. shortness, or, straitness. 



Pharaoh would not only consent, but be very urgent 
to have them go. 

3. / appeared ; Gen. 17 : 1 ; 35 : 11 ; 48 : 3. By 
'my name Jehovah was I not kiiuw7i ; not so 
fully known as he would be in time to come. The 
name of a person is that by which he is known. 
So those manifestations of Jehovah by which he i» 
known are often called in the Bible his name, as 
in John 17 : 6 : ''I have manifested thy name unto 
the men which thou gavest me out of the world." 
That is, I have more clearly shown them thy true 
character, as a God not only of justice, but of mercy 
and grace. So John 17: 11, "Keep tlirough thine 
own name those whom thou hast given ine." That 
is, keep them through those manifestations of thy- 
self which thou hast made, and wilt make in the 
person and work of thy Son and of the Holy Spirit. 
So those infinite perfections implied in tlie term 
Jehovah, especially his immutable truth and his 
unchanging faithfulness to his promises, he would 
now more clearly show. Their fathers knew that 
his name was Jehovah, but they did not know what 
that name implied so fully as he would now show 
them, by fulfilling the promises which he made to 
their fathers. 

4. Give them; their posterity. 

8. I did swear; Gen. 15 : 18; 26 : 3; 28 : 1?; 
35:12. 

79 



Tlie genealogy of 



EXODUS VII. 



Reuben, Simeon, and Levi. 



1 1 Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of 
Egypt, that he let the children of Israel 
go out of his land. 

12 And Moses spake before the Lord, 
saying. Behold, the children of Israel 
have not * hearkened unto me ; how then 
.shall IMiaraoh hear me, who am of ''un- 
circumcised lips? 

13 And the Lord spake unto Moses and 
unto.^aron, and gave them a "^charge unto 
the children of Israel, and unto Pharaoh 
king of Egypt, to bring the children of 
Israel out of the land of Egypt. 

14 1[ These be the heads of their fathers' 
houses : The ''sons of Reuben the first- 
born of Israel ; Hanoch, and Pallu, Hez- 
ron, and Carmi : these be the families of 
Reuben. 

15 And the ^sons of Simeon; Jemuel, 
and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and 

V Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish 
woman ; these arc the families of Simeon. 

16 Tl And these arc the names of the 
sons of "^Levi according to their genera- 
tions ; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari : 
and the years of the life of Levi were a 
hundred thirty and seven years. 

17 The sons of Gershon; Libni, and 
Shimi, according to their families. 

18 And the sons of ^Kohath; Amram, 
and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzzicl : and 
the years of the life of Kohath were a hun- 
dred thirty and three years. 

19 And the sons of Merari ; Mahali and 
Mushi : these are the families of Levi 
according to their generations. 

20 And Amram took him Jochebed his 
father's sister to wife ; and she bare him 
Aaron and Moses : and the years of the 
life of Amram were a hundred and thirty 
and seven years. » 

21 T[And the sons of ''Izhar; Korah, 
and Nepheg, and Zichri. 

22 And the sons of 'Uzzicl; Mishael, 
and Elzaphan, and Zithri. 



«ver. 9. b vcr. 30; l.pv. iSMl; JeremiKh 9 : 26 ; Ai-t3 7:f)l. 
c Num. 27:19, M; Dent. 31 : 14. d Gen. 4B : 9, etc. ; lCliron.5:3. 
e I Chroa 4 : 24. f Num. 3: 17 : 1 Cliron. 6: 1. BNum.26:57. 
bNum. I«:l. iLev.lOM. jRutli4:19. fc 1 Chron. 6:3; 24: 1. 

12. TJucircumcised lips ; not eloquent. Chap. 
4:10. 

14-27. These verses show from whom Moses and 
Aaron were descended. 

IN.STRt:CTIONS. 

1. When men despair of help from themselves and 
from creatures, and look to God, he shows both his 
readiness and his power to do for them what they need. 

8. Those atlriliiites of God which are implied in 
the names that he appropriates to himself in his 
word, are made known to men in his providence. 
Both hy what he says, and by what he does, he 
shows that he is Jehovah. 

12. Even the best of men are strongly tempted to 

walk by sight, not by faith ; and if appearances are 

against them, are liable to be discouraged though all 

die perfections of Jehovah are pledged m their behalf. 

80 



23 And Aaron took him Elishe- B.c.?JJh 
ba, daughter of JAmminadab, si.stcr of 
Naashon, to wife ; and she bare him '' Na- 
dab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar. 

24 And the sons of Korah ; Assir, and 
Elkanah, and Abiasaph : these are the 
families of the Korhites. 

25 And Eleazar, Aaron's son, took him 
one of the daughters of Puticl to wife ; and 
she bare him 'Phinehas: these are the 
heads of the fathers of the Levites accord- 
ing to their families. 

26 These are that Aaron and Moses, to 
whom the Lord said. Bring out the chil- 
dren of Israel from the land of P^gypt ac- 
cording to their armies. 

27 These are they which spake to " Pha- 
raoh king of Egypt, to bring out the chil- 
dren of ° Israel from Egypt : these are that 
Moses and Aaron. 

28 TIAnd it came to pass on the day 
when the Lord spake unto Moses in the 
land of Egypt, 

29 That the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing, I am the Lord : speak thou unto Pha- 
raoh king of Egypt ° all that I say unto thee. 

30 And Moses said before the Lord, Be- 
hold, I am of P uncircumcised lips, and how 
shall Pharaoh hearken unto me? 

CHAPTER VII. 

I Moses is encouraged to go to Pharaoh. 7 His age. 3 
His rod is turned inio a serpent. 1 1 The sorcerers do 
the like. 13 Pharaoh's heart is hardened. 14 God's 
message to Pharaoh. 19 The river is turned into blood. 

AND the Lord said unto Moses, See, I 
have made thee a '^ god to Pharaoh ; 
and Aaron thy brother shall be thy 
prophet. 

2 Thou shalt speak 'all that I command 
thee; and Aaron thy brother shall speak 
unto Pharaoh, that he send the children 
of Israel out of his land. 

3 And I will "harden Pharaoh's heart, 
and multiply my signs and my wonders in 
the land of Egypt. 



1 Jo»li. 


24: 


Kl. 


m 


Cllfl 


p.B 


:1 


7: 


10. 


n chap. 


33: 


; P«a. 


77: 


20; 


Micali 1 


:4 





.ler. 


1 : 


I**! 


17 


Xi 


28 


26:2; Ezek 


2:6,7, 


3 


H; 


Milt. 2S 


:2C 


P 


ver 


12 


q 


P6a.8i 


:6; 


Jobn 10 


36. 


r chap 


6 


29. 


s chap. 


It 


9. 

























29. The utter insufficiency of men, and their en- 
tire dependence on God, instead of being a reason 
why tliey should not in all things obey him, are a 
reason why they should obey him ; and in doing his 
will they will find his grace to be sufficient for 
them, and his strength made perfect in their weak- 
ness. 2 Cor. 12:9; Heb. 11:34. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1. I have made thee a god ; appointed thee to 
make known the will of God, and work miracles 
in liis name. Thy prophet ; to speak what you 
shall direct him. 

3. Harden Pharaoh's heart ; as a punishment 
for his sins, he was given up to hardness of heart 
and blindness of mind, or suffered to continue and 
increase his obduracy and wickedness. 



Moses and Aaron 



EXODUS VII. 



JO unto Pharaoh. 



B.'am"' 4 But Pharaoh shall not hearken 
unto you, that I may lay my hand upon 
Egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and 
my people the children of Israel, out of 
the land of Egypt by great judgments. 

5 And the Egyptians shall know that I 
am the *Lord, when I stretch forth my 
hand upon Egypt, and bring out the chil- 
dren of Israel from among them. 

6 And Moses and Aaron did as the Lord 
commanded them, so did they. 

7 And Moses ivas fourscore years old, 
and Aaron fourscore and three years old, 
when they spake unto Pharaoh. 

8 yi And the Lord spake unto Moses 
and unto Aaron, saying, 

9 When Fharaoh shall speak unto you, 
saying, Show a •" miracle for you : then 
thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, 
and cast it before Pharoah, and it shall 
become a serpent. 

1 1[ And INIoses and Aaron w^ent in unto 
Pharoah, and they did so as the Lord had 
commanded : and Aaron cast down his 
rod before Pharaoh, and before his ser- 
vants, and it became a serpent. 

1 1 Then Pharaoh also called the wise 
men and the "^sorcerers: now the magi- 
cians of Egypt, they also did in like man- 
ner with their enchantments. 

12 For they cast down every man his 
rod, and they became serpents : but 
Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods. 

13 And he hardened Pharaoh's heart, 
that he hearkened not unto them ; as the 
LoRD'^ had said. 

14 1[And the Lord said unto Moses, 
Pharaoh's heart i.s " hardened : he "^refus- 
eth to let the people go. 

1 5 Get thee unto Pharaoh in the morn- 
ing; lo, he goeth out unto the water; and 
thou shalt stand by the river's brink 
against he come ; and the rod which was 
turned to a s serpent shalt thou take in 
thy hand. 



•• cbiip. H:4, 


l«i 


Psalm 9 


Ifi 


. b Matthew 12 


39 


; Johns 


18. 


e Daniel 2 


2 ■ 


2 Tin 


1. 3 : 8. 


d 


ver. 4. 


e chap. 


8: 


15; 


10:1 


27. 


f Jer. 8:5; 


Hel 


rews 12 : 25. 


R 


ver. 10. 


k chap 


3 


18. 


i c: 


ap. 


8: l,etc. 


ve 


se 5 


; 1 Samu 


el, 


17:46; 


1 Kings, 


20 


28 


SKi 





4. T/iat I may lay my hand npoii EgyjJt ; this 
was not Pharaoh's object in refusing to obey God, 
but it was God's object in suffering him to do it. 

5. Tlie Egyptians shall kiiou' ; that Jehovah 
is almighty, and able to do his pleasure. 

7. Fourscore ; eighty. 

n. Sorcerers — magicia^ts ; men who pretended 
to supernatural power, and were accustomed to prac- 
tise deceits upon their fellow-men. 2 Tim. 3 : 8. 

12. And they became serpents ; or they appear- 
ed to become serpents. See chap. 8 : IS. 

13. He Jiardened Pliaraoh^s heart ; this in the 
original is the .^ame as in verses 14 and 22, where 
it is rendered, Pharaoh's heart was hardened. 

22. Did so with their eiichantments ; smote 
the waters, in order to appear to turn them into 
blood. Pharaoh's heart was hardened ; by his 



16 And thou shalt say unto him. The 
Lord God of the '' Hebrews hath sent me 
unto thee, saying. Let my people 'go, 
that they may serve me in the wilder- 
ness : and behold, hitherto thou wouldest 
not hear. 

17 Thus saith the Lord, In this thou 
shalt know that I am J the Lord : behold, 
I will smite with the rod that is in my 
hand upon the waters Avhich are in the 
river, and they shall be ''turned to blood. 

18 And the fish that is in the river shall 
die, and the river shall stink; and the 
Egyptians shall loathe to drink of the 
water of the river. 

19 ^And the Lord spake unto INIoses, 
Say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch 
out thy hand upon the waters of Egypt, 
upon their streams, upon their rivers, and 
upon their ponds, and upon all their * pools 
of water, that they may become blood ; 
and that there may be blood throughout 
all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of 
wood, and in vessels of stone. 

20 And Moses and Aaron did so, as 
the Lord commanded; and he lifted up 
the rod, and 'smote the waters that n'ere 
in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and 
in the sight of his servants ; and all the 
waters that were in the river were turned 
to blood. 

21 And the fish that teas in the river 
died ; and the river stank, and the Egyp- 
tians could not ™ drink of the water of the 
river ; and there. was blood throughout all 
the land of Egypt. 

22 And the magicians of Egypt "did so 
with their enchantments : and Pharaoh's 
heart was hardened, neither did he heark- 
en unto them; as the Lord had said. 

23 And Pharaoh turned and went into 
his house, neither did he set his "heart to 
this also. 

24 And all the Egyptians digged round 
about the river for water to drink ; for 



19:19; Ezekiel29:9: 30:8; 38:23. k Psalm 78 : 44 ; 105:29; 
Uev. 8:8, 1*5:4,6. * lAf^h. gathering of their waters. 1 chap. 
17:5; Num. 20:11. m ver. 18. n2Tim.3:8. o Isa. 26:11; Jer 
5:3; 36:24; Haggai 1:.5. 



continuing proudly and obstinately to refuse to 
obey God. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. The Lord takes occasion, even from the obsti- 
nacy and wickedness of men, to manifest his char- 
acter and show forth his glory, to the terror of his 
enemies and the joy of his friends. 

13. Things which, in the course of divine provi- 
dence, take place through the wickedness of men, 
are sometimes, in the Bible, ascribed to God This 
shows his all-controlling agency, though he cannot 
be tempted, neither does he at any time tempt men, 
to commit sin. Jas. 1 : 13, 14. 

22. When men dislike to obey God. and seek ex- 
cuses for their neglect, they can generally find them ; 
and when they wish to harden themselves against 
him, he often suffers them to do it, even to their ruin. 

81 



TTtt plagve ofjrogs, 



EXODUS VIII. 



and of lire. 



they could not drink of the water of the ^ 

river. I 

25 And seven days were fulfilled, after 

that the Lord had smitten the river. ' 

CHAPTER VIII. j 

1 Fro^ are sent. 8 Pharaoh sueth to Moses, 12 and 
Moses by prayer reinoveth them a-way. 16 The dust 
is turned into lice, which the magicians could not do. 
•_'0 The swarms of flies. 25 Pharaoh inclineth to let 
the people fjo, 3'2 but yet is hardened. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, Go 
unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, 
Thus saitli the Lord, Let my people go, 
that they may serve me. 

2 And if thou refuse to let them go, he- 
hold, I will smite all thy horders with 
frogs : 

3 And the river shall hring forth frogs 
abundantly, which shall go up and come 
into thy house, and into thy bedchamber, 
and upon thy bed, and into the house of 
thy servants, and upon thy people, and 
into thine ovens, and into thy * kneading- 
troughs : 

4 And the frogs shall come up both on 
thee, and upon thy people, and upon all 
thy servants. 

5 T[ And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thy hand 
with thy rod over the streams, over the 
river.'<,and over the ponds, and cause frogs 
to come up upon the land of Egypt. 

6 And Aaron stretched out his hand 
over the waters of Egypt; and the "frogs 
came up, and covered tlio land of Egypt. 

7 And the magicians did so with their 
enchantments, and brought up frogs upon 
the land of Egypt. 

8 ^[ Then Pharaoh called for Moses and 
Aaron, and said, ''Entreat the Lord, that he 
may take away the frogs from me, and from 
my people ; and I will let the people go, that 
they may do sacrifice unto the Lord. 

9 And Moses said unto Pharaoh, t Glory 
over me : ^ when shall I entreat for thee, 
and for thy servants, and for thy people, 
to* destroy the frogs from thee and thy 
houses, that they may remain in the river 
only ? 



» Or, dovgh. > Panim 78:46; l(»:30; Ilev. 16:13. b rlinn. 
9:M; 10:17; Numbem 21 : 7; 1 Kinifii, IS : fi; Act<8:J4. f Oi\ 
Have tliid honor aver me. J Or, agninit when. J Heh. lo ctit i<ff. 
I) Or. ngainil to morrow. c PimiI. 3-2 : 31 ; *) : 21! ; 2Sntn. 7:«; 
1 Cliron. 17:20; Pan. 83: 18; 8r,:8; laa. ■«0:2,'); 4«:>i; .Jeremiah 

CHAPTER VIII. 

7. And brought vp frogs:. See chap. 7 : 12. 

9. Glory over me ; have the honor of saying 
when the frogs sliall be removed. 

1,3. Village.^; yards, or grounds ahoiit the houses. 

Ki. He hardened his heart : by refusing to obey 
God. Here, the hardening of his heart is ascribed 
to Pharaoh ; and yet the process was probably the 
same as when it was ascribed to God. Chap. 
7: 13. In one sen.sc it was ascribed to God, and 
in anotlier to Pharaoh. 
82 



10 And he said, H To-morrow. *B.c:r4»i.' 
And he said. Be it according to thy word ; 
that thou mayest know that " there is none 
like unto the Lord our God. 

1 1 And the frogs shall depart from thee, 
and from thy houses, and from thy ser- 
vants, and from thy people ; they shall 
remain in the river only. 

12 And Moses and Aaron went out from 
Pharaoh : and Moses *cried untothe Lord 
because of the frogs which he had brought 
against Pharaoh. 

13 And the Lord ^did according to the 
word of Moses ; and the frogs died out 
of the houses, out of the villages, and out 
of the fields. 

14 And they gathered them together 
upon heaps ; and the land stank. 

15 But when Pharaoh saw that there 
was respite, he ''hardened his heart, and 
hearkened not unto them ; as the Lord 
had Ssaid. 

16 IT And the Lord said unto Moses, Say 
unto Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite 
the dust of the land, that it mny become 
lice throughout all the land of Egypt. 

17 And they did so ; for Aaron stretch- 
ed out his hand with his rod, and smote 
the dust of the earth, and it became *'lic« 
in man, and in beast: all the dust of the 
land became lice throughout all the land 
of Egypt. 

18 And the magicians did so with their 
enchantments to bring forth lice, but they 
could not:' so there were lice upon man, 
and upon beast. 

19 Then the magicians said unto Pha- 
raoh, This i.s- the J finger of God: and 
Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he 
hearkened not unto them ; as the Lord 
had said. 

20 ^And the Lord said unto Moses, 
Rise up early in the morning, and stand 
before Pharaoh ; lo, he cometh forth to 
the water ; and say unto him, Thus saith 
the Lord, Let my people go, that they 
may serve me. 

21 Else, if thou wilt not let my people 
go, behold, I will send * swarms of flies 



i,7. d Jjimes.'i: Ifi, 18. • Deut. 34 : 10-15. fF<Tl.R:lI. 
ap.7:4. h Pail.l0n:31. i Gen.41:8; l»n.l!):i:; M:\i, 
,2:10. j lS:im. «::(,!): Pp,i.8:3; Mnt l'2:-28: I.nken:'20. 
r, a mixture of noisome liensts, etc. 



16. Lice ; the word translated lice is by many- 
supposed to mean gnats, 

18. The magicimis did .'o : smote the earth to 
bring forth lice ; but as they had no previous warn- 
ing of this plague, and no time to prepare their 
deceptions, they could not imitarte this mir.acle even 
in appearance; and to hide their shame, confessed 
that it was the effect of divine power. 

21. Sii-ariiis of flies; the word in the original, 
translated swarms of flies, may mean a mixed mul- 
titude of noisome insects. 



The swarms of flies. 



EXODUS IX. 



The 7nurrain of beasts. 



and upon thy people, and into thy houses : 
and the liouses of the Egyptians shall be 
full of swarms of flics, and also the ground 
whereon they are. 

22 And I will * sever in that day the 
land of Goshen, in which my people 
dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be 
there ; to the end thou mayest know that 
I am the Lord in the midst of the earth. 

23 And I will put a * division between 
my people and thy people: t to-morrow- 
shall this sign be. 

24 And the Lord did so ; and there came 
a grievous swarm of flies into the house 
of Pharaoh, and into his servants' houses, 
and into all the land of Egypt : the land 
was + corrupted by reason of the swarm 
of flies. 

25 H And Pharaoh called for Moses and 
for Aaron, and said. Go ye, sacrifice to 
your God in the land. 

2G And Moses said, It is not meet so to 
do; for we shall sacrifice the ''abomina- 
tion of the Egyptians to the Lord our 
God : lo, shall we sacrifice the abomina- 
tion of the Egyptians before their eyes, 
and will they not stone us 1 

27 We will go "^ three days' journey into 
the wilderness, and sacrifice to the Lord 
our God, as he shall ''command us. 

28 And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, 
that ye may sacrifice to the Lord your 
God in the wilderness ; only ye shall not 
go very far away : "entreat for me. 

29 And Moses said, Behold, I go out 
from thee, and I will entreat the Lord 
that the swarms of flies may depart from 
Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his 
people, to-morrow : but let not Pharaoh 
deal*" deceitfully any more in not letting 
the people go to sacrifice to the Lord. 

30 And Moses went out from Pharaoh, 
and entreated the Lord. 



« cliap. 9:4,etc. ; 10:2.T; ll:fi,7i 13:13. * Heb. a redemption. 
Or, bn ta-morroio. % Or, destroyed, b Genesis 43 : 3J : 46 : 34 ; 
'eut.7:2n,- 12:3l; 1 Kiogs, 1 1 : 5-7 ; 2 Kings, 23: 13. ccliap.3:18. 



22. Sever; separate. 

24. Corr wpted ; destroyed or devoured. Psalm 
78 : 45. 

2G. Meet ; suitable, fit, proper. Sacrifice the 
abomi)iation ; various animals were worshipped 
by the Egyptians, and should they see the Israelites 
sacrifice them they would be greatly offended. 

32. Pharaoh hardened his heart ; ver. 15. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

6. God can make even the meanest of his crea- 
tures instruments of punishment to those who rebel 
against him ; and none are so exalted that they can 
resist him and prosper. Though for a time he waits 
upon them, not willing that they should perish, yet 
"he that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, 
shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without rem- 
edy.'" 

15. Those misgivings, confessions, resolutions, 
and promises which are extorted only by the en- 



31 And the Lord did according to the 
word of Moses ; and he removed the 
swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his 
servants, and from his people ; there re- 
mained not one. 

32 And Pharaoh e hardened his heart 
at this time also, neither would he let the 
people go. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 The murrain of beasts. 8 The plague of boils and 
blains. 13 His message about the hail, 'ii The 
plague of hail. 27 Pliaraoh sueth to Moses, ,0.3 but 
yet is hardened. 

THEN the Lord said unto Moses, Go 
in unto Pharaoh, and tell him. Thus 
saith the Lord God of the Hebrews, Let 
my people go, that they may serve me. 

2 For if thou refuse to let them go, and 
wilt hold them still, 

3 Behold, the hand of the Lord is upon 
thy cattle which is in the field, iipon the 
horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, 
upon the oxen, and upon the sheep : there 
shall he a very grievous murrain. 

4 And the Lord shall sever between the 
cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt : 
and there shall nothing die of all that is 
the children's of Israel. 

5 And the Lord appointed a set time, 
saying. To-morrow the Lord shall do this 
thing in the land. 

6 And the Lord did that thing on the 
morrow, and ''all the cattle of Egypt died : 
but of the cattle of the children of Israel 
died not one. 

7 And Pharaoh sent, and behold, there 
was not one of the cattle of the Israelites 
dead. And the heart of Pharaoh was 
hardened, and he did not let the people go. 

8 T[And the Lord said unto Moses and 
unto Aaron, Take to you handfuls of ashes 
of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it 
toward the heaven in the sight of Pharaoh. 

9 And it shall become small dust in all the 

d rli.ip. .34 : 1 1 ; Lev. 10:1; Mat. 28 : 20. e verse 8 ; ch;ip. 9 : 28 ; 
1 Kings, I3:fi. f Psalm 78:34-37; Jer. 42:20. g ver. 15; cUap. 
4:21; Horn. 2:5. h Psa. 78 : 50. 



durance of present, or the fear of future evils, are 
not to be depended on. When those evils or fears 
are removed, their apparent good effects will be 
like the morning cloud or early dew, which quickly 
pass away. Hos. 6 : 4. 

22. However great the calamities which God 
brings upon his enemies, he is ever able and willing 
to protect his people and deliver them from ti'mp- 
tations, while he reserves the wicked fo the day of 
judgment to be punished. And though now they 
may often seem to be in many respects alike, yet 
hereafter all men will return and discern between 
him that serveth God and him that serveth him 
not. Mai. 3 : 18 ; 2 Peter, 2 : 9. 

CHAPTER IX. 
3. Murrain; a pestilence, or fatal dise.\se. 
6. All the cattle ; great numbers of all kind*. 
Ver. 19. 

83 



The plague 'of boils, 



EXODUS IX. 



and of hail. 



land of Egypt, and shall be a 'boil break- 
ing forth with blains upon man, and upon 
beast, throughout all the land of Egypt. 

10 And they took ashes of the furnaee, 
and stood before Pharaoh ; and Moses 
sprinkled it up toward lieaven ; and it 
beeamc a boil breaking forth with blains 
upon man, and upon beast. 

11 And the magicians eould not ''.stand 
before Moses because of the boils ; for the 
boil was upon the magicians, and upon 
all the Egyptians. 

12 And the Loud hardened the heart of 
Pharaoli, and he '^ hearkened not unto them ; 
as the Lord had '^ spoken unto Moses. 

13 ^And the Lord said unto Moses, 
Rise up early in the morning, and stand 
before Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus 
saith the Lord God of the Hebrews, Let 
my people go, that they may serve mc. 

14 For I will at this time send "all my 
plagues upon thy heart, and upon thy 
servants, and upon thy people ; that thou 
mayest know that there is none like me 
in all the earth. 

15 For now I will stretch out my hand, 
that I may smite thee and "^thy people 
with pestilence ; and thou shall be cut off 
from the earth. 

1 6 Aiul in very deed for ^ this cause have 
I * raised tliee up, for to show in thee my 
power; and that my name may be de- 
clared throughout all the earth. 

17 As yet exaltest thou ''thyself against 
my people, that thou wilt not let them go? 

18 Behold, 'to-morrow about this time 
I will cause it to Jrain a very grievous 
hail, such as hath not been in Egypt since 
the foundation thereof even until now. 

19 Send therefore now, and gather thy 
cattle, and all that thou hast in the field ; 
for upon ev'ery man and beast wliicli shall 
be found in the Held, and shall not be 
brouglit liomc, the hail shall come ''down 
upon them, and they shall die. 

20 He tliat feared the ' word of tlie Lord 
among the servants of Pharaoh made his 

• Dfut. '.'S.-a?; .)ob 2:7; Rev. 16:2. b Isa. M7: 1-2, 14. c Psa. 
»1:11. <t rliap. 4:21. r Lev. 21;: 18; Dent. 28: l.i; 29: 20; 32: W; 
lSani.4:e; .ler.I9:«: Uev.l8:8; 22:1R. fProv.2:22. I! Prov. 
16:4; Itiiin. 9: 17: 1 Peter,2:8. * Heb. mode thtt itand. h Job 
9:4; Ifi:25,2fi. M Kings, 19: 2 : 20: fi. jPBn.Kl:l5. k ver. 26. 
I Prov. 16:20; 22:3. f Hvb. Itl not liii lirart unto, m rliap. 7 :2.3. 

10. Jilniiis ; violent and painful inflammation. 

12. The Tjord hanlciied the heart of Pha- 
raoh ; cliap. 4 : 21 ; 7:3; 8 : Ky. 

l."). Thon ^hnlt he cut off ; rrceaX numbers of 
his people would die, and he eventually be destroyed. 

IC. Rained I lire up ; caused thee to stand; con- 
tinued thee in life, notwithstandinj; all thy wicked- 
ness. Ml/ iinme 7naij lie declared ; my character, 
a-s manifested in iriy wonderful works, m.ay be made 
known to all people. 

23. Fire; li^rhtninjj. 

29. The earth is the Lord's ; he is its rightful 
owner and universal governor. 
84 



servants and his cattle flee into the *b. ":»": 
houses : 

21 And he that t regarded "" not the word 
of the Lord left his servants and his cat- 
tle in the field. 

22 T[And the Lord said unto Moses, 
Stretch forth thy hand toward heaven, 
that there may be hail in all the land of 
Egypt, upon man, and upon beast, and 
upon every herb of the field, throughout 
the land of Egypt. 

23 And Moses stretched forth his rod 
toward heaven : and the Lord sent tliun- 
der and "hail, and the fire ran along upon 
the ground; and the Lord rained hail 
upon the land of Egypt. 

24 So there was hail, and fire mingled 
with the hail, very grievous, such as there 
was none like it in all the land of Egypt 
since it became a nation. 

25 And the hail smote throughout all 
the land of Egypt all that was in the 
field, both man and beast ; and the hail 
smote" every herb of the field, and brake 
every tree of the field. 

26 Only in the land of P Goshen, where the 
children of Lsrael were, was there no hail. 

27 T[And Pharaoh sent, and called for 
Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, 1 
have sinned this time : the Lord is i right- 
eous, and I and my people arc wicked. 

28 Entreat the Lord'' (for it is enough) 
that there be no more + mighty thunder- 
ings and hail; and I will let you go, and 
ye shall stay no longer. 

29 And Moses said unto him. As soon 
as I am gone out of the city, I will spread 
abroad my "hands unto the Lord; and 
the thunder shall cease, neither shall 
there be any more hail ; th.at thou mayest 
know how that the earth is the * Lord's. 

30 But as for thee and thy servants, I 
know that vc will not yet "fear the Lord 
God. 

31 And the flax and the barley was 
smitten :'' for the barley was in the car, 
and the flax was boiled. 



n Josh. 10:11; 1 Sam. 12:17, 18; Job 38:22; Psd. 18:13; 78:47; 
lO:. : 32 ; Isaiah 30 : 30 ; Ezek. 38 : 22 ; Rev. 8:7. o Ps,-!. 10.") : 33. 
p chap. 8 : 22, etc. ; I»a. 32 : 18, 19. q 2 Chron. 12 :6; Psa.9:16; 
129:4; 14.1:17; Lam. 1 : 18; Dan.9:l4. r Act. 8 : 24. t H.-h. 
voicet of God. • 1 Kings, 8:38; Psa. 143:6; Isa. 1 : 15 t Psalm 
24:1; ICor. 10:26. ul8a.26:IO. t Ainos 4 :9; Hub. 3: 17. 



31. Was boiled ; the pod to contain the seed 
was formed. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

0. The brute creation often suffer through the 
wickedness of man, and are visited with calamities 
as .a puni.^hment of his sins. 

1 1. Whatever power the wicked claim, or what- 
ever intluence they may be able to e.xert over their 
fellow-men, they are entirely dependent upon God ; 
and if thev continue in rebellion against him, noth- 
ing can shield them from his indignation. 

16. All men are under sacred obligations to honor 
God. If they will not, by obeying his commands, 



The hail ceases. 



EXODUS X. 



The plague of locusts. 



not smitten : for they were * not grown up 

33 And Moses went out of the city from 
Pharaoh, and spread abroad his hands unto 
the Lord : and the thunders and hail ceas- 
ed, and the rain was not poured upon the 
earth. 

34 And when Pharaoh saw that the rain 
and the hail and the thunders were ceas- 
ed, he sinned yet ^more, and hardened his 
heart, he and his servants. 

35 And the heart of Pharaoh was hard- 
ened, neither would he let the children 
of Israel go ; as the Lord had spoken t by 
Moses. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 God threateneth to send locusts. 7 Pharaoh, moved 
by his servants, inclineth to let the Israelites go. 12 
The plague of the locusts. IG Pharaoh sueth to Mo- 
ses. 21 The plague of darkness. 24 Pharaoh sueth 
unto Moses, 27 but yet is hardened. 

AND the Lord said unto Moses, Go in un- 
to Pharaoh : for I "■ have hardened his 
heart, and the heart of his servants, that I 
might show these my signs before him : 

2 And that thou mayest tell in the ears 
of thy "^son, and of thy son's son, what 
things I have wrought in Egypt, and my 
signs which I have done among them ; that 
ye may know how ■'that I am the Lord. 

3 And Moses and Aaron came in unto 
Pharaoh, and said unto him. Thus saith 
the Lord God of the Hebrews, How long 
wilt thou refuse to "^humble thyself be- 
fore me ? let my people go, that they may 
serve me. 

4 Else, if thou refuse to let my people 
go, behold, to-morrow will I bring the 
locusts "^ into thy coast : 

5 And they shall cover the + face of the 
earth, that one cannot be able to see the 
earth : and they shall eat the s residue of 
that which is escaped, which remaineth 
unto you from the hail, and shall eat every 
tree which groweth for you out of the field : 

6 And they shall fill thy ''houses, and the 
houses of all thy servants, and the houses 
of all the Egyptians ; which neither thy 
fathers, nor thy fathers' fathers have seen. 





^ Heb 


hidden 


or 


dark, a 2 Cli 


on. *! : 23 


; .% 


13 


Romans 


2 


4,.i. 


Hel). by th 


hand of Moses 


b chap. 


7:1.1 


14 


c Deut. 


4 


9; 6: 


20; Psa 


44: 


1; -1:18: 78: 


1; .Joel 1 


3. 


i Psa-.W: 11. 


e 


IKins 


, 21 : 29 


2Chron. 7:14: 3.1 


12,19; .1 


lb 42 


fi: 


Jeremiah 


13: 18; J 


ames4: 


10. 


f Proverbs .30 


27; Rev. 


9:. 3. 


t 


Heb. tye. 



he will glorify his justice in their punishment, and 
ultimately in their ruin. 

21. Men who believe God, will use the means 
which are needful to escape the evils he threatens; 
while those who disbelieve, by neglecting the means 
of escape will bring those evils upon them. 

27. However much the wicked may try to jus- 
tify them.selves and condemn Jehovah for bringing 
evils upon them, they will ultimately all confess that 
he is right and they are wrong ; and will feel that 
they are the cause of their own ruin. 

34. The long-suffering and patience of God, his 
kindness in removing evils and in bestowing new 



since the day that they were upon the 
earth unto this day. And he turned him- 
self, and went out from Pharaoh. 

7 And Pharaoh's servants said unto him, 
How long shall this man be ' a snare unto 
us ? let the men go, that they may serve 
the Lord their God : knowest thou not 
yet that Egypt is destroyed ? 

8 And Moses, and Aaron were brought 
again unto Pharaoh : and he said unto 
them, Go, serve the Lord your God : but 
who* are they that shall go? 

9 And Moses said. We will go Avith our 
young and with our old, with our sons 
and with our daughters, with our flocks 
and with our herds w'ill we go ; for we 
must hold a feast unto the Lord. 

10 And he said unto them, Let the Lord 
be so with you, as I will let you go, and 
your little ones: look to it; for evil is 
before you. 

1 1 Not so : go now ye that are men, and 
serve the Lord ; for that ye did desire. 
And they were driven out from Pharaoh's 
presence. 

12 ^ And the Lord said unto Moses, 
Stretch Jout thy hand over the land of 
Egypt for the locusts, that they ma}' come 
up upon the land of P^gypt, and eat every 
herb of the land, even all that the hail 
hath left. 

13 And Moses stretched forth his rod 
over the land of Egypt, and the Lord 
brought an east wind upon the land all 
that day, and all that night ; and when it 
was morning, the ^ east wind brought the 
locusts. 

14 And the 'locusts went up over all 
the land of EgA'pt, and rested in all the 
coasts of Egypt : very grievous tcere they ; 
before them there were no such '"locusts 
as they, neither after them shall be such. 

15 For they covered the face of the 
whole earth, so that the land was dark- 
ened ; and they did eat every herb of the 
land, and all the fruit of the trees which 
the hail had left : and there remained not 
any green thing in the trees, or in the 



g chap. 9 : 32 ; Joel 1 : 4 ; 2 : 25. h ver. 14, l.=> ; cliap. 8:3. i chap. 
23:33; Josh. 23 : 13 ; 1 Sam. 18:21; Proverbs 29 : 6 ; Kccl. 7 : 26. 
% Heb. foAo anrf ujAo, <<<r. i chap. 7: 19. k Psa. 78: 26; 107 : 26; 
Mat 8 : 27. 1 Pealm 78 : 46 ; 105 : 34. m Joel 2 : 2. 



mercies, are often abused to the increase of trans- 
gression, and a preparation for more aggravated 
woe. 

CHAPTER X. 

4. Locusts ; a species of large grasshopper, very 
voracious in eastern countries, and often destruc- 
tive to vegetation. 

7. A snare; a means of bringing evils upon us. 

10. Be .fo with yon ; no more favor you than I 
will in letting yoiir little ones go; that is, they 
shall not go. ivil is before you ; you mean evil, 
and evil shall overtake you. 

85 



The plague of darkness. 



EXODUS XI. 



The first-born threatened. 



herbs of the field, through all the land of 
Egypt. 

16 1i Then Pharaoh * called for Mo.ses 
and Aaron in haste ; and he said, I have 
sinned "against the Lord your God, and 
against you. 

17 Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, 
my sin only this onee, and '' entreat the 
Lord your God, that he may take away 
from me this death only. 

18 And he went out from Pharaoh, and 
entreated the Lord. 

19 And the Lord turned a mighty strong 
west wind, which took away the locusts, 
and tcast them "^into the Red sea; there 
remained not one locust in all the coasts 
of Egypt. 

20 But the Lord hardened Pharaoh's 
heart, so that he would not let the chil- 
dren of Israel go. 

21 TfAnd the Lord said unto Moses, 
Stretch out thy hand toward heaven, that 
there may be "* darkness over the land of 
Egypt, +even darkness which may be felt. 

22 And Moses stretched forth his hand to- 
ward heaven ; and there was a thick dark- 
ness in all the land of Egypt three days : 

23 They saw not one another, neither 
rose any from his place for three days : 
but all the children of Israel had "^ light in 
their dwellings. 

24 ^And Pharaoh called unto Moses, 
and said. Go ye, serve the Lord ; only 
let your flocks and your herds be stayed : 
let your little ones also go with you. 

25 And Moses said, Thou must give ^ us 
also sacrifices and burnt-offerings, that we 
may sacrifice unto the Lord our God. 

26 Our "^cattle also shall go with us ; 
there shall not a hoof be left behind ; for 

* Keh.hanttnedlacnll. • chnfi. !J : 27. b 1 Kings, IS:6; Isa. 26:16. 
i Uvb. fattened. c.)ocl2:20. d »8l>. H.'i: 6; lO.". :28: Prnv.4: 1«; 
Eccl. 2:14; 6:4: I.in. 8 : 22. J Heb. thai one may feel darknesi. 
• Iso. 42 : lb ; Col. 1:13; 1 Peter, 2:9. \ Heb. into our liandt. 



17. Death ; deadly plague. 

21, 22. Darkness which may be felt — thiol: 
darkness ; heavy, damp darkness, e.xceedingly great 
and distressing. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The glory of God in the manifestation of his 
true character, is one grfat design of all his dispen- 
sations towards the children of men. 

7. The wickedness and obstinacy of rulers are 
often the means of great calamities to the people. 
And when, instead of being what they ought to be, 
ministers of God for good, they become ministers 
of evil, it is right for the people by suitable means 
to seek a change for the better. 

11. When men become convinced that they must 
yield to God or perish, their yielding is often partial, 
or in pretence merely ; and when they find that their 
submission must be sincere, and that they must in all 
things follow the will of God, they sometimes become 
vexed and determine that they will not regard him. 

17. Increasing sin brings increasing misery; and 
men often earnestly seek deliverance, not from the love 
and practice of iniquity, but from its consequences. 



thereof must we take to serve the *b.c 1401: 
Lord our God ; and we know not with 
what we must serve the Lord, until we 
come thither. 

27 TIBut the Lord « hardened Pharaoh's 
heart, and he would not let them go. 

28 And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee 
from me, take heed to thyself, sec my 
face no ''more ; for in that day thou seest 
my face thou shalt die. 

29 And Moses said, Thou hast spoken 
well, 'I will see thy face again no more. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 God"s message to the Israelites to borrow jewels of 
their neighbors. 4 Moses threateneth Pharaoh with 
the death of the first-born. 

AND the Lord said unto Moses, Yet 
will I bring one plnguo more upon 
Pharaoh, and upon Egypt ; afterwards he 
will let you go hence : when he shall let 
you go, he shall surely thrust you out 
hence J altogether. 

2 Speak now in the ears of the people, 
and let every man borrow of his neighbor, 
and every woman of her neighbor, jewels 
of silver, and jewels of gold. 

3 And the Lord gave the people '' favor 
in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover, 
the man Moses %cas very 'great in the 
land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh's 
servants, and in the sight of the people. 

4 And Moses said. Thus saith the Lord, 
About "'midnight will I go out into the 
midst of Egypt : 

5 And all the first-born in the land of 
Egypt shall "die, from the first-born of 
Pharaoh that sitteth upon his throne, even 
unto the first-born of the maid-servant 
that is behind the mill ; and all the first- 
born of beasts. 



f HoseB.'i:fi; Zecb. 14:20. f ver. 1 , 20; cbnp. 14:4,«. k 2Cbron. 
16:10; 2ri: 16: Anios7:l3. iHeli.ll:27. j eliiip. 12:31-.3!). k clinp. 
12:36; Tsa. 106:46. I 2Sam.7:9; F,stli.9:4; Kev.3:9. ■» Job 
34:20; Micah2:10; Zech. 14 : 3. o Aino9 4:l0. 



28. However great the miseries which the sins 
of men bring upon them, if left without the grace 
of God to pursue their own chosen way, they will 
grow worse and worse till they perish. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1. T/iC Z<orJ.!ri7;V/; made known to Moses. This 
was done before Moses left the presence of Pharaoh; 
and he denounced against him the judgment men- 
tioned verses 4-6 before he departed, as stated in 
verse 8. Thrust yon out; be exceedingly earnest 
to have them all immediately depart. Ver. 8. 

2. 7for;o7<',' ask, solicit, or demand. Chap. 3:22. 
Jetvels ; the Hebrew word here used means also ves- 
sels, utensils, garment.*, and weapons. Chap. 3 : 22. 

3. Gave thepeople favor; inclined the R:;yptians 
willingly to give the Israelites what they asked, so as 
to hasten their departure. This, however, did not 
take place till after Moses had left Pharaoh, and 
brought upon him the judgment he had denounced. 

.'J. Behind I hr, mill; their grain was ground in a 
small hand-mill of two stones, by a female servant, 
who sat behind the mill and turned the upper stone. 



The Passover 



EXODUS XII. 



is instituted. 



B.c''i«" 6 And there shall he a great* cry 
throughout all the land of Egypt, such 
as tfiere was none like it, nor shall be 
like it any more. 

7 But against any of the children of 
Israel shall not a dog move his •• tongue, 
against man or beast : that ye may know 
how that the Lord doth put a difference 
between the Egyptians and Israel. 

8 And all these thy "^ servants shall come 
down unto me, and bow down themselves 
unto me, saying, Get thee out, and all the 



3 % Speak ye unto all the congregation 
of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this 
month they shall take to them every man 
a tlamb, according to the house of their 
fathers, a lamb for a house : 

4 And if the household be too little for 
the lamb, let him and his neighbor next 
unto his house take it according to the 
number of the souls; every man accord- 
ing to his eating shall make your count 
for the lamb. 

5 Your lamb shall be without ^blemish, 



people * that follow thee : and after that i a male ^ of the first year : ye shall take it 
I will go out. And he went out from out from the sheep, or from the goats : 
Pharaoh in t a great anger. 6 And ye shall keep it up until the 

9 And the Lord said unto Moses, Pha- fourteenth'' day of the same month: and 
raoh shall not hearken unto you ; that my! the whole assembly of the congregation 
wonders ''may be multiplied in the land of Israel shall kill it ii in the 'evcnins 



of Egypt, 

10 And IMoses and Aaron did all these 
wonders before Pharaoh: and the Lord 
hardened" Pharaoh's heart, so that he 
would not let the children of Israel go 
out of his land. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1 The beginning of the year is changed. 3 The pass- 
over is instituted. 11 The rite of the passover. 15 
Unleavened bread. 29 The first-born are slain. 31 
The Isiaolites are driven out of the land. 37 They 
come to Succoth. 43 The ordinance of the passover. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses and 
Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying, 
2 This '^month sliall be unto you the 
beginning of months : it shall be the first 
month of the year to you. 





a c 


lap. 


12:30; Amos 


.S: 17. 


b .losh. 


10 


•21. c 


chap. 


12 


31,3.1. 




■11 


It IS 


, al thy fret. 


IKin- 


s, 20:1C 




f Heb 


htat 


of 


anger. 




CllB 


p. 7 


:i. e chap. 1( 


: -20, r 


; ISain 


(i: 


i: Hon 


1. '2 : 5 




chap. 


ly 


:4 


:i4: 


18; Deut. 16: 


1- t 


Or, kid. 


e 


Lev. 2 


2:19, 


'1; 


Deut. 



7. Not a dog move his tongue ; a proverbial 
expression denoting entire peace and safety. 

9. The Lord said ; had said. He hail foretold 
this, and all things had occurred according to his 
predictions. Chap. 3 : 19 ; 4:21; 7 : 3, 4 ; 10 : 1. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. All hearts are in the hands of the Lord, and 
he can turn them as the rivers of water are turned. 
When he sees best he can influence his enemies to 
favor his people, and gladly to bestow upon them 
whatever they desire. 

5. As God is the giver and preserver of life, he 
has a perfect right, at such times and by such 
means as he sees best, to take it away. 

8. When G-od undertakes to deliver his people he 
will accomplish it; and what men do to prevent 
this he will overrule to render their deliverance in 
due time more complete, triumphant, and glorious. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1. Spake; had spoken. 

2. This movth ; the month Abib or Nisan, an- 
swering to the last part of March and the first part 
of April. The beginning ; of their ecclesiastical 
year. It had been the seventh month ; and Tisri, 
answering to the last part of September and the 
first part of October, h.^d been the first month, and 
so in their civil concerns it still continued to be. 

4. According to the number ; about the num- 
ber that would at a meal consume a lamb. 



7 And they shall take of the blood, and 
strike it on the two side-posts and on the 
upper door-post of the houses, wherein 
they shall cat it. 

8 And they shall eat the flesh in that 
night, roast with fire, and J unleavened 
bread ; and with bitter herbs they shall 
eat it. 

9 Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all 
with water, but roast u'ith fire ; his head 
with his legs, and with the purtenancer 
thereof. 

10 And ye shall let nothing of it ''re- 
main until the morning; and that which 
rcmaineth of it until the morning ye shall 
burn with lire. 

1 1 IF And thus shall ye eat it ; with your 



17:1; 


Mai. 1 : 8, 


14; 


1 Peter, 


1:19. % H 


eh. 


son of a 




Lev. 


23: 12 


h Lev. 2 


!:.■; 


; Num. ; 


:3; 2S:16: 


Dp 


It. 16:1, 


6. ( 


Heb. 


betwee 


M Ike tioo t 


ven 


ngs. 1 


[•Imp. 16:12 


i 


chap. 34 


: '25 ; 


Ueut. 


16:3; 


1 Cor. r, : 8 


k 


chap. 2.1 


:18. 











5. Without blemish ; perfect, sound, healthy. 
Of the first year ; not more than a year old. 

6. In the evening ; literally between the two 
evenings. The first evening with the Jews began 
at noon, the second at sunset. Between noon and 
sunset the lamb was to be killed. 

7. Upper door-post ; the lintel or beam that 
goes across 6ver the door. 

8. Fire ; an emblem of the wrath which, as 
sinners, they deserved. Unleavened bread ; bread 
not raised with yeast, leaven, or any fermenting sub- 
stance. As leaven work.s in secret and unseen, it ia 
the emblem of hypocrisy and deceit. They were on 
these occasions to abstain from it. to impress on their 
minds the importance of worshipping (rod sincerely, 
inspirit and in truth. lCor.5:6-8. Bitter herbs; 
reminding them of the bitter fruits of sin, and the 
necessity of repentance in order to salvation. 

9. Sodden ; boiled. Pnrtenayice ; head, legs, 
heart, liver, lungs, and kidney. The lamb after 
being dressed was to be roasted whole. 

10. That which remaiuetk ; which they did 
not eat. 

11. Loins girded ; they wore loose flowing gar- 
ments, which when they were about to travel were 
fastened close by a girdle, strap, or belt around the 
body. This girdle was to be thus fastened that they 
might be prepared to start immediately on their 
journvy towards Canaan. The LonCs passover ; 
that, out of regard to which the Lord, when he should 

87 



Unleavened bread. 



EXODUS XII. 



The first-horn are slain. 



loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and 
your staff in your hand ; and ye shall eat 
it in haste : it is the Lord's passover. 

12 For I will pass through the land of 
Egyptthis night, and will smite all the first- 
born in the land of Egypt, both man and 
beast; and against all the * gods of "Egypt 
I will execute judgment : I am the Lord. 

13 And the blood shall be to you for a 
token upon the houses where ye are : and 
when I see the blood, I will pass over 
you, and the plague shall not be upon 
you tto destroy you, when I smite the 
land of Egypt. 

14 And this day shall be unto you for a 
memorial ; and ye shall keep it a '' feast to 
the Lord throughout your generations : 
ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance 
for ever. 

15 Seven "= days shall ye eat unleavened 
bread ; even the first day ye shall put away 
leaven out of your houses : for whosoever 
eateth leavened bread from the first day 
until the seventh day, that soul shall ''be 
cut off from Israel. 

16 And in the first day there shall be a 
holy'' convocation, and in the seventh 
day there shall be a holy convocation to 
you ; no manner of work shall be done 
in them, save that which every tman 
must eat, that only may be done of you. 

17 And ye shall observe the feast o/ un- 
leavened bread ; for in this self-same day 
nave I brought your armies out of the 
land of Egypt : therefore shall ye observe 
this day in your generations by an ordi- 
nance for ever. 

18 ^ In the first ?no?i//i., on the fourteenth 
day of the month at even, ye shall eat 
unleavened bread, until the one and twen- 
tieth day of the month at even. 

19 Seven days shall there be no ""leaven 
found in your houses : for whosoever eat- 
eth that which is leavened, even that soul 
shall be cut off from the congregation of 



*Or,prin«». • NuIn.^■):4; r(ia.82:l. f Heh. for a deitruc- 
lion, b l.ev.23:4,6; 2Kings, Mr'Jl; 10or.6:8. ccliap.l3:6, 
etc.; Num. 28:17. JNum. MrlS. o Num. 2<t: 1-2. ^ Heb. »om^ 
f clinp. 2.1: 1.1; 34:18; Deut 16:3. ^ Or, kid. c .losli. .") : 10; 
2KiMgB,C3:21; Kira 6 : 20 ; Miittliew 26 : 18; Mark 14:12; Luke 



slay the Egyptians, would pass over, spare, and not 
destroy the Israelites. The blood of this Iamb, sprin- 
kled by God's command on the door-posts, typified 
the blood of the Lamb of (jod, Jesus Christ, out of 
regard to which God pa.sses over, spares, and saves 
those who obey him. Hence Christ is said to be 
"our Passover." 1 Cor. 5:7. By eating of the lamb 
the Israelites were taught the necessity of union by 
faith to Jesus Christ, as well as of reliance on his 
blood for salvation. John 6 : 4S-58. 

12. Thi; gods of Egypt ; all the objects of their 
worship and dependence. 

13. A token ; an evidence that they had com- 
plied with the Lord's directions, and were under his 
protection. The plague ; that which destroyed 
the firstborn of Egypt. Ver. 23. 

88 



Israel, whether he be a stranger, ^s.c.uJr 
or born in the land. 

20 Ye shall eat nothing leavened ; in 
all your habitations shall ye eat unleav- 
ened bread. 

21 TIThen Moses called for all the el- 
ders of Israel, and said unto them. Draw 
out and take you a ^ lamb according to 
your families, and kill the ^passover. 

22 And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, 
and dip it in the blood that is in the ba- 
sin, and ''strike the lintel and the two 
side-posts with the blood that is in the 
basin: and none of -you shall go out at 
the door of his house until the morning. 

23 For the Lord will pass tlirough to 
smite the Egyptians ; and when he seeth 
the 'blood upon the lintel, and on the two 
side-posts, the Lord will pass over the door, 
and 'will not suffer the destroyer to come 
in unto your houses to smite you. 

24 And ye shall observe this thing for an 
ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever. 

25 And it shall come to pass, when ye 
be come to the land which the Lord will 
give you, according as he hath promised, 
that ye shall keep this service. 

26 And it shall come to pass, when your 
children shall say unto you, '' What mean 
ye by this service? 

27 That ye shall say. It is the sacrifice 
of the Lord's passover, who passed over 
the houses of the children of Israel in 
Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, 
and delivered our houses. And the people 
bowed the head and 'worshipped. 

28 And the children of Israel went away, 
and did as the Lord had commanded Mo- 
ses and Aaron, so did they. 

29 TI And it came to pass, that at mid- 
night the Lord '"smote all the first-born 
in the laiul of Egypt, from the first-born 
of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto 
the first-born of the captive thatii'rt.s in the 
dungeon ;ll and all the first-born of cattle. 



22:7, etc. k Lev. 14:6,7; Psalm .''il : 7 ; Hebrews <): 19; 11:28- 
i Heb. 12:24. i 2 Sam. 24:16; Ezekiel 9: 4, B; Kev. 7:3; 9:4. 
k cliap. 13:8, 14; Deut.32:7; .Io6li.4:6; P8a.78:6. 1 cliap.4:3i. 
m Num. 3:13; 8:17; 33:4; Psa. 78:61; 10.'>:36; 135:8; 136:10; 
Heb. 1 1 : 28. || Heb. houit of the pit. 



14. A memorial ; a means of keeping in re- 
membrance their preservation and deliverance when 
the EgA'ptians were destroyed. Ver. 27. 

1.5. Seven days ; from the evening of the four- 
teenth to the evening of the twenty-first day of the 
month. Ver. IS. Cut off from Linirl ; fieipa.ra.tcd 
from the congregation aud deprived of its blessings. 
Ver. 19 ; Gen. 17 : 14. 

16. Convocation ; an assembling together for 
public worship. No manner of woric ; e.xcept 
what was neeaful in the preparation of food. 

17. For ever ; to the end of the Jewish state. 

21. The passover; the Iamb that was to be 
slain on that occasion. 

22. Hyssop ; a bushy plant, with leaves of aro- 
matic smell and pungent taste. 



The Israelites are 



EXODUS XII. 



hastened out of Egypt. 



B.'"S' 30 And Pharaoh rose up in the 
night, he, and all his servants, and all the 
Egyptians ; and there was a great *cry in 
Egypt : for there was not a house where 
there ivas not one dead. 

31 TfAnd he '' called for Moses and 
Aaron by night, and said, Rise up, and 
get you forth from among my people, 
both ye and the children of Israel ; and 
go, serve the Lord, as ye have said. 

32 Also take your flocks and your herds, 
as ye have said, and be gone; and "^ bless 
me also. 

33 And the Egyptians were ''urgent up- 
on the people, that they might send them 
out of the land in haste ; for they said, 
We be all dead men. 

34 And the people took their dough be- 
fore it was leavened, their * kneading- 
troughs being bound up in their clothes 
upon their shoulders. 

35 And the children of Israel did ac- 
cording to the word of Moses ; and they 
borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of sil- 
ver, and jewels of gold, and raiment : 

36 And the Lord "gave the people favor 
in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they 
lent unto them such things as they required: 
and they spoiled the Egyptians. 

37 TIAnd the children of Israel jour- 
neyed from "^Rameses to Succoth, about 
sixs hundred thousand on foot that were 
men, besides children. 

38 And ta mixed ■• multitude went up 



• chap. U:6; Prorerbs 21:13; Amos 5:17; Mattli 


evr 2.5 : t; ; 


.lames 2: 13. b chap. U : 1. c Genesis 27 : 34. d Psal 


m 10.->:.38. 


» Or, dough, e Genesis 39: 21; chap. 3:21; 11:. 3. f 


Numbers 


33:3,.'). g Num. 1:46; 11:21. ^ Huh. a great mixture 


1. Num. 



31. Called for ; sent to. 

32. Bless me ; seek of God a blessing for me. 

33. We be all dead ; we shall be. 

34. Kneading-troughs ; vessels containing their 
dough. 

35. Borrowed; asked, requested. Chap. 3:21, 
22; 11:2,3. 

36. Lent unto them; granted them what they 
desired, in order to hasten their departure. Spoiled 
the Egyptians ; received and carried away much 
of their substance. G-en. 15 : 14. 

37. Rameses ; a city which the Israelites had 
built, and where they were now assembled. Chap. 
1 : 11. Siiccoth ; a place of encampment between 
Rameses and Suez. Six hundred thousand — 
men, ; this shows that the whole number of souls 
was probably over two millions. Psa. lOo : 37. 

40. Four hundred and thirty years ; from the 
time the promise was made to Abraham. Gen. 
15:13. About half this time was spent in Ca- 
naan, and the rest in Egypt. Gal. 3 : 17. 

43. Stranger; a foreigner who had not em- 
braced the Jewish religion, and was not circum- 
cised. Ver. 45, 48. 

46. Neither — breah a hone ; John 19 : 33, 36. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The directions of God to his ancient people 
were suited to impress upon them the evil of sin, 
the necessity of an atonement, and the efficacy of 
that precious blood wliicli was to be shed for many 
for the remission of sins. Mat. 26 : 28. 



also with them ; and flocks, and herds, 
even very much cattle. 

39 And they baked unleavened cakes of 
the dough which they brought forth out 
of Egypt, for it was not leavened ; because 
they were thrust out of Egypt, and could 
not tarry, neither had they prepared for 
themselves any victuals. 

40 \ Now the sojourning of the children 
of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was 'four 
hundred and thirty years. 

41 And it came to pass at the end of 
the four hundred and thirty years, even 
the self-same day it came to pass, that all 
the hosts of the Lord went out from the 
land of Egypt. 

42 It is ta night to be Jmuch observed 
unto the Lord for bringing them out from 
the land of Egypt : this is that night of 
the Lord to be observed of all the chil- 
dren of Israel in their generations. 

43 H And the Lord said unto Moses and 
Aaron, This is the ''ordinance of the 
passover : there shall no stranger eat 
thereof: 

44 But every man's servant that is 
bought for money, when thou hast 'cir- 
cumcised him, then shall he eat thereof. 

45 A ""foreigner and a hired servant 
shall not eat thereof. 

46 In one house shall it be eaten; thou 
shalt not carry forth aught of the flesh 
abroad out of the house ; neither shall ye 
break a " bone thereof. 

11:4. i Gen. 1.1:13; Acts 7: fi; Gal. 3:17. % Meh. a night of 
observations, j Deut. IR: 1, K. k Numbers 9: 14. IGen.l7:12. 
m Lev. 22:10; Eph.2:12. ■> Num.y:12; John 19:33, 36. 



8. It was not enough for the deliverance of Israel 
that (he paschal lamb should be slain and its blood 
struck upon the door-posts, but they must eat of the 
lamb, and thus a union be formed between it and them. 
So the blood of Christ will save none but such as are 
by faith united to him. John 6 : .53 ; 1 Cor. 6 : 17. 

13. It is through the blood of Christ, typified by 
the blood of tlie p;i.schal lamb, th.at God pardons 
men, and saves them from that destruction which 
as sinners they deserve. 1 Cor. 5 : 7. 

24. The ordinances which God appoints as me- 
morials of his goodness, should be carefully observed 
by his people, not in outward form merely, but in 
spirit and in truth, with repentance for sin, faith in 
the Redeemer, and gratitude for his infinite mercy. 

27. The ordinances of God, when understood, are 
adapted to impress divine truth, esp-'cially upon tlie 
minds of children and youth. The meaning of 
them should therefore be carefully explained by 
parents and teachers, that all may apprehend it, 
and receive the benefit which it is suited to impart. 

33. God can so order events in his providence, that 
oppressors will be anxious to get rid of those whom 
they oppress; and all will at length see that, under 
his righteous government, the condition of the op- 
pressor is more dreadful than that of the oppressed. 

41. If the oppressed believe and obey God, their 
deliverance from the power of their oppressors will 
not be delayed any longer than is needful to make 
such deliverance most for the glory of God, and the 
final srood of all who trust in him. 

89 



Ordinance of the passover. 



EXODUS XIII. 



T lie first-born set apart. 



47 All the congregation of Israel shall 
keep* it. 

48 And when a .stranger shall sojourn 
with thee, and will keep the passover to 
the Loud, let all his males be circumcised, 
and then let him come near and keep it ; 
and he shall be as one that is born in the 
land : for no uncircumeiscd person shall 
eat thereof. 

49 One ='la\v shall be to him that is 
home-born, and unto the stranger that 
sojourncth among you. 

50 Thus did all the children of Israel; 
as tlie Lord commanded Moses and Aaron, 
so did they. 

51 And it came to ''pass the self-same 
day, that the Lord did bring the children of 
Israel out of the land of "^ Egypt, by their 
armies. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1 The first-bom are sanctified to God. S The memorial 
of the passover is commanded. 11 The firstlings of 
bf-as'.sare set apart. 17 The Israelites go out of Egypt, 
and carry Joseph's bones with them. 20 They come 
to Ktham. 21 God guideth them by a pillar of a 
cloud, and a pillar of fire. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 

2 Sanctify unto me all the ^first-born, 
whatsoever opencth the womb among the 
children of Israel, both of man and of 
beast : it is mine. 

3 ^And Moses said unto the people. 
Remember this ''day, in which yo came 
out from Egypt, out of the house of t bond- 
age ; for by strength of hand the Lord 
brought you out from this place: there 
shall no leavened bread be eaten. 

4 This day came ye '^out in the month 
Abib. 

5 And it shall be when the Lord shall 
bring thee into the land of the Canaan- 
ites, and the Hittitcs, and the Amorites, 
and the Ilivites, and the Jebusites, which 
he ^sware unto thy fathers to give thee, a 
land (lowing with milk and honey, that 
thou shall keep this service in this month. 

6 Seven ''days thou shall eat unleavened 
bread, and in the seventh day shall be a 
feast to the Lord. 

7 Unleavened bread shall be eaten seven 



* Hi-h.doit. • Nimi.9:H; ir.:IS,16: Gal.»:28; Col.3:II. 
kver.41. c clinp.'r.r'ja J ver. li; clinp. 23:2!); S4 ; 19 ; Num. 
:):in; Deiit ir.; Ill; I.iike2:2.1. « clinp. 12: 42. f Hi-lt.tcrvants. 
cliap.2a:2. f cli:ip. 23: If); Dent. 16: 1-3. I! Gen. 17 : 8: 22 : Ifi. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

2. Sanctify ; set apart for G-od, to be devoted 
pi'culiarly to his service. Ver. 12. 

4. Abib ; meaning, green corn. This was tlie 
seventh month, called also Nisan. Chap. VI: 2. 

9. A sign ; a means of keeping their deliverance 
inremeinhrance, and making God's commands famil- 
iar to their minds. Ver. 10; Prov. 3:3. The Jews 
interpreted these directions liler.illy, writing cerUiiii 
precepts of the law on parchment, and wearing them 
as evidences or ornaments of piety. Mat. 23 : 5. 
90 



days ; and there shall 'no leavened *b ": "J?: 
bread be seen with thee, neither shall 
there be leaven seen with thee in all thy 

quarters. 

8 TI And thou shalt show thy J son in that 
day, saying, This is done because of that 
iL'hich the Lord did unto me when I came 
forth out of Egypt. 

9 And it sli all be for a ''sign unto thee upon 
thy hand, and for a memorial between 
thine eyes, that the Lord's law may be in 
thy mouth : for with a strong hand hath 
the Lord brought thee out of Egypt. 

10 Thou shalt therefore keep this 'ordi- 
nance in his season from year to year. 

11 *f[ And it shall be when the Lord 
shall bring thee into the land of the Ca- 
naanites, as he sware unto thee and to 
thy fathers, and shall give it thee, 

12 That thou shalt J set apart unto the 
Lord all that openeth the matrix, and 
every firstling that cometh of a beast 
which thou hast; the males shall be the 
Lord's. 

13 And every firstling of an ass thou 
shalt redeem with a * lamb ; and if thou 
wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break 
his neck : and all the first-born of man 
among thy children shalt tliou redeem. 

1 4 TI And it shall be when tliy "'son asketh 
thee II in time to come, saying, What is 
this ■? that thou shalt say unto him. By 
strength of hand the Lord brought us out 
from Egypt, from the house of bondage : 

15 And it came to pass, when Pharaoh 
would hardly let us go, that the Lord 
slew all the first-born in the land of Egypt, 
both the first-born of man and the first- 
born of beast: therefore I sacrifice to the 
Lord all that opencth the matri.x, being 
males; but all the first-born of my chil- 
dren I redeem. 

16 And it shall be for a token upon thy 
hand, and for frontlets between thine 
eyes : for by strength of "hand the Lord 
brought us forth out of Egypt. 

17 lIAnd it came to pass, when Pha- 
raoh had let the people go, that God led 
them not through the way of the land of 
the Philistines, although that was near; 



h 


rlinp 


12 


1.5. 


cli.ip. 12 


1<) 


i r 


lap. 12 


:2r 


: v( 


r. M 


k r 


■r. 


Hi; 


11 


flit. « 


:8; 


11:18; Prciv. 1 


:!• 


«:2 


; Cants 


li. 


1 rl. 


ip. 12: 


M 


24. 


t 


Heb. 


cause to 


pass over 




4 Or. 


kid. 


m 


Deut. 6: 


20; J 


on 


<ua 


4 


fi,2l 


II 


Heh. 


to-morrow. 


n Dcut. 26 


8. 













10. In his season; on vhe fourteenth day of 
Abib annually. 

13. Every firstlitig of an ass — and all the 
first-horii of man — shalt thou redeem; Num. 
3:4G-.')1; 18:8-18. 

14. What is this? why are tlie first-born thus 
devoted to God and redeemed ? What is the mean- 
ing of it? 

1.5. Would hardly ; refused. 
17. Through the — land of the Thilistines ; 
the direct way from Egj'pt to Canaan. 



The pillar of fire. 



EXODUS XIV. 



Pharaoh pursueth Israel. 



tc.!*": for God said, Lest perad venture 
the "people repent when they see war, 
and they ''return to Egypt: 

18 But God *= led the people about, //iroHg/t 
the way of the ^Yilderness of the Red sea : 
and the children of Israel went up * har- 
nessed out of the land of Egypt. 

19 And Moses took the bones of Joseph 
with him : for he had straitly sworn the 
children of Israel, saying, ^ God will surely 
visit you ; and ye shall carry up my bones 
away hence with you. 

20 ^ And they took their "journey from 
Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the 
edge of the wilderness. 

21 And the Lord went before ""them by 
day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them 
the way ; and by night in a pillar of fire, 
to give them light ; to go by day and night. 

22 He took not away the pillar of the 
cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by 
night, //-om before the people. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1 God instructeth the Israelites in their journey. 5 
Pharaoh pursueth after them. 10 The Israelites mur- 
mur. 13 Moses comforteth them. 15 God instruct- 
eth Moses. 1 9 The cloud reraoveth behind the camp. 
21 The Israelites pass through the Red sea, 23 which 
drowneth the Egyptians. 

ND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing. 



A 



« Hiap. 14:11, 1-2; Numbers 14: 1-4. h Deut. 


17:lfi. 


c Deut. 


.11 : 10. * Or, Injjive in a rank. A Gen. .W : 25 


; .Io?liu? 


24:33; 


.\it3 7:lfi. « .N urn 3.3:6. f Num. 9: ir,--23 


10:. 34; 


14:14; 


l>i-ut.l;33; Neh. 9:12, 19; Psa. 78:14; 99:7; 


103 : 39 


Isaiah 



18. Red sea ; which separates Egypt from 
Arabia. It is about 1,400 miles long, and upon an 
average about 150 miles wide. It extends from 
the straits of Babelmandel on tlie south, which 
unite it with the Indian ocean, to the isthmus of 
Suez on the north, which separates it from the 
Mediterranean sea. At the north end it divides 
into two arms or gulfs, between wliich is the wil- 
derness in which the children of Israel spent forty 
years. The western arm, called the gulf of Suez, 
IS about 190 miles long and on an average 21 miles 
wide, it was near the head of this gulf, that the 
Hebrews passed and the Egyptians were drowned. 
(!;ii,ip. 14 : 21-30. The eastern arm. called the gulf 
of Akabah, and anciently the ..^lanitic gulf or gulf 
of Elatli, is about 112 miles long, and on an average 
about 15 miles wide. On this gulf was Eziongeber, 
a port from which Solomon sent his ships to Ophir 
for gold. 1 King's, 9:26. From Rameses to the Red 
.sea was about forty or fifty miles. Harnessed ; 
jirmcd. equipped, and in order. 

10. The hones of Joseph ; Gen. 50:2-1 

20. Etiiam ; a place near Suez, at the head of 
the western branch of tlie Red sea. The wilder- 
71CSS ; of Etham. 

21. Pillar of a cloud; a cloud in the form of a 
pillar, to shield them from the sun and guide them 
in tlie djiytime, and to give them light by night. 

22. Too^ not away the pillar; it continued 
with them through the wilderness, as the emblem 
of the divine presence. Chap. 14 : 24 ; 33 : 9-14. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
7. In the Bible the same or similar instructions are 
often repeated, that the truth niiiy become familiar, 
and make a strong, abiding impression on the lieart. 



2 Speak unto the children of Israel, that 
they turn and encamp before ° Pi-hahiroth, 
between ^ Migdol and the sea, over against 
Baal-zephon : before it shall ye encamp 
by the sea. 

3 For Pharaoh will say of the children 
of Israel, 'They are entangled in the land, 
the wilderness hath shut them in. 

4 And I will J harden Pharaoh's heart, 
that he shall follow after them ; and I 
will be honored upon Pharaoh, and upon 
all his host; that the Egyptians may know 
that I am the Lord. And they did so. 

5 IT And it was told the king of Egypt 
that the people fled : and the heart of Pha- 
raoh and of his servants was ''turned 
against the people, and they said. Why 
have we done this, that we have let Is- 
rael go from serving us? 

6 And he made ready his chariot, and 
took his people with him : 

7 And he took si.\ hundred chosen ' char- 
iots, and all the chariots of Egypt, and 
captains over every one of them. 

8 And the Lokd hardened the heart of 
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued 
after the children of Israel : and the chil- 
dren of Israel went out with a " high hand. 

9 But the Egyptians pursued after them, 
all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, 
and his horsemen, and his army, and 



4.5; lCor.lO:2; Rev.lO:l. B Numbers 33 : 7. hjer.44:l. 
i PsHlm3:2; 71:11; Jer. 20:10,11. j rliap. 4 : 21, etc. I Psa. 
105 : 25. 1 chap. 15:4. m Num. 33 : 3 ; Deut. 26 : 8. 



14. The ordinances of God are designed to in- 
crease the knowledge, perpetuate the remembrance, 
and extend the efficacy of his truth; and the proper 
understanding of these ordinances is suited to bene- 
fit all, especially the young. 

18. The way through this world, in which God 
leads his people, is often very different from what 
they expect or desire, and very different from what 
any finite mind at the time would think to be best. 

But though they go far wandering round, 
'Tis the right way to Canaan's ground. 

22. God is the guide and protector of his people. 
To follow him is perfectly safe. And after he has, 
by the wisest means and in the best way, prepared 
them for heaven, he will receive them there. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

2. That they tierti ; to the south, and go down 
on the west side of the west arm of the Red sea, 
instead of passing northward round the head of the 
sea, as they might have done. Pi-hahiroth — 
Migdol and — liaal-zephon ; places south of 
Etham, where they would be shut in between the 
mountains and the sea; so that should Pharaoh fol- 
low them with his army, they would, without a 
miracle, have no way of escape. 

4. Harden. Pharaoh's heart; chap. 4:21. i 
u'ill be honored; in the destruction of Pharaoh 
and his host. 

5. Turned against the people; against per- 
mitting them to escape. 

8. High hand; openly, with regularity, and in 
order. Not as fugitives, but as a numerous and 
disciplined army. 

91 



The passage of the Red sea. 



EXODUS XIV. 



T7ie Egyptians are drou-ncd. 



overtook them encamping by the sea, be- 
side Pi-hahiroth, before Baal-zephon. 

10 T[ And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the 
children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and 
behold, the Egyptians marched after 
them ; and they were sore afraid : and 
the children of Israel "cried out unto the 
Lord. 

1 1 And they said unto Moses, Because 
there U'ere no graves in Egypt, hast thou 
taken us away to die in the wilderness? 
Wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, 
to carry us forth out of Egypt? 

12 Is not this the word that we did tell 
thee in ''Egypt, saying, Let us alone, that 
we may serve the Egyptians ? For it had 
been better for us to serve the Egyptians, 
than that we should die in the wilderness. 

13 T[And ]Mo.ses said unto the people, 
Fear ye not, '^ stand still, and see the sal- 
vation of the Lord, which he will show 
to you to-day : * for the Egyptians whom 
ye have seen to-day, ye shall see them 
again no more for ever. 

14 The Lord shall ^ fight for you, and ye 
shall hold your peace. 

1.5 ^And the Lord said unto JMoses, 
Wherefore criest thou unto me ? Speak 
unto the children of Israel, that they go 
forward : 

16 But lift thou up thy rod, and stretch 
out thy hand over the sea, and divide it: 
and the children of Israel shall go on dry 
ground through the midst of the sea. 

17 And I, behold, I will harden the 
hearts of the Egyptians, and tliey shall 
follow them : and I will get me honor 
upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon 
his chariots, and upon his horsemen. 

18 And the Egyptians shall know that 
I am the Lord, when I have gotten me 
honor upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots, 
and upon his horsemen. 

1 9 ^i And the " Angel of God, which went 
before the camp of Israel, removed and 
went behind them ; and the pillar of the 



• Jonli.M:?; Neh.9:»; I'»ii.34: 17; 106:44; 107:fi. b chap.. S: 21; 
fi:l). e Nuin.l4:9! Deul.20:3i 2Kings.6:l«; 2 Cliron.iO: IB, 17; 
Pm.27:1,2; 4R;l-3; l9a.41;in,M. * Or, fur whereat yr have teen 
the Egnptiam today. i Deut. 1:30; 3:22; 20:4; Josh. 10:14; 



13. <Sto?/y/«tt7/; be firm, unmoved. No more ; 
no more alive. 

14. Hold your peace; not fi^'ht, but quietly 
follow (i oil's directions. 

18. Gotten ine honor ; ver. 4. 

19. Angel of God; ver. 24, 20. He who dwelt 
in the cloud, called the Angel of the Covenant, who 
was afterwards made fiesli and dwelt among men. 
Dent. 1 : 32, 33 ; Psa. 99 : 6, 7 ; Isa. 63 : 8-16 ; John 
1:14; ICor. 10:9. 

20. To them; the Egyptians. These; the 
Israelites. 

21. The. morning-toatch ; nin;ht was divided 
into three watches of four hours eacli. The morn- 
ing-watch was tiir last, and began eight hours after 
sunset. Looked ; with displeasure. 

92 



cloud went from before their face, *B.c:rJ": 
and stood behind them : 

20 And it came between the camp of the 
Egyptians and the camp of Israel ; and it 
was a cloud aiul darkness to them, but it 
gave light by night to these : so that the one 
came not near the other all the night. 

21 And Moses stretched out his hand 
over the sea ; and the Lord caused th*^ 
sea to go back by a strong east wind all 
that night, and made the sea ''dry land, 
and the waters were divided. 

22 And the children of Israel went into 
the s midst of the sea, upon the dry ground : 
and the waters u-cre a M'all unto them on 
their right hand, and on their left. 

23 If And the Egyptians pursued, and 
went in after them to the midst of the 
sea, even all Pharaoh's horses, his char- 
iots, and his horsemen. 

24 And it came to pass, that in the 
morning-watch the Lord looked unto the 
host of the Egyptians through the pillar 
of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the 
host of the Egyptians, 

25 And took off their chariot-wheels, 
thatt they drave them heavily: so that 
the Egyptians said, Let us flee from the 
face of Israel ; for the Lord fighteth for 
them against the Egyptians. 

26 If And the Lord said unto Moses, 
Stretch out thy hand over the sea, that 
the waters may come again upon the 
Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon 
their horsemen. 

27 And Moses stretched forth his hand 
over the sea, and the sea returned to his 
strength when the morning appeared ; 
and the Egyptians fled against it ; and the 
Lord J overthrew the Egyptians in the 
midst of the sea. 

28 And the waters returned, and ''cov- 
ered the chariots, and the horsemen, and 
all the host of Pharaoh that came into the 
sea after them ; there remained not so 
much as one of them. 



23:3,10; 2 Chron. 20: 2!) ; Nell. 4:20; Isn. 30: ir,. e Num. 20:16; 
Isa.«3:9. f .losli. 3:16; 4:-23; P»a. fifi:»i. g 1 Cnr. 10: 1 ; Heh. 
1 1 : 29. t Or, and made them to go heavily. J Hcli. shook qff. 
h chap. 15:10; P»a. 77: 16-20; 78:.'i3; 106:11. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. If men would not iiave their hearts hardened, 
they must not continue knowingly to disobey G-od. 
If they tims disobey, all tiie blame will rest upon 
themselves. 

9. When suffering the consequences of sin and 
fearing destruction, men often appear to be peni- 
tent and disposed to reform ; but if when they are 
relieved and their fears pass away, they rush again 
into sill, they not unfrequently become more hard- 
encd, reckless, ;md wicked than ever, till, given up 
of God, they sink into ruin. 

15. It is the duty of men not merely to pray, but 
to act : and unless they go forward in the way of 
duty, their prayers will not avail. God helps those 
who do what he requires to help themselves 



The song of Moses 



EXODUS XV 



and the hracliles. 



n. aiTai'- 29 But the children of Israel walk- 
ed upon dry land in the midst of the sea ; 
and the waters were a wall unto thcin on 
their right hand, and on tlieir left. 

30 Thus the Lord saved Israel that day 
out of the hand of the Egyptians ; and 
Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the 
sea-shore. 

31 And Israel saw that great *work 
which the Lord did upon the Egyptians : 
and the people feared the Lord, and " be- 
lieved the Lord, and his servant Moses. 

CHAPTER XV. 

1 Moses' song. 22 The people want water. 23 The 
waters at Marah are bitter. 25 A tree sweeteneth 
them. 29 At Elim are twelve wells, and seventy 
palm-trees. 

THEN ''sang Moses and the children 
of Israel this song unto the Lord, and 
spake, saying, I will sing unto the Lord, 
for he hath triumphed gloriously : the 
horse and his rider hath he thrown into 
the sea. 

2 The Lord is my strength and '^song, 
and he is become my salvation : he is 
my God, and I will prepare him a '' habi- 
tation ; my father's God, and I will exalt 
him. 

3 The Lord Z5 a man of •■ war : the Lord 
is his name. 

4 Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath 
he east into the sea : his chosen captains 
also are drow'ned in the Red sea. 

5 The depths have covered them : they 
sank into the bottom as a stone. 

6 Thy right Hiand, Lord, is become 
glorious in power : thy right hand, Lord, 
hath dashed in pieces the enemy. 

7 And in the greatness of thine s excel- 
lency thou hast overthrown them that 
rose up against thee : thou sentest forth 



* Heh.hand. a cliap.4:l'); 1!):9; .)nliii2:Il: ) 1 : -15. b .Inilf;. 
6:1: '2Sam. 2>2:1; I'salrn lOfi : 12. c Psalm 18: -2; 27:1; 62 :H; 
1I8:H; Isai;ili 12 : 2. ■! 1 Kings, 8 : l:J. 27. e Ps.n. 24 : 8; 4,')::!; 
Kev.l9:U. f Psalm 118 : l.i, jtr. s Deut. 33 : 2H ; Psa. B8 : ^3. 
Ii Paa. ,19 : 1.3 ; laaiali5:24: 47:14; Mnt.3:12. i 2Sam. 22:16; 

18. The dispensations of- Providence, as -n-ell as the 
publication of divine truth, are to some, by being im- 
proved, a savor of life unlo life; to others, by being 
abused, a savor of death unto death ; and God is 
honored in the s.alvation of the one and the destruc- 
tion of the other. 

20. Many things are very plain, and give great 
light and comfort to those who obey God, which 
appear exceedingly dark and perple.ting to those 
who knowingly disobey him. 

128. The way of transgressors is hard. God is 
against them, and the time will come when they 
will see this. Happy will it be if they see it wliile 
he is waiting to be gracious, saying, " Turn ye, turn 
ye ; for why will ye die?" and hearken to his voice, 
instead of madly persevering in rebellion against 
him. 

CHAPTER XV. 

2. Song; the subject of it. Mi/ salvation ; 
the author of it. A habitation ; a place for his 
public worihip TLxalt : glorify and adore. 

7 



thy Avrath, ich ich consumed '' theni as stub- 
ble. 

8 And with the blast of ' thr nostrils the 
waters were gathered together, the floods 
stood upright as a heap, and the depths 
were congealed in the heart of the sea. 

9 The enemy said, I will pursue, I will 
overtake, I will divide the spoil ; my lust 
shall be satisfied upon them ; I will draw 
my sword, my hand shall t destroy them. 

10 Thou didst blow with thy Jwind, 
the sea covered them : they sank as lead 
in the mighty waters. 

11 Who is ''like unto thee, O Lord, 
among the - gods 1 who is like thee, glo- 
rious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing 
wonders 1 

12 Thou stretchedst outthy right hand, 
the earth swallowed them. 

13 Thou in thy mercy hast 'led forth 
the people ivhich thou hast redeemed : 
thou hast guided them in thy strength 
unto thy holy habitation. 

14 The people shall hear, and\>Q afraid : 
sorrow shall take hold on the inhabitants 
of Palestina. 

15 Then the dukes of Edom shall be 
amazed ; the mighty men of Moab, trem- 
bling shall take hdd upon them ; all the 
inhabitants of Canaan shall '"melt away. 

1 6 Fear and dread shall " fall upon them ; 
by the greatness of thine arm they shall 
be as ° still as a stone; till thy people 
pass over, Lord, till the people pass 
over, which Pthou hast purchased. 

17 Thou shalt bring them in, and ^ plant 
them in the mountain of thine inherit- 
ance, in the place, Lord, which thou 
hast made for thee to dwell in ; in the 
sanctuary,'' Lord, which thy hands have 
established. 



.lob 4:9;.2Thes.'i.2:8. f Or, lepossess. j rliap. 14 :21 ; Poalm 
117:18. k Isaiah 40 : 18, f Or, viighCj/ onca. 1 Isaiah 63 : 13. 
m .Joshua .1:1. n Dent. 2 : i.") ; 11:25; .Joshua 2 : 9. o 1 Sanu 
2;"):. I?. P Psa. 74 : 2 ; Acts 20 : 28. q Psa. 44 : 2. rP8,x7S:54. 



3. A man of war; one who obtains great vic- 
tories. 

7. Consumed ; utterly destroyed. 

8. Blast of thy nostrils ; the wind, represented 
as the breath of the Almighty. Ver. 10, The 
depths were congealed; made to stand upon 
either side like walls, of ice. 

12, The earth; the sea in the depths of the 
earth, Psa. 77 : 14-20. 

13. Tliy holy habitation. ; the place wh?rc he 
would be worshipped, and delight to dwell, 

11. The people ; the surrounding nations, Vcr. 
15, 

15. Du/.es ; leaders, princes, 

16. Pass over ; over the desert and through the 
intervening countries, to take possession of Canaan, 
Purchased ; redeemed or delivered from bondage, 
to be his peculiar people, 

17. The mountain of thine inheritance ; the 
land of Canaan, especially Jerusalem, and the tem- 
ple where he would dwell. 

93 



The loatcrs of Mar ah. 



EXODUS XVI. 



The people murmur 



18 The Lord shall "reign for ever and 
ever. 

19 For the horse of Pharaoh went in 
with his chariots and with his horsemen 
into the sea, and the Lord brought again 
the waters of the sea upon them ; but the 
children of Israel went on dry land in the 
midst of the sea. 

20 HAnd ^Miriam the prophetess, the 
sister of Aaron, Hook a timbrel in her 
hand ; and all the women went out after 
her Avith timbrels and with dances. 

21 And Miriam answered them. Sing 
ye to the •= Lord, for he hath triumphed 
gloriously : the horse and his rider hath 
he thrown into the sea. 

22 So Moses brought Israel from the Red 
sea, and they went out into the wilderness 
of "*Shur; and they went three days in 
the wilderness, and found no water. 

23 ^And wiien they came to «Marah, 
they could not drink of the waters of JNIa- 
rali, for they were bitter : therefore the 
name of it was called * Marah. 

24 And the people murmured against 
Moses, saying, What shall we drink ■? 

25 And he cried unto the Lord ; and 
the Lord showed him a tree, which when 
he had cast ""into the waters, the waters 
were made sweet : there he made for them 
a statute and an ordinance, and there he 
proved them, 

26 And said. If thou wilt diligently 
hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, 
and wilt do that which is right in his 
sight, and wilt give ear to his command- 
ments, and keep all his statutes, I will 
put none of these diseases upon thee, j 



which I have brought upon the bo.' "no?. 
Egyptians:? for I am the Loud ■■ that 
healcth thee. 

27 1i And they came to Elim, where 
icere twelve wells of water, and three- 
score and ten palm-trees : and they en- 
camped there by the waters. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

1 The Israplites come to Sin. 2 They murmur for want 
of bread. 4 God promiseth them bread from heaven. 
11 Quails are sent, 14 and manna. 16 The orderin<j 
of manna. 2.5 It was not to be found on the Sabbath. 
32 An omer of it is preserved. 

AND they took their journey from 
Elim,' and all the congregation of 
the children of Israel came unto the wil- 
derness of J Sin, which is between Elim 
and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the sec- 
ond month after their departing out of the 
land of Egypt. 

2 And the whole congregation of the 
children of Israel '' murmured against Mo- 
ses and Aaron in the wilderness : 

3 And the children of Israel said unto 
them, Would to God we had died by the 
hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, 
when 'we sat by the flesh-pots, and when 
we did eat bread to the full ; for ye have 
brought us forth into this wilderness, to 
kill this whole assembly with hunscr. 

4 ^ Then said the Lord unto Moses, 
Behold, I will rain '"bread from heaven 
for you ; and the people shall go out and 
gather t a certain rate every day, that I 
may " prove them, whether they will walk 
in my law, or no. 

5 And it shall come to pass, that on the 
sixth day they shall prepare tliat which 



1 P»a. 14fi:10; Dan. 4:3; 7:27. b Judg. 11 


34; 2Sain. 6:.t; 


.peRlni r.8:'J5; 8I:2; U9:3; I.tO:4. c ver. I. 


il Geneai.i 16 : 7. 


e tluinberB M: 8. * Tli.it is, btUerneit. Ruth I 


:20. t iKinjs, 


jj:21; 4:41. g Deut. 28 : i?, 6.S. bI'Ba.41:4 


103:3. i Num. 



20. Timbrel; a musical instrument like the 
tambourine. The prophetess ; appointed of God to 
instruct the women, and lead them in their devo- 
tions. Num. 12 : 1, 2 ; Micah C : 4. 

21. Miriam, ansicered ; she led the women, who 
gunjr responsively with the men. 

23. Marah; meaning bitterness ; where was a 
fountain of bitter water. 

2.'). Statute — ordinance ; rule, direction, or de- 
cree, mentioned ver. 20 ; Jer. 7 : 22, 23. Proved 
them ; tried lliem by his providence, and thus gave 
them opportunity to sliow whether they would obey 
him. <jen. 22 : 1. 

26. Healcth thee; forgiveth, sanctifieth, and 
saveth thee. 

27. Elim, ; a place south-east of Marah, and on 
the way to mount Sinai. Threescore and ten ; 
seventy. 

IX.STRUCTIONS. 
1. Those dispensations of Providence which ex- 
cite our greatest fears, often so result as to call forth 
our loudest praises. 

7. They that, being often reproved, continue to 
harden their iiearts, will be suddenly destroyed, and 
that without remedy. 2 Chron. 3G : 16 ; Prov. 
■6:14, 15; 29:1. 
94 



33 : 10. j Elek. 30 : l.^ k chap. 15 : 24 ; Paa. lOfi : ih ; 1 Cor. 10:10 
1 Number.! 11:4, .S. m Pn.i. 78 : 24 ; John 6: 31, 32. t Heb. <A» 
portion of a day in hit day. n Deut. 8: Iti 



10. When the enemies of God are most confident 
of success, they are often the nearest to destruction. 

16. That fear of coming evil which prevents ex- 
ertion and leads to despair, instead of delivering 
from danger only increases it, and prevents escape. 

21. Great deliverances should be celebrated with 
manifestations of hearty gratitude to God, and sin- 
cere devotion of body and soul to his service. 

26. The human heart cannot be safely trusted. 
At one time it will sing praises to God, and at 
another murmur against him. All true confidence 
in God, and all genuine love to him, are the fruit 
of his Spirit ; and to him belongs the glory of every 
thing spiritually good in men. 

CHAPTER -XVI. 
1. Fifteenth day of the second month; just 
one month after they started from Egypt. 

3. Kill — with hanger ; they had hitherto lived 
on provisions which they brought with them, or 
obtained by the way; but as they now entered tile 
wilderness, where they tho\ight they could not obta in 
any, they feared they should perish. 

4. Bread ; food. Prove them ; put them to trial. 

5. TIbC sixth day ; the sixth working day, the 
day before the Sabbath. 



God sendeth 



EXODUS XVI. 



quails and manna. 



B.o'Sthey bring in; and it shall te 
twice* as much as they gather daily. 

6 And Moses and Aaron said unto all 
the children of Israel, At even, then ye 
shall know that the Lord hath brought 
you out from the land of Egypt : 

7 And in the morning, then ye shall see 
the '' glory of the Lord ; for that he heareth 
your murmurings against the Lord : and 
what are wc, that ye murmur against us 1 

8 And Moses said, This shall be when 
the Lord shall give you in the evening 
flesh to eat, and in the morning bread to 
the full ; for that the Lord heareth your 
murmurings which ye murmur against 
him: and what are we? your murmurings 
are not against '^ us, but against the Lord. 

9 ^ And Moses spake unto Aaron, Say 
unto all the congregation of the children 
of Israel, Come ''near before the Lord: 
for he hath heard your murmurings. 

10 And it came to pass, as Aaron spake 
unto the whole congregation of the chil- 
dren of Israel, that they looked toward 
the wilderness, and behold, the glory of 
the Lord "appeared in the cloud. 

11^ And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

12 1 have heard the '^murmurings of the 
children of Israel : speak unto them, say- 
ing, At even ye shall eat flesh, and in the 
morning ye shall be filled with bread ; and 
ve shall know that I am the Lord your 
God. 

1 3 And it came to pass, that at even the 
quails s came up, and covered the camp : 
and in the morning the dew lay round 
about the host. 

14 And when the dew that lay was gone 
up, behold, upon the face of the wilder- 
ness there lay a small round thing, as 
small as the hoar frost on the ground. 



» ver. 22. b ver. 10 : cbap. ^0 


34 ; Num. H : 10. c 1 Sam. 8 : 7 i 


Mat, 10:40; I.uke 10:16. * Nun 


i.l6:lfi. e Num. 14:10 ; IKinjs, 


8:10. f ver. 7. g Num. 11:31 


Psa. 78 : 27-31 ; lus : 40. * Or, 


What is this ? or. It IS a portion. 


h ver. 31,33; Numbers 11:7; 



6. Ye shall know; by the Lord's providing 
miraculously double the quantity of food. 

7. See the glory of the Lord; he would show 
them that he heard what they said, and knew how 
they felt. 

8. Not against us ; merely or principally. 

9. Near before the Lord ; near to the cloudy 
pillar, in which he dwelt, and from which he spoke. 
A^er. 10. 

12. I am the Lord your God; of course all 
their fears in following his guidance were ground- 
less. 

13. Quails ; small fowls good for food. Psa. 
78 : 27. 

14. When the dew — ivas gone ; Num. 11:9. 

15. It is manna; which might be translated, 
What is this? This is the bread; ver. 4. 

16. An omer ; about three quarts. 

17. Some -more, some less ; according to their 
activity, and the number of persons they had to 
eat it. 



15 And when the children of Israel saw 
it, they said one to another, * It is ^ man- 
na : for they wist not what it rcas. And 
Moses said unto them. This is the bread 
which the Lord hath given you to eat. 

16 Tf This is the thing which the Lord 
hath commanded, Gather of it every man 
according to his eating, an omer + for every 
man, according to the number of your 
persons ;+ take ye every man for them 
which are in his tents. 

17 And the children of Israel did so, and 
gathered, some more, some less. 

18 And when they did mete it with an 
omer,' he that gathered much had nothing 
over, and he that gathered little had no 
lack; they gathered every man according 
to his eating. 

19 And Moses said. Let no man J leave 
of it till the morning. 

20 Notwithstanding, they hearkened not 
unto Moses ; but some of them left of it 
until the morning, and it bred worms, 
and stank : and Moses was wroth with 
them. 

21 And they gathered it every morning, 
every man according to his eating : and 
when the sun waxed hot, it melted. 

22 ^Anditcametopass,fAaf on the sixth 
day they gathered twice as much bread, 
two omers for one ?7ian: and all the rulers 
of the congregation came and told Moses. 

23 And he said unto them, This is that 
which the Lord hath said, To-morrow is 
the ''rest of the holy sabbath unlo the 
Lord : bake that which ye will bake to- 
day, and seethe that ye will seethe ; and 
that which remaineth over, lay up for 
you to be kept until the morning. 

24 And they laid it up till the morning, 
as Moses bade : and it did not ' stink, nei- 
ther was there any worm therein. 



Deut8:3,16; Josh.ft:12; Neb. 9:15; Psa. 78:24; 105:40; John 
6:31,49,.'i8: 1 Cor 10:3: Heb. 9: 4 ; Rev. 2 : 17. f Heb. ftj) «i« 
poll, or, head. % Heh. touts. i2Cor. 8:1S. j Matthew 6 : 34. 
k chap. 20 : 8 ; 31:15; 35 : 3 ; Gen. 2 : 3 ; Lev. 23 : 3. 1 ver. 20. 



18. Tlfe^e zV; measure it. Had nothing over ; 
he had only an omer for each one in his family. 
He that gathered little ; he too had an omer for 
each one in his family, so that each family had 
what they needed. 2 Cor. 8 : 10-15. According 
to his eating; according to the number of his 
household. 

19. Let no man leave of it till the morning ; 
not that each one, under all circumstances, was 
required to eat the whole, but no one was allowed 
to lay up any of it for the next day, or for future 
use. This was designed to teach them to depend 
on God, from day to day, for their daily bread. 
Mat. 6:11, 34. 

23. The Lord hath said; G-od had told this to 
Moses, ver. 5, and Moses now tells it to the people. 
Seethe ; boil. Remaineth over ; above one omer 
for a man, or above what they would want for the 
sixth day. To he kept ; for their supply on the 
Sabbath.' It was cooked the d.iy before, to prevent 
unnecessary labor on the Sabbath. 

95 



Divers di reel ions 



EXODUS XVII. 



roneerniiis; the manna. 



Aaron laid it ''up before the Tcs- *B.c;rS^': 
timony, to he kept. 

35 And the children of Israel did eat 
manna "^ forty years, until tliey came to a 
land inhabited : they did eat manna, until 
they came unto the ^borders of the land 
of Canaan. 

36 Now an '' onier is the tenth part of an 
cphah. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

1 The people launnur for ^vatcr at Repliidim. 5 God 
sendctii Inm for water to the rock in Horeb. 3 Ama- 
lek is overcome by the holding np of Moses' hands. 
J5 Moses buildeth the altar Jehovah-nissi. 

AND all the congregation of the chil- 
dren of Israel journeyed from the 
\Yilderness of 'Sin, after their journeys, 
according to the commandment of the 
LoKD, and pitched in Repliidim : and there 
was no water for the people to drink. 

2 Wherefore the people did J chide with 
Moses, and said, Give us water that we 
may drink. And Moses said unto tlicm, 
Why chide ye with me? wherefore do yc 
tempt'' the Lord^ 

3 And the people thirsted there for 
water ; and Ihc people murmured against 
Moses, and said. Wherefore is this that 
thou hast brouglit us up out of Egypt, to 
kill us and our children and our cattle 
with thirst? 

4 And Moses cried nnto the Lord, say- 
ing, What shall I do unto this people 7 
they be almost ready to 'stone me. 

• clmp. 20:«, 10. b Numbers 14: 11; 2Kings, 17.14; I'salm ; 5; 1-2; Nell. 9 : 15. h ver. 16,3-2,33. > cliiip. 16: 1 : Num. 33: 1-2, 14. 
TH:10,M; lOB: 13 ; .Ter. 9:rt ; Kzckie».T:fi. c Numbers 11 : 7, 8. : j Num. -20: 3, 4. kDeut.6:lfi; P.sa. 7«: Il», 41 ; >).'):8,9; LsaiHli 
J Heb.<):4. e cli:ip. 2.t:16; Num.I:60; 17:10; lKiiigs,«:9. 7 : 1-2; Mat 4 : 7 ; I Cor. iq:9. 1 1 Sam. 30:6; John 8: .'i9; 10:31 ; 
-•■■■■■■•• Acts 7:. -.9; 14:19. 



25 And Moses said, Eat that to-day; 
for to-day is a sabbath unto the Lord: 
to-day ye shall not lind it in the Held. 

26 Six ""days ye shall gather it ; but on 
the seventh day, ivhich is the sabbath, in 
it there shall be none. 

27 "([And it came to pass, that there went 
out some of the people on the seventh day 
for to gather, and they found none. 

28 And the Lord said unto Moses, How 
long '' refuse ye to keep my command- 
ments and my laws? 

29 See, for that the Lord hath given you 
the sabbath, therefore he giveth you on 
the sixth day the bread of two days : abide 
ye every man in his place, let no man go 
out of his place on tlie seventh day. 

30 So the people rested on the seventh 
day. 

31 And the house of Israel called the 
name thereof manna: and ''it was like 
coriander-seed, white ; and the taste of it 
was like wafers made with honey. 

32 TfAnd Moses said. This is the thing 
which the Lord commandcth. Fill an 
omcr of it to be kept for your generations ; 
that they may see the bread wherewith 
I have fed you in tlie wilderness, when I 
brought you forth from the land of Egypt. 

33 And Moses said unto Aaron, "^Take 
a pot, and put an omer full of manna 
therein, and lay it up before the Lord, to 
be kept for your generations. 

34 As the Lord commanded Moses, so 



" ncD. M : 1. o cniip. '.;.•>: ID ; iiuni.i:wf: l/:iu; i ivmgn, «t : ». 
f Num.33::!S; Deut.8:-2,3; Ncll.9:'21; .lobn R: 31, 49. s .Insll. 



28. Ml/ laivs ; especially those which required 
them to rest from their ordinary einployinents, and 
keep the Sabbath-day holy. 

29. Go out of his place; for needless, worldly 
purposes. 

31. Lii-e coria7ider-sepel ; in shape and size. 
Wafers ; thin cakes. When cooked it had sonie- 
tliinir of the taste of sweet oil. Num. 11 : 6-8. 

33. A pot ; Heb. 0:4. Before the Lord; in 
the ark of the testimony, the place of his presence. 
Ver. 31 ; chap. 2-5: 10, 21 ; 30:6. 

3.'). Forty years; the time they .spent in the 
wilderness. Josh. •'5 : 1 1. 12. 

.30. JCphah ; about thirty quarts. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

.3. Men arc prone to undervalue their mercies and 
to majjnify their trials. ]5y comparing their present 
with their past condition they become discontented, 
and thus unlit themselves for duty and dishonor God. 

.'>. Such was God's rejjard for the Sabbath before 
the establishment of the Jewish ritual, and before 
the ten commandments had been written on tables 
of stone, that he wrought a stupendous miracle, 
that his people might continue to keep it holy. 

S. When men murmur against others for doing 
what God commands, instead of blaming men only, 
they are in reality blaming (.iod. 

12. The ingratitude and wickedness of men arc 
often the occasion of wonderful manifestations of 
the patience, kindness, and gra/:e of God. 

18. Were it best, the Lord could furnish his peo- 
06 



pie with the necessaries of life, and even with 
luxuries, without their labor; and he sometimes 
does tills. But generally he requires them to make 
etforts; and in all cases, having food and raiment, 
he requires them to be therewith content. 1 Tim. 
0:8; lleb. 13:5. 

23. Things should be so arranged on Saturday 
that all may rest from worldly employments on the 
Sabbath, and not be prevented by needless cooking, 
or any other labor, from remembering the day to 
keep it holy. 

27. However clearly it may be shown that God 
requires men to keep the Sabbath, some will neglect 
it. And though he makes known that men cannot 
in the end be gainers by disobeying him, yet such 
as have no love to him, and no confidence in h m, 
will violate the day. 

2^). All which will in the end benefit believers, 
they will, in the use of suitable means, receive. 

" All needful grace will God be.^tow, 
And crown that grace with glory too ; 
He gives ui all thing.s, and withholds 
No real good from upright souls.'' 

CHATTER XVII. 

1. Rephidim ; a place on their way towards 
mount Sinai. 

2. Chide with Moses; found fault with liiiu ; 
murmured against him. Tempt the, Lord; try 
his patience by finding fault with his ministers, and 

provoking him to destroy them. 



Water from the rock. 



EXODUS XVIII. 



Amalck is overcome- 



aaS' 5 And the Lord said unto Moses, 
Go on before the people, and take with 
thee of the elders of Israel ; and thy rod, 
whereM'ith thou *smotest the river, take 
in thy hand, and go. 

6 Behold, I will stand before thee there 
upon the rock in Horeb ; and thou shalt 
smite the rock, and there shall ''come 
water out of it, that the people may drink. 
■And Moses did so in the sight of the 
elders of Israel. 

7 And he called the name of the place 
Massah,* and tMeribah, because of the 
chiding of the children of Israel, and be- 
cause they tempted the Lord, saying. Is 
the Lord among us, or not? 

8 ^Then came "^Amalek, and fought 
with Israel in Rephidim. 

9 And Moses said unto t Joshua, Choose 
us out men, and go out, fight with Ama- 
lek : to-morrow I will stand on the top of 
the hill with the rod of God in my hand. 

10 So Joshua did as INIoscs had said to 
him, and fought with Amalek : and Mo- 
ses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top 
of the hill. 

1 1 And it came to pass, when Moses held 
up his hand, that Israel prevailed ; and 
when he let down his hand, Amalek pre- 
vailed. 

12 But IMoscs' hands were heavy; and 
they took a stone, and put /? under him, and 
he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed 
up his hands, the one on the one side, and 



» chap. 
10:4. * 
e Genesis 
Ueb. 4:8. 


?:20: Num. '20:8-U. 

That is, temptalinn. 
!fi:l-2; Numbers 24:2(1 

d Num. 24:20; Deut. 


b 
t 

25 


Psa 
Tl 
t 
19 


. 105:41 ; 114:8; 1 Cnr. 

It is, chiding, or, strife. 

Called Jesus. Arts 7 : 45 ; 

% That is, the LoaD my 



6. I ivill stand before thee ; in the uloudy pil- 
lar, that would rest upon tlie rociv which Moses was 
to strike with his rod. ' 

7. Massah ; temptation. Meribah ; chiding ; 
because there they chided with Moses and tempted 
the Lord. 

8. Amalek; the Amalekites,apeoplelivnngin the 
wilderness of Paran. between Rephidim and Canaan. 

9. Josli.ua; this is the first time he is mentioned 
in the Bible. His name in Hebrew means Saviour, 
the same as Jesus in Greek. Hence he is sometimes, 
in the New Testament, which was written in 'Jreek. 
called Jesus. Acts 7 : 45 ; Heb. 4 : 8. 

10. Hnr ; 1 Chron. 2 : 19. 

11. Held itp his hand ; in token of his seeking 
help from God. 1 Tim. 2 : 8. 

12. Heavy ; weary, tired. His hands were 
steady ; continued to be lifted up; showing that 
they felt that success must come from God. 

13. Discomfited Amalek ; obtained a victory 
over the Amalekites. 

14. Write this ; that God ■woxAAput ont the re- 
memhranee : utterly destroy the Amalekites. Deut. 
25 : 17-19 ; ISam. 15 : 3-33 ; 30: 1-19 ; 2 Sam. 1 : 1-15. 

15. Jehovah-iiissi ; the Lord my banner. 

16. From generation to generation ; till they 
are destroyed. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 
3. No miracles or manifestations of divine power, 
wisdom, and goodness, will of themselves lead men 
to trust in God, or prevent them, when tried, from 



the other on the other side ; and his hands 
were steady until the going down of the sun. 

13 And Joshua discomfited Amalek and 
his people with the edge of the sword. 

14 And the Lord said unto Moses, Write 
this for a memorial in a book, and re- 
hearse it in the ears of Joshua : for I will 
utterly put out the remembrance of '' Ama- 
lek from lender heaven. 

15 And Moses built an altar, and called 
the name of it * Jehovah-nissi ; 

1 6 For he said, HBecauso * the Lord hath 
sworn that the Lord will have war with 
Amalek from generation to generation. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1 Jethro bringeth to Moses his wife and two sons. 7 
Moses cntertaineth him. 13 Jethro's counsel is ac- 
cepted. 27 Jethro departeth. 

TirHEN ^Jethro the priest of Midian, 
VV Moses' father-in-law, heard of all 
that God had done for Moses, and for Is- 
rael his people, and that the Lord had 
brought Israel out of Egypt : 

2 Then Jethi-o, Moses' father-in-law, 
took Zipporah, Moses' wife, after he had 
sent her back, 

3 And her two sons ; of which the name 
of the one icas t Gershom ; for he said, I 
have been an alien in a strange land : 

4 And the name of the other ivas tEli- 
ezer; for the God of my father, said he, 
was my help, and delivered mc from the 
sword of Pharaoh : 

5 And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, 



banner. Psa. 60:4. 


II Or, Beca 


use the hand of Amalek is against 


the throne of the L 


RD, therefor 


°, etc. * Heb. the hand upon tht 


throne of the Lord 


e rhap. 2 


16. t That IS, a stranger then. 


t That is, my God 


s a help. 





being dissatisfied with his dealings and murmuring 
against him. 

12. The servants of God may grow weary in pray- 
er, and often they do so sooner than in the use of other 
means ; but our great Advocate and Intercessor in 
heaven is never weary. Ministers of the gospel need 
the aid and encouragement of God's people. 

There is no inconsistency between hearty de- 
pendence on God, manifested in believing, affec- 
tionate, fervent prayer for blessings, and the most 
skilful, vigorous, and persevering use of all appro- 
priate means to obtain them; but the proper use of 
the one secures and gives efficacy to the right per- 
formance of the other. 

16. National sins are followed by national judg- 
ments ; and though the manifestation of divine in- 
dignation may long be delayed, in due time it will 
come ; and those who fear not God, nor regard the 
welfare of their fellow-men, will be destroyed with 
utter destruction. 

CHAPTER XVni. 

1. Jethro ; chap. 2 : 16 ; 3:1. 

2. Sent her back; he had sent back Zipporah 
to her father, while he and Aaron went to bring 
Israel out of Egypt. Chap. 4 : 21-26. 

3. Gershom ; chap. 2 : 22. " 

4. Eliezer; meaning, my God a help. Acts 
7 : 29. 

5. The mount of God; Sinai. Chap. 3 : 1, 12 
19: 11,20. 

97 



Jelhro's visit and 



EXODUS XVIII, 



cou7isel to Moses. 



came with his sons and his wife unto 
Moses into the wilderness, where he en- 
camped at the 'mount of God : 

6 And he said unto INIoscs, I thy father- 
in-law Jethro am come unto thee, and thy 
wife, and her two sons with her. 

7 If And Moses went out to meet his fa- 
ther-in-law, and did ''obeisance, and kiss- 
ed him ; and they asked each other oi their 
welfare ;* and they came into the tent. 

8 And Moses told his father-in-law all 
that the Lord had done unto Pharaoh and to 
the Egyptians for Israel's sake, and all the 
travail that had t come upon them by the 
way, and how the *= Lord delivered them. 

9 And Jethro '' rejoiced for all the good- 
ness which the Lord had done to Israel, 
whom he had delivered out of the hand 
of the Egyptians. 

10 And Jethro said, * Blessed be the 
Lord, who hath delivered you out of the 
hand of the Egyptians, and out of the 
hand of Pharaoh ; who hath delivered the 
people from under the hand of the Egyp- 
tians. 

1 1 Now I know that the Lord is greater 
than all "^gods : for in the thing wherein 
they dealt ^ proudly, he was above them. 

12 And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, 
took a burnt-offering and sacrifices for 
God : and Aaron came, and all the ciders 
of Israel, to eat bread with Moses' father- 
in-law ''before God. 

1 3 1[ And it came to pass on the morrow, 
that Moses sat to judge the people : and 
the people stood by Moses from the morn- 
ing unto the evening. 

14 And when Moses' father-in-law saw 
all that he did to the people, he said. What 
is this thing tliat thou doest to the peo- 
ple ? Why siltcst thou thyself alone, and 
all the people stand by thee from morning 
unto even 1 

15 And Moses said unto his father-in- 
law, Because the people come unto 'me 
to inquire of God : 

16 When they have a matter, they come 

*rlinii.3:l,W. b Gen.M: 13: M:4. *Heh.peace. f Heh/oimrf 
titcm. c P»a.lOti:43; lf»7:2. aRom.l2:15. e JSiim. 18:28; I.ukc 
l:BH. f P(ia.il5:3: HT.H. |! .lolMO: 11 ; Dnn.'l::iT. hPeul.l'2:7; 
lCliron.I9:'2-2; lCor.lO:21. 1 Num. lo:34: 27:fi; Deut 17:«,9. 



8. Travail ; toils and trials. 

11. They ; the king and princes of Egypt. 

12. Bnrnt-oJJering and sacrifices ; in devout 
acknowledgtnent of the goodness of G-od, and as an 
expression «f gratitude for his mercies. 

13. Judge the people ; hear and decide their 
controversies, and give them such instruction as 
they needed. Ver. 16. 

15. To inquire of God ; to learn his will. 

17. Not good ; it was not good for Moses to do 
the whole alone, because it would injure his health 
and shorten his life. 

18. Wear away ; he would become exhausted, 
and the people would sufTer through the delay of 
their causes. 



unto me ; and I judge between *one ^' c! h«?. 
and another, and I do make them know 
the statutes of God, and his laws. 

17 And Moses' father-in-law said unto 
him. The thing tliat thou doest is not good. 

18 Thou^ wilt surely wear away, both 
thou, and this people that is with thee : 
for this thing is too ' heavy for thee ; thou 
art not able to perform it thyself alone. 

19 Hearken now unto iny voice, I will give- 
thee counsel, and God shall be with thee : 
Be thou for the ''people to God-ward, that 
thou maycst bring the causes unto God ; 

20 And thou shalt teach them 'ordi- 
nances and laws, and shalt show them 
the way wherein they must walk, and 
the work that they must do. 

21 Moreover, thou shalt provide out of 
all the people able men, such as '"fear 
God, men of truth, hating covetousness ; 
and place such over them, to he rulers of 
thousands, ami rulers of hundreds, rulers 
of fifties, and rulers of tens : 

22 And let them judge the people at all 
seasons : and it shall be, that every great 
matter they shall bring unto thee, but 
every small matter they shall judge : so 
shall it be easier for thyself, and they 
shall bear the '^burden with thee. 

2.'3 If thou shalt do this thing, and God 
command" thee so, then thou shalt be 
able to endure, and all this people shall 
also go to P their place in peace. 

24 So Moses hearkened to the voice of 
his father-in-law, and did all that he had 
said. 

25 And ]Moses chose able men out of all 
Israel, and made them heads over the 
people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hun- 
dreds, rulers of lifties, and rulers of tens. 

26 And they judged the people at all 
seasons : the hard causes they brought 
unto Moses, but every small matter they 
judged themselves. 

27 ^ And Moses let his father-in-law 
depart; and ''he went his way into his 
own land. 

t Hel). a wirtrtnn(/A»>/c//oiw. ^Heh.J^itdinijtkoutaiUfitdf. j Deut 
1:9.1.'. k clmp. -20:19; DeuLS:."!. I Deut.4: 1 ; fi: 1,4; Neli.S): 14. 
m Deut 1 :1.S-I7; IB: 18; 28:1171. 23: 3; Job29:16; 31:13 » Num. 
11:17. olSam.8:7. p Gen. 30: 2.1. <i Num. 10; 29, 30. 

19. God shall be with thee ; he believed the 
plan he proposed would be approved of God. To 
God-u-ard ; Moses was to inquire of God for them, 
and make known to them liis will. 

21. Aide men ; capable men, who are disposed 
and qualified rightly to discharge the duties in- 
trusted to them. 

2.'}. If — God command thee ; if he approve the 
plan, and direct thee to follow it. Go to their 
place in peace ; finish their business with correct- 
nes.s and dispatch, and go home satisfied. 

27. His oivn la7id ; the \a,nil of Widian. Chap. 
2 : 16, 21. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. It is sometimes proper for husbands and wives 



The people come 



EXODUS XIX. 



to mount Sinai. 



chaptp:r XIX. 



1 The people come to Sinai. 3 God's message by Mo- 
ses unto the people out of the mount. 8 The people's 
ans\ver returned again. 10 The people are prepared 
against the third day. 1'2 The mountain must not 
be touched. 16 The fearful presence of God upon the 
mount. 

IN the third month, when the children 
of Israel were gone forth out of the land 
of Egypt, the same day came tliey into the 
wilderness'' of Sinai. 

2 For they were departed from •'llcphi- 
dim, and were come to the desert of Sinai, 
and had pitched in the wilderness ; and 
there Israel camped before the mount. 

3 And Moses went up unto God, and 
the Lord called vmto him out of the moun- 
tain, saying. Thus shall thou say to the 
house of Jacob, and tell the children of 
Israel ; 

4 Ye have seen what I "^did unto the 
Egyptians, and hoiv I bare you on eagles' 
wings/ and brought you unto myself. 

5 Now therefore, if ye will obey my 
voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then 
ye shall be a peculiar *■ treasure unto me 
above all people : for all the earth is mine : 

6 And ye shall be unto me a kingdom 
of '^priests, and a holy nation. These are 
the words which thou shalt speak unto 
the children of Israel. 

7 1[ And Moses came and called for the 
elders of the people, and laid before their 
faces all these words which the Lord 
commanded him. 

8 And all the people answered together. 



« Nam. 33:15. b cliap. 17 :1, 8. c chap. 7, etc. d Deut. 3-2: 11; 
I«a.40:31; &3:9. e Deut.7:6; 32:9; lKings,8:53; Psa. 135:4; 
Isa. 41:8; 43:1; Titus -2: 14. f Rev. 1 : 6 : 5 : 10. ecliap. 24:3; 



to live apart for a time, but generally it is best for 
them to live together, and by precept and example, 
unite in training up their children in the nurture 
and admonition of the Lord. 1 Cor. 7 : 5 ; E ph. 6:4. 

10. When friends who meet recount the goodness 
of God to them, it is calculated to honor him, to 
increase their gratitude, and better to fit them for 
the discharge of their duties. 

13. When those vi-ho have been separated meet 
again, it is not enough merely to speak of the kind- 
ness of Grod, but they should unite in worshipping 
him as the author of all the blessings they enjoy. 

18. It is not wise, nor is it right for men to labor 
so much as to injure their health and shorten their 
lives, even for the purpose of doing good ; but they 
should proportion iheir labors to their ability most 
usefullv to perform them. 

21. Rulers, and all civil officers should be capa- 
ble men, who love God, speak the truth, hate covet- 
ousness, and are strictly honest : men who are able 
and willing promptly to discharge their appropriate 
duties, in order to honor God and do good to men. 

26. Division of labor greatly increases useful re- 
sults. Our object should be to have others do all 
the good they consistently can, and to do ourselves 
all we consistently can of what they leave undone. 

CHAPTER XIX. 
1. The same day ; that is, the first day of the 
third month, called Sivan, answering to the last 



and said, ^AU that the Lord hath spoken 
we will do. And Moses returned the 
words of the people unto the Lord. 

9 And the Lord said unto Moses, Lo, I 
come unto ''thee in a thick cloud, that the 
people may hear when I speak with thee, 
and believe thee for ever. And Moses told 
the words of the people unto the Lord. 

10 Tf And the Lord said unto Moses, Go 
unto the people, and 'sanctify them to- 
day and to-morrow, and let them wash 
their clothes, 

1 1 And be ready against the third day : 
for the third day the Lord will come 
downJ in the sight of all the people upon 
mount Sinai. 

12 And thou shalt set bounds unto the 
people round about, saying. Take heed 
to yourselves, that ye go not up into the 
mount, or touch the border of it : who- 
soever '' toueheth the mount shall be sure- 
ly put to death : 

13 There shall not a hand touch it, but 
he shall surely be stoned, or shot through ; 
whether it be beast or man, it shall not 
live: when the * trumpet soundeth long, 
they shall come up to the mount. 

14 T[And Moses went down from the 
mount unto the people, and sanctified the 
people ; and they washed their clothes. 

1 5 And he said unto the people. Be ready 
against the third day : come 'not at your 
wives. 

16 TfAnd it came to pass on the third 
day in the morning, that there were thun- 



Deut. 5: 27-29; Josh. -24: 24; Neh. 10:29. h chap. 20:21 ; 24: 1.l, 16; 
Deut.4: 11; P8a.I8:ll,12; laa.lS: 1. iLev.ll:44. iver.l(),18. 
kHeb.I2:20. * Or, cornet. 1 I Sam, 21 : 4, 5 ; Joel 2 : 16. 



part of May and the first of June. This was forty* 
five days after they left Egypt : namely, si.xteen 
days of the first month and twenty-nine of the sec- 
ond. The next day Moses went up to meet God. 
Ver. 3. The day after he returned to God the 
answer of the people, verses 7, 8, then three days 
were allowed the people to prepare themselves, and 
on the third day, which was the fiftieth from their 
departure out of Egypt, God came down on mount 
Sinai and gave them the law. Verses 11, 16. Hence 
the feast which was established in commemoration 
of this event was called Pentecost, meaning the 
fiftieth. At this feast it was that the Holy Ghost 
descended on the disciples. Acts 2 : 1— I. 

4. Brtre you on eagles' wings ; saved them, 
and brought them safely and triumphantly to the 
enjoyment of his special presence and favor. Deut. 
32:11; Isa. 63:9. 

6. A kingdom of priests ; a kingly or royal 
priesthood ; a nation consecrated to God, and while 
they obeyed him victorious over their enemies. 

7. Laid before their faces ; fully explained to 
tliem, and submitted to their consideration what 
God had said. 

10. Sanctify them ; cause them to cleanse and 
prepare themselves. 

13. To the mount ; towards it, but not beyond 
the bounds prescribed for them. 

14. Sanctified the people ; led them to purify 
themselves as directed, verses 10, 15. 

99 



The solemn giinng of 



EXODUS XX. 



the ten eonimatiflmcnts. 



ders and lightnings, and a thick cloud 
upon the mount, and the voice of the 
trumpet exceeding loud ; so that all the 
peoi)lc that was in the camp "trembled. 

17 And Moses brought forth the people 
out of the camp to meet with God ; and 
they stood at the nether part of the mount. 

18 And mount Sinai was altogether on 
a smoke, because the Lord descended 
upon it in ''fire : and the smoke thereof 
asceiulcd as the smoke of a furnace, and 
the whole mount quaked greatly. 

19 And when the voice of the trumpet 
Bounded long, and waxed louder and loud- 
er, Moses spake, and God answered him 
by a voice. 

20 And the Lord came ''down upon 
mount Sinai, on the top of the mount: 
and the Lord called Moses up to the top 
of the mount; and Closes went up. 

21 And the Lord said unto Moses, Go 
down, * charge the people, lest they break 
through unto the Lord to ^ gaze, and many 
of them perish. 

22 And let the priests also, which come 
near to the Lord, sanctify themselves, lest 
the Lord break forth upon them. 

23 And Moses said unto the Lord, The 
people cannot come up to mount Sinai : 
for thou chargedst us, saying. Set bounds 
about the mount, and sanctify it. 

24 And the Loud said unto him. Away, 
get thee down, and thou slialt come up, 
thou, and Aaron with tliee : but let not 
the priests and the people break through 



• Heb. 12:21. 


b Deut. 4:11; 33 : 2 ; Judg. .''1:5; Psalm 68 : S ; 


Hab. 3:3. c Nell 


9:13. * Heb. contttt. <1 chap. .13 : 20 ; 1 Sam. 


6:19. • Deut n 


4, etc. f I,ev. 2ii:13; Psalm 81: 10. f Heb. 
ngs, 17;3i5; .ler. 2.'S:f.; MaUhew4:I0. h T.ev. 


ttrvanlt. B 2Ki 



17. Nether; lower, outside of the prescribed 
line. Ver. 12. 

18. Q/i.^XW; trembled and shook. Psa. 68:8; 
104 : :]2. 

19. Moses spate, and God answered him ; 
Neh. 9: 13; Heb. 12:18-21. 

21. Break through; over the bounds set for 
them. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. If we hcarjcen to the voice of God, believe his 
declarations, and obey his commands, he ■will de- 
light in us, and esteem lis as his peculiar treasure. 
Deut. 7 : 6 ; .32 : 9 ; P.sa. 135: 4 ; Tit. 2 : 14 ; 1 Peter, 
2:9; Rev. 5 : 10. 

8. Men are often much more ready to promise 
than to perform : and it is generally not wise to say 
what we will or will not do, but to say, " If the Lord 
will, we shall live and do tiiis or that ;"' and while we 
resolve in his strenirth, we should depend on him for 
wisdom and grace to learn and do his will. 

13. To meet God with acceptance, we must ap- 
proach him feeling that we are sinners, and that he 
IS of purer eyes than to behold iniquity but with ab- 
horrence, and striving to cleanse ourselves from all 
filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, and to perfect 
holines.s in the fear of God. 

21. All unholy curiosity in approaching God, gaz- 
ing upon what he designed should not be seen, or 
prying into what is not revealed, is olfensivc to him 
and dangerous to ourselves. 
100 



to come up unto the Lord, lest he *b.c:m»i: 
break forth upon them. 

25 So Moses went down unto the peo- 
ple, and spake unto them. 

CHAPTER XX. 

1 The ten commandments. 18 The people are afraid 

20 Moses comforteth them. 22 Idolatry is forbidden 

21 Of wliat sort the altar should be. 

AND God spake all these * words, say- 
ing, 

2 I am the Lord thy God, which have 
brought thee out of the land of ""Egypt, 
out of the house of tbondjige. 

3 Thou shalthave no other ^ gods before 
me. 

4 Thou shalt not make unto thee any 
graven'' image, or any likeness of any 
thing that is in heaven above, or that is 
in the earth beneath, or that is in the 
water under the earth : 

5 Thou shalt not 'bow down thyself to 
them, nor serve them : for I the Loud thy 
God am a Jjealous God, visiting the ini- 
quity of the fathers upon the children 
unto'' the third and fourth generation of 
them that hate me ; 

6 And showing 'mercy unto thousands 
of them that love nie, and keep my com- 
mandments. 

7 Thou shalt not take the "'name of Iho 
Lord thy God in vain : for the Lord will 
not hold him "guiltless that takcth his 
name in vain. 

8 Remember the sabbath-day, to keep it 
holy. r 



2ti:l; Deut 4: 16. 1 chap. 23 : 24 ; Joelma 23 : 7 ; Isa. 44: 15, 19. 
j Josliua 24:19; Nahum 1 : 2. k chap. 34:7; Niim 14:18; Job 
21:19; .Ter. 2:9; 32:18. 1 Deut 7:9; Romans 11:28. m L«». 
19:12; l>eut. 28:.';8. n I,cv.24:l6; Psa. 139:20. 



CHAPTER XX. 
3. Hare iio other god.i ; to have a god is to love 
an object supremely. What a man most loves is 
his god. Thou shall not love any object in compari- 
son wi'.li Jehovah, or worship any but liim. Before 
mc ; id my sight, or besides me. 

5. Not bow down — vor serve them ; for that is 
giving them the place of Jehovah ; worshipping and 
serving the creature in opposition to and delianee 
of the Creator. Jealous God; displeased with 
those who bestow upon others what belongs only to 
him. Visiting the iniquity of the fathers npoii 
the children ; by sutfering the sins of parents to 
bring evil upon children, and often suffering children, 
through the wicked influence of parent-s, to imitate 
their example and live and die in sin, and bring upon 
themselves its awful guilt and punishment. 

6. Showing mercy unto thousands — that loi^e 
me ; not only by forgiving their sins and saving 
their souls, but ofteNi making them instrumental in 
leading others, especially their children and chil- 
dren's children, to become pious, and the means of 
.salvation to their posterity to many generations. 

7. Take — invain; uselightly, without anygood 
reason. Not hold him guiltless ; will view and 
treat him as he truly is, exceedingly guilty and de- 
serving divine displeasure. 

8. Remeviber ; that God in six d.ays made the 
heavens and the earth, the sea, .and all that in them 
is, and that the seventh day he made for rest and 



The people tremble 



EXODUS XX, 



at the presence of God. 



B.'c!'i«L 9 Six days shalt thou labor, and 
do all thy work : 

10 But the * seventh day is the sabbath 
of the LoKD thy God : in it thou shalt not 
do ""any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy 
daughter, thy man-servant, nor thy maid- 
servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger 
that is within thy gates : 

11 For in "^six days the Lord made 
heaven and earth, the sea, and all that 
in them is, and rested the seventh day : 
wherefore the Lord blessed the ^ sabbath- 
day, and hallowed it. 

1 2 T[ Honor " thy father and thy mother : 
that thy" days may be long upon the land 
which the Lord thy God giveth thee. 

13 Thou shalt not ndll. 

14 Thou shalt not commit s adultery. 

15 Thou shalt not ''steal. 

16 Thou shalt not bear 'false witness 
against thy neighbor. 

17 Thou shalt not covet thy J neighbor's 
house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's 
wife, nor his man-servant, nor his maid- 
servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any 
thing tliat is thy neighbor's. 

18 TfAnd all the people saw the thun- 



• chap. 31: 13, 14; Isaiah 5R : 13. b Lev. 23:3; E/.ek. 20: 1-2. 
<• Neh. IS:!."),!'); Mat. 12:1-12. i Gen.2:2.3. e Deut.27:lfi; 
Prov. 1:8; .Jer.:i5: 18,19; Mat. 15 : 4, B; Eiih.6:2. f Gen.9:6. 



spiritual duties; that on it he himself rested from 
all his work ; that he blessed it and sanctified if. or 
set it apart from other days, to be devoted from the 
beginning to the end of time, not to secular, but to 
sacred duties. Gren. 2 : 1-3. Keep it holy ; in 
accordance with the object for which G-od made it 
and gave it to men. As a day to be devoted not 
to worldly business, conversation, reading, travel- 
ling, visiting, or amu.sement, nor to sleep, idleness, 
or worldly thoughts and feeling.?, but to be employed 
in religious worship, and in the promotion of our 
ovi-n spiritual good and that of our fellow-men. 

9. Six days — do all tliy tcork ; all the worldly 
business which men do must be done in the si.x 
working days, and what cannot be done in those 
days must be left undone, except what is needful 
to the be.st discharge of the appropriate duties of 
the Sabbath. 

10. The Sahhath ; the day of rest for men and 
beasts of burden. 

11. Hallowed it ; devoted it to sacred, in dis- 
tinction from secular duties. 

1*2. Honor tliy father and thy mother ; love 
them, he.i.rken to their teaching, and obey their com- 
mands. Treat them with respectful and kind at- 
tention, assist them when they need, labor to supply 
their wants, promote their comfort, increa.se their 
usefulness, and do them all the good in your power. 
-Mat. l;j : 4-6 ; 19 : 19 ; Mark 7 : 10-13 ; 10 : 19 ; 
Luke 18:20; Eph. 6:1-3; Col. 3:20; 1 Tim. 
5:1. Days — be lo)ig ; life be continued prosper- 
ous and happy. 

13. Not kill; not take the life of any human 
being except when God requires it. G-en. 9:6' 
Dent. 25 : 17-19 ; 1 Sam. 15 : 1-3, IS, 19. This 
command not only forbids murder, but all those 
practices and kinds of business which tend to de- 
stroy human life ; and requires the performance of 
those duties, and the pursuit of such courses as tend 
to preserve it and render it useful. 



derings, and the lightnings, and the noise 
of the trumpet, and the mountain smok- 
ing: and when the people saw it, they 
removed, and stood afar off. 

19 And they said unto Moses, Speak 
thou Avith us, and we will hear : but let 
not God speak with us, lest we die. 

20 And Moses said unto the people, 
Fear not : for God is come to prove you, 
and that his fear may be before your 
faces, that ye sin not. 

21 And the people stood afar off, and 
Moses drew near unto the thick darkness 
where God was. 

22 TfAnd the Lord said unto Moses, 
Thus thou shalt say unto the children of 
Lsrael, Ye have seen that I have talked 
with you from heaven. 

23 Ye shall not make with me gods of 
silver, neither shall ye make unto you 
gods of gold. 

24 IT An altar of earth thou shalt make 
unto me, and shalt sacrifice thereon thy 
burnt-offerings, and thy peace-offerings, 
thy sheep, and thine oxen : in all places 
where I record my ^name 1 will come 
unto thee, and I will bless thee. 



S Mat. .5 : 27, 28 ; 13 : 18 ; nom. 13 : 9. h Epii. 4 : 28 ; 1 Thesa. 4 : S. 
i Psa. r)2 : 3, 5 ; Rev. 22:16. j Hab.'2:9; Rom. 7:7; 1 Cor. 6:10; 
Col. 3:6. k 2 Chron. 7 : 16 ; Mat. 18 : 20. 

14. Not commit adultery ; this command for- 
bids all unchastity in thought, word, or deed. It 
also forbids all those things which tend to this evil. 
It is the application of the great law of supreme 
love to (jrod and impartial love to men with regard 
to purity in heart and life. Mat. 5 : 28. 

15. Not steal; this command forbids us to ap- 
propriate to our own use what belongs to others. 
It is the application of the law of love to property, 
and requires us to do to others, in respect to it, as 
we ought to wish them to do to us. Mic. 6:8; 
Col. 4 : 1 ; 2 Peter, 2 : 9. 

16. Not bear false witness ; this is the applica- 
tion of the law of love to the reputation of others, 
and forbids us to speak differently of them from 
what, under similar circumstances, we ought to 
wish them to speak of us. Mat. 12:37; Rom. 13:10. 

17. Nat covet ; not desire what does not right- 
fully belong to us, in any such sense as would incline 
us wrongfully to take or retain possession of it. Re- 
spect and treat the rights of all as you would wish 
them to respect and treat yours. 

All these ten commands express great moral ob- 
ligations, arising from the nature and relations of 
things. Tiiey extend to the thoughts and feelings 
as well .as the outward actions, and are binding in 
all countries and in all ages. 

18. Saw; personally witnessed the thunderings 
and lightnings. 

19. Lest we die; Judg. 6 : 22 ; 13 : 22. 

20. Fear not; not fear immediate death, but 
fear to disobey G-od. Prove yoii ; give you oppor- 
tunity to show whether you will or will not obey 
him. 

22. Seen that I have tal/ced ; they heard his ' 
voice but they saw no likeness of him, and this was 
designed to guard them against attempting to make 
any such likeness. Ver. 2!. 

24 Record my name ; appoint to meet my peo- 
ple and receive their public worship. 

101 



Laws for 



EXODUS XXI. 



men-servants. 



25 And if thou wilt make me an altar of I 2 If thou buy a Hebrew servant, *B'.c:ifii: 
stone, thou !*halt not *build it of hewn six years ''he shall serve : and in the sev- 



stonc ; for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, 
thou hast polluted it. 

26 Neither shalt thou go up by steps 
unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be 
not discovered thereon. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

1 Laws for men-sprvants. 5 For the servant whose 
ear is bored. 7 For women-servants. 12 For man- 
slaughter. IG For stealers of men. 17 F'or cursers 
of parents. 18 Forsmiters. 22 For a hurt by chance. 
28 For an ox that goreth. 33 For him that is an oc- 
casion of liarm. 

"XTOW these are the judgments which 
JLN thou shalt *set before them. 



Heb. build them with hewing, a Deut. 6:1. b Deut. 1 



12; 



25. Thou hast polluted it ; rendered it unfit 
for a place of public worship, by disobeying Grod in 
the manner of building it. 

26. Neither — hy steps ; they were to go up by 
a gradual ascent, and thus avoid such exposure 
as might result from their being dressed in loose 
flowing garments. 

L\STRUCTIO>fS. 

1. By proclaiming the ten commandments to the 
Israelites himself, and in circumstances of awful so- 
lemnity, God showed their fundamental importance, 
and took a course adapted to impress upon all men 
their obligations perfectly to obey tiiem. 

2. Deliverance from bondage is a great and pre- 
cious blessing, and special praises should be ren- 
dered to God by those who enjoy it. 

3. By forbidding men to regard any object more 
than God, or to worship any other, he would remove 
the temptation, and prevent the inclination which 
supreme regard to creatures occasions to break his 
commandments. 

5. To treat creatures, or the likenesses of crea- 
tures, as if they were divine, by bowing down to 
them and worshipping them, is to act as if they 
were gods when they are not, and thus by actions 
to inculcate a falsehood suited to degrade, debase, 
pollute, and destroy the soul. 

7. To use the name of God in a profane, light, 
or irreverent manner, or to mention it without good 
reason, tends to lessen the reverence which the soul 
ought to feel for him, to render it reckle.ss and in- 
creasingly wicked, and is a fhigrant offence against 
the Ruler of the universe. 

10. Men have no riglit to employ themselves, their 
children, servants, or cattle in worldly business more 
than si.\ days in a week. If they take the Sabbath 
for worldly purposes, they take what is not theirs, 
and thus show themselves to be dishonest men, 
taking that which does not belong to them, and in 
opposition to the express command of Jehovah. 

11. As God has hallowed the Sabbath, or set it 
apart for sacred purposes, and for this end has blessed 
it, he makes it a blessing to all who rightly keep it, 
and through them a nif ans of rich benetits to others. 

12. Children are bound to respect, love, and obey 
their parents, for the purpose of thus honoring and 
obeying God; and if they do not thus honor them, 
they dishonor and rebel against him. 

1.'3. By taking the life of a human being when 
not required by God, a in;in forfeits his own, and 
ought, in obedience to the divine requirement, to be 
put to death. 

14. Unchastity is a sin which greatly corrupts 
the human soul, and exposes it to numerous evils in 
this world, and to the wrath of God in the world to 
come. Lev. 20 : 10 ; Prov. G ; 2-5 ; Mai. .'J : .') ; Mat. 
5 : 2S ; 1 Cor. G : 9 ; Gal. 5 : 19 ; Heb. 13 : 4. 
102 



cnth he shall go out free for nothing. 

3 If he came in ^ by himself, he sliall go 
out by himself: if he were married, then 
his wife shall go out with him. 

4 If his master have given him a wife, 
and she have borne him sons or daugh- 
ters, the wife and her children shall be her 
master's, and he shall go out by himself. 

5 And if the servant + shall plainly say, 
I love my master, my wife, and my chil- 
dren ; I will not go out free : 

6 Then his master shall bring him unto 
the judges ; he shall also bring him to the 



Jer. 34:8-17. f Heh. with his body. $ Ueh. saying shall »ay. 



15. Every man has certain things which God has 
given him, and which, by right from God, belong to 
himself. They are his property. To take them 
away, or without just cause deprive him of them, 
is theft, and exposes those who do it to be excluded 
from heaven. Isa. 10 : 1, 2; Luke 16 ; 11 ; 1 Cor. 
6 : 9 ; 2 Thess. 2 : 12. 

16. To utter falsehood concerning others, or truth 
for the purpose of injuring them, is a violation of 
duty, and will be condemned by God when the se- 
crets of all hearts shall be revealed. Mat. 12 : 37 ; 
Jas. 4: 11. 

17. The law of God forbids us not merely to take 
what belongs to others, but to desire to take it. It 
extends to the thoughts and feelings, requiring us to 
be content with such things as we have and can 
gain by doing right ; loving Jehovah supremely and 
our fellow-men as we love ourselves, and pursuing 
that course which, under the direction of his word, 
this love requires. Psa. 119 : 96 ; Mat. 22 : 37-40 : 
Rom. 13 : 7-10 ; 1 John, 3 : 10 ; 4 : 8. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

1. Judgments ; rules or laws by which their 
civil government was to be conducted. 

2. If thou buy ; God did not require or justify 
this any more than the t.aking of two wives, ver. 10, 
but both were then common, and many evils sprung 
from them. God gave directions which would tend 
to lessen some of those evils, and render the case of 
those servants and wives less distressing than it 
otherwise would be. The word translated buy, 
means to acquire, obtain, or possess. Gen. 4:1. 
The seventh ; one Hebrew should not be bound to 
serve another more tiian six years ; about the time 
that an apprentice among us serves his master. 
For nothing ; however little work lie h.ad done 
during his time of service, he was not to be required 
to pay any thing for his freedom, because at the close 
of six years it belonged to hiin, and his master was 
bound not only to let him go, but also liberally to 
supply him. So with a woman-servant. Deut. 
1.5 : 12-15. 

4. A u'ife; from his female servants. Shall 
be her master's ; neither her marriage nor the close 
of her husband's term of service shall release her 
from any previous obligation to serve her master. 

5. Viainly say ; openly, freely, so as to m.ike 
it manifest tliat it was his free, deliberate choice ; 
thinking that it would on the whole be better for 
him to continue, than to take another course. 

6. liore his car ; this was to be the evidence, 
that from love to his master, his wife, and his chil- 
dren, he iiad voluntarily engaged to continue 
through life to work for his master. For ever ; 

A through life. 



Concerning manslaughter, 



EXODUS XXI. 



and injuries by strife. 



his master shall bore his ear through 
■with an awl ; and he shall serve him for 
ever. 

7 T[ And if a man ^sell his daughter to 
be a maid-servant, she shall not go out as 
the ''men-servants do. 

8 If she * please not her master, who 
hath betrothed her to himself, then shall 
he let her be redeemed : to sell " her 
unto a strange nation he shall have no 
power, seeing he hath dealt ''deceitfully 
with her. 

9 And if he have betrothed her unto his 
son, he shall deal with her after the man- 
ner of daughters. 

10 If he take him another wz/e, her food, 
her raiment, and her ""duty of marriage 
shall he not diminish. 

1 1 And if he do not these three unto her, 
then shall she go out free without money. 

12 T[He that ""smiteth a man, so that he 
die, shall be surely put to death. 

13 And ^if a man lie not in wait, but 
God deliver him into his hand ; then I 
will appoint thee a ''place whither he 
shall flee. 

14 But if a man 'come presumptuously 
upon his neighbor to slay him with guile, 
thou shalt take him from mine J altar, that 
he may die. 

15 T[ And he that smiteth his ''father, or 
his mother, shall be surely put to death. 

16 If And he that 'stealeth a man, and 
selleth '" him, or if he be found in his hand, 
he shall surely be put to death. 



a Nell. 5:5. b ver. 2, 3. * Heh. be evil in the eyes of . c Beut. 
21:14. il Mal.2:I4,l.^. elCoi-.7:5. f Lev.24: 17; Num.3.n:3a.31; 
Mat.2fi:,'i2. g Deut. 19:4..5. h Num.3,T: 11. i Num. l.T:.3n. j Gen. 
9:6; Deut. 19: 11-13; I Kinss, 2: 29-34. k 1 Tim. 1 : 9. 1 Rev. 



7. Sell his daughter ; under the expectation 
that the buyer or his son would marry her ; and 
his thus buying her was an engagement to do so, 
as it was tlien customary for a man to buy his wife. 
Not go out as the men-servants do ; she should 
be better provided for. 

8. Who hatk betrothed her ; by thus buying 
her. Let her be redeemed ; cause her to be re- 
deemed To sell Iter; and thus betroth her, or 
cause her to be married or disposed of. He liath 
dealt deceitfully ; in not marrying her himself, or 
having her married in his family. 

9. After the manner of daughters ; giving 
her a dowry, and treating her on her marriage as 
he should his own daughter. 

10. Her food, her raiment, and her duty of 
vianiage ; those of the wife whom he had bought 
and married. 

11. Go out free; free from all further obliga- 
tions to him. She might be divorced and married, 
if she chose, to another man. 

12. Smiteth a man ; intending to kill him. 
One who commits murder. Gen. 9:o; Lev. 24:17; 
Num. 35 : 30, 31. 

13. Lie not in wait ; had no malice against the 
man, and did not intend to kill him. God deliver 
him ; if the act was wholly providential, without 
human intention. Whither he shall Jiee ; and 



17 IT And he that t curseth his " father, or 
his mother, shall surely be put to death. 

18 ^ And if men strive together, and one 
smite J another with a stone, or with Ids 
fist, and he die not, but kecpeth his bed, 

19 If he rise again, and walk abroad 
upon his staff, then shall he that smote 
him be quit: only he shall pay /or Hhe 
loss of his time, and shall cause him to be 
thoroughly healed. 

20 \\ And if a man smite his servant, or 
his maid, with a rod, and he die under his 
hand, he shall be surely H punished. 

21 Notwithstanding, if he continue a day 
or two, he shall not be punished : for he 
is his money. 

22 ^If men strive, and hurt a woman 
with child, so that her fruit depart from 
her, and yet no mischief follow, he shall 
be surely punished, according as the 
woman's husband will lay upon him ; and 
he shall pay as the "judges determine. 

23 And if any mischief follow, then thou 
shalt give life for life, 

24 Eye p for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for 
hand, foot for foot, 

25 Burning for burning, wound for 
wound, stripe for stripe. 

26 T[ And if a man "J smite the eye of his 
servant, or the eye of his maid, that it 
perish ; he shall let him go ''free for his 
eye's sake. 

27 And if he smite out his man-servant's 
tooth, or his maid-servant's tooth ; he shall 
let him go free for his tooth's sake. 

28 1[ If an ox gore a man or a woman, 



18:12.13. m Deut. 24:7. f Or, 


revileth. 


n Proverbs 20 : 20 ; 


30:11,17; Mat. 15:4. i Or, his 


xeighbor. 


% Heb. his ceasing. 


II Heb. avenged, o ver. 30 ; Deut 


1H:18. 


p Lev. 24:20; Deut. 


19:21; Mat. 5:38. qEph. 6:9. r 


Col. 4 : 





stay till the matter could be duly examined and the 
man rightly treated. 

14. Slay him icith guile ; intending to murder 
him. Tale him from miiie altar ; even if he 
should flee there for refuge. 1 Kings, 2 : 28-34. 

15,17. Smiteth — curseth; rebellion againsfc 
rightful parental authority was rebellion against 
God ; and to smite or curse parents, under that gov- 
ernment of which God was the civil as well .as moral 
ruler, was at his command punished with death. 

16. Stealeth a man ; taking him by force or 
guile, for the purpose of selling or enslaving him. 
The guilt would be the same, should one hire or in- 
duce others to do it. 

18. If men strive ; get into a quarrel. 

19. Be quit ; free from the guilt of killing the 
man, and be punished only as speciiied. 

20. Surely punished ; according to what, on 
judicial investigation, should appear to have been 
his intention and his crime. 

21. Not be pnnished ; notbe punished, especially 
with death. He is his money ; the master had 
such a monied interest in the continued life of his 
servant, that it was not to be concluded that he 
meant to kill him, unless there should be clear evi- 
dence of the fact. 

22-25. Hye for eye ; Lev. 24 : 17-22 ; Deut. 
19 : 16-21. 

103 



The ox that sorelh. 



EXODUS XXII. 



Of theft and damage. 



that they die, then the 'ox shall be surely 
stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten; 
but the owner of the ox shall be quit. 

29 But if the ox were wont to push with 
his horn in time past, and it hath been 
testified to his owner, and he hath not 
kept him in, but that he hath killed a man 
or a woman ; the ox shall be stoned, and 
his owner also shall be put to death. 

30 If there be laid on him a sum of 
money, then he shall give for the ''ransom 
of his life whatsoever is laid upon him. 

ol Whether he have gored a son, or have 
gored a daughter, according to this judg- 
ment shall it be done unto him. 

32 If the ox shall push a man-servant 
or a maid-servant, he shall give unto their 
master "^thirty shekels of silver, and the 
ox shall be stoned. 

33 H And if a man shall open a pit, or 
if a man shall dig a pit, and not cover it, 
and an ox or an ass fall therein ; 

34 The owner of the pit shall make it 
good,^ and give money unto the owner of 
them ; and the dead beast shall be his. 

35 ^ And if one man's ox hurt another's, 
that he die, then they shall sell the live 
ox, and divide the money of it; and the 
dead ox also they shall divide. 

36 Or if it be known that the ox hath 
used to '■push in time past, and his owner 
hath not kept him in, he shall surely pay 
ox for ox ; and the dead shall be his 



• Gen.9:5. b cliap.30:I2; Prov.l3:8. c Zecli. II : 12, 13; 
Matthew 2li: 15; Phil. 2:7. d chap. 22 : 6, 14. « vcr. 211. * Or, 
goat, f 2 Sam. 12:6; Proverbs 6:31: Luke 19:8. f!.lob24:H; 



28. His Jlcsh shall not be eaten ; this was de- 
signed to impress upon all the sacredness of human 
life. lie quit ; not be held guilty of murder, nor 
suffer, except by the loss of the ox. This was on 
supposition that he did not before know that the ox 
was unruly, and that its going at large would en- 
danger the lives of men. But if he did know it, he 
was to be punished according to the circumstances 
and .aggravations of the offence. Ver. 29-31. 

32. Thirty shekels ; supposed to be about fifteen 
dollars. Some have tliought it to be more. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. God, as civil ruler among the Jew.s, did not 
at once abolish all existing evils, but suffered some 
for a time to continue, on account of the hardness 
of their hearts. Yet he adopted regulations which 
were suited to lessen some of the distressing conse- 
quences of those evils, and prepare the way, under 
the manifestations of increasing light and love, for 
their ultimate entire removal. Mat. 19:8; Mark 
10 : 5 ; Acts 17 : 30. 

10. The giving of regulations to lessen the evils 
of an existing practice does not sanction the con- 
tinuance of that pr.aotice, or afford any evidence 
that it ought not to be abandoned. 

14. As King of the Jews, God .-ulopted into their 
civil code many of those moral laws whicii had been 
obligatory on all men from the creation of the world, 
and among them was that which required ihe mur- 
derer to he put to death — a law binding on men 
under all dispensations. Gen. 9:6; Num. .3-T : 31. 

26. A Jew by maiming his servant forfeited all 
104 



CHAPTER XXII. \^tfm. 

1 Of theft. 5 Of damage. 7 Of trespasses. 14 Of 
borrowing. 10 Of fornication. 18 Of witchcraft. 19 
Of bestiality. 20 Of idolatry. '21 Of strangers, wid- 
ows, and fatherless. 23 Of usury. 20 Of pledges. 
2S Of reverence to magistrates. 29 Of thefir.st-fruits. 

IF a man shall steal an ox, or a * sheep, 
and kill it, or sell it ; he shall restore 
live oxen for an ox, and four "^shecp for a 
sheep. 

2 If If a thief be s found breaking up, and 
be smitten that he die, there shall^ no blood 
be shed for him. 

3 If the sun be risen upon him, there 
shall be blood shed for him ; for he should 
make full restitution : if he have nothing, 
then he shall be sold for his theft. 

4 If the theft be certainly found in his 
hand alive, whether it be ox, or ass, or 
sheep; he shall 'restore double. 

5 ^1 If a man shall cause a field or vine- 
yard to be eaten, and shall put in his 
beast, and sliall feed in another man's 
field ; of the best of liis own field, and of 
the best of his own vineyard, shall he 
make J restitution. 

6 If fire break out, and catch in thorns, 
so that the stacks of corn, or the standing 
corn, or the field, be consumed tkcretvith; 
he that kindled the fire shall surely make 
restitution. 

7 H If a man shall deliver unto his neigh- 
bor money or stuff'to keep, and it be stolen 
out of the man's house; if the thief be 
found, let him pay double. 



Joel 2: 9; Mat. 24:43. 
18:6. j chap. 21:34. 



h Numbers 35 : 27. iJer. 16:18; Rev. 



claim to his services ; and God, by requiring him to 
be set at liberty, and in many other things, showed 
a regard to the persons, property, and rigiits of ser- 
vants, and to the mutual good of all, far beyond 
wliat was then shown in the civil code of any other 
nation. Deut. 4 : 5-9. 

29. Wlien a man has reason to believe that any 
thing under his control, if sent out or suffered to go 
out, will endanger the lives of men, he is bound to 
keep it in. If he does not. and a man is killed by 
it, he is responsible for the life of that man, and 
will be treated accordingly at the bar of God. 

3-1. Carelessness is forbidden by the law of God, 
as well as m.alice and covelousne.ss ; and if others 
suffer loss through our neglect, we are bound, as 
far as may be in our power, to remunerate them. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

2. Breaking up; breaking into a dwelling in 
the night. No blood be shed ; the man who killed 
him was not to be deemed guilty of murder, or be 
punished. 

3. If the sun be risen ; if it was in the day- 
time the man could be seen and secured. There 
was no need of killing him, and the wanton killing 
of him would be murder. Be sold for his theft ; 
till he can make restitution for it. 

.'). Restitution ; a proper compensation to the 
person injured. 

6. Make restitution ; for the injury which his 
carelessness or neglect occasioned. 

7. Stuff ; furniture or articles of any kind. 



Of trespass and borrowing. 



EXODUS XXII, 



Of strangers and the poor. 



the master of the house shall be brought 
unto the judges, to see whether he have put 
his hand unto his neighbor's goods. 

9 For all manner of trespass, ii'hether it 
he for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, 
or for any manner of lost thing, which 
another challengeth to be his, the cause of 
both parties shall ^ come before the judges; 
and whom the judges shall condemn, he 
shall pay double unto his neighbor. 

10 If a man deliver unto his neighbor 
an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast, 
to keep ; and it die, or be hurt, or driveii 
away, no man seeing it ; 

11 Then shall an ""oath of the Lord be 
between them both, that he hath not put 
his hand unto his neighbor's goods ; and 
the owner of it shall accept thereof and 
he shall not make it good. 

12 And if it be stolen from him, he shall 
make restitution unto the owner thereof. 

13 If it be torn in pieces, then let him 
bring it /or witness, and he shall not make 
good that which was torn. 

14 11 And if a man borrow aught of his 
neighbor, and it be hurt, or die, the owner 
thereof being not with it, he shall surely 
make it good. 

1 5 But if the owner thereof be with it, 
he shall not make it good : if it be a hired 
thing, it came for his hire. 

IG 1[ And if a man entice a maid that is 
not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall 
surely endow "= her to be his wife. 

17 If her father utterly refuse to give 
her unto him, he shall *pay money ac- 
cording to the dowry of virgins. 

1 8 ^Tliou shall not suffer a* witch to live. 

19 ^Whosoever lieth with a® beast shall 
surely be put to death. 



• Pe 


It. V, : 


1; 2C1 


m 


). I<) 


in. 


b 


Hel) 


R 


Ifi 


c Oe 


ut. 22 : 28 


29. 


* Hel.. 


weigh 


d 1 


ev 


20: 


.'7; 


Up 


It. 18: 


10 


1 Samuel, 28 : a 


9; 


Rev. -22 


: ir,. 


f Lev. 


IS 


23, 2ri. 


f Deut 


i: 


:1 


11. S 


Lev. 19: 


a; 


Zecli. 7 


: 10. 


li De. 


t. 24:n 


; Peali 


n 94 


(i, 


7; 


I.saiah 


:17; E7 


ek. 


•-•a.-T^Jas. 1: 


27. i 


.Je 


r. 15 


8; 


18 


21; 


I 


-im 


6: a. 


j Nell. 6 


7; 



8. F/it his hand ; taken the articles himself. 

9. ChaUoigetli, ; affirms or declares. 

12. MaL-e restitution ; oa the ground of his not 
having taken proper care to prevent the theft. 

13. Bri?/g it for wimess ; show by proper evi- 
dence that it had been killed v\-ithoiit his fault. 

14 Make it good ; presuming he had not taken 
proper care of it. 

1.5. Not make it good ; because the owner 
Bould see how it was treated. It came for his 
hire ; the price p:iid for the use of the beast was 
supposed to be enough not only to compensate for 
service, but also to cover the risk to wliich it would 
be exposed. Of course should the beast be hurt or 
die, the owner was to bear the loss. 

16. Endow her ; marry her, and suitably pro- 
vide for as his wife. 

17. According to the d(nory ; such as would be 
proper according to her rank and condition. 

18. A witch ; one who pretended to have inter- 
course with evil spirits anil from them to receive 
supernatural power. 



20 Tf He that sacrificcth unto ^any god, 
save unto the Lord only, he sliall be ut- 
terly destroyed. 

21 T[ Thou shall neither vex a s stranger, 
nor oppress him : for ye were strangers 
in the land of Egypt. 

22 IT Ye shall not afflict any ^ widow, or 
fatherless child. 

23 If thou afflict them in any wise, and 
they cry at all unto me, I will surely 
hear their cry ; 

24 And my wrath shall wax hot, and I 
will kill you with the sword ; and your 
wives shall be 'widows, and your chil- 
dren fatherless. 

25 T[ If thou lend money to any of my 
people that is poor by thee, thou shall not 
be to him as a J usurer, neither shall thou 
lay upon him usury. 

26 If thou at all take thy neighbor's rai- 
ment to "^ pledge, thou shall deliver it unto 
him by that the sun goeth down : 

27 For that is his covering only, it is 
his raiment for his skin : wherein shall 
he sleep ? and it shall come to pass, when 
he crieth unto me, that I will ' hear ; for I 
am "'gracious. 

28 TfThou shall not "revile the tgods, 
nor curse the ruler of thy people. 

29 ^ Thou shall not delay to offer i the 
firstof thy ripe "fruits, andof thy ^ liquors : 
the first-born of thy p sons shall thou give 
unto me. 

30 Likewise shall thou do with thine 
oxen, and with thy sheep: i seven days 
it shall be with his dam ; on the eighth 
day thou shall give it me. 

31 ^And ye shall be ''holy men unto 
me : neither shall ye eat any flesh that is 
torn of "beasts in the field ; ye shall cast 
it to the dogs. 



Ps.alm l.'S:,'>; Ezekiel 18:8,17. k Deut 24 : 6, etc. ; .lob 22:6. 
1 ver. 23. n. -jClironicles, 30:9. n Acts 23 : 3, .1; .Itule B. f Or, 
judges. ^ Yleh. thy fulness. oMicali7;l. % Heb. tear, p chap. 
13:2. n Lev. 22:27. r Lev. 19:2; 1 I'eter, 1 : 15, 1(3. « Lev. 
22:8; Ezek. 4: 14; 44:31. 



20. Sliall be utterly destroyed ; he not only 
broke the first commandment of the moral law, but 
also committed treason against the state, in ac- 
knowledging another god instead of Jehovah, who 
was then the civil head of the Jews. 

21. A stranger ; one who came among them 
from another nation. 

2.'). Usury; interest, especially excessive interest. 

28. The gods; magistrateSjjudges.andothercivil 

rulers, officers under God. Curse ; speak evil of. 

30. Give it vie ; this was an acknowledgment 
of G^od as the rightful proprietor of all. Ex. 13 : 2. 

31. Holy tnen unto lae ; separated from others 
to be peculiarly Jehovah's people. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
3. Among the Jews, men were sometimes sold 
or bound out for a time as a punishment for their 
crimes. Their services were sold till they had made 
compensation to those whom they had injured. A 
poor man sometimes sold liis own services, or tlio.'se 
of his children, or his creditors sold them for die 
pavment of his debts. Chap. 21 : 2. 

105 



Of slander and injustice. 



EXODUS XXIII. 



The three yearly yeasttt. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

1 Of slander and false witness. 3, 6 Of justice. 4 Of 
ch.^riIablencss 10 Of the year of rest. 1'2 Of the 
sabbath. 1 :} Of idolatry. 14 Of the three feasts. 18 
Of the blood and the fat of the sacrifice. 20 An Angel 
is promised, with a Messing, if they obey him. 

THOU shall not * rai.se a false "report: 
put not lliy hand with the wicked to 
be an '"unrighteous witnc.«s. 

2 ^ Thou shalt not follow a "^multitude 
to do evil ; neither shalt thou t speak in a 
cause to decline after many to wrest judg- 
ment : 

3 ^Neither shalt thou countenance a 
poor"* man in his cause. 

4 1[ If thou meet thine ^enemy'.s ox or 
his ass going astray, thou shalt surely 
bring it back to him again. 

5 If thou see the ass of him that hateth 
thee lyjng under his burden, and t would- 
est forbear to help him, tliou shalt surely 
help with him. 

6 Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of 
thy '^poor in his cause. 

7 Keep thee far from a false matter ; and 
the innocent and righteous slay thou not: 
for I will not ^justify the wicked. 

8 1[And thou shalt ''take no gift: for 
the gift blindeth ^ the wise, and perverteth 
the words of the righteous. 

9 1[ Also thou shalt not oppress a stranger: 
for ye know the il heartof a stranger, seeing 
ye were strangers in the land of Egypt 



" Or, rtctivt. • INiilm l.") : 3. b Proverbs 19 : fi ; Eph. 4 : 2h. 
r I Kings, 19 : 10: Job 31 : 34. f Heb. answer, i ver. 6. • Mat. 
R: 44. t Or, wilt thnu cease to help him? or, wouldest cease to 
leave thy business /or him; thou shalt surely leave it to join 



6. When one man injures another through de- 
sign or heedlessness, he is bound, as far as may be 
in his power, to make him suitable compensation. 

10. Fidelity in the safe preservation and good 
treatment of whatever is committed to us, is re- 
quired by the law of God. We should regard 
another's property as we ought to wish him to re- 
gard ours. 

1.'). When a man hires property, giving a rent 
sufficient to compensate not only for its use, but 
also for the risk to which it is exposed, and the 
property without his fault is providentially injured 
or destroyed, the lo.ss should fall on the owner. 

20. The restraints which are needful to keep men 
from outbreakinjf iniquity, show that their hearts 
are depraved ; and t hat all the holiness which there is 
among men is the fruit of divine grace. Jas. 1 : 17. 

21. Stranger.s, widows, orphans, and poor per- 
son.s are prculiarly exposed to be wronged by the 
wicked, and on this account God graciously makes 
iheiri objects of his peculiar care, and with special 
severity will punish their oppressors. Psa. G8: f*); 
Prov. 22 : 1.'2, 23 ; Jer. 49 : 1 1 ; Mat. 26 : 1 1. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

1. Put not thy hand; do not join with the 
wicked in his wickedness. 

2. Wrest ; pervert. 

3. Cov Hte nance ; unduly favor. In deciding 
causes, they were not to favor the rich, the great, 
or the many ; nor were they to be partial towards 
the poor, but to decide according to evidence, right, 
and duty. 

5. Lying under his burden ; fallen, and not 
106 



10 And six 'years thou shalt sow *b.":mJ?. 
thy land, and shalt gather in the fruits 
thereof: 

11 But the seventh i/rar thou shall let 
it rest and lie still ; that the poor of thy 
people may eat : and what they leave the 
beasts of the field shall eat. In like man- 
ner thou shalt deal with thy vineyard. 
and with thy * olive-yard. 

12 Six days thou shalt do thy work, and 
on the seventh day thou shalt rest: that 
thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the 
son of thy handmaid, and the stranger, 
may bo refreshed. 

13 And in all things that I have said 
unto you be J circumspect : and make no 
mention of the name of ''other gods, nei- 
ther let it be heard out of thy mouth. 

14 ^ Three times thou shalt keep a feast 
unto me in the year. 

1 5 Thou shalt keep the feast of unleav- 
ened bread : thou shalt eat unleavened 
bread seven days, as I commanded thee, 
in the time appointed of the month Abib ; 
for in it thou earnest out from Egypt : and 
none shall appear before me empty : 

16 And the feast of harvest, the first- 
fruits of thy labors, which thou hast sown 
in the field : and the feast of ingathering, 
vhich i.-i in the end of the year, when 
thou hast gathered in thy labors out of 
the field. 

witiTliim. f vpr. 3. R chap. 34 : 1. k Prov. 17:23; Isn. SsTl ,^. 
\ Heh. the seeini,. || Heb. »o«/. 1 Lev. 2.'j : 3, 4 ; 26 : 34. * Or, 
olive-trees, j Deut,4:9; Eph.6:16. k Josh. 23:7; Psa. 16:4; 
Hosea 2: 17. 

able to rise without help. Help with him ; assist 
the owner in getting the beast up. 

7. Far from a false matter ; not attempt to 
support a false accusation. Slay thoii not ; not 
be accessory to the death of an innocent person. 

8. Gift ; a bribe offered to induce a magistrate 
to favor one in judgment. 

9. A stranger ; a foreigner. They h.td learned 
by experience in Egypt the liability of foreigners to 
be oppressed, and remembered how they felt under 
oppression. 

11. Let it rest ; this was to teach them their 
dependence on God, and the safety of trusting in 
him. 

12. Thy ii'orl : all worldly business except what 
was needful in arts of mercy, and for the best dis- 
charge of the .Tiipropriate duties of the Sabbath. 
May be refreshid ; one day's rest in a week from 
labor is, for man and beast, essential to the best 
refreshment, the greatest vigor, and longest life. 
Chap. 34:21. 

13. Circumspect ; very careful to obey his will. 

15. Feast of unleavened bread ; this followed 
the passover, instituted the night before they left 
Egypt. It was called the feast of unleavened bread 
because they were required, during that feast, to 
eat nothing leavened, and to have no leaven in their 
houses. Chap. 12 : 14-20. Empty; without an 
offering, or something devoted especially to the Lord. 
Chap. 34 : 18-20. 

16. Feast of harvest ; so called because the 
harvest then began to be ripe. It w.as called also the 
feast of weeks, or of sevens, because it was kept 
seven weeks after the passover; also the feast of 



The ^ngel of the covenant. 



EXODUS XXIII. 



Blessings of obedience. 



males shall appear before the Lord God 

18 Thou shalt not offer the blood of my 
sacrifice* with leavened bread; neither 
shall the fat of my sacrifice remain until 
the morning. 

19 The first of the first-fruits of thy land 
thou shalt bring into the house of the 
Loud thy God. Thou shalt not * seethe a 
kid in his mother's milk. 

20 T[ Behold, I send an ''Angel before 
thee, to keep thee in the way, and to 
bring thee into the place which I have 
prepared. 

21 Beware of him, and obey his voice, 
provoke him not ; for he will not pardon 
your transgressions : for my name is in 
him. 

22 But if thou shalt indeed obey his 
voice, and do all that I speak ; then I will 
be an <^ enemy unto thine enemies, and an 
adversary t unto thine adversaries. 

23 For mine ■* Angel shall go before thee, 
and bring thee in unto the Amorites, and 
the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the 
Canaanitcs, the Hivites, and the Jebusites ; 
and I will cut them oflf. 

24 Thou shalt not bow ""down to their 
gods, nor serve them, nor "^do after their 
works : but thou shalt utterly overthrow 
them, and quite break down « their images. 

25 And ye shall serve the ■" Lord your 



«0r 


fra 


St. » 


chap. 34 


:2fi. 


hGer 


.48 


:lt\ 


Isa.S! 


9. cGer 


.12:3; 


Deut, 30:1 


; Zech. 2 : 8. 


f c 


r, III 


ill 


ajtict them 


that afflict thee. 


d chap 


Xi 


2; .T 


osUua 5 


13. 


e Ch 


ap. 


20: 


b. f Lev. 18:3 


Deut. 


12:30; 


Hs 


I. 101 


3. 6 chap. 


32:20; 


Van 


1. 33 : .52 


; 2Chror 


.34:7. 


h JosI 


.'2-2 


5. 


Deut. 


■: 13 


Isa. 


33 


Ifi 


Mai. 3 


: 10,11. 


j Psa. 



Pentecost, which means the fiftieth, because it 
commenced on the fiftieth day after the passover, 
and was commemorative of the giving of the law 
from mount Sinai, which took place fifty days after 
the departure of the Israelites from Egypt. Chap. 
34 : 22 ; Lev. 23 : 14-21 ; Num. 28 : 26-31. The 
feast of ingathering ; so called because it took 
place after the gathering in or completion of the 
harvest. It was called also the feast of taberna- 
cles, in commemoration of tlieir having dwelt forty 
years in tabernacles or tents in the wilderness. The 
feast was kept from the fourteenth to the twenty- 
first day of the month Tisri, answering to the last 
part of September and the first part of October. It 
was the seventh month of their ecclesiastical, and 
the first of their civil year. Lev. 23 : 3^1-36 ; Deut. 
16 : 13-15. 

18. The blood of my sacrifice ; at the feast of 
the passover. Chap. 12 : 7-10 ; 34 : 25 ; Lev. 2:11; 
Deut. 16 : 4. 

19. Seethe ; boil or cook. 

20. AiiAiigel; hewhodweltinthepillarof cloud 
and of fire. Chap. 14 : 19 ; 32 : .34 : 33 : 2, 14 ; Num. 
20 : IG ; Josh. 5 : ] ;}-15 ; 6 : 2 ; Isa. 63 : 7-13. 

21. -ITy i>a7ne is in him; he possessed and 
manifested the attributes of Jehovah. Mai. 3: 1. 

23. Mine Angel shall — bring thee in; Josh. 
24:2-11. 

26. Thy days I n-ill fulfil ; he would preserve 
their lives to a good old age. 

28. Hornets ; Deut. 7 : 20 ; Josh. 24 : 12. 

29. Beast of the field; wild and ravenous 
beasts. Deut. 7 : 22. 



God, and he shall 'bless thy bread, and 
thy water ; and I will take J sickness away 
from the midst of thee. 

26 T[ There shall nothing cast their 
young, nor be ''barren, in thy land: the 
number of thy days I will fulfil. 

27 I will send my 'fear before thee, and 
will destroy all the people to whom thou 
shalt come ; and I will make all thine 
enemies turn their J backs unto thee. 

28 And I will send "" hornets before thee, 
which shall drive out the Hivite, the Ca- 
naanite, and the Hittite, from before thee. 

29 I will not drive them out froiu before 
thee in one year ; lest the land become 
desolate, and the beast of the field multi- 
ply against thee. 

30 By little and little I will drive them 
out from before thee, until thou be in- 
creased, and inherit the land. 

31 And I will set thy "bounds from the 
Red sea °even unto the sea of the Philis- 
tines, and from the desert unto the river: 
for I win deliver the inhabitants of the 
land P into your hand ; and thou shalt 
drive them out before thee. 

32 Thou shalt make no i covenant with 
them, nor with their gods. 

33 They shall not dwell in thy land, 
lest they make thee sin against me : for if 
thou serve their gods, it ''will surely be a 
snare unto thee. 



103:. 3. 


k Deut. 28 : 4. 


1 Josh. 2 


9,11 


1 Sam 


. 14 


IS; 2Ch 


ro«. 


14: 14 


X Heb. neck. 


Psa 


18 : 40. 


m Deut 7 


20 


.Josh 24 


12. 


n Nui 


nbers 34 : 3, etc. 


Deut. 11: 24. o 


Nu.n. 


34:3: .Tosh. 1 


:4; 


Psalm 


72 : 8. p Joshu 


a 21 


44. q 


chap 


34 : 12 


15; 


Psa. lOfi : 


3.5; 


2 Cor. 


6; \h. T Judg. 2 


:3. 















31. Seaof the Philistines ; the Jflediterranean, 
on the eastern shore of which the Philistines lived. 
The desert; of Shur. The river; Euphrates. 
Josh. 1 : 4 ; 1 Kings, 4 : 21. 

32. JVb covenant — with their gods ; not wor- 
ship them. 

33. A snare ; it would draw them away from 
tlie worship of Jehovah, and bring upon them his 
wrath. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The majority as to numbers, wealth, and po- 
litical influence are often wrong. If in such cases 
a person would do right, he must not be governed 
by public opinion, however it maybe expressed, but 
by the law of God. 

7. The laws of Moses, as well as those of Christ, 
required men to love others as they loved them- 
selves ; and, under all circumstances, to do to others 
as thev ought to wish that others should do to them. 
Mat. 7:12; 19: 19; 22:37-40. 

9. Might never gives right, and to oppress or 
wrong any one because he cannot defend himself, 
or bring to justice the aggressor, is mean, base, and 
wicked. 

12. In requiring men to remember the Sabbath- 
day to keep it holv, God regards not only his own 
glory, but the comfort and highest good of all chisses 
of men and of laboring animals. To deprive them 
of the rest of the Sabbath is robbery of God, and of 
man and beast. 

17. Not only individuals but nations are bound 
to follow the directions of God. Nor does their 
safety or their best interest ever require them, a> 
107 



Moses buildeth an altar, 



EXODUS XXIV. 



and goclh up the moxint. 



CHATTER XX rv. 

1 Moses is called up into the inountain. 3 The people 
promise obedience. 4 Moses buildeth an altar, and 
twelve pillars. 6 He spriirkleth the blond of the cov- 
enant. 9 The glory of God appeareth. 14 Aaron 
and Hiir have the charge of the people. 15 Moses 
goeth into the mountain, where he continueth forty 
days and forty nights. 

AND he said unto Moses, Come *np 
unto the Loud, thou and Aaron, Na- 
dab, and ''Abihu, and <= seventy of the 
elders of Israel ; and ^vorship ye afar off. 

2 And JNIoses alone shall come near the 
Lord : but they shall not come nigh ; 
neither shall the people go up with him. 

.3 TfAnd Moses came and told the peo- 
ple all the words of the Lord, and all the 
judgments : and all the people answered 
with one voice, and said. All the w^ords 
which the Lord hath ""said will we do. 

4 And Moses * wrote all the words of 
the Lord, and rose up early in the morn- 
ing, and buildcd an altar under the hill, 
and twelve pillars, according to the twelve 
tribes of Israel. 

5 And he sent yoiing men of the chil- 
dren of Israel, which offered burnt-oifer- 
ings, and sacrificed peace-offerings of oxen 
unto the Lord. 

6 And Moses took half of the blood, and 
put it in basins ; and half of the blood he 
sprinkled on the altar. 

7 And he took the book of the covenant, 
and read in the audience of the people : 
and they said. All that the Lord hath said 
will we do, and be obedient. 

8 And Moses took the blood, and ''sprin- 
kled it on the people, and said. Behold 
the blood of the covenant, which the Lord 
hath made with you concerning all these 
words. 



• ver. 1.1; chap. 34:2. 


b chap. 28:1. « Nrtm. 11 : 16. d Deut 


h:<n; Joshua 24 :K. 


e Deut 31 : 9; f Heb. 9 : 19-21 ; 13 : 20 ; 


1 Peter. 1:2. B 1 Kings 


,22:19; Isaiah 6:1,6. h Ej.ek. 1 : 26 ; 


10:1; Kev.4:3; 21: 19. 


> Mat 17:2; Kev. 1:16. j Gen. 18:8. 



nations or individu.ils, to break his commands. Vcr. 
22-27 ; chap. 31 : 24. 

31. Jehovah claims and exercises the right to 
dispose of all parts of the earth according to his 
pleasure. 

CHAPTER XXrV. 

I. Nadah, and Ahihu ; sons of Aaron. 

3. The words ^of the Lord — the judgments ; 
his directions, especially those contained in the 
three previous chapters. 

4. All the vords of the JjOrd ; those which the 
people said tiiev would do. 

7. The hook of the covenant; that which he 
had written. Ver. 4. 

8. The hlood of the covenant; that by wliich 
the covenant which they had made was ratified. 
Heb. 9:19; Mat- 26:28; Mark 14:24; Luke 
22 : 20. 

0. Then vent iip l^'oscs ; as directed, ver. 1. 

10. Saw the God of Israel ; a special manifes- 
tation of his presence. Sapphire-stone ; a pre- 
cious stone of sky-blue color. 

II. He laid not his hand; they received no 
harm, tliough tiicv saw God ; not his essence or 

IDS 



9 If Then went up Moses, and *b.c:u1?: 
Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy 
of the elders of Israel ; 

10 And they ^saw the God of Israel; 
and there was under his feet as it were a 
paved work of a ''sapphire-stone, and as 
it were the body of 'heaven in his clear- 
ness. 

11 And upon the nobles of the children 
of Israel he laid not his hand : also they 
saw God, and did Jeat and drink. 

12 ^And the Lord said unto Moses. 
Come up to me into the '"mount, and be 
there: and I will give thee 'tables of 
stone, and a law, and "'commandments 
which I have written ; that thou mayest 
teach them. 

13 And Moses rose up, and his minister 
Joshua ; and Moses went up into the 
mount of God. 

14 And he said unto the elders. Tarry 
ye here for us, until we come again unto 
you : and behold, Aaron and Ilur arc 
with you : if any man have any matters 
to do, let him come unto them. 

15 And Moses went up into the mount, 
and a cloud "covered the mount. 

16 And the "glory of the Lord abode 
upon mount Sinai, and the cloud covered 
it six days : and the seventh day he called 
unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud. 

17 And the sight of the glory of the 
Lord was like p devouring fire on the top 
of the mount in the eyes of the children 
of Israel. 

18 And Moses went into the midst of 
the cloud, and gat him up into the mount : 
and Moses was in the i mount forty days 
and fortv nights. 



k ver. 2, 18. 1 Deut 5: 22. m Nehemmh 9: 13. n chap. 19:9. 
o Leviticus 9:23; Numbers 14:10. p Deut4:S6; Exekiel 1:27; 
Nahuiiil:6; Hab.3:4,6; Hebrews 12 : 18, 29. q ch.ip. 34 : 28 ; 
Deut 9 : 9. 



shape, but his visible glory. John 1: 18; 5:37; 
G:46; 14:9; 15:24; 1 John, 4 : 12. 

12. Come up to me; still nearer to the visible 
glory. Tahlesof stone ; on which were the ten com- 
mandments. Chap. 31: 18; 32:15,10; Deut. 5: 22. 

13. Minister; servant. Into the m itnt ; 
towards the top of the mount, on which was the 
visible presence of Jehovah. 

14. Matters to do ; controversies to be settled, 
or cases to be decided. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. We should approach God not only with rever- 
ence and holy fear, out witli filial respect, conlidence, 
and love. 

3. We often find that many who are forward to 
promise are backward to perform, and that nothing 
but the grace of God will make those who solemnly 
covenant with him steadfast and persevering in obey- 
ing his commands. Num. 14: 11-35; Psa. 78:10- 
Cl; 100: 8-13; 1 Cor. 10:5-12. 

8. The blood which was shed in sacrifices under 
the Old Testament dispensation, was designed to 
impress upon all the necessity of an atonement, in 
order to the forgiveness of sin and acceptance with 
God. It pointed forward to tiie blood of Christ, who, 



Offerings for the tabernacle. 



EXODUS XXV. 



The ark and the mercy-scat. 



1 What the Israelites must offer for the making of the 
tabernacle. 10 The form of the ark. 17 The meroy- 
seat, with the cherubim. 23 The table, with the 
furniture thereof. 31 The candlestick, with the in- 
struments tliereof. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing, 

2 Speak unto the children of Israel, that 
they * bring me an t offering: of every 
man that giveth it "willingly with his 
heart ye shall take my offering. 

3 And this is the offering whieh ye shall 
take of them ; gold, and silver, and brass, 

4 And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and 
fine- linen, and goats' hair, 

5 And rams' skins dyed red, and badg- 
ers' skins, and shittim-wood, 

6 Oil for the light, spices for anointing 
oil, and for sweet incense, 

7 Onyx-stones, and stones to be set in 
the epliod, and in the breastplate. 

8 And let them make me a sanctuary ; 
that I may ''dwell among them. 

9 According to all that I *=show thee, 
after the pattern of the tabernacle, and 
the pattern of all the instruments thereof, 
even so shall ye make it. 

10 1[ And they shall make an ''ark of 
shittim-wood : two cubits and a h&U shall 
be the length thereof, and a cubit and a 
half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and 
a half the height thereof. 

1 1 And thou shalt overlay it with pure 



* Heh. take for me. f Or, luaventfering. a 2 Cor. 8 : 1'2 ; 9 : 7. 
t Or, silk, b chap. '29:4:); ^Cor. 6:U1; Rev. 21 :•■!. c Heb. 8 : .'). 
dHeb. 9:4?' e chap. 16: .34 ; 31:18; 34:'29; Num. 17:4; Ueut. 



in due time, wa.s to take away sin by the sacrifice of 
himself; and who would enter the holy place with 
liis own blood, and thus obtain eternal redemption 
for all who should believe on him. Heb. 9: 6-28. 

12. A right understanding of the law which (rod 
wrote with his finger on tables of stone, is essential 
to a right estimate of human character. Ministers 
should therefore be very explicit in teacliing it. 
Without rightly understanding the law, men will 
not rightly understand the gospel, or their need of 
it.s blessings. 

18. Moses received his directions from Grod, there- 
fore all the children of Israel were bound to obey 
him. If they did not they rebelled against Grod, 
and were justly e.xposed to his wrath. How much 
more aggravated will be the sin and doom of men 
who refuse to obey Jesus Christ. Deut. 18 : 15 ; 
John 1 : 45 ; Acts 3 : 22-26 ; 7 : 37 ; Heb. 10 : 28-31. 

CHAPTER XXV. 
5. Shiltim-ivood ; acacia, a kind of wood e.v- 
ceedingly liard. smooth, and durable, from which is 
obtained the gum Arabic. 

7. EpJiod ; an outer garment somewhat like a 
double apron, the fore and after parts of which were 
united at the shoulders. Chap. 28 : 6, 7. Breast- 
plate : a splendidly embroidered ornament, in which 
were set twelve precious stones, on e.ach of wliich 
was the name of one of the twelve tribes of Israel. 
It was M-orn bv the high-priest on the front of his 
ephod. Cliap.' 28 : 15-29 ; 39 : 8-21. 

8. A sanctuary ; a large tabernacle or tent, to 
be the peculiar dwelling-place of G-od, where he 



gold, within ai>d without shalt thou over- 
lay it, and shalt make upon it a crown of 
gold round about. 

1 2 And thou shalt cast four rings of 
gold for it, and put ihem in the four cor- 
ners thereof; and two rings shall he in the 
one side of it, and two rings in the other 
side of it. 

13 And thou shalt make staves 0/ shit- 
tim-wood, and overlay them with gold. 

14 And thou shalt put the staves into 
the rings by the sides of the ark, that the 
ark may be borne with them. 

15 The staves shall be in the rings of 
the ark : they shall not be taken from it. 

16 And thou shalt put into the "ark the 
testimony which I shall give thee. 

17 And thou shalt make a ""mercy-scat 
o/pure gold: two cubits and a half .s/ta/Z 
be the length thereof, and a cubit and a 
half the breadth thereof. 

18 And thou shalt make two cherubim 
of gold, of beaten work shalt thou make 
them, in the two ends of the mercy-seat. 

19 And make one cherub on the one end, 
and the other cherub on the other end : 
even^ of the mercy-seat shall ye make the 
cherubim on the two ends thereof. 

20 And the cherubim shall stretch forth 
?AeJr Swings on high, covering the mercy- 
seat with their wings, and their faces .'ihall 
look one to another ; toward the mercy- 
seat shall the faces of the cherubim be. 



10:2, .5; lKmgs,8:9; 2Kings,ll: 12; 2Chron.34: 14; Rom.3:2; 
Heb.rt: I. f chap.3-:(i; 40:20; Lev.lS:13; Rom. 3:25; Heb.9:.'). 
% Or, of the matter of the mercy-seat, g 2 Chron. 3:10. 



was to be worshipped, and from which he would 
give directions to the people. Ver. 22. Divell 
amoHg them ; by a visible manifestation of his 
presence in the sanctuary. 

9. The x>attcrn ; the model of the tabernacle 
and the furniture connected with it, which Grod 
showed to Moses in the mount. 

10. An ark ; this is a different word from that 
rendered ark, G-en. 6 : 14, and means a chest. A 
cubit; about eighteen inches. 

11. A crown; a cornice or border around the 
lid of the ark. 

13. Staves ; poles or rods to go through the 
rings of the ark, by which to carry it. 

16. The testimony ; the tables of stone, on 
which were written the ten commandments, Grod's 
testimony as to the duty of men. 

17. A tnercy-seat ; this was the golden covering 
or lid, the upper side of the sacred chest or ark, 
called the mercy-seat because on it was sprinkled 
tjje blood of atonement, and above it dwelt Jehovah 
in his visible glory, dispensing mercy to men. 

18. Chenihim ; representations of creatures in- 
tensely studying, for the purpose of doing the will 
of G-od. Some have supposed them to resemble the 
living creatures described Ezek. 1 :4-14. 

20. One to another; the cherub on one end, 
looking towards the cherub on the other end of t':e 
mercy-seat, and their wings stretched over it. 
Heb. 9 : 5. Between them, on the mercy-seat, was 
the shekinah, or the visible glory of Jehovah. 
Hence, he is said to dwell between the cherubim. 
1 Sam. 4:4; Psa. 80 : 1 ; 99 : 1. 

109 



The show-table 



EXODUS XXV 



and the candlestick. 



21 And thou shalt put the mercy-seat 
aboA'e * upon the ark ; and '' in the ark thou 
shalt put the testimony that I sliall give 
thee. 

22 And there I will meet with thee, and 
I will commune with thee from above 
the mercy-seat, from *= between the two 
clierubim which are upon the ark of the 
testimony, of all things which I will give 
thee in commandment unto the children 
of Israel. 

23 TIThou shalt also make actable o/shit- 
tim-wood : two cubits shall be the length 
thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, 
and a cubit and a half the height thereof. 

24 And thou shalt overlay it with "^ pure 
gold, and make thereto a crown of gold 
round about. 

25 And thou shalt make unto it a border 
of a handbreadth round about, and thou 
shalt make a golden crown to the border 
thereof round about. 

26 And thou shalt make for it four rings 
of gold, and put the rings in the four cor- 
ners that are on the four feet thereof. 

27 Over against the border shall the 
rings be for places of the staves to bear 
the table. 

28 And thou shalt make the staves of 
shittim-wood, and overlay them with gold, 
that the table may be borne with them. 

29 And thou shalt make the ""dishes 
thereof, and spoons thereof, and covers 
thereof, and bowls thereof, * to cover with- 
al : o/pure gold shalt thou make them. 

30 And thou shalt set upon the table 
show-bread fi before me always. 

3 1 T[ And thou shalt make a '■ candlestick 



• cliap.26:34. b ver.lG. c cliap.SOrB; LeT.lR:2; Num.7:89; 
17:4; 1 Sam. 4:4; 2 Sam. 6:2: 2 Kings, 19:15; Pan. 80: 1; 99:1; 
I»a.37:l6. d cliap. .■37:10; 1 King.s, 7:48; Heb. 9:2. olKing,s, 
6:20. f cliap.37:16; Kiim.4:7. * Or, to pour out withal. K Lev. 
24:5, 6; 1 Sam. 21:6; Mai. 1 : 7, 12; Mat. 12: 4. h oh.ip. 37: 17; 



QA. A croini ; cornice or rim. 

2-'5. Border; this was to be below the leaf, 
around the frame of the table. Handbreadth ; 
the width of the four fingers ; about three or four 
inches. A golden crown,; a rim of gold around 
the border, liice tliat around the leaf of the table. 

29. Ditkes ; chargers or platters. Spoo7is ; 
censers or cups for incense. 

30. Shoic-hrrad; twelve loaves of bread, equal to 
the number of the tribes. It was placed on the table, 
and called sliow-brea<l, or bread of the presence, 
because it always stood in the presence of the Lord. 
It was sprinkled with frankincense. On the Sal^j 
bath the bread was taken away, and new bread put 
in its place. The frankincense that was on it was 
burnt as an oblation to G-od. and the bread was 
e.\ten by the priests. Lev. 2 1 : .O-O. On one emer- 
gency mentioned in Scripture it was given to others. 
1 Sam. 21 : 1-G ; Mat. 12:2, 4. This show-bread, 
and all the articles and worship in the tabernacle, 
and afterwards in the temple, pointed forward to 
the Bread of God, which was to come down from 
heaven, and give life unto the world. John 6 : 32- 
58. 

31. A candlestick ; one with various branches; 

110 



q/'pure gold: o/ beaten work shall H.ciris?: 
the candlestick be made: his shaft, and 
his branches, his bowls, his knops, and 
his flowers, shall be of the same. 

32 And six branches shall come out of 
the sides of it ; three branches of the 
candlestick out of the one side, and three 
branches of the candlestick out of the 
other side : 

33 Three bowls made like unto almonds, 
ivith a knop and a flower in one branch ; 
and three bowls made like almonds in 
the other branch, with a knop and a flow- 
er : so in the six branches that come out 
of the candlestick. 

34 And in the candlestick shall he four 
bowls made like unto almonds, ivith their 
knops and their flowers. 

35 And there shall be a knop under two 
branches of the same, and a knop under 
two branches of the same, and a knop 
under two branches of the same, accord- 
ing to the six branches that proceed out 
of the candlestick. 

36 Their knops and their branches shall 
be of the same : all of it shall be one beaten 
work of pure gold. 

37 And thou shalt make the 'seven 
lamps thereof : and J they shall t light the 
lamps thereof, that they may give light 
over against tit. 

38 And the tongs thereof, and the snufl^ 
dishes thereof, shall be o/pure gold. 

39 0/" a talent of pure gold shall he make 
it, with all these vessels. 

40 And look that thou make them '' after 
their pattern, * which was showed thee in 
the mount. 



IKinja, 7:49; 2Cbron. 13:11; Zeeli. 4:2; Heb. 9:2; Rer. 1:12. 
i Zedl.4:2; Uev.l:4,12. j chap. 27: 20, 21 ; 30:7,8; Lev.24:3,4; 
Num. 8:2; 2CIiron. 13: II. ^ Or, eauseto ascend. ^ Heb. the/ace 
of it. k cliap.2fi:30; Num.8:4; 1 CIiron.28: 11 ; Acts7:44; Heb. 
8:5. \ Heb. which thou wast caused to see. 



a candeliibrum or lamp-bearer. Knops ; knobs or 
embossed v\-ork. These and the bowl.s and flowers 
were orn.i.mental figures on the shaft and branches. 

33. Liie u7ito ahnonds ; in the form of an al- 
mond, or of an egg. In the six branches ; three 
bowls, knobs, and flowers on each branch, and four 
on the shaft of the candlestick, making twenty-two 
in all. 

35. Of the same ; the same material, pure gold. 

37. Seven lanips ; one for the shaft, and one for 
eacii branch of the candlestick. 

38. The tongs ; snuffers or scissors to trim the 
lamps. Snnff-dishes ; vessels to receive the lamp 
trimmings. 

39. A talent of pure gold ; estimated by some to 
be equal to about twenty, and by others thirty thou- 
sand dollars. The light of these lamps represented 
the spiritual light which God in Ciirist, by his word 
and Spirit, through the instrumentality of his peo- 
ple, especially his ministers, communicates to the 
world. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. God most justly requires of men that, whatever 
they do, they should seek to honor him and benefit 
their fellow-men. 



The ten curtains. 



EXODUS XXVI. 



Boards of the tabernacle. 



tlun: CHAPTER XXVI. 

1 The ten curtains of the tabernacle. 7 The eleven 
curtains of <);oats' hair. 14 The covering of rams' 
skins. 15 The boards of the tabernacle, with their 
sockets and bars. 31 The veil for the ark. 3G The 
hanging for the door. 

MOREOVER thou shalt make the tab- 
ernacle loith ten * curtains of fine 
twined linen, and blue, and purple, and 
.scarlet : with cherubim * of cunning work 
shalt thou make them. 

2 The length of one curtain .'shall be 
eight and twenty cubits, and the breadth 
of one curtain four cubits : and every one 
of the curtains shall have one measure. 

3 The five curtains shall be coupled to- 
gether one to another; and other five cur- 
tains shall he coupled one to another. 

4 And thou shalt make loops of blue upon 
the edge of the one curtain from the sel- 
vedge in the coupling ; and likewise shalt 
thou make in the uttermost edge oi anoth- 
er curtain, in the coupling of the second. 

5 Fifty loops shalt thou make in the 
one curtain, and fifty loops shalt thou 
make in the edge of the curtain that is in 
the coupling of the second ; that the loops 
may take hold one of another. 

6 And thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, 
and couple the curtains together with the 
taches : and it shall be one tabernacle. 

7 ^And thou shalt make curtains of 
goats' ^hair to be a covering upon the tab- 
ernacle : eleven curtains shalt thou make. 

8 The length of one curtain s/ia// be thirty 
cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four 
cubits : and the eleven curtains shall be 
all of one measure. 

9 And thou shalt couple five curtains 
by themselves, and six curtains by them- 
selves, and shalt double the sixth curtain 
in the fore-front of the tabernacle. 

10 And thou shalt make fifty loops on 
the edge of the one curtain that is outmost 



a 1 Chron. 17: 1. * Heb. the work of a cunning wot-km 
nbroidercr. b chap. :iO : H, etc. f Or, covering. % Heb. 



8. Though God is in all places, yet he dwells 
especially in those which, according to his will, are 
consecrated to his worship ; and from them he be- 
stows peculiar blessings on his people. 

16. What relates to the worship and glory of G-od, 
and to the redemption of men by Jesus Christ, is 
«L • described in the Bible with greater minuteness, 
and treated as of greater importance, than the tem- 
poral interests of kingdoms, or all the mere worldly 
concerns of men. 

"22. All things which, by divine appointment, are 
connected with the sanctuary, were designed by God 
to impress upon the worshippers a conviction of his 
presence, and communicate something of those truths 
which relate to thebestowmentof mercyand the gift 
of salvation through Christ. 

30. It is not enough, in order to salvation, that 
Christ tasted death for every man, and was made 
a propitiation for the sins of the world; but in order 
to be saved, men must receive from him spiritual 
life, be united to him, and receive from him per- 



in the coupling, and fifty loops in the 
edge of the curtain which coupleth the 
second. 

1 1 And thou shalt make fifty taches of 
brass, and put the taches into the loops, 
and couple the t tent together, that it may 
be one. 

12 And the remnant that remaineth of 
the curtains of the tent, the half curtain 
that remaineth, shall hang over the back- • 
side of the tabernacle. 

13 And a cubit on the one side, and a 
cubit on the other side t of that which re- 
maineth in the length of the curtains of 
the tent, it shall hang over the sides of 
the tabernacle, on this side and on that 
side, to cover it. 

14 And thou shalt make a covering for 
the tent of rams' skins dyed red, and a 
covering above of badgers' skins. 

1 5 *\ And thou shalt make boards for the 
tabernacle o/ shittim-wood standing vip. 

16 Ten cubits .s/ta// be the length of a 
board, and a cubit and a half shall he the 
breadth of one board. 

17 Two Henons shall there he in one 
board, set in order one against another : 
thus shalt thou make for all the boards of 
the tabernacle. 

18 And thou shalt make the ■= boards for 
the tabernacle, twenty boards on the south 
side southward. 

19 And thou shalt make ^ forty sockets 
of silver under the twenty boards ; two 
sockets under one board for his two ten- 
ons, and two sockets under another board 
for his two tenons. 

20 And for the second side of the taber- 
nacle on the north side there shall be 
twenty boards, 

21 And their forty sockets o/ silver ; two 
sockets under one board, and two sockets 
under another board. 



ma inder or surplusage. 
chap. 27 : 10. 



% Heb.ftandj. c Num.3: 36; 4:31, 3^ 



manently spiritual nourishment and support. Heb. 
2 : 9 ; 1 John, 2:2; John 6 : 32-58 ; 1-5 : 1-11. 

37. Jesus Christ is the light of the world. All 
men, and especially his ministers, .are bound to fol- 
low him, that they may not walk in darkness, but 
have the light of life ; and let that light so shine in 
godly, beneficent conduct, that men sliall be led to 
glorify their Father fn heaven. John 8 : 12 ; Mat. 
5 : 14-16. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

1. Cult 71171 g work; work skilfully, ingeniously 
devised and wrought. 

2. Ei ght and tiventy cubits ; the common cubit 
was about eighteen inches ; the sacred cubit is sup- 
posed to have been somewhat longer, about twenty- 
one inches. 

6. Taches ; clasps, to hold the edges of the cur- 
tains together. 
8. One measure ; equal size. 
15. Boards ; a framework of boards or plank. 
Ill 



The bars and the veil. 



EXODUS XXVII. 



Altar of burnt -offering. 



22 And for the sides of the tabernacle 
westward thou shalt make six boards. 

23 And two boards shalt thou make for 
the corners of the tabernacle in the two 
sides. 

24 And they shall be * coupled together 
beneath, and they shall be "coupled to- 
gether above the head of it unto ''one 
ring : thus shall it be for them both ; they 

, shall be for the two corners. 

25 And they shall be eight boards, and 
their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets ; 
two sockets under one board, and two 
sockets under another board. 

26 H And thou shalt make bars of shit- 
tim-wood ; five for the boards of tlie one 
side of the tabernacle, 

27 And five bars for the boards of the 
other side of the tabernacle, and five bars 
for the boards of the side of the tabernacle, 
for the two sides westward. 

28 And the middle bar in the midst of 
the boards shall reach from end to end. 

29 And thou shalt overlay the boards 
with gold, and make their rings of gold 
for places for the bars : and thou shalt 
overlay the bars with gold. 

30 And thou shalt rear up the taber- 
nacle according to the •^fashion thereof 



nacle toward the south : and thou shalt 
put the table on the north side. 

36 And thou shalt make ashangingfor 
the door of the tent, of blue, and purple, 
and scarlet, and line twined linen, wrought 
with needlework. 

37 And thou shalt make for the hanging 
five pillars of shittim-?<'oo(/, and overlay 
them witli gold, a)ul their hooks shall be 
of gold : and thou shalt cast five sockets 
of brass for them. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

1 The altar of burnt-offering, with the vessels thereof. 
9 The court of the tabernacle inclosed -nath hangings 
and pillars. 18 The measure of the court. 20 The 
for the lamp. 

ND thou shalt ''make an altar o/shit- 
tim-wood, five cubits long, and five 
cubits broad ; the altar shall be four- 
square, and the height thereof shall be 
three cubits. 

2 And thou shalt make the 'horns of it 
upon the four corners thereof: his horns 
shall be of the same : and thou shalt over- 
lay it with brass. 

3 And thou shalt make his pans to re- 
ceive his ashes, and his shovels, and his 
basins, and his ficsh-hooks, and his fire- 
pans : all the vessels thereof thou shalt 



A' 



which was showed thee in the mount. 

31 T[And thou shalt make a ''veil o/ make J o/ brass, 
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine ; 4 And thou shalt make for it a grate of 
twined linen of cunning work : with cher- j network of brass ; and upon the net shalt 
ubim shall it be made. thou make four brazen rings in the four 

32 And thou shalt hang it upon four pil- corners thereof. 



lars of shittim-ri'ooc/ overlaid with gold : 
their hooks .sAa// be of gold, upon the four 
sockets of silver. 

33 H And thou shalt hang up the veil 
under the taclies, that thou maycst bring 
in thither within the veil the ark of the 
testimony : and the veil shall divide unto 
you between the 'holy p/ace and the most 
holy. 

34 And thou slialt put the mercy-seat 
upon tlie ark of the testimony in the most 
holy place. 

35 And thou shalt ''set the table without 
the veil, and the candlestick over against 



5 And thou shall put it under the com- 
pass of the altar beneath, that the net 
may be even to the midst of the altar. 

6 And thou shalt ''make staves for the 
altar, slaves o/shittim-wood, and overlay 
them with brass. 

7 And the staves shall be put into Ihe 
rings, and the staves shall be upon the 
two sides of the altar, to bear it. 

8 Hollow with boards shalt thou make 
it : as t it was showed thee in the mount, 
so 'shall they make it. 

9 1[ And thou shalt make the "'court of 
the tabernacle : for the south side south- 



* Heb. twined. « Psalm 133:1; 1 Cor. 3;lfi; 1 Peter, S.-S. 
b Enli. 4:IU; Col. 2 : 19. c cliap. W:9, 40; 27:8; ArU7:44; 
Heb. 8:5; 9:23. <l cliap. 36:36; Lev. 16:2; 2 Chron. 3:14; 
Mnt. 27:51; Heb 9:3i8; 10:20. • 1 King*, 8: 8-10; 2 Chri.n. 
5-7-10. f clinp. 40:22. It cimp. 36 : 37. !• clinp. 38 : 1 ; 2 CLron. 



4:1; E7.ekiel 43 : 13 ; Heb. 13 : 10. I clinp. 29 : 12 ; Lev. 4 : 7, 18 ; 
16- 18; \ Kinra, 1 :.W; 2:28; Psn. 118:27; Heb. 6: 18. J IKingo, 
7 • 48 ; Jer. hi: 20. k clinp. 30 : 4 ; Niim 4 : 14. f Heb. lit tliowed. 
1 chap. 26:30, etc.; Heb. 8:6. m cbnp. 38:9; I Kinss, 6:36; 
8:64; Psalm 92: 13; Ewk. 40: 20, etc. 



26. Bars; these were to run through the sides of 
the framework, to increase its bc.iuty and strength. 

33. The /toll/ place and the most holy ; these 
were the two divisions into which the tabernacle 
was divided. Heb. 9 : 6-9. 

36. The door : the entrance to the tabernacle. 
INSTRUCTIO.NS. 

30. In order to be accepted, we must consecrate 
to G-od the best tiiat we have, and be careful in all 
thinr;s to follow his directions. 

33. As tlie veil which sep;irated the holy from 
the most holy place, in tlie tabernacle and after- closure around the tabernacle 
112 



wards in the temple, was at the crucifixion of Christ 
rent in twain, to show us that the way to the throne 
of mercy is open for all, all should, with beli(i.ving 
and Kraleful hearts, draw near to God, in that new 
and living way opened by the death of Christ, that 
they may°obtain mercv, and find s^pe to help in 
all times of need. HJb. 9 : 1-14, 20-'22. 



CHArTER XXVII. 
2. Horns; projections at the corners. 
9. Conrt of the tabernacle ; a large open in- 



Tlic court of the tabernacle. 



EXODUS XXVIII. 



Garments for the pricsta. 



court of fine twined linen of a hundred 
cubits long for one side : 

10 And the twenty pillars thereof and 
their twenty sockets shall be of brass ; 
Ihc hooks of the pillars and their fillets 
.shall be of silver. 

11 And likewise for the north side in 
length there .fhall be hangings of a hun- 
dred cubits long, and his twenty pillars 
and their twenty sockets of brass ; the 
hooks of the pillars and their fillets of 
silver. 

12 ^ And for the breadth of the court 
on the west side shall be hangings of fifty 
cubits : their pillars ten, and their sockets 
ten. 

13 And the breadth of the court on the 
east side eastward shall be fifty cubits. 

14 The hangings of one side of the gate 
."fhall be fifteen cubits : their pillars three, 
and their sockets three. 

15 And on the other side shall be hang- 
ings fifteen cubits : their pillars three, and 
their sockets three. 

16 ^ And for the gate of the court shall 
he a ^hanging of twenty cubits, o/blue, 
and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined 
linen, wrought with '' needlework : and 
their pillars shall be four, and their sockets 
four. 

17 All the pillars round about the court 
.shall be filleted with silver ; their hooks 
shall be of silver, and their sockets of 
brass. 

18 T[ The length of the court shall be 
a hundred cubits, and the breadth * fifty I 
everywhere, and the height five cubits; 
o/fine twined linen, and their sockets of\ 
brass. 

19 All the vessels of the tabernacle in 
all the service thereof, and all the pins I 
thereof, and all the pins of the court, shall 
be o/'' brass. 

20 T[ And thou shalt command the chil- 



• clmp. .1R : 37. b chap. 2S : 39 ; 39 : 29 i Psalm J.i : 14. * Heb. 
Ji/tv by fifty, c ver. 3. d Leviticus 24 : -2. t Heb. to ascend up. 
e cliap. 30 : 8 ; 1 Sam. 3:3; -2 Chron. 13:11; Luke 12 : 3,"i. f chap. 
2«:43; 29:9,28; Lev. 3:17; lfi:34; 24:9; Num. 18:23; 19:21; 
ISnm. 30:25. s Lev. 8:2; Num. 18:7; 2 Chron. 26: 18-21 ; Heb. 



20. Oil-olive beateji ; oil obtained from beating 
olives in n. mortar, which was more pure than that 
obtained by pressin;^ them in a mill. 

21. Order it ; see to the lijjhting of the lamp, 
according to divine direction. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

8. Every altar for sacrifice, erected by divine 
appointment under the Old Testament, pointed for- 
ward to the sacrifice of Christ; who, through the 
etern;il Spirit, offered himself without spot unto G-od, 
to purge our consciences from dead works to serve 
the livnig (3-od. Heb. 9 : 10-21. 

20. Intelligence and purity should ever charac- 
terize the followers, and especially the ministers of 
Christ. He is the light of the world, and in follow- 
ing him they will not walk in darkness, but have the 
light of life, and be instrumental in communicatino- 



dren of Israel, that they bring ''thee pure 
oil-olive beaten for the light, to c<iuse the 
lamp tto burn always. 

21 In the tabernacle of the congregation 
without the veil, which is before the tes- 
timony, Aaron and his sons shall ■■ order 
it from evening to morning before the 
Lord : it shall be a ""statute for ever unto 
their generations on the behalf of the chil- 
dren of Israel. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

1 Aaron and hi-ssons are set apart for the jiriest's office. 
2 Holy garments are appointed. 6 The ephod. 15 
The breastplate with twelve precious stonps. 30 The 
Urim and Thummim. 31 The robe of the ephod, with 
pomegranates and bells. 3G Tlie plate of the mitre. 
39 The embroidered coat. 40 The garments for 
Aaron's sons. 

AND take thou unto ethee Aaron thy 
brother, and his sons with him, from 
among the children of Israel, that he may 
minister unto me in the priest's office, even 
Aaron, Nadab and iVbihu, Elcazar and 
Ithamar, Aaron's sons. 

2 And thou shalt make ''holy garments 
for Aaron thy brother, for 'glory and for 
beauty. 

3 And thou shalt speak unto all that are 
wise-hearted,i whom I have filled with 
the spirit of wisdom, that they may make 
Aaron's garments to consecrate him, that 
he may minister unto me in the priest's 
ofiice. 

4 And these are the garments which 
they shall make; a ''breastplate, and an 
ephod,' and a '"robe, and a "broidered 
coat, a "mitre, and a p girdle: and they 
shall make holy garments for Aaron thy 
brother, and his sons, that he may min- 
ister unto me in the priest's office. 

5 And they shall take gold, and blue, 
and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen. 

6 it And they shall make the ephod of 
gold, o/blue, and o/purple, o/scarlet, and 
fine twined linen, with cunning work. 

7 It shall have the two shoulder-pieces 

.5:1,4. h chap. 29 : .1, 29 ; Lev. 8 : 7, 30 ; Num. 20 : 2fi, 28 ; Psalm 
132:16. i Lsaiab 61 :3, 10; Rev. 5:10; 19:8. j chap. 31:3; 
:i5:30-3.S; Prov.2:6; 1 Cor. 12:11. k ver. 15 ; chap. 39 : 8, 41 ; 
Isaiah .59: 17; Eph.6;14. I verse a m verse 31 ; chap. 39 : 22. 
n Lev. 8:7. o chap. 39: 28; Zech. 3:5. visa. U:.S. 



it for the salvation of their fellow-men. Mat. 5:16; 
John 1:9; 8:12. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

2. Hoi]/ garme.7its ; garments to be used not on 
ordinary occasions, but when engaged in the public 
worship of God. For glory and for heaiity ; to 
inspire proper feelings towards the sacred olTice and 
its ministers, and thus promote proper feelings 
towards (jod. 

3. Wisr-hearted ; ingenious and skilful. Con- 
secrate Itim, ; to be a sign and badge of his conse- 
cration to the priest's office. 

4. A robe ; a garment worn under the ephod, 
and reaching below the knees. A mitre ; a crown 
for the he;wl. A girdle ; a belt to fasten the loose 
garments close round the body. 

113 



Epiiod aiid breastplate. 



EXODUS XXVTII. 



The Urim and Tlmmmim. 



thereof joined at the two edges thereof; 
and so it shall be joined together. 

8 And the * curious girdle of the cphod, 
which is upon it, shall be of the same, 
according to the work thereof; even of 
gold, o/bluc, and purple, and scai-let, and 
tine twined linen. 

9 And thou shalt take two onyx-stones, 
and grave on them the names of the chil- 
dren of Israel : 

10 Six of their names on one stone, and 
the other six names of the rest on the other 
stone, according to their birth. 

1 1 With tlie work of an engraver in stone, 
like the " engravings of a signet, shalt thou 
engrave the two stones with the names of 
the children of Israel: thou shalt make 
them to be set in ouches of gold. 

12 And thou shalt put the two stones 
upon the shoulders of the cphod/or stones 
of memorial unto the children of Israel : 
and Aaron shall ''bear their names before 
the Lord upon his two shoulders for a 
memorial."^ 

1 3 ^f And thou shalt make ouches o/gold ; 

14 And two chains of pure gold at the 
ends; o/wreathen work shalt thou make 
them, and fasten the wreathen chains to 
the ouches. 

15 1[ And thou shalt ''make the breast- 
plate of judgment with cunning work; 
after the work of the ephod thou shalt 
make it; o/gold, o/bluc, and o/ purple, 
and of scarlet, and of line twined linen, 
shalt thou make it. 

16 Foursquare it shall be ie/ng' doubled ; 
a span shall he the length thereof, and a 
span shall be the breadth thereof. 

17 And thou shalt tset in it settings of 
stones, even four rows of stones : the first 
row shall 6<? a t sardius, a topaz, and a car- 
buncle : this shall be the first row. 

18 And the second row shall be an eme- 
rald, a sapphire, and a diamond. 

19 And the third row a ligure, an agate, 
and an amethyst. 

20 And the fourth row a beryl, and an 
onyx, and a ""jasper : they shall be set in 
gold in their Enclosings. 

21 Aiul the stones shall be "^with the 
names of the children of Israel, twelve, 
according to their names, like the engrav- 



' Or, embroidered. • ver S6. b vcr. 'Jit ; clinp. 3^1 : fi, 7. c Josli. 
4:7; Zeiliarinllfi:14. d i|,np. 39: 8; Lev. 8: a t Hi-I) Jt// in iV 
Jillingt of ttone. % Or, ruhy. e Uev. 4 :3; 21 : 19, -.'O. J Hcb. 

11. Signet; a seal. Ouches; sockets. 

12. For a memorial ; to put llieiii in remem- 
brance that Aaron, as priest, appeared in their be- 
half before the Lord. 

1.5. Breastplate of judgment ; so called be- 
cause worn by (he high-priest when he applied to 
the Lord for his judgment or decision, in matters 
about which tiiey inquired of him. 

16. A span ; about nine inches. 
114 



ings of a signet ; every one Avith his *b. "■ na^ 
name shall they be according to the twelve 
tribes. 

22 T[ And thou shalt make upon the 
breastplate chains at the ends 0/ wreathen 
work of pure gold. 

23 And thou shalt make upon the breast- 
plate two rings of gold, and shalt pvit the 
two rings on the two ends of the breast- 
plate. 

24 And thou shalt put the two wreathen 
chains of gold in the two rings which are 
on the ends of the breastplate. 

25 And the other two ends of the two 
wreathen chains thou shalt fasten in the 
two ouches, and put them on the shoulder- 
pieces of the ephod before it. 

26 ^And thou shalt make two rings of 
gold, and thou shalt put them upon the 
two ends of the breastplate in the border 
thereof, which is in the side of the ephod 
inward. 

27 And two other rings of gold thou 
shalt make, and shalt put them on the 
two sides of the ephod underneath, tow- 
ard the fore part thereof, over against the 
other coupling thereof, above the curious 
girdle of the ephod. 

28 And they shall bind thebreastplate by 
the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod 
with a lace of blue, that it may be above 
the curious girdle of the cphod, and that the 
breastplate be not loosed from the ephod. 

29 And Aaron shall bear the names of 
the children of Israel in the breastplate 
of judgment upon his heart, w-hen he 
goeth in unto the holy place, for a ^ memo- 
rial before the Lord continually. 

30 1[ And thou shalt put in the breast- 
plate of judgment the ''Urim and the 
Thummim ; and they shall be upon 
Aaron's heart, when he goeth in before 
the Lord : and Aaron shall bear the judg- 
ment of the children of Israel upon his 
heart' before the Lord continually. 

31 T^And thou shalt make the robe of 
the ephod all of blue. 

32 And there shall be a hole in the top 
of it, in the mid.st thereof: it shall have 
a binding of woven work round about the 
hole of it, as it were the hole of an J ha- 
bergeon, that it be not rent. 

Jillingt. f Rev. 21:13 e ver. 12. h t.ev. 8:8; Numbers 27:21 ; 
Deiit, 33 : 8 : 1 Siiin. 2f< : 6 , Ezra S : 03 ; Nell. 7 : 65. i Heb. 9 : 24. 
j Nell. 4: 1«; .lob 41 :S6. 



17. Setliuffs of stoiN'.s ; the twelve precious 
stone.s iiicnlioned ver. 17-20. 

30. The Urim and the Thiunmim ; the mean- 
ing of these words is, liglits and perfections: indi- 
cating, as some suppose, the value of the truth 
conveyed and the clearness of the mode of convey- 
ing it. 

32. Habergeon ; a. coat with iron network or 
small plates, to defend the neck and breast. 



The plate of the mitre. 



EXODUS XXIX. 



Other articles of dress. 



b.c'h9k" 33 ^And beneath upon the *hem 
of it thou shalt make pomegranates of 
blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round 
about the liem thereof; and bells of gold 
between them round about : 

34 A golden bell and a pomegranate, a 
golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the 
hem of the robe round about. 

35 And it shall be upon Aaron to min- 
ister : and his sound shall be heard when 
he goeth ''in unto the holy place before 
the Lord, and when he cometh out, that 
he die not. 

36 T[And thou shalt make a ''plate of 
pure gold, and grave upon it, like the en- 
gravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE 
LORD. 

37 And thou shalt put it on a "^ blue lace, 
that it may be upon the mitre ; upon the 
fore-front of the mitre it shall be. 

38 And it shall be upon Aaron's fore- 
head, that Aaron may "^bcar the iniquity 
of the holy things, which the children of 
Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts ; 
and it shall be always upon his forehead, 
that they may be "accepted before the 
Lord. 

39 TfAud thou shalt embroider the coat 
of line linen, and thou shalt make the 
mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make 
the girdle of "^needlework. 

40 ^And for Aaron's sons thou shalt 
make coats, and thou shalt make for them 
girdles, and bonnets shalt thou make for 
them, for ^ glory and for beauty. 

41 And thou shalt put them upon Aaron 
thy brother, and his sons with him ; and 



* Or, tkirts. aHeh. 9:12. h cliap. :i9:™; Zedi. 14: iO ; Heb. 
7:2fi; I'2:U; Kev. 21 : 27. c Ter.-J8,;!l: Num. l/i:38. i ver.43; 
Lev. 10:17: 23:9; Num. 18:1; l.ia. .5:i : H, 1 1 : Ezek. 4:4-6; John 
1 : 2;) ; 2 Cor. 5 : 2 1 ; Heb. 9 : 28 ; 1 Peter, 2 : 24. e Leviticus 1:4; 
22 : 27 ; 2:! : 1 1 ; Isn. .=.« : 7 ; fiO : 7 ; Eyili. 1 : H ; 1 Peter, 2 : .5. f Psa. 
45:14. g ver.2. h chap. 29: 7; 30:311 : 40: lii; lsa.«l : 1. f Heb. 



33. Pomegra/iates ; balls in the form of pome- 
granates, a species of fruit shaped like an apple. 

34. A golden he.ll avd a pomegranate ; one 
after the other, alternately, round the hem of the 
robe. The bell was an emblem of pleasant sound, 
and the pomegranate of abundant fruitfulness; in- 
dicating the duty of making a good profession, and 
abounding in fruits of holiness. 

35. Bear the iniquity of the holy things; 
typically make atonement for their sins, and thus 
obtain forgiveness through the atonement of Christ. 

41. Anoint them ; in token of their dedication 
to the sacred office. Sanctify them; set them 
apart, and devote them to tlieir work. 

43. Sear not iniquity ; do not commit sin, by 
neglecting divine directions, thus e.xposing them- 
selves to divine judgments. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The high-priest, among the Jews, was a strik- 
ing type of the Messiah, who, as a priest, entered 
the holy place with his blood, and obtained eternal 
redemption for his people. Heb. 9 : 11, 12. 

3. The ingenuity of men, tlieir genius and judg- 
ment, their ability to plan, and their power to exe- 
cute, all come from G-od, and should all be devoted 
to his service. Jas. 1 : 17. 



shalt'' anoint them, and t consecrate 'them, 
and sanctify them, that they may minister 
unto me in the priest's office. 

42 And thou shalt make them J linen 
breeches to cover + their nakedness ; from 
the loins even unto the thighs they shall 
reach. * 

43 And they shall be upon Aaron, and 
upon his sons, when they come in unto 
the tabernacle of the congregation, or 
when they come near '' unto the altar to 
minister in the holy place; that 'they 
bear not iniquity, and die : it shall be a 
statute'" for ever unto him and his seed 
after him. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

1 The sacrifice and ceremonies of consecrating the 
priests. 38 The continual burnt-ofFering. 45 God's 
promise to dwell among the children of Israel. 

AND this is the thing that thou shalt 
do unto "them to hallow them, to 
minister unto mc in the priest's office : 
Take one young bullock, and two rams 
without blemish, 

2 And "unleavened bread, and cakes un- 
leavened tempered with oil, and wafers 
unleavened anointed with oil : o/wheaten 
flour shalt thou make them. 

3 And thou shalt put them into one 
basket, and bring them in the basket, with 
the bullock and the two rams. 

4 And Aaron and his sons thou shalt 
bring unto the door of the tabernacle of 
the congregation, and shalt Pwash them 
with water. 

5 And thou shalt take the ''garments, 



fill their hand, i Lev. 8 ; Mehxevra h-.-i. jLev. Ifi:4; Ezeiiiel 
44:18. % \ieh. flesh nf theirnakednem. ?i Ueh. bt. k chapter 
20:26. 1 Lev.6:1.17; 20:19,20; 22:9; Numbers 9: 13; 18:22. 
m cliap. 27:21; Leviticus 17:7. n Leviticus 8 : 2, etc. o Lev. 
2:4; 6:20-22. P chap. .W : 19-21 ; 40:12; Leviticus 8: 6; Heb. 
10 : 22 ; 1 Peter, 3:21. q chap. 28 : 2-8. 



9, 12. Our great High-priest, of whom Aaron was 
a type, bears all his people upon his heart, presents 
their wants before bis Father, and will save to the 
uttermost all who come unto God through him, 
seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them. 
1 Pet. 2 : 24 ; Heb. 7 : 2-5. 

21. The names of all his people are in the Lamb's 
book of life; he will never blot them out, but will 
acknowledge them as his redeemed people, before 
his Father and the holy angels. R.ev. 3 : .5 ; Mat. 
10 : 32. 

30. All spiritual illumination and perfection are 
in Jesus Christ, and he is able and willing to com- 
municate according to the wants of all who feel 
their need, and heartily apply to him. 

38. Holiness to the Lord w.as the great and all- 
pervading characteristic of the Redeemer ; and it is 
his great design, by his word, his Spirit, and his 
providence, in all his dispensations to make his peo- 
ple like him. 1 Cor. 1.3 : 49 ; 1 John, 3 : 2. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

1. To hallow ; set apart from secular to sacred 
duties. Blemish; defect or deformity. 

2. Wafers ; thin cakes. 

115 



The consecration of 



EXODUS XXIX. 



Jlaron and his sons. 



and put upon Aaron the coat, and the 
robe of the epliod, and tlie cphod, and the 
breastplate, and gird liiin with the curious 
girdle of the epliod : 

6 And thou shalt put the mitre upon 
his head, and put the holy crown upon 
the mitre. 

7 Then shalt thou take the anointing oil, 
and pou r it * upon his head, and anoint him. 

8 And thou shalt bring ""his sons, and 
put coats upon them. 

9 And thou shalt gird them with girdles, 
Aaron and his sons, and *put the bonnets 
on them : and the priest's "^ office shall be 
theirs for a perpetual statute : and thou 
shalt t consecrate Aaron and his sons. 

10 And thou shalt cause a bullock to be 
brought before the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation ; and Aaron and his sons shall 
put their ^ hands upon the head of the 
bullock. 

11 And thou shalt kill the bullock be- 
fore the Lord, by the door of the taber- 
nacle of the congregation. 

12 And thou shalt take of the "blood of 
the bullock, and put it upon the horns of 
the altar with thy finger, and pour all the 
blood beside the bottom of the altar. 

13 And thou shalt take all the fat that 
covereth the inwards, and the + caul that 
is above the liver, and the two kidneys, 
and the fat that is upon them, and burn 
them upon the altar. 

14 But the flesh of the bullock, and his 
skin, and his dung, shalt thou burn with 
fire "^ without the camp : it is a sin-offering. 

15 IT Thou shalt also take one ram ; and 
Aaron and his sons shall put their hands 
upon the ^hcad of the ram. 

16 And thou shalt slay the ram, and 
thou shalt take his blood, and sprinkle it 
round about upon the altar. 

17 And thou shalt cut the ranj in pieces, 
and wash the inwards of him, and his 
legs, and put them unto his pieces, and 
unto^ his liead. 

18 And thou shalt burn tlic whole ram 
upon the altar : it is a burnt-oflering unto 
the Lord : it is a '' sweel savor, an oficring 
made by fire unto the Lord. 

19 ^ And thou shaft take the ' other ram ; 

• Levitii-uB 10:7; Pnulm 13.1:2. b chap. 28 : 4f). etc * Hnh. 
bind, c Niimbprs 18:7; Hebrews ft: 4. f He^i. Jill thr hand of. 
d Lev.l:4; 3:2; 8:U; loRinli 53 : 8 i 2Cor..'i:2I. • Lev.8:I.V 
* Or, midrib, f Lev. 4: 11, 12; Heb. 13; 11. f ver. 10. J Or, 



6. Hofy crown; tfie plate of gold. Cliap. 
28:36,37. 

7. A7ioi)iti>iff oil ; an oil prepared whh various 
spices. Chap. 30 : 23-33. 

9. The bonnets; or turbans. Cliap. 28 : 40. 

10. Put their hands npon the head of the 
Jndlock ; this expressed their conviction of jjuilt, 
and their hope that through the shedding of tlie 
blood of that victim, pointing forward to tlie blood 
of Chri.st, they should receive panlon. 

ne 



and Aaron and his sons shall put *b.c:hoi; 
their hands upon the head of the ram. 

20 Then shalt thou kill the ram, and 
take of his blood, and put it J upon the 
tip of the right ear of Aaron, and upon 
the tip of the right car of his sons, and 
upon the thumb of their right hand, and 
upon the great toe of their right foot, and 
sprinkle the blood upon the altar .round 
about. 

21 And thou shalt take of the blood that 
is upon the altar, and of the anointing 
oil,'' and sprinkle it upon Aaron, and upon 
his garments, and upon his sons, and upon 
the garments of his sons with him : and 
he shall be hallowed, and his garments, 
and his sons, and his sons' garments with 
him. 

22 Also thou shalt take of the ram the 
fat and the rump, and tlie fat that cover- 
eth the inw'ards, and the caul ahove the 
liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat 
that 15 upon them, and the right shoulder; 
for it is a ram of consecration. 

23 And one loaf of bread, and one cake 
of oiled bread, and one w"afer out of the 
basket of the unleavened bread that is 
before the Lord : 

24 And thou shalt put all in the hands 
of Aaron, and in the hands of his sons ; 
and shalt II wave them /or a 'wave-oflcr- 
ing before the Lord. 

25 And thou shalt i-eceive them of their 
hands, and burn them upon the altar for 
aburnt-offering, for a '" sweet savor before 
the Lord: it is an offering made by fire 
unto the Lord. 

26 And thou shalt take the "breast of 
the ram of Aaron's consecration, and 
wave it for a wave-offering before the 
Lord: and it shall be fhy part. 

27 And thou shalt "sanctify the breast 
of the wave-oflering, and the shoulder of 
the heave-offering, which is waved, and 
which is heaved up, of the ram of the 
consecration, even of thut which is for 
Aaron, and of that which is for his sons : 

28 And it shall be Aaron's and his sons' 
by a statute for ever from the children of 
Israel ; for it is a heave-offering: and it 
shall be a heave-offering from the children 



upon, h Genesis 8 : 2 


; Elih. 6:2; Pbil. 4:18. i ver. 3. j Lev. 


8:24; Hebrews 9: 22. 


k cliap. 30 : 2A, etc. || Heb. thake to and 


fro. 1 Lev. 7:30. m 


ver. 18. "Lev. 8:29. o Num. 18: 11,18; 


Deut 18:3. 





12. The horns of the altar ; chap. 27 : 2. 

].'). One ram ; one of ihe two mentioned ver. 1. 

IS. Burn the whole ; denoting the necessity of 
an entire consecration of the wliole man to God, as 
Well as the necessity of an atonement, in order to 
salvation. 

24. Wave them ; move them to and fro. 

28. Heave-offering; one lifted up. and thus pre- 
sented to God. Peace-offerings ; indicating peace 
and communion with God. 



Consecration of the altar 



EXODUS XXIX. 



Cuntinual burnt-offering 



B.^i'™' of Israel of the sacrifice of their 
peace-offerings, even their heave-offering 
unto the Lord. 

29 T[And the holy garments of * Aaron 
shall be his sons' after him, to be anointed 
therein, and to be consecrated in them. 

30 And * that son that is priest in his 
stead shall put them on ''seven days, 
when he cometh into the tabernacle of 
the congregation to minister in the holy 
place. 

31 ^ And thou shalt take the ram of the 
consecration, and seethe his flesh in the 
holy place. 

32 x\nd Aaron and his sons shall eat 
the flesh of the ram, and the "^ bread that 
is in the basket, by the door of the taber- 
nacle of the congregation. 

33 And they shall ''eat those things 
wherewith the atonement was made, to 
consecrate and to sanctify them : but a 
stranger shall *not eat thereof^ because 
they are holy. 

34 And if aught of the flesh of the con- 
secrations, or of the bread, remain unto 
the morning, then thou shalt "^burn the 
remainder with fire : it shall not be eaten, 
because it is holy. 

35 And thus shalt thou do unto Aaron, 
and to his sons, according to all things 
which I have commanded thee : seven 
days shalt thou consecrate them. 

36 And thou shalt ^ofli'er every day a 
bullock /or a sin-offering for atonement: 
and thou shalt cleanse the altar, when 
thou hast made an atonement for it, and 
thou shalt anoint '' it, to sanctify it. 

37 Seven davs thou shalt make an 



a Numbers 18:8. * Heb. he nf his sons, b Lev. 8 : 35 ; 9:1. 
c ver. 2, 3, 23. d Lev. 10:13-18: .lolin « : 53, Ho. e Lev. 22 : 10. 
f Leviticus 7: 18; 8:32. g EzekieH3:27; Heb. 10: II. h cliap 

30:26-29; 40: '" ' " " -" " — — - . 

IChron. 16: 10 



':i»; »;:v.j. g £,zeKiel 4:i:'i7; Met). iu:ll. n cliap. 
0:10. i chap. 30:29; Mat. 23:1 <1. jNum.28:3,4; 
■10; 2Chron. 2:4; 31:3; Ezra 3 : 3 ; Dan. 9:21,27; 



30. That son ; the one who should succeed his 
father in the high-priest's office. Wiieii he Com- 
eth ; before he should be permitted to discharge the 
duties of high-priest. 

33. Eat those things icherewith the atone- 
ment vas made; denoting the necessity of luiion 
to liim by whom it was ma<le. Mat. 26 : 26; John 
6 : .'J.'}_;-).5 ; 1 Cor. 6 : 17. 

3(5. Sanctify it ; set it apart to the worship of 
God. 

37. For the altar; upon it. Holy; devoted to 
God. Mat. 23: 19. 

38. Contin iially ; each day. 

40. A tenth-deal ; one-tenth of an ephah, or 
three quarts, an ephah being seven and a half gal- 
lons. A kin ; five quarts, or one-si.\th of an ephah. 

42. A continual burnt-offering ; representing 
their continual need of the constant efficacy of the 
atonement, righteousne.ss, and intercession of Christ. 

4"). Dwell among the children of Israel ; by 
his continual presence in the shekinah, or visible 
glory, on the mercy-seat, where he was worshipped, 
and from which he made known his will. 
IXSTRUCTIONS. 

1. It is the will of God that those who minister 



atonement for the altar, and sanctify 
it ; and it shall be an altar most holy : 
whatsoever' toucheth the altar shall be 
holy. 

38 TTNow this is that which thou shalt 
offer upon the ■" altar : two lambs of the 
first year day by day continually. 

39 The one lamb thou shalt offer in the 
morning ; and the other lamb thou shalt 
offer at even : 

40 And with the one lamb a tenth-deal 
of flour mingled with the fourth part of a 
hin of beaten oil; and the fourth part of 
a hin of wine for a drink-offering. 

41 And the other lamb thou shalt offer 
at even, and shalt do thereto according 
to the meat-offering of the morning, and 
according to the drink-ofl'ering thereof, 
for a sweet savor, an offering made by 
fire unto the Lord. 

42 This shall be a continual burnt-offer- 
ing throughout your generations at the 
door of the tabernacle of the congregation 
before the Lord, where I will ""meet you, 
to speak there unto thee. 

43 And there I Avill meet with the chil- 
dren of Israel, and t the tabernacle shall be 
sanctified by my glory. 

44 And I will sanctify the tabernacle 
of the congregation, and the altar: I will 
sanctify also both Aaron and his sons, to 
minister to me in the priest's office. 

45 T[ And I will "'dwell among the chil- 
dren of Israel, and will be their God. 

46 And they shall know that °I am the 
Lord their God, that brought them forth 
out of the land of Egypt, that I may dwell 
among them : I am the Lord their God. 



12:11; John 1:29; Rev. 5:9-12. k chapter 25 : 22 ; 30:6,36; 
Num. 17:4. f Or, Israel. 1 cban. 40:34; 2 Chron. 5 : 14; 7; 1-3; 
Ezek. 43:5; Haggai 2 : 7, 9; Malacbi3:l. m chap. 25:8; Lev. 
26:12; PsaUn68:18; Zech. 2:10; John 14: 17, 20; 2 Cor. 6:16; 
Rev. 21 : 3. n cbap. 20 : 2. 



in'holy things, making known the will of God and 
leading the devotions of his people, should not only 
be called of him, but should be publicly set apart 
to their work. 

10. Ministers of religion, as well as their people, 
are sinners, and need pardon through the atonement 
of Christ, and the purifying influences of his Spirit, 
in order rightly to di-scharge their duties; 

18. The evidence of genuine repentance for sin, 
faith in Christ, and pardon through his atonement, 
is sincere and hearty consecration of body and soul 
to his service. 

28. The effects of reconciliation to God are peace 
and communion with him, access to his mercy-seat, 
and grace to help in all times of need. 

33. Continued union to Christ, by habitual trust 
in him, not only for pardon, but for wisdom, strength, 
consolation, and all needed good, is essenti.al to 
progress in holiness and preparation for heaven. 

42. Habitual acknowledgment of God as the 
author of all good, and daily supplication to him 
for the blessings which we need for ourselves, our 
friends, and all our fellow-men, are the duly of all. 
They are also a privilege, the enjoyment of which 
should not be sacrificed for any worldly good. 
117 



The altar of incense. 



EXODUS XXX. 



The brazen laver. 



CHAPTER XXX. 



1 The altar of incense. 11 The ransom of souls. 17 
The brazen laver. 22 The holy anointing oil. 34 
The composition of the perfume. 

AND thou shall "make an altar to burn 
inccn.se upon : o/shittim-wood slialt 
thou make it. 

2 A ^iwh'ii shall be the length thereof, and 
a cubit the breadth thereof; four.square 
shall it be, and two cubits shall he the 
height thereof : the horns thereof shall be 
of the same. 

3 And thou shall •'overlay it with pure 
gold, the * top thereof, and the ^ sides there- 
of round about, and the horns thereof; 
and thou shalt make unto it a crown of 
gold round about. 

4 And two golden rings slialt thou make 
to it under the crown of it, by the two 
corners - thereof, upon the two sides of 
it shalt thou make it : and they shall be 
for places for the staves to bear it withal. 

5 And thou shalt make the *= staves of 
shittim-wood, and overlay them with 
gold. 

6 And thou shalt put it before the ^ veil 
that is by the ark of the testimony, before 
the ^ mercy-seat that is over the testimony, 
•where I will meet with thee. 

7 And Aaron shall burn thereon ^ sweet 
incense "^ every morning: when he dress- 
eth the lamps, he shall burn incense 
upon it. 

8 And when Aaron II lightcth the lamps 
at * even, he shall burn incense upon it, 
a perpetual incen.se before the Loud 
throughout your generations. 

9 Ye shall offer Sno strange incense 
thereon, nor burnt-sacrifice, nor meat- 
offering; neither shall ye pour drink- 
offering thereon. 

10 And Aaron shall make an atonement 
upon the horns of it '"once in a year wi-th 
the blood of the sin-offering of atoncment.s ; 
once in the year shall he make atonement 
upon it throughout your generations: it 
is most holy unto the Loiin. 

] 1 *\\ And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 



• Hiap. »7 : 2S. k clinp. -25 : II. * Heb. roo/. \ Vleh. mallt. 
tHeb-Wif. c clinp. M:!^. <1 cli«p. Jfi:.-!! ; 40:3; Mlit 27 : fil ; 
Heb. 9:3. • cliiip. W .-21. \ Ht-b. incente of tpica. f ver. 31 ; 
ISain.S:28; 1 Chron.':3: 1.3; l.iikc i :9. WVieh. cauttthtoatctnd. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

2. A cuhit ; supposed to he the sacred cubit, 
about twenty-one inches. Cliap. 26 : 2. 

3. A crown ; cornice or border. 

6. The veil ; which separi^ted the holy from the 
most holy place. 

7. Sweet ince7ise ; this represented the inter- 
cession of Christ for his people, as the burnt-olTering 
did liis atonement. 

9. Strange incense ; such as God had not com- 
manded. 

10. Once in a year ; on the great day of atone- 

118 



12 When thou takest the 'sum of VI u". 
the children of Israel after t their num- 
ber, then shall they give every man a 
ransomJ for his soul unto the Lord, when 
thou numberest them ; that there be no 
plague '' among them, when thou number- 
est them. 

13 This they shall give, every one that 
passeth among them that are numbered, 
half a shekel after the shekel of the sanc- 
tuary : (a shekel is twenty gerahs :) a 
half shekel shall be the offeri ng of the Lord. 

14 Every one that passeth among them 
that are numbered, from twenty years old 
and above, shall give an offering unto the 
Lord. 

15 The rich shall not tgive more, and 
the poor shall not ^ give less, than half a 
shekel, when they give an offering unto 
the Lord, to make an atonement for your 
souls. 

16 And thou shalt take the atonement- 
money of the children of Israel, and shalt 
appoint it for the service of the tabernacle 
of the congregation ; that it may be a me- 
morial unto the children of Israel before 
the Lord, to make an atonement for your 
souls. 

17 1[And the Lord spake unto ;Mo.scs, 
saying, 

1 8 Thou shalt also make a ' laver o/brass, 
and his foot also of brass, to wash withal : 
and thou shalt put it between the taber- 
nacle of the congregation and the altar, 
and thou shalt put water therein. 

19 For Aaron and his sons shall '"wash 
their hands and their feet thereat. 

20 When they go into the tabernacle of 
the congregation, they shall wash with 
water, that they die not ; or when they 
come near to the altar to minister, to burn 
offering made by fire unto the Lord. 

21 So they shall wash their hands and 
their feet, that they die not : and it shall 
be a statute for CA'cr to them, even to 
him and to his seed throughout their 
generations. 

22 T[ Moreover the Lord spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 





sttletli up. * Heb. between tt\e two 


evetu. 


It Lev. 


lU: 


I. kLev. 


IR 


18; '23: 


27; Heb.9:7 


•2.1. 


Num. 


:2; 26: 


2. t Hell 


thetn t/tat 




ttobenu 


mbered. j Nu 


m.3l 


:.10. k 


2Snin.2 


:2-l.') 


t 


Heh.mul- 


tiplv- %H 


sb.diminis/t. 


Ich: 


p. 38:8 


I Kings 


7:38. 




P»n.26:6. 



ment. Lev. 16 : 18 ; 23 : 27, 28. Shall— male 
atonemeJit ; this showed that atonement was neces- 
sary, in order to the efficacy of intercession. 

12. The Sinn; the census; their number. A 
ransom for his sonl ; a tribute paid to God for 
the preservation and blessings of life, and for the 
support of divine worship. 

13. Half a shekel ; in value about twenty-fivf' 
cents. 

IS. A laver; large bowl or basin. 
20. Wash with water ; an emblem of the puri- 
fying influences of the Holy Ghost. 



The holy ointment^ 



EXODUS XXXI. 



and perfume. 



D. cliwf 23 Take tliou also unto thee prin- 
cipal spices, of pure * myrrh five hundred 
shekels, and of sweet cinnamon half so 
much, eve7i two hundred and fifty shekels, 
and of sweet calamus two hundred and 
fifty shekels, 

24 And of cassia five hundred shekels, 
after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of 
oil-olive a hin : 

25 And thou slialt make it an oil of holy 
ointment, an ointment compound after the 
art of the * apothecary : it shall be a '' holy 
anointing oil. 

26 And thou shalt ''anoint the taber- 
nacle of the congregation therewith, and 
the ark of the testimony, 

27 And the table and all his vessels, 
and the candlestick and his vessels, and 
the altar of incense, 

28 And the altar of burnt-offering with 
all his vessels, and the laver and his foot. 

29 And thou shalt sanctify them, that 
they may be most holy : '^ whatsoever 
touchcth them shall be holy. 

30 And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his 
sons, and consecrate them, that they may 
minister unto me in the priest's office. 

31 And thou shalt speak unto the chil- 
dren of Israel, saying. This shall be a 
holy anointing oil unto me throughout 
your generations. 

32 Upon man's flesh shall it not be 
poured, neither shall ye make any other 
like it, after the composition of it : it is 
holy,*" and it shall be holy unto you. 

33 Whosoever compoundeth anyVike it, 
or whosoever puttcth any of it upon a 
stranger, shall even be cut off from his 
people. 

34 TfAnd the Lord said unto Moses, 



a Psa.4S:8. * Or, perfu 
8:10. d chap. M: 37. ever 



^89::0. c cliap. 40:9; Lev. 
13; lChron.9::!l,:iO. f Heb. 



23. Principal spices ; of the purest and most 
precious kind. Five hundred sliekels ; about 
sixteen pounds. 

2-5. The aiiothecary ; perfumer, or maker of 
ointments. 

30. Anoint Aaron and his sons ; in token of 
the necessity of their being endued with the Holy 
Spirit, to fit them for their duties. 

32. Upon man's Jiesh ; the flesh of men who 
were not priests. 

34. Stacte — 07iycha,aud galbanum ; fragrant 
spices or gums. 

35. Confection- ; mixture. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

]. In the Mosaic ritual we are continually re- 
minded of ihe priesthood, sacrifice, and intercession 
of Christ, through the incense of whose merits alone 
our prayers can ascend with acceptance before God. 

8. Our need of Christ's intercession is constant; 
and day by day, morning and evening, continually 
our supplications should ascend before him as in- 
cense, and the lifting up of our hearts in prayer 
and praise as our habitual sacrifice. Heb. 13: 15. 

16. A portion of what Grod has given us should 
be gratefully devoted to the support of his worship, 



Take unto thee ""sweet spices, stacte, and 
onycha, and galbanum ; these sweet spices 
with pure frankincense: of each shall 
there be a like iceight : 

35 And thou shalt make it a perfume, 
a confection after the art of the apothe- 
cary, t tempered together, pure and holy : 

36 And thou shalt beat some of it very 
small, and put of it before the testimony 
in the tabernacle of the congregation, 
where s I will meet with thee : it shall be 
unto you most holy. 

37 And as for the perfume which thou 
shalt make, ye sliall not make to your- 
selves according to the composition there- 
of: it shall be unto thee holy for the Lord. 

38 Whosoever shall make like unto that, 
to smell ''thereto, shall even be cut off" 
from his people. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

1 Bezaleel and Aholiab are called and made meet for 
the work of the tabernacle. 12 The observation of 
the sabbath is again conunanded. 18 Moses receiv- 
eth the two tables. 

ND the Lord spake unto jNIoses, say- 



AND 

jA. ing. 



2 See, I have called by 'name J Beza- 
leel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the 
tribe of Judah : 

3 And I ''have filled him with the spirit 
of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, 
and in knowledge, and in all manner of 
workmanship, 

4 To devise cunning works, to work in 
gold, and in silver, and in brass, 

5 And in cutting of stones, to set them, 
and in carving of timber, to work in all 
manner of workmanship. 

6 And I, behold, I have given with him 
Aholiab,' the son of Ahisamach, of the 



salted. Lev.2:13. gchap.29:-12; Lev 
j lCliron.2:-20. k chap.3ri:3I ; 1 Kii 



lfi:2. liver.33. i Isa.4.T:3,4. 
^,3:9; 7:14. 1 chap. 35: 34. 



as a memorial of his goodness and a testimony of 
our obligations for all the blessings of his provi- 
dence and grace. 

21. Purity of heart and life is as needful as the 
pardon of sin ; and for it we should look habitually 
to the Holy Spirit, the Author and Finisher of all 
that is spiritually good in the children of men. 

31. All our services must be perfumed with the 
incense of Christ's merits, and be the fruit of his 
Spirit, working in us both to will and also to do, in 
order to be holy, or ascend before Grod with accept- 
ance. John 15 : 5 ; Rev. 8 : 4. 

38. While we rely on the atonement, righteous- 
ness, and intercession of Christ as the one only and 
all-sufficient Mediator, and look to his Spirit as the 
only Sanctifier, we should most carefully abstain 
from looking to or depending on any other ; for there 
is none other name under heaven given among men 
whereby we must be saved. Acts 4 : 12. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 
6 Given with him ; as his associate and assist- 
ant in making the tabernacle and its furniture, ac- 
cording to the pattern and directions which God had 
given to Moses. 

119 



The keeping of the Sabbath. 



EXODUS XXXII, 



The tables of the law given. 



tribe of Dan : and in the licart;; of all that 
are*wisc-heartcd I have put wisdom, that 
they may ''make all that I have command- 
ed thee ; 

7 The tabernacle of the congresation, 
and the ark of the testimony, and the 
mercy-seat that is thereupon, and all the 
furniture * of the tabernacle, 

8 And the table and his furniture, and 
the pure candlestick -\vilh all his furni- 
ture, and the altar of incense, 

9 And the altar of burnt-offering with all 
his furniture, and the lavcr and his foot, 

10 And the clothes of service, and the 
holy garments for Aaron the priest, and 
the garments of his sous, to minister in 
the priest's office, 

1 1 And the anointing oil, and sweet in- 
cense for the holy place: according to all 
that I have commanded thee shall they do. 

12 ^1 And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

13 Speak thou also unto the children of 
Ispael, saying. Verily '^my sabbaths ye 
shall keep : for it is a ""sign between me 
and you throughout your generations; 
that ye may know that I am the Lord 
that doth sanctify you. 

14 Ye shall ''keep the sabbath therefore ; 
for it is holy unto you. Every one that 
defileth it shall surely be put to death : for 
whosoever "^ doeth any work therein, that 
soul shall be cut off from among his people. 

15 Six days may work be done; but in 
the seventh is the sabbath of rest, t holy 



• Pro- 


erbs 2 : 


fi, 7. b fl 


aps. 37, 38 ; 


Nn 


11. oil. 


4; 


1 Kinjrs 


, rhs. 


6.7,8; 


2 Cliron 


eh». 3, 4 ; 


Kzek 


rli. 4; 


* 


H<-1). 


vesseli. c 


Lev. 


ly : S, 3C 


; 26:2. 


J Nell. < 


:I4; 


Kzek. 


20: 


2, 20. 


e 


chap. 20 : « ; 


Deiit. 5 


12; Isaiah 58:13; 


Kiek 


. 44 : 24. 


' chap 


3.T 


:2. t 


Hell. 


hotinest. 


e Sii 


m. i;.:35. 


b ver 


13. i 


Genesis 1 


31 


2:2; 


Heb. 



13. A sign hetiveen me avd you; a sign of 
the relation which subsisted between them. By 
keeping tlie Sabbath holy, according to his direc- 
tions, chap. 20:8-11, they would show tiiat they 
were Iii.s people, and tliat he was their G-od. It 
would also be a great means of preserving among 
.them ;i right Icnowiedge of God, and tiius making 
them lioly and preparing them for heaven. 

14. Ilidy unto yoa ; set apart; devoted to sa- 
cred employments. Defileth it; by devoting it to 
worlilly business. Viit to death ; by the magis- 
trate, at the command of God. who was King of 
that nation, and had a right to dispose of life as he 
saw best. 

17. A sign. ; an evidence of God's kindness to 
men, and a public token that they who rightly keep 
it are his people, that he is their <]rod, and will do 
for them all that he has promised. Was refresh- 
ed ; delighted in his work, especially in the Sab- 
bath, which he had provided and sec apart as a day 
of rest for his people, and in the beneKts which the 
keeping of il holy would confer upon them. 

18. Tables of testimony ; on which were writ- 
ten, by the finger of God, the ten commandments, 
chap. "20 : 3-17. testifying his will and tiie duty of 
men. Ex. 20 ; 3-17 ; '24 : 12 ; 32 : 1.5, IG. 

I.\.STRL'CT]ONS. 
3. God bestows various talents on men, not for 
the purpose of their lying useless, or being employed 
120 



to the Loud : whosoever doeth anij acinii: 
work in the sabbath-day, she shall surely 
be put to death. 

16 Wherefore the children of Israel shall 
keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath 
throughout their generations, for a per- 
petual covenant. 

1 7 It is a '" sign between me and the chil- 
dren of Israel for ever : for in ' six days the 
Lord made heaven and earth, and on the 
seventh day he rested, and was J refreshed. 

18 ^And he gave unto Moses, when he 
had made an end of communing with him 
upon ''mount Sinai, two tables of testi- 
mony, tables of stone, written with the 
finger of Cod. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

1 The people, in the absence of Moses, cause Aaron to 
make a calf. 7 God is angered thereby. H At the 
entreaty of Moses he is appeased. 1.5 Moses cometh 
down with the tables. 19 He breaketh them. 'iO He 
destroyeth the calf. 22 Aaron's excuse for himself. 
'2o Moses causeth the idolaters to be slain. 30 He 
prayeth for the people. 

AND when the people saw that Moses 
' delayed to come down out of the 
mount, the people gathered themselves 
together unto Aaron, and said unto him. 
Up, make us "'gods, which shall go before 
us; for as for this Moses, the man that 
brought us up out of the land of " Egypt, 
we wot not what is become of him. 

2 And Aaron said unto them, Break off 
the "golden earrings which «/•<; in the ears 
of your wives, of your sous, and of your 
daughters, and bring them unto- me. 

4:3,4,10. j .lob 38:7; Psa. 104:31. k chap. 24 : 12; 32: 15, 16 : 
34 : 28, 2'J ; Deut- 4:13; 6 : 22 ; 9:9-11; 2 Cor. 3:3. 1 chap. 24 : 18 ; 
Deut 9:9. mActs7:40. n Mat 24 : 48 ; 2 Peter, 3 : 4. « Gen. 
24:22; J udg. 8 : 24-27 ; Ezek. 16: 12, 17; Hosea2:8. 



only for the gratification or benefit of their posses- 
sors, but for the promotion of his glory and the good 
of mankind. 

6. Dirt'erent gifts are imparted to men, that they 
may feel their need of each other, and be mutual 
helpers in the discharge of their various duties, and 
the accomplishment of the work to which he calls 
them. 

11. The more exactly men follow the directions 
of God, the greater wisdom and goodness they will 
manifest, and the more useful they will be. 

14. The Sabbath was not given to men for labor, 
even in preparing houses or furniture for the wor- 
ship of God, hut for rest, and for religious duties. 
It is in keeping the day holy that men show that 
they rightly know God, belong to his people, and 
are preparing for the rest of heaven. Heb. 4 : 0. 

17. The holy keeping of the Sabbath is delightful 
to the pious. It makes them more and more like 
God, and gives them greater views of his goodness, 
especially in the manifestations which on that day 
he makes of himself, and in the everlasting and 
glorious ends which, through the Sabbath and its 
means of grace, he will accomplish. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

1. Ontofthe inoKut ; c]\;\'p.'2\:V2-\fi. Gods; 
idols, or an idol to represent God. 11 ot ; know. 



A golden caJf is made. 



EXODUS XXXII. 



Moses destroyeth it. 



B.c'iwf 3 And all the people brake off the 
golden ear-rings which were in their ears, 
and brought them unto Aaron. 

4 And ho received them at their hand, 
and fashioned it with a graving tool, after 
he had made it a * molten calf: and they 
said. These be thy gods, Israel, which 
brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. 

5 And when Aaron saw it, he built an 
altar before it ; and Aaron ''made procla- 
mation, and said. To-morrow is a feast to 
the Lord. 

6 And they rose up early on the morrow, 
and offered burnt-offerings, and brought 
peace-offerings ; and the "^ people sat down 
to eat and to drink, and rose up to play. 

7 T[ And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, 
get thee down ; for thy people, which thou 
broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have 
corrupted'' themselves: 

8 They have turned aside quickly out 
of the way which I commanded them : 
they have made them a molten calf, and 
have worshipped it, and have sacrificed 
thereunto, and said. These be thy gods, 
Israel, which have brought thee up out 
of the land of Egypt. 

9 And the Lord said unto Moses, I have 
seen this people, and behold, it is a '"stiff- 
necked people : 

10 Now therefore let me alone, that my 
wrath "^may wax hot against them, and 
that I may consume them: and ^1 will 
make of thee a great nation. 

11 And Moses besought *tlie Lord his 
God, and said. Lord, ■' why doth thy wrath 
wax hot against thy people, which thou hast 
brought forth out of the land of Egypt with 
great power, and with a mighty hand 1 

1 2 Wherefore should the ' Egyptians 
speak, and say. For mischief did he bring 
them out, to slay them in the mountains, 
and to consume them from the face of 
the earth 1 Turn -i from thy fierce wrath, 
and '' repent of this evil against thy people. 

13 Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Is- 
rael, thy servants, to whom thou 'swarest 
by thine own self, and saidst unto them, 
I will multiply your seed as the stars of 

" .-hap. 20: -23: Dent.9:16; Juilg. 17 : 3,4 ; 1 Kinss, 1-2:28: Neb. 
9:18; P3a.l0rt:19; Isa. 40: 18, 19 : -IB: 6 : Rom. 1 : -23. biKings, 
10:30. clCor.lO:7. cl Gen. 6: II, 12 ; Pent. 4 : Ifi; .Tuilg. 2 : 19 i 
Hosea9:9. e 2 Chron. 30 : 8 : I-o-a. 48 : 4. f clinp. 22 : 24. B Num. 
14:12; Paa.l0fi:23. * Heli. W^/ac-eo/Me T.ord. h Dent. 9: 18-29; 
rBalm74:l,2. i Deut. 32 : 2rt, 27. j Dent. 13 : 17; Jcsluia 7: 2H ; 



6. Play ; eiTgage in revelling and wantonness. 

9. St i if- necked ; refusing to yield obedience to 
the commands of God. 

10. Let me alone; do not ask me to spare 
them. Of thee ; thy posterity. 

12. Repent of this evil ; not destroy, but spare 
the people. 

13. Thou swarest: Gen. 13:1.5, 16; 2G : 4 • 
28: 13, 14; 3-): 11, 12. 

14. The Lord repented ; instead of destroying, 
he spared tiie nation. 



heaven, and all this land that I have 
spoken of will I give unto your seed, and 
they shall inherit it for ever. 

14 And the Lord '"repented of the evil 
which he thought to do unto his people. 

15 T[ And Moses turned, and went down 
from the mount, and the two tables of 

' the testimony were in his hand : the tables 
were written on both their sides ; on the 
one side and on the other were they written. 
I 16 And the tables were the work of God, 
I and the writing ° uylv the writing of God, 
graven upon the tables. 

1 7 And when Joshua heard the noise of 
the people as they shouted, he said unto 
Moses, There is a noise of war in the camp. 

1 8 And he said. It is not the voice of them 
that shout for mastery, neither is it the 
yoiceoi them tltat cry for t being overcome; 
but the noise of thexi that sing do I hear. 

19 T[And it came to pass, as soon as he 
came nigh unto the camp, that he saw the 
calf, and the dancing: and Moses' anger 
waxed hot, and he east the tables out of 
his hands, and brake them beneath the 
mount. 

20 And he took the calf which they had 
made, and "burnt it in the fire, and ground 
it to powder, and strewed it upon the water, 
and made the children of Israel drink of it. 

21 And Moses said itnto Aaron, P\Vhat 
did this people unto thee, that thou hast 
brousht so great a sin upon them "? 

22 And Aaron said. Let not the anger 
of my lord wax hot : thou knowest the 
people, that they are "iset on mischief. 

23 For they said unto "^me. Make us 
gods, which shall go before us : for as for 
this Moses, the man that brought us up 
out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what 
is become of him. 

24 And I said unto them. Whosoever 
hath any gold, let them break it off. So 
they gave it me : then I cast it into the 
fire,' and there came out this calf. 

25 TfAnd when Moses saw that the 
people were naked, (for Aaron had made 
them *naked unto their shame amongtheir 
enemies,^) 

Ezra 10:14; Psa. 78: 38. kPsa.90:13. 1 Gen.22: 16; Heb. 6: 13. 
■n 2Sam.24:16; 1 Cliroii.21 : l.i; Psa. 106:4.=); Jer. 18:S; .IoeI2: 13. 
n i-Iiap.31:18; neiit.9:10; Heh.8:10. j Heh.wenknes^. o Deut. 
9:21. p Gen. 20:9. q Deut. 31:27. r ver. I. s ver. 4. t chap. 
33:4,5; 2 Cliron. 28 : 19 ; Isaiah 47:3; Micahl:ll; Rev. 3:18. 
i Heb. those that rose up against tJicm. 

15. Tables of the testimony ; those on which 
God had written the ten commandments. 

19. He — brake them; to show the people, in a 
significant manner, that they had broken the cove- 
nant into which they liad solemnly entered, chap. 
24 : 4, 7, and deserved to be destroyed. 

20. The water ; which flowed from the rock, 
chap. 17 : C, and of which tlie people continued to 
drink. 

2o. Naked ; stripped of their ornaments, and ex- 
posed. 



The idolaters arc slain. 



EXODUS XXXIII. 



God trieth the people. 



26 Then Moses stood in the gate of the 
camp, and said, Who is on the Lord's 
side? let him come unto me. And all the 
sons of Levi gathered themselves together 
iinto him. 

27 And he said unto them, Thus saith 
the Loud God of Israel, Put every man 
his sword by his side, and go in and out 
from gate to gate throughout the camp, 
and "slay every man his brother, and 
every man his companion, and every man 
his neighbor. 

28 And the children of ^ Levi did accord- 
ing to the word of Moses : and there fell 
of the people that day about three thou- 
sand men. 

29 For *]Moses had said, t Consecrate 
yourselves to-day to the Lord, even every 
man upon his son, and upon his brother; 
that he may bestow upon '^you a blessing 
this day. 

30 ^ And it came to pass on the mor- 
row, that INIoses said unto the ^ people. 
Ye have sinned a great sin : and now I 
will go up unto the Lord ; pcradvcnturo 
I "^^ shall make an atonement for your sin. 

31 And ]\Ioses returned unto the Lord, 
and said, Oh, this people have sinned a 
great sin, and have made them ""gods of 
gold. 

32 Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their 
sin ; and if ^ not, blot nic, I pray thee, 
out of '' thy book which Ihon hast written. 

33 And the Lord said unto Moses, Who- 
soever hath sinned against 'me, him will 
I blot out of mv book. 



a Num. 25:5. h Deut. 33 : 9 ; Mai. i2 M-«. * Or, And Moset 
XflKf, Consecrate yourselves to-day to the Lord, because every man 
liafa been against his sun, and against his brother, etc. f Heb. 
Pill your hands. cJoeliMJH. <1 1 Sam. IJ : 20, 23. e Num. 



27. His brother — companion, and — neighbor ; 
all wlio should continue to uphold or vindicate this 
idolatry. 

29. Coiisecrateyonrselves ; devote yourselves to 
the Lord, in the execution of his will in punishing 
the tr.msgressors. 

30. Make an atonement; obtain mercy for 
them. 

3'2. Blot me — out of thy book ; if thou destroy 
them let me die also, and not live to see thy dis- 
honor and their ruin. 

.34. / ivill visit their sin ; in the day of retri- 
bution I will punish them. 

30. Plagued the jieople ; visited them with 
judgments. 

IXSTRUCTIOXS. 

1. Into whatever engagements men enter to serve 
tlie Lord, if left to tlieir own sinful inclinations 
they will soon break them, and plunge into wicked- 
ness, to their disgrace ami ruin. 

6. Those forms of religion whicli gratify the 
pride, selfishness, and carnal inclinations of men, 
while they attract great numbers, instead of mak- 
ing them better, only make them worse and ripen 
them for divine judgments. 

l-l. Prayer for sinners, offered from regard to the 
glory of God, lias great influence with him, and is 
often the means of changing his conduct towards 
122 



34 Therefore now go, lead the *b.c:h9?. 
people unto the place of which I have spo- 
ken unto thee : behold, mine J Angel shall 
go before thee : nevertheless, in the day 
when I visit, I will ''visit their sin upon 
them. 

35 And the Lord plagued the people, 
because they made the calf, which Aaron 
made. 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

1 The Lord refuseth to go as he had promised with the 
people. 4 The people murmur thereat. 7 The tab- 
ernacle is removed out of the camp. 9 The Lord 
talketh familiarly with Moses. 12 Moses desireth to 
see the glory of God. 

AND the Lord said unto IMoses, De- 
part, and go up hence, thou and the 
people which thou hast brought up out 
of the land of Egypt, unto the land which 
I sware unto Abraham, to Isaac, and 
to Jacob, saying, Unto thy seed will I 
give it: 

2 And I will send an Angel before thee; 
and I will drive out the Canaanite, the 
Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Periz- 
zite, the Hivite, and the Jcbusite : 

3 Unto a land flowing with milk and 
honey : for I will not go up in the midst 
of thee ; for thou art a stifl'-necked people : 
lest I consume thee in the way. 

4 1[ And when the people heard these 
evil tidings, they mourned: and no man 
did put on him his ornaments. 

For the Lord had said unto IMoses, 
Say unto the children of Israel, Ye arc a 
still-necked people: I will come up into 



25:13; .Toh42:7.8; Amos 5: 15 ; .lames 6 : 16. fcliap. 20:83 
gHnm.9:3. h Psalm ."ifi: 8; Daniel 12:1: Phil.4:3; )le».3:5. 
iPsalm69:28. j chap. 23: 20; Num. 20: 16; Isa. 63:9. k Deut. 
32:35; .Amos 3:14. 



them ; so that, instead of destroying them, he 
brings them to repentance, and bestows upon them 
precious and everlasting mercies. 

24. When good men connive at iniquity, and es- 
pecially when they aid in promoting it. their guilt 
is exceedingly great, and the excuses which they 
make are both cowardly and foolish. If such con- 
duct does not bring destruction on themselves, it 
may on multitudes of others. 

29. It is sometimes a duty to take away human 
life ; and in doing it we may honor God, do good to 
men, and secure special divine favor. When done 
at the command <>f God, or in obedience to his will, 
it is a proper and useful expression of his indigna- 
tion against sin. 

34. Respite, or delay of punishment, is not for- 
giveness ; and persons may be spared for a time, and 
yet afterwards be destroyed. The goodness of God 
in delaying punishment, should lead all to repent- 
ance. If it does not, it will in the end aggravate 
their ruin. 

CHAPTER XXXllI. 

3. I will not go ; not go with his visible, special 
presence, but would send an Angel to lead them, as 
stated ver. 2 and chap. 32:34. 

•'). Ill-ill — consume til ee : this he might justly 
do; and this, should they continue their wickedness, 
he would do. 



God talketh with Moses, 



EXODUS XXXIII. 



and showeth him his glory. 



r.v.'um: the midst of thee in a moment, and 
consume thee : therefore now put *otf thy 
ornaments from thee, that I may know 
what to do unto thee. 

6 And the children of Lsrael stripped 
themselves of their ornaments by the 
mount Horeb. 

7 And Moses took the ''tabernacle, and 
pitched it without the camp, afar off from 
the camp, and called it the Tabernacle of 
the congregation. And it came to pass, 
that every one which sought the Lord 
went out unto the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation, which icas without the camp. 

8 And it came to pass, when Moses 
went out unto the tabernacle, that all the 
people rose up, and stood every man at 
his tent-door, and looked after Moses, 
until he was gone into the tabernacle. 

9 And it came to pass, as Moses entered 
into the tabernacle, the cloudy pillar 
descended, and stood at the door of the 
tabernacle, and the LORD ''talked with 
Moses. 

10 And all the people saw the cloudy 
pillar stand at the tabernaelc-door : and 
all the people rose up and worshipped, 
every man in his tent-door. 

11 And the Lord spake ''unto Moses 
face to face, as a man speaketh unto his 
friend. And he turned again into the 
camp; but his servant .Toshua, the son of 
Nun, a young man, departed not out of 
the tabernacle. 

12 *^And Moses said unto the Lord, 
See, thou say est unto me, ''Bring up this 
people : and thou hast not let me know 
whom thou wilt send with me. Yet thou 
hast said, I know '^thee by name, and 
thou hast also found grace in my sight. 



» .Tob 1 : CO ; Isaiah 3-2:11; Ezeki^l -Zr, : IR. b chap. 29 : 42, 4X 
rPsa.M:7. () Deut. 34: 10. e rhap. 3-2:34. f Tsil. 43 : 1 ; .ler. 
]:n: -2 Timothy, 2: m. g Psa. 8R:11; 119:33; John 14 : 21--23. 
h Deut 9:36, '29; .loel 2:17. i chap. 40:34-38; Isaiah 63:9. 



7. The Taiernacle of the congregation. ; the 
place where the penitent of the congregation should 
assemble, and where G-od would meet them. 

10. Worsh ipped; worshipped Jehovah, who was 
in the cloudy pillar. 

11. Face to face; plainly, kindly, and famil- 
iarly. But ; Mo.ses returned again into the camp, 
and, as some suppose, his servant Joshua; but Je- 
hovah, as appearing in the cloud, departed not out 
of the t.abernacle, or as it is in the original, out of 
the midst of the tabernacle, where he was when 
conversing with Moses. 

12. Thou hast tiot let me kumv ; he had only 
told him he would send an angel before them, ver. 
2 ; and Moses wished for more information, espec- 
ially that God, by his own presence, would go with 
them. By name; as his intimate and peculiar 
friend.. 

13. Thy vmy ; the way and means by which he 
would lead them to Canaan, and give them pos- 
session of the promised land. Know thee ; more 
fully know. 

14. My 'presence shall go; in the pillar of 



13 Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have 
found grace in thy sight, s.show me now 
thy way, that I may know thee, that I 
may find grace in thy sight: and ''con- 
sider that this nation is thy people. 

14 And he said. My 'presence shall go 
ii'ith thee, and I will give thee -* rest. 

15 And he said unto him,If thy presence 
go ''not with me, carry us not up hence. 

16 For wherein shall it be known here 
that I and thy people have found grace in 
thy sight ■? is it not in that thou goest with 
us ? So ' shall we be separated., I and thy 
people, from all the people that are upon 
the face of the earth. 

17 And the Lord said unto Moses, I 
will do this thing also that thou hast 
spoken : for thou hast found grace in my 
sight, and I know thee by name. 

18 And he said, I beseech thee, show 
me thy glory. 

19 And he said, I will make all my 
goodness'" pass before thee, and I will 
proclaim the name of the Lord before 
thee; and will be "gracious to whom I 
will be gracious, and will show mercy on 
whom I will show mercy. 

20 And he said. Thou canst not "see my 
face : for there shall no man see me, and 
live. 

21 And the Lord said. Behold, there is 
a place by me, and thou shalt stand upon 
a rock : 

22 And it shall come to pass, while my 
glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a 
cleft of the rock, and will cover thee with 
my hand while I pass by : 

23 And I will take away my hand, and 
thou shalt see my back parts ; but my 
face shall not be seen. 



j Joshua -23:1; 


Jer. 6:IR. V Psahn 4 : 6. I Num. 14:14; Deut. 


4:7,34; 2 Sam 


7: -23; 1 King.«, 8 : 53; Psa. 147:20; 2CoP. 6:17. 


in chap. 34 : 5-7 


. n Rom. 9: 13, 18. o John 1 : 18; 1 Tim. 6 : 16 ; 


Heb. 1:1-3. 





cloud and of fire, to guide .ind protect them. Thus 
the prayer of Moses was answered. 

If). Thou goest with -its? in the cloudy pillar, 
thus showing that they were his people, and he was 
their God. 

18. Thy glory; brighter and more glorious 
manifestations of it. 

19. Proclaim the name of the Lord; make 
himself more fully known, and give to Moses greater 
discoveries of the e.xcellence of his character and 
ways. 

20. My face ; a full and unclouded vision of hi.s 
glory. No 7nan ; in this world, could have a full 
view of G-od and live. 

23. Cover thee tvith my hand; conceal him- 
self, and not give Moses such views of his glory as 
would destroy him. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. No created beings and no earthly enjoyments 
can be an adequate substitute for the prt-sence and 
favor of G-od. Without him as our friend and por- 
tion, however many other things we may have, we 
shall ultimately be wretched. 

123 



God makcth a covenant 



EXODUS XXXIV. 



with the Israelites. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

1 The tables are renewed, o The name of the Lord 
proclaimed. S:' Moses enlreateth God to go with them. 
10 God maketh a covenant with them, repealing cer- 
tain duties of the first table. 2s Moses after forty- 
days in the mount cometh down with tha tables. ^ 
His face shineth, and he covereth it with a veil. 

AND the Loud .said unto RIo-scs, Hew 
thce two tables of stone like unto the 
first: and I will "write upon these tables 
the words that were in "the first tables, 
which thou brakest. 

2 And be ready in the morning, and 
come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, 
and present thyself there to me in the top 
of the mount. 

.3 And no man shall ''come up with 
thee, neither let any man be seen through- 
out all the mount ; neither let the flocks 
nor herds feed before that mount. 

4 ^And he hewed two tables of stone 
like unto the first ; and Moses rose up 
early in the morning, and went up unto 
mount Sinai, as the Lord had commanded 
him, and took in his hand the two tables 
of stone. 

5 And the Lord descended in the cloud, 
and stood with him there, and proclaimed 
the ''name of the Lord. 

6 And the Lord passed by before him, 
and proclaimed. The Lord, The Loud 
(iod, ''merciful aiul gracious, long-sutfer- 
ing. and abundant in 'goodness and truth, 

7 Keeping mercy for "^thousands, for- 
giving iniquity and transgression and sin, 
and that will by no means clear the i^uilty; 
visiting the s iniquity of the fathers upon 
the children, and upon the children's chil- 
dren, unto the third and to the fourth 
generation. 

8 And Moses made haste, and bowed his 

« Deut. 10 : 1-4. b rlinp. 19: 1'2, IS. cProT.18:10. d Num. 
11:18| iCIiron. 30:9; Neli.9:17; Psalm 86:15; 103:8; II6:.'ij 
14S:8; .Ioel2:13; .IonaIi4:2; Ilom.2:-t. • Pst-u."!?: 10. f Micnli 
7:18. J cliap. 20:5,6. h cliap.SS: l.'i, lU. > chap. 33:3. j DeuU 



head toward the earth, and wor- '^B.ciHsi.' 
shipped. 

9 And he said, If now I have found 
grace in thy sight, O Lord, let my Lord, 
I pray ''thee, go among us; for it is a 
stiff-necked' people ; and pardon our ini- 
quity and our sin, and take us for J thine 
inheritance. 

10 T[And he said. Behold, I make a 
covenant:'' before all thy people I will 
do 'marvels, such as have not been done 
in all the earth, nor in any nation: and 
all the people among which thou art shall 
see the work of the Lord : for it is a "' ter- 
rible thing that I will do with thee. 

1 1 Observe thou that which I command 
thee this day : behold, I " drive out before 
thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and 
the Hittitc, and the Perizzite, and the 
Hivite, and the Jebusite. 

12 Take heed to thyself, lest thou make 
a covenant with the inhabitants of the 
land whither thou goest, lest it be "for a 
snare in the midst of thee : 

13 But ye shall destroy their altars, 
break their * images, and cut down their 
groves : 

14 For thou shalt f worship no other 
god : for the Lord, whose name is Jeal- 
ous, is a jealous God. 

1.5 Lest thou make a covenant with the 
inhabitants of the land, and they go a 
whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice 
unto their gods, and one call thee, and 
thou eat of his sacrifice ; 

16 And thou take of ''their daughters 
unto thy sons, and their daughters go a 
whoring after their gods, and make thy 
sons go a whoring after their gods. 

1 7 Thou shalt make thee no molten cods. 



7. If men would find mercy and obtain the fa- 
vor of God, they must seek him while he is to be 
found, and call upon him while he is near; repent 
of their sins, forsake their evil ways, and turn 
heartily to him: then he will abundantly pardon. 
Isa. G.J : 7. 

13. Clear views of the will and ways of God are 
earnestly desired by his people; especially such 
views as shall make plain the path of duty, and 
prepare tlicm faithfully to walk in it. 

17. The number and greatness of the favors 
which God has bestowed, may be pleaded as a rea- 
son why he should bestow still more and greater. 
When rightly improved, the more numerous they are 
the more numerous will be (ho.se which shall follow. 

'2'.\. However great the manifestations of the glory 
of God, his people desire to sec more, and they will 
see more and still more, as their blessedness and 
usefulness may require. But however much they 
may see, and however long their knowled<^e may 
continue to increase, it will only increase their s?nse 
of I he infinitude of what remains unseen. 2 Cor. 
3:18. 

124 



32 


:9: Psa.33:12: 


94 


:H; 


13S 


:4; .Ter. 


10:16; 


Zecliariali 2 : 12. 


k 


Deut. 5:2,3; 29 


12 


14. 


1 Deut 4 :.)•:- 


!7; Psa 


78:12. m P«n. 


fir 


:5. n Deut.7:l 


19 


9:4 


h. 


o .Tosh. 2: 


:I2,13. 


* Heh.ttatuet 


p 


Mat. A : 10. q N> 


m. 


25:1 


2; 


Kzra9:2 


; 2 Cor. 


6:14. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

5. Tlie 7iame ; his various perfections. 

7. By no means clear ; literally, clearing will 
not clear. Even the penitent, while they escape 
destruction, will not wholly escape the consequences 
of sin ; and the perseveringly impenitent will finally 
perish. Upon the children ; children often suffer 
from the sins of parents, while tiie punisliment of 
no one is ever greater than his own sins deserve. 

10. Wake a covenant ; he renewed his promise, 
though tiie people had so shamefully and wickedly 

I broken theirs. Do marvels; perform wonderful 
things in giving their children the land of Canaan. 
A terrible thing, he would accomplisli, through 
their means, towards their enemies. 

11. That which I command; ver. 12-2(5. 

12. A covenant; a treaty of peace. A snare ; 
means of leading them into sin. 

13. Their groves ; where they worshipped idolis. 

14. A jealous God; espccinlly displeased with 
those who worship any thing except himself. 

17. Molten; that is, melted; idols cast in a 
furnace. 



Various ordinances. 



EXODUS XXXIV. 



Moses' face [lu'iicth 



B-ai^K 18 HThe feast of unleavened bread 
shalt thou keep. Seven days thou shalt cat 
unleavened "bread, as I commanded thee, 
in the time of the month Abib : for in the 
month Abib thou camest out from Egypt. 

1 9 All'' that opencth the matrix 75 mine ; 
and every firstling among thy cattle, 
whether ox or slieep, that is male. 

20 But the firstling of an ass thou shalt 
redeem with a * lamb : and if thou redeem 
him not, then shalt thou break his neck. 
All the first-born of thy sons thou shalt 
redeem. And none shall appear before 
me empty. 

21 1[Six "^^days thou shalt work, but on 
the seventh day thou shalt rest : in ear- 
ing-time and in harvest thou shalt rest. 

22 ^And thou shalt observe the feast 
of weeks, of the first-fruits of wheat-har- 
vest, and the feast of ingathering at the 
year's^ end. 

23 ^Thrice'' in the year shall all your 
men-children appear before the Lord God, 
the God of Israel. 

24 For I will cast out the ■" nations be- 
fore thee, and enlarge thy borders : nei- 
ther shall any ""man desire thy land, when 
thou shalt go up to appear before the Lord 
thy God thrice in the year. 

25 Thou shalt not oifer the blood of my 
sacrifice with leaven ; neither shall the 
sacrifice of the feast of the passover be 
left unto the morning. 

26 The first of the s first-fruits of thy 
land thou shalt bring unto the house of 
the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not " seethe 
a kid in his mother's milk. 

27 And the Lord said unto Moses, Write 



a chap. U: 15; -.'3: 15. b cbap. 13: 2. * Or, *W. ccliap.35:2. 
\liKhrevotutionoftheyear. d ch. 'i-l: 14. 17. ever. 11. fiCliroa. 
17:10; .lob 1:10. g I)eut.26:2, 10. h Deut. 14:21. iDeut.31:H. 



18. The feast of unleavened bread ; that con- 
nected with tlie passover. Chap. 12: li-20. 
10. Is mine; chap. l.?:2, 12, 13. 

21. ila;■M^g',• ploughing. //n/fCif ; in tlie most 
busy seasons of the year, when they would be most 
strongly tempted to break the Sabbath, as well as at 
other times, tliey were to rest and keep the day holy. 

22. Feast of weeks ; pentecost, which began 
seven weeks, or the fiftieth day after the passover. 
Chap. 23 : 16 ; Deut. 16 : 9, 10. Feast ofingath- 
eriiig ; of tabernacles, which was observed at the 
clos? of ihe harvest. Chap. 23 : 1-1-16. 

24. Desire thy land; while all the able-bodied 
men should be absent, G-od would not only prevent 
their land from being invaded, but he would keep 
their enemies from desiring it. This promise was 
literally fulfilled. In the history of the Jews, no 
instance is known of their enemies' t-iking advan- 
tage of their attendance upon the appointed feasts 
(0 invade the land. 

28. Lie vrote ; the Lord wrote the ten com- 
mandments on the.se tables, as lie iiad done on the 
first, which were broken ; and the other commands 
Moses wrote as God directed him, ver. 1 ; Deut. 10 : 4. 

29. His face shone ; this was the elfect of being 
with God, and beholding his glory. 

33. He juit a veil on his face ; to prevent their 

9 



thou' these words : for after the tenor of 
these words I have made a covenant with 
thee and with Israel. 

28 And he was there with the Lord 
forty J days and forty nights ; he did nei- 
ther eat bread, nor drink water. And he 
wrote'' upon the tables the words of the 
covenant, the ten i commandments. 

29 T[ And it came to pass, when Moses 
came down from mount Sinai with the 
two tables of testimony in Moses' hand, 
when he came down from the mount, 
that Moses wist not that the skin of his 
face 'shone while he talked with him. 

30 And when Aaron and all the chil- 
dren of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin 
of his face shone ; and they were afraid 
to come nigh him, 

31 And Moses called unto them; and 
Aaron and all the rulers of the congrega- 
tion returned unto him : and Moses talked 
with them. 

32 And afterward all the children of 
Israel came nigh : and he gave them in 
commandment'" all that the Lord had 
spoken with him in mount Sinai. 

33 And till Moses had done speaking 
with them, he put a "veil on his face. 

34 But when Moses went in before the 
LoKD to speak with him, he took the veil 
off, until he came out. And he came out, 
and spake unto the children of Israel that 
which he was commanded. 

35 And tiie children of Israel saw the 
face of Moses, that the skin of Moses" 
face shone : and Moses put the veil upon 
his face again, until he went in to speak 
with him. 



j Deut.9:9,18. t ver. 1 ; Deut.4 : l:i; 10: 2,4; 2Cor.3:7. t Heb. 
words. I Mat.l7:2; Luke9:29; Acts6:15; 2Cor3:7,I3; Rev. 
1 : 16. ra chap. 21:1; Num. 15: 40. n 2 Cor. .">: 13-16. 



being afraid of him. The shining of his face indi- 
cated the glory, and his veiling it indicated the dark- 
ness of that dispensation, compared with the gos- 
pel. The veil also fitly illustrated the darkness of 
the human mind as to spiritual things, without the 
illuminating influences of the Holv Spirit. 2 Cor. 
3 : 6-18. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. Notwithstanding the indignation of Jehovah 
against backsliders, those who repent and seek his 
mercy he will forgive, renew his covenant with 
them, and take them again under his gracious care. 

7. Though God forgives his penitent believing 
people, he does not deliver them from all the con- 
sequences of their sins. The evils of them they 
may feel, in numerous ways, to the end of life, and 
even transmit to future generations ; while none 
who do not repent, and turn heartily to him, can 
escape utter and irretrievable ruin. 

II. No repentance of sin, or professed reforma- 
tion, will avail to salvation, which does not lead 
men to do M-hat God commands them. 

14. To reijard any object above Jehovah, or pay 
even external worship to any but him, is e.xceed- 
ingly ofl'ensive in his ."ight, and exposes those who 
are guilty of it to his just indign;ition. 

1-). Intimate connection with the openly wicked. 
125 



EXODUS XXXV. 



The free g'fls of the people 

CHAPTER XXXV. 



1 The Sabbath. 4 The free gifts for the tabernacle. 
•JO The rt'adiiiess of the people to offer. 30 Bezaleel 
and Aholiab are called to the work. 

A ND .Mo.scs gathered all the congrega- 
j_l_ tion of the children of Israel together, 
and said unto them,* These arc the words 
wliich the Lord hath commanded, that 
ye should do them. 

2 Six ''days shall work be done, but on 
the seventh day there shall be to you *a 
holy day, a sabbath of rest to the Lord : 
whosoever doeth work "^ therein shall be 
put to death. 

3 Ye shall kindle ""no fire throughout 
your habitations upon the sabbath-day. 

4 T[ And Moses spake unto all the con- 
gregation of the children of Israel, saying. 
This is the thing \yhich the Lord com- 
manded, saying, 

5 Take ye from among you an offering 
unto the Lord : whosoever is of a "^will- 
ing heart, let him bring it, an otTering of 
the Lord; gold, and silver, and brass, 

6 And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and 
fine linen, and goats' hair, 

7 And rams' skins dyed red, and badg- 
ers' skins, and shittim-wood, 

8 And oil for the light, and spices for 
anointing oil, and for the sweet incense, 

9 And onyx-stones, and stones to be set 
for the ephod, and for the breastplate. 

10 And every wise-hearted among you 
shall '"come, and make all that the Lord 
hath commanded ; 

1 1 The tabernacle, his tent, and his cov- 
ering, his taches, and his boards, his bars, 
liis pillars, and liis sockets ; 

1 2 The K ark, and the staves thereof, w///i 
the mercy-seat, and the veil of the covering ; 

13 The table, and his staves, and all his 
vessels, and the ''show-bread; 

14 The candlestick also for the light, and 

• chnp.34:32. b I,ev.«:3. * Hvh. holinett. c ncut.fi: 1-2-14 ; 
t.nkc 1:1:14,1.1. <I Nuin 1.1:32,610. c cll.l|>. 2.1:2; Miirk 12:41-44; 

2 Cor. 8 : 1 1 , 1-2 ! 9 : 7. f cliap. 31 : 6. g cliap. 25 : 10, etc. h Lev. 



for the tabernacle. 



and all apparent joining with them in their iniquity, 
or connivin;f at it, should bu carefully avoided. 

21. {jrt«;n, plainly, and e.xpres.sly, God commands 
men to keep the Sabbath ; and no pressure of worldly 
business, even in the most pre.ssmg season, should 
lead them ever to neglect it. They have no right 
to do. to attempt, or wish to do any more business 
than is consistent with their remembering the Sab- 
bath-day to keep it holy. 

24. God is able so to control the desires and 
efforts of men, that none shall in the end be losers 
from conscientiously and per.severingly obeying him. 

27. It is a great blessing to have the words of 
the Lord written in a book. And as we have the 
book which contains them, written not in words 
which mairs wisdom taught, but which the Holy 
Ghost taught, their meaning should be communi- 
cated in the plainest manner to ail the people. 

,'i3. The meaning and use of the Old Testament 
are, to a great e-xtent, explained in the New. They 
126 



his furniture, and his lamps, with ac^?^?: 
the oil for the light; 

1 5 And the ' incense-altar, and his staves, 
and the anointing oil, and the sweet in- 
cense, and the hanging for the door at the 
entering in of the tabernacle ; 

16 The altar of burnt-ofTering, with his 
brazen grate, his staves, and all his ves- 
sels, the lavcr and his foot ; 

17 The J hangings of the court, liis pil- 
lars, and their sockets, and the hanging 
for the door of the court ; 

18 The pins of the tabernacle, and the 
pins of the court, and their cords ; 

19 The ''clothes of service, to do ser- 
vice in the holy place, the holy garments 
for Aaron the priest, and the garments of 
his sons, to minister in the priest's office. 

20 1[And all the congregation of the 
children of Israel departed from the pres- 
ence of Moses. 

21 And they came, every one 'whose 
heart stirred him up, and every one whom 
his spirit made willing, and they brought 
the Lord's offering to the work of the 
tabernacle of the congregation, and for all 
his service, and for tlie holy garments. 

22 And they came, both men and wom- 
en, as many as were willing-hearted, anf/ 
brought bracelets, and ear-rings, and 
rings, and tablets, all jewels of gold : and 
every man that odcred, offered an oflering 
of gold unto the Lord. 

23 And every man, with whom was 
found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and 
fine linen, and goats' hair, and red skins 
of rams, and badgers' skins, brought tlicm. 

24 Every one that did offer an oflering 
of silver and brass brought the Lord's 
offering: and every man, with whom was 
found shittim-wood for any work of the 
service, brought it. 

25 And all the women that were wise- 



24 : ft, a i clmp. 30 : 1 , etc. j cliaji. S7 : 9 ; 2 Sam. 7:2. k chap. 
31:10; 39:1,41; Num. 4:. 1, 7, etc. I vrr. ft, 22, etc. ; c)iap.2e:2; 
36:2; 1 Cliron.28:2,9; 29:9; E»ra7:27. 



are parts of the same revelation, and a knowledge 
of both is necessary in order to a full understanding 
of either. Those, therefore, who think that (lie Old 
Testament is out of date, and that the study of it 
can be neglected without sin, or without great loss 
to the soul, do exceedingly err, not knowing the 
Scriptures. 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

3. Kindle no fire ; for any worldly purpose ; not 
even to manufacture articles for the tabernacle, or 
sanctuary of the Lord. 

4-29. The tabernacle. Chap. 25 : 2-40. 

18. Pins of the tabernacle ; supposed to be 
those to which the cords of the sacred tent were 
fastened, and which were driven into the ground, 
to keep it firm in its place. 

22. Tablets ; supposed to be ornaments worn 
around the head or neck. 

25. Wise-liearted ; skilled in curious spiiinin<;. 



Bezalcel and Aholiab. 



EXODUS XXXVI. 



The offerings are too many. 



b.c'muk' hearted did^spiii with their hands, 
and brought that which they had spun, 
both of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, 
and of fine linen. 

26 And all the women whose heart stir- 
red them up in wisdom spun goats' hair. 

27 And •" the rulex's brought onyx-stones, 
and stones to be set, for the ephod, and 
for the breastplate ; 

28 And "^ spice, and oil for the light, and for 
the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense. 

29 The children of Israel brought a 
willing"' offering unto the Lord, every 
man and woman, whose heart made them 
willing to bring for all manner of work, 
which the Lord had commanded to be 
made by the hand of Moses. 

30 T[ And Moses said unto the children 
of Israel, "See, the Loud hath called by 
name Bezalcel the son of Uri, the son of 
llur, of the tribe of Judah; 

3 1 And he hath filled him with the spirit 
of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and 
in knowledge, and in all manner of work- 
manship ; 

32 And to devise curious works, to work 
in gold, and in silver, and iu brass, 

33 And in the cutting of stones, to set 
them, and in carving of wood, to make 
any manner of cunning work. 

34 And he ""hath put in his heart that 
he may teach, both he, and Aholin,b, the 
son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan. 

35 Them hath he s filled with wisdom of 
heart, to work all manner of work, of the 
engraver, and of the cunning workman, 
and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in pur- 
ple, in scarlet, and in fine linen, and of the 
weaver, even of them that do any work, 
and of those that devise cunning work. 



a<liaii.28:3;-2Kinss,M:7;Prov.Sl:19. b 1 Clir.39: 6; Ezr:<2:K8. 
cliap. 30:iS. <1 ver -21 : 1 Clir. 21 : 9. e chap. 31: 2, eta f Nell. 
■Ai. f ver.31; cli.ip. 31 .■.■?,«; 1 Kin^,:l: 12; 7: 14 ; 2Clir.2:14; 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The observance of the Sabbath was so essen- 
tial to the civil welfare of the Israelites, and to the 
prevalence and perpetuity of true religion, that it 
was here placed first among the directions which God 
gave his people. The command to keep it holy was 
often repeated, and on a variety of occasions ; and 
the open, presumptuous violation of it w;i.s to be 
punished with death. 

5. Free, voluntary offerings for the purpose of 
promoting the glory of G-od and the good of man- 
kiiui, are peculiarly pleasing to him. 

10. Those whose t;tlents and skill are employed 
in doing what God has commanded, are, in the best 
sense, wise-hearted; while those whose powers are 
not employed in obeying him, are. in the mo.st em- 
phatic sense, fools. Psa. 14 : I ; Prov. 17 : IC. 

22. All wlio are truly wise, both men and women, 
when they know the will of God, will be disposed 
to do it; and iu offering willingly to him of what 
he has given them, they will derive from it gre.ater 
enjoyment and benefit than if tliey had hoarded it, 
or employed it on themselves. 

29. In giving to the Lord of what he has given 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

I The offerings are delivered to the workmen. H The 
liberality ol the people is restrained, b The curtains 
of cherubim. 14 The curtains of goats' hair. 19 
The covering of .skins. 20 The boards with their .sock- 
ets. 31 The bars. 3.5 The veil. 37 The hanging 
for tlie door. 

THEN wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, 
and •' every wise-hearted man, in 
whom the Lord put wisdom and under- 
standing to know how to work all man- 
ner of work for the service of the ' sanc- 
tuary, according to all that the Loud had 
commanded. 

2 And Moses called Bezaleel and Aho- 
liab, and every wise-hearted man, in 
whose heart the Lord had put wisdom, 
even every one whose J heart stirred him 
up to come unto the work to do it : 

3 And they received of Moses all the 
offering, which the children of Israel had 
brought for the work of the service of the 
sanctuary, to make it withal. And they 
brought yet unto him free offerings every 
morning. 

4 T[And all the '' wise men, that w'rought 
all the ' work of the sanctuary, came every 
man from his work which they made ; 

5 And they spake unto Moses, saying, 
The people bring much '"more than 
enough for the service of the work, which 
the Lord commanded to make. 

6 And Moses gave commandment, and 
they caused it to be proclaimed through- 
out the camp, saying. Let neither man 
nor woman make any more work lor the 
offering of the sanctuary. So the people 
were restrained from bringing. 

7 For the stuff they had was sufficient 
for all the work to make " it, and too much. 

8 IfAnd every wise-hearted man among 



Tsa.28:2f.; .M.-IH. h ch.ip. 2S: 3: 31 : fi : 3."i : 10, 3.->. i cll.-i|i. .'.n:«; 
Num.7:«); Heb.8:2. j cliap.3.=>:2.'i.2ii; I Clir.2>l:.".. k lCor.3:10. 
1 2 Clir. 24:13. m 2 Cor. 8:2,3; Phil. 4 : 17, 18. 112 011^31:10. 



to them, all may take a part, the poor as well .as 
the rich, and their offerings may be equally accept- 
iible. If there be a willing mind, it is accepted 
according to what any one hath, and not according 
to what he hath not. Mark 12 : 43. 44 ; 2 Cor. 8 : 12. 
34. Mechanical skill, as really as divine grace, 
men receive from God ; but they can obtain and con- 
fer the benefits of neither without their own efforts. 
And both, to be accepted, must be employed in the 
service and to the glory of the Giver. 

CHAPTER XXXVJ. 
mSTRUCTIONS. 
3. Those who are intrusted with public contribu- 
tions should conscientiously appropriate them to 
the objects for which they are given, and avoid both 
the reality and tlie appearance of employing any 
p.art of them for other purposes. 

7. The hearts of men, and all their powers, are 
so under the control of God, that he can at any 
time lead them to devote any portion of what he 
gives them to his service, and make them instru- 
mental, in such w.ays as he sees best, of advancing 
his cause. 

127 



The curtains and boards. 



EXODUS XXXVII. 



The bars, rcil, and ark. 



them that wrought the work of the taberna- 
cle made 'ten curtains 0/ tine twined linen, 
and blue, and purple, and scarlet: icitk 
cherubim of cunning -work made he them. 

9 The length of one curtain was twenty 
and eight cubits, and the breadth of one 
curtain four cubits : the curtains were all 
of one size. 

10 And he coupled the five curtains one 
unto another: and the other five curtains 
he coupled one unto another. 

1 1 And he made loops of blue on the 
edge of one curtain from the selvedge in 
the coupling : likewise he made in the 
uttermost side of another curtain, in the 
coupling of the second. 

12 Fifty ^ loops made he in one curtain, 
and fifty loops made he in the edge of the cur- 
tain which tvas in the coupling of the sec- 
ond : the loops held one curtain to another. 

13 And he made fifty taches of gold, and 
coupled the curtains one unto another with 
the taches: so it became ""one tabernacle. 

1 4 T[And he made curtains o/** goats' hair 
for the tent over the tabernacle : eleven 
curtains he made them. 

15 The length of one curtain icas thirty 
cubits, and four cubits ica.'i the breadth 
of one curtain : the eleven curtains were 
of one size. 

1 6 And he coupled five curtains by them- 
selves, and six curtains by tliemselvcs. 

17 And he made fifty loops upon the ut- 
termost edge of the curtain in the coupling, 
and fifty loops made he upon the edge of 
the curtain which eouplcth the second. 

18 And he made fifty taches 0/ brass to 
couple the tent together, that it might be one. 

19 And he made a "covering for the tent 
of rams' skins dyed red, and a covering 
0/ badgers' skins above that. 

20 ^I And he made ""boards for the tab- 
ernacle o/^shittim-wood, standing up. 

21 The length of a board was ten cubits, 
and the breadth of a board one cubit and 
a half. 

22 One board had two tenons, ecjually 
distant one from another: thus did he 
make for all the boards of the tabernacle. 

23 And he made boards for the taber- 
nacle ; twenty boards for the south side 
southward : 

24 And forty sockets of silver he made 
under the twenty boards ; two sockets 
under one board for his two tenons, and 
two sockets under another board for his 
two tenons. 

• clinpter in A, etc h rlmpli-'r iti : f>. « 1 Corintliinim, 1 2 : iO ; 
Epil. 2 : iO-QJ ; 1 Peter, 2 : 4, S. il rlmp. •:!■.: 7. • rlinp. CfiiM. 
f chr>p.2fi: Ift. r clinp. 25: B, in : Niinil>pr» « : 1 ; Dcut.lO:a. 
* Hen. twined, f Hel>. two mckttt, two lockclt under one board. 



25 And for the other side of the "i^.f^ 
tabernacle, which is toward the north 
corner, he made twenty boards, 

26 And their forty sockets of silver; two 
sockets under one board, and two sockets 
under another board. 

27 And for the sides of the tabernacle 
westward he made six boards. 

28 And two boards made he for the cor- 
ners of the tabernacle in the two sides. 

29 And they were * coupled beneath, and 
coupled together at the head thereof, to 
one ring: thus he did to both of them in 
both the corners. 

30 And there were eight boards; and 
their sockets HTre sixteen sockets of silver, 
under t every board two sockets. 

31 ^And he made ''bars of shittim- 
Avood ; five for the boards of the one side 
of the tabernacle, 

32 And five bars for the boards of the 
other side of the tabernacle, and five bars 
for the boards of the tabernacle for the 
sides westward. 

33 And he made the middle bar to shoot 
through the boards from the one end to 
the other. 

34 And he overlaid the boards with gold, 
and made their rings o/gold to be places for 
the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold. 

35 ^And he made a 'veil of blue, and 
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen : 
Hv7/i cherubim made he it of cunning work. 

36 And he made thereunto four pillars 
o/shittim-?roor/, and overlaid them with 
gold : their hooks tccre of gold ; and he 
cast for them four sockets of silver. 

37 *[ And he made aJ hanging for the tab- 
crnacle-door o/blue, and purple, and scar- 
let, and fine twined linen, ^^of'needle-v/ork ; 

38 And the five pillars of it with their 
hooks; and he overlaid their chapiters 
and their fillets with gold : but their five 
sockets were 0/ brass. 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 

1 The ark. G The mercy-seat with cherubim. 10 The 
table with his vessels. 17 The candlestick with his 
lamps and instruments. 2-3 The. altar of incense 
•Ji) The anointing oil and sweet incense. 

AND Bezaleel made the 'ark o/'shittim- 
wood: two cubits and a half was 
the length of it, and a cubit and a half 
the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half 
the height of it : 

2 And he overlaid it with pure gold 
within and without, and made a crown 
of gold to it round about. 



h chnu. 2H 


.o 


;. i rl 


np. 


W: 


31; 


M. 


n 


M 


ttliew27:r.l 


Hel. 


rewK 


10 : id. j 


rli 


ap. M: 


SH. 


t 


Hel 


.th 


e t 


l-nrk of 


a needle 


irorkr 


r, or 


emhroidert 




kr- 


».45>H 


. 1 


Cl. 


'P 


iR 


10; 


40:.1;J1 


Nun 


ben 


IO:33,nJi. 



























CHAPTER XXXVII. supposed that this was done with thin plates, others 

2. He overlaid it with pure gold ; some liavc that it was gilt. 
128 



The mercy-scat and table, 



EXODUS XXXVIII. 



candlestick and altars. 



Bc'iwi'' 3 And he cast for it four rings of 
gold, to be set by the four corners of it ; 
even two rings upon the one side of it, and 
two rings upon the other side of it. 

4 And he made staves of shittim-wood, 
and overlaid them "with gold. 

And he put the staves into the rings 
by the sides of the ark, to bear the ark. 

6 TfAnd he made the "mercy-scat of 
pure gold : two cubits and a half ivas the 
length thereof, and one cubit and a half 
the breadth thereof. 

7 And he made *" two cherubim of gold, 
beaten out of one piece made he them, on 
the two ends of the mercy-seat; 

8 One cherub * on the cud on this side, 
and another cherub t on the other end on 
that side : out of the mercy-seat made he 
the cherubim on the two ends thereof. 

9 And the ''cherubim spread out their 
wings on high, and covered with their wings 
over the mercy-scat, with their faces one 
to another ; even to the ^ mcrcy-seat-ward 
were the faces of the cherubim. 

1 "^ And he made the •" table of shittim- 
wood : two cubits ivas the length thereof, 
and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a 
cubit and a half the height thereof: 

11 And he overlaid it with pure gold, 
and made thereunto a crown of gold round 
about. 

12 Also he made thereunto a border of 
a handbreadth round about ; and made a 
crown of gold for the border thereof round 
about. 

13 And he cast for it four rings of gold, 
and put the rings upon the four corners 
ihat U'ere in the four feet thereof. 

14 Over against the border \Tere the 
rings, the places for the staves to bear the 
table. 

15 And he made the staves q/' shittim- 
wood, and overlaid them with gold, to bear 
the table. 

It) And he made the vessels which were 
upon the table, his "^dishes, and his spoons, 
and his bowls, and his covers ^^ to cover 
withal, o/pure gold. 

17 1[ And he made the ^candlestick of 
pure gold : of beaten work made he the 
candlestick; his shaft, and his branch, 
his bowls, his knops, and his llowcrs, 
were of the same : 



18 And six branches going out of the 
sides thereof; three branches of the can- 
dlestick out of the one side thereof, and 
three branches of the candlestick out of 
the other side thereof: 

19 Three bowls made after the fashion 
of almonds in one branch, a knop and a 
flower ; and three bowls made like al- 
monds in another branch, a knop and a 
llower : so throughout the six branches 
going out of the candlestick. 

20 And in the candlestick were four 
bowls made like almonds, his knops, and 
his flowers : 

21 And a knop under two branches of 
the same, and a knop under two branches 
of the same, and a knop under two branches 
of the same, according to the six branches 
going out of it. 

22 Their knops and their branches were 
of the same : all of it was one beaten work 
of pure gold. 

23 And he made his seven lamps, and his 
snuflcrs, and his snufF-dishes, o/pure gold. 

24 Of a talent of pure gold made he it, 
and all the vessels thereof. 

25 ^ And he made the *■ incense-altar of 
shittim-wood : the length of it u'as a cubit, 
and the breadth of it a cubit ; it ivas four- 
square ; and two cubits ivas the height of 
it ; the horns thereof were of the same. 

26 And he overlaid it with pure gold, both 
the top of it, and the sides thereof round 
about, and the horns of it : also he made 
unto it a crown of gold round about. 

27 And he made two rings of gold for 
it under the crown thereof, by the two 
corners of it, upon the two sides thereof, 
to be places for the staves to bear it withal. 

28 And he made the staves of shittim- 
wood, and overlaid them with gold. 

29 ^ And he made the 'holy anointing 
oil, and the Jpure incense of sweet spices, 
according to the work of the apothecary. 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

1 The altar of burnt-offering. S The laver of brass. 9 
The court. 21 The sum of tliat the people offered. 

AND he made the ''altar of burnt-off'er- 
ing of shittim-wood : five cubits was 
the length thereof, and five cubits the 
breadth thereof ; zY ?f'a.s foursquare ; and 
three cubits the height thereof. 



• cli.ip. -2.^: 17. b lKings,6:23; PsalmSO:!. * Or, out o/. 1 iW: 31 ; 40: «, 25 ; 1 Cliron. 28: 15 ; SCIiron. 13: U ; Zecli. 4 .-2, II ; 
tOr,ou<o/. c Gen.3:'24; lsii.fi:2: Ezek.clr. 10. ■! chap.2o:20. I Heb. 9: 2 ; Rev. 1 : 12, 20; 2:1, .5. h chap. 30: 1 ; 40: 27; I.iike 
•chap. 25:23; 35:13; 40:4,22; Ezekiel 40 : :i9 ; Malachil:12. 1:>),I0; Rev.8:3,4. icbap.30:23; Psa. 23 : 5; 92 : 10; iKliah 
f chap. 25:29: 2 Tim. 2:20. ^ Or, to pour out withal, e chap, fil : 1,3. jchap.30:34. kcliap.27:l. 

INSTRUCTIONS. | fully stated that all was done according to the pat- 

As tlie dwelling of God in the tabernacle, and the tern shown to Moses in the mount ; thus indicating 
sacrifict'S of his people, were preparatory to and em- that redemption is peculiarly the work of God, and 
blematieal of his tabernacling in human flesh, and reflecting special honor on Christ as Redeemer, 
by one offering of himself opening the treasures of 

his grace to mankind, every thing relating to them is i CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

recorded with minute exactness, and the fnct care- 1. The altar ; chap. 27 : 1-8. 

129 



T%c lavcr and the court. 



EXODUS XXXVIII. 



Tfie sum of the offerings. 



2 And he made the horns thereof on the 
four corners of it; the horns thereof •were 
of the same : and he overlaid it -svitli brass. 

3 And he made all the vessels of the altar, 
the pots, and the shovels, and the basins, 
and the flesh-hooks, and the fire-pans : all' 
the vessels thereof made he of brass. 

4 And he made for the altar a brazen 
grate of network, under the compass there- 
of, beneath unto the midst of it. 

5 And he cast four rings for the four 
ends of the grate of brass, to be places for 
the staves. 

6 And he made the staves of shittim- 
wood, and overlaid them with brass. 

7 And he put the staves into the rings 
on the sides of the altar, to bear it M'ithal ; 
he made the altar hollow with boards. 

8 ^And he made the *laver o/brass,and 
the foot of it of brass, of the * looking- 
glasses of the women t assembling, which 
assembled at the door of the tabernacle of 
the congregation. 

9 ^And he made the ''court: on the south 
side southward the hangings of the court 
were offmc twined linen, a hundred cubits : 

10 Their pillars were twenty, and their 
brazen sockets twenty ; the hooks of the 
pillars and their fillets were q/" silver. 

11 And for the north side the kn77gings 
were a hundred cubits, their pillars tcerc 
twenty, and their sockets of brass twenty ; 
the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of 
silver. 

12 And for the west side were hangings 
of fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their 
sockets ten ; the hooks of the pillars and 
their fillets of silver. 

1.3 And for the east side eastward fifty 
cubits. 

14 The hangings of the one side of the 
gate were fifteen cubits ; their pillars three, 
and their sockets three. 

15 And for the other side of the court- 
gate, on this hand and that hand, 7rcre 
hangings of fifteen cubits ; their pillars 
three, and their sockets three. 



• chapter 30:18. * Or, brazen glattet. f Heb. attemblinf 
by troopt. b rlinpter 27 : 9; -10:8, :«; IKingn, 6:afi; Psalm 
84:3,10. c 2ClironicIc», 3: H. •! fliiip. 27 : IM; 2Chron. 3:9; 
F.zrR9:8; Ina. 22:23. « Num. 1 : nO, .V); 9:1.1; 10:11; 17:7,8; 
18:2; SCliron. 24: 6; Art«7:44; Rev. 11:19. f Num. 4 : 28, 3.3. 



8. The /aver; chap. .lO: 18-21. Looking- 
glasses ; mirrors of polished nietal. Which as- 
senibted ; for religious purposes, and to unite in 
the worship of God. 

9. The court : chap. 27:9. 

18. The height in the breadth ; the heiglit of 
the gate, or cntrante, was equal to the breadth of 
the curtain, or hanging, which closed it. 

21. The sum ; enumeration or statement of the 
various articles for the tabernacle. 

24. Talents — shekels ; a shekel was lialf an 

ounce avoirdupois, and a talent equal to three tliou- 

sand shekels, or ninety-three pounds and twelve 

ounces. In value, a shekel was about fifty cents, 

130 



16 All the hangings of the court Vll.ijii'. 
round about were of fine twined linen. 

17 And the sockets for the pillars were 
o/brass ; the hooks of the pillars and their 
fillets of silver; and the overlaying of 
their chapiters 0/ silver; and all the pil- 
lars of the court tvere filleted with silver. 

18 And the hanging for the gate of the 
court ^ra."; needle-work, of 'hlvte, and pur- 
ple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen : 
and twenty cubits iras the length, and 
the height in the breadth was five cubits, 
answerable to the hangings of the court. 

19 And their pillars tcere four, and their 
sockets o/brass four; their hooks 0/ sil- 
ver, and the overlaying of their chapiters 
and their fillets of silver. 

20 And all the ''pins of the tabernacle, 
and of the court round about, u-cre o/brass. 

21 Tl This is the sum of the tabernacle, 
e77en of the "tabernacle of testimony, as 
it was counted, according to the com- 
mandment of Moses, for the service of 
the Levitcs, by the hand of ^Ithamar, son 
to Aaron the priest. 

22 And sBezalecl the son of Uri, the son 
of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all 
that the Lord commanded Moses. 

23 And with him teas * Aholiab, son of 
Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an en- 
graver, and a cunning workman, and an 
embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and 
in scarlet, and fine linen. 

24 AH the 'gold that was occupied for the 
work in all the work ofthe holy p/ace, even 
the gold of the offering, was tAventy and 
nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty 
shekels, after the J shekel of the sanctuary . 

25 An* the silver of them that were 
numbered of the congregation was a hun- 
dred talents, and a thousaiul seven hun- 
dred and threescore and fifteen shekels, 
after the sliekel of the sanctuary : 

26 A bckah for t every man, that is, half 
a shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, 
for ''every one that went to be numbered, 
from twenty years old and 'upward, for 



K cUap. 31:1, 6; 3.'>.30. h cliap. 3.". : 34. i 1 Clironiclw, 22 : 14 . 
29:2,7; Haggai2:8. j chap. 30: 13,24; Lbt. 6:1,'); 27:3,26, 
Num. 3:47; 18: 16. f Heb. a poll. V chap. 30: 13, 1». 1 Num. 
bers 1 :46; 26:. 51. 



and a talent of silver about fifteen hundred dollars. 
A talent of gold was equal, it is supposed, to about 
twelve times that amount. 

INSTRl'CTION?. 

8. Religion has ever taken a strong and perin.-)- 
nent liold upon the heart of woman ; and while it 
has greatly elevated, adorned, and ennobled her 
character, increased her enjoyments, and extended 
her usefulness, it has been greatly promoted by her 
pniyers, her example, her sacrifices, and her efforts. 

24. However much property, at the direction of 
God, is devoted to the promotion of his glory, in 
the establishment and support of his worship, in- 
stead of being lost, as many suppose, it is employed 



The holy garments. 



EXODUS XXXIX. 



The brcaslplate, and robe. 



b-c'iml' six hundred thousand and three 
thousand and five hundred and lifty men. 

27 And of the hundred talents of silver 
were *cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and 
the sockets of the veil ; a hundred sockets of 
the hundred talents, a talent for a socket. 

28 And of the thousand seven hundred 
seventy and five shekels he made hooks 
for the pillars, and overlaid their chapi- 
ters, and ''filleted them. 

29 And the brass of the offering was 
seventy talents, and two thousand and 
four hundred shekels. 

30 And therewith he made the sockets to 
the door of the tabernacle of the congrega- 
tion, and the brazen altar, and the brazen 
grate for it, and all the vessels of the altar, 

31 And the sockets of the court round 
about, and the sockets of the court-gate, 
and all the pins of the tabernacle, and all 
the pins of the court round about. 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

I Theclothesof service and holy garments. 2Theephod. 
8 The breastplate ii The robe of the ephod. 27 
The coats, mitre, and girdle of fine linen. 30 The 
plate of the holy crown. 32 All is viewed and ap- 
proved by JNIoses. 

AND of the "^blue, and purple, and scar- 
let, they made ''clothes of service, to 
do service in the holy place, and made the 
holy garments for Aaron ; as the Lord 
commanded*" Moses. 

2 And he made the ""ephod o/gold, blue, 
and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined 
linen. 

3 And they did beat the gold into thin 
plates, and cut it into w^ires, to w'ork it 
in the blue, and in the purple, and in the 
scarlet, and in the fine linen, with cunning 
work. 

4 They made shoulder-pieces for it, to 
couple it together ; by the two edges was 
it coupled together. 

5 And the curious girdle of his ephod, 
that was upon it, U'as of the same, accord- 
ing to the work thereof; o/gold, blue, and 
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen ; 
as the LoKD commanded Moses. 

6 ^And they wrought onyx-stones in- 
closed in ouches of gold, graven, as sig- 
nets are srrraven, with the names of the 
children of Israel. 

7 And he put them on the shoulders of 
the ephod, that ihcij should be stones for a 
memorial'' to the children of Israel ; as 
the Lord commanded Moses. 

8 ^[ And he made the 'breastplate of 
cunning work, like the work of the ephod; 



» chnp. 2(5:19-3-:. b chap. 27:17. c chap. 2.t:4; 3.i:23. d clnp. 
31:10; 36:la e chap. 28:4; Ezek. 42: H. f ch:ip.2R:B; LeT.8:7. 



to the greatest advantage, both to the possessors and 
to the world. 



of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and 
fine twined linen. 

9 It was foursquare ; they made the 
breastplate double : a span u-as the length 
thereof, and a span the breadth thereof, 
being doubled. 

10 And they set in it four ' rows of stones: 
the first row was a * sardius, a topaz, and a 
carbuncle : this was the first row. 

1 1 And the second row, an emerald, a 
sapphire, and a diamond. 

12 And the third row', a ligure, an agate, 
and an amethyst. 

13 And the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, 
and a jasper : theij were inclosed in ouches 
of gold in their inclosings. 

14 And the stones irerc according to the 
names of the children of ''Israel, twelve, 
according to their names, like the engrav- 
ings of a signet, every one with his name, 
according to the twelve tribes. 

15 And they made upon the breastplate 
chains at the ends, of wrcathen work of 
pure gold. 

16 And they made two ouches o/gold, 
and tw'o gold rings, and put the two rings 
in the two ends of the breastplate. 

17 And they put the 'two wreathen 
chains of gold in the two rings on the 
ends of the breastplate. 

18 And the two ends of the two wreath- 
en chains they fastened in the two ouches, 
and put them on the shoulder-pieces of the 
ephod, before it. 

19 And they made two rings of gold, 
and put them on the two ends of the breast- 
plate, upon the border of it, which was 
on the side of the ephod inward. 

20 And they made two other golden rings, 
and put them on the two sides of the ephod 
underneath, toward the forepart of it, over 
against the other coupling thereof, above 
th^ curious girdle of the ephod. 

21 And they did bind the breastplate by 
his rings unto the rings of the ephod with 
a lace of blue, that it might be above the 
curious girdle of the ephod, and that the 
breastplate might not be loosed from the 
ephod; as the Lord commanded JNIoses. 

22 ^And he made the '" robe of the ephod 
of woven work, all of blue. 

23 And there teas a hole in the midst of 
the robe, as the hole of an habergeon, vith 
a band round about the hole, that it should 
not rend. 

24 And they made upon the hems of the 
robe pomegranates of blue, and purple, 
and scarlet, and twined linen. 

B chap. 28:9-12. li chap. 28:29; .Tosh.4:7. ich.28: 1.5,etc. j Rer. 
21:r9,20. *Or,rM6v. kKev.il:12. ICant.l:10. nich.28:3l. 



CHAPTER. XXXIX. 
2-31. The high-priest's dress. Chapter 28. 
131 



The tahernade completed. 



E X D U S X L . It is to be set up. and anointed. 



25 And they made ^bells w/piire gold, 
and put the bells between the '"pome- 
granates upon the liem of the robe, round 
about between the pomegranates ; 

26 A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and 
a pomegranate, round about the hem of 
the robe to minister in; as the Lord com- 
manded ISIoses. 

27 ^[And they made " coats of fine linen 
of woven work for Aaron, and for his sons, 

28 And a'^mitreo/fine linen, and goodly 
bonnets o/"fine linen, and *" linen breeches 
o/ fine twined linen, 

29 And a ''girdle of fine twined linen, 
and blue, and purple, and scarlet, o/ nee- 
dle-work ; as the Lord commanded Moses. 

30 1[And they made the plate of the 
holy crown of pure gold, and wrote upon 
it a writing, like to the engravings of a 
signet, 6 HOLINESS TO THE LORD. 

31 And they tied unto it a lace of blue, 
to fasten it on high upon the mitre ; as the 
Lord commanded Moses. 

32 *[] Thus was all the work of the tab- 
ernacle of the tent of the congregation 
finished; and the children of ''Israel did 
according to all that the Lord commanded 
Moses, so did they. 

33 "li And they brought the tabernacle 
unto Moses, the lent, and all his furniture, 
his taches, his boards, his bai's, and his 
pillars, and his sockets ; 

34 And the covering of rams' skins dyed 
red, and the covering of badgers' skins, 
and the veil of the covering ; 

35 The ark of the testimony, and the 
staves thereof, and the mercy-seat ; 

3G The table, and all the vessels there- 
of, and the show-bread ; 

37 The pure candlestick, icith the lamps 
thereof, even ivith the lamps to be set in 
order, and all the vessels thereof, and the 
oil for light ; 

38 And the golden altar, and the anoint- 
ing oil, and *the sweet incense, and the 
hanging for the tabernacle-door; 

39 The brazen altar, and his grate of 
brass, his staves, and all his vessels, the 
laver and his foot ; 



• clinp.'28:33. b Cnnt.4 : IM. c cliap.M:39,40. •! c1i!in.28:4,3>). 
• clmp.'i8:4-2; Kzck.44:18. f cliap. '28 ; »l. E Zerli. 14 : '.'0. h ver. 
«, « ; chap. 2.1 : 40 J Dent 12.:i2; 1 Sum. Ifi: 22; I Cliron. 28: 19; 
Mat 28: 20; Heb. 8:5. * Hvh.llit iiietmea/tioeceipicct. i cli.ip. 



43. Moses Meised them ; invoked on them the 
blessing of God. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

32. When numbers nnite earnestly and persever- 
ingly in a good work, much, with the blessing of 
G-od, may be accomplished in a sliort time. 

42. \\ hen things are undertaken and accomplish- 
ed according to the directions of God, they will be 
done in the Dest manner. 

43. When others have done well we should show 
ourselves pleased, ask God to bless them, and give 
to him the glory. 

132 



pillars, and his .sockets, and the hanging for 
the court-gate, his cords, and his pins, and 
all the vessels of the service of the taber- 
nacle, for the tent of the congregation ; 

41 The 'clothes of service to do service 
in the holy place, and the holy garments 
for Aaron the priest, and his sons' gar- 
meiits, to minister in the priest's olfice. 

42 According to all that the Lord J com- 
manded jNIoscs, so the children of Israel 
made all the work. 

43 And Moses did look upon all the 
work, and behold, they had done it as the 
Lord had commanded, even so had they 
done it: and Moses ''blessed them. 

CHAPTER XL. 

1 The tabernacle is commanded to be reared, 9 and 
anointed. 13 Aaron and his sons to be sanctified. 16 
Moses performeth all things accordingly. 34 A cloud 

coveretU the tabernacle. 

A ND the Lord spake unto INIoses, say- 
J±. ing, 

2 On the first 'day of the first month 
shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the 
tent of the congregation. 

3 And thou shalt put therein the ark of the 
testimony, and cover the ark with the veil. 

4 And thou shalt bring in the table, and 
set in order ^ the things that are to be "'set 
in order upon it ; and thou shalt bring in the 
candlestick, and light the lamps thereof. 

5 And thou shalt set the altar of gold 
for the incense before the ark of the testi- 
mony, and put the hanging of the door to 
the tabernacle. 

6 And thou shalt set the altar of the 
burnt-ofl'ering before the door of the tab- 
ernacle of the tent of the congregation. 

7 And thou shalt set the " laver between 
the tent of tlie congregation and the altar, 
and shalt put water therein. 

8 And thou shalt set up the court round 
about, and hang up the hanging at the 
court-gate. 

9 And thou shalt take the anointing oil, 
and "anoint the tabernacle, and all that 
is therein, and shalt liallow it, and all the 
vessels thereof: and it shall be holv. 



31:10. jclinp..a'i: 10. k Gen. H:19; Lev. M: 22, 23; Num. 6: 2.1-27; 
.Io«ll.22:6; 2Slim.fi:l8; lKing8,8:14; 2Cliron.:iO:27 ; Nell.ll:2; 
l.uke2:34. I ver. 17; c\,ap. 12:2; l:):4; Num. 7:1. t Heli.rt* 
order therenf. nil,ev.24:8. n ver..30; clinp.30: 18. o rli.30:2K. 

CHAPTER XL. 
2. T/ie _fir.<:t dny of the Jirst month ; they 
started from Egypt on the fifteenth day of the first 
month. On the iiftietli d:iy after, the law was given 
from mount Sinai ; and Moses was eighty days in 
the mount. A number of other things were done, 
and several delays occasioned, which must have 

1 occupied about six months, before the tabernacle 
w;is begun. As the first day of the first month 
would make a year from the time they left Egypt 
wanting fifteen days, they were prob.aldy employed 

, not far from six months in preparing the t;ibernacle. 



Tlie tabernacle is set up. 



EXODUS XL. 



The cloud covercth it. 



B. C. Si'M. 

of the burnt-offering, and all his vessels, 
and sanctify the altar: and ^it shall be 
an altar *most holy. 

11 And thou shalt anoint the laver and 
his foot, and sanctify it. 

12 And thou shalt '' bring Aaron and his 
sons unto the door of the tabernacle of the 
congregation, and wash them with water. 

1 3 And thou shalt put upon Aaron the 
holy garments, and ""■ anoint him, and sanc- 
tify '' him ; that he may minister unto me 
in the priest's office. 

14 And thou shalt bring his sons, and 
clothe them with coats : 

15 And thou shalt anoint them as thou 
didst anoint their father, that they may min- 
ister unto me in the priest's office : for their 
anointing shall surely be an ^everlasting 
priesthood throughout their generations. 

16 Thus did Moses : according to all that 
the Lord commanded him, so did he. 

17 l[And it came to pass in the "^ first 
month in the second year, on the first day 
of the month, that the tabernacle was 
reared up. 

18 And Moses reared up the tabernacle, 
and fastened his sockets, and set up the 
boards thereof, and put in the bars there- 
of, and reared up his pillars. 

19 And he spread abroad the tent over 
the tabernacle, and put the covering of 
the tent above upon it ; as the Lord com- 
manded Moses. 

20 T[ And he took and ^ put the testimony 
into the ark, and set the staves on the ark, 
and put the '' mercy-seat above upon the ark : 

21 And he brought the ark into the tab- 
ernacle, and set up the ' veil of the cover- 
ing, and covered the arlfof the testimony ; 
as the Lord commanded IMoses. 

22 ^And he put the J table in the tent 
of the congregation, upon the side of the 
tabernacle ''northward, without the veil. 

23 And he set the bread in order upon 
it before the Lord ; as the Lord had com- 
manded Moses. 



« chap. 29:36,37 


'' Heh. holiness of holinmtt. 


1 


r.ev 


.8:1- 


1.3. 


e chap 


28:41: Isa 


61 : 1 : IJohn, 2:^0. J 


.lohn 


17 


:li». 


e m 


m. 


2.T : 13 ; 


Psalm 111): 


4; Heb.7:17-24. f ver. 


1; Nu 


m. 


7:1. 


Scl 


ap. 


•»: lli. 


h chap. 37 


6-9. i chap. 26: 33; 3.i: 


I-". J 


ve 


r. 4. 


k rl 


ap 


2(i:3ft. 


lver.4;ch 


lip.2.T:37. m chap. 30: 7. 


D ver 


B: 


chap 


.27: 


.*• 



17. In the second year ; after their departure 
from Egypt. 

20. The testimony ; the tables containing the 
ten coininandinents. that solemn testimony of God 
with res^arJ to the duty of men. 

21. The veil of the covering ; that which cov- 
ered or closed the entrance into the holy of holies, and 
thus prevented the ark from being seen, except by the 
high-priest once a year. Chap. 30 : 10 ; Heb. 9 : 7. 

.32. As the Lord commande4 : chap. 30: 19-21. 

33. The court ; chap. 27 : 9-10. Finished the 
vjork; the work of preparing the tabernacle ac- 
cording to the pattern which God showed, and the 
directions he g.-ive to ilose? in the mount. 



24 T[And he put the candlestick in the 
tent of the congregation, over against the 
table, on the side of the tabernacle south- 
ward. 

25 And he 'lighted the lamps before the 
Lord ; as the Lord commanded Moses. 

26 T[ And he put the golden altar in the 
tent of the congregation before the veil : 

27 And he '"burnt sweet incense there- 
on ; as the Lord commanded Moses. 

28 •[ And he set up the hanging at the 
door of the tabernacle. 

29 And he put the " altar of burnt-offer- 
ing h\j the door of the tabernacle of the 
tent of the congregation, and offered upon 
it the burnt-offering and the meat-ofler- 
ing; as the Lord commanded Moses. 

30 ^ And he set the ° laver between the 
tent of the congregation and the altar, and 
put water there, to wash withal. 

31 And Moses and Aaron and his sons 
washed their hands and their feet thereat : 

32 When they Avent into the tent of the 
congregation, and when they came near 
unto the altar, they p washed ; as the Lord 
commanded Moses. 

33 And he reared "lup the court round 
about the tabernacle and the altar, and 
set up the hanging of the court-gate. So 
Moses finished the work. 

34 ^Theii a "^cloud covered the tent of 
the congregation, and the glory of the 
Lord filled the tabernacle. 

35 And Moses was not able to enter into 
the tent of the congregation, because the 
cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the 
Lord filled the tabernacle. 

36 And when the ^ cloud was taken up 
from over the tabernacle, the children of 
Israel twent onward in all their journeys : 

37 But if the cloud were not taken up, 
then they journeyed 'not till the day that 
it was taken up. 

38 For the cloud of the " Lord was upon 
the tabernacle by day, and fire was on it 
by night, in the sight of all the house of 
Israel, throughout all their journeys. 



o ver. 7 : chap. .30 : 18. p chai". 30: 19, 20; Pea. 73: 13. qver.8; 
chap. 27: 0,16. r chap. 13 : 21,2-2; 29:43; 33:9; Lev. 1^:2; Num. 
9:15; lKing8,8:10; 2Chron..'>: 13; 7:2: Psa. 18: 10-12; Isa.6:4; 
Ha».2:7,9: Rev. l.-.:8. sNeh.9:19. \ 'O.eb.joumtyea. I P»a. 
31 :!,=). u Psa.78:14; iai:39; Isa.4:n. 

31. A clond ; that in which Jehovah dwelt. 
The glory of the Lord: the resplendent bright- 
ness which manifested his presence. 

36. The cloud was taken, up ; and moved for- 
ward in the way that they should go. Chap. 13 : 21. 
22; Num. 9: 15-23; Neli. 9 : 19; Psa. 78 : 14 ; 
105:39. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The return of the seasons is well adapted to 
remind us of the goodness of G»)d, and our obliga- 
tions to him for his meiTie.<. And when, according 
to his will, we begin the year wiih devoutly a :- 
knowledging and adoring him, we may hope that 
whether we continue to its close in this world, or 
133 



THE THIRD BOOK OF MOSES, 



LEVITICUS. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 The bunit-oflerings, 3 of the herd, 10 of the (locks, 
14 of the fowls. 

AND the Lord called unto Moses, and 
spake unto " him out of the tabernacle 
of the conjjregation, saying, 

2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
say unto them. If any man of ''you bring 
an offering unto the Loud, ye shall bring 
your offering of the cattle, even of the 
herd, and of the flock. 

3 If his offering be a burnt-sacrifice of 
the herd, let him oflTer a ''male without 
blemish : lie sliall offer it of his own vol- 
untary will at the door of the tabernacle 
of the congregation before the Lord. 

4 And he shall put his ''hand upon the 
head of the burnt-ofiering; and it shall 
be "accepted for him to make ""atonement 
for him. 

5 And he shall kill the bullock before the 
Lord : and the i)riests. Aaron's sons, shall 
bring the blood, and « sprinkle the blood 
round about upon tlie altar that is by the 
door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 

C And he shall flay the burnt-offering, 
and cut it into his pieces. 
7 A nd the sons of Aaron the priest shall 



• Ex.If):.'?; Num. 12:4, 6. h clinp. •i2: 18. c olinp. 3: 1 ; 23: M, 
■21 ; Ex. 1-2:.-.; Deut. 15:-: I ; Mill. 1 : 14 : I.uke I:3S; John 1:36; 
E|ili.5:27; Hel>.<):14: I Pet. 1 : 19. d chap. 3:2,8, 13; 4:15; 
8:14,2-2; 1G:21; Ex. 2M: 10, I.i, 19 ; Num. 8:12; Isa. .13 : 4-6 ; 2 



are removed to another, we shall still be happy in 
the service of G-od. 

].'>. Such is the nature of men, rind such the wa^fs 
in whicli they are most usefully impressed, that the 
settinij apart of particular pl.aces for public wor- 
sliip. and of particular men to conduct it, is suited 
to promote their hi{;hest good. 

'il. The doing of all things as t!ie Lord com- 
mands, is the sure way of promoting his glory, and 
of obtaining his blessing. It is also tiie way to 
make our temporary sqiourn on eartli a prepara- 
tion for an eternal dwelling with God in heaven. 

33'. God"s taking forty d:iys to give directions 
about the- t;tbernacle ••ind its worship, and but six to 
create the world ; and his occupying many chap- 
ters of thi* Bible to describe the former, and but one 
to de.scribe the latter, should increase our conviction 
of the superiority of redemption to creation, and 
lead us to regard principally not things seen and 
temporal, but things unseen and eternal. 

3S. All the preparation tiiat was made to provide 
a dwelling-place for God, and inslitule his worship 
among the Israelites, the glory which filled the tab- 
erna'le, his guidance of them by the pillar of cloud 
and tire in all their journey through the wilderness, 
and his introduction of them into Can.aan, prefig- 
ured his dwelling in human nature and becoming 
134 



put lire upon the altar, and lay the %^,f^^ 
wood in order upon the fire : 

8 And the priests, Aaron's sons, shall 
lay the parts, the head, and the fat, in 
order upon the wood that is on the fire 
whicii is upon the altar: 

9 But his inwards and his legs shall he 
wash in water : and the priest shall burn 
all on the altar, to be a burnt-sacrifice, an 
offering made by fire, of a ''sweet savor 
unto the Lord. 

10 1[ And if his ofi'ering be of the flocks. 
namely, of the sheep, or of the goats, for 
a burnt-sacrifice ; he shall bring it a male 
without blemish. 

1 1 And he shall kill it on the side of the 
allar' northward before the Lord: and 
the priests, Aaron's sons, shall sprinkle 
his blood round about upon the altar. 

12 And he shall cut it into his pieces, 
\\\\\\ his head and his fat: and the priest 
shall lay them in order on the wood that 
is on the fire which is upon the altar : 

13 But he shall wash the inwards and the 
legs with water: and the priest shall bring 
it all, and burn it upon the altar : it is a 
burnt-sacrifice, an offering made by fire, 
of a sweet savor unto the Lord. 



Cor.fi 


21 


D 


cli.-ip. 22 


:21 


27; Is 


1.56: 


7. f 


cliap. 4 


20, 26 


9:7: 


lti:24 


^ 


um 


15:25; 5 CI 


ron. 29 


23, 2 


; Hell. 10:4 


1 .lolin 


,2:2. 


<.d.np 


3 


8: 


2 Clir. 3.'-. 


: 11 


; I*. 5 


2:15: 


Heh. 


12:24. 


h Oen. 


8:21: 


Ezek. 


20 


28 


41 ; Epl, 


5: 


2; Pliil 


4: 18 


1 E 


X. 40:2 


2: E7.ek 


.8:6. 



the light of the world, that such as should follow 
him might be guided by his counsel, and afterwards 
be received to glory. John 1:14; 8:12; Heb. 
9 : 2-2S. 

CHAPTER I. 

I. Out of the tabernacle ; the previous direc- 
tions God g;ive to Moses from the mount; the sub- 
sequent, from the t;ibernacle. 

3. Without f>let?iish ; this was designed to in- 
dicate the perfection of Jesus Christ the great aton- 
ing sacrifice, and the duty of offering to him the 
best we have. Before the Lord; who dwelt in 
the tabernacle on the inercy-.seat. 

'1. Put his hand upon the head of the burnt - 
offering ; thus confessing his desert of death, and 
his desire ihat the death of the innocent victim 
might be .a substitute for his own death. 

G. Flay : take ofl' the skin. 

9. Wash in water; showing the necessity of 
internal purification. A sweet savor : acceptable 
to God .as pointing to the atoneuient of Christ. 

II. Northward; the approach to the alt.ar is 
supposed to have been from the south ; t!ie ashes 
and refuse to have been cast on the east side, 
ver. 16 ; while the tabernacle stood on the west. 
This left the north side vacant. 



Of the burnt-sacrifice. 



LEVITICUS II. 



Of the meat-offerings. 



his offering to the Lord be of fowls, then 
he shall bring his offering of ^turtledoves, 
or of ^roung pigeons. 

15 And the priest shall bring it unto the 
altar, and *wring off his head, and burn 
it on the altar ; and the blood thereof shall 
be wrung out at the side of the altaf: 

16 And he shall pluek away his crop with 
his tfeathers,and cast it beside the altar on 
the east part, by the place of the ashes. 

1 7 And he shall cleave it with the wings 
thereof, but shall not '' divide it asunder : 
and the priest shall burn it upon the altar, 
upon the wood that is upon the fire : it is 
a burnt-sacrifice, an offering made by fire, 
of a "^ sweet savor unto the Lord. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 The meat-ofFering of flour with oil and incense, 4 
either baken in the oven, 5 or on a plate, 7 or in a 
frying-pan, 12 or of the first-fruits in the ear. 13 The 
salt of the meat-oflering. 

AND when any will * offer a meat-offer- 
ing unto the Lord, his offering shall 
be of fine flour ; and he shall pour oil up- 
on it, and put frankincense thereon. 

2 And he shall bring it to Aaron's sons 
the priests : and he shall take thereout his 
handful of the flour thereof, and of the oil 
thereof, with all the frankincense thereof; 
and the priest shall "^burn the memorial of 
it upon the altar, to be an oflfering made by 
fire, of a sweet savor unto the Lord: 

3 And the remnant of the meat-offering 
shall be Aaron's and his sons' : it is a 
thing most holy of the offerings of the 
Lord made by fire. 



a chap. 5:7: 13:8; Luke 2:24. * Or, pinch off the head with 
the uail. f Or, the filth thereof, b Gen. 15:10. c ver. 9, 13. 
<1 chap. 6:14: 9:17; Num. Ift:4. e ver. 9; chap. ■1:12; 24:7; 
Acts 10:4. f Ex. 39:2. i Or, on a fiat Plate, ut slice. 6 chap. 

14. Turtledoves ; emblems of meekness, inno- 
cence, and purity. 

17. Not divide it asinider; not entirely sepa- 
rate one part from the other. Chap. 5 : 8. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. We should be voluntary, cheerful, and hearty 
in all our offerings to Grod ; for he looks upon the 
heart and loves a cheerful giver. 2 Cor. 9 : 7. 

4. The great doctrine of atonement by the suffer- 
ings of the innocent lor the guilty, has ever held a 
conspicuous place in the communications of Grod 
with men ; and he has shown himself to be just, as 
well as merciful, in his bestowment of ble.ssings 
upon them. 

9. Purity of heart, as well as reliance on the 
atonement, is needful to acceptance with God. 

13. The offering of innocent animals for guilty 
men typified the death of Christ for sinners, that 
God might be just and yet justify the ungodly. See 
the epistle to the Hebrews, a book which may be 
profitably read in connection with the books of Le- 
viticus and Numbers. 

17. The hearty offerings of the poor, thougli in 
the sight of men of small value, may through the 
atonement be as acceptable to God as the most 
costly offerings of the rich, and may receive as great 
reward. 



4 T[ And if thou bring an oblation of a 
meat-oflering baken in the oven, it shall 
be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled 
with oil, or unleavened "^wafers anointed 
with oil. 

5 ^ And if thy oblation be a meat-ofler- 
ing baken tin a pan, it shall be o/ fine 
flour unleavened, mingled with oil. 

6 Thou shalt part it in pieces, and pour 
oil thereon : it is a meat-offering. 

7 If And if thy oblation be a meat-ofler- 
ing baken in the frying-pan, it shall be 
made of fine fiour with oil. 

8 And thou shalt bring the meat-offering 
that is made of these things unto the Lord: 
and when it is presented unto the priest, 
he shall bring it unto the altar. 

9 And the priest shall take from the 
meat-offering a ^ memorial thereof, and 
shall burn it upon the altar : it is an off'er- 
ing made by fire, of a sweet savor unto 
the Lord. 

10 And that which is left of the meat- 
offering shall be Aaron's and his sons' : it 
is a thing most holy of the offerings of the 
Lord made by fire. 

1 1 No meat-ofi'ering, which ye shall 
bring unto the Lord, shall be made with 
leaven:'' for ye shall burn no leaven, nor 
any honey, in any offering of the Lord 
made by fire. 

12 TJAs for the oblation of the 'first- 
fruits, ye shall offer them unto the Lord : 
but they shall not ' be burnt on the altar 
for a sweet savor. 

13 And every oblation of thy meat-of- 
fering shalt thou season with J salt ; n'ei- 



6 


Ift. 


h 


cl 


ap. 6:17; 


Ex. 


12 


19, 20 


; Mat. 


16:1 


; M 


rk 


8: lr>; 


L 


uke 


12: 


1 


1 Cor. f, 


6-,S. 


1 


chap. 


23:10, 


>> ; 


Exod 


1.S 


22:29. 


* 


Jscend 




i Numbers 


18 


19 


Ezra 


7:22; 


Kzel 


. 4;i: 


M; 


Mark 


9 


49. 

























CHAPTER II. 

1. ATiifat-offeriiig ; meat, in the Bible, means 
any kind of food ; in this case, it means flour. Of the 
burnt-offerings, described in the preceding cliapter, 
the whole was burnt with fire; of the meat-offerings 
described in this chapter, a part, called the meiuorial, 
ver. 2, was burnt, and the rest was eaten by the priests, 
ver. 3 ; pointing not only to the atonement of Christ, 
but to the necessity of union to him by faith and love. 

2. Oil — fratikincevse ; emblems of the influ- 
ences of the Holy Spirit, and the acceptable inter- 
cession of Christ and supplic;itions of his people. 
Isa. 61:1: 1 John, 2 : 27 ; Psa. 141 : 2 ; Rev. 8 : 3, 4. 

4. Wafers ; thin cakes. 

9. A memorial ; that part of the meat-offering 
which was burnt, pointing to the justice and mercy 
of God in the atonement, and the blessings which on 
account of it he bestows. 

11. No leaven.^ nor — honey ; leaven was an em- 
blem of liypocrisy, and honey of sensual indulgence, 
both of which are offensive to God. 

13. Sah ; an emblem of purity, integrity, and 
perpetuity. Mark 9 : 49 ; Col. 4 : 6. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. In all our offerings, in order to be accepted, 
we must have respect to the atonement, righteous- 
ness, and intercession of Christ. 

135 



The sacrifice of 



LEVITICUS III. 



the peace-offering. 



ther slialt thou sufTer the salt of the cov- 
enant of thy God to be lacking from thy 
ineat-ofiering: witli all thine ofTerings 
thou shall olfer salt. 

14 And if thou offer a incat-otTering of 
ihy first-fruits unto the Lord, thou slialt 
offer for the meat-offering of thy first-fruits 
green ears of corn dried by the fire, ei'en 
eorn " beaten out of full ears. 

15 Audthoushaltpnt oil upon it, and lay 
frankincense thereon: it /.*; a meat-offering. 

16 And the priest shall burn the memo- 
rial of it, part of the beaten corn thereof, 
and part of the oil thereof, with all the 
frankincense thereof: it is an offering 
made by fire unto the Lord. 

CHAPTER III. 

1 The peace-offering of the herJ, 6 of the flock, 7 either 
a lamb, 1"2 or a goat. 

AND ifhis oblation ^easacrifice of peace- 
offering,'' if he offer it of the herd, 
whether it be a male or female, he shall 
offer it without "= blemish before the Lord. 

2 And he shall "^lay his hand upon the 
head of his offering, and kill it at the door 
of the tabernacle of the congregation : and 
Aaron's sons the priests shall sprinkle the 
blood upon the altar round about. 

3 And he shall offer of the sacrifice of 
the peace-offering an offering made by fire 
unto the Lord; the *fat that "covereth 
the inwards, and all the fat that is upon 
the inwards, 

4 And the two kidneys, and the fat that 
is on them, which is by the flanks, and 
the tcaul above the liver, with the kid- 
neys, it shall lie take away. 

5 And Aaron's sons shall '^burn it on 
the altar upon the burnt-sacrifice, which 
!.s- upon the wood that is on the fire: it is 
an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor 
unto the Lord. 

(j T[And if his offering for a sacrifice of 
peace-offering unto the Lord he of the 

• 2 Kiii-H, 4:42. li clinp. 7;11, M; 2::':i. c Num. 6: H ; Mai. 
1:8, U; Heb. 10:22. J chap. 1:4, .1; 8:22: 16:21; Kx. 29: 10. 
» Or, tuet. t chap. 4 : R, 'J ; Ex. 29 : 13, 22. f Or, midriff uver Ihe 
iiver, nnil over the kidneys, f fhap. fi: 12; 3 Cliron. 3.'i:14; Eze. 
44:1.5. tver. I. h 1 Kings, 8: 62. i cliiip. 4 : 4, LI, 24. i Ex. 29:22. 

3. God has ever required that a support be provided 
for his ministers. Under the Old Testament he ordain- 
ed that tliose who waited at the allar. should be par- 
takers witli the altar ; and under tlie New, that those 
who preach the gospel should live of the gospel. 1 Cor. 
9:13, 14. 

9. Christ, as our great High-priest and Inter- 
cessor, must present all our offerings perfumed with 
the incense of his merits, in order to have thein rise 
with acceptance before G-od. Rev. 8:3, 4. 

13. Pride, iiypocrisy, and sinful indulgence of 
every sort must be avoided, and humility, sincerity, 
and self-denial assiduously cultivated, if we would 
meet the approbation and obtain the blessing of the 
Most High. 

14. With the first-fruits of our time, talents, 
property, and all that wc possess, God is well pleas- 

136 



flock, male or female, he shall offer *b.c: iJSi: 
it without ^blemish. 

7 If he offer a lamb for his offering, then 
shall he offer it '"before the Lord. ^ 

8 And he shall lay his 'hand upon the 
head of his offering, and kill it before 
the tabernacle of the congregation : and 
Aaron's sons shall sprinkle the blood 
thereof round about upon the altar. 

9 And he shall offer of the sacrifice of 
the peace-offering an offering made by 
fire unto the Lord; the J fat thereof, and 
the whole rump, it shall he take off hard 
by the backbone; and the fat that covcr- 
eth the inwards, and all the fat that is 
upon the inwards, 

10 And the two kidneys, and the fat 
that is upon them, which is by the flanks, 
and the ''caul above the liver, with the 
kidneys, it shall he take away. 

11 And the priest shall burn it upon 
the altar: it is the 'food of the offering 
made by fire unto the Lord. 

12 1[ And if his offering be a goat, then 
he shall offer it before the Lord. 

13 And he shall lay his hand upon the 
head of it, and kill it before the tabernacle 
of the congregation : and the sons of Aaron 
shall sprinkle the blood thereof upon the 
altar round about. 

14 And he shall offer thereof his offer- 
ing, even an offering made by fire unto the 
Lord ; the fat that covereth the inwards, 
and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 

15 And the two kidneys, and the fat that 
is upon them, which is by the flanks, and 
the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, 
it shall he take away. 

16 And the priest shall burn them upon 
the altar: it is the food of the offering 
made by fire for a sweet savor: nil the 
fat'" i.s- the Lord's. 

\7 It shall be a perpetual " statute for your 
generations throughout all your dwell- 
ings, that ye eat neither fat nor "blood. 



k ver. 


4. 1 Hi 




21: 


li, 22; Ni 


ni. 


2K 


.,. 


Ezek. 


44 : 7 ; .M:i 


1:7, 


12; 1 


Cor. 10 


21 


n» chap. 7 


:2.n 


28; 


.Sam. 


2:l.i; 2 Cliron. 


7:7. 


n chap 


fi 


• IB 


; 7:3(i; 


17: 


7; 


*l 


14. 


o Genesis 


9:4; 


Deuteronomy 


,2: 


16; 


1 Samuel 


14 


32 


33 


E7ek 


. 44 : 7, !.=> 


Acts 


1.t:20 


29. 





















ed ; and our own highest interests, as well as his 
glory, will be promoted by our devoting them to him. 

CHAPTER HI. 

1. Peace-offering ; an expression not only of 
reliance on the atonement, and of gratitude for mer- 
cies, but of peace, friendship, and communion with 
God and with one another. 2 Chion. 33 : 16 ; Psa. 
107:2-2; 116:16, 17. 

2. Sprinkle the hluud ; typifying that blood 
which purifies the conscience from dead works to 
serve Ihe living (Irod. Heb. 9: 1 1-14; 12 :24. 

11. The food; that part of tlie beast or offi-ring 
which was presented to God. Ver. 16 ; chap. 21 : 6, 
8, 17. 21, '>2 ; Num. 28 : 2 ; Ezek. 44 : 7 ; Mai. 1 : 7, 
12 ; Rev. 3 : 20. 

17. Neither fit iiur lluuJ ; the fat of the in- 



The sln-offeriiii 



LEVITICUS IV 



of ignorance. 



J.-^'S- CHAPTER IV. 

1 The sin-offering of ignorance, 3 forthe priest, ISforthe 
congregation, 'i-J for the ruler, 27 for any of the people. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing, 

2 Speak unto fhe children of Israel, say- 
ing, If a soul shall sin * through ignorance 
against any of the commandments of the 
Lord concerning things which ought not to 
be done, and shall do against any of them ; 

3 If the priest that is anointed do sin 
according to the sin of the people ; then 
let him bring for his sin, which he hath 
sinned, a ''young bullock without blemish 
unto the Lord for a sin offering. 

4 And he shall bring the '-bullock unto 
the door of the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation before the Lord ; and shall lay his 
hand upon the bullock's head, and kill 
the bullock before the Lord. 

5 And the priest that is * anointed shall 
take of the bullock's blood, and bring it 
to the tabernacle of the congregation : 

6 And the priest shall dip his finger in 
the blood, and sprinkle of the "blood seven 
times before the Lord, before the veil of 
the sanctuary. 

7 And the priest shall put some of the 
blood upon the '^horns of the altar of 
sweet incense before the Lord, which is 
in the tabernacle of the congregation ; and 
shall pour all the blood of the bullock at 
the s bottom of the altar of the burnt- 
offering, which is at the door of the tab- 
ernacle of the congregation. 

8 And he shall take off from it all the 
fat of the bullock for the sin-oflering; the 
fat that covereth the inwards, and all the 
fat that is upon the inwards, 

9 And the two kidneys, and the fat that 
is upon them, which is by the flanks, and 
the caul above the liver, with the kid- 
neys, it shall he take away, 

» rh.ap. .'j:1.5, 17; Num. I.'>:22; Vm. !9:l-2: Heb. 6 ; 2. b cliap. 
16:6. c E.'t. 29: 10, 11. * cliap. 16: H ; Num.l9:4. « rhap. 
14: 16, 27. f chap. 8: 15: «:9: lfi:lS: Ex. 30: 1-10: Psa. 118:27. 
I! cliap. .n:9. * Heb. to wilhoutlhe camp, i Ex. i9: U; Numbers 



wards and the blood above-mentioned. The one w.as 
to be burnt, and the other sprinkled upon the .altar. 
Ver. 13. 1(5. The breast and the right shoulder were 
given to the priests. The remainder, which was 
much the greater part, belonged to the offerers, and 
was eaten by them and their friends. 
IX.^TRUCTIOXS. 

.'). The comfort of our thanksgivings to God, the 
peace we have through faith in Christ, and the joy 
of communion with him and liis people, we should 
ever remember are merries which come to us through 
the Saviour's blood. Eph. 2 : 13-2->. 

11. The kindness and condescension of God, in 
communing with his people, and permitting them 
to feast with him on the riches of his grace, are un- 
speakablv great. 

17. While we receive with thanksgiving the 
mercies which God bestows,- we should ronscien- 
tiously abstain from using, and should sacredly con- 
secrate to him, that portion which he requires. 



10 As it was taken ofl' from the bullock 
of the sacrifice of peace-offerings : and 
the priest shall burn them upon tlie altar 
of the burnt-offering. 

11 And the skin of the bullock, and all 
his flesh, with his head, and with his legs, 
and his inwards, and his dung, 

1 2 Even the whole bullock shall he carry 
forth *without the camp unto a clean place, 
where the ashes arc poured out, and '' burn 
him on the wood with fire : twhere the 
ashes are poured out shall he be burnt. 

13 ^And if the 'whole congregation of 
Israel sin through ignorance, and the 
thing be 'hid from the eyes of the assem- 
bly, and they have done someu'hat against 
any of the commandments of the Lord 
concerning things which should not be 
done, and are ''guilty; 

14 When the sin, wiiich they have sin- 
ned against it, is known, then the con- 
gregation shall offer a young bullock for 
the sin, and bring him before the taber- 
nacle of the congregation. 

15 And the elders of the congregation 
shall 'lay their hands upon the head of 
the bullock before the Lord ; and the bul- 
lock shall be killed before the Lord. 

1 6 And the "" priest that is anointed shall 
bring of the bullock's blood to the taber- 
nacle of the congregation : 

17 And the priest shall dip his finger in 
some of the blood, and sprinkle it seven 
times before the Lor D,crc?i before the veil. 

18 And he shall put .some of the blood up- 
on the "horns of the altar which is before 
the Lord, that is in the tabernacle of the 
congregation, and shall pour out all the 
blood at the bottom of the altar of the 
burnt-offering, which is at the door of thf 
tabernacle of the congregation. 

19 And he shall take all his fat from 
him, and burn it upon the altar. 

I9:ft; Hebrews 13:11. f Heb. at the pinnwi/ out of the ashn. 
i Num. l.';:24; ,)o»liua 7 : II ; I Tim. 1 : I:!. j Hiap. 5: ■:-■!. 17. 
k Ezra 10:19. 1 rh.ap. 1:4. m verse a; Hebcewa U:I-;-14. 



CHAPTER IV. 

2. Through ignorance ; not sensible at the 
time of doing wh.at was wrong, but becoming con- 
vinced of it afterwards. Ver. 23, 28. 

3. The priest tliat is anointed; the high-priest. 
Ex. 29 : 7, 29, 30 ; Lev. 8 : 12 ; 21 : 10-12. AccortL 
nig to the sin of the people ; his sin was aggra- 
vated : it might lead the people to sin. or involve 
them in its consequences. 

4. hay his hand npon. the buUocl-'s head; 
thus confessing his sin and his de.sire to h.ave t!ie li;i- 
bility to suffer transferred from himself to the sacri- 
fice of God's appointment. 

6. Seven ; a, number signifying fulness, com- 
pleteness. 

12. The ii'hole bullock ; e.\cept the fat, which 
was burnt, and the blood. Ver. 6-10. With fire ; 
a fire made upon the ground for that purpose. 

15. TliR elders; their chief men, magistrates, 
reprei?entatives of the people. 

137 



The sin-offering 



LEVITICUS V 



of ignorance. 



20 And he shall do with the bullock as 
he "did with the bullock for a sin-offer- 
ing, so shall he do with this: and the 
priest shall ""make an atonement for them, 
and it shall be forgiven them. 

21 And he shall carry forth the bullock 
without the camp, and burn him as he 
burned the "^ first bullock: it is a sin- 
offering for the congregation. 

22 H When a ruler hatli sinned, and 
done somewhat through "^ ignorance against 
any of the commandments of the Lord 
his God concerning things which should 
not be done, and is guilty ; 

23 Or if his sin, wherein he hath sin- 
ned, ''come to his knowledge; he shall 
bring his offering, a kid of the goats, a 
male without blemish : 

24 And he shall lay his ""hand upon the 
head of the goat, and kill it in the place 
where they kill the burnt-offering before 
the Lord : it is a sin-offering. 

25 And the priest shall take of tlic blood 
of the 8 sin-offering with his fmgcr, and 
put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt- 
offoring, and shall pour out his blood at 
the bottom of the altar of burnt-offering. 

26 And he shall burn all his fat upon 
the altar, as the fat of the ''sacrifice of 
peace-offerings : and the priest shall make 
an 'atonement for him as concerning his 
sin, and it shall be forgiven him. 

27 *[[ And if *any one of the tcomraon 
people Jsin through ignorance, while he 
doeth somewhat against any of the com- 
mandments of the Lord concerning things 
which ought not to be done, and be '' guilty ; 

28 Or if his sin, which he hath 'sinned, 
come to his knowledge ; then he shall 
bring his offering, a kid of the goals, a 
female without blemish, for his sin which 
he hath sinned. 

29 And he shall lay his '" hand upon the 
head of the sin-offering, and slay the sin- 
offering in the place of the burnt-offering. 



• V 


er. 3. 


k Num. l.-> 


2-.: 


n.ir 


. >) 


24; 


Rotn. 


5 


,1 


( 


i:il. 3:13; 


HpI.. 


2:17: 


10:10, 12; 1 


.lol 


n, 1. 


7; 


2:1 


Ucv. 


[ : 


•■». 


c 


■er. 1!, 12. 


<l ve 


r.2, l:i. 


over. 14; < 


ha,. 


.'>:■( 


. r 


vnr 


4, etc. 


; 1 


sn 


W\ 


fi. g ver. 


7, no 


b ■' 


mn. :l : fi. i 


ver 


.20; 


Ni 


m. lfl:2K. 


* 


H 


el). 


anv tout. 


tHe 


i^peoplc of the land, j 


Nun 


^. 1." 


:27 


k Ni 


m 


.ft 


(1. 


1 ver. 23. 



























20. MaLe analonement for them ; that which 
•would save tlieni from the temporal evils of their 
sin ; and, if they exercised faith in the atonement 
of Christ, which this typified, would save them also 
from its eternal consequences. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

•']. There is no man, or body of men on earth in- 
fallible, or perfect. All are liable to sin, through 
carelessne.'s, inattention, and the indnenco of temp- 
tation. All need repentance and pardon tiirough 
faith in the atonement of Jesus Christ. Psa. 
19:1-2-11. 

12. The way in which God pardons sin is suited 
to make a deep impression of its evil, and lead men 
to abhor and forsake it. 

21. Nations, as well as individuals, may commit 
great iniquity, and without national repentance, 

138 



30 And the priest shall take of *b.J!.?J»: 
the blood thereof with his finger, and put 
it upon the horns of the altar of burnt - 
offering, and shall pour out all the blood 
thereof at the bottom of the altar. 

31 And he shall take away all the "fat 
thereof, as the fat is taken away from off 
the sacrifice of peace-offerings : and the 
priest shall burn it upon the altar for a 
sweet" savor unto the Lord; and the 
priest shall make an atonement for him, 
and it shall be forgiven him. 

32 And if he briiis a lamb for a sin- 
oficring, ho shall bring it p a female with- 
out blemish. 

33 And he shall lay his hand upon the 
head of the sin-offering, and slay it for 
a sin-offering in the place where they 
kill the burnt-offering. 

34 And the priest shall take of the blood 
of the sin-offering with his finger, and 
put it upo"n the horns of the altar of burnt- 
offering, and shall pour out all the blood 
thereof at the bottom of the a liar: 

35 And he shall take away all the fat 
thereof, as the fat of the lamb is taken 
away from the sacrifice of the peace-of- 
ferings ; and the priest shall burn them 
upon the altar, according to the i offerings 
made by fire unto the Lord : and the 
priest shall make an ''atonement for his 
sin that he hath committed, and it shall 
bo forgiven him. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 lie tKal siniielh in concealing his knowledge, in 
touching an unclean thing, 4 or in making an oath, 
(i His trespas"Oirering. of the flock, 7 of fowls, 1 1 or 
of flour. 14 The tre.spa.^s- offering in sacrilege, 17 
and in sins of ignorance. 

AND if a\soul sin, and hear the voice of 
swearing,* and is a witness, whether 
he hath seen or known of it; if he do not 
utter it, then he shall "bear his iniquity. 
2 Or if a soul touch " any unclean thing, 
whether it be a carcass of an unclean 



m ver. 4, 24. n 


ch:ip. 3:3, 14. o chap. 


1:9; Ex. 2!>:18; E7.r« 


6:10; I«a. 42:91 


p ver. 2K. f\ clmp. 3 : 6 


r ver. 26, 31. • E7.<k. 


18:4,20. I IK 


iijra, 8:31; Prov. v'li : 24 ; 


Mnt.26:Kl. n ver. 17; 


chap. 7:1R; 17 


IB; 19:«; 20: 17; Niiiii 


9:13; Pwi. 38:4; Isn. 


.W:ll; 1 Pet. 2 


24. V Num. 19:11-16; 


Hag. 2:13. 



reformation, and p.ardon through the atonement of 
Christ, such iniquity will draw down upon them 
the .sore judgments of G-od. 

2G. Rulers and teachers, ecclesi.astical and civil, 
often fall into sirf like other men; and without re- 
pentance and forgiveness, in the way that God has 
provided and m.^de known, they will perish. 

35. Pardon of all transgressions is ;is free to the 
common people, to the poor and despised, as to the 
rich and the great. Acts 2:21; 10:^1; Rom. 
l():ll-i:]. 

CHAPTER V. 

1. Hear the voice of swearing ; is summoned 
to testify, under oath, as to what he knows .about 
a matter in question. If he, ilo not niter it ; does 
not tell what he knows. He shall bear his ini- 
(jnity ; has sinned, and is exposed to punishment. 



The trespass-offering 



LEVITICUS V. 



for sins of ignorance. 



tie, or the carcass of unclean crecpin 
things, and //"it be hidden from him; he 
also shall be unclean, and ''guilty. 

3 Or if he ''touch the uncleanness of 
man, whatsoever uncleanness it be that 
a man shall be defiled withal, and it be 
hid from him; when he "^knoweth of it, 
ihen he shall be guilty. 

4 Or if a soul swear, pronouncing with 
his ■* lips to do evil, or to do good, whatso- 
ever it he that a man shall pronounce 
with an oath, and it bo hid from him ; 
when he knoweth of it, then he shall be 
guilty in one of these. 

5 And it shall be, when he shall be 
guilty in one of these things, that he shall 
confess " that he hath sinned in that thing : 

6 And he shall bring his trespass-offer- 
ing unto the Lord for his sin which he 
hath sinned, a female from the flock, a 
lamb, or a kid of the goats, for a sin-offer- 
ing; and the priest shall make an atone- 
ment for him concerning his sin. 

7 And if *he be not ""able to bring a 
lamb, then he shall bring for his tres- 
pass which he hath committed, two tur- 
tledoves, or two young pigeons, unto the 
Lord ; one for a sin-offering, and the other 
for a burnt-offering. 

8 And he shall bring them unto the 
priest, who shall offer that which is for 
the sin-ofToring first, and s wring off his 
head from his neck, but shall not divide 
it asunder : ■ 

9 And he shall ''sprinkle of the blood 
of the sin-ofFering upon the side of the 
altar ; and the rest of the blood shall be 
wrung out at the bottom of the altar : it 
is a sin-offering. 

1 And he shall offer the second for a 
burnt-offering, according to the tmanner : 
and the priest shall 'make an atonement 
for him for his sin which he hath sinned, 
and it shall be J forgiven him. 

1 1 1[ But if he be not '' able to bring two 



a vei 


.17 


h chap. 


12, 13, \n. 


c ^ 


er. 4. d 


.TuJg. 11:31; 


1 Sam. 


■2r.:22: 


'Zt 


in^a, 6; 31 


; Mark 6: 23; 


Arts 2.! : 


12. e chap. 


2K:40; 


Num. S 


:7: 


.losh. 7.19; Ezra 10 


II 


; Ps.a. 32 


: S ; Dan. n : 4 


Uotn. 


10:10. 


* 


Heh./.K/i 


ind cannot 


rro 


Ck t.> the 


u>mciencu nf 


t lamh. 


*■ chap. 


U: 


8; U:'2l. 


g chap. 1 


l.") 


h Ex. 12 : -22, 23 ; Heb 


12:24. 



3. He shall he guilty ; of violating that cere- 
monial law, when he knows what he has done. 

4. A sold swear ; raslily, as to what he will or 
will not do, and when it may be wicked, or not in 
his power to do it. It he hid from him; if he 
was not aware at the time that it was wicked, or 
was not in his power. 

7. Sin-offering; chap. 4 : 2-t-Q6, 3-2-3-J. Burnt- 
offering; chap. 1:14-17. 

10. According to the manner; the manner 
prescribed in the previous chapters. 

11. Tenth part of an ephali ; abou: three quarts. 

12. A miemorial ; chap. 2 : 2. 

13. A meat-offering ; chap. 2: 1-3. 

lo. Holy things of the Lord; l>y withholding i 



turtledoves, or two young pigeons, then 
he that sinned shall bring for his offering 
the tenth part of an ephah of line flour 
for a sin-offering: he shall 'put no oil 
upon it, neither shall he put any frankin- 
cense thereon : for it is a sin-oflering. 

12 Then shall he bring it to the priest, 
and the priest shall take his handful of it, 
even a ""memorial thereof, and burn // on 
the altar, according to the offerings made 
by fire unto the Lord : it is a sin-offering. 

13 And the priest shall make an atone- 
ment for him as touching his sin that he 
hath sinned in one of these, and it shall 
be forgiven him : and the " remnant shall 
be the priest's, as a meat-offering. 

14 l[And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

15 If a soul commit a trespass, and sin 
through "ignorance, in the holy things of 
the Lord ; then he shall bring for his tres- 
pass unto the Lord a p ram without blem- 
ish out of the flocks, with thy estimation 
by shekels of silver, after the i shekel of 
the sanctuary, for a trespass-offering : 

16 And he shall make amends for the 
harm that he hath done in the holy thing, 
and shall add the fifth part thereto, and 
give it unto the priest: and the ■■ priest 
shall make an atonement for him with 
the ram of the trespass-offering, and it 
shall be forgiven him. 

17^ And if a " soul sin, and commit any 
of these things which are forbidden to be 
done by the commandments of the Lord; 
though he wist it 'not, yet is he guilty, 
and shall bear his iniquity. 

18 And he shall bring a ram without 
blemish out of the flock, with thy estima- 
tion, for a trespass-offering, unto the 
priest: and the priest shall make an 
atonement for him concerning his igno- 
rance wherein he erred and wist it not, 
and it shall be forgiven him. 

19 It is a trespass-offering : he hath cer- 
tainly "trespassed against the Lord. 



i Or, ordinance. irhap.4:2fi. j .Tas. ."i: la. k ver. 7. lNum..T:1.5. 
»n chap. 2:2; Num. .5:26; Arts 10:4. n chap. 7:6. o chap. 
22:14. pEzralfl:n>. q chap. 27: *i; Ex. 30: 13. r ver. 10. 
s chap. 4 : 2, 22. t chap. 4 : 2, 13, 27 ; Psa. 19:12; Luke 12:48. 
u Ezra 10:2. 



from God something which he required to be de- 
voted to his ministers, or his wor:5liip and service. 
Thy estimation ; of the value of the tliinss with- 
held, or perverted from the use which God re- 
quired. 

17. Wist;knev.: ff«/7<?/ ; liable to suffer evil, 
and must, v/hen he knows that he has broken the 
divine command, present the required offering. 
rN!3TRUCTrONS. 

]. "We should hate sin in ourselves, and by all 
suitable means endeavor to prevent it in others. 
When called in providence to testify before a m.agis- 
trate, or in a court of justice, we should let nothing 
hinder us from doing it with fidelity. 

1. We should be careful never to declare what is 
139 



For sins done willingly. 



LEVITICUS VI. 



Burnt and meat offerings. 



CHAPTER VI. 



1 The Irespass-ofTeririfj for sins done wittingly. S The 
law of the hurnt-oifering, 14 and of the meat-offering. 
19 The offering at the con.secration of a priest. 2-1 
The law of tlie sin-offering. 

AND the Lord spake unto Mo.se.s, saj^ing, 
2 If a soul sin, and commit a trespass 
against the Lord, and "lie unto his neigh- 
bor in that whicli was '' delivered him to 
keep, or in *fcllo^vship, or in a thing taken 
away by violence, or "^hath deceived his 
neighbor; 

3 Or have "^ found that which was lost, 
and lieth concerning it, and ^sweareth 
falsely ; in any of all these that a man 
doeth, sinning therein : 

4 Then it shall be, because he hath sin- 
ned, and is guilty, that he shall restore 
that which he took violently away, or the 
thing which he hath deceitfully gotten, or 
that which was delivered him to keep, or 
the lost thing which he found, 

5 Or all that about which he hath sworn 
falsely ; he shall cven''rcstore it in the prin- 
cipal, and shall add the (ifth part more there- 
to, and give it unto liiin to Avhom it apper- 
taineth, tin i he day of his trespass-ofFcring. 

6 And he shall bring his trespass-offer- 
ing unto tlie Lord, a ram without blem- 
ish out of the flock, with thy estimation, 
for a trespass-offering, unto the priest: 

7 And the priest shall f make an atone- 
ment for liitn before the Lord: and it 
shall be forgiven hiin for any thing '"of all 
that he hath done in trespassing therein. 

8 1[ And the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ii>g) 

9 (Command Aaron and his sons, say- 
ing. This is the law of the burnt-offering : 
[t is the burnt-offering, ^because of the 
burning upon the altar all 'night unto the 
morning, and tlic fire of the altar shall 
be burning in it. 



» chap. 1911; Arts 6:4; Col. 3 : H. Ii Ex. i22 : 7, 10. * Hcb. put- 
ling of the hand, or dealing, c I'rov. 21: 28; 26:29; Jer. 9 : 5. 
d Deut. 22:1-^ e cli.ip. i;t:13; .Icr. f,:i; 7:9; Zerli. .'>:4. 
rrlian.ft:IH; Kum.S:7: 1 Siim. 12: 3; ■2Sani.I2:fi; I,ukpl9:«. 
t Hcb. in the day of hit tretpati, or, in the day of hit being 

false, or promise to do what is iinpractic;ible or 
wicked. Especially shonld we avoid .all rash and 
profane oaths. 

.'5. We may do wrong witiiout at the time being 
.aware of it. When we see the wrong, we should 
he ready to confess and forsake it. 

10. No sins, not even those of ignorance or care- 
lessness, even when truly repented of. can be for- 
given e.\cept through the at>jnement of .fesiis Christ 

11. ft is not tlie greatness of the offerings which 
we present \f) (rod, but the spirit with which wc 
offer them, that he principally regards. 

Ifi. True repentance will lead a man not only to 
forsake his sins, but to make suitable restitution to 
those whom he has injured. 

10. We need the teacliingof the tfoly Spirit to see 
what is right, and be disposed heartily to do it. We 
cannot faithfully review the past without perceiving 
that in many things we have done wrong, and need 
pardoning mercy tlirough the atonement of Clirist. 
140 



10 And the priest shall put on Vlw^ 
his J linen garment, and his linen breeches 
shall he put upon his flesh, and take up 
the ashes which the fire hath consumed 
with the burnt-ofl^ering on the altar, and 
he shall put them beside the altar. 

1 1 And he shall put offhis garments, and 
put on ^ other garments, and carry forth the 
ashes without the camp unto a clean place. 

12 And the fire upon the altar shall be 
burning in it; it shall not be put out: 
and the priest shall burn wood on it every 
morning, and lay the burnt-ofl^ering in 
order upon it ; and he shall burn thereon 
the fat of the pcaee-oflx^rings. 

13 The fire shall ever be burning upon 
the altar; it shall never go out. 

14 ^And this is the 'law of the meat- 
offering: The sons of Aaron shall offer 
it before the Lord, before the altar. 

15 And he shall take of it his handful, 
of the flour of the meat-offering, and of 
the oil thereof, and all the frankincense 
which is upon the meat-offering, and shall 
burn it upon the altar /or a sweet savor, 
even the memorial of it, unto the Lord. 

16 And the remainder '"thereof shall 
Aaron and his sons eat : with unleavened 
bread shall it be eaten in the holy place; 
in the court of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation they shall eat it. 

17 It shall not be bakcn with leaven. I 
have given it tinlo them for their portion 
of my offerings made by fire ; it is most 
holy, as is the sin-offering, and as tint 
trespass-offering. 

18 All the males among the children of 
Aaron shall eat of it. It shaU be a statute 
for ever in your generations concerning 
the offerings of the Lord made by fire : 
every one that touchetli them "shall bi^ 
holy. 



f< 


und guiUv. 


K rliap. .'■> 


:l.'i 


Ifi. 


h Isa. I : 


IS; 


Mat. 12:31 ; 


ICor 


fi 


9-1 1. 


t Or 


far the 


but 


ntng 


i ver. 


13. 


13. j cliap. 


Ifi 


4; 


K 


X. 2S 


39-J3 ; 


¥.7.rk. 4- 


:17 


18. 


k Ezek 


44 


19. 1 chap 


. 2 


1 ; 


N 


iitl. 


.•) : -t. 


m Num. 


IH: 


10; 


Ezek. 4 


:2a 


; 1 Ciir. 9: 


13, 


14 




ulmp 


2i:3-7 


; Kx. 2!) 


.37. 















CHAPTER VI. 

2. FelJowsJiip ; dealing. 

Ci. Ailil the JiflJi part ; this was the case when 
he voluntarily confessed his crime and restored that 
which was taken. If he did not confess, but w.as con-' 
victed of the crime, he was to pay more. Ex. 22 : 9. ]•'>. 

0. Thi/ estimation ; (he judge's estimation of 
the amount which, according to the direction, ver. ■'J, 
he was to restore. Chap. •'5:15. 

1 1 . His garvients ; the holy garments whicli he 
wore in the sanctuary. These he was not allowed 
to wear elsewhere. 

13. The. fire — shall never go out ; thisfirewns 
first kindled from heaven ; and the priests, by timely 
application of fuel, were to keep it continually burn- 
ing. Chan. : 24. 

M-17. Ment.olJ'eriiig; chap. 2:1-16. 

18. Shall he holy; none but consecrated per- 
sons should touch them, and tJiey must be free from 
ceremonial defilement. 



TTie law of the sin-offering 



LEVITICUS VII. 



Ba'S 19 ^ And the Lord spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

20 This is the "offering of Aaron and of 
his sons, which they shall offer unto the 
Lord in the day when he is anointed ; 
the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour 
for a meat-offering perpetual, half of it in 
the morning, and half thereof at night. 

21 In a pan it shall be made with oil, and 
when it i.s baken, thou shalt bring it in : and 
the baken pieces of the meat-oft'ering shalt 
thou offer for a sweet savor unto the Lord. 

22 And the priest of his sons that is 
anointed in his stead shall offer it : it is 
a statute for ever unto the ''Lord ; it shall 
be wholly burnt. 

23 For every meat-offering for the priest 
shall be wholly burnt : it shall not be eaten. 

24 If And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

25 Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, 
saying. This is the law of the "^sin-offer- 
ing: In the place where the burnt-offer- 
ing is killed shall the sin-offering be killed 
before the Lord : it is "^most holy. 

26 The priest that offereth it for sin 
shall eat it: in the holy ''place shall it 
be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle 
of the congregation. 

27 Whatsoever shall touch the '^flesh 
thereof shall be holy : and when there is 
.sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any 
garment, thou shalt wash that whereon 
it was sprinkled in the holy place. 

28 But the earthen vessel wherein it is 
.sodden shall be broken : and if it be sod- 
den in a brazen pot, it shall be both 
scoured, and rinsed in water. 

29 All the males among the priests shall 
eat thereof: it is most holy. 

30 .-^nd no sin-offering, whereof a??]/ of 
the s blood is brought into the tabernacle 
of the congregation to reconcile withal in 
the holy;)/ace, shall be eaten: it shall be 
burnt in the fire. 



, 


Kl 


. -29 : 1 


2; 


Heb. 7: 


■;_ 


h Kx 


29: -23 


-25. 


« chap 


4:33. 


ll t 


e.T. 


17; cIk 


p. '. 


1 : -2. e 


<-\ 


nn. 10: 


17,18; 


Ntii 


n. 18: 10 


Kiek. 


44 


■2\>. 


(Ex 


•M 


37 ; SO : 59 ; 


M.it. 9 


21; 14 


W. 


B chap. 


10: 18: 


16 


27 


Heb. 9:1J 


h chap 


fi 


17, ■JS; 


21:22. 


i N 


im. li:12. 


Ezek. 



19-23. Offering of Aaron ; Ex. Q): 1-25. 
25-30. Sin-offnlng; chap. 4 : 21-31. 
1N.STRUCTIOXS. 

2. "When we wrong our fellow-men, we sin against 
God. 

3. He wh'o finds lost property, and does not wish 
to restore it to its rightful owner when known, is 
dishonest. 

7. Thouiili repentance, confe.^sion. and restitution 
are all needful, in order to pardon, neither nor all of 
them can atone for sin, or of themseh'es obtain for- 
giveness. There must also be application to that 
blood which was shi-d for many for the remission 
of sins. Mat. 26: 28. 

12. As the priest was every morning to put wood 
on the altar, that the fire might never go out ; so we, 
who are called to be kings and priests unto God, 

10 



and of the trespass-offering. 
CHAPTER VII. 

1 The law of the trespass-offering, 11 and of the peace-of- 
ferings, 1 2 whether it be for a thanksgiving, 16 or a vow, 
or a freewill-offering. 22 The fat, 2(5 and the blood, are 
forbidden. 2-i The priests' portion in the peace-offerings. 

LIKEWISE this is the law of the Mres- 
pass-oflcring : it is most holy. 

2 In the place where they kill the burnt- 
offering shall they 'kill the trespass-offer- 
ing : and the blood thereof shall he sprin- 
kle round -i about upon the altar. 

3 And he shall offer of Mt all the fat 
thereof; the rump, and the fat that cover- 
eth the inwards, 

4 And the two kidneys, and the fat that 
is on them, which is by the flanks, and 
the caul that is above the liver, with the 
kidneys, it shall he take away : 

5 And the priest shall burn them upon 
the altar /or an offering made by fire unto 
the Lord: it is a trespass-offering. 

6 Every male among the 'priests shall 
eat thereof: it shall be eaten in the holy 
place : it is most holy. 

7 As the sin-offering is, so is the ""tres- 
pass offering : there is one law for them : 
the priest that maketh atonement there- 
with shall have it. 

8 And the priest that offereth any manV 
burnt-offering, even the priest shall have 
to himself the skin of the burnt-offering 
which he hath offered. 

9 And all the meat-offering that is baken 
in the oven, and all that is dressed in tho 
frying-pan, an,d *in the pan, shall be the 
priest's that offereth it. 

10 And every meat-offering, mingled 
with oil, and dry, shall all the sons of 
Aaron have, one as much as another. 

1 1 And this is the law of the sacrifice 
of "peace-offerings, which he shall offer 
unto the Lord. 

12 If he offer it for a thanksgiving, then 
he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanks- 
giving unleavened cakes mingled with oil, 
and unleavened "wafers anointed with 



40:39. j chap. 3:2; 5:9. k chap. 4 : R, 9 ; Et.29:13. 1 chap. 
fi: 16, 18. ni chap. 6:2ft, 26; 14: 1.3. * Or, on tht flat platt , or 
tlicc. n chap. 3:1; 22 : 31 ; Ezek. 4.'< : 13. o chap. 2:4; Numbera 



should every morning kindle anew the flame of 
divine love in our hearts, that it may warm all our 
services and shine brightly through all the duties 
and events of the d.ay- Mat. 5 : 16 ; Jude 21. 

17. Often, and in various ways, God warns men 
•against insincerity and hypocrisy, and urges upon 
them the habitual practice, in all things, of perfect 
sinceriiv and truth. 1 Cor. .5:7. 8. 

28. AH the directions of God with regard to things 
connected with his worship, are suited to impros*. 
upon men the conviction of his purity and their pollu- 
tion, and that without holiness no m.an can see his 
face in peace. Chap. 19:2; 20:7; H^. 12: U; 
IPet. 1:16. 

CHAPTER. Vn. 

7. Shall have it; that portion of it which wa* 
not burnt on the altar. 

141 



The peace-offerings. 



LEVITICUS VII. 



The priests' jmrtion. 



oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine 
flour, fried. 

13 Besides the cakes, he shall ofTer/o/- his 
offering leavened "bread with the sacrifice 
of thanksgiving of his peace-odcriugs. 

14 And of it he shall offer one out of 
the whole oblation /or a ''heave-offering 
unto the Lord, a)i(Z it shall be the priest's 
that sprinklcth the blood of the peace- 
offerings. 

15 And the flesh of the sacrifice of his 
peace-offerings for thanksgiving shall be 
eaten "^ the same day that it is offered ; he 
shall not leave any of it until the morning. 

16 But if the sacrifice of his ofiering be 
a vow, or a voluntary ofiering, it shall be 
eaten the same day that he offereth his 
sacrifice ; and on the morrow also the re- 
mainder of it shall be eaten : 

1 7 But the remainder of the ^ flesh of the 
sacrifice on the third day shall be burnt 
with fire. 

18 And if rtni/ of the flesh of the sacrifice 
of his ]ieace-of!"erings be eaten at all on the 
third day, it shall not be accepted, neither 
shall it be imputed unto him that offereth 
it: it shall be an 'abomination, and the 
soul that eateth of it shall bear his iniquity. 

I'J And the flesh that touchcth any un- 
clean thing shall not be eaten ; it shall be 
burnt with fire: and as for the flesh, all 
that be clean shall eat thereof. 

20 But the soul that eateth of the flesh 
of the sacrifice of peace-offerings, that 
pertain unto the Lord, ''having his uu- 
cleanness upon him, even that soul shall 
be cut off from his people. 

21 Moreover the soul that shall s touch 
any unclean thing, as the ''uncleanness 
of man, or any unclean beast, or any 
abominable ' unclean thing, and cat of the 
flesh of the sacrifice of peace-offerings, 
which pertain unto the Lord, even that 
soul shall be 'cut off from his people. 

22 T[And the Lord spake unto JNIoses, 
saying, 

23 Speak unto the children of Israel, 
saying. Ye shall eat no manner of fat, of 
ox, or of sheep, or of goat. 

24 And the fat of the *bcast that dicth 
of itself, and the fat of that which is torn 



> A moil 4 : A. I> Num. »:18; 


It 


19. c cinp. -li 


lW. a chap. 


19; 7. • chnp. 11:10, 41; 19 


7. 


1 chap. I.".: 3; 


lC<ir. 11:28. 


J cliRn. ll:'.!4,2a. Ii (Imp. 12 
* Heu. carcass, k ch;ip. 17 : 


i:i, 


Ift. i K7.ek. 4 


11. j vor. 30. 


16; 


Dent M:il ; 


Ezek. 44:31. 



13. heavened bread; that which was offered 
to the Lord was to be uiili'aveacd, as oeforo pre- 
scribed, ver. 12; but that which the priest ate him- 
self, in token of thanksc;iviiijT for mercies, might, like 
common bread, be leavened. 

18. Iti his offering. If lie ate any of the flesh 
after the second day, his offering; would be rejected. 
lienr his iiiiqiuty ; be exposed to punishment. 

20. Cut off; Gen. 17:14. 

23. A'o manner of fat ; of that fat of beasts 
142 



with beasts, may be used in any ^augo: 
other use : but ye shall in no wise '' eat of it. 

25 For whosoever eateth the fat of the 
beast, of which men ofler an offering made 
by fire unto the Lord, even the soul that 
eateth it shall be cut off from his people. 

26 Moreover ye shall eat no manner of 
blood,' whether it be of fowl or of beast, in 
any of your dwellings. 

27 Whatsoever soul ii be that eateth any 
manner of blood, even that soul shall be 
cut ofl' from his people. 

28 Tl And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

29 Speak unto the children of Israel, 
saying. He that otfereth the sacrifice of 
his "'peace-ofl'erings unto the Lord, shall 
bring his oblation unto the Lord of the 
sacrifice of his pcace-ofierings. 

30 His own "hands shall bring the offer- 
ings of the Lord made by fire, the fat with 
the breast; it shall he bring, that the 
breast may be waved for a "wave-offer- 
ing before the Lord. 

3 1 And the priest shall burn the fat upon 
the altar : but the breast shall be Aaron's 
and his sons'. 

32 And the right shoulder shall ye give 
unto the p priest /"or a heave-offering of the 
sacrifices of your pca«e-offerings. 

33 He among the sons of Aaron, that 
offereth the blood of the peace-oll'erings, 
and the fat, shall have the right shoulder 
for /;/.•; part. 

34 For the wave-breast and the heave- 
shoulder have I taken of the children of 
Israel from ofl'thc sacrifices of their peaee- 
ollcriugs, and have given them unto Aaron 
the priest and unto his sons, by a statute 
for ever, from among the children of Israel. 

35 •[ This i.s- the portion of the anointing 
of Aaron, and of the anointing of his sons, 
out of the oficrings of the Lord made by fire, 
in the day irlien he jircscnted them to min- 
ister unto the Lord in the priest's otiice; 

36 Which the Lord commanded to be 
given them of the children of Israel, in the 
day that he i anointed Ihcm, by a statute 
for ever throughout their generations. 

37 This is the Maw of the burnt-offer- 
ing, of the meat-offering, and of the sin- 



1 cl>.ip 


.t:l7 


: 17: 


10 


14 


fie 


n. 9 : 4 , 


I.Sam 


14:34 


; t 


7.ek 


33 


: C.-i ; 


.Inlin h 


:r>3: 


Aot.s 


In 


20 


29. 


•n clin 


p. 3. 


n .loll. 


10: 


IS. 


o ch.'ip. 


R:27; 


9;J1 


Kx. 


2!1 


24, 


27. 


!> Kuin 


. 6 : 20. 


qcli: 


p. 8 


■'-<• 


30; 


Kx. 


40:13. 


15. r 


cbnp. 6 


:9, 


14,2 


•■ 















Ver. 



whicli. was to be offered in sacrifice to Orod. 
3-5, 25. 

'26. No manner of bhod ; that which flo\\-s from 
the arteries and veins, called the life, or the blood 
of the life. The blood which minjjled witli the flesh 
when cooked, was not forbidden. Oen. 9:4, ■'>. 

']■). The portion of the anointing of Aaron ; 
his portion in consequence of his having been 
anointed as ■hii;h-priest. Ver. ."16. 

37, 3S. Tkelaw of the— offerings; Ex.29: 1-44. 



Moses consccrateth 



LEVITICUS VIII. 



Aaron and his sons. 



B.c.'uso.' offering, and of the 'trespass-offer- 
ing, and of the consecrations, and of the 
sacrifice'' of the peace-offerings ; i 

38 Which the Lord commanded Moses 
in mount Sinai, in the day that he com- 
manded the children of Israel to offer their 
oblations unto the Lord, in the wilderness 
of Sinai. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1 Moses consecrateth Aaron and his sons. 14 Theii sin- 
offering. Is Their biirnt-oifering. 22 The ram of 
consecration. 31 The place and tima of their con- 
secration. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing, 

2 Take "^ Aaron and his sons with him, 
and the ^ garments, and the '^ anointing oil, 
and a bullock for the sin-offering, and two 
rams, and a basket of unleavened bread; 

3 And gather thou all the congregation 
together unto the door of the tabernacle 
of the congregation. 

4 And Moses did as the Lord command- 
ed him ; and the assembly was gathered 
together unto the door of the tabernacle 
of the congregation. 

5 And Moses said unto the congregation, 
This is the thing which the Lord com- 
manded to be done. 

G And JMoses brought Aaron and his 
sons,*^ and washed them with water. 

7 And he put upon him the coat, and 
girded him with the girdle, and clothed 
him with the robe, and put the ephod 
upon him, and he girded him with the 
curious girdle of the ephod, and bound it 
unto him therewith. 

8 And he put the breastplate upon him : 
also he ^put in the breastplate the Urim 
and the Thummim. 

9 And he put the ''mitre upon his head; 
also upon the mitre, even upon his fore- 
front, did he put the golden plate, the holy 
crown ; as the Lord 'commanded JNIoses. 

10 And Moses took the J anointing oil, 
and anointed the tabernacle and all that 
tra.s therein, and sanctified them. 

11 And he ''sprinkled thereof upon the 



an 


PT. 


. b chap. 6 : 20 


Ex. -"1 


1 ; ver 


11. 


c 


Ex. -29: 1.3 


dEx. 


7.8; ■ 


, 4 


e Ex. yO:-24. -J 


5. f Ex 


. -29 : 4. 


K 


Ex 


. •2S:l.'>-30 


39:8- 


<l\ : 


K,7.r 


1 -i-.H-i. h Ex 


•29: B; 


Zecb. 


■■t:n 




i Ex. 38:37, etc. 


) r.K 


, 3(1 


: SB-Jft k cliai 


J:6; 


.»:i. 52 


l.'i 


E 


cek. .■»«:« 


Titus 


3:6. 


1 


cliiip. -21 : 10, 1-2 


Ex. -29 


7; 30 


:30 


' 


8a. 1.33 : 2. 


in Ex. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

10. While God requires his ministers to devote 
their time and tulents to his immediate service, he 
also requires that their temporal wants be supplied 
by those for whose spiritual good they labor. Ver. 
31-56; chap. 10:13-1-'). 

16. While we are called to mourning on account 
of our sins, we are also called to rejoicing on account 
of the goodness of G-od ; and our joy may some- 
times be appropriately expressed by feasting on the 
bounties of his providence and grace. 

30. Each individual, while he relies on the great 
atonement for salvation, must also himself be volun- 



altar seven times, and anointed the altar 
and all his vessels, both the laver and his 
foot, to sanctify them. 

12 And he poured of the anointing oil 
upon Aaron's head, and 'anointed him, to 
sanctify him. 

13 And Moses brought Aaron's sons, 
and put '"coats upon them, and girded 
them with girdles, and *put bonnets upon 
them ; as the Lord commanded Moses. 

14 And he brought the bullock for the 
sin-offering: and Aaron and his sons laid 
their hands upon the head of the bullock 
for the sin-offering. 

15 And he slew it: and Moses "took the 
blood, and put it upon the horns of the 
altar round about with his finger, and pu- 
rified the altar, and poured the blood at 
the bottom of the altar, and sanctified it, 
to make " reconciliation upon it. 

16 And he took all the fat that iras upon 
the inwards, and the caul above the liver, 
and the two kidneys, and their fat, and 
Moses burned it upon the altar. 

17 But the bullock, and his hide, his 
flesh, and his dung, he burnt with Pfire 
without the camp ; as the Lord com- 
manded Moses. 

18 ^ And he brought the ram for the 
burnt-offering: and Aaron and his sons 
laid their hands upon the head of the ram. 

19 And he killed it; and Moses sprin- 
kled the blood upon the altar round about. 

20 And he cut the ram into pieces ; and 
Moses burnt the head, and the pieces, and 
the fat. 

21 And he washed the inwards and the 
legs in water ; and Moses burnt the whole 
ram upon the altar: it ivas a burnt-sacri- 
fice for a 1 sweet savor, and an offering 
made by fire unto the Lord ; as the Lord 
commanded Moses. 

22 T[And he brought the ''other ram, 
the ram of consecration : and Aaron and 
his sons laid their hands upon the head 
of the ram . 

23 And he slew it; and Moses took of 
the "blood of it, and put it upon the tip of 



M:8, 9. * Heb. bound. ncliap. 4:7 


E7.ek. 43 : CO, 2B ; Heb. 


9:18-23. o cliap. Itf: 20 : 2 Cliron. 29 


24; Ezek. 4.5:20; Dan. 


9:24; 2 Cor. 6 : 18, 41 ; EpU. 2:16; C 


)l. 1:20-22; Heb. 2:17. 


P rlirip.4: 11, 12; Ex. 29:14; Heb. 13- 


11-13. q Gen.8;20,2li 


Eph. .=i:2. r Ex. 29: 19-:!1. ' chap. H: 


4, 17, 28. 



tarv and active in presenting his offerings to Grod 
and in doing what he requires. 

CHAPTER Vill. 

1. T/ie Lord spale utito Mo.'^es ; after the tab- 
ernacle was finished, and the way prepared for the 
consecration of Aaron and his sons to the priest- 
hood. 

5. The thing which the Lord commanded; 
Ex.28: 29. 

12. Sanctify him ; set him apart, or consecrate 
him to his sacred office. 

17. As the Lord commanded ; chap. 4:11. 12. 
143 



Aaron's offerings for 



LEVITICUS IX. 



himself and the people. 



Aaron's right ear, and upon the thumb of 
his right hand, and upon the great too of 
his right foot. 

24 And he brought Aaron's sons, and 
Moses put of the blood upon the tip of 
their right ear, and upon tlie thumbs of 
their right hands, and upon the great toes 
of their right feet: and Moses sprinkled 
the "blood upon the altar round about. 

25 And he took the ""fat, and tlic rump, and 
all the fat that ivas upon the inwards, and 
the caul aJmvp. the liver, and the two kid- 
neys, and their fat, and the right shoulder : 

26 And out of the basket of unleavened 
bread, that tras before the Lord, he took 
one unleavened cake, and a cake of oiled 
bread, and one wafer, and put them on 
the fat, and upon the right shoulder : 

27 And he put all upon Aaron's hands, 
and upon his sons' hands, and waved them 
for a wave-offering before the Lord. 

28 And Moses took them from oft' their 
hands, and burnt them on the altar upon 
the burnt-offering: they were consecra- 
tions for a sweet savor : it is an offering 
made by fire unto the Loud. 

29 And Moses took the ''breast, and waved 
it/o>- a wave-offering before the Lord : for 
of the ram of consecration it was Moses' 
part; as the Lord commanded INIoses. 

30 And Moses took of tlie anointing oil, 
and of the blood which \cas upon the altar, 
and sprinkled // upon Aaron, and upon his 
garments, and upon his sons, and upon his 
.sons' garments with him; and '' sanctified 
Aaron, and his garments, and his sons, 
and his sons' garments with him. 

.31 ^ And Moses said unto Aaron and to 
his sons, "Boil the flesh at the door of the 
tabernacle of the congregation ; and there 
cat it with the bread that i.s- in the basket 
of consecrations, as I commanded, saying, 
Aaron and his sons shall cat it. 

32 And that which remaineth of the flesh 
and of the bread shall ye burn with fire. 

33 And ye sliall not go out of the door 
of the tabernacle of the congregation in 





. H.- 


,. 1 


: ii. 


>• Kx. '29 : iZ 


«<■. 


= r.x. 


."• 


•:ii. 


•1 1- 


lap. 


10 


■■>; 


N 


um. :J 


::i 


<■ y 


X. M::ll 


:V2: 


1 Sum. 


■2:V\- 


7. 


f Kick 


4:'.; 


«, 


w. 


re 


Niim 


n 


7; «: 


«; Den 


II 


1: IK 


nxo, : 


:3 


i IT 


m. 1 


:l« 


r>: 


31 ; 


fi 


■H\: ■ 


T 


in. 4: 


, h Kz. 


k.4:> 


:ir. 


cimp 


4: 


r); 8 


14 


Ex 


29 


:1. 



31. As he hath done this dat/ ; e.acliol' the seven 
days he was to offer siinrifice, as he had the first day. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

9. If the niinisters of relijrion are comely in the 
sijrlit of (io 1. or in any measure fitted for their 
work, it mii.st he tlirou^h the comeliness which he 
puts upon them — clothinj; them with iiis righteou.s- 
nesK, and adornin;^ them with the {j. aces of his Spirit. 
11. T^veii those who lire the most solemnly con- 
secrated to t!ie service of Ijod ar'- tlieniselves sin- 
ners, and need the cleansing of afoning blood. 

30. In every tiiin;^ sinners need the purifvinginfiu- 
ences of tlie IToly Spirit, in order to otTer acceptable 
sacrifice (o :i holy (rod, or be prepared for his pres- 
ence. Heb. W:22. 
144 



consecration be at an end : for seven "^days 
shall he consecrate you. 

34 As he hath done this day, so the 
Lord hath commanded to do, to make an 
atonement for you. 

35 Therefore shall ye abide at the door 
of the tabernacle of the congregation day 
and night seven days, and ^ keep the charge 
of the Lord, that ye die not : for so I am 
commanded. 

3fi 80 Aaron and his sons did all things 
which the Lord commanded by the hand 
of Moses. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 The first offerings of Aaron, for himself and the peo- 
ple, 8 The sin-offerinfj, 1'2 and the burnt-offering 
for himself. 1,'i The offerings for the people, 23 Mo- 
ses and Aaron bless the people, 24 Fire coraeth from 
the liOrd ujjon llie attar. 

AND it came to pass on the'^ciglitli day, 
that Moses called Aaron and his sons, 
and the ciders of Israel ; 

2 And he said unto Aaron, Take thee a 
young calf for a 'sin-offering, and a ram 
for a J burnt-offering, without blemish, 
and oflcr them before the Lord. 

3 And unto the children of Israel thou 
shalt speak, saying. Take '' ye a kid of the 
goats for a 'sin-offering; and a calf and 
a lamb, both of the first year, without 
blemish, for a burnt-oflering; 

4 Also a bullock and a ram for peaec- 
ofrerings,to sacrifice before the Lord; and 
a ""meal-offering mingled with oil : for to- 
day the Lord will appear unto you. 

5 ^ And they brought that wliich Moses 
commanded before the tabernacle of the 
congregation: and all fhc congregation 
drew near and stood before the Lord. 

6 And Moses said. This is the thing 
which the Lord commanded that ye. 
should do: and the "glory of the Loud 
shall appear unto you. 

7 And Moses said unto Aaron, Go unto 
the altar, and offer thy "sin-olfering, and 
thy burnt-offering, and make an atone- 
ment for P thyself, and for the people : 

j rlnp. 8:18. V c-liap. 4:13; Ezra 6:17. Ilsa. M:ln; H<-l.. 
i):'ifi. m Num. 15: a. n ver. 2.1; Exoilus 2 1 : 10 ; 2 Chron. 
5:l,1, 14. ver. 2; 1 Samuel. 3: 14. p Hebrews 6:3; 7:27; 
»:7. 

36. Ministers of religion who have a right spirit, 
will feel deeply the responsibilities of iheir office; 
that they are called to it not merely by mrn, but 
by (rod; and will labor first of all to please him by 
seeking his glory and doing his will, 

CHAPTER IX. 

4. The Lord 7i'tU appear ; in a special ni.inoer, 
and show his approbation of their services. Ver. 
23,24. 

5. Before the Lord ; before the tabernacle, or 
sanctuary, in which he dwelt. 

7, Go unto the altar ; the altar of burnt-offer- 
ings ; in Ihe court, near the door of the talfernacle. 
Ex, 27:1-8, 



Tlie people's offeinng 



LEVITICUS X. 



Nadab and jibihu slain. 



tc'S' and offer the offering of the people, 
and make an " atonement for them ; as the 
Lord commanded. 

8 ^ Aaron therefore went unto the altar, 
and slewthecalf of the sin-offering, which 
■was for himself. 

9 And the sons of Aaron brought the 
blood unto him : and he dipped his finger 
in the blood, and ""put it upon the horns 
of the altar, and poured out the blood at 
the bottom of the altar. 

10 But the *^fat, and the kidneys, and 
the caul above the liver of the sin-offer- 
ing, he burnt upon the altar; as the Lord 
commanded Moses. 

11 And the flesh and the hide he burnt 
with fire without the camp. 

12 And he slew the burnt-offering; and 
Aaron's sons presented unto him the blood, 
which he "* sprinkled round about upon the 
altar. 

13 And they presented the burnt-offer- 
ing unto him, witli the pieces thereof, and 
the head : andheburnt^/iemupon the altar. 

14 And he did wash the inwards and the 
legs, and burnt them upon the burnt-of- 
fering on the altar. 

15 ^yAnd he brought the people's offer- 
ing, and took the goat, which iras the sin- 
offering for the people, and slew it, and 
offered'' it for sin, as the first. 

16 And he brought the burnt-offering, 
and offered it according to the *manner. 

17 And he brought the meat-offering, 
and ttook a handful thereof, and burnt it 
upon the altar, beside the ""burnt-sacritice 
of the morning. 

1 8 He slew also the bullock and the ram 
for a sacrifice of s peace-offerings, which 
was for the people : and Aaron's sons pre- 
sented unto him the blood, which he .sprin- 
kled upon the altar round about, 

19 And the fat of the bullock and of the 
ram, the rump, and that which covereth 



» Heb 


5:1. b 


cliap.4:7; Heb. 9: 22, -23. c 


chap. 8: 16. 
. * 0r,o. 


d cliap. 


1 : n ; 8 : 


in. e 


Ts:i. m : 10 ; H 


Ph. 


•2:17: 5:: 


dinancr. 


t Heh filled hit 


hand out of it 


f 


Ex. -29:. "is 


e <h:ip.3. 


1,3, etc. 


liclwp.7 


■ 30-.H. 


i Num. 6: '23- 


27: 


Deut.21:.n 


: iCliron.e 


:3: Ps,i. 


7-2:17; I 


uke'24 


:70. j ver.B; N 


urn 


14:10; IG: 


19,42. k Jlulg.6:-21; 



9. The sons of Aaron ; Nadab, Abilui. Eleazar, 
and Ithamar. Chap. 10:1-6. 

10. According to the manner; the manner 
that (lod had pre.scribed. Chap. 1 : 10-1.3. 

21. As Moses commanded; Ex. 29: 24-26. 
24. From before the Lord; from his visible 

presence in the tabernacle. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

7. Ministers, after being duly consecrated to their 
office, should without delay enter upon the faithful 
discharge of its duties. 

8. Atonement through the blood of Christ, and 
purification by the Holy Spirit, are among the first 
great doctrines which a minister sliould preach; 
and which, in their various relations, he should 
continue to inculcate through the whole of his 
ministry. 

22. He should not confine himself to the preach- 



the inwards, and the kidneys, and the caul 
above the liver: 

20 And they pvit the fat upon the breasts, 
and he burnt the fat upon the altar: 

21 And the breasts and the right shoul- 
der Aaron waved/or a ^ wave-offering be- 
fore the Lord ; as Moses commanded. 

22 And Aaron lifted up his hand tow- 
ard the people, and 'blessed them; and 
came down from offering of the sin-offer- 
ing, and the burnt-offering, and peace- 
offerings. 

23 And Moses and Aaron went into the 
tabernacle of the congregation, and came 
out, and blessed the people : and the glory 
of the J Lord appeared unto all the -jieople. 

24 And tliere came a '' fire out from be- 
fore the Lord, and consumed upon the 
altar the burnt-offering and the fat : ivhich 
when all the people saw, they 'shouted, 
and fell on their faces. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 Xadab and Abihu, for offering of strange fire, are 
burnt by fire. (J Aaron and Viis sons are forbidden to 
mourn for Ihera. S The priests are forbidden wine 
when they are to go into the tabernacle. 1"2 The law 
of eating tiie holy things. 16 Aaron's excuse for 
transgressing thereof. 

AND Nadab and Abihu, the sons of 
Aaron, took either of them his censer, 
and put fire therein, and put incense there- 
on, and offered '"strange fire before the 
Lord, which he commanded them not. 

2 And there went out "fire from the 
Lord, and devoured them, and "they died 
before the Lord. 

3 Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is 
it that the Lord spake, saying, I will bo 
sanctified P in them that come nigli me, 
and before all the people 1 will be i glori- 
fied. And Aaron '^held his peace. 

4 And Moses called Mishael and Elza- 
phan, the sons of Uzziel the uncle of 
Aaron, and said unto them, Come near, 



13: 19,20: IKinss, 1S:3S; 2Cliron.7:l-3. lKir:«3:ll. m chap. 
Ifi: 12; K.x. .10:9: Num. ir.:(i,etc. n ch.ip.9:24; Num. 16:.3fi: 
2Kinga. 1:10, 12 " Nnm.3:4; 26:fil. p Ex. 19:22; c-liap.21:6, 
8,1.5; ISamti:2n; 1 Cliroil. I.t : 12, 13: P(s:l.89: 7; Isa.,^: 11 : Heh. 
12:2.'<. q Iaa.49>3; Ezek. -28:22; Johnl2:28. r Psa.39:9; 4(i: 10. 

ing of a few of the many doctrines of the gospel, 
but should, in due time, order, and proportion, labor 
to inculcate tlie whole; and in such a manner as 
shall be most profitable to the people. 

24. True love and devotion to (jrod in the human 
heart, are enkindled by the Holy Spirit; and the 
manifestation of his approval is a just cause of re- 
joicing. 

CHAPTER X. 

1. Censer; afire-pan. Strange fire; common 
fire — not tliat which was kindled by the Lord on the 
altar. Chap. 9:24. 

2. From the Lord; from liis visible glory on the 
mercy-seat. Deroi/red; killed. 

3. The Lord spale; E.v. 19 : 22 ; 29 : 43. Them 
that cojne nigh me: especially those who conduct 
religious worship. Ilcldhispeace ; submitted with- 
out a murmur to the righteous judgment of God. 

145 



Of wine and strong drink. 



LEVITICUS X. 



Oy eating the sin-offering. 



carry your brethren from before the sanc- 
tuary out of the cainp. 

5 So they went near, and "carried them 
in their coats out of the camp ; as Moses 
had said. 

6 And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto 
Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons, ''Un- 
cover not your heads, neither rend your 
clothes ; lest ye die, and lest "^ wrath come 
upon all the people: but let your breth- 
ren, the whole house of Israel, bewail the 
buruiu;? which the Lord hath kindled. 

7 And ye shall not go '' out from the door 
of the tabernacle of the congregation, lest 
yc die : for the anointing oil of the Loud 
is '"upon yoti. And they did according 
to the word of Moses. 

8 ^And the Lord spake unto Aaron, 
saying, 

9 Do not drink ""wine nor strong drink, 
thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go 
into the tabernacle of the congregation, 
lest yc die : it shall be a statute for ever 
throughout your generations : 

10 And that ye may put ^difference be- 
tween holy and unholy, and between un- 
clean and clean ; 

1 1 And that ye may ^ teach the children 
of Israel all tlic statutes which the Lord 
hath spoken unto them by the hand of 
Moses. 

12 11 And Moses spake unto Aaron, and 
unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons 
that were left, Take the mcat-olfering that 
remaineth of the offerings of the Lord 
made by fire, and eat it without leaven 
beside the altar: for it is most holy. 

13 And ye shall eat it in the 'holy place. 



a Ait8fi:fi, in. k c)iap. 21 :10; Exek. 24:17. cNuin.l6:4R; 
Jo8li. 7:1; 22 : IS, M ; 2 Sam. 24 : 1 1 , IS. <t chap. 21 : 12. • Ex. 
28:41; 40: in. f l8a.28:7; E2ek.44:21 ; I.ukel:16; lTim..'J:3; 

5. 07it of the cavip; for burial. 

6. Uncover not — neither rend; avoid all ap- 
pearance of mourning. 

7. Not go out ; not suspend any of the duties of 
the ministry, but continue to discharge them. 

9. Do tiot drink icine nor strong drink; 
it is supposed that Nadab and Abihii had been 
drinkin;^ and became excited; tliat this was one 
cause of their transgression; and that God enjoined 
on his ministers, when about to engage in public 
worship, entire abstinence from the u.se of intoxi- 
cating drink, that they might not be unHtted for 
their work. 

10. Holt/ and vnholy — nnclean and clean ; 
things which God forbids in his worship, and those 
which he requires. 

12. Meat-offering; chap. 2:3; 6:16; 7:29~T-1. 

18. Ye should — have eaten it; if its blood had 
been brought into that part of the tabern.acle called 
the sanctuary, or holy place, they were to burn it 
without the camp; if not, they were to eat it. 
Chap. f.:26-:}0. 

U). This dny—lhey offered; chap. 9:8-21. 

Such things; the death of his two sons. //" / 

had eaten ; joined with his family in feasting, 

while thus heavily afflicted. Should it have been 

146 



due, of the sacrifices of the Lord made by 
fire : for so I am commanded. 

14 And the wave-breast and heave- 
shoulder shall ye eat in a clean pface ; 
thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with 
thee : for they be thy due, and thy sons' due, 
ii'hich are given out of the sacritices of 
peace-ofTerings of the children of Israel. 

15 The heave-shoulder and the Avave- 
brcast shall they bring with the offerings 
made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave- 
offering before the Lord; and it shall be 
thine, and thy sons' with thee, by a statute 
for ever ; as the Lord hath commanded. 

16 1[And Moses diligently sought the 
goat of the sin-offering, and behold, it was 
burnt : and he was angry with Eleazar 
and Ithamar, the son§ of Aaron u'hich were 
left alive, saying, 

1 7 Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin- 
ofl^ering in the holy place, seeing it is most 
holy, and God hath given it you to bear 
the iniquity of the congregation, to make 
atonement for them before the Lord? 

18 Behold, the blood of it was not 
brought in within the holy place: ye 
should indeed have eaten it in the lioly 
place, as I 'commanded. 

19 And Aaron said unto Moses, Behold, 
this day have they oflerod their sin-offer- 
ing and their burnt-oflerins before the 
Lord ; and such things have befallen me : 
and if\ had eaten the sin-ofiering to-day, 
should it have been* accepted in the sight 
of the Lord? 

20 And when Moses heard that, he was 
content. 

Titilal:7. (t cliap. 1 1 : 47 i 20: 2S, 26; Jpr. I.i: IP; Kzek.44:2». 
k Nell. S: 2, 8; Mai. 2: 7. i Num. 18: 10. j ch;ip. fi : 2R, 30. k Isa. 
1:11-15; Jer.6:20; 14:12; Hiisea9:4; Mai. 1:10,13. 



accepted? would it, under those peculiar circum- 
stances, have been suitable or p?e;ising to God? 

20. He rras content ; satisfied tli.-»t God would 
not be displeased with Aaron and his sons for what 
they had done. 

INSTRT'CTIONP. 

1. Recklessness in divine worship, and tlie offer- 
ing of our own excited and proud emotions inslea<l 
of that humble and obedient spirit which he re- 
quires, arc peculiarly offensive to God. 

2. Great sins and great trials may speedily follow 
the reception of gre.at mercies. 

.3. Prompt and cheerful submission to God. and 
hearty acquiescence in his will, under trials, how- 
ever great, is a fruit of the Spirit which peculiarly 
honors him, and i.s u.seful to men. 

7. Regard for our friends, or sorrow on account 
of their death, must not lead us improperly to mani- 
fest grief or to neglect our appropriate duties. 

11. The use o{ wine or strong drink is ex- 
ceedingly dangerous, and should be abstained from, 
especially by ministers when .about to engage in s.a- 
cred public duties; that they may rightly conduct 
the worship of God, and make known his will to the 
people. 

14. A cheerful reception of the good things of 



Of clean and unclean 



LEVITICUS XI. 



beasts, fishes, and fowls. 



CHAPTER XI. 



1 "What beasts may, 4 and what may not be eaten. 9 
What fishes. 13 What fowls. 29 The creeping things 
wliich are unclean. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses and 
to Aaron, saying unto them, 

2 Speak unto the chihlren of Israel, say- 
ing, These arc the beasts wliich ye shall ^ cat 
among all the beasts that are on the earth. 

3 Whatsoever parteth the hoof, and is 
cloven-footed,'' and cheweth the cud, 
among the beasts, that shall ye eat. 

4 Nevertheless, these shall ye not eat 
of them that chew the cud, or of them that 
divide the hoof: as the camel, because he 
cheweth the cud, but dividcth not the 
hoof; he is unclean unto you. 

5 And the coney, because he cheweth 
the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is 
unclean unto you. 

6 And the hare, because he cheweth 
the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is 
unclean unto you. 

7 And the swine, though he divide the 
hoof, and be cloven-footed, yet he chew- 
eth not the cud; he is unclean to you. 

S Of their flesh shall ye not eat, and 
their carcass shall ye not *= touch; they are 
unclean to you. 

9 H These shall ye eat of all that are in 
the ''waters: whatsoever hath fins and 
scales in the waters, in the seas, and in 
the rivers, them shall ye eat. 

10 And all that have not fins and scales 
in the seas, and in the rivers, of all that 
move in the waters, and of any living 
thing which is in the waters, they shall 
be an '"abomination unto you : 

1 1 They .shall be even an abomination unto 
you ; ye shall not eat of their flesh, but ye 
shall have their carcasses in abomination. 

12 Whatsoever hath no fins nor scales 
in the waters, that shall be an abomina- 
tion unto you. 

13 II And these are they xvhich ye shall 
have in abomination among the ''fowls ; 



a Deut. 14 : 3. eti-. : Ezekiel4:14; Daniel 1:8; Mat. l.^:U: 
Roni.H:l4; Hp1).9:10; 13:9. b Ps.!. 1 : 1 , 3. c Is:l. 5-2 : 1 1 ; 
Actt 10: 1(1-1.5; 2Cor.6:17: Col. 2:21. cini"Ut.l4:9. e cll.ip. 
":1«. f Deut. 14: 1-2. g Matthew :S : 4 ; Mark 1:6. hverseS; 

Providence, and. at proper times and in suitable 
circumstances, even feasting with our families on 
the fruits of divine kindnes.s. is not only allowable, 
but is a duty, the right performance of which will 
promote the divine glory and our own highest good. 
19. Some things which on ordinary occasions 
would be right, proper, and useful, may without sin 
be omitted on occasions of great affliction and dis- 
tress ; and some things which on ordinary occasions 
would not be proper, may at such times be done. 
1 Sam. 21:6; 2 Chron. 30:18-20; Mat. 9:1-5; 
Mark 2 : 19, 25, 26 ; Luke 5 : 34. 

CHAPTER XI. 
3. Clove)!- footed ; having the hoof divided into 
two parts, like that of the ox and sheep. 



they shall not be eaten, they are an abom- 
ination : the eagle, and the ossifrage, and 
the ospray, 

14 And the vulture, and the kite after 
his kind ; 

15 Every raven after his kind ; 

16 And the owl, and the nighthawk, and 
the cuckoo, and the hawk after his kind, 

17 And the little owl, and the cormo- 
rant, and the great owl, 

18 And the swan, and the pelican, and 
the gicr eagle, 

19 And the stork, the heron after her 
kind, and the lapwing, and the bat. 

20 All fowls that creep, going upon all 
four, shall be an abomination unto you. 

21 Yet these may ye cat of every (lying 
creeping thing that goeth upon all four, 
which have legs above their feet, to leap 
withal upon the earth ; 

22 Even these of them ye may ^cat; the 
locust after his kind, and the bald locust 
after his kind, and the beetle after his 
kind, and the grasshopper after his kind. 

23 But all other flying creeping things, 
wliich have four feet, shall be an abomi- 
nation unto you. 

24 And for these ye shall be unclean : 
whosoever ''toucheth the carcass of them 
shall be unclean until the even. 

2.5 And whosoever beareth aught of the 
carcass of them shall 'wash his clothes, 
and be unclean until the even. 

26 The carcasses of every beast which 
divideth the hoof, and is not cloven-foot- 
ed, nor cheweth the cud, are unclean unto 
you : every one that touchcth them shall 
be unclean. 

27 And whatsoever goeth upon his paws, 
among all manner of beasts that go on all 
four, those are unclean unto you : whoso 
touchcth their carcass shall be unclean 
until the even. 

28 And he thatbeai-cth the carcass of them 
shall J wash his clothes, and be unclean un- 
til the even : they are unclean unto you. 

diap. 17:13, 16. icliap.l4:a; Ir,:?,; Num. 19:10, '23 ; 31 : 24 ; 
Psalm.nl : -2, 7; Zech. 13:1; John 13:8; Acts Ji: 16; Heb. 9:10; 
10 : -22 ; 1 Peter, 3:21; Rev. 7 : 14. j ver. 24. 



4. Unclean ; not to be eaten. 
•'5. Coney: a small animal inhabiting high, rocky 
places. Prov. 30 : 26. 

10. Anahomination; to be loathed and rejected. 

20. Fowls that creep ; winged insects. See ver. 
21-23. 

21. Legs above their feet ; those which, in ad- 
dition to the feet on which they w.alk, have long 
legs with which to jump; as locusts and grass- 
hoppers. 

23. Flying creeping things; as flies, wasps, 
and bees. 

24. For these; the creatures mentioned verses 
26-28. Unclean until the even; not admitted 
to unite in public worship, or associate with others 
who united in it. 

147 



The creeping things 



LEVITICUS XII. 



which arc unclean. 



29 ^ These also shall be unclean unto 
you among the creeping things that creep 
upon the eartli ; the weasel, and the 
mouse,' and the tortoise after his kind, 

30 And the ferret, and the chameleon, 
and the lizard, and the snail, and the mole. 

31 These arc unclean to you among all 
that creep : ^vllosoevcr doth ''touch them, 
when they be dead, shall be unclean until 
the even. 

32 And upon whatsoever any of them, 
when they are dead, doth fall, it shall 
be unclean ; whether it be any vessel of 
wood, or raiment, or skin, or sack, what- 
soever vessel it be, wherein any work is 
done,' it must be put into water, and it 
shall be unclean until the even ; so it 
shall be cleansed. 

33 And every earthen vessel, whereinto 
any of them fallcth, whatsoever is in it 
shall be unclean ; and ^ ye shall break it. 

34 Of all meat which may be eaten, that 
on which such water comctli shall be un- 
clean : and all drink that may be drunk 
in every svcJi vessel shall be unclean. 

3.5 And every thing whereupon any part 
of tlieir carcass falleth shall be unclean; 
whether if be oven, or ranges for pots, they 
shall be broken down : for they are un- 
clean, and shall be unclean vinto you. 

36 Nevertlielcss a fountain or pit, xvhere- 
in *tl>£re is plenty of water, shall be clean : 
but that which toucheth their carcass 
shall be unclean. 

37 And if any part of their carcass fall 
upon any sowing seed which is to be 
sown, it shall be clean. 

38 But if any water be put upon the 
.seed, and any part of their carcass fall 
thereon, it shall be unclean unto you. 

39 And if any beast, of which ye may 
eat, die; he that tonchclh the carcass 
thereof shall be unclean until the even. 

40 And hq that*cateth of the carcass of 



• I«:i. (.6:17. bver. 8; Hag. 2:13. c clinp. l.'i : 12. d clian. 
«:28; INa. 2:9; Jer. 48:3?; •: Tim. 2:21; llev. 2 : 27. * Heb. 
a gathering togtthev pf waters. e cliJip. 17:IB'; 22:8; Dent. 
N : 21 ; Ezpk. 4 : U ; 44 : 31 ; 1 Cor. 10:21. t Hcb. doth muUipty 
fctt. f rlmiiter 20 : 2.i. J Hcb. your Jou(«. g cliapter 19: 2; 



.30. Ferret; supposed to be a kind of weasel. 
Chameleon ; a species of lizard. 

41. Ye shall be holy ; the great objects of the 
above regulations Mere, to show whether they would 
obey God; ;iccuKtoin them to distinguish between 
good and evil; promote their iiioial puritv, their 
separation from what would pollute thein ; and keep 
them distinct from all other nations, to be a people 
governed by and devoted to Jehovah. 
INSTRL'CTION.S. 

2. In eating and drinking, we should seek not 
merely to gratify appetite or preserve life, health, 
iind reason, but 10 fil ourselves for t!ie best discharge 
of our duties. Whatever, as to kind, quality, or 
quantity, tends to unlit us for this, should be rejected. 
I Cor. 10:31. 

8. Great attention and care are needful to avoid the 
conimission of sin. and exposure to its punishment. 
MS 



it .shall wash his clothes, and be un- b. c.i^o*" 
clean until the even : he also that bearetii 
the carcass of it shall wash his clothes, 
and be unclean until the even. 

41 And every creeping thing that crcep- 
eth upon the earth shall be an abomina- 
tion ; it shall not be eaten. 

42 Whatsoever gocth upon the belly, and 
whatsoever goeth upon all four, or what- 
soever t hath more feet among all creep- 
ing things that creep upon the earth, them 
ye shall not eat ; for they are an abomi- 
nation. 

43 Ye shall '"not make tyourselves abom- 
inable with any creeping thing that crcep- 
eth, neither shall ye make yourselves un- 
clean with them, that ye should be defiled 
thereby. 

44 For I am the Lord your God : ye shall 
therefore sanctify yourselves, and ye « shall 
be holy; for I«)/i holy : neither shall ye de- 
file yourselves with any manner of creep- 
ing thing that crecpcth upon the earth. 

4.5 For I am the Lord that '" bringcth you 
up out of the land of Egypt, to be your 
God : ye shall therefore be holy, for I am 
holy. 

46 This is the law of the beasts, and of 
the fowl, and of every living creature that 
moveth in the waters, and of every crea- 
ture that creepeth upon the earth: 

47 To make a 'dillerence between the 
unclean and the clean, and between the 
beast that may be eaten and the beast 
that may not be eaten. 



CHAPTER XII. 



G Her 



1 The purification of women after childbirth. 
ofTerings for her purifying. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing, 
2 Speak unto the children of Israel, say- 
ing, If a woman have conceived seed, and 
borne a man-child, then J she shall be un- 

20:7, -Jti; Exoilus l'.t:fi; Amos 3:3; Mat. h : 48 ; 1 Tlii-s... 4:7; 
1 Peter, 1:15, li>; Rev. 22:11, II. h F..xodiis «: 7; 20:2: Ps.ilm 
10'.:4:>-4.i: Hoseall;l. i cliiip. 10: 10: Ezek. 44:23; M;ilacUi 
3:18. J Job 1 4 : 4 ; Phb. M : .1 ; Luke 2 : 22. 



2.5. Pollution bv sin, and need of spiritual cleans- 
ing by the Holy Ghost, were taug'it abundantly in 
the ,Tevvish ritual ; and none who understand its 
teaching, can be ignorant of the doctrine of liuman 
depravity, and the necessity of being born again in 
order to see tln^ kingdom of God. John 3: 10. 

4.'). Holiness is to all men the one thing needful. 
In every heart where it e.vists, it is the fruit of the 
Holy Spirit. Hence, the reason why all. men should 
hearken diligently to iiis voice speaking to them in 
the Bible, rei:eive his teiichings as infallible truth, 
and cordially obey them. 

CHAPTER XII. 
2. Unclean; ceremonially; not allowe<l to enjoy 
.society, attend public ordinances, or eat of the ofler- 
ings of which she might otherwise partake. Chap. 
1.5: 19-25. 



The purifying of women. 



LEVITICUS XIII. 



The plague of leprosy. 



B.aus'o'' clean seven days ; according to the 
days of the separation for her "infirmity 
shall she be unclean. 

.3 And in the ''eighth day the flesh of his 
foreskin shall be circumcised. 

4 And she shall then continue in the 
blood of her purifying three and thirty 
days ; she shall touch no hallowed thing, 
nor come into the sanctuary, until the 
days of her purifying be fulfilled. 

5 But if she bear a maid-child, then she 
shall be unclean two weeks, as in her 
separation : and she shall continue in the 
blood of her purifying threescore and six 
days. 

6 And when the days of her "^purifying 
are fulfilled, for a son, or for a daughter, 
she shall bring a lamb *of the first year 
for a burnt-ofiering, and a young pigeon, 
or a turtledove, for a sin-ofTeriug, unto 
the door of the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation, unto the priest : 

7 Who shall ofl'er it before the Lord, 
and make an atonement for her ; and she 
shall be cleansed from the issue of her 
blood. This is the law for her that hath 
borne a male or a female. 

8 And ''if tshe be not able to bring a 
lamb, then she shall bring two turtles, or 
two young pigeons ; the one for the burnt- 
ofl^'ering, and the other for a sin-oflfering : 
and the priest shall make an atonement 
for her, and she shall be clean. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1 Tlie laws and tokens whereby the priest is to be guided 
in discerning the leprosy. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses and 
Aaron, saying, 

2 When a man shall have in the skin of 
his flesh a ^rising, a ''scab, or bright spot, 
and it be in the skin of his flesh like the 
plague of leprosy ; then he shall be brought 
unto Aaron the "^priest, or unto one of his 
sons the priests : 

3 And the priest shall look on the plague 
in the skin of the flesh : and ^vhcn the hair 
in the plague is turned white, and the 



• cli.>ii. 15:19. b Gen.l7:IJ; I,uke2:31: .Jolin 7: M.'il; Rom. 
3:19; Onl.n:.". <■ Luke 2: 2-2. * Heb.<»«')ni>/'/ii»v<rnr. d iliap. 
6:7. t Heb.herhandfindnotsufficiencyofalumb. t^r, swelling. 



4. Three and thirty days: daring this time 
she might have society, but not attend public wor- 
ship or partake of ordinances. 

6-8. Aburvt-njfering — a si n.-offeri v sj ; these 
were to express her need of p.ardon, lier ijratitude to 
God for his mercies, lier faith in his great atone- 
ment, and her devotion of herself and all that she 
had to his service. Luke 2 : '2'2-'2l. 
IX^«TRUCT10XS. 

7. Parents have always been bound sfratofully to 
recognize the goodness of God in the birth of tlieir 
children, (o acknowledge their need of his mercy, 
and to train them for his service and glory. 

8. The poor, as well a.s the ricli, may have access 
to God, and be accepted of him. As to property. 



plague in sight he deeper than the skin of 
his flesh, it is a plague of leprosy : and 
the priest shall look on him, and pro- 
nounce him unclean. 

4 If the bright spot he white in the skin 
of his flesh, and in sight he not deeper 
than the skin, and the hair thereof be not 
turned white ; then the priest shall s shut 
up hhn that hath the plague seven days : 

5 And the priest shall look on hiin the 
seventh day : and behold, if the plague 
in his sight be at a stay, and the plague 
spread not in the skin ; then the priest 
shall shut him up seven days more : 

6 And the priest shall look on him again 
the seventh day : and behold, //"the plague 
he somewhat dark, and the plague spread 
not in the skin, the priest shall pronounce 
him clean : it ?.f hut a scab : and he shall 
wash his clothes, and be clean. 

7 But if the scab spread much abroad 
in the skin, after that he hath been seen 
of the priest for his cleansing, he shall be 
seen of the priest again : 

8 And if the priest see that, behold, the 
scab sprcadeth in the skin, then the priest 
shall pronounce him unclean : it is a 
leprosy. 

9 'TI When the plague of leprosy is in a 
man, then he shall be brought unto the 
priest ; 

10 And the ''priest shall see him: and 
behold, if i\\G rising he white in the skin, 
and it have turned the hair white, and 
there he ^uick raw flesh in the rising ; 

11 It is an old leprosy in the skin of his 
flesh, and the priest shall pronounce him 
unclean, and shall not shut him up : for 
he is unclean. 

12 And if a leprosy break out abroad in 
the skin, and the leprosy cover all the 
skin of him that hath the plague from his 
head even to his foot, wheresoever the 
priest lookcth ; 

13 Then the priest shall consider: and 
behold, if the leprosy have covered all 
his flesh, he shall pronounce him clean 



« Deut -28:27; I.iihli :i : 17. f D.Mit. 17: 8, 9; S4 : 8 ; M.ll. 2 : 7 ; 
I.iil<pl-:H. 6 .Viim. 1-2: l.i. h Nam. 12:10,1-2; 2Kins!i,5:27; 
2 Cbron. -26:19,20. % Heh. the quickening of living fitsh. 



opportunities, and capacities, God requires .accord- 
ing to what men have, or may have, and not accord- 
ing to what they have not, or cannot h.ave, 

CH^VPTER XIII. 

2. Lrprosy ; a foul disease, covering the body 
with a kind of white scales : from its loatlisomo and 
incurable character it is often referred to as an em- 
blem of sin. 

3. Unclean ; leprous, and therefore to be ex- 
cluded from divine ordin.ances and from society. 

1.3. Clean ; he was not aflected with that kind 
of leprosy ; or was not in that stage of it which ren- 
dered him dangerous to society, or required him to 
be excluded from it. 

149 



LEVITICUS XIII. 

is all turned 



Laws and tokens for 

that hath the plague : it 
white :* he i.s clean. 

14 But when raw flesh appeareth in 
him, he .shall be unclean. 

1 5 A nd the priest shall see the raw flesh, 
and pronounce liiin to be unclean : for the 
raw llesh is unclean : it is a leprosy. 

16 Or if the raw flesh turn again, and 
be changed unto white, he shall come unto 
the priest ; 

17 And the priest shall see him: and 
behold, if the plague be turned into white ; 
then the priest shall pronounce him clean 
that hath the plague : he is clean. 

1 8 1[ The flesh also, in which, even in the 
skin thereof, was a ''boil, and is healed, 

19 And in the place of the boil there be 
a white rising, or a bright spot, white, and 
somewhat reddish, and it be showed to 
the priest ; 

20 And if, when the priest secth it, be- 
hold, it be in sight lower than the skin, 
and the hair thereof be turned white ; the 
priest shall pronounce him unclean : it is 
a plague of leprosy broken out of the boil. 

21 But if the priest look on it, and be- 
hold, there he no white hairs therein, and 
if it he not lower than the skin, but he 
somewhat dark ; then the priest shall shut 
hini'^ up seven days: 

22 And if it spread much abroad in the 
skin, then the priest shall pronounce him 
unclean : it is a plague. 

23 But if the bright spot ''stay in his 
place, aud spread not, it is a burning boil ; 
and the priest shall pronounce him "clean. 

24 ^1 Or if there be ami flesh, in the skin 
whereof there is *a hot "^burning, and the 
quick Jlesh that burneth have a white 
bright spot, somewhat reddish, or white; 

2.5 Then the priest shall look upon it: 
and behold, if the hair in the bright spot 
be turned white, and it be in sight deeper 
than the skin ; it is a leprosy broken out 
of the burning: wherefore tlie priest shall 
pronounce him unclean: it is the plague 
of leprosy. 

2(j Hut if the priest look on it, and be- 
hold, there he no white hair in the bright 
spot, and it he no lower than the other skin, 
but he somewhat dark; then the priest 
shall shut him up seven days: 

27 And the priest shall look upon him 
the seventh day : and if it be spread much 
abroad in fhe skin, then the priest shall 
pronounce him unclean : if is the plague 
of leprosy. 

28 And if the bright spot stay in his 
place, and spread not in the skin, but it 
be somewhat dark ; it is a rising of the 



« Inn. («;«; .Iolinfl:41. b Exodus 9:9; Ifi: 'W. c I Cor. R : (i. 
* .lob :U : 31 ; Prov. 2H : 13 ; 1 Peter, 4:3. e 2 Cor. 8:7. * Heb. 
a burning uf fire, f l»a. 3 : -24. t I King», 8 : 38 ; 2 Cbron. 6 : as ; 

150 



discerning leprosy. 



burning, and the priest shall pro- ^i " h»: 
nounce him clean : for it is an inflamma- 
tion of the burning. 

29 H If a man or woman have a s plague 
upon the head or the beard ; 

30 Then the priest shall see the plague : 
and behold, if it be in .sight deeper than 
the skin, and there be in it a yellow thin 
hair ; then the priest shall pronounce him 
unclean : it is a dry scall, even a leprosy 
upon the head or beard. 

31 And if the priest look on the plague 
of the scall, and behold, it he not in sight 
deeper tlian the skin, and that there is no 
black hair in it ; then the priest shall shut 
up him that hath the plague of the scall 
seven '• days : 

32 And in the seventh day the priest 
shall look on the plague : and behold, if 
the scall spread not, and there be in it no 
yellow hair, and the scall be not in sight 
deeper than the skin ; 

33 He shall be shaven, butthe scall shall 
he not shave ; and the priest shall shut up 
hi)7i tliat hath the scall seven days more: 

34 And in the seventh day fhe priest 
shall look on the scall : and behold, '/the 
scall be not spread in the skin, nor he in 
sight deeper than the skin ; then the priest 
shall pronounce him clean: and he shall 
wash his clothes, and be clean. 

3.5 But if the scall spread much 'in fhe 
skin after his cleansing; 

3() Then the priest shall look on him: 
and behold, if the scall be spread in the 
skin, the priest shall not seek for yellow 
hair ; he is unclean. 

37 But if the scall be in his sight at a 
stay, and that there is black hair grown 
up therein ; the scall is healed, he is clean : 
and the priest shall pronounce him clean. 

38 *\ If a man also or a woman have in 
the skin of their flesh bright J spots, even 
white bright spots ; 

3!) Then the priest shall look: and be- 
hold, if the bright spots in the skin of 
their flesh be darkish white, it is a frec- 
kled spot that groweth in fhe skin : he is 
clean. 

40 And the man whose thair is fallen 
off his head, he is bald ; yet is he clean. 

41 And he that hath his hair fallen off 
from the part of his head toward his face, 
he is forehead-bald ; yet is he clean. 

42 And if there be in the bald head, or 
bald forehead, a N\hifc reddish sore; if is 
a leprosy sprung up in his bald head, or 
his bald forehead. 

43 Then the priest shall look upon it: 
and behold, if the rising of the sore be 

Iminh 1 ^b. iT^er. 4-6. ^1 rerses 7, 27; 2Timotb}-. 2: 17; 3: 1.3. 
i Eld. 7:20; Uoinans 7 : 22, 23 ; James 3:2. t Heb. /ita</ u 
pitied. 



Concerning leprosy 



LEVITICUS XIII. 



in a rrarment. 



in his bald forehead, as the leprosy ap- 
peareth in the skin of the flesh ; 

44 He is a leprous man, he is unclean : 
the priest shall pronounce him utterly 
unclean; his plague is in his *head. 

45 And the leper in whom the plasue 
is, his clothes shall be ''rent, and "=his 
head bare, and he shall put a covering 
upon his upper ^ lip, and shall cry, " Un- 
clean, unclean. 

46 All the "^days wherein the plague 
shall be in him he shall be defiled ; he is 
unclean: he shall dwell « alone; without 
the camp shall his habitation be. 

47 T[ The *■ garment also that the plague 
of leprosy is in, ichether it be a woollen 
garment, or a linen garment ; 

48 Whether it be in the warp, or woof, 
of linen, or of woollen ; whether in a skin, 
or in any *thing made of skin; 

49 And if the plague be greenish or red- 
dish in the garment, or in the skin, either 
in the warp, or in the woof, or in any tthing 
of skin ; it is a plague of leprosy, and 
shall be showed unto the priest: 

50 And the priest shall look upon the 
plague, and shut up it that hath the plague 
seven days : 

51 And he shall look on the plague on 
the seventh day : if the plague be spread 
in the garment, either in the warp, or in 
the woof, or in a skin, or in any work 
that is made of skin ; the plague is a 
fretting' leprosy; it is unclean. 

52 He shall therefore Jburn that gar- 
ment, whether warp or woof, in woollen 



» Isa. 1:5. b -2 Sam. 13 ; 19 ; Ezra 9:3; Job 1 : M ; Jer. 36 : 2-J ; 
.loel2:1.3. c chap. 10:6; 21:10. d Ezek. 24: 17,22; Micall 3: 7. 
e .Iol)42:6; P8a..51:3,5; Isa e:.!; 64:6; Rom.3:-23; lCor.6:Il. 
r Prov.30:I2. g Num.."-.:*; 12:14; 2Kinga,7:3; 15:,5; 2Cliron. 
S6:2l; Psa.38:ll: tam.l:l: Lukel7:12; lCor.5:S,13; 2Tlies8 
3:6: lTini.6:5; Rev.2l:27; 22:15. h Jo3h.7:21; Eccl.9:8; 



45. Unclean, itnxlean; this was an acknow- 
ledgment of his disease, and a warning to others 
not to approach him. 

51. A fretting leprosy ; corroding and destroy- 
ing the cloth. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Sin occasions a great variety of diseases, and 
will finally consign the hody to the grave, and the 
soul, unless cleansed from its pollution, to perdition. 
All should therefore be solicitous to know whether 
they are under its power; and if so. to apply with- 
out delay to Him who can say with effect, I will ; be 
thou clean. Mat. 8 : 3. 

7. In doubtful cases, persons should not be hasty 
in deciding upon their own spiritual state. They 
should obtain all the light they can from experi- 
enced ministers and Christians ; from self- exami- 
nation, from the Scriptures, and religions books. 
Above all, they should go habitually to (jrod, ear- 
nestly praying, Search me, O (>od. and know my 
heart; try me, and know my tliouglits ; and see if 
there be any wicked way in me. and lead me in the 
way everlasting. Psa. i:30: 23, 24. 

II. Old habits of sin, unless tliey are effectually 
renounced and forsaken, will revive and break out 
at times into flagrant transgression, and the last 



or in linen, or any thing of slcin, wherein 
the plague is : for it is a fretting leprosy ; 
it shall be burnt in the fire. 

53 And if the priest shall look, and be- 
hold, the plague be not spread in the gar- 
ment, either in the warp, or in the woof, 
or in any thing of skin ; 

54 Then the priest shall command that 
they wash the thing wherein the plague is, 
and he shall shut it up seven days more : 

55 And the priest shall look on the 
plague, after that it is ^washed : and be- 
hold, if the plague have not changed his 
color, and the plague be not spread, it is 
unclean ; thou shalt burn it in the fire ; it 
is fret inward, whether it be +bare within 
or without. 

56 And if the priest look, and behold, 
the plague be somewhat dark after the 
washing of it; then he shall rend it out 
of the garment, or out of the skin, or out 
of the warp, or out of the woof: 

57 And if it appear still in the garment, 
cither in the warp, or in the woof, or in 
any thing of skin ; it is a spreading /j/agH^ ; 
thou shalt 'burn that wherein the plague 
is with fire. 

58 And the garment, either warp, or 
woof, or whatsoever thing of skin it be, 
which thou shalt wash, if the plague be de- 
parted from them, then it shall be washed 
the second time, and shall be clean. 

59 This is the law of the plague of lep- 
rosy in a garment of woollen or linen, 
either in the warp, or woof, or any thing 
of skins, to pronounce it clean, or to pro- 
nounce it unclean. 



Isa. 61:10; 64:6: Zecli. 3:3, 4; .las. 5:2; .lude -23 ; lleV. 4:4; 
16:1.5. * Heb. ivurfc of. f Heh. vessel^ or inittrument. t chap. 
14:44. j chap. 1 1 : 3:) ; Deut. 7: 25,26; I.ia.30:22; Acts 19: 19, 20. 
k Ezek. 24 : 13 ; Heb. 6:4-8: 2 Peter, 1:9; 2 : 20-22. t JJeh. 6n'd 
in the head thereof, or in the forehead thereof. .'^ Isaiah 33: 14; 
Mat. 3 : 1 2 ; 25 : 41 ; Rev. 21 : 8. 



state of a man be worse than the first. Matthew 
12 : 45. 

17. Ministers of the gospel, and those who are 
called not only to judge of their own state, but to 
give directions to others, need great wisdom. They 
should be familiar with the Scriptures, well ac- 
quainted with themselves, and accustomed in every 
thing, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiv- 
ing, to make known their requests unto God. Eph. 
G:I8; Phil. 4:6. 

28. Not every sin of which a man may have 
been guilty, of itself merely, proves him to be in an 
unregenerate state; while no transgression of God's 
law, known, allowed, and persevered in, or not 
repented of and forsaken, can consist with a gra- 
cious and s.afe state. 

41. Persons may be free from one kind of sin, 
and yet deeply involved in another ; and we are not 
to conclude that we are not under condemnation be- 
cause we are not guilty of all sorts of transgressions, 
of sins which others practise, or which are known to 
our fellow-men; but we are to .search out ami for- 
sake all iniquity ; crying unto God, Cleanse thou me 
from secret faults, as well as, Keep me b:ick from 
presumptuous transgressions. P.sa. 19: 12-14. 

46. Sin is contagious, and all suitable efforts 
151 



Riles and sacrijices L E V I T I C U S X I V . in cleansing the leper. 

CHAPTER XIV. 



1 The rilps and sacrifices in cleansing of ihe leper. 3ii 
The signs of leprosy in a house. 43 The cleansing 
of that house. 



A 



ND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 



2 This shall be the law of the leper in 



I 1 1 And the priest that maketh him ^fftH: 
clean shall 'present the man that is to be 
made clean, and those things, before the 
Loud, at the door of the tabernacle of the 
congregation. 

12 And the priest shall take one he-lamb, 
and offer him for a "" trespass-olfering, and 



the day of his cleansing: He shall be I the log of oil, and wave tliem/o>- a" wave 



brought* unto the priest: 

3 And the priest shall go forth out of 
the camp ; and the priest shall look, and 
behold, ?/the plague of leprosy be healed 
in the lopt'r ; 

4 Then shall the priest command to take 
for him that is to be cleansed two *birds 
alive and clean, and ''cedar-wood, and 
scarlet, and "^hyssop: 

5 And the priest shall command that 
one of the birds be killed in an earthen 
vessel over ^ running water. 

G As for the living bird, he shall take it, 
and the cedar-wood, and the scarlet, and 
the hyssop, and shall dip them and the 
living bird in the blood of the bird that 
was killed over the running water: 

7 And he shall 'sprinkle upon him that 
is to be cleansed from the I'lcprosy seven 
times, .and shall pronounce him clean, 
and shall let the living bird loose tinto 
the open field. 

8 And he that is to be cleansed shall 
washs his clothes, and shave off all his 
hair, and wash '"himself in water, that he 
may be clean : aiid after that he shall 
come into the camp, and shall tarry abroad 
out of his tent seven days. 

9 Rut it shall boon the seventh day, that 
he shall shave all his hair ofi'his head and 
his beard and his 'eyebrows, even all his 
hair he shall shave off: and he shall wash 
his clothes, also he shall wash his flesh in 
water, and he shall be clean. 

10 And on the eighth ^day he shall take 
two he-lambs without blemish, and one 
cwe-lamb -of the first vear without blem- 



ofTering before the Lord 

13 And he shall slay the lamb in the 
place where he shall kill the sin-offering 
and the burnt-oflering, in the holy place: 
for" as the sin-offering is the priest's, so 
is the trespass-ofiering: it is most holy: 

14 And the priest shall take soinc of the 
blood of the trespass-offering, and the 
priest shall put it Pupon tlie tip of the 
right ear of him that is to bo cleansed, 
and upon the thumb of his right hand, 
and upon the great toe of his right foot. 

15 And the priest shall take some of tlio 
log of oil, and pour it into flic palm of his 
own left hand : 

16 And the priest shall dip his right 
finger in the oil that is in his left hand, 
and shall sprinkle of the oil with his fin- 
ger seven times before the Lord: 

1 7 And of the rest of the oil that is in his 
hand shall the priest put lupon the tip of 
the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, 
and upon the thumb of his right hand, and 
upon the great toe of his right foot, upon 
the blood of the trespass-offering: 

18 And the remnant of the oil thai is in 
the priest's hand he shall pour upon the 
head of him that is to be cleansed: and 
the i)riest shall make an 'atonement for 
him before the Lord. 

19 And the priest shall ofl'er the sin- 
oflering, and make an atonement for him 
that is to be cleansed from his unclcan- 
ness ; and afterward he shall kill the 
burnt-offering: 

20 And the priest shall ollVr liio burnt- 
offering and the mcat-otlVring upon the 



ish, and three tenth-deals of fine flour/or altar: and the priest shall make an atone- 



a '' meat-olferinf 
one log of oil : 



mingled with oil, and 



• .Mnt. H-.'i.l: M- 


rk 1 : 44 : 


I.iik<- h 


•1-: 


14: 


17: 


14. 


>' () 


r, spar- 


roioi. 


li Num. l!i:(i 


; Hfl..!! 


10. c 1 


^n 


M : r. 


d 


v<'r 


.10. 


e Num. 


19: IH 


l«; Ina. M:\ 


t; F.7.ek. 


3fi:2-.; 


.111 


in \'.\ 


:n 


: HhI,. ■! 


1.3, 21 ; 


n : ■:^ 


1 .Iolin.S:ti. 


f iKiti 


;»,ft:10, 


14 


l'»a. 


.M 


2. 


\ H. 


1). upon 


the/,, 


coflhefirlll. 


f dinp 


. n:«. 


li 


rli:.p 


II 


■25: 


Kpl 


. fi : Jii : 



thoiilJ be iiKule to prevent one wicked person from 
corrupting others ; wo should not liiive for our com- 
paiiii)Ms anv wlio le:id us iuio sin. 1 Cor. 1.5:33; 
ksa. 1: li'Prov. 4:14. 1.'); i:t:-20. 

57. We should avoid not only the coinini.ssion of 
sin, l)ut liie occasions of it ; and maive wiiatever sac- 
rifice is needful to be delivered from its power. 
Mat. 5:29, 30; 6:13. 

CHAPTER XIV. 



meiit for him, and he shall be clean. 
21 And "if he be poor, and + cannot get 



Hell. 


10: 


a:: 1 IVtPr, 


3:JI 


: Rev. 1 : 


.*>, (». i NlimhiT:* H 


:9; 8:7. 


> ver 


•2X 


i H<-l>. tht 


daughter of hi 


r j/rar. 


k rliap. 2: 


1; Num. 


1.^:4 


\h. 


1 Numbers 


8:11 


21 i Kpli 


5:26,27; 


JuJe 24. 


m rliaji. 


h: lit 


H 


B. >> Kx.2!l 


:24. 


o clmp. 7 


: 7. P rli 


»li. K:2;!. 
hi* hand t 


<1 ver. 1 1. 


r ili» 


p. 4 


:2t;; f>;r>. • 


I'lmp 


h-.T, li:M. 5 Hcb 


each not. 



distinction from that which is stagnant, or luis been 
long standing. 

7. Liriiiir bird loose ; in token that the leprosy 
is he:ile(l. Ver. .')3. 

10. Tit rec tenlli-ihals ; a tenth-deal, or an omer, 
the tenth of an ephah, E.x. 1G:3(), was about tliree 
quarts. Oiir log ; sometliing more than half a pint. 

11. Mnirtk him clean ; declares liim healed. 
17, 18. E:ir — tliinnb — toe — lie-id; in token that 

all his members ,T,nd faculties need cleansing, through 

4. Scarlet ; wool dyed red. ITi/ssop ; a plant' tlie elUcacy of tlie atonement, by the Holy Spirit; 
of a spie.y, fragrant smell. E.x. 12 : 22. I and should all be consecrated to the service of G-od. 

5. K/iiniing water; living, fresh water, in | Ex. 29:20. 

152 



Signs of leprosy 



LEVITICUS XIV. 



in a he 



lamb/or a trespass-offering *to be waved, 
to make an atonement for him, and one 
tenth-deal of fine flour mingled with oil 
for a meat-offering, and a log of oil ; 

22 And two turtledoves, or two young 
pigeons, such as he is able to get; and 
the one shall be a sin-offering, and the 
other a burnt-offering. 

2.3 And ho shall bring them on the eighth 
day for his cleansing unto the priest, unto 
the door of the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation, before the Lord. 

24 And the priest shall take the lamb 
of the trespass-offering, and the log of oil, 
and the ''priest shall wave them for a 
wave-offering before the Lord : 

25 And he shall kill the lamb of the 
trespass-offering, and the priest shall take 
some of the ''blood of the trespass-offer- 
ing, and put it upon the tip of the right 
ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon 
the thumb of his right hand, and upon the 
great toe of his right foot. 

26 And the priest shall pour of the oil 
into the palm of his own left hand : 

27 And the priest shall sprinkle with 
his right finger i'o?»c of the oil that is in his 
left hand seven times before the Lord : 

28 And the priest shall put of the oil that 
is in his hand upon the tip of the right ear 
of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the 
thumb of his right hand, and upon the 
great toe of his right foot, upon the place 
of the blood of the trespass-offering: 

29 And the rest of the oil that is in the 
priest's hand, he shall put upon the head 
of him that is to be cleansed, to make an 
atonement for him before the Lord. 

30 And he shall offer the one of the '^ tur- 
tledoves, or of the young pigeons, such as 
he can get ; 

31 Even such as he is able to get, the one 
/or a sin-offering, and the other/or aburnt- 
offering, with the meat-offering : and the 
priest shall make an atonement for him 
that is to be cleansed before the Lord. 

32 This is the law of him in whom is the 
plague of leprosy, whose hand is not ''able 
to get that vShirh'pertaincth to his cleansing. 

33 ^And the Lord spake unto Moses 
and unto Aaron, saying, 

34 When ye be come into the land of 
Canaan, which I give to '^you for a pos- 
.<iession, and I ''put the plague of leprosy in 
ii, liouse of the land of your possession ; 



' Wfth. for a reaving, aver. 1-2. b ver 


14,17. c ver. 22; chap. 


IS:M,1-.. d Psm. 72:1-2-14; Mat.ll:5 


« Gen. 14:7; 1:1: 17; 


17:8; Heut. 3-2 : W. f Prov. 3: M : Aln 


19 6: 11. S Psa. 91 :in: 


Prov. .1:3:(; Zech. 5:4. t Or, prepare. 


h rh.ip. I3:.n0. i Kev. 



37. If the plague be in the walls: this has 
been .supposed to be something corrosive, which 
caused the walls to moulder away. Lower than 



35 And he tliat owneth the house shall 
come and tell the priest, saying, It seem- 
eth to me there is as it were a ^plague in 
the house: 

36 Then the priest shall command that 
they tempty the house, before the priest 
go into it to see the plague, that all that 
is in the house.be not made unclean : and 
afterward the priest shall go iii to see the 
house : 

37 And he sliall look on the plague, and 
behold, if the plague be in the walls of 
the house with hollow streaks, greenish 
or reddish, which in siglit are lower than 
the wall ; 

38 Then the priest shall go out of the 
house to the door of the house, and shut 
up the house ''seven days: 

39 And the priest shall come again tho 
seventh day, and shall look: and behold, 
if the plague be spread in the walls of 
the house ; 

40 Then the priest shall command that 
they take away the stones in which the 
plague is, and they shall cast them into 
an unclean place 'without the city : 

41 And he shall cause the house to be 
scraped within round about, and they 
shall pour out the dust that they scrape off 
without the city into an unclean place : 

42 And they shall take other stones, and 
put them in the place of those stones ; and 
he shall take other mortar, and shall plas- 
ter the house. 

43 And if tlie plague 'come again, and 
break out in the house, after that he hath 
taken away the stones, and after he hath 
scraped the house, and after it is plastered ; 

44 Then the priest shall come and look, 
and behold, //"the plague be spread in the 
house, his a''fretting leprosy in the house : 
it is unclean. 

45 And he shall break down' the liouse, 
the stones of it, and the timber thereof, 
and all the mortar of the house ; and he 
shall carry them forth out of the city into 
an unclean place. 

4G Moreover, he that goeth into the 
house all the while that it is shut up shall 
bo '"unclean until the even. 

47 And he that lieth in the house shall 
wash his clothes; aiul he that eatcth in 
the house shall wash his clothes. 

48 And if the priest ishallcome in, and 
look upon it, and behold, the plague hath 
not spread in the house, after the house 



22:1.-.. j Heh. fi:4-8: 2Peter,2:2n,22; .luile 12. k clnp. 13:51 ; 
Zerh..->:4. I 1 Kings, W: fi-9; 2 Kings, 10:27 ; IS:4: Jer. .12: I.T; 
M It- 24:2. in cliup 22:15; Numbers 19:32. t Heb. in wmin/ 
in shatt come in, etc. « 



the wall ; indentations or hollow places in the wall. 
44. Fretting lepro.ii/; eating away the stones, 
or causing them to decay. 

153 



Of cleansing the house. 



LEVITICUS XV. 



Uncleanncss of men. 



Avas plastered ; then the priest shall pro- 
nounce the house "clean, because tiie 
plague is healed. 

4'J And he shall ''take to cleanse the 
house two birds, and cedar-wood, and 
scarlet, and hyssop: 

50 And he shall kill the one of the birds 
in an earthen vessel over funning water : 

51 And he shall take the cedar-wood, 
and the hyssop, and the scarlet, and the 
living bird, and dip them in the blood of 
the slain bird, and in the running water, 
and sprinkle the house seven times: 

52 And he shall cleanse the house with 
the blood of the bird, and with the run- 
ning water, and with the living bird, and 
with the cedar-wood, and with the hys- 
sop, and with the scarlet : 

5.3 But he shall let go the living bird out 
of the city into the open fields, and make 
an '^ atonement for the house : and it shall 
be clean. 

54 This is the ''law for all manner of 
plague of leprosy, and "scall, 

55 And for the leprosy of a ''garment, 
and of a ^ house, 

56 And for a*" rising, and for a scab, and 
for a bright spot : 

57 To ' teach *when it is unclean, and 
when it is clean : this is the law of leprosy. 

CHAPTER XV. 

1 The uncloanness of men in their ij^sups. 13 The 
cleansing of them. 19 The uncleannessof women in 
their issues. 3S Their cleansing. 

AND the Loim spake unto Moses and 
to Aaron, saying, 
2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
say unto them. When any man hath a 



»lCor.6:ll. b vcr.4. c ver. :0. d Dent. 24: 8. e chap. 13:30. 
f cli:ip. 13:47. B vcr. 34. h (■li;ip. 13 : 2. i Ezek. 44 : 23. » Ht^li. 
irt the day of tht unclean, and in the day of the clean, f Or, I'un- 



51. haw of leprosy ; the course to be pursued 
witli regard to it. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. When any one ha.s reason to believe that he is 
delivered from the rejirninii; power of sin. he should 
make it known, and seek admission to the fellow- 
ship of the church. 

8. He who is really cleansed from the pollution 
of sin. will j^ratcfally acknowledi^e his indebtedness 
for the Messintr to the grace of <Jod in Jesus Christ, 
and will seek to purify himself more and more, and 
to perfect holiness in the fear of God. 

12. The change which has been wrought in a sin- 
ner when he becomes pious, is never to be ascribed 
to himself or to creatures, but always lo God, and 
the glory to be given lo him. 

21. Altlinugh a man who repents and forsakes his 
sins, is pardoned through faith in Christ, yet, to be 
saved, he must devote his powers of body and mind 
as an ofi'ering of gratitude to his service. 

32. None are excluded from the benelits of Christ's 
salvation on account of their poverty ; nor can any 
be saved except throu;;h faith in him, and consecra- 
tion to his service and glory. 

•15. Not only our souls, but our bodies, and all 
that we possess, are affected by sin. Moth and rust 
corrupt; lliieves break through and steal. The 
154 



running ti.ssue Jout of his flesh, ^Bciuao! 
because o/his issue he is unclean. 

3 And this shall be his uncleanncss in 
his issue : whether his flesh run with his 
issue, or his flesh be stopped from his 
issue, it is his uncleanncss. 

4 Every bed, whereon he lieth that hath 
the issue, is unclean : and every -thing, 
whereon he sitteth, shall be unclean. 

5 And whosoever touchcth his bed shall 
wash his ''clothes, and bathe himself in 
water, and be unclean until the even. 

6 And he that sitteth on any thing where- 
on he sat that hath the issue shall Avash 
his 'clothes, and bathe him.'ielf in water, 
and be unclean until the even. 

7 And he that toucheth the flesh of him 
that hath the issue shall wash his clothes, 
and bathe himself in water, and be un- 
clean until the even. 

8 And if he that hath the issue spit upon 
him that is clean ; then he shall wash his 
clothes, and bathe himself in water, and 
be unclean until the even. 

9 And what saddle soever he rideth up- 
on that hath the issue shall be unclean. 

10 And whosoever toucheth any thing 
that was under him shall be unclean un- 
til the even : • and he that bearctli ani/ of 
those things shall wash his clothes, and 
bathe himself in water, and be unclean 
until the even. 

1 1 And whomsoever he touchcth that 
hath the issue, and hath not rinsed his 
hands in water, he shall wash his clothes, 
and bathe himself in water, and be un- 
clean until the even. 

12 And the '"vessel of earth, that he 



ning of the reint. i chap. -22 : 4 ; Num. B : 2 ; a Sam. 3 : -iS : Mat 
9:-.'0; Mark 7 : M-SS. f Heh. veteel. k iliap. 11 : ii ; 17:15. 
1 Isa. 1:16; .las. 4 : 8. m chap, fi : 28 ; 1 1 : 33. 



earthly house of this tabernacle must be dissolved ; 
the earth and all in it burnt up. Happy they, and 
they only, who have a building of God. a house not 
made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 

CHAPTER XV. 

I. T/ie Lord spake ; the evils about which he 
spoke, and which have prevailed more or less in all 
ages and countries, may some of i.hem have resulted 
from natural diseases, and others from diseases oc- 
casioned by vicious indulgence. All either directly 
or indirectly spring from sin; and should teach us 
the necessity, in order to escape endless de.ath. of 
being delivered from its power. 

IN.-^TRUCTIONS. 

7. With depraved hearts, and in a world of temp- 
tation, we are always exposed to contract moral pol- 
lution ; and need to be kept, by the restraining and 
purifying grace of God. from its defiling power. 

15. Nothing can avail to the pardon of sin, and 
the sanctification of the soul, but the atoning blood 
of Christ, etRcaciously applied by the Holy Ghost. 

22. Sin is contagious; and all occasions of being 
defiled with it. in thought, word, or deed, should be 
carefully guarded against, and the prayer ollered 
to God contiaually, "Lead us not into temptation ; 
but deliver us from evil."' 



Ceremonial 



LEVITICUS XVI. 



purifications. 



shall be * broken : and every vessel of 
wood shall be rinsed in water. 

13 And when he that hath an issue is 
cleansed of his issue, then he shall number 
to himself ''seven days for his cleansing, 
and wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh 
in running water, and shall be clean. 

14 And on the eighth day he shall take 
to him "^two turtledoves, or two young 
pigeons, and come before the Lord unto 
the door of the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation, and give them unto the priest: 

15 And the priest shall offer them, the 
one for a sin-offering, and the other /or a 
burnt-offering; and the priest shall make 
an atonement for him before the Loud for 
his issue. 

16 And''if any man's seed of copulation 
go out from him, then he shall wash all 
his flesh in water, and be unclean until 
the even. 

17 And every garment, and every skin, 
whereon is the seed of copulation, shall 
be washed with water, and be unclean 
until the even. 

18 Th^ woman also with whom man 
shall lie with seed of copulation, they 
shall both bathe themselves "in water, and 
be unclean until the even. 

19 11 And "^if a woman have an issue, 
and her issue in her flesh be blood, she 
shall be *put apart seven days : and who- 
soever toucheth her shall be unclean un- 
til the even. 

20 And every thing that she lieth upon 
in her separation shall be unclean : every 
thing also that she sitteth upon shall be 
unclean. 

21 And whosoever toucheth her bed 
shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself 
in water, and be unclean until the even. 

22 And whosoever toucheth any thing 
that she sat upon shall wash his clothes, 
and bathe himself in water, and be un- 
clean until the even. 

23 And if it he on her bed, or on any 
thing whereon she sitteth, when he touch- 
eth it, he shall be unclean until the even. 

24 And if any man lie with her at all, 
and sher flowers be upon him, he shall 
be unclean seven days ; and all the bed 
whereon he lieth shall be unclean. 

25 And if a woman have an ''issue of 
her blood many days out of the time of 



• Psa. SrH. bver. i.'l; rlinp. 14:8; Num. 19 : U, li. c chap. 
H;2i-.31. li chap. 2-2 : 4 ; Dent. 2:i : 10. « Ex. 19:15: 1 Samuel, 
•21:4: Psa. 61:5: 1 Cor. 6:18; 1 Tliess. 4 : 3-5 ; Hebrews i:i : 4. 
f chap. 1 i : i. * Heb. in her stparation. B chap. 20 : 18 ; K7.ek. 
18:6; 22:10. h Mark 5 : 2;-) ; Luke 8:43. i ver. 13-1.5. j chap. 



31. The great object of God in fiis rep^ulations, is, 
that irifii may be lioly in bodv and spirit, and offer 
unto him acc-eptjibh' .service, througli Jesus Christ, 
their slreniith and Redeemer. 



her separation, or if it run beyond the 
time of her separation; all the days of 
the issue of her uncleanness shall be as 
the days of her separation : she shall be 
unclean. 

26 Every bed whereon she lieth all the 
days of her issue shall be unto her as the 
bed of her separation : and whatsoever 
she sitteth upon shall be unclean, as the 
uncleanness of her separation. 

27 And whosoever toucheth those things 
shall be unclean, and shall wash his 
clothes, and bathe himself in water, and 
be unclean until the even. 

28 But 'if she be cleansed of her issue, 
then she shall number to herself seven 
days, and after that she shall be clean. 

29 And on the eighth day she shall take 
unto her two turtles, or two yovtng pig- 
eons, and bring them unto the priest, to 
the door of the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation. 

30 And the priest shall offer the one for 
a sin-oflering, and the other /or a burnt- 
offering; and the priest shall make an 
atonement for her before the Lord for the 
issue of her uncleanness. 

31 Thus shall ye •> separate the children 
of Israel from their uncleanness ; that 
they die not in their uncleanness, when 
they defile my ''tabernacle that is among 
them. 

32 This is the law of him that hath an 
issue, and of him whose seed goeth from 
him, and is defiled therewith ; 

33 And of her that is sick of her flowers, 
and of him that hath an issue, of the man, 
and of the woman, and of him that lieth 
with her that is unclean. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

1 How the high-priest must enter into tlie holy place. 
11 The sin-offering for himsulf. 15 The sin-olf-ring 
for the people. 20 The scape-goat. 29 The yearly 
feast of the expiations. 

AND the Lord spake unto INIoses after 
the death of the two sons of 'Aaron, 
when they offered before the Lord, and 
d"ied ; 

2 And the Lord said unto Moses, Speak 
unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not 
at all ""times into \\\c holy place within the 
veil before the mercy-seat, which is upon 
the ark ; that he die not : for I will appear 
in the "cloud upon the mercy-scat. 

3 Thus shall Aaron "come into the holy 



11:47; Ezek. 44:23; Hebrews 12 : 1.5. k chap. 19: :iO; 21:23: 
Numbers 6:3; 19:13,20; Ezek. 5:1]; M : :t-S ; 44 : .5-7 : Daniel 
9:27; lCor.3:17. 1 chap. 10: I, 2. m Exo<lus.30: 10 ; Heb. 
9:7,8; 10:19. n Exoilus 23 : 2-2 ; 1 Kings, 8:10; Psalm 18: 11. 
o Heb. 9 : 7, etc. 



CHAPTER XVI. 
2. Come }/ot at all times; but only at such 
times as God directed. Heb. 9 : 7-l"J. Witliin 
the veil ; into the most holv place. 

155 



7%e high-pricst\i yearly 



LEVITICUS XVI. 



enlcring the holy place. 



place; ■with a "young bullock for a sin- 
offerins, and a ram for a burnt-offering. 

4 Ho slinll put on the '' holy linen coat, 
and he shall have the linen breeches up- 
on his flesh, and shall be girded with a 
linen girdle, and with the linen mitre shall 
lie be attired: these arc holy garments; 
therefore shall ho *^ wash his flesh in wa- 
ter, and so jiut them on. 

5 And he shall take of the ''congregation 
of the children of Israel two kids of the 
goats for a sin-offering, and one ram for 
a burnt-offering. 

6 And Aaron shall offer his bullock of 
the sin-offering, which ?'.<; for himself, and 
make an atonement for "himself, and for 
his house. 

7 And he shall take tlie two goats, and 
present them before the Lord at the door 
of the tabernacle of the congregation. 

8 And Aaron shall cast lots upon fhe 
two goats; one lot for the Loun, and fhe 
other lot for the *scape-goat. 

9 And Aaron shall bring the goat upon 
which the Lord's lot tfcU, and offer him 
for a sin-offering. 

10 Rut the goat, on which the lot fell to 
be the scape-goat, shall be presented alive 
before the Loud, to ""make an atonement 
with him, and to let him go for a scape- 
goat into the wilderness. 

11 And Aaron shall bring fhe bullock 
of the sin-offering, which is for himself, 
and shall make an atonement for himself, 
and for his house, and shall kill the bullock 
of the sin-offering which is for himself: 

12 And he shall take asc-enser full of 
burning coals of fire ''from off the altar 
before the Lord, and his hands full of 
sweet' incense beaten small, and bring 
it within the veil : 

I'.i And he shall put the J incense upon 
the (ire before the Lor.n, that the cloud of 
the incense may cover the ''mercy-seat 
that i.s- upon the testimony, that he die not: 

14 And he shall take of the blood of the 



• rhap. 4 : :t. b rhap. 6:10; Ex. IS : m-n ; F.T.vk. 41:17; M»t. 
52:11,12. c i-Uap, 8:6; Ex. 30:'20. J cli.ip. 4 : H. e<-h:ip.9:7; 
Heb.6:2,3; 7:27. 28; 9:7. * lUh. jlzazel. f Heh. locnt up. 
( Isa. B3 : S, 6 ; 2 Cor. .S : 21 : Heb. 7 : 27 ; 9 : 23, 24. e 'iKip. 10:1; 
Kum. 16: IH, 4H. h laaiali 6 : 6, 7. i Ex. :tO : 34-38 ; Rev. 8 : 3, 4. 
)Kx.30:& kEx.2.1:iI. I i-li.ip. 4 : fi, 6 ; Hebrews 9: 13-26. 



4. Hoh/ ssfi.rmeiits ; Ex. 28 : 39-43. 

6. Aloiicmoit for himself; verse 11; Heb. 
fl : 1-4. 

8. For the Lord; for the goat tliat w.ik to be 
ofTered to the Lord. 

10. Mrrl-e an- atonemrtit rcith him; by typi- 
cally l;iyin<j their sins on him, to be borne awav. so 
that the punishment need not fall on them. Ver. 

12. Censer; chap. 10:1. Fire; of tlial which 
(rod h:ul kindled. Chap. 9:'JI. I.ieeiise ; Ex. 
30:31-3S. 

16. Atonement for the holy place — aml^for 
the tahcrnade ; Ileb. 9: l-'JS." 
156 



bullock;' and sprinkle il with his l ".nw! 
finger upon the mercy-seat eastward ; and 
before the mercy-seat shall he sprinkle of 
the blood with his finger seven times. 

15 1] Then shall he kill the goat of the 
sin-offering,'" that is for fhe people, and 
bring his blood "within fhe veil, and do 
Avith that blood as he did with the blood 
of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the 
mercy-seat, and before the mercy-seat. 

1() And he shall make an "atonement 
for the \\(A\ \t\acc, because of the unelcan- 
ness of the children of Israel, and because 
of their transgressions in all their sins: 
and so shall he do for the tabernacle of 
the congregation, that +rcmainefh among 
them in the midst of their unclcanncss. 

17 And there shall be no man in the 
tabernacle of the p congregation when he 
goeth in to make an atonement in the holy 
place, until he come out, and have made 
an atonement for himself, and for his 
household, and for all the congregation 
of Israel. 

18 And he shall go out unto the altar 
that is before the Loud, and imake an 
atonement for it; and shall take of fhe 
blood of the bullock, and of the blood of 
fhe goat, and put it upon the horns of the 
altar round about. 

19 And he shall sprinkle of fhe blood 
upon it with his finger seven times, and 
cleanse it, and ''hallow it from the un- 
clcanncss of fhe children of Israel. 

20 1[And when he hath made an end of 
reconciling "the holy place, and fhe taber- 
nacle of flic congregation, and fhe altar, 
he shall bring the live goat: 

21 And Aaron shall lay bofh his hands 
upon the head of the live coaf, and con- 
fess 'over him all fhe iniquifies of the 
children of Israel, and all their transgres- 
sions in all their sins, puffing "theiu upon 
the head of the goat, and shall send hiin 
away by the hand of ^a fit man into the 
wilderness : 



m ver. ."i-fl. n ver. 2; Heh.K:19; 9:3,7,12. » Ex.29:3fi: Exek. 
45 : 1 R ; Heb. 9 : 22, 23. J Heb. rtloclUth. 1> Ex. 34 : 3 ; Heb. 9 : 7. 
q E.vndus :!0: 10. r Ezek. 43 : 18-22. • E7.ek. 4:"> : 20 ; CdI. 1 : W. 
t cli!ip. 2(1:40; Psalm 32:6; Proverbn 28: 13; Ronmos 10: 10. 
u laaiali 63: 6. ^ Heb. a man of opporlunity. 



19. Cleayiseit ; indicating; that so deep .and nni- 
vorsal was the pollution of sinners, th;it all their 
services, and every thing with which they hiid to do, 
needed purifying;. 

20. RecouciUn s; the holy jilace — the taberna- 
cle — thenltiir ; making atoneirient for them, .icoord - 
ing to ver. 1*5. 

2 1 . Putting them upon the head of the scout ; 
typically transferring them to liim; jis if he were 
lo c;i.rry them away, and thus the people lie diliv- 
ered from them and their consequences : thus point- 
ing to Christ and his salvation. Isa. .53:4-12; 
.lohn 1:29; Rom. 4:25; I Pet. 2:24; 3:18; 
1 John, 2 : 2. 



The scape-goat. 



LEVITICUS XVII. 



Feast of expiations. 



B-aiMi!' 22 And the goat shall* bear upon I fAa? ye may be clean from all your sins 
him all their iniquities unto a land *not before the Lord. 



inhabited :'' and he shall let go the goat 
in the wilderness. 

23 And Aaron shall come into the tab- 
ernacle of the congregation, and shall put 
off the linen garments, which he put on 
when he went into the holy place, and 
shall leave them there : 

24 And he shall wa.sh his flesh with 
Avater in the holy place, and put on his 
garments, and come forth, and offer his 
burnt-offering, and the burnt-offering of 
the people, and make an atonement for 
himself, and for the people. 

25 And the ''fat of the sin-offering shall 
he burn upon the altar. 

26 And he that let go the goat for the 
scape-goat shall wash his clothes, and 
bathe "^ his flesh in water, and afterward 
come into the camp. 

27 And the bullock /or the sin-offering, 
and the goat for the sin-offering, whose 
blood was brought in to make atonement in 
the holy place, shall one " carry forth without 
the camp ; and they shall burn in the fire 
their skins, and their flesh, and their dun 

28 And he thatburneth them shall wash 
his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water 
and afterward he shall come into the 
camp. 

29 ^ And this shall be a statute for ever 
unto you : that ""in the seventh month, on 
the tenth day of the month, ye shall ^ af- 
flict vour souls, and do no work at all, 



31 It shall be a 'sabbath of rest unto 
you, and ye shall afflict your souls, by a 
statute for ever. 

32 And the J priest, whom he shall 
anoint, and whom he shall teonsecrate to 
minister in the priest's office in his father's 
stead, shall make the atonement, and shall 
put on the linen clothes, even the holy 
garments : 

33 And '' he shall make an atonement 
for the holy sanctuary, and he shall make 
an atonement for the tabernacle of the 
congregation, and for the altar: and he 
shall make an atonement for the priests, 
and for all the people of the congregation. 

34 And 'this shall be an everlasting 
statute unto you, to make an atonement 
for the children of Israel for all their sins 
once'" a year. And he did as the Lord 
commanded Moses. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

1 The blood of aU slain beasts must be offered to the 
Lord at the door of the tabernacle. 7 They must not 
offer to devils. 10 All eating of blood is forbidden, 
lo .and all that dieth alone or is torn. 

the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 



1 A ND 

, xL ing 



2 Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons,, 
and unto all the children of Israel, and 
say unto them. This is the thing which 
the Lord hath commanded, saying, 

3 What " man soever there be of the house 
of Israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb, or 



u-hcther it be one of your own country, or goat, in the camp, or that killeth it out of 



a stranger that sojourneth among you : 

30 For on that day shall the priest make 
an atonement for you, to ''cleanse you. 



a lea. .W : 1 1 , 12 ; John 1 : 29 ; Heb. !) : 28 ; 1 Peter, 2 : 24. " Heb. 
of separation. bP8xlO:>:12. <: chap. 4 : 8-10. d ver. 28 ; chap. 
i:>:5. e chapter 4:12,21; 6:30; Heb. 13: 11. fchap.23:27; 
Ex.30:10; Niim.29:7. g Isa. 58 : .3, 5; Dan.l0:3,12. h Psa. 



2H. Wash his chtli.Hs. and bathe his flesh ; as 
if he had contracted pollution by carry infj away the 
things mentioned and burning them ; thus indicat- 
ing the contagious, polluting nature of sin. 

29. Seventh month; Tizri ; answering to the 
last part of September and the first part of October, 
ft was the first month of the civil, and the seventh 
of the ecclesiastical year. 

31. Afflict your souls : mourn over, confess, and 
forsake their sins. 

31. An ei-eiiasti.tig statute : perpetual, to the 
end of the Jewish dispensation. 

L\STRUCTIONS. 

2. In the dealings of God with men, his justice is 
no less conspicuous than his mercy. Those who ap- 
proach him must do it not only with filial confidence, 
but with reverence and holy fear ; in the way of 
his appointment ; and for the purpose of honoring 
him as well as of obtaining benefits for themselves 
and their fellow-men. 

€. Often are we taught that the most holy men, 
in their most holy duties, need the influence of 
atoning blood, and the life-giving communications 
of the Holy Ghost. 

15. Christ has not only made a full atonement for 
11 



the camp, 

4 And bringeth it not unto the door of 
the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer 



Til :2; Jer. 33: 8; Ezekiel 36 : 25; Eph.6:2fi; Hebrews 9: 1.3, 14 ; 
10:1,2; IJohn, 1 :7,9. ■ ch.ap. 23 : 32. j chap. 4: 3-l(i. f Heb. 
fill his hand, k ver. 16; Ex. 29:36, 37. 1 chap. 23 : 31. m El. 
30 : 10 ; Heb. 9 : 7, 2.5. n Deut. 12 : .5, 6, 21. 



sin, and procured the blessings of the Holy Spirit, 
but has entered into heaven itself, and there ever 
lives to make effectual intercession for all who come 
unto God through him. 

'22. As far as the east is from the west, so far he 
removes the transgressions of all who trust in him ; 
so that they will never rise in this world to their 
shame, nor in the future to their condemnation. 

2.S. The perpetual offerings of blood, and the per- 
petual applications of water, under the Old Testa- 
ment dispensation, show our perpotu.al need of par- 
doning mercy through Christ, and of the cleansing 
influences of his Spirit in order to preparation for 
heaven. 

.34. Stated seasons, according to divine appoint- 
ment, of rest from worldly business, cares, and amuse- 
ments, to search out and confess their sins, acknow- 
ledge and adore Jehovah, and seek his blessing on 
themselves and others, have been observed by the 
people of God, and been seasons of great comfort 
and benefit to them in all ages of the world. 

CHAPTER -XVIf. 
4. He hath shed blood ; in opposition to the 



known command of God. 



\r^i 



Ealing of blood forbidden. 



LEVITICUS XVIII. 



Unlavftd marriages. 



an offerin^z unto the Lord before the tab- 
ernacle of the Lord ; blood shall be "im- 
puted unto that man ; he hath slied blood ; 
and that man shall be cut off from among 
his people : 

o To the end that the children of Israel 
may bring their sacrifices, which ''they 
offer in the open field, even that they may 
bring them unto the Loud, unto the door 
of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto 
the priest, and offer them /or peace-offer- 
ings unto the Lord. 

6 And the priest shall *= sprinkle the 
blood upon the altar of the Lord at the 
door of the tabernacle of the congrega- 
lion, and ''burn the fat for a sweet savor 
unto the Lord. 

7 And they shall no more offer their 
sacrifices unto ''devils, after whom they 
have ""gone a whoring. This shall be a 
statute for ever unto them throughout 
tlieir generations. 

S ^ And thou .shalt say unto them, What- 
soever ^man there be of the house of Is- 
rael, or of the strangers which sojourn 
among you, that ofTereth a burnt-offering 
or sacrifice, 

9 And bringetli it not unto the door of 
the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer 
il unto the Lord; even tliat man shall be 
cut off from among his people. 

10 '[And whatsoever man there be of 
the house of Israel, or of the strangers 
that sojourn among you, that''eateth any 
manner of blood ; I will even 'set my face 
against that soul that eateth blood, and 
will cut him off from among his people. 

1 1 For J the life of the flesh is in the 
blood ; and I have given it to you upon 
the altar to make an '' atonement for your 
souls : for it i.f the 'blood that maketh an 
atonement for the soul. 

12 Therefore I said unto the children of 
Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood, nei- 
ther shall any stranger that sojourneth 
among you eat blood. 



• Rnin.A:I3. bGen.3l:51; i Cliron. 28 : •« : Kiek.S0:28; 2J:9. 
r rlinp. 3:2. 'I Ex. 29:13. e DcuL.Ti:!?: -^Cliron. 11:15; Psa. 
I0«:37i ICor. 10:20; Rev.9:20. f diap. 20 : R ; EiekieI23:8. 
J ver. •«. bGen. n:4; clmp. 7 : 26, 27 : DeuU 12 : 16, 2.'! ; Eiek. 
U:7. iEzek. M:S. j ver. H. k Mat 2li :28; Koni. .5: 9; Epli. 
1 : t ; Heb. 13: 12 ; Rev. 1 ;.i. 1 Heh. 9: 22. * H.-b. that hunUth 



S. To the e,7id ; the object of the above rejru- 
lation was to prevent .any ofTerinfis beinj; made 
at any place except the taoemacle, by any persons 
except the priests, or to any one but Jehovah. 
Ver. 7-9. 

10. Eateth any manner of blood; the eating 
of blood was forbidden, to produce a more sacred 
regard to human life, and to the atonement of which 
blood was the emblem. Ver. 1]-14. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

'1. In all things, especially things connected with 
the worsiiip of (jod, we should be careful to follow 
his dinctions, and avoid both the reality and the 
appear;i.nce of worshipping any one but Jehovah. 

7. Worship presented to any but Jehovah, is pe- 
158 



13 And whatsoever man there he B.c.»io; 
of the children of Israel, or of the strangers 
that sojourn among you, *which hunteth 
and catcheth any beast or fowl that may 
be eaten ; he shall even '"pour out the blood 
thereof, and "cover it with dust. 

14 For "il is the life of all flesh; the 
blood of it is for the life thereof : there 
fore I said unto the children of Israel, Ye 
shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh ; 
for the life of all flesh is the blood there- 
of: whosoever eateth it shall be cut off. 

15 And P every soul that eateth tthat 
which died of itself, or that which was 
torn icilh beasts^ u'hethcr it he one of your 
own country, or a stranger, i he shall both 
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in 
water, and be unclean until the even : 
then shall he be clean. 

1 6 But if he wash them not, nor bathe his 
flesh ; ''then he shall bear his iniquity. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1 Unlawful marriages. 19 Unlawful lusts. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing, 

2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
say unto them, °I am the Lord your God. 

3 After the 'doings of the land of Egypt, 
wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do : and 
after the doings of the land of Canaan, 
whither I bring you, shall ye not do : nei- 
ther shall ye walk in their ordinances. 

4 Ye "shall do my judgments, and keep 
mine ordinances, to walk therein: lam 
the Lord your Cod. 

5 Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, 
and my judgments : which if a man do, he 
shall live in them : I am the Lord. 

6 T[ None of you shall approach to any 
that is + near of kin to him, to uncover 
their nakedness: I am the Lord. 

7 The " nakedness of thy " father, or the 
nakedness of thy mother, shalt thou not 
uncover: she is thy mother; thou shalt 
not uncover her nakedness. 

any hunting, m Deut. I.'i: 2.3. nE7.ek.24:7. over.ll. p diap. 
22:8; Dent. 14:21: Eiekiel 4:14; 44:31. t Hob. a earcatt. 
1 diap. 1 1 : 2.i. r Num. 19 : 13, 20. ■ Ex. 6 : 7. tPea.l06:3fi; 
E7.ek. 20 : 7, 8 ; Enli. fi : 1 1. u Deut. 4:1,2; 6:1; Psalrn 119:4; 
Ei^fk 36:27. i Heb. remaindtr of hit Jtah. i cliap. 20: ll,«c. 
« Er.ck. 22 : 10. 



culiarly offensive in his sight, and e.xposes those 
who render it to his indignation. 

12. God requires, and in various ways inculcates, 
a sacred regard to human life; and especially to 
the great atonement which he has made by the 
shedding of that blood without which there could 
be no remission of sin. Heb. 9 : 22. 

16. In this world of impurity, we must have re- 
course to the great Purifier, whom clean water rep- 
resents, or we shall live and die in pollution, and 
bear for ever the sad consequences of our sins. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

3. The doings ; the sinful practices. 

4. Judgments; E.x. 21 : 1; Deut. 4 : 1,2; 6:1. 



Of forbidden marriages^ 



LEVIflCUS XVIII. 



and abominable lusts. 



B.c!u9o!' 8 The nakedness of thy father's 
wife* shalt thou not uncover: it is thy 
father's nakedness. 

9 The nakedness of thy ^sister, the 
daughter of thy father, or daughter of thy 
mother, ivhethcr she be born at home, or 
born abroad, even their nakedness thou 
shalt not uncover. 

10 The nakedness of thy son's daugh- 
ter, or of thy daughter's daughter, even 
their nakedness thou shalt not uncover : 
for theirs is thine own nakedness. 

1 1 The nakedness of thy father's wife's 
daughter, begotten of thy father, she is 
thy sister, thou shalt not uncover her 
nakedness. 

12 Thou shalt not uncover the naked- 
ness of thy father's sister : she is thy fa- 
ther's near kinswoman. 

13 Thou shalt not uncover the naked- 
ness of thy mother's sister : for she is thy 
mother's near kinswoman. 

14 Thou shalt not uncover the naked- 
ness of thy father's brother, thou shalt not 
approach to his wife : she is thine aunt. 

15 Thou shalt not uncover the naked- 
ness of thy "^daughter-in-law : she is thy 
son's wife ; thou shalt not uncover her 
nakedness. 

16 Thou "^ shalt not uncover the naked- 
ness of thy brother's wife : it is thy broth- 
er's nakedness. 

17 Thou shalt not uncover the naked- 
ness of a woman and her daughter, nei- 
ther shalt thou take her son's daughter, 
or her daughter's daughter, to uncover her 
nakedness ; for they are her near kins- 
women : it is wickedness. 

1 8 Neither shalt thou take *a wife to her 
sister, to ""vex her, to uncover her naked- 
ness, besides the other in her life-fimc. 

19 Also thou shalt not approach unto 
a. woman to uncover her nakedness, as 



« I Cor.5:l. b 2Sam. 13:11,1-2. 


c Gen. 38: IS. d Deut. 2.n: .S; 


Mat. 2-2 : -24. » Or, one wif<^ to a 


tothcr. e 1 Sam. 1:6-8; Mai. 


■2:14,15. f Ezek. 18:6; 22:10. 


E Ex. 20 : 14 ; Prov. 6 : 2.=i, 33; 


Mat. 5: 27. h Deut. 12 :31 ; 18 : K 


: 2King9, lfi:3; Paa. 10fi:37; 



21. T]iy seed; children or posterity. Pass 
through the fire to Molech ; be offered to that 
idol. Profane tlie iiame of iJiy God; by giving 
that worship to another which is due to him alone. 

24. The 7iatio)is — wJi.ich I cast out ; the Ca- 
naanites, which he would cast out. 

25. Voiniteth ont her inhabitants ; a strong 
expression, to denote their loathsomeness in the 
bight of Grod. 

28. It spued o/it ; would spue out, or eject the 
inhabitants. 

30. / am the Lord rjotir God; this is often 
mentioned as a strong and conclusive reason why 
they should in all things obey him. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. The sinful maxims and customs of this world 
we must forsake, and be guided, in our connections 
and intercourse with others, by the revealed will of 
Grod, or be shut out of heaven. 

6. Marriage is an institution of God, and when 



long'^as she is put apart for her unclean- 
ness. 

20 Moreover s thou shalt not lie carnally 
with thy neighbor's wife, to defile thyself 
with her. 

2 1 And thou shalt not let any of thy seed 
pass through the ^firc to tMolech, neither 
shalt thou profane the name of thy God : 
I am the Lord. 

22 Thou shalt not lie with 'mankind, as 
with womankind: it is abomination. 

23 Neither shalt thou lie with any beast 
to defile thyself therewith; neither shall 
any woman stand before a beast to lie 
down thereto : it is confusion. 

24 Defile not ye yourselves in any of 
these J things : for in all these the nations 
ai-e defiled which I cast out before you : 

25 And the land is defiled : ''therefore I 
do visit the 'iniquity thereof upon it, and 
the land itself "'vomiteth out her inhabi- 
tants. 

26 Ye shall therefore keep my statutes 
and my judgments, and shall not commit 
ayiy of these abominations ; neither any of 
your own nation, nor any stranger that 
sojourneth among you ; 

27 (For all these abominations have the 
men of the land done, which icere before 
you, and the land is defiled ;) 

28 That the " land spue not you out also, 
when ye defile it, as it spued out the na- 
tions that were before you. 

29 For whosoever shall commit any of 
these abominations, even the souls that 
commit them shall be cut off from among 
their people. 

30 Therefore shall ye keep mine ordi- 
nance, that ye "commit not any one of 
these abominable customs, which were 
committed before you, and tha^ ye p defile 
not yourselves therein: il am the Lord 
your God. 



.leremiah 7:31. t "Called Afo/ocA. Acts 7 : 43. i Romans 1:27. 
J ver. fi, etc. It Dent. 18 : 12. 1 .ler. h : H, 29 : Hosea 2 : 13 ; ci: i|. 
m ver. 28. n ver. 25; chap. 20:22. o Deut. 18:9. p ver. 24. 
q ver. 2, 4. 



it is entered into, and its duties discharged accord- 
ing to his will, it is honorable in all, a means of 
rich blessings to the persons concerned, and of great 
usefulness to others ; and the violation of his will 
with regard to it, is a crime tending to the greatest 
guilt, debasement, and wretchedness in this life and 
the life to come. 

21. The strong tendency to idolatry, and its great 
prevalence for so long a time and in so many na- 
tions, is conclusive evidence that men do not natu- 
rally like to retain the knowledge and worship of 
Jehovah, or to walk in his ways. 

25. That it should ever be needful for Grod to pro- 
hibit practices so unnatural and detestable as are here 
referred to. or that men should be disposed to degrade 
and sink themselves so low, is demonstration that 
madness, defilement, and death are in their hearts; 
and that except they be quickened, justified, and sanc- 
tified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit 
of God, they can never see the kingdom of heaven. 
159 



Eating of blood forbidden. 



LEVITICUS XVIII. 



Unlawful marriages. 



au offerinii unto tlic Lord before the tab- 
urnacle ol" llic Lokd; blood shall be "im- 
puted unto tliat man ; he hath shed blood ; 
and that man shall be cut off from among 
Ills people : 

.'■> To ihe end that the children of Israel 
may bring their sacrifices, which ''they 
offer in the open field, even that they may 
bring them unto the Lord, unto the door 
of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto 
ilie priest, and offer them /or peace-offer- 
ings unto the Lord. 

6 And the priest shall "^ sprinkle the 
blood upon the altar of the Lord at the 
door of the tabernacle of the congrega- 
tion, and ''burn the fat for a sweet savor 
unto the Lord. 

7 And they shall no more offer their 
sacrifices unto 'devils, after whom they 
have '^gone a whoring. This shall be a 
statute for ever unto them throughout 
their generations. 

8 ^Andthou shalt say unto them, What- 
soever 5 man there be of the house of Is- 
rael, or of the strangers which sojourn 
among you, that offereth a burnt-offering 
cr sacrifice, 

9 And bringeth it not unto the door of 
the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer 
it unto the Lord; even that man shall be 
cut off from among his people. 

10 "[And whatsoever man there be of 
I he house of Israel, or of the strangers 
liiat sojourn among you, that''eatcth any 
manner of blood ; I will even 'set my face 
against that soul that eateth blood, and 
will cut him off from among his people. 

11 For J the life of the flesh is in the 
blood ; and I have given it to you upon 
the altar to make an '' atonement for your 
souls : for it is the 'blood that maketh an 
atonement for the soul. 

12 Therefore I said unto the children of 
Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood, nei- 
ther shall any stranger that sojourncth 
among you eat blood. 



* Rnrn.n:n. b Grn..'ll ; 51: ; Climn. SH : 4 : Kzvk.WtiS; 32:9. 
<■ rliii|<.3:2. J Ex.21l:in. • DeuL.1i:I7: -JCliron. ll:l.'>; I'na. 
in«:37; ir.ir. IO:M; lli-v. it : JO. r rliRii. JO : R ; Klpkiel23:H. 
»v.T. -4. k Opii.!t:H; rlinp. 7: M, 27 : nruLH:lfi, Mj Fxpk. 
41:7. iEick. M:H. j vpr. H. k .Miit 2r.:28; It.mi. S: 9 ; F.nh. 
1:7; Ili-b. 13: 12 : R.-v. \:h. I H?li. <J: 2.'. * H.-b. Ih.it hunteth 



.'). To the end; the object of the above rcnfii- 
lation was to prevent any ofTerinfjs beinj; made 
at liny place except the tabernacle, by any persons 
except the priests, or to any one but Jehovah. 
Ver. 7-9. 

10. Kateth ant/ Manner of blood ; the eatinir 
of blood was forbidden, to produce a more sacred 
fgard to human life, and to the atonement of which 
Hood was the emblem. Ver. 11-11. 
INSTRUCTION.S. 

•1. In all thinffli, especially things connected with 
the worship of (jod, we .should he careful to follow 
his directions, and avoid both the re;ility and the 
appearance of worshippinjij any one but Jehovah. 

7. Worship presented to any but Jehovah, is pe- 
158 



13 And whatsoever man there be b.c.h«: 
of the children of Israel, or of the strangers 
that sojourn among you, 'which hunteth 
and catchcth any beast or fowl that may 
be eaten; he shall even '"pour out the blood 
thereof, and "cover it with dust. 

14 For "it is the life of all flesh; the 
blood of it is for the life thereof: there 
fore I said unto the children of Israel, Ye 
shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh ; 
for the life of all flesh is the blood there- 
of: whosoever eateth it shall be cut off. 

15 And P every soul that eateth tthat 
which died of itself, or that which was 
torn icilh beasts, ivhether it be one of your 
own country, or a stranger, i he shall both 
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in 
water, and be unclean until the even: 
then shall he be clean. 

16 But if he wash them not, nor bathe his 
flesh ; ""then he shall bear his iniquity. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1 Unlawful marriages. 19 Unlawful lusts. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing, 

2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
say unto them, 'I am the Lord your God. 

3 After the 'doings of the land of Egypt, 
wherein yc dwelt, shall ye not do : and 
after the doings of the land of Canaan, 
whither I bring you, shall ye not do : nei- 
ther shall yc walk in their ordinances. 

4 Yc "shall do my judgments, and keep 
mine ordinances, to walk therein : I am 
the Lord your God. 

5 Ye shall tlierefore keep my statutes, 
and my judgments : which if a man do, he 
shall live in them : I am the Lord. 

6 ^None of you shall approach to any 
that is +ncar of kin to him, to uncover 
their nakedness: I ain the Lord. 

7 The " nakedness of thy "^ father, or the 
nakedness of thy mother, shalt thou not 
uncover : she is thy mother ; thou shalt 
not uncover her nakedness. 



any hunting, m Deut. 1.1 : ::). n Eick. 24 : 7. o ver. U. p iliap. 
':2:8; neuLl4:01: Ei.ekicI 4:14; 44::tl. f Hfh. a caraut. 
q rlinp. 1 1 : 2.V r Num. 19 : 19, 20. • Ex. 6 : 7. t VtiK. 106 : 36 ; 
Kzpk. 20:7, 8; Ei>li. B: 11. u Deiit. 4 : 1,2: 6:1; Psalm 119:4; 
Ezrk :)«:27. I Heb. remainder »/ /ill ^uA. t cbap. 20: U.etc. 
w Erck. 22 ; 10. 

culiarly offensive in his sight, and exposes those 
who render it to his indignation. 

12. God requires, and in various ways inculcates, 
a sacred regard to human life; and especially to 
the great atonement which he has made by the 
shedding of that blood without which there could 
be no remission of sin. Heb. 9 : 22. 

16. In this world of impuritv, we must have re- 
course to the great Purifier, whom clean water rep- 
resents, or we shall live and die in pollution, and 
bear for ever the sad consequences of our sins. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

3. The doings ; the sinful practices. 

4. Judgments: Ex. 21:1; Deut. 4:1,2; 6:1. 



Of forbidden marriages, 



LEVIflCUS XVIII 



and abominable lusts. 



B. C. H'M. 

wife* shalt thou not uncover: it is thy 
father's nakedness. 

9 The nakedness of thy ''sister, the 
daughter of thy father, or daughter of thy 
mother, whether she be born at home, or 
born abroad, even their nakedness thou 
shalt not uncover. 

10 The nakedness of thy son's daugh- 
ter, or of thy daughter's daughter, even 
their nakedness thou shalt not uncover : 
for theirs is thine own nakedness. 

1 1 The nakedness of thy father's wife's 
daughter, begotten of thy father, she is 
thy sister, thou shalt not uncover her 
nakedness. 

12 Thou shalt not uncover the naked- 
ness of thy father's sister : she is thy fa- 
ther's near kinswoman. 

13 Thou shalt not uncover the naked- 
ness of thy mother's sister : for she is thy 
mother's near kinswoman. 

14 Thou shalt not uncover the naked- 
ness of thy father's brother, thou shalt not 
approach to his wife : she is thine aunt. 

15 Thou shalt not uncover the naked- 
ness of thy "daughter-in-law : she is thy 
son's wife ; thou shalt not uncover her 
nakedness. 

16 Thou "^ shalt not uncover the nakdd- 
ness of thy brother's wife : it is thy broth- 
er's nakedness. 

17 Thou shalt not uncover the naked- 
ness of a woman and her daughter, nei- 
ther shalt thou take her son's daughter, 
or her daughter's daughter, to uncover her 
nakedness ; for they are her near kins- 
women : it is wickedness. 

18 Neither shalt thou take *awife to her 
sister, to "vex her, to uncover her naked- 
ness, besides the other in her lik-time. 

19 Also thou shalt not approach unto 
a woman to uncover her nakedness, as 



a 1 Cor. 


Kl. b 2 Sam. 13.11,12. c Ge 


1.38:18. il DeuLS.T:.^; 


Mat. 22 : -2 


* Or, one toift to another. 


e 1 Sam. 1 : KK; Mai. 


■2.14,15. 


t Ezek. 18:6; -ZitW. g Ex. 


20:14; Prnv. 6:2.i, 3.3; 


.MaLo:'27. 


h Deut. 12:31 ; 18:10: 2 K 


igs, lli:.3; Psa. 106:37; 



21. T/i7/ seed; children or posterity. Pass 
through the fire to Molech ; be ofTered to that 
idol. Profane the name of tliy Gud; by giving 
that worship to another which is due to him alone. 

24. T)te 7iatio7is — vjJi.ich I cast out ; the Ca- 
naanites, which he would cist out. 

25. Vomiteth out her inhabitants ; a strong 
expression, to denote their loathsomeness in the 
bight of G-od. 

28. It spued out ; would spue out, or eject the 
inhabitants. 

30. I am the Lord your God ; this is often 
mentioned as a strong and conclusive reason why 
they should in all things obey him. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. The sinful maxims and customs of this world 
we must forsake, and be guided, in our connections 
and intercourse with others, by the revealed will of 
&od, or be shut out of heaven. 

6. Marriage is an institution of God, and when 



long^as she is put apart for her unclean- 
ness. 

20 Moreover 6 thou shalt not lie carnally 
with thy neighbor's wife, to defile thyself 
with her. 

21 And thou shalt not let any of thy seed 
pass through the ^firc to tMolech, neither 
shalt thou profane the name of thy God : 
I am the Lord. 

22 Thou shalt not lie with 'mankind, as 
with womankind: it is abomination. 

23 Neither shalt thou lie with any beast 
to defile thyself therewith; neither shall 
any woman stand before a beast to lie 
down thereto: it is confusion. 

24 Defile not ye yourselves in any of 
these J things : for in all these the nations 
are defiled which I cast out before you : 

25 And the land is defiled : ''therefore I 
do visit the 'iniquity thereof upon it, and 
the land itself "vomiteth out her inhabi- 
tants. 

26 Ye shall therefore keep my statutes 
and my judgments, and shall not commit 
amj of these abominations ; neither any of 
your own nation, nor any stranger that 
sojourneth among you ; 

27 (For all these abominations have the 
men of the land done, which ivere before 
you, and the land is defiled ;) 

28 That the " land spue not you out also, 
when ye defile it, as it spued out the na- 
tions that were before you. 

29 For whosoever shall commit any of 
these abominations, even the souls that 
commit them shall be cut off from among 
their people. 

30 Therefore shall ye keep mine ordi- 
nance, that ye "commit not any one of 
these abominable customs, w"hich were 
committed before you, and thaf ye p defile 
not yourselves therein: il am the Lord 
your God. 



niah7:;)l. f -Called ilfWocA. Acts 7 : 43. i Romans 1 : 27. 
. fi. etc k Dent. 18:12. 1 .Ter. h : 9. 23 : Hosea 2 : 13 ; 9: '.I. 
r. 28. n ver. 25 ; chap. 20 : 22. o Deut 18:9. p ver. 24. 
-. 2, 4. 



it is entered into, and its duties discharged accord- 
ing to his will, it is honorable in all, a means of 
rich blessings to the persons concerned, and of great 
usefulness to others ; and the violation of liis will 
with regard to it, is a crime tending to the greatest 
guilt, debasement, and wretchedness in this life and 
the life to come. 

21. The strong tendency to idolatry, and its great 
prevalence for so long a time and in so many na- 
tions, is conclusive evidence that men do not natu- 
rally like to retain the knowledge and worship of 
Jehovah, or to walk in his ways. 

25. That it should ever be needful for God to pro- 
hibit practices so unnatural and detestable as are here 
referred to. or that men should be disposed to degrade 
and sink themselves so low, is demonstration that 
madness, defilement, and death are in their hearts; 
and that except they be quickened, justified, and sanc- 
tified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit 
of God, they can never see the kingdom of heaven. 
159 



A repetition 



LEVITICUS. XIX. 



of sundry Inwi 



CHAPTER XIX. 

A repetition of sundry laws. 

AND the Lord spake vuito Moses, say- 
ing, 

2 Speak unto all the couaregation of the 
children of I.';racl, and .say unto them, 'Ye 
shall be holy : for I the Lord your God 
am holy. 

3 ^Yesliall fear every man his ''mother, 
and liis father, and '' keep my sabbaths: I 
am the Lord your God. 

4 T[ Turn ye not unto "'idols, nor make 
to yourselves molten gods : I am the Lord 
your God. 

5 ^ And ""if ye offer a sacrifice of peace- 
offerings unto the Lord, ye shall offer it 
at your own will. 

6 It shall be eaten the same day ye offer 
it, and on the morrow : and if aught re- 
main until the third day, it shall be burnt 
in the fire. 

7 And if it be eaten at all on the third day, 
it is abominable ; it shall not be accepted. 

S Therefore every one that eateth it shall 
bear his iniquity, because he hath pro- 
faned the hallowed thing of the Lord ; 
and that soul shall he cut off from among 
his people. 

9 il And "^when ye reap the harvest of 
your land, thou shalt not wholly reap the 
corners of thy field, neither shalt thou 
gather the gleanings of thy harvest. 

10 And thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, 
neither shalt thou gather every grape of thy 
vineyard ; thou shalt leave them for the 
poor and stranger : I am the Lord your God. 

11 HYe shall not « steal, neither deal 
falsely, neither ''lie one to another. 

12 ^And yc shall not 'swear by my 
name falsely, neither shalt thou J profane 
the name of thy God : I am the Lord. 

13 ^ Thou shalt not defraud thy neigh- 
bor, neither rob him : the '' wages of him 
that is iiired shall not abide with thee all 
night until the morning. 

14 ^ Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor 
put a stumbling-block before the 'blind, 
but shalt ""fear thy God: I am the Lord. 



• chop. 1 1 : 44 ; 20 : 7, 26 j Amos 3:3;! Peter, 1:16. ^ Exoihls 
80:12. e Ex. 20:8; 31 : 13; Isn. 58:1.1. d rlinp. 26; 1 ; Ex. 20: 4; 
I Cor. 10:14; IJolin, 5:21. • cliap. 7 : 16, 17. f clmp. 23 : 22 ; 
DeuL 24 : 19-21 ; Rulli 2 : 15-17. kEx.20:1.'.. hEph.4:2A; 
Col.3:<l. Irlinp.fi:3; Ex. 20:7; Janie» ft : 12. j rlinp. 18: 21 ; 
Elek. 06 : 20-23. k M»li\clii 3 : ft; Jninen f. : 4. IDeuL27:ia 
nchnp. 25:17. ii DeuL 16: 19. a Proverba 24 : 23 ; Jaa. 2:9. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

3. Fear — motliiT— father ; honor, reverence^s- 
teem, and in all things right, please thein. JEx. 
20:12; Mat. 19:19. 

5. At your oil' )i will ; what they did was to be ac- 
cording to the divine will, and it was to be done freely. 

7. It is abominable ; the eating of it in oppo- 
sition to the command of God was wicked, and 
incurred the divine di.spleasure. 

1-5. In judgment ; in deciding cases of right 
between man and man. 
160 



15 1[Yc''shalldonounrighteou.«!- *b.c:»m 
ness in judgment ; thou shalt not " respect 
the person of the poor, nor honor the per- 
son of the mighty : hut in righteousness 
shalt thou .judge thy neighbor. 

16 ^Thou shalt not go up and down as 
a P talebearer among thy people ; neither 
shalt thou stand against the ''blood of thy 
neighbor: I am the Lord. 

17 If Thou shalt not 'hate thy brother in 
thy heart : thou shalt in any wise ' rebuke 
thy neighbor, * and not suffer 'sin upon liiin. 

18 ^ Thon shalt not "avenge, nor bear 
any grudge against the children of thy 
people, but thou shalt ^love thy neighbor 
as thyself: I am the Lord. 

19 1[Ye shall keep my statutes. Thou 
shalt" not let thy cattle gender with a 
diverse kind : thou shalt not sow thy field 
with mingled seed: neither shall a gar 
ment mingled of linen and woollen come 
upon thee. 

20 1[ And whosoever lieth carnally with 
a woman, that is a bondmaid, tbetrothed 
to a husband, and not at all redeemed, 
nor freedom given her ; * she ^ shall be 
scourged : they shall not be put to death, 
because she was not free. 

21 And "he shall bring his trespass-of- 
fering unto the Lord, unto the door of the 
tabernacle of the congregation, even a ram 
for a trespass-offering. 

22 And the priest shall make an atone- 
ment for him with the ram of the tres- 
pass-offering before the Lord for his sin 
which he hath done ; and the sin which 
he hath done shall be forgiven him. 

23 ^And when ye shall come into the 
land, and shall have planted all manner 
of trees for food, then yc shall count the 
fruit thereof as uneircumeised : three 
years shall it be as uneircumeised unto 
you : it shall not be eaten of. 

24 But in the fourth year all the fruit 
thereof shall be Hholy to Upraise the Lord 
xvithal. 

25 And in the fifth year shall ye eat of 
the fruit thereof, that it may yield unto 



p Pniv. 20:19. q Ex. 23:7. r 1 .(olin. 2 : 9, 11 ; 3 : IS. • Prnv. 
27:5; Epli.ft:ll; lTim.6:20. * Or , that thou Itearnot tin for 
him. I I Cor. 5:2. u Koinnn.1 12 : 17, 19. t Mat. 22 : 39, 40. 
» DeuU 22 : 9-11. f Heb. reproachtd A.v. or for man, or, abusrd 
hy any. J Or, they. \ Heb. there shall be a teourging. x cliap. 
6:6. \\ Heh. holiness of praitea to the \.ot,i>. yProv. 3:9. 



16. Stand against the blood; take a conrsp 
suited to procure the death of the innocent. 1 Sam. 
22:9, IS; 1 Kings, 21 : 13 ; Mark 14:57. 

17. Not suffer sin ; not see another live in it 
without making efforts to reclaim him. 

20. She shall be sconi'ged ; literally, there shall 
be scourging ; as is supposed, of the man, as well 
as the woman. Not be put to death; Deul. 
22:_23-'27. 

2.'?. As uncircnmcised ; not suitable to be eaten 
by them. 



.f repetition 



LEVITICUS XIX. 



of sundry laws. 



S. c!'S' you the increase thereof : I am the 
Loud your God. 

26 1[ Ye shall not eat aiiy thing with ^the 
blood, neither shall ye use ''enchantment, 
nor observe times. 

27 Ye *^ shall not round the corners of 
your heads, neither shalt thou mar the 
corners of thy beard. 

28 Ye shall not make any cuttings in 
your flesh for the dead, nor print any 
marks upon you : I am the Lord. 

29 ^[ Do not *prostitute thy daughter, to 
cause her to be a whore ; lest the land 
fall to whoredom, and the land become 
full of wickedness. 

30 If Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and rev- 
erence my ''sanctuary : I am the Lord. 

3 1 ^ Regard *■ not them that have famil- 
iar spirits, neither seek after wizards, to be 
defiled by them : I am the Lord your God. 



32 T[ Thou shalt rise up before the hoary 
head, and Hionor the face of the old man, 
and sfear thy God : I am the Lord. 

33 ^And if a ''stranger sojourn with 
thee in your land, ye shall not tvex him. 

34 Bat the stranger that dwelleth with 
you shall be unto you as one born among 

; you, and thou shalt love him as thyself; 
for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt : 
j I am the Lord your God. 

35 % Ye shall do no unrighteousness in 
judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in 
measure. 

36 Just 'balances, just ^weights, a just 
ephah, and a just hin, shall ye have : I 
am the Lord your God, which brought 
you out of the land of Egypt. 

37 Therefore shall ye J observe all my 
statutes, and all my judgments, and do 
them : I ain the Lord. 



» near. 12:2:!. 
irrufune. i Eccl. 



1> Deut. 18: 10-14. c diup. 21 : .5. ' 
i: 1. e Deuteionomy 18: 10, 11. f .Job : 



26. JJse enchantment ; attempt to do things by 
the aid of evil spirits. Observe times ; as if some 
were more lucky and fortunate than others. 

27. Round — mar t/ie corners ; according to the 
superstitious observances of the heathen. 

28. Cuttings in your Jiesh ; in mourning for 
the dead. 

31. Have familiar spirits — n-izards ; those 
•vvho pretend to have intercourse with evil spirits, 
and by their aid to foretell future events, and do 
other supernatural things. 

3.i). ilfe^eyarf^; measure of lengths. Measure; 
of liquids. 

36. Ephah — hin; names of ditferent measures. 
Chap. 5:11; Ex. 16:36; 29:40. 
INSTRUCTION.S. 

2. As Grod is holy, so must we be in order to meet 
his approbation or enjoy hjs presence. 

3. Due subordination and affection in families is 
inseparably connected with the right keeping of the 
Sabbath; and the neglect of the one tends directly 
and powerfully to the destruction of the other. 

4. That nien should ever forsake .Tehovah for gods 
of their own making, is demonstration of their strong 
and active opposition to him. 

8. To meet the approbation of God, men must not 
only be cheerful and hearty in serving him, but must 
be guided in their efforts by his directions. 

10. God requires, and holiness leads men, to be 
not only pious, but benevolent ; to be disposed, as 
there is opportunity and ability, to help the poor ; 
and one of the best ways of helping them, is to 
lead them to heip themselves. 

12. Falsehood is intimately connected with theft ; 
and profane swearing with both. Let a man be guilty 
of one of these sins, and you have no security that he 
will not commit any sin to which he may be tempted. 

13. Refusing promptly to pay just wages for 
labor, and robbing men by fraud or violence of their 
dues, are sins which God abhors, and against which 
he denounces his dreadful curse. Jas. Z) : 2—5. 

14. To reproach or despise men. or to bring any 
evil upon them, on account of any natural infirmity 
or cahimity, is mean, ungrateful, and wicked. 

1.5. Partiality in judicial decisions, and injustice 
under the cover of law, are an abomination in the 
sight of Jehovah, and expose those who are guilty 
of them to his vengeance. 

16. Tattlers, those who go about retailing scandal, 
and delight in accusing, ridiculing, or depreciating 



g 1 I'eter, 
t Heb. sto 



. h Ex. 22; 21. f Or, oppress. 
j Deut. .'5:1; Psa. 119:4, 34. 



Proverbs 11:1. 



others, especially the good, are following Satan the 
great accuser, and in a way which leads to his place 
of torment. 

18. Real love, such as God requires and holiness 
of heart produces, leads men to desire and strive to 
deliver others from all evil, especially from sin ; and 
to do them all the good in their power. Let this love 
fill all hearts, and it will make earth resemble heaven. 

22. Without repentance and faith in the atoning 
blood of Christ, none to whom he is made known can be 
forgiven, or escape the just punishment of their sins. 

25. Jehovah is the God of providence as well as of 
grace ; the giver of all temporal as well as spiritual 
blessings, which should be received as from him, 
and used for his glory and the good of his kingdom. 

28. There are means of sin, as well as of holi- 
ness. Among them are all pretended intercourse 
with evil or departed spirits, sorcery, enchantments, 
jugglery, fortune-telling, and every thing which 
tends to lead men away from God as their portion, 
from his word as their guide, from his service as 
their employment, and his favor as their reward. 
All such things should be avoided, and only such 
occupy the attention of men as tend to make them 
holy, and lead them to love, trust in, and obey God. 

30. Stated, regular, conscientious attendance on 
public worship, when God gives opportunity, is an 
essential part of the right keeping of the Sabbath ; 
and highly promotive of all the social, civil, and 
religious interests of men. 

31. Those who pretend to wisdom they do not 
possess, especially to receiving it from disembodied 
spirits, or intercourse with invisible agents, and 
thus to be able to reveal secrets and foretell future 
events, are morally defiled and defiling, and should 
be treated accordingly. 

32. Respect to the aged is a mark of wisdom, 
and essential to virtue ; a .source of comfort, and a 
means of usefulness ; an ornament to character, 
and a passport to influence, reputation, and honor. 

34. Kindness to strangers is a dictate of true 
religion, and peculiarly grateful to persons in a 
strange country. It so much resembles the kind- 
ness of God. that it is one of the best means of lead- 
ing men to love him, and thus show their gratitude 
to him for his love. Eph. 2: 19. 

36. Strict honesty in trading, and in all business 
transactions, and the doing to others as we ought 
to wish others to do to us, is a duty required by 
God, by our own good, and the good of all. 
161 



Of Molech, and wizards. 



LEVITICUS XX 



Of unlairful lustn. 



CHAPTER XX 



1 Of him that giveth of his seed to Moleoh. 4 Of him 
that favoreth such an one. 6 Of going to wizards. 
7 Of sanctification. 9 Of him that ciirseth his par- 
onts. 10 Of adultery. 11, 14, 17, 19 Of incest. 13 
Of sodomy. 15 Of bestiality. 18 Of uncleanness. 
2vJ 01>edieiice is required with holiness. '27 AVizards 
must he put to death. 



A 



ND the Lord spake unto Mo.ses, say- 



2 Again, thou .';lialt say to the children 
of Israel," Whosoever Ae be of the children 
of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn 
in Israel, that giveth any of his seed unto 
Molech ; he shall surely be put to death : 
the people of the laud shall stone him 
with stones. 

3 And I will ''set my face against that 
tnan, and will cut him off from among 
his people ; because he liath given of liis 
seed unto Molech, to defile my sanctuary, 
and to profane my lioly name. 

4 And if the people of the land do any 
ways hide their eyes from the man, when 
he giveth of his seed unto Molech, and 
kill"^ him not; 

-5 Then I will set my face against that 
man, and against his ''family, and will 
cut him off, and all that go a ''whoring 
after him, to commit whoredom with 
Molech, from among their people. 

6 1[ And the ^soul that turneth after such 
as have familiar spirits, and afterwizards, 
to go a whoring after them, I will even 
.set my face against that soul, and will 
cut him Soil' from among his people. 

7 ^ Sanctify ''yourselves therefore, and 
be ye holy : for I am the Loun your God. 

8 And ' ye shall keep my statutes, and do 
them : ' I atn the Loud which sanctify you. 

9 HFor every ''one that curseth his fa- 
ther or his mother shall be surely put to 
death: he liath cursed his father or his 
mother; his 'blood .shall be upon him. 

10 ^And the man that eominitteth adul- 
tery with another man's wife, even he that 
committcth adultery with his neighbor's 
wife, the '"adulterer and the adulteress 
shall surely be put to death. 

11 And the man that lieth with his fa- 
ther's "wife hath uncovered his father's 
nakedness: both of them shall surely bo 
put to death ; their blood shall he upon them. 



• <-l 


ap. I8:!2I 


b clinp. 17: 10 


V.%« 


.14:8. 


<■ llput 


17:2-6. 


•1 Ki 


tO-.h. • 


rlinp. 17:7; Jer 


3 : ■: i 


Honon •! 


:S, 1.1. 


f clinp. 


11: SI 


t Krr. 


«: 1.1. k cliap. 


!!»:«. 


1 fhiip. 


Ii»::i7. 


j clinp. 


•:i : 8 ; 


Kx. 31:13: Ell-k. 37:28i 


ICor. 


1 : :>.0. k 


ExoJu 


21:17; 


Proverbn 20 : !0. 


I ver. II, 13. ■» T>Q\ 


t 2-2 : 2J. 


n n.-u 


.27:20. 



CHAPTER XX. 
2. Giveth — his seed ii/ito Mo/erh ; otrerelh liis 
nhildren to idols. 

H. Sanctify you ; separate them from other 
nations, and set tneni apart for himself. Ver. 24, 26. 
23. Cast out ; sliall cast out. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. Capital punishment by the hand of m.igistrates 
162 



12 And ifainanliewithhisdaugh- Rciuit 
ter-in-law,° both of them shall surely be 
put to death : they have wrought confu- 
sion; their blood shall be upon them. 

13 If a man also lie with f mankind, as 
he lieth with a woman, both of them have 
committed an abomination: they shall 
surely be put to death ; their blood shall 
be upon them. 

14 And if a man take a wife and her 
mother,*! it is wickedness : they shall be 
burnt with fire, both he and they; that 
there be no wickedness among you. 

15 And if a man lie with a "^ beast, he 
shall surely be put to death; and ye 
shall slay the beast. 

16 And if a woman approach unto any 
beast, and lie doAvn thereto, thon shalt 
kill the woman, and the beast : they shall 
surely be put to death ; their blood shall 
be upon them. 

17 And if a man shall take his "sister, 
his father's daughter, or his mother's 
daughter, and see her nakedness, and she- 
see his nakedness ; it is a wicked thing ; 
and they shall be cut off in the sight ol 
their people : he hath uncovered his sis- 
ter's nakedness; he shall bear his iniqnity. 

18 And if a man shall lie with a woman 
having her 'sickness, and shall uncover 
her nakedness ; he hath *discovered her 
fountain, and she hath uncovered the 
fountain of her blood : and both of them 
shall be cut off from among their people. 

19 And "thou shalt not uncover the na- 
kedness of thy mother's sister, nor of thy 
father's sister; for he uncovereth his near 
kin : they shall bear their iniquity. 

20 And if a man shall lie with his un- 
cle's w'ife, he hath uncoA^ered his uncle'.v 
nakedness: they shall bear their sin; 
they shall die '^ childless. 

21 And if a man shall take his brother's 
wife,* it is tan unclean thing: he hath 
uncovered his brother's nakedness ; they 
shall be childless. 

22 ^Ye shall therefore keep ''all my 
statutes, and all my judgments, and do 
them : that the land, whither I bring you 
to dwell therein, *■ spue you not out. 

23 And ye shall not walk in the man- 
ners of the nation, which I cast out before 



» cli.->p. ia:ir>. I> <li.ip. 18:23; Oeut. 2:1:17. n chap. 18 : 17. 
r chap. 18:23; Tteuun-.i]. • Deut, 27 : -22. t chap. IS : 24 ; 
18:19; Ezek. 18:6. * Heh. mn(ft nnkiJ. u cbap, 18: 12. etr. 
» Jer. 22:30. « M.at. 14 : 3, 4. j Heb. a separation, i chap. 
I!t:37. y chap. 18:25,28. 

is sometimes not only right, but ;v duty which they 
owe to (rod and their fellow-men. It is a needful 
means of restraining iniquity ; and the people, when 
God commands it, are bound tosee that itise.xecuted. 
5. If the magistrates and people neglect to pros- 
ecute criminals, and to punish the guilty, they en- 
courage crime, incur guilt, and expose themselves 
to divine judgments. 



Of the priests' mourning, 



LEVITICUS XXI. 



marriases. and blemishes. 



B.'c!'S'' you '■ for they committed all these 
things, and ^therefore I abhorred them. 

24 But I have said ''unto you, Ye shall 
inherit their land, and I will give it unto 
you to possess it, a land that flowcth with 
milk and honey: I am the Lord your 
God, which ''have separated yovT from 
other people. 

25 Ye shall therefore puf'ditierenee be- 
tween clean beasts and unclean, and be- 
tween unclean fowls and clean ; and ye 
shall not make your souls abominable by 
beast, or by fowl, or by any manner of 
living thing that *crecpcth on the ground, 
which I have separated from you as un- 
clean. 

26 And ye shall be holy unto me: for 
P the Lord am holy, and have ''severed 
you from other people, that ye should be 
mine. 

27 1[A man also or woman that hath a 
familiar ^ spirit, or that is a wizard, shall 
surely be put to death : they shall stone 
them with stones; their blood shall he 
upon them. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

1 Of the priests' mourning 6 Of their holiness. 8 Of 
their estimation. 7, 13 Of their marriages. 17 The 
priests that have blemishes must not minister in the 
sanctuary. 

AND the Lord said unto Moses, Speak 
unto the priests the sons of Aar'on, 
and say unto them, ^ There shall none be 
defiled for the dead among his people: 

2 But for his kin, that is near unto him, 
that is, for his mother, and for his father, 
and for his son, and for his daughter, and 
for his brother, 

3 And for his sister a virgin, that is 
nigh unto him, which hath had no hus- 
band ; for her may he be delilcd. 

4 But the shall not defile himself, being 
a chief man among his people, to profane 
himself. 

5 They shall not make baldness upon 
their head, neither shall they shave off 
the corner of their beard, nor make any 
cuttings in their flesh. 

6 They shall be holy unto their God, 
and not 'profane the narne of their God : 
for the oflerings of the Lord made by fire. 



• Deut.9:5. b Ex. 3: 17 ; 6 : 8. c jer 26 ; Ex. 19: .■);:«: Iti ; 
lKings,8:f.3. « chap. 1 1 : 47. * Or,mi>veth. e ver.7 ; fliap. 19:2; 
IPfter, 1:16. f ver.24; Deut.7:fi; 14:2; 26:18,19; TitU92:14. 
E Ter.6; lSatn.28:9. h Ezek. 44:2.5. f Or.bein^a husband among 
his people, he shall not defile himself for lii.s wife, etc. See Ezek. 



9. That laws should be needful to keep parents 
from destroying children, and cliildren from cursing 
parents ; and people to whom Jehovah is known 
from forsiiking him for idols, and committing the 
most polluting and degrading abominations, shows 
the strength and malignancy of sin, and the neces- 
sity, in order to salvation, of being delivered from it 
by the mighty power of G-od. 1 Cor. 6 : 9-11 ; Eph. 
1 : 19, 20. 



and the bread of their God, they do offer: 
thereforeJ they shall be holy. 

7 They shall '' not take a wife that is a 
whore, or profane ; neither shall they 
take a woman put 'away from her hus- 
band: for he is holy unto his God. 

8 Thou shalt sanctify him therefore ; 
for he offereth the bread of thy God : he 
shall be holy unto thee : for ""I the Lord, 
which sanctify you, am holy. 

9 ^ And the daughter of any priest, if 
she profane herself by playing the whore, 
she profaneth lier father: she shall be 
burnt" with fire. 

10 And he that is the high-priest among 
his brethren, upon whose head the anoint- 
ing oil was poured, and that is conse- 
crated to put on the "garments, shall not 
uncover P his head, nor rend his clothes; 

11 Neither shall he go lin to any dead 
body, nor defile himself for his father, or 
for his mother ; 

r2 Neither shall he go out of the sanc- 
tuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his 
God ; for the ''crown of the anointing oil 
of his God is upon him : I am the Lord. 

13 And he shall take a "wife in her 
virginity. 

14 A widow, or a divorced woman, or 
profane, or a harlot, these shall he not 
take: but he shall take a virgin of his 
own people to wife. 

15 Neither shall he profane 'his seed 
among his people: for I the Lord do 
sanctify him. 

16 ^ And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

17 Speak unto Aaron, saying, Whoso- 
ever /te he of thy seed in their generations 
that hath any "blemish, let him not ^'ap- 
proach to offer the thread of his God. 

18 For whatsoever man he be that hatli 
a blemish, he shall not approach : a blind 
man, or a lame, or he that hath a flat nose, 
or any thing "superfluous, 

19 Or a man that is broken-footed, or 
broken-handed, 

20 Or crook-backed, or ^ a dwarf, or that 
hath a blemish in his eye, or be scurvy, 
or scabbed, or ' hath his stones broken ; 

21 No man that hath a blemish of the 



24: 16,17. i chap. 19: 12 


j I9a.fl2 


11. k Ezek. 44:22. 1 Deut. 


24:1^. m chap. 20: 7, 8. 


n Gen. 38 


24. Ex. 29: 29, 30. p chap. 


10:6,7, q Num. 19:14. 


r chap. 8 


9-12; Ex. 29:6, 7. • ver. 7. 


t Gen.l8:19; Ezra2:62. 


u chap. 22 


2.";. Tch.ap.lO:.1. 1 Or,/oo</. 


ch.lp. 3:'!!. " chap. 22: 


23. % Or, 


too slender, x Deut. 23 : 1. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

1. Priests — defiled for the dead; by touching 
dead bodies, going where they were, or assisting in 
burying them, except in the case of near relatives, 
mentioned ver. 2, 3 ; and the high-priest might not 
do it even for them. Ver. 10-12. 

5. Not make baldness ; in token of mourning. 

15. Profa ne Ills seed ; render his sons unfit for the 
priesthood, by disregarding these divine directions. 
163 



Of abstinence from 



LEVITICUS XXII. 



eating the holy things. 



seed of Aaron the priest shall come nigh 
to offer the offerings of the Loud made by 
fire : he hath a blemish ; he shall not come 
nigh to offer the bread of his God. 

22 He shall eat the bread of his God, 
both of the "most holy, and of the ''holy. 

23 Only he .shall not go in unto the veil, 
nor come nigh unto the altar, because he 
hath a blemish; that he profane'' not my 
sanctuaries: for ''I the Lord do sanctify 
them. 

24 And Moses told it unto Aaron, and to 
his sons, and unto all the children of Israel. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

1 The priests in their iincleannessmust abstain from the 
holy things. 6 How they shall be cleansed. 10 Who 
ofthepriest'shouse maycat of theholy thinr;.<i. 17 The 
sacrifices must be without blemish. 2(5 The age of 
the sacrifice. 29 The law of eating the sacrifice of 
thanksgiving. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing, 

2 Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, 
that they ''separate themselves from (he 
holy things of the children of Israel, and 
that they "^profane not my holy name in 
those things which they s hallow unto me : 
I avi the Lord. 

3 Say unto them. Whosoever he be of 
all your seed among your generations, 
that goeth unto the holy things, which 
the children of Israel hallow unto the 
Lord, having his '■uncleanness upon him, 
that soul shall be cut off from my pres- 
ence : I um the Lord. 

4 What man soever of the seed of Aaron 
is a leper, or 'hath a running * issue; he 
shall not eat of the holy things, until he 
be clean. And ''whoso toucheth any 
thing that is unclean by the dead, or a 
man' whose seed goeth from him ; 

5 Or whosoever '" toucheth any creeping 
thing, whereby he may be made ° unclean, 



• cli.ip. 2:3, 10; 6:!7,29; 7:1; 24:9; Num.l«:9. b cliap. 
22:10-12; N.nn.l8:19. <: ver. 12. dver.8. eNum.6:.1. f chap. 
18:21. I Ex. ^8:38; Num. 18:32; Dcut. 15:19. Iichap.7:20. 
lchnp.l.'.:2. ' neb.oflhertim. jchnp.l6:l3. k Num. 19: 11,12. 
' cl«p,lli:lC.. in <!hap. 11:24,43. n chap. IJi: 7, 19. oHag.2:13. 



22. He shall eat the bread of his God ; though 
the blemishes mentioned disqualifiecl them from 
ofTeriii;; s.-icrifioes, they did not exclude them from 
performing such duties as were suited to their con- 
dition, and rereivin^j a support. 

IN.STRt;CTIOXS. 

6. Ministers of religion should be distinguished 
for sobriety, purity, and elevation of character, and 
for the faithful discharge of their appropriate duties ; 
that to their instructions they may add the weight 
of their example. 

l.S. Ministers of religion, even those most distin- 
guished, should in all ordinary ca-ses be married; 
and their wives should in all cases be examples of 
purity, propriety, and excellence. 

2.3. All should avoid engaging in duties for which 
they are disqualified, and be diligent in the dis- 
charge of such as are suited to their condition, and 
by which they may honor God, and benefit thcin- 
selves and their fellow-men. 
164 



or a man of whom he may take *b " iiio; 
uncleanness, whatsoever uncleanness he 
hath; 

6 The soul which hath "touched any 
such shall be unclean until even, and 
shall not eat of the holy things, unless 
he P wash his flesh with water. 

7 And when the sun is down, he shall 
be clean, and shall afterward eat of the 
holy things ; ''because it is his food. 

8 That which ''dieth of itself, or is torn 
u'ilh beasts, he shall not eat to defile him- 
self therewith : I am the Lord. 

9 They shall therefore keep mine ordi- 
nance, lest they "bear sin for it, and die 
therefore, if they profane it : I the Lord 
do sanctify them. 

1 There shall no stranger eat of the holy 
thing : a sojourner of the priest, or a hired 
servant, shall not eat of the holy thing. 

1 1 But if the priest buy a?ji/ soul with 
his t money, he shall eat of it, and he that 
is born in his house: 'they shall eat of 
his meat. 

12 If the priest's daughter also be mar- 
ried unto + a stranger, she may not eat of 
an offering of the holy things. 

13 But if the priest's daughter be a wid- 
ow, or divorced, and have no child, and is 
returned " unto her father's house, as in her 
youth, she shall eat of her father's meat : 
but there shall no stranger eat thereof. 

14 1[ And if a man eat q/'the holy thing 
unwittingly,''' then he shall put the fifth 
part thereof unto it, and shall give it unto 
the priest with the holy thing. 

15 And they shall not profane the holy 
things" of the children of Israel, which 
they offer unto the Lord ; 

16 Or f suffer them to ''bear the iniquity 
of trespass, when they eat their holy 
things : for I the Lord do sanctify them. 



pcliap. 16:5; Heb. 10:22. q cliap. 21 : 22 ; Numbers 18 : U, 13. 
r Ex. 22 : 31 ; Eiek. 44 : 31. • Ex. 28 : 43. f Heb. the purchaie tif 
hitmonty. t Num. 18: 11, 13. % Heb. o man, a </ranj7tr. u Gen. 
38:11. T cbap. .'•>:16, 16. w Num. 18:32. ^ Or, lade thcmielves 
with the iniquity of trespass in their eating, x ver. 9. 



CHAPTER XXir. 

2. Separate themselves from theholy things ; 
abstain from partaking of them whenever they were 
ceremonially unclean, and could not partake with- 
out defiling them. Ver. 3-7. 

.3. Hallow; consecrate. 

7. Bat of the holy tht7igs; tliat part of them 
which belonged to the priests. 

11. He shall eat of it ; because he belonged to 
the family, and was entitled to its privileges. 

14. Uini'ittiugly ; without knowing that it was 
holy, or consecrated to God. The fifth — give unto 
the priest ; he should pay for what he ate and one 
fifth part more. This was designed to make them 
careful not to offend ignorantly. 

16. Or suffer theoi to hear the iuiqnity ; the 
priests should not suffer the people thus to trans- 
gress, without requiring of them what God com- 
manded. 



Sacrijiccs must he perfect. 



LEVITICUS XXIII. 



0/ the sabbath-day. 



b.c!h3o'' 17 TTAud the Lord spake unto 
Moses, saying, 

1 8 Speak unto Aaron, and to his sons, and 
unto all the children of Israel, and say unto 
thern, Whatsoever he he of the house of Is- 
rael, or of the ^strangers in Israel, that will 
offer his oblation for all his vows, and for 
all his freewill-offerings, which they will 
offer unto the Lord for a burnt-offering : 

1 9 Ye .shnll offer at your own will a male 
without ''blemish, of the beeves, of the 
sheep, or of the goats. 

20 Hut '^ whatsoever hath a blemish, that 
shall ye not offer : for it shall not be ac- 
ceptable for you. 

21 And whosoever offereth a sacrifice of 
peace-offerings'^ unto the Lord to accom- 
plish his ^vow, or a freewill-offering in 
beeves or *sheep, it shall be perfect to be ac- 
cepted : there shall be no blemish therein. 

22 Blind, or broken, or maimed, or hav- 
ing a wen, or scurvy, or scabbed, ye shall 
not offer these unto the Lord, nor make 
an offering by fire of them upon the altar 
unto the Lord. 

23 Either a bullock or a t lamb that hath 
any thing ^superfluous or lacking in his 
parts, that maycst thou offer for a free- 
will-offering ; but for a vow it shall not 
be accepted. 

24 Ye shall not offer unto the Lord that 
which is bruised, or crushed, or broken, 
or cut ; neither shall ye make any offering 
thereof in your land. 

25 Neither from a s stranger's hand shall 
ye offer the bread of your God of any of 
these ; because their ^ corruption is in 
them, and blemishes he in them : they 
shall not be accepted for you. 

26 ^And the Lord spake unto INIoses, 
saying, 

27 When a 'bullock, or a sheep, or a goat, 
is brought forth, then it shall be seven 



aNum.l5:H. I. chap. 1 : 3. c Deut. ir.:-2l ; Mai. I: 8, 14: Epii. 
5:27; 1 reter,l:19. il chap..'!:l,fi. e Num. 15:3,8. * Qr.goatt. 
^ Or, kid. f chap.'21:18. e Num. 16:40. h Eph.2: 12: I .rohii.o: 19. 
i Ex.W::!0. i Or,shegoat. j Deut. 2-2 : B. k chap. 7: 12-15; Psa. 



27. Bullock — sheep — goat : calf, lamb, kid. 
Under the dam; with its mother. 

29. At your own will; voluntarily; in .such a 
manner as to be accepted. 

3'2. Profane my holy name ; by disregarding 
his directions. Halloived ; reverenced, honored, 
obeyed. 

rNSTRUCTIOXS. 

3. Known and allowed iniquity, secret or open, 
unfits a man for the acceptable discharge of sacred 
duties ; and without repentance and reformation he 
will be excluded from the holy society :md worship 
of heaven. 

9. Neglect of the ordinances of Grod, or a profane 
attendance on them, exposes men to punishment 
for their iniquity. 

13. Those who minister in holy things have a 
right to support, not only for themselves, but for 
their families. 

16. ilinisters of religion should labor to enlighten 



days under the dam ; and from the eighth 
day and thenceforth it shall be accepted 
for an offering made by fire unto the Lord. 

28 And whether it he cow or -ewe, ye 
shall not kill it and her ■> young both in 
one day. 

29 And when ye will oflfer a sacrifice of 
thanksgiving'' unto the Lord, offer it at 
your own will. 

30 On the same day it shall be eaten 
up ; ye shall leave none of it until the 
morrow ; I am the Lord. 

31 Therefore shall ye 'keep my com- 
mandments, and do them : I am the Lord. 

32 Neither shall ye ""profane my holy 
name; but I "will be hallow-ed among 
the children of Israel: "I am the Lord 
which hallow you, 

33 That P brought, you out of the land of 
Egypt, to be your God: I am the Lord. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

1 The feasts of the Lord. 3 The sabbath. 4 The 
passover 9 The sheaf of first-fruits. 15 The feast 
of Pentecost. 22 Gleanings to be left for the poor. 
'2.'3 The feast of trumpets. 26 The day of atonement. 
33 The feast of tabernacles. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing, 

2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
say unto them, Concerning the "i feasts of 
the Lord, which ye shall ''proclaim to be 
holy convocations, even these are my 
feasts. 

3 Six 'days shall work be done: but 
the seventh day is the sabbath of rest, a 
holy convocation : ye shall do no work 
therein : it is the sabbath of the Lord in 
all your dwellings. 

4 ^ These are the feasts of the Lord, 
even holy convocations, which ye shall 
proclaim in their seasons. 

5 In the * fourteenth daij of the first 
month at even is the Loiid's passover. 



107:22: Ainos4:.=i. I chap. 19:37; Num. l.i : 40; DeuL 4 : 40. 
m rhap.I8:21. Bihap.lO:3. ochap.20:8. p chap. 11 :4.=j. q ver. 
4,37. r Ex. 32:5; Psa. 81:3. s chap. IS : 3; Ex. 20: 9. t Ex. 
12:6,etc.; 13:3, 10; .34: 18; Num.9:2,3; Deut Ifi: 1-8; .Tosh.6: 10. 

the people as to the will of God, that they may not 
sin ignorantly; and if they have so sinned, should 
use all suitable means to reclaim them, and bring 
them in future to know and. obey the truth. 

21. God justly requires that which is perfect; and 
the best that we offer can be accepted only through 
the atonement, righteousness, and intercession of 
Christ. 

31. Notwithstanding all that Christ has done, no 
one is or can be saved by him, unless as he is made 
willing heartily to obey God's commands. 

CHAPTER XXflf. 
2. Holy convocations ; assemblies for religions 
purpo.ses. 

5. First month ; Ablb or Nisan, the first month 
of the ecclesiastical and the seventh of the civil 
year; answering to the last part of March and the 
first part of April. The Lord's passover; Ex. 
12:3-17. 

165 



Tlie feasts of the Lord. 



LEVITICUS XXIII. 



The day of atonement. 



6 And on the fifteenth day of the same 
month is the feast of unleavened bread 
unto the Lokd : seven days ye must eat 
unleavened bread. 

7 In the tir.'^t day yc shall have a holy 
eonvocation : yc shall do no servile work 
therein. 

8 But ye shall offer an offering made by 
fire unto the Lord seven days: in the 
seventh day is a holy convocation: ye 
shall do no servile work therein. 

9 ^And the Loud spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

10 Speak unto the children of Israel, 
and say unto them, When ye be come 
into the laud which I give unto you, and 
shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye 
shnll bring a *sheaf of the * first-fruits of 
your harvest unto the priest: 

1 1 And he sliall ^ wave the sheaf before 
the Loud, to be accepted for you : on tlie 
morrow after the sabbath the priest .sliall 
wave it. 

12 And ye shall offer that day wlien ye 
wave the sheaf a he-lamb without blem- 
ish of the first year for a burnt-offering 
unto the Loud. 

13 And the ""meat-offering thereof .s7m// 
he two tenth-deals of fine flour mingled 
with oil, an offering made by fire unto 
the Lord/o/- a sweet savor : and the drink- 
offering thereof .^/la// he of wine, the fourth 
-part of a hin. 

14 And ye shall cat neither bread, nor 
parched corn, nor green ears, until the 
selfsame day that ye have brought an of- 
fering unto your God : it shall he a statute 
for ever throughout your generations in 
all your dwellings. 

15 T[ And ye shall count unto you from 
the morrow after the sabbath, from the 
day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave- 
offering; ''seven sabbaths shall be com- 
plete : 

16 E^vcn unto the morrow after the sev- 
enth sabbath shall ye ''number fifty days ; 
and yc shall offer a new meat-offering 
unto the Loud. 

17 Ye shall bring out of your habita- 
tions two wave-loaves of two tenth-deals : 
they shall be of fine flour; they shall be 
baken with leaven ; they are the "^first- 
fruits unto the Lord. 

• H<!b. omtr, or haml/ul. • KtoJus2::'«; •i1:19; VA:16; 
Prov.3:«; Eli-k ipUl : :!0. b Exoilim 2!>: 24. c rlinp. 2 : M-lt;. 
<< rlinp. ir>:8! Ex. :11:22; n«uL |ii:'l. «Arti2:l. r ver. 10; 
Kiimbcr" 1B:20: 28:2fi, i-tc. « Mnl. 1 : 13, 14. h cimp. 4 : 2:1. 
1 Num. 18:12: D<;utl»:4; 1 Cor. 9:14. j chap. 19:9; Deut. 



Jl. Wave tile sheaf; move it to and fro. 

14. It .-shnll he a statute; a law, that they 
should not eat of the new harvest till lliey had first 
prcsmtcd an ofTering from it to the Lord. 

l.l. The morrow after the sahbath ; the six- 
teenlh day of tlie month Abib. Seven sabbaths ; 
seven weeks, or forty-nine days. 
166 



18 And ye .shall offer with the *•":»» 
bread seven lambs^ without blemish of the 
first year, and one young bullock, and two 
rams : they shall be for a burnt-off'ering 
unto the Lord, with their meat-ofTering. 
and their drink-offerings, even an oflfering 
made by fire, of sweet savor unto the Lord. 

19 Then ye shall sacrifice one ''kid of 
the goats for a sin-offering, and two lambs 
of the first year tor a sacrifice of peace- 
offerings. 

20 And the priest shall wave them with 
the bread of the first-fruits for a wave- 
offering before the Lord, with the two 
lambs: 'they shall be holy to the Lord 
for the priest. 

21 And ye shall proclaim on the self- 
same day, that it may be a holy convo- 
cation unto you : ye shall do no servile 
work therein: it .shall be a statute for ever 
in all your dwellings throughout your 
generations. 

22 lyAnd when ye Jreap the harvest of 
your land, thou slialt not make clean rid- 
dance of the corners of thy field when 
thou reapest, neither shalt thou gather 
any gleaning of thy harvest : thou shalt 
leave them unto the ''poor, and to the 
stranger: I am the Lord your God. 

2.3 T[And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

24 Speak unto the children of Israel, 
saying, In the 'seventh month, in the first 
(lay of the month, shall ye have a sab- 
bath, a memorial of blowing of "'trum- 
pets, a holy convocation. 

2.5 Yc shall do no servile work therein : 
but ye shall offer an offering made by 
fire unto the Lord. 

26 Tl And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

27 Also on the tenth day of this seventh 
month there .shall he a day of "atonement : 
it shall be a holy convocation unto you ; 
and yc shall "afflict your souls, and oficr 
an offering made by fire unto the Lord. 

28 And ye shall do no work in that same 
day : for it is a day of atonement, to make 
an atonement for you before the Lord 
your God. 

29 For whatsoever soul it be that shall 
not be Paflflicted in that same day, he shall 
be icut off from among his people. 



24 


19. 


k 


Rutli 


.; 


\ etc. ; 


r»n 


.41:1-3; 


112:9; 


Pi 


ov. 11 


:24, 


2.'>; 


litainli 


.SS: 


7.8. K 




l.iike M 


:4I 


; 2 Cor. S 


:B-I2. 


1 


Num 


10 


10; 


29 


1 ; 


Pun. 81:3 


4 


98 :K. 


m 


chap. 2.^ . 


9; l«a. 


27 


•13. 


» c 


inp. 


l« 


SO 


N 


am. 29 


7. 


o Er.r 


II 8 


21; Dan 


10:3. 


P 


Isaiah 22 : 


12; 


Jc 


.31 


:9 


Ezek. 


7 


16. q 


ien 


17:14. 













16. A next' meat-offering ; made ofnewfiour. 
Tliis was on the fiftieth day from the sixteenth of 
the month Abib. It was called the feast of Pente- 
cost, which means the fiftieth, Acts 2:1; and was a 
feast of thanksgi ving at the close of the harvest, which 
began about the time of the passover. Ver. 39. 

24. The seventh mouth ; Tizri. Chap. 16:29. 



Tlie feast of tabernacles. 



LEVITICUS XXIV. Of the lamps, and show-bread. 



B.c'iTti' 30 And whatsoever soul i^ie that 
doeth any work in that same day. the same 
soul will I "destroy from among his people. 

31 Ye shall do no manner of work: it 
shall be a statute for ever throughout your 
generations in all your dwellings. 

32 It shall be unto you a sabbath of rest, 
and ye shall afflict your souls : in the 
ninth day of the month at even, from even 
unto even, shall ye *celebrate your sab- 
bath. 

33 ^And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

34 Speak unto the children of Israel, 
saying, The fifteenth day of this seventh 
month shall be the ''feast of tabernacles 
for seven days unto the Lord. 

35 On the first day shall be a holy con- 
vocation : ye shall do no servile work 
therein. 

36 Seven days ye shall offer an offering 
made by fire unto the Lord ; on the '^ eighth 
day shall be a holy convocation unto you, 
and ye shall offer an offering made by fire 
vmto the Lord : it is a tsolemn ^ assembly ; 
and ye shall do no servile work therein. 

37 These are the feasts of the Lord, 
which ye shall proclaim to be holy con- 
vocations, to offer an offering made by 
fire unto the Lord, a burnt-offering, and 
a meat-offering, a sacrifice, and drink- 
offerings, every thing vipon his "day: 

38 Beside the ''sabbaths of the Lord, 
and beside your gifts, and beside all your 
vows, and beside all your freewill-offer- 
ings, which ye give unto the Lord. 

39 Also in the fifteenth day of the sev- 
enth month, when ye have ^ gathered in 
the fruit of the land, ye shall keep a feast 
unto the Lord seven days : on the first 
day shall be a sabbath, and on the eighth 
day .thall be a sabbath. 



40 And ye shall take you on the first 
day the t boughs of goodly trees, branches 
of palm-trees, and the boughs of thick 
trees, and willows of the brook ; and ye 
shall'' rejoice before the Lord your God 
seven days. 

41 And ye shall keep it a feast unto the 
Lord 'seven days in the year: it shall be 
a statute for ever in your generations ; ye 
shall celebrate it in the seventh month. 

42 Ye shall dwell in booths seven days ; 
all that are Israelites born shall dwell in 
booths : 

43 That 'your generations may know- 
that I made the children of Israel to dwell 
in booths, when I brought them out of the 
land of Egypt: I am the Lord your God. 

44 And Moses ''declared unto the chil- 
dren of Israel the feasts of the Lord. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

1 The oil for the lamps. .5 The show-bread. 10 Shelo- 
mith's son blasphemeth. 13 The law of blasphemy. 
17 Of murder. 18 Of damage. 23 The blasphemer 
is stoned. 

ND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 



A^ 



a chap. 20 : .'J-fi. * Heb. resl. b Exodus «: 16 : 34 : '22 ; Num. 
29:12; Dent 16:1:); Kzra3:4: Neli. 8 : 14 ; Zecli. H : 16-19 ; 
.Iohn7:2; Heb.U:9. c Num. 29:3.5; Neh.8:18; John7:37. 
t Heb. dnv oCrestraint. i Deut. 16:8; 2 Cliron. 7:9; .loel 1 : 14 ; 
2:15. oEccI.S:!. fNurA.29:39. kEx.23:16. t Heb./r«rt. 



31. A Statute ; a law, that the tenth day of 
Tizri should be observed as a sabbath, or day of 
atonement, of rest, and of religious worship. It was 
a day of annual fasting, humiliation, and prayer. 

SI. Feast of tabernacles ; in commemoration of 
their having dwelt in tabernacles during forty years 
in the wilderness. 

42. Booths; temporary dwellings, made of 
boughs or other slight materials. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. No other seasons or occasions of public wor- 
ship are ever to set aside, supersede, or lead any to 
neglect the habitual and holy observance of the 
weekly Sabbath. 

5. The reasons why believers in Christ are passed 
over or spared, and made partakers of the riches of 
grace, should ever be remembered, and the love 
which procured their salvation be celebrated accord- 
ing to his command, with gratitude and joy. Luke 
22 : 19 ; 1 Cor. 5:7; 11 : 24. 



2 Command 'the children of Israel, that 
they bring unto thee pure oil-olive beaten 
for the light. Ho cause the lamps to burn 
continually."' 

3 Without the veil of the testimony, in 
the tabernacle of the congregation, shall 
Aaron order it from the evening unto the 
morning before the Lord continually : it 
shall be a statute for ever in your genera- 
tions. 

4 He shall order the lamps upon the pure 
candlestick" before the Lord continually. 

5 T[ And thou shalt take fine flour, and 
bake "twelve cakes thereof: two tenth- 
deals shall be in one cake. 

6 And thou shalt set them in two rows. 



h Deut. 16: 14, 15. i Num. 29: 12. j Ex. 13: 14: Deut 31 : 13; 
P.ia. 78:5, 6. k ver. 2. I Exodus 27 : 20, 2:. i Keh. to cause to 
ascend. m Mat 25 : :i-8 ; Luke 12:35. n Ex. 31 : 8 ; 37:17-24; 
39 : 37 ; Zech. 4:2,11; Rev. 1 : 20. o Ex. 26 : 30. 



14. The blessings of providence, as well as of 
grace, are from the Lord. They should all be ac- 
knowledged as his gifts, and used to his glory. 

21. After gathering in the fruits of the earth, a 
day of annual thanksgiving, appropriately observed 
by all the people in commemoration of the goodness 
of Grod, is suited to honor him and benefit them. 

31. A day annually, of humiliation, fasting, and 
prayer, when labor and amusements are suspended, 
and the people unite in confessing and forsaking their 
sins and imploring divine mercy, is highly proper, 
and has often been blessed. 

40. Deliverances from great evils, as well as the 
reception of great favors, call for peculiar gratitude 
to (j-od, and should be celebrated with special 
thanksgiving. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

5. Tiro tenth-deals ; two omers. or tenths of an 
ephah : about six quarts. Ex. 16 : 36. 
167 



The law of blasphemy. 



LEVITICUS XXV. 



Of the seventh year. 



six on a row, upon the pure "table before 
the Lord. 

7 .\ndthou slialtputpurefrankincen.se 
upon carh row, that it may be on the 
bread for a memorial, even an offering 
made by fire unto the Loud. 

8 Every ''sabbath he shall set it in order 
before the Lord continually, being taken 
from the children of Israel by an ever- 
lasting covenant. 

9 And it shall be Aaron's and his sons' ; 
and "they shall eat it in the holy place: 
lor it ix most holy unto him of the offer- 
ings of the Lord made by fire by a per- 
petual statute. 

10 *i\ And the son of an Israclitish wom- 
an, whose father was an Egyptian, went 
out among the children of Israel : and this 
son of the Israclitish icoman and a man 
of Israel strove together in the camp; 

1 1 And the Israclitish woman's son blas- 
phemed'* the name o/'//ie L07\'D, and curs- 
ed. And they brought '"him unto Moses : 
and his mother's name teas Shelomith, the 
daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan: 

12 And they "^put him in ward, *that the 
minds of the Lord might be showed them. 

13 And the Lord spake unto jNIoses, 
saying, 

14 Bring forth him that hath cursed 
without the camp; and let all that heard 
him lay their '■hands upon his head, and 
let all the congregation stone him. 

15 And thou shalt speak unto the chil- 
dren of Israel, saying, Whosoever curscth 
his God shall bear his sin. 

16 And 'he that blasphemeth the name 
of the Lord, he shall surely be put to 
death, and all the congregation shall cer- 
tainly stone him: as well the stranger, 
as he that is born in the land, when he 
blasphemeth the name of the LORD, 
shall be put to death. 

17 HAnd he that tkillcth any Jman 
shall surely be put to death. 

• 1 Kinj», 7:48; Heb. 9:2. b 1 Cliron. 9 : 32 ; 2 Chron. 2 : 4. 
e cli«p. 8:31; Ex. 29 : 32 ; 1 Sam. 21 : fi ; Mat. 12 : 4. d Job 1 : 0, 
11,22; I»ii. 8:21. c Ex. 18:26. f Numbers Ifi : 34. * Heh. (o 
txpound unto thfm according to tht mouth of the Lord, b Num. 
27:». b Deut. 13:9; 17:7. i KxoJus20:7; 1 Kill'il, 21 : 10-13; 

8. Every sabbath ; the bread was taken away 
and faten by the priests, and the frankincense was 
burnt as an offering by fire to the Lord; and new- 
bread and frankincense were put in their place. 

12. Ward; prison, or safe custody. 

17. Killcth ; murdereth. 

I.N.STRUCTIONS. 

4. Ministers of rcli^ifn should constantly endeav- 
or, from the word, the Spirit, and the providences 
of God, to enlighten the minds of men as to their 
duty, and set before them the motives to obedience 
which God has revealed. 

IC. Blasphemy against God is great and aggra- 
vated wickedness; and under the Jewish dispensa- 
tion, was, as treason, punished with di'ath. 

2.3. The execution, at the command of Ood, of no- 
torious criminals, is a soleriin duty, the performance 
168 



18 And he that killeth a ■'beast *b.c:hw: 
shall make it good; + beast for beast. 

19 And if a man cause a blemish in his 
neighbor; 'as he hath done, so shall it be 
done to him : 

20 Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth 
for tooth : as he hath caused a blemish in 
a man, so shall it be done to him again. 

21 And he that killeth a beast, he shall 
restore it : and he that killeth a man, he 
shall be put to death. 

22 Ye shall have '"one manner of law, 
as well for the stranger, as for one of your 
own country: for I am the Lord your God. 

213 ^And Moses spake to the children 
of Israel, that they should bring forth him 
that had cursed out of the camp, and stone 
him with stones : and the children of Is- 
rael did as the Lord commanded Moses. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

1 The sal'bath of the seventh year. 8 The jnbiloe in 
the fiftieth year. 14 Of oppression. 18 A blessing 
of obedience. 2-3 The redemption of land. "29 Of 
houses. :!5 Compassion of the poor. ;}9 Tlie usage 
of bondmen. 47 The redemption of servants. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses in 
mount Sinai, saying, 

2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
say unto them. When ye come into the 
land which I give you, then shall the land 
keep^ a sabbath unto the Lord. 

3 Six "years thou shalt sow thy field, 
and six years thou shalt prune thy vine- 
yard, and gather in the fruit thereof; 

4 But in the seventh year shall be a 
sabbath of rest unto the land, a sabbath 
for the Lord : thou shalt neither sow thy 
field, nor prune thy vineyard. 

5 That which "groweth of its own ac- 
cord of thy harvest thou shalt not reap, 
neither gather the grapes of thy !l vine 
undressed: for it is a year of rest unto 
the land. 

6 And the sabbath of the land shall be 
meat for you ; for thee, and for thy ser- 



Psa. 74:10,18; 139:20; Mat. 12:31. f Kch. tmiteth Ihcli/e nf 
aman. j Ex. 21 : 12 : Num. 35 : 31 ; lleut. 19: 11, 12. k vrr. 2i. 
t H^h. life for life. I Deut. 19:21; Mnt.r):38; 7:2. m Num. 
15:16. hWKh.rett. n Ex- 23 : 10; 2 Chron. 36 : 21. oiKing:!!, 
19 : 29. If Heb. separation. 

of M-hich is suited to give timely warning to the 
wicked and exercise upon them salutary restr.aint. 
By commanding that some should thus be put to 
death in this world, God gives indications of the 
terrible punishment which awaits the persevcringly 
wicked in the world to come. Hence a reason why 
some who deny punishment in the future world, are 
opposed to capital punishment in this : because one 
foreshadows the other. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

Ci. Not reap, iieither gather ; as in other years, 
but share what grew with others as thev might 
need, .and with the beast of the field. Ver. 6, 7. 
11. V2. 

G. The aabbiith of the land; the spontaneous 
produce of the sabbatical year. 



The year of julnlce. 



LEVITICUS XXV. 



Redemption of land. 



B. O. 1490 

hired servant, and for thy stranger that 
sojourneth with thee, 

7 And for thy cattle and for the beast 
that arc in thy land, shall all the increase 
thereof be meat. 

8 T[ And thou shall number scA-en sab- 
baths of years unto thee, seven times 
seven years ; and the space of the seven 
sabbaths of years shall be unto thee forty 
and nine years. 

9 Then shalt thou cause the trumpet *of 
the jubilee to sound on the tenth day of 
the seventh month, in the "day of atone- 
ment shall ye make the '' trumpet sound 
throughout all your land. 

10 And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, 
and "^proclaim liberty throughout all the 
land unto all the inhabitants thereof : it 
shall be a jubilee unto you ; and ye shall 
return ** every man unto his possession, and 
ye shall return every man unto his family. 

11 A jubilee shall that fiftieth year be 
unto you : ye shall not sow, neither reap 
that which groweth of itself in it, nor gath- 
er the grapes in it of thy vine undressed. 

12 For it is the jubilee ; it shall be holy 
unto you : ye shall eat the increase there- 
of out of the field. 

13 In the ®year of this jubilee ye shall 
return every man unto his possession. 

14 And if thou sell aught unto thy neigh- 
bor, or buyest aught of thy neighbor's 
hand, ye shall ""not oppress one another: 

15 According to the number of years after 
the jubilee thou shalt buy of thy neighbor, 
and according unto the number of years of 
the fruits he shall sell unto thee: 

16 According to the multitude of years 
thou shalt increase the price thereof, and 
according to the fewness of years thou 
shalt diminish the price of it: for accord- 
ing to the number of the years of the fruits 
doth he sell unto thee. 

17 Ye shall not therefore oppress one 
another; but thou shalt sfear thy God: 
for I am the Lord your God. 

18 IT^Vherefore ye shall '' do my statutes, 
and keep my judgments, and do them ; and 
ye' shall dwell in the land in safety. 





* Heb 


hud 


of sound. 


a chap. 


23 


24. 27. 


b Ni 


mliera 


10 


10. 


e 


Isa.61 


l,-2; 


63 : 4 ; .ler. 34 : 15- 


17 


Zecliariah 9 : 


11, 12 


1. 


■ ke 


4 


: lfi-21. 


<< ve 


r. 13: N 


mbers 36 


4. 


e ver 


10: cl 


ap. 27 


•17 


-24. 


r 


ver. 17 


chap 


19:13; 


Micall2:2 


a 


1 Cor. 


6:8. B 


Gen. 


42: 


18; 


Jer. 22:16. i 


Psa. 103 


: 18. i Deut 12 : 10 


; Psalm 4 : 8 


Prov. 



9. The day of atonement ; chap. 23:27-32. 

10. Halloic ; keep sacred as a season of rejoicing;. 
16. According to the mnltititde — and — the 

fewness ; the price of what they sold was to be 
regulated according to the distance of time from the 
year of jubilee, when it would revert to its former 
owner. Ver. 10, 23. 

21. For three years; namely, the seventh or 
sabbatical year ; the eighth, the year of jubilee ; 
and till the harvest of the ninth. 



19 And the land shall yield her fruit, 
and ye shall eat your fill, and dwell there- 
in in safety. 

20 And if ye shall say, What shall we 
eat the seventh year? behold, wc shall 
not sow, nor gather in our increase : 

21 Then I will J command my blessing 
upon you in the sixth year, and it shall 
bring forth fruit for three years. 

22 And ''ye shall sow the eighth year, 
and eat yet of old fruit until the ninth 
year; until her fruits come in ye shall 
eat of the old store. 

23'^ The land shall not be sold t for 
ever : for the land is ' mine ; for ye are 
strangers'" and sojourners with me. 

24 And in all the land of your possession 
ye shall grant a redemption for the land. 

25 T[ If thy brother be waxen poor, and 
hath sold away some of his possession, 
and if " any of his kin come to redeem it, 
then shall he redeem that which his 
brother sold. 

26 And if the man have none to redeem 
it, and + himself be able to redeem it ; 

27 Then let him "count the years of the 
sale thereof, and restore the overplus unto 
the man to whom he sold it; that he may 
return unto his possession. 

28 But if he be not able to restore it to 
him, then that which is sold shall remain 
in the hand of him that hath bought it un- 
til the year of jubilee : and in the jubilee 
it shall go Pout, and he shall return unto 
his possession. 

29 And if a man sell a dwelling-house 
in a walled city, then he may redeem it 
within a whole year after it is sold ; ivith- 
in a full year may he redeem it. 

30 And if it be not redeemed within the 
space of a full year, then the house that 
is in the walled city shall be established 
for ever to him that bought it through- 
out his generations : it shall not go out 
in the jubilee. 

31 But the houses of the villages whicii 
have no wall round about them shall be 
counted as the fields of the country : Hhey 
may be redeemed, and they shall go out 
in the jubilee. 



1:33; .Ter. 23:6; Ezekiel 34 : 25-28. j Dent 28: 8. k2Kinp., 
19 : 29. t Heb. for culling itf, or tr he quite cut off. 1 2 Clirnn. 
7:20. m Psalm :i9: 12. n Kuth 2 : 20 ; .ler. 32 : 7. 8. ^ Heb. /ii> 
hand hath attained and found sufficiency. chap..T:7. o ver. .tO-52. 
P ver. 13. \ Heb. redemption belongeth unto it. 



23. Not be sold for ever ; but only till the year 
of jubilee. 

27. Count the years ; from the time he sold it 
to that date, and also to the year of jubilee, and 
give accordingly. If he sold it twenty years before 
the year of jubilee, and ten of them had expired, he 
would, for the redemption, give half as much as he 
sold it for ; if but five years had passed, he would 
give three quarters ; and so in proportion for any 
length of time. Ver. 50— 55. 

169 



Tlie usage of bondmen. 



LEVITICUS XXV. 



Redemption oj" sen- ants. 



32 Notwithstanding the "cities of the 
Levites, a)id the liouses of the cities of 
their possession, may the Levites redeem 
at any time. 

33 And if *a man pnrchasc of the Le- 
vites, then the honse that was sold, and 
the city of his possession, shall go out in 
the year 0/ jubilee : for the houses of the 
cities of the Levites arc their possession 
among the children of Israel. 

34 But the ''field of the suburbs of their 
cities may not be sold ; for it is their per- 
petual possession. 

35 If And if thy brother be wa.xen ■■ poor, 
and tfallcn in decay with thee ; then thou 
shalt -relieve ''him: yea, though he be a 
stranger,* or a sojourner ; that he may 
live with thee. 

36 Take thou no ""usury of him, or in- 
crease: but efear thy God; that thy 
brother may live with thee. 

37 Thou shalt not give him thy money 
upon usury, nor lend him thy victuals for 
increase. 

38 I ^'am the Lord your God, which 
brought you forth out of the land of 
Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, 
and to be your God. 

39 ^ And if thy brother that dwclltth by 
thee be waxen poor, and be sold unto 
thee ; thou shalt not 5 compel him to serve 
as a bondservant: 

40 But as a 'hired servant, and as a 
sojourner, he shall be with thee, and shall 
serve thee unto the year of jubilee: 

41 And then shall he depart from thee, 
both he and his children with him, and 
shall return unto his own family, and 
unto the possession of his fathers shall 
he return. 

42 For tjiey are J my servants, which 1 
brought forth out of the land of Egypt: 
they shall not be sold Has bondmen. 

43 Thou shalt not rule over him with 
rigor;'' but shalt 'fear thy God. 

4 4 Hotlitliy bondmen, and thy bondmaids, 
which thou shalt have, .^hall he of the hea- 
then that are round about you; of them 
shall ye buy>bondmcn and bondmaids. 



• Num. as : 2 ; Josh. 21:1, etc. * Or, one of the Levitet redeem 
tlicrn. h Actii I : nii, 37. c n»l. «: 10; I John, :i : 17. i Hvh. hit 
haniifaUelh. % \l<^\i. ttrenglhen. d DeuL 15:7,8. «Hel). 13-2 
' DruU 2:t: Ifl; Punlrn Ifttft. It Neli. f.:9,iri. h clinp. 2-J:32,a:i. 
4 Hehrervelhytel/wUhhimiellhlhetervice. I Ex. 21:2, 3. i ver. 

35. Rclicrc him ; by taking no interest, or in- 
crease, for what w.os needful for the poor man's 
support. Ver. 30, .37. 

39. Sold nnto thee ; becomes obligated to yield 
service. Ver. 42. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

C. God requires that we should in all things feel 
our consUmt dependence on liiin; and he so orders 
things in hi.s providence as to supply the wants of 
those who trust in and obey him. 

17. God is the friend of justice and mercy, and the 
eternal enemy of covctousness and oppression. None 
170 



45 Moreover, of the children of b":h»: 
the strangers "'that do sojourn among you, 
of them sliall ye buy, and of their families 
that are witli you, which they begat in 
your land: and they shall be your pos- 
session. 

46 And ye shall take them as an "in- 
heritance for your children after you, to 
inherit them for a possession; *they shall 
be your bondmen forever: but over your 
brethren the children of Israel, ye shall 
not rule one over another with "rigor. 

47 IfAud if a sojourner or stranger t wa.x 
rich by thee, and thy brother //iof dwellcth 
by him wax poor, and Psell himself unto 
the stranger or sojourner by thee, or to 
the slock of the stranger's family; 

48 After that he is sold he may be re- 
deemed again; one of his brethren may 
redeem him : 

49 Either his uncle, or his uncle's son, 
may redeem him, or any that is nigh of kin 
unto him of his family may redeem him ; 
or if he be able, he may redeem himself. 

50 And he shall reckon with him that 
bought him from the year that he was sold 
to him unto the year of jubilee: and the 
price of his sale shall be according unto 
the number of years, according to the f time 
of a hired servant shall it be with him. 

51 If there be yet many years behind, 
according unto them he shall give again 
the price of his redemption out of the 
money that he was bought for. 

52 And if there remain but few years 
unto the year of jubilee, then he sliall 
count with him, and according unto his 
years shall he give him again the price 
of his redemption. 

53 And as a yearly hired servant shall 
he be with him: and the other shall not 
rule with rigor over him in thy sight. 

54 And if he be not redeemed *in these 
year.f, then he shall go out in the year of 
jubilee, both he, and his children with him. 

55 For unto me the children of Lsrael 
are servants ; "■ they are my servants whom 
I brought forth out of the land of Egypt : 
I am the Lord vour God. 



5.T ; I Cor. 7 : 22, 23. \\ Ueb. with the tale of a hondman. k ver. 
46; Eph. 6:9. lMnI.3:.'i. itilsn.nfi:6. nlsn.M:*. * Hcb. 
ye thall serve yourselves with them. ver. 39. " ver. 43. f H»*b. 
his hand obtain, ver. W. p Neli. 6 : .■), 8. q Job 7 : 1 ; Isa. 16: H. 
^ Or, by these mennH. r ver. 42. 

can obtain his favor without doing justly, loving 
mercy, and walking humbly with him. Mic.ah 6 : R. 

22. For individuals and for nations, obedience to 
God is the sure means of competence and safety. 

37. God has speci.al regard for the poor, sympa- 
thizes with them in distress, and requires that suoh 
as have the means, and know their condition, sliould 
relieve their wants. 

53. Jehovah is a God of kindness and compassion. 
These traits of character he requires in all his peo- 
ple; and without them none can meet his approba- 
tion or enjoy the blessings of his everlasting favor. 



A blessins; and 



LEVITICUS XXVI. 



a curse proposed. 



t^.\f^': CHAPTER XXVI. 

1 Of idolatry. 2 Religiousness. .3 A blessing to them 
that keep the commandments. 14 A curse to those 
that break them. 40 God promiseth to remember 
them that repent. 

TE ''shall make yon no idols nor graven 
image, neither rear you up a *stand- 
ing image, neither shall ye set up any 
imaget of stone in your land, to bow down 
unto it: for I am the Lord your God. 

2 T[ Ye ''shall keep my sabbaths, and rev- 
erence my sanctuary : I am the Lord. 

3 T[ If '^ ye walk in my statutes, and keep 
my commandments, and do them ; 

4 Then I will give you '' rain in due 
season, and the "land shall yield her in- 
crease, and the trees of the field shall 
yield their fruit. 

5 And your "^ threshing shall reach unto 
the vintage, and the vintage shall reach 
unto the sowing-time : and ye shall eat 
yoi]r bread to the full, and dwell in your 
land safely. 

6 And I will give s peace in the land, 
and ye shall lie down, and none shall 
make yoa afraid : and I will t rid evil 
beasts'' out of the land, neither shall the 
sword go through your land. 

7 And ye shall chase your enemies, and 
they shall fall before you by the sword. 

8 And 'five of you shall chase a hun- 
dred, and a hundred of you shall put ten 
thousand to flight : and your enemies shall 
fall before you by the sword. 

9 For I will have respect unto Jyou, 
and '' make you fruitful, and ' multiply you, 
and establish my covenant with you. 

10 And ye shall eat old ""store, and bring 
forth the old because of the new. 

11 And I will set my "tabernacle among 
you : and my soul shall not "abhor you. 

1 2 And I will P walk among you, and i will 
be your God, and ye shall be my people. 

13 1 'am the Lord your God, which 
brought you forth out of the land of 
Egypt, that ye should not be their bond- 
men; and I have ^broken the bands of 
your yoke, and made you go upright. 



» neut.l6:22; 27:15. * Or, pillar. \ Yish. a stane of picture, 
or figured stone. bchnp. 19:30. c Deut. 11 : 13-15; 28; 1-14. 
i» l3a. 30:23; Ezek. 34:26. o Psa. 67 : 6. f Amos 9: 13. e Psa. 
147:14. I Weh. cause to cease, h 2Kings, 17:25; Ezek. 5 : 17. 
i Deut. 32:30. j E.x. 2:2.i ; 2 Kings, 13 : 23. k Nell. 9:2.3. I Psa. 
107 : 38. m cU.-ip. 25 : 22. n Psx 76 : 2 ; Ezek. 37: 2(i-28 ; Rev. 21 : 3. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

8. Five — a kiindred — ten tho^isand ; definite 
numbers are here used for indefinite. 

9. Have respect ; remember and favor you. 

10. Bring forth the old; from their granaries, 
to make room for the new crop. 

11. Set my tabernacle ; continue to dwell 
among them with his visible presence on the mercy- 
seat, and to do tlieni good. 

12. Walk among you; communicate freely 
with them. 

l.'l. Made you go upright ; delivered you from 
Lowing down under oppression or in despondency. 



14 ^But'if ye will not hearken unto me, 
and will not do all these commandments'; 

15 And if ye shall despise my statutes, 
or if your soul abhor my judgments, so 
that ye will not do all my commandments, 
but that ye "break my covenant; 

16 I also will do this unto you; I will 
even appoint 5 over you terror, consumji- 
tion, and the burning ague, that shall con- 
sume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart : 
and ye shall ''sow your seed in vain, for 
your "enemies shall eat it. 

1 7 And I will set my face against you, and 
ye shall be "slain before your enemies: 
they that hate you shall reign over you ; 
and ye shall^ flee when none pursueth you. 

18 And if ye will not yet for all this 
hearken unto me, then I will punish you 
seven times more for your sins. 

19 And I will break the ^ pride of your 
power ; and I will make your heaven as 
iron, and your earth as brass: 

20 And your strength shall be spent in 
vain:'' for your land .shall not yield her 
increase, neither shall the trees of the land 
yield their fruits. 

2 1 1[ And if ye walk II contrary unto me, 
and will not hearken unto me ; I will 
bring seven times more plagues upon you 
according to your sins. 

22 I will also send wild ''beasts among 
you, wiiich shall rob you of your children, 
and destroy your cattle, and make you 
few in number ; and your highways shall 
be '■ desolate. 

23 And if ye will not be reformed by me 
by these things, but will walk contrary 
unto me ; 

24 Then will I also walk ''contrary unto 
you, and will punish you yet seven times 
for your sins. 

25 And I will bring a sword upon you, 
that shall '"avenge the quarrel of my cov- 
enant : and when ye are gathered to- 
gether within your cities, I will send the 
pestilence ^ among you ; and ye shall be 
delivered into the hand of the enemv. 



o Deut. 32: 19; Psalm 78:.59. P 2 Cor. 6 : Ifi. q Ezekiel 11 :20. 
r chap. 25:. 38, 42. sjer.2:20. t Deut. 28 : 1 6-68. u Ezek. Ifi:,^. 
% Keh.upan. v Micah6:15. w Neh. 9 : .36, 37. » .Ter. 19:7. 
y Prov. 28:1. zlsa.25:ll. aPsa.l27:l. \\ Ot,at alladventuref 
withme. b 2Kiiiss, 17: 25; Ezek. 5: 17. c Lam. 1 : 4. dP8a.lS:2r>; 
Isa. 63 : 10. e Deut. 32 : 35 ; Ezek. 20 : 37. f Jer. 24 : 10. 



15. Myjudgme7its; his directions and decisions 
as to their conduct. 

16. Appoint over you ; send upon them the 
terrible evils mentioned. 

18. Seven times ; cause a great increase of their 
sorrows. 

19. As iron., and — as brass ; the clouds would 
give no rain, any more than if they were iron, and 
the earth no fruit, any iriore than if it were brass. 
Ver. 20. 

22. Yonr highways shall be desolate; men 
would not travel in them, on account of the danger. 
Judges 5 : G ; 2 Chron. 15 : 5 ; Isa. 33 : 8. 
171 



Many and sore curses. 



LEVITICUS XXVI. 



Merry for the penitent. 



26 A)id when I have 'broken the staff 38 And ye shall perish among the *b.c.uw. 
of your bread, ten women shall bake your heathen, and the land of your enemies 
bread in one oven, and they shall deliver shall eat you up. 

you your bread again by weight : and ye 39 And they tliat are left of you shall 
shall eat, and ''not be satisfied. pinei away in their iniquity in your en- 

27 And if ye will not for all this hearken cmies' lands; and also in the iniquities 
unto me, but walk contrary unto me ; of tlieir fathers shall they pine away with 

28 Then I will walk contrary unto you jthem. 

also in fury ; and I, even I, will chastise , 40 If Mliey shall confess their iniquity, 
you seven times for your sins. ! and the iniquity of theirfathers, with their 



29 And ye shall "=eat the flesh of your 
sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall 
ye eat. 

30 And I will "* destroy your high places, 



trespass which they trespassed against 
me, and that also they have walked con- 
trary unto me ; 
41 And that I also have walked contra- 



and cut down your images, and cast your ry unto them, and have brought them into 
carcasses upon the carcasses of your idols, j the land of their enemies; if then their 
and my soul shall '"abhor you. i uncircumcised" hearts be •humbled, and 

31 And I will make your ""cities waste, they then "accept of the punishment of 



and bring your s sanctuaries unto desola 
tion, and I will not ''smell the savor of 
your sweet odors. 

32 And I will bring the 'land into deso- 
lation : and your enemies which dwell 
therein shall be J astonished at it. 

33 And I will '' scatter you among the 
heathen, and will draw out a sword after 
you : and your land shall be desolate, and 
your cities waste. 

34 Then shall the 'land enjoy her sab- 
baths, as long as it lieth desolate, and ye 
he in your enemies' land ; even then shall 
the land rest, and enjoy her sabbaths. 

3.5 As long as it lieth desolate it shall 
rest ; because it did not rest in your sab- 
baths, when ye dwelt upon it. 

36 And upon them that are left alive of 
you I will send a '" faintncss into their 
hearts in the lands of their enemies ; and 
the ".sound of a *shaken leaf shall chase 
them ; and they shall flee, as fleeing from 
a sword ; and they shall fall Avhen none 
pursueth. 

37 And they shall " fall one upon anoth- 
er, as it were before a sword, when none 
pursueth : and ye shall have no power to 
stand P before your enemies. 



• Pun. lOS : IB. hHng. 1:6. cl.am. 4:10. d Eick. G: 3-1.3. 
e Hiiip. 20:n. f Nell. -2:3. « 2 Chron.M: I'l; M.it. 24: 2. h Isa. 
1:13. i.)<T.2fi:ll,lR. i.1er.I9:8. kPsa.44:ll. 1 2Cliron.3fi:21. 
m Kick. 21 : 7, Ifi. n. Job in : 21. * Heh. drivrn. oIm. 10:4. 
■• Judg. 2:14. q Liim. 4:9; Kiek. 4 : 17. r i Kings, 8 : 33, etc. ; 



26. Ten women — bake — iii one oven ; on ac- 
count of the small quantity they would have to bake. 

29. Bat the Jtcsk of your .ions, and — daugh- 
ters ; on account of the scarcity of food. 2 Kings, 
6 : 29 ; Lam. 4 : 10 ; Joscphus. Jewish Wars, B. 7, 
c. 2. 

35. It shall rest, because it did not rest ; in 
four hundred and ninety years, tlic time from the 
reign of Saul to the Bal)ylonish captivity, there 
would be seventy years of sabbaths, and also seven- 
ty sabbatical years — equal to the number of years 
tile hind lay desolate during their captivity in Bab- 
ylon; and, as some have supposed, equal to the 
number of sabbatical years the ob.scrvnnce of which 
they had neglected. 2 Chron. .30:21 ; Jer. 2.5: 8-11. 
172 



their iniquity 

42 Then will I " remember my covenant 
with Jacob, and also my covenant with 
Isaac, and also my covenant with Abra- 
ham will I remember ; and I will remem- 
ber the "land. 

43 The land also shall be left of them, 
and shall enjoy her "sabbaths, while she 
lieth desolate without them : and they 
shall >' accept of the punishment of their 
iniquity ; because, even because they * de- 
spised my judgments, and because their 
soul abhorred my statutes. 

44 And yet for all that, when they bo in 
the land of their enemies, I " will not cast 
them away, neither will I abhor them, to 
destroy them utterly, and to ''break my 
covenant with them: for I am the Lord 
their (4od. 

45 But I will for their *^sakes remember 
the covenant of '' their ancestors, whom 1 
brought forth out of the land of Egypt in 
the sight of the heathen, that I might be 
their God : I am the Lord. 

46 These are the statutes and judgments 
and laws, which the Lord made between 
him and the children of Israel in mount 
Sinai by the hand of Moses. 



Neh.9:2,et<-.; PrQv.28: 13; I.uke 15:18: 1 .Folin, 1 : 9. ■.Ter.9:S6; 
A.ts7:.11; Roni.2:29. t 2 Cliron. 12:6,7,12. u P8a.39:9; 51 :3,4; 
Dan.9:7. r Pg:i. 106:4.1; Ezek. 16:fi0. wJoel2:18. xver.34,:». 
yver.41. « 2 Chron. 36:16. « Piia.94: 14; Lam.3:3l; Rom. 11 :2. 
b Psa. 89 : 33, 34. c Rom. 1 1 : 28. i Luke 1 : 72, 73. 



38. Eatyoitiip; consume them : many would 
die in their enemies' country. 

41. Accept of the pnnishment ; feel and ac- 
knowlcdo;e that God was just in punishing them, 
and humiily submit themselves to his disposal. 

42. Kemfmber my covenant ; grant them the 
blessings promised in it. Remember the land; 
cause it again to be inhabited by the seed of Abra- 
ham, Isaac, and .Tacob. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. One of the most effectual means of preservation 
from idolatry, and all sins secret and open, persona! 
and national, is the due observance of the Sabbath, 
with habitual attendance on public worship. 

12. Obedience to divine commands is not only 



Of the estimation 



LEVITICUS XXVII. 



of things vowed. 



J.c-H^' CHAPTER XXVII. 

1 He that maketh a singular vow must be the Lord's. 
'2 The estimation of the person. 9 Of a beast given 
by vow. \i Of a house. 16 Of a field, and the re- 
demption thereof. 'iS No devoted thing may be re- 
deemed. 32 The tithe may not be changed. 

A ND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
IV i-.ig, 

2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
.say unto them, "Wlicn a man shall make 
a singular ''vow, the persons shall he for 
the Lord by thy estimation. 

3 And thy "= estimation shall he of the 
male from twenty years old even unto 
sixty years old, even thy estimation shall 
be fifty shekels of silver, after the ^ shekel 
of the sanctuary. 

4 And if it be a female, then thy estima- 
tion shall be thirty shekels. 

5 And if it be from five years old even 
unto twenty years old, then thy estima- 
tion shall be of the male twenty shekels, 
and for the female ten shekels. 

6 And if it be from a month old even 
unto five years old, then thy estimation 
shall be of the male fwc shekels of silver, 
and for the female tin'' estimation i/ia// be 
three shekels of silver. 

7 And if it he from sixty years old and 
above ; if it he a male, then thy estima- 
tion shall be fifteen shekels, and for the 
femnle ten shekels. . 

8 But if he be poorer than thy estima- 
tion, then he shall present himself beiore 
the priest, and the priest shall value him ; 
according to his *" ability that vowed shall 
the priest value him. 

9 And \i it be abeast, whereof men bring 
an offering unto the Lord, all that any 

iiN»m.6:2; .Tuilj. 11 : 30. etc. ; 1 Sam. 1 :11,28. b Eccl. ."i : 4, 5. 
cNum.l8:16. rt E.'c.SO.lS. eLev.5:7. * iie\>. according to thy 



the surest, but the only way to personal and national 
excellence, and permanent prosperity, happiness, 
and glory. 

13. Gcd speaks of deliverance from bondage as a 
blessing which lays those who receive it under pecul- 
iar obligations to love and obey him. 

24. The reason why God sets himself against 
individuals or nations, or ever punishes them, is 
because they oppose him, and act in opposition to 
what he directs, and what their good and the great 
interests of his kingdom require. 

29. The dreadful evils vi<hich sin often occasions 
in this world, are indications of evils still more 
dreadful which it will occasion in the world to 
come ; but neither in this nor the future world will 
any sinners suffer more or greater evils than their 
iniquities deserve. 

35. The desecration of Sabbaths, or the neglect to 
observe them according to divine appointment, is 
liighly offensive to God and injurious to men. It is 
treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, and 
exposes both individuals and nations to desolating 
judgments. 

39. Children often suffer greatly in consequence 
of the sins of their parents; but not more th;m their 
own sins deserve, nor more than, if they repent of 
and forsake them, will be overruled for their <rood. 

12 



man giveth of such unto the Lord shall be 
holy. 

10 He shall not alter it, nor change it, 
a good for a bad, or a bad for a good : and 
if he shall at all change beast for beast, 
then it and the exchange thereof shall be 
holy. 

1 1 And if it he any unclean beast, of 
which they do not offer a sacrifice unto 
the Lord, then he shall present the beast 
before the priest : 

1 2 And the priest shall value it, whether 
it be good or bad : *as thou valuest it, 
icJio art the priest, so shall it be. 

13 But "^if he will at all redeem it, then 
he shall add a fifth jmrt thereof unto thy 
estimation. 

14 ^ And when a man shall sanctify his 
houses to be holy unto the Lord, then the 
priest shall estimate it, whether it be good 
or bad : as the ''priest shall estimate it, so 
shall it stand. 

15 And if he that sanctified it will re- 
deem his house, then he shall add the 
M{\V part of the money of thy estimation 
unto it, and it shall be his. 

16 And if a man shall sanctify unto the 
Lord some part of a field of his possession, 
then thy estimation shall be according to 
the seed thereof : ta homer of barley-seed 
shall be valued at fifty shekels of silver. 

17 If he sanctify his field from the year 
of jubilee, according to thy estimation it 
shall stand. 

18 But if he sanctify his field after the 
jubilee, then the priest shall J reckon unto 
him the money according to the yeans 
that remain, even unto the year of the 



estimation^ O priests f ver. Ift, 19. 
i ver. 13. t Or, the land of a homer 



e Tan. 101 : 2-7. k ver. 12. 
j chap. 25 : 15, 16. 



4.5. A deep conviction and hearty confession of 
the righteousness of God in all the evils he brings 
upon us, humble submission to his will, and true 
devotion to his service, will end in deliverance from 
all evil; and the everlasting enjoyment of all needed 
good. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

2. Sihgidar ; special, great, extraordinary. Bt/ 
thy estimation ; the persons spoken of vowed to 
devote themselves or their children to God, in the 
service of the temple. But they might redeem 
them from this service by paying a specified sum, 
according to the estimation, ver. 3-8. The money 
paid was devoted to the support of public worship. 

9. Shall be lioly ; it could not be reclaimed, 
but must continue devoted to the object to which 
it was consecrated, provided it was ,a thing suitabb' 
to be offered in sacrifice to God. If not, then he 
must pay the value of it, according to the estima- 
tion of the priest, and one fifth part more. Ver. 
13-15, 19, 27. 

14. Sanctify ; set apart, to be devoted to the 
service of the sanctuary. 

16. According to the teed; the seed that it 
would take to sow the field, or which tiie field 
would produce. A homer ; ten ephahs, or about 
three hundred quarts. 

173 



Of things devoted, 



LEVITICUS XXVII. 



and of tithes. 



jubilee, and it shall be abated from thy 
estimation. 

19 And if Mie that sanctified the field 
will in any wise redeem it, then he shall 
add the fifth part of the money of thy 
estimation unto it, and it shall be assured 
to him. 

20 And if he will not redeem the field, 
or if he have sold the field to another man, 
it shall not be redeemed any more. 

21 But the field, when it ''goeth out in 
the jubilee, shall be holy unto the Lord, 
as a field '^ devoted ; the possession there- 
of shall be the ''priest's. 

22 And if a man sanctify unto the Lord 
a field which he hath bought, which is 
not of the fields of *his possession; 

23 Then the "^priest shall reckon unto 
him the worth of thy estimation, even 
unto the year of the jubilee : and he shall 
give thine estimation in that day, as a 
holy thing unto the Lord. 

24 In the ^year of the jubilee the field 
shall return unto him of whom it was 
bought, et'fJi to him to whom the posses- 
sion of the land did belong. 

25 And all thy estimations shall be ac- 
cording to the shekel of the sanctuary : 
twenty gerahs shall be the shekel. 

26 II Only the 'firstling of the beasts, 
which should be the ''Lord's firstling, no 
man shall sanctify it, whether it be ox or 
sheep : it is the Lord's. 



• ver. 13 


b cliap. 


•2,-) 


10, 


J8. 


c 


ver 


28 


d Numbers 18:14; 


Eiek. 44 : 


9. e chap 


2.1 


2.i. 


f 


v<>r 


IR. 


f 


chap. 2.'i:28. 


* Heb. 


Jirtt-bom. 


h Kxoduo 15 


:2, 


12 


2-2 


:30 


N 


umbers 18: 17 


Deut. 


18:19. i 


ver. 11-13. 


J 


Joshua 6 : 


19. 


k 


I*um. 21:2, 3; 


ISam. 



25. Twenty gerahs; a gerah was about two 
and a half cents. 

2fi. It is the hordes; Ex. 13 : 2, 12-15. 

28. Devoted thing ; a thing irrevocably conse- 
crated by the offerer to a specific object, which 
could not be redeenried, but must be applied to the 
object to which it was devoted. In this respect it 
differed from the things previously mentioned, and 
is expressed in the original by a different word. 

29. Devoted of men ; doomed by the curse of 
God to extermination. See Num. 21 : 2, 3. 

31. Tithes ; a tenth part of the products of the 
land, after the first-fruits had been deducted. This 
the Israelites were bound to "ive for the support of 
the ministers of religion. Verses 30-33; Num. 
18 : 21-32. Another tenth of what remained was to 
be brought to Jeru.salem and used for offerings and 
for the support of the worshippers while there. 
Deut. 12:. 5-7; 14:22-20. 

32. The rod; which had some coloring matter 
on the end, by which one tenth part was marked as 
a tithe to be devoted to the Lord. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. It is good to be ready and zealous in good 
things, but wisdom and discretion are also needful. 
Persons sometimes devote theiiisclves or others to 
services for which they are not wanted, or are unfit. 
In sucli cases, it is better for them to aid the cause 



27 And ifiVicofan unclean beast, *b.c:m»: 
then he shall redeem it according to thine 
estimation, and shall add a 'fifth part of it 
thereto: or if it be not redeemed, then it 
shall be sold according to thy estimation. 

28 Notwithstanding, no devoted thing, 
that a man shall devote unto the Lord of 
all that he hath, both of man and beast, 
and of the field of his possession, shall be 
sold or redeemed: every J devoted thing 
is most holy unto the Lord. 

29 None ''devoted, which shall be devot- 
ed of men, shall be redeemed ; but shall 
surely be put to death. 

30 And all the 'tithe of the land, icheth- 
er of the seed of the land, or of the fruit 
of the tree, is the Lord's : it is holy unto 
the Lord. 

3 1 And if a man will at all redeem aught 
of his tithes, he shall ""add thereto the 
fifth part thereof. 

32 And concerning the tithe of the herd, 
or of the flock, even of whatsoever "pass- 
eth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy 
unto the Lord. 

33 He shall not search whether it be 
good or bad, neither shall he "change it: 
and if he change it at all, then both it and 
the change thereof shall be holy ; it shall 
not be redeemed. 

34 These Pare the commandments, 
which 1 the Lord commanded Moses for 
the children of Israel in mount 'Sinai. 



15:18-23. 1 Gen. 28:2-2; Num. 18 : 21, 24; 2 Chron. 31 : .I, fi, 12 ; 
Neh. 13: 12; MaL3:8, 10. m ver. 13. njer. 33:13; Ezekiel 
20 : 37 ; Micah 7:14. o ver. 10. P chap. 26 : 46. <i Malachi 4 : •«. 
r Exodus 19:2, 3,25. 



of Christ in some other way. Their money may be 
more useful than their personal service, or their ser- 
vices more useful in some other employment than 
that to which they aspire. 

10. Rash promises, and inconstancy in perform- 
ing such as are right, should be carefully avoided. 

19. All our possessions belong to the Lord, and 
should be used in such a manner as will please 
him ; some part of them should be devoted espe- 
cially to the support and extension of his worship. 
The proportion which should be thus devoted is not 
now definitely prescribed, and the manner in which 
persons feel, judge, and act in the use of property, 
is one of the prominent indications and evidences of 
their character ; and one which will have a mo- 
mentous influence on their future condition. Mat. 
25 : .3-5-46. 

25. Strict integrity towards God and men is a 
duty, the desire and conscientious endeavor to prac- 
tise which, is essential in the sight of God to the 
character of an honest man. 

33. An honest man will not retain, or appro- 
priate to his own use, what he knows of right be- 
longs to another, in opposition to tiie known will of 
the owner, whether human or divine ; but he will 
be disposed to render to all what rightfully belongs 
to them. It is a great thing to be truly honest. 
Mic. C : 8 ; Mat. 22 : 21 ; Luke 16 : 10-13. 



174 



THE FOURTH BOOK OF MOSES, 



NUMBERS. 



B.c!i^^' CHAPTER I. 

1 Godcommandeth Moses to niimber the people. 5 The 
princes of the tribes. 17 The number of every tribe. 
47 The Levites are exempted for the service of the 
Lord. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses in the 
"wilderness of Sinai, in the taberna- 
cle of the congregation, on the first day 
of the second month, in the second year 
after they were come out of the land of 
Egypt, saying, 

2 Take ''ye the sum of all the congrega- 
tion of the children of Israel, after their 
families, by the house of their fathers, 
with the number of their names, every 
male by their polls ; 

3 From twenty years old and upward, 
all that are able to go forth to war in Is- 
rael : thou and Aaron shall number them 
by their armies. 

4 And with you there shall be a man of 
every tribe ; every one *= head of the house 
of his fathers. 

5 T[ And these are the names of the men 
that shall stand with you : of the tribe of 
Reuben ; '' Elizur the son of Shedeur. 

6 Of Simeon; Shelumiel the son of Zu- 
rishaddai. 

7 Of Judah; *Nahshon the "son of Am- 
minadab. 

8 Of Issachar ; Nethaneel the son of 
Zuar. 

9 Of Zebulun ; Eliab the son of Helen. 

1 Of the children of Joseph : of Ephra- 
im; Elishamathesonof Ammihud: of Ma- 
nasseh ; Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur. 

11 Of Benjamin; Abidan the son of 
Gideoni. 

1 2 Of Dan ; Ahiezer the son of Ammi- 
shaddai. 

1 3 Of Asher ; Pagiel the son of Ocran. 

14 Of Gad; Eliasaph the son of t Deuel. 

15 Of Naphtali ; Ahirathe son of Enan. 

16 These were the '^ renowned of the 
congregation, princes of the tribes of their 
fathers, s heads of thousands in Israel. 

1 7 T[ And Moses and Aaron took these men 
which are '' expressed by their 'jjames : 

18 And they assembled all the congre- 



• chap. 10:12: Ex. 19:1. b chap. 2fi: 2, 6.1; Ex. 30:12; 2S,im. 
24:2; ICIiron. 21:2. c Ex. 18 : 2.=) ; .losh. 22 : 14. dchap.2:10, 
etc.; 7:30, etc.; 10:18, etc. * Called, A'ooMon, Mat 1 : 4 ; Luke 



CHAPTER I. 
1. The second month; called Zif; answering 
to the last part of April and the first part of May. 



gation together on the first day of the sec- 
ond month, and they declared their pedi- 
grees after their families, by the house of 
their fathers, according to the •< number of 
the names, from twenty years old and 
upward, by their polls. 

1 9 As ''the Lord commanded Moses, so he 
numbered them inthe wilderness of Sinai. 

20 And the children of Reuben, Israel's 
eldest son, by their generations, after their 
families, by the house of their fathers, ac- 
cording to the number of the names, by 
their polls, every male fromtAventy years 
old and upward, all that were able to go 
forth to war ; 

21 Those that were numbered of them, 
even of the tribe of Reuben, were forty and 
six thousand and five hundred. 

22 lyOf the children of Simeon, by their 
generations, after their families, by the 
house of their fathers, those that were 
numbered of them, according to the num- 
ber of the names, by their polls, every 
male from twenty years old and upward, 
all that were able to go forth to war ; 

23 Those that were numbered of them, 
even of the tribe of Simeon, were fifty and 
nine thousand and three hundred. 

24 T[ Of the children of Gad, by their gen- 
erations, after their families, by the house 
of their fathers, according to the number of 
the names, from twenty years old and up- 
ward, all that were able to go forth to war ; 

25 Those that were numbered of them, 
even of the tribe of Gad, were forty and 
five thousand six hundred and fifty. 

26 1[0f the children of Judah, by their 
generations, after their fa*nilies, by the 
house of their fathers, according to the 
number of the names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were able to go 
forth to war; 

27 Those that were numbered of them, 
even of the tribe of ' Judah, were threescore 
and fourteen thousand and six hundred. 

28 HOf the children of Issacliar, by 
their generations, after their families, by 
the house of their fathers, according to 



3 : 32. e Rutli 4 : 20. f Called Rtuet, cliap. 2:14. f cliap. 7:2; 
IChron. 27:16, etc. e Ex. 18 : 21, 25. h Bev. 7: 4, etc. ilsa. 
43:1; John 10:3. j ver. 20, etc. k ver. 2. 1 2 Chron. 17: 14. 



4. With you; to assist them. Ver. 5, 44. 
18. Their pedigrees; the line of their fore- 
fathers. 

175 



Israel numbered by tribes. 



NUMBERS I. 



The Lei'ites not included. 



the number of the names, from twenty 
years old and upward, all that were able 
to j;o forth to war ; 

29 Those that were numbered of them, 
even of the tribe of Issachar. were fifty and 
four thousand and four liuudred. 

30 11 OfthcchildrcnofZebulun, by their 
generations, after their families, by the 
house of their fathers, according to the 
number of the names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were able to go 
forth to war ; 

31 Those that were numbered of them, 
even of the tribe of Zebulun, were fifty and 
seven thousand and four hundred. 

32 H Of the children of " Joseph, namely, 
of the children of Ephraim, by their gen- 
erations, after their families, by tlic house 
of their fathers, according to the number of 
the names, from twenty years old and up- 
ward, all that were able to go forth to war ; 

33 Those that were numbered of them, 
even of the tribe of Ephraim, were forty 
thousand and five hundred. 

34 H Of the children of Manasseh, by 
their generations, after their families, by 
the house of their fathers, according to 
the number of the names, from twenty 
year.s.old and upward, all that were able 
to go forth to war; 

35 Those that were numbered of them, 
even of the tribe of Manasseh, were thirty 
and two thousand and two hundred. 

3G 1i Of the children of Benjamin, by 
their generations, after tlicir families, by 
the house of their fathers, according to the 
number of the names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were able to go 
forth to war ; 

37 Those that were numbered of them, 
even of the tribe of Benjamin, were thirty 
and five thousand and four hundred. 

38 H Of the ehildrcnof Dan, by their gen- 
erations, after their families, by the house 
of their fathers, according to tlie number of 
the names, from twenty years old and up- 
ward, all that were able to go forth to war; 

39 Those that were numbered of them, 
even of tlic tribe of Dan, tvere threescore 
and two thousand and seven hundred. 

40 TOfthocliildrcnof A slier, by their gen- 
erations, after their families, by the house 
of their fathers, according to the number of 
the names, from twenty years old and up- 
ward, ail that were able to go forth to war ; 

41 Those that were numbered of them, 



• Di!iit.M:17. brliiip.2fi:B4. c rlinp.?:32; SB: M : Ex. 12:37 ; 
S8:!iB; Deut. 10:2-2. 5 rlinp. 2:33; rlin|ia. 3, 4 : 1 Cliron. rli. (I; 
tl;6. < clinp. n:fi, ele.; £l. 38:31. ' vcr. r>3. ( clmp. 10: 17-21. 



even of the tribe of Ashcr, were forty *B.a"'M 
and one thousand and five hundred. 

42 HOfthe children of Naphtali, through- 
out tlieir generations, after their families, 
by the house of their fathers, according 
to the number of the names, from twenty 
years old and upward, all that were able 
to go forth to war ; 

43 Those that were numbered of them, 
even of the tribe of Naphtali, icere fifty 
and three thousand and four hundred. 

44 These''flrc those that were numbered, 
which jNIoses and Aaron numbered, and 
the princes of Israel, being twelve men : 
each one was for the house of his fathers. 

45 So were all those that were numbered 
of the children of Israel, by the house of 
their fathers, from twenty years old and 
upward, all that were able to go forth to 
war in Israel ; 

46 Even all they that were "^numbered 
were six hundred thousand and three 
thousand and live hundred and fifty. 

47 ^But the ''Levites after the tribe of 
their fathers were not numbered among 
them. 

48 For the Loud had spoken unto INIo- 
ses, saying, 

49 Only thou shalt not number the tribe 
of Levi, neither take the sum of them 
among the children of Israel : 

50 But '"thou shalt appoint the Levitcs 
over the tabernacle of testimony, and over 
all the vessels thereof, and overall things 
that belong to it : they shall bear the tab- 
ernacle, and all the vessels thereof ; and 
they shall minister unto it, and shall '^en- 
camp round about the tabernacle. 

51 Andswhen the tabernacle setteth for- 
ward, the Levitcs shall take it down ; and 
when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the 
Levitcs shall set it up : and tlic '' stranger 
that cometh nigh shall be put to death. 

52 And the ehildrcnof Israel shall pitcli 
their tents, every 'man by his own camp, 
and every man by his own standard, 
throughout their hosts. 

53 But the J Levitcs shall pitch round 
about the tabernacle of testimony, that 
there be no '' wrath upon the congregation 
of the children of Israel : and the ' Levitcs 
shall keep the charge of the tabernacle of 
testimony. 

54 And the children of Israel did accord- 
ing to all that the Loud eomin:indcd INlo- 
ses, so did they. 



46. Six hundred thousand ; tlie number able 
for war shows that the wliol*- people must Jiave 
amounted to more than two millions. 

5;>. Keep the charge ; guard the tabernacle from 
176 



l> tlinp. 18:22. I chnp.2:2; S4 : 2. ) ver. 50. k r1iiip.R:I9: 
l(",:lfi; 18:ri; 1 Siim. H : 1<1. 1 ili:ip. 3: 7, 8; 31 : 30, 47 ; 1 Cliron. 
23:32; 2 Cliron. 13:10. 



the approach of all improper persons, and thus keep 
them from the piinishment threatened, ver. 51. 
INSTRUCTIONS 
40. From the great increase of tlie Israelites in 



Order of the tribes 



NUMBERS II 



in their tents. 



;;;^!S CHAPTER, II. 

The order of the tribes in their tents. 

A ND the Lord spake unto Moses and 
J\. unto Aaron, saying, 

2 Every "man of the children of Israel 
shall pitch by his own standard, with the 
ensign of their father\s honse : *far''oir 
about the tabernacle of the congregation 
.siiall they pitch. 

3 And on the east side toward the ris- 
ing of the sun shall they of the standard 
of the camp of Judah pitch throughout 
their armies: and "^Nahshon the son of 
Amminadab shall he captain of the chil- 
dren of Judah. 

4 And his host, and ihose that Avere 
numbered of them, mere threescore and 
fourteen thou.sand and six hundred. 

5 And those that do pitch next unto him 
shall be the tribe of Issachar : and Ne- 
thaneel the son of Zu,\.r shall be captain of 
the children of Issachar. 

6 And his host, and those that were 
numbered thereof, ivere fifty and four 
thousand and four hundred. 

7 Theii the tribe of Zcbulun : and Eliab 
the son of Helon shall he captain of the 
children of Zebulun. 

8 And his host, and those that were 
numbered thereof, were fifty and seven 
thousand and four hundred. 

9 All that were numbered in the camp 
of .Tudah tvere a hundred thousand and 
fourscore thousand and six thousand and 
four hundred, throughout their armies : 
these shall ''first set forth. 

10 ^ On the south Hide shall be the stand- 
ard of the camp of Reuben according tp 
their armies : and the captain of the chil- 
dren of Reuben shall be Elizur the son of 
Shedeur. 

1 1 And his host, and those that were 
numbered thereof, toere forty and six thou- 
sand and five hundred. 

12 And those which pitch by him shall 
be the tribe of Simeon : and the captain of 
the children of Simeon shall be Shelnmiel 
the son of Zurishaddai. 

13 And his host, and those that were 
numbered of them, icere fifty and nine 
tliousand and three hundred. 

14 Then the tribe of Gad: and the cap- 
tain of the sons of Gad shall be Eliasaph 
the son of t Reuel. 



a chap. 1:52. * Heh. over against, bjogli. 3:4. c chap. 1 ; 7, 
ttc. ; 10:14; ICliron. 2:10; MmI. 1 : 4 ; t.uke .1 : K, 33. i chap. 



their bondage, and from their deliverance according 
to the divine prediction, we have evidence of the 
faithfulness of G-od, and are encouraged to trust in 
him for the fulfilment of all his promises. 

CHAPTER II. 
2. His own standard; that of his ovni tribe. 



15 And his host, and those that were 
numbered of them, tcere forty and five 
thousand and six hundred and fifty. 

16 All that were numbered in the camp 
of Reuben tcere a hundred thousand and 
fifty and one thousand and four hundred 
and fifty, throughout their armies : and 
they shall set forth in the second "rank. 

17 ^ Then the "^ tabernacle of the con- 
gregation shall set forward with the camp 
of the Levites in the midst of the camp : 
as they encamp, so shall they set forward, 
every man in his place by their standards. 

18 1[ On the west side shall be the stand* 
ard of the camp of Ephraim according to 
their armies : and the captain of the sons 
of Ephraim shall be Elishama the son of 
Ammihud. 

19 And his host, and those that were 
numbered of them, irere forty thousand 
and five hundred. 

20 And by him shall he the tribe of Ma- 
nasseh : and the captain of the children 
of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel the son of 
Pedahzur. 

21 And his host, and those that were 
numbered of them, loere thirty and two 
thousand and two hundred. 

22 Then the tribe of Benjamin : and the 
captain of the sons of Benjamin shall be 
Abidan the son of Gideoni. 

23 And his host, and those that were 
numbered of them, 7vcrc thirty and five 
thousand and four hundred. 

24 All that were numbered of the camp 
of Epliraim ivere a hundred thousand and 
eight thousand and a hundred, through- 
out their armies : and they shall go for- 
ward in the £ third rank. 

2-5 1[ The standard of the camp of Dan 
shall be on the north side by their armies : 
and the captain of the children of Dan 
shall be Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai. 

26 And his host, and those that were 
numbered of them, ivcre threescore and 
two thousand and seven hundred. 

27 And those that encamp by him shall 
he the tribe of Asher : and the captain of 
the children of Asher shall he Pagiel the 
son of Ocran. 

28 And his host, and those that were 
numbered of them, icere forty and one 
thousand and five hundred. 

29 II Then the tribe of Naphtali : and 



10:14. t Calle.l DfKt/. chap. 1:14; 7:42,47; 10:20. 
10:18. f chap. 10: 17, 21. g chap. 10:22. 



chap. 



9. The camp of Judah ,• a division of the main 
host, consisting of three tribes, of vi-hich Judah was 
the head. 

16. The camp ofRettbeii ; the division of which 
this tribe was the head. 

24. The camp of Ephraim ; the division of 
which Ephraim was the head. 

177 



Number of the people. 



NUMBERS III, 



Fatnilks of the Levites. 



the captain of the children of Naphtali 
shall be Ahira the son of Enan. 

30 And his host, and those that were 
numbered of them, u'crc fifty and three 
thousand and four liundred. 

31 All they that wore numbered in the 
camp of Dan were a hundred thousand and 
fifty and seven thousand and six hun- 
dred: they shall 'go hindmost M'ith their 
standards. 

32 ^ These are those which were num- 
bered of the children of Israel by the 
house of their fathers: ''all those that 
were numbered of the camps throughout 
their hosts icere six hundred thousand and 
three thousand and five hundred and fifty. 

33 But the Levites were not numbered 
among the children of Israel ; as the Loud 
commanded Moses. 

34 And the children of Israel did accord- 
ing to "^ all that t lie Lord commanded Moses: 
so ^ they pitched by their standards, and so 
they set forward, every one after their 
families, according to the house of their 
fathers. 

CHAPTER III. 

1 The sons of Aaron. 5 The Levites are given to the 
priests for the service of the tabernacle, 1 1 instead of 
the first-bom. 14 The Levites are nnmbered by their 
families. 21 The families, number, and charge of the 
Ger.shonites, 27 of the Kohathites, 33 of the Mera- 
rites. 38 The place and charge of Moses and Aaron. 
•10 The first-born are freed by the Levites. 44 The 
overplus are redeemed. 

THESE also are the generations of Aaron 
and Moses, in the day that the Lord 
spake with Moses in mount Sinai. 

2 And these are the names of the sons 
of Aaron ; ""Nadab the first-born, and Abi- 
hu, P'leazar, and Ithamar. 

3 These arc the names of the sons of 
Aaron, the "^pricsts which were anointed, 
whom* he consecrated to minister in the 
priest's office. 

4 And Nadab and Abihu ^died before 
the Lord, when they olfered strange fire 
before the Lord, in the wilderness of Si- 
nai, and they had no children : and Elea- 
zar and Ithamar ministered in the priest's 
oflico in the sight of Aaron their father. 



• chap. I0:2.'>. b clinp. I :4fi,47 : 1 1 :21 : Ex.38:M. cP3,i.Iiq:6. 
<l cli«p.W:J,r.,fi. tEx.6:Z). f Ex.iK: 41 ; I.ev.8:2 mc. * Heb. 
ahoit hand hr fitUd. t clinp. 26: fil : Lev. 10: 1,2 ; lCliron.24:2 
kcliRp.8:6; 18:2,et<:.; Deut.33:10; .Mnl.2:4. i lChron.26:20,22. 



31. The camp of Dan ; this made fo\ir divis- 
ions into whicli the tribes were divided, and they 
were arranged in the order above mentioned. 

33. Not numbered ; not numbered as men of 
war, from which they were exempted by tlieir office. 

INSTRl'CTIOXS. 
2. The Lord appoints the habitation and circum- 
stances of all as seems good in his sight. If these 
are favor.able, wo should be grateful ; if trying, 
submissive; and in all things seek to honor him. 

34. Jehovah is a G-od of order, requiring each one 
to take and to keep his proper pliwe, by the faitiiful 
discharge of duty. Thus he will not only most honor 

178 



ses, saying, 

6 Bring the ''tribe of Levi near, and pre- 
sent them before Aaron the priest, that 
they may minister unto him. 

7 And 'they shall keep his charge, and 
the charge of the whole congregation be- 
fore the tabernacle of the congregation, 
to J do the service of the tabernacle. 

8 And they shall keep all the instru- 
ments of the tabernacle of the congrega- 
tion, and the charge of the children of Is- 
rael, to do the service of the tabernacle. 

9 And thou shalt ''give the Levites unto 
Aaron and to his sons : they are wholly 
given unto him out of the children of Israel. 

10 And thou shalt appoint Aaron and 
his sons, and they shall wait on their 
priest's office : and the ' stranger that com- 
eth nigh shall be put to death. 

11 And the Lord spake unto INIoses, 
saying, 

12 And I, behold, I have taken the "'Le- 
vites from among the children of Israel 
instead of all the first-born that openeth 
the matrix among the children of Israel : 
therefore the Levites shall be mine ; 

13 Because all the "first-born are mine; 
for on the day that I smote all the first-born 
in the land of Egypt I hallowed unto me all 
the first-born in Israel, both man and beast : 
mine they shall be : I am the Lord. 

14 ^ And the Lord spake unto Moses 
in the wilderness of Sinai, saying, 

15 Number the children of Levi after 
the house of their fathers, by their fami- 
lies : every "male from a month old and 
upward shalt thou number them. 

16 And Moses numbered them accord- 
ing to the t word of the Lord, as he was 
commanded. 

17 And P these were the sons of Levi by 
their names ; Gershon, and Kohath, and 
Merari. 

1 8 And these are the names of the sons 
of Gershon by their families ;i Libni, and 
Shimei. 

19 And the sons of Kohath by their fam- 



Jcliap. 1:S0. k chap.8:19; 18:6,7. I ver. :18; Eph. 2 : 19: Heli. 
10: 19-22. m ver. 41 ; cliap. 8:16. n Ex. 13 : 2, 12 ; Lev. 27 : 26 : 
Luke 2 : 23. o ver. 39 ; clmp. 26 : 62. f Ueb. mouth, p Genesia 
46:11; Ex. 6:16. q Ex. 6:17-19. 



God, but be most happy himself and most useful to 
others. 

CHAPTER III. 

4. In the sight of Aaro7i ; under his direction. 

fi. Minister iiiito him ; wait upon and assist 
him in the service of the sanctuary. Ver. 7-9. 

10. The stranger ; not of the seed of Aaron, 
and not appointed by God to the priest's office. 

12. Be mine ; consecrated to the service of the 
sanctuary. 

1.3. Hallowed unto me ; set apart for his partic- 
ular service. Ex. 12 : 29, 30 ; 13 : 11-15. 



The number of the Levites, 



NUMBERS III. 



and their several charges. 



t'.c.'hm.' ilies ; Amram, and Izehar, Hebron, 
and Uzziel. 

20 And the sons of Merari by their fam- 
ilies ; Mahli, and Mushi. Tliese are the 
families of the Levites according to the 
house of their fathers. 

21 Of Gershon ivas the family of the 
Libnites, and the family of the Shimites : 
these are the families of the Gershonites. 

22 Those that were numbered of them, 
according to the number of all the males, 
from a montli old and up%yard, even those 
that were numbered of them were seven 
thousand and five hundred. 

23 The families of the ^ Gershonites shall 
pitch behind the tabernacle westward. 

24 And the chief of the house of the fa- 
ther of the Gershonites shall be Eliasaph 
the son of Lael. 

25 And the charge of the sons of '' Ger- 
shon in the tabernacle of the congregation 
shall be the <= tabernacle, and the "^ tent, the 
covering thereof, and the hanging for the 
doorof the tabernacle of the congregation, 

26 And the "^hangings of the court, and 
the curtain for the door of the court, which 
is by the tabernacle, and by the altar 
round about, and the ''cords of it, for all 
the service thereof. 

27 If And of sKohath was the family of 
the Amramites, and the family of the Ize- 
harites, and the family of the Hebronites, 
and the family of the Uzzielites : these 
are the families of the Kohathites. 

28 In the number of all the males, from 
a month old and upward, were eight thou- 
sand and six hundred, keeping the charge 
of the sanctuary. 

29 The families of the sons of ^ Kohath 
shall pitch on the side of the tabernacle 
southward. 

30 And the chief of the house of the fa- 
ther of the families of the Kohathites shall 
be Elizaphan the son of Uzziel. 

31 And their 'charge shall be the Jark, 
and the ''table, and the candlestick, and 
the 'altars, and the vessels of the sanc- 
tuary wherewith they minister, and the 
hanging,"" and all the service thereof. 

32 And Eleazar the son of Aaron the 
priest shall be chief over the chief of the 
Levites, and have the oversight of them 
that keep the charge of the sanctuary. 

33 H Of "Merari was the family of the 
Mahlites, and the family of the Mushites : 
these are the families of Merari. 

34 And those that were numbered of 
them, according to the number of all the 



• chnp. 1:53. b chap. 4 : 24-26. c Ex. 25:9. d Et. 26: I.etc. 
» Ex. 27: 9, etc. f Ex. .15 : 18. g 1 Cliron. 26 : 23. h chap. 1 : ,53. 
ichap.4:16. jEx.25:IO. k Ex. 25 : 2.3, 31. 1 Ex. 27: 1 ; 30 : 1. 
m Exoiius 26 : 32. n 1 chron. 6 : 19. o chap. 1 : .53. * Heb. the 



males, from a month old and upward, icere 
six thousand and two hundred. 

35 And the chief of the house of the fa- 
ther of the families of Merari was Zuriel 
the son of Abihail : ° these shall pitch on 
the side of the tabernacle northward. 

36 And *under the custody and p charge 
of the sons of Merari shall be the boards 
of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, 
and the pillars thereof, and the sockets 
thereof, and all the vessels thereof, and 
all that serveth thereto, 

37 And the pillars of the court round 
about, and their sockets, and their pins, 
and their cords. 

38 TfBut those that encamp before the 
tabernacle toward the east, even before 
the tabernacle qf the congregation east- 
ward, shall be Moses, and Aaron and his 
sons, 1 keeping the charge of the sanctuary 
for the charge of the children of Israel; 
and the ''stranger that cometh nigh shall 
be put to death. 

39 All 'that were numbered of the Le- 
vites, which Moses and Aaron numbered 
at the commandment of the Lord, through- 
out their families, all the males from a 
month old and upward, ivere twenty and 
two thousand. 

40 H And the Lord said unto Moses, Num- 
ber'' all the first-born of the males of the 
children of Israel from a month old and up- 
ward, and take the number of their names. 

41 And "thou shalt take the Levites for 
me (I am the Lord) instead of all the first- 
born among the children of Israel ; and 
the cattle of the Levites instead of all the 
firstlings among the cattle of the children 
of Israel. 

42 And Moses numbered, as the Lord 
commanded him, all the first-born among 
the children of Israel. 

43 And all the first-born males by the 
number of names, from a month old and 
upward, of those that were numbered of 
them, were twenty and two thousand two 
hundred and threescore and thirteen. 

44 f[And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

45 Take the ^Levites instead of all the 
first-born among the children of Israel, and 
the cattle of the Levites instead of their 
cattle; and the Levites shall be mine : I 
am the Lord. 

46 And for those that are to be "redeemed 
of the two hundred and threescore and 
thirteen of the first-born of the children of 
Israel, which are " more than the Levites ; 



office of the charge, p chap. 4 : 31 , 32. q ver. 7, 8. 
• chap. 26:62. t ver. IS. n ver. 12, 45. » ver. 41. 
18:15; Ex. 13:13. i ver. 39-43. 



w chap. 



25. The charge of the sons of Gershon ; the things committed to their particular care 

179 



The age and time 



NUiMBERS IV. 



of the Levites' service. 



47 Tliou shalt even take "five shekels 
apiece by the poll, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary shalt thou take them : (the 
shekel'' is twenty gerahs :) 

48 And thou shalt give the money, 
wherewith the odd number of them is to 
be redeemed, unto Aaron and to his sons. 

49 And Moses took the redemption- 
money of them that were over and above 
them that were redeemed by the Levites : 

50 Of the tirst-born of the children of Is- 
rael took he the money ; a thousand three 
hundred and threescore and live shekels, 
after the "^.shekel of the sanctuary : 

51 And Moses ''gave the money of them 
that were redeemed unto Aaron and to 
his sons, according to the word of the 
Lord, as the "^Lord compianded Moses. 

CHAPTER IV. 

I The age and time of the lievites' service. 4 The 
carriage of the Kohathites, when the priests have 
taken down the tabernacle. 16 The charge of Elea- 
zar. 17 The office of the priests. 21 The carriage 
of the Ger.-;honites. 29 The carriage of the Merarites. 
'M The number of the Kohathites, 33 of the Gershon- 
ites, 42 and of the Merarites. 

A ND the Lord spake unto Moses and 
-lx. unto Aaron, saying, 

2 Take the sum of the sons of Kohath 
from among the sons of Levi, after their 
families, by the house of their fathers, 

3 From ""thirty years old and upward 
even until fifty years old, all that enter 
into the host, to do the w^ork in the tab- 
ernacle of the congregation. 

4 This ^shnll he the service of the sons 
of Kohath in the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation, about the ''most holy things. 

5 ^ And when the camp settcth for- 
ward, Aaron shall come, and his sons, 
and they shall take down the covering 
veil,' and cover the Jark of testimony 
with it : 

G And shall put thereon the covering of 
badgers' skins, and shall spread over it a 
cloth wholly of blue, and shall put in the 
staves '' thereof. 

7 And upon the 'table of ""show-bread 
they shall spread a cloth of blue, and put 
thereon the dishes, and the spoons, and 



• chap. I8:IA; 


Lev. 27 : 6. b Ex. :!0 : l.T ; Lev. 27 : V, ■ Eiek. 


«:1S. c ver. ■«« 


47. d ver. 48. eMiihchi4:4. fclinp. 8:24; 
27. « ver. l.V b ver. 19. i Ex. 26: 31 ; I».i. 


1 Chron. M : .t, 24 


?8:7; Heb.{l;3 


10:20. j Ex. 2.5: 10. 111. k 1 Kings, 8 : 7, 8. 
n Lev.24:I>.8. ' Or, pour out. » Kx. 2S:31-.18. 


1 Ex.2f.:2.V30. t 



47. Five shekels; about two dollars and a half. 
INSTRUCTION?. 

12. The minister.s of relij^ion should be in a pe- 
culiar sense devoted to God ; not entangling them- 
selves M-ilh the affairs of this life, but employing 
their time and talents in the discharge of the ap- 
propriate duties of their office. 

38. The Lord appoints to all their places and 
their work; and as it is his will that there should 
be division of labor, e.ach one should strive to fill 
the place assigned him, and faithfully perform the 
duties to which he is called. 
180 



B. C. 14M 

withal : and tiie continual bread shall be 
thereon : 

8 And they sliall spread upon them a 
cloth of scarlet, and cover the same with 
a covering of badgers' skins, and shall put 
in the staves thereof. 

9 And they shall take a cloth of blue, 
and cover the "candlestick of the light, 
and his lamps, and his tongs, and hi.s 
snuff- dishes, and all the oil-vessels there- 
of, wherewith they minister unto it : 

10 And they shall put it and all the ves- 
sels thereof within a covering of badgers' 
skins, and shall put it upon a bar. 

11 And upon the golden "altar they 
shall spread a cloth of blue, and cover it 
with a covering of badgers' skins, and 
shall put to the staves thereof; 

12 And they shall take all the p instru- 
ments of ministry, wherewith they min- 
ister in the sanctuary, and put them in a 
cloth of blue, and cover them with a cov- 
ering of badgers' skins, and shall put 
them on a bar. 

13 And they shall take away the ashes 
from the altar, and spread a purple cloth 
thereon : 

14 And they shall put upon it all the 
vessels'! thereof, wherewith they minis- 
ter about it, even the censers, the flesh- 
hooks, and the shovels, and the + basins, 
all the vessels of the altar ; and they shall 
spread upon it a covering of badgers' 
skins, and put to the staves of it. 

15 And when Aaron and his sons have 
made an end of covering the sanctuary, 
and all the vessels of the sanctuary, as 
the camp is to set forward ; after that, 
the sons of ''Kohath shall come to bear it: 
but tliey shall not 'touch any holy thing, 
lest they 'die. These ^tilings arc the bur- 
den of the sons of Kohatli in the taberna- 
cle of the congregation. 

16 ^And to the ofhee of Eleazar the 
son of Aaron the priest pcriaineth the " oil 
for the light, and the * sweet incense, and 
the daily *meat-oflering, and the anoint- 
ing y oil, and the oversight of all the tab- 



o Ex.SO:!-.";. p Ex.2.->:9; lChron.9:2* q Ex. 38:3; 2Cliron. 
4:19. f Or, liowU. r chap. 7:9; 10:21 ; Deut.31 :9; .losli. 4: 10; 
2Sam.H:l3; I Chron. l.i :2, 1!). • 2 Sam.6: 6,7: 1 Chron. 13:9, in. 
iHcb. 12:29. u chop. 3:31. »Ex. 2,i:6; Lev. 24 : 2. "Ex. 
30 : 34. X Kx. 29 : 40. J Ex. 30 : 23-:!3. 

51. Different persons are called to promote the 
cause of God in different w.ays ; some by their per- 
sonal services, others by their property, and all by 
their pr.ayers, their intliience, and their e.xample. 
If from love to him they employ what he gives 
them in liis service, they will all be iiccepted in 
Christ, and receive an abundant reward. 

CHAPTER IV. 
15. The burden of the sons of Kohath ; the 
things connected with the tabern.-icle, which they 
were to carry. Chap. 3:31. 



Number and charge of the 



NUMBERS IV. 



Kohathitcs and Gershonites. 



B. C. UUO. 

the sanctuary, and in the vessels thereof. 

17 ^And the Lord spake unto Moses 
and unto Aaron, saying, 

18 Cut ye not off the tribe of the families 
of tlie Kohathites from among the Levites: 

19 But thus do unto them, that they 
may live, and not die, when they approach 
unto the *most holy Ihings : Aaron and 
his sons shall go in, and appoint them ev- 
ery one to his service and to his burden: 

20 But they shall not go in to ""see when 
(he holy things are covered, lest they die. 

21 TfAnd the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

22 Take also the sum of the sons of 
Gcrshon, throughout the houses of their 
fathers, by their families; 

23 From "^thirty years old and upward 
until fifty years old shalt thou number 
them ; all that enter in to * perform the 
service, to do the work in the tabernacle 
of the congregation. 

24 This is the service of the families of the 
Gershonites, to serve, and for t burdens : 

25 And ''they shall bear the curtains of 
the tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the 
congregation, his covering, and the cov- 
ering of the badgers' ''skins that is above 
upon it, and the hanging for the door of 
the tabernacle of the congregation, 

26 And the "^hangings of the court, and 
tlie hanging for the door of the gate of the 
court, which is by the tabernacle and by 
the altar round about, and their ^ cords, and 
all the instruments of their service, and all 
that is made for them: so shall they serve. 

27 At the i appointment of Aaron and his 
sons shall be all the service of the sons of 
the Gershonites, in all their burdens, and 
in all their service : and ye shall appoint 
unto them in charge all their burdens. 

28 This is the service of the families of 
the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of 
the congregation : and their charge shall 
be under the hand of '' Ithainar the sou of 
Aaron the priest. 

29 Tf As for the sons of Merari, thou 
shalt number them after their families, 
by the house of their fathers ; 



a ver. -1. 1) Exoiiun 13:21 ; Lev. 10:2; 1 Sam. fi: 19. c ver. 3. 
» Hel). war the warfare. 1 Cor. 3:7; 1 Timotliy, 1 : 18. f Or, 
carriage. <1 cliap. 3: 25, -26. "Ex. 26:14. f Ex. 27:9. g Ex. 



18. Cut ye not off — the Kohathites ; by suf- 
fering them to see the holy things which they were 
to carry. Ver. 20. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Maturity of body and mind, and thorough prep- 
aration, are needful to the proper discharge of the 
duties of the ministry ; and none unprepared or un- 
called should assume the responsibilities of the sacred 
office. 1 Tim. 3 : 6. 

1.'). Sacred things should be treated with rever- 
ence, and we should not attempt to reveal or dis- 
cover what God designed to conceal. 



30 From 'thirty years old and upward 
even unto fifty years old shalt thou num- 
ber them, every one that entereth into 
the 5 service, to do the work of the taber- 
nacle of the congregation. 

31 And J this is the charge of their bur- 
den, according to all their service in the 
tabernacle of the congregation ; the''boards 
of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and 
the pillars thereof, and sockets thereof, 

32 And the pillars of the court round 
about, and their sockets, and their pins, 
and their cords, with all their 'instru- 
ments, and with all their service : and by 
name ye shall reckon the instruments of 
the charge of their burden. 

33 This is the service of the families of 
the sons of Merari, according to all their 
service, in the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation, under the '"hand of Ithamar the 
son of Aaron the priest. 

34 "^And Moses and Aaron and the chief 
of the congregation numbered the sons of 
the Kohathites after their families, and 
after the house of their fathers, 

35 From "thirty years old and upward 
even unto fifty years old, every one that 
entereth into the service, for the work in 
the tabernacle of the congregation : 

36 And those that were numbered of 
them by their families were two thousand 
seven hundred and fifty. 

37 These were they that were numbered 
of the families of the Kohathites, all that 
might do service in the tabernacle of the 
congregation, which Moses and Aaron did 
number according to the commandment 
of the Lord by the hand of Moses. 

38 And those that were numbered of the 
sons of Gershon, throughout their fami- 
lies, and by the house of their fathers, 

39 From thirty years old. and upward 
even unto fifty years old, every one that 
entereth into the service, for the work in 
the tabernacle of the congregation, 

40 Even those that were numbered of 
them, throughout their families, by the 
house of their fathers, were two thousand 
and six hundred and thirty. 

41 These °are they that were numbered 



■IS 


IS. 


t 


Heb 




outh. 


h 


ver. 


,33. 


i J 


er. 3. 


? 


Heb. « 


arfare. 




. 23. 


J 


ch.ip. 


3 


3fi, 37. 


k 


Ex 


2H 


15. 


1 Ex 


2.T 


9. m ^ 


er. 2S ; 


Jo 


h. 3 


6. 


n V( 


■• 


47. » 


ver 


22 















19. We should use all suitable means to prevent 
others from committing sin, lest, by our neglect, we 
become the occasion of their ruin. 

47. While men should not enter the ministry too 
young, they should also not continue to sustain its 
responsibilities, and attempt to discharge its duties, 
when they are too old ; but the Scriptures do not 
fix the age at which the public ministry now should 
cease. Different duties are suited to different periods 
of life, and wisdom from above is needful in order to 
judge rightly as to what are appropriate duties, and 
also as to the time and manner of performing them. 
181 



Charge of the Merarites. 



NUMBERS V. 



0/ separating the unclean. 



of the families of the sons of Gershon, of 
all that might do service in the tabernacle 
of the congregation, whom Moses and 
Aaron did number according to the com- 
mandment of tlie Loud. 

42 1[ And those that were numbered of 
thefamiliesof the sons of Merari, through- 
out their families, by the liouse of their 
fathers, 

43 From thirty years old and upward 
even unto fifty years old, every one that 
entereth into the service, for the work in 
the tabernacle of the congregation, 

44 Even those that were numbered of 
them after their families, were three thou- 
sand and two hundred. 

45 These he those that were numbered 
of the families of the sons of Merari, 
whom Moses and Aaron numbered ac- 
cording to the word of the "Lord by the 
hand of Moses. 

46 All those that were numbered of the 
Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the 
chief of Israel numbered, after their fam- 
ilies, and after the house of their fathers, 

47 From '' thirty years old and upward 
even unto fifty years old, every "^one that 
came to do the service of the ministry, 
and the service of the burden in the tab- 
ernacle of the congregation, 

48 Even those that were numbered of 
them, were eight thousand and five hun- 
dred and fourscore. 

49 According to the commandment of 
the Lord they were numbered by the 
hand of Moses, every one according to 
his ^ service, and according to liis burden : 
thus were they numbered of him, as the 
Lord" commanded Moses. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 The unclean are removed out of the camp. 5 Res- 
titution is to be made for trespasses. 11 The trial of 
jealousy. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 

2 Command the children of Israel that 
they put out of the camp every "^leper, 
and every one that hath an tissue, and 
whosoever is defiled by the '-dead: 

3 Both male and female shall ye put out, 
without' the camp shall ye put them; 
that they defile not their camps, in the 
midst whereof I J dwell. 

• ver. W. b vcr. 3, n, 30 ; 1 Cliron. 43:3, 87. c Rom. 12:6-8; 
I Cor.U:4-31. <t ver. lft,2<,3l. •ver.1,21. rcliap.l'2:l4; Lev. 
13:3.<«: Drut.lM:8,». «L»v.lS:2. ■> rhiip.9:fi, 10: I'J: 11-13; 
31:19; Lev. 21:1. I 2 Kingn, 7:3 ; 2 Cliron. M: ?I. i Ltv. 2fi : 1 1 , 
12; 2Cor.6:l6. k LeT.6:2. lLcv.6:6; 26:40; Juiili.7:19; Job 



CHAPTER V. 

2. Out of the camp ; outside of the regular en- 
campment. 

6. A trespass against the Lord; by defraud- 
ing his fellow-men. 

8. // the vian have vo kinsman ; if the in- 
jured man were dead, and he had no relative to re- 
182 



4 And the children of Israel did Vcrfii 
so, and put them out without the camp: 
as the Lord spake unto Moses, so did the 
children of Israel. 

5 T[And the Lord spake unto Mo.ses. 
saying, 

6 Speak unto the eliiklren of Israel, ''When 
a man or woman shall commit any sin 
that men commit, to do a trespass against 
the Lord, and that person be guilty; 

7 Then they shall 'confess their sin 
which they have done : and he shall ^ rec- 
ompense his trespass with the principal 
thereof, and add unto it the fifth ]part there- 
of, and give it unto him against whom he 
hath trespassed. 

8 But if the man have no kinsman to 
recompense the trespass unto, let the tres- 
pass be recompensed unto the Lord, even 
to the priest; beside the ram of the atone- 
ment, whereby an atonement shall be 
made for liim. 

9 And every *ofrering of all the holy 
things of the children of Israel, which 
they bring unto the priest, shall be "his. 

10 And every man's hallowed things 
shall be his : whatsoever any man giveth 
the priest, it shall be his. 

11 If And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

12 Speak unto the children of Israel, 
and say unto them. If any man's wife go 
aside, and commit a trespass against him, 

L3 And a "man lie with her carnally, 
and it be hid from the eyes of her hus- 
band, and be kept close, and she be de- 
filed, and there be no witness against her, 
neither she be taken with the manner; 

14 And the spiritofP jealousy come upon 
him, and he be jealous of his wife, and 
she be defiled ; or if the spirit of jealousy 
come upon him, and he be jealous of his 
wife, and she be not defiled : 

15 Then shall the man bring his wife unto 
the priest, and he shall bring her i offcrirtg 
for her, the tenth ]mrt of an ephah of bar- 
ley-meal ; he shall pour no oil upon it, nor 
put frankincense thereon ; for it is an of- 
fering of jealousy, an offering of memo- 
rial, "^ bringing iniquity to remembrance. 

16 And tlie priest shall bring her near, 
and set her before the Lord : 

17 And the priest shall take holy water 



33:27: P»a.32:!S; Prov.28:13: 1 .John, 1 : !>. m Lev. 6:,'>-7 ; 7:7. 
* Or.heaveiifftring. n rljap. 1S:8,9, 19; r.x.29:28; Lev.6:17,l8; 
7:6-14; Deut. 18:3,4; K J.f k. 44 : 2!>, .TO ; Mal.3;8-10; lCor.9:l3. 
o Lev. 18:20. p Prov. 6:34,3.'i; Cant 8:fi: Zeph. 3:8. q Lev. 
6:11. r I Kingt), 17:18; Ezek. 29:16; Heb. 10:3. 

ceive restitution, then it was to be made to the Lord 
by being given to the priest. Ver. 9, 10. 

16. Near; near to the holy place, where the 
Lord dwelt upon the mercy-seat. 

17. Holy water ; water from the laver in the 
t.abernaole ; called holy because devoted to a sacred 

J or religious use. Ex. 30 : 18. 



The law of trial 



NUMBERS VI. 



in a case of jealousy. 



B. C. H90 

dust that is iu the floor of the tabernacle 
the priest shall take, and put it into the 
water. 

18 And the priest shall set the woman be- 
fore the ^LoRD, and uncover the woman's 
head, and put the offering of memorial in 
her hands, which is the jealousy-offering : 
and the priest shall have in his hand the 
bitter water that causeth the curse. 

19 And the priest shall charge her by an 
oath,'' and say unto the woman, If no man 
have lain with thee, and if thou hast not 
gone aside to uncleanness *ivith another 
instead of thy husband, be thou free from 
this bitter water that causeth the curse : 

20 But if thou hast gone aside to another 
instead of thy husband, and if thou be de- 
filed, and some man have lain with thee 
besides thy husband: 

21 Then the priest shall "= charge the 
woman with an oath of cursing, and the 
priest shall say unto the woman. The Lord 
make thee a '^ curse and an oath among 
thy people, when the Lord doth make thy 
thigh to t rot, and thy belly to swell ; 

22 And this water that causeth the curse 
shall go into thy ''bowels, to make thy 
belly to swell, and thy thigh to rot. And 
the woman "^ shall say. Amen, amen. 

23 And the priest shall write these curses 
in a book, and he shall blot them out with 
the bitter water : 

24 And he shall cause the woman to drink 
the bitter water that causeth the curse : 
and the water that causeth the curse shall 
enter into her, and become bitter. 

25 Then the priest shall take the jeal- 
ousy-offering out of the woman's hand, 
and shall ?wave the offering before the 
Lord, and offer it upon the altar: 



• Heb. 13:4; Rev. 2 : 19-23. b Mat. 26 : 63. * Heb. under, or 
being in the power of, thy hushand. c Josh. 6:26: ISam. 14:24; 
Neb. 10:29. d.Ier.29:22. fHeb./atl. ePsa.l09:18. f Deut. 
27 : 15. B Lev. 8 : 27. b Lev. 2 : 2, 9. i Deut. 28 : 37 ; Isa. 65 : 15 ; 



19. Charge her hy an oath ; to testify the truth. 

22. Amen : be it so, or so let it be. 

23. Ill a book ; on parchment, or on something 
from which it could be washed oft'. 

27. Be a curse; be viewed as guilty and accurs- 
ed of the Lord. 

28. Site shall be free; from all reproach or 
harm. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. As Jehovah is holy, and requires men to be 
holy, all causes of mental and moral defilement, and 
especially whatever tends to increase and extend it, 
should be carefully avoided. 

7. Unjustly to obtain or keep possession of an- 
others property, is a sin which llod abhors. No 
professed repentance, which does not lead a man 
who is conscious of this sin to forsake it, and, if in 
his power, make restitution, will deliver him from 
divine wrath. 

13. Adulterers and adulteresses are highly crimi- 
nal, and e,\posed to the vengeance of God. Though 
their crime may be known only to him and them- 



26 And the priest shall take a handful 
of the offering, even the '' memorial thereof, 
and burn it upon the altar, and afterward 
shall cause the woman to drink the water. 

27 And when he hath made her to drink 
the water, then it shall come to pass, that, 
if she be defiled, and have done trespass 
against her husband, that the water that 
causeth the curse shall enter into her, and 
become bitter, and her belly shall swell, 
and her thigh shall rot : and the woman 
shall be a 'curse among her people. 

28 And if the woman be not defiled, but 
be clean ; then she shall be free, and shall 
conceive-! seed. 

29 This is the law of jealousies, when 
a wife goeth '' aside to another instead of 
her husband, and is defiled ; 

30 Or when the spirit of jealousy com- 
etli upon him, and he be jealous over his 
wife, and shall set the woman before the 
Lord, and the priest shall execute upon 
her all this law. 

31 Then shall the man be guiltless from 
iniquity, and this woman shall 'bear her 
iniquity. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 The law of the Nazarites. 22 The form of blessing 
the people. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
^ing, 

2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
say unto them, When either man or wom- 
an shall + separate themselves to vow a 
vow of a " Nazarite, to separate themselves 
unto the Lord ; 

3 He shall separate himself from " wine 
and strong drink, and shall drink no vin- 
egar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, 
neithershallhcdrinkany liquor of grapes, 
nor eat moist grapes, or dried. 



.ler 


24:9 


■ 29 


18 


22 


; 4' 


:18; Zech 


8:1.3. 




Psa. 113 


•1. 


k Ter. 


19; 


Isaiah 57 


8. 


1 


Leviticus 20: 17-20. 


t 


Or, make themselves 


f\'a 


writes 


ni 


•h 


Jr 


13 


b; Acts 21 


23,24 




n Jer.35 


6-R 


Amus 


2:12; Lu 


ke 1 


:15 



















selves, he will reveal it — if not in this world, in the 
world to come — and will visit them with his terrible 
indignation. 

27. The diseases which the licentious often suffer, 
and witli which they infect and torment each other, 
are a manifestation of divine wrath against their sin, 
and a warning that, unless they repent and become 
pure and holy, the curses of G-od will sooner or later 
overwhelm them. 

31. Satan tries hard to promote domestic jeal- 
ousy, because it tends to destroy family peace, re- 
ligion, and usefulness; all should therefore avoid 
occasions of producing it, and withstand all tempta- 
tions to indulge it. If any are unjustly suspected, 
they should in calmness, patience, ;ind well-doing, 
commit themselves to thedisposalof God, and in due 
time he will remove suspicions, or overrule them 
for the advancement of his glory and the good of his 
kingdom. 

CHAPTER VI. 

2. A Nazarite; one devoted to special religious 
service, either for a limited term or for life. 
183 



The law of the Nazarites. 



NUMBERS VI. 



The form of blessing. 



4 All the clays of his 'separation shall 
he eat nothiiiii that is made of the t vine- 
tree, from the kernels even to the husk. 

5 AH the days of tlie voav of his separa- 
tion there shall no "razor come upon his 
head: until the days be fnllillcd, in the 
which he scparatcth A/»).vc//unto the Lord, 
he shall be holy, a»K/ shall let the locks of 
the hair of his head grow. 

6 All the days that he separateth him- 
self unto the I.ord he shall come at no 
dead ''body. 

7 lie shall not make himself unclean 
for his father, or for his mother, for his 
brother, or for his sister, when they die : 
because the t consecration of his God is 
upon his head. 

8 All the days of his "^ .reparation he is 
holy unto the Loun. 

9 And if any man die very suddenly by 
him, and he liath defiled the head of his 
consecration ; then he shall "* shave his 
head in the day of his cleansing, on the 
seventh day shall he shave it. 

10 And on the eighth day he shall bring 
two ''turtles, or two young pigeons, to the 
priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the 
congregation : 

11 And the priest shall offer the one for 
a sin-offering, and the other for a burnt- 
offering, and make an atonement for him, 
for that he sinned by the dead, and shall 
hallow his head that same day. 

12 And he shall consecrate unto the 
Lord the days of his separation, and shall 
bring a lamb of the first year for a "^tres- 
pass-ofi'cring : but the days that were be- 
fore shall ^ be lost, because his separation 
was defiled. 

13 TIAnd this is the law of the Naza- 
rite : when the days of his separation arc 
fulfilled,^ he shall be brought unto the 
door of the tabernacle of the congregation : 

14 And he shall offer his offering unto 
the Lord, one he-lamb of the first year 
without blemish for a burnt-offering, and 
one ewe-lamb of the first year without 
blemish ^ for a sin-offering, and one ram 



' Or, Nauirileihip. i He\>. vine o/ lite tvine. • .luilg. Ifi: 17, 
19; ISKliiui-l, : : 11. b cli:ip. n:fii 19:11, lli; Lev. 21 : I, 2, II. 
t Heh.teporalion. c 2Cor. (1: 17, IH. il Arts IH: 18. rLev.fi:7j 
14:22; 16:14.4'.). f LfvitirUB ft: (i. % Heli./o//. (!Act«2l:2fi. 
b I.ev. 4 : 3, 2«, »i ; Mnlaclii I : 13, M ; I I'etcr, 1:19. I I-ev. 3 : fi. 
I Lev. 2:4. « Ex. 29:2. 1 cliap. Ifi : .1, 7, 10. m Acts 21 : 24. 



4. Nothing that is made of the viiie-tree; 
this wa.s desij;ned to impress the importance of so- 
briety, and of .abstinence from all the intoxicating 
pleasures of sin. 

5-8. Dnys of the vow ; tlie.se regulations re- 
quired iiiiti to show peculiar deadness to the world 
and devotion to tlie service of God. 

12. Days — shall he lost ; they would not be 
counted as a part of the time of his Nazariteship, 
but he must begin again. 

1.3-"20. His (ilJerDi-x ; these offerings were an ac- 
knowledgment that in liis best services he needed the 
184 



without blemish for 'peace-offer- VciiJoo. 
ings, 

15 And a basket of unleaA'ened bread, 
cakesJ of fine flour mingled with oil, and 
wafers ofunleavened'' bread anointed with 
oil, and their meat-offering, and their 
drink-offerings.' 

16 And the priest shalj bring //tp;?; before 
the Loud, and shall oficr his sin-offering, 
and. his burnt-offering: 

1 7 And he shall offer the ram for a sac- 
rifice of peace-offerings unto the Lord, 
with the basket of unleavened bread : the 
priest shall offer also his meat-offering, 
and his drink-offering. 

18 And the Nazarite shall "'shave the 
head of his separation at the door of the 
tabernacle of the congregation, and shall 
take the hair of the head of his separation, 
and put il in the fire which is under the 
sacrifice of the peace-offerings. 

19 And t he priest shall take the " sodden 
shoulder of tlie ram, and "one unleavened 
cake out of the basket, and one unleav- 
ened wafer, and shall put them upon the 
hands of the Nazarite, after the hair of his 
separation is shaven : 

20 A"nd the priest shall wave them for 
a wave-ofl'ering before the Lord: this is 
holy for the priest, with the wave-breast 
and heave-shoulder : and after that the 
Nazarite may drink wine. 

21 This is the law of the Nazarite who 
hath vowed, and of his offering unto the 
Lord for his separation, besides that, that 
his hand shall get: according to the vow 
wiiich he vowed, so he must do after the 
law of his separatioB. 

22 T[ And the Lord spake unto INIoscs, 
saying, 

23 Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, 
saying. On this wise ye shall p bless the 
children of Israel, saying unto them, 

24 The Lor di bless thee, and ' keep thee : 

25 The Lord make his "face shine upon 
thee, and be 'gracious unto thee: 

26 The Lord lift up "his countenance 
upon thee, and give thee "peace. 

n l.S.imuel, 2:ln. o Ex. 29 : 23-28. p 1.M-. 9 : 22 ; Deut. 10: 8; 
21:5; .l09lj.8:33; lCliron.23: 13. q Pan. 1 :H : .I. r Psa. 121 :7; 
John 17: II. ^ Punlm 31:1H; ti7:l; 80:3, 7, 19; 1 19: l;l.=V; Dnn. 
9:17. I Gen. 43:29; Exmlus :)3: 19; M.il. I : 9. u P»nlm4:fi; 
89:IS. » P8alrn29:ll; Isa. 2li: 3, 12; .lolin 14:27; Pliil.4:7; 
2TlieKS. 3:16. 

efficacy of atoning blood and of the purifying Spirit, 
and also tokens of gratitude for the goodness of God. 

21. That his hand shall get ; such freewill- 
offerings as he might be disposed to make. 

2ii. IJlfss the childre?!. of Israel ; ask of God, 
and pronounce in liis name, blessings upon them. 

24. Keep thee; from all evil; especially from 
sin and its consequences. 

25. Male h is face shine ; smile graciously upon 
thee, and grant thee his Spirit. 

2(5. Ijij't lip his CO II II ten mice iipon thee; re- 
veal himself to thee, and give thee sweet commun- 



Offering of the princes. 



NUMBERS VII. 



Dedication of the altar. 



B.c!'i?w.' 27 And they shall put my *name 
upon the children of Israel, and I will ^ bless 
them. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1 The offering of the jirinces at the dedication of the 
tabernacle. 10 Their several offerings at the dedi- 
cation of the altar. fc9 God speaketh to Moses from 
the mercy-seat. 

AND it came to pass on the day that 
Moses had fully set "^ up the taberna- 
cle, and had anointed "^il, and sanctified 
it, and all the instruments thereof, both 
the altar and all the vessels thereof, and 
had anointed them, and sanctified them ; 

2 That the " princes of Israel, heads of 
the house of their fathers, who were the 
princes of the tribes, * and were over them 
that were numbered, offered : 

3 And they brought their offering be- 
fore the Lord, six covered wagons, and 
twelve oxen ; a wagon for two of the 
princes, and for each one an ox : and they 
brought them before the tabernacle. 

4 And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying. 

5 Take it of them, that they may be to 
do the service of the tabernacle of the 
congregation; and thou shaft give them 
unto the Levites, to every man according 
to his service. 

6 And Moses took the wagons and the 
oxen, and gave them unto the Levites. 

7 Two wagons and four oxen he gave 
unto the sons of Gershon, according to 
their ""service : 

8 And four wagons and eight oxen he 
gave unto the sons of ^Merari, according 
unto their service, under the hand of Ith- 
amar the son of Aaron the priest. 

9 But unto the sons of Kohath he gave 
none : ''because the service of the sanctu- 
ary belonging unto them ivas that they 
should bear upon their shoulders. 

10 T[And the princes ofiered for 'dedi- 
cating of the altar in the day that it was 
anointed, even the princes offered their 
offering before the altar. 



« T5eut.M:in; 2 CIiron.7: 14; lsa.«:7; Dan.9:I8,19. b chap. 
e.-!:20; Gen. 12:2,3i Paulm .i: 12 ; 67 : 7; 11/>:12,13; Ai:t83:2fi; 
K|>li.l:3. c Kxodus 40: 18. d Lev. 8: 10, 11. e clrap. 1 :4, etc. 
» Hel). who stood, f chap. 4 : 24-28. g chap. 4 : 29-3.3. h cliap. 



ion with himself. Give thee peace ; peace with 
God, with conscience, and with men. Psa. 29; 11; 
85:8; 119:165; Phil. 4:7. 

27. Put my vame iipoii — Israel; treat them 
as his people, and lead them to obey him. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

8. Holiness to the Lord is the b.idge of his people, 
and should ever be their peculiar characteristic. 
They should abstain from fleshly lusts which war 
against the soul, moderate their desires for earthly 
things, place their affections on thina;s above, and 
regulate all their acts by the will of (jod. 

20. We are always exposed in this world to moral 
defilement, and in our best services need the appli- 
cation of the blood of Christ and the purifying in- 
fluences of his Spirit, in order that our offerings may 
be acceptable in his sight. 



1 1 And the Lord said unto Moses, They 
shall offer their offering, each prince on 
his day, for the dedicating of the altar. 

12 1[ And he that offered his offering the 
first day was' Nahshon the son of Ammin- 
adab, of the tribe of .ludah: 

1 3 And his oflering was one silver charg- 
er, the weight whereof ii'«.v a hundred 
and thirty .sJickcls, one silver bowl of sev- 
enty shekels, after the '' shekel of the sanc- 
tuary ; both of them icere full of fine flour 
mingled with oil for a 'meat-offering: 

14 One spoon of ten shekels of gold, full 
of " incense : 

1 5 One young bullock, one ram, one lamb 
of the first year, for a "burnt-offering: 

1 6 One kid of the goats for a^sin-offering : 

17 And for a sacrifice of p peace-offer- 
ings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five 
lambs oX the first year : this was the offer- 
ing of Nahshon the son of Amminadab. 

18 % On the second day iNethaneel the 
son of Zuar, prince of Issachar, did offer: 

19 He 'offered /or his offering one silver 
charger, the weight whereof zcas a hun- 
dred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl 
of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary ; both of them full of fine flour 
mingled with oil for a meat-offering : 

20 One spoon of gold of ten shekels, full 
of incense : 

2 1 One young bullock, one ram, one lamb 
of the first year, for a burnt-offering: 

22 One kid of the goats for a sin-offering : 

23 And for a sacrifice of peace-offerings, 
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five 
lambs of the first year: this was the of- 
fering of Nethaneel the son of Zuar. 

24 ^f On the third day ' Eliab the son of 
Helen, prince of the children of Zebulun, 
did offer: 

25 His oflTering was one silver charger, 
the weight whereof was a hundred and 
thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy 
shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary ; 



4:4- 


lo. i neut.20:.T; I Kings, 8:63; 2 Chron. 7:5,9; EzraR:I6; 
12 : 27 ; P8:i. 30, title. J chap. 1 : 7; 2::!. k Exodus 30:13. 


Neh 




V. 2:1. m Ex. 30 : .34. n Lev. 1 : 2, 3. o Lev. 4 : 23. P Lev. 


3: 1. 


q chap. 1 : 8 ; 2 : 5. r ver. 13, etc. > chap. 1:9; 2:7. 



27. The blessing of Jehovah, in the love of the 
Father, the grace of the Son, and the communion 
of the Holy Grhost, bestowed upon his believing, 
obedient people, will make them all for ever truly 
and perfectly blessed. 

CHAPTER VII. 

2. The pi'inces of Israel; chap. 1: IG. 

3. Their offerijig ; these were voluntary offer- 
ings in addition to those which were commanded. 

9. Bear vpon their shoulders ; the arlc and the 
sacred things whicli they were to carry. Chap. 
3:31. 

11. Each prince on his day ; to promote order 
and increased solemnity, each was to present his 
offering on a separate day. 

13. C^ar^-er/al.-irgedish. SAf.(c/; ;Bx. 38:21. 
185 



Princes^ offerings at the 



NUMBERS VII. 



dedication oj" the altar. 



both of them full of fine flour mingled 
with oil for a meat-off'ering: 

26 One golden spoon of ten shekels, full 
of incense: 

27 One youngbullock, one ram, one lamb 
of the first year, for a burnt-offering: 

28 One kid of the goats for a sin-offering : 

29 And for a sacrifice of peace-offerings, 
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five 
lambs of the first year: this was the of- 
fering of Eliab the son of Helon. 

30 ^On the fourth day *Elizur the son 
of Shedeur, prince of the children of Reu- 
ben, (lid offer: 

31 His ''offering was one silver charger 
of the weight of a hundred and thirty 
shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shek- 
els, after the shekel of the sanctuary; 
both of them full of fine flour mingled 
with oil for a meat-offering : 

32 One golden spoon of ten shekels, full 
of incense : 

33 One youngbullock, one ram, one lamb 
of the first year, for a burnt-ofljering : 

34 One kid of the goats for a sin-offering : 

35 And for a sacrifice of peace-offerings, 
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five 
lambs of the first year: this ifas the of- 
fering of Elizur the son of Shedeur. 

36 ^ On the fifth day "^ Shelumiel the son 
of Zurishaddai, prince of the children of 
Simeon, did offer: 

37 His "^offering was one silver charger, 
the weight whereof was a hundred and 
thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy 
shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary ; 
both of them full of fine flour mingled with 
oil for a mcat-ofTering: 

38 One golden spoon of ten shekels, full 
of incense : 

39 One young bullock, one ram, one lamb 
of the first year, for a burnt-offering: 

40 One kid of the goats for a sin-offering : 

4 1 And for a sacrifice of peace-offerings, 
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five 
lambs of the first year : this iras the offer- 
ing of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai. 

42 ^ On the sixth day " Eliasaph the son 
of * Deuel, prince of the children of Gad, 
offered : 

43 His ''offering ivas one silver charger 
of the weight of a liundrcd and thirty 
shekels, a silver bowl of seventy shekels, 
after the shekel of fhe sanctuary; both 
of them full of fine flour mingled with oil 
fur a meat-offering : 

44 One golden spoon of ten shekels, full 
of incense: 

45 One young bullock, one ram, one lamb 
of the first year, for a burnt-offering: 



46 One kid of the goats for a sin- *b.c:hm 
oflfering : 

47 And for a sacrifice of peace-offerings, 
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five 
lambs of the first year : this ivas the of- 
fering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel. 

48 If On the seventh day sElishama the 
son of Ammihud, prince of the children 
of Ephraim, offered : 

49 His '' offering was one silver charger, 
the weight whereof ivas a hundred and 
thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy 
shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary ; 
both of them full of fine flour mingled Avith 
oil for a meat-offering: 

50 One golden spoon of ten shekels, full 
of incense : 

51 One youngbullock, one ram, one lamb 
of the first year, for a burnt-offering : 

^52 One kid of the goats for a sin-offering : 

53 And for a sacrifice of peace-offerings, 
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five 
lambs of the first year : this was the of- 
fering of Elishama the son of Ammihud. 

54 HOn the eighth day offered 'Gama- 
liel the son of Pedahzur, prince of the 
children of Manasseh : 

55 His J offering was one silver charger 
of the weight of a hundred and thirty 
shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shek- 
els, after the shekel of the sanctuary; 
both of them full of fine flour mingled 
with oil for a meat-offering: 

56 One golden spoon of ten shekels, full 
of incense : 

57 One youngbullock, one ram, one lamb 
of the first year, for a burnt-offering: 

58 One kidof the goafs for a sin-offering: 

59 And for a sacrifice of peace-offerings, 
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five 
lambs of the first year : this teas the of- 
fering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur. 

60 If On the ninth day '' Abidan the son 
of Gideoni, prince of the children of Ben- 
jamin, offered: 

61 His 'offering «'«."! one silver charger, 
the weight whereof ivas a hundred and 
thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy 
shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary ; 
both of them full of fine flour mingled 
with oil for a meat-offering : 

62 One golden spoon of ten shekels, full 
of incense : 

63 One youngbullock, one ram,onelamb 
of the first year, for a burnt-offering: 

64 One kid of the goats for a sin-offering; 

65 And for a sacrifice of peace-offerings, 
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five 
lambs of the first year: this icas the of- 
fering of Abidan the son of Gideoni. 



• rlmp. 1 : B; 2 : 10. b rer. 13, etc. • rlinp. 1 : 6; 2:12. dyer- 13, etc g clinp. 1 : 10 ; 2 : 18. k »er. 13,etc. I chap. 1: 10; 2:2a 
13, eu-. • clll^>. 1 : U ; 2 : 14. • Culled Rcuel, clinp. 2 : H. I vrr. J ver. 13, otc. k chRp. 1 : 1 1 ; 2 : 22. I ver. 13, etc. 
186 



The princes' offerings. 



NUMBERS VIII. 



Lighting of the lamps. 



5.aHi'' 66 IT On the tenth day "Ahiezer 
the son of Ammishaddai, prince of the 
children of Dan, offered: 

67 His ''offering wAs one silver charger, 
the weight whereof teas a hundred and 
thirty shekels., one silver bowl of seventy 
shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary ; 
both of them full of fine flour mingled 
with oil for a meat-offering : 

68 One golden spoon of ten shekels, full 
of incense : 

69 One young bullock, one ram, one lamb 
of the first year, for a burnt-offering : 

70 One kid of the goats for a sin-offering : 

71 And for a sacrifice of peace-offerings, 
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five 
lambs of the first year : this was the offer- 
ing of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai. 

72 IF On the eleventh day ""Pagiel the 
son of Ocran, prince of the children of 
Asher, offered: 

73 His ^ offering 7vas one silver charger, 
the weight whereof tvas a hundred and 
thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy 
shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary ; 
both of them full of fine flour mingled 
with oil for a meat-offering: 

74 One golden spoon of ten shekels, full 
of incense : 

75 One youngbullock, one ram, one lamb 
of the first year, for a burnt-offering: 

76 One kid of the goats for a sin-offering : 

77 And for a sacrifice of peace-offerings, 
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five 
lambs of the first year : this was the of- 
fering of Pagiel the son of Ocran. 

78 IT On the twelfth day ^Ahirathe son 
of Enan, prince of the children of Naph- 
tali, offered: 

79 His '^offering teas one silver charger, 
the weight whereof ivas a hundred and 
thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy 
shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary ; 
both of them full of fine flour mingled 
with oil for a meat-offering : 

80 One golden spoon of ten shekels, full 
of incense: 

8 1 One youngbullock, one ram, one lamb 
of the first year, for a burnt-offering: 



« cbap. 1 : 12 ; 2 : 25. b ver. 13, etc. c chap. 1 : 13 ; 2 : 27. A ver. 12:8; Eiodus 33 : 9, 11 
5, etc. e chap. 1: 15; 2:29. f ver. 13, etc. g ver. I. h chap. 25:37;40:25. 



13, etc 



89. Him; G-od, to whom the altar and tabernacle 
had been dedicated. The voice of one; Ex. 2.5:22. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Those who are truly devoted to G-od, and thank- 
ful for his mercies, will not be satisfied with doing 
merely what is specifically commanded, but will 
make voluntary offerings of time, talents, and prop- 
erty, from love to him and his cause, and to promote 
his glory and the good of their fellow-men. 

5. None need to be discouraged because called to 
great and laborious services, for G-od will provide for 
them, that as their duties are, their strength and all 
needful mercies may be. 



82 One kid of the goats for a sin-offering : 

83 And for a sacrifice of peace-offerings, 
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five 
lambs of the first year : this was the of- 
fering of Ahira the son of Enan. 

84 This was the dedication of the altar, 
in the day when it was anointed, by the 
princes of Israel : twelve chargers of sil- 
ver, twelve silver bowls, twelve spoons 
of gold : 

85 Each charger of silver tveighing a 
hundred and thirty shekels, each bowl sev- 
enty : all the silver vessels weighed two 
thousand and four hundred shekels, after 
the shekel of the sanctuary : 

86 The golden spoons were twelve, full 
of incense, weighing ten shekels apiece, 
after the shekel of the sanctuary : all the 
gold of the spoons ivas a hundred and 
twenty shekels. 

87 All the oxen for the burnt-offering 
were twelve bullocks, the rams twelve, 
the lambs of the first year twelve, with 
their meat-offering: and the kids of the 
goats for sin-offering twelve. 

88 And all the oxen for the sacrifice of 
the peace-offerings were twenty and four 
bullocks, the rams sixty, the he-goats 
sixty, the lambs of the first year sixty. 
This was the dedication of the altar, after 
that it was ^ anointed. 

89 And when Moses was gone into the 
tabernacle of the congregation to ''speak 
with *him, then he heard the voice of one 
speaking unto him from off the 'mercy-seat 
that was upon the ark of testimony, from 
between the two cherubim : and he spake 
unto him. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1 Ho-w the lamps are to be lighted. 5 The consecration 
of the Levites. 2.3 The age and time of their service. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing, 

2 Speak unto Aaron, and say unto him. 
When thou lightest the -i lamps, the seven 
lamps shall give light over against the 
candlestick. 

3 And Aaron did so; he lighted the 



- That ia, God. i Ejt. 25 : 22. j Ex. 



11. Jehovah -would haveall things, especially with 
regard to his worship, conducted with propriety, and 
in a way to confer the greatest blessings. John 6 : 12 ; 
ICor. 14:33,40; James 3: 16. 

88. Jehovah is a bountiful God, and is delighted 
with liberality in his people. Much may be devoted 
to the support of his worship, and when so used, it is 
not wasted or unprofitably employed, but is spent to 
the highest advantage. Psa. 145 : 16 ; Prov. 11 : 25; 
Isa. 3-2 : 8 ; 2 Cor. 9 : 13. 



CHAPTER VIII. 
The lamps; E.x. 2.5:31-37. 



187 



TTie consecration 



NUMBERS VIII. 



of the Levites. 



lamps thereof over against the candle- 
stick, as tlie Lord eoinmandcd Moses. 

4 And this work of tlie "candlestick was 
o/ beaten gold ; unto the shaft thereof, un- 
to the flowers thereof, iro.? ''beaten work; 
according unto the ■= pattern which the 
Loud had showed Moses, so he made the 
candlestick. 

5 ^And tlie Loud spake unto Moses, 
.•laying, 

6 Take the Levites from among the chil- 
dren of Israel, and cleanse them. 

7 And thus shalt thou do unto them, to 
cleanse them : Sprinkle ^ water of purify- 
ing upon them, and ""let them * shave all 
their flesh, and let them wash their clothes, 
and so make themselves clean. 

8 Then let them take a young bullock 
with his ''meat-offering, even fine flour 
mingled with oil, and another young bul- 
lock shalt thou take for a sin-offering. 

9 And Ethou shalt bring the Levites be- 
fore the tabernacle of the congregation : 
and ''thou shalt gather the whole assem- 
bly of the children of Israel together. 

10 And thou shalt bring the Levites be- 
fore the Loud: and the children of Israel 
shall 'put their hands upon the Levites : 

11 And Aaron shall t offer the J Levites 
before the Lord for an + offering of the 
children of Israel, that they may ^execute 
the service of the Lord. 

12 And the Levites shall lay their hands 
upon the heads of the bullocks : and thou 
shalt offer the one/or a sin-offering, and the 
other for a burnt-offering, unto the Lord, 
to make an atonement for the Levites. 

13 And thou shalt set the Levites before 
Aaron, and before his sons, and ofler them 
for an offering unto the Lord. 

14 Thus shalt thou'' separate the Levites 
from among the children of Israel : and 
the Levites shall be 'mine. 

15 And after that shall the Levites go 
in to do the service of the tabernacle of 
the congregation : and thou shalt cleanse 
them, and ofler '"them for an offering. 

16 For they arc wholly given unto me 
from among the children of Israel; "in- 



1 Ex. W:^). b Ex. 2S: 1 
rtc. • LevilicuB 14:8,9. 



<■ Kx. MMO. a Hinp. Hl:!>, 17, 
rw:. « i^QTiviLun n . o, ^. Heb. cautc (I mzor to past over, 

fI.eY.2:l. I Ex. 211:4, etc.: 10: 1 J. hI,ev.K:.3. i Lev. 1:4. 
t Heb. wave, i ver. Ifi. t Hcb. wnveoffering. J Hd). be to 
execute, kcbnp. I6:fl. 1 rbnp. ;t : 4.i. m verses 11, 13. u rbflp. 
3:12, 4.'>. o clinp. :1:13; Ex. 13:2, li-lA; Liike2:23. p clinp. 



6. Levites ; those of the tribe of Levi who as- 
sisted the priests, the descendants of Aaron, in vari- 
ous services about the tabernacle, and afterwards 
about the temple. 

7. Sprinkle water of purifying upon them ; 
chap. 10: 1-10; Heb. 9 : 13, 14. 

11. Offer the Levites; consecrate them to the 
service of thn Lord in the various duties of the 
sanctuary. Ver. 1 1—19. 

2'1. Tu-entt/ and Jive years old; at this .nge 
they began to wait upon the priests, learn their du- 
188 



stead of such as open every womb, *b.c: u* 
even instead of the first-born of all the chil- 
dren of Israel, have I taken them unto me. 

17 For all the ° first«-born of the children 
of Israel are mine, both man and beast : on 
the day that 1 smote every first-born in the 
land of Egypt I sanctified them for myself. 

18 And I have taken the Levites for all 
the first-born of the children of Israel. 

19 And I have p given the Levites as Ha 
gift to Aaron and to his sons from among 
the children of Israel, to do the service of 
the children of Israel in the tabernacle of 
the congregation, and to make an atone- 
ment for the children of Israel : that "I there 
be no plague among the children of Israel, 
when the children of Israel come nigh 
unto the sanctuary. 

20 And Moses, and Aaron, and all the con- 
gregation of the children of Israel, did to 
the Levites according unto all that the Lord 
commanded Moses concerning the Levites, 
so did the children of Israel unto them. 

21 And the Levites were ''purified, and 
they washed their clothes ; and Aaron 
offered" them as an offering before the 
Lord ; and Aaron made an atonement for 
them to cleanse them. 

22 And 'after that went the Levites in 
to do their service in the tabernacle of 
the congregation before Aaron, and before 
his sons: as the "Lord had commanded 
Moses concerning the Levites, so did they 
unto them. 

23 T[And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

24 This is it that helon^eth unto the Le- 
vites : from * twenty and five years old 
and upward they shall go in to * wait upon 
the service of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation : 

25 And from the age of fifty years they 
shall t cease waiting upon the service 
thereof, and sliall serve no more : 

26 But shall minister with their breth- 
ren in the tabernacle of the congregation, 
to "keep the charge, and shall do no ^ser- 
vice. Thus shalt thou do unto the Le- 
vites touching their charge. 



3:9. II nch. given. 1 cbdp. 1 :.'-.3 : 16:4(1; 18:(1: 2 Cliron.26: 16. 
' ver. 7. • ver. 11,12. t ver. Ut. n ver. .1, etc. v clinp 4:3; 
I Chrnn. 23 : 3, 27. " Heb. war the warfare. 1 Cor. 9:7. t Heb 
return /rom l/ie warfare p/ the service. 2 Timothy, 4 : 7. w clmp. 
l:M; 18:4; 1 Cbnin. 23:32; Ezekiel 44:8. 11. x 1 Timothy, 
4 : 1ft. 

ties as Levites, and do some thinjjs about the taber- 
nacle ; but they did not enter fully on their vi-ork as 
Levites till they were thirty. Chap. 4 : 3. 23. 

26. Ker/) the charge, and — do 710 service ; after 
tlieiige of filly , they might in some things assist their 
younger brethren and instruct the people, but not 
continue to bear the responsibilities or perform the 
laborious duties of their office. 

INSTRIICTIOXS 

3. Ministers of the gospel who communicate a 
knowledge of God and his will to men, shine as lights 



OJ the passover. 



NUMBERS IX. 



The pillar of cloud. 



CHAPTER IX. 



K. M. 2514, 

e. c i4ao. 

I The passover is commanded again. 6 A second pass- 
over allowed for them that were unclean or absent. 
15 The cloud guideth the removings and encampings 
of the Israelites. 

AND the Lord spake unto Mcses in the 
wilderness of Sinai, in the first month 
of the second year after they -were come 
out of the land of Egypt, saying, 

2 Let the children of Israel also keep 
the passover at his appointed "season. 

3 In the ''fourteenth day of this month, 
at *even, ye .shall keep it in his appointed 
season : according to all the rites of it, 
and according to all the ceremonies there- 
of, shall ye keep it. 

4 And Moses spake unto the children of 
Israel, that they should keep the passover. 

5 And "^they kept the passover on the 
fourteenth day of the first month at even 
in the wilderness of Sinai : according to 
all that the Lord commanded Moses, so 
did the children of Israel. 

6 1[ And there were certain men, who 
were '^defiled by the dead body of a man, 
that they could not keep the passover on 
that day; and "'they came before Moses 
and before Aaron on that day. 

7 And those men said unto him, We are 
defiled by the dead body of a man : where- 
fore are we kept back, that we may not offer 
an offering of the Lord in his appointed 
season among the children of Israel? 

8 And Moses said unto them. Stand still, 
and I will hear what the Lord will com- 
mand concerning you. 

9 ^And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

10 Speak unto the children of Israel, 
saying. If any man of you or of your pos- 
terity shall be unclean by reason of a 
dead body, or be in a journey afar off", yet 
he shall keep the passover unto the Lord. 



a Exodus 12:3; Deut.l6:l. b 2 Cljron. 30: 2, l.-i. * Heb. 
between the two evenings. Exodus 12: 6. c .lopli. .'i; 10. A chap. 
6:2; 19 : II, 16; John 18 : Sg. e chap. 27 : 2, 6; Ex. 18:15,19. 
f ver. 3. B Ex. 12:8. h Ex. 12:10. i Ex. 12 : 4fi; John 19: 36. 



in the world holding forth the word of life, and mul- 
titudes who were in darkness, are, through their in- 
strumentality, made light in the Lord, and prepared 
to shine as the brightness of the firmament and as 
the stars for ever. 

6. The best of men need cleansing through faith 
in the blood of Christ, and by the influence of his 
Spirit, in order that their services may be accepted 
of God. 

21. Though God is the author of spiritual cleans- 
ing, he accomplishes it through the means of his 
appointment; and men are bound to use these means 
according to his will, and thus cleanse themselves 
from all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, per- 
fecting holiness in the fear of God. 2 Cor. 7:1; 
Isa. 1:16, 17; Ezek. IS: 31. 

26. After ministers of the gospel have become too 
old to perform the laborious duties of their office, 
they may still be very useful by wise counsel, judi- 
cious instruction, habitual prayer, and a holy ex- 
ample; and should be provided for to the end of life. 

13 



11 The ''fourteenth day of the second 
month at ev^en they shall keep it, and eat 
it with s unleavened bread and bitter herbs. 

12 They shall leave ''none of it unto 
the morning, nor 'break any bone of it: 
according to all the ordinances of the pass- 
over they shall keep it. 

1.3 But the man that is clean, and is not 
in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the 
passover, even the same Jsoul shall be 
cut off from among his people: because 
he brought not the offering of the Lord 
in his ''appointed season, that man shall 
bear' his sin. 

1 4 And if a stranger shall sojourn among 
you, and will keep the passover unto the 
Lord; according to the ordinance of the 
passover, and according to the manner 
thereof, so shall he do : ye shall have 
one™ ordinance, both for the stranger, and 
for him that was born in the land. 

15 ^ And on the day that the tabernacle 
was reared up, the cloud "covered the tab- 
ernacle, na7nely, the tent of the testimony : 
and at ° even there was upon the taber- 
nacle as it were the appearance of fire, 
until the morning. 

16 So it was alway : the p cloud covered 
it by day, and the appearance of fire by 
night. 

17 And "iwhen the cloud was taken up 
from the tabernacle, then after that the 
children of Israel journeyed : and in the 
place where the cloud abode, there the 
children of Israel pitched their tents. 

18 At the commandment of the Lord 
the children of Israel journeyed, and at 
the commandment of the Lord they 
pitched : as long as the cloud abode upon 
the ''tabernacle they rested in their tents. 

19 And when the cloud t tarried long 
upon the tabernacle many days, then the 



jEx.l2:13. k ver.7. lchap.5:31. mEx.I2:49. "Ex. 40:34. 
o Exodus 13:21: 40:38; Neh.9:I2,19; Psa. 78:14. p Jlfut. 
1:.33. 11 chap. 10:11,33; Ex. 40:36-38. rlCor.lO:!. f Heh. 
prolonged. 



CHAPTER IX. 

1. The first month ; Abib. 

2. The passover; Ex. 12:2-14. 

11. The fourteenth day of the second month ; 
this was in the month Zif, and one month after the 
usual time of keeping the passover. 

1-3. Forbeareth to keep the jyassover ; at the 
usual time. 

18. At the commandment of the Lord; as 
manifested by the moving or resting of the cloud. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. As the death of Christ is the procuring cause 
of the salvation of his people, it is his will that they 
should from time to time celebrate it according to 
his appointment, with humility, penitence, grati- 
tude, and joy. Mat. 26:26-28; Luke 22:19; 
ICor. 11:23-26. 

13. To obey God, we must neither neglect to 
commemorate the death of Christ, nor do it in an 
unholy manner ; but must examine ourselves and 
see whether we believe on him, feel our need of his 
189 



Of the silver trumpets. 



NUMBERS X. 



The Israelites leave Sinai. 



children of Israel kept the 'charge of the 
Lord, and journeyed not. 

20 And .so it ^vas, when the cloud was a 
few days upon the tabernacle ; according 
totliecoiimiandnicntof the Lord tlicy abode 
in their tents, and according to the com- 
mandment of the Lord they journeyed. 

21 And so it was, when the cloud *" abode 
from even unto the morning, and that 
the cloud was taken up in the morning, 
then they journeyed : whether it u-as by 
day or by night that the cloud was taken 
up, they journeyed. 

22 Or whether it were two days, or a 
month, or a year, that the cloud tarried 
upon the tabernacle, remaining thereon, 
the children of Israel ''abode in their tents, 
and journeyed not : but when it was taken 
up, they journeyed. 

23 At the commandment of the Lord 
they rested in their tents, and at the com- 
mandment of the Loud they journeyed : 
they kept the "-charge of the Lord, at the 
commandment'' of the Lord by the hand of 
Moses. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 The use of the silver trumpets. 11 The Israelites 
remove from Sinai to Paran. 14 The order of their 
march. 29 Hobab is entreated by Moses not to leave 
them. Xi The blessing of Moses at the removing and 
resting of the ark. 

A ND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
J±. ing, 

2 Make thee two trumpets of silver ; of a 
whole piece shalt thou make them : that thou 
maycst use them for the ■" calling of the as- 
sembly, and forthcjourneyingof thccamps. 

.■{ And when they shall ""blow with them, 
all the assembly shall assemble them- 
selves to thee at the door of the taberna- 
cle of the congregation. 

4 And if they blow but with one trum- 
pet, then the princes, which are ^ heads of 
the thousands of Lsrael, shall gather them- 
selves unto thee. 

5 When ye blow an ''alarm, then the 
••amps that lie on the 'east parts shall go 
forward. 

() When ye blow an alarm the second 
time, tlicn the camps that lie on the J south 
side shall take their journey : Ihey shall 
blow an alarm for their journeys. 

7 IJut wlien the congregation is to be 
gathered tosethcr, ye shall blow, but ye 
shall not sound an alarm. 



• rlinp. 1 : ft:l : 3:8; Zccli. 3:7. * llc-b. loat. b Ex. ^0 : 36, .37. 
•• rer. ID. H Vnn. 77 : in. t I.h. 1 : 13. I Jer. 4 : f. : Joel 2 : IS. 
< rlinp. I:iri: Kx. 18:31. liJoel2:l. lclinp.Q:3. j cliap.'': 10. 
k cli«p.3l:C: JuBli.r>:4; 1 Cliron. IA:!!1 : 2Chron. 13: 13. 1 1 Citron. 
13:14. n Juile.2:18; 10:8,1); run. 10li:4i. ■> Gen. 8: 1 ; Psn. 

:;alv!ition, and make it our grt-at object in all tilings 
to do his will. 1 Cor. 11 : 27-30. ' 

23. If we are di.sposcd to obey God, he will, by 
his word, his Spirit, and his providence, make so 
■plain the path of duty, th.i.t in walking in it we 
Bliall be safe, useful, and happy. 
190 



priests,'' shall blow with the trumpets; 
and they shall be to you for an ordinance 
for ever throughout your generations. 

9 And if ye go to 'war in your land 
against the enemy that '"oppresseth you, 
then ye shall blow an alarm with the 
trumpets ; and ye shall be " remembered 
before the Lord your God. and ye shall 
be "saved from your enemies. 

10 Also Pin the day of your gladness, 
and in your solemn days, and in the be- 
ginnings of your months, ye shall blow 
with the trumpets over your burnt-offer- 
ings, and over the sacrifices of your pcace- 
offcrings; that they may be to you for a 
memorial 1 before your God: I u?n. the 
Lord your God. 

11 Tl And it came to pass on the twen- 
tieth day of the second month, in the sec- 
ond year, that the ''cloud was taken up 
from off" the tabernacle of the testimony. 

12 And the children of Lsrael took their 
journeys out of the wilderness of "Sinai; 
and the cloud rested in the wilderness of 
Paran.* 

13 And they first took their journey ac- 
cording to the commandment of the ^ Lord 
by the hand of Moses. 

14 1[hi the first place went the '^stand- 
ard of the camp of the children of Judah 
according to their armies : and over his 
host was Nahshon the son of Amminadab. 

15 And over the host of the tribe of the 
children of Issachar was Nethaneel the 
son of Zuar. 

Hi And over the host of the tribe of the 
children of Zebulun was Eliab the son of 
Hclon. 

17 And the tabernacle was '■'taken down; 
and the sons of Gershon and the sons of 
Mcrari set forward, "bearing the taber- 
nacle. 

18 IT And the '' standard of the camp of 
Reuben set forward according to their 
armies: and over his host was Elizur the 
son of Shcdcur. 

19 And over the host of the tribe of the 
children of Simeon was Shclumiel the son 
of Zurishaddai. 

20 And over the host of the tribe of the 
children of Gad was Eliasaph the son of 
Deuel. 

21 And the Kohathites set forward, bearing 

106:4; 136:23. « iTlke I :70,71. f chnp.29: 1 : I.ev.S3:!4: 1 Clir. 
15:24; f2Cliron.fi: 1'2; 7:6: 29:46; Eir«3:in; Neli.l2:3S; Pm 
81:3:89:15. q Ex. 28: 29 : Ai-U 10 : 4. r clinp. 9: 17-20; Ex. 
40:. 36, 37. lEx. 1<1:1. I rlinp. 12: 16. u clmp. 2 : 9-34. t clisp. 
2 : 3-9. w clmp. 1:51. X clmp. 4:21; 7 : 6-8. J clmp. 2 : 10, 16. 



CHAPTER X. 

r>. Blow ail alar?!! ; the meaning of the differ- 
ent sounds of the trumpets was understood by the 
people. 

12. Wilderness of Paraii ; on the way towards 
Canaan. 



Tlie burninsr at Taberah. 



NUMBERS XI. 



The people lust for flesh. 



e.c.'H^. tlie * sanctuary : and *the other did 
set up the tabernacle against they came. 

22 ^r And the '' standard of the camp of 
the children of Ephraim set forward ac- 
cording to their armies : and over his host 
u'as Elishama the son of Ammihud. 

23 And over the host of the tribe of the 
children of Manasseh icas Gamaliel the 
son of Pedahzur. 

24 iVnd over the host of the tribe of the 
children of Benjamin was Abidan the son 
of Gideoni. 

25 ^ And the '^ standard of the camp of 
the children of Dan set forward, ti'hich 
was the "* rearward of all the camps 
throughout their hosts : and over his host 
was Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai. 

26 And over the host of the tribe of the chil- 
dren of Asher ivas Pagiel the son of Ocran. 

27 And over the host of the tribe of the 
children of Naphtali icas Ahira the son of 
Enan. 

28 Thus t tvere the journeyings of the 
children of Israel according to their ar- 
mies, when they set forward. 

29 ^And Moses said unto Ilobab, the 
son of + Raguel the Midianite, Moses' fa- 
ther-in-law, We are journeying unto the 
place of which the Lord said, " I will give 
it you : come thou with us, and we will 
do thee good: for the Lord hath spoken 
good*^ concerning Israel. 

30 And he said unto him, I will not go ; 
but I will depart to mine own land, and 
to my kindred. 

31 And he said, Leave us not, I pray 
thee ; forasmuch as thou knowest how 
we are to encamp in the wilderness, and 
thou may est be 1o us instead of ^eyes. 

32 And it shall be, if thou go with us, 
yea, it shall be, that what goodness the 
Lord shall do unto us, the '' same will we 
do unto thee. 



a chafi. 4 : 4-16. * That ia, the Gershonites and the Merarites. 
ver.n. hrlmp.2:ls,':4. c olmp. 2 : 2,=i, 3) . <i .losh.tj:!) ; Isa.58:8. 
t Heb. These. % Ex. C: 18. Reilel. e Gen. 12:7. f Ex. 6:7,8. 
l!.Iob29:l.'i. h.hlilg. 1:16; 4:11. iEx.3:l. J Deilt. 1 :33; Josli. 
3:;)-B. k Ex.l3:21; Neli.9:12,19. 1 Psa. 68: 1,2; 1.32:8. ij Heb. 



29. Raguel ; supposed to be the same as Reuel 
and Jethro. E.x. 2 : 18 ; 3:1; 18 : 1. 

31. Be to lis — eyes ; Hobab was acquainted with 
the country, and could assist on their journey. 
INSTRUCTIOMS. 

8. Christi.in ministers are placed as watchmen, 
and should give the people counsel and warning from 
God. When they speak, it should be with such 
plainness as to be understood, and with such affec- 
tion as is best suited to persuade the people to follow 
their directions. 1 Cor. 14 : 6-19; Eph. 4 : 15. 

13. All men are on a journey through this world. 
Jehovah offers to be theirguide, and if they follow 
him he will direct them to the Canaan of eternal 
rest. If they reject him. and continue to walk in 
their own way. they will wander in darkness and 
find no rest for ever. 

29. Those who have chosen God for their guide, 
and are on their way to heaven, ."should urge others, 



33 ^ And they departed from the 'mount 
of the Lord three days' journey : and the 
ark of the covenant of the Lord went J be- 
fore them in the three days' journey, to 
search out a resting-place for them. 

34 And the '' cloud of tlie Lord was upon 
them by day, when they went out of the 
camp. 

35 And it came to pass, when the ark set 
forward, that Moses said, ' Rise up. Lord, 
and let thine enemies be scattered ; and 
let them that hate thee flee before thee. 

36 And when it rested, he said, Return, 

Lord, unto the ^ many thousands of 
Israel. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 The burning at Taberah quenched by Moses' prayer. 
4 The people lust for flesli, and loathe manna. 10 
Moses complaineth of his charge. 16 God divideth 
his burden unto seventy eiders. 31 Quails are given 
in wrath at Kibroth-hattaavah. 

AND '"when the people Hcomplained, *it 
displeased the Lord : and the Lord 
heard it; and his "anger was kindled; 
and the "fire of the Lord burnt among 
them, and consumed them thai were in 
the uttermost parts of the camp. 

2 And the people cried unto Moses ; 
and when Moses prayed unto the Lord, 
the fire t was quenched. 

3 And he called Ihc name of the place 
Taberah :t because the fire of the Lord 
burnt among them. 

4 Tl"And the p mixed multitude that was 
among them ^fell a lusting: and the chil- 
dren of Israel also H wept again, and said. 
Who 1 shall give us flesh to eat? 

5 We remember the fish, which we did 
eat in Egypt freely; the cucumbers, and 
the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, 
and the garlic : 

6 But 'now our soul is dried away: 
there is nothing at all, besides this manna, 
before our eyes. 



ten thousand thous 


am/i. Deut 1 : 10. m Deut. 9:22. I\ Or, were 


as it tvei'e complait 


ers. * Heb. it was evil in the ears of. n Pna. 


78:21. I.ov. 10 


2; 2Kings, 1 :12. f Heb. iunt. J Tli.it is. 


fl burning, p Ex. 


2 : 38. 5 Heb. lusted a lust. \\ Heb. returned 


and wept, q 1 Cor 


10:e. r chap. 21:5. 



especially their relatives and friends, to accompany 
them, and present as a motive the good which God 
has promised to those who follow him. 

32. Those who are journeying towards heaven, 
need help not only from God, but also from one an- 
other, and they may be of great assistance to each 
other in guarding from danger, and guiding in the 
way of safety, usefulness, and peace. 

36. However much assistance the people of God 
may receive from men, thrir desires can never be 
full}' met, nor their wants satisfied, without the per- 
manent presence and favor of God. 

CHAPTER XI. 

3. Taberah ; a burning. 

4. Mixed mnhitude ; Ex. 12:38. Fe/ialust- 
ing ; impatiently desired other kinds of food. 

6. 07t.r sold is dried aivay ; we languish and 
are suffering for want of other food. 

191 



Moses complaindh. 



NUMBERS XI, 



Seventy elders appointed. 



7 And the manua teas as coriandcr-seed, 
and the *color thereof as the color of 
bdellium.* 

8 And the people went about, and gath- 
ered it, and ground it in mills, or beat it 
in a mortar, and baked it in pans, and 
made cakes of it : and the "^ taste of it was 
as the taste of fresh oil. 

9 And when Ihe '= dew fell upon the camp 
in the night, the manna fell upon it. 

10 T[ Then Moses heard the people weep 
throughout their families, every man in 
the door of his tent : and the anger of the 
Lord was "'kindled greatly; Moses also 
was ''displeased. 

11 And Moses said unto the Lord, 
Wherefore liast thou afflicted thy servant? 
and wherefore have I not found favor in 
thy sight, that thou layest the burden of 
all this people upon me? 

12 Have I conceived all this people? 
have I begotten them, that thou shouldcst 
say unto me, "^ Carry them in thy bosom, 
as a 5 nursing-father beareth the sucking 
child, unto the land which thou ''swarest 
unto their fathers ? 

13 -Whence 'should I have flesh to give 
unto all this people? for they weep unto 
me, saying. Give vis flesh, that we may eat. 

14 I Jam not able to bear all this people 
alone, because it is too heavy for me. 

15 And if thou deal thus with ''me, kill 
mc, I pray thee, out of hand, if I have 
found favor in thy sight; and let me not 
see my wretchedness. 

16 ^ And the Lord said unto Moses, 
Gather unto me 'seventy men of the el- 
ders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be 
the ciders of the people, and officers over 
them; and bring them unto the taberna- 
cle of the congregation, that they may 
stand there with thee. 

17 And "'I will come down and talk with 
thee there : and I will take of the " spirit 
which is upon thee, and will put it upon 
them; and they shall bear the burden of 
the people with thee, that thou bear it not 
thyself alone. 

18 And say thou unto the people, "Sanc- 
tify yourselves against to-morrow, and 
ye shall cat flesh : for ye have wept in 
the Pears of the Lord, saying, i Who shall 
give us flesh to eat? for it was well with 



* Hfl). ti/t of it nl Ihe tyc. m Gpnei.i« 2:12. b Exodus Ifi : 31. 
e Ex. 1«: M. * Trr. 1 ; liia.6: 2A. « Pun. 159:21. f Ii.n. 40: 11. 
{ I«ailili4'l:-21; 11 li.-.-. J : 7. b Oen. I.t:l5; 2H:3. i MaltllPW 
1.^:33. j Ex. 1H:1H; n^ut 1 :n-i:. k I Kinzii, 19: -1; .lonnli 4: 3. 
I Exnilii«24: 1,9. m vpr. 2S ; Gpn.ll:fi; 18:21; Exodus 19:20. 

7. As coria}ider-scfd ; small and round. Tlie 
Co!or of hdeUiiim ; supposed to be white. 
15. OiUofhand; at once, now. 

17. Tut it npoii them ; furnisli them with the 
Kpeci,^l influences of his Spirit, to fit them for tlieir 
work. 

18. Saiicti fy yourselves ; rspent of your mur- 

192 



us in Egypt: therefore the Lord ^o.cini!; 
will give you flesh, and ye shall eat. 

19 Ye shall not eat one day, nor tw'o 
days, nor five days, neither ten days, nor 
twenty days ; 

20 But even a 1 whole month, ■■ until it 
come out at your nostrils, and it be loath- 
some unto you : because that ye have 
despised the Lord which is among you, 
and have wept before him, saying, Why 
came we forth out of Egypt ? 

21 And Moses said. The people, among 
whom I am, are ^six hundred thousand 
footmen ; and thou hast said, I will give 
them flesh, that they may eat a whole 
month. 

22 Shall 'the flocks and the herds be 
slain for them, to suffice them? or shall 
all the fish of the sea be gathered together 
for tlicni, to suffice them? 

23 And the Lord said unto jNIoses, "Is 
the Lord's hand waxed short? thou shalt 
see now ''whether my word shall come 
to pass unto thee or not. 

24 ^ And Moses went out, and told the 
people the words of the Lord, and gath- 
ered the seventy men of the elders of the 
people, and set them round abovit the tab- 
ernacle. 

25 And the Lord came "down in a cloud, 
and spako unto him, and took of the spirit 
that was upon him, and gave it unto the 
seventy elders : and it came to pass, that, 
when" the spirit rested upon them, fhcy 
prophesied, and did not cease. 

26 But there remained two of the men 
in the camp, the name of the one u'os El- 
dad, and the name of the other Medad : 
and the spirit rested upon them ; and they 
ti-ere of them that were written, but went 
not out unto the tabernacle: and ^they 
prophesied in the camp. 

27 And there ran a young man. and told 
Moses, and said, Eldad and Medad do 
prophesy in the camp. 

28 And .Joshua the son of Nun, the ser- 
vant of Moses, one of his young men. an- 
swered and said, My lord Moses, "forbid 
them. 

29 And Moses said unto him, Enviest 
thou for my sake? "would God that all 
the Lord's people were prophets, and that 
the Lord would put his spirit upon them ! 



n 2K 


n2s,2:9,lS; Tsn.44:3; .Ioel2:2S. <.Ex.l9:I0. pEl.lK:7. 


q Tcr 


4.fi. \ Heh.monlhofdatil. r Psn. 78:29: lOrt: IS. • rlinp. 


1:4K; 


Ex. 12:37. t 2KingR,7:2; M.irk 8:4; .lohn 6:7.9. " U.1. 


-.0 : 2 


69:1. V Ezek. 12 :■;,'■.; 24:14. w -ver. 17. TlS»m.lO:6, 


6,eU- 


y .ler. 36:6,6. « Luke 9:49; Jolm 3:26. "ICor. 14:5. 



murin;rs and turn to the Lord, that you may escape 
his judgment and receive his favor. 

20. Come ont at your nostrils ; they would eat 
fle.sli till they were not only satisfied, but made 
.sick by it and loathed it. 

2.1. Wa.rrd short ; is God unable to do what hi; 
has promised ? 



Quails are given in wrath. 



NUMBERS XII, 



Miriam and Aaron murmur. 



caini3, he and the elders of Israel. 

31 ^ And there went forth a wind from 
the Lord, and * brought quails from the 
sea, and let them fall by the camp, as it 
were *a day's journey on this side, and as 
it were a day's journey on the other side, 
round about the camp, and as it were two 
cubits high upon the face of the earth. 

32 And the people stood up all that day, 
and all that night, and all the next day, 
and they gathered the quails : he that 
gathered least gathered ''ten homers : and 
they spread them all abroad for themselves 
round about the camp. 

3 3 And "^ while the flesh icas yet between 
their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath 
of the Lord was kindled against the peo- 
ple, and the Lord smote the people with 
a very great plague. 

34 And he called the name of that place 
Kibroth-hattaavah:t because there they 
buried the people that lusted. 

35 And the people ■* journeyed from Kib- 
roth-hattaavah unto Hazeroth ; and + abode 
at Hazeroth. 

CHAPTER XII. 

I God rebuketh the sedition of Miriam and Aaron. 10 
Miriam's leprosy is healed at the prayer of Moses. 
14 God commandeth her to be shut out of the host. 

AND (Miriam and Aaron spake against 
Moses because of the ^ Ethiopian 



• Ex. 16 : 13 ; Psa. 78 : 26-29 ; I O.t : 40. * Heb. the way of a day. 
b Ei.l6:36. c Psa. 78:30,31. f T\\aX\i,thc graves of lust. Dent. 
9:22. d cbap.33:17. % Knh. they were in. \Ox.Cuihite. e Ex. 
2:21. II Heb. <aitn. f Ex. 15:Mi Micah 6:4. 6 cliap. 11 :1; Psa. 



32. Ten homers; Lev. 27: 16. 

34. Kibroth-hattaavali ; the graves of lust. 

35. Hazeroth ; a place still farther on the way 
towards Canaan. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Discontentment with the dealings of Grod is 
unvi-ise and wicked. Those who indulge in it pro- 
voke him, and expose themselves to his wrath. 

2. The wicked are more indebted to the righteous 
than they are apt to imagine, and in their distresses 
they often feel tliis, and look to them for help. 

6. We are apt to depreciate and undervalue the 
blessings we have, and to magnify and overrate 
those which we desire. 

11. The best of men are but partly sanctified; 
and not unfrequenlly in their hearts, and sometimes 
in words, they find fault with Grod. 

15. Those who kill themselves, or ask God or men 
to kill them, are not in a proper state to die. Did 
they feel right, whatever their trials, they would 
say, All the days of my appointed time will I wait, 
till my change come. Not my will, but thine be 
done. Job 14 : 14 ; Luke 22 : 42. 

17. God is often kind and gracious in withhold- 
ing from men what in their wickedness they desire, 
and in giving tiiem what they need. If he calls 
them to great and dilBcult services, they have no 
reason to complain or to despond ; if they trust in 
him he will provide for them, that as their duties 
are, their ability may also be. 

20. What people impatiently and wickedly de- 
sire, God sometimes suffers them to have, and to 
abuse to their ruin. 



woman whom he had married: for ^he 
had II married an Ethiopian woman. 

2 And they said. Hath the Lord indeed 
spoken only by Moses? hath he not ""spo- 
ken also by us"? And the LoRosheard it. 

3 (Now the man Moses wa.-i very meek, 
above all the men which were upon the 
face of the earth.) 

4 And ''the Lord spake suddenly unto 
Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto Mir- 
iam, Come out ye three unto the taber- 
nacle of the congregation. And they 
three came out. 

5 And the Lord came 'down in the pil- 
lar of the cloud, and stood in the door of 
the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Mir- 
iam : and they both came forth. 

6 And he said, Hear now my words: 
If there be a prophet among you, / the 
Lord will make myself known unto him 
in a J vision, and will speak unto him in a 
dream.'' 

7 My servant Moses is not so, who is 
faithful' in all my ™ house. 

8 With him will I speak "mouth to 
mouth, even apparently, and not in dark 
speeches ; and the similitude of the Lord 
shall he behold : wherefore then were ye 
not "afraid to speak against my servant 
Moses? 

9 And the anger of the Lord was kin- 
dled against them ; and he departed. 

94:7-9; Isa. 37:4; Ezek. 35:12, 13. bP3a.76:9. ichap.ll:25. 
i Gen. 1.t:I; 46:2; Joba3: I.t; Ezek. 1:1; Luke 1: 11,22; Acts 10:11, 
17. k Gen.31:ll; lKings,3:5; JobSS:!.";. lHeb.3:2,5. m 1 Tim. 
3:15; lPeter,2:4,5. n Ex.33: 11 ; Deut.34:10. o 2 Peter,C: 10. 

23. It needs stronger faith than good men often 
have, or without the influences of the Holy Spirit 
would ever have, to believe that God will do all that 
he has promised. 

29. It is natural for men to envy others on account 
of the blessings which God gives them; but divine 
grace teaches us to rejoice in the blessings of others, 
and to desire that, if consistent, such blessings may 
be given to all. 

33. God may in wrath give men what they de- 
sire, to show them and others the wickedness and 
folly of wishing to have their own way, and refusing 
to be guided and governed by him. 

34. Lust, and the use of things lusted after, are 
plagues which have opened and filled many graves. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1. Miriam; the sister of Moses and Aaron. 
Ex. 15 : 20. Ethiopian woman ; supposed to be 
Zipporah, called an Ethiopian, or, as in the original, 
a Cushite, because a native of that part of Arabia 
which was settled by the descendants of Cush. 
Ex. 2:16, 2L 

3. Meek; not easily provoked or disposed to 
complain, not proud or self-sufficient, but humble, 
patient, and sttbmissive. 

6. In a visio7i — in a dream; that was the 
usual way in which he communicated with prophets. 

8. Apparently ; plainly, familiarly. Simili- 
tude of the Lord ; Ex. 33 : 23 ; ai : 5-S. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The most inoffensive character, and the most 
useful life, may not secure persons from being 
193 



Miriam's leprosy healed. 



NUMBERS XIII. 



Twelve spies sent out. 



10 And the cloud departed from ofTthe 
tabernacle; and behold, INliriam became 
leprous,* vhitc as snow : and Aaron looked 
upon INIiriam, and behold,. 'j/ir irns leprous. 

11 And Aaron .said unto Mose.s, Alas, 
my lord, I beseech thee, lay not the sin 
upon us, wherein we have done ''foolish- 
ly, and wherein we have sinned. 

12 Let her not be as one dead, of whom 
the flesh is half consumed when he Com- 
eth out of his mother's womb. 

13 And Mo.scs cried unio the Loru, .ray- 
ing, *" Heal her now, (Jod, I beseech thee. 

14 If And the Lord said unto Moses, If 
her father had but spit in her face, should 
she not be ashamed seven day.sl let )ier 
be .shut ■'out from the camp seven days, 
and after that let her be received in again. 

15 And Miriam wa.s shut out from the 
camp seven days: and the people jour- 
neyed not till Miriam was brought in 
again. 

16 And afterward the people removed 
from Ilazeroth. and pitched in the wilder- 
ness of Paran. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1 The names of the men wlio were sent to search the 
land. 17 Their instructions. 21 Their acts. 26 
Their relation. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing, 

2 Send " thou men, that they may search 
the land of Canaan, which I give unto 
the children of Israel: of every tribe of 
their fathers shall ye send a man, every 
one a ruler among them. 

.3 And Moses by the commandment of 
the Lord sent "^them from the wilderness 
of Paran : all those men were heads of the 
children of Israel. 

4 And these 7vere their names : Of the 
tribe of Reuben, Shammua the son of 
Zaccur. 

5 Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the 
son of Hori. 



• Deut. -24:9: 2King», r>:27; ZChn 
«4: 10; Proverb« 30:3-2. cJai<.6:l& 
3-2:8. Mleut.l:23. « Ter. Ifi. h v. 



. 2H:)»-21. k 2 Samuel, 
<l Lev. 13: -46. • chap. 
8; Ex. 17: it. i vcr. 2-2. 



hlamed, even by their nearest relatives ; but, if 
humble, patient, and submissive, the Lord will 
plead their cause, and in due time brin^ forth their 
righteousness as the liglit. and their judgment as 
the noonday. Psa. 37 : 1-1 1. 

'2. The Lord hears all that men say; and he is 
especially displeased with those who, without good 
reason, talk against and find fault with iiis people. 

8. Those who wickedly oppose such as God loves 
and peculiarly favors, Ihut; great cause to fear, for 
he views what is done to them as in a sense done to 
him. Mat. 2.') : 40. 

10. Sin is sometimes visited with immediate pun- 
ishinent. 

11. To commit known sin is foolish, because it 
always tends not only to dishonor God, but also to 
injure those who commit it. 

14. However great the sins of transgressors, when 
194 



fi Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb Vc;»» 
the son of Jpphunneh. 

7 Of the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son 
of Joseph. 

8 Of the tribe of Ephraim, eOshea the 
son of Nun. 

9 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son 
of Raphu. 

10 Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the 
son of Sodi. 

1 1 Of the tribe of .Joseph, namehj, of the 
tribe of Manassch, Gaddi the .son of Susi. 

12 Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son 
of Gcmalli. 

1 3 Of the tribe of Asher, Selhnr the son 
of Michael. 

14 Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the 
son of Vophsi. 

15 Of the tribe of (iad, Geuel the son o.f 
Machi. 

16 These are the names of the men 
which Moses sent to spy out the land. 
And Moses called Oshea the son of Nwn 
Jehoshua."" 

17 If And Moses seiit them to spy ou) 
the land of Canaan, and said unto them, 
Get you up this tvay 'southward, and go 
up into the J mountain : 

18 And see the land, what it z",";; and 
the people that dwelleth therein, whether 
they he strong or weak, few or many; 

19 And what the land ».s- that they dw^ell 
in, whether it he good or bad ; and what 
cities they be that they dwell in^ whether 
in tents, or in strong-holds; 

20 And what the land is, whether it he 
fat '' or lean, whether there be wood there- 
in, or not. And be ye of good ' courage, and 
bring of the fruit of the land. Now the 
time teas the time of the first ripe grapes. 

21 ^ So they went up, and searched the 
land from the wilderness of "Zin unto 
Rehob," as men come to llamath. 

22 And they ascended by the south, and 
came unto Hebron ; where Ahiman, Shc- 

j Geneois H : 10; DenL 1 : 34 : Judg. I : <i, 1>«. k Neh. 9 : V<, 3f>; 
Kzek. 34 : 14. I Deut 31 : 6, 7, 33. m Josliun 16:1. i> Joaliuit 
19: -28. 

they truly repent and turn to the Lord he will for- 
give them. His people, so far as they have his 
Spirit, will do the same ; and desire for such the 
greatest blessings. Mat. 18:21-35. 

CHAPTER XTII. 
16. OsJiea; salvation. Jehoshiia ; salvation of 
Jehovah. 

20. F(7/ or /^«m; fruitful or b.arren. Time of the 
first ripe ^rape.s ; about the month of Aumist. 

21. Wildeniess of Ziji ; lying south of (-anaan. 
Rehii/) ; a city near the north part of Canaan. JI/i- 
■math ; a city of Syria, lying still further north. 

22. Hebron; a city in the sonth part of Canaan, 
about twenty miles from Jerusalem. Anak ; son 
of Arba, a distinguished man, after whom Hebron 
was called Kirjatli-Arba, or the citv of Arba. Gen. 
23:2; Josh. \\:\?,. 



The spies' evil report. 



NUMBERS XIV, 



Tlie people murmur at it. 



Anak,* were. Now '' Hebron was built 
seven years before "^ Zoan in Eygpt. 

23 And they came unto the *brook of 
Eshcol,t and cut down from thence a 
branch with one cluster of grapes, and 
they bare it between two upon a staff; and 
they brought of the pomegranates, and of 
the figs. 

24 The place was called the * brook 
Eshcol,* because of the cluster of grapes 
which the children of Israel cut down 
from thence. 

25 And they returned from searching of 
the land after forty days. 

26 ^ And they went and came to Mo- 
ses, and to Aaron, and to all the congre- 
gation of the children of Israel, unto the 
wilderness of Paran, to ^ Kadcsh ; and 
brought back word unto them, and unto 
all the congregation, and showed them 
the fruit of the land. 

27 And they told him and said. We 
came unto the land whither thou sentest 
us, and surely it " floweth with milk and 
honey ; and "^Ihis I'.f the fruit of it. 

28 Nevertheless the ^ people be strong 
that dwell in the land, and the cities are 
walled, and very great : and moreover we 
saw the children of •'Anak there. 

29 The ' Amalekites dwell in the land of 
the south : and the Ilittitcs, and the Jeb- 
usites, and the Amorites, dwell in the 
mountains : and the Canaanites dwell by 
the sea, and by the coast of Jordan. 

30 And J Caleb stilled the people before 
Moses, and said, Let us go up at once, 
and possess it ; for we are well '' able to 
overcome it. 

31 But the men that went up with him 
said, We be not able to go up against the 
people; for they are stronger than we. 

32 And 'they brought vip an evil report 
of the land which they had searched unto 



« .losh. 11:21. b .losli. -21 : 11. cTsa. 78:12; Is.iiah 1<» : U. 
* Or, valley, j Thnlis, a chittero/ grapes. % i'>T,valtct/. % That 
ut, a cluster of drapes, d chap. 20 : 1 , 1 6. eEx.:n:3. f Dent. 
l:2.i, etc. B bent. 9: 1. 2. h ver. .33. i chap. 14 : «; Eloilus 



23. Eshcol ; a fruitful valley near Hebron. 

24. Called the brook Eshcol ; Eshcol meaning 
a cluster. 

26. Kadesh ; a city near the south-east border 
ot" Canaan, towards Edom. 

27. Floweth with ■milk ; is very fruitful. 

3S. Childreiidf Aiiak ; men of great stature. 

3-. Eatetli iip the inhabitants ; causing them 
to die from the unhealthiness of tiie climate, or 
some other cause. If this were so, it must have been 
strange that they were so large and strong. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. God permits men, by proper means, to acquire 
all needful information with regard to what he has 
promised ; and to take all proper measures, in the 
right way and at the right time, to obtain it. 

27. Those who trust the promjses of God and fol- 
low his directions, will find that what he has prom- 



the children of Israel, saying. The land, 
through which we have gone to search it, 
i.s a land that eateth up the inhabitants 
thereof; and all the people that we saw 
in it are men of II a great '"stature. 

33 And there we saw the giants, the 
sons of ° Anak, u-hich come of the giants : 
and we were in our own sight as grass- 
hoppers," and so we were in their sight. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1 Tlip p"ople murmur at the news. 6 Joshua and Ca- 
leb labor to still them. 11 God threateneth them. 
[■i Moses persuadeth (Jod, and obtaineth pardon. 36 
The miirmurers are deprived of entering into the laud. 
.36 The men who raised the evil report die by a plague. 
40 The people that would invade the land against the 
will of God are smitten. 

AND all the congregation lifted up their 
voice, and cried ; and the people 
wcptP that night. 

2 And all the children of Israel i mur- 
mured against Moses and against Aaron : 
and the whole congregation said unto 
them. Would God that we had died in the 
land of Egypt ! or would God we had died 
in this wilderness! 

3 And wherefore hath the Lord brought 
us unto this land, to fall by the sword, 
that our wives and our children should 
be a prey ? were it not better for us to 
return into Egypt? 

4 And they said one to another, Let us 
make a captain, and let us ''return into 
Egypt. 

5 Then Moses and Aaron fell on their 
faces' before all the assembly of the con- 
gregation of the children of Israel. 

6 IT And 'Joshua the son of Nun, and 
Caleb the son of Jephunneh, tvhich mere 
of them that searched the land, rent their 
clothes : 

7 And they spake unto all the company 
of the children of Israel, saying, The land, 
which we passed through to search it, is 
an exceeding good land. 



17 : S. j .loslma 14 : 7, 8. k Uom. 8 : 37. 1 Dent. 1 : 2S. || Heb. 
statures. I" Dent. 9:2. n ver. 22. olaa. 40:22. p chap. 11:4. 
q INa. 10ii:24, 25. r Dent. 17:16; NehemiaU 9 : 17; Act37:3ii. 
» chap. 16 : 4, 22. t ver. 30, 38. 

ised is true, and their own experience will realize its 
fulfilment. 

29. Men may do externally what God directs, and 
yet with such a spirit and for such a purpose as 
may tend to their ruin. 

30. Different men may unite externally in doing 
the same things, and yet with a very different spirit 
and for totally different ends. Thus what is done 
may be to one a savor of life unto life, and to an- 
other a savor of death unto death. 2 Cor. 2; 16. 

32. In making excuses for not doing their duty, 
and saying that they are not able to do what God 
requires and is ready to enable them to perform, 
men are often very inconsistent and contradict 
themselves. 

CHAPTER XIV. 
5,6. Fell on their faces — rent their clothes ; 
modes of expressing deep regret. 

195 



The murmurers excluded 



NUMBERS XIV. 



from entering the land. 



8 If the Lord 'delight in us, then he 
will bring us into this land, and give it 
us; aland which floweth with ''milk and 
Kouey. 

9 Only "^ rebel not ye against the Lord, 
neither "Tear ye the people of the land; 
for they are "^ bread for us : their "defence 
is departed from them, and the Lord is 
with "^us : sfear them not. 

10 But all the congregation bade stone 
them'' with stones. And 'the glory of 
the Lord appeared in the tabernacle of 
the congregation before all the children 
of Israel. 

11^ And the Lord said unto Moses, 
How long will this people J provoke me"? 
and how long will it be ere they believe 
me,'' for all the signs which I have showed 
among them? 

12 1 will smite them with the pesti- 
lence, and di.sinherit them, and will make 
of ' thee a greater nation and mightier 
than they. 

13 ^And '"Moses said unto the Lord, 
Then " the Egyptians shall hear it, for 
thou broughtest up this people in thy 
might from among them ; 

14 And they will tell it to the inhab- 
itants of this land: for they have "heard 
that thou Lord art among this people, 
that thou Lord art p seen face to face, and 
that thy ''cloud standeth over them, and 
that Mhou gocst before them, by daytime 
in a pillar of a cloud, and in a pillar of 
fire by night. 

15 Now if thou shaltkilla// this people 
as one man, then the nations which have 
heard the fame of thee will .speak, saying, 

16 Because "the Lord was not able to 
bring this people into the land which he 
sware unto them, therefore he hath slain 
them in the wilderness. 

17 And now, I beseech thee, let the 
power' of my Lord be great, according as 
thou hast "spoken, saying, 

18 The Lord is long-suffering, and of 
great mercy, ^ forgiving iniquity and 
transgression, and by no means clearing 

• Drul. 10: IS; 2.Snm. 16:2.1,26; 22:20; I Kinjn, 10:9; Ps.!. 
147:11. b clinp. 13:27. eT)euL9:2.1. <lDeut.20:S. •chap. 
24:S. ♦ Hf h. fAddoKi. P«n. 121 : S. f Gen. 48:21 ; Dent. 20- 1-1 ; 
3l:fi,R; .Iud|;.l:22; 2 Clirnn. Ifi: 2 : 32:«; Psa. 46:7,11; Isa. 
«:9. 10; 41:10; Amos B: 14; Zecli. 8:2.3; Rom. 8:31. e Isa 
41:14. bEx.l7:4. 1 clian. IH : IS, 42; 20:fi. jZccli.8:14; 
Heb.3:iri. k P»a. 10fi:24; .lolin 12: 37. I Ex. 32 : 10. m I)euL 
M : 2lt-28. n DeuL 32 : 27 ; Ezelciel 20 : 9, 14. o .loaliua 2 : i), 10. 

8. Floweth with mill- and honnj ; abounds in 
the necessaries and luxuries of life. 

9. Arr. bread for i/s ; the wealth of Canaan 
would he the means of their support. 

16. Therefore he hath shim them ; this, Mo- 
ses thoiio;ht, would be {jreally to his dishonor. 

17. Let the power of my Lord be great ; be 
"reatly manifested in forgiving their iniquity, and 
Bringing them into the land of promise. 

'20. According t'l thy word ; G-od so far he.%rk- 
ened to Moses as to spare the people for a tinne, 
190 



the gxilty, ''visiting the iniquity *b.c.»w: 
of the fathers upon the children unto the 
third and fourth generation. 

19 Pardon,^ I beseech thee, the iniquity 
of this people according unto the great- 
ness of thy mercy, and as thou hast for- 
given this people, from Egypt even t un- 
til now. 

20 And the Lord said, I have pardoned 
according^ to thy word : 

21 But as truly as I live, *all the earth 
shall be filled with the glory of the Lord. 

22 Because all those men which have 
seen my glory, and my miracles, which 
I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and 
have tempted me now these ten times, and 
have not hearkened to my voice; 

23 Surely tfhey ^shall not seethe land 
which I sware unto their fathers, neither 
shall any of them that provoked me see it : 

24 But my servant ''Caleb, because he 
had another spirit with him, and hath fol- 
lowed me fully, him will I bring into the 
land whereinto he went; and his seed 
shall possess it. 

25 (Now the Amalekites and the Ca- 
naanites dwelt in the valley.) To-mor- 
row turn you, and get you into the wil- 
derness by the way of the Red sea. 

26 T[ And the Lord spake unto Moses 
and unto Aaron, saying, 

27 How "^long shall I bear with this evil 
congregation, which murmur against me? 
I have ''heard the murmurings of the 
children of Israel, which they murmur 
against me. 

28 Say unto them, As trxily as I live, 
saith the Lord, as ye have spoken in 
mine ears, so will I do to you : 

29 Your carcasses shall fall in this wil- 
derness, and all that were *■ numbered of 
you, according to your whole number, 
from twenty years old and upward, which 
have murmured against me. 

30 Doubtless ye shall not come into the 
land, concerning which I * sware to make 
you dwell therein, save Caleb the son of 
Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun. 

p Ex. 33:11. <i ciiap. 10:34. r Ex. 13 :2I, 22 ; Psalm 78:14. 
• Deut.9:28; Jo81iuh7:9. 1 Micali3:8; M;it.9:6,8. " Ex. 
34 : 6, 7. T Micah 7:18. " Ex. 20 : 5 ; Jer. 23 : 2. x Psa. 78 : .38. 
^ Or, hitherto, y Psa. I0fi:23; Ja*. S:16. • Psr.72:19; Isa. 
66 : 1 8, 1 9. t Heb. if they tee. • neut I : S.'i, etc. ; Psa. 9.1 : 1 1 ; 
Eiekiel 20 : 1.1 ; Heb. 3 : 17, 18. b chap. 32 : 1 1 , 12. c Matthew 
17: 17. il ExoJus 16: 12. • chap. I :45. J Heb. lifted up my 
hand. Gen. 14 : 22. 



and to bring their children into the promised land. 
Ver. 31. 

21. Filled with the glory of the Lord; he 
would treat them in such a manner as to manifest 
to all nations his glory, as a merciful, just, and 
faithful God. 

22. Ten : many. 

2.5. Dwelt; dwell. In the valley ; the valley 
on the other side of the hill, which separated them 
from the Israelites. Ver. 40— J.5. 

28. As ye have spoken ; ver. 2. 



Ten of the spies slain. 



NUMBERS XV. 



Israel is discomfited. 



said should be a prey, them will I brin 
in, and they shall know the land which 
ye have ''despised. 

32 But as /or you, your ''carcasses, they 
shall fall iu this wilderness. 

33 And your children shall *wander in 
the 'wilderness forty years, and bear 
your ''whoredoms, until your carcasses 
be wasted in the wilderness. 

34 After the number of the days in 
which ye searched the land, even '^ forty 
days, each day for a year, shall ye bear 
your iniquities, even forty years, and ye 
shall know my t breach of "^promise. 

35 I sthe Lord have said, I will surely 
do it unto all this '' evil congregation, that 
are gathered together against me : in this 
wilderness they shall be consumed, and 
there they shall die. 

36 And the 'men, which Moses sent to 
search the land, who returned, and made 
all the congregation to nuu-mur against him, 
by bringing up a slander upon the land, 

37 Even those men that did bring up 
the evil report upon the land, ' died by 
the plague before the Lord. 

38 ButJoshuathesonofNun,and Caleb 
the son of Jephunneh, ichicli tccre of the men 
that went to search the land, lived '^.slill. 

39 And Moses told these sayings unto 
all the children of Israel : and the people 
mourned' greatly. 



« Psa. 10rt:-24. blCor.lO:5. * Or, feed, c chap. 32:13; Psa. 
107:41). a .Ier.3:l,2; Ezek. 23:35; Hoseafl:!. e chap. 13 : 2,1. 
\Or,allering of my purpose, f Jer. 18:9, 10; Lam.3:3l-33. B chap. 



31. Ye said; ver. 3. 

33. Bear your whoredoms ; suffer the effects of 
their sins. Ex. 20 : .5. Forty years; from the 
time they left Egypt. 

34. My breach of promise ; the effect of his 
determination that they should not enter Canaan, 
but die in the wilderness. 

39. These sayings; what God had told him. 
Ver. 29-35. 

40. The mountain ; that which lay between 
them and the Amalekites. Ver. 2-1. 

45. Hormali ; a place in the south part of Ca- 
naan, about twenty miles from Kadesh. It was 
before called Zephath. Chap. 21 : 3 ; Judges 1 : 17. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. Along couise of bondage, whether bodily or 
spiritual, is suited to produce a weak and cowardly 
spirit ; to degrade and debase the human mind, and 
unfit it for great and noble deeds. 

9. Rebellion against (rod is the great cause of 
human sorrow. By trusting in him and doing his 
will, men may obtain all needed blessings, in the 
best way, at the right time, and with only those 
sacrifices which will in the end promote their high- 
est good. 

10. The most unreasonable men are most ready 
to use mob violence. Instead of answering their 
opponents, they attempt to kill them. Sometimes 
they for a time succeed, but often they bring ruin 
on themselves. Acts 7 : .59. 

II. Men may see the most stupendous mir,acles, 
and receive the greatest temporal mercies, and yet 
remain enemies to God. No means, witliout the 



40 ^And they rose up early in the 
morning, and gat them up into the top of 
the mountain, saying, Lo, we be here, and 
will go up unto the place which the Lord 
hath promised : for we have sinned. 

41 And Moses said. Wherefore now do 
ye transgress the '"commandment of the 
LordI but it shall not prosper. 

42 Go not up, for the Lord is not among 
you ; that ye be not smitten before your 
enemies. 

43 For the Amalekites and the Canaan- 
ites are there before you, and ye shall fall 
by the sword: "because ye are turned 
away from the Lord, therefore the Lord 
will not be with you. 

44 But they presumed to go up unto the 
hill-top : nevertheless the " ark of the 
covenant of the Lord, and Moses, departed 
not out of the camp. 

45 Then the Amalekites came down, 
and the Canaanites which dwelt in that 
hill, and smote them, and discomfited 
them, even unto p Hormah. 

CHAPTER XV. 

1 The law of the meat-offering and the drink-offering. 
13, 29 The stranger is under the same law. 17 The 
law of the first of the dough for a heave-offering. 22 
The sacrifice for sins of ignorance. • 30 The punish- 
ment of presumption. 32 He that violated the sab- 
bath is stoned. 37 The law of fringes. 

ND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ins, 



A 



23:19. h ver. 27. i chap. 13:31, .32. j 1 Cor. 10 : 10; Heb. 3: 17; 
.Iude,=>. k chap. 26:65; ,I05h. H:fi, 10. 1 Ex. 33: 4; Isa. 26: 16. 
inver.2.5. n 2Chron. 1,5; 2. och.lO:33. 1> ch. 21:3; Judg. 1 :17. 



converting influences of his Spirit, will ever lead 
them to love and serve him. 

16. Good men dread what will dishonor God 
more than any temporal evils, and desire the pro- 
motion of his glory more than the reception of all 
temporal mercies. 

20. The righteous are often the means of averting 
great calamities from the wicked, and bringing 
upon them unspeakable good. \ 

21. God will bestow mercy only in such a way 
as is consistent with justice, wisdom, goodness, and 
truth — only in such a way as will glorify himself, 
give a correct view of his character, and fill the 
hearts of all holy beings with admiration and delight. 

24. Steadfastness in duty, however unpopular or 
dangerous, is the way to glory, honor, and blessed- 
ness. 

28, God sometimes takes men at their word, and 
evils which they wickedly imprecate, he in righteous 
judgment brings upon them. 

33. Many evils come upon children in conse- 
quence of the sins of parents; but, if they do not 
imitate their parents, nor disobey God, he will over- 
rule these evils for their highest good. Ver, 31, 

38. In due time, all will see the difference be- 
tween the righteous and the wicked, between him 
that serveth God and him that serveth him not, 

41. As the Lord never brings evils upon any but 
for the wisest and best reasons, when he does bring 
them, none should murmur against him, but all should 
cheerfully submit, feeling that he afflicts thern less 
than their iniquities deserve, and saying, It is the 
Lord ; let him do as seemeth good in his sight, 
197 



The law of the meat-offering 



NUMBERS XV. 



and oj" the drink-offering. 



2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
say unto them, When ye be come into 
the land of your habitations, -syhich I give 
unto you, 

3 And "will make an offering by fire 
unto the Lord, a burnt-offering, or a sac- 
rifice in * performing a ''vow, or in a free- 
will-ofiering, or in your solemn "^ feasts, 
to make a ''sweet savor unto the Lord, of 
the herd, cr of the flock : 

4 Then shall he that ofi'ercth his offer- 
ing unto the Lord bring a ^meat-offering 
of a tenth-deal of flour, mingled with the 
fouTih part of a hin of "^oil. 

5 And the fourth part of a hin of wine 
for a drink-offering shalt thou prepare 
with the burnt-offering or sacrifice, for 
one lamb. 

6 Or for a ram, thou shalt prepare /or 
a meat-offering two tenth-deals of flour, 
mingled with the third part of a hin of oil. 

7 And for a drink-offering thou shalt 
offer the third part of a hin of wine, for 
a sweet savor unto the Lord. 

8 And when thou prcparest a bullock 
for a burnt-offering, or for a sacrifice in 
performing a vow, or ^ peace-offerings 
unto the Lord; 

9 Then shall he ''bring with a bullock 
a meat-offering of three tenth-deals of 
flour, mingled with half a hin of oil. 

10 And thou shalt bring for a drink- 
offering half a hin of wine, for an offer- 
ing made by fire, of a sweet savor unto 
the Lord. 

11 Thus'shallitbe done for one bullock, 
or for one ram, or for a lamb, or a kid. 

12 According to the number that ye 
shall prepare, so shall ye do to every one 
according to their number. 

1 3 All that are born of the country shall 
do these things after this manner, in of- 
fering an offering made by fire, of a sweet 
savor unto the Lord. 

14 And if a stranger sojourn with you, 
or whosoever be among you in your gen- 
erations, and will offer an offering made 
by fire, of a sweet savor unto the Lord ; 
as ye do, so he shall do. 

15 One J ordinance shall be both for you 
of the congregation, and also for the stran- 
ger that sojournclh with yon, an ordinance 
for ever in your generations: as ye are, 
so shall the stranger be before the Lord. 



• Lev. 1 : 2, .■). • Hrh. tepnrating. I.cv. 57:2. b T.ev. 7:lfi; 
M:18,21. t Lev. M: 8, 12. 'lKjt.29:l«. e Ex.i'.l: ■«0; Lev.JS: 13. 
r clia|i. 28: n, etc i Lev. 14:10. (Lev. 7:11. h clinp. 28: 12, etc. 
■ clinp. 28. J ver. 29: chnp. 9: M; Kx. I2:'«9. k DeuL 26 : 1 , etr. 



CHAPTER XV. 
2. Ye ; the childri-n of those who were to die in 
the wilderness, f'hnp. 14 : .'Jl. The land of your 
hahitatlinig ; Canaan. 

4. A tenth-deal ; about three qnarCs. A hin ; 
about live quarts. 
198 



16 One law and one manner shall *b.c:m^ 
be for you, and for the stranger that so- 
journeth with you. 

17 If And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

18 Speak unto the children of Israel, 
and say unto them, ''When ye come into 
the land whither I bring you, 

19 Then it shall be, that, when ye eat 
of the bread of 'the land, ye shall oflTer 
up a heave-ofllcring unto the Lord. 

20 Ye shall offer up a cake of the "'first 
of your dough for a heave-offering: as 
ye do the "heave-offering of the thresh- 
ing-floor, so shall ye heave it. 

21 Of the first of your dough ye shall 
give unto the Lord a heave-oflcring in 
your generations. 

22 ^And if ye have "erred, and not 
observed all these commandments, which 
the Lord hath spoken unto Moses, 

23 Even all that the Lord hath com- 
manded you by the hand of Moses, from 
the day that the Lord commanded Mo- 
ses, and henceforward among your gen- 
erations; 

24 Then it shall be, if avght be commit- 
ted by ignorance twithout the knowledge 
of the congregation, that all the congre- 
gation shall offer one young bullock for a 
burnt-offering, for a sweet savor unto the 
Lord, with his p meat-offering, and his 
drink-offering, according to the ^ manner, 
and one "^ kid of the goats for a sin-offering. 

25 And the priest shall make an atone- 
ment for all the congregation of the chil- 
dren of Israel, and it shall be forgiven 
them ; for it is ignorance : and they shall 
bring their offering, a sacrifice made by 
fire unto the Lord, and their sin-offering 
before the Lord, for their ignorance: 

26 And it shall be forgiven all the con- 
gregation of the children of Israel, and 
the stranger that sojourneth among them ; 
seeing all the people rvcre in ignorance. 

27 T[And if "any soul sin through ig- 
norance, then he shall bring a she-goat 
of the first year for a sin-offering. 

28 And 'the priest shall make an afone- 
ment for the soul that sinneth ignorantly, 
when he sinneth by ignorance before the 
Lord, to make an atonement for him ; and 
it shall be forgiven him. 

29 Ye shall have one law for him that 



1 .Io»li.R:ll,12. in Prov..T:'», 10. n Lev. 23 : 10. o Lev. 4 :2,etr. 
t Heb./rom (At tyM. pver.8-10. % Or, ordinance. qchnp.28:l/i: 
Lev.4:23: KxraR:l7; 8::Wi. r Acts3:l7,I9; 1 Tim. 1 : 13 ; Heb. 
6:2. • Lev. 4 : 27, 28. t Lev. 4 : 38. 



24. According to the manner; in accordance 
witli the method or ordinances which God hati 
prescribed. 

28. Sinneth ig7tora7)tly ; through carelessness 
or inattention, violating some law without at the 
time being aware of it. 



Otie is stoned for 



NUMBERS XVI. 



vioJatin"; the Sabbath. 



for him that is born among the children 
of Israel, and for the * stranger that so- 
journeth among them. 

30 If But the soul thatdoeth a!/g-/if t pre- 
sumptuously,'' iohether he be born in the 
land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth 
the Lord ; and that soul shall be cut off 
from among his people. 

31 Because he hath despised the "^ word 
of the Lord, and hath broken his com- 
mandment, that soul shall utterly be cut 
off; his ''iniquity shall be upon him. 

32 T[ And while the children of Israel 
were in the wilderness, they found a 
man that gathered "sticks upon the sab- 
bath-day. 

33 And they that found him gathering 
sticks brought him unto Moses and Aaron, 
and unto all the congregation. 

34 And they put him in ''ward, because 
it was not declared what should be done 
to him. 

35 And the Lord said unto Moses, The 
mans shall be surely put to death: all 
the congregation shall ''stone him with 
stones without the camp. 

36 And 'all the congregation brought 
him without the camp, and stoned him 
with stones, and he died; as the Lord 
commanded Moses. 

37 1[And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

38 Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
bid them thaf they make them J fringes in 
the borders of their garments throughout 
their generations, and that they put upon 
the fringe of the borders a ribbon of blue: 

39 And it shall be unto you for a fringe, 
that ye may look upon it, and remember 

* Heb. docth. a Komans 3 : 29, 30. f Heb. with a high hand. 
b Deut. 17: 12; Psa. IW: 13; Heb. 10:26; 2 Peter, 2:10. c 2 Sam. 
12:9; Prov. 13:13; Acts 13:41; Heb. 10 : 28, 29. d Lev. 5:1; 
P8il.38:4; Ezek.l8:20; 2Peter,2:21. e Ex.35:2,3. fT,ev.24:12. 
g Ex. 31 : 14, 15. h Lev. 24 : 14. i Josh. 7 : 25. j Deut. 22 : 12 ; 



30. Soeth aught presumptuously ; violates a 
known law by design, and in defiance of Jehovah. 

31. His iniquity shall be upon him ; he shall 
be punished for his sin. 

32. Gathered sticks upon the sahbath-day ; 
presumptuously, in open defiance of God and his 
laws. Ver. 30, 31. 

3S. A ribbon of blue ; to distinguish them from 
others, and to remind them of the law of Crod and 
their duty to keep it. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Though ever so many prove unfaithful to Grod, 
and cut themselves off from his blessings, it will 
not annul his faithfulness, or render his promises of 
no effect. Rom. 3 : 3, 4. 

16. Persons of all nations may have access to 
Lrod through Jesiis Christ, and by faith in him may 
be freely pardoned, sanctified, and saved ; whether 
ihey be Jews or G-en tiles, high or low, bond or free. 

21. God is the giver of all our mercies, and in 
partaking of them we should gratefully acknowledge 
and adore him. Prov. 3:6; Phil. 4 : 6. 

26. The law of God is exceeding broad. We 



all the commandments of the Lord, and 
do them ; and that ye seek not after ^ your 
own heart and your own eyes, after which 
ye use to go ' a whoring : 

40 That ye may remember, and ""do all 
my commandments, and be "holy unto 
your God. 

41 I "am the Lord your God, which 
brought you out of the land of Egypt, to 
be Pyour God : I am the Lord your God. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

1 The rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abirara. 2:5 
Moses separateth the people from the rebels" tents. 
:?L The earth swalloweth up Korah, and a fire eon- 
sumeth others. 36 The censers are reserved to holy 
use. 41 Fourteen thousand and seven hundred are 
slain by a plague for murmuring against Moses and 
Aaron, lb Aaron by incense s"ayeth the plague. 

IVrOWi Korah, the son of Izhar, the son 
_LN of Kohath, the son of Levi, and Da- 
than and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and 
On, the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, 
took men: 

2 And they rose up before Moses, with 
certain of the children of Israel, two 
hundred and fifty princes of the assem- 
bly, '■famous in the congregation, men of 
renown : 

3 And "they gathered themselves to- 
gether against Mo.ses and against Aaron, 
and said unto them, iYetake too much 
upon you, seeing 'all the congregation arc 
holy, every one of them, and the "Lord 
is among them ; wherefore then lift ye 
up yourselves above the congregation of 
the Lord "? 

4 And when Moses heard it, " he fell 
upon his face: 

5 And he spake unto Korah and unto 
all his company, saying. Even to-morrow 
the Lord will show who are his, and wlio 



Mat. 23 : o. 




t Deut. 


29: 19: 


.lob 31 


7; Jer. 9: 14 


Eiek 


ti-'t 


1 Psa. 73 : • 


7 


106:39 


m Psa 


119:4 


n Lev. 11:4 


. 4.1. 


Lev. 


22 : 3.3. P 


Heb. ll:lfi. q d 


a p. 26 : 
i Het 


9; Exodus fi: 


21 ; .lude 11. 


r chap. 26 


9 


» Psa. 


106:16. 


. It 18 much fur 


1/uu. 


Ex. 


19:6. « Ex 


29 : 4.5. 


V chap. 


14:5; ' 


0:6. 







often violate it tlirough inattention, without at the 
time being aware of it ; and are in continual need 
of pardoning mercy through Christ. Psa. 19:13. 

30. The open transgression of known divine laws 
is a reproach upon their Author, and brings upon 
the soul his awful displeasure. 

36. Wilful sabbath-breaking, iu opposition to the 
known command of God, is a sin of presumption, 
and e.xposes those who practise it to be cut off for 
ever from his favor. 

40. All the directions of God are designed and 
adapted to make his people holy, to remind them of 
their obligations, and lead them so to keep his com- 
mandments as to receive the blessings of his ever- 
lasting love. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

3. Above the congregation ; by acting as rulers 
and taking the direction of their concerns. Ver. 10, 
13, 28. 

4. He fell upon his face ; expressing his deep 
sense of their guilt and danger. 

5. Will he cause to come near ; God would 

199 



The rebellion of Korah, 

is *holy; and will cause ^him to come 
near unto liim : even him whom he hath 
chosen "^will he cause to come ''near 
unto him. 

6 This do: Take you censers, Korah, 
and all his company; 

7 And put fire therein, and put incense 
in them before the Lord to-morrow : and 
it shall be that the man whom the Lord 
doth choose, he shall be ' holy : ye take too 
much upon "^you, ye sons of Levi. 

8 And Moses said unto Korah, Hear, I 
pray you, ye sons of Levi : 

9 Seemcth it but a s small thing unto you, 
that the God of Lsrael hath ''separated 
you from the congregation of Israel, to 
bring you near to himself to do the ser- 
vice of the tabernacle of the Lord, and to 
stand before the congregation to minister 
unto themi 

1 And he hatli brought thee near to him, 
and all thy brethren the sons of Levi with 
thee: and seek ye the priesthood also? 

1 1 For which cause both thou and all 
thy company are gathered together against 
the Lord : and ' what is Aaron, that ye 
murmur against him? 

12 ^ And Moses sent to call Dathan and 
Abiram, the sons of Eliab ; which said, 
We will not come up : 

13 Is^it a small thing that thou hast 
brought us up out of a land that floweth 
with milk and honey, to kill us in the 
wilderness, except thou make thyself al- 
together a ''prince over us? 

14 Moreover, thou hast not brought us 
into a land that 'floweth with milk and 
honey, or given us inheritance of fields 
and vineyards : -wilt thou *put out the 
eyes of these men ? we will not come up. 

15 And Moses was very wroth, and said 
unto the Lord, ""Respect not thou their 
offering : "I have not taken one ass from 
them, neither have I hurt one of them. 

16 And ]\loscs said unto Korah, Be thou 
and all thy company before the Lord, 
thou, and they, and Aaron, to-morrow : 

17 And take every man his censer, and 
put incense in them, and bring " ye before 
the Lord every man his censer, two hun- 
dred and fifty censers; tliou also, and 
Aa^ron, each of you his censer. 

• I.eriticiia 21 : 6, etc. h HpIi. 12 : M. cclmp. 17:B. d cliRp. 
3:10; Lev. 10:3; 21:17, 1»; KwkieUO: 4(5; '«'l:lft, 16. • Enh. 
1:4. rHebrewa6:4. e ver. 13 ; I»ii. 7: 13. k rliap. 3:41, 45; 
8:14; neuU10:8. i Exoclus lf>:8; 1 .Siitnuel, 8:7; Actsf>:4; 
irnr.3:B. j ver. 9. liKl.2:14. 1 Ex. 3 : 8; I.eviticuii 20: 24. 
" Heb. bore out. m Gen. 4 : fi ; In.iiiili 1 : 10-1.1. n I Sum. 12:3; 
Aclli20:3;t; 2Cor. 7:2. o 1 Sniil. 12 ; 7. p chap. 14 : 10. q ver. 



NUMBERS XVI. 



Dathan. and Abiram. 



show whom he had chosen to be priest and leader 
in his worship. 

7. The man ni'h.om the Lord doth choose; by 
showinj; approbiition of his conduct. He shall be 
hoi If ; acknow!((l;r(.i| and trt-ated a..s liigh-priest. 

] I. Against I lieLord; theirconduct was rebellion 
200 



' 18 And they took every man his i, ":„??: 
censer, and put fire in them, and laid in- 
cense thereon, and stood in the door of 
the tabernacle of the congregation with 
Moses and Aaron. 

19 And Korah gathered all the congre- 
gation against them unto the door of the 
tabernacle of the congregation : and Pthe 
glory of the Lord appeared unto all the 
congregation. 

20 And the Lord spake unto Moses and 
unto Aaron, saying, 

21 Separate ^yourselves from among 
this congregation, that I may ' consume 
them in a moment. 

22 And they 'fell upon their faces, and 
said, God, the ' God of the spirits of all 
flesh, shall "one man sin, and wilt thou 
be wroth with all the congregation ? 

23 1[ And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

24 Speak unto the congregation, saying. 
Get you up from about the tabernacle of 
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. 

25 And Moses rose up and went unto 
Dathan and Abiram; and the elders of 
Israel followed him. 

26 And he spake unto the congregation, 
saying, " Depart, I pray you, from the tents 
of these wicked men, and touch nothing of 
theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins. 

27 So they gat up from the tabernacle 
of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on every 
side: and Dathan and Abiram came out, 
and stood in the door of their tents, and 
their wives, and their sons, and their lit- 
tle children. 

28 And Moses said, Hereby "ye shall 
know that the Lord hath sent me to do 
all these works; for 1 have not done them 
of mine own " mind. 

29 If these men die tthe common death 
of ail men, or if they be visited after the 
visitation^ of all men; then the Lord 
hath not sent me. 

30 But if the Lord + make a * new thing, 
and the earth open her mouth, and swal- 
low them up, with all ihut appertain unto 
them, and they go down quick into the 
pit;" then ye shall understand that these 
men have provoked the Lord. 

31 ^And it came to pass, as he had 



45; Rev. 18:4. r Heb. 12:28,29. • cli.ip. 14:5. tcbnp.27:16; 
.Job 12:10; Eccl.l2:7; I»a. 87:16; ZecliBrmh 12 : 1 ; Reb.l2:>). 
" Gen. 18:32; .IO!!llua7: I, etc.; Rom.&:18. t Gen. 19 : 12, 14 ; 
I.«aiali r.::ll; 2 Cor. 6:17; 1 Tim. 6:22; Rev. 18:4. w Exodim 
3:12; Zrcliariali 2:9; .lolin 5:36. x Jeremiah 23: 16. f Heb. 
at every man dielh. y Isaiah 10:3. J Heb. create a creature. 
" Job 31 : 3. • ver. 33 ; Pao. 55 : IS. 



against his arrangement, and of course ag.iinst him. 

14. Put out the eyes of these men; treat thejii 
as blind, and attempt to lead them at pleasure. 

l-'j. Respect not thou their offering ; regard it 
not with favor, but with iust indignation. 

30. Qnic/:; alive. Ver. 33. 



Korah is swallowed up. 



NUMBERS XVI. 



The 'plaguc slaycth many. 



B.c!'i4™' made an end of speaking all these 
words, that the ground clave asunder that 
was under them : 

32 And "the earth opened her mouth, 
and swallowed them up, and their houses, 
and all the men that appertained unto Ko- 
rah, and all their goods. 

33 They, and all that appertained to 
them, went down alive into the pit, and 
the earth closed upon them : and they 
perished from among the congregation. 

34 And all Israel that were round about 
them fled at the cry of them : for they 
said. Lest the earth swallow us up also. 

35 And there came out a ''fire from the 
Lord, and consumed the two hundred 
and fifty "^men that off'ered incense. 

36 TfAnd the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

37 Speak unto Eleazarthe son of Aaron 
the priest, that he take up the censers out 
of the burning, and scatter thou the fire 
yonder ; for '' they are hallowed. 

38 The censers of these ^ sinners against 
their own souls, let them make them 
broad plates for a covering of the altar : 
for they offered them before the Lord, 
therefore they are hallowed : and they 
shall be a ""sign unto the children of Israel. 

39 And Eleazar the priest took the bra- 
zen censers, wherewith they that were 
burnt had offered ; and they were made 
broad plates for a covering of the altar : 

40 To be a memorial unto the children 
of Israel, that ^no stranger, which is not 
of the seed of Aaron, come near to offer 
incense before the Lord ; that he be not 
as Korah, and as his company: as the 
Lord said to him by the hand of Moses. 



a chap. 26:10, 11; Deut. 11:6; Psalm 106: 17, 18. b chtiiiter 
11:1; Lev. 10:2. c verse 17. d Leviticus 27 : JS. e Proverbs 
8:36; 20:2; Hab.2:10. f chap. 17 : 10 ; Ezek. 14 : 8. g chap. 
3:10; 2ChronicIe9, 26: 18. hrliap.H:2: Psalm 106: 2,5, etc. 



35. Tu-o hundred and Jifty men ; ver. 2, 17. 

37. Out of the burning ; from the fire that 
had destroyed the men. They are hallowed ; the 
censers, or pans for incense, were set apart for the 
sacred purpose mentioned, ver. 3S-40. 

46. make an atoneme)it for them; by offer- 
ing the incense to the Lord, and supplicating his 
mercy ; thus typifying the atonement and inter- 
cession of Christ. 

48. The plague was stayed ; expressive of the 
efficacy of the great atoning sacrifice, and the all- 
prevalent intercession of Christ. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. When some are raised to power and influence, 
others often overlook the hand of G-od in their ele- 
vation, and ascribe it all to men ; and instead of be- 
ing contented with the place which he assigns them, 
and seeking to discharge its duties, they envy and 
blame those above them, and, in so doing, find fault 
with God. 

7. Servants of Grod, in the use of suitable means, 
are disposed to refer their cause, and that of their 
friends, to him ; and in faith, patience, and prayer, 
to wait for his decision. 

11. Men who ungratefully overlook the goodness 



41 ^ But on the morrow all the congre- 
gation of the children of •" Israel mur- 
mured against Moses and against Aaron, 
saying. Ye have killed the people of the 
Lord. 

42 And it came to pass, when the con- 
gregation was gathered against Moses 
and against Aaron, that they looked tow- 
ard the tabernacle of the congregation : 
and behold, the ' cloud covered it, and 
the J glory of the Lord appeared. 

43 And Moses and Aaron came before 
the tabernacle of the congregation. 

44 1[And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

45 Get ''you up from among this con- 
gregation, that I may consume them as 
in a moment. And ' they fell upon their 
faces. 

46 ^ And Moses said unto Aaron, Take 
a censer, and put fire therein from off the 
altar, and put on incense, and go quickly 
unto the congregation, and make an atone- 
ment for them : for there is "" wrath gone 
out from the Lord; the plague is begun. 

47 And Aaron took as Moses command- 
ed, and ran into the midst of the congrega- 
tion; and behold, the "plague was begun 
among the people : and he put on "incense, 
and made an atonement for the people. 

48 And he stood p between the dead and 
the living; and the plague was i stayed. 

49 Now they that died in the plague 
were fourteen thousand and seven hun- 
dred, besides them that died about the 
matter of Korah. 

50 And Aaron returned unto Moses unto 
the door of the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation : and the plague was stayed. 



i E.x. 40:.')4. j verse 19. k ver. 21, 24. 1 ver. 22 ; chap. 20 : 6. 
m chap. 11:33; IS:,";; Leviticus 10 : 6; 1 Chron. 27: 24. n Psa. 
106:29. oDeut.33:10. p Heb. 7: 24,25. q 1 Chron. 21 : 26, 27 ; 
Psalm 106:30. 



of G-od to them, neglect the appropriate duties of 
their station, and ambitiously strive to usurp the 
places of those above them, are under the influence 
of pride and ripening for ruin. 

15. When falsely charged with baseness and 
crime, conscious integrity, and the expectation that 
God will vindicate those who trust in and obey him. 
give unfailing support, and prepare the soul to go 
forward in duty with firmness, courage, and success. 
Psa. 37 : 3-9. 

26. All such connection with the wicked as tends 
to encourage them in sin, and all appearance of 
conniving at their transgressions, should be care- 
fully avoided. 2 Cor. 6 : 17. 

33. Though this is a state of trial rather than of 
retribution, God sometimes manifests his hatred of 
sin in such a manner as to show that he is a God that 
judgeth in the earth, and that the wages of sin is 
death. Psa. 58 : 11 ; Rom. 6. 23. 

41. Punishment of itself will not change the hearts 
of tlie wicked, or lead them to love and serve God. 
Such a change, whenever it takes place, is by the 
grace of God, through the influences of the Holy 
Spirit. 

48. A good man is kind, compassionate, and for- 
201 



Aaron's rod buddeth. 



NUMBERS XVIII. 



The charge of the Levites. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

1 Aaron's rod among all the rods of the tribes only 
flourisheth. HI It is left for a monuraent against the 
rebels. 



A 



ND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 



2 Speak unto the chiklrcii of Israel, and 
take of every one of them a "rod accord- 
ing to the house of their fathers, of all 
their princes according to the house of 
their fathers, twelve rods: write thou 
every man's name upon his rod. 

3 And thou shalt write Aaron's name 
upon the rod of Levi : for one rod shall be 
for the head of the house of their fathers. 

4 And thou shalt lay them up in the tab- 
ernacle of the congregation before the tes- 
timony, where ''I will meet with you. 

5 And it shall come to pass, that the 
man's rod, whom I shall '^choose, shall 
blossom : and I will make to cease from 
iKie the murmurings of the children of Is- 
rael, whereby '' they murmur against you. 

6 ^And Moses spake unto the children 
of Israel, and every one of their princes 
gave him *a rod apiece, for each prince 
one, according to their fathers' houses, 
even twelve rods : and the rod of Aaron 
wan among their rods. 

7 And Moses laid up the rods before the 
Lord in the "tabernacle of witness. 

8 And it came to pass, that on the mor- 
row Moses went into the tabernacle of 
witness; and behold, the ""rod of Aaron 
for the house of Levi was bvidded, and 
brought forth buds, and bloomed blos- 
soms, and yielded almonds. 

9 And Moses brought out all the rods 
from before the Lord unto all the chil- 
dren of Israel : and they looked, and took 
every man his rod. 

10 ^And the Lord said unto Moses, 





m Kiek 


S7:l& 


li 


Ex. 2.S : 2 


; 20: 42. 43 


; :iO:»6 


. c cliap. 


16:6. 




clitip. iri: II. 


* 


Hob. a rod for one 


prince 


a rod fii 




r 


'ince. ' 


Ex. 38 


ai 


; Acts 7: 


44. f Vs:x. 


110:2: 


Ezek. 19: 


2, 14. 


( 


Hob. 9 


i. t Hcb 


. children 


of reheUion 


. ti P 


aim 90:7 


; Isn. 



giving; .ind does nof desire the destruction of the 
wicked, however mucli they may have injured him. 

-to. No finite mind can fully comprel.end the evil 
of sin. It has slain not only thousands, but millions 
and hundreds of millions. Deliverance from it is 
the greatest of blessings, and all who receive this 
lilossing will be for ever indebted for it to the Father, 
thp pDii. and the Holy Giiost. None who continue 
10 love and practise sin can escape perdition. Ezek. 
3:i: 11. 

CHArXER XVII. 

T). Whom I shall choose ; to be high-priest. 
.!/«/■« to cease — the vinrmnriiigs ; about the 
priesthood, by showing his will with regard to it. 

10. Their initrmiiriiigs ; on account of the 
priesthood's being confined to the family of Aaron. 

VI. We all perish ; this they deserved, and by 
iheir ."»ins, especially should they repeat them, they 
would expose themselves to death. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

•5. To the clear manifestations of the divine will 
202 



Bring Aaron's rod again before the Vc:?"^; 
testimony, to be e kept for a token against 
the t rebels; and thou shalt quite take 
away their murmurings from me, that 
they die not. 

1 1 And Moses did so : as the Lord com- 
manded him, so did he. 

1 2 And the children of Israel spake unto 
Moses, saying. Behold, we die, we ''per- 
ish, we all perish. 

13 Whosoever 'cometh any ■> thing near 
unto the tabernacle of the Lord shall die : 
shall we be consumed with dying? 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1 The charge of the priests and Levites. 9 Thepriesta' 
portion. 21 The I.evites' portion. 2.') The heave- 
offering to the priests out of the Levites' portion. 

AND the Lord said unto Aaron, Thou 
and thy sons and thy father's house 
with thee shall ''bear the iniquity of the 
sanctuary: and thou and thy sons with thee 
sliall bear the iniquity of your priesthood. 

2 And thy brethren also of the tribe of 
Levi, the tribe of thy father, bring thou 
with thee, that they may be 'joined unto 
thee, and "'minister unto thee: but thou 
and "thy sons with thee shall minister be- 
fore the tabernacle of witness. 

3 And they shall keep thy charge, and 
the charge of all the tabernacle : only 
they" shall not come nigh the vessels of 
the sanctuary and the altar, that neither 
they, nor ye also, die. 

4 And they shall be joined unto thee, 
and keep the charge of the tabernacle of 
the congregation, for all the service of 
the tabernacle: and a stranger shall not 
come nigh unto you. 

5 And yc shall keep the charge of the 
sanctuary, and the charge of the p altar; 
that there be no "i wrath any more upon 
the children of Israel. 



.•>7:I6. i diap. 1 :61, .IS; 18:4 


7. j Eph. 2:13; Heb. 10 : I9-2i 


k Ex. 28:38; Isaiah fi3 : fi, 1 1 ; 


1 Peter, 2 : 24. 1 Genesis 29 : 34. 


ra cliap. 3 : fi, 7. n chap. 3 : 10, 


etc. ocliap. 16:40. p Exodua 


30 : 7, etc ; Lev. 24 : 3. q cliap 


16:46. 



all should cheerfully submit; and they who do not, 
incur the guilt of rebelling against God. 

8. God is the author of nature as well as of grace. 
All its laws are under his direction, and subject to 
his control. 

10. God uses all reasonable and proper means to 
prevent men from continuing in sin ; but his mer- 
cies, if perverted and abused, will increase their 
guilt and aggravate their ruin. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1. Bear the iitiqitity of the sanctuary; it 
was now shown that Aaron and his sons were con- 
firmed in the honors of the priesthood, and the Lord 
informed him that they must bear its responsibili- 
ties. If any thing should be done wrong, they would 
be accountable. 

4. A stra7iger ; one not of the tribe of Levi. 

.'). Keep the charge of the stnictitart/ ; to see 
that every thing with regard to the worship of God, 
was done according to his direction. 



The portion of the 



NUMBERS XVIII. 



priests and Lcvites. 



i; "mf 6 And I, behold, I have taken your 
brethren the Levites from among the chil- 
dren of Israel : to you they are * given as a 
gift for the Lord, to do the service of the 
tabernacle of the congregation. 

7 Therefore ''thou and thy sons with 
thee shall keep your priest's office for 
every thing of the altar, and "^within the 
veil; and ye shall serve: I have given 
your priest's office unto yon as a service 
of gift : and the stranger that cometh nigh 
shall be put to death. 

8 TTAnd the Lord spake unto Aaron, 
Behold, I also have given thee the charge 
of my *" heave-offerings of all the hal- 
lowed things of the children of Israel ; 
unto thee have I given them by reason 
of the ''anointing, and to thy sons, by an 
ordinance for ever. 

9 This shall be thine of the most holy 
things, reserved from the fire : every ob- 
lation of theirs, every '"meat-ofTering of 
theirs, and every s sin-offering of theirs, 
and every ''trespass-offering of theirs, 
which they shall render unto me, shall be 
most holy for thee and for thy sons. 

10 In 'the most holy place shalt thou 
eat it ; every male shall eat it : it shall be 
holy unto thee. 

1 1 And this is thine ; the ' heave-offering 
of their gift, with all the wave-offerings 
of the children of Israel : I have given 
them nnto ''thee, and to thy sons and to 
thy daughters with thee, by a statute for 
ever: every one that is 'clean in thy 
house shall eat of it. 

12 All the *best of the oil, and all the 
best of the wine, and of the wheat, the 
first-fruits '" of them which they shall offer 
unto the Lord, them have I given thee. 

13 And whatsoever is first ripe in the 
land, which they shall bring unto the 
Lord, shall be thine; every one that is 
clean in thy house shall eat of it. 

14 ICvery "thing devoted in Israel shall 
be thine. 

1 5 Every ° thing that openeth the matrix 
in all flesh, which they bring unto the Lord, 
whether it he of men or beasts, shall be 
thine : nevertheless the first-born of man 
shalt thou surely p redeem, and the first- 
ling of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem. 



16 And those that are to be redeemed 
from a mouth old shalt thou redeem, ac- 
cording to thine i estimation, for the money 
of five ^shekels, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary, which is "twenty gerahs. 

17 But the ^firstling of a cow, or the 
firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a 
goat, thou shalt not redeem ; they are 
holy: thou shalt "sprinkle their blood 
upon the altar, and shalt burn their fat 
for an offering made by fire, for a sweet 
savor unto the Lord. 

18 And the flesh of them shall be thine, 
as the "' wave-breast and as the right 
shoulder are thine. 

19 All the "heave-offerings of the holy 
things, which the children of Israel offer 
unto the Lord, have I given thee, and thy 
sons and thy daughters with thee, by a 
statute for ever : it is a ^covenant of salt 
for ever before the Lord unto thee and 
to thy seed with thee. 

20 ^And the Lord spake unto Aaron, 
Thou^ shalt have no inheritance in their 
land, neither shalt thou have any part 
among them : ^ I am thy part and thine in- 
heritance among the children of Israel. 

21 And behold, I have given the chil- 
dren of Levi all the ^ tenth in Israel for an 
inheritance, for their service which they 
serve, even the service of the tabernacle 

j of the congregation. 

! 22 Neither must the children of Israel 
henceforth come nigh the tabernacle of 

, the congregation, lest thev bear sin, t and 

[die." 

23 But "^ the Levites shall do the service 
of the tabernacle of the congregation, and 

' they shall bear their iniquity : it shall be 

j a statute for ever throughout your genera- 
tions, that among the children of Israel 
they have no inheritance. 

! 24 But the <• tithes of the children of Is- 

I rael, which they offer as a heave-ofl^ering 

I unto the Lord, I have given to the Levites 
to inherit : therefore I have said unto 

jthem, Among the children of Israel they 

j shall have no inheritance. 

25 TfAnd the Lord spake unto Moses, 
i saying, 

26 Thus speak unto the Levites. and say 
unto them, When ye take of the children 



a chap. R: 19. 1> ver. 5. c Heb. 9 : 3, 6. J cliap. Sig; Lev. 
7:33. e Ex. 29:29; 40 .-13, IS. f Lev. 2: 2,3 ; 10: 13, 13. e Lev. 
6:2S,26. h Lev. 7: 7; 14: 13. i Lev.6:lfi,etc. iver.8. V Detll. 
18:3. lLev.22:2. * Heb. /nt m Ex. 23 : 10 ; Dent. 18: 4 ; 
Nell. 10:35,36. n Lev. 27: 28. o Ex. 13:2; 22:29. P Ex. 13:13; 
34:20. q Lev. 27:2,6. rcliap.3:47. • Ezek. 4."> : 12. t DeuU 

6. Do the service; the less sacred and more 
laViorions parts of it. 

7. Tlie stranger ; one not of the family of Aaron. 

9. Vor thy sons ; for their use and support. 

10. F.very maJe ; of the family of Aaron. 

16. Tiventy gerahs; a gerah was about two 
and a half cents. 



l.i:19. n Ex. 29:16; Lev. 3:2,5; Heb. 12:24. v Ex. 29 : 26, 28 ; 
Lev. 7:34. w ver. U. it Lev. 2 : 13; 2Chron. 13 :,<>. y clmp. 
26:62. I Deut.l0:9; 12:12; 14:27,29; 18:1,2: Josh. 13: 14, .33; 
14:3; 18:7; Pea. 16:5; Ezek. 44:28. » Lev. 27 : 30, .32. f Heb. 
to die. b chap. 1 : 61. c chap. 3:7. d verse 21 ; Neh. 10 : 37 ; 
13 : 44 ; Mai. 3:8-10; Heb. 7 : S-9. 

19. A covenant of salt ; a perpetual, permanent 
covenant. 

20. No inheritance ; no landed property. 

21. The tenth; a tenth part of the produce or 
increase of the property of the otiier tribes. 

23. They shall bear their iniquity; if any 
thing is done wrong, they shall hcxr t!u> blame. 
203 



Water of separation. 



NUMBERS XIX. 



Mode of preparing it. 



of Israel the tithes which I have given 
you from them for your inheritance, then 
ye shall olTcr up a heave-otferingof it for 
the Loud, even a "tenth part of the tithe. 

27 And this your hcave-otTcring shall 
be reckoned unto you, as ''though it ivere 
the corn of the threshing-floor, and as the 
fulness of the wine-press. 

28 Thus ye also shall offer a heave- 
offering unto the Lord of all your tithes, 
Avliich ye receive of the children of Israel ; 
and yc shall give thereof the Lord's heave- 
offering to Aaron the priest. 

29 Out of all your gifts ye shall offer 
every heave-offering of the Lord, of all 
the *best thereof, even the hallowed part 
thereof out of it. 

30 Therefore thou shalt say unto them, 
When ye have heaved the best thereof 
from it, *= then it shall be counted vinto the 
Levites as the increase of the threshing- 
floor, and as the increase of the wine- 
press. 

31 And ye shall cat it in every place, 
ye and your households: for it is your 
reward'^ for your service in the taberna- 
cle of the congregation. 

32 And yc shall "bear no sin by reason 
of it, when ye have heaved from it the best 
of it : neither shall yn "^pollute the holy 
things of the children of Israel, lest ye die. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

1 The water of separation made of the ashes of a red 
heifer. 11 The law for the use of it in the purifica- 
tion of the unclean. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses and 
unto Aaron, saying, 
2 This is the ordinance of the law, 
M'hich the Lord hath commanded, saying. 
Speak unto the children of Israel, that 
they bring thee a red heifer without spot. 



• Neliemi:ili 10:38. h ver. 30. "• Heb./a<. ver. 1'2. c ver. 27. 
d Matthew 10:10; Luke 10:7; lCor.9:13; 2Cor. 12:13; 1 Tim. 
6:ia e Lev. 19:8; 22:lti. f Lev. 23 : 2, 18; Mai. 1 : 7; I Cor. 
il I S7, 29. B Ex. 12 : 5 ; M;il. 1 : 13, 14 ; 1 Peter, 1:19. h Deut. 
81:3; I Sam. 6:7. i Lev. 4: 12, 21 ; 16: 27; Heb. 13: II. j Lev. 



SQ. Ye shall bear no sin ; they would not do 
•wrong in eating, as they would if they should not 
first ofler a tenth for the use of the priests according 
to the Lord's directions. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The ministry is a great and responsible work. 
To be intrusted with it is a peculiar honor ; and 
to be made faithful in discharging its duties is an 
unspeakable blessing. 

19. While ministers of religion are precluded by 
their offien from engaging in worldly business, and 
thus obtaining a support for themselves and their 
families, it is the will of God that ihey should be 
supported by those for whose spiritual good they 
minister. 

3'i. God requires not only that his ministers and 
their families should be supported, but also that they 
should have something for pious and charitable uses ; 
and in devotinfj all to him. they may gratefully par- 
take of what they need, and expect his blessing to 
rest upon them. 
204 



whereins is no blemish, and upon b."'?^ 
which "^ never came yoke. 

3 And yc shall give her unto Eleazar 
the priest, that he may bring her forth 
without' the camp, and one shall slay her 
before his face: 

4 And Eleazar the priest shall take of 
her blood with his finger, and J sprinkle 
of her blood directly before the taberna- 
cle of the congregation seven times. 

5 And one shall burn the heifer in his 
sight; her ''skin, and her flesh, and her 
blood, with her dung, shall he burn : 

6 And the priest shall take ' cedar- wood, 
and hyssop, and scarlet, and cast it into 
the midst of the burning of the heifer. 

7 Then the priest shall wash "' his clothes, 
and he shall bathe his flesh in water, and 
afterward he shall come into the camp, 
and the priest shall be unclean until 
the even. 

8 And he that burnetii her ."shall wash 
his clothes in water, and bathe his flesh 
in water, and shall be unclean until the 
even. 

9 And a man that is clean shall gather 
up the "ashes of the heifer, and lay the7n 
up without the camp in a clean place, 
and it shall be kept for the congregation 
of the children of Israel for a "Avater of 
separation : it is a purification for sin. 

10 And he that gathereth the ashes of 
the heifer shall wash his clothes, and be 
unclean until the even : and it shall be 
unto the children of Israel, and unto the 
stranger that sojourneth among them, for 
a statute for ever. 

11 1 He P that toucheth the dead body of 
any tman shall be unclean seven days. 

12 He 1 shall purify himself with it on 
the third day, and on the seventh day he 



4:6; 16:14,19; Heb.9:13; 12:H. k Exoitus 29 : 14. I Lev. 
14:4,6,49. m Leviticus 1 1 : e.!) ; 15:5. n Heb. 9:13. over. 
13, 20, 21 ; chap. 31 : 23. pcliap.6:2; 9:6,10; Leviticus 21 : 1 ; 
Lamentations 4:14; Haggai 2 : 1.3. f Heb. tout of man. q cbai> 
31:19. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

9. Water of separatioti ; with which to purify 
those who had oeen separated from the congregation 
on account of ceremonial uncleanness. 

12. It ; the water of separation. Ver. 9. 
INSTRUCTION'S. 

4. In the Old Testament, as well as the New, we 
are often reminded of the prevalence and evil of sin. 
and the necessity of the atonement of Christ, and of 
purification by the Holy Spirit, in order to accept- 
ance with God and preparation for heaven. 

10. Though God is the author of spiritual purifi- 
cation, men do not obtain it without the use ot 
means. They must make efforts according to his 
directions, or they will fail of his blessing. 

20. Sin is ihe cause of death, and the putrefaction 
of a de.ad body may well remind us of the pollution 
of :i corrupt soul. All the washings and sprinklings 
under Levitical institutions were designed to teach 
the necessity of the w.ashing of regeneration, and 
the renewing of the Holv Ghost. Titus 3 : 3-7. 



Use of the water of separation. NUMBERS XX. 

b:"ij7^ shall be clean : but if he purify not j 
himself the third day, then the seventh 
day he shall not be clean. 

13 Whosoever toucheth the dead body 
of any man that is dead, and purifieth 
not himself, "defileth the tabernacle of the 
Lord ; and that soul shall be cut off from 
Israel : because the ^ water of separation 
was not sprinkled upon him, he shall be 
unclean ; his *= uncleanness is yet upon 
him. 

14 This is the law, when a man dieth 
in a tent : all that come into the tent, and 
all that is in the tent, shall be unclean 
seven days. 

15 And every open ''vessel, which hath 
no covering bound upon it, is unclean. 

16 And whosoever toucheth one that is 
slain with a sword in the open fields, or 
a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a 
grave, shall be unclean seven days. 

17 And for an unclean person they shall 
take of the *ashes of the burnt heifer of 
purification for sin, and f running water 
shall be put thereto in a vessel: 

18 And a clean person shall take "^hys- 
sop, and dip it in the water, and sprinkle 
it upon the tent, and upon all the vessels, 
and upon the persons that were there, and 
upon hiin that touched a bone, or one 
slain, or one dead, or a grave : 

19 And the clean person shall sprinkle 
upon the unclean on the third day, and "^ on 
the seventh day ; and on the seventh day 
he shall purify himself, and wash his 
clothes, and bathe himself in water, and 
shall be clean at even. 

20 But the man that shall be vmclean, 
and shall not purify himself, that soul 
shall be cut off from among the congre- 
gation, because he hathsdeliled the sanc- 
tuary of the Loud : the water of separa- 
tion hath not been sprinkled upon him; 
he is unclean. 

21 And it shall be a perpetual statute 
unto them, that he that spriiikleth the 
water of separation shall wash his clothes ; 
and he that toucheth the water of separa- 
tion shall be unclean until even. 

22 And '' whatsoever the unclean person 
toucheth shall bo unclean; and the 'soul 
that toucheth it shall be unclean until 



« I.evlticus 15 : .H. hver. 9; than. S: 7. 
i Leviticus 11: SJ. * Heh.dml. t Heli 


c Le/. 7:20; 23:3. 


Iivin<) utiters shall he 


fivcn. Gen. M: I'.); .Tolin4:10. e I'sa. 51 


7. f Leviticus 14 : 9. 


tver. 13. 1) Hiig. '2:1:1. i Lev. 15 : 6. 1 


chap. 33 : 3t). k E.x. 



CHAPTER XX. 
1. Desert of Zin ; a desert south of Canaan, 
and west of Edoin. Ver. 16. The first month ; 

of the fortieth year after they left E^^ypt, having 
(lurinir that lime wandered in the wilderness, as 
God foretold, chap. 14 : 27-35 ; 33 : 19-36. A list of 
places visited in these wanderings is given, chap. 33. 

14 



Water fluwcth from the rock. 
CHAPTER XX. . 

1 The children of Israel come to Zin, where Miriam 
dieth. i They murmur for want of water. 7 Mos'.'s 
smiting the rock briiigeth forth water at Meribah. 
14 Moses at Kadesh desireth passage through Edoni, 
which is denied him. 22 At mount Hor Aaron re- 
signeth his place to Eleazar, and dieth. 

THEN Jcame the children of Lsrael, 
even the whole congregation, into the 
desert of Zin in the first month : and the 
people abode in Kadesh; and ''Miriam 
died there, and was buried there. 

2 And 'there was no water for the con- 
gregation : and " they gathered themselves 
together against Moses and against Aaron. 

3 And the people chode with Moses, and 
spake, saying, "Would God that \\c had 
died when our brethren died before the 
Lord ! 

4 And why have ye brought up the con- 
gregation of the Lord into this wilderness, 
that we and our cattle should die there? 

5 And wherefore have ye made us to 
come up out of Egypt, to bring us in unto 
this evil place? °It is no place of seed, or 
of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates ; 
neither is there any water to drink. 

6 And Moses and Aaron went from the 
presence of the assembly unto the door 
of the tabernacle of the congregation, and 
they fell upon their faces : and the glory 
of the Lord appeared unto them. 

7 TJAnd the Lord spake unto Mo.se«. 
saying, 

8 Take the rod, and gather thou tlip 
assembly together, thou and Aaron thy 
brother, and speak ye unto the rock be- 
fore their eyes; and it shall give fortli 
his water, and thou shalt bring forth to 
them water out of the Proek: so thou 
shalt give the congregation and their 
beasts drink. 

!) And IMoses took the rod from before 
the Lord, as he commanded him. 

10 And Moses and Aaron gathered the 
congregation together before the rock, and 
he said unto them, Hear now, ye i rebels ; 
must we fetch you water out of this rock? 

11 And Moses lifted up his hand, and 
with his rod he smote the rock twice : 
and the "■ water came out abundantly, 
and the congregation drank, and their 
beasts also. 

12 ^And the Lord spake unto Mose.^ 

1.t:'20. 1 Exodus 17:1, etc. m chap. 16 : 42. n chap. U : i, etc. 
o chap. IH:H. p ver. II; Neh. 9:l.i; Ps.a. 78: l.i, Ifi; I0.'>:4I: 
114:S; L-sa. 41:20; 48:21. q Psa. 10(3 : 33. r Ex. 17:fi; Deu:. 
8: 15; 1 Cor. 10:4. 



2. There was no water; tlie water from ll e 
rock in Horeb, Ex. 17:5-7, had ceased to s.ipp)/ 
them. 

12. Believed me >/ot, to sauctifi/ vie ; he did 
not manifest full confidence in trod, or suitably honor 
him before the people as the author of the miraole. 
Ver. 24 ; Psa. 106 : 32, 33. 

203 



Edom refusetk passage. 



NUMBERS XXI. 



Aaron dieth on mount Hor. 



and Aaron, "Because yc believed me not, 
to ''sanctify me in tlic eyes of tlic chil- 
dren of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring 
this congregation into the. land which I 
have given them. 

13 This is the water of *Mcribah; be- 
cause the children of Israel strove with 
the Lord, and he was "^sanctified in them. 

14 Tl And ''Moses sent messengers from 
Kadesh unto the king of Edom, Thus 
saith" thy brother Israel, Thou knowest 
all the travail that hath t befallen us: 

15 How our fathers went ""down into 
Egypt, and we have s dwelt in Egypt a 
long time; and the Egyptians vexed us, 
and our fathers : 

16 And ''when we cried unto the Lord, 
he 'heard our voice, and 'sent an Angel, 
and hath brought us forth out of Egypt: 
and behold, we are in Kadesh, a city in 
the uttermost of thy border. 

17 Let '' us pass, I pray thee, through thy 
country: we will not pass through the 
fields, or through the vineyards, neither 
will we drink of the water of the wells: 
wo win go by the king's high-way, we will 
not turn to the right hand nor to the left, 
until we have passed thy borders. 

1 8 And Edom said unto him, Thon shalt 
not pass by me, lest I come out against 
thee with the sword. 

19 And the children of Israel said unto 
him. We will go by the highway : and 'if 
I and my cattle drink of thy water, then I 
will pay for it : I will only, without doing 
any thing else, go through on my feet. 

20 And liesaid,"'ThouslialtnotgothrougIi. 
And Edom came "out against him with 
jnuch people, and with a strong hand. 

21 Thus Edom refused to give Israel 
passage tjirough his border: wherefore 
Israel iurned away from him. 

22 TIAnd "the children of Israel, even 
the whole congregation, journeyed from 



• clinp. 27 : U ; Deul. 3:M; n2:BI. b Lov,)n;3; F.Mk . r)f> : 23 ; 
1 Peter, 3: 1.1. * TU-.it'iB. ilrift. Kxoilns 17:7. c F.zek. 20:41. 
4 Juilg. II : It), 17. « neut.2:4. f Heb. found u>. fGen. 4ti:6. 
» Et. l-2:-IO. h Ex. 2:2.3. IEx.3:7. j Kx. 3:2 ; 14 : IS; 2:!: 20; 
33:2. k ihnp. 21:22; Deut. 2 : 27. I Deut. 2 ; B, 28. m .luJg. 



14. Travail; labor, hardship, suffering. 

16. All. All gel ; the Angel of lii.s presence; the Mes- 
»enger of the covenant ; the Word of God. John 1:1. 

22. Muinil Hot ; one of the summits of Seir, a 
chain of mountains running through Edom towards 
the eastern gulf of the Red sea. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. Inclination to sin is common to all men. No 
dispensations of Providence, witiiout the teaching 
of the Holy Spirit, will prevent their indulging it, 
nr keep them froin rebelling against God. 

12. The best of men are defective, even in those 
virtues for vi-hich they are inost distinguished. 
Abraham was wanting in faith; Moses in meekness, 
and Job in patience; and if any are saved, it must 
be by grace through faith, and that notof tiiemseives, 
It is the gift of God. Eph. 2 : S ; James 1 : 17. 
206 



Kadesh, and came unto mount bc^- 
Hor. 

23 And the Lord spake unto Moses and 
Aaron in mount Hor, by the coast of the 
land of Edom, saying, 

24 Aaron shall be p gathered unto his 
people : for he shall not enter into the 
land which I have given unto the cliil- 
dren of Israel, because ye'' rebelled against 
my iword at the water of Meribah. 

25 Take Aaron and Elcazar his son, and 
bring them up unto mount Hor: 

2G And strip Aaron of hi.s garments, 
and put them upon Elcazar his son : and 
Aaron shall be gathered unto his people, 
and shall die there. 

27 And Moses did as the Lord com- 
manded : and they went up into mount 
Hor in the sight of all the congregation. 

28 And Moses stripped Aaron of his 
garments, and put them upon Eleazar his 
son; and Aaron ''died there in the top of 
the mount: and Moses and Eleazar came 
down from the mount. 

29 And when all the congregation saw that 
Aaron was dead, they mourned for Aaron 
thirty days, even all the house of Israel. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

1 I.«rael with some loss destroy the Canaanitps at Hor- 
mah. 4 Tho peoplp murmuring are plagueil with 
fiery serpents. 7 They rei)enting are healed by a 
brazen serpent. 10 Sundry journeys of the Israelites. 
2"2 Sihon is overcome, 33 and Og. 

AND when king "Arad the Canaanite, 
which dwelt in the south, heard tell 
that Israel came by the 'way of the spies ; 
then he fought against Israel, and took 
some of them prisoners. 

2 And Israel " vowed a vow unto the 
Lord, and said, If thou wilt indeed de- 
liver this people into my hand, then I 
will ^utterly destroy their cities. 

3 And the Lord '^hearkened to the voice 
of Israel, and delivered up the Canaan- 



11 : 17. n Ob. 10-15. o chap. 33 : 37. p Gen. Vi : 8; Dent. 32 : fitt 
<( ver. 12. t Heb. mouth, r dinp. 33 : :i8, 39. • cliap. 33:40: 
Juilge8l:I6. I fhnp. 13:21. u Genesis 28:20; Juilgea U: :;a 
1 Lev. 27:28; Deut. 13: l.i. w Pan. 22: 4, 6. 



21. The Israelites were not at liberty to engage 
in war with any nation. -except as directed by God. 
In destroying the Canaanites, and taking possession 
of their country, they were the appointed instru- 
ments of his wr.ath against those nations on account 
of their sins. 

2-1. The sins of good men are peculiarly offensive 
to God, and lead him often to visit theiuwilh sore 
calamities. 

29. The most distinguished and useful must soon 
die. Their death is a public calamity, and a just 
cause of general grief and mourning. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

1. /;/ the south ; the south part of Canaan. 
3. Hormah ; meaning utter destruction. 



The serpent of brass. 



NUMBERS XXI. 



Sihon is overcome. 



them and their cities : and he called the 
name of the place *Hormah. 

4 *[[ And "they journeyed from mount 
Hor by the way of the Red sea, to com- 
pass the ""land of Edom : and the soul of 
the people was much t discouraged be- 
cause of the way. 

5 And the people "^ spake against God, 
and against Moses, ^ Wherefore have ye 
brought us up out of Egypt to die in the 
wilderness? for there i.f no bread, neither 
t.f ° there any water ; and our soul loatheth 
this light bread. 

6 And '^the Lord sent fiery serpents 
among the people, and they bit the people ; 
and much people of Israel died. 

7 ^Therefore ^the people came to Mo- 
ses, and said. We have sinned, for we have 
spoken'' against the Lord, and against 
thee; 'pray unto the Lord, that he take 
away the serpents from us. And Moses 
prayed J for the people. 

8 And the Lord said unto Moses, Make 
thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a 
pole ; and it shall come to pass, that ev- 
ery one that is bitten, when he looketh 
upon it, shall live. 

9 And Moses made a ''serpent of brass, 
and piit it upon a pole ; and it came to pass, 
that if a serpent had bitten any man, when 
he beheld the serpent of brass, ho lived. 

10 ^ And the children of Israel set for- 
ward, and pitched in 'Oboth. 

1 1 And they journeyed from Oboth, and 
pitched at tije-abarim, in the wilderness 
which is before Moab, toward the sun ris- 
ing. 

12 Tf From thence they removed, and 
pitched in the valley of ""Zared. 

13 From thence they removed, and pitch- 
ed on the other side of " Arnon, which is in 
the wilderness that Cometh out of the coasts 
of the Amorites : for Arnon ?'.•> the border of 
Moab, between Moab and the Amorites. 

14 Wherefore it is said in the book of 



* "nv-it i^, utter desti^cfion. a chap. 20: 22 : 33 Ml. b .luj'. 
11:18. f Or, arUvcii. Heh. slwrtenett. Ex. fi : 9. i:Psa.7S:19 
« Ex. lfi:3; 17:3. ech:ip.ll:fi; Ps:ilm fiS : 6. fneut8:15i 
ICor. I0:<». e Psalm 78 : 34. h vcr. .li. iEx. 8:8, 28; Dent. 
9:20,26; 1 Sam. 12:19; 1 Kings, I3:ti; ,T<il) 42 : S, 10; .Ter. 1.1:1; 
Acts 8:24; .las. S: 16. j P8;i. 1 06 : 2:!. k 2 Kings, 18: 4 : .Inhn 
3:14,15. 1 dmp. 33 : 43. 44. % Or , heapt of Abarim. m Deut. 



4. Compass : go round. 

5. Tli^s liglit hirad ; the inimna. John 6: 31. 

6. Fiery ; bright, shining. Ver. 8. 

10. Sel forward; to go round the land of Edom, 
and up north, through its eastern border, to the land 
of Moab. Deut. 2:1-8. 

12. The valley of Zared ; a valley north-east 
of the Red sea. on the way towards Canaan. The 
Zared empties into the Dead sea. 

13. Arnoii ; a small stream which empties into 
the Dead sea from the east. 

14. The hook ; some book, describing the wars 
referred to. 

15. Ar; the capital of Moab. Ver. 28. 



the wars of the Lord, ^W^hat he did in 
the Red sea, and in the brooks of Arnon, 

15 And at the stream of the brooks that 
goeth down to the dwelling of "Ar, and 
liethll upon the border of Moab. 

1 6 And from thence they ivent to p Beer : 
that is the well whereof the iLord spake 
unto Moses, Gather the people together, 
and I will give them water. 

1 7 1[ Then Israel ^sangthis song, * Spring 
up, well ; t sing ye unto it : 

18 The princes digged the well, the no- 
bles of the people digged it, by the direc- 
tion of the "lawgiver, with their staves.. 
And from the wilderness they tvcnt to 
Mattanah : 

19 And from Mattanah to Nahaliel: 
and from Nahaliel to Bamoth : 

20 And from Bamoth in the valley, that is 
in the t country- of Moab, to the top of *Pis^ 
gah, which 'looketh toward H Jeshimon. 

21 T[ And "Israel sent messengers unto 
Sihon king of the Amorites, saying, 

22 Let ''me pass through thy land: we 
will not turn into the fields, or into the 
vineyards ; we will not drink of the 
waters of the well : but we will go along 
by the king's high-yvsLV, until we be past 
thy borders. 

2.S And Sihon would not sufi'er Israel to 
pass through his border : but ^^ Sihon gath- 
ered all his people together, and went out 
against Israel into the Avilderness : and he 
came to .lahaz, and fought against Israel. 

24 And ^ Israel smote him with the edge 
of the sword, and possessed his land from 
Arnon unto Jabbok, even unto the chil- 
dren of Amnion: for the border of the 
children of Ammon was strong. 

25 And Israel took all these cities : and 
Israel dwelt in all the cities of the Am- 
orites, in Heshbon, and in all the *villa- 
ges thereof. 

26 For ^ Heshbon teas the city of Sihon 
the king of the Amorites, who had fought 
against the former king of Moab, and 



2:13. n cliap. 22 : 36 : Judges 1118. i Or, Vahrh in Suphah. 
o Deut. 2: 18, 29. \l Ueb. leanctli. p .Tuilg. 9: 21. qcliap.20:& 
T Ex. 1,5 : 1 ; Judges r,:\; Psalm 106 : 12. * Heli. Jtcend. f Or. 
anricer. » Deut. .33 : 4 ; Isa. 33 : 22. | Or.jfc/rf. ^ Or. tlit hit!. 
t cliap. 23:28. |I Or. t/ie wilderness, u Deut. 2 : 26, 27 ; .luilg. 
11:19,20. V cliap.20: 17. wDeut.39:7. x Josh. 12: 1,3; 24: 8. 
* Heh. daughters, y Cant. 7:4; Ixi. IS: 4. 



16. Beer; Cleaning, a well. Ver. 18. 

20. Pisgah ; the summit of Nebo, one of the 
range of mountains called Abarim. between the 
mountains of Gilead on the nortli, and the moun- 
tains of Seir on the south. Deut. 3"i : 49. Jeshi- 
mon ; meaning, wilderness. 

21. Amorites ; a people who inhabited a country 
in the south-eastern part of Can.aan and on both 
sides of the river Jordan. The part east of Jordan 
was between the rivers Arnon and Jabbok. 

23. Jahaz; a city near the northern border of 
Moab. 

26. Heshbon ; the city in which Sihon lived, 
about sixteen miles north of the Arnon. Ver. 34. 
207 



Og ii overcome. 



NUMBEIIS XXII, 



Balak scndeth for Balaam. 



taken all his land out of hi.s hand, even 
unto Arnon. 

27 Wherefore they that .speak in 'prov- 
erbs say, Come into }Ie.>libon, let the city 
of Sihon be built and prepared: 

28 For '■there is a fire gone out of Ilesh- 
bon, a flame from the city of Silion : it 
hath consumed'" Ar of Moab,(T/if/ the lords 
of the high places of Arnon. 

29 Woe to thee, Moab ! thou art un- 
done, people of ^Chemosh: he hath 
given his sons that escaped, and his 
daughters, into captivity unto Sihon king 
of the Amorites. 

* 30 We have shot at them; Heshbon is 
perished even unto '^Dibon, and we have 
laid them waste even unto Nophah, which 
reacheth unto Mcdeba. 

31 T[Thus Israel dwelt in the land of 
the Amorites. 

32 And Moses sent to spy out ""Jazer; 
and they took tlic villages thereof, and 
drove out the Amorites that icere there. 

33 *\ And sthcy turned and went up by 
the way of Bashan : and Og the king of 
Bashan went out against them, he, and 
all his people, to the battle at Edrei. 

34 And the Lord said unto jMoses, Fear 
him not: for I have delivered him into 
thy hand, and all his people, and his land; 
and thou shalt do to him as thou didst 
unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which 
dwelt at Ileshbon. 

3,0 So ''they smote him, and his sons, 
and all his people, until there was none 
lefthim alive : and they possessed his land. 

• Hiib.'2:6. l>.Ier.48:4.=i,-»K. e Deut 2:9, 18; Ian. 1S:I.2. dJudg. 
11:24: 2Kinj«,Q3jl:). « .ler. 48: 18,22. rch.32:l. g Deut. 3 : 1 . et<:. 
kDeutiW:7i .(osli. 13: 12; Psa.l3r>:10,ll; 136:20. i chap. 3:5 : 48. 



29. Chemosh : one of the idols of Moab. 

30. Dihoii — Medeba ; cities between Heslibon 
and the Arnon. 

33. Bashan; a country east of the Jordan, be- 
tween mount Gileiid and mount Lebanon. Edici ; 
one of the chief citie.i of B.ishan. 

instrt:ctioxs. 

5. However much men may suffer on account of 
their sius, they frequently repeat them; and under 
the calamities whicl; come upon them, they often find 
fault not only with men, but with God, and thus 
multiply and increase their troubles. Prov. 19 : 3. 

9. Jehovah answers prayer in a manner suited 
to try the faith of his people. Though he is the 
great eflii-iciit Cause, they must use the means ap- 
pointed in order 'o avail themselves {d liis blessings. 
If they do lliis as he has directed, through grace they 
will live; if they do not. they will die, and the blame 
be all on lh.'m.' John 3 : II ; fi : 29 ; 11: a."), 26. 

13. Life is like a journey through a wilderness. 
We are never stationary, but constantly passing 
onward to our final and everlasting abode. 

16. Though we have many and great trials in 
this world, yet they :irc never as many or great as 
our sins deserve, and the Jjord graciously bestows 
many and great mercies, which, if gratefully re- 
ceived and rightly used, will evenlually prepare us 
for deliverance from all trouble, and the reception 
of unmingled eternal joy. Eph. 3 : 10-21. 
208 



cilAPTEll XXII. *e.^^:nt 

I Balak's first message for Balaam is refused. 15 Hi.i 
second message obtaineth him. a*J An angel would 
have slain him, if his ass had not saved him. 36 Ba- 
lak entirtaiiieth him. 

A ND'the children of Israel set forward, 
JjL and pitched in the plains of Moab on 
this side Jordan hy Jericho. 

2 ^ And Balak the son of Zippor saw 
all that Israel had done to the Amorites. 

3 And ''Moab was sore afraid of tin- 
people, because they were many : and 
Moab was distressed because of the chil- 
dren of Israel. 

4 And INIoab said unto the 'elders of 
Midian, Now shall this company lick up 
all that are round about us, as the ox lick- 
cth up the grass of the field. And Balak 
the son of Zippor was king of the Moab- 
ites at that time. 

5 He ""sent messengers therefore unto 
Balaam the son of Beor to Pethor, which 
is by the river of the land of the children 
of his people, to call him, saying, Behold, 
there is a people come out from Egypt : 
behold, they cover the *face of the earth, 
and they abide over against me. 

C Come now therefore, I pray thee, 
curse " me this people ; for they are too 
mighty for me: peradventurc I shall pre- 
vail, that we may smite them, and that 1 
may drive them out of the land : for I wot 
that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and 
he whom thou curscst is cursed. 

7 And the elders of Moab and the elders 
of Midian departed with the "rewards of 
divination in their hand; and they came 

j .ludg. 1 1 :-25. k £1.13:1.1; Deut2:25. 1 c1ian.31 :8; Josli. 13:21, 
22. m r)euU23:4: .losh.24:9; Nrll.l3:l,2; MirMliB:fi. * Hcb. 
eye. n cimp. 23 : 7. o 1 Sam. 9: 7, 8; Micali 3: 11 ; Jude II. 

31. In this world we have many enemies, and if 
we would be saved we must figlu, not with flesh 
and blood only, but with principalities and powers, 
with the rulers of the darkness of this world, and 
with spiritual wickedness in high places. 

.31. Those who trust in God and do his will have 
no reason to fear any enemies, however numerous 
or powerful, lie will in due time make them con- 
querors and more than conquerors, through Him 
that loved tluMii and gave himself for them, and to 
him they will for ever give all the glory. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

1. Tlie ■))lai)is of yioah ; tho.se which had be- 
longed to the Moabites, and from them received 
their name. They had afterwards been taken by 
the Amorites. and now by the children Xi Isrjvel. 
Tltis side; the east side of Jordan. Jericho; :v 
city of Canaan on the west side of Jordan. 

'I. aiders; the word translated elders me.ins 
abso princes or rulers. Ver. 8, 14, l-l. Midian ; 
a people living near the Moabites. hick up all ; 
overcome and swallow us up. 

5. Balaam ; a noted sorcerer or soothsayer, of 
Mesopotamia. Ver. 7 ; Joshua 13: 22. Pet/ior;n 
place near the Euphrates. Chap. 23:7; Deut. 23:1. 

C. Wot ; know. 

7. Keii'iirds oj divination ; money or presents 
to induce him to come and curse Israel. 



n.ilak's second mcssasre. 



NUMBERS XXII 



Balaam mccteth the angel 



H.c!ili unto Balaam, and spake unto him 
the words of Balak. 

8 And he said unto them, Lodge here 
this night, and I will bring you word 
again, as the Lord shall speak unto me ; 
and the princes of Moab abode with 
Balaam. 

9 And God came unto Balaam, and said. 
What men are these with theel 

10 And Balaam said unto God, Balak 
the son of Zippor, king of Moab, hath sent 
unto me, saying, 

1 1 Behold, there is a people come out 
of Egypt, which covereth the face of the 
earth : come now, curse me them ; perad- 
venture*I shall be able to overcome them, 
and drive them out. 

12 And God said unto Balaam, Thou 
shalt not go with them ; thou shalt not 
curse the people: for "they are blessed. 

13 And Balaam rose up in the morning, 
and said unto the princes of Balak, Get 
you into your land : for the Lord ''refus- 
cth to give me leave to go with you. 

14 And the princes of Moab rose up, 
and they went unto Balak, and said, Ba- 
laam refuseth to come with us. 

15 ^ And Balak sent yet again princes, 
more, and more honorable than they. 

16 And they came to Balaam, and said 
to him. Thus s-aith Balak the son of Zip- 
por, + Let nothing, I pray thee, hinder thee 
from coming unto me: 

17 For I will promote thee unto very 
great honor, and I will do whatsoever 
thou sayest unto me: "^come therefore, I 
pray thee, curse me this people. 

18 And Balaam answered and said unto 
the servants of Balak, ''If Balak would 
give me his house full of silver and sold, 
I "cannot go beyond the word of the Lord 
my God, to do less or more. 

19 Now therefore, I pray you, tarry ye 
also here this night, that I may know what 
the Lord will say unto me more. 

20 And ""God came unto Balaam at 
night, and said unto him, If the men come 
to call thee, rise up, and go with them ; 
but syet the word which I shall say unto 
thee, that shalt thou do. 

21 And Balaam rose up in the morning, 



* Heb. 


/ ihal 


prevail in 


fightina 


itgaimt him. 


« Genesis 


<ii: 16-18 


Deut. 


33: 


19. b 


Dcut M 


:5. t Heb. 


Be not thou 


Utltd. c 


ver. 6. 


<< 


chapter 24 : 13. 


e chnpter 2.'] 


:2fi: 24:13; 


1 KiiisB, 2 


3:14. 


f ve 


r. 9. e 


ver. 3.-. ; 


elia|i. 23:12 


h Ex. 4:24. 


> 2 Kings, 


6:17; 


Dar 


. 1»:7; 


Acts 22 


9; 1 Corinthi 


ans, I : 27-29. 



8. A.$ the Lord shall s-pei-k ; this shows that 
Balaam had some knowledge of Jehovah, and of his 
obligations to follow his guidance. 

9. Gotl came itiito Balaam; whether he had 
ever done this before we are not informed. 

13. Refnset)i, to give me leave ; the Lord not 
only did this, but told Bala:\m not to go. 

18. I ca II not go heyovd the vord of the Lord ; 
it was true that he could not. consistently with his 



and saddled his ass, and went with the 
princes of Moab. 

22 H And God's anger Avas kindled be- 
cause he went : and ^ the angel of the Lord 
stood in the way for an adversary against 
him. Now he was riding 'upon his ass, 
and his two servants icere with him. 

23 And the ass 'saw the angel of the 
Lord standing in the way, and his sword 
drawn in his hand; and the ass turned 
aside out of the way, and went into the 
field ; and Balaam smote the ass, to turn 
her into the way. 

24 But the angel of the Lord stood in a 
path of the vineyards, a wall being on 
this side, and a wall on that side. 

25 And when the ass saw the angel of 
the Lord, she thrust herself unto the 
wall, and crushed Balaam's foot against 
the wall: and he smote her again. 

26 And the angel of the Lord went fur- 
ther, and stood in a narrow place, where 
was no way to turn either to the right 
hand or to the left. 

27 And when the ass saw the angel of 
the Lord, she fell down under Balaam : 
and Balaam's anger was kindled, and he 
smote the ass with a staff. 

28 And the Lord J opened the mouth of 
the ass, and she said unto Balaam, What 
have I done unto thee, that thou hast 
smitten me these three times'? 

29 And Balaam said unto the ass. Be- 
cause th.ou hast mocked me : I would 
there were a sword in my ^ hand, for now 
would I kill thee. 

30 And the ass said unto Balaam, Am 
not I thine ass, tupon which thou hast 
ridden ever since ^7 was thine unto this 
day ? was I t^ver wont to do so unto thee? 
And he said. Nay. 

31 Then the Lord 'opened the eyes of 
Balaam, and he saw the angel of the Lord 
standing in the way, and his sword drawn 
in his hand : and he '" bowed down his 
head, and il fell flat on his face. 

32 And the angel of the Lord said unto 
him, Wherefore hast thou smitten thine 
ass° these three times? Behold, I went 
out *to withstand thee, because "thy way 
is P perverse before me: 



j 2 Peter. 2: IB. k Prov. 12: 10. % Or, taho hatt ridden upon 
me. i Ot, Ihou wait. 1 Genesis 21 : 19 ; 2 Kin^s. li : 17 : Luke 
24:1P,31. mE.\.34:8. \l Or, hoioed himie'f. n Psalm H.") : 3. 
* Heh. to be an adversary unto thee, o 3 Peter, 2:14. p Prov. 
14:2; 28:18. 



duty,- though it seems he earnestly desired to do so. 

20. Rise lip, and go with them ; in this, (rod 
suffered Balaam, from the love of unrighteous gain, 
to follow his own inclinations. 2 Pet. 2 : 13-16. 

22. Because he iceiit ; Balaam's object and 
course were wrong and displeasing to G-od. Ver. 
32-31. The angel of the Lord; supposed to be 
the same who spoke to him, ver. 12, 20, and who is 
spoken cf, ver. 31-35. 

209 



Balaam cometh to Balak. 



NUMBERS XXIII. 



His first prophecy. 



33 And the ass saw me, and turned from 
me these three times: unless she had 
turned from me, surely now also I had 
slain thee, and saved her alive. 

34 And Balaam .said unto the angel of 
the Lord, »I have sinned; for I knew not 
that thou stoodest in the way against me : 
now therefore, if it *displcasc thee, ""I 
will get me back again. 

35 And the angel of the Lord said unto 
Balaam, " Go with the men : but '' only the 
word that I shall speak unto thee, that 
thou shalt speak. So Balaam went with 
the princes of Balak. 

36 1[And when Balak heard that Ba- 
laam was come, he went out to meet him 
unto a city of IMoab, which is in the bor- 
der of Arnon, which is\\\ the utmost coast. 

37 And Balak said unto Balaam, Did I 
not earnestly send unto thee to call thee? 
wherefore earnest thou not unto me"? am I 
notable indeed to" promote thee to honor'? 

38 And Balaam said unto Balak, Lo, I am 
come unto thee : have I now any power 
atall to say any thing? the "^word that Cod 
putteth in my mouth, that shall I speak. 

39 And Balaam went with Balak, and 
they came unto t Kirjath-huzoth. 

40 And Balak offered oxen and sheep, 
and sent to Balaam, and to the princes 
that were with him. 

41 And it came to pass on the morrow, 
that Balak took Balaam, and brought liim 
up into the ^ high places of Baal, that thence 
he might see the utmost jjarf of the people. 

• 1 Sam. 15: 24, 30; 26 : 21. * Heb. be evil in thine eyet. b Job 
S4 : 31 , 32. c laa. 47 : 1 2. i ver. 20. e ver. 17; rliap. 2 1 : 1 1 ; Psa. 
T5:6; .U>linn:44. fver.18. ^ Or. acilj/o/ttrfels. gDeut. 12:2. 
k ver. 2(1. i ver. 14,30. jver. l."). f Or, tolitari/. I ver. 16. I ch. 



36. Utmost coast ; boundary of his kingdom. 

39. Kirjath-hitzoth ; meaning, a city of streets; 
probably of many streets — a large city. 

40. Balak offered oxen ; as is supposed, to his 
idols. Sent to Balaam ; to come and feast on 
the sacrifice. 

4L Baal ; an idol worshipped by many eastern 
n&tions. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Those who know not Jehovah and do not trust 
in him, are always exposed to distressing fears, and 
to many evils from which no human wisdom or 
power can save them. 

6. The wicked place that confidence in men 
•which should be placed only in God, and hope for 
that from them which can come only from him. 

9. God has sometimes held communications with 
wicked men, and jjiven them a knowledge of his 
will. But knowledge alone, without love, will not 
lead them so to obey him as to obtain his blessing. 

12. All whom God blesses will in the end be truly 
blessed ; and all whom he curses, will in the end 
be wretched. 

17. Those who supremely regard this world often 
think that other men, like themselves, for a sudioiont 
reward, can be persu.aded to do what they wish. 

19. To love the reward of iniquity and desire to 
do wrong to obtain it, is exceedingly dangerous. It 
exposes men to be given up to the practice of ini- 
quity till they sink into irremediable ruin. 
210 



CHAPTER XXIII. ^B^Vrj:- 

1, 13, '2S Balak's sacrifice. 7, IS Balaam's parable. 

AND Balaam said unto '■ Balak, Build 
me here seven altars, and prepare 
me here seven oxen and seven rams. 

2 And Balak did as Balaam had spoken ; 
and Balak and Balaam 'otfcred on every 
altar a bullock and a ram. 

3 And Balaam said unto J Balak, Stand 
by thy burnt-offering, and I will go: per- 
ad venture the Lord will come to meet me, 
and whatsoever he showeth me I will tell 
thee. And he went Ho a, high place. 

4 And '' God met Balaam : and he said 
unto him, I have prepared seven altars, 
and I have offered upon every altar a bul- 
lock and a ram. 

5 And the Lord ' put a word in Balaam's 
mouth, and said. Return unto Balak, and 
thus thou shalt speak. 

6 And he returned unto him, and lo, he 
stood by his burnt-sacrifice, he, and all 
the princes of Moab. 

7 And he took up his "" parable, and said, 
lialak the king of Moab hath brought me 
from Aram, out of the mountains of the 
east, sayins;. Come, "curse me Jacob, and 
come, "defy Israel. 

8 How P shall 1 curse, whom God hath 
not cursed? or how shall I defy, uhom the 
Lord hath not defied? 

9 For from the top of the rocks I see him, 
and from the hills I behold him : lo, the 
people shall dwell "i alone, and 'shall not 
be reckoned among the nations. 



22:35; Deut. 18:18; .Ter.1 : 9. mver.lS; dinp. 24: 3, l.n,23; Job 
27;1; 20:1: Psalm 78:2: Kzek. 17:2; Mirah2:4; Hab. 2:6; 
Mat 13:.3.%3i-.. nProv. 2fi:2. ■> 1 Sam. 17: 10. p Isa. 47 : 12, J3. 
q Deut 33: 28. r Kx. 3:i : 16 : Ezra tf : 2 ; Kph. 2 : 14 



27. Men are often angry with dumb beasts and 
cruelly beat them, when the fault is all in them- 
selves. 

30. God could speak through the mouths of dumb 
animals, and cause them to tell a tale which would 
make the hearts of their owners quake with fear, 
and show that, through sin, man has sunk below the 
beasts that perish. 

33. Beasts sometimes see what men do not, and 
by doing that for which they are abused, save their 
owners from death. 

31. To have God for an adversary is an unspeak- 
able calamity, and one that should by all needful 
sacrifices and Labors be avoided. 

41. All expectations from men, in opposition to 
the purposes and will of God, are vain, and will end 
in disappointment. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

3. Peradventure ; perhaps ; it may bo. 

5. Put a xnord ill Balaarn's mouth ; directed 
him what to say. 

7. Took up his parahle ; began to speak in 
solemn, figur;itive, prophetic style. Aram; after- 
wards called Mesopotamia; a mountainous country 
east of Moab, between the rivers Euphrates and 
Tigris. Curse — defy; devote to destruction. 

9. Dirfll alone — not be reckoned ; they should 
continue to be a distinct people, and not be united 
with, swallowed up, or lost in other nations. 



The second sacrifice 



NUMBERS XXIV 



and prophecy. 



S;"S' 10 Who ^ can count the dust of Ja- 
cob, and the number of the fourth part of 
Israel? Let *me die the ''death of the right- 
eous, and let my last end be like his! 

11 And Balak said unto Balaam, What 
hast thou done unto me? "^I took thee 
to curse mine enemies, and behold, thou 
hast blessed them altogether. 

12 And he answered and said, ''Must I 
not take heed to speak that which the 
Lord hath put in my mouth? 

13 And Balak said unto him. Come, I 
pray thee, with me '"unto another place, 
from whence thou mayest see them : thou 
shalt see but the utmost part of them, and 
shalt not see them all : and curse me them 
from thence. 

14 '[[And he brought him into the field 
of Zophim, to the top of tpisgah, and 
built '^ seven altars, andsofiered a bullock 
and a ram on every altar. 

15 And he said unto Balak, Stand here 
by thy burnt-offering, while I meet the 
LORD yonder. 

16 And the Lord met Balaam, and ""put 
a word in his mouth, and said. Go again 
unto Balak, and say thus. 

17 And when he came to him, behold, he 
stood by his burnt-offering, and the princes 
of Moab with him. And Balak said unto 
him, 'What hath the Lord spoken? 

1 8 And he took up his parable, and said, 
Rise' up, Balak, and hear; hearken unto 
me, thou son of Zippor : 

19 God is ''not a man, that he should lie ; 
neitherthe.sonof man, that he should repent: 
hath he said, and shall he not do «V? or 'hath 
he spoken, and shall he not make it good? 

20 Behold, I have received command- 
ment to bless : and '" he hath blessed ; and 
I " cannot reverse it. 



• Gen. 13: IS. * Heb. my soul, or my li/e. b Ps:)lni .iT: ."ST; 
Proverbs 14:3-2; 2 Cor. 5 : 1. c chap. !!■: : 11. d chap. 22 : 38. 
« 1 Kings, 20:23. f Or, t/ie hill. f verses 1,2. e Isaiah 1 : 11. 
kver. 5. i 1 Sam. 3:17; Jer. 37:17. j .ludg. 3 : 20. k 1 Sam. 
lo:29; P8a.89:.3.5; Uom. 11 :29 ; Titus 1 : 2 ; Heb. 6 : 18 ; .las. 
1:17. I IChron. 17:27; Micah 7:20. m chap. 22 : 12. n John 



10. Who can coimt — the ini7nber? they would 
be exceedingly numerous. TJie righteous ; those 
whom God accepts and blesses as his redeemed 
people. 

14. Field of Zophiin ; or of watchers, who could 
there see to a great distance. Fisgah ; chap. 
21 : 20. 

19. God is not a man;- he is unchangeable and 
almighty. Make it good ; do as he has declared. 

21. Not beheld iniquity ; such iniquity as would 
prevent his blessing them. Sliout of a Hug; of 
one who will conquer all his foes. 

22. Unicorn; an animal of great strength. 

23. Eiichajitment — divination; artsbywhich 
heathen sorcerers and magicians sought to deceiv'e 
and overcome their enemies. What hath God 
wrought .' he hath wonderfully delivered them, and 
caused them to overcome their enemies. 

24. As a great lion ; conquer his enemies as a 
lion does beasts of the forest. 

28. Pear ; a high place in Moab. 



I 21 He "hath not beheld iniquity in Ja- 
cob, neither hath he seen perverseness in 
Israel: the pLord his God is with him, 
and the i shout of a king is among them. 

22 God ''brought them out of Egypt; he 
hath" as it were the strength of a unicorn. 

23 Surely there is no enchantment 
against t Jacob, neither is there any divi- 
nation against Israel : according to this 
time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, 
What' hath God wrought! 

24 Behold, the people shall rise "" up as a 
great lion, and lift up himself as a young 
lion : he shall not lie ^ down until he eat of 
the prey, and drink the blood of the slain. 

25 T[ And Balak said unto Balaam, Nei- 
ther curse them at all, nor bless them at all. 

26 But Balaam ''answered and said unto 
Balak, Told not I thee, saying. All that 
the Lord speaketh, that I must do? 

27 H And Balak said unto Balaam, Come, 
I pray thee, I will bring thee unto another 
place; peradventureitwill please God that 
thou mayest curse me them from thence. 

28 And Balak brought Balaam unto the 
top of Pcor, that looketh toward Jeshimon. 

29 And Balaam said unto Balak, Build * 
me here seven altars, and prepare me 
here seven bullocks and seven rams. 

30 And Balak did as Balaam had said, and 
offered a buUoek and a ram on every altar. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

1 Balaam, leaving divinations, prophesietii the happi- 
npss of Israel. 10 Balak in anger dismisseth him. 
15 He prophesietii of the Star of Jacob, and the de- 
struction of some nations. 

AND when Balaam saw that it pleased 
the Lord to bless Israel, he went 
not, as at other times. Ho seek for en- 
chantments, but he set his face toward 
the wilderness. 

10:28,29; Iliim. 8:38, 39. o Ps.alm 103 : 12 ; Isa.l:18; 38:17; 
MicaIi7:I9; Rom.4:7,8; 8:1. p E.v. 29: 4."), 4fi; 33:lfi; Psa. 
4fi:ll. q Psa. US:!."). rchap.24:8. > I)eut.33: 17; Psa.92:IO. 
t Or, m. Matthew 12: 2.=i, 27. I Psalm 31 : 19. u Genesis 49 :<> ; 
Mil-all 6:8. v Genesis 49 : 27. w verses 12, 13. % Heb. to tht 
meeting of, 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Wicked men often take much pains, perform 
many labors, and are at great expense, to induce Grod 
to favor their selfish designs. Ver. 14, 30 ; ch. 24 : 12. 

4. They often boast of what they have done, and 
seem to think that their hypocritical, proud, and 
wicked services entitle them to the special favor of 
God. 2 Kings, 10: IG; Luke 18: 11. 

10. Many have a conviction of the reality, excel- 
lence, and importance of true religion, and wish todie 
the death, who refuse to live the lite, of the righteous. 

16. God can speak by the mouth of a wicked man, 
or of a dumb beast, and communicate momentous 
truth without changing the nature of the one or the 
character of the other. Ver. 20, 26 ; chap. 24 : 13. 

23. No enchantment, divination, devices, or efforts 
of men or devils can injure those who please God, and 
have him for their guide, protector, and friend. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 
1. Wilderness; where the Israelites camped. 
211 



Israel's happiness foretold. 



NUMBERS XXIV. The Star and Srcplre of Jacob- 



2 And Balaam lifted up his eyes, and he 
saw Israel abiding in his tents according 
to their tribes; and "the Spirit of God 
name upon him. 

3 And he took up his parable, and said, 
Balaam the son of Beor hath said, and the 
man *'whose eyes arc open hath said : 

4 He hath said, which heard the words 
of God, which saw the vision of the Al- 
mighty, falling into a trance, but having 
his eyes open : 

5 How goodly arc thy tents, Jacob, 
and thy tabernacles, O Israel! 

6 As the valleys are they spread forth, 
as ''gardens by the river's side, as the trees 
of lignaloes which the Lord hath planted, 
and as "^cedar-trees beside the waters. 

7 He shall pour the water out of his 
buckets, and his seed shall be in many 
waters, and his king shall be higher than 
A gag, and his kingdom shall be exalted. 

8 God brought him forth out of Egypt; 
he hath as it were the strength of a uni- 
corn: he shall eat up the nations his en- 
emies, and shall ''break their bones, and 
pierce® them through with his arrows. 

' 9 He couched, he lay down as ^a lion, 
and as a great lion: who shall stir liim 
up? £ Blessed is ho that blesscth thee, 
and cursed is he that curseth thee. 

10 ^ And Balak's anger was kindled 
against Balaam, and he smote hi.s hands 
together: and Balak said unto Balaam, I 
called thwe to curse mine enemies, and 
behold, '' thou hast altogether blessed them 
Lhese three times. 

1 1 Therefore now flee thou to thy place : 
I thought to promote thee unto great hon- 
or; but lo, the Lord hath kept thee back 
from honor. 

12 And Balaam said unto Balak, Spake 
I not also to thy messengers which thou 
t^entest unto me, saying, 

13 If Balak would give me his house 
full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond 
the commandment of the Lord, to do cither 



a I Sam. 10: 10. * Heh. who had hu eyet shut, \nit now npcnei. 
» P«a. 1:3; .Ter. 17:8. e PBa.92; 12-H. dPsa.Q:9. cPsa.4.'S:5. 
' chap. 23:24. t Gen. I2:.r li Ncll. 13:2. i Rev. 1:7. j Rev. 
M:I6. kPiin.llO:2. f Or. through the princet. 1 Pso. 60: 8-I2. 

3. Whose eyes are open ; who Iiad been blind 
to many things which lie afterwards saw. 

6. Lignaloes ; a tree remarkable for its beauty 
and fragrance. 

7. In- '7navy waters ; places well watered and 
very fruitful. Agag ; a name for the kings of 
Moab, as Pharaoh was for the kings of Egypt. 

8. Eat lip the nations ; overcome and destroy 
them. 

14. Advertise ; inform. 

\C). Whose eyes are open ; to see and foretell 
many things that will hereafter take place. 

17. See him — heliold liim ; the person of whom 
he is about to speak ; supposed by some to be Christ, 
and by others lo be David typifying Christ in de- 
livering his people and overcoming their foes. 
212 



good or bad of mine own mind ; hut \^l.f^ 
what the Loud saith, that will I speak? 

14 And now, behold, I go unto my peo- 
ple : come therefore, and I will advertise 
thee what this people shall do to thy peo- 
ple in the latter days. 

1 5 If And he took up his parable, and said, 
Balaam the sou of Beor hath said, and the 
man whose eyes are open hath said : 

16 He hath said, xchich heard the words 
of God, and knew the knowledge of tlie 
Most High, ichich saw the vision of tho 
Almighty, falling into a trance, but hav- 
ing his eyes open : 

17 I 'shall see him, but not now : I shall 
behold him, but not nigh: there shall 
come a J Star out of Jacob, and a '' Sceptre 
shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite 
the t corners of Moab, and destroy all the 
children of Sheth. 

IS And 'Edom shall be a possession, 
Seir also shall be a possession for his en- 
emies ; and Israel shall do valiantly. 

19 Out of Jacob shall come he that shall 
have dominion, and shall destroy him 
that reniaineth of the city. 

20 ^And when he looked on Amalek, 
he took up his parable, and said, Amalek 
was the first of ithc nations; but his lat- 
ter end shall be Hhat he perish for ever. 

21 And he looked on the ""Kenites, and 
took up his parable, and said. Strong is 
thy dwelling-place, and thou puttcst thy * 
nest in a rock. 

22 Nevertheless H the Kenite shall be 
wasted, *until Asshur shall carry thee 
away captive. 

23 And he took up his parable, and said, 
Alas, "who shall live when God doeth this ! 

24 And "ships shall come from the coast 
of Chittim, and shall p afflict Asshur, and 
shall afflict lEber, and he also shall per- 
ish for ever. 

25 And Balaam ro.sc up, and went and 
returned to his place: and Balak also 
went his way. 



t Or, the nationt that waned ai/ainst lirael. E.t. 17:R, IB. \ Or, 
evcH to destrvctiun. Ex. 17:14; I Sam. l.") :3. >" Genesis l.l : lil. 
II Heb. Kni'n. * O/.Auio /nny shall it be ere. n Mai. 3: 2. o Dan. 
11:30. p Gen. 10:11. q Gen. 10: 21, 25. 



18. Seir ; a mountain, or range of mountains, in 
Edom. 

22. Asshnr; the Assyrians. 

23. Doetli this; overcomes, carries captive, or 
destroys those of whom he had spoken. 

21. Coast of Chittim : countries on the Medi- 
terranean. .BApr; the Hebrews, or Israelites. He ; 
Chittim, or the power that would afflict the Assy- 
rians and Israelites. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The Lord will cause all men to see that it is 
his unchangeable purpose to bless his people. Those 
who rejoice in it will be partakers of his joy. and 
those who are grieved at it be filled with ever-grow- 
ing .sorrow. 

4. However much men m.ay know of God and 



Phinehas killetk 



NUMBERS XXV. 



Zimri and Cozhi. 



S.c!S CHAPTER XXV. 

1 Israel at Shittim commit whoredom and idolatry. 6 
Phinehas killeth Zimri and Cozbi. 10 God therefore 
giveth him an everlasting priesthood. 16 The JVlid- 
lanites are to be vexed. 

AND Israel abode in "Shittim, and the 
people began to commit ''whoredom 
with the daughters of Moab. 

2 And "^they called the people unto the 
.sacrifices of their gods : and the people did 
eat, and ''bowed down to their gods. 

3 And Israel ^joined himself unto Baal- 
peor : and the anger of the Lord was kin- 
dled against Israel. 

4 And the Lord said unto ""Moses, Take 
all the heads of the people, and hang them 
up before the Lord against the sun, that 
the 6 fierce anger of the Lord may be 
turned away from Israel. 

5 And Moses said unto the judges of 
Israel, *" Slay ye every one his men that 
were joined unto Baal-Pcor. 

6 ^ And behold, one of the children of Isra- 
el came and brought unto hisbrethren a Mid- 
ianitish woman in the sight of Moses, and in 
the sightof allthe congregation of the chil- 
dren of Israel, who were ' weeping before the 
door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 

7 And when J Phinehas, the son of Elea- 
zar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw it, 
he rose up from among the congregation, 
and took a javelin in his hand ; 

S And he went after the man of Israel 
into the tent, and thrust both of them 
ihrough, the man of Israel, and the wom- 
an through her belly. So the plague was 
staved from the children of Israel. 



a 


i-hnp. S-T : 49 


Micah 6 : 


S. 


b 


rl.ap 


31:Ifi; 


ICor. 10:8. 


c Ex. 


34: 


I.V Iti. <1 Ex 


20:5. e .losll. 


'2J 


:17; 


Psa. 10b 


:28,2S;Hosea9:10. 


f Deut.l3:(i-9. 


S Deut. la 


:17 




hEx 


32 : 27. 


i Joel 2: 17. 


j P.sa. 


106 


:M. kDeut.4:3; ICor 


10 


8. 


1 Psa. 106:2 


3;.Iolm3;36. 


*0r, 



his ways, and however much they may see of the 
blessedness of his people, if they do not love and 
obey him their knowledge will but increase their 
guilt and aggravate their ruin. 

9. Grod will treat men in some measure as they 
treat his people. The blessings which they bestow, 
or the curses which they heap upon them, will re- 
turn upon themselves. 

1 1. By refusing to please the wicked, men often 
fail of those worldly honors which by doing wrong 
they might obtain. 

13. Men may feel their dependence on God, that 
they are under his control and cannot escape out of 
his hands, without rejoicing in their dependence, 
receiving mercies with gratitude, or giving him the 
glory of what thuy enjoy. 

23. A view of the future, while it awakens glad- 
ness in the righteous, fills the wicked with appre- 
hension and dismay. 

CHAPTER XXV. 
1. Shittim ; a place in the plains of Moab, east 
of Jordan. Commit u-liorcdom ; this was in con- 
sequence of the advice of Balaam. Chap. 31 : 15, 16 ; 
2 Pet. 2 : 15, 16 ; Rev. 2 : 14. 

3. Haal-peor ; an idol worshipped by the Moab- 
ites. 

4. Heads of the people ; the chief men who had 
joined in the idolatry. 



9 And ''those that died in the plague 
were twenty and four thousand. 

10 ^And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

1 1 Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the 
son of Aaron the priest, hath 'turned my 
wrath away from the children of Israel, 
Avhile he was zealous *for my sake among 
them, that I consumed not the children of 
Israel in my '"jealousy. 

12 Wherefore say. Behold, I give unto 
him" my covenant of peace: 

13 And he shall have it, and his seed 
after him, even the covenant of an ° ever- 
lasting priesthood ; because lie was p zeal- 
ous for his God, and made an "i atonement 
for the children of Israel. 

14 Now the name of the Israelite that 
was slain, even, that was slain with the 
Midianitish woman, was Zimri, the son of 
Salu, a prince of a tcliief house among the 
Simeonites. 

15 And the name of the Midianitish 
woman that was slain was Cozbi, the 
daughter of ''Zur; he tra.? head over a peo- 
ple, and of a chief house in Midian. 

16 ^And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

17 Vex' the Midianites, and smite 
them : 

18 For they vex S'ou with their wiles, 
wherewith they have beguiled you in the 
matter of Peor, and in the matter of Cozbi, 
the daughter of a prince of Midian, their 
sister, which was "slain in the day of the 
plague for Poor's sake. 



with mi/ zeal, m Ex. 20:5; Deut. 32 : 16, 21 ; 1 Kings, 14 : 22 ; Ps.-u 
7a:.'i8; Ezek. 16:38; Zepli.l:lS; 3:8. nMal.2:4,.i. oEx.40:l.^ 
prsa.69:il. qHeb.2:17. f Heb.homeofafathlr. rcliap.31:8; 
.losll. 13:21. »chap.31:2. t chap. 31 : 16; Rev. 2: 14. uver.8. 



6. A Midianitish iroman. ; wlio was an idola- 
ter and abandoned to wickedness. 

7. Javelin ; a kind of spear. 

9. Twenty and four thousand ; supposed to 
include twenty-three thousand mentioned, 1 Cor. 
10 : S, and one thousand who were slain, ver. 4, 5. 

13. ISrerlasting ptiesiliood : to continue till 
the end of the Jewish state. Made an atonement ; 
did that out of regard to which God spared the rest 
of the people. 

17. Vex — and smite ; destroy them. 

18. For Poor's sake ; because they had wor- 
shipped Baal-peor. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The greatest evil which any one can do to his 
fellow-men is to induce them to commit sin, and 
thus provoke the Lord to destroy them. 

5. It is the will of God that great transgressors 
against him and against the laws of the state, 
should in some cases, by the magistrates, be put to 
death. 

8. The death of notorious criminals is often a 
great blessing to survivors. 

15. The higher the station and the greater the 
influence of those who commit iniquitj"-, the greater 
the evil and the more necessary their punishment. 

18. Tempters to iniquity are among the most 
dangerous and de-siructive enemies, and. as far as 
maybe consistent, should be avoided and put away. 
213 



The sum of Israel taken 



NUMBERS XXVI 



m the plains of Moab. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

1 The sum of all Israel is taken in the plains of Moab. 
5i. The law of diviJing among them the inheritance 
of the land. 57 The families and number of the Le- 
▼itcs. 63 None were left of them which were num- 
bered at Sinai, but Caleb and Joshua. 

AND it came to pass after the plague, 
tliat the Lord spake unto Moses and 
unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, 
say ins, 

2 Take Mhc sum of all the congregation 
of Ihe chiliirou of Israel, from twenty years 
old and upward, throughout their fathers' 
house, all that are able to go to war in Israel. 

3 And Moses and Eleazar the priest 
spake with them in the ''plains of Moab 
by Jordan near Jericho, saying, 

4 Take the sum of the people, from twenty 
years old and upward; as tlic Lord com- 
manded Moses and the children of Israel, 
which went forth out of the land of Egypt. 

5 ^ Reuben,"^ the eldest son of Israel : 
the children of Reuben ; Ilanoch, o/u'/io??i 
comctli the family of the Ilanochites: of 
Pallu, the family of the Palluites : 

() Of llczron, the family of the Hezron- 
ites : of Carmi, the family of the Carmites. 

7 These arc the families of the Reuben- 
ites : and they that were numbered of 
them were forty and three thousand and 
seven hundred and tliirty. 

8 And tiio sons of Pallu ; Eliab. 

9 And the sons of Eliab; Nemuel, and 
Dathan, and Abiram. This is that Da- 
than and Abiram, which were famous in the 
congregation, who ''strove against Moses 
and against Aaron in the company of Ko- 
rah, when they strove against the Lord: 

10 And the earth opened her mouth, 
and swallowed them up together with 
Korah, when that company died, what 
time the fire devoured two Iiundrcd and 
fifty men: and "'they became a sign. 

11 Notwithstanding the ""children of 
Korah died not. 

12 IIThe sons of Simeon after their fami- 
lies : of "Nemuel. tlie family of the Nemuei- 
itcs : of Jainin, the family of the Jaminites : 
of tjachin, tlic family of tlie Jaehinitcs: 

1 3 Of + Zcrah, the family of the Zarhites : 
of Shaui, the family of the Shaulites. 

14 These are the families of the Sim- 
eonitcs, twenty and two thousand and 
two hundred. 

15 Ti Tlic children of Gad after their fami- 
lies: of^ Zephon,the family of the Zephon- 
ites: of IIaggi,tlie family of tlie Haggites: 
of Shuni, the family of the Shunitcs: 

Ifi Of II Ozni, the family of the Oznites : 
of Eri, the family of the Eritcs : 



• ilian, 1 : 2, 3 ; E«. 30:11; n8:S.\ 26. b ver. 63; cliitp. 3.^: 1. 
«Oen.ml:8. il clinp. lS:l,elc. • clinii. Ifi: 38; ICorlO:.'); 
SPKer 2:R. rEx.li:'24. * Jfinuf/. Genfui" 4R; 10 : Ex. 6: 16. 
f Jori/i. 1 Cliron. 4 : M. t Znhar. rie«ei.i« 4H: 10. % Ziphion. 
Genesis 46; 18. || Or, Eiiun. Genesis 46: 16. * Arodi. Oetuait 
214 



17 Of *Arod,thefamilyofthe Arod- V't^ 
ites : of Areli, the family of the Arcliles. 

18 These are the families of the children 
of Gad according to those that were number- 
ed of them, forty thou sand and five hundred. 

19 li The sons of eJudah were Er and 
Onan : and Er and Onan died in the land 
of Canaan. 

20 Andthe sons of Judah after their fami- 
lieswere ; of Shelah, the family ofthe Slie- 
lanites : of Pharez, the family ofthe Phar- 
zites : of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites. 

21 And the sons of Pharez were; of 
Hezron, the family ofthe Ilczronites: of 
Hamul, the family of the Hamulites. 

22 These are the families of Judah ac- 
cording to those that were numbered of 
them, threescore and sixteen thousand 
and five hundred. 

23 ^ Of the sons of '' Issachar after their 
families : of Tola, the family of the Tola- 
ites : of t Pua, the family of the Punites : 

24 Of iJashub, the family of the Jash- 
ubites : of Shimron, the family of the 
Shimronitcs. 

25 These are the families of Issachar 
according to those that were numbered of 
them, tlireescore and four thousand and 
three hundred. 

26 1[ 0/ the sons of 'Zebulun after their 
families : of Sered, the family of the Sar- 
dites : of Elon, the family of the Elonites : 
of Jahleel, the family ofthe Jahleelites. 

27 These arc the families of the Zebu- 
lunites according to those that were num- 
bered of them, threescore thousand and 
five hundred. 

28 1[ The sons of J Joseph after their 
families were Manasseh and Ephraim. 

29 Of the sons of Manasseh: of 'Ma- 
chir, the family of the Maehirites: and 
Machir begat Gilead: of Gilead come the 
family of the Gileadites. 

30 These are the sons of Gilead : of 
Jeezer,^ the family of the Jeezerites: of 
Helek, the family of the Helekites: 

31 And of Asriel, the family of the As- 
rielites : and of Shechem, the family of 
the Shechemites : 

32 And of Shemida, the family of the 
Shcmidaitcs: and of Ilepher, the family 
of the Ilepherites. 

33 '[And 'Zelophehad the sonof Hepher 
had no sons, but daughters : and tlic niimcs 
ofthe daughters of Zelophehad were ]\l;ili- 
lah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tiizali. 

34 These are the families of Manassih, 
and those that were numbered of them, lifly 
and two thousand and seven hundred. 

411:16. t Oenegia 38:2-10: 1 Chronicles 2 : .1, etc. ■> Genesis 
4fi: i:\; 1 Chronicles 7:1. f O'. ^A"™*- t Or, Job. i Genesis 
46:14. j Genesis 46:5:0. kJoshual7:l: 1 Chrnnirles 7: 14, LV 
5 Cnlle.l Abieitr, Joshua 17:2; Judgws 6:11, 24, 34. 1 thiip 
27: I ; 36:11. 



The numbering of Israel 



NUMBERS XXVI. 



in the plains of Moab. 



B.c:u^: 35 IThese are the sons of Ephra- 
im after their families : of Shuthelah, the 
family of the Shuthalhites : of *Becher. 
the family of the Bachrites : of Tahan, 
the family of the Tahanites. 

36 And these are the sons of Shuthelah : 
of Eran, the family of the Eranites. 

37 These are the families of the sons of 
Ephraim according to those that were 
numbered of them, thirty and two thou- 
sand and five hundred. These are the 
sons of Joseph after their families. 

38 U The sons of ''Benjamin after their 
families: of Bela,thefamilyof theBelaites: 
of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites : of 
Ahiram,t the family of the Ahiramites : 

39 Of i Shupham, the family of the Shu- 
phamites : of Hupham, the family of the 
Huphamites. 

40 And the sons of Bela were ^Ard and 
Naaman : ofArd, the family of the Ardites : 
o/if/ofNaaman, the family of the Naaniites. 

41 These are the sons of Benjamin after 
their families : and they that were num- 
bered of them were forty and five thou- 
sand and six hundred. 

42 IT These ^are the sons of Dan after 
their families : of II Shuham, the family of 
the Shuhamites. These are the families 
of Dan after their families. 

43 All the families of the Shuhamites, 
according to those that were numbered of 
them, ivere threescore and four thousand 
and four hundred. 

44 *[[ 0/the children of "^ Asher after their 
families : of Jimna, the family of the Jim- 
nites : of Jesui, the family of the Jesuites : 
of Beriah, the family of the Beriites. 

45 Of the sons of Beriah : of Heber, the 
family of the Heberites : of Malchiel, the 
family of the Malehielites. 

46 And the name of the daughter of 
Asher teas Sarah. 

47 These are the families of the sons of 
Asher according to those that were num- 
bered of them; luho were fifty and three 
thousand and four hundred. 

48 IT 0/the sons of "'Naphtali after their 
families : of Jahzeel, the family of the.Iah- 
zeelites : ofGuni,the family oftheGunites: 

49 Of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites : 
of *Shillem, the family of the Shillemites. 

50 These arc the families of Naphtali 
according to their families : and they that 
were numbered of them were forty and 
five thousand and four hundred. 



* Btrtd. IChron.T 


■20. »Gen.46:21; 1 Cliron.7:6. \ Ehi. Gen. 


4fi:ll; Aharah. 1 Clir 


>n.8:l. t Muppim.and Huppim. Gen.-tfi:21. 


\Adday. lChron.8:3. 


1> Gen. 46 : -2:!. || Or, Hushim. <■ Gen. 4H : 1 r ; 


lCl.ron.7:m << Gen 


.46:24; lChron.7;13. * Shatlum. ICliron. 


7 : 13. chap. 1 : 46. 


f Josh. 11:23; 14:1. e chap. 33 : .14. f Heb. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 
53. The land; Canaan. 



5 1 These •■ were the numbered of the chil- 
dren of Israel, six hundred thousand and 
a thousand seven hundred and thirty. 

52 1[And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

53 Unto "^these the land shall be divided 
for an inheritance according to the num- 
ber of names. 

54 To smany thou shalt tgive the more 
inheritance, and to few thou shalt Jgive 
the less inheritance: to every one shall 
his inheritance be given according to 
those that were numbered of him. 

55 Notwithstanding the land shall be di- 
vided by lot: according to the names of the 
tribes of tlieir fathers they shall inherit. 

56 According to the lot shall the pos- 
session tliereof be divided between many 
and few. 

57 1[And ** these «/-e they that were num- 
bered of the Levite.s after their families : of 
Gershon, the family of the Gcrshonites : of 
Kohath, the family of the Kohalhitcs : of 
Merari, the family of the Merarites. 

58 These are the families of the Levites : 
the family oftheLibnites, the family of the 
Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the 
family of the Mushites, the family of the 
Korathites. And Kohath begat Amram. 

59 And the name of Amram's wife was 
Jochebed,' the daughter of Levi, whom 
her mother bare to Levi in Egypt : and 
she bare unto Amram, Aaron and Moses 
and Miriam their sister. 

60 And unto -i Aaron was born Nadab 
and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar. 

61 And ''Nadab and Abihu died, when 
they ofl^ered strange fire before the Lord. 

62 And 'those that were numbered of 
them were twenty and three thousand, 
all males from a month old and upward : 
for "'they were not numbered among the 
children of Israel, because there was no 
inheritance" given them among the chil- 
dren of Israel. 

63 ^ These are they that were niimbered 
by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who 
numbered the children of Israel "in the 
plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho. 

64 But among P these there was not a man 
of them whom Moses and Aaron the priest 
numbered, when they numbered the chil- 
dren of Israel in tlie wilderness of Sinai. 

65 For the Lord had i said of them, They 
shall surely die in tlie wilderness. And 
there was not left a man of them, save 



multiply hii. i Heh. diminisli his. h Gen. 46: 1 1 ; Ex. 6: 16-19; 
1 Chron. 6:1, 16. i Ki. 2: 1,2; 6:20. i rli.ip.3:2. k chap. S:4; 
Lev. 10:1,2: lC'hron.24: 2. 1 chap. 3 : 39. n>chap.I:49. n chap. 
18:20-24; Dent. 10:9; .losh. 13: 14,33 ; 14:3. o ver.3. P Meut 
4:3,4. q chap. 1 4 : 28-30 ; 1 Cor. 10 : 5, 6 ; Jude 5. 



65. Not left a man ; except the two mentioned, 
and also some of the tribe of Levi, who were not 
included in the numbering referred to, ver. 64. 
215 



Joshua is appointed 



NUMBERS XXVII. 



to succeed Moses. 



Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua 
the sou of Nun. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

1 The dau!;htprs of ZelophehaJ sue for an inheritance. 
The law of inheritances. 12 Moses, being told of 
his death, sueth for a successor. Id Joshua is ap- 
pointed to succeed him. 

THEN camctlic daughters .of 'Zclophc- 
had. tlie son of Hcphor, the son of Gil- 
ead, the son of Machir, the son of Manas- 
sch, of the families of Manasseh the son 
of Joseph : and these arc the names of his 
daughters ; Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, 
and Milcah, and Tirzah. 

2 And they stood before Moses, and be- 
fore Eleazar the priest, and before the prin- 
ces and all the congregation, by the door of 
the tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 

3 Our father ""died in the wilderness, 
and he was not in the company of them 
that ■= gathered themselves together against 
the Loud in the company of Korah ; but 
died in his own ''sin, and had no sons. 

4 Why should the name of our father' 
be "done away from among his family, 
because he hath no son? ""Give unto us 
therefore a possession among the brethren 
of our father. 

5 And "^Moses brought their cause before i 
the Lord. 

6 ^And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

7 The daughters of Zelophehad speak 
right: ^thou shalt surely give them a' 
possession of an inheritance among their 
father's brethren ; and thou shalt cause 
the inheritance of their father to pass 
unto them. 

8 And thou shalt speak unto the cliil- 
dren of Israel, saying, If a man die, and 
have no son, then ye shall cause his in- 
heritance to pass unto his daushtcr. 

9 And if he have no daughter, then ye 
shall give his inheritance unto his brethren. 

, 10 And if he have no brethren, then ye 
shall give his inheritance unto his father's 
brethren. 



• ch.ip. "irKai; 3«:l-n; .loiili. 17:3. b clinp. 1 4 : a'i : Cfi:fi4.6.'i. 
c rimn. If>: l,<2. il Exok iel 1 8 : ■! : .lolin 8:21. J4 ; llonians (i : M. 
* Heb. diminulial. n .losli. 17:4. f Ex. 18: IS, 19: .lob ■2.1:4. 
( cli:i|i. 3K:'2. h rliap. 3A:09. i rliiip. TO: 47 ; Dent.:! :«T; n-3:4!l; 
m:l. j clinp. '20:'24; .11 :2. k clinp,'20:-2R : Dent. 10:l>. I clinp. 
30:10-12. mEx.l7:7. n chap. IK:2'2: Heb. 1'2:9. o .Icr. S: l.l. 



INSTRUCTIONS 

61. As the murder of one man Is n, sin so gre.at 
AS .justly to incur the penalty of death, how {treat 
must be the evil of sin, which hits caused the death 
of millions, and will cause the death of millions 
more; and how great the guilt of those who love 
and practise it, and thus nnile with him who was 
a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in 
the truth. John 8:41. 

C"). Tlie declarations of God will in due time all 
be accomplished, and those who cleave to him and 
obey his commands will be graciously remembered 
and receive an abundant reward. 
216 



; 11 And if his father have no V^.S 
brethren, then ye shall give his inheri- 
tance unto his kinsman that is next to him 
of his family, and he shall possess it : and 
it shall be unto the children of Israel a 

'statute'" of judgment, as the Lord com- 

I manded Moses. 

i 12 H And the Lord said unto INIoses, 

j Get 'thee up into this mount Abarim, and 
see the land which I have given unto the 

' children of Israel. 

13 And when thou hast seen it, thou 
also shalt be J gathered unto thy people, 
as ''Aaron thy brother was gathered. 

14 For 'ye rebelled against my com- 
mandment in the desert of Zin, in the 
strife of the congregation, to sanctify me 
at the water before their eyes : that is the 
water of ""Meribah in Kadesh in the wil- 
derness of Zin. 

15 ^And Moses spake unto the Lord, 
saying, 

1 6 Let the Lord, the " God of the spirits of 
all flesh, "set a man over the congregation, 

17 Which may go Pout before them, and 
which may go in before them, and which 
may lead them out, and which may bring 
them in ; that the congregation of the Lord 
be not as "i sheep which have no shepherd. 

18 Tl And the Lord said unto Moses, 
Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man 
in 'whom is the spirit, and 'lay thy hand 
upon him ; 

19 And set him before Eleazar the priest, 
and before all the congregation ; and give 
him 'a charge in their sight. 

20 And "thou shalt put 50?nc of thine hon- 
or upon him, that all the congregation of 
the children of Israel may be "obedient. 

21 And he shall stand before Eleazar 
the priest, who shall "ask counsel for him 
after the judgment of *Urim before the 
Lord : at his word shall they go out, and 
at his word they shall come in, both he, 
and all the children of Israel with him, 
even all the congregation. 

22 And Moses did as the Lord com- 



p Dent. ."11 : 2 ; 1 S,im. 8 : 20 ; 18:13; 2Chron. 1:10; .lolinIO:!). 
q 1 Kings, 22: 17; Zeclinrhili 10:2; M.'it. 9:36; 1 Peter, 2:26. 
r Genesis 41:38; .Iiiilges 3: 10; 11:29; 1 Sam. 16 : 13, 18; Dan. 
.■i:l4: Actafi:3? • neuteronomy .34:9: Acts 6: 6. tDeiit31:7 
u 2Kin;:«,2:9, 15. » .Posliun 1 : Ifi, 17. w Judges 20:18, ett.; 
1 Sum. 22 : 10 ; 23 : 9 J 30 : 7. » Kx. 28 : 30. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

11. Ki ti small ; relative. A statute of judg- 
ment ; a permanent regulation. 

12. Aharim ; a range of mountain.s on the e.\st 
of .Jordan ; one of these was mount Nebo. a summit 
of which it is suppo.sed w.-is Pisgah. where MoseS 
stood when he viewed the land of Canaan. Chap. 
21:20; Dent. 3:27. 

It. Yerehelled; chan. 20: 8-13. 

10. f>rt a man over tiie congregation ; to suc- 
ceed Moses as tiieir leader. 

18. The spirit; the Spirit of God. hay thy 
hand upon him ; in token of his being iipp>inted 



offerings on the Sabbath, 



NUMBERS XXVIII. 



and on other feasts. 



b.'^hS: nianded him : and he took Joshua, 
and set him before Eleazarthe priest, and 
before all the congregation : 

23 And he laid his hands upon him, and 
gave him a charge, as the Lord 'com- 
manded by the hand of Moses. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

1 Offerings are to be observed. 3 The continual burnt- 
offering. 9 The offering on the sabbath, 11 on the 
new moons, 16 at the passover, 26 in the day of first- 
fruits. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing, 

2 Command the children of Israel, and 
say unto them. My otTering, and my bread 
for my sacrifices made by ''fire, for *a 
sweet savor unto me, shall ye observe to 
offer unto me in their due season. 

3 And thou shalt say unto them. This "^ w 
the offering made by fire which ye shall 
offer unto the Lord ; two lambs of the 
first year without spot t day by day, for a 
continual burnt-oftering. 

4 The one lamb shalt thou offer in the 
morning, and the other lamb shalt thou 
offer -at ''even ; 

5 And a tenth part of an ephah of flour 
for a * meat-offering, ''mingled with the 
fourth part of a hin of beaten oil. 

6 It is a continual burnt-oflering, which 
was ordained in mount Sinai for a sweet 
savor, a sacrifice made by fire unto the 
Lord. 

7 And the drink-offering thereof shall be 
the fourth part of a hin for the one Iamb : 
in the holy place shalt thou cause the 
strong wine to be poured unto the Lord 
for a drink-offering. 

8 And the other lamb shalt thou offer at 
even : as the meat-offering of the morn- 
ing, and as the drink-oflTering thereof, thou 
shalt offer it, a sacrifice made by fire, of 
a sweet savor unto the Lord. 

9 ^ And on the sabbath-day two lambs 
of the first year without spot, and two 
tenth-deals of flour for a meat-offering, 

a ver. 19. bl,ev.3:ll. * Heb. a tavor of my rest. oRx. 
29:3S. t Heb.inarfav. t Heh. between the two evenings, it Ex. 
l'2:e. e clinp. 15:4; Lev. 2:1. fEx.M:40,etc gEzek.4(i:4. 
b chap. 10: 10; 1 Chron. 23: 31 ; 2Cliron.2:4; Nell. 10:33; Is.i. 



as leader of Israel, and endued with the Holy Spirit 
to fit him for his office. 

23. Gave him a charge ; instructed him as to 
his duties and exhorted him to the faithful discharge 
of them. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. As the cause of every death and of all our 
evils is sin, all our sufferings should lead us more 
and more to abhor and forsake it. 

.'). In all cases of difficulty we should look to God, 
and seek that direction from him which we need. 

13. However much any one may be favored of 
G-ocI, however useful he may be, or however long he 
may live, the time will soon come when he must 
die. and leave all the concerns of this world to others. 

1(3. A pious man earnestly desires the spiritual 



mingled with oil, and the drink-offering 
thereof: 

10 This is the burnt-oifering of every 
sabbath, ^beside the continual burnt-offer- 
ing, and his drink-offering. 

11 T[And in the ''beginnings of your 
months ye shall offer a 'burnt-offering 
unto the Lord ; two young bullocks, and 
one ram, seven lambs of the first year 
without spot; 

12 And three tenth-deals of flour for a 
meat-ofiering, mingled with oil, for one 
bullock ; and two tenth-deals of flour for 
a meat-offering, mingled with oil, for 
one ram ; 

13 And aseveraltenth-dealof flour min- 
gled with oil /or a meat-ofiering unto one 
lamb ; /or aburnt-offering of a sweet savor, 
a sacrifice made by fire unto the Lord: 

14 And their drink-off'erings shall be 
half a hin of wine unto a bullock, and the 
third part of a hin unto a ram, and a fourth 
part of a hin unto a lamb : this is the 
burnt-oflTering of every month through- 
out the months of the year. 

15 And 'one kid of the goats for a sin- 
oftering unto the Lord shall be offered, 
beside'' the continual burnt-offering, and 
his drink-offering. 

16 And in. the 'fourteenth day of the 
first month is the passover of the Lord. 

1 7 And in the fifteenth day of this month 
is the feast : seven days shall unleavened 
bread be eaten. 

18 In the first day shall be a holy con- 
vocation; ye shall do no manner of ser- 
vile work therein : 

19 But ye shall offer a sacrifice made by 
fire for a burnt-offering unto the Lord; 
two young bullocks, and one ram, and 
seven lambs of the first year : they shall 
be unto you "'without blemish. 

20 And their meat-ofi"ering .•>/;«// be of 
flour mingled with oil: three tenth-deals 
shall ye offer for a bullock, and two tenth- 
deals for a ram ; 



1:13,14; E/.ekiel 4."i : 17 ; Col. 2:16. i cliap. 15: 3-11. j chap. 
15:24. k ver. 10. 1 <h.ip. 9: 3; Exodus 12 : 6, 18; I,ev. 23: 5, 6; 
Ezek. 45:21. m ver. 31 ; ihap.29:8; Lev.23:20; Deut. 15:21; 
Mai. 1 : 13, 14; 1 Peter, 1:19. 



benefit of those who may survive him, and will be 
much in prayer that, after his decease, '.rod will 
continue to bless them with all needed good. 

21. Rulers who seek the teaching of the Holy 
Spirit, who know their duties, and are faithful in 
the discharge of them, are great blessings to the 
people. 

CHAPTER XXVm. 

2. Iti their due seasoi : according to the will 
of (Tod. heretofore or hereafter made known. 

5. An ephah— a hin ; Ex. 29:40. 

10. ('ontimtal ; daily. 

11. j\Io>t.t)is ; these began with e.ach new moon. 
13. A several tenth-deal; one for each lamb. 

Ver. 21, 29. 

18. Convocation; assembling together. 
217 



Offerings appointed 



NUMBERS XXIX. 



Jor the holy days. 



21 A several tenth-deal shalt thou offer 
for every lamb, throughout the seven 
lambs : 

22 And one "goat for a sin-offering, to 
make an atonement for you. 

2.3 Ye shall offer these beside the burnt- 
offering in the morning, which is for a 
continual burnt-offering. 

24 After this manner ye shall offer daily, 
throughout the seven days, the meat of 
the sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet sa- 
vor unto the Lord : it shall be offered be- 
side the continual burnt-offering, and his 
drink-offering. 

25 And on the seventh day ye shall 
have a holy convocation ; ye shall do no 
servile work. 

26 T[ Also in the ''day of the first-fruits, 
when ye bring a new meat-offering unto 
llie Lord, after your weeks be otit, ye shall 
have'a holy convocation; ye shall do no 
.servile work : 

27 But ye shall offer the burnt-offering 
for a sweet savor unto the Lord; two 
young bullocks, one ram, seven lambs of 
the first year; 

28 And their meat-offering of flour min- 
gled with oil, three tenth-deals unto one 
bullock, two tenth-deals unto one ram, 

29 A several tenth-deal unto one lamb, 
throughout the seven lambs; 

30 And one kid of the goats, to make an 
atonement for you. 

.31 Ye shall offer theTU beside the contin- 
ual burnt-offering, and his meat-offering, 
(they shall be unto you without 'blem- 
ish,) and their drink-offerings. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

1 Th-n offering at the feast of trumpets, 7 at the day of 
afflicting their souls, 13 and on the eight days of the 
feast of tabernacles. 

A ND in the seventh month, on the first 
xL day of the month, ye shall have a 
holy convocation; ye shall do no servile 
work: "'it is a day of blowing the trum- 
pets unto you. 



2 And ye shall offer aburnt-offer- b.c.hs?: 
ing for a sweet savor unto the Lord ; one 
young bullock, one ram, and seven lambs 
of the first year without blemish : 

3 And their meat-offcrings/ta//ieo/ flour 
mingled with oil, three tenth-deals for a 
bullock, and two tenth-deals for a ram, 

4 And one tenth-deal for one lamb, 
throughout the seven lambs: 

5 And one kid of the goats /or a sin-offer- 
ing, to make an atonement for you : 

6 Beside the^burnt-offeringof the month, 
and his meat-offering, and the "^daily burnt- 
offering, and his meat-offering, and their 
drink-offerings, s according unto their man- 
ner, for a sweet savor, a sacrifice made by 
fire unto the Lord. 

7 T[ And ''ye shall have on the tenth day 
of this seventh month a holy convoca- 
tion ; and ye shall 'afflict your souls: ye 
shall not do any work therein: 

8 But ye shall offer aburnt-offeringunto 
the Lord for a sweet savor; one young 
bullock, one ram, and seven lambs of the 
first year; 'they shall be unto you with- 
out blemish. 

9 A nd their meat-offering .^/ia// ico/ flour 
mingled with oil, three tenth-deals to a 
bullock, and two tenth-deals to one ram, 

10 A several tenth-deal for one lamb, 
throughout the seven lambs: 

1 1 One kid of the goats for a sin-offer- 
ing; beside the ''sin-offering of atone- 
ment, and the continual burnt-offering, 
and the meat-offering of it, and their drink- 
offerings. 

12 1[And 'on the fifteenth day of the 
seventh month ye shall have a holy con- 
vocation ; ye- shall do no servile work, 
and ye shall keep a feast unto the Lord 
seven days : 

13 And ""ye shall ofler a burnt-offering, 
a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savor 
unto the Lord; thirteen young bullocks, 
two rams, aiid fourteen lambs of the first 
year; they s'hall be without blemish: 



• ver. ir>. b Ex.23: 16; 34:22; Icviticus 23: 10, etc.; Deut 
16:10; Act^2:l. c ver. 19. < Leviticus 23 : 24 ; Pna. 81 : 3, 4. 
e chiip. 28: 11. f cli.ip. 28 : 3 ; Heb.lO:l. B ihap. 15: 1 1, 12 ; 

26. After your weiiks ; after seven weeks from 
the second day of tlio passover, when the feast of 
weeks, or Pentecost, was celebrated. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. No engagements for this world should induce 
MS to neglect the ordinances of religion, or fail to 
observe, at the proper time, the divinely appointed 
means of grace. 

9. While it is our duty daily to read the Scrip- 
tures and pr;vy. as individuals and families, M'e 
should on (he sabbath give special attention to these 
duties, and also worship Crod in public with the 
assembly of his people. 

II. The Lord has appointed the sun and moon 
for seasons; and the beginning of every d;iy, month, 
and year, should remind us of our obligations to 
218 



Kzra3:4; 1 Cor. 14:40. h Lev. Ifi : 29; 23 : 27. iP»a.3'>:I3; 
Isaiah BS:.'). j cliap. .'8: 19. k Lev. Ifi: 3, etc. 1 Lev. 23:34; 
Deut. 16:13; Ezek. 4.'. : 2.n. m Ezm3:4. 



him, and lead us to devote ourselves anew to his 
service. 

16. In all our rel igious exercises we should have ref- 
erence to the atonement of Christ, and place our reli- 
ance on him and what he has done for acceptance 
with God. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

I. The sevejitk month ; Lev. 23 : 23—13. 

II. Tlie sin-offeriit g of atonement ; especially 
prefiguring the atonement of Christ. Ver. 16, 19, 
22, 25, 28, 31, 34, .38. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

11. The frequency with which tiie atonement of 

Christ is brought to view, in both the Old Testament 

and the New, shows its importance in the system 

of mercy which God has devised for the salvation of 



Offerings on the eight days 



NUMBERS XXX. 



of the yeast of tabernacles. 



B.c!i45i 14 And their meat-offering shall 
be of flour mingled with oil, three tenth- 
deals unto every bullock of the thirteen 
bullocks, two tenth-deals to each ram of 
the two rams, 

15 And a several tenth-deal to each lamb 
of the fourteen lambs : 

16 And one kid of the goats for a sin- 
offering ; beside the continual burnt-offer- 
ing, his meat-offering, and his drink-of- 
fering. 

■ 1 7 T[ And on the second day ye shall offer 
twelve youngbuUocks, two rams, fourteen 
lambs of the first year without spot: 

18 And their meat-offering and their 
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the 
rams, and for the lambs, shall be accord- 
ing to their number, after the ^manner: 

19 And one kid of the goats for a sin- 
offering ; beside the continual burnt-offer- 
ing, and the meat-offering thereof, and 
their drink-offerings. 

20 ^ And on the third day eleven bul- 
locks, two rams, fourteen lambs of the 
first year without blemish : 

21 And their meat-offering and their 
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the 
rams, and for the lambs, shall be according 
to their number, after the manner: 

22 And one goat /or a sin-offering; be- 
side the continual burnt-offering, and his 
meat-offering, and his ''drink-offering. 

23 T[ And on the fourth day ten bullocks, 
two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first 
year without blemish : 

24 Their meat-offering and their drink- 
offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, 
and for the lambs, shall be according to 
their number, after the manner : 

25 And one kid of the goats for a sin- 
offering ; beside the continual burnt-offer- 
ing, his meat-offering, and his drink- 
offering. 

26 IF And on the fifth day nine bullocks, 
two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first 
year without spot : 

27 And their meat-offering and their 
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the 
rams, and for the lambs, shall be according 
to their number, after the manner : 

28 And one goat /or a sin-offering; be- 
side the continual burnt-offering, and his 
meat-offering, and his drink-offering. 

29 T[And on the sixth day eight bul- 

• ver.3,4,9,10; chap. 15: li; 28:7,14. b Psa. 1«:4; .Toell :9, 13; 
814. c Le». 23:3R; Jolin7:37. 'Or.offcr. d Lev. M: 2, etc.; 
IChron. 23:31: 2Cliron. 31:3; Ezr.-! 3 : .1 ; Nell. 10:3:); Isa. 1 : 14. 



men, and the necessity of relying upon it in order to 
obtain pardon and eternal life. 

39. True love to God will lead men not only to 
attend habitually and conscientiously on the ap- 
pointed means of grace, but cheerfully to present 
to him freewill-offerings of prayer, alms, thanks- 
giving, and praise. 



locks, two rams, ajid fourteen lambs of the 
first year without blemish : 

30 And their meat-offering and their 
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the 
rams, and for the lambs, shall be according 
to their number, after the manner: 

31 And one goat /or a sin-offering; be- 
side the continual burnt-offering, his meat- 
offering, and his drink-offering. 

32 H And on the seventh day seven bul- 
locks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the 
first year without blemish : 

33 And their meat-offering and their 
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the 
rams, and for the lambs, shall be according 
to their number, after the manner: 

34 And one goat /or a sin-offering; be- 
side the continual burnt-offering, his meat- 
offering, and his drink-offering. 

35 ^On the '^ eighth day ye shall have 
a solemn assembly : ye shall do no servile 
work therein: 

36 But ye shall offer a burnt-offering, 
a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savor 
unto the Lord : one bullock, one ram, sev- 
en lambs of the first year without blem- 
ish : 

37 Their meat-offering and their drink- 
offerings for the bullock, for the ram, and 
for the lambs, shall be according to their 
number, after the manner : 

38 And one goat /or a sin-offering; be- 
side the continual burnt-offering, and his 
meat-offering, and his drink-offering. 

39 These things ye shall *do unto the 
Lord in your ""set feasts, beside your 
vows,* and your freewill-offerings, for 
your burnt-offerings, and for your meat- 
offerings, and for your drink-offerings, and 
for your peace-offerings. 

40 And Moses told the children of Israel 
according to all that the Lord commanded 
Moses. 

CHAPTER XXX. 

1 Vows are not to be broken. 3 The exception of a 
maid's vow. (i Of a wife's. 9 Of a widow's, or her 

that is divorced. 

AND Moses spake unto theHieads of the 
tribes concerning the children of Is- 
rael, saying. This is the thing which the 
Lord hath commanded. 

2 If a man ^vow a vow unto the Lord, 
or "'swear an oath to bind his soul with a 
bond ; he shall not t break his word, he 



e Lev.7: 11,16; 22:21,23; Deut.l2:6. f chap. 1:4-16. Bl.eT.27:2; 
Deut. 23: 21 ; .ludg. 11:35,36; l'sa.I5:4; Eccl.5:4. h I.cv.5:4; 
Mat.5:33; 14:7-9; Acta 23:14. t Heb. profant. Psa. .55:2a 



CHAPTER XXX. 
2. He shall not break his word; provided the 
thing which he vowed or promised to do is priicti- 
cable. andnot morally wrong: bat if the thing prom- 
ised is wicked, he must repent of his ^iin in promis- 
ing: for the sin in this case is in the promi.^o, and 
not in breaking it. Mat. 14 : 7-10 ; Acts 23 : 12. 
219 



J'ous are not 



NUMBERS XXXI, 



to be broken. 



shall »do accoidingto all that proceedeth 
out of his mouth. 

3 If a woiiiau also vow a vow unto the 
Lord, and bind herself by a bond, being in 
her father's house in her youth; 

4 And lier father hear her vow, and her 
bond wherewith slic hath bound her soul, 
and her father sliall hoUl his pence at her; 
then all lier vows shall stand, and every 
bond wherewith she hath bound her soul 
shall stand. 

o But if her father disallow her in the 
day that he heareth, not any of her vows, 
or of lier bonds wherewith she hath bound 
lier soul, shall stand; and the Lord shall 
forgive her, because her father disallowed 
her. 

6 And if she had at all a husband, when 
she* vowed, or uttered aught out of her 
lips, wherewith she bound her soul ; 

7 And her husband heard it, and held his 
peace at her in the day that he heard it ; 
then her vows shall stand, and her bonds 
wherewith she bound her soul shall stand. 

8 But if her '' husband disallowed her on 
the day that he heard it, then he shall 
make her vow which she vowed, and that 
which she uttered with her lips, where- 
with she bound her soul, of none effect; 
and the Lord shall forgive her. 

9 But every vow of a widow, and of her 
that is divorced, wherewith they have 
bound their souls, shall stand against her. 

10 And if she vowed in her husband's 
house, or bound her soul by a bond with 
an oath; 

1 1 And her husband heard it, and held 
his peace at her, and disallowed her not; 
then all her vows shall stand, and every 
bond wherewith she bound her soul shall 
stand. 

12 But if her husband hath utterly made 
them void on the day he heard them; then 



whatsoever proceeded out of her ''b.".'^i. 
lips concerning her vows, or concerning 
the bond of her soul, shall not stand : her 
husband'' hath made them void; and the 
Lord"* shall forgive her. 

13 Every vow, and every binding oath 
to afflict the soul, her husband may estab- 
lish it, or her husband may make it void. 

14 But if her liusband altogether hold 
his peace at her from day to day ; then he 
establishethall her vows, or all her bonds, 
which are upon her: lie confirmeth them, 
because ho held his peace at her in the 
day that he heard ihern. 

15 But if he shall any ways make them 
void after that he hath heard (hem j then 
he shall bear her iniquity. 

16 These are the statutes, which the 
Lord commanded Moses, between a man 
and his wife, between the father and his 
daughter, being yet in her youth in her 
father's house. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

1 The Midianites are spoiled, and Balaam slain. 13 
Moses is ■wroth with the officers, for saving the women 
alive. 19 How the soldiers, with their captives and 
spoil, are to be purified. C5 The proportion whereby 
the prey is to be divided. 48 The voluntary oblation 
unto the treasury of the Lord. 

AND the Lord spake unto IMoses, say- 
ing, 

2 Avenge "^the children of Israel of the 
Midianitefi : afterward shall thou be 
gathered'" unto thy people. 

3 And Moses spake unto the people, 
saying, Arm some of yourselves unto the 
war, and let them go against the Midian- 
ites, and avenge the Lord of Midian. 

4 Oft every tribe a thousand, through- 
out all the tribes of Israel, shall ye send 
to the war. 

5 So there were delivered, out of the 
thousands of Israel, a thousand of every 
tribe, twelve thousand armed for war. 



« Job 2-2 : 27 
Naliuni 1 : IS. 
b Gen. 3:16; 



I'salm 22:2.'>; fiO:I4; »i:l:),I4; Ilfi:14,I8; 
Heb. her vows were upun her. Ps.ilm 56:12. 
or. 7:4; 14:34; Kph. 5: 22-24. cl Cor. 11:3. 



4. Shall stand; be binding on her. 

•"j. The, Lord .iholl forgive her ; for not doing 
as slie h;id promised. 

9. Shall stnj/d ; because she had a right to bind 
herself, and no one liad a right to forbid it. 

ir> Make them void; by liindering her from 
performing what ho had previously allowed her to 
promise. Bear her iiilqnily ; be punished as the 
woman would have been if she liad wilfully broken 
her promise. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. A man may solemnly engage to do a wicked 
thing, but no engagement can lay him under any 
obligation to do it; and if he does it, it will be at 
the peril of his soul. Kut if the thing which he has 
engaged to do is not wicked, and is practicable, he 
must not break liis engagement, even if the fullil- 
ment of it should injure himself. Psa~ 1.1 : 4. 

8. It is the will of God that there should be in 
ull families conjugal and parental government and 
220 



d verses .i, 8; ob:ip. Ift:2.'i, 28. • chap. 25:17. I chap. 87: 13. 
f Heb. A thoiaand of ii tribe, a tlwusand of a tribe. 



control; and relative duties are so important, that 
no vows or covenants into which any one can enter, 
can release him or her from obligations to perform 
them. Those, therefore, who induce persons to shut 
themselves up in nunneries, or to neglect relative 
duties, that they may control their persons or their 
monoy, are blind leaders of the blind — men who 
make void the commandment of Orod through their 
traditions. Mat. 15:3-6. 

15. No conjugal, parental, ecclesiastical, or civil 
authority can in any case bind a person to commit 
sin; and if any attempt it, they rebel against the 
authority of God, and expose themselves to his ju.«t 
indignation. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

2. Ave?iffe — of the Midianites ; punish them 
for tempting Israelites to sin, and thus causing 
their destruction. Chap. 25 : 1-9, 17, 18. 

'A. Aveuge the Lord ; e.\ecute his just indig- 
nation. 



The Midianites spoiled^ 



NUMBERS XXXI. 



and Balaam slain. 



^■.c-'i^: 6 And Mose.s sent them to the 
war, a thousand of ei'^cry tribe, them and 
Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, 
to the war, with the holy instruments, 
and the trumpets to *blow in his hand. 

7 And they warred against the Midian- 
ites, as the Lord commanded Moses ; and 
they'' slew all the males. 

8 And "^they slew the kings of Midian, 
beside the rest of them that were slain ; 
namely, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and 
Hur, and Reba, fiA'e kings of Midian : Ba- 
laam also the son of Beor they slew with 
the sword. 

9 And the children of Israel took all the 
women of Midian captives, and their little 
ones, and took the spoil of all their cattle, 
and all their flocks, and all their goods. 

10 And ''they burnt all their cities 
wherein they dwelt, and all their goodly 
castles, with fire. 

1 1 And they took all the ''spoil, and all 
the prey, both of men and of beasts. 

12 And they brought the captives, and 
the prey, and the spoil, unto Moses and 
Eleazar the priest, and unto the congre- 
gation of the children of Israel, unto the 
camp at the '^plains of Moab, which are 
by Jordan near Jericho. 

1 :i ^ And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, 
and all the princes of the congregation, 
went forth to meet them without the camp. 

14 And Moses was wroth with the oth- 
cers of the host, ivith the captains over 
thousands, and captains over hundreds, 
which came from the *battle. 

15 And Moses said unto them, Have ye 
saved all the ^women alive? 

1 6 Behold, ''these caused the children of 
Israel, through the 'counsel of Balaam, to 
commit trespass against the Lord in the 
matter of Peor, and there was a > plague 
among the congregation of the Lord. 

17 Now therefore ''kill every male among 
the little ones, and kill every woman that 
hath known man by lying with thim. 

18 But all the women-children, that 
have not known a man by lying with 
him, keep alive for yourselves. 

19 And do ye abide without the camp 
seven days: 'whosoever hatli killed any 
person, and whosoever hath touched any 
slain, purify both yourselves and your 
captives on the third day. and on the sev- 
enth day. 

• chai.. 10:9. b Deut 20: 1:t : Judg. 21 : 1 1 ; 1 Kinra. II : 15, Ifi. 
e Josh i:t;21,v"2. d .losli. 6 : 24 i Rev. 18:B. •lieuU20:H; 
Josh. 8:2. f rliiip. 2-2 : 1. * Hn-b. host of war. R Dent. 20: 13; 
1 Samuel, 15 : 3. h ihaii. «.=> : 1-.3. i 2 I'eter, 2 : I.t ; Rev. 2 : 14. 
> chap. 2ii : 9. k .Imlges 21:11. f Heb. a male. Icliap..5:2; 

7. Sletvallthemaleis ; who were t.iken iiib:ittle. 

8. Balaam ; chap. 'i2 : •'). 

16. T/iro/isrlt the comiscl of Bal'iam ; chap. 
25 : 1-3 ; '2 Prt. '2 : L"). 

15 



20 And purify all your raiment, and all 
thatt is made of skins, and all work of 
goats' hair, and all things made of wood. 

21 1[And Eleazar the priest said unto 
the men of war which went to the battle. 
This is the ordinance of the law which 
the Lord commanded Moses ; 

22 Only the gold, and the silver, the 
brass, the iron, the tin, and the lead, 

23 Every thing that may abide the fire, 
ye shall make it go through the fire, and 
it shall be clean : nevertheless it shall be 
purified'^ with the water of separation: 
and all that abideth not the fire ye shall 
make go through the water. 

24 And " ye shall wash your clothes on 
the seventh day, and ye shall be clean, 
and afterward ye shall come into the camp. 

25 1[And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

26 Take the sum of the *prey that was 
taken, both of man and of beast, thou, and 
Eleazar the priest, and the chief fathers 
of the congregation : 

27 And "divide the prey into two parts ; 
between them that took the war upon 
them, who went out to battle, and between 
all the congregation. 

28 And levy a p tribute unto the Lord 
of the men of war which went out to bat- 
tle : one i soul of five hundred, hath of the 
persons, and of the beeves, and of the asses, 
and of the sheep : 

29 Take it of their half, and give it unto 
Eleazar the priest, for a hcave-oflering of 
the Lord. 

30 And of the children of Israel's half, 
thou shalt ''take one portion of fifty, of the 
persons, of the beeves, of the asses, and 
of the II flocks, of all manner of beasts, and 
give^ them unto the Levitcs, which *kcep 
the charge of the tabernacle of the Lord. 

31 And Moses and Eleazar the priest 
did as the Lord commanded Moses. 

32 And the booty, being the rest of the 
prey which the men of war had caught, 
was six hundred thousand and seventy 
thousand and five thousand sheep, 

33 And threescore and twelve thousand 
beeves, 

34 And threescore and one thousand 
asses, 

35 And thirty and two thousand per- 
sons in all, of women that had not known 
man by lying with him. 



IS: 11 


etc. 


i Heb. 


instru 


mr 


nt. 


or vfsset 


/ tkin 




m chap 


ter 


ly : 9, 


17. n 


Lev. 1 1 


2.S 


■ * 


h 


ell. 


,fth 


cap 


ivity. 





Tush. 22 


«; 


1 Sam 


30 : 2 


; Psa. 6S: 


2. 


P 


(ie 


1. 14 


20; 


.losluia 


B 


19; 2.S 


im. 


8:11, 


12; Pr 


ov. 3 : 9, 


10. 


<] 




.31 


47; 


chap 


18:26 




ver. 42, 


47. 


l\ Or, 


goals. 


» 1 Cor 


a 


13, 


14 


t 


clinp 


3:7 


etc. 









18. Keep alive for yourselves ; to be their ser- 
vants. 

19. Purify — yourselves ; ch.^p. 19 : ll-2"2. 
23. The water of separation ; chap. 8 : 7. 

221 



Moses divideth 



NUMBERS XXXII. 



the Midianites' spoil. 



36 And the half, which was the portion 
of them that went out to war, was in 
number three hundred thousand and sev- 
en and thirty thousand and live hundred 
.•^heep : 

37 And the Lord's tribute of the sheep 
was six hundred and threescore and (if- 
Icen. 

38 And the beeves were thirty and six 
thousand ; of which the Lord's tribute rvas 
threescore and twelve. 

39 And the asses ivere thirty thousand 
and five hundred; of which the Lord's 
tribute was threescore and one. 

40 And the persons were sixteen thou- 
sand ; of which the Lord's tribute was 
thirty and two persons. 

4 1 And Moses gave the tribute, ichich was 
the Lord's heave-offering, unto Eleazar 
the priest, *astlie Lord commanded ]Moses. 

42 And of the children of Israel's half, 
which Moses divided from the men that 
warred, 

43 (Now the half that pertained unto the 
congresalion was three hundred thousand 
and thirty thousand and seven thousand 
and five hundred sheep, 

44 And thirty and six thousand beeves, 

45 And thirty thousand asses and five 
hundred, 

46 And sixteen thousand persons,) 

47 Even'' of the children of Israel's half, 
Moses look one portion of fifty, both of 
man and of beast, and gave them unto 
the Levites, which kept the charge of the 
tabernacle of the Lord ; as the Lord com- 
manded Moses. 

48 ^, And the officers which were over 
thousands of the host, the captains of 
thousands, and captains of hundreds, 
came near unto Moses: 

49 And they said unto Moses, Thy ser- 

« cliap. 1(1:8, I'.l. 1i verse :iO. ' l\vh. hand, f Heh. /ouiicl. 
c Ex. ;)(): IJ, IB. t He\>. htuveiiff'eiiug. dDeiit. M:U. e Kx. 
JO:l">. 4 Or,Jaaicr. ver.35i chap. 21:33; .losli. 13:25; 2S;iiii. 



50. A71 oblation; an ofTerin^ of gratitude for 
dieir preservation and success. To male an atone- 
meiil ; be used for the sacrilices which preli^ured 
the atonement of Christ, and showed their need of 
bis salvatiqn. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Vengeance belongeth unto God. It is his pre- 
rogative to punish the guilty; and wiien he re- 
quires a magistrate to put tlie guilty to death, it is 
not the wradi of the magistrate which is manifest- 
ed, but the wrath of <jod — designed for a terror to 
evil-doers and a protection and encouragement to 
those who do well. 

7. It is as really righteous in God to destroy 
wicked men by the sword of the magistrate as by 
earthquake, pe.stilencc, fever, or any other calamity. 

8. jle who tempts men, or induces others to 
tempt men to commit sin, must e.\pectamost fear- 
ful retribution. Rev, 2: 14. 

17, In putting men to death, magistrates may 
be obeying <";od; and not to do it when he com- 
mandii, is ri'bellion against hinri. 



vants have taken the sum of the men ^ c! iJS 
of war which are under our 'charge, and 
there lacketh not one man of us. 

50 We have therefore brought an obla- 
tion for the Lord, what every man hath 
gotten, t of jewels of gold, chains, and 
bracelets, rings, ear-rings, and tablets, to 
make*^ an atonement for our souls before 
the Loud. 

5 1 A nd Moses and Eleazar the priest took 
the gold of them, even all wrought jewels. 

52 And all the gold of the -oflering that 
they offered up to the Lord, of the cap- 
tains of thousands, and of the captains of 
hundreds, was sixteen thousand seven 
hundred and fifty shekels : 

53 For the men of war had ''taken spoil, 
every man for himself. 

54 And Moses and Eleazar the priest 
took the gold of the captains of thousands 
and of hundreds, and brought it into the 
tabernacle of the congregation, for a " me- 
morial for the children of Israel before 
the Lord. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

1 The Reubenites and Gaditps sue for their inheritance 
on that side JorJan. (i Moses reproveth them. 10 
They offer him conditions to his content. Xi Moses 
assi;;nelh ihcm the land. 39 They conquer it, 

OW the children of Reuben and the 
Idren of Gad had a very great 
multitude of cattle : and when they saw 
the land of ^.lazer, and the land ol^ ""Gil- 
ead, that, behold, the place was a « place 
for cattle ; 

2 The children of Gad and the children 
of Reuben came and spake unto Moses, 
and to Eleazar the priest, and unto the 
princes of the congregation, saying, 

3 Ataroth, and '' Dibon, and Jazcr, and 
Nimraii,!! and 'Ileslibon, and Elealeh, and 
Shebam,* and Nebo, and t Beon, 



1\ chil 



24:.'j: Isii. Ili:8, •), f Jer. .ID- 19 ; Mic.ill 7 : 14. BGen,13:2,6; 
47:4. h l.sa. l.T : 2, 4. || BcM nimrn/i. ver. 36, iJudg, 11:36 
* Shibmah. vpr. 08, f Baalmeun. ver. 38, ' 



24, Our best services, even our most hearty obe- 
dience to God. are imperfect and polluted with sin; 
and we need in every thing the purifying influence* 
of the Holy Ghost, 

28, We should ever acknowledge God as the 
giver of all our mercies, and a portion of all we ob- 
tain by following his directions should be devoted 
to his worship and ,service, 

47, God is the rightful owner of all things, and 
in taking, at his command, the possessions of their 
enemies, the Israelites were not guilty of robbery, 
but rightfully obtained from God that portion of his 
property which he was pleased in this w;iy 10 give 
them, Psa, 44 : 3, 

50, Spe(-ial favors from God should be acknow- 
ledged with special thanksgiving, and with hearty 
reliance on the atonement of Christ as the merito- 
rious cause of all our mercies. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 
1, The land of Jasrr, and — of Gileod ; cast 
of Jordan, between the rivers A rnon and Jabbok. 



37» Rcubcnitcs and Gad'Ucs 



NUMBERS XXXIL 



claim their inheritance. 



S.'c.i^l^ 4 Even the "country which the 
Lord smote before the congregation of 
Israel, is a land for cattle, and thy ser- 
vants have cattle : 

5 Wherefore, said they, if vvc have found 
grace in thy sight, let this land be given 
unto thy servants for a possession, and 
bring us not over Jordan. 

6 1[ And jNIoses said unto the children 
of Gad and to the children of Reuben, 
Shall your brethren go to war, and shall 
ye sit here? 

7 And wherefore 'discourage ye the 
heart of the children of Israel from going 
over into the land which the Lord hath 
given them] 

8 Thus did your fathers, when '' I sent 
them from Kadesh-barnea to see the land. 

9 For when they went up unto the val- 
ley of Eshcol, and saw the land, they dis- 
couraged the heart of the children of Is- 
rael, that they should not go into the land 
which the Lord had given them. 

10 And the "^Lord's anger was kindled 
the same time, and he sware, saying, 

1 1 Surely none of the men that came up 
out of Egypt, from twenty years old and 
upward, shall see the land which I sware 
unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Ja- 
cob ; '^because they have not t wholly fol- 
lowed me : 

12 Save Caleb the son of Jcphunneh the 
Kenezite, and Joshua the son of Nun: for 
they have wholly followed the Lord. 

13 And the Lord's anger was kindled 
against Israel, and he made ""them wan- 
der in the wilderness forty years, until 
all "^ the generation, that had done evil in 
the sight of the Lord, was consumed. 

14 And behold, yc are risen up in your 
fathers' stead, an ^ increase of sinful men, 
to ''augment yet the fierce anger of the 
Lord toward Israel. 

15 For 'if ye turn away from after him, 
he will yet again J leave them in the wil- 
derness; and ye shall destroy all this 
people. 

16 11 And they came near unto him, and 
said, We will build sheep-folds here for 
our cattle, and cities for our little ones: 

17 But ''we ourselves will go ready 
armed before the children of Israel, until 
we have brought them unto their place: 
and our little ones shall dwell in the 
fenced cities, because of the inhabitants 
of the land. 



1 8 We ' will not return unto our houses, 
until the children of Israel have inherited 
every man his inheritance: 

1 9 For we will not inherit with them on 
yonder side Jordan, or forward ; because 
our"' inheritance is fallen to us on this 
side Jordan eastward. 

; 20 1[ And "Moses said unto them. If ye 
will do this thing, if ye will go armed be- 
fore the Lord to war, 

21 And will go all of you armed over 
Jordan before the Lord, nntil he hath driv- 
en out his enemies from before him, 

22 And the land be "subdued before the 
'Lord; then p afterward ye shall return, 
' and be guiltless before the Lord, and be- 
; fore Israel ; and this land shall be your 

possession before the Lord. 
! 23 But if ye will not do so, behold, ye 
have sinned against the Lord : and be svire 
your 1 sin will find you out. 
[ 24 Build '■you cities for your little ones, 
j and folds for your sheep; and do thai 
' which hath proceeded out of your mouth. 
j 25 And the children of Gad and the chil- 
I dren of Reuben spake unto Moses, sav- 
ing, ''Thy servants will do as my lord 
commandeth. 

26 Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, 
and all our cattle, shall bo there in the 
cities of Gilead: 

27 But 'thy servants will pass over, 
every man armed for war, before the Lord 
to battle, as my lord saith, 

28 So concerning them Moses command- 
ed Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son 
of Nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes 
of the children of Israel: 

29 And "Moses said unto them. If the 
children of Gad and the children of Reu- 
ben will pass with you over Jordan, every 
man armed to battle, before the Lord, and 
the land shallbc subdued before you ; then 
ye shall give them the land of Gilead for 
a possession : 

30 But if they will not pass over with 
you armed, they shall have possessions 
among you in the land of Canaan. 

31 And the children of Gad and the chil- 
dren of Reuben answered, saying. As the 
Lord hath said unto thy servants, so will 
we do. 

32 We will pass over armed before the 
Lord into the land of Canaan, that the 
possession of our inheritance on this side 
Jordan may he ours. 



• iliap.:i.-24,r!4. * Heb. Ai-M*. Art.i21:13. t> chap. n:.T-2fi; 
Deut 1 : li. c I hap. 14:11.2!): DeuL 1 : :i5. i chap. 14 : 24, 30 ; 
Joshirn 14:8,9. f Hth. fulfilled after me. e diap. I4::«-3S. 
f Chap. 2K : fi4, 65 ; I Cor. 10:5; Heli. 3 : lfi-19. t P-atni 7R : ft7. 
hNeh. 13:18; Isaiah fvi : 6, 7. i Dent. 30: 17; .losh. 22 : 1«, 18; 



8. Thus did your fathers ; chap 13:2-20. 

14. Augment ; increase. 

19. Yonder side , the west side. 



2 Cliro 


n. 7: 19; 1.1 


2. i chap. I4:3.'>. k .Io.sli. 4: 12. 13. I .losh 


■22 : 4. 


■n ver. 3:1 


.losh. 13:8. n Dent. 3: 18, etc.; .losll. Ij M, 


etc. ; 4 


:12, 13. 


lo.sliiia 18: I. p .To.-shua 22 : 4, 9. <K C,fn.\:T ; 


44: Ifi 


P.sa. 90 ; 8 


139:11; Prov. 13:21; lsa.S9:12; lCor.4:^ 


r ver. 


Irt, 34, etc. 


» .losh. 1:13, 14. I Josh. 4 : 12. u ver. 20. 



23. Your siu will find you out; it will bring 
punishment upon you. 

30. Among you; with the rest of the tribes. 
223 



Record of the journey 



NUMBERS XXXIII. 



of Israel ovt of Egypt. 



33 And "Moses gave unto them, ci'cn to 
the children of Gad, and to the children 
of Renben, and unto half the tribe of Ma- 
nassch the son of ''Joseph, the kingdom 
of Sihon king of the Amorites, and the 
kingdom of Og king of Bashan. the land, 
•with the cities thereof in the coasts, even 
the cities of the country round about. j 

34 «y And the children of Gad built <= Di- j 
bon, and Atarotli, and ''Aroer, j 

35 And Atroth, Shophan, and *Jazer, 
and .logbchah, i 

36 And t Heth-nimrah, and Beth-haran, ' 
fenced'' cities; and folds for sheep. 

37 An<l the children of Reuben built 
Ileshbon,*" and Elealeh, and Kirjathaim. 

38 And sNebo, and ''Baal-meon, their 
names being changed, and Shibmah : and 
gavet other 'names unto the cities which 
they buildcd. 

39 And the children of Macliir the son of 
Manasseh went to Gilead, and took it, and 
di.sposscssed the Amorite which was in it. 

40 And Moses gave J Gilead unto Ma- 
chir the son of Manasseh; and he dwell 
therein. 

41 And .Jair the son of Manasseh went 
and took the small towns thereof, and 
called them ■■ Ilavoth-jair. 

42 And Nobah went and took Kenath, 
and the villages thereof, and called it No- 
bah, after his own name. 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

1 Two and forty journeys of tlie Israelites. 51) The 
Canaanitps are to be destroyed. 

THESE are the journeys of the children 
of Israel, which went forth out of the 
land of Egypt with their armies under the 
hand of Moses and Aaron. 

2 And Moses wrote their goings out ac- 
cording to their journeys by the command- 
ment of the Loud: and these arc their 
journeys according to their goings out. 

• DfilLSrll-lT; 29:8; .Io.sli.I2:(i. b chap. 21 : 24, M. c cliap. 
Sa:4r>,Af\. <l neiit.2:3fi. « Or, Jaowr, ver. 1,3. f Nimrah.ver.--^. 
r vcr. 21. f (Imp. 21 : 27. l!l».n.4K:l. h cliap. 22 ; 41. j Heb. 
Ihty culled hii namet the namt! nf the citiet. i ver.3; Ex. 23:13; 
Jo«lma23:T. j Joshua 13:29-31. kjud^. 10:4. 1 Ex. 12:37. 



3 And they 'departed from Ra- Vc iSS 
meses in the first month, on the "' fifteenth 
day of the first month; on the morrow 
after the passover the children of Israel 
went out with "a high hand in the sight 
of all the Egyptians. 

4 For the Egyptians buried all their 
first-born, which "the Loud had smitten 
among them : upon their Pgods also the 
LoRn executed judgments. 

5 And the children of Israel removed 
from 1 Rameses, and pitched in Succoth. 

fi And Mhcy departed from Suecolh, and 
pitched in Etham, which is in the edge of 
the wilderness. 

7 And 'they removed from Etham, and 
turned agnin unto Pi-hahiroth, which is 
before Baal-zephon : and they pitched 
before Migdol. 

8 And they departed from before Pi- 
hahiroth, and 'passed through the midst 
of the sea into the wilderness, and went 
three days' journey in the wilderness of 
Etham, and pitched in Marah. 

9 And they removed froni INIarah, and 
came" unto Elim : and in Elimvcere twelve 
fountains of water, and threescore and ten 
palm-trees ; and they pitched there. 

10 And they removed from Elim, and 
encamped by the Bed sea. 

1 1 And ^ they removed from the Red sea, 
and encamped in the wilderness of Sin. 

\ 12 And they took their journey out of 

the wilderness of Sin, and encamped in 

Dophkah. 
I 13 And they departed from Dophkah, 

and encamped in Alush. 
14 And they removed from Alush, and 

encamped" at Rephidim, where was no 
1 water for the people to drink. 
! 15 And they departed from Rephidim, 

and pitched in the * wilderness of Sinai. 

IG And they removed from the desert of 
I Sinai, and pitched at ^ Kibroth-hattaavah." 



33. Kingdnvi of Sihon; lying east of the Jor- 
dan near its mouth. Kingdom of Og; a country 
north of Gilead, and east of the sea of Galilee. 
IN.STRUCTIONS. 

4. In selecting a place of residence, men often 
regard l.ind, cattle, merchandise, and other earthly 
treasures, more than religious privileges, the favor 
of (lod. and treasures in heaven. 
, \-i. By discour.-iging men from pursuing the path 
of duly, persons iniiy be tlie means of dislroying not 
only tliernsflvcs, but multitudes of their fellow-men. 

I'S. Kind niiionstrances and timely explanations 
remove misunderstandings, and ]>revint multitudes 
of evils. Psa. 141:.'); Prov. 10:17; Vl:\\ 13:18; 
15:5, 10,31,32; 17:10. 

22. I; cadinesstobe satisfied with siiitahle explan.a- 
f inns and with good rv.a.sons, is an indication of sound 
Judgment, benevolent feeling, and an honest heart. 
224 



■" F.I 


13: 


4. n 


Ex 


. 14 


:S. 


„ 


E.T. 12 


:2<1. 


p F.x. 12: 


12; 


18:11: 


iHHiali 


1»: 


1; Re 


V. 


2:' 


-q. 


1 


Ex. 1. 


:37. 


r Ex. 13 


20. 


» Ex. 


14:2, 


1. 


I Ex. 


14 


22; 


1.5 


22 


23. 


n Kx 


1ft: 27. 


r E 


«. 10:1. 


w Ex. 


17: 


1; 19 


2. 


X 


Ex. 


IH 


1; 19 


1,2. 


\ TliBt is 


,th 


grave t 


tiflmt 


. y 


cl.ap 


11 


34. 

















23. The idea that men may be selfish and con- 
tinue in sin. and yet escape punishment, is vain. 

27. In promoting the cause of God and of human 
•welfare, all should be disposed to bear their propor- 
tion of needful burdens, sacrifices, and hibors. 

33. When God in his providence deprives one peo- 
ple of their possessions and gives them to another, 
he only does what he will with his own. I'or all 
his dealings he has the wisest and best reasons, and 
he never alTlicts individu;ils or nations beyond what 
their iniquities deserve. 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 
1. The jourvrys of the. children of Israel; the 
phices mentioned from the third to the forty-ninth 
verses of this chapter, are those through which the 
Isr;ielites p.issed during their wanderings in the wil- 
derness, and on llieir way from Egypt to Canaan. 



Two and yorty Journeys 



NUMBERS XXXIII. 



oj" the Israelites. 



i:c:ubt' n And they departed from Kibroth- 
hattaavah, and ^encamped at Hazeroth. 

18 And they departed from Hazeroth, 
and pitched in ''Rithmah. 

19 And they departed from Kithmah, 
and pitched at Rimmon-parez. 

20 And they departed from Rimmon- 
parez, and pitched in Libnah. 

21 And they removed from Libnah, and 
pitched at Rissah. 

22 And they journeyed from Rissah, 
and pitched in Kehelathah. 

23 And they went from Kehelathah, and 
pitched in mount Shapher. 

24 And they removed from mount Sha- 
pher, and encamped in Haradah. 

25 And they removed from Haradah, 
and pitched in Makheloth. 

26 And they removed from Makheloth, 
and encamped at Tahath. 

27 And they departed from Tahath, and 
pitched at Tarah. 

28 And they removed from Tarah, and 
pitched in Mithcah. 

29 And they went from Mithcah, and 
pitched in Hashmonah. 

30 And they departed from Hashmonah, 
and encamped at *Moseroth. 

31 And they departed from Moseroth, 
and pitched in <" Bene-jaakan. 

32 And they removed from Bene-jaakan, 
and encamped at t Hor-hagidgad. 

33 And they went from Hor-hagidgad, 
and pitched in -Jotbathah. 

34 And they removed from Jotbathah, 
and encamped at Ebronah. 

35 And they departed from Ebronah, 
and encamped at * Ezion-geber. 

36 And they removed from Ezion-geber, 
and pitched in the ''wilderness of Zin, 
which is Kadesh. 

37 And ""they removed from Kadesh, 
and pitched in mount Hor, in the edge of 
the land of Edom. 

38 And "^Aaron the priest went up into 
mount Hor at the commandment of the 
Lord, and died there, in the fortieth year 
after the children of Israel were come out 
of the land of Egypt, in the first day of 
the fifth month. 

39 And Aaron was a hundred and twen- 
ty and three years old when he died in 
mount Hor. 

40 And king ^Arad the Canaanite, which 
dwelt in the south in the land of Canaan, 

■ rhap. 11:11. b chap. 12.16. " Mnsrra. Deuteronomy 10:fi. 
•■ 1 Chron. 1 : 4.'. t Gudqodah. Deiit. 10: 7. % Jotbath. Deut. 
10:7. % Dellt. ■2:8; 1 Kin;a, 9 : 56, Ezlmtgebcr. 1 Kings, 22 : 48. 
* rlmp.iO: 1; 27:14. « chap. 20:22,23; 21 : 4. f chap. 20 : i.V-Sg ; 
Deut 10:6; 32 : .W. e chap. 2 1 : 1 , etc. ti chap. 2 1 : 4. i chap. 
21:10. \\ Or, heaps of Abarim. j chap. 21:11. k chap. .'52 : 34. 

52. Pictures ; sculptured figures used for idol- 
atrous purposes. 

St"). Pricls — and thorns ; sources of vexation 
.iiid distress. 



heard of the coming of the children of 
Israel. 

41 And they departed from mount ''Hor, 
and pitched in Zalmonah. 

42 And they departed from Zalmonah, 
and pitched in Punon. 

43 And they departed from Punon, and 
pitched in 'Oboth. 

44 And they departed from Oboth, and 
pitched in lllje-abarim,i in the border of 
Moab. 

45 And they departed from lim, and 
pitched in ^Dibon-gad. 

46 And they removed from Dibon-gad, 
and encamped in ' Almon-diblathaim. 

47 And they removed from Almon-dib- 
lathaim, and ™ pitched in the mountains of 
Abarim, before Nebo. 

48 And they departed from the moun- 
tains of "Abarim, and pitched in the plains 
of Moab by Jordan near Jericho. 

49 And they pitched by Jordan, from 
Beth-jesimoth even unto *Abel-shittim'' in 
the plains of Moab. 

50 ^ And the Lord spake unto Moses in 
the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jeri- 
cho, saying, 

51 Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
say unto them, p When ye are passed over 
Jordan into the land of Canaan ; 

52 Then '^ ye shall drive out all the in- 
habitants of the land from before you, and 
destroy all their pictures, and destroy all 
their molten images, and quite pluck down 
all their high places : 

53 And ye shall dispossess the inhabi- 
tants of the land, and dwell therein : for 
I have given you the land to possess it. 

54 And "^ye shall divide the land by lot 
for an inheritance among your families ; 
and to the more ye shall tgive the more 
inheritance, and to the fewer ye shall i give 
the less inheritance : every man's inhrr- 
itance shall be in the place where his lot 
falleth; according to the tribes of your 
fathers ye shall inherit. 

55 But^if ye will not drive out the inhab- 
itants of the land from before you ; then it 
shall come to pass, that those which ye let 
remain of them shall he pricks in your eyes, 
and thorns in your sides, and shall vex 
you in the land wherein ye dwell. 

56 Moreover it shall come to pass, that 
I shall do u»to you, as I thought to do 
unto them. 



1 .1 


er 


»«:22: Eiek. (i 


14. 


ni Deut. 32 


: 49. n 


chap. 22: 1. 


' Or. 


the 


pk 


m« of Shiltim. 


o 


chap. 25 : 1 : 


.losh. 2 


:1. P 


Deut. 9:1; 


.lo.sh. 3:17. 1 T.\ 23 


:24 


XI: 34:13: 


[lent. 7 


2, .1: 


12:3; 


.losli. 


11 


11 


Judg. 2:2. r 


chap. 21; : .M-.Vi. 


t Heb. 


multiply his 


'nher- 


ita 


nee 


J Heb. diminish his inheriCar 


«. 1 Ex. 23 . 


:«; J 


osliu.-) 


23 


1-2, 


13: Judg. I :21 


-3« 


Psa. I0fi:3^ 


Ufi; T.i 


ek. 28 


24. 





56. Do unto you, as I thonght to do unto 
them; expel you from vour country and destroy you. 
I.VSTRUCTIONS 
1. Human life is a journey from the cradle to the 



The borders of 



NUMBERS XXXIV. 



the promised land. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

1 The borders of the land. IG The names of the men 
which shall divide the land. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing, 

2 Command the children of Israel, and 
say unto them, When ye come into the 
land of Canaan ; thi.s is the land that shall 
fall unto you for an inheritance, crcn the 
land of Canaan Avith the coasts thereof: 

3 Then "your south quarter shall be 
from the ^Ailde^ness of Zin along by the 
coast of Edom, and your .south border 
shall be the outmost coast of the ""salt sea 
eastward : 

4 And your border shall turn from the 
south to the ascent of Akrabbim, and pass 
on to Zin : and the going forth thereof 
shall be from the south "^to Kadesh-bar- 
nea, and shall go on to Hazar-addar, and 
pass on to Azmon : 

5 And the border shall fetch a compass 
from Azmon unto the river of "^ Egypt, and 
the going.s out of it shall be at the sea. 

6 And as for the western border, ye 
shall even have the great sea for a border : 
this shall be your west border. 

7 And this shall be your north border : 
from the great sea ye shall point out for 
you mount ""Ilor : 

8 From mount Ilor ye shall point out 
your border unto the entrance of 4Iamath ; 
and the goings forth of the border shall 
be to «Zedad: 

9 And the border shall go on to Ziph- 
ron, and the goings out of it shall be at 
Hazar-enan ; '■ this- shall be your north 
border. 



• .loah. IS:l,etc.; Ezek.4T:13,etc. bGen.H:3. c rliap.l3:26; 
."JiiS. J Gen. lfi:18; IKings, 8:6.1: Ia;i. 27:l-2. echnp.33:37. 
'chap. 13:21; 2Kins9,l4:i.i; Eiek.47: IB. B Ezelt.47: 15. h Ezek. 

gjave, and each day carries iis one day nearer to 
our final, our eternal abode. 

2. It is often useful to look back on the various 
stajres of our past life, to reooiint the goodness of 
God, and sometimes to write down portions cf our 
history for the benefit of others. 

49. However long our journey, or whatever be 
our course through time, we shall soon come to its 
close and pass into eternity. 

52. Occasions of sin, temptations to evil, and 
whatever tends to draw our hearts from God and 
unfit us for heaven, should be carefully avoided. 

.'j.'). If we spare our lusts, or continue to indulge 
them, they will continue to torment us, and ulti- 
mately prove our ruin. 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

3— '5. iSow//t Aorf/<!r,- of the land of Canaan. The 
pl.-iccs mentioned lay from the south end of the Dead 
s>ea. round by the wilderness to the Mediterranean 
sea. at El-Arish, the ancient Rhinocolura; called 
in Scripture Sihor, and also the river of Egypt. It 
is south-west of Gaza. 

6. Tlie wcsleni. harder ; of Canaan, was the 
Mediterranean, from the river of Egypt in latitude 
about thirty-one degrees, to a point a little above 
226 



1 And ye shall point out your ea.st *„ c! f^ 
border from Hazar-enan to Shepham : 

11 And the coast shall go down from 
Shepham to 'Riblah, on the east side of 
Ain; and the border shall descend, and 
shall reach unto the *side of the sea of 
Chinnereth^ eastward. 

12 And the border shall go down to Jor- 
dan, and the goings out of it shall be at 
the salt sea : this .shall be your land with 
the coasts thereof round about. 

13 And Moses commanded the children 
of Israel, saying, This is the land which 
ye shall inherit by lot, which the Lord 
commanded '' to give unto the nine tribes, 
and to the half tribe : 

14 For 'the tribe of the children of Reu- 
ben according to the house of their fa- 
thers, and the tribe of the children of Gad 
according to the house of their fathers, 
have received their inheritance ; and half 
the tribe of Manasseh have received their 
inheritance : 

15 The two tribes and the half tribe 
have received their inheritance on this 
side Jordan near Jericho eastward, toward 
the sunrising. 

16 ^ And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

17 These are the names of the men 
which shall divide the land unto you: 
Eleazar™ the priest, and Joshua the son 
of Nun. 

1 8 A nd ye shall take one " prince of every 
tribe, to divide the land by inheritance. 

19 And the names of the men are these : 
Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of 
Jephunneh. 

47:17. i 2 Kings, 23:33 ; Jer. 39:6,6. * Hch. thmldrr. J DeuL 
3:17; Jmhu.! 1 1 : 2 ; l!):^^; Luke A: I. k ver. I ; .l08hK>l4:3. 
1 cliap. 32 : 33. m .Tosh. )4 : 1 ; 19 : 6). » cli.-ip. 1:4-16. 



Sidon, in latitude between thirty- three and thirly- 
four degrees north. Its average length was about 
one hundred and si-xty miles. 

7-9. Your north, border ; from the Mediterra- 
nean sea to mount Jlor ; supposed to be a sum- 
mit or spur of mount Lebanon, llamath ; a part 
of Syria which was entered through a piiss in the 
mountain called the entering in of Ham:ith. 1 Kings, 
8:65. Zedad — Ziphron — Hazar-enan ; places 
further east towards D;imascus. 

10, 11. ^ast border — Shepham — Riblah ; 
places to the south-east, towards the head-waters of 
the Jordan. Ain : meaning a fountain, and sup- 
posed by some to mark the source of the Jordan. 
Chinnereth. ; the lake of Gennesareth. or sea ol 
Galilee, which, with the river Jordan and Dead 
sea, formed the eastern border. The land of Ca- 
naan, upon .an average, was about fifty miles wide. 
It lay between thirty-four and thirty-seven degrees 
east longitude, an4|pontained about eight tiiousand 
square miles. 

IN.STRUCTION.S. 

2. God assigns (o individujils and to nations the 
bounds of their habitation, and tiiey possess no 
rights, privileges, or blessings, but what they re- 
ceive from him. They hold them by his permis- 
sion, and subject at all times to his disposal. 



Cities for the Levites. 



NUMBERS XXXV 



Cities of refuge. 



S."S 20 And of the tribe of the chil- 
dren of Simeon, Shemuel the son of Am- 
mihud. 

21 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the 
son of Chislon. 

22 And the prince of the tribe of the 
children of Dan, Bukki the son of Jogli. 

23 The prince of the children of Joseph, 
for the tribe of the children of Manasseh, 
Hanniel the son of Ephod. 

24 And the prince of the tribe of the 
children of Ephraim, Kcmuel the son of 
8hiphtan. 

25 And the prince of the tribe of the 
children of Zebulun, Elizaphan the son 
of Parnach. 

26 And the prince of the tribe of the 
children of Issachar, Paltiel the son of 
Azzan. 

27 And the prince of the tribe of the 
children of Asher, Ahihud the son of She- 
lomi. 

28 And the prince of the tribe of the 
children of Naphtali, Pedahel the son of 
Ammiluid. 

29 These '^are they whom the Lord com- 
manded to divide the inheritance unto the 
children of Israel in the land of Canaan. 

CHAPTER, XXXV. 

1 Ei|;ht and forty cities for the Levites with their sub- 
urbs, and measure thereof. Six of them are to be 
cities of refuge. 9 Tlie laws of murder. 21 IS^o satis- 
faction for murder. 

AND the Lord spake unto Moses in the 
j^ plains of Moab by .Jordan near Jeri- 
cho, saying, 

2 Command ''the children of Israel, that 
they give unto the Levites, of the inheri- 
tance of their possession, cities to dwell 
in ; and ye shall give also unto the Levites 
suburbs for the cities round about them. 

3 And the cities shall they have to dwell 
in; and the suburbs of them shall be for 
their cattle, and for their goods, and for all 
their beasts. 

4 And the ""suburbs of the cities, which 
ye shall give unto tlie Levites, xhall reach 
from tlic wall of the city and outward a 
thousand cubits round about. 

5 And ye shall measure from without 
the city on the east side two thousand 



« Terse 18. 1> .Iiisliua U : S-A; 21:2. etc.: Ezekiel 4:>: I, etc.; 
<8:»,etc. c 2 rliron. 1 1 : U. il ver. la, U ; Deut. 4:41-4:1 : .losli. 
St):S-»; 21:3, IS, etc.; Psa.62:7, 8: Heb. 6:1». * Heb. above 
them ye shatl give. « josli. 21 :4I. f .Insli. 21 : .1. B cll,ip. 26 : .'i4. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

2. Subiirbs ; the la nd around and near a city. 

4. A thousand cuhits ; about fifteen hundred 
feet. 

6. Cities for refuge ; cities to which he who 
had killed a man might flee and be safe, till he 
could have a fair trial, and it be proved whether 
or not he intended to kill the man. If he did, he 
was to be put to death, ver. 30-33; if he did not, 
he must stay in the city of refuge till the death 



cubits, and on the south side two thousand 
cubits, and on the west side two thousand 
cubits, and on the north side two thousand 
cubits ; and the city shall be in the midst : 
this shall be to them the suburbs of the 
cities. 

6 And among tlie cities which ye shall 
give unto the Levites there shall be "'six 
cities for refuge, wiiich ye shall appoint 
for the manslayer, that he may flee thith- 
er: and *to them ye shall add forty and 
two cities. 

7 So all the cities which ye shall give to 
the Levites shall he forty and '" eight cities : 
them shall ye give Avith their suburbs. 

8 And the cities which yc shall give 
."fhall be of the ''possession of the children 
of Israel : from ^them that have many 
ye shall give many ; but from them that 
have few ye shall give few : every one 
shall give of his cities unto the Levites 
according to his inheritance which t he 
inheriteth. 

9 TTAnd the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

10 Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
say unto them, '' When ye be come over 
Jordan into the land of Canaan, 

11 Then 'ye shall appoint you cities to 
be cities of refuge for you ; that the slayer 
may flee thither, which killeth any person 
at* unawares. 

12 And they shall be unto you cities for 
refuge from the 'avenger; that the man- 
slayer die not, until he stand before the 
congregation in judgment. 

13 And of these cities which ye shall 
give, ''six cities shall ye have for refuge. 

14 Ye shall give 'three cities on this side 
Jordan, and three cities shall ye give in 
the land of Canaan, which shall be cities 
of refuge. 

1 5 These six cities shall be a refuge, both 
for the children of Israel, and for the 
stranger,'" and for the sojourner among 
them ; that every one that killeth any per- 
son unawares may flee thither. 

1 6 And " if he smite him with an instru- 
ment of iron, so that he die, he is a mur- 
derer : the murderer shall surely be put 
to death. 



t HpI). the;/ inherit. Ii Deut. 19:2; .Tciliua 20 : 2. i Ex. 21 : IS. 
i Hell. *!/ en-ur. j Dent. 19: 6; .fosli. 20:3-6. k ver. 6. I Deut. 
4:41 : .loah. 20:8. m chnp. 1.5: 16; Lev. 24:22. n Ex. 21 : 12-14; 
Lev. 24:17; Deut. 19:11, 12. 



of the high-priest, and after that he might go at 
large. Ver. 11, 25-28. 

11. At niiawares ; without intending it. 

12. Tlie avenger ; the nearest relative of him 
who w.as killed, and who. if he could find the man- 
slayer out of the city of refuge, would kill him. 
Ver. 19. In judgment ; for trial. Ver. 24. 

14. Th is side ; the e».st side, where the Israelites 
then were. In the land of Canaan ; on the west 
side of Jordan. 

227 



Tlie laws of murder, 



NUMBERS XXXVI, 



and of matislaughtcr. 



17 And if he smite him with * throwing 
a stone, wherewith he may die, and he 
die, he is a murderer : the murderer shall 
Burely be put to death. 

18 Ori/hesmitehim withaliaiid-weap- 
on of wood, wherewith he may die, and 
he die, he i.s a murderer: the murderer 
sliall surely be put to death. 

19 The "revenger of blood himself shall 
slay the murderer : when he mectcthhim, 
he shall slay him. 

20 But if he thrust him of ''hatred, or 
hurl at him by '^laying of wait, that he die ; 

21 Or in enmity smite him with his 
hand, that he die : he that smote hhn shall 
surely be put to death; for he is a mur- 
derer : the revenger of blood shall slay 
the murderer, when he meeteth him. 

22 But if he thrust him suddenly with- 
out enmity, or have cast upon him any 
thing without laying of wait, 

23 Or with any stone, wherewith a man 
may die, seeing him not, and cast it upon 
him, that he die, and was not his enemy, 
neither sought his harm ; 

24 Then the ''congregation shall judge 
between the slayer and the revenger of 
blood according to tliese judgments: 

25 And the congregation shall deliver 
the slayer out of the hand of the revenger 
of blood, and the congregation shall re- 
store him to the city of his refuge, whither 
he was fled: and he shall abide in it unto 
the death of the high-priest, which was 
anointed'' with the holy oil. 

2(5 But if the slayer shall at any time 
come without the border of the city of his 
refuge, whither he was fled; 

27 And the revenger of blood find him 
without the borders of the city of his ref- 
uge, and the revenger of blood kill the 
slayer; the shall not bo guilty of blood : 

28 Because he should have remained in 
the citv of his refuge until the death of 



• Heh. a 


itonr of the 


hand, a 


•(•r. 21,24 


27 


T)eiit. 19 


R, 


2; 


Jo»l..50:3, 


\ bGen.4 


!>,»; 2S.im 


.■i:27; 20: 


10: 


IKi 


ngs, 2 : 


■»!, 


12; 


Prov. ih-.U. c Ex. 21 


14; DeuL 10: 11. i 


ver. 12 


Jooll 


2(i 


:«, 


• Ex. 29: 7 


Lev. 21 : 10 


t Heb. Fi< 


Mood HhMhK 


toh 


m F.x 


.23 


:2. 


r chnp. 27 : 


n. e Deut. 17:6; 19 


.IS; .M»t 


18. 


1«; 


2 Cor. 


13 


1; 



27. Not be guilty of blood; not be punished as 
a murderer. 

^4. / the Lord dwell among the children of 
Tsrnel ; this he did in a peculiar manner, and espe- 
cially by the visible manifestations of his presence 
and glory. 

INSTRUCTIO.VS. 

7. A comfortable maiiilenance for the ministers 
of relifjion and their families is required hy (xod in 
the Old Testament and in the New. 1 Cor. 9 : 14. 

12. He who is charged with killing; a man, or is 
supposed to have done it. should have a speedy and 
fair trial. If he with rnalice intended to kill him, 
he is a murderer, and should himself be put to death. 
If he did not, he should be acquitted. 

24. The intention and the feelings with which an 
ivction is done give it its cliariR-ter. Two men 
may sometimes perform the same outward act, and 
228 



thehigh-priesi; but after the death *b.'!:^ 
of the high-priest the slayer shall return 
into the land of his possession. 

29 So these things shall be for a statute 
of ""judgment unto you throughout your 
generations in all your dwellings. 

.30 Whoso killeth any person, the mur- 
derer shall be put to death by the mouth 
of witnesses :s but one witness shall not 
testify against any person to cause him 
to die. 

31 ^Moreover ye shall take no satisfac- 
tion for the life of a murderer, which is 
guilty + of death: but he shall be surely 
put to death. 

32 And ye shall take no satisfaction for 
him that is fled to the city of his refuge, 
that he should come again to dwell in the 
land, until the death of the priest. 

33 So ye shall not pollute the land where- 
in ye are: for blood it '' defileth the land : 
and Mhe land cannot be cleansed of the 
blood that is shed therein, 'but by the 
blood of him that shed it. 

34 Defile ■> not therefore the land which 
ye shall inhabit, wherein I dwell : for ''I 
the Lord dwell among the children of 
Israel. 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

1 The inconvenience of the inheritance of daughters 
5 is remedied by marrying in their own tribes. 7 lest 
the inheritance should be removed from the tribe. 10 
The daughters of Zelopheliad marry their father's 

brothers' sons. 

AND the chief fathers of the families 
of the children of 'Gilead, the son of 
Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the fam- 
ilies of the sons of Joseph, came near, and 
spake before Moses, and before the prin- 
ces, the chief fathers of the children of Is- 
rael : 

2 And they said, The Lord '"commanded 
my lord to give the land for an inheritance 
by lot to the children of Israel : and " my 
lord was commanded by the Lord to give 

Ht:b.lO:28. f H>-\>./ault!/ to die. h 2 King^, 24 : 4 ; I'sa. lOK: 38; 
Micali 4:11; Mat. 23 : 31-3.'i. % Het). there am be no expiation 
for the land, i Gen. a : 6. i Lev. 18 : 2fi ; Deut. 21 : 23. k Ex. 
29 : 4.'i, 4t> ; 1 Kinpt, 6:13; 2 Onr. 6 : 1 K. I clinp. 26 : 29. » chnp. 
26 : .% ; K) ; .14 ; .loab. 17:3. n cliap. 27 : 1-7. 

one be guilty and the other innocent. Careful dis- 
crimination should therefore be made in such cases, 
and each treated according to the true character of 
his deeds. 

.'$3. Murder is a great crime, not only against the 
person who is killed, but against the community 
and against God. It pollutes the land, and exposes 
those who dwell in it to the judgnieuts of God. 
This exposure cannot be removed without the death 
of the murderer. Hence, it becomes a public duty 
to put him to death. Instead of being, as some 
contend, wrong, it is required by God, and is es- 
sential in order to escape his judginents. By pro- 
tecting criminals we oecome partikers in their 

I guilt, and expose ourselves to share in their pun- 
ishment. 

CHAPTER XXXVT. 

1 2. Commanded by the Lord ; chap. 27 : 7. 



Of the marriage 



DEUTERONOMY I. 



of heiresses. 



a-c.'uT.' the inheritance of Zelophehad onr 
brother unto his daughters. 

3 And if they be married to any of the 
sons of the other tribes of the children of 
Israel, then shall their inheritance be tak- 
en from the inheritance of our fathers, 
and shall be put to the inheritance of the 
tribe * whereunto they are received : so 
Khali it be taken from the lot of our inher- 
itance. 

4 And when the "jubilee of the children 
of Israel shall be, then shall their inher- 
itance be put unto the inheritance of the 
tribe whereunto they are received : so shall 
their inheritance be taken away from the 
inheritance of the tribe of our fathers. 

5 And Moses commanded the children 
of Israel according to the word of the 
Lord, saying, The tribe of the sons of Jo- 
seph hath said ''well. 

6 This is the thing which the Lord doth 
command concerning the daughters of Ze- 
lophehad, saying, Let them t marry to 
whom they think best; ''only to the fam- 
ily of the tribe of their father shall they 
marry. 

7 So shall not the inheritance of the 
children of Israel remove from tribe to 



tribe : for every one of the children of 
Israel shall J keep ''himself to the inheri- 
tance of the tribe of his fathers. 

8 And " every daughter, that possesseth 
an inheritance in any tribe of the chil- 
dren of Israel, shall be wife unto one of 
the family of the tribe of her father, that 
the children of Israel may enjoy every 
man the inheritance of his fathers. 

9 Neither shall the inheritance remove 
from one tribe to another tribe ; but every 
one of the tribes of the children of Israel 
shall keep himself to his own inheritance. 

10 Even ""as the Lord commanded Mo- 
ses, so did the daughters of Zelophehad : 

11 For eMahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, 
and Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of 
Zelophehad, were married unto their fa- 
ther's brothers' sons: 

1 2 And they were married ^ into the fam- 
ilies of the sons of Manasseh the son of 
Joseph, and their inheritance remained in 
the tribe of the family of their father. 

13 These are the commandments and 
the judgments, which the Lord command- 
ed, by the hand of Moses, unto the chil- 
dren of ""Israel in the plains of Moab by 
Jordan near Jericho. 



THE FIFTH BOOK OF MOSES, 



DEUTERONOMY. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 Moses' speech in the end of the fortieth year, briefly 
rehearsing the story 6 of (iod's promise, 13 of pivini; 
them offi.'ers, 19 of sending the spies to search the 
land, 34 of God's anger for tlieir incredulity, 41 and 
disobedience. 

THESE be the words which Moses spake 
unto all Israel on 'tRis side Jordan in 
the wilderness, in the plain over against 
the II Red sea, between Paran, and To- 



* Heh. unto whom they shall be. 
47:7. t Heb. *e tciiw. c ver. 1: 
X Heb cltavc to. i 1 Kings, il : 3. 



. ■•5 ; 10, etc. b cb.ip. 
.■<is-.M:ri: iCor. fi: u. 
on. ii-.li. faChrun. 



13. Thejiidgntevts; decisionsof God concerning 
the duties, rights, and privileges of his people. The 
plains of Moab : on the east side of Jordan, over 
agtiinst Jericho The Moabites had once possessed 
this country. It was afterwards taken by the Amo- 
rites, and was now in possession of the Israelites, 
yet it still retained it.s ancitnt name. Chap. 22: 1. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. It is well to foresee evils to M-hich we are ex- 
posed, and as far as practicable, by the use of proper 
ine.ans. to provide against them. 

8. The regulation.? of the Jews, which were de- 



phel, and Laban, and Hazcroth, and Diz- 
ahab. 

2 There are eleven days' journey from 
Horeb by the way of mount Seir unto 
Kadesh-barnea. 

3 And it came to pass in the fortieth 
year, in the eleventh month, on the first 
day of the month, that Moses spake unto 
the children of Israel, according unto all 



W: 1-2. B chap. 27: 1. % Heb. to siime 
h clwp. -26:3; 33:50. i Josli. 9:1, 10. 



tb.it were of the familitl. 
II Or, Sxiph. 



signed to make and keep them a peculiar people. 
separate from other nations, are in the Christian 
dispensation done away. All nations now are con- 
sidered as one family ; marriage and other connec- 
tions maybe formed with the itili.abitants of different 
countries, the gospel should be preached to all, .and 
individuals and nations do to others as they ought 
to wish that others should do to them. 

CHAPTER I. 
1. The Red sea; sea is not in the original; and 
the word Suph, translated Red, is supposed to be 
229 



Hoses' rehearsal of 



DEUTERONOMY I. 



the Israelites^ pilgrimage. 



Ihatthe Loud had given him in command- ' 17 Ye shall not i! respect ' persons *«. "•: m^: 
mcnt unto Ihcm; | in judgment; i;i< ye shall hear the small as 

4 After he had *slain Sihon the king of : well as the great; yc shall not be "'afraid 
the Amoritcs, which dwelt in llcshbon, 'of the face of man; for the "judgment is 
and Oil tiic king of Bashan, which dwelt [ God's : and the cause that is too hard for 



at Astaroth in Edrei : 

5 On this side Jordan, in the land of Moab, 
began Moses to declare this law, saying, 

(5 The Loud our God spake unto us in 
Horcb,'' saying, Ye have dwelt longcnough 
in this mount: 

7 Turn ''you, and lake your journey, 
and go to Ihe mount of the Amorites, and 
unto * all the places nigh Ihereunto, in the 
plain, in the hills, and in the vale, and in 
the south, and by the seaside, to the land 
of the Canaanites, and unto Lebanon, unto 
the great ri^^cr, the river Euphrates. 



you, bring it unto me, and I will hear it. 

18 And I commanded you at that time 
all the things which ye should do. 

19 ^[And when we departed from Horeb, 
we "went through all that great and ter- 
rible P wilderness, which ye saw by the 
way of the mountain of the Amorites, as 
the Loud our (Jod commanded us; and 
we icame to Kadcsh-barnca. 

20 And I said unto you. Ye arc come 
unto the mountain of the Amorites, which 
the Lord our God doth give unto us. 

21 Behold, the Lord thy God hath set the 



8 Behold, I have t set the land before land before thee : go up and possess it, as 



you: go in and possess the land which 
the Lord '' sware unto your fathers, Abra- 
ham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give unto them 
and to their seed after them. 

9 ^And I spake unto you at that time, 
saying, I ''am not able to bear you myself 
alone : 

10 The Loud your God hath multiplied 
you, and behold, yc are this day as the 
stars ""of heaven for multitude. 

11 (The "Lord God of your fathers make 
you a thousand times so many more as ye 
arc, and bless you, as he hath promised 
you !) 

12 How ""can I myself alone bear your 
cumbrance, and your burden, and your 
strife? 

1 .3 Take? you wise men, and understand- 
ing, and known among your tribes, and I 
will make them rulers over you. 

14 And ye answered me, and said. The 
thing which thou hast spoken is good for 
us to do. 

15 So I 'took the chief of your tribes, 
wise men, and known, and hnade thorn 
heads over you, captains over thousands, 
and captains over hundreds, and captains 
over fifties, and captains over tens, and 
odiccrs amonii your tribes. 

If) And I charsod your judges at that 
time, saying, Hear the ra n scs hc\\y can your 
brelliren, and 'judne righteously between 
every man and his brother, and the '' stran- 
ger that is with him. 



m Num. 2l:24,^i; Joslum 13:1-2. k F.».a:l. c Kx. 1(1:1; 
Num. 10:11. ' Hvh. all hit ncithhort. t Huh. piVr n. d Gen. 
18:7; il:!!;-^: ;ii::l, 4; W: l:!, M. • T.x. 18: IS; Num. 11: H. 

. 1(1:22; Orncum 1.^:5. t 2 Sara. ^ : S. h 1 Klng«, 3: T-9. 

.gioe. i Ei. 18:25. ^HfS.yarf. j chnp. Id : 18; .lolm 



t rl.nn. 1 
t Hrb.i 



the name of a place, like Paran, Tophe), Laban, 
Hazcrotli, and Dizahab, all in or near tlic plains of 
Mo;ib. where tiie Israelite.s were encamped. 

4. Si/,07l—0>,fl Orr; NuiTl. 2 ! : 2 1-3'). 

0. I lore!) ; the ;,fen'-ral name of the mountains, 
of which Sinai was one. Num. 10: 11-13. 
230 



the Loud God of thy fathers hath said unto 
thee; fear not, neither be discouraged. 

22 Tf And ye came near unto me every 
one of you, and said. We will send men 
before us, and they shall search us out 
the land, and bring us word again by what 
way we must go up, and into what cities 
we shall come. 

23 And the saying pleased me well ; and 
I' took twelve men of you, one of a tribe : 

24 And they turned and went up into 
the mountain, and came unto the valley 
of Eshcol, and searched it out. 

25 And they took of the fruit of the land 
in their hands, and brought it down unto 
us, and brought us word again, and said. 
It is a good land which the Lord our God 
doth give us. 

26 Notwithstanding "ye would not go 
up, but rebelled against the commandment 
of the Lord your God: 

27 And ye murmured in your tents, and 
said. Because the Lord 'hated us, he hath 
brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, 
to deliveriis into the hand of the Amo- 
rites, to destroy us. 

28 Whither shall we go up? our breth- 
ren have * discouraged our heart, saying. 
The people ?.s- "greater and taller tlian we; 
the cities are great ami walled up to heav- 
en ; and moreover we have seen the sons 
of the ''Anakim there. 

29 Then I said unto you, Dread not, 
neither be afraid of them. 

. l!i:l.S: 



7 : 24. k I,e». 24 : 22. || Hcb. acknowledge facet. I Lc 
Prov. 24 : 23 ; .^a^. 2:1. n, .Icr. 1:17. n 2 Climn. 19 : K. " Num. 
10:12. p cliap. 8:1.1: 32:10: Jrr. 2: fi. <|Num.l3:2H. r Num. 
13:3, etc. • Num. 14:1, <:tr.; Psalm 106 : 24. 2.'-,. Irliap. 9:28. 
* Heh. melleit. Jo»li. 2:11. <■ clinp. 9:1,2. v Num. 13:28,3.% 

8. Unto your fathers; Gen. 12:7; 1.3:14,15; 
15:lfi; 17:7, 8. 

10. As the stars of heaven; very numerous. 
9-18. Evhrs over yon ; Ex. IS f 17-26. 
19-21. Kndesh-hnrnea ; Num. 13:26. 
22-45. Ye would not go up; Num. 14 : 2-45. 



Moses rehear scih the 



DEUTERONOMY II. 



story of their •pilgrimage. 



B-aNsf 30 The Loud your God which 
goeth before you, '"he shall fight for you, 
according to all that he did for you in 
Egypt before your eyes ; 

31 And in the wilderness, where thou 
hast seen how that the Lord thy God 
bare'' thee, as a man doth bear his son, 
in all the \tay that ye went, until ye came 
into this place. 

.32 Yet in this thing yc did ""not believe 
the Lord your God, 

.S3 Who "* went in the way before you, to 
search'^ you out a place to pitch your tents 
in, in fire by night, to show you by what 
M^ay ye should go, and in a cloud by day. 

34 And the Lord heard the voice of your 
words, and was wroth, and ""sware, saying, 

35 Surely e there shall not one of these 
men of this evil generation see that good 
land, which I sware to give unto your 
fathers, 

36 Rave Caleb the son of .lephunneh ; 
he shall see it, and to him will I give the 
land that he hath trodden upon, and to his 
children, because he hath * wholly fol- 
lowed the Lord. 

37 Also ''the Lord was angry with me 
for your sakes, saying. Thou also shalt 
not go in thither : 

38 But 'Joshua the son of Nun, which 
staudeth before thee, he shall go in thith- 
er: i encourage him; for lie shall cause 
Israel to inherit it. 

39 Moreover'' your little ones, which ye 
said should be a prey, and your children, 
which in that day had no 'knowledge 
between good and evil, they shall go in 
thither, and unto them will I give it, and 
they shall possess it. 

40 But as for you, ""turn you, and take 



• Ex. 14:H,2;i; NeIi.4:-20; nom.8:r!7. !• rliap.33 : U, 12; Ex. 
19:4; Isa. 40 : 1 1 ; 4fi:3; 63:9; Hoseii U :3; Acts 13: 18. c Psa. 
infi:'24: Heb. 3: 18: .TuileS. d Ex. 1.3 : Jl, iJ. e Num. 10:33; 
Kzek. CO:*, r chap. 2 : 14, 1."). e Num. 14 : i-2, etc. * Heh.ful- 
filled to go a/Ur. h chap. 3 : M-Sfi ; 4:21; 34 : 4 ; Num. 20 : 12 ; 

44. The Ainorites ; supposed to be included 
.imong the Canaaiiites, who united with the Ama- 
lekites. in opposing Israel. Num. 14 : 4.'). 

46. Ill Kadesh many days ; Nurfi. 20: 1-22. 
IXSTRUCTIOX.'^. 

3. Men who have spent their life in the service 
of (rod. as they draw near its close may often with 
great advantage recount the goodness of God, and 
repeat his commands to those around them. 

11. As good men draw near to heaven, they pos- 
sess, and often manifest an unusual degree of the 
spirit of heaven, in earnest desires, fervent prayers, 
and benevolent efforts for the good of others. 

17. Magistrates are God's ministers to execute 
tiiat part of his government which concerns the 
temporal rights of men, and as such are bound to be 
candid and impartial; to decide and act in the fear 
and love of God, and according to truth and duty. 

21. (rreat courage is needful in order to be will- 
ing, under all circumstances, to obey God. 

30. None will have courage enough to obey God, 
except those who put their trust in him. 



your journey into the wilderness by the 
way of the Red sea. 

41 Then "yc answered and said unto 
me. We have sinned against the Loud, we 
will go up and fight, according to all that 
the Lord our God commanded us. And 
when ye had girded on every man his 
weapons of war, ye were ready to go up 
into the hill. 

42 And the Lord said unto me. Say unto 
them, Go not up, neither fight; for I am 
not "among you ; lest yc be smitten be- 
fore your enemies. 

43 So I spake unto you; and ye would 
not hear, but rebelled against the com- 
mandment of the Lord, a)id twent pre- 
sumptuously up into the liill. 

44 And the Amorites, which dwelt in 
that mountain, came out against you, and 
chased you, as p bees do, and destroyed 
you in Seir, even vmto Hormah. 

45 And ye returned and wept before the 
Lord; but the Lord would not hearken 
to your voice, nor givp ear unto you. 

46 So T ye abode in Kadesh many days, ac- 
cording unto the days that ye abode there. 

CHAPTER II. 

I The story is continued, that tliey were not to meddle 
with the Edomites, 9 nor with the Moabites, 17 nor 
with the Ammonites, 24 but Sihon the Amorite was 
subdued by them. 

THEN we turned, and took our journey 
into tli,e wilderness by the way of the 
Red sea, as '' the Lord spake unto me : and 
we compassed mount Seir many days. 

2 And the Lord spake unto me, saying, 

3 Ye have compassed this mountain 
long' enough: turn you northward. 

4 And command thou the people, say- 
ing, *Ye are to pass through the coast of 



27:13,14; Psa. 10ti:3.'. i Num. 14:30; 27: 18-2.3. j rhup.3l :7,23. 
kNum.l4:31. IKniii.9:ll. mNHm.l4::5. n Num. 14: 40, etc 
o .loshua 7; 12, 1.3. f Heh. ye were presumptuous and went up. 
pP8.a.US:12. q Num. 14: i."!; 20: 1. 22 ; Judg. 11 : 17. r chap 
1:40; Num. 14:2.i. ' ver. 7, 14. t Num. 20: 14. 

34. God is angry with those who are afraid to 
obey him. 

37. To please God, men must be careful not to 
bo,ast of their own power ; or take the glory of what 
they do to themselves. As they have nothing good 
but what God gives them, the glory of their doing 
good all belongs to him. 

30. Little children are objects of God's peculiar 
kindness and care ; and though the sins of parents 
may occasion tliem great trouble, yet by loving and 
obeying their Father in heaven they may be deliv- 
ered from all sorrow, and inherit pure and ever- 
lastingjoys. 

4-') Men often weep in view of the evils they 
have brought on themselves, when it is too late to 
escape them. They must trust in and obey God, 
if they would avoid deep and unavailing sorrow. 

CHAPTER II. 

1. Moini.t Seir; a range of mountains running 
from near the south end of the Dead sea, towardS 
the eastern branch of the Red sea. 

231 



Moses rehearseth the 



DEUTERONOMY II. stonj of their pilgrimage. 



your brethren the children of Esau, which 
dwell in Seir; and they shall be afraid of 
you : take ye good heed unto yourselves 
therefore : 

5 Meddle not with them; for I will not 
give you of their land, *no, not so much 
as a footbreadth; because "I have given 
mount Seir unto Esau for a possession. 

6 Ye shall buy meat of Iheni for money, 
that yc may eat ; and ye shall also buy water 
of them for money, that ye may drink. 

7 For the Lord thy God hath blessed 
thee in all the ''works of thy hand: he 
knoweth thy walking through this great 
wilderness: these "^ forty years the Lord 
thy God hath been with thee; thou hast 
lacked nothing. 

8 And ''when we passed by from our 
brethren the children of Esau, which 
dwelt in Seir, through the way of the 
plain from "Elath, and from Ezion-geber, 
we turned and passed by the way of the 
wilderness of Moab. 

9 And the Lord sg,id unto me, * Distress 
not the Moabites, neither contend with 
ihcm in battle : for I will tiot give thee of 
their land for a possession; because I 
have "^given Arunto the ^children of Lot 
for a possession. 

10 The "^ Emim dwelt tlierein in times 
past, a people great, and many, and tall, 
as the 'Anakiin ; 

11 Whicli also were accounted giants, 
as the Anakim; but the Moabites call 
them Einim. 

12 The Horim alsodwelt in Seir before- 
time ; but tlie children of Esau t succeeded 
them, when they had destroyed them from 
before them, and dwelt in their ^ stead; as 
Israel did unto the land of his possession, 
which the Lord gave unto them. 

13 Now rise up, said I, and get you over 
the 1! brook ''Zered. And we went over 
the brook Zered. 

14 And the space in which we 'came 
from Kadesh-barnea, until we were come 
over the ' brook Zered, wvLs-tliirty and eiglit 
years ; until '"all the generation of the men 
of war were wasted out from among the 
host, as "the Lord swarc unto them. 



15 For indeed the "hand of the *b.^ ;5S: 
Lord was against them, to p destroy tliem 
froiTi among the host, until they were 
consumed. 

16 11 So it came to pass, when all the 
men of war were consumed and dead from 
among the people, 

1 7 That the Lord spake unto me, saying, 

18 Thou art to pass over through Ar, 
the coast of Moab, this day : 

19 And ichen thou comest nigh over 
against the children of Ammon, distress 
them not, nor meddle with them : for I 
will not give thee of the land of the chil- 
dren of Ammon any possession ; because 
I have given it unto the children of i Lot 
for a possession. 

20 That also was accounted a land of 
giants : giants dwelt therein in old time ; 
and the Ammonites call them ^ Zamzum- 
mim ; 

21 A people "^great, and many, and tall, 
as the Anakim; but the Lord destroyed 
them before them; and they succeeded 
them, and dwelt in tVieir stead: 

22 As he did to the children of Esau, 
which dwelt in Seir, wlien he destroyed 
the "Horim from before them; and they 
succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead 
even unto this day : 

23 And the 'Avim wliieli dwelt in 11a- 
zerim, even unto "Azzah, the * Caphtorim, 
which came forth out of Caphtor, destroy- 
ed them, and dwelt in their stead. 

24 % Rise ye up, take your journey, and 
pass "over the river Arnon : behold,! have 
given into thy hand Sihon the Amorite, 
king of Heshbon, and liis land : -begin to 
possess it, and contend with liim in battle. 

25 This day will I begin to put the dread 
of thee and the "fear of thee upon the 
nations that arc under the whole lieaven, 
who shall hear report of thee, and shall 
tremble, and be in anguish because of thee. 

26 ^ And I sent messengers out of the 
wilderness of Kedemoth unto Sihon king 
of He.shboji with words of ^ peace, saying, 

27 Let^me pass through thy land : I will 
go along by the highway, 1 will neither 
turn unto the right hand nor to the left. 



• Hfh. rvtn III the treading of the Male of the f oat. • Gen. Sli : « ; 
JokIi.'2'4:4. b PBa.<)0:17. r (Imp. 8:2-4 i M:fi; Np1i.>):-.M ; I.iikp 
»2:.1.-.. <• .liidg. I1:IK. I Kingn, «:26. \ Or, Ole no hattility 
agninit Moal: f Num. 21 : 28. e Oen. 19: TO. :t7. ■> Gen. M : fl. 
■> clil«|. !):2; Num. I5:2-2,3.1. iGen.l4:6. t Hi^i. inherited Ihem. 
^ Or, rm.m. II Or.iKiWfv. k Nuni.21 : 1-.'. I Num. i:i: '.'i;. * Or, 



8. Tilath, and — TSzion-geher ; pl.ooes at the 
north end of the eiistern branch of the Red sea. 

9. Ar ; the capital of Moab, about twenty-five 
miles soutli of the river Arnon. Num. 21 : IS-l."). 

10. Eiiiim; tl eancient inhabil.inl.<!of ihecountry 
which was afterwards possessed by the Moabites. 

14. Zered ; abrook which einjiues into the south- 
east part of the Dead sea. 

19. The chilli re II of Ammon ; on tiie east of 
Jordan, nortli of llie Moabites. 
23-2 



vallc!/. m Kum.M:32.3:l: 2K:fi4. o rliai.. 1 ::H,3:.; Num. M :a'V: 
Psa. !«:ll; Exek. 20: l.'). o P«a. 78: .1:1; lOti: 2H. I> 1 Cor. 10:.'i. 
1 Geo. IfliWi-.W. t Zutim. Gen. [*:ri. rver. 10. iGi-n. 3fi:20, 
etc. 1 .losli. n : H. u .Jer. 2.''.:20. t Genesis 10: U ; Amo» 9: 7. 
w Nu!n.21: 13, 14; JuiIr 11:18,22. f Heh.beain. potteti. t Ei. 
1.1: 14-ir.; .I(i8li.2:9, 10. y rli.ip. 20: 10. « Num.21:21.22 



2.3. Ilazrrim ; a country south and so\itii-west 
of Gaza. Azzah; 'xaza. Caphtorim; the Phi- 
listines. Caphtor; supposed by some to be the 
island of Crete, in the Mediterranean ; and by otliers, 
a part of Egypt bordering on that sea. 

21. The river Arnon ; tlie northern boundary of 
the Moabites. Heshbon ; one of the cities of the 
Amoriles. 

26. The wilderness of Kedemoth ; awilderne.ss 
north of tiic river Arnon. 



The slory of their 



DEUTERONOMY III. conquest of Sihon and Og 



8:c.H6i: 28 Thou shall sell me meat for 
money, that I may eat ; and give me water 
for money, that I may drink; only I "will 
pass through on my feet: 

29 As *the children of Esau which dwell 
in Seir, and the Moabites which dwell in 
Ar, did unto me : until I shall pass over 
Jordan into the land which the Lord our 
God givetli us. 

30 But ''Sihon king of Heshbou would 
not let us pass by him : for the Lord thy 
God "^hardened his spirit, and made his 
heart obstinate, that he might deliver him 
into thy hand, as appearcth this day. 

31 And the Lord said unto me, Behold, 
I have begun to give Sihon and his land 
before thee : begin to possess, that thou 
mayest inherit his land. 

32 Then "* Sihon came out against us, he 
and all his people, to fight at Jahaz. 

33 And the Loud our God delivered him 
before us; and "'we smote him, and his 
sons, and all his people. 

34 And we took all his cities at that time, 
and utterly '^destroyed *the men, and the 
women, and the little ones, of every city, 
we left snone to remain: 

35 Only the cattle we took for a prey 
unto ourselves, and the spoil of the cities 
which we took. 

36 From ''Aroer, which is by the brink 
of the river of Arnon, and from the city 
that is by the river, even unto Gilead, 
there was not one city too strong for us : 
the 'Lord our God delivered all unto us : 

37 Only unto the land of the children of 
Ammon thou earnest not, nor unto any 
place of the river J Jabbok, nor unto the 
cities in the mountains, nor unto whatso- 
ever the Lord our God ''forbade us. 



• Num. 20:18. t>Nnm.21:2S. c Kl.4:-2I : U : 10; .losh. 11 :'20; 
Rom.9: 18,22. d Num '21 : W, -24. e cliap.SS: 7. f ch.20: 16; 29: 7. 
* Heb. ever;/ citi/ nf men, and women, and littlt onfS. e ch. 7:2,26. 
kcliaii.3:12;4:4B; .losli. 13:9. iPsa.44:3. iGen.3-2:22. k ver. 

30. Har/lejied his spirit ; by leaving him to 
follow his own wicked inclinations in fighting 
ag-ainst the Israelites. 

32. Jahaz ; a city near tlie northern frontier of 
the Moabites. 

36. Aroer ; a city on the north side of tlie river 
Arnon. Gilead; the country north of the A morites. 

37. Tlie land of the ch ildren of Am nioii ; east 
of the Ainorites. The river Jahbok ; that empties 
from the east into the Jordan, about thirty miles 
below the sea of Galilee. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 

.'). Nations, as well as individuals, are bound in 
all tilings to obey God ; and rulers are to be gov- 
erned, in public as well as private concerns, by his 
revealed will. 

9. The Lord claims, and in his providence exercises, 
the right of giving any and all portions of the earth 
to whomsoever he will. 

12. When the sins of one nation are full, and 
have ripened them for ruin, God in righteous judg- 
ment often sulfers another nation to destroy them 
and take possession of their country ; though none ! 



CHAPTER III. 

1 The story of the conquest of Oi; king of Bashan. 1 1 
The bigness of his bed. ]'2 The distribution of those 
lands to the two tribes and half. '£i Moses' prayer to 
enter into the land. 26 He is permitted to see it. 

THEN we turned, and went up the way 
to Bashan : and ' Og the king of Ba- 
shan came out against us, he and all his 
people, to battle at "' Edrci. 

2 And the Lord said unto me, "Fear him 
not: for I will deliver him, and all his 
people, and his land, into thy hand; and 
thou shall do unto him as thou didst unto 
Sihon " king of the Amorites, which dwelt 
at Heshbon. 

3 So the Lord our God deliveied into 
our hands Og also, the king of Bashan, 
and all his people : and we smote him 
until none was left to him remaining. 

4 And we took all his cities at that time, 
there was not a city which we took not 
from them, threescore cities, all the region 
of PArgob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan. 

5 All these cities were fenced with high 
walls, gates, and bars ; beside unwalled 
towns a great many. 

6 Ami "iwe utterly destroyed them, as 
we did unto Sihon king of Heshbon, ut- 
terly destroying the men, women, and 
children, of every city. 

7 But ''all the cattle, and the spoil of the 
cities, we took for a prey to ourselves. 

8 And we took at that time out of the 
hand of the two kings of the Ainorites the 
land that ivas on this side Jordan, from the 
river of Arnon unto mount Herinon : 

9 Wliich "Hermon the Sidonians call 
Sirion ;' and the Amorites call it " Shenir ; 

1 All the cities of the plain, and all Gilead , 
and all "Bashan, unto Salchah and Edrei, 
cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan. 



6,9 


19. 


1 cliap 


29:7; 


Num.21 : 33-3.5 


m chap. 


I: 


4. n 2 Chrou. 


21): 


17. 


o Num 


21:24 


P 1 Kings, 4 


13. q cl 


ap 


2:31; 


Psalm 


135 


10 


12: 136: 


19-21. 


r.losh.ll:12,I4. » chap 


4 


48,49. 


t Psa. 


29: 


B. 


a 1 Chron. 5 : 23 


; Kze!<.27:,5. 


» Josb. 12 


:6 


; 13:11 





have a right to do this, except at the direction and 
under the guidance of God. 

23. As with individuals so with nations, they 
rise and fall in succession, according to the wise 
and good purposes of God. While the heart of man 
deviseth his way, the Lord directeth his steps ; and 
though there be many human devices, the counsel 
of the Lord that shall stand. Prov. 16 : 9 ; 19 : 21. 

30. If men continue to rebel against God, he will 
finally give them up, and suffer them to pursue their 
own chosen way of iniquity to their utter ruin. 

CHAPTER in. 

1. Bashan. ; a country north-east of Gilea<l. 
Edrei ; a chief city of Bashan. 

4. Argob ; a district of Bashan. 

8. Moinit Ileniion ; mount Lebanon consists 
of two nearly parallel ranges, extending along the 
eastern shore of the Mediterranean north of Pales- 
tine ; the eastern of these ranges, is called Anti-Leb- 
anon. Mount Herinou branches off from the south 
end of the Anti-Lebanon range, near the borders of 
Galilee. 



TTie distribution of lands 



DEUTERONOMY IV. 



east of the Jordan. 



1 1 For only 0;T king of Baslian remained of 
thercinuant of *i;ianis; buliold. liis bedstead 
was a bedstead of iron ; is it not in '' Rab- 
batliof (heeliildrenof Aintnon? nine cubits 
was the Icngtb tliercof, and four cubits the 
breadth of it, after the cubit of a man. 

12 And this land, ichicli wc possessed at 
that time, from ''Aroer, which is by the 
river Arnon, and half mount Gilead, and 
the cities thereof, gave I unto the Reuben- 
ites and to the Gadites. 

13 And "^ the rest of Gilead, and all Ra- 
shan, being the kin-^dom of Og, gave 1 unto 
the half tribe of Maiiasseh ; all the region 
of Argob, with all Bashan, which was 
called tlic land of giants. 

14 J air" the son of Manasseh took all 
the country of Argob unto the "^coasts of 
Geshuri and Maaehalhi ; and called them 
after his own name, Bashan-havoth-jair, 
unto this day. 

15 And I gave Gilead unto Machir. 

16 And unto the Reubenites and unto 
the Gadites I gave from Gilead even unto 
the river Arnon half t.he valley, and the 
border even unto the river Jabbok, ivhicli 
is the s border of the children of Amnion ; 

17 The plain also, and Jordan, and the 
coarii thereof, from ''Chinnereth even unto 
the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, un- 
der *Ashdoth-pisgah eastward. 

1 8 "[ And I commanded you at that time, 
saying. The Lou o your God hath given you 
this land to possess it: ' yc shall pass over 
arrncd before yourbrethrenthechildrcn of 
Israel, all that are t meet for the war. 

19 But your wives, and your little ones, 
and your cattle, {for I know that yc have 
much cattle,) shall abide in your cities 
which I have given you ; 

20 Until the Loud have given rest unto 
your brethren, as well as unto you, and 
until tliey also possess the land which the 



• AllKWj 


:H. b 2.S; 


m. 12 


2« 




c . 


0-1 


. 12:2 


Pti- 


; i:i 


9. etc 


* .Inal 


. i:i. 


W. e 1 Clir 


on 2: 


•2-2 


^ 


nm 


.^2 


.-an 


. r 


.Inslr 


I3:i:i; 


2 Sun. 


:i : :i 


10:fi. K .1 


l-h. !■• 


:-2 


X 


b 


N« 


m. :U : 


II 


* Or 




the >pi 


triffs 


n/ Pitgah, or thf hill. 


i 


Num. S2 : -20. 


ctr. 


t Hell. «,.nl 


OJPUV, 


'—. 


.losh. .'.'.■ 4. 


k N. 


m. 


27 


2-2 


•;:i. 


Il9» 


43: 


,2. 


n cimp. 



11. Of giants ; of the Rcpliaim or giants here 
spoken of. Nine cii/ilts ; thirteen and a half feet. 
Four cithits; six ftet. The. cnhit of a 'man; 
such as men use; about eighteen inches long. 

1-2-20. This land— gare T ; Num. :J-2 : 1-33. 

21. These twn kings ; Sihon .T,nd Og. 

26. The I ord was wruih : Num. 2(J : 7-12. 

27. Pisgak ; the top of Nebo, one of the sum- 
mits of innuiit Abarim. Num. 27 : 12-11. 

20. liilk-pfor ; nic.ining. house of Peor: a place 
in Moab noted for tiie worship of Peor, or Raal. 
INSTRUCTI0y.S. 

3. Wlien men refuse to take warning from the 
destruction of others, and rush on in the same course 
of transgression, they may expect to come to the 
same dreadful end. 

II. No human arm however strong, if employed 
agrtinst God, can ultimately succeed. God may 
sutler his opposers to prosper for a time, while he 
234 



Lord your God hath given them B.c.?5t?: 
beyond .Jordan : a.nd' then shall ye return 
every man unto his possession, which I 
have given you. 

21 "I And ''I commanded Joshua at that 
time, saying, Thine eyes liave seen all 
that the Loud your God hath done unto 
these two kings: so shall the Loud do unto 
all the kingdoms Avhither thou passcst. 

22 Ye shall not 'fear them: for '"the 
Loud your God he shall fight for you. 

23 And! besought tlie Loud at that time, 
saying, 

24 O Lord God, thou hast begun to show 
thy servant thy "greatness, and thy mighty 
hand : for what "God is there in heaven 
or in earth, that can do accordiug to thy 
works, and according to thy might? 

25 I pray thee, let me go over, and see 
the fgood land that is beyond Jordan, that 
goodly mountain, and Lebanon. 

2(j But the 1 Loud was wroth with me for 
your sakes, and would not hear me : and 
the Loud said unto me. Let it sutllce thee; 
speak no more unto me of this matter. 

27 Get thee up into the top of JPisgah, 
and lift up thine eyes westward, and 
north vvard, and southward, and eastward, 
and behold it with thine eyes : for thou 
shalt not go over this Jordan. 

28 Buf^charge Joshua, and encourage him, 
and strengthen liim: for he shall go over 
before this people, and he shall cause them 
to inherit the land which tliou shalt see. 

29 So we abode in the valley over against 
Beth-peor.' 

CIIAPTKR IV. 

1 An exhortation lo obedience. 41 Moses ap]iointet)i 
tlie three cities of refuge on that siJe JorJan. 

TVTOW therefore hearken, O Lsrael, unto 
_LN the 'statutes and unto the judgments, 
which I teach you, for to "do them, that 



1 ::!0; 20:4; Ex. 14: 14. n clmj 


11:2. o Ex. 1.'): 11 ; 


2S:im 7:22; 


I'sn. 71 : HI; HrtTS; 8H:6,8; Is:i 


40 : 28 : Dnn. 3 : 29. 


P Ex.3:a 


q Num. 20: 12; 27:13,14. t Or 


the hill, r ,1,:,|.. 1 


3S; 31 :3,7; 


Nnml)prs37: 18, 23. « cIkij.. 4 


41). t Lev. 19:37 


Psa. 119:4. 


u Elek.20:ll; Hum. 10:. 5. 







waits to be gracious; but if his goodness does not 
lead them to repentance, thev will perish. 

18. However great the elfbrts of the people of 
God in obedience to his command, their successes 
are to be ascribed to him, not to their own wisdom, 
goodness, or power. 

20. With sue!) earthly good things .as in the use 
of proper means God sees fit to bestow, we should 
be content, and pray that sucli evils as our sins here 
bring mion us, may wean us from the world, quicken 
ns in duty, and prepare us for lieaven. 

28. The good which we cannot do or enjoy, we 
should rejoice to have done and enjoyed by others ; 
and we should be really in all proper ways to aid 
them in doing and enjoying it. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1. Statutes and — judgments ; the laws which 
God gave the Israelites concerning his worship 
and their social and civil duties. Ver. 14. 



Moses exhorteth the 



DEUTERONOMY IV. 



people to obedience. 



B.c!'i4of' ye may live, and go in and possess 
the land which the Lord God of your 
fathers giveth you. 

2 Ye" shall not add unto the word which 
I command you, neither shall ye diminish 
aught from it, that ye may keep the com- 
mandments of the Lord your God which 
I command you. 

3 Your eyes have seen what the Lord did 
because of ''Baal-peor : for all the "= men 
that followed Baal-peor, the Lord thy God 
hath destroyed them from among you. 

4 But ye that did '* cleave unto the Lord 
yourGod are alive every oneof you thisday. 

5 Behold, '"I have taught you statutes 
and judgments, even as the Lord my God 
commanded me, that ye should do so in 
the land whither ye go to possess it. 

6 Keep therefore and do them; for this is 
your •" wisdom and your understanding in 
the sight of the nations, which shall hear all 
these statutes, and say, ^ Surely this great 
nation /.v a wise and understanding people. 

7 For what '' nation is there so great, who 
hath God .so nigh unto them, as the Lord 
our God is in all things that we call upon 
him fur 1 

8 And what ' nation is there so great, that 
hath statutes and judgments so righteous 
as all this law, which I set before you 
this day 1 

9 Only take heed to thyself, and Jkeep 
thy soul diligently, ''lest thou forget the 
things which thine eyes have seen, and 
lest they depart from thy heart all the 
days of thy life ; but ' teach them thy sons, 
and thy sons' sons ; 

10 Specially the ""day that thou stoodest 
before the Lord thy God in Horeb, when 
the Lord said unto me. Gather me the peo- 
ple together, and I will make them liearmy 
words, that they may learn to " fear me all 
the days that they shall live upon the earth, 
and that they may teach their children. 

1 1 And ye came near and stood under 
the mountain; and the mountain burned 
with tire unto the 'midst of heaven, with 
darkness, clouds, and thick darkness. 

12 And the Lord spake unto you out of 
the midst of the fire: ye heard the voice 



» chap. 12:32; Rev. 22:18,19. h Num.2.->: 1-9; Psa. 106: 28,2M. 
e Nnm.2fi:64. d Joshua 2.1 : 8; Aits 11:23. e Prov. 22 : 19, 20. 
f .Iob28::R: Psa.l9:7; Ul:IO: Prov.l:7. 6 Pan. 1 19:99. h2S:im. 
7:2:i. i P...a.l47:19,20. irrnv.4:13. k Prov.S: 1 ; 4:21. 1 chap. 
fi:7;Il:19:Psa.78:.V7iEpIi.6:4. m Kx.rhs. 19,20. n Eccl. 12: l:i. 
* Ufh. heart. \ Hob. tave a voice. " 1 Kings, 19: 12; Is.l. 30:21. 



3. What the Lord did; Num. 25 : 1-9. 

6. Yo7ir wisdom and yoitr understanding ; 
it woiiUl promote their reputation for wisdom arid 
understanding among other nations. 

10-1 :]. In ITorrb: E.v. ciis. 19, 20. 

11. Statitt-'s and judgments; Ex. 21, 22, 2-3. 

19. God hath divided : he liad given the bene- 
fit of tlie heavenly bodies to all nations, as well as 
to the Israelites. 



of the words, but saw no similitude ; t only 
ye heard a "voice. 

13 And he declared unto you his cove- 
nant, which he commanded you to per- 
form, even p ten commandments ; and "i he 
wrote them upon two tables of stone. 

14 Tl And the ''Lord commanded me at 
that time to teach you statutes and judg- 
ments, that ye might do them in the land 
whither ye go over to possess it. 

15 T.ake •■'ye therefore good heed unto 
yourselves; for ye saw no manner of 'si- 
militude on the day ^/t«M he Lord spake unto 
you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire ; 

1 6 Lest ye " corrupt yourselves, and make 
you a graven image, the similitude of any 
figure, the "likeness of male or fciDale, 

17 The likeness of any ''beast that is on 
the earth, the likeness of any winged fowl 
that llicth in the air, 

18 The likeness of any thing that creep- 
cth on the ground, the likeness of any fish 
that is in the waters beneath the earth: 

1 9 And lest thou " lift up thine eyes unto 
heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and 
the moon, and the stars, even all the host 
of heaven, shouldest be driven to*' worshfp 
them, and serve them, which the Lord 
thy God hath t divided unto all nations 
under the whole heaven. 

20 But the Lord hath taken you. and 
brought you forth outof the 'iron furnace, 
even out of Egypt, to be unto him a peo- 
ple of "inheritance, as ye are this day. 

21 Furthcrmore''thc Lord was angry with 
me for your sakes, and sware that I should 
not go over Jordan, and that I should not go 
in unto that good land, which the Lord thy 
God giveth thee /or an inheritance: 

22 But I must die in this land, I must 
not go over Jordan : but ye shall go over, 
and possess that good land. 

23 Take '^heed vinto yourselves, lest ye 
forget the covenant of the Lord yourGod, 
which he made with you, and make you 
a graven image, or the likeness of any 
thing, which the Lord thy God hath for- 
bidden thee. 

24 For the Lord thy God 25 a consuming 
fire,'' even a "'jealous God. 



P Ex. 34 :2a. q Ex. 31: 18. r Kx. cli. 21,et<-. > .losli 2:!: II; P»ii. 
119:9. tisa. 40:18. iiEx.32:7. » Ex. 20 : 4, .">. wKom.l:2:v 
y. .1ol> 31 :26,27. y th.ip. 17:3; 2Kings, 17: IH. J Or, imparted 
« 1 King.<, 8:.51; .Ter. 11:4. a cliap. 9: 29; 32:9; Eph. 1 ; la 
b Num. 20:12. ever. 1.1, Irt. d clj;»ii. 9:3; Heb. 12:29. « Ex 
20 : 5 ; N.ihum 1:2; Zeph. 3 : 8. 



20. The iron furnace ; the great oppression and 
hardship of tlieir state of bondage. A people of in- 
heritance; hispeculiarpenple, and heirs of his favor. 

22. This land; ver. 46. 

23. The covenant ; E.x. 20 : 4. 5. ^ 

24. Consuming fire — a jealous God ; one who 
is greatly displeased with those who give to others 
what is due only to liimself, and if they do not re- 
pent, will destroy them. Ver. 26. 

235 



Warning against idolatry. DEUTERONOMY IV 



Three cities of refuge. 



and children's children, and ye shall liave great fire; and thou heardet-t his words 
remained long in the land, and shall cor- out of the midst of the fire. 
rupti/o»rsc/rf,v, and make a graven image, I 37 And because ihe loved thy fathers, 
or the likeness of any thing, and shall do therefore he chose their seed after them, 
evil in the sight of the Lord thy God, to ' and brongiit thee out in his sight with his 
provoke' him to anger; j mighty'' power out of Egypt; 

26 I ''call heaven and eartli to witness I 38 To drive out nations from before thee 
against you this day, that ye shall soon greater" and mightier than thou art, to 
utterly perish from off the land whereunto bring thee in, to give thee their land for 
ye go over Jordan to possess it; ye shall I an inheritance, as it is this day. 

not prolong your days upon it, but shall 39 Know therefore this day, and 'con- 
utterly be destroyed. j sider it in thy heart, that "the Lord he is 

27 And the Lord shall "^scatter you God in heaven above, and upon the earth 
among the nations, and ye shall be left beneath: there is none else. 



few in number among the heathen, whith- 
er the Lord shall lead you. 

28 And ''there ye shall serve gods, the 
work of mens hands, wood and stone, which 



40 Thou "shalt keep therefore his stat- 
utes, and his commandments, wliieh I 
command thee this day, that it may go 
well" with thee, and with tliv children 



neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell. ! after thee, and that thou mayest prolong 

29 But*" if from thence thou slialt aeek thy days upon tlie earth, which the Lord 
the Lord thy God, thou shall find him, if thy God giveth thee, for ever. 

thou seek him with ^all thy heart and 
with all thy soul. 

30 When thou art in tribulation, and all 
these things *are come upon thee, even in 
the s latter days, if thou turn to the Lord thy 
God, and shalt be obedient unto his voice ; 

31 (For the Lord thy God is a '■ merciful 
God;) he will not forsake thee, neither 
destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of 
thy fathers, which he sware unto them. 

32 For 'ask now of the days that are 
past, which were before thee, since the 
day that God created man upon the earth, 
and ask from the one side of heaven unto 
the other, whether there hath been any 
.w.ch thing as this great thing is, or hath 
been heard like it? 

33 Did ever people hear the voice of God 
speaking out of the midst of the Jfire, as 
thou ha.-^t heard, and live? 

34 Orhath God assayed to go an// take him 
a nation from the midst of anoiher nation, 
by I" temptations, by 'signs, and by wonders, 
and by war, and by a '"mighty hand, and 
by a"strctched-outarm,and by great "ter- 
rors, according to all that the Lord your 
God did for you in Egypt before your eyes? 

35 Unto thee it was showed, that thou 
mightest know that the Loud he is God; 
there is none else beside him. 

36 Out of P heaven he made thee to hear 
his voice, that he might instruct thee : and 

• SKinjn, 17: 17, etc.: I Cor. ]0:^. k clinp. DO: 18, 1'); Ik,. 
1:1; MIrali 6:2. c cli»|>. 28 : tW-M ; Lev. 2li : 3.3 ; Nell. 1 : 8 <> 
a .ler. IH: 1.3. « I-PV. aii:^^, 40; Jer. 3:l-2-U. ( Joel -2 : 1 i 
• Hvb. hnvt /nund litre. I! Jer. 2.1 : 20. h Paulrn 1 16:fl ; .lonnli 
■4:2. I.IotiH:«. j Ex. 19: 18, 19. kcllBr.a9:3. IE«.7:.3. 
■< Exotlu.i 13:3. n Elodu9l>:6. o cbnp. 34 : 12. pHeb. 1'2:2A. 

31. The covenant; Lev. 26:42-^5; Genesis 
15:1.1-21. 

34. Assayed; attempted. Temptations ; trials. 

35. None else ; no other living; or true God. 

36. Ilis great fire; Ex. 19:9-19. 

23(i 



4 1 *\\ Then Moses severed three cities on 
this side Jordan toward the sunrising; 

42 That ''the slayer might flee thither, 
which should kill his neighbor unawares, 
and hated him not in times past ; and that 
fleeing unto one of these cities he might live : 

43 Namely, ^ Bezer in the wilderness, in 
the plain country, of the Reubcnites ; and 
Ramoth in Gilead, of the Gadites; and 
Golan in Bashan, of the Manassites. 

44 TI And this is the law which Moses 
set before the children of Israel : 

45 These are the ^testimonies, and tin- 
statutes," and the ''judgments, which ]\Io- 
ses spake unto the children of Lsrael, 
after they came forth out of Egypt, 

46 On this side Jordan, in tlie ''valley 
over against Bcth-peor, in the land of Si- 
hon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at 
Heshbon, whom Moses and the children 
of Israel ^ smote, after they were come 
forth out of Egypt; 

47 And they possessed his land, and the 
land of Og king of Bashan, two kings of 
the Amorites, which ivere on this side Jor- 
dan toward the sunrising; 

48 From "Aroer, which is by the bank 
of the river Arnon, even unto mount Sion. 
which is '^Ilermon. 

49 And all the plain on this side Jordan 
eastward, even unto the sea of the plain, 
under the « springs of Pisgah. 

q <li:ip. 10 : \h ; .ler. 31:3. r Eioilus 13 : 3, 9, 14. • rliap. 7:1; 
9:1.2. I I.:,. 1:3; Ho»e.i 7:2. " .losli. 2:11; 1 Chron, 29 : 1 1 
»I.ev.22:31. w dmp. 5 : Iti; Epli.H:.3. xcliap.l9:4; Num. 
.3fi:ll. y Jo-ihiia 20 : 8. iPsa. 119:2. •Psn. 119:S. b P».i. 
119:7. crhiip.3:2U. H cliap. 1 : 4; Num. 21 :24, etc. f chap. 
2 : 36. f Pa.T. 133 : a c clinp. 3:17. 

41. Sei^ered ; set apart. 

48. Siou; called .ilso Sirion, which was another 
name for Hermon. Chap. 3 : 8, 9. 

40. Sea of the plaiji ; the Dead sea. Chap 
3:17. 



Moses rehearsetk 



DEUTERONOMY V. 



the ten comnmndmenti. 



J:c",r- CHAPTER V. 

1 The covenant in Horeb. 6 The ten commandments. 
22 At the people's request Moses receivelh the law 
from God. 

AND Moses called all Israel, and said 
unto them, Hear, O Israel, the stat- 
utes and judgments which I speak in your 
ears this day, that ye may learn them, and 
keep* and do them. 

2 The Lord our God made a * covenant 
with us in Horeb. 

3 The Lord made not this covenant with 
our fathers, but with ''us, even us, who 
are all of us here alive this day. 

4 The "^ Lord talked with you face to face 
in the mount out of ihe midst of the fire, 

5 (I ''stood between the Lord and you at 
that time, to show you the word of the 
Lord ; for ye were afraid by reason of the 
fire, and went not up into the mount,) 
saying, 

6 T[I ^am the Lord thy God, which 
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from 
the house of t bondage. 

7 Thou ""slialt have none other gods be- 
fore me. 

8 Thou s shalt not make thee any graven 
image, or any likeness of any thing that is 
in heaven above, or that is in the earth 
beneath, or that is in the waters beneath 
the earth : 

9 Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto 



* Heb. keep to do them, a Ex. 19 r 5-8; Heb. 8 : 9. b- c}iap. 
29:10-15. c Ex. 19:9, l«, 19: 20:18-M. A Ex. 24 : 2, 3 ; G:tl. 
3:19. < Ex. 2a:-2-17; I's:ilm 81 : 10. i lleh. servantt. f Mat. 
4:10. B cUap. 4 : I.V19. h Ex. 34:14. i Ex. 34 : 7; Jer. 32 : 18; 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Obeii'.ence to the laws of God is required by 
interest as well as by duty. 

2. We should take the testimony of God in his 
word as he has given it, and not be disposed in 
any respect to alter it. 

4. God often makes a difference in this world 
between the righteous and the wicked, and shows 
by his providence that godliness with contentment 
is great g.iin. 1 Tim. 1:8; 6:6. 

6. Obedience to God is the height of human wis- 
dom, and all who neglect his commandments are 
guilty of the greatest folly. Psa. 14 : 1. 

10. The object of God in the revelation of him- 
self, is not only to lead the present generation to 
love and serve him, but also to communicate a 
knowledge of !iis will to their children and children's 
cliildren, and thus perpetuate to all generations a 
people to his praise. 

16. Men arc strongly inclined to corrupt them- 
selves by worshipping idols; serving the creature 
and neglecting (he Cieator. 

S'i. True benevolence will teach a man earnestly to 
desire and diligently to labor, tiiat blessings of which 
he is deprived may, if consistent, be given to others. 

23. Men should be very careful to avoid every 
species of idolatry, and all appearance of worship- 
ping images, or giving th;it honor to them which 
belongs only to God. 

26. However great the goodness of God to any 
people, without obedience to Iiis laws they cannot 
prosper, but will become as distinguished for their 
calamities as they have been for his favors. 

16 



them, nor serve them : for I the Lord thy 
God am a ''jealous God, 'visiting the in- 
iquity of the fathers upon the children 
unto the third and fourth generation of 
them that hate me, 

10 And showing mercy unto thousands 
of them that love me and keep my com- 
mandments. 

1 1 Thou ' shalt not take the name of tho 
Lord thy God in vain : for the Lord will 
not hold him guiltless that taketh his name 
in vain. 

12 Keep'' the sabbath-day to sanctify it, 
as the Lord thy God hath commanded 
thee. 

13 Six days thou shalt labor, and do all 
thy Avork : 

14 But the seventh day is the 'sabbath 
of the Lord thy God : in it thou shalt not 
do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy 
daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy 
maid-servant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, 
nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger 
that is within thy gates ; that thy ""man- 
servant and thy maid-servant may rest as 
well as thou. 

1 5 And " remember that thou wast a ser- 
vant in the land of Egypt, and that tho 
Lord thy God brought thee out thence 
through a mighty hand and by a stretched- 
out arm : therefore the Lord thy God 
commanded thee to keep the sabbath-day. 



Dan 


inl I) 


4-9; 


M 


at. 23 


35 


3fi; 


Rom. 


11 : 


28. 29. 


i 


T,ev 


10 


12; 


l>sa 


139 


■20; 


Ian 


lesS 


12. 


Ic 


lea. 58 


:13 


; Eiek. 


20 


12. 


1 


iea 


2:2 


: He 


srews 4 


4. I 


n Exodus 23 : 1 


2. 


n chap. 


15 


:15 


16 


I'J; 


24: 


8, 2. 



























31. However great have been the iniquities of 
individuals or nations, and however dreadful their 
sufferings, if they repent and turn heartily to thi' 
Lord, he will have mercy upon them, and abun- 
dantly pardon. Isa. 55 : 7. 

37. The piety of parents is often the means of 
great blessings to their children; and if they are 
led to imitate their parents in loving and serving 
God, their ble.ssings will be eternal. 

40. All who wisely regard their own interes-', or 
that of their posterity, will hearken diligently to the 
voice of God, and heartily obey his commands. 

CHAPTER V. 

2. In Ilorch ; Ex. 19 : 3-6. 

3. Our fathrrs ; Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 

5. Any graven image, or any likeness; to 
bow down to, adore, or worship. 

11. 1)1 vain; without good reason. 

12. AstJieLord—comnianded; Ex. 20:8-11. 
15. Therefore the Lord — comvianded; this 

was to the Israelites a reason, in addition to that 
mentioned Ex. 20:11. why they should keep th<i 
Sabbath; and especially why their servants should 
enjoy its rest and privileges. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. The great object of attending to and becoming 
acquainted with the laws of God should be, that we 
may obey them. 

6. The Lord ever speaks to his people as if their 
deliverance from bond;ige was a great .and precious 
blessing, and one which laid them under new and 
peculiar obligations to love and serve him. 

237 



TTie manner of giving 



DEUTERONOMY VI. 



the law to the people. 



16 ^ Honor* thy father and thy mother, 
as the Lord thy God hath commanded 
thee; that thy ""days may be prolonged, 
and that it may go well with thee, in 
the land which the Lord thy God givcth 
thee. 

17 Thou shalt not '=kill. 

1 8 Neither shalt thou commit ^ adultery. 

19 Neither shalt thou ''.steal. 

20 Neither shalt thou bear "" false wit- 
ness against thy neighbor. 

21 Neither shalt thou desire Ihy neigh- 
bor's wife, neither shalt thou s covet thy 
neighbor's house, his field, or his man- 
servant, or his maid-servant, his ox, or his 
ass, or any thing that is thy neighbor's. 

22 1[ Tliese words the Lord spake unto 
all your assembly in the mount out of the 
midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the 
thick darkness, with a great voice; and 
he added no more. And '' he wrote them 
in two tables of stone, and delivered them 
unto me. 

23 And 'it came to pass, when ye heard 
the voice out of the mid.st of the darkness, 
for the mountain did burn with fire, that 
ye came near unto me, even all the heads 
of your tribes, and your elders ; 

24 And ye said, Behold, the Lord our 
God hath showed us his glory and his 
greatness, and we have heard his voice 
out of the midst of the fire : we have seen 
this day that God doth talk with man, 
and J he liveth. 

25 Now ''therefore why should we die? 
for this great fire will consume us : if we 
hear* the voice of the Lord our God any 
more, then we shall die. 

26 For who is there q/all flesh, that hath 
heard the voice of the living God speak- 
ing out of the midst of the fire, as wc have, 
and lived'? 

27 (^<o thou near, and hear all that the 
Lord our (jod shall say ; and ' speak thou 
unto us all that the Lord our God sliall speak 
unto thee ; and we will hear it, and do it. 

• T,i-r.T<lT3; Hint. ir.:4-K: Kpli. fi : l-r). b clrip;!^ 4n.^~MTt. 
(S:21,«i. ■! rrov. K:3-2,X1; M.lt. ft: 27,28 ; .Ins. 2; II. o Kom.l:!: !); 
Kpll.<:2R, fMill.:i:6. t Hab. 2 : !>l I.llke 12: l.S; Uoin. 7: 7; 
Heb. i:i:.>i. hKx.3l:l8. i p;x. 20: 18, IH. j chap. 4: 33: Jiid'. 
13:22. kohnp.lR:lH. » Heli.n</d«u/ie«r. lHeb.l2:19. m oh.i|>. 

14. Servants as well as m.^sters have an inalien- 
able ri;;ht, and it is their inilispensaWe duty, to rest 
from tlieir labors on the Sabbath, and to keep it 
holy ; and masters are s.aoredly bound to grant ser- 
vants liberty and opportunity for this. 

l."}. The giving of a new rc.%son why men should 
perform a duty, is no evidence that the duty was 
not binding before that reason was given or even 
existed ; nor that there are not many other reasons 
for the performance of the duty. Chap. 24 : 17, 18 

16. I'ew duties are more intimately connected 
with or essential to the prosperity of children, than 
a kind, affectionate, hearty obedience to their parents. 

21. It is wrong not only to t.ake what we ought 
not to have, but even to desire it. 

22. The obligations expressed in the ten com- 

238 



B. C. U61. 

of your words, when ye spake unto me; 
and the Lord said unto me, I have heard 
the voice of the words of this people, which 
they'" have spoken unto thee: they have 
well said all that they have spoken. 

29 Oh "that there were such a heart in 
them, that they would fear me, and "keep 
all my commandments always, tliat Pit 
might be well with them, and with their 
children for ever! 

.30 Go say to them, Get you into your 
tents again. 

31 But as for thee, stand thou here by 
me, and '^l will speak unto thee all the 
commandments, and the statutes, and the 
judgments, which thou shalt teach them, 
that they may do them in the land which 
I give them to possess it. 

32 Ye shall observe to do therefore as 
the Lord your God hath commanded you: 
ye shall not turn 'aside to the right hand 
or to the left. 

33 Yc shall walk in ' all the ways which 
the Lord your God hath commanded you, 
that ye may live, and that it maybe 'well 
with you, and that ye may prolong your 
days in the land which ye shall possess. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 The end of the law is obedience. 3 An exhortation 
thereto. 

"IVTOW these arc the commandments, the 
_l\ statutes, and the judgments, which 
the Lord your God commanded to teach 
you, that ye might "do them in the land 
whither yc tgo to possess it: 

2 That thou mightesffear the Lord thy 
God, to keep all his statutes and his com- 
mandments, which I command thee, thou, 
and thy son, and thy son's son, all the 
days of thy life; and that thy days may 
be "prolonged. 

3 11 Hear therefore, Israel, and ob- 
serve to do it; that it may be ' well with 
thee, and that ye may increase mightily, 



18:17. 


n 


■ll 


p. 32:29; Psa. 


SI : 13 


Un 


4H: 


18; E 


ek. .33 


31,32; 


Mat. 2.1 


;37 


; 


.like 1!) 


J2. 


chap. 


II: 1 


P 


chap. 


■) : 4(1. 


q Gal. 


3: 19. 


rb 


T 


17:20; 


2S:H; 


.I..SI.. 1 


:7; 




4:27. 


• Psa 


Il9:n; 


r.uke 1 


: »i. 




.Jor. 7 


23. u 


Ezekiel m 


:24. 


f Hcl). pass ovfr. 


» Eccl. 


12: 


13 


" Pr 


IV. 3:1 


2. X 


Keel. 


8:12; Is.l. 


3:10. 





mands which were written by God on tables of 
stone, are mor.al : they arise from the nature of men, 
and their relations to God and their fellow-men ; 
and are binding upon all who know them, in all ages 
and in all countries. 

.33. Obedience to all the commands of God is 
conducive to the highest good of men, in this world 
as well as in the world to come. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1. Cominaii/inieiits — .statutes — jiids'meuts ; 
in this and .some other places, cominandiiients seem 
to mean the moral law, statutes the ceremonial, and 
judgments the judicial, or civil law. In other c.ises 
they h;ive a more gencr.al meaning, ;ind compre- 
hend the whole of God's commandments. 



An exhortation 



DEUTERONOMY VI, 



to obedience. 



tc.'m^: as the "Lord God of thy fathers 
hath promised thee, in the land that flow- 
eth with milk and honey. 

4 Hear, '' Israel : The Lord our God is 
one*^ Lord : 

5 And thou shalt love the Lord thy God 
with * all thy heart, and with all thy soul, 
and with all thy might. 

6 And these words, which I command 
thee this day, shall be in thy ''heart: 

7 And thou shalt *tcach them diligently 
unto thy '"children, and shalt talk of them 
when thou sittest in thy house, and w4ien 
thou walkest by the way, and when thou 
liest down, and when thou risest up. 

8 And thou shalt ^bind them for a sign 
upon thy hand, and they shall be as front- 
lets between thine eyes. 

9 And thou shalt ''write them upon the 
posts of thy house, and on thy gates. 

10 And it shall be, when the Lord thy 
God shall have brought thee into the land 
which he sware unto thy fathers, to Abra- 
ham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee 
great and goodly cities, which thou 'build- 
edst not, 

1 1 And houses full of all good things, 
^which thou fiUedst not, and wells digged, 

which thou diggedst not, vineyards and 
olive-trees, which thou plantedst not ; when 
thou shalt have eaten and be full ; 

12 Then beware lest thou forget the 
Lord, which brought thee forth out of the 
land of Egypt, from the house of t bondage. 

13 Thou i shalt fear the Lord thy God, and 
serve him, and shalt "^ swear by his name. 

14 Ye 'shall not go after other gods, of 
the gods of the people which are round 
about you ; 

15 For the Lord thy God is a ""jealous 



• Gen.2-2;I7. b Mark 1-2 : 29-3-2; .7olinl7:3: ICor. 8:4, B. 
c 2 Kings. 19 ;!.';. cl 2 Kings, 23 : 25. t Prov. 2 : 10, 11 ; 3:3,5. 
» Heb. whrt, m tharpen. I clmp. 11:19; Psa. -8:4-fi: Eph. 6:4. 
EProv.fi:21; 7:3. h H.ib.2:2. i Jnsll. 24 : 13; Psa. 10.j:44. 
f Heh. bondmen, or servants, i c-liap. 10: 12, 20. k Isa.Ad:]^; 
Jer. 6:2; 12: IB. l.Ier. 25:6. m ExoJus 20: .5. n Amos 3: 2. 



8. Bind thein for a sign ; take such measures 
as will m.ake you familiarly acquainted with and 
mindful of tliciii. 

13. Swear bi/ his name ; in taking an oath on 
any proper occasion, they were not to appeal to idols 
or false a;ods, but only to Jehovah. 

14. TJie gods of the people ; idols and imaginary 
deities. 

16. As ye temjyted him in Massah ; Exodus 
17:2-7. 

20. Testimonies ; commandments. Ver. 1. 

25. Our righteousness ; by observing and doing 
with a proper spirit what G-od commanded, they 
would for Christ's sake be accepted and treated as 
righteous. 

l.\STRUCTIOi\S. 

3. The commandments of God are all suited to 
promote industry, economy, temperance, and all 
those virtues which are conducive to health, long 
life, wealth, and happiness. 

4. Though G-od is revealed as existing in three 
persons, yet is he one Jehovah. 



God among "you; lest the "anger of the 
Lord thy God be kindled against thee, and 
destroy thee from oft' the face of the earth. 

16 ^Ye P shall not tempt the Lord your 
God, as ye tempted him in i Massah. 

17 Ye shall diligently ''keep the com- 
mandments of the Lord your God, and 
his testimonies, and his statutes, which 
he hath commanded thee. 

18 And nhou shalt do that which is right 
and good in the sight of the Lord; that 
it may be well with thee, and that thou 
mayest go in and possess the good land 
which the Lord sware unto thy fathers, 

19 To *cast out all thine enemies from 
before thee, as the Lord hath spoken. 

20 And when thy son asketh thee tin 
time to come, saying, "What mean the tes- 
timonies, and the statutes, and the judg- 
ments, which the Lord our God hath com- 
manded you"? 

21 Then thou shalt say unto thy son, 
We were Pharaoh's bondmen in Egypt; 
and the Lord brought us out of Egypt 
with a mighty hand : 

22 And the Lord showed "signs and 
wonders, great and ^sore, upon EgypL 
upon Pharaoh, and upon all his house- 
hold, before our eyes : 

23 And he brought us out from thence, 
that he might bring vis in, to give us the 
land which he sware unto our fathers. 

24 And the Lord commanded us to do 
all these statutes, to "fear the Lord our 
God, for our "good always, that he might 
preserve^ us alive, as it is at this day. 

25 And it shall be our ^righteousness, 
if we observe to do all these command- 
ments before the Lord our God, as he hath 
commanded us. 



o clinp. 7:4; 2Cliron. 36: 16. P Mat 4 : 7. q Exodus 17 : 2, T; 
lOor. 10:9. rl'sa. 119:4. > chap. 12 : 28; Ex. 15 : 26. t Num. 
.33: ,52, S3. ± Heh. tomorrow^ u Ex. 13:14. » Ex. cli.s. 7-li; 
Ps.T. 135:9. \Heb.evil. w ver. 2. i chap. 10 : 13 ; .lob 35: 7,8; 
Jer.32:39. yP8alm41:2i Prov.22:4. i chap. 24: 13; Ram. 
10:3,5. 



9. All are bound to become familiarly acquainted 
with the commands of G-od, in order that through 
divine aid they may habitually and heartily obey 
them. 

12. G-reat prosperity, though it comes from G-od, 
is apt, through the wickedness of men, to lead them 
to forget and rebel against him. 

21. Children are naturally inquisitive, and parents 
should delight to communicate to them the infor- 
mation they need; especially with regard to the 
character, works, and w.ays of God, that they may 
understand and do his will. 

23. The land of Canaan, of which the children 
of Israel at the command of God took po:isession, 
was his gift to them. In taking it from the Canaan- 
ites and giving it to the Israelites, he only did what 
he saw to be best with his own. 

2-5. The way for men to be treated for Christ's 
sake as righteous, is to obey God ; and tliey can 
have no evidence that they are accepted of him, any 
further than they are disposed to keep his com- 
mandments. 

239 



TTie Canaanitcs are 



DEUTERONOMY VII. 



to be destroyed. 



CHAPTER VII. 

I All communion -n-ith the nations is forbidden, 4 for 
fear of idolatry, 6 for the holiness of the people. for 
the nature of God in his rnercy and justice, 1 7 for the 
assuredne<<s of victory which God will give over them. 

"TTrHEN the Lord thy God shall bring 
VV thee into the land whither thou go- 
est to possess it, and hath cast "out many 
nations before thee, the ''Hittitcs, and the 
Girgashites, and the Amoritcs, and the 
Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and the 
Hivitcs, and the Jebusites, seven nations 
greater and mightier than thou; 

2 And when the Lord thy God shall de- 
liver them before thee; thou shalt smite 
them, and "^utterly destroy them; thou 
shalt make no covenant with them, nor 
show mercy unto them : 

3 Neither shalt thou ''make marriages 
with them ; thy daughter thou shalt not 
give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt 
thou take unto thy son. 

4 For they will turn away thy son from 
following me. that they may serve other 
gods: so will the anger of the Loud be 
kindled against you, and destroy thee sud- 
denly. 

5 But thus shall ye deal with them ; ye 
shall destroy their altars, and break down 
their *images, and cut down their groves, 
and burn their graven images wnth fire. 

6 For thou art a " holy people unto the 
Lord thy God: the Lord thy God hath 
chosen thee to be a '^special people unto 
himself, above all people that are upon 
the face of the earth. 

7 The Lord did not set his love upon 
you, nor choose you, because ye were 
more in number than any people; for ye 
were the ^ fewest of ail people: 

8 But because the Lord loved you, and 
because he would keep the ''oath which he 
had sworn unto your fathers, hat h the Lord 
brought ' you out with a mighty hand, and 
redeemed you out of the J house of bondmen, 
from the hand of I'haraoh king of Egypt. 

9 Know therefore that the Lord Ihy 
God, lie is (Jod, the '' faithful ' God, which 
keepeth covenant and mercy with them 
that love him and keep his commandments 
to a thousand generations; 

10 And '" repayelh them thathate him to 
their face, to destroy them : he will not be 



« Pun. 41:2. :i. h C.cn l.i: 1!>--2I. tNu 


n.:i:) :;..'. .1 Kira 'i : 1 , -2. 


* Ueh. ttnfues, or pilturM, « rlmp. H : ■; 


K>. Ifl:«. f 1 IVt.T, 


«t<). f thnn. 10: iZ. h Oen. '22: lit, 17 
12:41, «. J Ex. 13:3, 14; 20:3. kU:i 


t.iiki" 1 :72, 73. i Kx. 


nil 4!l:7; 1 Cor. 10: 13; 


« Tliew. .3:3; 1 .lolm, 1:9. 1 Nell. 1 : ft ; 


Diiniel !l; 4. m clinp. 



CHAPTER VII. 
2. Th'iu xhah smite thriii, and vtterhj destroy 
them; tlie Israelites wcrr tlie executioners ofdivine 
justice upon the 0:i.n:ianite.'; for llieir sins. 

7. F<'west of (ill : wlieu (joil seleoteil them ,inil 
made promises to .-Mir.iliani .nnd hi-" seed, they were 
very few; nor did thev so greatly increase till ne:ir 
210 



slack to him that hatcth him, ho *»." f^ 
will repay hifti to his face. 

11 Thou shalt therefore keep the com- 
mandments, and the statutes, and the 
judgments, which I command thee thi.s 
day, to do them. 

12 ^Wherefore it shall come to pass, 
ift ye "hearken to these judgments, and 
keep and do them, that the Lord thy God 
shall keep unto thee the covenant and the 
mercy which he sware unto thy fathers : 

13 And he will love thee, and bless thee, 
and multiply thee: he will also bless the 
fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy 
land, thy corn, and thy wine, and thine 
oil, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks 
of thy sheep, in the land which he sware 
unto thy fathers to give thee. 

14 Thou shalt be blessed above all peo- 
ple: there "shall not be male or female 
barren among you, or among your cattle. 

15 And the Lord will take away from 
thee all sickness, and will put none of the 
evil P diseases of Egypt, which thou know- 
est, upon thee; but will lay Ihcm upon 
all ihcm that hate thee. 

16 And thou shalt consume all the peo- 
ple which the Lord thy God shall deliver 
thee; thine ^eye shall have no pity upon 
them : neither shalt thou serve their gods ; 
for that will he a "^ snare unto thee. 

17 If thou shalt say m thy heart. These 
nations arc more than I; how can I dis- 
possess themi 

18 Thou "shalt not be afraid of them: 
hnl shalt well 'remember what the Lord 
thy (Jod did unto IMiaraoh, and unto all 
Egypt ; 

19 The great "temptations which thine 
eyes saw, and the signs, and the wonders, 
and the mighty hand, and the stretched- 
out arm, whereby the Lord thy God 
brought thee out : so " shall the Lord thy 
God do unto all the people of whom thou 
art afraid. 

20 Moreover the Lord thy God will send 
the "hornet among them, until they that 
are left, and hide themselves from thee, 
be destroyed. 

21 Thou shnlt not be atfrighted at them : 
for the Lord thy (lod is among you, a 
miahty" (Jod and terrible. 

22 And the Lord thy God will tput out 



3-2:3.i; I 


:i. .W:18: 


lorn. 1 i : 


1, 


1 Hel). 


became 


n rl 


np. 


!«:t, 


etc.; r.e 


■. 2(i : 3, 


etr 




Ex. 


".■\ 


2H. etc 


I. Ex. 


9:14. 


1 


clm|K 


13:8; Itf 


13,21. 


r 


rh 


ip. 12 


:io 


Ex -2; 


:33: .1 


uh. H 


•-•7 


: Vml 


inn: 36. 


■ clinp 


31 


(>. 


1 P8.1. inr.:r,. 


u chap. 


4:34. 


T 


Jcih. 


3:10. w 


Ex. M 


•28. 


" 


clmp 


10 


17. % 


Hel). pi 


liA- aC. 







Ada 



the time of their deliverance from Egypt. 
7:17. 

10. Repay liiin to Itis face; promptly and 
openly punish liiin. 

10. ('i>iisiimc nil tlie people ; destroy them. 

in. Temptations ; trials, with wliich God visited 
rii.ir.toh. 



Obedience ur^cd from 



DEUTERONOMY VIII. regard of Godh mer da. 



U. C. 1451 

and little : thou mayest not consume them 
at once, lest the beasts of the field increase 
upon thee. 

23 But the Lord thy God shall deliver 
them *unto thee, and .shall destroy them 
with a mighty destruction, until they be 
destroyed. 

24 And he shall deliver their ^ kings into 
thy hand, and thou shalt destroy their 
name from "^ under heaven: there ''shall 
no man be able to stand before thee, until 
thou have destroyed them. 

25 The graven images of their gods .shall 
ye " burn with fire : thou shalt not '^desire 
the silver or gold that is on them, nor take 
it unto thee, lest thou be s snared therein : 
for it is an abomination to the Lord thy 
God. 

26 Neither ''shalt thou bring an abomi- 
nation into thy house, lest thou be a cursed 
thing like it : but thou shalt utterly detest 
it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it 
is a 'cursed thing. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

An exhortation to obedience in regard of God's dealing 
with them. 

ALL -ithe commandments which I com- 
mand thee this day shall ''ye observe 
to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and 
go in and possess the land which the Lord 
sware unto your fathers. 

2 And thou shalt remember all the way 
which the Lord thy (Jod led thee these 
forty 'years inthe"' wilderness, to humble 
thee," and to "prove thee, to Pknow what 
was in thy heart, whether thou wouldest 
keep his commandments, or tio. 

3 And he humbled thee, and suffered 
thee to hunger, and fed thee with "i man- 
na, which thou kncwest not, neither did 
thy fathers know- ; that he might make 
thee know that ■'man doth not live bv 



• E> 


.■23:M, 


30. 


* 


Heh. 


I,cf,„ 


f ihv f 


«■<:. 


1. .lo.si 


. 10 


24, 42 ; 


12:1. 


» cliap. 


■2ft: 


19. 


.1 (1. 


ip. II 


:2.'i 


; 1 


a. .■; 


: 17. e 


Kt 


S2 : 2(1 ; 


1 Chron U: 12 




.IosIk 7 : 


\,'2\. 


e 


.Iiids. 8 


•27. h 


K.7.P 


k. 14:7. 


t .Tosh 


fi: 17, 18. 


Ps 


a. 11» 


■ H. 


k ri 


ap 


.'i:.'! 


>, :«. 


rli 


p.2:7; 


29:5; 


Amos -2 


:1U 




1 l'.ta. 


l:ili: 


(i. 




lob 


i:i:17. 


K 


I. 1« : 4. 



Vi. An abomination ; having been \ised in idol 
worship, the Israelites were lo treat it with abhor- 
rence, as a testimony against that sin. 
TN.STRI'CTIONS. 

2. In putting men to death according to God's 
directions, it is not needful or right to hate them, or 
have any unkind feelings towards them; .^nd the 
idea that capital punishments spring from or imply 
any such feelings, is a great mistake. 

4. Chosen and intimate connections with the 
openly wicked increase our danger of being drawn 
into sin, and should be carofuily avoided. 

9. The Lord will be faithful in fulfiUinghis prom- 
ises to the righteous, and in executing his tlireaten- 
ings again^^t the wicked. 

14. Obediance to God will procure the greatest 
blessings for this life and the life to come. 

23. Things which are done by God's direction, 
and which take place under his guiding and all- 



bread only, but by every 'word that pro- 
ceedcth out of the mouth of the Lord doth 
man live. 

4 Thy 'raiment waxed not old upon 
thee, neither did thy foot swell, these forty 
years. 

5 Thou shalt also consider in thy heart, 
that, as a man "chasteneth his son, so the 
Lord thy God chasteneth thee. 

6 Therefore thou shalt keep the com- 
mandments of the Lord thy God, to walk 
in his ways, and to "fear him. 

7 For the Lord thy God bringeth thee 
into a good land, a land of brooks of wa- 
ter, of fountains and depths that spring 
out of valleys and hills; 

8 A land of wheat, and barley, and 
vines, and fig-trees, and pomegranates ; a 
land tof oil-olive, and honey; 

9 A land wherein thou shalt eat bread 
without scarceness, thou shalt not lack 
any thins; in it; a land whose stones are 
iron," and out of whose hills thou mayest 
dig brass. 

10 When thou hast ^ eaten and art full, 
then thou shalt^blesstheLoRDthy Godfor 
the good land which he hath given thee. 

1 1 Beware that thou forget not the LoRp 
thy God, in not keeping his command- 
ments, and his judgments, and his stat- 
utes, which I command thee this day : 

12 Lest ^when thou hast eaten and art 
full, and hast built goodly houses, and 
dwelt therein; 

13 And ivhen thy herds and thy flocks 
multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is 
multiplied, and all that thou hast is mul- 
tiplied ; 

14 Then thy heart be lifted up, and thou 
forget* the Lord thy God, which brought 
thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from 
the house of bondage; 

15 Who led thee through that great and 



p 2 Cliron. 3-2:31. <^ Ex. Ifi: 1.5. r Mat. 4:4. « Psa. 104 : 27-2<l 
lNeh.9:21. u Prov. 3 : 12 ; Heb. 12 : ,S 6; Rev. 3 : 19. » 1 Sam. 
12:24. \ H^t). of otivctree of oU. w chap. 33 : 25. n 1 Cor. 
10:31. y I Chron. '29:14: Ps.i. 103:2; Prov.iJ: 9. «Prov..30:a 
».ler. i:!). 

controlling providence, are in the Bible often spoken 
of as done by him. 

24. The putting of criminals to death according 
to Gods direction, is .a proper e.xpression of his jusl 
indign.ation .against their sins; and when he com- 
mands, it cannot be neglected without disobeying 
him. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

2. To know; make known to themselves and 
to others. 

3. Not — hy bread only ; Mat. 4:4. 

9. Brass; or copper, of which brass is chiefly 
composed. 

14. J]'^ lifted np ; become proud and self-confi- 
dent. Ver. 17. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. One great object of God in all his dispensa^ 
tions. is to try men and le.ad them to see and to 
manifest their true character. 

241 



They must not ti'ust rn 



DEUTERONOMY IX. 



their ou-n righteousness. 



terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery ser- 
pents," iuid scorpions, and '' drought, where 
there icas no water ; who broughtthcc forth 
water*^ out of the rock of flint; 

16 Who fed thee in the wilderness with 
manna,'' which thy fathers knew not, that 
he" might humble thee, and that he might 
prove thee, to ''do thee good at thy latter 
end ; 

17 A nd thou say in thy heart, s My power 
and the might of 7?)j/ hand hath gotten me 
this wealth. 

■ 18 But thou shalt remember the Lord 
thy God: for it is ''he that giveth thee 
power to get wealth, that he may estab- 
lish his covenant which he sware unto 
thy fathers, as it is this day. 
. 1 9 And it shall be, if thou do at all for- 
get the Lord thy God, and walk after other 
gods, and serve them, and worship them, 
I ' testify against you this day that ye shall 
gurely perish. 

20 As the nations which the Lord de- 
stroyeth before your face, so 'shall ye 
perish ; because ye would not be obedient 
unto the voice of the Lord your God. 

CHAPTER IX. 

MosPK dissuadeth them from the opinion of their own 
righteousness, by rehearsing their several rebellions. 

HEAR, Israel : Thou arHo'' pass over 
Jordan this day, to go in to possess 
nations 'greater and mightier than thy- 
self, cities great and fenced up to heaven, 

2 A people great and tall, the children 
of the Anakim, whom tliou knowest, and 
of whom thou hast heard say, Who can 
stand before the children of Anak! 

3 Understand therefore this day, thatthe 
Lord thy God is he wliich '"gocth over 
before thee; as a consuming fire he shall 
destroy them, and he shall bring them 
down before thy face: so "shalt thou drive 
them out, and destroy tlicm quickly, as 
the Lord hath "said unto thee. 

4 Speak P not thou in thy heart, after 
that the Lord thv God hath cast them out 



• Num.'2l:(;. b Hnaca i:i:ft. c Num. 20: II : P»a. 78: 15. 16; 
IU;8; 1 Cor. 10:4. d ver. 3. e vcr. •:. f I.ain. 3: 2fi-33; Hf I). 
18:10,11. (T rlinp. 9:4; I Cor. 4:7. I> Prov. 10: 22 : Hosen -2 : 8. 
J chnp. 4:2fi: nO:lS. ) 2CIiron. :tf.: Ifi, 17 ; Dan. 9: 1 1, 1-2. k .loali. 
4:19. 1 Num 13:28-33. >n clmp.SI :3-6; .losll.S: II. n cli.ip.7:-2J. 

5. The Lord never sends tri.ils because he delights 
in them, but for the profit of his people; that they 
inay be led to feel their dependence, and to exercise 
those feeJinffs towards him which shall fit them for 
heaven. 

10. In seasons of great prosperity we should feel 
under special obligations to God, and acknowledge 
his goodness with special thanksgiving. 

1-1. Great prosperity is peculiarly apt to make 
men proud, and lead tlu-in so to trust in themselves 
(ind neglect God and his .service, as to harden their 
hearts .and increa.se their exposure to ruin. Ver. 17. 

18. Power to get wealth, and also to keep and 
enjoy it, are from tiie Lord. For this reason it 
242 



from before thee, saying. For my *b.c:m1?: 
righteousness the Lord hath brought me 
in to possess this land : but for the i wicked- 
ness of these nations the Lord doth drive 
them out from before thee. 

5 Not '■for thy righteousness, or for the 
uprightness of thy heart, dost thou go to 
possess their land : but for the wickedness 
of these nations the Lord thy God doth 
drive them out from before thee, and that 
he may perform the word which the Loud 
sware unto thy fathers, 'Abraham, *Isaac, 
and "Jacob. 

6 Understand therefore, that the Lord 
thy God giveth thee not this good land to 
possess it for thy righteousness ; for thou 
art a ''stifTnecked people. 

7 ^ Remember, and forget not, how thou 
provokedst the Lord thy God to wrath in 
the wilderness ; from the "day that thou 
didst depart out of the land of Egypt, until 
ye came unto this place, ye have been 
rebellious against the Lord. 

8 Also *in Horcb ye provoked the Lord 
to wrath, so that the Lord was angry with 
you to have destroyed you. 

9 When I was gone up into the mount 
to receive the tables of stone, even the ta- 
bles of the covenant which the Loud made 
with you, then I ^ abode in the mount forty 
days and forty nights ; I neither did cat 
bread nor drink water: 

10 And ^the Lord delivered unto me 
two tables of stone written with the fin- 
ger of God; and on them U'as ivriltcn ac- 
cording to all the words which the Lord 
spake with you in the ^mount,out of the 
midst of the fire, in the day of the as- 
sembly. 

1 1 And it came to pass at the end of forty 
days and forty nights, that the Lord gave 
me the two tables of stone, even the tables 
of the ''covenant. 

12 And the Lord said unto me, Arise, 
get thee down quickly from hence; for 
thy people which thou hast brought forth 
out of Egypt liavc corrupted tJumselvcs; 



» Ex. 


23 


31. 


p cli 


T.,.^ 


: 17; 


Uom. 


Il:»>,20; 


1 Cor. 4 : 7. 


q clia 


1'- 


18: 12 


; Gen. 15: Ifi; 


18:24,25. 


r Titus 3: 


■i. • Gen. 12 


:7; 17 


8. 


I (ier 


. 2h 


:4. 


n Gen. 2 


(:I3. 


T V 


JC. 32:9; 


3:i:3; 2Cli 


on. 31> 


8. 


- Kx 


14 


II; 


Ifi: '2 


17: 


2; N 


ini.ll 


:4; 20:2 


2.-.: 2. tE 


X.:!2:l 


li 


y Ei. 


:m 


■28. 


. E 


«. 31 


:I8. 


• Ex. 


I9:I.S,I9 


k Heb. 8 : 


B-IO. 





should ever be viewed as his gift, and employed in 
promoting his cause. 

20. However great the goodness of God, and 
however abundant his promises to any people, con- 
tinued disobedience will bring upon Vhem irretriev- 
able ruin. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1. This (hry : soon. Fenced up to heaven ; 
with very high walls. 

2. Aiiakim; descendants of A n.ak, son of A rba, 
and distinguished for their size and strength. Num. 
13:2-2. 

10. The ivor/ls vliick the Lord spake ; E.x. 
19:18; 20:1-17. 



Afoses rccounteth 



DEUTERONOMY X. 



their various rebellions. 



«."c!i^' they are 'quickly turned aside out 
of the way which I commanded them; 
they have made them a molten image. 

13 Furthermore the Lord ''spake unto 
me, saying, I have seen this people, and 
behold, it is a *= stiffneckcd people : 

14 Let me alone, that I may destroy 
them, and ""blot out their name from un- 
der heaven: and ""I will make of thee a 
nation mightier and greater than they. 

15 So '^I turned and came down from the 
mount, and the « mount burned with fire : 
and the two tables of the covenant were in 
my two hands. 

16 And I looked, and behold, ye had 
sinned against the Lord your God, and 
had made you a molten calf: ye had turned 
aside quickly out of the way which the 
Lord had commanded you. 

17 And I took the two tables, and cast 
them out of my two hands, and brake them 
before your eyes. 

18 And I "'fell down before the Lord, a.s 
at the first, forty days and forty nights : I 
did neither eat bread nor drink water, be- 
cause of all your sins which ye sinned, 
in doing wickedly in the sight of the Lord, 
to provoke him to anger. 

19 For I was ' afraid of the anger and hot 
displeasure, wherewith the Lord was wroth 
against you to destroy you. But the Lord 
hearkened' unto me at that time also. 

20 And the Lord was very angry with 
Aaron to have destroyed him: and I 
prayed for Aaron also the same time. 

21 And ''I took your' sin, the calf which 
ye had made, and burnt it with fire, and 
stamped it, and ground it xcry small, even 
until it was as small as dust: and I cast 
the dust thereof into the brook that de- 
scended out of tlie mount. 

22 And at '" Taberah, and at " Massah, 
and at "Kibrolh-hattaavah, ye provoked 
the Lord to wrath. 

23 Likewise Pwhen the Lord sent you 
from Ivadesh-barnea, saying. Go up and 
possess the land which I have given you ; 
then ye rebelled against the command- 



« Jmlg. 2:17; Psa. 7S:67; Ho9c<n8:4. l>Kx.lH:10. cvf.r.6; 
Act» 7 : SI. <1 clinp. 2<> : JO. ' Num. H : 1-2 < Kx. 33 : 15, ctr. 
t chap. 4:11: 5:2.1; KxoduRl9:18. b Kx.SJ: 10-14. i I.uke 
IS : 4, 5. 1 Kx. 33 : 17 ; Ps i. 103 : 23. k Ex. 32 : 20. I Un. 31 : 7. 
m Num. 11 : 1-4. n Ex. 17:7. o .Num. 11 : 34. p Num. rli8. 13, 14. 



17. Urale them ; Ex. 32 : 19. 
INSTRUCXrOX.^. 

3. In the discharge of duty, we should neither de- 
spi.se nor fear our enemies ; but fiutting our trust in 
God, go forward in humble dependence on him, com- 
mitting ourselves and all our concerns to his wise 
and gr:ieious guidance and disposal. 

6. Men do not receive blessings because of their 
own •worthiness, but on account of the worthiness of 
Christ, and the abounding grace of (jod through him. 

14. Should men receive from God their just de- 
eerts as sinners, they would all be destroyed. 

19. Humble, believing, earnest, persevering prayer 



ment of the Lord your God, and ye i be- 
lieved him not, nor hearkened to his voice. 

24 Ye have been ''rebellious against the 
Lord from the day that I knew you. 

25 Thus "I fell down before the Lord 
forty days and forty nights, as I fell down 
at the first; because the Lord had said he 
would destroy you. 

26 I 'prayed therefore unto the Loud, 
and said, Lord God, destroy not thy 
people and "thine inheritance, which thou 
hast redeemed through thy greatness, 
which thou hast brought forth out of 
Egypt with a mighty hand. 

27 Ptemembcr thy servants, Abraham, 
Lsaac, and Jacob ; look not unto the " stub- 
bornness of this people, nor totheir™wick- 
edness, nor to their ^sin : 

28 Lest the ^ land whence thou brought- 
est us out say, Because "the Lord was 
not able to bring them into the land which 
he promised them, and because he hated 
them, he hath brought them out to slay 
them in the wilderness. 

29 Yet *they are thy people and thino 
inheritance, which thou broughtest out by 
thy mighty power and by thy stretched- 
out arm. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 God's mercy in restoring the two tables, 6 in continu- 
ing the priesthood, 8 in separating the tribe of Levi, 
10 in hearkening unto !\loses' suit for the people. 13 
An exhortation to obedience. 

AT that time the Lord said unto me, 
Hew'' thee two tables of stone like 
unto the first, and come up unto me into the 
mount, and make thee an "^ ark of wood. 

2 And I will write on the tables the 
words that were in the first tables which 
thou brakcst, and thou shalt put them in 
the ark. 

3 And I made an ark o/ ""shittim- wood, 
and hewed two tables of stone like unto 
the first, and went up into the mount, 
having the two tables in my hand. 

4 And he "■ wrote on the tables, according 
to the first writing, the ten *command- 
ments, which the ""Lord spake unto you 



q Ps.-llm 78 : 22 ; lOS : 24, 25. 


r chnp. 31 : 27. » ver. 18. 1 Ex. 


.•52: 11, eti-. u 1 Kmgs, 8:51 


V Psalm 78 : 8. w Prov. 21 : 11 


» Miciili7:18. yEx.6:6-8. 


Num. 14 : 16. » ver. 26 ; Neh. 1 : 10; 


PSR.100:3. b Ex. 34:1, etc. 


c Ex.-25:10; Heb.9:4. dEx.37:l. 


e Ex. 34:28. * Heh. words. 


f Ex. 20:1-17. 



has great influence with God, and has often been the 
means of saving the wicked from destruction. 

24. No mercies or trials will of themselves re- 
move mens proneness to sin, or prevent their con- 
tinued and persevering rebellion .against God. He 
must grant them the influences of his Spirit, or 
they will perish. 

29. Prayers which spring from desires to have 
God honored, and reproaches against him prevented, 
are the fruit of his Spirit, and are peculiarly pleasing 
in his sight. 

CHAPTER X. 

4. The first writivg ; chap. 9:10: Ex. 34 : 28. 
243 



An exhortation 



DEUTERONOMY XI. 



to obedience. 



in the mount, out of the midst of the fire, j 
in the day of the assembly : and the Lord . 
gave them unto me. ] 

5 And I turned myself and came down j 
from the mount, and put the tables in the. 
ark which I had made; and "there they 
be, as the Lokd commanded mc. 

6 '[And''the children of Israel took their | 
journey from Bccroth of the children of 
Jaakan to Mosera: there Aaron died, and 
there he was buried; and Elcazar his son 
ministered in the priest's olFice in his stead. 

7 From thence they journeyed unto 
Gudgodah; and from Gudgodah to Jot- 
bath, a land of rivers of waters. 

8 II At that ""time the Loud separated 
the tribe of Levi, to ''bear the ark of the 
covenant of the Loud, to *" stand before 
the Lord to ""minister unto him, and to 
bless s in his name, unto this day. 

9 Wherefore ''Levi hath no part nor in- 
heritance with his brethren ; the Lord is 
his inheritance, according as the Lord thy 
God promised him. 

10 And I stayed in the mount, according 
to the *first time, forty days and forty 
nights; and the Lord 'hearkened unto 
■me at that time also, and the Lord would 
not destroy thee. 

11 And the Lord said unto me. Arise, 
take W/(jy journey before the people, that they 
may go in and possess the land, which I 
Bware unto their fathers to give unto them. 

1 2 •■ And now, Israel, wiiat ' dotii tiie Lord 
thy God require of thee, but to ^fear the 
Loud thy God, to 'walk in all his ways, and 
to '"love him, and to "serve the Lord thy 
God wit^i all thy heart and with all thy soul, 

13 To keep the commandments of the 
Lord, and his statutes, which I command 
thee this day for "thy good? 

14 Behold, the p heaven and the heaven 
of 1 heavens ix the Lord's thy God, the 
earth ' also, with all that therein is. 



• lKinK».8:9. b Num.a3;.'ll-S«. c Num. 3:0-9. dNum.4:15. 
• Pun. irt.'i : 2. f clinp. 18:5; 2nirnn.2!):n; Rom. 12:7. e rhiin. 
11:. 5: Num. 6:20. b Num. 18:20,24 ; Ezek. 44 : 28. *OT./o>mn- 
dajit. i Ex. 32:14. fHvU.gninjnuriitv- )Mir:ili6:R. k chap. 
6 : 13 ; PHii. .14 : 9. 1 rli.ip. fi : 33. m rlmp. 6 : .'j; 11 : 13 ; 30: Ifi. 20; 
Fan. 18:1; 14S:20; Miit22:37. n Ji.b3«:ll; Zepli,3:9; Rom. 



6. Mosera ; supposed by some to be a pl;ice on or 
near mount Mor. Places often liail difTerent names, 
«,nd events are not always stated in the order in which 
they occurred. Num. 20 : 2:]--30 ; 33 : .lO-^g. 

8. At that time; while they were at Sinai. 
Kum. chs. 3, 4. 

10. Circumcixe — the foreskin of your heart ; 
break off your sins, and enjj.age heartily in doing 
the will of God. Ver. 20. 

17. Regardeth not prrfons ; does not regard 
men according to outward distinctions, or appear- 
ance merely, but according to their true char;icter. 

18. Jitdgnievt cf the fatherless ; (jod decides 
and .acts rightly, kindly, and graciously concerning 
them He opens his hand and supplies their wants. 

21. He is thy praise ; the Giver of their mer- 
cies, whom they ought to praise. 
2\A 



15 Only the Loud had a delight Vc.fS^. 
in thy fathers to love them, and he chose 
their seed after them, even you above all 
people, as it is this day. 

16 Circumcise therefore the foreskin of 
your 'heart, and be no more stiffnecked. 

17 For the Loud your God is 'God of 
gods, and " Lord of lords, a great God, a 
mighty,'' and a terrible, which '^regardeth 
not persons, nor taketh reward : 

18 lie ^ doth execute the judgment of the 
fatherless and widow, and lovcth the 
stranger, in giving him food and raiment. 

19 Love^ ye therefore the stranger: for 
ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. 

20 Thou shalt fear the Loud thy God ; 
him shalt thou serve, and to him shalt 
thou ^cleave, and 'swear by his name. 

21 He 15 thy ''praise, and he is thy God, 
that hath done for thee these great and 
terrible things, which thine eyes have 
seen. 

22 Thy fathers went down into "= Egypt 
with threescore and ten persons ; and now 
the Loud thy God hath made thee as the 
stars of heaven for multitude. 

CHAPTER, XI. 

1 An exhortation to obeJiencc, 2 by their own experi- 
ence of Go I's great works, f^ by promise of God's sreat 
blessings. 10 anj by threateninps. IS A careful study 
is required In God's words. 20 The blessing and curse 
is set before thcin. 

THEREFORE thou shalt love the Lord 
thy God, and keep his charge, and his 
statutes, and his judgments, and his com- 
mandments, alway. 

2 And know ye this day : iov I speak \\o\, 
with your children which have not known, 
and which have notseen the ''chastisement 
of the Loud your God, his greatness, his 
mighty hand, and his strctched-out arm, 

3 And his miracles, and his acts, which 
he did in the midst of Egypt unto Pharaoh 
the king of Egypt, and unto all his land ; 

1:9; Hell, 12:28. o rli:ip. fi : 24. p V»i\. 115: Hi. q Psa. 148:4. 
r Gen. 14 : 19 ; Ps.i. 24 : 1 : 50 : 12. " .ler. 4:4; Rom. 2 : 28, 29. 
I .Tosli 22 : 22 ; Dan. 2 : 47. u Ilev. 17 : 14 ; 19 : 16. » Nell. 9 : 32. 
w 2 Chron. 19 : 7 : .loh 34 : 19 ; Epii. 6:9. i Ps.i. 68 : (>. J Ler. 
19 : 33. • Acta 11 : 23. • l8.iiali 45 : 23. b Jer. 17 : 14. c Gen. 
46 : 27. A chap. 8 : 5. 



INSTRUCTIOXS. 

4. The ten commandments express the will of 
God ;ind the duty of men, and the effect of divine 
grace is, to lead men heartily to love them and 
strive in all things perfectly to obey them. 

8. It is the will of God that there should be an 
order of men set apart to minister for liiin, conduct 
his worship, proclaim his will, ;ind set before men the 
motives which he has revealed to induce them to 
do it. 

13. The fear and love of God which lea<l men 
cheerfully and heartily to obey him, promote not 
only his glo.y. but their highest good. 

17-19. Gcd is no respecter of persons. He looks 
with tender compassion on the stringer, the widow, 
and the fatherless. He delights to help (hem, and re- 
quires that all, in this, should imitate his example. 



God's word must be 



DEUTERONOMY XI. 



studied and obeyed. 



B.c!'i^i' 4 And what he did unto the army 
of Egypt, unto their horses, and to their 
chariots ; how lie made the "water of the 
Red sea to overflow them as they pursued 
after you, and how the Lord hath de- 
stroyed them unto this day; 

5 And what he did unto you in the wil- 
derness, until ye came into this place; 

6 And what he did unto Dathan and 
Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the son of Reu- 
ben : how the earth opened her mouth, 
and swallowed them up, and their house- 
holds, and their tents, and all the *sub- 
stance that t ivas in their possession, in the 
midst of all Israel : 

7 But your eyes have seen all the great 
acts of the Lord which he did. 

8 Therefore shall ye keep all the com- 
mandments which I command you this 
day, that ye may be strong, and go in and 
possess the land, whither ye go to pos- 
sess it; 

9 And that ye may prolong your days in 
the land, which the Lord sware unto your 
fathers to give unto them and to their seed, 
a land that floweth with milk and honey. 

10 HFor the land whither thou goest in 
to possess it, is not as the land of ^ Egypt, 
from whence ye came out, where thou 
sowedst thy seed, and watcrcdst it with 
thy foot, as a garden of herbs : 

1 1 But the land, whither ye go to pos- 
sess it, is a land of hills and valleys, oh// 
drinketh water of the rain of heaven : 

1 2 A land which the Lord thy God + car- 
eth for: the <^eyes of the Lord thy God 
are always upon it, from the beginning of 
the year even unto the end of the year. 

13 1[ And it shall come to pass, if ye 
shall hearken ''diligently unto my com- 
mandments which I command you this 
day, to ''love the Lord your God, and to 
serve him with all your heart and with 
all your soul, 

14 That ''I will give yoii the rain of your 
land in his due season, the s first rain and 
the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in 
thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil. 

15 And I ''will 5 send grass in thy fields 



• Ex. 14:2.1-31. * Or, livini; su'istance which fMowcd them. 
t Heb. was nt J/itir/««. b Zccli.H: IH. tHvh.sceketh. c I Km"s, 
9::). J ver. 22: c1ki|>. 6:17. ' cIkii. 1 ; I ■-'. fl.pv.i;«:4. s .li)el 
!:n:Jas.5:7. h Psa. 104 : 14 ; Hosra i : -21, 02. % Heb. <7tV« 
IJoel2:19. j Josti.2;!:ll-lfi. k chni.. -i'l: 18; Jer. 4 ; 18. 1 dmp' 



CHAPTER XI. 

9. Floweth with milk aiid honey ; is very 
fruitful. 

10. Wateredst it with thy foot ; drawing up 
w.iter from the rivers and fountain.s by treiul- 
wheel.s, or with great labor, to keep the land from 
drying up for w.ant of rain. 

12. Caret h for ; by granting seasonable rains 
and rendering it fruitful. Ver. 14, 1-5. 

18. Lay itp these my words in your heart ; 
remember and obey them. 



for thy cattle, that thou mayest 'eat and 
be full. 

16 Take -iheed to yourselves, that your 
heart'' be not deceived, and ye turn aside, 
and serve other gods, and worship them; 

17 And then the Lord's 'wrath be kin- 
dled against you, and he '"shut up the 
heaven, that there be no rain, and that 
the land yield not her fruit; and lest ye 
perish quickly from off the good land 
which the Lord giveth you. 

18 Tl Therefore shall ye lay "up these 
my words in your heart and in your soul, 
and " bind them for a sign upon your hand, 
that they may be as frontlets between 
your eyes. 

19 AndPye shall teach them your chil- 
dren, speaking of them when thou sittest 
in thy house, and when thou walkest by 
the way, when thou liest down, and when 
thou risest up. 

20 And thou shalt write them upon the 
door-posts of thy house, and upon thy 
gates : 

21 That "i your days may be multiplied, and 
the days of your children, in the laud which 
the Lord sware unto your fathers to give 
them, as the ''days of heaven upon the earth. 

22 H For if ye shall diligently keep all 
these commandments which I command 
you, to do them, to love the Lord your 
God, to walk in all his ways, and to 
cleave' unto him ; 

23 Then will the Lord * drive out all 
these nations from before you, and ye 
shall possess greater nations and mightier 
than yourselves. 

24 Every place "whereon the soles of 
your feet shall tread shall be yours : from 
the ^wilderness and Lebanon, from the 
river, the river Euphrates, even unto the 
uttermost sea shall your coast be. 

25 There * shall no man be able to stand 
before you: for the Lord your God shall 
lay the "fear of you and the dread of you 
upon all the land that ye shall tread upon, 
as he hath J'said unto you. 

26 ^ Behold, ^I set before you this day 
a blessing and a curse ; 



6:13. m I Kings, 8::!5: 2Chron. 7:13. nrbap. 6:fi-9; ProT. 
3:1. o Proverbs :i : :i. p rh.iii. 4 : «, 10. q Proverl)s 4: 10 : 9: 1 1. 
r Psa. 89:M. > chap. 10:20: .30:20. t ilnip. 0:;". ; Ps;i. 78 : 5.i. 
" .Tosh. 1 : 3. T Gen. 15:18; Niirn.:l4:3. w.hap.7:24. x Josh. 
1 : 9, 24. y Ex. 23 : 27. » chap. 30 : I , l.i, 19 

20. Write them; to make them familiar not 
only to yourselves, but to your children. 

21. As the days of heaven iipo)!. earth ; that 
you may continue prosperous and happy to the end 
of time. 

23. Possess greater ■iiations ; the countries of 
those nations. 

24. 2'lieivihlerness ; of Zin, the soi'th border of 
Canaan. Leia;/o«; the north border. Eiiplirntes; 
the east border. Uttermost sea : the Mediterranean, 
the west border of Canaan. Num. 34 : 1-12. 

2-15 



A blessins and a curse. 



DEUTERONOMY XII. 



Moses' charge continued. 



27 A "blessing, if yc obey the command- 
ments of the LoRo your God, which I 
command you this day : 

28 And a ''curse, if ye will not obey the 
commandments of the Lord your God, but 
turn "" aside out of the way which I com- 
mand you this day, to go after other gods, 
which ye have not known. 

29 And it shall come to pass, when the 
Lord thy God hath brought thee in unto the 
land whither thou goest to possess it, that 
thou shalt ''put the blessing upon mount 
Gerizim, and the curse upon mount Ebal. 

30 Are they not on the other side Jor- 
dan, by the way where the sun goeth 
down, in the land of t he Canaanites, which 
dwell in the champaign over against Gil- 
gal, beside the plains of Moreh ? 

31 For ye shall pass over Jordan to go 
in to possess the land which the Lord 
your God giveth you, and ye shall possess 
it, and dwell therein. 

32 And ye shall *" observe to do all the 
statutes and judgments which I set before 
you this day. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1 Monuments of idolatry are to be destroyed. 5 The 
place of God's service is to be kept. 15, '23 Blood is 
forbidden. 17, 20, 26 Holy things must be eaten in 
the holy place. 19 The I.evite Is not to be forsaken. 
29 Idolatry is not to be inquired after. 

THESE ""are the statutes and judgments, 
which ye shall observe to do in the 
land, which the Lord God of thy fathers 
giveth thee to possess it, all the ^days 
that ye live upon the earth. 

2 Ye shall utterly '' destroy all the pla- 
ces, wherein the nations which ye shall 
possess* served their gods, upon the high 
mountains,' and upon the hills, and under 
every green tree : 

3 And ye shall t overthrow their J altars, 
and break their pillars, and burn their 



• rliap. 2» 


2-13 


b cliap 


28:l.'">-fi8. 


c 1 Sam 


12:21 




d chap. 


27:12, l.T: .I09I1.8. 


3X « chap. 1 i 


:i2. 


r cliap. ti 


1. e 


■h 


ip.4:10. 


kEi.:W:13. 


« Or, inherit. 


i2K 


njB, 


17:10,11; 


Jer.3 


H. 


t Heb. 


break dinon. 


jNu 


n.33:.M; 


Judg. 


2:2 


SChroa 


.» : 1. 


k 


1 King3, 



29. Put the bles.wi!^ ; cause it to be procl.-iini- 
ed. Chap. 27 : 12, 13; Jo.sli. 8 : 30-.%'). Gerizim ; 
this mountain was fruitful, and Ebal was rocky 
a.nd barren; between them was the city Sychem, 
or Shechem, called also Sychar. Gen. 33 ; 18 ; 
John -1 : .'). 

30. ChampaigH ; level, open country. 

INSTRUCTION.S. 

1. Love to God and to men, a disposition to lienor 
him and do good to them, is the essence of true 
religion. 

8. The dealings of God in past generations form 
a cogent reason why all men sliould obey him. 

12. Temporal as well as spiritual blessings are 
the gift of God. and for them men are indebted to 
his unmerited favor. 

17. Temporal as well as spiritn.al judgments are 
the fruit of sin. and should lead all to hate and for- 
sake it. knowing that if they continue in it, it will 
prove their ruin. 
246 



groves '' with fire ; and ye shall hew V c. fai. 
down the graven images of their gods, and 
destroy the names of them out of that place. 

4 Ye ' shall not do so unto the Lord your 
God. 

5 But unto the ""place which the Lord 
your God shall choose out of all your 
tribes to put his name there, ct;f?i unto iii.s 
habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou 
shalt come : 

6 And "thither ye shall bring your 
burnt-offerings, and your sacrifices, and 
your "tithes, and heave-offerings of your 
hand, and your vows, and your freewill- 
offerings, and the firstlings of your herds 
and of your flocks : 

7 And there ye shall eat before the Lord 
your God, and yc shall p rejoice in all that 
ye put your hand unto, ye and your house- 
holds, wherein the Lord thy God hath 
blessed thee. 

8 Ye shall not do after all the things that 
we do here this day, i every man whatso- 
ever i.s right in his own eyes. 

9 For ye are "^not as yet come to the rest 
and to the inheritance, which the Lord 
your God giveth you. 

10 But wher\ ye go over 'Jordan, and 
dwell in the land which the Lord your 
God giveth you to inherit, and when ho 
giveth you rest from all your enemies 
round about, so that ye dwell in safety ; 

11 Then there shall be a *place which 
the Lord your God shall choose to cause 
his name to dwell there; thither shall 
ye bring all that I command you; your 
burnt-offerings, and your sacrifices, your 
tithes, and the heave-offcringof your hand, 
and all +your choice vows which ye vow 
unto the Lord : 

1 2 And ye shall " rejoice before the Lord 
your God, ye, and your sons, and your 
daughters, and your men-servants, and 



15:13. lver.31. m ver. 11 ; 2Clir 7: 12; Pfia.78:68. nl.ev 17:3,4. 
» chap. 14:22-36. p vlt. 12, IS; chap. ll>: 11-1."); 2«:11 ; Lev. 23:4a 
q .Iildg. 17:H; 21:2.i. r Heh. 4 : 9. •Joiih.3:I7. t.Iosh. 18:1; 
1 Kings, 8 : 2!). t Heb. the choke nf y,>ur vouit. u ver. 7. 



21. Parents should take measures not only to 
become .acquainted with the commands of God 
themselves, but to have them deeply impressed on 
the minds of their children. 

28. Life .and death are set before men, and tlie 
strongest motives presented to induce them to choose 
life. If they do, and show this by taking the way 
that leads to it, they will live. If they do not, they 
will die, and the blame be wholly on tliem. Chap. 
30 : 19 ; Josh. 21 ; 15. 

CHAPTER XII. 
5. His habitalioii- ; the place where he shouM 
dwell with his visible presence. 

7. There ye. .shall eat ; according to the direc- 
tions which God had before given them. 

8. Ye .shall not do; as they h.ad done while on 
their journey, when various things were neglected 
which they must attend to after they should be 
settled in the land of promise. 



The place of Gocfs 



DEUTERONOMY XII. 



service to be kept. 



B. C. 1451 

that, is within your gates ; forasmuch as he 
hath no *part nor inheritance with you. 

13 Take heed to thyself that thou offer 
not thy burnt-otferings in every ^ place that 
thou seest : 

14 But in the place which the Lord 
shall choose in one of thy tribes, there 
thou'^ shalt offer thy burnt-offerings, and 
there thou shalt do all that I command 
thee. 

15 Notwithstanding, thou mayest kill 
and eat flesh in all thy gates, whatsoever 
thy'^ soul lusteth after, according to the 
blessing of the Lord thy God which he 
hath given thee: the '"unclean and the 
clean may eat thereof, as of the roebuck, 
and as of the hart. 

16 Only ye shall not eat the blood; "^ye 
shall pour it upon the earth as water. 

17 Tf Thou mayest not eat within thy 
gates the tithe of thy corn, or of thy wine, 
orof thine oil, or the firstlings of thy lierds 
or of thy flock, nor any of thy vows which 
thou vowest, nor thy freewill-offerings, or 
heave-offering of thy hand: 

18 But sfhou must eat them before the 
Lord thy God in the place which the 
Lord thy God shall choose, thou, and tiiy 
son, and thy daughter, and thy man-ser- 
vant, and thy maid-servant, and the Lovite 
that is within thy gates: and thou shalt 
rejoice before the Lord thy God in ''all 
that thou puttcst thy hands unto. 

19 Take 'heed to thyself that thou for- 
sake not the Levite *as long as thou livest 
upon the earth. 

20 HWhen the t,ORD thy God shall 
enlargeJ thy border, as he hath ''promised 
thee, and thou shalt say, I will eat flesh, 
because thy soul longeth to eat flesh ; thou 
mayest eat flesh, whatsoever thy soul lust- 
eth after. 

21 If the place which the Lord thy God 
hath chosen to put his name there be too 
far from thee, then thou shalt kill of thy 
herd and of thy flock, whicli the Lord 
hath given thee, as I have commanded 



» cli;ip. H:S<1. k Lev. 17: -2-5 <•■ ver. 11. d rl,:ip. H: 2fi. ever. 
2-2 ; dmp. 15 : 2-2. f Gen. 9 M : Lev. 7 : 2H. j ver. 11. 12 ; rli;ip. 
14:21. K ICiir. 10:31. i rlinp. 14 : 27. * Heb. a« My rfawj. 
j 1 Chron. 4 : 10. k Gen.28: 14 : Ex. :14: 24. I ver. 1.5, Ifi. t Heb. 
ttrong. m Lev. 17:11. 14. n i li.ip. 4 : 40. ■ o El. 15:-26; 1 Kinif, 
II : 38; E.rl. 2 : -26. P Num. ."i : 9, 10. <i Lev. 22 : IR, etc. ; 1 S;im. 



l.*). Kill and eat flesh ; for their ordinary food. 
Lusteth after ; desireth, if not forbidden by the 
law of (3-od. The imclen.ii and the clean may 
eat; they might satisfy their hunger on flesh, not- 
witlislaiiding ceremonial uncleanness. As of the 
rocliiick. and — hart ; iliey might treat domestic 
animals and wild .iniinals, in this respect, alike. 
While in the wilderness, it is supposed they were 
forbidden to kill and eat domestic animals, e.\cept 
at the tabernacle. Lev. 17 : 1-10. i:3. 

16. Not eat the blood; this was the means and 
emblem of life; it was offered in sacrifice to God 



thee, and thou shalt eat in thy gates what- 
soever thy soul lusteth after. 

22 Even 'as the roebuck and the hart is 
eaten, so thou shalt eat them : the unclean 
and the clean shall eat of them alike. 

23 Only be t sure that thou eat not the 
blood : for the '" blood is the life ; and thou 
mayest not eat the life with the flesh. 

24 Thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt 
pour it upon the earth as water. 

25 Thou shalt not eat it; that it "may 
go well with thee, and with thy children 
after thee, when "thou shalt do thatiuhich 
is right in the sight of the Lord. 

26 Only thy P holy things which thou hast 
and thy vows, i thou shalt take, and go un- 
to the place which the Lord shall choose: 

27 And thou shalt offer thy burnt-offer- 
ings, the flesh and the blood, upon the 
altar "^ of the Lord thy God : and the blood 
of thy sacrifices shall be poured out upon 
the altar of the Lord thy God, and thou 
shalt eat the flesh. 

28 Observe' and hear all these words 
which I command thee, that it may go 
well with thee, and with thy children 
after thee for ever, when thou doest that 
ivhich is good and right in the sight of the 
Lord thy God. 

29 ^ When the Lord thy God shall cut 
oft"' the nations from before thee, whither 
thou goest to possess them, and thou i sue- 
ceedest them, and dwellest in their land; 

30 Take heed to thyself that thou be not 
snared Jby '•'following them, after that they 
be destroyed from before thee ; and that 
tliou inquire not after their gods, saying. 
How did these nations serve their gods? 
even so will I do likewise. 

31 Thou ''shalt not do so unto the Lord 
thy God: for every abomination Hto the 
Lord which he hafeth have they done 
unto their gods ; for "even their sons and 
their daughters they have burnt in the 
fire to their gods. 

32 What ^thing soever I command you, 
observe to do it: thou ^' shalt not add 
thereto, nor diminish from it. 



1:21-31. r Lev. 1:6,0. 13; 17:11. • Ex. 34 : 11 ; 2 Cliron. 7: 17i 
E7.el.iel:i7:24; .John l.'i : 10, 14. t clnp 19:1; Exodus -23 : 23; 
.losli. ■?:!: 4. ^ Heb. itihifitest, or possestest. ^ Y{*i\i. after them, 
u -JKinss, 17: 15; I'sulm lOK : 34-3S. t Ex. 23 : 2. (| Heli. o/. 
wLev. 1S:21; Jer. 32:^1; Ezekie] 20 : 31 ; 23:37; Mic;ili 6 : 7. 
X .losh. 1:7. y Rev. 22: IS. 



to make atonement for the sins of men, and was not 
to be eaten, but to be regarded ,is sacred, in order 
to increase tlieir conviction of the evil of sin, the 
justice of God, and their need of pardon. 

19. Forsake tiot the Levite; by withholding 
what belonged to him. 

I\STRUCT(OXS. 

3. We should put awav all things which tend to 
draw us from the worship and service of God, :ind en- 
conr,ige all which lead us to cleave to and obey him. 

7. To have our oli'erings accepted, we iniist bring 
them to God in the way of his appointment, in reli- 
5:47 



Tliey must be slain DEUTERONOMY XIII. who entice to idolatry. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

1 Enticers to idolatry, C how near soever unto thee, 9 
are to be stoned to death. 12 Idolatrous cities are not 
to be spared. 

IF there ari.se among you a "prophet, or 
a ''dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee 
a "^ sign or a wonder, 

2 And the .sign or the wonder ^come to 
pas.s, whereof he .spake unto thee, saying, 
Let us go after other gods, which thou hast 
not known, and let us serve them; 

3 Tliou shalt not hearken unto the words 
of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: 
for the Lord your God "^proveth you, to 
know whether ye love the Lord your God 
with all your heart and with all your soul. 

4 Ye shall '^walk after the Lord your 
God, and fear him, and keep his com- 
mandments, and obey his ^Voicc, and ye 
Bhall serve him, and ''cleave unto him. 

5 And 'that prophet, or that dreamer of 
dreams, shall be put to death; because 
he hatli spoken *to turn you away from 
the Lord your God, which brought you 
out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed 
you out of the house of bondage, to thrust 
thee out of the way which tlie Lord thy 
God commanded thee to walk in. So 
shalt' thou put the evil away from the 
midst of thee. 

6 ^f If thy brother, the son of thy moth- 
er, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the 
wife "^ of thy bosom, or thy ' friend, which 
is as thine own soul, entice tliee secretly, 
saying. Let us go and serve other gods, 
which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy 
fatlicrs ; 

7 Namely, of the gods of the people which 
are round about you, nigh unto thee, or far 
off from thee, from the one end of the earth 
even unto the other end of the earth ; 

8 Tliou shalt not '"con sent unto him, nor 
hearken unto him ; neither shall thine eye 



• IKiiign, 13:IR; lsa.y: 1.".; .ler. «: l.i ; 2:1:11: Kzek. 13: 2,3.53; 
Zecli. 13:4. b Zerh. 10:2. c Mat. 24 : 24 ; 1 Thcss. 2:9; Uev. 
13:14. i< chap. 18; 2J; Jer. 28:9; Mat. 7:22. « 1 Cor II : 19. 
f aCliron. 34:31. f.ler.7:23. b rlia|). 10: 20. iZecli.l3:3. 
• Hrll. revalt ugaintt tht Loko. j chapter 17:7: I Cor. ft: 13. 
k chap. 28 : bi ; Miiah 7 : S. I 1 .Sam. 20 : 17. m Pri)verb.s 1 : 10. 



ance on the .%toneinent and intercession of Christ, 
and for the purpose of honorinir him as well as ben- 
efitin^ ourselves and our fellow-men. 

r2. Sincere and hearty worship of Jeho^^^h is not 
only highly pleasing to him, but a means of useful- 
ness ;ind happiness to those wiio present it, jind to 
all connected with Ihem. 

10. A deep conviction of the evil of sin, of the jus- 
tice .and mercy of God. the necessity and value of tlie 
atonement, and a holy re;jard for divine institutions, 
should ever be cultivated by all the children of men. 

10. What belongs to '.rod and his ministers, should 
not be withheld or perverted to any other use. 

S-"). .Subjection of our desires to the revealed will of 
God, with iiabitual obedience to his commands, is the 
way to promote not only our own good, but that of 
all who come after us or may feel our influence. 

32 We should not wish lo add to or lake from 
what God has said ; but should take it a.s it is, and 
248 



pity him, neither shalt thou spare, u.c.r^S; 
neither slialt thou conceal him : 

9 But thou shalt surely kill him; thy 
hand" shall be first upon him to put him 
to death, and afterwards the hand of all 
the people. 

10 And thou shalt stone him with stones, 
that he die; because he hath sought lo 
thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, 
which brought thee out of the land of 
Egypt, from the house of t bondage. 

11 And "all Israel sliall hear, and fear, 
and shall do no more any such wickedness 
as this is among you. 

12 1[ If thou shalt Phear say in one of 
thy cities, which the Lord thy God liath 
given thee to dwell there, saying, 

13 Certain men, Hhe children of Belial, 
are gone out from among you, and have 
withdrawn^ the inhabitants of their city, 
saying. Let us go and serve other gods, 
which ye have not known ; 

14 Then shalt thou inquire, and make 
search, and ask diligently; and behold, 
if it be truth, arid the thing certain, that 
such abomination is wrought among you ; 

15 Thou shalt surely smite the inhabi- 
tants of that city with the edge of the 
sword, ''destroying it utterly, and all that 
is therein, and the cattle thereof, with the 
edge of the sword. 

16 And thou shalt gather all the spoil 
of it into the midst of the street thereof, 
and shalt burn with fire the city, and all 
the spoil thereof every whit, for the Lord 
thy God : and " it shall be a heap for ever : 
it shall not be built again. 

17 And there shall (;leave naught of tiio 
cursed' Mhing to thy hand: that the Lord 
may "turn from the fierceness of his anger, 
and ^ show thee mercy, and havc*compas- 
sion upon thee, and '^multiply thee, as he 
hath ^' sworn unto thy fathers; 

iTch.ip. 17:7. t Heb. bondmen, a chap. 19 : 2(1, f Josh. 22 TlT. 
t Or, naU(iA(y men. .lulls. 19:22; 1 Kings, 21 : 10, 13. ■) .Imle 19. 
r Ex. 22: JO; .loah.R: 17,24. > .losh. 8 : 28; Jer. 49 : 2. 5 Or, 
devoted, t chap.7:26; .)osh.t;:18; 7:1. » .lo.ih. 7 :2li; P»«. 
78: .38. » Ex. 20:1). w Lamentations 3 : 32. i Ezekiel 37 : 26. 
y Gen. 22: 17. 

let it have its proper influence on our hearts and 
lives. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

3. Proveth you : by suffering the false prophets 
to do some strange and wonderful things, and thus 
to tempt them to forsake God and worship idols. 

5. Turn 71011 awny from the Lord ; as he was 
the King of the Jews, idolatry was treason, and 
punishable with death. 

9. Kill him ; when proved to be guilty by legal 
process according to divine directions. Be first 
ii))0)i, him; the accusers and witnesses were to 
cast the first stones. Chap. 17 : 7. 

16. Burn — every whit ; this was to cut ofT all 
temptation to avarice, and express the utmost ab- 
horrence of the crime. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Wicked men who give themselvc", up to the 
service of the devil, may be sulTercd by God to do 



Of meats clean 



DEUTERONOMY XIV. 



and unclean. 



i.c.'iiti: 18 When thou shalt hearken to 
the voice of the Lord thy God, to *keep 
all his commandments which I command 
thee this day, to do that ivhich is right in 
the eyes of the Lokd thy God. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

1 (Jod's children are not to disfigure themselves in 
mourning. 3 What may, and what may not be eaten, 
4 of beasts, 9 of fishes, 11 of fowls. 21 That which 
dieth of itself may not be eaten, 'i'i Tithes of divine 
service. 'Xi Tithes and firstlings of rejoicing before 
the Lord. 28 The third year's tithe of alms and 
charity. 

YE are the ''children of the Lord your 
God: ye shall not "= cut yourselves, 
nor make any baldness between your 
eyes for the dead. 

2 For thou art a ''holy people unto the 
Lord thy God, and the I.ord hath chosen 
thee to be a "peculiar people unto him- 
self, above all the nations that arc upon 
the earth. 

3 ^f Thou shalt not ""eat any abominable 
thing. 

4 These are the beasts which ye shall 
eat : the ox, the sheep, and the goat, 

5 The hart, and the roebuck, and the 
fallow-deer, and the wild goat, and the 
pygarg,* and the wild ox, and the cha- 
mois. 

6 A nd every beast that ^ parteth the hoof, 
and cleaveth the cleft into two claws, and 
cheweth the cud among the beasts, that 
ye shall eat. 

7 Nevertheless these ye shall not eat, of 
them that chew the cud, or of them that 
divide the cloven hoof; as the camel, and 
the hare, and the coney : for they chew 
the cud, but divide not the hoof; therefore 
they are unclean unto you. 

8 And the swine, because it divideth the 
hoof, yet cheweth not the cud, it is un- 
clean unto you : ye shall not eat of their 
flesh, nor ''touch their dead carcass. 

9 T[ These 'ye shall eat, of all that are 
in the waters : all that have tins and scales 
shall ve eat: 



• Pan. 119 


6. b .ler. 


1:19; 


Uoin, 8 . 


Ifi 


q 


B 


•2h 


; GhI. 3: 


Jfi. 


• Lev. I9:-2S 


; Jereniinli 


rt:6. 


i Lev 


20 


■2B. 




e 


IVter, 2 


.•9. 


r EwkieU: 


4; kiU 10 


11, U 


; 1 Cor. 


10. 


■JS. 




* 


Heb. dishon. 


or bison, % 


Leviticus 1 1 


:3, 4; 


PsillmM: H. 


h 


L« 


v. 1 1 : iK, 


■i7. 



many strange and unaccountable things. But no 
one should hearken to them, or in any way give 
them encouragement. 

3. God sutlers many things to take place in this 
world (o try men. and lead them to show whether 
they will serve him or not. 

8. We must not suffer our nearest relatives or 
most intimate friends to lead us into sin, nor must 
we in any way connive at their transgre.ssions. 

11. One object of punishment is to e.xpress the 
wrath of God against crime, and thus restrain others 
from committing it. 

17. Men slioulil show .a deep .abhorrence of crime 
by suitably punishing it. and in executing God's 
wrath against the guilty they should, both in reality 



10 And whatsoever hath not fins and 
scales ye may not eat; it is unclean unto 
you. 

\\ % Of all clean birds ye shall eat. 

12 But J these are they of which ye shall 
not eat : the eagle, and the ossifrage, and 
the ospray, 

13 And the glede, and the kite, and the 
vulture after his kind, 

14 And every raven after his kind, 

15 And the owl, and the nighthawk, and 
the cuckoo, and the hawk after his kind, 

1 6 The little owl, and the great owl, and 
the swan, 

17 And the pelican, and the gier-eagle, 
and the cormorant, 

18 And the stork, and the heron after 
her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat. 

19 And every creeping thing that flieth 
is unclean unto you : they shall not be 
eaten. 

20 But of all clean fowls ye may eat. 

21 1[ Ye shall not eat of any thing that 
dieth'' of itself: thou shalt give it unto 
the stranger that is in thy gates, that ho 
may eat it; or thou may est sell it unto 
an alien : for ' thou art a holy people unto 
the Lord thy God. Thou '"shalt not seethe 
a kid in his mother's milk. 

22 Thou shalt truly "tithe all the in- 
crease of thy seed, that the field bringeth 
forth year by year. 

23 And "thou shalt cat before the Lord 
thy God, in the place which he shall 
choose to place his name there, the tithe 
of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, 
and the p firstlings of thy herds and of thy 
flocks ; that thou may est learn to fear the 
Lord thy God always. 

24 And if the way be too long for thee, 
so that thou art not able to carry it ; or if 
the 1 place be too far from thee, which the 
Lord thy God shall choose to set his name 
there, when the LoRDlhyCaod hath blessed 
thee ; 

25 Then shalt thou turn it into money, 
and bind up the money in thy hand, and 



i I 


ev. 


11:9 


j Lev. 


11:1.1 




t Le> 


17: 


!.=> 


•2- 


:R 


; F.zek. 


4:14. 


1 V 


»r. 


2. m 


Exodus -2 


1:19; 


34 


:2li. 


D rl 


ap. 


12 


fi. 


17; 


Le 


ItlCUI 


'i7 


■M) 


Nu. 


1. 18: -21 ; 


Neh. 


10 


37. 


el 


a p. 


1-2 


s. 


etc 


P 


chap. 


15 


19 


'20. 


q cliap. 1-2 


:'21. 





















and in appearance, be influenced only by holy and 
benevolent motives. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1. Not ci(t yourselves ; as idolaters were accus- 
tomed to do. 1 Kings, IS : 3S. 

5. Pygarg ; supposed to be a species of antelope 
or gazelle. Chamois ; a species of goat. 

2'2. Truly titlie ; the first tithe or tenth part 
was devoted to the worship of God and the support 
of the Levites. There was a second titlie, .a tenth of 
the nine remaining parts ; and once in tiuee years 
it was to be devoted to the entertainment of the 
Levites, the stranger, the widow, and the fatherless. 
Yer. 29. 

219 



Of the year 



DEUTERONOMY XV. 



of release. 



fihalt go unto the place which the Lord 
thy God shall choose : 

26 And thou slialt bestow that money 
for- whatsoever tliy soul lustcth after, for 
oxen, or for sheep, or for wine, or for 
strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul 
desircth:* and *thou shalt eat there be- 
fore the Lord thy God, and thou shalt 
rejoice, ''thou, and thy household, 

27 And the Levite that is within thy 
gates; thou shalt not forsake him : for "^ he 
hath no part nor inheritance with thee. 

28 1[ At"* the end of three years thou shalt 
bring forth all the lithe of thine increase 
the same year, and shall lay it up within 
thy gates : 

29 And the Levite, because -lie hath no 
part nor inheritance with thee, and the 
strangcr,'^and the fatherless, and the wid- 
ow, which are within thy gates, shall 
come, and shall eat and be satisfied ; that 
the 6 Lord thy God may bless thee in all 
the work of thy hand which thou doest. 

CHAPTER XV. 

1 The seventh year a year of release for the poor. 7 It 
must be no let of lending or giving. 12 A Hebrew 
servant, 16 except he will not depart, must in the 
seventh year go forth free and well furnished. 19 All 
firstling males of the cattle are to be sanotifled unto 
the Lord. 

A T '■ the end of every seven years thou 
.^JL shalt make a release. 

2 And this is the manner of the release : 
Every t creditor that lendctli aught unto 
his neighbor shall release it ; he shall not 
<'xact it of his neighbor, or of his brother ; 
because it is called the Lord's release. 

3 Of a 'foreigner thou mayest exact it 
again: but that which is thine with thy 
brother thy hand shall release; 

4 Save* when there shall be no poor 
among you; for 'the Loud shall greatly 
bless thee in the land which the Lord thy 
God giveth thee for an inheritance to pos- 
sess it: 

5 Only if thou carefully hearken unto 
the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe 

" Hi!li. ankclh v/lhct. • chap. 1-2:7, IS. b Eccl. 9:7. c clinp. 
18:1.-2; Num. 18:20. il r1iHp.'J6: 1-2; Ainna4:-I. ever.27; cliap. 
1-2:1-2. I r.x.«:'21-:4;.ltil):!i:l(i-22; l.uki- 14 : 12-14; Heb.l:l:-2. 
« clnp.l6:lO; Prov.3:>), 10; 19: 17; Mnl. :l: 10. h Ex. 23: 10, 1 1 ; 
Lev. -23 : -2-4 ; .ler. 34 : 14- 1 7. t Heli. matter nf the lending of his 
hand, i clinp. i'l : 20. ^ Or, To the end that there he. i t-luip. 

2G. Thy soul dexircth ; in accordance with the 
revealeJ will of God. 

IN.'^TRUCTIONS. 

2. The people of God are rallpd in a peculiar 
manner to be holy, and should carefully avoiti sin- 
ful conformity to the world, and all those practices 
■whicli tend to draw tliein away from tlie word and 
ordinances of .lehovah. 

C. Tlie Lord allows us freely to partake of all 
thin<;s wliicli will not injure us, and wliicli tend to 
our lii{;li('st good. 

22. We siiouid endeavor to 1 e truly honest and 
faithful in devoting to God whatever he requires, 
and in using all we possess according to liis will, 



to do all these commandments *b.c >5S- 
which I command thee this day. 

6 For the Lord thy God blesscth thee, 
as he promised thee : and thou shalt ' lend 
unto many nations, but thou shalt not 
borrow; and thou shalt reign over many 
nations, but they shall not reign over thee. 

7 ^ If there be among you a poor man 
of one of thy brethren within any of thy 
gates in thy land which the Lord thy God 
giveth thee, thou 'shalt not liarden thy 
heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor 
brother: 

8 BufHhou shalt open thy hand wide un- 
to him, and shalt surely lend him sufficient 
for his need, in that which he wantcth. 

9 Beware that there be not a * thought in 
thy II wicked heart, saying. The seventh 
year, the year of release, is at hand ; and 
thine "eyebe evil against thy poor brother, 
and thou givest him naught ; and he "cry 
unto the Lord against thee, and it be p sin 
unto thee. 

10 Thou shalt surely give him, and thy 
heart shall not be i grieved when thou 
givest unto him : because that for this 
thing the Lord thy God shall ^ bless thee 
in all thy works, and in all that thou put- 
test thy hand unto. 

11 For the "poor shall never cease out 
of the land: therefore I command thee, 
saying. Thou shalt open thy hand wide 
unto thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy 
needy, in thy land. 

12 'i\And if thy 'brother, a Hebrew man, 
or a Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, 
and serve thee six years ; then in the sev- 
enth year thou shalt let him go free from 
thee. 

13 And when thou sendest him out free 
from thee, thou shalt not let him go away 
empty : 

14 Thou shalt furnish him liberally out 
of thy flock, and out of thy floor, and out 
of thy wine-press: o///iflf" wherewith the 
Lord thy (iod hath ^blessed thee thou 
shalt give unto him. 



2K:1-S,etc. k rliap. 2>i: 12, 44. 1 1 .Iohn,3: 17. m Lev. 2.'. : :»-37 ; 
Gal. 2 : 10. 4 Heb. loui rf. || Heb. Belial, n chap. 2S : M-fifi; Prov. 
23 : 6 ; Mat. 20 : lr>. " chap. 24 : l.l ; Ex. 22 : 23. V Mat. 2.'i : 41-45. 
q 2 Cor. <l: 6-7. ' ch:.p. 24:19; Psa. 41:1,2; Prov. ll:-2r>; 22:9; 
Heb.l3:16. •Mat.2li:ll. t Ex.21 :2: Lev. 2.5: 39-41 ; Jcr.34: 14. 
u I'»a. 68 : 10. » Prov. 10 : 22 ; Acts 20 : 36. 

remembering that he is the owner, and that we are 
stewards of what he intrusts to our care. 

29. The ministers of religion, the stranger, the 
■widow, the fatherless, and all who are destitute 
should be kindly remembered, and share in the bless- 
ings which God graciously gives us. 

CHAPTER XV. 

3. Thy brother; an Israelite. 

9. Givest him. naught ; dost not lend to him 
■what he needs. 

12. Be sold it7ito thee ; be bound to serve thee 
for the payment of a debt, or as a punishment for 
crime. 



Firstlings of the fiock. 



DEUTERONOMY XVI. 



Of the passover. 



JauG^ 15 And thou shall* remember that 
thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt, 
and the Lord thy God redeemed thee: there- 
fore I command thee this thing to-day. 

16 And it shall be, if ""he say unto thee, 
I will not go away from thee ; because he 
loveth thee and thy house, because he is 
well with thee ; 

17 Then thou shalt take an awl, and 
thrust it through his ear unto the door, 
and he shall be thy servant for ever. And 
also unto thy maid-servant thou shalt do 
likewise. 

18 It shall not seem "^hard unto thee, 
wlien thou sendest him away free from 
thee; for he hath been worth a double 
hired servant to thee, in serving thee six 
years: and the Lord thy God shall bless 
thee in all that thou doest. 

1 9 lyAU the '' firstling males that come of 
thy herd and of thy flock thou shalt sanc- 
tify unto the Lord thy God : thou shalt do 
no work with the firstling of thy bullock, 
nor shear the firstling of thy sheep. 

20 Thou ''shalt eat it before the Lord 
thy God year by year in the place which 
the Lord shall choose, thou and thy house- 
hold. 

21 And if ''there be any blemish there- 
in, as if it be lame, or blind, or have any 
ill blemish, thou shalt not sacrifice it unto 
the Lord thy God. 

22 Thou shalt eat it within thy gates : 
the ^ unclean and the clea.n person shall eat 
it alike, as the roebuck, and as the hart. 

23 Only thou shalt not eat the blood 
thereof; thou shaltpour it upon the ground 
as water. 



acliap. 5:15; 16:12; Isaiah 51 : 1. b Ex. 21 : 6, 6. c vi-r. 10. 
<1 Ex.l:j:2; Num.3:13: 18:17. e cli.ip. 12:5,t>, 17. f chap. 17: 1 ; 
Lev. 22 : 21) ; Mai. 1:7,8. e chap. 12 : 15, etc. h E.\oilua .34 : 18. 



16. Because he is vte/l with thee ; because, in 
his estimation, it would be better for him to stay 
than to go aw.ay. 

18. Worth a double hired servant ; hired ser- 
vants were not accustomed to serve under one con- 
tract more than three years. Isa. 16 : 14. 

22. Withiu thy gates ; at home ; not at the 
tabernacle or temple, as was the case with that 
which was without blemish. Chap. 12: 1"), 16. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. A debtor who without his fault is poor, and 
really notable to pay, should not be imprisoned, nor 
disabled from making efforts ; nor should payment 
be enforced till he is, or by suitable means may be 
able to meet it. 

o. While we are bound, as we have opportunity and 
ability, to do good to all who are needy, we are under 
special obligations to do it to the friends of God. 

10. The fact that a man is poor and may not be 
.able to repay, is not to prevent us from lending to 
him, when it is necessary to relieve his wants and 
our doing so will be for his benefit; but we are 
to love our neighbor as ourselves, and do what 
such love, under the guidance of sound wisdom, re- 
quires. 

11. God suffers the poor always to be among us, 
that compassion may be cultivated by exercise; and 



CHAPTER XVI. 

1 The feast of the passover, 9 of weeks, 13 of taber- 
nacles. 16 Every male must offer, as he is able, at 
these three feasts. 18 Of judges and justice. 21 
Groves and images are forbidden. 

r\ BSERVE the '■ month of Abib, and keep 
v/ the passover unto the Lord thy God : 
for in the month of Abib the Lord thy God 
brought thee forth out of Egypt by 'night. 

2 Thou shalt therefore sacrifice the pass- 
over unto the Lord thy God, of the J fiock 
and the herd, in the''place which the Lord 
shall choose to place his name there. 

3 Thou 'shalt eat no leavened bread 
with it ; seven days shalt thou eat unleav- 
ened bread therewith, even the bread of 
affliction ; for thou camest forth out of 
the land of Egypt in haste : that thou 
mayest remember the day when thou 
camest forth out of the land of Egypt all 
the days of thy life. 

4 And there shall be no leavened bread 
seen with thee in all thy coast seven days ; 
neither '" shall there any thing of the flesh, 
which thou sacrificedst the first day at 
even, remain all night until the morning. 

5 Thou mayest not *saerifice the pass- 
over within any of thy gates, which the 
Lord thy God giveth thee : 

6 But at the place which the Lord thy 
God shall choose to place his name in, 
there thou shalt sacrifice the "passover at 
even, at the going down of the sun, at the 
season that thou camest forth out of Egypt. 

7 And thou shalt " roast and eat it in the 
placed which the Lord thy God shall 
choose : and thou shalt turn in the morn- 
ing, and go unto thy tents. 

i Ex. 12::U-J2. j Num. 28: lR-19. k chap. 15:20. 1 Ex. l:i : fi, 7. 
m Ex. 12:10; ;M:2.^ * Or, .ti7/. n E.x. 12: B-H. o 2Chron.:!5: 1:!, 
p 2 Kings. 2:i : 23 ; John 2 : 1.3, 23 ; 1 1 : 55. 

that we may have opportunity to show wliether or 
not we .are disposed to assist them, and thus to 
imitate our Father in heaven. Mat. 5:48; Luke 
6 : 31-36. 

14. Liberality to servants and those who have 
assisted us, and readiness in return to assist them, 
is an exhibition of excellence, and a source of bless- 
ings to both givers and receivers. 

16. It is well so to treat servants as to secure 
their confidence, gratitude, and esteem, and that 
they will rather continue with us than go away. 
By so doing their services may be greatly prolonged, 
and rendered much more pleasant and useful to us 
and to tlicmselves. 

15. Kindness and liberality to servants are means 
of securing not only their good will and fidelity, 
but also the blessing of God. 

22. Fidelity to God, in rendering to him what he 
requires, is the way to secure his favors, and make 
them the means of the greatest enjoyment to our- 
selves and others. 

CHAPTER XVL 
1. The month of Abib — the passover ; Ex. 
12:2, 18; 34:18. 

3. Bread of affliction ; in remembrance of their 
afflictions in Egypt. 

251 



TTie three feasts. 



DEUTERONOMY XVII 



Idolaters to be stoned. 



8 Six days thou slialt eat unleavened 
bread; and on the "seventh day .s/m// be 
a 'solemn assembly to the Lord thy God : 
thou yhalt do no work therein. 

9 ^ Seven ''weeks shalt thou number 
unto thee: begin to number the seven 
weeks from such time as thou begiunest to 
put the sickle to the corn. 

10 And thou shalt keep the feast of weeks 
unto the Lord thy God with ^ a tribute of a 
freewill-offering of thy hand, which thou 
shalt give unto the LORD thy GW, "^accord- 
ing as the Lord thy God hath blessed thee : 

11 And ''thou shalt rejoice before the 
Lord thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy 
daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy 
maid-servant, and the Lcvite that is within 
thy gates, and the stranger, and the father- 
less, and the widow, that are among you, 
in the place which the Lord thy God hath 
chosen to place his name there. 

12 And "thou shalt remember that thou 
wast a bondman in Egypt : and thou shalt 
observe and do these statutes. 

13 ^Thou shalt observe the feast of 
tabernacles'^ seven days, after that thou 
hast gathered in thy i corn and thy wine : 

14 And thou shalt ^ rejoice in thy feast, 
thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and 
thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, 
and the Levite, the stranger, and the fa- 
therless, and the widow, that are within 
thy gates. 

1 5 Seven '' days shalt thou keep a solemn 
feast unto the Loud thy God in the place 
which the Lord shall choose : because the 
Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thine 
increase, and in all the works of thy hands, 
ihercforc thou shalt surely rejoice. 

l(i 1[ Three 'times in a year shall all thy 
males appear before the Lord thy God in 
the place which he shall choose; in the 
feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast 
of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles : 



• Lev. 2.-1:8. * Heb.rf»rrninr Lev. 2f):.16. h Ex.23: Ifi; 34:22; 
Ufv il: 15; Act52:l. i Or, tu^cienc!/. c ver. 17; 1 Cor. Ifi.2. 
< ••Imp. I :: 7, 12, Id. e cli;l|i. !.•>: 15: Lam. 3: Ml, 20. f Lev.2:l:34. 
t Hvli. floor, and Ihy wine pittt. g Neli. 8:9-1-2. h Lev. -23: 39. 40. 
I Kx.2.'>:14; :H:2i. iKx.23:IS. ^ Heb. according Co the gift njT 
hit hand, k Mark 12 : 41-44 ; 2 Cor. 8 : U. 1 ver. 10. m chap. 

9. To put the sickle ; to reap the slieaf of first- 
fruits, which was offered on the first day of unleav- 
ened brp.ad. 

in. The feast of weels ; Ex. 34 : 21 

VX The feast of i.iheniaclps ; Ex. 23:14-17. 

19. Wrest ; pervert. A gift ; a bribe, sonie- 
thinjj given to nialie a judge partial. A gift doth 
blind; tends to do it. 

21. T\ot plant — a grove : groves were pl.acos of 
idol-worsliip. and planting thcin near their pl,%ce of 
worsliip would increase the temptation to idolatry. 
INSTRl/CTIONS. 

3. We should not forget our past trials, nor the 
goodness of God in our deliverance, but should be 
encouraged by his kindness to put our trust in hint, 
and with patient continuance in well-doing look to 
him for whatever we need. 
252 



land they shall not appear before b.c usf: 
the Lord J empty : 

17 Every man shall give ^ as he is '' able, 
according to the ' blessing of the Lord thy 
God which he hath given thee. 

1 8 1[ Judges '" and officers shalt thou make 
thee in all thy gates, which the Lord thy 
God giveth thee, throughout thy tribes: 
and they shall judge the people with just 
judgment. 

1 9 Thou " shalt not wrest judgment ; thou 
shalt not ° respect persons, neither take a 
gift; for a P gift doth blind the eyes of the 
wise, and pervert the Hvords of the right- 
eous. 

20 That *which is altogether ''just shalt 
thou follow, that thou mayest 'live, and 
inherit the land which the Lord thy God 
giveth thee. 

21 ^ Thou shalt not plant thee a 'grove 
of any trees near unto the altarof the Lord 
thy God, which thou shalt make thee. 

22 Neither 'shalt thou set thee up any 
image ;t which the Lord thy God " hateth. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

1 The things sacrificed must be sound. 2 Idolaters 
must be slain. 8 Hard controversies arc to be deter- 
mined by the priests and judges. 12 The contemner 
of that deiermination must die. 14 The election, 16 
and duty of a king. 

THOU shalt not sacrifice unto the Lord 
thy God AH?/ bullock, or t sheep, "where- 
in is blemish, or any evil-favorcdness : for 
that 75 an abomination unto the Lord thy 
God. 

2 ^If" there be found among you. wit bin 
any of thy gates which the Lord thy God giv- 
eth thee, ma nor woman, that hath wrought 
wickedness in the sight of the Lord thy 
God, in ■^ transgressing his covenant, 

3 And hath gone and served other gods, 
and worshipped them, either the sun. or 
moon, or any of the host of heaven, which 
I have not commanded ; 



1:1.T-17: Ex. 18:2r.,2H; lChron.2l:4; 2Cliron. 19:.'>-11. n Lev. 
11:1.S. oProv. J4:23. pProv. 17:2'. \] Or, mattert. * Heh. 
Jutlice, iuttice. <lMiraliB:8; riiil. 4 : 8. r Kzckiel 18:.S, ft 
« 1 Kill's, 14:15. ILev. 2li:l. t Heh. ttatue, nr pillar, u .ler. 
44:4. t Or, poat. » Mai. 1 : 8, 1.1, 14. w rliap. 13: H.etC. x Jo»U. 
7: 11,15; .linls. 2 : 20; 'iKillss, 18: 13; Hosea 8:1. 

6. Such is thj unteachableuess of men, that the 
Lord sees it needful often to repeat his instruc- 
tions, especially with regard to their guilt as sin- 
ners, and their need of pardoning mercy tiirough tlie 
atonement of Clirist. 

11. True religion is social in its chiiracter. and 
tends to make all who possess it grateful, kind, com- 
municative, benevolent, and joyful. 

17. Religious y>y and gr;ititude to God may at 
suit.able times be properly expressed by feastin"; on 
the bounties of his providence, and giving them 
liberally to the poor and destitute. 

20. Civil government is God's institution to se- 
cure to men those rights and privileges which it is 
his will that they should enjoy; and magistrates are 
bound, as far .as practicable, to give to all what 
justly belongs to tnem. 



Authority of judges. 



DEUTERONOMY XVII. 



Duties of a king. 



B. c!h5u' 4 And it be told thee, and thou hast 
heard of it, and inquired diligently, and 
behold, it be true, and the thing certain, that 
such abomination is wrought in Israel; 

5 Then shalt thou bring forth that man 
or that woman, which have committed 
that wicked thing, unto thy gates, even 
that man or that woman, and shalt stone 
them with stones, till they die. 

6 At "the mouth of two witnesses, or 
three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of 
death be put to death; but at the mouth of 
one witness he shall not be put to death. 

7 The '' hands of the witnesses shall be 
first upon hiin to put him to death, and after- 
ward the hands of all the people. So thou 
shalt put the evil away from among you. 

8 11" If there arise a matter too hard for 
thee in judgment, between "^ blood and 
blood, between plea and plea, and between 
stroke and stroke, being matters of con- 
troversy within thy gates ; then shalt 
thoii arise, and get thee up into the ''place 
which the Lord thy God shall choose; 

9 And thou shalt come unto the •'priests 
the Levites, and unto the "^judge that shall 
be in those days, and inquire; and they 
shall show thee tlie sentence of judgment : 

10 And thou shalt do according to the 
sentence, which they of that place which 
the Lord shall choose shall show thee ; 
and thou shalt observe to do according to 
all that they inform thee: 

1 1 According to the sentence of the law 
which they shall teach thee, and accord- 
ing to the judgment which they shall tell 
thee, thou shalt do : thou shalt not decline 
from the sentence which they shall show 
thee, to the right hand, nor to the left. 

12 And sthe man that will do presump- 
tuously, *and will ''not hearken unto the 
priest that 'standeth to minister there be- 



• .N'u 


•n. M 


30; .loIin8:17 


; 2 Cor. 13:1; 


ITim 


5:19 




b Acts 


7 : 58, W. e 


F,l. 2 


: 12 


etc. 


d 


Psalm 12 


:4,6. 


» .) 


ir. 


18: J8; 


Haggai 


2:11 


Mai. 


2:7. 


f 


chap 


19: 17. 


B Num. 15 : 


'W 


; Eira 


10:»; 


Hosea 4 : 4 


* 


Heh 


not 


to hemk 


(11. h 


■ Inr. 


i') 


: 3, etc. 


1 rh.ip. 


18:5 


7. J 


Heb 


10 


28. 


k chap. 


13:5. 


1 ch 


'P 


13: 11. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

7. First upon him ; chap. 13:9. 

8. Blood and blood ; relating to the killing of a 
man. Plea and plea ; concerning property, or 
civil rights. Stroke and stroke ; personal quarrel. 

9. Come nnto the— judge ; apply to a higher 
tribunal, at the head of which was God himself. 
Se?iteuce of judgment ; right decision. 

1"2. Dopresumptuoiiuli/ ; refuse to comply with 
known law, enacted by God, who was tlien the 
chief magistrate of that people. 

15. Shalt thou set king over thee; this did 
not require them to set a king over them, or imply 
that it would be right; it only required, that if at 
iny time they would do it, these directions should 
be followed. 1 Sam. S:-l-2-2. 

18. This law; either the hook of Deuteronomy, 
or the five books of Mo.ses, called the law, as contain- 
ing the laws of Jehovah for the government of Israel. 
Mat. .'3:17; 7:12; Luke 16: 16; 2-1:44. 

17 



fore the Lord thy God, or unto the judge, 
even that man shall J die : and ^ thou shalt 
put away the evil from Israel. 

13 And 'all the people shall hear, and 
fear, and do no more presumptuously. 

14 ^ When thou art come unto the land 
which the Lord thy God giveth thee, and 
shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, 
and shalt say, "" I will set a king over me, 
like as all the nations that arc about me : 

15 Thou shalt in any wise set him king 
over thee, whom ° the Lord thy God shall 
choose: one from "among thy brethren 
shalt thou set king over thee : thou may- 
est not set a p stranger over thee, which I'.v 
not thy brother. 

16 But he shall not i multiply horses to 
himself, nor cause the people to ' return 
to Egypt, to the end that he should mul- 
tiply horses : forasmuch as the Lord hath 
said unto you, 'Ye shall henceforth re- 
turn no more that way. 

17 Neither shall he multiply wives to 
himself, that his 'heart turn not away: 
neither shall he greatly multiply to him- 
self silver and gold. 

18 And it shall be, when he sitteth upon 
the throne of his kingdom, that he shall 
write him a copy of this law in a book 
out of that which is before the priests the 
Levites : 

19 And "it shall be with him, and he 
shall read therein all the days of his life ;. 
that he may learn to fear the Lord his 
God, to keep all the words of this law and 
these statutes, to do them : 

20 That his heart be not lifted up above 
his brethren, and that he ^turn not aside 
from the commandment, ^o the right hand, 
or to the left: to the end that he may 
prolong" his days in his kingdom, he, and 
his children, in the midst of Israel. 



m 1 Sa 


m. 


8:5 


19, 20. 


„ 


ISam. 9:15-17; 


Ifi 


12 


1 Chron. 22 


10 


o Jer. 


",() 


21. 


p Jer 


2 


2n. 


<l 1 K.ngs, 


10: 


26-28; Psalm 20 


:7; 


Hosea 


14 


:3. 


r Isaiah 31 : 1 ; 


Ezekiel 17 


:I5 




Exodus 13 : 


17; 


Hnsea 


11 


: .">. 


t IKi 


n^s 


11:: 


, 4. u .loshiis 


1 


8; Psa. 119 


97, 


' IKi 


SI 


15: 


n. w 1 


•ro 


•. 10: 


27. 











19. All the days of his life ; daily, habitually. 

20. Be not lifted up ; do not become proud. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The best we have belongs to God, and it should 
be our delight cheerfully to render to him whatever 
he requires. 

7. Idolatry in the Jewish commonwealth was 
treason, and as such, when proved by two or more 
witnesses, was punished with death ; but great care 
was taken that none should be punished except those 
who were really guilty. 

9. It is a great privilege that in cases of doubt 
and difficulty with regard to duty, we may appeal 
to an infallible standard, the Scriptures ; and look 
to Him who hath said. If any of you lack wisdom, let 
him ask of God, and it shall be given him. 

12. To turn away and refuse, to do the known 
will of God is great presumption, wickedness, and 
folly ; and justly exposes those who are guilty of it 
to his indignation. 

253 



Dues of the Levites. 



DEUTERONOMY XVIII. 



The great Prophet. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

1 The Lord is the priests' and Levites' inheritance. 3 
The priest's due. G The Levite's portion. 9 The 
abominations of the nations are to be avoided. 15 
Christ the Prophet is to be heard. "20 The presump- 
tuous prophet is to die. 

THE * priests the Levites, and all the 
tribe of Levi, shall have no part nor 
inheritance with Israel : they shall eat 
the •'ofFerings of the Loud made by fire, 
and his inheritance. 

2 Therefore sliall they have no inheri- 
tance among their brethren : '^ the Lord is 
tlieir inheritance, as he hatli said unto them . 

3 If And ''this shall be the priest's due 
from the people, from them that offer a 
sacrifice, wliether it be ox or sheep; and 
I hey shall give unto the priest the shoul- 
der, and the tw^o cheeks, and the maw. 

4 The "first-fruit also of thy corn, of thy 
wine, and of thine oil, and the fir.^^t of the 
llecce of thy sheep, shalt thoti give him. 

•5 For the Lord thy God hath '^chosen 
him out of all thy tribes, to stand to min- 
ister in the name of the Lord, him and 
his sons for ever. 

6 T[And if a Levitc come from any of thy 
gates out of all Israel, where he ^sojourned, 
and come with all the '' desire of his mind 
unto the place wliicli the Lord shall choose ; 

7 Then he shall minister in the name of 
the Lord his God, as all his brethren the Le- 
vites do, which stand there before the Lord. 

8 They shall have like 'portions to cat, 
besides *that which cometli of the sale of 
liis patrimony. 

9 il When thou art come into the land 
which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou 
shalt not learn to do after the abomina- 
tions of those nations. 

10 There J shall not be found among you 
any one that maketh his son or his daugh- 
ter to pass through the lire, or that useth 
divination, or an observer of times, or an 
enchanter, or a witch, 

1 1 Oracharmer,oraconsulterwithfamil- 
iar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer. 

> Num. 18: -20. b I Cor. 9: l:i, 14. c Pna. 16 : n ; I.am. 3 : 24~ 
d I.e;. 7:30-34. cE)[.22:29. f Num. 3:10. R Num. S.'i : 2, 3. 
b Pna. 84 : 2. i 2 Cliron. 31 : 4. * Heb. his tales by the fathers. 
J Leviticus 18:21, etc. kRcv. 22:lfi. ^ Or, upright, or sincere. 
Gen. 17:1 i Job 1 ; 1. % Or, inherit. 1 Gen. 20: 6: P»a. 147: 19,20; 
Act»14:li;. m .Idim 1:4.-.: 6: 14: Act»3;22, 23. iiMat.l7:6; 



15. The giving of directions for the regulation of 
the conduct of men, by no me.ans proves tliat the con- 
duct which needs such regulation is riglit. It may 
be wicked, and the object of the regulations be, to 
lessen somewhat its evils till it be done away. 

20. (jod gives the people power to choose their 
own rulers and form of government; and rulers are 
bound to take the Bible as their guide, and govern 
according to its precepts. 

CHAPTER, XVIII. 

8. Patrimony ; other property besides what he 
received officially as a Levitu. 

13. Be perfect ; sincerely, heartily, and wholly 
devoted to (jod. Job 1 : 1 ; Mat. 5 : 43-18. 
2.54 



12 For all that do these things are ^b'.c.usi: 
an abomination unto the Lord : and because 
of these ^abominations the Lord thy God 
doth drive them ottt from before thee. 

1 3 Thou shalt be + perfect witli the Lord 
thy God. 

14 For these nations, which thoti shalt 
possess, t hearkened unto observers of 
times, and unto diviners : but as for thee, 
the Lord thy God hath not 'suffered thee 
so to do. 

15 H The Lord thy God will raise up 
unto thee a '"Prophet from the midst of 
thee, of thy brethren, like unto me ; unto 
him" ye shall hearken ; 

16 According to all that thou desiredst 
of the Lord thy God in Horeb in the "day 
of the assembly, saying. Let me not hear 
again the voice of the Lord my God, nei- 
ther let me see this great fire any more, 
that I die not. 

1 7 And the Lord said unto me. They have 
well spoken that which they have spoken. 

18 1 will P raise them up a "iProphet from 
among their brethren, ''like unto thee, and 
will put my words in his mouth ; and "he 
shall speak unto them all that I shall com- 
mand him. 

19 And it shall come to pass, that 'who- 
soever will not hearken unto my words 
which he shall speak in my name, I will 
require it of him. 

20 But "the prophet, which sliall pre- 
sume to speak a word iti my name, which 
I have not commanded him to speak, or 
that shall speak in the name of other gods, 
even that prophet shall ^die. 

21 And if thou say in thy heart, How 
shall * we know the word which the Lord 
hath not spoken ? 

22 When ''a prophet spcakcth in the 
name of the Loud, if the thing follow not, 
nor come to pass, that is the thing which 
the Lord hath not spoken, but the prophet 
haihspoken it presumptuously ; thou shalt 
not be afraid of " him. 



Heb.l:l,2; 2:1-3; IJobn,3:23. oEi. 20:19. plsa.9:6; 
Zech. 6:12, 13; Mnl. 3:1. i| T.ukp24:l9. r Num. 12:fi-S; Heb. 
3:2-6. ■ John 4: 2.'j; 8:28; 12:49, no ; 1.1: 1.1. tMarkl(i:lfi; 
Art»3:22,23; Heb.2:3; 12:2.'). n cliap. 13 : 1-.1; .ler. 14:14. In; 
Zech. 13:3. t Jer. 28 : 1.5-17; Uev. 19:20. w i John, 4 : 1-3. 
X Isa. 41 : 22, 23 ; Jer. 28 : 9. y Prov. 2fi : 2. 



l."). A Prophet ; referring to Jesus Christ. Ver. 
18, 19; Acts 3:22,23. 

IG. Thou desiredst ; Ex. 20 : 19 ; Heb. 12 : 19. 

19. Rrtjiiire it of him; call him to account 
and punish him for his neglect. 

22. Speakelh in the name of the Lord; pre- 
tends to do it, and to foretell future events. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. Often, and in a variety of \\'ays, the Lord 
shows that while it is not his will that his ministers 
should be rich, or engage in worldly business for 
gain, it is his will that they should receive a sup- 
port for themselves and their families, and devote 
themselves cheerfully and faithfully to their appro- 
priate work. 



Cities of refuge. 



DEUTERONOMY XIX. 



The law of witnesses. 



S/cM' CHAPTER XIX. 

1 The cities of refuge. 4 The privilege thereof for the 
manslayer. 14 The landmark is not to be removed 
15 Two witnesses at the least, lli The punishment 
of a false witness. 

TTrHEN Mhe Lord thy God hath cut 
VV off the nations, whose land the Lord 
thy God giveth thee, and thou *succeedest 
them, and dwellest in their cities, and in 
their houses ; 

2 Thou shalt separate ''three cities for 
thee in the midst of thy land, which the 
Lord thy God giveth thee to possess it. 

3 Thou shalt prepare thee a way, and 
divide the coasts of thy land, which the 
Lord thy God giveth thee to inherit, into 
three parts, that every slayer may flee 
thither. 

4 1[ And this is the case of the slayer, 
which shall flee thither, that he may live : 
Whoso killeth his neighbor ignorantly, 
whom he hated not tin time past; 

5 As when a man goeth into the wood 
with his neighbor to hew wood, and his 
hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe to cut 
down the tree, and the i head slippeth 
from the Shelve, and Ulightetli upon his 
neighbor, that ho die ; he shall flee unto 
one of those cities, and live : 

6 Lest the avenger of the blood pursue 
the slayer, while his heart is hot, and 
overtake him, because the way is long, 
and *.slay him; whereas he ica.f not wor- 
thy of death, inasmuch as he hated him 
not t in time past. 

7 Wherefore I command thee, saying. 
Thou shalt separate three cities for thee. 

8 And if the Lord thy God "= enlarge thy 
coast, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, 
and give thee all the land which he 
promised'' to give unto thy fathers; 

9 If thou shalt keep all these command- 
ments to do them, which I command thee 
this day, to love the Lord thy God, and 
to walk ever in his ways ; then shalt thou 



add" three cities more for thee, beside 
these three : 

10 That innocent blood be not shed in 
thy land, which the Lord thy God givetli 
thee for an inheritance, and so blood be 
upon thee. 

1 1 ^ But ''if any man hate his neighbor, 
and lie in wait for him, and rise up against 
him, and smite him + mortally that he die, 
and fleeth into one of these cities ; 

12 Then the elders of his city shall send 
and fetch him thence, and deliver him into 
the hand of the avenger of blood, that he 
may die. 

13 Thine eye shall not pity him, but 
thou shalt put away the guilt of innocent 
blood from Israel, that it may go well 
with thee. 

14 ^ Thou shalt not remove thy neigh- 
bor's ? landmark, which they of old time 
have set in thine inheritance, which thou 
shalt inherit in the land that the Lord 
thy God giveth thee to possess it. 

15 TfOne ''witness shall not rise up 
against a man for any iniquity, or for any 
sin, in any sin that he sinneth : at the 
mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth 
of three witnesses, shall the matter be 
established. 

16 T[ If a false witness rise up against 
any man to testify against him ^ that ivhich 
is wrong; 

17 Then both the men, between whom 
the controversy is, shall stand before the 
Lord, before the priests and the judges, 
which shall be in those days ; 

18 And the judges shall make diligent 
inquisition: and behold, i/the witness be 
a false witness, and hath testified falsely 
against his brother; 

19 Then 'shall ye do unto him, as he 
had thought to have done unto his broth- 
er : so shalt thou put the evil away from 
among you. 



chap. 12:29 * Heb. in/ieri<«t, or j»o«i«»«f. 1> chap. 4 : 41, third day. cEx. 34:'24. d Gen. 1.5; 1&-21. e Joshua 20 : 7, 8. 

Ex. 21: 1.3: Num. rii: 10, etc.; .losh. iO:^-?. t Heb. /rom f Gen. 9: 6; Exodus 21 : 1-2, etc. ; Prov. 28:17. J Heb. in /t/e. 

yesterday the third day. % Heb. iron. % Heb. wood. \\ Heb. E Hosea 5 : 10. h 2 Cor. 13 : 1. | Or, falling away, i Proverbs 

findeth. " Heb. tmile him in life, f Heb. from yesterday the 19:5, 9; Dan. 6: 24. 



12. Pretended intercourse with evil spirits, and 
all seeking of information or any good from those 
who pretend to have such intercourse, are an abom- 
ination in the sight of God. 

18. Moses was in various respects an eminent 
type of Christ, especially in acting as mediator be- 
tween Grod and the people, and making known to 
them his will. 

19. If he who rejected the testimony of Moses 
and despised his law, died without mercy, of how 
much sorer punishment will he be thought worthy 
who rejects the testimony of Christ and despises his 
commands ? Heb. 10 : 28, 29. 

22. G-od has given to men, in the holy Scrip- 
tures, the means of judging, and by these they are 
bound to judge whether those who profess to speak 
in his name, do or do not declare his truth. Acts 
17:11. 



CHAPTER XIX. 
2. Separate three cities ; to be cities of refuge 
on the west side of Jordan, as he already had done 
on the east side. Chap. 4 : 4 1^3. 

12. Deliver him into the liand of the aven- 
ger ; after he had been proved guilty of murder. 

13. Shall iiot pity him ; in any such way as to 
prevent his execution. 

14. Landmark ; that which showed the division 
line between the property of one man and another. 

15. One jvitness shall not rise ; a man shall not 
be condemned on the testimony of one witness only. 

18. I)i.quisition ; inquiry. 

19. Do Huto him; he shall receive the punish- 
ment which he sought to bring on another. 

I.VSTRUCTIONS 
7. Great care should be taken that men do not 
suffer for that of which they are not guilty. 
255 



Laws to be 



DEUTERONOMY XX, 



observed in war. 



20 And those which remain shall hear, 
and fear, and shall henceforth commit no 
more any such evil among you. 

•21 And thine eye shall not pity; ^hut 
life shall go for life, eye for eye, tooth for 
tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot. 

CHAPTER XX. 

I The pdest's' exhortation to encourage the people to 
battle. 5 The officers' proclamation who are to be 
ilismissed from the war. 10 IIow to use the cities 
that accept or refuse the proclamation of peace. 16 
AVhal cities must be devoted. 19 Trees of man's 
meat must not be destroyed in the siege. 

'TTT'HEN thou goest out to battle against 
\ V thine enemies, and seest '' horses, 
and chariots, and a people more than thou, 
be not afraid of them : for the Lord thy 
God is with thee, which brought thee up 
out of the land of Egypt. 

2 And it shall be, when ye are come 
nigh unto the battle, that the priest shall 
approach and speak unto the people, 

3 And shall say unto them. Hear, 
Israel, ye approach this day unto battle 
against your enemies : let not your hearts 
faint,* fear not, and do not t tremble, nei- 
ther be yc *= terrified because of them; 

4 For ""the Lord your God is he that 
iTocth Avith you, to fight for you again.st 
your enemies, to save you. 

5 T[And the officers shall speak unto 
the people, saying. What man is there that 
liath built a new house, and hath not ''ded- 
icated it? let him go and return to his 
house, lest he die in the battle, and an- 
other man dedicate it. 

<j And Mhat man i.s- Ac that hath planted 
a vineyard, and hath not yet t eaten of it? 
let Hum also go and return unto his house, 
lest he die in the battle, and « another 
jnan eat of it. 

7 And what man is there that hath be- 
trothed a Avife, and hatli not taken her? 
let him go and return unto his house, lest 
he die in the bntlle, and another man take 
her. 

8 And the officers shall speak further 



What •> man is there that is fearful and faint- 
I hearted ? let him go and return unto his 

house, lest 'his brethren's heart ^ faint as 

well as his heart. 

i 9 And it shall be, when the officers have 
j made an end of speaking unto the people, 
I that they shall make captains of the ar- 
I mies llto lead the people. 

1 1[ When thou comest nigh unto a 
city to fight against it, then proclaim 
peaceJ unto it. 

1 1 And it shall be, if it make thee an- 
swer of peace, and open unto thee, then 
it shall be, that all the people that is found 
therein shall be tributaries unto thee, and 
they'' shall serve thee. 

12 And if it will make no peace with 
thee, but will make war against thee, then 
thou shalt besiege it : 

13 And when the Lord thy God hath 
delivered it into thy hands, thou 'shalt 
smile every male thereof with the edge of 
the sword : 

14 But the women, and the little ones, 
and the '"cattle, and all that is in the city, 
even all the spoil thereof, shalt thou *take 
unto thyself; and thou " shalt eat the spoil 
of thine enemies, which the Lord thy God 
hath given thee. 

1 5 Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities 
tvhich are very far off from thee, which 
are not of the cities of these nations. 

i 16 But of the cities of these people, 
: which the Lord thy God doth give thee 

for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive 

nothing" that breatheth : 

17 But thou shalt utterly destroy them; 
namely, the Hittites, and the Amorites, 
the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, the 

Hivites, and the Jebusites; as the Lord 
thy God hath commanded thee : 

18 That Pthey teach you not to do after 
all their abominations, which they have 

I done unto their gods ; so should ye sin 
against the Lord your God. 



• Lev. 24 


:l<t 


20. 


b ra»lm 20 


:7. 




• Hcb 


lie lender, t Heb. 


make hatte 


U 


1. M 


Ifi. 


c l8n. 


51 


7 


8. <l 


rlinp 


1 : 30 ; 3 : 22 ; 


JrmlluniS: 


(1; 


•i CI. 


ron. 13:12; 


32 


7 


8. • 


Nell. 


2:27; Psalm 


30, title, t 


He 


). made it 


comjnon. 


l.p 


V. 19:-; 


■?, 2.1. 


' olinp. 24 : t,. 


It chnp. 28 : 


tl). 


h J 


udge 


7:3. 


i 


Su 


nil)ers 


K : <l. 


i Heb. melt. 



13. If men are proved to be {jnilty of murder, no 
pity or compassion should save them from the pun- 
i.^binent which God requires to be inflicted on them. 

II. Every attempt of men to appropriate to them- 
sflves what belongs to others is a sin against God, 
:iiid exposes those who are Kuillj of it to his wrath. 

■Jl. Few crimes are more oflensive to God than 
bearinij false witness; and whether false accusers 
meet due punishment or not in tliis world, continu- 
ing; iiripenitent the^ will notcscapr; it in the world to 
come. 

CHAPTER XX. 

1. TIfiue etiemirf ; foreii^n nations wlio should 
make war upon the Israelites, or against whom God 
should call the Israelites to make war. Ver. 4, 15. 
256 



II Heb. to be in the head of the people, j 2 Samuel, 20:19-22. 
k Lev. 2.1 : 44-46. 1 Num 31 : 7-9. n. Josh. 8:2. * Hih. spoil 
n Jo8hun22:8. o chap. 7:1-4; Numbers 21 : 2, 3, 3.S; Joshua 
11:14. p cbap. 12:30,31; £xodus33:33; Psa. 106 : 34-10 ; 1 Cur. 
15:33. 



5. Dedicated it ; by acknowledging the good- 
ness of God in giving it, feasting on the bountie.-, of 
his providence, and seeking his blessing. 

7. Betiothed a wife ; engaged to marry her. 

8. Return unto )iis house; to free the army 
from all who were unwilling to go into the battle. 

10. Proclaim peace; propose terms of peace. 
Ver. 11. 

13. Smite every male ; this was directed by 
God as a punishment for their sins, and was de- 
signed so to weaken the nation that they would not 
be likelv to make war upon the Israelites in future. 

16. These people; the Canaanites, who were 
by God devoted to destruction, and whose land the 
Israelites were to possess. 



Of murder^ when the 



DEUTERONOMY XXI. 



slayer Is unknown. 



city a long time, in making war against 
it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the 
trees thereof by forcing an axe against 
them : for thou raayest eat of them, and 
thou shalt not cut them down (*for the 
tree of the field is man's life) Ho employ 
them in the siege : 

20 Only the trees which thou knowest 
that they be not trees for meat, thou shalt 
destroy and cut them *down; and thou 
shalt build bulwarks against the city that 
raaketh war with thee, until it the sub- 
dued. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

1 The expiation of ail uncertain murder. 10 The usage 
of a captive taken to wife. 15 The first-bom is not 
to he disinherited upon private affection. 18 A stub- 
born son is to be stoned to death. 22 The malefactor 

inust not liang all night on a tree. 

[F one be found slain in the land which 
the Lord thy God giveth thee to pos- 
sess it, lying in the field, and it be not 
known who hath slain him ; 

2 Then thy elders and thy judges shall 
come forth, and they shall measure unto 
the cities which are round about him that 
is slain : 

3 And it shall be, that the city ivhich is 
next unto the slain man, even the elders 
of that city shall take a heifer, which hath 
not been wrought with, and which hath 
not drawn in the yoke ; 

4 And the elders of that city shall bring 
down the heifer unto a rough valley, 
which is neither eared nor sown, and 
shall strike off the heifer's neck there in 
the valley. 

5 And the priests the sons of Levi shall 
come near; for ''them the Lord thy God 
hath chosen to minister unto him, and to 
bless *= in the name of the Lord; and by 



» Or, /or, man, the tree of the field w to be employed in the 
tUge. \ Ueh. to go from before thee, a .7er. n : 6. t Heh. come 
down, b 1 Chron. 2:! : 1.3. c Numbers 6 : 2^-27. % Heb. mouth. 
4 chap. 17:8-10. e Psalm 26 : 6 ; Mat. 27 ; 24. f 2King3, 24: 4 ; 

19. Not destroj/ the trees ; the fruit-trees. The 
tree — is mail's life ; its fruit is the means of his 
support. 

20. Not trees for meat ; not fruit-trees. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. Men should not go to war except when G-od 
requires it ; and when he does, their dependence 
should be not on themselves or their fellow-men, but 
on him; and tiieir object not their own gratification 
or aggrandizement, but the promotion of his glory 
and the highest good of mankind. 

5. Tiie Lord is disposed to gratify all the innocent 
and useful affections of men, and not to call them 
to arduous, self-denying, and dangerous duties, ex- 
cept when his glory and their good require it. 

II. Peace, wherever it can consistently be main- 
tained is desired by God, and should be by all men. 
Mat. 5:9, 43-48; Rom. 12:18; 14:19; Heb. 
12:14. 

18. As it is wicked to kill any human being un- 
less God require it, so it is wicked to spare any 



their * word shall every "^controversy and 
every stroke be tried : 

6 And all the elders of that city, tliat arc 
next unto the slain man, shall '^wash their 
hands over the heifer that is beheaded in 
the valley : 

7 And they shall answer and say, Our 
hands have not shed this blood, neither 
have our eyes seen it. 

8 Be merciful, Lord, unto thy people 
Israel, whom thou hast redeemed, and lay 
not "^innocent blood II unto thy people of 
Israel's charge. And the blood shall be 
forgiven them. 

9 So shalt thou put Saway the guilt of 
innocent blood from among you, when 
thou shalt do that which is right in the 
sight of the Lord. 

10 ^When thou goest forth to war 
against thine enemies, and the Lord thy 
God hath delivered them into thy hands, 
and thou hast taken them captive, 

1 1 And seest among the captives a beau- 
tiful ''woman, and hast a desire unto 
her, that thou wouldest have her to thy 
wife ; 

12 Then thou shalt bring her home to 
thy house: and she shall 'shave bedhead, 
and *pare her nails; 

13 And she shall put the raiment of 
her captivity from off" her, and shall re- 
main in thy house, and bewail her J fa- 
ther and her mother a full month: and 
after that thou shalt go in unto her, and 
be her husband, and she shall be thy 
wife. 

14 And it shall be, if thou have no de- 
light in her, then thou shalt let her go 
whither she will ; but thou shalt not '' sell 
her at all for money, thou shalt not make 
merchandise of her, because thou hast 
humbled ' her. 



Jonah I 


14. 1 


Heb. 


n the midtt 


g chap. 


19 


13. h 


Numberi 


.•51 : 18. 


ICor. 


ll:fi. 


* Heb 


make, or drett 


; ( 


r.mffe 


r to grotm. 


j Psalm 45 : 10 ; 


Luke 


14:26. 


k 


Exodus 21 


8. 


1 chap. 22:2'.!; 


Gen. 34 


2. 

















whom he requires to be slain. 1 Samuel, 15: 3. 8, 
11, 23. 

CHAPTER XXj. 

4. Eared; ploughed. Gen. 45 : 7. 

6. Shall ivash their hands ; a profession of 
their innocence by actions. Ver. 7, 8. 

9. The guilt of iiiuocnit blood; these trans- 
actions strikingly showed God's abhorrence of mur- 
der and the guilt of committing it, and were design- 
ed as a safeguard to human life. 

12. Pare her nails; the word rendered pare 
signifies to make or dress, and may mean to let 
them grow, as persons did in mourning. 

14. Not sell her — for money ; conquerors were 
accustomed to sell those whom they took in war, 
but God in this case forbade the* Israelites to do it; 
not to sanction as right in any case the practice here 
forbidden, but in some measure to lessen its evils 
■while it continued ; and open the way for it, under 
increasing light and love, to be ultimately done 
away. 

257 



DEUTERONOMY XXII. 



Tlie rebellious son. 

15 H If a man have two wives, one "be- 
loved, and another ''hated, and they have 
borne him children, both the beloved and 
the hated ; and if the first-born son be 
hers that was hated ; 

16 Then it shall be, when he maketh his 
sons to inherit that which he hath, that he 
may not make the son of the beloved first- 
born "^before the son of the hated, U'hich^ 
is indeed the first-born : 

17 But he shall acknowledge the son of 
the hated for the first-born, by * giving 
him a double portion of all that *he hath : 
for he is the beginning of his strength ; 
the ^ right of the first-born is his. 

18 H If a man have a stubborn and re- 
bellious son, which will not ""obey the 
voice of his father, or the voice of his 
mother, and that, when they have schas- 
tened him, will not hearken unto them ; 

19 Then shall his father and his mother 
lay hold on him, and bring him out unto 
the elders of his city, and unto the gate of 
his place ; 

20 And they shall say unto the 'elders 
of his city. This our son is stubborn and 
rebellious, he will not 'obey our voice; he 
is a J glutton, and a drunkard. 

21 And ^all the men of his city shall 
stone him with stones, that he 'die: so 
shalt thou put evil away from among you ; 
and all Israel shall hear, and fear. 

22 H And if a man have committed a sin 
worthy"" of death, and he be to be put to 
death, and thou hang him on a tree; 

23 His "body shall not remain all night 
upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise 
bury him that day ; (for he that is hanged 
is + accursed of God ;) that thy land be not 
defiled," which the Lord thy God giveth 
thee for an inheritance. 

• Gen. 29 : 18, 20. b Gen. 29 : 31-,'t3. c I Clir. 6 : 2 ; 26: 10; 2CIir. 
11:21,22. d lCliron.6:l,2. *Heh.is/ounduiithhim.Gen.49:X 
Gen. 25: 31-34. fEx.20:12. e Prr)v.l3:24; 19: 18. h ctian.2.'H:7. 
• Pror. 29:17.' j PrOT. 19:26; 23: 19-21. kProv. 29:1. 1 chap. 



Humane precepts. 



CHAPTER XXII. ^'i/Z: 

1 Of humanity toward brethren. 5 The sex is to he 
distinguished by apparel. 6 The dam is not to be 
taken with her younp ones. 8 The house must have 
batilements. 9 Confusion is to be avoided. 12 
Frin;;es upon the vesture. 13 The punishment of 
him that slandereth his wife. 20, '2"i Of adultery, 23 
of rape, 28 and of fornication. 30 Incest. 

THOU P shalt not see thy brother's ox or 
his sheep go astray, and *> hide thyself 
from them : thou shalt in any case bring 
them again unto thy brother. 

2 And if thy brother be not nigh unto 
thee, or if thou know him not, then thoti 
shalt bring it unto thine own house, and 
it shall be with thee until thy brother seek 
after it, and thou shalt restore it to him 
again. 

3 In like manner shalt thou do with his 
ass; and so shalt thou do with his rai- 
ment; and with all lost things of thy 
brother's, which he hath lost, and thou 
hast found, shalt thou do likewise : thou 
mayest not hide thyself. 

4 H Thou '' shalt not see thy brother's 
ass or his ox fall down by the way, and 
hide thyself from them : thou shalt sure- 
ly help him to "lift them up again. 

5 T[ The woman shall not wear that 
which pertaineth unto a man, neither 
shall a man put on a woman's garment : 
for all that do so are 'abomination unto 
the Lord thy God. 

6 ^ If a bird's nest chance to be before 
thee in the way in any tree, or on the 
ground, ichethcr they he young "ones, or 
eggs, ami the dam sitting upon the young, 
or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take the 
dam^ with the young: 

7 But thou shalt in any wise let the dam 
go, and take the young to thee; that it 
may" be well with thee, and that thou 
mayest * prolong thy days. 



l.*). One beloved, and another hated ; this reg- 
ulation did not imply that it was right for a man 
to have two wives, or to hate either; but, like the 
regulation ver. 14, was designed to lessen the evils 
of a wrong practice, while men were so ignorant, 
wicked, debased, and cruel as to continu*" it. 

20. Say unto the elders ; concerning their son, 
that and that only which was true. 

21. The men of his city shall stone him; to 
show God's abhorrence of the son's conduct, and pre- 
vent others from imitating his example. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. The great doctrine of atonement by the sub- 
stitution of the death of the innocent for the guilty, 
is taught often, and in various ways, ttirougliout tht- 
Bible, showing the great importance of the right un- 
derstanding and use of this truth. 

n. The guilt of murder rests upon every land in 
which it is committed, if proper mi'iisures are not 
taken to acquit the innocent and punish the guilty. 

17. Though all wrong practices among the Israel- 
ites, on account of their wickedness and hardness of 
258 



13:,5,ll. HI rliap. 19:fi; A.t,..2S:ll,25. n .losll. 8:29; 10:S«,S7; 
.Io)inl9:31. f Heb Mfonvt o/Gorf. Num.2,S:4; GbI.3: 13. o Wnm. 
35:33,34. pEx.23:4. ql8n..=;8:7. rEx.23:ft. •Heb.H:12,13 
lch.l8:12. nl.ukel2:6. » L^v.«:28. wch.4:4a x PrOT.2<J:4. 

heart, were not at once discontinued, or in the course 
of providence abolished, God \A-as kind and gracious 
in giving them regulations which, while those prac- 
tices continued, lessened in some measure their evils. 

20. Rebellion of children against the wise and good 
instruction and authority of parents is highly offen- 
sive to God, and exposes those who are guilty of it 
to be abandoned of him, and given up to vice, infamy, 
and ruin. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

1. Hide thyself from them ; pass by as if you 
did not see them ; refuse to care for them. 

5. Shall not wear that ; because it tended to 
impurity and wickedness. 

6. Thoii shalt not take the dam; it would be 
cruel, and tend to sanction cruelty, and also to ex- 
tirpate that species of birds. 

7. Take t/ir young ; that is, the young only: 
not a command to take young birds from the nest, 
but a prohibition of their being taken with the 
parent oird. Prolong thy days; by showing a 
tender and kind spirit, even to the brute creation. 



Of a suspected wife. 



DEUTERONOMY XXII. 



Of adultery and rape. 



B.'"i^f 8 IT When thou buildest a new- 
house, then thou shalt make a battlement 
for thy * roof, that thou bring not blood upon 
thy house, if any man fall from thence. 

9 TI Thou ''shalt not sow thy vineyard 
with divers seeds: lest the * fruit of thy 
seed which thou hast sown, and the fruit 
of thy vineyard, be defiled. 

10 H Thou shalt not "^ plough with an ox 
and an ass together. 

1 1 H Thou ''shalt not wear a garment of 
divers sorts, as of woollen and linen to- 
gether. 

12 1[ Thou shalt make thee "fringes 
upon the four t quarters of thy vesture, 
wherewith thou coverest thyself. 

13 1[If any man take a wife, and ''go in 
unto her, and hate her, 

1 4 And give s occasions of speech against 
her, and bring up an evil name upon her, 
and say, I took this woman, and when I 
came to her, I found her not a maid ; 

15 Then shall the father of the damsel, 
and her mother, take and bring forth the 
tokens of the damsel's virginity unto the 
elders of the city in the gate : 

1 6 And the damsel's father shall say unto 
the elders, I gave my daughter unto this 
man to wife, and he hateth her; 

17 And lo, he hath given occasions of 
speech against her, saying, I found not thy 
daughter a maid ; and yet these are the 
tokens of my daughter's virginity. And 
they shall spread the cloth before the 
elders of the city. 

18 And the elders of that city shall take 
that man and chastise him ; 

19 And they shall amerce him in a hun- 
dred shekels of silver, and give them unto 
the father of the damsel, because he hath 
brought up an evil name upon a virgin of 
Israel; and she shall be his wife : he ''may 
not put her away all his days. 

20 But if this thing be true, and the tokens 
of virginity be not found for the damsel ; 



> Is 


.22: 


; Jer. 19 


1.1: 


Mat 


10 : il. 


b 


Lev. 


19: 19. 


* Heb. 


futncs 


e 


2 Cor. «:14-lti. 


i 


Lev. 19: 


19. 


e 


Numbers 15 


38; 


Mat. 2:! : 5. 


t Heb. u 


tngs 


! 


Genesis 29 


•Jl. 


S ITin 


.,■> 


14. 


h M«t. 


1<):S 


9. i Get 


.M 


7; 


Juilg. 20 


s, 


10; 


2 Sam. 13 


12 


1.3. 


J Lev. 


21:9 


k cbap. 


i:i : 5. 


Lev. 20 


:I0; N 


imbers 5 


22- 


27; 



8. A battlement for thy roof; a wall or railing 
around the roof, to keep persons from falling off; 
as their roofs were flat, and were often re.sorted to 
for air and exercise. 

9-12. Divers sorts; these directions were de- 
signed to prevent the Israelites from imitating the 
heathen, and keep them a separate people. 

13-21. Occasions of speech against her ; these 
directions were designed to prevent unjust accusa- 
tions, to protect the innocent, and punish the guiltv. 

"22. They shall both of them die ; this was on 
the ground tliat both were consenting to the wick- 
edness. 

L\STRUCTIONS. 

2. The Okl Testament as well .as the New requires 
men to do to others as in like circumstances they 
ought to wish others to do to them. 



] 21 Then they shall bring out the damsel 
I to the door of her father's house, and the 
men of her city shall stone her with stones 
that she die; because she hath wrought 
folly' in Israel, to J play the whore in her 
father's house: so ''shalt thou put evil 
away from among you. 
{ 22 1[If 'a man be found lying with a 
' woman married to a husband, then they 
shall both of them die, hath the man that 
lay with the woman, and the woman: so 
shalt thou put away evil from Israel. 

23 H If a damsel that is a virgin be '"be- 
trothed unto a husband, and a man find 
her in the city, and lie with her ; 

24 Then ye shall bring them both out 
unto the gate of that city, and ye shall 
stone them with stones that they die ; the 
damsel, because she cried not, being in the 
city ; and the man, because he hath ° hum- 
bled his neighbor's wife: so °thou shalt 
put away evil from among you. 

25 T[ But if a man find a betrothed dam- 
sel in the field, and the man t force her. 
and lie with her; then the man only that 
lay with her shall die : 

26 But unto the damsel thou shalt do 
nothing; there is in the damsel no sin 
worthy of death : for as when a man riseth 
against his neighbor, and slayeth him, 
even so is this matter : 

27 For he found her in the field, and the 
betrothed damsel cried, and there teas none 
to save her. 

28 T[ If a P man find a damsel that is a 
virgin, which is not betrothed, and lay 
hold on her, and lie with her, and they be 
found ; 

29 Then the man that lay w"ith her shall 
give unto the damsel's father fifty shekels 
of silver, and she shall be his wife ; be- 
cause he hath humbled her, he may not 
put her away all his days. 

30 If A iman shall not take his father's 
wife, nor ''discover his father's skirt. 

Ezekiel 23: 45-18; Jolm8:.5; Heb. 13 : 4. m Matthew 1 : 18, 19. 
n rhap. 21 : 14. o ver. 21, 22 ; 1 Cor. n : 2, 13. t Or, takt ttrong 
hold of her. iSi\m.\3:H. p Exodus 22: 16, 17. q chap. 27:20; 
Leviticus 18:8; 20:11; lCor.S:l-13. rRutU3:9; Ezekiel 
16:a 

3. Things which others have lost, and which we 
find, are not ours if by using suitable means we can 
find the owner. 

4. The law of God requires us to e.xercise com- 
passion not only towards our fellow-men, but also 
towards animals in distress, and to make all proper 
efforts to relieve them. 

^). All practices which tend to impurity of heart 
or of life, in ourselves or others, should be avoided. 

fi. The directions of God are suited to lessen, and 
should they be perfectly followed, to do away the 
selfishness and cruelty of the human heart, and lead 
it to delight in the happiness of the whole sensitive 
creation. 

7. The manifestation of a kind and compassionate 
disposition is favorable to the continuance of life, 
prosperity, and happiness. 

259 



Who may not enter 



DEUTERONOMY XXIII. 



the consi'csatwn. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

1 WTio may or may not enter into the congregation. 

9 Uncleanness to be avoided in the host. 15 Of the 
fugitive servant. 17 Of filthiness l^ Of abomina- 
ble sacrifices. 19 Of usury. 21 Of vows. 24 Of 
trespasses. 

HE that is 'wounded in the stones, or 
hath his privy member cut off, shall 
not enter into the congregation of the 
Lord. 

2 A ''bastard shall not enter into the 
congregation of the Lord; even to his 
tenth generation shall he not enter into 
the congregation of the Lord. 

3 An "^Ammonite or ''Moabite sliall not 
enter into the congregation of the Lord ; 
even to their tenth generation shall they 
not enter into the congregation of the 
Lord for ever: 

4 Because "they met you not with bread 
and with water in the way, when ye came 
forth out of Egypt; and because they 
liired against thee '^Balaam the son of Beor 
of Pethor of Mesopotamia, to curse thee. 

5 Nevertheless, the Lord thy God would 
not hearken unto Balaam ; but the Lord 
thy God s turned the curse into a blessing 
unto thee, because the Lord thy God loved 
thee. 

6 Thou '' shalt not seek their peace nor 
their * prosperity all thy days for ever. 

7 ^ Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite ; 
for he is thy 'brother : thou shalt not ab- 
hor an Egyptian ; because J thou wast a 
.stranger in liis land. 

8 The children that arc begotten of them 
shall ''enter into the congregation of the 
Lord in their third generation. 

!) ^When the host goetli forth against 
thine enemies, then keep 'thee from every 
wicked thing. 

10 1[If "'there be among you any man, 

« Lev. 21 : 17, 21 ; 22 : 22-24. b Zecli. 9:6. c Nell. 13:1,2; 
188.66:3; Lam. 1:10. d Ruth 4: 10, etc. o ch:ip. 2:29. f Num. 
22:6, etc. eMicnli6:6. h Ezra 9: 12. * Heb. food, i Gen. 
26:24-26; Obadiah 10, 12 ; M:il.l:2. j chap. 10: 19; Exodus 
22:21; 23:9; Lev. 19:34. k Rom. 3: 29, 30; Eph. 2: 13. 1 .losh. 
6:18. m Lev. 15:16. t Heb. <urni;Wi toward. n Lev. Li : 6. 

8. Carelessness, as well as cruelty, is offensive to 
'jod and tends to bring numerous evils upon men. 
If others suffer through our neglect, we shall be held 
responsible at the divine tribunal. 

"9-12. Jehovah delights in harmony, propriety, de- 
cency, and order. Every thing contrary to these, and 
tending to corrupt the imagination, pervert the judg- 
ment, or deprave the heart, is offensive in his sight. 

21. Marriage is an institution of God, established 
at the creation, and to continue to the end of time. 
Its obligations are most sacred, and those who vio- 
late them are exposed to his awful curse. 

2.5. By the penalty which God under the Jewish 
dispensation affixed to adultery, he showed his deep 
and unchanging abhorrence of that crime, and the 
sore punishment which, without repentance, awaits 
the guilty in the future world. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 
1. Not enter into the congregntion of the 
Lord; not be admitted to worship in the temple. 
260 



that is not clean by reason of un- '^'.c.mm: 
cleanness that chanceth him by night, 
then shall he go abroad out of the camp, 
he shall not come within the camp : 

1 1 But it shall be, when evening tcometh 
on, he shall "wash him.'iclf with water; 
and when the sun is down, he shall come 
into the camp again. 

12 ^ Thou shalt have a place also with- 
out the camp, whither thou shalt go forth 
abroad : 

13 And thou shalt have a paddle upon 
thy weapon ; and it shall be, when thou 
wilt+ ease thyself abroad, thou shalt dig 
therewith, and shalt turn back and cover 
that which comcth from tliee : 

14 For the Lord thy God "walketh in 
the midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, 
and to give up thine enemies before thee ; 
therefore shall thy camp be holy : that 
he see no ^unclean thing in thee, and 
turn away from thee. 

15 ^ Thou shalt not deliver unto his 
master P tlie servant which is escaped 
from his master unto thee : 

1 6 He shall dwell with thee, even among 
you, in that place which he shall choose 
in one of thy gates, where it H iiketh him 
best: thou ''shalt not oppress him. 

17 ^ There shall be no * whore of the 
daughters^ of Israel, nor a "sodomite of 
the sons of Israel. 

18 Thou shalt not bring the hire of a 
whore, or the price of a dog, into the house 
of the Lord thy God for any vow: for 
even both these are abomination unto the 
Lord thy God. 

19 li Thou 'shalt not lend upon usury 
to thy brother; usury of money, usury of 
victuals, usury of any thing that is lent 
upon usury : 



t Heb. tiltcst doiuii. o Lev. 26:12; 2 Cor. 6:16. 5 Heb. riu*Irf. 
nes! of anrj thing, p 1 Samuel, 30 : 15. \\ HAi. it good far him. 
q E.xodus 22 : 21. * Or, todomiteti. Rom. 1 : 26. ' Lev. 19 : 29. 
« Genesis IH : 4, 6 : 2 Kings, 23 : 7 ; Rom. 1 : 27, 28. t Ex. 22 : 26 ; 
Lev. 2.T : .'!.'>-.37 ; Neb. .S : 2, 7 ; r»a.l.-.:5; Ezek. 18 : 8, 17; 22 : 12; 
Luke 6: 34, 3A. 



This was designed to prevent Israelitish parents from 
mutilating their children, as w.as often done among 
the heathen. 

3. Ammonite — Moabite ; these nations bor- 
dered upon that part of Canaan which lay east of 
the Jordan. 

7. Brother; relative, being descended like them- 
selves from Abraham and Isaac. 

8. Shall initi'r into the congregation. ; become 
entitled to all the privileges of an Israelite, if they 
embrace his religion. 

9. The host ; the army of Israel. 

10-11. Wash himself; these regulations were 
designed to promote cleanliness and a conviction 
of the necessity of internal as well as external pu- 
rity. 

18. The hire; the wages of iniquity must not be 
offered to the Lord, as was done by the he.^then. 

19. Usury ; interest. This was designed to 
inculcate and increase the habit of assisting and 
doing good to one another as the people of God. 



Laws concerning vows. 



DEUTERONOMY XXIV. divorce, mamtealing, etc. 



kc.'i%f.' 20 Unto a ^stranger thou mayest 
lend upon usury ; but unto thy brother 
thou shalt not lend upon usury : that ''the 
Lord thy God may bless thee in all that 
thou settcst thy hand to in the land whith- 
er thou goest to possess it. 

2 1 ^ When thou shalt ■-" vow a vow unto the 
Lord thy God, thou shalt not slack to pay it ; 
for the Lord thy God will surely require 
it of thee ; and it would be sin in thee. 

22 But if thou shalt forbear to vow, it 
shall be no sin in thee. 

23 That '^ which is gone out of thy lips 
thou shalt keep and perform ; even a free- 
will-offering, according as thou hast vowed 
unto the Lord thy God, which thou hast 
promised with thy mouth. 

24 ^ When thou comest into thy neigh- 
bor's vineyard, then thou mayest eat 
grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure ; but 
thou shalt not put aiiy in thy vessel. 

25 W^hen thou comest into the standing 
corn of thy neighbor, then thou mayest 
pluck ** the ears with thy hand; but thou 
shalt not move a sickle unto thy neigh- 
bor's standing corn. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

I Of divorce. 5 A new married man goeth not to war. 
6. 10 Of pledfies. 7 Of manstealers. 8 Of leprosy. 
14 The hire is to be given. 16 Of justice. 19 Of 
charity. 

"YTT^HEN a man hath taken a wife, and 
V \ married her, and it come to pass that 
.she find no favor in his eyes, because he 
hath found *some uncleanness in her; 
then let him write her a bill of t divorce- 



»ihap. 15:3. b chap. 15: 10; Lev. 19: 34. c Numhera 30 : 2 ; 
Ecrl. r, ; 4. 5. d Psa. 6ti : 13, 14 : I IH : 18. e Mat. 12:1. * Heb. 
matter of nakedncis. ^ He\>. cutting off. f Matthew 6 : 31, 33. 



24. Eat grapes thy Jill ; enough to satisfy pres- 
ent want. Not put any in thy vessel ; to carry- 
it away. 

25. Corn; grain. Mat. 12:1, 2. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Every thing should be avoided by parents 
which tends to deprive children of .tny of the privi- 
leges and ble.ssings of the people of God. 

3. Sins committed by parents may, long after they 
aredead, entail greatevilson theirchildren — and sins 
committed by rulers, great evils on the people. 

9-11. The individuals of an army, even when 
going forth to battle, are all, from the commander- 
in-chief to the lowest subaltern, sacredly bound to 
be holy in body and spirit ; to indulge no feelings 
and allow no actions which shall not be pleasing to 
God and tend to fit them for the purity, the employ- 
ments, and the bliss of heaven. 

16. The oppression of servants, depriving them 
of their rights, or in any way injuring them, is for- 
bidden by Jehovah. 

18. The gains and the practices of iniquity are an 
abomination to the Lord ; and no offerings are ac- 
ceptable to him but those of honest, upright, believ- 
ing, and affectionate hearts. 

20. Proper compensation for the use of money 
or any other properly is not in itself wrong ; but we 
should kindly assist tiie poor, and as we have op- 
portunity and ability do good to all, especially to 



ment,'' and give it in her hand, and send 
her out of his house. 

2 And when she is departed out of his 
house, she may go and be another man's 
wife. 

3 And if the latter husband hate her, 
and write her a bill of divorcement, and 
giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out 
of his house ; or if the latter husband die, 
which took her to be his wife; 

4 Her former husband, which sent her 
away, may not take her ^ again to be his 
wife, after that she is defiled ; for that j.v 
abomination before the Lord : and thou 
shalt not cause the ''land to sin, which 
the Lord thy God giveth thee for an in- 
heritance. 

5 ^ When ' a man hath taken a new wife, 
he shall not go out to war, tneither shall 
he be charged with any business : hut he 
shall be free at home one year, and shall 
cheerJ up his wife which he hath taken. 

6 ^ No man shall take the nether or the 
upper millstone to pledge : for he taketh 
a man^s life to pledge. 

7 ^If ''a man be found stealing any of 
his brethren of the children of Israel, and 
maketh merchandise of him, or selleth 
him ; then that thief shall die ; and thoti 
shalt put 'evil away from among you. 

8 ^ Take heed in the plague of "" leprosy, 
that thou observe diligently, and do ac- 
cording to all that the priests the Levites 
shall teach you : as I commanded them, so 
ye shall observe to do. 

9 Remember what the Lord thy God 

g Jer. 3:1. h Lev. 18:2,t-28. i chap. 20:7. Jr Heb. not ana 
thing sliaU pass upon him. j Prov. 5 : 18. k Ex. 21 : 16. 1 chap. 
19 : 19. m Lev. chaps. 13. 14. 



the friends of God and those who will use our kind- 
ness in honoring him. 

23. What we promise, if it is not wicked or im- 
practicable, we should be very careful to do : it is 
better not to promise, than to promise and not 
perform. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

1-1. Send Iter out of his house ; this was not 
a command, and it was a practice contrary to the 
original institution of marriage. God always ab- 
horred it. But on account of the wickedness and 
hardness of their hearts it was for a time suffered, 
and regulations were adopted to lessen its evils. 
Mai. 2:14-16; Mat. 5:31, 32; 19:3-9; Mark 
10 : 2-12. 

5. Free at home one year ; this was suited to 
increase and render more permanent conjugal affec- 
tion, and thus render the family state more useful 
and happy. 

6. Nether; lower. A mayi's life ; that which 
was needful to prepare his food, and thus enable 
him to live. Each family then had a mill in their 
house, and ground their gr.-wn by hand. Ex. 11: 5 ; 
Mat. 24:41. 

7. That thief shall die ; he that stole an ox 
was to restore double, but he that stole a man was 
to die ; so much more wicked was it to steal a man 
than an ox. Ex. 21 : 16 ; 22 : 4. 

S. As I commanded ; Lev. chs. 13, 14. 
261 



Of oppression. 



DEUTERONOMY XXV. 



Of justice and charity. 



did unto "Miriam by the way, after that 
ye were come forth out of Egypt. 

10 1[Whcn thou dost *lend thy brother 
any thing, thou shalt not go into his house 
to fetch his pledge. 

11 Thou shalt stand abroad, and the 
man to whom thou dost lend shall bring 
out the pledge abroad unto thee. 

12 And if the man he poor, thou shalt 
not sleep with his pledge : 

13 In ''any case thou shalt deliver him 
the pledge again when the sun goeth down, 
that he may sleep in his own raiment, and 
bless '■ thee : and it shall be ^ righteousness 
unto thee before the Lord thy God. 

14 11 Thou shalt not oppress a hired ser- 
vant that is poor and needy, whether he be 
of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that 
are in thy land within thy gates : 

15 At his day thou shalt give him his 
hire, neither shall the sun go down upon 
it; for he is poor, and tgetteth his heart 
upon it : lest he " cry against thee unto the 
Lord, and it be sin unto thee. 

1 6 The ''fathers shall not be put to death 
for the children, neither shall the children 
be put to death for the fathers : every 
man shall be put to death for his own sin. 

17 IfThou shalt not pervert the judg- 
ment of the stranger, nor of the ^fatherless ; 
nor take a widow's raiment to pledge : 

18 But ""thou shalt remember that thou 
wast a bondman in Egypt, and tlie Lord 
thy (iod redeemed thee thence : therefore 
I command thee to do this thing. 

I'J U When 'thou cuttestdowntliyharvest 
in thy field, and hast forgot a sheaf in the 
field, thou shalt not go again to fetch it : it 
shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, 
and for the widow ; that the Loud thy God 
may bless thee in all the work of thy hands. 



20 When thou beatest thine olive- *b.'?:?^: 
tree, thou shalt not +go over the boughs 
again : it shall be for the stranger, for the 
fatherless, and for the widow. 

21 When thou gatherest the grapes of 
thy vineyard, thou shalt not glean it ^ af- 
terward: it shall be for the stranger, for 
the fatherless, and for the widow. 

22 And J thou shalt remember that thou 
wast a bondman in the land of Egypt : 
therefore I command thee to do this thing. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

1 Stripfis must not exceed forty. 4 The ox is not to be 
muzzled. 5 Of raising seed unto a brother. 11 Of 
the immodest woman. 13 Of unjust weights. 17 
The memory of Amalek is to be blotted out. 

IF there be a '' controversy between men, 
and they come unto judgment, that the 
judges may judge them ; then they shall 
justify ' the righteous, and condemn the 
wicked. 

2 And it shall be, if the wicked man be 
worthy to be "beaten, that the judge shall 
cause him to lie down, and to be beaten 
before his face, according to his fault, by 
a certain number. 

3 Forty stripes he may give \i\m, and not 
exceed : lest, if he should exceed, and beat 
him above these with many stripes, then 
thy brother should seem "vile unto thee. 

4 H Thou "shalt not muzzle the ox when 
he lltreadeth out the corn. 

5 T[ If brethren dwell together, and one 
of them die, and have no child, the wife 
of the dead shall not marry without unto 
a stranger : her *husband's p brother shall 
go in unto her, and take her to him to 
wife, and perform the duty of a husband's 
brother unto her. 

6 And it shall be, that the first-born 
which she beareth shall i succeed in the 



• Num. 12 : 10. * Heb. lend the loan of any Ihing to. b Ex. 
■22 : 26, JT. c .Job 29 : U-IS ; .11 : 19, 20 ; 2 Cfir. 9 : 1:1, 14. d Grii. 
1.5:6; ■■da. 106 : 31 : 112:9; Dan. 4 : 27 ; .Ti<!<. 2: 15-23. f Heb. 
lifttth hit toul unto it. Ps.l. 25 : 1 ; 86 : 4. t .T,iu. 5:4. f 2 Kings, 
J4:f<,li; .Iff. 31 : 29, 30; Ezekiell8:20. e Ex. 22:22-27: Prov. 
2S:-.'2, M; .ler. 22:3; Zcoli. 7:10; Mai. 3 : 5. h chap. 16 : 12. 

10. Not go iiito his house ; lest he should take 
something as a pledge which the man could not 
well spare. 

12. Not sleep nnth his pledge ; it might be some 
covering which at night the poor man would need. 

13. It shall he righteousness ; doing what 
would be right; and when done with right motives, 
accepted of (rod. 

1.'). At his day ; at the close of his day's service, 
or the time he liad agreed to work. 

16. Every man ; who commits crimes for which 
death is the prescribed penalty. 

18. Do this thing ; n Train from wronging the 
aborer. the stranger, the widow, or the fatherless. 

20. It ; what is left on the trees. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. G-od, as civil ruler among the Jews, suffered, 
and in his providential government he now suffers, 
some things which are contrary to his moral law, 
which it is wicked for men (o do, and which, if they 
do, will draw down upon them his curse. 
262 



i Lev. 19 : 9, 10 : 23 : 2-2 ; Psa. 41:1. t Heb. Aoup/i it a/lfr thee. 
5 Hch. a/le7- thee, i ver. 1«. k rliap. 19:17; E7.ekii-I 44:44. 
1 2Cbron.l9:8; Prov. 17 : 1.1. m Mat 10: 17; I.uke 12:48; 2Cor. 
11:24. ii.Iobl8:3. o I Cor. 9:9; 1 Tim. ft : 18. \\ Heh. thresheth . 
Hotea 10:11. * Ot, next kiniman. Gen. 38:8,9; Ruth 1 : 12, 13. 
p Mat 22 : 24. q Gen. 38 : 8. 



5. Lrreat care should be taken not to interrupt or 
weaken affection between man and wife, but it 
should by all proper means be cherished and per- 
petuated. Eph. 5 : Q.'j-S.l. 

6. Nothing should be taken from a poor man for 
debt which is needful to his subsistence. 

]•'). The oppression of the poor, and withholding 
from hired laborers what is due to them, is an aggra- 
vated offence not only against them, hut against (rod. 

16. No criminal should be punished except for 
his own sins. 

18. The kindness of Grod to ns should lead us to 
be kind to others, especially to the poor, the stranger, 
the widow, and the fatherless. 

CHAPTER. XXV. 

4. Muzzle the o.t. ; to prevent his eating. The 
usual way of threshing grain at that time, was tread- 
ing it out with oxen. 

6. Succeed — his brother; to his inheritance, and 
to his name in the genealogical records. 



The brolher\ wife. 



DEUTERONOMY XXVI. 



Of the first frtiits. 



bc'i^k' name of his brother which is "dead, 
that his name be not put out of Israel. 

7 And if the man like not to take his 
brother's* wife, then let his brother's wife 
go up to the gate unto the elders, and say, 
My husband's brother refuseth to raise up 
unto his brother a name in Israel, he will 
not perform the duty of my husband's 
brother : 

8 Then the elders of his city shall call 
him, and speak unto him : and if he stand 
to it, and say, I like not to take her; 

9 Then shall his brother's wife come 
unto him in the presence of the elders, 
and loose his shoe from off his foot, and 
spit in his face, and shall answer and say. 
So shall it be done unto that man that 
will not build up his brother's house. 

10 And his name shall be called in Israel, 
The house of him that hath his shoe loosed. 

11 T[ When men strive together one with 
another, and the wife of the one draweth 
near for to deliver her husband out of the 
hand of him that smiteth him, and putteth 
forth her hand, and taketh him by the 
secrets ; 

12 Then thou shalt cut off her hand, 
thine eye shall not pity her. 

13 TfThou shalt not have in thy bag 
divers t weights, a great and a small : 

14 Thou shalt not have in thy house 
divers i measures, a great and a small : 

15 But ''thou shalt have a perfect and 
just weight, a perfect and just measure 
shalt thou have: that thy. days may be 
lengthened in the land which the Lord 
thy God giveth thee. 

16 For "^all that do such things, and all 
that do unrighteously, a*-e an abomination 
unto the Lord thy God. 

17 iy Remember what Amalek did unto 
thee by the way, when ye were come 
forth out of Egypt; 

« Ruth 4 : 10, etc. * Or, next kinsman's. f Heb. a stone 
and a stone, f Heh. an ephah ami an epiiah. b Lev. 19 : 35, 36 ; 
Prov. U:l; Ezek. 43:10; Amos 8:5; Micali 6 : II. c 1 Thess. 



10. Hath his shoe loosed; is disgraced in view 
of the people. 

13. A great and a small ; so as to get more 
than just weight when he bought, and give less 
when he sold. 

17. What Amalek did; Ex. 17: 8; Num. 24: 20. 

19. Blot out the remembrance ; utterly destroy 
them. 1 Sam. 1.5: 1-3. 

INSTRUCTION'S. 

1. The acquitting of thp guilty, and the condemn- 
ing of the innocent, are both an abomination to the 
Lord. 

4. The withholding of needful support and com- 
fort even from oxen, is a sin against God ; much 
more is the withholding of them from servants and 
other human beings who labor for our good, and espe- 
cially from those who labor for our spiritual good. 
I Cor. 9:9-11; 1 Tim. ."J : 17, 18. 

10. Various regulations were adopted by God to 
make the Israelites a peculiar people, and keep 
them separate from other nations. These regulations 



f 18 How he met thee by the way, and 
smote "^ the hindmost of thee, even all that 
were feeble behind thee, when thou wast 
faint and weary ; and he ^ feared not 
God. 

1 9 Therefore it shall be, ''when the Lord 
thy God hath given thee rest from all thine 
enemies round about, in the land which the 
Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheri- 
tance to possess it, that thou shalt ^blot out 
the remembrance of Amalek from under 
heaven ; thou shalt not forget it. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

1 The confession of hira that ofFereth the basket of first- 
fruits. 12 The prayer of him that giveth his third 
year's tithes. 16 The covenant between God and 
the people. 

AND it shall be, when thou art come in 
unto the land which the Lord thy 
God giveth thee for an inheritance, and 
possessest it, and dwellest therein ; 

2 That '•thou shalt take of the first of all 
the fruit of the earth, which thou shalt 
bring of thy land that the Lord thy God 
giveth thee, and shalt put it in a basket, 
and shalt go unto the place which the 
Lord thy God shall choose to place his 
name there. 

3 And thou shalt go unto the priest that 
shall be in those days, and say unto him, 
I profess this day unto the Lord thy God, 
that I am come unto the country which 
the Lord sware unto our fathers for to 
give us. 

4 And the priest shall take the basket 
out of thy hand, and set it down before 
the altar of the Lord thy God. 

.5 And thou shalt speak and say before 
the Lord thy God, 'A Syrian ready to 
perishJ was my father; and ''he went 
down into Egypt, and sojourned there 
with a 'few, and became there a nation, 
great, mighty, and populous : 



4:6. d Ex. 17 : 8, etc. e Psa. S6 : 1 : Prov. Ifi : 6. f 1 .Sam. IS : 3. 
s Ex. 17:14. h Ex. -23:19? Num. 18:13. i Hosea 1-2: 12. j Gen. 
43:1,2. k Gen. 46:1,6. 1 chap. 7 : 7. 



were binding on them till the introduction of the 
gospel dispensation, when they were abolished, and 
the Jews freed from all obligations to observe them. 

16. Strict honesty in buying and selling, and a 
sacred regard to what is just and right in all our 
dealings with men, are essential to acceptance with 
God. 

18. Taking advantage of those who are in dis- 
tress, and wronging such as have not power to pro- 
tect themselves, is mean and wicked. Those who 
do it incur the wrath of God, and may expect to be 
visited with his curse. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 
2. The place which — thy God shall choose ; 
as the place of his worship, and of the visible mani- 
festation of his presence. 

5. A Syrian ; Padan-aram, where Jacob lived 
for more than twenty years, and which was the na- 
tive place of his mother and his wives, was a part 
of Syria. 

263 



The third year's tithes. DEUTERONOMY XXVII. The Lord's covenant. 



6 And the "Egyptians cvil-cntrcatcd us, 
and afflicted us, and laid upon us hard 
bondage : 

7 And when we cried unto the Lord 
God of our fathers, the Lord ''heard our 
voice, and looked on our affliction, and 
oar labor, and our oppression : 

8 And the Lord brought us ''forth out 
of Egypt with a mighty hand, and with 
an outstretched arm, and with great terri- 
bleness, and with signs, ''and with won- 
ders: 

9 And he hath brought us into this 
place, and hath given us this land, even a 
land that "floweth with milk and honey. 

10 And now, behold, I have brought the 
first-fruits of the land, which thou, O 
Lord, hast given me. And thou shalt set 
it before the Lord thy God, and ""worship 
before the Lord thy God : 

11 And thou shalt ^ rejoice in every 
good thing which the Lord thy God hath 
given unto thee, and unto thy house, thou, 
and the '"Lcvite, and the stranger that is 
among you. 

12 TfWhen thou hast made an end of 
tithing all the 'tithes of thine increase the 
third year, which is the -iyear of tithing, 
and hast given it unto the Levite, the 
stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, 
that they mav eat within thy gates, and 
be filled; 

13 Then thou shalt say before the Lord 
thy God, I have brought away the hal- 
lowed things out of 7ny house, and also 
have given them unto the Levite, and 
unto the stranger, to the fatherless, and to 
the widow, according to all thy command- 
ments which thou hast commanded me: 
I have not ''transgressed thy command- 
ments, neither have I 'forgotten them. 

14 I have not eaten thereof in my 
mourning,'" neither have I taken away 
aught thereof for any unclean nsc, nor 
given aught thereof for the dead: but I 



B. C. 1461. 

Lord my God, and have done according 
to all that thou hast commanded me. 

15 Look ■'down from thy holy habita- 
tion, from "heaven, and r bless thy people 
Israel, and the land which thou hast giv- 
en us, as thou '•swarest unto our father.s, 
a land that floweth with milk and honey. 

16 ^This ''day the Lord thy God hath 
commanded thee to do these statutes and 
judgments : thou shalt therefore keep and 
do them with all thy heart, and with all 
thy soul. 

17 Thou hast 'avouched the Lord this 
day to be thy God, and to walk in his 
ways, and to keep his 'statutes, and his 
commandments, and his judgments, and 
to hearken unto his voice: 

18 And "the Lord hath avouched thee 
this day to be his "peculiar people, as he 
hath promised thee, and that thou should- 
est "keep all his commandments; 

19 Ami to make thee ''high above all 
nations which he hath made, in praise, 
and in name, and in honor; and that thou 
mayest be a *'holy people unto the Lord 
thy God, as he hath spoken. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

1 The people are commanded to write the lavr upon 
stones, .4 and to build an altar of whole stones. II 
The tribes divided on Gerizim and Ebal. 14 The 
curses pronounced on mount Ebal. 

AND Moses with the ciders of Israel 
commanded the people, saying, Keep 
all the commandments which I command 
you this day. 

2 And it shall be, on the '^day when ye 
shall pass over Jordan unto the land 
which the Lord thy God giveth thee, 
that thou shalt set thee up great stones, 
and plaster them with plaster: 

3 And "thou shalt write upon them all 
the words of this law, when thou art 
passed over, that thou mayest go in unto 
the land which the Lord thy God giveth 



• Et. 1 : 11-14. b Ex. cli». 2. 3, 4. c Ex. IS : 37, ."il ; 13: 3, 16. 
<l clmp. 4 : 34. eEx.3:8. f Prov. 3 : q; 1 Cor 10 : 31. B cliap. 
1S:7,13; lti:ll. k lCor.9:ll. i Lev. 27:30; Num. 18:24. 
i chxp. I4:2.S,29. k Pea. 18:21-24; 26:1,6; Acts 24:16; IJohn, 
3:2-2. 1 Piia.ll9:14l. m Lev.7:20; 21 : 1,11; Ho9ea9:4. n Isa. 

12. The year of tithing ; this was the second 
tithing, or the tithing of the remaining nine parts, 
after one tenth hatl been given to the Levites. 
Chap. 14::2;^20. 

13. llaUowed things; those which God required 
to be set apart for the Levites, for the poor, and for 
religious purposes. 

II. For the dead; as w.ts the custom of the 
heathen around them. 

17. Avouched; afTirmed, decl.^red. 
INSTRUCTION'S. 

3. Howeverlong the fulfilment of divine promises 
may he delayed, and liowever great the obstacles, 
they will in due time all be accomplished. 

7. Those vtlio are oppressed, and with humble, be- 
lieving, and afTectionate hearts, seek help from God, 
may cxpeot that in due time he will deliver them. 
261 



63:l.'i. ol8il. fifi:I. p P»iilm M: 9; IS : 18. q Heb. 6 : 13-18. 
rrhap. 11:8. « Ex. 24:7: iCliron. 34 : 31 ; Isnial. 44 : ft; Ze<-li. 
13 : 9 ; 2 Ciir. 8 : f). t Psa. 147 : 19, 20. u chap. 14 : 2 ; 28 : 9. r Ex. 
19:5.6; TitU82:ll. w Pga. 119: 6; Itom. 16:26. xP»B.148:14. 
y 1 Peter, 2:9. • Jo8li. 4:1, etc. « JobIi. 8 : 32. 

10. As God is the author of all our blessings, we 
should as such acknowledge him; and should honor 
him with our substance and with the first-fruits of 
all our increase. Prov. 3 : 9. 

11. Obedience to the commands of God is a 
good preparation for seeking his favor with accept- 
ance, and receiving his blessing on all our enjoy- 
ments. 

16. As God gives to men, heart, soul, mind, 
strength, and all luercies, it is reasonable that they 
should be devoted to his service. 

19. Devotion to God is the way to be truly great, 
noble, excellent, useful, and happy. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 
3. This law ; supposed to be the law or decla- 
ration which follows. Ver. 11-26. 



Curses pronounced 



DEUTERONOMY XXVIII, 



071 mount Ebal. 



B. C. 1451 

and honey; as the Lord God of thy fa- 
thers hath promised thee. 

4 Therefore it shall be when ye be gone 
over Jordan, that ye shall set up these 
stones, which I command you this day, in 
mount *Ebal, and thou slialt plaster them 
with plaster. 

.5 And there shalt tliou build an altar unto 
the Lord thy God, an altar of stones : thou 
shalt not lift up any iron tool upon them. 

6 Thou shalt build the altar of the Lord 
thy God of whole stones : and thou shalt 
offer burnt-offerings thereon unto the 
Lord thy God: 

7 And thou shalt offer peace-offerings, 
and shalt eat there, and ''rejoice before 
the Lord thy God. 

8 And thou shalt write upon the stones 
all the words of this law very plainly. 

9 ^ And Moses and the priests the Le- 
vites spake unto all Israel, saying. Take 
heed, and hearken, O Israel ; this "^ day 
thou art become the people of the Lord 
thy God. 

10 Thou shalt therefore obey the voice 
of the Lord thy God, and do his command- 
ments and his statutes, which I command 
thee this day. 

1 1 ^ And Moses charged the people the 
same day, saying, 

12 These shall stand upon mount Geri- 
zim to bless the people, when ye are come 
over Jordan ; Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, 
and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin: 

13 And these shall stand upon mount 
Ebal *to curse ; Reuben, Gad, and Ashcr, 
and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali. 

14 TlAnd the ^Levites shall speak, and 
say unto all the men of Israel with a loud 
voice, 

15 Cursed be the man thafmaketh any 
graven or molten image, an abomination 
unto the Lord, the work of the hands of 
the craftsman, and putteth it in o "^secret 



• chap. 


11 :'29; .loslui 


a8 


.30-33. 1> chap. 26 : 


10, n. c cl 


ap. 


16 : 1«. • 


Web. /or a a 


rttng. 


* cliap. 33 : 10. 


e Ex. 20:4, 


J:); 


Isa. 44:9 


Hose.i 13 : 2, 


,3. 


f 2 


Kings, 17:9, 10: 


Jeremiah 23 


24. 


e Lev. 19 


: 3 : Proverbs 


30 


17 


h chap. 19 : 14 


i Lev. 19 


14. 


j Ex. 22 : 


21-24; MalacI 


i3 


5. 


k Lev. 18:8; 20 


: 11 ; 1 Cor. 5 


:1. 



4. Ehal; G-en. 12 : 6. 

12. Gerizim; (jren.V2,:G. Bless the people; a,dti 
their Amen in token of their concurrence, when the 
Levites should pronounce blessings on the obedient. 

13. To curse; add their Amen when the Le- 
vites should pronounce curses on the disobedient. 
Ver. 14-26. 

1"). Graven or molten image; for the purpose 
of worshipping it. E.x. 20 : 4-6. 

16. Setteth light; disregards and dishonors. 
Ex. 20:12. 

17. Landmark ; chap. 19:14. 

19. Perverteth the judgment of ; commits in- 
justice towards those mentioned. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. All proper methods should be adopted to make 
the law of God familiar to all the people, and to set 



■place: and all the people shall answer and 
say, Amen. 

16 Cursed be he that s setteth light by 
his father or his mother : and all the peo- 
ple shall say. Amen. 

17 Cursed be he that ''removeth his 
neighbors landmark : and all the people 
shall say. Amen. 

18 Cursed be he that maketh the 'blind 
to wander out of the way : and all the 
people shall say, Amen. 

19 Cursed be he that J perverteth the 
judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and 
widow : and all the people shall say, 
Amen. 

20 Cursed be he that ''lieth with his fa- 
ther's wife ; because he uncovereth his 
father's skirt : and all the people shall say, 
Amen. 

21 Cursed be he that lieth with any 
manner of 'beast: and all the people 
shall say. Amen. 

22 Cursed be he that lieth with his ""sis- 
ter, the daughter of his father, or the 
daughter of his mother: and all the peo- 
ple shall say. Amen. 

23 Cursed be he that lieth with his 
mother-in-law:" and all the people shall 
say. Amen. 

24 Cursed be he that smiteth his neigh- 
bor" secretly : and all the people shall say. 
Amen. 

25 Cursed be he that taketh reward to 
slayP an innocent person: and all the 
people shall say, Amen. 

26 Cursed he '^ he that confirmeth not all 
the words of this law to do "'them: and 
all^ the people shall say. Amen. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

1 The blessings for obedience. 15 The curses for dis- 
obedience. 

AND it shall come to pass, if *thou 
shalt hearken diligently unto the 
voice of the Lord thy God, to observe 



1 Lev.l8:23: 20:15. m Lev.l8:9; 20:17. ■> Lev. 18:17; 20:14. 
o chap. 19:11, 12; Ex. 21 : 12-14. p Ex. 23:7,8; Prov. 1 : 11-19: 
Ezekiel 22: 12. ■) chap. 28 : 15, etc. ; Psalm 119: 21; Gal. 3:10. 
rEom. 10:5. " Jer. 11 : 3-5; Romans 3 : 19. t Exodus 15 : 26 ; 
Lev. 26 : 3, etc. 



before them the motives which G-od has revealed to 
induce them to keep it. 

10. Whenever God makes any his peculiar peo- 
ple, he lays them under special obligations to obey 
him ; and if they do not, they incur peculiar guilt 
and expose themselves to an aggravated punish- 
ment. Chap. 28 : 14-68. 

15. By adding their solemn Amen to what is 
uttered, people profess to believe its truth. If it is 
a curse, they acknowledge its justice ; and if a bless- 
ing, their desire to receive it. 

26. All the revelations and declarations of G-od 
are suited to deter men from transgression, and per- 
suade them to obedience, showing that he has no 
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but great pleas- 
ure in their turning from their wickedness that they 
may live. Chap. 28; Ezek. 33: 11; Luke 15: 10. 
265 



Blessings for obedience. DEUTERONOMY XXVIII. Curses for disobedience. 



and to do all his commandments which I 
command thee this day, that the Lord thy 
God will set thee on *high above all na- 
tions of the earth : 
• 2 And all these blessings shall come on 
thee, and ''overtake thee, if nhou shalt 
hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy 
God. 

3 Blessed ^ shalt thou be in the city, and 
blessed shall thou be in the field. 

4 Blessed .shall be "the fruit of thy body, 
and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit 
of thy cattle, the increase of thy kinc, and 
the flocks of thy sheep. 

5 Blessed shall be thy basket and thy 
store.* 

6 Blessed shalt thou be when thou '^com- 
est in, and blessed shalt thou be when 
thou goest out. 

7 The Lord shall cause ?thine enemies that 
rise up against tlice to be smitten before thy 
face : they shall come out against thee one 
way, and '' flee before thee seven ways. 

8 The Lord shall 'command the bless- 
ing upon thee in thy t storehouses, and in 
all that thou settest thy hand unto ; and 
he shall bless thee in the land whicli the 
Lord thy God giveth thee. 

9 The Lord sliall J establish thee a holy 
people unto himself, as he hath ■'sworn 
unto thee, if thou shalt keep the com- 
mandments of the Lord thy God, and 
walk in his ways. 

10 And all 'people of the earth shall see 
that thou art "'called by the name of the 
Lord; and they shall be "afraid of thee. 

11 And "the Loud shall make thee plen- 
teous i in goods, in the fruit of thy ^ body, 
and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the 
fruit of thy ground, in the land which the 
Lord swarc unto thy fathers to give thee. 

1 2 The Lord shall open unto thee his good 
treasure, the heaven to give the p rain unto 
thy land in his season, and to bless all the 
work of thy hand ; and thou shalt Tlend unto 
many nations, and tliou shalt not borrow. 

13 And the Lord shall make thee the 
head,' and not the tail ; and thou shalt be 
above only, and thou shalt not be be- 
neath; if that thou hearken unto the 
commandments of the Lord thy God, 
which I command thee this day, to ob- 
serve and to do them: 

• limp. 2fi:l!). kver. lfi.45. elTim.4.«. "I Gen. Sfl: r>; Pna. 
i;8;l-4. « rlinp. 7: i:>; Gen. 49: '25; Pun. 107:38; 1-27:3. * Or, 
tl.iUfih. nr kncading-lrougkt. f Pun. I'Jl : 8. l; aSniii. M : 3fM1. 
h .1n»li.8;-2-2;2CIimn. 14:0-16. ILev.2fi:?l. f Or, barm, j Pun. 
R7:Sj '2TlieM.3:3; lPrter,6:I0. k Ex. 19:S,6. 1 MbI.3:12. 
m Dan. 9:18, 19. n chap. II : 26; I Cliron. 14: 17. o Prov. 10 : il. 



14 And "thou shalt not go aside *b.c:?46?: 
from any of the words which I command 
thee this day, to the 'right hand, or to the 
left, to go after other gods to serve them. 

15 11 But it shall come to pass, if thou 
wilt "not hearken unto the voice of the 
Lord thy God, to observe to do all his 
commandments and his statutes which I 
command thee this day ; that all these 
curses shall "come upon thee, and over- 
take thee : 

16 Cursed"' shalt thou be in the city, and 
cursed shalt thou be in the field. 

17 Cursed shall be thy basket and thy 
store. 

18 Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, 
and the fruit of thy land, the increase of 
thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep. 

19 Cursed shall thou be when thou com- 
est in, and cursed shull thou be when thou 
goest out. 

20 The Lord shall send upon thee curs- 
ing, * vexation, and *■ rebuke, in all that 
thou settest thy hand unto Hfor to ^do, until 
thou be destroyed, and until thou perish 
quickly ; beeauseof the wickedness of thy 
doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me. 

21 The Lord shall make the * pestilence 
cleave vinto thee, until he have consumed 
thee from oft' the land, whither thou go- 
est to possess it. 

22 The Lord shall smite thee with a 
consumption, and with a fever, and with 
an inflammation, and with an extreme 
burning, and with the ''sword, and with 
blasting,* and with mildew; and they 
shall pursue thee until thou perish. 

23 And ''thy heaven that is over thy 
head shall be brass, and the earth that is 
under thee shall be iron. 

24 The Lord shall make tlie rain of thy 
land powder and dust : from heaven shall 
it come down upon ''thee, until thou be 
destroyed. 

25 The Lord shall cause thee to bo 
smitten*" before thine enemies : thou shalt 
go out one way against them, and flee sev- 
en ways before them; and shalt be t re- 
moved ""into all the kingdoms of the earth. 

26 And thy ^carcass shall be meat unto 
all fowls of the air, and unto the beasts 
of the earth, and no man shall fray thrm 
away. 

t Or, for good. ^ Heb.htlly. !• Joel -2: 23. q clinp.lR :r>. r I.a. 
9:14,1.1. •cli.5::l2. 11911.30:21. n I.ev.26: I4,ctc vr.am.2:17. 
wMal.2:2. Tliin.28:19. yl8R.30:17. \\ Hvh. which IhoUKuuld- 
ettdo. I 1 Sam. 14:20; Zedi. 14:13. •Jer.24:10. b .\mos4:9. 10. 
* Or.droughl. c .Ict. 14 : 1-6. d vpr.l2; .lob 18: 16-21. e rli.32:30. 
i Heb. /or a removing. f.Ter.l5:4. s P»a. 79 : 2 ; Jer. 7 :33. 



CHAPTER XXVIII. give any more rain than if it were brass, nor the 

2. These, blessings ; ver. 3-14. earth yield any more fruit than if it were iron. 

7. Seven; used for many. 26. Thy carcass f^h a 11 he meat ; many of their 

10. Called; Jehovah's people. dead bodies would be left unburied. i^rrry; friglit- 

23. Be brass, avd — iron; the heaven would not en, scare. 
266 



Curses pronounced 



DEUTERONOMY XXVIII. 



for disobedience. 



I'.c.uS: 27 The Lord will smite thee with 
the botch of Egypt, and with the * emerods, 
and with the scab, and wiui the itch, 
whereof thou canst not be healed. 

28 The Lord shall smite thee with mad- 
ness, and blindness, and '' astonishment of 
heart : 

29 And thou shalt "^ grope at noonday, 
as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou 
shalt not prosper in thy ways : and thou 
shalt be only oppressed and spoiled ever- 
more, and no man shall save thee. 

30 Thou shalt ''betroth a wife, and an- 
other man shall lie with her : thou shalt 
build ^ a house, and thou shalt not dwell 
therein : thou shalt plant a vineyard, and 
shalt not * gather the grapes thereof. 

31 Thine ox shall be slain before thine 
eyes, and thou shalt not eat thereof: 
thine ass shall he violently taken away 
from before thy face, and shall not tbe 
restored to thee : thy sheep shall be given 
unto thine enemies, and thou shalt have 
none to rescue them. 

32 Thy ""sons and thy daughters shall 
be given unto another people, and thine 
eyes shall look, and fail loith longing for 
them all the day long: and there shall be 
no might in thy hand. 

33 The K fruit of thy land, and all thy 
labors, shall a nation which thou know- 
est not eat up; and thou shalt be only 
oppressed and crushed alway : 

34 So that thou shalt be mad for the 
sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see. 

35 The Lord shall smite thee in the 
knees, and in the legs, with a sore botch 
that cannot be healed, from the ''sole of 
thy foot unto the top of thy head. 

36 The Lord shall 'bring thee, and thy 
king which thou shalt set over thee, unto 
a nation which neither thou nor thy fa- 
thers have known ; and there shalt thou 
serve other gods, wood and stone. 

37 And thou shalt become an astonish- 
ment, a proverb, and a J byword, among 
all nations whither the Lord shall lead 
thee. 

38 Thou shalt carry much '' seed out into 
the field, and shalt gather but little in ; for 
ihe 'locust shall consume it. 

39 Thou shalt plant vineyards, and 
dress them, but shalt neither drink of the 

• E!C.9:9,11; I Samuel, 5:6, 12. b .ler. 4 : 9. c.7ob5:14; 
Isa. .W : in. d .Ter. 8:10. « Amo.i .i) : 1 1 ; Micali 6 : l.i. * Heb. 
profane, or \ue it at common meat, ns chap. iO : 6. t Heb. return. 
f i Cl.ron. 29 : H. s Ni-h. 9 : 36, 37 ; .ler. 5:17. h Isaiali 1:6. 
i -2 Chron. 36 : 6, 17. j Psa. 44 : 14. k Mirali 6:15; HaRf ai 1 : 6. 
1 .Fofil 1:4. ni Amo.i 7:1,2. | Heb. thei/ shall not he thine. 
" 2King9,24: 14; I.am. I : 5. \ Or, possess, o Judg. 3: 11-1.5. 



wine, nor gather the grapes; for the 
worms'" shall eat them. 

40 Thou shalt have olive-trees through- 
out all thy coasts, but thou shalt not 
anoint ^/tJ/.scZ/with the oil; for thine olive 
shall cast his fruit. 

4 1 Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, 
but + thou shalt not enjoy them ; for " they 
shall go into captivity. 

42 All thy trees and fruit of thy land 
shall the locust ^ consume. 

43 The "stranger that is within thee 
shall get up above thee very high ; and 
thou shalt come down very low. 

44 He P shall lend to thee, and thou shalt 
not lend to him : he shall be the head, and 
thou shalt be the tail. 

45 Moreover all these i curses shall 
come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, 
and overtake thee, till ''thou be destroyed ; 
because thou hearkenedst not unto the 
voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his 
commandments and his statutes which he 
commanded thee : 

46 And they shall be upon thee for a 
sign ' and for a wonder, and upon thy seed 
for ever. 

47 Because thou*servedst not the Lord 
thy God with joyfulness, and with glad- 
ness of heart, for the "abundance of all 
things; 

48 Therefore " shalt thou serve thine en- 
emies, which the Lord shall send against 
thee, in '^hunger, and in thirst, and in 
nakedness, and in want of all things : and 
he shall put a yoke of ^ iron upon thy neck, 
until he have destroyed thee. 

49 The Lord shall bring a ^ nation 
against thee from far, from the end of the 
earth, as ^sivift as the eagle flieth ; a na- 
tion whose tongue thou shalt not II under- 
stand ; 

50 A nation *of fierce countenance, 
which shall not "regard the person of the 
old, nor show favor to the young: 

51 And he shall eat the fruit of thy cat- 
tle, and the fruit of thy land, until thou 
be destroyed : which also shall not leave 
thee either corn, wine, or oil, or the in- 
crease of thy kine, or flocks of thy sheep, 
until he have destroyed thee. 

52 And he shall ''besiege thee in all thy 
gates, until thy high and fenced walls 

P ver. 12, 13. q ver. 15. r 2 Kings, 17:20. » Eiekiel 14:8; 
1 Cor. 10:11. t Neb. 9:35-37. u chap. 32 : 1 5. t 2CTiron. 12:8; 
Jer 5:19; Ey.ekiel 17 : 3, 7, 12. w I.am. 5 : -2-6. iJer.28:14. 
y Jer. 5: 15; 6:2.', 23. i Lam. 4:19 || Heb. AMr. * Heb. 
strong of face. Prov. 7:13; Eccl. 8 : 1 ; llan. 8:2.3. a 2 Chron. 
36 : 17 ; Isa. 47 : 6. b 2 Kings, 25 : 1-4 ; Isa. 1 : 7 ; 62 : 8. 



27. Botch; painful ulcers. Ver. 35. 46. J^orer-er; so long as they should continue as 

32. No might ; no power to escape the evils or a people to transgress his commands, 
to prevent them. ' 48. A yoke of iron ; afflict them with grievous 

40. Cast his fruit ; it would drop off unripe. bondage. 

42. TAy ?/•««; their leaves. ' | 49. /Sitv/i as ^Aec^z^/e; rapid in their conquests. 

267 



Curses pronounced DEUTERONOMY XXVIII. 



for disobedience . 



come down, wherein thou trustedst, 
throughout all thy land: and he shall 
besiege thee in all thy gates throughout 
all thy land, which the Lord thy God 
hath given thee. 

53 And thou shalt " eat the fruit of thine 
own *body, the flesh of thy sons and of 
thy daughters, which the Lord thy God 
hath given thee, in the siege, and in the 
straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall 
distress thee: 

54 So that the man tiiat is tender among 
you, and very delicate, his eye shall be 
pvil'' toward his brother, and toward the 
wife*^ of his bosom, and toward the rem- 
nant of his children which he shall leave : 

55 8o that he will not give to any of 
I hem of the flesh of his children whom he 
shall eat: because he hath nothing left 
him in the siege, and in the straitness, 
wherewith thine enemies shall distress 
thee in all thy gates. 

5H The tender and delicate woman 
among you, which would not adventure 
to set the sole of her foot upon the ground 
for delicateness and tenderness, her eye 
shall be evil toward the husband of her 
bosom, and toward her son, and toward 
her daughter, 

57 And toward her t young one that 
Cometh out from between her feet, and 
toward her ''children which she shall 
bear: for she shall '^eat them for want of 
all things secretly in the siege and strait- 
ness, wherewith thine enemy shall dis- 
tress thee in thy gates. 

58 If thou wilt not observe to do all 
the words of this law that are written in 
this book, that thou mayest fear this "^ glo- 
rious and sfearful name, THE '"LORD 
THY 'GOD; 

59 Then the Lord will make thy plagues 
wonderful,J and the plagues of thy seed, 
ivcn great plagues, and of long continu- 
ance, and sore sicknesses, and of long 
continuance. 

60 Moreover, he will bring upon thee 



« 5King», 6:28,M; .ler. 19:9; I.!»m.2:2n; 4:10. » Heh.belly. 
bcliiip. Ifi:9; Mnt-SO:!,"!. c Hmp.l:t:r.; Micali7:6. f Heb.o/<er- 
birth. d I»n. WrLn. e ver. .13. f Nell. 9: ft; Pan. 72: 19. e P.iR. 
111:9. h Ex.r.:2,3; P8.i.8:t:l8. i Ex. 20:2; Pso. SO: 7: Inn. 41 : 10. 



57. She shall eat them ; Josephiis' Wars of the 
Jews, b. .'5, c. 10, s. 3 ; b. 6. e. 2, s. 4. 

03. Fliicked from off' the land ; tliev were by 
the Romans carried off from their land and scattered 
anionjj all nations; and were forbidden again to 
rome within sisjht of .Terus.alem. 

G8. Ye shall be sold — niid vo man shall buy 
yoH ; many were sold into perpetual bondage, and 
many more were offered for sale for whom their 
conquerors could not find .a market, so great were 
their numbers ; and multitudes were slain or left to 
perish. See Josephus, Patrick, Rasnage, Newton, 
Keith, etc. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. No tongue can express or finite mind conceive 
2G8 



all the diseases of Egypt, which *b.c:?5S 
thou wast afraid of; and they shall cleave 
unto thee. 

Gl Also every sickness, and every 
plague, which is not written in the book 
of this law, them will the Lord -bring 
upon thee, until thou be destroyed. 

62 And ye shall be left 'few in num- 
ber, whereas ye were as the ""stars of 
heaven for multitude; because thou 
wouldest not obey the voice of the Loud 
thy God. 

63 And it shall come to pass, that as the 
Lord rejoiced over you to do you "good, 
and to multiply you; so the Lord will 
rejoice over you to "destroy you, and to 
bring you to naught; and ye shall be 
plucked from off the land whither thou 
goest to possess it. 

64 And the Lord shall p scatter thee 
among all people, from the one end of 
the earth even unto the other; and there 
thou shalt serve other gods, which neither 
thou nor thy fathers have known, even 
wood and stone. 

65 And ''among these nations shalt thou 
find no ease, neither shall the sole of thy 
foot have rest: but the Lord shall give 
thee there a trembling heart, and failing 
of eyes, and sorrow of mind : 

66 And thy life shall hang in doubt be- 
fore thee; and thou shalt fear day and 
night, and shalt have none assurance of 
thy life: 

67 In the '"morning thou shalt say. 
Would God it were even ! and at even 
thou shalt say. Would God it were morn- 
ing! for the fear of thy heart wherewith 
thou shalt fear, and for the sight of thin-- 
eyes which thou shalt see. 

68 And the Lord shall bring thee into 
I'^.gypt" again with ships, by the way 
whereof I *spake unto thee. Thou shall 
see it no more again : and there ye shall 
be sold unto your enemies for bondmen 
and bondwomen, and no man shall buy 
I/O"- 

j nnn.9:12. k cliap. 7: l.l. t Ueh. caute to atctnd. 1 Nell. 7:4: 
I(ia.l:9. m Neli.9:2.3. n cli.ip. 30: 9; Jer. 32 : 41. o Prov. I : Cfi ; 
Isil.l:54. p .ler. lfi:13; fiO: 17; Ezek. II :Ifi.l7. ilAnio»9:4 
r Jul) 7: 4. • Hosea 8 : 13 ; 9 : 3. I chap. 17:16. 

the number, greatness, variety, richness, or duratio ; 
of the blessings which flow from obeying God. 

l.*). The miseries comprehended in the curse.'^ 
which flow from continued disobedience to God, as 
much surpass all finite conception as the blessings 
which flow from his favor. 

24. As all the element-s are under the control of 
God, he can at any time arm them against his foe.s 
and pursue them with wrath till they perish. 

^. Diseases of body and mind are God's servants 
Thev go and come at his bidding, and fasten their 
deadly fangs on such .as he commissions them to tor- 
ment and destroy. 

,32. Few calamities are more dreadful than to see 
the misery of children, and be unable to help them. 



»5n exhortation 



DEUTERONOMY XXIX. 



to obedience. 



.Lc-S- CHAPTER XXIX. 

I Moses e.\horteth them to obedience, by the memory of 
the works they have seen. 10 All are presented be- 
fore the Lord toeiiterintohiscovenant. 18 The great 
wrath on him that flattereth himself in his wicked- 
ness. 29 Secret things belong unto God. 

THESE are the word,s of the covenant, 
which the Lord commanded Moses 
to make with the children of Israel in the 
land of Moab. besides the covenant wiiich 
he "made with them in Horeb. 

2 ^ And Moses called unto all Israel, 
and said unto them, Ye have seen all that 
the Lord ""did before your eyes in the 
land of Egypt unto Pharaoh, and unto all 
his servants, and unto all his land; 

3 The great "= temptations which thine 
eyes have seen, the signs, and those great 
miracles : 

4 Yet the Lord hath not given you a 
heart"* to perceive, and eyes to see, and 
ears to hear, unto this day. 

5 And I have led you forty years in the 
wilderness : your ""clothes are not waxen 
old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen 
old upon thy foot: 

6 Ye have not "^eaten bread, neither 
have ye s drunk wine or strong drink; 
that ye might know that I a??i the Lord 
your God. 

7 And when ye came unto this place, 
Sihon*" the king of Heshbon, and Og the 
king of Bashan, came out against us unto 
battle, and we smote them : 

8 And we took their land, and gave it 
for an inheritance unto the Reubenites, 
and to the Gadites, and to the half-tribe 
of Manasseh. 

9 Keep 'therefore the words of this cov- 
enant, and do them, that ye may prosper 
in all that ye do. 

10 HYe stand this day 'all of you be- 
fore the Lord your God; your captains of 



• clmp..'i:J,3. bEx.8-i:. <■ ch.ip. 4:34. d Isa.6:9, 10; 63: 17; 
.Io)m8:43. oclmp.8;4. r Ei. IH : 35; Psa. 78: 24, 25. e 1 Cor. 
9:1». hNum.2l:23. i .Tosli. 1 : 7, 8. j 2Cliron. 23: Ifi: 34:29-32; 
.Veli.8:2. k Josh. 9: 21, 27. 'Heb.pata. INe1i.lO:e9. m cli;.|>. 



45. What renders calamities vastly more dread- 
ful is, a conviction that we by our own wickedness 
have occasioned them. 

.'57. The horrors of famine can be but faintly con- 
ceived ; and if the sufferings occasioned by sin are 
so great in this world, what must they be in the 
world to come ? 

67. The history of the Jews for eighteen hundred 
years is an illustration of the truth of the predictions 
aontiiined in this chapter, and conclusively proves 
that in uttering them Moses spoke by the direction, 
and under the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

1. The coveiiaiit ; the declarations of God with 
regard to the duty of the Israelites, his blessings on 
the obedient, and his curses on the disobedient. In 
Iloreh; E.x. 19:3-'j; 24:2-8. 

2. Ye have seen ; many of the older ones had 
Reen, and the rest had heard. 

4. Pcrceice; the spiritual beauty, excellence, 

18 



your tribes, your elders, and your officers, 
ivith all the men of Israel, 

1 1 Your little ones, your wives, and thy 
stranger that is in thy camp, from the 
hewer'' of thy wood unto the drawer of 
thy water : 

12 That thou shouldest * enter into cov- 
enant with the Lord thy God, and into 
his 'oath, which the Lord thy God mak- 
eth with thee this day : 

13 That he may ""establish thee to-day 
for a people unto himself, and that he 
may be unto thee a God, as he hath "said 
unto thee, and as he hath sworn unto thy 
fathers, to "Abraham, to p Isaac, and to 
Jacob. 1 

14 Neither with you only do I make 
this covenant and this oath; 

15 But ''with him that standeth here 
with VIS this day before the Lord our 
God, and also with him that is not here 
with us this day : 

16 (For ye know how we have dwelt 
in the land of Egypt; and how we came 
through the nations which ve passed 
by; 

17 And ye have seen their abomina- 
tions, and their tidols, wood and sto-ne, sil- 
ver and gold, which u^cre among them :) 

18 Lest there should be among you 
man, or woman, or family, or tribe, whose 
heart turneth away this day from the 
Lord our God, to go and serve the gods 
of these nations ; lest there should bo 
among you a root that beareth * gall" and 
wormwood ;* 

19 And it come to pass, when he hear- 
eth the words of this curse, that he bless 
himself in bis heart, saying, I shall have 
peace, though I walk in the Hmagination 
of my heart, to add H drunkenness" to 
thirst : 



28:9. iiEx.6:7. o Gen. 17: 7. p Gen. 26: 3, 4. q Gen. 28 : 13-13. 
r Acts 2: 39. f Heb. rfwn^y<70rfjr. ^Heh-rosh; OT,apoi$onousherh. 
« Act3 8:2:J. tHeb.l2:15. % Or,s(«6(iornnM». .ler. 3 : 17; 7:24. 
II Heb. the drunktn to the thirsty, u Isa. 30 : 1 ; Rom. 2 : !j. 



and glory of God, and the supreme blessedness of 
loving, believing, and obeying him. This perception 
no one has without receiving it from God-. Thfv 
great body of the Israelites did not feel their need 
of this, did not seek it, nor desire it, nor obtain it. 
They rebelled against God, and nearly all who 
when they came out of Egypt were over twenty 
years old, died in the wilderness. 

5. Yoitr clothes — thy shoe; these God so pro- 
vided and preserved as to keep them fro-m want. 

6. Nut eaten bread, v either — cVrnnk miii' ; 
they lived on manna, and drank -water from the roc!;. 

12. Enter into covenant ; by engaging to obey 
him; on the fulfilment of which engagements he 
promised to bless them. 

14. Neitherm'thpo?(OJ>lif; God made this eov- 
enant not only with them, but with their posterity 
and with all who should obey iiim. Heb. 6 : 13-20. 

15. Gall ; a bitter, poisonous herb. 

19. Bless himself in his heart ; promise liiiii- 
self blessedness in sin. 

269 



Mercy promised 



DEUTERONOMY XXX. 



to the penitent. 



20 The Lord will not spare him, but 
then the "anger of the Lord and his 
jealousy'' shall smoke against that man, 
and all the curses that are written in this 
book shall lie upon him, and the Lord 
shall blot "^out his name from under 
heaven. 

21 And the Lord shall ''separate him 
unto evil out of all the tribes of Israel, 
according to all the curses of the cove- 
nant that * are written in this book of the 
law : 

22 So that the generation to come of 
your children that shall rise up after you, 
and the stranger that shall come from a 
far land, shall say, when they see the 
plagues of that land, and the sicknesses 
whicht the Lord hath laid upon it; 

2.3 And that the whole land thereof is 
brimstone, and 'salt, and burning, that it 
is not sown, nor'^beareth, nor any grass 
groweth therein, like the overthrow of 
Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zc- 
boim, which the Lord ^overthrew in his 
anger and in his wrath : 

24 Even all nations shall say, ''Where- 
fore hath the Lord done thus unto this 
land ? what meancth the heat of this great 
anger? 

25 Then men shall say, Because they 
have forsaken the covenant of the Lord 
God of their fathers, which he made with 
them when he brought them forth out of 
the land of Egypt: 

26 For tiiey went and served other gods, 
and worshipped them, gods whom they 



*lP8il.74:l. Ii r83.79:6. c cliap. 9: 14 ; Kzek. 14:7, 8. il Mat. 
24:fil. * Heli. is loritten. f Heh. ivho-ewith the LonD /uzth made 
ittick. e Jer. 17:r>; Zeph. 2:<<. f I'sa. 107 : 34. g Gen. 19:24; 
Jar.M:!G. h 1 Kings, 9: 8, 9; Jer. 2-2:8, 9. % Or, vihn had not 



2Q. Blot out his name ; destroy him. 

2"2. That land; the land of Cruiaan. 

23. Brimstone^ and salt ; utterly barren. 

21. This great anger ; of G-od against Canaan 
in turning itfroiri fertility to barrenness, and visiting 
its inhabitants with such awful calamities. 

2G. Whom he had not given; who had not 
done and could not do any thing for them. 

20. Secret things ; things not revealed, and which 
we do not and need not know. Things — revealed; 
those which God m.akes known, or has given us the 
means of knowing, and which we need to know. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. So long as men continue to neglect what they 
know to be right and do what they know to be wrong, 
God will not give them hearts to perceive his spiritual 
glory, or to enjoy his infinite love. 

9. A faithful survey of the past dealings of G-od 
with us and our friends, is well adapted to lead us 
to do his will, and thus to secure all needed good. 

12. The course taken by parents deeply aflecls 
their children for both worlds, and may be a means 
of their salvation or destruction. 

18. Apostasies from God begin in the heart, and 
in order to escape destruction men must with all dili- 
gence keep their hearts in the love of God, with ihcm 
believe unto righteousness, and from them make pro- 
fession of their faith and love to salvation. 
270 



knew not, and ^-rwhom he had not ^B.aiiti: 
given^ unto them: 

27 And 'the anger of the Lord was kin- 
dled against this land, to bring upon it all 
the curses that are written in this book : 

28 And the Lord -i rooted them out of 
their land in anger, and in wrath, and in 
great indignation, and cast them into an- 
other land, as it is this day. 

29 The ''secret things belong unto the 
Lord our God : but those things u-hich 
are 'revealed belong unto us and to our 
children for ever, that u-e may do all the 
words of this law. 

CHAPTER XXX. 

1 Great mercies promised unto the repentant. 11 The 
commandment is manifest. 15 Death and life are 
set before them. 

AND it shall come to pass, when all 
these things are come upon thee, the 
blessing and the curse, which I have set 
before thee, and thou shalt call them to 
mind"" among all the nations, whither the 
Lord thy God hath driven thee, 

2 And shalt "return unto the Lord thy 
God, and shalt obey his voice according 
to all that I command thee this day, thou 
and thy children, with all thy heart, and 
with all thy soul ; 

3 That then the Lord thy God will turn 
thy captivity, and have compassion upon 
thee, and will return and "gather thee from 
all tiic nations, whither the Lord thy God 
hath scattered thee. 

4 If ^any of thine be driven out unto 
the outmost parts of heaven, from thence 

ffiven to Vtem any portion. \ Heb. divided, i Daniel 9: 11-14. 
J 1 Kings, 14:1.1. V .Ier.-J.T:1S: D.in.2:22,28; lCor.2:l6. I Psa. 
78:2-7; 2Tim.3:16. m l Kings, 8: 47, 48. n Isa.Ri:7; 1 .Iolin,l:9. 
o Jer. 32 : 37, etc. ; Ezek. 3ti:24. p Ncli. 1:9. 



19. For a man to think that he shall be happy in 
a course of sinning, or can continue in it and escape 
destruction, is one of the surest ways to ruin. 

23. The past and present state of Palestine, as 
well as of the .Tews its ancient inhabitants, is a fulfil- 
ment of the word of God by Moses, uttered and re- 
corded more than three thousand years ago ; and a 
proof that none of his declarations will fail, but all 
in due time come to pa-'S. 

28. Men of various nations, characters, and coun- 
tries now say, concerning the Jews and the land of 
Canaan, what Moses here predicted that thev would 
say ; .and thus show that he w.as inspired oy Him 
who sees the end from the beginning, and can de- 
scribe things thousands of ye.ars before, with as 
much accurivcy as after they have taken place. 

29. God gives us the means of knowing all that 
we need to know ; and for us to strive or wish to 
know what we cannot, ought not, and need not know, 
is foolish, hurtful, and wicked. The more content 
we are without such knowledge the better; while, 
by the revelation of God, to know him in such a 
manner as to love and obey him, is the whole of 
man's duty, excellence, blessedness, and glory. 

CHAPTER XXX. 
1. These things ; things mentioned in the pre- 
vious ch.apters. 



Death, and life are 



DEUTERONOMY XXXI. 



set before the people. 



e'c'i^r will the Lord thy God gather thee, 
and from thence will he fetch thee : 

5 And the Lord thy God will bring thee 
into the land which thy fathers possessed, 
and thou shalt possess it; and he will do 
thee good, and multiply thee above thy 
lathers. 

6 And the Lord thy God will circumcise 
Ihy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love 
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and 
with all thy soul, that thou mayest live. 

7 And the Lord thy God will put all 
these curses upon thine* enemies, and on 
them that hate thee, which persecuted 
thee. 

8 And thou shalt return and obey the 
voice of the Lord, and do all his com- 
mandments which I command thee this 
day. 

9 And the Lord thy God will make thee 
plenteous ''in every work of thy hand, in 
the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of 
thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy land, 
for good : for the Lord will again *^ rejoice 
over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy 
fathers ; 

1 If thou shalt ^ hearken unto the voice 
of the Lord thy God, to "^keep his com- 
mandments and his statutes which are 
written in this book of the law, and if 
thou ''turn unto the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, and with all thy soul. 

11 II For this commandment which I 
command thee this day, it is not s hidden 
from thee, neither is it far off. 

1 2 It is '■ not in heaven, that thou should- 
cst say. Who shall go up for us to heaven, 
and bring it unto us, that we may hear 
it, and do if? 

1 3 Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou 
shouldest say, Who shall go over the sea 
for us, and bring it unto us, that we may 
hear it, and do it? 



« Isaiah 14:1-27; Obadinh 10. b chap. 28 ; 1 1 . cZeph.3:17. 
<1 Isa. 55 : 2, 3. • 1 Cor. 7 : 19. I ver. 2 ; Lam. :) : 40, 41 ; Ezek. 
33:11, etc. e Psa. 147:19; Isa. 4,t : 19. k Romans 10:6,etc. 
i ver. I, 19; chap. II: 2fi. j Matthew 22 : 37, 38. k. John 14: 21. 



6. Circitmcise thy heart; turn it from the 
love and practice of sin to the love and practice of 
holiness. Mayest live ; live a life of holiness and 
prosperity on earth and of blessedness and glory in 
heaven. Rom. 2 : 29 ; Col. 2 : 1 1-13. 

11. Not hidden — neither is it far off; notdifR- 
cult, but easy to be understood. What was wanted 
was humble, docile, obedient, and affectionate hearts. 
Rom. 10:6-11; 2 Tim. 3:11-17. 

15. Li fe and good ; temporal and eternal, to be 
obtained as the gracious gift of God, by obeying 
him. Death and evil ; which they would bring 
upon themselves by disobeying him. Ver. 16-18. 

19. Choose life ; by choosing to obey Grod, and 
thus obtain it. Ver. 20. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. However great or long continued the calami- 
ties which any suffer in this world on account of 
their sins, if they think upon their ways, repent, 
and turn heartily to the Lord, he will forgive them 



14 But the word is very nigh unto thee, 
in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou 
mayest do it. 

15 TTSee, 'I have set before thee this 
day life and good, and death and evil ; 

16 In that I command thee this day to 
loveJ the Lord thy God, to walk in his 
ways, and to keep his ''commandments, 
and his statutes, and his judgments, that 
thou mayest live and multiply. : and the 
Lord thy God shall bless thee in the land 
whither thou goest to possess it. 

17 But if thy 'heart turn away, so that 
thou wilt not hear, but shalt be drawn 
away, and worship other gods, and serve 
them; 

18 I '"denounce unto you this day, that 
ye shall surely perish, and that ye shall 
not prolong your days upon the land, 
whither thou passcst over Jordan to go 
to possess it. 

19 1 "call "heaven and p earth to record 
this day against you, that I have set be- 
fore you life and death, blessing and curs- 
ing: therefore choose life, that both thou 
and thy seed may live : 

20 That thou mayest love the Lord thy 
God, and that thou mayest obey his voice, 
and that thou mayest cleave unto him; 
for he is thy ilife, and the length of thy 
days ; that thou mayest dwell in the land 
which the Lord sware unto thy fathers, 
to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give 
them. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

1 Moses encourageth the people. 7 He encourageth 
Joshua. 9 He delivereth the law unto the priest* 
to read it in the seventh year to the people. 14 God 
giveth a charge to Joshua, 19 and a song to testify 
against the people. 21 Moses delivereth the book of 
the law to the Levites to keep. 23 He maketh a 
protestation to the elders. 

ND Moses went and spake these 
words unto all Israel. 

IPrav. 14:14. m chap. 8:19. n chap. 4 : 26 ; 31 : 2S. » chap. 
3-2:J; isaialil:2; Jer. 2 : 12, 13. pJer. 22:29; Micah 6:1,2. 
q Fsa. 27: 1; 30:5; John 11:2.1; Acts 17:28. 



A 



and bestow upon them freely, for Christ's sake, 
rich and lasting blessings. Proverbs 1 : 23 ; Isa. 
55 : 7. 

6-10. When men turn heartily to the Lord, it is 
because he by his Spirit turns them. Jer. 31 : 18. 
Of the necessity of this turning, circumcision under 
the Old Testament was a sign. Hence the re:ison 
M'hy to love the Lord and to keep his command- 
ments is spoken of as the circumcision of the heart. 
Ver. 6 ; Rom. 2 : 28, 29. 

14. The way of salvation revealed in the Old 
Testament is the same as that revealed in the New. 
Hence Paul, in describing it, employed the language 
used by Moses, and to persuade men to embrace it, 
reasoned with them out of the Old Testament scrip- 
tures. 

19. To be saved, men must choose to obey God ; 
and what is most efficacious in leading them to do 
this, will do the most towards their salvation. Josh. 
24 : 15 ; Prov. 1 : 29. 

271 



nc people encouraged^ DEUTERONOMY XXXI. Their apostasy foretold. 

2 And he said unto tlicm, "lam a hun- j to fear the Loud your God, as long *b.c.mS 
dred and twenty years old this day ; I as yc live in the land whither ye go over 



ean no more go out and come in : also the 
Lord hath ""said unto me, Thou shalt not 
go over this Jordan. 
.3 The Lord thy God, "^he will go over 



Jordan to possess it. 

14 ^ And the Lord said unto Moses, Be- 
hold, thy days approach that thou must 
die :' call Joshua, and present yourselves 



before thee, and he will destroy these j in the tabernacle of the congregation, that 
nations from before thee, and thou shalt j I may give him a "charge. AndMosesand 



possess them : and Joshua, he shall go 
over before thee, as the Lord hath ''said. 

4 And the Lord shall do unto them as 
he ''did to Sihon and to Og, kings of the 
Amorites, and unto the land of them, 
whom he destroyed. 

5 And the Lord shall ''give them up be- 



Joshua went, and presented themselves in 
the tabernacle of the congregation. 

15 And ^the Lord appeared in the tab- 
ernacle in a pillar of a cloud : and the pil- 
lar of the cloud stood over the door of the 
tabernacle. 

1 6 *\\ And the Lord said unto Moses, Be- 



fore your face, that ye may do unto them hold, thou shalt ''sleep with thy fathers; 
according unto all the commandments and this people will "rise up, and go a 



which I have commanded you. 

6 Be ^strong and of a good '' courage, fear 
not, nor be afraid of them : for the Lord 
thy God, he it is that doth go with thee; 
he' will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. 

7 1[ And Moses called unto Joshua, and 
said unto him in the sight of all Israel, 
BeJ strong and of a good courage: for 
thou must go with this people unto the 
land which the Lord hath sworn unto 
their fathers to give them ; and thou shalt 
cause them to inherit it. 

8 And the Lord, ''he it is that doth go 
before thee ; he will be with thee, lie will 
not' fail thee, neither forsake thee: fear 
not, neither be dismayed. 

9 T[ And Moses wrote this law, and ""de- 
livered it unto the priests the sons of Levi, 
which bare the ark of the covenant of the 
Lord, and unto all the elders of Israel. 

10 And Moses commanded them, say- 
ing, At the end of every seven years, in 
the solemnity of the year of " release, in 
the "feast of tabernacles, 

11 When all Israel is come to p appear 
before the Lord thy God in the place 
which he shall choose, thou shalt iread 
this law before all Israel in their hearing. 

12 Gather ''the people together, men, and 
women, and children, and thy stranger 
that is within thy gates, that they may 
hear, and that they may learn, and fear 
the Lord your God, and observe to do all 
the words of this law: 

13 And that their 'children, which have 
not known any thing, may hear, and learn 



whoring' after the gods of the strangers 
of the land, whither they go to be among 
them, and will forsake me, and break my 
covenant which I have made with them. 

17 Then my anger shall be kindled 
against them in that day, and I will ^ for- 
sake them, and I will ^hide my face from 
them, and they shall be devoured, and 
many evils and troubles shall t befall 
them ; so that they will say in that day. 
Are not these evils come upon us, because 
our God is not "among us ? 

18 And I will surely hide my face in 
that day for all the evils which they shall 
have wrought, in that they are turned unto 
other gods. 

19 Now therefore write ye this song for 
you, and teach it the children of Israel : 

; put it in their mouths, that this song may 
be a witness for me against the children 
of Israel. 

20 P'orwhen I shall have brought them 
into the laud which I sware unto their fa- 
thers, that floweth with milk and honey ; 
and they shall have eaten and '' filled them- 
selves, and waxen fat ; then will they turn 
unto other gods, and serve them, and pro- 
voke me, and break my covenant. 

21 And it shall come to pass, when 
many*^ evils and troubles are befallen 
them, that this song shall testify * against 
them as a witness ; for it shall not be for- 
gotten out of the mouths of their seed : for 
i '' know their imagination which they f go 
about, even now, before I have brought 
them into the land which I sware. 



» cliap.34:7 


: ¥.x 


7: 


7. Ixl 


•.p.S:^ 


N 


iim.20:12. 


cell 


p.9:3: 


rm.^i:2. 


1. 


i Nui 


n.'2 


7:18-51 


r Num 


.21 


:2H,33. frlinp. 


7:2,18. 


c Jo«l>. 10 


V, 


101 


ron 


.22:13. 


h rlinp 


■.'0 


-4: Iiia.4.1 


1-6. 


> .Innli. 


l:A; Heb 


i:) 


r.. j 


ch 


ip. 3 : 2« ; .lohb. 


:l 


; Enl,. 6: 


10. k 


ver. 3! 


Kl.l3:21, 


22. 


1 veir.fi. 


m Tor 


»i.2«. 


1 rliRp. Ifi: 1, 


oI,ev 


23:34. 


r clmp. 16 


:16 


q .Io»l 


.H:34; 


2Kingii, 


23: 


2; Nell. 8 


1-8. 


r clinp. 



CHArTER XXXI. 

2. Go oitt and come in ; perform the duties of 
leader of Isr.^el. 

3. lie loill go over : in his visible presence on 
the mercy-seat. Ver. 8. 

272 



4:10. • Poa. 78:4-8. I eli.ip. 


:M:.->. u ver.23; Nuin.27:19. ' Ki. 


33:9. * Hell. (It town. 2S!ir 


1.7:12. " Ex. 32:6. » Kl. 34:15; 


Ju.lg.2:ir--'0; P»n.73:J7:.le 


r.3:l:E7,ek.l«:IS. T 2riiron. 1.^:2. 


• lsa.M:7: Kiok.3'»:2:l,24. 


t Hcb Jlnd. • Num. 14:42; .luilg. 
9 : 2'>, 26 ; Hosea 13:6. c \er. 17. 


fi: 1.1. b rhap. 32: 16; Nell 


t He\>. befort. <l Psa. 139:2 


; Hnaea6:3. \ Heb. do. 



n. This law ; a park or the whole of what he 
had delivered to them. 

1.3. Not L-nouni any thing; not witnessed what 
God had done for his people. 

17. Hide my face ; withdraw tokens of favor. 

19. This song; as in the following chapter. 



Ttie book of the law. 



DEUTERONOMY XXXII. 



The song of Mosts. 



B."]^' 22 ^[ Moses therefore wrote this 
song the same day, and taught it the chil- 
dren of Israel. 

23 And he gave Joshua the son of Nun 
a charge, and said. Be strong and of a good 
courage : for thou shalt bring the children 
of Israel into the land which I sware flnto 
them : and I will be with thee. 

24 T[ And it came to pass, when Moses 
had made an end of writing the words of 
this law in a book, until they were finished, 

25 That Moses commanded the Levites, 
which bare the ark of the covenant of the 
Lord, saying, 

26 Take this book of the law, and put it 
in the side of the ark of the covenant of 
the Lord your God, that it may be * there 
for a witness against thee. 

27 For I know thy rebellion, and thy 
stiff neck : behold, while I am yet alive 
with you this day, ye have been '' rebel- 
lious against the Lord; and how much 
more after my death 1 

28 T[ Gather '^unto me all the elders of 
your tribes, and your officers, that I may 
speak these words in their ears, and "* call 
heaven and earth to record against them. 

29 For I know that after my death ye 
will utterly * corrupt yourselves, and turn 
aside from the way which I have com- 
manded you ; and ''evil will befall you in 
the latter days ; because ye will do evil in 



« 2 Kings, 22: 8, etc. bEx.32:9. cGen.49:l,2. d cliap.32: 1. 
e Judges 2:19. f 2 Cliron. 34 : 24. g cliap. 30 : 19 ; Psalm 60 : 4. 
k Psalm 72 : 6 ; Isaiah 55 : 10, 11 ; Micali 5:7. i I Cliron. 29 : 11 ; 
Rev. 7:11, 12. j Psalm 18: 2. k Eccl. 3 : 14. 1 Daniel 4 : 37. 



26. A imtness against thee ; when they should 
rebel against God. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. As the limit of human life is set, the aged, even 
if they enjoy good health, must soon die; this they 
should feel, and endeavor so to live as to be prepared 
at any time to leave this world and enter heaven. 

5. In destroying the Canaanites and taking pos- 
session of their country, the Israelites were only 
doing what Crod commanded them. Their e.xample 
gives no authority to any nation to destroy another, 
take their country, or make war upon them, with- 
out a command from God. 

8. With tiie presence and favor of God men may 
safely and properly undertake any service, however 
difficult, dangerous, or trying, to which he calls 
them. 

13. The laws of God should be made known and 
people, yi 
e, that all 
derstand them, and the reasons for obeying them 
which he has revealed. 

18. God is perfectly acquainted with all the sins 
which any will ever commit ; and their iniquities 
alone lead him ever to withdraw from them the 
manifestations of his favor. 

21. Prosperity often leads men to forget God, 
turn from him, and drawdown upon themselves his 
desolating judgments. But their own consciences 
■will testify against them, and if they turn not to him 
will mar their enjoyments and ere long make them 
wretched. 

29. A good man knows that no trust can safely be 



be often inculcated upon all the people, young and 
old, rich and poor, bond and free, that all may un- 



the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to 
anger through the work of your hands. 

30 And Moses spake in the ears of all 
the congregation of Israel the words of 
this song, until they were ended. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

1 Moses' song, which setteth forth God's mercy ami 
vengeance. 4G He exhorteth them to set their hearts 
upon it. 48 God sendeth him up lo mount Nebo, tc 
see the land, and die. 

&IVE ^ear, ye heavens, and I will 
speak; and hear, earth, the words 
of my mouth. 

2 My doctrine shall ''drop as the rain, 
my speech shall distil as the dew, as the 
small rain upon the tender herb, and as 
the showers upon the grass : 

3 Because I will publish the name of the 
Lord : ' ascribe yc greatness unto our God. 

4 He is the J Rock, his work is '' perfect ; 
for all his 'ways are judgment: a God of 
truth™ and without iniquity, just and right 
is he. 

5 They * have corrupted themselves, their 
spott is not the spot of his children : they 
are a perverse and crooked generation. 

6 Do ye thus requite the Lord, foolish 
people and unwise? is not he thy "father 
that hath ° bought thee? hath he not made 
thee, and established thee? 

7 ^Remember the days of old, consider 
the years of i many generations : ask thy 



m Psalm 92 : 15. * Heb. He hath corrupted to himself. \ Or, 
that they are not his children, that is, their blot. » Ex. 15 : 16; 
1 Corinthians, 6 : 20. o chapter 28 : 64. J Heb. generation and 
generation. 



placed in the human heart; that without the constant 
keeping of God, however great its mercies or trials, 
it will show itself to be deceitful above all things and 
desperately wicked ; and that there is no hope for the 
cause of God and holiness on earth but in the riches 
of his grace. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

1. G-ive ear — hear ; this mode of address was 
designed to awaken attention, and impress on the 
hearers the importance of the subject. 

2. Drop as the rain ; be copious and refreshing. 
Distil as the dew; be gentle, penetrating, and 
efficacious. 

3. Publish the name ; proclaim those perfec- 
tions by the manifestation of which God makes him- 
self known. Ascribe ye greatness nil to our God ; 
treat him according to his true character. 

4. The Rock ; this is the first time God is called 
a rock, in the Bible. It expresses his durable and 
unchanging perfection, the safety of trusting in him, 
and reposing on him our hopes for eternity. Ver. 
15, 18 ; Psa. 31 : 2, 3 ; Mat. 7 : 24, 25 ; 16 : 18. Judg- 
ment ; just, and right. 

5. Not the spot of his children ; do not possess 
their character, nor appear as his people. 

6. Requite; repay, recompense. Thy father ; 
one who treated them as children. Bought thee; 
by delivering them from Egyptian bondage. Made 
thee ; made them a great people. Established 
thee ; as an independent nation, with a regular and 
good government. 

7. Remember the days of old ; what God has 
done for your ancestors, and through them, for you. 

273 



The song of Moses. 



DEUTERONOMY XXXII 



The sotig of Moses. 



father, and he will show thee; thy elders, 
and they will tell thee. 

8 When the Most High "divided to the 
nations their inheritance, when he '•sep- 
arated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds 
of the people according to the number of 
the children of Israel. 

9 For "the Lord's portion is his people; 
Jacob is the *Iot of his'' inheritance. 

10 He found him in a desert land, and 
in the waste howling wilderness ; he tied 
him about, he instructed him, he kept him 
as the ''apple of his eye. 

1 1 As an eagle stirreth up her nest, flut- 
tereth over her young, spreadeth abroad 
her wings, taketh "^them, beareth them on 
her wings; 

12 So the Lord alone did lead him, and 
there was no strange god with him. 

13 He ^ made him ride on the liigh places 
of the earth, that he might eat the increase 
of the fields ; and he made him to suck 
honey'' out of the rock, and oil out of the 
flinty rock; 

14 Butter of kine, and milk of sheep, 
with fat of lambs, and rams of the breed 
of Bashan, and goats, with the fat of kid- 
neys of wheat; and thou didst drink the 
pure blood of the grape. 

15 T[But 'Jeshurun waxed fat, and kick- 
ed :' thou art waxen fat, thou art grown 
thick, thou art covered iv it h fatness ; then 
he ''forsook God which made him, and lightly 
esteemed the liock of his salvation. 

16 They provoked him to 'jealousy with 
strange gods, with abominations provoked 
they him to anger. 



■ Acts 17:26. 1> Gen. U : 8. c Ex. 19: .'5; Psa. 135: 4. * Heb. 
cord, "i Psa. 78:71; Epli. 1:1R. f Or, compatatd. eZecll. 2:8. 
'I8a.63:9. |! lea. 68: 14. 'h Psa. 81 : 16. i Isa. 44 : 2. j 1 Sam. 
S:29; Act»9:.5. k Nell. 9 : 25, 26. 1 lCor.lO:22. m lCor.lO:20. 



8. He set the bounds of tlie ■people ; so ordered 
events in his providence, vi'hen he divided the earth 
among the nations, that the Canaan ites, who for 
their sins were to be destroyed, should inherit the 
land that was to be possessed by the Israelites; 
find thus prepare for them houses, cities, cultivated 
fields, and all needful things. Accordiii g to the 
niimber of the cliildreit of Israel ; a land just 
large and good enough for the best accommodation 
of the twelve tribes of Israel. Genesis 10:32; 
11 : 9. 

9. The LonFs portion ; those whom he set 
apart especially for himself, treated as his peculiar 
treasure, and from whom he might rightfully ex- 
pect a special revenue of glory. Jacob ; his de- 
scendants. 

10. Found him; entered into covenant with 
them, and consecrated them as his people. Chap, 
a : 11-18. Led him about ; Num. ;]3 : ;3-19. 

11. An eagle stirreth np her iiest ; when her 
youn;^ ones are large enough to fly. I'lntterctli 
over her iionng ; to show them how to use their 
wings. Spreadeth abroad Iter u'i)igs ; to protect 
her young, assist them in flying, and if need be 
carrv them, as a parent would a feeble or weary 
child. 

V2. So the Lord; excited his people to leave 
274 



17 They "'sacrificed unto devils, V":??!?; 
not* to God ; to gods whom they knew not, 
to new gods that came newly up, whom 
your fathers feared not. 

18 Of the Rock that begat thee thou art 
unmindful, and hast "forgotten God that 
forgied thee. 

1 9 And when the Lord saw it, he * ab- 
horred them, because of the provoking of 
his sons, and of his daughters. 

20 And he said, I will hide my face from 
thcm,,I will see what their end shall be : 
for they are a very froward generation, 
children in whom is no faith. 

21 They have moved me to jealousy 
with that which is not God ; they have 
provoked me to anger with their vani- 
ties: and I will "move them to jealousy 
with those which are not a people ; I will 
provoke them to anger with a foolish 
nation. 

22 For a Pfire is kindled in mine anger, 
and II shall burn unto the lowest hell, and 
shall* consume the ''earth with her in- 
crease, and set on fire the foundations of 
the mountains. 

23 I will heap mischiefs upon them ; I 
will spend mine ''arrows upon them. 

24 They shall be burnt with hunger, and 
devoured with burning t heat, and with 
bitter destruction : I will also send the 
teeth" of beasts upon them, with the poi- 
son of serpents of the dust. 

25 The sword without, and terror +with- 
in, shall ^ destroy both the young man and 
the virgin, the suckling a/50 with the man 
of gray hairs. 



J Or.wliicli wereno/ Gorf. ver.21. n l.sa. 17 : 10. ^ Or, detpued. 
»Uoni. 10:19. p Lam. 4:11. I\ Or, hath hurned. * Or, hath 
coniumed. qZenll. 3:8. rEzek.5:IB. f Heb. foo/j. Hab. 3:6. 
» Ezek. 14:21. f Heb. from the ehamf}ert. % Heb. bereave. 

their bondage in Egypt, and protected and assisted 
them on their way to the promised land. No 
strange god with him; none had assisted the 
Israelites or bestowed upon them any blessings ex- 
cept Jehovah. 

13. Ride on the high places ; expressive of 
their prosperity. Honey out of the rock, and 
oil ; from the most rocky parts of the country, 
where these things would abound. 

14. The breed of Bashan — the fat of kidneys 
— the pare blood ; the best kind of the things 
mentioned. 

15. Jeshiirnii; a name for Israel, meaning, 
upright. 

16. Provoked liim to jealousy ; greatly offended 
him. 

17. New gods; lately made or adopted as ob- 
jects of worship. 

19. His SONS, and — his daughters ; by birth 
and privileges. Yet they rebelled against him. 
Lsa. 1 : 2-4. 

20. Faith : faitlifulness, fidelity. 

21. Provoke them to anger ; by casting them 
ofl", and bringing 'Tcntiles into their place, as his 
peculiar people. Rom. 10:19; 11:1 1-36. 

22. Jtnrn unto the loivest hell; he would sink 
them into the lowest depths of misery. 



The song of Moses. 



DEUTERONOMY XXXII. 



The song of Moses. 



b."i«l' 26 I said, I would* scatter them into 
corners, I would make the remembrance 
of them to cease from among men : 

27 Were it not that I feared the wrath 
of the enemy, lest their adversaries should 
behave themselves strangely, finrf lest they 
should say, *Our hand is high, and the 
Lord hath not done all this. 

28 For they arc a nation void of counsel, 
neither is there oh?/ understanding in them. 

29 Oh ''that they were wise, that they 
Understood this, that they would consider 
their latter end ! 

30 How should one chase a thousand, 
and two put ten thousand to flight, except 
their Rock had "^sold them, and the Lord 
had shut them up] 

3 1 For ''their rock is not as our Rock, even 
our "enemies themselves being judges. 

32 For their vine is t of the "^ vine of s Sod- 
om, and of the fields of Gomorrah : their 
grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are 
bitter : 

33 Their wine is the '"poison of dragons, 
and the cruel venom of 'asps. 

34 Is not this J laid up ia store with me, 
and sealed up among my treasures 1 

35 To '' me belongeth vengeance, and rec- 
ompense; their 'foot shall slide in due 
time: for the day of their calamity is at 
hand,™ and the things that shall come upon 
them make haste. 

36 For the Lord shall judge his people, 
and ° repent himself for his servants, 
when he seeth that their J power is gone, 
and there is none shut up, or left. 

37 And he shall say, Where are their 
gods, their rock in whom they trusted, 



• Isaiah G3 : 16. * Or. Our hu/h hand, and not the Lard, hath 
done. bPsa. 81:13. cisa. 50:1. <i 1 Sam. 2 : 2. el Sam. 4:8. 
t Or, worse than, f .ler. i : 21. B Isaiah 1:10. h Paalm TiS : 4. 
1 Rom. 3:13. i .ler. 2 : 22 : Rom. 2:5. k Heb. 10 : .TO. 1 Jer. 
13:16. m2Peter, 2:3. n Judges 10: 15, 16. f Heb. hand. 



26. Mai:e tJie remembraiice of tlie.tn to cease ; 
he would utterly destroy tliem as a people, were it 
not that greater evils would result, and less good be 
accomplished, than by keeping them, as he is now 
doing, distinct, with a view when they shall repent 
and turn to him, of bringing them again into his 
church and adopting them, with all believing Gen- 
tiles, as his people. 

27. Our hand is high ; our high, strong hand, 
and not Jehovah, hath done this. 

28. Yoid of counsel ; they did not so understand 
their true interests as to take the way to secure 
them, but took that which ruined them. Mat. 27 : 25 ; 
Luke 1.3:34, ,35. 

29. Consider their latter e7id ; in suchamanner 
as to shun the course that will make it wretched, and 
take theeour.se that will make it blessed. Ch..30: 19. 

30. 0)ie chase a thousand ; if obedient, they 
would be victorious over all their foes. Their Rock ; 
Jehovah. 

31. Their rock ; the gods of the heathen. 

32. Their vine ; the Israelites. The vine of 
Sodom; they were exceedingly wicked, like Sod- 
om. Their clusters are ditter ; their works were 
offensive. 



38 Which did eat the fat of their sacri- 
fices, and drank the wine of their drink- 
offerings'? let them "rise up and help you, 
and be * your protection. 

39 See now that pI, even I, am he, and 
there is no god with me : 1 1 kill, and I 
make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither 
is there any that can deliver out of my 
hand. 

40 For I lift up my hand to heaven, and 
say, I live for ever. 

41 If I whet my glittering ''syord, and 
my hand take hold on judgment; I will 
render vengeance to mine enemies, and' 
will reward them that hate me. 

42 I will make mine '' arrows drunk with 
blood, and my sword shall devour flesh ; 
and that with the blood of the slain and 
of the captives from the beginning of re- 
venges upon the enemy. 

43 Rejoice, 11 ye nations, with his peo- 
ple : for he will 'avenge the blood of his 
servants, and will render vengeance to his 
adversaries, and " will be merciful unto his- 
land, and to his people. 

44 T[ And Moses came and spake all the 
words of this song in the ears of the people, 
he, and * Hoshea the son of Nun. 

45 And Moses made an end of speaking 
all these words to all Israel: 

46 And he said unto them, ^Set your 
hearts unto all the words which I testify 
among you this day, which ye shall com- 
mand your children to observe to do, all 
the words of this law. 

47 For it is not a vain thing for you ; be- 
cause it is your "life: and through this 
thing ye shall prolong your days in the 



.Tuilgea 10:14. % Heb. a hiding for you. p Isa. 45 : 6, 18, 22, 
q Psa. 68 : 20 ; Rev. I : 17, 18. r Ezek. 21:9-15. " Psahil 4-5 : b. 
\\ Ot, Sing ye; or. Praise his people, ye nations. t Re\. 19:2. 
u Psa. 8.i : I. * Or, Joshua, v Proverbs 3:1-4; Ezekiel 40 : 4. 
w Lev. 18:5; Prov. 4:22. 



33. Venom of asps ; destructive to themselves 
and others. 

34. This; the Lord's indignation against their 
sins. 

36. Judge his people, and repent himself for 
liis sercants ; turn from his fierce anger, and be 
merciful to them, when they shall feel that no one 
else can help them, and shall repent of their sins 
and turn to him. 

37. Their gods ; false gods in whom they had 
trusted. 

38. Eat the fat of their sacrifices ; idols to 
whom they had sacrificed, het them rise; if they 
can ; but they cannot, and there is no help but in 
Jehovah. 

42. Revenges upon the enemy; judgments 
upon those who continue to rebel against Jehovah 
and oppress his people. 

43. With his people; in their repentance and 
deliverance from their oppressors, and in their res- 
toration .again in due time to the privileges of hi* 
chosen and redeemed people. Zech. 12 : 10 ; Rom. 
11:15. 

47. Your life : that on which their continuance 
and prosperity would depend. 

275 



The blessings of 



DEUTERONOMY XXXIIl. 



the twelve tribes. 



land, whither ye go over Jordan to pos- 
sess it. 

48 And the Lord spake unto Moses that 
selfsame day, saying, 

49 Get ^ thee up into this mountain Aba- 
rim, unto mount Nebo, which is in the 
land of Moab, that is over against Jericho ; 
and behold the land of Canaan, which I 
give unto the children of Israel for a pos- 
session : 

50 And die in the mount whither thou 
goest up, and be gathered unto thy people ; 
as Aaron thy brother ''died in mount Hor, 
and was gathered unto his people : 

51 Because ye "^trespassed against me 
among the children of Israel at the waters 
of *Meribah-Kadesh, in the wilderness of 
Zin ; because ye '' sanctified me not in the 
midst of the children of Israel. 

52 Yet thou shalt ""see the land before 
thee ; but thou shalt not go thither unto the 
land which I give the children of Israel. 



• Num. 27 : 1 
* Or, ttri/e at 
34: 1-4. 1 Ex 


2. n. b Nl 
Kadesh; d 

19:18, •20; 


m 
I 
Ji 


20: 
eviti 


24-29. 
cus 10:3 
,1:4,5; 


c Numbers 
l.sa. 8 : 13 
Hab. 3 : 3. 


20 


11, 12. 
chap. 
Psalm 









49. Abarim; Num. 27 : 12-14 

50. In mount Hor ; Num. 20 : 2-3-29. 

51. Meribah-Kadesh ; Num. 20: 11-13. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The instructions of (rod through his inspired 
Bervants, as recorded in the Scriptures, are worthy of 
universal attention. 

2. As the rain and the dew. so the truths of the 
Bible are perfectly adapted to produce their appro- 
priate effects. Isa. 5-5: 10-13. 

4. Nothing could be added to or taken from the 
character of God, which would make it more per- 
fect; and no change in his dealings could make 
them in any re.spect better. 

5. Men are the authors of all their own wicked- 
ness, and they are wholly to blame for it. The more 
they have of it the more unlike they are to G-od, and 
the more guilty in his sight. 

6. To live in sin, after all that God has done to 
deliver us from it, is the vilest and basest ingrati- 
tude, and exposes to the most fearful retribution. 

8. The consideration that God thought kindly and 
graciously of us before we were born, and so ordered 
things that our wants of body and soul may all be 
supplied, is suited to impress our obligation to love 
and serve him, and to show our utter inexcusable- 
ness and great guilt if we neglect it. 

11. God takes a variety of ways to influence men 
to work out their own salvation, and renders their 
efforts effectual to their mounting up on wings as 
eagles, going from strength to strength and holding 
on their way, till in heaven they st;ind, trophies of 
grace, perfect before God, to his infinite and ever- 
lasting joy. So should parents and ministers do, 
•with regard to the young; and if in this they imi- 
tate the divine example, or are as true to parental 
instinct as the eagle, they may hope that the ob- 
jects of their affection will much oflener fly upward 
towards heaven, and not downward towards hell. 
Chap. 6:7; Prov. 22 : 6. ^ 

12. The tenderness of God to his people, his un- 
ceasing care for them, and the variety and wisdom of 
the methods he lakes to lead them to himself, demand 
their gratitude and renewed devotion to his service. 

15. The facts that increasing prosperity so often 
occasions increasing wickedness, and that the more 
outward blessings God bestows upon a people the 
276 



CHAPTER XXXIIl. ^T»t. 

I The majesty of God. The blessings of the twelve 
tribes. 26 The excellency of Israel. 

AND this is the blessing, wherewith 
Moses the man of God blessed the 
children of Israel before his death. 

2 And he said. The Lord ''came from Si- 
nai, and rose up from Seir unto them ; he 
shined forth from mount Paran, and she 
came with ten thousands of saints : from 
his right hand went ta fiery law for them. 

3 Yea, he '' loved the people ; all his 
saints are in thy 'hand: and they sat 
down at thy feet ; every one shall J receive 
of thy words. 

4 Moses commanded us a law, even the 
inheritance of the congregation of Jacob. 

5 And he was ''king in Jeshurun, when 
the heads of the people and the tribes of 
Israel were gathered together. 

6 ^Let 'Reuben live, and not die; and 
let not his men be few. 

68 :17; Gal. 3 : 19. f Or, fire of. h Hosea 11:1 ; 1 .John, 4:19. 
i 1 Samuel, 2:0; P8alm3l:15; John 17: 11-15. j 1 Tliess. 1 : 6- 
k Ex. 18:16, 19. 1 Gen. 49:3, etc. 



more they forget him and become worldly, proud, 
sensual, and devilish, are conclusive proofs of the 
awful wickedness of the human heart. Ver. 17, 18. 

]9. For those who have experienced most of God's 
goodness, and especially for his redeemed people to 
rebel against him, is peculiarly wicked, and he will 
pursue them with his indignation till they repent or 
perish. 

29. God desires that men should consider what 
will be the end of their continuing in sin, arul that 
they should turn from it and live. Ezek. 3j : 11 ; 
Mat. 23 : 37. 

43. The mercy of God to those who repent, and 
the good which he bestows upon them, ought to 
occasion universal joy, and will give joy to all the 
good throughout the universe. 

44. Instruction conveyed in poetry is often more 
impre.ssive, more easily remembered, and more ex- 
tensively useful, than when conveyed in prose. God 
has therefore manifested his wisdom and kindness 
in using it so much in the Bible. 

46. To be benefited by God"s communications, 
men must attend to them, treasure them up in 
their memories, and apply them to the regulation of 
their feelings, thoughts, words, and actions. 

47. On the manner in which men treat the com- 
mands of God, and the book which contains them, 
depends their best good and that of their children, 
for this life and the life to come. 

50. Death is always the fruit of sin. By one 
man sin entered, and death by sin. But to those 
who forsake sin and serve God, he turns it into a 
blessing. Often, as death approaolies, the land of 
promise, the heavenly city, opens before them with 
a beauty, a grandeur, a glory which surp.^ss a\\ 
conception. Earth and its glories they joyfully re- 
linquish, though to live on it were Christ; because 
to die and be with Christ, like Christ perfectly and 
for ever, is unspeakable gain. Pliil. 1:21; 1 Joiin, 
3:2. 

CHAPTER XXXIIl. 

2. Sinai — Seir — Paran ; mountains by which 
the Israelites passed on their way from Egypt to 
Canaan. Saints ; holy ones. Psa. 68 : 17. 

5. In Jeshurun ; among the Israelites. Chap. 
32 : 15. 

6. Reuben ; his posterity ; the tribe of Reuben. 



2^e blessings of 



DEUTERONOMY XXXIIl, 



the twelve tribes. 



ta^: 7 ^And this is the blessing of Ju- I 
dah : and he said, Hear, Lord, the voice of | 
Judah, and bring him unto his people : let 
his hands be sufficient for him; and be 
thou a *help to him from his enemies. 

8 "^And of Levi he said, Let thy '' Thum- 
mim and thy L^rim he with thy holy one, 
whom thou didst prove at Massah, a7id 
fcitli whom thou didst strive at the waters 
of Meribah; 

9 Who said unto his father and to 'his 
mother, I have not seen him ; neither "^ did 
he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew 
his own children : for they have observed 
thy word, and kept thy '' covenant. 

10 They shall teach Jacob thy judg- 
ments, and Israel thy law : * they shall put 
incense" tbefore thee, and "^whole burnt 
sacrifice upon thine altar. 

11 Bless, Lord, his substance, and s ac- 
cept the work of his hands : smite through 
the loins of them that rise against him, 
and of them that hate him, that they rise 
not again. 

12 ^ And of Benjamin he said, The be- 
loved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by 
him; and the Z,0/?D shall cover him all the 
day long, and he shall dwell between his 
shoulders. 

13 "y And of Joseph he said, Blessed of 
the LoRD^ehis land, fortheprecious things 
of heaven, for the •'dew, and for the deep 
that coucheth beneath, 

14 And for the precious fruits brought 
forthhy the sun, and for the precious things 
put+ forth by the ^'moon, 

15 And for the chief things of the an- 
cient mountains, and for the precious 
things of the lasting hills, 

16 And for the precious things of the 
earth and fulness thereof, and /or the good 
will of him that dwelt in the 'bush : let 



the blessing come upon the head of Joseph, 
and upon the top of the head of him that 
was separated from his brethren. 

17 His J glory is like the firstling of his 
bullock, and his horns are like the ^ horns 
of il unicorns : with them he shall 'push 
the people together to the ends of the earth : 
and they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, 
and they are the thousands of Manasseh. 

18 ^And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, 
Zebulun,in thy going out; and, Issachar, 
in thy tents. 

19 They ""shall call the people unto the 
mountain; there they shall "offer sacrifi- 
ces of righteousness : for "thej* shall suck 
of the abundance of the seas, and o/ treas- 
ures hid in the sand. 

20 ^ And of Gad he said, Blessed be he 
that enlargeth Gad : he dwelleth as a p lion, 
and teareth the arm with the crown of the 
head. 

21 And ne provided the "i first part for 
himself, because there, in a portion of the 
lawgiver, ivas he * seated; and he came 
with the heads of the people, he ' executed 
the justice of the Lord, and his judgments 
with Israel. 

22 •[ And of Dan he said, Dan 25 a lion's 
whelp: he ^ shall leap from Bashan. 

23 ^ And of Naphtali he said, Xaph- 
tali, * satisfied with favor, and full with 
the blessing of the Lord, ° possess thou 
the west and the south. 

24 ^And of Asher he said, Let Ashe^ 
be blessed with children; let him be ac- 
ceptable to his brethren, and let him dip 
his foot in 'oil. 

25 Thyt shoes shall be iron and brass; 
and as "thy days, so shall thy strength be. 

26 ^ There is none ^like unto the God of 
Jeshurun, who ^rideih upon the heaven in 
thy help, and in his excellency on the sky. 



• Pbsl 146 : 5. b Ex. S8 : 30. c El. 32 : C^-Ca d Mai 2 : 5-7. 12:3. 
» Or, Ul Ihem. • Eioiius 30 : 7, 8. t Heb. at thv noir. f Lev. 
1:9,17; Pwlm ,^1 : 19. i:Job«!:8; Ezek. 20 : 40, 41. k Gsn. 
57 : 28. t Or, Ihnut. \ Heb. mm)iu. i Ei. 3 : 3, 4. i 1 Cliron. 
5:1. k Psa. 92 : 10. || Heb. a uniconu 1 Psa. 44 : .i. ■■> Isa. 



7. Sufficient for him; sufficient to overcome 
and protect him from his enemies. 

8. Thy Thummim — he imth thy holy one ; the 
privilege of consulting the Lord for the people, and 
conducting public worship, should continue in the 
tribe of Levi. Massah — Meribah ; Ex. 17 : 7. 

9. Not seen — acknowledge — 7tor knew his own 
children ; he did not spare his own relatives, or 
favor any who were guilty, but executed divine 
justice upon them. Ex. 32:26-29. 

12. By him; the Lord. Jerusalem was in the 
tribe of Benjamin. Between his shoulders; by 
his side ; they would be near the dwelling-place of 
God, who would shield and protect them. 

14. By the sun, and — the moon ; their influence 
in ripening the products of the earth. 

16. Him that dwelt in the bush ; Ex. 3 : 2-6. 

17. Horns of niiicorns ; very strong. Ephra- 
im and — Man-asseh ; the two tribes which de- 
scended from Joseph. Gen. 48: 1, 17-19. 



l4:5. o Isa. 60:5, 16. p 1 Cliron. 12 : 8. q Num. 
32 : 1 , etc » Heb. ceiled, r Joshua 4 : 12, 13. « Josbna J 9 : 47. 
< Psalm 36: 8; 90:14: Jer. 31: 14. » Josh. 19: 32, etc. t Job 
■29 : 6. f Or, Under thy. chap. 8 : 9. w Isa. 41 : 10 ; 1 Cor. 10:13. 
I Jer. 10:6. T Psa. 68 : 4, 33. 



19. Offer sacrifices of righteoiisness ; be espe- 
cially conscientious and sincere in the worship of 
God.' 

21 . The first part for himself; in the country 
which the Israelites first conquered, on the east of 
Jordan. A portion of the lawgiver ; that which 
Moses, their lawgiver, assigned to them. He came 
with the heads of the people; went over Jordan 
with the rest of the Israelites and assisted them in 
the conquest of Canaan. 

22. Leap from Bashan ; Bashan was a coun- 
try east of Jordan, between the mountains of Her- 
mon and Gilead. From this country the Dinites 
made successful warlike excursions. Josh. 19 : 47 ; 
Jndg. 18:27-29. 

23. WeU and — soiith : west and south of that 
which was conquered bv the Panites. 

25. Shoes — iron and brass: his prosperity 
would be not only gjea.z, but durable ; and his mer- 
cies continue according to his wants. 

277 



Moses viewelh the 



DEUTERONOMY XXXIV. 



land and dieth. 



27 The eternal God is thy 'refuge, and 
undcrnealh are the everlasting arms : and 
he shall thrust out the enemy from before 
thee; and shall say, Destroy them. 

28 Israel then shall dwell in '' safety 
alone :" the fountain of Jacob shall he upon 
a land of corn and wine ; also his heavens 
shall drop down dew. 

29 Happy ^art thou, Israel: who is 
like unto thee, people saved by the 
Lord, the *■ shield of thy help, and who 
is the ""sword of thy excellency ! and 
thine enemies shall be * found liars unto 
thee; and thou shalt tread upon their 
high places. 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

1 Moses from mount Neto vieweth the land. 5 He 
dieth there. 6 His hurial. 7 His age. 8 Thirty- 
days' mourning for him. 9 Joshua succeedeth him. 
10 The praise of Moses. 

AND Moses went up from the plains of 
Moab unto the mountain M Nebo, to 
the top of t Pisgah, that is over against Jer- 
icho : and the Lord showed him all the 
land of Gilead, unto Dan, 

2 And all Naphtali, and the land of 
Ephraira, and Manasseh, and all the land 
of Judah, unto the utmost sea, 

3 And the south, and the plain of the 
valley of Jericho, the city of palm-trees, 
unto Zoar. 

4 And the Lord said unto him, This is 
the land which I ^sware unto Abraham, 



^ Psa. 90 : 1 ; Isa. 25 : 4. b .Ter. 23 : fi. c Num. 2.3 : 9. d Psa. 
144 :!.'>. e PsR. 115:9-11. f Rev. 1:16. * OT,tubdued. t Or, 
the hill, g Genesis 12 : 7. h eliap. 3 : 26, 27. i Juile 9. j Josli. 



27. The enemy ; the Canaanites. 

28. Alone ; not incorporated with other nations. 

29. Fowid liars ; be subdued, notwithstanding 
all their assertions and expectations to the contrary. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Ministers of G-od delight in proclaiming the 
blessings which will come on his people ; and 
though in faithfulness they must point out the de- 
struction that will come on the wicked, they do it 
with earnest desires that they may turn from their 
wicked ways and live. 

7. Those who have God for their helper will at 
last triumph over all their foes. 

12. It i.s a great blessing to enjoy religious privi- 
leges, and dwell near the house of the Lord ; and 
those who delight in worshipping him on earth are 
preparing for the worship of heaven. 

17. The fidelity of parents is often followed by 
rich and lasting blessings on their children. 

10. Sacrifices of righteousness offered in love to 
God, will be rewarded with all needed abundance 
on earth, and with endless and inexhaustible treas- 
ures in heaven. 

21. In executing just punishments on the wicked, 
when called to it by God, men may be acceptably 
.serving him and securing his blessings. 

23. For all temporal as well as spiritual favors, 
men are dependent on the blessing of the Lord. 

2.'). The Lord communicates to those who trust 
in him, all which they need to secure in the end 
their highest good. 

27. To have God for our refuge is the best secu- 
rity from fear, and the safest protection from danger. 
278 



unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying, *b.c ?«?; 
I will give it unto thy seed : I have caused 
thee to see it with thine eyes, but '■thou 
shalt not go over thither. 

5 ^ So Moses the servant of the Lord 
died there in the land of Moab, according 
to the word of the Lord. 

6 And he buried him in a valley in the 
land of Moab, over against Beth-peor : but 
no' man knoweth of his sepulchre unto 
this day. 

7 TfAnd Moses was a hundred and twen- 
ty years old when he died: his J eye was 
not dim, nor his ^ natural force abated. 

8 ^ And the children of Israel wept for 
Moses in the plains of Moab ''thirty days : 
so the days of weeping and mourning for 
Moses were ended. 

9 ^ And Joshua the son of Nun was full 
of the ' spirit of wisdom ; for " Moses had 
laid his hands upon him : and the children 
of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as 
the Lord commanded Moses. 

10 T[And there arose not a prophet since 
in ° Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord 
knew face to face, 

11 In all the "signs and the wonders 
which the Lord sent him to do in the land 
of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to all his ser- 
vants, and to all his land, 

1 2 And in all that p mighty hasd, and in 
all the great terror which Moses showed 
in the sight of all Israel. 

14:10,11. t neh. moisture fled, k Num. 20 : 20. I Dan. fi : 3. 
m Numbers 27 : 18, 23. n chap. 18:15, 18; Heb. 3 : 6, 6. o chap. 
4 : 34. V chap. 7 : 19. 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

1. Dan ; this was in the north part of the coun- 
try. Judges 18 : 29. 

2. Utmost sea ; the Mediterranean, forming the 
western boundary. 

3. Zoar; near the southern boundary of Canaan. 
6. Beth-peor ; chap. 3 : 29. 

9. Laid his hands upon him ; Num. 27 : 18-23. 

10. K7iew face to face; conversed familiarly 
with him, as a man with his friend. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. However long or faithfully the people of God 
may serve him, they must die. As they approach 
that momentous and solemn event, the Lord can 
and sometimes does give them such views of the 
glorious things which he has promised, as not only 
to take away fear, but to lead them in pe.ice and 
with delight to yield up their spirit to him who 
gave it. 

5. Though it is ordinarily a blessing, when called 
to die, to be surrounded with kind, sympathizing 
friends, yet if we die among strangers, or even 
alone, with no kind hand to smooth a pillow or 
wipe away a tear, God can so manifest himself, that 
without aid from creatures we shall be lilled to over- 
flowing with the fulness of God. 

8. When friends, especially such a.s have been 
eminently u.seful, die, it is proper to mourn; hnt it 
should be with cheerful acquiescence in the will of 
God, deep lo.alhing of sin the cause of death, and 
earnest prayer that all the living may be so saved 
from its power, that when ahsent from the body, 
they shall be present with the Lord. 



THE 



BOOK OF JOSHUA, 



i:c:^: CHAPTER I. 

1 The Lord appointeth Joshua to succeed Moses. 3 
The borders of the promised land. 5, 9 God promis- 
eth to assist Joshua. 8 He giveth him instructions. 
10 He prepareth the people to pass over Jordan. I'i 
Joshua putteth the two tribes and a half in mind of 
their promise to Moses. 16 They promise him fealty. 

IVTOW after the = death of Moses the ser- 
_L\ vant of the Lord it came to pass, that 
the Lord spake unto Joshua the son of 
Nun, Moses' ''minister, saying, 

2 Moses my servant is dead ; now there- 
fore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and 
all this people, unto the land which I do 
give to them, even to the children of Lsrael. 

3 Every "^ place that the sole of your foot 
shall tread upon, that have I given unto 
you, as I said unto Moses. 

4 From the ^wilderness and this Leba- 
non even unto the great river, the river 
Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and 
unto the great sea toward the going down 
of the sun, shall be your coast. 

5 There "shall not any man be able to 
stand before thee all the days of thy life: '"as 
I was with Moses, so I will be with thee : 
I « will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. 

6 Be strong and of a good courage : for 
unto * this people shalt thou divide for an 
inheritance the land, which I sware unto 
their fathers to give them. 

7 Only ''be thou strong and very cou- 
rageous, that thou mayest observe to do 
according to all the law, which Moses my 
servant commanded thee : turn not from 



• Deut. 34 : .1. I>Et. 2-«:13. cDeut. 11:24. d Gen. 15:18; 
Num. :!4 : 2-12. o Deiit. 7 : 24. fcliiip. 3:7: 6:27. e Dent. 
31 : 5, 8 ; Heb. \Z:5, * Or, thou shalt cause this people to ijiherit. 
h Deut. 31 :7, 23; F.ph.6:IO; 2 Timothy, 2 : 1. \ Or, do wisely. 



9. GoJ is not dependent for the accomplishment 
of his work on any of his servants, but they are 
constantly and entirely dependent on him. He 
raises up one, fits him for his work, sustains him 
till it is accomplished, and then, in his own way 
and time, removes him. With equal ease he can 
raise up others and fit them for what remains to 
be done, so that not one jot or tittle of what lie has 
promised shall fail, till all be accomplished. 

10. Moses was an example of true greatness. 
The more we imitate him in meekness, humility, 
faith in (xod. courage, and perseverance in duty, the 
more free will be our access to God, and the j;reater 
our likeness to him; the more useful and blessed 
■will be our life, the richer our prospect in death, and 
the more glorious our condition and inheritance in 
eternity. 

CHAPTER I. 

1. Minister ; assistant, agent. 

4. The utildrrness ; of Zin, on the south, heb- 
anon ; on the north. Eiiph~ates ; on the east. 
The great sea ; the Mediterranean, on the west. 



it to the right hand or to the left, that thou 
mayest tprosper whithersoever thou goest. 

8 This book of the law shall not depart 
out of thy mouth ; but thou shalt meditate 
therein day and night, that thou mayest 
observe to do according to all that is writ- 
ten therein : for then thou shalt make thy 
way prosperous, and then thou shalt ^have 
good success. 

9 Have not I commanded 'thee'? Be 
strong and of a good courage ; be not 
afraid,J neither be thou dismayed : for the 
Lord'' thy God is with thee whithersoever 
thou goest. 

10 Tf Then Joshua commanded the offi- 
cers of the people, saying, 

1 1 Pass through the host, and command 
the people, saying. Prepare you victuals ; 
for within ' three days ye shall pass over this 
Jordan, to go in to possess the land, which 
the Lord your God giveth you to possess it. 

12 If And to the Reubenites, and to the 
Gadites, and to half the tribe of Manasseh, 
spake Joshua, saying, 

1 3 Remember the word which Moses the 
servant of the Lord commanded you, say- 
ing, ""The Lord yovir God hath given you 
rest, and hath given you this land. 

14 Your wives, yourlittle ones, and your 
cattle, shall remain in the land which Mo- 
ses gave you on this side Jordan ; but ye 
shall pass before your brethren farmed, all 
the mighty men of valor, and help them ; 

1 5 Until the Lord have given your breth- 



Deut. 29:9. t Or, do wisely, ver. 7. i 1 Cbron. 28:20; Haggai 
2:4; Zerli. 8:9. J Gen. 28 : 15 : Psa. 27 : 1 ; Jer. 1:8. k P.Halni 
4K:7; Isaiah 4.1 : I , .■). I chap. 3 : 2. m chap. 22: 1-4; Numbers 
32 : 20-28. \ Heb. marshalled by five. Ex. \3 : 18. 



8. This book of the law; Deut. 17:18, 19; 
31 : 26. 

13. Remember the word; Num. 32 : 1-42. 
IXSTRUCTIONS. 

2. When the servants of Grod die and enter into 
rest, those who survive should be aroused to increas- 
ing efforts to carry forward the good works which 
they had begun. 

7. The highest and noblest courage is shown by 
the most faithful discharge of duty, and no real 
coward makes it his great object to obey the known 
will of God. 

8. The grand means of inspiring and increasing 
true courage, is daily attention to the principles and 
precepts of the Bible, for the purpose of understand- 
ing and obeying them. 

11. The certainty that God will be.stow upon his 
people the blessings he has promised them, docs not 
in the least lessen the necessity of their using all 
appointed means to obtain them. 

18. Rebellion against rightful authority requir- 
j what is right, is rebellion against God. 
279 



Two spies are 



JOSHUA II. 



sent into Jericho. 



ren rest, as he hath given you, and they 
also have possessed the land which the 
Lord your God giveth them : then ye shall 
return unto the land of your possession, 
and enjoy it, which Moses the Lord's ser- 
vant gave you on this side Jordan toward 
the sunrising. 

16 ^And they answered Joshua, saying, 
All * that thou commandest us we will do, 
and whithersoever thou sendest us, we 
will go. 

17 According as we hearkened unto Mo- 
ses in all things, so will we hearken unto 
thee : only the Lord thy God be with thee, 
as ""he was with Moses. 

18 Whosoever Ae6e that doth rebel against 
thy commandment, and will not hearken 
unto thy words in all t"hat thou commandest 
him, he *= shall be put to death : only ''be 
strong and of a good courage. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 Rahab receivelh and concealeth the two spies sent 
from Shittim. 8 The covenant between her and 
them. 23 Their return and relation. 

AND Joshua the son of Nun *sent out 
of Shittim two men to "spy secretly, 
saying. Go view the land, even Jericho. 
And they went, and came into a harlot's 
house, named "^Rahab, and t lodged there. 

2 And it was told the king of Jericho, 
saying, Behold, there came men in hither 
to-night of the children of Israel to search 
out the country. 

3 And the king of Jericho sent unto Ra- 
hab, saying. Bring forth the men that are 
come to thee, which are entered into thy 
house : for they be come to search out all 
the country. 

4 And ^the woman took the two men, and 
hid them, and said thus. There came men 
unto me, but I wist not whence they were : 

5 And it came to pass about the time of 
shutting of the gate, when it was dark, 
that the men went out; whither the men 
went, I wot not: pursue after them quick- 
ly ; for ye shall overtake them. 

6 But ''she had brought them up to the 
roof of the house, and hid tliem with the 
stalks of flax, which she had laid in order 
upon the roof. 



• Dout S : 07. b ver. 5 : 1 S»m. 20 : 13 ; 1 Kingfi, 1 : 37. c Rom. 
13:1-.V ■< vpr. 6,7,!); 1 Cor. 16:13. * Or, hartient. eNiim.l3:2. 
f M«t 1 : S ; Hck. 11 : .11 : .las. 2 : S.-i. f Heb. (<iy. e 2 Sam. 1 7 : 111, 'M. 
kEx.l:lS-?l. iGen.ai:5; Kj. I.'k 15, 1'i : Mi'J?; Deut 2:16; 
11:4,1. t Heb. nKtt. I.Sam. H: 16; 2 Siim. 17:10. jEx.H:21. 



CHAPTER II. 

1. Sent; had sent. Shittim; a, place in the 
plains of Moab, a few miles east of the Jordan. 
Num. 2.'>:1. 

4,!}. Wist; knew. Wot; know. 

6. Roof of the house ; (hi'ir roofs were flat, and 
were pliices often resorted to for air, meditation, and 
rest. Dent. 22 : 8. 

7. The fords ; where they expected that the spies 
would cioss over Jordan. 

280 



7 And the men pursued after them VaiJti: 
the way to Jordan unto the fords : and as 
soon as they which pursued after them 
were gone out, they shut the gate. 

8 T[And before they were laid down, she 
came up unto them upon the roof; 

9 And she said unto the men, I know 
that the Lord hath given you the land, 
and that your 'terror is fallen upon us. 
and that all the inhabitants of the land 
faint 5: because of you. 

10 For we have heard how the Lord 
driedJ up the water of the Red sea for 
you, when ye came out of Egypt; and 
what'' ye did unto the two kings of the 
Amorites, that were on the other side Jor- 
dan, Sihon and Og, whom ye utterly de- 
stroyed. 

1 1 And as soon as we had heard these 
things, our 'hearts did melt, neither ^did 
there remain any more courage in any 
man, because of you : for '" the Lord your 
God, he is God in heaven above, and in 
earth beneath. 

12 Now therefore, I pray you, swear 
unto me by the Lord, since I have showed 
you kindness, that ye will also show kind- 
ness unto " my father's house, and give me 
a true "token: 

1 3 And that ye will save alive my father, 
and my mother, and my brethren, and my 
sisters, and all that they have, and deliver 
our lives from death. 

14 And the men answered her, Our life 
for'l yours, if ye utter not this our busi- 
ness. And it shall be, when the Lord 
hath given us the land, that we will deal 
kindly P and truly with thee. 

15 Then she "ilet them down by a cord 
through the window: for her house was 
upon the town wall, and she dwelt upon 
the wall. 

16 And she said unto them, Get you to 
the mountain, lest the pursuers meet you; 
and hide yourselves there three days, un- 
til the pursuers be returned : and after- 
ward may ye go your way. 

17 And the men said unto her, We U'ill 
6c 'blameless of this thine oath whicli thou 
hast made us swear. 



k Num. 21 : 21-,'i.->. I rliap. 6:1; 7:6; Isa. 13:7. % Heb. rote up. 
m Pent 4 :.■!<). n Gen 2< : 3, 9 : I Sam. 20: 16, 17 ; Rom. 1 : 31 ; 
1 Tim. 5:8. o ver. 18: F.i. 12: 13; Eiek. >):4-6. || Heb. initiad 
of vou to die. p Gen. 24 : 49 ; .ludg. 1 ; 24 ; 1 Sam. 20 : 8. q AcU 
9:25. r Lev. 19: 11, 12; Num. 30:2; 2 Sam. 21 : 1, 2, 7. 



9. Faint ; are filled with terror. Deut. 11 : 25. 
12. House ; family. 

14. Our life for yours ; may our life be taken 
if we do not save yours. 

15. She dwelt upon the wall ; so that from her 
window she could let the men down outside of the 
city wall. 

17. We will be blameless ; not under obligation 
to fulfil their en<;agement to her, unless she should 
do as they mentioned. Ver. 18. 



The people prepare 



JOSHUA III. 



to pass over Jordan. 



B.c!Hlr 18 Behold, ivhen we come into the 
land, thou shalt bind this line of scarlet 
thread in the window which thou didst 
let us down by: and *thou shalt * bring 
thy father, and thy mother, and thy breth- 
ren, and all thy father's household, home 
unto thee. 

19 And it shall be, /^ai whosoever shall 
go out of the doors of thy house into the 
street, his blood shall be upon his head, and 
we tcillbe guiltless : and whosoever shall 
be with thee in the house, his blood shall 
be on our '' head, if any hand be upon him. 

20 And if thou "^ utter this our business, 
then we will be quit of thine oath which 
thou hast made us to swear. 

21 And she said. According unto your 
words,"* so be it. And she sent them away, 
and they departed : and she bound the 
scarlet line in the window. 

22 And they went, and came unto the 
mountain, and abode there three days, un- 
til the pursuers were returned : and the 
pursuers sought them throughout all the 
way, but found them not. 

23 1[ So the two men returned, and de- 
scended from the mountain, and passed 
over, and came to Joshua the son of Nun, 
and told him all things that befell them : 

24 And they said unto Joshua, Truly the 
Lord hath "^delivered into our hands all 
the land ; for even all the inhabitants of 
the country do t faint because of us. 

CHAPTER III. 

1 .Toshua Cometh to Jordan. 2 The officers instruct 
the people for the passajre. 7 Tlie LorJ encourap;eth 
Joshua. 9 Joshua encourageth the people. 14 The 
waters of Jordan are divided. 

AND Joshua rose early in the morning ; 
and they removed from '^Shittim, and 
came to Jordan, he and all the children of 
Israel, and lodged there before they passed 
over. 

2 And it came to pass after three days, 
that the ofHcers ^went through the host; 



» diap. 6 : 3.1. * We\i. gntlitr. b 1 Kings, 2 : .32 ; Miit. -27 : iS. 
r Proverlis 11 : 13. d Mat. 7 : 24. e chap. 21:44; KxoJus ST : 31. 
t Heb. melt, verse 9. f chap. 2:1. B chap. 1 : 10, 11. h Num. 
10:33. i Dent. 31 : 9, 2.'). i Ex. 19:12. t KeK linct ytstetday 
and the Ihird day. k chap. 7:13; Ex. 19:10, 14; Lev. 20:7; 
Num. 11:18; 1 .S:.inuel. Ifi : 5 : .lob 1 : 5 ; Joel2:lfi; John 17 : 19. 



19. His blood shall be upon his head; his 
death will be his own fault. 

INSTRUCTION?. 

9. The providences of God. as well as his word, 
often terrify the wicked ; yet those terrors which do 
not lead them to repentance will do them no good, 
but will be forerunners of their destruction. 

13. Kindness to the people of God, and assist- 
ance rendered to them for his sake, are well pleasing 
in him. and secure his blessing. Mat. 10: 41, 12; 
Heb. 11:31. 

14. We should be careful to promise only what 
is practicable and right, and when we make such 
promises, should conscientiously and faithfully fulfil 
them. 

24. When God ^ibandons a people on account 



3 And they commanded the people, say- 
ing, When ye see the •" ark of the covenant 
of the Lord your God, and the 'priests the 
Levites bearing it, then ye shall remove 
from your place, and go after it. 

4 Yet there shall be a J space between 
you and it, about two thousand cubits by 
measure : come not near unto it, that ye 
may know the way by which ye must go : 
for ye have not passed this way thereto- 
fore. 

5 And 'Joshua said unto the people, 
Sanctify yourselves : for to-morrow the 
Lord will do ' wonders among you. 

6 And Joshua spake unto the priests, 
saying, '"Take up the ark of the covenant, 
and pass over before the people. And 
they took up the ark of the covenant, and 
went before the people. 

7 1[ And the Lord said unto Joshua, This 
day will I begin to "magnify thee in the 
sight of all Israel, that they may know 
that, as "I was with Moses, so I will be 
with thee. 

8 And thou shalt command the priests 
that bear the ark of the covenant, say- 
ing, When ye are come to the brink of 
the water of Jordan, ye shall p stand still 
in Jordan. 

9 T[And Joshua said unto the children 
of Israel, Come hither, and hear the words 
of the Lord your God. 

10 And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall 
know that the living i God is among you, 
and that he will without ''fail 'drive out 
from before you the Canaanites, and the 
Hittites, and the Hivites, and the Periz- 
zites, and the Girgashites, and the Amo- 
rites, and the Jebusites. 

1 1 Behold, the ark of the covenant of the 
Lord' of all the earth passeth over before 
you into Jordan. 

1 2 Now therefore take you " twelve men 
outof the tribes of Israel, outof every tribe 
a man. 



IPaa. 86:10. m Num. 4 : 15. n chap. 4 : 14 ; 1 Chron. 29 :26 ; 
2Chron. 1:1; Psa. 18:3i. o chap. 1 : 5. p Ter. 17. q Daniel 
5:26; Mat. 16: 16; 1 Thess. 1 : 9. r chap. 21:45. s Exodus 
33:2; Deut.7:l; Psalm 44: 2. Iver. 13; Iaamh54:5; Micah 
4: 13; Zech.4: 14; 6:5. u chap. 4 : 2. 



of their sins, all things conspire to work out their 
ruin. 

CHAPTER in. 
2. After three tlays ; from the time mentioned, 
chap. 1:10, 11. 

4. Two thousand cubits ; about one thousand 
yards, or two thirds of a mile. 

5. Sanctify yourselves ; Ex. 19:10-14; Lev. 
20:7, 8; Num. 11: 18. 

7. Magnify thee ; show by miracle that he had 
appointed Joshua, and clothed him with authority 
as the leader of Israel. Chap. 4 : 14. 

10. Hereby ; by what he would do in dividing 
the waters of Jordan. Ver. 16. 

12. Twelve men ; these were to be selected for 
a special purpose. Chap. 4 : 2, 3. 

281 



Tlie passage of Jordan. 



JOSHUA IV. 



Twelve stones set up. 



13 And it shall come to pass, as •soon 
as the soles of the feet of the priests that 
bear the ark of the Lokd, the Lord of all 
the earth, shall rest in the waters of Jor- 
dan, that the waters of Jordan shall be 
cut off from the waters that come down 
from above; and they shall ''stand upon 
a heap. 

1 4 ^ And it came to pass, when the peo- 
ple removed from their tents, to pass over 
Jordan, and the priests bearing the "^ark 
of the covenant before the people ; 

15 And as they that bare the ark were 
come unto Jordan, and the ''feet of the priests 
that bare the ark were dipped in the brim 
of the water, (for "^Jordan overfloweth all 
his banks all the time of harvest,) 

16 That the waters which came down 
from above stood and rose "^up upon a heap 
very far from the city Adam, that is be- 
side *Zaretan ; and those that came down 
toward the ^sea of the plain, even the salt 
sea, failed, and were cut off: and the peo- 
ple passed over right against Jericho. 

17 And the priests that bare the ark of 
the covenant of the Lord stood firm on 
dry •' ground in the midst of Jordan, and all 
the Israelites passed over on dry ground, 
until all the people were passed clean over 
Jordan. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1 Twelve men are appointed to take twelve stones for 
a memorial out of Jordan. 9 Twelve other stonps 
ar« spt up in the midst of Jordan. 10, 19 The people 
pass over. 14 God ma^ifieth Joshua. 20 The 
twelve stones are pitched in Gilgal. 

AND it came to pass, when all the peo- 
ple were clean passed over Jordan, 
that the Lord spake unto Joshua, saying, 

2 Take you twelve men out of the peo- 
ple, out of every tribe a man, 

3 And command ye them, saying. Take 
you hence out of the midst of Jordan, out 
of the place where the priests' feet stood 
firm, 'twelve stones, and ye shall carry 

• Tcr.lft.Ifi. l>Pen.78:13. c Deut 31 :26; Jer.3 :15; Heb.<l:4. 
dver.n. • lCliron.l2:I5; .Ter.l2:5. fP8l\.n4:3. *lKing3, 
4:12, ZortonoA. 1 Kings, 7: Hfi; ZarMan. e Deut. 3 : 17. h Ex. 



13. Be cut off; the waters below would separate 
from the waters above, leaving the channel of the 
river dry. Ver. 16. 

l-*). The tiyne of harvest ; barley-harvest, which 
began in Abil). the first month of their ecclesiastical 
year, answering to a part of March and April. Chap. 
4 : 19. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. They who are earnest, diligent, and persever- 
ing in the discharge of their appropriate duties, may 
expect to be rendered eminently useful, and advanced 
10 distinguisiied honor and glory. Ver. 7. 

3. To follow the directions of God as indicated by 
his M'ord, his Spirit, and his providence, is the way 
of safety, happiness, and success. 

S. Sanctification of body and spirit is a prepara- 
tion for peeing the glory of God, and experiencing 
the manifestations of his power and grace. 

10. However dark the path before us, God can 
282 



them over with you, and leave them *b c! i«i: 
in the lodging-place, where ye shall lodge 
this night. 

4 Then Joshua called the twelve men, 
whom he had prepared of the children of 
Israel, out of every tribe a man : 

5 And Joshua said unto Ihem, Pass over 
before the ark of the Lord your God into 
the midst of Jordan, and take you up every 
man of you a stone upon his shoulder, 
according unto the number of the tribes 
of the children of Israel : 

6 That this may be a sign among you, 
that J when your children ask their fathers 
int time to come, saying, What mean ye 
by these stones ? 

7 Then ye shall answer them, ^ That the 
waters of Jordan were cut off before the 
ark of the covenant of the Lord ; when it 
passed over Jordan, the waters of Jordan 
were cut off: and these stones shall be for 
a 'memorial unto the children of Israel 
for ever. 

8 And the children of Israel did so as 
Joshua commanded, and took up twelve 
stones out of the midst of Jordan, as the 
Lord spake unto Joshua, according to the 
number of the tribes of the children of 
Israel, and carried them over with them 
unto the place where they lodged, and laid 
them down there. 

9 And Joshua set up ""twelve stones in 
the midst of Jordan, in the place where 
the feet of the priests which bare the ark 
of the covenant stood : and they are there 
unto this day. 

10 ^For the priests which bare the ark 
stood" in the midst of Jordan, until every 
thing was finished that the Lord command- 
ed Joshua to speak unto the people, accord- 
ing to all that Moses commanded Joshua: 
and the people hasted and passed over. 

1 1 And it came to pass, when all the peo- 
ple were clean passed over, that the ark 

H:29. iDeut.27:2. j ver.21 ; Et. 13:H; Deut fi:20: Psi».«:l; 
78:3-8. t Heb. (om-rroio. k clinji.3: 13, 16. 1 Num. 16 : 40; P»n. 
111:4. m Ex. 24:12; 28:31; 1 Kings, 18:31. n cli.ip. 3: 13. 



make it plain; and however great the difficulties in 
the way of duly, he can remove them, and cause us 
in obeying him to triumph. 

13. Multitudes of things which are impossible 
with men are possible with God. It is therefore 
reasonable and a duty to believe whatever he de- 
clares, and show that belief by our conduct. 

16. Whatever dilTiculties may be in the w.ay of 
believing God, living and strong faith will overcome 
them ; and those who exercise it will in due time 
see the complete fulfilment of his declarations. 

CHAPTER IV. 
4. Prepared; previously selected. Chap. 3:12. 

6. A sign; a monument to commemorate the 
dividing of the river Jordan, and to transmit the 
knowledge of it to future generations. Ver. 7. 

7. For ever ; as long as the knowledge of thii 
event should continue. 



They encamp in Gilgal. 



JOSHUA V. 



Circumcision renewed. 



B.c.'im.' of the Lord passed over, and the 
priests, in the presence of the people. 

1 2 And * the children of Reuben, and the 
children of Gad, and half the tribe of Ma- 
nasseh, passed over armed before the chil- 
dren of Israel, as Moses spake unto them : 

13 About forty thousand *prepared for 
war passed over before the Lord unto bat- 
tle, to the plains of Jericho. 

14 HOn that day the Lord ''magnified 
Joshua in the sight of all Israel; and they 
feared him, as they •= feared Moses, all the 
days of his life. 

1 5 And the Lord spake unto Joshua, say- 
ing, 

16 Command the priests that bear the 
ark"* of the testimony, that they come up 
out of Jordan. 

17 Joshua therefore commanded the 
priests, saying. Come ye up out of Jordan. 

18 And it came to pass, when the priests 
that bare the ark of the covenant of the 
Lord were come up out of the midst of Jor- 
dan, and the soles of the priests' feet were 
liftedt up unto the dry land, that the wa- 
ters of Jordan returned unto their place, 
and- flowed "over all his banks, as they did 
before. 

19 If And the people came up out of Jor- 
dan on the tenth day of the first month, and 
encamped in Gilgal, in the east border of 
Jericho. 

20 And ■" those twelve stones, which they 
took out of Jordan, did Joshua pitch in 
Gilgal. 

21 And he spake ixnto the children of 
Israel, saying, ^ When your children shall 
ask their fathers ^ in time to come, saying. 
What mean these stones 1 

22 Then ye shalllet your children know, 



• Nu 


m. 32 : 20-29. ' Or, ready armed. b chap. 3 : 7. cEx. 


H:31; 


1 Sam. 12 : 18 ; 1 Kings, 3 : 28. d Ex. 2.t : 16, 21. f Heb. 


pluckec 


i up. 1 Heb. went. « cliap. 3 : 1.5. f ver. 8. g ver. 6. 


\ Heb 


to-mortow. h chap. 3 : 17. i Exodus 14:21. jl Kings, 



14. The Lord magni fiedJoshna ; by the man- 
ner in which he led the Israelites over the Jordan. 
Ch.Tp. 3 : 7. 

19. The tenth day of the first tnonth; forty years, 
wanting five days, frojn the time they left Egypt, 
and on the day that the paschal lamb was to be set 
apart for sacrifice. Chap. 5 : 10 ; E.k. 12 : 3-42. 

20. Pitch ; put in a conspicuous place, so as to 
be easily seen. 

23. The Bed sea; Ex. 14 : 21, 22. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. All proper care should be taken to keep in mind 
the mercies of the Lord ; and to transmit a knowledge 
of them to our children and all coming generations. 

6. It is wisely ordered that children should be in- 
quisitive. It opens the way to communicate instruc- 
tion in a form most interesting and useful. Such op- 
portunities should be diligently improved by parents 
and all intrusted with the education of the young. 

10. When in obedience to God vre have taken the 
place and engaged in the service which he has as- 
signed tis, we should patiently abide in it till he in 
liis providence bids us leave it, and then we should 



saying, Israel •'came over this Jordan on 
dry land. 

23 For the Lord your God dried up the 
waters of Jordan from before you, until ye 
were passed over, as the Lord your God 
did ' to the Red sea, which he dried up from 
before us, until we were gone over: 

24 That -iall the people of the earth 
might know the hand of the Lord, that it 
is mighty : that ye might fear the Lord 
your God II for ever. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 The Canaanites are afraid. 2 Joshua reneweth cir-' 
cumcision. 10 The passover is kept at Gilgal. 12 
Manna ceaseth. 13 An angel appeareth to Joshua. 

A ND it came to pass, when all the kings 
^ A_ of the Amorites, which ivcre on the side 
of Jordan westward, and all the kings of the 
Canaanites,'' which ivere by the sea, ' heard 
that the Lord had dried up the waters of 
Jordan from before the children of Israel, 
tintil we were passed over, that "'their heart 
melted, neither was there " spirit in them 
any more, because of the children of Israel. 

2 ^ At thattime the Lord said unto Joshua, 
Make thee sharp *knives, and circumcise 
again the children of Israel the second time. 

3 And Joshua made him sharp knives, 
and circumcised the children of Israel at 
the thill of the foreskins. 

4 And this is the cause why Joshua did 
circumcise : °A11 the people that came out 
of Egypt, that leere males, even all the men 
of war, died in the wilderness by the way, 
after they came out of Egypt. 

5 Now all the people that came out were 
circumcised ; but all the people that luere 
born in the wilderness by the way as they 
came forth out of Egypt, them they had 
not circumcised. 



8 : 42, 43 


■ 2 Kings 


,19:19 
k Num 


P 


a. 106:8 


; .ler 


10 


■fi, 


7 ; Dan. 4 


.34, .36. 


II Heb. a 


// days. 


13 


29. 1 E 


I. l.'i: 


H 


l.=i. 


m chap.' 


:9.11: 


Psa. 48: 


5; Ezek 


21:7. 


n 


I Kings, 


O:."!. 


* 


Or 


knives ofjlints. 


Ex. 4 : 2 


.. t Or 


Gibeak-ha 


aratoth. 


o N 


im 


26 


:64,63. 





go to any other place and engage in any other ser- 
vice to which he calls us. 

12. The friends of God should remember that they 
belong to one family, and have one common cause. 
Most gladly therefore should each portion pursue the 
course which is best for the whole, and in so doing 
they will subserve their own best interests. 

14. They who most heartily and faithfully follow 
the directions of God, will in due time be most 
highly honored. Mat. 19 : 28. 

is. What are called laws of nature, are stated 
modes of God's operation, which he can continue or 
change, as he sees best. 

24. When God works wonders, they are not for 
any particular people or period merely, but for all 
people in all ages, and are designed and adapted to 
make known his character to the universe for ever. 

CHAPTER V. 

1. The sea ; the Mediterranean. 

2. The second time ; not that any who had 
been circumcised were to be circumcised again, but 
those who had not been, were to b6. Ver. 5-7. 

283 



The Captain of God's host. 



JOSHUA VI. 



Jericho is shut up. 



6 For the children of Israel "walked forty 
years in the wilderness, till all the people 
that were men of war, which came out of 
Egypt, were consumed, because they 
obeyed not the voice of the Loud: unto 
whom'' the Louu sware that he would not 
show them the land, which the Lord sware 
unto their fathers that he would give us, 
a land that floweth with milk and honey. 

7 And their "^ children, irhom he raised up 
in their stead, them Joshua circumcised : 
for they were uncircumciscd, because they 
had not circumcised them by the way. 

8 And it came to pass, when *they had 
done circumcising all the people, that they 
abode in their places in the camp, till they 
were whole. 

9 And the Lord said unto Joshua, This 
day have I rolled away the '' reproach of 
Egypt" from off you. Wherefore the name 
of the place is called tGilgal unto this day. 

10 ^ And '^the children of Israel en- 
camped in Gilgal, and kept the passover 
on the s fourteenth day of the montyi at 
even in the plains of Jericho. 

1 1 And they did eat of the old corn of 
the land on the morrow after the pass- 
over, unleavened cakes, and parched corn 
in the .selfsame day. 

1 2 *[[ And the '' manna ceased on the mor- 
row after they had eaten of the old corn 
of the land; neither had the children of 
Israel manna any ' more ; but they did eat 
of the fruit of the land of Canaan that year. 

13 H And it came to pas.s, when Joshua 
was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes 
and looked, and behold, there stood a J man 
over against him with his ''sword drawn 
in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, 
and said unto him, Art thou for us, or for 
our adversaries ? 

14 And he said, Nay; but as t captain 



« Num. 14. -33; Dcut. 1 :3; 2 : 7, 14 ; 8: 4. fc P.sa.9.^: 10, U : Heb. 
3:11. c Num. 14:31; DeuL 1 : 3!i. * Heb. tlie people had made an 
tnd to he circumcued. d Gen.34: 14; 1 Siim. 17 :•.'«. e clmp. 'M: 14; 
Exek. 20 : 7, 8 ; e! : 3, 8. f ''Imt ''i rotting. ( clinp. 4 : I>). u Ex. 
IJ:6; Num.9:S. liEx.I6:35; Nell.9:20. i Rev. 7 : IH, 17. 
j Gen. 32 : 24 ; Ex. 23 : 23. k Num. 22 : 23 : 1 Cliron. 21 : 27, 30 



8. Whole; healed. 

9. 2V/e reproach of Egypt : the reproach of 
their having been bondmen in Egypt, God had re- 
moved by putting them in po.ssession of the prom- 
ised kind. Gilgal ; that is. rolling away. 

10. Fourteenth day ; just forty years from the 
time of their keeping it, on the evening before their 
departure from Egypt. E.x. r2 : 6-1-1. 

13. A mail ; one in the form and .^ppear.ance of 
a, man. 

U. Captain; Uch. 2: 10. Did worship ; 'Hlv^i. 
4:10; Rev. 19 : 10. 

1.5. Loose thy shoe ; Ex. .3 : 5. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. However much those who continue in sin may 
^ee of their own appro.aching ruin, they take no 
proper measures to escape it. 

2. If under special and peculiar circumstances 
the ordinances of God luive been for a time neglect- 

284 



of the host of the Lord am I now ^BciHi"?: 
come. And Joshua ' fell on his face to the 
earth, and did worship, and said unto him, 
What'" saith my lord unto his servant? 

15 And the captain of the Lord's ho.«t 
said unto Joshua, "Loose thy shoe from 
off thy foot; for the place whereon thou 
standest is holy. And Joshua did so. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 Jericho is shut up. 2 God instructeth Joshua how to 
besiege it. 12 The city is compassed. 17 It must 
be accursed. 20 The walls fall down. 22 Rahab is 
saved. 2G The builder of Jericho is cursed. 

TVTOW Jericho ^ w^as straitly shut up be- 
_l\ cause of the children of Israel : none 
went out, and none came in. 

2 And the Lord said unto Joshua, See, °I 
have given into thy hand Jericho, and the 
kingP thereof, a/if/ the mighty men of valor. 

3 And ye shall compass the city, all ye 
men of war. and go round about the city 
once. Thus shalt thou do six days. 

4 And seven priests shall bear before 
the ark seven ^ trumpets of rams' horns : 
and the seventh day ye shall compass the 
city seven times, and the "■ priests shall 
blow with the trumpets. 

5 And it shall come to pass, "that when 
they make a long blast with the ram's 
horn, and when ye hear the sound of the 
trumpet, all the people shall * shout with 
a great shout; and the wall of the city 
shall fall down H flat, and the people shall 
ascend up every man straight before him. 

6 T[ And Joshua the son of Nun called 
the priests, and said unto them, "Take up 
the ark of the covenant, and let seven 
priests bear seven trumpets of rams' horns 
before the ark of the Lord. 

7 And he said unto the people. Pass on, 
and "compass the city, and let him that is 
armed pass on before the ark of the Lord. 



t Or, prince. Ex. i3 : 20 ; Dan. 10 : 13, 21 ; 12:1; Rev. 19 : 11-14. 

I Gen. 17:3; Num. 16:22. m lSam.3:n,10; lsa.f):8; Acts 9 : 6. 
n Kx. 3:fi; Acts 7: 33. \ Heb. did thvt up, and was shut up. 
» rhap. 2:9,24; 8:1. !• Deut. 7 : 24 ; .) u Jges U : 24. 1 Judges 
7:16,22. rNum.lO:8. • 2Chron. 20:21,22. t 2 CliroD. 13 : 14, lA. 

II Heb. unoter it. u cliap. 3:6. » ver. 3. 

ed, the earliest opportunity should be embrt-vced to 
observe them, and thus to secure the benefits they 
are suited to impart. 

3. Whatever be the circumstances of men, it is 
safe, wise, and best for them to obey God. He can 
protect tliem from all harm, or overrule what they 
may suffer for their highest good. 

6. By the dispensations of his providence, God 
fulfils the declarations of his word. 

9. Reproach may for a season rest upon the peo- 
ple of God, but in due time it shall be done away, 
and they shall be crowned with honor and glory. 

12. When on» source of support ceases, God opens 
another, and instead of leaving his people destitute, 
he will abundantly supply them with all real good. 

It. Jehovaii, who took the form of man, is the t^ap- 
tain of salvation to his people. Those whom he saves 
worship him on earth, and will for ever worship him 
in heaven. Mat. 14 : 33 ; Acts 7 : 59 ; Rev. 5 : 8-14. 



Destruction of Jericho. 



JOSHUA VI. 



Rahab is spared. 



ua had spoken unto the people, that the 
seven priests bearing the seven trumpets 
of rams' horns passed on before the Lord, 
and blew with the trumpets : and the ark 
of the covenant of the Lord followed them. 

9 And the armed men went before the 
priests that blew with the trumpets, and 
the * rearward *came after the ark, the 
l^riests going on, and blowing with the 
trumpets. 

10 And Joshua had commanded the peo- 
ple, saying. Ye shall not shout, nor make 
any t noise with your voice, neither shall 
««?/ word proceed out of your mouth, until 
the day I bid you shout ; then shall ye 
shout. 

1 1 So the ark of the Lord compassed the 
city, going about it once : and they came 
into the camp, and lodged in the camp. 

1 2 1[ And Joshua rose early in the morn- 
ing, and the priests took ""up the ark of the 
Lord. 

13 And seven priests bearing seven 
trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of 
the Lord went on continually, and blew 
with the trumpets: and the armed men 
went before them ; but the rearward came 
after the ark of the Lord, the priests going 
on, and blowing with the trumpets. 

14 And the second day they compassed 
the city once, and returned into the camp. 
So they did six days. 

15 And it came to pass on the "^seventh 
day, that they rose early about the dawn- 
ing of the day, and compassed the city 
after the same manner seven times: only 
on that day they compassed the city seven 
times. 

16 And it came to pass at the seventh 
time, when the priests blew with the trum- 
pets, Joshua said unto the people, "* Shout ; 
for the Lord hath given you the city. 

17 1[ And the city shall be + accursed, 
even it, and all that arc therein, to the Lord : 
only Rahab the harlot shall live, she and 
all that are with her in the house, because 
she ""hid the messengers that we sent. 

18 And ye, in any wise '^keep yourselves 
from the accursed thing, lest ye make your- 



* Heb 


gathering liost- a 


Num.10 


.■2.1. t Heb 


your voice to 


be heard. 


b verse 6 


; I)eut .'51 : 26. 


ver. 4. A 


■er 


5. i Or, 


devoted. 


Lev. 27 


2S 


Micall4:l3. e 


cbap. 2 : 4. 


f 


chap. 7:1; 
\ Heb. 


Dent. 7 


i!fi; l:t 


17 


2 Cur. 


fi:17. 


e chapter 7 


2.T 


Iwlinesr. 


h IKi 


g». 


7:51. 


i ver. 6. 


II Heb. under i 


. j Deut 



CHAPTER VI. 

8. Before the Lord ; before the ark, the visible 
manifestation of his presence. 

9. The rearward; the rest of the people, who 
were not armed. 

17. Accursed ; devoted to destruction. 

19. Into the treasury of tlie Lord ; to be em- 
ployed in the service of the sanctuary and the sup- 
port of public worship. 

26. Adjured them ; commanded them, under 

19 



selves accursed, when ye take of the ac- 
cursed thing, and make the camp of Israel 
a curse, and ? trouble it. 

19 But all the silver, and gold, and ves- 
sels of brass and iron, are ^ consecrated 
unto the Lord : they shall come into tho 
treasury'" of the Lord. 

20 So the people shouted when the priest.' 
blew with the trumpets : and it came to 
pass, when the people heard the sound of 
the trumpet, and the people shouted witli 
a great shout, that the 'wall fell down 
flat, II so that the people went up into the 
city, every man straight before him, and 
they took the city. 

21 And they utterly J destroyed all that 
u'as in the city, both man and woman, 
young and old, and ox, and sheep, and 
ass, with the edge of the sword. 

22 But Joshua had said unto the two 
men that had spied out the country, Go 
into the harlot's house, and bring out 
thence the woman, and all that she hath, 
as ye "^ sware unto her. 

23 And the young men that were spies 
went in, and brought out Rahab, and 'her 
father, and her mother, and her brethren, 
and all that she had ; and they brought 
out all her * kindred, and left them with- 
out the camp of Israel. 

24 And they '"btirnt the city with fire. 
and all thatira.s- therein : only the " silver, 
and the gold, and the vessels of brass and 
of iron, they put into the treasury of the 
house of the Lord. 

25 And Joshua saved "Rahab the harlot 
alive, and her fathers household, and all 
that she had ; and she dwelleth in p Israel 
even unto this day: because ^she hid the 
messengers, which Joshvia sent to spy out 
Jericho. 

26 IT And Joshua adjured thein at that 
time, saying, 'Cursed be the man before 
the Lord, that riseth up and buildcth this 
city Jericho : he shall lay the foundation 
thereof in his first-born, and in his youn- 
gest son shall he set up the gates of it. 

27 So the Lord was with 'Joshua; and 
his fame was noised throughout all the 
country. 



7:2,16:20:16,17; 1 Samuel, 15:3, 18; 1 Kings, 20:43; Psalm 
137:8. 9; Jer. 48:10; Rev. 18:21. kchap. 2>14. 1 cbap. 2:18. 
* Heh./amiliet. m Deut 13:16. n ver. IS. o Juiig. 1 : 24, 25 : 
Heb. 11:31. p Matthew 1 : .5. qJas. 2:26. r l Kings, 16 : 34. 
» Deut. 31 : 6. 



the penalty of a curse, not to build a^ain the city 
of Jericho. I?i his first-born, aiidin his youngest 
son : this is supposed to mean, that all his sons 
would die while he was building the city ; his first- 
born when he laid the foundation, and his youngest 
when he set up the gates. 1 Kings, 16 : 34. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. If men continue in known transgression, they 
will bring themselves into difficulties and dangers 
from which they cannot escape. 

285 



Israel smitten at Ai 



JOSHUA VII, 



The sin of Achan. 



CHAPTER VII. 

1 The Israelites are smitten at Ai. 6 Joshua's com- 
plaint. 10 God instructethhimwhat todo. 16 Achan 
is taken by the lot. 19 His confession. 22 He and 
all he had are destroyed in the valley of Achor. 

BUT the children of Israel committed a 
trespass* in the accursed thing: for 
Achan,* the son of Carmi, the son of 
Zabdijt the son of Zerah, of the tribe of 
Judah, took of the accursed thing: and 
the anger of the Lord was kindled against 
the children of Israel. 

2 And .Jo.shua sent men from Jericho to 
Ai, which is beside Beth-aven, on the east 
side of Beth-el, and spake unto them, say- 
ing. Go up and view the country. And 
the men went up and viewed Ai. 

3 And they returned to Joshua, and said 
unto him. Let not all the people go up ; but 
let + about two or three thousand men go 
up and smite Ai ; and make not all the peo- 
ple to labor thither; for they are but few. 

4 So there went up thither of the people 
about three thousand men ; and they "^ fled 
before the men of Ai. 

5 And the menof Ai smote of them about 
thirty and six men : for they "^ chased them 
from before the gate, even unto Shebarim, 
and smote them ^ in the going down : 
wherefore the hearts of the people ''melt- 
ed, and became as "water. 

6 ^AudJoshua''rcnt his clothes, and fell 
to the earth upon his face before the ark of 
the Lord until the eventide, he and the ciders 
of Israel, and put^dust upon their heads. 

7 And Joshua said, Alas, Lord God, 
wherefore'' hast thou at all brought this 
people over Jordan, to deliver us into the 
liand of the Amorites, to destroy us? 
would to God we had been content, and 
dwelt on the other side Jordan ! 

8 Lord, 'what shall I say, when Israel 
turneth their II backs before their enemies ! 



a ver. 20, 21. * jlchar. 1 Cliron. 2:7. f Or, Zimri. 1 Cliron. 
2:6. t Hcl). about two thoxuand mtn^ or about three thousand 
ynen. h Lev. 2li : 17 ; Deut 28 : 25. c Deut. 1 : 44. % Or, in 
Morad. <1 Lcv.2(i:.%. eP8a.22:14. f Gen-.W: 29,.'i4. e 1 Sam. 
4:12; 2S.im.l:2i 13:19; Neli.9:l; Job2:12. hEj.5:22; 
2 Kings, 3 : 10. 1 Hab. 2:1. || Heb. neckt. j Exodus 32 : 12 ; 



5. G-od gives success to his people in such a way as 
to try their faith, and to show them that their victories 
come not from themselves, but from him alone. 

10. Silence is often conducive to that serious med- 
itation, and solemn reflection upon the character, 
works, and ways of God, which prepare his people 
to see his glory and experience his salvation. 

14. Careful attention to the directions of God, 
and patient perseverance in following them, whether 
we see any immediate effects or not, is the highest 
wisdom, and the surest way of securing success. 

19. The silver and gold and treasures of every 
description wliich men liave accumulated, belong to 
the Lord, and he has a perfect right to the disposal 
of them. 

21. The manner in which the Israelites passed 
over Jordan and took the city of Jericho, showed 
that while men obey God they have no good reason 
to distrust his willingness or his power to do for 
them all which they need. 
286 



9 For J the Canaanites and all the *».".?«?: 
inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and 
shall environ us round, and cut ''off our 
name from the earth : and what wilt thou 
do unto thy great 'name? 

10 ^And the Lord said unto Joshua, 
Get thee up ; wherefore * liest thou thus 
upon thy face 1 

1 1 Israelhathsinned,and they have also 
transgressed my covenant which I "'com- 
manded them : for they have even "taken 
of the accursed thing, and have also sto- 
len, and "dissembled also, and they have 
put it even among their own stuff. 

12 Therefore Pthe children of Israel 
could not stand before their enemies, but 
turned their backs before their enemies, 
because they were ''accursed : neither will 
I be with you any more, except ye destroy 
the accursed from among you. 

13 Up, sanctify the people, and say, 
Sanctify'' yourselves against to-morrow: 
for thus saith the Lord God of Israel, 
There is an accursed thing in the midst of 
thee, Israel : thou canst not stand be- 
fore thine enemies, until ye take away the 
accursed thing from among you. 

14 In the morning therefore ye shall be 
brought 'according to your tribes : and it 
shall be, that the tribe which the 'Lord 
taketli shall come according to the fami- 
lies thereof; and the family which the 
Lord shall take shall come by households ; 
and the household which the Lord shall 
take shall come man by man. 

15 And it shall he, that he that is taken 
with the accursed thing shall be burnt 
with fire, he and all that he hath : because 
he hath transgressed the covenant of the 
Lord, and because he hath wrought tfolly 
in "Israel. 

1 6 ^So Joshua rose up early in the morn- 

Num. 14:13. k Deut. 32 : 26, 27 ; Pen. 83 : 4. 1 Ezek. 36: 22, 23. 
* Heh. fallcst. m cliap. 6:17, 18. n verse 21. o Acts 5: 1, 2. 
p Num. 14:45; Judg. 2: 14. q clian. fi: 18; Deut. 7:26; Haggni 
2:13,14. rchap.3:5. • 1 Samuel, 10: 19; 14 : 38-42. t Prov. 
16:33; .Tonah 1 : 7. f Or, wiekedneii. n Genesis 34: 7; Judg. 
20:6; 1 Sam. 26:21. 



25. Faith in God meets his approbation, and se- 
cures, for those who exercise it, the richest blessings. 
Heb. 11:30, 31. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1. The children of Israel; one or more of them. 

2. Ai ; a city north-west of Jericho ; the same as 
Hai. Gen. 12 : 8 ; 13 : 3. 

5. Became as water ; were utterly discouraged. 

6. Put ditst upon their heads ; in token of deep 
distress. 

9. What wilt thou do? how would God secure 
his honor as faithful to his promises and able to 
fulfil them. 

11. Israel; some of them. Dissembled ; a.ct^i. 
deceitfully. Stuff ; furniture, goods. 

12. The accursed; those who had sinned in the 
matter referred to, ver. 11. 

11. The Lord taketh ; designates by lot, or in 
some otiier way. 



Achan taken by lot, 



JOSHUA VIII. 



and put to death. 



B.c.'u^.' iiigj 3,nd brought Israel by their 
tribes ; and the tribe of Judah was taken : 

17 And he brought the family of Judah ; 
and he took the family of the Zarhites : 
and he brought the family of the Zarhites 
man by man ; and Zabdi was taken : 

18 And he brought his household man 
by man ; and Achan, the son of Carmi, 
the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the 
tribe of Judah, was taken. 

19 And Joshua said unto Achan, My 
son, give, I pray thee, * glory to the Lord 
God of Israel, and make ''confession unto 
him; and tell me now what thou hast 
done; hide it not from me. 

20 And Achan answered Joshua, and 
said. Indeed I have sinned against the 
Lord God of Israel, and thus and thus 
have I done : 

21 When I <^saw among the spoils a 
goodly Babylonish garment, and two hun- 
dred shekels of silver, and a * wedge of 
gold of fifty shekels weight, then I "^ cov- 
eted them, and ^took them; and behold, 
they arc Hiid in the earth in the midst of 
my tent, and the silver under it. 

22 T[ So Joshua sent messengers, and 
they ran u\jto the tent; and behold, it ivas 
hid in his tent, and the silver under it. 

23 And they took them out of the midst 
of the tent, and brought them unto Joshua, 
and unto all the children of Israel, and 
laid t them out before the Lord. 

24 And Joshua, and all Israel with him, 
took Achan the son of Zerah, and the sil- 
ver, and the garment, and the wedge of 
gold, and his sons, and his daughters, and 



«lSam.6:5; Jer. 13:16. bNum.S:6,T; 2 Chron. M : 22 ; 
S3: 12. 13; Ezra 10 : 10, U; Psa. 32:5; 51:3; Jer. 3: 12,13; Dan. 
S:4; Rom.lO:10; IJohn, 1:8-10. cProv.28:22. * Heb. tongue. 
ilHab. 2:9; Roiu. 7:7; 1 Tim. 6:10; Jas. 1:15. •Micah2:l. 



19. Give — glory to the Lord; by confessing 
the truth. 

26. Achor ; meaning, trouble. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. Sins known only to those who commit them and 
to G-od, may occasion calamities to a nation, and be 
the means of bringing many to an untimely grave. 

3. G-reat prosperity often tempts men to be self- 
confident, and leads them to neglect tho.se means 
which are essential to their continued success. 

4. When men undertake plans in reliance on their 
own judgment or that of others, without inquiring 
of (3rod, or seeking his direction, they will be likely 
to fail, and instead of success meet with speedy and 
sore disappointment. 

5. Men are prone to go to extremes, and after 
being highly elated, to sink into despair. 

7. In trouble we should humble ourselves on ac- 
count of our sins, and implore pardoning mercy ; 
especially inquiring why it is that Grod contendeth 
with us, and seeking to know his will, that we may 
do it. 

9. When we truly desire the honor of God, and 
wish for success in our efforts that he may be glori- 
fied, our prayers will be accepted and answered in 
rich mercy. 

II. The cause of all trouble is sin ; and so long 



his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and 
his tent, and all that he had : and they 
brought them unto the valley of Achor. 

25 And Joshua said. Why hast thou 
troubled s us 1 the Lord shall trouble thee 
this day. And all Israel '' stoned him with 
stones, and burned them with fire, after 
they had stoned them with stones. 

26 And they 'raised over him a great 
heap of stones unto this day. So the Lord 
turnedJ from the fierceness of his anger. 
Wherefore the name of that place was 
called, The ''valley of +Achor, unto this 
day. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1 God encourageth Joshua. -3 The stratagem whereby 
Ai was taken. 29 The king thereof is hanged. 30 
Joshua buildeth an altar, 3'2 writeth the law on 
stones, 33 propoundeth blessings and cursings. 

AND the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear 
not, neither be thou dismayed : take 
all the people of war with thee, and arise, 
go Lip to Ai : see, I have given into thy hand 
the king of Ai, and his people, and his city, 
and his land: 

2 And thou shalt do to Ai and her king 
as thou didst unto 'Jericho and her king: 
only the "spoil thereof, and the cattle 
thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto your- 
selves : lay thee an ambush for the city 
behind it. 

3 ^ So Joshua arose, and all the people 
of war, to go up against Ai : and Joshua 
chose out thirty thousand mighty men of 
valor, and sent them away by night. 

4 And he commanded them, saying. Be- 
hold, ye shall ° lie in wait against the city, 



f laaiah 29 : 15. f Heh. poured, g IChron. 2:7; Heb. 12:l.^. 
hDeut.l7:5. i chap. 8:29; 2 Samuel. 18: 17. i Deut. 13 : 17. 
k ver. 24 ; Isa. 65 : 10 ; Hosea 2:15. t That is, trouble. 1 chap. 
6:21. m Deut. 20 : H. n Judg. 20: 29, etc. 



as it is indulged, however secretly, we cannot ex- 
pect deliverance, or the protection and blessing of 
God. 

13. All iniquity is perfectly known to God, and 
it is a solemn thing to stand before him and have it 
brought to light and spread out before the sun. 

15. The punishment which God sometimes brings 
upon the workers of iniquity here, is a premonition 
of the more dreadful woes which will come upon 
them hereafter. 

18. The idea of keeping sin a secret is vain: those 
who commit it may be sure that, sooner or later, their 
sin will find them out. Num. 32 : 23 ; Mat. 10 : 26. 

21. I saw, I coveted, and I took, describes the 
course with regard to forbidden objects, of multi- 
tudes of transgressors ; and their condition, when 
their sins are brought to light, is in total contr.ast 
to what they expected when they committed them. 
Prov. 13:15; Jas. 1:15. 

25. There are cases where God requires trans- 
gressors to be put to death, and his anger will not be 
turned away from a people unless they execute this 
punishment. Gen. 9:6; Num. 35 : 16-21 ; Deut. 
19 : 11-13. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

4. Ye shall lie in wait ; either the whole or a 
part of them. Ver. 12. 

287 



Ai in taken 



JOSHUA VIII. 



and destroyed. 



even behind the city : go not very far from 
the city, but be ye all ready : 

5 And I, and all the people that arc with 
me, will approach unto the city: and it 
shall come to pass, when they come out 
against us, as at the * first, that we will flee 
before them, 

6 (For they will come out after us,) till 
wc have * drawn them from the city ; for 
they will say. They flee before us, as at the 
first: therefore we will flee before them. 

7 Then ye shall rise up from the am- 
bush, and seize upon the city : for the 
Loud your God will deliver it into your 
hand. 

8 And it shall be, when ye have taken 
the city, that ye shall set the city on fire : 
according to the commandment of the 
Lord shall ye do. ''See, I have com- 
manded you. 

9 ^Josliua therefore sent them forth; 
and they went to lie in ambush, and abode 
between Beth-el and Ai,on the west side 
of Ai : but Joshua lodged that night among 
the people. 

10 And Joshua rose up early in the morn- 
ing, and numbered the people, and went 
up, he and the ciders of Israel, before the 
people to Ai. 

1 1 And "^ all the people, even the people of 
war that ivcrc with him, went up, and drew 
nigh, and came before the city, and pitched 
on the north side of Ai : now there was a 
valley between them and Ai. 

1 2 And he took about five thousand men, 
and set them to lie in ambush between Beth- 
el and Ai, on the west side tof the city. 

13 And when they had set the people, 
even all the host that was on the north of 
the city, and their -Hers in wait on the 
west of thecity, Joshua went that night 
into the midst of the valley. 

14 H" And it came to pass, when the king 
of Ai saw it, that they hasted and rose up 
early, and the men of the city went out 
against Israel to battle, he and all his peo- 
ple, at a time appointed, before the plain; 
but he ''wist not that there were liers in 
ambush against him behind the city. 

15 And Joshua and all Israel made as if 
they were beaten before them, and fled by 
the way of the wilderness. 

Ifi And all the people that were in Ai 
Avcre called together to pursue after them : 
and they pursued after Joshua, and were 
drawn away from the city. 



17 And there was not a man left *B.c:ii5?. 
in Ai or Beth-el, that went not out after 
Israel: and they left the city open, and 
pursued after Israel. 

18 And the Lord said unto Joshua. 
Stretch'' out the spear that is in thy hand 
toward Ai ; for I will give it into thy hand. 
And Joshua stretched out the spear that 
he had in his hand toward the city. 

19 And the ambush arose quickly out 
of their place, and they ran as soon as he 
had stretched out his hand : and they en- 
tered into the city, and took it, and hasted 
and set the city on fire. 

20 And when the men of Ai looked behind 
them, they saw, and behold, the smoke of 
the city "^ascended up to heaven, and they 
had no ^power to flee this way or that way: 
and the people that fled to the wilderness 
turned back upon the pursuers. 

21 And when Joshua and all Israel saw 
that the ambush had taken the city, and 
that the smoke of the city ascended, then 
they turned again, and slew the men of Ai. 

22 And the other issued out of the city 
against thon; so they were in the midst 
of Israel, some on this side, and some on 
that side: and they smote them, so that 
they let ^none of them remain or escape. 

23 And the king of Ai they took alive, 
and brought him to Joshua. 

24 And it came to pass, when Israel had 
made an end of slaying all the inhabitants 
of Ai in the field, in the wilderness where- 
in they chased them, and when they were 
all fallen on the edge of the sword, until 
they were consumed, that all the Israel- 
ites returned unto Ai, and smote it with 
the edge of the sword. 

25 And so it was, that all that fell that 
day, both of men and women, were twelve 
thousand, even all the men of Ai. 

26 For Joshua '' drew not his hand back, 
wherewith he stretched out the spear, un- 
til he had utterly destroyed all the inhab- 
itants of Ai. 

27 Only 'the cattle and the spoil of that 
city Israel took for a prey unto tliemselves, 
according unto the word of the Lord which 
he J commanded Joshua. 

28 And Joshua burnt ''Ai, and made it 
a heap forever, even a desolation unto this 
day. 

29 And the 'king of Ai he ""hanged on a 
tree until eventide: and as "soon as the .sun 
was down, Joshua commanded that they 



« ilia|.. 7 : fi. * Hch. pulled, b 2 S 
of /li t Heh. Ining in wait, ver. 4. 
fl:12; Isa. 19:11, 13; lThe»».fi:3. 



im. I3:'iR. e vcr. .">. ♦ Or, 
A .TimIr. 20 : M, etc. : Eccl. 
• Ex. H:6. f Gen. 19:28; 



12. Ahontfive. thoufaiid; of tliose he had chosen, 
ver. 3, or in adilition to that comjriny. 

\&. All the people ; the mrn of M-ar. Ver. 2'1. 
19. Set the city on fire ; they burnt a part of 
2S8 



luainli 34 : 10. % Heb. Aniirf. f TJput. 7:2. 1> Ex. 17:11,12. 
i Nlimhers 31 : 22. 2(i. j ver.>2. k Deut. 13: 16. I Ps.n. 110: 5. 
tn clinp. 10 : 2G, 27. » Deut 21 : 22, 23. 



it; but the rest was not burnt till the spoil had 
been taken out and the inhabitants destroyed. Ver. 
27 28. 
" }b. As the sun was down; Deut. 21 : 22, 23. 



The reading of the law. 



JOSHUA IX. 



The Gibconitcs^ craft. 



S.c!u5?' should take his carcass .down from 
the tree, and cast it at the entering of the 
gate of the city, and =" raise thereon a great 
heap of stones, that rcmaineth unto this day. 

30 H Then Joshua built an altar unto the 
Lord God of Israel in mount ''Ebal, 

31 As Moses the servant of the Lord 
commanded the children of Israel, as it is 
written'^ in the book of the law of Moses, 
an altar of whole stones, over which no 
man hath lifted up any iron: and they 
offered thereon burnt-offerings unto the 
Lord, and sacrificed peace-offerings. 

32 IJAnd ''he wrote there upon the stones 
a copy of the law of Moses, which he wrote 
in the presence of the children of Israel. 

33 And all Israel, and their elders, and 
officers, and their judges, stood on this side 
the ark and on that side before the priests 
the Levites, which "bare the ark of the 
covenant of the Lord, as well the ''stran- 
ger, as he that was born among them ; half 
of them over against mount Gerizim, and 
half of them over against mount Ebal ; as 
Moses the servant of the Lord had ^ com- 
manded before, that they should bless the 
people of Israel. 

34 And afterward he ^ read all the words 
of the law, the 'blessings and cursings, 
according to all that is written in the book 
of the law. 

35 There was not a word of all that Mo- 
ses commanded, which Joshua read not 
before all the congregation of Israel, with 
the women, and the little ones, and the 
strangers that * were conversant among 
them. 



CHAPTER IX. 



a 


chap. 7 


26 


b Deut. 27 


:4-6. c Ex 


20:25. d Deut. 27 


2,3 


8. 


' i 


eut. 31 


li 


M; IChron. 


I.T 


ii-i.-i. 


f Deut 31 : 12. g 


Deut. 


11: 


29: 27: 


12. 


h Deut. 31 


II 


; Nell. 8: 


2, 3: 13:1. i Lev 


26 


:!, 


etc 


; Deut. 


27 


15-26; 28; 2 


9; 


30:15-20 


* Unh. walked, j 


Nu 





30. Mowit Ebul; Deut. 11:29,30; 27:2-8. 

31. Whole stones ; E.x. 20 : 25. 

33. Mount Gerizim ; Deut. 27 : 12, 13. 

34. All the words of the laiv ; Deut. ch. 27, 28. 

IXSTRUCTrONS. 

1. "When sin is heartily put away, and men are 
disposed to hear and obey God, there is no reason to 
be discouraged, or to fear to undertake any service 
to which he calls them. 

2. By coveting what does not belong to them, 
and making haste to be rich, men often bring them- 
selves to an untimely end ; when, had tliey waited 
with patience and faithfully done their duty, they 
would in due time have had an abundance and been 
able to enjoy it. 

8. If men would secure the blessings of the Lord, 
they must not shrink from any service to which he 
• calls them. 

13. To accomplish things which G-od has foretold, 
and which are beforehand certain, it is as needful to 
use means as it would be if they were not foretold, 
or their accomplishment depended wholly upon hu- 
man efforts. 

17. Wlien the measure of a people's iniquity is 
full, they are given up in hardness of heart and 
blindness of mind, to pursue a course which ends in 
their ruin. 



1 The kings combine against Israel. 3 The Gibeonites 
by craft obtain a league ; 13 for which they are con- 
demned to perpetual bondage. 

AND it came to pass, when all the kings 
which were on this side Jordan, in the 
hills, and in the valleys, and in all the 
coa.sts of the J great sea over against Leba- 
non, the ''Hittite, and the Amorite, the 
Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and 
the Jebusite, heard thereof; 

2 That they 'gathered themselves to- 
gether, to fight with Joshua and with Is- 
rael, with one t accord. 

3 If And when the inhabitants of ""Gib- 
eon "heard what Joshua had done unto 
Jericho and to Ai, 

4 They did work wilily, and went and 
made as if they had been ambassadors, 
and took old sacks upon their asses, and 
wine-bottles, old, and rent, and bound up ; 

5 And old shoes and clouted upon their 
feet, and old garments upon them ; and all 
the bread of their provision was dry mul 
mouldy. 

6 And they went to Joshua unto the 
camp° at Gilgal, and said unto him, and 
to the men of Israel, We be come from a 
far country : now therefore make ye a 
league with us. 

7 And the men of Israel said unto the 
Hivites,P Peradventure ye dwell among 
us; and how shall we make a i league 
with y-ou ■? 

8 And they said unto Joshua. We are thy 
servants.' And Joshua said unto them. 
Who arc ye? and from whence come ye? 



34:6. k Ex. 3:17; 23:23. l2Cliror 


. 20 : 1 , etc. ; Psa. 83 : 3, 6 ; 


Isa.8:9, 10; 54:1,>). f Heb. mouM. m 


chap. 10:2. n chap, (i: 27. 


o cli:ip. .">: 10. P chiip. 1 1 : 19. q Ex 


23 : 32 ; Deut. 7:2; Judg. 


2 : 2. r Dent. 20 : 1 1 ; 2 Kings, 10:5. 





25. In punishing men for their sins, God uses such 
instruments as he sees best, and it was no more 
wrong for him to destroy the men of Ai by the hand 
of the Isiaelites, than it would have been to destroy 
them by pestilence, famine, or an earthquake. 

29. Men of great influence, wtio have been leaders 
in transgression, will bedistinguished in their punish- 
ment, and the righteous Judge will award to all who 
persevere in iniquity according to their works. 

30. We should ever feel and acknowledge that all 
our blessings come through the atonement of Christ, 
and should engage in nothing which will unfit us to 
acknowledge and adore him. 

3-5. The minds of all classes of people should be 
habitually directed to the will of God as revealed 
in the Scriptures, and all suitable means be pcrse- 
veringly used to lead them to obey it. 

CHAPTER IX. 
1. Tliis side Jordan ; the west side, where the 
Israelites then were. The great sea ; the Medi- 
terranean. 

3. Gibeon ; a large city of the Hivites, a few 
miles north of Jerusalem. Chap. 10 : 2. 

4. Wilily; craftilj'. deceitfully. Wine-bottles ; 
these were made of the skins of animals. 

6. A league • an agreement not to destroy them. 
2S9 



The league with Gibeon. 



JOSHUA X. 



It is reditced to bondage. 



9 And they said unto him, From a very 
far" country thy servants arc ''come, be- 
cause of the name of the Lord thy God : 
for we have ''heard the fame of him, and 
all that he did in Egypt, 

10 And all that he did to the two kings 
of the Amorites, that were beyond Jordan, 
to Sihon king of Heshbon, and to Og king 
of Bashan, which was at Ashtaroth. 

1 1 Wherefore ^ our elders and all the in- 
habitants of our country spake to us, say- 
ing, Take victuals *\vith you for the jour- 
ney, and go to meet them, and say unto 
them, We are your servants : therefore 
now make ye a league with us. 

12 This our bread we took hot for our 
jirovision out of our houses on the day we 
came forth to go unto you ; but now, be- 
hold, it is dry, and it is mouldy : 

1 3 And these bottles of wine, which we 
filled, u'cre new ; and behold, they be 
rent: and these our garments and our 
shoes are become old by reason of the very 
long journey. 

1 4 And + the men took of their victuals, 
and asked '"not counsel 'at the mouth of 
the Lord. 

15 And Joshua made « peace with them, 
and made a league with them, to let them 
live : and the princes of the congregation 
sware unto ''them. 

1 6 T[ And it came to pass at the end of three 
days after they had made a league with 
them, that they heard that they were their 
neighbors, and that they dwelt among them. 

17 And the children of Israel journeyed, 
and came unto their cities on the third day. 
Now their cities were 'Gibeon, and Ohe- 
phirah, and Beeroth, and Kirjath-jearim. 

18 And the children of Israel smote them 
not, because the princes of the congrega- 
tion had J sworn unto them by the Lord 
God of Israel. And all the congregation 
murmured against the princes. 

19 But all the princes said unto all the 
congregation. We have sworn unto them 
by the Lord God of Israel : now there- 
fore wc may not touch them. 

20 This we will do to them; we will even 



«Deut.20:16. b 1 Kinpi.S: 41 ; lsii.55: 5; Acts 8:27. c chap, 
S: If>: Ej. 1R:H; Num. 21:35. il Entlier 8 : 17. * Heb. in your 
hand, t Or, thei/ received Che men by reason of their victualt. 
• Num.27:2l; 1 Chron. 10: 13, 14: I»n. 30: 1, 2. fJmlgesl:!; 
20:18,28; I Sam. 2.T : 10, 1 1 ; 30:8; 2Sam.2:l; 5:19. g chap. 
11:19. b2Sam.21:2. 1 chap. 10: 2 ; 18: 25-28. jP8a.l3:4; 



18. Sworn unto them ; that their lives should 
be preserved. Ver. 1.5, 20. 

■21. Hewers of wood and drawers of water ; 
especially for the services of religion. Verses 23, 
27. 

'27. In the place which he should choose ; for 
the .sanctuary and for public worship. 
INSTRUCTION.S. 

2. No combination or power of wicked men, if 
they continue in sin, will save them from ruin. 

S. A knowledge of the truth, the will, and pur- 
290 



let them live, ^ lest wrath be upon b.cIhs? 
us, because of the oath which we sware 
unto them. 

21 And the princes said unto them, Let 
them live; but let them be 'hewers of 
wood and drawers of water unto all the 
congregation ; as the princes ""had prom- 
ised them. 

22 1[ And Joshua called for them, and he 
spake unto them, saying, Wherefore have 
ye beguiled us, saying. We are very far 
from you ; when ye dwell among us ? 

23 Now therefore ye are "cursed, and 
there shall ^ none of you be freed from be- 
ing bondmen, and "hewers of wood and 
drawers of water for the house of my God. 

24 And they answered Joshua, and said. 
Because it was certainly told thy servants, 
how that the Lord thy God '"commanded 
his servant Moses to give you all the land, 
and to destroy all the inhabitants of the 
land from before you, therefore we were 
sore 1 afraid of our lives because of yoB, 
and have done this thing. 

25 And now, behold, we are in thy 
hand .^ as it seemeth good and right unto 
thee to do unto us, do. 

26 And so did he unto them, and deliv- 
ered them out of the hand of the children 
of Israel, that they slew them not. 

27 And Joshua ^made them that day 
hewers of wood and drawers of water for 
the congregation, and for the altar of the 
Lord, even unto this day, in the 'place 
which he should choose. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 Five Icings war against Gibeon. 6 Joshua rescueih 
it. to God fighteth against them with hailstones. 
12 The sun and moon stand still at the word of Joshua . 
IG The five tings are immured in a cave. 'X^ They 
are brought forth, '2\ scornfully used, 'Jfi and hanged. 

28 Seven kings more are conquered. 43 Josliua re- 
tumeth to Gilgal. 

"IVrOW it came to pass, when Adoni-ze- 
±N dek king of Jerusalem had heard how- 
Joshua had taken Ai, and had ' utterly de- 
stroyed it ; as he had done to Jericho and 
her king, so he had done to °Ai and her king; 
and how the inhabit ants of Gibeon had made 
peace'' with Israel, and were among them ; 



Eccl. 5 : a k. 2 Sam. 21 : 1-6 ; Ezek. 17 : 12-21 ; Zech. 6 : 3, 4 ; MaT. 
3:5. 1 DeuL 29: 11; 2Chmn. 2:17, 18. m Ter. 15. n Leviticus 
27 : 28, 29. J Heb. not be tut off from jrox. o ver. 21 , 27. p El. 
i): 32; Deut. 7:1,2. q Ex. 15: 14-16. r 2Sam. 24: 14 ; Isn. 47 : 6. 
T^Heh. gave, OT delivered to be. E7.n1 8: 20. "00^.12:5; Psa. 
132:13,14. t chap. 8:22-28. ichap.6:21. v chap. 9: 15. 



poses of God, leads some to oppose and others to 
submit themselves to him. Ver. 2.'). 

14. If men do not ask counsel of God, and seek 
his direction, they may expect to be habitually and 
grossly deceived. 

19. Solemn engagements to do things which are 
practicable, and not wicked, should be sacredly ob- 
served. Psa. 1.5 : 4. 

27. The sins of men are sometimes overruled for 
their good; but this does not lessen the evil of such 
sins, or the guilt of those who commit them. 



Five kings combine. 



JOSHUA X. 



TTie sun and moon stand still. 



B.^:^!: 2 That they ^feared greatly, because 
Gibeoii was a great city, as one of the royal 
cities,* and because it urns greater than Ai, 
and all the men thereof irerc mighty. 

3 Wherefore Adoni-zedek king of Jeru- 
salem sent unto Hoham king of Hebron, 
and unto Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto 
Japhia king of Lachish, and unto Debir 
king of Eglon, saying, 

4 Come up unto me, and help me, that 
we may smite Gibeon : for it hath made 
peace with Joshua and with the children 
of Israel. 

5 Therefore the five kings of the Amo- 
rites, the king of Jerusalem, the king of 
Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of 
Lachish, the king of Eglon, ''gathered 
themselves together, and went up, they 
and all their hosts, and encamped before 
Gibeon, and made war against it. 

6 T[ And the men of Gibeon sent unto 
Joshua ^ to the camp to Gilgal, saying, 
Slack not thy hand from thy servants ; 
come up to us quickly, and save us, and 
help us : for all the kings of the Amorites 
that dwell in the mountains are gathered 
together against us. 

7 So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he, 
and all the people of war with him, and 
all the mighty men of valor. 

8 1[ And the Lord said unto Joshua, "Tear 
them not : for I have delivered them into 
thy hand; there shall not a man of them 
stand before thee. 

9 Joshua therefore came \nito them sud- 
denly, and went up from Gilgal all night. 

10 And the Lord ''discomfited them be- 
fore Israel, and slew them with a great 
slaughter at '^ Gibeon, and chased them 
along the way that goeth up to Beth-horon, 
and smote them to Azekah, and unto Mak- 
kedah. 

1 1 And it came to pass, as they lied from 
before Israel, and were in the going down 
to Beth-horon, that the Lord cast down 
greafSstones from heaven upon them unto 
Azekah, and they died : thcxj were more 
which died with hailstones than they 
whom the children of Israel slew with 
the sword. 



• Ex. 15 : 14-16 ; Deut. U : -25. * Heb. citici of tht kingdom. 
h cliap. 9:2; Isn. 8:9, 10. c chap. 9 : 6. d cli.ip. 1 1 : 6; Judges 
•4 : 14, 15. JuJk- 4 : 15. f Isaiah 28 : 21. B E.xodus 9 : 22-2ti ; 
Psa. 18 : 13, 14 ; laa. 30 : 30 ; Rev. llj : 21. f Heb. bt tiUnt. h Job 



CHAPTER X. 

3. Hebron — Jarmuth — Lachish — Eglon ; 
places south-west of Jerusalem, and in that part 
of Canaan which afterwards fell to the tribe of 
Judah. 

5. The Amorites ; a general name for the Ca- 
naanites in that part of the country. 

10. ]ieth-horo7i : north-west of Jerusalem. 

11. Down to lit'th-horon ; there were places 
of this name called upper and lower. This was 
the lower. That referred to, verse 10, was the 



12 TfThen spake Joshua to tlie Lord in 
the day when the Lord delivered up the 
Amorites before the children of Israel, and 
he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, t stand 
thou '' still upon Gibeon ; and thou, Moon, 
in the valley of 'Ajalon. 

13 And the sun stood still, and the moon 
stayed, until the people had avenged them- 
selves upon their enemies. Is not this 
written in the book of tJasher?J So the 
sun stood still in the midst of heaven, 
and hasted not to ''go down about a whole 
day. 

1 4 And there was no day like that before 
it or after it, that the Lord hearkened unto 
the voice of a man : for the Lord 'fought 
for Israel. 

1 5 TfAnd Joshua returned, and all Israel 
with him, unto the camp to Gilgal. 

1 6 But these five kings fled, and hid 
themselves in a '"cave at Makkedah. 

17 And it was told Joshua, saying. The 
five kings are found hid in a cave at Mak- 
kedah. 

18 And Joshua said. Roll great "stones 
upon the mouth of the cave, and set men 
by it for to keep them : 

19 And stay ye not, but "pursue after 
your enemies, and ^ smite the hindmost of 
them ; sutTer them not to enter into their 
cities : for the Lord your God hath deliv- 
ered them into your hand. 

20 And it came to pass, when Joshua 
and the children of Israel had made an end 
of slaying them with a very great slaugh- 
ter, till they were consumed, that the rest 
which remained of them entered into 
fenced P cities. 

21 And all the people returned to the 
camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace : 
none moved his i tongue against any of the 
children of Israel. 

22 Then said Joshua, Open the mouth of 
the cave, and "■ bring out those five kings 
unto me out of the cave. 

23 And they did so, and brought forth 
those five kings unto him out of the cave, 
the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, 
the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, 
and the king of Eglon. 

9:7: Hah. 3:11. ijudg. 12:12. ^ O^, the upright. j2Sam. 
1:18. klsa.38:8. 1 Deut. 1 : 30. m Jud<;. fi : 2: LSam. 13:6; 
24:3,8. n Mat. 27; 60. ojer. 48:10. ?t Heb. cut off the tail. 
p 2Sam. 20:6; Jer. 8: 14. q Ex. 11:7. r 1 Sam. 15 : 32. 



upper. Azekah; south of Beth-horon and west of 
Jerusalem. 

12. Ajalon; a town and valley west of G-ibeon. 

13. Tlie book of Jasher ; this is supposed by 
many to be a collection of poems, referring to the 
wonderful events in the history of Israel. 2 Sam. 
1:18. 

16. Makkedah ; south-west of Jerusalem. 
19. The hindmost ; such of them as they could 
overtake. 

yO. Fenced; fortified. 

291 



The five Icings slain, 



JOSHUA X. 



with divers others. 



24 And it came to pass, when they 
brought out those kings unto Joshua, that 
Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and 
said unto the captains of the men of war 
which went with him, Come near, put 
your * feet upon the ''necks of these kings. 
And ''they came near, and put their feet 
upon the necks of them. 

25 And Joshua said unto them, ^"Fear 
not, nor be dismayed, be "^strong and of 
good courage : for "^thus shall the Lord do 
to all your enemies against whom ye fight. 

26 And afterward Joshua smote them, 
and slew them, and ^ hanged them on five 
trees : and they were hanging upon the 
trees until the ''evening. 

27 And it came to pass at the time of the 
going down of the sun, that Joshua com- 
manded, and they took them down off the 
trees, and cast them into the cave wherein 
they had been hid, and laid great stones 
in the cave's mouth, u'hicli remain until 
this very day. 

28 T[ And that day Joshua took Makke- 
dah, and smote it with the edge of the 
sword, and the king thereof he utterly ' de- 
stroyed, them, and all the souls that were 
therein; he let none remain: and he did 
to the king of Makkedah as he J did unto 
the king of Jericho. 

29 Then Joshua passed from Makkedah, 
and all Israel with liim, unto ^ Libnah, and 
fought against Libnah: 

.30 And tlic Lord delivered it also, and 
the king thereof, into the hand of Israel; 
and he smote it with the edge of the sword, 
and all the souls that ice)X therein ; he let 
none remain in it; but did unto the king 
thereof as he 'did unto the king of Jericho. 

31 T[ And Joshua passed from Libnah, 
and all Israel with him, unto "^ Lachish, and 
encamped against it, and fought against it : 

32 And the Lord delivered Lachish into 
the hand of Israel, which took it on the 
second day, and smote it with the edge of 
the sword, and all the souls thatrt'cre there- 
in, according to all that he had "done to 
Libnah. 

• Inn. 26: 6, 6; Malaelii 4 : .1. bP«a.l8:4n. c Pna. 107 : JO ; 
149:8,9. d clinp. I :9; Deut.31:6, 8. tiEpli. 6:10. f Deut. 
3: -21; 7:19; Ilomaiw 8 : 37. c chap. 8 : 29. h Deut. 21 : 23. 
i Deut. 7:2,16. j ch.%p. 6:21. k clinp. IS: 42; 21:13; 2 Kings, 
8:22; 19:8. I ver. 28. m vcr. 3, 6. n ver. 30. o ver. 3. p ver. 



24. Upon the necks of these kings; in token 
of the complete victory of tlie Israelites over them 
;ind over all their foes. 

29. Libnah ; a city south of Makkedah. 

31. Lachish ; still further south. 

33. Gezer ; in the territory that afterwards fell 
to the tribe of Ephraim, about fifteen miles north- 
west of .Terusalem. 

31. Egloii ; a few miles west of Lachish. 

36. Hebron ; .^ city east of L.achish, and twenty 
miles south of Jerusalem. 

3*^. Dehir ; south-M'est of Hebron. 

40. Cun>iti-y of the hills ; the hill country of 
202 



33 IfThen Iloram king of Gezer e.g^^k 
came up to help Lachish ; and Joshua 
smote him and his people, until he had 
left him none remaining. 

34 T[ And from Lachish Joshua passed 
unto ° Eglon, and all Israel with him ; and 
they encamped against it, and fought 
against it: 

35 And they took it on that day, and 
smote it with the edge of the sword, and 
all the souls that ivere tlierein he utterly 
destroyed that day, according to Pall that 
he had done to Lachish. 

36 And Joshua went up from Eglon, and 
all Israel with him, unto PHebron; and 
they fought against it: 

37 And they took it, and smote it with 
the edge of the sword, and the king there- 
of, and all the cities thereof, and all the 
souls that icere therein ; he left none re- 
maining, according to ^ all that he had done 
to Eglon ; but destroyed it utterly, and all 
the souls that luere therein. 

38 T[And Joshua returned, and all Is- 
rael with him, to 'Debir; and fought 
against it : 

39 And he took it, and the king thereof, 
and all the cities thereof; and they smote 
them with the edge of the sword, and utter- 
ly destroyed all the souls that i«re there- 
in; he left none remaining: as lie had 
done' to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and 
to the king thereof; as he had done also 
to Libnah, and to her king. 

40 ^ So Josliua smote all the country of 
the hills, and of the south, and of the vale, 
and of the springs, and all their kings : he 
left none remaining, but utterly destroyed 
all that breathed, as the Lord God of Is- 
rael "commanded. 

41 And Joshua smote them from 'Ka- 
desh-barnea even unto "Gaza, and all the 
country of ^Goshen, even unlo^Gibeon. 

42 And all these kings and their land 
did Joshua take at one time, "because the 
Lord God of Israel fought for Israel. 

43 And Joshua returned, and all Israel 
with him, unto the camp to Gilgal. 

32. q chap. 14:13; 1,1:13; Juclg. 1:10; 2Sam. .i: 1-5; 15:9,10; 
1 Chron. 1-2:2:1, 38. r verse 35. ■ chap. 15: I.t ; Judges 1:11. 
t ver..37. u Deut 20:16, 17. » Deut. 9:23. w Gen. 10:19; 
ISimuel, 6:17. x chap. II : 16. y verses 2, 12; 1 Kings, 3:6. 
• ver. 14. 

Judea and the southern part of Canaan. Luke 
1 : 39, 65. 

41. Kadesh-harnea ; near the south-east border 
of Canaan. Gaza; near the Mediterranean and 
the south-west border of Can;ian. 

41. Country of Goshen; a region south of 
Hebron. 

I,\STRUCTIO.\S. 

4. When sinners desert the cause of Satan and 
join with the people of (3'od, those who continue to 
be Satan's slaves often unite ag.iinst thcni, and 
would, if they could, utterly destroy them. 

8. Those who oppose their fellow-men because 



Divers kim^s overcome 



JOSHUA XI. 



at the waters of Mcrom. 



CHAPTER XI, 



1 Divers kings overcome at the waters of Merom. 10 
Hazor is taken and burnt. IG All the country taken 
by Joshua. 21 The Anakim cut off. 

A ND it came to pa.ss, when Jabiii king 
J:a_ of Hazor had heard tJwse things, that 
he "scut to Jobab king of Madon, and to 
the king of ''Shimron, and to the king of 
Achshaph, 

2 And to the kings that were on the north 
of the nioiintains, and of the plains south 
of "^.Chiuueroth, and in the valley, and in 
the borders of ''Dor on the west, 

3 And to the Canaanite on the east and 
on the west, and to the Amorite, and the 
Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebu- 
site in the mountains, and to the "^Hivite 
under ''Hermon in the land of ^Mizpeh. 

4 And they went out, they and all their 
hosts with them, much people, even as the 
sand'' that is upon the sea-shore in multi- 
tude, with horses and chariots very many. 

5 And when all these kings were *met 
together, they came and pitched together 
at the waters of Merom, to fight against 
Israel. 

6 1[ And the Lord said unto Joshua, ' Be 
not afraid because of them : for to-morrow 
about this time will I deliver them up all 
slain before Israel : thou shalt J hough their 
liorses,'' and burn their 'chariots with fire. 

7 So Joshua came, and all the people of 
war with him, against them by the waters 
of Merom '"suddenly ; and they fell upon 
them. 



a chap 


10 : .3. 


b cl. 


ip. 19 


15. c 


Nu 


m. 34 


11. 


(i chap 


17:11; 


.IuiIr. I : 


.7; I Kings, ■ 


:11. 


e .lutlg 


.3: 


3. 1 


L-li.ap 


13:11. 


g Gen. 


3l:«. 


i.Tuds.7 


:l-2; 


I Sam. 13: 5. 


'^ 


Heb. assembled by appoint- 


inent. i 


cliap. 10 


8. 


2 San 


1.8:4. 


kl 


sa.20 


7; Isx3l:l 


Hosea 



they join the cause of God, oppose him, and thus 
often bring upon themselves utter ruin. 

11. All the elements are under G-od's control, and 
when he directs will fight against his foes. Judg. 
5 : 20 ; .Tob 20 : l.t-29 ; Isa. 4-5 : 9 ; Heb. 2 : 3. 

14. Those who take the side of God, and follow 
his directions, will experience his aid, and through 
his grace will ultimately triumph. 

18. Places to which tlie wicked flee for safety 
may become their pri.sons ; and measures wliich 
they take to escape destruction, may be the occasion 
of bringing it upon them. 

22. Those who have been most distinguished by 
the means of doing good, but have employed them 
in doing evil, will be most distinguished in their 
punishment. 

30. Many things which are accomplished by hu- 
man agency, are in the Bible ascribed to God. In 
one sense man is the author, and in another sense 
God. 

40. By commanding the Israelites to destroy the 
Canaanites and t.ake possession of their country, 
God laid them under obligation to do it ; but no in- 
dividual or nation, without his command, is author- 
ized to do as they did. 

CHAPTER XI. 
1. Hazor ; a strong and chief city in the north 
part of Canaan. Ver. 10. Madon ; not far from 
Hazor. Shimron ; called, chap. 12:20, Shimron- 



8 And the Lord "delivered them into 
the hand of Israel, who smote them, and 
chased them unto tgreat Zidon, and unto 
Misrephoth-maim,5^and unto the valley of 
Mizpeh eastward ; and they smote them, 
until they left them none remaining. 

9 And Joshua did unto them as "the Lord 
bade him : he houghed their horses, and 
burnt" their chariots with fire. 

10 TfAnd Joshua at that time turned 
back, and took Hazor, and smote the king 
thereof with the sword : for Hazor before- 
time was the head of all those kingdoms. 

11 And they smote all the souls that 
ivere therein with the edge of the sword, 
utterly destroying them: there w"as not 
any ^^ left to breathe : and he burnt Hazor 
with fire. 

12 And all the cities of those kings, and 
all the kings of them, did Joshua take, and 
smote them with the edge of the sword, 
and he utterly "i destroyed them, as Moses 
the servant of the Lord commanded. 

13 But as for the cities that stood still 
in 'I their strength, Israel burned none of 
them, save Hazor only; that did Joshua 
burn. 

14 And all the spoil of these cities, and 
the cattle, the children of Israel took for 
a prey unto themselves ; but every man 
they smote with the edge of the sword, 
until they had destroyed them, neither 
left they any to breathe. 

15 1[ As the Lord commanded Moses his 
servant, so did Moses command Joshua, 

14:3. IPsa. 46:9. m chap. 10: 9 ; 1 Thess. 5: .3. n chap. 21 : 44. 
t Or, Zidon-rahbuk. ^ Heb. burninffS ; or, salt pits, o verse 6. 
p Ezek.39:9, 10. % Heb.any6r«a«. chap. 10:40. q Num. 33:62; 
Deut. 7:2; 20 : 1 fi, 1 7. || Heb. on their heap. Jer. 30 : IS. 

meron. It was afterwards in the tribe of Zebulon. 
Achshaph ; west of Zebulon, in the tribe of Asher. 

2. The. moioitaiiis ; Lebanon and Anti-Leba- 
non. See Deut. 3 : 8. Chiiiiieroth ; 'on.t\\e\a,k& oi 
Gennesareth, or sea of Tiberias. Dor; on the Medi- 
terranean, not far from mount Carmel. 

3. Ilermon ; Deut. 3 : 0. Mizpeh ; an emi- 
nence in the north part of Gilead, from which they 
had an e.xtensive prospect. 

4. As the sand ; very numerous. 

5. The waters of Merom ; a collection of wa- 
ters in the upper part of Canaan, from which flows 
the river Jordan. It is about twelve miles above 
the sea of Galilee, and in the spring, when the wa- 
ter is high, is about seven miles long and three and 
a half wide. Its present name is Bahr el-Huleh. 

6. Hoicgh their horses ; hamstring them ; cut 
the great cord of their hind legs. 

8. Great Zidon ; a city on the Mediterranean, 
about twenty-five miles north of Tyre, fifty south of 
Beyroot, and sixty-six west of Damascus. It is 
called great on account of its numerous people and 
abundant wealth. Misrephoth-mai/ii ; north of 
Zidon. 

1 1. Not any left ; any that fell into their hands. 

12. As Moses — continan.iled ; this is often men- 
tioned to show that for destroying the Canaanites 
the Israelites were not to be blamed but commend- 
ed, because that in doing it they were obeying God. 
Ver. 1.5, 20, 23. 

293 



The Anakim cut off. 



JOSHUA XII, 



The coast of Sihon and Og. 



and so did Joshua; he 'left notliingmidoue \ 
of all that the Lord commanded Moses. 

16 So Joshua took all that land, the 
hills,* and all the south country, and all 
the land of ''Goshen, and the valley, and 
the plain, and the mountain of Israel, and 
the valley of the same ; 

17 Even from tthe mount ""Halak, that 
goeth up to Seir. even unto Baal-gad in the 
valley of Lebanon under mount Hermon : 
and all their "^ kings he took, and smote 
them, and slew them. 

18 Joshua made war a long time* with 
all those kings. 

1 9 There was not a city that made peace 
with the children of Israel, save the ^Hi- 
vites the inhabitants of Gibeon: aXlother 
they took in battle. 

20 For it was of '"the Lord to s harden 
their hearts, that they should come against 
Israel in battle, that he might destroy them 
utterly , rtju/ that they might have no favor, 
but that he might destroy them, as the 
Lord ''commanded Moses. 

21 H And at that time came Joshua, and 
cut off the 'Anakim from the mountains, 
from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and 
from all the mountains of Judah, and from 
all the mountains of Israel: Joshua de- 
stroyed them utterly with their cities. 

22 There was none of the Anakim left 
in the land of the children of Israel : only 
in Gaza, in J Gath, and in ''Ashdod, there 
remained. 

23 So Joshua took the whole land, ac- 



* Hvh. removed, a chap. 1-2 : 8. b chap. 10:41. \ Or, the smooth 
mountain. cchHp.l2:7. d chap. 13:9-24; Deut.7:'24. tTilll445. 
echap.!t:3,7 fJudg. 14:4; 1 Sam. 2:2.5 ; 1 Kings, 12 : 15. 6 Deut. 
2:30; l9a.6:10; Rom.9:I8. h Deut. 20: 16,17. i chap. 15: 13,14; 
Nunl. 13:22,33; Ueut.9:2. j lS.am.l7:4; 2Sam.2l:22; 1 Chron. 



cording to all that the Lord 'said ^b'.chm' 
unto Moses ; and Joshua gave it for an 
inheritance unto Israel according to their 
divisions '" by their tribes. And the land 
rested from ° war. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1 The two kings whose countries Moses took and dis- 
posed of. 7 The one and thirty kings on the other 
side Jordan which Joshua smote. 

IVrOW these are the kings of the land, 
A-S which the children of Israel smote, 
and possessed their land on the other side 
Jordan toward the rising of the sun, from 
the river°Arnon unto mount Hermon, and 
all the plain on the east: 

2 SihonP king of the Amorites, who dwelt 
in Heshbon, and ruled from Aroer, which 
is upon the bank of the river Arnon, and 
from the middle of the river, and from half 
Gilead, even unto the river Jabbok, which 
Z.S- the border of the children of Ammon ; 

3 And from the plain to the sea of Chin- 
neroth on the ea.st, and unto the sea of the 
plain, even the salt sea on the east, the way 
to Beth-jeshimoth ; and from Hhe south, 
under HAshdoth-pisgah : 

4 And the coast of 1 0g king of Bashan, 
U'hich tea."; of the ■■ remnant of the giants, 
that ■* dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei, 

5 And reigned in 'mount Hermon, and 
in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto the bor- 
der of the Geshurites and the Maacha- 
thitcs, and half Gilead, the border of Si- 
hon king of Heshbon. 

6 Them did Moses the servant of the Lor d 



17. Moimt Jialak ; in the south part of the 
country towards Edom. Baal-gad; the northern 
extremity of the country. Motcnt Hermon ; the 
Eouthern part of Anti- Lebanon. Deut. 3 : 8. 

IS. A. long time : about seven years. 

20. To harden their hearts ; by leaving them, 
as a punishment for their sins, to pursue their own 
chosen way to ruin. Ex. 4 : 21. 

21. Hehron — Debir — Anab; in the southern 
part of the country. 

22. Gaza— Gath — A.ihdod ; cities of the Phi- 
listines in the south-west part of Palestine, and 
near the Mediterranean. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Tlie wicked in their distress often pursue 
courses which, instead of relieving them, nasten 
their destruction. 

C. However numerous tlic enemies within and 
without, or however mighty the combinations 
against the people of God, if in obedience to him 
they rightly use the means which he gives them, they 
have no reason to fear, for at his appointed time he 
will cause them to triumph over all their foes. 

7. The aid whicli 'rod gives is not designed to super, 
sede or render needless human ctTorts ; bat to encour- 
age men to make fctlbrts.and to render them successful. 

9. The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in 
pain. Even the brute creation suffer in consequence 
of the sins of men. Though these sufferings are 
294 



18:1. V cliap. 15:46; 2Chron.26:6; Neh. 13 : 2:J, 24. 
34:2, etc. ro chaps. 14-16; Num. 26 : 52-.'i5. n rliap 21 
Num.21:2l; Deut.3:8,9. T> Heut. 2 : a3, 36 ; 3:6,l>i.i; 
Teman. || Or, the springt of Pugah, or the hill. I1"ii 
q Num.21:33-:». rDeut. 3:U. • Deut. 1 : 4. t Deut 


1 Num. 
: 44, 4.5. 
%0r, 
t. 4 : 49. 
i:8-14. 



under the direction of an iniinitely wise, holy, and 
benevolent God, they are the effects of sin, and a 
just expression of his indignation against it. 

11. Men are often called to most self-denying 
duties, and those from which the most wise, holy, 
and benevolent minds would, if consistent, gladly 
be excused. Mat. 2G : 39. 

15. Resolute, determined, and habitual obedience 
to God's commands, is the only course of wisdom, 
safety, usefulness, and bliss. 

IS. We must not cease in our efforts to conquer 
the spiritual enemies of God and our own souls, till 
they are so effectually subdued as never again to rise 
up against us. 

20. When God has determined to destroy men, he 
lets them pursue their chosen way of folly and sin 
to their ruin. 

23. Perseverance in 'humble, hearty, courageous 
obedience to God, will end in sure and most glorious 
triumph. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1. From the river Arnon ; on the south. Un- 
to mount Hermon ; on the north. On the east ; 
the east side of Jordan. 

3. SeaofChi}ineroth;o{Ga\i\ee. Sea of the 
plain; the Dead sea. Beth-jeshimoth ; .\bout 

^ ten miles east of the motith of the Jordan, vli/i- 
doth-pi.irrah ; near the foot of mount Pisgah. 

4. AsTuaroth and— Edrei ; places in Bashan. 



One and thirty kings 



JOSHUA XIII. 



subdued by Joshua. 



kc.'iua: and the children of Israel smite: and 
Moses the servant of the Lord gave * it/or 
a possession unto the Reubenites, and the 
Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh. 

7 IfA nd these are the kings of the country 
which Joshua and the children of Israel 
smote on this side Jordan on the west, from 
Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon even 
unto the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir; 
which Joshua gave unto the tribes of Israel 
/or a possession according to their divisions; 

8 In the mountains, and in the valleys, 
and in the plains, and in the springs, and 
in the wilderness, and in the south coun- 
try ; the •• Hittites, the Amorites, and the 
Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, 
and the Jebusites : 

9 The king of "^Jericho, one ; the king of 
Ai,"* which is beside Beth-el, one ; 

10 The king of "Jerusalem, one; the king 
of Hebron, one; 

1 1 The king of Jarmuth, one ; the king 
of Lachish, one; 

12 The king of Eglon, one; the king of 
Gezer, one ; 

13 The king of Debir, one; the king of 
Geder, one; 

14 The king of Hormah, one; the king 
of Arad, one; 

15 The king of Libnah, one; the king of 
Adullam, one; 

16 Thekingof Makkedah, one; the king 
of "^ Beth-el, one ; 

17 The king of Tappuah, one; the king 
of 'Hepher, one; 

18 The king of Aphek, one; the king of 
Lasharon,* one; 

19 The king of Madon, one ; the king of 
Razor,'' one ; 

20 The king of 'Shimron-meron, one; 
the king of Achshaph, one ; 

• Numbers 32 : 29, M. b Ex. 23 : 23. c chap. 6:2. i chap. 
8 : 17, 2>1. e chap. 10 : 23-43. f Jujg. 1 : 22. el Kings, 4 : 10. 
* Or, Sharon. Isa. 33 : 9. h chap. 11 : 10. i chap. 11:1. f Heb. 
<« possess it. De\it. 31 : 3. j Judges 3:1. k 2 Samuel, 3:3; 



7. Baal-gad ; on the northern boundary of Ca- 
naan. Mount Halak ; the southern boundary. 

9-"24. The places here mentioned are those which 
Joshua conquered during the wars described in the 
previous chapters. 

INSTRUCTIONS.^ 

1. It is useful to recount what G-od has done by 
human instrumentality, and not only by men who 
are now living, but by those who have gone to their 
rest and are enjoying the reward of their labors. 

7. We are greatly indebted to men of past gen- 
erations. Other men have labored, and we enter 
into their labors; and the good works which they 
began, but were not able to finish, we should en- 
deavor in the strength of the Lord, and by his aid, 
to accomplish. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1. TT'rtj'oW; afeout one hundred years old. Much 
land ; tliat belonged to the Canaanites, and was 
promised to Israel, but was not yet taken. 

2. The borders of the Philistines ; a region of 
country in the south-west part of Canaan, and e.x- 



21 The king of Taanach, one; the king 
of Megiddo, one ; 

22 The king of Kedesh, one ; the king of 
Jokneam of Carmel, one ; 

23 The Idng of Dor in the coast of Dor, 
one; the king of the nations of Gilgal, one; 

24 ThekingofTirzah,one: all the kings 
thirty and one. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1 The boimds of the land not yet conquered. 8 The 
inheritance of the two tribes and a half. 14, 33 The 
Lord and his sacrifices are the inheritance of Levi. 15 
The bounds of the inheritance of Reuben. 22 Balaam 
slain. 24 The hounds of the inheritance of Gad, 2'J 
and of the half tribe of Manasseh. 

IVrOW Joshua was old and stricken in 
XN years ; and the Lord said unto him. 
Thou art old and stricken in years, and 
there remaineth yet very much land tto 
be possessed. 

2 This is the land that yet J remaineth: 
all the borders of the Philistines, and all 
Geshuri,'' 

3 From 'Sihor, which is before Egypt, 
even unto the borders of Ekron north- 
ward, which is counted to the Canaanite : 
five"" lords of the Philistines; the Gaza- 
thites, and the Ashdothites, the Eshka- 
lonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites ; 
also the "Avites : 

4 From the south, all the land of the Ca- 
naanites, and tMearah that is beside the 
Sidonians, unto "Aphek, to the p borders of 
the Amorites : 

5 And the land of the i Giblites, and all 
Lebanon toward the sunrising, from 'Baal- 
gad under mount Hermon unto the enter- 
ing into Hamath. 

6 All the inhabitants of the hill country 
from Lebanon unto 'Misrephoth-maim, 
and all the Sidonians, them will I 'drive 
out from before the children of Israel : 



13:37,38. I Jeremiah 2 : 18. m Judges 3:3; lSam.6:4,16; 
Zeph. 2 : 4, 5. n Deut 2 : 23. t Or, the cave, o 1 Sam. 4 : 1. 
p Judges 1:36. q 1 Kings, 6 : 18; Psalm 83 : 7. r chap. 12:7. 
• chap. 11:8. t Ex. 23 : .30, 31. 



tending on the Mediterranean about sixty miles. 
Geshtiri; a country south l)f the Philistines and 
on the borders of the wilderness of Shur. 1 Sam. 
27 : 8. There was another country of the same 
name on the north-east border of Canaan. 

3. Sihor; called the river of Egj'pt ; a small 
stream which r.an through the valley El-Arish and 
emptied into the Mediterranean south-west of Gra- 
za. Num. 34 : .5. Ekron ; the northern district 
of the Philistines, about ten miles north-east of 
Ashdod, and thirty-four west of Jerusalem. T/ie 
Avites ; they were the original inhabitants of this 
country, but were dispossessed by the Philistines, 
called Caphtorim, Deut. 2 : 23. Gen. 10 : 13, 14. 
Some Avites still continued in that region. 

4. Aphek ; supposed to be a city in the north 
part of Canaan. Judg. 1 : 31. 

5. Gihlites ; inhabitants of G-ebal, near Sidon. 

6. Divide thou it ; Joshua was by lot to divide 
the whole land of Canaan on the west side of Jor- 
dan among the nine and a half tribes, although it 
was not yet all conquered. 

295 



Division of Canaan 



JOSHUA XIII. 



among: the tribes. 



only * divide thou it by lot unto the Isra- 
elites for an inlieritance, as I have com- 
manded thee. 

7 Now therefore divide this land for an 
inheritanee unto the nine tribes, and the 
half-tribe of Manasseh, 

8 With whom tlie Reubcnites and the 
Gadites have received their inheritance, 
which '' Moses gave them, beyond Jordan 
eastward, even as Moses the servant of the 
Loan gave them ; 

9 From Aroer, that is upon the bank of 
the river Anion, and the city that is in 
the midst of the river, and all the plain 
of "^ Medeba unto Dibon ; 

10 And all the cities of Sihon king of the 
Amoritcs, which reigned in Hcshbon, unto 
the border of the children of Ammon ; 

1 1 And "^ Gilead, and the border of the 
Geshurites and Maachathites, and all 
mount Ilermon, and all Bashan unto Sal- 
cak; 

12 All the kingdom of Og in Bashan, 
which reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrci, 
who remained of the remnant of the gi- 
ants : for •= these did Moses smite, and cast 
them out. 

13 Nevertheless the children of Israel 
expelled ""not the Geshurites, nor the Maa- 
chathites: but the Geshurites and the 
Maachathites dwell among the Israelites 
until this day. 

14 Only unto the tribe of Levi he gave 
nones inheritance; the ''sacrifices of the 
Loud God of Israel made by fire are their 
inheritance, as he said unto them. 

15 ^ And Moses gave unto the tribe of 
the children of Reuben inheritance accord- 
ing to their families. 

16 And their coast was from 'Aroer, that 
is on the bank of the river Arnon, and the 
city that is in the midst of the river, and 
all the plain by Medeba; 

17 IIcshbon,J and all her cities that are 
in the plain; Dibon, and *Bamoth-baal, 
and Bcth-baal-meon, 

18 And ''Jahaza, and Kcdemoth, and 
Mepliaath, 

1 9 And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and Za- 
reth-sliahar in the mount of the valley. 

20 And Bctli-pcor,and tAshdoth-pisgah, 
and Bcth-jcshimoth, 

21 And 'all the cities of the plain, and 
all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Am- 



oritcs, which reigned in Hcshbon, *b.cim6' 
whom Moses smote with the princes of 
Midian,™ Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and 
Hur, and Reba, ivhichivcrc dukes of Sihon, 
dwelling in the country. 

22 T[ Balaam" also the son of Beor, the 
soothsayer,?^ did the children of Israel slay 
with the sword among them that were 
slain by them. 

23 And the border of the children of 
Reuben was Jordan, and the border there- 
of. This teas the inheritance of the chil- 
dren of Reuben after their families, the 
cities and the villages thereof. 

24 And Moses gave inheritance unto the 
tribe of Gad, even unto the children of Gad 
according to their families. 

25 And their coast was °Jazer, and all 
the cities of Gilead, and half the land of 
the children of Ammon, unto Aroer that 
is before PRabbah; 

26 And from Hcshbon unto Ramath- 
mizpeh, and Betonim; and from Maha- 
naim unto the border of Debir; 

27 And in the valley, iBeth-aram, and 
Beth-nimrah, and "^Succoth, and Zaphon, 
the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of 
Hcshbon, Jordan and his border, even unto 
the edge of the sea of " Chinncreth on the 
other side Jordan eastward. 

28 This is the inheritance of the chil- 
dren of Gad after their families, the cities, 
and their villages. 

29 T[And Moses gave inheritance unto 
the half-tribe of Manasseh : and this wa.s 
the possession of the half-tribe of the chil- 
dren of Manasseh by their families. 

30 And 'their coast was from Maha- 
naim, all Bashan, all the kingdom of Og 
king of Bashan, and all the "towns of Jair, 
Mhicli arc in Bashan, tlircescorc cities: 

31 And half Gilead, and 'Ashtaroth, and 
Edrci, cities of the kingdom of Og in Ba- 
shan, ivere pertaining- unto the children of 
Machir the son of Manasseh, even to the 
one-half of the children of Machir by their 
families. 

32 These are the countries which Closes 
did distribute for inheritance in the plains 
of Moab, on the other side Jordan, by Jer- 
icho, eastward. 

33 But " unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave 
not an?/ inheritance: the Loud (lod of Israel 
tt'a.v their inheritance, as he "said unto them. 



• rliiin. M: 1,2. bKuin. 32::n. •• verse IK; Num. 21 : 30. \ Or.thc tptings nf Pitgah,nT Ihc hilt. IDeut.S:in. m Num. 
d clnn. 12:5. « Num. 21 : ."M, M. I cliiip. 23:12,1:1; Num. 31 : «. i Nuni. 22:5; 31:8. t Or, diviner. <• Num. 32 : :1A. 
33:5:.; .Judges 2: 1-3. it cli.ip. U : 3, 4. h Numlii-rfi 18 : 20-24. | p 2 Sum. II : 1. M Num. 32 : .3K. rGcn.33:I7; IKms',7:4H. 
icliap. 12:2. j Niiniheni 21 :38, 30. * Or, the high j>lace» nf "Num. 34:11. t Num. 32 : 3S>-41. « 1 Chron. 2 : 3:1. » clinp. 
Baal, and houie of Bualmenn. Num. .32:. 38. k Num. 21:23. 12:4. w ver. 14. xDeut. 18:1. 



opli 

quered by Moses on the east side of Jordan. The south habiting; districts east of tiie sources of the Jordan, 
part was allotted to the tribe of Reuben, the central norlh of Baslian, and near mount Herinon. 
part to the tribe of G.ad, and the north part to the , .30. Threescorr- ; sixty. 

half tribe of Mana.sseh. ; 33. Tlie Lord God of Israel iras thiir iii- 

■296 



Caleb by privilege 



JOSHUA XIV. 



obtainclh Hebron 



B.c.i^'! CHAPTER XIV. 

1 The nine tribes and a half are to have their inheri- 
tance by lot. 6 Caleb by privilege obtaineth Hebron. 

AND these arc the countries which the 
children of Israel inherited in the land 
of Canaan, which "Elcazar the priest, and 
Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the 
fathers of the tribes of the children of Is- 
rael, distributed for inheritance to them. 

2 By ''lot icas their inheritance, as the 
Lord commanded by the hand of Moses, 
for the nine tribes, and /or the half-tribe. 

3 For Moses had given the inheritance 
of two tribes and a half-tribe on the other 
side Jordan : but unto the Levites he gave 
none inheritance among them. 

4 For the children of Joseph were ^two 
tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim : therefore 
they gave no part unto the Levites in the 
land, save '' cities to dwell in, with their 
suburbs " for their cattle and for their sub- 
stance. 

5 As ""the Lord commanded Moses, so 
the children of Israel did, and they divid- 
ed the land. 

6 ^ Then the children of Judah came 
unto Joshua in Gilgal : and s Caleb the son 
of Jephunnch the Kenczite said unto him. 
Thou knowest the thing that the Lord 
said'' unto Moses the 'man of God con- 
cerning me and thee in Kadesh-barnea. 

7 Forty years old tvas I when Moses the 
servant of the Lord J sent me from Kadesh- 
barnea to espy out the land ; and I brought 
him word again as it ^ivas in my heart. 

8 Nevertheless my brethren that went 
up with me made the heart of the people* 



» Num.;i4:17, 18. b Nam. 56 : fiS ; 33:r>4; 34:13; Paa. 16:5,6. 
t Gen. 48:.'); IChron. S:l,'2. il 1 Cliron. H :64-«l. eNum.35:3. 
f Num. 3.'i : 2. g Num. 32:12. h Num. 14 : 30; Bent. 1 : 36, .38. 
iNiim.l2:7.R j Num. 13: 6, 26. k Num. 13:30; I4:6-S. I Num. 
13:31,32; Deut 1:28,36. mNum.i4:24. ncliap.l:3. o Num. 



heritance ; they received their support in conduct- 
ing his worship from the tithes and oft'eriags of the 
people. Num. 18. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. If life is preserved, old age with its attendant 
infirmities will soon come, and death will follow. 
All should therefore be diligent in the discharge of 
their appropriate duties. When unfitted for one kind 
of labor, they should, if practicable, engage in an- 
other; and spend life in the discharge of duty, that 
they may be fitted to close it and enter into rest. 

2. However diligent and successful any may be in 
extending the kingdom of God, much will remain to 
be accomplished by their successors. Each genera- 
tion has its appropriate work, and no part of what be- 
longs to it should be left to be performed by others. 

6. Men may be sure before the promises of God 
are fnltilled that he will perform them, and may with 
perfect propriety act accordingly. 

14. Though the ministers of Christ have not oppor- 
tunities to acquire wealth, yet, if faithful to him, he 
will provide for them all things needful in this world, 
and will himself be their portion for ever. Ver. 33. 

2"2. Those wlio love the wages of unrighteous- 
ness and tempt others to sin, may for a time escape 
punishment, yet their sins are not forgotten, and in 



melt:' but I ""wholly followed the Lord 
my God. 

9 And Moses sware on that day, saying, 
Surely the land "whereon thy feet have 
trodden shall be thine inheritance, and 
thy children's for ever, because thou hast 
wholly followed the Lord my God. 

10 And now, behold, the Lord hath kept 
me alive, as he °said, these forty and live 
years, even since the Lord spake this word 
unto Moses, while the children of Israel 
wandered* in the wilderness : and now, 
lo, I am this day fourscore and five vears 
old. 

1 1 As yet I am as strong this day as I 
was in the day that Moses sent me : as 
myP strength was then, even so is my 
strength now, for war, both to "igo out, 
and to come in. 

12 Now therefore give mc this moun- 
tain, whereof the Lord spake in that day ; 
for thou heardest in that day how the ''An- 
akim loerc there, and that the cities were 
great and fenced : if so be "the Lord will 
be with me, then I shall be able to drive 
them out, as the Lord said. 

13 And Joshua* blessed him, and "gave 
unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh Hebron 
for an inheritance. 

14 Hebron therefore became the inheri- 
tance of Caleb the son of Jephunneh the 
Kenczite unto this day, because that he 
wholly followed the Lord God of Israel. 

15 And the name of Hebron heforc was 
Kirjath-arba;'' u'hich '"Arba urns a great 
man among the Anakim. And the " land 
had rest from war. 



14:30. * Heb.wa!ked. p Deut.34 :7 ; Psa. 103: .'i. qDeut.3l:-2 
r Num. 13:-28,33. » lSam.l4:6; 2CIiron. 14: 11 ; Ps.i. 18 : :J'2-34 ; 
27:1-3; 44:3: 60:12; 118:10-12; Rom.8:31; PIli?.4:13; Heb. 
11:33. t chap. 22:6; Cant. 6:9. u ch.ip. 15: 13. » Gen. 23 : '2. 
w Gen. 35: 27. x chap. 11 : 23. 



due time they will receive the just reward of their 
deeds. 

32. G-od places men in such countries and condi- 
tions as he sees best. They should all receive their 
blessings as his gifts, and use them for his honor 
and their own highest good. 

CHAPTER XIV. 
2. B// lot was their iiiheritance ; and yet God 
so ordered the lot that each tribe obtained the in- 
heritance which it was predicted by Jacob and 
Moses that they skould possess. Gen. 49 ; Deut. 33. 

6. T]ie thing that the Lord said; Numbers 
14 : 24, 30 ; Deut. 1 : 36. 

7. As it was in. my heart ; he gave a sincere, 
honest, faithful report. 

12. This mountain ; the mountainous country 
about Hebron. 

13. Hebron ; the district in which Hebron lay ; the 
city itself was given to the Levites. Ch. 21 : 12, 13. 

15. Kirjath-arba ; Gen. 23:2. Had rest; 
rest from general wars. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. Those things which appear to men to be cas- 
ual, which are sometimes spoken of as happening 
or coming by chance, are nevertheless under the 
direction and control of God. Prov. 16 : 33. 
297 



The inheritance of 



JOSHUA XVII. 



Ephraim and Manassch. 



2 And goeth out from Beth-el to *Luz, 
and passetli along unto the borders of Ar- 
chi to Ataroth, 

3 And goeth down westward to the coast 
of Japhleti, unto the coast of ''Beth-horon 
the nether, and to "^ Gezer : and the goings 
out thereof are at the sea. 

4 So the ''cliildren of Joseph, Manassch 
and Ephraim, took their inheritance. 

.5 1[And the border of the children of 
Ephraim according to their families was 
thtts : even the border of their inheritance 
on the cast side was Ataroth-addar, unto 
Beth-horon the upper; 

6 And the border went out toward the 
sea to ''Miehmcthah on the north side; 
and the border went about eastward unto 
Taanath-shiloh, and passed by it on the 
east to Janohah ; 

7 And it went down from Janohah to 
Ataroth, and to Naarath, and came to Jer- 
icho, and went out at Jordan. 

8 The border went out from Tappuah 
westward unto the river "^Kanah ; and the 
goings out thereof were at the sea. This 
is the inheritance of the tribe of the chil- 
dren of Ephraim by their families. 

9 And the separate cities for the children 
of Ephraim tverc among the inheritance of 
the children of Manassch, all the cities 
with their villages. 

10 And ^thcy drave not out the Canaan- 
ites that dwelt in Gezer: but the Canaan- 
ites dwell among the Ephraimites unto 
this day, ;ind serve under tribute, 

CHAPTER XVII. 

I Thelot of Manasseh. 7 His coast. 12TheCanaan- 
ites not driven out. 14 The children of Joseph obtain 
another lot. 

THERE was also a lot for the tribe of 
Manasseh ; for he was the '■ first-borji 
of Joseph; to icit, for 'Maehir the first- 
born of Manasseh, the father of Gilead: 
because he was a man of war, therefore 
he had J Gilead and Bashan. 

2 There was also a lot for the '' rest of 
the children of Manasseh bv their fami- 



■ rliap. 18: 13; Genesis 28 : 19 ; Ju<ig.l:26. b 2 Cliron. 8 : 6. 
c ) Cliron. 7 : 28. d cliap. 17 : 14. « cliap. 17; 7. . f rliap. 17 :!>. 
K JuJg. 1:29; IKings, 9:lli, 21. li Gen. 41 : .51. I Gen. 60 : 2.1. 



lies; for the children of 'Abiczer, B.<!.r«i 
and for the children of Hclek, and for the 
children of Asricl, and for the cliildren of 
Shechcm, and for the children of Hcpher, 
and for the children of Shemida: these 
were the male children of Manasseh the 
son of Joseph by their families. 

3 1[ But Zelopheliad, the son of Hepher, 
the son of Gilead, the son of ]\Iachir, the 
son of Manasseh, had no sons, but daugh- 
ters : and these are the names of his daugh- 
ters, Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, 
and Tirzah. 

4 And they came near before 'Eleazar 
the priest, and before Joshua the son of 
Nun, and before the princes, saying. The 
Lord commanded "'Moses to give us an 
inheritance among our brethren. There- 
fore, according to the commandment of the 
Lord, he gave them an inheritance among 
the brethren of their father. 

5 And there fell ten portions to Manas- 
seh, besides the land of Gilead and Ba- 
shan, which were on the other side Jordan ; 

6 Because tlie daughters of Manasseh 
had an inheritance among his sons: and 
the rest of Manasseh's sons had the land 
of Gilead. 

7 TfAnd the coast of Manasseh was from 
Asher to "^lichmethah, that lieth before 
Shechem ; and the border went along on 
the right hand unto the inhabitants of En- 
tappuah. 

8 iN^OM' Manasseh had the land of Tappu- 
ah : but Tappuah on the border of Manas- 
seh bclovf^ed to the children of Ephraim; 

9 And the coast descended unto the t riv- 
er Kanah, southward of the river: these 
cities" of Ephraim are among the cities of 
Manassch : the coast of Manasseh also 
was on the north side of the river, and the 
outgoings of it were at the sea: 

10 Southward it 7cas Ephraim's, and 
northward it was Manasseh's, and the sea 
is his border; and they met together ih 
Asher on the north, and in Issachar on the 
east. 

j Deut. .1:16. k Numbers 26 : sg-T?. * Jetztr. Numbers 26 : 3tl 
Irlmp. 14:1. " Num. 27 : 6, 7. o chop. 16: 6-8. f Or, brook 
ofyccdt. chnp. 16:9. 



nasseh. The inheritanci^ of Ephraim was north of 
that of Simeon, .Tud.ah, Dan, and Benjamin. It ex- 
tended from the river .Jordan .across the whole land 
to the Mediterranean. The inlieritance of that half- 
tribe of Man.isseh wliich was not provided for on 
the east of Jordan, was nortli of that of Ephraim, 
and had the Mediterranean on the west, Aslier and 
Zebulon on the north, and Issachar on the east. 

2-10. Tlie places mentioned in these verses are 
in the districts of country above described. 
INSTRUCTIOX.S. 

1. The lot of all is appointed to them in tlie prov- 
idence of God. For its blessings they should be 
thankful, under its trials submissive, and in all its 
duties guided by the revealed will of (.rod. 
300 



10. The more faithfully men follow the will of 
G-od, the greater real good will they enjoy, both in 
this life and that to come. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

1. Gilead and Bashan; countries on the east 
of Jordan and north of those allotted to the tribes of 
Gad and Reuben. 

2. The rest of the children of Manasseh : 
those not provided for on the east of .Tordan. Ver. -Ci. 

A. The Lord cnmvinndrd; Num. 27 : 6-11. 

9. The river Kanah ; a small stream which 
formed the boundary between M.an.assoh and Ephra- 
im, and empties into the Mediterranean south of 
CiBsarea. 



Canaanitcs in the land. 



JOSHUA XVIII. 



The tabernacle set up. 



I'an^ 11 And'Manassehhadinls.sachar 
and in Asher '' Beth-shean and her towns, 
and Ibleam and her towns, and the inhabi- 
tants of Dor and her towns, and the inhab- 
itants of "^Endor and her towns, and the 
inhabitants'* of Taanach and her towns, 
and the inhabitants of INIegiddo and her 
towns, even three countries. 

12 Yet*' the children of Manasseh could 
not drive out the inhabitants of those cit- 
ies ; but the Canaanitcs would dwell in 
that land. 

1 3 Yet it came to pass, when the children 
of Israel were waxen strong, that they pat 
the Canaanitcs to "^ tribute; but did not 
utterly drive them out. 

14 And the children of Joseph spake 
unto Joshua, saying, Why hast tliou given 
me but one lot and one portion to inherit, 
seeing I am a great people, forasmuch as 
the Lord hath s blessed me hitherto"? 

15 And Joshua answered them. If thou 
be a great people, then get thee up to the 
wood country, and cut down for thyself 
there in the land of the Pei'izzitcs and of 
the *giants, if mount Ephraim be too nar- 
row for tltee. 

16 And the children of Joseph said. The 
hill is not enough for us : and all the Ca- 
naanitcs that dwell in the land of the val- 
ley have chariots of ''iron, both they who 
are of 'Beth-shean and her towns, and 
they who are of the valley of J Jezreel. 

17 And Joshua spake unto the house of 
Joseph, even to Ephraim and to Manasseh, 
saying, Thou art a great people, and hast 
great power : thou shalt not have one lot 
only: 

18 But the mountain shall be thine; for 
it i.s a wood, and thou shalt cut it down : 
and the outgoings of it shall be thine : for 



a 


I Chro 


n. 7 : a) 


b 


.S.i 


11.31 


10 


1 King 


', 4 


12. 


c ISnm. 


■28:7; 


I'sn 


m8:i: 


10. d 


Zed 


. 1-2 


:11. 


e 


hi.lg. 1 


■27 


28. 


f cliap. 


rt:10. 


% ( 


en. 49 


■ 2;--2fi 


Nu 


m. "2 


i:-U 


-X7 


Deut. 


n.T 


i:!- 


17. * C 


r Kf- 


pha 


im. Ge 


n. 14:. 


; 15 


.■■20 


2S 


m. 


5:18,2 




h J 


uJg. 1 : 19 


4:3. 



11. Ill Issfic/tar and in Asher; within the limits 
of those tribes. 

V2. Could not ; because they would not use the 
proper itieans. 

13. Tribute; an annual tax, in token of sub- 
mission. 

14. One fortion ; only a small tract of country. 
Tlie Lord hatlt, blessed me; made me very nu- 
merous. 

15. Get thee np ; take possession of those por- 
tions of the country allotted to you, which have not 
yet been subdued. 

16. The valley of Jezreel ; a valley running 
south-east of mount Carmel, and south-west from 
mount Tabor, called by the Greeks, Esdraelon. 

18. The mountain ; the hilly country before 
spoken of. Thou shnlt drive out the Canaan- 
ites ; this they could do in reliance on God. 
JNSTRUCTIOXS. 

1. The various talents of men come from God, 
and he allots to them such situations as are suited 
to the duties to which he calls th'.'m. 

20 



thou'' shalt drive out the Canaanitcs, 
though they have iron chariots, and 
though they be strong. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

I The tabernacle is set up at Shiloh. 2 The remainder 
of the land is described, and divided into seven parts. 
Ill Joshua divideth it by lot. 11 The lot and border 
of Benjamin. 21 Their cities. 

AND the whole congregation of the chil- 
dren of Israel assembled together at 
Shiloh,' and set up the "" tabernacle of the 
congregation there : and the land was sub- 
dued before them. 

2 And there remained among the chil- 
dren of Israel seven tribes, which had not 
yet received their inheritance. 

3 And Joshua said unto the children of 
Israel, How long are ye " slack to go to pos- 
sess the land, which the Lord God of your 
fathers hath given you ? 

4 Give out from among you three men 
for each tribe : and I will send them, and 
they shall rise, and °go through the land, 
and describe it according to the inheri- 
tance of them ; and they shall come again 
to me. 

5 And they shall divide it into seven 
parts: PJudah shall abide in their coast 
on the south, and the house of i Joseph 
shall abide in their coasts on the north. 

6 Ye shall therefore describe the land 
into seven parts, and bring the description 
hither to me, that I may cast Mots for you 
here before the Lord our God. 

7 But the 'Levites have no part among 
you ; for the priesthood of the Lord is 
their inheritance : and 'Gad, and Reuben, 
and half the tribe of Manasseh, have re- 
ceived their inheritance beyond Jordan on 
the east, which Moses the servant of the 
Lord gave them. 



■ IK 


n„ 


.■!,4 


:12 


j 2 Kings 


9:10,37. 


k Deut. 20 


:1 


; I.sa.41. 


14- 


IB; 


Rorii 


8 


:)l 


:i7; 


Heh. 13:16. 


1 chap. 19 


61; Jer.7: 




m.T 


1(1- 


18 


SI: 


ISan 


1.1 


::i 


24; 


4:3,4. n 


Fudg. 18 : < 


ver. 8. 


P 


chap 


15 


1, 


etc. 


q ch 


P- 


IB 


1-4 


rver.lO; 


chap. 14: 


2. » chap. 


13 


33. 


tch.l3:8. 



4. It is proper that daughters should have an in- 
heritance as well as sons, and so far as is consistent 
be provided for according; to their wants. 

12. It is often said in the Bible that men cannot 
do that, which they will not try to do, nor use the 
means by which, through tlie blessing of God, they 
can do it. 

13. Through sloth and inactivity, men will often 
sacrifice great future good for the sake of a little 
present ease. 

15. Men are often in want because they neglect to 
use proper means to obtain relief, and the best wav 
to help such persons is to put them in a way to help 
themselves. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1. Shiloh ; in the tribe of Ephraim, about 
twenty-five miles north of Jerusalem, and about 
fifteen south of Shechem. 

2. Seven tribe.'; ; Simeon. Benjamin, Dan, Iss.a- 
char, Zcbulon, Asher, and Napht;ili. 

4. Give out ; choose, or appoint. 

5. Their coast ; the place already assigned them. 

'301 



The inheritance of 



JOSHUA XIX. 



the tribe of Benjamin. 



8 TT And the men arose, and went away : 
and Joshua charged thcin that -svent to 
describe the land, saying. Go and walk, 
through" the land, and describe it, and' 
come again to me, tliat I may here cast] 
lots for you before the Loiin in Sliiloh. 

9 And the men went and passed througli 
the land, and described it by cities into 
seven'' parts in a book, and cameag'atuto 
Joshua to the host at Shiloh. 

10 ^ And Joshna cast "^ lots for them in ' 
Shiloh before the Lord : and there Joshua [ 
divided -the land unto the children of Is- 
rael according to their divisions. | 

1 1 IT And the lot of the tribe of the chil- 
dren of Benjamin came up according to 
their families: and the coast of their lot 
came forth between the children of Judah 
and the children of Joseph. 

12 And their border on the north side 
was from Jordan ; and the border went up 
to the side of Jericho on the north side, 
and went up through the mountains west- 
ward; and the goings out thereof were at 
the wilderness of Beth-aven. 

1 3 And the border went over from thence 
toward Luz, to the side of Luz, which is 
Beth-el,^ southward; and the border de- 
scended to Ataroth-addar, near the hill 
that lieth on the south side of the nether 
Beth-horon." 

1 4 And the border was drawn thence, and 
compassed the corner of the sea south- 
ward, from tiie hill that lieth before Beth- 
horon southward ; and the goings out 
thereof were at Kirjath-baal, which is 
Kirjath-jearim, a city of the children of 
Judah: this was tlie west quarter. 

15 And the south quarter was from the 
end of '^ Kirjath-jearim, and the border went 
out on the west, and went out to the well 
of « waters of Nephtoah : 

1 6 And the border came down to the end 
of the mountain that lieth before the val- 
ley of the son of Hinnom, and which is 
in the valley of the giants on the north, 



• Gen.l3:17. bArtal:):19. c Kwk. 47:22; ■J8.-29. dGen.28:19; 
.J»dg.l:2:». eclinp.lii:3. f ICIiron.lSr.'i.e. (!c1m|>. 15:^1. b chap. 
15:8; 2King»,M: 10; ■2Clir.28:3; 3.3:6; Jer.l9:2; 32:3,i. i chap. 



9. Described it — in a hook ; they made a map 
and gave a description of the country, as divided by 
them into seven parts, one for e:u'.h tribe that had 
not yet received its inheritance. 

11. Between tiie children of Judah and the 
children of Joseph ; Judah was on tiie south, 
and Ephraim on the north. Jerusalem was in Ben- 
jamin, and thus, as predicted of him, lie dwelt in 
safety by the Lord. Dent. 33 : 1"2. 

12-28. The places here mentioned were on the 
borders of Benjamin's inheritance, which was bound- 
ed by the Jordan on the east and Dan on the west. 
INSTRUCTION.S. 

1. The place for public worship should be central, 
and such as will best accommodate tiiose who are 
expected there to assemble. 

3. Men often lonij remain destitute of many 
302 



and descended to the valley of *b. "?<«•■ 
Hinnom,'' to the side of Jebusi on the 
south, and descended to 'En-rogcl, 

17 And was drawn from the north, and 
went forth to Eii-sliemesh, and went forth 
toward Geliloth, which is over against the 
going up of Adummiin, and descended to 
the J stone of Bohan the son of Reuben, 

18 And passed along toward the side 
over against *Arabah northward, and went 
down unto Arabah : 

19 And the border passed along to the 
side of Beth-hoglah northward : and the 
outgoings of the border were at the north 
bayt of the salt sea at the south end of 
Jordan : this iras the south coast. 

20 And Jordan was the border of it on 
the east side. This icas the inheritance 
of the children of Benjamin, by the coasts 
thereof round about, according to their 
families. 

21 Now the cities of the tribe of the chil- 
dren of Benjamin according to their fam- 
ilies were Jericho, and Beth-hoglah, and 
the valley of Keziz, 

22 And Beth-arabah, and ''Zemaraim, 
and 'Beth-el, 

23 And Avim, and Parah, and '"Ophrah, 

24 And Chephar-haammonai, and Oph- 
ni, and Gaba; twelve cities with their vil- 
lages : 

25 Gibcon," and "Ramah, and Beeroth, 

26 And PMizpch, and Chephirah, and 
Mozah, 

27 And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah, 

28 And Zclali. Eleph, and i Jebusi, which 
is Jerusalem, Gibcath, and Kirjath ; four- 
teen cities with their villages. This is 
the inheritance of the children of Benja- 
min according to their families. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

1 The lot of Simeon, lOofZebulon, 17 of Issachar, 24 
ol'Asher, ;« of Naphtali, 10 of Dan. 49 The chil- 
dren of Israel give an inheritance to Joshua. 

AND the second lot came forth to Sim- 
con, even for the tribe of the children 



1.5:7. i chap.l,=>;6. " Or, thr pinin. f Heb. foHi?!!!;. Isa. 11 : IS. 
k Gen.l0:18; 2Cbron.l3:4. I IKinss.I2:2!),32. m 1 Sam. 13: 17. 
n 1 Kings, 3: 4,5. o .ler. 31 : IS. pJudg.lO:17. q chap. 15 : 8, 63. 



things which it is the will of God that they should 
enjoy, and which with the right use of means they 
might enjoy. 

i). In dividing estates, great care should be taken 
that the boundaries be so fi.xed as to avoid all future 
contention about them. 

11. By the proper use of means, each individual 
may obtain that situation which is most suitsble for 
him, and in which he may promote his highest good. 

20. Families are the appointment of Jehovah, and 
for them he provides with infinite wisdom and good- 
ness. They are designed and adapted to be sources 
of great enjoyment on earth and to be nurseries for 
heaven. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

1. Within the inheritance of — Juilah; on tli" 
survey of the whole land, it was found that wiiat hud 



The lots of Simeon, Zebulun, 



JOSHUA XIX. 



Issachar, and Asher. 



B. C. UH. 

lies: and their inheritance was "within 
the inheritance of the children of Judah. 

2 And they had in their inheritance 
Beer-sheba'' or Sheba, and Moladah, 

3 And "^Hazar-shual, and Balah, and 
Azem, 

4 And Eltolad, and Bethul, and ''Hor- 
mah, 

5 And ^Ziklag, and Beth-marcaboth, and 
Hazar-susah, 

6 And Beth-lebaoth, and Sharuhen ; thir- 
teen cities and their villages : 

7 Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan ; 
four cities and their villages : 

8 And all the villages that were round 
about these cities to Baalath-beer, "^Ra- 
math of the south. This is the inheri- 
tance of the tribe of the children of Sim- 
eon according to their families. 

9 Out of the portion of the children of 
Judah u'lis the inheritance of the children 
of Simeon : for the part of the children of 
Judah was too ^much for them : '' therefore 
the children of Simeon had their inheri- 
tance within the inheritance of them. 

10 IJAnd the third lot came up for the 
children of Zebulun according to their 
families : and the border of their inheri- 
tance was unto Sarid: 

1 1 And their border went up toward the 
sea,' and ^Maralah, and reached to Dab- 
basheth, and reached to the river that is 
before J Jokneam ; 

1 2 And turned from Sarid eastward tow- 
ard the sunrlsing unto the border of '' Chis- 
loth-tabor, and then goeth out to 'Dabe- 
rath, and goeth up to Japhia», 

13 And from thence passeth on along on 
the east to "" Gittah-hepher, to Ittah-kazin, 
and goeth out to *Remmon-methoar to 
Neah ; 

14 And the border compa.sseth it on the 
north side to Hannathon: and the outgo- 
ings thereof are in the valley of Jiph- 
thah-el : 

15 And Kattath, and "Nahallal, and 



« verse n. b Gen. 21:31: 1 Cliron. 4 : SR. e Hmp. I."!: 2-'<-32. 
.Iu<lg. 1:17. • 1 Sam. 27 : 6 : .SO : 1. f 1 Sam. 30 : 27. R 2 Cc.r. 
H. 1.1. li ver. I. i Gen. 4^1:13. j rliap. 12:22. k.Iiidg. 4:6, 
I 1 Clirnn.6:73. m 2King«, 14:-2.i. * Clr,ichich 
ocliap. 11:1. p Ruth 1 : 19 ; 2 Sam. 
iig», 21 : 1 . r 1 Sam. 28 : 4 ; 2 Kings, 



12; Psa. R9: 12 _ 

Iff drawn. n .Tudg. 1 : 30. o 

23:15: 2CI]ron. 11:6. q IK 



been allotted to Judah was too large for one tribe, 
ver. 9; the south-west part of it was therefore al- 
lotted to Simeon. His inheritance was bounded 
on tlie north and e.^st by that of Judah, on the south 
by the desert of Zin, and on the west by the land of 
the Philistines. 

2-9. These places were within the above-men- 
tioned district. 

10. The children of Zchnhui ; their inheri- 
tance was bounded on t!ie east by the river Jordan 
and the sea of Galilee, on the north by Asher and 
Naphtali, on the west by Asher and Manasseh, and 
on the south by Issachar. 



Shimron," and Idalah, and PBeth-lehem: 
twelve cities with their villages. 

1 6 This is the inheritance of the children 
of Zebulun according to their families, 
these cities with their villages. 

17 ^Andlhe fourth lot came out to Issa- 
char, for the children of Issachar accord- 
ing to their families. 

18 And their border was toward "iJez- 
reel, and Chesulloth, and ''Shunem, 

19 And Haphraim, and Shihon, and An- 
aharath, 

20 And Rabbith, and Kishion, and Abez. 

21 And Remeth, and 'En-gannim, and 
En-haddah, and Beth-pazzez ; 

22 And the coast reacheth to 'Tabor, and 
Shahazimah, and "Beth-shemesh ; and the 
outgoings of their border were at Jordan : 
sixteen cities with their villages. 

23 This is the inheritance of the tribe of 
the children of Issachar according to their 
families, the cities and their villages. 

24 TfAnd the fifth lot came out for the 
tribe of the children of Asher according 
to their families. 

25 And their border was 'Helkath, and 
Hall, and Betcn, and Achshaph, 

26 And Alainmelech, and Amad, and 
Mishal; and reacheth to *Carmcl west- 
ward, and to Shihor-libnath ; 

27 And turneth toward the sunrising to 
Beth-dagon," and reacheth to Zebulun, 
and to the valley of Jiphthah-el toward 
the north side of Beth-emek, and Neiel, 
and goeth out to Cabul on the left hand, 

28 And Hebron, and Rehob, and Ham- 
mon, and Kanah, even unto great *Zidon ; 

29 And then the coast turneth to Ramah, 
and to the strong city t Tyre ; and the 
coast turneth to Hosah; and the outgo- 
ings thereof are at the sea from the coast 
to ''Achzib : 

30 Ummah also, and "Aphek, and Rehob : 
twenty and two cities with their villages. 

31 This is the inheritance of the tribe of 
the children of ""Asher according to their 
families, these cities with their villages. 



4 : S, 12. 9 chap. 21 : 29. t 1 Chron. 6 : 77. n 1 Sam. 6 : 9, etc ; 
2 Kings, 14:11. » 2 Sam. 2:16. w 1 Sam. 15 : 12 ; 1 Kings, 18 : 20. 
42: Cant.7:.'i; I.sa.33:9; 35:2; 37:24; Jer. 46:18. x 1 S.im. 
.1:2. y chap. 11 :S;.7u<lg. 1:31. t Heb. Tzor 2Sam.,5: II ; F.zek. 
27:2, etc. iJuiig. 1:31; Micahl:14. '1 Sam. 4:1; 1 Kings, 
20 : 30. b Gen. 49 : 20 ; Deut 33 : 24. 



11-1-'). These places were in, or on the borders of 
the above-mentioned territory. 

17. The children of Issachar ; their inheri- 
tance was bounded on the east by the .Jordan, on the 
north by Zebulun, on the west by Manasseh, and on 
the south by Ephraim. 

18-2"2. Places in, or on the borders of Issachar. 

24. The children of Asher : their inheritance 
was in the north-west part of the country towards 
Tyre, and w.as bounded on the e;ist by Naphtali. on 
the north by Syria, on the west by Plienicia, and on 
the south by Zebulun. 

25-31. Places in. or on the borders of Asher. 
303 



The lots of Naphtali and Dan. JOSHUA XX. 

32 HThc sixtli lot came out to the chil- 
dren of Naphtali, even for the children of 
Naphtali according to their families. 

33 And their coast Avas from Heleph, 
from Allon to Zaanannim, and Adami, 
Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum ; and the 
outgoings thereof were at Jordan : 

34 And then the coast turncth westward 
to Aznoth-tabor, and goeth out from thence 
to Ilukkok, and reacheth to Zebulun on 
the south side, and reacheth to Asher on 
the * west side, and to Judah upon Jordan 
toward the sunrising. 

35 And the fenced cities are Ziddim,Zer, 
and Hammath, Rakkath, and ^ Chinnereth, 

36 And Adamah, and Ptamali, and Hazor, 

37 And Kcdesh, and Edrei, and En-ha- 
zor, 

38 And Iron, and Migdal-el, Horem, and 
Beth-anath,and'^Beth-shemesh ; nineteen 
cities with their villages. 

39 This is the inheritance of the tribe of 
the children of Naphtali according to their 
families, the cities and their villages. 

40 yi And the seventh lot came out for 
the tribe of the children of Dan according 
to their families. 

41 And the coast of their inheritance 
was ''Zorah, and ^Eshtaol, and Ir-she- 
mesh, 

42 And Shaalabbin, and ""Ajalon, and 
Jethlah, 

43 And Elon, and Thimnathah, and 
Ekron,« 

44 And Eltekeh, and ''Gibbethon, and 
Baalath, 

45 And Jehud, and Bene-berak, and 
Gath-rimmon, 

46 And Me-jarkon, and Rakkon, with 
the border *bcfore t Japho. 

47 And ' the coast of the children of Dan 
went out too little for them : therefore the 
children of Dan went up to fight against 
Lethem, and took it, and smote it with the 



Inheritance of Joshua. 



« Dent 3:! : 23. b Mnrk fi : 53. c ver. 2-2. i 2 Cljron. 11:10. 
• Judge8l8:2. f 1 Siimuel, 14: 31. g 1 Siim. S : 10; Amos 1 : 8. 
h IKinss, 15:27. * Or. ovtrngaimt. i Or, Joppa. Arts 9 : 3K. 
'. clmn. H: 1; Num. 34:17. 



u 1 i\ii|o^, iD.-^i. KIT. over ago 

i J udg. 1 8 : 1 , 27-29. j clmp. 24 : : 



32. The children of Najihtali ; their inheri- 
tance was in the north-e.ast part of the country, and 
was bounded on the east by the Jordan, on the nortli 
by Syria, on the west by Asher, and on the south 
by Zebulun and the sea of Gralilee. 

33—3'^. Places in, or on the borders ofNapht.ali. 

40. The children of Dan ; their inheritance 
wai bounded by Benjamin on the east, by Ephraim 
on the north, by the Mediterranean and the Philis- 
tines on the west, ^nd by Jndah on the south. 

41^6. Places in, or on the borders of Dan. 

47. heshem ; the same as Laish, a city near the 
foot of mount Lebanon and the sources of the .Jor- 
dan. .Tudg. IS : 1-29. 

50. Timnalh-serah ; a place in the hilly country 
of the tribe of Ephraim, called, Judj;. 2 : 9, Tim- 
nath-heres. It was here that Joshua lived, died, 
and was buried. Chap. 24 : 30. 
301 



edge of the sword, and possessed *b.c:i44i: 
it, and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, 
Dan, after the name of Dan their father. 

48 This i.s the inheritance of the tribe 
of the children of Dan according to their 
families, these cities with their villages. 

49 TfWhen they had made an end of 
dividing the land for inheritance by their 
coasts, the children of Israel gave an in- 
heritance to Joshua the son of Nun among 
them : 

50 According to the word of the Lord 
they gave him the city which he asked, 
ei'en JTimnath-serah in mount Ephraim : 
and he built the city, and dwelt therein. 

51 These are the inheritances, which 
Eleazar'' the priest, and Joshua the son 
of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of 
the tribes of the children of Israel, divided 
for an inheritance by lot in ' Shiloh before 
the Lord, at the door of the tabernacle of 
the congregation. So they made an end 
of dividing the country. 

CHAPTER XX. 

1 God commandeth, 7 and the children of Israel appoint 
the six cities of refuge. 

THE Lord also spake unto Joshua, say- 
ing, 

2 Speak to the children of Israel, saying. 
Appoint'" out for you cities of refuge, 
whereof I spake unto you by the hand of 
iNIoses : 

3 That the slayer that killeth oh?/ person 
unawares a«(/ unwittingly may flee tliith- 
er: and they shall be your refuge from 
the avenger of blood. 

4 And when he that doth flee unto one 
of those cities shall stand at the "entering 
of the gate of the city, and shall declare 
his cause in the ears of the elders of that 
city, they shall take him into the city unto 
them, and give him a place, that he may 
dwell" among them. 

5 And if the p avenger of .blood pursue 



1 Hmp. 18: 10: Gen. 49:10: .Tiidiies 21 : 19, 21 : 1 Sam. I : 3 ; Psn. 
78: HO; Jer. 7:12-14. ni Kx. 21:13; Num. a5 : 6, 1 1 , 14 ; Deut. 
19:2,9. n UutU4: 1, 3; Prov. 31 :23. oHel).6:18. p Num. 
35:12,25. 



INSTRCJCTIONS. 

9. If through mistake persons have obtained more 
than rightfully belongs to them, they should, on its 
being known, promptly and clieerfully restore it. 

40. Although the land of Canaan M-.as divided by 
lot among the sever.al tribes of Isr.ael, yet their in- 
heritance and condition were such as was predicted, 
and as it was beforehand certain that they would be. 

50. They who have been eminent benefMctors of 
their fellow-men, should be remembered with grati- 
tude, honored, and if need be provided for, by those • 
whose interests have been secured by their sacrifices 
and efforts. 

CHAPTER XX. 

2. Whereof I spake; Ex.21: 13; Num.3j:6-ai; 
Deut. 19 : 2-13. 

3. Unu-ittinghj ; without design. 



Six cities nf refuge. 



JOSHUA XXT. 



Cities for the Levites. 



B. C. 1444 

liver the slayer up into his hand ; because 
he smote his neighbor unwittingly, and 
hated him not beforetime. 

6 And he shall dwell in that city, until 
he stand before the congregation for judg- 
ment, and until the death of the high- 
priest that shall be in those days : then 
shall the slayer return, and come unto his 
own city, and unto his own house, unto 
the city from whence lie fled. 

7 IfAnd they *appointed * Kedesh in Gal- 
ilee in mount Naphtali, and ''Shechem in 
mount Ephraim, and "= Kirjath-arba which 
is Hebron in the ''mountain of Judah. 

8 And on the other side Jordan by Jeri- 
cho eastward, they assigned " Bezer in the 
wilderi^ess upon the plain out of the tribe 
of Reuben, and '^Ramoth in Gilead out of 
the tribe of Gad, and ^ Golan in Bashan 
out of the tribe of Manasseh. 

9 These were the cities ^ appointed for 
all the children of Israel, and for the stran- 
ger that sojourneth among them, that who- 
soever killeth any person at unawares 
might flee thither, and not die by the hand 
of the avenger of blood, until he 'stood 
before the congregation. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

1 Eight and foriy cities given by lot, out of the other 
tribes, unto the Levites. 43 God gave the land, and 
rest unto the Israelites, according to his promise. 

THF2N came near the heads of the fa- 
thers of the Levites unto J Eleazar the 
priest, and unto Joshua the son of Nun, 
and unto the heads of the fathers of the 
tribes of the children of Israel ; 

2 And they spake unto them at ''Shiloh 
in the land of Canaan, saying. The Lord 
commanded ' by the hand of Moses to give 
us cities to dwell in, with the suburbs 
thereof for our cattle. 

3 And the children of Israel gave unto 
the Levites out of their inheritance, at the 
commandment of the Lord, tliese cities 
and their suburbs. 

4 And the lot came out for the families 



* 


Heb. . 


anctified. 




. chap 


21 : 32 


, 1 Chron. 6 


76. 


h chap. 


21: 


21 ; 


•IV, 


ron. 10 : 




c elm. 


14:1.5 


21: 


11, 1.3. 


i Luke 1 : :w. 


t rl 


•<P 


21 


3fi : Deut. 


4:43; 


1 Chro 


n. fi 


7S. f 


clia 


1. 21 :38: 


IKi 


np* 


,22 


3, 4. 6. 


B 


cli:ip. 2 


1 : 27. 


h N 


im. 3.=i : 


.',. 


> rer.te K. 


J cl 


ip. 


H : 


1; 17:4. 


k 


clmp. 18:1. I 


Nun 


. 35 : 2. 


m 


«. 8, lil; 



6. Judgment ; a fair trial and a righteous de- 
cision. 

7. Mmnit Naphtali ; the hilly region in the 
tribe of Naphtali, in the north part of the country. 
Shechem ; this was in the central part, and He- 
bron in the south part of the country. 

8. Bezer ; a city in the south part of the coun- 
try, east of Jordan; Ranyath was in the central, 
and Golan in the north part of the country. 

INSTRUCTIO.VS. 
5. Our lives are .always uncertain, and are liable 
to be suddenly t.Tken away, either by design or 
through our own carelessness and mistakes, or those 
of our fellow-inen. 



of the Kohathites: and the children of 
Aaron"' the priest, which icere of the Le- 
vites, had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, 
and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of 
the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities. 

5 And the rest of the children of "Ko- 
hath had by lot out of the families of the 
tribe of Ephraim, and ovit of the tribe of 
Dan, and out of the half-tribe of Manas- 
seh, ten cities. 

6 And the children of "Gershon had by 
lot out of the families of the tribe of Issa- 
char, and out of the tribe of Asher, and 
out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the 
half-tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen 
cities. 

7 The children of p Merari by their fam- 
ilies had out of the tribe of Reuben, and 
out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe 
of Zebulun, twelve cities. 

8 And the children of Israel i gave by lot 
unto the Levites these cities with their 
suburbs, as the Lord commanded by the 
hand of Moses. 

9 IT And they gave out of the tribe of the 
children of Judah, and out of the tribe of 
the children of Simeon, these cities which 
are here t rnentioned by name, 

10 Which the children of Aaron, being 
of the families of the Kohathites, trho were 
of the children of Levi, had : for theirs 
was the first lot. 

1 1 And ' they gave them tthe city of Arba 
the 'father of Anak, which city is Hebron, 
in the 'hill country of Judah, with the sub- 
urbs thereof round about it. 

12 But the fields of the city, and the vil- 
lages thereof, gave they to " Caleb the son 
of Jephunneh for his possession. 

13 1[ Thus" they gave to the children of 
Aaron the priest Hebron with her sub- 
urbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer, 
and Libnah with her suburbs, 

14 And Jattir with her suburbs, and 
Eshtemoa with her suburbs, 

15 And ^Holon with her suburbs, and 
Debir with her suburbs, 

chapter 24 : 33. n ver. 20. etc. o ver. 27, etc. p ver. 34, etc. 
q ver. 3. f Heb. cal/td. r i Chron. «:.W. f Or, Khiatkarbn. 
Gen. 2:i:2. ■ chap. 15 : 13, 14. t chap. 20 : 7, et.-. ; I.uke 1 : .39. 
u chap 14:14. » 1 Chron. 6: 66, etc. 8chap.l5:51; 1 Chron. 
6:58. Hiltn. 



6. As life may be destroyed through carelessness, as 
well as by design, carelessness is a sin which should be 
most conscientiously avoided, and if it is not. sliould 
be visited with its appropriate punishment. 

9. No person accused of murder should be ac- 
quitted or condemned till after a full and fair tri.al ; 
nor should he suffer death unless proved to be guilty. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

4. Judah — Simeon — Beirjamin ; thus tlie 
priests had their cities in the tribes that were near 
to Jerusalem and the temple. Ver. 9-19. 

5. The rest ; those of the family of Kohath who 
were not priests. Ver. 20-26. 

305 



Cities of the Kohathites, 



JOSHUA XXI. 



Gershonites^ and Meraritet. 



1 6 And *Aiii with her suburbs, and Jut- 
lah with her suburbs, and Beth-shemesh 
with her suburbs ; nine cities out of those 
two tribes. 

17 And out of the tribe of Benjamin, 
Gibeon with her suburbs, tGeba with her 
suburbs, 

18 Anathoth with her suburbs, and -Al- 
mon with her suburbs; four cities. 

1 i) All the cities of the children of Aaron, 
the priests, were thirteen cities witli their 
suburbs. 

20 1[ And the families of the children of 
Kohath,* the Levitcs which remained of 
the children of Kohath, even they had 
the cities of their lot out of the tribe of 
Ephraim. 

21 For they gave them Shechcin with 
her suburbs in mount Ephraim, to be a city 
of refuge for the slayer; and Gezcr with 
her suburbs, 

22 And Kibzaim with her suburbs, and 
Beth-horon with her suburbs; four cities. 

23 And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh 
with her suburbs, Gibbethon with her 
suburbs, 

24 Ajalon with her suburbs, Gath-rim- 
mon with her suburbs ; four cities. 

25 And out of the half-tribe of iNIanas- 
sch, Taanach with her suburbs, and Gath- 
rimmon with her suburbs; two cities. 

26 All the cities were ten with their sub- 
urbs for the families of the children of Ko- 
haih that remained. 

27 T[And unto the children of ''Ger- 
shon, of the families of the Levites, out 
of the other half-tribe of JNIanasseh they 
gave "^ Golan in Bashan with her sub- 
urbs, to he a city of refuge for the slayer, 
and Beeshterah with her suburbs; two 
cities. 

28 And out of the tribe of Issachar, Ki- 
shon with her suburbs, Dabareh with her 
suburbs, 

29 Jarmuth with her suburbs, En-gan- 
nim with her suburbs ; four cities. 

.30 And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal 
with her suburbs, Abdon with her sub- 
urbs. 



* nliap. IS.-VJ; 1 Climn. 6 : 69. A>han. t clitip. 18:24. Gaha. 
J 1 Chron. fi : tiO. AUmcth. •ver6: IChron. 6:6fi. hver.fi; 
ICliron.6:7I. c chiip.'20:8. d chap. 20: 7. • ver.7; I Cliron.6:77. 



27. The children of Gershoji ; these were Le- 
vi tes, but not priests. 

31. The children of Merari; Levites, but not 
priests. 

41. Forty and eight cities ; according to the 
direction of Moses, Num. G-'} : 7. 

42. Siibnrhs ; adjacent territory to the extent of 
two thousand cubits on every side, according to the 
din ction. Num. G-l : 5. 

43. They possessed it ; they possessed all that 
they then needed ; and the rest the Lord would 
give them, according to liis promise. Ex. 23:30. 

4-5. AH came to pass ; in due time. 
306 



31 Helkath with her suburbs, and *B.aH«-' 
Rehob with her suburbs ; four cities. 

32 And out of the tribe of Naphtali, ^ Ke- 
desh in Galilee with her suburbs, to be a 
city of refuge for the slayer; and Ham- 
moth-dor with her suburbs, and Kartan 
with her suburbs; three cities. 

33 All the cities of the Gershonites ac- 
cording to their families luere thirteen cit- 
ies with their suburbs. 

34 ^ And unto the families of the chil- 
dren of ''Merari, the rest of the Levites, 
out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with 
her suburbs, and Kartah with her suburbs, 

35 Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal 
with her suburbs; four cities. 

36 And out of the tribe of Reuben, ""Be- 
zer with her suburbs, and Jahazah with 
her suburbs, 

37 Kedemoth with her suburbs, and Me- 
phaath with her suburbs; four cities. 

38 And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth 
in Gilead with her suburbs, to he a city of 
refuge for the slayer; and Mahanaim with 
her suburbs, 

39 Heshbon with her suburbs, Jazer 
with her suburbs; four cities in all. 

40 So all the cities for the children of 
Merari by their families, which were re- 
maining of the families of the Levites, 
were hy their lot twelve cities. 

41 All the cities of the Levites within 
the possession of the children of Israel were 
forty and eight « cities with their suburbs. 

42 These cities were every one with 
their suburbs round about them : thus 
were all these cities. 

43 TI And the Lord gave unto Israel all 
the land which lie ''sware to give unto 
their fathers; and they possessed it, and 
dwelt therein. 

44 And 'the Lord gave them rest round 
about, according to all that ho sware unto 
their fathers : J and there stood not a man 
of all their enemies before them ; the Loud 
delivered all their enemies into their hand. 

45 There ''failed not aught of any good 
thing which the Lord had spoken unto the 
house of Israel; all came to pass. 



f chap. 20:8. it Num. 35:7. b Gen. 12:7; 13:1.t; 1S:13-21; 
28:.-), 4; 28:4, Ki, 14. i ch. U : 2.'?; 22: 4. j Deut7:2.1,24. k ch. 
23:14; Nuin.23:lii; lKing!.,8:5«; lCor.l:9; Titus 1 : 2. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. It is not left merely to the inclinations of men 
whether they will provide for the comfortable sup- 
port of tlie ministers of religion, but it is tlie com- 
mand of <.Tod that those who preach the gospel 
should live of the gospel, and their hearers cannot 
withhold from them needful support without de- 
priving them of what is justly their due. 1 Cor. 
9 : 13, 14. 

4. It is a great convenience for the ministers of 
religion to live near the place of public worship, 
and generally it will be found to be most conducive 
to their good and the good of the people. 



The tribes east of Jordan 



JOSHUA XXII. 



build an altar of ivitness. 



ti:-^: CHAPTER XXII. 

1 The two tribes and a half with a blessing are sent 
home. 10 They build the altar of testimony in their 
journey. 11 The Israelites are offended thereat. 21 
They give them good satisfaction. 

THEN Joshua called the Reubenites, 
and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of 
Manasseh, 

2 And said unto them, Ye have kept all 
that *j\Ioses the servant of the Lord com- 
manded you, and have obeyed my voice 
in all that I ''commanded you: 

3 Ye have not left your brethren these 
many days unto this day, but have kept 
the charge of the commandment of the 
Lord your God. 

4 And now the Lord your God hath giv- 
en rest unto your brethren, as he prom- 
ised them : therefore now return ye, and 
get you unto your tents, and unto the land 
of your possession, which Moses the ser- 
vant of the Lord gave "^ you on the other 
side Jordan. 

5 But take •' diligent heed to do the com- 
mandment and the law, which Moses the 
servant of the Lord charged you, to "love 
the Lord your God, and to walk in all his 
ways, and to keep his commandments, and 
to ^cleave unto him, and to s serve him 
Avith all yourheart and with all your soul. 

6 So Joshua'' blessed them, and sentthem 
away : and they went unto their tents. 

7 ^Now to the one half of the tribe of 
Manasseh INIoses had given possession in 
Bashan; but 'unto the o^/ic/- half thereof 
gave Joshua among their brethren on this 
side Jordan westward. And when Josh- 
ua sent them away also unto their tents, 
then he blessed them, 

8 And he spake unto them, saying, Re- 
turn with much ' riches unto your tents, 
and with very much cattle, with silver, 
and with gold, and with brass, and with 
iron, and with very much raiment: ''di- 
vide the spoil of your enemies with your 
brethren. 

9 H And the children of Reuben and the 
children of Gad and the half-tribe of Ma- 
nasseh returned, and departed from the 
children of Israel out of Shiloh, which is 



« Num. :!2 


■:0, ■:'*; Deut :i: 16-M. h cliap. 1 : i:-18. c DeuL 


89:8. ■• D^ 


ut. 6 : rt, 17 ; 11: ii; 1 Cliron. -iS : 7. 8 ; Jer. 1-: : 16. 


e Deut 10 : 1 


;. f Acta 1 1 : eS. e clinp. 24 : 14 ; 1 Saul. 13 : 20, 24. 


b Gen. 47 : 7 ; 


2S.im.fi: 18; Luke 2 : 34 ; 24 : .'iO. icliap. I7:S. 


j Deut. 8 : 10- 


14. k Num. 31 : 27 ; 1 Samuel, 30 : 24 ; Psa. 68 : 12. 



5. There should be ministers of religion in all 
parts of t!ie country, that all the people may have 
the benefit of their good instructions and exam- 
ple. 

41. The Lord in his providence appoints to min- 
isters tlieir various fields of labor, and wherever 
they are placed it should be tlieir great object to 
honor liiin and be most useful to men. 

43. Whatever may be the promises of God, and 
however great ttie difficulties in the way of their 
accomplishment, in due time they will all be ful- 
filled. 



in the land of Canaan, to go unto the coun- 
try of ' Gilead, to the land of their posses- 
sion, whereof they were possessed, accord- 
ing to the word of the Loud by the hand 
of Moses. 

10 1[ And when they came unto the bor- 
ders of Jordan, that are in the land of Ca- 
naan, the children of Reuben and the chil- 
dren of Gad and the half-tribe of Manas- 
seh built there an altar by Jordan, a great 
altar"" to see to. 

11 IT And the children of Israel "heard 
say. Behold, the children of Reuben and 
the children of Gad and the half-tribe of 
INIanasseh have built an altar over against 
the land of Canaan, in the borders of Jor- 
dan, at the passage of the children of Israel. 

1 2 And when the children of Israel heard 
of it, the whole congregation of the chil- 
dren of Israel gathered themselves togeth- 
er at Shiloh, to go up to war against them. 

13 And the children of Israel sent unto 
the children of Reuben, and to the chil- 
dren of Gad, and to the half-tribe of Ma- 
nasseh, into the land of Gilead, ° Phinehas 
the son of Eleazar the priest, 

14 And with him ten princes, of each 
chief* house a prince throughout all the 
tribes of Israel ; and each one ivas a p head 
of the house of their fathers among the 
thousands of Israel. 

15 TfAnd they came unto the children 
of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and 
to the half-tribe of INIanasseh, unto the 
land of Gilead, and they spake with them, 
saying, 

16 Thus saith the whole congregation 
of the Lord, What trespass is this that ye 
have committed against the God of Israel, 
to turn away this day from following the 
Lord, in that ye have builded you an al- 
tar, that ye might i rebel this day against 
the Lord ? 

17 Is the iniquity of ^Peor too little for 
us, from which we are not cleansed until 
this day, although there was a plague in 
the congregation of the Lord, 

18 But that ye must turn away this day 
from following the Lord 1 and it ^ will be. 



1 Num.32: 1, 2rt, 29. 


m cli.ip. 24 : '26, 27; Gea 2S : 18 ; 31 


4ri-<i2. 


n Deut. 13: 12. etc.; 


.Judges 20:1, 12. o Exodus i;:2.S: 


Num. 


ber3 25:7, 11-13. « 


Heh. house of the father, p Numbe 


rs 1 : 4. 


q Leviticus 17 : 8, 9. 


r Numbers 25 : 3, etc. ; Deut. 4 : 3. 


» Ezra 


9:13, 14. 







CHAPTER XXII. 

1. Reubenites — Gadites, and the half-trihe 
of ^lanasseli ; their men of war, who h;id left 
their homes on the east side of Jordan to as.sist 
their brethren in tiie conquest of Canaan. 

7. Bashan ; the north part of the country pos- 
sessed by the I.sraelites on the east of Jordan. 

10. Jji/ Jorda)i ; on its east bank. 

16. Builded yoH an altar ; to offer s.acrifice in 
any place except at the tabernacle, was expresslv 
forbidden. Lev. 17 : 8, 9. 

17. Iniquity of Peor; Num. 2.5:3; Deut. 4 : 3 

307 



The two tribes and a half 



JOSHUA XXII. 



vindicate their conduct. 



seeing ye rebel to-day against the Lord, 
that to-morrow he will be " wroth with the 
whole congregation of Israel. 

19 Notwithstanding, if the land of your 
posscs.'iion be unclean, then pass ye over 
untothelandof the possession of the Lord, 
wherein the Lord's tabernacle ''dwelleth, 
and take possession among us : but rebel 
not against the Lord, nor rebel against us, 
in building you an altar besides the altar 
of the Lord our God. 

20 Did nofAchanthe son of Zerah com- 
mit a trespass in the accursed thing, and 
wrath fell on all the congregation of Is- 
rael ? and that man perished not alone in 
his iniquity. 

21 II Then the children of Reuben and 
the children of Gad and the half-tribe of 
Manasseh answered, and said unto the 
heads of the thousands of Israel, 

22 The Lord ''God of gods, the Lord 
God of gods, he "knoweth, and "^Israel he 
shall know; if it be in ^ rebellion, or if in 
transgression against the Lord, (save us 
not this day,) 

23 That we have built us an altar to turn 
from following the Lord, or if to offer 
thereon burnt-offering or meat-ofl'cring, or 
if to oiler peace-offerings thereon, let the 
Lord himself ''require it; 

24 And if we have not rnthcr done it for 
fear of this thing, saying, *In time to come 
your cliildren might speak unto our chil- 
dren, saying, What have ye to do with the 
Lord God of Israel 1 

25 For the Lord hath made Jordan a bor- 
der between us and you, ye children of Reu- 
ben and children of Gad ; ye ' have no part 
ill the Lord : so shall your children make 
our children ' cease from fearing the Lord. 

26 Therefore we said. Let us now pre- 
pare to build us an altar, not for burnt- 
offering, nor for sacrilice: 

27 Rut thai it may be a ''witness between 
us, and you, and our generations after us, 
that we might do the service of the Lord 
before' him witli our burnt-offerings, and 



B. c. im. 

peace-offerings ; that your children may 
not say to our children in time to come, 
Ye have no part in the Lord. 

28 Therefore said we, that it shall be, 
when they should so say to us or to our 
generations in time to come, that we may 
say «g-aj«. Behold the '"pattern of the altar 
of the Lord, which our fathers made, not 
for burnt-ofl'erings, nor for sacrifices ; but 
it is a witness between us and you. 

29 God " forbid that we should rebel 
against the Lord, and turn this day from 
following the Lord, to build an altar for 
burnt-offerings, for meat-offerings, or for 
sacrifices, besides the altar of the Lord our 
God that is before his tabernacle. 

30 T[ And when Phinehas the priest, and 
the princes of the congregation and heads 
of the thousands of Israel which u'crc with 
him, heard the words that the children of 
Reuben and the children of Gad and the 
children of Manasseh spake, it t pleased 
them. 

31 And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the 
priest said unto the children of Reuben, 
and to the children of Gad, and to the chil- 
dren of Manasseh, This day we perceive 
that the Lord is " among us, because ye have 
not committed this trespass against tiie 
Lord: ^now ye have delivered the chil- 
dren of Israel out of the hand of the Lord. 

32 TfAnd Phinehas the son of Eleazar 
the priest, and the princes, returned from 
the children of Reuben, and from the chil- 
dren of Gad, out of the land of Gilcad, 
unto the land of Canaan, to the children 
of Israel, and brought them Pword again. 

33 And the thing pleased the children of 
Israel ; and the children of Israel i blessed 
God, and did not intend to go up against 
them ill battle, to destroy the land wherein 
the children of Reuben and Gad dwelt. 

34 And the children of Reuben and the 
children of Gad called the altar ^Ed : for 
it shall be a witness between us that the 
Lord is God. 



• Num. J6:22. b cli,ip. 18: 1. c diap. 7 ; 1 , etc. d Deiit. 10: 17; 
Pbs. 9.5:5; in<i:2; nnnicli:47; ll:3B. e 1 King", 8: 39; J<ib 
!»: 10; P»B. 44:21; 139:1-12; Jer. 12:3: .lolm 2 : 24, 2fi ; 21:17; 
At'ta I :24; 2Cor. 11:11,31; Heb.4:13; Rev.2:a3. fMnI.3:18. 
e ISnm. Ifi:23. I>neut)8:l9; 1 Skid. 20 : 16; 2 ClirOn. 24 : 22. 
• Hvb. tomorrow. Kx. 13:14. • Neli. 2::0. j 1 Kings, 12:27,2S. 

19. If the land — he uncletin; if they thouglit 
it uncl(.'.\n because there w.as in it no altar for sac- 
riticf, and no pl.ice for public religious worship, 
they were invitttd to come over and live on the west 
«ide of Jordan where M-as the tabernacle, rather 
than to set up separate worship and thus rebel 
Against God. 

■M. Not alone ; chap. 7 : 5. 24, Q.'i. 

2'i. The Lord — require ; let him punish us, if 
we designed to rebel against him. 

2-'). Make our children cease from fearing the 
Lord ; by refusing to let them come over Jordan 
to worship hitii. 

28. A u-iifiess : that they liad a right to go over 
308 



k ver. 34. 1 Deul. 12 : 5. Mr. m Kx. 2.5 : 40 ; Kzekiel 43 i 10. 1 1, 
n Gen. 44:7, 17; ISani. 12:23; lKinM,21:3; R.in).3:& t Hel). 
l(>«« ooorl in their tytt. o Lev. 2fi : 1 1 , 1 2 ; Zeclmrinli » : 23 ; I Cor. 
14:2S. t Heb. t/if>i. p Proverbs 2fi : 13. H 1 Sam. 25 : 32, 3:1 ; 
1 Cbron. 29 : 20 ; Neh 8:6; Dnniel 2 : 19; Epll. 1:3. \ Tlmt is, 
ft witness ; ehap. 24 : 27. 



Jordan and worship with the other tribes at the 
tabernacle. 

29. To hnild an altar ; Deut. 12: 13, 1 1. 

31. Ye have delivered the children of Israel ; 
not exposed them to punishment as they feared, by 
sinning against the Lord, but taken measures to 
perpetu.ate his worship. 

31. lid ; a witnes.s. 

IX.'JTRI'CTIOXS. 

2. Just commendation is due to those who do 
well, and true gratitude should be e.xercised towards 
all who make sacrifices, endure hard.ships, and per- 
form labors for the good of their fellow-men. 

4. Fidelity in obeying God's commandg will re- 



Jushica's exhortation 



JOSHUA XXIII, 



before his death. 



2.ai^7 CHAPTER XXIII. 

1 Joshua's exhortation before his death, 3 by former 
benefits, 5 by promises, 11 and by threatenings. 

AND it came to pass, a long time after 
that the Lord had given* rest unto Isra- 
el from all their enemies round about, that 
Joshua waxed ""old and *stricken in age. 

2 And Joshua "^called for all Israel, and 
for their elders, and for their heads, and for 
their judges, and for their officers, and said 
unto them, I am old and stricken in age : 

3 And ye have seen all that the Lord 
your God hath done unto all these nations 
because of you ; for the ''Lord your God is 
he that hath fought for you. 

4 Behold, I have ^divided unto you by 
lot these nations that remain, to be an 
inheritance for your tribes, from Jordan, 
with all the nations that I have cut off, 
even unto the great sea t westward. 

5 And the Lord your God, ""he shall ex- 
pel them from before you, and drive them 
from out of your sight; and ye shall pos- 
sess their land, as the Lord your God hath 
promised^ unto you. 

6 Be ye therefore very ''courageous to 
keep and to do all that is written in the 
book of the law of Moses, that ye 'turn 
not aside therefrom to the right hand or to 
the left; 

7 That ' ye come not among these nations, 
these that remain among you ; neither make 



« cllHp. C;? : 4. b cliap. 13 : 1. * Heb, come into days. <• chap. 
24:1; I )eut. :« : 2K ; 1 Clironirles, 28 : 1. <t Psa. 44 : 3. e chap. 
!:!:«, 7; 18:10. f Heh. at thr sunset, f Dent. 1 1 : -23 ; Psalm 
44:2. B Numbers 33: /iS. h chap. 1 : 7. iDeut. 5:3i i Deiit. 
7:i, :i. k Psa. 16:4; Hosea 2:17. IZeph. l:4-«. f Or, Far 



ceive his approbation and blessing, and a glorious 
reward. 

5. Tlie true greatness, glory, and blessedness of a 
people consist in their loving the Lord, observing 
liis ordinances, and walking in his ways. 

10. Suitable care should be taken, in providing 
against future evils, not to awaken needless suspi- 
cions, nor occasion unnecessary anxiety and trouble 
to o\iT fellow-men. 

16. We may be blamed, even by good men, for 
our best actions. But we should not be disconcert- 
ed, should listen to them with patience, and wiien 
we thoroughly understand their mistakes, should 
endeavor kindly to remove them. 

19. When those who are disturbed at the conduct 
of others, go to them and frankly state their diffi- 
culties, and manifest a readiness to make sacrifices 
and even to give up their own rights, rather than 
to have God dishonored or his cause injured, it 
maybe expected that with reasonable explanations 
they will be satisfied. 

22. A consciousness of being and doing right 
tends to prevent undue excitement under unjust 
accusations, and to lead to such explanations as 
will remove needless apprehensions and be satisfac- 
tory to all concerned. 

"26. It is proper to take all suitable measures to 
guard our children against evils to which froiri the 
selfishness of men they will be exposed, and to en- 
able them to know what are their rights, especially 
their religious rights, and successfully to maintain 
and permanently enjoy them. 

30. A disposition to enjoy religious rights our- 



mention'' of the name of their gods, nor 
cause to 'swear by them, neither serve 
them, nor bow yourselves unto them : 

8 But t cleave "' unto the Lord your God, 
as ye have done unto this d.ay. 

9 For* the Lord hath driven out from 
before you great nations and strong : but 
rt.s- for you, no man hath been able to stand 
before you unto this day. 

10 One "man of you shall chase a thou- 
sand : for the Lord your God, he it i.s that 
fighteth for you, as "he hath promised you. 

1 1 Take good heed therefore unto I! your- 
selves, that ye love the Lord your God. 

12 Else, if ye do in any wise go Pback, 
and cleave unto the remnant of these na- 
tions, even these that remain among you, 
and shall make "^ marriages with them, and 
go in unto them, and they to you : 

13 Know for a certainty that the Lord 
your God will no ■'more drive out any of 
these nations from before you; but they 
shall be "snares and traps unto you, and 
scourges in your sides, and thorns in your 
eyes, until ye perish from 'off this good 
land which the Lord your God hath given 
you. 

14 And behold, this day I am going the 
way of all the earth : and ye know in all 
your hearts and in allyour" souls, that not 
one thing hath failed of all the good things 
which the Lord your God spake concern- 



i/ne will cleave, m chap. 22 :,5. % Or, TIten the I.OBD will drive. 
n Lev. 2rt : 8 ; Judg. 7 : 19-22 ; 15 : 15. o Ex. 2:1 : 27, etc. || Hel). 
your souls, p Psa. 125 : 5 ; Isa. 1:4; Zeph. 1 : fi ; Heb. 10 : 38, 39 ; 
2Peter, 2:20, 21. q 2 Cor. 6:14. r Judges 2: 2, 3. » 1 Kings, 
11:4. t 2 Kings, 17:22, 23. uchap.21:45. 



selves, and to secure them to coming generations, 
is pleasing to all intelligent and right-minded men, 
especially to pious rulers and ministers of the gospel. 

33. Grood men, enlightened by the Spirit of God, 
will not make M-ar upon others for maintaining 
their just rights, especially their right to hearken 
to the voice of God in the Scriptures, to judge of his 
meaning, and to worship him according to his di- 
rections. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

4. The great sea; the Mediterranean, which 
formed the western boundary of Can.aan. 

7. Neither male mcntio]i ; the familiar men- 
tion of the names of idols would tend to lessen their 
abhorrence of them. 

10. One man of yon shall chase a tlionsand ; 
however few they might be, and however numerous 
their enemies, they, in obeying God, would be able 
to overcome them. 

11. Take good heed ; be very careful. 

14. Going the way of all the earth ; about to 
die. Gen. 3 : 19. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. No fidelity to God, or usefulness to men, can 
keep otT the approach of age, infirmity, or death. 
This should he borne in mind, and incite all to do 
with their might what their hands find to do, know- 
ing that in the grave, to which they are hastening, 
there is no work, 

3. The aged may recount the mercies of the Lord 
with great advantage to themselves and to their 
fellow-men. 

4, Faith in God produces a permanent conviction 

309 



Joshua assembleth the 



JOSHUA XXIV. 



tribes at Shechem. 



ingyou; all are come to pass unto you, and 
not one thing hath failed thereof. 

15 Therefore it shall come to pass, that 
as all good things are come upon you, 
which tlie Loud your God promised you; 
so shall the Loiin bring upon "you all evil 
tliinus, until he have destroyed you from 
oil" this good land which the Lord your 
God hath given you. 

16 When ye have transgressed the cov- 
enant of the Lord your God, which he 
commanded you, and have gone and served 
other gods, and bowed yourselves to them ; 
then shall the ''anger of the Lord be kin- 
dled against you, and ye shall perish quick- 
ly from off the good land which he hath 
given unto you. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

1 Joshua assembleth the tribes at Shechem. 2 A brief 
history of God's benefits from Terah. It He renew- 
eth the covenant between them and God. 26 A stone 
the witness of the covenant. 29 Joshua's age, death, 
and burial. 32 Joseph's bones are buried. 33 Ele- 
azar dieth. 

AND Joshua gathered all the tribes of 
Israel to Shechem, and "^called for the 
elders of Israel, and for their heads, and 
for their judges, and for their otiiccrs; and 
they ''presented themselves before God. 

2 And Joshua said unto all the people, 
Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Your 
fatliers" dwelt on the otlier side of the 
flood in old time, even Terah, the father of 
Abraliam, and the father of Nahor: and 
they served other gods. 

3 And I took your "^ father Abraham from 
the otlicr side of the flood, and led him 
throughout all the land of Canaan, and 
multiplied his seed, and gave him ^ Isaac. 

4 And'' I gave unto Isaac Jacob and 
Esau : and I gave unto ' Esau mount Seir, 
to possess it; but J Jacob and his children 
went down into Egypt. 

5 I sent Moses also and Aaron, and I 
plagued '' Egypt, according to that which I 



« l>T.-2r.:M,etC.; De«U-28:1.5.IM. b 5 Kings. 24: 20. i:cli.l3:2. 
a iSnin. ]0:I9. e Gen. 11 : -Jti, rtc. f Gen. 12:1. B Gen. ai :'2,3. 
h Gen. ■:.'>: 24. I Gen 3li:8; neut. -2 :.'>. iGen.4K:I-7. k Ex. clis. 
7-12. I Kit. til. 14. m ■•l,ap.,'i:K. n Kum.'21 : 21-3.'.. o Num. M:.'!, 



did among them: and afterward I b.c:h27: 
brought you out. 

6 And I brought yourfathers out of Egypt : 
and ye ' came unto the sea ; and the Egyp- 
tians pursued after your fathers with char- 
iots and horsemen unto the Red sea. 

7 And when tliey cried unto the Lord, 
he put darkness between you and the 
Egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, 
and covered them ; and your eyes, have 
seen what I have done in Egypt: and ye 
dwelt in the wilderness a "'long season. 

8 And I brought you into the land of the 
Amorites, which dwelt on the other side 
Jordan; and "they fought with you: and 
I gave them into your hand, that ye might 
possess their land; and I destroyed them 
from before you. 

9 Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of 
Moab, arose and warred against Israel, 
and "sent and called Balaam the son of 
Beor to curse you : 

10 But Pi would not hearken unto Ba- 
laam; therefore he blessed you still: sol 
delivered you out of his hand. 

1 1 And "i ye went over Jordan, and came 
unto Jericho: and the men of 'Jericho 
fought against you, the Amorites, and the 
Perizzites, and the Canaanites, and the 
ffittites, and the Girgashites, the Hivites, 
and the Jebusites ; and I delivered them 
into your hand. 

12 And I sent the ^hornet before you, 
which dravc them out from before you, 
even the two kings of the Amorites; but 
not' with tliy sword, nor with thy bow. 

13 And I have "given you a land for 
which yc did not labor, and "cities which 
ye built not, and ye dwell in them ; of the 
vineyards and olive-yards which ye plant- 
ed not do ye eat. 

1 4 % Now " therefore fear the Lord, and 
serve him in "sincerity and in truth; and 
put i'away the gods which your fathers 

etn. p Deut.M:.'!; Mirallfii.'S. q rli.ip.3: 14 17. rchap.6. "Ex. 
■2.3:28; l)eut.7:-20. t I'8:\. 44 : 3, 6. u cll!ip.2I :4S. t clmp. II : 13; 
Dent. 6: 10-13. w 1. Sam. 12:24. i Gen. 17: 1 : DeuL 18: 13: Jolin 
4:24; 2Cor. 1:12; Kpli.6:24. y Lev. 17:7; E7ek.i0:l8. 



of the truth of his promises and leads men to act as 
if they knew that they would be fulfilled. 

6. The fact that God will do for us wliat we 
need, instead of ieadinij us to nejjlcct appropriate 
means, or to fee! that they are less important, should 
lead us with Kdi-iity to use them, because tiiat is 
the only way effectually to secure his aid. 

7. Intimate connections with the wicked greatly 
increase the dan<rer of becoming like them. 

9. Thin-js are done by the Lord which are accom- 
plished by human instrumentality. Men use the 
means, and (rod renders them successful. 

JO. When God is on our side and works for us, 
we need fe;ir no enemies, however numerous or 
Rtron;;, but we ni;i.y go forward in duty, with assured 
conlidence of final and complete victory. 

11. If we love and obey God. we sliall be in all 
good efforts in the highest and best sense success- 
310 



ful ; but if we disregard hi.s laws, and are governed 
by the principles and practices of the wicked, we 
may expect calamity and ruin. 

14. The fulfilment of (>od's declarations in time."! 
past, should assure us of their fulfilment in time to 
come. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

1. Shechem ; a city north of Shiloh, and nearer 
to Timnath-serah where Joshua lived. Chap. IS: 1. 

2. The flood; the river; meaning the Euphrates. 
Other gods; idols. 

4. Seir; a country south of the Dead sea. 
0. The .lea ; the fted sea. 
7. A long season ; about forty years. 
10. His hand; the hand of Balak. 
12. The hornet ; a winged insect whose sting is 
terrible. 
14. The gods; idols. 



He rencweth the covenant. 



JOSHUA XXIV 



His death and burial. 



and ill Egypt ; and serve ye the Lord 

15 And if it seem evil unto you to serve 
the Lord, * choose you this day whom ye 
will serve ; ''whether the gods which your 
fathers served that ivere on the other side 
of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, 
in whose land ye dwell: but as for "^me 
and my house, we will serve the Lord. 

16 And the people a'nswered and said, 
God forbid that we should forsake the 
Lord, to serve other gods ; 

17 For the Lord our God, he it is that 
brought us up and our fathers out of the 
land of Egypt, from the house of bondage, 
and which did those great signs in our 
sight, and preserved us in all the way 
wherein we went, and among all the peo- 
ple through whom we passed : 

18 And the Lord drave out from before 
us all the people, even the Amorites which 
dwelt in the land : therefore '' will we also 
serve the Lord; for he is our God. 

19 And Joshua said unto the people. Ye 
cannot" serve the Lord : for he is a '"holy 
God ; he is a « jealous God ; he will not '' for- 
give your transgressions nor your sins. 

20 If ye 'forsake the Lord, and serve 
strange gods, then he will turn and do you 
hurt, and consume you, J after that he hath 
done you good. 

21 And the people said unto Joshua, 
Nay ; but we will serve the Lord. 

22 And Joshua said unto the people, '' Ye 
are witnesses against yourselves that ye 
have 'chosen you the Lord, to serve him. 
And they said, IVe are witnesses. 

23 Now therefore put "^away, .<!aid he, 
the strange gods which are among you, 
and incline your ''■ heart unto the Lord God 
of Israel. 

24 And the "people said unto Joshua, 



« Ruth 1:15. Ifi; 1 Kings, 18: 21 ; .Jolin 6: R7. h E7.ck. SO : 39. 
c Ps.1. 101:2; 119: 106. a Psa. 116 : 16; Luke 1 : 74. 7'.. e .Mat. 
6:24. f Lev. 19: -2; I Sam. 6:20: Isit. 6:3. EEx.20:r>. h Ex. 
34:7. i lChron.3R:9; K7.r.l8:-22; laa. W : 1 1 , 1 3. j Ezek, 18:24. 
k Deut. -26 : 17. I Psa. 1 19 : 173. m JiiJg. 10 : 1.i, 16 ; 1 Sam. 7 : 3. 



19. Ye cannot serve the Lord ; they could not 
without renouncing all idols, as Joshua exhorted 
them to do, loving 0-od with supreme affection, and 
obeying his commands ; and for disposition to do 
this, they must depend not on themselves merely, or 
on their own goodness, but on the intluences of his 
Spirit. He u^ill iiot forgive your — sins ; unless 
they should repent of, and forsake them. Therefore 
Joshua urged them to do this. 

26. These words; the engagements into which the 
people had entered to serve the Lord. J3i/ the stiiic- 
tunry ; near the place where the tabernacle stood. 

27. It hath heard; a strong figure of speech, 
expressive of the solemnity of the transaction, and 
of their guilt and danger should they break their 
engagements. 

i3.'. Which Jacob bought; Gen. 33 : 19 ; 50 : 2-3 ; 
E.X. 13:19. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. It is good for all people at times to appear 



The Lord our God will we serve, and his 
voice will we obey. 

25 So Joshua made a covenant with the 
people that day, and set them a statute and 
an ordinance in Shechem. 

26 ^And Joshua wrote these words in 
the book of the lawof God, and took a great 
stone, and set it up p there under an oak, 
that xvas by the sanctuary of the Loud. 

27 And Joshua said unto all the people. 
Behold, this stone shall be a witness unto 
us ; for it hath i heard all the words of the 
Lord which he spake unto us: it "'shall 
be therefore a witness unto you, lest ye 
deny your God. 

28 So Joshua let the people depart, every 
man unto his inheritance. 

29 ^And it came to pass after these 
things, that Joshua the son of Nun, the 
servant of the Lord, died, being a hundred 
and ten years old. 

30 And they buried him in the border 
of his 'inheritance in Timnath-serah, 
which is in mount Ephraim, on the north 
side of the hill of Gaash. 

31 And Israel 'served the Lord all the ■ 
days of Joshvia, and all the days of the 
elders that *overlived Joshua, and which 
had "known all the works of the Lord, 
that he had done for Israel. 

32 1[And the ^bones of Joseph, which 
the children of Israel brought up out of 
Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in a par- 
cel of ground which Jacob "bought of the 
sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for 
a hundred t pieces of silver; and it be- 
came the inheritance of the children of 
Joseph. 

33 And Eleazar the son of Aaron died; 
and they buried him in a hill that pertained 
to Phinchas his son, which was given him 
in mount Ephraim. i 



n ProT. 2:2; Heb. 1 2 : 28. 29. « Deut. 5 : 28, 29. p .Tu Jg. 9:6. 
q Dent. 32 : 1 . r cliap. 22 : 28, 34. • chap. 19 : 50. t Judj;. 2 : 7. 
* Heb. prolonged their dat/s after, u DeuL 11 : 2, 7. v Genesis 
.W:25; Exodus 13: 19; Heb. 11 :22. w Genesis 33 : 19. f Or, 
lambs. 

before G-od, look back on the way through which he 
hath led them, recount his goodness, renew their 
engagements to serve him, and seek that grace 
which tliey need to do it in spirit and in truth. 

2. Aged men m.iy to great advantage give the 
young a history of G-od's dealings with past genera- 
tions, point out the instructions it aifords and the 
duties it inculcates, and e.xhort all to fidelity in his 
service. 

6. Things accomplished by human instrumen- 
tality and the persevering use of appointed means, 
are m the Bible ascribed to God .as really as if no 
instrumentality or means had been employed. 

10. Those measures which men take to injure 
G-od's people and stop the progress of his cause, he 
often overrules for its advancement. 

13. Themerciesby which the friends of God are dis- 
tinguished from his enemies, spring from his unmer- 
ited goodness, and are given not as the fruit of their 
worthiness, but of the abounding riches of his grace. 
311 



THE 

BOOK OF JUDGES. 



CHAPTER I. 

I The acts of Judah and Simeon. 4 Adoni-bezek justly 
requited. 8 Jerusalem taken. 10 Hebron taken. 
1 1 Othniel hath Achsah to wife for taking of Debir. 
16 The Kenites dwell in Judah. 17 Ilormah, Gaza, 
Ashkelon, and Ekron taken. 21 The acts of Benja- 
min. 2*2 Of the hou.«e of Jo.seph, wlio take Beth-el. 
30 OfZebulun. 31 Of Aslier. 33 OfNaphtali. 34 
Of Dan. 

IVrOW after the "death of Joshua it came 
-LN to pass, that the children of ''Israel 
asked the Lord, saying, Who shall go up 
for us against the Canaanites first, to tight 
against them? 

2 AndtheLoRDsaid,'' Judah shall go up : 
behold, I have delivered the land into his 
hand. 

3 And Judah said unto Simeon his broth- 
er. Come up with me into my lot, that we 
may fight against the Canaanites ; and I 
likewise will go with ''theo into thy lot. 
So Simeon went with him. 

4 And Judah w^ent up; and the Lord 
delivered the Canaanites and the Periz- 
zites into their hand: and they slew of 
them in "Bezek ten thousand men. 

5 And they found Adoni-bezek in Bezek: 
and they fought against him, and they slew 
the Canaanites and the Pcrizzitcs. 

6 But Adoni-bezek ficd ; and they pur- 
sued after him, and caught him, and cut 
off his thumbs and his great toes. 



« .losli. 24 : 29. b chap. -20 : 18 : Num. 27 : 21. c Gen. -49 : 8, 9. 
i verse 17. e 1 Sam. 11:8. * Heli. Hit thumht of their handt 
and of their feet. ^ Or, gleaned. fLev.24:19; ISam.lB:*); 

14. Peculiar mercies lay men under peculiar ob- 
ligations to put away all .sin, and to perfect holiness 
in the fear and love of God. 

!•'). True religion is a matter of choice with all 
who heartily embrace it, and no man ever does or 
can serve G-od, in spirit and in truth, witiiout choos- 
ing to do so. Of course ministers siiould present to 
men the motives which are best suited to lead them 
to do this, and to their preaching should add the 
influence of their example. 

19. As Jehovah is holy, it is impossible accept- 
ably to serve him without becoming holy; and as 
the cause of holiness in men is the influence of the 
Holy Spirit, all should feel their need of this, and 
sincerely, heartily seek it. 

21. Wherever there is a willing mind men can 
truly serve God, and for Christ's sake be accepted in 
doing it; and as a willing mind is the fruit of the Spir- 
it, all who possess it should give to him the glory. 

23. It is the duty of men to incline their hearts 
to serve the Lord. They should avoid those things 
which tend to hinder them, and do the things which 
tend to aid them in this. 

24. Persons may, and it is right that they should, 
determine, resolve, and engage to serve the Lord ; 
and they may freely and heartily trust in him for 
what they need rightly to do this, and to be accepted 
in it. 

312 



7 And Adoni-bezek said. Three- aciuS: 
score and ten king,s, having *their thumbs 
and their great toes cut off, tgathered their 
meat under my table : as I "^have done, so 
God hath requited me. And they brought 
him to Jerusalem, and there he died. 

8 Now the children of Judah had ^ fought 
against Jerusalem, and had taken it, and 
smitten it with the edge of the sword, and 
set the city on fire. 

9 T[And ''afterward the children of Ju- 
dah went down to fight against the Canaan- 
ites, that dwelt in the mountain, and in the 
south, and in the t valley. 

10 And Judah went against the Canaan- 
ites that dwelt in ' Hebron : now the name 
of Hebron before was Kirjath-arba : and 
they slew Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Tal- 
mai. 

1 1 And from thence he went against the 
inhabitants of Debir : and the name of De- 
bir before was Kirjath-sepher : 

12 And J Caleb said. He that smiteth 
Kirjath-sepher, and takcth it, to him will 
I give Achsah my daughter to wife. 

1 3 And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's 
younger brother, took it : and he gave him 
Achsah his daughter to wife. 

14 And it came to pass, when she came 
to him, that she moved him to ask of her 



Isa 


u:« 


1 ; 


M 


It. 7 : 1 , 2 ; 


.U 


nea 2 : 


:t. 


e Jo 


ah. IS 


K). 


h 


Josh. 


11 


21. 


t 


Or 


tow count 


■». 


i Josh 


1.5 


Ki. 


Josh 


15 


15, 


etc. 



27. It is so perfectly reasonable that all to whom 
Jehovah is known should love and obey him, and 
they are under such strong and indispensable obli- 
gations immediately to do this, that if they do not, 
all their mercies and every thing around and within 
them will testify to their ingratitude, baseness, and 
guilt. 

31. Aged men and men of influence, especially 
rulers, miigistrates, and all in authority, are under 
peculiar obligations to serve God, and to set holy 
examples. If they do, many others will be likely 
to follow them and obtain eternal life. But if they 
do not, they will be instrumental in bringing de- 
struction not only on themselves, but on multitudes 
of others. 

33. Rulers and ministers of religion, as well as 
other men, will. soon die, but their influence for good 
or evil will live and go down to the end of time, and 
onward to eternity. 

CHAPTER L 
4. Bezek ; a place in the territory of Judah. 
.^. Ailoni-hezek ; the lord or king of Bezek. 
7. Threescore and ten ; seventy. 

9. The south ; the south part of Canaan. 

10. Ilchroii ; a city south of Jerusalem. Gen. 
13: 18; .Tosh. 1.5: 13. 

11. Belli r; Jo.sh. 13:15. 



The conquests of 



JUDGES I. 



several tribes. 



B.c'S' father a field : and she lighted from 
off her ass ; and Caleb said unto her, What 
wilt thou ] 

15 And she said unto him, Give me a 
blessing : * for thou hast given me a south 
land : give me also springs of water. And 
Caleb gave her the upper springs and the 
nether springs. 

16 ^And the children of the ''Ivenite, 
Moses' father-in-law, went up out of the 
city'^ of palm-trees with the children of 
Judah into the wilderness of Judah, which 
lleth in the south of ''Arad; and "they 
went and dwelt among the people. 

17 And "^ Judah went with Simeon his 
brother, and they slew the Canaanites that 
inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed 
it. And the name of the city was called 
Hormah.s 

18 Also Judah took '' Gaza with the coast 
thereof, and Ashkelon with the coast there- 
of, and Ekron with the coast thereof. 

19 And the 'Lord was with Judah; and 
he *drave out the inhabitants of the moun- 
tain ; but could not drive out the inhabi- 
tants of the valley, because they had 
chariots^ of iron. 

20 And they gave ^ Hebron unto Caleb, 
as Moses ' said : and he expelled thence 
the three sons of Anak. 

21 And the children of ""Benjamin did 
not drive out the Jebusites that inhabited 
Jerusalem; but the Jebusites dwell with 
the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem 
unto this day. 

22 T[ And tlie house of Joseph, they also 
went up against Beth-el : and the " Lord 
urns with them. 

23 And the house of Joseph sent to "de- 
scry Beth-el : now the name of the city 
before icas p Luz : 

24 And the spies saw a man come forth 
out of the city, and they said unto him, 
Show us, we pray thee, the entrance into 
the city, and we iwill show thee mercy. 

25 And when he showed them the en- 



« Gen. 33 : 1 1 ; 1 Peter, 3:9. b iliap. 4:11,17; I Cliron. 2 : ."is, 
rDeut. 34:3. d Num. 21:1. e Num. 10 : 29-32 ; ISam. l.'i:fi. 
fver.3. eNum.21:3. h Josli.ll :23. i ver.2 ; 2Kinj9, l.S:7; Psa. 
fi0:l2i Eccl.9:ll. * Or, possessed the mountain, j Kx. H:7.etr.; 
Jo8h.l7:lB; Psa.46:9. kjosli. 14:9-14. 1 Num. 14:24; Peut. 1 : 36. 



15. A south land; Josh. 15: 16-19. 

16. The Kenite; Jethro. Exod. 3:1; Num. 
10:29-32. Arad ; a city on tlie south border of 
Canaan. Num. 21 : 1. 

17. Zephatli,; a place near the south part of 
Judah. Ilormah ; utter destruction. 

IS. Gaza — Ashkelon — and Ekron; cities of 
the Philistines. 

19. Coiilil not; because, terrified by the char- 
iots, they did not trust in God and u.se the proper 
means. 

21. Jerusalem ; this city was on tlie border 
between Judah 'and Benjamin, and both had an 
interest in it. Ver. 8; Josh. 15:63. 

2? The house of Joseph ; the tribe of Ephraim. 



trance into the city, they smote the city 
with the edge of the sword ; but they let 
go the man and all his family. 

26 And the man went into the land of 
the ■'Hittites, and built a city, and called 
the name thereof Luz : which is the name 
thereof vuito this day. 

27 TI Neither did "Manasseh drive out 
the inhabitants of Beth-shean and her 
towns, nor Taanach and her towns, nor 
the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, nor 
the inhabitants of Ibleam and her towns, 
nor the inhabitants of Megiddo and her 
towns : but the Canaanites would 'dwell 
in that land. 

28 And it came to pass, when Lsrael was 
strong, that they put the Canaanites to trib- 
ute, and did not utterly drive them out. 

29 If Neither did Ephraim drive out the 
Canaanites that dwelt in "Gezer; but the 
Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them. 

30 11 Neither did Zebulun drive out the 
inhabitants of Kitron, nor the inhabitants 
of "Nahalol; but tlie Canaanites dwelt 
among them, and became tributaries. 

31 T[ Neither did "^Asher drive out the 
inhabitants of Accho, nor the inhabitants 
of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor 
of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob : 

32 But the Asherites dwelt among the 
Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land : 
for they " did not drive them out. 

33 1[ Neither did ^ Naphtali drive out the 
inhabitants of Beth-shemesh, nor the in- 
habitants of Bcth-anath ; but he dwelt 
among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of 
the land : nevertheless, the inhabitants of 
Beth-shemesh and of Beth-anath became 
tributaries^ unto them. 

34 And the Amorites forced the children 
of Dan into the mountain : for they would 
not suffer them to come down to the valley ; 

35 But the Amorites would dwell in 
mount Hcres in *Ajalon, and in Shaalbim : 
yet the hand of the house of Joseph tprc- 
vailed, so that they became tributaries. 



m .Tos 


I.IS 


:63; 18 


2i?. 


D ver. 19; Gen 


49: 


24. « 


.Tosh. 7: 2. 




28 


U 


q 


Josh. 2 


12 


1 Samuel, 30: 


.S. 


1- 2K 


URS, 7 : B. 




17 


11 


-13. 


t Horn 


7 ; 


n. VL Josl.. 16 


10 


I Ki 


ngs, 9:lfi. 




19 


15 




.loiih. 19:24-30. x Psa. 


lOfi 


3r.. 


y .To.^h. IS 


: 32-39 


' ""• 


30; 


Psa. 18 


44. 


• Joali. 10:12 


; H 


:42. 


t Heb. W7rt 


heavy 



23. Descry ; examine and ascertain the state 
of the city. Beth-el ; a place north of Jerusalem. 
Gen. 2S : 19. 

27. Beth-shean ; a place near the east end of 
the valley of Jezreel. Taanach : west of Beth- 
shean. Dor ; a town on the Mediterranean, north 
of Cffisarea. Megiddo; near the river Kislion. 

29. Gezer ; a town in the tribe of Ephraim. 
north-west of Jerusalem. 

29—33. Towns within the bounds of the tribes, in 
connection with whose names they are mentioned. 

35. Mount He res ; the mounlainous regions 
about Dor. Ajalon ; a place between Jerusalem 
and Ekron. Ver. IS. The house of Jo.teph ; his 
descendants. 

313 



The Israelites are rebuked. 



JUDGES II. 



They fall into idolatry. 



36 And the coast of the Amorites was 
from *the going up to Akrabbim, from the 
rock, and upward. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 An angel rebuketh the people at Bochim. 6 The 
wickedness of the new generation after Joshua. 14 
God's anger and pity towards tliem. 20 The Canaan- 
itcs are left to prove Israel. 

A ND -an tangel of the Lord, came up 
J\. from Gilgal to * Bochim, and said, I 
made you to go up out of Egypt, and have 
brought you unto the land which I sware 
unto your fathers ; and I ""said, I will nev- 
er break my covenant with you; 

2 And '^ ye shall make no league with the 
inhabitants of this land; ye shall "* throw 
down their altars : but ye have not •■ obey- 
ed my voice; why have ye done this? 

3 Wherefore I also said, I will not drive 
them out from before you ; but they shall 
be as 'thorns in your sides, and tlieir ^gods 
shall be a ''snare unto you. 

4 And it came to pass, when the angel 
of the Loud spake these words unto all 
the children of Israel, that the people lift- 
ed up their voice, and wept. 

5 And they called the name of that 
place t Bochim : and they sacrificed there 
unto the Loud. 

6 11 And when 'Joshua had let the peo- 
ple go, the children of Israel went every 
man unto his inheritance to possess the 
land. 

7 And the people served the Lord all the 
days of Joshua, and all the days of the 
elders that ^ outlived Joshua, who had seen 

* Or. Maa'.eh. Akrabbim. Numliprs M : 4 ; Joshua l.i: S. f Or, 
meitenger. • ver. S. b G«n. 17:7; Psalm 89: 34. c Dent. 7: 2. 
aDeut.l-2:3. «verse20; P.s.ilm 1 06 : 34-36. f Joshua -23 : 13. 
K rhnp. 3:6. 1> Exodus 2;? : 33 : Deut. 7:16. t That is. weepers. 
i Joshua 24:28, etc. § Heh. prolonged days after. \\ Timnath- 



36. Akrabbim ; a hilly region on the southern 
bonier of Canaan. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. However great m.ay have been their past suc- 
cesses, the people of (iod should not rest till fully 
triumphant over all their foes. 

3. The union of all classes of pious men in doing 
good is greatly promotive of success. 

G. Pride and cruelty are forerunners of disaster ; 
and the peculiar sins of men may often be read in 
their punishment. 

7. A true conviction of the evil of sin will lead 
all who suffer to feel that their punishment is 
just. 

I'l. A wise and affectionate wife wi.shes the tem- 
poral prosperity as well as the eternal good of her 
husband, and will use all suitable means to promote 
it. 

1.5. A wise and affectionate father will take great 
pleasure in complying, as far as may be consistent, 
with the requests of his children. 

19. Viewing difficulties with an eye of sense only, 
men often despond, when, should they use proper 
means in dependence on God, he would render them 
successful. 

21. Love of ease, and aversion to great and self- 
denying efforts, often keep men from receiving the 
variety and fulness of good which they might ot'ier- 
314 



all the great works of the Lord, b.c.h1 
that he did for Israel. 

8 And Joshua the son of Nun, the ser- 
vant of the Lord, died, being a hundred 
and ten years old. 

9 And they buried him in the border of 
his inheritance in UTimnath-hercs, in the 
mount of Ephraim, on the north side of 
the hill Gaash. 

10 And also all that generation were 
gathered unto their fathers : and there 
arose another generation after them, which 
knewJ not the Lord, nor yet the works 
which he had done for Israel. 

1 1 1[ And the children of Israel did evil 
in the sight of the Lord, and served Baa- 
lim : 

12 And they ''forsook the Lord God of 
their fathers, which brought them out of 
the land of Egypt, and followed other gods, 
of the gods of the people that rvere round 
about them, and 'bowed themselves unto 
them, and provoked the Lord to anger. 

13 And they forsook the Lord, and 
served Baal and Ashtaroth. 

14 1[And the "'anger of the Lord was hot 
against Israel, and he "delivered them into 
the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, 
and he "sold them into the hands of their 
enemies round about, so that they could 
not any longer stand before their enemies. 

15 Whithersoever Pthey went out, the 
hand of the Lord was against them for 
evil, as the Lord had said, and as the 
Loud had sworn unto them : and they 
were greatlv distressed. 



serah. Joshua 19: 5(1; 24:30. j Ex. .'):2; 1 Chron. 2,S : ^1 : Psa. 
92:5,6; Jer. 9:3; 22:16; Gal. 4:8; 2 Thess. 1 : 8 ; Titus 1 : 16. 
kDeut.31:16. 1 Deut. 5 : 9. m chapter 3 : 7, 8; 10:7; Psahn 
106:40-42. n 2Kings, 17: 20. o chap.4: 2; P8a.44: 12; Isa..i0: 1. 
p Lev. 26:17; Deut. 28:16. 



wise obtain, and leave them to suffer much evil 
which they might otherwise avoid. 

2.5. Assisting the people of God in doing his will, 
maybe the means of delivering us from many trials 
and bringing on us great blessings. 

34. When men neglect their duty, they may ex- 
pect to meet with trouble ; and if they are not led 
to repent.Tnce and reformation, their troubles will 
never end. 

CHAPTER 11. 

1. Angel of til eJjord ; supposed to be the same 
who appeared to Joshua, Josh. .') : 13. liochini ; 
meaning the weepers, or place of weeping. Ver. •'J. 

2. Ye have not obeyed ; they h:ul not done it 
fully, or to the extent which he commanded. 

3. / will itot drive them out ; not to the extent 
he would have done, had they obeyed him. 

9. Timiiath-he.res ; called Timnath-serah, Josh. 
24:30. ^ 

10. Knen' not the Lord ; they had not seen his 
wonders in Egypt, and had not that knowledge of 
him which led them to love and obey him. 

11. Baalim; a general name for idol-gods. 
Ver. 12. 

13. Ashtaroth ; a general name for idol-god- 
dessos. 

14. Sold; delivered. 



God is angry with Israel. 



B. C. 1406. 

lip * judges, which *delivered ''them out of 
the hand of those that spoiled them. 

1 7 And yet they would not hearken unto 
their judges, but they went a "^whoring 
after other gods, and bowed themselves 
unto them : they turned quickly out of the 
way which their fathers walked in, obey- 
ing the commandments of the Lord; but 
they did not so. 

18 And when the Lord raised them up 
judges, ^ then the Lord was with the judge, 
and delivered them outof the hand of their 
enemies all the days of the judge : for it 
repented " the Lord because of their groan- 
ings by reason of them that oppressed 
them and vexed them. 

1 9 And it came to pass, •'when the judge 
was dead, that they returned, and t cor- 
rupted themselves more than their fathers, 
in following other gods to serve them, and 
to bow down unto them ; they + ceased not 
from their own doings, nor from their stub- 
born way. 

20 ^ And the anger of the Lord was hot 
against Lsrael ; and he said, s Because that 
this people hath transgressed my cove- 
nant which I commanded their fathers, 
and have not hearkened unto my voice ; 

21 T also will not henceforth drive out 
any from before them of the nations which 
Joshua left when he died : 

22 That through them I may •> prove Is- 
rael, whether they will keep the way of 
the Lord to walk therein, as their fathers 
did keep it, or not. 

23 Therefore the Lord Heft those na- 
tions, without driving them out hastily ; 
neither delivered he them into the hand 
of Joshua. 



JUDGES in. Nations left to prove them. 

CHAPTER III. 

1 The nations ■which were left to prove Israel. 6 By 
communion with them they commit idolatry. 8 0th- 
niel delivereth them from Cliushan-rishathairn ; 12 
Ehud from Eglon ; 31 Shamgar from the Philistines. 

lyrOW these are the nations which the 
J-N Lord left, to prove Israel by them, 
even as many of Israel as had not known 
all the wars of Canaan ; 

2 Only that the generations of the chil- 
dren of Israel might know to teach them 
war, at the least such as before knew noth- 
ing thereof; 

3 Namely, five 'lords of the Philistines, 
and all the Canaanites, and the Zidonians, 
and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Leb- 
anon, from mount Baal-hermon unto the 
entering in of Hamath. 

4 And they were to prove Israel by them, 
to know whether they would hearken unto 
the commandments of the Lord, which he 
commanded their fathers by the hand of 
Moses. 

5 ^And the children of Israel dwelt 
among the Canaanites, Hittites, and Am- 
orites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and 
Jebusites : 

6 And they J took their daughters to be 
their wives, and gave their daughters to 
their sons, and served their gods. 

7 And the children of Israel did evil in 
the sight of the Lord, and forgat the Lord 
their God, and served Baalim and the 
groves. 

8 1[ Therefore the anger of the Lord 
was hot against Israel, and he sold them 
into the hand of ''Chushan-rishathaim king 
of II Mesopotamia: and the children of 
Israel served Chushan-rishathaim eight 
years. 

9 And when the children of ' Israel cried 



• Acts 13: JO. *Heb. tavcd. b Psa. lOfi : 4')-15. c Ex.34 : 15, 16. 
<1 .losh. 1 : S. e Gen. 6:6; Beut. 32 : 36 : Hosea 11 : 8. f chap. 
4:1; 8 : 33. f Heb. wtre corrupt. J Heb. ttt nothing fall of. 



16. J ledges ; rulers and deliverers. 

18. It repented the Lord ; the meaning is, that 
he changed his course of conduct towards the Isra- 
elites, and instead of keeping them longer in bond- 
age, delivered them. 

23. Therefore ; on account of the sins of the 
people. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The rich and lasting blessings which God 
promises to the obedient, men often forfeit by their 
sins. 

5. Sin is the cause of our sorrows, and no tears 
will remove tliem, unless we forsake it. 

7. The pious instruction, example, and influence 
of the aged, are of great service to the young, and 
often keep them from sins that would cause their 
ruin. 

10. Children, when deprived of thepious influence 
of parents, often become openly vicious ; and nothing 
but the grace of God is a safeguard against aban- 
donment in wickedness. 

14. The woes which sin occasions in this life, are 
a warning to men not to continue in it, lest it bring 
upon them woes which will be eternal. 



g .Tosli 


23: 


6. 


h 


I'sal 


nfifi 


10. 


'l 


Heb, ! 


uffcrtd. 


i .Tn 


Ii. 13:.?. 


i Dent. 7 : 3 


4. 


k 


Hah. 


3:7. 


II 


Hf 


b. Ara 


n-nahara 


im. 


1 1 Sam. 


1-2: 10; 


Neb 


y 


27 


Ksa 


107 


13, 


19. 











16. The blessings which God bestows upon men 
in this world, show that he desires that they should 
repent of their sins, and thus be prepared for endless 
blessings in the world to come. 

19. If men are not led by the mercies of the Lord 
to repent.ance, they will become more hardened in 
sin, and ripen for aggravated ruin. 

22. All tlie dealings of God with men in this 
worhl have a tendency to reveal their true charac- 
ter, show whether they will serve him or not, and 
prepare them for the retributions of eternity. 

CHAPTER III. 
3. The Canaanites; those that lived about 
Zidon. Baal-hermon ; a region of country near 
the sources of the Jordan. Entering in of Ha- 
math ; a valley on the north border of Canaan. 

5. Among the Canaanites ; those of them that 
were not destroyed. 

6. Gods; idols. 

7. The groves ; the idols that were worshipped 
in them. 

8. Mesopotamia ; the country between the Eu- 
phrates and the Tigris. 

315 



Othniel delivers Israel. 



JUDGES III. 



Ehud slayeih Eglon. 



unto the Lord, the Lord raised up a •de- 
liverer to the children of Israel, who de- 
livered them, ei'oi * Othniel the son of Ke- 
naz, Caleb's younger brother. 

10 And the ''Spirit of the Lord tcame 
upon him, and he judged Israel, and went 
out to war: and the Lord delivered Chu- 
shan-rishathaim king of + Mesopotamia 
into his hand; and his hand prevailed 
against Chushan-rishathaim. 

1 1 And the land had rest forty years : 
and Othniel the son of Kenaz died. 

12 H And the children of Israel did evil 
again in the sight of the Lord: and the 
Lord strengthened Eglon the king of Moab 
against Israel, because they had done evil 
in the sight of the Lord. 

13 And he gathered unto him the chil- 
dren of iVmmon and Amalek, and went 
and smote Israel, and possessed the "^city 
of palm-trees. 

1 4 So the children of Israel ''served Eglon 
the king of Moab eighteen years. 

15 But when the children of Israel cried 
unto the Lord, the Lord raised them up 
a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera, * a Ben- 
jamite, a man H left-handed : and by him 
the children of Israel sent a present unto 
Eglon the king of Moab. 

16 But Ehud made him a dagger which 
had two edges, of a cubit length ; and he 
did gird it under his raiment upon his 
right thigh. 

17 And he brought the present unto Eg- 
lon king of Moab : and Eglon was a very 
fat" man. 

18 And when he had made an end to 
offer the present, he sent away the people 
that bare the present. 

19 But he himself turned again from the 
quarries* that hcere by Gilgal, and said, 
I have a secret errand unto thee, king: 
who said, Keep silence. And all that 
stood by him went out from him. 

20 And Ehud came unto him; and he 
was sitting in t a summer-parlor, which 
he had for himself alone : and Ehud said. 



• H.-b. tav 


ior. 


■ cli»li. I : 13. 


b 


cliiip. 6::» 


11:. '9. t Hrb. 


Ulll. t »f\ 


. Ar« 


m. c rhnp. 1 : 


m. 


■1 Deut. •. 


8 : 4«. \ Or, the 


ton o/Gtmin 


•• 1 


Hcb. ll,ut of 1, 


is r 


ight hand. 


« P»a. 73:7, 19. 


" Or, niai'tn 


imaijet. f JoitU. 4 : 


'20. 


\ Heh. a 


pavtor of cooling. 


Am9»:i:l.i. 


*o 


, it came out at 


thtfundamen 


. \ Or, tloeCh hit 



10. Judged; governed. 

13. T/ie cily of palm-trees ; Jericho, or the 
re^^ion around it. 

2.J. Were ashamed ; ashamed to wait any longer, 
lest they should appear to neglect their duty. 

27. Jilew a trumpet ; as a signal of war. 
•- 28. Fords ; places where they crossed the river. 

30. Fourscore ; eighty. 

31. Oxgoad ; a staff si.x or eight feet long, with 
a sharp point of iron on one end for pricking the 
oxen, and a kind of spade on the other for cleaning 
the plough. 

INSTRUCTION.S. 

5-7. Intimate connections with the wicked in- 
316 



I have a message from God unto b.c!^ 
thee. And he arose out oi his seat. 

21 And Ehud put forth his left hand, 
and took the dagger from his right thigli, 
and thrust it into his belly : 

22 And the haft also went in after the 
blade ; and the fat closed upon the blade, 
so that he could not draw the dagger out 
of his belly; and ?the dirt came out. 

23 Then FLliud went forth through the 
porch, and shut the doors of the parlor 
upon him, and locked them. 

24 When he was gone out, his servants 
came; and when they saw that, behold, 
the doors of the parlor were locked, they 
said. Surely he * covereth his feet in his 
summer-chamber. 

25 And they tarried till they were 
ashamed : and behold, he opened not the 
doors of the parlor; therefore they took 
a key, and opened them : and behold, their 
lord was fallen down dead on the earth. 

26 And Ehud escaped while they tar- 
ried, and passed beyond the ^ quarries, and 
escaped unto Seirath. 

27 And it came to pass, when he was 
come, that he ''blew a trumpet in the 
mountain' of Ephraim, and the children 
of Israel went down with him from the 
mount, and he before them. 

28 And he said unto them, Follow after 
me: for the Lord hath J delivered your 
enemies the Moabites into your hand. 
And they went down after him, and took 
the fords of Jordan toward Moab, and 
suffered not a man to pass over. 

29 And they slew of ]\Ioab at that time 
about ten thousand men, all H lusty, and 
all men of valor; and there escaped not 
a man. 

30 So Moab was subdued that day under 
the hand of Israel. And the land had 
rest fourscore years. 

31 ^[And after him was ■'Shamgar the 
son of Anath, which slew of the Philis- 
tines six hundred men with 'an oxgoad: 
and he also delivered ""Israel. 



easement. 1 Sam. 2-1 : 3. e ver. 19. h rli.ip. 6: 34 : lSam.l3:3. 
i .Iii.sli. 17:15. j chiip. 7:!>, 1.x || Heli./<if. Fsa. 17: 10. k rimp. 
.1:6. 1 clmp. fi : « : 1 .'> : 1 5 ; 1 Samuel, 1 7 : 47. n> So part is calleil 
Israel, rliap. 4:1,3, etc. It seems to concern only the country 
next to tlie I'hiliatines. 



crease the temptation to adopt their sentiments and 
to imit.'ite their example. Psalm 1:1; Proverbs 
1:10-10; ICor. .'iiO-ll. 

S. The calamities which men suffer are expres- 
sionsof God's displeasure against sin; and when ihey 
duly humble themselves before liim, and seek his 
pardoning mercy, their trials while continued will 
be overruled for good, and in due time will be re- 
moved. 

29. Though the wicked may for a time be suc- 
cessful, and even be used as instruments of correct- 
ing .and punishing the people of God, yet if they 
continue in their sins, they will come to a dismal end. 
Isa. 10:5-19. 



They are delivered from Jabin. 



JUDGES IV. 



Siscra slain by Jael. 



S.c"S CHAPTER IV. 

1 Deborah and Barak deliver Tsrael from Jabin and 
Sisera. IS Jael killeth Sisera. 

AND the children of Israel * again did 
evil in the sight of the Lord, when 
Ehud was dead. 

2 And the Lord ^.sold them into the hand 
of Jabin king of Canaan, that reigned in 
Hazor;'^ the captain of whose host icas 
Siscra, which dwelt in ''Harosheth of the 
Gentiles. 

3 And the children of Israel cried unto 
the Lord: for he had nine hundred ^char- 
iots of iron ; and twenty years he mightily 
oppressed the children of Israel. 

4 *i\ And Deborah, a prophetess, the wife 
of Lapidoth, she judged Israel at that time. 

5 And she dwelt under the palm-tree of 
Deborah,'^ between Ramah and Beth-el in 
mount Ephraim : and the children of Is- 
rael came up to her for judgment. 

6 And she sent and called Barak the son 
of Abinoam out of Kedesh-naphtali, and 
said unto him, Hath not the Lord God of 
Israel commanded, saying, Go and dra'^ 
toward mount Tabor, and take with thee 
ten thousand men of the children of Naph- 
tali and of the children of Zebulun? 

7 And ? I will draw unto thee, to the river 
Kishon,'' Slserathe captainof Jabin's army, 
with his chariots and his multitude; and 
I will deliver him into thy hand. 

8 And Barak said unto her. If thou wilt 
go with me, then I will go: but if thou 
wilt not go with me, then I will not go. 

9 And she said, I will surely go with 
thee: notwithstanding the journey that 
thou takest shall not be for thine honor; 
for the Lord shall sell Sisera into the hand 
of a 'woman. And Deborah arose, and 
went with Barak to Kedesh. 

10 T[ And J Barak called Zebulun and 
Naphtali to Kedesh ; and he went up with 
ten thousand men at his feet: and Debo- 
rah went up with him. 

11 Now Ilebcr the ''Kenite, which was 
of the children of 'Ilobab the father-in- 
law of Moses, had severed himself from 



« ■■liTi|).2:19. b I Snm. li.-fl; Tsf 
North Isriel. '- .losh. 1 1 : 1 . 10. d v 
:■">:«. S Ex U:i. b rhiip. .S.-ai 
k chap. 1:16. ' Num. 10:2!>. » 



I. W : 9. It seems to concern only 

er. m, 1/;. erhap. I: 19. f Gen. 

. i ver. 18-21. j chap, .i : IS. 

Zaanannim. Josh. 19:33, ST. 



CHAPTER TV. 
2. Ilazor — llarosheth ; cities in the north part 
of Canaan, in and around which many of the re- 
inaininn Canaanites lived. Josh, 11 : 1-1 1, 

5. Mount Eplirai m; thehillcoiintryof Kphraim, 

6. KfilesJi-napJi.tali ; so called to di3tin<^uish it 
from two other cities called Kedesh, one in Issachar 
and one in Judnh, Moinit. Tahor ; on the north- 
east border of tlie plain of Jezreel. 

7. The rlrer Kishun ; which rises near mount 
Tahor, runs throu<;h the plain of Jezreel, and empties 
into the Mediterranean at the bay of Acre. 

9. Sell Sisera; ver. 21, 

21 



the Kenitcs, and pitched his tent unto the 
plain of *Zaanaim, which is by Kedesh. 

12 And they showed SLsera that Barak the 
son of Abinoam was gone up to mount Tabor. 

1 3 And Sisera t gathered together all his 
chariots, even nine hundred chariots ol 
iron, and all the people that ifcre with him. 
from Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the 
river of Kishon, 

14 And Deborah said unto Barak, lUp: 
for this is the day in which the Lord hath 
delivered Sisera into thy hand : '"is not the 
Lord gone out before thee? So Barak 
went down from mount Tabor, and ten 
thousand men after him, 

15 And the Lord "discomfited Sisera, 
and all his chariots, and all his host, with 
the edge of the sword before "Barak; so 
that Sisera lighted down off his chariot, 
and fled away^ on his feet. 

1 Vi But Barak pursued after the chariots, 
and after the host, unto Harosheth of the 
Gentiles: and all the host of Si.sera fell 
upon the edge of the sword; and p there 
was not t a man left. 

17 Howbeit Sisera fled away on his feet 
to the tent of Jael the wife of Heber the 
Kenite : for there was peace between Jabin 
the king of Hazor and the house of Heber 
the Kenite. 

18 ^And 1 Jael went out to meetSisern, 
and said unto him. Turn in, my lord, turn 
in to me; fear not. And when he had 
turned in unto her into the tent, she cov- 
ered him with a ^mantle. 

19 And he said luito her, Give me, I 
pray thee, a little water to drink ; for I am 
thirsty. And she opened a bottle of 'milk, 
and gave him drink, and covered him. 

20 Again he said unto her, Stand in the 
door of the tent, and it shall be, when any 
man doth come and inquire of thee, and 
say. Is there any man here? that thou 
shall say, No, 

21 Then Jael Heber's wife took a nail 
of the tent, and Mook a hammer in her 
hand, and went softly unto him.andsmoti- 
the nail into his 'temples, and fastened it 



t Ueh. ffatkered ffi/ ay 


or 


proclfimatio 


n. m 


Dent- 9:3 


■JSam f,:-U 


Psa. ii« 


:7,8: U.x. 


i2: 


■i. 


n P 


<a.a;!t 


>4 10 


,Iosh 


10 


in. 


o Hel. 


M : 32. 


p l.ia. 43 : 


17, 


t 


Heh. 


unto ti 


nr. 


q 2K. 




fitio 


5 Or 


ruy, or 


blanket. • 


ch 


>P 


5:2.T 


Ki. II 


Heb 


. put. 


• Psa,3 


7. 



10. Called Zebuhui and Naphtali ; the men 
of war from those tribes, 

11, Had secc red himself ; the Kenites lived in 
the south part of the country, but Heber hail left them 
and removed to the north. Chap, 1 : IG ; Num, 21 : 1 . 

IG, Upon ; by. 

21. Nailof the tent ; a lar;^e spike or pin, whicli 
was driven into the ground to fasten the cords of 
a tent. 

IXSTRUCTIOXS. 
1, When restraint is removed, notwithstanding 
all divine favors, men will continue in sin, and often 
be guilty of the grossest transgressions, 
317 



The triumphal song 



JUDGES V. 



of Deborah and Barak. 



into the ground : for he was fast asleep 
and weary. So he died. 

22 And behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, 
,lael came out to meet him, and said unto 
him, Come, and 1 will show thee the man 
whom thou seekest. And when he came 
into her tent, behold, Sisera lay dead, and 
I lie nail icas in his temples. 

23 So *God subdued on that day Jabin 
ihe king of Canaan before the children of 
l.srael. 

24 And the hand of the children of Is- 
rael *prospered, and prevailed against 
Jabin the king of Canaan, until they had 
destroyed Jabin king of Canaan. 

CHAPTER V. 

The song of Deborah and Barak. 

THEN ''sang Deborah and Barak the 
son of Abinoam on that day, saying, 

2 Praise ye the Lord for the "^avenging 
of Israel, when the people ^willingly 
offered themselves. 

3 Hear,*" ye kings; give ear, ye 
princes ; I, even I, will sing unto the Lord ; 
I will &ix\gpraiseio theLoRD God of Israel. 

4 Lord, ''when thou wcntest out of Seir, 
when thou marchcdst out of the field of 
Edom, the dearth trembled, and the heav- 
ens dropped, tlic clouds also dropped water. 

5 The mountains t melted from ''before 
ilie Lord, even that ' Sinai from before the 
Lord God of Israel. 

6 In the days of JShamgar the son of 



highways' were unoccupied, and the 
travellers + walked through ^by-ways. 

7 The inhabitants o/the villages ceased, 
they ceased in Israel, until that I Deborah 
arose, that I arose a mother in Israel. 

8 They chose "" new gods ; then ivas war 
in the gates: "was there a shield or spear 
seen among forty thousand in Israel ? 

9 My heart is toward the governors of 
Israel, that "offered themselves willingly 
among the people. Bless ye the Lord. 

1 Speak, il ye that p ride on white asses, ye 
that sit in judgment, and walk by the way. 

1 1 They that are delivered horn tVie noise 
of archers in the places of drawing water, 
there shall they i rehearse the *righteous 
acts'" of the Lord, even the righteous acts 
toward the inhabitants of his villages in 
Israel: then shall the people of the Lord 
go down to the gates. 

1 2 Awake, " awake, Deborah : awake, 
awake, utter a song : arise, Barak, and 
lead* thy captivity captive, thou son of 
^binoam. 

13 Then he made him that remaincth 
have dominion over the nobles among the 
people: the Lord "made me have domin- 
ion over the mighty. 

14 Out of Ephraim was there a root of 
them against Amalck; after thee, Benja- 
min, among thy people; out of Machir 
came down governors, and out of Zebulun 
they that t handle the pen of the writer. 



« Psalm 18: 47. ' Heh. going, went and teas hard, b Kxodu6 paths. 1i He\>. crooked wax/s. m Deuteronomy .32 : 17. n 1 Sam. 
15:1 ; Psa. 18, title, o Deut. 32: 43; Psalm 18: 47. (I 2 Chron. 13:19,22. o verse 2. \\ Or, meditate, p chap. 10:4. q Psa. 
17:16. e Psa. 2: 10. f Psa. 68: 7, 8. 6 2 Sam. 22:8; Isaiah I 14.=) : 7. * Ueh. riahteousnttses. r I Sam. 12:7. • Psalm 67 : 8. 
'"4:3; Hab. 3:3, 10. \ livh. flowed, li Psa. 97 : .1. iEx.l9:I8. tPaa.68:18. uf9a.7a:7. i Ke\>. draw with. 
< cliaji. 3 : 31. k chap. 4:17. 1 Lev. 26 : 22. J Heb. walkers of 



3. Oft-repeated iniquities bring upon their perpe- 
trators j^reatly increased calamities. 

7. When men cry unto the Lord in their trouble, 
lie can, and often does, grant them relief; and in 
receiving it they should hear his voice saying. Sin 
MO more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. John 
."1:14. 

9. Want of confidence in God, and of readiness to 
undertake that to which he calls, brings dishonor, 
;ind deprives men of many blessings which they 
might otherwise enjoy. 

13 Men, from pride and the indulgence of wicked 
pnssions, often engage in projects which God designs 
shall be for their ruin, 

1.'). Though men are the means, God is the au- 
thor of success, and to him belongs the glory. 

21. When the enemies of God and the oppressors 
of his people say, Peace and safety, sudden destruc- 
tion may come upon them from which there can be 
no escape. 

23. Things which God in his providence accom- 
plishes through the instrumentality of men, are in 
the Bible ascribed to him as really as if no agency 
but his had been employed ; and they arc also as- 
cribed to men as really as if men alone had per- 
formed them; thus showing that divine ami human 
agency harmoniously cooperate, and that men are 
workers together with God when they obey him 
iind thus work out their salvation, he working in 
them to will and to do of his own good ple.-isure. 
318 



CHAPTER V. 
2. Offered themselves; to fight against their 
oppressors. 

4. Seir — Edom; a country soutii of the Dead 
sea. 

5. Melted; were agitated or shaken. Ex. 19:18. 

6. Shamgar ; chap. 3 : 31. The highways 
were nnocciipied ; on account of the danger of 
travelling. 

7. The villages ceased ; were deserted. 

8. New gods; idols, as objects of vi-orshlp. 
Then was war; as a punishment for their idol- 
atry. A shield or spear ; of these the Israelites 
were very destitute. 

10. White asses ; the kind often used by judges. 

11. 1)1 the places of drawing ivater ; where 
before they were greatly exposed. Go down, to 
the gates ; into and out of their cities in peace and 
safety. 

12. lifad thy captivity captive; lead those 
captive who had been their captors. 

13. Him that remainelh ; tho.se who remained 
in Israel. The nobles; the chief men of the Ca- 
naanites. 

14. Out of Ephraim; the Ephraimites, from 
a region supposed to have been once occupied by 
Amalekites, went forth to the war. Chap. 12: l.j. 
Out of Machir ; from the tribe of Manasseh. The 
pe}i ; or rod used by those who mustered men for 
the army. 



The triumphal song 



JUDGES VI. 



of Deborah and Barak. 



B.'c!'S' 15 And the princes of Issachar 
were with Deborah ; even Issachar, and 
also Barak : he was sent on *foot into the 
valley. tFor the divisions of Reuben 
tliere were great t thoughts of heart. 

16 Why abodest thou among the sheep- 
folds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks? 
For^ the divisions of Reuben there were 
great * searchings of heart. 

17 Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why 
did Dan remain in ships ■? Asher continued 
on the II .sea-shore, and abodein his *breaches. 

18 Zebulun and Naphtali were a people 
that t jeoparded their lives unto ''the death 
in the high places of the field. 

19 The kings came and fought; then 
fought the kings of Canaan in Taanach 
by the waters of Megiddo ; they ''took no 
gain of money. 

20 They fought from ''heaven; the stars 
in their * courses fought against Sisera. 

21 The river of "Kislion swept them away, 
that ancient river, the river Kishon. my 
soul, thou hast "^trodden down strength. 

22 Then were the horse-hoofs broken by 
the means of the 5pi-ancings, the pranc- 
ings of their mighty ones. 

23 Cui-se ye Meroz, said the angel of the 
Lord, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants 
thereof; ^because they came not to the 
help'' of the Lord, to the help of the Lord 
against the mighty. 

24 Blessed above women shall Jael the 
wife of Heber the Kenite be ; blessed shall 
she be above women in the tent. 

25 He 'asked water, and she gave him 



* Heb. his feet, f Or, In. % Htb. iniprestions. \ Or, In. 
aPsalin4:4; 77:6; Lam. 3: 40, 41. \\ Or, port. * Or, creeks, 
f Heh. exposed to reproach, b Rev. li : 11. c Genesis 14 : '2:J. 
il chap. 4: 1.5. f Heb.paths. e chap. 4 : 7; 1 Kings, 18 : 40; Psa. 
8.3:9,10. fP.sa. 44:5. !i Ueh. tramplings, or plungings. 6 Nell. 



15. T/ie valley; of Jezreel. Chap. 4:6, 14. 
Great thoughts ; they thought much about going 
to the war, but they did not go. 

17. Remain ill, ships ; Dan, a seafaring people, 
stayed away from the war to tiike care of their 
merchandise. So with Asher. Breaches; haven.s, 
or harbors. 

19. Taanach ; a place in the plain of Jezreel. 

20. From heaven ; God in various ways assisted 
the Israelites in obtaining the victory. 

21. Strength; strong and mighty ones. 

22. Prancings; their swift running in flight. 

23. Meroz ; its location is not now known. 

24. Above women ; above other women. 
2.5. IS/itter; curdled milk. 

20. Smote off' ; beat, or crushed in. 

28. The lattice ; a blind, of open vi-ood-work. 
In coming ; in coming back, as she expected he 
would, victorious over his foes. 

30. Sped; succeeded in obtaining the victory. 

31. So ; as had Sisera and his host. 

INSiTRUCTIONS. 

2. When delivered from great troubles, or in any 
way specially favored of the Lord, we should with- 
out, delay acknowledge his goodness, and render that 
praise and thanksgiving which are his due. 

4. Present mercies should remind us of those which 
are past, and lead us to praise Jehovah for his goodness. 



milk; she brought forth butter in a lordly 
dish. 

26 She put her hand to the nail, and her 
right hand to the workmen's hammer; 
and llwith the hammer she smote Sisera, 
she smote off his head, when she had 
pierced and stricken through his temples. 

27 At* her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay 
down: at her feet he bowed, he fell: where 
he bowed, there he fell down t dead. 

28 The mother of Sisera looked out at a 
window, and cried through the J lattice. 
Why is his chariot so long in coming? 
why tarry the wheels of his chariots ? 

29 Her wise ladies answered her, yea, 
she returned + answer to herself, 

30 Have they not sped? ''have they not 
divided the prey ; * to every man a damsel 
or two ; to Sisera a prey of divers colors, 
a prey of divers colors of needlework, of 
divers colors of needlework on both sides, 
meet for the necks of them that take the 
spoil? 

31 So let all thine enemies 'perish, 
Lord : but let them that love him be as the 
sun'" when he goeth forth in his ■" might. 
xVnd the land had rest forty years. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 The Israelites for their sin are oppressed by Midian. 
8 A prophet rebuketh them. 11 An angel sendeth 
Gideon for their deliverance. 17 Gideon's present is 
consumed with fire. 25 Gideon destroyeth Baal's 
altar, and offereth a sacrifice upon the altar Jehovah- 
shalom. 26 Joash defendeth his son, and calleth him 
Jerubbaal. 33 Gideon's army. 36 Gideon's signs. 

AND the "children of Israel did evil in 
the sight of the Lord : and the Lord 



3:r,. hi Sam. 18:17. i chap. 4 : 1'.), etc. \l Heb. she hammered. 
* Heb. Between, j Heb. destroyed, j Cant. '2:9. f Heh. he 

words, k Ex. 15 : 9, 10. % Heb. to the head of a ' "— '■ 

92:9. ■niSam.23:4; Psa.37:6; J'r ' ■ 
o chap. 2:19. 



., I Psalm 

.4:18. n Psalm 19 : 5. 



8. If men forsake God and worship idols, or place 
their dependence on creatures to the neglect of the 
Creator, they may expect to be visited with trials, 
and unless they repent and turn to him, to be 
overwhelmed in ruin. 

9. The Lord is the author of the good we receive 
from men as really as of what we receive directly 
from him ; and to him pious and grateful minds 
will give the praise. 

10. The good desire that all, high and low, rich and 
poor, should unite in praising God for his goodness, 
and for his wonderful works to the children of men. 

11. The liberty and power to go in and out at 
pleasure when and where we choose, with none to 
molest or make us afraid, is a great and precious 
privilege, for which we are bound to be specially 
grateful, and which we should earnestly desire may 
soon be enjoyed by all people. 

20. Human and divine agency, in the production 
of events, often cooperate ; and both should be ac- 
knowledged. Phil. 2 : 13. 

30. Worldly minds, which relish no enjoyments 
except those that spring from worldly things, when 
these are gone will be destitute and wretched. 

CHAPTER VL 
1. Midian; the Midianites lived east of the 
south part of Palestine. 

319 



Israel oppressed by Midian. 



JUDGES VI. 



Gideon is called- 



delivered them into the hand of "Midian 
seven years. 

2 And tlie liand of ]\Iidian *prcvailed 
again.st Israel: and because of the Midi- 
anite.s the children of Israel made them 
the ""dens which arc in the mountains, and 
caves, and strong holds. 

3 And so it was, when Israel had sown, 
that the Midianitcs came up, and the 
Amalekltes, and the children of the east, 
even they came up against them; 

4 And they encamped against them, and 
destroyed*^ the increase of the earth, till 
thou come unto (jaza, and left no suste- 
nance for Israel, neither t sheep, nor ox, 
nor ass. 

5 For they came up with their cattle and 
their tents, and tliey came as ''grasshop- 
pers for multitude ; forhoth they and their 
camels were without number: and they 
entered into the land to destroy it. 

6 And Israel was greatly impoverished 
because of the Midianitcs; and tlie chil- 
dren of Israel "^ cried unto the Lord. 

7 1[ And it came to pass, when the chil- 
dren of Israel cried unto the Lord because 
of the Midianitcs, 

8 That the Lord sent + a prophet unto the 
children of Israel, which saicV unto them, 
Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I 
brought you up from Egypt, and brought 
yon forth out of the house of bondage; 

9 And I delivered you out of the hand of 
the F'.gyptians, and out of the hand of all 
that oppressed you, and "^drave them out 
from before you, and gave you their land ; 

10 And I said vinto you, I am the Lord 
your God ; efear not the gods of the Am- 
orites, in whose land yc dwell : but ye 
have not obeyed my voice. 

11 11 And there came an angel of the 
Loud, and sat under an oak which v:as in 
Ophrah, that pertained unio .loash the 
Abi-ezrite: and his son ^ Gideon threshed 
wheat by tlie wine-press, to 'I hide it from 
the IMidianites. 

12 And the ''anuel of the Lord appeared 
unto him. and said unto him, The Lord is 
with thee, thou mighty man of valor. 

13 And Gideon said unto him, O my 

»H.ib.3:7. * H^h.wnittrnni;. b I Sam. n : fi. e Lev. 2li : 1 6 ; 
DeuL «<::«. i Or. goal. ■! rli.ip. 7 : 1> ; .ler. JK : i1. e Hosea 
6 : ir>. J H.-I1. n man a praphel. f I'milin 44 : i, :t. t 2 Kin"a, 
17 : ■■»-.■!». \ Gtdton. Helirewi. 1 1 : f!;. || Hel). caute it to fire. 
k chiip. 1:1 : n. i Gen. 2.'. : iJ. i rsulni 77 : T-fl: 811 : 4il. V Heb. 
n::i:. • llel) mil IhuiltaudK Ihc meantst. Micnli.1:2. 1 1 S;im. 



3. Amahkitrs, and the children of the cast ; 
nei^liborin;^ tribes to tlie MiJiiinites. Gaza ; a 
citv of llie Philistines in tlie south-west part of 
]';ilestine. on the Mediternuu-an. 

r». To di'slroy it ; take away the means of sus- 
tenance. V'er. G. 

10. Vcani'it the gnds; not worshiporserve them. 

11 Aimel of iheliord; this i.s.-inpposed lo have 
been the Angel of the covenant, who liroujflit Israel 
out of Egypt, Jeh6vah-Jesu.s. Ver. 14, IG, "J.']. Oph- 
■ 3-20 



Lord, ' if 1 he Lord be with us, why *b ": la" 
then is all this befallen us? and J where 
he all his miracles which our fathers told 
us of, saying, Did not the Lord bring us 
up from Egypt] but now the Lord hath 
forsaken us, and delivered us into Iho 
hands of the Midianitcs. 

14 And the Lord looked upon him, and 
said, Go in this thy '' might, and thou shall 
save Israel from the hand of the Midian- 
ites : have not I .sent thee? 

15 And he said unto him, my Lord, 
wherevvifli shall I save Israel? behold, 
my* family is poor in INlanasseh, and I am 
the 'least in my father's house. 

16 And the Lord said unto "'him, Surely 
I will be with thee, and "thou shalt smite 
the Midianitcs as one man. 

17 And he said unto liim, If now I have 
found grace in thy sight, then "show me 
a sign that thou talkest with me. 

18 Depart P not hence, I pray thee, until 
I come unto thee, and bring forth my t pres- 
ent, and set it before thee. And he said, 
I will tarry until thou come again. 

19 And Gideon went in, and made ready 
at kid, and unleavened cakes of an ephah 
of flour: the llcsh he put in a basket, and 
he put the broth in a pot, and brought // 
out unto him under the oak, and present- 
ed it. 

20 And the angel of God said unto him. 
Take the tiesh and the unleavened cakes, 
and lay them upon this rock, and poiirout 
the broth. And he did do. 

21 1[ Then the angel of the Lord put 
forth the end of the stalT that u-as in his 
hand, and touched the flesh and the un- 
leavened cakes; land there rose up fire 
out of the rock, and consumed the flesh 
and the unleavened cakes. Then the an- 
gel of the Lord departed out of his sight. 

22 And when Gideon perceived that he 
was an angel of the Lord, Gideon said, 
Alas, Lord God! for "'because I have 
seen an angel of the Lord face to face. 

23 And the Lord said unto him. Peace />f 
unto thee; fear not: Mhou shalt not die. 

24 Then Gideon built an altar there unto 
the Lord, and called it Uehovah-shalom : 



Kx. 3:li 
. Rfi ; 17 



Isaiilli 41 : I'<, Hi. » vpr. :>(;-IO; 2 Kiny-. 
p Genesis 18: :i, &. \Clt,mt4,t 
I Lcv.'li.M; 1 Kings, 18:38; 



*u . rt , I :i;i. nti ; i / , »-,.,. j . i i. v v.tii,r.-.i.T .•<..>,•.. i ...,...,..- 

offering. ± Vifh.akid nf tht gimU. 1 Lev. -1 ; .'4 ; 1 Kings, 18:38; 
■i rliron. 7:1. ' cliiip. 13 : K, 23 : I»;iiiili « :.•>-«. • Gmi. .32 : 3i>. 
\ Tliiit is. The Lord senJ peace. Genesia 2J : 14 ; Kx. 17 : 15; Jcr. 
33:1G; K7.ek. 48:3.">. ___^___ 

rah ; a city in the tribe of Benjamin. By the witie- 
press ; an unusual place for threshing wheat, where 
the Midianites would not be likely to look for it. 

M. honked; looked efficaciously. Luke 22: 61. 

IG. As one man. ; as easily and efTectually as if 
there were but one man. 

17. Show me a sign ; evidence that it is Jelio- 
vah who speaks to me, and that his word will be 
accomplislied. 

21. Shalom; meaning peace. 



He destroyeth Baal's altar. 



JUDGES VI. 



Two sis:ns n-zi'pu him. 



•.c!'S' unto this day it is yet in Ophrah 
of the Abi-ezrites. 

25 TI And it came to pass the same night, 
that the Loud said unto him, Take thy fa- 
ther's youn5bullock,*cven the second bul- 
lock of seven years old, and throw down 
the altar of Baal that thy father hath, and 
cut "down the grove that is by it: 

26 And build an altar unto the Loud thy 
God upon the top of this t rock, in t the or- 
dered place, and take the second bullock, 
and offer a burnt-sacrifice with the wood 
of the grove which thou shalt cut down. 

27 Then Gideon took ten men of his ser- 
vants, and did as the Lord had said unto 
him : and so it was, because he feared his 
fatJier's household, and the men of the 
city, that he could not do it by day, that 
he did it by night. 

28 T[ And when the menof the city arose 
early in the morning, behold, the altar of 
Baal was cast down, and the grove was 
cut down that was by it, and the second 
bullock was offered upon the altar that teas 
built. 

29 And they said one to another. Who 
hath done this thing? And when they 
inquired and asked, they said, Gideon the 
son of Joash hath done this thing. 

30 Then the men of the city said unto 
Joash, Bring out thy son, that he may die : 
because he hath cast down the altar of 
Baal, and because he hath cut down the 
grove that was by it. 

31 And Joash said unto all that stood 
against him, Will ye plead for Baal? will 
ye save him? he that will plead for him, 
let him be put to death whilst it is yet 
morning : if he 6e a god, let him plead for 



* Or, and. a Dent. 7:5. f Hell, tirang place. t Or, an 
erderl!/ manner. % Tlj.it is. Let Baal plead. 1) 1 .Samuel, \i:\\; 
2Sam. 11 : -ILJerubbexheth, Th.it is. Let the thame/ul thingplead; 

31. Joash said; though he seems to have been 
a worshipper of Baal, his view* may have been 
changed by what Gideon had told him. Whilst it 
is yet moniiiig; many suppose the meaning to be, 
If Baal were a god, he who contended or fought 
against him, would have died before moiiiing: and 
the original will bear this construction. 

32. Jernhhaal ; that is. let Baal plead. 

34. Ahi-czer ; the family of his father, and his 
relatives. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Unless the grace of God prevent, men natu- 
rally incline to sin; showing that in them, without 
the grace of God, tliere is no spiritually good thing. 

4. Sin tends to misery, and all the cal.amities 
which men suffer are tokens of God's displeasure 
against it. 

7. The only hope of deliverance from sin and its 
consequences is in the Lord ; and when men feel this, 
and cry unto him, he, for Christ's sake, ol ten appears 
for their help. 

10. When God is about to grant deliverance to 
his people, he first convinces them that sin is the 
cause of their troubles, and leads them to forsake it. 

12. Providence developes human cliaracter. Many 



himself, because one hath cast down his 
altar. 

32 Therefore on that day he called him 
Jerubbaal,* '' saying, Let Baal plead against 
him, because he hath thrown down his 
altar. 

33 ^Then "^all the Midianites and the 
Amalckites and the children of the east 
were gathered together, and went over, 
and pitched in the valley of Jezreel. 

34 But ''the Spirit of the Lord H came 
upon Gideon, and he "^blew a trumpet: 
and Abi-ezer was *gathered after him. 

35 And he sent messengers throughout 
all Manasseh; who also was gathered 
after him: and he sent messengers unto 
Ashcr, and unto Zebulun, and unto Naph- 
tali; and they came up to meet them. 

36 T[ And Gideon said unto God, If thou 
wilt save Israel by my hand, as thou hast 
said, 

37 Behold, ""I will put a fleece of wool in 
the floor; and if the dew be on the fleece 
only, and it he dry upon all the earth he- 
side., then shall I know that thou wilt save 
Israel by my hand, as thou hast said. 

38 And it was so: for he rose up early 
on the morrow, and thrust the fleece to- 
gether, and wringed the dew out of the 
fleece, a bowl full of s water. 

39 And Gideon said unto God, ''Let not 
thine anger be hot against me, and I will 
speak but this once : let me prove, I pray 
thee, but this once with the fleece; let it 
now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon 
all the ground let there be dew. 

40 And 'God did so that night: for it 
was dry upon the fleece only, and there 
was dew on all the ground. 



Hos 


e.l!) 


in. 


c 


ver. 3 


<l 


hap 


3:10. 


II Heh 


clothed. 


• N 


im. 


1(1:: 


. "• 


Hel> 


C 


lUed. 


1 Kx 


4:1 


etc. g 


Isa.33 


7. h Ge 


.18 


:u. 


■ I'.s 


a. 107:3.3, 


.3. 


; l3a. 


50:2 















who have been buried for a time in obscurity, have 
afterwards, by peculiar circumstances, been raised 
to elevated positions of influence, usefulness, and 
Jionor. 

14. A look from the Lord can nerve the self-dif- 
fident for the most perilous services ; and fit them, 
notwithstanding all dilficulties, to go on in his name 
and strength from conquering to conquer. 

18. God is ready to give evidence of his truth to 
all sincere inquirers who wish to understand his 
will for the purpose of doing it. 

24. All the manifestations of God to his believing, 
obedient people will lead them anew to adore and 
bless him. 

25. Strong faith in God's word will be tried, and 
thus fit the believer, by patient continuance in well- 
doing, to be made victorious and perfect. 

31. Idolatry so debases men, and renders them so 
foolish, that they will worship, and sometimes try 
to help gods that have no power to help themselves. 

34. If men are to be fitted for good, great, and 
noble deeds, it must be through the influences of the 
Spirit of God.' Wisdom, strength, courage, energy, 
and perseverance are hisgifts, and to him Aey should, 
by all who possess them, be heartily devoted. 
3-.^l 



Gideon's a? my reduced. 



JUDGES VII. 



He visits the enemies^ camp. 



CHAPTER VII. 

1 Gideon's army of two and thirty thousand is brought 
to three hundred. 9 He is encouraged by the dream 
and interpretation of the barley-cake. 16 His strata- 

fera of trumpets and lamps in pitchers. 34 The 
Iphraimites take Oreb and Zeeb. 

THEN ".Terubbaal, who i.v Gideon, and 
all the people that were with him, rose 
up early, and pitched beside the well of 
Harod : so that the host of the Midianites 
were on the north side of them, by the hill 
of Moreh, in the valley. 

2 And the Loud said unto Gideon, The 
people that arc with thee are too many for 
me to give tlie Midianites into their hands, 
lest Israel ''vaunt themselves against me, 
saying, Mine own hand hath saved me. 

3 Now therefore go to, proclaim in the 
ears of the people, saying, "^ Whosoever i.v 
fearful and afraid, let him return and depart 
early from mount Gilead. And there re- 
turned of the people twenty and two thou- 
sand; and there remained ten thousand. 

4 And the Lord said iinto Gideon, The 
people are yetfoo ''many ; bring them down 
unto the water, and I will try them for 
thee there: and it shall be, that of whom 
I say unto thee, This .shall go with thee, 
the same shall go with thee ; and of whom- 
soever I say unto thee. This shall not go 
with thee, the same shall not go. 

5 So he brought down the people unto 
the water : and the Lord said unto Gideon, 
Every one that lappeth of the water with 
his tongue, as a dog lappeth, him .shalt thon 
set by himself; likewise every one that 
boweth down upon his knees to drink. 

6 And the number of them that lapped, 
•putting their hand to their mouth, were 
three hundred men : but all the rest of the 
people bowed down upon their knees to 
drink water. 

7 And the Lord said unto *■ Gideon, By 
the three hundred men that lapped will I 
save you, and deliver the Midianites into 
thy hand: and let all the other people go 
every man unto his place. 



8 So the people took victuals in aclSfa 
their hand, and their trumpets : and he 
sent all the rc^ro/ Israel every man unto 
his tent, and retained those three hundred 
men : and the host of Midian was beneath 
him in the valley. 

9 *\ And it came to pass the 'same night, 
that the Lord said unto him, Arise, get 
thee down unto the host ; ^for I have de- 
liA'cred it into thy hand. 

10 But if thou fear to go down, go thou 
with Phurah thy servant down to the host : 

1 1 And ''thou shalt 'hear what they say ; 
and afterward shall thy hands be strength- 
ened to go down unto the host. Then went 
he down with Phurah his servant unto 
the outside of the *armed men that wtre 
in the host. 

12 And the Midianites and the Amalek- 
ites and all the children of the east lay 
along in the valley like J grasshoppers for 
multitude ; and their camels ivere without 
number, as the sand by the seaside for 
multitude. 

13 And when Gideon was come, behold. 
there teas a man that told a dream unto 
his fellow, and said. Behold, I dreamed a 
dream, and lo, a * cake of barley-bread 
tumbled into the ho.st of Midian, and came 
unto a tent, and smote it that it fell, and 
overturned it, that the tent lay along. 

14 And his fellow answered and said. 
This is nothing else, save the sword of 
Gideon the son of Joash,aman of Israel: 
for into his hand hath God delivered INlid- 
ian, and all the host. 

15 ^ And it was so, when Gideon heard 
the telling of the dream, and the t inter- 
pretation thereof, that he worshipped, and 
returned into the host of Israel, and said. 
Ari.se; for the Lord hath delivered into 
your hand the host of Midian. 

16 And he divided the three hundred 
men into thretf companies, and he put i a 
trumpet in every man's hand, Avith empty 
pitchers, and * lamps within the pitchers. 



• clinp. G::i2. l" Deut.8:17; Irni. 10:13; Rom.ll:I8; 1 Cor. 
1:20; 2Cor. 4:7. eDeiltiZOiS. J Psn. M: 16. e 1 Sam. H : fi 
fOen. 4fi:2, 3. g .Tosli. 1 : 5, 9. b Gen. 24 : 14 ; 1 Sam. H: 9, 10. 



37. Evidence of the presence and favor of God, 
and a conviction of beinj; enj;;i;^ed in his work, sup- 
port the soul under tri.ils, arm it for conflicts, and 
prepare it, notwithst.inding all dilRcultics and dan- 
gers, in his name to triumph. 

CHAPTER VJI. 

1. Jenihhaal ; chap. 6 : 32. Harod ; on the bor- 
ders of Iss.arhrir, not far from mo\int < jiiboa. ]\Ioreh ; 
supposed to be a summit of Gilboa. 

2. Vnuiit ; boast. 

3. Mo7iiit Gilrad; theranj'eofmonnlaiiisusmlly 
so called was on the east of Jordan, but some have 
supposed that there might be an eminence called by 
this name on the west of .lordan. where Gideon was. 

.'). Lajijltlh of the water ; from iiis hand, having 
raised it to his mouth. Ver 6. 
322 



i ver. irf-1.5. * Or, ranks hy five. y.x.U:\». j rbap. fi: 5,33 ; 8: 10: 
Psn. 1 IS: 10-12. k I Cor. 1:27. ^ Hf\i. Irrraking. t Heh. ti-umptti 
in the hand of all of them. % Or, firehranas, or torchet. 

8. The valley ; the valley of Jezreel. 

12. As the sand; very numerous. 

1.3. Tumbled into the host; it is represented 
as roiling dovt-n from the hill Moreh, where Gideon 
was, into the valley where were the Midianites, 
overturning their tents and prostrating all that was 
in its way. 

14. This is — the sword of Gideon. ; meaning, 
it represents it, and showing that tlie literal mean- 
ing of words is often not their true meaning. Mat. 
26 : 26. 

l.*). Worshipped; bowed himself in grateful rev- 
erence before God for giving him this encourage- 
ment to go down against the Midianites. 

16. Lamps; torches. These were often made of 
pitch-wood, which was easily kindled, and g;ave a 
Drilli.-int ii<;ht. 



TliC Midianites routed. 



JUDGES VIII. 



Gideon pursueth them. 



B.'c!S n And he said unto them, Look 
on me, and do likewise : and behold, when 
I come to the outside of tlie camp, it shall 
be that, as I do, so shall ye do. 

18 When I blow with a trumpet, I and 
all that are with me, then blow ye the 
trumpets also on every side of all the camp, 
and say, The sword of the Lord, and of 
Gideon. 

19 H So Gideon, and the hundred men 
that were with him, came unto the outside 
of the camp in the beginning of the mid- 
dle watch; and they had but newly *set 
the watch: and they blew tlie ''trumpets, 
and brake the "^ pitchers that were in their 
hands. 

20 And the three companies blew the 
trumpets, and brake the pitchers, and held 
the lamps in their left hands, and the trum- 
pets in their right hands to blow withal: 
and they cried, The sword of the Lord, 
and of Gideon. 

21 And they ''stood every man in his 
place round about the camp : ^and all the 
host ran, and cried, and fled. 

22 And the three hundred ""blew the 
trumpets, and the Lord ^set every man's 
sword against his ''fellow, even through- 
out all the host : and the host fled to Beth- 
shittah *in Zererath, and to the t border of 
Abel-meholah, unto Tabbath. 

23 And the men of Israel gathered them- 
selves together out of Naphtali, and out of 
Asher, and out of all Manasseh, and pur- 
sued after the Midianites. 

24 T[ And Gideon sent messengers 
throughout all mount 'Ephraim, saying, 
Come down against the Midianites, and 
take before them the waters unto Beth- 



« lTlies9.S:3. bver.8. cver.16. <l Ex. 14:13, 14; 2Cbr.-20: 17. 
e 2 Kings, 7; 6, 7. f Josli. 6 : I fi, -20. g Psa.8.T:9; Isa. 9: 4. h 1 .S;un. 
14:20; 2Cliron.20:23. * Or, toward. fHeb./ip. i chap.3:-27, 2S. 



19. The middle watch ; they diviJea the night 
into three equal parts, called watches. The Jews 
afterwards divided it into four. 

22. Beth-shittali — Tabbath; supposed to be 
places towards Jordan, which the Midianites must 
cross to get into their own country. Ver. 24. 

24. Beth-barah ; supposed to be the same as 
Beth-abara, John 1 : 28. It means, a house or pas- 
sage, and lay on the east side of Jordan where they 
crossed the river. Took the ivaters ; guarded the 
fording-places where they expected the Midianites 
would cross. 

25 The rock Oreb ; so called, it is supposed, 
from the fact of his having been killed upon it. So 
with the wine-press. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1 . To obtain the blessings which God has prom- 
ised, men must not only rely on him, but must em- 
ploy those means which he has appointed, and in 
the use of which alone they have reason to expect 
success. 

2. The means by which, and the manner in 
which God accomplishes the purposes of his grace, 
are adapted to show men that the glory of their 
successes belongs not to them, but to him. 



barah and Jordan. Then all the men of 
Ephraim gathered themselves together, 
and took the waters unto ' Beth-barah and 
Jordan. 

2o And' they ''took two princes of the 
Midianites, Oreb andZeeb ; and they slew 
Oreb upon the rock Oreb, and Zeeb they 
slew at the wine-press of Zeeb, and pur- 
sued Midian, and brought the heads of 
Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon on the other side 
Jordan. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1 Gideon pacifieth the Ephraimites. 4 Succoth and 
Penuel refuse to relieve Gideon's army. 10 Zebah 
and Zaimunna are taken. 13 Succoth and Penuel 
are destroyed. IS Gideon revengeth his brethren's 
death on Zebah and Zaimunna. '2-2 Herefuseth gov- 
ernment. '24 His ephod cause of idolatry. 28 Mid- 
ian subdued. 29 Gideon's children, and death. 33 
The Israelites' idolatry and ingratitude. 

AND the 'men of Ephraim said unto 
him, i Why hast thou served us thus, 
that thou calledst us not, when thou went- 
est to fight with the Midianites 1 And 
they did chide with him * sharply. 

2 And he said unto them. What have I 
done now in comparison of you ? Is not 
the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim bet- 
ter than the vintage of Abi-ezer? 

3 God hath delivered into your hand.s 
the princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb : 
and what was I able to do in comparison 
of you ? Then their H anger was "' abated 
toward him, when he had said that. 

4 TfAnd Gideon came to Jordan, and 
passed over, he, and the three hundred 
men that tcere with him, faint, yet pursu- 
ing them. 

5 And he said unto the men of " Succoth, 
Give, I pray you, loaves of bread unto the 



iJolinUML k clian.8:3; P9a.83:H,12. 1 cli. 12: 1 ; '.'Sam. 19:41. 
t Heb. What thing i»lhU thou hast done unto us? % Hfh.strongly. 
WHeh.spirit. m Prov. 16: 1 ; 2.5: 15. n Gen..%3: 17 ; Psa. 60:6. 

7. The power of God's visible people depends not 
so much on their number as on their character : 
and sometimes a diminution of their number may 
give them increased strength. 

10. When God has a work for any one to accom- 
plish, he will prepare him to perform it. 

1.5. If by a dream, or any other means, one is 
encouraged to obey the revealed will of God, and 
strengthened for the performance of known duty, 
he has reason to be grateful and anew to acknow- 
ledge and adore God. 

IS. The agency of God and that of men are both 
employed in the accomplishment of his designs. 
There is therefore no good reason to imagine that 
there is any inconsistency between them. Ver. 22. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

2. The gleaning ; the little done by the Ephra- 
imites. Better; more important and honorable. 
Thau the vintage; than all that was done by 
Gideon and his father's house. Inis was a soft 
answer, designed to appease the wrath of the Ephra- 
imites. Prov. 15 : 1 ; Eccl. 10 : 4. 

5. Succoth ; a city in the tribe of Gad, on the east 
of Jordan, below the s«a of Galilee. Gen. 33 : 17. 
323 



Succoth and Pcnuel punished. 



JUDGES VIII. 



Zebak and Zalmunna slain. 



people that follow me ; for they be faint, 
and I am pursuing; after Zebah and Zal- 
munna, kings of Midian. 

6 And the princes of Succoth said, ^Are 
the liands of Zebah and Zalmunna now 
in thy hand, that we should give bread 
unto thine army 1 

7 And Gideon said. Therefore when the 
Lord hath delivered Zebah and Zalmunna 
into my hand, ''then I will *tear your ilesh 
with the thorns of the wilderness and 
with briers. 

8 And he went up thence to "Penuel, 
and spake unto them likewise : and the 
men of Penuel answered him as the men 
of Succoth had answered him. 

9 And he spake also unto the men of 
I'enuel, saying, When I ''come again in 
peace, "I will break down this tower. 

10 ^Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in 
Karkor, and their hosts Mitli them, about 
tiftccn thousand men, all that were left of 
all the hosts of the children of the east : 
for there fell t a hundred and twenty thou- 
sand men that drew sword. 

11 And Gideon went up ^y the way of 
them that dwelt in tents on the east of 
Nobah'^and Jogbehah, and smote the host: 
for the host was ^ secure. 

12 And when Zebah and Zalmunna fled, 
he pursued after them, and 'Mook the two 
kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, 
and t discomfited all the host. 

1.3 H And Gideon the son of Joash re- 
turned from battle before the sun was 
up, 

14 And caught a young man of the men 
of Succoth, and inquired of him : and he 
described^ unto him the princes of Suc- 
coth, and the elders thereof, even three- 
score and seventeen men. 

15 And he came vmlo the men of Suc- 
coth, and said. Behold Zebah and Zul- 
munna, with 'whom yc did ujjbraid me, 
saying. Are the hands of Zebah and Zal- 
munna now in thy hand, that we should 
give bread unto thy men that are weary? 

16 And he took the elders of the city, 



« ISam.2S:ll; lKingg,;0:n. bver.lfi. * HvKthreth. cGcn. 
ns : 30; 1 Kins», 12 : ii. Hi Kings, 22 : 27. e ver. 17. . f Or. one 
hundred and twtnty thnvannd, every one drawing a t\cord. t Num. 
32:a"i,42. icli. 18:27; IThens 6:3. tiraa.83:ll. t Heh. Unified. 



6. Noir ill thy hand? have you already taken 
them? Ver. lO. 

I. Tfar your flesh with the thorns of the 
wilderness ; a mode of punisliment not uncommon 
in those days. 

8. Pe7inel ; east of Succoth, and near the river 
Tabbok. Gen. 32:30. 

9. This tower ; one to which the men of Penuel 
tru.sted for tlieir defence. 

10. Karkor ; supposed to have been eastward of 
Penuel, and near tlie borders of Gad. 

II. Hohah and Joishehali ; not far from the 
line between Gad and Alanas.soh. 

324 



and thorns of the wilderness, and VciSs.' 
briers, and with them he W taught the men 
of Succoth. 

17 And he beat down the J tower of Pe- 
nuel, and slew the men of the city. 

18 T[ Then said he unto Zebah and 
Zalmunna, What manner of men were 
they whom ye slew at ■'Tabor? And 
they answered, As thou art, so were 
they ; each one *resembled the children 
of a king. 

19 And he said. They were my brethren, 
even the sons of my mother: as the Lord 
liveth, if ye 'had saved them alive, I would 
not slay you. 

20 And he said unto Jether his first- 
born, Up, and slay them. But the youth 
drew not his sword : for he feared, because 
he was yet a youth. 

21 Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Rise 
thou, and fall upon us : for as the man is, 
so is his strength. And Gideon arose, and 
slew Zebah and Zalmunna, and look away 
the tornamcnts that ivcre on their camels' 
necks. 

22 T[ Then the men of Israel' said unto 
Gideon, Rule thou over us, both thou, 
and thy son, and thy son's son also: for 
thou hast delivered us from the hand of 
Midian. 

23 And Gideon said unto them, I will 
not rule over you, neither shall my son 
rule over you : the Lord shall 'rule over 
you. 

24 T[And Gidconsaidunto them, I would 
desire a request of you, that ye would give 
me every man the ear-rings of his prey. 
For they had golden ear-rings, because they 
ivere '"Ishmaelites. 

25 And they answered. We will willing- 
ly give thein. And they spread a garment, 
and did cast therein every man the ear- 
rings of his prey. 

26 vVnd the weight of the golden car-rings 
that he recjucstcd was a thousand and sev- 
en huiulred shekels of gold ; besides orna- 
ments, and t collars, and purple raiment 
that was on the kings of Midian, and be- 

5 Heb. writ, i ver. n, 7. I( Heb. made to know, j ver. 9. Ic cliRp. 
4:6; Tsil. RS: IJ. " Heb. according to the form, f Qt,ornamenf 
likelhemoon. l9il.3:lH. I ISiim.8:7: 10:19; 12:12; l!ia.3U:22; 
ei : 1«. n> Gen. 25 : 13 ; .37: 26, 2S. t Or, nveetjeiaeU. 

14. Described iinto him ; literally, wrote for 
him; probably gave him their names. 

10. Tan gilt the men; showed them the folly 
of their course by punishing them. 

21. So is his strength ; as his age was mature, 
so was his strength. 

23. The Lord shall rule ; he was their chief 
magistrate, and Gideon would not be instrumental 
in changing lliat form of government. 

24. liar-rings of his prey ; tiiose which they 
had taken from their enemies. Ishmaelites ; the 
Midianites are sometimes called Ishmaelites ; they 
lived near,and often mingled together. Gen. 37 : 28. 



Gideon^s ephod. 



JUDGES IX. 



Cruelty of Abimelech. 



C'cIimsl' sides the chains that were about 
their camels' necks. 

27 And Gideon ?made an epliod thereof, 
and put it in his city, even in ''Ophrah: 
and all Israel went thither a "^whoring 
after it: which thing became a ''snare unto 
Gideon, and to his house. 

28 "[] Thus was Midian subdued before 
the children of Israel, so that they lifted 
up their heads no more. And the coun- 
try was in quietness forty years in the 
days of Gideon. 

29 ^ And Jerubbaal the son of Joash 
went and dwelt in his own house. 

30 And ^ Gideon had threescore and ten 
sons *of his body begotten: for he had 
many wives. 

3 1 And his concubine that was in She- 
chem, she also bare him a son, whose 
name he t called '^Abimelech. 

32 "[And Gideon the son of Joash died 
in a good 'old age, and was buried in the 
sepulchre of Joash his father, in Ophrah 
of the Abi-ezrites. 

33 And it came to pass, as •" soon as Gid- 
eon was dead, that the children of Israel 
turned again, and went a whoring after 
Baalim, and made 'Baal-berith their god. 

34 And the children of Israel remem- 
bered^ not the Lord their God, who had 
delivered them out of the hands of all their 
enemies on every side: 

35 Neither '' showed they kindness to the 
house of Jerubbaal, namely, Gideon, ac- 
cording to all the goodness which he had 
showed unto Israel. 



CHAPTER IX. 



■ chap. 17 : 5. b clnp. fi : H. c Psa. 106 : M. i Deut. 7 : 16. 
■• chapter H : -2,, 5. * Heh. going out of his thigh. f Heli. tet. 
I chap. 9:18. s Genesis M : 8; .lob fl : -26. b chap. -2 : 17, 19. 
i chap. 9:4. j Psahn 78 : 1 1 , 42 ; 106 : 13, 21. k chap. 9 : lS-19. 



27. A?i. ephod ; a very rich and costly garment, 
Eucli as was worn by the high-priest. E.\. 28 : 4. 
A whorl)! g after it ; it became a means of siiper- 
stilion and idolatry. 

30. Threescore and ten ; seventy. 

33. Baalim and— Baal-berith ; idol-gods. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Those who neglect their duty are often dis- 
posed to cast the blame on others ; and those who 
refuse to engage in great and important services, 
are often most anxious to have the credit of them. 

2. A command of one's temper, and a disposition 
to give full credit to the worthy actions of others, 
are likely means of appeasifig envy, abating wrath, 
and causing contentions to cease. 

6. It is unwise to refuse aid to brethren in dis- 
tress, and foolish as well as wicked to upbraid them. 

10. The multitudes who have fallen in wars by 
the hands of their fellow-men, and in the indulgence 
of the most hateful passions, present an impressive 
view of tiie evil of sin, and of the horrible state of 
those who are abandoned to its everlasting power. 

16. Sin often brings iiii-sery in this world of mercy. 
iis it will, to all who continue in it, in the world of 
retribution. 

21. Tiie dread which men have of a lingering and 
dishonorable temporal death, should prompt them 
to immediate, earnest, and persevering efforts to 



1 Abimelech by conspiracy with the Shechemites, and 
murJiT of h!s brethren, is maJe king. 7 Jotham by 
a parabln r^buketh them, and foretelleth their ruin. 
'2'2 Gaal oonspireth with the Shechemites against liirn. 
.OU Zebul r-vealeth it. .31 Abimelech overcometh 
them, and soweth the city with salt. 4i)Heburneth the 
hold of the god Berith. 5!) At Thebez he is slain by a 
piece of a millstone. 50 Jotham's curse is fulfilled. 

AND Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal 
went to 'Shechcm unto his mother's 
brethren, and communed with them, and 
with all the family of the house of his 
mother's father, saying, 

2 Speak. I pray you, in the cars of all 
the men of Shechera, t Whether ix better 
for you, either that all the sons of Jerub- 
baal, which are '"threescore and ten per- 
sons, reign over you, or that one reign 
over you"? remember also that I am your 
bone" and your flesh. 

3 And his mother's brethren spake ol 
him in the ears of all the men of Sliechem 
all these words : and their hearts inclined' 
to* follow Abimelech; for they said, He 
is our brother. 

4 And they gave him threescore and ten 
pieces of silver out of the house of "Baal- 
berith, wherewith Abimelech p hired vain 
and light persons, which followed him. 

5 And he went unto his father's house 
at Ophrah, audi slew his brethren the sons 
of Jerubbaal, icing- threescore and ten per- 
sons, upon one stone: notwithstanding, 
yet Jotham the youngest son of Jerubbaal 
was left; for he hid himself. 

6 And all the men of Shcchem gathered 
together, and all the house of Millo, and 



1 chap. 8 


:31. 


t Heh 


What ifl ijood 


^ whether 


etc 




1 ch 


ap.R 


no. 


n Genes 


8 29 


14. $ 


Heb. a/tt 


r. 


o chap. 8 


:t:i. 


P 


cha 


.. 11 


:'i; 


2 Chroni 


les, 


l.-!:?; 


Proverbs 


1-2: 


II; Acts 


17: 


5. 


q 


2Ki 


I's 


11:1, '2. 























avoid the disgrace and torment of that which is 
eternal. 

23. A wise man will not covet an incre.ase of 
power, care, and responsibility; nor, unless it ap- 
pears to be manifestly the will of God, will he con- 
sent to receive it. 

27. The consequences of men's actions may be 
very different from wh.at they anticipate ; they 
should not, therefore, at any time le.an to their own 
understandings, but sliould in all their ways ac- 
knowledge G-od, that he may direct their patlis. 

31. A departure from the design and will of God 
in the institution of marriage, has in some form ever 
been the easily besetting sin of men, and the source 
of innumerable and most distressing calamities. 

33. No sooner are restraints removed, tlian men 
show their wickedness by voluntarily engaging in 
known sin, and the manifestation of awful ingrati- 
tude towards both G-od and men. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1. Shechem ; a city in the tribe of Epiiraim. 
Chap. 8:31. 

2. Your hone ; a Sliechemlte, and one of their 
relatives. 

A. House of Ba:il-berith ; the place of their 
idol worship. 

6. House of Millo ; a tower or castle in the city. 
325 



Jolhani's rebuke 



JUDGES IX. 



and denunciation. 



went and made Abimelech king, by the 
plain* of the pillar Ihatwa.v in Shechem. 

7 ^ And when they told it to Jotham, he 
went and stood in the top of * mount Geri- 
zim, and lifted up his voice, and cried, and 
said unto them. Hearken unto me, ye men 
of Shechem, that God may hearken unto 
you. 

8 The '' trees went forth 07i a time to 
anoint a king over them; and they said 
unto the olive-tree. Reign thou over us. 

9 But the olive-tree said unto them, 
Should I leave my ■= fatness, wherewith by 
me they honor God and man, and go tto 
be promoted over the trees? 

10 And the trees said to the fig-tree, Come 
thou, and reign over us. 

11 But the fig-tree said unto them, Should 
I forsake my sweetness, and my good fruit, 
and go to be promoted over the trees'? 

12 Then said the trees unto the vine, 
Come thou, and reign over us. 

13 And the vine said unto them. Should 
I leave my wine, which ''cheereth God and 
man, and go to be promoted over the trees ? 

1 4 Then said all the trees unto the tbram- 
ble. Come thou, and reign over us. 

15 And the bramble said unto the trees, 
Ifih truth ye anoint me king over you, /Ae;i 
come and put your trust in my ''shadow; 
and if not, let "^fire come out of the bram- 
ble, and devour the e cedars of Lebanon. 

16 Now therefore, if ye have done truly 
and sincerely, in that ye have made Abim- 
elech king, and if ye have dealt well with 
Jerubbaal and his house, and have done 
unto him according to the deserving of his 
hands : 

17 (For my ''father fought for you, and 
adventured^ his life far, and delivered you 
out of the hand of Midian : 

18 And 'ye arc risen up against my fa- 
thers house this day, and have slain his 
sons, threescore and ten persons, upon one 

* Or, nak. .losh, H : M. » .losli. R : 3S ; .lolin 4: 20. b 2 Kings, 
U:9. c I'bii. KM : 15. ^ Heh.upanddo\pnf,n-o\hettrefx. J Prov. 
31:6; Eci'l. ICI:l!l. % Or, thUtle. e Isn.SU: -2; Dan.4 : 12; Hosea 
H:7. fver.2(l; Num.21:'2S; Elek. 19:14. s liia.2: 13; E7.ek.3I ::(. 
k clmp. 7. It Hub. out. i ver. 6, 6 ; chap. 8 : 35. jclinp. 8:31. 

7. Gerizivi; a mountain on the south side of 
Shechem. 

8. The trees wnit forth ; this is the commence- 
ment of a p.xrahle, representina; the folly of the 
Slu'clieinites in makinir Abimelech kinjj. 

9. Olive-tree; a trre yielding oil, used not only 
in food, but also in the worship of (jod and in the 
consecration of men to public office. 

13. Wiite, which clierreth God; it was em- 
ployed in his worship, and thus pleased him. 

1-1. The bramble ; one of the meanest and most 
■worthless shrubs. Grideon, who 1 ike i he olive, tig-tree, 
and vine, was useful, refused ; but A hiiiielei-h. who like 
the bramble was worthless, consented to be made king. 

]•'). Let fire come ovt; this expre.s.«ed the trouble 
which Abimelech would bring upon the chief men 
of Siiecliem, rppresented as cedars. 

1'). Truly : rightly, in a proper manner. 
a-'6 



stone, and have made Abimelech, ^.".J^ 
the Json of his maid-servant, king over 
the men of Shechem, because he is your 
brother :) 

19 If ye then havfe dealt truly and sin- 
cerely with Jerubbaal and with his house 
this day, then ''rejoice ye in Abimelech. 
and let him also rejoice in you : 

20 But if not, let 'fire come out from 
Abimelech, and devour the men of She- 
chem, and the liouse of Millo ; and let fire 
come out from the men of Shechem, and 
from the house of Millo, and devour Abim- 
elech. 

21 And .Totham ran away, and fled, and 
went to '"Beer, and dwelt there, for fear 
of Abimelech his brother. 

22 TJWhen Abimelech had reigned three 
years over Israel, 

23 Then God "sent an evil spiritbetween 
Abimelech and the men of Shechem ; and 
the men of "Shechem dealt treacherously 
with Abimelech : 

24 That the p cruelty done to the three- 
score and ten sons of Jerubbaal misht 
come, and their blood be laid, upon Abim- 
elech their brother, which slew Hiein, and 
upon the men of Shechem, which Raided 
him in the killing of his brethren. 

25 And the men of Shechem set Hers in 
wait for him in the top of the mountains, 
aiid they robbed all that came along that 
way by them : and it Avas told Abimelech. 

26 And Gaal the son of Ebed came with 
his brethren, and went over to Shechem : 
and the men of Shechem put their confi- 
dence in him. 

27 And they went out into the fields, and 
gathered their vineyards, and trode the 
grapes, and made *merry, and went into 
the "i house of their god, and did eat and 
drink, and cursed Abimelech. 

28 And Gaal the son Ebed said. Who is 
Abimelech,'' and who is Shechem, that we 



k 


Un.% 


fi; 


l'I.il.3:3; 


Jas. 4:ir>. 


1 ver 


IS,."* 


.17. n 


2 Sam. 


20 


14. 


n 


I Sam 


1« 


: 14; 


IKi 


gs, 12:15 


; 22 : 22, 23 ; 


I»a. 1> 


:14: 2Th 


e8s. 


2 


11,12 




> \m 


33: 


. 1. 1 Ki 


;.•<, 2 : 


■!2; K. 


«tll. 9: 


25; Psa 


7 


16. 


i 


Heb. 


trengtht 


nedl 


n handf to kill. 


* Or 


tongt. 


I»a. 16 


s> 


10; 


'.r. 25 . 


30. 


q » 


er. 4. 


T 1 Sam. 


25:10 


iKir 


gs, 12 


16. 







20. Tjct fire come out ; lire will come out ; ex- 
pressive of the mutual calamities which Abimelech 
and the men of Shechem would bring on each other. 

21. Beer; a place south of Shechem. 

23. God sent ; suffered, through the temptation 
of Satan, to arise in their own hearts. 

25. Liers in. vait ; to kill Abimelech, who was 
then absent from the city, or to take him prisoner 
on his return. 

2C. Gaal; supposed to be a Canaanite, pretend- 
ing to have descended from Hamor the father of 
Shechem, and former prince of that country. Ver. 
28 ; Gen. 34 : 2. 

27. Their god; their idol-god. Chap. 8 : ,33. 

28. Who is Abimelech ; that he should reign 
over the ancient and renowned city of Shechem. 
Zrhnl; the governor of Shechem during Abime- 
lech's absence. Ver. 30. 



GaaVs insurrection. 



JUDGES IX. 



Abimelech'' s vengeance. 



1). C. 1206 

ofJerubbaal? and Zebul his officer? serve 
the men of ^Hamor the father of Shechem : 
for why should we serve him "l 

29 And '' would to God this people were 
under my hand ! then would I remove 
Abimelcch. And he said to Abimelech, 
Increase thine army, and come out. 

30 T[ And when Zebul the ruler of the 
city heard the words of Gaal the son of 
Ebed, his anger was * kindled. 

31 And he sent messengers unto Abim- 
elech t privily, saying. Behold, Gaal the 
son of Ebed and his brethren be come to 
Shechem ; and behold, they fortify the 
city against thee. 

32 Now therefore up by night, thou and 
the people that is with thee, and lie in 
wait in the field : 

33 And it shall be, that in the morning, 
as soon as the sun is up, thou shalt rise 
early, and set upon the city : and behold, 
when he and the people that is with him 
come out against thee, then mayest thou 
do to them as tthou shalt find occasion. 

34 T[ And Abimelech rose up, and all the 
people that were with him, by night, and 
they laid wait against Shechem in four 
companies. 

35 And Gaal the son of Ebed went out, 
and stood in the entering of the gate of the 
city : and Abimelech rose up, and the peo- 
ple that were with him, from lying in wait. 

36 And when Gaal saw the people, he 
said to Zebul, Behold, there come people 
down from the top of the mountains. And 
Zebul said unto him, Thou seest the shad- 
ow of the mountains as // they icere men. 

37 And Gaal spake again and said, See, 
there come people down by the ^ middle of 
the land, and another company come along 
by the plain of II Meonenim. 

38 Then said Zebul unto him, Where is 
now thy mouth, wherewith thou saidst, 
Who*^ 15 Abimelech, that we should serve 
himi is not this the people that thou hast 
despised'? go out, I pray now, and fight 
with them. 

39 And Gaal went out before the men of 
Shechem, and fought with Abimelech. 

40 And Abimelech chased him, and he 
fled before him, and many were over- 
thrown and wounded, even unto the enter- 
ing of the gate. 



• Gen. 34:2, 6. b 2Sam. ISr 4 ; Psa. 10: 3. * Or, Ao*. f Heb. 
craftily, or to Tormak. t Heb. thy hand thall find. 1 Sam. 
10:7: 25 : 8 ; Eccl. 9 : 10. \ Heb. naml. \\ Or, the regarded of 



37. Middle; height. 

41. Du'elt ; encamped. Arum ah ; a place 
near Shechem. 

43. He ; Ahimelpch. Tool- ; had taken. 

4-5. Soicedit with salt ; in tokenof itsdesolation. 

46. Tower; supposed to be the tower or castle 
of MiUo. Ver. 6, 20. 



41 And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: 
and Zebul thrust out Gaal and his breth- 
ren, that they should not dwell in She- 
chem. 

42 And it came to pass on the morrow, 
that the people went out into the field; 
and they told Abimelech. 

43 And he took the people, and divided 
them into three companies, and laid wait 
in the field, and looked, and behold, the 
people ivere come forth out of the city ; and 
he rose up against them, and smote them. 

44 And Abimelech, and the company that 
was with him, rushed forward, and .stood in 
the entering ofthe gate of the city : and the 
two o^Aer companies ran upon all the people 
that were in the fields, and slew them. 

45 And Abimelech fought against the city 
all that day ; and ""he took the city, and slew 
the people that ivas therein, and beat ""down 
the city, and sowed it with "^salt. 

46 T[ And when all the men of the tower 
of Shechem heard that, they entered into 
a hold ofthe house of the god ^Berith. 

47 And it was told Abimelech, that all 
the men of the tower of Shechem were 
gathered together. 

48 And Abimelech gat him up to mount 
Zalmon,'' he and all the people that were 
with him ; and Abimelech took an axe in 
his hand, and cut down a bough from the 
trees, and took it, and laid it on his shoul- 
der, and said unto the people that icere 
with him, What ye have seen * me do, 
make haste, and do as I have done. 

49 And all the people likewise cut down 
every man his bough, and followed Abim- 
elech, and put them to the hold, and set 
the hold on fire upon them ; so that all the 
men of the tower of Shechem died also, 
about a thousand men and women. 

50 If Then went Abimelech to Thebez, 
and encamped against Thebez, and took it. 

5 1 But there was a strong tower within 
the city, and thither fled all the men and 
women, and all they of the city, and shut 
it to them, and gat them up to the top of 
the tower. 

52 And Abimelech came unto the tower, 
and fought against it, and went hard unto 
the door of the tower to burn it with fire. 

53 And a 'certain woman cast a piece 
of a millstone upon Abimelech's head, and 
aU-to brake his skull. 

the times. T)enV\»:\4. cTer.2«:29. if ver. 20. « 2 Kings, 3: i."). 
r Dent. 2« : 23 ; Ezek. 47 : U ; Zepli. 2:9. I! chap. 8 : M. h Psa. 
68: 14. * Heb. I have done, i 2 Sam. n:2I. 

48. Zalmoii ; meaning shady ; supposed to be 
so called from its being covered with forests. 

."iO. Thehez ; a city of Ephraim. 

51. A strong tower; such towers in or near 
cities, to which the people fled in time of danger, 
were common. 

53. Amillstoiie; theupper stone of a hand-mill, 
• 327 



Abimelcch' s death. 



JUDGES X. 



Tula and Jair judge Israel. 



54 Tlicn he called hastily untothcyoiing 
mail his arrnor-bearcr, and said unto him, 
Draw* thy sword, and slay me, that men 
say not of me, A woman slew him. And 
'his young man thrust him through, and 
he died. 

55 And when the men of Israel saw that 
Abimcleeh was dead, they departed every 
man unto his place. 

56 ^Thus God ''rendered the wicked- 
ness of Abimclecli, which he did unto his 
father, in slaying his seventy brethren : 

57 And all the evil of the men of She- 
chem did God render upon their heads : 
and upon them came the "= curse of Jotliam 
the son of Jcrubbaal. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 Tola jndgeth Israel in Shamir. 3 .Tair, whose thirty 
sons had thirty cities. 6 The Philistines and Am- 
monites oppress Israel. 10 In their misery God send- 
eth them to their false gods. 1j Upon their repent- 
ance he pitieth them. 

AND after Abimelech there arose to •de- 
fend Israel, Tola the son of Puah, the 



h ver.24; Job .'51:3; Psa.«4:-23; Prov.5:22; Mnt. 
ver.20,45. * Heh.tavc, or lUlivei: d cliap..'): 10; 



in wliich the women ground their grain. Mat. 
21: -11. AU-to ; an old English term meaning, 
wholly, entirely. 

5-1. Au'omau xleiv Itim ; to be slain by a woman 
was considered disgraceful. 

56. liendered ; requited or punished. Ver. 5, 
18, 24. 

57. The curse of Jothani ; ver. 20. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Men who earnestly desire power, and flatter 
their fellow-inen to obtain it. are not M'orthy to be 
trusted, and should not be chosen to rule over others. 

3. Men are easily flattered, and their judgment, 
feelings, and conduct often bia.ssed towards those who 
are related to or connected with them. 

4. Vain and liglit persons, the vicious and the 
worthless of all descriptions, will prostitute their 
political influence to the support of those flatterers 
who like themselves are vicious, and who will fur- 
nish ihetn with money. 

5. Ambitious men, who are given up of God to 
the gratitication of their lusts, will commit any 
crime to secure their selfish objects. "■ 

6. When a people choose immoral men as their 
rulers, they will generally be made instruments of 
mutuiil punishment to each other. 

8. Parables may be a most effective and useful 
method of inculcating divine truth, and he who 
wisely employs them be an eminent benefactor of 
mankind. 

9. Wise men will not be anxious to leave the 
safe, quiet, and useful pursuits and enjoyments of 
private life, for the sake of becoming rulers, espe- 
cially over the wicked. 

1.). Those who are most unfaithful and worthless 
in private life, are often most anxious for promotion 
to public life; and those who tliu.s promote them, 
may expect through them to reap the fruit of their 
folly. 

19. Teachers of divine truth in all ages have 
maintained that godliness is profitable unto all 
things, and that the way of transgressors is hard ; 
that righteousness tcndeth to life, and that those who 
continue in wickedness do it to their own death. 

23. The wicked have no permanent bond of union, 
328 • 



sonof Dodo,amanof Issachar; and *b "i^: 
he dwelt in Shamir in mount Ephraim. 

2 And he judgetysrael twenty and three 
years, and died, and was buried in Sha- 
mir. 

3 IfAnd after him arose Jair, a Gilcadite, 
and judged Israel twenty and two years. 

4 And he had thirty sons that ''rode on 
thirty ass colts, and they had thirty cities, 
which" are called t Havoth-jair unto this 
day, which are in the land of Gilead. 

5 And Jair died, and was buried in Ca- 
mon. 

6 T[And''the children of Israel did evil 
again in the sight of the Lord, and served 
Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and the gods of 
Syria, and the gods of «Zidon, and the gods 
of ISIoab, and the gods of the children of Am- 
nion, and the gods of the Philistines, and 
forsook the Lord, and served not him. 

7 And the anger of the Lord was hot 
against Israel, and he "'sold them into the 
hands of the Philistines, and into the 
hands of the children of Ammon. 



1-2:14. «Dcut3:I4. t Or,MeDi«a»M<)/yniV. Num.32:4l. •/(■Imp. 
2:11-14; 3:7; 4:1; 6.1; 13:1. g IKiiigs, ll:3:i. h 1 Sam. 12:9, 10. 



safety, or peace; and tho.se who have been treach- 
erous and cruel to others, will ordinarily meet with 
others who will be treacherous and cruel to them. 

26. Men may rebel against one set of wicked rul- 
ers, and yet choose another who are no better ; and, 
by so doing, may only increase their distress and 
hasten their ruin. 

27. Dissipation, rioting, and licentiousness are 
not true liberty, and those who indulge in them can 
never enjoy it. 

28. Boasting, pride, and self-esteem are forerun- 
ners of defeat, degradation, and contempt. 

38. These who pretend to despise their enemies 
when at a distance, are often afraid of them when 
they come near; and the most repro.achfu! in time 
of safety, are often most cowardly in time of danger. 

45. The men who aid and exalt the wicked, are 
often the men who are injured and destroyed by 
them. 

46. The courses which wicked men take to secure 
their safety, not unfrequently accelerate their ruin ; 
and often by those whom they have aided in slaying 
others, they are theinselves slain. 

52. Success often renders men reckless, and when 
they are most confident they are nearest to destruc- 
tion. They may escape the greatest apparent dan- 
gers, and then fall by such as are not thought of. 

54. Men, especially warriors, think much about 
.an honorabl'3 death, and sometimes are peculiarly 
sensitive of their reputation when sinking into shame- 
and everlasting contempt. 

56. Jehovah is a G-od that judgeth in the earth, 
and not unfrequently here proclaims the sins of 
men in their punishment. 

CHAPTER X. 
1. Iledwelt in Shamir; after he became judge, 
as this was a more central part of the country, and 
a more convenient place for a judge than any ia his 
own tribe. 

3. A Gileadltc ; he was the first judge from the 
east side of Jordan. 

4. Havoth-jair ; the villajjes of .Tair. 

7. Philislines ; they lived on the west of the 
Israelites, and the children of Ammon on the east. 



Israel is oppi-cssed 



JUDGES XI. 



by the Ammonites. 



oppressed* the children of Israel : eighteen 
years, all the children of Israel that ivcrc 
on the other side Jordan in the land of tlie 
x\morites, which i.s in Gilead. 

9 Moreover the children of Ammon 
passed over Jordan to fight also against 
Jiidah, and against Benjamin, and against 
the house of Ephraim ; so that Israel was 
sore * distressed. 

10 ^And the children of Israel cried 
unto the Lord, saying. We have sinned 
against thee, both becanse we have for- 
saken our God, and also served Baalim. 

1 1 And the Lord said unto the children 
of Israel, Did not I deliver you from the 
Egyptians,"" and from the "^Amorites, from 
the children of <■ Ammon, and from the 
Philistines'? 

12 The "Zidonians also, and the ^Ama- 
Ickites, and the Maonites, did ^ oppress 
you ; and ye cried to me, and I delivered 
you out of their hand. 

13 Yet ye have forsaken ''me, and served 
other gods: wherefore I wilidcliver you 
no more. 

14 Go and cry unto the gods which ye 
have chosen ; let 'them deliver you in the 
time of your tribulation. 

15 ^ And the children of Israel said unto 
the Lord, Wc have sinned : do ' thou unto 
us whatsoever tseemcth good unto thee; 
deliver us only, we pray thee, this day. 

K) And they put ''away the estrange 
gods from among them, and served the 
Lord : and his soul was ^ grieved for the 
misery' of Israel. 

17 Then the children of Ammon were 
gathered II together, and encamped in Gil- 
cad. And the children of Israel assem- 
bled themselves together, and encamped 
in ""Mizpeh. 

1 8 And the people and princes of Gilead 



* Heb.crU5/it</. a lSam.28:ln. bF.x.U:OT. c Num.21 : 21-55. 
•I cliap. 3:12-l.'i,:H. edinp. 5:10. f rli^p. (i : 3. sPsa. 106:42. 
b.Jer.2:13. i Deut 3.':37..%'( ; 2Kings..T : I3| Jer.2:2S. jISmih. 
SAX; 2 Sam. 15: '2H. f Heb.in ^nadinthine e.ves. k 2Chron. 7: 14 i 
),'.:«. f Hch.ffoclsofstrangeys. ^ Heb. shorlened. I Rsa. 1C6:44, 

8. That year; the oppression of both began 
about the same time. That of t!ie Ammonites 
lasted ei^rhteen years, anil that of the Pliilistines 
forty. Chap. 13:1. Other; east. 

ri. The M/io/rites ; supposed to be the Midian- 
ites, or a people dwelling in their vicinity. 

13. / wi/l deliver yon no more ; he would not, 
unless they should repent of their sins. 

14. Cry nnto the gods ; this was designed to 
m.ake them feel more deeply the ■worthlessness of 
t!ieir iddl.s, and their need of help from Jehovah. 

17. Ill Gilead ; on the east of Jordan. Miz- 
2>e!i ; near mount G-ilead. Chap. 11 : 29. 
IXSTRl'CTIOXS. 

1. Good rulers are the gift ofGod, and are designed, 
through the enactment and execution of good laws, 
to be for the protection and defence of the people. 

6. Though a course of sinning has often been 
tried, and always found to lead in the end to misery, 



said one to another. What man is he that 
will begin to tight against the children of 
Ammon"? he shall be head over all the 
inhabitants of Gilead. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 The covenant between Jephthah and the Gileadites, 
that he. should he their head. I'i The treaty of peace 
between him and the Anuiionites is in vain. 29 Jeph- 
thah's vow. M Ilis conquest of the Ammonites. 3-1 
He performeth his vow on his daughter. 

"jVrOW *Jephthah the Gileadite was a 
_LN mighty " man of valor, and he was the 
son of a t harlot : and Gilead begat Jeph- 
thah. 

2 And Gilead's wife bare him sons ; and 
his wife's sons grew up, and they thrust 
out Jephthah, and said unto him. Thou 
shalt "not inherit in our father's house; 
for thou art the son of a strange woman. 

3 Then Jephthah J fled from his breth- 
ren, and dwelt in the land of Tob : and 
there were gathered Pvain men to Jeph- 
thah, and went out with him. 

4 ^And it came to pa.ss Hn process of 
time, that the children of Ammon made 
war against Israel. 

5 And it was so, that when the children 
of Ammon made war against Israel, the 
elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthali 
out of the land of Tob : 

6 And they said unto Jephthah, Come, 
and be our captain, that we may fight willi 
the children of Ammon. 

7 And Jephthah said unto the elders of 
Gilead, 1 Did not ye hate me, and expel 
me out of my father's house'? and why 
are ye come unto me now when ye arc 
in distress"? 

8 And the elders of Gilead said unto 
Jephthah, Therefore we turn 'again to tliee 
now, that thou mayestgo with us, and fight 
against the children of Ammon, and be our 
head 'over all the inhabitants of Gilead. 



45: Tsa. 


m 


3. II 


Heb. CI 


Krf. 


m cl. 


p. 11 


11, ■: 


); G 


■n. 31 : 40 


" Heb. 1 


:3 


,calle 


Jcphth, 


e. 


n rimp. t 


:12; 


.'Kins 


'»,5: 


. fHeb 


a womar\ 


a 


inrlot. 


o Gen 


21 


10; Ga 


.4:.m t 


Heh 


/.vm Mr 


face of. 


V 


cliap, < 


:4; IS.l 


m. 


2: -2. 4 


Heb. 


after 


Uai/s 


q Gen 


2e:27. 




uke 17 


: 4. . • cl 


ap. 


10: 18. 











yet such is the folly and wickedness of men, that 
they will try it again with as much eagerness and 
confidence of success as if the experiment had never 
been made. 

10. Men who, in prosperity, cast ofTthe fear of the 
Lord and openly rehel against him, in adversity, 
and when suffering the eflects of their sins, often feel 
their need of his help. 

].5. Though God miglit justly leave men to the 
consequences of their transgressions and never again 
deliver them, yet when tliey feel and acknowledge 
his righteousness, and turn heartily to him, lie has 
compassion on them and opens the way for their 
relief. 

CHAPTER XT. 

2. A strange woman; not the lawful wife of 
his father. 

3. The land of Tob ; supposed to be in or near 
Syria. 

329 



Jcplithah's fruitless 



JUDGES XI. 



embassage to Ammon. 



9 And Jephthah said unto the elders of 
Gilead, If ye bring me home again to fight 
against the children of Ammon, and the 
Lord deliver them before me, shall I be 
your head"? 

10 And the elders of Gilead said unto 
Jephthah, *The Louobe *\vitness between 
us, if we do not so according to thy words. 

11 Then Jephthah went with the elders 
of Gilead, and the people made him ''head 
and captain over them : and Jephthah 
uttered all his words before the Lord in 
Mizpeh.<= 

1 2 ^ And Jephthah sent messengers unto 
thekingof the children of Ammon, saying, 
What hast thou to do with me, that thou 
art come against me to fight in my land? 

13 And the king of the children of Am- 
mon answ^ercd unto the messengers of 
Jephthah, Because ''Israel took away my 
land, when they came up out of Egypt, 
from Arnon even unto '"Jabbok, and unto 
Jordan : now therefore restore those lands 
again peaceably. 

14 And Jephthah sent messengers again 
unto the king of the children of Ammon : 

15 And said unto him. Thus saith Jeph- 
thah, Israel took "^not away the land of 
Moab, nor the land of the children of Am- 
mon : 

16 But when Israel came up from Egypt, 
and ^ walked through the wilderness unto 
the Red sea, and ''came to Kadesh; 

17 Then Israel scut messengers unto the 
king of Edom, saying, Let me, I pray thee, 
pass through thy land : but the king of 
Pklom would not hearken thereto. And 
in like manner they sent unto the king 
of Moab ; but he would not consent: and 
Israel abode in Kadesh. 

18 Then they went along through the 
wilderness, and 'comp<asscd the land of 
Edom, and the land of Moab, and came 
by the east, side of the land of Moab, and 
pitched on the other side of Arnon, but 
came not w-ithin the J border of Moab : for 
Arnon icas the border of Moab. 



■ Jcr. 12: 6. * Heb. tht heartr. b verse 8. c cliap. 20: 1 ; 
ISnm. 10:17. <l Num. 21:24. « Gen. .12 : 22. f Deut 2 : 1 iq. 
( Num. M : 25; Dcut, I : 40 ; .Ioi.li. .1 : fi. h Num. 20 : I, 14. etc. 
I Num. 21 : 4. etc. j Num. 22 : M. k Num. 21 : 21. etc. ; Deut. 
S : 26, etr. I Num. 21 : 2il ; 1 Kings, 11:7; .ler. 48 : 7. ni Micnli 

10. T/ie Lordhc witness ; this was a solemn en- 
gagement that they would make Jephthah their ruler. 

11. A// hi swords ; the words of the engagement 
between him and the elders of Gilead, that tiie people 
might all henr, understand, and ratify them. 

1.3. Israel took a way viy linul ; Num.21 :21-35. 

2'2. The coasts of the Amorites ; the Amorites 
had dispo.ssessed the Ammonites and taken tlieir 
country, from Arnon to Jabhok, before the children 
of Israel came out of Egypt; and the Israelites 
took it not from the Ammonites, iis they now pre- 
tended, vcr. 13, but from the Amorites. 

21. Chcmosh; the idol-god of the Ammonites, 
to whom they .ascribed their successes. 
330 



19 And Israel ^sent messengers *b " r^i' 
unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the king 
of Heshbon ; and Israel said unto him. Let 
us pass, we pray thee, through thy land 
into my place. 

20 But Sihon trusted not Israel to pass 
through his coast: but Sihon gathered all 
his people together, and pitched in Jahaz, 
and fought against Israel. 

21 And the Lord God of Israel delivered 
Sihon and all his people into the hand of 
Israel, and they smote them: so Israel 
possessed all the land of the Amorites, the 
inhabitants of that country. 

22 And they possessed all the coasts of 
the Amorites, from Arnon even untoJab- 
bok, and from the wilderness even unto 
Jordan. 

23 So now the Lord God of Israel hath 
dispossessed the Amorites from before his 
people Israel, and shouldest thou possess 
it? 

2-1 Wilt not thou possess that which 
Chcmosh' thy god giveth thee to possess? 
So "'whomsoever the Lord our God shall 
drive" out from before us, them will we 
possess. 

25 And now art thou any thing better 
than "Balak the son of Zippor, king of 
Moab? did he ever strive against Israel, 
or did he ever fight against them, 

26 While Israel dwelt in p Heshbon and 
her towns, and in ''Arocr and her towns, 
and in all the cities that he along by the 
coasts of Arnon, three hundred years? 
why therefore did ye not recover iJicm 
within that time? 

27 Wherefore I have not sinned against 
thee, but thou doest me wrong to war 
against me : the Loud the ''Judge be "judge 
this day between the children of Israel 
and the children of Amnion.- 

2S Howbeit the king of the children of 
Ammon hearkened not unto the words of 
Jephthah which he sent him. 

29 T[ Then the S^pirit of the Lord came 
upon "Jephthah, and he passed over Gil- 



4:S. n Deut. 18: 12; Psa. 78:.^.^ o Num. 22 : 2, etc. p Num. 
21:26. q Deut. 2 : SB. r Genesis 18:2.S; P.«alm 7.1:7; Krrl. 
12:14. • Oenesi.-. 1B:5; 31 :53; 1 Samuel, 24 : 12, I."). I clinp. 
.3 : 10. u Jephthah seems to have been j^ilge only of North-east 
Israel. 



2.'}. Better than Tialnk ; had they any better 
claim to the lands than had Balak. who was king 
of Moab when Israel took them ? He did tiot take 
them back; and as the Ammonites had not at- 
tempted it, but sutferi'd the Israelites to possess it 
unmolested for three hundred years, it was evident 
that they had lost all title to it, and the Israelites 
did not wrong them in possessing it. 

27. The Lord — he judge; decide, by giving the 
victory to those who were right. 

29. The Spirit — ca7ne itpo7i Jephthah ; fur- 
nishing him with wisdom, conr.age, and all needful 
qualilications to conduct the war. Over; through 
the places mentioned, to collect his army. 



Jephthah's rash vow. 



JUDGES XII, 



Its accomplishment. 



B."'S' ead, and jNIanasseh, and passed 
over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh 
of Gilead he passed over unto the children 
of Ammon. 

30 And Jephthah * vowed a vow unto 
the Loud, and said, If thou shalt without 
fail deliver the children of Ammon into 
my hands, 

31 Then it shall be, that * whatsoever 
Cometh forth of the doors of my house to 
meet me, when I return iu peace from the 
children of Ammon, shall ''surely be the ' 
Lord's, t and I will offer it up for a burnt- 
offering. 

32 11 So Jeplithah passed over unto the 
children of Ammon to fight against them ; 
and the Lord delivered them into his 
hands. 

33 And he smote them from Aroer, even 
till thou come to "^Minnith, even twenty 
cities, and unto tthe plain of the vine- 
yards, with a very great slaughter. Thus 
the children of Ammon were subdued be- 
fore the children of Israel. 

34 ^And Jephthah came to "* Mizpeh 
unto his house, and behold, his daughter 
came out to m6et him with "timbrels and 
with dances : and she was his only child ; 
beside ^ her he had neither son nor daugh- 
ter. 

35 And it came to pass, when he .saw 
her, that he '^rent his clothes, and said, 
Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me 
very low, and thou art one of them that 



• Gen. 


28: 


■20 


1 Sam. 1 


: 11 ; Eccl. 


5:2,4,.i. 


* 


Heb. that 


which 


Cometh fo 


rth 


which shall 


comeforth 


b Lev 


2i 


:-2, 


3 ; 1 Samuel, 


1:11,:8; 


1'h 


•\ h 


ri: 13, 14. 


t Or, or. 


c Ezek. 


•27 


17. 


t Or, 


Mel. 


A ver. 11. 




V. 


|[. 15: -20; 


1 -Snm. 18 


6; r.sa. 


iS: 


in 


190:4 


.ler. 


31 : 4. % 


Or 


,he 


had not 


of hi, own 


either son 




da 


ughter; 


Heb. 



31. Be the hord' s ; devoted especially to his ser- 
vice. And; some have translated this, or; suppos- 
ing that what should come to meet Jephthah was to 
be a burnt-offering, if it were an object which the 
law allowed for that purpose ; and if not. that it was 
to be devoted to God in some other way. 

33. Aroer; a town near the river A rnon. Mln- 
nith; aplace north of Aroer, in the tribe of Reuben. 

35. Opened my mouth ; made a vow. Ver. 30. 
Cannot go hack ; he could not without breaking 
his engagement, and thus, in his view, doing wron^. 

37. My virginity ; that she was to live and die 
without being married and having children, which 
Jewish women verymuch regretted. Fellows; com- 
panions. 

39. According to his voiv ; he devoted her to 
the Lord, in a manner consistent with his promise, 
whatever that was. She knew no man ; was never 
married, and had no children; a thing bewailed and 
lamented both by herself and her companions. 

40. Lament ; this word in the original means, to 
celebrate, or rehearse, and is so translated, chap. -5: II. 
The daughters of Israel, from year to year, com- 
memorated the case of Jephthah's daughter. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 
2. As the sins of parents may greatly injure and 
distress their children, tliis should be a motive to 
induce them to govern all their appetites and pas- 
sions, and to regulate their whole conduct accord- 
ing to the revealed will of God. 



trouble me : for I haA'c opened my mouth 
unto the Lord, and I s cannot go back. 

36 And she said unto him, My father, 
if thou hast opened thy mouth unto the 
Lord, do to me according to that which 
hath proceeded out of thy mouth ; foras- 
much as ''the Lord hath taken vengeance 
for thee of thine enemies, even of the chil- 
dren of Ammon. 

37 And slie said unto her father. Let this 
thing be done for me : let me alone two 
months, that I may H go up and down upon 
the mountains, and bewail my virginity, 
I and my fellows. 

38 And he said. Go. And he sent her 
away /or two months ; and she went with 
her companions, and bewailed her virgin- 
ity upon the mountains. 

39 And it came to pass at the end of two 
months, that she returned unto her father, 
who' did with her according to his vow 
which he had vowed : and she knew no 
man. And it was a *custom in Israel, 

40 That the daughters of Israel went 
yearly t to i lament the daughter of Jeph- 
thah the Gileadite four days in a year. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1 The Ephraimites, quarrelling with Jepththah, and 
discerned by Shibboleth, are slain by the Gileadites. 
7 Jephthah dleth. » Ibzan, who had thirty sons and 
thirty daughters, 11 and Klon, 13 and Abdon, vrho 
had forty sons and thirty nephews, judged Israel. 

ND J the men of Ephraira ^gathered 
themselves together, and went north- 



A 



of himself, f Gen. 37 : 23, 34. e Num. 30: '2 ; Psa. IS: 4. b2Sam. 
18:19,31. II Hvb. go and </o down, i ver. 31 ; 1 Sam. 1 : 22, 24 ; 
2:ia * Or. ordinance. i Mrh. from year to year, f Or, talk 
with. chap. ^ -.11. j chap. 8:1. ^ Heb. were called. 



7. In prosperity, men often despise and reject 
those to whom in adversity they are glad to apply 
for help. 

9. Arrangements in which different parties are 
concerned should be plainly and correctly slated 
beforehand, that there may be afterwards no mis- 
understandings and contests about them. 

12. For the wicked courses which wicked men 
pursue they can give no good reason ; and a correct 
statement of facts shows, that for their pretended 
reasons there is no just found ttion. 

21. The agency of God should never be excluded 
in our contemplations of the affairs of men, and his 
goodness should always be acknowledged as the 
source of all the blessings which we enjoy. 

27. A disposition in the use of proper means to 
commit all our concerns to the guidance and dis- 
posal of God, is a good preparation for obtaining his 
favor, and receiving from him all needed aid. 

^31. We should be careful to promise nothing but 
what is practicable, lawful, and right, that all we 
promise may be faithfully performed. 

35. This life is a mi.\ed scene of trials and mer- 
cies. Great blessings are often followed by great 
distresses; and if uncalled of God and without good 
reason we have brought them upon ourselves, tlie 
poignancy of them is thereby increased. 
CHAPTER XII. 

1. Went vorthioard; towards Mizpeh. on the 
east side of Jordan, where Jephthah lived. 
331 



Tlie Ephrnimites' quarrel. 



JUDGES XIII. 



Israel under the Philistines. 



ward, and said unto Jcplilhah, Wherefore 
passedst thou over to fight airainst the chil- 
dren of Amnion, and didst not call us to 
go with thee? we AA'ill burn thy house 
upon thee with fire. 

2 And .Jephthah said unto them, I and 
my people were at great strife with the 
children of Ammon; and when I called 
you, ye delivered me not out of their hands. 

3 And when I saw that ye delivered me 
not, I *put my life in my hands, and passed 
over against the children of Ammon, and 
the Lord delivered them into my hand : 
wherefore then are ye come up unto me 
this day, to fight against me? 

4 Then .lephthah gathered together all 
the men of Gilead, and fought with Ephra- 
im: and the men of Gilead smote Ephraim, 
because they said. Ye Gileadites arc fugi- 
tives of Ephraim among the Ephraimites, 
and among the Manassites. 

5 And the Gileadites took the ''passages 
of .Jordan before the Ephraimites: audit 
was so, when those Ephraimites which 
were escaped said, Let me go over, that 
the men of Gilead said unto him. Art thou 
an Epliraimite ? If he said. Nay; 

6 Then said they unto' him, Say now 
Shibboleth:* and he said Sibboleth : for 
he could not frame to pronounce it right. 
Then they took him, and slew him at the 
passages of .lordan : and there fell at that 
time of the Ephraimites forty and two 
thousand. 

7 And .Jephthah judged Israel six years. 
Then died .Jephthah the Gileadite, and 
was buried in one of the cities of Gilead. 

8 And after him t Ibzan of lieth-lchem 
judged Israel. 

9 And he had thirty sons, and thirty daugh- 



« lSMm.l9:5; 28:21: .I"l.l:i:]4; I'sii 


119:101. bchiip.3::8; 


7:!4: .l<.«li. 22: 11. * Wliicl] signifietli 


a stream, or fiond. Psa. 


69: 2, 15 ; laa. 27 : 12. f He seems to h:iv 


e l,._-en only a civil jiul-e, 


Ui do justice in North-east Israel. J A 


civil jiiiiKe in Nortli-e:>.st 



2. Ye delivered me not ; did not attempt it, 

3. Put my life iit my hands ; took on myself 
the work and danger of attempting to obtain de- 
liverance. 

6. Forty and two tJtonsand; supposed by many 
to mean two thousand and forty, as tlie Ephraimites 
when numbered amounted only to thirty-two thou- 
sand five hundred. Num. 2(3 : 37. 

10. Beth-lehem ; there were two places of this 
name, one in Zebulun, and one in .Tudah where our 
Saviour w.is born. 

13. A Pirathonite; so called from Pirathon the 
place where he lived. 

M. Nephews; in the original, sons' sons, or 
grandsons. 

15. Mount of the Amalekiles ; supposed to be a 
place in Ephraim called by that naine. Chap, .'j : 14. 
INSTRUCT ION.S. 

J. Persons who have refused to eng.age in great 
and difficult services themselves, often most bitterly 
envy (liose who have successfully performed them. 

3. Men are sometimes called, instead of depend- 
ing on others, to take iheniselvcs the responsibility, 
meet the dangers, and perform the labors of great 
332 



ters, whom he sent abroad, and took *b. c:?^: 
in thirty daughters from abroad for his 
sons. And he judged Israel seven years. 

10 Then died Ibzan, and was buried at 
Beth-lehem. 

1 1 \ And after him t Elon, a Zebulonite, 
judged Israel ; and he judged Israel ten 
years. 

12 And Elon the Zebulonite died, and 
was biiried in "^Aijalon in the country of 
Zebulun. 

13 ^And after him ^Abdon the son of 
Hillel, a Pirathonite, judged Israel. 

14 And he had forty sons and thirty 
nephews,!' that "^ rode on threescore and ten 
ass colts : and he judged Israel eight year.s. 

1.5 And Abdon the son of Ilillel the Pi- 
ratlionite died, and was buried in Pira- 
thon in the land of Ephraim, in the " mount 
of the Amaleldtes. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1 Israel is in the hand of the Philistines. 2 An angel 
appeareth to Manoah's wife. 8 The angel appeareth 
to Manoah. 1.5 Manoah's sacrifice, whereby the an- 
gel is discovered. 21 Samson is born. 

AND the children of Israel *did evil 
again*" in the sight of the Lord; and 
the Lord t delivered them into the ^hand 
of the Phili.stines forty years. 

2 T[ And there was a certain man of ''Zo- 
rah, of the family of the Danites, whose 
name was Manoah ; and his wife was bar- 
ren, and bare not. 

3 And the 'angel of the Lord appeared 
unto the woman, and said unto her, Be- 
hold now, thou art barren, and bearcst not : 
but 1ht)u shall conceive, and bear a son. 

4 Now therefore beware, I pray thee, 
and drink not wine nor strong drink, and 
eat not any unclean thing: 



Isnel. c 1 Cliron. 8 : 13. 5 A civil jmlge also in Norttie.lst Israel. 
II hlvh. torn' >om. d clmi>.B:IO; JO : 4. ' cliap. 3 : |:!, 27; 5:14. 
* Ueh.addett In commit. Horn, i: a. f Jer. 1.3: 23. f This seeins ,■« 
parti.il captivity. BlSam.l2:9. bJosh.l9:4l. i I.uke 1 : ll.etc. 



and trying emergencies. In such cases they should 
not shrink, but in dependence on G-od go forward 
in duty, and leave the resulr, to him. 

4. Family contentions are most bitter and dis- 
astrous. The beginning of them should be most 
carefully avoided, for when once begun no one can 
tell where they will end. 

6. Those who wickedly be^in a qu.arrel, would 
often be struck with horror should they foresee all 
its consequences. 

7. As death is to all persons near, .and after death 
is the judgment, the great object of all should be so 
to live .as to be fitted, through grace, to give up their 
account with joy, and enter into that rest which 
remains for the people of God. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1. Forty years ; chap. 10:7. 

2. Zorah ; a city in the south part of the tribe 
of Dan. 

3. The an gel of the Lord ; supposed to be the 
Angel-Jehovah, in the form of man, and the same 
who appeared to Moses, Joshu.a, and Gideon. Ver. 
21-23. 



j1)i angel appcarelh 



JUDGES xiir. 



to Manoah and kis wife. 



bear a son; and no * razor shall come on 
his head: for the child shall be a ''Naz- 
arite unto God from the womb : and he 
shall begin to deliver Israel out of the 
hand of the Philistines. 

6 Then the woman came and told her 
husband, saying, "^A man of God came 
unto me, and his ''countenance tc.is like 
the countenance of an angel of God, very 
terrible : but I asked him not whence lie 
vas, neither told he me his name : 

7 But he said unto me, Behold, thou shalt 
conceive, and bear a son ; and now drink 
no wine nor strong drink, neither eat any 
unclean thing: for the child shall be a 
Nazarite to God from the womb to the day 
of his death. 

8 TfThen IManoah entreated the Lord, 
and said, my Lord, let the man of God 
which thou didst send come again unto 
us, and teach us what we shall do unto 
the child that shall be born. 

9 And God hearkened to the voice of 
Manoah ; and the angel of God came again 
unto the woman as she sat in the field : but 
IManoah her husband icas not with her. 

10 And the woman made haste, and ran, 
and showed her husband, and said unto 
him. Behold, the man hatli appeared unto 
me, that came unto me the other day. 

1 1 And Manoah arose, and went after 
his wife, and came to the man, and said 
unto him, Art thou the man that spakest 
unto the woman? And he said, I am. 

1 2 And Manoah said. Now let thy words 
come to pass. *How shall we order tlie 
child, and ^how shall we do unto him? 

13 And the angel of the Lord said unto 
Manoah, Of all that I said unto the woman 
let her beware. 

14 She "may not eat of any thing that 
Cometh of the vine, neither let her drink 
wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean 
thing: all that I commanded her let her 
observe. 



«lSam.l:ll. b Nurtl. R: J.etc. c I Kinjs, 17:24. dMat.-28:.3; 
Acts K : 1 5. * Hell. Jl'lmt shall be the manner of. f Or, what ihall 
hedo? Keh.vihMthMbehis work? e ver. -1. f chap. 6: 18, etc. 
t Heb. before, g Gen. 32 : 29. % Or, wonderful. Isa. 9:6. b chap. 



5. A Nazarite; Num. 6:2-21. 
12. Order the child; treat, train, or educate him. 
18. Secret ; wonderful ; the same in the original 
as in Isa. 9 : 6. 

25. Zorah — Eshtaol ; in the south part of Dan. 
IXSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Our mercies and our trials are perfectly known 
to God, and he can so adapt his favors as in the best 
way and time to supply our wants. 

4. Children are tlie gift of God, and parents 
should take such a course as is best adapted to fit 
them for his service. 

C. Husbands and wives should avail themselves 
of each other's counsel, and thus unite their efforts, 
especially in every thing pertaininjj to the temporal 
and eternal welfare of their children. 

22 



15 1[And Manoah said unto the angel 
of the Lord, I pray thee, let us Metain 
thee, until we shall have made ready a 
kid i for thee. 

16 And the angel of the Lord said unto 
Manoah, Though thou detain me, I will 
not cat of thy bread: and if thou wilt 
offer a burnt-offering, thou must offer it 
unto the Lord. For INIanoah knew nol 
that he u'as an angel of the Loud. 

17 And Manoah said unto the angel of 
the Lord, "What z.s- thy name, that when 
thy sayings come lo pass we may do thee 
honor? 

18 And the angel of the Lord said unto 
him. Why askestthou thus after my name, 
seeing it is * secret? 

19 So Manoah took a kid with a meat- 
offering, and *= offered it upon a rocJc unto 
the Lord : and the angel did wondrously ; 
and Manoah and his wife looked on. 

20 For it came to pass, when the flame 
went up toward heaven from off the altar, 
that the angel of the Lord ascended in the 
flame of the altar : and Manoah and his 
wife looked on it, and 'fell on their faces 
to the ground. 

21 But the angel of the LoRDdid no more 
appear to Manoah and to his wife. Then 
Manoah knew that he was an angel of the 
Lord. 

22 And Manoah said unto his wife, ' We 
shall surely die, because we have seen 
God. 

23 But his wife said unto him, If the Lord 
were pleased to kill us, he would not have 
reoeivedaburnt-offeringanda meat-offer- 
ing at our ^ hands, neither would he have 
showed us all these things, nor would as at 
this time have told ns such things as these. 

24 1[And the woman bare a son, and 
called his name 'Samson : and ""the child 
grew, and the Lord blessed him. 

25 And the "Spirit of the Lord began 
to move him at times in il the camp of Dan 
between "Zorah and Eshtaol. 

6:19-23. i Lev.9:24; 1 Chron. 21 : 16,26; E7.ek.l:28; Mat. 17:6. 
iEx.33:20: neut..'>:26. k P«a. '.'.1 : 1 4 ; 27:1.1; Prov.:i:32: .lolin 
ir, : IS. 1 Heb. 11 : 32. ml Sam. 3:19. n chap. 3:10. |{ Hel.. 
Mahanehdan, .as cli. 18: 12. " chiip. 18:11; .I<.s)i. 13:. 13. 

8. One of the most important and ditlicult duties 
of parents is the right education of children, and no 
one will ever properly perform it, unless in the habir. 
of dailv seeking wisdom from God. 

9. When p.irents ask direction from God how to 
treat their children, in order most to honor him, to 
benefit them, and make them useful to others, God 
is ready to hear and to aid them in training their 
children in the w;iy they should go. 

13. To be successful in the right education of 
children, parents mustgive heed to ihe directions of 
God on this subject; and if they would lead their 
children to obey him, they must be careful to set 
them the example. 

15. The mercies of God bestowed on our children, 
should increase our sense of obligation, and lead us 
333 



Samson marrieth a 



JUDGES XIV. 



wife of the Philistines. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



1 Samson desireth a ■wife of the Philistines. 5 In his 
journey he killeth a lion. 8 In a second journey he 
fiudeth honey in the carcass. 10 Samson's marriage- 
feast. 12 His riddle by his wife is made know^l. 19 
Hespoileth thirty Philistines. 20 His wife is married 
to another. 

AND Samson went down to "Timnath, 
and ^saw a woman in Timnath of the 
daughters of the Philistines. 

2 And he came up, and told his father 
and his mother, and said, I have seen a 
woman in Timnath of the daughters of 
the Philistines : now therefore get her for 
me to wife. 

3 Then his father and his mother said 
unto him, 7s there never a woman among 
the daughters of thy "^brethren, or among 
all my people, that thou goest to take a 
wife of the ''uncircumciscd Philistines? 
And Samson said unto liis father, Get her 
for me; for slie *pleaseth me well. 

4 But his father and his mother knew 
not that it was of the Lord, "" that he sought 
an occasion against the Philistines: for 
at that time the "^Philistines had dominion 
over Israel. 

5 Tl Then went Samson down, and his 
father and his mother, to Timnath, and 
came to the vineyards of Timnath: and 
behold, a young lion roared t against him. 

fi And the ^ Spirit of the Loud came 
minhtily upon him, and ''he rent him as 
he would have rent a kid, and he had noth- 
ing in his hand : but he told not his father 
or his mother what he had done. 

7 And he went down, and talked with 
the woman ; and she pleased Samson wall. 

8 If And after a time he returned to take 
her, and he turned aside to see the carcass 
«f the lion : and behold, there icas a swarm 
of bees and honey in the carcass of the 
lion. 

9 And 'he took thereof in his hands, 
and went on eating, and came to his father 
and mother, and he gave them, and they did 
eat : but he told not them that he had taken 
the honey oiit of the carcass of the lion. 



» Gen. 38:13; JosU. 16: 10. b Gen. 34 : 1, 2. c Gen. 24 : 3, 4. 
d Gen. 34 : 14 ; Ex. 34 : 12. 16 ; Dent. 7:3. • Heb. ia rifht in mint 
eyci. Jo8ll.ll:20; 2King«i,fi:3:ij 2Cliron. 10 :16 : 22:7; 2.i:20. 
fcliBp.l3:I. iHvh. in meeting him. 5 cliap. 13:25; 1 Sam. 1 1 :6. 
h ISain. I7:34,3fi. i 1 S.im. 14 : 2.1-30 ; Prov. 2.=i: 16. iE»th.l:6; 



to offer to him the sacrifices of praise and thanks- 
giving. 

18. God manifest in the flesh is indeed, The Won- 
derful; and while we should receive with implicit 
confidence all that he reveals concerning himself, 
we should not seek to know what we cannot and 
do not need to understand. 

20. The Lord is wonderful, not only in his nature 
and perfections, but in his operations; and they 
should inspire us not only with reverence and awe, 
but with admiration, confidence, and love. 

CHAPTRR XIV. 
1. Timnath; in Judah, near the Diilistines. 
334 



10 1[ So his father went down unto *i,c;iJJ?; 
the woman : and Samson made there a 
feast;-' for so used the young men to do. 

1 1 And it came to pass, when they saw 
him, that they brought thirty companions 
to be with him. 

12 ^ And Samson said unto them, I will 
now put forth a ''riddle unto you: if ye 
can certainly declare it me within the 
seven' days of the feast, and find it out, 
then I will give you thirty + sheets and 
thirty '"change of garments : 

13 But if ye cannot declare it me, tltf-n 
shall ye give inc thirty sheets and thirty 
change of garments. And they said unto 
him. Put forth thy riddle, that we may 
hear it. 

14 And he said unto Ihcm, Out of the 
eater came forth meat, and out of the 
strong came forth sweetness. And they 
could not in three days expound the riddle. 

15 And it came to pass on the seventh 
day, that they said unto Samson's wife, 
Entice" thy husband, that he may declare 
unto us the riddle, lest we "burn thee and 
thy father's house with fire : have ye called 
us to Hake that we have? is it not so? 

16 And Samson's wife wept before him, 
and said, PThou dost but hate me, and 
lovest me not: thou hast put forth a rid- 
dle unto the children of my people, and 
hast not told it me. And he said unto 
her. Behold, I have not told it my father 
nor my mother, and shall I tell it thee? 

17 And she wept before him H the seven 
days, while their feast lasted : and it came 
to pass on the seventh day, that he told 
her, 1 because she lay sore upon him : and 
she told the riddle to the children of her 
people. 

18 And the men of the city said unto him 
on the seventh day before the sun. went 
down. What is sweeter than honey? and 
what is stronger than a lion ? And he said 
unto them, If ye had not ploughed with 
my heifer, ye had not found out my riddle. 

19 ^ And "the Spirit of the Lord came 



2: 


IK; 


Kiel. 10: 


la 


k 


Pr 


>v. 


:6; 


Eiek 


17:2 


I.ukel4:7. 


Gen. 


2fl 


27 


; 2 0l.ron 


. 7 


8. 


t 


Or 


shirt*, ni 


GenesiB 4,t : 22. n 


rhap. 


16 


fi; 


Proverb 


n 1 


: U 




1 t 


bnp 


lS:h 


I 


Heb. pofteta 


««, or 


impoffr'tWi U9. 


P 


rhn 


P- 


16: 


l.i. 


II "r, 


the rest of the. q 


l.uke 


11 


■8; 


18:4, .1. 




ver 


6. 















4. Of the Lord ; to overrule this transaction for 
avenging the wrongs inflicted by the Philistines, 
and beginning to deliver the Israelites from their 
power. Chap. 13:5. 

11. They; the people of Timnath. 

12. Put forth a riddle ; this was a common 
amusement on such occasions. Thirty shett.i ; 
shirts or linen, worn next the body. (Tarments ; 
the outer garments, worn over the shirts. 

I-'). Called ns ; invited us to the feast. 

IS. Ploughed with my heifer ; persuaded his 
wife lo tell them. 

19. Ashkelon ; a city of the Philistines, soutli- 
west of Timnath and north of Gaza. 



Samson vexeth and 



JUDGES XV. 



slayeth the Philistines 



B.aiT4L upon him, and he went down to 
Ashkelon, and slew thirty men of them, 
and took their *spoil, and gave change of 
garments unto them which expounded the 
riddle. And his anger was kindled, and 
he went up to his father's house. 

20 But Samson's wife was ^ given to his 
companion, whom he had used as his 
friend.'' 

CHAPTER XV. 

1 Samson is denied his wife. 3 He burneth the Philis- 
tines' corn with foxes and firebrands. G His wife and 
her father are burnt by the Philistines. 7 Samson 
smiteth them hip and thigh. 9 He is bound by the 
men of Judah, and delivered to the Philistines. 14 
He killeth them with a jawbone. IS God maketh 
the fountain En-hakkore for him in Lehl. 

BUT it came to pass within a while after, 
in the time of wheat-harvest, that Sam- 
son visited his wife with a kid ; and he said, 
I will go in to my wife into the chamber. 
But her father would not suffer him to go in. 
2 And her father said, I verily thought 
that thou hadst utterly hated her; there- 
fore I "^gave her to thy companion : is not 
her younger sister fairer than she? t take 
her, I pray thee, instead of her. 



* Ot, apparel, a chap. 1.5 : -2. bjer. 9:4; Micali7:.S; .lolin 
3 : 29. c chap. 14 : M. f Heb. Itt her be thine, i Or, Now shall 



20. His friend ; the person who had the direc- 
tion at the marriage-feast ; called by way of emi- 
nence the friend of the bridegroom. John 3 : 29. 
IN.STRUCTIONS. 

1. On no subject connected with human welfare 
does a young man need divine guidance more than 
in selecting a wife. 

2. It is ordinarily wise for a young man, before 
engaging to marry any one, to consult his parents 
and avail himself of the benefits of their advice. 

3. All wise parents will desire that their children 
should marry those who are pious and who are con- 
nected with religious families. 

4. While parents should advise their children and 
give them good counsel on the subject of marriage, 
yet after they become of age they should not under- 
take to control them. They do not know enough 
about the designs of G-od with regard to such con- 
nections, to render such control either safe or proper. 

5. When the course of children with regard to 
marriage is settled, parents should endeavor to 
make the best of it, and to render it as useful and 
comfortable as possible. 

6. If a young man is under the direction of the 
Spirit of God, and is aided by him, though he may 
meet with great difficulties and dangers, he will be 
enabled to overcome them. 

8. It is often useful to review the scenes in which 
God has especially favored us and enabled us to 
overcome the dangers to which we were exposed. 

9. A generous mind does not wish to enjoy its 
blessings alone, and its happiness is increased by 
imparting them to others, especially to parents, rel- 
atives, and friends ; but there are some things the 
knowledge of which a wise man will keep to himself 
and not impart to any one. 

10. Marriage is a joyful occasion, and it is proper 
gratefully to notice it by feasting. But in feasting 
there is peculiar danger, not only of being be- 
trayed into excesses, but of forgetting God and sin- 
ning against him. All therefore, when so exposed, 
should seek his protection and guidance. 



3 ^ And Samson said concerning them, 
Now t shall I be more blameless than the 
Philistines, though I do them a displeas- 
ure. 

4 And Samson went and caught three 
hundred foxes, and took ^firebrands, and 
turned tail to tail, and put a firebrand in 
the midst between two tails. 

5 And when he had set the brands on 
fire, he let them go into the standing ^ corn 
of the Philistines, and burnt up both the 
shocks, and also the standing corn, with 
the vineyards and olives. 

6 Then the Philistines said, Who hath 
done this? And they answered, Samson, 
the son-in-law of the Timnite, because he 
had taken his wife, and given her to his 
companion. And the Philistines came 
up, and * burnt her and her father with 
fire. 

7 And Samson said unto them, Though 
ye have done this, yet will I be avenged 
of you, and after that I will cease. 

8 And he smote them hip and thigh with 
a great slaughter : and he went down and 
dwelt in the top of the rock Etam. 



I be blameless from the. \OT^torchet. daSam. 14:30. « clinp. 
14:15. 

1 1 . Virtuous compagions are great blessings, and 
vicious ones are great curses. 

12. When in company with the frivolous and 
wicked we are tempted, e.specially after feasting, to 
become like them, and to engage in their frivojou.s 
or even wicked sports. But nothing should receive 
the sanction of our example, except what is moral 
in its nature and useful in its effects. 

13. Thepledgingof property on contingencies the 
results of which we cannot foresee, and which ren- 
der us liable to give or receive an amount without 
an equivalent, is wrong. By encouraging idleness, 
and leading men to the wide extremes of high ex- 
pectation and sore disappointment, it tends great- 
ly to injure them, and should be conscientiously 
avoided. 

15. The hope of gain without laboring or render- 
ing an equivalent, the fear of loss, and the desire to 
prevent it, have tempted many to the commission 
of enormous crimes. 

17. We cannot be sure that others will keep a 
secret which we cannot keep ourselves, as their 
temptation to divulge it may be greater than ours. 
If we would therefore not have a thing known, we 
should not reveal it. 

18. Intimate companionship with the wicked ex- 
poses to the most disastrous results, and by it, from 
the highest mirth, men may be plunged into the 
deepest sorrow. 

20. One wrong step opens the way for another, 
and when a woman betrays her husband, he has no 
security that she will not forsake him. There is no 
safety but in avoiding the beginning of evil. 

CHAPTER XV. 
1. The time of ivhcat-harvest ; in M.ay. A 
hid ; as a present, and in token of reconciliation. 

4. Caught; either he or tliose whom he em- 
ployed. 

5. Corn; grain. Ver. 1. 

8. Top; fissure, cleft, or cavern. 'Etam; sup- 
posed to be south of Timnath, in the tribe of Judah. 
335 



Sanison killeth a 



JUDGES xvr. 



thousand at Lehi. 



9 •[ Then the Philistines went up, and 
pitched in Judah, and spread themselves 
in 'Lehi. 

10 And the men of Judah said, Why are 
ye come up against us? And they an- 
swered, To bind Samson are we come up, 
to do to him as he hath done to us. 

11 Then three thousand men of Judah 
went* to tlie top of the rock Etam, and 
said to Samson, Knowest thou not that the 
Philistines'" are "^rulers over us? what is 
this that tliou hast done unto us ? And 
he said unto them. As they did unto me, 
so have I done unto them. 

12 And til c y s a i d u n 1 h i m , We are come 
down to bind thee, that wc may deliver 
thee into the hand of the Philistines. And 
Samson said unto them. Swear unto me, 
that ye will not fall upon me yourselves. 

13 And they spake unto him, saying, 
No ; but we will bind thee fast, and deliv- 
er thee into their hand: but surely we 
will not kill thee. And they bound him 
with two new cords, and brought him up 
from the rock. 

14 %And when he came unto Lehi, the 
Philistines shouted against him: and the 
Spirit "^ of the Lord came mightily upon 
him, and the "cords that were upon his 
arms became as flax tlfatwas burnt with 
fire, and his bands t loosed from off his 
hands. 

1.5 And he found a tnew jawbone of an 
ass, and put forth his hand, and took it, 
and slow a thousand men tlicrcwith. 

16 And Samson said. With the jawbone 
of an ass, Uieaps upon heaps, with the jaw 
of an ass have I slain a thousand men. 

17 And it came to pass, when he had 



• ver. 19. * HKh. went down. l> rhap. 14:4. c Psa. iniiMi. 
il ch.ip. 14 : fi. e Psiilm 18:34. ^ Hek were melted. J Heb. 
moitt. \ Heb. a heap, two heaps. || That ia, the tiftina up nf 
the jatobone, or the casting away of the jawbone. f Psalin 3 : 7. 
' Or, Lehi. b Isa. 44 : 3. h l»a. 40 : 29. f TImt ia, the well nf 



9. Lehi; the place where S;iinson with a jaw- 
bone smote the Philistines, and on that account 
called Lehi, which means in Hebrew, jawbone. 
Ver. 15-17. 

17. Ramath-lehi ; the hill of the jawbone. 

19. I7i the jaw; in Lehi; the meaning is sup- 
posed to be, that in the place where Sampson was, 
God made a hollow, from which came out water. 
Ver. 9. Jin-hakkorc; meaning, the fountain of him 
that prayed. 

IN.5TRUCTI0NS. 

1. Those who have been wronged or offended, 
should ever be re:idy to forgive, and take all suit- 
able measures for reconciliation with iho.se who 
h.vve wronged or olTeiuled lliem. Mat. 6: l'2-l.'j. 

2. The friendship of the wicked is .soriietimes more 
hi/, irdoiis than their enmity, and tiie course they 
propose to remove one diliiculty, often plunges those 
wlio follow it into .i greater. 

.1. If there must be a contest, we should be care- 
ful not ourselves to be the sinful cause of it. 

6. By doing wrong to avoid an evil, we take a 
course which will bring upon us either that or some- 
tiiing worse. 

336 



made an end of speaking, that he *ri c:??JJ: 
cast away the jawbone out of liis hand, 
and called that place H Ramath-lehi. 

18 1[ And he was sore athirst, and called 
on the Loud, and said, ""Thou hast given 
this great deliverance into the hand of thy 
servant: and now shall I die for thirst, 
and fall into the hand of the uncircum- 
cised ? 

19 But God clave a hollow place that 
was in *the jaw, and there came « water 
thereout; and when he had drunk, his 
spirit came '' again, and he revived : where- 
fore he called the name thereof tEn-hak- 
kore, which is in Lehi unto this day. 

20 And he tjudged Israel in the days of 
the Philistines twenty years. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

1 Samson at Gaza pscapeth, and carrieth away the gates 
of the city. 4 Delilah, corrupted by the Philistines, 
enticeth Samson, (j Thrice she is deceived. 15 At 
last she overcometh iiim. 21 The Philistines take 
him, and put out his ©yes. ->i His strength renew- 
ing, he pulleth down the house upon the Philistines, 
and dielh. 

THEN went Samson to Gaza, and saw 
there * a harlot, and went in unto her. 

2 And it was told the Gazitcs, saying, 
Samson is come hither. And they 'com- 
passed him in, and laid wait for him all 
night in the gate of the city, and were 
quiet II all the night, saying, In the morn- 
ing, when it is day, wc shall kill him. 

3 And Samson lay till midnight, and 
arose at midnight, and took the doors of 
the gate of the city, and the two posts, and 
went away with them, *bar and all, and 
put them upon his shoulders, and carried 
them up to the top of a hill that is before 
Hebron. 

him that catted, or ci-ied. Psa. 34 : 6. t He seems to linve juJ^il 
.Soutli-west Israel iliiring twenty years of their servitude of tlie 
PliilLitines. chap. 13:1. % Heb. a woman a harlot. i I Sam 
uel, JSrSe; Psalm 118:10-12. jj Heb. silent. » Heb. toi'M the 
hai'. ' 

11. The professed friends of G-od m.ay be so be- 
sotted and deb;vsed by sin as to Join with his ene- 
mies, and oppnse tho.se who would save them and 
their children from degradation and ruin. 

11. The triumph of the wicked is short, and when 
they are most confident of success they are often 
nearest to destruction. 

IG. The weakest and most contemptible instru- 
ments may become mighty through God to the de- 
struction of the most powerful of his foes. 

18. Great successes are often, in the course of 
providence, followed by great trials, that all who 
have been favored may feel their dependence on 
God and their constant need of his help. 

19. When men are sensible of their insufficiency, 
and look up with a humble, believing, and alFeclion- 
ate heart to God, he is able and willing to lielp them 
and cause them to raise a permanent memorial to 
his praise. 

CHAPTER XVL 

1. Gaza ; the capital of the southern district of 
^e Philistines. 

3. Br fore ; towards. 



Delilah's treachery. 



JUDGES XVI. 



Samson^ s captivity. 



5.C.S' 4 <^And it came to pass afterward, ' sleep, and went away w^ith the pin of the 



that he loved a "woman *in the valley of 
Sorek, whose name vas Delilah. 

5 And the lords of the Philistines came 
up unto her, and said unto her, ''Entice 
him, and see wlierein his great strengtl 



beam, and with the web. 

15 TfAnd she said unto him, "^ How canst 
thou say, I love thee, when thy heart is 
not with me? Thou hast mocked me 
these three times, and hast not told me 



lieth, and by what mean.s we may prevail ' wherein thy great strength lieth 
against him, that we may bind him to' 16 And itcame to pass, when she pressed 
afflict t him : and we will give thee every | him daily with her words, and urged him, 
one of us eleven hundred piece.'i of silver. I so that his soul was t vexed unto death ; 
6 HAnd Delilah said to Samson, Tell me, { 17 That he "*told her all his heart, and 



I pray thee, wherein thy great strength 
lieth, and wherewith thou mightest be 
bound to afflict thee. 
7 And Samson said unto her. If they 



said unto her. There hath not come a razor 
upon my head; for *"I have been a Naza- 
rite unto God from my mother's womb : 
if I be shaven, then mv strength will go 



bind me with seven ? green withs that [from me, and I shall become weak, and 
were never dried, then shall I be weak, I be like any other man. 
and be as ^another man. I 18 And when Delilah saw that he had 

8 Then the lords of the Philistines i told her all his heart, she sent and called 
brought up to her seven green withs which for the lords of the Philistines, saying, 
had not been dried, p.nd she bound him Come up this once, for he hath showed 



with them. 

9 Now thci'c icere men lying in wait, abid- 
ing with her in the chamber. And she said 
unto him. The Philistines he upon thee, 
Samson. And he brake the withs, as a 
thread of tow is broken when it I! toucheth 
the fire. So his strength was not known. 

10 And Delilah said unto Samson, Be- 
hold, thou hast mocked me, and told me 
lies : now tell me, I pray thee, wherewith 
thou mightest be bound. 

11 And he said unto her, If they bind 
me fast with new ropes *that never were 
occupied, then shall I be weak, and be as 
another man. 

1 2 Delilah therefore took new ropes, and 
bound hiin therewith, and said unto him, 
The Philistines he upon thee, Samson. 
And there icere liers in wait abiding in the 
chamber. And he brake them from off 
his arms like a thread. 

13 And Delilah said unto Samson, Hith- 
erto thou hast mocked me, and told me lies : 
tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound. 
And he said unto her, If thou weavest the 
seven locks of my head with the web. 

14 And she fastened /'/ with the pin, and 
said unto him, The Philistines he upon 
thee, Samson. And he awaked out of his 



:', " 



Or, hy the brook. h rliap. 14:15; Prov. 
11; fi: -21-26; 7:21-:7; I Cor. 6 : 1.^-18. t Or, 



• iKin 
2: IK-iy; . , 

humhte. X Heb. moiitt, or neio cordt. ?J Heb. one. 
smetUlh. * Heh, loherewith xoorh hath not heen done. 
IH.lfi. \ Yleh. shortened, d Prov. 12:2;) ; Mic.lU 7 : 5. 



■ ciinp. 
' ch:*p. 



4. Sorek ; a brook between the Philistines and 
the tribe of Dan. 

5. Elevfii hii7idred pieces of silver ; more than 
two thousand dollars. 

9. In the chamber ; in another apartment of the 
chamber. 

10. Mocked ; deceived. 

13. Seven locks; braids or plaits in which his 
hair may have been arranged. Web ; the cloth in 
the loom which Delilah was perhaps weaving. 



me all his heart. Then the lords of the 
Philistines came up unto her, and brought 
money in their hand. 

19 And "^she made him sleep upon her 
knees; and she called for a man, and she 
caused him to shave off the seven locks 
of his head ; and she began to afflict him, 
and his strength went from him. 

20 And she said. The Philistines be upon 
thee, Samson. And he awoke out of his 
sleep, and said, «! will go out as at other 
times before, and shake myself. And he 
wist not that the Lord was '' departed from 
him. 

21 T[ But the Philistines took him, and 
puti out his eyes, and brought him down 
to Gaza, and 'bound him with fetters of 
brass; and he did grind in the prison- 
house. 

22 Howbeit the hair of his head began 
to grow again ^ after he was shaven. 

23 Then the lords of the Philistines gath- 
ered them together for to oflVr a great sac- 
rifice unto JDagon their god, and to ''re- 
joice: for they said. Our god hath deliv- 
ered Samson our enemy into our hand. 

24 And when the people saw him, they 
praised ' their god : for they said. Our god 
hath delivered into our hands our enemy, 



13 : .n ; Num. 6:5. f Proverbs 7 : 26 ; KccL 7 : 26. e Hosea 7 : !!. 
I> Num. 14:42, 43; 1 Sam. 28: l.i. f Heh. bored out. i.Ier2:l9. 
% Or, at when, j 1 Sam. 5 : 2, etc. k Job 30 : 9, 10 ; Psa. 35 : IS, 
16; Prov. 24:17, 18. 1 Dan.5:4. 



14. Pin ; the same word in the original which is 
translated nail, chap. 4 : 21. 

16. Vexed tijito death ; greatly vexed. 

17. If I be shaven : in losing his hair, he would 
lose the li.adge of his Nazariteship and the strength 
connected with it. 

19. Her knees ; as his pillow. 

21. Did grind ; this was done by turning round 
a stone with the hands, and was, for a man. a de- 
grading employment. 

337 



Samson^ s death. 



juaoES XVII. 



Micah and his gods. 



and the destroyer of our country, *\vhich 
slew many of us. 

25 And it camcto pass, when their liearts 
were ■ merry, that they said, Call for Sam- 
son, that lie may make us ''sport. And 
they called for Samson out of the prison- 
house ; and he made tthein sport: and 
they set him between the pillars. 

26 And Samson said unto the lad that 
held him by the hand. Suffer me that I 
may feel the pillars whereupon the house 
standeth, that I may lean upon them. 

27 Now the house was full of men and 
women ; and all the lords of the Philis- 
tines were there; and there were upon the 
roof about three thousand men and wom- 
en, that beheld while Samson made sport. 

28 And Samson "^called unto llie Lord, 
and said, O Lord God, ''remember me, Ipray 
thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only 
this once, O God, that I may be at once 
avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes. 

29 AndSamson took hold of the two mid- 
dle pillars upon wliicli the house stood, 
and +on which it was borne up, of the 
one with his right hand, and of the other 
with his left. 

30 And Samson said, Let 5 me die with the 
Philistines. And hebowed himself with a// 
/ijs might; and the'' house fell upon the lords, 
and upon all the people that iccre therein. 
So the dead wliieh he slew at his dcatli were 
more than they which he slew in liis life. 

31 Tlien his brethren and all the house 
of his father came down, and took him, 
and brought him up, and buried him be- 



* Heb. < 


ind who multiplied o 


<ir slain. 


\ 


chap 


9 : 27. 


k Heb. 


U : 3fi. t 


Heb. 


be/ore them. 


e Psi<lm 


91 


l.i; 


I.am. 3 


m, »2; 


Jonah 2 : 1 


, -Z, 7. 


<i Psa. 74; If 


-23; .)er. 


1.5: 


l.^i. 


± Or, /• 


leaned 


on them. 


:> He 


J. my snut. e 


lob 20 ;S 


; P 


ia. f>2 


;.1; Kcc 


1.9:12. 


I cliap. 13 


:2S. 


e .loslma 17 : 


14-18. 


b a 


enes 


8 14: W 


Until 



25. Made theni sport ; was the subject of their 
sports. The pillars ; two pillars on which the 
building mainly rested. 

IN.STRUCTIOXS. 

1. Many nnen distinguished by special favors have 
fallen victims to the blandishments of vicious women, 
and from their wiles none, without the keeping of 
(rod, can be .safe. 

2. No one, when tempted to the commission of sin, 
can yield to the temptation without exposinghimself 
to be destroyed. 

3- The punishment of sin is often delayed for a 
season; but in due time, if men repent not, it will 
come upon them, and there will be no escape. 

4. Yielding to temptation increases its power. 

5. Tempters to sin often become tormentors ; and 
those who yield to their enticements, may expect to 
partake of their plagues. 

7. The farther men go in transgression the greater 
the ditBciiUies of escaping from it; and those who 
try to deceive others, tempt others to deceive them. 

9. God is long-sutferiiig, and often continues his 
favors to the guilty, not willing that ihoy siiould 
perish, but that they should come to repentance. 

14. Though lying may relieve a man for a mo- 
ment, yet instead of getting him out of trouble, or in 
the end benefiting him, it will only plunge him into 
deeper sorrows. 
338 



tween ''Zorah and Eshtaol in the bc.?^.' 
burying-place of Manoah his father. And 
he judged Israel twenty years. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

1 Of the money that Micah first stole, then restored, his 
mother inaketh images, 5 and he ornaments for them. 
7 He hireth a Levite to be his priest. 

AND there was a man of mount ^Ephra- 
im, whose name was Micah. 

2 And he said unto his mother. The elev- 
en hundred sliekcls of silver that were 
taken from thee, about which thou cur- 
sedst, and spakest of also in mine ears, 
behold, the silver is with me ; I took it. 
And his mother said, ^ Blessed he thou of 
the Lord, my son. 

3 And when he had restored the eleven 
hwwAred shekels of silver to his mother, his 
mother said, I had wholly dedicated the 
silver unto the Lord from my hand for 
my son, to 'make a graven image and a 
molten image : now therefore I will re- 
store it unto thee. 

4 Yet he restored the money unto his 
mother; and his motliertook two hundred 
shekels of silver, and J gave them to the 
founder, who made thereof a graven im- 
age and a molten image : and they were 
in the house of JMicah. 

5 And the man INlieah had a house of 
gods, and made an''ephod,and 'teraphim, 
and II consecrated one of his sons, who be- 
came his priest. 

6" In those days there was no "'king in 
Israel, but every man did '^that tvhich was 
right in his own eyes. 



3: 


10; Neh. 13: 


25; 2.I0I1 


n, 11. 


i Exodus 20; 


4,23; Lev 


19:4. 


J 1 


oaiah 4H:fi. 


k cliap. 8 : 


27. 


1 Genesis 31 : If 


, 30 ; Hosea 3 : 4. 


II Heb. Jilled th 


e hand. Exotlufl 


29:9; 1 Kings, 


13 : 3.3. ni 


chap. 


18 


1,7; 19:1; 


21 : 3, 25. 


n Deut, 12:8; Pro 


erb8l6:2; 


Eccl. 


11 


9. 













16. Importunity has great infiuence both with 
man and with G-od, and much depends upon reso- 
lute, earnest, untiring perseverance. Luke 11:8. 

17. Those who persist in a course of sinning, will 
soon find themselves weak, helpless, and undone. 

20. Men without the aid of (_rod, are not aware of 
their helplesscondition till they learn it by experience. 

21. Tliose senses which have been the inlets of 
iniquity often become the organs of punishment. 

23. The fall of the professed friends of God gre.atly 
dishonors him, injures his cause, and gives the wicked 
occasion to reproach and triumph. 

27. The triumph of the wicked is short, and the 
height of their joys is the prelude of their ruin. Psa. 
73:lS-20. 

28. Even the loss of eyesight, great as is the ca- 
lamity, may be to a man the means of unspeakable 
good. If it lead him to repentance of his sins and 
faith in Jesus Christ, though his grave be with the 
wicked, his resurrection will be with the just. 

CHAPTER -XVII. 

The events recorded in this and the four following 
chapters, are supposed to have taken place a con- 
siderable time before those recorded in the previ- 
ous chapters, and soon after the death of the elders 
who outlived Joshua. Chap. 20 : 28 ; Josh. 24 : 3] . 

0. Teraphim; household images, or idol-gods. 



He obtainelh a priest. 



JUDGES XVIII, 



Dan seekcth an inherUance. 



B.aS 7 1[And there wasaj-oungmanoutof 
Beth-lehem-judah* of the family of Jiulah, 
who u-as a Levite, and he sojourned there. 

8 And the man departed out of the eity 
from Beth-lehem-judah to sojourn where 
he could find a place: and he came to 
mount Ephraim to the house of Micah, 
as * he journeyed. 

9 And Micah said unto him, Whence 
comest thou'? And he said unto him, I 
iun a Levite of Beth-lehem-judah, and I 
go to sojourn where I may find a place. 

10 And JNIicah said unto him. Dwell with 
me, and be unto me a ''father and a priest, 
and I will give thee ten shekels of silver 
by the year, and ta suit of apparel, and 
thy victuals. So the Levite went in. 

1 1 And the Levite was content to dwell 
with the man ; and the young man was 
unto him as one of his sons. 

12 And ^licah "^consecrated the Levite ; 
and the young man ''became his priest, 
and was in the house of Micah. 

13 Then said Micah, "^ Now know I that 
the Lord will do me good, seeing I have 
a Levite to my priest. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1 The Danites send five men to seek out an inheritance. 
3 At the house of Micah they consult with Jonathan, 
and are encouraged in their way. 7 They search 
Laish, and bring back news of good hope. 11 Six 
hundred men are sent to surprise it. 14 In the way 
they rob Micah of his priest and his consecrated things. 
27 They win Laish, and call it Dan. .'3 j They set up 
idolatry, wherein Jonathan inherited the priesthood. 

IN "^those days there loas no king in Is- 
rael : and in those days the tribe of the ! 
Danitess sought them an inheritance to' 
dwell in ; for unto that day all their inher- 



« Ruth I : 1 , 2. * Heh. in making his wa!/. h cliap. 18: 19. t Or, 
I double tuit ; Heb. an order of garments, c ver. f>. i chap. 18 : 30. 
!Prov.U:l-2. fcliap.l7:6. g Josh. 19:47. J Heb.Juilt. h chap. 



7. Heth-lehem-judah ; so called to distinguish 
it from Bethlehem in Zebulun. Of the family ; 
the city was in the tribe of Judah. 

10. A father ; a guardian, guide, and di.ector 
in spiritual things. 

12. Consecrated the Levite ; set him apart to 
the office of a priest. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Covetousness often increases with age, so that 
the less a man has to hope for from the world, th^ 
more he cleaves to it. 

3. What some people call dedication to Jehovah, 
may be a violation of his law and an utter abomi- 
nation in his sight. 

5. The wickedness of parents is often aided and 
imitated by their children, and thus those who should 
seek each other's salvation, promote each other's 
destruction. 

6. The want of wise, efficient, and good civil 
government is a great calamity to a people, and 
tiiat may seem right to ignorant, wicked men, which 
is a palpable and open violation of the law of God. 

7. Men may have an outward consecration to the 
service of G-od, and yet in heart and in practice be 
ready to unite with his enemies. 

9. Men who rove about without any regular and 



itance had not fallen unto them among the 
tribes of Israel. 

2 And the children of Dan sent of their 
family five men from their coasts, tmen 
of valor, from ''Zorah, and from Eshtaol, 
to spy out the land, and to search it; and 
they said unto them,' Go, search the land : 
who when they came to mount Ephraim, 
to the house of Micah, they lodged there. 

3 When they iwreby the house of ^licah, 
they knew the voice of the young man the 
Levite : and they turned in thither, and 
said unto him, Who brought thee hither? 
and what makest thou in Wnn place? and 
what hast thou here? 

4 And he said unto them. Thus and thus 
dealeth Micah with me, and hath hired 
me, and I am his priest. 

5 And they said unto him, 'Ask coun- 
sel, we pray thee, of God, that we may 
know whether our way which we go shall 
be prosperous. 

6 And the priest said unto them, ' Go in 
peace : before the Lord is your way where- 
in ye go. 

7 1[Then the five men departed, and came 
to * Laish, and saw the people that were 
therein, how they dwelt careless, after the 
manner of the Zidonians, quiet and se- 
cure ; and there icas no II magistrate in the 
land, that might put them to shame in any 
thing; and they were far from the Zido- 
nians, and had no business with any man. 

8 And they came unto their brethren to 
Zorah'' and Eshtaol: and their brethren 
said unto them. What say ye] 

9 And they said, 'Arise, that we may go 
up against them : for we have seen the 



13.'25: 16:31; Gen. 42:9; Num.l.1:l7; .losh.2:l. >Husea4:I3. 
■j 1 Kings, 22:6. % Josh. 19: 47, called Z/wAem. I! Heti. possessor, 
or heir of restraint, k ver. -2. I Sam. 13:.30; 1 Kins*, 23:3. 



stated employment are generally worthless, and 
ready, for money, to unite with others in open 
wickedness. 

12. Many choose both gods and ministers of their 
own making, and depend for acceptance with Jeho- 
vah upon a religion which he abhors. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1. Those days ; the times referred to in the pre- 
ceding chapter. Had 71 ot fallen loito them; it 
had been allotted to them, but they had not gotten 
possession of ail of it. Chap.l:34; Josh. 19:40, 47. 

2. Zorah. and — TLshtaol ; towns or districts in 
the tribe of Dan. 'Chap. 13 : 2. Search the laml ; 
for a place to which a portion of the tribe might 
emigrate. 

3. Knew the voice ; they were before acquainted 
with him, or knew from his speech who he was. 
Make.-'t ; doest. 

6. Before the Lord is your way ; he will pros- 
per you. 

7. Laish ; a town or district in the north of Pal- 
estine, at the foot of mount Lebanon, and near the 
source of the Jordan; called also Leshein, Josh. 
19:47. No hitsiness; no public connection or 
treaty with any people from whom they could e.\- 
pect protection and defence. 

339 



The expedition of the 



JUDGES XVIII, 



Danites against Laish 



land, and behold, it is very good : and are 
ye still ? be not slothful to go, and to enter 
to possess the land. 

10 When ye go, ye shall come unto a 
people "secure, and to a large land: for 
God*" hath given it into your hands; a 
place "^ where there is no want of any tiling 
that is in the earth. 



he took the ephod, aiid the tera- *b. ":»*.' 
phim, and the graven image, and went in 
the midst of the people. 

21 So they turned and departed, and put 
the little ones and the cattle and the car- 
riage before them. 

22 ^And when they were a good way 
from the house of Micah, the men that 



1 1 T[ And there went from thence of the , were in the houses near to Micah's house 
family of the Danites, out of Zorah and were gathered together, and overtook the 
out of P^slitaol, six hundred men *appoint- children of Dan. 

cd with weapons of war. 23 And they cried unto the chi:ldren of 

12 And they went up, and pitched in Dan. And they turned their faces, and 
Kirjath-jearim,''in Judah: wherefore they i said unto Micah, ''What aileth thee, that 
called that place "Mahaneh-dan unto this thou Jcomest with such a company? 



day: behold, it is behind Kirjath-jearim 
13 And they passed thence unto mount 
Ephraim, and came unto the house of 
Micah. 



14 ^Then answered the five men that aileth thee? 



24 And he said, Ye have taken away my 
gods which I made, and the priest, and ye 
are gone away : and what have I more 1 
and what is this that ye say unto me, What 



\"''nt to spy out the country of Laish, and 
said unto their brethren. Do ye know that 
there is in these Hiouses an ephod, and 
teraphirn, and a graven image, and a molt- 
en image? now therefore consider what 
ye have to do. 

15 And they turned thitherward, and 
came to the house of the young man the 
LevitCjCDcn unto the house of Micah, and 
saluted t him. 

16 And 6 the six hundred men appointed 
with their weapons of war, which were 
of the children of Dan, stood by the en- 
tering of the gate. 

17 And the ''five men that went to spy 
out the land went up, a)u/came in thither, 
and took the graven image, and the ephod, 
and the teraphirn, and the molten image: 
and the priest stood in the entering of the 
gate with the six hundred men that were 
appointed with weapons of war. 

1 8 And these went into Micah's house, and 
fetched the carved image, the ephod, and 
theteraphim,and the molten image. Then 
said the ])riest unto them, What do ye? 

19 And tliey said unto hi in, Hold thy peace, 
lay ' thy hand upon thy mouth, and go with 
us, and be to J us a father and a priest: is 
it better for thee to be a priest unto the 
house of one man, or that thou be a priest 
unto a tribe and a family in Israel ? 

20 And the priest's heart was glad, and 





> ve 


r 7, 27. 


b 


.ln« 


h. i : 


•2S, 


24. 


c 


neuL8: 


9. 


~ir 


Hoi, 








■on. l:l 


fi, 0; 2 


t'hro 


n. 


:4 


e 


rlinii. la 


:2r> 


1 




. 17 


■ f, 


t Heh 


atked him 


nf peace 


G»n. 


13:27; 1 Sam 


17 


•2^ 






11 


h 


vpr. 


2. U. 


i J. 


b2 


:«: 


29 


!>: 


4(1 


A; Vxm 


erhs .TO 


rW; 


Mi 


nil 


7 


1»>. 


j cli.ip 


17 


10. 


k t 


en 


21 


:17 


2KingK 


fi: 


■8; 


P«a. 


n4 


s; 



12. Ill-: near. Mahaueh-dan ; the camp of 
Dan. Behind: on the west side. 

M. Coiisidf.r ; whether it is not best for you to 
rob Micah of his images. 

10. Lay thy hand upon thy mouth; say 
nothing. 

28. Zidon ; a populons city on the Mediterra- 
nean. Beth-rehob ; a place west of Laish. 
310 



25 And the children of Dan said unto 
him. Let not thy voice be heard among us, 
lest * angry fellows run upon thee, and 
thou lose thy life, with the lives of thy 
household. 

2G And the children of Dan went their 
way : and when Micah saw that they were 
too strong for him, he turned and went 
back unto his house. 

27 And they took the things which Micah 
had made, and the priest which he had, 
and came unto Laish, unto a people that 
were at quiet and ' secure : and they smote 
them with the edge of the sword, and 
burnt the city with fire. 

28 And there was no "'deliverer, because 
it ivas far from Zidon, and they had no 
business with any man ; and it was in the 
valley that licth by " Beth-rehob. And 
they built a city, and dwelt therein. 

29 And " they called the name of the city 
Dan, after the name of Dan their father, 
who was born unto Israel : howbcit the 
name of the city ivas Laish at the first. 

30 T[ And the children of Dan set up the 
graven image : and .lonathan, the son of 
Gershom, the son of INlanasseh, he and 
his sons were priests to the tribe of Dan 
until the Pday of the captivity of the land. 

31 And tliey set them upMieah's graven 
image, which he made, all the time that 
the house of i God was in Shiloh. 



Uk 


22 : 1. t Hcb. art nalhried tngetlicr. 


\ Heb. bitter of tout. 


2S 


\m. 17:8. 1 ver. 7, 10 ; Dent. 3:1 : 22. 


ro ver. 1, 7. n Num. 


13 


21; SSnm. 10:fi. o Genesis 14:14; 


Jnsli. 19:47; 1 Kingn, 


12 


211,30; 15:20. |> 1 Samuel, 4 : 2, etc. 


; Psa. 78 : 60. q clinp. 


m 


18; .loili. 18:1. 





30. Set up the graven image ; thus idolatry 
was first publicly established in Israel. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. If men were as sensible of their spiritu.al wants 
as they are of their temporal, and as earnest and 
persevering in providing for tliem, they might all 
be made rich for eternity. Prov. 2 : 3-5. 

5. Wicked men often have some conviction of 



The Lev He and 



JUDGES XIX. 



his concubine. 



CHAPTER XIX. 



1 A Levite goeth to Beth-lehem to fetch home his wife. 
16 An old man entertaineth him at Gibeah. ^il The 
Gibeonites abuse his concubine to death. 29 He. di- 
videth her into twelve pieces, to send them to the 
twelve tribes. 

AND it came to pa.ss in those day.s, when 
there was no king in Israel, that there 
was a certain Levite sojourning on the 
side of mount Ephraim, who took to him 
a *concubine out of Beth-lehem-judah. 

2 And his concubine played the whore 
against him, and went away from him 
unto her father's house to Beth-lehem-ju- 
dah, and was there t four whole months. 

3 And her husband arose, and went after 
her, to speak + friendly unto her, and to 
bring her * again, having his servant with 
him, and a couple of asses: and she 
brought him into her father's house ; and 
when the father of the damsel saw him, 
he rejoiced to meet him. 

4 And his father-in-law, the damsel's 
father, retained him ; and he abode with 
him three days : so they did eat and drink, 
and lodged there. 

5 Tl And it came to pass on the fourth 
day, when they arose early in the morn- 
ing, that he rose up to depart: and the 
damsel's father said unto his son-in-law. 
Comfort 5 thy ''heart with a morsel of 
bread,"" and afterward go your way. 

6 And they sat down, and did eat and 
drink both of them together : for the dam- 
sel's father had said unto the man. Be con- 
tent, I pray thee, and tarry all night, and 
let thy ''heart be merry. 

7 And when the man rose up to depart, 
his father-in-law urged him : therefore he 
lodged there again. 

8 And he arose early in the morning on 
the fifth day to depart : and the damsel's 



father said, Comfort thy heart, I pray thee. 
And they tarried H until afternoon, and 
they did eat both of tliem. 

9 And when the man rose up to depart, 
he, and his concubine, and his servant, 
his father-in-law, the damsel's father, said 
unto him. Behold, now the day *draweth 
toward ''evening, I pray you tarry all 
night: behold, ttlie ""day groweth to an 
end, lodge here, that thy heart may be 
merry; and to-morrow get you early on 
your way, that thou mayest go +home. 

10 But the man would not tarry that 
night, but he rose up and departed, and 
came * over against ^ Johns, which is Jeru- 
salem; and //tc/-e were with him two asses 
saddled, his concubine alsowa.? with him. 

11 And when they were by Jebus, the 
day was far spent ; and the servant said 
unto his master, Come, I pray thee, and 
let us turn in into this city of the Jebu- 
sites, and lodge in it. 

12 And his master said unto him, We 
will not turn aside hither into the city of 
a stranger, that is not of the children of 
Israel; we will pass over to Cxibcah. 

1.3 And he said unto his servant, Come, 
and let us draw near to one of these places 
to lodge all night, in Gibeah, or in "'Ramah. 

14 And they passed on and went their 
way ; and the sun went down upon them 
when they ivcre by Gibeah, which helong- 
eth to Benjamin. 

15 And they turned aside thither, to go 
in and to lodge in Gibeah : and when he 
went in, he sat him down in a street of 
the city : for there icas no man that took 
them into his house to 'lodging. 

1 6 % And behold, there came an old man 
from his J work out of the field at even, 
which ivas also of mount Ephraim ; and 



* Heb. a u 

Gen. 34 : 3. 
b Psa. 104:15 


oman a concubine, or a wife a concubine, f Or, a 

months; Heh. dims f our monlbs. ^ Heb. to her henit. 

ajer.3:l. ^ Heb. strengthen, vi-r. 8; Gen.lSr.'i. 

ever. 22. d Psa. 104:15. llHeb.tilttheilat/declineil. 



their dependence on God, and ask otliers to seek for 
them his blessing. 

7. Those who are without civil government are 
destitute of the means which God has appointed to 
restrain the wicked and encourage the good, and to 
protect the one from tlie aggressions of the other. 

9. Power to take possession of a good land does 
not give men a right to it, nor is their success any 
evidence that God approves of their conduct. He 
may in wrath suffer them to rob others, and that 
robbery may prepare the way for their own ruin. 

14. Consideration, and cool, deliberate calculation 
in iniquity, increase its guilt, and manifest great 
hardness of heart. 

17. Rebellion against God and injustice towards 
men go together, and no ties of relationship or ex- 
perience of kindness will lead the wicked ever to 
make it their object to do to others a.s they would 
th.at others should do to them. 

20. The great object of false teachers is worldly 
good; the pro.^pect of this, though byconnivingat and 
sharing in flagrant wickedness, makes them glad. 



" Heb. I 


ewealc. • Luke 24: 29. ^ Heh. it \% the pitching lime vf 


the day. 


f .ler. fi: 4. i Heb. to thv tent. \ Heb. to over against. 


g .lo.sh. 


ii:8,6:!; 18:28: 2S:>m.D:fi. h .losli. 18 :3.i; lSani.7:I7. 


i Mat. 2. 


:43; Heb. 13:2. I I'sa. 101:23. 



24. Idols can afford their worshippers no help ; 
and were not tlie human mind awfully blinded, 
and the heart besotted by sin, no one would e.vpect 
it from them. 

2o. Robbery prepares men for murder, and those 
who feel and act as if might gave right, will commit 
any enormity. 

;iO. Satan, in his worsiiip, is willing men should 
use robbery for burnt-olTerings, but Jehovah in his 
worship abhors i t. Idolatry begun by few may spread 
to many, and ultimately prove the ruin of all. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

12. A stranger ; the city was then inhabited to 
a considerable e.xtent by Jebusites, one of the na- 
tions of Canaan that had not been driven out. Gib- 
eah : this was a few miles north of Jerusalem, and 
on the way towards mount Ephraim. 

13. Ratiuih ; a place near Gibeah. 

15. To lodge ; tnere were then no taverns, and 
lr:ivellers were dependent for lodging on private 
hospitality. 

341 



The u-ickedncs) 



JUDGES XX. 



of Gibeah. 



he sojourned in Gibeah: but the men of 
the place were Beujaniites. 

17 And when lie had lifted up his eyes, 
he saw a wayfaring man in the street of 
the city : and the old man said, Whither 
goest tliou? and whence comest thou? 

18 And he said unto him. We rt;-e passing 
from Beth-Ichem-judah toward the side of 
mount Ephraim; from thence am I: and 
I went to Beth-lchcm-judali, but I am now 
going to the "house of the Lord ; and there 
is no man that *rcceiveth me to house. 

19 Yet there is both straw and proven- 
der for our asses ; and there is bread and 
wine also for me, and for thy handmaid, 
and for the young man u'hich is with thy 
servants : there is no want of any thing. 

20 And the old man said, ''Peace be with 
thee ; howsoever, let all thy wants lie upon 
me; only lodge not in the *= street. 

2 1 So ''he brought him into his house, and 
gave provender unto the asses: and they 
washed their ''feet, and did eat and drink. 

22 1[ Xow as they were making their 
hearts "^merry, behold, the men of the city, 
certain ^sons of Belial, ''beset the house 
round about, and beat at the door, and spake 
to the master of the house, the old man, 
saying, Bring 'forth the man that came into 
thy house, that we may know him. 

23 Andtheman, the master of the house, 
went out unto them, and said unto them, 
Nay, my brethren, nay, I pray you, do not 
.so wickedly; seeing that this man is come 
into my liouse, do not this J folly. 

24 Behold, here is my daughter a maid- 
en, and his concubine; them I will bring 
out now, and ''humble ye them, and do 
with them what seemeth good unto you : 
but unto this man do not t so vile a thing. 



• .losh. 18:1 ; l.S.im. 1 : 3, T. * Heb. gnthtreth. ver. 15; .lolin 
15:6. h ch!>p.B:'2.1; Gen. 4:!:-2-1,-24. cGt'ii. 19:i <1 Gen. -24 : .3-2. 
• Gen.l8:4; John 1.3:6-14 ; lTim.5:ICI. f ver.6,9i clin).. 16:3.i. 
e Deut 1:! : 13 : iZSiim. 2) : 6, 7. h rlinp. 20 : .n ; Gen. 19 : 4. etc. ; 



18. The house of the Lord ; this was in Sliiloh, 
and probably not far from the place where the Levite 
dwelt. 

19. No wa^i.t ; except for lodging. 

20. Peace be with thee; the u.sual salutation of 
kindness. 

22. Sons of Belial ; wicked, abandoned men. 

28. None answered ; she was dead. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. When there is no regular, efficient civil gov- 
ernment, such is human nature, that crimes of all 
descriptions will abound and the wicked triumph. 

6. Hospitality and kindness to friends are highly 
commendable, but we should not urge them against 
their convenience and to the neglect of their duties. 

7. We should never let kindness and importunity 
overcome our judgment. If we do, by the evils 
whii'h spring from it we may, when too late, be 
taught our folly. Multitudes have suffered for want 
of the habit of saying to all undue solicitations, 
promptly, firmly, perseveringly, No. 

8. Nothing should be delayed till afternoon that 
ought to be done in the morning. 

12. It is a great comfort and blessing to travellers 
342 



25 But the men would not heark- \.'t'.fZ. 
en to him : so the man took his concubine, 
and brought her forth unto them ; and ihey 
knew her, and abused her all the night 
until the morning: and when the day be- 
gan to spring, they let her go. 

26 Then came the woman in the dawn- 
ing of the day, and fell down at the door 
of the man's house where her lord was, 
till it was light. 

27 And her lord rose up in the morning, 
and opened the doors of the house, and 
went out to go his way : and behold, the 
woman his concubine was fallen down a? 
the door of the house, and her hands icere 
upon the threshold. 

28 And he said unto her, Up, and let us 
be going: but none answered. Then the 
man took her up upon an ass, and the man 
rose up, and gat him unto his place. 

29 Tl And when he was come into his 
house, he took a knife, and laid hold on 
his concubine, and 'divided her, together 
with her bones, into twelve pieces, and 
sent her into all the coasts of Israel. 

30 And it was so, tliat ail that saw it 
said. There was no such deed done nor 
seen from the day that the children of Is- 
rael came up out of the land of Egypt unto 
this day : " consider of it, take " advice, and 
speak your minds. 

CHAPTER XX. 

1 The Levite in a general assembly declareth his wrong. 
8 The decree of the assembly. 1'2 The Benjamilcs, 
bfiing cited, make head against the Israelites. 18 
The I.*raelites in two battles lose forty thousand. 26 
They destroy by a stratagem all the Benjamites, ex- 
cept six hundred. 

THEN°alI the children of Israel went 
out, and the congregation was gath- 

Hi>se:i i):9j 10:9. i Rom. I : 26, 27. i2Snm. 13:12. k Gen. 
Si:i; Deut 21:14. f U«h. the matter of thit folhj. I chap. 
20:6,7: ISamuel, II :7. mc1iap.20:7. n Prov. 11 : 14 ; 84 : 6. 
o ver. II: chap. 2 1 : fi'j; Jo«h. 22 : 1 2 ; I Sam. 11:7. 

to find good lodging-places where they can rest in 
quietness, and not be disturbed by the wicked. 

16. Diligence in business is conducive to excel- 
lence of character, and promotive of all those vir- 
tues which secure the welfare and comfort of both 
citizens and strangers. 

20. Hospitality, especially to the needy, is a great 
blessing to the giver and to the receiver. It is well- 
pleasing to God, and when exercised from love to 
him will receive a gracious and an abundant reward. 
Rom. 13:13; 1 Tim. 3:2; Tit. 1:8; 1 Pet. 4:9. 

22. The greater the light which men resist, the 
more wicked they will be ; and apostate professors 
of religion, who become openly vicious, are among 
the worst of m.ankind. 

S.'j. Habitual wickedness makes men inexpres- 
sibly cruel, and none are so dead to pity and com- 
passion as tho.se who are given up to its power, it 
is the spirit of hell, and those who pursue it are 
ripening for that place of torment. Psa. 26 : 9. 

CHAPTER XX. 
1. Dan; the north part of the land. Beer- 
sheba ; the south part. Gilead; on the east side 



The Israelites 



JUDGES XX. 



roused to revem^c. 



b'cI'S ered together as one man, from 
Dan* even to Beer-sheba, with the land 
of Gilead, unto the Lord in ""^lizpeh. 

2 And the chief of all the people, even of 
all the tribes of Israel, presented themselves 
in the assembly of the people of God, four 
hundred thousand footmen that ''drewsword. 

3 Now the children of Benjamin heard 
that the children of Israel were gone up 
to Mizpeh. Then said the children of Is- 
rael, Tell us, how was this ''wickedness'? 

4 And *the Levite, the husband of the 
woman that was slain, answered and said, 
I ® came into Gibeah that belongeth to Ben- 
jamin, I and my concubine, to lodge. 

5 And the men of Gibeah rose against 
me, and beset the house round about upon 
me by night, and thought to have slain 
me: and my concubine have they tforced, 
that she is dead. 

6 And "^I took my concubine, and cut 
her in pieces, and sent her throughout all 
the country of the inheritance of Israel : 
for they have committed lewdness and 
folly s in Israel. 

7 Behold, ye are all children of Israel; 
give'' here your advice and counsel. ' 

8 ^ And all the people arose as one man, 
saying, We will not any of us go to his 
tent, neither will we any of us turn into 
his house. 

9 But now this shall be the thing which 
we will do to Gibeah ; ive tvill go up by 
lot against it ; 

1 A nd we will take ten men of a hundred 
throughout all the tribes of Israel, and a 
hundred of a thousand, and a thousand out 
of ten thousand, to fetch victuals for the 
people, that they may do, when they come 
to Gibeah of Benjamin, according to all the 
folly that they have wrought in Israel. 

1 1 So all the men of Israel were gathered 
against the city, +knit together as one man. 

12 U And the tribes of Israel 'sent men 
through all the tribe of Benjamin, saying. 
What wickedness is this that is done 
among you? 

13 Now therefore deliver us the J men, 
the children of Belial, which are in Gibeah, 
that we may put them to death, and put 
away '' evil from Israel. But the children 
of Benjamin would not hearken to the voice 
of their brethren the children of Israel : 





a 1 S«m. 3 • 


20; ■ 


.Snn 


1. 3 


:10 


,. 


i :-2. 


b ,-l,ap. 


11 :11; IS 


im. 


7 


5: 10:17. 


c ohs 


p. H 


:10 


d 


ch 


ip. It 


:-22 27. 


* Heb. the n 


lan 


the Levite. e 


cliap 


11: 


IS, 


etc.. 


t 


Heb. 


humhled. 


f cbnp. 19 


■W. 


e 


.I..si.. 7 : IS. 


h r 


u.p. 


1«: 


30. 


t 


Heb 


fellows. 


i Deut. 13: 


H; 



of .Jordan. JMizpeh; aplace south-west of G-ibeah, 
and near the border of Judah and Benjamin. 

11. Ktiit ; united. 

IS. Which of Its shall go iip first ? they did 
not ask, as thfv should have done, wiiether they 
should go up. This, in reliance on their ovrn wis- 
dom and strength, they had resolved to do, and they 



14 But the children of Benjamin gath- 
ered themselves together out of the cities 
unto Gibeah, to go out to battle against the 
children of Israel. 

15 And the children of Benjamin were 
numbered at that time out of the cities 
twenty and six thousand men that drew 
sword, besides the inhabitants of Gibeah, 
which were numbered seven hundred 
chosen men. 

16 Among all this people there were sev- 
en hundred chosen' men left-handed; eve- 
ry one could sling stones at a \\Mx-brcadtn, 
and not miss. 

17 And the men of Israel, besides Ben- 
jamin, were numbered four hundred tiiou- 
sand men that drew sword : all these were 
men of war. 

18 1[And the children of Israel arose, 
and "'went up to the house of God, and 
asked" counsel of God, and said. Which 
of us shall go up first to the battle against 
the children of Benjamin ? And the Lord 
said, Judah shall go up first. 

19 And the children of Israel rose up in 
the morning, and encamped against Gib- 
eah. 

20 And the men of Israel went out to 
battle against Benjamin; and the men of 
Israel put themselves in array to fight 
against them at Gibeah. 

21 And the children of Benjamin came 
forth out of Gibeah, and "destroyed down 
to the ground of the Israelites that day 
twenty and two thousand men. 

22 And the people the men of Israel en- 
couraged themselves, and set their battle 
again in array in the place where they put 
themselves in array t4ie first day. 

23 And Pthe children of Israel went up 
and M^ept before the Lord until even, and 
asked counsel of the Lord, saying. Shall 
I go up again to battle against the children 
of Benjamin my brother? And the Lord 
said. Go up against him. 

24 And the children of Israel came near 
against the children of Benjamin the sec- 
ond day. 

25 And Benjamin went forth against 
them out of Gibeah the second day, and 
destroyed i down to the ground of the chil- 
dren of Israel again eighteen thousand 
men; all these drew the sword. 



Josh. i-J : 13, etc. j chap. 19 : 2J. k Deut. 17: 12. Icliap. 3:15; 
IChron. 12:2. m ver. 2:1, 26 ; Joel I : U. ncliap. 1:1; Num. 
27:21. o Gen. 49:27: Hoseal0:9. p ver. 26, 27; Psa. 78:34; 
Hosea 5 : 15. q ver. 21. 



only asked who should go first. The Lord told 
them, but did not by this insure their success. 

2-"). Destroyed — of the children of Israel — 
ei-ziiteen thousand ; the Israelites had tliemselves 
been guilty of various crimes, and God s.aw fit thus 
to punish them before he used them as instruments 
of punishing Benjamin. 

343 



Icmporary success, 



and 



JUDGES XX. 



overthrow of Benjamin. 



26 ^ Then *all the children of Israel, ' they were smitten: for the men of o." ?S?S: 
and all the people, went up, and came j Israel gave 'place to the Benjamites, be- 



unto the house of God, and ''wept, and sat 
there before the Loud, and fasted that day 
until even, and ollercd burnt-ofTerings and 
peace-offerings before the Lord. 

27 And the children of Israel inquired 
of the Loud, (for the "^ark of the covenant 
of God wax there in those davs. 



cause they trusted unto the Hers in wait 
which they had set beside Gibeah. 

37 And the liers in wait hasted, and 
rushed upon Gibeah ; and tlie liers in wait 
drewt themselves along, and smote all the 
city with the edge of the sword. 

38 Now there was an appointed ^sign 



28 And '' Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, between the men of Israel II and the liers 
the son of Aaron, •" stood before it in those : in wait, that they should make a great 
days,) saying, Shall I yet again go out to flame* with smoke rise up out of the city, 
battle against the children of Benjamin 39 And when the men of Israel retired in 
my brother, or shall I cease"? And the the battle, Benjamin began to smite ^ and 
Lord said, Go up; for ""to-morrow I will kill of the men of Israel about thirty per-- 
deliver them into thy hand. sons: forthey said, Surely theyaresmitteu 

29 And Israel set ^ liers in wait round down before us, as in the first battle. 



about Gibeah. 

30 And the children of Israel went up 
against the children of Benjamin on the 
third day, and put themselves in array 
against Gibeah, as at other times. 

.31 And the children of Benjamin went 
out against the people, and were drawn 
aM'ay from the city ; and they began to 
smite of the people, *an(l kill, as at other 
times, in tne liighways, of which one go- 
eth up to t the house of God, and the other 
to Gibeah in the field, about thirty men 
of Israel. 

32 And the children of Benjamin said. 
They are smitlcn down before us, as at 
the first. But the children of Israel said. 
Let us flee, and draw them from the city 
unto the highways. 

33 And all the men of Israel rose up out 
of their place, and put themselves in array 
at Baal-tamar : and the liers in wait of Is- 
rael came forth out of their places, even 
out of the meadows of Gibeah. 

34 And there came against Gibeah ten 
thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and 
the battle was sore: but ''they knew not 
that evil luas near them. 

35 And the Lord smote Benjamin before 
Israel : and the children of Israel destroyed 
of the Benjamitcs that day twenty and five 
thousand and a hundred men : all these 
drew the sword. 

36 So the children of Benjamin saw that 



• ver.lB.M. k Joel2:IJ-18. c .losli.IS: 1; I Sam.4.;!,4. il Num. 
W:7-l:l; Jonli. 24 : S.1. • DruL 10:8; 18:ft. I 2 rliron. 20: 17. 
( Jor.|i.8:4;2SanLft:23. * Heb. tnnaiirffd. f Or.Btthcl. tijosli. 
8:14; Kccl.9:i:; Ion. 47 : U ; 1 Tlicus. 5 ! .X I .losli. R; 1ft, etc. 
J 0r,7iirtrffa/<»n^Bonnd with llie trumpets. Jouli 6:ft. ^ Or,/ime. 



28. Phinehas — stootl before it in those days ; 
this shows that these transaclions took place not 
long after the death of Joshua or the elders that 
outlived him. Chap. 17: 1. Or shall I cease? 
this shows that they were now in some measure 
humbled, ready to commit tlieiiiselves to the ;ruid- 
anoe and disposal of Crod. and thus were better 
prepared for success. / vill deliver them ; not 
without, their use of means, but by .«uch means. 

33. Baal-tamar ; a place near Gibeaii. 
344 



40 But when the flame began to arise up 
out of the city with a pillar of J smoke, the 
Benjamitcs looked behind them, and be- 
hold, the + flame of the city ascended up 
to heaven. 

41 And when the men of Israel turned 
again, the men of Benjamin were ''amaz- 
ed : for they saw that evil ^ was come upon 
them. 

42 Therefore they turned their backs be- 
fore the men of Israel unto the way of the 
wilderness ; but the 'battle overtook them ; 
and them which came out of the cities they 
destroyed in the midst of them. 

43 Thus they inclosed the Benjamifes 
round about, and chased them, and trode 
them II down with ease *over against Gib- 
eah toward the sunrising. 

44 And there fell of Benjamin eighteen 
thousand men ; all these i^-e/T men of valor. 

45 And they turned and fled toward the 
wilderness unto the rock of '"Rimnion: 
and they gleaned of them in the highways 
five thousand men ; and pursued hard after 
them unto Gidoni, and slew two thousand 
men of them. 

46 So that all which fell that day of Ben- 
jamin were twenty and five thousand men 
that drew the sword; all these tecrc men 
of valor. 

47 But" six hundred men turned and fled 
to the wilderness unto the rock IJimmon, 
and abode in the rock Riunnon four months. 



II Heb. 


MiiWi. * Heb. elevation, t Heb. the wounded, i Gen, 


10:28; 


Jn«l 3 : 30. t Heb. whole contumption. k Iianjnli 13 : 8; 


3.3:14. 


% Heb. tourhed. 1 l.nin. 1:3. || Or, from Menuchah. 


» Heb 


utUo ovty againit. tn Jo»Ii. 1,'):32; lChron.6:77; Zecli, 


14 : 10. 


n cbiip. 21 : l:i. 



4-'). Kock of Rimnion ; supposed to be a place 
north of G^ibeah, 

47. In tlie rock; in its openings, clefts, or caves, 
m.STRl.'CTIONS. 

1. The sins of others, especially when great and 
aggravated, may be condemned ; but without divine 
grace men will not abhor and forsake tlieir own. 

3. Men should carefully inquire into the facts, and 
obtain full proof of guilt, before they undertake to 
punish. 



Benjamin obtain wives 



B."S' 48 And the men of Israel turned 
again upon the children of Benjamin, and 
smote them with the edge of the sword, as 
well the men of every city, as the beast, 
and all that *came to hand : also they set 
on fire all the cities that tthey came to. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

1 Tlie people bewail the desolation of Benjamin. 8 By 
the dpstruction of Jabesh-gilead they provide them 
four hundred wives. 16 They advise them to sur- 
prise the virgins tliat danced at Shiloh. 

IVrOW* the men of Israel had '' sworn in 
_L\ Mizpeh, saying. There shall not any of 
us give his daughter unto Benjamin to wife. 

2 And the people *= came to the house of 
God, and abode there till even before God, 
and '^ lifted up their voices, and wept sore ; 

.3 And said, Lord God of Israel, why is 
this come to pass in Israel, that there should 
be to-day one tribe lacking in Israel ■? 

4 And it came to pass on the morrow, 
that the people rose early, and •* built there 
an altar, and offered burnt-offerings and 
peace-oflering.s. 

5 And the children of Israel said, Who 
is there among all the tribes of Israel that 
came not up with the congregation unto 
the Lord'? For they had made a great 
oath concerning him that came not up to 
the Lord to Mizpeh, saying. He shall sure- 
ly be put to death. 

6 And the children of Israel "^repented 
I hem for Benjamin their brother, and said, 
There is one tribe cut off from Israel this 
day. 

7 How shall we do for wives for them 
that remain, seeing we have sworn by the 
Loud, that we will not give them of our 
daughters to wives? 

8 ^ And they said. What one is there of 
Ihe tribes of Israel that came not up to 
Mizpeh to the Lord'? And behold, there 
came none to the camp from s Jabesh-gil- 1 
ead to the assembly. ] 

9 For the people were numbered, and I 

* Heh.wan/ound. t Heh.wercfuund. •ch.20:l,I0. blSam. [ 
14:-2S,2y; Roin.lO:-2. c chap. JO: 18, -26. d Opn.-27;.18 : I Sani..'!0:4. 
e 2Sam .24:25. t cliap. 11 : 35. I! 1 Sam. 11 : 1 ; 31 : 1 1, h ver. .5 ; 
chap. 5: 23; 1 Sam. 11:7. iNum.3l:l7. f Heij. knoiveth the It/iiig 

8. When men, in reliance on their own wisdom and 
strength, determinewhattheywiU do without asking 
direction of CroJ or seeking his blessing, they should 
not think it strange if he does not give them success. 

12. Men who protect criminals and screen them 
from punisliinent, become partakers of their guilt, 
and often of tlieir woes. 

J7. The race is not always to the swift, nor the 
battle to the strong. Men are dependent oa G-od, 
and numbers merely can never insure success. 

"23. Men may externally seek the Lord without 
forsaking their sins, and in righteous judgment he 
may suH'er them to take a coarse which shall end 
in their ruin. 

28. A disposition to be governed in all things, not 
by our own will, but by the will of God, is a good 
preparation for sure, ultimate, and complete success. 



JUDGES XXI. from Jabesh-gilead and Shiloh. 

\ behold, there were none of the inhabitant.s 
of Jabesh-gilead there. 

10 And the congregation sent thither 
twelve thousand men of the valiantest, 
and commanded them, saying, ""Go and 
smite the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead 
with the edge of the sword, with the wom- 
en and the children. 

• 11 And this is the thing that ye shall 
do, 'Ye shall utterly destroy every male, 
and every woman that + hath Iain by man. 

1 2 And they found among t he inhabitants 
of Jabesh-gilead four hundred * young vir- 
gins, that had known no man by lying 
with any male : and they brought them 
unto the camp to > Shiloh, which is in the 
land of Canaan. 

13 And the whole congregation sent 
some II to speak to the children of Benja- 
min that ^werc in the rock Ptimmon, and 
to *call peaceably unto them. 

14 And Benjamin came again at that 
time ; and they gave them wives which 
they had saved alive of the women of Ja- 
besh-gilead : and yet so they sufficed them 
not. 

15 And the people 'repented them for 
Benjamin, because that the Lord had 
made a '"breach in the tribes of Israel. 

16 ^Then the elders of the congrega- 
tion said. How shall we do for wives for 
them that remain, seeing the women are 
destroyed out of Benjamin ? 

17 And they said. There must be an in- 
heritance for them that be escaped of Ben- 
jamin, that a tribe be not destroyed out 
of Israel. 

18 Howbeit we may not give them 
wives of our daughters : for the "children 
of Israel have sworn, saying. Cursed be 
he that giveth a wife to Benjamin. 

19 Then they said, Behold, there is a 
feast of the Lord in Shiloh t yearly, in a 
place which is on the north side of Beth- 
el, + on the east side 5 of the highway that 

with man. ^Hph. women virijins, j Josh. 18:1. \\ Heh.andsptike 
andcatled. kch. 50:47. '' Or, proclaim pence. Ivt-r.6. m I Chr. 
13: 11; l.i: 13; l3.t 3(1:13; .'JS:12. n ver. 1. t Heb./rom i/t/ir 
to yeui: ^ Or, totoard the sunrising. \ <lr, "W. 



29. The promise of divtne aid, rightly understood, 
le.ads men not to neglect means, but diligently and 
perseveringly to use them. 

35. However numerous or efficacious the means 
which men use. their success comes from G-od, .and 
in the Bible is ascribed to him as really as if no 
means had been employed. 

46. The wicked in this world are often the means 
of punishing themselves and one another; and t!iis, 
in the future world, may continue to be the casi^ 
for ever. 

CHAPTER. XXI. 

6. Repented the»i ; were grieved. 

8. Jabesh-gilead ; a city iu tlie half-tribe n{ 
Manasseh, on the east of Jordan. 

]'2. I». the laud of Canaan ; on the west sid« 
of Jordan. 

345 



Naomi dwells ik Moab. 



RUTH I. 



She returns to Jiidah. 



goeth up from Bcth-cl to Shecliem, and on 
the south of Lebonah. 

20 Therefore they commanded the chil- 
dren of Benjamin, saying, Go and lie in 
wait in the vineyards; 

21 And see, and behold, if the daughters 
of Shiloh come out to * dance in dances, then 
come ye out of the vineyards, and catch 
you every man his wife of the daughters of 
Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin. 

22 And it shall be, when their fathers or 
their brethren come unto us to complain, 
that we will say unto them, *Be favorable 
unto them for our sakes : because we re- 
served not to each man his ''wife in the 



war : for ye did not give unto them *b. c:?52^: 
at tliis time, that ye should be guilty. 

23 And the children of Benjamin did so, 
and took them wives, according to their 
number, of them that danced, whom they 
caught: and they went and returned unto 
their inheritance, and repaired the ■" cities, 
and dwelt in them. 

24 And the children of Israel departed 
thence at that time, every man to his tribe 
and to his family, and they went out from 
thence every man to his inheritance. 

25 In those ''days there was no king in 
Israel : every man did that ivhich was right 
in his ^own eyes. 



THE 



BOOK OF RUTH. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 Elimelech driven by famine into Moab, dieth there. 
4 Mahlon and Chilion, having married wives of Moab, 
die also. 6 Xaomi returning homeward, 8 dissuad- 
eth her two daughters-in-law from going with her. 
14 Orpah leaveth her, but Ruth with great constancy 
accompanieth her. 19 They two ijorae to Beth-lehcra, 
where they are gladly received. 

"IVrOW it came to pass in the Mays when 
J_N the judges t ruled, that there was a 
famine in the land. And a certain man 
of f Bcth-lchem-judah went to sojourn in 
the country of Moab, he, and his wife, 
and his two sons. 

2 And the name of the man ivas Elim- 
elech, and the name of his wife Naomi, 
and the name of his two sons Mahlon and 
Chilion, '" Kphrathitcs of Beth-lchem-ju- 
dah. And they came into the country of 
Moab, and J continued there. 

3 And Elimelech Naomi's husband died ; 
and she was left, and her two sons. 

• clmp. U :M; EccL :l: 4. * Or, Gratify us in them, b 1 Cor. 
7:2. « chap. 20:48. d chap. 17:fi; 18: 1 ; 19: I. eDeut. 12:8. 
t Judg. 3 : IC. t Heh. judged, b .luJg. 17 : 8. h Genesis 3.t : 



4 And they took them wives of the wom- 
en of Moab ; the name of the one rra.s Or- 
pah, and the name of the other Ruth : and 
they dwelt there about ten years. 

5 And Mahlon and Chilion died also 
both of them ; and the woman was left of 
her two sons and her husband. 

6 T[ Then she arose with her daughters- 
in-law, that she might return from the 
country of Moab : for she had heard in the 
country of Moab how that the Loud had 
visited' his people in giving them J bread. 

7 Wherefore she went forth out of the 
place where she was, and her two daugh- 
ters-in-law with her; and they went on 
the way to return unto the land of Judah. 

8 And Naomi said unto her two daugh- 
ters-in-law, Go, return each to her mother's 
house: the Lord ''deal kindly with you, as 
ye have dealt with the dead, and with me. 

t Heb. were, i Genesis 50 : -ih ; Ex. 4 : :)1 ; Luke 1 : 68. j Psa. 
132 : 16 ; Mat. 6 : 31-34. k 2 Tim. 1 : 16-18. 



22. Ye did not give u7ito them ; by this they 
imply th.-vt they did not violate tlie oath spoken of, 
ver. 1, 7, 18, as the women were not taken by tlieir 
consent. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. Engagements made in the heatof passion often 
end in bitter repentance. 

5. Civil wars, and those waged among brethren, 
are often mo^t cruel, an<l le.od on from one degree of | 
enormity to another, till multitudes of both parties 
are overwhelmed in common woe. 

10. Men may be very scrupulous about moral 
obligation in some things, and most regardless of it ' 
in others. 

II. Conscience unenlightened and blinded by sin, 
is a very unsafe guide. What it forbids men to do 
directly, it often suffers them to do indirectly, and 
under circumstances which greatly increase their 
guilt. 

346 



18. Men may be so blinded by sin as to think that 
the giving of onii wife, with her own consent and 
that of her paren's, to one man. is a crime ; and that 
being accessory by robbery and violence \o the giv- 
ing, without their consent or that of their parents, 
two hundred wives to two hundred men, is a worthy 
deed. Surely, he that trustcth in his own heart is 
a fool. Prov. 28 : 26. 

23. Persons may sometimes be married very im- 
properly, and without theconsent of friends, yet after 
their marriage has occurred, and cannot be revoked, 
it is usually wise for friends cheerfully to acquiesce, 
and strive to make the connection as useful as pos- 
sible. 

CHAPTER I. 

1. The land; Palestine. Moab; a coiinlry 
south-east of Palestine. 

2. Ephrathitrs ; Bethlehem was called Ephra- 
tah, and its inhabitants Ephrathites. 



Ruth soeth with 



RUTH II, 



Naomi to Bethlehem. 



find rest, each of you in the house of her 
husband. Then she kissed thcni ; and 
they lifted up their voice, and wept. 

10 And they said unto her, Surely Ave 
will return with thee unto thy people. 

1 1 And Naomi said. Turn again, my 
daughters: why will ye go with me? are 
there yet any more sons in my womb, that 
they" may be your husbands'? 

12 Turn again, my daughters, go your 
v:ay; for I am too old to have a husband. 
If I should say, I have hope, if\ *.shou]d 
have a husband also to-night, and should 
also bear sons ; 

13 Would ye t tarry for them till they 
were grown 1 would ye stay for them from 
having husbands'? nay, my daughters; for 
it J grieveth me much for your sakes that 
the ''hand of the Lord is gone out against 
me. 

14 And they lifted vip their voice, and 
wept again : and Orpah kissed her moth- 
er-in-law; but Ruth "^ clave unto her. 

l.'i And she said. Behold, thy sister-in- 
law is gone back unto her people, and unto 
her ''gods: return ''thou after thy sister- 
in-law. 

16 And Ruth said, ^Entreat me not to 
leave"" thee, or to return from following 
after thee : for whither thou goest, I will 
go ; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge : 
thy s people shall be my people, and thy 
God my God : 

17 Where thou diest. will I die, and there 
will I be buried ; the '' Lord do so to me, 
and more also, if aught but ' death part 
thee and me. 

18 When J she saw that she II was stead- 



aGei 


.38 


11; Deut. 


25:5. 


*0r, 


oei 


e with. 


t Heb. hope 


tHeb. 


Jhave n 


luch bitter 




. b.I 


H-.2. 


15; 


Job 19 


21; Paa.Si: 


4; 38:2; 


3fl:9, 11 


r 


Prov 


17 


17. "1 


.li.(l» 


11 


24. e 


.Insh. 24 : 15. 


% Heb. 


Be not 


aga 


nst m 




f 2 Kings, 2 


2-6; I.uk 


e 24 : 28, 211. 


g clmp. 



15. Her gods ; the Moabites were worshippers 
of idols. 

16. Thy God my God: in this she expre.ssed 
her determination to embrace and adliere to the 
Jewish religion. 

20. JVflowir; meaning pleasant. JWffra; bitter. 

22. Beginning of barley-harvest ; in April. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Men are dependent on G-od for the comforts of 
this life, as well as the life to come ; and witliout 
his blessing, notwithstanding all human efforts, the 
earth would never yield a harvest. 

2. To remove, from a regard to worldly circumstan- 
ces merely, out of a land of religious light and priv- 
ileges to a land of darkness and idolatry, is a course 
full of danger, and likely to terminate in distress. 

5. A state of widowhood is one of peculiar trials, 
which calls for, and should receive, peculiar sym- 
pathy and aid. 

6. AllourblessingsarethcgiftofGrod; theyshould 
be sought from him, and in the reception of them his 
goodness should be daily acknowledged. Mat. 6: 11. 

9. The marriage of daughters with husbands who 
will give them a peaceful, pleasant, and useful 
home, is desired by wise and pious parents, not 



fastly minded to go with her, then she left 
speaking unto her. 

19 11 So they two went until they came 
to Beth-lehcm. And it came to pass, when 
they were come to Bcth-lehem, that all the 
city was moved about them, and they said, 
Is this ''Naomi'? 

20 And she said unto them, Call me not 
Naomi,* call me IMara: for the Almighty 
hath dealt very bitterly with me. 

21 I went out full, and the 'Lord hath 
brought me home again empty : why then 
call ye me Naomi, seeing the Lord hath 
testified against mc, and the Almighty 
hath afflicted me7 

22 So Naomi returned, and Ruth the 
Moabitess, her daughter-in-law, with her, 
which returned out of the country of 
Moab : and they came to Beth-lchem in 
the beginning of barley-harvest. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 Ruth gleaneth in the fields of Boaz. 4 Boaz taking 
knowledge other, 8 showeth her great favor. 18 That 
which she got, she carrieth to Naomi 

AND Naomi had a "> kinsman of her hus- 
band's, a mighty man of wealth, of 
the family of Elimelech; and his name 
was -Boaz. 

2 And Ruth the Moabitess said unto 
Naomi, Let me now go to the field, and 
glean" ears of corn after him in whose 
sight I shall find grace. And she said 
unto her. Go, my daughter. 

3 And she went, and came, and gleaned 
in the field after the reapers : and her ^ hap 
was to light on a part of the field belong- 
ing unto Boaz, who was of the kindred of 
Elimelech. 

4 If And behold, Boaz came from Belh- 



2:11,12. hi Sam. 3:17. i Acts 20 : 24. j Acta 21 : 14. || Heb. 
strengthened hersef/. k l8a.23:7; Latn.2;I5. * Ihtxti/*, pleasant. 
t Tli:it i», liilter. 1 Job 1 :21. m cbap. .1:2, 12. f Called liiioz, 
Mat. 1:5. ti Lev. 19:9; Deut. 24 : 19. $ Heb. happened. 



only for the good of their daughters, but of all who 
may feel their influence. 

l-l. Pious relatives may conduct with such wis- 
dom and kindness as, with the blessing of God, to 
endear themselves to those who have no religion ; 
and this they should desire, for the purpose of doing 
them good. 

16. Fixed and strong resolution is necessary in 
order truly to serve God, and those who love him 
will, when called to it, give up all for his sake. 

20. True piety will lead men to see and acknow- 
ledge the hand of God in their mercies and in their 
trials ; to be thankful for the one and submissive 
under the other, and to endeavor in both to honor 
him. 

CHAPTER II. 

1. Kinsman ; relative. 

2. Glean ears ; pick up what was scattered and 
left in the field by the reapers. Grace; favor. 

3. Ajtartofthejield; the cultivated fields were 
not then ordinarily divided by fences, but by a stone 
or landmark. Without her knowing whose it was, 
G-od so ordered that she went into that part which 
belonged to Boaz. 

347 



Ruth glcaneth in 



RUTH II 



thr fields of Boa 2. 



lehem, and said unto the ''reapers, The 
Lord be with you. And they ''answered 
him, The Lord bless thee. 

5 Then said Boaz unto his servant that 
was set over the reapers, Whose damsel 
is this 1 

G And the servant that was set over the 
reapers answered and said, It is tlie Mo- 
abiti.sh damsel that came back with Naomi 
out of the country of Moab : 

7 And she said, I pray you, let me glean 
and gather after the reapers among the 
sheaves : so she came, and hath continued 
even from the morning until now, that 
she tarried a little in the house. 

8 Then said Boaz unto Ruth, Hearcst 
thou not, my daughter? Go not to glean 
in another field, "^neither go from hence, 
but abide here fast by my maidens: 

9 Let thine eyes be on the field that they 
do reap, and go thou after them: have I 
not charged the young men tliat they shall 
not"* touch thee? and when thou art athirst, 
go unto the vessels, and drink oil hat which 
the young men have drawn. 

10 Then she 'fell on her face, and bowed 
herself to the ground, and said unto him. 
Why have I found grace in thine eyes, 
that thou shouldest take knowledge of me, 
seeing I am a stranger? 

11 And Boaz answered and said unto her. 
It hath fully been "^showed mc, all tliat thou 
hast done unto thy motlier-iii-law since the 
death of thy husband ; and hoic thou hast 
left thy father and thy mother, and the land 
of thy nativity, and art come unto a peo- 
ple which thou knewest not heretofore. 

12 The Lord « recompense thy work, 
and a full reward be given thee of the 
Lord God of Israel, under whose ''wings 
thou art come to 'trust. 

13 Then she said, *Let me find^favor 
in thy sight, my lord; for that thou hast 
comforted me, aiul for that thou hast spok- 
en + friendly unto thy handmaid, though I 
be not like unto one of thy handmaidens. 

1> lTim.(i:2. r. Cunt, 
f cliap.l :H-I7 



« r»a.l2'.l:7,8; I.ukel:38;2Tli 
1:7. S. d r.on.Cn.K; Prov.6:29. 
t I Sam. 24: 19; I'niv. U:18. b 
1 iliap. I : I& * Or, I/!nd. j G 



U And Boaz said unto her. At Vcf^i. 
meal-time come thou hither, and cat of the 
bread, and dip thy morsel in the vincaar. 
And she sat beside the reapers : and he 
reached her parched corn, and she did eat, 
and was sufficed, and ''left. 

15 And when she was risen up to glean. 
Boaz commanded his young men, saying, 
Let her glean even among the sheaves, 
and + reproach 'her not: 

16 And let fall also some of the handfuls 
of purpose for her, and leave them, that 
she may glean (hem, and rebuke her not. 

17 So she gleaned in the field until even, 
and beat out that she liad gleaned : and it 
was about an cphah of barley. 

18 1[ And she took it up, and went into 
the city ; and her mother-in-law saw what 
she had gleaned: and she brought forth, 
and gave to her that she had reserved after 
she was sufficed. 

19 And her mother-in-law said unto 
her. Where hast thou gleaned to-day ? and 
where wroughtest thou? blessed be ""he 
that did take knowledge of thee. And she 
showed her mother-in-law with whom 
she had wrought, and .'^aid. The man's name 
with whom I wrought to-day is Boaz. 

20 And Naomi said unto her daughter- 
in-law, "Blessed be he of the Lord, who 
hath not left "off his kindness to the living 
and to the dead. And Naomi said unto 
her, The man is near of kin unto us, one 
of ^ our next kinsmen. 

21 And Ruth the Moabitess said, He 
said unto me also, PThou shall keep fast 
by my young men, until they have ended 
all my harvest. 

22 And Naomi said unto Ruth hcrdaugh- 
ter-in-law. It is good, my daughter, that 
thou go out with his maidens, that they 
meet II thee not in any other field. 

23 So slie ikept fast by the maidens of 
Boaz to glean unto the end of barley-har- 
vest and of wheat-harvest; and dwelt 
with her mother-in-law. 



sa. 17:8: 3ii:7i M : 1 : M : 7. 
.33:15; 1 S;in'i. 1:18. f Heb, 



8. ITcarest thon not ; hcatken. My daughter ; 
an expression of kindness. 

10. She frll Oil her face ; a common mode in 
those days of expressing reverence and jjratitude. 

14. Yinegar ; a kind of sour wine or sauce used 
in those days. 

17. Ah ephah ; nearly a busliel. 

20. One of our next kliismeyi ; one vi-ho ac- 
cording to the law had a ri;jht to redeem. Lev. 
25:25. 

23. Wheat-harvest; in May. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. True piety Mill lead those who have it to l>e 
industrious, and to engiije in any honest, useful 
employment to which they may in the prov-idence 
of (jou be called. ' 



4:3; Juilg. 19:3. k P.sa. 23 : ."i. t Keh.lhamt. 

. 41 :1. n cliap. 3:10; 2Sam. 2 : fi ; .Job 211 : 13. 
;1. iClr,thathathrighttoreiUem. l^-y.iR-.V^. |> Clint. 
Or, fall not upon, q Prov. 13:20; 1 Cor 15:. 33. 



loth 

I .J:i! 

o 2S;im.9: 

1:7.8. 

3. With a fatherly kindness God watches over 
and directs the concerns of the poorest, most ob- 
scure, and defenceless of his people, and directs 
them in such a manner as to promote their highest 
good. 

4. Love to God inspires good-will to men, and 
promotes kind affection and true politene.'s in all 
conditions and relations of life. 

5. Kindness to the destitute, especfally to (h • 
stranger, the widow, the fatherless, and those w!in 
have no earthly helper, is peculiarly pleasing to Go I 
.■vnd endearing to men. 

11. Affectionate regard to parents and other rel.i- 
tives. and .^ai'rilices for their benefit from love to 
God and his cause, are always remembered by him, 
and often even in this life receive a great reward. 



318 



Ruth claimcth of Boaz 



RUTH III. 



the duty of a kinsman. 



CHAPTER III. 



1 By Naomi's instruction, 5 Ruth lieth at Boaz's feet. 
8 Boaz acknowledgeth the right of a kinsman. 14 
He sendeth her away with six measures of barley. 

THEN Naomi her mother-in-law .said 
unto her, My daughter, shall *I not 
.seek ''rest for thee, that it may he well 
with thee 1 

2 And now is not Boaz of our kindred, 
with whose maidens thou "^wast? Be- 
hold, he winnowcth barley to-night in the 
threshing-floor. 

3 Wash thyself therefore, and ''anoint 
thee, and put thy raiment upon thee, and 
get thee down to the floor : but make not 
thyself known unto the man, until he 
shall have done eating and drinking. 

4 And it shall be, when he lieth down, 
that thou shall mark the place where he 
shall lie, and thou shall go in, and *un- 
cover his feet, and lay thee down ; and he 
will tell thee what thou shall do. 

5 And she said unto her. All that thou 
say est unto me I will do. 

6 IT And she went down unto the floor, 
and did according to all that her mother- 
in-law bade her. 

7 And when Boaz had eaten and drunk, 
and his heart was ''merry, he went to lie 
down at the end of the heap of corn : and 
she came softly, and uncovered his feet, 
and laid her down. 

8 ^And it came to pass at midnight, 
that the man was afraid, and t turned him- 
self : and behold, a woman lay at his feet. 

9 And he said. Who art thou? And she 
answered, I am Ruth thy handmaid ; 
spread '^ therefore thy skirt over thy hand- 
maid; for thou art ta near kinsman. 





« 1 Cor. 7 


:36; 


1 Tim. 5 : 8. 


1> chap. 


:9. 


c chap. 2 


8, 23. 


ri 


2 Sam 


14: 


2: K 


ccl. 9:8. *• C 


r, li/C up 


the clothes that a 


re on. 


e 


.Imlfe 


m 


6,9, 

to 


22 J 2 Sam. 13 


28 ; F,.stlier I 


10; Eccl. 


8 : !.=> ; 


9 


7; 10 


19. 


r, took hold on. 


f Ezek 


16:8 


t Or, 0, 


e that 



15. A generous mind will avoid repro.aches and 
every thing calculated to wound the feelings of the 
poor, and will delight to aid them in their efforts, 
hy industry and economy, to provide for themselves 
and those dependent upon them. 

19. In answer to the prayers of the pious poor 
for blessings on those who supply their wants, the 
rich often receive treasures better and more abun- 
dant than all which they bestow. 

22. When in a course which we find by experi-. 
ence to be safe and useful, and in which the Lord 
blesses us, it is ordinarily wise to persevere and 
not be disposed to change. This the aged and ex- 
perienced feel more deeply than the inexperienced 
and young. 

CHAPTER III. 

1. Seek rest; by procuring a liu.sband and a home 
for her. 

9. Spi-end — tlnj skirt; this was a request to 
him to redeem lier husband's property and marry 
her, according to the directions, Deut. 2o:.')-]0. 

13. The part of a kinsman ; redeem the prop- 
erty and marry her. 

14. Let it not be known ; lest false reports 
should be raised. 

23 



10 Aiid he said. Blessed be thou of the 
Lord, my daughter : for thou hast showed 
more kindness in the latter end than at the 
beginningjS inasmuch as thou followcdst 
not young men, whether poor or rich. 

11 And now, my daughter, fear not; I 
will do to thee all that thou requirest: for 
all the ^ city of my people doth know that 
thou art a ''virtuous woman. 

1 2 And now it is true that I am thy near 
kinsman : ' howbeit there is a kinsman 
nearer than I. 

13 Tarry this night, and it shall be in 
the morning, that if he will perform unto 
thee the J part of a kinsman, well; let him 
do the kinsman's part: but if he will not 
do the part of a kinsman to thee, then will 
I do the part of a kinsman to thee, as ''the 
Lord liveth : lie down until the morning. 

14 IT And she lay at his feet until the 
morning : and she rose up before one could 
know another. And he said, ' Let it not be 
known that a woman came into llie floor. 

15 Also he said. Bring the II veil that 
thou hast upon thee, and hold it. And 
when she held it, he measured six mcas- 
vres of barley, and laid it on her: and he 
went into the city. 

16 And when she came to her mother- 
in-law, she said. Who art thoit, my daugh- 
ter? And she told her all that the man 
had done to her. 

17 And she said. These six measures of 
barley gave he me ; for he said to me. Go 
not empty unto thy mother-in-law. 

18 Then said she, ''^Sit still, my daugh- 
ter, until thou know how the matter will 
fall : for the man will not be in rest, until 
he have finished the thing this day. 



hath a right to redeem, chap. 2:20. g chap. 1:8. ^ Heb. gate. 
li Prov. 1-2:4:31:10. i chap. 4:1. i chap. 4:5: Deut 25 : 5 ; 
JIat. 23 : 24, 2.i. k Jer. 4:2. 1 Rom. 14 : 16 ; 1 Cor. 10 : 32. || Or. 
sheet, or apron, ni Psa. 37 : 3, ,'j. 



I'i. Veil ; this was made of strong coarse cloth, 
and often used as a sack or bag in which things 
were carried. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. Wise and pious parents will desire that their 
children should, if the Lord open the way for it, be 
well settled in married life, as most conducive to 
their usefulness and comfort, and that of those 
around them. 

5. The directions of parents should be followed 
by children, even when they have arrived to ma- 
ture years, so far as they accord with the will of 
G-od. 

II. A readiness promptly to comply with the 
known will of God, and to promote the highest good 
of men, especially of the poor and needy, is pecu- 
liarly pleasing in his sight, and prepares us for the 
reception of his choicest blessings. 

14. Many things may be proper in one country 
or generation which M'ould not be proper in another, 
and while our great object should be in all things 
to do right, we should also, as far as consistent, avoid 
all appearance of doing wrong, all occasions of mis- 
apprehension, and of liaving our good evil spoken of. 
Rom. 14 : 16 ; 1 Thess. 5 : 22. 

349 



The next of kin refusing, 



RUTH IV. 



Boaz marrieth Ruth. 



CHAPTER IV. 



1 Boaz calleth into judgment the next kinsman. 6 He 
refuseth the redemption according to the manner in 
Israel. 9 Boaz buyeth the inheritance. 11 He mar- 
rietli Ruih. 13 SJie beareth Obed the grandfather of 
David. IS The generation of Pharez. 

THK\ went Boaz up to the gate, and sat 
liiin down there : and behold, the kins- 
man of whom Boaz "spake came by ; unto 
whom he said, Ho, such a one ! turn aside, 
sit down here. And he turned aside, and 
sat down. 

2 And he took ten men of tlie ''elders of 
the city, and said, Sit ye down here. And 
they sat down. 

3 And he said unto the kinsman, Naomi, 
that is come again out of the country of 
Moab, selleth a parcel of land, which was 
our brother Elimeleclrs : 

4 xVnd *I thought to advertise thee, say- 
ing, "^Buy it before the ''inhabitants, and 
before the elders of my people. If thou 
wilt redeem il, redeem it : but if thou wilt 
not redeem it, then tell me, that I may 
know : for there is none to redeem it be- 
sides thee; and I «??i after thee. And he 
said, I will redeem it. 

5 Then said Boaz, What day thou buy- 
est the field of the hand of Naomi, thou 
must buy it also of Buth the iMoabitess, 
the wife of the dead, to •■ raise up the name 
of the dead upon his inheritance. 

6 And the kinsman said, I cannot redeem 
it for myself, lest I mar mine own inher- 
itance: redeem thou my right to thyself; 
for I cannot redeem it. 

7 Now "^this was the manner in former 
time in Israel concerning redeeming and 
concerning changing, for to confirm all 
things; a man plucked o(l' his shoe, and 
gave it to his neighbor: and this u-as a 
testimony in Israel. 

8 Therefore the kinsman said unto Boaz, 
Buy it for thee. So he drew off his shoe. 

9 If And Boaz said unto the elders, and 
unto all the people. Ye are witnesses this 
day, that I have bought all that teas Elim- 
elech's, and all that ivas Chilion's and 
Mahlon's, of the hand of Naomi. 



• ctmp. 3:12. b 1 Kings, 21 : 8. * Heb. I said Twill reveal in 
thiiu ear. o Jer. 32 : 8, in. d Gen. 2.1: 18. e clmp. 3: i:i. f Dent. 
.!»:7-9. B Paa. 127:3; 128:3. h Gen. clis. 29,30. i Dr. fet thee 
richa, or power. iMicMi/>:2. t Heb. pi-ocfaim thy name, j Gen. 



CHAPTER IV. 

1. The gate ; to which men resorted to transact 
business. 

2. He took ten men; to witness the transac- 
tions. Ver. 9-11. 

5. To raise up the name of the dead ; he must 
marry Ruth, as well as redeem or buy the hind. 

7. A testimony ; thai the man who gave the 
shoe transferred his right to the one who received it. 

10. Raise up the name of the dead ; tlie eldest 
son would inherit the estate, and thus the name and 
inheritance of the family would be preserved. 

11. Build the house ; had a numerous posterity. 

350 



I 10 Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, *„.'^:^: 
the wife of Mahlon, have I purchased to 
be my wife, to raise up the name of the 
dead upon his inheritance, that the name 
of the dead be not cut off from among his 
brethren, and from the gate of his place : 
ye are witnesses this day. 

1 1 And all the people that were in the 
gate, and the elders, said, Wc are witnesses. 
The Loud ^make the woman that is come 
into thy house like Rachel and like Leah, 
which '' two did build the house of Israel : 
and tdo thou worthily in 'Ephratah, and 
be t famous in Bcth-lehem : 

12 And let thy house be like the house 
of Pharez, whom - Tamar bare unto Ju- 
dah, of the seed which the Lord shall 
give thee of this young woman. 

1 3 H So Boaz took Ruth, and she was his 
wife : and when he went in unto her, the 
Lord gave her ''conception, and she bare 
a son. 

14 And 'the women said unto Naomi, 
Blessed he the Lord, which hath not Ueft 
thee this day without a II kinsman, that his 
name may be famous in Israel. 

15 And he shall be unto thee a restorer 
of thy life, and *a nourisher of t thine old 
age: for thy daughter-in-law, which lov- 
eth thee, which is ""better to thee than 
seven sons, hath borne him. 

16 And Naomi took the child, and laid it 
in her bosom, and became nurse unto it. 

17 And the " women her neighbors gave 
it a name, saying. There is a son born to 
Naomi ; and they called his name Obed : 
he is the father of Jesse, the father of 
David. 

18 1[ Now these are the generations of 
Pharez : " Pharez begat Hczron, 

19 And Ilczron begat Ram, and Ram 
begat Amminadab, 

20 And iVmminadab begat PNahshon. 
and Nahshon begat + Salmon, 

21 And Salmon begat Boaz, and Boaz 
begat Obed, 

22 And Obed begat Jesse, and Jesse be- 
gat 1 David. 



38:29. k Gen. 20: 17, 18: 33:5. 1 Rom 


12 : la. % Heh. caused to 


cease unto. || Or, redeemer. '^ Heb. /o 


nourish. Gen. 4.1 : 1 1 ; P»:l. 


'i5:22. t Heb.</iy<7i-ilv/ii'ir». m 1 Sam. 


:R. ti I.ukel:SR. u Mat. 


1 : 3, etc. p Num. 1:7. % Or, Salmah. 


q ICliron. 2:15. 



Epliratah — Detli-leliem ; different names of the 
place in which they lived. 

12. Pharez ; from whom Boaz and the Beth- 
lehemites descended. 

11. A kinsman ; one who should perpetuate the 
name and inheritance of her family. 

17. Obed; meaning, a servant, or one who would 
be serviceable. From him descended David and 
Christ. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Punctuality in the transaction of bu.siness, .and 
a habit of having every thing done at the right time 
and in the right way, are highly conducive to pros- 
perity, usefulness, and enjoyment. 



THE 



FIRST BOOK OF SAMUEL, 

OTHEWRI.SE C.AJLLED, 

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE KINGS. 



B:c^,n^- CHAPTER I. 

1 Elkanali a T.evite, having two wives, worshippeth 
yearly at Shiloh. 4 He cherisheth Hannah, though 
barren, and provoked by Peninnah. 9 Hannah in 
grief prayeth for a child. 1'2 Eli first rebuking her, 
afterwards blesseth her. 19 Hannah having borne 
Samuel, stayeth at home till he be weaned. 24 She 
presenteth him, according to her vow, to tlie Lokd. 

IVrOW there was a certain man of Ra- 
_L\ mathaim-zophim, of mount Ephraim, 
and his name leas ''Elkanah, the son of 
Jeroham, the son of Elihii, the son of Tohu, 
the son of Ziiph, an Ephrathite : 

2 And he had two wives; the name of 
the one was Hannah, and the name of the 
other Peninnah : and Peninnah had chil- 
dren, but Hannah had no chiklrcn. 

3 And this man went up out of his city 
yearly* to ''worship and to .sacrifice unto 
the Lord of hosts in Shiloh. And the two 
sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, the 
priests of the Lord, u'cre there. 

4 ^ And when the time was that Elka- 
nali "^ otfered, he gave to Peninnah his wife, 
and to all her sons and her daughters, por- 
tions : 

5 But unto Hannah he gave a tAvorthy 
portion; for he loved Hannah: but ''the 
Lord had shut up her womb. 

6 And her adversary also t provoked her 
sore," for to make her fret, because the 
Lord had shut up her womb. 

7 And as he did so year by year, ^ when 



a 1 Chron. 6 : i7, 34. f Heh./nim ycnr to year. h Ex. -2.3 : 14 ; 
Luke 2: 41. c Deut. 1-2 : .5-7. t Or. double. H Genesia 30 : 2. 
i Heb. angered. « Job 24:21. % Or, froin the time that she 



2. In thft sale and conveyance of property, great 
care shoulil be taken that tlie case be fairly stated 
and correctly understood by all concerned, that it 
be duly witnessed, and so condncted in all respects 
as to cutolFall occasion of future misunderstanding 
and contention. 

6. It is not wise for a man to purchase more 
property than he can pay for. Nor, if he has one 
wife, is it right for him to take another. If he does, 
he violates the original law of nuirriage, and will 
find the way of transgressors to be li:u'd. 

11. Marriage is an ordinance of God, which should 
be entered into in his fear, be solemnized before 
witnesses, and its duties so discharged that it may 
be a blessing to all concerned. 

14. The birth of a child is a just cause of rejoic- 
ing, and all interested should unite in supplication 
to G-od that it may live, be sanctified, and made a 
blessing to itself and its friends, to the church of 
God and the world. 

17. Those who honor God, he will honor ; and 
make them blessings to all generations, even to the 



she went up to the house of the Lord, so 
she provoked her ; therefore she wept, and 
did not eat. 

8 Then said Elkanah her husband to her, 
Hannah, why weepest thou ? and why eat- 
estthou not? and why is thy heart grieved? 
am not I ''better to thee than ten sons? 

9 T[ So Hannah rose up after they had 
eaten in Shiloh, and after they had drunk. 
Now Eli the priest sat upon a seat by a 
post of the temple of the Lord. 

10 And she was H in bitterness of soul, 
and prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore. 

11 And she Avowed a vow, and said, 
Lord of hosts, if thou wilt ''indeed look on 
the affliction of thy handmaid, and 're- 
member me, and not forget thy handmaid, 
but wilt give unto thy handmaid *a man- 
child ; then I will give him unto the Lord 
all the days of his life, and there shall no 
razorJ come upon his head. 

12 And it came to pass, as she t contin- 
ued praying before the Lord, that Eli 
marked her mouth. 

1 3 Now Hannah, she spake in her heart ; 
only her lips moved, but her A'oice was 
not heard: therefore Eli thought she had 
been drunken. 

1 4 And Eli said unto her, How long wilt 
thou be drunken ? put away thy wine from 
thee. , . 

went; Heh. from, her going up. f Ruth 4: 16. |I Heh. bitter of . 
S Jiulg. 1 1 : 30. b 2 Sam. 16 : t-2. i Gen. 30 : 22. * Heb. seed of 
men. j Num. 6:5. ^ Yieh. multiplied to pray. 

end of time and onward to eternity. Blessed, su- 
premely, for ever blessed, are all who trust in and 
obey him. \ 

CHAPTER I. 

I. A71 Ephrathite ; so called from his having 
lived in Ephratah, or Bethlehem. 

3. The Lord of hosts ; this is the first mention 
in the Bible of Jetiovah under this title. See verse 
11. It means, God of armies, or of the multitudes 
of heaven, and of the universe. Eli ; he was then 
high-priest. 

4. Portions ; of the offering on which they were 
to feast. Lev. 7 : 15. 

5. A worthy jjortioii; larger and better. 

6. Her adversary ; supposed to be Peninnah. 
Ver. 7. 

9. The temjyle ; the tabernacle ; the temple was 
not then built. 

II. Give him unto the Lord; to be employed 
all his life in the special service of Jehovah. No 
razor come upon his head; he should be a Naza- 
rite. Num. 6 : 2-5. 

351 



Samtiel is horn. 



I. SAMUEL, I. 



He is lent to the Lord. 



15 And Hannah answered and said, No, 
my lord, I am a Avoman *of a sorrowful 
spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor 
strong drink, but have "poured out my 
soul before the Lord. 

16 Count not thy handmaid for a daugh- 
ter of Belial : for out of the abundance of 
my t complaint and grief have I spoken 
hitherto. 

17 Then Eli answered and said, Go in 
peace: and the God of Lsrael •" grant thee 
thy petition that thou hast asked of him. 

18 And she said, Let thy handmaid find 
grace in thy sight. So the woman went 
her way, and did "^eat, and her counte- 
nance was no more sad. 

19 ^And tliey rose up in the morning 
early, and worshipped before the Lord, 
and returned, and came to their house to 
Ramah : and Elkanah knew Hannah his 
wife; and the Lord ''remembered her. 

20 Wherefore it came to pass, t when the 
time was come about after Hannah had 
conceived, that she bare a son, and called 
his name ^ Samuel, saying, Because I have 
asked him of the Lord. 

21 And the man Elkanah, and all his 
house, went up to offer unto the Lord the 
yearly sacrifice, and his vow. 

22 But Hannah went not up; for she 
said unto lier husband, / trill not go vp 
until the child be weaned, and then I will 
bring him, that he may ""appear before the 
Lord, and there abide for ever. 

2.3 And Elkanah her husband said unto 
her, "^Do what seemeth thee good; tarry 
until thou have weaned him ; only the 



* Hel) hard of tpirit. » Psalm 62 : 8. f Heb. meditation. 
b P8a.20;.1, S. c Eccl. 9:7. il ver. II. t Heb. inrevolution 
of days. \ That is, asktd of Gad. ' T.uke 2 : M. f Num. 30 : 7. 
gSSam. 7:i5. hPbil. 4:6. i Psa. 14.-. : 18, 19. ]l Or, retU7-ntd 



16. Daughter of Belial ; an abandoned, wick- 
ed woman. Spo/cen ; prayed to the Lord. 

18. Grace; favor. r\o more sad; she cheer- 
fully committed her case to the Lord, and expected 
that he would answer her prayers. 

20. Samuel; meaning, asked of God. 

21. His vow ; to do as he had engaged. 

22. For ever ; as long as he lives. 
2'4. One epJiah ; about tliirty quarts. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. When a man so far departs from the original 
law of marriage as to have two wives, he may ex- 
pect to have peculi:ir trials. 

6. Designed and needless provocations increase 
the wickedness of the giver and the unhappiness of 
the receiver 

8. A Just sense of our unworthiness as sinners, 
and of the numerous mercies which God bestows 
upon us, would cure us of discontent. 

10. The best way to obtain relief from trouble 
is to go to God in humble. alTectionate, believing 
prayer, spread out before him our wants, and be- 
seech liiin for Christ's sake to bestow the blessings 
we need. 

17. Fidelity in giving reproof, meekness in re- 
ceiving it, and readiner^s to correct mistakes, and 
also to receive correction, are traits of character 

352 



' Lord ^establish his word. So the *u.V;:it?? 
woman abode, and gave her son suck 
until she weaned him. 

24 T[ And when she hadAveaned him, she 
took him up with her, with three bullocks, 
and one cphah Of flour, and a bottle of wine, 
and brought him unto the house of the 
Lord in Shiloh : and the child was young. 

25 And thev slew abullock, and brought 
the child to Eli. 

26 And she said, O my lord, as thy soul 
liveth, my lord, I amihe. woman that stood 
by thee here, praying unto the Lord. 

27 For this child I *■ prayed; a)id the 
Lord hath 'given me my petition which 
I asked of him : 

28 Therefore also I have II lent him to 
the Lord; as long as he liveth *he shall 
be lent to the Lord. And he worshipped 
the Lord there. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 Hannah's song in thankfulness. 12 The sin of Kli's 
sons. 18 Samuel's ministry. 20 By Kli"s bles.'iinj; 
Hannah is more fruitful. 22 Eli reproveth his sons. 
27 A prophecy against Eli's house. 

AND Hannah prayed, and said, JMy 
heart rejoiceth in the Lord, my horn 
is ''exalted in the Lord; my mouth is 
enlarged over mine enemies; because I 
rejoice ' in thy salvation. 

2 There '"is none holy as the Lord: for 
there is none besides thee : neither is there 
any " rock like our God. 

.3 Talk no more so exceeding proudly; "let 
not t arrogancy come out of your mouth : 
for the pLord is a God of knowledge, and 
by him actions are weighed. 

him, whom I have obtained by petition, to the T.ord. * Or, he 

whom I have obtained by petition, shalt lie returned. j I.uke 

l:4K,etc k Psa. 113:8,9. 1 Piia. 13 : .1. mEx.l.i:!!. n Deut. 
32 : 31. o Psa. 94 : 4. f Heb. hard, f Jer. 17 : 10. 

in the worshippers of Jehovah which prepare them 
for the mutual reception of his blessings. 

18. Prayer often brings sweet peace to the soul, be- 
fore the particular blessing.s prayed for are received. 

20. Blessings obtained of God in answer to prayer 
should be promptly and grateful'y acknowledged, 
and measures be taken to keep his goodness in per- 
petual remembrance. Psa. 116 : 1, 2. 

23. A wise woman will, if consistent, nurse and 
train her own children. Even if it keep her for a time 
from public worship, and occasion many privations 
and cares, yet, in the health, character, and conduct 
of her well-trained children, she may expect, with 
the blessing of God, whose wise and good arrange- 
ment she has in this respect followed, a gracious 
and abundant reward. 

28. No blessings are more dear, and none give 
greater comfort, than those which are gratefully 
received from, and heartily devoted to the Lord. 

CHAPTER, II. 

1. My horn is e.raltrti ; the horn was an em- 
blem of power : the Lord would cause her to tri- 
umph over all her foes. 

2. None besides thee ; no other living and true 
God. Rock ; support, refuge, source of good. 

.3. Actions are weighed ; God perfectly under- 
st<i.nds their nature, character, and deserts. 



Hannah's song of praise. 



I. SAMUEL, II. 



The wicked sons of Eli. 



B."iZ' 4 The »bows of the mighty men 
are broken, and they that stumbled are 
girded with strength. 

5 They that were full have hired out them- 
selves for bread ; and they that were hun- 
gry ceased : so that the'' barren hath borne 
seven : and she that hath many children is 
waxed feeble. 

6 The Lord "^killeth, and maketh alive : 
h« bringeth down to the grave, and bring- 
eth up. 

7 The Lord "* maketh poor, and maketh 
rich: he "bringeth low, and lifteth up. 

8 He '^raiseth up the poor out of the dust, 
and lifteth up the beggar from the dung- 
hill, to set them among princes, and to 
make them inherit the throne of glory : 
for the pillars of the earth arc the Lord's, 
and he hath sget the world upon them. 

9 He will keep the ""feet of his saints, 
and the wicked shall be silent in darkness; 
for by 'strength shall no man prevail. 

10 The adversaries of the Lord shall be 
broken' to pieces ; out of heaven shall he 
thunder'' upon them: the Lord shall 
judge' the ends of the earth ; and he shall 
give strength unto his king, and '" exalt the 
horn of his anointed. 

11 And Elkanah went to Ptamah to his 
house. And the child did minister unto 
the Lord before Eli the priest. 

12 1[Now the sons of Eli loere sons of 
Belial; they knew "not the Lord. 

13 And the priest's custom with the peo- 
ple was, that, when any man offered sac- 
rifice, the priest's servant came, while the 
flesh was in seething, with a flesh-hook of 
three teeth in his hand ; 

14 And he struck it into the pan, or ket- 
tle, or caldron, or pot; all that the flesh- 
hook brought up the priest took for him- 
self. So they did in Shiloh unto all the 
Israelites that came thither. 

15 Also before they burnt the "fat, the 





« Psal 


n 37 : 15 


17 


b 


Psalm 113:9. 


c Deuteronomy 


32 


:39. 


A 


Job 1 : 


•21. « !■ 


8a. 


7S:1 


f P.sa. 113:7 


8; D.aii 


. 4 : 17. 


B 


Csa. 


K 


2 : -25. 


U Psn. 


21 


S. 


i Ecrl. 9:11. 


Exoiii 


» 15:6; 


1' 


<alni 


•?. 


q. k 


Psa. 18 


l:! 


14. 


1 Psiu HH : 13. 


■n Psa. 


89 : 24. 


n 


.ler. 


■n 


:16; 


Romans 


: 24, 28. 


o Leviticua 3 


3-5, 16 


* Het 


.at on 



4. Themiglity ; who trust in their own strenifth. 
They that stumbled ; the feeble who trust in God. 

5. Ceased ; ceased to be hungry, from the abun- 
dance that G-od gave them. Borne seven; had 
many chilflren. 

8. The pillars of the earth are the Lord's ; 
he made and sustains it, and lie overrules and dis- 
poses of all its concerns. 

9. Keep the feet of his saints ; preserve them. 
By strengtli ; of any created arm. 

10. Hisiing — hisanoiiited; this is the first time 
the word Messiah, or the Anointed, is mentioned in 
the Bible. It is applied to David and to Christ. 

11. Kamah ; the same as Ramathaim-zophim. 
Chap. 1:1. Minister unto the Lord; perform 
such services about the sanctuary as were suited to 
his age. 

12. So7isofEli ; Hophniand rhinehas. Ver. 34. 



priest's servant came, and said to the man 
that sacrificed. Give flesh to roast for the 
priest; for he will not have sodden flesh 
of thee, but raw. 

16 2\nd if any man said unto him, Let 
them not fail to burn the fat *preseutly, 
and then take a.s- much as tliy soul desircth ; 
then he would answer him. Nay; but thou 
shall give it me now : and if not, I will 
take it by force. 

17 Wherefore the sin of the young men 
was very great p before the Lord : for men 
abhorred^ the oflering of the Lord. 

18 Tf But Samuel ministered before the 
Lord, being a child, 'girded with a linen 
ephod. 

19 Moreover his mother made him a lit- 
tle coat, and brought it to him from year 
to year, when she 'came up with her hus- 
band to offer the yearly sacrifice. 

20 TfAnd Eli blessed Elkanah and his 
wife, and said, The Lord give thee seed 
of this woman for the ^ loan which is lent 
to the Lord. And they went unto their 
own home. 

21 And the Lord 'visited Hannah, so 
that she conceived, and bare three sons 
and two daughters. And the child Samuel 
grew before the Lord. 

22 TT Now Eli was very old, and heard 
all that his sons did unto all Israel; and 
how they lay with the women that + as- 
sembled at the door of the tabernacle of 
the congregation. 

23 And he said unto them. Why do ye 
such things 1 for I liear ^ of your evil deal- 
ings by all this people. 

24 Nay, my sons; for i7 i.s no good report 
that I hear: ye make the Lord's people 
to II transgress. 

25 If one man sin against another, the 
judge shall judge him: but if a man sin 
against" tlic Lord, who shall "entreat for 
himi Notwithstanding, they hearkened 

theday. p Gen. 13:13. q Mai. 2:8. r Exoilus 28 :4. • cliap. 
1:3. \ Or, pttition which the asked, t Genesis 21 : 1. J Heb. 
otsemliied by troops. Exodus 38 ; 8. % ^^. 'vil words of you. 
11 Or, cry out. u Num. 15 : 30; Psalm 51 : 4, 16. » 1 Tim. 2:5; 

Heb. 7 : 25. 

Sonsof Belial; exceedingly wicked. Knewnotthe 
Lord; not in such a manner as to love and serve him. 

13. Seething; boiling. 

14. The priest took ; this was robbing the offerer. 

15. Sodden ; boiled. 

16. I will take it; tliis was an additional robbery. 

17. Men abhorred the offering of the Lord ; 
on acco\int of the \vickednes.s of the priests. 

18. A linen ephod ; a garment like that which 
was worn by the priests. 

20. The loan ; chap. 1 : 28. 

24. Ye make the LorcTs people to transgress ; 
by tempting them to sin. 

25. The judge shall jndge him ; if it were an 
offence of a man against his fellow-man, he might 
be punished according to the law ; or by offering the 
appointed sacrifice, he might through faith in Christ 
be forgiven. But this was a sin not only against men, 

353 



Eli and his house 



I. SAMUEL, II, 



are threatened. 



not unto the voice of tlieir father, " because 
the Lord -svould slay them. 

26 And the cliild Samuel grew on, and 
was in favor ''both with the Lord, and 
also with men. 

27 ^ And there came a man of God unto 
Eli, and said unto him, Thus saith the 
Lord, Did I plainly •" appear unto the house 
of thy father, when they were in Egypt 
in Pharaoh's house'? 

28 And did I choose ''him out of all the 
tribes of Israel to be my priest, to offer 
upon mine altar, to burn incense, to wear 
an ephod before me? and did I "give unto 
the house of thy father all the offerings 
made by fire of the children of Israel? 

29 Wherefore ^kick ye at my sacrifice 
and at mine offering, which I have com- 
manded in my habitation ; and honorest 
thy sons above me, to make yourselves 
fat with the chiefest of all the offerings of 
Israel my people? 

30 Wherefore the Lord God of Israel 
saith, I Ssaid indeed that thy house, and 
the house of thy father, should walk be- 
fore me for ever : but '' nowthe Lord saith. 
Be it far from me ; for ' them that honor 
me I will honor, and they that J despise 
me shall be lightly esteemed. 



• Jotli. 1 1 : 20. t Proverbs 3:4; Luke 2 : .52. c Ex. 4 : U, 27. 
i Ex. 2.S:1,4. e I-eviticus 7:7, 8, 34; Num. 5 r<>, 1»; 18r8-li>. 
fDeut.32:15. g Exodus 29: 9. h Jereiniab 18 : 9, 10. i Psa. 
91 : 14 ; Prov. 3 : 9, 10. j Maladii 2 : 8, 91 k i Kinga, 2 : 27, 33. 



but against God ; it profaned the sacrifice which typ- 
ified the sacrifice of Christ, and there remained no 
more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for 
of judirment and fiery indignation. Such was proba- 
bly the meaning of Eli, but he did not convey it with 
clearness and power to the minds of his profligate 
sons. N"or did he, as he should have done, act it out, 
by not only reproving thom, but e.icpelling them from 
their office and visiting them with condign punish- 
ment, as a warning toall of theguilt and danger of such 
wickedness. He was a judge as well as a father, and 
should have been a terror to tho.se evil-doers. But be 
regarded his sons in this matter more than he did the 
honor of God. Because; on account of their sins. 

26. Ill favor — rinth the Lord ; God may have 
given him renewing grace in his infant years, in 
answer to the prayers of his mother. 

27. Appear nnlo the hinise of thy father; 
Eli descended from Aaron. Ex. 1 : 14, 27 ; 28: 1—1 ; 
Lev. 7:7-35. 

29. Kick ; dishonor, by profaning them or suffer- 
ing them to be profaned. 

30. Walk be fore me ; Ex. 28: 43; 29:9; Num. 
25:10-13. For ever; to the end of the Jewish 
dispensation. Lightly esteevted ; be /ejected and 
punished. 

31. Cut off thine arm; cause his power and 
authority to cease. 

32. All enemy in my habitation ; great afflic- 
tion in the tabernacle on account of the ark being 
taken by the Philistines, and other calamities. 

34. A sign ; an evidence that all which he had 
fcretold would be accomplished. Chap. 4:11. 

S-J. A faithful priest ; Zadok, a de.scendant not 
of Eli, but of Eleazar. 1 Kings, 2 : 27, 35; 1 Chron. 
29:22. Build him a sure house ; continue his pos- 
terity in the priesthood. Mine uJioiiited; the kings 
354 



' 31 Behold, the ''days come, that "b.^.J^; 
I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of 
thy father's house, that there shall not be 
an old man in thy house. 

32 And thou shalt see *an enemy in my 
habitation, in all the tvealth which God 
shall give Israel : and there shall not be 
an old man in thy house for ever. 

33 And the man of thine, u'hom I shall 
not cut off from mine altar, shall be to 
consume thine eyes, and to grieve thy 
heart : and all the increase of thy house 
shall die tin the flower of their age. 

34 And this shall be a sign unto thee, that 
shall come upon thy two sons, on Hophni 
and Phinehas ; in one day they shall ' die 
both of them. 

35 And ""I will raise me up a faithful 
priest, that shall do according to that which 
is in my heart and in my mind : and I will 
build him a sure house ; and he shall walk 
before mine anointed for ever. 

36 And it shall come to pass, /Aaf every 
one that is left in thy house shall come 
and crouch to him for a piece of silver 
and a morsel of .bread, and shall say. 
Putt me, I pray thee, into *one of the 
priests' offices, that I may eat a piece of 
bread. 



* Or, the affliction trf the tabemactt, for alt the wealth tcMcii 
God would have ffivtn Jm-aet. f Ueb. men. 1 chapter. 4:11. 
m E7.ckiel 44 : 15, 16. t Heb. Join. \ Or, somewhat about the 
priesi/eood. 



of David's line who would be anofnted by him to their 
office, and from whom Christ would come. For ever; 
as long as the kings of Israel should continue. 

3C. In thy house ; of Eli's descendants. Shall 
say ; on account of their great poverty and degra- 
dation. 

rXSTRUCTIOXS. 

I. Whenever we receive new mercies, let who 
will be the instrumeat, we should feel that they 
xome from God, and give him the praise. 

3. A conviction of the constant, all-pervading 
presence of God tends to keep us from sin, excite us 
to duty, and make us humble, grateful, and better 
fitted for every good work. 

6. Changes in the condition of individuals, fami- 
)ies, and nations, though brought about by human 
instrumentality, are ordered by the Lord, and his 
agency in them should always be acknowledged. 

9. However great the opposition of the wicked, 
the righteous shall finally overcome, and tlie tem- 
porary succe.'jses of the wicked will end in their final 
and everlasting defeat. 

II. God is greatly pleased when little children 
devote themselves to his service; and the smallest 
child who loves him, has more true spiritual know- 
ledge than the greatest and most learned man who 
neglects his service. 

12. Men may be called priests, or ministers of re- 
ligion, may conduct the forms of public worship, and 
have the best opportunities of knowing God, and yet 
hiite him and be guilty of the most enormous wick- 
edness. 

17. A covetous, self-indulgent, and licentious 
ministry is one of the greatest curses to the souls of 
men. It leads multitudes to despise the ordinances 
ol' religion and sink into the darkness and pollution 
of infidelity. 



The Lord callcth SaimicL 



I. SAMUEL, III. 



andforciellcth Eli's woe. 



B,c"if4T- CHAPTER III. 

1 How the word of the LorJ was first revealed to S^am- 
uel. 11 God telleth Pamuel the destruction of Eli's 
house. 15 Samuel, though loath, telleth Eli the vision. 
19 Samuel groweth in credit. 

AND the child Samuel ministered unto 
the Lord before Eli. And the ^ word 
of the Lord was precious in those days ; 
there was no open vision. 

2 A nd it eame to pass at that time, when 
Eli was laid down in his place, and his 
eyes began to wax dim, that he could not 
see; 

3 And ere the '' lamp of God went out in 
the temple of the Lord, where the ark of 
God was, and Samuel was laid down to 
sleep; 

4 That the Lord called Samuel: and he 
answered. Here am L 

5 And he ran unto Eli, and said. Here 
am I ; for thou calledst me. And he said, 
I called not; lie down again. And he 
went and lay down. 

6 And the Lord called yet again, Sam- 
uel : and Samuel arose and went to Eli, 
and said". Here am I ; for thou didst call 
me. And he answered, I called not, my 
son ; lie down again. 

7 Now* Samuel did not yet know the 
Lord, neither was the word of the Lord 
yet revealed unto him. 

8 And the Lord called Samuel again the 
third time. And he arose and went to 
Eli, and said. Here am I; for thou didst 
call me. And Eli perceived that the Lord 
had called the child. 

9 Therefore Eli said unto Samuel, Go, 
lie down : and it shall be, if he call thee, 
that thou shalt say. Speak, Lord ; for thy 
servant heareth. So Samuel went and 
lay down in his place. 



«Psu.74:9. b Ex.-27:20,2I. * Or. Thus liii Samuel be/ore he 
knew the I.okd, and before the word of the I-obd was revealed unto 
him. c ver.4,.'j,6, 8. it jKing.s,-21 : 13; .ler. I'.J::!. e rhrip.2:-39,etf. 
f Heb. bei/inninff and ending, f Or, .'Ind Iwill tett. fEzek.7;3. 



20. A freewill-offering to the Lord, even of th;it 
which is his, he receives with delight, and bestows 
upon the offerer an abundant reward. 

22. When those who liave the right and the power 
to put licentious men out of the ministry, neglect to 
do it, they become partakers in their sins, and will 
share their woes. 

26. Parents who receive their children as the gift 
of Grod, and train tliem up in tlie way they should 
go, may hope that, through the renewing and sanc- 
tifying influences of the Holy Spirit, they will early 
devote themselves to the service of Christ, and con- 
tinue in it to tiie end of life. Prov. 22 : C ; Acts 
2:17; Eph. 6 : 4. 

27. Great favors shown to anyone lay him under 
great obligations to be faithful in the discharge of 
his appropriate duties, and will aggravate his guilt 
if he neglect them. 

29. It is a great sin for parents to regard their 
children more than they do <.Tod, and tiie continued 
indulgence of this sin will bring upon tiiem fearful 
punishment. 

31. The sins of parents may deeply affect not 



10 And the Lord came, and stood, and 
called "^ as at other times, Samuel, Samuel. 
Then Samuel answered, Speak; for thy 
servant heareth. 

1 1 H And the Lord said to Samuel, Be- 
hold, I win do a thing in Lsrael, at which 
both^ the ears of every one that heareth 
it shall tingle. 

12 In that day I will perform against Eli 
all things which I have spoken ''concern- 
ing his house : t when I begin, I will also 
make an end. 

13 For+ I have told him thati wilHjudge 
his house for ever for the iniquity which 
heknoweth; because his ssons made them- 
selves '- vile, and he il restrained them not. 

14 And therefore I liave sworn unto the 
house of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli's 
house shall not be ""purgedwith sacrifice 
nor offering for ever. 

15 *[[ And Samuel lay until the morning, 
and opened the doors of the house of the 
Lord. And Samuel feared to show Eli 
the vision. 

16 Then Eli called Samuel, and said, 
Samuel, my son : and he answered, Here 
arn I. 

1 7 And he said. What is the thing that 
the LORD hath said unto thee? I pray 
thee hide it not from me: 'God do so to 
thee, and *more also, if thou hide any 
thing t from me of all the things that he 
said unto thee. 

18 And Samuel told him + every whit, 
and hid nothing from him. And he said, 
IV is the Lord : let him do what scemeth 
him good. 

19 TfAnd Samuel grew, and the Lord 
was with him, and ''did let none of his 
words fall to the ground. 



g chap. 2 : 12, 23, etc. % Or. accursed. [[ Heb. /rtnvne^ not upon 
them. h Num. 1.t:30; HsalmM:16; Isru 22 : H ; Heb. 10: 4-10. 
i Rutli 1:17. » Heb. so add. t Or. word, t Heb. all the things, 
or words, j Job 1 : 21 ; I'sa. 39 : 9 ; Isa. 39 : 8. k chap. 9 : 6. 

only their children, but their distant posterity, even 
to the end of time and onward to eternity. 

3-1. When God makes declarations with regard 
to the future, he furnishes such evidence of the cer- 
tainty of their accomplishment as ought to produce 
universal conviction. 

35. The providence of God is a commentary on 
his word, and the more we see of the operations of 
the one, the more we shall see of the truth of the 
other. 

CHAPTER in. 

1. Precto?« ; rare, uncommon. JVo open vision; 
no public prophet making known to the people the 
will of God. 

7. Did not yet know tlie Lord ; did not know 
that it was the Lord who spoke, nor had any thing 
yet been revealed to liim. 

14. Not he purged; not so done away as to pre- 
vent the threatened punishment. 

17. Do so to thee ; punish tliee. 

19. Let none of his wonls fall ; let none of his 
predictions fail of their accomplishment. 
355 



The Philistines overcome 



I. SAMUEL, IV. 



Israel at Eben-vzer. 



20 And all Israel from Dan even to Bcer- 
sheba knew that Samuel was 'established 
to be a prophet of the Lord. 

21 And the Lord appeared again in Shi- 
loh : for the Lord revealed himself to 
Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the Lord. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1 The Israelites are overcome by the Philistines at Eben- 
ezer. 3 They letch the arli to the terror of the Phil- 
istines. 10 They are smitten again, the ark taken, 
Hophni and Phinehas are slain. I'2 Eli at the new.<, 
falling backward, breaketh his neck. 19 Phinehas' 
wife, discouraged in her travail with Ichabod, dieth. 

AND the word of Samuel tcame to all 
Israel. Now Israel went out against 
the Philistines to battle, and pitched beside 
Eben-ezer : and the Philistines pitched 
in Aphek. 

2 And the Philistines put themselves 
in array against Israel : and when t they 
joined battle, Israel w'as smitten before 
the Philistines : and they slew of* the army 
in the field about four thousand men. 

3 1[ And when the people were come 
into the camp, the elders of Israel said. 
Wherefore hath the Lord smitten us to- 
day before the Philistines 1 Let us H fetch 
the ark of the covenant of the Lord out 
of Shiloh unto us, that, when it cometh 
among us, it may save us out of the hand 
of our enemies. 

4 So the people sent to Shiloh, that they 
might bring from thence the ark of the 
covenant of the Lord of hosts, Avhich 



Or, faithful. fOr.c 
t spread. ^ Heh.thca 



me to pass; Heb. was. | Heh. the battle 
ray. \\ Heh. take untous. «2Siim.6;2; 



dwelleth' between the ''cherubim: *;.c:r?^. 
and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phin- 
ehas, were there with the ark of the cove- 
nant of God. 

5 And when the ark of the covenant of 
the Lord came into the camp, all Israel 
shouted with a great shout, so that the 
earth rang again. 

6 And when the Philistines heard the 
noise of the shout, they said. What mcan- 
eth the noise of this great shout in the 
camp of the Hebrews'? And they under- 
stood that the ark of the Lord was come 
into the camp. 

7 And the Philistines were afraid ; for 
they said, God is come into the camp. 
And they said. Woe unto us! for there 
hath not been such a thing *heretofore. 

8 Woe unto us! who shall deliver us 
out of the hand of these mighty Gods? 
these are the Gods that smote the Egyp- 
tians with all the plagues in the wilder- 
ness. 

9 Be "^strong, and quit yourselves like 
men, ye Philistines, that ye be not ser- 
vants unto the Hebrews, as ^they have 
been to you : t quit yourselves like men, 
and fight. 

10 1[And the Philistines fought, and 
Israel* was smitten, and they fled every 
man into his tent: and there was a very 
great slaughter; for there fell of Israel 
thirty thousand footmen. 

■■ Heb. yesterday, or the third day. 
f Heb. be men. • Pot. 78 : fiO-64. 



20. From Dan even to Beer-sheba ; from one 
end of the land to the other. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Those who are blessed with a fulne.ss of divine 
instruction and with all the means of grace, bi:t very 
faintly realize the sad condition of such as are with- 
out them, wandering in darkness and the shadow of 
death. 

2. Eyesight is a great blessing, which should he 
carefully preserved and wisely employed ; thrit in 
case of its loss, the mind, in rich stores of knowledge, 
may iiave materials for useful and h.appy contem- 
plation. 

.'5. Cheerful readiness in children to comply with 
the wishes of parents and teachers, is an indication 
of great excellence of character, and of eminent use- 
fulness in future life. 

7. God by his Spirit, in his word and his provi- 
dence, sometimes repeatedly speaks to men before 
they are aware of it, especially if they are young 
and have not been accustomed to distinguish his 
voice from that of others. 

10. When men, and even children, manifest a 
readiness to be instructed by (rod, he will commu- 
nicate to them a knowledge of his will ; and tlioui^h 
it may be trying, yet in doing it they will be ac- 
cepted of him and receive a great reward. 

13. Parents, to please (jod and escape his indig- 
nation, must not only pray with and for their chil- 
dren, and counsel and advise them, but must also 
govern them; and if tliey are disposed to be openly 
vicious, must inflict such punishment a^ will elfect- 
ually restrain them. Nor must fear or favor hinder 
356 



them from exercising the authority and power which 
God has given them for this purpose. 

17. Parents should encourage their children freely 
and fully to communicate with them on all things 
in which they are interested, especially on the sub- 
ject of religion and whatever pertains to the per- 
formance of duty. 

18. When the will of God is made known, true 
piety in vigorous exercise will le.ad the soul to ac- 
quiesce in it, feeliiig that what God says must be 
true, and what he does must be right and g'lod. 

19. When men follow the directions of God so far 
as they know them, he will communicate to them 
an inori-asing knowledge of his will, and by experi- 
ence they will acquire the habit of readily under- 
standing and promptly obeying it. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1. Tke wofil of Samuel; that wliioh Gm,I re- 
vealed to him. Wie.ii-ezer — Aphek ; places not far 
from Mizpeh. and near the border between Judah 
and Benjamin. Chap. 7 : 12 ; Judges 20 : 1. 

3. Let ns fetch the arlc ; the emblem of the 
divine pre.sence. 1 hey hoped to receive fioin the 
emblem what could come only from God ; as many 
now hope from the image or figure of the cross, to 
receive what can come only from him who bled 
upon it. 

•1. Between, the cherubi m ; on the merfy-seat. 

R Gods ; God. Though this word in the orig- 
inal is in the plural number, yet when applied to 
.Teliovah it should be, as it usually is, translated in 
the singular. 

9. Q,uit yourselves ; do your duty. 



The death of Eli. 



I. SAMUEL, V. 



The ark taken to Ashdod. 



and the two sous of Eli, Ilopliui and Phin 
ehas, were *slain. 

12 ^ And tliere ran a man of Benjamin 
out of the array, and came to Shiloh the 
same day with his clothes rent, and with 
earth'' upon his head. 

13 And when he came, lo, Eli sat upon 
a seat by the way-side watching : for "^ his 
heart trembled for the ark of God. And 
when the man came into the city, and told 
it, all the city cried out. 

14 And when Eli heard the noise of the 
crying, he said. What menncth the noise 
of this tumult ■? And the man came in 
hastily, and told Eli. 

15 Now Eli was ninety and eight years 
old ; and his eyes twere dim, that he could 
not see. 

16 And the man said unto Eli, I am he 
that came out of the army, and I fled to- 
day out of the army. And he said. What 
is ^ there done, my son? 

17 And the messenger answered and 
said, Israel is fled before the Philistines, 
and there hath been also a great slaughter 
among the people, and thy two sons also, 
Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the 
ark** of God is taken. 

18 And it came to pass, when he made 
mention of the ark of God, that he fell 
from off" the seat backward by the side of 
the gate, and his neck brake, and he died : 
for he Avas an old man, and heavy. And 
he* had judged Israel forty years. 

19 IfAnd his daughter-in-law, Phine- 
has' wife, was with child, near to II be de- 
livered : and when she heard the tidings 
that the ark of God was talcen, and that 
her father-in-law and her husband were 
dead, she bowed herself and travailed ; for 
her pains *came upon her. 



a cliap. -2 : 34. • « Heb. ditj. b Josli. 7:6; 3 Sam. 15 : 32 ; .loh 
2 : 12. c I'sa. 26 : 8. t Heli. stMcl. t Heh. the thing. A chap. 
2 : 32. \ He peems to have been a .iu(l,2:e to Jo justice only, arnC 
that in South. west Israel. |f Or, ct'y out. ^' Heb. were turned. 
« Gen. 3.5 : 17. t Heb. set not her heart, t That is, where is the 



12. His clothes rent : in token of gre.^t mourning. 

18. That he fell; Eli. 

21. Ichahoil; vi-ithout glory, or no glory. 
IX.STRTTCTIOXS. 

1. The declarations of God in his word are often 
shown to be true by his providence, and those who had 
disbelieved tliem are tlius made to see their truth. 

3. ilen often e.xpect from the mere forms of re- 
ligion what can come only from its power : from 
senseless wood or stone they e.xpect wliat can come 
only from the one living ;ind true Ood. 

5. Ignorant and false zeal in immoral and wicked 
teacliers is apt to be noisy and vain-glorious, to be 
fond of show, and to abound in appeals to the senses 
and passions of men. 

7. All men who are in any measure enlightened 
have a conviction of a power which is above them, 
and wliii'h, on account of tlieir sins, they have reason 
to fear. 

10. Under wicked religious teachers the people also 



20 And about the time of her death the 
M-omen that stood by her said unto her, 
Fear^ not; for thou hast borne a son. 
But she answered not, t neither did she 
regard it. 

21 And she named the child tichabod, 
saying. The glory is departed from Is- 
rael : because the ark of God was taken, 
and because of her father-in-law and her 
husband. 

22 And she said, The •" glory is departed 
from ^Israel: for the ark of God is taken. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 The Philistines having broufrht the ark into Ashdod, 
set it in the house of Dagon. 3 Dagon is smitten 
down and cut in pieces, and they of Ashdod smitten 
with emerods. 8 So God dealeth with them of Gath, 
when it was brought thither : 10 and so with them of 
Ekron, when It was brought thither. 

AND the Philistines took the ark of God, 
and brought it from '' Ebcn-ezcr unto 
Ashdod. 

2 When the Philistines took the ark of 
God, they brought it into the house of 
Dagon,' and set it by Dagon. 

3 1[And when they of Ashdod arose 
early on the morrow, behold, Dagon was 
fallen upon his face to the earth before 
the ark of the Loud. And they took Da- 
gon, and 'set him in his place again. 

4 And when they arose early on the 
morrow morning, behold, Dagon was fall- 
en upon his face to the ground before the 
ark of the Lord ; and the ''head of Dagon 
and both the palms of his hands were cut 
off upon the threshold ; only the ^ stump of 
Dagon was left to him. 

5 Therefore neitherthe priests of Dagon, 
nor any that come into Dagon's house, 
tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ash- 
dod unto this day. 

6 But the ' hand of the Lord was heavy 
upon them of Ashdod, and he destroyed 



glori/f or, there is no glory, f Psa. 78 : 61 ; 106 : 20 : .Ter 2:11. 
B Ho.^ea i):12. hchap.7:12. > Judg. 16: 23; 1 Cliron. iO: 10. 
J lHa.l>):l; 46:1,2,7. k .rer.fiO:2; Ezek.6:4,6; Micahl:7. 
TiOt. fishtj part. I ver. 7, 1 1 ; E.rodu9 9:3; Psalm 32: 4: Acts 
13:11. 



become exceedingly wicked, and thus ripen for divine 
judgments; and when ripe, others who are wicked, 
are often suffered to bring thosejudgments upon them. 

13. The place where God dwells is precious to 
good men, and they fear t!ie loss of his presence 
more than that of any worldly good. 

IS. The dishonor of Crod, and his frown upon the 
people, .are more distressing to good men than the 
death even of their nearest earthly friends. 

21. The chief glory of a nation is the presence 
and favor of G-od, for the loss of which no earthly 
good can be an adequate compensation. 

CHAPTER V. 

1. Ashdod; one of the cities of the Philistines. 

2. Dagon; from dag,signiiyinga fish. It was the 
name of an idol, the upper part of which was in the 
form of a man, and the lower part in that of a fish. 

4. Only the stump ; in the original, the dagon, 
that is the fishy part of the idol. 

357 



Judgments on the Philistines. I. SAMUEL, VI. 



They plan to restore the ark. 



them, and smote them with 'emerods, even 
Ashdod and the coasts thereof. 

7 And when the men of Ashdod saw that 
it was so, they said, The ark of the God of 
Israel shall not abide with us : for his hand 
is sore upon us, and upon Dagon our god. 

8 They sent tiicrefore and gathered all 
the lords of the Philistines unto them, and 
said, What shall we do with the ark of the 
God of Israel? And they answered. Let 
the ark of the God of Israel be carried 
about unto Gath. And they carried the 
ark of the God of Israel about thither. 

9 And it was so, that, after they had car- 
ried it about, the ""hand of the Lord was 
against the city with a very great destruc- 
tion : and he smote the men of the city, 
both small and great, and they had em- 
erods in their secret parts. 

10 1[ Therefore they sent the ark of God 
to "^Ekron. And it came to pass, as the 
ark of God came to Ekron, that the Ekron- 
ites cried out, saying. They have brought 
about the ark of the God of Israel to *us, 
to slay us and our people. 

1 1 So they sent and gathered together all 
the lords of the Philistines, and said, Send 
away the ark of the God of Israel, and let 
it go again to his own place, that it slay 
ust not, and our people: for there was a 
deadly destruction throughout all the city ; 
the hand of God was very "^ heavy there. 

12 And the men that died not were smit- 
ten with the emerods : and the ''cry of the 
city went up to heaven. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 After sevon months the Philistines take counsel how- 
to send back the ark. 10 They bring it on a new cart 
with an olFering unto Beth-shemesh. 19 The people 
are smitten for looking into the ark. 21 They send 
to them of Kirjath-jearim to fetch it. 

AND the ark of the Lord was in the 
country of the Philistines seven 
months. 
2 And the Philistines called for the 



• Deut. 28 : 27 ; Psa. 78 


66. b cliap.7:I3; 12:15; Deut. 2:1.5. 


e 2 Kings, 1:2. * Heb. 


nc, to ituy mt and my. \ Heb. me not. 


and my. i ver. 6, 9. e 


cliap. 9:16; .Ter. 14:2. f Gen. 41:8; 


Ex. 7:11; Isa. 47:13; Da 


11.2:2; 6:7; Mat. 2:4. s Micab 6:6-9. 


h Deut. 16:16. i Ler. 6 


W, 16. j Job 10: 2 ; 34 : 31, 3.'. k ver. 



8. Lords; rulers. Gath; another city of the 
Philistines. 

9. Evierods ; liemorrlioiJs, or a species of the 
piles. 

10. 'Ekron; the northernmost city of the Philis- 
tines. 

11. Yery heavy ; GoJ smote them with sore 
judgments. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. As a punishment to his people, (rod often suf- 
fers the wicked for a tiinu to triumph over them, and 
to take from them many precious olessings. 

4. All tlie efforts of the wicked to perpetuate their 
triumphs, and idtimately to prevail over the people 
of fjrod, will be unavailing. 

7. God will finally convince all that they cannot 
continue to oppose him and prosper, and th.at those 
358 



priests and the ''diviners, saying, ^■.c.Jho.' 
What shall we do to the ark of the Lord? 
tell us swherewith we shall send it to 
his place. 

3 And they said. If ye send away the ark 
of the God of Israel, send it not ''empty; 
but in any wise return him a 'trespass- 
offering : then ye shall be healed, and it 
shall be known to you Jwhy his hand is 
not removed from you. 

4 Then said they, What shall be the tres- 
pass-offering which we shall return to 
him'? They answered. Five golden em- 
erods, and five golden mice, according to 
the ''number of the lords of the Philis- 
tines : for one plague !m.f on t you all, and 
on' your lords. 

5 Wherefore ye shall make images of 
your emerods, and images of your mice 
that mar the land ; and ye shall give"" glo- 
ry unto the God of Israel: peradventure 
he will " lighten his hand from off you, 
and from off your gods, and from off your 
land. 

6 Wherefore then do ye harden your 
hearts, as the "Egyptians and Pharaoh 
hardened their hearts? when he had 
wrought ^wonderfully among them, did 
they not let II the people go, and they p de- 
parted ? 

7 Now therefore make a inew cart, and 
take two milch kine, on Avhich there hath 
come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, 
and bring their calves home from them : 

8 And take the ark of the Lord, and lay 
it upon the cart; and put the ""jewels of 
gold, which ye return him /or a trespass- 
offering, in a coffer by the side thereof; 
and send it away, that it may go. 

9 And see, if it gocth up by the way of 
his own coast to 'Beth-shemesh, ihrn "he 
hath 'done us this great evil: but if not, 
then " we shall know tiiat it is not his hand 
that smote us ; it was a chance that hap- 
pened to us. 

17, IS: .Io»buaI3:3; .Tuilge3 3:3. i Heb. thtm. 1 Rom. 2:11. 
ra Josh. 7:19; Mai. 2:2. n chap, ."i : 6, 1 1. o Ex. 7:14; 8:1.^; 
14:17,2:!. \ Or, reproachfully. || Heb. Mfm. p Ex. 12:31. 
q 2 Sam. 6 : 3. r ver. 4, 5. • Josh. 15 : 10. * Or, it. I Amos 
3:6. u ver. 3; Isa. 26 : U. 



things which they have idolized, and from which 
they expected help, have proved their ruin. 

10. All expi'die.its of men to save tliemselves 
from the wrath of God, without returning in peni- 
tence and faith to him, are vain. 

\2. Diseases are God's servants ; they go and 
come at his bidding, and .all things in heaven, earth, 
and hell, are subject to his control. 

CHAPTER VI. 
2. Priests — diviners ; their religious guides. 
5. Mice ; these are supposed to have destroyed 
their crops. 

8. Coffer ; a small chest or box for money and 
precious treasures. 

9. Beth-.iliemesh ; a city of priests in the tribe 
of Judah and on the border of the Philistines. 



They send it to Beth-shcmesh . I. SA]\IUEL, VII, 



The Bcth-shcmitcs smitten. 



B. c. IIW. 

two milch kiue, and tied them to the cart, 
and shut up their calves at home : 

11 And they laid the ark of the Lord 
upon the cart, and the coffer with the mice 
of gold and the images of their emerods. 

12 And the kine took the straight way 
to the way of Beth-shemesh, and went 
along the highway, lowing as they went, 
and turned not aside to the right hand or 
to the left ; and the lords of the Philistines 
went after them unto the border of Beth- 
shemesh. 

13 And they of Beth-shemesh ivere reap- 
ing their wheat-harvest in the valley : and 
they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, 
and rejoiced to see it. 

14 And the cart came into the field of 
Joshua, a Beth-shemite, and stood there, 
where there was a great stone : and *they 
clave the wood of the cart, and offered the 
kine a burnt-offering unto the Lord. 

15 And the Lcvites took down the ark 
of the Lord, and the coffer that 'icas with 
it, wherein the jewels of gold tcere, and 
put them on the great stone : and the men 
of Beth-shemesh offered burnt-offerings 
and sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto 
the Lord. 

1 6 And when the ^ five lords of the Phil- 
istines had seen it, they returned to "^ Ekron 
the same day. 

17 And these are the golden emerods 
which the Philistines returned for a tres- 
pass-offering unto the Lord; for ''Ashdod 
one, for "^ Gaza one, for ""Ashkelon one, for 
Gaths one, for Ekron one; 

18 And the golden mice, according to the 
number of all the cities of the Philistines 
belonging to the five lords, both of fenced 
cities, and of country villages, even unto 
the *great stone o/Abel, whereon they set 
down the ark of the Lord : luhich stone re- 



a .T 


xiees 6 


::R; 


aSamue 


, 24 : 22, 


2,=). 


b ver. 


4. 


c chap. 5 


10. 


d 2 Cliron. 26 


:6; 


er. 25 : 2 


3; Zech 


9 : 


5, 6. e 


Ju 


Jges 16: 1, 


21; 


Amos 1 : 6, 7. 


f -2 Samuel, 


: 20. 8 


2.S 


amnel, 2 


1 :i 


2 : Amos 6 


: 2. 


• Or, 


great 


Uonr. 


h Ex. 


19:21; 


Nu 


mbers 4 


:13 


20: IChl 


on. 


13:9, 


10. i 


2 Sam 


. 6 : 7, 9 


Psa. 76 


:7; 


Mai. 3 


'1. 


j Luke 5 


n; 



13. Their wheat-harvest ; in May. 

18. Abel : the stone on wliich they offered the 
sacrifice. Ver. 15. 

19. Fifty ihousatid and threescore and ten 
men ; literally, threescore and ten men, fifty a thou- 
sand ; supposed by some to mean, fifty out of a thou- 
sand, or seventy out of fourteen hundred inhabitants. 
A great slaughter; for such a plaoe. 

21. Kirjath-jearim ; north-east of Beth-shemesh, 
and on the border between Judah and Benjamin. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. So long as men continue in wickedness, it is 
vain to expect permanent deliverance from trouble. 

4. Sinners who are ignorant of, or who reject the 
way of acceptance which God has provided through 
Jesus Christ,' devise various methods of their own, 
and are often willing to make great sacrifices and 
be at much expense to appease his wrath and pur- 
chase his favor. 



maineth unto this day in the field of Joshua, 
the Beth-shemite. 

19 1[ And he smote the men of Beth-she- 
mesh, '' because they had looked into the 
ark of the Lord, even he smote of the peo- 
ple fifty thousand and threescore and ten 
men : and the people lamented, because 
the Lord had smitten many of the people 
with a great slaughter. 

20 And the men of Beth-shemesh said, 
Who' is able to stand before this holy 
Lord God ? and to whom shall he go up 
from Jus? 

21 ^And they sent messengers to the 
inhabitants of ''Kirjath-jearim, saying, 
The Philistines have brought again the 
ark of the Lord ; come ye down, and fetch 
it up to you. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1 They of Kirjath-jearim bring the ark into the house 
of Abinadab, and sanctify E leazar his son to keep it. 
2 After twenty years .3 the Israelites, by Samuel's 
means, solemnly repent at Mizpeh. 7 While Sam- 
uel prayeth and sacrificeth, the Lord discomfiteth the 
Philistines by thunder at Eben-ezer. 13 The Philis- 
tines are subdued. 15 Samuel peaceably and relig- 
iously judgeth Israel. 

AND the men of Kirjath-jearim came, 
and 'fetched up the ark of the Loud, 
and brought it into the house of '"Abina- 
dab in the hill, and ''■ sanctified Eleazar his 
son to keep the ark of the Lord. 

2 And it came to pass, while the ark 
abode in Kirjath-jearim, that the time was 
long ; for it was twenty years : and all the 
house of Israel "lamented after the Lord. 

3 IfAnd Samuel spake unto all the house 
of Israel, saying, If ye do p return unto 
the Lord with all your hearts, then iput 
away the strange gods and Ashtaroth from 
among you, and ''prepare your hearts unto 
the Lord, and serve "him only: and 'he 
will deliver you out of the hand of the 
Philistines. 



8::!7. 


k Josh. 18:14; .lu.lg. 18:1 


2; 1 Chron. 13:5, a I chap. 
3,4. n Is.a. 52:11. o Zecii. 


6:21; 


Psa. I:12:H. m 2 Samuel, fi 


12 : 10 


U. p Deut. 30:2, 10; I Ki 


igs, 8 : 48 ; Joe! 2 : 13. q Gen. 


35:2; 


Josh. 24 : 14, 23. r 2 Cliror 


.:!0:19; Job 11:13,14; John 


4 : 24. 


a Deut. 13:4. t l3a.55:7 


Ho3ea6:l. 



9. Men had rather feel that their sufferings come 
by chance, than see in them the hand of God and 
feel that tliey are manifestations of his displeasure 
against tlieir sins. 

12. God has perfect control over the animal as 
well as the rational creation, can use the instincts 
of nature or counteract them as he pleases, and will 
eventually convince all that nothing comes by 
chance throughout his dominion. 

IS. An unhallowed desire to see what God has 
hidden, to pry into what he has not revealed, and 
do what he forbids, is a sin, the indulgence of which 
has involved multitudes in ruin. 

CHAPTER VII. 
2. It was twenty years ; after the ark was 
brought to Kirjath-jearim, before the Israelites hum- 
bled themselves and turned to the Lord as related 
in the following verses. 

359 



Israel nuhdue the Philistines, 



I. SAMUEL, VIII. 



and request a king. 



4 Then the children of Israel did put 
away * Baalim and Ashtaroth, and served 
the Lord only. 

5 And Samuel said, Gather all Lsrael to 
Mizpeh, and I will pray for you unto the 
Lord. 

6 And they gathered together to Mizpeh, 
and drew water, and poured •" it out before 
the Lord, and fasted on that day, and said 
there, '^ We have sinned against the Lord. 
And Samuel judged the children of Israel 
in Mizpeh. 

7 And when the Philistines heard that 
the children of Israel were gathered to- 
gether to ]\Iizpeh, the lords of the Philis- 
tines went up against Israel. And when 
the children of Israel heard it, they were 
afraid of the Philistines. 

8 And the children of Israel said to Sam- 
uel, *Cease not to cry unto the Lord our 
God for ^ us, that he will save us out of 
the hand of the Philistines. 

9 1[ And Samuel took a sucking lamb, 
and offered it for a burnt-oflering wholly 
unto the Lord : and Samuel cried unto the 
Lord for Israel ; and the Lord theard ''him. 

10 And as Samuel was offering up the 
burnt-offering, the Philistines drew near 
to battle againstlsrael : butthcLoRD thun- 
dered with a great thunder on that day upon 
the Philistines, and'^discomflted thenij and 
they were smitten before Israel. 

1 1 And the men of Israel wentoutof Miz- 
peh, and pursued the Philistines, and smote 
them, until they came under Beth-car. 

12 Then Samuel took a e stone, and set 
it between Mizpeh and Shen, and called 
the name of it i Eben-ezer, saying, Hith- 
erto hath the Lord helped us. 

1 3 11 So the Philistines were subdued, and 
they came no more into the coast of Israel : 
and the hand of the Lord was against tlie 
Philistines all the days of Samuel. 

14 And the cities which the Philistines 



a .Tu 


l». i 


: 11. 


b .loll 


Ifi: 


■2n; 


Jpremiall '.1 : 


1. c .Ti 


ilf 


10:10; 


Psalm 


1(16: 


ri; J 


er. :) : 13, 


14. 


* 


Hel). Be not 


ilentfrn 


m 


« from 


erning 


d 


l»a. 


37:4. t 


Or 


an. 


ftpertit. c Pfi 


■A. m : fi 


.In 


9. b: Hi. 


r P,ali 


1 18 


14. 


e Gen. 


i2.S: 


IK, 


<». t Thut i( 


, The ttone 


of help. 



4. Baalim and Ashtaroth ; idols tliiit they had 
worshipped. 

VI. Ehen-ezer ; meaning, the stone of help, or 
the help-stone. 

16. Beth-el — Gilgal — Mizpeh ; places within 
the tribe of Benjamin. 

17. Raniali ; in Benjamin, supposed to be the 
same as Ramath.iiin-zopliiin. Cliap. 1 : 1. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The ordinances of God will benefit all who 
rightly observe them, but none who continue to 
ne;;lect them. 

3. By the right use of means which G-od has pro- 
vided, men are bound to prepare their hearts for his 
service. 

.'). Penitent confession of sin. and humble prayer for 
divine mercy, are essential to forgiveness, .ind are a 
sure preparation for the reception of divine favors. 
360 



had taken from Israel were restored *b c. i^i 
to Israel, from Ekron even unto Gath; 
and the coasts thereof did Israel deliver 
out of the hands of the Philistines. And 
there was peace between Israel and the 
Amorites. 

15 And Samuel judged Israel all the 
days of his life. 

16 And he went from year to year -in 
circuit to Beth-el, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, 
and judged Israel in all those places. 

17 And his return was to ''Ramah; for 
there wa.'i his house ; and there he judged 
Israel ; and there he built an altar unto 
the Lord. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1 By occasion of the ill government of Samuel's sons, 
the Israelites ask a king. 6 Samuel praying in grief, 
is comforted by God : lO He telleth th'> manner of a 
king. 19 God wiUeth Samuel to yield unto the im- 
portunity of the people. ' 

AND it came to pass, when Samuel was 
old, that he made his sons judges over 
Israel. 

2 Now the name of his first-born was 
Joel ; li and the name of his second, Abiah : 
they u-ere judges in Beer-sheba. 

3 And his sons walked not in his ways, 
but turned aside after 'lucre, and took 
bribes,' and perverted judgment. 

4 Then all the elders of Israel gathered 
themselves together, and came to Samuel 
unto Ramah, 

5 And said unto him. Behold, thou art 
old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways : 
now make us a ''king to judge us like all 
the nations. 

6 ^But the thing *displeased Samuel, 
when they said, Give us a king to judge 
us. And Samuel prayed unto the Lord. 

7 And the Lord said unto Samuel, 
Hearken unto the voice of the people in 
all that they say u nto thee : for ' they have 
not rejected thee, but they have rejected 
me, that I should not reign over them. 



i Heh. 


and he c 


rcuited. 


h 


chap. 


8:4. 


II Vashni 


1 Thro 


1. fi 


•:«. 


i Exodl 


» 18: -21 


i I Tim 


3: 


3. 


Prov 


29 : 4. k 


Dent. 


17: 


14; 


Hosea 13 : 10. 


* Heb. «>a» 


evil I 


n the eyes of. 1 


Kxodu 


9l(> 


:8; 


Mat. 10 


:40. 



















8. All who have right views of God and of them- 
selves, will place a high value on the prayers of his 
?eople, and will earnestly desire them. Esth. 4 : 16; 
ob4>:S, 9; Jas. r):lG. 
10. Humble, believing. earnest, perseveringprayer 
has great influence witli God, and is instrumental of 
unspeakable good to men. 

15. Rulers who are men of prayer, and who 
transact their civil duties in the fear and love of 
God, are great blessings to the people. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

3. Litcre ; gain. Bribes; gifts to induce one 
wrongly to favor those who offer them. 

6. Displeased Samuel ; appeared to him to be 
wrong. Samuel prayed; to be rightly directed 
with regard to the matter in question. 

7. Not rejected thee ; not him only. 



The manner of the king 



I. SAMUEL, IX. 



The people's importunity. 



they have done since the day that I brought 
them up out of Egypt even unto this day, 
wherewith they have forsaken ine, and 
served other gods, so do they also unto thee. 

9 Now therefore *hearken unto their 
voice: t ho wbeit yet protest solemnly unto 
them, and ^show them the manner of the 
king that shall reign over them. 

10 1[ And Samuel told all the words of 
the Lord unto the people that asked of him 
a king. 

11 And he said, This will be the. man- 
ner of the king that shall reign over you : 
He will take your sons, and appoint ^/iem 
for himself, for his chariots, and to be his 
horsemen ; and some shall run before his 
chariots. 

12 And he will appoint him captains 
over thousands, and captains over fifties; 
and tcill set them to ear his ground, and to 
reap his harvest, and to make his instru- 
ments of war, and instruments of his 
chariots. 

13 And he will take your daughters to 
be confectionaries, and to be cooks, and to 
be bakers. ^ 

14 And he will take your ''fields, and 
your vineyards, and your olive-yards, ei'e/i 
the best of them, and give them to his ser- 
vants. 

lo And he will take the tenth of your 
seed, and of your vineyards, and give to 
his ^officers, and to his servants. 

16 And he will take your men-servants, 
and your maid-servants, and your goodli- 
est young men, and your asses, and put 
them, to his work. 



* OT,obet/. i Or, tiotwithstandiuff when thttuhnst solemnly pro- 
tested offainst them, t/tfn th'fu shntt show, » clilip. 10: ■2'i; 14:.'v3. 
1> lKings,2l:7; Kzek.^^>.•18. t Heb.eunuchs, Gfn.liT -.36. c I'rov. 



9. Hearken-; give them a king, if after showing 
how he will treat them, they continue to insist upon 
it. Ver. ]9-2'2. The -maiDier of the king ; how 
he would treat them. Ver. 11. 

il. Hun before ; as waiters. 2 Sam. 15:1. 

12. To rar; to till. Gen. 45: 7. 

13. Co7ifectioiiaries ; persons who prepared per- 
fumes and spices. 

19. The voice of Samuel ; in dissuading them 
from having a king. Nay ; we will not hearken 
to thee. 

INSTRIICTTOXS. 

3. When men appoint their own rulers, if they 
do not have such, and such only, as are wise and 
good, it is their own fault; but w!ien the govern- 
inent is hereditary, and de.scend:^ from parents to 
children, whether good or bad, wise or foolish, it is 
often unjust and cruel, for wise and goo 1 parents 
may be followed by foolish and wicked children. 

5. AVhen men in trouble follow their own judg- 
ment merely, as to the way of getting out of it. they 
often take a course which tend^ only to increase it ; 
and if they will not be dissuaded from sue i a course. 
God in righteous judgment sometimes sullers them 
to pursue it, and thus dreadfully to punish them- 
selves. Jer. 2:19. 

6. When in new and difficult circumstances men 



1 7 He will take the tenth of your sheep : 
and ye shall be his servants. 

18 And ye shall cry out in that day be- 
cause of your king which ye shall have 
chosen you; and the Lord will not ''hear 
you in that day. 

1 9 11 Neve rt heless the people ^ refused to 
obey the voice of Samuel ; and they said, 
Nay; but we will have a king over us; 

20 That we also may be ''like all the 
nations; and that our king may judge us, 
and go out before us, and fight our battles. 

21 And Samuel heard all the words of 
the people, and he rehearsed them in the 
ears of the Lord. 

22 And the Lord said to Samuel, ''Heark- 
en unto their voice, and make them a king. 
And Samuel said unto the men of Israel, 
Go ye every man unto his city. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 Saul despairing to find his fathers stsses, 6 by the 
counselof his servant, II and direction of young maid- 
ens, 15 according to God's revelation, 13 cometh to 
Samuel. 19 Samuel entertaineth Saul at the feast. 
25 Samuel, after secret communication, bringeth Saul 
on his way. 

"IVrOW there was a man of Benjamin, 
J_\ whose name im.v ^Kish, the son of 
Abiel, the son of Zcror, the son of Becho- 
rath. the son of Aphiah, ^ a Benjamite, a 
mighty man of II power. 

2 And he had a son, whose name ^m.^ 
Saul, a choice young man, and a goodly, 
and there was not among the children ol 
Israel a goodlier person than he : from his 
shoulders and upward he icas ^ higher than 
any of the people. 

3 And the asses of Kish Saul's father 



l:25--28; Isa. I:l.'i; Mical] 3:4. li .ler. 44 :I6. ever.-i. fver.7; 
Hosea 13: U. g chap. 14:.il. % Or, the son of a man of Jemini. 
Il Or, substance, h cliap. 10:23. 

go to God for direction, choosing rather to be gov- 
erned by his will th.an their own, he will guide them, 
and in the proper use of their own faculties will lead 
them to right decisions. 

9. God delights to commwiicate to men all needed 
information, so that if they will follow his directions, 
they may be saved from suffering the fruits of their 
folly. 

18. When men with their eyes open go on in 
wickedness, regarding their feelings more than the 
testimony of Jehovah, .and thus bring themselves 
into trouble, God leaves them to endure it till they 
are convinced of their sin and turn to him, or sink 
into utter ruin. 

19. When men by word or deed say to God, Not 
thy -will but mine be done, let them prepare for 
trouble. If in that way they should succeed and be 
finally blessed, it would show that their will was 
wiser and better than his, as Satan tempts them to 
believe. Hence God, in vindication of his own char- 
acter, di'iappoints them. 

20. Men who are enchanted with the trappings 
of royalty, and carried away by .a thirst for military 
glory, are not safe guides for themselves nor their 
fellow-men. 

CHAPTER IX. 
2. A choice young man ; of fine appearance. 
361 



Saul, seeking his father s 



I. SAMUEL, IX, 



asses, is led to Samuel. 



were lost. And Kish said to Saul his sou, 
Take now one of the servants with thee, 
and arise, go seek the asses. 

4 And he passed through mount Ephra- 
im, and passed through the land of Sha- 
lisha, but they found them not: then they 
passed through the land of Shalim, and 
there they were not : and he passed through 
the land of the Benjamitcs, but they found 
them not. 

5 And when they were come to the land 
of Zuph, Saul said to his servant that ii'a.s 
with him. Come, and let us return ; lest 
my father leave caring for the asses, and 
take thought for us. 

6 And he said unto him, Behold now, 
there is in this city a*" man of God, and he 
is an honorable man; all '^that he saith 
Cometh surely to pass : now let us go 
thither; perad venture he can show us our 
way that we should go. 

7 Then said Saul to his servant, But 
behold, i/ we go, what "* shall we bring the 
manl for the bread is *spent in our ves- 
.sels, and there is not a present to bring to 
the man of God : what t have we 1 

8 And the servant answered Saul again, 
and said, Behold, +1 have here at hand the 
fourth part of a shekel of silver : that will 
I give to the man of God, to tell us our way. 

9 (Beforetimc in Israel, when a man 
went to inquire of God, thus he spake. 
Come, and let us go to the seer: for he that 
is now called a Prophet was beforetime 
called a ^ Seer.) 

10 Then said Saul to his servant, HVell 
said ; come, let us go. So they went unto 
the city where the man of God ivas. 

11^ And as they went up II the hill to 
the city, they found young '^maidcns going 
out to draw water, and said unto them, Is 
the seer here? 

12 And they answered them, and said. 
He is ; behold, he is before you : make 
haste now, for he came to-day to the city ; 
for there is a *sacrifice of tho^people to- 
day in the ''high place: 

13 As soon as ye be come into the city, 
ye shall straightway find him, before he 
go up to the high place to eat : for the peo- 
ple will not eat until he come, because he 
doth 'bless the sacrifice; and afterwards 
they eat that be bidden. Now therefore 



« iKin-tH.IM:. li l)ent33:l : lKinsii,13:l. c,l,.3:19. d Gen. 
4S;ll;.IudK.(i:l«; lKing»,14:a; 2Kins»,.S:8. " Heh. gone out of. 
t Hel). is wilh ut. t Heb. there it found in mv hand, e 2 Sam. 
24.11; 2Kili-«, 17: i:i; 2 Cliron. 1G:7, 10; Iml. 30:10; Amo»7:12. 
% H«b. T/iv icard is good. || Hel). in the alctnt of the citv. f Gen. 
24:11. " Or, /««««. « di.ip. IS : 2 ; Gen. :ll : .'>4. h 1 Kings, 3 : 2. 



4. Mount Ephraim; the hill country in the 
tribe of Ephraim. 

7. A present ; such as it was then, and in the 
East, is now, customary to offer. 

8, A shekel ; about fifty cents. 

12. Before you ; in the city to which they were 
362 



get you up ; for about t this time ye ^ c?^; 
shall find liim. 

14 And they went up into the city : and 
wlien they were come into the city, be- 
hold, Samuel came out against them, for 
to go up to the liigh place. 

15 TfNow the Lord ^had told 'Samuel 
in his ear a day before Saul came, saying, 

16 To-morrow about this time I will 
send thee a man out of the land of Benja- 
min, and thou shalt '' anoint him to he cap- 
tain over my people I.'jrael, that he may 
save my people out of the hand of the 
Philistines : for I have ' looked upon my 
people, because their cry is come unto me. 

17 And when Samuel saw Saul, the 
Lord said unto him. Behold the man whom 
I spake to thee of ! this '" same shall ^ reign 
over my people. 

18 Then Saul drew near to Samuel in 
the gate, and said. Tell me, I pray thee, 
where the seer's house is. 

19 And Samuel answered Saul, and said, 
I am the seer: go up before me unto the 
high place ; for ye shall cat with me to- 
day, and to-morrow I will let thee go, and 
will °tcll thee all that is in thy heart. 

20 And as for thine ° asses that were lost 
three II days ago, set not thy mind on them ; 
for they are found. And on whom is all 
the P desire of Israel? Is it not on thee, 
and on all thy father's house? 

21 And Saul answered and said,^-JH! not 
I a Benjamitc, of the i smallest of the 
tribes of Israel? and my 'family the least 
of all the familiesof the tribe of Benjamin? 
wherefore then speakcst thou *so to me? 

22 And Samuel took Saul and his ser- 
vant, and brought them into the parlor, 
and made them sit in the chiefcst place 
among them that were bidden, which were 
about thirty persons. 

2.3 And Samuel said unto the cook. Bring 
the portion which I gave thee, of which I 
said unto thee. Set it by thee. 

24 And tlie cook took up tlie "shoulder, 
and that which was upon it, and set it be- 
fore Saul. And Samuel said. Behold that 
which is t left ! set it before thee, and cat : 
for unto this time hath it been kept for 
thee since I said, I have invited the people. 
So Saul did eat with Samuel that day. 

25 T[ And when they were come 'down 



i Mnrk6:41; I.uke24:30. f Heh. (o-rfnv. J Heb. i-e»ta/«< Me rar 
(i/'.Vomue/. clinp.20:2. i Amos :i : 7 ; A.t-< 27 : 23. Veil. 10:1. I Kx. 
2:23-25; r so. 106: 44. mAet«13:2l. \ Heb. restrain in. n .Inlin 
4:29. oTer.3. \] Heh. to-dai/ three dav3. Pcli.l2:13. q .Iiiiig. 
20:4B-48; P»a.68:27. r Judg.fi: LS. * Heh. aftordinn to this word. 
• I.ev. 7:32,33; Eieli.24:4. t Heb. reserved, t ver. 13. 



going. The high, place ; the eminence on which 
they ofTered sacrifices. 

l.l. They eat; that portion of the ofl^ering which 
was allowed them in the Le\'itical law. 

2-'). The top of the house; a retired place, to 
which they often went for consultation. 



Samuel anointeth Saul. 



I. SAMUEL, X. 



Said prophcsicth. 



tc-'S: from the high place into the city, 
SamueZ communed with Saul upon the "top 
of the house. 

26 And they arose early : and it came 
to pass about the spring of the day, that 
Samuel called Saul to the top of the house, 
saying, Up, that I may send thee away. 
And Saul arose, and they went out both 
of them, he and Samuel, abroad. 

27 And as they were going down to the 
end of the city, Samuel said to Saul, Bid 
the servant pass on before us, (and he 
passed on,) but stand thou still *a while, 
that I may show thee the word of God. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 Samuel anointeth Saul. 2 He conflrmeth him by 
prediction of three signs. 9 Saul's heart is changed, 
and he prophesieth. 14 He concealeth the matter of 
the kingdom from his uncle. 17 Saul is chosen at 
Mizpeh by lot. 26 The different affections of his 
subjects. 

THEN'' Samuel took a vial of oil, and 
poured it upon his head, and = kissed 
him, and said, Is it not because the Lord 
hath anointed thee to fte*^ captain over his 
inheritance?'' 

2 When thou art departed from me to- 
day, then thou shalt find two men by Ra- 
chel's '^sepulchre in the border of Benjamin 
at^Zelzah; and they will say unto thee. 
The asses which thou wentest to seek are 
found: and lo, thy father hath left the 
care t of the asses, and sorroweth for you, 
saying. What shall I do for my son ? 

3 Then shalt thou go on forward from 



i Acts 10:9. * Heb. to-dat/. b clinp. fl : 16 ; 16 13: 2 Kings, 
9:3,6. c •2Sam.l9:39i lThea8.5:-26. A iS^ir..nr2. oP8;i.78:71. 
f Gen. .35 : 19. 20. g Josh. 18: -28. f Heh. business, h Gen. 28: 19. 
f Heb. ask thee of peace. Jaig. 18:15. i ver. 10. j chap. 13 : 3. 



26. The spring of the day ; as it began to be 
light. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 

2. A sound mind and a well-formed, healthy, and 
vigorous body are rich gifts of God, which lay those 
who possess them under peculiar obligations of dis- 
tinguislied usefulness in his service. 

3. All earthly possessions are liable to be lost, 
and tliis should lead us to seek those treasures which 
will be secure, and which when obtained will be 
enjoyed for ever. 

5. As property is of little v.ilue compared with 
life, it is foolish, as well as wicked, for the salce of 
obtaining the one to sacrifice the other. 

6. If men were as anxious to be saved from sin 
as they are to find lost property, they would seek 
all needful information, and when they learned tlie 
way would let nothing hinder them from walking 
in it. Prov. 2 : 4, 5. 

13. Those who eat, drink, and enjoy the good 
things of life without thanking God or imploring 
his blessing, act in this respect like atheists, and 
the language of their practice is, No God. Psa. 
14 : 1 ; 53 : 1. 

1-5. The Lord makes known to those wlio do his 
will many things of which others are ignorant, and 
which no one without obeying him will ever know. 

20. While men in their actions seek one object, 
God often by them accomplishes another ; and no 
one, when he performs any act, can tell what great 
results may be connected with it. 



thence, and thou shalt come to the plain 
of Tabor, and there shall meet thee three 
men going up to God to''Beth-eI, one car- 
rying three kids, and another carrying 
three loaves of bread, and another carry- 
ing a bottle of wine : 

4 And they will + salute thee, and uivc 
thee two loaves of bread ; which thou shalt 
receive of their hands. 

5 After that thou shalt come to the ' hill 
of God, where is the 'garrison of the Phil- 
istines: and it shall come to pass, when 
thou art come thither to the city, that thou 
shalt meet a company of prophets coming 
down from the ''high place with a 'psal- 
tery, and a tabret, and a pipe, and a harp, 
before them; and they sliall '"prophesy : 

6 And the ° Spirit of the Loud will come 
upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with 
them, and shaltbe turned into another iiniii. 

7 And 5 let it be, when these signs are 
come unto thee, il/Aaf thou do as occasion 
serve thee ; for God is with thee. 

8 And thou shalt go down before mo to 
Gilgal;" and behold, I will come down 
unto thee, to offer burnt-offerings, and to 
sacrifice sacrifices of peace-offerings: ^sev- 
en days shalt thou tarry, till I come to thee, 
and show thee what thou shalt do. 

9 TfAnd it was so, that, when he had 
turned his *back to go from Samuel, God 
gavet him another heart: and all those 
signs came to pass that day. 

10 And when they came thither to the 



kchap.9:12. lEx.l.5:;0. mICor.l4:l. a chap. 10: 13; Nllir; 
U : 25, 26. ^, Heb. it shall come to pass that. \\ Heb. lio f.tr thee 
as thy hand shall Jind. .Judg. 9 : 33. o chap. U : H, 1.) ; 13 : 4, 8. 
p cbap. 13 : 8. * Heb. shoulder, f Heb. turned. 



22. Those who are selected by God as rulers 
should, for their office' sake, receive all due honors, 
and when the will of God witli regard to them is 
known, all should acquiesce in it. 

27. Ministers sliouid make known to rulers as 
well as others the will of God, and none are ever 
so exalted as not to be under sacred obligations in 
all tilings to obey it. 

CHAPTER X. 

1. Poured it upon his head ; in token of his 
being set apart and furnished by God to be king of 
Israel. 

2. Rachel's sepulchre ; Gen. 3-3 : 19, 20. 

3. Tabor ; not mount Tabor, but a place in the 
tribe of Benjamin. J\Ie>i. going np to God ; to 
worship God. 

5. The hill of G-od ; an eminence on which he 
worshipped, and on which was a school of the 
prophets. They shall prophesy ; praise God with 
the voice and instruments of music. 

6. Thon shalt prophesy ; unite with them in 
praisingGod. Ex. 15:21 ; ICIiron. 2-3:3. Turned 
into another man; so changed as to be fitted to 
become king. 

7. As occasion serve ; as he should judge best ; 
or as circumstances might require. 

8. Gilgal ; in the tribe of Benjamin, near Jeri- 
cho. Josli. 4 : 19. 

9. Another heart ; one that fitted him to govern 
the people. 

363 



Israel assemble at Mizpch. 



1. SAMUEL, XI. 



Saul is chosen king. 



hill, behold, a company of prophets met 
him; and the Spirit of God *camc upon 
him, and he prophesied among them. 

1 1 And it came to pass, when all that 
knew him bcforetime saw that, behold, he 
prophesied among the prophets, then the 
people said *one to another. What is this 
that is come vuito the son of Kish? ^ Is 
Saul also among the prophets'? 

1 2 xlnd one t of the same place answered 
and said, But who is their father'? There- 
fore it became a proverb, Is Saul also 
among the prophets? 

13 And when he had made an end of 
prophesying, he came to the high place. 

1 4 ^ And Saul's uncle said unto him and 
to his servant. Whither went ye 1 And he 
said, To seek the asses : and when we saw 
that tkcy were no where, we came to Samuel. 

15 And Saul's uncle said. Tell me, I pray 
thee, what Samuel said unto you. 

16 And Saul said unto his uncle. He told 
us plainly that the asses were found. But 
of the matterofthekingdom, whereof Sam- 
uel spake, he told him not. 

17 ^And Samuel called the people to- 
gether unto the Lord to "^Mizpeh; 

18 And said unto the children of Israel, 
Thus^ saith the Lord God of Israel, I 
brought up Israel out of Egypt, and deliv- 
ered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, 
and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and 
of them that oppressed you: 

19 And''ye have this day rejected your 
God, who himself ""saved you out of all 
your adversities and your tribulations ; 
and ye have said unto him. Nay, but set 
a king over us. Now therefore present 
yourselves before the Lord by your "tribes, 
and by your thousands. 



» vt>r. 6 ; chap. 11 ; fi. ^ Heh. a man to his neighbor. l» chap. 
19:-20-i;4; John7:I5, 16. t Heh. from thence, c chap. 7:5,6. 
•1 Judse.i 2 : -2 ; 6 : 8, 9 ; Neh. 9 : 9, etc. e chap. 8 : 7, 19 ; 12 : 13. 
f P8a.l06:iS-l0i l8a.Ki:9; Jer.3:23. g Josh. 7: H, etc. h chap. 



11. Is Said also a,mo7i^ the prnpliets? they 
were surprised that, witlioufc having been instructed, 
he should be able thus to join with them. 

1"2. Their father ; teacher and guide. 

17. Mizpeh; near the confines of Judah and 
Benjamin. Juiijr. "iO : 1. 

10. Rejected ijoii,r God ; by insisting on a change 
in the governniont which he had established. 

20. Benja.iniii was taken; they cast lots, and 
the lot fell upon the tribe of Benjamin. 

2'J. St It If ; furniture, baggage. 

2'). The viannir of the kingdom; the reguhi- 
tions which G-od h.ad prescribed for its government. 
Deut. 17 : 14-20. 

20. Ha'l touched ; inclined to follow Saul and 
support his authority. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 

2. If men wait upon God and follow his direc- 
tions, he will show them wh.it he would have them 
do, and furnish them for the duties to which he calls 
them. 

7. If men are under the guidance of God and seek 
his glory, they will be able to judge, in view of all 
3G4 



all the tribes of Israel to come near, the 
tribe of Benjamin was taken. 

2 1 When he had caused the tribe of Ben- 
jamin to come near by their families, the 
family of Matri was taken, and Saul the 
son of Kish was taken: and when they 
sought him, he could not be found. 

22 Therefore they inquired of the Lord 
further, if the man should yet come thith- 
er. And the Lord answered. Behold, he 
hath hid himself among the stuff. 

23 And they ran and fetched him thence ; 
and when he stood among the people, he 
was ''higher than any of the people from 
his shoulders and upward. 

24 And Samuel said to all the people, 
See ye him whom the Lord hath chosen, 
that there is none like him among all the 
people? And all the people shouted, and 
said, t God save the king. 

25 Then Samuel told the people the man- 
ner of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book, 
and laid it up before the Lord. And Sam- 
uel sent all the people away, every man 
to his house. 

26 1[And Saul also went home to'Gib- 
eah; and there went with him a band of 
men, whose hearts God had touched. 

27 But the ' children of Belial said, How 
shall this man save us? And they de- 
spised him, and brought him no ''presents. 
But he 5 held his peace. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 Nahash offereth them of Jabesh-gilead a reproachful 
condition. 4 They send messengers, and are delivered 
by Saul. ]"3 Saul thereby is confirmed, and his king- 
dom renewed. 

THEN ' Nahash the Ammonite came up, 
and encamped against ""Jabesh-gile- 



9:2. t Heb. Let the kina line. 1 Kiiij.s 1 : 25, 39 ; 2 Kings, 11:12. 
ichap.ll:4. i Deut, 13: l:) ; iChron. 13:7. k 2Sani.8:2; 1 Kings, 
4:21; 10:25; 2Chron.l7:5; l>sa. 72 : 10 % Or, was at though he 
had been deaf. 1 chap. 12 : 12. m .Tudg. 21:8, etc. 



circumstances, what sliould be done to render them- 
selves most useful. 

9. All the qualifications of men for the formation 
and accomplishment of great and useful plans come 
from God, and lay them under increased obligations 
of devotion to his service ; but enlarged views and 
great talents may be given, and men may join ex- 
ternally in the worship of G-od, without the renew- 
ing and sanctifying influences of his Spirit. 

19. The reception from God of an object which is 
sought, is no certain evidence of his apnrohation. 
He may give it in wrath. Chap. 12 : 12, 13. 19. We 
should therefore rely upon his wi.sdom rather than 
our own, saying, Not my will, but thine be done. 

2.'). Kings, and men in authority, as well .as in all 
other conditions of life, are bound to be acquai ited 
with, and to be governed by the revealed will of (.rod, 

27. The best wa}' (o treat dilliculties often is, for 
a time at least, to say and do nothing about tliem. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1. Jahesh-gilead: a city in the tribe of Manas- 
seh, on the east side of Jordan. 



Saul rescuelh Jabcsh 



I. SAMUEL, XII. 



yrom the Ammonites. 



unto Nahash, ^Make a covenant with us, 
and we will serve thee. 

2 And Nahash the Ammonite answered 
them, On '' this co«r/z7Jou will I make a cov- 
enant with you, that I may thrust out all 
your right eyes, and lay it for a *= reproach 
upon all Israel. 

3 And the elders of Jabesh said unto 
him, *Give us seven days' respite, that we 
may send messengers unto all the coasts 
of Israel : and then, if there be no man to 
save us, we will come out to thee. 

4 ^ Then came the messengers to ^ Gib- 
eah of Saul, and told the tidings in the 
ears of the people : and all the peop i lift- 
ed up their voices, and wept. 

5 And behold, Saul came after the h rd 
out of the field ; and Saul said. What aileJi 
the people that they weep 1 And they told 
him the tidings of the men of Jabesh. 

6 And the "Spirit of God came upon 
Saul when he heard those tidings, and his 
anger was kindled greatly. 

7 And he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed 
them in "^pieces, and sent them throughout 
all the coasts of Israel by the hands of 
messengers, saying, e Whosoever cometh 
not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so 
shall it be done unto his oxen. And the 
fear of the Lord fell on the people, and 
they came out t with one consent. 

8 And when he numbered them in'' Be- 
zek, the children of Israel were three liun- 
dred thousand, and the men of Judah thir- 
ty thousand. 

9 And they said unto the messengers 
that came. Thus shall ye say unto the 
men of Jabesh-gilead, To-morrow, by 
that time the son be hot, ye shall have 
help.t And the messengers came and 
showed it to the men of Jabesh ; and 
they ' were glad. 

10 Therefore the men of Jabesh said. 
To-morrow we will ' come out unto you, 



» Isa. W : 16 ; Ezekiel 17:13. b Prov. 12 : 10. c diap. 17 : 26. 
* Heb. Forbear us. i chap. In: 34; 2 Samuel, 21 : fi. e chap. 
10:10. f .ludg. ia:29. g .ludg. 21 : .5-10. f Heb. as one man. 
Judges 20 : 1. h Judges 1 : S. t Or, deliverance, i chap. 31 : II. 



4. Gibeah ; in Benjamin, where Saul lived. 

6. The Spirit of God ; awakened Saul's indig- 
nation and inspired him with wisdom, courage, and 
all needful qualities to collect an army and lead 
them forth to victory. 

7. The fear of the Lord; that he would in his 
providence bring dreadful judgments upon them, if 
they should not go forth to protect their brethren. 

8. Bezek ; a place between Shechem and Jabesh- 
gilead. 

11. The morni)ig-watch ; between two o'clock 
and sunrise. 

12. Who is he ? chap. 10 : 27. 

14. Renew the kingdom ; publicly acknow- 
ledge Saul as king. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. If it is wise in men to make great sacrifices and 

21 



and ye shall do with us all that seemeth 
good unto you. 

1 1 And it was .to on the morrow, that 
Saul put the people in three "^ companies ; 
and they came into the midst of the host 
in the morning-watch, and slew the Am- 
monites until the heat of the day : and it 
came to pass, that they which remained 
were scattered, so that two of them were 
not left together. 

12 TfAnd the people said unto Samuel, 
Who is he that ' said. Shall Saul reign over 
usl "'bring the men, that we may put them 
to death. 

1 3 And Saul said, " There shall not a man 
be put to death this day : for to-day the 
Lord hath wrought "salvation in Israel. 

1 4 Then said Samuel to the people. Come, 
and let us go to p Gilgal, and renew the 
kingdom there. 

15 And all the people went to Gilgal: 
and there they made Saul king before the 
Lord in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed 
sacrifices of peace-offerings before the 
Lord ; and there Saul and all the men of 
Israel rejoiced greatly. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1 Samuel testifieth his inteerity. 6 Hb reproveth the 
people of ingratitude. 16 He terrifieth them with 
thunder in harvest-time. 20 He comfortcth them in 
God's mercy. 

AND Samuel said unto all Israel, Be- 
hold, I have hearkened unto your 
voice in all that ye ''said unto me, and 
have ''made a king over you. 

2 And now, behold, the king walketh 
before you : and I am old and gray-head- 
ed; and behold, my sons arc with you: 
and I have walked before you from my 
childhood unto this day. 

3 Behold, here I am: witness against 
me before the Lord, and before his anoint- 
ed : "whose o.x have I taken? or whose 
ass have I taken? or whom have I de- 
frauded? whom have I oppressed? or of 

j ver. 3. VJudg. 7:16. I chap. 10:27. m Luke 19:27. n chap. 
H : 4,i ; 2 Sam. 19 : 22. o chap. 19: 5 ; Isa. 59: 16. p chap. 10 : 8. 
1 chap. 8:5, 19, 20. r chap. 10: 24; 11 : 14, 1.5. sNum.l6:I5; 
Acts 20 : 33 i 2 Cor. 12 : 14. 



submit to many hardships to save their lives, how 
much more wise is it to sacrifice and suffer whatever 
may be needful to save their souls. Mat. 5 : 29, 30. 

2. Great cruelty and bitter opposition to the peo- 
ple and cause of God generally go together. 

4. It is right that one portion of the human fam- 
ily should deeply sympathize with the sulTerings of 
another, and do whatever may be consistent with 
truth and duty to afford them relief. 

9. If gladness and joy are occasioned by deliver- 
ance from temporal calamities, much more shouM 
they be by deliverance from those which are eternal. 

13. True courage and real greatness are mani- 
fested in forgiving personal injuries, not in avenging 
them. 

CHAPTER XII. 

3. His anointed; Saul. Chap. 10 : 1. 

365 



Samuel's discourse 



1. SAMUEL, XII. 



to the Israelites. 



whose hand have I received amj *bribe''^to 
blind mine "eyes therewith? and I Avill 
restore *" it you. 

4 And they said, Thou hast not defraud- 
ed us, nor oppressed us, neither hast thou 
taken aught of any man's hand. 

5 And he said unto them, The Lord is 
\vitness against you, and his anointed is 
witness this day, that "^ ye have not found 
aught in my hand. And they answered, 
He is witness. 

6 If And Samuel said untothe people, 
It is the Loud that ^ advanced INIoses and 
Aaron, and that brought your fathers up 
out of the land of Egypt. 

7 l\o^Y therefore stand still, that I may 
reason "* with you before the Lord of all 
the ^ righteous acts of the Lord, which he 
did II to you and to your fathers. 

8 When Jacob was come into Egypt, 
and your fathers cried unto the Lord, then 
the LoRD*sent Moses and Aaron, which 
brought forth your fathers out of Egypt, 
and made them dwell in this place. 

9 And when they forgat the Lord their 
God, he sold them into the hand of "^Sis- 
era, captain of the host of Hazor, and into 
the hand of the^IMiilistines, and into the 
liand of the king of' Moab, and they fought 
against them. 

10 And they 'cried unto the Lord, and 
said, We have sinned, bccavise we have 
forsaken the Lord, and have J served Baa- 
lim and Ashtaroth : but now deliver us 
out of t\ie hand of our enemies, and we' 
will serve thee. 

11 And the Lord sent ''.lerubbaal, and 
Eedan, and ' Jephthah, and "'Samuel, and 
delivered you out of the hand of your ene- 
mies on every side, and ye dwelt safe. 

12 And when ye saw thafNahash the 
king of the children of Ammon came 
against you, ye said unto me. Nay ; but a 



king shall reign over us : when the s.ciJSSf. 
Lord your God icas your king. 

1 3 Now therefore behold the king whom 
ye have chosen, and wiiom ye have de- 
sired! and behold, the "Lord hath set a 
king over you. 

14 If Pye will fear the Lord, and serve 
him, and obey his voice, and not rebel 
against the 'commandment of the Lord; 
then shall both ye and also the king that 
reigncth over you + continue following Uie 
Lord your God : 

15 But if ye will not obey the voice of 
the Lord, but rebel against the command- 
ment o*" the Lord ; then ^ shall the hand 
of th Lord be against you, as it was 
aga" ..sf your fathers. 

J I TTNow therefore stand and see this 
gx eat thing, which the Lord will do before 
your eyes. 

17 Is it not wheat-harvest to-day? I 
-will 'call unto the Lord, and he shall 
send thunder and rain; that ye may per- 
ceive and see that your wickedness is 
great, which ye have done in the sight of 
the Lord, in asking you a king. 

18 So Samuel called unto the Lord; and 
the Lord sent thunder and rain that day : 
and 'all the people greatly feared the Lord 
and Samuel. 

19 And all the people said unto Samuel, 
Pray"' for thy servants unto the Lord thy 
God, that we die not: for we have added 
unto all our sins this evil, to ask us a king. 

20 ^ And Samuel said untothe people. 
Fear not : ye have done all this wickedness : 
yet "turn not aside from following the Lord, 
but serve the Lord with all your heart; 

21 And turn ye not aside : for then 
should yc go after vain things, which "can- 
not profit nor deliver; for they are "vain. 

22 For the Lord will nofyforsake his 
people for * his great name's sake : because 



* Heb. raiuom. f Or, that I should hitte mine evci at him. 
• neut. 16 : 19. b Exodu.9 22 : 4. c Act.i 2-1 : 16, 20. i Or, made. 
<1 Ina. 1 : 18; Micah 6 : 2, 3. % Heb. righteousnesses, or benefits. 
Judg. .5:1. II Heb. with, t Ex. 3 : 10. f .ludg. 4:2. g Judg. 
10: T; 13:1. h Judg. 3:12. I Judg. 10 : 10, etc. j Judg. 2 : 13. 
k Judges 6 : U, 32. 1 Judg. 11 : 1, etc. m chap. 7: 13. n clwp. 



4. Taken might ; any thing; wrongfully. 

11. Jeriibbaal ; Grideon. Judj;. G : 14, 3'3. Be- 
dan ; supposed to be Barak. Heb. 11 : 32. 

18. The Lord sent thunder a?ul rain ; an un- 
common thing, as it ordinarily never rained in Pal- 
estine during the season of wheat-harvest. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Those who serve G od from their childhood are 
often made distinguished benefactors to mankind. 

4. Men who have long been in public life, and 
have been governed by tlie fear and love of G-od, 
may expect when they retire to leave a conviction 
of their fidelity in tlie hearts of others, which shall 
tend greatly to promote his glory, and the good of 
their fellow-men. 

6. Aged men after retiring from more Idborious 
and active duties, may still be useful by communi- 
cating to the young a knowledge of facts in the 
366 



11:2. oHosea 13:11. p Jnsbua 24 : 14, 20 ; Psalm 81 : 12-15. 
'« Hell. wiokM. t Weh. be after, q Lev. 26: 14, etc. r ver. 9. 
■ Ja8.5:16-18. t Ex. 14 : 31 ; Ezra 10: 9. u Ex. 9 : 28; 10 : 17 i 
Isaiah 26:16; lJohn,5:16. » DeuL 11 : 16; Jer.3:l. w Jer. 
16:19; Jonah 2: 8. xHab. 2:18. I Lam. 3 : 31, 33. s Ezek. 
20 : 9, 14. 



history of their fathers, and of the instructions which 
those facts afford. 

10. A just review of the past will impress the 
conviction tlial sin loads to misery, and th.at there 
is no escaping it, e.xcept in repentance and hearty 
devotion to the service of G-od. 

15. However great the blessings which God be- 
stows upon a people, they cannot long preserve them 
unless they hearlcen to his voice, and walk in his 
ways. 

19. The true friends of God can greatly benefit 
their fellow-men; and often the wicked in their dis- 
tress feel this, and apply to them for help. 

23. However ungratefully pious men may have 
been treated, they will labor to do good even to 
those who have done tiiein evil ; while they main- 
tain that there can be no real blessedness but in 
liearty obedience to the commands of G-od. 



The Philistines war 



I. SAMUEL, Xlir, 



against Israel. 



t'.c.'i^: it hath pleased the Lord to make 
you his people. 

23 Moreover as for me, God forbid that 
I should sin against the Lord *in ceasing 
to * pray for you : but I will teach you the 
good and the right way : 

24 Only ""fear the Lord, and serve him 
in truth with all your heart: for consider 
howt great things he hath done for you. 

25 But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye 
shall be consumed, both "^ y c and your king. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1 Saail's selected band. 3 Ho calleth the Hebrews to 
Gilgal against the Phili'stines, whose garrison Jona- 
than had smitten. 5 The Philistines' great host. 6 
The distress of the Israelites. 8 Saul,-weary of staying 
for Samuel, sacrificeth. 11 Samuel reproveth him. 
17 The three spoiling bands of the Philistines. 19 
The policy of the Philistines, to suffer no smith in 
Israel. 

SAUL? reigned one year; and when he 
had reigned two years over Israel, 

2 Saul chose him three thousand men of 
Israel; whereof two thousand were with 
Saul in Michmash and in mount Beth-el, 
and a thousand were with Jonathan in 
Gibeah ^ of Benjamin : and the rest of the 
people he sent every man to his tent. 

3 And Jonathan smote the ^ garrison of 
the Philistines that luas in ^ Geba, and the 
Philistines heard of it. And Saul-blew 
the trumpet throughout all the land, say- 
ing, Let the Hebrews hear. 

4 And all Israel heard say that Saul had 
smitten a garrison of the Philistines, and 
that Israel also II was had in abomination 
with the Philistines. And the people were 
called together after Saul to Gilgal. 

5 Tl And the Philistines gathered them- 
selves together to fight with Israel, thirfy 
thousand chariots, and six thousand horse- 
men, and people as the sand which is on 
the sea-shore in multitude : and they came 
up, and pitched in Michmash, eastward 
from '^Bcth-aven. 

6 When the men of Israel saw that they 
were in a ^ strait, (for the people were dis- 
tressed.) then the people did ^ hide them- 
selves in caves, and in thickets, and in 
rocks, and in high places, and in pits. 

7 And some of the Hebrews went over 
Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead. 
As for Saul, he ims yet in Gilgal, and all 
the people ^followed him trembling. 



* Heb./i om. • Col. 1 : 9. b Errl. I 


:n. i Or.trhatafieanWng. 


e Dent. 28 : :!6. J Heb. tht son of one 


vearinhis veignin0. H clia|>. 


10:26. o chap. 10:6. f^ Or. the hill. 


I] Hell. did n/iii*. Gen.n4:30; 


Ex. 6:21. fj09li.7:2. g2S:>m.24: 


14. h cliap.H:ll; .ludg.6:2. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

2. 7;j Michmask and inmowit Beth-el; in 
the tribe of Benjamin. 

3. Geba; supposed to be Gibeah, or a place 
near it. 

7. Went over Jordan ; to escape from the Phil- 
istines. 



8 TfAnd he tarried seven days, accord- 
ing to the set 'time that Samuel had ap- 
pointed: but Samuel came not to Gilgal; 
and the people were scattered from him. 

9 And Saul said. Bring hither a burnt- 
offering to me, and peace-offerings. And 
he offered the burnt-otlering. 

10 And it came to pass, that as soon as 
he had made an end of offering the burnt- 
offering, behold, Samuel came; and Saul 
went out to meet him, that he might t sa- 
lute him. 

11 T[ And Samuel said. What hast thou 
done 1 vVnd Saul said. Because I saw that 
the people were scattered from me, and 
that thou camest not within the days ap- 
pointed, and that the Philistines gathered 
themselves together at Michmash; 

12 Therefore said I, The Philistines will 
come down now upon me to Gilgal, and 
I have not tmadc supplica,tion unto the 
Lord: I forced myself therefore, and of- 
fered a burnt-offering. 

1 3 And Samuel said to Saul, > Thou hast 
done foolishly: thou ''hast not kept the 
commandment ofthc Lord thy God, which 
he commanded thee : for now would the 
Lord have established thy kingdom upon 
Israel for ever. 

14 But now thy kingdom shall not con- 
tinue: the Lord hath sought him a 'man 
after his own heart, and the Lord hath 
commanded him to be captain over his 
people, because thou hast not kept that 
which the Lord commanded thee. 

15 And. Samuel arose, and gat him up 
from Gilgal unto Gibeah of Benjamin. 
And Saul numbered the people that ivere 
present^ with him, about ""six hundred 
men. 

16 And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and 
the people that icerc present with them, 
abode in H Gibeah of Benjamin: but the 
Philistines encamped in ^lichmash. 

17 "[And the spoilers came out of the 
camp ofthc Philistines in three companies: 
one company turned unto the way that lead- 
cth to "Ophrah, unto the land of Shual: 

18 And another company turned the 
way ^o"Beth-horon : and another compa- 
ny turned to the way of the border that 
looketh to the valley of PZeboim toward 
the wilderness. 



* Heb. trembled after him. i cliap. 10: 8. f Heb. bittt. J Heb. 
entreated the face, i 2Chrnn. 1H:9. k ch. l.'i:] l,2S. I Psa. f><>:20: 
Act-1 13:22. % Heb. found, m tlinp. 14:2. || Heb. Geba. vtf.S. 
n Josli.l8:23. o Josh. 16:3. p Gen. 14:2; Keli. 1 1 :3I; Ho9. U :8. 



13. Thou hast done foolishly ; in offering sac- 
rifices which he had no right to offer, and in not 
waiting for Samuel, .as God h.ad commanded. 

14. .1 man after his own heart ; David. 

17. Ophrah — Shnal ; pLaces north of Gibeah. 

18. The way toBeth-hoion; toward the west. 
Toicard the tvilderness ; on the east. 

367 



Jonathan smitcth 



I. SAMUEL, XIV 



the Pli Hist i ties' garrison 



19 IfNow tliere was no ^siniUi found 
throughout all the land of Israel : for the 
Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make 
them swords or spears : 

20 But all the Israelites went down to 
the Philistines, to sharpen every man his 
share, and his coulter, and his axe, and 
his mattock. 

21 Yet they had a *file for the mattocks, 
and for the coulters, and for the forks, and 
for the axes, and to t sharpen the goads. 

22 So it ''came to pass in the day of bat- 
tle, that there was neither sword nor spear 
found in the hand of any of the people that 
were with Saul and Jonathan : but with 
Saul and with Jonathan his son was there 
found. 

23 And the J garrison of the Philistines 
went out to the passage of "Michmash. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1 Jonathan, unwitting to Ills' father, the priest, or the 
people, goeth and miraculously smiteth the Philis- 
tines' garrison. 15 A divine terror maketh them 
beat themselves. 17 Saul, not staying the priest's 
answer, setteth on them. 21 The captivated Hebrews, 
and the hidden Israelites, join against them. 24 Saul's 
unadvised adjuration hindereth the victory. 3'2 He re- 
straineth the people from eating blood. ."35 He build- 
eth an altar. 31) Jonathan, taken by lot. is saved by 
the people. 47 Saul's strength and family. 

IVTOW Jit came to pass upon a day, that 
J_N Jonathan the son of Saul said unto 
the young man that bare his armor. Come, 
and let us go over to the Philistines' gar- 
rison, that is on the other side. But he 
told not his father. 

2 And Saul tarried in the uttermost part 
ofGibeah under apomegranatc-tree which 
is in Migron : and the people that tvere 
with him iccre about '' six hundred men; 

3 And IIAhiah, the son of Ahitub,''Icha- 
bod's brother, the son of Phinehas, the 
son of Eli, the Lord's priest in Shiloh, 
wearing an ""ephod. And the people knew 
not that Jonathan was gone. 

4 11 And between the passages, by which 
Jonathan sought to go over unto the Phil- 
istines' ^ garrison, f/tc/-<'?rH.s a sharp rock on 
the one side, and a .sharp rock on the other 
side : and the name of the one was Bozez, 
and the name of the other Seneh. 



• 2King!i,i24:M; lMa.54:If,; .Icr.24:l. * Heh. file with mniith.s. .liiSfi; .IiiJg. 7H,7; ^rliron. 14: 11. i .Iiidg. 7:3-11. \ Hf\>. Be ttilt. 

fHeb.ft/. bJudg.5:S. iOr.ttandinacamp. c Isa. 10:-2K. ?^ Or, j Gen. 24 : H. krli.l3:B. l2King9,U:8. m 2Sain. .'i:24. n Lev. 

there teat a day. A cli. 13:15. || CaMkA AliimeUch,i:h.-ii:%\i ,iO. 2S:S. % Or.lial/fi/wToioo/anacre. o 2 Kings, 7:6,7; Job 18: II. 

• cliap.4:21. rrlinp.2:2«. nh.ip. 13:J3. * Heh.toalh. h Deut. p clmp. 1:1: 17. 1^ He\>. trem'iling n/ God. Geo. So : ^. 



situate northward over against INIichmash, 
and the other southward over against 
Gibeah. 

6 And Jonathan said to the young man 
that bare his armor, Come, and let us go 
over unto the garrison of these uncircum- 
cised : it may be that the Lord will work 
for us : for there is no restraint to the Lord 
to "^save by many or by few. 

7 And his armor-bearer said unto hiin, Do 
all that is in thy heart: turn thee ; behold, 
I am with tlicc according to thy heart. 

8 Then said Jonathan, Behold, we will 
pass 'over unto these men, and we will 
discover ourselves unto them. 

9 If they say thus unto us, t Tarry until 
v,'e come to you; then we will stand still 
in our place, and will not go up unto them. 

10 But if they say thus, Come up unto 
us; then we will go up : for the Lord hath 
delivered them into our hand; and this 
shall be a ' sign .unto us. 

11 And both of them discovered them- 
selves unto the garrison of the Philistines: 
and the Philistines said. Behold, the He- 
brews come forth out of the '' holes where 
they had hid themselves. 

1 2 And the men of the garrison answered 
Jonathan and his armor-bearer, and said. 
Come' up to us, and we will show you a 
thing. And Jonathan said unto his armor- 
bearer. Come up after mc : for '"the Lord 
hath del i ve red tiicm into the hand of Israel. 

13 And Jonathan climbed up upon his 
hands and upon his feet, and his armor- 
bearer after him: and "they fell before 
Jonathan ; and his armor-bearer slew after 
him. 

14 And that first slaughter, which Jon- 
athan and his arinor-bearer made, Avas 
about twenty men, within as it were -a 
half acre of land, ivhich a yoke of oxen 
might plough. 

15 And there was "trembling in the host, 
in the field, and among all the people : the 
garrison, and the p spoilers, they also trem- 
bled, and the earth quaked: so it was a 
very* great tromblini 



19. There was no smith; the Philistines had 
removed them to prevent the Israelites from being 
furnished with weapons of war. 

20. To the Philistines ; to the difTerent garrisons 
of the Philistines. Mnttoch : a kind of pickaxe. 

IN.STRUCTIOXS. 
6. Tliose who rely on tlieir own wisdom, trusting 
to man not to God, and expect to prosper, will be dis- 
appointed, and troubles will come upon them, from 
which, without returning to him, they cannot escape. 
9. The expedients which men adopt to deliver them- 
selves from calamities, often only increase them. 
368 



13. No one can tell the evils which may result 
from a single act of known disobedience to God. 

19. For their sins, a people are often bronght 
into oppressive and degrading bondage, wlien. had 
they obeyed God, they might have enjoyed liberty, 
peace, and prosperity. 

CT-UPTER XIV. 

1. On the other side ; of tlie valley which lay 
between the Israelites and tiie Pliilistines. 

10. A sign; that God called them to go up to 
the Pliilistines, and would give them success. 



SauVs rash oath. 



I. SAMUEL. XIV. 



The people t)-ansgress. 



b.'c'iom'' 16 And the watchmen of Saul in 
Gibeah of Benjamin looked ; and behold, 
the multitude melted away, and *they 
went on beating' dpwn one another. 

17 Then said Saul unto the people that 
trcre with him, Number now, and see who 
is gone from us. And when they had 
numbered, behold, Jonathan and his ar- 
mor-bearer were not there. 

18 And Saul said unto Ahiah, ''Bring 
hither the ark of God : for the ark of God 
was at that time with the children of Is- 
rael. 

19 TTAnd it came to pass, while Saul 
talked"^ unto the priest, that the *noise that 
was in the host of the Philistines went on 
and increased: and Saul said unto the 
priest. Withdraw thy hand. 

20 And Saul and all the people thatjrcrc 
with him tassembled themselves, and they 
came to the battle: and behold, every 
man's ^ sword was against his fellow, a»i(i 
there was a very great discomfiture. 

21 Moreover, the Hebrews that were 
with the Philistines before that time, 
which went up with them into the camp 
from the country round about, even they 
also turned to be with the Israelites that 
were with Saul and .lonathan. 

22 Likewise all the men of Israel which 
had "^hid themselves in mount Ephraim, 
when they heard that the Philistines fled, 
even they also followed hard after them 
in the battle. 

23 So "^the Lord saved Israel that day : 
and the battle passed ^over unto Beth- 
aven. 

24 T[And the men of Israel were dis- 
tressed that day: for Saul had ''adjured 
the people, saying. Cursed />e the man that 
eateth any food until evening, that I may 
be avenged on mine enemies. So none 
of the people tasted any food. 

25 And all they of the land came to a 
wood; and there was 'honey upon the 
ground. 

26 And when tlic people were come into 
the wood, behold, the honey dropped ; but 
no man put his hand to his mouth : for 
the people feared the oath. 

27 But Jonathan heard not when his 
father charged the people with the oath : 



wherefore he put forth the end of the rod 
that was in his hand, and dipped it in a 
honey-comb, and put his hand to his 
mouth; and J his eyes were enlightened. 

28 Then answered one of the people, 
and said. Thy father straitly charged the 
people with an oath, saying, Curi?ed be the 
man that eateth any food this day. And 
the people were t faint. 

29 Then said Jonathan, My father hath 
troubled the land: see, I pray you, how 
mine eyes have been enlightened, because 
I tasted a little of this honey. 

30 How much more, if haply the people 
had eaten freely to-day of the spoil of their 
enemies which they found? for had there 
not been now a much greater slaughter 
among the Philistines'? 

31 And they smote the Philistines that 
day from Michmash to Aijalon : and the 
people were very faint. 

32 And the people flew upon the spoil, 
and took sheep, and oxen, and calves, and 
slew them on the ground : and the people 
did eat thc77i with the blood. 

33 T[ Then they told Saul, saying, Be- 
hold, the people ''sin against the Lord, in 
that they eat with the blood. And he 
said, Ye have Hransgressed : roll a great 
stone unto me this day. 

34 And Saul said. Disperse yourselves 
among the people, and say unto them, 
Bring me hither every man his ox, and 
every man his sheep, and slay them here, 
and eat; and sin not against the Lord in 
eating with the blood. And all the peo- 
ple brought every man his ox II with him 
that night, and slew them there. 

35 And ' Saul built an altar unto the 
Lord: *thc same was the first altar that 
he built unto the Lord. 

36 H And Sanl said, Let us go down after 
the Philistines by night, and spoil them 
until the morning light, and let us not 
leave a man of them. And they said, Do 
whatsoever sccmeth good unto thee. Then 
said the priest. Let us draw near hither 
unto God. 

37 And Saul asked counsel of God, Shall 
I go down after the Philistines? wilt thou 
deliver them into the hand of Israel ? But 
he'" answered him not that day. 



«ver. 20. b iS.iin. LliSJ-Jfi. c Num. 27:21. * Or.tumull. M:l-2;T 
t H>-i>.wen: rried Inarthcr. A .luilg. 7 : 2-2 ; *pliroii. 20:2:1; Isil. IH: 2. 
e chap. IS : «. f Ex. H : M ; P«n. 44 : fi, /• Hiisea 1:7. f chap. 
13:A. h Josh. 6:26. i Ex. :l: 8; Num. 1.1: 27 : Mat. 3: 4. j chap. 



16. The mitltitnde ; of the Philistines. 

19. Withdraw thy hand ; he need not proceed 
any further in liis inquiry as to what Israel should do. 

■JO. Agai)ist hix felloiv ; the Philistines de- 
stroyed one another. 

21. Cursed; devoted to destruction. 

27. His eyes were enlightened ; he was invig- 
orated and refreshed. 



K. t Or, H^cary. k Lev. 3: 17; 17 : 10 ; Dent. 
12 : 23, 24 ; Kiek. 3:! : 2.1. \ Or, dtalt treacheroml.v. II Heh. in hit 
hand. I Hosea 8:14. * Heb. that altar he began to huild unto 
the Lo»o. in chap. 28 : 6. 



29. Troubled the land; been instrumental of 
great evil. 

31. Aija/on; in the tribe of Dan, towards the land 
of the Philistines. 

3"2. Difl eat them with the l/lood ; in a manner 
forbidden by their law. 

36. Draw near — unto God ; inquire of him 
whether they should go after the Philistines or not. 
369 



Jonathan is rescued. 



I. SAMUEL, XV 



SauVs strength and family. 



38 And l^aul said,* Draw ye near hither, 
all the *chicf of the people ; and know and 
see wherein lliis sin hath been this day : 

39 For, as ""the Lord livctli, which sav- 
eth Israel, though it be in Jonathan my 
son, he shall surely die. But there was 
not a ma*n among all the people that an- 
swered him. 

40 Then said he unto all Lsrael, Be ye 
on one side, and I and .Jonathan my son 
will be on the other side. And the peo- 
ple said unto Saul, Do what scemeth good 
unto thee. 

41 Therefore Saul said unto the Lord 
God of Israel, tGive a perfect "^ /o/. -And 
Saul and Jonathan were taken : but the 
people r escaped. 

42 And Saul said. Cast lots between me 
and Jonathan my son. And Jonathan 
was taken. 

43 Then Saul said to Jonathan, ''Tell 
me what thou hast done. And Jonathan 
told him, and said, ^1 did but taste a little 
honey with the end of the rod that was 
in my hand, and lo, I must die. 

44 And Saul answered, '^God do so and 
more also : for ^ thou shalt surely die, Jon- 
athan. 

45 And the people said unto Saul, Shall 
Jonathan die, who hath wrought this great 
salvation in Israel? God forbid; a.s the 
Lord liveth, there shall not one ''hair of 
his head fall to the ground; for he liath 
wrought with God 'this day. So the J peo- 
ple rescued Jonathan, that he died not. 

46 Then Saul went up from following 
the Philistines : and the Philistines went 
to their own place. 



• diap. 10:19; .loali. 7 : H, etc. ' Heb. corntrt. Judg. 20:2. 
b aSaill. 12 : S. t Or, Show the innocent, c Prov. 16 : 3:i ; Acts 
1:24. ^ Heb 7aent forth, il Jonah 1 : 7-10. e ver. 27. f Ruth 
1:17. ever. 3'J. h 2Sam. 14: 11 ; 1 Kings, 1 :52; Luke 21 : 18. 



38. This sill ; the sin which prevented the an- 
swer to his inquiry. 

44. Goddo so; cause Saul to die, if he did not put 
Jonathan to death according to his oath. Ver. 24. 

47. Zohah ; a part of Syria north-east of Canaan. 

48. Amalekites ; a people south of Canaan. 

IXSTRUCTIO.VS. 

6. When men in the fear and love of Grod engage 
in duties to which he calls them, they may safely 
trust in him, and expect, in following his directions, 
to meet with success. 

12. Right views of dependence on Grod will lead 
men to use means to obtain his blessing, and when 
it is obtained, to acknowledge his goodness andgiare 
him the glory. 

20. When Grod sets himself against a people, he 
can cause them to fall, not only before their enemies, 
but by the hands of one another. 

24. There is nfeitlier wisdom nor piety in forbidding 
men to partake of those bounties of providence the 
proper use of which is conducive to their comfort, and 
to tlie best discharge of their appropriate duties. 

32. Forbidding men to do what God allows, in- 
creases their temptations to do what he forbid.s, 
and thus to bring trouble not only on themselves, 
but upon all with whom they are connected. 
370 



47 HSo Saul took the kingdom V'^:??i;: 
over Israel, and fought against all his 
enemies on every side, against i\Ioab, and 
against the children of ''Amnion, and 
against Edom, and against the kings of 
Zobah,' and against the Philistines: and 
whithersoever he turned himself, he vex- 
ed them. 

48 And he ^gathered a host, and smote 
the ""Amalekites, and delivered Israel out 
of the hands of them that spoiled them. 

49 Now the " sons of Saul were Jona- 
than, and Ishui, and JMelchi-shua : and 
the names of his two daughters were these: 
the name of the first-born Merab, and the 
name of the younger Michal : 

50 And the name of Saul's wife was 
Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahimaaz : and 
the name of the captain of his host teas 
Abner,ll the son of Ner, Saul's uncle. 

51 And"Kish ivas the father of Saul; 
and Ner the father of Abner was the son 
of Abiel. 

52 And there was sore war against the 
Philistines all the days of Saul : and when 
Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant 
man, he Ptook him unto him. 

CHAPTER XV. 

1 Samuel sendeth Saul to destroy Amalek. 6 Saul 
favoreth the Kenites. 8 He spareth Agag and the 
best of the spoil. 10 Samuel denounceth unto Saul, 
commending and excusing himself, God's rejection of 
him for his disobedience. 31 Saul's humiliation. 33 
Samuel killeth Agag. 31 Samuel and Saul part. 

SAMUEL also said unto Saul, iThe Lord 
sent me to anoint thee to be king over 
his people, over Israel: now therefore 
hearken thou unto the voice of the words 
of the Lord. 



i 5Chron. 19:11; laa. 13:3; 2 Cor. 6:1; Pliil. 2 : 12, 13. j I.«a. 
29:20,21. kchap.lUll. l2Sam.lO:6. ^ Or, wrought mightily, 
m chap. 15 : 3, 7. n chap. 31:2; 1 Cliron. 8 : 33. )| Heb. Miner. 
o chap. 9:1,2. p chap. 8:11. q chap. 9:10. 

35. Education, the goadings of conscience, the 
hope of gain, and many other motives may lead men 
to attend to some of the externals of religion, who 
never make it their great object in all things to 
obey God, and who have no real love to his charac- 
ter or ways. 

39. Those who are least sensible of their own sins 
are often most ready to denounce the sins of others, 
and while they openly disobey God's commands, to 
kill those who disobey tiieirs. 

44. Reckless zeal, profane swearing, and great 
cruelty may all be united, and under cover of re- 
gard for truth and duty, stifle even natural aflec- 
tion and lead to the commission of the most abomi- 
nable crimes. 

45. The most sofemn engagements to commit sin 
can never be binding on the conscience, and should 
never in any case be fullilled. The guilt in such 
cases is not in breaking the engagement, but in 
making it, and the fulfilment of it would only in- 
crease the sin. 

48. Civil government, though administered by 
wicked men. may be the means of protecting God"s 
people, and procuring for them blessings which l;iy 
them under new obligations to honor him, and to do 
good, as they have opportunity, to their fellow-men. 



Tlie Amalckitcs destroyed. 



I. SxVMUEL, XV. 



Saul disobeyeth. 



iuwl 2 Thus saith the Lord of hosts, 1 1 
remember that which Amalek did to Is- ' 
rael, how he "Laid wait for hiin in the' 
way, when he came up from Egypt. 

3 Now go and smite Amalek, and ''utterly 
destroy "^ all that they have, p.iid spare them 
not ; but slay both man and woman, infant 
and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass. 

4 And Saul gathered the people together, 
and numbered them in Telaim, two hun- 
dred thousand footmen, and ten thousand 
men ofJudah. 

5 And Saul came to a city of Amalek, 
and *laid wait in the valley. 

G ^ And Saul said unto the'' Konites, "Go, 
depart, get you down from among the Am- 
alckites, lest I destroy you with them : for 
ye showed ^kindness to all the children of 
Israel, when they came up out of Egypt. 
So the Kenites departed from among the 
Amalekites. 

7 And Saul smote the Amalekites from 
Havilahs until thou comest to ''Shur, that 
is over against Egypt. 

8 And he 'took Agag the king of the 
Amalekites alive, and utterly J desti'oyed 
all the people with the edge of the sword. 

9 But Saul and the people spared ''Agag, 
and the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, 
and of the tfatlings, and llie lambs, and 
all that was good, and would not utterly 
destroy them: but every thing that was 
vile and refuse, that they destroyed ut- 
terly. 

10 ^Then came the word of the Lord 
unto Samuel, saying, 

11 It 'repenteth me that I have set up 
Saul to be king: for he is "turned back 
from following me, and hath " not per- 
formed my commandments. And it griev- 
ed Samuel; and he cried unto tlic Lord 
all night. 

12 And when Samuel rose early to meet 
Saul in the morning, it was told Samuel, 
saying, Saul came to ° Carmel, and behold, 
he set him up a place, and is gone about, 
and passed on, and gone down to Gilgal. 

1.3 And Samuel came to Saul : and Saul 
said unto him, p Blessed be thou of the 
LoRn: I have 1 performed the command- 
ment of the Loud. 

• Ex. 17:8,14; neut. 2.i: 17-19.. b I.eT.l!7:28j Josli. 6: 17,21. 
c Nuiii.'M:-20. * Or. fought, d .TuJg. 1 : Ifi: 4: 1 1. eRev.l8:4. 
f Num. IO.M-3-2; STim. i:lfi. 5 Gen.2: 1 1 ; -Jo: IS. liGen.I6:7. 
i IKinjs, 20:30, etc. jnlm|>.30:l. kver.S.IV i Or, second tort. 
Iver.lS: Gen.6:6,7; 2Siim. 54 : Ifi; .ler. 18: 8, 10. ni 1 Kings, 
9 : H ; Heb. 10 ! 38. n ver. 3, 9; clinp. 13 : 13. o I Kinga, 18 : 42. 



CHAPTER XV. 

•J. That which Amalek did ; E.x.lTiS-lG. 

4. Telaim ; supposed to be a place in the south- 
ern p.art of Judah. 

G. Keiiite.i ; supposed to have been descendants 
of Jethro. Ye showed kindness; E.x. 18:9-19; 
Num. 10 : 29-32. 

7. From Havilah; m the north-east part of 



1 4 And Samuel said, What meaneth then 
thisbleatingof the sheep in mine ears, and 
the lowing of the oxen which I hear? 

15 And Saul said, They have brought 
them from the Amalekites: for the ^peo- 
ple spared the best of the sheep and of the 
oxen, to sacrifice unto the Lord thy God : 
and the rest we have utterly destroyed. 

16 Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, 
and I will tell thee what the Lord hath 
said to m_e this night. And he said unto 
him, Say on. 

17 And Samuel said. When thou wast 
little" in thine own sight, wa.st thou not 
made the head of the tribes of Israel, and 
the Lord anointed thee king over Israel"? 

18 And tlie Lord sent thee on a journey, 
and said. Go and utterly destroy the sin- 
ners the Amalekites, and fight against 
them until they tbe consumed. 

19 Wherefore then didst thou not obey 
the voice of tiie Lord, but didst fly upon 
the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the 
Lord"? 

20 And Saul said unto Samuel, Yea, I 
have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and 
have gone the way which the Lord sent 
me, and have brought Agag the king of 
Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the 
Amalekites. 

21 But the 'people took of the spoil, 
sheep and oxen, the chief of the tilings 
which should have beenutterly destroyed, 
to sacrifice unto the Lord thy (iod in Gil- 
gal. 

22 And Samuel said, " Hath the Lord as 
isreat delight in burnt-ofterings and sac- 
rifices, as in obeying the voice of the 
Lord"? Behold, to "obey is better than 
sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of 
rains. 

23 For rebellion is as the sin of ^ witch- 
craft, and "stubbornness is as iniquity and 
idolatry.^ Because thou hast rejected the 
word of the Lord, >'he hath also rejected 
thee from being king. 

24 *[\ And Saul said unto Samuel, I have 
sinned : for I have transgressed the com- 
mandment of the Lord, and thy words: 
because I ''feared the people, and obeyed 
their voice. 



P .Tuilg. 17:-2. q Prov. 28:13; 30:13. rver.9,21. •cliap.9:21. 
XH^h. consume, t ver. l.i. u Pea. S0:8,!l: .11 : IB, 17; Prov.21 :3; 
I»n. 1:11-17; Jer.7:22,23; Micali 6: li-8: Heb. 10:4-10. » Eccl. 
5:1 : Ho8ea 6:0; Mark 12:33. \ Heb. divination. Deut 1«: 10. 
wUev.22:15. x 2 Cor.6: 16; G:il. 5 : -20; Rev. 21 ;8. Tcli.l3:14. 
• Ex. 23:2; Prov. 29:25; l8,l. .M:I2; Gal. 1 : 10. 

their country. To Shur ; in the south-west part. 
8. All the people ; all who fell into his hands. 

11. It repenteth me ; he would chanjje his con- 
duct towards Saul on .account of his sins, and would 
reject him from beina; kin;;. Ver. 23-28. 

12. To Carmel; a city in the south part of Judah. 
A place ; a monument of his victory. 

23. As the sin of ivitchcraft ; in its {juik. 
371 



God rejecteth Saul. 



I. SAMUEL, XIV. 



Samuel sent to Bctk-lehcm. 



25 Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon 
my sill, and turn again with me, that I 
may worship the Lord. 

26 And Samuel said unto Saul, *I will 
not return willi thee ; for thou hast reject- 
ed the word of the Lord, and the Lord 
hath rejected thee from being king over 
Lsrael. 

27 And as Samuel turned about to go 
away, ''he laid hold upon the skirt of his 
mantle, and it rent. 

28 And Samuel said unto him, The Lord 
hath rent the kingdom of Israel from thee 
this day, and hath given it to a neighbor 
of thine, that is better than thou. 

29 And also the *Strength of Israel will 
not ""lie nor repent: for he is not a man, 
that he should repent. 

30 Then he said, I have sinned : yet 
honor '' me now, I pray thee, before the 
elders of my people, and before Israel, and 
turn again with me, that I may worship 
the Lord thy God. 

31 So Samuel turned again after Saul; 
and Saul worshipped the Lord. 

32 T[ Then said Samuel, Bring ye hither 
to me Agag the king of the Amalekites. 
And Agag came unto him delicately. And 
Agag said, Surely the bitterness of death 
is past. 

33 And Samuel said, As thy "^ sword hath 
made women childless, so shall thy moth- 
er be childless among women. And Sam- 
uel hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord 
in Gilgal. 

34 If Then Samuel went to Ramah; and 
Saul went up to his house to Gibeah of 
Saul. 



• 2 John, U. k 1 Kings, II : .10, .'Jl. ■• Or, cternitu, or victory. 
« Num. -23:19; Elek. 24: 14 ; 2 Tim. 2 • M ; Tit. 1:2. 1 .Tolin 
S:44; 12:43. e Juilg. 1 : T. f ver. 11 ; Plia. 119: I3H ; Jer. 13: 17. 
e cImp.I5:35;Jer7:16; 11:14; 14:11. h eliap. K-i :23. l2Kings, 



28. To a neighbor ; David. 

29. The Strength ; Jehovah, who h.od given 
Israel the victory. Nor repent; he would not re- 
verse the sentence he had pronounced against Saul. 

3'2. Bitterness — is past; he thought that as Saul 
had spared his life, ha should not now be slain. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The reception of special favors lays men under 
special obligations to hearken attentively to the 
directions of God and in all things to follow them. 

2. Though God may delay for a time to punish 
the wicked, yet he does not forget tl.oir sins, and 
unless they repent, he will in due time punish them 
according to their deserts. 

6. Intimate as.sociations with the wicked are dan- 
gerous, and we must separate oursi.-lves from their 
sins, or we shall share in their punishment. 

9. God requires that some men should be put to 
death ; and in sparing them we may as really rebel 
against him, and expose ourselves to his wrath, as 
in taking the life of those whom ho requires to be 
preserved. Ver. 18, 

13. Men often imagine that they have obeyed God 
and are entitled to his ffivor; when their obedience 
has been only external, and has extended only to a 
part of his commands. Ver. 20. 
372 



35 And Samuel came no more ^BaioT^: 
to see Saul until the day of his death: 
nevertheless Samuel ''mourned for Saul : 
and the Lord repented that he had made 
Saul king over Israel. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

1 Samuel sent by God, under pretence of a sacrifice, 
Cometh to Beth-lehem. 6 His human judgment is 
reproved. 11 He anointeth David. 15 Saulsendetli 
for David to quiet his evil spirit. 

AND t-lie Lord said unto Samuel, e How 
long wilt thou mourn for Saul, ''see- 
ing I have rejected him from reigning over 
Israel? fill thy horn with 'oil, and go, I 
will send thee to Jesse the Beth-lehemite : 
for-il have provided me a king among his 
sons. 

2 And Samuel said, How can I go ? if 
Saul hear it, he will kill me. And the 
Lord said. Take a heifer t with thee, and 
say, I am come to ''sacrifice to'the Lord. 

3 And call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I 
will show thee what thou shalt do: and 
thou shalt anoint unto me 'Aim whom I 
name unto thee. 

4 And Samuel did that which the Lord 
spake, and came to Beth-lehem. And the 
elders of the town trembled at his t coming, 
and said, Comest thou '"peaceably? 

5 And he said. Peaceably : I am come 
to sacrifice unto the Lord : " sanctify your- 
selves, and come with me to the sacrifice. 
And he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and 
called them to the sacrifice. 

6 T[ And it came to pass, when they were 
come, that he looked on * Eliab, and said, 
Surely the Lord's anointed is before him. 

7 But the Lord said unto Samuel, Look 



9:1. i Psii. 78 : 70 ; R) : 19, 20 : Ua. .^5 : 4. f Heb. in thy hand. 
k chap. 9: 12: 20:29. IDout. 17:15. X Hfh.mteting. m 1 Kingx, 
2 : IS. n Ex. 19 : 10 ; Num. 11:18; .losh. 3:5; Job 1 : 6 ; 1 Cor. 
11 : 28. 5 chap. 17:13; called Elihv, 1 Chron. 27 : 18. 

14. Facts often show the falsehood of men's pro- 
fe.ssioii-;. and that however high they may stand in 
their own estimation, they are rebels in the sin-ht of 
God. _ ^ 

16. The Lord's messengers must point out and 
condemn the sins of rulers as well as of people ; and 
let nothing hinder them from declaring with plain- 
ness and fidelity the whole revealed will of God. 

21. Wicked men when convicted of sin often try 
hard to throw the blame of it on others. 

2'2. No external attention, even to things which 
God h.as commanded, can be accepted as a substitu te 
for an obedient heart. He is a, Spirit, and to be ac- 
cepted men must obey him in spirit and in truth. 

2.'5. Multitudes are more anxious to stand well 
with their fellow-men than with God, and often 
look for pardon to them rather than to him. 

32. Wlien wicked men most confidently imagine 
that they have escaped all danger, they may be the 
nearest to ruin. There is and can be no security 
except in the friendship and protection of Jehovah. 

CHAPTER XVI. 
1. The Beth-lehemite ; so called from his re- 
siding in Bethlehem. 

5. Saiiclify yourselves ; Ex. 19 : 10-15. 



Samuel anointeth David. 



I. SAMUEL, XVir. 



David quietcth Said. 



height of his stature ; heeanse I have re- 
fused him: for ^the LORD seeth not as 
man seeth ; for man lookcth on the •out- 
ward "^ appearance, but the Lord looketh 
on the heart.^ 

8 Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made 
him pass before Samuel. And he said, 
Neither hath the Lord chosen this. 

9 Then Jesse made tShammah to pass 
by. And he said. Neither hath the Lord 
chosen this. 

10 Again, Jesse made seven of his sons to 
pass before Samuel. And Samuel said unto 
Jesse, The Lord hath not chosen these. 

1 1 And Samuel said unto Jesse, Are here 
all ?/tJ/ children"? And he said, There rc- 
maineth yet the youngest, and behold, he 
keepeth'^ the sheep. And Samuel siiid 
unto Jesse, Send and fetch him : for we 
will not sit tdown till he come hither. 

12 And he sent, and brought him in. 
Now he ivas "^ruddy, aw/ withal ^ of a beau- 
tiful countenance, and goodly to look to. 
And the Lord said. Arise, anoint him : for 
this 1.9 he. 

13 Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and 
anointed him in the midst of liis brethren : 
and the s Spirit of the Lord came upon 
David from that day forward. So Samuel 
rose up, and went to Ramah. 

1 4 *\ But the Spirit of the Lord '" depart- 
ed from Saul, and an evil 'spirit from the 
Lord ^troubled him. 

15 And Saul's servants said unto him. 
Behold now, an evil spirit from God troub- 
leth thee. 

16 Let our lord now command thy ser- 
vants, which are before thee, to seek out 
a man, who is a cunning player on a harp : 
and it shall come to pass, when the evil 
spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall 
playj with his hand, and thou shalt be 
well. 



nPsa. U-.IO. hIsa,S5:8,9. * Heb. <i/m. c -2 Cor. 1 : 7. 
tl 1 Kii^s. 8 : 39 ; 1 Clirnn. -28 : 9 : Psn. 7:9; Jer. 17 : 10 ; Ilev. 2 : -2:!. 
t Shimcah,lSim.\^:3; Sliimmn,\ C\\.i:\X ' 2Sani.7:8; Psa. 
78:70-7-2. ^Heb.roilnrf. f chap. 17 : 4-2: Cant. .S; 10. % Heb./air 
o/eyei. e ch.ap. 10: 6, 9, 10 ; .ludg. 11 : -29; U :6. li Jndg. 16: 20; 



11. Sit dowit. : to feast on the sacrifice. 

13. The Spirit of the Lnrd came upon Da- 
vid; to fit him to become king of Israel. 

14. Departed frutn Saul : he lost the qualifica- 
tions which God had before given him for the success- 
ful discharge of puhlic business. Troubled ; terri- 
fied ; he became melancholy, suspicious, and cruel. 

16. TItOH sli'dt he ii'rll ; they hoped that music 
would cheer up his spirits, and remove his diffi- 
culties. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 

1. No sorrows should ever lead us to murmur at 
the dealings of G-od, or to neglect the duties to which 
he calls us. 

2. When God requires men to en^jage in perilous 
services, they need not fear; if they trust in him and 
follow his directions, he will protect them and give 
them all desirable success. 



17 AndSaui said unto his servants. Pro- 
vide me now a man that can play well, 
and bring him to me. 

18 Then answered one of the servants, 
and said. Behold, I have seen a son of 
Jesse the Beth-lehemite, that i.s cunning 
in playing, and a mighty ''valiant man, 
and a man of ' war, and '"prudent in *mat- 
ters, and a "comely person, and the "Lord 
is with him. 

19 T[ Wherefore Saul sent messengers 
unto Jesse, and said. Send me David thy 
son, which is with the sheep. 

20 And Jesse took an ass laden with 
bread, and a bottle of M-ine, and a kid, and 
sent them by David his son unto Saul. 

21 And David came to Saul, and stood 
beforeP him: and he loved him greatly; 
and he became his armor-bearer. 

22 And Saul sent to Jesse, saying. Let 
David, I pray thee, stand before me ; for 
lie hath found favor in ray sight. 

23 And it came to pass, when the evil 
spirif from God was upon Saul, tiiat Da- 
vid took a harp, and played with his hand : 
so Saul was refreshed, and was well, and 
the evil spirit departed from him. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

1 The armies of the Israelites and the Philistines being 
ready to battle, 4 Goliath cometh proudly forth to 
challenge a combat. 12 David, sent by his father to 
visit his brethren, taketh the challenge. 28 Eliab 
chidpthhim. 30 He is brought to Saul. 32 He show- 
eth the reason of his confidence. 38 Without armor, 
armed by faith, he slayeth the giant. 55 Saul taketh 
notice of David. 

nVTOW the Philistines gathered together 
_L\ their armies to battle, and were gath- 
ered together at ''Shochoh, which "belongs 
ctJi to Judah, and pitched between Sho- 
choh and Azekah, in t Ephes-dammim. 

2 And Savil and the men of Israel were 
gathered together, and pitched by the val- 
ley of Elah, and tset the battle in array 
against the Philistines. 



Psa. 


51 : 1 




i cliap 


18 


10 


19 


:9. 


II Or, terrified, j 1 


er. 23. 


t cl 


ap. 17 


32-36. 1 


2 Sain. 


17: 


3, 10. m 2S: 


m. 14:30. 


» Or, 


spec 


•A. 


ver 


12. o 


cli 


ip. 


8: 1 


2-14 


p Prov. 


■22: -39. q 


■er. M, 


IH. 


r2Cli 


on. 


28:18. 


f . 


osl 


. IS 


:w. 


f Or. Ilie 


oast n/ Dan 


nmimi 


called Pan 


dar 


"'""«. 


IC 




. U 


13. 


t Heb. )■ 


ingcd the battle. 



7. As God looks upon the heart, and judges of 
men according to their real character, the gre.at ob- 
ject of all should be, not outward appearance or ex- 
ternal accomplishments merely, but internal purity 
and the exercise of such feelings as are pleasing to 
God. 

11. Those who are faithful in the duties of private 
life, will be most likefy to be so in the duties of 
public life. 

17. Human expedients may for a time lessen 
one's sorrow; yet there is no permanent relief from 
the sad effects of sin but in heartily forsaking it, 
and believing in .lesus Christ, who died, the just for 
the unjust, that he might bring us unto God. 

CHAPTER XVII. 
1. Shochoh — Azfkah — Ephfs-flatnmim ; 
places in Judah. 

373 



Goliath deficth Israel. I . S A i\l U 

3 Ahd the Philistines stood on a moun- 
tain on the one side, and Israel stood on 
a mountain on the otlier side: and there 
was a valley between them. 

4 *\ And there went out a champion out 
of the camp of the Philistines, named Go- 
liath, of Gath, whose height vms six cu- 
bits and a span. 

5 And he laid a helmet of brass upon his 
liead, and lie U'as *arnicd with a coat of 
mail ; and the weight of the coat icas five 
tiiousand shekels of brass. 

6 And he had greaves of brass upon his 
legs, and a t target of brass between his 
shoulders. 

7 And the " staff of his spear was like a 
weaver's beam ; and his spear's head 
weighed six hundred shekels of iron : and 
one bearing a shield went before him. 

8 And he stood and cried unto the armies 
of Israel, and said unto them, Why are ye 
come out to set your battle in array? am 
not I a Philistine, and ye ''servants*to 
Saul? choose you a man for you, and let 
him come down to me. 

9 If he be able to fight with me, and to 
kill me, then will we be your servants : 
but if I prevail against him, and kill him, 
then shall ye be our servants, and serve us. 

10 And the Philistine said, I "^defy the 
armies of Israel this day ; give me a man, 
that we may fight together. 

1 1 When Saul and all Israel heard those 
words of the Philistine, they were dis- 
mayed, and greatly afraid. 

12 1[ Now David was the ""son of that 
Ephrathite of Beth-lehem-judah, whose 
name iras Jesse ; and he had ''eight sons : 
and the man went among men/o/ an old 
man in the days of Saul. 

1.3 And the three eldest sons of Jesse 
went and followed Saul to the battle : and 
the names of his three sons that went to 
the battle were Eliab the first-born, and 
next unto him Abinadab, and the third 
Shainmah. 

14 And David loas the youngest: and 
the three eldest followed Saul. 

1.5 But David went and returned from 
Saul to "^feed his father's sheep at Beth- 
lehem. 

16 And the Philistine drew near morn- 
ing and evening, and presented himself 
forty days. 

17 And Jesse said unto David his son, 



■ * 


H 


-Ii. 


cinthed. 


t Or 


fforgrt. « 


2 Siim. 


21: 1'). 


b rl 


an. «• 17. 


c V 


pr. ' 


K 


2 .Sam. 2 


:21. 


A Until 4 : 22. « cl 


ap. 16 


10,11 


. rcl,:ip. 


IR 


11. 


l« 


t HhI> 


Cher III of milk. 


% Heb 


a tho 


Hand 


« Gc-n. 


:t7 


14. 


1 


Or, ptai 


r o/lh 


e currtage. 


clinp. 2 


6:5. 


* Or, 


bailie ar- 



4. Whose height was six cubits and i spati ; 
a onbit was about eighteen inches, and a span about 
nine inches. 

^). Five thousa)id shekels ; nearly two hundred 

poun'ls. 

374 



EL, X ^ 1 1 . David visits the camp. 

Take now for thy brethren an ephah *b. c! wra: 
of this parched cor7i, and these ten loaves, 
and run to the camp to thy brethren; 

18 And carry these ten + cheeses unto 
the captain of hhcir thousand, and ^look 
how thy brethren fare, and take their 
pledge. 

19 Now Saul, and they, and all the men 
of Israel, ircrc in the valley of Elah, fight- 
ing with the Philistines. 

20 T[And David rose up early in the 
morning, and left the sheep with a keeper, 
and took, and went, as Jesse had com- 
manded him ; and he came to the il trench, 
as the host was going forth to the *fight, 
and shouted for the battle. 

21 For Israel and the Philistines had put 
the battle in array, army against army. 

22 And David left t his carriage in the 
hand of the keeper of the carriage, and 
ran into the army, and came and i saluted 
liis brethren. 

2.3 And as he talked with them, behold, 
there came up the champion, the Philis- 
tine of Gath, Goliath l)y name, out of the 
armies of the Philis-tines, and spake ac- 
cording to the same '' words : and David 
heard them. 

24 And all the men of Israel, when they 
saw the man, fled from Uiim, and were 
sore afraid. 

25 And the men of Israel said. Have ye 
seen this man that is come up? surely to 
defy Israel is he come up : and it shall be, 
that the man who killeth him, the kin^ 
will enrich him with great riches, and 
will give him his 'daughter, and make his 
father's house free in Israel. 

26 And David spake to tlie men that 
stood by him, saying, Wiiat shall be done 
to the man that killeth this Philistine, and 
taketh away the reproach from Israel? 
for who is this luncircumcised Philistine, 
that he should defy the armies of the '' liv- 
ing God? 

27 And the people answered him after 
this manner, saying, So shall it be done 
to the man that killeth him. 

28 1[ And Eliab his eldest brother heard 
when he spake unto the men ; and Eliab's 
anger' was kindled against David, and he 
said. Why camest thou down hillicr? and 
with whom hast thou left those few sheep 
in the wilderness ? I know thy pride, and 
the naughtiness of thy heart; for thou art 



i<ii/, or place of fight, f Heb. Ihe vritels from vponhim. 


t HH.. 


ntked hit brelhren of fence, n» Juilg. 1H:I.V h ver. 8. 


5 H.l>. 


hit face, i Josh. 15: 16. jcliap. N:I6. k DeuL ft : 26. 


1 r.pn. 


37:4,8,11. 





7. Six hwidred shekels; about twenty-tive 
pounds. 

12. That Ephrathite ; so called from Epiiratah, 
one of the names of Bethleliem. 

25. Free ; free from liability to pay taxe.s. 



David acccplclh the 



I. SAMUEL, XVII. 



challenge of Goliath. 



B C. 1UC3 

the battle. 

29 And David said, " What have I now 
done? Is there not a cause? 

30 1[And he turned from him toward 
another, and spake after the same *man- 
ner: and the people answered him again 
after the former manner. 

31 And when the words were heard 
which David spake, they rehearsed ihcm 
before Saul : and he t sent for him. 

32 ^And David said to Saul, Let no 
man's heart ''fail because of him;- thy 
servant will go and fight with this Phil- 
istine. 

33 And Saul said to David, Thou art not 
able to go against this Philistine to fight 
with him: for thou art but a youth, and 
he a man of war from his youth. 

34 And David said unto Saul, Thy ser- 
vant kept his father's sheep, and there 
came a lion, and a bear, and took a t lamb 
out of the flock : 

35 And I went out after him, and smote 
him, and delivered i< out of his mouth : and 
when he arose against me, I caught /ji»i by 
his beard, and smote him, and slew him. 

36 Thy servant slew both the lion and 
the bear : and this uncircumcised Philis- 
tine shall be as one of them, seeing he 
hath defied the armies of the living God. 

37 David said moreover,*^ The Lord that 
delivered me out of the paw of the lion, 
and out of the paw of the bear, he will 
deliver me out of the hand of this Philis- 
tine. And Saul said unto David, Go, and 
the ''Lord be with thee. 

38 1[ And Saul farmed. David with his 



«rrr 


V. 15: 


1. 


* He 


Ij. tvord. 


fHeh. took him. 


h Den; 


20:2 


3. 


t Or, kid. c 


Hs 


. 11 : 


I; lS:n 


; 77:11 ; 


:Ci.r. 1 


: 10; 2T 


m. 4: 


7, 


18. d 


chap. 


20 


n: 


1 Chrori. 


■22:11,16 


% Heb. cMhe 


rl Da 


III 


llith hi 


s clothes 


II 


r; val/ei/. 


* Heb. 


vessel 


e Psa. 


■j:i:4 


1 



29. A caiisf ; good reason. 

39. Assayed ; attempted. Not proved them ; 
not been accustomed to them, and could not readily 
use them. 

45. 1)1 the name of the Lord ; by his direction, 
with confidence in him, and for the purpose of pro- 
moting his cause. 

INSTRUCTIOX.S. 

10. Wlien distingiii.shed strengtli and courage 
make men proud, and lead them to trust in them- 
selves and despise others, they often become the 
occasion of their ruin. 

17. Men in executing their projects often liave no 
idea of the ends which God by them will .accomplisli. 

2:^. Men are induced to perform much labor, and 
make many sacrifices, by tlie hope of reward; and 
God graciously points us to the joy set before us, as 
.a motive to denv our.^elves, take up the cross, and 
follow Christ, ilom. 8:24. 

28. Men naturally envy those who do better and 
are more honored than themselves, and no ties of rela- 
tionship are any certain security .against the effects 
of this evil and malignant passion. James 4 : 5. 

32. Confidence in God is a source of the highest 
and noblest courage, the most self-sacrificing devo- 
tion to duty, and the most exalted virtue. 



armor, and he put a helmet of brass upon 
his head ; also he armed him witli a coat 
of mail. 

39 And David girded his sword upon his 
armor, and he assayed to go ; for he had 
not proved it. And David said unto Saul, 
I cannot go with these ; for I have not 
proved them. And David put them olf 
him. 

40 And he took his staff in his hand, and 
chose him five smooth stones out of the 
brook,!' and put them in a shepherd's * bag 
which he had, even in a scrip ; and his 
sling u'cis in his hand : and he drew near 
to the Philistine. 

41 And the Philistine came on and drew 
near unto David ; and the man that bare 
the shield went before him. 

42 And when the Philistine looked 
about, and saw David, he •'disdained him : 
for he was hut a youth, and "^ruddy, and 
of a fair countenance. 

43 And the Philistine said unto David, 
Am I a^dog, thatvthou comcst to me with 
staves ? And the Philistine cursed David 
by his gods. 

44 And the Philistine ''said to David, 
Come to me, and I will give thy llesh vinto 
the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of 
the field. 

45 Then said David to the Philistine, 
Thou comest to me with a sword, and with 
a spear, and with a shield: but 'I come 
to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, 
the God of the armies of Israel, whom 
thou hast -i defied. 

46 This day will the Lord t deliver thee 
into my hand; and I will smite thee, and 

Cor. I : -'7--.'<P. t chap. 1H:12. s -2 58111.3:8; 2 Kings, 8:13. 
h 1 Kin°s, '20:10, U. i 2 S.^muel, 32:33, 3r> ; I'salin I24:S; 
12.T : 1 : 2 Cnrinthiiiiw, 3:5; Hebrews U : 33. j ver. 10. t Heb. 
shut thee up. 



■3-1. Past experience of the readiness and power 
of God to help, encourages men to trust in him, ;i.nd 
to expect from him in future all which they need. 

38. The devices and efforts of men to aid us often 
prove a hinderancc instead of a lielp, and-w-e must 
renounce dependence on them and depend on God 
in our efforts, in order to meet witii success. 

40. True dependence on God leads men not to 
neglect appropriate means, but in the right w.ay to 
use them. Thus, while they work, God works by 
them in securing tlio result, and preparing them to 
give him the glory. 

43. Pride goeth before destruction, and a haugh(y 
spirit before a fall. Prov. 16 : 18. 

46. One great design-of Jehovah in all his- deal- 
ings, is to make known liis character, and show to 
the universe that there is no one but iiimself who 
governs and controls in the kingdoms of nature, prov- 
idence, and grace. 

51. The strongest as well as the weakest are de- 
pendent upon Go 1, and that expectation which rests 
on creatures is liable at any time to be disappointed. 

55. Services performed for men may by them be 
forgotten, and those who have performed thei:i pass 
out of mind; but services done for God he always 
remembers, and will graciously reward. 
375 



David slayeth Goliath. 



I. SAMUEL, XVIII, 



Jonathan's love to David. 



take " thy head from thee : and I wil 1 give the 
carcasses of the host of the Philistines this 
day unto the ''fowls of the air, and to the 
wild beasts of the earth ; that all the earth 
may ''know that there is a God in Israel. 

47 And all this assembly shall "'know- 
that the Lord saveth not with sword and 
spear: for the "battle is the Lord's, and 
he will give you into our hands. 

48 And it came to pass, when the Phil- 
istine arose, and came and drew nigh to 
meet David, that David hasted, and ran 
toward the army to meet the Philistine. 

49 And David put his hand in his bag, 
and took thence a stone, and slang it, and 
smote "^ the Philistine in his forehead, that 
the stone sunk into his forehead; and he 
fell upon his face to the earth. 

50 So David prevailed over the Philis- 
tine with a s sling and with a stone, and 
smote the Philistine, and slew him; but 
there was no sword in the hand of David. 

51 Therefore David ran, and stood upon 
the Philistine, and took his ''sword, and 
drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew 
him, and cut 'off his head therewith. 
And when the Philistines saw their cham- 
pion was dead, they J fled. 

52 And the men of Israel and of Judah 
arose, and shouted, and pursued the Phil- 
\stines, until thou come to the'' valley, and 
to the gates of Ekron. And the wounded 
of the Philistines fell dov/n by the way to 
Shaaraim, even unto Gath. and unto Ekron. 

53 And the children of Israel returned 
from chasing after the Philistines, and 
they 'spoiled their tents. 

54 And David took the head of the Phil- 
istine, and brought it to .Icrusalem; but 
he put his armor in his tent. 

55 ^ And when Saul saw David go forth 
against the Philistine, he said unto Abner, 
the captain of the host, Abner, ""whose son 
is this youth 1 And Abner said. As thy 
soul liveth, king, I cannot tell. 

56 And the king said. Inquire thou whose 
son the stripling is. 

57 And as David returned from the 
slaughter of the Philistine, Abner took 
him, and brought him before Saul with 
thc''head of the Philistine in his hand. 

58 And Saul said to him, Whose son art 
thou, thou young man? And David an- 
swered, "/ am the son of thy servant 
Jesse the Beth-lehomite. 



• Tcr.M. b r>eilt. 28:2f>; Mi>t.'24:I8. c Jnnli. 4:24 ; 1 Kin'K, 
8:4^; 18:3fi; 3 Kingii. 10: 19 ; Psn. 46:10; I»a.S2:10. it P»n. 
44 : fi. 7 ; Ho«en 1:7; Zecli. 4 : «. '2 Cliron. 20: 15. f 1 Kiiigt, 
21 : S4. B .IiiJg. 3 : 31 ; Ifi : 1ft 1> cliai). 41:0; 2 Snm. 23 : 21 ; Pmb. 
7 : IS, 16. i ver. 4fi. j Heb. M : 34. I Josh. 1» : 33, 36, 4fi. I .Ter. 
30:16. m chap. 16:21,22. n vcr. fi4. o vsr. 12. |> Gen. 44:30. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

6. Tabri^ts; or timbrels; a sort of small drum. 
9. Eyed ; watched. 
376 



CHAPTER XVIII. ^B^?^': 

1 Jonathan loveth David. 5 Saul envieth his praise, 
10 seeketh to kill him in his fury, 12 fearethhim for 
his good success, 17 offereth him his daughters for a 
snare, 'iri David^persuaded to be the kin^s son-in- 
law, giveth two hundred foreskins of the Philislines 
for Michars dowry. 28 Saul's hatred, and David's 
glory increaseth. 

AND it came to pass, when he had made 
an end of speaking unto Saul, that 
the Psoul of Jonathan was knit with the 
soul of David, and Jonathan ^ loved him 
as liis ''own soul. 

2 And Saul took him that day, and would 
let him go no more home to his father's 
house. 

3 Then Jonathan and David made a cov- 
enant, because he loved him as his own 
soul. 

4 And Jonathan stripped'himself of the 
robe that was upon him, and gave it to 
David, and his garments, even to his 
sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle. 

5 ^ And David went out whithersoever 
Saul sent him, flHfZ *behaved himself wise- 
ly : and Saul set him over the men of war, 
and he was accepted in the sight of all the 
people, and also in the sight of Saul's ser- 
vants. 

6 And it came to pass as they came, when 
David was returned from the slaughter of 
the t Philistine, that the 'women came out 
of all cities of Israel, singing and dancing, 
to meet king Saul, with tab rets, Avith joy, 
and with + instruments of music. 

7 And the women answered one another as 
they played, and said, Saul hath " slain his 
thousands, and David his ten thousands. 

8 And Saul was very ^ wroth, and the 
saying 5 displeased him; and he said, They 
have ascribed unto David ten thousands, 
and to me they have ascribed but thou- 
sands : and what can he have more but 
the "kingdom'? 

9 And Saul eyed David from that day 
and forward. 

1 1[ And it came to pass on the morrow, 
that the evil "spirit from God came upon 
Saul, and he J' prophesied in the midst of 
the house : and David played with his 
hand, as at other times : and there was a 
javelin" in Saul's hand. 

1 1 And Saul cast the javelin ; for he 
said, I will smite David even to the wall 
with it. And David ■avoided out of his 
presence twice. 

12 H And Saul was afraid of David, be- 



q vor. 3; chap. )>):3; 20:17; 2 Sam. 1 : 2fi. r Dent 13:6. 
« Gen. 41 : 42. * Or, proiptred. ver. 14, IS, 30 ; Pnn. 1:3. t Or, 
Philittinei. I Ex. 16 : 20; Juiig. 11 : 34. J Heb. Mr«j/i-in<;fJ 
itutrumrntt, o ch:ii>. 21 : 11. » Prov. 27 : 4 ; Eiil. 4 : 4. J Heb. 
wal evit in hif even, w chap. 15:28. x chap, 16: 14. yrb»p.I0:24: 
Acta IB: 16. » "chap. 19:9, 10; 20:33. • Psa. 37:32,3;> ; I»a. .M : 1 7. 



10. I'rophesied : imitated the conduct of proph- 
ets. 1 Chron. 25 : i-6. yl_;«ff/fM; a light spear 
I pointed with some sharp metal. 



Saul's jealousy and 



I. SAMUEL, XIX. 



hatred of David. 



was departed from Saul. 

13 Therefore Saul removed him from 
him, and made him hi.s captain over a 
thousand; and he went out and came in 
before the people. 

1 4 And David *behaved himself wisely in 
all his ways ; and the Lord ivas with him. 

15 ^yherefore when Saul saw that he 
behaved himself very wisely, he was 
afraid of him. 

16 But all Lsrael and Judah loved David, 
because he *went out and came in before 
them. 

1 7 TT And Saul said to David, Behold my 
elder daughter '' Merab, her will I give thee 
to wife : only be thou t valiant for me, and 
fight •= the Lord's battles. For Saul said. 
Let not my hand be upon him, but ''let the 
hand of the Philistines be upon him. 

18 And David said unto Saul, "Who am 
I? and what is my life, or my fathei-'s 
family in Israel, that I should be son-in- 
law to the king] 

19 But it came to pass at the time when 
Merab Saul's daughter should have been 
given to David, that she was given unto 
AdrieH the sMeholathite to wife. 

20 And Michal Saul's daughter loved 
David : and they told Saul, and the thing 
pleased t him. 

21 And Saul said, I will give him her, 
that she may be a '^ snare to him, and that 
the ' hand of the Philistines may be against 
him. Whei-efore Saul said to David, Thou 
shalt this day be my son-in-law in the one 
of the twain. 

22 T[ And Saul commanded his servants, 
saying, Commune with David secretly, 
and say. Behold, the king hath delight in 
thee, and all his servants love thee : now 
therefore be the king's son-in-law. 

23 And Saul's servants spake those 
words in the ears of David. And David 
said, Seemeth it to you a J light thing to 
be a king's son-in-law, seeing that I am a 
poor man, and ''lightly esteemed"? 



* 


r, prospered, ve 


r T 


a Nur 


n 5 


7: 17 


2 S.im. I 


: 2 


; 1 Kinss, 


S:7. 


b ch.ip. 17 : 


ih. 


tu 


eb.ajon 


of 


vahr. 


c chap. 


iS: 


28. dver. 


21,-2.5 


■2 Sam. 1-2 


M, 




r. « ; cl 


;>n 


<):21 


2 Sam. 7 


\t 


f2Sam. 


21:8. 


S .luJg. 7 


2-2. 


t 


Heb. w<u r 


ght in 


his eyes. 


h 


Ex. 10:7: 


ProT. 


29:6. i ve 


r. n 


■ 1 


1 John, 


3: 


1. k 


I'sa. 119 


HI. % Heb. 



17. Be upon him; kill him. 

21. Twain; two. 

2-5. Dotvry ; among the Hebrews, and generally 
in the East, a compensation or present made by the 
bridegroom to the father of the bride. 

26. TJie (lays; previous to the time appointed 
for his marriage. 

30. Went forth; to-fight with Israel. 
INSTRUCTIOXS. 

1. Real excellence of character forms the surest 
basis for ardent and durable friendship, and those 
who rightly cultivate it on earth may hope to tnjoy 
it for ever in heaven. 

5. The presence and favor of God are the grand 



24 And the servants of Saul told him, 
saying, ^ On this manner spake David. 

25 And Saul said. Thus shall ye say to 
David, The king desireth not any 'dowry, 
but a hundred foreskins of the Philistines, 
to be '"avenged of the king's enemies. But 
Saul thought to make David fall by the 
hand of the Philistines. 

26 And when his servants told David 
these words, it pleased David well to be 
the king's son-in-law : and the days were 
not II expired. 

27 Wherefore David arose and Avent, he 
and his " men, and slew of the Philistines 
two hundred men; and David brought 
their "foreskins, and they gave them in 
full tale to the king, that he might be the 
king's son-in-law. And Saul gave him 
INIichal his daughter to wife. 

28 ^And Saul saw and knew that the 
Lord ivas with David, and that Michal 
Saul's daughter loved him. 

29 And Saul was yet the more afraid of 
David ; and Saul became David's p enemy 
continually. 

30 Then the princes of the Philistines 
wenfi forth: and it came to pass, after 
they went forth, that David behaved him- 
self ''more wisely than all the servants of 
Saul ; so that his name was much *set by. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

1 Jonathan disoloseth his father's purpose to kill Da%n(]. 
4 He persnadeth hi.s lather to reconciliation. 8 By 
reason of David's good success in a new war, Saul's 
malicious rage breaketh out against him. 12 Michal 
deceiveth her father with an image in David's bed. 
18 David cometh to Samuel in Naioth. 20 Saul's 
messengers sent to take David, '2i and Saul himself, 
prophesy. 

AND Saul spake to Jonathan his son, 
and to all his servants, that they 
should kill David. 

2 But Jonathan Saul's sou delighted 
much" in David: and Jonathan told David, 
saying, Saul my father seeketh to kill 
thee : now therefore, I pray thee, take 
heed to thyself until the morning, and 
abide in a secret place, and hide thyself: 



.Iccording to these worilt. 1 Ex. 22:17. m chap. 14 : 24. || Heb. 
fulfilled, n ver. 1.3. o 2 Samuel, 3:14. p Psalm 37:12, 14. 
•I 2 Samuel. 11:1. r ver. 5 : Psahn 119:M. * Heh. precious. 
chap. 2ti:21; 2 Kings, 1 : i;j; Psalm 116:15; 1 Peter, 2:7. 
• chap. 18: 1. 

source of all true wisdom, and the surest guaranty 
of durable success. 

8. An envious disposition tends to torment him 
who indulges it, and all who feel its influence. 

11. Thereis no wickedness so great but the human 
heart, unrestrained by divine grace, may commit it. 

15. Rulers often regard their own glory more 
than the public good, and seek to destroy those whom 
the people delight to honor. Luke 10 : 47. 4.S. 

17. What men will not do directly, they often 
attempt to do indirectly, and thus try to cast the 
responsibility of their evil actions on others. 

29. The more one Ls favored in the course of divine 
Providence, the more will envious men hate him. 
377 



Saul sciks David's life. 



I. SAMUKL, XIX. 



David cscapiih to Xaiolh. 



3 And I will go out and stand beside my 
father in the (ield where thou art, and I 
will commune with my father of thee; 
and what I sec, that I will tell thee. 

4 ^And Jonathan spake* good of David 
unto Saul his father, and said unto him, 
Let not the king ''sin against his servant, 
against David ; because he hath not sinned 
against thee, and because his works have 
been to theeward very "^ good : 

5 For he did ''put his life in his hand, 
and'"slew the Philistine, and the ^Lord 
wrought a great salvation for all Israel : 

.Ihou sawest it, and didst rejoice: where- 
fore then ^wilt thou sin against innocent 
blood, to slay David without a cause'? 

6 And Saul hearkened unto the voice of 
Jonathan: and Saul'^sware, As the Lord 
liveth, he shall not be slain. 

7 And Jonathan called David, and Jon- 
athan showed him all those things. And 
Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he 
was in his presence, as *in times 'past. 

8 1[ And there was war again : and Da- 
vid went out, and fought with the Philis- 
tines, and slew them with a great slaugh- 
ter; and they fled from thim. 

9 And the evil J spirit from the Lord 
was upon Saul, as he sat in his house with 
his javelin in his hand : and David played 
with his hand. 

10 And Saul sought to smite David even 
tothe wall with the javelin ; but he slipped 
away out of Saul's presence, and he smote 
the javelin into the wall : and David fled, 
and ^escaped that night. 

11 Saul also 'sent messengers unto Da- 
vid's house, to watch him, and to slay 
him in the morning: and Michal David's 
wife told liim, saying. If thou save not 
thy life to-night, to-morrow thou shalt be 
slain. 

12 1[So'"Michal let David Mown through 
a window : and he went, and fled, and 
escaped. 

13 And Michal took an -image, and laid 



• Prov. :il : R. 9. l>Oen.42;2:, c Psr. 35 : IJ ; im):.5 


; Prov. 


17:i:i. d chiip. 28: -21; .Iiidg. ]i:3; I'sa. H«:I<». 


clmp. 


17:10. no. t rl.ap. 11:13; 1 Cl.ron. 11:14. B cliap. 


20 : M. 


li Prov. 2ri • 24. M. * Hell, yetterday third day. i cliap. 


lfi:21; 


18:2, IS. t Hcb. hit face, j chap. Ift: 14; 18: 10, U. 


V Psa. 



. CHAPTER XIX. 

3. In the field ; where JonaUian expected his 
father would walk. Cominniie ; converse. 

IS. Nniotli ; a place in Benjamin, near to Ramah. 

20. They also prophesied, ; joined in singing; 
sacred songs, and thus praising G-od. 1 Chron. 
•JT) : 1-4. 

'2\. His clothes ; his outer garments. Naked; 
without his upper garments. 

IN.STRUCTIOXS 

1. Envy indulged often Icail.s to murder, and 
many are in heart guilty of this sin who are pre- 
vented from outwardly committing it. 1 John, 
3 : 10. 

4. Real love will seek the good of the object be- 

378 



it in the bed, and put a pillow of b.c.?^?: 
goats' hair for his bolster, and covered it 
with a cloth. 

14 And when Saul sent messengers to 
take David, she said. He is sick. 

15 And Saul sent the messengers again 
to see David, saying, Bring him up to me 
in the bed, that I may slay him. 

1 6 And when the messengers were come 
in, behold, there was an image in the bed, 
with a pillow of goats' hair for his bolster. 

17 And Saul said unto Michal, Why 
hast thou deceived me so, and sent away 
mine enemy, that he is escaped'? And 
Michal" answered Saul, He said unto me, 
Let me go; why p should I kill thee'? 

18 ^So David fled, and escaped, and 
came to Samuel to Ramah, and told him 
all that Saul had done to him. And he 
and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth. 

19 And it was told Saul, saying. Behold, 
David is at Naioth in Ramah. 

20 And Saul sent i messengers to take 
David : and ''when they saw the company 
of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel 
standing «.s- appointed overthem, the Spirit 
of God was upon the messengers of Saul, 
and Hhey also prophesied. 

21 And when it was told Saul, he sent 
other messengers, and they prophesied 
likewise. And Saul sent messengers again 
the third time, and they prophesied also. 

22 Then went he also to Ramah, and 
came to a great well that is in Sechu : and 
he asked and said, Where are Samuel and 
David'? And one said. Behold, they be at 
Naioth in Ramah. 

23 And he went thither to Naioth in Ra- 
mah: and the Spirit of God was upon him 
also, and he went on, and prophesied, un- 
til he came to Naioth in Ramah. 

24 And' he stripped ofl'his clothes also, 
and prophesied before Samuel in like man- 
ner, and 5 lay down naked all that day and 
all that night. Wherefore they say, Is 
Saul "also among the prophets? 

124:7; M.it. 10:2.1. 1 Psa. 50, title. nip,a.34:19. n Josh. 
2:1.5: Acts 9: 24, 25; 2 Cor. II : 32, .IS. t Heh. teraphim. Gen. 
:!l:19; JuJg. 17:.S. o2Sani. 17:20. 1> 2Siiin.2:22. q John 
7 : 32, 4.5. r chap. 10 5, fi ; 1 Cor. 14 : 24. 25. ■ Num. 1 1 : 25 : Joel 
2:28. tlsa.20:2. ?^ Heb. /cH. Num. 24 : 4. n chap. 10 : 10, 12. 

loved, and if need be, perform labors, make sacri- 
fices, and meet dangers to promote it. 

0. Sound reason and kind persuasion may for .^ 
time overcome passion; but without a change of 
lieart. when depravity is restrained in one direction 
it will break out in another. 

10. When one is given up to the power of evil, 
not only engagements but solemn oaths will be 
disregarded, and malignant p.assions will overcome 
all restraint. 

17. Those who hate others, and treat them as 
enemies, are apt to feel that others hate them and 
are their enemies. 

20. The hearts of all are in the hands of the Lord, 
and he can turn them whithersoever he will. No 



Jonathan and David 



I. SAMUEL, XX. 



renciB their covenant 



i:c:'^: CHAPTER XX. 

1 David consulteth \vith Jonathan for his safety. 11 
Jonathan and David renew their covenant by oa,th. 
IS Jonathan's token to David. '2\ Saul, missing Da- 
vid, seeketli to kill Jonathan. 35 Jonatha;i lovingly 
taketh his leave of David. 

A ND David fled from Naioth in Ramah, 
Ix. and came and said before Jonathan, 
What have I done "? what is mine iniquity'? 
and what ?'.■> my sin before thy father, that 
he seeketh my life? 

2 And he said iinto him, God forbid; 
thou shalt not die : behokl, my father will 
do nothing either great or small, but that 
he will *show it me: and why should 
my father hide this thing from me? it is 
not 50. 

.3 And David sware moreover, and said, 
Thy father certainly knoweth that I have 
found grace in thine eyes ; and he saith, 
Let not Jonathan know this, le.st he be 
grieved: but^truly, as the Lord liveth, 
and as thy soul liveth, there is but a step 
between me and death. 

4 Then .said Jonathan unto David, 
Whatsoever t thy soul +desireth, I will 
even do if for thee. 

5 And David said unto Jonathan, Be- 
hold, to-morrow is the ''new moon, and I 
should not fail to sit with the king at meat: 
but let me go, that I may hide myself in 
the "^iield unto the third day at even. 

6 If thy father at all miss me, then say, 
David earnestly asked leave of me that he 
might run to Beth-lehem his city : for 
there is a yearly 5 sacrifice there for all the 
family. 

7 If he say thus, It is well ; thy servant 
shall have peace : but if he be very wroth, 
then be sure that evil is '' determined by 
him. 

8 Therefore thou shalt* deal kindly with 
thy servant ; for thou hast brought thy ser- 
vant into a ''covenant of the Lord with 
thee : notwithstanding, ^ if there be in me 
iniquity, slay me thyself; for why should- 
est thou bring me to thy father? 

9 And Jonathan said, Far be it from thee: 
for if I knew certainly that evil were de- 
termined by my fatlier to come upon thee, 
then would not I tell it thee? 



* Heb. uncover mint tar. ver. 13: chnp. «:l."i. « chap. 27 : 1 ; 
2 Cor. 1 : 9, ID. f Or. Sav what is tliv mind, and I^cill do. t Heb. 
speakelh, or thinketh. b Num. 10:10; iS:\\. c cUap. lfl:2. 
% Or, /eaJtr. cbap. 9:1'2. J cbap. C5 : 17: Estli. 7:7. f .Tosli, 
2:14. f ver Ifi, cliap. 18:3; 2,1:18. « 2 Sam, 14:32. HHeb. 
searched. * Heb. uncover thint tar. ver. 2, h cbap, 17 ; .37, 



devices will succeed against those whom he' designs 
to bless, and no evils will come upon them which 
he will not overrule for their good, 

CHAPTER XX. 

5. The new moon ; the beginning of the month, 
when it was customary for relatives to unite in a 
sacrifice and a feast. 

6. Beth-lehem ; David's native city. 

12. Sou7ided: learned his state of mind. 



10 Then said David to Jonathan, Who 
shall tell me? or what (/"thy father an- 
swer thee roughly? 

11 T[And Jonathan said unto David, 
Come, and let us go out into the Held. 
And they went out both of them into the 
field. 

12 And Jonathan said unto David, 
Lord God of Israel, when I have H sounded 
my father about to-morrow any time, or 
the third day, and behold, if there be good 
toward David, and I then send not unto 
thee, and *show it thee; 

13 The Lord do so and much more ta 
Jonathan : but if it please my father to do 
thee evil, then I will show it thee, and 
send thee away, that thou mayest go in 
peace : and the '' Lord be with tlicc, as he 
hath 'been with my father. 

14 And thou shalt not only while yet I 
live show me the kindness of the Lord, 
that I die not: 

15 But Hilso thou shalt not cut off thy 
kindness from my house for ever: no, not 
when the Lord hath cut off tlie enemies 
of David every one from the face of the 
earth. 

16 So Jonathan tmade a covenant with 
the house of David, saying, Let the Lord 
even require '' it at the hand of David's 
enemies. 

17 And Jonathan caused David to swear 
again, +because he loved him : for he 'loved 
him as he loved his own soul. 

18 Then Jonathan said to '"David, To- 
morrow is the new moon : and thou shalt 
be missed, because thy seat will be ^cmpty. 
"19 And ivhen thou hast stayed three 
days, then thou shalt go down ii quickly, 
and come to the "place where thou didst 
hide thyself *wlicn the business was in 
hand, and shalt remain by the stone lEzel. 

20 And I will shoot three arrows on the 
side thereof, as though I shot at a mark. 

21 And behold, I will send a lad, saying. 
Go, find out the arrows. If I expressly 
say unto the lad. Behold, the arrows are 
on this .side of thee, take them ; then come 
thou: for there is peace to thee, and +no 
hurt; a.9"the Lord liveth. 



i cbap. 10: 7 : 11:6, etc, ; 2 Sam. "■: 15. j chap, 24 : 21 : 2 Sam, 
9:1-7. t Heb. cu/, k chap, 31:2; 2 Sam. 4:7, t Or, by hit 
love totoard him. I cbap, 18:1, m ver. 5, J Heb! milted. 
II Or, diligently ; Heh. greatln. n cbap. ly:2. * lleh. in the dny 
of the businets. \ Or, that shotveth the loSji, J Heb. not any 
thing, o Jer. 4 : 2, 



14, The l-indiiess — tJiat I die iiot ; it was com- 
mon, when one began to reign, for him to put to 
death those who were supposed to have a claim to 
the throne. 

15, 'My hmise : his posterity, 

16, Require it ; take vengeance on either party, 
should they break tiiis covenant, 

18. Thy seat ; at the family feast. 

19. Stone Ezel ; one that showed the way; a 
way-stone. 

379 



Tlie parting of 



I. SAMUEL, XX, 



David and Jonathan. 



22 But if I say thus unto the young 
man, BehoUl, the arrows are beyond thee ; 
go thy way : for tlic Lord hath sent thee 
away. 

23 And as touching the 'matter which 
thou and I have spoken of, behold, the 
Lord be between thee and me for ever. 

24 1[So David hid himself in the field: 
and when the new moon was eome, the 
king sat him down to eat meat. 

25 A nd the king sat upon his seat, as at 
other times, eren upon a scat by the wall : 
and Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by 
SauTs side, and David's place was empty. 

26 Nevertheless Saul spake not any 
thing that day : for he thought. Something 
hath befallen him, he i.s not *" clean ; surely 
he is not clean. 

27 And it came to pass on the morrow, 
which u'us the second day of the month, 
that David's place was empty : and Saul 
said unto .Jonathan his son. Wherefore 
cometh not the son of Jesse to meat, nei- 
ther yesterday, nor to-day 1 

28 And Jonathan answered "^ Saul, Da- 
vid earnestly asked leave of me to go to 
Beth-lehem : 

29 And he said. Let me go, I pray thee ; 
for our family hath a sacrifice in the city ; 
and my brother, he hath commanded me 
to be there : and now, if I have found favor 
in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thee, 
and see my brethren. Therefore he com- 
eth not unto the king's table. 

30 Then Saul's ''anger was kindled 
against Jonathan, and he said unto him. 
Thou *son of +the perverse rebellious wo)n- 
an, do not I know that thou hast chosen 
the son of Jesse to thine own confusion, 
and unto the confusion of thy mother's 
nakedness'? 

31 For as long as tlie son of Jesse liveth 
upon the ground, thou shalt not be estab- 
lished, nor thy kingdom. Wherefore now 
send and fetch him unto " me, for he - shall 
surely die. 



• Ter. 14, IB, 42. k Lev. 7 : 21 : IS : 5, etc. c ver. fi. d Prov. 
19:12. * Or, pervcrre rebel, f Heh. pervertt rebellion. <• cliiip. 
liJ.O, 11. t Hfb. Mtlieton of death. I clinp. 19:fi; Prov. 31:8, 

22. Hath sent thee away ; in order to preserve 
his life. 

2G. He is not clean ; Saul thought that David 
was ceremonially unclean, and had kept away on 
that account. 

31. Thoic shalt not be established ; as king. 

40. Artillery ; weapons. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

]. This is a state of trial, and even obedience to 
Grod will not keep a person from sulferings; yet it 
will cause them to be overruled for his good and the 
good of others. 

10. The certainty that David would be king did 
not render it unnecessary for him to use means to 
preserve his life; nor does the promise of God, to 
Keep his children to the end, render unnecessary 
their own diligent pr.ayers and eiTorts to persevere 
380 



32 And Jonathan answered Saul "g'^-.f^i 
his father, and said unto him, ""Wherefore 
shall he be slain"? what hath he done"? 

33 And Saul scast a javelin at him to 
smite him : whereby '"Jonathan knew that 
it was determined of his father to slay 
David. 

34 So Jonathan arose from the table in 
fierce anger, and did eat no meat the sec 
ond day of the month : for he was grieved 
for David, because his father had done 
him shame. 

35 ^ And it came to pass in the morn- 
ing, that Jonathan went out into the field 
at the time appointed with David, and a 
little lad with him. 

36 And he said unto his lad, Run, find 
out now the arrows which I shoot. A7ul 
as the lad ran, he shot an arrow ^ beyond 
him. 

37 And when the lad was come to the 
place of the arrow which Jonathan had 
shot, Jonathan cried after tlie lad, and 
said. Is not the arrow beyond 'thee'? 

38 And Jonathan cried after the lad, 
Make speed, haste, stay not. And Jona- 
than's lad gathered up the arrows, and 
came to his master. 

39 But the lad knew not any thing: only 
Jonathan and David knew the matter. 

40 And Jonathan gave his H artillery 
unto *his lad, and said unto him. Go, carry 
thcin to the city. 

41 ^]And as soon as the lad was gone, 
David arose out of a place toward the 
south, and fell on his face to the ground, 
and bowed himself three times : and they 
kissed one another, and wept one with 
another, until David exceeded. 

42 And Jonathan said to David, JGo in 
peace, t forasmuch as we have sworn both 
of us in the name of the Lord, saying, 
The Lord be between me and thee, and 
between my seed and thy seed for over. 
And he arose and departed : and Jonathan 
went into the city. 

0; Mat. 27 : 23. e cli.ip. 18. 11. k ver. 7. % Heb. to patt over. 
i vor. •-'!, ii. [I Heb. iiistrumentr. * Heb. the lad that wa« hit. 
i chap. 1:17. f Or, the Lord be witness of that h'/iiM, etc. ver. 23. 

in faith and holiness. It is through the use of ap- 
propriate means, and not without them, that the end 
will be accomplished. 

15. The conduct of parents may deeply affect not 
only their children, >but their distant posterity, .-vud 
each one should so act as shall tend to secure bless- 
ings to all who come after him, to the end of time. 

23. An habitual conviction that the Lord is wit- 
ness of all we do, that we shall stand before him in 
judgment, and be treated for eternity according to 
our works, tends to make us circumspect, upright, 
and faithful. 

27. An appearance of kindness may cover a mur- 
derous heart, and no crime is so abominable that a 
supremely selKsh heart, under strong temptation, 
may not commit it. 

31. Men in saying, I will, or, He shall, often 



David fleeth to 



I. SAMUEL, XXI. 



Nob, and to Gath. 



-^!,r CHAPTER XXI. 

1 David at Nob obtaineth of Ahimelech hallowed bread. 
7 Doeg wa.^ present. 8 David taketli Goliath's sworJ. 
10 David at Gath fejgneth himself mad. 

THEN came Davitl to Nob to *Aliiinelech 
the priest : and Ahimelech was " afraid 
atthc meeting of David, and said unto him, 
Why a/f thou alone, and no man with thee ? 

2 And David ''said unto Ahimelech the 
priest, The king hath commanded me a 
business, and hath said unto me, Let no 
man know any thing of the business 
whereabout I send thee, and what I have 
commanded thee: and I have appointed 
mjj servants to such and such a place. 

.'5 Now therefore what is under thy hand 1 
give me five loaves o/ bread in my liand, 
or what there is t present. 

4 And the priest answered David, and 
said, There is no common bread under my 
hand, but there is "^hallowed bread; if 
the'' young men have kept themselves at 
least from women. 

5 And David answered the priest, and 
said unto him. Of a truth women have 
been kept from us about these three days, 
since I came out, and the "vessels of the 
young men are holy, and the bread is in a 
manner common, -yea, though it were 
sanctified this day in the vessel. 

6 So the priest "^gave him hallowed 
bread: for there was no bread there but 
the show-bread, that was taken from be- 
fore the Lord, to put hot bread in the day 
when it was taken away. 

7 Now a certain man of the servants of 
Saul was there that day, detained before 
the Lord; and his name it'a.ssDoeg, an 

* Called.cli'ap. U.-.l, .-f/iiVi/i; called also -■//'loMai-, Mark 2 : in. 
.•> cliap. 15:4. b I'sa. 119 : 2U. f Helj. /ulind. c K.X. 2.i : :iO ; 
l.ev. -24 : .•>->). <I E.\. IM: l.i. e 1 Tliess. 4: 4. t Or, tspecialli/ 
when this day there is other sanctified in the vessel, f Mat. 12 ::l. 



speak as if events depended solely on themselves, 
whereas they depend on God ; and men ought ever to 
feel, that if the Lord will, they shall live and do this 
or that. James 4 : 1-*}. 

39. Men are often instrumental in promoting more 
benevolent objects, and in accomplishing greater 
good, than they are aware of; and all who faithfully 
do their duty, however humble their condition, when 
they come to see the results of their labors, will ad- 
mire the grace of God, and be filled with gratitude 
and joy. 

CH.APTER XXI. 

1. Nob; a city of Benjamin. Ahimelech; one 
of the descendants of Eli. Was afraid; that there 
was a difficulty between David and Saul, and that 
it might be dangerous to entertain him. 

4. llalloiced bread; E.x. 2-3:30; Lev. 24:5-9. 

5. lu a manner common ; every Sabbath, the 
bread which liad stood on the table during the week 
was t,aken away to be eaten by tlie priests, and new 
bre.ad was put in its place. Tlie old bread, it is sup- 
posed, which had been taken from the table, was 
that of which David and his men partook. Mat. 
12 : 3, 4 ; Mark 2 : 2-5, 26. Thottgh it n-ere sanc- 
tijied ; since other bre,ad is tliis Jay sanctified, or 
put in its place. Ver. 6. 

25 



Edomito, the cliicfest of the herdmen that 
belonged to Saul. 

8 HAnd David said unto Ahimelech, 
And is there not here under thy hand spear 
or sword? for I have neither brought my 
sword nor my weapons with me, because 
the king's business required haste. 

9 And the priest said. The sword of Go- 
liath the Philistine, whom ''thou slowest 
in the valley of Elali, behold, it 'is here 
wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod : if 
thou wilt take that, take it : for there is 
no other save that here. And David said. 
There is none like that; give it me. 

10 •! And David arose, and fled that day 
for fear of Saul, and went to ^Achish the 
king of Gath. 

1 1 And the J servants of Aehish said 
unto him. Is not this David the king of the 
land? did they not sing one to another of 
him in dances, saying, ''Saul hath slain 
his thousands, and David his ten thou- 
sands 1 

12 And David 'laid up these words in 
his heart, and was sore afraid of Aehish 
the king of Gath. 

13 And he '"changed his behavior before 
them, and feigned himself "mad in their 
hands, and il scrabbled on the doors of the 
gate, and let his spittle fall down upon 
his beard. 

14 Then said Aehish unto his servants, 
Lo, ye see the man *is mad: wherefore 
then have ye brought him to me? 

15 Have I need of madmen, that ye 
have brought this feUow to play the mad- 
man in my presence? shall this fellow 
come into my house? 

4. K dinp 22:9: I'..ia, .'12, title. h i-liap. 17: 2, .W, .51. i rliap. 
31:10. \ Or, A'timclech. Psa. 34. title, j Psa. .')6, title, k chap. 
18:7; 29:3. Il,uke2:19. m Psa. 34, title. »Eccl.7:7. || Or, 
made marks. * Or, plat/eth the mad/nan. 



7. Detained ; for the purpose, it is supposed, of 
performing some religious service. 

12. Sore afraid ; lest Acliish should think that 
he had come for some evil purpose. 

13. Mad ; bereft of reason. 

IXSTRUCTION.g. 

1. Elevated situations are often places of peculiar 
trials, and from tlie height of worldly prosperity 
men m.ay suddenly fall into deep distresses ; we 
should therefore not put. our trust in men, nor even 
in princes, but in the living God, who hath said to 
all who trust in him, I will never leave nor forsake 
thee. 

2. When men are guilty of falsehood for the sake 
of obtfiining a present good, they know not what 
evils they may occasion to themselves and otiiers. 
Chap. 22 : 9-2-2. 

7. Jlen may externally attend on tlie worship of 
God, and yet in their hearts be opposed to him, and 
when tempted, may even destroy tiiose with wliom, 
in the forms of devotion, they have united. 

10. It is sometimes more safe to be among the 
heathen, than among those who have enjoyed the 
light of revelation and have abused it ; who in words 
profess friendship to Jehovah, but in works deny 
him. 

381 



David at the cave AduUam. 



I. SAMUEL, XXII. 



Saul slaycth the priests. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

1 Companies resort unto David at AduUam. .3 At Miz- 
pehhe commendeth his parents unto the king of Moab. 

5 Admonished by Gad, he comelh to Hareth. Saul 
tjoing to pursue him. complaineth of his servants' un- 
faithfulness. 9 Doegaccuseth Ahimelech. 11 Saul 
commandeth to kill the priests. 17 The footmen re- 
fusing, Dopg executeth it. 20 Abiathar escaping, 
bringeth David the news. 

DAVID therefore departed thence, and 
escaped^ to the cave ''AduUam : and 
when his brethren and all his father\s house 
lieard it, they went down thither to him. 

2 And "^ every one that ivas in distress, 
and every one that *was in debt, and every 
one that was t discontented, gathered them- 
selves unto him; and he became a ''cap- 
tain over them : and there were with him 
about four hundred men. 

3 ^ And David went thence to^Mizpeh 
of JNIoab : and he said unto the king of 
]\Ioab, Let my father and my mother, I 
pray thee, come forth, and be with you, 
till I know what God will do for me. 

4 And he brought them before the king 
of Moab : and they dwelt with him all 
the while that David was in the ""hold. 

•[ And the prophet « Gad said unto Da- 
rid, Abide not in the hold; depart, and 
get tliee into the land of Judali. Then 
David '' departed, and came into the forest 
of Hareth. 

6 lyWhcn Saul heard that David was dis- 
covered, and the men that were with him ; 

now Saul abode in Gibeahundcra + tree in 
Ilamah, having his spear in hi.s hand, and 
all his servants were standing about him ;) 

7 Then Saul said unto his servants that 
stood about him. Hear now, ye Benja- 
mites ; will the son of Jesse give 'every 
one of you fields and vineyards, and make 
you all captains of thousands, and cap- 
tains of hundreds ; 

8 That all of you have conspired against 
me, and there is none that^showcth me 
that my son hath made a J league with the 
son of Jesse, and there is none of you that 
is sorry for me, or showeth unto me that 
my son hath stirred up my servant against 
me, to lie in wait, as at this day? 



• Paa. .S7, 


title, 


and H-2, title 


b 2 Sam 


2.1 


13: 


Mi<Ml< 1 


IS- 


Heb. 11 : »8. 


c .T 


idir. 11:3. * 


Heb. hod » 


creditor 


t H^b 


hit- 


ter of tout. 


J Psa. 72 : 12, 14 


M.>t.9:li 


13 


e 


Juiig. 11 


■ 'M, 


f ICliron. 12:16. 


( 1 Cliron. 


21:9; 2C 


irn 


. in 


:-.'5. h 


tint 


10:23. |0r 


grove 


inahigkptact 


. icbap. 18 


14. 


%H. 


b. uncovereth 



CHAPTER XXII. 

I. Adidlam ; in the tribe of Judah. 

3. Mizprh ; in Mo.xb, on tlie east of Jordan. 

5. Ilaretli ; in the land of Judah. 

6. Raniali.; meaninjr an eminence. 

9. / saw th.e. son of Jesse ; chap. 21 : 7. 

II. iris falher^s house ; the descendants of Eli. 
18. Fourscore and five; eiglity-five. Thus 

•was fulfilled the Ijord's declaration to Eli, chap. 
2 : 31-36 ; 3 : 12-14. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
3. The distresses of children occasion great anx- 
382 



9 IT Then answered "^ Doeg the*Bc:?S2-. 
Edomite, which was set over the servants 
of Saul, and said, I saw the son of Jesse 
coming to Nob, to 'Ahimelech the son of 
Ahitub. 

10 And he "inquired of the Lord for 
him, and gave him victuals, and gave him 
the sword of Goliath the Philistine. 

1 1 Then the king sent to call Ahimelech 
the priest, the son of Ahitub, and all his 
father's house, the priests that it'crc in Nob : 
and they came all of them to the king. 

12 And Saul said. Hear now, thou son 
of Ahitub. And he answered, i'Here I 
am, my lord. 

13 And Saul said unto him. Why have 
ye conspired against me, thou and the son 
of Jesse, in that thou hast given him 
bread, and a sword, and hast inquired of 
God for him, that he should rise against 
me, to lie in wait, as at this day? 

14 Then Ahimelech answered the king, 
and said. And who is so "faithful among 
all thy servants as David, which" is the 
king's son-in-law, and goeth at thy bid- 
ding, and is honorable in thy house? 

15 Did I then begin to inquire of God for 
him 1 be it far from me : let not the king 
impute any thing unto his servant, nor to 
all the house of my father : for thy servant 
knew nothing of all this, *less or more. 

1 6 And the king said. Thou shalt surely 
die, Ahimelech, thou, and p all thy father's 
house. 

17 IT And the king said unto the t foot- 
men that stood about him. Turn, and slay 
the priests of the Lord; because their 
hand also is with David, and because they 
knew when he fled, and did not show it to 
me. But flic servants of the king would 
not ''put forth their hand to fall upon the 
priests of the Lord. 

18 And the king said to Doeg, Turn thou, 
and fall upon the priests. And Doeg the 
Edomite turned, and he fell upouthe priests, 
and ^slcw on that day fourscore and five 
persons that did wear a linen ephod. 

19 And 'Nob, the city of the priests. 



mine ear. <• 


lap. 20 : 


._ 


i cbap. IK 


:3 


20:30. 


k 


clinp. J 


1:7; 


Vm. 


S2. title, 


.111(1 


ver.l.i 


3. 


1 cliap. 21 


:l| 


etc. m 


N'u 


m. 27 : 2 


'■ w 


Heh. 


Bekotd 


ne. 


n cliap. 


U) 


4,."): 24: 


1. 


cbap 


114 


:27. * 


Heb 


litUe 


or oreat 


P 


Dent, -i- 


: le. ; Entb. 3 


t>. 


f Or, guard ; Heb. i-uniurt. 


qEn. 1: 


17. 


r chap 


2 


31,. W. • 


ve 


.9,11. 











iety to parents, and rij^ht-minded children will 
strive to alleviate their sorrows, and as far 
as Providence may permit, to provide for their 
wants. 

5. While we exercise our own best judgment, we 
should feel our need of divine guidance, seek wis- 
dom from above, and be ready to go wherever God 
calls. 

7. Men are apt to judge others by themselves, and 
when they are supremely selfish to think that otheis 
are so too. 

0. To exalt themselves, and gain the favor of those 
above them, many will occasion the ruin of others, 



David rescueth Keilah. 



I. SAMUEL, XXIII. 



He escapcth to Ziph. 



B.c!'iM^' smote he witli the edge of the 
sword, both men and women, children 
and sucklings, and oxen, and asses, and 
sheep, with the edge of the sword. 

20 T[ And one of the sons of Ahimelech 
the son of Ahitub, named *Abiathar, es- 
caped, and fled after David. 

21 And Abiathar showed David that 
Saul had slain the Lord's priests. 

22 And David said unto Abiathar, I 
knew it that day, when Doeg the Edomite 
teas there, that he would surely tell '' Saul : 
I have occasioned the death of all the per- 
sons of thy father's house. 

23 Abide thou with me, fear not : for he 
that seeketh my life seeketh thy life : but 
with me thou shalt be in safeguard. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

I David, inquiring; of the Lord by Abiathar, rescueth 
Keilah. 7 God showing him the coming of Saul, and 
the treachery of the Keilites;. he escapeth from Keilah. 
14 In Zipli Jonathan cometli aud coraforteth him. 
19 The Ziphites di.scover him to Saul. '2.5 At Maon 
he is rescued from Saul by the invasion of the Philis- 
tines. 29 He dwelleth at En-gedi. 

THEN they told' David, saying. Behold, 
the Philistines fight against "^ Keilah, 
and they rob the threshing-floors. 

2 Therefore David'^inquired of the Lord, 
saying. Shall I go aud smite these Philis- 
tines ? And the Lord said unto David, 
Go, and smite the Philistines, and save 
Keilah. 

3 And David's men ''said unto him. Be- 
hold, we be afraid here in Judah: how 
much more then if we come to Keilah 
against the armies of the Philistines'? 

4 Then David inquired of the Lord yet 
again. "^ And the Lord answered him and 
said, Arise, go down to Keilah ; for I will 
deliver the Philistines into thy hand. 

5 So David aud his men went to Kei- 
lah, and fought with the PhilisUnes, and 
brought away their cattle, and smote them 
with a great slaughter. So David saved 
the inhabitants of Keilah. 

6 And it came to pass, when Abiathar 
the son of ^Ahimelech fled to David to 
Keilah, that he came down with an ephod 
in his hand. 

7 1[ And it was told Saul that David was 



• clinp. 23:fi; 1 Kinss, 4:26, 27. b cliai.. 21 : 1-9. c .Toslu 
15:44. d vrr. 4, 6, 9; cliap. 30:S; ^Sam. ,S: 19. 23. ePsa.ll:!. 
r .ludR. 6:39. B cliap. 2i : 20. h Psa. 71 : 10, 11. i.Ipr. 11:1S, 
19. j clmp. 30 : 7 ; Num. 27 : 21 ; .ler. 33 : 3. k ver. 8 ; Esth. 3:6; 

and even imbrue their hands in the blood of the 
innocent. 

17. Tyrants who resolve to take the life of their 
fellow- men will not be hindered by want of reasons, 
or be backward to contend that the public good re- 
quires it. 

18. Rulers who reauire men to commit sin, will 
generally find some who are wicked enough to obey 
them. 

2"2. To have been even the innocent occasion of 
the death of others is exceedingly distressing to an 



come to Keilah. And Saul said, God hath 
delivered him into my hand; for ''he is 
shut in, by entering into a town that hath 
gates and bars. 

' 8 And Saul called all the people together 
to war, to go down to Keilah, to besiege 
David and his men. 

9 ^ And David knew that 'Saul secretly 
practised mischief against him; and J he 
said to Abiathar the priest. Bring hither 
the ephod. 

10 Then said David, Lord God of Is- 
rael, thy servant hath certainly heard that 
Saul seeketh to come to Keilah, to destroy 
the city for ''my sake. 

11 Will the men of Keilah deliver me 
up into his hand? will Saul come down, 
as thy servant hath heard ? Lord God 
of Israel, I beseech thee, tell thy ser- 
vant. And the Lord said, Hewill come 
down. 

12 Then said DaA'id, Will the men of 
Keilah *deliver me and my men into the 
hand of Saul"? And the ioRD said. They 
will deliver thee up. 

13 IfThen David and his 'men, ichich 
were about six hundred, arose and depart- 
ed out of Keilah, and went whithersoever 
they could go. And it was told Saul that 
David was escaped from Keilah ; and he 
forbare to go forth. 

14 And David abode in the wilderness 
in strong-holds, and remained in a "" moun- 
tain in the wilderness of " Ziph. And Saul 
sought him every day, but" God delivered 
him not into his hand. 

15 And David saw that Saul was come 
out to seek his life : and David was in the 
wilderness of Ziph in a wood. 

16 ^And Jonathan Saul's son arose, 
and went to David into the wood, and 
strengthened P his hand in "i God. 

17 And he said unto him. Fear not: for 
the hand of Saul my father shall ''not find 
thee; and thou shalt be king over Israel, 
and I shall be next unto thee ; and that 
also *Saul my father knoweth. 

18 And they 'two made a covenant be- 
fore the Lord: and David abode in the 
wood, and Jonathan went to his house. 



Prov. 28:15; Rom. 3: 15, Irt. * Heb. */ii/< up. Icbap. 2::2; 
25 : 13. m Psa. 11:1. n Josll. 15 : ,56. o Pa.-i. 37 ; 32, .33 ; 54 : 3. 4. 
P Prov.27:9, 17 ; Isa..35:3, 4; Heb. 12:12. q Kpb.fi: 10. r Job 
5:11,15. scbap.24:20. t chap. 20 : 16, 43 : 2 Sam. 21 : 7. 



ingenuous mind, and much more distressing is it 
when it has been occasioned by their kindness to us, 
or by our sins. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

1. Keihili ; in the western part of Judah. Ver. 7. 

14. WHdeniess of Zipli, ; a rough, hilly region 
in the tribe of Judah. 

16. Strengthened his hand i>i God; encour- 
aged him to hope in &od, and expect deliverance 
from him. 

383 



David is pursued by Saul, 



I. SAMUEL, XXIV, 



but spareth him in a cave. 



19 1[ Then' came up tlicZipliiles to Saul 
to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David hide 
himself with us in strong-holds in the 
wood, in the hill of Hachilah, which i.-.- 
on* the south of tjcshimoni 

20 Now therefore, king, come down 
according to all the desire of thy soul to 
come down ; and ''our part shall be to de- 
liver him into the king's hand. 

21 And Saul said, ''Blessed be ye of the 
Lord; for ye have compassion on me. 

22 Go, I pray you, prepare yet, and 
know and sec his place where his * haunt 
is, and who hath seen him there : for 
it is told me that he dealeth very sub- 
tilely. 

23 See therefore, and take ''knowledge 
of all the lurking places where he hideth 
himself, and come ye again to me with 
the certainty, and I will go with you : and 
it shall come to pass, if he be in the land, 
that I will "search him out throughout all 
the ""thousands of Judah. 

24 And they ^rose, and went to Zipli 
before Saul : but David and his men ircre 
in the wilderness of ^Maon, in the plain 
on the south of Jcshimon. 

25 Saul also and his men went to seek 
him. And they told David : wherefore he 
came down ^ into a rock, and abode in the 
wilderness of Maon. And when Saul 
heard that, he pursued after David in the 
wilderness of Maon. 

26 And Saul went on this side of the 
mountain, and David and his men on that 
side of the mountain: and David made 
haste'' to get away for fear of Saul; for 
Saul and his men 'compassed David and 
his men round about to take them. 

27 ^[ButHhere came a messenger unto 
Saul, saying, Haste thee, and come; for 
the Philistines have II invaded the land. 

28 Wherefore Saul returned from pur- 
suing after David, and went against the 



a chap. 2fi: 1 ; Psa. .'14. title. * Heb. on the rinlU hantl. f Or, 
the wiMernetl. b Psa. M : S. c Jutlg. 17:2; Miiali H:!!. 
i neh. foot than be. il .lolin 18:2, 3. e I Kinj^, 18: 10. f Num. 
10:30; Micali. 1:2. (! cl.ap. 2.5 : 2. ^ Cir, fn>m the mck. h Ps;i. 
31:2-3. i Psa. 17:9, 11 : HO: 1,3. j 2 Kins». I'.I:H. || Hell. »ri-eorf 
themsetvet upon. * Ttiat ia, the rock o/ divhivnu. k 2Cliran. 

19. Jeshimoii. ; meaning wilileriiesSj or desert 
21. Maon ; a place south of Ziph. , 

2S. Sela-hammah-lekoth ; meanin";, the rock of 
division. 

20. Eii-gfdi ; north-east of Maon, and on the 
liorder of the Dead sea; called also, Hazezon-tamar. 
Cren. 11:7; 2 Chron. 20 : 2. 

IN.STRL'CTIONS. 

2. A conviction of our dependence on God. and a 
disposition to seel; his direction, are a good prepara- 
tion for receiving his favor and securing success. 

7. Men are .apt to interpret the providences of 
G-od according to their wishes, and to think tiiat 
what favors their designs is a token of his approval. 

12. It is not uncommon for men to return evil for 
good, and requite their benefactors with base in- 
gratitude. 

384 



Philistines: therefore they called B.c.wh 
that place *Sela-hammah-lekoth. 

29 IT And David went up from thence, 
and dwelt in strong-holds at''En-gedi. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

1 David in a cave at En-gpdi, having cut off Saul's 
skirt, spareth his life. 8 He showeth thereby his in- 
nocency. 16 Saul, acknowledging his fault, taketh 
an oath of David, and dcparteth. 

AND it came to pass, when Saul was 
returned' from t following the Philis- 
tines, that it was told him, saying, Behold, 
David is in the wilderness of En-gcdi. 

2 Then Saul took three thousand chosen 
men out of all Israel, and went to '"seek 
David and his men upon the "rocks of the 
wild goats. 

3 And he came to the sheepcotes by the 
way, where was a cave ; and Saul went in 
to "cover his feet : and David and his men 
remained in the sides of thePcave. 

4 And the men of David said unto him. 
Behold 1 the day of which the Lord .'Jaid 
unto thee. Behold, I will deliver thine 
enemy into thy hand, that thou may est da 
to him as it shall seem good unto lliee. 
Then David arose, and cut off the skirt ol 
Saul's + robe privily. 

5 And it came to pass afterward, thai 
David's "^ heart smote him, because he had 
cut off Saul's skirt. 

6 And he said unto his men, 'The Lord 
forbid that I should do this thing unto my 
master, the Lord's anointed, to stretch 
forth my hand against him, seeing he is 
the 'anointed of the Lord. 

7 So David ^stayed "his servants with 
these words, and suffered them not to rise 
against Saul. But Saul rose up out of the 
cave, and went on his way. 

8 H David also arose afterward, and 
wentout.of the cave, and cried after Saul, 
saying. My lord the king. And when 
Saul looked behind him, David stooped 

•30:2. I chap. 2.1 : 28. 29. j Hi:h. n/ler. mPaa. 38:12. n Psa. 
141 :fi. o Juilg. 3: -'4. p Psa. .",7, H2, titles. q chap. 21".: 8-11. 
t Hi-h. the rvOe which WM Saul's. riSam. 24:10; I .Iolm.S:20.2l. 
« 1 Kings, 21 : 3. t 2 Sam. 1:14. 4 Heb. cut itff. u Psa. 7:4 ; 
Mat 5 : 44 ; Horn. 12 : 17-21. 



16. Pious friendship delights in giving comfort 
in distress, bv raising e.xpectations from, and inspir- 
ing hope in Jehovah. 

21. Men sometimes invoke the blessing of th^ 
Lord in the pursuit of objects which he abhors. 

27. The Lord has a varieij' of w:iys in which he 
can protect his people, and he sometimes makes use 
of one enemy to deliver them from another. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

2. Rocks of the wild goats ; the wild, unculti- 
vated regions inhabited by those anim.als. 

3. A carp ; caves in tliat country were often 
large enough to contain iiundreds of men. 

5. Darifr.s hraif .';»ioif /lim ; fearing hehad done 
wrong in cutting olT Saul's skirt, and iiad not treated 
him whom God had made king with proper respect. 



Saul confcssclh his fault. 



I. SAMUEL, XXV. 



Samuel d'leth. 



B. (J. 1001 

bowed himself. 

9 And David said to Siuil, Wherefore 
hearest* thou men's words, saying, Be- 
hold, David seeketh thy hurt? 

10 Behold, this day thine eyes have seen 
liow that the Lord had delivered thee to- 
day into my hand in the cave : and ''some 
bade mc kill thee : but mine eye spared 
thee; and I said, I will not put forth my 
hand against my lord ; for he is the Lord's 
anointed. 

1 1 Moreover, my father, see, yea, see 
the skirt of thy robe in my hand : for in 
that I cut off the skirt of thy robe, and 
killed thee not, know thou and see that 
there is neither"^ evil nor transgression in 
my hand, and I have not sinned against 
thee ; yet thou ^ huntest my soul to take it. 

12 The Lord judge between mc and 
thee, and the Lord avenge me of thee: 
but my hand shall not be upon thee. 

13 As saith the proverb of the ancieaits, 
Wickedness procccdeth from the wicked : 
but my hand shall not be upon thee. 

1 4 After whom is the king of Israel come 
ouf? after whom dost thou pursue? after 
a dead dog, after a flea. 

1 5 The Lord therefore be judge, and 
judge between me and thee, and^see, and 
plead ''my cause, and *de]iverSme out of 
thy hand. 

Ifi ^And it came to pass, when David 
had made an end of speaking these words 
unto Saul, that Saul said, Is this thy voice, 
my son David? And Saul lifted up hi.s 
voice, and wept. 

17 And he said to David, Thou art more 
righteous than I ; for thou hast rewarded 
me ""good, whereas I have rewardcd'thee 
evil. 

18 And thou hast showed this day how 
that thou hast dealt well with me : foras- 



« Lev. 19: 16; Prov. 18:8; -26:20— 'J; IW-.Vl; EccL7:-21. I» ver 
c Psa. 35:7. <1 cli:<p. •26:20. o SCliron. 24: -22. f Pea. 35: 
43: 1 ; II'.1:M: Mirah7:9. * Heh.judgt. g cli:ip. 2fi:24. b JI 
.'>:44. t neh.lhutup. cliap. -23: 12 ; 26" ' "- '-""■ "- 



Mat. 

r»a. 18:20; Prov. 



1.3. Wickedness procecdctli from the i'.-icked ; 
if David had been wicked, and sought Saul's life, 
he would have killed him. Eat a.s lie did not, it 
showed that he was not thus wicked. 

11. After a dead dog; one insignificant and 
worthless. 

21. Not destroy my name ; by cutting off his 
posterity. 

1>J.''TRUCTI0\S 

2. Where the heart is not duly humbled and turned 
from the love of sin, men will continue in some form 
to practise it. When disappointed in one way they 
will pnrsue it in another, and nothing but the grace 
of <jod will lead them wholly to forsake it. 

4. We should be very careful not to interpret the 
opportunity and inclination for iniquity as a license 
from God to commit it. 

6. Conscientious regard to propriety in the treat- 
ment of those whom G-od has raised to be rulers, 
will ever characterize his enlightened and consistent 



much as when the Lord had '^ delivered 
me into thy hand, thou killedst me not. 

19 For if a man find his enemy, will he 
let him go well away ? wherefore the 
Lord ' reward thee good for that thou hast 
done unto me this day. 

20 And now, behold, I > know well that 
thou shalt surely be king, and that the 
kingdom of Israel shall be established in 
thy hand. 

21 Swear now therefore unto me by the 
Lord, that thou wilt not cut off my seed 
after me, and that ''thou wilt not destroy 
my name out of my father's house. 

22 And David sware unto Saul. And 
Saul went home ; but David and his men 
gat them up unto the ' hold. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

1 Samuel dieth. 2 David in Paran sendeth to Nabal. 
10 Provoked by Nabal's churlishness, he mindeth to 
destroy him. 14 Abigail understanding thereof, ]c? 
taketh a present, 'Zi and by her wisdom 3'2 paoifieth 
David. 30 Nabal hearing thereof dieth. 39 David 
takuth Abigail and Ahinoam to be his wives. 44 Mi- 
chal is given to Phalti. 

AND Samuel died; and "> all the Israel- 
ites were gathered together, and la- 
mented him, and buried him in his house 
at Ramah. And David arose, and went 
down to the wilderness of " Paran. 

2 And there loas a man in ° Maon, whose 
possessions t were in Carmel ; and the man 
u-as very great, and he had three thousand 
sheep, and a thousand goats : and he was 
shearing his sheep in Carmel. 

3 Now the name of the man ivas Nabal, 
and the name of his wife Abigail ; and 
she was a woman of Pgood understanding, 
and of a beautiful countenance: but the 
man icas i churlish and evil in his doings : 
and he vas of the house of Caleb. 

4 *\ And David heard in the wilderness 
that Nabal did ''shear hi^ sheep. 

5 And David sent out ten young men, 



25:21, -22. j cimp. '23: 17. k 2S:inn. 21 : G-8. 1 lliap. 23 : 2i<. 
m cliHp. 28 : 3 ; Num. 20: 29 ; Deut. ;M : 8. n Gen. 21 : 21 ; Num. 
10: 12; 13:3, 26. o cliap. 23 : 24. J Or, *i»mMi. pProv.l4:l; 
31:26,:iO. q vcr. in, II, 17. r Gen. 38 : 13 ; 2 Sam. 13: 2.3. 



friends. Yet this will not lead them to justify their 
errors, nor hinder them from condemning their vices. 

7. To be accepted of God, we must not only ab- 
stain from evil ourselves, but must use our influence 
to prevent it in others. 

9. It is highly honorable to religion, when the 
conduct of its friends shows that the slanders of 
their enemies are false. 

13. The conduct of men is the best evidence of 
theircliaracter.and theyshouldeverso actas to show 
supreme regard to God and good-will to men. 

16. Wicked men often see that they are wicked, 
that the righteous are more excellent and more 
happy than they, and that their end will be more 
glorious. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

1. At Ramah: the place M-here he was born, 
and had lived. Paran; near the southern border 
of .Tud.ah. 

2. Carmel; a place in that part of .Tudah. 

38-5 



NabaPs churlishness. 



I. SAMUEL, XXV. 



Abigail's wise conduct. 



and David said uuto the young men, Get 
you up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and 
greet *him in my name: 

6 And thus shall ye say to him that liv- 
eth in pro.spo if ij, 'Peace be both to thee, 
and peace be to thy house, and peace be 
unto all that thou hast. 

7 And now I have heard that thou hast 
shearers : now thy shepherds which were 
with us, we t hurt them not, neither was 
there aught missing unto them, all the 
while they were in Carmel. 

8 Ask thy young men, and they will 
show thee. Wherefore let the young men 
find favor in thine eyes ; for we come in 
a good ''day: 'give, I pray thee, whatso- 
ever cometh to thy ""hand unto thy ser- 
vants, and to thy son David. 

9 And when David's young men came, 
they spake to Nabal according to all those 
words in the name of David, and + ceased. 

10 ^And Nabal answered David's ser- 
vants, and said, ^ Who is David ? and who 
fv the son of .Jesse? there be many ser- 
vants nowadays that break away ever}' 
man from his master. 

1 1 Shall "^I then take my bread, and my 
water, and my * flesh that I have killed 
for my shearers, and give it unto men, 
whom I know not whence they be? 

12 So David's young men turned their 
way, and went again, and came and told 
him all those sayings. 

1.3 And David said unto his men. Gird 
ye on every man his sword. And they 
girded on every man his sword ; and Da- 
vid also girded on his sword : and there 
went up after David about four hundred 
men ; andtwohundred s abode by the stuff. 

14 ^ But one of the young men told Abi- 
gail, Nabal's wife, saying. Behold, David 
sent messengers out of the wilderness to 
salute our master; and he H railed on them. 

15 But the men iwre very good unto us, 
and ''we were not *hurt, neither mis.sed 
we any thing, as long as we were con- 
versant with them, when we were in the 
fields. 

16 They were a 'wall unto us both by 
night and day, all the while wc were with 
them kcepintr the sliecp. 

17 Now therefore know and consider 



what thou wilt do ; for evil is deter- *d. c! i2«a 
mined against our master, and again.st all 
his household : for he ?'*■ sitch a son of J Be- 
lial, that a man canhot speak to him. 

1 8 1[Then Abigail made haste, and ^ took 
two hundred loaves, and two bottles of 
wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and 
five measures of parched corn, and a hun- 
dred t clusters of raisins, and two hundre J 
cakes of figs, and laid them on asses. 

19 And .she said unto her serA'ants, 'Go 
on before me; behold, I come after you. 
But she told not her hu.sband Nabal. 

20 And it was .to, as she "rode on the ass, 
that she came down by the covert of the 
hill, and behold, David and his men came 
down against her; and she met them. 

21 Now David had said. Surely in vain 
have I kept all that this fcUoiu hath in the 
wilderness, so that nothing was missed of 
all that pertained unto him : and he hath 
requited me "'evil for good. 

22. So and more also H.o God unto the 
enemies of David, if I leave of all that 
pertain to him by the morning light any 
that pisseth against the wall. 

23 And when Abigail saw Da-\-id, she 
hasted, and "lighted off the ass, and fell 
before David on her face, and bowed her- 
self to the ground, 

24 And fell at his. feet, and said. Upon 
me, my lord, upon mc let this iniquity he : 
and let thy handmaid, I pray thee, speak 
in thine i audience, and hear the words of 
thy handmaid. 

25 Let not my lord, I pray thee, ^ regard 
this man of Belial, even Nabal : for as his 
name is, so is he ; H Nabal is his name, and 
folly is with him : but I thy handmaid 
saw not the young men of my lord, whom 
thou didst send. 

26 Now therefore, my lord.a.v the Lord 
liveth, and as thy soul livetli, seeing the 
Lord hath "withholden thee from coming 
to .v/icf^ blood, and from 'avenging ? thyself 
with thine own hand, now let thine ''en- 
emies, and they that seek evil to my lord, 
be as Nabal. 

27 And now this t blessing which ''thy 
handmaid hath brought unto my lord, let 
it even be siven unto the young men that 
follow t my lord. 



* Heh.mk him in my name of peace, clinp. 17: W. • 1 Cliron. 
IJ: 19; Luke 10:. 5. f Heh.t^awifd. vor. lii.il. b Keh. g: |0-l'2 ; 
Estll.T ft: P>. c Kcil. 11:2. < I.llk<- 11:41. % Hel). retted. 
• .luil^. <):'2«; Psa. 7:1:7. 8; 123:3,4; l.^n. S':.";, 7. f Jmlg. R:C. 
a H"l>. WniiyA/cr. t rlinp. 30 : 24. \\ Ht-h. flrw upon, h ver. 7. 
' Hi-h. thamed. I Ex. 14 : 22 ; Job 1 : 10; Jer. l.'.:2n. J iSiiir.. 



8. Whatsoever cometh to thy haiul ; what he 
had and could conveniently spare. 

16. A wall unto n.i ; they protected us. 

22. So and more also do God; this was a kind 
of oath wliich David took that he would destroy 
every man belonging to Nabal. 

21. This iniquity ; the blame belonging to lier 
386 



23:fi, 7. k Gen. 32:13: Pror. I8:1B: 21:14. f Or. Imipt. 
) Gen. .32: IB, 211. m PsK. la):."! ; Prov. 17:13. n .losh. l.-i: 18. 
t Hfh.eart. ^ Hph. lav it lo hit heart. [| Tlwt ir<,/..o(. oxer. 
33; Gen. '.'0:6. ' Heb. tavinp. p num. 12:ia q 2 Sam. IP : 32. 
^ " "— ■•■'• ■'■ "'^■-7>,->:15. t Hel>. irort «/ M» 



t Or, prrtent. r Gen. :)3 : 1 1 
feet of. ver. 42 ; .InJg. 4 : 10. 



husband for so basely treating David and his men. 
Audience; hearing. 

S-l. Nahal ; meaning folly. 

26. llnthvithholdfn thee ; by sending Abigail 
to persu.ide him not to do as he had intended. As 
Nabal ; so foolish as to destroy themselves. 

27. This blessing ; the present she had brought. 



She pacifies David. 



I. SAMUEL, XXV, 



He taketh her to wife. 



S:"iro'; 28 I pray thee, forgive the tres- 
pass of thy handmaid : for the * Lord will 
certainly make my lord a sure liouse ; be- 
cause my lord ''fighteth the battles of the 
Lord, and evil hath "^not been found in 
thee nil thy days. 

29 Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and 
to seek thy soul : but the soul of my lord 
shall be bound in the '^ bundle of life with 
the Lord thy God; and the souls of thine 
enemies, them shall he sling out, *as out 
of the middle of a ■■ sling. 

30 And it shall come to pass, when the 
Lord shall have done to my lord accord- 
ing to all the good that he hath spoken 
concerning thee, and shall have appointed 
thee ruler over Israel; 

31 That this shall bo no t grief unto thee, 
nor ofTenee of heart unto my lord, either 
that thou hast shed blood causeless, or that 
my lord hath avenged himself: but when 
the Lord shall have dealt well with my 
lord, then '^remember thy handmaid. 

32 ^ And David said to Abigail, ^Blessed 
be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee 
this day to meet me : 

33 And blessed 6c thy '"advice, and bless- 
ed be thou, which hast kept me this day 
from coming to shedhlooA, and from aveng- 
ing myself with mine own hand. 

34 For in very deed, as the Lord God of 
Israel liveth, which hath ' kept me back 
from hurting thee, except thou hadst hast- 
ed and come to meet me, surely there had 



a 2Siim. r: U, 27; lKing3,9:5; P-sa. 89:29. brliap, 18:17 
c IKiiigs, 15:5; Psa. 119:1-3. d M.il. 3:17. » Hel). in the 
midst nf the bow of a fling. ejer. 10:18. ^ Hf'h. itaQgering , or 
stumbling. f Gen. 40 : U ; Luke 23:42. E Gen. 24:27: Kx.. 
18: 10 ; Kzr.l 7:-27 ; Psa. 41 : 13 ; I.vike 1 : 63. h Psa. 141 : 5; Prov. 



28. Make my lord a sure house ; establish and 
prosper him in his kingdom. 

29. A man; Saul. Soul; life. Sound i/i 
the bundle; surely be preserved. Sling out; 
destroy or reject them. 

37. His heart died; he was overcome, and be- 
came senseless. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The removal by death of the wise and good is 
a just cause of lamentation to the living, and should 
lead to fervent prayer that God would raise up others 
to fill their places, and carry forward his work. 

6. Kind feelings manifested in kind words and 
actions, even towards the evil and unthankful, are 
means of great good to those who indulge them, and 
tend to the good of all who feel tlieir influence. 

10. Uiikindness and reproaches torment those who 
indulge in them, and often tempt others to the com- 
mission of sin. 

14. Servants are often wiser and better than their 
masters, are more grateful for kindness, and more 
disposed to treat it as it deserves. 

15. A prudent wife is from the Lord, and maybe 
the means in his hands of unspeakable good to her 
husbiind. 

2'J. Men who have nobly withstood great and 
sore temptations, may meanly give way to those 
which are small, and profanely resolve to commit 
such enormous crimes as would cover them with 
deserved and perpetual disgrace. 



not been left unto Nabal by the morning 
light any that pisseth against the wall. 

35 So David received of her hand that 
which she had brought him, and said unto 
her, J Go up in peace to thy house ; see, I 
have hearkened to thy voice, and have 
accepted thy person. 

36 ^And Abigail came to Nabal; and 
behold, he held a ''feast in his house, like 
the feast of a king; and Nabal's heart tvas 
merry ' within him, for he ica.s very drunk- 
en : wherefore she told him nothing, less 
or more, until the morning light. 

37 But it came to pass in the morning, 
when the wine was gone out of Nabal, 
and his wife had told him these things, 
that his '"heart died within him, and he 
became as a stone. 

38 And it came to pass about tendays o/Ver, 
that the Lord "smote Nabal, that he died. 

39 ^ And when David heard that Nabal 
was dead, he said, "Blessed he the Lord, 
that hath p pleaded the cause of my reproach 
from the hand of Nabal, and hath Mcept his 
servant from evil: for the Lord hath ''re- 
turned the wickedness of Nabal upon his 
own head. And David sent and communed 
with Abigail, to take her to him to wife. 

40 And when the servants of David were 
come to Abigail to Carmel, they spake unto 
her, saying, David sent us unto thee, to 
take thee to him to wife. 

41 And she arose, and bowed herself on 
her face to the earth, and said. Behold, let 

9:9. iver.2S. j2Sam. 15:9; I.uke?:.*. k 2 Sam. 13 : 2:!. 
I Proverbs 20: 1; EcelesLastes 10: 19; Isaiah 23:3, 7. ni Job 
15:21; Proverbs 23:29-35. n 2 K;ii«.s, 15:5 ; Acts 12: -23. over. 
32. p Proverbs 22 : -23. q ver. 26, 34. riKings, 3:«; Paalm 
7:16. 



26. All the wisdom needful in conducting a diffi- 
cult concern, and all the success of human efforts in 
accomplishing it, come from God. and to him the 
wise and the good will give the glory. 

30. When one is raised by God to a station- of 
great power and influence, it is a source of much 
pleasure to be able to look back and see that he has 
not swerved from the path of truth and duty in order 
to obtain it. 

32. However great the blessings which come 
through the instrumentality of creatures, we should 
not overlook the Creator, or fail to acknowledge his 
gracious agency in the affairs of men ; nor while we 
acknowledge him as the source of all good, should 
we fail to be grateful to the voluntary and benevo- 
lent instruments through which his goodness is be- 
stowed. 

34. None but God knows how many evils may 
be averted from a foolish and wicked husband by a 
pious, prudent, and energetic wife. 

36. A person when drunk is ordinarily not in a 
condition to be benefited by conversation, and it is 
not usually wise, while lie is in that state, to at- 
tempt to converse with him. 

35. Many a drunkard, after lying for a time as 
dead, has been smitten by the Lord, and in less tjjan 
ten days h.-is gone to the drunkard's grave; and no 
one who falls into the drunkard's sleep can avoid 
the danger of awaking in the drunkard's eternity. 

43. Men who see and acknowledge the duty and 
387 



David a 7am 



1. SAMUEL, XXVI. 



sparelh SauVs life- 



thy *haiulmaicl J/e a servant to wash the j 
feet of the servants of my lord. 

42 And Abigail hasted, and arose, and, 
rode upon an ass, with five damsels of hers j 
that went *after her ; and she went after the 
messengers of David, and became his wife, i 

43 David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel ; 
and ''they were also both of them his wives. 

44 ^But Saul had given Michal his 
daughter, David's wife, to t Plialti the son 
of Laish, which icas of "^Gallim. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

1 .Siul. by the discovery of the Ziphites, cometh to 
Hachilah against DaviJ. 5 David coming into the 
trench stayeth Abishai from killing Saul, but taketh 
his spear and cruse. 13 David reprovelh Abner, IS 
and exhorteth Saul. 21 Saul acknowledgeth his sin. 

A ND the ■'Ziphites came unto Saul to 
-LJ_ Gibeah, saying. Doth not David hide j 
himself in the hill of Hachilah, ichicli is i 
before Jeshimon'? i 

2 Then Saul arose, and went down to 
the wilderness of Ziph, having three thou- 
sand chosen men of Israel with him, to • 
seek David in the wilderness of Ziph. 

3 And Saul pitched in tlie hill of Ilachi- j 
lah, which is before Jeshimon, by the i 
way. But David abode in the wilderness, | 
and he saw that Saul came after him into 
the wilderness. 

4 David therefore sent out spies, and un- 
derstood that Saul was come in very deed. 

5 •[ And David arose, and came to the 
place where Saul had pitched : and David 
beheld the place where Saul lay, and ''Ab- 
ner the son of Ner, the captain of his host : 
and Saul lay in the + trench, and the peo- 
ple pitched round about him. 

6 Then answered David and said to 
Ahimclech the Ilittite, and to ''Abishai the 
son of Zcruiah, brother to Joab, saying, 
Who will go down with me to Saul to the 
camp 1 And Abishai said, I will go down 
with thee. 

7 So David and Abishai came to the peo- 
ple by night: and behold, Saul lay sleep- 
ing within the trench, and his spear stuck 
in the ground at his bolster: but Abner 
and the people lay round about him. 

8 Then said Abishai to David, God hath 
delivered 5 thine enemy into thy hand this 
day : now therefore let me smite him, I pray 
t liee, with the spear even 1 o t lie earth at once, 
and I will not smite him the second time. 



« Kiltll2:IO, m; Prov. 15:33. * IU1>. n/;«:r/«(. ver.27. li ili.in. 
?7:3. i He\>.r>ialtitl. iS:im.S:ln. cl,„. 10:30. J iliiip. 23: IVI; 
INh. M, title, e cljlip. M:SO. t Or, midtt of hit carriiiget. rliap. 
: 7 : 20. f 1 Chron. 2 : la 4 Heh. thut up. chap. 21 : 18. e chnp. 
:i:6, etc. ; 2Snm. 1:16. h Psa. 91 : 23 ; Luke 18:7. I Ueut. 



the blessedness of obeying God, and in some things 
actually do it; in otiier things, -when tempted, are 
sometimes left openly to rebel against him, and 
tlius pierce themselves and others through with 



9 And David said to Abi.shai,De- ^ac.i^o: 
stroy him not: for" who can stretch forth 
his hand against the Lord's anointed, and 
be guiltless'? 

10 David said furthermore, As the Lord 
liveth, the ''Lord shall smite him; or his 
day ' shall come to die ; or he shall de- 
scend into battle, and J perish. 

1 1 The Lord '' forbid that I should stretch 
forth my hand against the Lord's anoint- 
ed: but, I pray thee, take thou now the 
spear that is at his bolster, and the cruse 
of water, and let vis go. 

12 So David took the spear and the cruse 
of water from Saul's bolster; and they 
gat them away, and no man saw it, nor 
knew it, neither awaked: for they were 
all asleep ; because a deep ' sleep from tlie 
Lord was fallen upon them. 

13 ^ Then David went over to the other 
side, and stood on the top of a hill afar 
off; a great space being between them : 

14 And David cried to the people, and 
to Abner the son of Ner, saying, Answer- 
est thou not, Abner"? Then Abner an- 
swered and said, Who art thou that criest 
to the kingl 

1.5 And David said to Abner, Art not 
thou a valiant man ? and who is like to thee 
in Israel? wherefore then hast thou not 
kept thy lord the king ? for there came one of 
the people in to destroy the king thy lord. 

16 This thing ii- not good that thou hast 
done. As the Lord liveth, ye are ii worthy 
to die, because ye have not kept your 
master, the Lord's anointed. And now 
see where the king's spear is, and the 
cruse of water that was at his bolster. 

17 And Saul knew David's voice, and 
said, '"Is this thy voice, my son David? 
And David said, It is my voice, my lord, 
king. 

18 And he said, Wherefore doth my lord 
thus pursvve after his servant? for what 
have I done ? or what evil is in my hand"? 

19 Now therefore, I pray thee, let my 
lord the king hear the words of his ser- 
vant. If the Lord have "stirred thee up 
against me, let him *accept an "offering: 
but if they be the children of men, cursed 
be they before the Lord; for they Phave 
driven me out this day from t abiding in 
the liniieritanee of the Lord, saying. Go, 
serve other gods. 



31 :14; .Tol)7:l ; P8a.37:13; Kccl.3:2; Heb.9:27. jrliap.31: 
k clinp. 2l:ti, 12. 1 Gen.2:21; 1.5:12. || Hfh. Iht tont of deal. 
2Snm.l2:5. m chap. 2-1: 16. n 2 Sam. 16: 11 ; 24; 1. • Heb. »»iti 
Gen. 8:21; r.ev.26:3l. o P«a. 119:108. f Dent. 4:27, 2H; Pe 
l-20:3: 190.00:5. f Heb. cleaving. 1 iSxm. 14:16. 



many sorrows. 
388 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

19. Let fiim accept ail offering ; if David li ad 

sinned, and on that account was persecuted, he 

would present tlie proper offering, and thus Sfek 

forgiveness and a termination of his distresses. Go 



Saul returncth home. 



I. SAMUEL, XXVII. 



David fleeth to Galh. 



B. cl'ioao* 20 Now therefore, let not my blood 
fall to the earth before the face of the Lord : 
for the king of Israel is come out to seek 
a flea, as when one doth hunt a partridge 
in the mountains. 

21 "^Then said Saul, *I have sinned: 
return, my son David ; for I will no more 
do thee harm, because my soul was ''pre- 
cious in thine eyes this day: behold, I 
have played the fool, and have erred ex- 
ceedingly. 

22 And David answered and said. Be- 
hold the king's spear! and let one of the 
young men come over and fetch it. 

23 The Lord "= render to every man his 
righteousness and his faithfulness : for the 
Lord delivered thee into my hand to-day, 
but I would not stretch forth my hand 
against the Lord's anointed. 

24 And behold, as thy life was much set 
by this day in mine eyes, so let my life be 
much set by in the eyes of the Lord, and 
let him ''deliver me out of all tribulation. 

25 Then Saul said to David, Blessed he 
thou, my son David: thou shalt both do 
great things, and also shalt still ''prevail. 
So David went on his way, and Saul re- 
turned to his place. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

1 Saul hearing David to be in Gath seeketh no more for 
him. 5 David beggeth Ziklagof Achish. 8 He, in- 
vading other countries, persuadeth Acliish he fought 
against Judah. 

AND David said in his heart, I shall 
now *perish one "^day by the hand of 
Saul : ihere is nothing better for me than 
that I should speedily escape into the land 
of the Philistines ; and Saul shall despair 
of me, to seek me any more in any coast 
of Israel : so shall I escape out of his hand. 



a chaii. 15:24. b ver. 24. c Psa. 7: 8; 18:-20. il Psa. 18, title; 
34:17,18; 144:2; 2 Cor. 1 : 9. 10; iThess. 3 : 2. e Gen. 32 : 28 ; 
Isn. 54: 17; Rom. 8:3.1, 37. "* Hfb. he comumeil. f Isa. 40:27-31 ; 
Si: 12. e chap. 25: 13. hchap.21:10. ■ chap. 2.t : 43. j Gen. 46:34. 



serve Other gods, by driving him out among the hea- 
then, they had tempted and e.vposed him to idolatry. 

20. Ajlea — a partridge ; a thing of small value, 
difficult to catch, and of little use when caught. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Whatever promises of reformation men may 
make, unless they are led to hate sin they will con- 
tinue in some form to commit it; and after tempo- 
rary and partial reformation, if they go back, they 
often become worse than before. 

5. No one, when closing his eyes to sleep, can tell 
to what dangers he may be exposed before he awakes. 
Each one should therefore e.\amine and see whether 
he is prepared for whatever may befall him, and com- 
mit himself and all his intere.sts to Jehovah, who 
alone can make him dwell in safety. 

9. It is never necessary to do wrong in order to 
obtain any needful good, and confidence in God will 
lead a man in the path of duty, to wait till He shall 
give him what he desires. 

1-'). Contidence in men for protection and support 
is always liable to be disappointed, and none are or 
can be safe except those who put their trust in G-od. 



2 And David arose, and he passed over 
with the six hundred « men that U'crc with 
him unto'^Achish, the son of Maoch, king 
of Gath. 

3 And David dwelt with Achish at Gath, 
he and his men, every man with his house- 
hold, even David with his two 'wives, 
Aliinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the 
Carmelitess, Nabal's wife. 

4 And it was told Saul that David was 
fled to Gath : and he sought no more again 
for him. 

5 lyAnd David said unto Achish, If I 
have now found grace in thine eyes, let 
them give me a J place in some town in the 
country, that I may dwell thei'e: for why 
should thy servant dwell in the royal city 
with thee? 

6 Then Achish gave him''Ziklag that 
day: wherefore Ziklag pertaineth unto 
the kings of Judah unto this day. 

7 And t the time that David dwelt in the 
country of the Philistines was ta full year 
and four months. 

8 T[ And David and his men went up, 
and invaded the 'Geshurites, andthe sGcz- 
rites,'" and the "Amalekitcs : for those 
nations tvcrc of old the inhabitants of the 
land, as thou goest to "Shar, even unto 
the land of Egypt. 

9 And David smote the land, and left 
neither man nor woman alive, and took 
away the sheep, and the oxen, and the 
asses, and the camels, and the apparel, and 
returned, and came to Achish. 

10 And Achish said, il Whither have ye 
made a road to-day"? And David said, 
Against the south of .ludah, and against 
the south ofthef'Jerahmeelites, and against 
the south of the i Kenites. 



k 


.To.«h. 


9: 


.i. 


t Heb. the n 


mnlier of dnyt. % Heb. 


a year of 


d 


Ii/». cl 


ip 


29 


3. 


1 .To3li. 15 


:2. % Or, Gerzitet. m J 


i,ix. 1 : 2S>. 


n 


Kx. 17 


11 


. Ge 


n. 2.5: 18. 


II Or, Did you not make ? 


p 1 Chroii. 


2 


■\ la. 


1 


Ju 


Is- I 


:16. 







20. Worldly men often pursue what it is very 
ditficult to obtain, and what, if they should obtain 
it, would in the end do them little good. 

21. For a man supremely to regard himself and 
seek his own glory, is foolish as well as wicked. It 
exposes him to great vexation, and will end in total 
disappointment. 

2i. Those who seek to glorify God, and to pro- 
mote tliehighestgoodof men, will in the end receive 
from him all whicli they can reasonably desire. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

2. Gath; the e.asternmost city of the Philistines, 
near the border of Judah. 

.'). Grace; favor. 

6. Ziklag; a town allotted first to Judah, which 
afterwards fell to Simeon, and was now occupied 
by the Philistines. 

8. Geshurites — Gezrites — Anialekites ; peo- 
ple soutii of Judea. Shnr ; a region between Pal- 
estine and Egypt- 

10. Jcrahmeelites ; apart of the tribe of Judah. 
Kenites ; a people near the Jeralmieelites. 
389 



Saul seeketh unto 



I. SAMUEL, XXVIII. 



a witch at Endor. 



11 And David saved neither man nor 
woman alive, to bring tidings to Gath, 
saying, Lest they should tell on us, say- 
ing. So did David, and so irill be his man- 
ner all the while he dwelleth in the coun- 
try of the Philistines. 

12 AndAchish believed David, saying, 
He hath made his people Israel *utterly 
to' abhor him ; therefore he shall be my 
servant for ever. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

1 Achish putteth confidence in David. 3 Saul, having 
destroying the witches, 4 and now in his fear forsaken 
of God, 7 seeketh to a witch. 9 The witch, encour- 
aged by Saul, raiseth up Samuel. 15 Saul, hearing 
his ruin, fainteth. '21 The woman with his servants 
refresh him with meat. 

AND it came to pass in those days, that 
the Philistines gathered their armies 
together for warfare, to fight with Israel. 
And Achish said unto David, Know thou 
assuredly, that thou shalt go out with mc 
to battle, thou and thy men. 

2 And David said to Achish, Surely thou 
shalt know what thy servant can do. And 
Achish said to David, Therefore will I 
make thee keeper of my head for ever. 

3 Tf Now* Samuel was dead, and all Is- 
rael had lamented him, and buried him in 
Ramah, even in his own city. And Saul 
had put away ''those that had familiar 
spirits, and the wizards, out of the land. 

4 And the Philistines gathered them- 
selves together, and came and pitched in 
Shunem:'^ and Saul gathered all Israel 
together, and they pitched in ^ Gilboa. 

5 And when Saul saw the host of the 
Philistines, he was ''afraid, and his heart 
greatly trembled. 

6 And when Saul inquired of the Lord, 
the Lord answered him '^not, neither by 
dreams,^ nor by ""Urim, nor by prophets. 



* Heb. to stink. Gen. 34:30. a cliap. 2.") : 1. b Lev. 20 : 27 ; 
Dent. IS: 10, 11. c Josh. 19: 18 ; 2 Kings, 4 : S. d chap. 31 : 1. 
e Job 18:11. f Prov. 1 : 28 ; Lam. 2 : !1. gNuin. 12:a. b Nuin. 



12. Therefore ; supposing from David's equiv- 
ocal answer that he had fought the Israelites. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Persons who at one time exercise strong con- 
fidence in G-od, may at another be guilty of great 
unbelief, and instead of seeking liis guidance, may 
trust to their own wisdom, and bring upon them- 
selves and others many sorrows. 

5. The people of <jod are sometimes more perse- 
cuted by his professed friends, than by the heathen ; 
and have fled to the one, to escape the violence of 
the other. 

10. Intimate connections with the wicked are 
sources of great temptation, and those who need- 
lessly expose themselves cannot rationally e.xpect to 
escape unharmed. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

2. What thy servant cati do ; Achish under- 
stood David to mean, what he \Vt>uld do in favor of 
the Philistines; though he did not say that, but 
gave, as in chap. 27 : 10, an equivocal replv. Keeper 
of my head ; captain of his body-guarif. 

390 



7 IT Then said Saul unto his ser- *b.^.?^: 
vants. Seek mc a woman that hath a fa- 
miliar spirit, that 'I may go to her, and 
inquire of her. And his servants said to 
him. Behold, there is a woman that hath 
a familiar spirit at En-dor. 

8 And Saul disguised himself, and put 
on other raiment, and he went, and two 
men with him, and they came to the wom- 
an by night: and he said, I pray thee, 
divine unto me by the familiar spirit, and 
bring me him up, whom I shall name unto 
thee. 

9 And the woman said unto him. Be- 
hold, thou knowest what Saul hath done, 
how he hath cut off J those that have fa- 
miliar spirits, and the wizards, out of the 
land : wherefore then laycst thou a snare 
for my life, to cause me to die? 

10 And Saul sware to her by the Lord. 
saying. As the Lord liveth, there shall no 
punishment happen to thee for this thing. 

1 1 Then said the woman. Whom shall 

1 bring up unto thee? And he said. Bring 
me up Samuel. 

12 And when the woman saw Samuel, 
she cried with a loud voice : and the wom- 
an spake to Saul, saying. Why hast thou 
deceived mc? for thou art Saul. 

13 And the king said unto her. Be not 
afraid : for what sawest thou? And the 
woman said unto Saul, I saw ''gods as- 
cending out of the earth. 

14 And he said unto her, t What form is 
he of? And she said, An old man cometh 
up; and he is covered with a 'mantle. 
And Saul perceived that it was Samuel, 
and he stooped with his face to the ground, 
and bowed himself. 

1 5 ^ And Samuel said to Saul, Why hast 
thou disquieted me, to bring me up ? And 

27:21. i Lev.l9:31 ; IChron. 10: 13; l«n.8:19. jver.3. k Ex. 
22 : 28 ; Psa. 82: 6, 7. f Heb. What is hit form .» 1 cbap. 15:37; 

2 Kings, 2 : 8, 13. 



3. Those that had familiar spirits, and the 
toizards ; persons who pretended to have inter- 
course with evil spirits, and by their aid to foretell 
future events. 

4. Shunem; in the tribe of Issachar. Gilboa; 
a mount.ain near Shunem, and at the south-east side 
of the valley of .Tezreel. 

6. By JJrim ; as worn by the high-priest. Ex. 
28:30; Num. 27:21. 

7. Ell-dor; north-cast of Shunem. 

10. Said sware to her ; in doing this, he swore 
that he would not obey Ood. Ex. 22 : IS. 

11. Bring me up Samuel ; witches pretended 
to be able to do this, though it was a false pretence. 

12. When the vnman. saw Samnel ; if hn 
really appeared, it was not she, or an evil spirit, 
that brought him up. but it was <Tod, who sent him 
to denounce the death of S.aul. 

13. I saw gods ascending ; or a god. ver. 14. 
She seems herself to have been surprised and af- 
frighted at what she saw. 

\'). Why hast than, disqitieted mc? been the 
occasion of it. 



Saurs ruin foretold. 



I. SAMUEL, XXIX. David among the Philistines. 



B.c.'wsi: Saul answered, I am sore * dis- 
tressed ; for the Philistines make war 
against me, and God is ''departed from 
me, and ''answereth me no more, neither 
by* prophets, nor by dreams : therefore I 
have called thee, that thou mayest make 
known unto me what I shall do. 

16 Then said Samuel, Wherefore then 
dost thou ask of me, ''seeing the Lord is 
departed from thee, and is become thine 
enemy'?'' 

17 And the Lord hath done tto him, as 
he ^spake by tme : for the Lord hath rent 
the kingdom out of thy hand, and given 
it to thy neighbor, even to David: 

1 8 Because thou s obeyedst not the voice 
of the Lord, nor executedst his fierce 
wrath upon Amalek, '"therefore hath the 
Lord done this thing unto thee this day. 

19 Moreover the Lord will 'also deliver 
Israel with thee into the hand of the Phil- 
istines ; and to-morrow xhalt thou and thy 
sons be with me : the Lord also shall de- 
liver the host of Israel into the hand of 
the Philistines. 

20 Then Saul ^ fell straightway all along 
on the earth, and was sore afraid, J because 
of the words of Samuel: and there was 
no strength in him ; for he had eaten no 
bread all the day, nor all the night. 

21 ^And the woman came unto Saul, 
and saw that he was sore troubled, and 
said unto him. Behold, thy handmaid hath 
obeyed thy voice, and I have ''put my life 
in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy 
words which thou spakest unto me. 

22 Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken 
thou also unto the voice of thy handmaid, 
and let me set a morsel of bread before 
thee ; and eat, that thou mayest have 
strength, when thou goest on thy way. 





» Pro 


V. 


1: U- 


in 


14: U 


.Jer 


•2:17, 


>1. 


b ch:ip 


18 


:1 


; Hoseil 


') 


1-2. 


% 


er ft. 


^ 


Hel. !», 


theh 


and of. 


cl 


1 Kings 


H 


•27. 


• Lam. 


2 


5.«t 


O 


r. for 


hiir 


.<■//. 1- 


ov. 16:4. 


cl 


.ip. IS : 


.'rt. 


% 


Heb. my 


/tanfT. 


e 


cUap 


1» 


: 9, 13 ; 


IKi 


ng», --'O 


M 


; 1 Cl.ri 


>n. 


10: 


l:i; .ler. 



17. To him; to thee, or for himself. 

IS. Thon obeyedst not; chap. 1-5 : 9, 23-26. 

10. With me ; with the dead. 

23. Compelled ; by urgent persuasion. 
INSTRUCTIOXS. 

2. When men equivocate to get out of one diffi- 
culty, they often plunge into a greater, and unless 
the grace of God do better for them tiian they do 
for themselves, they ■will sink into utter ruin. 

4. When godly magistrates and ministers of religion 
are removed the people become peculiarly exposed, 
and if on accountof theirsinsGod havedeparted from 
them, their enemies may be e,\pected to triumph. 

7. Those who h.^ve resisted great light, and long 
continued in open disobedience to known commands 
of God, often commit sins which they once had 
earnestly opposed, and go from one degree of iniquity 
to another, till tiiey become their own destroyers. 

10. Men wlio wisii to commit crimes themselves 
are often ready to connive at them in others, and if 
need be, to bind themselves by awful imprecations 
to secure them from punishment. 



23 But he refused, and said, I will not 
eat. But his servants, together with the 
woman, compelled him ; and he heark- 
ened unto their voice. So he rose from 
the earth, and sat upon the bed. 

24 And the woman had a fat calf in the 
house ; and she hasted, and killed it, and 
took flour, and kneaded it, and did bake 
unleavened bread thereof: 

25 And she brought it before Saul, and 
before his servants ; and they did eat. 
Then they rose up, and went away that 
night. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

1 David marching with the Philistines. 3 is disallowed 
by their princes, (i Achish dismisseth him, with 
commenJations of his fidelity. 

IVrOW the ' Philistines gathered together 
-L\ all their armies to '"Aphek: and the 
Israelites pitched by a fountain which is 
in Jezreel. 

2 And the lords of the Philistines passed 
on by hundreds, and by thousands : but 
David and his men passed on in the rear- 
ward with Achish. 

3 Then said the princes of the Philis- 
tines, What do these Hebrews here ? And 
Achish said unto the princes of the Phil- 
istines, I.s not this David, the servant of 
Saul the king of Israel, which hath been 
with me these "days, or these years, and 
I have found no ° fault in him since he fell 
unto me unto this day? 

4 And the princes of the Philistines 
were wroth with him; and the p princes 
of the Philistines said unto him. Make 
this fellow return, that he may go again 
to his place which thou hast appointed 
him, and let him not go down with us to 
battle, lest in the i battle he be an adver- 
sary to us : for wherewith should he rec- 



■18: 10. 


h PS2 


..=>0:2 


, 2-2, i 


cliap. 


11 


l-fi 


Da 


n.S:2l>-2.S. i Heb. 


m 


ade hatte nt 


dfell 


with Ih 


. fuln 


$s 


ofh 


* stnture. i .Inb In : 


•20. 


k 


chap 


1>):S. 


1 cl 


ap. 28 


1, 2. 


n 


clia 


.. 4 


1. n cliap. '27 


:7. 


° 


rliap. 


M : -28 


; Dan 


8:5. 


P ICl 


ron. 12 


19. 


q cbap. 14:21. 





l-"). If men continue in sin, Grod will at length 
depart from them, and they will then find no effect- 
ual help from heaven, earth, or hell. 

19. Though none suffer except for their own sins, 
nor more than they deserve, yet ungodly parents may 
be the means of great distress to their children, and 
ungodly rulers of great calamities to their people. 

22. Men may as well expect to have health and 
strength without eating, drinking, or sleeping, as 
to be blessed here or hereafter without obeying (rod. 
They may say. He is good, and he is almighty. 
This is true, but it will not save them from death, 
temporal nor eternal. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

1. Aphek ; in Issachar. not far from Gilbo.a. 

4. Kis place; Ziklag. Jlis master; Saul. 
With the heads of these men; by killing the 
Philistines. 

IN.STRUCTIONS. 

2. The fact that men have so often been assem- 
bled by hundreds and thousands for the sake of de- 

391 



The AviaUkitcs burn Ziklag. I . S A ?il U E L , XXX. 



David pursueth them. 



oncile himself unto liis master'? should it 
not he with the heads of these men ? 

5 Is not this David, of whom *they sang 
one to another in dances, saying, Saul slew 
his thousands, and David his ten thou- 
sands 1 

6 T[ Then Achish called David, and said 
unto him, Surely, as the Lord livcth, thou 
hast been upright, and "^ thy going out and 
thy coming in with me in the host is good 
in my sight: for "^I have not found evil 
in thee since the day of thy coming unto 
me unto this day : nevertheless *the lords 
favor thee not. 

7 Wherefore now return, and go in 
peace, that thou + displease not the lords of 
the Philistines. 

8 T[ And David said unto Achish, But 
what have I done? and what hast thou 
found in thy servant so long as I have 
been J with thee unto this day, that I may 
not go fight against the enemies of my lord 
the king"? 

9 And Achish answered and said to Da- 
vid, I know that thou art good in my 
sight, as ^ an angel of God : notwithstand- 
ing, the princes of the Philistines have 
said,*" He shall not go up with us to the 
battle. 

10 Wherefore now rise up early in the 
morning with thy master's servants that 
arc come with thee : and as soon as ye be 
up early in the morning, and have light, 
depart. 

1 1 So David and his men rose up early 
to depart in the morning, to return into 
the land of the Philistines. And the Phil- 
istines went up to '"Jezrecl. 

CHAPTER XXX. 

1 The Amalekites spoil Ziklag. 4 David asking coun- 
sel is encouraged by God to pursue them. 11 By 
the means of a revived Egyptian he is brought to the 
enemies, and recovereth all the spoil. !22 David"s 
law to divide the spoil equally between them that 
fight and them that keep the stuff. 2G He sendeth 
presents to his friends. 

AND it came to pass, when David and 
his men were come to Ziklag on the 
third day, that the Amalekites had in- 
vaded the south, and Ziklag, and smit- 



• chap. 18:7. I" i Sam. 3:2.". ; 2 Kinjs, \'^■.n. c ver. .1. * Heb. 
thou nrt ni't ffnod in the eye* of the lords, f Hel). do not evil in 
the eyet of. % Heli. before, d J Sam. 14 : 17 ; 1« : ■::. « ver. 4. 
f 2 Sum. 4:4. g l'»u. 7ii :'10. h iliap. ri : 4-2, 43. iKi. 17:4. 



stroyinjj one another, shows the avi-ful depravity of 
the human heart, and the necessity of its being 
changed hy tlie Holy Spirit before men will love 
one another as they love themselve.'i, or do to others 
as tliey would that others should do to tliem. 

6. When men have brouglit themselves into dif- 
ficulty, the Lord often graciously delivers them, 
and by means which tiiey never thought of, and for 
purposes wholly unexpected ; and when afterwards 
they see the ends which he hatl in view, they be- 
hold new manifestations of his wisdom, kindness, 
and grace. 

392 



ten Ziklag, and burned it with Vl"^, 
fire; 

2 And had taken the women captives, 
that xcere therein: they slews not any, 
either great or small, but carried Xhcm 
away, and went on their way. 

3 ^f So David and his men came to the 
city, and behold, jY w'«5 burned with tire; 
and their wives, and their sons, and their 
daughters, were taken captives. 

4 Then David and the people that were 
with him lifted up their voice and wept, 
until they had no more power to weep. 

5 And David's two ''wives were taken 
captives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and 
Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite. 

() And David was greatly distressed ; for 
the 'people spake of stoning him, because 
the soul of all the people was ^ grieved, 
every man for his sons and for his daugh- 
ters : but -David encouraged himself in 
the Lord his God. 

7 And David said to Abiathar the priest, 
Ahimelcch's son, I pray thee, bring ■'me 
hither the ephod. And Abiathar brought 
thither the ephod to David. 

8 And David inquired at the Lord, say- 
ing. Shall I pursue after this troop ? shall 
I overtake them ? And he answered him. 
Pursue: for thou shalt surely overtake 
them., and without fail recover a//. 

9 So David went, he and the six hun- 
dred men that were with him, and came to 
the brook Bcsor, where those that were 
left behind stayed. 

10 But David pursued, he and four hun- 
dred men : for two 'hundred abode behind, 
which were so faint that they could nor 
go over the brook Bcsor. 

1 1 1[ And they tound an Egyptian in the 
field, and brought him to David, and gave 
him bread, and he did eat ; and they made 
him drink water ; 

12 And they gave him a piece of a cake 
of figs, and two clusters of raisins : and 
when '" he had eaten, his spirit came again 
to him : for he had eaten no bread, nor 
drunk any water, three days and three 
nights. 



% Hfb. 6i«cr. cliap.l:10: .Iuils.l8:M; iS«m.l7:«; 2 King». 
4: -27. j Psa. 18:6: 56: 1,2; :l4:I-8; 40:1,2; 42:.'>, II ; .56:1-4! 
l«n. 2.t:4; .ler. 16:19; Hah. 3:17; Rom. 8:31 ; 2Cor. 1 :fi, lO; 
Heb.l3:6. k chap. 23 : 2-9. lver.21. ni chap. 14:27; Juilg. 1.5: 19- 



CHAPTER XXX. 
1. The south; the south part of Judea, where 
Ziklag was situated. 

6. Spnkc of stouhtg him ; for leaving their 
wives and children exposed and defenceless, lui- 
coHrnred hi nisei f in the Lord ; by remembering 
what G-od had already done for him, and wh:it lie 
had promised to do. 

I 9. The brook Besor ; a small stream which 
empties into the Mediterranean south of Gaza. 
I 13. His spirit came again; he was revived 
I and strengthened. 



David recovercth his 



I. SAMUEL, XXX. 



household and much spoil. 



i.aS' 13 And David said unto him, To 
whom helongest thou ? and whence art 
thou 1 And he said, I am a young man of 
Egypt, servant to an Amalekite ; and my 
master left me, because three days agone 
I fell sick. 

14 We made an invasion uponi\\Q south 
of the "Cherethites, and upon the coast 
which belongeth to Judali, and upon the 
south of ''Caleb; and we burned Ziklag 
with fire. 

15 And David said to him, Canst thou 
bring me down to this company'? And 
he said. Swear unto me by God, that thou 
wilt neither kill me, nor deliver me into 
the hands of my master, and I will bring 
thee down to this company. 

16 If And when he had brought him 
down, behold, they tccre spread abroad 
upon all the earth, *= eating and drinking, 
and dancing, because of all the great spoil 
that they had taken out of the land of the 
Philistines, and out of the land of Judah. 

17 And David smote them from the twi- 
light even unto the evening of *the next 
day : and there escaped not a man of them, 
save four hundred young men, which rode 
upon camels, and (led. 

18 And David recovered all that the 
Amalekites had carried away : and David 
rescued his two wives. 

19 And '^ there was nothing lacking to 
them, neither small nor great, neither sons 
nor daughters, neither spoil, nor any thitig 
that they had taken to them : David recov- 
ered ''all. 

20 And David took all the flocks and the 
herds, ichich they drave before those other 
cattle, and said. This is David's spoil. 

21 ^ And David came to the two Hiun- 
dred men, which were so faint that they 
could not follow David, whom they had 
made also to abide at the brook Besor : and 
they went forth to meet David, and to meet 





, 


■3Sr 


111. 8:18; 


1 Kings, 


1 i3S 


44 


Ki 


^k 




i:16 


Zeph 


■2 : a. 


b 


.1 




14:13. c 


Mat i1 : 


!8, :;• 




Tlif 


.-ts 


.=) 


3. 


» Heb. 


their 




0} 


Toil 


i G<>n. 


I4:14-1H. 


e 


er. 


«. 


f ^ 


er 


U). 


f Or, 


tt/tked 


t 


ei 


nho 


then did 


Juilg. IS 


• 1.5. 


e 


1 Ki 


ngs 


. * 


1:10 


13. t 


Heb. 



14. Cherethites ; Philistines. Ver. IG. 

22. Alight ; any thing. 

27—31. The places here mentioned were those 
visited by David in the south of Judea. 
INSTRUCTION.S. 

1. We can never be certain when we leave our 
friends, that we shall again meet them in this world. 
We should therefore commit them and ourselves 
heartily to the care of God, and endeavor so to act 
that if we meet them not again on earth, we may 
he prepared to meet them in heaven. 

4. No one beforehand can tell how great may be 
his calamities, how soon or suddenly they may come 
upon him, or how deeply they may afflict him. 

6. It is not wise under troubles to vent reproaches 
on others, or to give up in despair ; we should rather 
confess and forsake our sins, seek help from tjod, 
and endeavor to learn and do his will. 

10. All cannot endure the same fatigue, or per- 



the people that were with him : and when 
David came near to the people, he tsaluted 
them. 

22 Then answered all the wicked men, 
and men of ^ Belial, of Hhose that went 
with David, and said. Because they went 
not with us, we will not give them aught 
of the spoil that we have recovered, save 
to every man his wife and his children, 
that they may lead them away, and de- 
part. 

23 Then said David, Ye shall not do so, 
my brethren, with that which the Lord 
hath given us, who hath preserved us, and 
delivered the company that came against 
us into our hand. 

24 For who will hearken unto you in 
this matter? but ''as his part zs that goeth 
down to the battle, so shall his part b^ that 
tarriethby the stuff : they shall part alike. 

25 And it was .so from that day ^^ forward, 
that he made it a statute and an ordinance 
for Israel unto this day. 

26 TfAnd when David came to Ziklag, 
he sent of the spoil unto the ciders of Ju- 
dali, even to his friends, saying, Behold a 
present II for you of the spoil of the ene- 
mies of the Lord; 

27 To them which were in Beth-cl, and 
to them which tvere in south ' Ramoth, and 
to them which tccre in J Jattir, 

28 And to them which xcerc in ''Aroer, 
and to them which u'crc in Siphmoth. and 
to them whicli icere in ' Eshtemoa, 

29 And to them which were in Rachal, 
and to them which luere in the cities of the 
Jerahmeelites,'" and to tli'jm which u-ere in 
the cities of the "Kenites, 

30 And to them which lucre in ° Ilormah, 
and to them which icere in Chor-ashan, 
and to them which were in Athach, 

31 And to them which were in p Hebron, 
and to all the places where David himself 
and his men were wont to haunt. 



men. b Kutn. 31 : il ; Josli. ii : «. % Heb onrf/c; 


ward. 1 


Heb. 


blessing, chap. •2.5 : 27 ; Gen. 33 : U. > Josh \'.<:». 


j Josh. 


5:48. 


k .losh. 13:16. 1 Josh. 15: .W. m ch;ip. 27: 10. 


n JuJg. 


1:16. 


Judg. 1 : 17. p Josh. 14: 13; 2S.im. -2: I. 







form the same amount of labor ; but if from love to 
G-od and men we do what we can, he will see that 
we are not left destitute, but partake with others in 
the rich blessings of his grace. 

12. Servants who are destitute of property are 
liable when sick greatly to suffer, and sometimes 
even to die from want, and those who with right 
feelings assist them will not fail of an abundant 
reward. 

16. Great prosperity tempts to sensual indul- 
gence, and is often the means and forerunner of 
speedy and utter ruin. 

22. Selfishness is hard-hearted and cruel, un- 
grateful and wicked. It would keep all it can get, 
and leave others, equally deserving, to destitution 
and death. 

26. A benevolent mind takes pleasure in giving; 
its happiness is increased by impa;tin ^ toothers, and 
thus enabling them to become partakers of its joys. 
393 



The Philistines slay 



II. SAMUEL, I. 



Slid and Jonathan. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

1 Saul having lost his army, and his sons slain, he and 
his armor-bearer kill themselves. 7 The Philistines 
possess the forsaken towns of the Israelites. 8 They 
triumph over the dead carcasses. 11 They of Jabesli- 

filead, recovering the bodies by night, burn them at 
abesh, and mournfully bury their bones. 

"IVrOW the * Philistines fought against Is- 
_L\ rael : and the men of Israel fled from 
before the Piiilistines, and fell down *slain 
in mount ''Gilboa. 

2 And the Philistines followed hard upon 
Saul and upon his sons ; and the Philis- 
tines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and 
Melchi-shua, "^Saul's sons. 

3 And the ** battle went sore against Saul, 
and the t archers +hit him; and he was 
sore wounded of the archers. 

4 Then ""said Saul unto his armor-bearer, 
Draw thy sword, and thrust me through 
therewith; lest these '^uncircumcised come 
and thrust me through, and ^ abuse me. 
But his armor-bearer would not; for he 
was sore afraid. Therefore Saul took a 
sword, and fell upon it. 

5 And when his armor-bearer saw that 
Saul was dead, he fell likewise upon his 
sword, and died with him. 

6 So Saul 5 died, and his three sons, and 
his armor-bearer, and all his men, that 
same day together. 



7 If And when the men of Israel *b.c ?mo: 
that were on the other side of the valley, 
and they that tverc on the other side Jor- 
dan, saw that the men of Israel fled, and 
that Saul and liis sons were dead, they 
forsook the cities, and fled; and the Phil- 
istines came and dwelt in them. 

8 And it came to pass on the morrow, 
when the Philistines came to strip the 
slain, that they found Saul and his three 
sons fallen in mount Gilboa. 

9 And they cut off his head, and stripped 
off" his armor, and sent into the land of 
the Philistines round about, to publish it 
in the house of their idols, and among the 
people. 

10 And '■ they put his armor in the house 
of Ashtaroth : ' and they fastened his body 
to the wall of J Beth-shan. 

11 IT And when tlie inhabitants of ''Ja- 
besh-gilead heard lof that which the Phil- 
istines had done to Saul, 

12 All the valiant men arose, and went 
all night, and took the body of Saul and 
the bodies of his sons from the wall of 
Beth-shan, and came to Jabesh, and 'burnt 
them there. 

13 And they tooktheirbones, and^buried 
them under a tree at Jabesh, and " fasted 
seven davs. 



THE 



SECOND BOOK OF SAMUEL 

OTIIKRWISE CALLED, 

THE SECOND BOOK OE THE KINGS. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 The Amalekite who brought tidings of the overthrow, 
and accused himself of Saul's death, is slain. 17 Da- 
vid's lamentation over Saul and Jonathan. 

"VTOW it came to pass after the death of 
_L\ Saul, when David was returned from 



m I Chrnn. 10: 1, eu: * Or, wounded, b clinp. SSM. c ch 
14 M9 ; 1 Cliron. « : ■». d 2 Sam. 1 : fi, etc. f Heb. thoatert, n 






with bows. t Heh. found. « JilUg. 9 : M. f cliap. 14 


fi; 


17:21). 4 Or, moi:*. B chap. 28 : 13. h cliap. 21:9. i2S: 


m. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

3. Archers ; persons who used bow and arrows. 

4. Ahtse ; mock, insult. 

10. Beth-shan ; on the west of Jordan and 
north-east of mount Gilboa. 

11. Jahrsh-gilead ; in the tribe of Manasseh, 
enst of Jordan. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
4. The wicked are more Bfraid of men than they 
are of God, and seek the praise of men more than 
the praise of God. 

6. Though the righteous and tlie wicked may 
394 



the "slaughter of the Amalekites, and Da- 
vid had abode two days in Ziklag; 

2 It came even to pass on the third day, 
that, behold, a p man came out of the camp 
from Saul with his clothes rent, and earth 
upon his head : and so it was, when he 



21:1-3. j Josh. 17: 


U ; .tudg. 1 :27. k cliap. U:1-I1. || Or, 


concerning him. \ 


2 riiron. lfi:U: Jer. 34:fi: Amos (1:10. 


m 2 Sam. i-.i.h: 21 


12-14. n Gen. 60: JO. o 1 S.am. 30: 17-86. 


p ISam. -1: 12, 16. 





here live and die together, yet in eternity they will 
be separated and be in states as diverse as heaven 
is from hell. 

9. It matters little where the body is, or how it is 
treated after death, if the soul is freed from sin and 
happy with God in heaven ; for tlie body in t!ial civse 
willsoonrisein the likeness of Christ's glorified body, 
and with the soul shine for ever like the sun in the 
kingdom of God. 

CHAPTER I. 

1. When David u-as returned; 1 Samuel. 
30 : 17-2G. 



The Amalekilc slain. 



II. SAMUEL, I. 



David's lamentation. 



earth, and did obeisance. 

3 And David said unto him. From 
whence comest thou? And he said unto 
him, Out of the camp of Israel am I es- 
caped. 

4 And David said unto him, *How went 
the matter? I pray thee, tell me. And 
he answered, that the people are fled from 
the battle, and many of the people also 
are fallen and dead: and Saul and Jona- 
than his son are dead also. 

5 And David said unto the young man 
that told him, How knowest thou that Saul 
and Jonathan his son be dead? 

6 And tlie young man that told him said. 
As I happened by chance upon mount Gil- 
boa, behold,* Saul leaned upon his spear; 
and lo, the chariots and horsemen followed 
hard after him. 

7 And when he looked behind him, he 
saw me, and called unto me. And I an- 
swered, t Here am I. 

8 And he said unto me. Who art thou'? 
And I answered him, I am an Amalekite. 

9 He said unto me again. Stand, I pray 
thee, upon me, and slay me : for t anguish 
is come upon me, because my life is yet 
whole in me. 

10 So I stood upon him, and slew him, 
because I was sure that he could not live 
after that he was fallen : and I took the 
crown that icas upon his head, and the 
bracelet that icas on his arm, and have 
brought them hither unto my lord. 

1 1 Tlicn David took hold on his clothes, 
and '' rent them ; and likewise all the men 
that were with him: 

12 And they mourned, and wept, and 
fasted until even, for Saul, and for Jona- 
than his son, and for the people of the 
Lord, and for tlic house of Israel ; because 
they were fallen by the sword. 

13 ^And David said unto the young 
man that told him. Whence art thou ? And 
he answered, I am the son of a stranger, 
an Amalekite. 

1 4 And David said unto "^ liim, How wast 



• Heh.Wltiitwns.rtc. I Sum. 4: Its. . 1 Siiin. :ll : l.i.etc. 


t Hell. 


Behold me. 1 .Sam. li : \l. % Or, my coat ofmnil,or mn emh 


oidered 


eoat, hinJrreth me, that mv, etc. h rlnp. 3 : 31 ; 13 ; 31. t 


IS.im. 


24:8; a«:Mi r«i. ia5:l5. il 1 Km»», S: .3-2, SJ, 37. « 


•er. 10 r 


niBkel9:2i. f Josh. 10: i:i. J^ Or. the uptight, it La 


m. 2: 1. 



11. Rei/t tliem, ; in token of anguish. 

14. Tlie hord's anointed ; him whom G-od had 
nn'ijnted to be king. 

1^. The boiL' ' some suppose this to be the title 
nf the poem which follows. The book of Jasher ; 
Tosh. 10:13. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Many will pay court to those who are lo have 
power, hoping in this way to obtain thfir favor and 
gain promotion. 

10. The courses wicked men take for their own ad- 
vancement, often prove the occasion of their ruin. 

1"2. A good man will not desire the death even of 



thou not afraid to stretch forth thy hand 
to destroy the Lord's anointed? 

15 And David called one of the young 
men, and said. Go near, and fall upon him. 
And he smote him that lie died. 

1 6 And David said unto him. Thy "'blood 
he upon thy head; for thy mouth hath 
testitied* against thee, saying, I have slain 
the Lord's anointed. 

1 7 H And David lamented with this lamen- 
tation over Saul and over Jonathan his sou: 

18 (Also he bade them teach the chil- 
dren of Judah the use of the bow : behold, 
it is written in the ""book of Uasher :) 

19 The 5 beauty oflsrael is slain upon thy 
high places: how are the ''mighty fallen! 

20 Tell 'if not in Gath, publish it not in 
the streets of Ashkelon ; lest the daugh- 
ters of the Philistines J rejoice, lest the 
daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. 

21 Ye mountains of Gilboa, ^let there be 
no dew, neither /cf tliere be rain upon you, 
nor fields of 'oflerings : for there the shield 
of the mighty is vilely cast away, the 
shield of Saul, as though he had not been 
anointed"'- with oil. 

22 From the blood of the slain, from the 
fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan 
turned " not back, and the sword of Saul 
returned not empty. 

23 Saul and Jonathan iccre lovely and 
pleasant H in their lives, and in their "death 
they were not divided : they were swift- 
er than eagles, they were stronger than 
lions. P 

24 Ye daughters of Israel, weep over 
Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with 
other delights; who put on ornaments of 
gold upon your apparel. 

25 How are the mighty fallen in the 
midst of the battle! Jonathan, thou 
wast slain in thy high places. 

26 I am distressed for thee, my brother 
Jonathan : very pleasant hast thou been 
unto me : thy i love to me was wonderful, 
passing the love of women. 

27 How ''are the mighty fallen, and the 
weapons of war perished ! 



h I,nm. 5:l'i. i Micali 1 : 10. j Judg. I« : 23. kJob3:.'J-10 
Jer. 20:14-lii. 1 Joel 1 : 9 ; 2 : H. "n ISnm. 10:1, n 1 Sam. 
H:6,et<-. \\ Or, noeet. o 1 Samuel, 31 : 1-). p Juil^.s 14: 18; 
Proverbs 30 : 30. q 1 Samuel, 18: 1, 3; 20: 17, 41 ; 2:1:16. r rer. 
19, 25, 



his bitterest enemy, though it would open the way 
to his own elevation, influence, and honor. 

17. It is proper to lament th.e death of those with 
whom we have been connected ; and while we bow 
with submission to the afflicting hand of God, we 
should acknowledge with gratitude his goodness in 
!he natural endowments as well as the spiritual 
blessings which he bestowed on them. 

26. The most intimate and endearing friendships 
must soon be broken ; but if founded in true piety, 
they will be revived again never to be interrupted, 
but to become more and more intimate and endear- 
ing for ever. 

395 



David made king of Jndah. 



II. SAMUEL, II. 



Abner slayeth Asahel. 



CHAPTER II. 

1 David, by God's direction, with his company goeth iip 
to Hebron, where he is made king of Judah. 5 He 
commendeth them of Jabesh-gilead for their kindness 
to Saul. 6' Abiicr inaketli Ish-bosheth king of Israel. 
Vi A mortal skirmish between twelve of Abner's and 
t\velve of Joab's men. 18 Asahel is slain. 25 At 
Abner's motion Joabsoundeth a retreat. 32 Asahel's 
burial. 

AND it came to pass after this, that 
David * inquired of the Loud, saying, 
Shall I go up into any of the cities of Ju- 
dah ? And the Lord said unto him, Go 
up. And David said, Whither shall I go 
up? And he said, LTnto ''Hebron. 

2 So David went up thither, and his two 
■wives'^ also, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and 
Abigail Nabal's wife the Carmelite. 

3 And his ^men that were with him did 
David bring up, every man with his 
household ; and they dwelt in the cities 
of Hebron. 

4 And the men of Judah came, and 
there they anointed David king over the 
house of Judah. And they told David, 
saying that the men of "^Jabesh-gilead iccre 
thcij that buried Saul. 

5 "[And David sent messengers unto 
the men of Jabesh-gilead, and said unto 
them, ''Blessed be ye of the Lord, that ye 
have showed this kindness unto your lord, 
even unto Saul, and have buried him. 

6 And Snow the Lord show kindness 
and truth unto you: and I also will re- 
quite you this kindness, because ye have 
done this thing. 

7 Therefore now let 3'our hands be 
strengthened, and be ye *valiant: for 
your master Saul is dead, and also the 
house of Judah have anointed me king 
over them. 

8 ^But ''Abner the son of Ner, captain of 
Saul's t host, took 5^Ish-bosheth the son of 
Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim ; 

9 And made him king over Gilead, and 
over tlic Ashurites, and over Jczrecl, and 
over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and 
over all Israel. 

10 Ish-bosheth Saul's son tvas forty 
years old when he began to reign over 
Israel, and reigned two years. But the 
house of Judah followed David. 

11 And the Himc that David was king 



a.luilg. 1:1; I Sam. 23:2, 4. 10. b iliap. 6:1. .1. c 1 Sain. 
SO:.";, if 1 Sam. 27:2, 3; ICliron. 12:l,etc. e 1 Sam. 31 :ll-i:i. 
f Ruth 2 : :0; 3: 10. f 2Tim. 1 : II>-1R. • Heb. the torn ff valor. 
h 1 Sam. M:60. t Heh. Ihthoit which was Saul't. J Or, Eth- 
banl. I riiron. 8::t3; 9:»l. \ Wvh. number of dnyt. i rlian. 
fi : fi ; I Kings, 2:11. i chnp. 17 : 24 ; C.i-n. 32 : 2. k Josli. 10 : 2, 



CHAPTER IP. 

1. Ilehron ; a chief city of Judah. where David 
was to be anointed king. 

3. Cities of Hebron ; towns near Hebron. 

'1. Biiried Saul; 1 Sam. 31: 11-13. 

8. Mahanaim ; a city on the east of Jordan, in 
the tribe of G-ad. 
396 



in 'Hebron over the house of Judah *b ": lofi: 
was seven years and six months. 

12 If And Abner the son of Ner, and the 
servants of Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, 
went out from J Mahanaim to '' Gibcon. 

13 And Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the 
servants of David, went out, and met !' to- 
gether by the 'pool of Gibeon: and they 
sat down, the one on the one side of the 
pool, and the other on the other side of 
the pool. 

14 And Abner said to Joab, Let the 
young men now arise, and '"play before 
us. And Joab said. Let them arise. 

15 Then there arose and went over by 
number twelve of Benjamin, which per- 
tained to Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, and 
twelve of the servants of David. 

16 And they caught every one his fel- 
low by the head, and thrvxt his sword in 
his fellow's side; so they fell down to- 
gether : wherefore that place was called 
Helkath-hazzurim,* which is in Gibeon. 

1 7 And there was a very sore battle that 
day; and Abner was "beaten, and the men 
of Israel, before the servants of David. 

18 TfAnd there were "three sons of Ze- 
ruiah there, Joab, and Abishai, and Asa- 
hel : and Asahel was as light t of foot + as 
a P wild roe. 

19 And Asahel pursued after Abner; 
and in going he turned not to the right 
hand nor to the left from ^following Ab- 
ner. 

20 Then Abner looked behind him, and 
said, Art thou Asahel ? And he answered, 
I am. 

21 And Abner said to him, Turn thee 
aside to thy right hand or to thy left, and 
lay thee hold on one of the young men, and 
take thee his II armor. But Asahel would 
not turn aside from following of him. 

22 And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn 
thee aside from following inc: wherefore 
should I smite llice to the ground? how 
then should I hold up my face to ''Joab 
thy brother? 

23 Hovvbeit he refused to turn aside: 
wherefore Abner with the hinder end of 
the spear smote him ''under the fifth rib, 
that the spear came out behind him ; and 



4, 12. II Heb. them together. I Jer. 41:12. m I'rov. in:2.X 
* That is, the field nf ftrong men. n rliap. 3:1. o 1 Cliroii. 2 : !«. 
f Heb. of hit feet, i Heb. at one of the roet that is in the field. 
p 1 Chroniele.i, 12:8; Canticles 2: 17; 8:14. 4 Hebrew, n/Zcr. 
||Or, »p.<i7. Judges 14: 19. q chapter 3 ^27. r chapter 3:27; 
4:fi; ■:0:10. 



9. Ashtirites ; the tribe of Ashur. Over all Is- 
rael ; except the tribe of Judah. Ver. 10. 

12. Gibeon ; on the M-est of Jordan, in the tribe 
of Benjamin. 

11. 'Piny ; fijrht. 

16. llelkath-hazzurim ; meaning, the field of 
strong men. 

IS. Zeruiah; a sister of David. 



Tlie icar continues. 



ir. SAMUEL, III. 



Abner deserts to David. 



S.'^S' he fell down there, and died in the 
8ame place : and it came to pass, that as 
many as came to the place where Asahel 
fell down and died, stood still. 

24 Joab also and Abishai pursued after 
Abner : and the sun went down when they 
were come to the hill of Ammah, that licth 
before Giah by the way of the wilderness 
of Gibeon. 

25 ^[ And the children of Benjamin gath- 
ered themselves together after Abner, and 
became one troop, and stood on the top of 
a hill. 

26 Then Abner called to Joab, and said, 
Shall the sword ''devour for ever? know- 
est thou not that it will be bitterness in 
the latter '' end ? how long shall it be then, 
ere thou bid the people return from fol- 
lowing their brethren? 

27 And Joab said, .4.9 God liveth, unless 
thou hadst "^spoken, surely then *in the 
morning the people had gone tvip every 
one from following his brother. 

28 So Joab blew a trumpet, and all the 
people stood still, and pursued after Israel 
no more, neither fought they any more. 

29 And Abner and his men walked all 
that night through the plain, and passed 
overJordan, and went through all Bithron, 
and they came to ''Mahanaim. 

30 And Joab returned from following 
A bner : and when he had gathered all the 
people together, there lacked of David's 
servants nineteen men and Asahel. 

31 But the servants of David had smit- 
ten of Benjamin, and of Abner's men, so 
that three hundred and threescore men 
died. 

32 H And they took up Asahel, and bur- 
ied him in the sepulchre of his father, 
wiiich teas in Beth-lehem. And Joab and 
his men went all night, and they came to 
Hebron at break of dav. 



• chap. 11:23: Is». 1:M; .ler. 46:10. M. hver. 16; Prov. 
17:14. c Isa. 47:7. * Hf\i. from, f Or, oiiiny. d Ter. 12. 
• dmp. 2:17; .lob 17:0; Psa.W:T; Pr.iv. 4 : IS. 19; Rev. 6 : i. 
f 1 Cliron. 3:1-1. g 1 Sam. 2.i : 4:i. t Or, UnniW. 1 Cliron. 3: 1. 



27. Unless thoH kadst spoioi ; ver. 14. 

29. Bithro/i; a hilly country between the Jor- 
dan and Mahanaim. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Men who in all their ways acknowledge God, 
seek direction from liim, and are disposed to follow 
his guidajice, will see the path of duty, and in walk- 
ing in it will find great reward. 

3. Those who have befriended and a-ssisted ns in 
adversity,should be gratefully remembered, and duly 
honored by us in prosperity. 

.'). Gratitude and kindness to benefactors are not 
only right, I ut the surest means of securing grati- 
tude and kindness in return, and thus promoting the 
good of all concerned. 

8. Men who aspire to power, and grasp at the 
possession of it without asking counsel of God or 
inquiring whether it is right, though they may for 
a time succeed, will in the end lind it to be a source 
of vexation, bitterness, and sorrow. 

26 



CHAPTER III. 

1 During the war David still waxetli stronger. 2 Six 
sons were bom to him in Hebron. 6 Abner, displeased 
with Ish-bosheth, 12 revolteth to David. 13 David 
requiretli a condition to bring Him his wife Michal. 
17 Abner, having communed with the Israelites, is 
feasted by David, and dismissed. 22 Joab, returning 
from battk', is displeased with the king, and killeth 
Abner. 2^ David curseth Joab, 31 and mourneth for 
Abner. 

IVrOW there was long war between tla- 
J-\ house of Saul and the house of David : 
but "David waxed stronger and stronger, 
and the house of Saul waxed weaker and 
weaker. 

2 If And ""unto David were sons born in 
Hebron: and his first-born was Amnon. 
of ^Ahinoam the Jczrcelitess; 

3 And his second, iChileab, of Abigail 
the ^yife of Nabal the Carmelite ; and the 
third, ""Absalom the son of Maacah the 
daughter of Talmai king of 'Geshur; 

4 And the fourth, JAdonijah the son of 
Haggith ; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son 
of Abital ; 

5 And the sixth, Ithream, by Eglah Da- 
vid's wife. These were born to David in 
Hebron. 

6 Tf And it came to pass, while there 
was war between the house of Saul and 
the house of David, that Abner made him- 
self ''strong for the house of Saul. 

7 And Saul had a concubine, whose 
name teas ' Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah : 
and Ish-bosheth said to Abner, Wherefore 
hast thou gone in unto my father's con- 
cubine? 

8 Then was Abner very wroth for the 
words of Ish-bosheth, and said, Am "'la. 
dog's head, which " against Judah do show 
kindness this day unto the house of Saul 
thy father, to his brethren, and to his 
frrends, and have not delivered thee into 
the hand of David, that thou chargest me 
to-dav with a fault eoncernina this woman ? 



1> chaps. IS to 18. i chap. 13:37: 1 S.im. -27 : 8. j 1 Kuigs, 1 : .I, 
etc. k Prov. 21 : .10 ; I»a. 8: 9, 10. 1 chap. 21 : 8. m chap. 9:8: 



1 Sam. 24:14. n Ps.!. 2:1. 



14. Warriors often treat the butchering of men 
as n, matter of sport, and thus siiow themselves (o 
be children of him who was a murderer from the 
beginning, and who as a roaring lion w.alketh about 
seeking whom he mav devour. John 8 : 44 ; 1 Pet. 
5:8. 

21. Ambition to be distinguished as a warrior 
has often proved .a man's ruin, and from the height 
of expectation and effort he has fallen suddenly into 
an untimely grave. 

26. Want of success in war often disposes men to 
peace, and leads them to speak very ditferently 
about the evils of war from what they did when it 
began; and though they liave been the cau=e of their 
own troubles, they often try to throw the blame of 
them on others. 

CHAPTER III. 
3. Geshur ; a countrj- on the east of Jordan, near 
mount Hermon. 

397 



Abncr visits David, 



II. SAiMUEL, III. 



and is murdered by Joab. 



9 So "do God lo Abncr, and more also, 
except, as ''the Loud lialli sworn to David, 
even so I do to him ; 

10 To ''translate the kingdom from the 
house of Saul, and to set up the throne of 
David over Israel and over Judah, from 
Dan"* even to Becr-sheba. 

11 And he could not answer Abner a 
word again, because he feared him. 

1 2 *[[ And Abncr sent messengers lo Da- 
vid on his behalf, saying, Whose is the 
land? saying also. Make thy league with 
me, and behold, my hand shall he with 
thee, to bring about all Israel unto thee. 

13 T[And he said, Well; I will make a 
league with thee : but one thing I require 
of thee, *that is, ^Thou shalt not see my 
face, except thou first bring '^Michal Saul's 
daughter, when thou comest to see my face. 

14 And David sent messengers to ^Ish- 
bosheth Saul's son, saying, Deliver mc my 
wife Michal, which I espoused to me for 
a ''hundred foreskins of the Philistines. 

15 And Ish-boshcth sent, and took her 
from her husband, even from t Phaltiel the 
son of Laish. 

16 And her husband went with her 
along + weejiing behind her to 'Bahurim. 
Then said Abner unto him. Go, return. 
And he returned. 

17 11 And Abner had communication 
with the elders of Israel, saying. Ye sought 
for David ^ in times pa.st to he king over you : 

18 Now then do it: for the Lord hath 
spokenJ of David, saying. By the hand of 
my servant David I will save my people 
Israel out of the hand of the Philistines, 
and out of the hand of all their enemies. 

19 And Abner also spake in the ears of 
Benjamin :'' and Abner went also to speak 
in the ears of David in Hebron all thai 
seemed good to Israel, and that seemed 
good to the whole house of Benjamin. 

20 So Abner came to David to Hebron, 
and twenty men with him. And David 
made Abner and the men that vcre with 
him a feast. 

21 And Abncr .said unto David, I will 
arise and go, and 'will gather all Israel 
unto my lord the king, that they may make 
a league with Ihcc, and that thou maycsl 
reign over '"all that thy heart desircth. 
And David sent Abner away ; and he went 
in peace. 

22 ^ And behold, the servants of David 



• Riitlil:l7; IKin^K, Hl:2. k 1 Sam. l.-iilS: IB : 1-12 ; 2«: 17; 
Paa. 89:S!j-.3T. c 1 Cliron. 12: 2.1. A chap. 17:11; .Imls. 20:1; 1 
Kingii, 4:25. * Hcb. «(ijiin<7. cGcn. 43:n. f 1 Sam. 1 8 : 20, 2«. 
f rfiap. 2:10. k 1 Sam. 18: 2,5, 27. t Plinlli. 1 Sam. 2.%: 4 1. 
X Heb gning and loeeping. \ clinp. 19:16. \ H«-b. botli j/etter' 
ilaji and tht third day. ) vcr. i). k 1 Cliron. 12: 29. I vcr. 10, 12, 



and Joab came from pursuing a *« c!?2w: 
troop, and brought in a great spoil with 
them: but Abuer was not with David in 
Hebron; for he had sent him away, and 
he was gone in peace. 

23 When Joab and all the host that zca.s 
with him were come, they told Joab, say- 
ing, Abncr the son of Ner came to the 
king, and he hath sent him away, and he 
is gone in peace. 

24 Then Joab came to the king, and said. 
What hast thou done"? behold, Abner came 
unto thee; why is it that thou hast sent 
him away, and he is quite gone ? - 

25 Thou knowest Abncr the son of Ner, 
that he came to deceive thee, and to know 
thy "going out and thy coming in, and to 
know °all that thou doest. 

26 And when Joab was come out from 
David, he sent messengers after Abner, 
which brought him again from the well 
of Sirah : but David knew it not. 

27 And when Abncr was returned to 
Hebron, Joab took him p aside in the gate 
to speak with him " quietly, and sinolc him 
there under the fifth rih, that he died, for 
the blood of lAsahel his brother. 

28 T[And afterward when David heard 
it, he said, I and my kingdom are guiltless 
before the Lord for ever from the *blood 
of Abner the son of Ner : 

29 Let it 'rest on* the head of Joab, and 
on all his father'.s house; and let tlwjre 
not t fail from the house of Joab one that 
hath an "issue, or that is a 'leper, or that 
leaneth on a statT, or that falleth on the 
sword, or that lacketh bread. 

30 So Joab and Abishai his brother ."^lew 
Abner, because he had slain their brother 
Asahel at Gibcon in the battle. 

31 T[ And David said to Joab, and to all 
the people that were with him, " Pvciul your 
clothes, and "gird you with sackcloth, and 
mourn before Abner. And king David 
/m'/m.vc//" followed the tbier. 

32 And they buried Abner in Hebron : 
and the king lifted up his voice, and wept 
at the grave of Abner; and all the people 
wept. 

33 And Hie king lamented over Abncr, 
and said. Died Abner as a fool "diethl 

34 Thy hands tvere not bound, nor thy 
feet put into fetters: as a man falleth be- 
fore ^wicked men, so fellcst thou. And 
all the people wept again over him. 



m 1 Kings, II ;37. n I.Sam. 29:6. » Gen. 4J :;), 12. P rliaii" 
20:H, 10; 1 KinK».2:,'>. \\ Or, ptacealily. qclinp.2::3. « Hfli- 
bliiodt. r 1 Kings, 2:32,33. t Hcb. Oe cut off. • Lev, 15:2. 
t I.pv. 13:2, etc. udiap. 1:2, II; .losli. 7 : «. » Gen. 37:34. 
^ Heb. btd. w Proverbs 18: 7 ; Jer. 17 : 11. I Hcb. children of 
xiliqwly. 

13. Mic/irt/; 1 Sam. 2.'3:44. 26. TO e m;cW o/-StmA; supposed to have been 

16. Bahurim; in the tribe of Benjamin, not far near Hebron, 
from Jerusalem. | S'l. So fellcst thou ; by the liaml of an assassin. 

398 



Ish-bosheth is slain 



II. SAMUEL, IV. 



hy his servants. 



B,c!icNa' 35 And -when all the people came 
to cau.se David to^eat meat while it was 
yet day, David sware, saying, So do God 
to me, and more also, if I taste bread, 
or anght else, ''till the sun be down. 

36 And all the people took notice of it, 
and it *pleased them : as whatsoever the 
king did pleased all the people. 

37 For all the people and all Israel un- 
derstood that day that it was not of the 
king to slay Abner the son of Ncr. 

38 And the king said unto his servants. 
Know ye not that there is a prince and a 
great man fallen this day in Israel? 

39 And I am this day tweak, though 
anointed king; and these men the sons of 
Zeruiah he too "^hard for me: the '^Lord 
shall reward the doer of evil according to 
his wickedness. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1 The Israelites being troubled at the death of Ahiier, 
2 Baanah and Rechab slay Ish-bosheth, and bring his 
head to Hebron. 9 David causeth them to be slaiii, 
and Ish-bosheth's head to be buried. 

AND when Saul's son heard that Abner 
was dead in Hebron, his ''hands were 
feeble, and all the Israelites were troubled. 

2 And Saul's son had two men that iverc 
captains of bands: the name of the one 
7ims Baanah, and the name of the i other 
Rechab, the sons of Rimmon a Beerothite, 
of the children of Benjamin ; for ^ Beeroth 
also was reckoned to Benjamin : 

3 And the Beerothites fled to ''Gittaim, 
and were sojourners there until this day. 

4 And Jonathan, Saul's son, had a 'son 
that luas lame of his feet. He was five 
years old when the tidings came of Saul 
andJonathan outof JJezreel,and his nurse 



a oliap. 13 : 17. 1. Jmlg. 30 : 26. * Heh. 


uas good in their eyes. 


t Heb. lender, c chap. 19 : 6, 7. il 1 Ki 


ngs, 2:.% fi, .13; Psa. 


7:16; 2S:4: 62:1-2; 2 Tim. 4: H. o Kira 4 


4 ; laa. l.T : 7. f Mat 


2:S. t Heb. second. e Josll. IS : S.'). Ii 


Nell. 11:3!!. i cliap. 


»:X j 1 Sam. 211 : 1, 11. % Or, Merib.baal. 


I Cliron. 8:. 14; 9:40. 



39. Weak — too hard ; D.avid was not able then 
to punisli the murderers, on account of their great 
influence with tiie armv. 

INSTRITCTIONS. 

1. Though the accoinplishinent of divine promises 
may for a time be delayed, yet all things will con- 
spire to their ultimate fulfilment. 

2. Men who depart from the original constitution 
of G-od with regard to marriage, will find the way of 
transgressors liard, and may expect, through life, to 
reap the sad fruits of their folly. 

8. Men often revolt from the charge, and even 
from the suspicion of crime, who have no hesitation 
in committing it. 

12. Selfish and ambitious men when di.^appointed 
in one quarter will turn to another; and in prose- 
cuting their objects will sell themselves to the high- 
est bidder. 

18. Such is the wickedness of men, that they will 
often act in opposition to what they know to be the 
revealed will of G-od. 

"20. When those who have been our enemies pro- 
fess to become our friends, we may treat them as 
such, yet we cannot and ought not to repose full 



took liim up, and fled : and it came to pass, 
as she made haste to floe, that he fell, and 
became lame. And his name was ^ Me- 
phibosheth. 

5 And the sons of Rimmon the Beeroth- 
ite, Rechab and Baanah, went, and came 
about the heat of the day to the house of 
Ish-bosheth, who lay on a bed at noon. 

6 And they came thither into the midst 
of the house, as though they would have 
fetched wheat; and they smote him ''un- 
der the fifth rih : and Rechab and Baanah 
his brother escaped. 

7 For when they came into the house, 
he lay on his bed in his bedchamber, and 
they smote him, and slew him, and be- 
headed him, and took his head, and gat 
them away through 1hc plain all night. 

8 And they brought the head of Ish-bo- 
sheth unto David to Hebron, and said to the 
king, Behold the head of Ish-bosheth the 
son of Saul thine enemy, which sought ' thy 
life; and the Lord hath avenged my lord 
the king this day, of Saul and of his seed. 

9 TfAnd David answered Rechab and 
Baanah his brother, the sons of Rimmon 
the Beerothite, and said unto them. As the 
Lord liveth, who "'hath redeemed my soul 
out of all adversity, 

10 When" one told me, saying. Behold, 
Saul is dead, II thinking to have brought 
good tidings, I took hold of him, and slew 
him in Ziklag, *who thought that I would 
have given him a reward for liis tidings: 

1 1 How much more, when wicked men 
have slain a righteous person in his own 
house upon his bed? shall I not therefore 
now ° require his blood of your hand, and 
take you away from the earth? 



kcliap.2:23. 1 1 Sam. 19 : 2, Id, 11 ; 23:15; 2r.:29; Psa. 63 : 9, 
10; 71:24. m Gen. 48:16; ISam. 26:24; lKing9,l:29: Psa. 
31:7; 34:6,7,17. n chap. I : 2-lB. I\ He\>. he mat in hu oian 
eyef as a bringer of. * Or, which was the reward I gave him. 
o Gen. 9:. 1,6. 



confidence in them till thcjir professions are verified 
by their conduct. 

2.'). Hen may appear very anxious to accomplish 
one object, when they are looking principally at an- 
other ; and may denounce others for deception, while 
they are seeking to practise it themselves. 

39. None are so high in authority and power that 
they can commit murder with impunity. Though 
they should not be punished by men, tiie vengeance 
of G-od in due time will overtake them, and they 
will sink under his indignation. 1 Kings, 2 : 5, 6, 
32-3t. 

CHAPTER IV. 

2. lleeroth ; a.city near Gibeon. 

4. The tidings came; of the death of Saul and 
Jonathan. 

7. Through the plain; on the w.ay from Ma- 
hanaim to Hebron. 

10. 0/ie told me; chap. 1 : 2-16. 

11. A righteous person; innocent as to his 
murderers, one who had done them no wrong. 

IXSTRUCTIOXS. 
1. Those wlio oppose the cause of God and at- 
tempt to frustrate his designs, will soon find them- 
399 



David is made kim 



II. SAMUEL, V. 



over all Israel. 



12 And 'David commanded his young 
men, and Ihey slew them, and cut off their 
hands and their feet, and hanged them up 
over the pool in Hebron. Rut they took 
the head of Ish-bosheth, and buried it in 
the ''sepulchre of Abner in Hebron. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 The tribes' come to Hebron to anoint David over Israel. 
4 David's ajc. fi lie taking Zion from the Jebusites 
dwellethinit. 11 Hiram sendeth to David. 13Eleven 
sons are born to him in Jerusalem. 17 David, directed 
by God, smitelh the Philistines at Baal-perazim, 22 
and again at the mulberry-trees. 

THEN <^came all tlie tribes of Israel to 
David unto Hebron, and spake, saying, 
Behold, we ^arc thy bone and thy flesh. 

2 Also in time past, when Saul was king 
over us, •'thou wast he thatlcddest out and 
broughtest in Israel : and the Lord said to 
thee, Thou shalt "^fced my people Israel, 
and thou shalt be a £ captain over Israel. 

3 So all the elders of Israel came to the 
king to Hebron ; and king David made a 
league'' with them in Hebron before the 
Loud : and they anointed David king over 
Israel. 

4 ^ David urns thirty years old when he 
began to reign, «/irf he reigned' forty years. 

5 In Hebron he reigned ovcr.ludah sev- 
en years and six months: and in Jerusa- 
lem he reigned thirty and three years over 
all Israel and .ludah. 

6 ^And the king and his men went to 
.lerusalemJ unto the .lebusites, the inhab- 
itants of the land : which spake unto Da- 
vid, saying. Except thou take away the 
blind and the lame, thou shalt not come 
in hither : *thinking, David cannot come 
in hither. 

7 Nevertheless, David took the strong- 
hold of Zion: the''samej.s- the city of David. 

8 And David said on that day, Whoso- 



• chap. 1 : 15. bclmp.3:32. c 1 rhron. 1 1 : I. li .Tuils. 9 :'2. 
•■ 1 Siim. 18:13. f Psa. 78 : 70-7-2. B Is.i. .WM. HKinjs. U : 17 : 
Neh. 9:38. i 1 Cliron. 2'.): 27. j Josli. 1.5 : 63. * Or, sai/iliij, Da- 
vid thall not. k 1 KlnxK.S: I. \ Ot, Because they had said, even 
the blind and the Lime^ He shall not come into the house, f Hc-b, 



selves in great trouble, and exposed to evils whicli 
they cannot escape. 

4. Many are the dangers of life and limb to which 
little children .are expo.sed, and the kindness of God 
in their preservation and comfort is constant and 
great. 

6. Rulers who depend for support only on sol- 
diers, can never be safe : many who for a time fight 
for them will, when they hope to be gainers, light 
against them and even take their life. 

8. Men often glory in iniquity, aiid speak of trea- 
son, bloodshed, and murder as if they were pleasing 
to G-od, and entitled the perpetrators to the gratitude 
of their fellow-men. 

9. Men who trust in God will not commit sin to 
accomplish his or their purposes; nor will they re- 
ward it or connive at it in others. 

12. All who expect in the end to be gainers by the 
commission of sin, will meet with sure and woful 
disappointment. 
400 



ever getteth up to the gutter, and ^B.eiiow 
smitetli the Jebusites, and the lame and 
the blind, tliat are hated 6f David's soul, 
he .shall be chief and captain, t Wherefore 
they said. The blind and the lame shall 
not come into the house. 

9 So David dwelt in the fort, and called 
it the city of David. And David built 
round about from Millo and inward. 

1 And David went t on, and grew great, 
and the Lord God of hosts teas with him. 

11 T[And 'Hiram king of Tyre sent 
messengers to David, and cedar-trees, and 
carpenters, and ^'masons: and they built 
David a house. 

12 And David perceived that the Lord 
had established him king over Israel, and 
that he had exalted his kingdom for his 
people Israel's sake. 

13 ^ And David took him '"more concu- 
bines and wives out of Jerusalem, after 
he was come from Hebron : and there were 
yet sons and daughters born to David. 

14 And these te the names of those that 
were born unto him in Jerusalem; H Sham- 
muah, and Shobab, and Natlian, and Sol- 
omon, 

1 5 Ibhar also, and *Elishua, and Nepheg, 
and Japhia, 

16 And Elishama, and t Eliad*, and 
Eliphalet. 

17 1[But when the Philistines heard 
that they had anointed David king over 
Israel, all the Philistines came up to seek 
David; and David heard of it, and went 
down to the "hold. 

1 8 The "Philistines also came and spread 
themselves in the p valley of Rcphaim. 

19 And David 1 inquired of the Lord, 
saying. Shall I go up to the Philistines? 
wilt thou deliver them into my handl 
And the Lord said unto David, Go up : 

gnitlg aJld fffotvinij. I 1 Kitip*. .5: I. ^ Heb. hewers oj" the stone 
of the wall, m nelit. 17:17; 1 Chnm. 14:3. || Or. .SViimtri. 1 Cliron. 
3 -.a. * Or, Elishama. 1 Cliron. 3: fi. t Or, Bw/mrfo. I Cliron. 
14:7. n cliap. 23:14. o 1 Cbronicles, 11 : 15. p Jo.^liua 15:8. 
q James 4; 15. 



CHAPTER V. 

1. Then came all the trihes: David had before 
reigned over only the tribe of Judah. Ver. 5. 

2. Feed my people, ; this is the first time a ruler 
is spoken of in the Bible under the emblem of a 
shepherd. 

3. Made a league; an agreement ■with them, 
as to the manner lu which he would govern. 

6. Jerusalem : a portion of this city had con- 
tinued to be inhabited bv the Jebusites. T/ie blind 
and the lame ; the Jebusites thought themseh-es 
so strongly fortified that even the blind and lame 
could defend them from the assaults of David. 

9. j\lillo; supposed to have been a part of the 
fortress on mount Zion. 

11. Ti/re ; a city of the Phcnicians on the Medi- 
terranean, near tl^ northern border of Palestine. 

17. The hold; a fortress, or fortified place. 

18. Rephaim ; a valley south-west of Jerusa- 
lem, towards Bethlehem. 



He brins^eth the ark 



II. SAMUEL, VI. 



from Kirjath-jearim. 



i; "ion'' for I will doubtless deliver the ' new cart, and brought it out of the house 
Philistines into thy hand. of Abinadab that was in tGibeah: and 

20 And David came to Baal-perazim, Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, 
and David smote them there, and said, ' drave the new cart. 

The Lord hath broken forth upon mine | 4 And they brought it out of the house 
enemies before me, as the breach of wa- of Abinadab which u'as at Gibeah, tac- 
ters. Therefore he called the name of companying the ark of God: and Ahio 



that place *Baal-peraznn. 

21 And there they left their images, and 
David and his men t burned them. 

22 1[And the Philistines came up yet 
again, and spread themselves in the val- 
ley of Rephaim. 

23 And when David inquired of the 
Lord, he said. Thou shalt not go up; but 
fetch a compass behind them, and come 
upon them over against the mulberry- 
trees. 

24 And let it be, when thou hearest the 
sound of a going in the tops of the mul- 
berry-trees, that then thou shalt bestir 
thyself: for then shall the Lord go out 
before thee, to smite the host of the Phil 
istines. 

25 And David did so, as the Lord had com- 
manded him; and smote the Philistines 
from JGeba until thou come to Gazer. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 David fetcheth the ark from Kirjath-jearim on a new 
cart. 6 Uzzah is smitten at Perez-uzzah. 9 God 
blesseth Obed-edom for the ark. 12 David bringing 
the ark into Zion wiih sacrifices, danceth before it, 
for which Wichal despiseth him. 17 He placeth it 
in a tabernacle with great joy and feasting. "20 Mi- 
chal reproving David for his religious joy, is childless 
to her death. 

AGAIN, David gathered together all the 
chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand. 

2 And David arose, and went with all 
the people that were with him from ^ Baale 
of Judah,to bring up from thence the ark 
of God, II whose name is called by the name 
of the Lord of hosts that dwelleth hehueen 
the cherubim. 

3 And they *set the ark of God upon a 



* Tll.1t is. the plain of breaches. f Or. took them nwat/. 
i Gibeon. ICIiron. 14: 16. ij Or, Baalah, that i!>, Khiathieiirim. 
.IobIi. 15 : n, fiO. II Heb. <i< li'/iic/i the name, evpn the name of the 
tiORDof hosts, was called upon. * Heh. made to ride, f Or, Me 



20. Baal-perazim; meaning, the plain of 
breaches ; it was in the valley of Repliaiin. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

]. Those wlio wait upon God in humble suppli- 
cation and hearty obedience, will in due time, and 
in the best way, receive all whicli they need or can 
reasonably desire. 

3. A clear definition and correct understanding!; of 
the mutual relations and duties of rulers and people 
tend to promote the stability of civil government 
and to increase its usefulness. 

6. Dependence on creatures is followed by sore 
disappointment; while dependence on God secures 
his blessing and leads to glorious success. 

12. Rulers are appointed and entrusted with au- 
thority for the. good of the people, and are bound in 
all their acts to seek this end. 

13. Great prosperity increases the power of temp- 
tation, and often leads to great transgressions. 



went before the ark. 

.5 And David and all the house of Israel 
played before the Lord on all manner 
of instruments made of fir-wood, even on 
harps, and on psalteries, and on timbrels, 
and on cornets, and on cymbaLs. 

6 T[ And when they came to ^ Nachon's 
threshing-floor, L^zzah put 'forth his hand 
to the ark of God, and took hold of it ; for 
the oxen il shook it. 

7 And the anger of the Lord was kin- 
dled against Uzzah, and God smote him 
there for /i/,s- *error ; and there he died by 
the ark of God. 

8 And David was displeased, because 
the Lord had tmade a breach upon Uz- 
zah; and he called the name of the place 
Perez-uzzah + to this day. 

<> And David was ''afraid of the Lord 
that day, and said, How shall ihe ark of 
the Lord come to me? 

10 So David would not remove the ark 
of the Lord unto him into the city of Da- 
vid: but David carried it aside into the 
house of Obed-edom the Gittite. 

11 And the ark of the Lord continued 
in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite 
three months : and the Lord blessed Obed- 
edom, and all his household. 

12 T[ And it was told king DaA'id, saying. 
The Lord hath blessed the house of Obed- 
edom, and all that pertaincth unto him, 
because *= of the ark of God. So David 
went and brought up the ark of God from 
the house of Obed-edom into the city of 
David with gladness. 

13 And it was so, that when they that 



i Ueh.wilh. % Chidon. 1 Chronicles, 13:9. » Numbers 
'■*. II Or, stumbled. * Or, rashness, f Hebrew, broken, 
t Th.1t 18, the breach of Uzzah. b Ps.ihn 119: 1-20. c Mattliew 
IO:-l-2. 



17, Such is the wickedness of men, that the in- 
creasing power and prosperity of one nation awak- 
ens the jealousy and provokes the hostility of another, 
and leads them to seek their own elevation by the 
depression or ruin of their neighbors, 

20, One nation can gain no advantage over an- 
other, except such as God sees fit to grant, or for 
wise reasons to permit; and whenever he gives 
prosperity, he lays men under new obligations to 
obey him. 

CHAPTER VI. 

2. Baale; another name for Kirjath-jearim. 

6. Put forth his hand ; this was contrary to 
the command of God. Num. \ : 15-20. 

8. Pfiez-nzzah ; meaning, the breach of Uz- 
zah. 

10. The Gittite ; so called, it is supposed, from 
Gath-rimmon, the place of his birth or abode. 
401 



Great joy at the 



II. SAMUEL, VII. 



restoring of the ark. 



bare* the ark of llic Lord had gone six 
paces, he sacriliccd oxen and fatling.s. 

14 And David ''danced before the Lord 
■vvitli all his might ; and David was ■" girded 
^vit!l a linen cphod. 

15 So '' David and all the hou.se of Israel 
brought up the arkof the LoRDwith shout- 
ing," and \\\\\\ the sound of tlic trumpet. 

16 And as the ark of the Loud came into 
the city of David, Miehal Saul's daughter 
looked through a window, and saw king 
David leaping and dancing before the 
Lord; and slie despised him in her heart. 

17 If And ""they brought in the ark of the 
Lord, and set it in his place, in the midst 
of the tabernacle that David had *pitched 
for it: and David ^otTered burnt-otierings 
and peace-offerings before the Lord. 

18 And as soon as David had made an 
end of oflering burnt-offerings and pcace- 
ofl'erings, he ''blessed the people in the 
name of the Lord of hosts. 

19 And 'he dealt among all the people, 
even among the whole multitude of Israel, 
as well to the women as men, to every one 
a cake of bread, and a good piece of flesh, 
and a flagon of wine. So all the people 
departed every one to his house. 

20 ^ Then David returned to ^ bless his 
household. And Miehal the daughter of 
Saul came out to meet David, and said, 
How glorious was the king of Israel to- 
day, who ''uncovered himself to-day in 
the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, 
as one of the vain fellows t shamelessly 
uncovcreth himself! 

21 And David said unto Miehal, // was 
before the Lord, which ' chose me before 
thy father, and before all his house, to ap- 
point me ruler over the people of the Lord, 



• 1 Cliron. 1S;2, 15, etc. b Psa. M : 11 ; 150: 4. c 1 .Sam. 2: 18, 
28. *P.ia. 132. e Psa.47:l. f I Cljrnu. 16: I. ^ Heh. flretched. 
t. I Kings, 8: 5. fi3 k Ex. 39: « ; 1 Kill^s, 8 : ."W. i 2 Clirnn. :in, 2< ; 
.11:7, 8, 1 J; Nell. 8:10. j I'e.i. 30, title : ini : 2. k ver M.lti; 
ISaiii. Iil::4. i Or.oiienty. M S:iin. 13 : 14 ; lii: 2<!. t Or, of 
the hantimttids i>(' my .^ervanta. m 1 Sam. l.S : 35. "1 Cliron. 17 ; I. 



14. Danced be fore the Lord; as a manifesta- 
tion of joy in God and gratitude for his mercies. 

IG. Despised him ; she tliought he was degrad- 
ing himself. 

"21. It was before the Lord ; for the purpose of 
honoring him. 

TNSTKUCTIONS. 

2. Rulers and people should without any unne- 
cessary delay establish the worship of God, and 
regularly attend, according to his will, upon all the 
ordinances of his appointment. 

6. Irreverence and rashness in our approaches to 
God, and all disregard to his commands in our at- 
tendance on his worship, are ofTensive in his sight 
and expose men to his displeasure. 

10. The disple.-isure of God against those who 
profane his worship, should not lead any to neglect 
it, for that vi'ill also displeivse him ; while in prop- 
erly attending upon it, they will secure his favor and 
receive a great reward. 

IG. Ardent love to God and eng.agedne.ss in his 
worship, are thought by many to be suitable only 
402 



over Israel: therefore will I play *„-.c:m2: 
before the Lord. 

22 And I will yet be more vile than thus, 
and will be base in mine own sight: and 
of- the maid-servants which thou hast 
spoken of, of them shall I be had in honor. 

2.3 Therefore Miehal the daughter of Saul 
had no child '"unto the day of her death. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1 Nathan first approving the purpose of David to build 
God a house. 4 after by the word of God forbiddelh 
him. 12 He promiseth him benefits and blessings in 
his seed. 18 David's prayer and thanksgiving. 

AN D it eame to pass, " when the king sat 
in his house, and the Lord had "given 
hiin rest round aboutfrom allhis enemies ; 

2 That the king said unto Nathan the 
prophet. See now, I dwell in a house of 
cedar,P but the ark of God dwelleth within 
curtains. 1 

.3 And Nathan said to the king, Go, do 
all that is in thy heart; for the Lord is 
with thee. 

4 % And it came to pass that night, that 
the word of the Lord came unto Nathan, 
saying, 

5 Go and telH my servant David, Thus 
saith the Lord, Shalt ■'thou build me a 
house for me to dwell in? 

6 Whereas I have not dwelt in amy house 
since the time that I brought up the chil- 
dren of Israel out of Egypt, even to this 
day, but have walked in a tent and in a 
tabernacle. 

7 In all the places wherein I have 'walked 
with all the children of Israel spake I a 
word with any of the II tribes of Israel, 
whom I commanded to Meed my people Is- 
rael, saying, Why build ye not me a house 
of cedar? 



» Psa. 18,title. p cliap. .">: 11. q Ki. 26: 1, etc : 4U:21. 5 Heb. 
to mv servant, to David. r 1 Kings, .«i:3: 8:16-19; 1 Cliron. 
22:8; 28:3, etc. • Leviticus 26:11, 12; Deuteronomy 2^!: 14 ; 
2 Corinthians, 6 : 1,6. || judaet. 1 Clironirles, 17:6. t cliap. .S : 2 ; 
Psalm 78:71, 72; Jeremiah 3: 15; M.itthew 2 : 6 ; Acts ■.10:28; 
1 Peter, 5 : 2. 



for the weak and isrnorant; but they are in reality 
e.xalting and ennobling, and confer the highest and 
most durable honor upon persons of all descriptions. 

18. Acts of piety should never be dissociated from 
those of charity and mercy ; nor should the public 
duties of religion be disconnected from those of the 
family .and the closet ; but regular attendance on the 
one should be .a preparation for the conscientious 
and h.abitual performance of the other. 

21. Those who know by experience the pleasure 
and the benefit of fervently worshipping God in 
spirit and in truth, will not be deterred from it by 
the sneers and scoffs of friends or foes ; but will re- 
solve in his strength, whatever others may do, to be 
more and more devoted, for time and eternity, to his 
service. 

CHAPTER VII. 
2. Within curtains ; in the tabernacle. Chap 
6:17. 

G. Walked; manifested his visible presence. 
7. The tribes ; their rulers. 



God^s covenant 



II. SAMUEL, VII. 



with Bnvid. 



S.c'-.^i" 8 Now therefore so shalt thon .say 
unto my servant David, Thus saith the 
Lord of host.s, I took thee from the sheep- 
cote, from *folloAving the sheep, to be ruler 
over my people, over Israel : 

9 And I was "with thee whithersoever 
thou Aventest, and ''have cut off all thine 
enemies t out of thy sight, and have made 
thee a great "^ name, like unto the name of 
the great men that are in the earth. 

10 Moreover I will appoint a place for 
my people Israel, and will "^ plant them, 
that they may dwell in a place of their 
own, and move no more; ''neither shall 
the children of wickedness afflict them 
any more, as beforetime, 

1 1 And as since the time that I com- 
manded judges iohc over my people Israel, 
and have caused thee to rest from all thine 
enemies. Also the Lord telleth thee that 
he will make thee a '^house. 

1 2 ^ And when thy days be fulfilled, and 
thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will 
set up thy ^sced after thee, which shall 
proceed out of thy bowels, and I will 
establish his kingdom. 

13 He shall build a house for my name, 
and I will establish the throne of his king- 
dom for ever. 

14 I ''will be his father, and he sliall be 
my son. If he commit iniquity, I will 
chasten him with the rod of men, and with 
the stripes of the children of men: 

15 But ' my mercy shall not depart away 
from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I 
put away before thee. 

1 6 And thy house and thy kingdom shall 
be established for ever before thee : thy 
throneJ shall be established for ever. 

17 According to all these words, and 
according to all this vision, so did Nathan 
speak unto David. 

18 TIThen went king David in. and sat 
before the Lord, and he said, '' Who am I, 
Lord God"? and what is my house, that 
thou hast brought me hitherto"? 

19 And this was yet a small thing in 
thy sight, Lord God ; but thou hast 



» Heb. a/(cr. ■ cli;ip. 5 : 10 ; 1 S:im. 18: U. h Pan. 18: 37-«. 
t Heb. Jrom thy /act. c Gen. 12 : 2. d Vsx. U : •-' ; Jer. 24 : K. 
e Ezek. 28:24; Kev. 21:4. f I Kinsa, 1 1 : 38. e 1 Kings, 8: -.'O ; 
Pe.1. IM : II, 12. h Van. 8«: 20-.17. ■ I Kings, 11 : 13, 34. j .lolm 
12:34; Heb. 1:8. k Gen. 32: 10 ; Epli. 3:8. i Heb. laio. 1 Psa. 



11. ]\rai-e thee a housf ; give him posteiityto 
succeed him on the throne of Israel. 

14. With the rod of men ; gentlj' and for his 
good, as a kind father corrects his child. 

10. Thy throne shall be established ; it should 
not he taken away, as it was from Saul ; but should 
continue in David's family till the coming of Christ, 
who, as King of his people, will reign for ever. 

18. Sat before the Lord ; before the ark in the 
tabernacle. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. When men employ their seasons of rest and 
retirement in reviewing the goodness of God, and in 



spoken also of thy servant's house for a 
great while to come. And is this the 
manjicr^ of man, Lord God? 

20 And what can David say more unto 
thee? for thou. Lord God, knowest thy 
servant. 

21 For thy word's 'sake, and according 
to thine own heart, hast thou done all 
these great things, to make thy servant 
know them. 

22 Wherefore thou '"art great, Lord 
God : for "there is none like thee, neither 
is there any God besides thee, according to 
all that we liavc heard with our cars. 

2.3 And" what one nation in the earth is 
like thy people, even like Israel, whom 
God went to redeem for a people to him- 
self, and to make him a name, and to do 
for you great things and terrible, for thy 
land, before thy people, which thou re- 
decmcdst to thee from Egypt, from the 
nations and their gods? 

24 For P thou hast confirmed to thyself 
thy people Israel to he a people unto thee 
for ever: and i thou. Lord, art become 
their God. 

25 And now, Lord God, the word that 
thou hast spoken concerning thy servant, 
and concerning his house, establish it for 
ever, and do as thou hast said. 

26 And let thy name be magnified for 
ever, saying. The Lord of hosts is the God 
over Israel : and let the house of thy ser- 
vant David be established before thee. 

27 For thou, Lord of hosts, God of 
Israel, hast ^ revealed to thy servant, say- 
ing, I will build thee a house : therefore 
hath thy servant found in his heart to 
pray this prayer unto thee. 

28 And now,0 Lord God, thou art that 
God, and thy 'words be true, and thou hast 
promised this goodness unto thy servant: 

29 Therefore now II let it please theo to 
bless tiie house of thy servant, that it may 
continue for ever before thee : for thou, O 
Lord God, liast spoken it: and with thy 
blessing let the house of thy servant be 
blessed for "ever. 



138:2; Eiek. 36 : 22, 32. m ,)eremi.ih 10: fi, 7. n Uainh 4.'> : .% 
18,22. o Psnlm 147:20. p Deuteronomy 26:18. q Psalm 
48:14. 5 Hvh. opened the eav. Uuth 4 : 4 ; 1 Samuel, 3 : IS; 
Psalm 40: 6. r John 17: 17. WReh. be thou pltatcd and btett. 
• chap. 22:51. 



devising plans for the promotion of his glory, much 
benefit may be expected to result to them, to thei'T 
children, and to all who may feel their influence. 

8. A faithful review of the goodness of God to us 
is suited to fill us with humility and self-abasement, 
and also with adoring gratitude and praise. 

\'2. God, in giving parents reason to hope that 
when they die their children will imitate their good 
example, and execute the schemes of benevolence 
which they devise, greatly encourages them to call 
upon him, and to devote themselves with increasing 
fidelity to his glory and the good of their fellow- 
men. 

403 



Duvid subducth Philistines, 



II. SAMUEL, VIII. 



Moabitcs, and Syrians. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

1 David subdueth the Philistines and tlie Moabites. 
3 He smiteth Hadadezer, and the Syrians. 9 Toi 
sendeth Joram with presents to bless him. 11 The 
presents and the spoil Day'd dedicatelh to God. 14 
He putteth garrisons in Edom. 16 David's officers. 

AND "after this it came to pass, that 
David smote the Philistines, and sub- 
dued them : and David took *Metheg-am- 
mah out of the hand of the Philistines. 

2 And he smote ''Moab. and "^measured 
them with a line, casting them down to 
the ground ; even with two lines meas- 
ured he to put to death, and with one full 
line to keep alive. And .so the Moabites 
became David's ''servants, and brought 
gifts.'' 

3 % David smote also + Hadadezer, the 
son of Rchob, king of Zobah, as he went 
to recover his border at the river Eu- 
phrates. 

4 And David took + from him a thousand 
chariots,^ and seven hundred liorsemen, 
and twenty thousand footmen : and David 
houghed s all the chariot horses, but re- 
served of them for a hundred chariots. 

5 And when the Syrians of Damascus 
came to succor '' Hadadezer king of Zobah, 
David slew of the Syrians two and twenty 
thousand men. 

6 Then David put garrisons in Syria of 
Damascus : and the Syrians became ser- 
vants to David, and brought gifts. And 
the ' Lord preserved David whithersoever 
he went. 

7 And David took the shields of gold 
that were on the servants of Hadadezer, 
and brought them to Jerusalem. 

8 And from ^ Betah, and from H Berothai, 
cities of Hadadezer, king David took ex- 
ceeding much brass. 



a 1 Cliron. 18 : 1. ^ Or. the bridle of Ammah. b Num. 24: IT. 
t cliap. 12:31. d ver, fi, 14. » 1 Sam. 10:57: Van. 72:10. f Or, 
//ac/nrf:er. 1 Chron. 18:3. JOr.n/Aw. r 1 Cliron. 18:4. g .losli. 
ll:R,a h I Kings, 11 : 2.3. i ver. 14. % Or, Ti7.Aa«/i. \\ Or, Chun. 
1 Cliron. 18:8. * Tou. 1 Chron. 18:0. f lladoram. 1 Cliron. 
18: 10. X Heb. ask him of peace. % Heh. was a man of wars 



18. When the goodness of G-od leads men in hum- 
ble and devout thanksgiving to himself, it shows 
that they are ripening for increasing manifestations 
and e.xperience of his goodness for ever. 

24. To have Jehovah for their God, and to be gov- 
erned by his laws, is the best defence and highest 
glory, not only of individuals and families, but of 
states and nations. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1. Metheg-aynmah ; literally, the bridle of Am- 
mah ; meaning Gath and her towns. 1 Chron. 18:1. 

2. Moab ; a country on the southeast border of 
Palestine. Measureil he ; divided between those 
who were to be put to deatli, and those who were to 
be preserved alive. 

3. Zobah ; a part of Syria north-east of Pales- 
tine. 

4. Houghed; cut their hamstrings. 

T). Damascus; a distinguished city of Syria. 
E). llamath; a Syrian province, near Palestine. 
13. The valley of salt ; south of the Dead sea, 
404 



heard that David had smitten all the host 
of Hadadezer, 

10 Then Toi sent tJoram his son unto 
king David, to ? salute him, and to bless 
him, because he had fought again.st Ha- 
dadezer, and smitten him : for Hadadezer 
had ^ wars with Toi. And Joram il brought 
with him A'essels of silver, and vessels of 
gold, and vessels of brass: 

1 1 Which also king David did ' dedicate 
unto the Lord, with the silver and gold 
that he had dedicated of all nations which 
he subdued ; 

12 Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the 
children of Ammon, and of the Philis- 
tines, and of Amalek, and of the spoil of 
Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah. 

13 And David gat A/m a name when he 
returned from *smiling of the '' Syrians in 
the 'valley of salt, ^ being eighteen thou- 
sand men. 

14 T[And he put garrisons in Edom; 
throughout all Edom put he garrisons, and 
all they of "" Edom became David's ser- 
vants. And the "Lord preserved David 
whithersoever he Avent. 

15 And David reigned over all Israel; 
and David executed "judgment and justice 
unto all his people. 

1 6 And Joab the son of Zeruiah teas over 
the host; andPJehoshaphatthe son of Ahi- 
lud was t recorder; 

17 And iZadok the son of Ahitub, and 
Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were the 
priests ; and Seraiah was the J scribe ; 

18 And ''Benaiah the son of Jehoiada 
ivas over both the ' Cherethitcs and the 
Pelethitcs ; and David's sons were II chief 
rulers. 

tvi^i. II HfU. in hit hand were, i lKin^,7:51; I Chron. 18: 1 1 ; 
2fi:2fi. ' Heb. his smiting, k Psa. 60. 1 2 Kings, 14 : 7. t Or, 
slaving, in Gen. 27:29; Num. 24:18. n Psa. 1:41:4-8. o Psa. 
7i'.2; 8ii:14; Jer. 22: 15, Ifi; Amos 5: 1.5, 24. plKing9,4:3. 
± Or, remembrancer, or writer of chronicles, q 1 Cliron. 24:3. 
^ Or, teaetari/. r 1 Cliron. 18:17. «1 Sam. 30:14. || Or, princM. 



where David's general slew eigliteen thojisand 
Syrians, or Edomites united with the Syrians against 
him. 2 Kings, 14 : 7 ; 1 Chron. 18 : 12. 

18. The Cherethites and the Pelethites ; sup- 
posed to have been David's body-guards. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Some are called to meet death, while others 
who appeared to be equally exposed are preserved 
alive. But wlioever may be tlie instruments, and 
in whatever w;iy life is preserved, those who enjoy 
it are indebted for it to God, and are bound to de- 
vote it to him. 

6. However exposed men may be to danger in 
doing the will of God, by putting their trust in him 
they may be safe. He will protect them till their 
work on earth is accomplished, and then receive 
them to the rewards of grace in heaven. 

15. However successful in war any ruler may be, 
his chief glory consists in doing justly, loving mer- 
cy, walking humbly with Gotl, and advancing, as 
far as may be in his power, the highest good of 
mankind. 



His kindness to 



II. SAMUEL, X. 



Jonathan's son. 



CHAPTER IX. 



1 David by Zibasendeth for Mephibosheth. TForJon- 
athan's sake he entertaineth him at his table, and 
restoreth him all that was Saul's. 9 He maketh Ziba 
his farmer. 

A ND David said, Is there yet any that 
J:x. is left of the house of Saul, that I 
may show him ^kindness for Jonathan's 
sake ? 

2 And there was of the house of Saul 
a servant whose name teas ''Ziba. And 
when they had called him unto David, the 
king said unto him. Art thou Zibal And 
he said, Thy servant is he. 

3 And the king said. Is there not yet any 
of the house of Saul, that I may show the 
kindness of God unto himl And Ziba 
said unto the king, Jonathaii hath yet a 
son, which is "^ lame on his feet. 

4 And the king said unto him. Where is 
he ■? And Ziba said unto the king. Behold, 
he is in the house of ''Machir, the son of 
Ammiel, in Lo-debar. 

5 ^ Then king David sent, and fetched 
him out of the house of Machir, the son 
of Ammiel, from Lo-debar. 

6 Now when *Mephiboshetli, the son of 
Jonathan, the son of Saul, was come unto 
David, he fell on his face, a,nd did rever- 
ence. And David said, Mephibosheth. 
And he answered. Behold thy servant! 

7 IT And David said unto him. Fear not : 
for I will surely show thee kindness for 
Jonathan thy father's sake, and will re- 
store thee all the land of Saul thy father; 
and thou shalt eat bread at my table con- 
tinually. 

8 And he bowed himself, and said. What 
is thy servant, that thou shouldest look 
upon such a dead ''dog as I am ? 

9 ^ Then the king called to Ziba, Saul's 
servant, and said unto him, I have ""given 
unto thy master's son all that pertained 
to Saul and to all his house. 

10 Thou therefore, and thy sons, and 
thy servants, shall till the land for him, 
and thou shalt bring in the fruits, that thy 



a I Sam. 20 : 14 ; I'rov. -27 : 10. b chap. 16 : 1, 4. c clinp. 4 : 4. 
a eliap. 17 : 27. * Called Mtribbaal. 1 Cliron. 8 : 34. • cliap. 16:9. 
f chap. 19:29. e ver. 7, 13. h chap. 19:17. i I Chron. 8 : 34. 



CHAPTER IX. 

3. T/ie kindness of God; great and special 
kindness, according to his oath to Jonathan. 1 Sam. 
20 : 14-17. 

4. Lo-debar ; east of Jordan, in the tribe of Gad. 

7. T/u/ father; his grandfather. 

8. A dead dog ; an expression of great unwor- 
thiness of such distinguished favors. 

13. Was lame ; chap. 4 : 4. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. True piety will be grateful, not only to Grod 
the aiitlior of all good, but to those who imitate 
him. and through wliom his goodness is displayed ; 
and it will manifest itself, not only towards them, 
but when practicable towards others who are con- 
nected with them. 



master's son may have food to eat: but 
Mephibosheth thy master's sou shall eat 
breads al way at my table. Now Ziba had 
fifteen'' sons and twenty servants. 

11 Then said Ziba unto the king. Ac- 
cording to all that my lord the king hath 
commanded his servant, so shall thy ser- 
vant do. As for Mephibosheth, said the 
king, he shall eat at my table, as one of 
the king's sons. 

12 And JMephibosheth had a young son, 
whose name teas 'JNIicha. And all that 
dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants 
unto Mephibosheth. 

13 So ^lephibosheth dwelt in Jerusa- 
lem: for he did eat continually at»the 
king's J table ; and was lame on both his 
feet. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 David's messeno;ers, sent to comfort llanun the son of 
Nahash, are villanously entreated. 6 The Ammon- 
ites, strengthened by the Syrians, are overcome by 
Joab and Abishai. 15 Shobach, making a new sup- 
ply of the Syrians at Helara, is slain by David. 

AND '' it came to pass after this, that the 
king of the children of Ammon died, 
and Hanun his son reigned in his stead. 

2 Then said David, I will show kindness 
unto Hanun the son of Nahash, as his 
father showed kindness unto me. And 
David sent to comfort him by the hand of 
his servants for his father. And David's 
servants came into the land of the chil- 
dren of Ammon. 

3 And the princes of the children of Am- 
mon said unto Hanun their lord, tThink- 
est thou that David doth honor thy father, 
that he liath sent comforters unto thee ? 
hath not David rather sent his servants 
unto thee, to 'search the city, and to spy 
it out, and to overtlirow if? 

4 Wherefore Hanun took David's ser- 
vants, and shaved oft" the one half of their 
beards, and cut off their garments in the 
middle, '"eve/i to their buttocks, and sent 
them away. 

5 When they told it unto David, he sent 



j 2 Kings, 25 : 29. k 1 Chron. 19:1. t Heb. In thine eyes doth 
David? 1 Gen. 42:9. m Isa. 20: 4 ; 47 : 2.. 



7. The good character and conduct of parents, and 
their kindness, especially to the distressed, are often 
followed by great blessings on their children. 

8. A conviction of unworthiness, and true grati- 
tude for favors, tend greatly to increase the libe- 
rality and usefulness of the giver, and also the hap- 
piness and benefit of the receiver. 

13. Bodily infirmities, though a present calamity 
to those who suffer them, may be overruled for their 
highest good. 

CHAPTER X. 

2. His father shotved kindness itnto Tne ; this 
is supposed to have occurred while David was per- 
secuted by Saul. 

4. Shaved off the one half of their beards ; 
this was considered a great disgrace. 

405 



David dcfealcth the 



II. SAMUEL. XI. 



Ammonites and Syrians. 



to meet them, because the men were great- 
ly ashamed : and the king said, Tarry at 
Jericho until your beards be grown, and 
then return. 

6 TI Ami when the children of Ammon 
saw that they "stank before David, tlie 
children of Ammon sent and hired the 
Syrians'* of Beth-rehob, and the Syrians 
of Zoba, twenty thousand footmen, and 
of king ]Maacah a lliousand men, and of 
Ish-tob' twelve thoiisiuid men. 

7 And when David heard of it, he sent 
Joab, and all the host of the mighty "^ men. 

8 And the cliildren of Ammon came out, 
and put the battle in array at the enter- 
ing in of the gate: and the Syrians of 
Zoba,'' and of Rehob, and Ish-tob, and 
Maacah, irerc by themselves in the field. 

9 When Joab saw that the front of the 
battle was against him before and behind, 
he chose of all the choice men of Israel, 
and '■put them in array against the Syr- 
ians : 

10 And the rest of the people he deliv- 
ered into the hand of Abishai his brother, 
that he might put them in array against 
the children of Ammon. 

1 1 And he said. If the Syrians be too 
strong for me, then thou shalt help me: 
but if the children of Ammon be too strong 
for thee, then I will come and help thee. 

12 Re "^of good courage, and "let us play 
the men for our people, and for the cities 
of our God : and the Lord do '' that which 
seemeth him good. 

13 And Joab drew nigh, and the people 
that were with him, unto the battle against 
the Syrians: and they 'fled before him. 

14 And when the children of Ammon 
saw that the Syrians were fled, then fled 
they also before Abishai, and entered into 



a Gen. 34 : 30 ; F.x. 5:21; 1 Sam. 13:4. h chap. 8 : 3, 5. * Or, 
the men of Tuft. .luilg. 11 : 3. 5. c cliap. 23 : 8, J ver. 6. e .Tosh. 
8:21,22. f Dent. 31:6; Josh. l:fi, 7,9; Neh. 4:14. B 1 Sam. 
4:<); 1 Cor. 10:3. h Judg. 10: 1.5 ; lS:iir.. 3 : 18. i Psa. 68: 1, 12. 



5. Jericho ; one of the first towns to which they 
came after crossing the Jordan on tlieir return. 

6. ]ictli-re)ioI) — Zoba — Isli-toh ; places nortli 
and east of Palestine. King Maacah ; the king 
of Maacah. Ver. 8. 

8. The entering in of the gate ; (he gate of 
Medeba, a city in the tribe of Reuben; near the 
border of the Ammonites, and in tlieir possession. 
IChron. 10:7. 

n. lie fore and behind ; the Syrians on one side 
and tlie Ainmoniles on tlie other. 

IG. lladarezer ; the kin^ of Zoba. The river ; 
Euphrates. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Selfishmen, who intend when they can todeceive 
others, are ever re.ady to suspect that others intend to 
deceive them ; and those who he;irken to sucli coun- 
sellors, will be likely to be led by ihein into mischief. 

5. Those who in the dischar^re of duty are dis- 
honor.ably and basely treated, slioiild not be cast 
down by the indignities of the wicki-d. and should 
receive from their friends special kindness. 
40G 



the city. So Joab returned from *d.c.?^ 
the children of Ammon, and came to Je- 
rusalem. 

15 TfAnd when the Syrians saw that 
they were smitten before Israel, they 
gathered themselves together. 

16 And Hadarezer sent, and brought out 
the Syrians that icere beyond tflie river; 
and they came to Ilelam : and -Shobach 
the captain of the host of Hadarezer wf^i^ 
before them. 

17 And when it was told David, he gath- 
ered all Israel together, and passed over 
Jordan, and came to Hclam. And the 
Syrians set themselves in array against 
David, and fought with him. 

18 And the Syrians fled before Israel; 
and David slew the men of seven hundred 
chariots of the Syrians, and forty thou- 
sand ^ horsemen, and smote Shobach the 
captain of their host, who died there. 

19 And when all the kings ?/iaf u'crc ser- 
vants to Hadarezer saw that they were 
smitten before Israel, they made peace 
with Israel, and J served them. So the 
Syrians'' feared to help the children of 
Ammon any more. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 While .Toab besieged Rabbah, David committeth 
adultery with Bath-slieba. 6 Uriah, sent for by Da- 
vid to cover the adultery, would not go home neither 
sober nor drunken. 14 He carrieth to Joab the letter 
of his death. 18 Joab sendeth the news thereof to 
David. 'X> David taketh Bath-sheba to wife. 

AND it came to pass, II after the year 
was expired, at the time when kings 
go forth to battle, that David sent 'Joab, 
and his servants with him, and all Israel ; 
and they destroyed the children of Am- 
mon, and besieged Rabbah. But David 
tarried still at Jerusalem. 
2 ^ And it came to pass in an evening- 



t That is, Euphrates. % Or, Shnphach. 1 Chron. 19:16. % foot- 
men. 1 Chron. 19:18. j cli!lp.8:(j. k I'sa. 18:37,.38. |) Heb. at 
the return of the year. 1 Kings, 20 : 23, 26 ; 2 Chron. 36 : 10. II 
Chron. 20:1. 



6. Those who are most ready to give needless 
and wanton offence, are most backward to make 
amends for it, and often proceed from one offence 
to another till they are ruined. 

9. The fact that men are dependent on God, and 
that he gives success to whomsoever he will, does 
not supersede the necessity of tlieir using the most 
appropriate means; for by such means trod usually 
works, in accomplishing the end. 

12. A conviction and acknowledgment of depend- 
ence on God for success in the use of means, is one 
of the surest ways of obtaining it. 

16. All the efforts of men to thw.art the counsels 
of God, and to succeed in opposition to him, will be 
in vain, and in the end will recoil on themselves. 
Psa. 2 : 1-9. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1. The time v)hen kings go forth ; in the 
spring. Rabbah; the capital of the Ammonites. 

2. An evening-tide ; the latter part of the after- 
noon. 



David'' s adultery. 



II. SAMUEL, XI. 



Uriah is slain. 



bed, and walked upon the roof of the 
king's house : and from the roof lie ^ saw a 
woman washing herself; and the woman 
U'as very ''beautiful to look upon. 

3 And David sent and inquired after the 
woman. And one said, J.s not this *Bath- 
sheba, the daughter of tEliam, the wife 
of = Uriah the Hittite? 

4 And David sent messengers, and look 
her; and she came in unto him, and "^ he 
lay with her ; t for she was * purified from 
her uncleanncss : and she returned unto 
her house. 

5 And the woman conceived, and sent 
and told David, and said, I am with child. 

6 ^And David sent to Joab, .saying, 
Send me Uriah the Hittite. And Joab 
sent Uriah to David. 

7 And when Uriah was come unto him, 
David demanded of him Miow Joab did, 
and how the people did, and how the war 
prospered. 

8 And David said to Uriah, Go down to 
thy house, and "^wash thy feet. And Uriah 
departed out of the king's house, and there 
followed II him a mess of meat from the king. 

9 But Uriah slept at the door of the 
king's house with all the servants of his 
lord, and went not down to his house. 

10 And when they had told David, say- 
ing, Uriah went not down unto his house, 
David said unto Uriah, Camest thou not 
from /At/ journey ? why the^i didst thou not 
go down unto thy house? 

1 1 And Uriah said unto David, The ^ ark, 
and Israel, and Judah, abide in tents ; and 
my lord ''Joab, and the servants of my lord, 
are encamped in the open fields ; shall 'I 
then go into my house, to eat and to drink, 
and to lie with my wife 1 as thou livest, and 
as thy soul livcth, I will not do tliis tiling. 

12 And David said to Uriah, Tarry here 
to-day also, and to-morrow I will let thee 
depart. So Uriah abode in Jerusalem that 
day, and the morrow. 

13 And when David had called him, he 
did eat and drink before him ; and he made 
him 'drunk: and at even he went ''out to 
lie on his bed with the servants of his 
lord, but went not down to his house. 



■ , 


Gen. M : 2 


; .1 


nha 


:1 ; 


Pri.v 


fi:M 


; Mat b : -2?. 


b Pro 


v.31:nO. 


* B 


athshwi. 


1 Chron 


^■.f, 


t" 


.Am 


niet. c chap 


33:39 


<iPsa. 


SI : 


.)!.9. l.H 


l.-i 


t 


Or, 


and tohen she had jntrified hers 


elf, etc.. 


slic 


•eturned. 


e 


Lev. 


15: 


\\>-'!» 


: 18: 


19. % Hell. 


of the peace of. 


f G 


n. 18:4. 


II 


Heb. 


went out 


ajter 


e chap. 7 


2,6. 


I> chap. 



6 T/ie Hittite; one who descended from the 
Hittites, but had united with the Israelites. 

8. Wa.sk tlty feet ; this was the custom after 
travelling, as they wore sandals, or soles tied to 
their feef, and was a great refreshment. 

9 The yerraiits of hi.'! lonl ; probably the sol- 
diers who formed David's body-guard. 

11. I will not do this thing ; lie resolved to 
be as self-denying as were the soldiers in the field. 



14 ^ And it came to pass in the morn- 
ing, that David wrote a 'letter to Joab, 
and sent it by the hand of Uriah. 

15 And he wrote in the letter, saying. 
Set ye Uriah in the forefront of the *hot- 
test battle, and retire ye t from him, that 
he may be "\smitten, and die. 

16 And it came to jjass, when Joab ob- 
served the city, that he assigned Uriah 
unto a place where he knew that valiant 
men were. 

17 And the men of the city went out, 
and fought with Joab : and there fell .some 
of the people of the servants of David ; 
and Uriah the Hittite died also. 

18 T[Then Joab sent and told David all 
the things concerning the war; 

19 And charged the messenger, saying. 
When thou hast made an end of telling 
the matters of the war unto the king, 

20 And if so be that the king's wrath 
arise, and he say unto thee. Wherefore 
approached ye so nigh unto the city when 
ye did fight "? knew ye not that they would 
shoot from the wall] 

21 Who smote "Abimelech the son of 
Jerubbesheth?+ did not a woman cast a 
piece of a millstone upon him from the 
wall, that he died in Thebez? why went 
ye nigh the wall? Then say thou. Thy 
servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also. 

22 •[[ So the messenger Avent, and came 
and showed David all that Joab had sent 
him for. 

23 And the messenger said unto David, 
Surely the men prevailed against us, and 
came out unto us into the field, and we 
were upon them even unto the entering 
of the gate. ^ 

24 And the shooters shot from off the 
wall upon thy servants ; and some of the 
king's servants be dead, and thy servant 
Uriah the Hittite is dead also. 

25 Then David said unto the messenger, 
Thus shalt thou say unto Joab, Let not 
this thing Ulisplease thee, for the "sword 
devourcth Hone as well as another: make 
thy battle more strong against the city, 
and P overthrow it: and encourage thou 
him. 

26 1[ And when the wife of Uriah heard 



20 : 6. i 


Psa. 137:3: Isa. 22: 12-14. j Gen. 19 :a3-:t.'>; Hali.2:l.'>. 


k ver. 9 


1 1 Kingo, 21 : St, 9. * Heb. slronQ. f Heb./.om nfin: 


m chap. 


12:9. n Judg. 9 : 53. % Jtrubhaal. ^v^\g. (,:3i. % Heb. 


*<; evil 


n thine eyes, o Eccl. 9:2, 3, 12. \\ Heb. «o and such. 


P cliap. 


12:26. 



21. Jp.rvhhesheth ; Jerubbaal, Gideon. Judg. 
6:3-2; 8:.35; 9:.53. 

25. This thing; the loss of his men. 
INSTRUCTrOXS. 

1. Great prosperity, while it increases the power 
of temptation, lessens the firmness of resistance, 
and is often followed by the commission of the 
greatest crimes. 

4. Neither mercies nor trials, privileges nor ob- 
407 



N^athan^s paraUe. 



II. SAMUEL, XII. 



David's confession. 



that Uriah her husband was dead, she 
mourned for her husband. 

27 And when the mourning was past, 
David sent and fetched her to his liouse, 
and she became his "wife, and bare him 
a son. But the thing that David had done 
displeased* the ""Loud. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1 Nathan's parable of the ewe-lamb causeth David to 
be liis own jud^e. 7 David, reproved by Nathan, 
confessoth hissin, and ispardoned. 15 Davidmourn- 
eth and praycth lor the child, while it lived. 24 Solo- 
mon is boru, and named Jedidiah. 2S David taketh 
Rabbah, and tortureth the people thereof. 

AND the Lord sent Nathan unto David. 
And "^he came unto him, and ''said 
unto him. There were two men in one 
city ; the one rich, and the other poor. 

2 The rich man had exceeding many 
flocks and herds : 

3 But the poor man hath nothing, save 
one little ewe-lamb, which he had bought 
and nourished up : and it grew up together 
with him, and with his children; it did 
cat of his own t meat, and drank of his 
own cup, and lay in his ^ bosom, and was 
unto him as a daughter. 

4 And there came a "^ traveller unto the 
rich man, and he spared to take of his 
own flock and of his own herd, to dress 
for tlie wayfaring man that was come 
unto him; but took the poor man's lamb, 
and dressed it for the man that was come 
to him. 

5 And David's anger was greatly kin- 
dled against the man ; and he said to Na- 
than, As the Lord liveth, the man that 
hath done this thing ^ shall surely die: 

6 And he shall restore the lamb sfour- 



• rhap. 12:9; Deut. 1i:1% * Heb. io<i» evil in the tyci of. 
k lCliron.21:7. c Psa. 51, title, d cliap. 14:5,etc.; 1 Kinss,20: :!6, 
41 : Isa. 5:1-7; Mat. 21 : 33, etc. i Lulle 15:11, etc ; Ifi : 19, etc. 
tHeb. mor«/. « I'rov. 5: 18, 19. fGen. 18:2. 7. i OT,\aworthy 
to die, or,\e a ion of death. 1 .Sam. 26: 16. B Ex. 22: 1 ; l.iike 19 : 8. 
1> 1 Sam. I fi : 13. i Psa. 18, title, j cliap. 5 : 5. k 1 Sam. 16 : 1 9. 



li;;ations, reputation nor usefulness, vi-ill keep back 
the human heart, whenleftto itself, from the commis- 
sion of the grossest and mo.st. enormous wickedness. 

6. The commission of one .<in increases the temp- 
tation to commit another and another, and, without 
the grace of G-od, the soul will go on adding sin to 
sin Tot ever. 

8. All attempts to hide iniquity, and to prevent 
the final disclosure of it, are vain. They may for a 
time screen it from the view of men, but God will 
at Icnjrth bring it all to light. Mat. 10 : -20. 

II. The soul under the blinding, polluting, and 
hardening power of .>;in, can plot the ruin of a most 
devoted and self-denying friend, and no generous 
emotion keep it back from the guilt of shedding, 
with cool deliberation, a benefactor's blood. 

2-5. Death-like moral insensibility is one of the 
fruits of allowed and continued iniquity; the soul un- 
der its influence can contemplate with indill'erence, 
and attempt to smooth over and even rejoice in, the 
foulest transgression. Let him that thinketh he 
standwth, take heed lest he fall. He who trusteth in 
his own heart is a fool. Prov. 28 : 26 ; 1 Cor. 10 ; 12. 
408 



fold, because he did this thing, and Bci imI: 
because he had no pity. 

7 T[ And Nathan said to David, Thou art 
the man. Thus saith the Lord God of Isra- 
el, I ''anointed thee king over Israel, and 
I 'delivered thee out of the hand of Saul ; 

8 And I gave thee thy master's house, 
and thy master's wives into thy bosom, 
and J gave thee the house of Israel and of 
Judah ; and if that had been too little, I 
would moreover have given unto thee 
such and such things. 

9 Wherefore ''hast thou 'despised the 
commandment of the Lord, to do evil in 
his sight? thou hast '"killed Uriah the 
Hittite with the sword, and hast taken his 
wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him 
with the sword of the children of Ammon. 

10 Now ° therefore the sword shall nev- 
er depart from thy house; because thou 
hast despised me, and hast taken the wife 
of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife. 

1 1 Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will 
raise up evil against thee out of thine own 
house, and I will "take thy wives before 
thine eyes, and give them unto thy neigh- 
bor, and he shall lie with thy wives in the 
sight of this sun. 

12 For thou didst it secretly : but I will 
do this thing before all Israel, and before 
the sun. 

13 And David said unto Nathan, I have 
sinned P against the Lord. And Nathan 
said unto David, The Lord also hath put 
awayi thy sin; thou shall not die. 

14 Howbeit, because by this deed thou 
hast given great occasion to the enemies 
of the Lord to ■'blaspheme, the child also 
that is born unto thee sl\all surely die. 



I Num.l5:31 ; l8a.5:24; Amos2:4. m di.ap. H : 15-27. n Amos 
7:9; Mat. 26: 52. o chap. 16:22 ; Deut 28 : 30. p cliap. 24 : 10 : 
Job7:20; 33:27,28; P8a.32:5; 51:4: Prov. 28:13. qP?a. 
130:3,4; Isaiah 6:. 5-7; Micali7:18: Zecliariali 3 : 4 ; IJolm, 
1:7,9; 2:1; Revelations 1:6. r Isaitih 52 : 5 ; Eiekiel36:20, 23; 
Rom. 2 : 24. 



CHAPTER XII. 

I. Nathan ; a prophet of the Lord. Ch. 7 : 2. 
6. Fourfold; Ex. 22:1. 

8. I gave thee ; God so ordered his providence, 
that David came into possession of the things men- 
tioned. 

9. Thou hast killed; a man is said to do, and 
is held responsible for doing, what he causes to be 
done. 

10. Tlie sicord shall never depart ; there would 
be war and various distresses in his family to the 
end of his life. Ver. 11 . Than hast despised me; 
by regarding his own sinful gratification more than 
the will of (.rod. 

II. / will take thy wives ; chap. 16 : 21, 22. 

12. I irill do this thing; it would take place 
in the course of providence, through the wickedness 
of Absalom, in violation of God's law, and to the 
groat distress of David. 

13. Put avny thy sin ; so forgiven it, in view 
of his penitence, as e.vpre.ssed in Psalm 51, that ho 
should not be put to death according to the law. 
Lev. 20 ; 10. 



David's child dieth. 



II. SAiMUEL, XII. 



Solomon in born. 



B.""m4°- 1-5 IT And Nathan departed unto 
his house. And the Lord struck the child 
that Uriah's wife bare unto David, and it 
was very sick. 

16 David therefore besought God for the 
child; and David *fasted, and went in, 
and 'lay all night upon the earth. 

17 And the elders of his house arose, 
andii'cnt to him, to raise him up from the 
earth : but he would not, neither did he 
eat bread with them. 

18 And it came to pas.s on the seventh 
day, that the child died. And the servants 
of David feared to tell him that the child 
was dead : for they said. Behold, while 
the child was yet alive, we spake unto 
him, and he would not hearken unto our 
voice: how will he then tvex himself, if 
we tell him that the child is dead ] 

19 But when David saw that his ser- 
vants whispered, David perceived that the 
child was dead : therefore David said unto 
his servants, Is the child dead 1 And they 
said. He is dead. 

20 Then David arose from the earth, 
and washed, and anointed himself, and 
changed his apparel, and came into the 
house of the Lord, and ''worshipped : then 
he came to his own house ; and when he 
required, they set bread before him, and 
he did eat. 

21 Then said his servants unto him. 
What thing is this that thou hast done? 
thou didst fast and weep for the child, 
while it was alive; but when the child 
was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread. 

22 And he said, While the child was yet 
alive, I fasted and wept : for I said, *= Who 



* Ueb./atttdafast. a cliap. 13 : 31. i Heh. do hurt ta. b Job 
1:20. c l3a. 38 : 2. 3 : .Ioel2:14: Jonali 3 : 'i. d .Iol> 7:8-10. 
e I Chron. 22 : 9. j That is, lielovcd of (he I.obd. .Veil. 1.3 : 26. 



15. Struck the child ; with sore disease. 

16. Lay all night upon the earth ; in token 
of his sorrow for sin, his deep humiliation, and his 
earnest desire that the child, if consistent with the 
•will of God, might live. 

18. Yex ; distress and injure. 

20. Washed and anointed — changed his ap- 
parel, and — worshipped ; in token of his hearty 
submission to the manifested will of G-od. 

2-1. Solomon; meaning, peaceable. 

2^. Jedldiah ; meaning, beloved of the Lord. 

27. The city of waters ; that part of the city 
which supplied the other parts with water; of course 
the whole must soon surrender. 

31. Under saivs ; to severe labor with, or to tor- 
ture under these instruments. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Men may try ever so much to hide their ini- 
quity, but all who commit it may be sure that in 
due time their sin will find them out. 

2. Much knowledge of men and much skill are 
requisite in order most effectually to administer 
reproof, especially to rulers and men of high rank ; 
and few methods are more suited to this, than wisely i 
selected and grapkic illustrations. 

5. Those most indulgenttotheirownsins.are often 
most severe against the supposed sins of others. I 



! can tell ivhether God will be gracious to 

I me, that the child may live ? 

I 23 But now he is dead, wherefore should 
I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall 
go to him, but ''he shall not return to me. 

24 ^And David comforted Bath-sheba 
his wife, and went in unto her, and lay 
with her: and she bare a son, and he 
called his name '" Solomon : and the Lord 
loved him. 

25 And he sent by the hand of Nathan 
the prophet ; and he called his name +Jed- 
idiah, because of the Lord. 

26 ^And'Joab fought against sRabbali 
of the children of Ammon, and took the 
royal city. 

27 And Joab sent messengers to David, 
and said, I have fought against Ilabbah, 
and have taken the city of waters. 

28 Now therefore gather the rest of the 
people together, and encamp against the 
city, and fake it : lest I take the city, and 
it^ be called after my name. 

29 And David gathered all the people 
together, and went to Kabbah, and fought 
against it, and took it. 

30 And he took their king's crown from ofl' 
his head, the weight wliereof u-as a talent 
of gold with the precious stones : and it was 
set on David's head. And he brought forth 
the spoil of the city H in great abundance. 

31 And he brought forth the people that 
icere therein, and put them under saws, and 
under harrows of iron, and under a.xes of 
iron, and made them pass through the brick- 
kiln : and thus did he unto all the cities of 
the children of Ammon. So David and 
all the people returned unto Jerusalem. 



f ICIiron. 20:1. g Deut 3: 
it. II Heb. very great. 



11. § Heb. my i 



6. Pity for those in distress is a duty so obvious, 
lovely, and universal, that those who have been 
most hardened and cruel themselves, when they see 
in others only a sh.adow of their own b;vseness, are 
ready indignantly to condemn it. 

7. To rulers, as well as all other classes of peo- 
ple, the ministers of Crod, when called to it. should 
make a plain, personal, and faithful application of 
his truth. Neither fear nor favor should hinder 
them from pointing out the wickedness of the most 
exalted sinner, and declaring. Thou art the man. 

9. G-reat mercies bestowed on any one exceed- 
ingly aggravate the guilt of his transgressions, and 
render him deserving of an aggravated punishment. 

11. God often causes men to read their sins in 
their punishment, and what they did in secret is 
punished before the world. 

13. One of the first things in doing good to sin- 
ners, is to make them sensible of their sins, and lead 
them to condemn themselves, and feel that God 
would be just should he punish them as they deserve. 

l-l. Though the truly penitent, however great their 
transgressions, will for Chri.st's sake, and through 
faith in him, be forgiven, yet many distressing 
effects of their sins they may experience to the end 
of life. 

20. The true penitent, however he may desire and 
409 



Amnon forceth 



II. SAMUEL, XIII. 



Tamar his $ister. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

1 Amnon loving Tamar, by Jonadab's counsel feigning; 
himself sick, ravisheih her. 15 He hateth her, and 
shamefully tnrneth her away. 19 Absalom enter- 
taineth her, and concealeth his purpose. SJJ At a 
sheep-shearing, among all the king's sons, he killeth 
Aranoii. ;J0 David grieving at the news is comforted 
by Jonadab. 37 Absalom fleeth to Talmai at Geshur. 

AND it came to pass after this, that Ab- 
salom the son of David had a fair sis- 
ter, whose name u'as * Tamar; and Am- 
non the son of David loved her. 

2 And Amnon was so vexed, that '"he 
fell siek for his si.ster Tamar; for she was 
a virgin ; and *Amnon thought it hard for 
liim to do any thing to her. 

3 But Amnon had a friend, whose name 
tm.9 Jonadab, the son of t Shimeah David's 
brother: and Jonadab vas a very subtle 
man. 

4 And he said unto him.Whyar/ thou, 
being the king's son, Jlean ^from day to 
day? wilt thou not tell mcl And Am- 
non said unto him, I love Tamar, my 
brother Absalom's sister. 

5 And Jonadab said unto him. Lay thee 
down on thy bed. and make thyself sick: 
and when thy father cometh to see thee, 
say unto him, I pray thee, let my sister 
Tamar come, and give me meat, and dress 
the meat in my sight, tliat I may see it, 
and eat it at her hand. 

6 H So Amnon lay down, and made him- 
self sick: and when the king was come 
to see him, Amnon said unto the king, I 
pray thee, let Tamar my sister eome, and 
make me a couple of ''cakes in my sight, 
that I may eat at her hand. 

7 Then David sent home to Tamar, say- 
ing. Go now to thy brother Amnon's house, 
and dress him meat. 

8 So Tamar went to her brother Amnon's 
house; and he was laid down. And she 
took il flour, and kneaded it, and made cakes 
in his sight, and did bake the cakes. 

9 And she took a pan, and poured them 
out before him; but he refused to eat. 
And Amnon said, Have out all men from 
me. And Ihcy went out every man from 
him. 

10 And Amnon said unto Tamar, Bring 
the meat into the chamber, that I may eat 
of thy hand. And Tamar took the cakes 
which she had made, and brouslit them 
into the chamber to Amnon her brother. 



« 1 Cliron. S : •). b 1 King«, 21 : 4 : J Cor. 


7:10 


* Heb. it ton. 


marvetlouM, or hidfUn in the tytt of Amnon. 


t Shn 


mmah. 1 Sam. 


Irt: !). t Hrl>. thin. \ Hell, morning Av m 


orntnff. 


c Gen. IH : 6. 


\\nr,paUe. d Gcn.39: IJ. » Heb.AumAfc 


»if. Ger 


.31:2. tHeb. 


\t ought not 10 to be done, r Lev. )8 : ',<, 1 1 ; 


•;o:ir. 


f Gen. :t4:7; 



pray th.at his distresses may lie removed or lessened, 
will heartily submit to those that <j-od lays upon him; 
feeling that God doeth all things well, and saying. 
Not as T will, but as thou wilt. Though he slay me, 
yet will 1 trust in him. Mat. 26 : 39 ; Job 13 : 15. 
410 • 



11 And when she had brought *b.^:^I- 
them unto him to cat, he ""took hold of 
her, and said unto her, Come lie with 
me, my sister. 

12 And she answered him, Nay, my 
brother, do not *foree me ; for t no such 
thing ought to be done in * Israel : do not' 
thou this '^ folly. 

13 And I, whither shall I cause my 
shame to go? and as for thee, thou shalt 
be as one of the fools in Israel. Now 
therefore, I pray thee, speak unto the king; 
for he will not withhold me from thee. 

14 Howbcit he would not hearken unto 
her voice : but, being stronger than she, 
forced s her, and lay with her. 

15 ^Then Amnon hated her * exceed- 
ingly; so that the hatred wherewith he 
hated her «'o.s- greater than the love where- 
with he had loved her. And Amnon said 
unto her. Arise, be gone. 

16 And she said unto him, There is no 
cause: this evil in sending me away is 
greater than the other that thou didst unto 
me. But he would not hearken unto her. 

17 Then he called his servant that min- 
istered unto him, and said. Put now thi.s 
tvoman out from me, and bolt the door 
after her. 

1 8 And she had a garment of divers *■■ col- 
ors upon her: for 'with such robes were 
the king's daughters tJiat wt?c virgins ap- 
parelled. Then his servant brought her 
out, and bolted the door after her. 

19 H And Tamar put^ashes on her head, 
and rent her garment of divers colors that. 
was on her, and laid her ''hand on her 
head, and went on crying. 

20 And Absalom her brother said unto 
her, Hath^Amnon thy brother been with 
thee 1 bvit hold now thy peace, my sister : 
he is thy brother; H regard not this thing. 
So Tamarremained *desolatc in herbroth- 
er Absalom's house. 

21 1[ But when king David heard of all 
these things, he was very wroth. 

22 And Absalom spake unto his brother 
Amnon 'neither good nor bad : for Absa- 
lom "'hated Amnon, because he had forced 
his sister Tamar. 

23 ^ And it came to pass after two full 
years, that Absalom had "sheep-shearers 
in Banl-hazor, which is beside Ephraim ; 
and Absalom invited all the king's sons. 

.liidR. I9:2:r; Prov. 5:2J, 23. K Deut. 22 :2.^ J Heb. loiM jr«i« 
hatred ffreatlf). h Gen. W : 3 ; Judg. 5:30. > Pan. 45:l:i, H. 
j chap. 1:2; .I<isli. 7 : R ; Job 2:12. k .ler. 2 : 37. % Heb. Aminnn. 
\\ He\y tet not thy heart. * lieh. and desolate. IGcn. 24:fi0; 
31:24. m Lev. 19: 1 7, 18. n Gen.38: 12, 13; 1 Sam. 23: 4, 3H. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

2. Thought it hard ; found it difficult. 

.'5. ilfa/C-(^; feign, pretend to be. Dress the meat ; 
cook him some food ; pretending that she could do 
it better than any one else. Ver. 6-8. 



Absalom killeth Amnon, 



II. SAMUEL, XIV, 



and Jlecth to Grshur. 



B.' ""S' 24 And Absalom came to the king, 
and said, Behold now, thy servant hath 
sheep-shearers ; let the king, I beseech 
thee, and his servants go with thy servant. 

25 And the king said to Absalom, Nay, 
my son, let us not all now go, lest we be 
chargeable unto thee. And he pressed him : 
howbeit he would not go, but blessed him. 

26 Then said Absalom, If not, I pray 
thee, let my brother Amnon go with us. 
And the king said unto him, Why should 
he go with thee'? 

27 But "Absalom pressed him, that he let 
Amnon and all the king's sons go with him. 

28 ^ Now Absalom had commanded his 
servants, saying, Mark ye now when Am- 
non's heart is ^ merry with wine, and when 
I say unto you. Smite Amnon ; then kill 
him, fear not: *have not I commanded 
you] be courageous, and be t valiant. 

29 And the servants of ''Absalom did 
unto Amnon as Absalom had commanded. 
Then all the king's sons arose, and every 
man i gat him up upon his '' mule, and fled. 

30 1[And it came to pass, while they were 
in the way, that tidings came to David, 
saying, Absalom hath slain all the king's 
sons, and there is not one of them left. 

3 1 Then the king arose, and "" tare his gar- 
ments, and ""lay on the earth ; and all his 
servants stood by with their clothes rent. 

32 And sJonadab, the son of Shimeah 
David's brother, answered and said. Let 
not my lord suppose that they have slain 
all the young men the king's sons ; for 
Amnon only is dead : for by the 5 appoint- 
ment of Absalom this hath been H deter- 



• Prov. 


26 : 24-26. 


1. .T 


i,U. 


19:6,9. 


22; Rutb 3:7; 


1 S 


im. 


55:36; Esther 


:in; 


Psa. 


104 


1,1 ; Keel 


9:7; 10 


19. * 


Or, 


mil 


you not, 


since 


/ ha 


•e comntf 


nded poi 


.' .Tosli. 


1:0. 


t I 


el>. 


sons of V 


alor. 


<■■ Pr 


n\: 2f 


: 12 


t Heh 


rode, il 


1 Kings, I 


Xi. 


e Hiap. I 


11. 


f cliap. 12 


IB. 


g ver. .3. 


% Heb. 


mouth 


11 


Or, 



mined from the day that he forced his 
sister Tamar. 

33 Now therefore let not my lord the 
king *> take the thing to his heart, to think 
that all the king's sons are dead : for Am- 
non only is dead. 

34 But Absalom 'fled. And the young 
man that kept the watch lifted up his 
eyes, and looked, and behold, there came 
much people by the way of the hill-side 
behind him. 

3.5 AndJonadab said unto the king. Be- 
hold, the king's sons come : *as thy ser- 
vant .said, so it is. 

36 And it came to pass, as soon as he had 
made an end of speaking, that, behold, the 
king's sons came, and lifted up their voice 
and wept : and the king also and all his 
servants wept t very sore. 

37 HBut Absalom fled, and went to^Tal- 
mai, the son of + Ammihud, king of Geshur. 
And David mourned for his son every day. 

38 So Absalom fled, and went to "^ Ge- 
shur, and was there three years. 

39 And the soul of king David ^longed 
to go forth unto Absalom : for he was 
comforted' concerning Amnon, seeing he 
was dead. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1 Joab, suborning a widow of Tekoah, by a parable to 
incline the king'.s heart to fetch home .Absalom, bring- 
eth him to Jerusalem. '25 Absalom's beauty, hair, 
and children. 2S After two years, Absalom by Joab 
is brought into the king's presence. 

"iYpOW Joab the sou of Zeruiah perceived 
J_N that the king's heart wm: toward "'Ab- 
salom. 



settled. h chap. 19 : ly. i ver. :18. * Hebrew, according to the 
word of thy servant. f Hebrew, ici7/i a great weeping greatly. 
i rlmpter3:3. f Or, J mmihur. k chapter 14 : 23. % Hebrew, 
was consumed. Psalm 84 : 2. I Genesis 37 : 35 ; 38 : 12. ni chapter 
13 : 39. 



21. Sheep-shearers ; at sheep-shearing it was 
customary to make a feast and invite friends. 

37. r«/7«fl?'; Absalom's grandfather. Chap. 3:3. 

39. Comforted concerning Amnon; was less 
grieved at his death, than at the absence of Ab- 
salom. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Great beauty, great honor, high station, and 
much property, are often the occasion of ruin to the 
possessor. They should therefore not be coveted. If 
bestowed, they should be employed to the honor of 
Grod and the good of men ; and if not bestowed, we 
should be contented without them. 

2. Were the power of men equal to their wicked- 
ness, virtue would be constantly outraged, and earth 
become an emblem of hell. 

3. Wicked men in high stations are ordinarily 
.surrounded by subtle flatterers, who Labor to secure 
their favor by tempting them to the commission of 
sin, and thus become the means of their destruction. 

6. No deception is so gross, and no wickedness 
so horrible, that licentious men in high stations will 
not practise it with cool deliberation and determined I 
purpose. 

12. Natural affection, gratitude, and all kindly 
feelings, the dictates of conscience, regard to conse- 



quences, and every thing which stands in the way 
of sinful gratification, will be disregarded by those 
who surrender themselves to its power. 

19. There are injuries inflicted which in this world 
can never be repaired, and distres.ses which none but 
God can assuage. Though he permits such injuries, 
he does not forget them, nor does he fail in due time 
to visit their authors with hi.*; wrath. Ver. '29. 

21. It is not enough for rulers to be angry at the 
foul crimes of their subjects ; they should pTinish 
them, that others may fear and be restrained from 
practising such iniquities. Nor, while they remem- 
ber with shame their own sins, and the injurious in- 
fluence they may have e.xerted on others, should they 
let natural affection, or a sense of their own guilt, 
hinder ihem from doing their duty. Rom. 13 : 3, 4. 

'29. One wicked man, in the indulgence of his 
hateful p.assions, may be the instrument of e.xecuting 
not only his own wrath, but the just indignation of 
God against .another, and then in due time be him- 
self punished, and that for ever and ever. Chap. 
17:14,23; 1 Kings, 2 : 31-31. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1. The Icing's heart was toward Ahsalom ; 
he wished for some pretext to bring him back. 

411 , 



Joab's device to 



II. SAMUEL, XIV, 



bring back jibsalom. 



2 And Joab sent to ^ Tekoah, and fetched 
thence a wise woman, and said unio her, I 
pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, 
and put on now mourning apparel, and 
anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a 
woman that had a long time mourned for 
the dead : 

3 And come to the king, and speak on 
this manner unto him. So Joab put the 
words in her mouth. 

4 T[And when the woman of Tekoah 
spake to the king, she ''fell on her face to 
the ground, and did obeisance, and said, 
Help,* king. 

5 And the king said unto her. What ail- 
eth thee? And she answered, "^I am in- 
deed a widow woman, and my husband is 
dead. 

6 And thy handmaid had two sons, and 
they two strove together in the field, and 
there was + none to part them, but the one 
smote the other, and.slew him. 

7 And behold, the whole family is risen 
against thy handmaid, and they said, ^ De- 
liver him that smote his brother, that we 
may kill him, for the life of his brother 
whom he slew; and we will destroy the 
heir also: and so they shall quench my 
coal which is left, and shall not leave to 
my husband neither name nor remainder 
upon the + earth. 

8 And the king said unto the woman. 
Go to thy house, and I will give charge 
concerning thee. 

9 And the woman of Tekoah said unto 
the king, My lord, king, the iniquity be 
on ''me, and on my father's house: and 
the '^king and his throne he guiltless. 

10 And the king .said, Whosoever saith 
aught unto thee, bring him to me, and he 
shall not touch thee any more. 

11 Then said she, I pray thee, let the 
king remember the Lord thy God, Hhat 
thou wouldest not sutler the ^ revengers of 
blood to destroy any more, lest they de- 
stroy my son. And he said, ^'As the Lord 
liveth, there shall not one hair of thy son 
fall to the earth. 



« 2Clir<in. lira >> 
etc. t Hcb. tin (lelivi 
of the earth, e Gen '. 
i-.y-i. % Uvh.thatth 
t Num. 35:19. I> 1 



Snm. 20 : 41. * Heh. Save, c clmp. i; : 1, 
r between. >1 Deut. IM : 13. t Heh. /«« 
KJ ; 1 Sam. 25 ; 24. f clmp. 3 : 28 ; I Kiliss, 
evetiijer of hlnod do not multiply to destroy. 
in. 14 : 4.) ; .ler. 4:2. i cli.ap. 13 : :)", 38. 



2. Tekoah ; in Judali, south of Bf thlehem. 

7. Quench my coal; destroy her son. 

8. Give charge concerning thee ; directions 
th.at she should not be injured. 

9. Iniquity he on vie; the blame, if there was 
any, of his deciding that her son should not be slain. 

12. Speak one vord ; having got David to de- 
cide that her son, who she said had killed his broth- 
er, .should not be hurl, she wished now to m.ake the 
application to Absalom, who liad killed Amiion. 

1.3. Against the people of God ; implying that 
David was injuring them by keeping Absalom in 
banishment, and having decided tiiat her son should 
412 



1 2 Then the woman said. Let thy *,;. ": "^r.. 
handmaid, I pray thee, speak o>ip word unto 
my lord the king. And he said. Say on. 

13 And the woman said. Wherefore then 
ha.st thou thought such a thing against the 
people of God? for the king dotii speak 
this thing as one which is faulty, in that 
the king doth not fetch home again his 
banished.' 

14 For we must needs Jdie, and are as 
water spilt on the ground, which cannot 
be gathered up again ; H neither doth God 
respect'' any person; yet doth he devise 
means,' tliat his banished be not "" expelled 
from him. 

15 Now therefore, that I am come to 
speak of this thing unto my lord the king, 
it is because the people have made me 
afraid : and thy handmaid said, I will now 
speak unto the king; it may be that the 
king will perform the request of his hand- 
maid. 

16 For the king will hear, to deliver his 
handmaid out of the hand of the man^Aa/ 
would destroy me and my son together out 
of the inheritance of God. 

17" Then thy handmaid said. The word 
of my lord the king shall now be *com- 
fortable : for as an " angel of God, so is my 
lord the king to t discern good and bad : 
therefore the Lord thy God will be with 
thee. 

18 Then the king answered and .'^aid 
unto the woman. Hide not from me, 1 
pray thee, the thing that I shall ask tliee. 
And the woman said, Let my lord the king 
now speak. 

19 And the king said, Jsnoi the hand of 
Joab with thee in all this 1 And the wom- 
an answered and said, .4.9 thy soul liveth, 
my lord the king, none can turn to the 
right hand or to the left from aught that 
my lord the king hath spoken : for thy 
servant Joab, he bade me, and ^he put all 
these words in the mouth of thy hand- 
maid : 

20 To fetch about this form of speech 
hath thy servant Joab done this thing: 



j .loll 34 : 


lA; P 


n. 90:3, 10; Hoi 


0:27. II 


Or. 


because 


God hath 


not taken 


away 


Ilis life, he hath a 


'so devisea 


k 


.lob 34 


l!i: M»l. 


22: 111; Acts 10 


34 ; Rom. 2:11. 


1 Num. 3. 


:2^ 


m I.cv. 2ti : 40 ; 


Isa. -,0 : 1 


2; I. 


«m. 3:31, Si. * 


Heh. fur 


est. 


n ch 


p. 19 : 27. 


t Heb. h 


ar. V 


ver. 3. 











be spared, was faulty in not sparing his own son, 
and bringing him back from banishment. 

14. Yet doth he devise means ; as God devises 
means to save men, .and is ready to be reconciled 
to them, her implication was that David should be 
reconciled to Absalom. 

l.l. The people have made me afraid ; as she 
stated, ver. 7 ; and she insinuated that (here would 
be greater reason to fear the people, if Absalom should 
not be brought back, as they greatly desired it. / 
«•/// now speak -unto the king ; state a ca.se as 
if it were her own, and then .ipply it to Absalom. 

17. As an angel of God ; wise and discerning. 



Absalom returns. 



II. SAMUEL. XV. 



David receives him. 



the wisdom of an angel of God, to know- 
all tliinirs that are in the earth. 

21 •[And the king said unto Joab, Be- 
hold now, I have done this thing: go 
therefore, bring the young man Absalom 
again. 

22 And Joab fell to the ground on his 
face, and bowed himself, and *thanked 
the king: and Joab said. To-day thy ser- 
vant knoweth that I have found grace 
in thy sight, my lord, king, in that 
the king hath fuliilled the request of this 
servant. 

23 So Joab arose and went to ' Geshur, 
and brought Absalom to Jerusalem. 

24 And the king said. Let him turn to 
his own house, and let him not see my 
face.'' So Absalom returned to his own 
house, and saw not the king's face. 

25 •[But- in all Israel there was none 
to be so much praised as Absalom for his 
beauty : "^from the sole of his foot even to 
the crown of his head there was no blem- 
ish in him. 

26 And when he polled his head, (for it 
was at every year's end that he polled it: 
because the hair was heavy on him, there- 
fore he polled it,) he weighed the hair of 
his head at two hundred shekels after the 
king's weight. 

27 And ■' unto Absalom there were born 
three sons, and one daughter, whose name 
7f«.s- Tamar: she was a woman of a fair 
countenance. 

28 T[ So Absalom dwelt two full years in 
Jerusalem, and saw ''not the king's face. 



» Hell. ft(«Mrf. t Or, «/ij(. • Hiiip. 13 : 37. h Gen. 43:3; Kx. 
10;2-'*. t Heh. ^nd as Abtatom there wat not a beautiful man 
in nit Israel to praite greatly. clsn.l:(S. <i chap. IS : 18. ever. 

21. I have done this thing ; he had decided, in 
the supposed case, that the woman's son should not 
be liurt, and was ready to make the desired appli- 
cation to Absalom. 

22. Grace; favor. 

20. Aflertheking'su-eight; some have thought 
this to be much less than the common shekel. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Courtiers, and those who covet royal favor, 
are quick to discern the inclinations of rulers, and 
skilful in devising means and presenting induce- 
ments to gratify them. 

2. ^Yilen great men and those in authority are 
set upon accomplishing their selfish objects, tiiey will 
generally find agents deceitful and wicked enough 
t'j aid them. 

4. Flatterers and those who are engaged in art- 
ful projects, are often most complaisant and respect- 
ful 10 those whose favor tliey seek, and whom they 
are aiming to deceive. 

5. Compassion towards the distressed and desires 
to grant relief should be regulated by correct know- 
ledge and sound judgment. 

8. It. is ordinarily unwise to decide a case on the 
testimony of one party, especially one that is inter- 1 
ested and likely to be strongly biased in his own 
favor. I 

13. After persons are committed on t!ie wrong 1 

27 



29 Therefore Absalom sent for Joab, to 
have sent him to the king; but he would 
not come to him : and when he sent again 
the second time, he would not come. 

30 Therefore he said unto his servants. 
See, Joab's field is near ^ mine, and he hath 
barley there ; go and set it on ''fire. And 
Absalom's servants set the field on fire. 

31 Then Joab arose, and came to Absa- 
lom unto his house, and said unto him, 
Wherefore have thy servants set my field 
on fire? 

32 And Absalom answered Joab, Be- 
hold, I sent unto thee, saying, Come hith- 
er, that I may send thee to the king, to say, 
Wherefore am I come from Geshur? it 
had been good for me to have been there 
still: now therefore let me see the king's 
face ; and if there be any iniquity in me, 
let him kill me. 

33 So Joab came to the king, and told 
him : and when he had called for Absa- 
lom, he came to the king, and bowed him- 
self on his face to the ground before the 
king: and the ^ king kissed Absalom. 

CHAPTER XV. 

1 Absalom, by fair speeches and courtesies, stealeth the 
hearts of Israel. 7 Under pretence of a vow lie ob- 
taineth leave to go to Hebron. 10 He maketh there 
a great conspir-icy. 1.3 David upon the news fleetli 
from Jerusalem. 19 Ittai would not leave him. 24 
Zadok and Abiathar are sent back with the ark. :3(t 
David and his company go up mount Olivet weeping. 
31 He curseth Ahithophel's counsel. '3i Hushai ia 
sent back with instruction:*. 

AND "'it came to pass after this, that 
Absalom 'prepared him chariots and 
horses, and fifty men to run before him. 

24. 4 Heb. iHH place. I J ii ilg 15 : 4, 6. e Gen. 45 : 16 ; Luke 15 .".W. 
h Cli»p.l2:ll. i IKings, 1:5. 



side, those who are interested will endeavor to take 
advantage of that commitment to lead them still 
farther into error and transgression. 

14. Those who so symp.athize with murderers as 
to try to screen them from the punishment wliicli 
God has diiected, often refer to his mercy as a rea- 
son wliy his directions should not be followed; as if 
his justice were at war with his mercy, or as if they 
were more merciful than G-od. 

21. When rulers, through fear or favor, natural 
affection, or improper sympathy, fail to punish mur- 
derers, or pardon and receive them into favor, they 
tiike .a course which tends to incre:ise crime, and to 
bring upon themselves and others grent distresses. 

2.5. Men are prone to regard and be greatly in- 
fluenced by mere external accomplishments, while 
the most beautiful form and graceful exterior may 
cover a polluted and murderous heart. 

30. Connivance at crime, or an utterly inadequati- 
punishment, tends to increase haughtine.ss, pride, 
and self-will in criminals!, and to lead them on from 
one crime to another till they perish. 

33. Parents who only kiss their childi;en when 
they should punish them, have reason to fe.ar that 
God, in righteous judgment, will suffer their chil- 
dren by their wickedness to become instruments of 
punishing their parents. Chap. 16:11, 21. 22; 
18:9, 14,33. 

413 



^HOsalomh conspiracy. 



II. SAMUEL, XV. 



David leaveth Jertisalcm. 



2 And Absalom rose up early, and stood 
beside the ^A^ay of the gate : and it was so, 
that when any man that had a controversy 
came* to the king for judgment, then Ab- 
salom called unto him, and said. Of what 
city art thou? And he said. Thy servant 
is of one of the tribes of Israel. 

3 And Absalom said unto him, See, thy 
matters are good and right; but Uhere is 
no man deputed of the ^ king to hear thee. 

4 Absalom said moreover, ''Oh that I 
were made judge in the land, that every 
man which hath any suit or cause might 
come unto me, and I would do him justice ! 

5 And it was so, that when any man 
came nigh to him to do him obeisance, he 
put forth his hand, and took him, and 
kissed him. 

6 And on this manner did Absalom to 
all Israel that came to the king for judg- 
ment • so "^Absalom stole the hearts of the 
men of Israel. 

7 T^And it came to pass after forty years, 
that Absalom said unto the king, I pray 
thee, let me go and "'pay my "vow, which 
I have vowed unto the Lord, in Hebron. 

8 For thy servant vowed a vow while I 
abode at ''Geshur in Syria, saying. If the 
Lord shall bring me again indeed to Jeru- 
salem, then I will serve the Loud. 

9 And the king said unto him, Go in 
peace. So he arose, and went to Hebron. 

1 *| But Absalom sent spies throughout 
all the tribes of Israel, saying, As soon as 
ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye 
shall say, Absalom f^reigneth in Hebron. 

11 And with Absalom went two hun- 
dred men out of Jerusalem, tliat urrc 
called : and they went in their'' simplicity, 
and tliey knew not any thing. 

12 And Absalom sent for Ahithophel 
the Gilonito, David's 'counsellor, from his 
city, even fromJ Giloh, while he ofi'ered sac- 
rifices. And the conspiracy was strong; 
for the '' people increased continually with 
Absalom. 

13 TlAnd there came a messenger to 
David, saying. The 'hearts of the men 
of Israel are after Absalom. 

* Heb. to come, f Or, none witi hear tkce from the king down- 
wnril. « Prnv. 30: 11, 17. ti .1 ml & <l : M. cRi>m. 16:18. d .ler. 
9:.'J.S. •' ISnm. lK:a. f rliap. 13 : 3R. B .loli a0:5.elc. h Gen. 
SO:.>i. I Pun. -tl.y; fv5:12-M. j .Tosli. l.i: ."il. k Poa. 3 : 1, '2. 
1 ver. 6; Judg. 9:3. n. diiip. l<i:9. % Heh. thruit. J Heb. 



CHAriER XV. 

2. The way of the gale ; wliere the people ?i,>i- 
semhM for j iidffinent, or to obtain the kinn's de- 
cision of their cases. 

.3. jVo 7)1(111 fleputrd; lie spoke as if David was 
negligent of Ins duty in not appointing him or some 
one to hear tliein. 

C. Stole the hearts ; l»d the people to admire him. 

9. Go ill peace; he probably hoped tiiai Absa- 
lom was becoming better. 

11. Called; invited to go with Absalom, sup- 
posing his object was, as he stated, a religious one. 
414 



14 And David said unto all his 1,.1!:?S^,1- 
servants that were with him at Jerusalem, 
Arise, and let us "'flee; for we shall not 
else escape from Absalom : make speed to 
depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and 
bring- evil upon us, and smite the city 
with the edge of the sword. 

1 5 And the king's servants said unto the 
king, Behold, thy servants are ready to do 
whatsoever my lord the king shall ^ap- 
point. 

16 And the king went forth, and all his 
household H after him. And the king left 
ten W'Omen, which were "concubines, to 
keep the house. 

17 And the king went forth, and all the 
people after him, and tarried in a place 
that was far olf. 

18 And all his servants passed on beside 
him; and all the"Cherethitcs, and all the 
Pelethites, and all the Gittites, si.x hun- 
dred men which came after him from 
Gath, passed on before the king. 

19 TIThen said the king to^Plttai the 
Gittite, Wherefore goest thou also with 
us? return to thy place, and abide with 
the king: for thou art a stranger, and also 
an exile. 

20 Whereas thou camest hut yesterday, 
should I this day make thee *go up and 
down with us? seeing I go i whither I 
may, return thou, and take back thy breth- 
ren : mercy and truth be with thee. 

21 Andlttai answered the king, and said. 
As" the Lord liveth, and as my lord the 
king liveth, surely in what place my lord 
the king shall be, whether in death or life, 
even there also will thy servant be. 

22 And David said to Ittai, Go and pass 
over. And Ittai the Gittite passed over, 
and all his men, and all the little ones that 
icere with him. 

23 And all the country 'wept with a 
loud voice, and all the people passed over : 
the king also himself passed over the 
brook t Kidron, and all the people passed 
over, toward the way of the 'wilderness. 

24 H And lo, Zadok also, and all the Le- 
vitcs V!ere with him, "bearing the ark of 



choose. W Heh. at hin feet, n clinp. li : 1 1 ; Hi : il, 3J. o clinr. 
8:lH. p ch.ip. lS:i. * He\y. wander in going, q 1 Snin. '^3 : 13. 
rRutlil:lfi. 17; Prov. 17:17; 1«:24; MhU8:1>), 20; John 
fi:66-6!l; Acts 11:23; 21:13; Rev. 2:10. • Uom. 12: In. 
t Called Cfdrun. .lolm 18: 1. t clmp. Iti : 2. uNum. 14:1.^ 



12. Ahithophel ; he had been a great friend to 
David, but now deserted him. Chap. 17 : ~'3. (t-,- 
loh ; in the mountainous parts of Judah. Josh. 
15:. 51. 

19. Ittai; the commander of the Gittites. The 
k'iiig; Absalom, who had proclaimed himself king. 
Thoii art a stranger ; the G-ittites were from the 
Philistines, but had become attached to David and 
his cause. 

2.'t. Tliehrook Kidron ; on the east side of Jeru- 
salem, between the city and the mount of Olives. 

24. Abiathar ; he was high-priest at that time. 



Zadok, Abia'.har, and 



II. SAMUEL, XV. 



Hushai befriend David. 



B.' "S' the covenant of God : and they set 
down the ark of God; and Abiathar went 
up, until all the people had done passing 
out of the city. 

25 And the king said unto Zadok, Carry 
back the ark of God into the city : if I 
.-^hall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, 
he* will bring me again, and show me 
both it and his habitation : 

26 But if he thus say, I have no delight 
in ""thee; behold, hrc am I, let *= him do 
to me as seemeth good unto him. 

27 The king said also unto Zadok the 
priest, Art not thou a ''seer'? return into 
the city in peace, and your two sons with 
you, Ahimaaz thy son, and Jonathan the 
sou of Abiathar. 

2<S See, I will tarry in the plain of the 
wilderness,- until there come word from 
you to certify me. 

2d Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried 
the ark of God again to Jerusalem : and 
they tarried there. 

30 T[ And David went up by the ascent 
of mount Olivet, *and wept as he went up, 
and had his "^head covered, and he went 
barefoot : « and all the people that xuas 
with him ''covered every man his head, 
and they went up, 'weeping as they went 

31 T[And one told David, saying, 'Ahitho- 
phel is among the conspirators with Ab- 



a Psa. 43 : .3, 4 ; 63 : I , '2 ; Isa. 38 : 22. b chap. -22 : 20 


Num. 


14:8; 1 Kings, 10:9. c 1 Sam. 3 : !.<;. "11 Sam. 9:3. 


e chap. 


17:16. * Heb. going up, and weeping. f rhap. 19:4; 


Esther 


6:12. g IsaUh -20 : 2, 4. h Jeremiah 14: 3, 4. i I'salir 


126 : 6. 



27. A seer ; a prophet, or a, wise and discerning 
man. 

30. His head covered ; in token of deep humil- 
iation and distress. He was reaping the fruit of 
only kissing Absalom when he should have pun- 
ished him, and also the fruit of his own sins in the 
matter of Uriivh. Chap. 14 : 33 ; 11: 2-21. 

31. Turn the counsel of Ahithophel into fool- 
ishness ; by preventing it from helping Absalom 
or injuring David. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Men of weak minds and depraved hearts are 
peculiarly fond of personal decoration and e.xternal 
display, while the truly worthy and noble seek prin- 
cipally internal excellence and those spiritual orna- 
menls which alone are, in the sight of the Lord, of 
great price. 

3. Familiarity and flattery, high promises of 
gratification, and strong expressions of regard for 
the people, mark the efforts of heartless dema- 
gogues to delude the multitude and promote their 
own elevation to office. 

5. Many a good cause has been betrayed, and 
many a bad one promoted, by a kiss. Luke 22 : 48. 

7. Wiiere godliness is respected, the most vil- 
lanous conduct is sometimes masked under the 
semblance of piety, and those most pleased with 
the appearance of religion may be most readily de- 
ceived. Jer. 17 : 9. 

ri. Traitors and apostates are .imong the most 
virulent enemies, and those whom we have espe- 
cially favored, and treated with confidence, may 
become our bitterest foes. Psa. 41 : 9 ; 5') : li-U. 



salom. And David said, Lord, I pray 
thee, ''turn the counsel of Ahithophel into 
foolishness.' 

32 1[And it came to pass, that when 
David was come to the top of the 
mount, where he worshipped God, be- 
hold, Hushai the '"Archite came to meet 
him with " his coat rent, and earth upon 
his head : 

33 Unto whom David said, If thou pass- 
est on with me, then thou shalt be a "^ bur- 
den unto me : 

34 But if thou return to the city, and 
say unto Absalom, f I will be thy servant, 
king; as I have been thy father's ser- 
vant hitherto, so tvill I now also be thy 
servant: then maycstthou for me ''defeat 
the counsel of Ahithophel. 

35 And hast thou not there witli thee 
Zadok and Abiathar the priests ? there- 
fore it shall be, that what thing soever 
thou shalt hear out of the king's house, 
thou shalt ''tell it to Zadok and Abiathar 
the priests. 

36 Behold, they have "there with them 
their two sons, Ahiinaaz, Zadok's son, and 
Jonathan, Abiathar's son; and by them ye 
shall send unto me every thing that ye 
can hear. 

37 So 'Hushai, David's "friend, came 
into the city, and Absalom came into Je- 
rusalem. 

j ver. 12. k chap. 16:23; 17:14,23. I .lob 5 : 13. m .Joshua 
16:2. n chap. 1:2. o chap. 19 : as. p chap. 16:19. q chap. 
17:5-14. r chap. 1T:15, IB. » ver. 27. t chap. 16:16, 17. 
u 1 Chron. 27 : 33. 

13. No one, however exalted or meritorious, can 
safely depend on popular favor. At one time the 
people may eulogize, and at another curse him ; 
at one time cry Hosanna, and at another, Cru- 
cify him. Mat. 21 : 9 : Mark 7 : 37 ; Luke 7 : 34 ; 
23:21. 

19. A generous and benevolent mind will not 
wish its friends to be involved in its troubles, but 
will desire, as far as may be consistent, to relieve 
them, and to promote tlieir enjoyment. 

21. True love is gratified not only in labors, but 
in self-denials and sacrifices to relieve the dis- 
tresses and advance the happiness of the object 
beloved. 

2.5. Humble and hearty submission in distress to 
the chastising hand of G-od, and cheerful commit- 
ment of one's interests to him, form a good prepa- 
ration for deliverance. 

30. Parents for their sins are often chastised by 
the sins of children, which are the occasion to them 
and their friends of many tears. 

31. A very short but hearty supplication to G-od 
may be answered in great and lasting blessings. 
Chap. 17 : 23 ; Gen. 17 : 18 ; Luke 23 : 3 1 ; John 
17 : 24. 

36. Prayer, though efficacious, does not lessen the 
necessity of using means ; and in cases of difficulty, 
the more knowledge a person h.os with regard to 
them, the more properly he will be able to treat 
them. But no means should be used to gain know- 
ledge, or accomplish any object, but such as are 
right, and no declarations made except those which 
are true. Prov. 12 : 17, 19, 20, 22. 

41.5 



David deceived by Ziha, 



II. SAMUEL, XVI. 



and cursed by Shimei 



CHAPTER XVI. 

1 Ziba, bv presents and false suggestions, obtaineth his 
inxster's inheritance. 5 At Bahurim Shimei cur-^elh 
DaviJ. 9 David with patience abstaineth, and re- 
straineth others, from revenge. 13 Hushai insinu- 
ualeth himself into Absalom's counsel. 21) Ahilho- 
phel's counsel. 

AND Avhen David was a, little past the 
top of the "hill, behold, ''Ziba the ser- 
vant of Mcphibcsheth met him, with a 
couple of asses saddled, and upon "^ them 
two hundred loaves of bread, and a hun- 
dred bunches of raisins, and a hundred of 
summer fruits, and a bottle of wine. 

2 And the king said unto Ziba, What 
meanest thou by these? And Ziba said. 
The asses be for the king's household to 
ride on; and the bread and summer fruit 
for the young men to eat; and the wine, 
that ''such as be faint in the wilderness 
may drink. 

3 And the king said, And where is thy 
master's son? And Ziba "said unto the 
king, Behold, he abideth at Jerusalem : 
for he said, To-day shall the house of Is- 
rael restore me the kingdom of my father. 

4 Then said the king to Ziba, Behold, 
thine are all that pertained unto Mephibo- 
sheth. And Ziba said,I*humbly beseech 
thee that I may find grace in thy sight, my 
lord, king. 

5 1[ And when king David came to Ba- 
hurim, behold, thence came out a man of 
the family of the house of Saul, whose 
name teas ""Shimei, the son of Gera: he 
came t forth, and ^cursed still as he came. 

() And he cast stones at David, and at 
all the servants of king David : and all 
the people and all the mighty men were 
on his right hand nnd on his left. 

7 And thus said Shimei when he cursed. 
Come out, come out, thou + bloody man, 
and lliou man of Belial ; 

8 Tlie Lord hath returned upon thee all 
the ''blood of the house of Saul, in whose 
stead thou hast reigned; and the Lokd 
hath delivered the kingdom into the hand 
of Absalom thy son: and behold, Hhou 



• cimp. Ift : 30, 32. 1> cliiip »: 2. c I Sam. 17 : 17, 18; 25:18. 4:8-12. % Heb. M« in M.v fwiV. i clinp. <) : 8. j Kit. i2 : ■.'«. 

d elinp. 17:29. • clmp. 19:27; Pr<)V.18:17. * Hvb. do ahei- k 1 Peter, 2 : 23. II,ain.3:3H. m ,Iol. i) : 1 2 ; Rom. 9 : 20. n Gen. 

tnnce. f clmp. 19: 18, etc.; 1 Kinj.s, 2: 44, eti-. f Ush. itill camt l.'S : 4. o 1 Peter, 4 : 19. || Or, /«/r»,- HpIi. cyf. Gen. 2ft : 32 ; 1 Sum. 

forth and cursed, i: Pm. lOii : 17, 28; Prov. 2fi: 2; Ecrl. 10: 20; 1 : 11 ; P8n.2o:)8 p Unm. 8 : 28. • Heb. </i«/ir(/ liim loiM </«»» 

Mnt.6:ll,12. t Heb. man of blood, h cliap. 1 : 16 : 3 : 28, 29 ; <) cliap. 15 : 3^. f Veb. Ltt the k-inf live, r cliap. 13:33. .M. 



art taken in thy mischief, because *b.c.'^J' 
thou art a bloody man. 

9 ^ Then said Abishai the son of Zeru- 
iah unto the king. Why should this dead 
dog' J curse my lord the king? let me go 
over, I pray thee, and take off his head. 

10 And the king said, ''What have I to 
do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah? so let 
him curse, because the 'Loud hath said 
unto him, Curse David. ""Who shall then 
say, Wherefore hast thou done so? 

1 1 And David said to Abishai, and to 
all his servants. Behold, my son, whicli 
came" forth of my bowels, seekcth my 
life: how much more now may this Ben- 
jamite do it? let him alone, and let him 
curse; for the Lord hath bidden him. 

12 It ° may be that the Lord will look 
on mine H affliction, and that the Loud will 
requite me p good for his cursing this day. 

13 And as David and his men went by 
the way, Shimei went along on the hilTs 
side over against him, and cursed as he 
AA^ent, and threw stones at him,and*cast 
dust. 

14 And the king, and all the people that 
were with him, came weary, and refreshed 
themselves there. 

15 T[And Absalom, and all the people 
the men of Israel, came to Jerusalem, and 
Ahithophel with him. 

16 And it came to pass, when ''Ilushni 
the Archite, David's friend, was come 
vinto Absalom, that Hushai said unto Ab- 
salom, God save the king, tGod save the 
king. 

17 And Absalom said to Hushai, Is- this 
thy kindness to thy friend? why'wenl- 
est thou not with thy friend? 

18 And Hushai said un10i\bsalom,Nay ; 
but whom the Lord, and this people, and 
nil the men of Israel, choose, his will I 
be, and with him will I abide. 

19 And again, whom should I serve? 
should I not serve in the presence of his 
son? as I have served in thy father's 
presence, so will I be in thy presence. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

1. The hill; Olivet. Cluap. If): 30. Ziba; 
chap. 9:2, 9-13. A bottle; bottles then were 
whole skins of animals, and some held a large 
quantity. 

3. Thy master^s son; Mephibosheth. Chap. 
: G-13. Ziba said ; what perhaps was not true, 
but was a slander on Menhiboshetl , for tlie purpose 
of gettiny; his estate. Chap. 19:20, 27. 

4. Thine are all ; a hasty and unjust decision 
of David. 

.5. Bahurim; a cit\' in the tribe of Benjamin. 
Shimei; a relative of Saul. 
416 



7. Come out ; in the original. Go out; flee from 
the kin<;dom, ,is not fit to live in it. 

10. Tlie Lord hath said ; so ordered things in 
liis providence, that this, as well .is other trials, 
should come upon David as a punishment for his 
sins. 

11. My son. — seekcth viy life ; DaviJ wickedly 
sought the life of Uriah, and now Absalom wick- 
edly sought his, and Shimei wickedly cursed him. 

10. //«.9//rt/; chap. 1.'):.32. God save the king : 
he did not siiy which king he wished God to save, 
whether Absalom or David, though he me.ant that 
Absalom should understand it of himself. 

17. Thy friend; David. 



AhithopheV s counsel 



II. SAMUEL, XVII. 



overthrown by Hushai. 



tlS: 20 HThensaid Absalom to ^\hith- 
ophel, Give counsel among you what we 
shall do. 

21 And Ahithophel said unto Ab.saloin, 
Go in unto thy father's concubines, which 
lie hath left to keep the house ; and all 
Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred of 
thy father: then '' shall the "hands of all 
that are with thee be strong. 

22 So they spread Absalom a tent upon 
the top of the house ; and Absalom went 
in'' unto his father's concubines in the 
sight of all Israel. 

23 Andthecounselof Ahithophel, which 
he counselled in those days, was as if a 
man had inquired at the *oracle of God : 
so iras all the counsel of Ahithophel both 
with David and with Absalom. 

CHAPTER, XVII. 

1 Ahilhophcl's counsel is oyerthnnvn by Hushai's, ac- 
cording to God's appointment. 15 Secret intelligence 
is sent unto David. '£i Ahithophel hangeth himself. 
'2-5 Amasa is made captain. 27 David at Mahanaim 
is furnished with provision. 

MOREOVER Ahithophel said unto Ab- 
salom, Let me now choose out twelve 
thousand men, and I will arise and pur- 
sue after David this night: 

2 And I will come upon him while he 
is "weary and weak-handed, and will 
make him afraid : and all the people that 
are with him shall flee; and I will smite 
the '"king only : 

3 And I will bring back all the people 
unto thee : the man whom thou seekest 
is as if all returned: .so all the people 
shall be in peace. 

4 And the saying tpleased Absalom well, 
and all the elders of Israel. 

5 Then said Absalom, call now Hushai 
the Architc also, and Ictus hear likewise 
what the saith. 

6 And when Hushai was come to Absa- 



. chap. 


15: 


12. b 


ISa 


n. '27 : 


■i. r. r 


lup. 2 


:7; Zedl. 8:1:!. 


•1 clinp. It 


:ll 


1-2; IS 


: 1« 


SO : ;!. 


* Hel). 


word. 


e cimp 


ir>: II : 


Deut. in : 


S. 


r iKi 


1»S, ' 


; : 31 : 


Zech. i: 


:7. 


^ HpI>. hi 


at right 


in the eyes 


of. 


I Sum. 


18: 


.u t 


Hel>. i> 


» hit 


mouth. 


% Heb. 



21. TAy father's concnhiiies ; chap. 15 : l(i. 
Abhorred of t hi/ father ; for his -wickedness, so 
that his father would not again be reconciled to 
him. Chap. 12 : 12 

IXSTRUCTIOXS. 

2. Sympathy and kindness under trials deeply 
affect the generous heart, and sometimes the pretence 
of them is used to conceal ti;e basest selfishness. 

4. Hasty decisions under tlie influence of strongly 
excited feelings, without taking time for delibera- 
tion, or asking direction of (jrod. are generally wrong, 
and often are exceedingly unjust and cruel. 

7. A malignant lieart rejoices in the calamities of i 
those it hates, and is gratified in tormenting them. 

10. A penitent soul will never overlook the hand 
of God in its trials, whoever and whatever may be 
the instruments of them ; and when we heartily sub- 
mit to his corrections, without .any wrong feelings 
towards the instruments of them, they will in the 
end promote our good. 



lom, Absalom spake unto him, saying, 
Ahithophel hath spoken after tliis man- 
ner: shall we do a// tT his ^ saying? if not, 
speak thovi. 

7 And Hushai said unto Absalom, The 
counsel that Ahithophel hath II given is 
not good at this time. 

8 For, said Hushai, thou knowest thy 
father and his men, that they be mighty 
men, and they he *chafed in their minds, 
as a shear robbed of her whelps in the 
!ield : and thy father is a man of war, and 
will not lodge with the people. 

i) Behold, he is hid now in some pit, or 
in some other place: and it will come to 
pass, when some of them be t overthrown 
at the first, that whosoever heareth it will 
say. There is a slaughter among the peo- 
ple that follow Absalom. 

10 And he also that is valiant, whose 
heart is as the heart of a lion, shall utterly 
melt:*" for all Israel knoweth that thy 
father' is a mighty man, and they whicli 
be with Jhim are valiant men. 

1 1 Therefore I counsel that all Israel be 
generally gathered unto thee, from Dan 
even to Beer-shcba, as ''the sand that is 
by the sea for multitude; and that +thou 
go to battle in thine own person. 

12 So shall we come upon him in some 
place where he shall be found, and we 
will light upon him as the dew fallcth on 
the ground: and of him and of all the 
men that are with him there shall not be 
left so much as one. 

13 Moreover, if he be gotten into a city, 
then shall all Israel bring ropes to that city, 
and we will draw it into the river, until 
there be not one small stone found there. 

14 And Absalom and all the men of Is- 
rael said. The counsel of Husliai the Arch- 
ite is better than the counsel of Ahitho- 
phel. For 'the Lord had * appointed to 



word. \\ Heh. ciiunselUii. * Keh. hitter of soul. .(lulg. 18 : 2"i. 
t I'rov. 1 7 : IJ ; Hosea l:l : 8. f Hch. fallen, b .Io»h. -2:11. i I Sam. 
IS: 17; Heh. 11:34.- j Cant 3 : 7. k .losll. 11 : 4 ; 1 Kings, CO : 10. 
X Heb. thtfface^ orpreseneego. I ch. 15 : 31 , etc. \ Heb. commantted. 

16. Men who undertake to deceive others are 
strongly tempted to use language which is equivo- 
cal, and may be understood as meaning one thing 
or another according to the situation of diflerent 
parties, and which, in the sense in which they design 
to be understood, is positively false, 

21, The wickedness of the wicked is made in- 
strumental by God in correcting and sanctifying his 
people, and thus in fulfilling his declarations of judg- 
ment and mercy concerning them. Chap. 12: 11, 1- ; 
Acts 2 : 23. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

4. The sayiitg pleased Absalom; because he 
thought that, if followed, it would cause the death 
of his father. 

11. Dan even to Beer-sheba ; one end of the 
land to the other. 

14. The Lord hail appointed; he so ordered 
events that Absalom should prefer ths counsel of 
Hushai to that of Ahithophel. and thus penitent, 
417 



David crosscth the Jordan. II. SAMUEL, XVIII. He is refreshed at Mahanaim. 



defeat" the good ''counsel of Ahithophel, 
to the intent that the Lord might bring 
evil upon Absalom. 

15 ^ Then said Hushai nntoZadok and 
to Abiathar the prie.sts, Thus and thus 
did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the 
ciders of Israel ; and thus and thus have 
I counselled. 

16 Now therefore send quickly, and tell 
David, saying, "^ Lodge not this night in 
the ''plains of the wilderne.ss, but speedily 
pass over ; lest the king be swal lowed up, 
and all the people that are with him. 

17 Now ^Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed 
by ''En-rogel ; for they might not be seen 
to come into the city : and a wench went 
and told them; and they went and told 
king David. 

18 Nevertheless, a lad saw them, and 
told Absalom : but they went both of them 
away quickly, and came to a man's house 
in^Bahurim, which had a well in his 
court; whither they went down. 

19 And ''the woman took and spread a 
covering over the well's month, and spread 
ground corn thereon ; and 'tlie thing was 
not known. 

20 And when Absalom's ser\'ants came 
to the woman to the house, they said, 
Where is Ahimaaz and Jonathan? And 
the woman said unto them, They be gone 
over tlic brook of water. And when they 
had sought and could not find ihem, they 
returned to Jerusalem. 

21 And it came fo pass, after they were 
departed, that they came up out of tlie 
well, and went and told king David, and 
said unto David, 'Arise, and pass quickly 
over the water : for thus hath Ahithophel 
counselled against you. 

22 Then David arose, and all the people 
that u'crc with him, and they passed over 
Jordan : bv the morning light there lacked 





• .lob ft: 


12, 


13. 


b Luke 


lfi:8. 


e Pn.v. 


B 


4, 


.5. 


a cl 


np 


15 


IS. 


e 


rhap 


15 


27 


36. 


f .losl 


. \f> : 7. 


B chap 


11 


: 5 


k . 


(>» 


..'2 


.■fi, 


c 


0. 


Ex. 1 


:I9. 


j rer. 


5, 16. 


* Heb 


a 


in 




k ch 


p. 


l.S 


1-2. 


t 


Heb. 


gar 


e charge 




ing hi 


house. 


' 


Ki 


nga 


, •-■0: 


. 


1 1 


9i.. 



lielievin^ David be saved, and impenitent, nnbe- 
lieving Absalom be destroyed. 

16. Pass over ; over the river Jordan. Ver. 22. 

17. E7i-ro^el ; on the e.ist side of Jerus.alem. 

23. Put his limisehold i)i order ; settled np his 
affairs. Hanged hi nise/f: this is the first instance 
of suicide recorded in the Bible. 

24. Mahanaim ; chap. 2 : 8. 

2.'). A7nasa. ; he and .Toab vi-ere cousins, and were 
sons of David's sisters. 

27. Lo-debnr — Rogelim ; in the tribe of Gad, 
not far from Mahanaim. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Apostates and traitors who give themselves up 
to iniquity, are often left to go from one degree of sin 
to another till they plunge into irretriev.able ruin. 

\. If parents do not govern their children and 
effectually subdue them when young, they will be 
in danger afterwards of being subdued by them. 
418 



not one of them that was not gone *i,.c.r^ 
over Jordan. 

23 ^ And when Ahithophel saw that hi.s 
counsel was not *followcd, he saddled hix 
ass, and arose, and gat him home to hi.s 
house, to his '' city, and t put his household 
in order, and 'hanged himself, and died, 
and was buried in the sepulchre of his 
father. 

24 Then David came to ""Mahanaim. 
And Absalom passed over Jordan, he anc2 
all the men of Israel with him. 

25 ^And Absalom made Ama.^a eaptain 
of the host instead of Joab : which Amasa 
wax a man's son, whose name ?ra.5^Ithra 
an Israelite, that went in to ^Abigail the 
daughter" of H Nahash, sister to Zeruiah, 
Joab's mother. 

26 So Israel and Absalom pitched in the 
land of Gilead. 

27 If And it came to pass, w^hen David 
was come to Mahanaim, that °Shobi the 
son of Naha.sh of ^ Kabbah of the children 
of Ammon, and''IMachir the son of Am- 
miel of Lo-debar, and ^Barzillai the Gil- 
eadite of Rogelim, 

28 Brought beds, and *basins, and earth - 
en vessels, and wheat, and barley, anil 
flour, and parched corn., anil beans, ant! 
lentiles, and parched pithe, 

29 And honey, and butter, and sheep, 
and cheese of kine, for David, and for the 
people that n-erc with him, to eat : for they 
said, 'The people i.f hungry, and Aveary, 
and thir-sty, in the wilderness. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1 David viewing the armies in their march, giveth 
them charge of Absalom. 6 Tlie Israelites are sore 
smitten in the wood of Kphraim. 9 Absalom, hang- 
ing in an oak, is slain by .Toab, and cast into a pit. 
IS Absalom's place. 19 Ahimaaz and Cushi bring 
tidings to David. 3-3 David moumeth far AbsalOTn. 

ND David numbered the people that 
ti'erc with him, and set captains of 



1 



.5:10: 6.5:23; Mat. 27:5. nichap.2:«. % Ot.Jether nl> hit- 
mnelile. ^ Heb. Abigal. n 1 Chron. 2: 16, 17. || Or, ^mm. I 
Cliron. 2 : 13, IS. orbap.lO:l. p ftMp. 12:20,30. <icliap. 9:4. 
T chap. 19:31,3:; IKiligs, 2:7. *Or,CMpt. • ch. I6:2,H; 17: i 



7. That counsel which wonld be most likely to 
succeed, should it be followed, may still not be good. 
It may spring from evil, tend to evil, and its prose^ 
cution be productive of mischief; still, no one has a 
right to do evil in order to defeat it. 

14. The Lord can easily defeat the craftiest coun- 
sels, disappoint the best concerted schemes, and 
overrule all things for the sah-ation of his friends 
and the destruction of his enemies. 

16. Men must make efforts to save themselves 
with as much promptness, skill, energy, and perse- 
verance, as if their salvation depended solelv on 
their efforts, while it is God who renders those efrorts 
successful, and to him, if they feel right, they will 
give the glory. 

23. The way of transgressors is hard, and the 
wages of sin is death ; when men are given up to 
its power, it makes them wretched here and plunges 
them into endless wretchedness hereafter. 



Absalom is defeated, 



II. SAMUEL, XVIII. 



and slain hij Joab. 



B.c'S' thousands and captains of hun- 
dreds over them. 

2 And David sent forth a tliird part of 
the people under the hand of Joab, and a 
third part under the hand of Abishai the 
son of Zeruiah, Joab's brother, and a third 
part under the hand of *Ittai the Gittite. 
And the king said unto the people, I will 
surely go forth with yon myself also. 

3 But ''the people answered. Thou shalt 
not go fortli : for if we flee away, they 
will not *care for us ; neither if half of us 
die, will they care for us: but now thou 
art t worth ten thousand of us : therefore 
now it is better that thou * succor us out 
of the city. 

4 And the king said unto them. What 
seemcth you best I will do. And the 
king stood by the gate side, and all the 
people came out by hundreds and by 
thousands. 

5 And the king commanded Joab and 
Abishai and Ittai, saying, Jkal gently for 
iny sake with the young man, even with 
Absalom. And "^all the people heard 
when the king gave all the captains charge 
concerning Absalom. 

6 •[ So the people went out into the field 
against Israel: and the battle was in the 
wood"* of Ephraim ; 

7 Where the people of Israel were slain 
before the servants of David, and there 
was there a great slaughter that day of 
twenty thousand men. 

8 For the battle was there scattered over 
the face of all the country : and tlie wood 
devoured* more people that day than the 
sword devoured. 

9 IfAnd Absalom met the servants of 
David. And Absalom rode upon a mule, 
and the mule went under the thick boughs 
of a great oak, and '"his head caught hold 
of the oak, and he was taken up between 
the heaven and the earth ; and the mule 
that was under him went away. 

10 And a certain man saw it, and told 
Joab, and said, Behold, I saw Absalom 
hanged in an oak. 

1 1 And Joab said unto the man that told 
him, And behold, thou sawest him, and 
why didst thou not smite him there to the 
ground? and I would have given thee ten 
shekels of silver, and a girdle. 



• cliap. In : I'J. >• cirip. -21 : 17. * Heb. ttt their lieart on us. 
f Hfh. at t Heb. hi tn succor. c ver. li. A .Josh. 17: IR, IK. 
\ Heb. multiplied to dtvour. e Ueiit. iX-.ta-. 5;7:lfi, '»: Job 
1«:S-10; :il::l: INi. Hi:!!, Ill; I'roi'. OT : M i Jer. -18:44. 
II Heb. weigh upon my hand. I ver. 5. ^ Heb. Beware whosoever 



12 And the man said unto Joab, Though 
I should II receive a thousand shekels of 
silver in my hand, yet would I not put 
forth my hand against the king's son : for 
in'^our hearing the king charged thee and 
Abishai and Ittai, saying, *Beware that 
none tottch the young man Absalom. 

13 Otherwise I should have wrought 
falsehood against mine own life: for "the re 
is no matter hid from the king, and thou 
thyself wouldest have set thyself against 
?ne. 

14 Then said Joab, I may not tarry thus 
witht thee. And he took three darts in 
his hand, and thrust them through the 
heart of Absalom, while he was yet alive 
in the -midst of the oak. 

15 And ten young men that bare Joab's 
armor compassed about and smote Absa- 
lom, and slew him. 

16 And Joab blew the trumpet, and the 
people returned from pursuing after Isra- 
el : for Joab held back the people. 

17 And they took Absalom, and cast 
him into a great pit in the wood, and '' laid 
a very great heap of stones upon him : 
and all Israel fled every one to his tent. 

18 ^ Now Absalom in his lifetime had 
taken and reared up for himself a pillar, 
which is in the king's 'dale ; for he said, 
I have no ' son to keep my name in remem- 
brance : and he '' called the pillar after his 
own name ; and it is called unto this day, 
Absalom's place. 

19 1} Then said Ahimaaz the son of Za- 
dok. Let me now run, and bear the king 
tidings, how that the Lord hath * avenged 
him of his enemies. 

20 And Joab said unto him. Thou shalt 
not II bear tidings this day, but thou shalt 
bear tidings another day : but this day 
thou shalt bear no tidings, because the 
king's son is dead. 

21 Then said Joab to Cu.shi, Go tell the 
king what thou hast seen. And Cushi 
bowed himself unto Joab, and ran. 

22 Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok 
yet again to Joab, But *howsoever, let me, 
I pray thee, also run after Cushi. And 
Joab said, Wherefore wilt thou run, my 
son, seeing that thou hast no tidings 
ready ?t 

23 But howsoever, said he, let me run. 



ye be <./. s chiip. 14 : U>, JO. f Hvb. lic/.-re. t tieh. heart 
k Josliu.i 7 : ■:«. i Genesis 14:17. j chapter 14 : i7. kl'sniln 
49: II. J Heb. judged him from the hand, etc. || Hebrew, be 
a man of tidings. * Hebrew, he what may. f Or, conven- 
ient. 



CHAPTER XVm. 

3. Succor Its out of the citij ; by sending them 
what they might need. 

6. Tkf icooil of Ephraim ; on \.\\f east side of 
Jordan. 

8. The wood devoured ; more were slain or per- 



ished in their flight through the woods, than had been 
slain in the open field. 

13. Wrought falsehood ; acted in such a man- 
i ner as to endanger his own life. 

18. The kius's dale; near Jerusalem. Gen. 
I 14 : 17, 18. / liave iio son ; he had had three 
, sons, who it is supposed were dead. Chap. 14 : 27. 

419 



David lanicnteth 



II. SAMUEL, XIX. 



yor Absalom his son. 



And he said unto liirn, Tiun. Then Ahi- 
maaz ran by the ^vtly of the plain, and 
overran "Cushi. 

24 And David sat between the two gates : 
and the ''watchman went up to the roof 
over the gate unto the w^all, and lifted up 
his eyes, and looked, and behold a man 
running alone. 

25 And the watchman cried, and told 
the king. And the 'king said, If he be 
alone, //ie/c 25 tidings in his mouth. And 
he came apace, and drew near. 

26 And the watchman saw another man 
running: and the watchman called unto 
the porter, and said, Behold another man 
running alone. And the king said. He 
also bringeth tidings. 

27 And the watchman said, *Methink- 
eth the running of the foremost is like the 
running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok. 
And the king said, "^ He is a good man, and 
cometh with good tidings. 

28 And Ahimaaz called, aiid said unto 
the king, +A11 is well. And he fell down 
to the earth upon his face before the king, 
and said, "^Blessed he the Lord thy God, 
which hath + delivered up the men that 
lifted up their hand against my lord the 
king. 

29 And the king said, ^ Is the young man 
Absalom safe? And Ahimaaz answered, 
When Joab sent the king's servant, and 
me thy servant, I saw a great tumult, but 
I knew not what it ivas. 

30 And the king said unto him, Turn 
aside, and stand here. And he turned 
aside, and stood still. 

31 And behold, Cushi came ; andCushi 
said, II Tidings, my lord the king: ''for the 



, 


•Tohr 


■30 


:4 


b 2K 


nfs 


9:17; Isa. -21:11 


W, Ezek.33 


:-2-7. 


- H 


•li. / 


frf 


th 


runnina 


c 


1 Kings, 


: 42 ; Pro 


v.ii:!.'! 


Isa. 


1-2 : 7. 


t 


r. I'r 


act 


be to thee : 


Hel 


. Pca». 


il Psa. 1-24 : B. t 


Heb. 


thut 


up. 


I'sa. 


•SI 


8. 


% Heb. I 


the 


re peace 


' II Heb. 


Tidings 


tbro 


ught. 



24. Between the two gates ; of the city Malia 
naim. Chap. 17:24. The roof; of the watch- 
house. 

;("2. As that yoiiii.g man is ; dead. 

33. Died for thee ; instead of thee, in thy place. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. All should consider in what way they can be 
most useful, and be disposed to take that course in 
which they can do the greatest good. 

5. The love of parents to their children is ordi- 
narily much greater than that of children to their 
p.arents. Sometimes it overcomes their judgment 
and leads them to act in such a manner as is ex- 
ceedingly injurious to themselves, their children, 
and the community. 

9. Though criminals may sometimes escape from 
their fellow-men, they cannot escape from (jod. 
However great their clforis, his judgment will in 
due time overtiike and destroy theni. 

12. Though money i.s valuable, and h.as great 
influence with men, yet it is foolish to endanger 
one's life for it. and much more foolish to endanger 
one's soul. 

14. One criminal is often made the means of pun- 
ishing another, and he may do it for an object, and 
420 



Lord hath ""avenged thee this day *» cirS^a! 
of all them that ^rosc up against thee. 

32 And the king said unto Cushi, i.s the 
young man Absalom safe] And Cushi 
answered. The *■ enemies of my lord the 
king, and all that rise against thee to do 
thee hurt, be as that young man is. 

33 T{ And the king was jnuch moved, 
and went up to the chamber over the gate, 
and wept : and as he went, thus he said, 
0' my son Absalom, my son, my son Ab- 
salom! would J God I had died for thee, O 
Absalom, my son, my son I 

CHAPTER XIX. 

1 Joab causeth the king to cease his mourning. 9 The 
Israelites are earnest to bring the king back. 11 Da- 
vid sendeth to the priests to incite them of Judali. 
13 Shimei is parJoned. 24 Mephibosheth excused. 
3'2 BarziUai dismissed, Chimham his son is taken 
into the king's family. 41 The Israelites expostulate 
with Judah for bringing home the king without them. 

AND it was told Joab, Behold, the king 
weepeth and'^mourneth for Absalom. 

2 And the *victory that day was turned 
into mourning unto all the people : for the 
people heard say that day how the king 
was grieved for his son. 

3 And the people gat them by stealth that 
day into the city, as people being ashamed 
steal away when they tlee in battle. 

4 But the king ' covered his face, and the 
king cried with a loud voice, '"0 my son 
Absalom! Absalom, my son, my son! 

5 And Joab came into the house to the 
king, and said, Thou hast shamed this day 
the faces of all thy servants, which this 
day have saved thy life, and the lives of 
thy sons and of thy daughters, and the 
lives of thy wives, and the lires of thy 
concubines ; 

e Psa. 144 : 7, 10. f I.uke 18 : T, 8. g Psa. 1-24 : -2, 3. b Judg. 

5:31; Daa. 4: 19. i cliiip. 19: 4. i Rom. fi : 7, 8; 9: .3. k Prov. 

17:2.5. * Heb. salvation, or detiverance. Ichap.l5:30. in chap, 
18:33. 

with a spirit, which may justly draw down punish- 
ment on himself. 

17. Children who rebel against and ill treat their 
parents, are in special danger of coming to an un- 
timely and miserable end. 
1 20. The immediate eifect of joyful or mournful 
I tidings depends much on the manner in which they 
' are communicated. Care should therefore be taken 
I to have it done by such persons and in such a man- 
I ner as will tend to produce the best results. 

27. Our wishes liave a great influence on our 
judgment, and high expectations of good are liable 
to be followed by distressing accuiiiuialioiis of evil. 
33. None fully know the suflerings of aflectionate 
parents in the untimely and violent death of chil- 
dren, but those who endure them ; and none but those 
who experience it can imagine the blessedness, .at 
such times, of intelligent, afTeclionate, childlike 
confidence in God, and a hearty commitment of all 
one's interests to his infinitely wise and good dis- 
posal. 

CHAPTER Xl.X. 
3. Gal til cm by stealth; secretly, privately, 
because the king appeared as if he was disple.osed 
at what they had done. 



He returns over the Jordan. 



II. SAMUEL, XIX. 



He pardonclh Shimci: 



B.c!S' 6 In* that thou lovest thine ene- 
mies, and hatest thy friends. For thou 
hast declared this day, t that thou regard- 
est neither princes nor servants : for this 
day I perceive, that if Absalom had lived, 
and all we had died this day, then it had 
pleased thee well. 

7 Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak 
comfortably t unto thy servants : for I swear 
by the Lord, if thou go not forth, there will 
not tarry one with thee this night : and that 
will be ''worse unto thee than all the evil 
that befell thee from thy youth vxntil now. 

8 Then the king arose, and sat in the gate. 
And they told unto all the people, saying. 
Behold, the king doth sit in the gate. And 
all the people came before the king: for 
Israel "^ had fled every man to his tent. 

9 T[And all the people were at strife 
throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying. 
The king saved us out of the hand of our 
enemies, and he delivered us out of the 
hand of the Philistines; and now ho is 
fled'^ out of the laud for Absalom. 

10 And Absalom, whom we anointed 
over us, is dead in battle. Now therefore 
why ^ speak ye not a word of bringing the 
king back"? 

11 11 And king David sent to Zadok and 
to Abiathar the priests, saying, Speak 
unto the elders of Judah, saying, Why are 
ye the last to bring the king back to his 
house? seeing the speech of all Israel is 
come to the king, even to his house. 

12 Ye are my brethren, ye are "^ my bones 
and my flesh : wherefore then are ye the 
last to bring back the king'? 

13 And say ye to ''Amasa, Art thou not 
of my bone, and of my flesh? God do so 
to me, and more also, if thou be not cap- 
tain of the host before me continually in 
the room of Joab. 

14 And he bowed the heart of all the 
men of Judah, 'even as the heart of one 
man ; so that they sent this word unto the 
king. Return thou, and all thy servants. 

15 So the king returned, and came to 
Jordan. And Judah came to sQilgal, to 
go to meet the king, to conduct the king 
over Jordan. 

16 HAnd ''Shimei the son of Gera, a 



* Heb. By lovintj, f Heb. that princts or se 
thee, t Heb. to the heart «/. Gfn. 34 : :l. a Prn' 



lan/t are not to 
U;-2j<, b chap. 

18: fi-8. c chap, li : H. % Huh. arn ye silent? i chap. .1: 1. 

• chap. 17:2.t; 1 Chron. 2:17. f Jlulg. 20:1. g Jo...h. 5:9. 

6. Thou lovest thine, enemies ; Joab's meaning 
was, that David by so mourning; for Absalom actcil 
as if he loved hini more than lie did his family and 
people, whose lives had been saved by the death of 
Absalom. 

7. Speai- comfnrtnhlii unto thy servants; 
show thyself pleased wiih their victory. 

11. The speech of all Israel is come ; express- 
ing their desire to have the king return. 

12. My flesh ; of the same tribe with him. 



Benjamite, which icns of Bahurim, hasted 
and came down with the men of Judah to 
meet king David. 

17 And there were a thousand men of 
Benjamin with him, and 'Ziba the servant 
of the house of Saul, and his fifteen sons 
and his twenty servants with him ; and 
they went over Jordan before the king. 

18 And there went over a ferry-boat to 
carry over the king's household, and to do 
what 11 he thought good. And Shimei the 
son of Gera fell down before the king, as 
he was come over Jordan; 

19 And said unto the king, JLet not my 
lord impute iniquity unto me, neither do 
thou '' remember that which thy servant 
did 'perversely the day that my lord the 
king w"ent out of Jerusalem, that the king 
should '"take it to his heart. 

20 For thy servant doth know that I 
have sinned ; therefore, behold, I am come 
the first this day of all the house of Joseph 
to go down to meet my lord the king. 

21 But Abishai the son of Zeruiah an- 
swered and said, Shall not Shimei be put 
to death for this, because he "cursed the 
Lord's anointed? 

22 And David said, What have I to do 
with you, ye sons of Zeruiah, that ye 
should thi.s' day be adversaries unto me? 
shall" there any man be put to death this 
day in Israel? for do not I know that I am 
this day king over Israel? 

23 Therefore the king said unto Shimei, 
Thou f shalt not die. And the king sware 
unto him. 

24 T[ And T ]\Iephibosheth the son of Saul 
came down to meet the king, and had nei- 
ther dressed his feet, nor trimmed his 
beard, nor washed his clothes, from the 
day the king departed until the day he 
came a<!;ain in peace. 

2.5 And it came to pass, "when he was 
come to Jerusalem to meet the king, that 
the king said unto him, ''Wherefore went- 
est not thou with me, Mephibosheth? 

26 And he answered, My lord, king, 
my servant deceived me: for thy servant 
said, I will saddle me an ass, that I may 
ride thereon, and go to the king; because 
thy servant is lame. 

k chap, lli : 3. ichap. 9:2, 10. \\ Heb. the goad in his et/es. jl 
Sam. 22:15; P5ia.32:2; Rom. 4:6-8. kPsa. 79:8. 1 chap. 
I«:5.et<;. Ill chap. 13: 3:l. n Ex. 22: 28 ; 1 Sam. 2fi:9. o I Sam. 
Il:l:i. p 1 Kings, 2:8,36, etc. qehap.9:6. r chap. 18:17. 

13. Amasa ; he had been the commanller of Ab- 
salom's army. Chap. 17 : 25. 

14. He; Amasa. 

19. Thy servant fli 'I perversehi ; chap. 16: -5-13. 

23. Nvt die; not be put to death for that of- 
fence. 

24. Neither dressed — iior I rimmed^-vor wash- 
ed ; showing that he had been in a state of deep 
mourning ever since Pavid left the city. 

26. My servant ; Ziba. 

421 



Incidents of 



II. SAiMUEL, XIX. 



David's return. 



27 And "he hath sLiiulered thy servant 
unto my lord the king; but my lord the 
kina is as an ''angel of God: do therefore 
what i.y jgood in tiiine eyes. 

28 For ail of my father's house were but 
dead* men before my lord the king: yet 
didst thou "^set thy servant among them 
that did eat at thine own table. What 
rigiit tlierefore have I yet to cry any more 
unto the king? 

29 And the king said unto him, Why 
speakest thou any more of thy matters? 
I have said, Thou and Ziba divide the 
land. 

30 And Mephibosheth said unto the 
king, Yea, let him take all, forasmuch as 
my lord the king is come again in peace 
unto his own house. 

31 ^ And '' Barzillai the Gileadite came 
down from Rogelim, and went over Jor- 
dan with the king, to conduct him over 
Jordan. 

32 Now Barzillai was a very aged man, 
even fourscore years old : and " he had pro- 
vided the king of sustenance while he lay 
at Mahanaim ; for "^he u'as a very great 
man. 

33 And the king said unto Barzillai, 
Come thou over with me, and I will feed 
thee with me in Jerusalem. 

34 And Barzillai said unto the king, 
IIow t long have I to live, that I should go 
up with the king unto Jerusalem"? 

35 I am this day ^ fourscore years old: 
anil can I '' discern between good and evil ? 
can 'thy servant taste what I eat or what 
I drink? can I hear any more the voice of 
singing men and singing women? where- 
fore then should thy servant be yet a bur- 
den unto my lord the king? 

36 Thy servant will go a little way over 
Jordan with the king: and why should 



a ili;il.. 10:3; .ler. 9:4. 1> chap. 14:17. CO. " Hell, mdn of 
drath. \!>:im.'i6:\lj. c chap. 9:7, 10. 13. dlKingH.2:7. e cliiip. 
17:-27. r lTiin.fi: 17-Hl. ) Heh. How many days are Hit tjenn of 
mi/ life? Gen. 47:9. g Psa. 90:10; Trov. 1K:31. h Heb. ft: 14. 

27. S///.?/dered f/n/ serva)/t ; ch.ap. 16:1—3. 

29. Diriilr. the land; the land that had belongod 
to Sa:il, and which David, after restoring it to Mophib- 
oshetli. had hastily given to Ziba. Chap. 9:7; 16 : 1. 

31. Barzillai; chap. 17:27. 

37. Chimham ; the son of Barzillai. 

41. Stole)! thee arcay ; gone first and brought 
the king back without consulting the other tribes. 
Ver. 4.3. 

42. Near of kin; he belonged to their tribe. 

I.VSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Excessive sorrow unfits the soul for duty, dis- 
pleases 'j-od, and tends to injure all who indulge it 
or feel its influence. 

.'). Rulers, as well as people, should be plainly 
told of their duty, and such motives set before them 
lis are suited to induce them to perform it. 

8. Tiie approbation of rulers should be promptly 
and cheerfully given to those who do right, and their 
disapprobation manifested towards those who do 
wrong. Roin. 13 : 3, 4. 
422 



the king recompense it me with *d c.?S: 
such a -i reward? 

37 Let thy servant, I pray thee, turn back 
again, that I may die in mine own city, 
and be buried by the grave of my father 
and of my mother. But behold thy ser- 
vant '' Chimham ; let him go over with my 
lord the king; and do to him what shall 
seem good unto thee. 

38 And the king answered, Chimham 
shall go over with me, and I will do to 
him that which shall seem good unto thee : 
and whatsoever thou shall + require of me, 
thai will I do for thee. 

39 And all the people went over Jordan. 
And when the king was come over, the 
king kissed 'Barzillai, and blessed him; 
and he returned unto his own place. 

40 Then the king went on to Gilgal, and 
Chimham ^ went on with him : and all the 
people of Judah conducted the king, and 
also half the people of Israel. 

41 ^And behold, all the men of Israel 
came to the king, and said unto the king. 
Why have our brethren the men of Jiulah 
stolen thee away, and have "'brought the 
king, and his household, and all David's 
men with him, over Jordan? 

42 And all the men of Judah answered 
the men of Israel, Because the king is 
near of "kin to us: wherefore then be ye 
angry for this matter? have we eaten at 
all of the king's costi or hath he given us 
any gift? 

43 And the men of Israel answered the 
men of Judah, and said. We have ten 
parts in the king, and we have also more 
right in David than ye: why then did ye 
despise II us, that our advice should not be 
first had in bringingback our king? And 
the words of the men of J udah were "fiercer 
than the words of the men of Israel. 



i K.cl. lJ:3-.n. 


j I.uliP 6:38. k IKings, 2:7: .ler. 41:17. 


1 Heh. choone. 


1 Gen. 31 : 65 ; 1 Tliess. 5 : -26. 8 Heb. Chimhan. 


m ver. 1 1-IS. n Tcr. 12. || Heb. tet u» at light, o Judg. 8:1; 


Jas. 3:2-10. 





11. All prudent care should be taken to avoid 
coining evils, especially to prevent di.scord among 
bretiiren, and to lead them to cooperate for the public 
good. 

13. When men are strono;ly excited and set upon 
accomplishing a favorite object, they are tempted 
to make rash promises, and to adopt measures which 
events show to have been unwise. 

19. If men confess their sins and appear to be 
penitent, it is ordinarily wise to treat them as if 
they were so. (rod alone knows the heart, and men 
ought not to .judge of it, e.xccpt so far as its char- 
acter is manifested in the conduct. 

24. True love will show itself in grief at the 
sorrows of those beloved, and in joy at the return 
of their joys. 

27. Sland(;r is a common and aggr.avated sin. and 
the slanderer, though he often escape punishment 
from men, is and ought to be regarded as among 
the basest of sinners. 

32. Kindness and active benevolence are pecul- 



Sheba''s rebellion. 



II. SAMUEL, XX. 



Joab slayeth Amasa. 



S."S CHAPTER XX. 

1 By occasion of the quarrel, Sheba maketh a party in 
Israel. 3 David's ten concubines are shut up in per- 
petual prison. 4 Amasa, made captain over .ludah, 
is slain by Joab. 14 Joabpursueth Sheba unto Abel. 
Ifi A wise woman savetk the city by Sheba's head. 
2.3 David's officers. 

AND there happened to be there a man 
of Belial, whose name xcas Sheba, the 
son of Bichri, a Benjamite : and he blew a 
trumpet, and said. We have no 'part in Da- 
vid, neither have we inheritance in the son 
of Jesse : every man to his tents, Israel. 

2 So ''every man of Israel went up from 
after David, and followed Sheba the son of 
Bichri : but the men of '^ Judah clave unto 
their kin^, from. Tordan even to Jerusalem. 

3 ^ And David came to his house at Je- 
rusalem ; and the king took the ten wom- 
en his ''concubines, whom he had left to 
keep the house, and put them "in *ward, 
and fed them, but went not in unto them. 
So they were t shut up unto the day of 
their death, 1^ living in widowhood. 

4 f Then said the king to Amasa, ^As- 
semble me the men of Judah within three 
days, and be thou here present. 

5 So Amasa "^went to assemble the men 
o/ Judah: but he tarried longer than the 
set time which he had appointed him. 

6 And David said to Abish.Ti. Now shall 
Sheba the son of Bichri do us more harm 
than did Absalom : take thou thy lord's 
.servants,? and pursue after him, lest he 
get him fenced cities, and H escape us. 

7 And there went out after him Joab's 
men, and the ""Cherethites, and the Peleth- 
ites, and all the mighty men : and they 
went out of Jerusalem, to pursue after 
Sheba the son of Bichri. 

8 When they ivere at the great stone 
which is in Gibeon, Amasa Avent before 
them. And Joab's garment that he had 
put on was girded unto him, and upon it 
a girdle xoith a sword fastened upon his 
loins in the sheath thereof; and as he 
went forth it fell out. 



• clian. 19:43; I Kin»!>, UrIB: T.uke 19:14. b P«a. fi2 : 9. 
cclinp. 19:41; 'iCIiron. 10: 17. d cli«p. IS : 16 ; lfi:i2l, 22. * Heb. 
a howe of ward, t Gen. 40 : ;l, 4, 7. f Heb. hound, t Hpb. in 
widowhood of life. t>, Heb. Call, frban. 19:1S. ediap. 11:11; 
I Kings, 1 : 33. {| He'b. dtlivrr himielffrom our eyes, h 1 Kings, 



iarly agreenWe in the aged, .and should ever be met 
with grateful and active kindness in return. As 
their tastes for the comforts of this life are diminisli- 
in;;. their desires for those of.the future should be in- 
creasing, and their chief concern be for preparation 
to close their work on earth, and enter the rest of 
heaven. 

37. Aged benevolent men arc pleased to have those 
who are younger part;ike of lawful innocent enjoy- 
ments, for which they themselves have no relish. 

38. The kindness and fidelity of pirent.s the Lord 
often rewards in blessings on their children and chil- 
dren's children ; thus showing merry even to ihoii- 
sands of those who love him and keep his command- 
ments. 



9 And Joab said to Amasa, Art thou in 
health, my brother"? And Joab took Am- 
asa by the beard with the right hand to 
kiss' him. 

1 But Amasa took no heed to the sword 
thatwa.^ in Joab's hand : so heJ smote him 
therewith ''in the fifth rih, and shed out 
his bowels to the ground, and *struck him 
not again ; and he died. So Joab and 
Abishai his brother pursued after Sheba 
the son of Bichri. 

1 1 And one of Joab's men stood by him, 
and said, He that favorcth Joab, and he 
that is for David, let him go after Joab. 

12 And Amasa wallowed in blood in 
the midst of the highway. And when 
the man saw that all the people stood still, 
he removed Amasa out of the highway 
into the field, and cast a cloth upon him, 
when he saw that every one tint came 
by him stood still. 

13 When he was removed out of the 
highway, all the people went on after Joab, 
to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri. 

14 IT And he went through all tlie tribes 
of Israel unto 'Abel, and to Bcth-maachah, 
and all the Berites : and they were gath- 
ered together, and went also after him. 

15 And they came and besieged him in 
Abel of Bcth-maachah, and they cast up a 
bank'" against the city, and it stood t in the 
trench : and all the people that were with 
Joab * battered the wall, to throw it down. 

Ifi ^ Then cried a wise woman out of 
the city, Hear, hear ; say. I pray you, unto 
Joab, Come near hither, that I may speak 
with thee. 

17 And when he was come near unto 
her, the woman said, Jrt thou Joab ? And 
he answered, I am he. Then she said 
unto him. Hear the words of thy hand- 
maid. And he answered, I do hear. 

18 Then she spake, saying, ^ They were 
wont to speak in old time, saying, Tliey 
shall surely ask counsel at Abel: and so 
thev ended the matter. 



I:3«. iI.ukeS2:47. j 1 Kings, 2: R. k chap. 2 : 23. * Heb. 
doubled not his stroke. 1 2Kin»s. 15:29: 2 Chrnn. lfi:4. mSKings, 
19 : 3-:. t Or, noaintt the outmott wall, f Heb. marred to thrmo 
down. \ Or, Tliev plainlv tpnke in the heginniag, saving, Surety 
they will ask of Ahel, ajid so make an end. Dent. 20 : 1 1. ' 



"*• CKAPTEH XX, 

3, III irard: in seclusion, 

10, He smote ]ti 111. : being angry because David 
had put Amasa over him. 

1"2. Stood still ; .and were thus hindered from 
going forward after .Toab .and Abishai. 

14. Beth-tiiaachah ; a place in the north part 
of Palestine. 

18. Abel; thesame .asBeth-maachah, ver. 14. 1-5. 
The meaning of this verse is supposed to be more 
plainly expressed in the margin : that the people had 
expected that Joab would first inquire whether they 
would submit to him ; .and they, by doing it, would 
settle the matter, and thus save their city from being 
destroved ; but as he had not done it, she interposed. 
423 



Shcba is slain. 



II. SAMUEL, XXI. 



The Gibconites avenf^rcd. 



19 I am one of them that are peaceable 
and faithful in Israel: thou seeke.st to de- 
stroy a city and a 'mother in Israel : why 
wilt thou swallow up the inlieritance of 
the Lord? 

20 And Joab answered and said, Far be 
it, far be it from me, that I should swal- 
low up or destroy. 

21 The matter is not so: but a man of 
mount Ephraim, Shcba the son of Biehri 
by *name, hath lifted up liis hand against 
the king, even against David: deliver him 
only, and I will depart from the city. And 
the woman said unto Joab, Behold, liis head 
shall be thrown to thee over the wall. 

22 Then the woman went unto all the 
people in her ''wisdom : and they cut off 
the head of Sheba the son of Biehri, and 
cast it out to Joab. And he blew a trum- 
pet, and they t retired from the city, every 
man to his tent. And Joab returned to 
Jerusalem unto the king. 

23 ^Now"^Joab teas over all the host of 
Israel : and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada 
wa.'i over the Cherethites and over the 
Pelethites : 

24 And Adoram ivas over the "^tribute: 
and "Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud icas 
recorder :t 

25 And Sheva was scribe: and Zadok 
and Abialhar irere the priests : 

26 And Ira also the Jairite was ^ a chief 
ruler about David. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

I The three years' famine for the Gibeonites ceaseth. 
by hanginij seven of Saul's sons. 10 Rizpah's kind- 
ness iiuto the lieatl. I"i David burieth tlio bones of 
Saul and Jonathan in his father's sepulchre, lo Four 
battles against the Philistines, wherein four valiants 
of David slay four giants. 

THEN there was a famine in the days 
of David three years, year after year ; 
and David H inquired of the Lord. And 
the Lord answered, It is for Saul, and for 
his bloody house, because he slew the 
Gibeonites.*" 

2 And tlie king called the Gibconites, 
and said unio them; (now tlie Gibeonites 
werc^ not of the children of Israel, but of 

• JiKlg. S : 7. * Heb. hit name, h Eccl. 9 : 14-16. f Heb. were 
leallered. c chap. 8: 10-18. d I Kinss, 4 : fi. elKings,4:3. 
t Or, yemembranccr. ij Or, a prime, chap. 8:18: Gen. 41 : 4fi : 
F..5.-2:l(i. II HKKtouqht the face. Num. '.'7 :-21. f 1 Snin. SJ: 19. 
t .losh. 9:S-2l. I" chap. iO: 19. » Or, It is not silver nor gold 



24. The tribute ; the revenue of the kingdom. 
TNSTRUCTrONS. 

1. Many difficulties might be amicahly settled, 
did not ."jome wicked man take occasion to fan the 
flame, and lead on to act.s of rashness de.structive, 
it may be. to himself and to his fellow-men. 

10. Many a bold and successful w.arrior has the 
heart of an assas.sin. and will without scruple mur- 
der even hi.s own relatives who stand in the way of 
his advancement. ^ 

I-"). The presence of one man may endanger the 
destruction of a whole city, and the wisdom of one 
•1'24 



the remnant of the Amoritcs; and *b c i^- 
the children of Israel had sworn unto them: 
and Saul sought to slay them in his zeal 
to the children of Israel and Judah;) 

3 Wherefore David said unto the Gib- 
eonites, What shall I do for you? and 
wherewith shall I make the atonement, 
that ye may bless the ''inheritance of the 
Lord? 

4 And the Gibeonites said unto him. 
We* will have no 'silver nor gold of Saul, 
nor of liis house ; neither for us shalt thou 
kill any man in Israel. And he said, 
What ye shall say, that will I do for you. 

5 And they answered the king, The man 
that consumed us, and that tdevised against 
us that we should be destroyed from re- 
maining in any of the coasts of Israel, 

6 Let seven men of his J sons be deliv- 
ered unto us, and we will hang them up 
unto the Lord in '' Gibeah of Saul, tirhom 
the Lord did choose. And the king said, 
I will give them. 

7 But the king spared Mephibosheth,the 
son of Jonathan the son of Saul, becaxise 
of the Lord's ' oath that was between them, 
between David and Jonathan the son of 
Saul. 

8 But the king took the two sons of'" Riz- 
pah the daughter of Aiah, whom she bare 
unto Saul, Armoni and ^lephiboshcth ; 
and the five sons of ^ Michal the daughter 
of Saul, whom she II brought up for Adriel 
the son of Barzillai the Mcholathite : 

9 And he delivered them into the hands 
of the Gibeonites, and they hanged them 
in the hill "before the Lord: and they 
fell all seven together, and were put to 
death in the days of harvest, in the first 
days, in the beginning of barley-liarvest. 

10 1[ And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah 
took sackcloth, and spread it for her upon 
the rock, from the beginning of harvest 
until water dropped upon them out of 
heaven, and suffered neither the birds of 
the air to rest on them by day, nor the 
beasts of the field by night. 

11 And it was told David what Rizpah 



that we have to do with Saul or his house, neithei 
to nil. etc. i r»n. 49 : H, 7. t Or, cut us off. j I 
Sam. 10:2H, % Or, chosen of the \.aKo. II Sam. 
3:7. \ Or. Michal's sister. || Heb. hare to .Idn 
n 1 Sam. 15:33. 



woman may do more timn all its men of war towards 
saving it. 

22. Magistrates, by putting to death one criminal, 
may save the lives of many who are innocent. 

CHAPTER -XXI. 

1. Tlie Gibfoiiitcs; 3oRh.{):ir}-'27. 

.3. Ble.ts the inheritance ; that the famine 
might cease, and the Israelites h.ave the blessings 
of harvests. 

7. The Lord's onth ; 1 i^am. 20 : l-")-!?. 

9. Bnrlrij-harvest ; in March. 



Philistinp. Slants slain. 



II. SAiMUEL, XXII. 



David's psalm of praise. 



R.c.'wS: the daughter of Aiah, the concu- 
bine of Saul, had done. 

1 2 ^ And David went and took the bones 
of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son 
from the men of ^'Jabesh-gilead, which had 
stolen them from the street of Beth-shan, 
where the Philistines had hanged them, 
when the Philistines had slain Saul in 
Gilboa : 

13 And he brought up from thence the 
bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan 
his son; and they gathered the bones of 
them that were hanged. 

14 And the bones of Saul and Jonathan 
his son buried they in the country of Ben- 
jamin in'^Zelah, in the sepulchre of Kish 
his father: and they performed all that 
the king commanded. And after that 
God was '^entreated for the land. 

15 11 Moreover the Philistines had yet 
war again with Israel; and David went 
down, and his servants with him, and 
fought against the Philistines : and David 
waxed faint. 

16 And Ishbi-benob, which was of the 
sons of *the giant, the weight of whose 
spear t weighed three hundred shekels of 
brass in weight, he being girded with a 
new sword, thought to have slain David. 

17 ButAbishai the son of Zeruiah suc- 
cored him, and smote the Philistine, and 
killed him. Then the men of David sware 
unto him, saying,'' Thou shalt go no more 
out with us to battle, that thou quench 
not the i light of ^Israel. 

18 And it came to pass after this, that 
there was again a battle with the Philis- 
tines at Gob: then '^Sibbechai the Hu- 
shathite slew ^ Saph, which n'as of the 
sons of II the giant. 

19 And there was again a battle in Gob 
with the Philistines, where Elhanan the 



« 1 Sam. :il : 1 1. h .Insli. 18 : 28. c chiip. 24 : 25. " Or, Riiplia. 
t Heb. tht $liiff, or tht htad. i ib.ip. 18:3. J Heh. candle, or 
lamv. e 1 Kings, II :36. r 1 Chron. 20 : 4. \ Or, Sippai. || Or, 
Kapha. * Or, Jair. f Or, Rapka. % Or. repniachiil. 1 Sam. 
17:10, 25, 26. % S/iammah. 1 Sam. lfi:9. s Psa. 116:2, :t. 

1-2. The bones of Saul; 1 Siim. 31 : 11-13. 

14. Was entreated for the land ; removed the 
famine. 

17. Quench not the lisiht; not deprive the 
nation of the ble.ssings of David's rei^ii. 
I.XSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Temporal calamities are the consequen,ces of 
sin, and should lead those who suffer tlicm to self- j 
e.'^amination. repentance, and reformation. I 

0. The wickedness of parents may bring great 
calamities on their children, and the wickedness of 
rulers great calamities on their people, long after I 
s<ic I parents and rulers are dead. Though the Lord ' 
dchi.vs, he does not forget, and in due time will man- 
ifest his just indigna'ion against sin. I 

10. The condition of children is often a source of 
nreat distress to parents, and occasions thein trou- 
bles under which none but 'rod can comfort, and 
from which none else can relieve them. 

14. The common blessings of life all come from ' 



' sonof *'Jaare-oregim,aBeth-lehemite,slow 
the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the staff 
of whose spear u'as like a weaver's beam. 

20 And there was yet a battle in Gath, 
where was a man of great stature, that had 
on every hand six fingers, and on every 
foot six toes, four and twenty in number; 
and he also was born to t the giant. 

21 And when he t defied Israel, Jonathan 
the son of ^ Shimeah the brother of David 
slew him. 

22 These four were born to the giant in 
Gath, and fell by the hand of David, and 
by the hand of his servants. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

A psahn of tlianksgiving for God's powerful deliverance, 
ft and manifold blessings. 

AND David spake unto the sLord the 
words of this ^ song, in the day that 
the Lord had delivered him out of the 
hand of all his enemies, and out of the 
hand of Saul : 

2 And he said, The Lord is my 'rock, 
and my 'fortress, and my deliverer; 

3 The God of my rock ; in him will I * 
trust: he is my ''shield, and the 'horn of 
my salvation, my high "'tower, and my 
refuge," my savior; thou savcst me from 
violence. 

4 I will call on the Lord, icho is wor- 
thy to be praised : so shall I be saved 
from mine enemies. 

5 When the H waves of death compassed 
me, the floods of *ungodly men made me 
afraid ; 

6 The + sorrows of hell compassed me 
about ; the snares of death prevented me. 

7 In my "distress I called upon the Lord, 
and cried to my God: and he did Phear 
my voice out of his temple, and my cry 
did enter into his ears. 

8 Then the ''earth shook and trembled ; 

h Ps:i. 18, title, i Deut. :i2 : 4. j Ps:i. Ill : 2. k Gen. 15:1; Psa. 
84:11. Il.ukel:fi9. m Prov. 18 : 10. n Psa. 4fi : 1 , 1 1 ; .ler. 
l>i:lit. II Or.paiipj. * Heh. Belial, f OV, cord*, o .lonali 3 : 2. 
p Psa. 34 : 6, l.i. q .luilg. 5:4; H:ib. 3 : 6, 10. 



God, and every-new harvest lays men under new 
obligations to love and obey him. 

17. The life, health, and reputation of good rulers 
are great blessings to the people, for the possession 
and continuance of which they should earnestly 
pray, and, when granted, be especially grateful. 

19. Great bodily strength and vigor are apt to be 
idolized, and when they are, often prove occasions 
of ruin to their possessors. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

2. Rod; and — fortress; support and protection. 

3. The and of my rock; ver. 47; 2 Cor. 1:3. 
Shield; defence from enemies. Horn ; the em- 
blem o( power. Toiver ; source of security. 

•"i. Waves; pangs, dis'.res.ses. Floods ; xashing^ 
multitudes. 

6. Prevented ; this word originally meant, to go 
before ; were spread out before him. 

8-16. A highly poetical description of God's ap- 
425 



David's psalm of 



II. SAMUEL, XXII. 



thanksgiving to God. 



the foundations of "heaven moved and 
shook, because he was wroth. 

9 There went up a smoke *out of his 
no.strils, and fire ''out of his mouth de- 
voured: coals were kindled by it. 

10 He "^ bowed the heavens also, and 
came down; and ''darkness was under 
his feet. 

1 1 And he rode upon a •"cherub, and did 
fly : and he was seen upon the "^wings of 
the wind. 

12 And he made darkness pavilions 
round about him, tdark waters, ayu/ thick 
clouds of the skies. 

13 Through the brightness before him 
were coals of fire kindled. 

14 The Lord ^thundered from heaven^ 
and the ^lost High uttered his voice. 

1 5 And he sent out '" arrows, and scattered 
them ; lightning, and discomfited them. 

16 And the channels of the 'sea ap- 
peared, the foundations of the world were 
discovered, at the rebuking of the Lord, 
at the blast of the breath of his ^^ nostrils. 

17 He sent from above, he took me, he 
drew mc out of ^ many ' waters. 

18 He delivered me from my strong en- 
emy, and from them that hated me : for 
they were too strong for mc. 

19 They prevented me in the day of my 
calamity: but the Lord was my stay. 

20 He brought mc forth also into a large 
place: he delivered me. because he ''de- 
lighted in me. 

21 The Lord rewarded mc 'according 
to my righteousness; according to Ihe 
cleanness'" of my hands hath he recom- 
pensed mc. 

22 For I have "kept the ways of the 
Loud, and have not wickedly departed 
from my God. 

23 For "all his judgments were before 
me : and as for his statutes, I did not de- 
part from them. 

24 I was also upright "before him, and 
have kept myself from mine iniquity. 

• JobJ(i:ll. *Heb.«y. bPsa.97:3,4. clsa.r>4:l. aPsn.97:2. 
eEwk.9:3. fPsa.104::!. ^ HMi. binding n/watert. BP»ru«:3; 
I»a 30::lO. t Deut. 3i:23. i Nnlnim 1 : 4. | Or, any«r. Psa. 74: 1. 
^ Or, gital. jlsa.41:2. k chap. I.t :-3fi. I 1 Sam. M : 2.1. m .Tob 
17:9. n Prov. 8:32. "Psa. U9:30. \\ Heb. tn him. * Heb. fte- 



25 Therefore the Lord hath rec- *b.c:?2S: 
ompensed me according to my righteous- 
ness ; according to my cleanness *in his 
eyesight. 

26 With the p merciful thou wilt show 
thyself merciful; and with the upright 
man thou wilt show thyself upright. 

27 With the pure thou wilt show tliy- 
self pure ; and witli the i froward thou 
wilt tshow thyself unsavory. 

28 And the afflicted people thou wilt 
save : but thine eyes are upon the 'haugh- 
ty, that thou mayest bring them down. 

29 For thou art my + lamp, Lord : and 
the Lord will lighten my darkness. 

30 For by thee 1 have ^ run through a 
troop: by my God have I leaped over a 
wall. 

31 As for God, his way is perfect; the 
word of the Lord is II tried : he is a buck- 
ler to all them that trust in him. 

32 For who is God, save the Lord? and 
who is a rock, save our God"? 

33 God is my strength and power ; and 
he *maketh my way perfect. 

34 He t maketh my "feet like hinds"/«^, 
and setteth me upon my high places. 

35 He teachethmy hands ttowar; sofliat 
a boM- of steel is broken by mine arms. 

36 Thou hast also given me the shield 
of thy salvation : and thy gentleness hatli 
made^ me great. 

37 Thou hast enlarged my steps under 
me ; so that my II feet did not slip. 

38 I have pursued mine enemies, and 
destroyed them; and turned not again 
until T had consumed them. 

39 And I have consumed them, and 
wounded them, that they could not arise : 
yea, they are 'fallen under my feet. 

40 For thou hast girded me with strength 
to battle: "them that rose up against me 
hast thou *subdued under me. 

41 Thou hast also given me the "necks 
of mine enemies, that I might destroy 
them that hate me. 



pearing for the deliverance of liis friends, and the 
destruction of his enemies. 

17. Many waters ; great afflictions. 

19. Prevented; went before, encountered. 

20. Into a large ylacc ; gave him freedom from 
his distresses. 

21. Righteonsness — cleanness of my hands ; 
his innocence of the sins charged upon him, and his 
hearty devotion to the service of God. 

23. His judgments ; his riglitcous decisions 
concerning the matters in question. 

'Jt. Upright; honest, .sincere, and merciful. 
Mi ne iniquity; thattowiiich he was most tempted. 

27. Shou- thyself Jinsat'ory ; he would con- 
tend with, oppose, and punish them. 
426 



/•- 


rrh 


» eyes, p Mat. .5 : 7 


q 


-e 


■.2fi 


23 


tOr 


wrest/e. 


r Dan. 


4 


37. 


i Or, tnndle. » Or 


broken 


II '>r. 


•ejineft 


' H^b. 


riddeth. 


n 


looseth. t H>-b. equalMh. 


g 


Hab 


3: 


19. t 


Hrb./..r 


the .(.«.-. 


i 


H.-b 


multiplied me. || 


Heb. 


at 


kits 


t 


Mai. 4 


3. u P«.i. 44 : 8. 


Heb 


caused to bow. v 


Oen. 


19 


:«; 


Josli. 10:24. 





29. My lamp ; showing him the way in which 
he should go. 

30. Ru7i through; broken. Leaped over a 
wall ; overcome .all obstructions. 

31 A buckler ; shielding him from his enemies. 
.32. A rock ; an efft-ctual support. 

33. Perfect ; upright, sincere, and prosperous. 

34. hike hinds'' feet ; very swift, and able to 
stand in safety on the most dangerous pl.aces. 

35. A bow of steel is broken ; showing that (ioil 
gave him great strength. 

36. Gentleness ; condescending kindness and 
teaching. 

37. linlarged my steps ; given me full liberty, 
and enabled me to walk in safet)'. 



DavlcVs last words. 



II. SAMUEL, XXIII, 



His mighty men. 



il-:S!l- 42 They looked, but there xvas 
none to save; even unto the Lord, but 
he* answered them not. 

43 Then did I beat them as snnall as the 
dust*" of the earth: I did stamp them as 
the <^ mire of the street, and did spread 
them abroad. 

44 Thou also hast delivered me from the 
strivings ''of my people, thou hast kept me 
to be head of the •■ heatlien : a people which 
I knew not shall serve me. 

45 Strangers* shall t submit themselves 
unto me : as soon as they hear, they shall 
be obedient unto me. 

46 Strangers shall fade away, and they 
shall be afraid out of their "^elosc places. 

47 The Lord liveth; and blessed 6e my 
rock; and exalted be the God of the rock 
of my salvation. 

48 It is God that J avengeth me, and that 
bringeth down the people under me, 

49 And that bringeth me forth from 
mine enemies : thou also hast lifted me up 
on high above them that rose up against 
me: thou hast ^delivered me from the 
violent man. 

50 Therefore I will give thanks unto 
thee, Lord, among the heathen, and I 
will sing praises unto thy name. 

5 1 He is\\\e tower of salvation for his king: 
and showeth mere)' to his anointed, unto 
David, and to his seed for ''evermore. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

1 David, in his la<t words, professeth his faith in God's 
promises to be beyond sense or experience. 6 The 
diiferent state of the wicked. 8 A catalogue of Da- 
vid's mighty men. 

"jVTOW these be the last words of David. 
_LN David the son of Jesse said, and the 

» I'rov. 1 : M ; Mi™ll.T:4. b 2 Kinss, l.i: 7. c Micali 7: 10. 
i cliap. 3 : 1 ; 19 : 9, 14 ; 20 : 1 , 2, 22. >• Ps.t. 2:8. * Heb. Snm of 
the slranvei: ^ Oj, yield feigntdoheiiitnce ; Heli. (I'c. Dent 33:2!! ; 
rsa.63:3. fMicali7:l7. i He\y. qivetli uvengement for jne. 
chap. 18: 19, 31 ; 1 S.itn. 25: 39. g Ps.l. 52 : 1, 5. 8 ; STIiess. 3: 2. 



42. Answered them not ; their cry to him was 
that of distress merely, after they were given up to 
ruin as a punishment for their sins. Prov. 1 : '2S. 

43. Dust — mire; expressive of utter destruction. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Deliverance from trouble shouKl he ever fol- 
lowed by devout acknowledijment of God as its 
author, and hearty thanksgiving forliis mercies. 

4. Humble dependence on (jod with believing 
supplication to him for all whicli is needed, is one 
of the best means of gaining benefit from trials 
while they last, and in due time a glorious deliver- 
ance from them. 

8. All created things are dependent upon and un- 
der the control of Jehovah, and whenever he sees best 
he can use them as instruments for the salvation of 
his friends and the destruction of liis enemies. 

21. The Lord often treats men in this world ac- 
cording to their character; and he will always do 
it in the world to come. 

28. The humble, sincere, and benevolent are ob- 
jects of G-od's favor, and receive special tokens of 
his love; while the proud, hypocritical, and selfish 
he abhors, and will visit with his displeasure. 



man who teas 'raised up on high, the 
anointed of the God of Jacob, and the 
sweet J psalmist of Israel, said, 

2 The'' Spirit of the Lord spake by me, 
and his word iras in my tongue. 

3 The God of Israel said, the Rock of Is- 
rael spake to me, 5 He that ruleth over men 
must be 'just, ruling in ""the fear of God. 

4 And he shall be as "the light of the 
morning, when the sun riseth, even a morn- 
ing without clouds ; as the tender grass 
springing out of the earth by clear shin- 
ing after "rain. 

5 Although my house be not so with 
God ; yet he hath made with me an p ev- 
erlasting covenant, ordered in all things, 
and sure ; for this is all my salvation, and 
all mj/1 desire, although he make it not to 
grow. 

6 But the sons of Belial .s7taZ/ be all of 
them as thorns thrust away, because they 
cannot be taken with hands; 

7 But the man that shall touch them 
must be " fenced with iron and the staff of 
a spear; and they shall be utterly burned 
with ^fire in the same place. 

8 Tf These be the names of the mighty 
men whom David had : *The Tachmonite 
that sat in the seat, chief among the cap- 
tains ; the same was Adino the Eznite : he 
lifted up his spear against eight hundred, 
whomt he slew at one time. 

9 And after him icas Eleazar the son of 
Dodo the Ahohitc, one of the three mighty 
men with David, when they defied the 
Philistines that were there gathered to- 
gether to battle, and the men of Israel 
were gone away : 

10 He arose, and smote the Philistines 

b Psa 8-! : 29. .16. i Psa. 78:70, 71. j I.uke 24 : 44. k 2 Peterl 
1:21. 4 Or, Be thou ruler, etc. Psa. 110:2. I Prov. 31 : 9. m Ex. 
18:21 ; iCliron. 19:7.9. nProv.4:ia. oP3a.72:<i. P cba|.. 
7:14-16; Is.l. 55: 3. q P,,.a. 73 : 25, 26. \\lioh. filled, r Mat. 3:10. 
" Or, Junhehbatsebet the Tachmonile^heud of the three, f Or, tlain. 



31. There are no difficulties in the path of duty 
which those who trust in G-od may not overcome, 
and no dangers which they may not escape. 

40. God adapts his dealings to the circumstances 
of his people, and gives mercies according to their 
necessiiies; so that as their day is. their wisdom, 
strength, consolation, and all needful blessings will 
be. Deut. 33 : 2.5. 

4.J. From what God has done for his people they a re 
encouraged as to what he will do, and led confidently 
to e.xpect that he will fulfil his promises for ever. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

L The last words of David; spoken near the 
close of his life. 

4. The light of the niorniitg ; a great blessing 
and joy to mankind. 

0. My house be not so with God ; his family, 
in many respects, was not what God required, nor 
what David wished ; nor what they would have 
j been, had not he and they done wrong. He make 
I it not to ffioif; his family did not increase in piety 
as he hoped that it would. 

I 7. Fenced with iron ; be completely defended. 
427 



A catalogue of 



II. SAMUEL. XXIII, 



David's mighty men. 



until his hand was weary, and his hand 
clave unto the sword: and the Lord 
wrought a i;reat victory that day ; and the 
people returned after him only to spoil. 

1 1 And after him was Shammah the son 
of Agee the Hararitc. And the Philis- 
tines were gathered together *into a troop, 
where was a piece of ground full of len- 
tiles : and the people fled from the Phil- 
istines. 

12 But he .^tood in the midst of the 
ground, and defended it, and slew the 
Philistines: and the Lord wrought a 
great victory. 

13 And t three of the thirty chief went 
down, and came to David in the harvest- 
time unto the "cave of AduUam: and the 
troop of the Philistines pitched in the val- 
ley of Rephaim. 

14 And David loas then in a hold, and 
the garrison of the Philistines icas then in 
Beth-lehem. 

15 And David longed, and said, Oh that 
one would give me drink of the water of 
the well of Beth-lehcm, which is by the 
gate! 

16 And the three mighty men hrake 
through the host of the Philistines, and 
drew water out of the well of Beth-lehem, 
that icas by the gate, and took it, and 
brought it to David: nevertheless he 
would not drink thereof, but poured it out 
unto the Lord. 

17 And he said. Be it far from me, 
Lord, that I should do this : is not this the 
blood of the men that went in jeopardy 
of tlieir livcsl therefore he would not 
drink it. These things did these three 
mighty men. 

18 And Abishai, the brother of Joab, the 
son of Zeruiah, was chief among three. 
And he lifted up his spear against three 



* Or, for foraging, t Or, tht three caplaiiut over the thirty. 
a 1 Slim. Mrl. | Heb. «/«tn. \ Keiy great :>f<iclt. || Heb. /t.<Hj 
of God. * neh.a man of ci>untenonce,m sight ; culled. I Cbron. 

11. Lentiles ; a species of pulse, or pea. 

l.^. Adullam ; 1 Sam. 22 : 1. Rephaim ; chap. 
5 : 18. 

17. The blood of the men; water, for whicli 
they h;ul hazarded tlieir lives. 

20. Kalizeel; in the south part of .Tudah. Josh. 
1.5 : 21. hion-like ; fierce, strong;. couran;eoas. 

21. A goodly man ; one of warlike appear.^nce, 
and of great strengtii and stiiture. 1 Chron. 11 : 23. ] 

INSTRUCTION.S. I 

1. The last words of good men often m;ike a deep ' 
impre.'sion on survivors, anil tljcir past labors, di- 
rected and aided by the Spirit of 'jod. may to tlie 
end of time assist others in pn-parinir for heaven. 

2. As the Spirit of G-od spoke by David, the words 
whicli nnder his fruidance he uttered wore the | 
words of Ood ; and Peter, in dechirin^ that the 
Holy irliost spoke by the mouth of D.ivid, uttered 
nothiriir but what was true. Acts 1:16. I 

.3. Parents, masters, ina:ristratrs. and rulers of^ 
every description, are under sacred obligations to be 
428 



hundred, iand slew them, and had *b.c:^S. 
the name among three. 

19 Was he not most honorable of three? 
therefore he v,-as their captain: howbcit 
he attained not unto the Jirst three. 

20 And Benaiahthe son of Jchoiada, the 
son of avaliantman,of Kabzeel, * who had 
done many acts, he slew two lllion-like men 
of ^loab : he went down also and slew a 
lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow. 

21 And he slew an Egyptian, *a goodly 
man : and the Egyptian had a spear in his 
hand; but he- went down to him with a 
staff, and plucked the spear out of the 
Egyptian's hand, and slew him with his 
own spear. 

22 These things did Benaiah the son of 
.Tehoiada, and had the name among three 
mighty men. 

23 He was tmore honorable than the 
thirty, but he attained not to ihc first three. 
And David set him tover his guard. 

24 Asahel the brother of .loab iras one 
of the thirty ; Elhanan the son of Dodo 
of Beth-lehem, 

2.5 Shammah the Haroditc, Elika the 
Harodite, 

26 Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ik- 
kesh the Tekoitc, 

27 Abiezcr the Anethothite, Mebunnni 
the Hushathitc, 

28 Zalmon the Ahohite, ^laharai tln' 
Netophathite, 

29 Hclcb the son of Baanah, a Netopha- 
thite, Iftai the son of Ribai out of (iibeah 
of the children of Benjamin, 

30 Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiddai of 
the * brooks of Gaash, 

31 Abl-albon the Arbathite, Azmaveth 
the Barhumitc, 

32 EliahbatheShaalbonite; oftheson.s 
of Jashen, Jonathan, 

11:2;), a man of great etalure. f Or, honorable among the, 
etc. t Or, over council : Heb. o< Aii command. I Sam. i-2:H. 
5 Or, valleyt. 



in all things strictly just; they are forbidden by 
Jehovah to e.xercise the le.ast injustice towards any 
whom they govern. 

•1. Rulers who obey (rod and so rule as to please 
him, are great blessings to themselves, their families, 
and the world. 

5. Parents, however exalted, cannot with cer- 
tainty secure the piety of their children, nor mas- 
ters of their servants, nor rulers of their people; 
and even for their own piety and salvation, they 
are dependent upon the rich gr.ace of Oroil in Jesus 
Christ. The everlasting covenant made with him 
and his people is their only security. In this they 
delight, and the s.alvation it profTers they supremely 
desire. 

6. Though the wicked may here for a time pros- 
per anil the righteous be in trouble, yet their condi- 
tion will soon be reversed ; the righteous through 
grace will be comforled. and the wicked, through 
thpir persevering wickedness, will be larmented. 
Mai. ;i: IS; Luke 16:2'). 



David numbereth Israel. 



II. SAMUEL, XXIV. 



He rcpcnteth thereof. 

S;"im^ 33 Shammali the Hararite, Ahiam pitched in ""Aroer, on the ri?ht side of the 
the .son of Sliarar the Hararite, I city that Ucih in the midst of the t river of 

34 Eliphelet the .son of Ahasbai, the Gad, and toward sJazer: 

son of the Maachathite, Eliam the son of 6 Then they came to Gilead, and to tlic 
Ahithophel the Gilonite, 'land^ of Tahtim-liod.shi ; and they came 

35 Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the ' to '' Dan-jaan, and about to 'Zidon', 
Arbite, j 7 And came to tlie .strong-hold of Tyre, 

36 Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, and to all the cities of the Hivites, and of 
Bani the Gadite, _ ; the Canaanitcs : and they went out to the 

37 Zclek the Ammonite. Naharai the south of Judah, r/vii to IJeer-shcba. 
Becrothitc, armor-bearer to Joab the son ' 8 So when thcv had none throusrli all the 



of Zeruiah, 

38 Ira* an Ithrite, Gareb an Ithrite, 

39 Uriah'' the Hittite: thirty and seven 
in all. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

1 David, tpmpted by Satan, forceth Joab to number the 
people. 5 Tlie captains, in nine months and twenty 
Jays, bring the muster of thirteen hundred thousand 
fighting men. 10 David, having three plagues pro- 
pounded by Gad, repenteth, and chooseth the three 
days' pestilence. 1.5 After the death of threescore and 
ten thousand, David by repentance preventeth the 
destruction of .Jerusalem. Is David, by Gad's direc- 
tion, purchaseth Araunah's threshing-Uoor ; where 
having sacrificed, the plague stayeth. 

AND again the "^ anger of the Lord was 
kindled against Israel, and *he moved 
David against them to say, ''Go, number 
Israel and Judah. 

2 For the king said to Joab the captain 
of the host, which rvas with him, tGo 
now through all the tribes of Israel, from 
Dan even to Beer-sheba, and number ye 
the people, that I may know the *" number 
of the people 



land, they came to .Jerusalem at the end 
of nine months and twenty days. 

9 And ,loab gave up the sum of the 
number of the people unto the king : and 
there were in Israel eiglit hundred thou- 
sand valiant men that drew the sword; 
and the men of Judah iccre live hundred 
thousand men. 

10 1[ And David's heart' smote him after 
that he had numbered the people. And 
David said unto the Lord, ''I have sinned 
greatly in that I have done : and now, I 
beseech thee, O Lord, take 'away the 
iniquity of thy servant; for I have done 
very '"foolishly. 

1 1 For when David was up in the morn- 
ing, the word of the Lord came unto the 
prophet "Gad, David's seer, saying, 

12 Go and say unto David, Thus saith 
theLoRD, I offer thee three ?/j//ig-.«; "choose 
thee one of them, that I may do it unto 
thee. 

13 So Gad came to David, and told hiin, 
3 And Joab said unto the king. Now the and said unto him, Shall p seven vears of 



Lord thy God add unto tlie people, how 



famine come unto thee in thv land? or 



many soever they be, a hundred-fold, and ' wilt thou flee three months before thine 



that the eyes of my lord the king may see 
it : but why doth my lord the king delight 
in this thing'? 

4 Notwithstanding the king's word pre- 
vailed against Joab, and against the cap- 
tains of the host. And Joab and the cap- 
tains of the host went out from the pres- 
ence of the king, to number the people of 
Israel. 

5 HAnd they passed over Jordan, and 



• cl]ii|i. 20: 2r>. b rliap. II :.•?, etc. c cli.ip. 21 : 1. * Satan. 
tChron. 21 : l.etc. : Jas. 1: 1», M. a 1 Chron. 27.'?1, 24. t Or, 
Compais. «Jer. 17:8. ' .losli. 13:9, Ifi. t Or, valley, f Num. 
32:1, .1. 5 Or, nether land newly inhabited. k Judg. IB: 29. 



8. Different men h.-ive different talents, both in 
kind and degree; but all their capacities and pow- 
ers they receive from God, and siiould employ in 
learning and doing liis will. They will thus best 
secure their own welfare, and do the most good of 
which they are capable to others. 

13-17. vVe should ever be ready to deny our- 
selves and endure privation, rather than jeopard 
the lives or injure the souls of our fellow-men. 1 
Cor. 8 : 9-13. " 

'H.AI'TER XXIV. 

1. Kindled against Israel ; on account of their 
sins. He mored David against them : D.vvid 
was moved or tempted by Sat^n to commit a sin, 
whicli was made instrumental in punishing the 

2S 



enemies, while they pursue thee? or that 
there be three days' pestilence in thy land ? 
Now advise, and see what answer I shall 
return to him tliat sent me. 

14 And David said unto Gad, I am in a 
great strait: let us fall nowint»the hand 
of the Loud; for ''his mercies arc ' great : 
and let me not fall "^ into the hand of man. 

15 If So the Lord sent a pestilence upon 
Israel from the morning even to the time 



I Joali. 19 : 28. JlSnm. 24:5. k clinp. 12 : 13. IHo9e!»l4::. 
m I Sam. 13 : 13. n 1 .Sam. 22 :5; 1 Clirnn. 29:2<». or.er.2«:41. 
4:1. p I Cliron. 21 : 12. q Psa. 103:8-14; 119: 136; 136. || Or, 
many, r Psa. 100:41, 42; Ua. 47:6. 



Israelites for their sins. 1 Chron. 21 : 1 ; James 
1 : 13, 14. 

5. Aroer ; a city in the south-east part of the 
country. 

6. Gilead — Talitim-hodstii — Dan-jaan ; 
pl.^ces between Aroer and the north border of Ca- 
naan. Zidon : at the north-west come'. 

7. Tyre; south of Zidon. Beer-slieba ; the 
southern extremity of the country. 

10. Davids heart smote him : he had no good 
reason for numbering the people. His object in doing 
it was wrong, and he felt giiilty. Takeaicai/: pardon. 

11. David's seer ; a prophet who made known 
to him the will of God. 

14. Strait; difficulty, and distress. 
429 



Three days of pestilence. 



II. SAMUEL, XXIV. 



T/ie plague is stayed. 



appointed : and there died of the people 
from Dan even to Beer-shcba seventy 
•thousand men. 

16 And wlien the * angel stretched out 
his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the 
Lord ''repented him of the evil, and said 
to the angel that destroyed the people, It 
is ■= enough : stay now thy hand. And the 
angel of the Lord was by the threshing- 
place of *Araunah the Jebusite. 

1 7 And David spake unto the Lord when 
he saw the angel that smote the people, 
and said, Lo, I have ^sinned, and I have 
done wickedly: but these ''sheep, what 
have they done ? let thy hand, I pray thee, 
he against me, and against my father's 
house. 

18 ^And Gad came that day to David, 
and said unto him, Go up, rear an altar 
unto the Lord in the threshing-floor of 
Araunaht the Jebusite. 

19 And David, according to the saying 
of Gad, went up as the Lord commanded. 

20 And Araunah looked, and saw the 
king and his servants coming on toward 
him : and Araunah went out, and bowed 
himself before the king on his face upon 
the ground. 



t Ex. li-.ii. b Pea. 90: i:i; 135:14. c Isa. 27 : 8 ; .=>7: 16; .loel 
■2:13,14. * ver. 18. Oi-nun, 1 Cbron. 21: l.-i; 2 Chron. 3:1. tlPsa. 
51:4. e Psa. 74:1. j Heb. Jianiuh. f Gen. 23:8-16. s Num. 



16. Repented him : changed his course of con- 
duct. Araunah the Jebusite ; the Jebusites were 
the original inhabitants of Jerusalem, and Arau- 
nah "s threshing-floor was on mount Zion, an eleva- 
tion in the south part of the city. 

17. These sheep ; the Israelites. 

2-[. Fifty sJiekels ; about twenty-five dollars. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Rulers are often left to act very foolishly and 
wickedly, and Satan is suffered to tempt them to the 
commission of sins, which occasion dreadful calami- 
lies as a punishment for the sins of the people. 

2. A rapid increase of population and great pros- 
perity among a people may make not only them 
but their rulers proud, overbearing, and self-confi- 
dent, and may thus draw down upon them the sore 
and desolating judgments of heaven. 

3. Even wicked men see with great clearness that 
the course which Christians sometimes are disposed 
to take is morally wrong, and will end in trouble. 
They sometimes give warning and advice which it 
would be well for Christians to follow. 

4. Despotic power tends to blind the mind and 
harden the heart. Those who possess it are often 
deaf to rea.son, and bent on a course which will 
biing great troubles on themselves and others. 

10. A good man"s conscience, though it some- 
times in liis commission of sins seems to be dead. 
is nevertheless alive; and it will sooner or later 



21 And Araunah said. Where- VciX' 
fore is my lord the king come to his ser- 
vant? And David said. To ''buy the 
threshing-floor of thee, to build an altar 
iinto the Lord, that the plague may be 
stayed s from the people. 

22 And Araunah said unto David, Let 
my lord the king take and offer up what 
si'cnietk good unto him : behold, here be 
oxen'' for burnt-sacrifice, and threshing- 
instruments and other instruments of the 
oxen for wood. 

23 All these thing.^ did Araunah, as a 
king,' give unto the king. And Araunali 
said unto the king. The Lord thy God 
accept' thee. 

24 And the king said unto Araunah, 
Nay ; but I will surely buy it of thee at a 
price : neither will I offer burnt-offerings 
unto the Lord my God of that whicli doth 
cost me nothing. So David bought tlie 
threshing-floor and the oxen for fifty shek- 
els of silver. 

2.5 And David built there an altar unto 
the Lord, and offered burnt-offerings and 
peace-offerings. So the Lord was ''en- 
treated for the land, and the plague was 
staved from Israel. 



16:47-30. h I Kin-9, IS: 21. i Psa. 45 : 16 ; Rev. 1 : 
42 : 8, 9 ; Ezek. 20 : 40, 41. k cliap. 2) : 14. 



awake, condemn him for his iniquity, fill him witli 
pungent grief, deep, heart-felt contrition, and lead 
him to most earnest supplications to G-od for mercy. 

12. No degree of penitence or faith in Jesus 
Christ will save the guilty in this world from many 
of the distressing effects of their sins, nor can they 
be sure that they will not be the occasion of bring- 
ing upon others endless destruction. 

14. The only resource for the truly penitent is in 
hearty submission to God, .and unreserved commit- 
ment of all their interests to him. 

16. Jehovah is a G-od of infinite compassion. He 
has no pleasure in the ruin even of tjie most guilty. 
and punishes as few and as little as will possibly 
consist with the highest public good. In the turn- 
ing of sinners from,tlie error of their ways, he has 
great delight. 

17. Few things are more distressing to a truly 
ingenuous and benevolent mind, than to have been 
the guilty occasion of bringing distress upon others, 
and it often wishes that the consequences of its own 
sins could be borne only by itself. 

2.J. There is no effectual and permanent relief 
from the sufferings which sin occasions, or from sin 
itself, but in hearty application, .according to the 
directions of God, to Him who died the just for the 
unjust, offering himself a sacrifice for sin, and thus 
obtaining eternal redemption for all who put their 
trust in him. 



430 



THE 



FIRST BOOK OF THE KINGS, 



COMMONLY CALLED, 



THE THIRD BOOK OY THE KINGS. 



S.c"i?^ CHAPTER I. 

1 Abishi^ cherisheth David in his extreme age. 5 Ad- 
onijah, David's darlinir, usiirpeth the kiiifrHoin. 11 
By the counsel of Xatlian, 15 Bath-shebainoveth the 
king, 2'i and Nathan secoudeth her. iS David re- 
neweth his oath to Bath-.sheba. 3'2 Solomon, by Da- 
vid's appointraent. being anointed king by Zadok and 
Nathan, the people triumph. 41 Jonathan bringing 
these news, Adonijah's guests fly. 50 Adonijah, fly- 
ing to the horns of the altar, upon his good behavior 
is dismissed by iSolomon. 

IVrOW king David was old and *strickeu 
_L\ ill years; and they covered him with 
clothes, but he gat no heat. 

2 Wherefore his servants said unto him, 
Let t there be sought for my lord the king 
at young virgin : and let her stand before 
the king, and Tet her ^^ cherish him, and let 
Iter lie in thy bosom, that my lord the king 
may get heat. 

3 So they sought for a fair damsel through- 
out all the coasts of Israel, and found Abi- 
shag a Shunammite, and brought her to 
the king. 

4 And the damsel was very fair, and 
cherished the king, and ministered to him : 
but the king knew her not. 

5 ^ Then ^Adonijah the son of Haggith 
exalted ''himself, saying, I will'lbe king: 
and "^ he prepared him chariots and horse- 
men, and fifty men to run before him. 

6 And his father had not displeased him 
at * any time in saying. Why hast thou done 
so? and he also ivas a very goodly man ; 
and his mother bare him after Absalom. 

7 And t he conferred wilii ""Joab the son 
of Zeruiali,and with "Abiathar the priest : 
and Ihey ^ following Adonijah helped liim. 

8 But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the 
son of .lehoiada, and Nathan the prophet, 
and '^Shimci, and Kci, and the mighty, 
mens which belonged to David, were not^ 
with Adonijah. 

9 And Adonijjih slew sheep and o.\en 
and fat cattle by the stone of Zoheleth, 
which is by * En-rogel, and called all his 



* Hell, entered into }avt. t Hch. Iliel 


njeek. t Heh.a damfel. 


a virffiti. ^ Hf b. be a ckeriiher unto. 


• 2 S.iin. 3:4. h l.uke 


14:11. II Hell. rri«». c JSam. I,"): 1. 


• Hrb. from hit dny,. 


f Heb. hit icordt irere. d cliap. J : 28. 


e aSnnn. iOri-i. t H.-li. 



brethren the king's sons, and all the men 
of Judah the king's servants: 

10 But ''Nathan the prophet, and Be- 
naiah, and the mighty men, and Solomon 
his brother, he called not. 

1 1 TyWhcrefore Nathan spake unto Bath- 
sheba the mother of Solomon, saying, Hast 
thou not heard that Adonijah the son of 
Haggith doth reign, and David our lord 
knoweth it not? 

12 Now therefore come, let me, I pray 
thee, give thee counsel, that thou mayest 
save iliine own life, and the life of thy 
son Solomon. 

13 Go and get thee in unto king David, 
and say unto him. Didst not thou, my lord, 
king, 'swear unto thy handmaid, say- 
ing, JAssuredly Solomon thy son shall 
reign after me, and he shall sit upon my 
throne] why then doth Adonijah reign? 

14 Behold, while thou yet talkest there 
with the king, I also will come in after 
thee, and 'confirm thy words. 

15 ^And Bath-sheba went in unto the 
king into the chamber: and the king was 
very old; and Abishag the Shunammitc 
ministered unto the king. 

16 And Bath-siieba bowed, and did obei- 
sance unto the king. And the king said, 
What* wouldest thou ? 

17 And she said unto him. My lord, thou 
swarest by the Louu thy (loil unto thy 
handmaid, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy 
son shall reign after me, and he shall sit 
upon my throne. 

18 And now, behold, Adonijah reigneth ; 
and now, my lord the king, thou knowest 
it not : 

19 And ''he hath slain oxen and fat cattle 
and sheep in abundance, and hath called 
all the sons of the king, and Abiathar the 
priest, and Joab the captain of the host : but 
Solomon thy servant hath he not called. 

I : O, rtc. 



helped after .Idnnii 
\ Or, the ifell R.fel. 
•M. i I CLron. i: : € 
k rer. 7-9. 



f clinp. 4 : IK. t iSnmoel. 
Sam. 17:17. 1" i S.im. 1 ■.' : 1 . etc 
1. II Heb.Jf//iij>. ' Hrb. Hliat t,i thee f 



CHAPTER I. 

5. Ild^sitJt ; one of David's wives. 

6. Bare him nl'tcr ; he was next in age to Ab- 
salom, wliose mother's name was Maacah. 2 Sam. 
3 : 3, 4. 



8. Shimei ; supposed to have been Shimei the 
.son of Elah, afterwards one of Solomon's officers. 
Chap. 4 : 18. 

9. En-rogel ; a fountain on the east side of Je- 
rusalem. 

1 \2. Save thine oicn life, and the life of thy 
' 431 



David'' s promise to Batli-sheba. 



I. KINGS, I. 



Solomon is anointed kint 



20 And thou, my lord, king, tlic eyes 
of all Israclare upon thee, that tliou should- 
est tell thcni -who shall sit on the throne 
of my lord the kin;? after him. 

21 Otherwise it shall come to pass, when 
my lord the king shall 'sleep with his fa- 
thers, that I and my son Solomon shall be 
counted * offenders. 

22 ^And lo, while she yet talked with 
the king. Nathan the prophet also came in. 

2.3 And they told the king, saying, Behold 
Nathan the prophet. And when he was 
come in before the king, he bowed himself 
before the king with his face to the ground. 

24 And Nathan said, My lord, king, 
hast thou said, Adonijah shall reign after 
me, and ho shall sit upon my throne'? 

25 For ''he is gone doAvn this day, and 
liath slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep 
in abundance, and hath called all the 
king's sons, and the captains of the host, 
and Abiathar the priest ; and behold, they 
eat and drink before him, and say, tGod 
save ""king Adonijah. 

26 But me, even me thy Servant, and 
Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of 
Jehoiada, and thy servant Solomon, hath 
he not called. 

27 Is this thing done by my lord the 
king, and thou hast not showed it unto 
thy servant, who should sit on the throne 
of my lord the king after him? 

28 ^ Then king David answered and 
said. Call me Bath-sheba. And she came 
into + the king's presence, and stood before 
the king. 

29 And the kingsware, and said, ''^.t the 
Lord liveth, that hath redeemed my soul 
out of all distress, 

30 Even as I ''sware unto thee by the 
Lord God of Israel, saying. Assuredly 
Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and 
he shall sit upon my throne in my stead; 
even so will 1 certainly do this day. 

31 Then Batii-sheba bowed Avith her 
face to the earth, and did reverence to the 
king, and said, ''Let my lord king David 
live for ever. 

32 HAnd king David said. Call me Za- 
dok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, 
and Benainh the son of Jehoiada. And 
they came before the king. 

33 The king also said unto them. Take 
with you the ^servants of your lord, and 
cause Solomon my son to ride ^ upon mine 
own mule, and bring him down to''Gihon: 



• clinp 


2: 10 


» He\>. tinners 


b ver 


10. 


t Hell 


r.rt kino 


Adonijah 


tive. 


c 1 Snmufl 


10 


24. t 


Heb 


. U/o,c 


11,1 


kin0. 


i 2 Sam. 


\:'.K 


' ver. 13, 17. 


f Nell. •::3; 


>nn 


2:4: 5 


in 


fi:2l. 


t 2Snm. ! 


0;K. 


5 Heh.ipAif/ibelon 


jctl. to m 


(.Kst.fi: 8. 


k 2 


Cliron. 


3-2:30. 1 


cliap 


19: IK; 1 Snm 


lU 


1: 16:3 


12; 


2. Slim, a 


:4 


6:3; 



son ; had Adonijah succeeded, he would prohably 
have put Solomon and his mother to di-ath. Vor. 21 . 
31. Live for ever ; an expression of high regard. 
432 



34 And let Zadok the priest and *b r.?Sf?; 
Nathan the prophet 'anoint him there king 
over Israel : and 'blow ye with the trumpet, 
and say, God .save king Solomon. 

3.5 Then ye shall come up after him, that 
he may come and sit upon my throne ; for 
he shall be king in my stead : and I have 
appointed him to be ruler over Israel and 
over .ludah. 

36 And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada an- 
swered the king, and said. Amen: ''the 
Lord ' God of my lord the king say so too. 

37 As ""the Lord hath been with my 
lord the king, even so be he with Solomon, 
and make liis throne "greater than the 
throne of my lord king David. 

38 So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the 
prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, 
and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, 
went down, and caused Solomon to ride 
upon king David's mule, and brought him 
to Gihon. 

39 And Zadok the priest took ahorn of" oil 
out of the tabernacle, and p anointed Solo- 
mon. And they blewthe trumpet ; and all 
the people said, ''God save. king Solomon. 

40 And all the people came up after him, 
and the people piped with H pipes, and re- 
joiced with great joy, so that the earth rent 
with the sound of them. 

4 1 ^And Adonijah and all the guests that 
?(•(?)•£ with him heard /Yas they had made an 
end of ''eating. And when Joab heard the 
sound of the trumpet, he said, Wherefore 
is this noise of the city being in an uproar? 

42 And while he yet spake, behold, Jon- 
athan the son of Abiathar the priest came : 
and Adonijah said unto him. Come in ; 
for "thou art a A-aliant man, and bringest 
good tidings. 

43 And Jonathan answered and said to 
Adonijah, Verily our lord king David hath 
made Solomon king. 

44 And the king hath sent with him 
Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, 
and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the 
Cherethites, and the Pelethites, and they 
have caused him to ride upon the king's 
mule: 

4.5 And Zadok the priest and Nathan the 
prophet have anointed him king in Gihon : 
and they are come up from thence rejoic- 
ing, so that the city rang asain. This is 
the noise that ye have heard. 

46 And also Solomon '.sil^t*-^^'! on the 
throne of the kingdom. 

2King», P:^: 11:12; Ps.llm 89 : 20, 3fi : Isa. 45 : 1 ; AftnIOiS-l; 
2Cor.l :21,22. ; 2KmgK.9: 1.1. k Pmi. 72: 19. I I Cliron. 17:27. 
m .lonli. l:fi, 17. n ver.47; P«a. 89:27. o Ei. .10 : 23-45; Pm. 
8<):2n. V 1 Clinin.29:22. ql Sum. 10:24. H CiT.ylulei. r Pror. 
14:13; Ecrl. 7:4-6. • 2 Sam. 18:27. « I Cliron. 29 : 23. 



33. Gihon ; a fountain on the west side of Jeru- 
salem. 

36. Amen ; be it so, as the king hath said. 



AJonijah is spared. 



I. KINGS, II. 



David's dyin^ charge. 



B.'c!S' 47 And moreover the kinir''s ser- 
vants came to bless our lord king David, 
saying, God* make the name of Solomon 
better than thy name, and make his throne 
greater than thy throne. And ''the king 
bowed himself npon the bed. 

48 And also thus said the king, Blessed 
be the Lord God of Israel, <= which hath 
given one to sit on my throne this day, 
mine ''eyes even seeing it. 

49 And all the guests that were with Ado- 
nijah were afraid, and rose up, and went 
every man his way. 

50 If And Adonijah feared because of 
Solomon, and arose, and went, and ""caught 
hold on the horns of the altar. 

5 1 And it was told Solomon, saying. Be- 
hold, Adonijah feareth king Solomon : for 
lo, he halh caught hold on the horns of the 
altar, saying, Let king Solomon swear 
unto me to-day that he will not slay his 
servant with the sword. 

52 And Solomon said. If he will show 
himself a worthy man, "^ there shall not a 
hair of him fall to the earth : ^but if wick- 
edness shall be found in him, he shall '' die. 

53 So king Solomon sent , and they brought 
liiin down from the altar. And he came 
and bowed himself lo king Solomon : and 
Solomon said unto him, Go to thy house. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 DiTid, having fjiven a charjfi to Solomon. 3 of relig- 
iousness, 5 of Joab, 7 of Barzillai. 8 ofShimei, 10 
dieth. 12 Solomon sucoeedeth. 13 Adonijah, mov- 
ing Bath-sheba to sue unto Solomon for Abishag, is 
put to death. 2o Abiathar, having his life given him, 
IS deprived of the priesthood. '2.-i Joab fleeing to the 
hornsof the altar is there slain. 35 Benaiah is put in 
JoaVs room, and Zadok in Abiathar's. 30 Shimei, 
confined to Jerusalem, by occasion of going thence to 
Gath is put to death. 

lyrOW ' the days of David drew nigh that 
_L\ he should die; and he charged Solo- 
mon his son, saying, 

2 I i go the way of ''all the earth : be thou 
strong therefore, and show thyself a ' man ; 



a V 


r. 


17. 


b Gen 


47 


31. 


c chap. 3:(<: Psa 


l:i 


!:M. d 


'.a. 


l»:f. 


H. 


erli 


ip.J: 


.'.1. 


f lS:i 


11. HM.5: Arts -27. 


:I4. 


t Job 1.1 


•2-2 i 


I'rov. 


IS 


6; 21 


:l-2. 


h chap. 1 . 


Jl-M. i Gen. 47 


'W 


neut.31 


14: 


.I..I) 7 


1. 


1.1. 


sli.ffl 


H. 


k P» 


1.89 MS; Heb.i): 


7. 


1 Keel. 1-2 


13; 


1 Cor. 


l« 


:l:i. 


m De 


ut. 1 


7:18- 


10. n Deut.'.'9:9 


* 


OT,dowitttjf. 



49. Afraid ; of being put to death as traitors. 
IXSTRUCTIONS. 

1. If life is spared, age and infirmities will come, 
and no means or efforts of men can save any one 
from de.%th. All should therefore make it their 
great object so to live that death .shall be gain. 

6. Over-indulgent parents are often cursed with 
relsellious children ; and inordinate desires for polit- 
ical distinctions have involved multitudes in ruin. 

9. Feasting and carousals have strong attrac- 
tions for tlie thoughtless, and are often used to draw 
them into dissipation and crime. 

12. All wise and proper means siiould be used to 
prevent the success of evil projects, and aid those 
which will honor God and benefit men. 

21. Parents should do what is practicable to pre- 
vent evils from coming on their families after their 
death, and to secure for them permanent blessings. 



3 And keep the charge of the Lord thy 
God, to walk in his ways, to keep his stat- 
utes, and his commandments, and his* 
judgments, and his testimonies, as it is 
written'" in the law of Moses, that "thou 
mayest 'prosper in all that thou doest, and 
whithersoever thou turnest thyself: 

4 That the Lord may continue his word 
which he spake concerning me, saying. 
If" thy children take heed to their way, 
to walk before me in truth with all their 
heart and with all their soul, there p shall 
not tfail thee, said he, a man on the throne 
of Israel. 

5 JNIoreover thou knowest also what 
Joab the son of Zeruiah did to ime, and 
^vhat he did to the two captains of the 
hosts of Israel, unto 'Abner the son of 
Ner, and unto "Amasa the son of Jether, 
whom he slew, and 'shed the blood of 
war in peace, and put the blood of war 
upon his girdle that ii-as about his loins, 
and in his shoes that iccre on his feet. 

6 Do therefore 'according to thy wis- 
dom, and "let not his hoar "head go down 
to the grave in peace. 

7 But show kindness unto the sons of 
Barzillai" the Gileadite, and let them be 
of those that eat at thy table : for so they 
came^ to me when I tied because of Ab- 
salom thy brother. 

8 And behold, thou hast with thee >' Shim- 
ei the son of Gera, a Benjamite of Bahu- 
rim, which cursed me with a ^grievous 
curse in the day when I went to Maha- 
naim: but* he came down to meet me at 
Jordan, and I sware to him by the Lord, 
saying, I will not put thee to death with 
the sword. 

9 Now therefore 'hold him not guiltless : 
for thou art a wise man, and knowest 
what thou oughtest to do unto him; but 
his hoar head bring thou down to the 
grave with blood. 



ISam. 18:5, 14,3a o I'sa. 132: 12. pSSam. 7:16. \Ht\i.Ucut 
off from thtefram tht throne. <\ J Sam. 19 : 5-7. r 1 Sam. 3 : 27. 
• ■: Sam. '20:10. %Heh.pul. t Tcr.9. iiTer.3l.34. •Gen.42:3S; 
44:31. w 2S.im. l>t:3l-40. » 2 Sam. 17 : 27. y 2 Sam. IK: 5, etc. 
\Heh.llrong. i 2 S.im. 19: 18-2:1. • Ex. 20:7; Job 9:20. 



27. Good rulers, who have secured general confi- 
dence, may. bv their dying advice greatly promote 
the welfare of' their people. 

32. What is essential for the public good should 
not be postponed, lest the opportunity of doing it 
be lost ; but should be undertiiken with promptness, 
and prosecuted with energy till it is accomplished. 

37. When God is duly acknowledged as the au- 
thor of all good, men may reasonably expect that 
their blessings will be increased. 

49. The most sanguine projects of the wicked are 
destined to disappointment; and from the heights 
of expectation tliey may suddenly be thrown into 
the depths of despair. , 

CHAPTER II. 

4. Covtivne; fulfil. 2 Sam. 7 : 12-16. 
9. With blood; put him to death for his crimes. 
433 



Plots of Adonijali. 



I. KINGS, II, 



Death of Adonijah and Joab. 



10 So David "slept with his fathers, and 
was '"buried in the ""cily of David. 
9 1 1 And ^ tlie days that David reigned 
over Israel were forty years ; seven years 
reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three 
years reigned he in Jerusalem. 

1 2 1[ Then ""sat Solomon upon the throne 
of David his father ; and his kingdom was 
established*^ greatly. 

13 •[And Adonijah the son of Ilaggith 
came to Bath-sheba the mother of Solo- 
mon. And she said,^Comest thou peace- 
ably? And he said. Peaceably. 

14 He said moreover, I have somewhat 
to say unto thee. And she said, Say on. 

1.5 And he said. Thou knowest that the 
kingdom was *" mine, and tlwt all Israel set 
their faces on me, that I should reign : 
howbeit the kingdom is turned about, and 
is become my brother's: for it \>'as 'his 
from the Lord. 

1 6 A nd now I ask one petition of thee, deny 
me not.* And she said tinto him, Say on. 

1 7 And he said, Speak, I pray thee, i7uto 
Solomon the king, (for he will not say thee 
nay.) that he give me JAbishag the Shu- 
nammite to wife. 

18 And Bath-sheba said, Well; I will 
speak for thee unto the king. 

19 *[ Bath-sheba therefore went unto 
king Solomon, to speak unto liim for Ado- 
nijah. And the king *rose up to meet 
her, and 'bowed himself unto her, and 
sat down on his throne, and caused a seat 
to b"e set for the king's mother; and she 
sat on his ""right hand. 

20 Then she said, I desire one small 
petition of thee; I pray thee, say me not 
nay. And the king said unto her. Ask 
on, my mother; fori will not say thee nay. 

21 And she said. Let Abishag the Shu- 
nammitc be given to Adonijah thy brother 
to wife. 

22 And king Solomon answered and said 
unto his mother. And why dost thou ask Ab- 
ishag the Shunammite for Adonijah ? ask 
for him the kingdom also; for he ?'.v mine el- 
der brother; even for him, and for "Abiathar 
the priest, and for.loab the son of Zcruiali. 

23 Then king Solomon sware by the 
Lord, saying, ° God do so to tne, and more 

• chnp. 1 :21 ; Acl8l3:n6. bArts2:29. c 2!5iim.5:7. d 1 Clir. 
2!>:J7. » IChr. 2'.(:23; aClir. I :l. f Pan. 7-' .-S.rlc. t 1 .Snin 
IB: 4, 6. li cliap. l.R. i I Climn. 22 .-fl, 10: .Icr. 27 : r>-« ; Dnn. 
2:21. * Heb.^Mmnofoioiijimy/a<r. P»n.l32: la i rhnp. 1 :.t. 4. 
kLe¥.)9:32. lEx.20:12. mPKi.4A:i>. iicli«p.l:7. o 2 Sum. 
3:3.1. p 2Sam. 7: 11-13. <J clinp. I : 5?. r Josli. 21 : 18. f Heb. 

10. The city of David ; "Lion, or Jerasalem. 

lo. The kingdom was vtiiir ; his meaning was, 
that it belongeu to him as DavitPs oldest living son. 

2'1. Ask for him the kiiigtlom; by this Solo- 
mon intimated to his mother, that, considering the 
relation Abisliag had sustained to Iiavid. it was 
aa really improper to request her for Adonijali, as 
it was to request for him the kingdom. 
431 



also, if Adonijah have not spoken *B.c:?m. 
this word against his own life. 

24 Now therefore, as the Loud livcth, 
which hath established me, and set me on 
the throne of David my father, and who 
hath made me a house, as he p promised, 
Adonijah shall be put to 'death this day. 

2o And king Solomon sent by the hantl 
of Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; and he 
fell upon him that he died. 

26 *' And unto Abiathar the priest saifl 
the king, Get thee to''Anathoth, unto thine 
own fields ; forthon art t worthy of death : 
but I will not at this time put thee to 
death, because thou 'barest the ark of the 
Lord Con before David my father, and 
because thou hast been 'afflicted in all 
wherein my father was afflicted. 

27 So Solomon thnist out Abiathar from 
being priest unto the Lord ; that he mighi 
fulfil the word of the Lord, which he spake 
concerning" the house of Eli in Shiloh. 

28 IfTheu tidings came to .loab : for 
Joab had ^turned after Adonijah, "though 
he turned 7iot after Absalom. And Joab 
(led unto the tabernacle of the Lord, and 
caught'' hold on the horns of the altar. 

29 And it was told king Solomon that 
Joab AA'as fled unto the tabernacle of the 
Lord; and behold, he is by the 'altar. 
Then Solomon sent Benaiah the son of 
Jehoiada, saying, Go, fail upon him. 

30 And Benaiah came to the tabernacle 
of the Lord, and said unto him. Thus 
saith the king, Gorne forth. And he said. 
Nay; but I will die here. And Benaiah 
brought the kin? word again, saying. Thus? 
said Joab, and thus he answered me. 

31 And the king said unto him. Do as 
he hath said, and fall upon him, and bury 
him; that *thou mayest take away the 
innocent blood, which Joab "shed, from 
me, and from the house of my father. 

32 And tlie Lord shall ''return his blood 
upon his own head, Avho fell upon two 
men more righteous and 'better than he, 
and slew them with the sword, my father 
David not ''knowing thereof, to jrit, Abner 
the son of ''Ner, captain of the host of Is- 
rael, and "^Amasa the son of Jether, cap- 
tain of the host of Judah. 

a mnn 0/ dtalA. I Sam. '!6:\6. • ISam. 33:R: 2Snm. IS:S'I, 2<lk 
I I .S.im. 22 : 20-2:1. n I Snm. 2 : SO^SC. » chap. 1 : 7. w Dent. 
32 : 3.5. r chap. I : Sft J Ex. 21 .- 14 ; Erek. 9 r fi: 1 Peter, 4 : 17. 
I Niim.3.'>:33: D0I1L19: 13: 21:8,a • rer.S. b Jade. 9: 24, 57: 
rgiilm7:16. c 2 Cliioa. 21 : 13. d2Sam.3:37. •2Sam.3:27. 
f 2 Sam. 20 : la 



23. God do so to me ; put me to death, if I do 
not put Adonijah to death. 

21. Made me a house ; secured him a posterity 
to inherit the throne after him. 

26. Aiialholh ; a city in Benjamin. 

2S. Fled luito the tabernacle — the altar; as 
a place of safety. 

20. Fall upon him; puthim todeath. Ex. 21:14. 



Ifcstruction of ,Shiiitci. 



I. KINGS, III. 



Marriage of Solomon. 



S.c^i^' 33 Their blood shall therefore 
return upon the head of Joab, and upon 
the head of his * seed for ever : but '' upon 
David, and upon his seed, and upon his 
house, and upon his throne, shall there be 
peace "^for ever from tlie Loud. 

34 So Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went 
up, and fell upon him, and slew him : and 
he was buried in his own house in the 
wilderness. 

35 •[ And the king put Benaiah the son 
of Jehoiada in his ■* room over the host: 
and'^Zadok the priest did the king put in 
the room of ""Abitithar. 

36 ^I And the king sent and called for 
Shimei,s and said unto him. Build thee a 
house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, and 
go not forth thence any whither. 

37 For it shall be, that on the day thou 
2oest out, and passcst over the brook '' Ki- 
dron,thou shalt know for certain that thou 
shalt surely die : thy 'blood shall be upon 
thine own head. 

38 And Shimei said unto the king. The 
saying is good : as my lord the king halh 
said, so will thy servant do. And Shimei 
dwelt in Jerusalem many days. 

39 And it came to pass at the end of 
three years, that two of the servants of 
Shimei ran away unto 'Achish son of Ma- 
achah king of Gath. And they told Shim- 
ei, saying, Behold, thy servants /jc in Gath. 

40 And Shimei arose, and saddled his 
ass, and went to Gath to Achish to seek his 
servants: and Shimei went, and brought 
his servants from Gath. 

41 And it was told Solomon that Shimei 
had gone from Jerusalem to Gath, and was 
come again. 

42 And the king sent and called for 
Shimei, and said unto him, Did I not make 
thee to swear by the Ix)11d, and protested 
unto thee, saying, Know for a certain, on 



• « Sam. 3: 29. I> Pror. ?,i : 5. « P»i». 89 : :ki, 37 : Isa. 9 : rt, 7. 
1 .Inb :i4 : 24. o Num. 2/1 : U-IS; I Cliron. «:fi.1; 24 : 3. fvHr.«7; 
1 Sam. 2:35. g Ter. 8. b 2 Sam. 15 : 2:1. i Lev. 20: 9; Jonliua 
2:19; 2 Sum. 1:16. i I Sam. 27 : 2. k Eccl. 8:2. 1 2 Samuel, 
16:.'>-8; Rom. 2:1.'); IJolin, 3:20. m Eiek. 17 : 19. ■ Paalm 



3-3. Shall there br peace ; by pnttinjj Joab to 
deatti, they \vo\iUl be free from the ;xuik of conniv- 
ing at the murders he had committed. Gen. 9 : 6. 

35. In his rvotn ; as military leader. 

42. Goest out ; away from Jeru.salem. 
INSTRtrCTIONS. 

3. To walk in the way of the Lord by keeping 
his commandments is, in rulers sis well as people, 
not only right and honorable, but the surest means 
of permanent prosperity : while the contrary course, 
in rulers or people, is dishonorable and ruinous. 

7. The compassion of parents, and their readiness 
to do good, especially to the distres.'sed, are often 
owned of G-od in blessings on their children, by lead- 
ing them to imitate the good examples of their p.ar- 
ent^. and thus to become partakers of their reward. 

1-'). God in his providence raises up one and puts 
down another; and when he has determined to ele- 
vate an individual to great power and influence, no 



the day thou goest out, and walkcst abroad 
any whither, that thou shalt surely die? 
and thou saidst unto me. The word that 
I liave heard is good. 

43 Why then liast thou not kept the oath 
of tlie Loud, and the ''commandment that 
I have cliarged thee with? 

44 The king said moreover to Shimei, 
Thou knowest all the 'wickedness whicli 
thy heart is privy to, that thou didst to 
David my father; '"therefore the Loud 
shall return thy wickedness upon thine 
own head : 

4.5 And king Solomon shall "ie blessed, 
and "the throne of David shall be estab- 
lished before the Loud for ever. 

46 So the king commanded Benaiah the 
son of Jehoiada; which went out, and 
fell upon him, that he died. And p the 
kingdom was established in the hand of 
Solomon. 

CHAPTER III. 

1 Solomon marrieth Pharaoh's Jauj^hter. '2 High place.s 
being in use, Solomon sacrificeth at Gibeoii. 5 Solo- 
mon at Gibeon, in the choice which God gave him, 
preferring wisdom, obtaineth wisdom, riches, and 
honor. Iti Solomon's judgment between the two 
harlots maketh him renowned. 

AND Solomon made affinity with Pha- 
raoh king of Egypt, and "itook Phara- 
oh's daughter, and brought her into the 
city "^ of David, until he had made an end 
of" building his own house, and 'the house 
of the Lord, and the "^wall of Jerusalem 
round about. 

2 Only ^' the people sacrificed in hi^li 
places, because there was no house built 
unto the name of the Loud, until those 
days. 

3 And Solomon "loved the Lord, walk- 
ing in the "statutes of David his father: 
only he sacrified and burnt incense in 
high places. 

4 And the king went to ''Gibeon to sac- 

72:17. >Tenes33,34. p 2Chroii. I : I. q cban. 7 : 8; 9:24. 
r 2 Samuel, 5:7. ■ rhap. 7 : I. > chap & « clias. 9:16,19. 
• chap. 22:43; Lev. 17:3,5. w Deut. 30 : l)i, 20 ; Paa.3l:23; 
Matthew 22 : 37 ; Ilomniu 8 : 28. s ver. 6, 14 ; John 14 : 15, 21, 
T 2 Chron. 1 : 3, etc. 



efTorts of men, however wisely directed or diligently 
pursued, will prevent it. 

19. No elevation of wise children will prevent 
them from loving and honoring aged parents, and as 
far as may be consistent with duty, complying with 
their requests. 

22. No filial respect or affection, and no promises 
or engagements, should ever lead men to do what is 
morally wrong, 

26. No elevation or official sanctity should be 
permitted to cover the guilt of crime, nor should 
the openly criminal or vicious be continued in any 
public employment. 

.39. By a too eager desire that others should serv«> 
them, men m;»y occasion their own ruin. 

CH.\PTER III. 

2. Sacrificed ill high jilnces ; previously to the 
building of the temple. 

4.1.-; 



God appears to Solomon. 



I. KINGS, III, 



His wise Judgment. 



rifice there; for *that ivcs the great hi^'h 
place : a thousand burnt-ofTerings did Sol- 
omon offer upon that altar. 

5 "[In Gibeon the Lord ''appeared to 
Solomon in a "^ dream by night: and God 
said, "^Ask what I shall give thee. 

6 And Solomon said, Thou hast showed 
unto thy servant David my father great 
mercy,* according as he "^walked before 
thee in truth, and in righteousness, and 
in '"uprightness of heart "svith thee ; and 
thou hast kept for him this great kindness, 
that thou hast given him a ^son to sit on 
his throne, as it is this day. 

7 And now, Lord my God, thou hast 
made thy servant king instead of David 
my father: and I am but a little ''child: 
I know not hoiv to 'go out or come in. 

8 And thy servant is in the midst of thy 
people which thou hast J chosen, a great 
people, that cannot be ''numbered nor 
counted for multitude. 

9 Give therefore thy servant an t under- 
standing 'heart to "'judge thy people, that 
I may " discern between good and bad : 
for who is able to judge this thy so great 
a people? 

10 And the speech pleased the Lord, 
that Solomon had asked this thing. 

11 And God said unto him, "Because 
thou hast asked this thing, and hast not 
asked for thyself - long life ; neither hast 
asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked 
the life of thine enemies ; but hast asked 
for thyself understanding to ^discern judg- 
ment; 

12 Behold, I have Pdone according to 
thy word: lo, I have given thee a wise 
and an understanding heart ; ""so that there 
was none like thee before thee, neither 
after thee shall any arise like unto thee. 

13 And I have also given thee Mhat 
which thou hast not asked, both "riches, 
and honor: so 'that there Ushall not be 
any among the kings like unto thee all 
thy days. 

14 And if thou wilt walk in my ways, 
to keep my statutes and my command- 
ments, as thy father David did walk, then 
I will "lengthen thy days. 

15 And Solomon awoke; and behold, j7 



• ICIiron. lfi:39. t> clinn. H : 2. c Num. 12:fi; Mat. 1 : -.'O. 
4 Mivt.7:7; Jiilin 16:54. •Or.ftuun^y. e iliap. 2 : 4: B : 4; l,"): S. 
f 2 Kings, 20:3; Psalm 18:2. « chap. 1 : 48. h 1 Cliron. 2>l : 1. 
iPna. 121:8. jDeut. 7;fi. k Gen. 13:16. f Heh./i<ariny. 1 Prov. 
2:3->l; Jas. l:fi. m Psa.72: 1.2; .lolin.-i : rifl. nHeb..S:14. o Uiim. 
8:2fi; Jas.4:2. i Heb.manj/daft. % Hcli.Acar. p I .lolin,.'>: 14. 

5. A dream ; before men hail the Bible to guide 
them, God sometimes made known to them his will 
in dreams. 

7. A little child; young and inexperienced. 
Go out or come in ; act as ruler of Israel. 

8. CtDDiot be numbered ; are very numerous. 
11. Discern judgment ; judge rightly in cases 

that might come before him. 

14. Lens^then thy days ; this and other prom- 
436 



lawadream. And hecameto Jeru- V^ioh; 
salem, and stood before the ark of the cov- 
enant of the Lord, and offered up burnt- 
offerings, and offered peace-offerings, and 
made a "feast to all his servants. 

16 H Then came there two women, that 
were harlots, unto the king, and stood "be- 
fore him. 

17 And the one woman said, O my lord, 
I and this woman dwell in one house ; and 
I was delivered of a child with her in the 
house. 

18 And it came to pass the third day 
after that I was delivercH, that this wom- 
an was delivered also : and we iccre to- 
gether; there was no stranger with us in 
the house, save we two in the house. 

19 And this woman's child died in the 
night; because she overlaid it. 

20 And she arose at * midnight, and took 
my son from beside me, while thy hand- 
maid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and 
laid her dead child in my bosom. 

21 And when I rose in the morning to 
give my child suck, behold, it was dead: 
but when I had considered it in the morn- 
ing, behold, it was not my son, which I 
did bear. 

22 And the other woman said. Nay ; but 
the living is my son, and the dead is thy 
son. And this said. No; but the dead is 
thy son, and the living is my son. Thus 
they spake before the king. 

23 Then said the king. The one sailh, 
This is my son that liveth, and thy son j.v 
the dead: and the other saith. Nay; but 
thy son is the dead, and my son is the 
living. 

24 And the king said, Bring me a sword. 
And they brought a sword before the king. 

25 And the king said, Divide the living 
child in two, and give half to the one, and 
half to the other. 

26 Then spake the woman ■whose the 
living child was unto the king, ''for her 
bowels * yearned upon her son, and she 
said, my lord, give her the living child, 
and in no wise slay it. But the other 
said. Let it be neither mine nor thine, but 
divide it. 

27 Then the king answered and said, 



q chap. 4 : 2'J-3l ; R:12; 10:23,24; Kiel. 1 : 13, IH. r Mat. fi : rW ; 
Kpli.:l:10. ■ chap. 4:21,24; l'r.>v. 3 : 16. t clinp. 10: 23-29. 
II Or, linth not btcn. >i Dent. 2ft ; 16 ; Paa. 21:4; 91 : Iti ; ProT. 
3:2; lTiin.4:8. v cliap.8:65; Eiit. 1:3; MnrliK:21. " Num. 
27:2. X Job 24:|f;; Psalm l:i»:ll. r Gen. 43 : 30 ; Isa. 49 : 15 ; 
Jer. 31 ; 20 ; Hosea 11:8. * Heli. i«r« hot. 

ises made to Solomon were on condition that he 
should continue to obey God. Chap. 6 : 1"J. 

21. Considered; looked upon and exainiiied. 

27. She is the mother ; having sliown for the 
child a mother's love. 

IXSTRtrCTIONS. 

3. To love God is tjie highest duty, the greatest 
honor, and the supreme blessedness of men. Those 
who do it, whatever their condition in this world, 



Solomon's princes 



I. KINGS, IV. 



and officers. 



b.cIioh" Give her the living child, and in no 
wise slay it : she is the inothei" thereof. 

28 And all Israel heard of the judgment 
which the king had judged ; and they 
feared the king: for they saw that the 
wisdom of God ivas in *him to do *judg- 
ment. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1 Solomon's princes. 7 His twelve officers for provis- 
ion. 20, 24 The peace and largeness of his kingdom. 
22 His daily provision. 2(5 His stables. 29 His 
wisdom. 

SO king Solomon was king over all Is- 
rael. 

2 And these xccrc the princes which he 
had; Azariah the son of Zadok tthe priest, 

3 Elihoreph and Ahiah, the sons of Shi- 
sha, ^scribes ; ''Jehoshaphat the son of Ahi- 
lud, the ^ recorder. 

4 And Bcnaiah the son of Jehoiada urns 
over the host : and Zadok and "^Abiathar 
icere the priests : 

5 And Azariah the son of Nathan was 
over the ollicers: and Zabud the son of 
Nathan was principal officer, and the king's 
friend .^ 

6 And Ahishar U"as over the household : 
and Adoniram the son of Abda ivas over 
the II tribute. 

7 HAnd Solomon had twelve officers 
over all Israel, which provided victuals 
for the king and his household : each man 
his month in a year made provision. 

8 And these arc their names : *The son 
of Hur, in mount Ephraim: 

9 Tlie t son of Dekar, in Makaz, and in 
Shaalbim, and Beth-shemesh, and Elon- 
beth-hanan : 

10 The i son of Hesed, in Aruboth; to 
him pertained Sochoh, and all the land of 
Hepher : 



* Heh. the midst of him. » Psa. 7-2: 2, 4. ^ Or, the chirf ttflicer. 
X Ot,smel<iries. 1> -2 Sam. QO : 24. ^Ot, remembrancer, c ihiip. 
2:27.:W. J ICliron. 27:33 || Or./cDV.cImp 5: 14. " Or.Benhiir. 
t Or, Jiendekar. % Or, Benheied. 4 Or, Benabinadab. || Or, 



are kings and priests unto G-od, and will reign with 
liim for ever and ever. 

5. The fact that before the canon of Scripture was 
complete, God sometimes made known his will in 
dreams, gives no countenance to the idea that he 
continues to do it, or that any can safely be guided 
by dreams now. 

6. G-od in not only permitting, but inviting all 
in every condition who lack wisdom to ask it of 
him in faith and love, expecting on the ground of 
his promise to receive it, shows marvellous conde- 
scension and kindness; and if any to whom he 
is revealed do not become wi.se unto salvation, it 
will be their own fault. Jas. 1 : 5. 

7. A deep sense of want and a grateful recogni- 
tion of the goodness of G-od, confidence in his will- 
ingness and power to help, and a disposition to ask 
of him, are a good preparation for receiving what 
we need. 

10. God is ple.ased when men from the heart ask 
for wisdom to understand and do their duty ; and 
in all such cases he will give them not onlv what 



11 The ^son of Abinadab, in all the 
region of Dor; which had Taphath the 
daughter of Solomon to wife : 

1 2 Baana the son of Ahilud ; to him per- 
tained Taanach and Megiddo, and all Beth- 
shean, which ishy Zartanah beneath Jez- 
reel, from Belh-shean to Abel-meholah, 
even unto the place that is beyond Jokne- 
am: 

1 3 The llson of Gebcr, in Ramoth-gilead ; 
to him pertained the towns of 'Jair the son 
of Manasseh, which are in Gilead ; to 
him also pertained the region of ^Argob, 
which is in Bashan, threescore great cit- 
ies with walls and brazen bars : 

14 Ahinadab the son of Iddo had *Ma- 
hanaim : 

15 Ahimaaz icas in Naphtali; he also 
took Basniath the daughter of Solomon to 
wife : 

16 Baanah the son of Ilushai icas in 
Asher and in Aloth : 

17 Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in 
Issachar : 

1 8 Shimei the son of Elah, in Benjamin : 

19 Geber the son of Uri teas in the coun- 
try of Gilead, in the country of Sihon 
king of the Amorites, and of Og king of 
Bashan ; and he teas the only officer which 
was in the land. 

20 T[Judah and Israel tvcre ^many, as 
the sand which is by the sea in multitude, 
eating'' and drinking, and making merry. 

21 And Solomon 'reigned over all king- 
doms from the river unto the land of the 
Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt : 
they brought J presents, and served Solo- 
mon all, the days of his life. 

22 Tf And Solomon's t provision for one 
day was thirty i measures of fine llour, 
and threescore measures of meal, 



Bengeber. « Num. .•52: 41. f Deut. .■? : 4, 8. *OT,taMahimaim. 
s cliap. 3:8; Gen. 22:17; Prov. 14:2a hEccl.2:24. iiClioin. 
!l:2(>,ctc.; Pii.T. 72: S-U. j 1 Sam. 10:27; Psa. 68 : 2'J. f Hcb. 
bread. % Heb. corM. 



they ask, but numerous other blessings for this world 
and the world to come. 

14. Obedience to G-od is conducive to health, long 
life, and the greatest enjoyment of temporal favors. 
It is .also conducive to the greatest usefulness, and 
is, through divine grace, a sure preparation for 
heaven. 

22. Persons who steal will also lie, and the prac- 
tice of these sins prepares the heart for, and often 
leads to the commission of murder. 

23. An acquaintance with human nature, and 
with the working of the various passions of the hu- 
man heart, is an important qualification for .i judge, 
and will in various ways aid him in eliciting evi- 
dence and coming to right decisions. 

26. A mother's love is great and in a high degree 
self-denying, but the practice of iniquity tends to 
destroy it, and to sink the mind to such ba-seness as 
to wish to rob others of what it cannot itself enjoy. 

CHAPTER IV. 
21. The river; Euphrates. 

437 



iSolomon's s^rcat wisdom. 



I. KINGS, V. 



Agreement with Hiram. 



23 Ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen out 
of the pastures, and a hundred sheep, be- 
sides harts, and roebucks, and fallow-deer, 
and fatted fowl. 

24 For he had dominion over all the re- 
gion on this side tlic river, from Tiphsah 
even to Azzah, over all the kings on this 
side the river: and he had "peace on all 
sides round about liim. 

25 And .ludah and Israel dwelt * safe- 
ly,'' every man under *^ his vine and under 
his fig-tree, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, 
all the days of Solomon. 

26 T[And Solomon ha5 forty thousand 
stalls of "^ horses for his *■ chariots, and 
twelve thousand horsemen. 

27 And those oflicers provided victuals 
for king Solomon, and for all that came 
unto king Solomon's table, every man in 
his month: they lacked nothing. 

28 Barley also and straw for tlie horses 
and t dromedaries brought they unto the 
place where the officers were, every man 
according to his charge. 

29 T[And God gave "^Solomou wisdom 
and understanding exceeding much, and 
largeness of heart, even as the sand that 
is on the sea-shore. 

30 And Solomon's wisdom excelled the 
■wisdom of all the children of ^the east 
country, and '' all the wisdom of Egypt. 

31 For he was wiser than all men; than 
Ethan' the Ezrahite, and JHeman, and 
Chaleol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol : 
and his fame was in all nations round 
about. 

32 And he spake three thousand ''prov- 
erbs : and his 'songs were a thousand and 
five. 

33 And he spake of trees, from the ce- 
dar-tree that is in Lebanon even unto the 
hyssop that springeth out of the wall : he 
spake also of beasts, and of fowl, and of 
creeping things, and of fishes. 

34 And "'there came of all people to 
hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all 
kings of the earth, w'hich had heard of 
his wisdom. 



• 1 Chron. 


2-2 :<1. • 


Heb. conjidtntly. 


b.Ier.2.'?:6. 


clIicalM:'!; 


Zecli.3:ia 


<l Dcut. 17: 16. erlinp. 10 


26; 2 Chron 


.1:14. 


tor, 


mutet, or «m 


i/l beaitt 


Ki«t.8:U; Miciili 


:l». fclinp 


3:1-2. 


CTnh 


1:3; Mat. a 


:l,lfi. h 


Ann 7: 22. i 1 CI 


ron. 15:19; 


P»n. 8! 


, title. 


J I Cliroii. 2 


:6; 6:3.1 


Psn. 88, title. k 


Prov. l.etc 


; F.ccl. 


12:9. 



24. This side the river ; the west side. 'Tiph- 
sah; a city on the Euphrates. Azzah; Gaza; 
on the south-west of Canaan towards Egypt. 

28. Dromedaries ; a species of cameLs. 
INSTRUCTION.S. 

2. A wise and good ruler, in tlie appointment of 
officers to take part in the administration of his <jo\-- 
erninent, will he especially ean-ful to select such as 
are distinguished for wisdom and tidility. and who.se 
example and influence will be s:ilut;iry to the people. 

21. Jehovah is a God of truth: when the word 
hath gone out of his mouth it standeth forever; and 
though the fulfilment of his promises may be long 
438 



CHAPTER V. 1,.^;?2S: 

1 Hiram, sending to conf^ratulate Solomon, is certified 
of his purpose to build the temple, and desired to 
furnish him with timber thereto. 7 Hiram, bless- 
ing God for Solomon, and requesting food for his 
family, furnisheth him with trees. 13 The number 
of Solomon's workmen and laborers. 

AND t Hiram king of Tyre sent his ser- 
vants unto Solomon : for he had heard 
that they had anointed him king in the 
room of his father: for "Hiram was ever 
a lover of David. 

2 And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying, 

3 Thou knowest how that David my 
father could not build a house unto the 
name of the Lord his God, for the "wars 
which were about him on every side, un- 
til the Lord put them under the soles of 
his feet. 

4 But now the Lord my God hath given 
me P rest on every side, so that there is nei- 
ther adversary nor evil oecurrent. 

5 And behold, I 5 purpose to build a 
house 1 unto the name of the Lord my 
God, as the Lord ''spake unto David my 
father, saying. Thy son, whom I will set 
upon thy throne in thy room, he shall 
build a house unto my name. 

6 Now therefore command thou that 
they hew me cedar-trees out of Lebanon ; 
and my servants shall be with thy ser- 
vants : and unto thee will I give hire for 
thy servants according to all that thou 
shalt I' appoint: for thou knowest that 
there is not among *us any that can skill 
to hew timber like unto the Zidonians. 

7 11 And it came to pass, when Hiram 
heard the words of Solomon, that he re- 
joiced greatly, and said. Blessed be the 
Lord' this day, which hath giA-en unto 
David awise'\son over this great people. 

8 And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, 
I have * considered the things which thou 
sentcst to me for: and I will do all thy 
desire concerning timber of cedar, and 
concerning timber of fir. 

9 My servants shall bring them down 
from Lebanon unto the sea; and I will 
convey them by sea in floats unto the 



1 Cant. 1 ; 1 . etc. m -2 Chron. 9: 1. 23; inn. 2:2, 3; Col. 2 : 3. t ver. 
10, 18: 2Chr. 2:3. i/«rn»i. n 2Siiin. 6: II ; Amns 1 :9. » I Chr. 
22:8; 28::). p Psii. 72 : 7 : Inn 9:7. % Heh. «iy. q 2 Chron. 
2:4, ete. r 2Sam. 7: 13; I Chron. 17: 12. \{ Heh. satj. • 1 Cor. 
12:14, etr. t nan. 2:20, 21. u Prov. 13:1. * Heb. Af/irrf. 



delayed, in due time they will be accomplished. 
Gen'. l.^ilS. 

29. Jehovah has infinite fulness, and he can so 
replenish the minds and hearts of his people with 
knowledge, wisdom, and grace, thiit they will shine 
as lights in the world, and pour forth tlie richest 
blessings on all generations, to the end of time. 

CHAPTER V. 

1. Ti/ic ; a city of the Phenicians on the Medi- 
terranean, north of Canaan. 

6. They; the subjects of Hiram. Zitloiiia>is ; 
inhabitants of Zidon, a city north of Tyre. 



Solomon raiscth a levy. 



I. KINGS, VI, 



The temple completed. 



B.c'io!*' place that thou shalt "appoint me, 
and will cause them to be discharged there, 
and thou shalt receive them: and thou 
shalt accomplish my desire, 'in giving 
food for my household. 

10 So Hiram gave Solomon cedar-trees 
and fir-trees according to all his desire. 

1 1 And Solomon gave Hiram twenty 
thousand tmeasures of wheat /or food to 
his household, and twenty measures of 
pure oil : thus gave Solomon to Hiram 
year by year. 

1 2 And the Lord gave Solomon wisdom, 
as he ''promised him : and there was peace 
between Hiram and Solomon ; and they 
two made a league together. 

13 T[And king Solomon raised a ^^levy 
out of all Israel; and the levy was thirty 
thousand men. 

14 xVnd he sent them to Lebanon, ten 
thousand a month by courses: a month 
they were in Lebanon, «;uZ two montlis at 
home : and "^Adouiram icas over the levy. 

15 And Solomon had threescore and ten 
thousand that bare "^ burdens, and four- i 
score thousand'' hewers in the mountains ; 

16 Besides the chief of Solomon's offi- 
cers which icere over the work, three thou- 
sand and three hundred, which ruled over 
the people that wrought in the work. 

17 And the king commanded, and they 
brought great stones, costly stones, and 
hewed stones, to lay the foundation of the 
house. 

18 And Solomon's builders and Hiram's 
builders did hew them, and the ^stone- 
squarers : bo they prepared timber and 
•stones to build the house. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 The builJing of .Solomon's temple. 5 The cham- 
bers thereof. 11 God's promise unto it. 15 The ceil- 
ing and adorning of it. 23 The cherubim. 31 The 
doors. 30 The court. .37 The time of building it. 

AND it came to pass in the four hun- 
dred and eightieth year after the chil- 
dren of Israel were come out of the land 
of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's 

« Heb. tend. » Ezra ;i : 7 ; F.7.ek. '27: 17 ; Arts 12:20. t Heb. 
cars, b clli(p.3:l2. % Hety IrihuU o/ men. c clinp. 4 : fi. H ch.ip. 
9:21. « .losh. 9:21. ij Or, ffifc/iVti. Ezek. 27:9. || Heb. *«i"«. 
r E7.ek. cb. 40-, 41. "^ Or, iL'indows broad within,«nd nftrrow with- 

1"2. A league ; a' treaty, or covenant of mutual 
peace and friendship. 

18. Stone-sqiiarers ; in the margin, Giblites; 
inhabitants of (>ebal. a town near Zidon. Josh. 
13:5; Ezek. 27:9. 

INSTRUCTION'S. 

1. Kings as well as subjects are bound to love 
one another, to rejoice in each other's prosperity, and 
seek each other's good. 

4. Peace is the gift of G-od. It should be received 
with gratitude, and employed by rulers and people 
in the prosecution of such works, and such only, as 
will be for his glory and their liighest prosperity. 

0. The difference in the climate, soil, ancl produc- 
tions of different countries, renders an interchange 



reisn over Israel, in the month Zif, which 
is the second month, that he I! began to 
build the house of the Lord. 

2 And the Hiouse which king Solomon 
built for the Lord, the length thereof u'as 
threescore cubits, and tlie breadth thereof 
twenty cubits, and the height thereof thir- 
ty cubits. 

3 And the porch before the temple of the 
house, twenty cubits icas the length there- 
of, according to the breadth of the house ; 
and ten cubits ivas the breadth thereof 
before tlie house. 

4 And for the house he made "windows 
of narrow lights. 

5 T[ And ^against the wall of the house 
he built ^chambers Ground about, against 
the walls of the house round about, both 
of the temple and of the oracle: and he 
made ^chambers round about. 

G The nethermost chamber tt'n.9 five cu- 
bits broad, and the middle icas six cubits 
broad, and the third was seven cubits 
broad : for without in the wall of the house 
he made ihiarrowed rests round about, that 
the beams should not be fastened in the 
walls of the house. 

7 And the house, when it was in build- 
ing, was built of stone made ready ''be- 
fore it was brought thither: so that there 
was neither hammer nor axe ?ior any tool 
of iron heard in the house, while it was 
in building. 

8 The door for the middle chamber was 
in the right *sidc of the house : and they 
went up with winding stairs unto the mid- 
dle chamber, and out of the middle into the 
third. 

9 So he built the house, and finished it; 
and covered the house twifh beams and 
boards of cedar. 

10 And then he built chambers again.st 
all the house, five cubits high: and they 
rested on the house with timber of cedar. 

1 1 ^ And the word of the Lord came to 
Solomon, saying, 

1 2 ConccrningWnn house Mhich thou art 

out : or, skeieed nnd closed, f Or, upon, or joining to, X HeU 
\ floors, e EiekieHI :K. ij Heb ri*». || Heb. n«rr»ii:in«^ nr 
rehntewrnts. h ib:ip. ,=> : 1 7. 18 ; Deot. 27 : .1, 8. * Heb. shoulder, 
f Or, the viiutt-heams and the ceilings with cedar, 

of commodities a mutual benefit ; .and this should 
ever be so conducted as to benefit all concerned. 

13. The building of suitable houses for public 
worship is essential to the highest prosperity of the 
community, and all should be disposed to do their 
part towards the accomplishment of this work. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1. Zif; the second month of their ecclesiastical 
year, answering to a part of April and May. 

2. T/irrescure ci//)its ; the common cubit is sup- 
posed to have been about eighteen inches, and the 
sacred about twenty-one. 

I 5. Oracle ; the most holy place, from which God 
spoke to the people. Ver. 16, 19. 

439 



Ornaments of the temple. 



I. KINGS, VI, 



The cherubim and doors. 



in building, if "thou wilt walk in my stat- 
utes, and execute my judgments, and keep 
all my eommandments to walk in them; 
then will I perform my word with thee, 
which I ''spake unto David thy father: 

13 And "^I will dwell among the chil- 
dren of Israel, and will not "'forsake my 
people Israel. 

14 So Solomon built the house, and fin- 
ished it. 

,15 And he built the walls of the house 
within with boards of cedar, *both the 
floor of the house, and the walls of the 
ceiling: and he covered them on the in- 
side with wood, and covered the floor of 
the house with planks of fir. 

16 And he built twenty cubits on the 
sides of the house, both the floor and the 
walls with boards of cedar : he even built 
them for it within, even for the oracle, creu 
for the "most holy place. 

17 And the house, that is, the temple 
before it, was forty cubits long. 

18 And the cedar ofthe house within «'a5 
carved with ^knops and ^opeu flowers : all 
wa.'i cedar; there was no stone seen. 

19 And the ""oracle he prepared in the 
house within, to set there the ark of the 
covenant of the Lord. 

20 And the oracle in the forepart teas 
twenty cubits in length, and twenty cu- 
bits in breadth, and twenty cubits in the 
height thereof: and he overlaid it with 
pure^^ gold ; and so covered the altar which 
was of cedar. 

21 So Solomon overlaid the house with- 
in with pure gold : and he made a parti- 
tion by the chains of gold before the ora- 
cle ; and he overlaid it with gold. 

22 And the whole house he overlaid 
with gold, until he had finished all the 
house: also^the whole altar that teas by 
the oracle he overlaid with gold. 

23 TIAnd within the oracle he made 
two ''cherubim of II olive-tree, each ten 
cubits liigh. 

24 And five cubits was the one wing of 
the cherub, and five cubits the other wing 
of the cherub: from the uttermost part 
of the one wing unto the uttermost part of 
the other ivere ten cubits. 



J 25 And the other cherub was ten *b.c.)J^; 
j cubits: both the cherubim tcere of one 
measure and one size. 

26 The height of the one cherub iro."; ten 
cubits, and so was it of the other cherub. 

27 And he set the cherubim within the 
inner house: and *they stretched forth 
the wings of the cherubim, so that the 
wing of the one touclicd the one wall, and 
the wing of the other cherub touched the 
other wall; and their wings touched one 
another in the midst of the house. 

28 And he overlaid the cherubim with 
gold. 

29 And he carved all the walls of the 
house round about with carved figures of 
cherubim and palm-trees and topen flow- 
ers, within and without. 

30 And the floor of the house he over- 
laid with gold, within and without. 

31 ^ And for the entering of the oracle 
he made doors of olive-tree:' the lintel 
and side-posts joere +a fifth part of the irall. 

32 The Hwo doors also nTreo/olive-trce ; 
and he carved upon them carvings of cheru- 
bim and palm-trees andl'open flowers, and 
overlaid them with gold, and spread gold 
upon the cherubim, and upon the palm- 
trees. 

33 So also made he for the door of the 
temple posts o/ olive-tree, *a fourth part 
of the wall. 

34 And the two doors K'cre o/fir-tree : the 
two' leaves of the one door were folding, 
and the two leaves of the other door were 
folding. 

35 And he carved thereon cherubim and 
palm-trees and open flowers : and covered 
thenfwith gold fitted upon the carved work. 

36 ^ And he built the inner court with 
three rows of hewed stone, and a row of 
cedar beams. 

37 T[ In the fourth year was the founda- 
tion of the house of the Lord laid, in the 
month Zif : 

38 And in the eleventh year, in the 
month Bui, which f^ the eighth month, 
was the house finished tthroughout all 
the parts thereof, and according to all the 
fashion of it. So was he ' seven years in 
building it. 



a clmp. 9:4. b 2Sam.7:13. 
2I:,3. d r>fut.31:6; Hi-b. I3:S. 
unto the walU, etc , and t 



r.x.VizS: 2Cor. 6:16; Uev. 
Or, from thtjioorn/thtlwute 



clmp.8:fi; Ex.26:Tl; Eiek. 
Ah:-\. \ Or, gourdi. tHe\i.oytt\inqioJ. f ver. ft 16; Psa. 28:2. 
It Heh. ihut up. 8 Ex.:lO:l,:l,6; 2Cliron.3:7,et<-. hEx.37:7-9. 



t \\ Heb. treet of oit, or oily trect. * Or, the cherubim stretched 
forth their wings, j Heb. ope ningt of. % Or, Jive square. 4 Or, 
leaves of the doors. |j Hfb. openings of. * Or, foursquare. 
i Ezelc. -I I : 2:J. f Or, with alt the appurtenances thereof, and with 
all the ordinances thereof, j ver. 1,9. 



IS. Kiiops ; knobs, or bunches. 

'J I. A partition; to divide the holy from the 
most holy place. 

38. The eif^lith month ; answering to a part of 
October and November. 

IXSTRUCTIOXS. 

I. The successful accomplishment of a preat and 
difficult undertaking depends much on the proper 
preparation for it; and the time, money, and labor 
410 



so spent are as needful and as useful as those spent 
in any part of the work. 

12. However iimch maybe expended in buihling 
and ornamenting houses for the worship of God, 
none of the worshippers will be accepted but tiiose 
who worship him in spirit and in truth. 

19. Although Jehovah dwells not in temples made 
with hands, yet he is peculiarly present where his 
people assemble to acknowledge, adore, and praise 



Solomon's porches. 



I. KINGS, VII. 



The two pillars. 



CHAPTER VII. 



1 The building of Solomon's house. 2 Of the house of 
Lebanon. Of the porch of pillars, 7 Of the porch 
of judjBjment. 8 Of the house for Pharaoh's daugh- 
ter. 13 Hiram's work of the two pillars. ^Zi Of the 
molten sea. 27 Of the ten bases. 38 Of the ten 
lavers, 40 and all the vessels. 

BUT Solomon was building his own 
house * thirteen years, and he finished 
all his house. 

2 T[ He built also the house of the forest 
of Lebanon ; the length thereof was a hun- 
dred cubits, and the breadth thereof fifty 
cubits, and the height thereof thirty cu- 
bits, upon four rows of cedar pillars, with 
cedar beams upon the pillars. 

3 And it ivas covered with cedar above 
upon the * beams, that lay on forty-five 
pillars, fifteen in a row. 

4 And there were windows in three rows, 
and tlight tra.s against light in three ranks. 

5 And all the i doors and posts were 
square, with the windows : and light icas 
against light in three ranks. 

6 1[ And he made a porch of pillars ; the 
length thereof u-as fifty cubits, and the 
breadth thereof thirty cubits : and the 
porch was § before them : and the other pil- 
lars and the thick beam tvere ^ before them. 

7 ^ Then he made a porch for the throne 
where he might judge, even the porch of 
judgment: and it was covered with cedar 
from II one side of the floor to the other. 

8 TT And his house where he dwelt had 
another court within the porch, ir/tz'c/i was 
of the like work. Solomon made also a 
house for Pharaoh's daughter, whom ''he 
had taken to icife, like unto this porch. 

9 All these u'ere o/costly stones, accord- 
ing to the measures of hewed stones, 
sawed with saws, within and without, 
even from the foundation unto the coping, 
and 50 on the outside toward the great 
court. 

10 And the foundation u'as of costly 
stones, even great stones, stones of ten 
cubits, and stones of eight cubits. 

1 1 And above were costly stones, after 
the measures of hewed stones, and cedars. 

1 2 And the great court round about was 
with three rows of hewed stones, and a 



• cliap. 9: 10; 2Chron.8:l. * Weh.riht. i Hfh. tight agaimt 
tight. i Or, spaces and pillnrii vfi'Tt^ tquare in prospect. ij Or, 
according to. || Heh from /loor to Jlaor. b cliap. :) : 1 ; SCIiron. 
8:11. c .Tolm 10 :■:;!; Acts 3: II. * //urnm. ver. 40 ; 2 Cliron. 
4:11. t Heb. the ton of a widow woman. d iCIiron. 2 : 14. 



him ; and there, by the proclamation of his truth, he 
will communicate to them a knowledge of his will. 

.30. (Jrold, although amongthe most precious things 
of earth, is nevertheless worthless and tit only to be 
trodden under foot, compared with that holine.ss of 
heart and life without which no man can see the Lord. 

.37. That which is undertaken in the fear and 
love of G-od, and is prosecuted according to his will, 
may be expected in due time to be successfully and 
joyfully accomplished. 



row of cedar beams, both for the inner 
court of the house of the Lord, and for 
the "^ porch of the house. 

] 3 ^And king Solomon sent and fetched 
Hiram* out of Tyre. 

14 He was ta widow's ''son of the tribe 
of Naphtali,and his ^father ?/vi.s- a man of 
Tyre, a worker in brass : and '^hc was fill- 
ed witii wisdom, and understanding, and 
cunning to work all works in brass. And 
he came to king Solomon, and wrought all 
his work. 

15 For he -cast two s pillars of brass, of 
eighteen cubits high apiece : and a line of 
tweh'c cubits did compass either of them 
about. 

16 And he made two chapiters o/molten 
brass, to set upon the tops of the pillars : 
the height of the one chapiter was five 
cubits, and the height of the other chap- 
iter teas five cubits : 

17 Jnd nets of checker-work, and 
wreaths of chain-work, lor the chapiters 
which were upon the top of the pillars : 
seven for the one chapiter, and seven for 
the other chapiter. 

18 And he made the pillars, and two 
rows round about upon the one network, 
to cover the chapiters that wot upon the 
top, with pomegranates : and so did he for 
the other chapiter. 

19 And the chapiters thatwrrc upon the 
top of the pillars irere of lily- work in the 
porch, four cubits. 

20 And the chapiters upon the two pil- 
lars had pomcp:ranatcs also above, over 
against the belly which teas by the net- 
work : and the pomegranates 7vere two 
hundred in rows round about upon the 
other chapiter. 

21 And he set up the pillars in the ''porch 
of the temple : and he set up the right pil- 
lar, and called the name thereof Uachin : 
and he set up the left pillar, and called 
the name thereof HBoaz. 

22 And upon the top of the pillars icas 
lily-work : so was the work of the pillars 
finished. 

23 ^[And he made a molten 'sea, ten 
cubits *from the one brim to the other: 



e 2Clir<)n. 4 r 16. t E.T. 31 rS; .Ifi: I. J Heb. fnthianed. c ver. 
21; 2X11155,2.1:17; 2Clir<in, 3 : 1.S, etc. ; 4:12, etc.: Jer..')2:2l,etc. 
h ver. 12; chap. 6:. 3. % Tlwt is, Ht ihnll ettnhtith. \\ That is, 
m 1/ is ttrength. i 2 Kings, 2,i : 13. ' Heb. front hit brim to hit 
brim. 



CHAPTER Vn. 
2. The house of the forest of Lehanon : a 
palace in or ne.ar Jerusalem, built of materials from 
the forest of Lebanon. Chap. 10: 17, 21. 

14. Brass ; this term was applied to various 
metals, composed chiefly or wholly of copper. 

21. Jaehtii ; meaning, he shall establish, or make 
it st.and. lioaz ; in strength. 

23. Molten sea; a very large vat or basin for 
I water. 

441 



The molten sea. 



I. KINGS, VII. 



The ten hirers. 



it was round all about, and his height v:as 
five cubits : and a line of thirty cubits did 
compass it round about. 

24 And "under the brim of it round 
about there were knops compassing it, ten 
in a cubit, compassing the sea round about : 
the knops were cast in t\Yo rows, when it 
was cast. 

25 It stood upon twelve oxen, three look- 
ing toward the north, and three looking 
toward the west, and three looking tow- 
ard the south, and three looking toward 
the east : and the sea was set above upon 
them, and all their hinder parts were in- 
ward. 

26 And itw'fl.s ahandbreadth thick, and 
the brim thereof was wrought like the 
brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies : it 
contained two thousand baths. 

27 ^And he made ten bases of brass; 
four cubits was the length of one base, 
and four cubits the breadth thereof, and 
three cubits the height of it. 

28 And the w^ork of the bases teas on 
this manner: they had borders, and the 
borders ivere between the ledges: 

29 And on the borders that u-erc between 
the ledges irere ''lions, o.ven, and ■= cheru- 
bim : and upon the ledges there teas a base 
above: and beneath the lions and oxen 
were certain'' additions made of thin work. 

30 And every base had four brazen 
wheels, and plates of brass : and the four 
corners thereof had undersctters : vmder 
the ]a.ver were undersctters molten, at the 
side of every addition. 

31 And the mouth of it within the chnp- 
iter and above was a cubit : but the mouth 
thereof teas round after the work of the 
base, a cubit and a half: and also upon 
the mouth of it icere gravings with their 
borders, foursquare, not round. 

32 And under the borders tcerc four 
wheels;* and the axletrees of the wheels 
were * joined to the base : and the height 
of a wheel was a cubit and half a cubit. 

33 And the work of the wheels was like 
the work of a chariot-wheel : their axle- 
trees, and their naves, and their felloes, 
and their spokes, rrere all molten. 

34 And there icere four undersctters to 



I the four corners of one base: 
the undersctters tccre of the very base 

I itself. 

I 35 And in the top of the base was there 

a round compass of half a cubit high : and 

on the top of the base the ledges thereof 

and the borders thereof ivcrc of the same. 

3G For on the plates of the ledges thcrc- 

, of, and on the borders thereof, he graved 
cherubim, lions, and palm-trees, accord- 
ing to the + proportion of every one, and 
additions round about. 

'; 37 After this manner he made the ten 

[bases: all of them had one casting, one 

j measure, and one size. 

38 11 Then made he ten "^lavers of brass : 
one laver contained forty baths : and cv- 

I cry .laver was four cubits : and upon every 

i one of the ten bases one laver. 

! 39 And he put five bases on the right 
side + of the house, and five on the left 
side of the house : and he set the sea on 
the right side of the house eastward, over 
against the south. 

40 And ^^Hiram made the lavers, and the 
shovels, and the basins. So Hiram made 
an end of doing all the work that he made 
king Solomon for the house of the Lord: 

41 The two pillars, and the tiro bowls 
of the chapiters that trere on the top of 
the two pillars; and the two s networks, 
to cover the two bowls of the chapiters 
which ii'crc upon the top of the pillars; 

42 And four hundred pomegranates for 
the two networks, even two rows of pome- 
granates for one network, to cover the 
two bowls of the chapiters that (j'crtilupon 
the pillars; 

43 And the ten bases, and ten lavers on 
the bases ; 

44 And one sea, and twelve oxen under 
the sea; 

45 And the ''pots, and the shovels, and 
the basins: and all these vessels, which 
Hiram made to king Solomon for the house 
of the Lord, were q/"* bright brass. 

4() In the plain of .Jordan did the king 
cast them, tin the clay-ground between 
Succoth' and JZarthan. 

47 And Solomon left all the A'essels nn- 
ivcighed, t because they were exceeding 



• SCIiron. 4:3-B. b E7.ek. 1 : 10; 10: M; 41 : 19; Ho«ea S: H; 
Rev.fi:S. o Gen. 3:M ; Ex. M: l»: 37:7; Heb. !l:6. d 1 Peter, 
2 : S. • Ezek. I : Ifi, eii-. ■* Heh. im thr hate, f H"-')- niikeilneiii. 
f 2 Cliron. 4 : fi, etc. J Heb. »Au«Wcr. ^ Heh. //iVum; ver. 13. 

26. Tii'o thousand biths; a batli is supposed 
to have been about seven and a half gallons. 

27. Bases ; tables or platforms for the vessels of 
water io stand on. 

30. Laver ; a vessel or basin to wash in. 
46. Succoth and Zarthan ; places near the 
Jordan, and not far from .Tericlio. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 
]. While convenient and comfortable dwellings 
are blessings for which men should be grateful, 
412 



I!ver.l7,18. \\ Keh. upon the face of the pitlai-i. h Ex. -27 : .3. 
* Heb. bvas$ made bright^ <»r scoured, f Heb. i« the thickness of 
thegrounri. ■ Genesis 33 : 1'. jJoabim3:IG. % Heh. for the 
exceeding multitude. 

their great concern should be to secure a house not 
made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 

S. The more husbands and wives are united in 
their views, judgments, and elForts, dwelling together 
as heirs of the grace of life, the more happy they 
will be, and the more useful to all who may feel their 
influence. • 

14. All natural endowments, as well as all spirjt- 
i ual grace*, come from God. He bestows them in 
difTorent measures upon dilferent individuals, and 



Dedication of the temple. 



I. KINGS, VIII. 



Solomon's blessin". 



the brass *fouiid out 

48 And Solomon made all the vessels 
that pcrtaiiud unto the house of the Lord : 
the * altar of gold, and the table of gold, 
whereupon the ''show-bread was, 

49 And the candlesticks of pure gold, 
five on the right side, and five on the left, 
before the oracle, with the flowers, and 
the lamps, and the tongs o/gold, 

50 And the bowls, and the snuffers, and 
the basins, and the spoons, and the tcen- 
sers of pure gold ; and the hinges of gold, 
both for the doors of the inner house, the 
most holy place, and for the doors of the 
house, to uut, of the temple. 

51 So was ended all the work that king 
Solomon made for the house of the Lord. 
AndSolonionbroughtinthetthings which 
David •= his father had dedicated ; cuen. the 
silver, and the gold, and the vessels, did 
he put among the treasures of the house 
of the Lord. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1 The feast of the dedication of the temple. 12, 54 
Solomon's blessing. '22 Solomon's prayer. 02 His 
sacrifice of peace-oDerings. 

THEN ''Solomon assembled the elders 
of Israel, and all the heads of the 
tribes, the s^ chief of the fathers of the chil- 
dren of Israel, unto king Solomon in Je- 
rusalem, that ''they might bring up the 
ark of the covenant of the Lord out of 
the ""city of David, which is Zion. 

2 And all the men of Israel assembled 
themselves unto king Solomon at the 
feasts in the month Ethanim, which is 
the seventh month. 

3 And all the elders of Israel came, and 
the ''priests took up the ark. 

4 And they brought up the ark of the 
Lord, and the 'tabernacle of the congre- 
gation, and all the holy vessels that were 
in the tabernacle, even those did {he 
priests and the Levites bring up. 

5 And king Solomon, and all the con- 
gregation of Israel, that were assembled 



* Heb. searched. 1 Chron. 22 ; 14. a Ex. 37 : 2.'i. b Lev. 24 : 6-«. 
f Heb. aalipans. J Heb. hols/ things of David, c 2 Sam. » : 11. 
i 2 Chron. o : 2, etc. % Heb. princes, o 2 Sara. 6:17. f 2 Sam. 
5:7-9. e Lev. 23:34. h Num. 4: 15: 1 Cliron. 15: 14. i 3 Cliron. 
1:3. i 2 Sam. 6:13. VE.x. 26:33. 1 chap. 6:27. \\ Heb. heads. 



in his service requires of each according to that he 
hath, and not according to tliat he hath not. 

23. The method of divine worsliip prescribed under 
every dispensation, the preparations for it. tlie mode 
of conducting it, and the truths inculcated by it. have 
all tended to impress upon the worshippers a convic- 
tion of their moral pollution, and the necessity of spir- 
itual puritication in order to preparation for heaven. 

48. In order to the right use of wealth, all persons 
need, and sliould habitually seek wisdom from 
above. How much, or what proportion, is to be 
employed in one way, and what in another, in order 
most to honor God and do good, he has not defi- 
nitely prescribed. But each one should endeavor 



unto him, ivcre with him before the ark, 
sacrificing' sheep and o.xen, that could not 
be told nor numbered for multitude. 

6 And the priests brought in the ark of 
the covenant of the Lord tinto his '' place, 
into the oracle of the house, to the most 
holy place, even under the 'wings of the 
cherubim. 

7 For the cherubim spread forth their 
two wings over the place of the ark, and 
the cherubim covered the ark and the 
staves thereof above. 

8 And they drew out the staves, that the 
endsll of the staves were seen out in the 
holy* place before the oracle, and they 
were not seen without: and there tlicy 
are unto this day. 

9 TJierc was nothing in the ark save the 
two tables of stone, which Moses put 
there'" at Horcb, twhen the Lord made a 
corena/i? "with the children of Israel, when 
they came out of the land of Egypt. 

10 And it came to pass, when the priests 
were conic out of the holy place, that the 
cloud" filled the house of the Lord, 

1 1 So that the priests could not stand to 
minister because of the cloud : for the 
glory of the Lord had filled the house of 
the Lord. 

12 TT Then P spake Solomon, The Lord 
said that he would dwell in the thick 
darkness."! 

13 I ''have surely built thee a house to 
dwell in, a settled 'place for thee to abide 
in for ever. 

14 And the king turned his face about, 
and 'blessed all the congregation of Israel : 
and all the congregation of Israel stood : 

15 And he said, "Blessed he the Lord 
God of Israel, which 'spake with his 
mouth unto David my father, and lintli 
with his hand fulfilled it, saying, 

1 6 Since tlic day that I brought forth my 
people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city 
out of all the tribes of Israel to build a 
house, that my name might be therein ; but 
I chose "David to be over my people Israel . 



* Or.or*. 2 Cliron. 6 : 0. m Kx. 25:21; 40:20; Dent. 10:2,3; 
Heb. 9:4. f Or, where, n Ex. 34 : 27, 29, o Kx. 40 : 34 ; Lev. 
16:2. p 2 Chron. 6:1, etc. q Ps.t 97 : 2 ; Isa. 45 : 1.5. r 2 Sara. 
7:13. •?«». 132:14. t2S.ara. 6:18. n Luke 1:6a TjSam. 
7:5, etc. wi Sam. 16:1. 



so to act as a steward of God, that when called to 
give up his account, he may do it with joy, and not 
with grief, 

CHAPTER VITI. 

1. Bring iip the ark ; from mount Zion in the 
south part of Jerusalem, where David lived, to the 
temple on mount Moriah, an elevation in the north- 
east p.^rt of the city. 

2. The feast ; of t,ibernacles. Ethatrim; an- 
swering to a part of September and October. 

4. The tabernacle ; that whicli David had pre- 
pared for tlie ark when he brought it from the house 
of Obed edom. 2 Sam. 6 : 17. 

13. Fur ever ; as long as the temple continued. 
443 



Solomoti's 



I. KINGS, VIII. 



1 7 And * it was in the hcnrt of David my 
father to build a house for the name of the 
Loud God of Israel. 

18 And the Lord said unto David my 
father, Whereas it was in thy heart to 
build a house unto my name, thou didst 
well that it was in thy heart. 

19 Nevertheless, thou shalt not build the 
house ; but thy son that shall come forth 
out of thy loins, he shall build the house 
unto my name. 

20 And the Lord hath performed his 
word that he spake, and I am risen up in 
the room of David my father, and sit on 
the throne of Israel, ''as the Lord prom- 
ised, and have built a house for the name 
of the Lord God of Israel. 

21 And I have set there a place for the 
ark, '^ wherein is the covenant of the Lord, 
which he made with our fathers, when he 
brought them out of the land of Egypt. 

22 •[ And Solomon stood before the altar 
of the Lord in the presence of all the con- 
gregation of Israel, and ''spread forth his 
hands toward heaven : 

23 And he said, Lord God of Israel, 
fAe;-e^t.";noGodlikethee,in heaven above, 
or on earth beneath, who "^keepest cove- 
nant and mercy with thy servants that 
walks before thee with all their heart: 

24 Who hast kept Avith thy servant Da- 
vid my father that thou promiscdst him : 
thou spakest also with thy mouth, and 
hast fulfilled it with thy hand, as it is this 
day. 

25 Therefore now. Lord God of Israel, 
keep with thy servant David my father 
that thou promiscdst ''him, saying, *There 
shall not fail thee a man in my sight to 
sit on the throne of Israel ; t so that thy 
children take heed to their way, that they 
walk before me as thou hast walked be- 
fore me. 

26 And now, God of Israel, 'let thy 
word, I pray thee, be A-erified, Avhich thou 
spakest unto thy servant DaA'id my father. 

27 But Avill God indeed dAvell on the 
earth"? behold, the J heaven and heaA'cn 
of ''heavens cannot contain thee; how 
much less this house that I have builded'? 

28 Yet haA^e thou respect unto the pray- 
er of thy servant, and to his supplication, 
O Lord my God, to hearken unto the cry 
and to the prayer, Avhich thy servant 
prayeth before thee to-day : 



• IChrtin. 17: 1, etc. k I Cliron. -.'8: ft. 6. c verse 9i Dent, 
3l:2r.. d Ex. 9:;i'l; Isniali 1:18. « Kx. IS: 11; iSnm. 7:2J. 
f Nell. 1:6; Daniel «: 4. Kcliap. 3:6. bclmp. •2:^. * Heb. 
There ihall nut lie cut off unia thee a man/rom my tight, f Heb. 
onig if. i Pbh. 1 m : <tl J 2 Cliron. <i:l\; Isn. U\ : 1 : .ler. ^3 : 24 ; 
Art«l7:24. k5Cor.l-2:2. lDeut.l2:ll. j Or, m. Dnn. «: 10. 



26. Verified; shown to be true, by its fulfil- 
ment. 

29. May he open, look with favor. Toward; 
in, ver. 33. 

4U 



-prayir. 

29 That thine eyes maybe open *n.c-^ 
toAvard this house night and day, even toAv- 
ard the place of Avhich thou hast said, ' My 
name shall be there : that thou mayest 
hearken unto the prayer which thy scr- 
A-ant shall make ^toAvard this place. 

30 And '"hearken thou to the suppli- 
cation of thy serA'ant, and of thy people 
Israel, Avhcn they shall pray HoAvard this 
place : and hear thou in hcaA'cnthy dAvell- 
ing-placc : and Avhen thou hearest, for- 
give. 

31 ^If any man trespass against his 
neighbor, and l!an oath be laid upon him 
to cause him to SAA'ear, and the oath come 
before thine altar in this house: 

32 Then hear thou in heaA'en, and do. 
and judge thy "serA-ants, condemning the 
Avicked, to bring his Avay upon his head: 
and "justifying the righteous, to giA-e him 
according to his righteousness. 

33 T[ When thy people Israel be p smitten 
doAvn before the enemy, because they 
liaA'^e sinned against thee, and shall ''turn 
again to thee, and confess thy name, and 
pray, and make supplication unto thee *in 
this hovise : 

34 Then hear thou in hcaA-en, and for- 
giA-e the sin of thy people Israel, and bring 
them again unto the land Avhich thou gaA'- 
est unto their fathers. 

35 ^ When ''heaA-en is slnit up, and there 
is no rain, because they haA-e sinned against 
thee; if they pray toAvard this place, and 
confess thy name, and turn from their sin. 
when thou afllictest them : 

36 Then hear thou in heaven, and for- 
giA'c the sin of thy serA'ants, and of thy 
people Israel, that thou "teach them the 
good way Avherein they should Avalk, and 
giA-e rain upon thy land, Avhich thou hast 
giA"en to thy people for an inheritance. 

37 Ijlf Mhere be in the land famine, if 
there be pestilence, blasting, mildcAv, lo- 
cust, or if there be caterpillar; if their 
enemy besiege them in the land of their 
cities ;t AvhatsoeA'er plague, AvhatsocA-er 
sickness there he; 

38 What prayer and supplication socA-er 
be made by any man, or by all thy people 
Israel, Avhich shall knoAv cA-ery man the 
plague of his own heart, and spread forth 
liis liands toAvard this house : 

39 Then hear thou in heaA-en thy dAvell- 
ing-place, and forgiA'c, and do, and give 

m 2Cliron. 20:9. % Or, in. Dan. r>:10. || Heb. he require tin 
oatho/him. Ex.Qi-.ll. n Ex. 34 : 7; Dent. 2S : 1. "lsa.3:in: 
Rnmnnil2:13: 5:9. p Dent. 28 : 2.'). q Lev. 2« : 40-42 ; Neli. 
1:8,9. * Or, toiiwrd. rLev. 2fi:19; Dent. 2« : 2:1. • 1 S.im. 
12:23; Psa. 2.5:8; 94:12. t Lev. 26 : 16, clc. ; Dent 28:21, etc. ; 
2Chron. 20:9. f Or, jurisdiction. 



33. In ; toward, ver. 30. The word in the orig- 
inal means in, or toward, according to the con- 
nection. 

38. Plague ; wickedness. 



Solomon's prayer. 



I. KINGS, VIII. 



He blesselh Israel. 



B. " icS°' to every man according to his ways, 
whose heart thou knowest ; (for ^thou, even 
thou only, kuowest the hearts of all the 
children of men ;) 

40 That they may '' fear thee all the days 
that they live in the land which thou gav- 
est unto our fathers. 

41 Moreover concerning a stranger, that 
i'< not of thy people Israel, but cometh out 
of a far country for thy name's sake ; 

42 (For they shall hear of thy great 
name, and of thy *= strong hand, and of thy 
strctched-out arm ;) when he shall come 
and pray toward this house : 

43 Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling- 
plnce, and do according to all that the 
stranger calleth to thee for : that "^ all peo- 
ple of the earth may know thy name, to 
fear thee, as do thy people Israel ; and that 
they may know that *this house, which I 
have builded, is called by thy name. 

44 ^ If thy people go out to battle against 
tlieir enemy, Avhithersoever thou shalt 
*cnd them, and shall pray unto the Lord 
toward tthe city which thou hast chosen, 
and toicdrd the house that I have built for 
thy name : 

45 Then hear thou in heaven their pray- 
er and their supplication, and maintain 
tlieir ^^cause. 

46 If they sin against thee, {for ^ there is 
no man that sinneth not,) and thou be an- 
gry with them, and deliver them to the 
enemy, so that they carry them ""away 
captives unto the land of the enemy, far 
or near; 

47 Yet if they shall ^ bethink themselves 
in the land whither they were carried cap- 
tives, and repent, and make supplication 
unto thee in the land of them that carried 
them captives, saying, *^ We have sinned, 
iind have done perversely, we have com- 
mitted wickedness; 

48 And. so ''return unto thee with all their 
heart, and with all their soul, in the land of 
their enemies which led them away cap- 
tive, and pray unto thee toward ' their land 
which thou gavest unto their fathers, the ! 
city which thou hast chosen, and the j 
house which I have built for thy name : I 

49 Then henrthouthcirprayer and their j 
supplication in heaven thy dwelling-place. I 
and maintain their II cause, I 

50 And forgive thy people that have! 
sinned against thee, and all their trans- j 
grcssions wherein they have transgressed i 



against thee, and Jgive them compassion 
before them who carried them captive, 
that they may have compassion on them : 

51 For ''they he thy people, and thine 
inheritance, which thou broughtest forth 
out of Egypt, from the midst of the ' fur- 
nace of iron : 

52 That thine eyes may be open unto 
the supplication of thy servant, and unto 
the supplication of thy people Israel, to 
hearken unto them in all that they call 
for unto thee. 

53 For thou didst separate them from 
among all the people of the earth, to be 
thine inheritance, as thou "spakest by the 
hand of INIoses thy servant, when thou 
broughtest our fathers out of Egypt, 
Lord God. 

54 And it was .so, that when Solomon 
had made an end of praying all this pray- 
er and supplication unto the Lord, he 
arose from before the altar of the Loud. 
from kneeling on his knees with his hands 
spread up to heaven. 

55 And he stood, and "blessed all the 
congregation of Israel with a loud voice, 
saying, 

56 Blessed he the Lord, that hath given 
rest unto his people Israel, according to 
all that he promised: there °hath not 
failed* one word of all his good promise, 
which he p promised by the hand of Closes 
his servant. 

57 The Lord our God be with us, as he 
was with our fathers: ilet him not leave 
us, nor forsake us : 

58 That he may ''incline our hearts unto 
him, to walk in all his ways, and to keep 
his commandments, and liis statutes, and 
his judgments, which he commanded our 
fathers. 

59 And let the.«e my words, whercwitli 
I have made supplication before the Lord. 
be nigh unto the Lord our God day and 
night, that he maintain the cause of his 
servant, and the cause of his people Israel 
att all times, as the matter shall require : 

60 That 'all the people of the earth may 
knov.'- that 'the Lord i.s God, and that there 
i.s none else. 

61 Let your heart therefore be "perfect 
with the Lord our God, to walk in his 
statutes, and to keep his commandments, 
as at this day. 

62 ^ And ^' the king, and all Israel with 
him, offered sacrifice before the Lord. 

« IClir.2!»:9i rsii. II M: .ler. 17:10: Hell. 4:i;. h Psa. ISO : 4. ' 7-ij;/i< j Eirs 7 : 6: Psa. lOfi: 4f). kDeiitSrCfl. 1 Dent. 4 : JO : 
eneut.4:M. U 2 Kinis, 19: 19 ; Psa. 67: i ; 10^ : l.i. * Heb. My I .ler. 1 1 : 4. m ExoiUis 19: S. «: Dent. 14 : :. n •; S^innel, ft: Is. 
namcit fal'eJ upon this house. ^ Heb.the icat/o/ iIk eiti/. J Or, " .losliua 2:?: 14. * Ueb. fallen. p Dfut H : I", 11. q Dent 
rinht. c Kc<1.7::0; .I:is.3:2: IJoim.l :8,10 r Deut. 2S : SB, 64. I 31 : (i r Pstilm 119 : 36. '\ Ueh. the thinv of a itav in hit clan. 
% Heh. Iniua back to Iktir hrnit. t Nell. 1 : 6. etc. : Psa. 106 : K ; i > verie 43 : .Tosliua 4 : 24. t Deut 4 : :W, 39. n DcuL 18 : I.X 
Dan. 9 : 5, etc. h Jer. Sy : 1-2-14 ; Hosea 14:1,.'. i ver. iB. || Or, I t -2 Chron. 7:4. etc. 



41. For thy uame\'s sal-e ; on account of what worshipping 
he had heard about God, and for the puroose of ; his people. 

29 



him and sharing in the blessings of 
445 



Sacrijices and feast. 



I. KINGS, IX. 



God's covejtant with Solomon. 



63 And Solomon offered a sacrifice of 
peace-offerings, which he offered unto the 
Lord, two and twenty thousand oxen, and 
a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. 
So the king and all the children of Israel 
dedicated the house of the Lord. 

64 The same day did the king hallow 
the middle of the court that teas before 
the house of the Lord: for there he offered 
burnt-offerings, and meat-offerings, and 
the fat of the peace-offerings : because the 
brazen'' altar that was before the Lord 
ivas too little to receive the burnt-offer- 
ings, and meat-offerings, and the fat of 
the peace-offerings. 

65 And at that time Solomon held a 
feast,"* and all Israel with him, a great 
congregation, from the ''- entering in of Ha- 
math unto the river of Egypt, before the 
Lord our God, seven days and seven days, 
even fourteen days. 

66 On the eighth day he sent the people 
away : and they *blessed the king, and went 
unto their tents joyful and glad of heart 
for all the ^ goodness that the Lord had done 
for David his servant, and for Israel his 
people. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 God's covenant in a vision with Solomon. 10 The 
mutual presents of Solomon and Hiram. 1.5 In Solo- 
mon's works the Gentiles were his bondmen, the Is- 
raelites honorable servants. 24 Pharaoh's daughter 
removeth to her house. 25 Solomon's yearly solemn 
sacrifices. 26 Ilis navy fctcheth gold from Ophir. 

A ND "^it came to pass, when Solomon 
-^A- had finished the building of the house 
of the Lord, and the king's Hiousc, and 
alN Solomon's desire which he was 
pleased to do, 

2 That the Lord appeared to Solomon 

« i Chron. 4:1. b ver. i. 
d P«;ilm 106:4,6; 12-2: 6-9. 
S i Chron. 8:6. k chap. 3 : 
j ihapter8:M. li Deut. 11 : 



c Num. 3-1 : .1. 8. * Or, thankrd. 
1 -2 Chron. 7: 11, etc. f chap. 7:1. 
. i 2King3,20:5j IJiihn, .1 : H. 
12. I chapter 2 : 4 ; 6:12; '5 : "). 



G-^. The entering in of Uamath ; on the north 
border of Canaan. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The most costly and splendid temple without 
the presence and favor of God, is but a dead iriass 
of useless matter ; and the most exact and gorgeous 
form.«i of worship without love and faith in tlie wor- 
shippers, are no more pleasing to him than sound- 
ing brass or a tinkling cymbal. 1 Cor. 13 : 1. 

10. Wlien the people of Qod have dedicated to 
him a hoiise, and assemble in it to worship him in 
spirit and in tr\ith, they may expect glorious man- 
ifestations of his presence, and rich spiritual joys. 

17. To every sincere desire for the promotion of 
liis glory and the good of men, God is witness; and 
whether it can consistently be now granted or not, 
lie will connect it with great results, and bestow 
upon it a gracious and glorious reward. 

'I'l. Every ruler should be a man of prayer, and 
on suitable occasions should publicly set tlie exam- 
ple of acknowledging and adoring God; blessing 
him for liis goodness, and seeking of him those 
mercies which are needed for rulers and people. 

'X\. The public calamities of a people arc caused 
iiy their sins ; and repentance, reformation, and ear- 
446 



the second lime, as he '■ had appear- ^b^c.^jj; 
ed unto him at (iibeon. 

3 And the Lord said unto him, I have 
heard' thy prayer and thy supplication, 
that thou hast made before me : I have 
hallowed this house, which thou liast 
built, to put 'my name there for ever; 
and mine eyes and my heart shall be "* there 
perpetually. 

4 And if thou wilt walk before me, as 
David ' thy father walked, in "" integrity of 
heart, and in uprightness, to do according 
to all that I have commanded thee, «/«i 
wilt keep my statutes and my judgments; 

5 Then I will establish the throne of thy 
kingdom upon Israel for ever, as I "prom- 
ised to David thy father, saying. There 
shall not fail thee a man upon the throne 
of Israel. 

6 But if "ye shall at all turn from fol- 
lowing me, ye or your children, and will 
not keep my commandments and my stat- 
utes which I have set before you, but go 
and serve other gods, and worship them; 

7 Then "will I cut off Israel out of the 
land which I have given them; and this 
house,'' which I have hallowed for my 
name, will I cast out of my sight; and 
Israel shall be a'^proverb and a byword 
among all people: 

8 And at this house, tvhich is high, ev- 
ery one that passeth by it shall be aston- 
ished, and shall hiss; and they shall say, 
Why hath the Loud done thus unto this 
land, and to this house 1 

9 And they shall answer, Because they 
forsook' the Lord their (Jod, who brought 
forth theirfathers outof the land of Egypt, 
and have taken hold upon other gods, and 

nl Proverbs 10 : M : 2.'* : 18. n 1 Chron. 22 : <1, 10 ; Psahll 132 : 12. 
2Siim. 7:14; Pan. 89 : 30, etc. pneut.4:2fi: 2Kinp«, 17: 23. 
q Jer. 7:14. r Deut. 28:37; Faa. 44 : 14. • Deut. 29:24-2ti; 
Jer. 22:8, 9. I Zeph. 1 : 4, .">. 

nest supplication to God are his appointed means for 
their removal. 

41. All enlightened and sincere friends of God 
earnestly desire that the blessings which he bestows 
on tliem may be enjoyed by all people, and that for 
this end he m.ay be revealed to them and tliey be 
taught to worship him in the beauty of holiness. 

45. There is no land .so distant or dark, and no 
condition so trying, that men may not think of their 
sins as the cause of their sorrows, repent of them, 
from the heart make supplication to God, and in due 
time receive abundant answers to their prayers. 

f'iS. God is the author of the inclination to love 
and serve him, and no greater blessing is ever be- 
stowed by him on earth, than a disposition to be- 
lieve his declarations and keep his commandments. 

Ct5. Sincere and upright worship of God, and 
he.arty obedience to his commands, is a .source of 
gladness and exceeding joy. It raises the soul to 
the highest enjoyment which can be found on earth, 
and fits it for perfect and endless bliss in lu'aven. 

CHAPTER IX. 
3. Hallowed; accepted their consecration of the 
temple to his service. 



Solomon buildcth cities. 



I. KINGS IX. 



Ships sent to Ophir. 



t'.c'ml^ have worshipped them, and served 
them: 'therefore hath the Lord brought 
upon them all this evil. 

10 ^ And ''it came to pass at the end of 
twenty years, when Solomon had built 
the two houses, the house of the Lord, 
and the king's house, 

11 {Noiv Hiram the king of Tyre had 
furnished Solomon with cedar-trees and 
fir-trees, and with gold, according to all his 
desire,) that then king Solomon gave Hi- 
ram twenty cities in the land of Galilee. 

12 And Hiram came out from Tyre to 
see the cities which Solomon had given 
him; and they * pleased him not. 

13 And he said, What cities are these 
which thou hast given me, my brother'? 
And he called them the land of t^Cabul 
unto this day. 

14 And Hiram sent to the king sixscore 
talents of gold. 

15 1[ And this is the reason of the ■'levy 
which king Solomon raised; for to build 
the house of the Lord, and his own 
house, and •'Millo, and the "^wall of Je- 
rusalem; and sHazor, and '' Megiddo, and 
Gezer.' 

16 For Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone 
up, and taken Gezer, and burnt it with 
fire, and slain the Canaanites that dwelt 
i 11 the city, and given it for a present unto 
his daughter, Solomon's wife. 

17 And Solomon built Gezer, and 'Beth- 
horon the nether, 

18 And ''Baalath, and Tadmor in the 
wilderness, in the land, 

19 And all the cities of store that Solo- 
mon had, and cities for his 'chariots, and 
cities for his horsemen, and tfhat which 
Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem, 



« .ler 1-2 : 7, «. b 5 Cliron. 8:1, etc. * Heh. weft not right in 
his eyes. \ TUnl is, displeasinff, or dirt;/, c .Josh. II) : 27. d chap. 
.■):l:l. e2Siiin.S:9. fPsaIm51:lS. c .losli. IH : 36. h .I.isli. 
17:11. i .losh. 16:10; Judges 1 :-21>. jJo»li. 16:3. k Josh. 
1>»: H4 : 2 Chron. 8:4,6, etc. 1 chap 4 : 26. t Heb. the deiire of 



13. Cnbnl ; displeasing, filthy. 

1-5. Millo; a part of the citadel or fortification 
of Jerusalem. Ilazor : in Naphtali. Megiddo; 
in Lssaehar. Gezer; in Ephraim. 

17. Beth-horo?i ; in the tribe of Benjamin. 
Nether; lower. Josh. 16- 3. 

18. Baalath ; in tlie territory of Dan. Tad- 
ino^ ; supposed to be the same as Palmyra, a city 
the ruins of which are still to be seen in the desert 
east of Damascus. 

26. Ezioii-geber ; near the north end of the east 
branch of the Red sea. 

28. Ophir ; supposed to be some place e;ist of 
Arabia, and on the Indian ocean. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. AH sincere and hearty supplications to God 
will be accepted, and all offerings presented in love 
to him receive a gracious reward. 

6. Continued obedience to God is needful in order 
to the continuance of his favors ; and if those who 
have been distinguished by his mercies rebel against 
him, they will be distinguished in their punish- 
ment. 



and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his 
dominion. 

20 And all the people that were left of 
the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, 
and Jebusites, which xcere not of the chil- 
dren of Israel, 

21 Their children that were ""left after 
them in the land, whom the children of 
Israel also were not " able utterly to de- 
stroy, upon those did Solomon levy a trib- 
ute of "bondservice unto this day. 

22 But of the children of? Israel'did Sol- 
omon make no bondmen: but they ivcre 
men of war, and his servants, and his 
princes, and his captains, and rulers of 
his chariots, and his horsemen. 

23 These tcere the chief of the officers 
that icere over Solomon's work, five hun- 
dred and fifty, which bare rule over the 
people that wrought in the work. 

24 ^ But "i Pharaoh's daughter came up 
out of the city of David unto her "house 
which Solomon had built for her: "then 
did he build Millo. 

25 If And three times m a year did Sol- 
omon offer burnt-offerings and peace-offer- 
ings upon the altar which he built unto 
the Lord, and he burnt incense * upon the 
altar that iras before the Lord. So he 
finished the house. 

26 ^And' king Solomon made a navy 
of ships in "Ezion-geber, which is beside 
Eloth, on the II shore of the Red sea, in the 
land of Edom. 

27 And Hiram sent in the navy his ser- 
vants, shipmen that had knowledge of the 
sea, with the servants of Solomon. 

28 And ^they came to "Ophir, and fetched 
from thence gold, four hundred and twenty 
talents, and brought it to king Solomon. 



Solomon which he desi 


■ed. 


m JuJg. 3: 


1. n 


Josh. 


15:63; 


17: 


IC 


Juilg. 1 


28 


Kzra 2 


.18. 


P I.ev. 25 : 


J9. q 


chn^ 


3:1. 


r ill 


T,: 


7:8. 11 


er. 


l.i; chap 


11 


27; 2Chroi 


. :V2:.i 


Heb. upon 


t 2 Chron 


8: 


12, etc. 


11 DeuL 2:8. | 


Heb. 


lip 


» chap. 


10: 


II. 


w Job 22 


24. 



















12. Different men have different tastes, which 
lead them to follow different occupations and live 
in different places. Some are attracted by the noise 
and bustle of cities, others by the stillness and quiet 
of the country, and both may be where God calls 
them, and be mutually serviceable to each other. 

18. The most opulent cities, and the most splen- 
did human works, are liable to become a heap of 
ruins. None should therefore set their hearts on 
them, but all should secure durable riches and 
righteousness, treasures in the heavens which will 
never pass away. 

2.'). All who are distinguished by wealth, power, 
and influence, should also be distinguished for ha- 
bitual devotion to God, and regular, conscientious 
attendance upon his worship. 

26. As commerce is a source of wealth, and sea- 
men are exposed to numerous privations, hardships, 
dangers, and vices, those who arc benetited by their 
services should, in addition to giving them suitable 
compensation and temporal comforts, furnish them 
with the Bible and other good books, and as far as 
pr.^oticable with all the means of grace. 
447 



77ic queen of Slicba. 



I. KINGS, X. 



Solomon's c-oW. 



CHAPTER X. 

1 The queen of Sheba admirpth l!ie wisdom of Solomon. 
14 Solomon's cold. 16 His targets. 18 The throne 
of ivory. 21 His vessels. 24 His presents. 20 His 
chariots and horse. 20 His tribute. 

AND ''^Yllen the qnccn of Shoba heard 
of the fame of Solomon concerning 
the name of the Lord, she came to prove 
liim with hard '' questions. 

2 And she came to Jerusalem "svith a 
very great train, vi'ith camels that bare 
spices, and very much gold, and precious 
stones : and when she was come to Solo- 
mon, she communed with him of all that 
was in her heart. 

3 And Solomon told her all her * ques- 
tions : there Avas not any thing hid from 
the king, which he told her not. 

4 And when the queen of Sheba had 
seen all Solomon's wisdom, and the house 
that he had built, 

5 And the meat of his table, and the sit- 
ting of his servants, and the t attendance 
of his ministers, and their apparel, and 
his +cup-bearers, and his ascent by which 
he went up untd'the house of the Lord; 
there was no more spirit in her. 

6 And she said to the king. It was a true 
report^ that I heard in mine own land of 
thy 1! acts and of thy wisdom. 

7 Howbeit I believed not the words, un- 
til I came, and mine eyes had seen it; 
and behold, the half was not told me : 
thy* wisdom and prosperity exceedeththe 
fame which I heard. 

8 Happy ''are tliy men, happy arc these 
thy servants, which stand continually be- 
fore thee, and that hear thy wisdom. 

9 Blessed ''be the Lord thy God, which 
delighted in thee, to set thee on the throne 
of Israel: because the Lord loved Israel 
for ever, therefore made he*thee king, "to 
do judgment and justice. 

10 And ''she gave the king a hundred 
and twenty talents of gold, and of spices 
very great store, and precious stones : 
there came no more such abundance of 
spices as these which the queen of Sheba 
gave to king Solomon. 

11 And IhcSnavy also of Hiram, that 
brought gold from Ophir, brought in from 
Opliir great plenty of t almug-frees, and 
precious stones. 

12 And the king made of the aim iig-trecs 

• 2Cliron.<>:l,etc.; Mnl.li:'l2. b I'rnv. i .•.■;, a • Hel). imrdt. 
t H»b. ilanding. X ^', I'UtUrt. \ Heb. woy,l. || Or, snuinpt. 
" H*?!). thou hatt added witdom and qiwdneti to, c Prov. 8 : 3J. 
Hcli.o;?. ePaa.-::!; Prnv.«:16. f P™. 7J; lo. |(i. g rlinn.<)!57. 
tals,um-lrcet.iC\ir.2:8;9:\0,l\. t Or. r«r/«. Heb.o prnp. % Heb. 



CHAPTER X. 

1. Shcha ; supposed to have been a country bor- 
dering on the soutli end of the Hed sea. llrard of 
the fame; probably by the sliips that went 'down 
from Ezion-jfcber. Prove, him; ascertain whether 
he was as wise as he had been reprc.«enl;cd to be. 

3. Told : answered. 
4 18 



pillars- for the house of the Lord, *b";.^jI 
and for the king's house, harps also and 
psalteries for singers ; there came no such 
almug-trees, nor were seen unto this day. 

13 And king Solomon gave unto the 
queen of Sheba all her desire, whatsoever 
she asked, besides that Kvhich Solomon 
gave her of his royal bounty. So she 
turned and went to her own country, she 
and her servants. 

14 *[[ Now the weight of gold that came 
to Solomon in one year was six hundred 
threescore and six talents of gold, 

15 Besides that he hud of the merchant- 
men, and of the trafiic of the spice-mer- 
chants, and of all the kings of Arabia, and 
of the II governors of the country. 

, 16 ^And king Solomon made two hun- 
dred targets o/ beaten gold: six hundred 
shekels of gold went to one target. 

17 And he viade three hundred ''shields 
q/beaten gold ; three pounds of gold went 
to one shield : and the king put them in 
the 'house of the forest of Lebanon. 

18 f[ Moreover, the king made a great 
throne of ivory, and overlaid it with the 
best gold. 

19 The throne had six steps, and the top 
of the throne ivas round * behind: and 
there were t stays on either side on the place 
of the seat, and two lions stood beside the 
stays. 

20 And twelve lions stood there on the 
one side and on the other upon the six 
steps : there was not+the like nuidc in any 
kingdom. 

21 TTAnd all king Solomon's drinking- 
vessels zvere o/gold, and all the vessels of 
the house of the forest of Lebanon iccre 
o/ pure gold; hwnc were o/ silver: it was 
nothing accounted of in the days of Sol- 
omon. 

22 For the king had at sea a navy of 
Tarshish' with the navy of Hiram: once 
in three years came the navy of Tarshish, 
bringing gold, and silver, Hivory, and apes, 
and peacocks. 

23 So'' king Solomon exceeded all the 
kings of the earth for riches and for wis- 
dom. 

24 ^ And all the earth sought ''to Solo- 
mon, to hear his wisdom, ' which God had 
put in his heart. 



which he gave het\ according to the hand of king Solomon. l\ Or, 
caplnint. h rliap. H : 26. >rbnp. 7:2. ' Heh. on the hinder part 
thereof, f Hcl). handt. % Hfb. so, ^ Or, tliere w«.i no silver in 
tl:pni. j Gfn. 10:4; iChr.JO:^. \\ Or, elephants' teeth, k rlinp. 
3 : 1-2, !.•? i 4 : SS-.IJ. » Hcb. the face of. I Prov. •: : r. ; Jns. 1 : 8. 



«'). No more spirit ; she was utterly astonished. 
] 9. Two lions ; statues, or representations of lions. 
22. Tarshish; chap. 22: 48, 49; 2Chr.20:3.')-.^7. 
21. All the earth ; people from all surroundin;:; 
nations. 

IXSTRUCTTOXS. 
1. The hiffhest honor and the noblest fame is thai 



Solomon'' s prosperity, and sins. I. KINGS, XI. 



God ihrcatcneth him. 



B.'"™"'" 25 And they brought every man 
his present, vessels of silver, and vessels 
of gold, and garments, and armor, and 
spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by 
year. 

26 TfAnd Solomon gathered together 
chariots* and horsemen: and he had a 
thousand and four hundred chariots, and 
twelve thousand horsemen, whom he be- 
stowed in the cities for chariots, and with 
the king at Jerusalem. 

27 And the king *made silver to be in 
Jerusalem as stones, and cedars made he 
to be as the sycamore-trees that are in the 
vale, for abundance. 

28 ^Andt Solomon had horses brought 
out of Egypt, and ''linen yarn : the king's 
merchants received the linen yarn at a 
price. 

29 And a chariot came up and went out 
of Egypt for six hundred slickcls of silver, 
and a horse for a hundred and fifty : and 
so for all the kings of the '^Hittitcs, and 
for the kings of Syria, did they bring them 
out by their + means. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 Solomon's wives and concubines. 4 Tn his old a^e 
they draw him to idolatry. 9 God threateneth him. 
l-l Solomon's adversaries were Hadad, who was en- 
tertained in Egypt, 23 Rezon, who reigned in Da- 
mascus, 20 and Jeroboam, to whom Ahijah prophe- 
sied. 41 Solomon's acts, reign, and deatli : Rehobo- 
am succeedeth him. 

BUT king Solomon loved many strange 
women, together with the daughter 
of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Am- 
monites, Edomitcs, Zidonians, and Hit- 
tiles ; 

2 Of the nations concerning which the 
Lord ■'said unto the children of Israel, Ye 
shall not go in to them, neither shall they 
come in unto you : for surely they will 
turn away your heart after their gods: 
Solomon clave unto these in love. 

3 And he had seven hundred wives, 
princesses, and three hundred concubines : 
and his ^ wives turned away his heart. 

4 For it came to pass, when Solomon 

« eChron. 1 :U,Pt<-. 'Heh.aavt. i He\i. Jiid th/- aoino forth 
oflheharte$whichvie-KSolomon'it. h K7,ek.:7: 7. c 8Kings,7:rt. 
J Hell. /innrf. J Or,AMiV/«. J Kx. S-t: 16; Heiit 7:3,4. « Dent. 
17: 17; Neb. n::i;. f rlinp. R:R1. tHi:ip.r):4. \\ Cx\M itilech, 
ver. 7, * Heh.fHifiUednttnfltr. Num. 14: -24. h Num. S) : .V2 ; 

which relates to the name of Jehovah ; and the 
greatest wisdom consists in learning and doing his 
will. Psa. 111:10. 

3. The richest and most profitable knowledge that 
can be communicated, is the kiiowledsje of G-od and 
the way of acceptably worshippin;^ him. 

7. The blessings which <jod bestows upon those 
who love and obey liim, exceed all human descrip- 
tion, and they never can be fully known except by 
those who receive and enjoy them. 

9. Wise and good rulers are manifestations of 
G-od's peculiar favor to a people, while foolish and 
wicked ones are tokens of nis wrath. 

IS. A great increase of wealth is liable to be 



was old. that his wives turned away his 
heart after other gods: and his heart was 
not '"perfect with the Lord his God, as 
ums^ the heart of David his father, 

5 For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the 
goddess of the Zidonians, and after II jMil- 
com the abomination of the Ammonites. 

6 And Solomon did evil in the sight of 
the Lord, and *went not fully after the 
Lord, as did David his father. 

7 Then did Solomon build a high ''place 
for 'Chemosh the abomination of Moab, 
in the hill that ix before Jerusalem, and 
for Molech the abomination of the chil- 
dren of Ammon. 

8 And likewise did he for all his strange 
wives, which burnt incense and sacrificed 
unto their gods. 

9 ^ And the Lord was J angry with Sol- 
omon, because his heart was turned from 
the Lord God of Israel, which had ap- 
peared iinto him ''twice. 

10 And had commanded him concern- 
ing this thing, that he should not go after 
other gods : but he kept not that which 
the Lord commanded. 

1 1 Wherefore the Lord said nnto Solo- 
mon, Forasmuch as this is tdonc of thee, 
and thou hast not ' kept my covenant nnd 
my statutes, which I have commanded 
thee, I will surely ""rendthe kingdom from 
thee, and will give °it to thy servant. 

12 Notwith.standing, in "thy days I will 
not do it for David thy father's sake : hut 
I will rend it out of the hand of thy son. 

13 Howbeit,P I will not rend away ail 
the kingdom; but will give one tribe to 
thy son for David my servant's sake, 
and for Jerusalem's sake i which I have 
chosen. 

14 ^ And the ''Lord stirred up an adver- 
sary unto Solomon, Hadad the Edomite : 
he u'as of the king's seed in Edom. 

15 For it came to pass, 'when David 
was in Edom, and Joab the captain of the 
host was gone up to bury the slain, after 
he had smitten every 'male in Edom; 

e Kings, 2.3:1:!. i Nnni. ai:2".1: .Tuilg. 1 1 -24. jP8a.7S:SS. k cli,ip. 
S:(i: 9:2, \ Heh.ioiththec. I^.<a. W: 13,14. m ver. 31, n cliap. 
12: IK, 20. oclmp.21:29;2King!i,20:17,l!l; 22:19.20. p ver. 89; 
2Snni.7:15. q Dent. 12:11, r 1 Cliron. fi : 26. •2Sain.8:14; 
1 Cliron. 18 : 12, 13. t Num. 24 : 19 ; IVut. 20 : 13. 



abused, and instead of leading men to God, to be 
prostituted to purposes of personal aggrandizement, 
external pomp, magnificence, and show. 

24. Tlie posses.sion of peculiar wisdom lays men 
under peculiar obligations to glorify 0-od by instruct- 
ing their fellow-men, and promoting tiieir highest 
welfare. 

CHAPTER XI. 

I. Strange u-oinen : women of foreign nations. 
5. Milcom ; supposed to be the same as Molech. 

Ver. 7. Ahominatio)! : idol-god. 

II. Thy servutit ; Jeroboam. 

13. One tribe ; Judah, including also Benjamin. 
1-3. Ei-er>j male ; all that he could capture. 
449 



Adversaries of Solomon. 



I. KINGS, XI. 



Promises to Jeroboam. 



16 (For six montlisdidJoab remain there 
with all Israel, until lie had cut off every 
male in Edom ;) 

1 7 That Iladad fled, he and certain Edom- 
ites of his father's servants with him, to go 
into Egypt ; Iladad being yet a little child. 

18 And they arose out of ^Midian, and 
came to ''Paran : and they took men with 
them out of Paran, and they came to 
Egypt, unto Pharaoh king of Egypt ; which 
gave him a house, and appointed him vict- 
uals, and gave him land. 

19 And Iladad found great favor in the 
sight of Pharaoh, so that he gave him to 
wife*^ the sister of his own wife, the sis- 
ter of Tahpenes the queen. 

20 And the sister of Tahpenes bare 
him Genubath his son, whom Tahpenes 
weaned in Pharaoh's house : and Genu- 
bath was in Pharaoh's household among 
tlie sons of Pharaoh. 

21 And when Hadad heard in Egypt that 
David slept with his fathers, and ^ that 
Joab the captain of the host was dead, 
Hadad said to Pharaoh, *Let me depart, 
that I may go to mine own country. 

22 Then Pharaoh said unto him. But 
what hast thou lacked with me, that, be- 
hold, thou seekest to go to thine own coun- 
try 1 And he answered, t Nothing : how- 
beit let me go in any wise. 

23 1[ And God stirred him up another ad- 
versary, Rezon the son of Eliadah, which 
fled from his lord'Hadadczer king of Zo- 
bah: 

24 And he gathered men unto him, and 
became captain over a band, when "^David 
slew them of Zobah: and they went to 
Damascus, and dwelt therein, and reigned 
in Damascus. 

2.5 And he was an adversary to Israel 
all the days of Solomon, besides the mis- 
chief that Hadad did: and he abhorred 
Israel, and reigned over Syria. 

26 11 And Meroboam the son of Nebat, 
an Ephrathite of Zereda, Solomon's ser- 
vant, whose mother's name was Zeruah, 
a widow woman, even he lifted ''up his 
hand against the king. 

27 And this v:as the cause that he lifted 
up his hand against the king: Solomon 
built 'Millo, and ^repaired the breaches 
of the city of David his father. 

28 And the man .leroboam iras a mighty 
man of valor: and Solomon seeing the 
young man that he Kvas industrious, he 



• Gen. 55 : 3, 4 ; Exoiluo 2 : IS. b Gfn. 21 : 21. r Gon. 41 : 4r>. 
<1 rlinp. 2 : 10, ;m. * Heh. Send mt amiy. t Heb. A'ot e2Snm. 
8:3. ' 2Sam. lOiK.lB. « rlinp. 12 :2; 'jriiron la: 8 li2.S.iin. 
20:21. 1 chnp. 9 : 24. ^ Heh. clatrd. \ He\i. did uiork. ||Hel). 
burden, j clinp. M : 3. k | Sam. IS : 27. I wr. 11-13. rover. 

18. Paran : botwoen Edom anil E;jypt. Pha- 
raoh; many kinj^'s of E;;j-pt liorc (his name. 
26. Zereila ; in tlie tribe of Ephraim. 
450 



made him ruler over all the ^charge *B!'c.'9e4. 
of the house of Joseph. 

29 And it came to pass at that time when 
Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, lliat the 
prophet ^Ahijah the Shilonite found him 
in the way ; and he had clad himself with 
a new garment ; and they two iccre alone 
in the field : 

30 And Ahijah'' caught the new garment 
that was on him, and rent it in twelve 
pieces : 

31 And he said to Jeroboam, Take thee 
ten pieces: 'for thus saith the Loup, the 
God of Israel, Behold, I will rend the king- 
dom out of the hand of Solomon, and will 
give ten tribes to thee : 

32 (But he shall have one tribe for my 
servant David's sake, and for Jerusalem's 
sake, the city which I have chosen out of 
all the tribes of Israel:) 

33 Because "that they have forsaken me, 
and have worshipped Ashtoreth the god- 
dess of the Zidonians, Chemosh the god of 
the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the 
children of Amnion, and have not walked 
in my ways, to do that which is right in 
mine eyes, and to keep my statutes and my 
judgments, as did David his father. 

34 Howbeit," I will not take the whole 
kingdom out of his hand : but I will make 
him prince all the days of his life for 
David" my servant's sake, whom I chose, 
because he kept my commandments and 
my statutes : 

35 But Pi will take the kingdom out of 
his son's hand, and will give it unto thee, 
even ten tribes. 

36 And unto his son will I igive one t/ibe, 
that ■■ David my servant may have a *li2ht 
alwaybeforemcinJcrusalcm.thccity wliich 
I have chosen me to put my name there. 

37 And I will take thee, and thou shall 
reign according to all that thy soul dcsir- 
eth, and shall be king over Israel. 

38 And it shall be, if "thou wilt hearken 
unto all that I coinmand thee, and will 
walk in my ways, and do that is right in 
my sight, to keep my statutes and my 
commandments, as David my servant did ; 
thalM will be with thee, and "build thee 
a sure house, as I built for David, and will 
give Israel unto thee. 

39 And 1 will for this afflict the seed of 
David, but ^'not for ever. 

40 Solomon "sought therefore to kill Jer- 
oboam. And Jeroboam arose, and fled 



.■^- 


7: Jer. 


2: 


13; 


Hosea 4:17. 


n Psalm 103: 10. 





Im 


.M:3. 


p 


Exoilii 


21 


! •'". 


«. q dinp. 


12: 17. 


r cliap. 15 


:4 


'. 


K.npi, 


fl 


: H»; Psnin 


1 13 


M7. 'Hob 


tamp, or 


candle. • 


oil 


'P. 




t 


JnRli. 1 


ft. 


II 


2Samiial, 7: 


1,27. ' 


Psalm 89 


3(V4i4 


Lam. 


3 


31,32. 


' 


Prov. IH:2I. 













29. Shilonite: a native or inhabitant of Shiloh. 
38. liiillil ihre. a fiire house; cause his pos- 
terity to reijjn after him. 



Rehoboam succeeds Solomon. 



I. KINGS, XII. 



Petition of the people. 



Egypt, and was in Egypt until the death 
of Solomon. 

41 11 And *the rest of the *acts of Solo- 
mon, and all that he did, and his wisdom, 
are they not written in the book of the 
acts of Solomon? 

42 And the ttime that Solomon reigned in 
Jerusalem over all Israel icas forty years. 

43 And Solomon slept with his fathers, 
and was buried in the city of David his 
father: and t Rehoboam his son reigned 
in his stead. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1 The Israelites, assembled at Sheohem to crown Reho- 
boam, by Jeroboam make a suit of relaxation unto him. 
6 Rehoboam, refusing the old men's counsel, by the 
advice of young men, answereth them roughly. 16 
Ten tribes revolting, kill Adoram, and make Rehoboam 
to flee. 21 Rehoboam, raising an army, is forbidden 
by Shemaiah. 2.) Jeroboam strengtheneth himself 
by cities, 20 and by tlie idolatry of the two calves. 

AND '' Rehoboam went to Shechem : for 
all Israel were come to Shechem to 
make him king. 

2 And it came to pass, when "^Jeroboam 
the son of Nebat, who was yet in Egypt, 
heard of it, (for he was fled from the pres- 
ence of king Solomon, and Jeroboam dwelt 
in Egypt,) 

3 Tliat they sent and called him. And 
Jeroboam and all the congregation of Israel 
came, and spake unto Rehoboam, saying, 

4 Thy father made our ''yoke grievous: 
now therefore make thou the grievous 
service of thy father, and his heavy yoke 
which he put upon us, lighter, and we will 
serve thee. 

5 And he said unto them. Depart yet 



a '2 Chron. 9 : 29-11. * Or. words, or things. f Heb. days, 
i Called Roboam, Matthew 1:7. b 2 Cljron. 10 : 1, etc. c chap. 



41. The book ; supposed to be a record which 
was kept of the transactions of his reign. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The union for life of one man with one woman, 
according to the appointment of Grod, is essential to 
the highest excellence, usefulness, and happiness in 
life ; and the neglect or violation of the original in- 
stitution of marriage is a source of many of the 
most direful evils to which men on the earth are 
exposed. 

'2. However great the blessings which any one 
may have enjoyed, and however well he may in 
times past have improved them, yet, if left to him- 
self, he is liable to depart from (iod, and to fall into 
the most abominable transgressions. 

4. Licentiousness weakens the underst.^nding, cor- 
rupts the afTections, stupefies the conscience, hard- 
ens the heart, and debases all the powers of the hu- 
man soul. No talents, acquisitions, or reno^^-n, can 
keep the soul which is under its power from the 
practice of the most degrading and destructive sins. 

9. The practice of iniquity shows that the heart 
is turned away from G-od, and subjects the soul to 
his just indignation. No previous favors, and no ful- 
ness or variety of earthly blessings, can then pre- 
serve it from trouble and sorrow. 

25. Tlie wickedness of rulers tends greatly to 



for three days, then come again to me. 
And the people departed. 

6 T[ And king Rehoboam consulted with 
the "old men, that stood before Solomon his 
father while he yet lived, and said, How 
do ye advise that I may answer this people? 

7 And they spake unto him, saying, If 
thou wilt be a ""servant unto this people 
this day, and wilt serve them, and answer 
them, and speak goods words to them, then 
they will be thy servants for ever. 

8 But he forsook the counsel of the old men, 
which they had given him, and consulted 
with the young men that were grown up 
with him, and which stood before him: 

9 And he said unto them. What counsel 
give ye that we may answer this people, 
who have spoken to me, saying. Make the 
yoke which thy father did put upon us 
lighter? 

10 And the young men that were grown 
up with him spake unto him, saying, Thus 
shall thou speak unto this people that 
spake unto thee, saying, Thy father made 
our yoke hearvy, but make thou it lighter 
unto us; tlius shalt thou say unto tliem, 
My \\{\\e finger shall be thicker than my 
father's loins. 

1 1 And now whereas my father did lade 
you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your 
yoke : my father liath chastised you with 
whips, but I will cliastise you with '' scor- 
pions. 

12 ^So Jeroboam and all the people 
came to Rehoboam the third day, as the 
king had appointed, saying, Come to me 
again the third day. 

13 And the king answered the people 



11:26,40. il chap. 4:7; 9:\h; I Sam. 8 : M-18. 
f M.irk 10 : 43, 44. t I'rov, 15:1. 1" Elek. S : 6. 



corrupt their people, and often brings on them nu- 
merous long and dreadful calamities. 

31. When rulers and people become corrupt, 
public peace and prosperity will decline, and divis- 
ions, revolutions, and bloodshed may be expected to 
follow. 

34. God is merciful and gracious, not willing 
that men should perish, but that they should come 
to repentance ; and punishments are sometimes 
delayed, and children suffered to live in the enjoy- 
ment of manifold blessings, out of regard to the 
piety and faithfulness of parents. 

38. The promises of (jod are connected with obe- 
dience. If men walk in his ways, blessings will be 
granted, and may go down increasing to tiieir chil- 
dren. But if they rebel against him, they forfeit 
his favor, and may deprive not only themselves, but 
their posterity, of his mercies. 

CHAPTER XII. 

I. Shechem; in the tribe of Ephraim. Ver, 25, 
7. Be a servant ; comply with their wishes. 
10. Thicker ; ho would oppress them as much 

more than his father did, as a man's body is larger 
than his little finger. 

II. Scorpions; a torturing kind of whip or 
scourge. 

451 



Ten tribes revolt. 



I. KINGS, XII. 



Golden calves of Jeroboam. 



roughly,*' and '' forsook the old men's 
counsel that they gave him; 

14 And *= spake to them after the coun- 
sel of the young men, saying, My father 
made your yoke heavy, and I will add to 
your yoke: my father also chastised you 
^vith whips, but I will chastise you with 
scorpions. 

15 Wherefore the king hearkened not 
unto the people; for ''the cause was from 
the Lord, that he might perform his say- 
ing, which the Lord " spake by Ahijah the 
Shilonite unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat. 

16 ^So when all Israel saw that the 
king hearkened not unto them, the people 
answered the king, saying, '^What portion 
have wc in David? neither have wc inher- 
itance in the son of Jesse : to your tents, 

Israel: now see to thine own house, 
David. So Israel departed unto their 
tents. 

17 But ^as for the children of Israel 
which dwelt in the cities of Judah, Pteho- 
boam reigned over them. 

18 Then king Rehoboam sent''Adoram, 
who was over the tribute ; and all Israel 
stoned him with stones, that he died. 
Therefore king Rehoboam trnade speed 
to get him up to his chariot, to flee to Je- 
rusalem. 

19 So ' Israel trebelled against the house 
of David unto this day. 

20 And it came to pass, when all Israel 
heard that Jeroboam was come again, that 
they sent and called him unto the congre- 
gation, and made him king over all Israel : 
there was none that followed the house 
of David, but the tribe of Judah 'only. 

21 ^ And ''when Rehoboam was come 
to Jerusalem, he assembled all the house 
of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin, a 
hundred and fourscore thousand chosen 
men, which were warriors, to figlit against 
the house of Israel, to bring the kingdom 
again to Rehoboam the son of Solomon. 

22 But the word of God came unto Shem- 
aiah the man of God, saying, 

23 Speak unto Relioboam, the son of 
Solomon, king of Judah, and unto all the 

* Hcb. hardily. • Prov. 10. 11, 3i ; Efcl. 10: 12; James 3: 17. 

1 Provorbs 13:20. c 2Cliron. 22:4, 5. d ver. 24 ; Judg. 14 : 4; 
JChroii. 22:7; 25:10; Amo»3:6. e cbnp. 1 1 : 11, ?.l. f 2 Sam. 
80:1. It olinp. II: 13, 36. b chap. 4 : 6 : fi : 14. i Heb. ttrength- 
ened himtelf. i 2 Kingn, 17:21. J Or, /ell away, j H(i.Hea 
11:12. k iCIiron. II :l,»'tc. 1 ver. 1.1. m Ji»lg, i) : 4.5. n ,ludg. 



l.*). The cause ivas from, the Lord ; he so or- 
dered events in hi.s providence, as to fulfil his dec- 
larations. Ver. 2.^1. 

18. The tribute ; the revenue of the kin;rdom. 

2.'). Peuiiel ; east of Jordan, on the river jabbok. 

27. They shall kill me ; this was in direct con- 
tradiction to what God had said, showing that ho 
did not believe him. Chap. 11 : .38. 

29. Beth-el ; in the south part of his kingdom. 
Dan ; in the north part. 

32. The eighth month; called Bui, and an- 
452 



house of Judah and Benjamin, and *b"6.^?^: 
to the remnant of the people, saying, 

24 Thus saith the Lord, Ye shall not go 
up, nor fight against your brethren the 
children of Israel : return every man to 
his house; 'for this thing is from me. 
They hearkened therefore to the word of 
the Lord, and returned to depart, accord- 
ing to the word of the Lord. 

25 ^ Then Jeroboam built "' Shechem in 
mount Ephraim, and dwelt therein; and 
went out from thence, and built "Pcnuci. 

26 And Jeroboam said in his heart. Now 
shall the kingdom return to the house of 
David : 

27 If this people go "up to do sacrifice in 
the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, then 
shall the heart of this people turn again 
unto their lord, ere?; unto Rehoboam king 
of Judah, and they shall kill me, and go 
again to Rehoboam king of Jiidah. 

28 Whereupon the king took counsel, and 
made twoPcalves o/gold, and said unto them , 
It is too much for you. to go up to Jeru- 
salem : 1 behold thy gods, Israel, which 
brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. 

29 And he set the one in ''Beth-el, and 
the other put he in "Dan. 

30 And this thing * became a sin : for the 
people went to worship before the one, even 
unto Dan. 

31 And he made a house of high places, 
and made "priests of the lowest of the 
people, which were not of the sons of Levi. 

32 And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the 
eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the 
month, like unto the 'feast that is in Ju- 
dah, and he ^ofi'ered upon the altar. So 
did he in Beth-el, H sacrificing unto the 
calves that he had made : and he placed 
in '^ Beth-cl the priests of the high places 
which he had made. 

33 So he *offered upon the altar which 
he had made in Beth-el the fifteenth day 
of the eighth month, even in the month' 
which he had '^devised of his own heart: 
and ordained a feast unto the children of 
Israel : and he oftercd upon the altar, tand 
burnt y incense. 



8:17. o Deut. 12:6, 14. p 2 KingB, 10:29; 17 : 16. q Kxoilin 
32:4,8. rGpn.2819. • .Iiulges 18 : 29: Amos 8: II. t clinp. 
13:34; Deut. 24:1ft. » Num. 3:10; 2Kinp», 17:32; Kiekiel 
4-1:6-8. » Lev, 23 : 3:t, .34. \ Or, went up to the altar. || Or, <<i 
lacritice. w Amo.'i7:13. "• Or , went up to the altar. » Num. 
15:39. \ nth. to hum. Trhnp. 13:1. 



swerinjr to apart of October and November. Like 
unto the feast ; the feast of tabernacles, celebrated 
in Jerusalem a month earlier. Lev. 23 : 39-^14. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. G-overnments should exist for the good of the 
people, and thi.s should be sought in all their acts. 

7. No enlightened and patriotic people can per- 
manently be governed by mere force or fear. Every 
wise ruler will therefore endeavor to cBnciliate his 
people, and secure their confidence and love. This, 
old men who have long observed the course of 



His ivithcred hand cured. 



I. KINGS, XIII. 



The disobedient prophet. 



tl-^t CHAPTER XIII. 

1 Jeroboam's hand, that offered violence to him that 
prophesied against his altar at Beth-el, withereth, 6 
and at the prayer of the prophet is restored. 7 The 
prophet, refusing the king's entertainment, departeth 
from Beth-el. 11 An old prophet, seducing him, 
bringeth him back. '20 He is reproved by God, '£i 
slain by a lion, 26 buried by the old prophet, .'!! who 
confirmeth his prophecy. 33 Jeroboam's obstinacy. 

AND behold, there came a man of God 
out of Judah by the word of the Lord 
unto Beth-el : and *Jeroboam stood by the 
altar to *burn incense. 

2 Andhecried againstthealtarin the word 
of the Lord, and said, altar, altar, thus 
saith the Lord ; Behold, a child shall be born 
unto the house of David, Josiah by name ; 
and upon thee shall he ""offer the priests of the 
high places that burn incense upon thee, 
and men's bones shall be burnt upon thee. 

3 And he gave a "^sign the same day, 
saying. This is the sign which the Lord 
hath spoken ; Behold, the altar shall be 
rent, and the ashes that arc upon it shall 
be poured out. 

4 And it came to pass, when king Jero- 
boam heard the saying of the man of God, 
which had cried against the altar in Beth-el, 
that he put forth his hand from the altar, 
saying, ^ Lay hold on him. And his hand, 
which he put forth against him, dried up, 
so that he could not pull it in again to him. 

5 The altar also was rent, and the ashes 
poured out from the altar, according to the 
sign*' which the man of God had given 
by the word of the Lord. 

6 And the king answered and said unto 
the man of God, '^Entreat now the face of 
the Lord thy God, and pray for me, that 
my hand may be restored me again. And 
the man of God besought t the Lord, and 
the king's hand was restored him again, 
and became as it was before. 

7 And the king said unto the man of 
God, Come home with me, and refresh 
thyself, and I will give thee a « reward. 

8 And ^hc man of God said unto the 



• clm|).12:3-2,3.3. * Or, offer, b a Kings, M: 15-50. cl9n.7:H; 
.•58:7,W: John2:18; lCor.l:22. <1 2Cliron. 16: 10; 18:2.5.610.; 
2.t:1.=>,16; Paa. 105:lfi; .ler. 20:2-4: Amn.s T: 10-17; Milt.2ii:40; 
.)olir.l3:20; Acts6:l2. ever.3 r ET.8:8i Nun).21 :7; Acts8:24; 



events and are well acquainted with human nature, 
feel much more deeply than young men. 

10. Young men, especially those who have grown 
up in lu.xury and dissipation, without restraint, and 
under the influence of bad examples, are apt to he 
proud, self-confident, and overbearing; not only 
tond of power, but of making a display of it, and 
accomplishing their objects not by truth, reason, 
and moral influence, but by force. 

1 0. When G-od leaves a man, especially a ruler, to 
follow pernicious counsels and his own wicked incli- 
nations, it is evident that he is preparing to punish 
him, and those who are partakers in his sins. 

20. In the appointment of rulers, the agency of 
men and the agency of Orod are bdth concerned ; 
and while the heart of man deviseth his way, the 
counsel of the Lord shall stand. 



king, ''If thou wilt give me half thy house, 
I will not go in with thee, neither will I 
eat bread nor drink water in this place: 

9 For so was it charged me by the word 
of the Lord, saying, 'Eat no bread, nor 
drink water, nor turn again by the same 
way that thou camest. 

10 So he went another way, and returned 
not by the. way that he came to Beth-eL 

1 1 IT Now there dwelt an old projihet in 
Beth-el ; and his Jsons came and told him 
all the works that the man of God had 
done that day in Beth-el : the words which 
he had spoken unto the king, them they 
told also to their father. 

12 And their father said unto them. 
What way went he? For his sons had 
seen what way the man of God went, 
which came from Judah. 

13 And he said unto his sons. Saddle 
me the ass. So they saddled him the ass ; 
and he rode thereon, 

14 And went after the man of God, and 
found him sitting under an oak : and he said 
unto him, Art thou the man of God that 
camest from Judah "? A nd he said, I (iin. 

1.5 Then he said unto him, Come home 
with me, and eat bread. 

16 And he said, I J may not return with 
thee, nor go in with thee : neither will I 
eat bread nor drink water with thee in 
this place : 

17 ForHt was said to me by the '' word 
of the Lord, Thou shalt eat no bread nor 
drink water there, nor turn again to go by 
the way that thou camest. 

18 He said unto him, I am a prophet also 
as thou art: and an angel spake unto me 
by the word of the Lord, saying, Bring 
him back with thee into thy house, that 
he may eat bread and drink water. Bttt 
he 'lied unto him. 

19 So ""he went back with him. and did 
eat bread in his house, and drank water. 

20 ^ And it came to pass, as they sat at 



Ja!i.6:l6. t Hell. <*</<!« o//;«I.o«D. f 1 Sam.9:7; 2Kings.5:lS. 
h Num. 22:18: 24: l:i. ilCor.5:ll. f Hfb. ton. j ver. 8, S). 
$ Hell, a tmrd was. k rhnp. 20 : 35 ; 1 Tlies.i. 4:15. 1 Isn. 9: 13 ; 
Jer. 2:1 : .32. m Deut, 13 : 1, 3, 5; 18:20; Arts4:19. 



27. Unbelief of Grod's declarations is a most fruit- 
ful source of trouble ; and the wicked courses which 
men take to avoid apprehended evils, are often flie 
means of bringing those evils upon them. 

30. Wicked rulers often wish to govern the church 
as well as the state, and to liave no ministers of 
religion except such as will regard them more than 
aod. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1. By the word of the Lord ; at his command. 

2. Offer the priests of the hiirh places; kill 
them. 2Kings, SSil.'j-aO. 

3. A sign ; a miracle, to show that God had sent 
him. Ver. 5. 

6. The face of the Loxd ; his favor. 
19. He uviit had-; instead of following the com- 
mand of God ; he had received his directions from 
-1.33 



'The prophet slain. 



I. KINGS, XIV. 



Jeroboam's obstinacy 



the tabic, that the word of the Lord came 
unto the prophet that brought him back: 

21 And he cried unto the man of God 
that came from Judah, saying. Thus saith 
the Lord, ^Forasmuch as thou hast dis- 
obeyed the month of the Lord, and hast 
not kept the commandment which the 
Lord thy God commanded thee, 

22 But camcst back, and hast ''eaten bread 
and drunk water in the place, of the which 
the LORD did "^say to thee. Eat no bread, 
and drink no water; thy ""carcass shall not 
come unto the sepulchre of thy fathers. 

23 ^ And it came to pass, after he had 
eaten bread, and after he had drunk, that 
he saddled for him the ass, to icit, for the 
proplict whom he had brought back. 

24 And when he was gone, a''lion met 
him by the way, and slew him : and his car- 
cass was cast in the way, and the ass stood 
by it, the lion also stood by the carcass. 

25 And behold, men passed by, and saw 
the carcass cast in the way, and the lion 
standing by the carcass : and they came 
and told it in the city where the old proph- 
et dwelt. 

26 And when the prophet that brought 
him back from the way heard thereof, he 
said. It is the man of God, who was dis- 
obedient unto the word of the Lord: 
therefore the Lord hath delivered him 
unto the lion, which hath *torn him, and 
slain him, according to the word of the 
Lord, which he ""spake unto him. 

27 And he spake to his sons, saying. 
Saddle me the ass. And they saddled him. 

28 And he went and found his carcass 
cast in the way, and the ass and the lion 
standing by the carcass: the lion had not 
eaten the carcass, nor ttorn the ass. 

29 And the prophet took up the carcass 



• Num.-20:12; lSam.l3:13,H; 15:23. bvcr.19. eTer.9. •' ver. 
30; chap. 14:13; 2Clir.21:20; Ibr. 14: 18-20; Jer.22: 18, l». tclmp. 
20:36; l'r<)v.2::13;2«: 13. * Heti broken, fver.9. f Heb./jroken. 



God, and had no right to deviate from them until 
God himself had countermanded them. That God 
had done so, he had no sufficient evidence. 

.30. Grave ; sepulchre. 

31. Ml/ hones ; his body, or corpse. 

'32. Samaria ; a part of Canaan which lay be- 
tween Judea and Galilee. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Shrewd worldly politicians know that men 
must have some religion, and they encourage that 
which they think will increase and perpetuate their 
power. But in substituting one of their own de- 
vising for that which God requires, they incur his 
wrath and accelerate their own ruin. 

.3. When God sends a message to men, he gives 
such evidence that it comes from him as ought to 
convince, and if rightly treated, will convince them ; 
and if it does not. it is their own fault. 

6. Godcaneasilyandquicklybringthe mostbitter 
persecutors of his people into such a condition that 
they will earnestly desire mid imjilorc their help. 

8. The messengers of God should show that they 

regard him more than all earthly good, and no 

451 



of the man of God, and laid it upon *n'"i;.'S?l 
the ass, and brought it back : and the old 
prophet came to the city, to mourn and to 
bury him. 

30 And he laid his carcass in his own 
grave; and they mourned over him-.-.o?/- 
ing, sAlas, my brother! 

31 And it came to pass, after he had 
buried him, that he spake to his sons, say- 
ing. When I am dead, then bury me in the 
sepulchre wherein the man of God i.t bur- 
ied; lay ''my bones beside his bones: 

32 For the saying which he cried by the 
word of the Lord against the altar in Beth- 
el, and against all the houses of the high 
places which are in the cities of ' Samaria, 
shall surely come to pass. 

33 1[After^ this thing Jeroboam retnrncd 
not from his evil way, but -made ''again 
of the lowest of the people priests of the 
high places : whosoever would, he ' con- 
secrated him, and he became one of the 
priests of the high places. 

34 And this thing became sin unto the 
house of Jeroboam, even to ' cut it off, and 
to destroy it from off the face of the earth. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1 Ahijah being sick, Jeroboam sendeth his wife dis- 
guised, with presents, to the prophet Ahijah at Shi- 
loh. 5 Ahijah, forewarned by Godj denounceth GorVs 
judgment. 17 Abijah dieth, and is buried. 10 Na- 
dab succeedeth .Teroboam. '21 Rehoboajn's wicked 
reign. 2-5 Sliishak spoileth Jerusalem. !i9 Abijaiu 
succeedeth Rehoboam. 

AT that time Abijah the son of Jerobo- 
am fell sick. 
2 And Jeroboam said to his wife, Arise, 
I pray thee, and disguise thyself, that thou 
be not known to be the wife of Jeroboam ; 
and get thee to Shiloh: behold, there is 
Ahijah the prophet, which '"told me that / 
should be king over this people. 



S.Ter.22:18. b 2Kins9,23: lfi-19. ichap.l6:24. j cliap. 12:31,32; 
2Clir.ll:1.5;13:!>. iHi^b. returned and made, k 2 Tim. 3: 1.3. J Hfb. 
JIHiri/AMAanrf. Judg. 17:12. 1 cli,14: 10; I'rov. 13:6. a cli. 11 :3I. 



temptations should induce them to swerve from fol- 
lowing his directions. 

15. Gods people are sometimes tempted to dis- 
obey him, but they are never forced to do it : and 
if tliey do it, they displease him, and subject them- 
selves to his rebuke. 

19. When God has clearly made known his will, 
wc are not to follow the opposing counsels of men, 
however plausible they may seem. 

21. As no one knows the time or manner of his 
death, all should so live as to be prepared at any 
time to meet it, and hear the joyful sentence. Well 
done, good and faithful servant; enter thou into the 
joy of thv Lord. 

30. \V hen those we have injured are dead, the 
recollection of our influence over them often gives 
us poignant sorrow. 

3:5. We are often reminded that no mercies or 
judgments, promises or threatenings, without the 
gr.ace of God, will lead men to forsake their sins 
and turn to him, and that whatever be his deal- 
ings, they will continue in transgression till they 
perish. 



Jeroboam's wife 



I. KINGS, XIV. 



visiteth Ahijah. 



£.c'9m'*' 3 And nake*with thee ten loaves, 
and ■'cracknels, and a -cruse of honey, and 
go to him : he shall tell thee what shall 
become of the child. 

4 And Jeroboam's wife did so, and arose, 
and went to '' Shiloh, and came to the house 
of Ahijah. But Ahijah could not see ; for 
his eyes Kvere set by reason of his "^age. 

o ^[ And the Lord'' said unto Ahijah, Be- 
hold, the wife of Jeroboam cometh to ask 
a thing of thee for her son ; for he is sick : 
tlius and thus shalt thou say unto her ; for 
it shall be, when she cometh in, that she 
shall feign herself to he another woman. 

(j And it was so, when Ahijah heard the 
sound of her feet, as she came in at the door, 
that he said, Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam ; 
why feignest thou thyself to be another? 
for I am sent to thee with H heavy tidings. 

7 Go, tell Jeroboam, Thus saith the 
Lord God of Israel, "Forasmuch as I ex- 
alted thee from among the people, and 
made thee prince over my people Israel, 

8 And ""rent the kingdom away from the 
house of David, and gave it thee: and 
yet thou hast not been as my servant Da- 
vid, ^who kept my commandments, and 
who followed me with all his heart, to do 
that only ichich teas right in mine eyes ; 

9 But hast done evil above all that were 
before thee : ''for thou hast gone and made 
thee other gods, and molten images, to 
provoke' me to anger, and hast -icast me 
behind thy back: 

10 Therefore, behold, I will bring evil 
upon the house of Jeroboam, and will 
cut off' from Jeroboam him that pisseth 
against the wall, rt/u/ him that is 'shut up 
and left in Israel, and will take away the 
remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a 
man taketh away dung, till it be all gone. 

11 Him'" that dieth of Jeroboam in the 
city shall the dogs eat; and him that dieth 
in the field shall the fowls of the air eat: 
for the Lord hath spoken it. 

1 2 Arise thou therefore, get thee to thine 



• 1 Sam. 9:7,8. * Heb. in Ihy hand, t ()r,caktt. % Or, bottle. 
li cUap. 1 1 : ». % Heb. ttoorl for Mt hoarineu. c Gen. 27 : 1 : Eccl. 
i:::). .1 Psa. l;i9 : 1-4. 11 Heb. Aarrf. e chap. 16 : '2. 'chap. 
llrSI-m E rliap. 1,5:.";. k rbap. li :2S; 2 Chron. 11 : 15. i Ps-a. 
t(lfi:-2«». i Neh. M.M: Ps.a. .W:17; Elek. M.-Si. k obap. 15::a 
1 Deut. .l-JiSe; aKinge, 14:26. ro cliap.l6:4; 21:24. n ver. 17. 



CHAPTER XIV. 
3. Crnclnels ; a kind of cakes. 

8. FoUowed me with all /lis heart ; not that 
he did not pommit great transgressions, but he re- 
pented of them, and was sincerely devoted to the 
service of God. 

9. Cast me behind thy back ; treated him as 
unworthy of regard. 

13. Come to the grave ; be buried with respect. 

11. Even now ; what he predicted was certain 
and near. 

l-"). A.': a reed is shal-en ; they would be sub- 
ject to perpetual commotions. Beyond the river; 
"the Euphrates. 2 Kings, 15:29. 



own house : and when thy feet enter into 
the city, the child shall "die. 

1 3 And all Israel shall mourn for him, and 
bury him: for he only of Jeroboam shall 
come to the grave, "because in him there 
is Pfound .some good thing toward the Lord 
God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam. 

14 Moreover the Lord shall raise him 
up a king over Israel, "iwho shall cut off 
the house of Jeroboam that day : but 
what? even now. 

1 5 For the Lord shall smite Israel, as a reed 
is shaken in the water, and Mie .*<hall ^root up 
Israel outof tliis good land, which he gave 
to their fathers, and shall 'scatter them 
beyond the river, because tliey have made 
their "groves, provoking the Lord to anger. 

16 And he shall give Israel "up because 
of the sins of Jeroboam, ^^ who did sin, 
and who made Israel to sin. 

17 If And Jeroboam's wife arose, and 
departed, and came to " Tirzah : and when 
she came to the threshold of the door, the 
child died; 

IS And they buried him; and all Israel 
mourned for him, according to the word 
of the Lord, which he ^ spake by the hand 
of his servant Ahijah the prophet. 

19 And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, 
how he^ warred, and how he reigned, be- 
hold, they are written in the book of the 
Chronicles of the kings of Israel. 

20 And the days which Jeroboam reign- 
ed ivere two and twenty years : and he 
slept* with liis fathers, and Nadab his son 
reigned in his stead. 

21 T[ And Rehoboam the son of Solomon 
reigned in Judah. Rehoboam vas "forty 
and one years old when he began to reign, 
and ho reigned seventeen years in Jeru- 
salem, the ''city which the Lord did 
choose out of all the tribes of Israel, to 
put his name there. And his mother's 
name was Naamah an Ammonitess. 

22 And Judah did evil in the sight of the 
Lord, and they provoked him to "^jealousy 



o Eiek. 18:14. eti". P 2 Cliron. 19:3. q chap. 15:27-29. r lieu I. 
28:fi.1,efi; .losb. 2.1:15, IB. »Psa. 52:!i. t 2Kin".«, l.i: 29; 17:fi. 
o Deut. 12:3,4; Lsa. 1:28, 29. vP3a.«l:12. » rbap. 1S:.3(), 34 ; 
16:2. X chap. 16 ! 6, «. r ver. 12, 13. » 2 Clirou. 13 : 2, etc. 
* Heb. lay down. • 2 Chron. 12 : 13. 1> chap. 1 1 : 36. c Dcuu 
33:21; Paa. 78:5«; 1 Cor. 10:22. 



17. Tirzah ; where Jeroboam lived, supposed to 
have been near Shechem. 

19. The book of the Chronicles ; tlie records of 
the kingdom. 

21. To pnt his name there ; as the place where 
he would be publicly inquired of and worshipped. 
INSTRi;CTIO\?. 

1. Parents are often punished in the sickness of 
their children, and should be led by it to repentance 
of their sins, and hearty consecration of themselves 
to the service and glory of G-od. 

2. Men who profess to believe that God is ac- 
quainted with all thing.<, often act as if they hoped 
to deceive him ; but all such efforts are vain, and 
will end in disappointment and sorrow. 

455 



Reign of Rchoboatn, 



I. KINGS, XV. 



Abijam, and Asa 



with their sins which they had committed, 
above all that their fathers had done. 

23 For they also huilt them *high pla- 
ces, and *images, and '' groves, on every 
high hill, and "^ under every green tree. 

24 And ^ Hiere M'ere also sodomites in the 
land: and they did according to all the 
abominations of the nations which the Lord 
cast out before the children of Israel. 

2.5 ^f And ''it came to pass in the fifth 
year of king Rehoboam, that Shishak king 
of Egypt came up against Jerusalem : 

26 And he took away the treasures of 
the house of the Lord, and the treasures 
of the king's house ; he even took away 
all : and he took away all the shields of 
gold ""which Solomon had made. 

27 And king Rehoboam made in their 
stead brazen shields, and committed f/icm 
unto the hands of the chief of the t guard, 
which kept the door of the king's house. 

28 And it was so, when the king went 
into the house of the Lord, that the guard 
bare them, and brought them back into 
the guard-chamber. 

29 1[ Now the rest of the acts of Reho- 
boam, and all that he did, arc they not 
written in the book of the Chronicles of 
the kings of Judah? 

30 And s there was war between Reho- 
boam and Jeroboam all their days. 

3 1 And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, 
a nd was buried with his fathers in the city 
of David. And his mother's name was 
Naamah an Ammonitess. And ^Abijam 
his son reigned in his stead. 

CHAPTER XV. 

1 Abijam's wicked reign. 7 Asa sucoeedeth him. 9 
A.sa's good reigu. IG The war between Baasha and 
him causeth him to make a league with Benhadad. 
2-3 .lehoshaphat succeedeth Asa. 45 Nadab's wicked 
reign. 27 Baasha conspiring against him executeth 
Ahijah's prophecy. .'31 Nadab's acts and death. 33 
Biasha's wicked reign. 

IVrOW ""in the eighteenth year of king 
JLN Jeroboam the son of Nebat, reigned 
Abijam over Judah. 



» Ezek, lH;'24,2fi. * Or, standitiff imaffet, or ftatues. b2Kings, 
17:9,10. l9ii.57:.'i; .ler. 3:1:!. d Dcut. 2.3: 17: 2 Kins», 23:7. 
e iClir. I2:2,etc. fcli.I0:17. f Heb.nin>i<;r». B cli. l::24 ; 15: 6. 
i Jl>iJah,2C\lt.n:\li. Mia, Mat. \:7. h 2CIir. 13:l,etc. i2Clir. 



• 3. Men are frequently more anxious to know the 
secret purposes of God, than to know his will for the 
sake of doing it. 

.1. Though age and infirmities may lessen or destroy 
the human senses. God can, and if men are disposed 
to obey him, ho will, reveal to them all they need to 
know in order to understand and do their duty. 

7. A mans guilt is aggravated in proportion to 
the blessings he has abused ; and in the same pro- 
portion, unless lie repent, wilFbe his jmnishment. 

8. In reading the Bible, we are often called to 
witness tluit many things which take place in tlie 
course of providence and are accomplished by hu- 
man instrumentality, are spoken of as done by God. 
Ver. M.ir); Jer. T)! : .39. 

]0. By obedience to God, parents may be the 



2 Three years reigned he in Je- *b"i;-^^: 
rusalem. And 'his mother's name was 
Maachah,* the daughter of "Abishalom. 

3 And he walked in all the sins of his 
father, which he had done before him : 
and his J heart was not perfect with tiie 
Lord his God, as the heart of David his 
father. 

4 Nevertheless "^ for David's sake did the 
Lord his God give him a *lamp in Jeru- 
salem, to set up his son after him, and to 
establish Jerusalem : 

5 Because David did that which was right 
in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not 
aside from any thing that he commanded 
him all the days of his life, save only in 
the matter of Uriah the Hittite. 

6 And there was war between Rehobo- 
am and Jeroboam all the days of his life. 

7 Now the rest of the acts of Abijam, 
and all that he did, are they not written 
in the book of the Chronicles of the kings 
of Judah"? And there was war between 
Abijam and Jeroboam. 

8 And 'Abijam slept with his fathers; 
and they buried him in the city of David : 
and Asa his son reigned in his stead. 

9 1[And in the twentieth year of Jerobo- 
am king of Israel reigned Asa over Judah. 

10 And forty and one years reigned he 
in Jerusalem. And his t mother's name 
wa.9Maaehah,the daughter of Abishalom. 

11 And Asa did that U'hich urns right in 
the eyes of the Lord, as did David his 
father. 

12 And he took away the sodomites out 
of the land, and removed all the idols that 
his fathers had made. 

13 And also Maacliah his mother, even 
her he removed from being queen, because 
she had made an idol in a grove ; and '"Asa 
destroy cdi her idol, and "burnt it by the 
brook Ividron. 

14 But "the high places were not re- 
moved : nevertheless Asa's heart was 
perfect with the Lord all his days. 



11:20-22. \ Michaiahtht (laughter, tfUritt. 2Clir.l3:2. || y/ftjo- 
/i«n,2Clir. 11:21. jchap.ll:4. k 2Clir.21 :7. " Or, cand/e. clmp. 
11:3B. 12Chr.U:l,etc f Tlintis.^rnndmoMrr'*. ver.2. roJClir. 
IS : 16, etc. t Heb. cut ciff. "Ex. .12 : 20. o cliiip. 22 : 43. 



means of bringing on their children great blessings, 
and by disobedience, great evils. Chap. 11 : 3S!. 

22. The course of human nature left to itself is 
downward from bad to worse, and the inost higiily 
exalted by privileges and blessings, when not re- 
strained by divine grace, will become the most 
wretched and debased by their crimes. 

CHAPTER XV. 

3. Perfect ; sincerely devoted to God. 

4. A lamp; continue to him the kingdom. 

5. T It nifil not aside from any thing ; not in 
such a wicked and notorious manner in any thing 
else ; and for that he heartily condemned himself, 
and most sincerely repented. Psa. ell. ' 

13. Kidron ; a shallow brook on the east side of 



^dsa's war with Baaska. 



I. KINGS, XV. 



Nadab^s wieJcca I'eisn. 



b.^qIk^' 15 And he brought in the ^things 
which his father had dedicated, and the 
things which himself had dedicated, into 
the house of the Lord, silver, and gold, 
and vessels. 

16 1[And there was war between Asa 
and Baasha king of Israel all their days. 

17 And "Baasha king of Israel went up 
against Judah, and built Ttamah, thaf^ht; 
might not suffer any to go out or come in 
to Asa king of Judah. 

18 Then Asa took all the silver and the 
gold that were left in the treasures of the 
house of the Lord, and the treasures of 
the king's house, and delivered them into 
the hand of his servants : and king Asa 
sent them to Ben-hadad, the son of Tabri- 
mon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, that 
dwelt ** at Damascus, saying, 

19 There is a league between me and 
thee, and between my father and thy fa- 
ther : behold, I have sent unto thee a pres- 
ent of silver and gold; come and break 
thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that 
he may t depart from mc. 

20 So Ben-hadad hearkened unto king 
Asa, and sent the captains of the hosts 
which he had against the cities of Israel, 
and smote ""Ijon, and ^ Dan, andsAbel-beth- 
maachah, and all Chinneroth, with all the 
land of Naphtali. 

21 And it came to pass, when Baasha 
heard thereof, that he left oft' building of 
Ramah, and dwelt in Tirzah. 

22 Then king Asa made a proclama- 
tion throughout all Judah; none was ^^ ex- 
empted : and they took away the stones 
of I'amali, and the timber thereof, where- 
with Baasha had buildcd; and king Asa 
built with them '•Geba of Benjamin, and 
Mizpali.' 

23 The rest of all the acts of Asa, and 
all his might, and all that he did, and the 
cities which he built, are they not written 
in tlie book of the Chronicles of the kings 



* Heb.holn. •2Chr. 16:1, etc. b Josh. 18: -^r.. cell. 12: i7. d rli. 
n:OT,J4. iHeh.s/oup. • iKi. I.5:2S. Mudg.lR:29. K iSa-SO: 14. 
tHel)./r«. b Josh, il : 17. iJo9h.l8:26. j iCIir. 16: 12. k2Chr. 



Jerusalem, between the city and the mount of 
Olives ; the same as Cedron, John 18:1. 

17. Built; fortified. Ramah: a city of Ben- 
jamin, on the confines of the kingdom of Israel. 

18. Damascus: the capital of Syria. 

20. Jjo7i—Dan — Ahel-heth-vinachah— Chinne- 
roth ; places in the north part of Israel next to Syria. 

22. Built ; greatly enlarged. 

2i). His sin ; idolatry- 

27. Gibbethon; in the tribe of Dan, but occupied 
by the Philistines. 
'29. The saying of the Lord; chap. 14: 14. 
TNSTRUCTrONS. 

8. Sometimes very pious parents are followed by 
very wicked children, and very wicked parents by 
very pious children. 

13. No affection or re2;ard for earthly relatives or 
friends, however exalted, should lead us to encour- 



of Judah? Nevertheless in the time of 
his old age he was J diseased in his feet. 

24 And Asa slept with his fathers, and 
was buried with his fathers in the city of 
David his father: 'and Uehoshaphat his 
son reigned in his stead. 

25 U And Nadab the son of Jeroboam 
began II to reign over Israel in the second 
year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned 
over Israel two years. 

26 And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, 
and walked in the way of his father, and in 
his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin. 

27 1[ And Baasha the son of Ahijah, of the 
house of Issachar, conspired against him; 
and 'Baasha smote him at "'Gibbethon, 
which belonged to the Philistines ; for Na- 
dab and all Israel laid siege to Gibbethon. 

28 Even in the third year of Asa king 
of Judah did Baasha slay him, and reigned 
in his stead. 

29 And it came to pass, when he reigned, 
that he smote all the house of Jeroboam ; 
he left not to Jeroboam any that breathed, 
until he had destroyed him, according 
unto the "saying of the Lord, which he 
spake by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite : 

30 Because of the sins of Jeroboam 
which he sinned, and which he made Is- 
rael sin, by his provocation wherewith he 
provoked ° the Lord God of Israel to anger. 

31 1[ Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, 
and all that he did, are they not written 
in the book of the Chronicles of the kings 
of Israel ■? 

32 And? there was war between Asa 
and Baasha king of Israel all their days. 

33 In the third year of Asa king of Ju- 
dah began Baasha the son of Ahijah to 
reign over all Israel in Tirzah, twenty 
and four years. 

34 And he did evil in the sight of the 
Lord, and walked in the i way of Jero- 
boam, and in his ■'sin wherewith he made 
Israel to sin. 



17:1, etc. 7i-}\M.\:»,Qa.\\eiJu$aphat. WHeh.rtigntd. Ich.NiM. 
ni ch. 1G:15; Josh.21:2.3. n ill. H:!>-Ifi. "cIl. 14:2-2. p ver. 16. 
<l clmp. 12:23,211; 13:3»,34. r chap. 14:16; Isa. 1:4. 

age or connive at their sins, or hinder us from using all 
proper means to prevent their injurious influence. 

18. When men, instead of trusting in God and 
doing his will, apply to the wicked for help and de- 
vote to them what should be devoted to him. though 
they may sometimes gain temporary relief, yet it 
will in the end be very likely to increase their 
trouble. 

23. However long any may live, and however 
much in the providence and oy the graco. of God 
they may be favored, they are constantly liablf t" 
dise.Tse and death. Nothing should hinder theni 
from being habitu.ally ready to close life, aod enter 
upon the retributions of eternity. 

29. One set of wicked men, in the proseCTtion of 
their wicked objects, may without intending it 
bring on other wicked men punishments which God 
lias denounced. 

457 



House of Bansha destroyed. I • KING 

CHAPTER XVI. j 

1, 7 Jehu's prophecy against Baasha. 6 Elah suc- 
ceedeth him. 8 Zimri conspiring against Elah suc- 
ceedeth him. 11 Zimri executeth Jehu's prophecy. 
15 Omri, made king by the soldiers, forceth Zimri 
desperately to burn himself. 21 The kingdom being 
divided, Omri prevaileth against Tibni. 2.3 Omri 
buildeth Samaria. 2.5 His wicked reign. 27 Ahab 
sucoeedeth him. 29 Ahab's most wicked reign. 34 
Joshua's curse upon Hiel the builder of Jericho. 

THEN the word of the Lord came to 
Jehu* the son of Hanani against ''Ba- 
a.sha, saying, 

2 Forasmuch as "^I exalted thee out of 
the dust, and made thee prince over my 
people Israel; and thou hast walked in 
the ''way of Jeroboam, and hast '"made 
my people Israel to sin, to provoke me to 
anger with their sins; 

3 Behold, I will ""take away the poster- 
ity of Baasha, and the posterity of his 
house; and will make thy house like the 
house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat. 

4 Him "that dieth of Baasha in the city 
shall the dogs eat; and him that dieth of 
his in the fields shall the fowls of the 
air eat. 

.5 Now the rest of the acts of Baasha, 
and what he did, and his might, arc they 
not '' written in the book of the Chronicles 
of the kings of Israel"? 

6 So Baasha slept with his fathers, and 
was buried in 'Tirzah : and Elah his son 
reigned in his stead. 

7 And also by the hand of the J prophet 
Jehu the son of Hanani came the word of 
the Loud against Baasha, and against his 
house,'' even for all the evil that he did in 
the sight of the Loud, in 'provoking him 
to anger with the work of his hands, in 
being like the house of Jeroboam ; and 
because"' he killed him. 

8 •[ In the twenty and sixth year of Asa 
king of Judah began Elah the son of Ba- 
asha to reign over Israel in Tirzah, two 
years. 

9 And his servant "Zimri, captain of 
half his chariots, conspired against him, 
as he was in Tirzaii, drinking himself 
drunk" in the house of Arza, "steward of 
his house in Tirzah. 

10 And Zimri went in and smote him, 
and killed him, in the twenty and seventh 
year of Asa king of .ludiili, and reigned 
in liis stead. 

1 1 ^ And it came to pass, when he be- 
gan to reign, as soon as he sat on his 



S, XVI. 



Zimri's short reign. 



throne, that he slew all the house *b"c.^m! 
of Baasha: he left him not Pone that 
pisseth against a wall, + neither of his 
kinsfolks, nor of his friends. 

12 Thus did Zimri destroy all the house 
of Baasha, according to the word of the 
Lord, which he i spake against Baasha 
byt Jehu the prophet, 

13 For all the sins of Baasha, and the 
sins of Elah his son, by which they sinned, 
and by which they made Israel to sin, in 
provokingMhe Lord God of Israel to an- 
ger with their 'vanities. 

14 Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and 
all that he did, are they not written in 
the book of the Chronicles of the kings 
of Israel ? 

15 1[In the twenty and seventh year of 
Asa king of Judah did Zimri reign seven 
days in 'Tirzah. And the people tcerc 
encamped against "Gibbethon, which be- 
longed to the Phili.stines. 

16 And the people that icere encamped 
heard say, Zimri hath conspired, and hath 
also slain the king: wherefore all Israel 
made Omri, the captain of the host, king 
over Israel that day in the camp. 

17 And Omri went up from Gibbethon, 
and all Israel with him, and they besieged 
Tirzah. 

18 And it came to pass, when Zimri saw 
that the city was taken, tliat he went into 
the palace of the king's house, and burnt 
the king's house over "him with fire, and 
died, 

19 For his sins which he sinned in do- 
ing evil in the sight of the Lord, in "^walk- 
ing in the way of Jeroboam, and in his 
sin which he did, to make Israel to sin. 

20 Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, 
and his treason that he wrought, are they 
not written in the book of the Chronicles 
of the kings of Israeli 

21 H Then were the people of Israel 
divided' into two parts: half of the peo- 
ple followed Tibni the son of (iinath, to 
make him king; and half followed Omri. 

22 But the people that followed Omri 
prevailed against the people that followed 
Tibni the son of Ginath: so Tibni died, 
and Omri reigned. 

23 ^ In the thirty and first year of Asa 
king of Judah began ^Omri to reign over 
Israel, twelve years : six years reigned he 
in Tirzah. 



• ver. 7; 2 Chron. \9:i: COrSI. b diap. lfl:3:i. c clinp. 14:7. 
■1 cliap. IS:."!-!. •Mnt. 5:19. ' vf r. U ; clinp. Jl :51,2>. it rlinp. 
M:ll. b 3 Chron. IK: 1, etc. I clinp. l.S:2l. j ver. 1. kEi.20:r.. 
I ver. 13. m ilmp. 15: -n-i^. n 2 Kingi!, 9: ni. o Nnliuin 1 : 10. 
* Heb. to/ilt/l wan Olif r. v 1 .Snm. C5:2J. f Or. both liit kinimen 



CHAPTER XVI. 
2. Oi't of tlir d/fst ; from a very low condhinn. 
7. KHIcil him : not Jeroboam himsflf. but his 
f.o-tority. Chap. 1.5 : 27-29. Tboujjh God had fore- 
4r)8 



and h 


sfr 


ends, q ve 


r.3. 


t Heh.ftvM 


t hand of. 


r cl 


np 


15: 


.''0 


• Dent. M 


21:1 Snm. 


2:21 


U 


i.*l:29; 


Jonah 2:8: 


Ron 


.1 


'.'1- 


."1; 


1 Cor 8 : < 


10:19. i\ 


er.8 


u 


chnp. 16 


27. r 2 Sam. 15 


:2.1; Pkr. 


9: m. 


w 


cli.ip. 12:2f 


; 15 


2H 


»4. « 


'rov. 28 : 2 


l«n. 


9: 


19- 


zi • 


19:2; 


Mnt 


.12:2.1. y 


2 Chron 


22:2. 













told, chap. 14 : 14, that Baasha would do this, and it 
was beforehand certain that he would, yet he was 
just as wicked and ^liUy in doing it as if it had 
not been foretold, or had not been certain. 



^hab''s evil rcisn. 



I. KINGS, XVII. 



Elijah fed by ravens. 



S.-^*^"!" 24 And he bought the hill Samaria 
of Shemer for two talents of silver, and 
built on the hill, and called the name of 
the city which he built, after the name of 
Shemer, owner of the hill, *Samaria.» 

25 1[ But Omri wrouglit''evil in the eyes 
of the Lord, and did worse than all that 
u'ere before him. 

26 For he "^ walked in all the way of Jer- 
oboam the son of Nebat, and in his sin 
wherewith he made Israel to sin, to pro- 
voke the Lord God of Israel to anger with 
their '' vanities. 

27 Now the rest of tlie acts of Omri which 
he did, and his might that he showed, are 
they not written in the book of the Chron- 
icles of the kings of Israel"? 

28 So Omri slept with his fathers, and 
was buried in Samaria : and Ahab his son 
reigned in his stead. 

29 ^1 And in the thirty and eighth year 
of Asa king of Judah began Ahab the son 
of Omri to reign over Israel: and Ahab 
the son of Omri reigned over Israel in 
Samaria twenty and two years. 

30 And Ahab the son of Omri did evil 
in the sight of the Lord * above all that 
were before him. 

31 And it came to pass, tas if it had 
been a ''light thing for him to walk in the 
sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that 
he took to swife Jezebel the daughter of 
Ethbaal king of the '' Zidonians, and' went 
and served Baal, and worshipped him. 

32 And he reared up an altar for Baal 
in the house of Baal, which he had built 
in Samaria. 



» Heb. Sh 


meror 


« 


chap. 


13 : ai 


; ZKinss 


17 


24 


John 4 


:4; 


Acts 8 : .'1-8. 


b Micah 6 : 16. 


c ver 


19. 


i ver. 


:)i 


Acta 14 


1,5. 


« ver Xi. i 


Heb. 


ivat 


it a light th 


'ng? 


f £7.ek. 8 


17; IR 


47. 


e Peut. 7:. 3 


Josh 


'j:t: 


12. W. 


h .Ii 


<ir. 18 


.•7. 


i 


chap 


. •21:2.5, 


2K; 


2Kins«, 10: 


«, etc 


; 17 


le. 


J 2Ki 


g', 13 


Ii 


17 


in 


21:3; 


Jer. 



"24. The hill SariKtria ; a few miles north-west 
of Shechem. Called the name — Samaria ; in the 
Hebrew, Shomeron, from Shemer. 

31. Baal; the idol of the Zidonians. 

34. Beth-elite ; one w!io lived in Beth-el, where 
Jeroboam had put one of his golden calves. Chap. 
12: "29. The word of the Lord; spoken more 
tiian four hundred years before. Josh. 6 : 26. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. By whatever means and in whatever way any 
are exalted to power, authority, or influence, there 
is an important sense in which their elevation is of 
the Lorcl; and all their increase of power increases 
their obligations to honor him and do good, and if 
they do not, increases their guilt and their exposure 
to speedy and awful ruin. 

3. Imitation of predecessors in wickedness pre- 
pares the way for similarity in punishment. 

7. Wicked men may by their wickedness fulfil 
t!ie declarations of Crod and be executioners of his 
wrath on his enemies, without les.sening their guilt 
or their exposure to his just indignation. 

9. Those who use as a beverage intoxicating 
liquor, are not only in danger of forming an intem- 
perate appetite, but of becoming intoxicated, and 
while in tliat state being summoned to the bar of 
God. 



33 And Ahab made a J grove; and Ahab 
did ''more to provoke the Lord God of 
Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel 
that were before him. 

34 Uln his days did Hiel the Beth-elite 
build Jericho: he laid the foundation 
thereof in Abiram his first-born, and set 
up the gates thereof in his youngest son 
Segub, according to the word of the Lord, 
which he ' spake by Joshua the son of Nun. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

1 Elijah, having prophesied against Ahab, is sent to 
Cherith, where the ravens feed him. 8 He is sent 
to the widow of Zarephath. 17 He raiseth the 
widow's son. 21 The woman belie veth him. 

AND ^Elijah the Tishbite, who mis of the 
inhabitants of Gilead, said unto Ahab, 
As"^ the Lord God of Israel liveth, "before 
Avhom I stand, "there shall not be dew nor 
rain these years, but according to my word. 

2 And the word of the Lord came unto 
him, saying, 

3 Get thee hence, and turn thee east- 
ward, and hide thyself by the brook Che- 
rith, that is before Jordan. 

4 And it shall be, that thou shalt drink 
of the brook ; and I have commanded the 
ravens P to feed thee there. 

5 So he went and did according unto the 
word of the Lord : for he went and dwelt 
by the brook Cherith, that z's before Jordan. 

6 And ''the ravens brought him bread and 
flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh 
in the evening; and he drank of the brook. 

7 And it came to pass ^ after a while, 
that the brook dried up, because there had 
been no rain in the land. 



17: 1 


2. k 


ver 


■M; 


chap. 21:2 


\ 1 Josliu 


a « : 26 ; 


.MiitMiS.'V. 


t He 


b. Elii, 


hu. 


I.ukel; 17; 4:' 


f,, he is cnlled Etiat. 


>« jKinir, 


:<:I4 


n Peut-IO 


8. o I.uke4:2J 


; Jas..5:l7. 


p l9». 4: 


: 20. "i Pun. 


37:3 


19; U: 


. 33 


Ifi; 


H:.b 3:17, 


18; Milt. 6 


.31-33; 


.nl.e22:*-.; 


Heb. 


I3:fi, S 


k 


Heb 


at the end 


ofdnt/t. 







13. Those who not only sin themselves, but who, 
by fear, favor, or any temptation, induce others to 
sin, become peculiarly offensive to G-od and obnox- 
ious to his wrath. 

IS. A man's pride and cowardice may be so great 
as to lead him to kill himself; or, in a duel or some 
other equally foolish and wicked way, expose him- 
self to be killed by others. 

22. For the wickedness of a people many are the 
rulers thereof. When revolution quickly succeeds 
revolution, and rulers in rapid succession, by vio- 
lence and murder, succeed rulers, without any fixed, 
stable, just, and efficient government, God has a 
controver.«y with the peopV, and is through their 
revolutions and rulers punishing them for thiMr sins. 
And without repentance and reformation there will 
be no permanent relief from their troubles. 

30. The children of the wicked, when raised to 
power, and left to act out their wickedness, often 
do worse than their fathers ; choosing the openly 
vicious for their companions, they become aban- 
doned in wickedness, and plunge into remediless 
destruction. 

CHAPTER -XVn. 

1. The Tishhite; so called from Tishbe, a town 
in Naphtali. where he lived. According to my 
word ; as he should foretell and pray for it. 
459 



Elijah at Zarcphath. 



I. KINGS, XVIII. 



Widow's s^n raised. 



8 HAnd the. word of the Lord came 
unto him, saying, 

9 Arise, get thee to *Zarcphath, which 
hclongcth to Zidon, and dwell there : be- 
hold, I have commanded a widow woman 
there to sustain thee. 

10 So he arose and went to Zarephath. 
And when he came to the gate of the city, 
behold, the widow woman u-as there gath- 
ering of sticks : and he called to her, and 
said. Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water 
in a vessel, that I may drink. 

1 1 And as she was going to fetch it, he 
called to her, and said, Bring me, I pray 
thee, a morsel of bread in thy hand. 

12 And she said. As the Lord thy God 
liveth, I have not a cake, but a handful of 
meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse : 
and behold, I am gathering two sticks, 
that I may go in and dress it for me and 
my son, that we may eat it, and * die. 

13 And Elijah said unto her. Fear not; 
go and do as thou hast said : but make me 
thereof a little cake ''first, and bring it 
unto me, and after make for thee and for 
thy son. 

1 4 For thus saith the Lord God of Israel, 
The barrel of meal shall not waste, neither 
shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that 
the Lord tsendeth rain upon the earth. 

15 And she went and did according to 
the saying of Elijah : and she, and he, and 
her house, did cat imany day.s. 

16 And the barrel of meal wasted not, 
neither did the cruse of oil fail, according 
to the word of the Lord, which he spake 
byi' Elijah. 

17 '^[And it came to pass after these 
things, that the son of the woman, the 



* Olinii. 20; LuKe 4 : 2fi, called Sarepta. a Gen. 21:16; Jer. 
U:18; l.am.4:9. b Prov. S: 9 in; Mark 9:41; Heb. fi : 10. 
i Heh. ffircth. % Or, a full year. \Heh.bythehandof. r. Luke 



9. Zirr(j)hath ; a city on the Mediterranean, be- 
tween Tyro and Zidon ; called in the New Testa- 
ment, Sarepta. Luke 4 : 26. 

12. Two; meaning a few. 

1.1. House ; family. 

IS. Slay nny sou ; she supposed her afflictions 
might have been as a punishment for her sins, and 
brought upon her by God through the instrumen- 
tality of the prophet. 

■2-I. ///. l/ii/ mouth is truth; she knew that 
what the prophet had declared was true, and would 
be accomplished. 

L\STRUCTIO.\.S. 

1. Instead of at once destroying the wicked as 
they deserve, God often waits long upon them, visits 
them with judgments and with mercies, and does 
all that infinite wisdom and goodness can .consist- 
ently do to lead them to repent, and tiius to escape 
the destruction which conliniiod wickedness and 
impenitence will bring upon them. 

G. Neither the fowls of the air nor the bea,sts of 
the tield ever rebel against the will of their Creator, 
nor do they rQfuse to do what he bids them. 

9. When one means of supply fails those who 
trust ill God, he will provide for them another, and 
4i;iJ 



mistress of the house, fell sick ; and ^b^c.^JJo: 
his sickness was so sore, that there was 
no breath left in him. 

18 And she said vinto Elijah, *= What 
have I to do with thee, thou man of 
God? art thou come unto me lo'^call my 
sin to remembrance, and to slay my son ? 

19 And he said unto her. Give me thy 
son. And he took him out of her bosom, 
and carried him up into a loft, where he 
abode, and laid him upon his own bed. 

20 And he cried unto the Lord, and said, 

Lord my God, hast thou also brought 
evil upon the widow with whom I so- 
journ, by slaying her son? 

21 And "he II stretched himself upon the 
child three times, and cried unto the Lord, 
and said, Lord my God, I pray thee, let 
this child's soul come into *him again. 

22 And the Lord heard the voice of Eli- 
jah; and the soul of the child came into 
him again, and he revived. 

23 And Elijah took the child, and brought 
him down out of the chamber into the 
house, and delivered him unto his '^moth- 
er: and Elijah said. See, thy son liveth. 

24 And the woman said to Elijah, s Now 
by this I know that thou art a man of (iod, 
and that the word of the Lord in thy 
mouth is truth. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1 In the extremity of famine Elijah, sent to Ahab, 
mceteth good Obadiah. 9 Obadiah bringeth Aliab to 
Elijah. 17 Elijah, reproving Ahab, by fire from 
heaven convinceth Baal's prophets. 41 Elijah, by 
prayer obtaining rain, followcth Ahab to Jezreel. 

AND it came to pass o/^cr'' many days, 
that the word of the Lord came to 
Elijah in the third year, saying, Go, show 



6 : R. ■• .lol) 13 : 2:), 2fi ; Kzek. 21 : 2S, 24. e 2 Kinp<. 4 : 34, -3.i, 
II Hell, vieaiwed. * Heb. his inward pnrtt. f Heb. 11 : SA. 
B ,lolm 3 : 2 ; 16 : 30. h cliap. 17:1. 



in obeying him they never will want any thing 
necessary to their highest good. 

11. God often requires of his people what nothing 
biit strong faith and active benevolence will leaa 
them to do. 

1-5. Confidence in the promises of God, manifested 
by acting under a conviction of their truth, will not 
be disappointed, but will be followed by timely and 
•abundant supplies. 

17. No exercise of faith in God, love to his 
friends, or readiness to honor him in doing them 
good, will secure us from liability to great and sore 
trials. It is only through much tribulation that 
any are prepared to enter the kingdom of God. 
Acts 14:22; Rom. 5:3; 2 Corinthians, 1:3-11: 
7:4-10; 1 Thess. 3: 3-13; Heb. 11:35-40; 12: 1-13; 
Rev. 7:11-17. 

IS. All our sufferings are caused by our sins, and 
should le.ad us more and more to loathe and forsake 
them, trusting in Christ for pardon, and for all 
which we need to do the will of God and meet his 
gr.Tcious acceptance. 

24. To those who obey God he so manifests him- 
self, as to convince them that all his declarations 
will be surely and fully accomplished. 



Elijah meets Obadiah. 



I. KINGS, XVIII. 



The trial at Carmel. 



n c'-.ir thyself unto Ahab; and "I will 
send rain upon the earth. 

2 And Elijah went to show himself unto 
Ahab. And there was a sore famine in 
Samaria. 

3 And Ahab called *Obadiah, which ims 
the t governor of his house. Now Oba- 
diah '' feared the Lord greatly : 

4 For it was .so, when ^Jezebel cut off the 
prophets of the Lord, that Obadiah took ■= a 
hundred prophets, and hid them by fifty in 
a cave, and fed them with ''bread and water. 

5 And Ahab said unto Obadiah, Go into 
the land, unto all fountains of water, and 
unto all brooks: peradventure we may 
find grass to save the horses and mules 
alive, that we Hose not all the beasts. 

6 So they divided the land between them 
to pass throughout it: Ahab went one 
way by himself, and Obadiah went an- 
other way by himself. 

7 ^ And as Obadiah was in the way, 
behold, Elijah met him : and he knew 
him, and fell on his face, and said, Art 
thou that my lord Elijah? • 

8 And lie answered him, I am: go, tell 
thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here. 

9 And he said. What have I sinned, that 
thou wouldest deliver thy servant into the 
hand of Ahab, to slay me? 

10 Js the Lord thy Godlivcth, thereisno 
nation or kingdom, whither my lord hath 
not sent to seek thee : and when they said. 
He is not there; he took an oath of the king- 
dom and nation, that they found thee not. 

1 1 And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy 
lord. Behold, Elijah is here. 

1 2 And it shall come to pass, as soon as I 
am gone from thee, that '"the Spirit of the 
Lord shall carry thee whither I know not ; 
and so when I come and tell Ahab, and he 
can not find thee, he shall si ay me : but I thy 
servant '^fear the Lord from my youth. 

13 Was it not told my lord what I did 
when Jezebel slew the prophets of the 
Lord, how I hid a hundred men of the 
Lord's ^ prophets by fifty in a cave, and 
fed'" them with bread and water? 

14 And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, 
Behold, Elijah /.s- Acre.- andheshall'slayme. 

1 .5 And Elijah said. As the Lord of hosts 

« DeutM:13; Pan. M7:S: Jer.5:24; H:2J: Hosea 2:51.2-2. 
* Heb. Obiidiahu. f Heh. aver liia Iwuie. I> Nell. 7 : 2. J Heb. 
hrhtl. c Nell. 5:1."). H Poa. 34:9, 10: Ism. .13: Ifi. ^Heh.cutnol 
nff ouT9e\\-e» from the bcrntts. e 2KinOT. 2 : 16; Elek. .1 : 12, U; 
Mat.4:l; ActK 8 : 3!l. f ProT.8:I:l; Kccl.7:18; Isaiah fiO : 10. 
6 M:it. 10:41,42. b Mat. 25 : .%■>. iMat.lO:28. jUa.6I:7,8. 



CHAPTER XVin. 
3. Feared the Lord; was a true friend and 

worshipper of Jehovah. 

10. ^o nation, or kingdom ; in that vicinity, 
or connected with Israel. 

18. Baalim ; heathen gods. 

19. Moniit Carmel : a mountain near the Medi- 
terranean, and south of the bav of Acre. 

30 



liveth, before whom I stand, J I will surely 
show myself unto him to-day. 

16 So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and 
told him : and Ahab went to meet Elijah. 

17 1[ And it came to pass, when Aliab 
saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto him, J/7 
thou he that ''troublcth Israel? 

18 And he answered, I have not troubled 
Israel ; but thou, and thy father's house, 'in 
that ye have "'forsaken the commandments 
of the Lord, and thou hast followed Baalim. 

19 Now therefore send, and gather to 
me all Israel unto mount " Carmel, and the 
prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, 
and the prophets of the "groves four hun- 
dred, which eat at Jezebel's table. 

20 So Ahab sent unto all the children 
of Israel, and p gathered the prophets to- 
gether unto mount Carmel. 

21 And Elijah came unto all the people, 
and said, i How long halt ye between two 
opinions ?il if the Lord ic God, follow him : 
but if 'Baal, then follow him. And the 
people answered him not a word. 

22 Then said Elijah unto the people, I, 
evenl "only, remain a prophet of the Lord; 
but Baal's prophets arc four hundred and 
fifty men. 

23 Let them therefore give us two bul- 
locks ; and let them choose one bullock 
for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and 
lay it on wood, and put no fire vndcr: and 
I will dress the other bullock, a;jd lay it 
on wood, and put no fire under: 

24 And call ye on the name of your gods, 
and J will call on the name of the Lord: 
and the God that answcrcth by 'fire, let 
himbeCxod. And all the people answered 
and said, *It is well spoken. 

25 And Elijah said unto the prophets of 
Baal, Choose you one bullock for your- 
selves, and dress it first ; for ye are many ; 
and call on the name of your gods, but put 
no fire under. 

26 And they took the bullock which was 
given them, and they dressed it. and called 
on the name of Baal from morning even 
until noon, saying, Baal, thear us. But 
there'' icas no voice, nor any that * an- 
swered. And they leaped^ upon the altar 
which was made. 



k AcU 16:20; 17:fi. 1 chap. 21 : 20. m 2 Cliron. 1.1:2. n I Sam. 
ir> : 12 ; 2 Kings, 2 : 25. o chap. 16 : 3.1. p cliap. 22 : 6 q 2 Kings, 
17:41; MiiL6:24. \\ Or. thouahlt. r Joshua 24 : 15. ■ chap. 
19:10,14. 1 1 Chrnn. 21:26: 2 Cliron. 7:1,3. * Heb. T^< iporrf 
la fiiod. t Or. a>im-er. u Paa. 1 15 : .5-8 ; .ler. 10 : n ; 1 Cor. 12 : 2. 
t Or. heard. J Or, up and down at the altar. 



21. Halt ye ; act as if doubtful whether Jeho- 
vah or Baal were the true G-od. 

22. I only ; he was the only prophet of Jeho- 
vah who was present, or appeared before the peo- 
ple. 

24. l,et him he God; let him be acknowledged 
and adored as God. 
26. Leaped ; as was the custom with idolaters. 
461 



God answers by fire. 



I. KINGS, XVIII. 



Mundancc of rain. 



27 And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah 
mocked them, and said. Cry *aloud : "for 
he is a god ; cither he ^is talking, or he ^^ is 
pursuing, or he is in a journey, or perad- 
veuture he sleepeth, and must be awaked. 

28 And they cried aloud, and''cut them- 
selves after their manner Avilh knives and 
lancets, till ?thc blood gushed out upon 
them. 

29 And it came to pass, when mid-day 
Nvas past, and they prophesied until the 
time of the l! offering of the evening sacri- 
fice, that there icas neither voice, nor any 
to answer, nor any *that regarded. 

30 And Elijah said unto all the people. 
Come near unto me. And all the people 
came near unto him. And he repaired 
the altar of the Lord //ia/ was broken down. 

31 And Elijah took twelve stones, ac- 
cording to the number of the tribes of the 
sons of Jacob, unto "^whom the word of 
the Loud came, saying, Israel shall be thy 
name ; 

32 And with the stones he built an altar 
in the name of the Lord: and he made a 
trench about the altar, as great as would 
contain two measures of seed. 

33 And he put the Avood in order, and 
cuf* the bullock in pieces, and laid him 
on the wood, and said. Fill four barrels 
with water, and pour it on the burnt-sac- 
rifice, and on the wood. 

34 Anc^ he said, Do it the second time. 
And they did it the second time. And he 
said, Do it the third time. And they did 
it the third time. ^ 

35 And the water tran round about the 
altar; and he filled the ""trench also with 
water. 

36 And it came to pass at the time of 
the offering of the evening sacrifice, that 
Elijah the prophet came near, and said, 
Lokd"^ (jod of Abraham, Isaac, and of 
Israel,^ let it be known this day that thou 
art God in Israel, and that I am thv ser- 





* Hi 


li. witli 


a great I 


ake • 


Isaiali 41 


: IX t Or, 


metlit 


alelh. 


* 


Hcb. 


lialh a 


purfuit. 


b Lev 


19::8. 


% Heb. thei/ 




tthod upon the 


n. II Heb. atcending. * 


Heb. attention, c 


r.pn, 




■.'M. 


* Le\ 


l:fi-«. 


f Hell 


inent. 


» ver. TO, 38. 


1 Er 


3:fi. 


( 


fbiip 


8M3; 


2 Kings 


l'.):19; 


Psil. SJ : 


18; F.7.ek.36 


•• 23.; 


39 : 7. 



27. Mocked; ridiculed. He is a ^od ; spoken 
in irony, intimating the absurdity of idol worship. 
^ 29. Fhe time of the offeri'iig ; about three 
o'clock in the afternoon, or between that and sunset. 

32. Tu-o measttres; a measure was about ten 
quarts. 

37. Turned their heart; to worship Jehovah 
as the tnie God. 

, 40. The brook Kish 0)1 ; which emptied into the 
bay of Acre near the foot of mount Carmel. !<lew 
them; according to the command of God. Deut 
13:5; 18:20; Jer. 48:10. 

42. Went lip ; to some place in the neighbor- 
hood where refreshments were proviiied for him. 

44. Get thee doioi ; fron> the mountain where 
he was, and return to his palace at Jezreel. 

4G. Girded up his loi/ii; put a girdle or belt 
•162 



vant, and ^that I have done all ^bVS 
these things at thy word. 

37 Hear me, Lord, hear me, that this 
people may know that thou art the Lord 
God, and that thou hast turned their heart 
back again. 

38 Then 'the fire of the Lord fell, and 
consumed the burnt-sacrifice, and the 
wood, and the stones, and the dust, and 
licked up the water that u-as in the trench. 

39 And when all the people saw it, they 
fell on their faces: and they said. The 
Lord, he is the God; the Lord, J he is the 
God. 

40 And Elijah said unto them, +Takc 
the prophets of Baal ; let not one of them 
escape. And they took them : and Elijah 
brought them down to the brook Kishon, 
and '' slew them there. 

41 l[Aud Elijah said unto Ahab, Get 
thee up, eat and drink; for there is ^a 
sound of abundance of rain. 

42 So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. 
And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel ; 
and 'he cast himself down upon the earth, 
and put his face between his knees, 

43 And said to his servant, Go up now, 
look toward the sea. And he went up, 
and looked, and said, There is nothing. 
And he said. Go again seven times. 

44 And it came to pass at the seventh 
time, that he said, Behold, there ariselh 
a little cloud out of the sea, like a man's 
hand. And he said, Go up, say unto 
Ahab, II Prepare thy chariot, and get thee 
down, that the rain stop thee not. 

45 And it came to pass in the mean 
while, that the heaven was black with 
clouds and wind, and there was a great 
rain. And Ahab rode, and went to Jez- 
reel. 

46 And the hand of the Lord was on 
Elijah; and he '"girded up his loins, and 
ran before Ahab *lo the entrance of Jez- 
reel. 



h Numbers 16 


IS. i Lev. 9: 


24; 


liiilse!) 


6:2 


; 1 Chron 


21 


2K; 


•zrbron 


7:1. 


ver. Q4. i Or, /Ippieliend 


k DellL i3:.S 


IN 


20; 


•2King8 


10 : 25 


% Or, « noi. 


e. 1 


.Ia.». ft 


•17, 


8. II He 


). li 


, f*r 


bind. 


m 2Ki 


l"s, 4 : 29 : 9:1 


.lot 


38:3; 


,lpr. 


1:17; Kj. 


1. li 


M; 


1 Peter, 


1:13. 


• Heb. <i«M 


'" CO' 


ne to. 











around his outer garments, as was the custom when 
about to travel. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The fidelity .^nd usefulness of truly religious 
persons sometimes lead very wicked men to employ 
tliem in preference to all others; and good men 
should ever strive so to act as to show that godli- 
ness is profitable unto all things, and that it renders 
those who possess it conscientiously diligent and 
faitliful in the discharge of all the duties of life. 

4. Under the government of wicked rulers the 
Lord's ministers are often persecuted, imprisoned, 
and dependent.on charity for support, while S;itan"s 
ministers go at large, and riot in luxury and abun- 
dance. 

9. Even the people of God are sometimes afraid 
to do what he commands them, lest they siiould 



Elijah Jlccth to Ilorcb. 



I. KINGS, XIX, 



GuJ ajiprarcth to him. 



CHAPTER XIX. 



L 



I Elijah, threatened by Jezebel, fleeth to Beer-sheba. 
4 In the wilderness, being weary of his life, he is 
comforted by an angel. 9 At Horeb God appeareth 
unto him, sending hiun to anoint Hazael, Jehu, and 
Elisha. 19 Elisha, taking leave of his friends, fol- 
ioweth Elijah. 

A ND Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah 
TjL had done, and withal how he had 
slain* all the prophets with the sword. 

2 Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Eli- 
jah, saying, ''So let the gods do to mc, and 
more also, '^ if I make not thy life as the life 
of one of themby to-morrow about this time. 

3 And when he saw that, lie arose, and 
went for his life, and came to Beer-sheba, 
wliieh belongetli to Judah, and left his ser- 
vant there. 

4 T[But he himself went a day's jour- 
ney into the wilderness, and came and sat 
down under a juniper-tree: and he re- 
quested for "himself that he might die; 
and said, ** It is enough; now-, Lord, 
take away my life; for *I am not better 
than my fatliers. 

5 And as he lay and slept under a juni- 
per-tree, behold, then an "^angel touched 
him, and said unto him. Arise and eat. 

6 And he looked, and behold, there was 
a cake baken on the coals, and a cruse of 
water at his t head. And he did cat and 
drink, and laid him down again. 



« .hap. 18: 40. b cimp. 20 : 10 ; llutli 1 : 17 ; 2 Kings, 6:31. 
Psa. W : .■!2, M. * Ueh. his lifr- d Num. 11 : 1.=.; .lonlOi ■« : S, 8. 
l'sa.39:l-2. fHeb.l:14. i Heh. holster, g Ex. 34 : i8 ; Dent. 



7 And the angel of the Lord came again 
the second time, and touched him. and 
said, Arise and eat; because the journey 
is too great for thee. 

8 And he arose, and did eat and drink, 
and went in the strength of that meat 
fortysdays and forty nights unto Horeb 
the ''mount of God. 

9 T[And he came thither unto a cave, 
and lodged there ; and behold, the word 
of the Lord came to him, and he said unto 
him. What docst thou here, Elijah? 

10 And ' he said, I have been > very jeal- 
ous for tlie Lord God of hosts: for the 
children of Israel have forsaken thy cov- 
enant, thrown down thine altars, and 
slain'' thy prophets with the sword; and 
I, eve7i I only, am left; and they seek my 
life, to take it away. 

11 And he said. Go forth, and stand 
upon the 'mount before the Lord. And 
behold, the Lord passed by, and a great 
and strong '"wind rent the mountains, and 
brake in pieces the rocks before tlie Lord ; 
but "the Lord teas not in the wind: and 
after the wind an earthquake; but the 
Lord icas not in the earthquake : 

12 And after the earthquake a fire; but 
the Lord icas not in the fire: and after 
the fire a still small voice. 

13 And it was .vo, when Elijah heard /Y, 



9 : 9, 18 ; MaU 4 : -2. h Ex. 3 : I ; Mai. 4 : 4, •'). i Horn. 1 1 : I-l. 
j Numbers -23: 11, 13; Psa. 69 : P. k chap. 13:4, 13; Micah 7 : •:. 
1 Ex. ■24:1-2. inEzek. 1:4. nZech. 4:6. . 



suffer ; but if they are truly devoted to him and 
desirous of doing their duty, he will make it plain 
and en.able them by his grace to perform it. 

17. Persecutors are apt to represent those who 
condemn them for their wickedness as disturbers of 
the public peace and troublers of the people, and to 
contend that their liberty is inconsistent with the 
public good, and that they should be banished or 
jint to death. 

18. The troubles which come upon rulers and 
people are a punishment from God on account of 
tlieir sins. Not those who condemn these sins, but 
those who commit them, are the real troublers of 
the country. 

'21. As Jehovah has in various ways shown con- 
■lusively that he is the only living and true God, 
reason, interest, and duty require that all to whom 
he is revealed should, without hesitation or reserve, 
love, worship, and obey him. 

22. Wliich is the right way is not to be deter- 
mined by the numbers, wealth, and power of those 
who follow it. God's friends may be few, poor, 
feeble, and despised, while Satan's may be many, 
rich, powerful, and respected. It is better, in such 
cases, to be of the few than of the many. Psa. 13S : 6 ; 
Prov. 3 : 31 ; IC : 19 ; 28 : 6. 

27. The worsiiip of images, and of all false, imag- 
inary deities, is mean, base, and foolish. 

2S. The worship of false gods is cruel to the 
worshippers, and often leads to the infliction ofj 
grea^ bodily penances and sufferings. Such sufTer- 
fngs please the tormentors, but do the tormented no I 
irood ; and are an abomination to Jehovah, whose 1 
ways are ways of pleasantness, and whose paths are i 
paths of peace. 

33. True religion has nothing to fear from e.xperi- i 



ment, and from candid, thorough, ttnd searching 
investigation. It loves the light, and seeks to dif- 
fuse it among all classes of people, so that they mav 
be able to judge of it themselves, and act intelli- 
gently with regard to it. 

37. Prayer, simple, earnest, and sincere, not in .t. 
foreign tongue which is not understood, but in 
that which the hearers themselves speak, is a pow- 
erful means of grace, and one by which God often 
convinces men of the truth and leads them to em- 
brace it. 

43. Not only sincerity and earnestness, but per- 
severance in supplication and in obedience to iTod, 
are essential to the highest success. However small 
the number or trying the condition of the friends of 
Jehovah, let them trust in him, seek of him what 
thev need, and follow his directions, and they shall 
in due tirne gloriously triumph over all their foes. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

2. So hi the gods do to me ; let them kill me, 
if I do not kill Elijah. 

4. Into the icilderness ; which lay south of Ca- 
naan, and in which Israel had wandered forty ye.ars. 

8. Forty dai/.t and forty iiigltts ; being mirac- 
ulously supported. Iloreb; where God appeared to 
Israel and gave tiiem the law. Deut. 1 : 6. 

10. Jealous for the Liord; desirous of honoring 
him by leading the people to obey him. I only : 
no other prophet openly appeared to stem the torrent 
of iniquity. 

11, 12. The Lord was not in the u-hid — earth- 
quake — -fire : Tie would not reform Israel by terrific 
outward displays of his power, but by the meek, 
patient, persevering labors of his servants under tlie 
invisible and silent influences of his Spirit. 

463 



The rail of Elisha. 



I. KINGS, XX. 



Siege nf Samaria. 



that "he wrapped liis face in his mantle, 
and went out, and stood in the entering 
in of the cave. And bcliold, there came 
a voice unto him, and said, What doest 
thou here, Elijah? 

14 And he said, *" I have been very jeal- 
ous for the Lord God of hosts : because 
the children of Israel have "^forsaken thy 
covenant, thrown down thine altars, and 
slain thy prophets with the sword; and 
I, t'ven I only, am left; and they seek my 
life, to take it away. 

15 And the Lord said unto him. Go, 
return on thy way to the wilderness of 
Damascus : and when thou comest, anoint 
Hazael"* to be king over Syria: 

16 And^'Jehu the son of Nimshi shaltthou 
anoint to be king over Israel : and *Elisha 
the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah shalt 
thou anoint to be prophet in thy room. 

17 And it ""shall come to pass, that him 
that escapeth the sword of Hazael shall 
Jehu slay : and him that escapeth from 
the sword of Jehu shall Elisha^slay. 

18 Yet'' I thave left me seven thousand 
in Israel, all the knees which have not 
bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which 
hath not 'kissed him. 

19 T So he departed thence, and found 
EI isha the son of Shaphat, who ?ca.'; plough- 
ing with twelve yoke of oxen before him, 
and he with the twelfth : and Elijah passed 
by him, and cast his mantle upon him. 

20 And he left the oxen, and ran after 
Elijah, and said. Let me, I pray thee, kiss 



0. c .leremiali 2-2 : 9. 
* Luke 4 : '27. called 
M : 3. B Hi>»ea (i : 5. 



• Exodus :! : 6 ; Isaiah 6:2. h ver. M, 
d 2KiTiga, 8: 12, 13. « 2 Kings. 9 : 1-3. 
EtiseU!. f SKings, 9: 14, etr. : 10 : fi, eti- 

16. Abel-meholah ; a town in the plain of Jor- 
dan, between Beth-shean and Shechem. 

17. JIazael — Jehii — and, — Elisha; they would 
all be instrumental in the puni.shment of idolatrous 
Israel. 

18. Seven thousand; who were still worship- 
pers of Jehovah. 

19. Cast his mantle ii]}onhim; indicating that 
he should follow him. 

20. What have I done ; that should hinder you 
from going and taking leave of your friends. 

21. Took a yole of oxen. ; to provide for him- 
self and friends a feast before he left them. Minis- 
tered unto him ; waited on and assisted him. 

INSTRUCTION'S. 

2. No miracles or means of grace will of them- 
selves lead persecutors and haters of God to cease from 
their efforts to overcome and destroy iiis people. 

X However bold, courasreous, and successful the 
people of God may have been under his influence, 
unless that is continued they will become timid and 
cowardly, desert their duty, and in despair even 
wi.sh to die. 

5. God knoweth the frame of his people and re- 
riPinberetli that they are dust. He compassion- 
ates their infirmities and symiiathizes in their sor- 
row.s, and when they duly feel their weakness and 
wants, appears for their relief. 

9. Men are made not merely to be acted upon 
but to act, and should never voluntarily go where 
they have nothing to do. or can do nothing. 
464 



my father and my mother, ^and *b"c.^ 
then I will follow thee. And he said 
unto him,+ Go back again : for what have 
I done to thee? 

21 And he returned back from him. and 
took a yoke of oxen, and slew them, and 
boiled their flesh with the '' instruments of 
the oxen, and gave unto the people, and 
they did eat. Then he arose, and went 
after Elijah, and ministered unto him. 

CHAPTER XX. 

1 Ben-hadad, not content with Ahah'.s homage, besieg- 
eth Samaria. 1.3 By the direction of a prophet, the 
Syrians are slain. 22 As the prophet forewarned 
Ahab, the Syrians, trusting in the valleys, come 
against him in Aphek. 28 By the word of the proph- 
et, and God's judgment, the t^yrians are smitten 
again. .31 The Syrians submitting themselves, Ahab 
sendeth Ben-hadad away with a covenant. 35 The 
prophet, under the parable of a prisoner, making 
Ahab to judge himself, denounceth God"s judgment 
against him. 

AND Ben-hadad the kinir of Syria gath- 
ered all his host together: and there 
icerc thirty and two kings with him, and 
horses, and chariots : and he went up and 
besieged Samaria, and warred against it. 

2 And he sent messengers to Ahab king 
of Israel into the city, and said unto him, 
Thus' saith Ben-hadad, 

3 Thy silver and thy gold is mine; thy 
wives also and thy children, c?'e» the good- 
liest, are mine. 

4 And the king of Israel answered and 
said. My lord, king, according to thy 
saying, I am thine, and all that I have. 

5 And the messengers came again, and 



ti Romans 11:4. f Or. trill leave. i Hosea 13 : 2. j Blattliew 
8:21, 22 ; I.like 9 : til , 62. f Heb. Go, return. k 2 Sam. 24 : 22. 
I Isa. 10: 13, 14. 



10. Men are never more likely to boast of their 
past labors, than when they are neglecting their 
present duty ; nor ever more likely to complain, 
find fault with others, and sink into despair. 

12. It is not always that which is most visible 
and tangible, or which makes the most noise, that 
is most efficacious in doing good. 

I/). If the people of God when fearful, discour- 
aged, and desponding, would get out of trouble, they 
must go to work ; -i^hat their hands find to do. they 
must do for the purpose of honoring God and doing 
good, cominitting themselves and all their interests 
to his guidance and disposal. 

18. Some good men are sometimes tempted to 
think that there are none who labor in the right 
way to sustain the cause of God but themselves 
and that when they are gone it must sink. But he 
will show that it is not as dependent on them as 
they tliought it was. 

20. God can at any time so touch the hearts of 
men that theywll voluntarily and cheerfully lenve 
all for him and his cause. But in doing this, he 
will not lessen their natural affection, or lead them 
to neglect anv of the proper kindnesses and courte- 
sies of life. 1 Pet. 3 : 8. 

CHAPTER XX. 

1. Kings; rulers of cities and the adjoining dis- 
tricts of country. 

4. T am thine ; meaning, that he would be trib- 
utary to the king of Syria. 



Defeat of Ben-hadad. 



I. KINGS, XX, 



He renews the war. 



B.' c.'S!"' said, Thus speaketh Ben-hadad, say- 
ing. Although I have sent unto thee, say- 
ing. Thou shah deliver me thy silver, and 
thy gold, and thy wives, and thy children ; 

6 Yet I will send my servants unto thee 
to-morrow about this time, and they shall 
seareh thy house, and the houses of thy 
servants ; and it shall be, that whatsoever 
is *pleasant in thine eyes, they shall put 
it in their hand, and take it away. 

7 Then the king of Israel called all the 
elders of the * land, and said, Mark, I pray 
you, and see how this man seekcth mis- 
chief: for he sent unto me for my wives, 
and for my children, and for my silver, 
and for my gold ; and 1 1 denied him not. 

8 And all the ciders and all the people 
said unto him, Hearken not unto hiin, nor 
consent. 

9 Wherefore he said unto the messengers 
of Ben-hadad, Tell my lord the king. All 
that thou dulst send for to thy servant at 
the first I will do: but this thing I may 
not do. And the messengers departed, 
and brought him word again. 

10 And Ben-hadad sent unto him, and 
said, The '' gods do so unto me, and more 
also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice 
for handfuls for all the people that -fol- 
low me. 

1 1 And the king of Israel answered and 
said, Tell him, <=Let not him that girdeth 
on his harness boast himself as he that 
putteth it off. 

1 2 And it came to pass, wiien Ben-hadad 
heard this ^message, as he was drinking, 
he and the kings in the II pavilions, that he 
said unto his servants, *Set yourselves in 
array. And they set themselves in array 
against the city. 

13 ^ And behold, there teame a prophet 
unto Ahab king of Israel, saying, Thus 
saith the Loud, Hast thou seen all this 
great multitude? behold, I will ''deliver 
it into thy hand this day ; and thou shalt 
know that I am the Lord. 

14 And Ahab said. By wiiom? And he 
said, Thus saith the Loud, Even by the 
young+ men of the princes of the provin- 
ces. Then he said. Who shalH order the 
battle? And he answered, Thou. 

15 Then he '"numbered the young men of 
the princes of the provinces, and they were 



* Hell, dcsirahle. 


• •2Km«, 5:7. 


f Heb. kept not hack from 


him. b cliiip. 19: -2. 


t Heb. are at 


mji feet. K.X. 11:8; Jud-es 


4:10. c Proverbs 


7:1. % Heb. 1 


iimd. II Or, tentt. " Or, 


riuce the ensines : a 


td they placed e 


i^iiiep. f Heb. approached. 


i ver. 28. t "r. »" 


vanlt. % Heb. 


bind, or tie. e .IikIj;. 7 : 7. 



10. If the dust of Samaria shall suffice; 
meaning, that he would come with such a multitude 
of people that the sand of Samaria would not give 
to each a handful. 

11. Girdelk on his harness ; puts on his armor 
for battle, or begins a war. Putteth it off ; vic- 
toriously closes it. 



two hundred and thirty-two : and after them 
he numbered all the people, even all the 
children of Israel, being seven thousand. 

16 And they went out at noon. But 
Ben-hadad tvas "^drinking himself drunk 
in the pavilions, he and the kings, the thir- 
ty and two ^ kings that helped him. 

17 And the young men of the princes of 
the provinces went out first; and Ben- 
hadad sent out, and they told him, saying, 
There are men come out of Samaria. 

18 And he said. Whether they be come 
outfor peace, take them alive; or whether 
they be come out for war, take them alive. 

19 So these young men of the princes of 
the provinces came out of the city, and 
the army which followed them. 

20 And ''they slew every one his man : 
and the Syrians fled; and Israel pursued 
them : and Ben-hadad the king of Syria 
escaped on a horse with the horsemen. 

21 And the king of Israel went out, and 
smote the horses and chariots, and slew 
the Syrians with a great slaughter. 

22 11 And the 'prophet came to the king 
of Israel, and said unto him. Go, strength- 
en thyself, and mark, and see what thou 
doest : for at the J return of the year the 
king of Syria will come up against thee. 

23 And the servants of the king of Syria 
said unto him. Their ''gods are gods of the 
hills ; therefore they were stronger than 
we : but let us fight against them in the 
plain, and surely we shall be stronger 
than they. 

24 And do this thing. Take the kings 
away, every man out of his place, and 
put captains in their rooms: 

25 And number thee an army, like the 
army that n thou hast lost, horse for horse, 
and chariot for cliariot: and we will fight 
against them in the plain, 'a«f/ surely we 
shall be stronger than they. And he 
hearkened unto tlieir voice, and did so. 

26 And it came to pass at the return of 
the year, that Ben-hadad numbered the 
Syrians, and went up to '"Aphek, to 'fight 
against Israel. 

27 And the children of Israel were num- 
bered, and were tall present, and went 
against them: and the children of Israel 
pitched before them like two little flocks 
of kids; but the Syrians filled the country. 



f ver. 12: (Imp. Ifi:<); Prov. il : l!<)-3-2 : Hosea4:n. It luai.lh 
.'>4:l.i. b Jii,l». 7:21,2-2; Kcrl.9:ll. i 2 Kin^s, fi: 1-2. j 2 Sain. 
11:1. k Psa. 115:2, :l; Isa. 42: S. || Heb. tea* /a»rn. 1 Psalm 
10 : .1. in 1 S:ira. 4:1; 29 : 1 ; 2 Kings, 13 : 17. » Heb. Me war 
with Uraet. f Or, victualled. 



14. The young men; those who waited upon 
the princes ; their servants. 

23. Gods of the hills ; their idea was, that dif- 
ferent gods ruled over different places, and that they 
must fight the Israelites in places which their gods 
did not govern. 

26. Aphelc ; in the north part of Canaan. 



Ben-hadad again difmled. 



I. KINGS, XX, 



He is spared by ^hab. 



28 •[ And there came a man of God, and 
spake unto the king of Israel, and said, 
Thus saith tlie Loud, "Because the Syr- 
ians have said. The Lord is God of the 
liills, but he is not God of the valleys, 
therefore'' will I deliver all this great mul- 
titude into thy hand, and ye shall know 
that I am the Loud. 

29 And they pitched one over against 
the other seven days. And so it was, 
that in the seventh day the battle was 
joined:*^ and the children of. Israel slew 
of the Syrians a hundred thousand foot- 
men in one day. 

30 But the rest "^ fled to Aphek, into the 
city ; and "^ there a wall fell upon twenty 
and seven thousand of the men that were 
left. And Ben-hadad fled, and came into 
the city, into *an inner chamber, 

31 ^And his servants said unto him. 
Behold now, we have heard that the kings 
of the house of Israel are '^merciful kings : 
let us, I pray Ihec, ?put sackcloth on our 
loins, and ropes upon our heads, and go 
out ^0 the king of Israel; peradventure 
he will save thy life. 

32 So they girded sackcloth on their 
loins, and put ropes on their heads, and 
came to the king of Israel, and said. Thy 
servant Ben-hadad sai»h, I pray thee, let 
me live. And he said. Is he yet alive'? 
he is my brother. 

33 Now the men did diligently observe 
whether amj thing ivovhl come from him, 
and did hastily catch it : and they said. 
Thy brother Ben-hadad. Then he said, 
Go ye, bring him. Then Ben-hadad came 
forth to him; and he caused him to come 
up*" into the chariot. 

34 And Ben-hadad said unto him, The 
ciiies," which my father took from thy 
father, I will restore ; and tliovi shalt make 
streets for thee in Damascus, as my father 



• r«niali :)7 : »--■«>. b ver. 13; .lob 1-2:1B-1>>. c r«alml0.-16. 
i PKalm 18:43. «• Jer. 48 : ^4 ; Luke 13:4. » Or. from tliam- 
hrr to chamhcr; Heb. a chamber within a chamber; cliap. 22: '2.^. 
f UhihIj lti:.5. B Genesis .37 : 34. h 2 Kings, 10: l.S; Acts 8: SI. 
i cliap. l.'i : 20. j Isaiali 8 : 12. k 2 Kings, 2 : 3, .S, etc. 1 cliap. 



31. Go out to the L-iiig of Israel ; as prisoners 
of war, liable according to the then prevalent cus- 
tom to be put to death. 

.3'i. On their heads; about their necks. My 
brother ; as king. 

3.'). In the irordofthe I^nrd ; by his command. 

■10. Thyself hrrst itecided ; that according to 
his owTi statement, whicli was designed to represent 
the c.-ise of Ahab. he had forfeited his life. Ahab 
decided that he should be put to death, and thus 
virtually condemned himself for letting Ben-hadad 
go M'hen he had him in his power. 

42. Ajrfmivteil to utter deslriictioii ; required 
that he should be destroyed. Thy life — for his 
life : Ahab would himself be destroyed. Chap. 
22 : 31-37. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 

4. Wickedness persevered in not only prevents 
men from receiving anv saving benefit from divine 
466 



made in Samaria. Then said Ahab, *,tV32iJ; 
I will send thee away with this covenant. 
So he made a J covenant with him, and 
sent liim away. 

35 T[ And a certain man of the 'sons ol 
the prophets said unto his neighbor in the 
word' of the Loud, '"Smite me, I pray thee. 
And the man refused to smite him. 

36 Then said he unto him, Because thow 
hast not obeyed the voice of the Lord, 
behold, as soon as thou art departed from 
me, a lion shall slay thee. And as soon 
as he wa.s departed from himja^lion founrt 
him, and slew hiio. 

37 Then he found another man, and said. 
Smite me, I pray thee. And the man smote 
him, tso that in smiting he wounded him. 

38 So the prophet departed, and waited 
for the king by the way, and "disguisec^ 
himself with ashes upon his face. 

39 And as the king pas.scd by, he cried 
unto the king: and he said, ^ Thy servant 
went out into the midst of the batJIe ; and 
behold, a man turned aside, and broughJ 
a man unto me, and said. Keep this man : 
ifby any means he be missing, then shalJ 
thy life be for his life, or else thow shall 
payi a talent of silver. 

40 And as thy servant Tva.s busy here 
and there, he Hvas gone. And the king. 
of Israel said unto him, '^oshall thy judg- 
ment be : 'thyself hast decided it. 

41 And he hasted, and took the a.^he.s 
away from his face ; and tlie king of Isnvel 
discerned him that ho was of the prophets. 

42 And he said unto him. Thus saith 
the Lord, Becau.se thou hast let go out of 
thy hand a man whom I appointed to utter 
destruction, 'therefore thy life shall go 
for his life, and thy people for his people. 

43 And the Icing of Israel went to his 
house ''heavy and displeased, and came 
to Samaria. 



13 


:17, 


18. 


„ 


.Ten 


27 


2 


T.7.e\iie\i 


3. B 


chnp. 


13 : 2.|L 


f HeN 


*m 


itina and t 


cottnding 




o 2Samue 


,>4r2 


f '■ 


Sam. 12 


:I,etc. 


q 2Ki 


nss 


10 


24. 


t 


Hf 


:>. treiij/t. 


Ji Heb. was 


not. T 


2 Slim. 


12 


::V 




« .Tob 1.5 


«i 


M 


sltlirw 21 : 


41-4.3; 


Luke 


1<»: 22. 


> cliAp. 


22 


:3I- 


-i7. 


" 


cb»p 


21 


4. 













judgments and mercies, bnt renders them mean, 
cowardly, base, and contemptible. 

fi. Success in wickedness often increase;? men's 
pride, arrogance, haughtiness, and rapacity, em- 
boldens them in sm, and thus ripens them for niin. 

10. For men to boikst of what they have doite. is 
vain and foolish ; to boast of what they will do, pre- 
sumptuous and wicked. It is glorying in the crea- 
ture and rebelling against the Lreator. 

13. The object of God in suffering wcked rulers 
to assemble great multitudes for war and go forth to 
battle, is very diflerent from their object in doing it. 
They design to promote their own glory, and he de- 
signs to show his perfections and advance his cause. 

16. Under the influence of intoxicating liquor, 
men are self-confident and reckless, and they often 
speak and act as if all things were under their con- 
trol, and are urged on by Satan, and their own lusts, 
from one crime to another till they perish. 



Naboth murdered 



I. KINGS, XXI. 



al Jezebel's direction. 



S.^'if CHAPTER XXI. 

1 Ahab being denied Naboth's vineyard is grieved. 5 
Jezebel writing letters against Naboth, he is con- 
demned of blasphemy. 15 Ahab taketh possession 
of the vineyard. 17 Elijah denounceth judgments 
against Ahab and Jezebel. '2.3 Wicked Ahab repent- 
ing, God deferreth the judgment. 

AND it came to pa.ss after these things, 
that Naboth the Jezreelite had a vine- 
yard, which icas in Jezreel, hard by the 
palace of Ahab king of Samaria. 

2 And Ahab .spake unlo Naboth, saying. 
Give* me thy vineyard, that I may have 
it for a garden of herbs, because it is near 
unto my house: and I will give thee for 
it a better vineyard than it ; or, if it *seem 
good to thee, I will give thee the worth of 
it in money. 

3 And Naboth said to Ahab, The Lord 
forbid it me, ''that I sliould give the inher- 
itance of my fathers unto thee. 

4 And Ahab came into his "^ house heavy 
and displeased because of the word which 
Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him : 
for he had said, I will not give thee the 
inheritance of my fathers. And he laid 
him down upon his bed, and turned away 
his face, and would eat no bread. 

5 TI But Jezebel his wife came to him, 
and said unto him, ''Why is thy spirit so 
sad, that thou eatest no bread? 

6 And he said unto her, Because I spake 
unto Nabotn the Jezreelite, and said unto 
him, Give me thy vineyard for money; 
or else, if it please thee, I will give thee 
«/iO//ic/' vineyard for it : and he answered, 
I will not give tiiee iny vineyard. 

7 And Jezebel his wife said unto him, 
Dost thou now govern the kingdom of 
Israel? arise, and eat bread, and let thy 
heart be merry: "l will give thee the 
vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite. 

8 So "^she wrote letters in Ahab's name, 
and scaled them with his seal, and sent 
the letters unto the elders and to the no- 
bles that were in his city, dwelling with 
Naboth. 

9 And she wrote in the letters, saying, 



• l.Sain.8:M. * Hr\i. be gond in thine eves, h Lev. iSiiS; Num. 
36:7: Ezek. ■tfitia c .Inbriri; Halp.i:;*-!:. JN>li.i:2. • Micnli 
2:1,;. f -.'.Sim. II: M, 15: K.slli 3: 13, l:). t Heb. in Me /..p »/. 
B Deut. l.T: 13. Ii Ex. ■.'■2:-28 : l.ev.2J : 1.1, 16; Mal.;«:5<)-«); Acts 



2"2. God tfnows and can reve.al what men will do 
before they think of doing it, and yet leave them 
as free anil accountable as if he had not revealed 
wliat they would do. 

28. God hears all that wicked men say, sees all 
that they do or intend to do, and can .adapt his provi- 
dence to meet their cases, and make them the occa- 
sion of advancing his glory and the welfare of his 
people. None therefore who put their trust in him, 
and follow his directions, need to fear. Psa. "2 : 4. 

3-^. No feelings or considerations should ever hin- 
der men from obeying G-od, and when they save 
from death those whom God requires to be slain, 
they incur his displeasure, and expose themselves 
to be destroyed 



Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth * on high 
among the people : 

10 And .set two men, ^sons of Belial, 
before him, to bear witness against him. 
saying. Thou didst •'blaspheme God and 
the king. And then carry him out, and 
stone' him, that he may die. 

1 1 And the men of his city, even the 
elders and the nobles who were the inhab- 
itants in his city, did as Jezebel had sent 
unto them, and as it was written in the 
letters which she had sent unto them. 

12 They proclaimed a J fast, and set Na- 
both on high among the people. 

1 3 And there catne in two men, children 
of Belial, and sat before him : and the 
men of Belial ''witnessed against him. 
even against Naboth, in the presence of 
the people, saying, Naboth did blaspheme 
God and the king. Then 'they carried 
him forth out of the city, and stoned him 
with stones, that he died. 

14 Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, 
Naboth is stoned, and is dead. 

1 5 ^ And it came to pass, when Jezebel 
heard that Naboth was stoned, and was 
dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise, 
take ""possession of the vineyard of Na- 
both the Jezreelite, which he refused to 
give thee for money : for Naboth is noi 
alive, but dead. 

16 And it came to pass, when Ahab 
heard that Naboth was dead, that Ahab 
rose up to go down to the vineyard of 
Naboth the Jezreelite, to take possession 
of it. 

17 ^And "the word of the Lord came 
to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, 

18 Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of 
Israel, "which is in Samaria: behold, he 
is in the vineyard of Naboth, whither he 
is gone down to possess it. 

19 And thou shalt speak unto him, say- 
ing, Thus saith the Loud, Hast thou killed, 
and also taken possession? And thou 
shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith 
the Lord, pIu the place where dogs licked 



6: 


11. 


i Lev. 24: 


U. 


j lsa.58 


4. 


kEx 


20:16; Pan 


27: 


■ 2, 


Prov. 


•» 


:1«: 


Mnlaclii .1 


:.">. 


1 2 Kin 


<^, 


9:56; 


Eccl. 4. 


1 ; 


AcU7 


.17-o<'. 


m 


Pro 


•. I:10-lrt 


4: 


7. n P 


4a. 


9: 12. 


o chap 


13 


32 


2 Cliron. 


22 


:% 


p cli.ip. 22 


:aj 


; Ps.->. 7 


It. 


; Mat 7 : 2. 











CHAPTER XXI. 

8. Sealed them with his seal ; this gave them 
the king's authority, and required all to obey on 
pain of his displeasure. 

9. Proclaim a fast ; to make an impression 
that Nahoth had committed some great wickedness, 
which required him to be put to death. 

10. Suns of Belial : wicked, abandoned men. 
Stone, him ; stoning was the punishment wliich 
God commanded for blasphemy, the crime of which 
Naboth was falsely accused. Lev. 24 : 15, 16. 

1*. Samaria ;'i\\h was the capital of Ahab'.' 
kingdom, though he had a palace at Jezreel. and 
sometimes resided there. 

467 



Predictions of Elijah ■ 



I. KINGS, XXII, 



Jehoshaphat visits Ahab. 



the blood of Nabotli shall dogs lick thy 
blood, even thine. 

20 And Ahab said to Elijah, "Hast thou 
found mc, mine enemy? And he an- 
swered, I have found thcc : because thou 
hast ''sold thyself to work evil in the sight 
of the LoKD. 

21 Behold,"! will bring evil upon thee, 
and will take away thy posterity, and 
will'' cut off from Ahab him that pisseth 
against the wall, and him that is shut up 
and left in Israel, 

22 And will make thy house like the 
house of "Jeroboam the son of Ncbat, and 
like the house of "^Baasha the son of Ahi- 
jah, for the provocation wherewith thou 
hast provoked mc to anger, and made Is- 
rael to sin. 

23 And of s Jezebel also spake the Lord, 
saying. The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the 
wall" of Jezreel. 

24 Him that dieth of Ahab in the city 
the dogs shall eat; and him that dieth in 
the field shall the fowls of the air eat. 

25 1[But '"there was none like unto 
Ahab, which did sell himself to w"ork 
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, 
whom Jezebel his 'wife t stirred up. 

26 And he did very abominably in fol- 
lowing idols, according to all things as 
did the ^Amorites, whom the Lord cast 
out before the children of Israel. 

27 And it came to pass, when Ahab heard 
those words, '' that he rent his clothes, and 
put 'sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, 
and lay in sackcloth, and went softly. 

28 And the word of the Lord came to 
Elijah the Tishbite, saying, 

29 Seestthou how "'Ahab humbleth him- 
self before me"? "because he humbleth him- 
self before me, I will not bring the evil 
in "liis days: but in Phis son's days will 
I bring the evil upon his house. 



» clmp. 18: 17. bver.aS; 2 Kings, 17: 17: Isa.60:l; 62:3; 
Roin.7:14. e c!iap.l4:10. il Ex.Win.fi; 2King8,9:8. o cliap. 
1S:29. f clmp. 1«:S,11. b 2 Kmg9,9:3S,37. * Or, ditch, k cliap. 
16 : 30, 31 ; ver. 20. i Jnsli. M : IZ, 13 ; Eccl. 7 : 26. t Or, incited. 
j Gen. 16:16; 2Kings, 21:11. kJocl2:H,13. 1 .Tonali 3: 6 10. 



20. Sold thyself ; abandoned himself to wicked- 

IN.'JTRIXTION.S. 

4. Covetou.sness is idolatry; and if the heart be 
under its power, and cannot obtain its wishes, it 
may at any time bo rendered miserable. Even little 
things that cannot be obtained, but are inordinately 
desired, may make a man wretched. 

7. Iiespotic power in the hand of man or woman 
under the control of wickedness, is a terrible curse, 
and liable at any time to be employed in the com- 
mission of the most outro^^cous and abominable in- 
justice and cruelty. 

9. No plans are .so wicked that men who are dis- 
posed may not find some wicked enou^fji to aid in 
executing them ; and no forms of injustice and' cru- 
elty are more execrable, and none will receive a 
deeper condemnation, than those which are perpe- 
trated under the cover of religion and law. 
468 



CHAPTER XXII. ^^'c';^; 

1 Ahab, seduced by false prophets, according to the 
word of Micaiah. is.slain at Ramoth-gilead. 37 The 
dogs lick up his blood, and Ahaziah succeedeth him. 
41 Jehoshaphat 's good reign, ■l.'j His acts. 50 Je- 
horam succeedeth him. 51 Ahaziah's evil reign. 

AND they continued three years with- 
out Avar between Syria and Israel. 

2 And 1 it came to pass in the third year, 
that Jehoshaphat the kingof Judah came 
down to the king of Israel. 

3 And the king of Israel said unto his 
servants, Know ye that ^Eamoth in Gil- 
ead i.f ours, and we be Estill, and take it 
not out of the hand of the king of Syria? 

4 And he said unto "Jehoshaphat, Will 
thou go with me to battle to Ramoth-gil- 
ead? And Jehosliaphat said to the king 
of Israel, 'I am as thou art, my people as 
thy people, my horses as thy horses. 

5 And Jehoshaphat said unto the king 
of Israel, "Inquire, I pray thee, at the 
word of the Lord to-day. 

6 Then the king of Israel gathered the 
prophets" together, about four hundred 
men, and said unto them. Shall I go against 
Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear'? 
And "they said, Go up; for the Lord shall 
deliver it into the hand of the king. 

7 And Jehoshaphat said, ''Is there not 
here a prophet of the Lord besides, that 
we might intiuire of him? 

8 And the kingof Israel said unto Jehosh- 
aphat, There /.v yet one man, Mieaiah tlie.^on 
of Imlah, by whom we may inquire of the 
Lord: butl^hatchim : forhedothnol proph- 
esy good concerning me, but evil. x\nd Je- 
hoshaphat said, Let not the king say so. 

9 Then the king of Israel called an ^^oth- 
cer, and said. Hasten liithcr Mieaiah the 
son of Imlah. 

10 And the king of Israel and Jehosha- 
phat the king of Judah sat each on his 
throne, having put on their robes, in a 



n Ex. 10 : 3. n Isa. 66 : 2. « 2 Kings, 20 : IH. p 2 Kings, 9 : 25. 
q 2Cliron. 18:2, etc. r Deut 4:43; .losli. iO: 8. % Hrh. silent 
from taking it. • Proverb.? I : 10 ; 2 Cor. 6:14. 12 Kings. 3 : 7. 
u Prov. 3:6; Jer. 21:2. v cli:ip. IS: 19. wjer.6:3l. x 2 Kings, 
3:11. yPsa.34:2l. ^ Or, eunuch. 



16. Men who have the power and the right to 
prevent crime, and yet suffer it for the sake of shar- 
ing its gains, are partakers in the guilt of those who 
commit it, and will share in their plagues. 

"20. Sinners are apt to be enemies to those who, 
by the command of God, denounce his wrath against 
them, and to feel as if such persons were their ene- 
mies. But this is a great mist.ake. They hate 
their sins, and lament the ruin these occasion. 
Mat. 23 : 37. 

2.3. Ringleaders in transgression will be distin- 
guished in their punishment ; and though e.\ternal 
humiliation may secure temporal favors, nothing 
short of real penitence and hearty forsaking of sin 
will save from its endless consequences. 

CHArTER XXII. 

.3. Ramoth ; a city of Gad, east of Jordan. 
6. Propkets ; false prophets. 



TIic false proplicts. 



I. KINGS, XXII. 



3Iica ia h's prediction. 



aic.'m^' void* place in the entrance of the 
gate of Samaria ; and all the prophets 
prophesied before them. 

1 1 And Zcdckiah the son of Chenaanah 
made him horns of iron : and he said, Thus 
sailh the Lord, With these shalt Ihon push 
the Syr ians, uuti 1 thou have consumed t lie m. 

12 And 'all the prophets prophesied so, 
saying, Go up to Ilamoth-gilead, and '' pros- 
per : for the Lord shall deliver it into the 
king's hand. 

13 And the messenger that was gone to 
call Micaiah spake unto him, saying. Be- 
hold now, the words of the pr«»pliets(/ec/(z/-e 
good unto the king with one mouth : let thy 
word, I pray thee, be like the word of one 
of them, and speak that ivhich is ""good. 

14 And ^licaiah said, As the Lord liv- 
cth, ■'what the Lord saith unto me, that 
will I speak. 

15 ^So he came to the king. And the 
king said unto him, INIieaiah, shall we go 
against Ilamoth-gilead to battle, or shall 
we forbear? And he answered him. Go, 
and prosper: for the Loud shall deliver 
it into the hand of the king. 

16 And the king said unto him, How 
many times shall I adjure thee tliat thou 
tell me nothing but that which is true in 
the name of the Lord"? 

17 And he said, I saw all *" Israel scat- 
tered upon the hills, as sheep that have 
not a shepherd : and the Lord said. These 
have no master: let them return every 
man to his house in peace. 

18 And the king of Israel said unto Jc- 
hoshaphat. Did I not tell tliee that he would 
prophesy no good concerning me, but evil? 

19 And he said, Hear thou therefore the 
word of the Lord: I ""saw the Lord sit- 
ting on his throne, and all the ^host of 
heaven standing by him on his right hand 
and on his left. 

20 And the Lord said, Who shall t per- 
suade Ahab, that he may go up and fall 
at Kamoth-gilead? And one said on this 
manner, and another said on that manner. 

21 And there came forth a spirit, and 
stood before the Lord, and said, I will 
persuade him. 



* Hel). ri.mr. • K7.ek!e1 I3:K-!I: Micali .1:11. k .loh 9:*. 
c l8H.:iO:IO. <l Num.W:S8; 54:13; .Fer. -M : iW ; Aitil!0:«; 
G.il. 1:10 <• Zeili l:l:7; Mat. !>:n6. f Isn. 6: 1-1; Dm. 7:<>, 10. 
I! .loh 1:6: I'sa. im:2l: M.it 0.5:31; Hev. S:ll. i Or, dtcriw. 
h .ludj. 9:i3; .lob 1<2: 16; Exrk. 14:9; -2 Tliess. ■2:10-1-;. i Milt 



1.5. (?o, and prosper ; this is supposed to ha\"e 
been spoken ironically, and in a manner that show- 
ed the king that Micaiah did not expect hiin to 
prosper. 

17. / sail' ; a representation of what would t.%ke 
place at the battle, upon Ahab's death. Ver. .36. 

19. I sni(< ; a representation of what was then 
going on for the deception and ruin of Ahab. 

2'!. T/ie Lord hath put a li/iiig spirit in the 
mouth of all these thy prophets ; an instance of 



22 And the Lord said unto him. Where- 
with"? And he said, I will go forth, and I 
will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his 
prophets. And he said. Thou slialt jiersuade 
him, and prevail also : go forth, and do so. 

23 Now '■therefore, behold, the Loud 
hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of all 
these thy prophets, and the Lord hath 
spoken evil concerning thee. 

24 But Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah 
went near, and 'smote Micaiah on the 
check, and said, Wliich way went the Spirit 
of the Lord from mc to speak unto thee? 

25 And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt 
see in that day, when thou shalt go ^iuto 
an^ inner chamber to hide thyself. 

26 And the king of Israel said, Take 
Micaiah, and carry him back unto Amon 
the governor of the city, and to Joash the 
king's son ; 

27 And say, Thus saith the king. Put 
this fellow in the J prison, and feed him 
with bread of ''aflliction and with water 
of affliction, until I come in peace. 

28 And Micaiah said, 'If thou return at 
all in peace, the Lord hath not spoken 
by me. And he said, "•Hearken, people, 
every one of you. 

29 So the king of Israel and Jehosha- 
phat the king of Judah went up to Ra- 
moth-gilcad. 

30 And the king of Israel said unto Je- 
hoshaphat, HI will disguise myself, and 
enter into the battle ; but put thou on thy 
robes. And the king of Israel "disguised 
himself, and went into the battle. 

31 But the king of Syria commanded 
his thirty and two captains that had rule 
over his chariots, saying. Fight neither 
with small nor great, save only with the 
king of Israel. 

32 And it came to pass, when the cap- 
tains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that 
they said, Surely it is the king of Israel. 
And "they turned aside to fisht against 
him : and Jehoshaphat cried out. 

33 And it came to pass, when the cap- 
tains of the chariots perceived that it irns 
not the king of Israel, that they turned 
back from pursuing him. 



•?« : 6S ; Arts 23 : •:. t 


Or. 


fr 


jm chamber to chax 


nher. 


5 Hel.. a 


chamher in 


a chamber 


cl 


Hp. 


20:30. 


1 Jr 


r. 38 


:ti: 


AitH ft: 18; 


Kev. -2 : 10. 


k Deut. 11 


in 


; Isa. :!0 : 20 


1 


Nun 


1. 16 


.^.l; n.'ut. 


1« : -.'O, iZ. 


m Mat. 13 


:9, 


43. 


/I Or, 


,rhc 


n he 


9cat 


/t» dlfffuire 


himtelf. n 


■iChron.M 


2-2 


° 


Prov. 13 


■:o. 









the manner in which things that take pl.ice, in the 
providence and under the government of God, are 
;iscribed to him ; he sutTered those false prophets to 
tell lies, and by their lie.«. as a punishment of Ahab 
for his sins, to deceive him to liis destruction. 

"25. Thou shalt see ; know who speaks the truth, 
you or I. 

27. Bread of affliction ; coarse and scanty fare. 

30. Disguise lui/srlj; so array iiimself as not 
to be known to be king. 

469 



Death of Ahab. 



I. KINGS, XXII. 



AhaziaK's leicked reign. 



34 And a certain mnii drew a bow *at a 
venture, and smote the king of. I.srael be- 
tween the joint.s tof the harue.s.s: where- 
fore lie said unto the driver of his ehariot, 
Turn thy hand, and earry me out of the 
ho.st; for I am ^ wounded. 

3.5 And the battle * increased that day: 
and the king was stayed up in his chariot 
against the Syrians, _ and died at even: 
and tlic blood ran out of the waund into 
the ilinidst of the chariot. ; 

36 And there went a proclamation 
throughout the host about the going down 1 
of the .sun, saying,* Kvcry man to his city, ! 
and every man to his own country. 

37 •[ So the king died, and *was brought , 
to Samaria; and they buried the king in 
Samaria. 

38 And one washed the chariot in the 
pool of Samaria; and the dogs licked up 
his blood; and they washed his armor; 
according unto the word of the Lord 
which he ''spake. 

3i) Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, 
and all that he did, and the "^ ivory house 
which he made, and all the cities that he 
built, are they not written in the book of 
the Chronicles of the kings of Israel"? 

40 So Ahab slept with his fathers; and 
Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead. 

41 ^And ''Jchoshaphat the son of Asa 
began to reign over Judah in the fourth 
year of Ahab king of Israel. 

42 .lehoshaphatu'fi.s thirty and five years 
old when he began to reign; and he 
reigned twenty and Ave years in Jerusa- 
lem. And his mother's name was Azu- 
bah the daughter of Shilhi. 

43 And*' he walked in all the ways of 
Asa his father; he turned not aside from 
it, doing that which was right in the eyes 



* Hel>. ill hit timpliciln. 2S.iin. 15: II. t Hrl). nnd tlie breast- 
plalr. % Heh. mnde tick. % Hi-h. atcendril. || Heb. bniom. 
• verses 17, 28. * Hch. come. 1> ihap. 21 : P(. c Amos 3:15. 
<1 2Cliron.J0:31,Plc. « SCIiroii. I7:.3. f iKinxs, 8: IS; 3Chron. 



34. At a venture; shooting into the midst of 
the Israelites, but without taking aim at any one. 

35. Accordiiisr unto the tcord of the Lord ; 
chap. 21 : 19 ; 2 Kings, 9 : 2-5, 26. 

39. The ivonj honae ; a house adorned with 
ivory, or precious ornaments made of elephants' 
tu.sk s. 

43. Tlie tvays of Asa-; chap. l-T : 11-1.'). 

48. Ezion-geher ; chap. 9 : 20. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. Intimate connections with (he wicked, and 
readiness to form coalitions with them, are exceed- 
ingly dangerous, and often lead to the most disas- 
trous results. 

6. False teachers are nuinerous. and they en- 
deavor to ingratiate themselves with tlio.se who em- 
ploy them by consulting their wishes, pandering to 
their pleasures, and aiding in accomplisliing their 
favorite designs. 

13. Many seem to think it unwise for ministers 
to conline themselves to truth and duty ; that it 
would be better to go with the multitude, and do 
470 



of the Lord: nevertheless the high ^B^c.'b".' 
places were not taken away ; for the peo- 
ple otfered and burnt incense yet in the 
high places. 

44 And .lehoshaphat made "^peace with 
the king of Israel. 

45 Now the rest of the acts of Jehosha- 
phat, and his might that he showed, and 
how he warred, arc they not written in 
the book of the Chronicles of the kings of 
Judah ? 

46 And the remnant of the ^sodomites, 
which remained in the days of his father 
Asa, he tool#out of the land. 

47 There was then no ''king in Edom : a 
deputy was king. 

48 Jchoshaphat tmadc 'ships of JTar- 
shish to go to Ophir for gold : but they 
went not; for the ships were broken at 
Ezion-geber.'' 

49 Then said Ahaziah the son of Ahab 
unto Jchoshaphat, Let my servants go 
with thy servants in the ships. But Jc- 
hoshaphat Avould not. 

50 T[And 'Jchoshaphat slept with liis 
fathers, and was buried with his fathers 
in the city of David his father: and Jc- 
horam his son reigned in his stead. 

51 Tl Ahaziah'" the .son of Ahab began 
to reign over Israel in Samaria the sev- 
enteenth year of-Jehoshaphat king of Ju- 
dah, and reigned two years over Israel. 

52 And he did evil in the sight of the 
Lord, and walked in the "way of his fa- 
ther, and in the way of his mother, and 
in the way of "Jeroboam the son of Ncbat, 
who made Israel to sin: 

53 For he served ^ Baal, and worshipped 
him, and provoked to anger the Lord ^od 
of Israel, according to all that his father 
had done. 



19:2; 2Cor. fi: 14. B rliap. 14: '4 ; 15: 12. h Gen. 25:2:1; 2 Sam. 
8:14; 2 K iiiK-f, :!;!!; « : 20. f Or. Iiati ten tliipt. i 2 Cliron. 20 : 3.i, 
vU: j chap. 10:22. k chap. 9:26. I 2 Cliron. 21 : I. m ver. 40. 
n chap. 16: :!0, etc. o chap. 12 : 2S-.'!3. p Juilg. 2:11. 



what is popular, especially with the rich and pow- 
erful. 

18. True ministers will proclaim only the truth 
and will of God. Of course they can promise no 
good to those who continue in sin, and on tliis ac- 
count they are often hated. 

23. As a punishment for their sins, God some- 
times sutTers wicked men to be deluded by false 
teachers and evil spirits, and under that delusion to 
be destroyed. 

28. They who disbelieve the word of God, will 
learn the truth of his declarations by their fnltilineiit. 

'.V). No efforts of the wicked to escape the evils 
which God intends to bring upon them, will be suc- 
cessful. 

34. Every arrow which flies is under the direction 
and control of God, ,^nd — though often without the 
intention of men — always accomplishes his di'signs. 

38. Animals, in following the instincts ,and appe- 
tites which God h.TS given them, may be instru- 
ments of his wrath against the wicked, and the 
means of fuUillini: his declarations concerning thein. 



THE 

SECOND BOOK OF THE KINGS, 

COMMONLY CALLED, 

THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE KINGS. 



Bo^r- CHAPTER I. 

I Moab rebelleth. 2 Ahaziah, sending to Baal-z«biib, 
hath his judgment by Elijah. 5 Elijah twice bring- 
eth fire from heaven upon them whom Ahaziah sent 
to apprehend him. 13 He pitieth the third captain, 
and, encouraged by an angel, telleth the king of his 
death. 17 Jehoram succeedeth Ahaziah. 

THEN Moab "rebelled against Israel 
. after the death of Ahab. 

2 And Ahaziah fell down through a 
lattice in his upper chamber that iras in 
Samaria, and was sick : and he sent mes- 
sengers, and said unto them, Go, inquire 
of Baal-zebub the god of ''Ekron whether 
I shall "^recover of this disease. 

3 But the angel of the Lord said to Eli- 
jah the Tishbite, Arise, go up to meet 
the messengers of the king of Samaria, 
and say unto them, Is it not because there 
is not a God in Israel, that ye go to inquire 
of ^ Baal-zebub the god of Ekron ? 

4 Now therefore thus saith the Lord, 
Thou* shalt not come down from that 
bed on which Ihou art gone up, but shalt 
surely die. And Elijah departed. 

5 T[And when the messengers turned 
back unto him, he said unto them. Why 
are ye now turned back? 

6 And they said unto liim, There came 
a man up to meet us, and said unto us, 
Go, turn again unto the king that sent 
you, and say unto him, "Thus saith the 
Loud, Is it not because there is not a God 
in Israel, that thou sendest to inquire of 
Baal-zebub the god of Ekron ? '"therefore 
thou shalt not come down from that bed 



iliap. 3:.".; iSiim. 8:2 b | S;im. ."iilO, c ,lin|.. S : !), 10: 
nxs, n : :!. i Mark .1 : n. * Heb. Tlic btd whithtr thou nrt 
■ up, thou thalt not eomr down from it. ' ImI.iIi 41 : JI. iX 



CHAPTER I. 

1. Moab rehelhd ; they had before, from the 
days of David, been tributary to the Israelites. 
Chap. 3:4, 5. 

2. Lattice; or balustrade ; a light fence, or net- 
work. Bnal-zcbnb ; an idol god, El'roji ; a city 
of the Philistines, 

S, A hairy man; dressed, it is supposed, in a 
garment made of hair. Mat, 3:4, 

1(1. Ijct fire come down': this was designed to 
show that Jehovali w.as the only living and true G-od, 
and able to protect all who put their trust in him, 
IXSTRl'CTIONS. 

2. The constant liability of men to sickness and 
death, should lead all so to live as to be, at all times, 
prepared for these events. They will then have no 



on which thou art gone up, but shalt 
surely die. 

7 And he said unto them, tWhat man- 
ner of man icas he which'came up to meet 
you, and told you these words ? 

8 And they answered him, ^He icas a 
hairy man, and irirt with a girdle of leath- 
er about his loins. And he said, It is 
Elijah the Tishbite. 

9 Tlien the king sent unto him a cap- 
tain of fifty witli his fifty. And he went 
up to him : and behold, he sat on the top 
of a hill. And he spake unto him. Thou 
man of God, the king hath said, Come 
down. 

10 And Elijah answered and said to the 
captain orf fifty, If I be a man of God, then 
let ''fire come down from heaven, and 
consume thee and thy fifty. And there 
came' down fire from heaven, and 'con- 
sumed him and his fifty. 

1 1 Again also he sent unto him another 
captain of fifty with his fifty. And he 
answered and said unto him, man of 
God, thus hath the king said, Come down 
quickly, 

12 And Elijah answered and said unto 
them. If \ be a. man of God, let fire come 
down from heaven, and consume thee 
and thy fifty. And the fire of (Jod came 
down from heaven, and consumed him 
and his fifty. 

13 IJ.Vnd he sent asain a captain of the 
third fifty with liis fifty. And the third 
captain of fifty went up, and came and 



f I Cliron, 10: 13; Psn. Ifi:4. t H.-l.. Vhtil wis Hit manner of tht 
man? « Zcrli. 13: 4 ; M:>t.3;-« h Sum. Ili: 3.-.; I.tik<->): =.4 ;'H<;b. 
I2:;9. i lKin;«, 18:24; Dan. 3:C.V j rliiip. 2 : « ; .\ct» .i:.i,9. 



occasion for anxiety, and no inclination to turn away 
from .Tehovah in applying for help. 

3. Applying to false gods, is .acting as if .Tehovah 
were not the only living and true God ; and is highly 
provoking to Him who will not give his glory to an- 
other, nor his praise to gr.aven iin.ages, 

0, It is sometimes necessary for good men, in 
order to honor God, to disobey the highest e:irthly 
authority ; and even to be instrumental in the de- 
struction of those who rebel against him, 

13. The only way for wicked men finally to escape 
the judgments of God, is by humble submission to 
him, hearty acknowledgment of his authority, and 
fervent supplication for his mercy, 

l-'). When God commands, his people may visit 
in safety their greatest persecutors, and proclaim 
without fear his truth and will concerning them. 
471 



Death of Ahaziah. 



II. KINGS, II. 



Elijah taken up to heaven. 



fell* on *his knees before Elijah, and be- Lord will take away thy master *n"f:'tS6; 
sought him, and said unto him, man of from thy head to-day '? And he said, Yea, 
God, I pray thee, let my life, and the life I know i( ; hold ye your peace. 



of these fifty thy servants, be "precious 
in thy sight. 

14 Behold, there "^came fire down from 
heaven, and burnt up the two captains of 
the former fiftie.**, with their fifties : there- 
fore let my life now be precious in thy 
sight. 

15 And the angel of the Lord said unto 
Elijah, Go down with him : be not afraid 
of him. And he arose, and went down 
with him unto the king. 

16 And he said unto him, Thus saith 
the Lord, ''Forasmuch as thou hast sent 
messengers to inquire of Baal-zebub the 
god of Ekron, is it not because there is 
no God in Israel to inquire of his word? 
therefore thou shalt not come down ofli" 
that bed on which thou art gone up, but 
shalt surely die. 

17 1[So he died according to the word 
of the Lord which Elijah had spoken. 
And Uehoram reigned in his stead, in 
the second year of Jehoram the son of 
.lehoshaphat king of Judah ; because he 
had no son. 

18 Now^ the rest of the acts of Ahaziah 
which he did, arc they not written in tlie 
book of the Chronicles of the kings of Is- 
rael? 

CHAPTER II. 

1 Elijah, taking his leave of Elisha, with his mantle 
divideth .Tordan, 9 and, granting Klisha his request, 
is taken np by a fiery chariot into heaven. 12 Eli- 
sha, dividing Jordan with Elijah's mantle, is acknow- 
ledged his successor. 16 The yonng prophets, hardly 
obtaining leave to seek Elijah, could not find hira. 

19 Elisha with salt healetii the unwholesome wa- 
ters. '£i Bears destroy the children that mocked 
Elisha. 

AND it came to pass, when the Lord 
would "take up Elijah into heaven by 
a whirlwind, that Elijah went with Eli- 
sha"" from Gilgal. 

2 And Elijah said unto Elisha, Tarry 
here, I pray thee ; for tlie Lord hath sent 
me to Beth-el. vVnd Elisha said unto him, 
As^ the Lord livetli, and as ^ thy soul liv- 
eth, I will not leave thee. So they went 
down to Beth-cl. 

3 And the 'sons of the prophets that 
were at Bcth-el came I'orlh to Elisha, and 
said unto him, Knowest thou that the 



• Hi-l.. '/"lUfrf. •Ii>n.fi6:2. b lSnm.2fi:21 : riin.7-2: H; llfi:l.i. 
' vet. 10, i;. ■• vprse fi. f The neooml year tiiat Jthiyram was 
Prarer, ami tlie eiglitffentli ofjthoihaphat, rlinp. .1 : 1, e Gen. r> : 5J. 
( lKing(i,l!):'21. t.Wt.A:i. h vcr. 4,6; rlinp. H:M; 1 .Sam. I r2& 



CHAPTER n. 
3. The soils of the prophets ; youn^ men in- 
.structcd. it is supposed, by the prophets in semina- 
ries established for th.Tt purpose. 



4 And Elijah said unto him, Elisha, tar- 
ry here, I pray thee; for the Lord hath 
sent me to Jericho. And he said, Js the 
Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will 
not leave thee. So they came to Jericho. 

5 And the sons of the prophets that iccre 
at Jericho came to Elisha, and said unto 
him, Knowest thou that the Lord will 
take away thy master from thy head to- 
day ? And he answered, Yea, I know 
it ; hold ye your peace. 

6 And Elijah said unto him. Tarry, I 
pray thee, here ; for the Lord hath sent 
me to Jordan. And he said. As the Lord 
liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not 
leave thee. And they two went on. 

7 And fifty men of the sons of the proph- 
ets \A"ent, and stood ^to vie%v afar off: and 
they two stood by Jordan. 

8 And Elijah took his 'mantle, and wrap- 
ped it together, and smote the waters, and 
they'' were divided hither and thither, so 
that they two went over on dry ground. 

9 ^And it came to pass, when they were 
gone over, that Elijah said unto Elisha, 
Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be 
taken away from thee. And Elisha said, 
I pray thee, 'let a double portion of thy 
spirit be upon me. 

10 And he said, Thou hast tasked a hard 
thing : nevertheless, if thou see me irhcn 
I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto 
thee ; but if not, it shall not be so. 

1 1 And it came to pass, as they still went 
on, and talked, that behold, there appeared 
a '"chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and 
parted them both asunder; and Elijah 
went up by a whirlwind into heaven. 

12 T[And Elisha saw it, and he cried. 
My" father, my father, the chariot of Is- 
rael, and the horsemen thereof! And he 
saw him no more : and he took hold of 
his own clothes, and rent them in two 
pieces. 

13 He took up also the mantle of Elijah 
that fell from him, and M'cnt back, and 
stood by the II bank of Jordan ; 

14 And he took the mantle of Elijah that 
fell from him, and smote the waters, and 
said. Where j'.s- the Lord God of Elijiih? 
And when he also had smitten the "wa- 



i 


ver 


r.,-, 1 


i; r 


,n 


p. 4: 


i.rsR 


; 0:1 ; 


IK 


n-. 


;n::!r 


■ t 


Hel.. 1.1 ..« 




III' 


>• <IffO 


in.'t 




J IK 


int-R, 


l<):i:i, 


I't. 


k V, 


r M: 


Kx 


U:':i; .1. 


H 


H- 


17. 


Ni 




. ■-•7 : 


;ii. 


i Hel. 


do 


tr ha 


rd in 


aik 


it». m il 


fi 


17 


I'm. 


ini 


4 


" 


•Lap 


11: U 


II 


Hel 


.hp. 


X 


er. K 



14. Where is the Lord God of Elijah ? let him 
ni.anifest his presence .nnd power, as he had been 
wont to do unto Elijah. They ported; by this 
G-od showed that he was with Elisha, as he had 



9. A d'liihlr portion : he wished a double portion been with Elijah, and that his request, verse f. 
of the iiifluenres of the Holy Spirit. , was granted. 

■17-i 



Unwholesome tvaters healed. 



II. KINGS, III. 



Mocking children destroyed. 



B c' BotT ters, they parted hither and thither : 
and Elisha went over. 

15 And when the sons of the prophets 
which were to "view at Jericho saw him, 
they said, The spirit of Elijah doth rest 
on Elisha. And they came to meet him, 
and bowed themselves to the ground be- 
fore him. 

1 6 T[And they said unto him, Behold now, 
there be with thy servants fifty *strong 
men ; let them go, we pray thee, and seek 
thy master : lest peradventure the '' Spirit 
of the Lord hath taken him up, and cast 
him upon tsome mountain, or into some 
valley. And he said. Ye shall not send. 

17 And when tlicy urged him till he was 
ashamed, he said. Send. They sent there- 
fore fifty men ; and they sought three days, 
but found him not. 

18 And when they came again to him, 
for he tarried at Jericho, he said unto 
tliem. Did I not say unto you. Go not"? 

19 1[And the men of the city said unto 
Elisha, Behold, I pray thee, the situation 
of this city is pleasant, as my lord secth : 
but the water is naught, and the ground 
barren. i 

20 And he said. Bring me a new cruse, 
and put salt therein. And they brought 
it to him. 

21 And he went forth unto the spring of 
the waters, and cast the "^ salt in there, and 
said. Thus saith the Lord, I have ''healed 
these waters ; there shall not be from 
thence any more death or "barren land. 



• ver. 7. ' Heli.sansn/sticnglh. b 1 Kings, 18: 1-2 ; Acts 8: 3^1. 
t Heii. one n/the mnuntain.f. f Heh. causing to misctiny. c Lev. 
2:13; Mat.5:13; Mark tf : .iO. <1 chap.4:4l; Ex. In:-25; Kzek. 



1-5. Bowed themselves ; acknowledging him as 
their teacher in the place of Elijah. 

17. Was ashamed ; any longer to refuse. 

19. Naught; had. 

23. Little children; young persons. Go itp. 
thou bald head ; an expression of the contempt of 
these young idolaters for the presence and office of 
the aged prophet. 

2-1. Cursed them in the vame of the Lord ; 
this was intended to show God as the protector of 
his people and the punisher of idolatry. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. At whatever time or in whatever way men 
are removed from this world, it is God wlio removes 
them ; and although his reasons may not be known 
by creatures, yet they are always the wisest and the 
best, and we should bow submissively and cheer- 
fully to his holy will. 

2. It is a great privilege to be. with wise and 
holy men who realize that they are near the close 
of life, and who are expecting soon to exchange 
earth for heaven. 

8. No obstructions will meet a soul that is ripe 
for heaven, which true faith will not overcome. It 
can, when called to do so, go through Jordan on dry 
grrfund, and rise to God in a chariot of fire. 

9. It is right to desire a double portion of the 
spirit which prepares good men for usefulness and 
for glory; and attending upon their instructions, 
uniting with them in devotion, and mini-stering to 



22 So the waters were healed unto this 
day, according to the saying of Elisha 
which he spake. ' 

23 1[ And he went up from thence unto 
Beth-cl : and as he was going up by the 
way, there came forth little "^childrcn out 
of the city, and ^mocked him, and said unto 
him, Go up, thou bald head ; go up, thou 
bald head. 

24 And he turned back, and looked on 
them, and ''cursed them in the name of 
the Lord. And there came forth two she 
bears out of the wood, and tare forty and 
two children of them. 

25 And he went from thence to mount 
Carmel, and from thence he returned to 
Samaria. 

CHAPTER III. 

1 Jehoram's reign. 4 Mesha rebelleth. 6 Jehoram. 
with Jehoshaphat, and the king of Edom, being dis- 
tressed for want of water, by Elisha obtaineth water, 
and promise of victory. 21 The Moabites. deceived 
by the color of the water, coming to spoil, are over- 
come. '.JG The king of Moab, by sacrificing the king 
of Edom'.s son, raiseth the siege. 

"iVrOW 'Jehoram the son of Ahab began 
-LN to reign over Israel in Samaria in the 
eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of 
Judali, and reigned twelve years. 

2 And he wrought evil in the sight of 
the Lord ; but not like his father, and like 
his mother : for he put away the ^ image 
of J Baal that his father liad made. 

.3 Nevertheless he cleaved unto ''the sins 
of Jeroboam the spii of Nebat, which made 
Israel to sin ; he departed not therefrom. 



47:8,9. e Psa. I07:M, 34. f .lob l«: 18; 30: I. 8, etc. It .M.it. 
•27 : at, etc. h Gen. rt : li ; Judg. 9 : 20, .57 ; t.nm. 3 : tS. i iliap. 1:17. 
\ Heb. ttalue. i 1 Kinp*, 16 : 3-2. k 1 Kings, 1-2 : -28-32. 



their vi-ants, are fruitful means of obtaining such a 
blessing. 

14. Though the wisest and best of men are re- 
moved from earth, God can make their successors 
wiser and better than they ; so that the light, not 
only of his ministers and individual Christians, but 
of his church, shall be as the light of the morning, 
growinjj brighter and brighter to the perfect day. 

16. The wisdom of age and experience cannot by 
any methods of instruction be imparted to the young. 
There is much, very much, which thev need to know, 
that nothing but experience will effectually teach 
them. 

19. There are many places and conditions which 
are externally very pleasant, and yet are internally 
barren and bitter. 

21. Divine kindness, power, and grace, can make 
a wilderness become like Eden, and a desert like 
the garden of God. 

23. The wickedness of parents is often followed 
and sometimes exceeded by that of tlieir children, 
and the curse of God on the children becomes the 
means of punishing the parents, till those who have 
been mutual and successful tempters, become mu- 
tual and dreadful tormentors. 

CHAPTER III. 
3. Cleaved unto the sins of Jeroboam ; though 
he put awav the image of Baal, he still continued 
to worship the golden calves. 1 Kings, 12:28, 29. 
473 



3Ioab rcvoUcth from Israel. 



II. KINGS, III. 



The Moabites defeated. 



4 TIAnd jNIesha king of Moab was a 
sheepmaster, and * rendered unto the king 
of Israel a hundred thousand ''lambs, and 
a hundred thousand rams, Avith the wool. 

5 But "^it came to pass, when Ahab 
was dead, that the king of Moab rebelled 
against the king of Israel. 

6 TTAndkingJehorain went out of Sama- 
ria the same lime, and numbered all Israel. 

7 And he went and sent to Jchoshaphat 
the king of .ludah, saying, The king of 
Moab hath rebelled against me : wilt thou 
go with me against ^loab to battle 1 And 
he said, I will go up : '' I am as thou art, 
my people as thy people, and my horses 
as thy horses. 

8 And he said, Which way shall we go 
up 1 And he answered, The way through 
the wilderness of Edom. 

9 So the kingof Israel went, and the king 
of Judah, and the kingof Edom : and they 
fetched a compass of seven days' journey : 
and there was no water for the host, and 
for the cattle *that followed them. 

10 And the king of Israel said, Alas, 
that the Lord hath called these three 
kings together, to deliver them into the 
hand of Moab ! 

11 But "Jchoshaphat said, I.s there not 
here a prophet of the Lord, that we may 
inquire of the Loud by him"? And one 
of the king of Israel's servants answered 
and said, Here is Elisha the son of Sha- 
phat, which "^poured water on the hands 
of Elijah. 

12 And Jehoshaphat said, The word of 
the Lord is with him. So the king of 
Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of 
Edom went down to him. 

1 3 And Elisha said unto the king of Israel, 
Whafs have I to do with thee"? ''get thee 
to the 'prophets of thy father, and to the 
prophets of thy mother. And the king of 
Israel said unto liim. Nay : for the Lord 
hath called these three kings together, to 
deliver them into the hand of Moab. 

14 And Elisha said, Jj.v the Loud of 
hosts livcth, before whom I stand, surely, 
were'' it not that I regard the presence of 
Jcliosliaphat the king of Judah, I would 
not look toward thee, nor see thee. 

15 But now bring me a 'minstrel. And 



• 2Sam. 8:2; Pirn. 108:9.10. bl»:i.lh:l. c cliiip. 1 : 1 ; 8: 


;'0 


<» lKing«, 2;M. * Hell. n«M(ir/«<. Ex. 11. -8. « 1 King«,2-2 


:7. 


f Luke 2!::fi; .lolin i:i : ft, 11; I Tim. fi:|0, e Kvckiel 14 


:t. 


h.Iudg 10:14: Prov.l:2»; Jrr.'::2«. i 1 Kiiiss, [8: ly. j cli 


rip. 


5;IK. 1 Kiiii;*, 17: 1. kP»n.l5:4. llSain.lO:5. m F.7.ek. I 


3; 



8. The wilderness ofEdovi ; south of the Dead 
sea. 

11. Poured water ; in wasliing one's hands it 
•vms then customary for an attendant to do tliis. 

14. Not look toward tlice ; not deign to notice 
him, or regard his request, because of liis idolatry. 

lo. A miimtrcl ; one who could play on a musi- 
cal instrument in praising God ; and thus aid in 
474 



it came to pass, when the minstrel Vc.^S 
played, that the "'hand of the Lord came ' 
upon him. ^. 

16 And he said, Thus saith the Lord, i 
3Iake" this valley full of ditches. 

17 For thus saith tlie Lord, Ye sliall not 
see wind, neither shall ye see rain ; yet ' 
that valley shall be tilled with water, that 

ye may drink, both ye, and your cattle, 
and your beasts. ' 

18 And this is bttt a light thing in the 
sight of the Lord : he will deliver the 
Moabites also into your hand. ,i 

19 And ye shall smite every fenced city, 
and every choice city, and shall fell every 
good "tree, and stop all wells of water, and 
mart every good piece of land with stones. 

20 And it came to pass in the morning, 
when the Pmeat-ofl'ering was oflered, that 
behold, there came water by the way of 
Edom, and the country was filled with 
water. 

21 ^And when all the Moabites heard 
that the kings were come up to fight against 
them, they ^gathered all that were able 
to t put on armor, and upward, and stood 
in the border. 

22 And they rose up early in the morn- 
ing, and the sun shone upon the water, j 
and the Moabites saw tlie water on the 
other side as red as blood : 

23 And they said, This is blood : the 
kings are surely II slain, and they have 
smitten one another : now therefore, 
Moab, to the spoil. 

24 And when they came to the camp of 
Israel, the Israelites rose up and smote the 
Moabites, so that they fled before them : 
but they *went forward smiting the ^lo- 
abitcs, even in their country. 

25 And they beat idown the cities, and 

on every good piece of land cast every j 
man his stone, and filled it; and they 
stopped'' all the wells of water, and felled | 
all the good trees : tonly in Kir-haraseth ; 
left' they the stones thereof ; howbcit the 
slingers went about it, and smote it. i 

26 'I And when the king of Moab saw 
that the battle was too sore for him, he 
took with him seven hundred men that 
drew swords, to break through even unto 
the king of Edom : but thcv could not. 



s 


:I4; 8: 


1. n cliiilv 4 


::i. " 


D 


ut. -10: 19 


,•20. 


t H 


-b. tfrieve. 


p 


K.X. •2^> 


30, 40. X 


H^h. wcr 


cried togeth 


--. » 


Heb 


gird him 




If with 




II 


■leb. deil, 


tjfrd. * 




n,'te 


n it, eren 




niting. 


q Isn. 37 : 


■.'(). 


r Ge 


1. •- 


«:l.=i. f 


Hch. 


inlit he left the 


ttunes thereof in Kit 


■hn 


rateth. 


• 


Isn. Iti : 7 


11. 







preparing the mind of the prophet to be directed by 
him. 1 Sam. 10 : 5. 

18. A light thing ; only a small part of what 
God will do. 

2.5. Kir-haraseth ; a strongly fortified place in the 
land of Moab; called also Kir-haresh,Isa. 16: 7, 11. 

26. To brink through; through the forces of 
the king of Edom, and so perhaps escape. 



The ividow^s oil multiplied. 



II. KINGS, IV. 



The woman of Shuncm. 



S.c'e'f- 27 Then he took his eldest "son 
that should have reigned in his stead, and 
offered him/o>- a ''burnt-offering upon the 
"wall. And there was great indignation 
against Israel : and they departed from 
him and "^returned to their own land. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1 I'llisha multiplioth the widow's oil. 8 He giveth a 
son to the good Shunammite. 18 He raiseth again her 
dead son. 3S At Gilgal he healeth the deadly pot- 
tage. 4"2 He satisfieth a hundred men with twenty 
loaves. 

"jVTOW there cried a certain, woman of 
j_\ the wives of the '' sons of the proph- 
ets unto Elisha, saying, Thy servant my 
husband is dead ; and thou knowest that 
thy servant did fear the Loru : and the 
creditor" is come to take unto him my 
two sons to be bondmen. 

2 And Elisha said unto her, What shall 
I do for thee'? tell me, what hast thou in 
the house ? And she said, Thy handmaid 
hath ""not any thing in the house, save a 
pot of oil. 

3 Then he said, sGo, borrow thee vessels 
abroad of all thy neighbors, even empty 
vessels ; * borrow not a few. 

4 And when thou art come in, thou shalt 
shut the door upon thee and upon thy sons, 
and "^ shalt pour out into all those vessels, 
and thou shalt set aside that which is full. 

5 So she went from him, and shut the 
door upon her and upon her sons, who 
brought the vessels to her; and she poured 
out. 

t) And it came to pass, when the vessels 
were full, that she said unto hor son, Bring 
me yet a vessel. And he said unto her, 
There is not a vessel more. And the oil 
stayed. 

7 Then she came and told the man of 
God. And he said. Go, sell the oil, and 
pay thy t debt, and live thou and thy 
children of the rest. 



a .Mi 


'»ii i; 


7 


b 


Amos a 


1. 


C \M 


.37:37. 


d 


I Kin? 


8, 20::iS. 


' Lev. 


iK:3fl 




Matlliew 18: 


M. 


1 IK 


ngx, 17: 


H. 


fch. 


p. 3:lfi; 


Koin. • 


:1T. 


* 


Or 


leant, h 


Ms 


rkfi: 


17-44 : f 


:5-( 


; .loll 


; 4:7-9; 


Kiili. 3 


:20. 


t 


Or, 


creditor. 


* 


Hel) 


there w 


as a 


day. 


i .)osli. 



27. Offered him ; .as a sacrifice to his idols, hop- 
ing in that way to obtain their help. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Men may refuse to cgnimit, or may break off 
some sins, ana yet continue to practise others ; but 
without a heart to hate and forsake all known sins, 
they must perish. 

7. When men engage in projects without acknow- 
ledging God or seeking his direction, especially when 
they join the wicked in the prostecution of their plans, 
they may expect to be brought into trouble, and will 
liave special reason for gratitude if they escape de- 
struction. 

11. In times of danger, it is always safest to go 
to (rod, and ask counsel of him. 

It. From regard to his people, the Lord often 
bestows great blessings not only on them, but on 
others with whom they are connected ; and tlie 



8 If And +it fell on a day, that Elisha 
passed to 'Shunem, where was a great 
woman ; and she ^constrained him to eat 
bread. And so it was, tJiat as oft as he 
passed by, he turned in thither to eat 
bread. 

9 And she said unto her hu.sband. Be- 
hold now, I J perceive that this is a holy 
man of God, which passeth by us contin- 
ually. 

1 Let ''us make a little chamber, I pray 
thee, on the wall ; and let us set for him 
there a bed, and a tabic, and a stool, and 
a candlestick : and it shall be, when he 
cometh to us, that he shall turn in thither. 

11 And it fell on a day, that he came 
thither, and he turned into the chamber, 
and lay there. 

12 And he said to Gehazi his servant. 
Call this Shunammite. And when he 
had called her, she stood before him. 

13 And he said unto him. Say now unto 
her. Behold, thou hast been 'careful for us 
with all this care ; what is to be done for 
thee? wouldcst thou be spoken for to the 
king, or to the captain of the host 1 And 
she answered, I dwell among mine own 
people. 

14 And he said, What then is to be done 
for her? And Gehazi answered. Verily 
she hath no child, and her husband is old. 

15 And he said. Call her. And when 
he had called her, she stood in the door. 

16 And he said, '"About this il season, 
according to the time of life, thou shalt 
embrace a son. And she said. Nay, my 
lord, Hlou man of God, "do not lie unto 
thy handmaid. 

17 And the woman "conceived, and bare 
a son at that season that Elisha had said 
unto her, according to the time of life. 

18 1' And when the child was grown, it 
fell on a day, that he went out to his fa- 
ther to the reaper.?. 



Iil:18. i Hvh. laid Iwld on liim. jMaUfirlfi. k MnLJ0:4l,.|:; 
Mark 9:41; Hch. 1:) : 2 ; I Peter, 4:3. 1 Heh. fi : 10. id Grnesia 
1H:I0, 14. 11 Heb. K( «»ii:. n ver. .28. o Psalm 113: 9; l.uke 
1 : 3fi. 



wicked may thus receive favors, which the}' would 
otherwise never obtain. 

16. God requires men in their troubles, not only 
to seek his help, but to show by their actions that 
they believe him and are willing' to follow his di- 
rections; and unless thev do this, they cannot rea- 
sonably expect that he will grant them relief. 

'23. Things often appear to the wicked to be very 
different from what they really are ; and as they do 
not feel their need of divine guidancg. and do not seek 
it, they have no security again.st fatal deception. 

27. The devices of men to atone lor their sins and 
obtain help from idols, are sangiiinary and cruel. 
They leave the heart wedded to its lusts, and are 
utterly vain. 

CHAPTER IV. 

8. Skiinem; a city in the tribe of Issachar. A 
great woman ; one of great influence. 
475 



Tlie Shunam/nili's son raised. 



II. KINGS, IV. 



The deadly pottage healed. 



19 And he said unto his father, My head, 
my head ! And he .said to a lad, Carry 
him to hi.s mother. 

20 And wlien he liad taken liim, and 
brought him to his mother, he sat on her 
knees till noon, and then died. 

21 And she went up, and laid him on 
the bed of the man of God, and shut the 
door upon him, and went out. 

22 And she called unto her hu.sband, and 
said, Send me, I pray thee, one of the young 
men, and one of the asses, that I may run 
to the man of God, and come again. 

2.3 And he said, Wlierefore will thou go 
to him to-day ? it is neither'new-iiioon, nor 
sabbath. And she said, It shall be *well. 

24 Then she saddled an ass, and said to 
her servant. Drive, and go forward ; tslack 
not thy riding for me, except I bid thee. 

25 So she went, and came unto the man 
of God to mount ''Carmel. And it came to 
pass, when the man of God saw her afar 
off, that he said to Gehazi his servant. 
Behold, yonder is that Shunammitc : 

26 Run now, I pray thee, to meet her, 
and say unto her. Is it well with thee 1 is 
it well with thy husband "? is it well with 
tlie child ? And she answered. It is "^well. 

27 And when she came to the man of 
God to the hill, she caught him tby the 
feet : but Gehazi came near to thrust her 
away."* And the man of God said, Let 
her alone ; for lier soul is H-exed within 
her : and the Lord hath " hid it from me, 
and hath not told me. 

28 Then she said. Did I desire a son of 
my lord? did I not "^say. Do not deceive 
mel 

29 Then he said to Gehazi, ^Gird up 
thy loins, and take my staff in thy liand, 
and go thy way : if thou meet any man, 
salute'' him not; and if any salute thee, 
answer him not again : and lay my 'staff 
upon the face of the child. 

30 And the mother of the child said. As 
the Lord livelh, and ns thy soul liveth, 
I will not leave thee. And he arose, and 
followed her. 

31 And (iehazi passed on before them, 
and laid the stalT upon the face of the 
child; but there icas neither voice, *nor 
hearing.ll Wherefore he went again to 



• Num. 28:11. * Keh, ptact. f Heli. reilrain not for me to 
ride, b rlinp. 2 : 2.1 : Isn. 3.1:2. c I.ev. 10:3: Job 1:21,22; Psa. 
:i9:;t. t Heb. *.v /ii»/^tf. Mnt. 2a:9. d Mat. 20:. 31. a Heb. 
bitter. 1 Sam. 1 : 10. e Genesin 18:17. t vcr. Hi. k cliap. !) : 1. 
h Luke 10: 4. i F.xftiluH 7 : I'.l; A<t«19:l2. \\ \\i-\i. nlltntion. 
j MarliS:39;.loIinll:ll. k ver.4; Miil.li:f.. I 1 Kin-», 17: 20,21. 



27. The Lord hath hid it; the prophets did 
not know more than other men, except as the Lord 
taiiKht them. 

38. Adrarlh; scarcity of food. Srrthe; boil. 

30. Knew — not ; that they were liiirtful. 

40. Death ; that which was hurtful and might 
cause death. 

476 



The child is not 'awaked. 

32 And when Elisha was come into the 
house, behold, the child was dead, and 
laid upon his bed. 

33 He went in therefore, and ''shut the 
door upon them twain, and ' prayed unto 
the Lord. 

34 And he went up, and lay upon the 
child, and put his mouth upon his mouth, 
and his eyes upon liis eyes, and his hands 
upon his hands : and ""he stretched him- 
self upon the child ; and the flesh of the 
child waxed warm. 

35 Tlien he returned, and walked in the 
house *to and fro ; and went up. and stretch- 
ed himself upon him : and the child sneezed 
seven times, and the child opened his eyes. 

36 And he called Gehazi, and said, Call 
this Shunammite. So he called her. And 
when she was come in unto him, he said. 
Take up thy son. 

37 Then she went in, and fell at his 
feet, and bowed herself to the ground, 
and "took up her son, and went out. 

38 T[And Elisha came again to "Gilgal : 
and there was a p dearth in the i land ; and 
the sons of the prophets were 'sitting be- 
fore him : and he said unto his servant, 
Set on the great pot, and seethe pottage 
for the sons of the prophets. 

39 And one went out into the field to 
gather herbs, and found a wild vine, and 
gathered thereof "wild gourds his lap full, 
and came and shred them into the pot of 
pottage : for they knew them not. 

40 So they poured out for the men to eat. 
And it came to pass, as they were eating 
of the pottage, that they cried out, and 
said, thou man of God, there is death in 
the pot. And they could not eat thereof. 

41 But he said. Then bring 'meal. And 
he cast it into the pot ; and he said, Pour 
out for the people, that they iriay eat. And 
there was no tharm in the pot. 

42 HAnd there came a man from "Baal- 
shalisha, and "brought the man of God 
bread of the tirst-fruits, twenty loaves of 
barley, and full ears of corn ^in the husk 
thereof. And he said. Give unto the peo- 
ple, that they may eat. 

43 And his servitor said, "What, should 



mActa20:10. * Heb. once hither, and oneet/iither. n Hrb. 1 1 : 3.1. 
ochnp.2:l. prliap.8:l. qclia|i.2:3. r I.uke 10 : 39 : Art* 
22:3. • I»a. f>:4; Mat, 15:13; Heb. 12: 1.1. I cliap. 2 : 21 ; Ej. 
IB: 28; .John 9: 6. f Heb. evil thing. nlSam. 9:4, 7. r 1 Cnr 
9: 11; Gal. 6:6. ^ Or, in hit tcrip, or garment. wLuki>9:17. 
John 6: 11-13. 



41. No harm ; nothing that would injure them. 

42. Baal-shalisha ; in the tribe of Ephraim. 

43. Servitor; servant. 

IN.STRUCTIOXS. 
1.' The power to take and h'lld men as bondmen in 
payment for debt, is a source of great distress, from 
wliich all propermcans should be usedtoafford relief. 



Naaynan the Syrian 



II. KINGS, V 



is aired of his leprosy 



I set this before a hundred men I ' unto me to recover a man of his leprosy? 



He said again, Give the people, that they 
may eat: for thus saith the Loud, *They 
shall eat, and shall leave thereof. 

44 So he set it before them, and they did 
eat, and left thereof, according to the ^vord 
of the Lord. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 Naaman, by the report of a captive maid, is sent to 
Samaria to be cured of his leprosy. 8 Klisha, send 
ing him to Jordan, cureth him. 15 He refusin; 
Naaman's gifts, granteth him some of the earth. 'JO 
Gehazi, abusing his master's name unto Naaman, is 
smitten with leprosy. 

"IVrOW ''Naaman, captain of the host of 
JL-N the king of Syria, was a great man 
with* his master, and thonorable, because 
by him the Lord had given i deliverance 
unto Syria : he was also a mighty man in 
valor, but he teas a leper. 

2 And the Syrians had gone out by com- 
panies, and had brought away captive out 
of the land of Israel a little maid ; and she 
waited^ on Naaman's wife. 

3 And she said unto her mistress. Would 
God my lord were H with the prophet that 
is in Samaria ! for he would *recover him 
of his leprosy. 

4 And one went in, and told his lord, 
saying. Thus and thus said the maid that 
is of the land of Israel. 

5 And the king of Syria said. Go to, go, 
and I will send a letter unto the king of 
Israel. And "^he departed, and took twith 
him ten talents of silver, and six thousand 
pieces of gold, and ten changes of raiment. 

6 And he brought the letter to the king 
of Israel, saying. Now when this letter is 
come unto thee, behold, I have therewith 
sent Naaman my servant to thee, that thou 
mayest recover him of his leprosy. 

7 And it came to pass, ''when the king 
of Israel had read the letter, that he rent 
his clothes, and said, '^Am I God, to Hcill 
and to make alive, that this man doth send 





• Mat. H:50; 15:37 


b I 


.i.ke4 


■.'7. * Hfl 


.hrfore 


t 


Or.gra- 


CI 


n/T ; 


Heb. lifted up. 


or accepted 


'n countena 


nee. t 


Or 


victorv. 


<> 


HpI> 


„.,» l,e/o,e. II 


H.l> 


hef.„- 


c. " Heb. oather 


n. 


c .1,,,,,. 


S 


«.>> 


1 S.im. <l : 8. t 


H.-I). 


in hit 


hand. <l 


sa. 37 : 


14. 


• Gen. 


3C 


.■2. 


f Dcut .T3:39; 


1 S.lli 


. 2 : «. 


% IK.ngs 


■20 : 7 ; 


l.iik 


e 11:54. 



9. A disposition to relieve and assist the pious, is 
peculiarly pleasing to God, and a means of secur- 
ing the special manifestations of his presence artd 
favor. 

13. The truly pious are grateful for the favors 
thev receive, and are disposed to make the best re- 
turn in their power. 

IS. Some of the highest joys and the deepest sor- 
rows come to parents through the medium of their 
children. But both are from God, and in both he 
.should be acknowledged as doing all things well. 

'2G. True piety inspires a deep interest in the hap- 
piness of others, especially of benefactors; and leads 
us to delight in communicating enjoyment, as we 
have opportunity, to all, especially to the people of 
God. 

39. Though every creature of God is good for the 
purpose for which he made it. yet there are many 

31 



Wherefore consider, I pray you, and see 
how he ^seeketh a quarrel against me. 

8 ^And it was .to, when Elisha the man 
of God had heard that the king of Israel 
had rent his clothes, that he sent to the 
king, saying. Wherefore hast thou rent thy 
clothes ? let him come now to me, and \u 
shall ''know that there is a prophet in Israel. 

9 So Naaman came with his horses and 
with his chariot, and stood at the door of 
the house of Elisha. 

10 And Elisha sent a messenger unto 
him, saying. Go and "wash in Jordan 
seven Mimes, and thy flesh shall come 
again to thee, and thou shalt be clean. 

1 1 But Naaman was wroth, and went 
away, and said. Behold, I ^thought, ^Hc 
will surely come out to me, and stand, 
and call on the name of the Lord his God. 
and ^strike his hand over the place, and 
recover the leper. 

12 Arc not HAbana and Pharpar, river.^ 
of Damascus, better than all the waters 
of Israel? may I not wash in them, and 
be clean? So he turned and went away 
in a rage. 

13 And his servants came near, and 
spake unto him, and sajd, 'My father, if 
the prophet had bid thee do soriie great 
thing, wouldest thou not have done it? 
how"' much rather then, when he saith 
to thee. Wash, and be clean? 

14 Then "went he down, and dipped 
himself seven times in Jordan, according 
to the saying of the man of God : and his 
flesh came again "like unto the flesh of a 
little child, and he was p clean. 

15 IfAnd he returned to the man of God. 
he and all his company, and came, and 
stood before him : and he said, Behold, now 
I^knowthat //if/T/VnoGod in all the earth, 
but in Israel ; now therefore, I pray thee, 
take a ''blessing of thv servant. 



h 1 Kings, 1S:3«, 37 


F.lek. 2 : S ; a:l : .■«. i Jolin 9:7. j Jasli. 
uithmytelf: Heh.taid. k.)alin4:4K. $ Reh. 


ii:4-ia jOr.Jrtirfi 


move up and down. 


II Or, Amana. 1 rhnp. 2 : 12 ; Gen. 41 : «. 


m iror.l::i,27. n 


F.zek.47:l-iJ; Zedi.l3:l; 14:8. o Joh:0:«5. 


P I.uke 4:27. q Da 


n. 2:47: 3:2'.); fi:2K,27. r Oen. 33: 11. 



things which he did not make for food or drink ; 
and men cannot so use them without producing 
sickness and death, and, if they know these to be 
their effects, sinning against God. 

42. Kindness to the good because they are good, 
blesses not only those who bestow and those who 
receive it, but often multitudes of others ; and while 
it breathes good-will to men, it brings glory in the 
highest to God. 

CHAPTER Y. 

,3. T/ie nrop/iet ; Elisha. 
4. jris lord ; Ben-hadad the king of Syria, 
i'). He ; Naaman. 
10. Clcciii ; entirely healed. 
13. Some great thing ; something very diffi- 
cult or e-xpensive. 

15. A blessing : a gift or present. 

477 



Gehaz 



II. KINGS, VI, 



and punishment. 



16 But he said, ^As the Lord liveth, be- 
fore whom I stand, I will receive ''none. 
And he urj^'cd him to take if : but he re- 
fused. 

17 And Naaman said, Shall there not 
then, I pray thee, be given to thy servant 
two mules' burden of earth? for thy ser- 
vant will henceforth offer neither burnt- 
offering nor sacrifice unto other gods, ""but 
unto the Lord. 

18 In this thing the Lord pardon thy 
servant, that when my master goeth into 
the house of Rimmon to worship there, 
and he '^leaneth on my hand, and I bow 
myself in the house of Rimmoii : when 
I bow *^down myself in the house of Rim- 
mon, the Loud ""pardon tliy servant in this 
thing. 

19 And he said unto him, ^Go in peace. 
So he departed from him a little *way. 

20 ^But Gchazi, the servant of Elisha 
the man of God, said. Behold, my master 
hath spared Naaman this Syrian, in not re- 
ceiving at his hands that which he brought : 
but, as the Lord liveth, I will run after 
him, and ''take somewhat of him. 

21 So Gehazi followed after Naaman. 
And when Naaman saw him running after 
him, he lighted down from the chariot to 
meet him, and said, tJs all welH 

22 And he said. All is well. My master 
hath sent me, saying, Behold, even now 
there be come to me from mount Ephraim 
tM-o young men of the sons of the proph- 
ets : give them, I pray thee, a talent of 
silver, and two changes of garments. 

23 And Naaman said, 'Be content, take 
two talents. And he urged him, and bound 



■ clmp. 3:W. Ij Genesis H : i£l ; Mat 10:8; Ants 20:3:!-:)r>. 
<• 1 ThesB. 1 : 9. <lcliap.7:2. eEx.-20:5. f 2 Cliron. 30: 18, 19. 
g Mark 5 j 34 ; Luke 7 : 60, • Heb. piece of ground, as Genesis 
35 :i6. b Hab. 2:9; 1 Timotby, 6 : 9, 10. t Heb. Is there peace ? 



3.7. Two mules'' burden of earth ; with this it 
is supposed he intended to build an altar or mound, 
on wnich to offer sacrifices to Jehovah. 

18. Kimnvon; an idol god. When I how down 
myself; it has been supposed that he meant not as 
liimst'lf worshipping the idol, but only in attending 
on. and performing a civil duty to the king. 

22. My mastt r Initli sent me ; this was false. 

25. Wetit 110 whither ; another falsehood. 

26. Went not my heart? did I not perceive? 

27. For ever ; as long as they should live. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. No honors or successes can secure men from 
trouble ; and for the blessings they obtain by their 
own efforts, or those of others, they are indebted to 
God. 

3. Servants may be the means of great blessings 
to their masters ; and the good influence even of 
a pious child may be felt through a nation, and to 
distant countries and times. 

6. Despotic rulers often feel and act as if minis- 
ters of (rod in the discharge of their duties were to 
be subject to their control. 

10. Ministers who understand and do their duty, 
will not be elated nor overawed by the presence of 
the rich and great; but will make known to them 
478 



two talents of silver in two bags, ^B"d-.'^: 
with two changes of garments, and laid 
them upon two of his servants ; and they 
bare them before him. 

24 And when he came to the ttower, he 
took them from their hand, and J bestowed 
them in the house : and he let the men go, 
and they departed. 

25 But he went in, and ''stood before 
his master. And Elisha said unto him, 
Whence comcst thou, Gehazi? And he 
said, Thy servant went *no whither. 

26 And he said unto him, 'Went not 
my heart with thee, when the man turned 
again from his chariot to meet thee 1 Is 
it a time to receive money, and to receive 
garments, and olive-yards, and vineyards, 
and sheep, and oxen, and men-servants, 
and maid-servants? 

27 The '"leprosy therefore of Naaman 
shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed 
for ever. And he went out from his pres- 
ence a "leper as ichite as snow. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 Elisha, giving leave to the young prophets to en- 
large their dwellings, causeth iron to swim. 8 He 
discloseth the king of Syria's counsel. 13 The army, 
which was sent to Dothan to apprehend Elisha, is 
smitten with blindness. 19 Being brought into Sa- 
maria, they are dismissed in peace. 24 The famine 
in Samaria causeth women to eat their own children. 
30 The king sendeth to slay Elisha. 

AND the " sons of the prophets said unto 
Elisha, Behold now, the place where 
we dwell with thee is too strait for us. 

2 Let us go, we pray thee, unto Jordan, 
and take thence every man a beam, and 
let us make us a place there, where we 
may dwell. And he answered, Go ye. 



i chap, 6:3. | Or, tecret place, j Joshua 7:21; Isaiah 29 : l.i. 
k E7.ek. 33 : 31. t/ Heb. not hither or thither. I Prov. 12 : U), 22. 
m Isa. .'•.9:2, 3; Ho8eal0:13. n chap. 15:6; Numbers 12: 10. 
o chap. 4 : .38. 



with plainness and fidelity the will of God, whether 
they will hear or forbear. 

13. Servants are sometimes wiser and better than 
their masters, and give them advice which it would 
be well for them to follow. 

14. Simply follovi-ing the directions of God, how- 
ever plain and easy, is more efficacious than the 
most skilful, laborious, and costly schemes of men. 
These tend to feed and strengthen human pride ; 
the other to exalt and glorify God. 

16. Disinterested kindness, and doing good with- 
out expecting or wishing any earthly rew-ard, is 
adapted to convey to men a correct impression of 
true religion. 

20. The unprincipled, selfish, and covetous think 
it wise to take any course in which, without danger, 
they can get money. 

25. Men who will sacrifice conscience for money, 
will tell lies in order to keep it ; but the wetting or 
keeping of money by lying, instead of being in the 
end a source of profit, will occasion most dreadful 
loss. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1. The place ; the building or apartment they 
occupied. Strait ; narrow, small. 



Godh care of EUsha. 



II. KINGS, VI. 



Famine in Samaria. 



B.^els" 3 Andonesaid,'Becontent,Ipray 
thee, and go with thy servants. And he 
answered, I will go. 

4 So he went with them. And when they 
came to Jordan, they cut down wood. 

5 But as one was felling abeam, the *axe- 
head fell into the water : and he cried, and 
said, Alas, master! for it was borrowed. 

6 And the man of God said, Where fell 
if? And he showed him the place. And 
he*" cut down a stick, and cast it in thith- 
er ; and the iron did swim. 

7 Therefore said he. Take it up to thee. 
And he put out his hand, and took it. 

8 1[ Then the king of Syria warred against 
Israel, and took counsel with his servants, 
saying, In such and such a place shall be 
my t camp. 

9 And the man of God sent unto the king 
of Israel, saying. Beware that thou pass 
not such a place ; for thither the Syrians 
are come down. 

10 And' the king of Israel sent to the 
place which the man of God told him and 
warned him of, and *= saved himself there, 
not once nor twice. 

1 1 Therefore the heart of the king of 
Syria was sore "^troubled for this thing; 
and he called his servants, and said unto 
them, Will ye not show me which of us 
is for the king of Israel 1 

12 And one of his servants said, -None, 
my lord, king : but ^ Elisha, the prophet 
that is in Israel, telleth the king of Israel 
the words that thou speakest in thy ''bed- 
chamber. 

13 T[ And he said, Go and spy where he 
is, that I may ssend and fetch him. And 
it was told him, saying. Behold, he is in 
Dothan.*" 

14 Therefore sent he thither horses, and 
chariots, and a %reat host : and they came 
by night, and compassed the city about. 

15 And when the "servant of the man 
of God was risen early, and gone forth, 
behold, a host compassed the city both 
with horses and chariots. And his ser- 
vant said unto him, Alas, my master! 
how shall we do 1 

16 And he answered, Fear not: for 'they 
that be with us arc more than they that 
be with them. 



• chap. 5 : M. " Hcb. iVon. b chnp. 2 : '21. f Or, tncamping. 
c 2 Chron. M : M. d Pa.i. -18 : 4, 6 : Mnt 2 : .1, etc. J Heb. .Yi>. 
f Amos 3 : 7. f Psa. 139 : 1 -4 ; .ler. 23 : 24. I! P«nlm 37 : 32, 33 ; 
Jer. 36:2ti; Acts 23 : 12-27. k Genesis 37: 17. J Heb. Awity. 



Or 



nitttr. i aChron. 16:3; 3'2:7,8; Ps.llm 63: 18; R« 



13. jyothan ; a few miles north of Samaria. 

16. They that be with us; God, and all the 
heavenly hosts. 

18. This people; 
Syria. 



17 And Elisha prayed, and said. Lord, 
I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may 
see. And the Lord opened the eyes of 
the young man; and he saw: and behold, 
the mountain tens full of J horses and char- 
iots of fire round about Elisha. 

18 And when they came down to him, 
Elisha prayed unto the Lord, and said. 
Smite this people, I pray thee, with blind- 
ness. And he smote them with ''blind- 
ness according to the word of Elisha. 

19 IfAnd Elisha 'said unto them. This 
is not the way, neither is this the city : 
follow* me, and I will bring you to the 
man whom ye seek. But he led them to 
Samaria. 

20 And it came to pass, when they were 
come into Samaria, that Elishasaid, Lord, 
open the eyes of these 7ncn, that they may 
see. And the Lord opened their ""eyes, 
and they saw ; and behold, they were in 
the midst of Samaria. 

21 And the king of Israel said unto Eli- 
sha, when he saw them. My father, shall 
I smite them ? shall I smite them ? 

22 And he answered. Thou shalt not 
smite them : wouldest thou smite those 
whom thou hast taken captive with thy 
sword and with thy bow ? set "bread and 
water before them, that they may eat and 
drink, and go to their master. 

23 And he prepared great provision for 
them : and when they had eaten and drunk, 
he sent them away, and they went to their 
master. So the "bands of Syria came no 
more into the land of Israel. 

24 ^And it came to pass after this, that 
Ben-hadad king of Syria gathered all his 
host, and went up, and besieged Samaria. 

25 And there was a great famine in 
Samaria: and behold, they p besieged it, 
until an ass's head was .<;oW for fourscore 
pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a 
cab of dove's dung for five pieces of silver. 

26 And as the king of Israel was pass- 
ing by upon the wall, there cried a woman 
unto him, saying, Help, my lord, O king. 

27 And he said, tif the Lord •'do not 
help thee, whence shall I help thee 1 out 
of the barn-floor, or out of the wine-press ? 

28 And the king said unto her, What 
aileth thee? And she answered, This 



8:31. icliap.2:ll; Ps.ilm .34 : 7 ; 68:17; Zecli. 


1:8; 6:1-7; 


Rev. 19: 11, 14. k Gen. 19:11. l2Sam. 16:18. » 


Heb. come ye 


after mr. m Luke 24 : 1 6, 31 . o Prov. 2,"; : 2 1 . 22 ; 


Rom. 12 : 20. 


chap. .1:2; 24 : 2. p Lev. 26 : 26 ; Jer 82 : 6 : Ezek 


4:16. f Or, 


Let not the Lose save thee, q Psa. 127: 1 ; 146:3,5 


Jer. 17:5. 



ed at Samaria, the chief city of the land they were 
invadintr. 

2'2. U'on/dest thou smite those? he would not; 
the hosts of the king of j and much less should he smite those who had been 
miraculously delivered into his power. 



19. This is vat the watf. neither is this the\ 25. A cab; between one and two quarts. Dove's 
city; they would not know Elisha till their i\-t%\dung ; supposed to be a mean kind of pulse or pea, 
were opened ; and this would not be till they arriv- 1 called by that name. 

479 



JEHsha's prediction. 



II. KINGS, VII. 



The Syrian host Jlccth. 



■woman said ualo me, Give thy "son, that 
we may eat him to-day, and we will eat 
my son to-morrow. 

29 So we boiled my son, and did eat him: 
and I said unto her on the *next day, Give 
thy son, that we may eat him : and ""she 
hath hid her son. 

30 ^And it came to pass, when the 
king heard the words of the woman, that 
he '^ rent his clothes ; and he passed by 
upon the wall, and the people looked, and 
behold, he had sackcloth within upon his 
flesh. 

.31 Then he said, ""God do so and more 
also to me, if the head of Elisha the son 
of Shaphat shall stand on him this day. 

32 But Elisha sat in his house, •■ and the 
elders sat with him; and the king sent a 
man from before him: "^but ere the mes- 
senger came to him, he said to the elders, 
See ye how this son of a s murderer hath 
sent to take away my head ? look, when 
the messenger cometh, shut the door, and 
hold him fast at the door : is not the sound 
of his master's feet behind him 1 

33 And while he yet talked with them, 
behold, the messenger came down unto 
him: and he said. Behold, this ''evil is 
of the Lord ; 'what should I wait for the 
Lord any longer? 

CHAPTER VII. 

I Klisha prophesieth incredible plenty in Samaria. 3 
Four lepers, venturing on the host of the Syrians, 
bring tidings of their flight. 12 The king, finding 
by spies the news to be true, spoileth the tents of the 
Syrians. 17 The lord who would not beliere the 
prophecy of plenty, having the charge of the gate, is 
trodden to death in the press. 

THEN Elisha said, Hear ye the word 
of the Lord; Thus saith the Lord, 
To-morrow J about this time shall a meas- 
ure of fine flour be sold for a shekel, and 
two measures of barley for a shekel, in 
the gate of Samaria. 
2 Then a lord ^on whose hand the king 





• 1 


pv. 


2f>: 


•:9; Dcut. '28:5:i-.'i7 


; Isaiiih 49 


If). 


a- 


Heb 


othtr. 


li 


IK 


npi 


a 


2fi c 1 Kingd, 21: 


27. a IK 


ngs 


19: 


2. B 


Kzek. 


n 


: l! 


iU: 


,. 


t 1 Kings, H : 6. g 


1 Kings, 18 


Ml, 


14. 


li Job 1:-21. 


1 


I>»a 


:>7 


:7 


9. j ver. 18, 111. 


f Heb. which 


I)p1o 


nged 


to the 


k 


iiff. 


Ua 


linff upon hit hand, c 


lap. 6 : 18. 


k 


Gen. 


7: U 


; Mai. 



31. // the head of Elisha — shall stand on 
him; he considered Elisha as the cause of tiie 
famine, or as guilty in not removing it. 

33. Wital should I u-ail for the Lord? sup- 
posed to be the exclamation of the king, who un- 
mediately followed his messenger to the door of 
Elisha ; implying that God was his enemy and 
there was no hope in Him. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. Borrowed articles should be used with care, and 
in due time returned, uninjured, to the owner. 

14. Wicked men often hope to prevail against 
those who have God for their protector, but ulTsuch 
liopes are vain. 

17. All who have right views will see that the ser- 
vants of God, however great their apparent danger, 
are perfectly safe under his care. 

2"2. Kindness towards enemies is good policy, as 
480 



leaned answered the man of God, "s^c.^e*! 
and said, Behold, ?/thc Lord would '' make 
windows in heaven, might this thing be? 
And he said. Behold, thou shalt see it with 
thine eyes, but 'shalt not eat thereof. 

3 1[And there were four leprous men 
at the entering in of the '"gate : and they 
said one to another. Why sit we here until 
we die ? 

4 If we say, We will enter into the city, 
then the famine is in the city, and we 
shall die there : and if we sit still here, 
we die also. Now therefore come, and 
let us fall unto the host of the Syrians : 
if they save us alive, we shall live ; and 
if they kill us, we shall but die. 

5 And they rose up in the twilight, to 
go unto the camp of the Syrians : and 
when they were come to the uttermost 
part of the c;imp of Syria, behold, there 
loas no man thurc. 

6 For the Loud had made the host of 
the Syrians to hear a "noise of chariots, 
and a noise of horses, even the noise of a 
great host : and p they said one to another, 
Lo, the king of Israel hath hired against us 
the 1 kings of the Hittites, and the kings of 
the J^gyptians, to come upon us. 

7 Wherefore they ''arose and fled in the 
twilight, and left their tents, and their 
horses, and their asses, even the camp as 
it teas, and fled for their life. 

8 And when these lepers came to the 
uttermost part of the camp, they went into 
one tent, and did eat and drink, and car- 
ried thence silver, and gold, and raiment, 
and went and hid it; and came again, 
and entered into another tent, and carried 
thence also, and went and hid it. 

9 Then they said one to another, "We do 
not well : this day is a day of good tidings, 
and we hold our peace : 'if we tarry till 
the morning light, +some mischief will 
come upon us : now therefore come, that 



3: 10. 1 ver. 17, -.'O. m 


Lev. l:!:4r>. n Kslher4:ir>; Luke 


l.'i:17, 18. o rhap. 19:7 


2Sam. 6:i4; .lob IS: 21. j. rliap. 


3:'22, etc. q 1 Kings, 10: 


2r>. r Psalm H:5; 48:4-6; Ii8:l2; 


Prov. -21:1. • Lev. Ii):18; 


Prov. Il:>2ti. 1 E.stlier4:14. J Heb. 


we shtttt find punishment. 





well as a Christian duty ; and however it may be 
received, will be the means of good to those who 
exercise it. 

■J/). None but God can fully understand the evils 
of war, or the guilt of those who are instrumental in 
needlessly inflicting them upon their fellow-men. 

31. Those who foretell the calamity of the wick- 
ed, are often treated as if they were the cause of it, 
and ^s if their removal would prevent the coming 
or continuance of threatened evils; but all e.xpec. 
tations of relief in that way will be disappointed. 

CHAPTER VII. 

2. If the Lord would innl-c wiiidows in hear- 
€71 ; he meant, that unless God should do this, the 
prediction of the prophet could not be accomplished. 

G. Hear a noise ; like that of chariots, horses, 
and a great army. 



The sicsre is raised. 



II. KINGS, VIII. 



The Shuna)nmite''s suit. 



B.c'ea"'' "^vc may go and tell the king's 
household. 

10 So they came and called unto the 
porter* of the city : and they told them, 
saying, We came to the camp of the Syri- 
ans, and behold, there ica.'i no man there, 
neither voice of man, but horses tied, and 
asses tied, and the tents as they were. 

1 1 And he called the porters ; and they 
told it to the king's house within. 

12 ^And the king arose in the night, and 
said unto his servants, I will now show 
you what the Syrians have done to us. 
They know that we be hungry ; therefore 
are they gone out of the camp to hide them- 
selves in the field, saying, When they come 
out of the city, wc shall catch them alive, 
and get into the city. 

13 And one of his servants answered 
and said. Let some take, I pray thee, five 
of the horses that remain, wliich are left 
in* the city, (behold, they are as all the 
multitude of Israel that arc left in it : be- 
hold, / say, they are even as all the mul- 
titude of the Israelites that are consumed,) 
and let us send and see. 

14 They took therefore two chariot hor- 
ses ; and the king sent after the host of 
the Syrians, saying. Go and see. 

Id And they went after them unto Jor- 
dan : and lo, all the way wa.t full of gar- 
ments and vessels, which the Syrians had 
cast away in their haste. And the mes- 
sengers returned, and told the king. 

16 And the people went out, and ^spoiled 
the tents of the Syrians. So a measure 
of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two 
measures of barley for a shekel, accord- 
ing to the "^word of the Lord. 

17 ^And the king appointed the lord on 
whose hand he leaned to hav^e the charge 
of the gate : and the people trode upon 
him in the gate, that he died, as the man 
of God had said/ who spake when the king 
came down to him. 

18 And it came to "pass as the man of 
God had spoken to the king, saying. Two 



• 2Sani. IS.'.'ri. * Heb in if. b I'anlm 68 : 1 2 ; Isi<i.ili :n : 1, 
4, '23. c ver. 1. il ver. 2. • Genesis 18 : H ; Niimters 1 1 : -23 : 
•2;(:19. ( Numbers 20: 12; Jer. 17:5, 6; Heb. 3 : 19. « clinp. 

10. Porter; the man who kept the gate. 

16. Spoiled t/i.e Cents; took them and their con- 
tents for their own use. 

17. 'The people trode upon him; in their haste 
to get food. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. However great the calamities which any 
people suffer, the Lord can remove them ; and 
interest as well as duty require all to wait upon 
him in the way of his appointment, till they obtain 
relief. 

2. Disbelief of the promises of God cuts men off 
from the blessings of their fulfilment. 

4. Though deliverance comes from Grod, it is 
ordinarily granted through the instrumentality of 



measures of barley for a shekel, and a 
measure of fine flour for a shekel, shall 
be to-morrow about this time in the gate 
of Samaria : 

19 And that lord answered the man of 
God, and said, Now, behold, ?/the Loud 
should make windows in heaven, miglit 
such a thing be ? And he said, Behold, 
thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but "^shalt 
not eat thereof. 

20 And so it fell out unto him : for the 
people trode upon him in the gate, and he 
died. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

I The Shunajnmite, having left hercountry seven years, 
to avoiJ the forewarned famine, for Elisha's miracle's 
.sake hath her land restored by the king. 7 Hazael, 
being sent with a present by Ben-hadad to Klisha at 
Damascus, afterhc had heard the prophecy, kiUeth hi.-! 
master and suocecdeth him. l(i Jehoram's wicked 
reign in Judah. 20 Edom and Libnah revolt. 23 
Ahaziah succeedeth Jehoram. 2.5 Ahaziah's wicked 
reign. 2S He visiteth Jehoram wounded, at Jezreel. 

THEN spake Elislia unto the woman, 
whose 6 son he had restored to life, 
saying, Arise, and go thou and thy house- 
hold, and sojourn wheresoever thou canst 
sojourn : for the Lord hath ''called for a 
famine ; and it shall also come upon the 
land 'seven years. 

2 And the woman arose, and did after 
the saying of the man of God : and she 
went with her household, and sojourned 
in the land of the Philistines seven years. 

3 And it came to pass at the seven years' 
end, that the woman returned out of the 
land of the Philistines : and she went fortli 
to cry unto the king for her house and for 
her land. 

4 And the king talked withJGehazi the 
servant of the man of God, saying, ''Tell 
me, I pray thee, all the great things that 
Elisha hath done. 

5 And it came to pass, as he was telling 
the king how lie had restored a dead body 
to 'life, that behold, the woman, whose 
son he had restored to life, cried to the 
king for her house and for her land. And 
Gehazi said, My lord, king, this is the 

4:18, etc. h Psalm lOi: 16: Hagsailrll. t Genesis 41 : 27. 
j cliap. n : 20, 27. k Mattbew2:8; I.ukey:9; 23:8; Joliny:27. 
1 rliap. 4:.'». 



human efforts ; and to obtain it, men must use the 
means which God has appointed for that purpose. 

9. When men are blessed with abundance, true 
wisdom, as well as real gratitude, and even self- 
interest, require that they should desire others to 
enjoy it with them. 

10. However great the improbability, or to hu- 
man appearance the impossibility, the word of the 
Lord will in due time be perfectly accomplished. 

18. The fulfilment of divine declarations is to 
some the means of salvation, and to others of de- 
' struction. 

I CHAPTER VIII. 

I 2. The laitd of the Philistines ; on the Medi- 
i terranean, south-west of Canaan. 

481 



Hazael slaycth his master. 



II. KINGS, VIII. Reign of Jchoram and Ahaziah 



woman, and thi.s is her son, -whom Elisha 
restored to life. 

6 And ■when the king asked the woman, 
she told him. So the king appointed unto 
her a certain 'officer, saying, Restore all 
thatira.s hers, and all the fruits of tlie field 
since the day that she left the land, even 
until now. 

7 ^ And Elisha came to Damascus ; and 
Ben-hadad the king of Syria was sick ; 
and it was told him, saying. The man of 
God is come hither. 

8 And the king said unto ^Hazael, Take 
a ''present in thy hand, and go, meet the 
man of God, and "^inquire of the Lord by 
him, saying, Shall I recover of this dis- 
ease? 

9 So Hazael went to meet him, and took 
a present twith him, even, of every good 
thing of Damascus, forty camels' burden, 
and came and stood before him, and said. 
Thy son Ben-hadad king of Syria hath 
sent me to thee, saying. Shall I recover 
of this disease ? 

10 And Elisha said unto him. Go, say 
unto him. Thou ^ mayest certainly recov- 
er : howbeit the Lord hath showed me 
that he shall surely '"die. 

1 1 And he settled his countenance istead- 
fastly, until he was ashamed : and the man 
of God "^wept. 

12 And Hazael said, Why weepeth my 
lord ? And he answered, Because I know 
the "Cvil that thou wilt do unto the chil- 
dren of Israel : their strong-holds wilt 
thou set on fire, and their young men wilt 
thou slay with the sword, and ""wilt dash 
their children, and 'rip up their women 
with child. 

13 And Hazael said, But what, is thy 
servant a 'dog, that he should do this 
great thing? And Elisha answered. The 
Lord hath showed ''me that thou slialt he 
king over Syria. 

14 So he departed from Elisha, and came 
to his master; who said to him, What 
said Elisha to thee? And he answered. 
He told me that thou 'shouldest surely 
recover. 

15 And it came to pass on the '"morrow, 
that he took a thick cloth, and dipped it 
in water, and spread it on his face, so that 



he died : and Hazael reigned in ^bVeii 
his stead. 

16 If And in the fifth year of .Joram the 
son of Ahab king of Israel, Jehoshaphat 
being then king of Judah, ''Jehoram the 
son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah * began 
to reign. 

17 Thirty and two years old was he 
when he began to reign ; and he reigned 
eight years in Jerusalem. 

18 And he walked in the "way* of the 
kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab ; 
for the P daughter of Ahab was his wife : 
and he did evil in the sight of the Lord. 

19 Yet ithe Lord would not destroy 
Judah for David his servant's sake, as 
he '■promised him to give him always a 
light, II (Hid to his children. 

20 l[In his days Edom ''revolted from 
under the hand of Judah, and made a 
king' over themselves. 

21 So Joram went over to Zair, and all 
the chariots with him : and he rose by 
night, and smote the Edomitcs which 
compassed him about, and the captains 
of the chariots : and the people fled into 
their tents. 

22 Yet "Edom revolted from under the 
hand of Judah unto this day. Then''Lib- 
nah revolted at the same time. 

23 And the rest of the acts of Joram, 
and all that he did, arc they not written 
in the book of the Clironicles of the kings 
of Judah ? 

24 And Joram slept with his fathers, 
and was buried with his fathers in the 
city of David: and *Ahaziah his "son 
reigned in his stead. 

25 U In the twelfth year of Joram the 
son of Ahab king of Israel did Ahaziah 
the son of Jchoram king of Judah begin 
to reign. 

26 Two and twenty years old was Aha- 
ziah when he began to reign ; and he 
reigned one year in Jerusalem. And his 
mother's name teas Athaliah,the t daugh- 
ter of Omri king of Israel. 

27 And he walked in the way of the 
house of Ahab, and did evil in the sight 
of the Lord, as did the house of Ahab : 
for he U'as the son-in-law of tlie house 
of Ahab. 



' Ot, eunuch. • I Kinc«, 19: IS. b IKinjs.U::!. c dmn. 
1:2,6. f Heh. in Ai» /land, i 1 Kings, 2-2 : 1.1. e ver. 1.5. t Hel). 
and ttt it. t I.uke 19:<l. c cliap. IO::iJ; 12:17; !.•) . 3 7 
h Psalm 137:8. 9; Amn« 1 : 3-.\ I chnp. 16 : IB ; Ho.ien l.T ■ ili • 
Amci«l:m. j IS.-imufI, 17:43. k 1 Kii)(ri,, 19 : 1ft. I vpr. 10. 
niMirali2:l. n 2Cliron. 21 : A,eti-. \ Weh rtigned. o 1 Kings, 

7. Damascus ; the capital of Syria. I 

8. Haznel ; an officer of the king of Syria. 

10. T/init maijfst — recorer ; his disease was not 
in itself mortal, and would not cause his death. | 
He shall siireh/ die ,• because, as the event showed, 1 
Hazael would kill liim. 

11. He settled his cotttitettance ; Elisha looked 

482 



22:.V3, .IS. T ver 26. q .ler. .■».■) :2.'>. 2(i; Hiiaea 11:9. r 2 Sam. 
7:i:i; I Kingn, II :3K; \!i:A; I'snim I:i2: 17. \\ Heb. eandit, or 
tamp. • Gen. 27 : 40. 11 Kings. 22 ; 47. " ver. 20. » Joshua 
21:13. * Culled Azatiali, 2 Clirnn. 22 : 6 : and Je/toaliaz. 2 Cliron 
21:17; S-l : 23. w 2 Clirnn. 22 : 1 , etc. f Or, granddaufliler, 
ver. IH. 

steadfastly at Hazael, till, foreseeing the cruelties 
Hazael would commit, he wept. 

14. Thoii s/ioiildest ; thisw&sfaise. The prophet 
said he might recover; that is, if not put to dtath 
by violence. 

1.'). He tool-; Hazael did thi.s. 

22. Libiiah ; one of the cities of Judah 



Jehu anointed kins 



II. KINGS, IX 



The house of Ahab judged. 



sou of Ahab to the war against Hazael 
king of Syria in Ramoth-gilead ; and the 
Syrians wounded Joram. 

29 And king Joram went back to be 
liealed in Jezreel of the wounds *which 
the Syrians had given him at tRamah, 
when he fought against Hazael king of 
Syria. And Ahaziah the son of Jeho- 
ram king of Judah ''went down to see 
Joram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because 
he was tsick. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 Elisha sendeth a young prophet with instructions to 
anoint Jehu at Ramoth-gilead. 4 The prophet hav- 
ing done his message fleeth. 11 Jehn, being made 
king by the soldiers, killeth Joram in the field of Na- 
both. 27 Ahaziah is slain at Gur, and buried at Je- 
rusalem. 30 Proud Jezebel is thrown down out of a 
window, and eaten by dogs. 

AND Elisha the *= prophet called one 
of the children of the prophets, and 
said unto him, ''Gird up thy loins, and 
take this box of oil in thy hand, and go 
to "Ramoth-gilead : 

2 And when thou comest thither, look 
out there Jehu the sou of Jehoshaphat the 
son of Nimshi, and go in, and make him 
arise up from '^amoug liis brethren, and 
carry him to an ^ inner chamber ; 

3 Then ^take the box of oil, ""and pour 
it on his head, and say. Thus saith the 
Lord, I have anointed thee king over Is- 
rael. Then open the door, and flee, and 
tarry not. 

4 ^[So the young man, even the young 
man the prophet, went to Ramoth-gilead. 

5 And when he came, behold, the cap- 
tains of the \\of,i were sitting; and he said, 
I have an errand to thee, captain. And 
Jehu said. Unto which of all us? And 
he said. To thee, captain. 

6 And he arose, and went into the house ; 
and he poured the oil on his head, and 



a clii>p.«:I5. * Heb. wherewilh the Si/riinis liati wounded, f Call- 
ed /J.imoM.ver. -28. bcli.it:l(). i Heh.WDUiided. c 1 Kinpi,'20:36. 
•1 clm|i.4:2M; .ler. 1:17. o chap. S ; 28. fver.,^,1!. % Heb.Mom- 
l>er ill a chamber, s 1 Kings, 19: 1& hi .S:im. 10: 1. i -2 Cliion. 
22:7. j I'aa. 75:6; Dan.2:il; 4:17,. "ii; ,'>:iO,2l. k Luke 18: 7,8; 



28. Ramoth-gilead; east of Jordan, in the tribe 
of Gad. 

29. Jezreel ; west of Jordan, in the tribe of Is- 
sachar. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. When the Lord is about to chastise a people 
for their sins, he remembers his children and sup- 
plies their wants, or sanctifies their privations to 
their highest good. 

6. The goodness of G-od is often manifested tow- 
ards his people, by inclining those in authority to 
do tliem justice and show them favor. 

S. Men who in health pay no regard to God or 
his people, in sickness or distress often apply to 
thorn for help. 

10. Of many blessings which God would other- 
wise bestow, men are often deprived by the wick- 
edness of their fellow-men. 

13. A change of circumstances often shows that 



said unto him, 'Thus saith the Lord 
God of Israel, I J have anointed thee king 
over the people of the Lord, even over 
Israel. 

7 And thou shalt smite the house of 
Ahab thy master, that I may '' avenge the 
blood of my 'servants the prophets, and 
the blood of all the servants of the Lord, 
at the hand of Jezebel. 

8 For the whole house of Ahab shall 
perish : and '" I will cut off from Ahab 
him that pisseth against the wall, and 
him that is shut "up and left in Israel : 

9 And I will make the house of Ahab 
like the house of "Jeroboam the son of 
JVebat, and like the house of PRaasha the 
son of Ahijah : 

10 And itho dogs shall eat Jezebel in 
the portion of Jezreel, and there .shall be 
none to bury her. And he opened the 
door, and fled. 

11 1[Then Jehu came forth to the ser- 
vants of his lord: and one said unto him, 
Is all wein wherefore came this ^mad 
fellow to thee? And he said unto them, 
Ye know the man, and his communication. 

12 And they said, It is false; tell us 
now. Ai)d he said, " Thus and thus spake 
he to me, saying, Thus saith the Lord, I 
have anointed thee king over Israel. 

13 Then they hasted, and took every 
man his 'garment, and put it under him 
on the top of the stairs, and "blew with 
trumpets, saying, Jehu His king. 

14 So Jeliu the son of Jehosliaphat the 
son of Nimshi conspired against Joram. 
(Now Joram had kept Ramoth-gilead, he 
and all Israel, because of Hazael king 
of Syria : 

15 But king * Joram was returned to be 
healed in Jezreel of the * wounds which 
the Syrians thad given him, when he 
fought with Hazael king of Syria.) And 



Kev,6:9,10. 1 1 Kings, l8:-»; '21 : 15,21. 


m iKingB. 14:10. n Deut. 


32::ifi. 1 Kings, 15:29. pi Kings, Irt: 


Ml. ■! ver.a-.,:)H; 1 Kings, 


21 : 2:1. r Jet. 19 : ili ; Hosea 9:7; .loll 


110:20: Arts26:24: 1 Ciir. 


4:10. iver. 6. (Mat. 21:7. u 2 Sail 


1. 1.5:10. 11 Heb. reigneth. 


* Heh. Jehoram. » chap. 8 : 28, -29. 


Hf b. tmute. 



men are much more wicked than they imagined, 
and that nothing but the grace of God keeps them 
from the commission of the most enormous crimes. 

14. A slight change in the words of a communi- 
cation may entirely alter its meaning, and convey 
to the hearers a false impression. 

15. A man's character and conduct are greatly 
influenced by liis wife; and no one should marry a 
woman who will draw him away from the service 
of God. 

27. The evil example of parents and those in au- 
thority, may extend its mischievous influence not 
only to their children, but also to their distant pos- 
terity ; and long after they are dead be instrumen- 
tal in ruining their fellow-men. 

CHAPTER IX. 
1. 0)ie of the childre)! of the prophets ; ayoung 
man who was under the instruction of Elisha and 
preparing to be a prophet of the Lord. 
4 S3 



Joram is slain. 



11. KINGS. IX. 



Ahaziah and Jezebel slam. 



Jehu said, If it be your minds, then *let 
none go fortli nor escape out of the city 
to go to tell it in .Tezrcel. 

16 So Jehu rode in a chariot, and went 
to Jezreel ; for Joram lay there. And 
Ahaziah king of Judah was come down 
to see Joram. 

17 And there stood a » watchman on the 
lower in Jezreel, and he spied the com- 
pany of Jehu as he came, and said, I see 
a company. And Joram said, Take a 
horseman, and send to meet them, and 
let him say, Is it ''peace ? 

18 So there went one on horseback to 
meet him, and said, Thus saith the king, 
f.s it peace ? And Jehu said. What hast 
thou to do with peace 1 turn thee behind 
me. And the watchman told, saying. 
The messenger came to them, but he 
cometh not again. 

19 Then he sent out a second on horse- 
back, which came to them, and said, 
Thus saith the king. Is it peace ? And 
Jehu answered. What hast thou to do 
with peace 1 turn thee behind me. 

20 And the watchman told, saying, He 
came even unto them, and cometh not 
again : and the ^driving is like the driving 
of Jehu the son of Nimshi ; for he'^driveth 
furiously.* 

21 And Joram said, ^ IMakc ready. And 
his chariot was made ready. And Joram 
king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah 
went out, each in his chariot, and they 
went out against Jehu, and II met him in 
the portion of Naboth the Jezreelite. 

22 And it came to pass, when Joram 
saw Jehu, that ho said. Is it peace, Jehu ] 
And he answered, ''What peace, so long 
as the whoredoms of thy mother "Jezebel 
and Iicr Avitchcrafts are so many ? 

23 And Joram turned his hands, and 
fled, and said to Ahaziah, There is treach- 
ery, Ahaziah. 

24 And Jehu *drew a bow with his full 
strength, and smote Jehoram between his 
arms, and the arrow went out at his heart, 
and he t.sunk down in his chariot. 

25 Then said Jehu to Bidkar his cap- 



* Heb. Ill n 


tteapir an. • 2 .Sum. 18 : 24 ; Isaiah 21:6, etc. 


k I Sam. in: 4; 


17:22; 1 King., 2: |:l. f Or. m<,rching. c Hab. 


1:6. t Heb. i 


n madneit. % Heb. Bind. || Heb. found i Isa. 


48 : 22. « Um 


. 2:20-2.1. » Huh. filUd hit hand with a how. 


f Heb. bowtd. 


t 1 KingH, 21 : 2'.1. t Heb. blofdi. t 1 KinRs, 



22. Whoredoms ; this word is used in the Old 
Testament to denote idolatry. Her vitch crafts — 
many ; expressive of the various deceitful prac- 
tices which Jezebel used to draw the people into 
idolatry. 

2•^. Laid this hurden; denounced this judfj- 
ment against him and his family. 1 Kings, 21 : 19, 
29. 

31. Zimri; 1 Kings, 16:10-18. 
INSTRUCTION.S 

3. G-od claims and exercises the right of giving 
authority to such as he chooses ; and all who are 
■181 



tain. Take up, and east him in the ^b^c.^sw! 
portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreel- 
ite : for remember how that, Avhen I and 
thou rode together after Ahab his father, 
the Lord laid this burden upon Hiim ; 

26 Surely I have seen yesterday the 
blood J of Naboth, and the blood of his 
sons, saith the Lord ; and ^ I will requite 
thee in this ^ plat, saith the Lord. Now 
therefore take and cast him into the plat 
of ground, according to the word of the 
Lord. 

27 ^ But when Ahaziah the king of 
Judah saw this, he fled by the way of the 
garden-house. And Jehu followed after 
him, and said, Smite him also in the 
chariot. And they did .<;o at the going up 
to Gur, which is by Ibleam. And he 
fled to ''INIegiddo, and died there. 

28 And his servants carried him in a 
chariot to Jerusalem, and buried him in 
his sepulchre with his fathers in the city 
of David. 

29 And 'in the eleventh year of Joram 
the son of Ahab began Ahaziah to reign 
over Judah. 

30 ^ And when Jehu was come to Jez- 
reel, Jezebel heard of it ; and she II painted 
her face, and tired her head, and looked 
out at a window. 

31 And as Jehu entered in at the gate, 
she said,' Had Zimri peace, who slew his 
master 1 

32 And he lifted up his face to tlie 
window, and said, Who is on my side 1 
who ? And there looked out to him two 
or three *eunuchs. 

33 And he said. Throw her down. So 
they threw her down : and sotne of her 
blood was sprinkled on the wall, and on 
the horses : and he trode her under foot. 

34 And when he was come in, he did 
eat and drink, and said. Go, see now this 
cursed woman, and bury her : for she is 
a king's ''daughter. 

35 And they went to bury her: 'but 
they found no more of her than the skull, 
and the feet, and the palms o{ her hands. 

36 Wherefore they came again, and 



21:19. \ Or, portion, h .losbua ir : II ; .Iiiilj. 1:27: 2 Cliron. 
22 : <). i rliap. 8 : 2.1 ; 2 Cliron. 22 : 1, 2. || Heb. put her tyei in 
pnintinff. Ezek. 23:40. j 1 Kinga, Ifi: 0-20 * Or, chamlierlnint. 
k 1 Kings, 16:31. IEccl.fi:3; Isaiali 14 : 18-20 ; Jcr. 22:l<li 

36 : :iO. 



intrusted with it are laid under peculiar obligations 
to employ it according to his will. 

21. The declarations of G-od in his word are ful- 
filled in his providence ; and though the fulfilment 
may be long delayed, in due time it will be per- 
fectly accomplished. 

27. Those who as.sociate M'ith the wicked are in 
danger of partaking in their punishment. 

36. Men mav have a conviction of the truth of 
divine declarations, and even see their fultilnient in 
the destruction of the wicked, and yet not forsake 
their sins, or flee from the wrath to come. 



Seventy sons of Ahab 



II. KINGS, X. 



slain in Jezrcel. 



B.'"'^"° told him. And he said, This is 
the word of the Lord, which he spake 
by* his servant Elijah the Tishbite, * say- 
ing. In the portion of Jezreel shall dogs 
eat the flesh of Jezebel : 

37 And the carcass of Jezebel shall be 
as ''dung upon the face of the field in the 
portion of Jezreel ; so that they shall not 
say, This is Jezebel. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 Jehu, by his letters, causeth seventy of Ahab's cliil- 
dren to be beheaded. 8 He exouseth the fact by the 
prophecy of Elijah. 12 At the shearing-house lie 
slayeth two and forty of Ahaziah's brethren. 15 He 
taketh Jehonadab into his company. 18 By subtlety 
he destroyeth all the worshippers of Baal. 29 Jehu 
foUoweth Jeroboam's sins. 32 Hazael oppresseth 
Israel. 34 Jehoahaz succeedeth Jehu. 

AND Ahab had seventy sons in Sama- 
ria. And Jehu wrote letters, and 
sent to Samaria, unto the rulers of Jez- 
reel, to the elders, and to tthem that 
brought up Ahab's children, saying, 

2 Now as soon as this letter cometh to 
you, seeing your master's sons are with 
you, and there are with you chariots and 
horses, a fenced city also, and armor ; 

3 Look even out the best and meetest 
of your master's sons, and set him on his 
father's throne, and fight for your mas- 
ter's house. 

4 But they were exceedingly afraid, and 
said, Behold, two *^ kings stood not before 
him : how then shall we stand "? 

5 And he that ivas over the house, and 
he that ivas over the city% the elders also, 
and the bringers up of the children, sent to 
Jehu, saying, ''We are thy servants, and 
will do all that thou shalt bid us : we will 
not make any king : do thou that ivhich 
is good in thine eyes. 

6 Then he wrote a letter the second 
time to them, saying. If ye be -mine, 
and if ye will hearken unto my voice, 
take ye the heads of the men your 
master's sons, and come to me to Jezreel 
by to-morrow this time. Now the king's 
sons, heiiip; seventy persons, were with 
the great men of the city, which brought 
them up. 

7 And it came to pass, when the letter 
came to them, that they took the king's 
sons, and ""slew ""seventy persons, and 
put their e heads in baskets, and sent him 
them to Jezreel. 

8 H And there came a messenger, and 



* Heb. fty tlie hand nf « 1 Kings. 21 : IX b Psii. 83 : 10 : .Ter. 
8:2;ltS:4. \ V\rh. nourishert. c cli.ip. 9 : 24, 27. d 1 Kings, 
20:4,:i-'. X Weh fm- mt. f 1 Kings, 21 : 21. f Judg. 9 : .=i, etc. 
8 Mat. H:fl, H. h , haj.. 9 : 14,24. 1 1 Sum. 3 : 19; .ler. 44 : 28. 29. 
j I Kings, 21 : 19, etc. \ Heb. Av the hnnd o/. \\ Or, acquaint- 
ance, k. Psalm 125:. 1; Trnv. 13:20. I 1 Kings, 14 : 10. » Heb. 



CHAPTER X. 

12. The shear! )ir^-liou!:e ; the place where the 
shepherds met for shearing their sheep. 



told him, saying. They have brought the 
heads of the king's sons. And he said, 
Lay ye them in two heaps at the entering 
in of the gate until the morning. 

9 And it came to pass in the morning, 
that he went out, and stood, and said to 
all the people. Ye be righteous : behold, 
I "'conspired against my master, and slew 
him : but who slew all these? 

10 Know now that there shall 'fall unto 
the earth notliing of the word of the Lord, 
which the Lord ■> spake concerning the 
house of Ahab : for the Lord hath done 
that which he spake ^by his servant 
Elijah. 

1 1 So Jehu slew all that remained of 
the house of Ahab in Jezreel, and all his 
great men, and his H kinsfolks,'' and his 
priests, ' until he left him none remaining. 

12 T[ And he arose and departed, and 
came to Samaria. And as he was at the 
shearing-house* in the way, 

13 Jehu t met with the brethren of 
Ahaziah king of Judah, and said. Who 
are ye? And they answered, We are 
the brethren of Ahaziah ; and we go 
down to ^salute the children of the king 
and the children of the queen. 

14 And he said. Take them ""alive. And 
they "took them alive, and slew them at 
the pit of the shearing-house, even two and 
forty men ; neither left he any of them. 

1 5 T[ And when he was departed thence, 
he ^ lighted on "Jehonadab the son of p He- 
chab coming to meet him : and he '! saint- 
ed him, and said to him. Is thy heart 
right, as my heart is with tliy lieart? 
And Jehonadab answered. It is. If it be, 
givei me thy hand. And he gave him his 
hand; and he took him up to him into 
the chariot. 

16 And he said, Come with me, and 
see my 'zeal for the Lord. So they 
made him ride in hi-s chariot. 

17 And when he came to Samaria, he 
slew ' all that remained unto Ahab in Sa- 
maria, till he had destroyed him, accord- 
ing to tlie saying of the Lord, which he 
spake' to Elijah. 

18 IT And Jehu gathered all the people 
together, and said unto them, "Ahab 
served Baal a little; bat Jehu shall serve 
him much. 

19 Now therefore call unto me all the 
prophets' of Baal, all his servants, and 



haute of thepherda hinding sheep, t Heh. found. % Helt. the 
peace of. m 1 Kings, M : 18. n 2 Chron. 22 : 8. % Heb. /..Kiid. 
" .ler. 35:6, etc. p 1 Clinm. 2 : .■>>. || Heb liltsted. i V.zn 
10:19. r IKings, 19:10; l'rov.27:2; Er.ek lei 3:1 : 31 ; Maltlievr 
6:'l.h. irliap. 9:8. t 1 Kings, 21 : 21. ■ 1 Kings, Hi : 31, 33. 
» I Kings, 22:6. 



15. Is thy heart right? do you favor my 
cause ? 

17. The sayitig of the Lord; 1 Kings, 21 : 21. 
4S5 



Worshippers of Baal slain. 



II. KINGS, XI. 



Wickedness and death of Jehu. 



all his priests ; let none be wanting ; for 
I have a great sacrifice to do to Baal : 
whosoever shall be wanting, he shall not 
Jive. But Jehu did // in * subtlety, to the 
intent that he might destroy the wor- 
shippers of Baal. 

20 And Jehu said, *Proclaim a solemn 
assembly for Baal. And they proclaimed 
it. 

21 And Jehu sent through all Israel: 
and all the worshippers of Baal came, so 
that there was not a man left that came 
not. And they came into the ''house of 
Baal ; and the house of Baal was t full 
from one end to another. 

22 And he said unto him that ivas over 
the v6stry, Bring forth vestments for all 
the worshippers of Baal. And he brought 
them forth vestments. 

23 And Jehu went, and*^ Jehonadab the 
son of Rechab, into the house of Baal, 
and said unto the worshippers of Baal, 
Search, and look that there be here with 
you none of the servants of the Lord, but 
the '^worshippers of Baal only. 

24 And when they went in to offer 
sacrifices and burnt offerings, Jehu ap- 
pointed fourscore men without, and said. 
If any of the men whom I have brought 
into your hands escape, he that lettctk him 
go, his " life shall be for the life of him. 

25 And it came to pass, as soon as he 
had made an end of offering the burnt- 
offering, that Jehu said to the guard and 
to the captains. Go in, and ^slay them ; 
let none come forth. And they smote 
them with the ^edgc of the sword ; and the 
guard and the captains cast them out, and 
went to the city of the house of Baal. 

26 And they brought forth the ^ images^ 
ontof the house of Baal, and ''burned them. 

27 And they brake down the image of 
Baal, and brake down the house of Baal, 
and 'made it a draught-house unto this 
day. 

28 Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of 
Israel. 

29 H Howbeit,/rom the sins of Jeroboam 
the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. 



• Job 13:7; I'rov. 2'.I:S. • Heb. Saiiclify. b 1 Kings, lH:3-2. 
f Or, so /utt timt tliey Bt»iod mouth to mouth, c ver. \h. d Mnt. 
1.1:30. 41 : 2o: 3-2, :i.T e 1 Kingn, 20 : IW. f Kxoilua 32: 27; I)eut 
I3:B-Il; E»ek.9:5-7. J Hcb l/lowfA \Heh.itatutl. i: I Kings, 
14:23. k 3Snm. 5:21; IKingK, l.'i:l:). i Kira 6 : II ; Dan. 2: 5; 
3:2». j I Kings, 12 : 2«, 29. k Eiek. 29 : 18-20. 1 ver. :» ; clinp. 



27. A draught-house ; a place to which they 
carried the filth of the city. 

INSTRUCTION.S. 

G. The sins of pari'iits are often tlie occasion of 
destruction to their children, and of various evils to 
all connected with them. 

15. Wicked men, who externally obey the com- 
mands of God, are often proud of tlicir obedience 
and disposed to proclaim it, that tliey may receive 
th'- praises of men. 

J 9. The Lord often uses one wicked man in pun- 
4SG 



Jehu departed not from after them, *B"c.'e84: 
to u'it, the golden J calves that were in 
Beth-el, and that icere in Dan. 

30 And the Lord said unto Jehu, ''Be- 
cause thou hast done well in executing 
that which is right in mine eyes, and hast 
done unto the house of Ahab according 
to all that was in my heart, thy 'children 
of the fourth generation shall sit on the 
throne of Israel. 

31 But Jehu 11 took no heed to walk in 
the law of the Lord God of Israel with 
all his "^'lieart: for he departed not from 
the "sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel 
to sin. 

32 1[In those days the Lord began *to 
cut Israel short : and ° Hazael smote them 
in all the coasts of Israel ; 

33 From Jordan teastward, all the land 
of Gilead, the Gadites, and the Reuben- 
ites, and the Manassites, from Aroer, 
which is by the river Arnon, -even 
Gilead P and Bashan. 

34 Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, and 
all that he did, and all his might, are they 
not written in the book of the Chronicles 
of the kings of Israel 1 

35 And Jehu slept with his fathers : 
and they buried him in Samaria. And 
Jehoahaz his son reigned in his stead. 

36 AndUhe timethat Jehu reigned over 
Israel in Samaria u'as twenty and eight 
years. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 .Tehoash, being saved by Jehosheba bis aunt from 
Athaliah's ma.ssaore of the seed royal, is hid six years 
in the house of God. 4 .Tehoiada, giving order to the 
captains, in the seventh year anointeth him king. 
13 Athaliah is slain. 17 jehoiada restoreth the wor- 
ship of God. 

AND"! when Athaliah the "^mother of 
2\haziah saw that her son was dead, 
she arose and destroyed ail the Usecd royal. 
2 But "Jehosheba, the daughter of king 
Joram, sister of Ahaziah, took tJoashthe 
son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among 
the king's sons u'hich ivere slain ; and they 
hid him, even him and his nurse, in the 
bed-chamber, from Athaliah, so that he 
was not slain. 



13:1,10; 14:2.1; 15:8-1-2. || Heh. olistrvcd not. m .lolin4:'24. 
n 1 Kings, 14 : 16. " Heb. to cut off the endt. o <li:.p. 8:12. 
f H«b. toward the ritinp of the sun. % Or, even to Gilead and 
Baihan. p Amos 1:3. % Heb. //i« rfn.vi were, q 2Clir<)n 22 : 10. 
r rimp, 8 ! 2(i. |) Heli. teed of the kingdom. * Jehothaheath. 
2Chron. 22:11. \Ol,Jehoash. 



ishing others, and afterwards punishes him for his 
wickedness. 

."10. E.\ternal obedience to some of the known 
commands of God, is often rewarded with external 
mercies ; but that obedience only which springs 
from the heart, and has respect to the whole will 
of God, has the promise of eternal life. 

CHAPTER XI. 
1. Destroyed all the seed royal ; so that she 
iniL'ht reign without a rival. 



Jehoash is crowned, 



II. KINGS, XI, 



and Alhaliah slain. 



tll'^t 3 And he was with her hid in the 
house of the Lord six years. And Atha- 
liah did reign over the land. 

4 11 And "the seventh year Jehoiada 
sent and fetched the rulers over hun- 
dreds, with the captains and the guard, 
and brought them to him into the house 
of the Loud, and made a covenant with 
them, and took an oath of them in the 
house of the Lord, and showed them the 
king's son. 

5 And he commanded them, saying, This 
is the thing that ye shall do : A third part 
of you that enter in on the sabbath shall 
even be keepers of the '' watch of the king's 
house ; 

(i And a third part shall be at the gate 
of Sur ; and a third part at the gate be- 
hind the guard : so shall ye keep the 
watch of the house, *that it be not broken 
down. 

7 And two tparts of all you that go forth 
on the sabbath, even they shall keep the 
watch of the house of the Lord about the 
king. 

8 And ye shall compass the king round 
about, every man with his weapons in 
his hand : and he that cometh within the 
ranges, let him be slain : and be ye with 
tlie king as he goeth out and as he cometh 
in. 

9 And the "^captains over the hundreds 
did according to all things that Jehoiada 
the priest commanded : ayd they took 
every man his men that were to come in 
on the sabbath, with them that should go 
out on the sabbath, and came to Jehoiada 
the priest. 

10 And to the captains over hundreds 
did the priest give king David's spears 
and ''shields, that were in the temple of 
the Lord. 

1 1 And the guard stood, every man with 
his weapons in his hand, round about the 
king, from the right ^corner of the temple 
to the left corner of the temple, along by 
the altar and the temple. 

12 And he brought forth the king's son, 
and put the ""crown upon him, and ^gave 
him the testimony ; and they made him 





» ■ 


Chron. Si : 1 


etc. 


b dm 


p. Ifi:I8. * Or 


fro 


n break 


ing up. 


f 


Or 


compdntes : 


Hel 


. bands. 


1 Cliron. Jrt 




i iS:l 


m. « : 7. 


t 


Hel). shoulder. 


« 1 


salm '21 


: 3. r Dent. 1 


: 1S--20. 5 


■2S;iin. 


2 


4, 


7. h I'sa. 47 


: 1. 


% Heh. 


Lei tlie king liv 


e. i 


1 Siim. 


10::4; 



4. Jflioiada ; the high-priest. 

8. Ye shall compass the i-i?ig ; to prevent his 
being slain by the partisans of Athaliah. 

rj. The testimo)i.y ; a copy of the law of Moses. 

15. Without the ranges : outside of the guards. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Love of power tends to destroy natural affec- 
tion, and leads not only to the violation of the rights 
of humanity, but to the commission of the most 
aboiiiiiiable crimes. 

4. Subjects are not always bound to obey their 



j king, and s anointed him; and they ^'clap- 
ped their hands, and said, ^God 'save the 
king. 

13 ^ And when Athaliah heard the 
noise of the guard and of the people, she 
came to the people into the temple of the 
Lord. 

14 And when she looked, behold, the 
king J stood by a pillar, as the manner 
ivas, and the princes and the trumpeters 
by the king, and all the people of the land 
rejoiced, and ''blew with trumpets : and 
Athaliah rent her clothes, and cried, 
Treason, treason. 

15 But Jehoiada the priest commanded 
the captains of the hundreds, the officers 
of the host, and said unto them, Have 
her 'forth without the ranges ; and him 
that followcth her kill with the sword. 
For the priest had said. Let her not be 
slain in the '"house of the Loud. 

1(3 And they laid hands on her: and 
she went by the way by the which the 
horses came into the king's house : and 
there was she "slain. 

17 ^ And Jehoiada made a "covenant 
between the Lord and the king and the. 
people, that they should be the p Lord's 
people ; between the king also and the 
people. 

18 And all the people of the land went 
into the i house of Baal, and brake it 
down; his altars and his ''images brake 
they in pieces thoroughly, and 'slew 
Mattan the priest of Baal before the 
altars. And the priest appointed I! officers 
over the house of the Lord. 

19 And he took the rulers over hun- 
dreds, and the captains, and the gunrd, 
and all the people of the land ; and Ihey 
brought down the king from the house of 
the Lord, and came by the way of the 
gate of the guard to the king's house. 
And he sat on the throne of tlie kings. 

20 And all the people of the land 're- 
joiced, and the city was in quiet : and 
they slew Athaliah with the sword be- 
side the king's house. 

21 Seven years old teas Jehoash when 
he began to reign. 



1 Kings. 1:34. 


J rl..-.p.23:3; SClirnn. .34: 31. I Num. 10: 1-IO. 


1 Kx. 21;H. m 


Eiiek.<):7. iiGen.9:«. o 2 Snm. 5 : 3 ; Neh. 


<):W: 10: -28, 29. 


|)2Cor. 8:5. q diap. 10:2«, 27. rDeutl2:3 


. Zed.. 13:2,. 1. 


11 Heb. qfficei. I I'rov. II : 10: 29:2. 



rulers, but may be called in extraordinary cases to 
set them aside, and place others in their stead; and 
if need be, to bring about a revolution for this pur- 
pose. 

12. No king can be safe on his throne, or magis- 
trate preserve his authority, without the providen- 
tial care and gracious aid of Grod. 

14. That treatment which, without remorse, per- 
sons have nnjustlv shown towards others who were 
innocent, they arc ready to stigmatize as enormous 
wickedness when justly shown towards themselves. 
487 



Reign of Jchoash. 



11. KINGS, xir. 



The temple is repaired. 



CHAPTER XII. 

1 Jehoash reigneth well all the days of Jehoiada. 4 He 
giveth order for the repair of the temple. 17 Hazael 
is diverted from Jerusalem by a present of the hal- 
lowed treasures, lit Jehoash being slain by his ser- 
vants, Amaziah succeeJeth him. 

TN 'the seventh year of Jehu, Jehoash 
.L began to reign ; and forty years reigned 
lie in Jerusalem. And his mother's name 
teas Zibiah of Bcer-sheba. 

2 And Jehoash did that which ivas right 
in the sight of the Lord all his days where- 
in Jehoiada the priest instructed him. 

3 But ''the high places were not taken 
away : the people still sacrificed and 
burnt incense in the high places. 

4 T[ And Jehoash said to the priests, AH 
the money of the *dedieated things that 
is brought into the house of the Loud, 
even the '^ money of every one that passeth 
the account^ the money + that every man 
is set at, and all the money that tcomcth 
into any man's ^ heart to bring into the 
house of the Lord, 

5 Let the priests take it to them, every 
man of his acquaintance : and let them 
repair the breaches of the house, where- 
soever any breach shall be found. 

6 But it was so, that Hn the three and 
twentieth year of king Jehoash the priests 
had not repaired the breaches of the house. 

7 Then ''king Jehoash called for Jehoi- 
ada the priest, and the other priests, and 
said unto them. Why repair ye not the 
breaches of the house 1 now therefore 
receive no more money of your acquaint- 
ance, but deliver it for the breaches of 
the house. 

8 And the priests consented to receive 
no more money of the people, neither to 
repair tlie breaches of the house. 

9 But Jehoiada the priest took a chest, 
and bored a hole in the lid of it, and set 
it beside the altar, on the right side as 
one Cometh into the house of the Lord: 
and the priests that kept the Moor put 
therein all the money that icas brought 
into the house of the Lord. 



» 2 


Chron. 


•24 : 1 , etc. 


b rl 


.in. 


U:4 


I KinL's. 


1.1:14: 2 


2:4:1; Jer. 


2:50 


« Or 


holy thingt 


;Hel>./. 


fttinoset. 


crh 


lt«.22:4: 


Ex. SO: 13. 


t Hell. o/Wi»»ol<'*"/Ai 


tcti 


'miitii'it 


,ev 


11:1 


4:H«I> 


utcendeth 


upon 


the hea 


■t of a man 


d 


r.x. 


•.Sh-.h. 


4 


Hel>. 


nthrtwr 


nliethyetiy 



20. When rulers receive their authority as from 
God, and u.se it according to his will, quietness, 
peace, and prosperity may be expected throughout 
the land. 

CHAPTER XII. 

8. Consented to receive no more moiieii ; they 
had before received what w.as otlercd, but had not 
appropri.'ited it to the object for which it was given. 

10. Told the money ; counted it and stated the 
amount. 

17. (ratli ; a city of the Philistines that ha<l 
been taken and was in possession of tlie Israelites. 
IN.ST RUCTIONS. 

2. When young rulers select pious counsellors 
and give due heed to tiieir instructions, they may 
4S8 



10 And it was so^ when they saw ^b^c.^sm: 
that there icas much money in the chest, 
that the king's *scribe and the high-priest 
came up, and they tput up in bags, and 
told the money thatt^'as found in the liouse 
of the Lord. 

11 And they gave the money, being 
told, into the hands of them that did the 
work, that had the oversight of the house 
of tlie Lord : and they +laid it out to the 
carpenters and builders, that wrouglit 
upon the liouse of the Lord, 

12 And to masons, and hewers of stone, 
and to buy timber and hewed stone to 
repair the breaches of the house of the 
Lord, and for all that Kvas laid out for 
the house to repair it. 

13 Howbeit there were not made for the 
house of the Lord bowls of silver, snufT- 
ers, basins, trvimpets, any vessels of gold, 
or vessels of silver, of the money that was 
brought into the house of the Lord : 

14 But they gave that to the workmen, 
and repaired therewith the house of the 
Lord. 

15 Moreover they "^ reckoned not with 
the men, into whose hand the">' delivered 
the money to be bestowed on workmen : 
for they dealt faithfully. 

16 The ^trespass-money and sin-money 
was not brought into the house of the 
Lord : it ''was the priests'. 

17 HThen 'Ilazacl king of Syria went 
up, and fougli^t against Gath, and took it : 
and Hazael set his face to go up to Jeru- 
salem. 

18 And Jchoash king of Judah 'took 
all the hallowed things that Jehoshnphat, 
and Jehoram, and Aliaziah, his fathers, 
kings of Judnh, had dedieatcd, and his 
own hallowed things, and all the gold 
that ira.s found in the treasures of the 
liouse of the Lord, and in the king's 
house, and sent?7 to Hazael king of Syria: 
and he went II away from Jerusalem. 

19 H And the rest of the acts of Joash, 
and all that he did, arc they not written 



and third near. ' 'ICIir. 24:.';,eti-. 


II Hell. MiM/(t>/rf. ' Or.trcre- 


tary. f Hvlt. bound ttp. ^Hel). ftro 


ut/htilfoith, ?iUeb went/otlh. 


r rlinp. 52:7. C I.pv. ."i: 1.5, l.«. h 


Lev. 7:-; Num. 18:9. i clinp. 


8:12. i olmp 18:1.";, 16: 1 Kings, 


lr.:18. II Hel.. up. 



expect to prosper, and be instrumental of great good 
to the people. 

8. Ministers of religion should cither avoid re- 
ceiving money for pious and charitable uses, or ex- 
ercise the most conscientious fidelity in the appro- 
priation of it. 

]•'). All money received should be kept with care, 
and faithfully appropriated to the persons to whom 
it belongs, and tor the objects for which it was 
given. 

18. Though an enemy may sometimes be pacified 
by pecuniary contributions, it is ordinarily unwise 
to attempt to procure peace in that way; it may 
lead to increasing demands, till the whole is required 
to satisfy the rapacious invader. 



Reign of Jehoahaz. 



II. KINGS, XIII. 



Elisha's last, prophecy. 



B u'sm'"' ill the book of the Chronicles of the 
kings of Judah ? 

20 And his ^servants arose, and made a 
conspiracy, and slew Joash in * the house 
of Millo, which goeth down to Silla. 

21 For t Jozachar the son of Shimeath, 
and Jehozabad the son of tShomcr, his 
servants, smote liim, and he died ; and 
they buried him with his fathers in the 
city of David : and Amaziah his son 
reigned in his stead. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

I Jehoahaz's wicked reign. 3 Jehoahaz, oppressed by 
Hazael, is relieved by prayer. 8 Joash succi'cdeth 
him. 10 His wicked reign. 1'2 Jeroboam siicceed- 
eth him. 14 Elishadying, prophesieth to Joasli three 
victories over the Syrians. 20 The Moabites invad- 
ing the land, Elisha's bones raise up a dead man. 
'2-2 Hazael dying, Joash getteth three victories over 
Ben-hadad. 

IN * the three and twentieth year of 
Joash the son of Ahaziah king of Jn- 1 
dah, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to ' 
reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned 
seventeen years. 

2 And he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the Lord, and li followed the sins , 
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made 
Israel to sin ; he departed not therefrom, i 

3 1[And ''the anger of the Loud was 
kindled against Israel, and he delivered ] 
them into the hand of "^Hazael king ofj 
Syria, and into the hand of Ben-hadad 
the son of Hazael, all their days. 

4 And Jehoahaz^ besought the Lord, and 
the Lord hearkened unto him : for he 
saw" the oppression of Israel, because 
the king of Syria oppressed them. 

5 (And the Lord gave Israel a "^savior, 
so that they went out from under the hand 
of the Syrians : and the children of Israel 
dwelt in their tents, as *beforetime. 

6 Nevertheless they departed not from the 
sins of the house of Jeroboam, who made 
Israel sin, but twalked therein : and there 
remained^ the ^grove also in Samaria.) 

7 Neither did he leave of the people to 
Jehoahaz but fifty horsemen, and ten 
chariots, and ten thousand footmen; for 
the king of Syria had destroyed them, and 
had made them like the dust by '' threshing. 

8 T[ Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, 
and all that he did, and his might, arc 
they not written in tlie book of tlie Chron- 
icles of the kings of Israel ? 



« .Imp. 14 : .V * Or, Bcthmilla. f Zahad. 2 Chron. 54 : 2fi. 
t Or, Shimrith. J Hd). tin lictnlitlh ycnr nnd third year. 
II H^l>. walktd after. b .liiilges 2 : H. c rliap 8:1-2; i::17. 
.1 ISiilin 78:;i4. « cliap. 14 : 2K ; El. 3:7. f Ter. 25. *Hel). 
yettcrday and third day. f Heb. he tcalked. X Heb. tlood 



CHAPTER Xm. 

0. A savior ; Joash the son of Jehoahaz. 
II. The chariot — and the horseoieit ; he who 
\t;v.s the defence of Israel. 



9 And Jehoahaz slept with his fathers ; 
and they buried him in Samaria : and 
Joash ^ liis son reigned in his "stead. 

10 If In the thirty and seventh year of 
Joash king of Judah began Jehoash the 
son of Jehoahaz to reign *over Israel in 
Samaria, and reigned sixteen years. 

1 1 And he did that ichich was evil in the 
sight of the Lord; he departed not from all 
the sins of Jeroboam the sonof Nebat, who 
made Israel sin: but he walked therein. 

12 And 'the rest of the acts of Joash, 
and all that he did, and his might where- 
with he J fought against Amaziah king of 
Judah, are they not written in the book 
of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel? 

13 And Joasli slept with his fathers; 
and Jeroboam sat upon his throne: and 
Joash was buried in Samaria with the 
kings of Israel. 

14 If Now Elisha was fallen sick of his 
sickness whereof he died. And Joash 
the king of Israel came down unto him, 
and wept over his face, and said, my 
father, iny father I the '' chariot of Israel, 
and the horsemen thereof. 

15 And Elisha said unto him. Take bow 
and arrows. And he took unto him bow 
and arrows. 

. 16 And he said to the king of Israel, 
Putt thy hand upon the bow. And he 
put his hand upon it : and Elisha put his 
hands upon the king's hands. 

17 And he said. Open the window east- 
ward. And he opened it. Then Elisha 
said. Shoot. And he shot. And he said. 
The' arrow of the Lord's deliverance, 
and the arrow of deliverance from Syria : 
for thou shall smite the Syrians in '"Aphek, 
till thou have consumed thiin. 

18 And he said. Take the arrows. And 
he look them. And he said unto the king 
of Israel, Smite upon the ground. And 
he smote thrice, and stayed. 

19 And the man of God was wroth with 
him, and said, Thou shouldest have smit- 
ten five or six times ; then hadst thou 
smitten Syria till thou hadst consumed 
it: whereas now thou shalt smite Syria 
but "thrice. 

20 ^ And Elisha died, and they buried 
him. And the bands of the Moabites 
invaded the land at the coming in of the 
year. 



ic I Kings, in : Xt. b Amos l:X 5 Jehoath. ver. 10. || Alone. 
* In concert with his father, chap. 14: 1, i chapter 14: ir., ih. 
i chnp. 14:9, etc.; 2Cliron.2.T: I7,etc. k chap. 2: 12. f H<?li. 
Make thy hand to ride. 1 Judges 7:20. m 1 Kings, 20:26 
n rer. 25. 



17. Aphek ; a city of Israel ■which the Syrians 
had taken. 

18. He smote, thrice: tliis marked the nuniLer 
of times that he would beat the Syrians. 

20. Moabites ; a people south-east of Jnilea. 
489 



Hazacl oppresses Israel. 



II. KINGS, XIV 



Reig7i of Amaziah. 



21 And it came to pass, as they were 
burying a man, that behold, they spied 
a band of men : and they east the man 
into the sepulehre of Eiisha: and when 
the man *was let down, and touched the 
bones of Eiisha, he revived, and stood 
up on his feet. 

22 T[But *Hazael king of Syria op- 
pressed Israel all the days of .Jehoahaz. 

23 And the Lord was gracious unto 
them, and had compassion on them, and 
had ''respect unto them, because of his 
covenant with *= Abraham, Isaac, and Ja- 
cob, and would not destroy them, neither 
cast he them from his t presence as ''yet. 

24 So Hazael king of Syria died ; and 
Ben-hadad his son reigned in his stead. 

25 And Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz took 
againt out of the hand of Ben-hadad the 
son of Hazael the cities, which he had 
taken out of the hand of Jehoahaz his 
father by war. Three ''times did Joash 
beat him, and recovered the cities of Israel. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1 Amaziah's good reign. 5 His justice on the murderers 
of his father. 7 His victory over Edom. 8 Amaziah, 
provoking Jehoash, is overcome and spoiled. 15 Jero- 
boam succeedeth Jehoash. 17 Amaziah slain by a con- 
spiracy. 31 Azariah succeedeth him. 2;3 Jeroboam's 
wicked reign. 23 Zachariah succeedeth him. 

IN 'the second year of Joash son of Je- 
hoahaz king of Israel reigned ^ Ama- 
ziah the son of Joash king of Judah. 

2 He was twenty and five years old 
when he began to reign, and reigned 
twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. 
And his mother's name was Jehoaddan 
of Jerusalem. 

3 And he did that u-liich U'as right in 
the sight of the Lord, yet not like David 
his father : he did according to all things 
as Joash his father did. 



■ » 


Hel>. went <1 


.wii. a ver 


3; 


cll.ip. 8 


12. b Exc 


J 11 


J 2 : 24, 25. 


c <; 


<-n. 17:2-5; 


ix. 32: 13; 


Np 


1. 9 : 32 ; 


Psalm 106 


45 


t Heb. 


ra« 


. d Genesis 


6:3. X W 


eb. 


•eturncd and tuuk. 


e 


er. 1«, 19 


f <■! 


ap. 13 : 10. 


g 2 Chroil. 


2.T: 


I, etc. 


h cli.li.. 1- 


::i 


1 chap. 


12: 


20. j Deut 


24 : Ifi. k 


K7 


ekiel 18 


: 4, 20. 5 


Or 


the rock. 



21. A band; of the Moabites. He revived; 
showing that God was with Eiisha after his death, 
as really as before. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The sins of transgressors may be imitated long 
after they are dead, and be instrumental in the de- 
struction of their distant posterity. 

4. Cries to the Lord for help may be the means 
of deliverance from evil and of the reception of tem- 
poral good, even where the heart is not right with 
him, nor the life devoted to his service. 

11. No temporal favors, without the grace of God, 
will induce men to break off their sins, or lead them 
to walk in the ways of the Lord. 

14. The expected removal of the righteous is often 
lamented even by the wicked, under the conviction 
that their pious lives are a great blessing to man- 
kind. 

18. Strong confidence in God is needful in order 
to the reception, to the fullest extent, of his favors. 

21. The presence of God with his people is not 
490 



not taken away : as yet the people did sac- 
rifice and burnt incense on the high places. 

5 T[ And it came to pass, as soon as the 
kingdom was confirmed in his hand, that 
he slew his 'servants which had slain 
the king his father. 

6 But the children of the murderers he 
slew not : according unto that which is 
written J in the book of the law of ]Moses, 
wherein the Lord commanded, saying. 
The ''fathers shall not be put to death for 
the children, nor the children be put to 
death for the fathers ; but every man 
shall be put to death for his own sin. 

7 He slew of Edom in the valley of salt 
ten thousand, and took ^ Selah by war, and 
called the name of it 'Joktheel unto this 
day. 

8 T[ Then ""Amaziah sent messengers to 
Jehoash, the son of Jehoahaz son of Jehu, 
king of Israel, saying, Come, let us "look 
one another in the face. 

9 And Jehoash the king of Israel sent 
to Amaziah king of Judah, saying. The 
thistle" that was in Lebanon sent to the 
cedar that was in Lebanon, saying. Give 
thy daughter to my son to wife : and there 
passed by a wild beast thatwa^ in Leba- 
non, and trode down the thi.stle. 

10 Thou hast indeed smitten Edom, and 
thy heart hath ^lifted thee up : glory of this, 
and tarry Hat home : for why shouldest thou 
meddle to thy hurt, that thou shouldest 
fall,i even thou, and Judah with thee? 

11 But Amaziah would not hear. There- 
fore Jehoash king of Israel went up; and 
he and Amaziah king of Judah looked one 
another in the face at ^Beth-shemesh, 
which helongeth to Judah. 

12 And Judah was *put to the worse 



Obad. .3. I Josh. l!i : 38. ni 2 Chrmi. ■-'.'i : 17, etc. n 2 Siiin. 2 : 14. 
o Judges 9 : 8, etc. p Dent. 8:14; 2 ("lironicles, 32 : 2fi ; Ezek. 
28:2, 5, 17; Hab. 2:4. \\ Heh. at thy houie. q Proverbs 3 : 30; 
13:1»; 26:8. r Joshua 19 : 38; I S.-imueI, 6 : 9, etc. * Heb. 
smitten. 



confined to this life ; and in answer to their prayers 
while here, he may after they are dead, bestow great 
blessing on his people. 

23. Wicked men are often spared in life and made 
the recipients of many great and precious blessings, 
in consequence of the piety and benevolence of those 
who have gone before them. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

3. That ifhich was right ; externally; indoing, 
at tlie commencement of his reign, many things 
which God had commanded. 

6. That which is v.-ritten ; Deut. 24 : 16. 

7. The valley of salt : near the south end of the 
Dead sea. Selah ; a city of Edom, supposed to be 
Petra the capital of Edom. Joktheel; signifying 
obedience to God. 

8. Look one another in the face ; engage in 
battle. 

9. The thistle; representing the kingdom of 
Judah. The cedar ; tne kingdom of Israel. 



Atnnziah defeated and slain. 



II. KINGS, XV 



Reign of Jeroboam. 



s.c.'k™' before Israel ; and they fled every 
man to their tents. 

13 And Jehoash king of Lsrael took 
Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Je- 
hoasli the son of Ahaziah, at Beth-she- 
mesh, and came to Jerusalem, and brake 
down the wall of Jerusalem from the 
gate" of Ephraim unto the ''corner gate, 
four hundred cubits. 

14 And he took all the "^ gold and silver, 
and all the vessels that were found in the 
house of the Lord, and in the treasures 
of the king's house, and hostages, and re- 
turned to Samaria. 

1 5 T[ Now "• the rest of the acts of Jehoash 
which he did, and his might, and how he 
fought with Amaziah king of Judah, are 
they not written in the book of the Chron- 
icles of the kings of Israel ■? 

16 And Jehoash slept with his fathers, 
and was buried in Samaria with the kings 
of Israel ; and Jeroboam his son reigned 
in his stead. 

17 ^ And ® Amaziah the son of Joash 
king of Judah lived after the death of 
Jehoash sou of Jehoahaz king of Israel 
fifteen years. 

18 And the rest of the acts of Amaziah, 
are they not written in the book of the 
Chronicles of the kings of Judah? 

19 Now they made a conspiracy against 
him in Jerusalem: and he fled to "^La- 
chish ; but they sent after him to Lachish, 
and slew him there. 

20 And they brought him on horses : 
and he was buried at Jerusalem with his 
fathers in the city of David. 

21 1[And all the people of Judah took 
Azariah,* which ivas sixteen years old, 
and made him king instead of his father 
Amaziah. 

22 He built sEIath, and restored it to 
Judah, after that the king slept with his 
fathers. 

23 *\ In the fifteenth year of tAmaziah 
the son of Joash king of Judah, Jeroboam 
the son of Joash king of Israel began to 



• Neh. 8:16. lijer.31:38; Zecli. 14 : 10. c 1 Kings, 7 : 51. 
i chap. 13: 1-2. o 2 Cliron. 25 : M, etc. f Josli. 10:31. « He is 
called C/izia/i.cliap. 16:13; 2Chron. -26: 1. t cinp. Ifi:6. t Now 
lie begins to reign alone. h l Kings, 12 : 28, etc. ; Psa. 10fi:-:0. 
iNum.34:8. jDeut,3:I7. J Jonali 1 : 1 ; called Jonnj, Mat. 
12:39,40. kDeut.32:36. 1 Deut.9: 14; Rom. 11 : 2,etc. m chap. 



14. Hostages ; some of the principal men of the 
city, as security that it would not again molest 
him. 

19. Lachish; in the south part of Judah. 

22. Elath; at the head of tne eastern branch of 
the Red sea. 

S-*). The entering ofHamath ; a province north 
of Palestine. The sea of the plain; the Dead 
sea, at the south part of the country. Gath-hc- 
pJier ; a town in the tribe of Zebulon. 

2S. Damasctis and Hamath ; these cities, 
which were taken from the Syrians in the time of 
David, and had been retaken \)y the Syrians, were 



reign in Samaria, and reigned forty and 
one years. 

24 And he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the Lord: he departed not from 
all the ''sins of Jeroboam the son of Ne- 
bat, who made Israel to sin. • 

25 He restored the coast of Israel from 
the entering of 'Hamath unto the Jsea of 
the plain, according to the word of the 
Lord God of Israel, which he spake by 
the hand of his servant t Jonah, the son 
of Amitt^i, the prophet, which was of 
Gath-hepher. 

2() For the Lord saw the aflliction of 
Israel, that it was very bitter : '' for there 
was not any shut up, nor any left, nor 
any helper for Israel. 

27 And the Lord said 'not that he 
would blot out the name of Israel from 
under heaven: but "'he saved them by 
the hand of Jeroboam the son of Joash. 

28 ^ Now the rest of the acts of Jero- 
boam, and all that he did, and liis might, 
how he warred, and how he recovered 
Damascus, and Hamath, U'hich "belonged 
to Judah, for Israel, are they not written 
in the book of the Chronicles of the kings 
of Israel 1 

29 And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, 
even with the kings of Israel ; and Zaclia- 
riah his son ^ reigned in his stead. 

CHAPTER XV. 

1 Azariah's good reign. 5 He dying a leper, Jotham 
succeedeth. 8 Zachariah, the last of Jehu's genera- 
tion, reigning ill, is slain by Shallum. 13 Slialluin, 
reigning a month, is slain i)y Menahem. Ki i\Iena- 
hem strengtheneth himself by Pul. 21 I'ekahiah 
succeedeth him. '2.'5 Pekahiah is slain by Pekali. 
'27 Pekah is oppressed by Tiglath-p.ileser, and slain 
by Hoshea. 3"2 Jotham's good reign. 36 Ahaz suc- 
ceedeth him. 

IN ° the II twenty and seventh year of Jer- 
oboam king of Israel began* Azariah son 
of Amaziah king of Judah to reign. 

2 Si.vtcen years old was he when he be- 
gan to reign, and he reigned two and fifty 
years in Jerusalem. And his mother's 
name was Jccholiah of Jerusalem. 

3 And he did that ichich ivas right in the 



13 : n. n 2 Sam, 8:6; 1 Kings, U : 24 ; 4 Cliron. 8:3. ? After nn 
interremum of eleven years ; chap. l.'>:8. o chap. 14:21 ; 2Cliron. 
2(5: 1. Tl This is the twenty-seventh year of Jeroboam*8 partnersliip 
in the kingdom with his father, wlio mHde him consort at his going 
to the Syrian wars. It is the sixteenth year of Jeroboam's mon- 
archy. " Called U^ziah, ver. 13, 30, etc.; 2 Cliron. 26: 1. 



now taken from them again by Jeroboam and re- 
stored to Israel. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 

3. External obedience will be followed by tem- 
poral benefits; but if it be merely external, it will 
have no reward hereafter. 

S. That pride which leads to contention and blood- 
shed is the fruit of wickedness, the cause of many 
calamities, and often the forerunner of ruin. 

2.'). The Lord may govern nations by means of 
wicked rulers ; may enlarge their borders, and thus 
fulfil his word and accomplish towards his people 
his own benevolent designs. 

491 



Various kings of 



II. KINGS, XV. 



Judah and Israel. 



sight of the Lord, according to all that 
his father Amaziah had done ; 

4 Save "that the high places Avere not 
removed : the people sacrificed and burnt 
incense still on the high places. 

5 HAnd ''the Lord smote the king, so 
that he was a leper unto the day of his 
death, and dwelt in a several house. And 
.Jotham the king's son u-as over the house, 
judging the people of the land. 

6 And the rest of the acts of Azariah, 
and all that he did, are they not written 
in the book of the Chronicles of the kings 
of Judah? 

7 So Azariah slept with his fathers ; 
and they buried him with his fathers in 
the city of David : and Jotham his son 
reigned in his stead. 

8 1[ In the thirty and eighth year of 
Azariah king of Judah did *Zachariah 
the son of Jeroboam reign over Israel in 
Samaria six months. 

9 And he did tJiat u-hich was evil in the 
sight of the Lord, as his fathers had done : 
he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam 
the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. 

10 And Shallum the son of Jabesh con- 
spired against him, and smote him before 
the people, and tglew him, and reigned 
in his stead. 

11 And the rest of the acts of Zacha- 
riah, behold, they a>'e written in the book 
of the C'hronicles of the kings of Israel. 

1 2 This was the word of the '^ Lord which 
he spake unto Jehu, saying. Thy sons shall 
sit on the throne of Israel unto the fourth 
generation. And so it came to pass. 

1.3 TI Shallum the son of Jabesh began 
to reign in the nine and thirtieth year of 
Uzziaht king of Judah; and he reigned 
a^ full month in Samaria. 

14 For Menahem the son of Gadi went 
up from Tirzali, and came to Samaria, 
and smote Shaliuin the son of Jabesh in 
Samaria, and slew him, and reigned in 
his stead. 

1.5 And the rest of the acts of Shallum, 
and his conspiracy which he made, be- 
hold, they are written in the book of the 
Chronicles of the kings of Israel. 

16 If Then Menahem smote ''Tiphsah, 
and all that u-ere therein, and the coasts 
thereof from Tirzah : because they opened 
not to him, therefore he smote it: and all 



« ver. r«. b aChron. 26: lit. * T 
num for eleven ycnrfl. f As* prnplu 
10 : :iO. t Calleil Oziai, Mnt. \:X,'.i 



pre linvinj; heen lin interre^- 
kietl. Amos 7:9. c rlinptf.'r 
Azui-iah^ verse I. \ Heh. 



CHAPTER XV. 
o. A arveral house : a retired building, where 
he was separated from the rest of the iiihiibitants. 
11. Zachariah ; he was the fourtli of the de- 
scendants of Jehu. Ver. 12 ; chap. 10:. 10. 

14. Menahem ; supposed to have been one of tiie 
492 



the'' women therein that were with *8"c.'ml 
child he ripped up. 

17 In the nine and thirtieth year of 
Azariah king of Judah began Menahem 
the son of Gadi to reign over Israel, and 
reigned ten years in Samaria. 

18 And he did that which icas evil in 
the sight of the Lord : he departed not 
all his days from the sins of Jeroboam 
the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. 

19 And Tul the king of Assyria came 
against the land: and Menahem «gave 
Pul a thousand talents of silver, that his 
hand might be Avith him to ''confirm the 
kingdom in his hand. 

20 And Menahem II exacted the money 
of Israel, even of all the mighty men of 
wealth, of each man fifty shekels of sil- 
ver, to give to the king of Assyria. So 
the king of Assyria turned back, and 
stayed not there in the land. 

21 ^ And the rest of the acts of Mena- 
hem, and all that he did, are they not 
written in the book of the Chronicles of 
the kings of Israel 1 

22 And Menahem slept with his fathers : 
and Pekahiah his son reigned in his stead. 

23 T[ In the fiftieth year of Azariah king 
of Judah, Pekahiah the son of Menahem 
began to reign over Israel in Samaria, 
and reigned two years. 

24 And he did that which luas evil in the 
sight of the Lord: he departed not from 
the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, 
who made Israel to sin. 

2.5 But Pekah the son of Remaliah, a 
captain of his, conspired against him, and 
smote him in Samaria, in the palace of 
the king's house, with Argob and Arieh, 
and with him fifty men of the Gileadites : 
and he killed him, and reigned in his 
room. 

26 And the rest of the acts of Peka- 
hiah, and all that he did, behold, they are 
written in the book of the Chronicles of 
the kings of Israel. 

27 H In the two and fiftieth year of 
Azariah king of Judah, 'Pekah (he son of 
Remaliah began to reign over Israel in 
Samaria, and reigned twenty years. 

28 And he did that u'hich was evil in 
the sight of the Lord: he departed not 
from the sins of Jeroboam the son of 
Nebat, who made Israel to sin. 

,1 mnnth «/ itiiv. << I Kin^s, 4 :':i. eriinp. 8:12; Amos I : H. 
f 1 Cliron. i) : iK. it Hosp:i H ; '.). Iiiliap. U:fi. || Heb. <■« u«rf /u 
come forth, i I.sa. 7 : 1, 4, «. 



generals of Zachariah. Tirzah ; a city in the tribe 
of Ephraim, for a time the capital of the ten tribes. 
1 Kings, chs. 14-16. 

16. Tiphsah ; supposed to have been in Ephraim. 
A place of this name was situated on the Euphrates, 
•and was taken po.ssession of by Solomon. 1 Kings, 
4 : ■:4. 



Fckah and Joiham. 



II. KINGS, XVI. 



Wicked reipi of .ihaz. 



B.ai^f 29 In the days of Pekah king of Is- 
rael, came Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, 
and took Ijon, and Abel-beth-maachah, 
and Janoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and 
Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of* Naph- 
tali, and carried them captive to Assyria. 

30 And Hoshea the son of Elah made 
a conspiracy against Pekah the son of 
Remaliah, and smote him, and slew him, 
and *reigned in his stead, in the ttwen- 
tieth year of Jotham the son of Uzziah. 

31 And the rest of the acts of Pekah, 
and all that he did, behold, they are 
written in the book of the Chronicles of 
the kings of Israel. 

32 T[ In the second year of Pekah the son 
of Remaliah king of Israel, began ''Jotham 
the son of Uzziah king of Judah to reign. 

33 Five and twenty years old was he 
when he began to reign, and he reigned 
sixteen years in Jerusalem. And his 
mother's name was Jerusha, the daughter 
of Zadok. 

34 And he did that ichich ivas right in 
the sight of the Lord : he did according 
to all that his father Uzziah had done. 

35 Howbeit the high places were not re- 
moved : the people sacrificed and burned 
incense still in the high places. He built 
the higher gate of the house of the Lord. 

36 ^ Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, 
and all that he did, are they not written 
in the book of the Chronicles of the kings 
of Judah ■? 

37 In those -days the Lord began to 
send against Judah, "= Rezin the king of 
Syria, and '' Pekah the son of Remaliah. 

38 And Jotham slept with his fathers, 
and was buried with his fathers in the 
city of David his father : and Ahaz his 
son reigned in his stead. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

1 Ahaz's wicked reiwn. 5 Ahaz, assailed by Rezin and 
Pekah, hireth Tiglath-pileser against them. 10 Ahaz, 
sending a pattern of an altar from Damascus to Uri- 
jah. diverteth the brazen altar to his own devotion. 
17 He spoileth the temple. 19 Hezekiah succeedeth 
him. 

IN *the seventeenth year of Pekah the 
son of Remaliah, Ahaz the son of Jo- 
tham king of Judah began to reign. 

2 Twenty years old icas Ahaz when he 
began to reign, and reigned sixteen years 



a Isaiali 9:1. ^ After an anarrliy for eome years, rliap. 17:1; 
Hosea 10:3, 7, l."*. f The fourth year of Ahai, the twentieth 
after .Totliam had he^un to reign. Usher, b '2 Chron. 27: 1, etc. 
i At the end of Jotham's reign, c chap. 1 6 : S. d verse 27. 
c 2 Chron. 28:1, etc. f Lev. 18:21; Psa. 106 : 37, 3S. B Deut. 



29. IJo7i — Naphtall ; the places here mentioned 
were in the north part of the land of Israel. 
IXSTRUCTIOXS. 
9. The sins of rulers and distinguished persons 
are often the means of destruction to their distant 
posterity, and to multitudes of others who imitate 
their wicked example. 

29. When the people of God rebel against him, 
^9 



in Jerusalem, and did not that U'hich was 
right in the sight of the Lord his God, 
like David his father. 

3 But he walked in the way of the kings 
of Israel, yea, and made his son to ''pass 
through the fire, « according to the abom- 
inations of the heathen, whom the Lord 
cast out from before the children of IsraeL 

4 And he sacrificed and burnt incense 
in the liigh places, and ''on the hills, and 
under every green tree. 

5 ^ Then ' Rezin king of Syria, and Pckali 
son of Remaliah king of Israel, came up 
to Jerusalem to war: and they besieged 
Ahaz, but could not overcome him. 

6 At that time Rezin king of Syria re- 
covered JElath to Syria, and drave the 
Jews from ^ Elath : and the Syrians came 
to Elath, and dwelt there unto this day. 

7 So Ahaz sent messengers to II Tiglath- 
pileser '' king of Assyria, saying, I am thy 
servant and thy son : come up, and save 
me out of the hand of the king of Syria, 
and out of the hand of the king of Israel, 
which rise up against me. 

8 And 'Ahaz took the silver and gold 
that was found in the house of the Lord, 
and in the treasures of the king's house, 
and sent it for a present to the king of 
Assyria. 

9 And the king of Assyria hearkened 
unto him : for the king of Assyria went 
up against *Damascus, and t took it, and 
carried the people of it captive to Kir, and 
slew Ptezin. 

10 ^ And king Ahaz went to Damascus 
to meet Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, 
and saw an altar that was at Damascus : 
and king Ahaz sent to LTrijah the priest the 
fashion of the altar, and the pattern of it, 
according to all the workmanship thereof. 

1 1 And Urijah the priest "' built an altar 
according to all that king Ahaz had sent 
from Damascus : so Urijah the priest 
made it against king Ahaz came from 
Damascus. 

12 And when the king was come from 
Damascus, the king saw the altar: and 
the king approached to the altar, and 
offered ° thereon. 

13 And he burnt his burnt-offering and 
his meat-offering, and poured his drink- 



12:31; Psa. 106:3.'>. li Dent. 12:2; 1 Kings, 1< : 23. i l9a.7:l, 
etc. j chap. 14 : 22. % Heb. Eloth. || Tilgnlh-pilnestr, 1 Chron. 
6:2ii. Tilynlh-pilnrser, iC\\xon.i»:iO. k ch.Tp. l.i: 29. I fhap. 
12:18. * Heb. J5iimmMffc f Foretold. Ainos 1 : 5. m Psahn 
106 : 39. B Num. 18 : 3 ; 2 Chron. 26 : 16, 19. 



the wicked are suffered to overcome and oppress 
them ; nor without repentance and reformation, can 
they escape destruction. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

9. Kir; a place in upper Media, west of the 
Caspian sea. 

10. An altar; dedicated to idol gods. 

493 



Hi zckiah and Hoshea. 



II. KINGS, XVII. 



Great sins of Israel. 



offering, and sprinkled the blood of *his 
peace-offerings upon the altar. 

14 And he brought also the brazen 
altar," which u-as before the Lord, from 
the forefront of the house, from between 
the altar and the house of the Lord, and 
put it on the north side of the altar. 

15 And king Ahaz commanded Urijah 
the priest, saying, Upon the great altar 
burn the ''morning burnt-offering, and 
the evening meat-offering, and the king's 
burnt-sacrifice, and his meat-offering, 
with the burnt-offering of all the people 
of the land, and their meat-offering, and 
their drink-offerings ; and sprinkle upon 
it all the blood of the burnt-offering, and 
all the blood of the sacrifice : and the 
brazen altar shall be for me t(5 inquire by. 

16 Thus did Urijah the priest, according 
to all that king Ahaz commanded. 

17 ^ And king Ahaz cut off the borders 
of the "^ bases, and removed the laver from 
off them ; and took down the sea from 
off the brazen oxen that tcere under it, 
and put it upon a pavement of stones. 

18 And the covert for the sabbath that 
they had built in the house, and the 
king's entry without, turned he from the 
house of the Lord for the king of Assyria. 

19 11" Now the rest of the acts of Ahaz 
which he did, are they not written in the 
book of the Chronicles of the kings of 
Judah? 

20 And Ahaz slept with his fathers, 
and ''was buried with his fathers in the 
city of David : and Hczekiah his son 
reigned in his stead. 

CHAPTER XVIl. 

1 Hoshea's wicked reign. 3 Being subdued by Shal- 
maneser, he conspireth again.st him with So king of 
Egypt. 5 Samaria for their sins is captivated. 24 
The strange nations, which were transplanted into 
Samaria, being plagued with lions, make a mixture 
of religions. 

IN the twelfth year of Ahaz king of 
Judah, began t Iloshea the son of Elah 
to reign in Samaria over Israel nine years. 
2 And he did that which was evil in the 



* Heb the peaecoffrringi which were hii. « 2 Chronicles, 4:1. 
V Ex. 2y:.3«-4l. c I Kings, 7:2.1, 28. il 2 Chron. 28 : 27. t After 
an interregnum, clinp. l."! : 30 e cli.ip. 18 : 9. % Heh. rendered. 
2Sam. 8:2. \ Or, Irihule. || cli.ip. 18: 10, 11 ; Foretold, Hoaea 
13 : 1«. f Lev. 5f> : M, XI ; Deut 28 : .16, 64 ; 29 : 27, 28. g 1 Chron. 



18. Covert for the sabbath ; supposed by some 
to have been a canopy or covering, under vrhich the 
king and his attendants went to the temple on the 
sabbath-day- 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. No advantages without the grace of God will 
overcome the wickedness of the human heart, or 
keep men from practising the vilest transgressions. 

7. The wicked ■will often bow in the most abject 
submi-ssion to their fellow-men, and give up their 
choicest trea.sures to obtain help from them, when 
they will not humble themselves before God for 
their sins, and seek effectual help from him. 

10. The trappings of idol-worship, and splendors 
4 'J I 



sight of the Lord, but not as the *b"c.'^: 
kings of Israel that were before him. 

3 ^Against" him came up Shalmancser 
king of Assyria ; and Hoshea became his 
servant, and -gave him ^presents. 

4 And the king of Assyria found con- 
spiracy in Hoshea ; for he had sent mes- 
sengers to So king of Egypt, and brought 
no present to the king of Assyria, as he 
had done year by year : therefore the 
king of Assyria shut him up, and bound 
him in prison. 

5 T[ Then the king of Assyria came up 
throughout all the land, and went up to 
Samaria, and besieged it three years. 

6 In II the ninth year of Hoshea, the king 
of Assyria took Samaria, and "^ carried 
Israel away into Assyria, and placed 
them in s Halah and in Habor by the river 
of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes. 

7 For so it was, that the children of 
Israel had sinned against the Lord their 
God, which had brought them up out of 
the land of Egypt, from under the hand of 
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and had feared 
other gods, 

8 And ''walked in the statutes of the 
heathen, whom the Lord cast out from 
before the children of Israel, and of the 
kings of Israel, which they had made. 

9 And the children of Israel did 'se- 
cretly those things that 7irre not right 
against the Lord their God, and they 
built them high places in all their cities, 
from the J tower of the watchmen to the 
fenced city. 

10 And ''they set them up *images and 
groves' in every ""high hill, and under 
every green tree : 

11 And there they burnt incense in all 
the high places, as did the heathen whom 
the Lord carried away before them ; and 
wrought wicked things to provoke the 
Lord to anger : 

12 For they served idols, whereof the 
Lord had "said unto them. Ye shall not 
do this thing. 



5:2K. h (Imp. 16:3; Leviticus 18:3: Deut. 18:9; P«n. I0f>:.1.i. 
i Ezekiel8: 12. jcliap. 18:8. k I Kin^, 14 : 23; Is»iall57:S. 
* Hvb. staliiei. 1 Deut. 16 : 21 ; Micali.^:14. m rhap. Ifi : 4 ; 
Deuteronomy 12:2. n Exodus 20 : 3, 4 ; Lev. 26: 1 ; Deut. 4:19; 
6 : 7, 8. 



of heathen idolatry, have sometimes more attrac- 
tions for the human heart, than the pure and simple 
worship of Jehovah ; and there have been not only 
kings, but priests and professed ministers of religion, 
who would exchange the one for the other. 

16. Wicked rulers liave ordinarily been aided by 
wicked ecclesiastics, and the corrupt projects of the 
one been supported by the ready and zealous coop- 
eration of the other. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

Q. Not as the ii/iffs of Israel ; he did not so 
rigidly enforce idolatry. 

6. Halah and — Ilabor ; cities of Media. 



Israel carried captive. 



II. KINGS, XVII, 



Idolatry of the Samaritans. 



B.c.'if^' 13 Yet the Lord testified against Is- 
rael, and against Judah, *by all the proph- 
ets, and by all the seers, saying, *Turn ye 
from your evil ways, and keep my com- 
mandments and my statutes, according 
to all the law which I commanded your 
fathers, and which I sent to you by my 
servants the prophets. 

14 Notwithstanding, they would not 
hear, but '' hardened their necks, like to 
the neck of their fathers, that did not be- 
lieve in the Lord their God. 

15 And they * rejected his statutes, and 
his ''covenant that he made with their 
fathers, and his ^ testimonies which he 
testified against them ; and they followed 
vanity ,*^ and became ^ vain, and went after 
the heathen that luere round about them, 
concerning whom the Lord had ''charged 
them, that they should not do like them. 

1(5 And they left all the commandments 
of the Lord their God, and made them 
molten' images, even two J calves, and 
made a ''grove, and worshipped all the 
host of 'heaven, and served '"Baal. 

17 And they caused their sons and 
their daughters to "pass through the fire, 
and used divination and "enchantments, 
and Psold themselves to do evil in the 
sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger. 

18 Therefore the Lord was very angry 
with Israel, and removed them out of his 
sight: there was none leffbut the tribe 
of Judah only. 

19 Also 'Judah kept not the command- 
ments of the Lord their God, but walked 
in the statutes of Israel which they made. 

20 And the Lord ' rejected all the seed 
of Israel, and afflicted them, and ' delivered 
them into the hand of spoilers, until he 
had cast them out of his sight. 

21 For "he rent Israel from the house 
of David ; and they made Jeroboam the 
son of Nebat king : and ^'Jeroboam drave 
Israel from following the Lord, and made 
them sin a great sin. 

22 For the children of Israel walked in 
all the sins of Jeroboam which he did ; 
they departed not from them; 

23 Until the Lord removed Israel out 
of his sight, as he had "said by all his 
servants the prophets. So "was Israel 



* Heb. fcy the hand of. • Isai.ih 1 : 1 6, 17 ; S5 ; 7 ; Jer. 1 8 : 1 1 ; 
2S:S; M:I5; Elek. 18:31; 2Peter,3:9. b DeuU ni : -27 ; Prov. 
29 ; I ; Isaiali <8 : 4 ; .ler. 7 : 26. c .ler. 8 : 9. i Deut. 29 : 25, 2li. 
e neut.6; 17, 18; Jer. 44:23. f Deut. 32 : 21 ; 1 Samuel. 12:21; 
1 Kin-a. Ifi: 13. b .Tonali 2 : 8 ; Rom.l:21. I> Deut 12 : 30, 31. 
i Ex. 32:4, a. i 1 Kin?!., 12 : 28. k 1X10^8,14:1.^,23: l.'i:ia 
IJer.8:2. m 1 Kings, lri:3l ; 22 :53. n cli.ip. 1«: 3; Lev. 18: 21 ; 



18. TIte tribe of Jiitlah only ; comprehending 
at this time the tribe of Benjamin. 

24. Cuthah — Ai-a — Ilamath — Sepharvaim ; 
countries north of Babylon, far nortli-east of Palestine. 

26. T/ie manner of the God; the proper way 
of worshipping him. 



carried away out of their own land to 
Assyria unto this day. 

24 1[ And ^'the king of Assyria brought 
men from ^Babylon, and from Cuthah, 
and from tAva, and from Hamath, and 
from Sepharvaim, and placed thon in the 
cities of Samaria instead of the cliildreu 
of Israel : and they possessed Samaria, 
and dwelt in the cities thereof. 

25 And .so it was at the beginning of 
their dwelling there, that they feared not 
the Lord : therefore the Lord "sent lions 
among them, which slew some of them. 

26 Wherefore they spake to the king of 
Assyria, saying. The nations which thou 
hast removed, and placed in the cities of 
Samaria, know not the manner of the 
God of the land: therefore he hath sent 
lions among them, and behold, they slay 
them, because they know not the manner 
of the God of the land. 

27 Then the king of Assyria commanded, 
saying, Carry thither one of the priests 
whom ye brought from thence ; and let 
them go and dwell there, and let him 
teach them the manner of the God of the 
land. 

28 Then one of the priests whom they 
had carried away from Samaria came and 
dwelt in Beth-el, and taught them how 
they should fear the Lord. 

29 Howbeit every nation made gods of 
their ""own, and put thcni in the houses 
of the high places which the Samaritans 
had made, every nation in their cities 
wherein they dwelt. 

30 And the men of *= Babylon made 
Succoth-benoth, and the men of Cuth 
made Ncrgal, and the men of Hamath 
made Ashima, 

31 And ""the Avites made Nibhaz and 
Tartak, and the Sepharvitcs ^ burnt their 
children in fire to Adrammelech and 
Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim. 

32 So they feared the Lord, and ""made 
unto themselves of the lowest of them 
priests of the high places, which sacrificed 
for them in the houses of the high places. 

33 They s feared the Lord, and served 
their own gods, after the manner of the 
nations ^whom they carried away from 
thence. 



E7ek. 23:37. ol)eut.l«:10. p 1 Kings, 21 :20. q 1 Kings, II : 13,32. 
rJer.3:8. •Jer.6:3n. I chap. 13 : 3; 15: 29 ; Neh. 9: 57, 2». 
u IKinga, 11:11. r 1 Kings, 12:20.28. w 1 Kings, 14: Ifi. iver.6. 
J Ezra 4: 2, 10. iver.30. t ^""^.^liap- 18: 34. • 1 Kings, 13: 2t); 
Jer. 5:6; Ezek. 14:21. b Micali 4:6. c ver. 24. il Eira 4 : <1. 
e Dent 12:31. f 1 Kings, 12:31. e ver. 41; Zepll. 1:6. J Or, 
who carritd them axcay from thence. 



30, 31. Succoth-benoth — Nergal — Ashima — 
Nibhaz aJid Tartak' ; names of different heathen 
gods. 

32. They feared the Lord; with that slavisli 
fear which made them dread liis wrath, but not with 
that filial fear which would lead them to ohev him. 
495 



The good reign 



II. KINGS, XVIII. 



of Hezekiah- 



34 Unto this day they do after the former 
manners : they fear not the Loud, neither 
do they after their statutes, or after their 
ordinances, or after the law and command- 
ment which the Lord commanded the chil- 
dren of * Jacob, whom he named Israel; 

35 With whom the Lord had made a 
covenant, and charged ''them, saying. 
Ye shall not fear other gods, nor "^bow 
yourselves to them, nor serve them, nor 
sacrifice to them : 

36 But the Lord, who brought you up 
out of the land of Egypt with great '' power 
and a stretched-out arm, him *" shall ye 
fear, and him shall ye worship, and to 
him shall ye do sacrifice. 

37 And the statutes, and the ordinances, 
and the law, and the commandment, 
which he wrote for you, ""ye shall observe 
to do for evermore ; and ye shall not fear 
other gods. 

38 And the covenant that I have made 
with you ye ^shall not forget; neither 
shall ye fear other gods. 

39 But the Lord your God ye shall 
fear; and he shall deliver you out of the 
hand of all your enemies. 

40 Howbeit'' they did not hearken, but 
they did after their former manner. 

41 So 'these nations feared the Lord, 
and served their graven images, both their 
children, and their children's children : 
as did their fathers, so do they unto this 
day. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1 Hezeklah's good reign. 4 He destroyeth idolatry, 
and prospereth. 9 Samaria is carried captive for 
their sins. 13 Sennacherib invading Judah is paci- 
fied by a tribute. 17 Rab-shakeh, sent by Senna- 
cherib again, revileth Hezekiah, and by blasphemous 
persuasions soliciteth the people to revolt. 

"IVTOW it came to pass in the third year 
J_\ ofHoshea son of Elah king of Israel, 



• Gen..'?-2:28. b .Iuilg.6:in. c El. 20:5. 
10:20. f Deut. .1 : 32. 8 Heut. 4 : 2). h Jc 
' 2Cliron.28:27; 2H:1. He is called Em*i« 
2Chroii.29:l. i Heb. statuet. j Num. 21 



i E.T.6:H. e Deut 
. 13 : 23. i ver 32, ?,3. 
, Mat. 1:9. f Jbijah, 
9. % That is, a piece 



34. Tket/ fear not the Lord; not with that 

fear which influences them to keep his laws. This 

people are supposed to have been the ancestor.s of 

the Samaritans mentioned in the New Testament. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Some sinners are less atrociously wicked than 
others ; yet none are so innocent as not to deserve 
all the evils they suffer in this world, and still more 
dreadful evils in the world to come. 

G. Though God bears long with giiilty nations, if 
they repent not of their iniquities he will eventually 
destroy them. 

9. Wicked as are the outward actions of men, 
their secret conduct is often much worse, and has 
greater influence in drawing down upon them the 
just judgments of heaven. 

13. Men do not go to destruction without warn- 
ing from G-od, and their disregard of him and his 
threatenings is among the chief causes of their 
ruin. 

496 



t}iat "Hezekiah the son of Ahaz ^b*'^.^: 
king of Judah began to reign. 

2 Twenty and five years old was ho 
when he began to reign ; and he reigned 
twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. 
His mother's name also was t Abi, the 
daughter of Zachariah. 

3 And he did that which U'as right in 
the sight of the Lord, according to all 
that David his father did. 

4 11 He removed the high places, and 
brake the t images, and cut down the 
groves, and brake in pieces the J brazen 
serpent that Moses had made : for unto 
those days the children of Israel did burn 
incense to it : and he called it ^ Nehushtan. 

5 He trusted in the Lord God of Israel ; 
so ''that after him was none like him 
among all the. kings of Judah, nor any 
that were before him. 

6 For he 'clave to the Lord, and de- 
parted not from H following him, but kept 
his commandments, which the Lord 
commanded Moses. 

7 And the Lord was "with him ; and 
he "prospered whithersoever he went 
forth : and he rebelled against the king 
of "Assyria, and served him not. 

8 He smote the Philistines, even unto 
Gaza,* and the borders thereof, from the 
tower of the watchmen to the fenced city. 

9 ^And it came to pass in the fourth 
year of king Hezekiah, which was the 
seventh year of .Hoshea son of Elah king 
of Israel, that p Shalmaneser king of As- 
syria came up against Samaria, and be- 
sieged it. 

10 And at the end of three years they 
took it : even in the sixth year of Heze- 
kiah, that is, the ninth year of Hoshea 
king of Israel, Samaria was taken. 

11 And "J the king of Assyria did carry 
away Israel unto Assyria, and put them 

ofln-asn. k cli.ip 23:2.1. 1 Deut 10:20; Josh. 2.'i : .S. || Heb. 
nflrr him. m 1 Samuel, 18 : 14 ; 2 Cliron. 16 : 2. » Psa. (i0:12: 
Horn. 8:31. och.ap. 16:7. * Heb. ^ZJoA. p chap. 17 : 3, etc. 



17. No wickedness is so great that it may not 
be committed by those who have light, but reject 
it ; who know the will of God, and yet refuse to 
do it. 

25. Even the heathen, though not as guilty as 
sinners under the gospel, know, or have the means 
of knowing, enough of God to render them guilty in 
not obeving him. 

29. Though unconverted heathen may be brought 
to pay a kiiiTl of reluctant outward homage to Je- 
hovah, yet without his grace their hearts will cleave 
to their idols, and they will still make and worsjiip 
the gods to which they have been accustomed. 

40. No instruction in the knowledge and worship 
of God will of itself lead men to love and obey him, 
or prevent them from practising those sins which 
provoke him to destroy them. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 
4. Nehnshtaii ; meaning a piece of brass. 



Sennacherib invades Judea. 



II. KINGS, XVIII. 



Rab-shakeli' s blasphemies. 



B."'??!^ ill Halah and in Habor by the river 
of Gozan, and in the cities o^tlie Medes : 

12 Becau.se *they obeyed not the voice 
of the Lord their God, but transgressed 
his covenant, a)ul all that Moses the ser- 
vant of the Lord commanded, and would 
not hear them, nor do them. 

13 ^Now ''in the fourteenth year of 
king Hezekiah did * Sennacherib king of 
Assyria come up against all the fenced 
cities of Judah, and took them. 

14 And Hezekiah king of Judah sent to 
the king of Assyria to Lachish, saying, 
I have offended ; return from me : that 
which thou puttest on me will I bear. 
And the king of Assyria appointed unto 
Hezekiah king of Judah three hundred 
talents of silver and thirty talents of gold. 

15 And •-'Hezekiah gave him all the sil- 
ver that was found in the house of the 
Lord, and in the treasures of the king's 
house. 

16 At that time did Hezekiah cut off 
the gold from the doors of the temple of 
the Lord, and/;-om the pillars which Hez- 
ekiah king of Judah had overlaid, and 
gave t it to the king of Assyria. 

17 T[And the king of Assyria '^sent 
Tartan and Rabsaris and Rab-shakch 
from Lachish to king Hezekiah with a 
great t host against Jerusalem : and they 
went up and came to Jerusalem. And 
when they were come up, they came and 
stood by the conduit of the upper pool, 
which is in the ^highway of the fuller's 

.field. 

18 And when they had called to the 
king, there came out to them Eliakim the 
son of Hilkiah, which icas over the house- 
hold, and Shebna the ^ scribe, and Joah 
the son of Asaph the recorder. 

19 And Rab-shakeh said unto them. 
Speak ye now to Hezekiah, Thus saith 
the great king, the king of Assyria, What 
confidence is this wherein thou trustest 1 

20 Thou II sayest, (but they arc but *vain 
words,) t/ have counsel and strength for 
the war. Now on whom dost thou trust, 
that thou rebellest against me 1 

21 Now, behold, thou t trustest upon 
the staff of this bruised ""reed, even upon 



, 


tieh. 


q:2fi 


57; 


P«a 


107: 


17: Dan. 9 


6, 10. 


h aCliron 


32:1, 


p.tc 


, Isa 


:ifi : 


, etc 




Heb 


Sank 


rih. 


c clmp. 16 : 8. 


Heb. 


Ihr 


n. d 


Tsa. ' 


0:1. 


t 


Hpb. 


Senvy. 


e 1 


w. 7 : .1. 


4 Or, tfc 


■etary. 


II 


r, tnlkest. 


• Heb. 


word 


of the 


tips. 


t Or 


But counsel and 


stre 


nglh 


are/. 


r the 


wa, 


■ t 


Heb. t 


rustegt thee. 


( Kz.ek. -i 


1 : H, 7. 



14. Lachish; a fortified city in the south part 
of Judah. 

2.5. The Lord said to me ; this assertion was 
false. 

27. Eat their own dung ; in the extremity of 
tJie famine which he threatened to bring upon 
them. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

-5. Confidence in God is the best safeguard in 



Egypt, on which if a man lean, it will go 
into his hand, and pierce it : so is Pharaoh 
king of Egypt unto all that trust on him. 

22 But if ye say unto me, We trust in 
the Lord our God : is not that he, whose 
highs places and whose altars Hezekiah 
hath taken away, and hath said to Judah 
and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before 
this altar in Jerusalem"? 

23 Now therefore, I pray thee, give 
pledges^ to my lord the king of Assyria, 
and I will deliver thee two thousand 
horses, if thou be able on thy part to set 
riders upon them. 

24 How then wilt thou turn away the 
face of one captain of the least of my 
master's servants, and put thy trust on 
Egypt for chariots and for horsemen 1 

25 Am I now come up without the 
Lord against this place to destroy if? 
The ''Lord said to me, Go up against this 
land, and destroy it. 

26 Then said Eliakim the son of Hil- 
kiah, and Shebna, and Joah, nnto Rab- 
shakeh, Speak, I pray thee, to thy ser- 
vants in the Syrian language ; for we 
understand // .• and talk not with us in 
the Jews' language in the ears of the 
people that are on the wall. 

27 But Rab-shakeh said unto them. 
Hath my master sent me to thy mas- 
ter, and to thee, to speak these words? 
hath he not sent me to the men which sit 
on the wall, that 'they may eat their own 
dung, and drink II their own piss with 
you ? 

28 Then Rab-shakeh stood and cried 
with a loud voice in the Jews' language, 
and spake, saying, Hear the word of the 
great king, the king of Assyria: 

29 Thus -i saith the king. Let not Heze- 
kiah deceive you : for he shall not be able 
to deliver you out of his hand': 

30 Neither ''let Hezekiah make you 
trust 'in the Lord, saying. The Lord 
will surely deliver us, and this city shall 
not be delivered into the hand of the 
king of Assyria. 

31 Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus 
saith the king of Assyria, * Makeaji agree- 
ment with me by a present, and come out 



e ver 


.4 


■ICh 


ron 


31: 


1. 


% Or, 


hostages. 




b Is 


R. 10 


R, fi; Aino.4 


3:fi; 


.lo 


in I'l 


10 


11. 


■ 1 


nm. 4 


,->; E7.ek 


4 


: l.\ 


II He 


b. the water 


oflh 


irfectf 


1 


Vm 


73 


8.9. 


k 2Tl.e. 


■) 


2:4, 


8. 


Ps.i. 11:1: 


22:7 


8; 


l.'S; 


,2 




Or 


. Seek 


myfat-nr 




Heb 


Make with me a 


blessing. 


Gen. 


32 


20; 


33 


11; P 


rov. 18:1 


rt. 









danger, and the surest means of all desirable pros- 
perity and success. 

12. The wicked often succeed, not on account of 
their worthiness, but on account of the wickedness 
of those over whom they triumph. 

25. Success emboldens men in transgression . and 
they sometimes claim that they please G-od, because 
he sufl'ers them for a time to prosper in their sins. 

35. Ascribing to creatures or to false gods what 
497 



Hezekiah sends to Isaiah. 



II. KINGS, XIX. 



He appeals unto God. 



to me, and then eat ye every man of his 
own vine, and every one of his fig-tree, 
and drink ye every one the waters of his 
cistern :* 

32 Until I come and take you away to 
a land "like your own land, a land of 
corn and wine, a land of bread and A'iue- 
yards, a land of oil-olive and of honey, 
that ye may live, and not die : and heark- 
en not unto Hezekiah, when he t persuad- 
eth you, saying, The Lord will deliver 
us. 

33 Hath ''any of the gods of the nations 
delivered at all his land out of the hand 
of the king of Assyria? 

34 Where are the gods of ' Hamath, and 
of Arpad] where are the gods of Sephar- 
vaim, Hena, and tlvah? have they de- 
livered Samaria out of my hand ? 

35 Who ^are they among all the gods of 
the countries, that have delivered their 
country out of my hand, that the Lord 
should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand 1 

36 But the people held their peace, and 
answered him '^not a word : for the king's 
commandment was, saying. Answer him 
not. 

37 Then came Eliakim the son of Hil- 
kiah, which was over the household, and 
Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of 
Asaph the recorder, to '^Hezekiah with 
their clothes rent, and told him the words 
of Rab-shakeh. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

1 Hezekiah moumingsendeth to Isaiah to pray for them. 
6 Isaiah comforteth them. 8 Sennacherib, going to 
encounter Tirhakah. sendeth a blasphemous letter to 
Hezekiah. 14 H<izekiah's prayer. .20 Isaiah's proph- 
ecy of the pride and destruction of Sennacherib, and 
the good of Zion. 35 An angel slayeth the Assyrians. 
3G Sennacherib is slain at Nineveh by his own sons. 

AND Kit came to pass, when king 
Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his 
clothes, and covered himself with sack- 
cloth, and went into the house of the 
Lord. 

2 And he .sent Eliakim, which was over 
the household, and Shebna the scribe, 
and the elders of the priests, covered 
with sackcloth, to Usaiah the prophet 
the son of Amoz. 

3 And they said unto him, Thus saith 
Hezekiah, This day is a ""day of trouble, 
and of rebuke, and I'bla.sphemy : for the 
children are come to the birth, and there 
is not strength to bring forth. 

4 It may be the Lord thy God will hear 



" Or, pit. • Deut. R : 7, «. \ Ot,il<criveth. b chnp. 19: 12, .3; 
Inainh 10: 10, 11. ejer.4«:23. t .^fn, clinp. 17: 3<. Jrlinp. 
lil: 17, 18; D.in. 3:15. • Prov. 56 : 4 ; Amo.n 5 : 13. ( I»x 3-! : 7. 
t iKninh 37 : 1, etc } I.uke 3 : 4, oiled i'»ai<i». k Jer. 30 : 7. 
\\ Ot. provocation. I chap. 18:17 iP«a. 74:18. iP.n. 50:21. 



belongs only to Jehovah, and pretending that it is 
as vain to trust in him a.s in them, is a sure way to 
provoke his wrath. 
498 



the king oil Assyria his master hath 'sent 
to J reproach the living God; and will 
reprove'' the words which the Lord thy 
God hath heard : wherefore lift up thy 
prayer for the 'remnant that are *left. 

5 So the servants of king Hezekiah 
came to Isaiah. 

6 ^And Isaiah said unto them, Thus 
shall ye say to your master. Thus saith 
the Lord, Be not afraid of the words 
which thou hast heard, Mith which "the 
servants of the king of Assyria have 
blasphemed me. 

7 Behold, "I will send a blast "upon 
him, and he shall hear a rumor, and 
shall return to his own land; and I will 
cause him to fall by the sword in his 
own land. 

8 II So Rab-shakeh returned, and found 
the king of Assyria warring against Lib- 
nah: for he had heard that he was de- 
parted from PLachish. 

9 And T when he heard say of Tirhakah 
king of Ethiopia, Behold, he is come out 
to fight against thee ; he sent messengers 
again unto Hezekiah, saying, 

10 Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah 
king of Judah, saying, Let not thy God 
in whom thou "trustest deceive thee, 
saying, Jerusalem shall not be delivered 
into the hand of llic king of Assyria. 

1 1 Behold, thou hast heard what the 
kings of Assyria have done to all lands, 
by destroying them utterly: and shalt 
thou be delivered? 

12 Have Mhe gods of the nations deliv- 
ered them which my fathers have de- 
stroyed; as Gozan, and Haran, and Re- 
zeph, and the children of 'Eden which 
tcere in Thelasar? 

13 Where is the king of Hamath, and 
the king of Arpad, and the king of the 
city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivah? 

14 ^And Hezekiah received the letter 
of the hand of the messengers, and read 
it: and Hezekiah went up into the house 
of the Lord, and spread it before the 
Lord, 

15 And Hezekiah "prayed before the 
Lord, and said, Lord God of Israel, 
which "dwellest between the cherubim, 
thou" art the God, even thou alone, of all 
the kingdoms of the earth; *thou hast 
made heaven and earth, 

1 6 LoRD,*bow down thine car, and hear : 



1 n<i 


mans 9: 2 


7. • 


Heh. found. 


m 


hap, 18:3.V 


n Ter 


3S-.37 


O Jo 


r. fil :1. 


p rl 


ap. 18:14. 


1 


IS 


m. sn : 2T. 


r cliaj 


18:ft 


• cl> 


np. 18:33 


34. 


1 Ezek. 27 


2.3. 


u 


■2 Cliron. .34 


:20. T 


ISam. 


■4:4 


2 Chron 


.5:7, 


8. w IKi 


nfr« 


18 


39; UmvC.> 


44:6. 


I Pa;.. 


1^2: 


2S. J P» 


1.31 


■2. 













8, Libnah , 



CHAPTER XIX. 

one of tlie fortified cities of J 



udah. 



Isaiah'' s prophecy. 



II. KINGS, XIX. 



Sennacherib's ruin. 



u.c't^^' open,* Lord, thine eyes, and see : 
and hear the words of Sennacherib, which 
hath sent him to reproach the living God. 

1 7 Of a truth, Lord, the kings of Assyria 
have destroyed tlie nations and their lands, 

18 And have *cast their gods into the 
fire : for they were no gods, but the '' work 
of men's hands, wood and stone : there- 
fore they have destroyed them. 

19 Now therefore, Lord our God, I 
beseech thee, save thou us out of his 
hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth 
may <=know that thou art the Lord God, 
evea thou only. 

20 T[Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent 
to Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith the Lord 
God of Israel, That which thou hast 
prayed to me against Sennacherib king 
of Assyria I have '^ heard. 

21 This is the word that the Lord hath 
spoken concerning him: The "virgin the 
daughter of Zion hath despised thee, and 
laughed thee to scorn ; the daughter of 
Jerusalem hath "^shaken her head at thee. 

22 Whom hast thou reproached and blas- 
phemed ? and against whom hast thou ex- 
alted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on 
high? eue/i^against the Holy One of Israel. 

23 By t thy messengers thou hast re- 
proached the Lord, and hast said. With 
the multitude of my ''chariots I am come 
up to the height of the mountains, to the 
sides of Lebanon, and will cut down ^ the 
tall cedar-trees thereof, and the choice 
fir-trees thereof: and I will enter into the 
lodgings of his borders, and into ^ the forest 
of his Carmel. 

24 I have digged and drunk strange wa- 
ters, and with the sole of my feet have I 
dried up all the rivers of l!bcsieged places. 

25 Hast* thou not heard long ago how I 
liave 'done it, and of ancient times that 
I have formed if? now have I brought 
it to pass, that thou shouldest be to lay 
waste fenced cities into ruinous heaps. 

26 Therefore their inhabitants were tof 
small power, they were dismayed and 
confounded ; they were as the grass of 
the field, and as the green herb, as the 



a aChroii. 6M0. * Heb. given, b Psa. 115:4, etc.; Isa. 44: 10, 
etc. c IKinss. 20:28 d Psa. 66 : 2. e Lam. 2 : 13. fJoblfi:4; 
I.am. 2:15. B Isa. 5 : 24 ; Jer. 51 : 5. t Heb. By the hand of. h Psa. 
20:7. X Heh.the tallnets. \ Or.lheforett und hit /ruit/uljield. 
Isa. 10:18. H Or, fenced. * Or, Hutt thou not heard hovr f have 
made it long ago, and formed it of ancient times T thoutd I now 



21. The daughter of Zion ; the church of God 
in Jerusalem. 

23. Cut down the tall cedar-trees ; overcome 
all obstructions and desolate the whole land. 

24. T)ru))k strange ivaters ; such as he had 
digged for, and tound himself. Dried up all the 
rivers ; the waters on which the besieged had de- 
pended for supply. 

25. I have done it ; the Lord liad suffered him 
to accomplish what he had done, and it was all in 
fullilment of the purposes of Jehovah. 



grass ' on the house-tops, and as corn blast- 
ed before it be grown up. 

27 But I know thy t abode, and thy go- 
ing out, and thy coming in, and thy rage 
against me. 

28 Because thy rage against me and thy 
tumult is come up into mine ears, therefore 
I will put my '' hook in thy nose, and my 
bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back 
by the way by which thou camest. 

29 And this shall he a sign unto thee. 
Ye shall eat this year such things as grow 
of themselves, and in the second year that 
which springeth of the same ; and in the 
third year sow ye, and reap, and plant 
vineyards, and eat the fruits thereof. 

30 And Hhe remnant that is escaped of 
the house of Judah shall yet again take 
root downward, and bear fruit upward. 

31 For out of Jerusalem shall go forth 
a 'remnant, and ilthey that escape out of 
mount Zion : the zeal of the Lord of hosts 
shall do this. 

32 Therefore thus saith the Lord con- 
cerning the king of Assyria, He shall not 
come into this city, nor shoot an arrow 
there, nor come before it with shield, 
nor cast a bank against it. 

33 By the way that he came, by the 
same shall he return, and shall not come 
into this city, saith the Lord. 

34 For ""I will defend this city, to save 
it, for mine own sake, and for my servant 
David's sake. 

35 T[ And "it came to pass that night, 
that the angel of the Lord went out, and 
smote in the camp of the Assyrians a 
hundred fourscore and five thousand : 
and when they arose early in the morn- 
ing, behold, they iccre all dead corpses. 

36 So Sennacherib king of Assyria de- 
parted, and went and returned, and dwelt 
at "Nineveh. 

37 And it came to pass, as he was wor- 
shipping in the house of Nisroch his god, 
that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons 
smote P him with the sword: and they 
escaped into the land of 'Armenia. And 
Esar-haddon his^son reigned in his stead. 



bring it to be laid watte, ami fenced citiet to be ruinous heaps f 
ilsa. 45:7. S K^h. short of hand, j Psa. 1 20 : fi. t Or. fi/rmy. 
k Kzek. S8: 4. \ Heb. the escaping of the house of Judah that 
remaineth. I verse 4. || Heb. the escaping, m chapter 20 : H. 
n 2 Chron. 32 : 21 ; Isa. 37 : 36. o Gen. 10:11; Jonah 1:2; 3:2, 
etc. p ver. 7. * Heb. Ararat, q Ezra 4:2. 



29. A sign unto thee; to Hezekiah and his 
people. 

3-5. r/tey o-rojc,- those who were spared. They 
were all dead ; those who had, the night before, 
been smitten by the angel of the Lord. 

37. Nisroch ; an idol god. 

INSTRUCTION.^. 

1. G-od is the unfailing resource of his people. 
In times of trouble they repair to him, and find him 
to be a very present and an all-sufficient helper. 

4. Jehovah is a prayer-hearing God : and his 
499 



HezekiaK's sickness. 



II. KINGS, XX. 



prayer and recovery. 



CHAPTER XX. 



1 Hezekiah, having received a message of death, by 
prayer hath his life lengthened. 8 The sun goeth 
ten degrees backward for a sign of that promise. 12 
Berodach-baladan sending to visit Hezekiah because 
of the wonder, hath notice of his treasures. 14 Isaiah 
understanding thereof foretelleth the Babylonian 
captivity. "20 Manasseh succeedeth Hezekiah. 

IN "those days was Hezekiah sick unto 
death. And the prophet Isiiiah the son 
of Amoz came to him, and said unto him, 
Thus saith the Lord, *Set thy house in 
order; for thou shalt die, and not live. 

2 Then he turned his face to the wall, 
and prayed unto the Lord, saying, 

3 I beseech thee, O Lord, ''remember 
now how I have '^ walked before thee in 
truth'' and with a perfect heart, and have 
done that which is good in thy sight. 
And Hezekiah wept tsore. 

4 And it came to pass, afore Isaiah was 
gone out into the middle i court, that the 
word of the Lord came to him, saying, 

5 Turn again, and tell Hezekiah the 
captain'' of my people. Thus saith the 
Lord, the God of David thy father, I have 
heard "^ thy prayer, I have seen thy ^tears : 
behold, I will ''heal thee: on the third 
day thou shalt go up unto the house of 
the Lord. 

6 And I will add unto thy days fifteen 
years; and I will deliver thee and this 
city out of the hand of the king of As- 
syria; and 'I will defend this city for 
mine own sake, and for my servant Da- 
vid's sake. 



7 And Isaiah said, Take a lump "b^c^J; 
of figs. And they took and laid it on the 
boil, and he recovered. 

8 ^ And Hezekiah said unto Isaiah, 
What shall be the J sign that the Lord 
will heal me, and that I shall go up into 
the house of the Lord the third day? 

9 And Isaiah said. This sign shalt thou 
have of the Lord, that the Lord will do 
the thing that he hath spoken : shall the 
shadow go forward ten degrees, or go 
back ten degrees'? 

10 And Hezekiah answered, It is a light 
thing for the shadow to go down ten de- 
grees : nay, but let the shadow return 
backward ten degrees. 

1 1 And Isaiah the prophet cried unto 
the Lord: and ''he brought the shadow 
ten degrees backward, by which it had 
gone down in the * dial of Ahaz. 

12 HAt 'that time il Berodach-baladan, 
the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent 
letters and a present unto Hezekiah : for 
he had heard that Hezekiah had been 
sick. 

13 And Hezekiah hearkened unto them, 
and showed '"them all the house of his 
precious* things, the silver, and the gold, 
and the spices, and the precious oint- 
ment, and all the house of his t armor, 
and all that was found in his "treasures: 
there was nothing in his house, nor in 
all his dominion, that Hezekiah showed 
them not. 



• iChron. 3'2:24,etc.; I«a. .18:l,etr. ' Heh. Gire iharsie cun- S9 : 12: 56 : 8; 1-26 : 5. h Deut. 32 : 39. ichsp. 19:34. i Judg. 

ccrning thi/ haute, i Sam. U: ■23. b Nell. 13 : 22. c ch;ip. IS : 3-6. 6: 17, 37 ; Isa. 7 : 11, 14. k Josh. 10:12. ^ Heb. dtfreei. I Isa. 

■t Gen. 17:1; 1 Kings,3:6. ^ Heb. 7iiith a drral wcepinn. J Or, 39 : 1, etc. \\ Or, Meiodnchbaladitn. m 2 Cliron. 32: 27. ''Or, 

cil!/. 1 lSam.9:16; 10:1. f cliap. 19 :;0 : Psa. Il6: 19,20. B I's.a. spicrri/. f Or, jewels ; Heh. vtsttU. iiProv.23:5. 



people not only call on him themselves, but desire 
the prayers of others, especially such as are distin- 
guished by his presence and favor. 

6. Those who trust in the Lord, and so fear as to 
obey him, have no reason to fear any others, but 
may expect in due time his effectual aid. 

12. Because the idols in which the wicked trust- 
ed have not delivered them, some conclude that Je- 
hovah will not deliver his people, and treat him as 
if he could do no more for or against them, than 
gods of wood and of stone. 

19. Jehovah will show that he is the one only 
living and true God, and that those who exalt them- 
selves he is able to abase ; and will effectually pro- 
tect and provide for all who trust in him. 

25. The exploits of the wicked are only a fulfil- 
ment of a part of the plan of Jehovah ; and when 
he sees fit he can dash them in pieces as a potter's 
vessel, or cause them in his own way and time to 
come to an ignominious and miserable end. 

29. To his people <jod affords evidence that it is 
safe to trust in him, and to wait upon him in hum- 
ble supplication ; for in due time all his promises 
will be fulfilled. 

.'W. Armies are as dependent on God as individ- 
uals ; he keeps the breath in their nostrils, and can 
at any time take it away and leave them all dead 
corpses. 

CHAPTER XX. 

1. Sici- ii/i/o death ; with a deadly disease. 

7. The boil ; with which Hezekiah was alDicted, 

500 



and which, if God had not interposed, would have 
been mortal. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. In every situation men are liable to sickness 
and death. They should therefore have all their 
affairs so arranged, as to be habitually prepared to 
leave tliis world and enter on the retributions of 
eternity. 

5. Prayer is often a means of removing sickness 
which would otherwise prove mortal, and inducing 
the Lord to continue life when he would otherwise 
have taken it away. 

7. Tiie fact that diseases are God's servants, and 
that they come and go at his bidding, should never 
supersede the use of appropriate means, or lead us 
in any measure to neglect them. 

II. The Lord gives abundant evidence of the 
truth of his promises, that his people may trust his 
word without fear of being disappointed. 

13. Even good men are liable to be elated with 
their blessings, to seek applause, and so display 
their acquisitions as to displease the Lord. 

16. The Lord will efTeclually humble the pride of 
his people, take off their hearts from transitory, un- 
certain riches, and lead them to trust alone in Him 
who giveth them richly all things to enjoy, and who 
can at .any time take aw.ay wiiat he has given. 

19. However trying the dispensations of Provi- 
dence, pious men will submit to them; knowing 
that God has the best of reasons for all which he 
docs, and doeth all things well. 



Captivity foretold. 



II. KINGS, XXI, 



Manassch's great wickedness. 



B.c.'n^' ^4 IT Then came Isaiah the prophet 
unto king Hezckiah, and said unto him, 
What said these men"? and from whence 
came they unto thee? And Hezekiah 
said, They are come from a far country, 
even from Babylon. 

15 And he said. What have they seen 
in thy house? And Hezekiah answered. 
All* the things that are in my house have 
they seen: there is nothing among my 
treasures that I have not showed them. 

16 And Isaiah said unto Hezekiah, 
Hear the word of the Lord. 

17 Behold, ""the days come, that all 
that is in thy house, and that which thy 
fathers have laid up in store unto this 
day, shall be carried unto Babylon : noth- 
ing shall be left, saith the Lord. 

18 And of thy sons that shall issue from 
thee, which thou shalt beget, shall they 
take "^away ; and '^thcy shall be eunuchs 
in the palace of the king of Babylon. 

19 Then said Hezekiah unto Isaiah, 
Good*" is the word of the Lord which 
thou hast spoken. And he said, *Is it not 
good, if peace and truth be in my days? 

20 1[And the rest of the acts of Heze- 
kiah, and all his might, and how he made 
a'^pool, and a conduit, and brought ^ water 
into the city, are they not written in the 
book of the Chronicles of the kings of 
Judah? 

21 And Hezekiah slept with his fathers : 
and Manasseh his son reigned in his stead. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

1 Manasseh's reign. 3 His great idolatry. 10 His 
■wickedness causetli prophecies against Judah. 17 
Amon succeedeth him. 19 Amon's wicked reign. 
23 He being slain by his servants, and those murder- 
ers slain by the people, Josiah is made king. 

MANASSEH'' was twelve years old 
when he began to reign, and reign- 
ed fifty and five years in Jerusalem. And 
his mother's name tuas Hephzi-bah. 

2 And he did that which rvas evil in the 
sight of the Loud, 'after the abominations 
of the heathen, whom the Lord cast out 
before the children of Israel. 

3 For he built up again the high places 
which J Hezekiah his father had destroy- 
ed ; and he reared up altars for Baal, and 



a vcr.lX b ch.ip. 24 : 1.1 ; -2.5:13; Lev. 20: la; Jcr. 27: -21 ; .V; : 17. 
c cliap. 24:12; 2Chron. 3.3: 11. d Dan. 1 : .3. eJobK-il. "Or, 
Shall there not be ptaet and truth T fNeh.3:lfi. « 2 Cliron. 32 : 30. 
h2Chron.33:l,etc. ichap.l6:3. i^|lap.l8:4. k I Kings, 16:32. 
I cliap. 17: 16; Dent 4: 19; Job 31: 26. "> .ler. 32 : 34. n 1 King.«, 
8:29. chap. 16:3; IT: 17; Miiah6:7. pDeut.l8:10. q 2SRm. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

6. Ohservedtimes ; seasons for worshipping idols, 
after the manner of the heathen. 

12. Botit his ears shall tingle ; at the dread- 
fulness of the judgments which God would bring 
upon them. 

1.3. T/ie line of Samaria; he would visit Je- 
rusalem with such judgTnents as lie liad Samaria. 
Wipe Jerusalem ; purify it from idolatry by the 
captivity and destruction of its wicked inhabitants. 



made a grove, as ''did Ahab king of Is- 
rael; and 'worshipped all the host of 
heaven, and served them. 

4 And he built altars in ""the house of 
the Lord, of which the "Lord said, In 
Jerusalem will I put my name. 

5 And he built altars for all the host of 
heaven in the two courts of the house of 
the Lord. 

6 And he made his "^son pass through 
the fire, and observed p times, and used 
enchantments, and dealt with familiar 
spirits and wizards: he wrought much 
wickedness in the sight of the Loud, to 
provoke Jiim to anger. 

7 And he set a graven image of the 
grove that he had made in the house, of 
which the Lord said to i David, and to 
Solomon"' his son. In this house, and in 
Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all 
the tribes of Israel, will I put my name 
for ever : 

8 Neither ''will I make the feet of Is- 
rael move any more out of the land 
which I gave their fathers; only if they 
will observe to do according to all that I 
have commanded them, and according to 
all the law that my servant Moses com- 
manded them. 

9 But they hearkened not: and 'Manas- 
seh seduced them to do more evil than 
did the nations whom the Lord destroy- 
ed before the children of Israel. 

10 T[And the Loud spake by his ser- 
vants the prophets, saying, 

11 Because "Manasseh king of Judah 
hath done these abominations, and hath 
done wickedly above all that the ^' A mo- 
rites did, which iferc before him, and halh 
made Judah also to sin with his idols: 

12 Therefore thus saith the Loud God 
of Israel, Behold, "I am bringing such 
evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that who- 
soever heareth of it, both his ears shall 
tingle. , 

13 2\.nd I will stretch over Jerusalem 
the *line of Samaria, and the plummet 
of the house of Ahab : and I will wipe 
Jerusalem ''as a man wipeth a dish, 
wiping t it, and turning it upside down. 



7:13. rlKing9,9:3. • 2 Sam. 7 : 10. t J'rov. 29: I 2. o chap. 
23:26,27; 24:3,4; .lerfimmh I.t: 4. Tver. 9; I Kings, 21 : 26. 
«r ISam. 3:11 ; Jer.lft:3; Ainns3:2. x Isaiah 10: 22 ; 34:11; 
I.am. 2:8; Amos 7 : 7, 8. y I Kinjs, 14 : 10. t Heb. he wipeth 
and turneth it upon the face thereof. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Men from religious families sometimes commit 
wickedness far beyond others who have not had pious 
instruction and example. 

9. Those who break over the restraints of a pious 
education and become abandoned in wickedness, 
often go to greater lengths in iniquity than even 
the heathen, and ripen for more agKra-^-ite'l ru^n- 

21. The wickedness of fathers will be likely to be 
imitated by their children, and that of rulers by tbeir 
501 



Anion's evil reign. 



II. KINGS, XXII. 



Josiah's good reign. 



14 And I will "forsake the remnant of 
mine inheritance, and deliver them into 
the hand of their ''enemies; and they 
shall become a prey and a spoil to all 
their enemies ; 

15 Because they have done that u-hich 
rcas evil in my sight, and have provoked 
me to anger, since the day their fathers 
came forth out of Egypt, even unto this 
day. 

16 Moreover Manasseh shed innocent 
blood "^ very much, till he had filled Jeru- 
salem *from one end to anotlier ; besides 
liis sin wherewith ''he made Judah to sin, 
in doing that tvhich was evil in the sight 
of the Lord. 

17 UNow nhe rest of the acts of Ma- 
nasseh, and all that he did, and his sin 
that he sinned, arc they not written in 
the book of the Chronicles of the kings of 
Judah'? 

1 8 And Manasseh slept with his fathers, 
and was buried in the garden of his own 
house, in the garden of Uzza: and Amon 
his son reigned in his stead. 

19 ^ Amon ^ was twenty and two years 
old when he began to reign, and he reign- 
ed two years in Jerusalem. And his 
mother's name was Meshullemeth, the 
daughter of Haruz of Jotbah. 

20 And he did that which was evil in 
the sight of the Lord, s as his father Ma- 
nasseh did. 

21 And he walked in all the way that 
his father walked in, and served the idols 
that his father served, and worshipped 
them : 

22 And he '' forsook the Lord God of 
his fathers, and walked not in the way 
of the Lord. 

23 And the servants of Amon conspired 
against him, and slew the king in his 
own liouse. 

24 And the people of the land slew all 
them that had conspired against king 
Amon ; and tlic people of the land made 
Josiah his son king in his stead. 

25 Now the rest of the acts of Amon 
which he did, are they not written in the 
book of the Chronicles of the kings of 
Judali? 

26 And he was buried in his sepulchre 
in the garden of Uzza : and t Josiah his son 
reigned in his stead. 



~ 


Psnlm 89 : 38 


etc.; 


Jf-r. 


1-2 


T; 


Amon A ; 'i 


k Piinlin 74 : 1-7. 


c .1 


.^r. 2 


34; 19: 


■1. * 


Hik 


A 


om 


mouth to 


mouth. 


<! 1 Kiii^-., 


H 


16, 


c -1 Cliro 


n .Tl: 


l-M. 


1 


'iC\irnn. 3:1 : ll . etc. 


e verse -2, 


etc 


h 


rlmp. M 


: 17; 


1 Kin;s, 


11 


■Xi. t M 


itUiew 1 


: 10, railed 



CHAPTER XXII. Vc"^: 

1 Josiah's good reign. .3 He taketh care for the repair 
of the temple. 8 Hilkiah having found a book cf the 
law, Joeiah sendeth to Huldah to inquire of the Lord. 
15 Huldah prophesieth the destruction of Jerusalem, 
hut respite thereof in Josiah's time. 

JOSIAH' was eight years old when he 
began to reign, and he reigned tliirty 
and one years in Jerusalem. And his 
mother's name laas Jedidah, the daughter 
of Adaiah ofJBoscath. 

2 And he did that ichich U'as right in 
the sight of the Lord, and walked in all 
the way of David his father, and turned 
not ^ aside to the right hand or to the left. 

3 TfAnd it came to pass in the eigh- 
teenth year of king Josiah, that the king 
sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, the son 
of Meshullam, the scribe, to the house of 
the Lord, saying, 

4 Go up to Hilkiah the high-priest, that 
he may sum the 'silver which is brought 
into the house of the Lord, which the '"keep- 
ersof the ^door have gathered of the people : 

5 And let them deliver it into the hand 
of the doers of the work, that have the 
oversight of the house of the Lord: and 
let them give it to the doers of the work, 
which is in the house of the Lord, to 
repair the breaches of the house, 

6 Unto carpenters, and builders, and 
masons, and to buy timber and hewn 
stone to repair the house. 

7 Howbeit, there was no reckoning 
made with them of the money that was 
delivered into their hand, because they 
dealt faithfully. 

8 11 And Hilkiah the high-priest said 
unto Shaphan the scribe, I have "found 
the book of the law in the house of the 
Lord. And Hilkiah gave the book to 
Shaphan, and he read it. 

9 A lid Sli a phan t he scribe came to the king, 
and brought the king word again, and said. 
Thy servants have ^gathered tlic money that 
was found in the house, and have delivered 
it into the hand of them that do the work, that 
have the oversightof the house of the Lord. 

10 And Shaphan the scribe showed the 
king, saying, Hilkiah the priest hath de- 
livered me a book. And Shaphan °read 
it before the king. 

11 And it came to pass, when the king 
had heard the words of the book of the 
law, that he Prent his clothes. 



.r, 


tint. i 


IK 


npi, 13:2; 


2rliron. 


.34: 


.etc. 


j Jnnhun 1.1:. 19. 


k 


Deut. .") ; 


32. 


1 chapter 


•2:4. etc 


m 


Ps.ilm 


84:10. 


t Heb. 


th 


rethotd. 


n Deut. 31 : 24 


; iCIiron 


34: 


14, etc. 


\ Heb 


melted. 


° 


Nell. 8:3 


. IR 


Jer. 3fi:'l, 


IS. V -le 


r. 19 









people; and after having been tempters of each other been tlie original copy of the law of Moses, written 
in this world, they will, if they continue in sin, be- and deposited in the ark by himself, 
come tormentors of each other in the world to come. ' 11. He rent his clothes ; on account of the judg- 
_„P YYTT ' ments denounced in the law against the people; and 

CHArl hit AAll. jq which they were exposed on account of their idol- 

8. r/teAoo>tq/"</ic /aw; this is supposed to have atry. Ver. 19. 
502 



Josiak''s pious reign. 



II. KINGS, XXIII. 



The book of the law read. 



S c"^f • 12 And the king commanded Hil 
kiah the priest, and Ahikam the son of 
!Shaphan,and *Achborthe sonof tMichai- 
ah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asahiah 
a servant of the king's, saying, 

13 Go ye, * inquire of the Lord for me, 
and for the people, and for all Judah, 
concerning the words of this book that 
is found : for '' great is the wrath of the 
Lord that is kindled against us, because 
our" fathers have not hearkened unto 
the words of this book, to ""do according 
unto all that which is written concern- 
ing us. 

14 So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, 
and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asahiah, 
went unto Huldah the prophetess, the 
wife of Shallum the son of t Tikvah, the 
son of ^ Harhas, keeper of the II wardrobe ; 
now she dv.^clt in Jerusalem * in the col- 
lege ; and they communed with her. 

15 T[And she so id unto them. Thus 
saith the Lord God of Israel, Tell the 
man that sent you to me, 

16 Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will 
bring evil upon this place, and upon the 
inhabitants thereof, even all the words of 
the book which the king of Judah hath 
read : 

17 Because ^they have forsaken me, 
and have burned incense unto other gods, 
that they might provoke me to anger with 
all the works of their hands ; therefore 
my*" wrath shall be kindled against this 
place, and shall not be quenched. 

18 But to the king of Judah which sent 
you to inquire of the Lord, thus shall ye 
say to him. Thus saith the Lord God of 
Israel, As touching the words which thou 
hast heard ; 

19 Because thy ^heart was tender, and 
thou hast ''humbled thyself before the 
Lord, when thou hcardest what I spake 
against this place, and against the in- 
habitants thereof, that they should be- 
come a 'desolation and a J curse, and 
hast ''rent thy clothes, and 'wept before 



*•! Chron. 34:20, Mdon. i Or, Mirah •IChr. 10:M. b Pna. 
76 : 7 : Nalium 1:6; Rev. 6:17. c Deut V> : J7. <1 Jas. 1 : K-iS. 
t 2 Cliron. 34 : 22, Tikvalh. ^ Or, Hasrah. \\ Heb. garmcntt. 
* Or, in Me second part. « Deut. '29 : 25, etc. ; Neli. 9 : 26, 27 : 
Dan.9:ll-I4. f 1 Thess. 2 : 16. 5 Psalm ,il : 17 ; Isaiah 57 : I."). 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Though children may be expected generally 
to imitate their parents, a wicked child sometimes 
arises from a very pious family, and a pious child 
from a very wicked family ; thus showing the power 
and the sovereignty of Orod in the bestowment of 
his grace. 

3. True piety will manifest itself in efforts to 
promote the salvation not only of him who has it, 
but of all who may feel his influence. 

]"2. A real belief of the threatenings of God 
aijainst sin, will lead to the most earnest desire and 
diligent efforts to escape his wrath, and obtain his 
everlasting favor. 



me ; I also have heard thee, saith the 
Lord. 

20 Behold therefore, I will gather thee 
unto thy fathers, and "" thou shalt be gath- 
ered into thy grave in peace; and thine 
eyes shall not see all the evil which I 
will bring upon this place. And they 
brought the king word again. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

1 Josiah causeth the book to be read in a solemn assem- 
bly. 3 He reneweth the covenant of the Lord. 4 
He destroyeth idolatry. 15 He burnt dead men's 
bones upon the altar of Beth-el, as was fore-prophe- 
sied. 21 He kept a most solemn passover. 24 He 
put away witches and all abomination. 26 God's 
final wrath against Judah. 29 Josiah, provoking 
Pharaoh-necho, is slain at Megiddo. 'SI Jehoahaz, 
succeeding him, is imprisoned by Pharaoh-necho, 
who made Jehoiakim king. 36 Jehoiakim's wicked 
reign. 

AND ■' the king sent, and they gathered 
unto him all the ciders of Judah and 
of Jerusalem. 

2 And the king went up into the house 
of the Lord, and all the men of Judah 
and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with 
him, and the priests, and the prophets, 
and all the people, tboth small and great: 
and he read in their ears all the words 
of the book of the covenant which was 
found" in the house of the Lord. 

3 IfAnd Pthe king stood by a pillar, 
and made a covenant before the Lord, 
to walk after the Lord, and to keep his 
commandments and his testimonies and 
his statutes with all their heart and all 
their soul, to perform the words of this 
covenant that were written in this book. 
And all the people stood to the covenant. 

4 And the king commanded Hilkiah the 
high-priest, and the priests of the second 
order, and the keepers of the door, to 
bring forth out of the temple of tlie Lord 
all the vessels that were made for Baal, 
and for the i grove, and for all the host 
of heaven : and he burned them without 
Jerusalem in the tields of Kidron, and 
carried the ashes of them unto Beth-el. 

5 And he +put down Hhe idolatrous 



b IKin 


p'».2 


1:29. 


■ I.e 


1^.26:31,32. 


Je 


r.26:6; 


44:2 


1. 


krer. 


11. 


1 Neh. 


I :4. 


m !■ 


a. 37 


37; l8a.57: 


,2 


Jer. 22 


:I0 


a 


2Chr 




34:29, 


etc. 


f H 


eb. /r 


om small eve 


1 unto great 


o 


rl, 


ip. 22 


•«. 


p cliap 


II : 


14, 17. 


q 


chapter 21 : 3 


7. 


X Heb 


caused 


to etc 


fr 


% Heb 


CACT. 


innm. 


Hos 


■a 10 : .S ; foretold 


Zeph. 1 


:4. 









16. The piety of an individual, though it will 
avail to his salvation and his deliverance from 
many temporal evils, will not save others who con- 
tinue in their sins, or avert from them ultimately 
the judgments of heaven. 

'20. Death, though the consequence of sin, is 
through the grace of God sent in mercy to his peo- 
ple, and made the means of delivering them from 
the evils of this world, and introducing them to the 
perfect unending joys of the world to come. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

4. FitldsofKidroii; ontheeastsideof Jerusalem, 
through whicii ran the brook of that name. Ver. 6. 
503 



Josiah dcstroycth idolatry. 



II. KINGS, XXIII. 



A solemn passover kept. 



priests, whom the kings of Judah had or- 
dained to burn incense in the high places 
in the cities of Judah, and in the places 
round about Jerusalem; them also that 
burned incense unto Baal, to the sun, 
and to the moon, and to the * planets, 
and to all the host of heaven. 

6 And he brought out the grove from 
the house of the Lord, without Jerusa- 
lem, unto the brook Kidron, and burned 
it at the brook Kidron, and stamped it 
small to powder, and cast the powder 
thereof upon the "graves of the children 
of the people. 

7 And he brake down the houses of the 
sodomites,'' that were by the house of the 
Lord, where the "^ women wove thangings 
for the grove. 

8 And he brought all the priests out of 
the cities of Judah, and defiled the high 
places where the priests had burned in- 
cense, from ^ Geba to Beer-sheba, and 
brake down the high places of the gates 
that were in the entering in of the gate of 
Joshua the governor of the city, which 
were on a man's left hand at the gate of 
the city. 

9 Nevertheless the "priests of the high 
places came not up to the altar of the 
Lord in Jerusalem, but they did eat of the 
unleavened ^brcad among their brethren. 

10 And he defiled ^Topheth, which is 
in the ''valley of the children of Hin- 
nom, that no man might make his son or 
his daughter to 'pass through the fire to 
Molech. 

1 1 And he took away the horses that 
the kings of Judah had given to the sun, 
at the entering in of the house of the 
Lord, by the chamber of Nathan-mclech 
the ^chamberlain, which ivas in the sub- 
urbs, and burned the chariots of the sun 
with fire. 

12 And the altars that were on the Uop 
of the upper chamber of Ahaz, which the 
kings of Judah had made, and the altars 
which '' Manassch had made in the two 
courts of the house of the Lord, did the 
king beat down, and ^ brake them down 
from thence, and cast the dust of them 
into the brook Kidron. 

13 And the high places that 7<r/T before 
Jerusalem, which were on the right hand 



* Or,lmelve tignt,nr contttllalioni. •2Clir. 34:4. b I Kings, 
14:34: lfi:l'2. c Eiek. 8: 14; IH: IK. f Heb. Ao«»M. d 1 Kings, 
15 : «. « E7.Kk. 44 : 10-14. I I Sum. 2 : .m k Isn. 30 : M ; .ler. 
7:31. hJ<Hh.l5:B. i I.evitiinii 18 :21 ; Dcut. 18: 10: Ezckiel 
i:i:37, .39. t Or, eunueh, or nfficer. j Jtr. 19: I:! ; Zeph. 1 : fi. 
k chap. 21 :f>. 5 Or, ran from t/icnce. || Tlint i», tlie mount of 



8. Geha ; in the north p,%rt of Judea. Beer- 
sheha ; in the south part of .ludca. 

10. T/ie valley of I lie children of Iliin/om; 



of lithe mount of corruption, which VcisS: 
Solomon' thekingof Israel had builded for 
Ashtoreth the abomination of the Zidoni- 
ans, and for Chemosh the abomination of 
the Moabites, and for jNlilcom the abomi- 
nation of the children of Ammou, did the 
king defile. 

14 And he '"brake in pieces the *imagcs. 
and cut down the groves, and filled their 
places with the bones of men. 

15 TT Moreover the altar that icas at 
Beth-el, and the "high place which Jero- 
boam the son of Nebat, who made Israel 
to sin, had made, both that altar and the 
high place he brake down, and burned 
the high place, and stamped it small to 
powder, and burned the grove. 

16 And as Josiah turned himself, he 
spied the sepulchres that u'ere there in 
the mount, and sent, and took the bones 
out of the sepulchres, and burned them 
upon the altar, and polluted it, according 
to the "word of the Lord which the man 
of God proclaimed, who proclaimed these 
words. 

17 Then he said, What title is that that 
I seel And the men of the city told him, 
It is the sepulchre of the man of PGod, 
which came from Judah, and proclaimed 
these things that thou hast done against 
the altar of Beth-el. 

18 And he said. Let him alone; let no 
man move his bones. So they let his 
bones talone, with the bones of the proph- 
et that came out of Samaria. 

19 And all the houses also of the high 
places that were lin the cities of Samaria, 
which the kings of Israel had made to 
provoke the LORD to anger, Josiah took 
away, and did to them according to all 
the acts that he had done in Bcth-el. 

20 And he +slew 'all the priests of the 
high places that icere there upon the 
altars, .and burned men's "bones upon 
them, and returned to Jerusalem. 

21 ^And the king commanded all the 
people, saying. Keep the passover unto 
the Lord your God, as it is 'written in 
the book of this covenant. 

22 Surely "there was not holden such a 
passover from the days of the judges that 
judged Israel, nor in all the days of the 
kings of Israel, nor of the kings of Judah ; 



Olives. I 1 Kings, 11:7. 
7 :ft, 25; Micah 1 : 7. 



m Exodus 23:24; Num. .ti : 5.' ; Dent. 
Heb. slntuts. n 1 Kings, 12:28, ;1.3. 



4 : .», *it , iuiunii 1 : I. jiiirw. «tii(uca. « i jiiii^.-., i* . .o, ..... 

» lKing8,13:2. p 1 Kings, 13:30,31. \ Keh.toetcape. q 2 f hr. 
34:fi, 7. i Or, tncrificed. r rliap. II : 18 ; Ex. 22:20; lKins», 
18:40. • 2 Cbron. 34 : ft. I Ex. 12 : 3, etc. ; Num.9:2; DeuU 



16 : 2, etc. 



12. Th e altars — of Ahaz ; which had been erect- 
ed to idols. 

13. Mount of corrnption ; that is, the mount 
a place south-east of Jerusalem, in which idolaters ' of Olives. Ashtoreth — Chemosh — Milcom ; idol 
made their children pass through fire in honor of gods. 

their idol gods. , 16. The man of God ; 1 Kings, 13: 1-32. 

504 



Death of Josiali. 



II. KINGS, XXIV. 



Reign of Jehoiakim. 



B.^e^f • 23 But in the eighteenth year of 
king Josiah, ivherein this passover was 
holden to the Lord in Jerusalem. 

24 1[ Moreover "the workers with famil- 
iar spirits, and the wizards, and the * im- 
ages, and the idols, and all the abomina- 
tions that were spied in the land of Judah 
and in Jerusalem, did Josiah put away, 
that he might perform the words of the 
law,'' which were written in the book 
that Hilkiah the priest found in the house 
of the Lord. 

25 And "^like unto him was there no 
king before him, that ^ turned to the Lord 
with all his heart, and with all his soul, 
and with all his might, "according to all 
the law of Moses ; neither after him arose 
there any like him. 

26 TT Notwithstanding, the Lord turned 
not from the fierceness of his great wrath, 
wherewith his anger was kindled against 
Judah, '^because of all the t provocations 
that Manasseh had provoked him withal. 

27 And the Lord said, I ^will remove 
Judah also out of my sight, as I have 
removed'' Israel, and will cast off this 
city Jerusalem which I have chosen, and 
the house of 'which I said, My name 
shall be there. 

28 Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, 
and all that he did, are they not written 
in the book of the Chronicles of the kings 
of Judah'? 

29 ^In Jhis days Pharaoh-necho king 
of Egypt went up against the king of As- 
syria to the river Euphrates: and king 
Josiah went against him ; and he slew him 
at ''Megiddo, when he had seen him. 

30 And his servants carried him in a 
chariot dead from Megiddo, and brought 
him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his 
own sepulchre. And 'the people of the 
land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and 
anointed him, and made him king in his 
father's stead. 

31 ^ Jehoahaz t was twenty and three 
years old when he began to reign, and 
he reisned three months in Jerusalem. 



« chap. 21 :6; Uev. 2J: 15. * Or, teraphim, Genesi.'i 31 : 19. 
b Lev. l!l:.'!l; W-.n; Deut 18:11. c clmp. 18:5. i IKiiigs, 
8 : 43 ; .Ter. 29 : 13. c Nell. 10 : 29. f cliap. -21:11,12; 24 : 3, 4 ; 
Jer. 15 : 4. t Heb. angers, e chap. 21 : 13. h chap. 17 : 18, -.'O; 
18:11. ilKings,9:3. j 2 Ch roil. .35 : 20, etc. k Zech. 12 : 11. 
1 2 Chron. ;I6: l.etc. % Calle.l Shallum, 1 Chron. 3: 15; .leremi.ih 



29. Megiddo ; in the valley of the river Kishon. 

IXSTRUCTIOXS. 

.3. No repentance is genuine which does not lead 
to external reformation ; and no reformation is ac- 
cepted of Grod, but such as springs from the heart, 
and i-s persevered in to the end. 

C. Tilings which have been used as instruments, 
and wliich operate as incentives to evil, should be 
eflectually removed, and either destroyed or so treat- 
ed tliat their evil inflnence shall be done away. 

16. Though the fullihnent of divine declarations 



And his mother'.? name tvas ""Ilamutal, 
the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnali. 

32 And he did that ichich was evil in 
the sight of the Lord, according to all 
that his fathers had done. 

33 And Pharaoh-necho put him in 
bands at "Riblah in the land of Hamath, 
that^ he might not reign in Jerusalem; 
and II put the land to a tribute of a hun- 
dred talents of silver, and a talent of gold. 

34 And Pharaoh-necho made Eliakim 
the son of Josiah king in the room of Jo- 
siah his father, and "turned his name to 
Jehoiakim, and took Jehoahaz away : and 
heP oume to Egypt, and died there. 

35 And Jehoiakim gave the i silver and 
the gold to Pharaoh ; but he taxed the land 
to give the money according to the com- 
mandment of Pharaoh : he exacted the 
silver and the gold of the people of the 
land, of every one according to his taxa- 
tion, to give it unto Pharaoh-necho. 

36 ^ Jehoiakim teas twenty and five 
years old when he began to reign, and he 
reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And 
his mother's name icas Zebudah, the 
daughter of Pcdaiah of Rumah. 

37 And he did that which was evil in 
the sight of the Lord, according to all 
that his fathers had done. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

1 Jehoiakim, first subdued by Nebuchadnezzar, then 
rebelling against him, procureth his own ruin. 5 
Jehoiachin succeedeth him. 7 The king of Kgypt 
is vanquished by the king of Babylon. 8 Jehoia- 
chin's evil reign. 10 Jerusalem is taken and carried 
captive into Babylon. 17 Zedekiah is made king, 
and reigneth ill unto the utter destruction of Judah. 

IN '"his days Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim be- 
came his servant three years : then he 
turned and rebelled against him. 

2 And ^ the Lord sent against him bands 
of the Chaldees, and bands of the Syrians, 
and bands of the Moabites, and bands ot 
the children of Ammon, and sent them 
against Judah to destroy it, according to 
the word of the Lord, which he spake 
by* his servants the prophets. 



Or, 



22:11. m chap. 24:18. n ch.-ip. 2ft : fi; .Ieremi.ih ,'>2 : 27. i 
hecauge he reigned. \\ Heb. set a mulct upon the land. 2 C 
3li : 3. o chap. 24 : 17 ; Gen. 41 : 4.5 ; Dan. 1:7. p Jer. 22 : 11, 12 
Ezek. 19:3, 4. q verse 33. r 2 ChrOTL 36 : 5, etc. •Jer.'25:9 
32 : -28 ; Ezek. 19:8. * Heb. bi/ the hand of. 



may be long delayed, and many may conclude that 
they will never be accomplished, not one jot or tittle 
of them will fail to come to pass. 

25. No penitence on the part of individuals, and 
no external reformation of those over whom they 
have influence, can save guilty nations who have 
sinned away their day of grace, from meeting the 
retribution which they deserve. 

29. Though pious men may, through their own 
fault or the wickedness of others, come to an un- 
timely and violent death, it will be well with them 
at last. 

505 



Jehoiachin carried' 



II. KINGS, XXV. 



captive to Babylon. 



3 Surely at tlie commandment of the 
Lord came thix upon Judah, to remove 
them out of his sight, for "tlie sins of Ma- 
nasseh, according to all that he did; 

4 And also for the innocent '"blood that 
he shed : for "^he lilled Jerusalem with in- 
nocent blood, which the Lord would not 
pardon.'' 

5 T[ Now the rest of the acts of Jehoia- 
kim, and all that he did, are they not 
written in the book of the Chronicles of 
the kings of Judah ? 

6 So " Jehoiakim slept with his fathers : 
and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his 
stead. • 

7 And "^the king of Egypt came not again 
any more ovit of his land : for the king of 
Babylon had s taken from the river of 
Egypt unto the river Euphrates all that 
pertained to the king of Egypt. 

8 T[ Jehoiachin* was eighteen years old 
when he began to reign, and he reigned 
in Jerusalem three months. And his 
mother's name rvas Nehushta, the daugh- 
ter of Elnathan of Jerusalem. 

9 And he did that tvhich ivas evil in the 
sight of the Lord, according to all that 
his father had done. 

10 TI At '' that time the servants of Neb- 
uchadnezzar king of Babylon came up 
against Jerusalem, and the city t was be- 
sieged. 

11 And Nebuchadnezzar king of Baby- 
lon came against the city, and his ser- 
vants did besiege it. 

12 And 'Jehoiachin the king of Judah 
went out to the king of Babylon, he, and 
his mother, and his servants, and his 
princes, and his ^officers: and the king 
of Babylon took him in the eighth year 
of his reign. 

13 And he carried out thence all the 
treasures of the house of the Lord, and 
the treasures of the king's house, and cut 
in pieces all the vessels of gold which 
Solomon king of Israel had made in the 
temple of the Loud, as the J Lord had said. 

14 And 'he carried away all Jerusalem, 
and all the princes, and all the mighty 
men of valor, even ten thousand cap- 
tives, and all the craftsmen and smiths : 



• cliap.23:26; Ex.!0:S. b cliap.21 : 16; Heut. 19: 10; .Ier.2: 34; 
19:4. cPda. 106:3a d Exek. a3 : 25. o .Ter. 42 : 18, 19. f Jer. 
37:6,7. i!Jer.46:-2. * CalleiU«onia/i,l Cliron.3:lB; Jer. 24: 1 ; 
anJ Coni'oA, Jer. 2'2; 24, 28. hDnn. 1:1,2. i Heh. came into liei/e. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 
n. Out of his sight ; from the land where he 
had manifested his special presence and favor. 
16. Menof^night; of property and influence. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. The Lord is never at a less for instruments to 
punish his rebellious people ; and though the wicked 
act out their enmity to him in oppo-sing tliem, yet 
through them he fulfils his declarations and accom- 
plishes his wist) and holy designs. 
50G 



none remained, save the 'poorest *b'*6'^2?; 
sort of the people of the land. 

15 And he carried away Jehoiachin to 
Babylon, and the king's mother, and the 
king's wives, and his ^officers, and the 
mighty of the land, tliose carried he into 
captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon. 

16 And all the men of might, even seven 
thousand, and craftsmen and smiths a 
thousand, all that ttere strong and apt for 
war, even them the king of Babylon 
brought captive to Babylon. 

17 IfAnd ""the king of Babylon made 
Mattaniah his father's brother king in his 
stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah. 

18 Zedekiah" teas twenty and one years 
old when he began to reign, and he reign- 
ed eleven years in Jerusalem. And his 
mother's name icas "Hamutal, the daugh- 
ter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 

19 And he did that which ivas evil in the 
sight of the Lord, according to all that 
Jehoiakim had done. 

20 For through the anger of the Lord 
it came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, 
until he had cast them out from his pres- 
ence, that Zedekiah p rebelled against the 
king of Babylon. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

1 Jerusalem is besieged. 4 Zedekiah taken, his sons 
slain, his eyes put out. 6 Nebuzar-adan defacetU 
the city, carrieth the remnant, except a few poor 
laborers, into captivity, 13 spoileth and carrieth away 
the treasures. IS The nobles are slain at Riblah. 
22 Gedaliah, who was set over them that remained, 
being slain, the rest flee into Egypt. 27 Evil-mero- 
dach advanceth Jehoiachin in his court. 

AND lit came to pass in the ninth year 
of his reign, in the tenth month, in 
the tenth day of the month, that Nebu- 
chadnezzar king of ]5abylon came, he, 
and all his host, against Jerusalem, and 
pitched against it; and they built forts 
against it round about. 

2 And the city was besieged unto the 
eleventh year of king Zedekiah. 

3 And on the ninth day of ihe fotirth 
month the famine prevailed in the city, 
and tlicrc was no bread for the people of 
the land. 

4 Tl And the city was broken up, and all 
the men of war^c(/by night by the way of 



iJer.29:I,2. ^ Or, eunuchs, i rliip. 20: 17. kjer.24:l. Uh.lp. 
2S:12. i Or. eunuchs, m Jer. 37:1. n Jer. S2 : 1 . etc. o ciinp. 
23:31. p 2Cliron. 3B:13; F.zek. H:!."!. q 2Clir()n. .36: 17, etc. ; 
Jer 34 : 2, etr. ; 3M : 1 , etc ; .W : 4, etc. : Kiek. 24 : 2, etc. 



10. The Lord sometimes permits one class of 
wicked men to prevail against his people, and at 
other times another; but their own sins arc the 
cause of their troubles, and whoever may be their 
oppressors, he never suffers them to inflict evils 
reater than their iniquities deserve. 
16. To whom much is given, of them much will 
be required ; and those who are distinguished by 
outward privileges and blessings, if they abuse them 
will be distinguislied in their punishment. 



Nebuchadnezzar takes Jerusalem. II. KINGS, XXV, 



Judah is carried captive. 



B.c'i^!'' the gate between two walls, which 
ix by the king's garden : now the Chaldees 
7i'ere against the city round about : and the 
king'' went the way toward the plain. 

5 And the army of the Chaldees pur- 
sued after the king, and overtook him in 
the plains of Jericho : and all his army 
were scattered from him. 

6 So they took the king, and brought 
him up to the king of Babylon to ** Riblah ; 
and they *gave judgment upon him. 

7 And they slew the sons of Zedekiah 
before his eyes, and tput out the eyes of 
Zedekiah,*^ and bound him with fetters of 
brass, and carried him to Babylon. 

8 H And in the fifth month, on the sev- 
enth day of the month, which is the nine- 
teenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar king 
of Babylon, came Nebuzar-adan, +captain 
of the guard, a servant of the king of Bab- 
ylon, unto Jerusalem : 

9 And '' he burnt the house of the Lord, 
and the king's house, and all the houses of 
Jerusalem, and ^ every great ma)Vs house 
burnt he with fire. 

10 And all the army of the Chaldees, that 
ivcre U'ith the captain of the guard, brake 
down"^ the walls of Jerusalem round about. 

1 1 Now the rest of the people that u-ere 
left in the city, and the 5 fugitives that fell 
away to the king of Babylon, with the 
remnant of the multitude, did Nebuzar- 
adan the captain of the guard carry away. 

12 But the captain of the guard left of 
the Spoor of the land to be vine-dressers 
and husbandmen. 

13 And ''the pillars of 'brass that were in 
the house of the Lord, and the bases, and 
the brazen sea that u'a.s in the house of the 
Lord, did the Chaldees break in pieces, 
and carried the brass of them to Babylon. 

14 And the J pots, and tlie shovels, and 
the snviffcrs, and the spoons, and all the 
vessels of brass wherewith they minis- 
tered, took they away. 

1 5 And the^re-pans, and the bowls, and 
such things as were of gold, in gold, and 
of silver, in silver, the captain of the 
guard took away. 

16 The two pillars, II one sea, and the 
bases which Solomon had made for the 
house of the Lord ; the brass of all these 
vessels was without weight. 



• Ezek. 12 : 12. b chap. 23 : 33. » Heb. ipake judgment with 
him. fHeh. made blind, c Eiek. 12: 13,etc. J Or,f/n>/m-i>»/iu/. 
d lKhig9,9:8; P8a.79:l; Isa.M:10,ll. e.tnios2:5. fNeh.l:3; 
Jer. 52: 14, etc. % Heh./ullen away. R chap. 24: 14; Jer. 40:7. 
li.Ier.2r:19,etc.; IKin^s. 7: 1.5-27. iEx.27:3. j 1 Kings,7:47,aO. 



CHAPTER XXV, 

6. Riblah ; a town in the land of Hamath, north 
of Palestine. 

10. Brale doicji the u-alls ; to prevent the in- 
habitants of Jerusalem from giving the king of Bab- 
ylon any further trouble. 



17 The '•height of the one pillar ivas 
eighteen cubits, and the chapiter upon it 
ica.s brass : and tiic height of the chapiter 
three cubits ; and the wreathcn work, and 
pomegranates upon the chapiter round 
about, all of brass : and like unto these 
had the second pillar with wreathcn work. 

18 TI And the captain of the guard took 
Seraiah' the chief priest, and '"Zephaniah 
the second priest, and the three keepers 
of the * door : 

19 And out of the city he took an toffi- 
cer that was set over the men of war, and 
five men of them that + were in the king's 
presence, which were found in the city, 
and the * principal scribe of the host, 
which mustered the people of the land, 
and threescore men of the people of the 
land that trerc found in the city : 

20 And Nebuzar-adan captain of the 
guard took these, and brought them to the 
king of Babylon to Riblah : 

21 And the king of Babylon smote them, 
and slew them at Riblah in the land of 
Hamath. So "Judah was carried away 
out of their land. 

22 T[ And" «.s- /or the people that remain- 
ed in the land of Judah, whom Nebuchad- 
nezzar king of Babylon had left, even over 
them he made Gcdaliah the son of Ahi- 
kam, the son of Shaphan, ruler. 

23 And when all the captains of the ar- 
mies, they and their men, heard that the 
king of Babylon had made Gedaliah gov- 
ernor, there came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, 
even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and 
Johanan the son of Careah, and Seraiah 
the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, 
and Jaazaniah the son of a Maachalhite. 
they and their men. 

24 And Gedaliah sware to them, and to 
their men, and said unto them. Fear not 
to be the servaifts of the Chaldees: dwell 
in the land, and serve the king of Baby- 
lon ; and it shall be well with you. 

25 But Pit came to pass in the seventh 
month, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, 
tlic son of Elishama, of the seed H royal, 
came, and ten men with him, and smote 
Gcdaliah, that he died, and the Jews and 
the Chaldees that were with him at Mizpah. 

26 And all the people, both small and 
great, and the captains of the armies. 



II Heb.MsoMt. k lKing9,7:l5. 1 I Chron.6: 14; Eirn7:l. >» Jer. 
21:1; 2'l : vV., 29. " Heb. threthold. f Or, eunucti. % Heb. law 
the king's face. Est 1:14. \ Or, tcrilie of the captain of the hutt. 
iiclin|..23:27: Lev. 26:3:); Dent. :8:3rt,fi4: Eiek. 12:2«-2S; 24:14. 
o Jer. 40:5, etc. p Jer. 41 : l.etc. || Heb. of the kingdom. 



16. Without weight; in such abundance, that 
the qu.antity and its value were not estimated. 

21. Slew them at Riblah ; as special friends of 
Zedekiah and men of influence among the people. 

25. Mizpah ; supposed to be a town in tlie tribe 
of Benjamin. 

507 



Evil-merodacK' s 



I. CHRONICLES, I. 



kindness to Jchoiackin. 



arose, and came to ' Egypt : for they were 
afraid of the Chaldees. 

27 ^ And ''it came to pass in the seven 
and thirtieth year of the captivity of Je- 
hoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth 
month, on the seven and twentieth day of 
the montli, that Evil-merodacli king of 
Babylon in the year that he began to reign 
did lift ""up the head of Jehoiachin king of 
Judah out of prison ; 



28 And he spake *kindly to him, \''c'"^,. 
and set his throne above the throne of the 
kings that ^iccre with him in Babylon; 

29 And ^changed his prison garments: 
and he did ""eat bread continually before 
him all the days of his life. 

30 And his allowance ivas a continual 
allowance given him of the king, a « daily 
rate for every day, all the days of his 
life. 



THE 



FIRST BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 Adaiin's line to Noah. 5 The sons of Japheth. 8 The 
sons of Ham. 17 The sons of Shem. 24 Shera's 
line to Abraham. 29 Ishmael's sons. 32 The sons 
of Keturah. 34 The posterity of Abraham by 
Esau. 43 The kings of Edom. 51 The dukes of 
Edom. 

ADAM,"" Sheth, Enosh, 
2 Kenan, Mahalaleel, Jered, 

3 Henoch, Methuselah, Lantech, 

4 Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. 

5 T[ The 'sons of Japheth; Gomer, and 
Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tu- 
bal, and JNIeshech, and Tiras. 

6 And the sons of Gomer; Ashchenaz, 
and t Riphath, and Togarmah. 



• .Ipr. 43 : 4, 7. b Jer. .5'2 : 31, etc. c Gen. 40: 13, 20. * Heb. 
pood thitiff! with him. d Dan. '2 : 37; 6: 1«, 19. e Isaiah 61 : .3. 
r2Sam.9:7. e Nell. 11:23; Dan 1:6; Mat.fi:ll; Aot36:l. 



28. The kings ; those who had been conquered 
by the Babylonians, and who were kept as prisoners 
at Babylon. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. No human power or skill can avail against the 
providence of Goa ; and when he undertakes to pun- 
ish gtiilty individuals or nations, without repentance 
and reformation there is no escape. 

7. The obstinate wickedness of parents is often 
the occasion of ruin to their children ; and those 
senses which have been inlets of iniquity, become 
inlets of torment. 

9. As a punishment to his people, the Lord 
sometimes suffers the wicked to abolish the ob- 
servance of his own ordinances, and to carry away 
or destroy what has been most solemnly devoted to 
his service. 

18. Those most intimately associated with the 
wicked in crime, are most exposed to be partakers 
with them in punishment. 

24. Supreme power is often greatly coveted, and 
no crimes are so base as not to be perpetrated to 
obtain it. But the greater the power which is ob- 
tained by iniquity, the greater curse it will be to 
those who receive it. 

27. The hearts of kings, and of all others, are in 
the hands of the Lord ; and he can at any time in- 
cline them to favor even the most abject and dis- 
tressed, and thus show them and others that they 
508 



7 And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and 
Tarshish, Kittim, and + Dodanim. 

8 T[ The sons of Ham ; Gush, and Miz- 
raim. Put, and Canaan. 

9 And the sons of Cush ; Seba, and Ha- 
vilah, and Sabta, and Raamah, and Sab- 
techa. And the sons of Raamah ; Sheba, 
and Dedan. 

10 And Cush begat Nimrod: he began 
to be mighty upon the earth. 

1 1 And Mizrairn begat Ludim, and Ana- 
mim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim, 

12 And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (of 
whom came the Philistines,) and JCaph- 
torim. 



h Gen. 4 : -25, S6; 6 : 3, 9. i Gen. 10 : 2, etc. f Or, Diphath, as it 
is in some copies. % Or, Rodanim^ according to some copies, 
j Deut -2 : 23. 



who truly seek the Lord shall not want any good 
thing. 

L CHRONICLES. 
This book and the one which follows are supposed 
to have been written by Ezra. The first nine chap- 
ters, which are made up principally of genealogies, 
were probably designed to point out the descent and 
location of the different tribes and families before the 
captivity ; and thus to enable those who returned 
from Babylon to regain their former inheritance, and 
to establish the worship of God according to his ap- 
pointment. They appear also to have been designed 
to show the origin of the human race ; that all men 
sprung from one human pair according to the account 
in Genesis, and that according to the prophecies con- 
tained in Scripture our Saviour was the Son of David, 
of Judah, and of Abraham. These and subsequent 
genealogies were kept by the Jews with great care, 
and have been and still are important to the ends 
for which they were written. They first trace the 
descendants of Adam to Abraham ; and then give 
the line of his descendants, to David and to Christ. 
But as these chapters are occupied principally with 
names, and suggest inquiries more particularly in- 
teresting to the learned and critical student than 
to common readers, we shall not farther notice them 
here, but proceed to the recapitulation of the his- 
tory of the Israelites which commences with the 
tenth chapter. 



Ge7icalo^ical 



I. CHRONICLES, II. 



tables. 



Bc'i'if' ^^ ^'^^ Canaan begat Zidon his 
""• ' first-born, and Heth, 

14 The Jebusite also, and the AmQxite, 
and the Girgashite, 

15 And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and 
the Sinite, 

16 And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, 
and the Hamathite. 

17 1[ The sons of Shem ; Elam, and As- 
shur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram, 
and Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and *Me- 
sheeh. 

18 And Arphaxad begat Shelah, and 
Shelah begat Eb«r. 

19 And unto Eber were born two sons : 
the name of the one ivas t Peleg ; because 
in his days the earth was divided : and 
his brother's name loas Joktan. 

20 And Joktan begat Almodad, and Shc- 
leph, and Hazarmavcth, and Jerah, 

21 Hadoram also, and Uzal, and Diklah, 

22 And Ebal, and Abimael, and Slieba, 

23 And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab. 
All these tcere the sons of Joktan. 

24 H Shem," Arphaxad, Shelah, 

25 Eber, Peleg, P>,eu, 

26 Serng, Nahor, Terah, 

27 ABram ;•• the same is Abraham. 

28 The sons of Abraham; "^ Isaac, and 
Ishmael."* 

29 1[ These are their generations : The 
first-born'^ of Ishmael, Nebaioth ; then Ke- 
dar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam, 

30 Mishma, and Dumah, JNIassa, tHa- 
dad, and Tema, 

31 Jetur, Naphish,andKedemah. These 
are the sons of Ishmael. 

32 1[ Now the sons of ""Keturah, Abra- 
ham's concubine: she bare Zimran, and 
Jokshan, and ]\Icdan, and Midian, and 
Ishbak, and Shuah. And the sons of Jok- 
shan ; Sheba, and Dcdan. 

33 And the sons of INIidian; Ephah, and 
Epher, and Hcnocli, and Abida, and El- 
daah. All these arc the sons of Keturah. 

34 And e Abraham begat Isaac. The 
sons'" of Isaac; Esau and Israel. 

35 T[ The 'sons of Esau; Eliphaz, Reuel, 
and Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah. 

36 The sons of Eliphaz; Teman, and 
Omar, ^Zephi, and Gatam, Kenaz, and 
Timna, and Amalek. 

37 The sons of Reuel; Nahath, Zerali, 
Shammah, and Mizzah. 

38 And the sons of Seir; Lotan, and 
Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, and Di- 
shon, and Ezar, and Dishan. 

39 And the sons of Lotan; Hori, and 
Homam :ll and Tirana was Lotan's sister. 

~ *'c>7^Math, Geiu 10 : -23. f That ia, Diviiion. Genesis 10 : C5. 
« Gen. 1 1 : 10, etc. bGen.ITi.i. cGen.21:i,3. <• Gen. Ifi: 1 1, 15. 
e Gen. 2.-. : 13-16. t Or. Hadar, Gen. 25 : 15. t Gen. 2.i : I , etc. 
s Gen. 21:2,3. h Gen.25:2.">,26. i Gen.3S:<>, etc. T^Or, Zeplio, 
Gen. 36: 11. U Or, //f man, Gen. 36:2.'. * Or, /*/M>r, Geii. 36: 2-3. 

33 



40 The sons of Shobal ; *Alian, and Ma- 
nahath, and Ebal, tShephi, and Onam. 
And the sons of Zibeon ; Aiah, and Anah. 

41 The sons of Anah; Dishon. And the 
sons of Dishon; ^Amram, and Eshban. 
and Ithran, and Cheran. 

42 The sons of Ezer; Bilhan, and Za- 
van, and Uakan. The sons of Dishan ; 
Uz, and Aran. 

43 ^ Now these are the kings that reign- 
ed in the land of Edom before any king 
reigned over the children of Israel ; Bcla 
the son of Beor : and the name of his city 
ivas Dinhabah. 

44 And when Bela was dead, Jobab the 
son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead. 

45 And when Jobab was dead, llusham 
of the land of the Temanites reigned in 
his stead. 

46 And when llusham was dead, Iladad 
the son of Bedad, which smote Midian in 
the field of Moab, reigned in his stead : 
and the name of his city icas Avith. 

47 And when Iladad was dead, Samlah 
of Masrekah reigned in his stead. 

48 And when Samlah was dead, Shaul 
of Rehoboth by the river reigned in his 
stead. 

49 And when Shaul was dead, Baal- 
hanan the son of Aehbor reigned in his 
stead. 

50 And when Baal-lianan was dead, 
Hadad H reigned in his stead : and the 
name of his city was *Pai; and his wife's 
name ivas Mehetabel, the daughter of 
Matred, the daughter of Mezahab. 

51 ^Iladad died also. And the dukes 
of Edom were ; duke Timnah, duke 
Aliah,t duke Jetheth, 

52 Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke 
Pinon, 

53 Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke 
Mibzar, 

54 Duke Magdiel, duke Iram. These 
arc the dukes of Edom. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 The sons of Israel. ."3 The posterity of .Tudah by Ta- 
mar. 1.3 The children of Jes::e. 18 The posterity 
of Caleb the son of Hezron. 21 Hezron's posterity 
by the daughter of Machir. 2-5 Jeraraeel's posterity. 
•'J4 Sheshan's posterity. 42 Another branch of Ca- 
leb's posterity. 50 The posterity of Caleb the son of 
Hur. 

THESE a/e thesonsof Hsrael; Reuben, 
Simeon,J Levi, and Judah, Issachar, 
and Zebulun, 

2 Dan, Joseph, and Benjamin, Naph- 
tali, Gad, and Ashcr. 

3 ^ The sons of ''Judah ; Er, and Onan, 
and Shelah : which three were born unto 



t Or, Shephn, Gen. 36 : 2.1. t Or. Iltmdan, Gen. 3fi : 2fi. \ Or, 
jlkan. Gen. .36 : 27. || Or, Iludar, Gen. :16 : 39. 'Or, Pau, Gea. 
36:39. ^Or.Alvah. t Or, Jno'b. j Gen. S9 : 32, etc. ; 30 : fi. 
etc. : 35 : 18, etc. ; 46 : 8, etc. k Genesia 33 : 3, etc. ; 46 : 1 2 ; Num. 
26 : 19. 

509 



Genealogical 



I. CHRONICLES, II, 



tables. 



him of the daughter of Shua the Canaan- 
itess. And Er, the first-born of Judah, 
was evil in the sight of the Lord ; and he 
slew him. • 

4 And *Tamar his daughter-in-law 
bare him Pliarez and Zerah. All the 
sons of Judah were five. 

o The ""sons of Pharez; Hezron, and 
Hamul. 

6 And the sons of Zerah ; *Zimri, and 
Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and 
Dara:t five of them in all. 

7 And the sons of Carmi; +Acliar, the 
troublcr*^ of Lsrael, who transgressed in 
the thing accvirsed. 

8 And tlie sons of Ethan ; Azariah. 

9 The sons also of Hezron, that were 
born vinlo him; Jerahmeel, and ^Ram, 
and llChelubai. 

10 And Ram ''begat Amminadab; and 
Amminadab begat Nahshon, "prince of 
the children of Judah ; 

1 1 And Nahshon begat * Salma, and 
Salma begat Boaz, 

12 And Boaz begat Obcd, and Obed 
begat Jesse. 

1 3 *[[ And ""Jesse begat his first-born Eli- 
ab, and Abinadab the second, and Shim- 
mat the third. 

14 Ncthaneel the fourth, Raddai the 
fifth, 

15 Ozem the sixth, David the seventh: 

16 Whose sisters were Zeruiah, and Ab- 
igail. Andthe^sonsof Zeruiah; Abishai, 
and Joab, and Asahel, three. 

17 And Abigail bare ''Amasa: and the 
father of Amasa luas + Jether the Ishma- 
elite. 

18 1[ And Caleb the son of Hezron begat 
children of Azubah his wife, and of Jeri- 
otli : her sons are these ; Jeshcr, and Sho- 
bab, and Ardon. 

19 And when Azubah was dead, Caleb 
took unto him 'Ephrath, which bare liim 
Hur. 

20 And Hur begat Uri, and Uri begat 
Bc^aleel.J 

21 ^ And afterward Hezron went in to 
the daughter of ''Machir the father of 
Gilcad, whom he ^ married wlien he was 
threescore years old; and she bare him 
Segub. 

22 And Segub begat Jair, who had three 
and twenty cities in the land of Gilead. 

23 And 'he took Gcshur, and Aram, 
with the towns of Jair, from Ihcm, with 
Kenath, and the towns thereof, even three- 
score cities. All these hrlnnsccd to the 
sons of Machir the father of Gilcad. 



• Gen. 3S:2!), nO; MnL l:n. b Gm. <6: 13: Rntfl < : IR. * Or, 
Zahdi, .Io«b. 7:1. f Or, Dnrdn. t Or, Achan. c .Io»li. r, : 18 ; 
7:1, -.'.V % nr,y*TOni,Miil. 1 :^.4. II ()r,C«/e'),vcr. IR.j:. K Kiitli 
4:19,20. oNum.l:7. * Or, .Sii/muH, Kutll 1: Jl. f 1 S.iiii. IC: fi.ctc. 

010 



24 And after that Hezron was a. m-j£33. 
dead in Caleb-ephratah, then Abi- u"- 
ah, Hezron's wife, bare him ""Ashur the 
father of Tekoa. 

25 1[And the sons of Jerahmeel the 
first-born of Hezron were, Ram the first- 
born, and Bunah, and Oren, and Ozem, 
and Ahijah. 

26 Jerahmeel had also another wife, 
whose name was Atarah; she icas the 
mother of Onam. 

27 And the sons of Ram the first-born of 
Jerahmeel were, Maaz, and Jamin, and 
Eker. 

28 And the sons of Onam were, Sham- 
mai, and Jada. And the sons of Sham- 
mai ; Nadab, and Abishur. 

29 And the name of the wife of Abishur 
was Abihail, and she bare him Ahban, 
and Molid. 

30 And the sons of Nadab; Selcd, and 
Appaim : butSelcm died without children. 

31 And the sons of Appaim ; Ishi. And 
the sons of Ishi; Sheshan. And the chil- 
dren of "Sheshan; Ahlai. 

32 And the sons of Jada the brother of 
Shammai; Jether, and Jonathan: and Je- 
ther died without children. 

33 And the sons of Jonathan ; Peleth,and 
Zaza. These were the sons of Jerahmeel. 

34 1[ Now Sheshan had no sons, but 
daughters. And Sheshan had a servant, 
an Egyptian, whose name ivas Jarha. 

35 And Sheshan gave his daughter to 
Jarha his servant to wife; and she bare 
him Attai. 

36 And Attai begat Nathan, and Nathan 
begat "Zabad, 

37 And Zabad begat Ephlal, and Ephlal 
begat Obed, 

38 And Obed begat Jehu, and Jehu be- 
gat Azariah, 

39 7\nd Azariah begat Helez, and Helez 
begat Elcasah, 

40 And Eleasaii begat Sisamai, and Sis- 
amai begat Shallum, 

41 And Shallum begat Jekamiali, and 
Jekaniiah begat Eli.shama. 

42 *\\ Now the sons of p Caleb the brother 
of Jerahmeel tccrc, jNIesha his first-born, 
which was the father of Ziph ; and the 
sons of Mareshah the father of Hebron. 

43 And the sons of Hebron ; Korah, and 
Tappuah, and Rekem, and Shema. 

44 And Shema begat Raham, the father 
of Jorkoam: and Rckcm begat Shammai. 

45 And the son of Shammai was INIaon : 
and Maon ivas the father of Bcth-zur. 

46 And Ephah, Caleb's concubine, bare 

t Or, 5'/i<iwilnrtA. ISam. 16:9. k 2S.im. 2 : 18. h 2.Sam. 17 : 2«. 
i Illna.nn Urnclitc. 1 vprKf .W. j Ex. :tl : 2. k Num. 27:1. 
4 Hvh.look. 1 Num. 32:41,- Pi-tit. 3 : U ; .l<i>li. I3::». m cli;ip. 
4:5. n ver. 31, :!5. o clinp. II : 41. p ver. 'J. 



Gcncalos;ical 



r. CHRONICLES, III, IV. 



tables. 



A.M. 2533. Haran, and Moza, and Gazez : and 
"c' ' Haran begat Gazez. 

47 And the sons of Jahdai ; Regem, and 
Jotham, and Geshan, and Pelet, and 
Ephah, and Shaapli. 

48 Maachah, Caleb's concubine, bare 
Sheber, and Tirhanali. 

49 She bare also Shaaph the father of 
Madmannah, Sheva the father of Mach- 
benah, and the father of Gibea: and the 
daughter of Caleb was "Achsa. 

50 ^ These were the sons of Caleb the 
son of Hur, the first-born of * Ephratah ; 
Shobal the father of Kirjath-jearim, 

51 Salma the father of Beth-lehem, Ha- 
reph the father of Beth-gader. 

52 And Shobal the father of Kirjath- 
jearim had sons ; t Haroeh,a?it/ thalf of the 
Manahethites. 

53 And the families of Kirjath-jearim; 
the Ithrites, and the Puhitcs, and the 
Shumathites, and the Mishraites ; of them 
came the Zareathites, and the Eshtaulitcs. 

54 The sons of Salma; Beth-lehem, and 
the Netophathites, ^ Ataroth, the house of 
Joab, and half bf the Manahethites, the 
Zorites. 

55 And the families of the scribes which 
dwelt at Jabez ; the Tirathites, the Shim- 
eathites, and Suchathites. These are the 
Kenites'' that came of Hemath, the father 
of the house of "^ Rechab. 

CHAPTER III. 

1 The sons of David. 10 His line to Zedekiah. 17 
The sucoessor.s of Jeconiah. 

'IVrOW these were the sons of David, 
_LN which were born unto him in He- 
bron ; the'^first-born Amnon,of "Ahinoam 
the .lezreeiitess : the second, H Daniel, of 
Abigail the Carmelitess: 

2 The third, Absalom the son of Maa- 
chah the daughter of Talmai king of Gc- 
shur: the fourth, Adonijah the son of 
Hacgith : 

3 The fifth, Shephatiah of Abital : the 
sixth, Ithream by Eglah his wife. 

4 These six were born unto him in He- 
bron; and there he reigned seven years 
and six months: and '^in Jerusalem he 
reigned thirty and three years. 

5 And these were horn unto him in 
.lerusalem; *Shimea, and Shobab, and 
Nathan, and Solomon, four, of t Bath- 
shua the daughter of +Ammicl: 

6 Ibhar also, and * Elishama, and Eliph- 
elet, 

7 And Nogah, and Nephcg, and Japhia, 



a .losh. I.SrlT. * Or,E;>AloM, ver. I<). t Or, ««<?iV;A,rliiip.4:5. 
f Or. hill/ of the Memichites, or HaUihammtnuchoth. \ Or. Ala- 
yites.ot cyment of tht home of Jiiuh. b .liid";. I : 16. c Jer.S5:2. 
.1 e . "5,1111. n : i. etc. « 1 Sjim. 5.1:42,4.3. || Or,C/iiVfrt»,2.''am. 3 :S. 
f Q Sam. .I: 4, 14, etc. • Or, .y/inmmwn,'2Sani. .i ; 14. \ Or, Bath- 
.■ihcha, 2 Snm. 1 1 : 3. t Or, Blinm, 1 Sam. 11:3. \ Or, Elwhua, 
ii.un.h-.Xa. II Or, BfriiW.;, chap. 14:7. gSSam. 13:1. * Or, 



8 And Elishama, and II Eliada, and 
Eliphelet, nine. 

9 These tvere all the sons of David, 
besides the sons of the concubines, and 
Tamar^ their sister. 

1 11 And Solomon's son was Rehoboam, 
Abia* his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat 
his son, 

11 Joram his son, tAhaziah his son, 
Joash his son, 

12 Amaziah his son, +Azariah his son, 
Jotham his son, 

13 Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, 
Manasseh his son, 

14 Amon his son, Josiah his son. 

15 And the sons of Josiah were, the first- 
born Klohanan, the second HJehoiakim, 
the third *Zcdekiali, the fourth Shallum. 

16 And the sons of Jehoiakim; t Jeco- 
niah his son, Zedekiah his son. 

17 T[And the sons of Jeconiah; Assir, 
Salathiel^: his son, 

18 Malchiram also, and Pedaiah, and 
Shenazar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and Ned- 
abiah. 

19 And the sons of Pedaiah were, Zcrub- 
babel, and Shimei : and the sons of Zerub- 
babel; Mcshullam, and Ilananiah, and 
Shelomith their sister: 

20 And Hashubah, and Ohel, and Bere- 
chiah, and Hasadiah, Jushabhescd, five. 

21 And the sons of Hananiah; Pclatiah, 
and Jesaiah : the sons of Rephaiah, the 
sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah, the 
sons of Shechaniah. 

22 And the sons of Shechaniah ; Shem- 
aiah : and the sons of Shemaiah; Hattush, 
and Igeal, and Bariah, and Neariah, and 
Shaphat, six. 

23 And the sons of Neariah; Eliocnai, 
and * Hezekiah, and Azrikam, three. 

24 And the sons of Eliocnai were, Hod- 
aiah, and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, and 
Akkub, and Johauan, and Dalaiah, and 
Anani, seven. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1, 11 The posterity of Judah hy Caleb the son of Hur. 
5 Of Ashur the posthumous son of Hezron. 9 Of 
Jabpz, and his prayer. 21 The posterity of Sh^lah. 
21 The posterity and cities of Simeon. 39 Their 
conquest of Gedor, and of the Amalekites in mount 
Seir. 

THE ""sons of Judah: Pharez, Hezron, 
and llCarmi, and Hur, and Shobal. 
2 And * Rcniah the son of Siiobal begat 
Jahath; and Jahath begat Ahumai. and 
Lahad. These arc the families of the 
Zorathitcs. 




Genealogical 



I. CHRONICLES, IV.' 



tables. 



3 And these were of the father of Etam; 
Jezreel, and Ishma, and Idbash : and the 
name of their sister ivas Hazelelponi : 

4 And Penuel the father of Gedor, and 
Ezer the father of Hushah. These are 
the sons ofHur, the first-born of Ephratah, 
the fatlier of Beth-lchem. 

5 ^ And Ashur the father of Tckoa had 
two wives, llelah and Naarah. 

6 And Naarah bare him Ahuzam, and 
Hepher, and Temeni, and Haahashtari. 
These were the sons of Naarah. 

7 And the sons of Helah iverc, Zereth, 
and Jezoar, and Ethnan. 

8 And Coz begat Anub, and Zobebah, 
and the families of Aharhel the son of 
Harum. 

9 T[And Jabez was more "honorable 
than his brethren : and his mother called 
his name *Jabez, saying, Because I bare 
him with sorrow. 

10 And Jabez called on the God of 
Israel, saying, tOh that thou wouldest 
bless me indeed, and enlarge ray coast, 
and that thy hand might be with me, and 
that thou wouldest +keep me from evil, 
that it may not grieve me ! And God 
granted him that which he requested. 

1 1 T[ And Chelub the brother of Shuah 
begat Mehir, which u-as the father of 
Eshton. 

12 And Eshton begat Beth-rapha, and 
Pascah, and Tehinnah the father of ^Ir- 
nahash. These are the men of Rechah. 

13 And the sons of Kenaz ; Othniel, and 
Seraiah : and the sons of Othniel ; II Ila- 
thath. 

14 And Meonothai- begat Ophrah: and 
Seraiah begat Joab, the father of the *val- 
ley of tCharashim; for ''they were crafts- 
men. 

15 And the sons of Caleb the son of 
Jephunneh; Iru, Elah, and Naam: and 
the sons of Elah, +evcn Kenaz. 

16 And the sons of .lehaleleel; Ziph, 
and Ziphah, Tiria, and Asareel. 

17 And the sons of Ezra ivere, Jether, 
and Mcred, and Ephcr, and Jalon: and 
she bare Miriam, and Shammai, and Ish- 
bali the father of Eslitemoa. 

18 And his wife ^Jehudijah bare Jcrcd 
the father of (Jcdor, and Hcber the father 
of Socho, and Jckuthiel the father of Za- 
noah. And these arc the sons of Bilhiah 
the daughter of Pharaoh, which Mcred 
took. 

19 And the sons ofhis wife " Hodiah the 
sister of Naham, the father of Kcilah the 
(iarmite, and Eshtemoa the Maachathite. I 

• Gene»i» 34 : I'l. ' Tlmt i», mrtmiful. t Hcl). If thou wilt. 
t Heh. do mc % Or, tht clip of Nulmih. || Or. Iliilhath. nml 
Meonolhai.vhabroal. ' Or, in1i;il,innt« of »/ir ivrHty. f Tliiit 1 
m.na/llmtn. bSvli. n:S5. t Or, f*mii. ii nr, the Jfwrir. ' 
Ij <)r,Je/iu<liiak, nieiitioncJ b-^fiirc. • Ot,Jemuel, Gi.-n. 16:10; 
512 



20 And the sons of Shimon ivcrc, a m. srw 
Amnon, and Kinnah, Ben-hanan, '"' 
and Tilon. And the sons of Ishi icere, Zo- 
hetli, and Ben-zoheth. 

21 H The sons of Shclah the son of 
Judah u-ere, Er the father of Lecah, and 
Laadah the father of Mareshah, and the 
families of the house of them that wrought 
fine linen, of the house of Ashbea, 

22 And Jokim, and the men of Chozeba, 
and Joash, and Saraph, who had the 
dominion in ]Moab, and Jashubi-lehcm. 
And these are ancient things. 

23 These u'ere the potters, and those that 
dwelt among plants and hedges : there 
they dwelt with the king for his work. 

24 •] The sons of Simeon were, *Nemuel, 
and .Jamin, t.Tarib, Zerah, and Shaul: 

25 Shallum his son. Mibsam his son, 
Mishraa his son. 

26 And the sons of Mishma; Ilamuel 
his son, Zacchur his son, Shimei his son. 

27 And Shimei had si.xteen sons and 
si.x daughters; but his brethren had not 
many children, neither did all their family 
multiply, +like to the children of Judah. 

28 And they dwelt at Beer-sheba, and 
Moladah, and Hazar-shual, 

29 And at ^Bilhah, and at Ezem, and 
at II Tolad, 

30 And at Bethuel, and at Hormah, and 
at Ziklag, 

31 And at Beth-marcaboth,and *nazar- 
susim, and at Beth-birei, and at Shaa- 
raim. These were their cities unto the 
reign of David. 

32 And their villages were, tEtam, and 
Ain, Rimmon, and Tochen, and Ashan, 
five cities : 

33 And all their villages that were round 
about the same cities, unto i Baal. These 
were their habitations, and Hheir gene- 
alogy. 

34 And Meshobab, and Jamlcch, and 
Joshah the son of Amaziah, 

35 And Joel, and Jehu the son of Josi- 
biah, the son of Seraiah, the .-^on of Asiel, 

36 And Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and 
Jeshohaiah, and Asaiah, and Adiel, and 
Jesimiel, and Benaiah, 

37 And Ziza the son of Shiphi, the son 
of Allon, the son of Jcdaiah, the soh of 
Sliimri, the son of Shcmaiah; 

38 These H mentioned by their names 
were princes in their families: and the 
hou.se of their fathers increased greatly. 

39 T[ And they went to the entrance of 
Gedor, even unto the cast side of the val- 
ley, to seek pasture for their flocks. 

Kx, 6:1S; Nurntifrs 2fi : 12. f Or. Jiicliin, Zohay. i Hrh. un/o. 
!iOT.Biilalt,Jns\,.\'i:3. I| Or. Kttu/nd, .losli. IH H. » Or, «i 
Mi-.M»(iA,.Io»li. 19:5. f Or, /OMrr,. Irwii. 19; 7. t Or. Baalalh- 
hctr. .Tnnliun 19: R. \ Or, at they ilhijcd themitlvtt by tiutU-nt 
among them. || Hcb. cominf. 



The sons of 



I. CHRONICLES, V. 



Reuben and Gad 



K.->.\.sfim. 40 And they found fat pasture and 

B C. about 1111 -1 

'16 good, and the land icas wide, and 
quiet, and peaceable ; for they of Ham had 
dwelt there of old. 

41 And these -written by name came in 
the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and 
smote'' their tents, and the habitations 
(hat were found there, and destroyed 
them utterly unto this day, and dwelt in 
their rooms: because there was ''pasture 
there for their flocks. 

42 And some of them, even of the sons 
of Simeon, five hundred men, went to 
mount Seir, having for their captains 
Pelatiah, and Neariah, and Rephaiah, 
and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi. 

43 And they smote the rest of the ""Ama- 
lekites that were escaped, and dwelt there 
unto this day. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 The line of Reuben (who lost his birthright) unto the 
captivity. 9 Their habitation and conquest of the 
JIagarites. 11 The chief men and habitations of Gad. 
18 The number and conquest of Reuben, Gad, and the 
half of Manasseh. 23 The habitations and chief men 
of that half-tribe. 25 Their captivity for their sin. 

IVTOW the sons of Reuben the first-born 
X\ of Israel, for ''he icas the first-born; 
but, forasmuch as he ^defiled his father's 
bed, his birthright was ''given unto the 
sons of Joseph the son of Israel: and the 
genealogy is not to be redkoned after the 
birthright: 

2 For sJudah prevailed above his breth- 
ren, and of him came the chief * ruler; 
but the birthright was Joseph's : 

3 The '■ sons, / say, of Reuben the first- 
born of Israel tvere, Hanoch, and Pallu, 
Hezron, and Carmi. 

4 The sons of Joel ; Shemaiah his son, 
Gog his son, Shimei his son, 

5 Micah his son, Reaia his son, Baal 
his son, 

6 Beerah his son, whom t Tilgath-pil- 
ueser king of Assyria carried away cap- 
tive: he was prince of the Reubenites. 

7 And his brethren by their families, 
when the genealogy of their generations 
was reckoned, were the chief, Jeiel, and 
Zechariali, 

8 And Bela the son of Azaz, the sou of 
Shema,t the son of Joel, who dwelt in 
Aroer,' even unto Nebo and Baal-meon : 

9 And eastward he inhabited unto the 
entering in of the wilderness from the 
river Euphrates : because their cattle 
were multiplied in the land of JGilead. 

10 And in the days of Saul they made 
war with the ''Hagarites, who fell by 



• 2King8, lfi:8, etc. b Num. .1: : 1-4. cEl.l7:l6; Deut. 
85-17, 11; ISam.lStS; ?0:n: 2Snin.R:i:. ■< Gen. 'ifl : W. 
• Gen. 35 : 22. f Gen. 4S : 1.1. f Gen. 4>i ; 8, 10 ; Pm. fiO ; 7 : Micjli 
6-2; Heb.7:14. * Or. prince, h Gen. 46:9: Ex.5: 14; N'lim. rtiiS. 
f Or Tii,lnt>ipiltscr,iK\nf;s,lBr29: 16:7. t '>r.5Atmnm/i. ver 4. 
i Josh. 13:16. J Jush. 22 : 9. k Gen. 25: 12; Psa. 83:6. % Heb. 



their hand: and they dwelt in their tents 
throughout^ all the east land of Gilead. 

11 lIAnd the children of Gad dwelt 
over against them, in the land of 'Bashan 
unto Salcah : 

1 2 Joel the chief, and Shapham the next, 
and Jaanai, and Shaphat in Bashan. 

13 And their brethren of the house of 
their fathers were, Michael, and Meshul- 
1am, and Sheba, and Jorai, and Jachan, 
and Zia, and Heber, seven. 

14 These are the children of Abihail 
the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the 
son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son 
of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of 
Buz; 

1.5 Ahi the son of Abdiel, the son of 
Guni, chief of the house of their fathers. 

16 And they dwelt in Gilead in Bashan, 
and in her towns, and in all the suburbs 
of "'Sharon, upon their H borders. 

17 All these were reckoned by geneal- 
ogies in the days of "Jotham king of Ju- 
dah, and in the days of "Jeroboam king 
of Israel. 

18 T[ The sons of Reuben, and the Gad- 
itcs, and half the tribe of Manasseh, * of 
valiant men, men able to bear buckler 
and sword, and to shoot with bow, and 
skilful in war, icerc four and forty thou- 
sand seven hundred and threescore, that 
went out to the war. 

19 And P they made war with the Hagar- 
ites, with Jetur, and Nephish, and Nodab. 

20 And 1 they were helped against them, 
and the Hagarites were delivered into 
their hand, and -all that trcrc with them : 
for they ''cried to God in the battle, and 
he was entreated of them; 'because they 
put their trust in him. 

21 And they ttook away their cattle; 
of their camels fifty thousand, and of 
sheep two hundred and fifty thousand, 
and of asses two thousand, an(f of ^men 
a hundred thousand. 

22 For there fell down many slain, 'be- 
cause the war u'as of God. And they 
dwelt in their steads until the "captivity. 

23 ^And the children of (he half-tribe 
of Manasseh dwelt in the land: they in- 
creased from Bashan unto Baal-hermon 
and Senir, and unto mount Hcrmon. 

24 And these were the heads of the house 
of their fathers, even Epher, and Ishi, and 
Eliel, and Azriel, and Jeremiah, and Hod- 
aviah, and Jahdicl, mighty men of valor, 
famous 5 men, and heads of the house of 
their fathers. 



upan all the fncr nf the eott. I .losliun 13:11. ■> rlinp tftflfi 
Cant.3:1. II Heh.|»,.inj)j/'>iM. n 2KingK, I.'5:32. » 2K:ngii,t-l:I& 

* Hel). font of valor, p ver. 10. q ver 22. r 2riin)n. 1«:.1I. 

• 2rljr. 14:11 ; Psa. 22:4.5: 84: 11 ,12. t Heb UdeapHre. | Heh. 
touho/men: n- .Vum. 31 : 35. t .Tosliiia 23 : 10;. J CUron. 34: 8. 
o 2Kinse, 13:29; 17;a } Heb. men of namri. 

513 



The children 



I. CHRONICLES, VI, 



of Levi. 



25 1[ And* they transgressed against the 
God of their fathers, and went a whoring 
after the gods of the people of the land, 
whom God destroyed before them. 

26 And the God of Israel stirred up the 
spirit of ''Pul king of Assyria, and the 
spirit of Tilgath-pilncser king of Assyria, 
and he carried thein away, even the Reu- 
benites, and the Gadites, and the half- 
tribe of Manasseh, and brought them unto 
Ilalah,*^ and Ilabor, and Kara, and to the 
river Gozan, unto this day. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 The sons of Levi. 4 The line of the priests unto the 
captivity. IG The families of Gershom. Merari. and 
Kohath. 49 The office of Aaron, and his line unto 
Ahimaaz. 54 The cities of the priests and Levites. 

THE "'sons of Levi; *Gershon, Kohath, 
and Merari. 

2 And the sons of Kohath ; Amram, 
Izhar," and Hebron, and Uzziel. 

3 And the children of Amram ; Aaron, 
and Moses, and Miriam. The sons also 
of Aaron ; ^Nadab and Abiliu, Eleazar 
and Ithamar. 

4 ^ Eleazar begat ^Phinehas, Phinehas 
begat Abishua, 

5 And Abishua begat Bukki, and Bukki 
begat Uzzi, 

6 And Uzzi begat Zerahiah, and Zera- 
hiah begat Meraioth, 

7 Meraioth begat Amariah, and Ama- 
riah begat Ahitub, 

8 And ''Ahitub begat Zadok, and Zadok 
begat Ahimaaz, 

9 And Ahimaaz begat Azariah, and 
Azariah begat Johanan, 

10 And Johanan begat Azariah; he it 
is that 'executed the priest's office in the 
templet that Solomon built in Jerusalem : 

11 And Azariah begat J Amariah, and 
Amariah begat Ahitub, 

12 And Ahitub begat Zadok, and Zadok 
begat i Shallum, 

13 And Shallum begat Hilkiah, and Hil- 
kiah begat Azariah, 

14 And Azariah begat ''Seraiah, and 
Seraiah begat Jehozadak, 

15 And Jchozadak went into captivity, 
when' the Lord carried away Judah 
and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebu- 
chadnezzar. 

16 H The sons of Levi; ^Gershom, Ko- 
hath, and Merari. 

17 And these be the names of the sons 
of Gershom ; Libni, and Shimei. 

18 And the sons of Kohath were, Am- 
ram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel. 



• JKiniB, 17:7-1R. ksKinRK 
4(i:ll; Num. 26:57. » Or, G, 
6:il,24. r I,ev. 10: I, 16. K Nu 
i 2Clirr.n. 26: 17. + H.-b. ho\ 
clirip. "I: II. I Neh. 11:11. 
vcr. I. II Or,/';/'i<i«,ver. ■!:. 

514 



• 2Kin(;r., IR:II. .1 Gen. 

fr. 16. e ver.ie22; Ki. 

: II. 13. li i^nm. 8: 17. 

j Kr.r.l 7:3. J Or. Metl,till„m, 

1 2 King., 25: IS. ij Or, (irrtlwn, 

* Or, /Jrfaio/i,ver.41. tOr.fiMni, 



19 The sons of Merari; Mahli, a. m.ttoi 
and Mushi. And these are the " "^tc'^' 
families of the Levites according to their 
fathers. 

20 Of Gershom ; Libni his son, Jahath 
his son, Zimmah his son, 

21 Joahil his son, *Iddo his son, Zerah 
his son, tJeaterai his son. 

22 Tlie sons of Kohath; +Amminadab 
his son, Korali his son, Assir his son, 

23 Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph his 
son, and Assir his son, 

24 Tahath his son, ^ Uriel his son, Uz- 
ziah his son, and Shaul his son. 

25 And the sons of Elkanah; Amasai, 
and Ahimoth. 

26 ^.v/o/- Elkanah : tliesons of Elkanah ; 
Zophaiil his son, and *Nahath his son, 

27 Eliab his son, Jcroham his son, El- 
kanah his son. 

28 And the sons of Samuel; the first- 
born tVashni, and Abiah. 

29 The sons of Merari; Mahli, Libni 
his son, Shimei his son, Uzza his son, 

30 Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, 
Asaiah his son. 

31 And these are they whom David set 
over the service of song in the house of 
the Lord, after that tlic ark had '"rest. 

32 And they ministered before the 
dwelling-place of the tabernacle of the 
congregation with singing, until Solomon 
had built the house of tlie Lord in Jeru- 
salem : and then they waited on their 
office according to their order. 

33 And these are they that t waited 
with their children. Of the sons of the 
Kohathites, "Ilcman a singer, the son of 
Joel, the son of Shemuel, 

34 The son of Elkanah, the son of Jero- 
ham, the son of Eliel, the son of ^Toah, 

35 Thesonof llZuph,the son of Elkanah, 
the son of Mahalh, the son of Amasai, 

36 The son of Eikanah, the son of *Joel, 
the son of Azariali, the son of Zephaniah, 

37 The son of Tahath, the son of Assir, 
the son of "Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, 

38 The son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, 
the son of Levi, the son of Israel. 

39 And his brother PAsaph, who stood 
on his right hand, even Asaph the son of 
Berachiah, the son of Shimea, 

40 The son of Miehacl, the son of Baa- 
seiah, the son of Malchiah, 

41 The son of Ethni, the son of i Zerah, 
the son of Adaiah, 

42 The son of Ethan, the son of Zim- 
mah, the son of Shimei, 



v.T 41. t Or, /:4rtr. ver. 2. IS. i Or. 7.ephaniah, Auriah,Joel, 
T»r. 36. II Or. Zi<p/i, ver. :» : 1 .S.imiicl, 1 : 1. • T..nA, ver 34. 
t Cnllcl nl«ny„f/, ver. .T3; lS:im. 8:2. mcliap. 16:1. t HhIi. 
iloml. n Punim 8S, title. % A'<i/i<J(A, Terse 26. II Or, Z"p/<r'.i 
* Shaul, C'ziiak, Ihiel.vfT.H. o En. 6:24. p Neh. 7 : 44 ; Pua. 
73, ttr., titles, q ver. 21. 



Genealogical 



I. CHRONICLES, VI. 



tables. 



A.M. 2721. 43 The son of Jahath, the son of 

B. C. 1280, ^ , ^ T • 

«'=■ Gershom, the son of Levi. 

44 And their brethren the sons of Me- 
rari stood on the left hand: *Ethan» the 
son of tKishi, the son of Abdi, the son 
of Mallueh, 

45 The son of Hashabiah, the son of 
Amaziah, the son of Ililkiah, 

4(i The son of Amzi, the son of Bani, 
the son of Shamer, 

47 The son of Mahli, the son of Mushi, 
the son of Merari, the son of Levi. 

48 Their brethren also the Levites were 
appointed '' unto all manner of service of 
the tabernacle of the house of God. 

49 ^[But Aaron and his sons offered 
upon the altar of the "^burnt-offering, and 
on the ''altar of incense, mid were appoint- 
ed for all the work of the place most holy, 
and to make an atonement for Israel, ac- 
cording to all that Moses the servant of 
God had commanded. 

50 And these are the sons of Aaron; 
Eleazar" his son, Phinehas his son, Abi- 
sliiia his son, 

51 Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zera- 
hiah his son, 

52 Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, 
Ahitub his son, 

53 Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son. 

54 If Now "^ these are their dwelling- 
places throughout their castles in their 
coasts, of the sons of Aaron, of the fam- 
ilies of the Kohathites : for theirs was 
the lot. 

55 And they gave them Hebron in the 
land of Judah, and the suburbs thereof 
round about it. 

66 But the fields of the city, and the 
villages thereof, they ^gave to Caleb the 
son of Jephunueh. 

57 And to the sons of Aaron they gave 
the cities of Judah, namely, Hebron, the 
city of refuge, and Libnah with her sub- 
urbs, and Jattir, and Eshtemoa, with 
their suburbs, 

58 And iHilen with her suburbs, De- 
bir with her suburbs, 

59 And ^Ashan with her suburbs, and 
Belh-shemesh with her suburbs: 

60 And out of the tribe of Benjamin; 
Geba with her suburbs, and HAlemeth 
with her suburbs, and Anathoth with 
her siTburbs. All their cities throughout 
their families toere thirteen cities. 

Gl And unto the sons of Kohath, which 
were ""left of the family of that tribe, iverc 
cities given out of the half-tribe, namely, 
Old of the half-^/6e of Manassch, by lot, 
ten cities. 



* CRlled, Jeduthun, cli.ip. 9:16; 2."> : 1 , 3, 6. « Psalm 89, title. 
f Or, Kushaiah, cimp. 15 : 17. b Numbers 8: .1-11. c I.ev. 1 : 9. 
dEx.30;7, o ver.4-8. f Josh. ch.ip. 31. c Josh, U: 13; 15: 13. 



62 And to the sons of Gershom through- 
out their families out of the tribe of Issa- 
char, and out of the tribe of Asher, and 
out of the tribe of Naphlali, and out of 
the tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen 
cities. 

63 Unto the sons of 'iMerari were given 
by lot, throughout their families, out of 
the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe 
of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, 
twelve cities. 

64 And the children of Israel gave to the 
Levites these cities with their suburbs. 

65 And they gave by lot out of the tribe 
of the children of .ludah, and out of the 
tribe of the children of Simeon, and out of 
the tribe of the children of Benjamin, these 
cities, which are called by their names. 

66 And ^the residue of the families of 
the sons of Kohath had cities of their 
coasts out of the tribe of Ephraim. 

67 And they gave unto them, of the 
cities of refuge, Shechcm in mount Ephra- • 
im with her suburbs ; they gave also Gezer 
with her suburbs, 

68 And *Jokmeam with her suburbs, 
and Beth-horon with her suburbs, 

69 And Aijalon with her suburbs, and 
Gath-rimmon with her suburbs : 

70 And out of the half-tribe of Manas- 
seh; Aner with her suburbs, and Bileam 
with her suburbs, for the family of the 
remnant of the sons of Kohath. 

71 Unto the sons of Gershom were give7i, 
out of the family of the half-tribe of Ma- 
nasseh, Golan in Bashan with lier sub- 
urbs, and Ashtaroth with her suburbs: 

72 And out of the tribe of Issachar; 
Kedcsh with her suburbs, Daberath with 
her suburbs, 

73 And Bamoth with her suburbs, and 
Anem with her suburbs : 

74 And out of the tribe of Asher; Ma- 
shal with her suburbs, and Abdon with 
her suburbs, 

75 And Hukok with her suburbs, and 
Rehob with her suburbs : 

76 And out of the tribe of Naphtali; 
Kedesh in Galilee with her suburbs, and 
Hammon with her suburbs, and Kirjath- 
aim with her suburbs. 

77 Unto the rest of the children of Mer- 
ari u-erc given, out of the tribe of Zebulun. 
Rimmon with her suburbs. Tabor with 
her suburbs : 

78 And ''on the other side .Jordan by 
Jericho, on the east side of Jordan, were 
given them, out of the tribe of Reuben, 
Bezer in the wilderness with her suburbs, 
and Jahzah with her suburbs, 



t Or, Holon, ,Io.sli. CI : 15. 5 Or, Jin, Josh. 21 : Ifi. || Or, Jlmon, 
Joali. 21:18. bver.6S ij;um.:!:20. i vtr.BI. » Josh 21 : 21-35, 
where many of these cities have other names, k Deut. 4:'I1-I3. 

(315 



Genealogical. 



I. CHRONICLES, VII. 



tables. 



79 Kedemoth also with her suturbs, and 
Mephaath with lier suburbs: 

80 And out of the tribe of Gad; *Ra- 
moth in Gilead with her suburbs, and 
Mahanaiin'' with her suburbs, 

81 And Hcshbou with her suburbs, and 
Jazer with her suburbs. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1 The sons of Issachar, 6 of Benjamin, 13 of Naphtali, 
14 of Manasseh, 20, 'J4 and of Ephraiin. '21 The 
calamity of Ephraim by the men of Gath. "23 Beriah 
is born. 28 Ephraim's habitations. 30 The sons of 
Asher. 

■]\TO\V the "^sons of Issachar u-cre, Tola, 
J_\ and *Puah, Jashub, and Shimron, 
four. 

2 And the sons of Tola; Uzzi, and Reph- 
aiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and Jibsam, 
and Shcmuel, heads of their father's house, 
to icit, of Tola: they were valiant men of 
might in their generations; whose ''num- 
ber was in the days of David two and 
twenty thousand and six hundred. 

3 And the sons of Uzzi ; Izrahiah : and 
the sons of Izrahiah ; Michael, and Oba- 
diah, and Joel, Ishiah, five : all of them 
chief men. 

4 And with them, by their generations, 
after the house of their fathers, were bands 
of soldiers for war, six and thirty thousand 
men: for they had many wives and sons. 

5 And their brethren among all the fam- 
ilies of "Issachar were valiant men of 
might, reckoned in all by their genealo- 
gies fourscore and seven thousand. 

6 If The sons of "^Benjamin ; Bela, and 
Bechcr, and Jediael, three. 

7 And the sons of Bela; Ezbon, and 
Uzzi, and Uzziel, and Jerimoth, and Iri, 
Ave; heads of the house oi their fathers, 
mighty men of valor; and were reckoned 
by their genealogies twenty and two 
thousand and thirty and four. 

8 And the sons of Becher; Zemira, and 
Joash, and Eliezcr, and Elioenai, and 
Omri, and Jerimoth, and Abiah, and An- 
athoth, and Alameth. All these are the 
sons of Beeher. 

9 And the number of them, after their 
genealogy by their generations, heads of the 
house oftheir fathers, mighty men of valor, 
was twenty thousand and two hundred. 

10 The sons also of Jediael; Bilhan : 
and the sons of Bilhan; Jcusli, and Ben- 
jamin, and Ehud, and ('hcnaanah, and 
Zethan, and Tharshish, and Ahishahar. 

1 1 All these the sons of Jediael, by the 
heads of their fathers, « mighty men of 
valor, were seventeen thousand and two 



hundred soldiers, fit to go out for am iwo. 

, , ,., ° B. <;. 14M. 

war and battle. ^to. 

1 2 Shuppimt also, and Huppim, the chil- 
dren of ^ Ir, aHr/Hushim,the sonsof ^Aher. 

13 1[ The .'tons of Naphtali; Jahziel, and 
Guni, and Jczcr, and Shall urn, the sons 
of Bilhah. 

14 HThe sons of Manasseh; Ashriel, 
whom she bare: {hut his concubine the 
Aramitess bare Maehir the father of Gil- 
ead: 

15 And Maehir took to wife the sister of 
Huppim'' and Shuppim. whose sister's 
name was Maachah;) and the name of 
the second was Zelophehad: and Zelo- 
phehad had daughters. 

1 6 And Maachah the wife of Maehir bare 
ason, and she called his name Peresh ; and 
the name of his brother icas Sheresh ; and 
his sons were Ulam and Rakem. 

17 And the sons of Ulam; 'Bedan. 
These were the sons of Gilead, the son of 
Maehir, the son of Manasseh. 

18 And his sister Hammoleketh bare 
Ishod, and HAbiezcr, and ^lahalah. 

19 And the sons of Shemidah were, 
Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and 
Aniam. 

20 1[And the Jsons of Ephraim; Shu- 
thelah, and Bered his son, and Tahath 
his son, and Eladah his son, and Tahath 
his son, 

21 And Zabad his son, and Shuthelah 
his son, and Ezer, and Elead, whom the 
men of Gath that were born in that land 
slew, because they came down to take 
away their cattle. 

22 And Ephraim their ''father mourned 
many days, and his brethren 'came to 
comfort him. 

23 % And when he went in to his wife, 
she conceived and bare a son, and he 
called his name *Beriah, "'because it 
went evil with his "house. 

24 (And his daughter ivas Sherah, who 
built Beth-horon the nether, and the up- 
per, and Uzzen-sherah.) 

25 And Rephali was his son, also Re- 
sheph, and Telah his son, and Tahau 
his son, 

26 Laadan his son, Ammihud his son, 
Elishama his son, 

27 Nont his son, Jehoshuah his son. 

28 1[ And their possessions and habita- 
tions luere, Bcth-el and the towns tliTrcof, 
and eastward "Naaran, and westward 
Gezer, Avith the * towns thereof; Shechem 
also and the towns thereof, unto ^Gaza 
and the towns thereof: 



» I Kingn, 22:3, etc. b Gen. 32 : 5 ; 2. Sam. 17 : 24. 27. c C.en. Num. ifi: .3«. k vcr. 12. ilS»m. 12:11. || y^io, Num. 26: 30- 
46:13; Num. 2«: 2.3. * Fhuvah. Job. J rlin|<. 27 : I. e <l,ap. j Num. 2«: 3.V k Gen. 37: 34. IJobS:!!. * Tlinl i«, in ri'iV. 
12:32. f Hiiip. 8: l.etr, 1 Gt-n. 46:21. « 2Clir. 17 : 13,elc. t *'*«■ I ■" Gen. :16 ; 18; 1 Snm. 4 : 21. » 2.«iim. 23: S. t Or, A'wil, Num. 
Wi<i"innJ7/«iiAnm, Num.26:3'J. J Or, /ri, vcr. 7. % Or, .i/iirom, | 13: B, IB. o Joob. I(i:7. % Hc\>. dauflittri. \Ot,A<ia(a. 
516 



Genealogical 



I. CHRONICLES, VIII. 



tables. 



A.M. 2660. 29 Andby the borders of the chil- 

B. C. 1«4, P u r 1 -I-. 1 1 

etc. dren oi ^Manasseh, Beth-shean 
and her towns, Taanach and her towns, 
Megiddo and her towns, Dor and her 
towns. In these dwelt the children of 
Joseph the son of Israel. 

30 IT The sons of ''Asher; Imnah, and 
Isuah, and Ishuai, and Bcriah, and Serah 
their sister. 

31 And the sons of Beriah; Ileber, and 
Malchiel, who is the father of Birzavith. 

32 And Heber begat Japhlet, and *Sho- 
mer, and Hotham, and Shua their sister. 

33 And the sons of Japhlet; Pasach, 
and Bimhal, and Ashvath. These arc 
the children of Japhlet. 

34 And the sons of tShamer; Ahi, and 
Rohgah, Jehubbah, and Aram. 

35 And the sons of his brother Helem; 
Zophah, and Imna, and Shelesh, and 
Amal. 

36 The sons of Zophah ; Suah, and Har- 
nepher, and Shual, and Beri, and Imrah, 

37 Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, and 
Shilshah, and Ithran, and Beera. 

38 And the sons of Jether; Jephunneh, 
and Pispah, and Ara. 

39 And the sons of Ulla; Arab, and 
Haniel, and Rezia. 

40 All these tvere the children of Asher, 
heads of their father's house, choice and 
mighty men of valor, chief of the princes. 
And the number throughout the genealo- 
gy of them that were apt to the war and to 
battle ivas twenty and six thousand men. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1 The sons and chief men of Benjamin. 33 The stock 
of Saul and Jonathan. 

nyrOW Benjamin begat Bela his first- 
J_N born, Ashbel the second, and Ahar- 
ah (he third, 

2 Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth. 

3 And the sons of Bela were, tAddar, 
and Gera, and Abihud, 

4 And Abishua, and Naaman, and 
Ahoah, 

5 And "^Gera, and ^Shephuphan, and 
Huram. 

6 And these arc the sons of Ehud ; these 
are the heads of the fathers of the inhabi- 
tants of Geba, and they removed them to 
Manahath:"^ 

7 And Naaman, and Ahiah, and Gera, 
he removed them, and begat Uzza, and 
Abihud. 

8 And Shaharaim begat children in the 
country of *Moab, after he had sent them 
away ; Hushim and Baara were his wives. I 

• Josh. 17:7, 11. b Gen. 46:17: Num. 2B:44. ♦ Shamer, ver. I 
34. t -W'-mfr, ver. .U. t Or, Jid, Gen. 46:21. o Jmlg. 3: li. I 
8 Or, Shupham, Number!, 2fi : 39 : cli.ip. 7:12. d cliap. 2 : n>. 
ellutlil:!. r Ezra2: W; NVh. 6:2; II :3.'). e Ter 21. || Or, I 
Slicma, \et. 13. b Joshua 18: S8; Neb.ll:!, * Called JcAi'c', I chap, 9:43 



9 And he begat of Hodesh his wife, Jo- 
bab, and Zibia, and ISIesha, and iMalcham, 

10 And Jeuz, and Shachia, and Mirma. 
These were his sons, heads of tbe fathers. 

11 And of Hushim he begat Abitub, 
and Elpaal. 

1 2 The sons of Elpaal ; Eber, and Mi- 
sham, and Shamed, who built ^Ono, and 
Lod, with the towns thereof: 

13 Beriah also, and ^Shema, who ivere 
heads of the fathers of the inhabitants of 
Aijalon, who drove away the inhabitants 
of Gath: 

14 And Ahio, Shashak, and Jeremolh, 

15 And Zebadiah, and Arad, and Adcr, 

16 And Michael, und Ispah, and Joha, 
the sons of Beriah ; 

17 And Zebadiah, and Meshullam, and 
Hezeki, and Heber, 

18 Ishmerai also, and Jezliah, and Jo- 
bab, the sons of Elpaal; 

19 And Jakim, and Zichri, and Zabdi, 

20 And Elienai, and Zilthai, and Eliel, 

21 And Adaiah, and Beraiah, and Shim- 
rath, the sons of UShimhi; 

22 And Ishpan, and Heber, and Eliel, 

23 And Abdon, and Zichri, and Hanan, 

24 And Hananiah, and Elani, and An- 
tothijah, 

25 And Iphedeiah, and Peneul, the sons 
of Shashak ; 

26 And Shamsherai, and Shehariah, and 
Athaliah, 

27 And Jaresiah, and Eliah, and Zichri, 
the sons of Jeroham. 

28 These were heads of the fathers, 
by their generations, chief 77je;i. These 
dwelt'' in Jerusalem. 

29 And at Gibeon dwelt the 'father of 
Gibeon; whose wife's name tvas Maa- 
chah : 

30 And his first-born son Abdon, and 
Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Nadab, 

31 And Gedor, and Ahio, and tZacher. 

32 And Mikloth begat tShimeah, And 
these also dwelt with their brethren in 
Jerusalem, over against them. 

33 ^[And Ner begat Kish, and Kish begat 
Saul, and Saul begat Jonathan, and Malchi- 
shua, and ^Abinadab, and HEsh-baal. 

34 And the son of Jonathan was *Merib- 
banl ; and I\lerib-baal begat Micah. 

35 And the sons of Micah icerc, Pithon, 
and Melech, and tTarca, and Aliaz. 

36 And Ahaz begat l.lehoadah ; and Je- 
hoadah begat Alcmctli, and Azmaveth, 
and Zimri; and Ziinri begat Moza; 

37 And Moza begat Binea: * Rapha «'as 
his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son. 



cliap, M : r>.1. t Or, Zechariah. cliap. •) : 37. ± Or. Shimtnm, ihnp. 
9:38. 4 /»/ii/i, 1 Samuel, 14 : 4R || Or, /M6ni*f//i, 2 S.inmel, 
2:8. ♦ Or. Mtphihnthtth. 2 .«amiiel, 4:4; 9:8,10. f Or, 
ToArrn, chapter 9; -11. J yoin'i, chapter 9: 42. \ Rrphaiah, 

517 



Families dwelling 



I. CHRONICLES, IX. 



in Jerusalem. 



38 And Azcl liad six sons, whose names ' 
are these, Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ish- , 
mael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and 
Hanan. All these were the sons of Azcl. 

39 And the sons of Eshek his brother 
were, Ulam his first-born, Jehush the 
second, and Eliphelet the third. 

40 And the sons of Ulam were mighty 
men of valor, archers, and had many 
sons, and sons' sons, a hundred and fifty. 
All these are of the sons of Benjamin. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 The original of Israel's and Judah's genealogies. 2 
The I.-raelites, 10 the priests, 14 and the Levites, 
with Nethinim, which dwelt in Jerusalem. 27 The 
charge of certain Levites. 35 The stock of Saul ind 
Jonathan. 

SO all Israel were reckoned by geneal- 
ogies ; and behold, they were written 
in the book of the kings of Israel and 
Jndah, U'ho were carried away to Baby- 
lon for their transgression. 

2 U Now" the first inhabitants that dwelt 
in their possessions in their cities were, 
the Israelites, the priests, Levites, and 
the ''Nethinim. 

3 And in '^Jerusalem dwelt of the chil- 
dren of Judah, and of the children of 
Benjamin, and of the children of Ephra- 
im, and Manasseh ; 

4 Uthai the son of Ammihud, the son of 
Omri, the son of Imri, the sou of Bani, 
of the children of Pharcz the son of Judah. 

5 And of the Shilonites; Asaiah the 
first-born, and his sons. 

6 And of the sons of Zcrali ; Jeucl, and 
their brethren, six hundred and ninety. 

7 And of the sons of Benjamin; Sallu 
the son of McshuUam, the son of Hoda- 
viah, the son of Hascnuah, 

8 And Ibnciah the son of Jerohnm, and 
Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri, 
and ]Mcsluillam the son of Shcphatiah, 
the son of llcuel, the son of Ibnijah; 

9 And their brethren, according to their 
generations, nine hundred and fifty and 
six. All these men were chief of the fa- 
thers in the liouse of their fathers. 

10 •' And of the ''priests; Jedaiah, and 
Jehoiarib, and .lachin, 

11 And *Azariah the son of Ililkiah, 
the son of Meshnllam, the son of Zadok, 
the son of Mcraioth, the son of Ahitub, 
the ruler of the house of God ; 

12 And Adaiah the son of .Tcroham, the 
son of I'ashur, the son of MaU-hijah, and 
Maasiai the son of Adiel, the son of Jah- 
zerah, the son of McshuUam, the son of 
Meshillcmith, the son of Inimcr; 

13 And their brethren, heads of the 

• F.Jir.l 2 : TO ; Neli. 7:73. k JoMmn « : 07 ; KzrxSMS; 8 : 'JO. 
«N<-li. 11:1. <1 NMl. II: in.elc. * ^Vrola/i, Ncli. II : II. f Heb. 
miehtij men K/volitr. f Heb. Ihytiholdt. « Num. 31:6. f cliup. 

518 



house of their fathers, a thousand a m 2iu4. 
and seven hundred and threescore ; "= 
veryt able men for the work of the service 
of the house of God. 

14 And of the Levites; Shemaiah the 
son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the 
son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari ; 

15 And Bakbakkar, Ileresh, and Galal, 
and INlattaniah Ihe son of Micah, the son 
of Zichri, the son of Asaph ; 

16 And Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, 
the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun, 
and Berechiah the son of Asa, the son of 
Elkanah, that dwelt in the villages of 
the Netophathites. 

17 ^And the porters were, Shallum, and 
Akkub, and Talmon, and Ahiman, and 
their brethren: Shallum was the chief; 

18 Who hitherto waited in the king's 
gate eastward : they ivere porters in the 
companies of the children of Levi. 

19 And Shallum the son of Kore, the 
son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his 
brethren, of the house of his father, the 
Korahites, u'ere over the work of the ser- 
vice, keepers of the -gates of the taberna- 
cle : and their fathers, being over the host 
of the Lord, icere keepers of the entry. 

20 And "Phinehas the son of Eleazar 
was the ruler over them in time past, 
and the Lord teas with him. 

21 And Zcchariali the son of Meshele- 
miali teas porter of the door of the taber- 
nacle of the congregation. 

22 All these tchich u-ere chosen to be 
porters in the gates were two hundred 
and twelve. These were reckoned by 
their genealogy in their villages, whom 
David "^ and Samuel the ^seer Mid ordain 
in their H set office. 

23 So they and their children had the 
oversight of the gates of the house of the 
Lord, namely, ihc house of the tabernacle, 
by wards. 

24 In four quarters were the porters, 
toward the cast, west, north, and south. 

25 And their brethren, u-hich were in 
their villages, were to come "^ after seven 
days from time to time with them. 

26 For these Levites, the four chief por- 
ters, were in their 'set otlice, and were 
over the tchambcrs and treasuries of the 
house of God. 

27 And they lodged round about the 
house of God, because the charge icas 
upon them, and the opening thereof every 
xaor lixng fcrtaincd to them. 

28 And certain of them had the charge 
of the ministering vessels, that they 
should t bring them in and out by tale. 



26:l,otc » I Samuel, « ; 9. % Hel., /,.«> 
1> 2Kingii, II :fi. » Or, Iriitt. r Or, tto'eho 
them in fry fa/r, and cany them out by taU. 



II n,,„u.t. 

% Heb. bring 



Israel is defeated. 



I. CHRONICLES, X, 



Saul and his sons slain. 



A.M. 2804. 29 Some of them also were ap- 

B. C. 1*200 ^ 

"c. ' pointed to oversee the vessels, and 
all the * instruments of the sanctuary, and 
the fine flour, and the wine, and the oil, 
and the frankincense, and the spices. 

30 And some of the sons of the priests 
made the ^ointment of the spices. 

31 And Mattithiah, one of the Levites, 
who ivas the first-born of Shallum the 
Korahite, had the t set office over the 
things'" that were made +in the pans. 

32 And other of their brethren, of the 
sons of the Kohathites, were over the 
show-bread,* to prepare it every sabbath. 

33 And these arc the '^singers, chief of 
the fathers of the Levites, who remaining 
in tlie chambers tvere free : for H they were 
employed in that work day and night. 

34 These chief fathers of the Levites 
U'cre chief throughout their generations; 
these dwelt at Jerusalem. 

35 ^ And in Gibeon dwelt the father of 
Gibeon, Jehiel, whose wife's name was 
Maachah i"* 

36 And his first-born sou Abdon, tlien Zur, 
and Kish, and Baal, and Ner, and Nadab, 

37 And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zecha- 
ri'ah, and Mikloth. 

38 And Mikloth begat Shimeam. And 
they also dwelt with their brethren at 
Jerusalem, over against their brethren. 

39 And "Ner begat Kish; and Kish begat 
Saul ; and Saul begat Jonathan, and Mal- 
chi-shua, and Abinadab, and Esh-baal. 

40 And the son of Jonathan ivas Merib- 
baal : and Merib-baal begat Micah. 

41 And the sons of Micah were, Pithon, 
and INIclech, and Tahrea, and ^Ahaz. 

42 And Ahaz begat Jarah : and Jarah 
begat Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zim- 
ri ; and Zimri begat Moza; 

43 And Moza begat Binea; and Repha- 
iah his son, Eieasah his son, Azel his son. 

44 And Azel had six sons, whose names 
are these, Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ish- 
maei, and Sheariah, and Obadiali, and 
Hanan. These were the sons of Azel. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 Saul's overthrow and death. 8 The Philistine.s tri- 
umph over Saul. 11 The kindnpss of Jabesh-silead 
towards Saul and his sons. 13 Saul's sin, for wliioh 
the kingdom was translated from him to David. 

"IVrOW the s Philistines fought against 
_LN Israel; and the men of Israel fled 



* Or, i'«K/i. « Ex. rtO:'i1, ■». trtr.trutt. b Lev. 2:^; 6:il. 
f Or, on Jtiit platti, or tticet. I Heb. tntaJ of ordering. Lev. 
■M:S. c ch.ip. B::!l; 2.i : 4 || Heb. upon them was. <1 (fliap. 
8:-2H. » ihap. 8:33. f cliap. 8 : J.'). 8 I Sam. 31 : 1, etc. * Or, 



CHAPTER X. 
]. l\Tonnt Gilhoa ; on the south of the valley 
of Esdraelon, sometimes called the valley of Jez- 
reel. 

3. Archers ; who fought with bows and arrows. 

4. Armor-bearer ; who carried his weapons. 



from before the Philistines, and fell down 
slain* in mount Gilboa. 

2 And the Philistines followed liard 
after Saul, and after his sons; and the 
Philistines slew Jonatlian, and tAbina- 
dab, and Malchi-shua, the sons of Saul. 

3 And the battle went sore against Saul, 
and tlie + archers * hit him, and he was 
wounded of the arcliers. 

4 Then said Saul to his armor-bearer, 
Draw thy sword, and tiirust me through 
therewith ; lest these uncircumeiscd come 
and 'I abuse me. But liis armor-bearer 
would not; for he was sore afraid. So 
Saul took a sword, and fell upon it. 

5 And when his armor-bearer saw that 
Saul was dead, he fell likewise on the 
sword, and died. 

6 So Saul died, and his three sons, and 
all his house died together. 

7 And when all the men of Israel that 
luere in the valley saw that they fled, 
and that Saul and his sons were dead, 
then they forsook their ''cities, and fled: 
and the Philistines came and dwelt in 
them. 

8 And it came to pass on the morrow, 
when the Philistines came to strip the 
slain, tliat tliey found Saul and liis sous 
fallen in mount Gilboa. 

9 And when they had stripped him, 
they took his head, and his armor, and 
sent into the land of the Philistines round 
about, to carry tidings unto their idols, 
and to the people. 

10 And 'they put his armor in the house 
of their gods, and fastened his head in the 
temple of Dagon. 

11 ^And when all Jabesh-gilead heard 
all that the Philistines had done to Saul, 

12 Tiiey arose, all the valiant men, and 
took away the body of Saul, and the 
bodies of his sons, and brought them to 
Jabesh, and buried their bones under the 
oak in Jabesh, and fasted seven days. 

13 ^ So Saul died for his transgression 
which he 'committed against the Loud, 
even J against the word of the Lord, which 
he kept not, and also for asking ^covnsd 
oi one that had a familiar spirit, to inquire 
of it: 

14 And inquired not of the Lord: there- 
fore he slew him, and 'turned the king- 
dom unto David the son of t Jesse. 



tooumled. \ 


.Uku 


t. ISam. U:*9. 


t Heb. thootert with boxef. 


% Heb. found. 


lOr.r 


nock, b Lev. tfi. 


31. 1 1 Sam 31:10. » Heb. 


'.rantgressed. j 


ISarr 


. 13:13; 15 : i1. 


k 1 Sam. 2S : 7. etc. 1 1 


Sam. 16:1. 13: 


:8: 17 


; 2Sam. 3:9, 10 


ft : 3. t Heb. Itai. 



10. Faste7ied his head ; his body had been fast- 
ened to the wall in Beth-shan. 1 Sam. 31 : 10. 
12. Jabesh ; on the east of Jordan. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 
4. Those who have not chosen God as their por- 
tion and have no hope in his mercy, arc often very 
'519 



David crowned at Hebron. I. CHRONICLES, XI, 



His mighty men. 



CHAPTER XI. 

1 David by a gpiieral consent is made king at Hebron. 
4 He winneth the castle of Zion from the Jebusites 
by Joab's valor. 10 A catalogue of David's mighty 
men. 

THEN *all Israel gathered themselves 
to David unto Hebron, saying, Be- 
hold, we are thy bone and thy flesh. 

2 And moreover *in time past, even 
when Saul was king, thou icast he that 
leddest out and broughtest in Israel : and 
the Lord thy God said unto thee, Thou 
shall tfced my people ''Israel, and thoix 
shall be ruler over my people Israel. 

3 Therefore came all the elders of Israel 
to the king to Hebron ; and David made 
a covenant with them in Hebron before 
the Lord; and they anointed David king 
over Israel, according to the word of the 
Lord tby "^Samuel. 

4 TfAnd David and all Israel went to 
Jerusalem, which is ^ Jebus ; where the 
Jebusites n'c/r, the inhabitants of the land. 

5 And the inhabitants of Jebus said 
to David, Thou shalt not come hither. 
Nevertheless David took the castle of 
Zion, which is the city of David. 

6 And David said. Whosoever smiteth 
the Jebusites first shall be * chief and 
captain. So Joab the son of Zeruiah 
went first up, and was chief. 

7 And David dwelt in the castle ; there- 
fore they called II it the city of David. 

8 And he built the city round about, 
even from Millo round about: and Joab 
repaired* the rest of the city. 

9 So David t waxed greater and greater : 
for the Lord of hosts teas with him. 

10 II These also are the chief of the 
mighty men whom David had, who 
strengthened* themselves with him in 
his kingdom, and with all Israel, to make 
hi!n king, according to the "word of the 
LoRn concerning Israel. 

1 1 And this is the number of the mighty 
men whom David had; Jashobeam, *a 
Hachmonite, the chief of flie captains: 
he lifted np his spear against three hun- 
dred slain by him at one time. 

12 And after him tvas Eleazar the son 
of Dodo, the Ahohitc, who tras one of the 
three mightics. 



• U.S.iiii. ,5:1, etr. * Hcb. holli yttterilav nnd lite Ihhd day. 
t Or. rule, b Pm. 7R : 71 ; .Ter. 3: Ifi. % HpIi. Iiy the hiind of. 
c 1 Sam l(i; I, \i. il Ju<l!.' I :-2l ; lit: 10. \ Heh. hend \\ Tliiit 
1», ZlVin. 'ZSnlll. ^:7. * Hfll. KlPlVrf t Hcb wrnt in going iiHd 
incrtating. t '>r, lield tlrunqlg with him. o 1 Sam. l>i: I. !■;. 
j Or, ion of Huchmoni. || Or, Epheidammin. I S.imiiel, 17: 1. 



mi.ser.aHe when they come to die; and .sometimes 
are re.ady to hasten their death by their own hands. 
14. To seek help trom evil spirits is a i;reat sin, 
and exposes those who do it to the just judfjirients 
of G-od. Pretensions to intercourse with, departed 
spirits dishonor him and his word, and should be 
refrained from and discountenaneed. Lev. 19:2G, 
31 ; 20 : 27 ; Dout. 18 ■ 11 ; Isa. 8 : 19, 20. 
520 



13 He was with David at H Pa.s- Vc/im?: 
dammim, and there the Philistines were 
gathered together to battle, where was a 
parcel of ground full of barley; and the 
people fled from before the Philistines. 

14 And they *set themselves in the 
midst of that parcel, and delivered it, and 
slew the Philistines ; and the Lord saved 
them by a great t deliverance. 

15 If Now t three of the thirty captains 
went "^down to the rock to David, into 
the cave of Adullam; and the host of the 
Philistines encamped in the valley of 
Rephaim.e 

16 And David v:as then in the hold, 
and the Philistines' garrison was then at 
Beth-lehem. 

17 And David ''longed, and said. Oh 
that one would give me drink of the wa- 
ter of the well of Beth-lehem, that is at 
the gate ! 

18 And the three brake througli the 
host of the Philistines, and drew water 
out of the well of Beth-lehem, that ii'as 
by the gate, and took it, and brought it to 
David : but David would not drink of it, 
but poured 'it out to the Lord, 

19 And said. My God forbid it me, that 
I should do this thing: shall I drink the 
bloodJ of these men Mhat have put ''their 
lives in jeopardy? for with the jeopardy 
of their lives they brought it: therefore 
he would not drink it. These things did 
these three miglitiest. 

20 H And 'Abishai the brother of Joab, 
he was chief of the three: for lifting up 
his spear against three hundred, he slew 
them, and had a name among the three. 

21 Of the three, he was more honorable 
than the two; for he was their captain: 
howbeit he attained not to the J?r.v7 three. 

22 Bcnaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son 
of a valiant man of Kabzeel, II who had 
done many acts; he slew two lion-like 
men of Moab : also he went down and 
slew a lion in a pit in a snowy day. 

23 And ho slew an Egyptian, a man 
of* great stature, five cubits high; and in 
the Egyptian's hand was a spear like a 
weaver's beam ; and he went down to 
him with a staff, and plucked the spear 



* r\t,ttonrt. t Or, sa/vrition. J Or, three coitlaint over the Ihirly. 
f ■! Slim. M: 1.1, etc. e €lm|>. 14 : 9. h I'sn. 107 : S. ilS«m.7:fi. 
j I.VV. 17 : 10. I I i P»li. 72 : 14. % Heli. icrM their livrt. k .ludg. 
»: 18; 9:17: 1 .Snm. IM:."!. I 2 Sam. 23: 18, etc. \\ Hth. great of 
deed: * Heh. of meaiure. 



CHAPTER XI. 

1. ITehiOH ; about twenty-seven miles south of 
Jerusalem. 

4. Jehvs ; the former name of Jerusalem. 
8. Millo ; a fortified part of Jerusalem. 
13. Pa.i-fianimim : in the tribe of Judah. 
l-l. A/liiltam — valley of Repliai III ; in .Tudah. 
23. Five cubits ; about seven and a half feet. 



The mighty men 



I. CHRONICLES, XII. 



of David's host. 



u.u'io^?"' out of the Egyptian's hand, and 
slew him with 'his own spear. 

24 These things did Benaiah the son of 
Jehoiada, and had a name among the 
three mighties. 

25 Behold, he was honorable among the 
thirty, but attained not to the Jirst three : 
and David set him over his guard. 

26 ^[ Also the valiant men of the armies 
irerc, Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan 
the son of Dodo of Beth-lehem, 

27 Shammoth* the t Harorite, Helez the 
Pelonite,^ 

28 Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, 
Abi-ezer the Antothite, 

29 Sibbecai* the Hushathite, « Ilai the 
Ahohite, 

30 Maharai the Netophathite, * Heled 
the son of Baanah the Netophathite, 

31 Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibeah, 
that pertained to the children of Benjamin, 
Benaiah the Pirathonite, 

32 Ilurait of the brooks of Gaash, 
AbieU the Arbathite, 

33 Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba 
the Shaalbonite, 

34 The sonsof Ulashem the Gizonite, 
Jonathan the son of Shage the Ilararite, 

35 Ahiam the son of II Sacar the Ilara- 
rite, * Eliphal the son of t Ur, 

36 HephcrtheMecherathite, Ahijah the 
I'elonite, 

37 Hezrot the Carmelite, ^Naarai the 
son of Ezbai, 

38 Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar 
the II son of Haggeri, 

39 Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the 
Berothite, the armor-bearer of Joab the 
son of Zeruiah, 

40 Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite, 

41 Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the son of 
Ahlai, 

42 Adina the son of Shiza the Reuben- 
ite, a captain of the Reubenites, and thirty 
with him, 

43 Hanan the son of Maachah, and 
Joshaphat the Mithnitc, 

44 Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and 
Jeliiel the sons of Hothan the Aroerite, 



» iSam. 17 


fil 


* Or, 


Shammah, 


t Or, Harodite, 


1 Sam. 


2:! : 25. 


t Or, 


1' 


iltite. ■! S 


am. -1% : ifi. 


% Or. Mcbunnui. 


1] 


Or, 




* 


r, Helch. t 


Or. Hiddui. 


X Or, Aliiiilbon 


\ 


Or, 




2 Sam 


23 


:3J,33. 


II Ot, Sham 


: * Or.EUvhtlci 


■ 


Or, 


Ahtttha 


. * Or, 


Htzrai 


5 Or, Paarai the Arbitt. \\ 


Or 


the 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. When the time comes, all persons and tilings 
•-onspire, as far as maybe needful, to advance those 
who are selected of G-od for stations of honor and 
responsibility, and to fulfil his designs of love and 
mercv witli regard to thcni. 

9. The presence and favor of God will overcome 
all obstructions in the way of the advancement of 
those whom he delights to honor. 

13. Though deliverance from evil comes from 
G-od, yet he works by means, and men must em- 



45 Jediael the * son of Shimri, and Joha 
his brother, the Tizilc, 

46 Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai and 
Joshaviah the sons of Elnaam, and Ith- 
mah the Moabite, 

47 Eliel, and Obed, and Jasicl the Mes- 
obaite. 

■CHAPTER XII. 

1 The companies that came to fiavid at Zildag. 23 
The armies that came to him at Hebron. 

"IVrOW ''these arc they tliat came to Da- 
_L\ vid to Ziklag, t while he yet kept 
liimself close because of Saul the son of 
Kish : and they tcerc among the mighty 
men, helpers of the war. 

2 They ivere armed with bows, and could 
use both the right hand and the '^left in 
hurling stones and shooting arrows out of a 
bow, even of Saul's brethren of Benjamin. 

3 The chief was Ahiczcr, then Joash, 
the sons of ^Shemaah the (iibcathile; and 
Jeziel, and Pelct, the sons of Azmaveth ; 
and Berachah, and Jehu the Antothite, 

4 And Ismaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty 
man among the thirty, and over the thir- 
ty; and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Jo- 
lianan, and Josabad the Gederathite, 

5 Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, 
and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the Ha- 
ruphite, 

6 Elkanah, and Jesiah, and Azareel, and 
Joezer, and Jashobeam the Korhites, 

7 And Joclah, and Zebadiah, the sons of 
Jeroham of Gedor. 

8 And of the Gadites there separated 
themselves unto David into the hold to 
the wilderness men of might, and men 
of* war fit for the battle, that could han- 
dle shield and buckler, whose faces were 
like the faces of lions, and icere II as swift 
as the ""roes upon the mountains; 

9 Ezer the first, Obadiah the second, 
Eliab the third, 

10 iNIishmanuah the fourth, Jeremiah 
the fifth, 

1 1 Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh, 

12 Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the 
ninth, 



Haggerite. * Or, Shimrite. b 1 Snm. 27 : 2, 6. t Heb. being yet 
shut up. c Ju.lg. iO.lS. t Or, Hiumauh. ^Ur\t.a/lhehatt. 
II Heb. rt* the roes upon the mvuntaint to make hatte. d 2 Sum. 
2:18; Cant. 8: 14. 



ploy them according to his appointment in order to 
receive his help. 

19. A generous man will not encourage others! to 
expose their lives for bis gratification, but will rather 
deny himself than be the means of such exposure 
to his fellow-men. 

CHAPTER XII. 
1. Ziklag; south-west from Jeru.salcm, in the 
tribe of Simeon. 

8. hike the faces of lions; bold, fierce, and 
courageous. Rocx ; a .species of hart or deer. 
521 



"Die companies 



13 Jeremiah the tenth, Machhanai the 
eleventh. 

14 These tfcre of the sons of Gad, cap- 
tains of the host: *one of the least ivas 
over a hundred, and the greatest over a 
thousand. 

1.5 These are they that went over Jor- 
dan in the first month, when it had t over- 
flown all * his hanks; and they put to 
flight all them of the valleys, both toward 
the east, and toward the west. 

16 And there came of the children of 
Benjamin and Judah to the hold unto 
David. 

17 And David went out tto meet them, 
and answered and said unto them. If ye 
be come peaceably unto me to help me, 
my heart shall ^be knit unto you: but if 
ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, 
seeing there is no II wrong in my hands, 
the God of our fathers look thereon, and 
rebuke it. 

18 Then the spirit *came upon ''Ama- 
sai, ivho was chief of the captains, and he 
said, Thine are tve, David, and on thy 
side, thou son of Jesse : peace, peace be 
unto thee, and peace be to thy helpers; 
for thy God helpeth thee. Then David 
received them, and made them captains 
of the band. 

19 And there fell some of Manasseh to 
David, " when he came with the Philis- 
tines against Saul to battle; but they 
helped them not: for the lords of the 
Philistines upon advisement sent him 
away, saying. He will fall to his master 
Saul tto the jeopard ij of o*ir heads. 

20 As he went to Ziklag, there fell to him 
of Manasseh, Adnah, and Jozabad, and 
Jcdiael, and Michael, and Jozabad, and 
P^lihu, and Zilthai, captains of the thou- 
sands that were of Manasseh. 

21 And they helped David -against the 
band"* of the rovers: for they u'cre all 
mighty men oflvalor, and were captains 
in the host. 

22 For at that time day by day there 
came to David to help him, until it was a 
great host, like the host of God. 

23 ^[ And these are the numbers of the 
bands ^ that toere ready armed to the war, 
and came to David to Hebron, to *turn 
the kingdom of Saul to him, according to 
the word of the Lord. 



I. CHRONICLES, XII. of David's army. 



'^ Or, one that wiu Ua«t couKi resist a hundred, and the greatest 
n thauiand. f Heb. filled over. • Josli. 3 : IR. t Heb. lie/ore 
Ihem. 4 Heb. be one. || Or, violence. * Heb. clothed. .Iiijg. 
li::M; 1m. 5^1:17. b 2 Sam. 17: 2S. o 1 Sam. 2!) : 2, 3. f Heb. on 
our heads, f Or. withal/and. il I Sam. 30: 1-10. ^Or, captains, 
nr men ; HkU. heads. • chap. 11:1. H Or, prepared, r 2 Sum. 



22. The host of God; very numerous and pow- 
erful. 

33. Doiihlc heart ; wavering, inconstant. 

38. Perfect heart ; united, single, and firm in 
their purpose to make David king. 
522 



24 The children of Judah that '^bI!:?^-^: 
bare shield and spear u'frc six thousand and 
eight hundred, ready Harmed to the war. 

25 Of the children of Simeon, mighty 
men of valor for the war, seven thousand 
and one hundred. 

26 Of the children of Levi, four thou- 
sand and six luuidred. 

27 And Jehoiada urns the leader of the 
Aaronites, and with him ti:ere three thou- 
sand and seven hundred; 

28 And "^Zadok, a young man mighty 
of valor, and of his father's house twenty 
and two captains. 

29 And of the children of Benjamin, 
the * kindred of Saul, three thousand: 
for ^hitherto tthe greatest part of them 
had kept the ward of the house of Saul. 

30 And of the children of Ephraim twen- 
ty thousand and eight hundred, mighty 
men of valor, + famous throughout the 
house of their fathers. 

31 And of the half-tribe of Manasseh 
eighteen thousand, which were expressed 
by name, to come and make David king. 

32 And of the children of Issachar, 
which^ icere men that had understanding 
of the times, to know what Israel ought 
to do; the heads of them were two hun- 
dred ; and all their brethren ivere at their 
commandment, 

33 Of Zebulun, such as went forth to 
battle, * expert in war, with all instru- 
ments of war, fifty thousand, which could 
keep II rank : they were * not of double 
heart. 

34 Andof Naphtali a thousand captains, 
and with them with shield and spear 
thirty and seven thousand. 

35 And of the Danitcs expert in war 
twenty and eight thousand and six hun- 
dred. 

36 And of Asher, such as went forth to 
battle, t expert in war, forty thousand. 

37 And on the other side of Jordan, of 
tiie Reubenites, and the Gaditcs, and of 
the half-tribe of Manasseh, with all man- 
ner of instruments of war for the battle, 
a hundred and twenty thousand. 

38 All these men of war, that could 
keep rank, came with a perfect heart to 
Hebron, to make David king over all Is- 
rael: and all the rest also of Israel were 
of one heart to make David king. 



8:17. * Hih.lirethren. C,fn.:M:Z3. s '2 S,im. 2: 8, 9. f Heb. a 
multitude. X Hfh. men of names. h Esther I : 13 ; Isa. 33: 6 : 
Miciih6:'J; .7ame83:13, 17. % Ot, rangers o/bnttle, arranged 
in battle. \\ Or, set the battle in arrav. * H^h. without a heart 
and a heart. Psa. 1-2:2. f Or, keeping their rank. vcr. 3:) ; Joel 
2: 7. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. The hearts of all are in the hand of the Lord. 
He endows them with qualities which fit them for 
the work to which they are called, and when he has 
need of them, uses them in advancintc his cause. 



Removal of the ark. 



I. CHRONICLES, XIV. 



Death of Uzzah. 



i "S 39 And there they were with Da- 
vid three days, eating and drinking : for 
their brethren had prepared for them. 

40 Moreover they that were nigh them, 
even unto Issachar and Zebnlun and Naph- 
tali, brought bread on asses, and on cam- 
els, and on mules, and on oxen,«/if/ *meaf, 
meal, cakes of figs, and bunches of raisins, 
and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep 
abundantly : for there ivas joy in Israel. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1 David fetcheth the ark with great sftlemnity from 
Kirjath-jearim. 9 Uzzah being smitten, the ark is 
left at the house of Obed-edom. 

AND David consulted with the captains 
of thousands and hundreds, and with 
every leader. 

2 And David said unto all the congrega- 
tion of Israel, \i it seem good unto you, and 
that it be of the Lord our God, let us t send 
abroad unto our brethren every where, 
that are 'left in all the land of Israel, and 
with them also to the priests and Levites 
u'hich are in t their cities and suburbs, that 
they may gather themselves unto us : 

3 And let us bring ^ again the ark of 
our God to us: for ''we inquired not at 
it in the days of Saul. 

4 And all the congregation said that 
they would do so: for the thing was 
right in the eyes of all the people. 

.5 So "^ David gathered all Israel together, 
from ^ Shihor of Egypt even unto the 
entering of Hemath, to bring the ark of 
God from Kirjath-jearim. 

6 And David went up, and all Israel, to 
Baalah," that is, to Kirjath-jearim, which 
belonged to Judah, to bring up thenec 
the ark of God the Lord, that '^dwellcth 
between the cherubim, whose name is 
called on it. 

7 And they II carried the ark of God in 



* Or, f>c(«a/o/mea(. f Hel). 4rfa«:/mM anil scjirf. • 1 Srtm 
31 : 1 ; 3 Sam. 6:1-11. t Heb. the citirt of their luliurbt. % Hel) 
a/iout. b ISam. 7:1,2. «2.»- — "■■ — ■' '• ' '-■•■■ '— 
2:18. e Josh. 1.5:9, W). f 1 .? 



_.eto. il J<i»li. l.T::f; .ler. 
4:4. II Heb. made the ark to 



17. Services to be acceptable must be sincere ; 
and what is done heartily, as unto the Lord, he will 
approve, and upon it bestow an abundant reward. 

22. The Lord can touch the hearts of multitudes 
as well as of individuals, and can unite as many as 
he pleases in the promotion of his cause. 

.32. Men of unuerstandin<r as well as of might 
are needed in the concerns of states and kingdoms ; 
and when God raises them up and inclines them 
with one heart to engage in his service, it is an in- 
dication of mercy, and should call forth the devout 
thanksgiving of his people. 

38. Union in the selection and support of good 
rulers, is an occasion of gratitude and joy to all who 
desire the honor of God and the prosperity of his 
people. 

CHAPTER XIIL 

3. The ark ; this had been for a number of years 
at Kirjath-jearim, a city of the Gibeonites. 

T). Shi/ior; at the south-western. Heniatk, at 
the north-eastern extremity of Palestine. 



a new cart out of the s house of Abinadab : 
and Uzzah and Ahio drave the cart. 

8 And ''David and all Israel played be- 
fore God with all their might, and with 
singing,* and with harps, and with psal- 
teries, and with timbrels, and with cym- 
bals, and with trumpets. 

9 If And when they came unto the 
threshing-floor of t Chidon, Uzzah put 
forth his hand to hold the ark; for the 
oxen i stumbled. 

10 And the anger of the Lord was kin- 
dled against Uzzah, and he smote him, 
because' he put his hand to the ark: 
and there he Jdied before God. 

11 And David was displeased, because 
the Lord had made abreach upon Uzzah : 
wherefore that place is called U'erez- 
uzzah to this day. 

12 And David was afraid of God that 
day, saying, How shall I bring the ark of 
God home to mc? 

13 So David il brought not the ark home 
to himself to the city of David, but car- 
ried it aside into the house of Obed-edom 
the Gittite. 

14 And the ark of God remained with 
the family of Obed-edom in his house three 
months. And the Lord '' blessed the house 
of Obed-edom, and all that he had. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1 Hiram's kindness to David. 2 David's felicity in 
people, wives, and children. 8 His two victories 
against the Philistines. 

IVrOW 'Hiram king of Tyre sent mes- 
-L\ sengers to David, and timber of ce- 
dars, with masons and carpenters, to build 
him a house. 

2 And David perceived that the Lord 
had confirmed him king over Israel, for 
his kingdom was lifted up on high, be- 
cause of his people Israel. 



rule, si Sam. 7:1. ti i Sam. f, : 5, etc. * Heb wbr.. f C«lleJ 
.\«/ion, '2 Sair.. 6 : 6. J Heb. thook iu i rlian. 15 :M, 1.5: Num. 
4:15. jLe>r.lO:2. \ThMie. the breachof Uzzah. U Heh. removed. 
k cliap. ?6 : 5 ; Gen. 30 : 27 ; Prov. 10 : iJ. 1 2 Sam. 5:11, etr. 



S. Played; danced, as an expression of his joy and 
gratitude to God. Chap, lo : 29 ; 2 Sam. 6 : .5," 14, 20. 

10. He put his hand to the ark ; this was con- 
trary to the divine command. Num. 4 : l.')-20. 

13. The cittj of David ; Jerusalem, or Zion. 
JXSTRl'CTIONS. 

1. When those in public stations propose to make 
changes, it is ordinarily wise to consult the leading 
men and secure their cooperation. This will open 
the way to bring the subject before the people gen- 
erally, and thus to unite them in it. 

8. Times of religious reformation are justly times 
of rejoicing. The king and the beggar, if they love 
the Lord, will unite in praising him and rendering 
thanks for his mercies. 

10. That reverential fear of God which leads to 
a careful regard to his commandments, is essential 
to secure his approbation, or avoid his displeasure. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

2. Lifted up on high ; greatly prospered. 

Ci'23 



David's victories. 



I. CHRONICLES, XV, 



The ark again removed. 



3 "[And David took * more wives at 
Jerusalem : and David begat more sons 
and daugliters. 

4 Now tlicse are the names of Ai.s "chil- 
dren which he had in Jerusalem ; Sham- 
mua, and Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon, 

5 And Ibhar, and Elishua, and Elpalet, 

6 And Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia, 

7 And Elishama, and tBecliada, and 
Eliphalet. 

8 ^[ And when the Philistines heard 
that David was anointed king over all 
Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek 
David. And David heard of it, and went 
out against them. 

9 And the Philistines came and spread 
themselves'' in the valley of Rephaim. 

10 And David inquired of God, saying. 
Shall I go up against the Philistines? and 
wilt thou deliver them into my hand? 
And the Lord said unto him. Go up; for 
I will deliver them into thy hand. 

1 1 So they came up to Baal-perazim ; 
and David smote them there. Then Da- 
vid said, God hath broken in upon mine 
enemies by my hand like the breaking 
forth of waters : therefore they called the 
name of that place t Baal-perazim. 

12 And when they had left their gods 
there, David gave a commandment, and 
they were burned with tire. 

13 And the Philistines yet "^ again spread 
themselves abroad in the valley. 

14 Therefore David inquired again of 
God; and God said unto him. Go not up 
after them ; turn away from them, and 
come upon them over against the mul- 
berry-trees. 

15 And it shall be, when thou shalt 
hear a sound of going in the tops of the 
mulberry-trees, that then thou shalt go 
out to battle : for God is gone forth before 
thee to smite the host of the Philistines. 

16 David therefore did as God com- 
manded him: and they smote the host of 
the Philistines from ^ Gibeon even to 
Gazer. 

17 And the ■'fame of David went out 
into all lands; and the Lord "brought 
the fear of him upon all nations. 



* HHi. yet. • <liK|iter :! : Ti, .ic. t '>r, Eliada, •! Sam. ii : 16. 
b cliap 11:15. t Thalia, a place of lirrnches. ever.!). '^ Geha, 
2 S.im. r. : JS. J .losh. fi : 27 ; '2 Cliron. ifi : 8 : Pan. 18:44. o Deut. 
1:45; ll:i->. fclinp.ir.:!. \\Heli. lUnnot tocirrytliciirko/God, 



9. Til r, valley of Rephaim ; near Jerusalem. 

1 1 . Bnal-jierazim ; near the valley of Rephaim. 

IG. ff/heon; in the tribe of Benjamin. Gazer; 
one of the cities of the Phili.stincs. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. All blessings, temporal and .spiritual, come 
from 'jod. When this is duly .acknowledged, it 
honors him and prepares the way for the increase 
and continuance of his favors. 

8. (rrcat mercies are often followed by great 
trials ; but careful inquiry as to tlie will of God, 
524 



CHAPTER XV. \'l;'Zr 

1 David, having prepared a place for the ark, ordereth 
the priests and Levites to bring it from Obed-edom. 
25 He performeth the solemnity thereof with great 
joy. 29 Michal despiselh him. 

AND David made him houses in the 
city of David, and prepared a place 
for the ark of God, and pitched for it a 
tent.f 

2 Then David said, II None bought to 
carry the ark of God but the Levites : 
for them hath the Lord chosen to carry 
the ark of God, and to minister unto him 
for ever. 

3 And David gathered all Israel together 
to Jerusalem, to bring '" up the ark of the 
Lord unto his place, which he had pre- 
pared for it. 

4 And David assembled the children of 
Aaron, and the Levites: 

5 Of the sons of Koliath ; Uriel the chief, 
and his * brethren a hundred and twenty : 

6 Of the sons of Merari ; Asaiah the 
chief, and his brethren two hundred and 
twenty : 

7 Of the sons of Gershom ; Joel the chief, 
and his brethren a hundred and thirty : 

8 Of the sons of 'Elizaphan ; Shemaiah 
the chief, and his brethren two hundred : 

9 Of the sons of J Hebron; Eliel the 
chief, and his brethren fourscore : 

10 Of the sons of Uzziel; Amminadab 
the chief, and his brethren a hundred 
and twelve. 

1 1 And David called for Zadok and 
Abiathar the priests, and for the Levites, 
for Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, 
and Eliel, and Amminadab, 

12 And said unto them. Ye arc the chief 
of the fathers of the Levites: ''sanctify 
yourselves, both ye and your brethren, 
that ye may bring up the ark of the Lord 
God of Israel unto the place that I have 
prepared for it. 

13 For because ye did it not at the first, 
the Lord our God made a 'breach upon 
us, for that we sought him not after the 
due '"order. 

14 So the priests and the Levites sanc- 
tified themselves to bring up the ark of 
the Lord God of Israel. 



butfii 


■thr 


hcviUs. 


g Nun, 


4 


•2- 


.i; 


Dei.t. 


10. 


8: 


11 


9. 


h limp. 


l.'Jif); 


IK 


ngs, 8 : 


. • Or 


k< 


nsm 


tn 




i K 


«. 6 


22. 




1 K 


X. 6:18. 


k iJChron 


5:11; 29:5: Ei 


pk 


48 


II 




1 r 


l.ip 


i:i 


:» 


10 


2 Sam. 


6:7,8 


m 


2 Cliron 


13:17-20; 


I Cor. 


11 


3 ; 


14: 


4I>. 









and a readiness when it is known to obey it, will 
secure his aid, and in due time give deliverance 
from trouble, and victory over every foe. 

CHAPTER XV. 

12. Sanctify yo7irseh)es ; by cleansing them- 
selves from all ceremonial and moral pollution, and 
by the performance of those duties which God had 
prescribed for that purpose. -, 

13. Made a breach upon us ; in the destruction 
of Uzzah. 



Removal of the ark 



I. CHRONICLES, XVI. 



to Jirimnlcm. 



ic'io«'- 15 And the children of the Levites 
bare the ark of God upon their shoulders 
■with the staves thereon, as "Moses com- 
manded, according to the word of the Lord. 

16 And David spake to the chief of the 
Levites to appoint their brethren to be 
the singers with instruments of music, 
psalteries and harps and cymbals, sound- 
ing, by ''lifting up the voice with joy. 

17 So the Levites appointed '^Ileman the 
son of Joel; and of his brethren, '' Asaph 
the son of Bereehiali; and of the sons of 
Merari their brethren, '"Ethan the son of 
Kushaiah; 

18 And with them their brethren of the 
second degree, Zechariah, Ben, and Jaa- 
ziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and 
Unni, Eliab, and Benaiali, and Maaseiah, 
and Mattithiah, and Eliphcleh, and iNlik- 
neiah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, the 
porters. 

19 So the singers, Ileman, Asaph, and 
Ethan, u-ere appointed to sound with cym- 
bals of brass ; 

20 And Zechariah, and *Aziel, and She- 
miramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, and Eli- 
ab, and Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with 
psalteries on ""Alamoth; 

21 And Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and 
Mikneiah, and Obcd-cdom, and Jeiel, and 
Azaziah, with harps on the t Shcminith 
to excel. 

22 And Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, 
icas t{or >^song: lie instructed about the 
song, because he was skilful. 

23 And Berechiah and Elkanah rccrc 
door-keepers for the ark. 

24 And Shebaniah, and Jehoshaphat, 
and Nethancel, and Amasai, and Zech- 
ariah, and Benaiah, and Eliczer, the 
priests, did ^blow with the trumpets be- 
fore the ark of God : and Obed-edom and 
Jehiah irere door-keepers for the ark. 

25 IT So •• David, and the elders of Israel, 
and the captains over thousands, went to 
bring up the ark of the covenant of the 
Lord out of the house of Obed-edom with 
joy. . 

26 And it came to pass, when God help- 



a Ex. 25:H; Num. 4:15; 7:9. b iClirm 


1. 5:13. c cliap.fi::13. 


cl cliap. 6 : 39. ' cliap. 6: -H. * Jaazirl. ve 


r. I«. f Psa. 4H, title. 


t Or, cig/U/i to oversee. Van. fi, title, t Or. 


vfnn/or the carriage: 


he instructed nhoitC the cnn-iuqe. ^ Heh. 


lifting up. c Num. 


10:Si Psalm 81:3; Joel i : 1, I."), h JS.imii 


»1, 6:1.S, et.-.; 1 Kings, 



ed the Levites that bare the ark of the 
covenant of the Lord, that they offered 
seven bullocks and seven rams. 

27 And David tva.<i clothed with a robe 
of tine linen, and all the Levites that 
bare the ark, and the singers, and Chen- 
aniah the master of the II song with the 
singers: David also had upon him an 
ephod of linen. 

28 Thus 'all Israel brought up the ark 
of the covenant of the Lord with shout- 
ing, and with sound of the cornet, and 
with trumpets, and with cymbals, making 
a noise with psalteries and harps. 

29 H And it came to pass, as the ark of 
the covenant of the Lord came to the 
city of David, that INlichal the daughter 
of Saul looking out at a window saw 
king David J dancing and playing: and 
she despised ''him in her heart. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

1 David's festival sacrifice. 4 He ordereth a choir to 
siriR thanksgiving. 7 The psalm of thanksgiving. 
37 He appointeth ministers, porters, priests, and mu- 
sicians, to attend continually on the ark. 

^O 'they brought the ark of (Jod, and 
kj set it in the midst of the tent that. 
David had pitched for it : and they offered 
burnt-sacrifices and peace-offerings before 
God 

2 And when David had made an end of 
offering the burnt-offerings and the peace- 
offerings, he blessed the people in the 
name of the Lord. 

.3 And he dealt to every one of Israel, 
both man and woman, to every one a 
loaf of bread, and a good piece of flesh, 
and a flagon of wine. 

4 ^ And he appointed certain of the Le- 
vites to minister before the ark of tin- 
Lord, and to '"record, and to thank and 
praise the Lord God of Israel : 

5 Asaph the chief, and next to him 
Zechariah, Jeiel, and Shemiramoth, and 
Jehiel, and Mattithiah, and Eliab, and 
Benaiah, and Obed-edom : and Jeiel with 
psalteries* and with harps; but Asaph 
made a sound with cymbals; 

6 Benaiah also and Jahaziel the priests 



8:1. II Or, carriage, i cliap. 13:8; J Chronicles, S: li ; Ezra 
3:10,11: Psnlm 47: I.etc. ; W:':.">; 98:4-fi; I.VI::l-.'i. i Prwlm 
149:3; Ecclc»iiiste»3:4. k Psalm «9 : 7-9. I i Samuel, I!: 17-19. 
■» Psalms as, 70, titles. * Heb. initrumenli of ptalteriet and 
harpt. 



29. She despised him : she thought that lie de- 
gr.aded himself, by thus joining with the priests and 
the people in their expressions of religious joy. 
INSTRUCTIO.NS. 

2. Our mistakes in times past sliould make us 
wiser in future ; should lead us to avoid tlic errors 
into which, from presumption, ignorance, or inat- 
tention, we may have fallen; and should engage, 
us in the performance of all duties which we have . 
neglected. 

12. Peculiar sanctity becomes the ministers of 
religion, and especially when engaged in religious 

34 



duties ; they .should be watchful not to indulge in 
any thing offensive to God, or that tends to unfit 
them for liis holy ser\-ice. 

16. Singing is a.n important part of divine wor- 
ship, and when rightly performed is ,icccptable to 
God, Those who engage in it should never forget 
that God looks upon the hc.irt, and requires that 
those who worship him should worship him in spirit 
and in truth. 

28. Thougli that fervor of devotion which the Holy 
Spirit inspires, and which is manifested by those who 
are und-?r his influence, is often despised and treated 
525 



DavicTs psalm 



I. CHRONICLES, XVI. 



of tlianksgivitig. 



with trumpets continually before the ark 
of the covenant of (jod. 

7 1i Then ''on that day David delivered 
first this psalm to thank the LojiD into the 
hand of Asaph and his brethren. 

8 Give *" thanks unto the Lord, call upon 
his name, make known his deeds among 
the people. 

9 Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him, 
talk'^ ye of all his wondrous works. 

10 Glory ye in his holy name: let the 
heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord. 

1 1 Seek the Lord and his strength, seek 
his face continually. 

12 Remember his marvellous works 
that he hath done, his wonders, and the 
judgments of his mouth; 

13 ye seed of Israel his servant, ye 
children of Jacob, his chosen ones. 

14 He is the Lord our God; his judg- 
ments are in all the earth. 

15 Be ye mindful always of his cove- 
nant; the word ichich he commanded to 
a thousand generations; 

16 Even of the covenant which he made 
with ''Abraham, and of his oath unto 
Isaac ;^ 

17 And hath confirmed the same to 
Jacob "^ for a law, and to s Israel for an 
everlasting ''covenant, 

18 Saying, Unto thee will I give the 
land of Canaan, the *lot of your inheri- 
tance ; 

19 When ye were but tfcw, even a 
few,' and strangers in it. 

20 And when they went from nation to 
nation, and from one kingdom to another 
people ; 

21 He suffered no man to do them 
w^rong; yea, he reproved J kings for their 
sakes, 

22 Sayinp;, Touch not mine anointed, 
and do my prophets no harm. 

23 Sing ''unto the Lord, all the earth; 
show forth from day to day his salvation. 

24 Declare liis glory among the heathen; 
his marvellous works among all nations. 

25 For great is the Lord, and greatly 



• 2 Snra 


.22:1:23:1. b I'sa. KB : 1-15. cMnl. 3:16. d Gen. 


17. -2. e 


Gen.56::i. f Gen. 28 : 13; 35: 1 1. K Kx. 3 : 17; Josli. 


24:11-13 


b Jer. 11:2-7. * Heh. card, t Heb. men of number. 


i Gen. M 


30. j Gen. 12:17; 20:8; Ex. 7: l.->, etc. k Pa,"!. 96. 



as degradiiirf, especially to tlie rich, the great, and 
tlie powerful, this will not prevent true Christians 
from being zealous in the service of G-od. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

7. This psalm ; composed by Diivid, and now first 
given to the musicians to be anw^ in imlilic worsliip. 

12. The judgments of his nioitlh ; those de- 
cisions and statutes which he had made known for 
the benefit of the people. 

14. /// all the earth ; the Lord reijins among 
all people, and makes known so much of his will, 
as to leave them without excuse if they do not love 
and obey him. 
52G 



ed above all gods. 

26 For all the gods of the people are 
idols:' but the Lord made the '"heavens. 

27 Glory and honor are in his pres- 
ence; strength and gladness are in liis 
place. 

28 Give unto the Lord, ye kindreds of 
the people, give unto the Lord glory and 
strength. 

29 Give unto the Lord the glory due 
unto his name : bring an offering, and 
come before him : worship the Lord in 
the beavity of holiness. 

30 Fear before him, all the earth: the 
world also shall be stable, that it be not 
moved. 

31 Let the heavens be glad, and let the 
earth rejoice: and let men say among the 
nations. The Lord reigneth. 

32 Let the sea roar, and the fulness 
thereof: let the fields rejoice, and all that 
is therein. 

33 Then shall the trees of the wood sing 
out at the presence of the Lord, because 
he Cometh to judge the earth. 

34 Oh "give thanks unto the Lord; for 
he is good ; for his mercy endureth for 
ever. 

35 And say ye, "Save us, God of our 
salvation, and gather us together, and de 
liver us from the heathen, that we may 
give thanks to thy holy name, and glory 
in thy praise. 

36 IBlcssed ^be the Lord God of Israel 
for ever and ever. And lall the people 
said. Amen, and praised the Lord. 

37 1[So he left there before the ark of 
the covenant of the Lord Asaph and his 
brethren, to minister before the ark con- 
tinually, as every days work required: 

38 And Obed-edom with their brethren, 
threescore and eight; Obcd-cdom also the 
son of Jedutliun and Hosah to he porters : 

39 And Zadok the priest, and his breth- 
ren the priests, before the tabernacle of 
the Lord in the high place that icas at 
Gibeon,'' 



1 Lev. 19:4; laa. 44 : 9, etc. ; .Ter. 10 : 10-14. m Psn. 102 : in: Isa. 
40:26; 44:24; Kev. 14:7. B 2 Chron. n : 13 ; 7 : 3 ; I'.sa. 1 0(i : 1 : 
107:1; 118:1; 136:1. o Psnlm 106 : 47, 4«. p lKings,8:13. 
H Deut.27;l.T; Ntli.8:6; lCor.l4:16. r 2 Cliron. 1:3, 13. 



\o. A thonsaud generations ; a definite for a 
long indefinite' period. 

30. The world also shall be stable ; that fear 
of the Lord wliich le.ads men to obey him, tend.- 
to the most perfect stability^ prosperity, and enjoy- 
ment. 

33. To judge the earth ; decide righteously 
upon the character and condition of men. 

37. The ark; this was carried to Jerusalem, 
and a part of the priests resided there with David 
to minister before it. Anotlier part resided at Gib- 
eon, wliere the tabernacle and brazen altar still re- 
mained, and where was ofl'ered the daily sacrifice. 
Ver. 39, 40. 



God's promises 



I. CHROx\ICLES, XVII. 



itnio Darid. 



B. C. 10-12. 

the Lord upon the altar of the burnt-offer- 
ing continually * morning "and evening, 
and to do according to all that is written in 
the law of the Lord, which he command- 
ed Israel ; 

41 And with them Hcman and Jcdu- 
thun, and the restihat were chosen, who 
were expressed by name, to give thanks 
to the Lord, ''because his mercy endurelh 
lor ever ; 

42 And with them Ileman and Jedu- 
thun with trumpets and *= cymbals for 
those that should make a sound, and with 
musical instruments of God. And the 
sons of Jeduthun were t porters."* 

43 And ''all the people departed every 
man to his house: and David returned to 
bless his house. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

1 Nathain first approving tliR purpose of David to huild 
(rod a house, 3 after by the word of God forbiddeth 
hira. 11 He promlseth him blessings and benefits in 
his seed. IG David's prayer and thanksgiving. 

IVTOW Ht came to pass, as David sat in 
_lN his house, that David said to Nathan 
the prophet, Lo, I dwell in a house of 
cedai-s, but the ark of the covenant of 
the Lord rcmaineik under curtains. 

2 Then s Nathan said unto David, Do all 
that is in thy heart ; for God is with thee. 

3 \i And it came to pass the same night, 
that the word of God came to Nathan, 
saying, 

4 Go and tell David my servant. Thus 
saith the Lord, Thou shalt not build me 
a house to dwell in : 

5 For I have not dwelt in a house since 
the day that I brought up Israel unto this 
day; but have +gonc from tent to tent, 
and from one tabernacle to another. 



■^ Hfh. in the rniiriiinff and in Iht eitning. • Kx ■29:»8; Num. 
':.S.-^.4. IJ ver.34; E7.r.i3:ll; I'sa. 103:17; Jer. Xi:]l. c Ps.i. 
ir.0:5. f Hell/ay l/,t gate. APsx8i:\0. « iSam. fi: 13, iO. 
f -Z Sam. 7 : 1, etc.; -2 Clirnn. fi : 7-9. B 1 Cor 1»:M. t Heb. /letn. 
h 1 Sam. lfi:ll, 12. i, Heb. afltr. i Gen. iS: l.") : 1 Sam. IS : 14; 



43. Bless /lis house ; in.struct and implore bless- 
ings upon his household, and engage with them in 
the worship of God. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Love to God and generosity to men go well 
together, and mutually aid each other. 

7. Singing the praises of God and calling upon 
his n;ime have ever formed an important part of his 
worship, and are well suited to the devotions of his 
people. 

1-3. The covenant which God hath made in Christ 
with his people, is an everlasting covenant, and its 
blessings are sure to all wiio put their trust in him. 

2-3. Praising God for his salvation, and praying 
that all may be made partakers of it, should form 
an important part of our daily duties. 

34. The mercy of God in Christ is the only ground 
of hope for lost and guilty men. On this they should 
depend, while they glory in him as their righteous- 
cess, wisclom, and strength.-' 

43. While the public worship of God should not 



I 6 Wheresoever I have walked M-ith all 
Israel, spake I a word to any of the judges 
of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my 
people, saying. Why have ye not built 
me a house of cedars'? 

7 Now therefore thus shalt thou say unto 
my servant David, Thus saith the Lord 
of hosts, I took thee from the ''sheep-cote, 
even from ^following the sheep, that thou 
shouldest be ruler over my people Israel ; 

8 And 'I have been with thee whither- 
soever thou hast walked, and have cut 
off all thine J enemies from before thee, 
and have made thee a name like the name 
of the great men that are in the earth. 

9 Also I will ordain a place for my peo- 
ple Israel, and will ^ plant them, and they 
shall dwell in their place, and shall be 
moved' no more; ""neither shall the chil- 
dren of wickedness Avaste them any more, 
as at the beginning, 

10 And since the time that I command- 
ed "judges to be over my people Israel. 
Moreover I will subdue all thine "ene- 
mies. Furthermore I tell thee, that the 
Loud will build thee a house. 

1 1 IT And it shall come to pass, when 
thy days be expired that thou must go to 
be with thy fathers, that I will raise up 
thy seed after thee, which shall be of thy 
sons; and I will establish his kingdom. 

12 He shall build me a house, and I 
will stablish his throne for ever. 

13 I Pwill be his father, and he shall 
be my son : and il will not take my mer- 
cy away from him, as I took it from him 
that was before thee : 

14 But ''I will settle him in my house 
and in my kingdom for ever: and 'his 
throne shall be established for evermore. 

15 According to all these words, and 



2 Sam 


8:6. 


U. j r 


ia. 


8, title. 


k Psa 


. !I2 : 1.1 


Isa. 61 : 3 


.ler. 


24 : n. 


1 1 


i-v. 3:12 




1. Ezck. 


'28 : -24 


. Itev. -2 


1 ;4 


n .7 


,l,-.-. 


2:14- 


.1. 


I'sn. 18 


40 


etc. ; 1 Conntl 


an.«, \r, 


3o. 


P 2 Samuel. 


7:14, 


IS. 


q Tsalm 


8!l 


:28, etc. 


la-oi 


Il A5:3. 


r 


Luke 


;;ti 


» P,-al 


ni 7-2 : 


17. 

















be neglected, but statedly observed according to 
divine appointment, it should never supersede, or 
be suffered to hinder the regular observance of 
family duties. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

1. Under curtails ; in a tabernacle or tent. 

7. S/i ceji-cote ; the fold or place where siieep were 
kept. 

y. Shall be moved iio more ; unless they should 
forsake the Lord and worship idols. 

10. Build thee a house : give him a numerou.'s 
and prosperous posterity. Ver. 12, 17, 23, 2-5. 27. 

12. Stablish his throne for ci-er : provided the 
occupant should continue to obey God. Ver. 17, 
22, 23. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. A godly man is not content merely to receive 
blessings himself, but wishes to do all he can for 
the honor of God and the good of mankind. 

7. The elevation of rulers is from God ; and the 
higher they are raised in power and influence, the 



David's thankssiviiit 



I. CHRONICLES, XVIII. 



His vidorici 



according to all this vision, so did Nathan 
speak unto David. 

16 H And David the king came and sat 
before the Lord, and said, ^'Who ain I, 
Lord God, and what is my ''house, that 
thou liast brought ine hitherto? 

17 And yd this was a small thing in 
thine eyes, God; for thou hast also 
spoken of thy servant's house for a great 
while to come, and hast regarded me 
according to the estate of a man of high 
degree, Lord God. 

18 What can David speak more to thee 
for the honor of thy servant? for thou 
knowest thy servant. 

19 Loud, for "^thy servant's sake, and 
according to thine ''own heart, hast Ihou 
done all this greatness, in making known 
all these * great things. 

20 Lord, ^ there is none like thee, 
neither is there any God besides thee, 
according to all that we have heard with 
our cars. 

21 And "^what one nation in the earth 
is like thy people Israel, whom God went 
to redeem to be his own people, to make 
thee a name of greatness and terrible- 
ness, by driving out nations from before 
thy people, whom thou hast redeemed 
out of Egypt? 

22 For thy people Israel didst thou make 
thine ^own people for ever; and thou. 
Lord, becamest their God. 

23 Therefore now, Lord, let the thing 
that thou hast spoken concerning thy ser- 
vant and concerning his house be ''estab- 
lished for ever, and do as thou hast said. 

24 Let it even be established, that thy 
name may be magnified for ever, saying. 
The Lord of hosts is the God of Israel, 
even a ' God to Israel : and let the house 
of David thy servant be 'established be- 
fore thee. 

25 For thou, my God, hast ttold thy 
servant that thou wilt build him a house : 
therefore thy servant hath found in his 
heart to pray before thee. 

26 And now, Lord, tliou art God, and ha.st 
promised this goodness unio thy servant: 

27 Now therefore +let it please tliee to 
bless the house of thy servant, that it 



> Gen. 32:10: Kpli. 3:& bJuilg.fi:IR. t Un.V -.Or'; Ai:l ; 
49:5, 6; Dan 9:17. d MnU 1 1 : 2'>. " Heh. oreatntttei. e Dent. 
33:«6j P^n. B«:H; Epli. 3:20. f Deill. 1 : 7, :12 ; :« : Jft « Ex. 
19:S.rt; I S.im. 12:22: Kiim. 9: •!. «: 11 : 1, -2, etc. b Paa. 119: ^'•; 
Jer.ll:(>. i Heb. K : in ; II : 16; nor.2l : 3. jP»ii.90:l7. t Heb. 
revealed the trtr of thy set-vant. ^ Ot^ it hath pleated. V Uoin. 



greater is their obligation to love and serve him, 
and the greater will be their guilt, and the more 
dreadful their condemnation, if they rebel against 
him. 

16. The goodness of God to his people deeply 
humbles them on account of their unworthiness, 
and leads them to Teel that for all their mercies 
they are indebted to the riches of his grace. 
528 



may be before thee for ever: for *B."^i 
thou blcssest, Lord, and ^it shall be 
blessed for ever. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1 David subilueth the Philistines and the Moabites. '■! 
He smiteth Hadarezer and the Pj-riaiis. 9 Tou send- 
eth Hadoram with presents to bless David. 11 The 
presents and the spoil David dedicateth to God. )'i 
He puttetli garrisons in Edom. 14 David's officers. 

"iVrOW 'after this it came to pass, that 
_l\ David smote the Philistines, and sub- 
dued them, and took Galh and her towns 
out of the hand of the Philistines. 

2 And he smote Moab ; and the Moabites 
became David's servants, a/u/ brought gifts. 

3 ^And David smote Uladarezcr king 
of Zobah unto Hamath, as he went to 
stablish his dominion by the river Eu- 
phrates. 

4 And David took from him a thousand 
chariots, and I! seven thousand horsemen, 
and twenty thousand footmen : David 
also houghed all the chariot horses, but 
reserved of them a hundred chariots. 

5 And when the Syrians of* Damascus 
came to help Hadarezer king of Zobah, 
David slew of the Syrians two and twenty 
thousand men. 

6 Then David put garrisons in Syria- 
damascus; and the Syrians became Da- 
vid'.s servants, and brought gifts. Thus 
the Lord preserved David Avhithersoevcr 
he went. 

7 And David took the shields of gold 
that were on the servants of Hadarezer, 
and brought them to Jerusalem. 

8 Likewise from t Tibhalh, and from 
Chun,- cities of Hadarezer, brought David 
very much brass, wherewith '"Solomon 
made the brazen sea, and tlic pillars, and 
the vessels of brass. 

9 TfNow when J Tou king of Hamath 
heard how David had smitten all the 
host of Hadarezer king of Zobah ; 

10 He sent II Hadoram his son to king 
David, to * inquire of his welfare, and to 
congralulatet him, because he had fought 
agninst Hadarezer, and smitten him ; (for 
Hadarezer * had war with Tou ;) and witJi 
him all manner of vessels of gold and sil- 
ver and brass. 



1 1 : 29. 1 2 .Sntn. 8 : 1 . etc. J Or, Hadndear, 2 Sam. 8 : .■!. (| teren 
hundred. 2 Sam. 8:4. * Heb. Dnrmerek. t Called Betah. i 
Snin. 8:8. | Calleil Ilernthai, 2 Sam. S : K. ml Kings, 7:16, ctr. 

?nr, Tni, 2 .Sam. 8:9. II Or, Jmam, 2 Sam. 8:10. * Or, lalule 
Heb. blen. t Heb. rva$ the mon of war: 



24. The righteous wish to have the promises of 
God fulfilled, not merely that it may be well with 
them, but that he may be glorified, and inultitud>'s 
be led to adore him for ever. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 
3. Zobah ; a part of Syria north of Damascus. 
Hamath ; a kingdom bordering on Zobah. 



DaviaCs messengers to 



I. CHRONICLES, XIX. 



Ilanun are ill-i(sed. 



cated unto the Lord, with the* silver and 
the gold that he brought from all these na- 
tions ; from Edom, and from INToab, and 
from the children of Amnion, and from 
the Philistines, and from Amalek. 

12 Moreover, *Abishai the son of Zerii- 
iah slew of the ''Edomites iu the valley 
of salt eighteen thousand. 

13 H And he put garrisons in Edom; 
and all the Edomites became David's 
servants. Thus the Lokd preserved Ehi- 
vid whithersoever he went. 

14 HSo David' reigned over all Israel, 
and '^executedjudgment and justice among 
all his people. 

15 And ,loab the son of Zeruiah icas 
over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son 
of Ahilud, t recorder; 

16 And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and 
Abiinelcch i the son of Abiathar, u'cre 
the priests; and ^Shavsha was scribe; 

17 And Benaiah the son of Jchoiada 
teas over the Cherethitcs and the Peleth- 
ites ; and the sons of David ivere chief 
about II the king. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

1 David's messengers, sent to comfort Ilanun the son 
of Nahash, are villanously entreated. The Ammon- 
ites, strengthened by the SjT-ians, are overcome by 
Joab and Abishai. IG Shophach, making a new sup- 
ply of the Syrians, is slain by David. 

IVTOW ''it canle to pass after this, that 
_l\ Nahash the king of the children of 
Animon died, and his son reigned in his 
stead. 

2 And David said, I will show kindness 
unto Hanun the son of Nahash, because 
his father showed kindness to me. And 
David sent messengers to comfort him 
concerning his father. So the servants of 
David came into the land of the children 
of Ammon to Ilanun, to comfort him. 

3 But the princes of the children of Am- 
mon said to Hanun, *Thinkest thou that 
David doth honor thy father, that he hath 
sent comforters unto tiiee'? are not his 
servants come unto thee for to search, and 
to overthrow, and to "spy out the land? 





a .losli. 


fi:lSI. " 


Hel). Ahthai. 


h 


2 Sam. 


8 


i:t 


U; I'b.i. 60. 


c 


r.er 


. 18 


: 19 : 1 Ki 


nss. 10: 9; I'ja 


7K:" 


i: 8;t: 


M 


I 


.1.9:7; .12:1. 


t 


Or 


remetnhrancer. t Called jihimeUch,iS 


nil) 


8 


17 k Called 


.V 


trai 


nh, 


2 Sam. 8 : 


17; nnd Shisha 


, 1 K 


in<;a, -4 


:;) 




11 Heb. at the 


A 


,nd 


of. 


J 2 Sam 


10:1, etc. « 


Hel) 


In Ml 


"' 


eye* doth David. 



12. Valley of salt ; south east of the Dead sea. 

17. Cheretltitesaiid — Peletliites ; David'sbody- 
guard. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. "When a man's w.ays please the Lord, he often 
makes his enemies to be at peace with him, or gives 
him the victory over all his foes. 

8. The spoils of the enemies of the Lord when 
they come into the possession of his people, instead 
of being used for their own aggrandizement, should 
be consecrated to his service and to the good of man- 
kind. 



4 Wherefore Hlanun took David's ser- 
vants, and shaved them, and cut off their 
garments in the midst hard by their but- 
tocks, and sent them away. 

.5 Then there went certain, and told 
David how the men were served ; and 
he sent to meet them : for the men were 
greatly ashamed. And the king said. 
Tarry at Jericho until your beards be 
grown, and then return. 

6 H And when tlie children of Am- 
mon saw that tiiey had made themselves 
odious t to David, Hanun and the children 
of Ammon sent a thousand talents of sil- 
ver to hire them ^ chariots and horsemen 
out of Mesopotamia, and out of Syria- 
maachah, and out of ''Zobah. 

7 So they hired thirty and two thou- 
sand chariots, and the king of Maachah 
and his people; who came and pitched 
before Medeba. And the children of Am- 
mon gathered themselves together from 
their cities, and came to battle. 

8 And wlien David heard of it, he sent 
Joab, and all the host of the mighty men. 

9 And the children of Ammon came out, 
and put the battle in array before the gate 
of the city : and the kings that were come 
were by themselves in the field. 

10 Now when Joab saw that the + battle 
was set against him before and behind, 
he chose out of all the ^choice of Israel, 
and put them in array against the Syrians. 

11 And the rest of the people he de- 
livered unto the hand of H Abishai his 
brother, and they set themselves in array 
against the children of Ammon. 

12 And he said, If the Syrians be too 
strong for me, then thou shalt help me : 
but if the children of Ammon be too 
strong for thee, then I will help thee. 

13 Be 'of good courage, and let us be- 
have ourselves valiantly for our people, 
and for the cities of our God : and J let the 
Louu do that which is good in his sight. 

14 So Joab and the people that were 
with him drew nigh before the Syrians 
unto the battle; and they fled ''before 
him. 



e Gen. 42:9. t P8«.3.'i:12; 109:4, S. t Heb. to Wilt*. Geli. 
34: no. tl'sa. 46:9 h rliap. IS: 5, 9. % Wch face «/ the hattlr. 
% Or, young men. || Heb. Abthai. i Neli. 4:14. j Ju.lg. 10 : l.V 
k Jer. 46 : 1!>, 16. 



13. The preservation of the people of God amidst 
the dangers to which they are exposed, and all the 
successes with which they are favored, come from 
him ; and lay them under new obligations to love ami 
obey him. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

4. Shaved them ; this was then deemed a great 
disgr.ice. 

(5. Mesopotamia — Suria-inaachah, and — Zo- 
bah ; countries east and north of Palestine. 

7. Medeha ; a cit)' east of the Jordan, in the 
tribe of Reuben. 

029 



The Ammonites defeated. I . CHRONICLES, XXI. 

15 And when the children of Ammon 
saw that the Syrians were fled, they like- 
wise fled before Abishai his brother, and 
entered into the city. Then Joab came 
to Jerusalem. 

16 TfAnd when the Syrians saw that 
they were put to the worse before Israel, 
they sent messengers, and drew forth the 
Syrians that icere beyond the * river : and 
Shophaclit the captain of the host of Ha- 
darezer xvent before them. 

17 And it was told David ; and he gath- 
ered all Israel, and passed OA-er Jordan, 
and came upon them, and set the battle in 
array against them. So when David had 
put the battle in array against the Syrians, 
they fought with him. 

18 But the Syrians fled before Israel; 
and David slew of the Syrians seven 
thousand men which fovght in chariots, 
and forty thousand footmen, and killed 
Shophach the captain of the host. 

19 And ""when the servants of Hadare- 
zer saw that they were put to the worse 
before Israel, they made peace with Da- 
vid, and became his servants: neither 
Avould the Syrians help the children of 
Ainmon any more. 



Sons of the giants sJaiti. 



CHAPTER XX. 

1 Rabbah is besieged by Joab, spoiled by David, and 
the people thereof tortun;d. 4 Tliree giants are slain 
in three several overthrows of the Philistines. 

AND ''it came to pass, that t after the 
year was expired, at the time that 
kings go out to battle, Joab led forth the 
power of the army, and wasted the coun- 
try of the children of Ammon, and came 
and besieged Rabbah. But David tarried 
at Jerusalem. And ''Joab smote Rabbah, 
and destroyed it. 

2 And David took the crown of their 
king from off his liead, and found it Ho 
weigh a talent of gold, and there were 



* Tlmt is, Euvhrntcs. \ Or, Shobnclt, 2 S.iin. 10: Ifi. • P.t.n. 
18:39, 44. b 2 Sam. 11:1. t Heb. nt Ihe rclurn of the yenr. 
e 2 Sam. 1-2 : 2fi, etc. 5 Heh. the wrifht of. >1 t ^■Mn. 21 : 18, etc. 
II Or, continvrd; Hel). ttood. * Or, Gol>. f Or. i'ap/i, 2 Sam. 



16. The river ; Euphrates. 

IXSTRLICTIOXS. 

2. Gratitude should ever be manifested for favors ; 
and if it cannot he shovm towards the benefactors 
themselves, it sliould be towards their children or 
others who were connected with them. 

.3. Our best intentions maybe misunderstood and 
misrepresented ; evil mav he returned for good, and 
that which should have Dcen the means of forming 
and cementing friendship, may be made the occa- 
sion of enmity and strife. 

13. In a good cause men sliould be of good cour- 
age ; and wTiile they use with fidelity all appointed 
means, they should feel their dependence on God, 
and commit the result of their efforts to him. 

IS. All efforts of the wicked to prevail against 
God and his people, will in the end prove ineffec- 
tual, and be tlie means of hastening and aggravat- 
ing their own ruin. 
530 



upon David's head: and he brought also 
exceeding much spoil out of the city. 

3 And he brought out the people that 
were in it, and cut them with saws, and 
with harrows of iron, and with axes. 
Even so dealt David with all the cities of 
the children of Ammon. And David and 
all the people returned to Jerusalem. 

4 TTAnd ''it came to pass after this, 
that there II arose war at * Gezer with the 
Philistines; at whieli time Sibbechai the 
Hushathite slew tSippai, that icas of the 
children of ^^the giant: and they were 
subdued. 

5 And tliere Avas Avar again with the 
Philistines ; and Elhanan the son of Uair 
slcAv Lahmi the brother of Goliath the 
Gittite, Avhose spear-stafl" -was like aweav- 
er's beam. 

6 And *■ yet again there was Avar at Gath, 
where was a man oi great II stature, Avhose 
fingers and toes were four and tAventy, six 
on each hand, and six on each foot : and he 
also Avas *the son of the giant. 

7 But Avlicn he t defied Israel, Jonathan 
tlic son of t Shimca, David's brother, sIcav 
him. 

8 These Avcre born unto the giant ia 
Gath ; and they fell by the hand of David, 
and by the hand of his serA'ants. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

1 David, tempted by Satan, foiceth Joab to number the 
people. 5 The number of the people being brought, 
Davidrepenteth of it. 9 DaTid having three plagues 
propounded Hy Gad, choosetli the pestilence. H After 
the death of seventy thousand, D.avid by repentance 
preventeth the destruction of Jerusalem. 18 David, 
by Gad's direction, ^lurchaselh Oman's threshing- 
floor : where having built an altar, God giveth a sign 
of his favor by fire, and stayeth the plague. 28 David 
.saorificeth there, being restrained from Gibeon by fear 
of the angel. 

ND "^Satan stood up ^ against Israel, 
and proA'oked DaA'id to number Is- 



A 

rael. 



21 : 18. f Or. Kapha. J Called al«o Jame-oreyim, 1 Snm. ?1 : 19. 
t 2Sam. -21 :iO. [I Heh. menture. * Heh. born to the giant, or 
Raphn, ver. 4. f Or, reproached. J Called SAaximak, I Sam. 
16:9. f 2 Sum. 24:1, etc. r Job 1 : fi, etc. ; 2: 1 ; Zcih. 3: 1. 



CHAPTER XX. 

1. Rnbhah ; the capital of tjie Ammonites. 

4. Gezer ; a city in the western part of the tribe 
of Epliraim, bordering upon the Philistines. 

6. Gath; a city of the Philistines. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Reference to the sin of David in the matter of 
Uriah, which took place while Joab Avas besieging 
Rabbah, is here entirely omitted ; and it is always 
proper to be silent about the sins of others, unless tfie 
cause ofGod and of truth requires the mention of them. 

4. This is a world of trial, and one trouble will 
succeed another through the Avholc journey of life. 
But to those who honor God in their trials he will 
at last grant a complete and glorious deliverance. 

CHAPTER XXI. 
1. Stood lip ; presented himself as an accuser. 
Provoked ; moved, excited. 



David numbcreth Israel. I. CHRONICLES, XXI. Oman's threshing-floor. 



ic.,^: 2 And David said to Joab and to 
the rulers of the people, Go, number Israel 
from Beer-sheba even to Dan ; and * bring 
the number of them to me, that I may 
know it. 

3 And Joab answered. The Lord make 
his people a hundred times so many more 
as they be: but, my lord the king, are 
they not all my lord's servants'? why 
then doth my loi'd require this thing? 
why will he be a cause of trespass to 
Israel? 

4 Nevertheless the king's word ''pre- 
vailed against Joab. Wherefore Joab de- 
parted, and went throughout all Israel, 
and came to Jerusalem. 

5 Tl And Joab gave the sum of the num- 
ber of the people unto David. And all 
thcij of Israel were a thousand thousand 
and a hundred thousand men lliat drew 
sword: and Judah was four hundred 
threescore and ten thousand men that 
drew sword. 

6 But "^Levi and Benjamin counted he 
not among them : for the king's word was 
abominable to Joab. 

7 And * God was displeased with this 
thing; therefore he smote Israel. 

8 And David said unto God, I have sin- 
ned greatly, because I have done this 
thing : but now, I beseech thee, '^ do away 
the iniquity of thy servant; for I have 
done very ''foolishly. 

9 ^And the Lord spake unto Gad, Da- 
vid's "^seer, saying, 

10 Go and tell David, saying. Thus 
saith the Lord, I t offer thee three tJiing.s: 
choose thee one of them, that I may do it 
unto thee. 

11 So Gad came to David, and said 
unto him, Thus saith the Lord, t Choose 
thee 

12 Either three years' famine; or three 
months to be destroyed before thy foes, 
while that the sword of thine enemies 
overtaketh thee; or else three days the 
sword of the Lord, even the pestilence, 
in the land, and the angel of the Lord 
destroying throughout all the coasts of 
Israel. Now therefore advise thyself 
what word I shall bring again to him 
that sent me. 

13 And David said unto Gad, I am in 
a great ^ strait: let me ''fall now into the 



• chap. -27 : £1. b Eocl 8 : <. c clmp. -27 : H. * Heb. i7 wal 
evil in the eves of Goit concerniha. A ■; Sam. IJ: 13. c 1 Sam. 
2ti:-21. fl Sam. 9:9. \ neh. stretch out. ^ Heb Tuic <<J (A» 
e .Inlin 12 : 27. h Heb. 10:31. \ Or, many. i Psa. 86 : .1, 15. 
J 2Cliron.28:9; Prov. 12:10; l3.i.4B:7; I.am. 5:2-15. k Num- 



2. Beer-sheba — to Dan ; one end of the land to 
the other. 

3. A cause of trespass to Israel ; a means of 
leadin<5 them into sin, and of thus bringing judg- 
ments upon them. 

5. Men that drew sword; able to go to war. 



hand of the Lord; for very * great' arc 
his mercies : but let me not fall into the 
hand of J man. 

14 1[So the Lord sent pestilence ''upon 
Israel : and there fell of Israel seventy 
thousand men. 

15 And God sent an angel unto Jerusa- 
lem to destroy it: and as he was destroy- 
ing, the Lord beheld, and he 'repented 
him of the evil, and said to the angel that 
destroyed, It is enough, '"stay now thy 
hand. And the angel of the Lord stood 
by the threshing-floor of 'I Oman the "Jeb- 
usite. 

16 And David lifted up his eyes, and 
saw the ° angel of the Lord stand be- 
tween the earth and the heaven, having 
a drawn sword in his hand stretched out 
over Jerusalem. Then David and the 
elders of Israel, who xccrc clothed in sack- 
cloth, fell upon their faces. 

17 And David said unto God, 7s it not 
I that commanded the people to be num- 
bered? even I it is that have sinned and 
done evil indeed ; but as for these ''sheep, 
what have they done? let thy hand, I pray 
thee, Lord my God, be ion me, and on 
my father's house ; but not on thy people, 
that they should be plagued. 

18 HThen the ''angel of the Lord com- 
manded Gad to say to David, that David 
should go up, and set up an altar unto 
the Lord in the threshing-floor of Ornffn 
the Jebusitc. 

19 And David went up at the saying of 
Gad, which he spake in the name of the 
Lord. 

20 And* Oman turned back, and saw 
the angel; t and his four sons with him 
hid themselves. Now Oman was thresh- 
ing wheat. 

21 And as David came to Oman, Oman 
looked and saw David, and went out of 
the threshing-floor, and bowed himself to 
David with his t'ace to the ground. 

22 Then David said to Oman, + Grant 
me the place of this threshing-floor, that 
I may build an altar therein unto the 
Lord: thou shalt grant it me for the full 
price: that the plague may be stayed 
from the people. 

23 And Oman said unto David, Take it 
to thee, and let my lord the king do that 
which is good in his eyes : lo, I give thee 



hers 16 


: J6-49. 


1 J 


ulgcs 2 


IK; 


.In 


n lb 4 : 


2. nl 


Psalra 


78:3s. 


II 


Or,.l 


rounnt 


, 2 Sarr 


ucl, 24 


: IS. 


n 


■2 Cl.ro 


nicies, 


3:1. 


» Gen- 




:*; 


Ni 


mbera 


22:31 ; 


.Ii>< 


lua 


5: 13, 


H P 


Pi.nl m 


44:11. 


4 


.lolin 


10 


>>i 


12. r 


verse l.i 


» 


Or 


When 


t Or 


, then 


lie and. 


t 


Heb. 


Gi 


«e. 



















8. I hare sinned; he had indulged his pride in 
numbering the people. 

15. Repented him of the evil ; he clianged his 
course of conduct. 

17. These sheep; the children of Israel, the peo- 
ple generally. 

531 



Materials for the temple. I. CHRONICLES, XXII. David^s charge to Solomon. 



the oxen aho for burnt-offerings, and the 
threshing instruments for wood, and tlie 
wheat for the incat-offering; I give it all. 

24 And king David said to Oman, Nay ; 
but I will verily 'buy it for the full price : 
for I will not take that which is thine for 
the LoKD, nor offer burnt-offerings with- 
out ''cost. 

25 So David gave to Oman for the place 
six hundred shekels of gold by weight. 

2G And David built there an altar unto 
the Loud, and offered burnt-offerings and 
peace-offerings, and called upon tlie Lord ; 
and ""he answered him from heaven by 
fire upon the altar of burnt-offering. 

27 And the Lord commanded the angel ; 
and he put up his sword again into the 
sheath thereof. 

28 ^ At that time when David saw that 
the Lord had answered him in the thresh- 
ing-floor of Oman the Jebusite, then he 
sacrificed there. 

29 For the tabernacle of the Lord, 
which Moses ^ made in the wilderness, 
and the altar of the burnt-offering, were 
at that season in the "high place at Gib- 
eon. 

30 But David could not go before it to 
inquire of God : for he was ''afraid be- 
cause of the sword of the angel of the 
Lord. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

• 

1 David, foreknowing the place of the temple, prepar- 
eth almnJance for the building of it. C He instruct- 
etli Solomon in God's promises, and his duty in build- 
ing the temple. 17 He chargeth the princes to assist 
his son. 

THEN David said, sThis is the house 
of the Lord God, and tliis is the altar 
of the burnt-offering for Israel. 

2 And David commanded to gather to- 
gether the "' strangers that were in the land 
of Israel ; and he set masons to liew 
wrought stones to build the house of God. 

3 And David 'prepared iron in abun- 



« Cien. 2:?:13. b Deut.l6:l7. c Lev. 9:«; .ludg. 8:21; 1 
King«, 18:24, 38; 2Cliron.7:l. i Kx. 40. e cb.ip. 16:39 ; 1 
Kingn, 3:4,etc. -f Psa. 90:11; Jer. 5:22; 10:7; Heb. 12:28, 
29; Kev. In:-). B clmp. 21 :28; Deut. 12 : .5 ; 2 Chroa. 3 : 1. hi 
Kiligii,9:2l. I ver. H. j 1 King», 7 : 47. k 1 King.s, 5 : 6. ll 



26. By fire ; the fire descended from God and 
burnt up tlie s;icritice, in token of his acceptance of 
David and his offering. 

28. He sacrificed there; continued to make that 
a place of sacrifice. 

30. Could not go before it ; he feared to do so, 
in the circumstances above narrated. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Whenever the people of God are left to tliem- 
selvcs. Satan stands ready to tempt them to the 
commission of sins which will bring distress, if not 
ruin, on tliemselves and others. 

8. Though the people of God may discover their 
sins, be deeply fiumbled on account of them, and be 
forgiven, yet if ilicir sins have been open and brought 
scandal upon the cause of religion, the Lord will 
manifest his displeasure against them. 

13. The penitent soul in all its difficulties will 
532 



the gates, and for the joinings ; and brasij 
in abundance ■> without weight; 

4 Also cedar-trees in ^abundance: for 
the Zidonians and they of Tyre brought 
much cedar-wood to David. 

5 And David said, Solomon my son is 
young' and tender, and the house that is 
to be builded for the Lord must be ex- 
ceeding '"magnifical, of fame and of glory 
througliout all countries: I will therefore 
now make preparation for it. So David 
prepared abundantly before his death. 

6 1[ Then he called for Solomon his son, 
and charged him to build a house for the 
Lord God of Israel. 

7 And David said to Solomon, My son, 
as for me, it "was in my mind to build a 
liouse° unto the name of the Lord my 
God: 

8 But the word of the Lord came to me, 
saying, ^Thou hast shed "^ blood abun- 
dantly, and hast made great wars : thou 
shalt not build a house unto my name, 
because thou hast shed much blood upou 
the eartli in my sight. 

9 Behold, a son shall be born to thee, 
who shall be a man of rest; and I will 
give him rest from all his enemies round 
about : for'his name shall be * Solomon, 
and I will give 'peace and quietness un- 
to Israel in his days. 

10 lie 'shall build a house for my name; 
and he shall be my *son, and I will be his 
father; and I will establish the throne of 
his kingdom over Israel for ever. 

11 Now, my son, the "Lord be with 
thee; and prosper thou, and build the 
house of the Lord thy God, as he hath 
said of thee. 

12 Only the Loud ^give thee wisdom 
and understanding, and give thee charge 
concerning Israel, that thou mayest keep 
the law of the Lord thy God. 



Kings, 3:7. m Ezra 3:12: Isa. 64 : 1 1 ; Ezek. 7 : 20 ; Hag. 2 : 3. 
n chap. 17: 1, etc. ; 28 : 2, etc. o Deut. 12 : .1, 1 1. I> 1 Kings, 
6:3. q Num. 31:19. ' r\int i». ptaceablc. r l Kings, 4:2S ; 
Psa. 72 : 7. '2 Sam. 7 : 13. t Psa. 89 : 26 ; Heb. 1:5. « ver. 16. 
T 1 Kings, 3 : 9. 12 ; P.sa. 72 : 1 ; Prov. 2 : 6, 7 ; James 1 : 5. 



submit to the Lord, and commit itself and its inter- 
ests to his merciful care and disposal. 

17. The ingenuous soul mourns deeply, not only 
on account of its sins and the sulTerings they bring 
upon itself, but for the evils they bring upon others 
whom they love, and whom they wish to benefit. 

26. When the soul is duly penitent for its sins, 
submits to the judgments of God, and is ready to 
follow his directions, he is ready to forgive and 
grant manifestations of his mercy and love. 

CHAPTER XXn. 

1. This is the house of the Lord; the place 
where the temple would be built, and the worship 
of God be established. 

9. Solo/noil ; meaning, peaceable. 

10. For ever ; so long as he should continue to 
obey God. Ver. 12, 13, 19. 



Solomon is made king. 



I. CHRONICLES, XXIII. 



The LcL'ites numbered 



K.L.'mi.' 13 Then "shalt thou prosper, if 
thou takest heed to fulfil the statutes and 
judu;mcuts which the Loud charged ^Moses 
with concerning Israel: be '' strong, and 
of good courage ; dread not, nor be dis- 
mayed. 

14 Now, behold, in my * trouble I have 
prepared for the house of the Loud a hun- 
dred thousand talents of gold, and a thou- 
sand thousand talents of silver; and of 
brass and iron without weiglit; for it is 
in abundance : limber also and stone have 
1 prepared; and thou mayest add thereto. 

lo ^loreover, there are workmen with 
thee in abundance, hewers and tworkers 
of stone and timber, and all manner of 
cunning men for every manner of work. 

16 Of the gold, the silver, and the brass, 
and the iron, there is no number. Arise 
therefore, and be doing, and the •= Loud be 
with thee. 

17 ^I David also commanded all the 
princes of Israel to help Solomon his 
son, saying, 

18 /.>; not the Loud your God with you'? 
and hath he not given you ''rest on every 
side'? for he hath given the inhabitants 
of the land into my hand; and the land 
is subdued before the Loud, and before 
his people. 

19 Now "set your heart and your soul 
to "^seek the Loud your God; arise there- 
fore, and build ye the sanctuary of tlie 
Loud God, to ^bring the ark of the cove- 
nant of the Loud, and the holy vessels of 
God, into the house that is to be built to 
the name of the Loud. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

1 David ill his old age maketh Solomon king. 2 The 
number and distribution of the Levites. 7 The fam- 
ilies of the Gerslionites. 1"2 The sons of Kohath. 21 
The sons of Merari. 24 The office of the Levites. 

SO '•when David was old and full of 
,^ days, he made Solomon his son king 
over Israel. 



• -2 Cliron. M : iO ; Psa. 1 lil : fi. b DeuL 31:7,8; Josli. 1 : t^'J. 
* Or, poverty, f Thnt is, minons nnit carpetittrt. c ver. 1!. 
i cUiip. -n : 25 ; l>eut. 1-2 : 10 ; Josli. i-: -.-i; i S;iiii. 7.1. e -2 Tliron. 
■:0:.1. fPsa. -27:4. B 1 Kinsa, .S: li, '1. h cli.i|i. iSiS; 1 Kings, 



2 IT And he gathered together all the 
princes of Israel, with the priests and 
the Lcvites. 

3 Now the Lcvites were numbered from 
the age of 'thirty years and upward : and 
their number by their polls, man by man, 
was tliirty and eight thousand. 

4 Of whicli, twenty and four thousand 
li'ere to - set forward the work of the house 
of the Loud; and six thousand ift/e' offi- 
cers and judges : 

5 ^Moreover four thousand were porters ; 
and four thousand praised tlie Loud with 
the ''instruments which I made, said Da- 
vid, to praise therewith. 

6 And David divided them into ^courses 
among the sons of Levi, namely, Gershon, 
Kohatli, and Merari. 

7 ^ Of the Gerslionites were II Laadau, 
and Shimei. 

8 The sons of Laadan ; the chief icas 
Jchicl, and Zetham, and Joel, three. 

9 The sons of Sliimei; Shelomith, aud 
Hazicl, and Haran, three. Tliesc were 
the chief of the fathers of Laadan. 

10 And the sons of Shimei itc re, J ahaih, 
Zina,* and Jcusii, and Bcriah. These 
four were the sons of Shimei. 

1 1 And Jahath was the chief, and Zizah 
the second: but Jeush and Bcriah + liad 
not many sons ; therefore they were in one 
reckoning, according to //«■//■ fatiier'siiouse. 

12 *] The sons of Kohath; Amram, Iz- 
har, Hebron, and Uzziel, four, 

13 The sons of Amram; Aaron, and 
Moses: and 'Aaron was separated, tliat 
he should sanctify the most holy things, 
he and his sons for ever, to '"burn incense 
before the Loud, to minister unto him, 
and to "bless in his name for ever. 

14 Now concernin<r Moses the man of 
God, his sons were named of the tribe of 
Levi. 

15 The sons of Moses icere, Gershom, 
and Eliezer. 



l::i:!, et<-. i Num. 4:;t, 47, t '*f. "l""". 1 


Dent II*: 18. 


k 2 Chron. I'.! : in, W : Amo8fi:S. ij H.-\,.divuior,t. 


II < >r. r,i»>.t. 


c-iuip. 6: 17. « Or. Zis/iA, ver. 11. t HcL. ilid nut 
1 ijl. 2S : 1 , eti-. ; Hcl). .i : 4. m Num. Iti : 40. • .Vu 


«u7ip<y „mi. 


m.6:.M-2<i 



19. Bring the ark ; from G-ibeon, 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The people of Grod when delivered from the sad 
effects of their sins, will become more engaged than 
before in doing his work ; and if they cannot honor 
him in one way they will attempt to do it in another, 
and thus to fill up life with fidelity and usefulness. 

5. Good men live and labor not merely for them- 
selves and their own generation, but for postcritj' 
and for all coming time ; and their efforts will be felt 
not onlv to the end of the world, but to eternity. 1 

10. The promises of '.rod to individuals, are made 
on condition that they hearken to his voice and con- 1 
tinue to obey his commandments. If they forsake 
him, he will cast them otF. 

16. If men would avail themselves of the bless- 
ings of Jehovah, enjoy his presence, and experience , 



the benefit of his promises, they must be found doing 
his will. 

CHArTER XXIII. 

13. Forever; continually to the cud of the Jew- 
ish dispensation. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3, Nothing is more important to the interests of 
true religion than the increase of faithful ministers; 
and good men at the close of life, will be peculiarly 
anxious that a sufficient number may be provided 
and rightly employed for the good of coming gener- 
ations. 

30. Religion is a daily duty; morning and evening 
offerings of praver, thanksgiving, and praise should 
be presented to God, and such special seasons of de- 
votion from time to time be observed, as he has 
appointed, 

533 



Office of the Levites. 



I. CHRONICLES, XXIV. 



Courses of the priests. 



16 Of the sons of Gcrshom, 
teas the chief. 

17 And the sons of Eliezer u'cre, Reha- 
biah the t chief. And Eliezer had none 
other sons; but the sons of Rehabiah 
^vere tvery many. 

18 Of the sons of Izhar; ^Shelomith 
the chief. 

19' Of the sons of Hebron; .Teriah the 
fir.-*t, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the 
third, and Jekameam the fourtli. 

20 Of the sons of Uzziel; Mieah the 
fir.«t, and Jesiah the second. 

21 "i Thesonsof Merari ; Mahli, and Mu- 
f^hi. Thesonsof Malili ; Eleazar. andlvish. 

22 And Eleazar died, and had no sons, 
but daughters: and their il brethren the 
sons of Kish took them. 

23 The sons of Mushi ; Mahli, and Eder, 
and Jeremoth, three. 

24 H These iccre the sons of Levi after 
the house of their fathers ; even the chief 
of the fathers, as they were "counted by 
number of names by their polls, that did 
the work for the service of the house of 
the Lord, from the age of ''twenty years 
and upward. 

2.5 For David said. The Lord God of Is- 
rael hath given '^ rest u nto liis people, * that 
they may dwell in Jerusalem for ever: 

26 And also unto the Levites : they shall 
no more carry the tabernacle, nor any 
vessels of it for the service thereof. 

27 For by the last words of David the 
Levites u-cre t numbered from '' twenty 
years old and above: 

28 Because their t office was to wait on 
the sons of Aaron for the service of the 
house of the Lord, in the courts, and in 
the chambers, and in the purifying of all 
holy things, and the work of the service 
of the house of God; 

29 Both for the «■ show-bread, and for the 
fine "^flour for meat-offering, and for the 
unleavened s cakes, and for that irhich is 
baked in the ^pan, and for that which is 
fried, and for all manner of' measure and 
size ; 

30 Andto 'stand every morning tothank 
and praise the Lord, and likewise at even ; 

31 And to Oder all bnrnt-saerifices unto 
the Lord Jin tlie sabbaths, in the new 
moons, and on the set ''feasts, by number, 
according to the order connnandcd unto 
tliem, continually before the Lord : 

32 And that they should keep the 



Shebuel I charge' of the tabernacle of the *B.t'?o?5' 

I congregation, and the charge of the holy 

place, and the '" charge of the sons of Aaron 

their brethren, in the service of the house 

of the Lord. 



* 5'AM/<oe',<Iiiip. 24:20. f lU.firit. t He\>. Iiiahlti multiplird. 

I SUelomolli,i\\i«f. U-.il. II Or, *i>um«i. • Num. 10 : 17, il. 

II vfr. •:? ; K7.rn 3 r R. c clm|i. ij : 1«. * Or, anil he tlwtllrlli. 
t HhIi. niimhert. * ver. 3, H. t Hfh. llalUm w.is at the hitiid 
,/, Nell. 11:4. eEj.er>:30. fr,ev.(i:2H. « Lev. •• : 4-7. <l Or, 
/tut plait, li Lev. 19 : Xi. I 2 fliron. i'.l : 2.i, 2ti ; Kira 3 : in, 11; 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

1 The divisions of the sons of Aaron by lot into four 
and twenty orders. 20 The Kohathites, 27 and the 
Merarites (jivided by lot. 

IVrOW " these are the divisions of the 
_L\ sons of Aaron. The sons of Aaron ; 
Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar aiul Ithamar. 

2 But Nadab and Abihu "died before 
their father, and had no children: there- 
fore Eleazar and Ithamar executed the 
priest's office. 

3 And David distributed them, both Za- 
dok of the sons of Eleazar, and PAhime- 
lech of the sons of Ithamar, according to 
their offices in their service. 

4 And there were more chief men found 
of the sons of Eleazar than of the sons of 
Ithamar; and thus were they divided. 
Among the sons of Eleazar there u-ere six- 
teen chief men of the house of their fathers, 
and eight among the sons of Ithamar ac- 
cording to the house of their fathers. 

5 Thus were they divided by ilot, one 
sort with another; for the governors of 
the sanctuary, and governors of the house 
of God, were of the sons of Eleazar, and 
of the sons of Ithamar. 

6 And Shemaiah the son of Nethancel 
the scribe, one of the Levites, wrote them 
before the king, and the princes, and Za- 
dok the priest, and Ahimelech the son 
of Abiathar, and before the chief of the 
fathers of the priests and Levites : one 
prineipari household being taken for Ele- 
azar, and one taken for Ithamar. 

7 Now the first lot came forth to Jehoi- 
arib, the second to Jedaiah, 

8 The third to Harim, the fourth to 
Seorim, 

9 The fifth to Malehijah, tlie sixth to 
Mijamin, 

10 The seventh to Ilakkoz, the eighth 
to 'Abijah, 

11 The ninth to Jcshuah, the tenth to 
Shceaniah, 

12 The eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth 
to .lakim, 

13 Tlie thirteenth to Iluppah, the four- 
teenth to Jeshebcab, 

14 The fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth 
to Immer, 



CHAPTER XXIV. 
1. The divisions of the sons of Aaro7i ; these 
534 



Pan. I3fl:l,2. i Num. 10:10; Psa. 81:3. k Lfv. 23:4, etc. 
1 Num. 1 :M. m Num. 3:6-9. n Lev. 10:1, «; Num. 2«!fiO.~ 
o Num. 3:4. Pi .Sum. 21 : 1 : 22 : 9, etc. q Josli. IR : in : Prov. 
Ifi::i3; .lonnli 1^7; Actil:2a [| Heh. houte of Iht /alher. 
r Nell. i::4, 17; Luke 1:6. 



divisions, it is supposed, were made by David ac- 
cording to divine appointment. 



Number and offices 



I. CHRONICLES, XXV. 



of the musicians. 



B c' iw™ 15 The seventeenth to Hezir, the 
eighteenth to Aphscs, 

16 The nineteenth to Pethahiah, the 
twentieth to Jehezekel, 

17 The one and twentieth to Jachin, 
the two and twentieth to Gamul, 

18 The three and twentieth to Delaiah, 
the four and twentieth to Maaziah. 

19 Tliese were the "orderings of them 
in their service to come into the house of 
the Lord, according to their manner, un- 
der Aaron their father, as the Lord God 
of Israel had commanded him. 

20 ^ And the rest of the sons of Levi 
tvere these: Of the sons of Amram ; *Shu- 
bacl: of the sons of Shubael; Jehdeiah. 

21 Concerning Rehabiah: of the sons 
of Rehabiah, the first iras Isshiah. 

22 Of the Izharites ; t Shelomoth : of the 
sons of Shelomoth; .lahath. 

23 And the sons of Hebron; Jeriah the 
first, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the 
third, Jekameam the fourth. 

24 0/ the sons of Uzziel ; Michah: of 
the sons of Michah; Shamir. 

25 The brother of Michah leas Isshiah : 
of the sons of Isshiah; Zcchariah. 

26 II The ''sons of Merari icere Mahli 
and Mushi : the sons of Jaaziah ; Beno. 

27 The sons of Merari by Jaaziah ; Be- 
no, and Shoham, and Zaccur, and Ibri. 

28 Of Mahli came Eleazar, "= who had no 
sons. 

29 Concerning Kish: the son of Kish 
icas Jerahmeel. 

30 The sons also of Mushi ; Mahli, and 
Eder, and Jerimoth. These icere the sons of 
the Levites after the house of their fatiier.s. 

3 1 These likewise east lots ''over against 
their brethi-en the sons of.Aaron in the 
presence of David the king, and Zadok, 
and Ahimelech, and the chief of the fa- 
thers of the priests and Levites, even 
the principal fathers over against their 
younger brethren. 



CHAPTER XXY. 

1 The number and offices of the singers. 8 Their divis- 
ion by lot into four and twenty orders. 

1\ /TOREOVER David and the captains 
_LvJ_ of the host separated to the service 
of the sons of "Asaph, and of Ileman, 



a chap. 9 : -25. * ^Vitius/, clinp. 23 : 16. t Shclomilh,<:\\xy,.-H:l». 
H K.T. B : 19. <■■ chap. •£!: -li. i ch.ip. OT : ». ' ihap. fi : M, etc. 
t Otherwise called Jesarelah.ver. 14. % Heli. by the hnmh of the 



19. Under Aaron their father ; all the priests 
were considered as successors of Aaron, and he is 
spoken of as their father. 

INSTRUCTION.S. 

1. Order and regularity are important in all con- 
cerns, especially in those of religion ; and its minis- 
ters should all, in the place which God assigns them, 
attend with punctuality and perseverance to the 
duties of their office. 



and of Jeduthun, who should prophesy 
with harps, with psalteries, and with 
cymbals: and the number of tlie work- 
men according to their service was: 

2 Of the sons of Asaph; Zaccur, and 
Joseph, and Nethaniah, and +Ashnrelali, 
the sons of Asapli uhder the hands of 
Asaph, which prophesied ^according to 
the order of the king. 

3 Of Jeduthun: the sons of Jedulhun; 
Gedaliah, and "Zeri, and Jeshaiah, Hash- 
abiah, and Mattithiaii, *six, under the 
hands of their father Jcdutliun, who proph- 
esied with a harp, to give tlianks and to 
praise the Lord. 

4 Of Ilcman : the sons of Ileman ; Buk- 
kiah, Malt;iniah, tUzziel, -Shcbuel, and 
Jerimoth, Ilananiah, llanani, Eliatliah, 
(Jiddaiti, and Romamti-czcr, Joshbeka- 
shah, IMallothi, Holhir, and IMahazioth: 

5 All these loere the sons of Ilcman the 
king's seer in the Kvords of God, to lift 
up the horn. And God gave to Heman 
fourteen sons and three daughters. 

6 All these were under the hands of 
their father for song in the house of the 
Lord, with cymbals, psalteries, and harps, 
for the service of the house of God, "ac- 
cording to the king's order to Asaph, Jed- 
uthun, and Heman. 

7 So the number of them, with their 
brethren that were instructed in the sonss 
of the Lord, even all that were cunnins, 
was two hundred fourscore and eight. 

8 H And ""they cast lots, ward against 
u'ard, as well tlie small as the great, the 
teacher^ as the scholar. 

9 Now the first lot came forth for Asaph 
to Joseph: the second to Gedaliah, who 
with his brethren and sons were twelve: 

10 The third to Zaccur, he, his sons, 
and his brethren, were twelve: 

1 1 Tlie fourth to Izri, he, his sons, and 
his brethren, ii'ere twelve: 

12 The fifth to Nethaniah, he, his sons, 
and his brethren, ivere twelve : 

13 The si.xtli to Bukkiah, he, liis sons, 
and his brethren, u'erc twelve: 

14 The seventh to Jesarelah, he, his 
sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 

15 The eighth to Jeshaiah, he, his sons, 
and his brethren, were twelve: 



kinn, ver. 6. II Or, Ilri, ve 
f Or.,^zareel,\■l'r Ift. f Or 
by the hnndt of the king, vi 



.11. * With Shimei, nientiunct) ver. IT. 
Shubarl.\vi.:xt. \0r, mnlltri. || Heb. 
r. -2. f chap. -24 : h. t 1 Chron. ■.•:!: 13. 



CHAriER XXV. . 
1. Prophesy : sing and chant sacred songs. 
•5. Seer: prophet. Lift up the horn ; take the 
direction of the musicians. 

INSTUUCTIOXS. 
1. To praise God is one of the noblest services in 
which men can engage ; and where it is done from 
the heart it is acceptable to God, and raises the 
affections to him. 



Of the porters 



I. CHRONICLES, XXVI. 



and Levitcs. 



16 The nintli to Maftiuiiah, he, his sons, 
and his brethren, nrre twelv-c : 

17 The tenth to Shiinei, he, his sons, 
and his brethren, icere twelve: 

18 The eleventh to *Azaree!, he, his 
sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 

19 The twelfth to Ilashabiah, he, his 
sons, and his brethren, tvcre twelve: 

20 The thirteenth to Shubael, he, his 
sons, and his brethren, ii'ere twelve : 

21 The fourteenth to Mattithiah. he, his 
sons, and his brethren, toere twelve : 

22 The fifteenth to Jeremoth, he, his 
sons, and his brethren, tccre twelve : 

23 The sixteenth to Hananiah, he, his 
sons, and his brethren, were twelve : 

24 The seventeenth to Joslibekashah,/iC, 
his sons, and his brethren, tvere twelve : 

25 The eighteenth to Hanani, he, his 
sons, and his brethren, were twelve : 

26 The nineteenth to Mallothi, he, his 
sons, and his brethren, icere twelve : 

27 The twentieth to Eliathah, he, his 
sons, and his brethren, u^ere twelve : 

28 The one and twentieth to Hothir, he, 
his sons, and his brethren, ivere twelve : 

29 The two and twentieth to Giddalti, 
he, his sons, and his brethren, icere twelve : 

30 The three and twentieth to Mahazi- 
oth, he, his sons, and his brethren, icere 
twelve : 

3 1 The four and twentieth to Romamti- 
ezer, he, his sons, and his brethren, tvere 
twelve. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

1 The divisions of the porters. 13 The gates assigned 
by lot. 20 The Levites that had charge of the treas- 
ures. 29 Ofiicers and judges. 

CONCERNING the divi.sions of the 
\J porters: Of the Korhites was t Mesh- 
eleiniah the son of Kore, of the sons of 
Asaph. t 

2 And the sons of Meshelemiah iccre, 
Zeehariah the first-born, .lediacl the sec- 
ond, Zcbadiah the third, Jalhnicl the 
fourth, 

3 Elam the fifth, Jchohanan the sixth, 
Elioenai tlic seventh. 

4 Moreover the sons of *Obed-edom 
were, Shemaiah the first-born, Jehozabad 
the second, .loah the third, and Sacar the 
fourth, and Nethaneel the tilth, 

5 Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the sev- 
enth, Peulthai the eighth : for God bless- 
ed Miim. 

6 Also unto Shemaiah his son were sons 



born, that ruled throughout the Va^: 
house of their father : for they were migh- 
ty ''men of valor. 

7 The sons of Shemaiah; Othni, and Re- 
phael, and Obed, Elzabad, whose breth- 
ren u-ere strong men, Elihu, and Sema- 
chiah. 

8 All these of the sons of Obcd-cdom : 
they and their sons and their brethren, 
able"^ men for strength for the serA'ice, 
icere threescore and two of Obed-cdom. 

9 And Meshelemiah had sons and breth- 
ren, strong men, eighteen. 

10 Also Mlosah, of the children of Mer- 
ari, had sons; Simri the chief, for though 
he was not the first-born, yet his father 
made him the chief; 

11 Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the 
third, Zeehariah the fourth: all the sons 
and brethren of Hosah were thirteen. 

12 Among these were the divisions of 
the porters, even among the chief men, 
having wards one against another, to 
minister in the house of the Lord. 

13 1[And they cast lots, II as well the 
small as the great, according to the house 
of their fathers, for every gate. 

14 And the lot eastward fell to *Shele- 
miah. Then for Zeehariah liis son, a 
wise counsellor, they cast lots; and his 
lot came out northward. 

15 To Obed-edom southward; and to 
his sons the house of tAsuppim. 

16 To Shuppim and Hosah the lot came 
forth westward, with the gate Shallecheth, 
by the causeway of the "going up, ward 
against ward. 

17 Eastward were six Levites, north- 
ward four a day, southward four a day, 
and toward "^Asuppim two and two. 

1 8 At I'arbar westward, four at the 
causeway, and two at Parbar. 

19 These are the divisions of the por- 
ters among the sons of Kore, and among 
the sons of Merari. 

20 TIAnd of the Levites, Ahijah was 
over the treasures of the house of God, 
and over the ^ treasures of the ^dedicated 
things. 

21 As concerning the sons of H^aadan; 
the sons of the Gcrslionite Laadan, chief 
fathers, even of Laadan the Gcrshonite, 
were H.Iehieli. 

22 Tiie sons of .Ichicli; Zcfham, and 
.loci his hroihcv, which were over the treas- 
ures of the house of the Lord. 



* Uzziel. 


ver. 4. 


t 


Or, SheUmiah, 


ver. 14. 


\ 


Or, Eh 


a^nph, 


cliap. 6 


:37 


9 


13. 


■ clinp. 16:1H, 


21 


I6:fi,3«. 


Tlmt is 


Ohcil- 


cdom^ n 


« rlmp 


i:! 


14; 


P*n. 1-28: 


.2. 


b Nell 


11 


:I4. 


Mat. 


2B:15; 


1C( 


r. 1 


2:4-11 


2 Cor. 3 : 6 


] Peter, 4: 11. 


»1 clinp 


lf>:3». 



5. Children are the gift of God; and whether they 
be sons or daughters, tlie great oliject of parents 
should be to train them up for his service. 
03G 



II Or, a» toell/m- the tmall at for tht ureal. * Cnllcil Metkele- 
miah,veT. 1. t Hr\>. falJieringt. « 1 Kings, 10: S; 2 rliri.!). «): 4. 
f ver. ir.. t Hinli. ix-.l-! : Mnl. 3: 10. t Hell. hull/. % Or, I,i6»il, 
cliHp.6:17. 11 Gr.yeAiW, ciinp. 23:8; 2'):8. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 
4. Obed-e/lovi ; who took charge of the ark after 
the death of Uzzah. 2 Sam. 6 : 10-12. 



Kccpcrsof the treasures. I. CHRONICLES, XXVII. 



Til c m Hit a ry force . 



b' "10°^' 23 Of the Amramites, and the Iz- 
harites, the Hebroiiitcs, (ind the Uzziclites : 

24 And ''Shebuel the son of Gershom, 
the son of Moses, icas ruler of the treas- 
ures. 

25 And his brethren by Eliczcr; Reha- 
biah his son, and .Teshaiah his son, and 
Joram his son, and Zichri his son, and 
Shelomith'' his son : 

26 Which Shelomith and his brethren 
wrre over all the treasures of the dedi- 
cated things, which David the king, and 
the chief fathers, the captains over thou- 
sands and hundreds, and the captains of 
the host, had dedicated. 

27 Out "^of the * spoils won in battles 
did they dedicate to maintain the house 
of the Lord. 

28 And all that Samuel the ''seer, and 
Saul the son of Kish, and Abner the son 
of Ner, and Joab the son of Zeruiali, had 
dedicated; and whosoever had dedicated 
any thing, it vas under tiie hand of Shel- 
omith, and of his brethren. 

29 1[ Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and 
his sons were for the outward business 
over Israel, for "^officers and judges. 

30 And of the Hebronites, Hashabiah 
and his brethren, "^men of valor, a thou- 
sand and seven hundred, ivere tofficers 
among them of Israel on this side Jordan 
westward in all the business of the Lord, 
and in the service of the king. 

31 Among the Hebronites was sjerijah 
the chief, even among the Hebronites, ac- 
cording to the generations of his fathers. 
In the fortieth year of the reign of David 
they were sought for, and there were 
found among them mighty men of valor 
at '■ Jazer of Gilead. 

32 And his brethi-en, men of valor, H'cre 
two thousand and seven hundred chief 
fathers, whom king David made rulers 
over the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the 
half-tribe of Manasseh, for every matter 
pertaining to God, and + affairs' of the 
king. 



• cliaji. ■:.•?: in. bch.ip.M: IS. C.I03I1. fi : 19. * Heh.bnIl/esnnrI 
spoilt. illSam.9:9. e cli.ip.23:4. fver.6. i Heh. avirtlit charge. 
8 cliri)i. iT.-lS. h Josh. 21:. 39. J Hcb. Minjr. i 2 Cliroii. IM: U. 



28. Whosoever had dedicated any thing ; it 
had been customary for those who Iiad property, to 
dedicate a portion of it to the Lord. 
INSTRUCTIOXS. 

4. Those who treat the ordinances of G-od with 
reverence, and are faithful in his service, may ex- 
pect ihat he will prosper them and their children 
after them, and make them blessings to mankind. 

1 .'3. In the service of God, each one should stand in 
his lot. and be ready to perform his portion of labor. 

20. The treasures witn which any one is intrusted 
should be guarded with care, and faitlifully appro- 
priated to the objects for which they are given. 

27. As all our treasures come from God. a suita- 
ble portion of them should be devoted to the support 



CHAPTER XXVII 

1 The twelve captains for every several month. ]fi 
The princes of the twelve tribes. 23 The number- 
ing of the people is liindered. 25 David's several 

officers. 

"jVTOW the children of Israel after their 
_LN number, to icif, the chief fathers and 
captains of thousands and hundreds, and 
their otficers that served the king in any 
matter of the courses, which came in and 
went out i month by month throughout all 
the months of the year, of every course 
were twenty and four thousand. 

2 Over the first course for the first 
month teas ''.lashobeam the son of Zab- 
diel : and in his course ivere twenty and 
four thousand. 

3 Of the children of Perez was the chief 
of all the captains of the host for the first 
month. 

4 And over the course of the second 
month wa.s ^ Dodai an Ahohite, and of his 
course jca.s Mikloth also the ruler: in his 
course likewise iccre twenty and four 
thousand. 

5 The third captain of the host for the 
third month was Benaiah the son of Je- 
hoiada, a II chief priest : and in his course 
were twenty and four thousand. 

6 This is that ' Benaiah, who iras mighty 
a/?!0»g- the thirty, and above the thirty: and 
in his course 7ras Ammizabad his son. 

7 The fourth captain for the fourth 
month was '"Asahcl the brother of Joab, and 
Zcbadiah his son after him: and in his 
course rcere twenty and four thousand. 

8 The fifth captain for the fifth month 
was Shamhuth the Izraliite: and in his 
course iccre twenty and four thousand. 

9 The si.\th captain for the sixth montli 
iL'as "Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tckoite: 
and in his course tfere twenty and four 
thousand. 

10 The seventh captain for the scventli 
month iras "Helez the Pelonite, of the 
children of Ephraim: and in his course 
iverc twenty and four thousand. 

11 The eighth captain for the eighth 



j 1 Kinpi, 4 : 7, 27. k cimp. 11: 1 1. J Or. Darfo, 2. Sam. 23: 9. || Or. 
principal (iff<:er,lKixisa.4,Fi. 1 clmp. 1 1 : 22-24; 2 Sam. 2.1 : 20, K. 
"»cliap.ll:26;2Snm. 2: 18-23; 2.1: 24. nclinp.ll :28. orliap.ll:27. 



of his worship, and the spread of a knowledge of his 
truth and will throughout tlie world. 

CHAPTER XXTH. 

1. Tirenti/ and four thousand; these wen- 
kept constantly under military discipline, and were 
changed for as many others once a month. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. In those services wliich are needful for the pub- 
lic safety, all should be willing to take part : and as 
far as consistent, thev should be so divided as to bear 
equally upon all according to their ability. 

23. It may sometimes be expedient and useful lor 
the people of a country to be numbered; but this 
should be done for useful purposes, and not to gratify 
537 



Princes and officers. 



I. CHRONICLES, XXVIII. 



David's oration. 



month ivas "Sibbecai tlic Ilushathite, of 
the Zarhites : and in his course u-cre 
twenty and four thousand. 

12 The ninth cnplain for the ninth 
month vas ''Abiezer the Anetothite, of 
the Benjamilcs : and in his course were 
twenty and four thousand. 

13 The tenth captain for the tenth month 
u-a.s "^jMaharai the Netophathite, of the 
Zarhites: and in his course were twenty 
and four thousand. 

14 The eleventh captain for the elev- 
enth month ivns ''Benaiah the Pirathon- 
itc, of the children of Ephraim : and in his 
course were twenty and four thousand. 

15 The twelfth captain for the twelfth 
month U'as * Heldai the Netophathite, of 
Othnicl: and in his course tcere twenty 
and four thousand. 

16 T[ Furthermore over the tribes of 
Israel : the ruler of the Reubenites ica.s 
Eliezer the son of Zichri: of the Simeon- 
ites, Shephatiah the son of Maachah: 

17 Of the Levitcs, ^Hashabiah the son 
of Kemuel: of the Aaronites, Zadok: 

18 Of Judah, tElihu, one of the breth- 
ren of David : of Issachar, Omri the son 
of Michael : 

19 Of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of 
Obadiah : of Naphtali, Jerimoth the son 
of Azriel : 

20 Of the children of Ephraim, Hoshea 
the son of Azaziah: of the half-tribe of 
Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedaiah : 

21 Of the haU-tribe of Manasseh in Gil- 
ead, Iddo the son of Zechariali: of Ben- 
jamin, .laasiel the son of Abner: 

22 Of Dan, Azarcel the son of Jeroham. 
These iccre the princes of the tribes of 
Israel. 

23 1[But David took not the number of 
them from twenty years old and under : be- 
cause the Lord had '"said he would increase 
Israel like to the stars of the licavens. 

24 Joab the son of Zcruiah began to 
number, but he finished not. because 
there fell ^\vrath for it against Israel; 
neither twas the number put in the ac- 
count of the Chronicles of king David. 

25 If And over the king's treasures u'a.'; 
Azmaveth the son of Adiel : and over the 
storehouses in the fields, in the cities, 
and in the villages, and in the castles, 
was Jehonathan the son of Uzziah : 



• chap. 11 :1!); 2S.im 21: 18. b rhnp. 1 1 : SS. c .linl.. 11 :nO; 
2Sam.M:2«. •! rlmp. II : 31. * Or, //<:/«/, clinp. 1 1 : 30. e cliiip- 
2r>::U1. t -K'!"*, I Siim lfi:R. f fJcn.l.l: r.. |[ i linp.2l : 7; 2Sam. 
2^: 1.5. t Hi-li. ateeniled. \ Hcli that which wns nf Iht vine- 
1/ariU. h 1 Kii«s, -20:27. \S Or, secreliny. * Ot, Hiichmonite. 



pride, or lead men to glory in their numbers, pros- 
perity, or strength. 

2-'). The division of labor, and the appointment of 
suitable persons to superintend every department of 
business, are essential to tliat regularity, diligence, 
538 



26 And over them that did the V".!^ 
work of the field for tillage of the ground 
was Ezri tlie son of Chelub : 

27 And over the vineyards icas Shimei 
the Ramathite: over Hhe increase of the 
vineyards for tlie wine-cellars was Zabdi 
the Shiphmite : 

28 And over the olive-trees and the 
sycamore-trees'" that were in the low 
plains icas Baal-hanan the Gcderite : and 
over the cellars of oil u-as Joash : 

29 And over the herds that fed in Sha- 
ron was Shitrai the Sharonite : and over 
the herds that icere in the valleys ivas 
Shaphat the son of Adlai: 

30 Over the camels also teas Obil the 
Ishmaelite: and over the asses was Jeh- 
deiah the Meronothite: 

31 And over the flocks u'as Jaziz the 
Hagerite. All these were the rulers of 
the substance which ivas king David's. 

32 Also Jonathan David's uncle was a 
counsellor, a wise man, and a II scribe: 
and Jehiel the *son of Hachmoni was 
with the king's sons : 

33 And 'Ahithopheln-a.s the king's coun- 
sellor: and J Hushai the Archite u-as the 
king's companion : 

34 And after Ahithophel was Jehoiada 
the son of Bcnaiah, and '' Abiathar: and 
the genera] of the king's army teas 'Joab. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

I David in a solemn assembly havipg declared God's 
favor to him, and promUe to his Fon Solomon, ex- 
horteth them to fear God. 9, 20 He encourageth 
Solomon to build the temple. 11 He giveth him 
patterns for the form, and gold and silver for the 
materials. 

AND David assembled all the princes 
of Israel, the "princes of the tribes, 
and the captains of the "companies that 
ministered to the king by course, and the 
captains over the thousands, and captains 
over the hundreds, and the "stewards over 
all the substance and t possession of the 
king, tand of his sons, with the ^ officers, 
and with the p mighty men, and with all 
the valiant men, unto Jerusalem. 

2 Then David the king stood up upon 
his feet, and said. Hear me, my brethren, 
and my people: As for v\e, I '^had in my 
heart to build a house of rest for the ark 
of the covenant of the Loun, and for tlie 
footstool ' of our God, and had made ready 
for the building: 



i 2S:im. 15:12. j 2Sam. 16: 37 ; l« : Iti. k 1 Kin^s, 1 : 7. 1 ilinp. 
ll:t>. m l-li.np. 27 : Itl n clinp 27 : 1 , 2. o clliip. 27 : 2ri. \ Or. 
cnttfe. t Or, and his fonti. ^ Or, etmuchs. p clinp. II : Id, etc 
q 2 Sam. 7 : 2'; Vm. 132 : 2-7. r Psa. 99 : 6 ; Lam. 2 : I. 



and dispatch, which the highest prosperity and use- 
fulness indispensably require. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 
2. Footstool; the peculiar earthly dwelling. 



Charge to Solomon. 



I. CHRONICLES, XX VI 11, 



Gold for the temple. 



shalt not build a house for my "name, be 
cause thou hast been a inaii of war, and 
hast shed * blood. 

4 Howbeit the Lord God of Israel chose 
me'' before all the house of my father to 
be king over Israel for ever; for he hath 
chosen "^Judah to be the ruler; and of the 
house of Judah, the ''house of my father; 
and among the sons of my father he liked 
me to make me king over all Israel: 

5 And of all my sons, "for the Loud hath 
given me many sons, he hath chosen "^ Solo- 
mon my son to sit, upon the throne of 
the kingdom of the Loud over Israel. 

6 And he ssaid unto me, Solomon thy 
son, he shall build my house and my 
courts: for I have chosen him to be my 
son, and I will be his fatiier. 

7 Moreover I will establish his kingdom 
for ever, '"if he be t constant to do my 
commandments and my judgments, as at 
this day. 

8 Now therefore, in the 'sight of all Is- 
rael the congregation of the Lord, and in 
the J audience of our God, ''keep and 'seek 
for all the commandments of the Lord 
your God ; '" that ye may possess this good 
kind, and "leave it for an inheritance for 
your children after you for ever. 

9 ^ And thou, Solomon my son, "know 
thou the God of thy father, and p serve 
him with a perfect i heart and with a will- 

.ing mind: for the Lord 'searcheth all 
hearts, and Hinderstandeth all the imagi- 
nations of the thoughts: 'if thou seek 
him, he will be found of thee ; but if thou 
forsake him, he will cast thee ofl'for ever. 

10 Take heed now; "for the Lord hath 
chosen thee to build a house for the sanc- 
tuary : be strong, and do it. 

11 ^Then David gave to Solomon his 
son the pattern of the porch, and of the 
houses thereof, and of the treasuries 
thereof, and of the upper chambers there- 
of, and of the inner parlors thereof, and 
of the place of the mercy-seat, 

12 And the "pattern of all that the had 
by the "'Spirit, of the courts of the house 
of the Lord, and of all the chambers 
round about, of the treasuries of the 



« 1 Kinss. 8 : 3. * Heb 6/..i>((j. h 1 S.iiii. If.: 7-13. c <-liap. ."i : C; 
Gea 49:ii, 10; Pso.fin:?; "8 : fiS ; Hi-li. 7 : 14. d 1 Sam. Iti: 1. 
e cliap. 3: 1, etc. f chap. 2-2:9, 10. B 2 Sam. 7 : 13, M. b rhap. 
22: 13. t Heb. »/)o>li;. i Pent. 4:6; Mat S: 14-lfi. i Deut. 
21:10,1.';. k Psa. 119:4,10 I I.sa. 34 : 16; Acts 17: II. m Dent. 
6:1-3. n Eira 9:12: Prov. 13:2:. o Jer. 9:24; Jobn 17:3. p Job 
36:11.12. q 2 Kings, 20:3; Psa. 101 : 2; John 4 : 24 ; Rom. 1 : 9; 



4. For ever; permanently in his posterity, if 
obedient, to the end of the Jewish state. Ver. 7, 8. 

9. A perfect heart ; sincere. upri£;ht, faithful. 

13. By the Spirit : as divinely directed. 

19. /// writing ; what (-rod showed David with j 
reg.^rd to the temple and it^ furniture, as related 
from verse 11. it is supposed he wrote down and 
delivered to Solomon for his guidance. 



house of God, and of the "treasuries of 
the dedicated things: 

13 Also for the courses of the priests 
and the Levitcs, and for all the work of 
the service of the house of the Lord, and 
for all the y vessels of service in the house 
of the Lord. 

14 He <javc of gold by weight for tliiii^s 
of gold, for all instruments of all manner 
of service; sih'cr also for all instruments 
of silver by weight, for all instruments 
of every kind of service : 

15 Even the weight for the ^candle- 
sticks of gold, and for their lamps of 
gold, by weight for every candlestick, 
and for the lamps thereof: and for the 
candlesticks of silver by weight, both for 
the candlestick, and also for the lamps 
thereof, according to the use of every 
candlestick. 

1(5 And by weight he gave gold for the 
tables of show-bread, for every table ; and 
likewise silver for the tables of silver: 

17 Also pure gold for the ^(lesh-hooks, 
and the bowls, and the cups: and for the 
golden basins he gave gold by weight for 
every basin ; and likeivi.'ie silver by weight 
for every basin of silver: 

18 And for the altar of incense refined 
gold by weight; and gold for the pat- 
tern of the chariot of the ''cherubim, that 
spread out their wrings, and covered the 
ark of the covenant of the Lord. 

19 All this, said David, the "^ Lord made 
me understand in writing by his hand upon 
me, even all the works of this pattern. 

20 And David said to Solomon his son. 
Be ''strong and of good courage, and do it : 
fear not, nor be dismayed, for the Lord 
God, even my God, ivill be with tliee ; 'he 
will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, until 
thou hast finished all the work for the ser- 
vice of the house of tlie Lord. 

21 And behold, the '^courses of the 
priests and the Levites, cjt/i they .v//n// br 
xL'ith thee for all the service of the house 
of God : and there shall he with thee for 
all mannerof workmanship every willing 
skilful" man, for any manner of service: 
also the princes and all the people will 
be ''wholly at thy commandment. 



Heb. 1 2 : 28. r 1 S.ini. 16:7; Pun. 7:9: Jrr. 1 7 : 10 ; Urv 2 ; ■-•.! 
• Psa. 139:2. t 2CUron. 15:2. u rer. 6. »F.J.31:2,3. i He!.. 
ici/tit'lV/iAi'in. w Ex. 25: 40: Heb. 8:. S. i rlmp.2<i:2a jlKini-, 
7:14,etc. « Zeih.4:2; Ri-v. 1:13, 20. • 1 Sam, 2: 13, 14. b Ft. 
25 : 18-22 : I Sam. 4 : 4 ; 1 Kingx, fi : 23 ; Heb. 9: R. c Tcr. II. 1 .'. 
d ilnp. 22: 13; Deut3l:7, 8; Jnab. 1:6-0. eHeh.l3:fi. fch,i|,. 
24-26. t E.t. 35 : 2ft, 26 ; 36 : 1 , 2 ; Uom. 13 : 1. h TitU!" 3:1. 



IXSTRfCTIONS. 
1 . As men draw near the clo,se of life, thev should 
endeavor to communicate such instruction from the 
word and providence of God, as may be most useful 
to survivors. 

7. Fidelity to God is essential to the reception of 
those blessinjjs which, to the faithful, he nas en 
gaged to impart. 

539 



Gifts for the temple. 



I. CHRONICLES, XXIX. 



David's prayer. 



CHATTER XXIX. 

1 David, by his example and entreaty, causeth the 
princes and people to offer willingly. . 10 David's 
thank.'giving and prayer. l!0 The people, having 
ble.sscd God, and sacrificed, make Solomon king. 26 
David's reijrn and death. 

TnURTHER:MORE David the king said 
,_D unto all the congregation, Solomon 
my .son, whom alone God hath chosen, 
is yet * young and tender, and the work 
is great: for the palace is not for man, 
but for the Lord God. 

2 \ow I have prepared with all my 
might for the house of my God the gold 
for things to be made of gold, and the sil- 
ver for things of silver, and the brass 
for things of brass, the iron for things of 
iron, and wood for things of wood ; '' onyx 
stones, and stones to be set, glistering 
stones, and of divers colors, and all man- 
ner of precious stones, and marble stones 
in abundance. 

3 Moreover, because I have set my af- 
fection to the house of my God, I have of 
mine own proper good, of gold and silver, 
tchich I have given to' the house of my 
God, over and above all that I have pre- 
pared for the holy house, 

4 Eve7i three thousand talents of gold, 
of the gold of "^Ophir, and seven thousand 
talents of refined sih-er, to overlay the 
walls of the houses rcithal : 

5 The gold for things of gold, and the 
silver for things of silver, and for all 
manner of work to he made by the hands 
of artificers. And who then is willing to 
consecrate* his service this day unto the 
Lord? 

6 ^ Then **thc chief of the fathers and 
princes of the tribes of Israel, and the 
captains of thousands and of hundreds, 
with the rulers of the king's work, oficr- 
ed * willingly, 

7 And gave, for the service of the house 
of God, of gold five thousand talents and 
ten thousand drams, and of silver ten 
thousand talents, and of brass eighteen 
thousand talents, and one hundred thou- 
sand talents of iron. 

8 And they with whom precious stones 
were found gave them to the treasure of 
tlie house of the Lord, by the hand of 
.lehieH the Gcrshonite. 



« ilnip. 22:5; I Kin(;fi,3: 7; Prov. 4:3. bEx. 2R:20: 39:(i,<>tc.; 
Ii.il. fi^ : M , 1'2 ; Rev. Jl : 1«. « 1 Kings. !l : 28 : Job 28 : Iti. * Hfb. 
/ill hit hand. H cliap. 27 : I , elr. c 2 Ciir. 9:7. f cli.in. 26 : 21. 
It Prov. 23: 15. h 2 Cliron. 20:20-28. iP»R.8<»:M: ITim. 1:17; 
Rev. 5: 12. 13. j G^n. 33:20. k Miit fi: 13. 1 Deut. 8: 18; Prov. 
8.18; Kcrl. f):HI; Rom. ll:3fi. '" I'sii. 7.'): 6, 7. n Isn. 40:29. 

9. To fee accepted of G-od, what men do they must 
do heartily as nnto him. with a willing mind, for his 
(.dory and the best q^ood of men. 

If). The Lord will show his believinnj people all 
that they need to know; rind in following his direc- 
tions, however great or diflipiilt their work, they may- 
undertake it with resolution and go forward with 
510 



9 Then the people rejoiced, for *n 11 I^ 
that they offered willingly, because with 
perfect heart they offered willingly to the 
Lord: and David the king also e rejoiced 
with great joy. 

10 ^[Wherefore David*" blessed the Lord 
before all the congregation: and David 
said, 'Blessed be thou. Lord God of J Is- 
rael our father, for ever and ever. 

11 Thine, ''O Lord, is the greatness, 
and the power, and the glory, and the 
victory, and the majesty; for all that is 
in the heaven and in the earth is thine : 
thine is the kingdom, Lord, and thou 
art exalted as head above all. 

12 Both 'riches and honor come of thee, 
and thou reignest over all; and in thy 
hand is power and might; and in thy 
hand it is to ""make great, and to give 
strength ° unto all. 

13 Now therefore, our God, we thank 
thee, and praise thy glorious name. 

14 But who am I, and what is my peo- 
ple, that we should t be able to offer so 
willingly after this sort? for all things 
come of thee, °and of thine +own have 
we given thee. 

15 For Pwe are strangers before thee, 
and sojourners, as ivcre all our fathers : 
ouri days on the earth are as a shadow, 
and there is none 5 abiding. 

16 Lord our God, all this store that 
we have prepared to build thee a house 
for thy holy name cometh of thy hand, 
and is all thine ""own. 

17 I know also, my God, that 'thou tri- 
est the heart, and hast ^pleasure in up- 
rightness. As for me, in the uprightness 
of my heart I have willingly offered all 
these things: and now have I seen with 
joy thy people, which arc II present here, 
to offer willingly unto thee. 

18 Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and 
of Israel, our fathers, keep this for ever 
in the imagination of the thoughts of the 
heart of thy people, and * prepare "their 
heart unto thee : 

19 And give unto Solomon my son a 
perfect heart, to keep thy commandments, 
thy testimonies, and thy statutes, and to 
do all these things, and to build the palace, 
for the * which I have made provision. 



t Heb. retain, or ahtain ttrtnath. o Kom. 11 : 3fi : .Th.... 1:17. 
JHcb./innd. p Psa. 39: 12; Heb. 11 : 13; 1 Peter,":!!, q .loh 
14:2; Ps.n. 90: 9 ; 102: 11 ; 144:4; l»a 40:6-8; .Tns. 4: 14. % He!i. 
expectation. rP»a.24:l. irbnp.2S:9. tl'rov.ll:20. || Or. 
found. * Or, j/aWi«A, Ps.llm JO: 17. a Prov. 16: 1. v ch.Tp. 
22 : ! 4. 



cheerfulness, expecting that in due time he will give 
them success. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

9. Perfect heart ; sincere, upright, for the pur- 
pcse of honoring God. Ver. 17. 

]S. Keep t/ii.s; (liis same disposition (o ofT'r 
willingly of their substance to the Lord. 



Solomon is magnified. 



11. CHRONICLES, I. 



Death of David. 



tc\^: 20 ^And David said to all the 
congregation, Now *bless the Lord your 
God. And all the congregation ble.s.sed 
the Lord God of their father.s, and bowed 
down their heads, and worshipped the 
Lord, and the king. 

21 And they sacrificed sacrifices unto 
the Lord, and offered burnt-offerings 
imto the Lord, on the morrow after that 
day, even a thousand bullocks, a thou- 
sand rams, and a thousand lambs, with 
their drink-offerings, and sacrifices in 
abundance for all Israel: 

22 And did eat and drink before the 
Lord on that day with great gladness. 
And they made Solomon the son of Da- 
vid king the second time, and ''anointed 
him unto the Lord to be the chief gover- 
nor, and Zadok to be priest. 

23 Then Solomon sat on the throne of 
the Lord as king instead of David his 
father, and prospered; and all Israel 
obeyed him. 

24 And all the princes, and the mighty 
men, and all the sons likewise of king 



David, 'submitted themselves unto Solo- 
mon the king. 

25 And the Lord magnified Solomon 
exceedingly in the sight of all Israel, and 
bestowed"^ upon him .such royal majesty 
as had not been on any king before him 
in Israel. 

26 ^ Thus David the son of Jesse reign- 
ed over all Israel. 

27 And ■'the time that he reigned over 
Israel was forty years ; seven years reign- 
ed he in Hebron, and thirty and three 
years reigned he in Jerusalem. 

28 And he "^died in a good old age, ""full 
of days, riches, and honor: and Solomon 
his son reigned in his stead. 

29 Now the acts of David the king, first 
and last, behold, they are written in the 
book of Samuel the seer, and in the tbook 
of Nathan the prophet, and in the book of 
Gad the seer, 

30 With all his reign and his might, 
and the «timcs that went over him, and 
over Israel, and over all the kingdoms of 
the countries. 



THE 



SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, 



CHAPTER I. 

1 The solemn offering of Solomon at Gibeon. 7 Solo- 
mon's choice of wisdom is blessed by God. 13 Solo- 
mon's strength and wealth. 

AND *> Solomon the son of David was 
strengthened in his kingdom, and the 
Lord' his God icas with him, and J mag- 
nified him exceedingly. 



a I'sa. 14.". :1. b I Kings. 1 ::M, etc. * Heb. ju 
under. Gen. 24: -2; 47: -29; 2 Clircm. 30: 8 ; E 
2:9. d I Kings, 2:11. « Gen. 2.1:8 



llie hiind 

c Keel. 

f Job 6 : 2i>. for, hiitory ; 



20. Tiu king; before whom they bowed, and 
thvis paid civil obeisance. 

2-5. Mag7iifted Solomon ; caused him to appear 
great in the eyes of the people. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. The Lord chooses such as he sees fit, to possess 
power and exercise authority among men ; on him 
they are dependent, and to him they must give ac- 
count for the manner in which they use the blessings 
with which they are favored. 

3. If a man's affections are set on God and his 
service, he will willingly ofler a portion of what 
G-od has given him to establish and maintain his 
worship among men. 

9. Such is the nature of the human soul, that in 
offering its best affections and choicest treasures to 
the Lord, it is filled with gladness and exceeding joy. 

II. None can offer any thing good and acceptable 

35 



2 Then Solomon spake unto all Israel, to 
the ''captains of thousands and of hundreds, 
and to the judges, and to every governor 
in all Israel, the chief of the fathers. 

3 So Solomon, and all the congregation 
with him, 'went to the high place that 
was at Gibeon ; for '"there was the taber- 
nacle of the congregation of God, which 



Hell. io0r</«. t T)an. 4 : 2), 3.'i. h|Kin^,2:46. iGen.n9:8. 
j lClirOD.29:25. k 1 Chroii.27 : 1. I I Kings, 3 : 4, etc b 1 CbroB. 



to God, except what they have first received from 
him. For all blessings, and for a disposition rightly 
to use them, men are indebted to his grace. To him 
belongs, and to him, so far as they feel right, they 
will give, all the glory. 

17. Sensible that God looks upon the heart, and 
that nothing is acceptable to him except wliat is 
done in sincerity and truth, good men will seek from 
him a preparation of heart not only for themselves, 
but for their children and all who come after them. 

20. However greatly men may be honored in 
being instrumental of good to others, the glory they 
will give to the Lord, whose is the greatness, and 
the power, and the victory, for ever. Amen. 

CHAPTER I. 
3. There was the taheriiacle ; this had not yet 
I been removed from Gibeon to Jerusalem. •• 

541 



Solomon's u-tse choice. 



II. CHRONICLES, II. 



His message to Huram. 



Moses the servant of the Lord had made 
in tlie wilderness. 

4 But'the ark of God liad David brought 
up from Kirjath-jearim to the place which 
David had prepared for it : for he had 
pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem. 

5 iNIorcovcr the brazen ''altar, that Be- 
zaleel the son of Uri, the son of Ilur, had 
made, *lie put before the tabernacle of the 
Lord : and Solomon and the congregation 
sought unto it. 

6 And Solomon went up thither to the 
brazen altar before the Lord, which icas at 
the tabernacle of the congregation, and of- 
fered a thousand burnt-olTerings upon it. 

7 ^ In that night did God appear unto 
Solomon, and said unto him. Ask what I 
.shall give thee. 

8 And Solomon said unto God, Thou hast 
showed great mercy unto David my father, 
and hast made me to reign in his "^ stead. 

9 Now, Lord God, let thy promise 
unto David my father be established : 
for thou hast made mc king over a people 
like t the dust of the earth in multitude. 

10 Give me now ''wisdom and know- 
ledge, that I may "go out and come in 
before this people : for who can judge this 
thy people, that is so great ■? 

1 1 And God said to Solomon, Because this 
was in thy ""heart, and thou hast not asked 
riches, wealth, or honor, nor the life of thine 
enemies, neither yet hast asked long life ; 
but hast asked wisdom and knowledge for 
thyself, that thou mayest judge my people, 
over whom I have made thee king : 

12 Wisdom and knowledge is ^granted 
unto thee; and ''I will give thee riches, 
and wealth, and honor, such as 'none of 
the kings have had that have been before 
thee, neither shall there any after thee 
have the like. 

13 ^ Then Solomon came fro7n his jour- 
ney to the high place that icas at Gibeon to 
Jerusalem, from before the tabernacle of 
the congregation, and reigned over Israel. 

14 And Solomon gathered J chariots and 
horsemen : and he had a thousand and four 
hundred chariots, and twelve thousand 
horsemen, which he placed in the chariot 
cities, and with the king at Jerusalem. 

1 5 And ""the king +made silver and gold at 



« 1 Cliron. 15:1, etc. bKx.38:l,2. * Or, ivntlherr. e lCh.28:5. 
fHeh.muchatllitdutlo/lhtmrlh. <lprov.4;7; Jm. I:r>,a eNum. 
•27 : 17 ; Deiit. .11 : i. f I'rov. 23 : 7 : Hcb. 4:1-2. c chap. >) : 2-2 ; Keel. 
2:9; .laa. 1 ;fi. hM;itG:3:). i 1 Cliron. '29 : jr.. j 1 Kin-s, 10: Jfi, 
etc. k 1 Kin^s, 10:27, etc i Joli 22:24. tHeh.gavf. ^ Heh. tlie 
going forth of the horses tvJtich wna Sotamon*s. |j Heb. hand. 



10. Go out and come in ; discharge aright his 
public duties. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. When the Lord is with Ws people they will he 
strong, and by his word, Spirit, and providence be 
furnished for every good work. 

6. Commuiiion with God and supreme devotion 
542 



Jerusalem as plenteous as stones, *b.c.iois: 
and cedar-trees made he as the sycamore- 
trees that arc in the vale for abundance. 

1 6 And 5 Solomon had horses brought out 
of Egypt, and linen yarn : the king's mer- 
chants received the linen yarn at a price. 

17 And they fetched up, and brought 
forth out of Eg^'pt a chariot for six hun- 
dred shekels of silver, and a horse for a 
hundred and fifty : and so brought they out 
horses for all the kings of the Hittites, and 
for the kings of Syria, by their H means. 

CHAPTER II. 

1,17 Solomon's laborers for the building of the temple. 
3 His emba.«sage to Iluram for workmen and pro- 
vision of stuli". \l Iluram sendeth him a kind an- 
swer. 

AND Solomon determined to build a 
house for the name of the Lord, and 
a house for his kingdom. 

2 And Solomon told out threescore and 
ten thousand men to bear burdens, and 
fourscore thousand to hew in the moun- 
tain, and three thousand and six hundred 
to oversee them. 

3 1[And 'Solomon sent to * Huram the 
king of Tyre, saying. As thou didst deal 
with "'David my father, and didst send 
him cedars to build him a house to dwell 
therein, eve7i so deal n-ith mc. 

4 Behold, I build a house to the name of 
the Lord my God, to dedicate it \oh'\m, and 
to "burn before him tgweet incen.'ic, and 
for the continual "show-bread, and for the 
burnt-ofFeringsP morning and evening, on 
the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and 
on the solemn feasts of the Lord our God. 
This is an ordinance for ever to Israel. 

5 And the house which I build is great: 
for 1 great is our God above all gods. 

6 But 'who +is able to build him a 
house, 'seeing the heaven and heaven of 
heavens cannot contain hiinl who am I 
then, that I should build him a house, 
save only to burn sacrifice before him ? 

7 Send me now therefore a man cun- 
ning to work in gold, and in silver, and 
in brass, and in iron, and in purple, and 
crimson, and blue, and that can skill Ho 
grave with the cunning men tliat are 
with me in Judah and in Jerusalem, 
whom' David my father did provide. 



I 1 KinsB, ,1:2, etc • Or, //iVom, I Kings, B: I. m I Cliron. ]4: 1. 
hEx. :K):7. i Heh. incense nf spices, o Ex. 25: 30; Lev. 24 : 5-9. 
P Num.:.'!: 3, etc. q Paa. 1:15:5; lTim.6:1.5. r Ian. fifi: 1, 2. 
^ Heb hath retained, mt ohiained strength. • chap. 6:18. 5 Heb. 
to grave gravings. t 1 Cliron. 22 : 15. 



to him, are a good preparation for the reception of 
all needed blessings. 

11. When men desire that wisdom which is from 
above inore than they desire wealth, power, or influ- 
ence, they may expect to receive it ; and with it all 
things necessary for their spiritual and everlasting 
good. 



HiiraTti's kind answer. 



II. CHRONICLES, III. 



T7(C temple Imilt. 



B.c.'w^: 8 Send me also cedar-trees, fir- 
trees, and *algum-trees, out of Lebanon : 
for I know that thy servants can skill to 
exit timber in Lebanon ; and behold, my 
servants shall be with thy servants, 

9 Even to prepare me timber in abun- 
dance: for the house which I am about 
to build shall he twonderful great. 

10 And behold, I will give to thy ser- 
vants, the hewers that cut timber, twen- 
ty thousand measures of beaten wheat, 
and twenty thousand measures of barley, 
and twenty thousand baths of wine, and 
twenty thousand baths of oil. 

1 1 ^ Then Huram the king of Tyre an- 
swered in writing, which he sent to Solo- 
mon, ''Because the Lord hath loved his 
people, he hath made thee king over 
tliem. 

12 Huram said moreover, Blessed be the 
Lord God of Israel, that made *" heaven and 
earth, who hath given to David the king 
a wise son, ^endued with pnulcnce and 
understanding, that might build a house 
forthe Lord, and a house for his kingdom. 

13 And now I have sent a cunning 
man, endued with understanding, of Hu- 
ram my father's, 

14 The "^son of a woman of the daugh- 
ters of Dan, and his father teas a man of 
Tyre, skilful to work in gold, and in sil- 
ver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in 
timber, in purple, in blue, and in fine 
linen, and in crimson; also to grave any 
manner of graving, and to find out every 
device which shall be put to him, with 
thy cunning men, and with the cunning 
men of my lord David thy father. 

1.5 Now therefore the wheat, and the 
barley, the oil, and the wine, which my 
lord hath spoken of, let him send unto 
liis servants : 

16 And wc will cut wood out of Leba- 
non, * as much as thou shalt need : and 
we will bring it to thee in floats by sea 



• Or, almuogim, 1 Kings, 10:11. ) Hvb. great ami laandcr/vl. 
« 1 Kins'". ^0:'.>; Psa. 7.! : 17. b Ps!i.3.3.«; Jer. 10:10,11: Acta 
14 : 1,1 ; Rev. 10 : fi f Heb. kwminv. c 1 King.1, 7 : 13, H. } Heb. 
according to all thy need. || Heb. JV/p/in, Josli. IS: 4rt ; Art«9:.'!fi. 
>1 chap. 8 : 7, 8 ; 1 Kings, 9 : -20, CI. ' Heb. the men the strangers. 



CHAPTER II. 

16. Joppa ; the nearest seaport on the Mediter- 
ranean, about forty miles west of Jerusalem. 

18. Threescore and ten ; seventy. 
IXSTRUCTIOXS. 

3. The establishment and support of the worship 
of Grod according to his appointment, and the spread 
of a knowledge of his s.-ilvation, is the most honor- 
able and noble work in which the kings of the earth 
can engage ; by it they not only honor God, but 
promote their own highest good and the good of the 
people over whom they are placed. 

0. The more exalted a good man's views of God, 
and the more abundant his labors and offerings for 
Him, the more humble will be his views of himself. 
and the more entire his sense of dependence on the 
riches of divine grace. 



to II Joppa; and thou shalt carry it up to 
Jerusalem. 

17 If And ''Solomon numbered all *the 
strangers that were in the land of Israel, 
after the * numbering wherewith David 
his father had numbered them ; and they 
were found a hundred and fifty thousand 
and three thousand and si.x hundred. 

18 And he set threescore and ten thou- 
sand of them to be bearers of burdens, 
and fourscore thousand to be hewers in 
the mountain, and three thousand and 
six hundred overseers to set the people 
awork. 

CHAPTER III. 

1 The place, and time of building the temple. 3 The 
measure and ornaments of the house. 11 The cheru- 
bim. 14 The veil and pillars. 

THEN f Solomon began to build the 
house of the Lord at Jerusalem in 
mount KJMoriah, t^Yhere the LORD ''ap- 
peared unto David his father, iik the place 
that David had prepared in the thresh- 
ing-floor of 'Oman the Jcbusite. 

2 And he began to build in the second 
day of the second month, in the fourth 
year of his reign. 

3 T[ Now these are the things irherein Sol- 
omon was instructed 'for the building of 
the house of God. The length by cubits 
after the first measure teas threescore cu- 
bits, and the breadth twenty cubits. 

4 And the 'porch that was in the front of 
the house, the length of it teas according to 
the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, 
and the lieight teas a hundred and twenty : 
and he overlaid it witiiin with pure gold. 

5 And the greater house ho ceiled with 
fir-tree, which he overlaid with fine gold, 
and set thereon palm-trees and chains. 

6 And he I' garnished the house with 
precious ''stones for beauty: and the gold 
icas gold of Parvaim. 

7 He overlaid also the house, the beams, 
the posts, and the walls thereof, and the 



e 1 Cliron. 2i:2. f 1 Kings, 6: 1, etc. It Gen. S2:'2, M. t Or. 
ichich was seen of David his /other. b 1 Chron. 21 : 18. i Or, 
Araunah,1 Sam. it: IS. 1^ Heb. founded. i 1 Chron. ;«: 11. 
j .lolin 10:23; Arti3:ll ; ,1:12. \\ Hfb. covered. k 1 Cbron. 
29:2,8; l»n.M:ll,l2; Rev. 21 : lfU2I. 



10. Not only the mutual exchange of kind offices, 
but the exchange of the labor and productions of 
different countries, may be of service to all. 

17. With a proper division of labor and union of 
effort, and with tlie blessing of God on well-directed 
diligence and perseverance, the most dilTicult under- 
takings may in due time be accomplished. 

CHAPTER HI. 
1. Mount Moriali ; an elevation in the south- 
eastern part of Jerusalem. 

3. Threescore cubits; about ninety feet. 

INSTRUCTION?. 
1. However great or dilBcult the work to which 
God calls men, in liis name and strength they should 
undertake it, with confidence that he -will give them 
all needed aid. 

543 



The furnilnre 



II. CHRONICLES, IV. 



of the temple 



doors thereof, with goUl ; and graved cher- 
ubim on the walls. 

8 And he made the most =holy house, 
the length whereof was according to the 
breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and 
the breadth thereof twenty cubits : and 
he overlaid it with fine gold, ainounting 
to six hundred talents. 

9 And the weight of the nails was fifty 
shekels of gold. And he overlaid the up- 
per chambers with gold. 

10 H And in the most holy house he 
made two cherubim *of image work, and 
overlaid them with gold. 

11 And the wings of the cherubim were 
twenty cubits long : one wing of the one 
cherub teas five cubits, reaching to the 
wall of the house: and the other wing 
was likewise five cubits, reaching to the 
wing of the other cherub. 

12 And one wing of the other cherub 
was five (jubits, reaching to the wall of 
the house: and the other wing loas five 
cubits also, joining to the wing of the 
other cherub. 

13 The wings of these cherubim spread 
themselves forth twenty cubits : and they 
stood on their feet, and their faces were 
inward. t 

14 T[ And he made the ''veil of blue, 
and purple, and crimson, and fine linen, 
and 5; wrought cherubim thereon. 

lo Also he made before the house two 
pillars "= of thirty and five cubits Uiigli, 
and the chapiter that icas on the top of 
each of them teas five cubits. 

16 And he made chains, as in the ora- 
cle, and put them on the heads of the pil- 
lars ; and made a hundred pomegranates, 
and put them on the chains. 

17 And he reared up the pillars before 
the temple, one on the right hand, and 
the other on the left; and called the name 
of that on the right hand H .lachin, and the 
name of that on the left *Boaz. 

CHArTEIl IV. 

1 The altar of brass. 2 The molten sea upon twelve 
oxen. The ten lavers, candlesticks, and tables. 
9 The courts, and the instruments of brass. 19 The 
instruments of gold. 

MOREOVER he made an ^altar of brass, 
twenty cubits the length thereof, and 
twenty cubits the breadth thereof, and ten 
cubits the height thereof. 



• Heb. 9:^1-8. * Or, ns bomc tUinW, nP movttltle wnrk. f Or, 
towiird tht houtc. b Kx. 2H:31. % He\). aiuttil to ascend. 
c I KintK, 7:15-'21 ; Jer.ft'J:20,2l. % Hell. fnnp. || Tlial is. /le 
ihall Citahliih. * 1]\n\,'n,inU nitrtngth. A Kx. 27: 1,2 ; 2 KingK, 



3. To those who are disposed to learn and do 
their whole duly, God will grant all needful in- 
struction ; so that they will see not only what to 
do, but also how to do it in order to meet his ap- 
probation, secure liis blessing, and be made bene- 
factors to mankind. 
511 



2 "[Also he made a molten' sea of arf^l 
ten cubits tfrom brim to brim, round in 
compass, and five cubits the height there- 
of; and a line of thirty cubits did com- 
pass it round about. 

3 And under it icas the similitude of 
o.xen, which did compass it round about; 
ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round 
about. Two rows of oxen were cast, when 
it was cast. 

4 It stood upon twelve oxen, three look- 
ing toward the north, and three looking 
toward the west, and three looking tow- 
ard the south, and three looking toward 
the east : and the sea icas set above upon 
them, and all their hinder parts were in- 
ward. 

5 And the thickness of it was a hand- 
breadth, and the brim of it like the work 
of the brim of a cup, twith flowers of lil- 
ies ; and it received and held three thou- 
sand baths. 

6 If He made also ten lavers, and put 
five on the right hand, and five on the 
left, to wash in them: Jsuch things as 
they offered for the burnt-offering they 
washed "^iu them ; but the sea was for the 
priests to wash in. 

7 And he made ten candlesticks of gold 
according to their Rform, and set them in 
the temple, five on the right hand, and 
five on the left. 

8 He made also ten tables, and placed 
them in the temple, five on the right side, 
and five on the left. And he made a 
hundred I! basins of gold. 

9 T[ Furthermore he made the ''court of 
the priests, and the great court, and doors 
for the court, and overlaid the doors of 
them with brass. 

10 And he set the sea on the right side 
of the east end, over against the south. 

11 And Huram made the pots, and the 
shovels, and the * basins. And Huram 
finished t the work that he was to make 
for king Solomon for the house of God; 

12 To wit, the two pillars, and the pom- 
mels, and the chapiters which ivere on the 
top of the two pillars, and the two wreaths 
to cover the two pommels of the chapiters 
which tecre on the top of the pillars; 

13 And four hundred pomegranates on 
the two wreaths; two rows of pomegran- 
ates on each wreath, to cover the two 



to 



Ifi: H; E7.ek.4:):13-I7. e 1 Kin»s,7:2:!,etc. \ Heh.from hit hr 
hithrim. % r)T,likt a lilt/flowtr. % Heli. Ihewotknflmrntxfftring. 
r Hub. 9:2.3. e Kx. '.'o :3l-J0 ; 1 rliron.28: 12-19; Heb. 8:6. || Or, 
bowli. h I Kiiifn,6:3a » Or, ftuic/j. \ Ue'b. finished to make. 



CHAPTER IV. 

2. Molle?!- sea ; a large metal vessel to hold 
water for the priests to M-ash in. Ver. 6. 

5. Three tlioiisaud baths; a bath was about 
seven and a half gallons. 

C. Lavers ; vessels to w:ush in. 



The golden vessels. 



II. CHRONICLES, V. 



Tfu ark brought in. 



B.'"'S pommels of the chapiters which 
were upon the *pillars. 

14 He made also "bases, and tlavers 
made he upon the bases ; 

15 One sea, and twelve oxen under it. 

16 The pots also, and the shovels, and the 
flesh-hooks, and all their instruments, did 
Huram"" his father make to king Solomon 
for the house of the LoRD,of -bright brass. 

17 In the plain of Jordan did the king 
cast them, in the ^clay ground between 
Succoth and Zeredathah. 

18 Thus Solomon made all these ves- 
sels in great abundance: for the weight 
of the bra.ss could not be found out. 

19 ^ And Solomon made all the vessels 
that ii'crc for the house of God, the gold- 
en altar also, and the tables whereon the 
show-bread*^ va.s sd : 

20 Moreover the candlesticks with their 
lamps, that they should ''burn after the 
manner before the oracle, of pure gold ; 

21 And the *" flowers, and the lamps, and 
the tongs, made he of gold, and that H perfect 
gold ; 

22 And the snuffers, and the *basins, and 
the spoons, and the censers, of pure gold : j 
and the entry of the house, the inner doors 
thereof for the most holy place, and the 
doors of the house of the temple, were of 
gold. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 The dedicated treasures. 2 The solemn induction of 
the ark into the oracle. 11 God being praised giveth 
a visible sign of his favor. 

THUS ""all the work that Solomon made 
for the house of the Lord was finish- 
ed : and Solomon brought in n// the ^things 
that David his father had dedicated; and 
the silver, and the gold, and all the in- 
struments, put he among the treasures of 
the house of God. 
2 ^Then '' Solomon assembled the elders 



^Heh/nccn/the. • I Kings, 7 : 27, 4.1. \ CtT.cilihons. b 1 Kiiis», 
7 : 1 4, 4:>. i Heb. made brinht. iir tcoured. % Heb thicknttsti a/ the 
ground. cKx.25::;0. d Ex. -27: ■.•". -'1. « Kx. i5:31. eti-. || Heh. 
retfeetimnofgold. * Or, hnwit. f I Kings," :5I. g I Cliron. 2i: H. 



14. Bases; foundations on which the lavers or 
basins were to stand. 

17. Succoth a/id ZererUtthaJi ; places in the 
tribe of Gad east of the Jordan. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The ordinances of divine appointment have 
ever been such as to impress upon men a conviction 
of their moral pollution, and the necessity of being 
washed in that fountain which Jesus Christ has 
opened to purify them from sin and all unclean- 
ness. 

7. Men are naturally in spiritual darkness ; and 
will never view things aright, unless the Holy Spirit 
shine into their minds and give them the light of 
the knowledge of his glory in the face of Jesus 
Christ. 

21. Treasures devoted to the service of God are 
by no means lost, but are safely invested where they 
will yield thirty, sixty, and a hundred fold. 



of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, 
the chief of the fathers of the children of 
Israel, unto Jerusalem, to bring up the 
ark' of the covenant of the Loud out of 
the J city of David, which is ''Zion. 

3 Wherefore all the men of Israel as- 
sembled themselves unto the king in the 
feast' which was in the seventh month. 

4 And all the elders of Israel came; 
and the Levites took up the ark. 

5 And they brought up the ark, and the 
tabernacle of the congregation, and all 
the holy vessels that icere in the taber- 
nacle, these did the priests and the Le- 
vites bring up. 

6 Also king Solomon, and all the con- 
gregation of Israel that were assembled 
unto him before the ark, sacrificed sheep 
and o.xen, which could not be told nor 
numbered for multitude. 

7 And the priests brought ""in the ark of 
the covenant of the Loud unto his place, 
to the oracle of the house, into the most 
holy place, even under the wings of the 
cherubim :" 

8 For the cherubim spread forth their 
wings over the place of the ark, and the 
cherubim covered the ark and the "staves 
thereof above. 

9 And they drew out the staves of the 
ark, that tiie ends of the staves were seen 
from the ark before the oracle; but they 
were not seen without. And tthere it is 
unto this day. 

10 There teas nothing in the ark save 
the two tables which p Moses put therein 
at Horeb, twhen the Lord made a cove- 
nant with the children of Israel, when 
they came out of Egypt. 

1 1 ^ And it came to pass, when the priests 
were come ou toft he holy jj/rt*.- (for all the 
priests that were * present were sanctified, 
and did not then wait bv ''course: 



h 


1 KingH. 8: 


, etc. 


1 Num. 


I0:S1 


:!«. 


j -J S.im 


K: 


\'.. IPm. 


«:«; 


K7 


: ■! : l.iJ : l.T 


-17. 


rl 


nn. 7 


:8-ra 


m 


P»a. i:l. 


:». 


i> Ex. 37 


:7-9; 


Heb. <):4,R. 


o Kx. 


ri7 


15. 


t Or. 


Ihey 


are the 


re. 


ns 1 Kin;:* 


,R:& 


P 


neuL 10:2- 


-'■■ t 


Or 


whc 


-'■ 4 


Heb 


found 


q 


clmp. V< : 


«. 



CHAPTER V. 

2. Zio)i ; this was in the south part of Jerus.ilem, 
and south-west from Moriah. tlie site of the temple. 

3. Sei'eiitli- moHtli. ; Tishri, part of September 
and October. 

10. The tu-o tables; on which were engraved 
the ten commandments. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. When a whole people assemble, and with uniU 
ed hearts engage sincerely in the worship of God, 
they may expect that their service will be accept- 
able to him and greatly beneficial to themselves. 

10. The ten commandments express the will of 
God, and are the measure and the rule of human 
duty, under all dispensations, and in all ages. 

13. When the ministers of religion heartily unit« 
in praising and adoring God for his mercies, he will 
accept their offerings, and give evidence of his ap- 
probation by delightful manifestations of his pres- 
ence and favor. 

545 



Solomon's prayer at 



II. CHRONICLES, VI. 



the consecration. 



12 Also "the Levites which were the 
singers, all of them of Asaph, of Heinan, 
of Jeduthun, with their sous and their 
brethren, being arrayed iu white linen, 
having cymbals and psalteries and harps, 
stood at the east end of the altar, and 
with Ihem a hundred and twenty priests 
sounding'' with trumpets:) 

1.3 It came even to pass, as the trum- 
peters and singers ivere as one, to make 
one" sound to be heard in praising and 
thanking the Lord; and when they lift- 
ed up (heir voice with the trumpets and 
cymbals and instruments of music, and 
praised the Lord, saying, ^ For he is good ; 
for his mercy cndureth for ever : that then 
the house was filled with a cloud, even 
the house of the Lord; 

14 So that the priests could not stand 
to minister by reason of the cloud; "for 
the glory of the Lord had filled the house 
of God. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 Solomon, having blessed the people, blesseth God. 
1'2 Solomon's prayer in the consecration of the tem- 
ple, upon the brazen scaffold. 

THEN ''said Solomon, The Lord hath 
said that he would dwell in the thick 
darkncss.E 

2 But I have built a house of habitation for 
thee, and a place for thy dwelling for ever. 

3 And the king turned his face, and 
blessed'' the whole congregation of Israel : 
and all the congregation of Israel 'stood. 

4 And he said, Blessed be the Lord 
God of Israel, 'who hath with his hands 
fuHilled that which he spake with his 
mouth to my father David, saying, 

5 Since the day that I brought forth my 
people out of the land of Egypt I chose 
no city amo^g all the tribes of Israel to 
build a house in, that ''my name might 
be there; neither chose I any man to be 
a ruler over my people Israel : 

6 But I have chosen 'Jerusalem, that my 
name might be there; and have chosen 
David'" to be over my people Israel. 

7 Now "it was in tlie heart of David 
my falhcr to build a house for the name 
of the Lord God of Israel. 

8 But the Lord said to David my fa- 
ther, Forasmuch as it was in thy heart 
to build a house for my name, Ihou didst 
well in that it was in thv heart: 



a I Cliron. 25 : 1. b I Cliron. I."): J-1 ; P»n. M : W. e Rev. 5 : H_U. 
d 1 Chron. 16:34-41 ; Pm. inti. c clinp. 7:5; Kx. W-.'-iR; Elek. 
10:4: Rev. 15:8. f I Kingf". 8 : 1-2, etc. J Lrv. IB:!! ; Pbh. 1«: II ; 
Kail. 1:3; Heb. IJ: 18. h Num. 6: ■;3-'27. INeli. 8:5. i I.iike 
1 : 68-70. k Deut. 1-2 : !>, 1 1. I ilinp. 12 : 1.1. in 1 Cliron. '28 : 4. 
" 2 Sam. 7: 2, etc.; I Cliron. '28: «, etc. o 1 Cliron. 49: »3. p 1 Cliron. 



CHAPTER VI. 
2. Thy dii-eU ill g for ever ; the place where he 
would pfrpttniillv manifest his special presence. 
1. With his hands; by his providence. 
516 



9 Notwithstanding thou shalt not '^j.ci^SSS: 
build the house; but thy son which shall 
come forth out of thy loins, he shall build 
the house for my name. 

10 The Lord therefore hath performed 
his word that he hath spoken : for I am 
risen up in the room of David my father, 
and am ° set on the throne of Israel, as the 
Lord Ppromised, and have built the house 
for the name of the Lord God of Israel. 

1 1 And in it have I put the ^ ark, where- 
in is the covenant of the Lord, that he 
made with the children of Israel. 

12 HAnd "^he stood before the altar of the 
Lord in the presence of all the congrega- 
tion of Israel, and spread forth his hands : 

13 For Solomon had made a brazen scaf- 
fold, of five cubits *long, and five cubits 
broad, and three cubits high, and had set it 
in the midst of the court: and upon it he 
stood,' and kneeled down upon his knees 
before all the congregation of Israel, and 
spread forth his hands toward heaven, 

14 And said, Lord God of Israel, there 
is * no God like thee in the heaven, nor in 
the earth; which "keepest covenant, and 
showest mercy unto thy servants, that walk 
before thee with all their hearts : 

15 Thou which hast kept with thy ser- 
A-ant David my father that which thou 
hast ^promised him; and spakest with 
thy mouth, and "" hast fulfilled it with thy 
hand, as it is this day. 

16 Now therefore, O Lord God of Is- 
rael, keep with thy servant David my 
father that which thou hast "promised 
him, saying. There shall not tfail thee a 
man in my sight to sit upon the throne 
of Israel ; yet ^so that thy children take 
heed to their way to walk in my law, as 
thou hast walked before me. 

17 Now then, Lord God of Israel, let 
thy word be verified, which thou hast 
spoken unto thy servant David. 

18 But will God in very deed ^ dwell 
with men on the earth? 'Behold, heaven 
and the heaven of heavens cannot con- 
tain thee; how much less this house 
W'liich I have built ! 

19 Have respect therefore to the prnyer 
of thy servant, and to his supplication, 
Lord my God, to hearken unto the cry 
and the prayer which thy servant pray- 
eth before thee: 



17:U. q chap. .i>:7, 10. r 1 Kingii, 8:2-2. etc. * Weh. tht Irnalh 
tlitrtof. etc. • Nell. 8:4. I Kx. 16: II ; Dent. 4 : W : 7 :!>. u N«li. 
l:A;Dnn.9:4. yICIiron.M:9 w ver. 4. t 2 Sam. 7: 12-lfi ; 
1 Kiii-[i<,2:4; 6:12. f Heh. a man be cut nff. y Psa. l:tj: 12. 
I Exralim 39:46,46; Pnaln. 68:18. >clinp.2:6; leuiuhefi:!; 
Acto7!49. 



5. Neither chose I any man; to establish in 
him and his posterity an hereditary authority, as he 
chose David. 

17. Verified; fulfilled. 



Solomon s prayer 



II. CHRONICLES, VI. 



at the dedication. 



B.c'im'' 20 That thine eyes may be "open 
upon this house day and night, upon the 
place whereof thou hast said that thou 
wouldest put thy name there ; to hearken 
unto the prayer whieh thy servant pray- 
eth *to\vard this place. 

21 Hearken therefore unto the suppli- 
cations of thy servant, and of thy people 
Israel, which they shall t make toward 
this place: hear thou from thy ''dwell- 
ing-place, even from heaven; and when 
thou hearest, forgive. 

22 H If a man sin against his neighbor, 
and + an oath be laid upon him to make 
him swear, and the oath come before 
thine altar in this house ; 

23 Then hear thou from heaven, and 
do, and judge thy servants, by requiting 
the wicked, by '^recompensing liis way 
upon his own head; and by justifying 
the righteous, by giving him according to 
his righteousness. 

24 T[ And if thy people Israel be * put to 
the worse before the enemy, because they 
have sinned against thee; and shall return 
and confess thy name, and pray and make 
supplication before thee I'in this house; 

25 Then ''hear thou from the heavens, 
and forgive the sin of thy people Israel, 
and bring them again unto the land 
which thou gavest to them and to their 
fathers. 

26 T[ When the heaven is shut up, and 
there is no *rain, because they have sin- 
ned against thee; yet if they pray toward 
this place, and confess thy name, and 
turn from their sin, when thou dost af- 
flict them ; 

27 Then htur thou from heaven, and 
forgive the sin of thy servants, and of 
thy people Israel, when thou hast taught 
them the good way, wherein they should 
walk; and send ""rain upon Ihy land, 
which thou hast given unto thy people 
for an inheritance. 

28 ^ If there be ^dearth in the land, if 
there be pestilence, if there be blasting 
or mildew, ''locusts or caterpillars; if 
their enemies besiege them in the *citics 
of their land ; whatsoever ' sore, or what- 
soever sickness there be ; 

29 Then what prayer or what supplica- 
tion soever shall be made of any man, or 
of all thy people Israel, when every one 
shall know ' his own sore and his own 



aPsa. 121:4. * Or. in. f Heb pmy. b chap. .TO : '27. J H«b. 
he require an oalh of him. c i Kins». 9 : -'« i Psn. 10: M: Jer. 
2,S: Iti. I7;5I :nO. \i1t,tmillen. \\ Or. tonnird. il P.«n. 10*i:<(M7. 
« 1 Kings, ch. 17, IS; l.s.i. 5:a f Jer. 5:24; Eiek. 34:'2ri; Hosan 
S : -21 . 2.'. I! chap. 20: f<-\X b Joel 1 : 4, 1 1 i 2 : 2.V " Heb. land 
,.f their gate$. 1 chap. 32 : 24 ; Jna. .1 : 13. j P»a. a2:S-6; 142: 1,2. 
^ Or, lincard. kPsa.62:l2. ^ Heh. all the day \chich. ^ Heb. 



grief, and shall spread forth his hands 
in^ this house : 

30 Then hear thou from lieaven thy 
dwelling-place, and forgive, and ''render 
unto every man according unto all his 
ways, whose heart thou knowest; (for 
thou only knowest the hearts of the chil- 
dren of men ;) 

31 That they may fear thee, to walk in 
thy ways, +so long as they live ^in the 
land which thou gavest unto our fathers. 

32 TI Moreover concerning the 'stran- 
ger, which is not of thy people Israel, 
but is come from a far country for thy 
great name's sake, and thy mighty hand, 
and thy stretched-out arm; if they come 
and pray in this house; 

33 Then hear thou from the heavens, 
eveii from thy dwelling-place, and do 
according to all that the stranger callcth 
to thee for; that all '"people of the earth 
may know thy name, and "fear thee, as 
doth thy people Israel, and may know 
that II this house which I have built is 
called by thy name. 

34 If thy people go out to "war against 
their enemies by the way that thou shalt 
send them, ami they pray unto thee tow- 
ard this city which thou hast chosen, and 
the house which I have built for thy name ; 

3.5 Then hear thou from the heavens 
Iheir prayer and their supplication, and 
maintain P their *cause. 

36 If they sin against thee, {iot'^thcrc is 
no man which sinneth not,) and thou be 
angry with them, and deliver them over 
before their enemies) and ^thcy carry them 
away captives unto a land far off or near; 

37 Yet ?/ they + bethink themselves in 
the land whither they are carried captive, 
and turn and pray unto thee in the land 
of their captivity, saying. We have sin- 
ned, we have done amiss, and have dealt 
wickedly ; 

38 If 'they return to thee with all their 
lieart and with all their soul in the land 
of their captivity, whither they have car- 
ried them captives, and pray toward their 
land, which thou gavest unto their fa- 
thers, and toward tJie "city which thou 
hast chosen, and toward the house which 
I have built for thy name : 

39 Then 'hear thou from the heavens. 
even from thy dwelling-place, their pray- 
er and their supplications, and maintain 



upon the /ace of. I l»a. .v;:.1. fi, 7; JohnlO:18: Aria »:27-.1V . 
F.ph. 2:12, l;). ni P!..ilni4tj:l'l. » Jer. 10:7. (| Hcb. «» Miii»f 
u called upon Ihit houte. o rhnp. 1 4 : 1 1 , 1 2 ; 20 : 4. etc. r Pmlm 
9::1.4. " Or. >!>*<. q F.rcl.7;20: J«m^s3:2; lJoiln,l:^ 
t Heb. rAry that take them eaptivet carry them, airaf. f Heb. 
bring back to their heart. r Jer. M: 12-14. • Uanial 6:10. 
t Daniel 9: 16-19. 



20. That thive eyes may be open ; that he 
mi'fht view with favor. i 



23. Justifying; acquitting. His righteous- 
ness; innocence of the charge brought against him. 
547 



Fire from heaven. 



II. CHRONICLES, VII. 



Sacrifices and feasts - 



their *cause, and forgive thy people which 
have sinned again.st thee. 

40 Now, my God, let, I beseech thee, 
thine eyes be open, and let thine ears be 
attent ^unto the prayer that is viade in 
this place. 

41 Now therefore * arise, Lord God, 
into tiiy ''resting-place, thou, and tlie ark 
of thy strength: let thy priests, Lord 
God, be clothed with salvation, and let 
thy saints rejoice in "^goodness. 

42 Lord God, turn not away the face 
of thine anointed: remember the ''mer- 
cies of David thy servant. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1 God having given testimony to Solomon's prayer by 
fire from heaven, and glory in the temple, the people 
worship him. 4 Solomon's solemn sacrifice, b Solo- 
mon having kept the feast of tabernacles, and the 
feast of the dedication of the altar, dismisseth the 
people. 12 God appearing to Solomon giveth him 
promises upon condition. 

"OW = when Solomon had made an end 
praying, the '^fire came down from 
heaven, and consumed the burnt-offering 
and the sacrifices; and the ^glory of the 
Lord filled the house. 

2 And the priests could not enter into 
the house of the Lord, because the glory 
of the Lord had filled the Lord's house. 

3 And when all the children of Israel 
saw how the fire came down, and the 
glory of the Lord upon tlie house, they 
bowed themselves with their faces to the 
ground upon the pavement, and worship- 
ped, ajid praised the Lord, saying, For he 
is good ; for ''his mercy cndureth for ever. 

4 II Then the king and all the people 
offered sacrifices before the Lord. 



1\ of 



* Or, right. ^ Yleh. to the prnyer of thi» place. aPsa. 132:8, 
etc. I) 1 Chron. 28:-2; Isa. G6: 1. c Nell. 9: 2.5; Pea. 65 :4, 1 1 i 
Zecll. 9:17. d Isa. .1.'):3. e 1 Kings. 8 :.M, etc f Ex. 29:43; 
Lev. 9:24; Ju(iges6:21; 1 Kings, 18:38; 1 Cliron. 21:26; Mai. 



41. Thy resting-place ; the temple, where he 
manifested his special presence. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. What God premises in his word, he will in his 
providence and by his Spirit faithfully perform. 

8. Tliosc who wish to do good, may in such wishes 
be accepted of God, when it is not his will that they 
.should accomplish the particular object on which 
their hearts are set. 

12. ^Vhen we have fini.?lied a work, we should in 
earnest believing prayer commend it to the blessingof 
God. without whicli it will not accomplish any good. 

10. The promises of God are often so connected 
with the failhfulnes.s of his people, that their con- 
ditions must be fulfilled, in order to obtain their 
blessings. Chap. 7 : 17-22. 

20. Prayer is a chief means of obtaining that 
forgiveness of sin, without which there can be no 
deliverance from its power. 

24. Sin is the cause of all sorrow; and unless it is 
confessed and forsaken, it will cause sorrow eternal. 

28. Temporal calamities are God's servants ; and 
are sent to remind men of their sins, and lead them 
to repentance, that they may escape everlasting 
punishment. 

518 



rifice of twenty and two thousand oxen, 
and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. 
So the king and all the people dedicated 
the house of God. 

6 And the priests waited on their ofli- 
ces : the 'Levites also with instrumenis 
of mtxsic of the Lord, which David the 
king had made to praise the Lord, be- 
cause his mercy endureth for ever, when 
David praised by their ^ministry ; and the 
priests' sounded trumpets before them, 
and all Israel stood. 

7 Moreover Solomon hallowed the mid- 
dle of the court that ivas before the house 
of the Lord: for there he offered burnt- 
offerings, and the fat of the peace-offer- 
ings, because the brazen altar which Sol- 
omon had made was not able to receive 
the burnt-offerings, and the meat-offer- 
ings, and the fat. 

8 T[Also at the sametime Solomonkeptthe 
feast seven days, and all Israel with him, 
a very great congregation, from the enter- 
ing in of ''Hamath unto the river of Egypt. 

9 And in the eighth day they made a 
solemn^^ assembly : for they kept the ded- 
ication of the altar seven days, and the 
feast seven days. 

10 And on the three and twentieth day 
of the seventh month he sent the people 
away into their tents, glad and merry in 
heart for the goodness that the Lord had 
siiowed unto David, and to Solomon, and 
to Israel his people. 

1 1 Thus ' Solomon finished the house 
of the Lord, and the king's house: and 
all that came into Solomon's heart to 



3:1,2. scliap. .'S:13, 14; Eiek. 10:3, 4. h chap. 20:21 ; 1 Cliron. 
16:41; P.s;i. 103 : 17 ; 136: 1 ; Heb. 7 :24, 2.i. i 1 Cliron. l.i : 16; 
Psa. 87 : 7. t Heb. hand, i cliap. 6:12. k Josli. 13 : 3, 5. % Heb. 
restraint. I 1 Kings, 9 : 1, etc. 

32. God is no respecter of persons ; but the prayer 
of the penitent, of whatever nation, kindred, or tribe, 
offered in fiiitli, lie will hear and answer according 
to the riches of his grace. 

31. The event of wars is in the hands of God : 
when his people rebel against him, he often suffers 
the wicked to prevail against them ; but if they 
become penitent, and turn heartily to him, he vi-ill 
deliver them and grant them his salvation. Chap. 
7 : 14. 

4) . When the ministers of God faithfully proclaim 
his salvation, and show its living power in their ex- 
ample, they may expect that many will embrace it, 
and rejoice in it with exceeding joy. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1. Fire came down from heaven; this w.os 
evidence that Solomon and the people were accepted 
in their offerings. 

5. Dedicated the house of God ; set it apart 
for his worship. 

7. Hallowed; treated as sacred. 

8. The fti.tering in of Hamath nvto the river 
of Egypt ; from the north to the south part of the 
land. 



God appeareih 



II. CHRONICLES, VIII, 



b;"'ioti°' make in the house of the Lord, 
and in his own house, he prosperously 
effected. 

12 Tf And the Lord appeared to Solo- 
mon by night, and said unto him, I have 
heard thy prayer, and *have chosen this 
place to myself for a house of sacrifice. 

13 If ""I shut up heaven that there be 
no rain, or if I command the locusts to 
devour the land, or if I send pestilence 
among my people; 

14 If my people, * which are called by 
my name, shall ''humble themselves, and 
pray,"* and "seek my face, and "^turn from 
their ■wicked ways; then ^will I hear 
from heaven, and will forgive their sin, 
and will heal their land. 

15 Now mine eyes shall be open, and 
mine ears attent tunto the prayer that is 
made in this place. 

16 For now have I chosen and sancti- 
fied this house, that my name may be 
there for ever: and mine eyes and my 
heart shall be there perpetually. 

17 And as for thee, if thou wilt walk 
before me as David thy father walked, 
and do according to all that I have com- 
manded thee, and shalt observe my stat- 
utes and my judgments ; 

18 Then will I stablish the throne of 
thy kingdom, according as I have cove- 
nanted with David thy father, saying. 
There shall not +fail thee a man to be 
ruler in Israel. 

19 But'' if ye turn away, and forsake my 
statutes and my commandments, which 
I have set before you, and shall go and 
serve other gods, and worship them; 

20 Then will I pluck them up by the 
roots out of my land which I have given 
them ; and this house, which I have sanc- 
tified for my name, will I cast out of my 
sight, and will make it to be a proverb 
and a byword among all nations. 

21 And this house, which is liigh, shall 
be an astonishment to every one that 



• Deut 1-2:5. b cliap. 6: Cfi, 28 ; Psa. 107 : .'M. ' Heb. upon 
whom my name it cnllcil. ejas. 4:10. d Acts 9: 11. els.T. 
4.'>:1U; Lam. 3:40, 41. f Isa. 59 : -.'0. 6 ilinp. «:i7. .10. f Hcb. 
to the praytr of this place. X Heb. At cut off to thee. k Lev. 



16. Sanctified this house ; devoted it to a holy 
use. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The manner in which God shows hi.? accept.ince 
of his people is such as to fill them with awe of his 
justice, as well as adoring njratitude for his mercy, 
and b'nd them in willing oEedience to his service. 

6. Praise is the spontaneous e.xpression of truly 
grateful hearts ; and is well-pleasing to God, and 
most useful to men. 

10. True devotion of heart to God, manifested in 
such acts of public religious worship as he has ap- 
pointed, is a source of great joy to his people, and 
prepares them to return to their families and en- 
gage in the duties of life with new cheerfulness 
and success. 



again to Solomoti. 

passeth by it; ho that he shall say, 'Why 
hath tlie Lord done thus unto this land, 
and unto this house'? 

22 And it shall be answered. Because 
they forsook the Lord God of their fa- 
thers, which brought tliem forth out of 
the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other 
gods, and worshipped them, and served 
them: therefore hath he brought all this 
evil upon them. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1 Solomon's buildings. 7 The Gentiles which were 
left Solomon made tributaries; but the Israelites 
rulers. 11 Pharaoh's daughter removeth to her house. 
1"2 Solomon's yearly solemn sacrificp.s. 11 lie ap- 
pointeth the priests and Levites to their places. 17 
The naT)- fetcheth gold from Ophir. 

AND Jit came to pass at the end of 
twenty years, wherein Sohjtnon had 
built the house of the Lord, and his own 
house, 

2 That the cities which Huram had re- 
stored to Solomon, Solomon built them, 
and caused the children of Israel to dwell 
there. 

3 And Solomon went to ^Hamath-zo- 
bah, and prevailed against it. 

4 And he built Tadmor in the wilder- 
ness, and all the store-cities, which he 
built in Ilainath. 

5 Also he built 'Beth-horon the upper, 
and Beth-horon the nether, fenced cities, 
with walls, gates, and bars; 

6 And Baalath, and all tlie store-cities 
that Solomon had, and all the chariot- 
cities, and the cities of the horsemen, 
and all 'that Solomon '"desired to biiiki in 
Jerusalem, and in " Lebanon, and through- 
out all the land of his dominion. 

7 % As for all the people tluit icere left 
of the Hittites, and the Amoritcs, and the 
Perizzites, and the llivitcs, and the Jeb- 
usites, which ircre not of Israel, 

8 But of their children, who were left 
after tliem in the land, whom the ciiil- 
dren of Israel consumed not. them did Sol- 
omon make to pay "tribute until this day. 



•2fi : 1 4, etc. ; Dcut. 2« : 3«. i .IiT. -22 : 8. 'J. JlKin; 


, « : 10, etc. 


k Nuni..'H:«; -2 33111.8:3. 1 .lo»h. 16: 3,5; 1 Cliron. 7 : 


.4. i Hrb. 

» 1 Kings, 


the Jetiie of Solomon which he. m Eccl. 2 : 4, etc. 


7:2; Cant. 4:S. o .losli. 16: 10 ; 17 : 13. 





13, No evil comes upon individuals or nations 
without the permission and control of God ; and he 
is able and ready, when they are duly humbled, to 
remove it and manifest towards them new tokens of 
his favor. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

3. Hamath-zobah; a country north and east of 
Palestine. 

4. Tadmor; a city in the ^reat Syrian desert, 
between Damascus and the Euphrates. It was 
afterwards called Palmyra, and has long been in 
ruins. 

5. Beth-horon the upper. a>id— the nethrr; on 
the border of Ephraim and Benjamin. 

6. Banlath ; a city within the territory of the 
tribe of Dan. 

549 



Solomon's works. 



II. CHRONICLES, IX. 



The qxiccn of Sheba. 



9 But of the children of Israel did Sol- 
omon make no servants for his work ; 
but they were men of war, and chief of 
his captains, and captains of his chariots 
and horsemen. 

10 And these iverc the chief of king Sol- 
omon's officers, even *two hundred and 
fifty, that bare rule over the people. 

11 "[And Solomon brought up the 
daughter'* of Pharaoh out of the city of 
David unto the house that, he had built 
for lier: for he said, My wife shall not 
dwell in the house of David king of Is- 
rael, because the places are *holy, where- 
unto ilic ark of the Lord hath come. 

12 T[ Then Solomon oflercd burnt-ofTcr- 
ings unto the Loud on the altar of the 
Loud, which he had built before the 
porch,'^ 

1 3 Even after a certain rate every '' day, 
offering according to the commandment 
of Moses, on the sabbaths, and on tHe new 
moons, and on the solemn feasts, * three 
times in the year, even in the feast of un- 
leavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, 
and in the feast of tabernacles. 

14 ^ And he appointed, according to the 
order of David his father, the '^courses of 
the priests to their service, and the Le- 
vites to their charges, to praise and min- 
ister before the priests, as the duty of 
every day required: the ^porters also by 
their courses at every gate: for so thad 
David the man of God commanded. 

15 And they departed not from the com- 
mandment of the king unto the priests 
and Levites concerning any matter, or 
concerning the treasures. 

16 Now all the work of Solomon was 
prepared unto the day of the foundation 
of tiie house of the Loud, and until it was 
finished. So the house of the Lokd was 
perfected. 

17 ^ Then ''went Solomon to Ezion-ge- 
ber, and to tElolh, at the seaside in the 
land of Edom. 

18 And ' Huram sent him, by the hands 
of his servants, ships, and servants that 
had knowledge of the sea; and they went 

« 1 Kinj,'s. 9 : iX. h I Kinga, 3 : 1 ; 7 : 8. * Heb. hullntat. c .lohn 
lO:-2:t. <IKx.29:3«. e K«. 23: 14; Dent. Irt : 1«. r 1 Cliron. rli. 
24, W. i; I Clirun. •) : 17 ; 26 •. 1. f Heb. was tht commnnilmcnt i/ 
David the man of G«d. b 1 Kingn. 9 : 2ri, 27. % Elalh, Deut. 



11. The cily of David; Zion, the south part of 
Jerusalem. 

17. Ezio)i-^eber,aiid — Eloth ; on the eastern 
branch of the Red sea. 

IS. Ophir ; a distant place visited by ships from 
the Red sea, but the location of whicii is not known 
with certainty. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. So fading and transitory are all earthly things, 
that the most splendid cities may become a heap of" 
ruins. This slio\ild lead all to seek a city that hatli 
foundations, whose builder and maker is God. 
550 



with the servants of Solomon to ^B^V.^r 
Ophir, and took thence four hundred and 
fifty talents of J gold, and brought Ihcm to 
king Solomon. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 The queen of Sheba admireth the wisdom of Solomon. 
13 Solomon's gold. 15 His targets. 17 The thrnne 
of ivory. 20 His vessels. 'Zi His presents. 25 His 
chariots and horse. 2G His tributes. 29 His reign 
and death. 

AND ■'when the queen of Sheba heard 
of the fame of Solomon, she came to 
prove Solomon with hard questions at 
Jerusalem, with a very great company, 
and camels that bare spices, and gold 
in abundance, and precious stones : and 
when she was come to Solomon, she com- 
muned with him of all that was in her 
heart. 

2 And Solomon told her all 'her ques- 
tions: and there was nothing Jiid from 
Solomon which he told her not. 

3 And when the queen of Sheba had 
seen the wisdom of Solomon, and the 
house that he had built, 

4 And the meat of his table, and the 
sitting of his servants, and the attend- 
ance of his ministers, and their apparel; 
his ^cup-bearers also, and their apparel; 
and his ascent by which he went up into 
the house of the Lord; there was no more 
spirit in her. 

5 And she said to the king. It ivas a 
true II report which I heard in mine own 
latid of thine *aets, and of thy wisdom : 

6 Howbeit I believed not their words, 
until I came, and mine eyes had seen it : 
and behold, the ""one half of the great- 
ness of thy wisdom was not told me : for 
thou exeeedest the fame that I heard. 

7 Happy are thy men, and happy are 
these thy servants, which stand continu- 
ally before thee, and hear thy wisdom. 

8 Blessed "be the Lord thy God, which 
delighted in thee to set thee on his throne, 
to be king for the Lord thy God : because 
thy God loved Israel, to establish tlu'iu 
for ever, therefore made he thee king 
over them, to do "judgment and justice. 

2:8; 2King«, 14:32. i rliap. 9:10, 13. j Eccl. 2:8. k 1 Kings, 
10: 1, etc. ; Mat 1-2 : 42 ; Luke 11 :.ll. 1 Prov. 18 ; 4 ; James 1 : 5. 
A Or, butters. \\ Heb word. • Or, layings. m Psalm 31 : 19. 
Psa. 7.': IS, 19. o IKinss, 3:!R; PrOT. 21:3. 



11. A man's wife has great influence upon liim, 
and through him upon others ; let him be careful 
that this influence do not mislead him into sinful 
practices. 

11. The commands of parents, so far as they 
accord with the commands of God, should be 
remembered and carefully followed by their chil- 
dren. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1. Sheba; supposed to h.ave been a country bor- 
dering on the soutli part of the Red sea. 



Riches and power II. CHRONICLES, X. of king Solomon. 

ic-^fp- 9 And "she gave the king a hull- 1 21 For the king's ships went to Tar- 
dred and twenty talents of gold, and ofishishwilh tlie servants of Huram : every 
spices great abundance, and precious ; three years once came the ships of Tar- 



stones : neither'' was there any such spice 
as the queen of Sheba gave king Solomon. 

10 And the servants also of Huram, and 
(he servants of Solomon, which "^ brought 
gold from Ophir, brought *algum-trees 
and precious stones. 

1 1 And the king made of the algum- 
trees tterraces to the house of the Loud, 



shish bringing gold, and silver, tivory, 
and apes, and peacocks. 

22 And ""king Solomon passed all the 
kings of the earth in riches and wisdom. 

23 If And all the kings of the earth sought 
the presence of Solomon, to hear his wis- 
dom, that God had put in his heart. 

24 And they brought every man his 



and to the king's palace, and ''harps and present, vessels of silver, and ves.sels of 
psalteries for singers : and there were none j gold, and raiment, harness, and spices, 
such seen before in the land of Judah. j horses, and mules, a rate year by year. 

12 And king Solomon gave to the queen of 1 25 ^[And Solomon had four thousand 
Shebaallherdesire,whatsoevershc asked, ' stalls for horses and chariots, and twelve 
besides that which she had brought unto | thousand horsemen ; whom he bestowed 



the king. So she lurncd, and went away 
to her own land, she and her servants. 

13 T[ Now the weight of gold that came 
to Solomon in one year was six hundred 
and threescore and six talents of gold; 

14 Besides that ivhich chapmen and mer- 
chants brought. And all the "kings of 
Arabia and t governors of the country 
brought gold and silver to Solomon. 

15 If And king Solomon made two hun- 
dred "^targets o/ beaten gold : six hundred 
shekels of beaten gold went 1o one target. 

16 And three hundred shields madehe of 
beaten gold : three hundred shekels of gold 
went to one shield. And the king put them 
in the s house of the forest of Lebanon. 

17 Tf Moreover the king mnde a great 
throne of ivory, and overlaid it with pure 
gold. 

18 And there were six steps to the tlirone, 
with a footstool of gold, which were fast- 
ened to the throne, and ^^ stays on each 
side of the sitting-place, and two lions 
standing by the stays : 

1 9 And twelve lions stood there on the one 
side and on the otlier upon the six steps. 
There was not the like made in any kingdom. 

20 ^ And all the drinking A-esseis of 
king Solomon were of gold, and all the 
vessels of the house of the forest of Leb- 
anon were q/" II pure gold: * none v:ere of 
silver; it was not any tiling accounted 
of in the davs of Solomon. 



a Psalm ^^^ : 10, 1.".. h Kcrl. -2 : «. t <hnp, 8 : IR. * AlmUQlirts, 
I Kings, 10:11. \Or,alaht; Hr-I, /i.V//iito»j. i V»n.Vl:\: Upv. 
6:8: 14:-2. e Tsr HS:M. X Or., iirtnint. ( ili:i|. l::>l, 10. 
B 1 Kins". 7:2. J Heb Annrfj. || HpIi. »/iu/ M/.. »■ Or, there wm 
no silver in tliem. t Or, clepliantt' leeth. h 1 Kinsn, 3 : U, !3 j 



14. Chapmen ; sellers, market-men. 

21. Tarshish ; some suppr>se that there was one 
place of this name to flif east and another to the 
west of Jiulea. To visit the one they would sail 
from Ezion-gcber, 2 Chron. 20 : 36 ; and to visit the 
other, from Joppa. Jonah 1 : 3. 

29. Book of Nathati—of Ahijah—of Lido; 
uninspired books of .Jewish history, not now extant. 
IN^JTRUCTION".^. 

1. Those vi'ho know the value of true wisdom will 



in the chariot-cities, and with the king 
at Jerusalem. 

26 If And he 'reigned over all the kings 
from the driver even unto the land of the 
Philistines, and to the border of Egypt. 

27 And J the king hnade silver in Jeru- 
salem as stones, and cedar-trees made he 
as the sycamore-trees that are in the low 
plains in abundance. 

28 And they brought unto Solomon 
horses out of Egypt, and out of all lands. 

29 ^1 Now the '' rest of the acts of Solo- 
mon, first and last, are they not written 
in the il book of Nathan the prophet, and 
in the prophecy of 'Ahijah the Shilon- 
ite, and in the visions of "'Iddo the seer 
against Jeroboam Ihe son of Nebat? 

30 And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem 
over all Israel forty years. 

31 And Solomon slept with his fathers, 
and he was buried in the city of David 
his father: and Rehoboam his son reign- 
ed in his stead. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 The Israelites, assembled at Shechein to crown Reho- 
boam, hy Jeroboam make a suit of relaxation unto 
him. 6 Rehoboam, refusing the old men's counsel, 
by the advice of young men answereth ihein roughly. 
16 Ten tribes revolting kill Hadoram, and make Re- 
hoboam to flee. 

ND "Rehoboam went to "Shechem: 
for to Shechem were all Israel come 
to make him king. 
2 And it came to pass, when ^Jerobo- 

t Tint i». 



A 



4:M,etr, I Gen. 1.1: 18 : 1 Kinis, 4: 
Euvhratet. j rlinp. I : l.'>-17 ; I King: 
k 1 King!", 1 1 : 41-43. || Heli. irnrr/*. 
1-: : l.\ ; 13 :22. n I Kin^s, 15 : I, etc. 
9: I. P I Kings, 11:56,40. 



10:27,^11-. \ He 

I Kins», 11 :2!>. m fhnp. 

o Gen. 37: 12, 13; Jinl-ea 



seek to obtain it ; and one means of this is, familiar 
intercourse -with those who posse.«s it. He that 
walketh with wise men shall be wi.se. 

S. ,\11 true wisdom comes from God. and habit- 
ual communion with him is the best means of ob- 
taining ii. 

12. A truly wise man will delight not only in re- 
ceivins;. but in imparting knowledj,'e : and by doing 
it willbeoome a bencfnctor to those around him. 

20. Silver and gold are a bliissm.:: or a curse ac- 
551 



Ten tribes revolt 



^t 



II. CHRONICLES, XI, 



from Rehoboam. 



am the son of Nehat, who was in Egypt, 
whither he had fled from the presence of 
Solomon the king, heard it, that Jeroboam 
returned out of Egypt. 

3 And they sent and called him. So 
.Jeroboam and all Israel came and spake 
to Rehoboam, saying, 

4 Thy father made our yoke grievous : 
now therefore ease thou somewhat the 
grievous servitude of thy father, and his 
heavy yoke that he put upon us, and we 
will serve thee. 

5 And he said unto them, Come again 
unto me after three days. And the peo- 
ple departed. 

6 ^ And king Rehoboam took * counsel 
with the ""old men that had .stood before 
Solomon his *= father while he yet lived, 
saying. What counsel give ye me to re- 
turn answer to this people"? 

7 And they spake unto him, saying, If 
thou be kind to this people, and please 
them, and '' speak good words to them, 
they will be thy servants for ever. 

8 But he forsook the counsel which the 
old men gave him, and ''took counsel with 
the young men that were brought up with 
him, that stood before him. 

9 And he said unto them. What advice 
give ye that we may return answer to 
this people, which have spoken to me, 
saying, Ease somewhat the yoke that thy 
father did put upon us? 

10 A nd the young men that were brought 
up with him spake unto him, saying. Thus 
shall thou answer the people that spake 
unto thee, saying, Thy father made our 
yoke heavy, but make thou it somewhat 
lighter for us ; thus shalt thou say unto 
them, My little finger shall be tliicker 
than my father's loins. 

1 1 For whereas my father *put a heavy 
yoke upon you, I will put more to your 
yoke : my fatherchastised you with whips, 
but I irill chastise you with scorpions. 

12 So Jeroboam and all the people came 
to Rehoboam on the third day, as the king 
bade, saying. Come again to iric on the 
third day. 



■ Prov. 12: 15; 19:20. b .loli li : 12, 13. f I'rov. 27 : 10. d Prov. 
16:1. elmi.:M1:l. * Hell. («</«/. fprov. 10:27. e Isn.SO: 12, 13. 
h Deul 2:"0; 1 SnR).2:2.'>; Isn. IS: 14. > I Kings, II :;)!. j2.'Siim. 



cording to the use that i.s made of them. A wise 
man, therefore, will not be so anxious to obtain more, 
as he will be to use what he has to the glory of 
the Giver. 

CHAPTER X. 
1-5. Bif thehaiidof; by means, or by the mouth 
of. 1 Kings. 11:29-3-3. 

17. Rfliohoam rfiigved ov'T them; and also 
over the tribe of Benjamin, which was joined to 
that of Judah. 

TX.«TRi:CTTOX8. 
4. When rulers engaj^e in expensive undertakings 
it necessarily brings heavy burdens on the people, 
052 



13 And the king answered them *b c.*9?5: 
roughly ; and king ■'Rehoboam forsook the 
counsel of the old men, 

14 And answered them after the advice 
of the young men, saying, j\Iy father 
made your yoke heavy, but I will add 
thereto: my father chastised you with 
whips, but I u-ill chastise you with scor- 
pions. 

15 So ethe king hearkened not unto the 
people: ""for the cause was of God, that 
the Lord might perform his word, which 
he 'spake by the hand of Ahijah the Shi- 
lonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat. 

16 ^[And when all Israel smc that the 
king would not hearken unto them, the 
people answered the king, saying, 'What 
portion have we in David? and ive have 
none inheritance in the son of Jesse: 
every man to your tents, fcrael : 071(1 
now, David, see to thine own house. So 
all Israel went to their tents. 

17 But as for the children of Israel that 
dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam 
reigned over them. 

18 Then king Rehoboam sent tHadoram 
that u'as over the tribute ; and the chil- 
dren of Israel stoned him with stones, 
that he died. But king Rehoboam '^made 
speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee 
to Jerusalem. 

1 9 And ''Israel rebelled against the house 
of David unto this day. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 Rehoboam raising an army to subdue Israel, is for- 
bidden by Shemaiah. 5 He strengtheneth his king- 
dom with forts and provision. 13 The priests and 
Levites, and such as feared God, forsaken by Jerobo- 
am, strengthen the kingdom of Judah. 18 The wives 
and children of Rehoboam. 

AND 'when Rehoboam was come to 
Jerusalem, he gathered of the house 
of Judah and Benjamin a hundred and 
fourscore thousand chosen men, which 
were warriors, to fight against Israel, that 
he might bring the kingdom again to Re- 
hoboam. 

2 But '"the word of the Lord came to 
Shemaiah" the man of God. saving. 



;n:l. f .^rf.miiom. 1 Kings, 4:fi; 6: M. t Heb. tirtngthencd 
himtelf. k Psa. 89: :!0, etc. 1 1 Kings, 12:21, etc. ro Prov. 21 : 3a 

n clmp. 12:6. 



under which they become uneasy, and from whicli 
they wish to be delivered. 

7. Kindness in rulers often docs more to secure obe- 
dience from the people, than force ; and the longer 
men live, and the more they see of their fellow-men, 
the deeper is their conviction of this truth. 

10. louth are reckless, and often plunge into 
courses which bring distress and ruin upon them- 
selves and others. 

I.'). The hand of God is never to be overlooked 
in the events of his providence, but is to be acknow- 
ledged even in those calamities which the folly and 
wickedness of men bring upon themselves. 



Works of Rehoboain. 



II. CHRONICLES, XII, 



Invasion by Shishak. 



K.c'^' 3 Speak unto Ptehoboam the sou 
of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all Is- 
rael in Judah and Benjamin, saying, 

4 Thus saith the Lord, Ye shall not go 
up, nor fight against "your brethren : re- 
turn every man to his house; ""for this 
thing is done of me. And they obeyed 
the words of the Lord, and returned from 
going against Jeroboam. 

5 II And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, 
and built cities for defence in Judah. 

6 He built even Beth-lehem, and Etam, 
and Tekoa, 

7 And Beth-zur, and Soco, and Adullam. 

8 And Gath, and Mareshah, and Ziph, 

9 AndAdoraim.andLachish, andAzekah, 

1 And Zorah, and Aijalon, and Hebron, 
which are in Judah and in Benjamiii, 
fenced cities. 

11 And he "^fortified the strong-holds, 
and put "'captains in them, and store of 
victuals, and of oil and wine. 

12 And in every several city he put 
shields and spears, and made them ex- 
ceeding strong, having Judah and Benja- 
min on his side. 

13 T[ And the priests and the Levites 
that u'ere in all Israel *resorted to him 
out of all their coasts. 

14 For the Levites left their ''suburbs 
and their possession, and came to Judah 
and Jerusalem : for Jeroboam and his 
sons had cast them "^ofi' from executing 
the priest's office unto the Lord : 

15 And she ordained him priests for 
the high places, and for the ''devils, and 
for the 'calves which he had made. 

IG And after them, out of Jail the tribes 
of Israel, such as set their hearts to seek 
the Lord God of Israel came to Jerusa- 
lem, to sacrifice unto the Lord God of 
their fathers. 

17 So they ''Strengthened the kingdom 
of Judah, and made Rehoboam the son of 
Solomon strong, three years: for three 
years they walked in the way of David 
and Solomon. 

18 ^ And Rehoboam took him Mahalath 
the daughter of Jerimoth the son of David 
to wife, and Abihail the daughter of Eliab 
the son of Jesse ; 



a Gen. 13:8. b cliap. 10: 15 ; Psa. 33 : 11. c Isn. CJ: 10, 1 1. d fliap. 
17:19. " Heh. preicnted tlumselvei. e Num. 35: -2, etc. f cliap. 
13:9. B IKins9,12::!l; 13:33. h Lev. 17 : 7 ; I)eiiU3-2 : 17 ; I Cor. 
10 : 20. i 1 Kings, 12 : 28 ; 14:9; Hosca 13 : 2. j cli.ip l.i : 9 ; 30 : 1 1, 



CHAPTER XI. 

1-5. Devils ; idols. 

23. He dealt wisely ; in placing his children in 
different parts of the country, so that they should 
not unite against Abijah, whom he appointed as 
ruler over them. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. Things which take place under the directing 
and controlling providence of God, are spoken of in 
the Bible as done by him. 



19 Which bare him children; Jeush, 
and Shamariah, and Zaharn. 

20 And after her he took 'Maachah the 
daughter of Absalom; which bare him 
Abijah, and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelo- 
mith. 

21 And Rehoboam loved Maachah the 
daughter of Absalom above all his wives 
and his concubines : for he took eighteen 
wives, and threescore concubines; and 
begat twenty and eight sons, and three- 
score daughters. 

22 And Rehoboam "'made Abijah the son 
of IVlaachah the chief, to be ruler among 
his brethren: for he thought to make him 
king. 

2.3 And he dealt wisely, and dispersed 
of all his children throughout all the coun- 
tries of Judah and Benjamin, unto every 
fenced city : and he gave them victuals in 
abundance. And he desired tmany wives. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1 Rehoboam. forsaking the hord, is punished by Shi- 
shak. 5 lie and the princes, repentin" at the preach- 
ing of Shcmaiah, are delivered from destruction, but 
not frona spoil. 13 The reign and death of Reho- 
boam . 

AND it came to pass, when Rehoboam 
had "established the kingdom, and 
had strengthened himself, " he p forsook the 
law of the Lord, and all Israel with him. 

2 And it came to pass that, in the fiftli 
year of king Rehoboam, Shishak king of 
Egypt eame up against Jerusalem, be- 
cause they had transgressed against the 
Lord, 

3 With twelve hundred chariots, and 
threescore thousand horsemen : and the 
people were without number that came 
with him out of Esypt; the iLubim, the 
Sukkiim, and the Ethiopians. 

4 And he took the fenced cities which 
pertained to Judah, and came to Jerusalem. 

5 ^Thcn came "'Shemaiah the prophet 
to Rehoboam, and to the princes of Judah, 
that were gathered together to Jerusalem 
because of Shishak, and said unto them, 
Thus saith the Lord, 'Ye have forsaken 
me, and therefore have I also left you in 
the liand of Shishak. 

6 Whereupon the princes of Israel and 



It) 


P 


a. m : 5-7. 


k chap. 12 


:1. 1 


1 K 


ing« 


1.1:2. 


.She 


is called 


Micl.a 


all the dau 


ghter i.r Urie 


, chap 


13 


2. r 


It chap 


12:1 


r> ; Dent 


21 


Ifi- 


17. tHel> 


a muttitutU 


of wives. 


nrh 


\p. II: 


17. 


1 Kill;:*, 


14 


22 


P Deut. 3 


1 : LI, 18. q <1 


ap. 16 


8. 


rcha 


Ml:-. 


. .cl 


:ip.l5:2. 



15. The worship of images is treated in the Bible 
as worship offered to devils. 1 Cor. 10 : 20. 

17. As long as nations walk in the way of the 
Lord, they may e.xpect that he will give ihem 
prosperity ; but when they forsake liiiii, they take 
a course adapted to bring ruin on themselves. 

CHAPTER XII. 

3. Liibini — Siiiiiim — IZthiojiians; people liv- 
ing in countries bordering upon Eg)-pt. 



Abijah rcigncth, and 



11. CHRONICLES, XIII, 



warrelh with Jeroboam. 



the king "humbled themselves; and they 
said, ""The Loud is righteous. 
•'' 7 And "=wheu the Lord saw that they 
humbled themselves, the -word of the Lord 
came to Shemaiah, saying, They have 
humbled themselves ; ^therefore I will not 
destroy them, but I will grant them *some 
deliverance; and my wrath shall not be 
poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand 
of Shisliak. 

8 Nevertheless they shall be ^his ser- 
vants ; that they may know my service, and 
the serviceof the'^kingdoinsofthe countries. 

9 So Shishak king of Egypt came up 
against Jerusalem, and took away the 
treasures of the house of the Lord, and 
the treasures of the king's house; he took 
all : he carried away also the shields of 
gold e which Solomon had made. 

10 Instead of which king Rehoboam 
made shields of brass, and committed them 
to the hands of the ''chief of the guard, 
that kept the entrance of the king's house. 

11 And when the king entered into the 
house of the Lord, the guard came and 
fetched them, and brought them again 
into the guard-chamber. 

12 And 'when he humbled himself, the 
wrath of the Lord turned from him, that 
he would not destroy him altogether ; tand 
also in Judah things went well. 

13 Tl So king Rehoboam strengthened hi m- 
.self in Jerusalem, and reigned : for Reho- 

, boam iras one and forty years old when he 
began to reign, and he reigned seventeen 
years in Jerusalem, the city which the 
Lord had chosen out of all the tribes of Is- 
rael, to put his name there. And his moth- 
er's name vns Naamah an Ammonitess. 

14 And he did evil, because he t pre- 
pared not his J heart to seek the Lord. 

15 Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and 
last, arc they not written in the ^ book of 
Shemaiah'' the prophet, and of 'Iddo the 
seer concerning genealogies? And there 



• Jer. 13:1S, 18; Jaa. 4:6, 10. bEx.9:37. c i Kings, -21 : 58, 
29. J Lev. 2R: 4 1, 42. * Or, a little while, e Neli. 9: 36, 37 ; Is.t. 
26:13. r Dent. 28 : 47, 48. g clinp. 9: 15, 16. h 2 Sam. 8: 18. 
i chap. 33:12, 13; I«a.57:15: 1 Peter, .5 : B. f Or. and yet in 
Judah there were pood Ihingt, Gen 18:24; 1 Kings, 14:13; cliap. 

12. Things u<P7it well; there were yet some 
good men, ami tilings went well compared with 
what they had done. 

14. lie prepared not his heart ; hi.s reformation 
was merely external. 

INSTRUCTTOXS. 

1. Great prosperity is dangerous ; when it is 
{Trantcd. men are increasingl)' prone to rebel against 
God, and thus to bring ruin upon themselves and 
those who join with them. 

fi. When men become sensible of their sins, as- 
cribe righteousness unto God, and humble them- 
selves before him, he is ready to forgive and save 
lliem from that destruction which their .sins deserve. 

14. Reformations which are merely external and 
in which the heart is not engaged, will not avail 
to the permanent removal of calamities in this 
554 



were wars between Rehoboam and *b!*c.T°: 
Jeroboam continually. 

16 And Rehoboam slept with his fa- 
thers, and was buried in the city of Da- 
vid : and II Abijah his son reigned in his 
stead. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1 Abijah succeeding maketh war against Jeroboam. 4 
He declareth the right of his cau.se. 13 Trusting in 
God, he overcoraeth Jeroboam. 21 The wives and 
children of Abijah. 

IVTOW "'in the eighteenth year of king 
J_N Jeroboam began Abijah to reign over 
Judah. 

2 He reigned three years in Jerusalem. 
His mother's name also ivas "Michaiah the 
daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there 
was war between Abijah and Jeroboam. 

3 And Abijah *set the battle in array 
with an army of valiant men of war, even 
four hundred thousand chosen men : Jer- 
oboam also set the battle in array against 
him with eight hundred thousand chosen 
men, being mighty men of valor. 

4 ^ And Abijah stood up upon mount 
Zemaraim," which i.s in mount Ephraim, 
and said. Hear me, thou Jeroboam, and 
all Israel ; 

5 Ought ye not to know that the Lord 
God of Israel gave the kingdom over Is- 
rael to David for ever, ei^eii to him and to 
his Psons by a ''covenant of salt? 

6 Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the 
servant of Solomon the son of David, is 
risen up, and hath ''rebelled against his 
lord. 

7 And there are gathered unto him "vain 
men, the children of Belial, and have 
strengthened themselves against Rehobo- 
am the son of Solomon, when Rehoboam 
was 'young and tender-hearted, and could 
not withstand them. 

8 And now ye think to withstand the 
kingdom of the Lord in the hand of the 
sons of David; and ye be a great multi- 



19:3. t ^''-J'^"'- J Dent.5:29; Kzek. 33:31. ^ Heh. wnrdt. 
k verse ."i. I cliap. 9:29. || Miiam. 1 Kinp-'i, 14:31. m 1 Kings, 
I.T:l,etc. n chap. 1 1 : 20. " Heb. buuiid together. o .losh. 
18:22. p 2 Sam. 7: 12-16. q Num. 18:19. r 1 Kings, 11 : 26; 
12 : 20. • Juilges 9:4. t chap. ID: 16. 

world, or save the soul from destruction in the 
world t/O come. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

5. A covenant of salt ; a perpetual covenant. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The frequency, prevalence, and devastation of 
war, show the wickedness of the human heart and 
the power of the great adversary in leading men in 
sucli vast numbers to murder one another. 

0. When men cast off the true ministers of relig- 
ion, and choose those who connive at and encour- 
age them in their sins, they are ripening for ruin. 

13. None can contend against Crod and prosper. 
However numerous or thoroughly disciplined their 
armies, and however skilfully devised their plans, 
they will be broken in pieces and flee before those 



God helpcth Judah. 



II. CHRONICLES, XIV. 



Reign of Jsa. 



calves, wiiicli" Jeroboam made you for <;0(ls 

9 Have ye not ''cast out the priests of the 
Lord, the sons of Aaron, and tlie Levitcs, 
and have made you priests after the man- 
ner of the nations of other lands? so that 
whosoever conieth to *consecratc himself 
with a young bullock and seven rams, the 
same may be a priest of them that arc no gods. 

10 But as for us, the Lord is our God, 
and we have not forsaken him ; and the 
priests, which minister unto the Lord, 
are the sons of Aaron, and the Levitcs 
wait upon their business : 

1 1 And ''they burn unto the Lord every 
morning and every evening burnt-sacri- 
tices and sweet incense : the ''show-bread 
also set they in order upon the pure table ; 
and the candlestick of gold with the lamps 
thereof, to '"burn every evening: for we 
keep the charge of the Lord our God ; but | 
ye have forsaken him. 

12 And behold, ''God himself is with 
us for our s captain, and his priests with 
sounding ""trumpets to cry alarm against 
you. children of 'Israel, fight ye not 
against the Lord God of your fathers; 
for ye shall not prosper. 

13 TyBut Jeroboam cau-^^ed an ambush- 
ment to come about behind them : so they 
were before Judah, and the ambushment 
was behind them. 

14 And when Judah looked back, be- 
hold, the battle v;as before and behind: 
and they cried unto the Lord, and the 
priests sounded with the trumpets. 

15 Then the men of Judah gave ashout : 
and as the men of Judah shouted, it came 
to pass, that God J smote Jeroboam and all 
Israel before Abijah and Judah. 

1 6 And the children of Israel fled before 
Judah : and God delivered them into their 
hand. 

17 And Abijah and his people slew them 
with a great slaughter : so there fell down 
slain of Israel five hundred thousand cho- 
sen men. 

18 Thus the children of Israel were 
brought under at that time, and the chil- 
dren of Judah prevailed, ''because they 
relied upon the Lord (iod of their fathers. 

19 And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, 
and took cities from him, Beth-el with the 



towns thereof, and Jeshanah with tlie towns 
thcreof.andKphraim wit lithe towns thereof. 

20 Neither did 'Jeroboam recover 
strength again in the days of Abijah: 
and the Loud ""struck him, and he died. 

21 ^[But Abijah waxed mighty, and 
married fourteen wives, and begat twen- 
ty and two sons, and si.xteen daughters. 

22 And the rest of the acts of Abijah, 
and his ways, and his sayings, are writ- 
ten in the tstory of the prophet °Iddo. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

1 Asa succeeding (lestroyeth idolatry. 6 Having peace, 
he strenglheneth his kingdom with forts and armies. 
9 Calling on God. he overthroweth Zerah, and spoil- 

eth the Etliiopians. 

go "Abijah slept with his fathers, and 
they buried him in the city of David : 
and Asa his sou reigned in his stead. In 
his days the land was quiet ten years. 

2 And Asa did that which u-as good and 
right in the eyes of the Lord his God : 

3 For he took away the altars of the 
strange gods, and tlie Phigh places, and 
brake down the ^images, and icut down 
the groves : 

4 And commanded Judah to seek the 
Lord God of their fathers, and to do the 
law and the commandment. 

5 Also he took away out of all the cities 
of Judah the high places and the images: 
and the kingdom was quiet before him. 

6 1[ And he built fenced cities in Judah : 
for the land had rest, and he had no war 
in those years; ■'because the Lord had 
given him rest. 

7 Therefore he said unto Judah, Let us 
build these cities, and make about thc7n 
walls and towers, gates and bars, vhilc 
the land is yet before us ; because we 
have ^sought the Lord our God, we have 
sought him, and he hath given us rest on 
every side. So they built and prospered. 

8 And Asa had an army of men that 
bare targets and spears, out of Judah three 
hundred thousand: and out of Benjamin, 
tliat bare shields and drew bows, two hun- 
dred and fourscore thousand : all these 
were mighty men of valor. 

9 T[And 'there came out against them 
Zerah the Ethiopian with a host of a thou- 
sand thousand, and three hundred chari- 
ots; and came unto "Mareshah. 



a lKings,I2:28; Hojea8:5, 6. b cti»p. 11 :14, I.i. *Hebj£///iij 
hand. Kx. 29 : 1 ; Lev. 8:2. c cliap. 2:4. d Lev. 24 : S-;i. <: E j. 
C? : », 21 : Lev. 24 : 2, .•). fIsa.8:IO. t Josh. .■>: 14, IS. h Num. 
10:8; Josh, fi: 13-20. i Job 9 : 4 ; Jer. iW : 24 ; Acts S : 3<>. i clmp. 
14:12. k. 1 Chron.5:20; Ps,i.22:.';; Daii.3:28; Nah. 1:7. I Psa. 



who have the Lord for their helper and trust in 
him for defence. 

20. Life and death are in the hand of the Lord ; 
and when he smites, the most mighty fall before 
liiiTi, However mtmerous their attendants, they can 
give them no respite and afford them no relief. 



18:37,38 m 1 Sam. 25 : 38. j Or, commenlory. » rhap. 15: 1.S. 
o 1 Kings, 15:8, etc. p chap. 15:17; lKinSi,ll:7. | Heb. 
ttatutl. q Ex. 31 : 13. J Meh sun imagrt. r Joshua tl : I. 
• Ps-alm 105:3,4; Jeremiali 39 : 13. t chap. Ifi:! ti JoshlU 
15:44. 



CHAPTER XrV. 
3. The groves; where they had -srorshipped 
idols. 

6. Fenced cities; cities that he fortified. 
9. Mnreshah; in the western part of Judah near 
the Philistines. 

555 



Ethiopians defeated. 



II. CHRONICLES, XV. 



jlsa's solemn covenant. 



10 Then Asa went out against him, and I 
they set the battle in array in the valley 
of Zcphathah at Mareshah. 

11 And Asa "cried unto the Lord his 
God, and said. Lord, it is nothing Avith 
thee to help, ''whether with many, or 
with them that have no power: help us, 

Lord our God; for we rest on thee, 
and in thy " name we go against this mul- 
titude. Lord, thou art our God; let 
not *man prevail against thee. 

12 So the Lord "'smote the Ethiopians 
before Asa, and before Judah; and the 
Ethiopians fled. 

13 And Asa and the people that icere 
with him pursued them unto "= Gerar : and 
the Ethiopians were overthrown, that 
they could not recover themselves ; for 
they were tdestroyed before the Lord, and 
before his host ; and they carried away 
very much spoil. 

14 And they smote all the cities round 
about Gerar: for the "^fear of the Lord came 
upon them : and they spoiled all the cities ; 
for there was exceeding much spoil in them. 

15 They smote also the tents of cattle, 
and carried away sheep and camels in 
abundance, and rctui-ncd to Jerusalem. 

CHAPTER XV. 

1 Asa with Judah and many of Israel, moved by the 
prophecy of Azariah the son of OdeJ, make a solemn 
covenant with God. IG He pntteth down Maachah 
his mother for her idolatry. 18 He bringeth dedicate 
things into the house of God, and enjoyeth a long 
peace. 

AND the e Spirit of God came upon 
Azariah the son of Oded: 

2 And he went out tto meet Asa, and 
said unto him. Hear ye mc, Asa, and all 
Judah and Benjamin : ''The Lord is with 
you, while ye be with him; and 'if ye 
seek him, he will be found of you ; but 
if ye J forsake him, he will forsake you. 

3 Now ''for a long season Israel hath 
been wilhout the true God, and without 
a 'teaching priest, and without law. 

4 But '"when they in their trouble did 
turn unto the Lord God of Israel, and 
sought him, he was found of them. 

5 And in those "times ilurc teas no peace 
to him that went out, nor to him that 



• l.h!»p. 13: H; Kx H: 10; Ph.i. 18:H; i;0:l. blSam. H:6. 
c 1 Snin. 17 Mi) : Tniv. 18:10. " Or, murttil mnn. i Hi.ip. l;i: ]f: 
• Gen.M:l. j HKb. bioktn. r iliap. 17 : 10: Gen ;(B:5; .losli. 
S:il, M; Ih.i. 3I:H. I! rlinp. W:14; •24:»; Num. Jl:-:; .Iildscs 
3:)0. j: Heb. ftf/uj-f. I. .I,i».4:H. i ver. 4, 1.5: cliap..-):! : 1-2. 13; 
1 Cliron. JK : !l ; .ler. 2<1: 12, 1:1 ; M:it7:7.S. > cliap. '24: -.'O: Heh. 
10 : 3«. k Ho»ea 3:4. I I.cv. 1(1 : 1 1 ; Mnl. 2:7. m Dent. 4 : -29 ; 



13. Clerar: then a city of the Philistines near 
the southern border of Palestine. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Pious rulers are a great blessing to a nation ; 
and by their efforts to reform the people and lead 
tbcin to obey God, they prepare the vav for him to 
bless them with all needed earthly good. 

9. Allliou^h it is our duty in times of trouble to 
use all suital)le means to help ourselves, yet our 
556 



B. C. »41. 

upon all the inhabitants of the countries. 

6 And nation was ^destroyed of "nation, 
and city of city : for God Pdid vex them 
with all adversity. 

7 Be ye i strong therefore, and let not 
your hands be weak: for your work shall 
be rewarded. 

. 8 And when Asa heard these words, and 
the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he took 
courage, and put away the ''abominable 
idols out of all the land of Judah and 
Benjamin, and out of the cities which he 
had ''taken from mount Ephraim, and 
renewed the altar of the Lord, that icas 
before the porch of the Lord. 

9 And he gathered all Judah and Ben- 
jamin, and the ^strangers with them out 
of Ephraim and INIanasseh, and out of 
Simeon : for they fell to him out of Israel 
in abundance, Avhen they saw that the 
Lord his God icas with him. 

10 So they gathered themselves together 
at Jerusalem in the third month, in the 
fifteenth year of the reign of Asa. 

1 1 And they offered unto the Lord *the 
same time, of the 'spoil which they had 
brought, seven hundred oxen and seven 
thousand sheep. 

12 And they entered into a "covenant 
to seek the Lord God of ''their fathers with 
all their heart and with all their soul; 

13 That "whosoever won Id not seek the 
Lord God of Israel should be put to death, 
whether small or great, whether man or 
woman. 

14 And they sware unto the Lord with 
a loud voice, and with shouting, and with 
trumpets, and with cornets. 

15 And all Judah rejoiced at the oath: 
for they had sworn with all their heart, 
and sought him with their whole "desire ; 
and he was found of them : and the Lord 
gave them rest round about. 

1 6 T[ And y also concerning Maachah the 
mother t of iVsa the king, he removed her 
from being queen, because she had made 
an tidol in a grove: and Asa cut down 
her idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at 
the brook Kidron. 



r».i. 10ii:44. n .Iuil{:us.'j:B; ISam. 13:fi. ^ Hub. heuttn in pirrrt. 
"Mai. -24:7. I> Amos 3:6. 1 Josli. 1:7,9; 1 Cliron. iRrM. 
U HKb. alMtninaliont. r diap. 13 : I!). • chap. II : IB. * Hel). 
Inlhatdav. I chap. 14: 13, 15. u chap. :t4 :31 : 2 King.i, 23 : 3; 
Neh:10:2<j. TAct!<S4:14. w Ex. S-2 :20; Deut. 13 :.'i-16: 17 :2-6 
n verse 1-2. y I Kings, IS: 13, etc. f That is, 7rnnrfmi</Ao- 
I Kings, lft:2, 10. t Heb. Awror. 



dependence for deliverance should be upon God. 
He can save by few or by many, and is ready to 
help all who truly trust in him. 

CHAPTER XV. 

9. Fell; came. 

Ifi. Kidron; a small stream between Jerusalem 
and the mount of Olives, which ran through the 
valley of Jehoshaphat into the Dead sea. 



.^sa's unbelief. 



II. CHRONICLES, XVI. 



Hanani reproves him. 



5; "-su''- 17 But the Miigh places were not 
taken away out of Israel : nevertheless the 
heart of Asa was perfect all his days. 

18 HAnd he brought into the house of 
God the things that his father had dedi- 
cated, and that he himself had dedicated, 
silver, and gold, and vessels. 

19 And there was no more war unto the 
five and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

1 Asa. by the aid of the Syrians, diverteth Baasha from 
building of Ramah. 7 Bping reproved thereof by 
Hanani, he putteth him in prison. 11 Among his 
oilier acts in his disease he seeketh not to God, but to 
the physicians. 13 His death and burial. 

TN ""the six and thirtieth year of the 
reign of Asa, Baasha king of Israel 
came up against Judah, and built Ramah, 
to the "^intent that he might let none go 
out or come in to Asa king of Judah. 

2 Then Asa brought out silver and gold 
out of the treasures of the house of the 
Loud and of the king's house, and sent 
to Ben-hadad king of Syria, that dwelt 
at *Damascus, saying, 

3 There is a league between me and 
thee, as there was between my father and 
thy father: behold, I have sent thee sil- 
ver and gold ; go, break thy league with 
Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart 
from me. 

4 And Ben-hadad hearkened unto king 
Asa, and sent the captains of this armies 
against the cities of Israel; and they smote 
Ijon, and Dan, and Abel-maim, and all the 
store-cities of Naphtali. 

.5 And it came to pass, when Baasha 
lieard it, that he left off building of Ra- 
mah, and let his work cease. 

() Then Asa the king took all Judah ; 
and they carried away the stones of Ra- 
mah, and the timber thereof, wherewith 



a <lia|.. 14:3, 5. !■ 1 Kin^s., IB: 17, etc. e. clmp. ISr.n. " Hfb. 
Dnrmrsck. \ Heb. «»■»(»« which Vfere his. A rlinp. 19:2; 
lKings,l6:l. e I'sa. UB:3, fi ; Isa. 31 : 1 i .7er. 17 : 6. f chap. 
] J : 3 i 14 : 9. X Heb. in uhundunce. e Job 34 : 21 ; Prov. 5 : 21 ; 



17. Perfect; See 1 Chron. 28 : 9. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The Lord encourages tlibse who seek him, with 
sperial manifestations of his presence and favor ; 
while he warns those who forsake him. that he will 
forsake them, and leave them to that ruin which 
thev deserve. 

7. The certainty that if men engage and perse- 
vere in well-doino^ they shall be graciously and 
.abundantly rewarded, should make them steadfast, 
immovable, always abounding in the work f>i the 
Lord. 

9. Evidence of the presence and favor of God 
will draw together multitudes, of all classes who 
love him, to acknowledge his goodness and render 
united thanks to hi.s holy name. 

1(). No natural affection, or regard to relatives 
and friends, should lead us to connive at their sins, 
or prevent us from taking decided measures to resist 
their evil influence. 

36 



Baasha was building; and he built there- 
with Gcba and Mizpah. 

7 ^ And at that lime ''Hanani tlic seer 
came to Asa king of Judah, and said un- 
to him, *■ Because thou hast relied on the 
king of Syria, and not relied on tlie Loud 
thy God, therefore is the host of the king 
of Syria escaped out of thy hand. 

8 Were not the ''Ethiopians and the Lu- 
bim + a huge host, with very many char- 
iots and hoftiemen? yet, because thou 
didst rely on the Lord, he delivered them 
into thy hand. 

9 For the scyes of tlie Lord run to and 
fro throughout the whole earth. Ho show 
himself strong in thebehalf of //joh whose 
heart is perfect toward him. Herein thou 
hast done foolislily : therefore from hence- 
forth thou shall have ""wars. 

10 Then Asa was wrotii with the seer, 
and put him in a 'prison-house ; for he 
iras in a rage with him because of this 
thing. And Asa II oppressed so7)ie of the 
people the same time. 

11 H And behold, the acts of Asa, first 
and last, lo, they are written in the book 
of the kings of Judah and Israel. 

12 And Asa in the thirty and ninth year 
of his reign was diseased in his feet, until 
his disease iras exceeding great: yet in 
his disease he sought not to the Lord, 
but to the physicians. 

13 If And Asa slept with his fathers, 
and died in the one and fortieth year of 
his reign. 

14 And they buried him in his own sep- 
ulchres, which he had *made for himself 
in the city of David, and laid him in the 
bed which was filled with sweet odors 
and divers kinds of .-tpices prepared by 
the apothecaries' art: and they made a 
very great burning for him! 



1.5 : 3 ; Jer. Ifi : 17 ; 3: : 19 ; /.ecli. 4:10. J Or, itronghj lo hnid 
with them, h 1 Kings, 15 : 3i. i cUap. 18 : 26 ; Jer. 20 : 2. || Hfli. 
a'ushcti. * Heb. diyged. 



CHAPTER XVL 

1. Ramah; north of Jerusalem, and near the 
border between Judah and Israel. 

4. Ijon, a till Dan, and Abel-maim ; cities in 
the north part of Palestine. 

6. Gcba and Mizpah ; in the tribe of Benja- 
min. 

7. Seer; prophet. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. When men in trouble rely upon tlieir own ef- 
forts merely, or look for help to their fellow-men 
instead of trusting in the Lord, they disiionor hin^ 
and may expect that he will visit them witli tokeni 
of his displeasure. 

10. Men, wlien reminded of their sins, instead of 
forsaking them, are sometimes angry with him who 
reminds them, and persecute him for his fidelity. 
But this increases their guilt, and ripens them fo, 
the just judgments of Goa. 

557 



The good reign 



IT. CHRONICLES, XVIII. 



of Jehoshaphat- 



CHAPTER XVII. 

1 Jehoshaphat, succeeding Asa, reigneth well, and pros- 
pereth. 7 lie sendeth Levites with the princes to 
teach Judah. 10 His enemies being terrified by God, 
some of them bring him presents and tribute. 12 His 
greatness, captains, and armies. 

A NT) * Jehoshaphat his .sou reigned in 
J\. his stead, and strengthened himself 
against Israel. 

2 And he placed forces in all the fenced 
cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the 
land of Judah, and in the citfcs of Ephra- 
im, which ''Asa his father had taken. 

3 And the Loud was with Jehoshaphat, 
because he walked in the first ways *of his 
father David, and sought not unto Baalim ; 

4 But sought to the LORD God of his 
father, and walked in his commandments, 
and not after the "^doings of Israel. 

5 Therefore the Lord stablished t he king- 
dom in his hand ; and all Judah ^brought 
to Jehoshaphat presents ; and he had rich- 
es and honor in abundance. 

6 And his heart iwas lifted up in the 
ways'' of the Lord: moreover'" he took 
away the high places and groves out of 
Judah. 

7 *^ Also in the third year of his reign 
he sent to his princes, even to Ben-hail, 
and to Obadiah, and to Zeehariah, and to 
Nethaneel, and to Michaiah, to "^tcach in 
the cities of Judah. 

8 And with them he sent s Levites, even 
Sliemaiah, and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, 
and Asahel, and Sliemiramotji, and Jchon- 
athan, and Adonijah, and Tobijah, and 
'I'ob-adoiiijah, Levites; and with them 
]'"lishama and Jehoram, ''priests. 

9 And they taught in Judah, and had 
the book of the law of the Lord with 
tlicm, and went about throughout all the 
cities of Judah, and taught the people. 

10 ^And the 'fear of the Lord ? fell 
upon all the kingdoms of the lands that 
were round about Judah, so that J they 
made no war against Jehoshaphat. 

1 1 Also .some of the Philistines brought 
Jehoshaphat ''presents, and tribute silver ; 
and the Arabians brought him flocks, sev- 



"1 1 Kings. 1S:24. b rlinp. ir.:8. 


* Or. o/hit/ot/itr and of 


ntivitl. c 1 Kinja, 12:30. f Heh. j;aii 


e. t Tli.itis, too. <ncr>ur- 


ogeil. d P»a. IH:-21,2-2. o Hmp. 19 


3; 20:3.3. f rliop. l.^iiS. 


i! tliap. »5 : 3 ; Nell. 8 : 7. li Mnl. 2 : 7. 


i l:ll!ip. M: M. % ^eb. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

6. TJfted lip; encouraged, strengthened. 

7. To track; teach the people the will of G-od. 
10. The fear nf the hard; a great dread, so 

that they did not dare to war against his servant. 

19. Fenced; fortified. 

INSTRt'CTION.''. 

3. A .suoeession of pious rulers is a great bless- 
ing to a people, and opens the way for permanent 
peace .and prosperity. 

7. The te.aching of the word and will of God to 
all the people, is the grand means of leading them 
to obey him. and thus securing his favor. 



en thousand and seven hundred *»"c.'S?^; 
rams, and seven thousand and seven hun- 
dred he-goats. 

12 Tf And Jehoshaphat waxed great ex- 
ceedingly ; and he built in Judah !' castles, 
and cities of store. 

13 And 'he had much business in the 
cities of Judah: and the men of war, 
mighty men of valor, were in Jerusalem. 

14 And these are the nvimbers of them 
according to the house of their fathers : 
Of Judah, the captains of thousands ; Ad- 
nah the chief, and with him mighty men 
of valor tliree hundred thousand. 

15 And *next to him was Jehohanan the 
captain, and with him two hundred and 
fourscore thousand. 

16 And next him was Amasiah the son 
of Zichri, who "'willingly olTered himself 
unto the Lord; and with him two hun- 
dred thousand mighty men of valor. 

17 And of Benjamin; Eliada a mighty 
man of valor, and with him armed men 
with bow and shield two hundred thou- 
sand. 

18 And next him u'as Jehozabad, and 
with him a hundred and fourscore thou- 
sand ready prepared for the war. 

19 These waited on the king, besides 
ihoae whom the king put in the fenced 
cities" throughout all Judah. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

1 .Jehoshaphat, joined in affinity with Ahab, is per- 
suaded to go with him against Ramoth-gilcad. 4 
Ahab, seduced by false prophets, according to the 
word of Micaiah, is slain there. 

IVrOW "Jehoshaphat had riches and hon- 
_LN or in abundance, and Pjoined affinity 
with Ahab. 

2 And t after certa/« " "i years he went 
down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab 
killed sheep and oxen for him in abun- 
dance, and for the people that he had with 
him, and persuaded him to go up with him 
to Ramoth-gilead. 

3 And Ahab king of Israel said unto Je- 
hoshaphat king of Judah, ^Vilt thou go 
with me to Ramoth-gilead? And he an- 



wnt. i Ex. M : CI 


; Prnv. Hi: 7. 


k verse 6 ; 


2 Sam. 8:2. || Or, 


paltices. 1 cliap. 2ti 


:10, 1.-,; ICIir 


on.27:2,->-3l. 


» Hvh.iithi! hnnd. 


in Judges 5:2.9; '. 


Vm.a-.h. n 


•ersc 2. cl 


ap. 17:6. P 2 Kins*, 


8:18; aCor.C:)!. 


t H<l> at the t 


ndofi/eurt. 


q 1 Kings, 22:2, etc. 



10. When a man's ways please the Lord, he inak- 
eth his enemies to be at peace with him ; and they 
who seek Jehovah as their chief good, will not want 
any ggod thing. 

CHAPTER XVin. 

1. Joined affinity ; Jehoshaphat's son married 
Ahab's daughter. 

2. Samaria ; the capital of the kingdom of Is- 
rael. 

3. Ratnoth-gilead ; a town within the territory 
of Gad, but at this time held by the Svrians. Deut. 
4:43; Josh. 20 : 8 ; 1 K ings. 22 : X 



League with Ahah. 



II. CHRONICLES, XVIII. 



Micaiah's ■prediction. 



B. "'ea'"' swered him, I am as thou art, and 
my people as thy people; and we will be 
with thee in the war. 

4 1[ And JehOvshaphat said unto the king 
of Israel, * Inquire, I pray thee, at the 
word of the Lokd to day. 

5 Therefore the king of Israel gathered 
together of prophets four hundred men, 
and said unto them, Shall we go to Pia- 
moth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? 
And ""they said, Go up; for God -will de- 
liver it into the king's hand. 

6 But .Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here 
a prophet of the Lokd 'besides, that we 
might inquire of him? 

7 And the king of Israel said unto Je- 
hoshaphat, There is yet one man, by whom 
we may inquire of the Lord : but I "^hate 
liim ; for he never prophesied good unto 
me, but always evil: the same is ^liea- 
iah the .son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat 
said, Let not the king say so. 

8 And the king of Israel called for one 
of his tollicers, and said, 5^ Fetch quickly 
ilicaiah the sou of Imla. 

9 And the king of Israel and Jehosha- 
phat king of Judah sat either of them on 
his thi'one, clothed in their robes, and 
they sat in a H'oid place at the entering 
in of the gate of Samaria; and all the 
prophets prophesied before them. 

10 And Zedekiah the son of Chcnaanah 
had made him horns of iron, and said. 
Thus'' saith the Lord, With these thou 
shall push Syria until Hthcy be consumed. 

11 And all the prophets prophesied so, 
saying. Go up to Ramoth-gilead, and pro.s- 
per : for the Lord shall deliver it into the 
linnd of the king. 

12 And the messenger that went to call 
."\Iicaiah spake to him, saying, Behold, 
the words of the prophets declare good to 
the king with one *assent; let *thy word 
therefore, I pray thee, be like one of 
theirs, and speak thou good. 

13 And Micaiah said, As the Lord liv- 
eth, '"even what my God saith, that will 
I speak. 

14 And when he was come to the king, 
the king said unto him, Micaiah, shall we 
go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I 

« I Sam. 2.3:2, 4.<);2Sain. 2:1. b.Ier.M: H;98:l,eti-. ' Hcb. 
yet.ormore c Psn. .34 :21 ; ft5:3 ; fit: 14 ; Trov. 3<( : 10 ; Amos 
.-.:10; Luke6:32. i Or, cunuchn. t Heh. llatten. \Ot,ftoor. 
<l .ler. S8 : 10, 1 1. || Heb. Iliou consume them. " Heb. mouth. 
e I.«;i. 30: 10; Micali -2 : «. f Num. 2.': 18,20; 23:12, 2S; 24': 13 
S Jer. 23:1,2; Ezekiel 34 : 6-8 ; Zecli. 10:2; 13:7. •> 2 Sum. 

•5. Prophets ; false prophets. 

12. Declare good; they promised him success 
in the war, as he desired. 

14. Go ye up, and prosper ; it is supposed that 
this was spoken ironically ; and that Ahab so under- 
stood, it. Hence his reply, ver. 15. 

16. These, have tio master ; this was a mode of 
foretelling that Ahab would be slain. 



forbear? And he said. Go ye up, and 
prosper, and they shall be delivered into 
your hand. 

15 And the king said to him. How many 
times shall I adjure thee that thou say 
nothing but the truth to me in the name 
of the Lord ? 

1 6 Then he said, I did see all Israel scat- 
tered « upon the mountains, as sheep that 
have no shepherd; and the Lord said. 
These have no ''master; let them return 
therefore every man to his house in peace. 

17 And the king of Israel said to Jehosh- 
aphat, Did I not tell thee that he would 
not prophesy good unto me, tbut evil? 

18 Again he said. Therefore hear the 
word of the Lord: I 'saw the Lord sit- 
ting upon his throne, and all the 'host of 
heaven standing on his right hand and 
on his left. 

19 And the Lord said, Who shall entice 
Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up 
and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And one spake 
saying after this manner, and another 
saying after that manner. 

20 Then there came out a ''spirit, and 
stood before the Lord, and said, I will 
entice' him. And the Lord said unto 
him, Wherewith? 

21 And he said, I will go out and be a 
lying spirit in the mouth of all his proph- 
ets. And the LORD said. Thou shall 
entice him, and thou shalt also prevail : 
go out, and do even so. 

22 Now therefore, behold, the Lord hath 
put"" a lying spirit in the mouth of these 
thy prophets, and the Lord hath spoken 
evil" against thee. 

23 Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaa- 
nah came near, and "smote Micaiah upon 
the cheek, and said. Which way went the 
Spirit of the Lord from me to speak untu 
thee ? 

24 And ^licaiah said, Behold, thou shalt 
see on that day when thou shalt go -into 
an* inner chamber to hide thyself. 

25 Then the king of Lsracl said. Take 
ye Micaiah, and carry him back to Amon 
the governor of the city, and to Joash the 
king's son ; 

26 And say, Thus saith the king. Put 



:7; 2 Kings, 10:3. f Or, for evil. i lsa.fi: l,rtc; H«n. 
7:9,10; Alts 7 : 5.% fi6 ; .Rev. 1 : 10, 12, etc. j Gen. 32:2; P»«. 
ia3:2l.' k Job 1:6. I.lnbl2:l6; 2 Tlieu. 2 : II, 12. •• ran. 
in: 14; Ezek. 14:9. n Jcr. 18 : 11 i Micnli 2 :.3. ojef.20:«: 
Mark 14 : fiS ; Ai-ts 23 : 2. X Or, /ram chamber la chamber. ( Heb. 

chamber in a chamber, 1 Kings, 20: 30. 



22. The Lord hath put a lying spirit ; he 
suffered the false prophets to lie to Ahab and thus, 
as a punishment for his sins, help him delude him- 
self to his own destruction. 

23. Which icay ireut the Spirit of the Lord'' 
this was spoken in derision of what Micaiah h.id 
said. 

24. To hide thyself; from fear of the enemy. 

5.5'J 



Death of Jhab. 



II. CHRONICLES, XIX. 



Jehoshaphaf s piety. 



\hh^ fellow in the prison, and feed him 
with bread of affliction and with water of 
affliction, until I return in peace. 

27 And Micaiah .said, ^ If thou certainly 
return in peace, "then hath not the Lord 
.spoken hy me. And he said, Hearken, 
all ye people. 

28 So the king of I.«rael and Jehosha- 
phat the king of Judah went up to Ra- 
moth-gilead. 

29 And the king of Israel said unto Je- 
hoshaphat, I will disguise myself, and 
will go to the battle ; but put thou on thy 
robes. So ^the king of Israel disguised 
himself; and they went to the battle. 

30 Now the king of Syria had command- 
ed the captains of the chariots that nrrc 
with him, saying, Fight ye not with small 
or great, save only with the king of Israel. 

.SI And it came to pass, when the cap- 
tains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, 
that they said. It is the king of Israel. 
Therefore they compassed about him to 
tight: but .lehoshaphat cried out, and the 
Lord •" helped him ; and God moved them 
to depart from him. 

32 For it came to pass, that, when the 
captains of the chariots perceived that it 
was not the king of Israel, they turned 
back again from *pursuing him. 

33 And a certain man drew a bow tat a 
venture, and smote the king of Israel be- 
tween the joints tof the harness: there- 
fore he said to his chariot man, Turn thy 
hand, that thou mayest carry me out of 
the host ; for I am hvounded. 

34 And the battle increased that day: 
howbcit the king of Israel stayed himself 



a chap. Id: 10. b Amo.%!): 10. c Num. lfi:29. <i chau 3r^:22, 
23. ersii.34:7. * Heb. afUr. i Heh. in hit simplicit!/, 1 Snm. 
15 : 1 1. t Heb. and hetween the brttirtplatt. J Heb. made sick. 
fchap. Ifi:-. B I'sri. 130 :•-'!. h clmp. 32 :2.-> i chap, li : 12 ; 



31. It is the ling of Israel ; so they thought 
from his being dressed like a king. 

33. The harness ; the armor he wore to shield 
himself from danger. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Great wealth is a source of great temptations, 
and among them is th.it of forming intimate con- 
nections with the rich and great, though they are 
enemies to the truth and will of G-od. 

3. When good men yield to the enticements of 
the wicked, and unite in their plans, without in- 
quiring as to the will of God. or m opposition to it 
when known, they are preparing for trouble. 

5. False teachers are numerous ; and those who 
reject the testimony of God, are suffered to be de- 
ccivod bv them to their ruin. 

7. Faitliful ministers promise no good to the 
wicked, and on this account are often hated and 
rejected by them; while the friends of God desire 
to know his will. 

V\ Worldly minded men think those the best 
preaclur.-', who best please their hearers ; and that 
no mes.^age can be good which they dislike and re- 
ject. 

20. Satanis the faJlrer of lies, and will, if suffered, 
be &, lying spirit in the mouth of all false teachers, 
060 



up in his chariot against the Syr- *b"c.'697: 
ians until the even : and about the time 
of the sun going down he died. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

I Jehoshaphat; reproved by Jehu, visiteth his kingdom. 
5 His instructions to the judges, 8 to the priests and 
liftvites. 

AND Jehoshaphat the king of Judah 
returned to his house in peace to 
Jerusalem. 

2 And Jehu the son of ^Ilanani the seer 
went out to meet him, and said to king 
Jehoshaphat, Shouldcst thou help the 
ungodly, and slove them that hate the 
Lord? therefore '"25 wrath upon thee from 
before the Lord. 

3 Nevertheless, there are 'good things 
found in thee, in that thou hast taken 
away the groves out of the land, and 
hast Jprej^arcd thy heart to seek God. 

4 And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem : 
and he I!went out again through the peo- 
ple from Bcer-sheba to mount Ephraim, 
and brought them back unto the Lord 
God of their fathers. 

5 T[ And he set ^judges in the land 
throughout all the fenced cities of Judah, 
city by city, 

6 And said to the judges, Take heed 
what ye do: 'for ye judge not for man, 
but for the Lord, who ""/.v with you in 
the * judgment. 

7 Wherefore now let the fear of the 
Lord be upon you; take heed and do it : 
for there is no "iniquity with the Lord 
our God, nor "respect of persons, nor 
taking of gifts. 

8 H Moreover in Jerusalem did Jehosh- 



17 :4,f 


. i 


Hk, 


1.30:1^1; 


K/.ra 7 


: 10 


1 Mel. 


returned and fcent out. 


k Dent 


ifi 


IS, 


1 Deut. 


: 17. n 


» I'aa 


82:1: 


Eccl.5:8 *Heb.?nor- 


ley o/j 


iti(jt 


nen 


. n Deu 


.3-2:4; 


Uoin. 3 : 5, e 


; 9: 14. 1) DeUt.lO: 17; 


Job 34 


m 


Acts 10:34 


: Rom 


2:11 


; Kpl, 


6:9; I Peter, 1:17. 



and deceive those who follow them to their destruc- 
tion. 

27. Though men may by falsehood be deceived 
for a time, the final event, as all faithful teachers 
know, will effectually undeceive them. 

31. Though good men by their owni folly and wick- 
edness may bring themselves into great trouble, yet 
if they turn heartily to God he will so order events 
in his providence that they shall escape. 

33. A bow dra\vn at a venture, and an arrow sent 
at random, so far as the agency of man is concerned, 
may be so guided by G-od as to fulfil his predictions 
and manifest to all the truth of his word. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

2. Seer; prophet. 

7. Gifts; bribes. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Intimate connections with the openly ungodly 
are displeasing to God, and dangerous 'o men. 

6. Magistrates are Good's ministers, and should 
by impartial and just decisions approve themselves 
to him, and guard the rights of all their fellow-men. 

11. True courage is essential to obedience to God ; 
and none who do not regard him more than men, 
will ever be accepted of him. 



Judah invaded. 



II. CHRONICLES, XX. 



Jehoshaphat' s prayer. 



5 "w^r aphat set of the "Lcvitos, and of 
the priests, and of the chief of tlie fathers 
of Israel, for the judgment of the Loud, 
and for controversies, when they returned 
to Jerusalem. 

9 And he charged them, saying, Thus 
shall ye do in the ''fear of the Lord, faith- 
fully, and with a perfect heart. 

10 And what cause soever shall come to 
you of your brethren that dwell in their 
cities, between blood and blood, between 
law and commandment, statutes and judg- 
ments, ye shall even "^warn them that they 
trespass not against the Lord, and .50 wrath 
come** upon you, and upon your brethren : 
this do, and ye shall not trespass. 

11 And behold, A mariah the chief priest 
is over you in all •= matters of the Loud; 
and Zebadiah the son of Ishinao!,the ruler 
of the house of Judah, for all the king's 
matters: also the Levitcs shall be olliccrs 
before you. * Deal courageously, and the 
Lord'" shall be with the good. 

CHAPTER XX. 

1 .Telioshaphat in hisfearproclaimetha fast SHispray- 
er. 14 The prophecy of Jahaziel. 20 Jehoshaphat 
exhorteth the people, and setteth singers to praise the 
I/ord. '22 Tlie great overthrow of the enemies. 2() 
The people, having blessed God at Berachah. return 
in triumph. 31 Jehoshaphaf's reign. .'35 His con- 
voy of ships, which he made with Ahaziah. according 
to the prophecy of Eliezer, .unhappily perished. 

XT came to pass after this also, that the chil- 
dren of Moab, and the children of Am- 
mon,and with them o/Acrbesides the Am- 
monites, came against Jehoshaphat tobattle. 

2 Then there came some that told Je- 
hoshaphat, saying. There cometh a great 
multitude against thee from beyond the 
sea on this side Syria; and behold, they 
be in s Ilazazon-tamar, which is ''En-gedi. 

.3 And Jehoshaphat feared, and set thim- 
self to 'seek the Lord, and proclaimed a 
fast' throughout all Judah. 

4 And Jvidah gathered themselves to- 
gether, to ask help of tiie Lord : even out 
of all the cities of Judah they came to 
seek the Lord. 

5 T[ And Jehoshaphat stood in the con- 
gregation of Judah and .Icrusalcm, in the 
house of the Lord, before the new court, 

6 And said, Lord God of our fathers, 
art not thou Cod in ''heaven'? andrulest jio/ 
thou over all the ' kingdoms of the heathen? 
and in thy hand is there not jiowerand might, 
so that none is able to withstand thee'? 



• Dent. 17 :«.!). Ii J Sum. -.M: fi. oK7.ek.3:18. d Num. Ifi: 46. 
e 1 Cliron. 'ifi : TO * Heli. Take cnurnge and iln. f ch.ip. 1.5 : 2 ; 
Eccl.2:-m );G.>n.l4:7. h .losli. l.'i.lH. f Hfli. A*/«M. i clinp. 
19:3. i V.zrn S : -21 ; .ler. 3B : !l i D.in. M : :! : .T.icl i : I.S, etc. ; Jonah 
3:5. k Deut.4:39; Josli.2: Hi P.sn. 115:3. I Diiii.4 : 17,-ai. J Heb. 
thou, m Ps.T. 44 : 2. n Isa. 41:8. o .Jaine.'. : 23. |> rlinp. B : 28-30. 



CHAPTER XX. 

2. The .'tea ; the De-dd. sea,. Eu-gedi ; a, city of 
Judah. 



7 Art not thou our God, iu-ho didst drive 
out '"the inhabitants of this land before thy 
people Israel, and gavest it to the "seed 
of Abraham thy friend "for ever? 

8 And they dwelttherein, and have built 
thee a sanctuary therein for thy name, 
saying, 

9 If, Ziehen evil cometh upon us, as the 
sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, 
we stand before this house, and in thy 
presenee,i (for thy ^name is in this house,) 
and cry unto thee in our aflliction, then 
thou wilt hear and lielp. 

1 And now, behold, the children of Am- 
mon and Moab and mount Seir, whom thou 
wouldest "not let Israel invade, when they 
came out of the land of Egypt, but Mhey 
turned from them, and destroyed them not; 

n Behold, I sat/, how they reward us, 
to''c6me to cast us out of thy possession, 
which thou hast given us to inherit. 

12 our God, wilt thou not judge them? 
for we have no might against this great 
company that cometh against us; neither 
know we what to do: but our 'eyes are 
upon thee. 

1 3 And all Judah stood before the Lord, 
with their little ones, their wives, and 
their children. 

14 ^[Then "upon Jahaziel the son of 
Zechariaii, the son of Benaiah, the son of 
Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, a Levite of 
the sons of Asaph, came the ^Spirit of the 
Lord in the midst of the congregation; 

1.5 And he said. Hearken ye, all Judah, 
and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and thou 
king Jehoshaphat, Thus saith the Lord 
unto you, ^ Be not afraid nor dismnyed 
by reason of this great multitude; for the 
battle is not yours, but God's. 

16 To-morrow go ye down aiainst them: 
behold, they come up by the ^ cliff of Ziz ; 
and ye shall find them at the end of the 
brook. I before the wilderness of Jerucl. 

17 Ye shall not need to figlit in this bat- 
tle: set yourselves, * stand ye .''till, and 
sec the salvation of the Lord with you, 
O Judah and Jerusalem : fear not, nor 
be dismayed; to-morrow go out against 
them: 'for the Lord will be with you. 

18 And Jehoshaphat ''bowed his head 
with his face to the ground: and all Ju- 
dah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem "^fell 
before the Lord, worshipping the Lord. 

19 And the Levites, of the children of 



■1 .Mat. 18:20. rrliap. «:20. • Dent 2: 4. 0, IM. INuin.20:21. 
u l"»ii. H3: 12. r P«a. 1 2:1 : 1 , 2. w Ian. «: 24i Dan. H: 20, 21. 
J cli.ip. I.S : 1 , 2 ; 24 : 20 ; Num. 1 1 : 2.5, 2fi ; 24 : 2. r chap. 32 : 7, 8: 
Kjc. I4:l:t, 14; Deut. 1:2<1. 30; 31 ;«, 8: I»a.43:I,2. J Heli. 
aictiit. l\ Or, ivillesi. • I»n. 30 : 7, 1.5 : I.am. 3: Cfi. aNum. 14:9: 
Uoin.8:3l. l>E.'t.4:31. e Job 1 : 20 ; Psa. 9.5 : 6. 



10. Mount Seir: a, mountainous country south 
of the Dead se.a, inhabited by the Edomites. 

16. Ziz : a pass between the Dead sea and Je- 
rusalem, lirook ; valley. 

561 



The enemies of Judah 



II. CHRONICLES, XX 



destroy one another. 



the Kohathites, and of the children of the' 
Korhites, stood up to ° praise the Lord God , 
of Israel with a ''loud voice on high. 

20 HAnd they rose early in the morning, 
and went forth into the wilderness of Te- 
koa : and as they went forth, Jchoshaphal 
stood and said, Hear me, Judah, and ye 
inhabitants of Jerusalem : Believe'^ in the 
Lord your God, so shall ye be established ; 
believe his prophets, so shall ye prosper. 

21 And when he had consulted with the 
people, he appointed ''singers unto the 
Lord, and *fhat should praise the 'beauty 
of holiness, as they went out before the 
army, and to say, "^Praise the Lord; for 
his s mercy cndnrcth for ever. 

22 ^And twhen they began J to sing 
and to praise, the Lord set ambushments 
against the children of Amnion, Moab, 
and mount Seir, which were come against 
Judah ; and they ^ were smitten. 

23 For ""the children of Ammon and 
Moab stood up against the inhabitants of 
mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy 
them : and when they had made an end 
of the inhabitants of Seir, every one help- 
ed II to destroy another. 

24 And when Judah came toward the 
watch-tower in the wilderness, they look- 
ed unto the multitude, and behold, they 
were 'dead bodies fallen to the earth, and 
none* escaped. 

25 And when Jehoshaphat and his people 
came to take away the spoil of them, they 
found among them in abundance both 
riches with the dead bodies, and precious 
jewels, which they stripped off for them- 
selves, more than they could carry away : 
and they were three days in gathering of 
the spoil, it^was so much. 

26 ^ And on the fourth day they assem- 
bled themselves in the valley of tBerachali ; 
for there they blessed the Lord: therefore 
the name of the same place was called, The 
valley of Berachah, unto this day. 





• Nrl 


.12 


^^ 


^3. 


I Psa. 81 : 1 


■):•>: I 


■2. t 1«H. 7 


•9; Heb. ll:fi. 


i 


rh.ip 


5:13. 


• Heh 


prait 


frg. 


e 1 Vh 


ron. 16:29. 


f cliaii. 7:3, H. 


e 


Paa. 136. 


t Heb. in 


the tl 


me that, t 


Heb. IM singing and praise. 


« 


Or,.n 


nntt 


one 


a not/ 


rr. k 


Tn(i"r 


s7:2 


•■. ISatn. 14 


20. 11 Hei../,..- 


tl 


edelt 


■uct 


on. 


1K.T 


14:30 


;1CI. 


»n.o 


■n; I8a37:.36. *Heb.tliere 



20. Tr.koa; a city south of Bethlehem on the 
border of the desert. 

22. Were smitten ; smote one another. 

2G. Berachah ; that is, blessing. 

30. Ezioi-^eber ; at the head of the eastern 
branch of the Red sea. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. This is a world of trials, and none in passing 
through it can escape them ; but if they, in despair 
of all human help, look to tlie Lord and depend upon 
him, he will in due time appear for them and grant 
them relief. 

7. The past mercies of God should be remembered 
with gratitude, and may be pleaded as reasons for 
the continuance of his favors and for the bestowmcnt 
of future blessings. 

12. The less we depend upon ourselves or crea- 
562 



27 Then they returned, every man *Bc.'bS2. 
of Judah and Jerusalem, and Jehoshaphat 
in the ^fore-front of them, to go again to 
Jerusalem with joy; ''for the Lord had 
made them to rejoice over their enemies. 

28 And they came to Jerusalem with 
psalteries and harps and trvimpets unto 
the house of the Lord. 

29 And the 'fear of God wa.s on all the 
kingdoms of those countries, when they 
had heard that the Lord fought against 
the enemies of Israel. 

30 So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet : 
for ""his God gave him rest round about. 

31 T[And "Jehoshaphat reigned over 
Judah: he was thirty and five years old 
when he began to reign, and he reigned 
twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And 
his mother's name was Azubah the daugh- 
ter of Shilhi. 

32 And he walked in the way of Asa his 
father, and departed not from it, doing thai 
which was right in the sight of the^ Lord. 

33 Howbeit "the high places were not 
taken away: for as yet the people had 
not ^prepared their hearts unto the God 
of their fathers. 

34 Now the rest of the acts of Jehosha- 
phat, first and last, behold, they are Avrit- 
tcn in the ^book of Jehu the son of Ilana- 
ni, who lli.s menlioned in the book of thf 
kings of Israel. 

35 iy And after this did Jehoshaphat king 
of Judah join liimself with Ahaziah king 
of Israel, who did very wickedly : 

3(5 And ihe joined himself with him to 
make ships to go to Tarsh/sh : and they 
made the ships in Ezion-gebcr. 

37 Then Eliezer the son of Dodavah of 
Mareshah prophesied against Jehosha- 
phat, saying, 'Because thou hast joined 
thyself with Ahaziah, the Lord hath bro- 
ken thy works. And the ships were bro- 
ken, that they were not able to go to 
Tarshi.sh.* 



WJI8 not t 


n esenping, Kzra i>: U. i Kwk. .W.-8-10 f Tli.it i.«, 


hiessing. 


t Heh.heail. V Nell. 12:43. 1 chap. 17:10. ni olinp 


\h: 15; .1 


oli34:-2!l. n 1 Kiiij?., -22 : 41, etc urliap.l;:6. p iliap. 


1-2: U; 1' 


:i; Dfiit. 29:4. J Heb.iwi/*. \\ HfAulcatmaeletciisrrnrt 
■:'2:4S,49 r Josii. 7 : 1 1 . 1 2 ; Prnf. 13 : -.'a •rhi\p<l:21. 


q 1 Kings 



tures, and the more entire our dependence is on 
God, the more certainly will help come from him. 

1.5. When God undertakes to tight for his people, 
however numerous or powerful their foes, he will 
give his people the victory, and in such a manner 
as to manifest his own glory. 

20. Faith in God is an earnest of success, and 
prepares the soul to hail his interposition Mnth glad- 
ness and joy. 

23. God can grant deliverance to his people, by 
leaving their enemies to fight against and dcstrov 
one another; so that while his people stand still, 
they see the salvation of God. 

20. The fear of the Lord is the best security of 
his people, and when he gives them rest and quiet- 
ness none shall make them afraid. 

35. Good men who unite with the wicked, dis- 



Reign of Jehoram. 



II. CHRONICLES, XXI. 



His wretched eml. 



tl-^t CHAPTER XXI. 

I Jehoram, succeeding Jehoshaphat, slayeth his breth- 
ren. 5 His wicked reign. 8 Edom and Libnah re- 
volt. 12 The prophecy of Elijah against him in 
writing. 10 Philistines and Arabians oppress him. 
18 His incurable disease, infamous death, and burial. 

"TVTOW ''Jehoshaphat slept with his fa- 
1}\ thers, and was buried with his fa- 
thers in the city of David. And Jehoram 
his son reigned in his stead. 

2 And he had brethren the sons of Je- 
hoshaphat, Azariah, and JchicI, and Zeeh- 
ariah, and Azariah, and Michael, and 
Shephatiah : all these luere the sons of 
Jehoshaphat king of Israel. 

3 And their father gave them great gifts 
of silver, and of gold, and of precious 
things, with fenced cities in Judah : but 
the kingdom gave he to '' Jehoram; be- 
cause he icas the first-born. 

4 Now when Jehoram was risen up to the 
kingdom of his fa1 her. he strengthened him- 
self, and slew all his brethren with the 
sword, and rfirers also oft he princes of Israel. 

5 TI Jehoram was thirty and two years 
old when he began to reign, and he reign- 
ed eight years in Jerusalem. 

6 And he walked in the way of the 
kings of Israel, like as did the house of 
Ahab : for he ''had the daughter of Ahab 
to wife : and he wrought that which icas 
evil in the eyes of the Lord. 

7 Howbcit the Lord would not destroy 
the house of David, because of the cove- 
nant that he had made with David, and 
as he promised to give a *light ''to him and 
to his sons for ever. 

8 *\ In his days the Edomites revolted 
from under the tdominion of Judah, and 
made themselves a king. 

9 Then Jehoram went forth with his 
princes, and all his chariots with him: 
and he rose up by night, and smote the 
Edomites which compassed him in, and 
the cap'.ains of the chariots. 

10 So the Edomites revolted from under 
the hand of Judah unto this day. The 
same time also did Libnah revolt from 
under his hand; because he had forsaken 
the Lord God of his fathers. 



« 1 kinj;s, ZJiflll. b 2 Kings, 8: 16, Ptc. c chap. 2-2 : 2. « Heb. 
lump, or candle. i 2 Sam. 7 : 12, 13 : 1 Kings, II : 36 ; 2 Kinga, 
8: HI. i Heh. hand. • Lev. M: .'i ; versB l:l ; Ilev. 2 : CO-'.'i. 
fKx.M:1.i; DeuU 31:16; .Ier.3:8,9. R 1 Kings, IK: 31-33; 



honor God, injure liis cause, and bring disappoint- 
ment, trouble, and distress upon tliemselves. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

1. The city of David; Jerusalem, or Zion, ch. 
5:2. 

4. S/ew all h is brethren ; lest they should rebel 
against his authority. 

10. Libnah; in the western part of Judah. 
. 12. A ivritiiig ; one, it is supposed, that Elijah 
prepared before his translation. 

l(i. The Philistines ; on the west side of Ju- 
dah. The Arabians ; on the east and south. 



1 1 Moreover he made high places in 
the mountains of Judah, and caused the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit '"for- 
nication, and compelled Judah thereto. 

I'i IfAnd there came a writing to him 
from Elijah the propliet, saying, Thus 
saith the Lord God of David thy father. 
Because thou hast not walked in the 
ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in 
the ways of Asa king of Judah, 

13 But hast walked in the way of the 
kings of Israel, and hast made Judah and 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem to ""go a 
whoring, like to the whoredoms of the 
house of « Ahab, and also hast ''slain thy 
brethren of thy father's house, vhicJi were 
better than thyself: 

14 Behold, with a groat t plague will 
the Lord smite thy people, and thy chil- 
dren, and thy wives, and all thy goods: 

15 And thou shalt have great sickness 
by disease of thy 'bowels, until thy bow- 
els fall out by reason of the sickness day 
by day. 

16 T[ Moreover the Lord 'stirred up 
against Jehoram the spirit of the Philis- 
tines, and of the Arabians, that were near 
the Ethiopians : 

17 And they came up into Judah, and 
brake into it, and enrried ^away all the 
substance that was found in the king's 
house, and his sons also, and his wives : 
so that there was never a son left him, 
save llJehoahaz, the youngest of his sons. 

18 ^And after all this the LoRD^sn^ole 
him in his bowels with an incurable dis- 
ease. 

19 And it came to pass, that in process 
of time, after the end of two years, liis 
bowels fell out by reason of his sickness : 
so he died of sore diseases. And his peo- 
ple made no burning for him, like the 
burning' of his fathers. 

20 Thirty and two years old was he 
when he began to reign, and he reigned 
in Jerusalem eight years, and departed 
without 'being '"desired. Howbeit they 
buried him in the city of David, but not 
in the sepulchres of the kings. 



2King9,9:22. b vprse 4. ^ Ht-b. «<ru*c, i verse 18: IH. j 1 Kinpi, 
1I:M,23; l9a.l0:f>,6. ^ Heb.i:np(ii'r,dinp.'.>2 : 1. || Or.Jliitztalt, 
chap. 22 : 1 ; or, Jzaiiali, chap. 22 : l>. k verse 1.5 ; AcU 12 ; 2a 
1 chap. 16:14. ' Heb. deiire. m Jer. 22 : 18. 



20. Without being desired ; the people did not 
desire that he should live, nor did they mourn his 
death. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Divine grace is not inherited ; and no parent 
can know what will be the state of his children 
after he is dead. 

6. Intimate connections with the openly wicked 
tend to corrupt the heart, deba.se the cjiaracter, and 
ripen the soul for the vengeance of God. 

12. The wickedness of the wirkcd is all known to 
Jehovah, and in due time he will punish it as it de- 
serves. 

563 



Ahaziah slain. 



II. CHRONICLES, XXIII. 



Joash preserved. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

1 Ahaziah succeeding reigneth wickedly. 5 In his 
confederacy with .Toram the son of Ahab, he is slain 
by Jehu. 10 Athaliah, destroying all the seed royal, 
save Joash, whom Jehoshabeath hjs aunt hid, usurp- 
eth the kingdom. 

ANDtlie inhabitants of .lerusalem made 
Ahaziah" his youngest son king in 
his stead : for the band of men that came 
with the Arabians to the camp had slain 
all the oldest. So Ahaziah the son of Je- 
horam king of Judah reigned. 

2 Forty and two years old icas Ahaziah 
when he began to reign, and he reigned one 
year in Jerusalem. His mother's name 
also was ''Athaliah the daughter of Omri. 

3 lie also walked in the ways of the 
liou.se of Ahab : for his '^mother was his 
counsellor to do wickedly. 

4 Wherefore he did evil in the sight of 
the Lord like the house of Ahab : for they 
were his ^counsellors, after the death of 
his father, to his destruction. 

5 1[ He *■ walked also after their counsel, 
and went with Jehoram the son of Ahab 
king of Israel to war against Hazael king 
of Syria at Rainoth-gilead : and the Syr- 
ians smote Joram. 

6 And Hie returned to be healed in Jez- 
reel because of the wounds *which were 
given him at Ramah, when he fought 
with Hazael king of Syria. And ^Azariah 
the son of Jehoram king of Judah went 
down to see Jehoram the son of Ahab at 
Jezreel, because he was sick. 

7. And the - destruction of Ahaziah ? was 
of God by coming to Joram : for when he 
was come, '' he went out with Jehoram 
against Jehu tJie son of Nimshi, whom 
the Lord had anointed to cut off the house 
of Ahab. 

8 And it came to pass, that, when Jehu 
was 'executing judgment upon the house 
of Ahab, and 'found the princes of Judah, 
and the sons of the brethren of Ahaziah, 
that ministered to Ahaziah, he slew them. 

9 And ''he sought Ahaziah: and they 
caught him, for he was hid in Sarnaria, 
and brought him 1o Jehu : and when they 
liad slain him, they buried him : 'Because, 



• chap. 21 :7; verse 6; aKinjis, R: -.M.etc. ti cliiip. 21 : 6. c Oen. 
27: 12, V.i; Deut. 7;. 1,4; l;i:(W10; .M;it. 10: :;7 : ArU4:l<». -1 Prov. 
12:5. <■ Micnli fi : i(i. f 2 Kings, SI: l.",. * Heh. whtretvitli lliei/ 
wounded him. f Ciille*) Ahazinh^wr^ti I ; anJ./f/i('»/m2,cliap.2l : 17. 
X Huh. treading diium. B rimp. in:ir): Deiil. 3-2 : 3ru Judges 

IS. The effects of sin are often terrible in this 
■world, and dreatlfiU warnings of the misery which 
awaits it in the world to come. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

10. Destroj/ed all the srerl royal; tliat they 
might not disturb her in reigning over the people. 
INSTRUCTlOiNS. 
3. Those parents who counsel their children to do 
wrong, arc often the means of their destruction, tem- 
poral and eternal. 
504 



phat,who '"sought the Loud with all his 
heart. So the house of Ahaziah had no 
power to keep still the kingdom. 

10 II But "when Athaliah the mother of 
Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she 
arose and destroyed all the seed royal of 
the house of Judah. 

11 But * Jehoshabeath, the daughter of 
the king, look Joash the son of Ahaziah, 
and stole liiju from among the king's sons 
that were slain, and put him and liis nurse 
in a bed-chamber. So Jehoshabeath, the 
daughter of king Jehoram, the wife of Je- 
hoiada the priest, (for she was the sister 
of Ahaziah,) hid him from Athaliah, so 
that she slew him not. 

12 And he was with them hid in the 
house of God six years : and Athaliah 
reigned over the land. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

1 Jehoiada, having set things in order, maketh Jca-^h 
king. 12 Athaliah is slain. 16 Jehoiada restoreth 

the worship of God. 

AND °in the seventh year Jehoiada 
strengthened himself, and took the 
captains of hundred.s, Azariah the son of 
Jeroham, and Ishmael the sou of Jehoha- 
nan, and Azariah the son of Obcd, and 
Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elisha- 
phat the son of Zicliri, into covenant with 
him. 

2 And they Ment about in Judah, and 
gathered the Levites out of all the cities 
of Judah, and the chief of the fathers of 
Israel, and they came to Jerusalem. 

3 And all the congregation made a p cov- 
enant with the king in tlie house of God. 
And he said unto them, Behold, the king's 
son shall reign, as the Lord hath 'said of 
the sons of David. 

4 This is the thing that ye shall do: A 
third part of you entering on the sabbath, 
of the priests and of the Levites, shall be 
porters of the H doors ; 

5 And a third part sluiUbe at the king's 
house; and a third part at the gate of the 
foundation : and all the people shall be in 
the courts of the house of the Lord. 



M 


:4; 


1 Kine.H, 


2:1.5 


Ho>ea M.Si. 


h 2KinK.s,') 


21. • 


2Ki 


'S». 





•',7 


j 2 Kin 


K"i '0 


12-14. 


k 2K 


ns», !1 : 27. 


1 Kins 


K, 14 


13. 


ni 


clin 


..17:4. 


1.2 K 


ings. U 


:l.etc. 


^ Jehiokeha, 2 Kil 


r», 1 


: 2. 





2Kin£«, 11:4 


eto. 


p 2Sa 


11. .1:^. 


q ilian. 21 


7; 2Sa 


m.7 


1«, 


lb 


;1K 


ing(*,9:5 


I'sn. 


69:2!1. 


II Heh.thrtihoidl. 









5. Those who knowingly do wrong are not unfre- 
quently given up of God to pursue such courses as 
involve themselves and their connections in irre- 
trievable ruin. 

10. The judgments of God upon the wicked, in- 
stead of being improved a.s a warning against sin, 
arc sometimes made the occasion of greater trans- 
gressions, which bring down heavier divine judg- 
ments. 

CHAPTER XXm. 

3. The kitig's sou ; Joash the son of Ahaziah. 



Joash is crowned, 



II. CHRONICLES, XXIV. 



and ^ihaliah dain. 

For the priest said, Slay her not 
in the hou.se of the Lord. 

15 So they hiitl liands on her; and when 
she was come (o the entcrinsof the ''liorse- 
gate by the king's house, they slew 'her 
there. 

16 TfAnd Jehoiada made a ""covenant 
between him, and between all the people, 
and between the king, that "they should 
be the Lord's people. 

17 Then all the people went to the house 
of Baal, and brake it down, and brake his 

cording to all things that .lehoiada the ' altars and his images in pieces, and ".slew 
priest had commanded, and took every INIattan the priest of Baal before the altars, 
man his men that were to come in on the 18 Also Jehoiada appointed the ofliccs 
sabbath, with them that were to go out on , of the house of the Lord by the hand of 
the sabbath: for Jehoiada the priest dis- the priests the Levites, whom David had 
missed not the ''courses. distributed p in the house of the Lord, to 

9 INIorcovor Jehoiada the priest deliver- offer the burnt-oflcrings of the Lord, as 
ed to the captains of hundreds spears, and it is i written in the law of Moses, with 



of the Lord, save the priests, and they that 
minister* of the Levites ; they shall go in, 
for they are holy : but all the people shall 
keep the watch of the Lord. 

7 And the Levites shall compass the 
king round about, every man with his 
weapons in his hand; and whosoever else 
Cometh ''into the house, he shall be put 
to death : but be ye with the king when 
he Cometh in, and when he goeth out. 

8 So the Levites and all Judali did ac- 



bucklers, and shields, that had been king 
David's, ''which were in the house of God. 

10 And he set all the people, every man 
having his weapon in his hand, from the 
right *side of the ttemple to the left side 
of the temple, along by the altar and the 
temple, by the king round about. 

11 Then they brought out the king's 
son, and put upon him the crown, and 
gave him the ''testimony, and made him 
king. And Jehoiada and his sons anoint- 
ed him, and said, +God save the king. 

12 11 Now when Athaliah heard the 
noise of the people running and praising 
the king, she came to the people into the 
house of the Lord: 

1 3 And ^she looked, and behold, the king 
stood at his pillar at the entering in, and 
the princes and the trumpets by the king: 
and all the people of the land ^ rejoiced, and 
sounded with trumpets, also the ''singers 
with instruments of music, and such as 
taught to singpraise. Then 'Athaliah rent 
her clothes, and said, ^Treason, treason. 

14 Then Jehoiada the priest brought out 
the captains of hundreds that were set 
over the host, and said unto them. Have 
her J forth of the ranges: and whoso fol- 
loweth her, let him be slain with the 



a I Cliron. 23 : 28, 29. b Num. 3 : 10, 38. c 1 Cliroo. cll. 24, 25. 
.1 2 Sam. 8:7.* Heb. $hnuldcr. f H<;b. hnute. • Deiit 17 : ls-20. 
f Heb. Let the king live, f Psn. U : S. e Prov. 11:10. hi Cliron. 
2.t:6-8. iEccl. 9:12. % Heb. C<>Fi»piracy. j Ex. 21 : U. k Neb. 
3:28. 1 Psa. 5:6; .15:23; Jaine,«2:l:). ni DeuL 29 : 1-15. n Deut. 



14. Ranges; ranks of guards around the temple. 
INSTRUCTFOXS. 

1. Revolutions in human governments are some- 
times needlul ; and those who are most distinguished 
by wisdom, integrity, and influence, arc tiie best 
fitted to take the direction of them, and to conduct 
them to successful results. 

8. Power to select rulers is with the people, and 
in doing it they should regard the word and will of 
G-od ; selecting such persons and conducting in such 
a manner as will meet his approbation. 



rejoicing and with singing, as it was or- 
dained II by David. 

19 And he set the ''porters at the gates 
of the house of the Lord, that none whicli 
teas unclean in any thing should enter in. 

20 And he took the 'captains of hun- 
dreds, and the nobles, and the governors 
of the people, and all the people of the 
land, and brought down the king from 
the house of the Lord: and they came 
through the high gate into the king's 
house, and set the king upon the throne 
of the kingdom. 

21 And all the people of the 'land re- 
joiced : and the city was quiet, after that 
they had slain Athaliah with the sword. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

I Joash reifrneth well all the days of Jehoiaila. 4 He 
givi-th order for the repair of the temple, lo Ji>hoi- 
ada's death and honorable burial. 17 Joasli. falling 
to idolatry, slayeth Zeohariah the son of J<>hoiada. 
23 Joash is spoiled by tlie Syrians, and slain by Za- 
baJ and Jehozabad. 27 Amaziah siicccedeth liiin. 

JOASH '^tcas seven years old when he 
began to reigii, and he reigned forty 
years in Jerusalem. His mother's name 
also was Zibiah of Beer-shcba. 

2 And Joash did thai which rcas right 
in the sight of tlie Lord all the ^days of 
Jehoiada the priest. 

26:17-19. « Deut. 13:9. i> I Cliron.rb.23,24. q Num. fli.28. || Heb. 
hyl/ie hnnilt of. r 1 Cliron. 26; I, etc. • 2 Kinfrs, II : 19. i Pun. 
fW : 10, 1 1 ; Rev. 18 : 20 ; 19 : 1 , 3. « 2 Kings, 11:21; 12 : 1, etc. 
" ch:<p. 26:5; Isn. 99:13. 



13. Usurpers and those who have been guilty of 
treason themselves, arc among the first to cry out 
against it in others. But not every rpvolnt'on is 
wrong, nor should the cry of treason ' ' ■■ 

who have power, from placing the ;: i 

the hands of such >is will use it to tin ^ i 

and the good of mankind. 

18. Whatever be the form of govertlnient and who- 
ever is called to administer it. it should be carried 
on in accordance with the reveahd \«ill of Grod ; and 
should protect all in their just rights, especially the 
5C5 



The temple repaired. 



11. CHRONICLES, XXIV, 



Idolatry of Joask. 



3 And Jehoiada took for him Uro wives ; 
and he benat sons and daughters. 

4 •; And it came to jmss after this, that 
Joash was minded to *repair the house of 
the Lord. 

5 And he gathered together the priests 
and tlic Levites, and said to them, Go 
out unto the cities of Judah, and gather 
of all Israel money to repair the house of 
your God from year to year, and see that 
ye hasten the matter. Howbeit the Le- 
vites hastened it not. 



set the house of God in his state, ^k^u.'JS; 
and strengthened it. 

14 And when they had finished it, they 
brought the rest of the money before the 
king and Jehoiada, whereof were made 
vessels for the house of the Lord, even 
vessels to minister, and ^ to offer iritlial, 
and spoons, and vessels of gold and sil- 
ver. And they offered burnt-offerings in 
the house of the Lord continually all the 
days of .Jehoiada. 

15 II But Jehoiada waxed old, and was 



6 And the king called for Jehoiada the full of days when he died ; a liundrcd and 



chief, and said unto him. Why hast thou 
not required of the Levites to bring in out 
of Judah and out of Jerusalem the col- 
lection, according to the '■commandment of 
]Moses the servant of the Lord, and of the 
congregation of Isi'ael, for the ''tabernacle 
of witness'? 

7 For the sons of Athaliah, that wick- 
ed woman, had ""broken up the house of 
God; and also all the dedicated ''things 
of the house of the Lord did they bestow 
upon Baalim. 

8 And at the king's commandment they 
made a chest, and set it without at the 
gate of the house of the Lord. 

9 And they made atproclamation through 
Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in to the 
Lord the '"collection that Moses the ser- 
vant of God laid upon Israel in the wil- 
derness. 

10 And all the princes and all the peo- 
ple "^ rejoiced, and brought in, and cast into 
the chest, until they had made an end. 

11 Now it came to pass, that at what 
time the chest was brought unto the king's 
office by the hand of the Levites, and 
when they saw that there was much mon- 
ey, the king's scribe and the high-priest's 
officer came and emptied the chest, and 
took it, and carried it to his place again. 
Thus they did ^day by day, and gathered 
money in abundance. 

12 And the king and Jehoiada gave it 
to such as did the work of the service of 
the house of the Lord, and hired masons 
and carpenters to repair the house of the 
Lord, and also such as wrouglit iron and 
brass to mend the house of the Lord. 

13 So the workmen wrought, and ^the 
work was perfected by them, and they 



» H'-b. riMtia. • Kx. HO : 1-2-16. h Num. 1 : 60 : Arts 7 ; 44. 
t rlii.p. -21 : 17. * Kiek. Ifi ; 17-19 ; Honei. i : X, n. t Heb. voict. 
rvPr.K. r.>ror.9:7. B I Cor. 16:1!. t Hv\>. Ihe hralind went up 
upon Ihr tvmk. % Or, ;«-«/i7l. h clinp. «; v.-rse-2: 1-2, M. 1 Prov. 
26 : X. i Prov. 29 ; 1 2. k 1 Kin(^. U : 2:t. I ilmp. 28 : 1 :l ; 2'.l : 8 ; 
3fi: U-I6; .IuilgesS:8; HoseaS: 10, M; Zepli. I : 4-6; Epli.5:ti. 



right to worship their Maker according to the dictates 
of coiLSoience. 

CHAPTER XXrV. 
0. T/ie commandment of Moses; Exodus 
30:1?- 16. 

566 



thirty years old xcas he when he died. 

16 And they buried him in the city of 
David among the kings, because he had 
done ''good in Israel, both toward God, 
and toward his house. 

17 Now after the death of Jehoiada came 
the princes of Judah, and made ' obeisance 
to the king. Then the king J hearkened 
unto them. 

18 And they left the house of the Lord 
God of their fathers, and ''served groves 
and idols: and wrath 'came upon Judah 
and Jerusalem for this their trespass. 

19 Yet "'he sent prophets to them, to 
bring them again unto the Lord; and 
they testified against them: but "they 
would not give ear. 

20 And the Spirit of God I'came upon 
Zcchariah the son of Jehoiada the priest, 
which stood above the people, and said unto 
them. Thus saitli God, "Why transgressye 
the commandments of the Lord, that ye 
cannot prosper? because ''ye have forsak- 
en the Lord, he hath also forsaken you. 

21 And they i conspired against him, 
and ■■ stoned him with stones at the com- 
mandment of the king in the court of the 
house of the Lord. 

22 Thus Joash the king remembered not 
the kindness which Jehoiada his father 
had done to him, but "slew his son. And 
when he died, he said. The Lord look 
upon it, and 'require it. 

23 11 And it came to pass *at the end of 
the year, that the "host of Syria came up 
against him : and they came to Judah and 
Jerusalem, and destroyed all the princes 
of the people from among the people, and 
sent all the spoil of them unto the king 
of tDamaseus. 



m .)er. 7 : 'JS, M ; '25 : 4 ; 26 : B. n P»a. ft'i : 7, 8 ; Art* 7 : ol . \\ Heb. 
clothed, .IuU?i-» fi : .'M. » Num. 14:41. p clinp. 15 : i. q Jer. 
18:18. r Mnttlie\v2I:35; 2:t:35; Actii7:58, 59 • Proverln 
17:1.3. I Psulm 10:14; .Ier.5l:56; Lukell:51; 2 Tlmotliy, 
4 : 16. * Htb. in lUc revolution of. u 2 Kings, 12 : 17. t Heb. 
Darmtftk. 



14. ContinitaUy ; daily. 

17. Aladr obeisance ; rendered homage, and made 
entreaty for the restoration of idolatry. 

22. tiook upon it ; will look upon it, atid re- 
quire, that is, punish it. 



Joash is slain. 



II. CHRONICLES, XXV. 



R c ign of Am a z ia h 



S; u'sS^' 24 For the army of the Syrians 
came witli a ^small company of men, and 
the Lord ''delivered a very great host into 
their hand, because they had forsaken the 
Lord God of their fathers. So they exe- 
cuted "^judgment against Joash. 

25 And when they were departed from 
him, (for they left him in great diseases,) 
his own servants conspired against him 
for the blood of the sons of '' Jelioiada the 
priest, and slew him on his bed, and he 
died : and they buried him in the city of 
David, but they buried him not in the 
sepulchres of the kings. 

26 And these arc they that conspired 
against him : *Zabad the son of Shimeath 
an Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son 
of tShimrith a INIoabitess. 

27 T[ Now concerning his sons, and the 
greatness of the burdens laid upon him, 
and the ^repairing of the house of God, 
behold, they arc written in the ^story of 
the book of the kings. And Amaziah his 
son reigned in his stead. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

1 Amaziah beginnetli to reign well. 3 He executeth 
justice on the traitors. 5 Having hired an army of 
Israelites against the Edomites, at the word of a 
prophet he loseth the huTidred talents, and dismisseth 
them. 11 He ovcrthroweth the Kdomites. 10, 13 
The fsraelites, discontented with their dismission, 
spoil as they return home. 14 Ariiaziali, proud of 
his victory, serveth the gods of Edom, and despiseth 
the admonitions of the prophet. 17 He provoketh 
Joash to his overthrow. 25 His reign. 27 He is 
slain by conspiracy. 

AMAZIAH ''ivas twenty and five years 
old when lie began to reign, and he 
reigned twenty and nine years in Jeru- 
salem. And his mother's name ircis Je- 
hoaddan of Jerusalem. 
2 And he did that which was right in the 

« Lev. 2H : 37 ; Deut 32 : 30 ; Isb. 30 : 17. b Lev. 26 : 2.n ; Deut 
?8:25,48. c cliap.22; 8 ; Isa. 10 : .1. it verses 2 1, 22. " Or, Joz- 
orAai-, 2 Kings, 12:21. t O', Shotnei: t Ueb. founding, j Or, 
commentary. e 2 Kings, 14 : 1. etc. f Psa. 78 r 37 ; Isa. 2!1 : 13 ; 



24. Exeviited'jiidgment ; the just judgments 
of God against Joash for his sins. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. It is a great blessing for men, especially when 
young, to be surrounded with wise and pious coun- 
sellors ; and in following their advice they will find 
the ways of wisdom to be ways of pleasant nes-i and 
her paths to be paths of peace. 

4. Many are zealous in the externals of religion 
who have no real piety ; and who, when left to the 
flattery of the wicked, will cast off the .appearance 
of religion and be guilty of the most abominable 
iniquity. 

7. \Vicked rulers by their profane treatment of 
sacred things, corrupt the hearts of the people and 
bring down upon them the just judgments of G-od. 

10. When rulers and those in authority set the 
example of outward respect for divine things, mul- 
titudes are ready to follow; and many will give of 
their substance to repair and decorate houses of 
worship, who will not give their hearts to God. 

17. When pious persons who have been instru- 
mental in keeping up public worship, are removed 



sight of the Lord, but ""not with a perfect 
heart. 

3 T[ Now it came to pass, when the king- 
dom was II established to him, tliat lie slew 
his servants that had killed the king his 
father. 

4 But he slew not their children, bul did 
as it 15 6 written in the law in the book of 
Moses, Avhere the Lord commanded, say- 
ing, '■ The fathers shall not die for tiie chil- 
dren, neillier shall the children die for the 
fathers, but every man sliall die for his 
own sin. 

5 1[ Moreover Amaziah gathered Judali 
together, and made them captains over 
thousands, and captains over luindreds, 
according to the liouscs of their fathers, 
throughout all Judah and Benjamin: and 
he numbered them from 'twenty years 
old and above, and found them three hun- 
dred thousand choice men, able to go forth 
to war, that could handle spear and shield. 

6 He hired also a hundred thousand 
mighty men of valor out of Israel for a 
hundred talents of silver. 

7 But there came a man of God to him, 
saying, king, let notthearmy of Israel go 
with thee ; for the Loud is not with Israel, 
to w'it. icifh all the children of Ephraim. 

8 But if thou wilt go, do it, be strong 
for the battle : God shall make thee fall 
before the enemy : for God > hath power to 
help, and to cast down. 

9 And Amaziah said to the man of God, 
But what shall we do for the hundred 
talents which I have given to the *army 
of Israel? And the man of God answer- 
ed. The Lord is ''able to give thee much 
more than this. 

1 Then Amaziah separated them, to irit. 



Hosea 10:2: James 1 :8; 4:8. \\ Heb. confirmed upon him. 
eDeut.24:l6. b Jer. 31 : 30 ; Kick. 1 8 : 20. iNum.l:3. j rhnp, 
20:t>; Psalme2:ll ; Eccl.9: II. ' Ve\>. band, k Psalm 24 : 1 ; 
Prov. 10:22; Phil. 4:19. 



by death, survivors who have no love for it often 
renounce it, and show by their conduct that their 
appearance of religion sprung from regard to men, 
not to God. 

19. Apostates who have cast off the fear of the 
Lord, are exceedingly averse to being reproved for 
their sins, and often hate, persecute, and even kill 
those who reprove them. 

22. Though God sometimes suffers the wicked to 
kill his servants, and their punishment m.iy be for 
a while delayed, it will, unless they repent, in due 
time overtake them. 

24. With a very small company God can easily 
overcome and desolate the country of those who 
rebel against him, and show them, by their puni.sh- 
ment, his wrath against their iniquity. 

CHAPTER XXV. 
2. He dill that which was right ; externally 
and for a time. 

C He hired also a hundred thousand mighty 
men ; to assist him in a war which he proposed 
aoTiinst the Edomites. 

567 



AmaziaVs idolatry 



II. CHRONICLES, XXV. 



and doumfall. 



the army that was come to him out of 
Ephraim, to go *hoine again : wherefore 
their anger was greatly kindled against 
Judah, and they returned home in tgreat 
anger. 

1 1 1[ And Amaziah strengthened him- 
self, and led forth his people, and went 
to the valley of salt, and smote of the 
children of Seir ten thousand. 

12 And other ten thousand left alive did 
the children of Judah carry away captive, 
and brought them unto the top of the rock, 
and cast them down from the top of the 
rock, that they all were broken in pieces. 

1 3 1[ But the isoldiers of the army which 
Amaziah sent back, that they should not 
go with him to battle, fell upon the cities 
of Judah, from Samaria even unto Beth- 
horon, and smote three thousand of them, 
and took much spoil. 

14 1[ Now it came to pass, after that 
Amaziah was come from the slaughter of 
the Edomites, that he brought *the gods 
of the children of Seir, and set them up to 
he his gods, and ''bowed down himself be- 
fore them, and burned incense unto them. 

15 Wherefore the anger of the Lord 
was kindled against Amaziah, and he 
sent unto him a prophet, which said un- 
to him. Why hast thou sought after the 
gods of the people, "= which could not de- 
liver their own people out of thy handl 

16 And it came to pass, as he talked 
with him, that the king said unto him, 
Art thou made of the king's counsel? 
forbear; why shouldest thou be smitten'? 
Then the prophet forbare, and said, I 
know that God hath ^determined to de- 
stroy thee, ''because thou h.ast done this, 
and hast not hearkened unto my counsel. 

17 •[ Then ''Amaziah king of Judah took 
advice, and sent to Joash, the sou of Jeho- 
ahaz, the son of Jeliu, king of Israel, saying, 
Come, let us see one another in the face. 

1 8 And Joash king of Israel sent to Am- 
aziah king of Judah, saying, The lUhistle 
that?ra.s- in Lebanon sent to the cedar that 
was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daugh- 



* Heb. to their place. f Heb. heat of anger. J Heb. font of 
the band. • cliiip. 2K: 23. li Kx itO : ;), ft ; Isn. 44 : 19. c vereee 
II, 12; P»il.9B:S. ^ Heh. eountelled. d 1 S.im. 2 : 25. e 2 Hints, 
14:8, etc. \\ Or, furzehuth, or thoin. " Hvh. beast of the Jield. 



11. Children of Seir ; Edomites. 

17. Let Its see one another ; engage in battle. 

27. Lachish ; in the south-west part of Judah. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Many for a time do that externally which is 
right, who have no supreme regard to God, and 
whose services for this reason are not accepted of 
him. 

5. When men engage in projects without asking 
counsel of the Lord, they may expect them to be 
sources of trouble, if not of ruin. 

7. Men, out of regard to their own interests 
merely, sometimes do externally as the Lord directs, 
5C8 



ter to my son to wife : and there *'B"t\!46 
passed by a *wild beast that was in Leb- 
anon, and trode down the thistle. 

19 Thou sayest, Lo, thou hast smitten 
the P^domites; and thy heart lifteth thee 
up to boast: abide now at home; why 
shouldest thou meddle to thy hurt, that 
thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah 
with thee? 

20 But Amaziah would not hear; ""for it 
came of God, that lie might deliver them 
into the hand of their enemies, because 
they sought after the gods of Edom. 

21 So Joash the king of Israel went up ; 
and they saw one another in the face, 
both he and Amaziah king of Judah, at 
Beth-shemesh, which belongeth to Judah. 

22 And Judah was tput to the worse 
before Israel, and they fled every man to 
his tent. 

23 And Joash the king of Israel took 
Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash, 
the son of^Jchoahaz, at Beth-shemesh, 
and brought him to Jerusalem, and brake 
down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate 
of Ephraim to the +corner-gate, ''four hun- 
dred cubits. 

24 And he took all the gold and the sil- 
ver, and all the vessels that were found 
in the house of God with Obed-edom, 
and the treasures of the king's house, the 
hostages also, and returned to Samaria. 

25 1[ And 'Amaziah the son of Joash king 
of Jndah lived after the death of Joash son 
of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years. 

26 Now the rest of the act.s of Amaziah, 
first and last, behold, are they not written 
in the book of the kings of Judah and 
Israel ? 

27 H Now J after the time that Amaziah 
did turn away from Hollowing the Lord 
they II made a conspiracy against him in 
Jerusalem; and he fled to Lachish: but 
they sent to Lachish after him, and slew 
him there. 

28 And they brought him upon horses, 
and buried liim with his fathers in the 
city of *Judah. 



f chap. 22:7: verse IB; 1 Kings, 12: IS. f Heb. tmilten. « Hinp. 
21:17. ^ Heb. gate of it that luokelh. h chap. 2K : >). i 2 Kin^s, 
14:17, etc. j cbnp. 1.t:2. % Heh. after. [| Hvh. contpireil u 
compiracy. * That is, the city of David; 2 Kings, 14 : 20. 



and thus save themselves from many of the evils 
which would otherwise come upon them. 

9. Men are often very reluctant to do what is 
right, on account of the pecuniary sacrifice it may 
involve ; but whatever be the sacrifice which obe- 
dience to God may occasion, it is wise to make it. 
for God can give us much more than we lose for . 
his sake. 

12. Apostasy and cruelty are often united. W.-tr 
tends to the production and increase of both, and is 
a source of innumerable evils to mankind. 

14. That men who know the true God and have 
received special blessings from him, should renounce 



Uzziali's prosperity, 



II. CHROxMCLES, XXVI. 



sin, and punishment. 



tlut CHAPTER XXVI. 

1 Uzziah succeeding, and reigning well in the days of 
Zechariah, prospereth. Ki Waxing proud, he invad- 
etli the priest"s office, and is smitten with leprosy. 
2'i He dielh, and Jotham succeedelh him. 

THEN *all the people of Jiulah took 
Uzziah,* who was sixteen ycar.s old, 
and made him king in the room of his 
father Amaziah. 

2 He built Eloth, and restored it to ,Iudah, 
after that the king slept with his fathers. 

3 Sixteen years old ?i'«.s- Uzziah when he 
began to reign, and he reigned fifty and 
two years in Jerusalem. His mother's 
name also teas Jecoliah of Jerusalem. 

4 And he did that ichich was right in 
the sight of the Lord, aecording to all 
that his father Amaziah did. 

5 And he sought God in the days ''of 
Zechariah, who had understanding in the 
visionst of God : and as '^ long as he sought 
the Lord, God made him to prosper. 

6 And he went forth and warred against 
the Philistines, and brake down the wall 
of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh, and the 
wall of Ashdod, and built cities -about 
Ashdod, and among the Philistines. 

7 And God helped liim ''against th€ 
Philistines,'^ and against the Arabians that 
dwelt in Gur-baal, and the Mchunim. 

8 And the Ammonites gave ''gifts to Uz- 
ziah ; and his name s spread abroad even to 
the entering in of Egypt ; for he strength- 
ened himself exceedingly. 

9 Moreover Uzziah built towers in Je- 
rusalem at the s corner-gate, and at the 
valley-gate, and at the turning of the wall, 
and i fortified them. 

10 Also he built towers in the desert, 
and 'digged many wells : for he had much 
cattle, both in the low country, and in the 
jilains ; husbandmen also, and vine-dress- 
ers in the mountains, and in tCarmel: 
for he loved ^husbandry. 

1 1 Moreover Uzziah had a host of fight- ^ 
ing men, that went out to war by bands,; 
aecording to the number of their account 
by the hand of Jeiel the scribe and Maa- 
seiah the ruler, under the hand of Hana- 
niah, one of the king's captains. 



» i Kinss, 14:21, 'ii; 15: 1, etc. * Or, Azariah. k chap. 2-« : 2 ; 
Gen. 41 : I."*, 38 ; Dan. 1 : 17 ; 10 : 1. t Heb. seeinff. c I Cliron. 
2-2:13. J Or, m the country <)/ A/irfod. d lChron.5:20; Isa. 
I4:2f'. ' chap. 21 : 16. f chnp. 17:11. \ Heb. wtnt. f chap. 
25:2;!; Neh. 3:13, 32; Zocli. 14:10. n Or, repairtd. "Or, 
ctil out muny citterns. \ Oz, fruitful Jteldi. X Hih. ground. 



liis service, bow down to idols, and expect to be 
trainers by it, shows that the heart is deceitful above 
;ill thin£;s and desperately wicked. 

16. \^'hen men persevere in rejecting the coun.se! of 
G-od. it is evidence that he intends to destroy them. 

17. As a punishment for their sins, God otten suf- 
fers the wicked, in gratification of their pride, to 
engage in projects which occasion their ruin. 

'Si^ Turning away from the Lord is often followed 
by great troubles from men, who, though they mean 
not so, neither does their heart think so, are yet 



12 The whole number of the chief of 
the fathers of the mighty men of valor 
loere two thousand and six hundred. 

13 And under their hand u-us ^an army, 
three hundred thousand and seven thou- 
sandand five hundred, that madewarwith 
mighty power, to help the king against 
the enemy. 

14 And Uzziah prepared for them through- 
out all the host shields, and .spears, and 
helmets, and habergeons, and bows, and 
slings II to cast stones. 

15 And he made in Jerusalem engines, 
invented by cunning men, to be on the 
towers and upon the bulwarks, to shoot 
arrows and great stones withal. And his 
name *spread far abroad ; for he was 
marvellously helped, till he was strong. 

1 6 ^ But '■when he was strong, his heart 
was lifted up to his 'destruction: for he 
transgressed against the Lord his God, 
and J went into the temple of the Lord to 
burn incense upon the altar of incense. 

17 And^ Azariah the priest went in af- 
ter him, and with him fourscore priests 
of the Lord, that were valiant men : 

18 And they withstood Uzziah the king, 
and said unto hitn, It appcrtainvth 'not 
unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto 
the Lord, but to the priests the sons of 
Aaron, that are '"consecrated to burn in- 
cense : go "out of the sanctuary ; for thou 
hast trespassed; ncither.v/i(i//j7 6c for thine 
honor" from the Lord God. 

19 Tlien L^zziah was Pwroth, and had a 
censer in his hand to burn incense: and 
while") he was wroth with the priests, 
the leprosy even rose up in his forehead 
before the priests in the house of the 
Lord, from beside the inccnsc-altar. 

20 And Azariah the chief priest, and 
all the priests, looked upon him, and be- 
hold, he xi'as leprous in his forehead, and 
they thrust him out from thence; yea, 
himself"^ hasted also to go out, because 
the Lord had smitten him. 

21 And 'Uzziah the king was a leper 
unto the day of his death, and dwelt in 
a + several 'house, being a leper; for he 



% HfiXt. the power of an army. \\ Heh. ttonei of ttinpt. * Heb 
went forth, h chap. 25: 1<(; Deiit. 8: 14: 32: 1."). i I'rov. IB: IS 
i 2 Kings, 16:12, 13. k 1 Cliron. 6: 10. 1 Num. 16: 40: 18 : <. 
n> Ex. :!0:7, 8; Heb. 6:4. n l Cor. ft : .1. ol Sam. 2:30. p chap. 
25:16. 1 Num. 12:10; 3Kinga,6:27. r E!ither6: 12. •2King«, 
15:6. fWeb.free. t Lev. 13 : 46; Nuni.6: 2 ; 12: 16; 2 Kingi>,7:3. 



instrumental in executing the wrath of God upon 
those who rebel against him. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 
7. Mehtini >7i ; a people in Arabia. 
10. Carmel ; a fertile region in Judah. 
14. Habergeons ; armor covering the neck and 
breast. 

21. Several house : one separate from all other.*!. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
5. Those who rightly seek the Lord will not want 
569 



Jothams good reign. II. CHRONICLES, XXVIII. Evil reign of Aha 



was cut off from the hoii.se of the Lord: 
aiul .lotham his sou icas over the king's 
house, judging the people of the land. 

22 ^ Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, 
first and last, did "Isaiah the prophet, the 
son of Amoz, write. 

23 So '' Uzziah slept with his fathers, 
and they buried him M'ith his fathers in 
the field of the burial which belonged to 
the kings; for they said. He is a leper: 
and Jotham his son reigned in his stead. 

CHAPTEll XXVII. 

1 .Totham reigning well prospereth. 5 He siibdueth the 
Ammonites. 7 His reign. 9 Ahaz succeedeth him. 

JOTHAM *= U'as twenty and five years 
old Mhen he began to reign, and he 
reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His 
mother's name also teas Jerushah, the 
daughter of Zadok. 

2 And he did that u-hich was right in 
the sight of the Lord, according to all 
that his father LTzziah did : howbeit he 
entered not into the temple of the Lord. 
And the people did yet corruptly. 

3 He built the high gate of the house of 
the Lord, and on the wall of *Ophel he 
built much. 

4 Moreover he built cities in the moun- 
tains of Judah, and in the forests he built 
castles and towers. 

') *[] He fought also with the king of the 
Ammonites, and prevailed against them. 
.Vnd the children of Ammou gave him 
the same year a hundred talents of sil- 
A'er, and ten thousand measures of wheat, 
and ten thousand of barley. tSo much 
did the children of Amnion pay unto him, 
both the second year, and the third. 

6 So .lotham became ''mighty, because ''he 
preparedt hiswaysbefore the Lord his God. 

7 1[ Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, 
and all his wars, and his ways, lo, they 



arc written in the book of the 
kings of Israel and Judah. 

8 He was five and twenty years old 
when lie began to reign, and reigned six- 
teen years in Jerusalem. 

9 ^ And Jotham slept with his fathers, 
and they buried him in the city of David : 
and Aliaz his son reigned in his stead. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

1 Ahaz reigning very wickedly is greatly afflicted by 
the Syrians. 6 Judah being captivated by the Israel- 
ites is sent home by the counsel of Oded the prophet. 
16 Ahaz sending (or aid to Assyria is not helped 
thereby. 2'2 In his distress he groweth more idola- 
trous. 20 He dying, Hezekiah succeedeth him. 

A H AZ ^ icas twenty years old when he 
began to reign, and he reigned six- 
teen years in Jerusalem: but he did not 
that which vas right in the sight of the 
Lord, like David his father: 

2 For he walked in the ways of the 
kings of Israel, and made also ^molten 
images for ''Baalim. 

3 Moreover lie ^^ burnt incense in the 
valley' of the son of Hinnom, and J burnt 
his children in the fire, after the abomi- 
nations of the heathen whom the Lord 
had cast out before the children of Israel. 

4 He sacrificed also and burnt incense 
in the high places, and on the hills, and 
under every green tree. 

5 Wherefore'' the Lord his Cod delivered 
him into the hand of the king of Syria ; and 
they smote him, and carried away a great 
multitude of them captives, and brought 
ihcm to "Damascus. And he was also de- 
livered info the hand oF the king of Israel, 
who smote him with a great slaughter. 

6 For ' Pekah the son of Remaliah slew 
in Judah a hundred and twenty thousand 
in one day, icJiich ivere all *valiant men; 
because '"they had forsaken the Lord God 
of their fathers. 



a Isa. 1:1. b Isa. 6:1. c 2 Kinpi, 16 :3-2, etc. * Or, tlie 
/ou!<!r, chap. .13:14; Nell. 3:26, 27. f Heb. TAij. d cliap. 26 ; .S. 
"cliap. 19:3. t Or, ettablUhcd. f 2 Kings, 1«: 2, etc. f Kx. 
34:17: Lev. 1P:<. h Judges 2: 11; Hosea 2 : 13, 17. % Or, 



any good thing, but may expect to prosper both for 
this life and tlie life to come. 

7. Help from God is needful in all human under- 
takings, and those who receive it may hope to tri- 
umph over all their foes. 

10. Husbandry is a most healthful, honorable, 
and useful employment ; and one which has en- 
gaged the attention and the labors of some of the 
wisest and best of mankind. 

11. Dependence on God, when rightly viewed, will 
not prevent the diligent use of means, or hinder one 
from making all proper efforts lo accomplish his ends. 

16. When men are greatly prospered, unless kept 
humble by divine grace they will be lifted up with 
pride, and in the gratification of it work out their 
ruin. 

19. Men who refuse to hearken to friendly warn- 
ings, and are angry iit just rebukes, may expect to 
be visited with the sore judgments of heaven. 

21. Sin is a source of great calamities here, and 
570 



nffcied sacrifice. i 2 Ki 


ngs, 23: 10. j cliap. 33:6; Lev. 18:21 ; 


Ksa. 106::i7; .ler. 32 : Sii ; 


Kzek. 16:20, 21 ; Mirnlifi:7. k Ifi». 


T: 1. II Hcb. Darmctek. 


1 2 Kiiiss, 16 : 27. * Hcb. son$ of valor. 


m neut.31 : 10, 17; Josh 


24:20; Isa 1:28; Jer. 15 :H. 



if not repented of, will cause endless misery here- 
after. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

2. He entered not into the temple ; as Uzziah 
rashly did to burn incense. Chap. 26 : 16. 

3. Ophel ; aheighton the east side of Jerusalem. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Men who imitate the virtues and avoid the 
vices of those who have gone before them, may ex- 
pect the blessing of God. 

6. Those who in all their ways acknowledge God, 
and whatever they do, do it heartily from love to his 
name and service, will ris{; to gre;it eminence in spirit- 
ual life, be blessed in death, and glorious to eternity. 

CHAPTER XXVni. 

3. Yaltey of thcsonof Hinnom ; a valley south 
of Jerusalem, into which was afterwards tiirown the 
filth of the city. 

6. Pekah: the kins: of Israel. 



Captives restored. 



II. CHRONICLES, XXVHI. 



Idolatry of Jlhaz. 



J.M.K63. y ^,^jj 2ichri, a mighty man of 
Ephraim, slew Maaseiah the kind's son, 
and Azfikam the governor of the house, 
and Elkanah that ica.s *next to the king. 

8 ^[ And the children of Israel carried 
away captive of their ^brethren two hun- 
dred thousand, women, sons, and daugh- 
ters, and took also away much spoil from 
them, and brought the spoil to Samaria. 

9 But a prophet of the Lord was tlicre, 
whose name icas Oded : and he went out 
before the host that came to Samaria, and 
said unto them, Behold, because the Loun 
God of your fathers was wroth with Ju- 
dah, he hath delivered them into your 
hand, and ''ye have slain them in a rage 
that "^reacheth up unto heaven. 

10 And now ye purpose to keep under 
the children of Judah and Jerusalem for 
bondmen'' and bondwomen unto you : but 
are there not with you, ^even with you, 
sins against the Lord your God*? 

1 1 Now hear me therefore, and "^deliver 
the captives again, which yc have taken 
captive of your brethren: ?for the fierce 
wrath of the Lord is upon you. 

12 Then certain of the heads of the 
children of Ephraim, Azariah the son of 
Johanan, Bereehiah the son of Meshille- 
moth, and Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, 
and Amasa the son of Iladlai, stood up 
against them that came from the war, 

13 And said unto them. Ye shall not 
bring in the captives hither: for whereas 
we have offended against the Lord al- 
rrndy, ye intend to add more to our sins and 
to our trespass : for our trespass is great, 
and there is fierce wrath against Israel. 

14 So the armed men left the captives 
and the spoil before the princes and all 
the congregation. 

1 5 And the men which were expressed by 
name'" rose up, and took the captives, and 
with the spoil clothed all that were naked 
among them, and arrayed them, and shod 
them, and gave them to 'eat and to drink, 
and anointed them, and carried all the fee- 
ble' of the in upon asses, and brought them 
to .Jericho, the ''city of palm-trees, to their 
brethren : then they returned to Samaria. 

16 ^[ At that 'time did king Ahaz send 
unto the kings of Assyria to help him. 

* Heh. Wif wcnnd « cliii|). 1 1 : 4. b Pss, fi9 : 26; Isn. tO:.V7: 
47:H; .ler. 60:17, 18: Ezek. 25:12-17; 2H:2,3: Obnd. 10, etr. ,' 
Zecli. 1 : !.=>. c Gen. 4: 10; Eira»:fi; Rev. IS:.!!, d Lev. 2n : :13, 
etr. Jer. 2S : 2H ; Mat 7 : 2-4. < Is«. .W : 6 ; Jer. S4 1 1 4. f Jiw. 
.•:13. b verse 12. i 2 Kings, B:22 ; Prov. 2.=i:21, 22; Luke 6:27, 



8. Samaria ; the capital of Israel. 

9. A rage that rcacheth np unto heaven; a 
very great and wicked rage. ' 

19. Naked ; weak and defenceless. 
INSTRUCTION'S. 

.3. The frequency with which God's ancient peo- 
ple forsook him and imitated the heathen, showed 
that they did not like to retain him in their know- 



17 For again the ""Edomites had come 
and smitten Judah, and carried away 
captives, t 

18 The "Philistines also had invaded 
the cities of the low country, and of the 
south of Judah, and had taken Beth-she- 
mesh, and Aijalon, and Gedcroth, and 
Soco with the villages thereof, and Tim- 
nah with the villages thereof, (limzo also 
and the villages thereof: and they dwelt 
there. 

19 For the Lord brought "Judah low be- 
cause of Ahaz king of Israel : for he made 
JiidahPnaked, and transgressed sore against 
the Lord. 

20 And iTilgath-pilneser king of As- 
syria came unto him, and distressed him, 
but strengthened liim not. 

21 For Ahaz took away a portion o"/ 
of the house of the Lord, and out of the 
house of the king, and of the princes, 
and gave jVunto the king of Assyria : but 
he helped him not. 

22 *\\ And in the time of his di.strcss did 
he trespass yet more against the Lord: 
this is that king Ahaz. 

23 For he sacrificed unto the gods of 
Damascus, t which smote him : and he 
said, Because the gods of the kings of 
Syria help them, therefore will I sacrifice 
to them, that they may Mielp me. But 
they were the "ruin of him, and of all 
Israel. 

24 And Ahaz gathered together the ves- 
sels of the house of God, and cut in pieces 
the vessels of the house of God, and 'shut 
up the doors of the house of the Lord, 
and he made him altars in every corner 
of Jerusalem. 

25 And in "every several city of Judah 
he made high places to ^burn incense 
unto other gods, and provoked to anger 
the Lord God of his fathers. 

26 Tl Now the rest of his acts and of all 
his ways, first and last, behold, they are 
written in the book of the kings of Judah 
and Israel. 

27 And Ahaz slept with his fathers, 
and they buried him in the city, even in 
Jerusalem : but they brought him not into 
the sepulchres of the kings of Israel : and 
Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead. 



3S. jKom.lSrl. k Deut, 94: 3 ; Judgirs I : 16. 1 2 Kin:pi. Hi: 7. 
in Ob.nl. 10. 13, 14. t Yi'-h. a oiptimtv. ■> Eickiel 16:J7, .".7. 
o Pan. 106:4.3. p Ex. 32:;S; Rev. 3: 17. I.« ; Ifi: IB. <1 2 Kingit, 
15:2y: 16:7-9. J Heb. DofmfK*. r.ler. 10: ."i; 44: r7-2« • 1«. 
1:28; Hos. 13:9. i diap. 2!) : 3, 7. o Jer. 1 1 : 1:1 \Ot,«ffcr. 



ledtre, and were therefore often given up to their 
own hearts' lusts, to work all uncleanness with 
greediness. 

5. When rulers and people imitate the heathen 
in their practices, tliey may expect the heathen to 
hecome instruments oi their piinifhinc^it, and exe- 
cutioners of divine venge.ince upon them for their 
sins. 

071 



Hezekiah's good reign. 



II. CHRONICLES, XXIX. 



I7te temple cleansed. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

1 Hezekiah's good reign. 3 He re.storeth religion. 5 
He exhorteth the Levites. I'i They sanctify them- 
selves, and cleanse the house of God. '.W Hezekiah 
offerelh solemn sacrifices, wherein the Levites were 
more forward than the priests. 

HKZEKI All" began to reign ivhen he 
zcas five and twenty years old, and 
he reigned nine and twenty years in Je- 
rusalem. And his mother's name was 
Abijah, the daughter of'Zechariah. 

2 And he did that ichich v-as right in the 
sight of the Lord, according to all that 
David his father had done. 

3 "i" He in the ■= first year of his reign, in 
the first month, ''opened the doors of the 
house of the Lord, and repaired them. 

4 And he brought in the priests and the 
Levites, and gathered them together into 
the east street, 

5 And said unto them, Hear me, ye Le- 
vites, ''sanctify now yourselves, and sanc- 
tify the house of the Lord God of your 
fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out 
of the ""holy place. 

6 For Sour fathers have trespassed, and 
done that ichich teas evil in the eyes of the 
Lord our God, and have forsaken him, and 
have'' turned away their faces from the habi- 
tation of the Lord, and * turned thcir'ba.cks. 

7 Also they have 'shutuplhedoorsofthe 
porch, and put out the lamps, and have not 
iDurned incense nor offered burnt-offerings 
iu tlic holy place unto the God of Israel. 

8 Wherefore J the wrath of the Lord was 
upon Judah and .lerusalem, and he hath 
delivered them to ttroublc, to astonishment, 
and to '' hissing, as yc see with your eyes. 

9 For, lo, our fathers have ' fallen by the 
sword, and our sons and our daughters 
and our wives are in captivity for tiiis. 

10 Now it i.'i in my heart to make a cove- 
nant'" with the Lord God of Israel, that his 
fierce wrath may turn away from us. 

1 1 My sons, be not now ^negligent : for 
the Lord hath "chosen you to stand before 



« 2King8, 18:1, etc. b cliap.26:.5. c Pea. 101 : ."i ; Gal. 1:16. 
il verse 7. o clinp. 3.5: fi; 1 Cliron. 15: 12. f Kzek. S:."). 9, etc. 
I! Nell. 9: 1«. h Jer. 2:27; Ezek. 8:16. * Heh. given the neck. 
i r1inp.C8:24; ver.ie 3; Mai. 1:10. j cliap.24:in. t Heb.com- 
msd'on, Deut.28:2/>. k lKings,9:8; Jer. 18: 16, 16; 25:9, 18. 

16. No application to the wicked and no depend- 
ence on creatures will help those who have God for 
their enemy, or deliver them from the eflVcts of his 
wrath against their sins. 

2Q. Distresses which come upon men on account 
of their sins, instead of leading them to repentance, 
will if they are left to themselves lead them to tres- 
pass more and more, till they beinn; often reproved 
and hardening their hearts, are suddenly destroyed 
and that without remedy. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

T). Srr7icfifi/; cleanse. 

G. The ha))itatio)i. of the Lord ; the temple, 
where the Lord manifested his presence. 

IG. The brook ICidroii ; on the east of Jerusa- 
lem. 



him. to serve him, and thatyeshould ^b^b.^: 
minister unto him, and ^burn incense. 

12 HThen the Levites arose, •jNIahath 
the son of Amasai, and Joel the son of 
Azariah, of the sons of the " Kohathites : 
and of the sons of ^Nlcrari; Kish the son 
of Abdi, and Azariah the son of Jehale- 
lel : and of the Gershonites; Joah the son 
of Zimmah, and Eden the son of Joah : 

13 And of the sons of Elizaphan ; Shim- 
ri, and Jeiel: and of the sons of Asaph; 
Zeehariah, and Mattaniah : 

14 And of the sons of Heman ; Jehiel, 
and Shimei : and of the sons of Jeduthun ; 
Shemaiah, and Uzziel. 

15 And they gathered their brethren, 
and P sanctified themselves, and came, ac- 
cording to the commandment of the king, 
byli the words of the Lord, to ''cleanse the 
house of the Lord. 

16 And the priests went into the inner 
part of the house of the Lord, to cleanse 
it, and brought "^out all the uncleanness 
that they found in the temple of the Lord 
into the court of the house of the Lord. 
And the Levites took it, to carry it out 
abroad into the brook Kidron. 

17 Now they began on the first r/a?/ of the 
first month to sanctify, and on the eighth 
day of the month came they to the' porch of 
theLoRD : sotheysanctificdlhehouscofthe 
Lord in eight days ; and in the sixteenth 
day of the first month they made an end. 

18 Then they went in to Hezekiah the 
king, and said, We have cleansed all the 
house of the Lord, and the altar of burnt- 
offering, with all the vessels thereof, and 
the show-bread table, with all the ves- 
sels thereof. 

19 Moreover all the vessels, which king 
Ahaz in his reign did 'cast away in his 
transgression, have we prepared and sanc- 
tified, and behold, they are before the 
altar of the Lord. 

20 H Then Hezekiah the king rose early, 



%: 



I cliap. 28:5, 8, etc.; Lam. 5:7. ™ clinp. 15: 12 

n Num. 3 : 6, 7 ; 18 : 2-B. % Or, offer tna-ijice. 

p verse 5. \\ Or, in the businest. <| 1 Chron 23 : 28. r Mat 

21:12,13. al Kings, 6:3. I chap. 28 : 24. 



17. The first mo7ith; Nisan, part of MaTch and 
April. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. In entering on a new situation it is of great 
Importance to begin right ; for the first actions may 
have a leading influence upon all which follow. 

.5. Ministers of religion must themselves be holy, 
to be instrumental of promoting holiness in others. 

8. All troubles are the consequences of sin, and 
should lead men to repentance and to newness of 
life. 

1.5. In reformations, ministers of the gospel and 
civil rulers should take the lead, go before the people 
in every good work, and set examples which all may 
safely and usefully follow. 

25'. Hearty turning unto the Lord is a source of 



Hezekiah offereth 



ir. CHRONICLES, XXX, 



solemn sacrifices. 



J.":'^- and gathered Ihc rulers of the city, 
and went up to the house of the Lord. 

2 L And they brought seven bullocks, and 
scA^en rams, and seven lambs, and seven he- 
goats, for a sin-offering *for the kingdom, and 
for the sanctuary, and for Judah. And he 
commanded the priests the sons of Aaron 
to offer them on the altar of the Lord. 

22 So they killed the bullocks, and the 
priests received the blood, and ''sprinkled 
it on the altar: likewise, when they had 
killed the rams, they sprinkled the blood 
upon the altar : they killed also the lamb's, 
and they sprinkled the blood upon the altar. 

23 And they brought *forth the he-goats 
for the sin-offering before the king and 
the congregation; and they laid their 
hands upon them : 

24 And the priests killed them, and they 
made reconciliation with their blood up- 
on the altar, to make an atonement for all 
Israel; for the king commanded that the 
burnt-offering and the sin-offering should 
be made for all Israel. 

25 And he set the Levites in the house of 
the Lord with cymbals, with psalteries, 
and witii harps, '^accordingtothecommand- 
ment of David, and of "^ Gad the king's seer, 
and Nathan the prophet : '"for so was t lie com- 
mand ment of the Lord tby his prophets. 

26 And the Levites stood with the '^in- 
struments of David, and the priests with 
the strumpets. 

27 And Hezekiah commanded to offer 
the burnt-offering upon the altar. And 
when"^ the burnt-offering began, the ''song 
of the Lord began also with the trumpets, 
and with the * instruments ordained by 
David king of Israel. 

28 And all the congregation worshipped, 
and the i!singers sang, and the trumpeters 
sounded; a)id all this continued until the 
burnt-offering was finished. 

29 And when they had made an end of 
offering, the king and all that were 'pres- 
ent with him ' bowed themselves, and 
worshipped. 

30 JMoreover Hezekiah the king and the 
princes commanded the Levites to sins 
praise unto the Lord with the words of 
David, and of Asaph the seer. And Ihey 
sang praises \Aith 'gladness, and they 
bowed'' their heads and worshipped. 

31 Then Hezekiah answered and said, 
Now ye have tconsecrated yourselves un- 
to the Lord, come near and bring sacrifices 



j and 'thank-offerings into the house of the 
Lord. And the congregation brought in 
sacrifices and thank-offerings ; and as many 

Jaswere of a free heart, burnt-offcring.s. 

I 32 And the number of the burnt-offer- 
ings, which the congregation brought, 
was threescore and ten bullocks, a hun- 

;dred rams, and two hundred lambs; all 

I these u'crc for a burnt-offering to the Lord. 
33 And the consecrated things were six 
hundred oxen and three thousand sheep. 

, 34 But the priests were too few, so tliat 
they could not flay all the burnt-ofrering.s : 
wherefore their brethren the Levites +did 
help"' them, till the work was ended, and 
until the other priests had sanctified them- 
selves ; "for the Levites ircre more °up- 

[ right in heart to sanctify themselves than 
the priests. 

35 And also the burnt-ofTerings n-ere in 
abundance, with the Pfat of the peace-of- 
ferings, and the ''drink-oflcrings {or every 
burnt-offering. So the service of the house 
of the Lord was set in order. 

30 And ■'Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the 
people, that God had 'prepared the peo- 
ple ; for the thing was done suddenly. 

CHAPTER XXX. 

1 Hezekiah proclaimeth a solemn passover on the sec- 
ond month for Judah and Israel. 1.3 The assembly, 
having destroyed the altars of idolatry, keep the feast 
fourteen days. 27 Tlie priests and Levites bless the 
people. 

AND Hezekiah sent to all Israel and .lu- 
dah,and wrote letters alsoto Ephraim 
and Manasseh, that they should come to the 
house of the Lord at Jerusalem, to keep 
the passover unto the Lord God of Israel. 

2 For the king had taken counsel, and 
his princes, and all the congregation in 
•Icrusalem, to keep the passover in the 
second' month. 

3 For they could not keep it at that 
time," because the priests had ^ not sanc- 
tified themselves sufiiciently, neither had 
the people gathered themselves togetlier 
to .Icrusalem. 

4 And the thing * pleased the king and 
all the congregation. 

5 So they established a decree to make 
proclamation throuirhout all Israel, from 
Beer-shcba even to Dan, that they should 
come to keep the passover unto the Lord 
God of Israel at Jerusalem : for they liad 
not done it of a long time in such sort as 
it was "written. 



» r.cv. 4:3, H. b I.ev.S: 14, etc.: Hel).i>:2l. ' Heb. near. 
c c1i:ip 8: 14; 1 Cliron. 16:4; 2:!:."!; ■» : I, etc. ^ 5 Sam. 24: II. 
• cliR >. OT: 12. t Heh. /.v the hand nf. I I Cbnin. 2:) : 5 ; P.<a. 
F7:7; l.'iO:'i-.i: Isn.SS: 2(1. t I Cliron. Ifi : ft. ^ Heb. in (Ac 
time. h clia|>. 2.1: 18; Ps.i. 137:S. 4. h Heh. handt of iiutnt- 
vicnts. WiXeh.simg. * Hch. found , i cl mp. 20: 1 8; r»«. 72:ll. 

n-radncss and joy; ."aid as it conies from God and 
is tfie fruit of lii.s Spirit, it should be acknowledged 
vrith adoring gratitude and praise. 

37 



j Pan. Il»l:2. k r..n. H-i-il. f Or, Jillrd fow knnd, chap. iX-.t. 
I Lev. 7:12. $ Heh. ttrenglhtntd. m rli»p. .•» : 1 1. ■ rlmp. 
30:fl. o Psn. 2ii:6: W: Ift. pl.ev.S:!!;^ q Num. l.'i:5-in. 
rEi™fi:22. • P»,T.'lO: 17; Pror. 1«: I. t Num. 9: 10. 11. ■ Fl. 
12:6. m. r ch.ip. 2fl : 34. \ Hcb. tcnl tight in the tytl iff. 
w I>cut. 12 : 32 ; 1 Cnr. 11:2. • 



CHAPTER :XXX. 
5. As it was ifritloi ; vniiten and required in 
the law of Moses. 

573 



The passovcr proclaimed, II. CHRONICLES, XXX. 



and kept with joy. 



6 So the posts went with the letters 
from* the king and his princes through- 
out all Israel and Jndali, and according 
to the commandment of the king, saying, 
Ye children of Israel, *turn again unto 
the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and 
Israel, and he will return to the ''rem- 
nant of you, that are escaped out of the 
hand of the kings of Assyria. 

7 And be not ye like your "^fathers, 
and like your brethren, which trespassed 
against the Lokd God of their fathers, 
u-ho therefore gave them "'up to desola- 
tion, as ye see. 

8 Now The ye not ""stifr-necked, as your 
fathers li'ere. but ^ yield '^yourselves unto 
the Lord, and enter into his sanctuary, 
which he hath sanctified for ever : and 
serve the Lord your God, that the s fierce- 
ness of his wrath may turn away from you. 

9 For if ye turn again unto the Lord, 
your brethren and your children shall 
find compassion before ■■ them that lead 
them captive, so that they shall come 
again into this land : for the Lord your 
God is 'gracious and merciful, and will 
not turn away his face from you, if ye 
returnJ unto him. 

10 So the posts passed from city to city, 
through the country of Ephraim and Ma- 
nasseh, even unto Zebulun : but '' they 
laughed them to scorn, and mocked them. 

11 Nevertheless, 'divers of Ashcr and 
Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled them- 
selves, and came to Jerusalem. 

12 Also in .Tudah the hand of ""God was 
(o give them one heart to do the com- 
mandment of the king and of the princes, 
by "the word of the Loud. 

13 ^And there assembled at "Jerusa- 
lem much people to keep the feast of un- 
leavened bread in the second month, a 
very great congregation. 

14 And they arose and took away the 
altars? that were in Jerusalem, and all 
the altars for incense took they away, 
and cast than into the brook Kidron. 



* Heb. from the hand of. i Jer. 4:1; Lnni. B : 21 ; Joel 2 : 13, 
H. blcn.fijn. e E7.ek. 20: 13. etc.; Heb. .1:7-11. « cliap. 
29:8. t H*th. harden not yuurnecks. e Dent, 10: 16; Rom. 
10:21. % HvI'. five the Itand; 1 Clirnn.M:':4 : Kxra 10: 1'l. f Uom. 
H:13-I9- S rlmp. 29; 111. h Pjn. lOBHR. > Ex. 3) :fi; Nell. 9: 17, 
:;l ; Pea. 111:4; Joimh 4:2. j I'rov. 28 : 13 ; Isii. 55 : 7. k chap. 



6. Kings of Assyria ; Piil and Tigla th-pileser. 

14. The allars ; idolatrous altars which they had 
•auBcd to be erected. 

l."). Kilted the passover ; animals slain for the 
.)ocasion. Were ashamed ; to see the people go 
before them in the good work of reformiition. 

17. Not sail etified; by the performance of those 
ceremonicK which were roquirecl by tlie law of Moses. 

20. Healed the people ; pardoned and accepted 
them, because they were' sincere in his service, not- 
withstanding their ceremonial uncleanness. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The true friends cf God are exceedingly desir- 
574 



15 Then they killed the passover ^"c^i. 
on the fourteenth r/rtj/of the second month : 
and the i priests and the Lcvites were 
ashamed, and sanctified themselves, and 
brought in the burnt- offerings into the 
house of the Lord. 

16 And they stood in their ^ place after 
their manner, according to the law of !\Io- 
ses the man of God : the priests sprinkled 
the blood, which they received of the hand 
of the Lcvites. 

17 For there were many in the congre- 
gation that were not sanctified : therefore 
the Levites had the charge of the killing 
of the passovers for every one that was 
not clean, to sanctify them unto the Lord. 

18 For ■'a multitude of the people, even 
many of Ephraim and ISIanasseh, Issa- 
char and Zebulun, had not 'cleansed 
themselves, yet did they eat the passover 
otherwise than it was written. But Hez- 
ekiah prayed for Ihcm, saying. The good 
Lord pardon every one 

19 That 'prepareth his heart to seek 
God, the Lord God of his fathers, though 
he be not cleansed according to the purifi- 
cation of the sanctuary. 

20 And the Loud "hearkened to Heze- 
kiah, and healed the people. 

21 And the children of Israel that were 
presentll at Jerusalem kept the feast of 
unleavened bread seven days with great 
gladness : and the Levites and the priests 
praised the Lord day by day, .tinging 
with *loud instruments unto the Lord. 

22 And Hezckiah spake tcomfortably 
unto all the Levites that "taught tlie good 
knowledge of the Lord : and they did eat 
throvghout the feast scA'cn days, offering 
peace-offerings, and "making confession 
to the Lord God of their fathers. 

23 And the whole assembly took coun- 
sel to keep other seven days: and they 
kept other seven days with gladness. 

24 For Hezekiah king of Judah +did 
give to the congregation a thousand bul- 
locks and seven thousand sheep; and the 



.3R:16. 1 clinp.JI :16:ver8CS 18, 21. m Jer. 24 : 7 ; Er.ck. S6 : 26 ; 
Phil. 2:13. n chap. 20:25. o Psn. 84 : 7. p chap. 28:24. q chap. 
2<):.34. ^ Wv\i. tlandhig. r verse 11. • Num. 9: 10, etc. t chop. 
19:.3. u jHUie.'>.'i: I.'.. || Hfb. /",.««(/. * Heh. inslrumenll of 
strength. t Heb. to the hnnl :\f all, Isa. 40 : 2. t Deut. 33 : 10. 
w Kzra 10: 11. % Heb. lifted up, or offered. 



ous that all. brethren and strangers, friends and foes, 
should unite in worshipping him and .attending, ac- 
cording to his requirements, on his ordinances. 

6. If those wliit are suffering for their sins heartily 
forsake them and turn unto the Lord, he will have 
mercy upon tliem, turn from tlie titrccness of his 
anger, and do them good according to tlie riches of 
his grace. 

10. When the offers of mercy are made to men, 
some treat them with scorn and contempt; others 
who feel their need of mercy, joyfully accept tliem, 
humble themselves before God, and devote their 
bodies and souls to his service. 



Zeal of the people 



II. CHRONICLES, XXXI, 



against idolatry. 



t'.c.'rS^' princes gave to the congregation 
a thousand bullocks and ten thousand 
sheep : and a great number of priests 
sanctified themselves. 

25 And all the congregation of Judah, with 
the priests and the Levites, and all the con- 
gregation that came out of Israel, and the 
strangers that came out of the land of 
Israel, and that dwelt in Judah, rejoiced. 

26 So there was great joy in Jerusalem : 
for since the time of Solomon the son of 
David king of Israel there ivas not the like 
in Jerusalem. 

27 T[ Then the priests the Levites arose 
and blessed the people: and their voice 
was heard, and their prayer came vp 
to *his holy dwelling-place, even unto 
heaven. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

1 The people is forward in destroying idolatry. 2 Hez- 
ekiah orderelh the courses of the priests and Levites. 
and provideth for their work and maintenance. H 
The people's forwardness in otlerings and tithes. 11 
Hezekiah appointeth officers to dispose of the tithes. 
20 The sincerity of Ilezekiah. 

"VrOW when all this was finished, all 
_Ln Israel that were tpresent went out 
to the cities of Judah, and brake the tim- 
ages in * pieces, and cut down the groves, 
and threw down the high places and the 
altars'" out of all Judah and Benjamin, in 
Ephraim also and jNIanasseh, until Hhey 
had utterly destroyed them all. Then all 
the children of Israel returned, every man 
to his possession, into their own cities. 

2 *[[And Hezekiah appointed the '^courses 
of the priests and the Levites after their 
courses, every man according to his ser- 
vice, the priests and ''Levites for burnt- 
offerings and for pcace-ofTerings, to min- 
ister, and to give thanks, and to praise in 
the gates of the tents of the Lord. 

3 //<?appo;/if«/ also the king's portion of his 
substance for the burnt-offerings, to wit, for 
the morning and evening burnt-offerings, 
and thcburnt-oderings for t he sabbaths, and 
for the new moons, and for the set feasts, 
as it is ''written in the law of the Lord. 

4 Moreover he commanded the people that 



* H 


pl>. fh 


hahittttiim 


of his U, 


Hness 


V* 


1. w 


.-.. t Heb 


found. 


f Heb. statues, a •> Kin;; 


,18:4. li iliilp 


:>,» 


: H. 


\ Heb. to t 


nakean 




1 CI 


ron. 23:6; 


:4: l,etc 


. d 1 


CI. 


rnn. 


Ji.m. • N 


um., rli. 


28, -29. 


fNuti 


1.1 8. -8, etc. 


Neli.l:): 


ia-i3 


s 


M;ll. 


2:7; 1 Cor. H : 9-1 1 ; 



18. The proper prep.Tration of the heart is more 
important in the sij^lit of God. when attending on 
liis ordinances, than any mere outward observance ; 
and inability to attend on what is external, should 
not lead to the neglect of the heart. 

2"^. They -who attend on ordinances sincerely and 
are accepted of God, nevertheless need lurther in- 
struction as to his char.acter and will ; and ministers 
shoukl continue to give such instruction, tliat their 
hearers may understand the whole -will of God. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 
7. The third month ; Sivan, part of May and 



dwelt in Jerusalem to give the '"portion of 
the priests and the Levites, that t iiey might 
be encouraged «in the law of the Lord. 

5 IfAnd as soon as the commandment 
came Habroad, the children of Israel brought 
in abundance the ''first-fruits of corn, wine, 
and oil,and*honey, and of all the increase 
of the field ; and the tithe of all things 
brought they in abundantly. 

6 And conceniing the children of Israel 
and Judah, that dwelt in the cities of Ju- 
dah, they also brought in the 'tithe of oxen 
and sheep, and the tithe of holy things 
wiiich were consecrated unto the Lord 
their God, and laid them tby iicaps. 

7 In the third month tlicy began to lay 
the foundation of the heaps, and finished 
them in the seventh month. 

8 And when Hezekiah and the princes 
came and saw the heaps, they ^blessed 
the Lord, and his people Israel. 

9 Then Ilezekiah questioned with the 
priests and the Levites concerning the 
heaps. 

10 And Azariah the chief priest of the 
house of Zadok answered liim, and said. 
Since the people began to bring the offer- 
ings into the house of the Lord, we have 
had enough to eat, and have 'left plenty : 
for the Lord hath blessed his people ; and 
that which is left i.-; this great store. 

1 1 1[ Then Ilezekiah commanded to pre- 
pare ^chambers in the house of the Lord ; 
and they prepared thctn, 

12 And brought in the offerings and tlic 
tithes and the '"dedicated things faithful- 
ly : over which Cononiah the Lcvite was 
ruler, and Shimei his brother was the next. 

13 And Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Na- 
hath, and Asahel, and Jerimotli, and Joz- 
abad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and Ma- 
hath, and Bcnaiah, ivcre overseers hinder 
tlie liand of Cononiah and Shimei his 
brother, nt the commandment of Heze- 
kiah the king, and Azariah the ruler of 
the house of God. 

14 And Kore the son of Imnah the Le- 
vite, the porter toward the east, teas over 



Gal. fi: fi. II Heb. hrakt fotth. h F.j. ■:; : W. « Or, datit. 
27 : 30 : Dent. 14: 58. t Heb. heaps, heaps. i Lev. ^^^^. 
k 1 Cbrnn. 29 : 14 ; K».ri\ 7 : -27 ; 2 Cor. 8 : Ifi ; Phil. 4 : 10, l» 
1: 10. i Or, storrhouses. m S Kings, 1'2: lii. \ Heb. at. 


i Lev. 
Ifi, etc. 
IMiiL 



June. The sevetith month ; Tishri, part of Sep- 
tember and October. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The finishing of one duty should be a prepara- 
tion for the performance of others ; and we should 
never grow weary of well-doing, for in due time wc 
shall reap if we faint not. 

3. In all our efforts for reformation, the word of God 
should be our rule ; and a readiness to contribute lib- 
erally of our substance to support the ministers and 
worship of God, will be an evidence of sincerity, and 
a preparation for the reception of his ble.ssings. 

8. The bounties of providence and a disposition 
575 



Offerings and tithes. II. CHRONICLES, XXXII. SennaeheriV s invasion. 



the freewill-oneriiigs of God, to ^distrib- 
ute the oblations of the Lord, and the 
most holy tilings. 

15 And 'next him li'c/cEden, and Mini- 
amin, and Joshua, and Shemaiah, Ama- 
riah, and Shecaniah, in the '' cities of the 
priests, in tlicir tset olHce, to give to their 
brethren by courses, as well to the great 
as to the small: 

16 Besides their genealogy of males, 
from three years old and upward, even 
unto every one that entereth into the 
house of the Lord, his daily portion for 
their service in their charges according 
to their courses ; 

17 Both to the genealogy of the priests 
by the house of their fathers, and the Le- 
vitefi from "^twenty years old and upward, 
in their charges by their courses; 

18 And to the genealogy of all their lit- 
tle ones, their wives, and their sons, and 
their daughters, through all the congre- 
gation : for in their Jsct office they sanc- 
tified themselves in holiness: 

19 Also of the sons of Aaron the priests, 
which were in the '^fields of the suburbs 
of their cities, in every several city, the 
men that w^ere expressed by "=name, to 
give portions to all the males among the 
priests, and to all that were reckoned by 
genealogies among the Levites. 

20 1' And thus did Hezekiah throughout 
all Judah, and wrought that ichich teas 
good "^ and right and truth before the Lord 
his God. 

21 And in every work that he began in 
the service of the house of God, and in 
the^law, and in the commandments, to 
seek his God, he did it with all his heart, 
and ''prospered. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

1 Sennacherib inYading Jiidah, Hezekiah fortifieth him- 
self, and encourageth his people. 9 Against the blas- 
phemies of .Sennacherib, by message and letters, Hez- 
ekiah and Isaiah pray. 21 An angel destroycth the 
host of the Assyrians, to the glory of Hezekiah. 24 
Hezekiah praying in his sickness, God givelh him a 
sign of recovery. 2-5 He waxing proud is hum- 
bled by God. 27 His wealth and works. .31 His 
error in the ambassage of Babylon. 32 He dying, 
Manasseh succeedeth him. 

AFTER 'these things, and the estab- 
lishment thereof, Sennacherib king of 

« Nell. 13:13. * Heh. nl hit hand, b .1o»li. 21:9. f Or, liiirt, 
I Cliron. 9:M. e 1 Cliron. M; ■2^, 27. ^ Or, lru$l. d Lev. 
'25:34; Num. ^'i:2. • verses 1-2-1.".. » -2 Kings, '20: 3; .lolm 
1 : 47 ; Acts -24 ; IB: 1 Tliess. •2:10: 3 .Tohn, .^ K Ps:ilm I : 2, 3. 
Ii chap.i26:fi; Josll. 1 :7. 8 ; Mnt fi::l3; T: 24--27. i 2 Kiil^ls.lS: 13, 
etc. ; Isn. 3<i : I , etc. % Heb. Iirealc them up. || Hcb. hit face was 



rightly to use them, are both from the Lord, and 
.should be acknowledged as his gifts with devout 
thanksgiving and praise. 

\'2. Special care sliould be taken of charitable 
contributions, and faithful application made of them 
to the objects for which they were given. 

20. When men do heartily unto tlie Lord tliat which 
is true, right, and gnoil. he ai-cept.T thrin and their 
570 



Assyria came, and entered into Ju- *i"c.^3; 
dah. and encamped against the fenced cities, 
and thought to *win them for himself. 

2 And when Hezekiah saw that Sen- 
nacherib was come, and that Hhe was 
purposed to fight against Jerusalem, 

3 He took counsel with his princes and 
his mighty jncn to stop the ^waters of the 
fountains which icere without the city: 
and they did help him. 

4 So there was gathered much people 
together, who stopped all the ibuntains, 
and the brook that *ran through the midst 
of the land, saying. Why should the kings 
of Assyria come, and find much water? 

5 Also he strengthened himself, and 
built up all the ''wall that was broken, 
and raised it up to the towers, and an- 
other wall without, and repaired ']Millo 
ill the city of David, and made tdarts and 
shields in abundance. 

6 And he set captains of war over the 
people, and gathered them together to him 
in the street of the gate of the city, and 
spake -comfortably to them, saying, 

7 Be '"strong and courageous, be "not 
afraid nor dismayed for the king of Assyria, 
nor for all the multitude that is with liim : 
ior° there be more with us than with him. 

8 With him i.5 an Parm of flesh; but 
with 1 us is the Lord our God to help us, 
and to fight our battles. And the people 
rested 5 themselves upon the ''W'Ords of 
Hezekiah king of Judah. 

9 T[ After this did Sennacherib king of 
Assyria send liis servants to Jerusalem, 
(but he himself laidsics^e against Lachish, 
and all his Upower with him,) unto Hez- 
ekiah king of Judah, and unto all Judah 
that icere at Jerusalem, saying, 

10 Thus saith Sennacherib king of As- 
syria, Whereon do ye trust, that ye abide 
in the *siege in Jerusalem'? 

11 Doth not Hezekiah persuade you to 
give over yourselves to die by famine and 
by thirst, saying. The Lord our God shall 
deliver us out of the liand of the king of 
Assyria? 

12 Hath not the same Hezekiah taken 
away liis high places and his altars, and 
commanded Judah and Jerusalem, say- 



towar. j Isn. -22: H, 11. * Heh. c 
1 2 S.nm. .T : 9 ; I Kinss, <St:1A. f Or. i 
tothtirheart.ehnf.W-.i'i. m Tleiit.Sl 
r. : IK. p .ler. 17 : .'''. q chap. 13:1 
5 Heb. leaned. t Proverbs 12 : 25. 
ftrong-hold. 



terjloived. k clinp. 25 : 23. 
wards, or weapans. f Heb. 
8. n cllRp.20:15. oSKinps, 
I; Rnm. 8:31 ; 1 .luhn, 4:4. 
II Heb. dnminwn. * Or. 



offerings, and gives them all that prosperity which 
will advance his glory and their own highest good. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 
.5. Millo ; a citadel or fortress in Jerusalem. 
8. Rr.iird lliemselvrs ; believed what Hezekiah 
said, and depended upon ils fulfilment. 
0. l.'u-hixh : iii the south part of Judah. 



Fall of Sennacherib. 



TI. CHRONICLES, XXXII. 



HezekiaK'i death. 



B.c'TfJ" iiig, Ye shall worsliip before one 
altar, and burn incense upon if? 

13 Know ye not Avhat I and my fathers 
have 'done unto all the people of of Ro- 
lands? were the gods of the nations of 
those lands any ways able to deliver 
their lands out of my hand? 

14 Who wa.s there among all the gods of 
those nations that my fathers utterly de- 
stroyed, that could deliver his people out 
of my hand, that your God should be able 
to deliver you out of my hand? 

15 Now therefore let not Hezekiah de- 
ceive you, nor persuade you on this man- 
ner, neither yet believe him: for no god 
of any nation or kingdom was able to de- 
liver his people out of my hand, and out 
of the hand of my fathers: how ''much 
less shall your God deliver you out of 
my hand? 

16 And his servants spake yet more 
against the Lord God, and against his 
servant Hezekiah. 

17 He wrote also "^letters to rail on the 
Lord God of Israel, and to speak against 
him, saying, As the gods of the nations 
of other lands have not delivered their 
people out of my hand, so shall not the 
God of Hezekiah deliver his people out 
of my hand! 

18 Then they cried with a loud voice, 
in the Jews' speech, unto the people of 
Jerusalem that icere on the wall, to ''af- 
fright them, and to trouble them; that 
they might take the city. 

19 And "they spake against the God of 
Jerusalem, as against the gods of the peo- 
ple of the earth, ichich tvere the work of 
the hands of man. 

20 And "^for this cau.'ic Hezekiah the 
king, and the prophet Isaiah the sou of 
Amoz, Sprayed and cried to heaven. 

21 iy And 'Mhe Lord sent an 'angel, 
which cut off all the mighty men of val- 
or, and the leaders and captains in the 
camp of the king of Assyria. So he re- 
turned with shame of face to his own land. 
And when he was come into the house of 
his god, they that came forth of liis own 
bowels *slew him there with the sword. 

22 Til us 'the Lord saved Hezekiah and 



• Isa. 10: 14 ; l)«n ft: 19. b Dan. :l; li. e i Kinjs. 19:9, ctr. 
dNeli. fi:n. e 1 Sam. I7:.1B ; Job 1.1:0.1, W ; Pwilm 10: n, H : 
7n-R-lI i nS: 19, 20. f Isn. :i7: I, etc. b Ps.n. 50: lii : SI : H. 15. 
h i-.a. 10 : lfi-18 ; 42 : s. ' J Sam. 54 : 16 : P.«a. lf> : .10 ; Tim. S : W : 
fi:2'. * Vleb made him /all. j Psnim 37 : 39, 40 ; Hosca 1 : 7. 
k Psa 4S:I4: 71:20,21. t Heh.prccinut lliinfft. I iKingn, CO: I, 
etc ; Isa. 31: l,etc. X Or, wought a mitaele far him. n. Pb« 

l-"). How much less; as if Jehovah vrere less 
powerful than idols. 

21. //« fffive hima si^ii; SKino^s, 20:4-11. 
31. Th e business of the arnhassatlors ; 2Kings, 

20 : 12, 13. 

IXSTRTTTTONf!. 
7. Those who have God for their helper, have 
more for them than can ever be against them. 



the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the 
hand of Sennacherib the king of Assyria, 
and from the hand of all others, and ^guid- 
ed them on every side. 

23 And many brought gifts unto the 
Lord to Jerusalem, and tprcsenls to Hez- 
ekiah king of Judah : so that he was 
magnified in the sight of all nations from 
thenceforth. 

24 If In ' those days Hezekiah was sick to 
the death, and prayed unto the Lord : and 
he spake unto him, and he ^gave him a sign. 

25 But Hezekiah ""rendered not again 
according to the benefit done unto him; 
for his heart was "lifted up: "therefore 
there was wrath upon him, and npon Ju- 
dah and Jerusalem. 

26 Notwitlistanding, Hezekiah hum- 
bled himself for the ^ pride of his heart, 
both ^ he and the inhabitants of Jerusa- 
lem, iso that the wrath of the Lord came 
not upon them in the days of Hezekiah. 

27 i[And 'Hezekiah had exceeding much 
riches and honor : and he made himself 
treasuries for silver, and for gold, and for 
precious stones, and for spices, and for 
shields, and for all manner of ''pleasant 
jewels ; 

28 Storehouses also for the increase of 
corn, and wine, and oil; and stalls for all 
manner of beasts, and cotes for flocks. 

29 Moreover he provided him cities, 
and possessions of flocks and herds in 
abundance: for God had given him sub- 
stance very much. 

30 This same Hezekiah also stopped the 
upper*water-courscof(iihon, and brought 
it straight down to the west side of the 
city of David. And Hezekiah prospered 
in all his works. 

31 If Howbeit, in the bu.'sine.i.'! of the 
ambassadors* of the princes of Babylon, 
who "sent unto him to inquire of the 
wonder that was done in the land, God 
left him, to ''try him, that he might know 
all that icns in his heart. 

32 ^ Now the rest of the acts of Heze- 
kiah, and his tgoodness, behold, they are 
written in the vision of "Isaiah the proph- 
et, the son of Amoz, and in the book of the 
kings* of Judah and Israel. 



116:12. n rlnp. 26: 16; D.nn. S : 20, 23 : H^ib. 2 : 4. o rtnp. 
24 : IR. J Hel). Ii/Hnt up. 2 King*. 14:10 p .Irr. 56: IK, 19. 
q I Kin»!<,21 : 19. r Prov. 10:22. || Heh. intlrymeitll n/ iltlirt. 
< .lob I :3,9: 42: II. I Isa. 22:9. 1 1. ' HrU. inlrffrl'"- «2Kirn», 
20:12, etc.; Isa. 39: I. etc. » Peut »; 2, 16 : .Inm'K 1 : IX f Heb. 
kindnetiei. w Is*, cb. 36-39. n 2 King., ih. 16-20. 



10. Implicit confidence in God often appears to 
worldly men foolish and absurd ; and they o.xpect no 
more from him, than they do from the idols of the 
heathen. 

16. Speaking against the Lord is a preparation 
for experiencing his wrath. 

20. Prayer to God in trouble is the never failing 
resource of his people. 

577 



Reign of Manasseh . 



II. CHRONICLES, XXXIII. 



His captivity. 



33 And Hezekiah slept with his fathers, they will take heed to do all that ^b^c.^: 
and they buried hini in the *chiefest of I have commanded them, according to 
the sepulchres of the sons of David : and : the whole law and the statutes and the 
all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusa- ordinances by tlie hand of Moses. 



lem did him honor *at his death. And 
Manasseh his son reigned in his stead. 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

1 Manasseh's wicked reign. 3 He setteth up iJolatry, 
and would not be ailmnnished. 11 He is carried into 
Babylon. l"i Upon his prayer to God he is released, 
and putteth down idolatry. 18 His acts. 20 He dy- 
inS< Amon succeedeth him. '21 Amon reigning wick- 
edly is slain by his servants. 25 The murderers be- 
ing slain, Josiah succeedeth him, 

MANASSEH '' was twelve years old 
when he began to reign, and he reign- 
ed fifty and five years in Jerusalem : 

2 But did that tvhich was evil in the 
sight of the Lord, like unto the 'abomi- 
nations of the heathen, whom the Lord 
had cast out before the children of Israel. 

3 TTFor he tbuilt again the high places 
which Hezekiah his father ''liad broken 
down, and he reared up altars for Baa- 
lim, and made *" groves, and worshipped 
alF the host of heaven, and served them. 

4 Also he built altars in the house of 
the Lord, whereof the Lord had said. In 
Jerusalem shall my name be for ever. 

5 And he built altars for all the host of 
heaven in the two courts of the house of 
the Lord. 

6 And she caused his children to pass 
through the fire in the valley of the son 
of Ilinnom: also ''he observed times, and 
used enchantments, and used witchcraft, 
and dealt with a familiar sj)irit, and with 
wizards : he wrought much evil in the 
sight of the Lord, to provoke him to 
anger. 

7 And he set a carved image, the idol 
which he had made, in the Iiouse of God, 
of which God had said to David and to 
Solomon his son. In tliis house, and in 
Jerusalem, which I have chosen before 
all the tribes of Israel, will I put my 
name for ever : 

8 Neither will I any more remove the 
foot of Israel from out of the land which 
I have appointed for your fathers; so tliat 



9 So Manasseh made Judah and the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, ami to 
do worse than the heathen, whom the 
Lord had destroyed before the children 
of Israel. 

10 And the Lord spake to Manasseh, 
and to his people : but they would not 
hearken. 

11 ^Wherefore the Lord brouL^ht upon 
them tlie captains of the host * of the king 
of Assyria, which took jNlanasseh among 
the 'thorns, and J bound him with Metiers, 
and carried him to Babylon. 

12 And when he was in affliction, he 
besought the Lord his God, and ''hum- 
bled himself greatly before the God of his 
fathers, 

13 And prayed unto him : and 'he was 
entreated of him, and heard his supplica- 
tion, and brought him again to Jerusalem 
into his kingdom. Then ■" Manasseh knew 
that the Lord he teas God. 

14 Now after this he built a wall with- 
out the city of David, on the west side of 
Gihon, in the valley, even to the entering 
in at the fish-gate, and compassed about 
Ophel,ll and raised it up a very great height, 
and put captains of war in all the fenced 
cities of Judah. 

15 And he took away the "strange gods, 
and the idol out of the house of the Lord, 
and all the altars that he had built in the 
mount of the house of the Lord, and in 
Jerusalem, and cast them out of the city. 

16 And he repaired the altar of the 
Lord, and sacrificed thereon peace-offer- 
ings and "thank-olTerings, and command- 
ed Judah to serve the Lord (iod of Israel. 

17 Nevertheless Pthe people did sacri- 
fice still in the high places, yet unto the 
Lord their God only. 

18 UNow the rest of the acts of :Ma- 
nasseh,and his prayer unto his God, and 
the words of the seers that spake to him 
in the name of the Lord God of Israel, 



* Or, hinhrtt. «Prov. 10:7. b 2 Kings, 21 ; 1, etc. crimp, j Pan. 107 : 10-14, 
28 : 3 ; Peiit 1 8 : 9. 1 2. f H»!b. telurned anil huilt. il iliap. 30 : U ; ' 
3I:I;32.I2. t Deut. Hi : -21. fDeut.l7:3. B Eiek. 2:i : 37, 30. 
h Deut. 18: 10, II. t Hfl). which were Ihe king'i. I I.nm. 3: 7. 



25. Even good men, if left to themselves when 
greatly blessed of G-od, instead of rendering to him 
gratitude and praise, will be lifted up with pride, 
and thus draw down upon theiTLselves his chastise- 
ments. 

29. As all earthly substance comes from God, 
men should receive it as his gift, view it as his 
property, and use it according to his will. 

31. ijod often leaves men to themselves to try 
them, that they and others may know what is in 
their hearts, and to lead them to trust in him. Thev 
will then be as mount Zion that cannot be moved, 



% Or, cha 

I 1 Cliron. ,1:50; E7.rn«:2.3. 

II Or. the /oiwr, ch«p. 27:3. 
p i Kings, l,'S:4. 



ini. k Hn.«ea 5:1.'>; I Pet. « : fi. 
n, Psalm 9:16; Daniel 4 : 34, Sft. 
a versesS, S, 7. o Lev. 7:li. 



and in seeking him as their portion they will not 
want any good thing. 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 
6. Pass through the fire; a mode of devoting 
them to idols. 

10. The Lord spake : bv his prophets. 

l\STRrC'i'IOX.S. 
2. For wise reasons, Lrod often suffers the wicked 
to prosper for a time in their iniquity ; but if they 
continue, tlicy will find that judgment lingereth not 
and damnation slumbcreth not. 



Manasseh and ^mon. II. CHRONICLES, XXXIV. 



Josiah's good reign. 



of the kings of Israel 

19 His prayer also, and how God was 
entreated" of him, and ''all his sins, and 
his trespass, and the places wherein he 
built high places, and set up groves and 
graven images, "^before he was humbled: 
behold, they are written among the say- 
ings of *the seers. 

20 1[ So Manasseh slept with his fathers, 
and they buried him in his own house; 
and Anion his son reigned in his stead. 

21 U Anion'' v:as two and twenty years 
old when he began to reign, and reigned 
two years in Jerusalem. 

22 But he did that which icos evil in the 
sight of the Lord, as did Manasseh his 
father: for Anion sacrificed unto all the 
carved" images which IManasseh his fa- 
ther had made, and served them; 

23 And humbled not himself before the 
Lord, as Manasseh his father had hum- 
bled himself; but An^ou ^trespassed Onore 
and more. 

24 And liis servants conspired against 
him, and slew him in his own liouse. 

25 H But the people of the land ^slew 
all them that had conspired against king 
Anion: and the people of the land made 
Josiah his son king in his stead. 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

1 Josiah's good reign. 3 He destroyetti idolatry. 8 He 
taketh order for the repair of the temple. 14 Hilkiah 
having found a book of the law, .losiah sendeth to 
Huldah to inquire of the Lord. 23 Huldah prophe- 
sicth the destruction of Jerusalem, but respite thereof 
in Jo.siah's time. 29 Josiah, causing it to be read in 
a solemn assembly, reneweth the covenant with God. 

JOSIAH'' ira.9 eight years old when he 
began to reign, and he reigned in Je- 
rusalem one and thirty years. 

2 And he did that u-hich ims right in 
the sight of the Lord, and walked in the 
ways of David his father, and declined 
neither' to the right hand, nor to the 
left. 

3 T[For in the eighth year of his reign, 
while he was yet J young, he began to 
seek after the God of David his father : 
and in the twelfth year he began to '' purge 



^ 


1 .Tolin 


1:9. b 


Uoni 


S 


lA. 




P»a 


119:67, 


l,7.i. * 


Or, 


}J. 


■ni. d 


2 Kinw. 2 


:I9, 


etr 




Is 


n. 4J 


l:l 


etc. 


t Heb. m 


Ultl- 


j}fit 


d trespass, f .ler. 


7:26. 


1! 


ieji 


.V 


B; .N 


itn 


.Vi : 31 


33. hiK 


ns», 


■2-2. 


1 , etc. 


i Deut. 5 


.•Mi 


n 


11 


•M 


; ii«: 


14 


Josh 


1:7. j I 


rov. 



10. To reject instruction, and turn a deaf ear to 
all warnings, is an indication of approaching and 
speedy ruin. 

12. Afflictions may be made the means of leading 
tlie most hardened sinners to repentance, and thus 
preparing them for the reception of divine mercy. 

]:5. True repentance will show itself in earnest, 
aflVctionate, and persevering prayer; in breaking 
oir our sins by rijrhteousness, and our iniquities by 
turning unto the Lord. 

Ui. The true penitent will endeavor, as far as 
possible, to undo the mischiefs which in his days of 



Judah and Jerusalem from the 'high pla- 
ces, and the groves, and the carved ima- 
ges, and the molten images. 

4 And they brake down the altars of 
Baalim in his presence; and the + images, 
that U'ere on high above them, he cut 
down ; and the groves, and the carved 
images, and the molten images, he brake 
in pieces, and made dust of '"them, and 
strewed // upon the ^graves of them that 
had sacrificed unto them. 

5 And he "burnt the bones of the priests 
upon their altars, and cleansed Judah and 
Jerusalem. 

6 And so did he in the cities of Manas- 
seh, and Ephraim, and Simeon, even un- 
to Xaphtali, with their H mattocks round 
about. 

7 And when he had broken down the 
altars and the groves, and had beaten the 
graven images *into "powder, and cut 
down all the idols throughout all the land 
of Israel, he returned to Jerusalem. 

8 T[ Now in the eighteenth year of his 
reign, when he had purged the land, and 
the house, he sent Shaphan the son of 
Azaliah, and Maaseiah the governor of 
the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the 
recorder, to repair the house of the Lord 
his (iod. 

9 And when they came to Hilkiah the 
high-priest, they p delivered tlie money 
that was brought into the house of God, 
which the Levites that kept the doors 
had gathered of the hand of Manasseh 
and Ephraim, and of all the remnant of 
Israel, and of all Judah and Benjamin; 
and they returned to Jerusalem. 

10 And they put it in the hand of the 
workmen that had the oversight of the 
house of the Lord, and they gave it to 
the workmen that wrought in the house 
of the Lord, to repair and amend the 
house : 

1 1 Even to the artificers and builders 
gave they it, to buy hewn stone, and 
timber for couplings, and to t|loor the 
houses which the kings of Judah had 
destroyed. 

S:I7: Errl. 1-2: 1. kLev.2fi:30. 1 clinp. 33 : 17, 2i 1 Or. mn 
imnatl, rliii|.. M : .1. ■» i Kiiisx, 23 : -1. \ H.-l>./.i« of the frai-ti. 
n 1 Kings, 13:2. |( Or, iihim'«. ' Hvh. ti makt poutlfr. o I>ful. 
9:21. p J Kings, 12 : •». t Or, rafter. 



impenitence he has occasioned, and to reclaim to 
the love and service of Crod those whom his former 
vices have led astray. 

22. Many imitate their parents and superiors in 
wickedness, who do not imitate them in their re- 
pentance : and though they may be their sucrcwsors 
in this world, they will have no connection or fellow- 
ship with them in the world to come. 

CHAPTER XXXrV. 
6. Mat tods ; implements of husbandry, used iu 
digging. ^^^ 



The book of the law. 



II. CHRONICLES, XXXIV 



HtddaWs prophecy. 



12 And the men did the "work faithful- 
ly : and the overseers of them v:cre Jahath 
and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of 
Merari; and Zechaiiah and IMeshullam, 
of the sons of the Koliathites, to set it for- 
ward; and other 0/ the Levites, all that 
could skill of instruments of music. 

13 Also they were over the ''bearers of 
burdens, and were overseers of all that 
wrought the work in any manner of ser- 
vice : and of '^the Levites there were scribes, 
and officers, and porters. 

14 ^And Avhen they brought out the 
money that was brought into the house of 
the Lord, Hilkiah the priest found a ""book 
of the law of the Lord given *by INIoses. 

15 And Ililkiah answered and said to 
Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book 
of the law in the house of the Lord. And 
Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan. 

16 And Shaphan "carried the book to 
the king, and brought the king word back 
again, saying. All that was committed tto 
thy servants, they do it. 

17 And they have J gathered together 
the money that was found in the house 
of the Lord, and have delivered it into 
the hand of the overseers, and to the hand 
of the workmen. 

18 Then Shaphan the scribe told the 
king, saying, Hilkiah the priest hath giv- 
en me a book. And Shaphan read ^it 
before the king. 

19 And it came to pass, when the king 
had *^heard the words of the law, that he 
rent his clothes. 

20 And the king commanded Hilkiah, 
and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and 
Abdonil the son of Mieah, and Shaphan 
the scribe, and Asaiah a servant of the 
king's, saying, 

21 Go, s inquire of the Lord for mc, and 
for them that arc ''left in Israel and in 
.Tudah, concerning the words of the book 
that is found: for 'great z.? the w^rath of 
the Lord that is poured out upon us, be- 
cause our fathers have not kept the word 
of the Lord, to do after all that is written 
in this book. 

22 And Hilkiah, and ihcij that the king 
had appointed, went to Huldah the proph- 
etess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tik- 
vath, the son of *Hasrah, keeper of the 
wardrobe ;t now she dwelt in Jerusalem 
in the ^college; and they spake to her 
to that effect. 



Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Tell 
ye the man that sent you to me, 

24 Thus saith the Lord, Behold, J I will 
bring evil upon this place, and upon the 
inhabitants thereof, eve7i all the curses 
that are written in the book which they 
have read before the king of Judah : 

25 Because they have forsaken me, and 
haA-e burned incense unto other gods, that 
they might provoke mc to anger with all 
the works of their hands; therefore my 
wrath shall be poured ''out upon this 
place, and shall not be quenched. 

26 And as for the king of Judah, who 
sent you to inquire of the Lord, so shall 
ye .say unto him, Thus saith the Lord 
God of Israel covicerning the words which 
thou hast heard ; 

27 Because thy heart Avas 'tender, and 
thou didst "'humble thyself before God, 
when thou heardest his words against 
this place, and agai^ist the inhabitants 
thereof, and humbledst thyself before me, 
and didst rend thy clothes, and weep be- 
fore me; I have even heard ^thee also, 
saith the Lord. 

28 Behold, I will gather thee to thy fa- 
thers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy 
grave in peace, "neither shall thine eyes 
see all the evil that I will bring upon this 
place, and upon the inhabitants of the same. 
So they brought the king word again. 

29 Tl Then Ptlie king sent and gathered 
together all the elders of Judah and Je- 
rusalem. 

30 And the king went up into the house 
of the Lord, and all the men of Judah, 
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and 
the priests, and the Levites, and all the 
people, ^great and small: and he read in 
their ears all the words of the book of 
the covenant that was found in the house 
of the Lord. 

31 And the king 1 stood in his place, 
and made a ''covenant before the Lord, 
to walk after the Lord, and to keep his 
commandments, and his 'testimonies, and 
his statutes, with all his heart, and with 
all his soul, to 'perform the words of the 
covenant which are written in this book. 

32 And he caused all that were Upres- 
ent in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand 
to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem 
did according to tlie covenant of God, the 
God of their fathers. 



• chap. 31 :12; Nell. 7:2; 1 Cor.4;I. t> dinp.S: |g; Ne)i.4:IO. //</>A<i», 2 KiiiCT. 22 : H. \ 'Hrh. garmtnli. J Or, »f*oo/, or 
i: 1 Cliron. 2.T : 4, 6. * Deut. 17 : 1«, I«; Jnnli. 1 : 8. * Heh. by \ tccmd rart. J Jer. 6 : 19 ; 19: 3, IS i 3S : 17. k Inn. 4-2 :2S : Jer. 
the hu lid a/, e Jer. 36:20, 21. j Hvb. to Hu liaml of. ^ Heh. , 7 : M ; I.nm. 2 : 4 ; 4 : 1 1. 1 cliap. 33 : 12, 13 ; Psn. .14 : 18; M : 17 ; 
pourtil uul. nr melted. % Hcb. in rt. f Rom 7 : 7, 9. || Or, l»n (i7 : 15 ; 8« : 2 ; Kick. 9: 4. n, .lame* 4 : 8, 10. n I'sa. 10: 17; 
jlcMor.'i Kins«, 22:12. e Jer. 21 : 2 ; Ezek. 14: l.etc. ; 20: I, etc. ] Inn. fifi i 24. o 1 Kings, -21 : 99 ; SKinjn, 20; lil. p 2Kinp(. 2:1: 1, 
Iil8a.:l7:4. 1 l.cv. 26: 14, etc.; Ileiit, 2« : 1 S, etc. ; 29 : 1 8-2« ; I etc 5 Heb./iom<7>w/c«n/n.mo«. <i cliap.K : 13 ; 2KiDKl<, II : 14. 
30:17-19; 31:16-22; 32:15-25; Rom. 1 : 18 ; 2:8-12. * Or, I r .Icr. .W: 5. « Pea. 1 19: 1 11, 1 12. I r«a. 119: 106. || Heb./uiinrf. 



12. Covld skill of instruments ; were skilful ] in playing upon the instruments used in the temple. 
580 



Josiah keepeth 



II. CHRONICLES, XXXV. 



a solemn passovcr. 



8 And his princes "gave willinslv unto 
abominations^outof all the countries that the people, to the priests, and to the Le- 
pcrtained to the children of Israel, and made vitcs : Hilkiah and Zecliariah and .lehiel, 
all that were present in Israel to serve, rulers of the house of God, gave unto the 
even to serve the Lord their God. And priests forthc passover-oflerings two thou- 
all his ''days they departed not from *fol- sand and six hundred smalt callle, and 



lowing the Lord, the God of their fathers. 
CHAPTER XXXV. 

1 Josiah keepeth a most solemn passover. 20 He, pro- 
voking Pharaoh-necho, is slain at Megiddo. 25 Lam- 
entations for Josiah. 

MOREOVER, •= Josiah kept a passover and five hundred oxen, 
unto the Lord in Jerusalem: and 



three hundred oxen. 

9 Conaniah also, and Shemaiali and 
Nethancel, his brethren, and Hashabiah 
and Jeiel and Jozabad, chief of the Le- 
vites, *gave unto the Lc vitcs for pass- 
over-offerings five thousand small cuttle, 



they killed the passover on the fourteenth 
day^ of the first month. 

2 And he set the priests in their "charges, 
and encouraged them to the service of the 
house of the Lord, 



10 So the service was prepared, and tlie 
priests stood in their place, and the Le- 
vites in their '"courses, according to the 
king's commandment. 

11 And "they killed the passovcr, and 
the priests sprinkled the blood from their 



3 And said unto the Levitcs that taught j hands, and the Levites flayed tlici 
allTsraeLwhich were holy unto the Lord, I 12 And they removed the burnt-offcr- 
Put the holy ark in the house which Sol- 1 ings, that they might give according to 
omon the son of David king of Israel did • the divisions of the families of the peo- 
build ; s it .shall not be a burden upon your ! pie, to oiler unto the Lord, as // is "writ- 
shoulders : serve now the Lord your God, ten in the book of Moses. And so did they 



and his people Israel, 

4 And prepare yourselves by the houses 
of your fathers, after your courses, ac- 
cording to the ''writing of David king of 
Israel, and according to the 'writing of 
Solomon his son : 

5 And J stand in the holy place accord- 



with the oxen. 

13 And tlicy p roasted the passover with 
fire according to the ordinance : but the 
other holy offerings isod they in pots, and 
in caldrons, and in pans, and tdividcd 
them speedily among all tlie people. 

14 And afterward thcv made readv for 



ing to the divisions of the tfamilies of the ! themselves, and for the priests: because 
lathers of your brethren the -people, and I the priests the sons of Aaron were busied 
after the division of the families of the I in ollcring of burnt-offerings and the fat 
Levites. j until night; therefore the Levites prepar- 

6 So kill the passover, and ''sanctify ! ed for themselves, and for the priests the 
yourselves, and prepare your brethren, ' sons of Aaron. 

that they may do according to the word 15 And the singers the sons of Asaph 
of the Lord by the hand of Moses. iccre in their +place, according to the com- 

7 And Josiah ^ gave to the 'people, of the . mandment of 'David, and Asaph, and 
flock, lambs and kids, all for the passover- Heman, and Jeduthun the king's seer; 
offerings, for all that were present, to the and tlie 'porters waited at every gate; 
numberofthirty thousand, andthree thou- they might not depart from their service ; 
sand bullocks: these were of the king's for their brethren the Levites prepared 
substance. for them. 





a 1 Kins 


,11:5. 


b 


.lei 


.3: 


10;Ho5.6 


4. *Heh.after. c 2 Kings, 


2-- 


: ■: 1 . etc. 


J Kx. 


•2 


6: 


Ki 


raB:19. e 


clmp.23:18. fcliap 


30:2:; 


r)ent.:i.i:!0 


Mal.i 


7 


c 


CI 


r<.n.23:26. 


b lCliron.cli.23-:(>. 


i cli.ip. 


8 


U. j l'3.l 


.134:1 


t 


He 


b.houtc. t Heh.toH$ of Ihc people. 


k chnp. 



33. Made all — to serve; made tliem conform ex- 
ternally to what was required in the law of Moses. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Piety in early youth saves from many troubles, 
and is a preparation for great enjoyment and use- 
fulness in riper years. 

.5. True reformers will treat vice with abhorrence, 
and endeavor in all suitable ways to render it con- 
temptible. 

S. The preparation of suitable houses, and the 
regular establishment of public worsiiip, is one of 
the essential means of general and permanent ref- 
ormation. 

14. If the Scriptures are lost, or the people are not 
in the habit of reading or hearing them, great de- 
generacy and wickedness will follow ; and there is no 



.30 : 3. 15 : Exrn 6 : 20. % Heb. cifftred. I cbnp. 7 : 8-IU ; :i(i : .'t. 
\\\\f\,. offered. » Heb.nJVifd. iiiEzrafi:l8 « chnp. ■: i i 

oI.ev.3:3. P Ex. 12 : 8,SI ; Deul 16: 7. <| 1 S«m.2: 13-l.V ■ \\ 
mif</f tliem run. ^ Heb. j/a/ion. r I Cliron,25; I.ptc. ■!(" 

way of efTectually reclaiming men, but in bringing 
them to an acquaintance witli the word of Ood. 

21. All who truly believe the Bible, will be anx- 
ious to know what they must do to escape that 
wrath of G-od to which, on account of their sins, 
they are exposed. 

:S. Although the true penitent shall not perish, 
he mav nevertheless be exposed to a violent death. 

31. %Vhen rulers take the lead in refomiation, 
many may be expected to follow, and to continue 
externally in the ways of the Lord iis long as those 
in authority set them the example. 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

1. Killed the passover; the animals that were 
to be oflered in sacrifice at this festival. 
381 



Death of Josiah. 



II. CHRONICLES, XXXVI. 



His successors. 



16 So all the service of the Lord was' 
prepared the same day, to keep tlie pass- 
over, and to offer burnt-offerings upon the 
altar of the Lord, according to the com- [ 
mandmcnt of king Josiah. [ 

17 And the children of Israel that were 
present* kept the passover at that time, ' 
and the feast of unleavened bread seven [ 
days. j 

18 And there was no passoA'er like to 
that kept in Israel from the days of Sam- 
uel the prophet; neither did all the kings 
of Israel keep such a passover as Josiah 
kept, and the priests, and the Levites, and 
all Judah and Israel that were present, 
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 

19 In the eighteenth year of the reign 
of Josiah was this passover kept. 

20 11 x\fter ='all this, when Josiah had 
prepared the ttemple, ""Necho king of 
Egypt came up to fight against Charche- 
mish by Euphrates : and Josiah went out 
against him. 

21 But he sent ambassadors to him, say- 
ing, What have I to do with thee, thou 
king of Judah? I come not against thee 
this day, but against the house twhere- 
with I have war; for God commanded 
me to make haste : forbear thee from 
meddling with God, who is with me, that 
he destroy thee not. 

22 Nevertheless Josiah would not turn 
his face from him, but djsguiscd himself, 
that he might fight with him, and heark- 
ened not unto the words of Neeho from 
the mouth of God, and came to fight in 
the valley of Mcgiddo. 

2:5 And the archers shot at king Josiah; 
and the king said to his servants, Have 
me away; for I am sore hvounded. 

24 His servants therefore took him out 
of that chariot, and put him in the second 
cliariot that he had ; and they brought 
him to Jerusalem, and he died, and was 
buried II in one of the sepulchres of his 
fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem 
mourned for Josiah. 

25 1[And Jeremiah '"lamented for Jo- 
siah: and all the ''singing-men and the 



singing-women spake of Josiah in ^b^c^; 
their lamentations to this day, and made 
them an 'ordinance in Israel : and behold, 
they are written in the lamentations. 

26 Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, 
and his *goodness, according to that u-hicli 
icas written in the law of the Lord, 

27 And his deeds, first and last, behold, 
they arc written in the book of the kings 
of Israel and Judah. 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

1 Jehoahaz succeeding is deposed by Pharaoh, and car- 
ried into Epypt. 5 Jehoiakiin reigning ill is carried 
bound into Babylon. 9 Jehoiachin succeeding reign- 
eth ill, and is brought into Babylon. 11 Zedeklah 
succeeding reigneth ill, and despiseth the prophets, 
and rebelleih against Nebuchadnezzar. 14 Jerusa- 
lem, for the sins of the priests and people, is wholly 
destroyed. '2'i The proclamation of Cyrus. 

THEN '"the people of the land took Je- 
hoahaz the son of Josiah, and made 
him king in his father's stead in Jerusa- 
lem. 

2 Jehoahaz icas twenty and three years 
old when he began to reign, and he reign- 
ed three months in Jerusalem. 

3 And the king of Egypt tput him down 
at Jerusalem, and ^condemned the land 
in a hundred talents of silver and a tal- 
ent of gold. 

4 And the king of Egypt made Eliakim 
his brother king over Judah and Jerusa- 
lem, and turned his name to Jehoiakim. 
And Necho took Jehoahaz his brother, 
and carried him to Egypt. 

5 ^ Jehoiakim ivas twenty and five years 
old when he began to reign, and he reign- 
ed eleven years in Jerusalem : and he did 
that ivhich was evil in the sight of the Lord 
his God. 

6 Against «him came up Nebuchadnez- 
zar king of Babylon, and bound him in 
fetters,^ to carry him to Babylon. 

7 Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the 
vessels of the house of the Lord to Bab- 
ylon, and put them in his temple at Bab- 
ylon. 

8 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, 
and his abominations which he did, and 
that which was found in him, behold, 

* Heh./.'uniJ. • -2 Kipgs. 23 : W. etc. f Heli. Aoi/w. b Jer. ft: 2-1. • Jer. '22 : CO. * Hel>. /tinduMjM. cliap. 32::w. f2Kiii(;», 
.<6 : 2, etr. f Heh. of m;/ war. \ Huh, maile tick;] Km^a,22:A4. 2:i:30, etc. i Heb. rtmovrd him. f Heb. jnuMtd. g 2 Kins», 
\\ Or, a inaiiff tilt lepulclnct. c Zecli. 12 : U : Lnin. 4 : 20. <1 Mnt. 24: I, etc. % Or, c/ioim; foretolj, Hab. 1 : 6, etc. 



20. Prepared the temple; for the observance of 
divine worship, according to the law of Moses and 
tlie commandments of David and Solomon. Char- 
chemish ; a stroiijjly fortified city on the river Eu- 
phrates. 

21. Valley of Me siddo ; near the river Kishon. 
in the tribe of Manasseh ; it formed a part of the 
great plain of Esdraelon. 

I.X.STRUCTIONS. 
2. Rulers should over encourage good works ; 
and labor to unite all classes, especially ministers 
of religion, in the regular and habitual worship of 
God. 

582. 



6. Due preparation is necessary to acceptable 
worship. 

10. When those in authority set the example, 
and ministers of religion faithfully do their duty, 
many may be expected to engage in the service of 
G-od. 

22. It is hazardous to engage in any enterprise, 
without first asking counsel of God and obtaining 
his approbation. 

'2'). Many lument the removal of great and good 
men, who have not given heed to their instructions 
while they were living, nor imitated their cxarriple 
after tlit-y were dead. 



Zedckiahh reign. 



11. CHRONICLES, XXXVI, 



Jerusalem destroyed. 



B.c''6«r they are -writteu in the book of 
the kings of Israel and Judah. And *Je- 
hoiachin his son reigned in his stead. 

9 Tf Jchoiachin* was eight years old 
when he began to reign, and he reigned 
three months and ten days in Jerusalem : 
and lie did iliat which teas evil in the sight 
of the Lord. 

1 And twhen the year was expired, 
king Nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought 
him to Babylon, with the t goodly "^ves- 
sels of the house of the Loud, and made 
Zedckiah^ "^his brother king over Judah 
and Jerusalem. 

11 Tl Zedekiah "^ ira.t one and twenty 
years old when he began to reign, and 
reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. 

12 And he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the Lord his God, and humbled 
not himself before Jeremiah the prophet 
spenkiug from the mouth of the Lord. 

13 And he also ''rebelled against king 
Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him 
swear by God : bnt he ''stiflencd his neck, 
and hardened his heart from turning un- 
to the Lord God of Israel. 

14 T[)\Ioreoverallthechief of the priests, 
and the people, transgressed very much 
after all the abominations of the heathen ; 
and polluted the house of the Lord which 
he had hallowed in Jerusalem. 

15 And sthe Lord God of their fathers 
sent to them H by his messengers, rising 
up " betimes, and sending; because lie had 
compassion on his people, and on his 
dwelling-place : 

16 But they ''mocked the messengers of 
God, and 'despised his words, and mis- 
used his prophets, until the wrath of the 
Loud arose against his people, till there 
was no tremedy. 

17 Therefore Jhe brought upon them 



* 


T.Jeamiah,lCht( 


n. 3:16 


or, Cu 


niah.ier.i 




4. »2Kin;rfl, 


24 :S, 


etc. t Hoh. at the rttur 


lofth 


near. ± 


Hell, vetscfs 


■f 




h Uiiniel 1:1, 


2; h:% 


i Or, Miitlaniah 


hitfathe 




brotht 


r, 2 Kinss, 24 : 17 


c .Tcr. 


37:1, 


i Jer, hi 


1, 


etc. e .Jer. 


f.-.> : :i ; 


Kiek. 17:15.18. 


f 2Kii 


S».17: 


14. RJer. 


i.'i 


.%4;3S: 


.'). 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 
1.3. Made him, sicear ; swear allegiance to the 
king of Babylon. 

lo. Betimes; often, seasonably, continually. 
17. The Chahlees; the Babylonians. 

20. Until the reign of the kingdom of Per- 
sia ; about seventy years. 

21. The word of the Lord; Jer. 25: 9-11. 

IN.STRUCTIONS. 
1. When wise and pious rulers are removed and 
are succeeded by those who are foolish and wicked, 
it is a punishment of the people for their sins ; and 
where it does not produce reformation, it forebodes 
approaching destruction. 



the king of the Chaldees, who slew their 
young men with the sword in the house 
of their sanctuary, and had no compas- 
sion upon young man or maiden, old man, 
or him that stooped for age : he gave thcnt 
all into his hand. 

18 And all the vessels of the liouse of 
God, great and small, and the treasures 
of the house of the Lord, and the treas- 
ures of the king, and of his princes ; all 
ihe-ie he brought to Babylon. 

19 And ^they burnt the liouse of God, 
and brake down the wall of Jerusalem, 
and burnt all the palaces thereof with 
fire, and destroyed all the goodly vessels 
thereof. 

20 And +thcm that had escaped from 
the sword carried he away to Babylon; 
where they were servants to him and his 
sons until the reign of the kingdom of 
Persia: 

21 To fulfil the word of the Lord by 
the mouth of 'Jeremiah, until the land 
had enjoyed her "'sabbaths: for as long 
as she lay desolate she kept sabbath, to 
fulfil threescore and ten years. 

22 T[ Now "in the first year of Cyrus 
king of Persia, that the word of the Lord 
spoken by the month of Jeremiah might 
be accomplished, the Lord stirred up the 
spirit of "Cyrus king of Persia, that he 
made a proclamation throughout all his 
kingdom, and put it also In writing, say- 
ing, 

23 Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, 
All the kingdoms of the earth halii tlie 
Lord God of heaven given me; and ho 
hath charged me to build him a house in 
Jerusalem, wliieh is in Juilah. \\ ho is 
there among you of all his peoiile? The 
Lord his God be with him, and let him 
go up. 



II Heb. by the hand of. * Th.il in. ttiHtinuully and earrfully. 
Iila:i, 28:K. > Prov. I : 24-.W. t Huh. htalint. i T)eut.:«:4'.t; 
2 Kins', -25: 1, etc. : Elrn!1:7. k Piw. 74 : frJI : lon-W :11. J Heb. 
Ihtremaindtf/romlhenmrd. 1 Jer. ■2,1: 9-1-2 ; ««: fi, 7 : 29: 10. 
m Lev.26:.34,43; niin.9:2. « Eim I ; I.etc. o Im.44 :2S;*i: I.etc. 



7. God sometimes suffers the wicked to obtain 
jrreat power, that they may be scourges of his peo- 
ple on account of their sins. 

12. No trials, witliout the grace of God, will 
humble and pjirify the iiuman heart, or lead men 
to forsake ihi-ir sins and turn to the Lord. 

10. When men mock the messengers whom God 
sends to reclaim them, and despise their words of 
mercy and love, they are ripening for wrath .aguiiuit 
which there will be no remedy. 

21. The providence of God manifests the truth of 
his word ; and shows that when the decl.-vrntion has 
once gone out of his mouth, it will in due time be 
accomplished. 



583 



EZRA. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 The proclamation of Cyrus for the building of the 
temple, a The people provide for the return. 7 
Cyrus restoreth the vessels of the temple to Shesh- 
ba.zzar. 

"jVTOW *in the first year of Cyrus king 
_L\ of Persia, that the word of Hhe Lord 
by the mouth of Jeremiah might be ful- 
filled, the Lord "^stirred up the spirit of 
Cyrus king of Persia, that he *made a 
proclamation"* througliout all his king- 
dom, enid put it also in writing, saying, 

2 Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, "^ The 
Lord God of heaven hath given me all 
the kingdoms of the earth; and ""he hath 
charged me to build him a house at Je- 
rusalem, which is in Judah. 

3 Who is there among you of all his peo- 
ple? his God be with him, and let him go 
up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and 
build the house of the Lord God of Lsra- 
el, (he s/a- the God,) which is in Jerusalem. 

4 And whosoever remaineth in any place 
where he sojournefh, let the men of his 
place thelp him w ilh silver, and with gold, 
and with goods, and with beasts, besides 
the freewiil-oflcring for the house of God 
that /.'; in Jerusalem. 

5 H Tlien rose npthe chief of Ihc fathers 
of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests, 
and the Levites, with all them whose spir- 
it God ''had raised, to go up to build the 
house of the Lord which is in .Terusalem. 

6 And all they that iccre about them 
strengthened* their hands with vessels 
of silver, with gold, with goods, and with 
beasts, and with precious things, besides 
all that was willingly offered. 

7 lIAlso Cyrus the king brought fortli 
the vessels of the 'house of the LoRD,which 
NebuchadnezzarJ had brought forth out 



« 2 Cliron.3H:Ji,2.1. b .ler.-ifi: ]::■:«: 10: :i:t: 7-13. cPr(iv.-2l:l: 
D.in.2:l. ' He\> cauttU « vuiee ti) pats. >l rliiip. .5 : 1.1 u. r T)iin 
2:21. f I«n.^^:■^R:^.^:l, n. c Psn. ».-):I8: laa. •|-.:.n:.ler. 10:10; 
nan. 6 : 2ti. t Hrb. li/l him up. I. Neli 2:12; I'riiv. Ifi: 1 ; I'lill. 
2:13; SJnlin, II. t Thai is, /iW/ir,/ M«m. f chni,. 6: 14 ; 8 fi. 



CHAPTER I. 

1. The word of the Lord; Jer. S.j : 1-2-11 ■ 'J9 • 10- 
33:7-1.1. 

2. He hath charged me ; Cyrus may liave said 
this in consequence of a prophecy uttered concern- 
ing hirn, more than a hundred years before he was 
born. Isa. W : 20-28 ; 4o : 1-0, 12, 13. 

3. Who is thcYe ? that wishes to go up to Jeru- 
salem. 

5. liaised; stirred up; the same word in the 
original as is applied to Cyrus, verse 1. 

8. ShesMuzzar ; afterwards called Zerubbabel. 
Chap. 2:2. He was the grandson of Jehoiachin 
king of Judah 

084 



of Jerusalem, and had put them ^b^c.'S 
in the house of his gods ; 

8 Even those did Cyrus king of Persia 
bring forth by the hand of Mithrcdath 
the treasurer, and numbered them unto 
Sheshbazzar, the prince of Judah. 

9 And this i.s the number of them : thir- 
ty chargers of gold, a thousand chargers of 
silver, nine and twenty knives, 

10 Thirty basins of gold, silver basins 
of a second sort four hundred and ten, 
and other vessels a thousand. 

11 All the ''A'cssels of gold and of sil- 
ver were five thousand and four hundred. 
All these did Sheshbazzar bring up with 
them of the * captivity that were brought 
up from Babylon unto Jerusalem. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 The number that return, of the people. .36 of the 
priests, 40 of the Levites, 43 of the Nethinim, 55 
of Solomon's servants, G"i of the priests which could 
not show their pedigree. 64 The whole number of 
them, with their substance. 68 Their oblations. 

IVrOW 'these arc the children of the 
_LN province that went up out of the 
captivity, of those which had been car- 
ried away, "'whom Nebuchadnezzar the 
king of Babylon had carried away unto 
Babylon, and came again unto Jerusalem 
and Judah, every one unto his city; 

2 Which came with "Zerubbabel : Jcsh- 
ua, Nehemiah, "Seraiah, *Reelaiah, Mor- 
decai, Bilshan, tIMizpar, Bigvai, -Rehum, 
Baanah." The number of the men of the 
people of Israel: 

3 The children of Parosh, two thousand 
a hundred seventy and two. 

4 'J'he children of Shephatiah, three 
hundred seventy and two. 

5 The children of PArah, seven hun- 
dred seventy and five. 



2 Kings, 24: l:!; 2 rlimn. 36: 7 ; Diin.S; 2. k 4 Tim. 2: Xl. 21. 
% Heb lyantpn'tntiim. Mat. I : II, 12 I Nell. 7 : 6, etc. m 2King«, 
24:14-16; 2Cliron.:l(i:20i l.am 1 :.1, ft; 4: 22 ; Zt-pli. 3:7. n H.ig. 
1:1, etc. II Or, v*i<iri«A, N>li 7:7. ' Or, Raiimiali. f Or, 
Mitptrtth. % Or, Nchum. ocliR|i.4:R. pNrli. 7:10. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The hearts of kings and all others are in the 
hand of the Lord, and he turneth them whitherso- 
ever he will ; and whatever difficulties may, to 
human view, stand in the way of the fulfilment 
of his declarations, they will in due time all be 
accoiTiplished. 

.'). Though the offers of mercy are freely made to 
all. none will accept them and thus avail themselves 
of the benefits, except those whose spirit God stirs up 
for that purpose. 

CHAPTER 11. 

1. The chihlreti of the province ; those who 
liad been carried away from Judea and their de- 
scendants, who now returned 



Number of those who 



EZRA II. 



returned from Babylon. 



B;c'-5lf ■ 6 The children of "Pahath-moab, 
of the children of Joshua and Joab, two 
thousand eight hundred and twelve. 

7 The children of ''P^lani, a thousand 
two hundred fifty and four. 

8 The children of Zattu, nine hundred 
forty and five. 

9 The children of Zaccai, seven hun- 
dred and threescore. 

10 The children of *Bani, six hundred 
forty and two. 

11 The children of Bebai, si.x. hundred 
twenty and three. 

12 The children of Azgad, a thousand 
two hundred twenty and two. 

13 The children of Adonikam, six hun- 
dred sixty and six. 

14 The children of Bigvai, two thou- 
sand fifty and six. 

15 The children of Adin, four hundred 
fifty and four. 

16 The children of Ater of llezekiah, 
ninety and eight. 

17 The children of Bezai, three hun- 
dred twenty and three. 

18 The children of tJorah, a hundred 
and twelve. 

19 The children of Hashum, two hun- 
dred twenty and three. 

20 The children of iQibba/T, ninety and 
five. 

21 The children of Beth-lehem, a hun- 
dred twenty and three. 

22 The men of Netophah, fifty and six. 

23 The men of Anathoth, a hundred 
twenty and eight. 

24 The children of ^ Azmavcth, forty 
and two. 

25 The children of Kirjath-ariin, Che- 
phirah, and Ikeroth, seven hundred and 
forty and three. 

26 The children of Ramah and Gaba, 
six hundred twenty and one. 

27 The men of ]Michmas, a hundred 
twenty and two. 

28 The men of Beth-el and Ai, two 
hundred twenty and three. 

29 The children of Nebo, fifty and two. 

30 The children of Magbish, a Uundred 
fifty and six. 

31 The children of the other "=Elam, a 
thousand two hundred fifty and four. 

32 The children of Harim, three hun- 
dred and twenty. 

33 The children of Lod, "Iladid. and 
Ono, seven hundred twenty and live. 

34 The children of Jericlio, three hun- 
dred forty and five. 



35 The children of Senaah, three thou- 
sand and six hundred and thirty. 

36 If The priests: the children of "^Je- 
daiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hun- 
dred seventy and three. 

37 The children of ''Immer, a thousand 
fifty and two. 

38 The children of Tashur, a thousand 
two liundred forty and seven. 

39 The children of « Harim, a thousand 
and seventeen. 

40 M The Levites : the cliildren of Jesh- 
ua and Kadniiel, of the children of *Ilod- 
aviah, seventy and four. 

41 The singers: the ciiildrcu of Asaph, 
a hundred twenty and eight. 

42 Tlic children of the porters : the chil- 
I dren of ISlialhnn, the children of Ater, the 
I children of Talmon, the children of Ak- 
j kub, the children of Hatita, the childrcii 
j of Shobai, in all a hundred thirty and 

nine. 

43 11 The "'Nethinim: the children of 
Ziha, the children of Ilasupha, the chil- 

I dren of Tabbaoth, 

44 The children of Keros, tlic children 
of ^Sialia, the cliildren of Padon, 

45 The children of Lebanah, the chil- 
dren of Ilagabah, the children of Akkub, 

46 The children of Hagab, the cliildren 
of iSlialmai, the children of llanan, 

47 The children of Giddel, tlic children 
of Gahar. the children of Reaiah, 

48 The children of Rezin, the children 
of Nekoda, the children of (Jazzain, 

49 The children of I'zza. tlie children 
of Paseah, the children of Besai, 

50 The children of Asnah, the children 
of ]Meliunim, the children of sXophusim, 

51 The children of Bakbuk, the cliil- 
dren of llakupha, the children of Ilarhur. 

52 The children of ilBazlutli, the chil- 
dren of Mehidn, the children of llnrsha, 

53 The children of Barkos, the children 
of Sisera, the children of Tliamah, 

54 Tlii^ children of Xeziali, the children 
of Hatipha. 

55 II The children of 'Solomon's ser- 
vants: the children of Sotai, the children 
of Sophereth, the cliildren of 'Pcruda, 

56 Tlic children of Jaalali, the children 
of Darkon, the children of (Jiddel. 

57 The children of Shopliatiah. llie chil- 
dren of Hattil, the children of Pocliercth 
of Zebaim, the children of tAmi. 

58 All the JNctliinim, and the childrcH 
of Solomon's servants, trerc three hundred 
ninety and two. 



» Neh.T:!!. b verse SI. * Or, Binni/i.-Neli. 7 : IS. f Or, 
Hiiriph, Nell. 7 : 24. t "f . Gili'on, Nell. T : if> 4 Or, Btth-,i-.- 
mavelli, Nell. 7 : M. c verse 7. || Or, Harid, a« it is in some copies, 
d 1 Cbron. -24 : 7. « I Cliron. '24 : 14. f 1 Chron. : 1-2. I 1 Cliron. 

55. Solomon's servants; from gentile nations, whom he had subdued and brought into bondage. 

5S5 



S4 : R. * Or, Judah, cliap. 3 : « : cnlW nUo HfHtrnh 


Nell. 7 : 4X 


h verse nf>. ^Or.Sia. t Or. Shnmlni. % Or. .NrpAlVA» 


•im. I| Or. 


B..:Wi, .Veil. T.:iV4. i 1 Kill;l». !> : -21. 'Or.Pcrida. 


Nth. J : 67. 


t0r,.</n.n,Neli.7:.-A j .lo.li.O: JI.^T: 1 Cliron. ^< : -2 


Neli.rtiSS. 



The sum of the people. 



p:zra III. 



and their offerings. 



59 And these were they which went 
lip from Tel-melah, Tel-liarsa, Cherub, 
Addan,* and Immer: but they could not 
show their fatlier's liouse, and their tseed, 
whether they n-crc of Israel : 

60 The cliildren of Delaiah, the chil- 
dren of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, 
six hundred fifty and two. 

6 1 If And of the children of the priests : 
the children of Habaiali, the cliiklrcn of 
Koz, the children of Barzillai ; which took 
a wife of the daughters of ^Barzillai the 
Gileadite, and was called after their name : 

()2 These sought their register among 
those that were reckoned by genealogy, 
but ''they were not found : therefore iwere 
they, as polluted, put from the priesthood. 

63 And the 5 Tirshatha said unto them, 
that they should not "^ eat of the most holy 
things, till there stood up a priest with 
Uriin"* and with Thummim. 

64 11 The "whole congregation together 
was forty and two thousand three hun- 
dred and threescore, 

6.5 Besides their servants and their maids, 
of whom there toere seven thousand three 
hundred thirty and seven : and there icere 
among them two hundred singing-men 
and singing-women. 

66 Their horses were seven hundred 
thirty and six; their mules, two hundred 
forty and five ; 

67 Their camels, four hundred thirty 
and five ; their asses, six thousand seven 
hundred and twenty. 

68 1[And ^some of the chief of the fa- 
thers, when they came to the house of 
the Lord which i.s at Jerusalem, offered 
freely for the house of God to set it up in 
his place : 

69 They gave after their ability unto 
the s treasure of the work threescore and 
one thousand drams of gold, and five 



» Or, AdiloH, Neb 7 : fil. t Or, pedigree, a i Samuel, 17 : 27. 
h Niiinherfi 3: 10. X Meb.tlutj were puKuled f rum the prirtlhoaU. 
% Or, juwiwor, Nell. 8 : >). c Lev. 2-2 : 10, U. <l Ex. -28: W; Lev. 
8:8; Num. 27:21 ; Deut. an: S. e Neli. 7 : 6fi, ete. fNeIi.7:70, 
etc. I 1 Chron. 26 : 20. || Or. Joihiia, Hjlg. 1 : 1 ; 2 : 2 ; Zecb. .3:1. 



59. They could not show their fathers house; 
their names were not found in the genealogies, or 
records of Israel. 

62. Put from the priesthood ; because there 
was nothing to sliow that they were descendants of 
Aaron. 

K\. Tirshatha ; governor. A priest with Urim 
nndu-itJi Thummi-m; one wlio by revelation from 
Grod could decide their case. 

70. Netliiitim ; servants of the Levites in the 
temple. Chap. 8 : 20. Their cities; Jerusalem 
and the cities round about it. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 
1. Those who accept the offers of mercy and give 
up all for the service of Christ, will be enrolled in 
an imperishable record, and be mentioned with honor 
for ever. 
59. Cases from time to time occur in which we 
586 



thousand pounds of silver, and *b.c. '^^ 
one hundred priests' garments. 

70 So the priests, and the Levites, and 
some of the people, and the singers, and 
the porters, and the Nethinim, dwelt in 
their cities, and all Israel in their cities. 

CHAPTER III. 

1 The altar is .=et up. 4 Offerings frequented. 7 "Work- 
men pri-pared. b The foundations of the temple arc 
laid in great joy and mourning. 

AND when the seventh month was 
come, and the children of Israel ivcrc 
in the cities, the people gathered them- 
selves together as one man to Jerusalem. 

2 Then stood up H Jeshua the son of 
Jozadak, and his brethren the priests, 
and *Zerubbabel the son of tShealtiel, 
and his brethren, and builded the altar 
of the God of Israel, to off"er burnt-oflcr- 
ings thereon, as it is ''written in the law 
of Moses the man of God. 

3 And they set the altar upon his bases : 
for fear was upon them because of the peo- 
ple of those countries: and they ofi"ered 
burnt-oflerings thereon unto the Lord, 
even burnt-otferings morning and even- 
ing. 

4 They 'kept also the feast of taberna- 
cles, as it is written, and offered the daily 
burnt-off'erings by number, according to 
the custom, ^as the duty of every ■> day 
required; 

5 And afterward offered the continual 
burnt-offering, both of the new moons, 
and of all the set '' feasts of the Lord that 
were consecrated, and of every one that 
willingly offered a freewill-offering unto 
the Lord. 

6 From the first day of the seventh 
month began they to ofl'er burnt-offerings 
unto the Lord. But Hhe foundation of 
tlie temple of the Lord was not yet laid. 

7 They gave money also unto the ma- 



* called Zurahnhel, Mat 1 : 12; Liike 3:27. f Called Salathirl, 
Mat. 1:12; LMke3:27. h Num. 28 : 3, etc. ; Dent. 12 : 8. B. i .Neh. 
8:H,I7; Zecll. 14: Hi. t He\i. llie mutter of the day in his dnv. 
jEx.29:3S. k Num., cli. 28,29. \Heh. the temple of the LORD 
wtit not yet/ounded. 



cannot with conliJence determine the true character 
of individuals, bu t must leave it to Him who searches 
the heart, and will render to all according to their 
works. 

6S. Those who are made partakers of the grace 
of God, will ofl'er willingly of their substance for 
the establishment and support of his worship, and 
labor to extend its benefits to all around them. 

CHAPTER III. 

2. Jeshua ; he was grandson of Seraiah, who was 
high-priest at the taking of Jerusalem. 

3. Fear was upon them; and they put them- 
selves under the special protection of the Almighty 
by establishing among them his wor.ship. 

5. Afrcftcill-offering; in addition to what wa.s 
required in the law. 

7. Joppa ; a seaport about forly miles west of 
Jerusalem. 



T7ic new temple. 



EZRA IV. 



The Jews'' adversaries. 



tc'bst' sons, and to the *carpcnfers ; and 
meat, and drink, and oil, unto tlieni of Zidon, 
and to them of Tyre, to bring cedar-trees 
from ''Lebanon to the scaof Joppa, accord- 
ing to tlie "^ grant that they had of Cyrus 
king of Persia. 

8 II Now in the second year of tlieir 
coming unto the house of God at .Jerusa- 
lem, in the second irionth, began "^Zerub- 
babel the son of Shcaltiel, and Jeshua 
the sou of Jozadak, and the remnant of 
their brethren the priests and the Levites, 
and all they that were come out of the 
captivity unto Jerusalem; and appointed 
the Levites, from ''twenty years old and 
upward, to set forward the work of the 
house of the Lord. 

9 Then stood Jeshua with his sons and 
his brethren, Kadmiel and his sons, the 
sons of tjudah, ^ together, to set forward 
the workmen in the house of God: the 
sons of Henadad, rrith their sons and their 
brethren the Levites. 

10 And when the ""builders laid the 
foundation of the temple of the Lord, they 
set "^ the priests in their apparel with trum- 
pets, and the Levites the sons of Asaph 
with cymbals, to praise the Lord, after 
the ordinance of David king of Israel. 

1 1 And they sang together by course in 
praising and giving thanks unto the Lord; 
because s he /.s good, for his mercy cndiir- 
tth for ever toward Israel. And all the 
people shouted with a great shout, when 
they praised the Lord, because the '' foun- 
dation of the house of the Lord was laid. 

12 But 'many of the priests and Levites 
and chief of the fathers, n7?o tcere ancient 
men, that had seen the first house, when 
the foundation of this house was laid be- 
fore their eyes, J wept with a loud voice; 
and many ''shouted aloud for joy : 

1.3 So that the people could not discern 
the noise of the shout of joy from the noise 
of the ' weeping of the people : for the peo- 
ple shouted with a loud shout, and the 
noise was heard afar off. 



CHAPTER IV. 



* Or, workmen. • 1 K injs, 5 : 6. 9. h chap. 6 : 3. c verse 2. 
d 1 Cliron. !■): 24. f Or. Hodavinh, (Imp. -2 :4a % Heh. ai one. 
e Zech. 4:10. / I Clirim. fi : :tl, etc. : lii : 4. etc. ; 2.i : I, etc. : Neli. 
12:24, etc. B 1 Chrnn. 16: :i4.41 ; Ps:ilm IW; 145:1-11 ; .Ier.3:t:ll. 
b Kev. 21 : 10-14. i Hiig. 2 : S. i Ps;l. 126:6; .ler. :!1 :8,'J. k Ps.-u 



12. Wept; because they thought this temple would 
be much inferior to that which had been destroyed. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. The establishment of the worship and ordi- 
nances of G-od, is the surest safeguard against ene- 
mies, and the best preparation for all the dispensa- 
tions of Providence. 

7. Money given for the establishment and support 
of divine worship, instead of being lost as some think, 
is most profitably used, and inyested where it will 
yield an abundant reward. 

II. Success in all good undertakings comes from 
the Lord, and the glory should be given to him. 

12. Men are often more atfectcd by what they 



I The adversaries, being not accepted in the building 
of the temple with the Jews, endeavor to hinder it. 
7 Tlielr letter to Artaxerxes. 17 The decree of Ar- 
taxerxes. '£i The building is hindered. 

"VrOW when the ""adversaries of Judah 
J_\ and Benjamin heard that the ? chil- 
dren of the captivity builded the temple 
unto the Lord God of Israel; 

2 Then they came to Zerubbabel, and 
to the chief of the fathers, and said unto 
them, Let us build with you: for "we 
seek your God, as ye do ; and we do sac- 
rifice unto liim since the days of "Esar- 
haddon king of Assur, which brought us 
up hither. 

3 But Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and the 
rest of the chief of the fathers of I.^racl, 
said unto them, pYc have nothing to do 
with us to build a house unto our God; 
but M'C ourselves together will build un- 
to the Lord God of Israel, as i king Cyrus 
the king of Persia hatli commanded us. 

4 Then the people of the land ^veaken- 
ed the hands of the people of Judah, and 
troubled' them in building, 

5 And hired 'counsellors against them, 
to frustrate their purpose, all the days of 
Cyrus king of Persia, even until the reign 
of Darius king of Persia. 

6 And in the reign of HAhasucrus, in the 
beginning of his reign, wrote they unto 
him an accusation against the inhajfitants 
of Judah and Jerusalem. 

7 % And in the days of Artaxerxes wrote 
Bishlam,* Mithredath, Tabeel, and the 
rest of their ^companions, unto Artaxerx- 
es king of Persia; and the writing of the 
letter iras written in the Syrian tongue, 
and interpreted in the Syrian tonsue. 

8 Kehum the chancellor and Shimshai 
the + scribe wrote a letter again.st Jeru.sa- 
lem to Artaxerxes the king in this sort: 

9 Then /c/o^cBehum the chancellor, and 
Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their 
companions;* the "Dinaites, the Aphar- 
sathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsitcs, 
the Archcvites, the B.abylonians, the Su- 



fi : 1 1. I Juilses S : S. m stntn T-U. \ Hcb. lont oftht : 

tation. c 2Kin»», 17:24,etr. o 2 Kinjti, li<:3". p Nell. .' 

8:21 : 3 John. <t. la q clinp. 1 : l-;t. rNeh.C:!!. •.! 

t Acti24: 1, etc. Il Heh. .Uo»Aiv.7>M. ' Or. in reoee. tlir. 

focietie*. X Or. tea-etary. ^ Ch.lW. societies, u 2 KifljO*. 1" : :*^', ^'. 



want, than with what they have ; and thus weep 
and lament, when they ought to rejoice and render 
praise. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1. The adversaries of Judah ; the Samaritans, 
composed of persons of various provinces whom the 
king of Assyria had removed and placed in Samaria. 
Ver. 7-10. 

2. Assur; Assyri.a. 

6. Aha.iiterus; king of Persia, between Cyrus 
and Darius. 

7. Arta.rer.res: who also reigned between Cyrus 
and Darius. Bishlam, Mit/iredat/i, Taberl ; rul- 
ers among the Samaritans. 

587 



Letter to Artaxerxcs. 



EZRA V. 



The building hindered. 



sanchites, the Dehavites, and the Elam- 
ites, 

10 And the rest of the nations whom 
the great and "noble Asnapper brought 
over, and set in the cities of JSamaria, and 
the rest that are on this side the river, and 
at* such a ''time. 

11 ^ This is (he copy of the letter that 
they sent unto him, even unto Artaxerxes 
the king: Thy servants the men on this 
side the river, and at such a time. 

12 Be it known unto the king, that the 
Jews which came up from thee to us are 
come unto Jerusalem, building the '^rebel- 
lious and the bad city, and have tset up the 
walls thereof, and ^^ joined the foundations. 

13 Be it known now unto the king, that, 
if this city be builded, and the walls set 
up again, then will they not ^pay toll, 
tribute,'' and custom, and so thou shalt 
endamage the ''revenue of the kings. 

14 Now because we *have maintenance 
from the king'' s palace, and it was not meet 
for us to see the king's dishonor, there- 
fore have we sent and certified the king; 

15 That search may be made in the 
book of the records of thy fathers : so 
shalt thou find in the book of the records, 
and know that this city is a rebellious 
city, and ''hurtful unto kings and prov- 
inces, and that they have tmoved sedition 
withiui the same of old time: for which 
cause was this city "^destroyed. 

16 We certify the king that, if this city 
be builded again, and the walls thereof 
set up, by this means thou shalt have no 
portion on this side the river. 

1 7 ^ Then sent the king an answer unto 
Rchum the chancellor, and to Shimshai 
the scribe, and to the rest of their ^com- 
panions that dwell in Samaria, and unto 
the rest beyond the river, Peace, and at 
such a time. 

18 The letter which ye sent unto us 
hath been plainly read before me. 

19 And III commanded, and search hath 



• Rom. 13:7. * Cl.iild. Chcenelh. l> verses II, 17; cliap.7: 1-2. 
c Kzek \7-A-2-n. iOr.finMetl. t Cha]d.aewedloget/ic>: % Cliald. 
give. ■! cli.ip. 7; 2^. II f>r, Urtngth. ' Cliald. me tnlltd with the 
lalt of the palace, e Entlier :i : «. f CliaUl. windc. % C\m\i. in the 



9. D indites — E/amites ; who came into Israel 
from the dilTerent Assyrian provinces. 

10. The river; the Euphrates. 

■20. Beyond the river; west of the Euphrates. 
lKin;rs. 4:21. 

24. Darius; who had Ruccceded Artaxcr.xes, as 
king of Persia. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. Worldly men are often disturbed at the pros- 
perity of the church; and if it does not promote their 
own selti.sh purposes, they endeavor to prevent its 
proj^ress. 

11. One way in which wicked men attempt to 
hinder the progre.ss of the church, is to represent it 
as injuriou.s to the interests of the state; and tlius 

5SS 



been made, and it is efound that *b'"c.'^: 
this city of old time hath *made insurrec- 
tion against kings, and tliat rebellion and 
sedition have been made therein. 

20 There have been mighty kings also 
o.ver Jerusalem, which ''have ruled over 
all countries 'beyond the river; and toll, 
tribute, and custom, was paid unto them. 

21 Givet ye now commandment to cause 
these men to cease, and that this city be 
not builded, until another commandment 
shall be given from me. 

22 Take heed now that ye fail not to 
do this : why should damage grow to the 
hurt of the kings'? 

23 T[Now when the copy of king Arta- 
xerxes' letter was read before Rehuni, and 
Shimshai the scribe, and their compan- 
ions, they went up in haste to Jerusalem 
unto the Jews, and made them to cease 
by +force and power. 

24 Then ceased the work of the house 
of God which is at Jerusalem. So it 
ceased unto the second year of the reign 
of Darius king of Persia. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 Zerubbal^el and Jeshua, incited by Haggai and Zech- 
ariah, set forward the building of the temple. .3 Tat- 
nai and Shethar-boznai could not hinder the Jews. 6 
Their letter to Darius against the Jews. 

THEN the prophets, J Haggai the proph- 
et, and ''Zechariah the son of Iddo, 
prophesied unto the Jews that were in 
Judah and Jerusalem in the name of the 
God of Israel, even unto them. 

2 Then rose up Zerubbabel the son of 
Shealtiel, and Jcshua the son of Jozadak, 
and began to build the houseof God which 
is at Jerusalem : and with them were the 
prophets of God helping them. 

3 ^ At the same time came to them 
Tatnai, governor on this s-ide the river, 
and Shethar-boznai, and their compan- 
ions, and said thus unto them, Who hath 
commanded you to build this house, and 
to make up this wall? 



midit thereof . r 2King.'<,24:-20; -.'.i: l,-4. J Cli.nM. loritfiM. || Cliald. 
hy me a decree t> set. i: -2 Kings, 18:7. * Cliald. lifted up itself. 
h 1 Kings, 4: 21, -24: Pe.ilm72:8. i Gen. IS: 18: Josh. I : .1, 4. 
\ ChaW. Make a deaee. J Cliald. oi-m. i Hag. I: I. kZecli. 1:1. 



to enlist civil rulers against it, and open the way to 
put it downi by force. 

14. Opposers of the church often represent them- 
selves as special friends of the state, and express 
great concern lest the increase of religion should 
conflict with the interests of civil rulers. 

17. Rulers who depend upon the representations 
of others, are often deceived as to facts ; and take 
such courses as are subversive of the rights, and 
injurious to the interests of their fellow-men. 

CHAPTER V. 

1. Trophesied nnto the Jetcs ; exhorting them 
to proceed with the building of the temple. 

3. Governor on this side the river; of the As- 
syrian provinces west of the Euphrates. 



The work is resumed. 



EZRA VI. 



nolwillistandivg opposition. 



Rc'o^r' 4 Then said we unto them after 
this manner, What are the names of the 
men that *make this building? 

5 But the *eye of their God was upon 
the elders of the Jews, that they could 
not*" cause them to cease, till the matter 
came to Darius : and then they "^returned 
answer by letter concerning this matter. 

6 ^ The copy of the letter that Tatnai, 
governor on this side the river, and She- 
thar-boznai, and his companions the 
Apharsachites, which were on this side 
the river, sent unto Darius the king: 

7 They sent a letter unto him, twherein 
was written thus : Unto Darius the king, 
all peace. 

8 Be it known unto the king, that we 
went into the province of Judea, to the 
house of the great God, which is builded 
with i great stones, and timber is laid in 
the walls, and this work goeth fast on, 
and prospereth in their hands. 

9 Then ^ asked we those elders, and said 
unto them thus. Who commanded you to 
build this house, and to make up these 
walls'? 

10 We asked their names also, to certify 
thee, that we might write the names of 
the men that mere the chief of them. 

11 And thus they returned us answer, 
saying. We are the ^servants of the God 
of heaven and earth, and build the house 
that was builded these many years ago, 
which a great king of "^Israel builded and 
set up. 

12 But 'after that our fathers had pro- 
voked the God of heaven unto wrath, he 
gave ''them into the hand of Nebuchad- 
nezzar the king of Babylon, the Chaldean, 
who destroyed this house, and carried the 
people away into Babylon. 

13 But 'in the lirst year of Cyrus the 
king of Babylon, the same king Cyrus 
made a decree to build this house of God. 

14 And the vessels also of gold and sil- 
ver of the house of God, which' Ncbu- 



«■ Chald.dKiW. »cliap.7:6,38; P«a.32:8; 3:l:18;34:15: 76:10. 
bPsn. l«:2-5. cch.B:«. ^ C\\!M.inthcmi,httchcreof. % C\\M. 
stonei o/rolling. A veraes 3, 4. e D^a. 3 : 26 i Acts 27 : 23 ; Itom. 
6:16. flKin^s, 6:1. s 2 Cliron. 3S : IH, 17. h 2 Kings, 24 : 2 ; 



4. What are the names? this question it seems 
wasputbyTatnai the governor, to the Jews. Ver. 10. 

10. Since that time ereii until now ; with the 
exception of the time that it had been neglected in 
consequence of their having been forced to cease. 
Chap. 4 : 23. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. When the people of G-od needlessly neglect his 
work, he will reprove them, and by his ministers and 
his providence convince them of their sin, and lead 
them to engage anew in the di.scharge of their duty. 

;■). Those who attempt, in dependence on God, to 
do what they can for the promotion of his cause, 
will find him ready to assist them ; and with him 
for their guide and helper, the elTorts of enemies to 
stop their proiirress will be in vain. 

38 



chadnezzar Uook out of the temple that 
was in Jerusalem, and brought them into 
the temple of Babylon, those did Cyrus 
the king take out of the temple of Baby- 
lon, and they were delivered unto ^one, 
whose name ivas Sheshbazzar, whom he 
had made * governor; 

15 And said unto him. Take these ves- 
sels, go, carry them into the temple that 
is in Jerusalem, and let the house of God 
be builded in his place. 

16 Then came the same Sheshbazzar, 
and 'laid the foundation of the house of 
God which is in Jerusalem; and since 
that time even until now hath it been in 
building, and ""rjct it is not finished. 

17 Now therefore, if it seem good to the 
king, let there be "search made in the 
king's treasure-house, which is there at 
Babylon, whether it be so, that a decree 
was made of Cyrus the king to build this 
house of God at Jerusalem, and let the 
king send his pleasure to us concerning 
this matter. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 Darius, finding the decree of Cyrus, maketh a new 
decree for the advancement of the building. 13 By 
the help of the enemies, and the directions of the 
prophets, the temple is finished. 10 The feast of the 
dedication is kept, 19 and the pasiover. 

THEN Darius the king made a decree, 
and "search was made in the house 
of the II rolls, where the treasures were 
laid* up in Babylon. 

2 And there was found at tAchmetha, 
in the palace that is in the province of 
the Medes, a roll, and therein u-as a rec- 
ord thus written : 

3 In the first year of Cyrus the king, 
the same Cyrus the king made a p decree 
concerning the house of God at Jerusa- 
lem, Let the house be builded, tiie i place 
where they offered sacriliccs, and let the 
foundations thereof be strongly laid; the 
height thereof threescore cubits, and the 
breadth thereof threescore cubits; 

4 Jl'ith Uhree rows of great stones, and 

2,'i:«-Il. i clinp. 1 : 1-8. jJiT.ft2:l9. k Hug. 1 : 14 ; 2:2, 21. »0r. 
drpulji. I cli;iii 3:8, la m rli«p. 6 : 1.%. d chap. 6:1,2. o rbap. 
h:\l. 11 Cli.ild. Aoofai. " ChvM mailt lodoctnd. i Or.Ecbatana. 
or in n coffer, p 2 Cliron 36: 22,2:1. q Psa. 122 : 4. r 1 Kings,6:36. 



11. Open and frank acknowled^ent of our at- 
tachment to God and his cause, oi our sins against 
him. and of his justice in our punishment, is the 
surest way of securing his continued smiles. 

17. A true statement of facts as they are, will 
ordinarily show the integrity of the people of God, 
and that in those trans.-iotions in which the wicked 
have most opposed them, they have .icted with fair- 
ness, uprightness, and fidelity. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1. The house of the rolls; the place in which 
the records were kept. 

2. Achmriha : ttie same as Ecbatana; a chief 
city of Media, and the summer residence of the 
Persian kings. 

589 



The decree of Darius. 



EZRA VI, 



The temple dedicated- 



a row of new timber : and let the expenses \ 
be given out of the king's house : 

5 And al«o let the golden and silver 
vessels" of the house of God, which Neb- 
uchadnezzar took forth out of the temple 
which is at Jerusalem, and brought unto 
Babylon, be restored, and *brought again 
unto the temple which is at Jerusalem, 
every one to his place, and place them in 
the house of God. 

6 Now therefore, ""Tatnai, governor be- 
yond the river, Shethar-boznai,and tyour 
companions the Apharsachites, which are 
beyond the river, be ye far from thence : 

7 Let "^the work of this house of God 
alone; let the governor of the Jews and 
the elders of the Jews build this house of 
God in his place. 

8 Moreover +1 make a decree what ye 
shall do to the elders of these Jews for 
the building of this house of God : that of 
the king's goods,eccH of the tribute beyond 
the river, forthwith expenses be given un- 
to these men, that they be not * hindered. 

9 And that which they have need of, 
both young bullocks, and rams, and lambs, 
for the burnt-offerings of the God of heav- 
en, wheat, salt, wine, and oil, according 
to the appointment of the priests which 
are at Jerusalem, let it be ''given them 
day by day without fail : 

10 That ^they may offer sacrifices II of 
sweet savors unto the God of heaven, and 
pray for the Hifeof tlieking, and of his sons. 

1 1 Also I have made a decree, that who- 
soever shall alter this word, let timber be 
])ullcd down from his house, and being set 
up, let him be * hanged thereon; and let 
his s house be made a dunghill for this. 

12 And the God that hath caused his 
name'' to dwell there 'destroy all kings 
and people, that shall put to their hand 
to alter and to destroy this house of God 
which is at Jerusalem. I Darius have 
made a decree; let it be done wilh speed. 

13 ^ Then Tatnai, governor on this side 
the river, Shethar-boznai, and their com- 



• chap. 1 : 7, 8 ; 6 : M ; Dan. R : '2. * C\m\A. go. b cl)ap. 6 : 3. 
t Cliald. their socictiet. c Acts 5 : 38, 39. J Cliald. Ay me a decree it 
vutde. a C\\7i\A. made to ceate. d Isn. 49 : 23. e clian 7; -23; .Jer. 
29:7. \\ C\\»\A. of rett. riTim.2:l,2. * ChM- de'lfoyed. 
(! nan. 2:S; 3:29. bl Kings, 9: 3. i Psa. 137 : 8. 9; Obad. 10. 
J clinp.6:l,2. \ C\\tM. decree, k verse 3. 1 clinp. 4:'S4. ni chap. 



6. xiow therefore; this is the direction of Darius 
to the Samaritans, and others who had sympathized 
and acted with them. 

11. Word; decree. 

14. Artaxer.ces ; one who succeeded Darius as 
king of Persia. 

22. Assyria; Persia,ofwhieh Assyria then form- 
ed a part. 

I.VSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Diligence and fidelity in searching for, and ob- 
taining a correct knowledge of facts, will sliow that 
oppcsition to the people of God in the establishment 
of his worship, is unreasonable and wicked. 
51*0 



riusthe king had sent, so they did speedily. 

14 AndJ the elders of the Jews builded, 
and they prospered through the prophe- 
sying of Haggai the prophet and Zecha- 
riahthesonof Iddo. And they builded. and 
finished it, according to the commandment 
of the God of Israel, and according to tlic 
commandmentt of ''Cyrus, and 'Darius, 
and Artaxerxes '"king of Persia. 

15 And this house was finished on the third 
day of the month Adar, which was in the 
sixth year of the reign of Darius the king. 

16 ^And the children of Israel, the 
priests, and the Levites, and the rest of 
the J children of the captivity, "kept the 
dedication of this house of God with "joy, 

17 And I' offered at the dedication of this 
house of God a hundred bullocks, two 
hundred rams, four hundred lambs ; and 
for a sin-oftering for all Israel, twelve 
he-goats, according to the number of the 
tribes of Israel. 

18 And they set the i priests in their di- 
visions, and the ''Levites in their courses, 
for the service of God, which is at Jeru- 
salem; ^as it is ^written in the book of 
Moses. 

19 And the children of the captivity 
kept the passover upon the 'fourteenth 
day of the first month. 

20 For the priests and the Levites were 
purified " together, all of them were pure, 
and ^killed the passover for all the chil- 
dren of the captivity, and for their breth- 
ren the priests, and for themselves. 

21 And the children of Israel, which were 
come again out of captivity, and all such as 
had separated themselves unto them from 
the'^'filthiness of the heathen of the land, to 
seek the Lord God of Israel, did eat, 

22 And kept the "feast of unleavened 
bread seven days with joy : for the Lord 
had made them joyful, and turndd the 
heart -^ of the king of Assyria unto them, 
to stren'gthen their hands in the work of 
the house of God, the God of Israel. 



7:1. ^ amiH. sons of the transportntion, chap. 4:t. n 1 Kincs, 
8:fi3; 2 Chron. 7 : .1. o ver.'ie 22 ; Neli.8:10; 12:43; P.-n. I'.'2:l 
p chap. 8:35. q 1 Chron.24:l. r 1 Chron. 23 : 6. J Chnlil. oc- 
cording to the writing. • Num. 3: 6i 8 : 9. tEjt. 1-3:6. n 2 C'linuL 
30:1.'). T 2 Chron. 3h: 11. wchap.9:11. n Ex. 12 : 16 ; 13 : t> ; 
2 Chron. 30 : 21 ; 3?> : 17 ; 1 Cor. 5 : 7, 8. y verse 6 ; Prov. 21:1. 



6. As the hearts of kings and rulers are in the 
hand of the Lord, he can lead tliem to favor li's 
people and use their power and influence to advanc' 
nis cause. 

1,3. Under the superintending providence of God. 
those who have bitterly opposed nis cause, may be 
led to unite with his people in promoting it ; and 
thus by the labors of both, great and good works 
may be speedily accomplished. 

20. The holy character and conduct of ministers 
is intimately connected with the prosperity of relig- 
ion ; and the establishment of the worship and ordi- 
nances of God according to his appoiiitiiuiit. is to 



Ezra reaches Jerusalem. 



EZRA vir. 



Decree of Arlaxcrxes. 



CHAPTER VII, 



1 Ezra goeth up to Jerusalem. 11 The gracious com- 
mission of Artaxerxes to Ezra 27 Ezra blesseth God 
for his favor. 

nVTOW after these things, in the reign 
Jl-N of * Artaxcrxes king of Persia, Ezra 
the sou of '' Seraiah, the son of Azariah, 
the son of llilkiah, 

2 The son of Shallum, the son of Zadok, 
the son of Ahitub, 

3 The son of Amariah, the son of Aza- 
riah, the son of Meraioth, 

4 The son of Zcrahiah, the son of Uzzi, 
the son of Bukki, 

5 The son of Abishua, the son of "^ Phin- 
ehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of '' Aa- 
ron the chief priest : 

6 This Ezra went up from Babylon ; 
and he was a ready "^scribe in the law of 
Moses, which the Lord God of Israel had 
given: and the king granted him all his 
request, '^accordiug to the hand of the 
Lord his God upon him. 

7 And e there went up some of the chil- 
dren of Israel, and of the priests, and the 
Levites, and the singers, and the porters, 
and the ''Nethinim, unto Jerusalem, in 
the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king. 

8 And he came to Jerusalem in the fifth 
month, which v:as in the seventh year of 
the king. 

9 For upon the first day of the first 
month * began he to go up from Babylon, 
and on the first day of the fifth month 
came he to Jerusalem, 'according to the 
good hand of his God upon him. 

10 For Ezra had J prepared his heart to 
seek'' the law of the Lord, and to 'do it, 
and to ""teach in Israel statutes and judg- 
ments. 

11 1[Now this is the copy of the letter 
that the king Artaxerxes gave unto Ezra 
the priest, the scribe, ci'e;i a scribe of the 
words of the commandments of the Lord, 
and of his statutes to Israel. 

12 Artaxerxes, "king of kings, tmitoEzra 
the priest, a scribe of the law of the God of 
heaven, perfect peace, and at such a time. 

13 I make a decree, that all tliey of the 
people of Israel, and of his priests and 
Levites, in my realm, which are minded 
of their own free will to go up to Jerusa- 
lem, go with thee. 



J 14 Forasmuch as thou art sent + of the 
iking, and of his "seven counsellors, to 
1 inquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, 
I according to the law of thy God which is 
I in thy hand; 

15 And to carry the silver and gold, 
which the ^king and his counsellors have 
freely offered unto the God of Israel, 
whose iliabilation is in Jeru.salem, 

16 And "'all the silver and gold that 
thou canst find in all the province of 
Babylon, with the freewill-offering of tiie 
people, and of the priests, 'offering will- 
ingly for the house of their God which is 
in Jerusalem : 

17 That thou mayest buy speedily with 
this money bullocks, rams, lambs, with 
their 'mcat-olferings and their drink-of- 
ferings, and offer them upon the "altar of 
the house of your God which is in Jeru- 
salem. 

18 And whatsoever shall seem good to 
thee, and to thy brethren, to do with the 
rest of the silver and the gold, that ^do 
after the will of your God. 

1 9 The vessels also that are given thee for 
the service of the house of thy God, those 
deliver thou before the God of Jerusalem. 

20 And whatsoever more shall be need- 
ful for the house of lliy God, which thou 
shall have occasion to bestow, bestow it 
out of the king's treasure-house. 

21 And I, even I Artaxerxes the king, 
do make a decree to all the treasurers 
which are beyond the river, that what- 
soever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the 
law of the God of heaven, shall- require 
of you, it be done speedily, 

22 Unto a hundred talents of silver, and 
to a hundred hneasnrcs of wheat, and to 
a hundred baths of wine, and to a hun- 
dred baths of oil, and salt without pre- 
scribing hoic much. 

23 Whatsoever is "commanded "by the 
God of heaven, let it be * diligently done 
for the house of the God of heaven: for 
why should there be wrath against the 
realm of the king and his sons? 

24 Also we certify you, that, touching 
any of the priests and Levites, singers, 

I porters, Nethinim, or ministers of this 
liouse of God, it shall not be lawful to im- 
pose toll, tribute, or custom, upon them. 



• Neli.i.l. !• I Cliron. fi : H. c Num. in: 1 1-13. d Heb. .1 : 4. 
e verses 1 1 , 1-2, 21. < verse 9 ; clmp. 8 : 22, 31 : Neli. 2 : 8. IS ; Prov. 
3:6. ; rhan. 8:1, l,'i,«tc b cban. 2 : <:t. * Heb. was the f, tun- 
dntionoflht going tip. i ver. 6. J 2 Cliron. 19: :!. l Pi-a. 119: 4fi. 
I Deut. 16:1.': Dan.fi:5. m Deut.3:f:IO: Mai. 2 : 7 ; Titus2:l, 
I ;,. n Kzek. 26 :.7 ; Dan. 2 : 37. t Or, /o Ezra the priett. a per- 



his people of every country and name, an occasion 
of joy. 

CHAPTER VII. 
1. Ezra; he was grandson of the high-priest 
who was slain at the talcing of Jern.^alcm. 2 Kings, 
2-3: 18-2], and was a descendant of Aaron. 



ftct tcrihe of the law oj the GmI r/hearr 
/rom liefitre the king. <i Estlier f : 1.4 
q 2 Chron. 6:2; P9.llm9:ll; 2fi:»; : 
• 1 Cbron ■2'.i:6, 9. < Num. l.'i : 4-13. » 
R : 1 7. 4 ChaM. vort. || Heb. n/ the deere 
119:4. 



' vcrvQ IH. II Pi 



6. Scri/)e in the lair; one who instructed the 
people in the meaning of it. Ver. 10. 

20. Bff/ow it out of the king's trrasurr. 
hnii.^p ; from the tribute and customs paid into 
the king's treasury by the people west of the Eu- 
phrates. Ver. 25. 

591 



Ezra's companions in 



EZRA VIII. 



returning from Babylon. 



25 And thou, Ezra, after the ^visdom of 
thy God, that is in tliy hand, set * magis- 
trates and judges, which may judge all 
the people that arc beyond the river, all 
shch as know the laws of thy God; and 
teach'' ye them that know them not. 

2(5 And whosoever will not do the law 
of thy (]od, and the law of the king, let 
judgment be executed speedily upon him, 
whether it be unto death, or to *banish- 
ment, or to confiscation of goods, or to 
imprisonment. 

27 1[ Blessed "^be the Lord God of our 
fathers, which hath ^put such a thing as 
this in the king's heart, to beautify the 
house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem : 

28 And " hath extended mercy unto me 
before the king, and his counsellors, and 
before all the king's mighty princes. And 
I was "^strengthened as the hand of the 
Lord my God icas upon me, and I gath- 
ered together out of Israel chief men to 
go up with me. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1 The companions of Ezra, who returned from Baby- 
lon. 15 He senJetli to IJJo for ministers for the tem- 
ple. 21 He keepeth a fast- 24 He cnmmitteth the 
treasures to the custody of the priests. 31 From Aha- 
va they come to Jerusalem. 33 The treasure is weigh- 
ed in the temple. -36 The co:nmission is delivered. 

THESE are now the chief of their fa- 
thers, and this is the genealogy of 
them that went up with me from Baby- 
lon, in the reign of Artaxcrxes the king. 

2 Of the ^sons of Phinehas; Gershom : 
of the sons of Ithamar; Daniel: of the 
sons of David; "^ Hattusli. 

.3 Of the sons of Shechauiah, of the sons 
of 'Pharosh; Zechariah : and with him 
were reckoned by genealogy of the males 
a hundred and fifty. 

4 Of the sons of Pahath-moab ; Elihoe- 
nai the son of Zcrahiah, and with liim 
two hundred males. 

5 Of the sons of Shechaniah ; the son of 
Jahaziel, and with hi mthrcchundrcd males. 



• Ex. 18:21,22; n<uit. 16: IK. liverselO; Romans 10 : 14-17. 
* CUrM roolini) oiil. c 1 cliron. 2!1: 10. cl cliap. fi : 22. s clinp. 
9:9. f verseS; cimp. 8: 18. B 1 Cliron. K : 4, etc. h I Cliron. 3 : 32. 



27. Blessed be the Lord God ; the exclamation 
of Ezra in view of wliat God had done for him and 
the Jews, especially in inclining the kinjj to favor 
them. 

INSTRUCTION,^. 

6. To be scribes well instructed in the things of 
the kingdom of God and able to teach others, men 
/ must devote themselves to this work, and seek that 
preparation which comes from Him only. 

12. When rulers and those in authority are led 
to promote the cause of God, his people should view 
it as the fruit of his grace, and render to him their 
tribute of gratitude and praise. 

21. Rulers who not only favor the cause of God, 
but use their influence to gain the cooperation of 
others, m;i,y expect a. blessing on themselves and 
their fellow-men. 
r)92 



6 Of the sons also of Adin ; Ebed ^b^c^J" 
the son of Jonathan, and with him fifty 
males. 

7 And of the sons of Elam; Jeshaiali 
the son of Athaliah, and with him seven- 
ty males. 

8 And of the sons of Sliephatiah; Zeb- 
adiali the son of Michael, and with him 
fourscore males. 

9 Of the sons of .loab ; Obadiah the son 
of Jehiel, and with him two hundred and 
eighteen males. 

10 And of the sonsof Shelomith ; tlie son 
of Josiphiah, and with liim a hundred and 
threescore males. 

11 And of the sons of Bcbai ; Zechariali 
the son of Bebai, and with him twenty 
and eight males. 

12 And of the sons of Azgad ; Johanan 
the tson of Hakkatan, and with him a 
hundred and ten males. 

13 And of the last sons of Adonikam, 
whose names are these, Eliphelet, Jeiel. 
and Shemaiah, and with them threescore 
males. 

14 Of the sons also of Bigvai; Uthai, 
and ^Zabbud, and with them seventy 
males. 

15 T[And I gathered them together to 
the river that runneth to Ahava; and 
there ^ abode we in tents three days: and 
I viewed the people, and the priests, and 
found there J none of the sons of Levi. 

16 Then sent I for Eliezcr, for Ariel, 
for Shemaiah, and for Elnathan, and for 
Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for Nathan, 
and for Zechariah, and for MeshuUam, 
chief men; also for Joiarib, and for El- 
nathan, men of ''understanding. 

17 And I sent them with commandment 
unto Iddo the chief at the place Casiphia, 
and III told them what they should say 
unto Iddo, and to his brethren the Ncth- 
inim, at the place Casiphia, that they 
should 'bring unto us ministers for the 
house of our God. 



i clmp. 2 : .3. f Or,younffett Kon. J Or, Zrtrcur, as eome read. & Or, 
pitched, i rhap. 7 : T. k 1 Cliron. 12 : S2 ; Prov. 20 : .'i ; 28 : 2. || Heli. 
I put wordt in their mouth, 2 Sam. U : 3, 19. 1 Titu» 1 : 5. 



CllAPTER VIII. 

15. Ahnva ; in Assyria, on a river of the same 
name, which emptied into the Euphrates. Ver. 21 . 

17. Casiijliia ; supposed to have been not far 
from Ahava. 

I.\STRUCTIONS. 

15. Ministers are sometimes backward to engage- 
in difficult and perilous services, and need, by the 
exhortation of their more zealous brethren, to be 
stirred up to their duty. 

21. We should never undertake a journey, or any 
enterpri.se, without first seeking the guidance and 
blessing of God ; which is a bettor security again.si 
evils than any assistance that can be rendered 1 )■ 
men. 

24. Those should be especially holy, who are in- 
trusted with holy tilings; and should carefully pr<'- 



Ezra's return 



EZRA IX. 



lo Jerusalem. 



» "4l"- 18 And by the good hand of our 
God upon us they "brought us a man of 
understanding, of tlie sons of Mahli, the 
son of Levi, the son of Israel ; and Shere- 
biah, with his sons and his brethren, 
eighteen ; 

19 And Ilashabiali, and with him Jesh- 
aiah of tlie sons of Merari, his brethren 
and their sons, t\\enty ; 

20 Also of the '' Ncthiuim, whom David 
and the princes had appointed for the ^ 
service of the Lcvites, two hundred and 
twenty Netliiuim: all of them were ex- 
pressed by '^ name. 

21 ^[Then I proclaimed a''fasl there, 
at the river of Ahava, that we might * af- 
flict ourselves before our God, to ""seek i 
of him a right way for us, and for our 
little s ones, and for all our substance. i 

22 For '' I was ashamed to require of the i 
iiing a band of soldiers and horsemen to 
help us against the enemy in the way : 
because we had spoken unto the king, 
saying, The ' hand of our God i.s- upon all j 
tliem for good that J seek him; but his i 
power and his "^ wrath h against all them 
that forsake him. 

23 So we fasted and besought our God 
for this: and he was 'entreated of us. 

24 "^Then I separated twelve of the 
chief of the priests, Sherebiah, Ilashabi- 
ali, and ten of their brethren with them, 

25 And weighed unto them the '"silver, 
and the gold, and the vessels, even the 
offering of the house of our God, which 
the king, and his counsellors, and his 
lords, and all Israel there present, had of- 
fered : 

26 I even weighed unto their hand six 
hundred and fifty talents of silver, and 
silver vessels a hundred talents, and of 
gold a hundred talents; 

27 Also twenty basins of gold, of a thou- 
sand drains ; and two vessels of * fine cop- 
per, ' precious as gold. 

28 And I said unto them, "Ye are holy 
unto the Lokd ; the "vessels are holy also ; 
and the silver and the gold are a freewill- 
offering unto the Lonn God of your fa- 
thers. 

29 Watch ye, and keep them, until ye 
weigh them before the chief of the priests 
and the Levites, and chief of the fathers 
of Israel, at Jerusalem, in the chambers 
of the house of the Lord. 



• Neh. 8:7; 9:4,5. b cliap. 2 : ^3. cPliill:^. J 2 Chron. 
;0:3. e Lev. IB:29; M:2Vli Is;i. SB : 3. 5 : Joel-2:13. ( P8«. 
b:»: W\:9. 10; Prov. 3:6; I»n. 3(1:21 ; «: 16: Jer. I0:'». ic P«a. 
8:2; Mark 10: 13, 16. 1< I Cor. 0: I."!. 1 cIj.ii. 7 :6,9.2(1. j Psa. 
33 : 1 8, 1 9 ; 34 : I .I, ii : I.ani. 3 : Q."; ; Uom. 8 : 28. Ii 2 Cliron. LS : 2 ; 
Zepli. 1:4,6; Hcb. 10:38. 1 1 Cbi:on. ft: 20; Psa. ti«i: 18-20 ; I»a. 



serve and faithfully appropriate what is committed 
to them. 
31. Those who secure the protection and blessing 



I 30 So took tlie priests and the Levites 
the weight of the silver, and the gold, and 
the vessels, to bring them to PJeru.^alcm 
unto the house of our God. 

31 T[ Then we departed from the river 
of Ahava on the twelfth day of the first 
month, to go unto Jerusalem: and the 
handi of our God was upon us, and he 
delivered us from the hand of the enemy, 
and of such as lay in wait by the way. 

32 And "^we came to Jerusalem, and 
abode there three days. 

33 ^ Now on the fourth day was the 
silver and the gold and the " vessels weigh- 
ed in the house of our (Jod by the hand 
of Meremoth the son of Uriah the priest; 
and with him was Eleazar the son of 
Phinehas; and with them was Jozabad 
the son of Jeshua, and Noadiah the son 
of Biniiui, Levites; 

34 By number and by weight of every 
one: and all the weight was written at 
that time. 

35 Also the children of those that liad 
been carried away, which were come 
out of the captivity, 'offered burnt-offer- 
ings unlo the God of Isimel, twelve bul- 
locks for all Israel, ninety and six rams, 
seventy and seven lambs, twelve he- 
goats for a sin-offering: all this was a 
burnt-offering unto the Lord. 

36 H And they delivered the king's " com - 
missions unto the king's lieutenants, and 
to the governors on this side the river: 
and they farthered the people, and the 
house of God. 

CHAPTER IX. 

I Kzra moiimeth for the affinity of the people with 
strangers. 5 He prayeth unto God with confession 
of sins. 

"VrOW when these things were done, 
XN the princes came to mc, saying. The 
people of Israel, and the priests, and tiie 
Levites, have not 'separated ihcmselvcs 
from the people of the lands, doing * ac- 
cording to their abominations, even of the 
Canaanites, tiic Ilittites, the Pcrizzitcs, 
the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moab- 
ites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites. 

2 For they have * taken of their daugh- 
ters for themselves, and for their sons : 
so that the 'holy seed have 'mingled 
themselves with the people of those lands : 
yea, the hand of the princes and rulers 
hath been chief in this trespass. 



19:22; Jer. 2it: I.', 13. m cliap. 7 : 15, 16. » Hrh. nrlloie.orthiming 
hrnll. i Heb. dttiruhlt. • Lev. 21:6-8; 22 : 2,3 ; D»ut. 33: K 
oNum. ^:l.^; Uom. 9:2.3. p vernf .32. ^ cliap. 7 : 28. ' NVli. 
2:11. • verden 26, 30. t rliap. 6: 17. a rliap. 7 : 21. <cliap.6:2l; 
Nell. n:2;'2Cor. 6: 17. w nciit. 12: 30,31 ; nom.2:17-«S. « Ex. 
34 : 16 ; Neb. 13 : 23. J Deut. M : 2 ; Ian. 6: 13. aCor. (i;l4. 



of G-od, niav pass through the greatest dangers and 
prosecute the most difficult enterprises, with safety 
and success. 



Ezra's prayer 



EZRA X. 



and confession. 



3 And when I heard this thing, I "rent 
my garment and my mantle, and plucked 
off the ''hair of my liead and of my beard, 
and sat down '^astonished. 

4 Then were assembled unto me every 
one that ^ trembled at the words of the 
God of Israel, because of the transgression 
of those that had been carried away; and 
I sat astonished until the ''evening sacri- 
fice. 

5 *[ And at the evening sacrifice I arose 
up from my * heaviness ; and having rent 
my garment and my mantle, I fell upon 

# my knees, and ""spread out my hands un- 
to the Lord my God, 

6 And said, my God, I saju ashamed 
and blush to lift up my face to thee, my 
God : for our iniquities are increased OA'er 
our ''head, and our t trespass is 'grown 
up unto the heavens. 

7 Since the days of our 'fathers have 
we been in a great trespass unto this day ; 
and for our iniquities have we, our kings, 
and our priests, been ''delivered into the 
hand of the kings of the lands, to the 
sword, to captivity, and to a spoil, and to 
confusion of faee, as it is this day. 

8 And now for a + little space grace hath 
been showed from the Lord our God, to 
leave us a remnant to escape, and to give 
us ^ a nail in his holy place, that our God 
may 'lighten our eyes, and give us a lit- 
tle '"reviving in our bondage. 

9 For we ?rc/c " bondmen ; yet "our God 
hath not forsaken us in our bondage, but 
hath extended mercy unto us in the sight 
of the kings of Persia, to give us a reviv- 
ing, to set up the house of our God, and 
to II repair the desolations thereof, and to 
give us a Pwall in Judah and in Jerusa- 
lem. 

10 And now, our God, what shall 
we say after this? for we have forsaken 
thy commandments, 

11 Which thou hast commanded * by thy 



• 2 Kingfi, 19 : 1. b Isa. 15 : 2. c Paa. «) : :). d rhnp. 1 9 : 3 ; Psa. 
119:1OT; Isa. R6:i; Ezpk. (I: 4. cKi. 2i>:39. * Or, iijliction. 
f IKings, 8:22. lDan.9:7,8. kPaB.38:4. i Or, guiltiness. 
i 2 Chron. 28:9; Luke 15: 21 ; Rev. 18 : 6. j Psa. 106: 6. k Deut. 
28::)8, B4. | Heb. mi.mtnt. !l Or, a pin : tUnt ia, a constant and 
sure abode, Ua. 22: 23. iPsa. 13:3. mPsa. 85:6. »Neli. 9:Si;. 



CHAPTER IX. 

3. I re7it iny garment ; a token of great con- 
sternation and sorrow at the transgression of the 
people, in mingling by marriage with the idolatrous 
nations around them. 

.'). At the evening sacrifice ; when the people 
assembled for evening worship. 

G. Grown vp unto the heavens ; become ex- 
ceedingly great. 

S. A little space ; from the time Zerubbabel 
with his company arrived at Jerusalem, to the ar- 
rival of Ezra. A nail in his holy place ; perma- 
nently establish them at Jerusalem. 

9. A wall in Jiiclah ; the means of defence from 
their enemies. 

15. Thou art righteous ; in the punishment he 
594 



servants the prophets, saying, The *b"c.^7: 
land, unto which ye go to possess it, is 
an unclean land with the filtliiness of the 
people of the lands, with their abomina- 
tions, which have filled it from tone end 
to another with their uncleanness. 

12 Now therefore give not your daugh- 
ters unto their sons, neither take their 
daughters unto your sons, i nor seek their 
peace or their wealth for ever: that ye 
may be strong, and eat the good of the 
land, and leave it for an inheritance to 
your children for ever. 

13 And after all that is come upon us 
for our evil deeds, and for our great tres- 
pass, seeing that thou our God hast ^ pun- 
ished us ''less than our iniquities deserve, 
and hast given us such deliverance as 
this ; 

14 Should *we again break thy com- 
mandments, and join in affinity witli the 
people of these abominations? wouldcst 
not thou be angry with us till 'thou hadst 
consumed i(s, so that there should be no 
remnant nor escaping? 

15 OLoRD God of Israel, "thou a// right- 
eous ; for we remain yet "escaped, as it 
is this day : behold, we are before thee in 
our "trespasses; for we cannot "stand be- 
fore thee because of this. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 Shechaniah encourageth Ezra to reform the strange 
marriages. 6 Ezra moiiniing assembleth the people. 
9 The people, at the exhortation of Ezra, repent, and 
promise amendment. 15 The care to perfonn it. IS 
The names of them %vhich had married strange wives. 

IVrO W when Ezra had prayed, and when 
_L\ he had confessed, weeping and cast- 
ing himself down ^before the house of God, 
there assembled unto him out of Israel a 
very great congregation of men and wom- 
en and children : for the people wept Wery 
sore. 

2 And Shechaniah the son of Jehiel, one 
of the sons of Elam, answered and said 



o Psalm I3fi:i.i; K7.(k. 11 : ifi. || Heh. set up. p chap. 6 : 8,ri. 
* Hell, by the hand of. f Heb. movth to mouth, 2 KiTi^'s. •.'1: 16 
<l lleut. 23 : K. t Heb. withheld henealh our iniquities. r p«a. 
103:10. • John 5: 14; 2 Peter, 2 : 20, 21. I Deut 9 : 8. » Nell. 
9:33; Dan.9:14. » I.am. 3: 22,23. w John 8 : 21,24; 1 Cor. 
15:17. I P.salm 130:3. ) 2 Chron. 20: a ^ Hfh. u great Keeping. 



had inflicted on them for their sins ; and their de- 
liverance was all of grace. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. However great the judgments of God on men 
for their sins, or his mercy in their deliverance, they 
are prone to forget him, and even to repeat the sins 
for which they have been called to sufter. 

2. Marriages with the openly wicked have ever 
been a powerful means of public corruption, and a 
fruitful source of calamity to both rulers and people. 

(). Ingenuous confession of sin, with heartysuppli- 
cation to God for p.ardon. is a more sure means of relief 
than anv application which can be made to creatures. 

1.3. SdWfVer great tlie calamities which God in- 
flicts on his people, they feel tliat he is righteous, and 
that he punishes them less tlian their sins deserve. 



Ezra reformeth 



EZRA X, 



the stra7ige marriages. 



'trespassed his pleasure: and separate yourselves 
against our God, and have taken strange ^ from the people of the land, and from 
wives of the people of the land : yet now the strange wives. 



there is ''hope in Israel concerning this 
thing. 

3 Now therefore let us make a "^cove^ 
nant with our God to *put away all the 



12 Then all the congregation answered 
and said with a loud voice, As thou hast 
said, so must we do. 

13 But the people are many, and it ix a 



wives, and such as are born of them, ac- !tim(! of much rain, and we are not able 
cording to the counsel of my lord, and of to stand without, neither is this a work 
those that "^tremble at the ^commandment of one day or two: for we II are many that 
of our God; and let it be done according ' have transgressed in this thing, 
to the law. I 14 Let now our rulers of all the con- 

4 Arise; for this matter helongdh unto gregation stand, and let all them which 
thee: wc also xcill be with thee: be of 1 have taken strange wives in our cities 
good courage, and do it. jcome at appointed times, ami with them 

5 Then arose F'zra, and made the chief the elders of every city, and the judges 
priests, the Lcvites, and all Israel, to i thereof, until the fierce wrath of our God 
swear'' that they should do according to for* this matter be turned from us. 
this word. And they sware. ' 15 T[Only Jonathan the son of Asahel 

6 T[Then Ezra rose up from before the ] and Jahaziah the son of Tikvah twerc 
house of God, and went into the chamber employed about this matter: and Meshul- 
of Johanan the son of Eliashib : and ?f /if// lam and Shabbethai the Levite helped 
he came thither, she did eat no bread, J them. 

nor drink water: for he mourned because 16 And the children of the captivity 
of the transgression of them that had been I did so. And Ezra the priest, with cer- 
carried away. I tain chief of the fathers, after the house 

7 And they made proclamation through- 1 of their fathers, and all of them by their 
out Judah and. Terusalem unto all the chil- ! names, were separated, and sat down in 
drenofthe captivity, that they should gath- the first day of the tenth month to >cx- 
er themselves together unto Jerusalem; amine the matter. 

8 And that whosoever would not come, 17 And they made an end with all the 
within three days, according to the coun- men that had taken strange wives by the 
sel of the princes and the ciders, all his first day of the first month, 
substance should be t forfeited, and him- 18 1[ And among tlie sons of the 'priests 
self separated from the congregation of there were found that had taken strange 
those that had been carried away. 'wives: namcli/. of the sons of Jeshua the 

9 1[Then all the men of Judah and Ben- ' son of Jozadak, and his brethren : Maa- 
jamin gathered themselves together unto seiah, and Eliezer, and Jarib, and Geda- 
Jerusaletn within three days. It teas the ! liah. 

ninth month, on the twentieth f/rtj/of the' 19 And they 'gave their hands that they 
month; and all the people sat in the street i would put away their wives; and bring 
of the house of God, trembling i" because ' guilty, they ""offered a ram of the flock for 
oHhis matter, and for the great train. ^ their trespass. 

10 And Ezra the priest stood up, and 20 And of the sons of Immer; Hanani. 
said unto them. Ye have transgressed, ' and Zebadiah. 

and have Haken strange wives, to in- j 21 And of the sons of Harim; Maase- 



crease the trespass of Israel. 

II Now therefore make confession 'un- 
to the Lord God of vour fathers, and do 



• Nell. 13:27. Ii Isr. /» : H,7. c iCIirnn. 3^ : HI. " Hfh.hrinp/nrlh. 
d cImP 9:4. e nmit. 7:2, .-«. f NVIi. .=i : 1 2. t Peut. !) : IS. f Hpb. 
devKted. h I S:ini I.': 18. tVleh thon-trt. 5 Heh. i<jii«i//.> rfiw//, 
or have brought hack, i Pror. 28: 13; 1 .lolin, 1 : ». ||Or, /ini'f 



CHAPTER X. 
14. Come at appointed times; to have their 
case.s duly investigated and decided according to 
truth. 

n>(STRL-CTIONS. 
1. Those who would lead others to repentance, 
must show that they are deeply afTccted with their 
sins, and earnestly desire their good. 

3. True repentance will always be accompanied 
with thorouirfi reformation ; and no sin is repented 
of, that is not heartily forsaken. 

4. Those who undertake public reformations need 



iah, and Elijah, and Shcmaiah, and Je- 
hiel, and Uzziah. 
22 And of the sons of Pashur; Elioe- 



iirtatly (tffended. ' Or, bt turned from u$ till Ihi 


r matter tie lie- 


spntclied. t Hfb.ltnod. i Tttut. 13: 14 : Job 2>) : 


f.; John 7: 111 


I Jer. 23: 11; Mai. 2: 8,9. 1 aKmjs.lO: l.i; 1 Cbrrm. 


■■l;:4;2Cbroo 


30:8; Lain.r>:ti. m Lev. 5: 15, Irt: 0: 4,6. •.Neb. 


7:41. 



encouragement from their brethren, and the cooper- 
ation of many will effect what no one can accom- 
plish alone. 

9. If men would forsake their sins and turn to the 
Lord, they must not only resolve to do it, but with 
his help must carry their resolutions into effect ; 
.actually doing what they know and acknowledge to 
be their duty. 

17. Courage, resolution, activity, and persever- 
ance, with dependence on God, will enable his peo- 
ple, for the good of his church, to accomplish ob- 
jects otherwise impossible. 

o9d 



The prayer 



XEHExMIAiri. 



of Nchcmiah. 



nai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethaneel, Joza- 
bad, aud Elasah. 

23 Also of the Lcvites; Jozabad, and 
Shimei, and Kelaiah, (the same is Kelita,) 
Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer. 

24 Of the singers also ; Eliashib : and 
of the porters ; Shallum, and Telem, and 
Uri. 

25 Moreover of Israel : of the sons of 
Parosh ; Ramiah, and Jeziah, and Mal- 
chiah, and Miamin, and Eleazar, and 
Malchijah, and Benaiah. 

26 And of the sons of Elam; INIattani- 
ah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, and Abdi, and 
Jeremoth, and Eliah. 

27 And of the sons of Zattu; Elioenai, 
Eliashib, Mattaniah, and Jeremoth, and 
Zabad, and Aziza. 

28 Of the sons also of Bebai; Jehoha- 
nan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and Athlai. 

29 And of the sons of Bani; Meshul- 
1am, Mallach, and Adaiah, Jashub, and 
Sheal, and Ramoth. 

30 And of the sons of Pahath-moab ; 
Adna, and Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, 



Mattaniah, Bezaleel, and Binnui, ^b^c.^^i?; 
and Manasseh. 

31 And o/ the sons of Harim ; Eliezer, 
Ishijah, ]Malchiah, Shemaiah, Shimeon, 

32 Benjamin, Malluch, atid Shemariah. 

33 Of the sons of Hashum; Mattenai, 
Mattathah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, 
JNIanasseh, and Shimei. 

34 Of the sons of Bani; Maadai, Am- 
ram, and Uel, 

35 Benaiah, Bedeiah, Chellvih, 

36 Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib, 

37 Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasan, 

38 And Bani, and Binniii, Shimei, 

39 And Shelemiah, aud Nathan, and 
Adaiah, 

40 Machnadebai,* Shashai, Sharai, 

41 Azareel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah, 

42 Shallum, Amariah, and Joseph. 

43 Of the sons of Nebo; Jeiel, Matti- 
tliiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jadau, and Joel, 
Benaiah. 

44 All tliese had taken * strange wives : 
and some of them had wives by whom 
they had children. 



THE 



BOOK OF NEHEMIAH 



CHAPTER I. 

1 Nehemiah. understanding by Hanani the misery of 
Jerusalem, mourneth, fasteth, and prayeth. 5 His 
prayer. 

THE words of ''Nehemiah the son of 
Hachaliah. And it came to pass in 
the month Chislcu, in the twentieth year, 
as I was in Shushan the palace, 

2 That Hanani, one of my brethren, 
came, he and certain men of Judah; and 
I asked them concerning the Jews that 
had escaped, which were left of the cap- 
tivity, and concerning Jerusalem. 

3 And they said unto me, The remnant 
that are left of the captivity there in the 
province are in "^ great adliction and re- 
proach: the wall of Jerusalem also is 
broken'' down, and the gates thereof are 
burned with fire. 

4 Tf And it came to pass, when I licard 
these words, that I sat down and wept, 
and mourned certain days, and fasted, 
and prayed before the God of heaven, 



* Or, Mabnadehaif nccoriiing to Bonie copies. ■ Prov. fi;20. 
keliap.lO: 1. c Psiilm 137 : 1-3 ; Lnm. 1 : 7 ; :t:61 ; 5 : I. "liKiiign, 
'U: 10; IsainliGI: lU, 11. e Daniel 9 : 4, etc. r Kxotlus 20: (i. 

CHAPTER L 
1. Chisleu ; the ninth month, answering to a 
596 



5 And said, I beseech ^thee, O Lord God 
of heaven, the great and terrible God, 
that keepeth "^covenant and mercy for 
them that love him and observe his com- 
mandments : 

6 Let s thine ear now be attentive, and 
thine eyes ''open, that thou mayest hear 
the prayer of thy servant, which I pray 
before thee now, day and night, for the 
children of Israel thy servants, and 
confess' the sins of the children of Is- 
rael, which we have sinned against thee : 
both I and my father's house have sin- 
ned. 

7 We J have dealt very corruptly against 
thee, and liavc hot ^kept the command- 
ments, nor the statutes, nor the judg- 
ments, which thou conimandedst thy ser- 
vant Moses. 

8 Remember, I beseech thee, the word 
that thou comniandedst thy servant Mo- 
ses, saying, '//" ye transgress, I will scat- 
ter you abroad among the nations : 



It 1 Kings, 8:'28,2i)i iChron. 6M0. b r/inlm.14 : l.i. 1 P»n. .1i : ."i ; 
I .lulin, 1 ; !1. j Psnim 106:0. k Deut 28: 1ft. 1 Lev. 26 : 33, etc. ; 
DeuL4:25,etc.;28:64. 



part of November and December. Shiisha?i ; a 
city in Persia, and tlie winter residence of the kings, 
2. Came; from Jerusalem. 



Artaxerxes sendeth 



nehp:miaii ii, 



Kchemiuh to Jerusalem 



sl'^t 9 But if ye tiini unto mc, and 6 And the king said unto me, (the 'queen 
keep my commandments, and do them;! also sitting by him,) For how long sliall 
though nhere were of you cast out unto thy journey be? and when wilt thou rc- 
the uttermost part of the heaven, j/ci wilH turn? So it pleased the king to send mc ; 
I ^gather them from thence, and -vvill and I set him a "time, 
bring them unto the place that I have] 7 Moreover 1 said unto the king, If it 
chosen to set my name there. i please the king, let letters be giv'cn me 

10 Now "^ these a/-e thy servants and thy , to the governors beyond the river, that 
people, whom thou hast redeemed by thy j they may convey mc over till I come 
great power, and by thy strong hand. into Judali ; 

11 Lord, I beseech thee, let now thine 8 And a letter unto Asaph the keeper 
ear be ''attentive to the prayer of thy ser- of the king's forest, that ho may give me 
vant, and to the prayer of thy servants, t timber to make beams for the gates of the 
who *= desire to fear thy name: and pros- palace which appertained to the house, 
per, I pray thee, thy servant this day, and for the wall of the city, and for tiie 
and grant him mercy in the sight of this : house" that I shall enter into. And the 
man. For ''I was the king's cupbearer, king granted me, p according to the good 

CHAPTER II hand of my God upon me. 

I Artaxerxes understandinf; the cause' of Nehemiah-s ^ ? "^''^'^ ^ '^'^'"'^ ^0 t'l<^ governors bc- 
sadiies-; sendeth liim witli letters and commission to yOUd the riVCr, and gaVC thcm tllC kins'.S 
Jerusalem. 9 Nehemiah to the grief of the enemies, letters. Now the king had sent captains 
Cometh to Jerusalem. 12 He vieweth secretly the ' r 41 j , • , ' 

ruins of the walls. 17 He inciteth the Jews to build I ^I tUC army and liorscuicn With mo. 

in despite of the enemies. 10 When Sanbalhit tlic lloronite, and 

A ND it came to pass in the month Ni- Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, heard 
irL san, in the twentieth year of sArta- to/ it, it igricved tliem exceedingly that 
xerxes the king, that wine ivas before there was come a man to seek the wel- 
him : and I took '"up the wine, and gave fare of the children of Israel. 
it unto the king. Now I had not been' 11 So ''I came to Jerusalem, and was 
beforetiiiie sad in his presence. there three days. 

2 Whereforethekingsaiduntome, Why 12^ And I arose in the night, I and 
/.vtliy countenance sad, seeing thou (n< not some few men with me; neither told I 
sick? this is nothing else but 'sorrow oi any man what my God had 'put in my 
lieart. Then I was very sore afraid, heart to do at Jerusalem : neither wa.t 

3 And said unto the king, J Let the king ^/tc/-c any beast with me, save the beast 
live for ever: why should not my coun- that I rode upon. 

tenanee be sad, when the ''city, the place ' 13 And I went out by nitiht by the 
of my fathers' 'sepulchres, lieth waste, gate' of the valley, even before the drag- 
and the gates thereof are consumed with j on-well, and to tiie duns-port, and view- 
lire? ed the walls of Jerusalem, which were 

4 Then the king said unto me. For what ^ broken" down, and the gates thereof were 
dost thou make request? So I '"prayed to 1 consumed with lire. 

the God of heaven. j 14 Then I went on to the gate of the 

o And I said unto the king. If it please I fountain," and to the king's pool: but 
the king, and if thy servant have found there was no place for the beast that was 
favor in thy sight, that thou wouldest under me to pass, 
send me unto Judah, unto the city of my 
lathers' sepulchres, that I may build it. 

» Deut. :10: 



bPsn. I47:'2; Isx. II : Ij ; hH:S; Jer.l'2:l5 
: 11, ■.'(). c Dent. 9:29; D»n. 9:lfi, etc. arsa.8fi:6. « I«n 
:S; Heb.I3:l8. fehap.'2:l. gK;.n\7:l. bcli»p.l:ll 
•rov. 15:13. j I Kiugs, 1 : 31 ; Dan. ■-•: 4. k clmp. I : 3. liChron 



15 Then went I up in the night by the 
brook," and viewed the wall, and turned 



•21::0; S8:-27; 32:33. ■» Prov.3:6; Pbil.4:(>. 


• 11- 


n cli.ip.fi:l4: I3:n. »rlinp.3:7. I> Bini S : A ; t 


rr. 1- 1 


11-2:10; Ktek.3r>:i>-8. r Ex. 8:3-2. 'PniLRl : IR ; 1-2. 


: <>. 1 . • 


2rt:9. ucliap 1:3. » clnp. 3 : 1.1. w-: Sam. 15l -23 ; 


.)«T 



9. The place that I have cAo^fw;, Jerusalem, firm confidence in tlie promises of trod, arc 

10. These are thy ser cants ; the Israelites who acceptible prayer, and open the way for a 
had returned to Judea. 

11. This man ; the king of Persia. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. True piety is soinetimes found anion"^ those 
who are high in civil otliee ; and it leads them to 
t;ilce a- deep interest in the welfare of the people 
and cause of G-od, in all parts of the world, espec- 
ially in the home of their ancestors and brethren 



peace. 

11. As the hearts of all men are in the hand of 
the Lord, application to him is the surest way of 
obtaining favors from them. 



1. Thi 



CHAPTER II. 
ilh i^lsfin : this wvs about four 



Prayer to the God of heaven forms the best i months after Nehemiah inquired about the Jew.* 
preparation for great and difficult undertakings, j and engaged in special prayer in their behalf, 
and is the surest means of securing complete and j A. So I prayed to the Gexl of liraven ; in silent 
final succe.ss. prayer that he might be directed, and tho king b<" 

7. Hearty confession of sin, and an expression of j led to favor him. 

597 



Names and order of the 



N EH EMI AH III. 



builders of the wall. 



back, and entered by the gate of the val- 
ley, and .vo returned. 

16 And the rulers knew not whither I 
went, or what I did ; neither had I as yetj 
told it to the Jews, nor to the priests, nor 
to the nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the 
rest that did the work. I 

17 ^ Then said I unto them, Ye see the 
distress that we are in, how Jerusalem 
Ueth * waste, and the gates thereof are 
burned with fire: come, and let us build 
up the wall of Jerusalem, that we be no 
more a ''reproach. 

18 Then I told them of the "^hand of my 
God which was good upon me; as also 
the king's words that he had spoken un- 
to me. And they said. Let us rise up 
and build. So they ''strengthened their 
hands for this good icork. 

19 But when Sanballat the Horonite, 
and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, 
and Geshem the Arabian, heard it, they 
laughed" us to scorn, and despised us, 
and said, What is this thing that ye do? 
will ye "^rebel against the king? 

20 Then answered I them, and said unto 
them, The God of heaven, ^ he will pros- 
per us; therefore we his servants will 
arise and build : but '' ye have no portion, 
nor right, nor memorial, in 'Jerusalem. 

CHAPTER III. 

The names and order of them that builded the wall. 

THEN JEliashib the high-priest rose 
up with his brethren the priests, and 
they builded the '' sheep-gate ; they sancti- 
fied it, and set up the doors of it; even 
unto the Mower of Mcah they sanctified 
it, unto the '"tower of Ilananecl. 

2 A)ul *next unto him builded the men 
of "Jericho. And nc.\t to them builded 
Zaccur the son of Imri. 

3 But the ° fish-gate did the sons of Ilas- 
senaah build, who also laid the beams 
thereof, and set up the doors thereof, the 
locks thereof, and the bars thereof. 

4 And next unto them repaired Mere- 



• Lam. 2 : 2, 8, 9. b clia|i. 1:3; Pan. 44 : 13 : 79 : 4, 13 ; .Icr. 24 : 9 i 
Kll-k. 5:14, 15; 22:4. « ver. R. il 2 Sain. 2 : 7 ; E7,r« 6:M. e P«n. 
m:6. fc!iiip.fi:6. g Paa. 102: i:i, 14 : Ercl. 7; 18. liEzrii4:3. 
1 I»a.Bfi:6. j rliiip. 12 : l(i. kJolm5:2. I cliiip. 12:39. m .Ter. 



18. The hand of my God ; how God had favored 
liim. 

19. Sa7ihallat — Tohiah — Geshem; governors, 
or chief men in provinces west of the Euphrates. 

INSTRUCTIONS 

4. Silent ejaculatory prayer slioulj be intermin- 
gled with all our einployin"nts ; and the liabit of 
asking the guidance and blpssing of God in all our 
concern.s, is honorable to iiiin and liighly useful to 
ourselves. • 

7. While we first seek the blessing of God on our 
endeavors to do good, we should use all suitable 
means to secure the aid and cooperation of men; 
especially of those in authority, and such as have 
influence witli others. 
598 



moth the son of Urijah, the son *b"c'^ 
of Koz. And next unto them repaired 
Meshullam the son of Bereehiah, the son 
of Meshezabcel. And next unto them 
repaired Zadok the son of Baana. 

5 And next unto them the Tekoites re- 
paired; but their p nobles put not their 
necks to the iwork of their Lord. 

6 Moreover the old gate repaired Jehoi- 
ada the son of Paseah, and iSIeshullam 
the son of Besodeiah ; they laid the beams 
thereof, and set up the doors thereof, and 
the locks thereof, and the bars thereof. 

7 And next unto them repaired Mcla- 
tiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the Mero- 
nothite, the men of Gibeon, and of Miz- 
pah, unto the ''throne of the governor on 
this side the river. 

8 Next unto him repaired Uzziel the 
son of Harhaiah, of the goldsmiths. Next 
unto him also repaired Hananiah the son 
of ofco/ the apothecaries, and they + for- 
tified Jerusalem unto the broad 'wall. 

9 And next unto them repaired Repha- 
iah the son of Hur, the ruler of the half 
part of Jerusalem. 

10 And next unto them repaired Jeda- 
iah the son of Harumaph, even over 
against his house. And next unto him 
repaired Hattush the son of Hashabniah. 

11 INIalchijah the son of Harim, and 
Hashub the son of Pahath-moab, repair- 
ed the tother piece, and the tower of the 
furnaces. 

12 And next unto him repaired Shal- 
lum the son of Halohesh, the ruler of the 
half part of Jerusalem, he and his daugh- 
ters. 

13 The 'valley-gate repaired Ilanun, 
and the inhabitants of Zanoah ; they built 
it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks 
thereof, and the bars thereof, and a thou- 
sand cubits on the wall unto the -dung- 
gate. 

14 But the dung-gate repaired INIalchiah 
the son of liechab, the ruler of part of 
Beth-hacccrem ; he built it, and set up 



31:38; Zee. 14:10 


» Hell, at his lianit. n Eir.i 2 :34. u 2 Chron. 


33: 14; Zepli. 1: 10. 


r Jer S,4,.S; 1 Cor. 1 : 2fi: 1 Tiio. ti: 17, 18. 


<K Juds. 5: 2.3. r tl 


an. 2:8. i Or, left. • ihiip. 12 :3a J Heb- 


second measure. I 


< imp. 2: 13. u rhiip.2 : 1:!. 



10. Tlie wicked are often griisved when the cause 
of God prospers and they cannot prevent it. 

]S. The history of (.rod's dealings with his people 
affords them encouragement to engage unitedly and 
heartily in his work. 

CHAPTER III. 

1. The sheep-gat r ; in the eastern part of the 
city near the temple, where sheep were .sold for the 
sacriiices. 

•'). Pitt not their necks; did not assist Nehe- 
miah in the building of the wall. 

7. The throne of the governor ; tjie place whero 
he administered justice. 

11. Tlic JiiiHT-sate ; on the south-west side. 



Huilding of the wall. 



NEHEMIAH IV. 



Plots of enemies. 



K.ciT"' the doors thereof, the locks there- 
of, and the bars thereof. 

15 But the gate of the "fountain repair- 
ed Shallum the son of Col-liozeh, the 
ruler of part of Mizpah; he built it, and 
covered it, and set up the doors thereof, 
the locks thereof, and the bars thereof, 
and the -svall of the pool of ""Siloah by 
the king's garden, and unto the stairs 
that go down from the city of David. 

16 After him repaired Nehemiali the son 
of Azbuk,tlie rulerof the half part of l?eth- 
zur, unto the place over against the sepul- 
chres of David, and to the ""pool that was 
made, and unto the house of the mighty. 

17 After him repaired the Levitcs, Re- 
hum the son of Bani. Next unto him 
repaired Hashabiah, the ruler of the half 
part of Keilah, in his part. 

18 After him repaired their brethren, 
Bavai the son of Henadad, the ruler of 
the half part of "^ Keilah. 

19 And next to him repaired Ezer the 
son of Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah, an- 
other piece over against the going up to 
the armory at the ''turning of the wall. 

20 After him Baruch the son of *Zab- 
bai earnestly repaired the other piece, 
from the turning of the wall unto the door 
of the house of Eliasihib tlic high-priest. 

2 1 A fter him repaired Meremoth the son 
of Urijah the son of Koz another piece, 
from the door of the house of Eliashib 
even to the end of the house of Eliashib. 

22 And after him repaired the priests, 
the men of the "^plain. 

23 After him repaired Benjamin and 
Hashub over against their house. After' 
him rej)aired Azariah the son of Maasc- 
iah the son of Ananiah by his house. 

24 After him repaired Binnui the son of! 
Henadad another piece, from the house of! 
Azariah unto the ^turning of the icall, 
even unto the corner. 



• chap. 2: H. bjolio9;7. c 1 Kinga/M: iO: Isa. 7 : 3 i Si : 1 1. 
<1 ISani. 2.1: l.etc. « 2Chron. 2(i:9. " Or, Zaccai. I clinpler 
12:28. s ver. 19. li .ler. ;i.': 2 : 37 : 21. " Kim 2 :-l:l, elc. t Or, 
ttiiicli dwelt in Ophel, rcpaircJ unto. X Or, the tinner, i 2 Chron. 



1-5. The gate of the fountain ; near the pool 
of Siloain, at the south-east part of the city. 

26. Ophel; an elevation or tower in the eastern 
part of the city. 

32. The sheep-gate; the place where they began 
to build. Thus they had surrounded the whole city. 
INSTRUCTrONS. 

1. In works of public reformation and such a.s are 
required for the protection and prosperity of the 
church, ministers of religion should take the lead, 
and set an example which may be safely and use- 
fully followed. 

5. Men of rank often excuse themselves from the 
performance of those labors which the public good 
requires, and in which others are engaged ; and thus 
neglect the talents with which they are intrusted, 
and set an example mischievous to all within their 
influence. 



25 Palal the son of Uzai, over against 
the turning of the ivall, and the tower 
which licth out from the king's high 
house, that ica.s by the ''court of the pris- 
on. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh. 

26 Moreover the 'Ncthinim ^ dwelt in 
- Ophel, i unto the place over against the 
water-gate'' toward the east, and the tow- 
er that lieth out. 

27 After them the Tekoites repaired an- 
other piece, over against the great tower 
that licth out, even unto the wall of Ophel. 

28 From above the 'horse-gate repaired 
the priests, every one over against his 
house. 

29 After them repaired Zadok the son 
of Immer over against his house. After 
him repaired also Shcmaiah the son of 
Shceaniah, the keeper of the east-gate. 

30 After him repaired Hananiah the son 
of Shelemiah, and Ilanun the sixth son of 
Zalaph, another piece. After him repair- 
ed Mcshullam the son of Bercchiah over 
against his chamber. 

31 After him repaired INIalchiah the 
goldsmith's son unto the place of the 
Nethinim,'" and of the merchants, over 
against the gate Miphkad, and to the Ago- 
ing up of the corner. 

32 And between the going up of the 
corner unto the "sheep-gate repaired the 
goldsmiths and the merchants. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1 AVliile the enemies scnlT, \etiemiah prayeth anil cnn- 
tinueth the work. 7 Understanding the wrath and 
secrets of the enemy, he settetli a watch. 13 Jle arm- 
eth the laborers, I!) and piveth military prec<|its. 

BUT it came to pass, that "wlien San- 
ballat heard that we builded tlie wall, 
he was wroth, and took great p indigna- 
tion, and 1 mocked the .lews. 

2 And he spake before his brethren 
and the army of Samaria, and said. What 
do these 'feeble Jews? will they H forti- 



27 


:3. k cl 


aiit<T 8: 1.3 
4 (>r.r.>rn« 


12 


.17. 1 2 


Ktngn, 


11: Irti Jrr.3l 


¥). 


ID 


ven»e 2fi. 


ehumtier. n 


ver. 1 


• chap.?: to 


19. 


P 


AcUft:l7. 


q Heb.ll 


3fl. 


r Zccl 


. 12:8. 


Ij Ueb. horrid 


themtelvet. 















8. Persons of all trades and professions may assist 
in promoting the cause of God. and each should en- 
deavor faithfully to perform that which belongs to 
him, and which his condition fits him to accompli.sh. 

12. When rulers and people of both sexes engage 
in works of beneficence, all doing what is appropri- 
ate to their condition, the work of the Lord will pros- 
per and the highest good be circctually advanced. 

28. Division of labor, and a-ssigning to e.ich one 
that which peculiarly Belongs to him, and which he 
can most readily perform, prevents confusion, pro- 
motes dispatch, and tends to the mast speedy and 
thorough accomplishment of every good work. 

CHAPTER IV. 

1. Snithallat ; governor of the Samaritans. 

2. Maie an etid ; finish their wall and works of 
defence. 

599 



The people pray, 



NEHEMIAH IV. 



watch, aiid labor. 



fy themselves? ■svill they sacrifice? -svill; 
they make an end in a day? will they 
revive the stones out of the heaps of the 
rubbish which arc burned? 

3 Now Tobiah the Ammonite was by 
him, and he said, * Even that which they 
build, if a fox go up, he shall even break 
down their stone wall. 

4 Hear,** our God ; for we arc *despis- 
ed : and "^turn their reproach upon their 
own head, and give them for a prey in 
the land of captivity : 

5 And ''cover not their iniquity, and let 
not their sin* be blotted ovit from before 
thee: for they have provoked thee to an- 
ger before the builders. 

6 So built wc the wall ; and all the wall 
was joined together unto the half thereof: 
for the people had a '^mind to work. 

7 ir But it came to pass, that when San- 
ballat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, 
and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, 
heard that the walls of Jerusalem t^vcre 
made up, and that the breaches began to 
be stopped, then they were very wroth, 

8 And "^conspired all of them together 
to come and to fight against Jerusalem, 
and to i hinder it. 

9 Nevertheless we made our sprayer 
unto our God, and '' set a watch against 
them day and night, because of them. 

10 And Judah said, The strength of the 
bearers of burdens is decayed, and there 
is much rubbish; so that we are not able 
to build the wall. 

1 1 And our adversaries said, ' They 
shall not know, neither see, till we come 
in the midst among them, and slay them, 
and cause the work to cease. 

12 And it came to pass, that when the 
Jews which dwelt by them came, they 
said unto us ten times, ^ From all places 
whence ye shall relurn unto us they tcill 
be ripnn yoi(. 

13 ^Therefore set I II in the lower places 
behind the wall, «??r/ on the higher places, 
I even set the people after flieir families 
with their swords, their spears, and their 
bows. 

■ 2 Kings, 18: M. !■ Pan. lOS : 3, 4. * Hob. despite, c Ps.i. 
79:12; Prov.3:34. i P«alin «» : 27 ; Jer.l8:2.'5; 2Tim.4;U. 
e 2 Cliron. 2>J : :lii ; Psa. 1 10 : .1. f Hel). atceiirletl. I P»n. 8:) : 3-5. 
t Heh. make on ennr til it.. 1i-T.iO:\0; naM(!:4.fi. sP.snlm 
ftO: Ifi; fi.i: IH-22. li l.iike 21 : :Mi ; Art* 4 : •.M-2M. i 2S.im. 17 : 2 : 
Acts 23 : 12, il. 5 Of. That/rum nil placet ye mutt return to ut. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Opposers of rclij,'ion often attempt to hinder 
its progress by ridicule; but if thi.s excites the peo- 
ple of (rod to increased prayer, it will further, rather 
than hinder their work. 

fi. Where there is a will there is a way. When- 
ever the people of G-od are disposed to work for him. 
he will open a way for them to be employed in his 
cause with success. 

9. Prayer to God, and a diligent use of all appro- 
priate means, will defend his people from the r.age 
600 



14 And I looked, and rose up, *i"6.^5ii 
and said unto the nobles, and to the rul- 
ers, and to the rest of the people, J Be not 
ye afraid of them : reiueniber the Lord, 
which is ''great and terrible, and 'fight for 
yourbrcthren,your sons, and your daugh- 
ters, your wives, and your houses. 

15 And it came to pass, when our ene- 
mies heard that it was J<nown unto us, 
and God had brought their counsel to 
naught,'" that wc returned all of us to the 
wall, every one unto his work. 

16 And it came to pass from that time 
forth, that the half of my servants wrought 
in the work, and the other half of them 
held both the spears, the shields, and the 
bows, and the habergeons ; and the rulers 
7vere behind all the house of Judah. 

17 They which builded on the wall, 
and they that bare burdens, with those 
that laded, rrcr?/07ic with one of his hands 
wrought in the work, and with the other 
hand held a " weapon. 

18 For the builders, every one had his 
sword girded *by his side, and so build- 
ed. And he that sounded the trumpet 
icas by me. 

19 1[ And I said unto the nobles, and 
to the rulers, and to the rest of the people. 
The work is great and large, and we are 
separated upon the Avail, one far from 
another. 

20 In what place therefore ye hear the 
sound of the trumpet, resort ye thither 
unto us : our God "shall fight for us. 

21 So we labored in the work: and 
half of them held the spears from the 
rising of the morning till the stars ap- 
peared. 

22 Likewise at the same time said I 
unto the people, Let every one with his 
servant lodge Avithin Jerusalem, that in 
the night Ihcy may be a guard to us, and 
labor on the day. 

23 So neither p I, nor my brethren, nor 
my servants, nor the men of the guard 
which followed me, none of us put off 
our clothes, ^.•;aving that every one put 
them off for washins. 



II Heb./nim the lower partt of the place, j llcut. 1 : 2'i, :I0 ; Mat. 
10: 28. k neut 10:17; Pan. Rli : 3, 5 : Null. 1 : fi, 7. - I 2 .Sam. 10 : 12. 
m .lob.'i:12; Pta. ;W:IO; Lniii. :t : 37, :i,s. ii 1 Cor. 16 13 ; PliiL 
1 : 2S. » Heb. on hit loint. o Ex. U : 14, 2."; ; Dent 1 : 30 ; Zerli. 
14:3. pi Cor 15:10. ^ Or^ every one vmnX toith hit weapon fin' 
water, jild^. .*»: 11. 



of their enemies, and carry them forward in their 
appropriate work till it be accomplislied. 

14. It is sometimes right to fight for the protec- 
tion of onr wives, children, property, and religions 
privileges, rather than to have tliem taken away by 
our enemies. 

■JO. When men who are at work for God are 
called to contend with enemies, they may expect 
that he will fight for them; and with God on their 
side they may both work and fight without fear, 
till their vi-ork is done. 



Usury rebuked. 

CHAPTER V 



NE HE MI AH V. 



Covenant of restitution. 



K. M. 3559. 
B. C. 446. 

1 The Jews complain of tlieiitiebt, mortgage, and bond- 
age. f> Nehemiah rebuketh the usurers, and causeth 
them to make a covenant of resiitulion. 14 He for- 
beareth his own allowance, and keepetli hospitality. 

A ND there was a ^'j^rent cry of the peo- 
JA. pic and of their wives against their 
brethren the Jews. 

2 For there were that said, We, our 
sons, and our daughters, are many : there- 
fore we take up corn for them, that we 
may eat, and live. 

3 Some also there were that said. We 
have '' mortgaged our lands, vineyards, and 
houses, that we might buy corn, because 
of the dearth. 

4 There were also that said. We have 
borrowed money for the king's tribute. 
and that vpon our lands and vineyards. 

5 Yet now our "^llesh is as the flesh of 
our brethren, our children as their chil- 
dren : and lo, we bring into bondage our 
sons and our daughters to be servants, 
and some of our "^ daughters are brought 
into bondage alrcadi/: neitlier i.f it in our 
power to redeem them; for other men have 
our lands and vineyards. 

6 ^And I was very angry when I heard 
their cry and these words. 

7 Then * I consulted with myself, and I 
rebuked the nobles, and the rulers, and 
said unto them. Ye exact ® usury, every 
one of his brother. And I set a great 
assembly against tliem. 

8 And I said unto them. We, after our 
ability, have "^ redeemed our brethren the 
Jews, which were sold unto the heathen; 
and will ye even sell your brethren? or 
shall they be sold unto us? Then held i this wall, neither bought wc any land: 
they their peace, and found nothing /o j and all my servants jrc/c gathered tliitlicr 
answer. \ unto the work. 

9 Also I said. It is not good that ye do : j 17 Moreover there were at my tabic a 
ought ye not to walk in the sfear of our hundred and lifty of the Jews and ruler.'«. 
God because of the ''reproach of the hea- besides those that came unto us from 
then our enemies? among the heathen that are about us. 



10 I likewise, and my brethren, and my 
servants, might exact of them money and 
corn : I pray you, let us leave off this 
usury. 

11 Restore, I pray you, to them, even 
this day, their lands, their vineyards, 
their olive-yards, and their lioiiscs, also 
the hundredth part of tlie money, and of 
the corn, the wine, and the oil, that ye 
exact of them. 

12 Then said they. We will restore them, 
and will require nothing of them ; so will 
we do as thou saycst. Then I called the 
priests, and 'look an oath of them, that 
they sliould do according to this promise. 

13 Also J I shook my lap, and said, So 
God shake out every man from his house, 
and from his labor, that performeth not 
this promise, even thus be he shaken out, 
and t emptied. And '' all the congregation 
said. Amen, and praised the Loud. And 
the ' people did according to this promise. 

14 1[ Moreover from the time that I was 
appointed to be their governor in the 
land of Judah, from the twentieth year 
even unto the two and tliirticth '"year of 
Artaxerxes the king, that is, twelve years, 
I and my brethren have not "eaten the 
bread of the governor. 

15 But the former governors that had 
been before me were chargeable unto the 
people, and had taken of them bread and 
wine, besides forty shekels of silver; yea. 
even their servants bate rule over the 
people: but ° so did not I, because of the 
fearP of God. 

16 Yea, also I continued in the work of 





. Is.l 


.t:7. 


h I,e 


•. JS : 35-439 


Deut. 15:7. 


c 


IsR.68:T. 


d Kx. 


2 


:7. 


» Heh 


. mi/ heart conttlUed I 


n me, P» 


1.4 


:4. 'Ex. 


22:ii; 


P 


»a. l.S 


1,."): 


Eiek. 


22:1-2. 1 


.ev 


2.^:48. 


1! 


■er. I ft. b 


2 Sam. 


I- 


:14; 


Uom. 


2 : -24 ; 


1 Pet. 2:1-. 


. i 


2 Kings 


23 


2, 3 : Eira 10:5; 



CHAPTER V. 

3. Dearth ; scarcity of food. 

4. The hug's tribute; the taxes which they 
were obliged to pay to the king of Persia. 

5. We bring into bondage our sous; by the 
sore exactions to which they were subjected in their 
poverty. 

7. V-^'uri/ ; exorbitant interest. 

11. The huJidredth part ; that which they had 
wrongfully taken. 

Ki. Amen; be it so. 

11. A'oi eaten the bread of the governor; not 
required the people to support him, but h.ad sup- 
ported himself. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The rich, instead of relieving the poor, often 
take advantage of their necessities to obtain their 
property, and sometimes to bring them and their 



r.»4:8,(). j Mat.lO:14: Arts 1:1:51; IH:ti f Hrh. emptf. 
void, k Deut 27: 15, etr. I SKinf>,2n:3. m rliilp.l3:K. 
iror.9:'l,l&. <> Proverbs 16:6; 3 CorinlhiaiM, 11:9; 1:1:13 



children into bondage ; thus violating the duty o\ 
doing to others as they should wish others to do to 
them. 

6. '■ Oppression maketh a wise man mad." and 
he will without delay, so far as may be in his power, 
devise and execute means to bring it to a speedy 
and perpetual end. 

8. Those who oppress their brethren will have 
nothing to answer when God shall call them to 
account. 

11. Those who have wrongfully taken any thinji 
from others are bound to make full restitution, and 
always to do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly 
with God. 

lo. The fear of God will often lead the rich to 
relinquish what is justly due to them, especially 
when those from whom it is due are poor, ami un- 
able to pay their honest debts without distressing 
themselves. 

601 



Devices of the enemy. 



NEHExMIAH VI. 



The wall completed. 



18 Now that which was prepared for 
me daily was one ox and six choice sheep ; 
also fowls were prepared for me, and 
once in ten days store of all sorts of 
wine: yet for all this retiuired not I the 
bread of the governor, because the *bond- 
ago was heavy upon this people. 

19 Think'' upon me, my God, for good, 
according'^ to all that I have done for tliis 
people. 

CHAPTER VI. 

1 Sanballat practiseth by craft, by rumors, by hired 
prophecies, to terrify Neliemiah. 15 The work is fin- 
ished to the terror of the eueraie.s. 17 Secret intelli- 
fence passeth between the enemies and the nobles of 
udah. 

"jVTOW it came to pass when ^ Sanballat, 
_L\ and Tobiah, and *Geshem the Arabi- 
an, and the rest of our enemies, heard 
that I had builded the wall, and that 
there was no breach left therein ; (though 
at that time I had not set up the doors 
upon the gates :) 

2 That Sanballat and ^ Geshem sent 
unto me, saying, Come, let us meet to- 
gether, in some one of the villages in the 
plain of ''Ono. But ^they thought to do 
me mischief. 

3 And I sent messengers unto them, 
saying, I am. doing a great work, so that 
I cannot come down: why should the 
work cease, whilst I leave it, and come 
down to you? 

4 Yet they sent unto me four times after 
this sort ; and '" I answered them after the 
same manner. 

5 Then sent Sanballat his servant unto 
me in like manner the fifth time with an 
open letter in his hand; 

6 Wherein was written, It is 'reported 
among the heathen, and tGashmu saith it, 
that i\\o^x and the Jews think to rebel: 
for which cause thou buildest the wall, 
that thou mayestbe their king, according 
to these words. 

7 And thou hast also appointed prophets 
to preach of thee at Jerusalem, saying. 
There is a king in Judah : and now shall 
it be reported 1o the king according to 
these words. Come now therefore, and 
let us take counsel together. 



• I's^.-ITj-SLM. b Ps.i. 40:17; clinp. IS: i2. c Mnf J.-i : <0 ; 
Miirk<l:4l. d cliap 2: 10, l« ; 4 : 1.7. * Or, Cn«/tm«, ver. 6. 
<> I'rov. 2(i:24, 45. f I Cllron. 8 : 1-2 ; cliap. II : 35. r 1'.h;l 37 : 12.32. 
h I'lov. 14: 1.5. ijpr. 20:10. \ Or, G«/iem, ver. 1. i I Sum. 



19. Those who from love to God and to men liave 
made pecuniary sacrifices for his cause, will not in 
the end be losers ; but will receive from God a gra- 
cious and an abundant reward. 

CHAPTER VI. 
2. The plain of Ono ; in the tribe of Benjamin. 
0. Gashmn; the same as Geshem. 
7. The king ; the king of Persia. 
9. Made its afraid; attempted to make us 
afraid. 

602 



8 Then I sent unto him. saying, Vc.^"!!^ 
There are no such things done as thou 
sayest, but thou feignest them out of tliine 
own heart. 

9 For they all made us afraid, saying, 
Their hands shall be weakened from the 
work, that it be not done. Now there- 
fore, God, J strengthen my hands. 

10 Afterward I came unto the house of 
Shemaiah the son of Delaiah the son of 
Alehetabcel, who was shut up; and he 
said. Let us meet together in the house of 
God, within the temple, and let us shut 
the doors of the temple: for they will 
come to slay thee: yea, in the ^ night will 
they come to slay thee. 

1 1 And I said, ' Should such a man as I 
flee 1 and who is there, that, being as I 
am, would go into the temple to save his 
life? I will not go in. 

12 And lo, I perceived that God had 
not sent him; but that he pronounced 
this prophecy against me : for Tobiah 
and Sanballat had hired liim. 

13 Therefore ira.s- "'he hired, that I should 
be afraid, and do so, and " sin, and that 
they might have matter for an evil re- 
port, that they might reproach me. 

14 My God,' "think thou upon Tobiah 
and Sanballat according to these their 
works, and on the prophetess Noadiah, 
and the rest of the prophets, that would 
have put me in fear. 

15 li So the wall was finished in the 
twenty and fifth day of the month Elul, in 
fifty and two days. 

16 And it came to pass, that when all 
our enemies heard thereof, and all the 
heathen that were about us saw these 
things, llicy were much cast down in 
their own eyes: for Pthcy perceived that 
this work was wrought of our God. 

17 H Moreover in those days the nobles 
of Judah +sent many letters unto Tobiah, 
and the letters of Tobiah came unto them. 

18 For there iccre many in Judah sworn 
unto him, because he was the son-in-law 
of Shcchaniah the son of Arah; and his 
son Jolianan had taken the daughter of 
Meshullam the son of Berechiah. 



X):(\: l'8a.7l:l. k.Iob24:lt>. I Pan. 11:1: ll-2:6,8; I.nke 
13:31-3.3; Acts '20: 24 ; 21 : 1 3. m K7.ek. 13: 17, etc. n Jamen 4 : 1 7. 
oclwj). 13:C!l; P»a. 3H : 11,12. p Psn. 12« : -2 ; Acts .ii : 38, 39. t Heb. 
multtplied their Utterf passinp to Tobiah. 



11. Bei)ig as I am; having a good conscience, 
and being engaged in the work of the Lord. 

10. Was irroiiglit of our God ; that he was 
with the people and blessed them in their work. 

18. Shcchaniah — and — Meshnllam ; foreign- 
ers whose daughters Tobiah and Johanan had mar- 
ried. 

INSTRUCTION!?. 

2. When the efforts of wicked men to hinder the 
work of God are disappointed in one way, they are 
often tempted to try another. 



Register of 



NEHEMIAH VII. 



genealogy. 



u.c.-^^- 19 Also they reported his good 
deeds before ine, and uttered my * words 
to him. And Tobiah sent letters to put 
me in fear. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1 Nehemiah committeth the charge of Jerusalem to 
Hanani and Hananiah. 5 A register of the geneal- 
ogy of them which came at the first out of Babylon, 
9 of the people, 39 nf the priests, 43 of the Levites. 
■IG of the JS'ethhiim, 57 of Solomon's servants, 03 
and of the priests which could not find their pedigree. 
66 The whole number of them, with their substance. 
70 Their oblations. 

"jVrOW it came to pass, when the wall 
XN was built, and I had set up the 
doors," and the porters and the singers 
and the Levites were ai)pointed, 

2 That I gave my brother Hanani, and 
Hananiah the ruler of the palace, charge 
over Jerusalem: ""for he was a faithful 
man, and "^ feared God above many. 

3 And I said luito them, Let not the 
gates of Jerusalem be opened until the 
sun be hot ; and while they stand by, let 
them shut the doors, and bar them: and 
appoint watches of the inhabitants of Je- 
rusalem, every one in his watch, and 
every one to be over against his house. 

4 Now the city was t large and great : 
but the people were few therein, and the 
houses were not builded. 

5 *[] And my God ^put into my heart 
to gather together the nobles, and the 
rulers, and the people, that Ihey miglit be 
reckoned by genealogy. And I found a 
register'' of the genealogy of them which 
came up at the first, and found written 
therein. 

6 These ^are the children of the prov- 
ince, that went up out of the captivity, 
of those that had been carried away, 
whoms Nebuchadnezzar tlie king of Bab- 
ylon had carried away, and came again 
to Jerusalem and to Judah, every one unto , 
his city ; 

7 Who came with •'Zcrubbabcl, Jcshua, 
Nehemiah, ^Azariah. Uaamiah, Nahama- 
ni, INIordecai. BiLshan. Mispereth, Bigvai. 
Nchum, Baanah. The number, I saij. of 
the men of the people of Israel was this: 

8 The children of Parosh, two thousand 
a hundred seventv and two. 



ht\nnl in spaces. 



■ Kxod. 18:21. t Hch. 
: l.cu-. f Ezra i: I. 



9. Fear of men is unbecoming in the people of 
<TOil, and when threatened, they should look up to 
hiin for the courage, wisdom, and strength which 
they need, go forward in duty, and let nothing hin- 
der them from learning and doing his will, commit- 
ting; tlicmselves and their cause to his wise and gra- 
cious disposal. 

11. Sometimes, if need be, it is proper in a good 
cause to endanger one's own life, but it is never 
proper to do wrong in order to save it ; for he who 
t'lus saves his life shall lose it, and lie who loses his 
life in doing right shall keep it to life etern.il. 



9 The children of Shcphatiah. three hun- 
dred seventy and two. 

10 Tlie children of Arab, six hundred 
fifty and two. 

11 The children of Pahath-moab. of the 
children of Joshua and Joab, two thou- 
sand and eight hundred and eighteen. 

12 The children of Elam, a thousand 
two hundred fifty and four. 

13 Tlie children of Zattii, eight hundred 
forty and five. 

14 The children of Zaccai, seven hun- 
dred and threescore. 

15 The children of ^ Binnui, six hun- 
dred forty and eight. 

16 The children of Bebai, six hundred 
twenty and eight. 

17 The children of Azgad, two tliou- 
sand three hundred twenty and two. 

18 The children of Adonikam, six hun- 
dred three.»^core and seven. 

19 The children of Bigvai, two thou- 
sand threescore and seven. 

20 The children of Adin. six hundred 
fifty and five. 

21 The children of Ater of Hczckiah. 
ninety and eight. 

22 The children of Hashum. three hun- 
dred twenty and eight. 

23 The children of Bezai, three hun- 
dred twenty and four. 

24 The children of HHariph, a hundreil 
and twelve. 

25 The children of *Gibeon, ninety and 
five. 

26 The men of Bcth-lehem and Neto- 
phah, a hundred fourscore and eight. 

27 The men of Anathoth, a hundred 
twenty and eight. 

28 The men of t Bcth-azmaveth. forty 
and two. 

29 The men of ^Kirjath-jearim, Chephi- 
rah, and Beeroth. seven hundred forty 
and three. 

30 The men of Uamah and Gaba. six 
hundred twenty and one. 

31 The men of Michinas, a hundred and 
twenty and two. 

32 The men of Beth-el and Ai, a hun- 
dred twenty and three. 



« -2 Ki.S4 14-1(5. l>Ha:.l:l. t Or.Sfini.iA.Eim C:-;. } Or.Bn...- 
WOt.Jora. * Or. Gil'liar. ^ (^r. .Umavtlk. % Or, Kvjallt.nrim 

16. Sometimes G-od so manifestly .appears in .sup- 
port of his cause, that even its enemies see hi.« hand, 
and are convinced that their efforts to stop it will 
be unavailing. 

CHAPTER MI. 

3. Let not the galcf of Jerusalem be opeiieA ; 
this wa.<; designed to guard against enemies. 

-I. The city vos large; the walls, liaving been 
built on the old foundations, enclosed more than 
was inhabited. 

5. A register; containing the names of those 
who came up from Babvlon to Judea. 

co:i 



Genealogy of those 



NEHEMIAH VII. 



returning J'rom Babylon- 



33 The men of the other Nebo, fifty and 
two. 

34 The chiklren of the other "Elarn, a 
thousand two hundred fifty and four. 

35 The children of Harim, three hun- 
dred and twenty. 

36 The chiklren of Jericho, three hun- 
dred forty and five. 

37 The children of Lod, Iladid, and 
Ouo, seven hundred twenty and one. 

38 The children of Senaah, three thou- 
sand nine hundred and thirty. 

39 ^ The priests: the children of '■Je- 
daiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hun- 
dred .seventy and three. 

40 The children of Immer, a thousand 
fifty and two. 

41 The children of "^Pashur, a thousand 
two hundred forty and seven. 

42 The children of Harim, a thousand 
and seventeen. 

43 1[ The Levites : the children of 
Jeshua, of Kadmiel, and of the children 
of * Hodevah, seventy and four. 

44 The singers : the children of Asaph, 
a hundred forty and eight. 

45 The porters: the children of Shal- 
lum, the' children of Ater, the children of 
Talmon, the children of Akkuh, the chil- 
dren of Hatita^ the children of Shobai, a 
hundred thirty and eight. 

46 *j, The Nethinim : the children of 
Ziha, the children of Hashupha, the chil- 
dren of Tabbaoth, 

47 The children of Keros, the children 
of tSia. the children of Padon, 

48 The children of Lebana, the children 
of Hagaba, the children of JShalmai, 

49 The children of IIanan,the children 
of Giddel, the children of Gahar, 

50 The children of Rcaiah, the children 
of Rezln, the children of Nekoda, 

51 The children of (lazzam, the chil- 
dren of Uzza, the children of Pascah, 

52 The children of Bcsai, the children 
of Mcunim, the children of* Nephishesim, 

53 The children of Bakbuk, the chil- 
dren of llakuplia, the children of Harhur, 

54 The children of il Bazlith, the chil- 
dren of Mehida, the children of Harsha, 



• ver.1'2. b I Cliron. 21 :7,i'lr r 1 rlir.m H:I2. * Ot, Jlndamali, 
F.7.rn'2:*0;nr,Juilah.F.7.r.\^:% fnr.Siahu. fClr, Xhnmlai. 5 Or, 
Nephutim. II Or, Biizlullt. " (tr,Peni</a. i Or,, ■! mi. d F.7,r;i 3 : M. 



61. Coiild not show their father'.'! house ; the 
names of their ancestors were not found in the reg- 
ister. 

64. Put from the priesthood : because it could 
not he shown that they descended from Aaron. 

65. r/V.«/(Y7///i7.; the governor, Nehemiah. ^^''ith 
ZTrim and Thuinmim ; one who could declare 
authoritatively concerning them. 

IXSTRUCTIO^'^!. 
2. Power and authority should he committed to 
those who fear Crod, and will employ their talents 
for his cause. 
004 



55 The childi-en of Barkos, the *„"c,T5. 
children of Sisera, the children of Tamah, 

56 Tlie children of Neziah, the children 
of Hatipha. 

57 11 The children of Solomon's ser- 
vants : the children of Sotai, the children 
of Sophereth, the children of *Perida. 

58 The children of Jaala, the children 
of Darkon, the children of Giddel. 

59 The children of Shephatiah,the chil- 
dren of Hattil, the children of Pochereth 
of Zebaim, the children of tAmon. 

60 All the Nethinim, and the children 
of Solomon's servants, icere three hun- 
dred ninety and two. 

61 And ''these icere they which went 
up alao from Tel-melah, Tel-haresha, 
Cherub, tAddon, and Immer : but they 
could not show their father's house, nor 
their ^^sced, whether they trcre of Israel. 

62 The children of Delaiah, the chil- 
dren of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, 
six hundred forty and two. 

63 ly And of the priests : the children 
of Habaiah. the children of Koz. the chil- 
dren of ''Barzillai, which took one of the 
daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite to 
w'ife, and was called after their name. 

64 These "^sought their register among 
those that were reckoned by genealogy, but 
it was ^not found : therefore were they, as 
polluted, '■put from the priesthood. 

65 And the i! Tirshatha said unto them, 
that they should 'not eat of the most holy 
things, till there stood ttp a priest with 
Uriin' and Thummim. 

66 ^ The whole congregation together 
ivas forty and two thousand three liun- 
dred and threescore, 

67 Besides their ^ man-sci*vants and their 
maid-servants, of whom there were seven 
thousand three hundred thirty and seven : 
and they had two hundred forty and five 
singing-men and singing-women. 

68 Their horses, seven hundred thirty 
and six : their mules, two hundred forty 
and five : 

69 Their camels, four hundred thirty 
and five : six thousand seven hundred 
and twentv asses. 



± Hr,A<liian. % Or,pediiirct. « 2 Sam. 17 :27 ; 19:.11-.'}i); 1 King., 
2:7. f Mat.22: ll-l:i. t Mat, 25: 11, 12. h I,ev. 4 :3 ; chap. 1:1: 29. 
II Or,g(ivtrnor,c\>.K:9. ■ I.ev.7: 19,20. jEx. 28:30. Ilsa.l4:l,9 



3. We should show our trust in God by the proper 
use of means, and not tempt him by the neglect of 
them. 

5. Every good thought is from above; and while 
we diligently improve it to the best adv.intage, God 
should be acknowledged as the giver of all good, 
•ind the glory of all be rendered to liim. 

70. \Vlu'n God, in addition lo all his other mer- 
cies, gives men a disposition to employ what they 
have to his glory, it is evidence of his peculiar 
favor, and should be acknowledged with peculiar 
gratitude and joy. 



The laiv is read 



NEHEMIAH VIH, 



and explained. 



n.c.'^T- TO li And *some of the chief of 
the fathers gas^e unto the work. The Tir- 
shatha "gave to the treasure a thousand 
drams of gold, fifty basins, five hundred 
and thirty priests' garments. 

71 And some of the chief of the fathers 
gave to the treasure of the work twenty 
thousand drams of gold, and two thousand 
and two liundred pounds of silver. 

72 And that which the rest of the people 
gave U'as twenty thousand drams of gold, 
and two thousand pounds of silver, and 
threescore and seven priests' garments. 

73 So the priests, and the Levites, and 
the porters, and the singers, and some of 
the people, and the Nctliinim, and all 
Israel, dwelt in their cities; and ''when 
the seventh month came, the children of 
Israel tccre in their cities. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

] The religious manner of reading and hearing the law. 
9 They comfort the people. l:J The forwardness of 
them to hear and be instructed. 16 They keep the 
feast of tabernacles. 

AND " all the people gathered them- 
selves together as one man into the 
street that u'a.s before the ''water-gate; and 
they spake unto Ezra the "^scribe to bring 
the book of the law of Moses, which the 
Lord had commanded to Israel. 

2 And Ezra the priest brought the law 
before the '^congregation both of men and 
W"omeii, and all that t could hear with 
understanding, ^upon the first day of the 
seventh month. 

3 And he read therein before the street 
that n-as before the water-gate from the 
morning f until midday, before the men 
and the women, and those that could un- 
derstand; and the ears of all the people 
icerc attentive unto the book of the law. 

4 And Ezra the scribe stood upon a 
pulpit* of wood, which they had made for 
the purpose; and beside him stood Mat- 
titliiah, and Shema, and Anaiah, and 
Uri.jah, and Hilkiah, and JNIaaseiah, on 
his right hand ; and on his left hand, 
Pedaiah, and Misliael, and Malchiah, 
and Ilashum, and Ilashbadana, Zecha- 
riah. and Menhullam. 

.5 And Ezra ''opened the book in the 
sight il of all the people; for he was above 



'Heh.iwrt. • cli. « :9. b Ezra 3: 1. c Kini:l: l.tlr. J cli. S.-IB. 
e Ezra ":«; Isn. .^-l : IR. rAflsl5:2I. i Heb. understimd in hear- 
inn s I.ev. Q3 : -24. j Heb. /i>At ^ H<f\i. tawtr. !■ Luke 4 : 16, Ftr. 
||Heli.<rv«. i.Imlg. .3:20; lkin'»,8: H. j iCliron. G : 4. k 1 Cor. 
14:!6. 1 l»s,i.6.T:4: Lani.;):4l ;lTiin.2:a m Ki. 1-2 :;7 ; 2 Climn. 
20:18 n l)eut.:«:10;2Cliron.l7:7-9;30:2-2; .Mar 2:7. o I.uke 



CHAPTER VIII. 

2. The seventh month; Tishri, answeriii"; to a 
part of September ami October. On the first day of 
this month was kept the feast of trumpets. Lev. 
23:23-25. 

3. The law; the law of Moses. 

39 



all the people; and when he opened it, 
all the people ' stood up : 

6 And Ezra J blessed the Lonn, the great 
God. And all the people answered, 'Amen, 
Amen, with 'lifting up their liands : and 
they "'bowed their heads, and worshipped 
the Lord with their faces to the ground. 

7 Also Jeshua, and Bani, and Sliere- 
biah, Jamin, Akkub, .Shabbcthai, Hodi- 
jah, Maaseiah, Kelita. Azariah, Jozabad, 
Hanan.Pelaiali, and the Levites, "caused 
the people to understand the law: and 
the people stood in their place. 

8 So they read in the book in the law of 
God distinctly, and gave the sense, and 
caused them to "understand the reading. 

9 ^ And Xehemiah. which is the 'Tir- 
shatha, and Ezra the priest the scribe, and 
the Levites that taught the people, said 
unto all the people, p This day is holy 
unto the Loud your God; i mourn not. 
nor weep. For all the people wept, when 
they 'heard the words of the law. 

10 Then he said unto them, Go your 
way, 'cat the fat, and drink the sweet, 
and 'send portions unto them for wliom 
nothing is prepared: for this day is holy 
unto our Lord: neither be ye sorry; for 
the "joy of the Lord is your strength. 

11 So the Levites stilled all the people. 
saying. Hold your peace, for the day is 
holy; neither be ye grieved. 

12 And all the people went their wii> 
to eat. and to drink, and to send portions, 
and to make great 'mirth, because "they 
had "understood the words that were de- 
clared unto them. 

13 ^ And on the second day were 
gathered together the chief of the father.'* 
of all the people, the priests, and the Le- 
vites, unto Ezra the scribe, even • to un- 
derstand the words of the law. 

14 And they found written in the law 
which the Lonnhad commanded 'by Mo- 
ses, that the children of Israel should 
dwell in * booths in the feast of the 
seventh month : 

15 And that they should publisli and 
proclaim in all their cities, and in ,loru- 
salcm. saying. Go forth unto the mount, 
and fetch olivebranches,and pincbraneh- 
es. and myrtle branches, and palm branch- 



24 : 27, 4.'i : Acti B : M, ctr. * Ot,f ovtmor. f \jrr. £1 : i* : Num. 
29:1. q DeutIR:M: Kprl3:4; I««.61:3. r srl.ron 34 :1<J. «I ; 
Roitx7:9. •Cmit.S:!. I E»lh. 9: IS.M: R»r. II : 10 • Pm. 14H:a; 
l»n. 12:2.3:3.'>: 1.4; fil : 10; Joel2 : 13; Phil.3:3. • Pmi. IW: I-S. 
w Rom. 7 : I. K. X viT. 7. 8. t Or. that Ihty mifKI initmct in. 
X Ueb.bylhtkandaf. y r.»T. 23 : 34,42; Dput. Ifi: n,«lr. 



7. Caused the people to understand ; shoved 
them the meaning of what was read. 

9. Tiishalha ; governor. All the people ipept ; 
in view of their transgressions ami the punishment 
which they deserved. 

14. In the feast of the seventh month ; the 
feast of tabernacles. Lev. 21 : 31. 

605 



Joy of the people. 



NEHEMIAII IX. 



The solemn fast. 



es. and branches of thick trees, to make 
boolhs. as it is written. 

16 ^ So the people went forth, and 
brought them, and made themselves 
booths, every one upon the*roof of his 
housC; and in their courts, and in the 
courts of the house of God, and in the 
.■direct of the water-gate, and ''in the 
street of the gate of Ephraim. 

17 And all the congregation of them 
that were come again out of the captivity 
made booths, and sat under the booths : 
for since the days of .Joshua the son of 
Nun unto that day had not the children 
of Israel done so. And there was very 
great "^gladness. 

18 Also ""day by day, from the first 
day unto the last day, he read in the 
book of the law of God. And they kept 
the feast seven days; and on the eighth 
day was a * solemn assembly, according 
unto the "" manner. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 A solemn fast, and repentance of the people. 4 The 
Levites make a religious confession of God's good- 
ness, and their wickedness. 

"IVTOW in the twenty and fourth day of 
J_\ this month the children of Israel 
were assembled with fasting, and with 
sackclolhcs, and '^earth upon them. 

2 And the seed of Israel sepnrated^thcm- 
selves from all t. strangers, and stood and 
eonfessed their sins, and the iniquities of 
their fathers. 

3 And they stood up in their place, and 
read'' in the book of the law of the Lord 
their God one fourth part of the day; and 
another fourth part they confessed, and 
worshipped the Lord their God. 

4 1[ Then stood up upon the ^ stairs, of 
(he Levites, Jeshua. and Bani, Kadmiel, 
Shebaniah, Bunni. Sherehiah, Bani, aiid 
Chenani, and 'cried with a loud voice 
unto tVie Lord their God. 

5 Then the Levites, Jeshua, and Kad- 



> De 


uL23 


8. b 2 Kings 


14: l:!; cimp. 12: :i7,.W 


c 2 


Cli 


ron. 


no.ii. 


d DeulSl : 10-1:!. 


* Heb. restraint. « 


Num. 


2it 


:«. 


f 1 Sim 


4: \i 


f Ezra it: 2: 


0:11. t Heb strange 


childri 


n, P«a. 


144:11 


hell. 


p. 8:7,8. t Or 


, scaffold, i P9a.3:4. ) 


I'sa. ISo: 


,'i- 


k 1 Clir 


on. W 


l:i. 1 I'sa-lC. 


2; 10(1:2. m I'sa «6: 


IO;I.sa 


:!7 


in. 



17. Made booths; in remembrance of their fa- 
thers" having dwelt in tents, forty years in the wil- 
derness. There was very threat gladness; in 
view of their being settled again in Canaan, as 
tliere was in the days of Jo.siiua, when they took 
possession of it, 

18. According unto the mamier ; as prescribed 
in the law of Moses. 

, INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The reading and explanation of the Scriptures 
is one of the most powerful moans of reviving true 
religion; and when men desire to hear, ministers 
should ever be ready to communicate to them a 
knowledge of the word and will of God. 

G. Proper attention to the word of God will lead 
a people to bless him for his goodness, and to wor- 
ship him in the way of his appointment. 
60G 



micl, Bani, Ilashabniah. Sherebi- "ah^'^a. 
ah, Hodijah. Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, 
said, 'Stand up and bless the Lord your 
God forever and ever; and 'blessed be thy 
glorious name, which is exalted 'above 
ail blessing and praise. 

6 Thou, even '"thou, art Lord alone; 
thou ha.'it ° made heaven, the heaven of 
heavens," with all their host, the earth, 
and all things that arc therein, the seas, 
and all that is therein, and Pthou pre- 
servest them all; and the ihost of heav- 
en worshippeth thee. 

7 Thou artWie Lord the God, ''who didst 
choose Abram, and broughtcst him forth 
out of Ur of the Chaldees, and gavest him 
the ^'name of Abraham ; 

8 And foundest his heart 'faithful be- 
fore thee, and madest a "covenant with 
him to give the land of the Canaanites, 
the Hittites. the Amorites, and the Pcriz- 
zitcs, and the Jebusites, and the Gir- 
gashites, to give it, I say, to his seed, and 
hast ^performed thy words; ti)r tliou art 
righteous ; 

9 And didst "see the affliction of our 
fathers in Egypt, and heardest their cry 
by "the Red sea; 

10 And showed.st 'signs and w^onders 
upon Pharaoh, and on all his servants, 
and on all the people of his land ; for 
thou knewest that they dealt 'proudly 
against them. So didst thou get thee a 
name,* as it is this day. 

11 And ''thou didst divide the sea be- 
fore them, so that they went through the 
midst of the sea on the dry land; and 
their persecutors thou threwest into the 
deeps, as a stone into the mighty waters. 

12 Moreover thou leddest them in the 
day by a cloudy '"pillar: and in the night 
by a pillar of tire, to give them light in 
the way wherein they should go. 

13 Thou earnest down also upon mount 
Sinai, and spakest with them from heav- 



n Gen. 1:1; K.\. 21) : 11. 


oDeut. 10:14. r Piia. :)fi : 8. q Rev. 


.i: 11-13. r Gen. 12:1. 


>Gen. 17:.5. t Gen. 15 :«, 18. u IV-a. 


in.'i:8. V .loah.2:!: 14. 


w Ex. 3 : 7, 8. x Ex. 14 : !0. J Ex. chnp. 


7-14. « Ej. 18: 11. a 


ls« 63: 12-14 : .ler .12 :20. k Ex. cliatt. 


14,15. c Ex. 13:21,22. 





9. Sorrow for sin, however great or long continued, 
should never prevent humble trust in God. or hinder 
any from using the bounties of Providence with 
cheerful gratitude, and imparling liberally to those 
who are destitute, that all may rejoice together. 

13. Due attention to the word of God will lead 
men to have respect to all his commandments ; nor 
will attention to one set of duties prevent them from 
promptly engaging in and faithfully performing oth- 
ers to which they are called. 

17. Readiness to engage in all known duty, and 
fidelity in the performance of it, fill the soul with 
gladness; and through grace prepare it to rejoice 
for ever with joy unspeakable and full of glory. 

CHAPTER IX. 
1. This month; Tishri, the seventh month. 



The LevitciP confession 



NEHEMIAH IX. 



at thf solemn fast. 



B."«r' en, and gavcst "them riglit judg-Ifore them the inhabitants of the land.tlic 
ments, and *truc laws, good statutes and | Caiiaanitcs, and gavcst them into their 
commandments: hands, witli their kings, and the pooide 

14 And madest known unto them thy of tiie land, that thcv might do with 



holy sabbath, and commandedst them pre 
eepts, statutes, and laws, by the hand of 
Moses thy servant : 

15 And gavest them ''bread from heav- 
en for their hunger, and broughtest 
forth •= water for them out of the rock for 
their thirst, and promisedst them that 
they should go in to possess the land 
which thou hadst t sworn to give them. 

16 But they and our fathers dealt 
proudly, and '' hardened their necks, and 
hearkened not to thy commandments, 

17 And refused to obey, ''neither were 
mindful of thy wonders that thou didst 
among them; but hardened their necks, 
and in their rebellion "^appointed a cap- 



them ^ as they would. 

25 And they took strong cities, and a fat 
land, and po.sscsscd houses full of all goods, 
wells'l digged, vineyards, and olive-yards, 
and "fruit-trees in abundance ; so tiiey did 
cat, and were filled, and became "fat, and 
delighted themselves in thy great goodness. 

26 Ne vert hclcss they were P disobedient, 
and rebelled against thee, and cast thy 
lawibeliind their backs, and ^«lcw thy 
prophets which testified against them to 
turn them to thee, and they wrought 
great provocations. 

27 Tlierefore 'thou delivercdst them 
into the hand of their enemies, who 
vexed them: and in the time of tlicir 



tain to return to their bondage: but thou ' trouble, when tliey cried unto thee, thou 
art a God t ready to pardon, gracious and i heardest them from heaven ; and accord- 



merciful, slow to anger, and of great 
kindness, and forsookest them not. 

18 Yea, when ethey had made them a 
molten calf, and said. This is thy God 
that brought thee up out of Egypt, and 
had wrought great provocations; 

19 Yet thou in thy manifold mercies 
forsookest"* them not in the wilderness: 
the pillar of the cloud departed not frotn 



ing to thy manifold mercies thou gavest 
them saviors, who saved them out of 
the hand of their enemies. 

28 But after they had rest, they + did 
evil again before thee : therefore leftest 
thou them in the hand of their enemies, 
so that they had the dominion over them : 
yet when they returned, and cried unto 
thee, thou heardest tlicm from lieaven ; 



them by day, to lead them in the way ; and many times didst tliou deliver tlicm 
neither the pillar of fire by night, to j according to thy mercies; 



show them light, and the way wherein 
they should go. 

20 Thou gavcst also thy 'good Spirit to 
instruct them, and withheldest not thy 
manna from their mouth, and gavest 
them water for their thirst. 

21 Yea, J forty years didst thou sustain 
them in the wilderness, so that they 
lacked nothing ; their '' clothes waxed not 
old, and their feet swelled not 



29 And testifiedst against them, thai 
thou mightest bring them again unto thy 
law: yet they dealt proudly, and heark- 
ened not unto thy commandments, but 
sinned against thy judgnu-nts, which if a 
man do, he shall live in them ; and * with- 
drew the shoulder, and hardened tlieir 
neck, and would not liear. 

30 Yet many years didst thou * forbear 
them, and 'testifiedst against tiiem bv ihv 



22 .Moreover thou gavest them king- j Spirit H in thy prophets : yet would tliey 
doms and nations, and didst divide them not give ear: therefore gavest tliou tliem 
into corners: so they possessed the land of j into the hand of the people of the lands. 
Sihon,' and the land of the king of Ilcsh- 31 Nevertheless for tliy great mercies" 
bon, and the land of Og king of Bashan. sake thou didst not utterly consume 

23 Their children also mullipliedst thou] them, nor forsake tliem : for thou art a 
as the stars of heaven, and broughtest . gracious and merciful God. 

them into the land, concerning which | 32 Now tlierefore, our God, the groat, 
thou hadst promised to their fathers, that j the mighty, and the terrible (Jod, who 
they should go in to possess it. keepest covenant and mercy, let not all 

24 So the '"children went in and pos- the 'trouble seem little before thee, that 
sessed the land, and thou "subduedst be- hath t come upon m. on our kings, on our 

• Ex^clT "0 eU- *^Heb. /.iii'»o//rii//i. >• Ki.ir>:H,l.i; Jolin accnrdinf to Ihcir will. || Or, ciitfut. ' Hrb.titrt .//....; 
fi-3l-.'i3 c Ex 17fi; Num. ■.'0:7-11. t Hcb. ;i^» up My Aanrf, o n<-iit. 3.' : 1.1. p Jii.lg. .' : II, W ; >:««-k. •:«; il. iP»..<ii7 
Num.H:30. d DeuL 31 : S7 ; raa. 7R:>1, etc. e i;,a. 8«:.1, l.i. r 1 Kinff., 18:4 : Arl.l 7: .V;. . P.«In. 106:41. \ H<-h ,„u, nr.i 

VurnH4 ± Heb o/ W'rfon*. eEx.3J:4. ii \S.\m.\-i: -22 ;] to da evil. % Hfh.theji )ave a tetlhiraicmf ik.oiUtr, Ar.U , i\ 
Isa 44-2r "i Isa.63':ll. i Dent. -2 : 7. kDe<lt8:4. 1 Num. Ij Hfli. piv/nirf »wr. I 2 C'liron 36: 1&. ^ Hrh. im U>t kmnd <■/. 
21:-21,et<-. m Num. 14 : 31 ; Josli. 21 :+I, 43. u Pan. 44 : •-•, 3. 4 Heb. j » Hrb. lcenrinr/». f Hch./oumil. 

20. Thy good Spitit to instruct them; by the 
mouth of his servants. Ver. 30. 

27. Saviors; men raised up in providence to 
deliver tliem. 

607 



13 Judgment/: ; especially judicial decisions. 
Statutes; what he ordained. 

17. Appointed a captain; resolved to do it. 
Num. 14 : 1-4. 



A covenant sealed. 



NEHEMIAH X. 



Aamcs of the sealers. 



princes, and ou our priests, and on our 
prophets, and on our fathers, and on all 
thy people, since the "time of the kings of 
Assyria unto this day. 

33 Ilowbcit thou arl ''just in all that is 
brought upon us; for thou hast done 
ri^ht, but "^^ we have done wickedly: 

34 Neither have our kings, our princes, 
our priests, nor our fathers, kept thy law, 
nor '' hearkened unto thy commandments 
and thy testimonies, wherewith thou 
didst ''testify against them. 

35 P'or '^they have not served thee in 
their kingdom, and in thy great goodness 
that thou gavest them, and in the large 
and 8 fat land which thou gavest before 
them, neither turned they from their 
wicked works. 

36 Behold, we ai-e ''servants this day, 
and for the land that thou gavest unto 
our fathers to eat the fruit thereof and 
the good therebf, behold, we are servants 
in it: 

37 And it yieldeth much increase unto 
the 'kings whom thou hast set over us 
because of our sins : also they have do- 
minion over our bodies, and over our 
cattle, at their pleasure, and we are in 
great distress. 

38 And because of all this we 'make a 
sure covenant, and write it; and our 
princes, Levites, and priests, *sea.l unto it. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 The names of them that sealed the covenant. 29 
The points of the covenant. 

"IVTOW t those that sealed were, Nehe- 
_LN miah, the + Tirshatha, the son of 
Jlachaliah,'' and Zidkijah, 



. 


2K 


"1 


, 17 


3. 


b Psa. 119: 


137 


H.'; 


:I7 


Dan. 9:.^- 


14. c Psa. 


I0< 


.•6. 


Jer 


29 


19. e Deut. 31-21, 


2K 


l|gs, 17:1.T 


f Deut, 


M 


47. 


i: 


Deut. 3 


■.'20. 1> E7.r 


n 9 


9. 


D.. 


ut. 28 : 3.3. 


J 2 Kings, 


an 


3; 2C1 


ron. 


•2H: 


10; chap, in 


:2<) 


* 


Hell 


are at the 


staling, or 



36. We are servants ; in l>ondage to the king of 
Persia. 

37. Doviin ion over our bodies ; to employ tliem 
in war.s and other services, at their pleasure. 

38. Wc make a sure eoveiiant ; a covenant, in 
all sincerity, with the Lord to obey him. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Due attention to the word of God will lead to 
humble confession of sin, and hearty devotion to 
his worship and service. 

5. Though the Lord is exalted above all human 
conception, yet he is pleased with the praises of his 
people, and glorified by all who worship him in 
spirit and in truth. 

8. Ijod is faithful to his promises, and never dis- 
appoints the well-grounded hopes of those who trust 
in liim. 

13. The laws of Jehovah are all right and good ; 
and suited to promote not only his glory, but the 
excellence, usefulness, and happiness of all who 
obey them. 

1(3. No mercies are so numerous, great, or long- 
continued as to lead men, without the grace of God, 
to obey liim ; but the greater and more constant 
608 



2 Seraiali,' Azariah, Jeremiah, */c.'m? 

3 Pashur, Amariah, Malchijah, 

4 Hattush, Shebaniah, JNIalluch, 

5 Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah, 

6 Daniel, Ginnethon, Barucli. 

7 MeshuUam, Abijali, ]Mijamin, 

8 Maaziah, Bilgai, iShemaiah : these 
were the priests. 

9 And the Levites : both Jcshua the 
son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of 
Henadad, Kadiniel; 

10 And their brethren, Shebaniah, Ho- 
dijali, Kelita, Pelaiali. Ilanan, 

11 Micha, Rehob, Hasliabiah, 

12 Zaccur, Sherebiaii, Shebaniah, 

13 Hodijah, Bani, Bcninu. 

14 The chief of the people; '"Parosh, 
Pahath-moab, Elam. Zatthu, Bani, 

15 Bunni, Azgad, Bebai, 

16 Adonijah. Bigvai. Adin, 

17 Ater, Ilizkijah, Azzur, 

18 Hodijah, Hashuni, Bezai, 

19 Hariph. Anathoth, Nebai, 

20 ]\]agpiash, MeshuUam, Hezir, 

21 Meshezabeel, Zadok, Jaddua, 

22 Polatiah, Hanan, Anaiah, 

23 Hoshea, Hananiah, Hashub, 

24 Hallohesh, Pilcha, Sliobek, ' 

25 Rehum, Hashabnah. JNIaaseiah, 

26 And Ahijah, Hanan, Anan, 

27 Malluch, Harim, Baanah. 

28 IT And "the rest of the people, the 
priests, the Levites, the porters, the 
singers, the Nethinim, and all they that 
had "separated themselves from the peo- 
ple of the lands unto the P]aw of God, 
their wives, their sons, and their daugh- 
ters, 1 every one having knowledge, and 
having understanding : 



sealed. f Hel). at the scalin/js, chap. 9:38. f Or, govet-nor, 
cliap. 8:9. V chap. 1:1. 1 chnp. 1-2:1. etc. m Ezra 2 : 3, etc. ; 
chap. T:«, etc n K7.ra 2 :36. o I,cv. -:0 : ■-'•I : Ezra 10: 11-19; chap. 
9:2; 13:3. p Roni. I : 1. q chap. 8; 2; Psa. 47 : 7. 

their mercies, the greater will be their ingratitude, 
till thev ripen for ruin. 

20. The Lord, by his Spirit, often admonishes and 
instructs even the most rebellious; and for a long 
time waits to be gracious, doing them good and 
using all suitable means to lead them to repent- 
ance and salvation. 

24. Children who inherit great blessings through 
the instrumentality of their parents and others, not 
unfrequently abuse them to their own destruction. 

28. Life often consi.-^ts much in a contest between 
the goodness of God and the ingratitude and rebel- 
lion of men; and though, in answer to their cries, 
he often delivers them from their troubles, they as 
often forget his mercies and trample on his com- 
mands. 

33. Sin is the cause of all trouble : and God is 
holy, just, and good in all the judgments he brings 
upon those who commit it. 

CHAPTER X. 

1. Tho.'-e that sealed ; that set their seal to the 
covenant mentioned at the close of the last chap- 
ter. 



Points of the covenant. 



XEIIEMrAH XI, 



Loiitlion rf the people. 



B.a ^«''- 29 They clave to their brethren, 
their nobles, and entered into a curse, 
and into an » oath, to ''walk in God's law, 
which was given *by Moses the servant 
of God, and to obs:erve and do all the 
commandments of the Lord our Lord, 
:in'l his judgments and his statutes; 

30 And that we would not give our 
daughters <= unto the people of the land, 
nor take their daughters for our sons : 

31 And ?/the people of the land bring 
ware or any victuals on the "'sabbath- 
day to sell, that we would not buy it of 
them on the sabbath, or on the holy day: 
and that we would leave the * seventh 
year, and the "^ exaction of every tdebt. 

32 Also we made ordinances for us, to 
charge ourselves yearly with the third 
part of a shekel for the service of the 
house of our God ; 

33 For the ^show-bread, and for the 
continual ''meat-offering, and for the 
continual' burnt-offering, of the sabbaths, 
of the new moons, for the set feasts, and 
for the holy things, and for the sin-offer- 
ings to make an atonement for Israel, and 
for all the work of the house of our God. 

34 And we cast the lots among the 
priests, the Levites, and the people, Jfor 
the wood-offering, to bring it into the 
house of our God, after the houses of our 
fathers, at times appointed year by '' year, 
to burn upon the altar of the Lord our 
God, as it is 'written in the law: 

35 And to bring the "Mirst-fruits of our 
ground, and the first-fruits of all fruit of 
all trees, year by year, unto the house of 
the Loud : 

36 Also the first-born of our sons, and 
of our cattle, as it /.s" written in the law, 
and the firstlings of our lierds and of our 
flocks, to bring to the house of our God. 
unto the priests that minister in the 
house of our God: 

37 And that we should bring the first- 
fruits of our "dough; and our offerings, 
and the p fruit of all manner of trees, of 
wine and of oil, unto the priests, to the 



• Deut. -29 : li, H ; clia|>. n : 1 J, 13 : I>s.i. I W : 1«. t> i Climn. 
.34 : 31. * H^ib. Ay the hand of. c Kx. S4 : 16 ; Ueut 7 : S ; Erra 
9 12 14. d Lev. 2:1 : :i : Deut .t: 12; ciinii. 13: IS, etc. ; I.iHinli 
68i:)14. eLev.ao:4. f Deut. 1.5:2 : cliap. S: 1-13. f Heb. 



Aand. ■ B L«-. 24 : 5. I> Num clinp. V, SI. 
13:31 ; Isa. 40: Ifi. k Heb. 10: :»-7. I 1.. 



i Heb. 10: II. 1 clinp. 
■- •• .23: I<J: 



29. They clave to their brethren : consented to 
the same covenant into which they had entered to 
serve the Lord. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. All who know God should covenant to obey 
him, and having .solemnly recoijnized their obliga- 
tions to him should be careful to fultil them. When 
this is done by ministers of the gospel and leading 
men among a people, multitudes will be ready to 
follow their example. 

31. Abstinence from traffic and from all kinds of 
secular travelling and business on the Sabbath, is 



chambers of the liouse of our God: and 
the 1 tithes of our ground unto the Le- 
vites, that the same Levites might liave 
the tithes in all the cities of our tillage. 

38 And the priest the son of Aaron 
shall be with the Levites, when the Le- 
vites take tithes: and the Levites .'•liail 
bring up the tithe of the tithes unto the 
house of our God, to the "^ chambers into 
the treasure-house. 

39 For the children of Israel and the 
children of Levi shall 'bring the offering 
of the corn, of the new wine, and the 
oil, unto the chambers, wliere arc the 
vessels of the sanctuary, and the priests 
that mini.ster. and the porters, and the 
singers: and 'we will not foisake the 
house of our God. 

CHAPTER XL 

1 The rulers, voluntary men, and the tenth man cho»«n 
by lot, dwell at Jerusalem. 'A A calaloffue of their 
namps. 20 Tlie residue dwell in other cities. 

AND the rulers of the people dwelt at 
Jerusalem : the rest of the people 
also cast "lots, to bring one often to dwell 
in Jerusalem the 'holy city, and nine 
parts to dwell in other cities. 

2 And the people blessed all the men, 
that "willingly offered themselves to 
dwell at Jerusalem. 

3 1[ Now these are the chief of the 
province that dwelt in Jerusalem: but 
in the cities of Judah dwelt every one in 
his possession in their cities, to wit, Is- 
rael, the priests, and the Levites, and 
the "Nethinim, and the children of Solo- 
mon's servants. 

4 And 5' at Jerusalem dwelt certain of 
the children of Judah, and of the chil- 
dren of Benjamin. Of the children of 
Judah; Athaiah the son of Uzziali. the 
son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, 
the son of Shephatiah. the son of Mahal- 
aleel, of the children of * Perez ; 

5 And Maaseiah the son of Raruch, 
the son of Col-hozeh, the son of Hazaiah, 
the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the 
son of Zechariah, the son of Shiloni. 



Num. 18:2; Deut. 2i; : 2. • Kl. 13 : 2, 12, 13 ; I.<-v. 27 : 2C. ' Sum. 
l.^i: I'l; D«ut. tl<:4. p DeuL 26 : 2. s Num. 18 : 21 ; Mill 3 : 0, lOl 
r 1 Chmn 9:.'6; JCbniIl.31 : 11,12. • UpuL 12: 6. 1 1, t clmp. 
13:10-12. aJosb.|g:ia t ver. 18 ; M«t 4 : »; 27 : M. w Joilj. 
6:9 » Expi 4 : 43, ftS. y 1 CUron. 9 : 3, etc. % Ptuim.ata. 
38:29. 



e&sential to a due observance of that holy day ; and 
all who have covenanted to obey God. should re- 
m«mber the Sabbath-day and keen it holy. 

32. While each individual should be disposed to 
bear his part in supporting the ministers, the wor- 
ship, and the ordinances of the gospel, he should 
also give to habitual attendance u(Hin them the in- 
fluence of a conscientious and consistent example. 

CHAriER XI. 
1. One of ten to dwell in Jentfalem; for the 
temple worship and the welfare of the city. 
609 



Distribution 



NEHExMIAH XI. 



of the people. 



6 All the sons of Perez that chvelt at j 
Jerusalem were four hundred threescore i 
and eight valiant men. 

7 And these are the sons of Benjamin;' 
Sallu the son of ]\Ieshullam, the son of 
Joed, the son of Pedaiali, the son of Ko- 
laiah, the son of Maasciah, the son of 
Ilhici, the son of Jcsaiah. 

8 And after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine 
hundred twenty and eight. 

9 And Joel the son of Zichri was their 
overseer: and Judah the son of Senuah 
was second over the city 

10 Of the * priests: Jedaiah the son of 
Joiarib, Jachin. 

1 1 Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son 
of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son 
of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, was the 
ruler of the house of God. 

12 And their brethren that did the 
work of the house were eight hundred 
tvsenty and two : and Adaiah the son of 
Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of 
Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of 
Pashur, the son of Malchiah, 

13 And his brethren, chief of the fathers, 
two hundred forty and two : and Amashai 
the son of Azareel, the son of Ahasai, the 
son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer, 

14 And their brethren, mighty men of 
valor, a hundred twenty and eight : and 
their overseer was Zabdiel, the son of 
one* of the great men. 

15 Also of the Levites : Shemaiah the 
son of Hashub, the son of Azrikam, the 
son of Ilashabiah, the son of Bunni; 

Ifci And Shabbethai and Jozabad, of the 
chief of the Levites, t had tlie ''oversight 
of the "^outward business of the house of 
God. 

17 And "^Mattaniah the son of Micha, 
the son of Zabdi,.the sou of Asaph, was 
the principal to begin the "thanksgiving 
in "^ prayer: and Bakbukiah the second 
among his brethren, and Abda the son 
of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son 
of Jeduthun. 

18 All the Levites in the eholy city 
were two hundred fourscore and four. 

19 Moreover the porters, Akkub, Tal- 
mon, and their brethren that kept ^the 



• I Cliron.9: 10,etn. ' Or. Haggrdolim. f Hel). were over. 
b I Cliron. 2«:-20 e Actx 6 : 4, 3. 'I clinp. H:8. e I cliron. IB: 4 ; 
45:4 6. fPliil.4:fi. jrer.l. X H<'\l.at tlie guUt. hPH,l.»l:IO. 
i chap. .1 : '26. \ Or. the tower, j Kzrn li: H, 9 ; 7 : CO, etc. || Or, 

If). Tlie outward btisi ness of the house of God; 
providing the .sacrifices, and making all needful prep- 
aration for the worship which the priests performed 
in the temple. 

'Jl. Zerah — was at the king's hand ; a com- 
missioner or agent, to transact his business with 
the people. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. It is a great blessing to dwell where spiritual 
privileges are enjoyed ; and many will commend 
610 



gates,"" were a hundred seventy "^t^.^ 
and two. 

20 T[ And the residue of Israel, of the 
priests, and the Levites, were in all the 
cities of Judah, every one in his inherit- 
ance. 

21 But 'the Nethinim dwelt in i'Ophel: 
and Ziha and Gispa were over the Neth- 
inim. 

22 The overseer also of the Levites at 
Jerusalem u-as Uzzi the son of Bani, the 
son of Hashabiah, tlte son of Mattaniah; 
the son of ^Nlicha. Of the sons of Asaph, 
the singers ivere over the business of the 
house of God. 

23 For Ht teas the king's commandment 
concerning them, that " a certain portion 
should be for the singers, due for every 
day. 

24 And Pethahiah the son of iNIesheza- 
beel, of the children of * Zerah the son of 
Judah, v:as '' at the king's hand in all 
matters concerning the people. 

25 And for the villages, with their fields, 
some of the children of Judah dwelt at Kir- 
jath-arba.' and in the villages thereof, and 
at Dibon, and in the villages thereof, and 
at Jekabzeel, and in the villages thereof, 

26 And at Jeshua, and at Moladah, 
and at Beth-phelet, 

27 And at Ilazar-shual, and at Beer- 
sheba, and in the villages thereof, 

28 And at Ziklag, and at Mekonah, and 
in the villages thereof, 

29 And at En-rimmon, and at Zareah, 
and at Jarmuth, 

30 Zanoal), AduUam, and in their vil- 
lages, at Lachish, and the fields thereof, 
at Azekah, and iti the villages thereof. 
And they dwelt from '"Bcer-sheba unto 
the "valley of Hinnom. 

31 The children also of Benjamin t from 
Geba dicelt ^at Michmash, and Aija, and 
Beth-el, and in their villages, 

32 And at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah, 

33 Hazor, Hamah, Gittaim, 

34 Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat, 

35 Lod, and Ono, the "valley of crafts- 
men. 

36 And of the Levites were divisions in 
Judah, and in Benjamin. 



to a tut 


<■ m 


dinance. 


« Z<i 


■uh. G 


en. :18 


:30 




k 


1 Cl.rQ 


n. 18 


17. 


1 Jotthu 


n U 


:1ft. 


m G 


pnesi» 


16 -.Si 


Amos s : 


H 




tt .losli 


i:i l.i 


:»■. 


2King« 


■23 


10; 


Jeren 


iaii a 


:a5. 


fOr, 


•/. 


* 





, to 


ICh 


oil. 


4:14. 



























those that choose such places for their residence, 
who will not imitate their example. 

4. In selecting a place of residence, all .should 
regard primarily the will of God. and seek a place 
in which they can most honor him, and secure the 
highest permanent benefit to themselves, their chil- 
dren, and their fellow-men. 

"iO. Wherever people are called to live, the wor- 
ship of Crod .should be a part of their daily business; 
and in seeking first the kingdom of God and his 



Priests and Levitcs. 



NEHEMIAH XII. 



Dedication of the loall. 



tc.-^^- CHAPTER XII. 

1 The priesti?, 8 and the Levites, which came up with 
Zerubbabel. 10 The succession of hiph-prilsts. '2-2 
Certain chief Levites. 27 The solemnity of the ded- 
ication of the walls. 44 The otKces of priests and 
Levites appointed in the temple. 

"IVTOW * these are the priests and the 
_L\ Levites that went up with Zerub- 
babel the son of Shcalticl, and Jeshua : 
Seraiah,*" Jeremiah, Ezra, 

2 Amariah, *]Malluch, Hattush, 

3 tShechaniah, tRchuin, ^^Meremotli, 

4 Iddo, 'IGinnetho, *Abijah, 

5 tMiamin, +Maadiah, Bilgah, 

6 Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiali, 

7 Sallu, ^ Amok. Ililkiah, Jcdaiah. 
These tvere the chief of the priests and 
of their brethren in the days of "^.Icsliua. 

8 jNIoreover the Levites: Jeshua, Bin- 
nui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and 
Mattaniah,"* which icas over Hhe thanks- 
giving, he and his brethren. 

9 Also Bakbukiah and Unni, their 
brethren, were over against tliem in the 
watches. 

10 1[ And Jeshua begat Joiakim. Joia- 
kim also begat Eliashib, and Eliashib 
begat Joiada, 

11 And Joiada begat Jonathan, and Jon- 
athan begat Jaddua. 

12 And in the days of Joiakim were 
priests, the chief of the fathers : of Sera- 
iah, IMeraiah; of Jeremiah, Hanaiiiah; 

13 Of Ezra, Meshullam ; of Amariah, 
Jehohanan ; 

14 Of Melicu, Jonathan ; of Shebaniah, 
Joseph ; 

15 Of Harim, Adna; of IMeraioth, Hel- 
kai; 

16 Of Iddo, Zechariah ; of Ginnethon, 
Meshullam ; 

17 Of Abijah, Zichri ; of Miniamin, of 
Moadiah, Piitai; 

18 Of Bilgah, Shammua ; of Shemaiah, 
Jehonathan ; 

19 And of Joiarib, Mattenai; ofJedaiah, 
Uzzi ; 

20 Of Sallai, Kallai ; of Amok, Eber ; 

21 Of Hilkiah, Hashabiah ; of Jedaiah, 
Nathaneel. 

22 HThe Levites in the days of Elia- 
shib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaddua, 





2: 1,2 


bch 


10:2-8. * 


Or, 


Melicu, V 


pr. U 


tor. 


SMi- 


aniah, v 


er. 14. 


i o 


. Hari, 


Fi.ver. l.'> 


5 Or. 


Mer„ 


i..W, V 


or l.V 


II Or, G 


HHllho 




16. * 


Jhi 


J, L 


,ke 1 : .-.. 


t o 




amtn. 


ver. 1 7. 


t Or 
Aua.H 




17. 


ll 


Or, .yu(/<i 


, ver. 


.11. e 


K7.ra 


3: -2; Joi 


ig.l: 


; Zecli 


3:1 




el,..|.. 11: 


17. 


1 Tlinl 





righteousness, all needed blessings will be given 
them. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1. That went 7ip; from Babylon to Jerusalem. 

27. The dedication of the wall ; as Jerusalem 
was designed to be a holy city, all parts of it were 
dedicated to the service of G-od. 

31. Two great companies ; one company went 
one way upon the wall with Ezra, and the other 



were recorded cliief of the fathers: also 
the priests, to the reign of Darius the Per- 
sian. 

23 The sons of Levi, the cliief of the 
fathers, were 'written in the book of tlie 
Chronicles, even until the days of Joha- 
nan the son of Eliashib. 

24 And the chief of the Levites: Hash- 
abiah, Siicrcbiah, and Jeshua the son of 
Kadmiel, with their brethren over agaiii.st 
them, to praise and to give thanks, accord- 
ing to the '^commandmcnt of David the 
man of God, ^ward over auainst ward. 

25 Mattaniah,aiul Bakbukiah, Obadiah. 
Me.'^hullam, Talmon, .\kkub. iverc porter.s 
keeping the ward at the •thresholds of 
the gates. 

26 These were in the days of Joiakim 
the son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, 
and in the days of ''Xehomiah the govern- 
or, and of Ezra the priest, the 'scribe. 

27 If And at the J dedication of the wall 
of Jerusalem they souL'hl the Levites out 
of all their places, to bring them to Jerusa- 
lem, to keep the dedication with gladness, 
both'' with tiianksgivings, and with sing- 
ing, iL'ith cymbals, psalteries, and with 
harps. 

28 And the sons of the singers gather- 
ed themselves together, both out of the 
plain country round about Jcnisalcin, 
and from the villages of Xetopha'hi ; 

29 Also from the house of Gilgal, and 
out of the fields of Geba and .\zinavcth: 
for the singers had builded them villages 
round about Jerusalem. 

30 And the priests and the Levites pu- 
rified themselves, and 'purified the people, 
and the gates, and the wall. 

31 Then I brought up liie princes of 
Judah upon the wall, and appointed two 
great companies of Ihcm that <xnvc thanks, 
whereof '" one \Ycn\ on the right hand upon 
the wall "toward the duns-sate : 

32 And after them went Hoshaiah, and 
half of the princes of Judali, 

33 And .\zariali, Kzra, and Meshullam, 

34 Judah, and Benjamin. nndSiiemaiah, 
and Jeremiah, 

35 And certain of the priests' sons with 
trumpets ;° namely, Zechariah the sou of 



pialmt of tkankigivin^- 


• ICIirotL9: H,rti-. 1 1 Chi 


■on. rh«p. 


2:1, ■»,:«. tKxr»3:ll. 


■ Or, trettiHritt, or attrmfttiri. 


k rl..np. 


8:<). i Kin. 7 : li, 1 1. il 


■aim :iO, Ictl^. k 1 lliron. » ; li . 


•HM.r^in 


5:1;;. 1 Hfb. .^: l,:l. <» 


Vf n>M :W, «. • rlmplrr :i : IS. 


• Nui.i 


10:8.8. 







went the other way with Nehemiah. They mpt on 
the opposite side of tho city, and went tn^»'tli»T to 
the temple and offered their sacrifices of thankx- 
giving and praise, for h.ivin:^ been eiialded to finish 
the rebuilding and fortifying of the i-itv. Vi-rMes 
40-43. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
22. WTien ministers of the gospel arp most faith- 
ful in the discharge of their appropriate duties, they 
611 



Officers in the temple. 



NEHEMIAII XlII 



Abuses rectified. 



Jonathan, the ron of Shcmaiah, the son 
of Mattaniah, the son of Michaiah, the 
son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph : 

36 And his brethren, Sheinaiah, and 
Azaracl, Mihilai, Gilahii, Maai,' Nethan- 
cel, and Judah, Hanani, Avith the music- 
al "instruments of David the man of God, 
and Ezra the scribe before them. 

37 And at the ''fountain-gate, -svhich 
■was over against them; they went up by 
the stairs of the city of David, at the 
going up of the wall, above the house of 
David, even unto the water-gate east- 
ward. 

38 And the "^ other company of them that 
gave thanks went over against them, and 
I after them, and the half of the people 
upon the wall, from beyond the tower 
of the furnaces even unto the broad 
wall ; 

39 And from above the gate of "^Ephra- 
im, and above the old gate, and -above 
the fish-gate, and the tower of Hananeel, 
and the tower of Meah, even unto the 
sheep-gate : and they stood still in the 
prison-gate." 

40 So stood the two eompanics of them 
that gave thanks in the house of God, and 
[, and the half of the rulers with me : 

41 And the priests ; Eliakim, Maaseiah, 
Miniarniu, INIichaiah, Elioenai, Zeeha- 
riah, and Hananiah, with trumpets; 

42 And Maaseiah, and Shcmaiah, and 
Eleazar, and Uzzi, and Jehohanan, and 
Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer. And 
the singers *sang "^loud, with Jezrahiah 
their overseer. 

43 Also that day they offered great sac- 
rifices, and rejoiced ; for God had made 
them rejoice with great joy : the wives 
also and the childi-en rejoiced : "so that 
the joy of Jerusalem was « heard even 
afar off. 

44 1[ And at that time were some ap- 
pointed over the "' chambers for the treas- 
ures, for the offerings, for the first-fruits, 
and for the tithes, to gather into them 
out of the fields of the cities the portions 
oft the law for the priests and Levites ; 



• 1 Cliron. 2.) : S. b rli«|i.3 : l.".,ftr. c ver. 31. d 2 Kinga, 14: I:); 
chap. 8: IG. e .'er. 32 : '2. * Heh. made llieir voice to /« heard. 
r P»a. m : I ; iW : 4-K. I! Eira 3 : 1 2. h rliiin. 13: 12, 13. fTIiatis, 
appainUd by the law. % Hcl). fur the ii>v of Judah. % Hel). stood. 
i I Cliron. cli. •2.1,26, J 2 Clirou. 2y : 30. k Num. 18 : 21,2(1 || That is. 



take the best course, not only to honor G-od and 
advance tlie interests of true religion, but also to 
secure a comfortable support for themselves and 
their families. 

30. To be made instrumental in purifying others, 
ministers of the gospel must seek purification them- 
selves, and endeavor in all things to set before the 
people a safe and u.seful example. 

41). Thanks should be rendered to God at the con- 
clusion of every great and good work; and all the 
glory of success by all classes should be given to 
him. 

012 



fort Judah rejoiced for the priests Vc.^iS 
and for the Levitcs that Svaited. 

45 And both the singers and the porters 
kept the ward of their (lod, and tlie word 
of the purification, according to the 'com- 
mandment of David, and of Solomon his 
son. 

46 For in the days of David and i Asaph 
of old there icerc chief of the singers, nisd 
songs of praise and thanksgiving unto God. 

47 And all Israel in the days of Zerul - 
babel, and in the days of Nclicmiah, gave 
the portions of the singers and tlie por- 
ters, every day his ''portion: and they 
sanctifiedil holy thing.t unto the Levitcs ; 
and the Levites sanctified them unto the 
children of Aaron. 

CHAPTER XITI. 

1 Tpon the reading of the law separation is made from 
the mixed multitude. 4 Nehemiah at hi.'; return caus- 
eth the chambers to be cleansed. 10 He reformeih 
the offices in the house of God. 1.5 The Tiolation of 
the sabbath, 2;^ and the marriages with strange wives. 

ON that day *they 'read in the book of 
Mose« in the t audience of the peo- 
ple ; and ""therein was found written, 
that the Ammonite and the Rloabite 
should not come into the congregation of 
God for ever ; 

2 Because "they met not the children of 
Israel with bread and with water, but 
hired" Balaam against them, that he 
should curse them: Phowbeit our God 
turned the curse into a blessing 

3 Now it came to pass, when they had 
heard the law, that they ''separated from 
Israel all the mi.xed multitude. 

4 ^ And before tliis, Eliashib the priest, 
havingt the oversight of the chamber of 
the house of our God, tvas allied unto 
Tobiah : 

5 And he had prepared for him a great 
chamber, ''where aforetime they laid the 
meat-olTerings, the frankincense, and tlie 
vessels, and the tithes of the corn, the 
new wine, and the oil, which was ^com- 
manded "to be given to the Levites, and 
the singers, and the porters ; and the of- 
ferings of the priests. 



set apart. 


■« H<b 


then 


was 


read. 


DeuL 31 


:ll 


12: 2K1 


ns»i 


23 : 2 ; 


rh 


in, R:3, R. 


fH 


•h, ea 


rs. ml)eut.23:3, 


4. 


> Mat. 2.1 


40. 


o Nutl 


. 2 


!:fi, V N 




1: III 


: Deut 2 


):6; .losh 


24 


n, 10 : M 


<'i.h 


fi:5. 


q 


rh. 0:2. 


t Hp 


b. he 


ng set o 


:er. r 2Chron.3l:ll; 


rh 


12:44 


% 


Hob the c 




ndment of th 


Levites. 


■ Nl 


m, IK:21 


,24. 



45. The influence of good men is felt long after 
they are dead ; and each one should be cartful to 
set an example which will be useful as long as it 
shall be remembered, and be instrumental when he 
is in heaven of preparing others for the same exceed- 
ing and eternal glory. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

4. Tobiah; an Ammonite, and an enemy to the 
Jews. 

5. A great chamber; in the courts of the tem- 
ple, contrary to the command of G-od. 



Sabbath violations, 



NEHEMIAH XIII. 



and strans:e wives. 



b;c''4m'.° 6 But in all this time was not I at 
Jerusalem : *for in the two and thirtieth 
year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon came 
I vmto the king, and * after certain days 
obtained t I leave of the king : 

7 And I came to Jerusalem, and under- 
stood of the evil that Eliashib did for 
Tobiah, in preparing him a chamber in 
the courts of the house of God. 

8 And it grieved me sore : therefore I 
cast forth all the household stuff of To- 
biah out of the chamber. 

9 Then I commanded, and they cleansed 
the chambers : and thither brought I again 
the vessels of the house of God, with the 
meat-offering and the frankincense. 

10 ^And I perceived that the portions 
of the Levites had not been given them: 
for the Levites and the singers, that did 
the work, were fled every one to his field. 

11 Then contended I with the rulers, 
and said, Why is the house of God for- 
saken ? And I gathered them together, 
and set them in their t place. 

12 Then brought all Judah the tithe of 
the corn and the new wine and the oil 
unto the ^ treasuries. 

1 3 And I made treasurers over the treas- 
uries,'' Shelemiah the priest, and Zadok 
the scribe, and of the Levites, Pedaiah : 
and II next to them iras Hanan the son 
of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah : for they 
were counted '^faithful, and *their ofhce 
was to distribute unto their brethren. 

14 Remember ""me, my God, concern- 
ing this, and wipe not out my good tdeeds 
that I have done for the house of my God, 
and for the t offices thereof. 

15 T[ In those days saw I in Judah 
some treading wine-presses on the * sab- 
bath, and bringing in sheaves, and lad- 
ing asses ; as also wine, grapes, and figs, 
and all manner of burdens, ''which they 
brought into Jerusalem on the sabbatli- 
day : and I testified against them in the 
day wherein they sold victuals. 

16 There dwelt men of Tyre also there- 
in, which brought fish, and all manner of 
ware, and sold on the sabbath unto the 
children of Judah, and in Jerusalem. 



»chap.5:14 " Ugh. al the end n/ din/s. t Or, I rarnetthj re- 
questtd. % Heh. stnniiing. \ Or, stmchouscs, yi.x\.Z: \0. b cIj. 
12 : 44 ; ver 5. || Hfb. at their hand. e Acts 6 : 3 ; 1 Tim. .T : lu. 
* Hell, it was up^m them. .1 Psa. IM :fi-9; Heb. K: 10. f Heb. 
kindnentet. f Or. o/itervatiom. eETOdMrlO. f chap. 10:31. 
B ver 11 ; Prov. 2S : 4. b Jer. ITtil-a iLev.23:32. Heb. dt- 



6. Was not I at Jerusalem ; Nehemiah had 
left Judea and returned to Persia; and the above 
mentioned abuses are supposed to have taken place 
durinjr his absence. Came I unto the i'i>ig ; the 
king of Persia, who reigned also over Babylon, and 
is here called the king of Babylon. Nehemiah's 
return was twelve years after lie first loft Persia 
and went to Jerusalem. Obtained I leave of the 
king ; leave to go back again to Jerusalem. How 
long he now continued in Persia is not known. 



17 Then sj contended with the nobles 
of Judah, and said unto them. What evil 
thing is this that ye do, and profane the 
sabbath-day"? 

18 Did not your fathers ''thus, and did 
not our God bring all this evil upon us, 
and upon this city? yet yc bring more 
wrath upon Israel by profaning the sab- 
bath. 

19 And it came to pass, that when the 
gates of Jerusalem began to be dark 'be- 
fore tlie sabbath, I commanded that the 
gates should be shut, and charged that 
they should not be opened till after the 
sabbath : and some of my servants set I 
at the gates, thai there should no burden 
be brought in on the sabbath-day. 

20 So the merchants and sellers of all 
kind of ware lodged without Jerusalem 
once or twice. 

21 Then I testified against them, and 
said unto them. Why lodge ye * about the 
wain if ye do so again, I will lay hands 
on you. From that time forth came 
they no more on the sabbath. 

22 And I commanded the Levites, that 
they should J cleanse themselves, and that 
they should come and keep the gates, to 
sanctify tlie sabbath-day. Remember 
me,'' my God, concerning this also, and 
spare me according to the H greatness of 
thy mercy. 

23 1[ In those days also saw I Jews 
that had * married 'wives of Ashdod, of 
Amnion, and of Moab : 

24 And their children spake half in the 
speech of Ashdod, and t could not speak 
in the Jews' language, but according to 
the language of teach people. 

25 And "'I contended with them, and 
cursed^ them, and smote certain of them, 
and plucked off their hair, and made 
them "swear by God, saying, Ye shall 
not give your daughters unto their sons, 
nor take their daughters unto your sons, 
or for yourselves. 

26 Did not "Solomon king of Israel sin 
by these things? Pyet among many na- 
tions was there no king like him, who was 
beloved 1 of his God, and God made him 



ftre. j cliap. l-2:.30. kver.l4, 31. ^ Or. mullituile. || Heb. 
made to dwelt vilh them. I E7.r;l ;* : •*. ■*" Heb. they diicerned not 
to tpeak. f H^h. people and people. m ver. 11,17. X Or, r^- 
viVfrf, Psalm IS : 4. n Ezra 10:. 'i; chapter 10: -29. .W. o i Kings, 
11: 1, etc. p 1 Kings, 3:13; 2 Chronicles, 9: M. <\ 2 Samuel, 
12:24. 



10. Were fled; because they did not receive their 
support. 

VI. The tithe ; a tenth part of their produce, for 
the support of the ministers of religion. 

1.3. Treading u-i/ie-presses ; to press the juice 
out of grapes, which was the usual manner of mak- 
ing wine. 

23. Ashdod — Ammo?t — Moab; heathen nations. 

2o. Pliicki'il off tlitir liair ; a token of disgrace. 

26. Outlandish ; heathen. 

613 



Ahasucriis makdh 



ESTHER I. 



a royal feast- 



king over all Israel: nevertheless even 
him did outlandish women cause to sin. 

27 Shall we then hearken unto you to 
do all this great evil, to transgress against 
our God in marrying strange wives ? 

28 And one of the sons of *Joiada, the 
son of Eliashib the high-priest, was son- 
in-law to Sanballat the Horonite : there- 
fore I chased him from me. 

29 Remember'' them, my God, *be- 



liood, and the " covenant of the priestliood, 
and of the Levites. 

30 Thus cleansed I them from all stran- 
gers, and appointed the '' wards of the 
priests and the Levites, every one in his 
business ; 

31 And for the wood-offering at tin.'cs 
appointed, and for the tirst-fruits. lic- 
membcr "-'me, my God, for good. 



THE 

BOOK OF ESTHER. 



CHAPTER I. 

1 Ahasuerus maketh royal feasts. 10 Vashti, sent for, 
refuseth to come. I'J Ahasuerus, by the counsel of 
Memucan, maketh the decree of men's sovereignty. 

"JYpOW it came to pass in the days of 
_L\ "^jiVhasucrus, (this is Ahasuerus which 
reigned from India even unto Ethiopia, 
over^ a hundred and seven and twenty 
provinces,) 

2 Tkat in those days, when the king 
Ahasuerus sat on the throne of his king- 
dom, which was in '' Shushan the palace, 

3 In the third year of his reign, he made 
a 'feast unto all his princes and his ser- 
vants; the power of Persia and Media, 
the nobles and princes of the provinces, 
being before him : 

4 When he showed the riches of his 
glorious kingdom and the honor of his 

a cli. 1-2: lO.ii. bell. H: 14. * Huh. for the dfjilingt. c Mai. 
2:4,10. <l ch. 10:. 34. ePsa. 26:8,9. f Exra 4 :6 ; Diin. 9: I. B ch. 
8:9: D,-)n. (i: 1. h Nell. 1 : 1. i Geii. 40 : iO ; cliap. 2 : 18 ; Mark 



28. Sanballat the Horonite ; governor of the 
Sa,maritans. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The daily reading of a portion of Scripture is 
one of the most effectual means of communicating 
a knowledge of the will of (jod, and leading men 
to perform it. 

4. Alliance with the wicked is one of the causes 
of increasing human corruption; and when minis- 
ters of religion are guilty of it, it tends to spread 
the evil through the community. 

6. When the authority of pious magistrates is 
Buspendcd, and those who rule encourage or connive 
at iniquity, it will be greatly increased ; all who are 
disposed will then commit it with impunity and 
without restraint. 

8. Increase of iniquity greatly grieves the friends 
of God ; and if they have the right and the ability, 
they will attempt speedily to restrain and remove 
it. In this they may expect the aid of good men 
and the blessing of '-rod. 

10. The withholding of adequate support from 
the ministers of the gospel, is one of the devices of 
Satan and his adherents to prevent the continuance 
of their labors. 

I.). The selling of food or other commodities, 
travelling for profit or pleasure, and the transac- 
C14 



excellent majesty many days, even a hun- 
dred and fourscore days. 

5 And when these days were expired, 
the king made a feast unto all the people 
that were t present in Shushan the palace, 
both unto great and small, seven days, 
in the court of the garden of the king's 
palace ; 

6 Where were white, green, and ^blue 
hangings, fastened with cords of fine lin- 
en and purple to silver rings and pillars 
of marble: the Jbeds ivere 0/ gold and 
silver, upon a pavement *of red, and blue, 
and white, and black marble. 

7 And they gave them drink in vessehs 
of gold, (the vessels being diverse one 
from another,) and II royal wine in abun- 
dance, according to the *statcof the king. 

8 And the drinking icas according to the 



fi:v'l. t Heb./ound. f ^>T,villlet, i\y.l\<. S: 15. j Ezek. M : 4l ; 
Arnos 6:4. ^ Or. of porphyry, and miu-hle, and alahatter, and 
stone of blue color. \\ Wvh. %vine of the kingdom. * Hcb. Auiirf. 

tion of other secular business, on the Sabbath, are 
highly ofl'ensive to God ; and tend to bring down 
upon individuals and the community, his wrath and 
curse. 

19. As servile or secular labor on the Sabbath is 
inconsistent with the temporal welfare of the com- 
munity, as well as the eternal good of individuals, 
it is the duty of tiie government by penal sanctions 
to prevent it. and if men will violate the law, to 
visit them with punishment ; and when transgress- 
ors find the government and the people resolutely 
set against them, and that they cannot trample on 
the Sabbath with impunity, they will be likely to 
abstain from it. 

28. Those who set at open defiance the laws of G-od 
and man. and whose continued presence is incon- 
sistent with the welfare of the community, should 
not be permitted to live in it; and in all wise and 
good ellorts to prevent their pestiferous influence, 
men may expect the aid of the enlightened, patri- 
otic, and good, and the blessing of God. 

CHAPTER I. 
1. Ahasiienis ; supposed by some to be the same 
as Xerxes. He reigned at Siiushan, in Persia to 
wiiich the seat of empire had been transferred from 
Babylon. 



Vashti is deposed. 



ESTHER II. 



Counsel of Memucan. 



B.c'0'9^' law; none did ^compel : for so the 
king had appointed to all the officers of his 
house, that they should do accordinji; to 
every man's pleasure. 

9 Also Vashti the queen made a feast 
for the women in the royal house which 
belonged to king Ahasuerus. 

10 ^ On the seventh day, when the 
heart'' of the king was "^ merry with wine, 
he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, ''Har- 
bona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and 
Carcas, the .seven *ehamberlains that serv- 
ed in the presence of Ahasuerus the king, 

1 1 To bring Vashti the queen before 
the king with the crown royal, to show 
the people and the princes her beauty : 
for she ivas t fair to look on. 

12 But the queen Vashti refused to come 
at the king's commandment tby his 
chamberlains: therefore was Ihe king 
very wroth, and his anger burned in him. 

13 ^ Then the king said to the "wise 
men, which "^knew the times, (for so teas 
the king's manner toward all that knew 
law and judgment : 

14 And the next unto him was Carshe- 
na, Shethar, Admatha, Tai-shish, INIeres, 
Marsena, an(/ Memucan, the » seven prin- 
ces of Persia and Media, '" which saw the 
king's face, and which sat the first in the 
kingdom,) 

15 What* shall we do unto the queen 
Vashti according to law, because she 
hath not performed the commandment of 
the king Ahasuerus by the chamberlains'? 

16 And Memucan answered before the 
king and the princes, Vashti the queen 
hath not done wrong to the king only, 
but also to all the princes, and to all the 
people that are in all the provinces of the 
king Ahasuerus. 

17 For this deed of the queen shall 
come abroad unto all women, so that 
they shall despise their husbands in their 
eyes, when it shall be reported, The 

• H,lb.2:l5. H -2 Sam. LI: M. cEccl.lO:19. d cliau. 7 : ». 
» Or, ruiiuclis. i Heh.ff""d n/counUnance, l!ixm.'2r,:n. J Heb. 
teliich was Ay the hand of his eunuclit. « .ler. 10:7. f 1 Cliron. 
1'2::J2. gEzr;l-:U. h 2 Kings, ii: 1>). % Heb. JTAo* fo rfo. |j Heb. 
bt good with. * Heb. f rum lie/ore him. f Heit pan not aivnu, 

8. None did compel; none were compelled to 
drinli. but each one drank, or refrained, as he pleased. 

1"2. Vashti refused to cojne ; it was felt by her 
to be an indignity to be summoned thus into the 
presence of men, to gratify the caprice and vanity 
of the king. 

l.'l Which knew the times; were acquainted 
with the history and customs of the kingdom. 

Ki. Done n-ro//g — to all the people ; by setting 
a bad example. 

10. That it be not altered; it was then the 
establi.shed u.sage, that laws of the Medes and Per- 
sians, once passed, could not be altered. No law of 
dis'orce such as this, has any divine sanction. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. Great power, wealth, and influence, tend to 
increase the pride of the human heart, and to lead 



king Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the 
queen to be brought in before him, but 
she came not. 

18 Likewise shall the ladies of Persia 
and Media say this day unto all the king's 
princes, which have heard of the deed 
of the queen. Thus shall there arise too 
much contempt and wrath. 

19 If it li please the king, let there go a 
royal commandment * from him, and let 
it be written among the laws of the Per- 
sians and the iNledes, that it t be not 
altered. That Vashti come no more be- 
fore king Ahasuerus; and let the king 
give her royal estate unto t another that 
is better than she. 

20 And M"hcn the king's decree, which 
he shall make, shall be published through- 
out all his empire, (for it is great,) all the 
wives shall give to their husbands 'hon- 
or, both to great and small. 

21 And the saying * pleased the king 
and the princes; and the king did ac- 
cording to the word of Memucan : 

22 For he sent J letters into all the 
king's provinces, into every province 
according to the writing thereof, and to 
every people after their language, that 
every man should bear ''rule in his own 
house, and that H it should be published 
according to the language of every people. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 Out of the choice of virgins a queen is to be chosen. 
5 Mordecai the nursing farher of Esther. S E.-^ther 
is preferred by Hegai before the rest. ]'2 The man- 
ner of purification, and going in to the king. 15 Es- 
ther best pleasing the king is made queen. '21 Mor- 
decai discovering a treason, is recorded in the chroni- 
cles. 

AFTER these things, when the wrath 
of king Ahasuerus was appeased, he 
remembered Vashti, and what she had 
done, and what was 'decreed against her. 
2 Then said the king's servants that 
ministered unto him. Let there be fair 
young virgins sought for the king: 

cliap. 8:8; Dan.6:)<-13. t Heh. her companion. iKpli5:33; 

Col. 3:18. ^ Heh. wat good in the enet of. jihap. 8:>'. )^ Kpli. 
! ft : c:--24 ; 1 Tim. i : 12. || Heb. one thould publith it according la 
\ the language of his people. I chap. 1 : 19, '20. 

men for the display of their own glory to scenes of 
festive and sensual indulgence, which expose them 
to vexation and .sorrow in this world, and to endless 
woe in the world to come. 

10. Wine is a mocker and strong drink is raging. 
When under its influence, reason is dethroned, and 
men often adopt measures disgraceful to themselves 
and ruinous to others. 

15. Those who are clothed with authority should 
be careful not to give commands which cannot con- 
sistently be complied with, which can neither be 
obeyed nor disobeyed witliout involving others in 
distress and ruin. 

19. As human laws are more or less imperfect, 
and are at times palpably unjust, the idea that they 
are never to be altered is the offspring of self-suffi.. 
ciency and pride. 

615 



Choice of a queen. 



ESTHER II, 



Esther is crowned. 



3 And let the king appoint ofTicers in 
all the provinces of his kingdom, that 
they may gather togetlier all the fair 
young virgins unto Shushan the palace, 
to the house of the women, unto the 
custody* of t Hcgc the king's chamber- 
lain, keeper of the women; and let their 
things for purification be given them: 

4 And let the maiden which plcaseth the 
king be* queen instead of Vasliti. And the 
thing pleased the king: and he did so. 

5 •[ Now in Shushan the palace there 
was a certain Jew whose name teas Mor- 
decai, the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, 
the son of Kish, a Benjamite : 

6 Who had been carried away from 
Jerusalem with the ''captivity which had 
been carried away with -Jeconiah king of 
Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king 
of Babylon had carried away. 

7 And he ^ brought up Hadassah, that 
is, Esther, his uncle's daughter: for she 
had neither father nor mother, and the 
maid ivas H fair and beautiful; whom 
Mordecai, when her father and mother 
were dead, took for his own daughter. 

8 ^ So it came to pass, when the king's 
commandment and his decree was heard, 
and when many maidens were "^gathered 
togetlier unto Shushan the palace, to the 
custody of Hegai, that Esther was brought 

_also unto the king's house, to the custody 
of Hegai, keeper of the women. 

9 And the maiden pleased him, and she 
obtained ''kindness of him; and he speed- 
ily gave her her things for ''purification, 
with *such' things as belonged to her, and 
seven maidens, which were meet to be 
given her, out of the king's house: and 
he + preferred her and her maids unto the 
best place of the house of the women. 

10 Esther had not showed her people 
nor her kindred: for Mordecai had 
charged Hier that she should not show it. 

11 And Mordecai walked every day 
before the court of the women's house, 
to know t how Esther did, and what 
should become of her. 

12 ^ Now when every maid's turn was 
come to go in to king Ahasuerus, after 
that she had been twelve months, ac- 
cording to the manner of llic women, (for 
bO were the days of their purifications 
accomplished, to wit, six months with 
oil of ^myrrh, and six months with sweet 



* Hvh. hand. t Or, Ufdiil, vcr« 8. • Mnt. M:l«: 2> : H. 
b 2 Kjiibm.M: H, ISl .ler. J<: I. % nr, JihoiaMn.l Kings, 24 : 6. 
4 Hell, nourMitil. Epli. 0:J. || Heh. fair iif /«<m, ai-d .»,..«/ n/ 
counUiw.ire. ever.:!. <l P»b. 106 MB. « vrr. :t, i:. * Hel>. Afr ;.,.>•■ 
tion: f Hvb. cliiingtd. I ver. iO. ^ Hub. Ihe peuee o/ Bslher, 

CHAPTER II. 

7. Hadassah ; this was her Jewish name, called 
Esther by the Persians. 
61G 



[ odors, and with other things for the Vc.^: 
purifying of the women,) 
I 13 Then thus came ere/?/ maiden unto 
'the king; whatsoever she desired was 
I given her to go with her out of the house 
! of the women unto the king's house. 

14 In the evening she went, and on 
jthe morrow she returned into the second 
[house of the women, to the custody of 

Shaashgaz. the king's chamberlain, which 
jkept the concubines: she came in unto 
the king no more, ''except the king de- 
lighted in her, and that she were called 
by 'name. 

15 1[ Now when the turn of Esther, the 
daughter of Abihail the uncle of Morde- 
cai, who had taken her for his daughter, 
was come to go in unto the king, she re- 
quired nothing but what Hegai the king's 
chamberlain, the keeper of the women, 
appointed. And Esther obtained J favor 
in the sight of all them that looked upon 
her. 

1 6 So Esther was taken unto king Ahas- 
uerus into his house royal in the tenth 
month, which is the month Tebeth, in the 
seventh year of his reign. 

17 And the king loved Esther above all 
the women, and she obtained grace and 
^ favor II in his sight more than all the 
virgins; so that he set the royal crown 
upon her head, and made her queen in- 
stead of Vashti. 

18 Then the king made a great ''feast 
unto all his princes and his servants, 
even Esther's feast ; and he made a *re- 
lease to the provinces, and gave 'gifts, 
according to the state of the king. 

19 And when the virgins were gather- 
ed together the second time, then Mor- 
decai "'sat in the king's gate. 

20 Esther had not yet showed her kin- 
dred nor her people, as Mordecai had 
charged her: for "Esther did the com- 
mandment of Mordecai, like as when she 
was brought up with him. 

21 1[ In those days, while Mordecai sat 
in the king's gate, two of the king's cham- 
berlains, tBigthan and Teresh, of tiiose 
whicli kept the ^door, were wroth, and 
sought to lay hand on the king Ahasuerus. 

22 And the thing was known to I\lor- 
decai, wlio "told it unto Esther the queen ; 
and Esther certified the king thereof in 
Mordccai's name. 

G*-!!. .17: 11; 1 .Snm. 17: 18. « Pror. 7: 17 : I«ninli 67:!». k Gen. 
31 : 19; Deul. ■;! : H; l«n.fi2:4,Ii. il«n.4:<:l. jCnnl.K:!': 
«: 10; Acta 7: in. ^ Or, kimllittt. ]\ »eb. Iirfore him. k rli.ip. 
I:S « HHi. irW. I N.-I1. 8: l». m ,|in|i :!: •:. i> Kpli. «: l-:i. 
i Or, Hit/lhnna, ili]i|i. <\ : -i. i Hi-b, Ihreiliold. « <liii|). (1:1.2. 

10. Not shotred her ■peo2)le ; not made known to 
any that slie was a Jewess. 

'.21. Soiisrht to Jay hand on the iiiiff; con- 
spired against his life. 



Hainan ploltclh against 



ESTHER III. 



Mordecai and the Jews. 



d'c's'iI?.* 23 And when inqulsilioii was 
made of the matter, it was found out ; 
therefore they were both hanged on a 
tree : and it was written in the book of 
the chronicles before the king. 

CHAPTER in. 

1 Haman, advanced by the kiiif;, and despised by Mor- 
decai. seeketh revenge upon all the Jews. 7 Hecast- 
eth lots. S He oblaineth bycalumnialion adeoree of 
the king to put the Jews to death. 

AFTER these things did king Ahasu- 
crus promote Haman the son of Ham- 
medatha the ^Agagite, and advanced hiin, 
and set his seat above all the princes 
that were with him. 

2 And all the king's servants, that were 
in the king's gate, ''bowed and reverenced 
Ilaman : for the king had so commanded 
concerning him. But Mordecai bowed 
nof,*^ nor did him reverence. 

3 Then the king's servants, which u'erc 
in the king's gate, said unto Mordecai, 
Why transgiessest thou the "^king's com- 
mandment? 

4 Now it came to pass, when they spake 
daily unto him, and he hearkened not 
unto them, that they told Haman, to see 
whether Mordccai's matters would stand : 
for he had told them that he was a Jew. 

5 And when Ilaman saw that Morde- 
cai bowed ''not, nor did him reverence, 
then was Haman full of '^ wrath. 

6 And he thought scorn to lay hands on 
Mordecai alone; for they had showed 
him the people of Mordecai: wherefore 
Haman sought to destroy sall the Jews 
that ivere throughout the whole kingdom of 
Ahasaerus, even the people of Mordecai. 

7 1[ In the first month, that is, the 
month Nisan, in the twelfth year of king 
Ahasuerus, they cast ''Pur, that is, the 
lot, before Haman from day to day, and 
from month to month, to the twelftli 
month, that is, the month Adar. 



« Ni 


m. 3^ 


:7; I Sam. 1,t:8,3H. 


b Gen. 41 : 43. c Pga. 1.5:1. 


<I ver. 


i. e 


fer. 2; cliap..5.i|. r Of 


n.4 :.%«; Il.in. 3 : U". B I'sa. 


83:4; 


Rev. 


1-2:17. h diiip. !l:'24. 


i K7.ra4: 13; AcU IH:'.'0. 



23. The hook of the chronicles ; the register of 
the affairs of the kingdpm, kept in the royal pal- 
ace. Chap. 6:1. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. What is done in a passion is often a source of 
deep regret ; and if men do not ch.-inge their conduct, 
but continue in sin and folly, choosing rather to do 
this than to acknowledge their error, they must in the 
end be miserable, eat the fruit of their own way, and 
be filled with their own devices. 

4. Sin in prospect appears to those who love it, 
very dilFerent from what it does .'ilter it has been 
rominilted. It proinises good; but at last, bites 
like a serpent and stings like an adder. 

7. Kindness to orphans is well-pleasing to God. 
and he often follows it with special manifestations 
of his favor. 

10. Ability and disposition to keep secret what 
sliould not be published, is a valuable trait of char- 



8 T[ And Haman said unto king Ahasu- 
erus, There js a certain people scattered 
abroad and dispersed among the people 
in all the provinces of thy kingdom ; and 
their' laws are diverse from all people; 
neither keep tliey the king's laws: there- 
fore it is not * for the king's profit to suffer 
them. 

9 If it please the king, let it be written 
thatt they may be destroyed: and I will 
payi ten thousand talents of silver to the 
hands of those tliat have the charge of 
the business, to bring it into the king's 
treasuries. 

10 And the king J took his ring from his 
hand, and gave it unto Haman the son 
of Ilammedallia the Agagite, the Jews' 
enemy. ^^ 

1 1 And the king said unto Haman, The 
silver is given to thee, the people also, to 
do with them as it seemelh good to tlice. 

1 2 Then '' were the king's li scribes 
called on the thirteenth day of the first 
month, and there was "written according 
to all that Haman had commanded unto 
the king's lieutenants, and to the govern- 
ors that were over every province, and 
to the rulers of every peojile of every 
province according to the writing tliereof, 
and to every people after their language; 
in' the name of king Aliasuerus was it 
written, and sealed with the kings ring. 

13 And the letters were sent by posts 
into all the king's provinces, to destroy, 
to kill, and to cause to perish, all Jews, 
both young and old, little children and 
women, in one day, even upon the thir- 
teenth (lay of the twelfth month, which 
is the montli Adar, and to lake the spoil 
of Ihein for a prey. 

14 The copy of the writing for a com- 
mandment to be given in every province 
was published unto all people, that they 
should be ready against that day. 

" Heit. mret, ox cquitl. f Heb. /o rfM/n>v Mem. J HKh. weigh. 
j Gen. 41:42: chap. 8:2, «. % Or, .ipjirc Mm-, rliap. 7 : ti. k cliap. 
K;0,etc. \\ Or, sraetaiiet. I 1 Kings., -21 : 8. 



acter, and should be cultivated by all wjio are in- 
trusted with great and important concerns. 

17. When G-od sees best, he can give his people 
favor even with those who rebel against him ; and 
all the influence he gives to any should be employed 
to promote his glory and the good of men. 

'2\. While the wicked are devising wicked de- 
vices and seeking the ruin of others, God may be 
preparing to overrule it for their own destruction, 
and for the salvation of his people. 

. CHAPTER III. 

1. Haman; supposed to have been an Amalek- 
ite, and a descendant of one of their ancient kings. 
E.X. 17 : 14 ; Deut. 25 : 17-19, 

8. To suffer litem ; suffer them to live. 

10. Took his ring — and gave it unto Haman, 
this was a token that he gave him authority to 
accomplish his wishes. 

617 



Tlic Jews Diourn. 



ESTHER IV 



Morihtai ihargclh Esther. 



15 The posts went out, being hastened 
by the king's coniuiandment, and the de- 
cree was given in Shushau the palace. 
And the king and llaman sat down to 
drink; but the *city Sliushan was per- 
plexed. 

CHAPTER IV. 

\ The great mourning of Mordecai and the Jews. 4 
Ksther, understanding it. sendeth to Mordecai, wlio 
showeth the cause, and adviseth her to undertake the 
suit. 10 She excusing herself is threatened by Morde- 
cai. 15 She ap])ointing a fast undertaketh tlie suit. 

"YTT^HEN Mordecai perceived all that 
V V' ^va.s done, Mordecai '' rent his clothes, 
and put on sackcloth with ■= ashes, and 
went out into the midst of the city, and 
cried with a loud and a ^ bitter cry ; 

2 And came even before the king's 
gate ; for none might enter into the king's 
gate clothed with sackcloth. 

3 And in every province, whithersoever 
the king's commandment and his decree 
came, there icas great ^mourning among 
the Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and 
wailing : and * many lay in sackcloth and 
ashes. 

4 T[ So E.sther's maids and her tcham- 
berlains came and told it her. Then was 
the queen exceedingly grieved; and she 
sent raiment to clothe Mordecai, and to 
take away his sackcloth from him : but 
he ^ received it not. 

5 Then called P^sther for Hatach, one 
of the king's chamberlains, whom he 
had J appointed to attend upon her, and 
gave him a commandment to Mordecai, 
to know what it was, and why it ivas. 

6 So Hatach went forth to Mordecai 
unto the street of the city, which teas 
before the king's gate. 

7 And Mordecai told him of all that 
had happened unto him, and of the ^sum 
of the money that Haman had promised 
to pay to the kings treasuries for the 
Jews, to destroy them. 



• Prov. 2>):2. b 2 Snin. I : II ; Job I :20. c.losli. 7:6: Ezek. 
27 : 30 ; .loniili 3 : fi. d Ocn. 27 : 34. e Isa. 22 : 4, .5 ; 37 : 1-3. "• Helj. 
tackcloth and iishct were laid under many, Isa. 58:5; Dan. 9 : 3. 
t Hcb. tunucht. I I'sa. 77 : 2. J Heb. set before, g chap 3 : 9. 



15. Shnsha7i was perplexed ; on account of the 
decree to destroy tlie Jews. 

INSTRUCTIONS 

I. Despots not unfrequently advance to places of 
honor and power the most wicked of their subjects. 

3. When rulers require tlieir subjects to disobey 
God, it is the duty of subjects to disobey them ; and 
thougli tliis may expose fhcm to the wrath of men, 
it will meet the approbation of God. 

(). A man may be so wicked a.s to regard liisown 
glory more than he does the lives of his fellow-men. 

7. The lot may be cast into the lap, but the dis- 
posal will be of God ; and lie may so order it as to 
prevent the end it was intended to subserve. 

II. For the gratification of a worthless favorite, 
a monarch will sometimes sacrifice the happiness, 
and even the lives of thousands of his subjects. 

15. The triumph of the wicked is short; and 
618 



8 Alsohegaveliim thecopy ofthe ^b^c.^i^j! 
writing'' of the decree that was given at 
Shushan to destroy them, to show it unto 
Esther, and to declare it unto her, and to 
charge her that she should go in unto the 
king, to make' supplication unto him, and 
to make request before him for her people. 

9 And Hatach came and told Esther the 
words of Mordecai. 

10 ^ Again Esther spake unto Hatach, 
and gave him commandment unto Mor- 
decai ; 

1 1 All the king's servants, and the peo- 
ple of the king's provinces, do know, that 
whosoever, whether man or woman, shall 
come unto the king into the dinner court, 
who is not called, there is ''one law of his 
to put him to death, except such to whom 
the king shall hold 'out the golden scep- 
tre, that he may live: but I have not 
been called to come in unto the king 
these thirty days. 

12 And they told to Mordecai Esthers 
words. 

13 Then Mordecai commanded to an- 
swer Esther, Think ""not with thyself 
that thou shalt escape in the king's house, 
more than all the Jews. 

14 For "if thou altogether boldest thy 
peace at this time, then shall there ^en- 
largement and deliverance arise to the 
Jews from another place ; but thou and 
thy father's house shall be destroyed : 
and who knoweth whether thou art come 
to the kingdom for such a time as this ? 

15 1[ Then Esther bade them return 
Mordecai this answer, 

16 Go, gather together all the Jews that 
are I! present in Shushan, and "fast ye for 
me, and neither eat nor drink three days, 
night or day : I also and my maidens will 
fast likewise; and so will I go in unto 
the king, which is not according to the 
law: and if I Pperi.sh, I perish. 



h clm|. :l: M,lf). i Nrli. 2: 4 : Prov. 21 : 1. icliap. B:l. k Dan. 
2:9. I rbap.5:2;8:4. m Prov. 24 : 1 1, 12. n Num. 23 : 2.3 ; I Sam. 
12:29; I»a. fi4: 17. i, lieh.retpiratian,Job9: 18. \\Hrb./uund. 
Jan:ili 3 : 4-9. p Gin. 43:14. 



while Providence for a tinj.e seems to favor them, 
and they glory in their expected success, they may 
be working out their own destruction. 

CHAPTER IV. 

3. Great vioiiniiiig — and fasting, and it-eep- 
ing ; they humbled themselves deeply before God. 
Chap. 9:31; Jonah 3:8,9. 

14. The7i. shall — enlargement — ar>.^e to the 
Jews from another place ; by this Mordecai show- 
ed his confidence in GckI. and his expectation that 
He would in some way grant them deliverance. 

IG. 7 also and my maidens vill fast ; this fast 
of Esther and her people was doubtless attended 
with earnest supplications that the Most High would 
interfere in their behalf. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. This is a state of trial, and great calamities 



Esther obtaindh 



ESTHER V 



the king's favor. 



a-c-'^t 17 So Mordecai *\vcnt his way, 
and did according to all that Esther had 
commanded him. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 Esther, adventuring on the king's favor, ohtainetli 
the grace of the golden sceptre, and inviteth the king 
and Haman to a banquet. (! She, being encouraged 
by the king in her suit, invilelli thein to another ban- 
quet the next day. 9 Haraan, proud of his advance- 
ment, repineth at the contempt of Mordecai. 14 By 
the counsel of Zeresh he buildeth for him a pair of 
gallows. 

"jVTOW it came to pass on the * third day, 
_LN| that Estlier put on Aer royal apparel, 
and stood in the '' inner court of the king's 
house, over against the king's house : and 
the king sat upon his royal throne ui the 
royal house, over against the gate of the 
house. 

2 And it was so, when the king saw Es- 
ther the queen standing in the court, that 
she obtained '^ favor in his sight: and the 
king held ^ out to Esther the golden sceptre 
that icas in his hand. So Esther drew 
near and touched the top of the sceptre. 

3 Then said the king unto her. What 
wilt thou, queen Esther 1 and what is thy 
request] it ""shall be even given thee to 
the half of the kingdom. 

4 And Esther answered, If it seem good 
unto the king, let the king and Haman 
come this day unto the banquet that I 
have prepared for him. 

Then the king said, Cause Haman to 
make haste, that he may do as Esther 
hath said. So the king and Haman came 
to the banquet that Esther had prepared. 

6 *i[ And the king said unto Esther at 
the banquet of wine, '^What is thy peti- 
tion ? and it shall be granted thee : and 
what is thy request? ^even to the half of 
the kingdom it shall be performed 



Heb. passed. a chap. 4:16. I) cli.np. 4 : U ; 6 : 4 



• neo. passea, » cii 
1:11; 2:4, etc. ; Prov. 2 
f fliap. 7:2; 9: 12. E 



„.,. - Neh. 
fi ; Mark 6 : 2.3. 



1:1. d cU.ip. 8:4. ever.fi; Mark 6 : 
:er. 3. t Heb. rto. li chap. 3 : 5 ; D 



may come upon us when we least expect them. 
Our interest and duty both require that we should 
so live as to be prepared at all times to meet such 
events ; and when they come, instead of sinking in 
despair, we should look to God for help. 

5. Diligent inquiry into the sufferings of others 
for the purpose of relieving them, well becom'^s those 
■who are at ease ; as they know not how soon they 
also may need sympathy and assistance. 

8. It is proper to make application to men, if 
they have the power to help us ; but while so doing, 
we should also make supplication to God, that he 
would incline men to use tlieir power in such a 
manner as to afford needed relief. 

It. Strong confidence in God, and e.xpectation 
that he will in his own time and way appear for 
those who put their trust in him, is a preparation 
to experience his salvation. 

16. Show good men the path of dutv. and though 
it be at the hazard of all earthly things, even of life 
itself, they will walk in it. committing themselves 
and all their interests, mortal and immortal, to Him 
who ruleth over all and who doeth all things well. 



7 Then answered Esther, and said, My 
petition and my request is ; 

8 If I have found favor in the sight of 
the king, and if it please the king to grant 
my petition, and to t perform my request, 
let the king and Haman come to the ban- 
quet that I shall prepare for them, and 
I will do to-morrow as the king Jiath 
said. 

9 T[Then went Haman forth that day 
joyful and with a glad heart; but when 
Haman saw JNlordecai in the king's gate, 
that he ''stood not up, nor moved for him, 
he was full of indignation against INIor 
decai. 

10 Nevertheless 'Haman refrained him- 
self: and when he came home, he sent 
and -called for his friends, and Zeresh 
his wife. 

11 And Haman told them of the glory 
of his riches, and the multitude of his 
children,' and all the things wherein the 
king had promoted him, and '' how he liad 
advanced him above the princes and ser- 
vants of the king. 

12 Haman said moreover, Yea, Esther 
the queen did let no man come in with 
the king unto the banquet that she had 
prepared but myself; and to-morrow am 
I invited unto her also with the king. 

13 Yet 'all this availeth me nothing, so 
long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at 
the king's gate. 

14 T[ Then said Zeresh his wife and all 
his friends unto him. Let a ^gallows be 
made'" of fifty cubits high, and to-morrow 
speak" thou unto the king that Mordecai 
may be hanged thereon: then go thou in 
merrily with the king unto the banquet. 
And the tiling pleased Haman; and he 
caused the gallows to be "made. 



3:1&-I9; Mat,4:I6. ■ 2Sani. 13:22. J Heb. raunn/ to came. 
jcll.9:l2,13. kcll.3:l. I I Kinpi,2I :4; Job 15: 20. % Heb. 
tree, m chap. 7 : 9. n chap. 6: 4. " Psa. 37: 14, 32. 



CHAPTER V. 

13. All this availeth me nothing ; it did noth- 
ing towards making him happy, or satisfying the 
wants of his soul. 

14. Fifty cubits high; about seventy-five feet. 
Go thou in merrily ; as if nothing unusual had 
taken place. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. God often favors his people, not only equal to, 
but beyond their expectations ; doing for them ex- 
ceeding abundantly above all tiiat they ask or think ; 
and the surest way of obtaining the favor of men, 
is first to secure the favor of God. 

6. Although men are prone to change, and but 
little dependence can be placed upon their promises, 
God can keep tliem of one mind as long as the 
good of his people requires. Chap. 7 : 2. 

8. Though delays are often dangerous, yet some- 
times they are essential to success ; and wisdom 
from above is needful in order to judge rightly as 
to the time as well as the manner of attempting to 
execute diflicult and important de.=;igns. 

11. No favors of mere creatures can satisfy the 
G19 



Mordccai honored. 



ESTHER VI. 



Banquet of the queen- 



CHAPTER VI. 



1 AhasiiPtus, reading in the chronicles of the good ser- 
vice done by Mordecai, taketh care for his reward. 4 
Ilanian, coming lu sue that Mnrdecai might be hang- 
ed, unawares giveUi counsel that he might do him 
honor. 12 Complaining of his misfortune, his friends 
tell him of his final destiny. 

ON that niglil *could not the king sleep, 
and he commanded to bring the *book 
of records of the chronicles; and they 
were read before the king. 

2 And it wa.s found %vritten, that INIor- 
decai had told of t Bigthana and Teresh, 
two of the king's chamberlains, the keep- 
ers of the -door, who sought to lay hand 
on the king Ahasuerus. 

3 And the king said, What honor and 
dignity hath been done to Mordecai for 
this ? Then said the kings servants that 
ministered unto him, There is ''nothing 
done for him. 

4 1[ And the king said, Who is in the 
court? Now Ilaman was come into the 
outward court of the king's house, to 
speak unto the king to hang iNIordccai on 
the gallows that he had prepared for him. 

5 And tlie king's servants said unto him, 
Behold, Ilaman standetli in the court. 
And the king said. Let him come in. 

6 So Haman came in. And the king 
said unto him, What shall be done unto 
the man ^ whom the king delighteth to 
honor? Now •^ Haman thought in his 
heart, To whom would the king delight 
to do honor more than to myself? 

7 And Haman answered the king. For the 
man H whom the king delighteth to honor, 

8 Let *the royal apparel be brought 
which t the king iiscth to wear, and the 
horse that tlie king rideth upon, and the 
crown royal which is set upon his head : 

9 And let this apparel and horse be de- 
livered to the hand of one of the king's 



* Heh. lilt Una's tUtp fled ntmiv. ' clmp. C : il. f Or, Big- 
than, vSm^.i: 21. % Hi:\, lhye<li„l(l. b Kiil. 9 : 1 5. % Hi-h. i/i 
H'hrisc honm- lite king dcHnhtelh ? c ProT. 1 R : I -2. || Heb. in wlwte 
honnr the king dettg/itct/t. ^ Heb. them In-ing the royal iipparet. 



wants of the soul, or keep it from being wretched 
while seeking supremely its own glory, regardless 
of the glory of God and the good of mankind. 

14. The measures which men take for the de- 
struction of others often prove the means of their 
own ; and wlijlc they glory in anticipated victory, 
they sink into irretricvahlu ruin. 

CHAPTER VI . 
1. That night could vol the king nhrp; God 
so ordered it, to make him acquainted with what 
Mordccai had done. The chionicies ; the records 
of the kingdom. 

1'2. Having his head coi'ercd ; a token of mor- 
tification, chagrin, and disappointment. 
lN.STRi:CTION,S. 
1. Sleep is a blessing which comes from God ; and 
when permitted quietly and safely to enjoy it, we 
should recognize his goodness and render him thanks 
for his mercy; and if kept awake during the night, 
we should so occupy our minds as to honor trod. 
G20 



most noble princes, that they may '^B^c.'iio: 
array the man withal whom the king 
delighteth to honor, and bring +him on 
horseback through the street of the city, 
and ''proclaim before him. Thus shall it 
be done to the man whom the king de- 
lightetli to honor. 

10 Then the king said to Haman,^]Make 
haste, and take the apparel and the horse, 
a.s thou hast said, and do even .so to Mor- 
dccai the Jew, that sittcth at the king's 
gate: Met nothing fail of all that thou 
hast spoken. 

1 1 Then took Haman the apparel and 
the horse, and arrayed Mordecai, and 
brought him on horseback through the 
street of the city, and proclaimed before 
him, Thus shall it be done unto the man 
wliom the king delighteth to honor. 

12 ^And Mordecai came again to the 
king's gate. But Haman •" hasted to his 
house mourning, and having his head 
covered. "^ 

13 And Haman told Zeresh his wife and 
all his friends every tiling that had befall- 
en him. Then said his wise men and Ze- 
resh his wife unto him, ^If Mordecai be of 
the seed of tlic Jews, before whom thou hast 
bcgixn to fall, thou shalt not prevail against 
him, but shalt surely ''fall before him. 

14 And while they iccre yet talking 
with him, came the king's chamberlains, 
and hasted to bring Haman unto the 'ban- 
quet that Esther had prepared. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1 Esther, entertaining the king and Haman, maketh 
suit for her own life and her people's. 5 >Slie accus- 
eth Haman. 7 The king in his anger understand- 
ing of the gallows which Haman had made for Mor- 
decai, causeth him to be hanged thereon. 

O the king and Haman came to II ban- , 
quet with Esther the queen. 



s 



t Hell, laherewilh the king clothelh himself. t Heb. cnliie himtn 
ride, il Gen. 41 :43 : 1 Kings, 1 : S:!, :i4. % Heb. suffer nnt a li-hit 
to full, e 2 Chron.-:fi:20. f 2 Sam. \5:Z0; .ler. H : S, 4. I! .Job 
\f,:-2\. h I'rov.M: 18; Hos. H;9. irh:ip..S;8. || Heb. (/rid*. 



and advance our growth in, grace and our highest 
usefulness. 

3. Ingratitude is a common sin. and we may per- 
form for others the most important services and yet 
receive from them no reward. But actions per- 
formed for God will never be forgotten ; even the 
giving of a cup of cold water for his sake to one of 
his disciples, will be acknowledged and graciously 
rewarded before the assembled world. 

d. The design of God in leading a man from one 
place to another, may be very dill'erent from his 
own in going. While his heart deviseth its way. 
the Lord directeth his steps ; and though then- be 
many devices in a man"s lieart, the counsel of i\i<^ 
Lord that shall stand. 

C. When a man delights to honor himsi If su- 
premely, he thinks that others should do the same ; 
and if they do not, he is often ready to overwhelm 
them in ruin. , 

13. God in his providence taketh the wise in their 
own craftiness, the counsel of tlie froward he carrielh 



Human is hanged. 



ESTHER Vlir 



Esthcr^s petition. 



tv',f'- 2 And the king said again unto 
Estlier on the second day at the banquet 
of wine, What is thy petition, queen Es- 
ther? and it shall be granted thee: and 
what is thy request? and it shall be per- 
formed, even to the half of the kingdom. 

3 Then Esther the queen answered and 
said, If I have found favor in thy sight, 
O king, and if it please the king, let my 
life be given me at my petition, and my 
people at my request: 

4 For * we are sold, I and my people, *to 
be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. 
But if we had been sold for bondmen and 
bondwomen, I had held my tongue, al- 
though the enemy could not countervail 
the king's damage. 

5 ^Then the king Ahasuerus answer- 
ed and said unto Esther the queen, Who 
is he, and where is he,t that durst pre- 
sume in liis heart to do so? 

6 And Esther said, + The adversary and 
enemy is this wicked Haman. Then Haman 
w"as •" afraid ^ before the king and the queen. 

7 1[And the king arising from the ban- 
quet of wine in his wrath ivent into the 
palace garden : and Haman stood up to 
make request for his life to Esther the 
queen ; for he saw that there was evil 
determined against him by the king. 

8 Then the king returned out of the pal- 
ace garden into the place of the banquet 
of wine ; and Haman was fallen upon the 
bed whereon Esther was. Then said the 
king, Will he force the queen also II before 
me in the house ? As the word went out 
of the king's mouth, they "^covered Ha- 
man's face. 

9 And ■'Harbonah, one of the chamber- 
lains, said before the king. Behold also 
the *gallows '"fifty cubits high, which 
Haman had made for Mordecai, who had 
spoken good for the king, standeth in tlie 
house of Hainan. Then the king said, 
Hang him thereon. 

10 So they hanged Haman on the gal- 
lows that he had '^prepared for Mordecai. 
Then was the king's wrath pacified. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



• ch 


tp. 


:i : W ; -i 


:7. 




»• H« 


b. that thru should destroy, c 


nd kill. 


and a 




to per 


«/.. 


t 


Heb. whose heu 


rt 1 


ath filled him. 


± Heb. 


The m 


an 


odvey 






b Pr 


ov. If, : U. 


ll 


Or, at the pres 


e,,ee of. 


II Heb 


Willi. e 


.lob 9 


■24. 


i cliap. 1 


10. 


» Heb. tree. 


p cliap. 


6: 14; 


Ps 


».7:1S 


IB; 


M 


■•8; 


141:10; P 


rov. 


11 r.Sfi. f Da 


n. 6 : 24 ; 



heaJlong ; and he may so evidently work against a 
man, that even worldly sagacity may foresee his 
downfall and ruin. 

CHAPTER VII. 
4. The king's damage; by making so large a 
number of his subjects slaves. 

8. They covered Hanifins fac.e; a token that 
he was condemned by the king. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
4. Persecution is always detrimental to rulers and 
subjects. 

6. When the doings of the wicked are brought to 

40 



1 Mordecai is advanced. 3 Esther maketh suit to re- 
verse Haman's letters. 7 Ahasuerus granteth to the 
Jews to defend themselves. 15 Mordeoai's honor, and 
the Je%v.s' joy. 

ON that day did the king Ahasuerus 
give the house of Haman the Jews' 
enemy unto e Esther the queen. And 
Mordecai came before the king ; for Es- 
ther had told what ''he was unio her. 

2 And the king took off his 'ring, which 
he had taken from Haman, and gave it 
unto Mordecai. And ' Esther set Morde- 
cai over the house of Haman. 

3 ^f And Esther spake yet again before 
the king, and fell down at his feet, and 
besought t him with tears to put away 
the mischief of Haman the Agagite, and 
his device that he had devised against 
the Jews. 

4 Then the king held ''out the golden 
sceptre toward Esther. So Esther arose, 
and stood before the king, 

5 And said. If it please the king, and if 
I have found favor in his sight, and the 
thing seem right before the king, and I he 
pleasing in his eyes, let it be written to 
reverse the t letters devised by Haman 
the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, 
which ^ he wrote to destroy the Jews 
which arc in all the king's provinces : 

6 For 'how can I H endure to see the 
evil that shall come unto my people? or 
how can I endure to see the destruction 
of my kindred ? 

7 ^ Then the king Ahasuerus said un- 
to Esther the queen and to Mordecai the 
Jew, Behold, '"I have given Esther the 
house of Haman, and him they have 
hanged upon the gallows, because he laid 
his hand upon the Jews. 

8 Write ye also for the Jews, as it liketh 
you, in the king's name, and seal it with 
the king's ring : for the writing which is 
written in the king's name, and sealed 
with the king's ring, "may no man re- 
verse. 

9 Then ° were the king's scribes called 



Psa.37 


•Sb 


36 


B Prov. 13 : 22. 


ch 


p. 2: 7. 


chap. 


i:in. 


i Ps.! 


37 : .M ; 


Vt. 


11. 2 : 48. t Heb. she i 


^ept 


and besought h 


m. k 


cliap. 


4 : 1 1 ; ."i 


-.1 


t 


Heb. device. \ Or 


, who tarote. 


1 Nell 


2:3; 


chap. 


7:4. 


Heb. 


he able that I Tnay 


see. 


m ver. 


1. n 


cbap. 


\:\9; 


Dan. 6 


8. 


1-2, 


5. o cbap. 3: 12. 













light, they see that they have reason to fear ; and 
that nothing but mercy can save them from ruin. 
The fear of the wicked conieth upon him. He is 
taken in his own net, and entangled in his own de- 
vices. 

9. When men begin to fall, many who have before 
favored them turn against them and unite to hasten 
their ruin. 

. CHAPTER VIII. 

2. Tlie king took off his ri)ig — and gave it 
itnto Mordecai ; a token of the power with which 
the king invested him. 

621 



Jlie Jews are succored. 



ESTHER IX. 



and their enemies slain. 



at that time in the third month, that is, 
the month Sivan, on the three and twen- 
tieth day tliereof ; and it was written ac- 
cording to all that Mordecai commanded 
unto the Jews, and to the lieutenants, and 
the deputies and rulers of the provinces 
which are "from India unto Ethiopia, a 
hundred twenty and seven provinces, un- 
to every province according to the writing 
thereof, and unto every people after their 
language, and to the Jews according to 
their writing, and according to their lan- 
guage. 

10 And he ''wrote in the king Ahasue- 
rus' name, and sealed it with the king's 
ring, and sent letters by posts on liorse- 
back, and riders on mules, camels, and 
young dromedaries: 

11 Wliereiu the king granted the Jews 
which ivere in every city to gather them- 
selves together, and to stand for their life, 
to "^destroy, to slay, and to cause to per- 
ish, all the power of the people and prov- 
ince that would assault them, both little 
ones and women, and to take the spoil of 
them for a prey, 

12 Upon one day in all the provinces 
of king Ahasuerus, namely, upon the 
thirteenth'' day of the twelfth month, 
which is the month Adar. 

13 The copy of the writing for a com- 
mandment to be given in every prov- 
ince U'as *published unto all people, and 
that the Jews should be ready against 
that day to avenge themselves on their 
enemies. 

14 So the posts that rode upon mules 
and camels went out, being hastened and 
pressed on by the king's commandment. 
And the decree was given at Shushan the 
palace. 

15 ^ And Mordecai went out from the 
presence of the king in royal appal-el of 
bluet and white, and with a great crown 
of gold, and with a garment of fine linen 

• clinp.I:!. b 1 Kings, '21: 8. c Pb.i. 37 : 14, 15; (« : « : l:!7 : 8 ; 
149:6-9; E7,ck.ai:10. d (Imp. 3 : 13, etc. ; 9:1. « Heb. if- 
veaUtl. f Or, violet, chap. 1:8. • Psa. 18 : 28 ; 30 : 5-1 1 ; 07 : U ; 
Prov. 11 : 10; Isa. »0:2<). r clmp. <1 : 19, 22. 5 Exod. I.'i: 16; Tlevit. 



and purple : and the city of Shu- '^s^c.^ii: 
shan rejoiced and was glad. 

16 The Jews had "^ light, and gladness, 
and joy, and honor. 

17 And in every province, and in every 
city, whithensoever the king's command- 
ment and his decree came, the Jews had 
joy and gladness, a feast and a "^good day. 
And many of the people of the land be- 
came Jews ; for the fear ^ of the Jews fell 
upon them. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 The Jews (the ruler.s, for fear of Mordecai, helping 
them) slay their enernieB, with the ten sons of Ha- 
man. 1'2 Ahasuerus. at the rcqnest of Esther, grant- 
eth another day of slaughter, and Haraan's sons to be 
hanged. 20 The two' days of Purim are made festi- 
val. 

"IVrOW ''in the twelfth month, that is, 
J_\ the month Adar, on tlie thirteenth 
day of the same, when the king's 'com- 
mandment and his decree drew near to 
be put in execution, in the day that the 
enemies of the Jews hoped to have power 
over them; though it was turned to the 
contrary, that the Jews had rule over 
them that hated them; 

2 The Jews gathered themselves •* to- 
gether in their cities throughout all the 
provinces of the king Ahasuerus, to lay 
hand on ''such as sought their hurt : and 
no man could withstand them; for the 
fear' of them fell upon all people. 

.3 And all the rulers of the provinces, 
and the lieutenants, and the deputies, and 
otRcerst of the king, helped the Jews; 
because the fear of JMordecai fell upon 
them. 

4 For Mordecai t^'a.v ■" great in the king's 
house, and his fame went out throughout 
all the provinces : for this man Mordecai 
waxed "greater and greater. 

5 Thus the Jews smote all their enemies 
with the stroke of the sword, and slaugh- 
ter, and destruction, and did 5 what they 
would unto those that hated them. 



11. To stajid for their life ; in self-defence, and 
to destroy those who should attempt to destroy 
them. 

15. 7m royal nppnrel ; in token of his being 
clothed, as prime-minister, with royal authority. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. Men cannot tell what will become of their 
riches and honors after they are dead. The wealth 
of the wicked is often laid tip for the just; and when 
the good of his church requires, G-od can cause the 
one to give pl.we to the otiicr. 

.3. The mischief which men do while they live, 
often continues long after they are dead; and were 
it not for the overruling providence of God, would 
contintie to the end of time. 

6. The exposure of our relatives and friends to 
destruirtion, is peculiarly distressing: and should 
022 



2:26: ll:2.'i; cll. 9:2. hcl,. 8:12. i cli. 3 : 13. j cli. 8: 11 ; ver. 16. 
k Psa. 71 : 13, 24. 1 Gea 35 : 5 ; iliap. 8: 17. J Heb. tkose which 
did the hiitii-.ets that belonged ^i the kino, m P»;l 18 : 43. "2 Sam. 
3 : 1 ; I Cliron. 11:9; Prov. 4:18. J Heh. accn-ding to their will. 



lead us earnestly to seek and fervently to pray for 
their salvation. 

10. Willi the utmost practicable haste, the way 
of salvation should be made known to all people, 
and they be urged to embrace it and live. 

1-5. Sudden changes await the people of God ; 
and as sudden await those who oppose them, or 
neglect the great S.alvation. L.azarus may one day 
lie at the rich man's gate full of sores, and tiie next 
day be in glory ; wliile the rich man, who is one day 
clothed in purple and fine linen, m.ay the next be in 
torment. The hope of the wicked shall perish ; while 
light is sown for the righteous and gladness for the 
upright in heart. Chap. 9 : 22, 25. 

CHAPTER IX. 
2. Lti]/ hatid on; destroy. Ver. 5, 16. ^ 



The cnimies of 



ESTHER IX. 



the Jews are slain. 



B.c'sox"' 6 And in Shushan the palace the 
Jews slew and destroyed five hundred 
men. 

7 AndParshandatha, and Dalphon, and 
Aspatha, 

8 And Poratha, and Adalia, and Arida- 
tha, 

9 AndParmashta, and Arisai, and Arid- 
ai, and Vajczatha, 

10 The ten *sons of Haman the son of 
Hammedatha, the enemy of the Jews, 
slew they ; ''but on the spoil laid they 
not their hand. 

11 On that day the number of those 
that were slain in Shushan the palace 
was* brought before the king. 

12 ^And the king said unto Esther the 
queen, The Jews have slain and destroy- 
ed five hundred men in Shushan the pal- 
ace, and the ten sons of Haman ; what 
have they done in the rest of the king's 
provinces ? now what is thy petition ? 
and it shall be granted thee: or what is 
thy request further? and it shall be done. 

13 Then said Esther, If it please the 
king, let it be granted to the Jews which 
arc in Shushan to do to-morrow also ac- 
cording unto this day's decree, and tlet 
Haman's ten sons be *^ hanged upon the 
gallows. 

14 And the king commanded it so to be 
done : and the decree was given at Shu- 
shan ; and they hanged Haman's ten 
sons. 

15 For ''the Jews that irere in Shushan 
gathered themselves together on the four- 
teenth day also of the month Adar, and 
slew three hundred men at Shushan ; 
but® on the prey they laid not their 
hand. 

16 But the other Jews that were in the 
king's provinces gathered themselves to- 
gether, and stood for their lives, and had 
rest from their enemies, and slew of their 
foes seventy and five thousand, but they 
laid not their hands on the prey, 

17 On the thirteenth day of the month 
Adar ; and on the fourteenth day J of the 
same rested they, and made it a day of 
feasting and gladness. 

18 But the Jews that U'cre at Shushan 
assembled together on the thirteenth day 
thereof, and on the fourteenth thereof; 
and on the fifteenth daij of the same they 
rested, and made it a day of feasting and 
gladness. 



a chap. 6: II ; Job 18; 19: 27: IS-l.'i; Psa. 21:10. b chap. 8: U. 
» Hel). cnme. f Heb. let men hang. <= DeuL 21 : 23 ; 2 Snin. 21 : 6, 9 ; 
Gal.3:l:!. d ver. :, 13. e ver. 10. i Heh. in it. f Deut- 16: 11, H ; 
chap. 8:17. gver. 22; Neb. 8:10-12. h Psa. 30: 11. i chap. 



13. The gallows ; the one, it is supposed, which 
Haman had prepared for Mordecai, and on which 
he was himself hanged. 

21. Fourteenth day of the month Adar; this 



19 Therefore the Jews of the villages, 
tl^at dwelt in the unwalled towns, made 
the fourteenth day of the month Adar 
a day of "^ gladness and feasting, and a 
good day, and of sending s portions one 
to another. 

20 T[ And Mordecai wrote these things, 
and sent letters unto all the Jews that 
were in all the provinces of the king 
Ahasucrus, both nigh and far, 

21 To establish this among them, that 
they should keep the fourteenth day of the 
month Adar, and the fifteenth day of the 
same, yearly, 

22 As the days wherein the Jews rest- 
ed from their enemies, and the month 
which was ''turned unto them from sor- 
row to joy, and from mourning into a good 
day : that they should make them days of 
feasting and joy, and of sending portions 
one to another, and gifts to tlie poor. 

23 And the Jews undertook to do as 
they had begun, and as Mordecai had 
written unto them ; 

24 Because Haman the son of Hamme- 
datha, the Agagite, the enemy of all the 
Jews, had 'devised against the Jews to 
destroy them, and had cast Pur, that is, 
the lot, to ^ consume them, and to destroy 
them ; 

25 But when ^Esther came before the 
king,, he J commanded by letters that his 
wicked device, which he devised against 
the Jews, should ''return upon his own 
head, and that he and his sons should be 
hanged on the gallows. 

26 Wherefore they called these days 
Purim after the name of *Pur. Therefore 
for all the words of this 'letter, and of 
that which they had seen concerning this 
matter, and which had come unto them, 

27 The Jews ordained, and took upon 
them, and upon tlieir seed, and upon all 
such as joined '"themselves unto them, so 
as it should not tfail, that they would 
keep these two days according to their 
writing, and according to their appointed 
time every year ; 

28 And that these days shovid be re- 
membered and kept throughout every 
generation, every family, every province, 
and every city ; and that these days of 
Purim should not tfail from among the 
Jews, nor the memorial of them ^perish 
from their seed. 

29 Tlieu Esther the queen, the daugh- 



3:6,7. % Heb. rruj/i. || Heb. the. j chap. 8:3, 11. k P«a. 
7:16. "Thatis, ;u«. 1 ver. 2a m chap. 8:17; I«a.Sfi:S,6; 
Zech. 2:11. \ Heb. pott, f Heb.patl. \ , Heb. lie ended. 



month answered to part of February and March. 
The feast of Purim, or the lots, thus instituted, is 
observed by the Jews to this day. 
26. Purim ; meaning lots. 

G23 



Th c yeast of Pu rim . 



ESTHER X. 



Mordccai's greatness. 



ter of Abiliail, and ^lordecai the Jew, 
wrote with all + authority, to confirm this 
second' letter of Puriin. 

30 And he sent the letters unto all the 
Jews, to the hundred twenty and seven 
provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, 
with words of peace and truth, 

31 To confirm these days of Purim in 
their times appointed, according as Mor- 
decai the Jew and Esther the queen 
had enjoined them, and as they had 
decreed for Hhemselves and for their 
seed, the matters of the ''fastings and 
their cry. 

32 And the decree of Esther confirmed 
these matters of Purim ; and it was writ- 
ten in the book. 



CHAPTER X. 



' Heb. itrenfth. a chap. 8: 10 ; ver. 20. f Heb. lAirir *««;». b ch. 
n, 16. c Luke 2:1. il Gen. 10: 6; Pssi. 72: 10: IsH. 24:15. J Heb, 



30. Withivordsofpeaceancltnith; kind words 
of truth according to the will of God. 

31. Tkcfastuigs; to keep in mind those observed 
by Esther and the Jews. Chap. 4 : 16, 17. Their 
cry ; for deliverance from the machinations of their 
enemies. 

32. In the book ; the records of the acts that 
were passed on this occasion. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The triumph of the wicked is short, and their 
most confident expectations will come to naught. 
Prov. 11:7. 

3. Many are more influenced by the fear of man 
than by the fear of God ; and when rulers are on 
the side of right, many will externally follow their 
example. 

10. The wickedness of parents may prove the 
occasion of destruction to their children ; and efforts 
to destroy the church of God may ruin not only 
those who make them, but all who are induced to 
follow their example. Ver. 25 ; chap. 3 : 6. 

10. One man, by his wickedness, may be instru- 
mental in the destruction of thousands. Ex. 7-14. 

19. With the people of God, darkness may endure 
for a night, but light cometh in the morning. 
''Let those that sow in sadness wait 
Till the fair harvest come ; 
They shall confess their sheaves are great, 
And shout the ble.ssings home." 

28. Special mercies demand special thanksgiv- 
ings to the Author and Finisher of all good, and 
call us to imitate the Saviour's example in doing 
good as we have opportunity and ability, to those 
who may need and feel our influence. 



A. M. saw. 
B. c.4au. 
1 Ahasuerus' greatness. 3 Mordecai's advancement 

AND the king Ahasuerus laid a '^ trib- 
ute upon the land, and upon the 
isles'* of the sea. 

2 And all the acts of his power and 
of his might, and the declaration of the 
greatness of ^lordccai, whcreunto the 
king II advanced him, are they not written 
in the book of the chronicles of the kings 
of Media and Persia? 

3 For Mordecai the Jew was ^next unto 
king Ahasuerus, and great among the 
Jews, and accepted of the multitude of 
his brethren, s seeking the wealth of his 
people, and speaking peace to all his 
seed. 



made him (real, Dan. 2 : 48. e Gen. 41 : 40 ; Dan. 6 : J6, 29. I Rom. 
14:8. g Nell. 2:10; Ps». 122:6-9; Rom. 10 : 1. 



CHAPTER X. 

1. A tribute ; a tax to be paid into the king's 
treasury'. 

2. Tlie book of the chronicles ; the book that 
contained the records of the kingdoms of Media and 
Persia. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. As civil government is an ordinance of God 
and a great blessing, all should be willing to bear 
their part in supporting it ; and taxes which are 
needful for tliat purpose .should be paid with cheer- 
fulness and fidelity. 

2. Records of the acts of governments sliould be 
fairly and faithfully kept, for the benefit of th^i 
present and future generations. 

3. The names of rulers who are acceptable to 
the people, who seek their peace and prosperity, 
and who adopt such measures as are best suited to 
promote them, will be handed do\\Ti with honor to 
posterity. They are special gifts of God, and should 
call forth devout gratitude to him from all who enjoy 
the benefits of their administration. 

Although in the book of Esther the name of God 
is not mentioned, yet we here see most illustrious 
and striking displays of his character and govern- 
ment : that he ruleth over all ; maketh the wrath 
of man to praise him and restraineth the remainder 
thereof; that the greatest and the smallest events 
are under his control, and are all so directed by 
him, as to promote the salvation of his people and 
the destruction of their and his enemies. 



624 



THE 



BOOK OF JOB 



B.aS CHAPTER I. 

1 The holiness, riches, and religious care of Job for his 
children. 6 Satan, appearing before God, by calum- 
niation obtaineth leave to tempt Job. 13 Understand 
ing of the loss of his goods and children, in his raouni' 
ing he blesseth God. 

THERE was a man intheiand of *Uz, 
whose name was^Joh ; and that man 
was perfect and upright, and one that 
feared*^ God, and eschewed evil, 

2 And there were born unto him seven 
sons and three daughters. 

3 His *substance also was seven thou- 
sand sheep, and three thousand camels, 
and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five 
hundred she asses, and a very great 
household ;t so that this man was the 
greatest of all the -men of the east. 

4 And his sons went and feasted in 
their houses, every one his day ; and sent 
and called for their three sisters to eat 
and to drink with them. 

5 And it was so, when the days of their 
feasting were gone about, that Job sent 
and sanctified them, and rose up early in 
the morning, and off'ered burnt-ofi'erings 
according to the number of them all: for 
Job said, It may be that my sons have 
sinned, and ''cursed God in their hearts. 
Thus did Job ^continually. 

6 T[ Now there was a ""day when the 
sons of God "^came to present themselves 
before the Lord, and !l Satan came also 
among* them. 

7 And the Lord said unto Satan, Whence 
comest thou "? Then Satan answered the 
Lord, and said, From ^ going to and fro 
in the earth, and from walking up and 
down in it. 

8 And the Lord said unto Satan, Hast 
thou t considered my servant Job, that 



a I Chron. 1 : 17,42; Lam 4:21. b Ezek. 14: 14, 30. c Prov. 
16:6 * Or. cattle, f Or, husbandry, t Heb. sum. <1 Lev. 
24: 1.5, Ifi. \ Heb. all the driys. e chap. '•: I.etc. f 1 KiiiKS, 
iZ : 19; chap. 3S: 7. || Heb. the adversary, I C hron. 21 :1 ; Zech. 

■ CHAPTER I. 

1. Uz ; a district in Arabia, east of Palestine. 
Perfect and upright: sincere, honest, pious. 
Feared God; with childlike, reverential, holy fear. 
Eschetced ; departed from, avoided. 

4. Every one his dai/ ; by turns. 

5. Sent a>id saiictifiiil them; reminded them 
of the duty of devcffing their hearts and lives to God, 
and offered prayer and sacrifices for them. Cursed 
God in their Itearts ; dishonored him by unwor- 
thy and wicked thoughts of him. Contninally ; 
habitually, or constantly after each feast. 



there is none like him in the earth, a per- 
fect and an upright man, one that fear- 
eth God, and eschewcth evil 1 

9 Then Satan answered the Lord, and 
said, Doth Job fear God for naught 1 

10 Hast not thou made a ''hedge about 
him, and about his house, and about all 
that he hath on every side'? thou hast 
blessed the work of his hands, and his 
substance t is increased in the land. 

11 But put forth thy hand now, and 
touch ' all that he hath, 'and he will J curse 
thee to thy face. 

12 And the Lord said unto Satan, Be- 
hold, all that he hath is in thy Upower; 
only upon himself put not forth thy 
hand. So Satan went forth from the 
presence of the Lord. 

13 11 And there was a ''day when his 
sons and his daughters icere eating and 
drinking wine in their eldest brother's 
house : 

14 And there came a messenger unto 
Job, and said. The oxen were ploughing, 
and the asses feeding beside them : 

15 And the Sabeans fell upon them, and 
took them away; yea, they have slain 
the servants with the edge of the sword; 
and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. 

16 While he u'as yet speaking, there 
came also another, and said, *Thc fire of 
God is fallen from heaven, and hath 
burned up the sheep, and the servants, 
and consumed them; and I only am es- 
caped alone to tell thee. 

17 While he ivas yet speaking, there 
came also another, and said. The Chal- 
deans made out three bands, and t fell 
upon the camels, and have carried them 
away, yea, and slain the servants with 



:1; Re».|-2:9. 10. * Heb. in the midst «/ them. ? .Mat 12:43; 
Peter, .5:8. t Heb. set thy heart un. h Psa. 34 : 7. t Or. cat 
i ch. 19 : 21 i Heb. if he curse thee not. i Ua. » : 21. 1) Heb. 
t - ■ - - 



hand. Gen. 16:6. i Eccl. 9:12 



atjire. f Heb. rushed. 



6. Sons of God ; supposed to mean angels. 

9. For naught ; without being paid for it. 

10. Blessed the rcork of his ha}ids ; rewarded 
him abundantly for his seeming piety. 

11. Touch all that he hath; take it away, or 
make it the occasion of trouble to him. Curse thee, 
to thy face; with daring impiety rebel against 
thee. 

12. Upon himself put not forth thy hand; 
not injure him personally. 

15. Sahcans ; a wandering Arab tribe. 
17. Chaldeans ; a trcop of pillagers from near 
the Euphrates. 

C25 



Job is sorely afflicted, 



JOB 11. 



yet doth not murmur. 



the edge of the sword; and I only am 
escaped alone to tell thee. 

18 While he iras yet speaking, there 
came also another, and said, Thy sons 
and thy daughters were eating and drink- 
ing wine in their eldest brother's house : 

19 And behold, there came a great 
wind *from the wilderness, and smote 
the four corners of the house, and it fell 
upon the young men, and they are dead; 
and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. 

20 Then Job arose, and *rent his t man- 
tle, and shaved his head, and ''fell down 
upon the ground, and worshipped, 

21 And said, ''Naked came I out of my 
mother's womb, and naked shall I return 
thither: the ''Lord gave, and the Lord 
hath taken away; ''blessed be the name 
of the Lord. 

22 In ""all this Job sinned not, nor 
charged t God foolishly. 

CHAPTER II. 

1 Satan appearing again before God obtaineth further 
leave to tempt job. 7 He smiteth him with sore boils. 
9 Job reproveth his wife, moving him to curse God. 
11 Hi.? three friends condole with him in silence. 

AGAIN s there was a day when the 
sons of God came to present them- 
selves before the Lord, and Satan came 
also among them to present himself be- 
fore the Lord. 

2 And the Lord said unto Satan, From 
whence comest thoul And Satan an- 
swered the Lord, and said, From going 
to and fro in the earth, and from walking 
up and down in it. 

3 And the Lord said unto Satan, Hast 
thou considered my servant Job, that 
there is none like him in the earth, aper- 



* Heb./ro;n u»irfe. aGcn.37:211. j Or, robe, b 1 Peter .5 : «. 
cl Tun. 6:7. i I.am. 3 : 3?. e Psa. 89 : 38, 62. f chap. 2: 10. 
t Or, attributrd /oil}/ to God. g chap. I : 6, etc. t chap. 27: 6, 6 ; 



20. Re7it his mantle, and shaved his head ; 
in token of deep mourning. 

21. Return; to the earth. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. God sometimes bestows upon his children great 
wealth, numerous friends, and abundance of earthly 
blessings, and thus increases their obligations to 
love and serve him. 

4. It is proper to partake of the bounties of Provi- 
dence with gratitude and joy ; and pleasant when 
brothers and sisters love one another, rejoice in each 
other's society, and together celebrate the goodness 
of God. 

.'). Seasons of feasting are seasons of peculiar 
danger. While men partake freely of God's gifts 
they are tempted to forgot or in .some other way to 
dishonor the giver, and tints they need his pardon- 
ing mercy through Jesus Christ. 

9. Those who contend that all religion is selfish, 
and ihat good iiicn serve God only because he does 
them good, resemble Satan and take part with him 
in promoting his cause. 

12. Satan, if permitted by God. may not only 
tempt men to sin, but bring upon them great and 
sore calamities. 
626 



feet and an upright man, one that n c ?5^o: 
feareth God, and escheweth evil? and still 
he holdeth fast his ''integrity, althougli 
thou niovedst me against him, to ^destroy 
him without cause. 

4 And Satan answered the Lord, and 
said. Skin for skin, yea, all that a man 
hath will he ' give for his life. 

5 But put forth thy hand now. and 
touch his bone and his flesh, and he will 
curse thee to thy face. 

6 And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, 
he is in thy hand; H but save his life. 

7 T[ So went Satan forth from the pres- 
ence of the Lord, and smote Job with 
sore boils from the sole of his foot unto 
his crown. 

8 And he took him a potsherd to scrape 
himself withal ; and he sat down among 
the J ashes. 

9 T[ Then said his wife unto him, Dost 
thou still retain thine integrity? curse 
God, and die. 

10 But he said unto her, Thou speakest 
as one of the foolish women speaketh. 
What! shall ''we receiA'c good at the 
hand of God, and shall we not receive 
evil? In all this did not Job 'sin with 
his lips. 

11 T[ Now Avhen Job's three friends 
heard of all this evil that was come upon 
him, they came every one from his own 
place ; Eliphaz the "" Tcmanite, and Bil- 
dad the "Sliuhitc, and Zophar the Naa- 
mathite: for they had made an appoint- 
ment together to "come to mourn with 
him, and to comfort him. 

12 And when they lifted up their eyes 
afar off, and knew him not, they lifted 



Psa. 26 : 1 ; 41 : 1-2. % Heb. swallow him up. > Mat. 6 : 2.i. f| Oi 
only, j Mat 11 :21. k .Tames .5 : 10, II. 1 Psa. 39: 1. m Gen. 36: II 
.7er.4P:7. n Gen. 25:2. o Rom. 12 : 1.1. 



20. Good men will not overlook God's hand when 
calamities come upon them, nor fail to humble them- 
selves beiore him. 

21. Nothing so sustains the soul in the day of 
severe trial, as the thought that God sends it. 

CHAPTER II. 

3. He holdeth fast his integrity; persevered 
in yielding obedience to God, notwithstanding his 
calamities. 

4. S/nn for skin, yea, all that a man hath 
will he give for his life : Satan here contended 
that Job was supremely selfish — that he would give 
up even his own children to save himself; but 
should God afflict him personally, he would renounce 
his allegiance to him. and blaspheme his name. To 
show the falsehood of tliis, exhibit the nature of true 
religion, and prepare Job for greater good in the 
end, God permitted Satan to try it. 

8. Potsherd ; a piece of earthen ware. 

10. Shall ve not receive evil? though Satan 
was the instrument, yet Job viewed liis trials a-s 
coming from God ; and as such, he humbly sub- 
mitted to them. 

12. Knew him not ; he was so altered by his 
disease, that at first they did not recognize him. 



Job curseth the 



JOB III. 



day of his birth- 



b."'i5m!' up their voice, and wept; and 
they rent every one his mantle, and 
sprinkled "dust upon their heads toward 
heaven. 

13 So they ''sat down with him upon 
the ground ''seven days and seven nights, 
and none spake a word unto him: for 
they saw that his grief was very great. 

CHAPTER III. 

1 Job curses th.e day and services of his birth. 13 The 
ease of death. 20 He complaineth of life, because of 
his anguish. 

AFTER this opened Job his mouth, 
and cursed his day. 

2 And Job *spake, and said, 

3 Let ■'the day perish wherein I was 
born, and the night in which it was said, 
There is a man-child conceived. 

4 Let that day be darkness ; let not 
God regard it from above, neither let the 
light shine upon it. 

5 Let darkness and the shadow of 
death t stain it ; let a cloud dwell upon it ; 
let- the blackness of the day terrify it. 

6 As for that night, let darkness seize 
upon it; let it not be >^ joined unto the 
days of the year; let it not come into the 
number of the months. 

7 Lo, let that night be solitary; let no 
joyful voice come therein. 

8 Let them curse it that curse the day, 
who"^ are ready to raise up II their mourn- 
ing. 

9 Let the stars of the twilight thereof be 
dark; let it look for light, but Aarc none; 
neither let it see the ^dawning of the day : 

10 Because it shut not up the doors of 
my mother's womb, nor hid sorrow from 
mine eyes. 

11 Why died I not from the womb? 



a Sell. 9:1; Lam. 2 : 10. b Ezra 9 : 3-n. c Gen. oO : 10. * Heb. 
answered d chap. 10 : 18. etc. : Jer. M: 14 ^ Or, challenge, j: Or, 
let them terrify it, as those \y\ia liave a bitter dnv, Amos 8:10. 
<l Or. rejoice aniong. e Jer.9 : 17-50. \l Or, a leviathan. * Heb. 



T/iei/ lifted up their voice, and u-ept ; when they 
came to know him, and see how dreadfully he was 
alilicted. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
3. Though true religion has been proved a thou- 
sand times to be genuine, yet Satan and his agents 
still insist that it is all hypocrisy and selfishness. 
To show the falsehood of this. God sometimes suffers 
him to visit his people with calamities, while he 
so sustains them by his grace as to silence the ob- 
jections of foolish men. 

9. Our most intimate friends may become our 
greatest tempters, and thus, unless resisted, our 
most dangerous foes. 

10. G-od is wise and good, not only in the mer- 
cies which he bestows, but in the trials which he 
sends or permits. While grateful for the one. we 
should be submissive under the other, and thus 
strive to honor him in both. 

12. Sickness and trials may so emaciate and dis- 
figure our bodies that our friends will hardly know 
us. and our sufferings be such that they can give us 
no relief. 



ivhij did I not give up the ghost when I 
came out of the belly 1 

12 Why did the ""knees prevent me"? or 
why the breasts that I should suck? 

1 3 For now should I have lain still and 
been quiet, I should have slept : then had 
I been at rest, 

14 With kings and counsellors of the 
earth, which built desolate ^places for 
themselves ; 

15 Or with princes that had gold, who 
filled their houses with silver: 

16 Or as a hidden untimely ''birth I had 
not been ; as infants which never saw- 
light. 

17 There the wicked cease from troub- 
ling ; and there the tweary be at rest. 

18 There the prisoners rest together; 
they hear not the voice of the oppressor. 

19 The small and great are tliere; and 
the servant is free from his master. 

20 Wherefore is light given to him that 
is in misery, and life unto the bitter in 
soul ; 

21 Which +long for 'death, but it com- 
eth not; and dig for it more than for hid 
treasures \ 

22 Which rejoice exceedingly, a7ul are 
glad, when they can find the grave 1 

23 Why is light given to a man whose 
way is hid, and whom God hath J hedged 
in? 

24 For my sighing comcth before ^' I cat, 
and my roarings are poured out like the 
waters. 

25 For lithe thing which I greatly 
feared is come upon me, and that which 
I was afraid of is come unto me. 

26 I was not in safety, neither had I rest, 
neither was I quiet; yet trouble came. 



eyelids of the morning. f Isa. 6rt: 12. e cliap. 


l.'i:2«. h Psa. 


r>»:8 ^ HeXi. weariedxnstrength. % Heh. wait, i 


Rev. 9 : a j cli. 


19 :S; Lam. 3:7. '^Heh.mymeat. || Heb. //e 


ared afear, and 


iV came upon me. 





CHAPTER III. 

3. Let the day perish ; let it not be numbered 
among the days of the year. Ver. 6. 

11. Why died I vot ; here Job sinned, in com- 
plaining of the providence of God. 

14. Desolate places fur themselves; cities in 
the desert ; or perhaps sepulchres, which they built 
where they might rest and be quiet. Had he died 
at his birth, Job thought he should have rested with 
eqtial quietness. 

19. There; in the grave. 

20. Unto the hitter in soul ; to him who pines 
in misery. 

21. Dig for it ; earnestly desire it. 

23. Wiiose way is hid; so that he could see 
no possibility of escape from his sufferings. 

25. That which I u-as afraid of; calamities 
more and more dreadful following each other in 
quick succession. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. A good man under trials may become fretful 
and peevish, have hard tiioughts of God and his 
ways, and may say things which he will afterwards 
627 



The address of EUphaz. 



JOB IV. 



His solemn vision 



CHAPTER IV 



1 EUphaz reproveth Job for want of relie;ioii. 7 He 
teacheth God's judgments to be not for the righteous, 
but for the wicked. 12 His fearful vision, to humble 
the excellency of creatures before God. 

THEN Eliphaz the Temanitc answered 
and said, 
2 If we assay * to commune with thee, 
wilt thou be grieved ? but who can with- 
hold+ himself from speaking? 

'.i Behold, thou hast instructed many, and 
thou hast "strengthened the weak hands. 

4 Thy words have upholden him that 
was falling, and thou hast strengthened 
the t feeble knees. 

5 But now it is come upon thee, and 
thou faintest; it toucheth thee, and thou 
art troubled. 

6 Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy 
hope, and the uprightness of thy ways'? 

7 Remember, I pray thee, who ever 
perished, being innocent? or where were 
the righteous cut off? 

8 Even as I have seen, ''they that 
plough iniquity, and sow wickedness, 
reap the same. 

9 By the blast of God they perish, and 
by Hhc breath of his nostrils are they 
consumed. 

10 The roaring of the lion, and the 
voice of the fierce lion, and the "^ teeth of 
the young lions, are broken. 

1 1 The old lion perisheth for lack of 
prey, and the stout lion's whelps are 
scattered abroad. 

* Heb. a worti. f J-Ieb. refrain from words, a Isa. 35:3. 
^ Hell. Iwwing, Heb. 12: li. b Gal. 6:7,8. % That is, hit anger, 
cli:i|>. 15 : 30 ; Isa. 1 1 : ■). c Psa. 58 : 6. \\ Heb. hyHralth. » Heb. 

see to be foolish and wicked, and of which he will 
be utterly ashamed. Chap. 42 : 3-6. 

11. Men if left to themselves under trials, may 
wish that they were dead, and be tempted some- 
times even to kill themselves ; but this is rebellion 
against God, and is the way to increase their own 
sorrows. 

23. lien sometimes wonder why it is that G-od 
preserves their lives, when they seem to be receiv- 
ing no good tliemselves. and doing no good to others. 
But God has wise and good reasons ; and through 
their preservation and trials, may bless not only 
them, bat mtiltitudes of others to the end of time 
and to eternity. Rom. 14 : 7 ; 1 Tim. 1 : 16. 

CHAPTER IV. 

3. T/ie weak IkuuIs ; persons tliat were ready 
to faint and despond under trouble. 

•'5. It ; distress. 

0. Tliy confidence ; where is now thy confidence 
in God, and in the reality of thy hope and love to 
him ? Jobs friends looked upon this world as a 
state not merely of trial, but of retribution. In 
tliis Job justly dillered from them; and this was 
the point of controversy between them. 

8. Plough — soiv ; practise. Reap the same; 
experience the fruit or effects of their sins. Verses 
9-11. 

12. Secretly brought ; revealed in a dream or 
vision. 

16. It ; the spirit. 

17. More jvsl than God? so that he can right- 

628 



12 Now a thing was 1! secretly b c!^. 
brought to me, and mine ear received a 
little thereof. 

13 In thoughts from the visions of the 
night, when deep sleep falleth on men, 

14 Fear *came upon me, and trembling, 
which made t all my bones to shake. 

15 Then a spirit passed before my face ; 
the hair of my flesh stood up : 

16 It stood still, but I could'not discern 
the form thereof: an image icas before 
mine eyes, ^ there teas silence, and I heard 
a voice, saying, 

17 Shall inortal man be more just than 
God? shall a man be more pure than his 
Maker ? 

18 Behold, he put no trust in his ser- 
A'ants ; and ^ his ** angels he charged with 
folly : 

19 How much less in them that dwell in 
houses of clay, whose foundation is in the 
dust, which arc crushed before the moth? 

20 They are H destroyed from morning 
to evening : they perish for ever without 
any regarding it. 

21 Doth "^not their excellency which is 
in them go away? they '^die, even with- 
out wisdom. 

CHAPTER V. 

1 The harm of inconsideration. 3 The end of the wick- 
ed is misery. 6 God is to be regarded in affliction. 17 
The happy end of God's correction. 

GALL now, if there be any that will 
answer thee ; and to which of the 
saints wilt thou *turn ? 



met me. j Heb. the multitude of. t Or, / heard a still voice. 
% Or, tioi- in his angels, in wliom he put light. i 2 Peter, 2:4. 
\\ Hvh. beaten in pieces, e Psa. HB : 3, 4. f Isa. 2: 32. *0r, /o<>*. 



fully arraign the conduct of his Maker ? Ought he 
not rather to submit to all his dispensations? 

19. Them — in hovsis of clay ; men. 
INSTRUCT I O.NS. 

3. The ability and disposition to give instruction 
to the ignorant, consolation to the sorrowful, and 
encouragement to the despairing, are valuable traits 
of character which should be diligently cultivated, 
and faithfully improved for the benefit of men. 

.5. It is much easier to preach than to practise ; 
and those instructions which we give to others, and 
which sometimes comfort and support them, we at 
other times fail properly to apply for our own direc- 
tion and benefit. 

7. The idea of Eliphaz and his friends, that good 
men will not be afflicted or suffer a violent death, 
and that of course the afllictions of .Tob proved him 
to be what Satan accused him of being, a h^Tio- 
crite, was false. By adopting this idea and apply- 
ing it to Job, they joined themselves with Satan in 
tormenting him, John 16 : 33; Rev. 7 : 14. 

13. Dreams are not now to be relied on ; and 
yet if they are the means of suggesting important 
thought.s and leading to useful reflections, they 
should be gratefully acknowledged and made sub- 
servient to our own good and that of others. 

IS, In comparison with God, all created wisdom, 
power, or goodness are as nothing. His perfections 
infinitely surpass all finite conceptions. 
CHAPTER V. 

1. Answer thee ; support thy cause. 



Job's leply to Eliphaz. 



JOB V. 



Object of God's judgments. 



man, and *eiivy slayeth the silly one. 

3 I *have seen the foolish taking root: 
but suddenly I cursed his habitation. 

4 His children are far from safety, and 
they are crushed in the gate, neither is 
there any to deliver them. 

5 Whose harvest the hungry eatcth up, 
and taketh it even out of the thorns, and the 
robber swalloweth up their substance. 

6 Although tatHiction cometh not forth 
of the dust, neither doth trouble spring 
out of the ground ; 

7 Yet ''man is born unto ? trouble, as 
the ^ sparks fly upward. 

8 I would seek unto God, and unto God 
would I commit my cause : 

9 Which doeth great things and II un- 
searchable ; marvellous things *without 
number : 

10 Who giveth rain upon the earth, and 
sendeth waters upon the tfields : 

1 1 To set up on high those that be low ; 
that those which mourn may be exalted 
to safety. 

12 He '^disappointeth the devices of the 
crafty, so that their hands cannot per- 
form t their enterprise. 

13 He ''taketh the wise in their own 
craftiness : and the counsel of the fro- 
ward is carried headlong. 

14 They ^ meet with darkness in the 
daytime, and grope in the noonday as in 
the night. 

15 But "he saveth the poor from the 



* Or, indignatioi 


1. a p..;a. 37:3.5. i Or, iniquit'/. h 1 Cor. 


10:13. t Or. lain 


r. % Heb. suns of the bwntng cual lift up to 


fly. II Heb. there 


s 71(7 search. * Heb. till there be nn number. 


t Wsh.out-placts. 


cNeh.4:lD. X Or, ana thing. <ilCor.3:19. 


\ Or, run mto, Isa. 


50 : 10 ; Amos 8:9. « Psn. 107 : 41. f Heb. 



2. Wrath — and envy ; are the means of ruin to 
the wicked who indulge them. 

3. Foolish; wicked. I cursed; saw it to be 
accursed. 

4. Crushed in the gate; condemned in the 
place where judgments were issued. 

5. Out of the thorns ; they take all. even that 
which is ungathered among the thorns of the field. 

6. Cometh not forth of the dust ; affliction 
does not come by chance ; it is ordered by Crod, and 
therefore should be cheerfully submitted to. 

7. As the sparks Jly itpu-ard ; it is as natural 
for fallen man to sin and suffer, as for sparks to fly 
upward. 

8. I would seek unto God; this expresses the 
duty of men in aflliction. 

13. T7ie ?/'j«fi; the worldly wise. Thefroward; 
those who disobey Grod. 

\5. The poor ; the afllicted, who trust in God. 

17. Whom God correcteth ; who receives cor- 
rection in a proper manner. 

19. Ill six troubles — in seven; a definite is 
here put for a large indefinite number. 
• 21. Hid; safe. 

23. 1)1 league with the stones ; they shall not 
hurt thee. 

24. Not sin; not wander, err, or miss the way 
to his house, but find it safe as he left it. 

25. Great ; numerous and prosperous. 



sword, from their mouth, and from the 
hand of the mighty. 

16 So the poor hath hope, and iniquity 
stoppeth her mouth. 

17 Behold, Hiappy is the man whom 
God correcteth : therefore despise not 
thou the chastening of the Almighty : 

1 8 For s he maketh sore, and bindeth up : 
he woundeth, and his hands make whole. 

19 He ''shall deliver thee in six troub- 
les : yea, in seven there shall no evil 
touch thee. 

20 In 'famine he shall redeem thee 
from death : and in war from the il power 
of the sword. 

21 Thou shalt be hid *from the scourge 
of the J tongue : neither shalt thou be 
afraid of destruction when it cometh. 

22 At destruction and famine thou shalt 
laugh : neither shalt thou be afraid of 
the beasts of the earth. 

23 For thou shalt be in league with the 
stones of the field: and the ''beasts of 
the field shall be at peace with thee. 

24 And lliou shalt know tthat thy tab- 
ernacle sJudl he in peace ; and thou shalt 
visit thy habitation, and shalt not tsin. 

25 Thou shalt know also that thy seed 
shall he ^ great, and thine offspring as the 
grass of the earth. 

26 Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full 
age,' like as a shock of corn Hcometh in 
in his season. 

27 Lo this, we have '" searched it, so it is; 
hear it, and know thou it for *thy good. 



12:. 5; 


James 


1 : \i. 


g Dent 


3 


: 3VI. h 


Psa. 91 : 3. 


i P« 


a. 37:19. 


11 Heb 
t Isa. 


. haiuis 


' 


-, ^vhen 


the 


tongue 


scouraeth. 


J P» 


a. 31 :-20. 


11:9. 


f Or, that peac 




thy tabernaclt. ± 


)r,er 


r. a Or, 


much. 


IProi 


.9:11. 


II Heb 


ascetideth. 


ui Prov. 2 


: 3-f,. 


•Heb. 


thyself, Prov. 


9 : 1-2. 















26. In a full age; not meet a premature death. 

27. We have searched it ; learned from obser- 
vation, that those who feel and act right, are deliv- 
ered or saved from trouble ; and tliose only continue 
to be afllicted, who continue to feel and act WTong. 
From this, Eliphaz would draw the erroneous con- 
clusion, that the continuance of Job''s afflictions 
proved him to be as Satan affirmed, a hypocrite, or 
a very selfish, wicked man. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Men sometimes think that all the good agree 
in opinion with themselves, and that those who do 
not are wicked. 

3. It needs no spirit of prophecy to foretell the ruin 
of such as continue in acourseofdisobedienceCoGod. 

6. As troubles do not come by chance, but are 
directed by infinite wisdom and goodness, for most 
benevolent ends, they should be borne with patience, 
and cheerful submission to the perfect will of God. 

12. No wisdom but that which comes from above 
will guide a man in the path of truth and duty, or 
ultimately meet with success. 

17. Trust in God and supreme devotion to him, 
will sanctify every trial while It lasts, and in due 
time secure certain, full, and eternal deliverance. 

27. Human reason and observation, without rev- 
elation, are unsafe guides : and none, unless enlight- 
ened by God. will haye.such views of his character 
and ways as lead to safety and success. 
629 



Job refrovelh 



JOB VI, 



his J'r tends. 



CHAPTER VI. 



1 Job showeth that his complaints are not causeless. 8 
He wisheth for death, wherein he is assured of com- 
fort. 14 He reproveth his friends of unkindness. 

BUT Job ans\A-ered and said, 
2 Oh that my grief were thoroughly 
weighed, and my calamity *laid in the 
balances together ! 

3 For now it would be heavier than the 
sand* of the sea: therefore t my words 
are swallowed up. 

4 For the arrows of the Almighty are 
within me, the poison whereof drinketh 
up my spirit : the '' terrors of God do set 
themselves in array against me. 

5 Doth the wild ass bray l^when he 
hath grass? or loweth the ox over his 
fodder ? 

6 Can that which is unsavory be eaten 
without salt? or is there any taste in the 
white of an egg ? 

7 The things that my soul refused to 
touch are as my sorrowful meat. 

8 Oh that I might have my request; 
and that God would grant me Hhe thing 
that I long for ! 

9 Even "^that it would please God to 
destroy me ; that he would let loose his 
hand, and cut mc off! 

10 Then should I yet have comfort; 
yea, I would harden myself in sorrow : 
let him not spare; ""for I have not con- 
cealed the words of the *'Holy One. 

1 1 What is my strength, that I should 
hope? and what is mine end, that I should 
prolong my life ? 

1 2 h my strength the strength of stones ? 
or is my flesh "of brass ? 

13 Is not my help in mc? and is wisdom 
driven quite from me ? 

14 To him that * is •" afflicted pity should 



* Heb. lifted up. » Prov. 27 : 3. t Tlmt is, / tvant words to ex- 
prett viti grirf,Vsa..n:i. b Pen. 88: IS, 16. J Heb.a/^r<M». % Heb. 
my expectation. c 1 Kings, 19:4; .lonab 4 : 3, 8. d Psa. 40 : 9 ; 
AcU20:-2ii. -27. e Isa. .17 : 1.5. || Heb. //rojen. " Heh. metteth. 



CHAPTER VI. 

3. Heavier than the sand ; very great, insup- 
portable. Are sivalloived uj); are insufficient to 
express my calamity. 

4. Arrows of the Almighty ; such distresses as 
G-od alone can inflict. 

5. Loiceth the o.r over his fodder? the beast 
does not complain without reason ; nor, as Job con- 
tended, did he. 

6. That which is nnsavonj ; like the speech of 
Eliphaz, which needed other qualities than what it 
possessed to make it palatable. 

8. The thing that I long for; immediate 
death. 

10. Not oncealed the words; not been hypo- 
critical, but upright and sincere. 

11. That I should hope; hope long to continue 
alive, under such aggravated sufferings. 

13. Is not my help In mc? had he not under- 
standing, and consciousness that he wa.s right? 

14. He forsnketh; he who docs not show pity 
to the afflicted, sins against the Almighty. 

630 



he showed from his friend ; but he *b.c:?»^ 
forsaketh the fear of the Almighty. 

15 JNIy ^brethren have dealt deceitfully 
as a brook, and as the stream of brooks 
they pass away ; 

IG Which are blackish by reason of the 
ice, and wherein the snow is hid : 

17 What time they wax warm, they 
tvanish: +when it is hot, they are ^ con- 
sumed out of their place. 

18 The paths of their way are turned 
aside ; they go to nothing, and perish. 

19 The troops 'of ''Tema looked, the 
companies of Sheba waited for thein. 

20 They were confounded because they 
had hoped;. they came thither, and were 
ashamed. 

21 For now 'lye are * nothing; ye see 
my casting down, and are afraid. 

22 Did I say. Bring unto me ? or. Give 
a reward for me of your substance? 

23 Or, Deliver mc from the enemy's 
hand? or, Redeem me from the hand of 
the mighty ? 

24 Teach me, .and I will hold my 
tongue : and cause mc to understand 
wherein I have erred. 

25 How 'forcible are right words I but 
what doth your arguing reprove? 

26 Do ye imagine to reprove words, 
and the speeches of one that is desperate, 
which arc as wind ? 

27 Yea, ye t overwhelm the fatherless, 
and ye dig a pit for your friend. 

28 Now therefore be content, look upon 
me ; for it is + evident unto you if I lie. 

29 Return, I pray you, let it not be in- 
iquity ; yea, return again, my righteous- 
ness is in ^it. 

30 Is there iniquity in my tongue? can- 
not my lltaste discern perverse things? 



f Heb. 13:3. gPsa. .38:11. \ Bvh. are cut off. ^ Heh. in the heat 
thereof. \ Heh. extinguished, h Gen. 2.i: 1.5. || Or, ve me like (u 
them;Ue\>.toit. " He\y not. i Eoi-l. 12: 11. ]Yic\y.causelo fall upon. 
% Kvb. before your face. % That is, MlJ mo«ci-. || Heb. palate. 



15. As a brook; a brook that abounds with 
water for a time, and then dries away. 

16. The ice ; that melted from the mountains. 

19. Tema — Sheba; countries south of Judea. 

20. Hoped ; to find water in the channel of the 
river in the desert. 

21. Ye are nothing; like the brooks that pass 
away. 

2"2. Did I .lay. Bring unto me? did he request 
his friends to help him? 

2-5. Right ifoids ; words of truth, which, as 
Job contended, the words of Eliphaz were not. 

27. Ye ovent'helm the fatherless ; they acted 
towards him with cruelty. 

29. Return. I pray yon ; and .address him in a 
different manner, one that should not impute to him 
iniquity, but should admit that he was upright and 
sincere. 

30. Discern,; bet«'een good and evil in him- 
self. 

IXi?TRlTCTTO\S. 
3. Complaints under calamities, instead of les- 



Job desireth death. 



JOB yiii. 



Address of Bildad. 



CHAPTER VII. 



I Job excuseth his desire of death. 12 He complain- 
eth of his own restlessness, 17 and God's watch- 
fulness. 

7S there not * an "appointed time to man 
upon earth? are not his days also like 
the days of a hireling? 

2 As a servant t earnestly desireth the 
shadow, and as a hireling looketh for the 
reward of his work ; 

3 So am I made to possess months of 
vanity, and wearisome '' nights are ap- 
pointed to me. 

4 When '^ I lie down, I say. When shall 
I arise, and the + night be gone"? and I am 
full of tossings to and fro unto the dawn- 
ing of the day. 

My flesh is clothed with worms and 
clods of dust; my skin is broken, and be- 
come loathsome. 

6 My days are swifter than a weaver's 
shuttle, and are spent without hope. 

7 remember that my life is wind : 
mine "^eye shall hio more II see good. 

8 The eye of him that haih seen me 
shall see me no more : thine eyes are 
upon me, and * I am not. 

9 As the cloud is consumed and van- 
isheth away ; so he that goeth down to 
the grave shall come up no more. 

10 He ^ shall return no more to his 
house, neither shall his place know him 
any more. 

1 1 Therefore I will not refrain my 
mouth ; I will speak in the anguish of my 
spirit; I will complain in the bitterness 
of my soul. 

12 Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou 
settest a watch over me? 

13 When I say, My bed shall comfort 
me, my couch shall ease my complaint; 



"Or, a „,a./a«. 


chap. H : .=i, U. \ Heb. gapeth after, b Psa. 


fi:fi. cDeut. 28:67. 


% Heb. evening Ite measured, il Gen. 4.' : 36. 


% Heb. not return. 


II to see, that m, to enjoy. * Th.1t is, lean 


live no longer, e Ps 


n. 451:1-2, 14. f Heb. ftonw. f chap. 10 : 1 .50. 



sening generally increase them, and unfit the mind 
to bear them with patience, or receive the benefit 
they might otherwise occasion. 

7. Trials from which we instinctively shrink in 
prosperity, sometimes become so wearisome in ad- 
versity, that we wish for death. 

14. The distresses of others should draw forth 
our compassion and kindness ; and the manifesta- 
tion of a contrary spirit, is a sin not only against 
men. but against G-od. 

21. Expectations of help from earthly friends are 
often disappointed ; but those which are placed on 
Grod will in tlie end be more than realized. 

* CHAPTER VII. 

6. Without hope; of recovery, or any relief ex- 
cept in death. 

S. / am, not ; I shall soon die and pass away. 

12. Thoio settest a ivatch over me; guaraest 
and confinest me with sickness. 

19. Till I swallow; a very short time. 

20. Set me as a mark ; for the arrows of the 
Almighty. 



14 Then thou scarest me with dreams, 
and terrifiest me through visions : 

15 So that my soul chooseth strangling, 
and death rather than my t life. 

16 1 '"loathe it ; I would not live alway : 
let me alone; for my days are vanity. 

17 What ^is man, that thou shouldest 
magnify him? and that thou shouldest 
set thy heart upon him? 

1 8 And that thou shouldest visit him every 
morning, and try him every moment ? 

19 How ^ long wilt thou not depart from 
me, nor let me alone till I swallow down 
my spittle ? 

20 I have sinned ; what shall I do unto 
thee, thou 'preserver of men? why 
hast thou set me as a -"mark against thee, 
so that I am a burden to myself? 

21 And why dost thou not pardon my 
transgression, and take ''away mine ini- 
quity? for now shall I sleep in the dust; 
and thou shalt seek me in the morning, 
but I shall not he. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1 Bildad showeth God's justice in dealing with men 
according to their works. 8 He allegeth antiquity to 
prove the certjiin destruction of the hypocrite. 20 
He applieth God's just dealing to Job. 

THEN answered Bildad the Shuhite, 
and said, 

2 How long wilt thou speak these 
things ? and hoiv long shall the words of 
thy mouth be like a strong wind? 

3 Doth '"God pervert judgment? or doth 
the Almighty pervert justice? 

4 If thy children have sinned against 
him, and he have cast them away +for 
their transgression ; 

5 If "thou wouldest seek unto God be- 
times, and make thy supplication to the 
Almighty ; 



;Psa. 8:4. h Psa. 00 : 4. iPsa. 36:6. jl..am 3:1-2. k Micah 
7 : 18, 19 ; 1 John, 1:9. I Psa. 103 : 13. m Deut. 3-2:4; 2 Chron. 
19:7; chap. .14: 1-2, 17: Psa.89:14; Dan. 9 : 14 ; Rom. 3 : 5, 6. 
t Heb. in the hand of their, n chap. 1 1 : 13 ; '22 : 23, etc. . 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. The length of human life is fixed by God ; and 
all tlie days of our appointed time we should wait 
with patience, and labor with diligence, till our 
change come. 

5. No perfection of human character will exempt 
men in this vi-orld from trials ; and none but those 
who have experienced them, can realize the diffi- 
culty of exercising at all times a calm, quiet, peace- 
ful submission under them. 

13. Quiet and refreshing rest in sleep is the gift 
of God, and a blessing the greatness of which no 
one who has not for a time been deprived of it -wsill 
duly appreciate. 

20. All men have sinned, and deserve all that 
they suffer ; and the only sure way of deliverance 
is in acknowledging their transgressions, and look- 
ing up to Him who is exalted to give repentance, 
that he would freely and abundantly pardon. 

CH.A.PTER Vni. 
3. Doth God })ervert judgment? Job had not 
asserted this, though Bildad speaks as if he had. 
C31 



The hypocrite s hop(. 



JOB IX. 



Job's reply to Bildad- 



6 If thou wcrt pure and upright: surely 
now he would awake for thee, and make 
the habitation of thy righteousness pros- 
perous. 

7 Though thy beginning was small, yet 
thy latter end should greatly increase. 

8 For inquire, I pray thee, of the former 
age, and prepare thyself to the search of 
their fathers : 

9 (For *we are but of yesterday, and 
know 'nothing, because our days upon 
earth are a ''shadow :) 

10 Shall not they teach thee, and tell 
Ihec, and utter words out of their heart? 

1 1 Can the rush grow up without mire ? 
can the flag grow without water? 

1 2 Wlxilst "^ it is yet in his greenness, and 
not cut down, it withereth before any 
other herb. 

13 So fl/-e the paths of all that forget God; 
and the hypocrite's ''hope shall perish: 

14 Whose hope shall be cut off, and 
whose tru.st shall be a spider's t web. 

15 He shall lean upon his house, but it 
shall " not stand : he shall hold it fast, 
but it shall not endure. 

16 He is green before the sun, and his 
branch shooteth forth in his garden. 

17 His roots are wrapped about the 
heap, and seeth the place of stones. 

18 If he destroy him from his place, 
then it shall deny him, saying, ''I have 
not seen thee. 

19 Behold, this is the joy of his way, 
and out of the earth shall s others grow. 

20 Behold, '' God will not cast away a 
perfect man^ neither will he +hel]) the evil- 
doers : 



• Psa. Sg:."). 'Heb.not. b : Cliron. 29: lA. 


c Psa.l29:6; 


Miit.13:M. d cliap. U : 20 ; 27:8; Prov. I0:2S. 


t Heb. house, 


laa. S9 : 6, 6. • Mat. 7 : 26. f Psa. 37 : 36. B Mat 


3:9. h Psa. 


94 : 14. ± Heb. lake the umodhj btj the hand. % 


Heb- thouting 


forjon. 1 Ps:!. 132: 18. \\Heh.nolhe. i Paa. 143 : 


2; Rom. 3: 20. 



6. He would au'cike fur thee; God would re- 
move his calamities and make him prosperous ; and 
because he did not do it, HJldad like Eliphaz erro- 
neously concluded that Job was a wicked man. 
Their error was, in supposing that the outward con- 
dition of men in this world was according to their 
character. 

10. They ; the fathers, who lived much longer 
than their descendants and had more time for obser- 
vation. 

11. Can the flag grow witkont water? as this 
could not be, so Bildad concluded that great afflic- 
tions could not come except on a very wicked man. 

15. It shall not stand ; that on which he de- 
pends shall give way and disappoint him. 

48. / have not seen, thee ; lie sliiiU be as though 
hn liad not been — rooted up, and forgotten. The 
above all goes upon the erroneous supposition that 
men are always treated in this world according to 
their character. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
'■i. It is common for men in controversy to impute 
sentiments to their opponents which they do not 
hold, and to charge them with consequences which 
they reject and abhor. 

G. Many errors arise from confounding this state 
632 



21 Till he nil thy mouth with *„.J?;?JS: 
laughing, and thy lips with ^rejoicing. 

22 They that hate thee shall be clothed 
with ' shame ; and the dwelling-place of 
the wicked shall II come to naught. 

CHAPTER IX. 

1 Job acknowledging God's justice, showeth there is no 
contending with him. 22 Man's innocency is not to 
be condemned by afflictions. 

THEN Job answered and said, 
2 I know it is so of a truth: ^but 
how should man be just *with God? 

3 If he will contend with him, he can- 
not answer him one of a thousand. 

4 He ^ is wise in heart, and mighty in 
strength : who hath hardened himself 
against him, and hath prospered ? 

5 Which removeth the mountains, and 
they know not; which overturneth them 
in his anger; 

6 Which 'shaketh the earth out of her 
place, and the pillars thereof tremble ; 

7 Which commandeth the "sun, and it 
riseth not; and sealeth up the stars; 

8 Which alone spreadeth out the "heav- 
ens, and "treadeth upon the t waves of 
the sea ; 

9 Which P maketh tArcturus, Orion, and 
Pleiades, and the chambers of the soutii ; 

10 Which doeth great things past find- 
ing out; yea, and wonders without num- 
ber. 

11 Lo, he goeth by me, and I see him 
not: he passeth on also, but I perceive 
him not. 

12 Behold, he taketh away, who can 
hinder' him? ''who will say unto him. 
What doest thou? 



* Ol, be/ore. k.Imle24,25. 1 Heb. 12:26. m .losh. 10 : 12. 
n Psa. 1(M : 2, 3 ; Isa. 40 : 22, 28. o M;it. 14 : 25. f Heb. heights. 
p Amos .5: 8. X Heh. Jsh, Cecii. and Cimah. 5 Heb. /iimAim 
aiduy .' chap. U : 10. qDair. 4:33. 



of trial with the future state of retribution. G-od 
will arise for the deliverance and salvation of his 
people, but it may not be in this world. Here 
they may have tribulation, but in heaven they will 
have rest. 1 Cor. 15 : 19. 

8. Much may be learned from the experience and 
observation of those who have gone before us ; but 
their principles as well as our own should be tried 
by the unerring word of God, and if not in accord- 
ance with that should be rejected. 

13. That on which hypocrites depend will, at 
death, if not before, utterly fail them. 

20. Though God will not cast away the right- 
eous, or help the wicked, in the future world, yet in 
this, the wicked may be in great prosperity, and the 
righteous in great adversity. Psa. 73 : 1-15. . 

CHAPTER IX. 

2. I knov) it is so ; that man in his best estate 
is a sinner, and that God in all his dealings is just. 

3. Answer him; excuse or justify himself, in 
one of a thousand of his actions. 

5. They knoiv not ; he does it suddenly, unex- 



C. Which shaketh the earth; as in earth- 
quakes. 



Job expostulateth 



JOB X, 



freely with God. 



'^■I'lfJ: 13 //God will not withdraNV his 
anger, the *proud helpers do stoop under 
him. 

14 How much less shall I answer him, 
aad choose out my words to reason with 
him? 

15 Whom, though I were righteous, yet 
would I not answer, *6«i I would make 
supplication to my judge. 

16 If I had called, and hchad answered 
me ; ytt would I not believe that he had 
hcaikened unto my voice. 

17 For he breaketh me with a tempest, 
and multiplieth my wounds without 
cause. 

18 He will not suffer me to take my 
breath, but filleth me with bitterness. 

19 If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong : 
and if of judgment, who shall set me a 
time to -plead ? 

20 If I justify myself, mine own mouth 
shall condemn me : if I say, I am perfect, 
it shall also prove me perverse. 

21 Though I u'ere perfect, yet would I 
not know mv soul : I would despise my 
life. 

22 This is one thing, therefore I said it. 
He '' destroy eth the perfect and the wicked . 

23 If the scourge slay suddenly, he will 
laugh at the trial of the innocent. 

24 The earth is given into the hand of 
the wicked : he covereth the faces of the 
judges thereof; if not, where, and who 
is he ? 

25 Now my days are swifter than a 
post: they flee away, they see no good. 

26 They are passed away as the t swift 
ships : as the eagle that hasteth to the 
prey. 

27 If I say, I will forget my complaint, 



* He\i. helpers of jn-idi, nr ntrength. a rliap. 34 : 31. *> Ezek. 
21 : 3. t Or, ships of JSMi ; Heb. ships of desire. c Jer. 2 : 2-2. 
X Heb. make me to be nhhoned. ^ Heb. one that should argue. 
II Or, umpire, i Psa. 106: -2.3. o Psii. 39:10. " Heb. 1 3m not 



15. Though I were righteous ; not conscious 
of sin. / ifould Tiiake supplication ; sensible 
that God might see sins where he did not. 

17. Without cause ; the cause of which Job did 
not see. 

18. To take my breath; his trials were con- 
stant as well as great. 

21. Though I were perfect ; in his own esti- 
mation; yet he did not know the state of his own 
soul, as G-od did. I would despise my life ; sub- 
mit to any trials that God might lay upon him. 

22. This is one thing ; that God does not in 
his providence deal with men here according to 
their character. In this opinion he differed entirely 
from his three friends. 

29. Why then labor I? why should he seek to 
show that he was innocent, when God would show 
him to be wicked ? 

32. Answer Jtim; contend with him in judgment 
and try to show my innocence. 

33. Daysman; one to decide between them. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
3. The justice of God in all his dispensations 



I will leave off my heaviness, and com- 
fort myself ; 

28 I am afraid of all my sorrows, I know 
that thou wilt not hold me innocent. 

29 // 1 be wicked, why then labor I in 
vain 1 

30 If^I wash myself with snow-water, 
and make my hands never so clean ; 

3 1 Yet shall thou plunge me in the ditch, 
and mine own clothes shall ^ abhor me. 

32 For he is not a man, as I am, that I 
should answer him, and we should come 
together in judgment. 

33 Neither is there ^ any II daysman ^be- 
twixt us, that might lay his hand upon us 
both. 

34 Let him *take his rod away from me, 
and let not his fear terrify me : 

35 Then would I speak, and not fear 
him; but *it is not so with mc. 

CHAPTER X. 

1 Job, taking liberty of complaint, expostulatnth with 
God about his atflictions. Jb He complaineth of life, 
and craveth a little ease before death. 

MY soul is t weary of my life; I will 
leave my complaint upon myself; 
I will speak in the bitterness of my soul. 

2 I win say unto God, Do ''not condemn 
me; show me ^ wherefore thou contcnd- 
est with me. 

3 Is it good unto thee that thou should- 
est oppress, that thou shouldest despise 
the -work of thy liands, and shine upon 
the counsel of tlie wicked ? 

4 Hast thou eyes of ilesh? or ''.seest 
thou as man seeth? 

5 Are thy days as the days of man ? are 
thy years as man's days, 

6 That thou inquirest after mine iniqui- 
ty, and 'searchest after my sin? 



so with myself. ^ Or. cut off while I live, f Psa. 143 :2 ; Rom. 
8:1. B Lam. 5 : 16, 17. tHeh. labor, hi Sam. 16:7. i Psa. 
10: 15. 



should be taken for granted ; and whatever may be 
a man's views of himself, his only safety is in the 
mercy and grace of God. 

10. As the greatness of God is past finding out, 
so the reason of many of his dealings is to creatures 
unknown, and can be revealed only by himself. 

16. Unbelief shuts out God from the soul, and 
prevents it from rejoicing in or seeing the manifes- 
tations of his mercy. 

20. All efforts at self-justification in the sight of 
God, are proofs of a want of submission to him, and 
only increase the difficulties they are intended to 
remove. 

27. There is no help for man but in the grace of 
God, abounding through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

CHAPTER X. 

2. Show me wherefore thou contendest with 
me ; Job wished to know why it was that God so 
afflicted him. 

3. Shine npoti the counsel of the wicked ; by 
prospering them, and so afflicting Job, as to give 
the wicked occasion to say he was a hj-pocrite. 

633 



Job craveth relief. 



JOB XI. 



Zophar reproveth him. 



7 Thou* knowest "that I am not wick- 
ed ; and there is none that can deliver out 
of thy hand. 

8 Thy hands thavc made me and fash- 
ioned me together round about; yet thou 
dost destroy nic. 

9 Remember, I beseech thee, that thou 
hast made mc as the '' clay ; and wilt thou 
bring mc into dust again? 

10 Hast thou not poured me out as 
milk, and curdled me like cheese? 

11 Thou '■"hast clothed me with skin 
and flesh, and hast + fenced me with bones 
and sinews. 

12 Thou hast granted me life and fa- 
vor, and thy visitation hath preserved my 
spirit. 

13 And these things hast thou hid in 
thy heart : I know that this is with thee. 

14 If I sin, then thou markest me, and 
thou wilt not acquit inc from mine ini- 
quity. 

15 If I be wicked, ^ woe unto me ; and if 
I be righteous, yet will I not lift up my 
head. / a?n full of confusion ; therefore 
see thou mine affliction ; 

IG For it increaseth. Thou huntest me 
as a fierce "lion : and again thou show- 
est thyself marvellous upon me. 

17 Thou renewest thy ^witnesses against 
me, and increasest thine indignation upon 
me; changes and war arc against me. 

18 Wherefore then hast thou brought 
me forth out of the womb ? ""Oh that I had 
given up the ghost, and no eye had seen 
me ! 

19 I should have been as though I had 
not been ; I should have been carried 
from the womb to the grave. 

20 Are not my days sfew? cease then, 
and let me alone, that I may take comfort 
a little. 



* Heb 


It i.-. 


upin 


thy knotctedye. a Joli 


n-l\: 17. 


t H 


eb. took 


pains about » 


e. Ii 


ler. 18: 


fi; Horn.!) 


:51. 


c P»a. l:?9 


1.1, 


tHeb. 


hedged. 


A U 


a. H: 


S. » ] 


:im. 3:10; 


Ho»eal3:7,8. 


il 


That is, 


ptaguei 


1 cl 


np. :f 


Ml. B 


Pan. 39 : fi 


\X 


li Psn. 8S 


M. 


! Paa. 



7. I am }iot u-iclced ; not a hypocrite, as Satan 
and his agents contended. 

13. These things host tho7i hid in thy heart ; 
the reasons of Job's sutrerings were all known to 
God, but not to hirn, and lie was greatly perplexed 
in view of them. 

l."). J f I he ifi cl-ed ; hypocritical, as his enemies 
said. Rig}tteoHs ; upright, sincere, and pious, as 
he believed himself to be, notwithstanding all his 
troubles. 

20. Cease then; cease to afflict him. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Complaints under trials reflect on the wisdom 
and goodness of God, and unfit the soul to look unto 
him for help. 

7. Conscious integrity is no sure safeguard against 
trials; nor will it, of itself, support the soul under 
them. What is needed is the presence of the Holy 
Spirit, inspiring it with that confidence in God which 
is the substance of things hoped for and the evidence 
of things not seen. 
634 



21 Before I go wheiicc I shall not 'k.^alSJ: 
return, even to the ''land of darkness and 
the 'shadow of death ; 

22 A land of darkness, as darkness itself; 
and of the shadow of death, without any 
order, and u-hcre the light is as darkness. 

CHAPTER XI. 

1 Zophar rpproveth Job for justifying himself. .5 God"s 
wisdom is unsearchable. 13 The assured blessing of 

repentance. 

THEN answered Zophar the Naama- 
thitc, and said, 

2 Should not the multitude of words be 
answered ?J and should a man "full of talk 
be justified ? 

3 Should thy *lics make men hold their 
peace? and when thou mockest, shall no 
man make thee ashamed? 

4 For ''thou hast said, My doctrine is 
pure, and I am clean in thine eyes. 

5 But oh that God would speak, and 
open his lips against thee ; 

6 And that ho would show thee the 
secrets of wi.sdom, that therj are double to 
that which is ! Know therefore that God 
e.xacteth of thee Hess than thine iniquity 
descrveth. 

7 Canst thou by "'searching find out 
God? Canst thou find out the Almighty 
unto perfection? 

8 It is t as high as heaven ; what canst 
thou do? deeper than hell; what canst 
thou know ? 

9 The measure thereof is longer than 
the earth, and broader than the sea. 

10 if "he tcut off, and shut up, or gath- 
er together, then who can * hinder him ? 

11 For °he knoweth vain men: he 
seeth wickedness also ; will he not then 
consider it? 

1 2 For II vain man would be wise, though 
man be born like a wild ass's colt. 



23:4. JTrov. 10:iy. II Heb. p//i>.t. "^ Or, devices, k chap. 
K:30;in:7. IK7.ra9:13. m Isa. 40 :28 : Rom. 1 1 : 3.^ t Heb. 
the heights of heaven, nllev. 3:7. i Or. make a chani^e. % Heb. 
turnhim nii'iiy? o Paa. 10 : 14 ; John 2: 24, 2f.. || Heb. t;;ip/y. 



17. Without constant, strong, and loving confi- 
dence in God, trials may become so great, that even 
good men may wish to die, or find fault with God 
for bringing them into being, and continuing them 
amidst their accumulated sufferings. But let them 
in patience wait upon God, ,^nd they will find that 
he is very pitiful and of tender mercy ; that not a 
trial has been suffered that has not aided in work- 
ing out for them an exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory. 

CHAPTER XI. 
3. Lies; devices, or false assertions concerning 
his innocence. 

6. They are double ; complex, intricate, and far 
above and beyond what man can discover or under- 
stand. 

7. Find out God; his perfections, and the rea- 
sons of his wavs. 

1 1 . lie srrih tfickedness ; in men, often when 
they do hot see it in themselves. 



TTie reply of Job. 



JOB XII. 



S."-iSo' 13 If thou ^prepare thy heart, 
and stretch out thy hands toward hiin ; 

] 4 If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far 
away, and let not wickedness dwell in 
thy ''tabernacles. 

15 For then shalt thou lift up thy face 
without spot; yea, thou shalt be stead- 
fast, and shalt not fear : 

1 6 Because thou shalt forget thy misery, 
rtju/ remember it as waters that pass away : 

17 And thine age shall *be clearer than 
the noonday; thou shalt '^ shine forth, 
thou shalt be as the morning. 

18 And thou shalt be secure, because 
there is hope ; yea, thou shalt dig about 
thee, and thou shalt take thy rest in 
safety. 

19 Also thou shalt lie down, and none 
shall make thcc afraid; yea, many shall 
maket suit unto thee. 

20 But the "^ eyes of the wicked shall 
fail, and i they shall not escape, and " their 
hope shall be as * the giving up of the 
ghost. 

CHAPTER XII. 

1 Job maliitaineth himself against his friends that re- 
prove him. 7 He acknovrledgeth the general doctrine 
of God's omnipotency. 

AND Job answered and said, 
2 No doubt but ye a/-c the people, and 
wisdom shall die with you. 

3 But I have Hunderstanding as well as 
you ; I *am not inferior to you : yea, 
whot knoweth not such things as these'? 

4 I am as one mocked of his neighbor, 
who calleth upon God, and he answercth 
him: the just upright man is laughed to 
scorn. 

5 He that is ready to slip with his feet 
is as a lamp despised in the thought of 
him that is at ease. 

6 The tabernacles of '^ robbers prosper, 
and they that provoke God are secure ; 



Omnipotence of God. 
God bringoth abun- 



• ISain. 7:3. li Psa. 101 ::!. * Heh. aihe above the noondti;/. 
c Prov. 4: 18; IsK.S8:8, 10. t Heb. entrent thy face. Psa. 4r.:lJ. 
d DflUt. 28 : B5. t Hebjlight shall pet ieh from them. e Prov. 
11:7. ^ Or, a puff of breath. \l Ueb. a heart. ' Heh, fall not 
lower than you. f Heb. with tohoin are not such as these? f Psa. 



15. Spot; sadness. 

18. Thou shalt dig; he might labor and rest 
in safety. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Men in controversy often charge their oppo- 
nents with that of which they are not guilty ; winch 
tends only to irritate, not to convince ; and wliich 
leads (o personal altercation, rather than to an ami- 
cable adjustment of their ditferences. 

7. No one can fully understand the perfections of 
God, or the reasons of his -ways ; yet from revela- 
tion we can learn as much as it is needful for us 
to know, in order to be satisfied of his wisdom, jus- 
tice, goodness, and truth. 

li. The best human services are polluted in the 
sight of G-od ; and the most perfect human ciiaracters 
need his pardoning mercy, through Jesus Christ. 

17. Light is sown for the righteous and gladness 
for the upright in heart. They may be afflicted 



into whose hand 
dantly. 

7 But ask now the beasts, and Ihcy 
shall teach thee ; and the fowls of the 
air, and they shall tell thee : 

8 Or speak to the earth, and it shall 
teach thee; and the fishes of the sea shall 
declare unto thee. 

9 Who knoweth not in all these that 
the hand of the Lord hath wrought this '? 

10 In whose hand is the ^soul of every 
living thing, and the breulh of all hnan- 
kind. 

1 1 Doth not the ear try words ? and 
the llmouth taste his meat? 

12 With the ^ ancient is wisdom: and 
in length of days understanding. 

13 With *him is wisdom and strength, 
he hath ''counsel and understanding. 

14 Behold, he brcaketh down, and it 
cannot be built again : he shutteth t up a 
man, and there can be no opening. 

15 Behold, lie withholdeth the waters, 
and they dry up : also he scndeth them 
out, and they overturn the earth. 

16 With him is strength and wisdom: 
the 'deceived and the deceiver are his. 

17 He leadeth counsellors away spoiled, 
andmaketh the J judges fools. 

18 He looscth the bond of kings, and 
girdcth their loins with a girdle. 

19 He ''leadeth princes away spoiled, 
and overthroweth the mighty. 

20 He 'removeth away the t speech of 
the trusty, and taketh away the under- 
standing of the aged. 

21 He "' poureth contempt upon princes, 
and * weakcneth the strength of the 
mighty. 

22 He "discovereth deep things but of 
darkness, and bringeth out to light the 
shadow" of death. 

23 He Pincreaseth the nations, and de- 

73:1J, eti-. : Jer. H: l.ete. t Or, life. i^Heb. Jtesh of man. 
II nch. palate, g chap. 32 : 7. * That i», Gorf. h Prov. 8:14. t Heli. 
upon. lEzek. M:9. jl8a.l<»:13. k Isa. 45: 1. I Isiu 3: !-.•). 
t Kvh.lipof the fa ilhful. m Dan. 2 : 2 1 , 2J. ^ Or, looseth the 
gir dle nf th e strong. nlCor. 4:.5. o chap. .14 : 22. P Psa 107:38. 

here, and contrary to the doctrine of Zophar and his 
friends, their alllictions may continue to the end of 
life ; but glory, honor, and perfect bliss await them 
in the life to come. 

CHAPTER XII. 
2. Ye ; Zophar and his friends : spoken in irony, 
meaning that they made vain pretensions. 

4. Who calleth iipon God; this Job m-.os ex- 
horted to do, as if he had never done it. Whereas 
he had long been a man of prayer. 

5. Keady to dip ; when a man falls into trouble, 
he is overlooked or treated with contempt by those 
who are in prosperity. 

G. The tabernacles of robbers ; very bad men 
are often prospered in this world, while very good 
men are alHicled. 

13. II im; God. 

16. Are his ; they are under his control, and all 
their circumstances directed by him. 

635 



Job with confidence 



JOB XIII, 



appcalcth unto God. 



stroyeth them: he cularseth the nations, 
and "straiteneth them again. 

24 He taketh away the "heart of tlic 
cliicf of the people of tlic earth, and 
causcth them to wander in a wilderness 
where there is no way. 

25 They ''grope in the dark without 
liglit, and he maketh them to t stagger like 
a drunken 7nnn. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1 .Tob reproveth his friends of partiality. 14 He pro- 
fesseth his confidence in God : '20 and entreateth to 
know his own sins, and God'-s purpose in afflicting 
liiin. 

LO, mine eye hath seen all this, mine 
ear hath heard and understood it. 

2 What ye know, the same do I know 
also: I am not inferior unto you. 

3 Surely I would .<peak to the "^Almighty, 
and I desire to "* reason with God. 

4 But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all 
physicians of ^no value. 

5 Oh that ye would altogether hold 
your peace ! and it ^should be your wis- 
dom. 

6 Hear now my reasoning, and hearken 
to the pleadings of my lips. 

7 Will ye speak s wickedly for God? 
and talk ''deceitfully for him'? 

8 Will ye accept his person? will ye 
contend for God? 

9 Is it good that he should search you 
out ? or as one man mockcth another, do 
ye .so ' mock him ? 

10 He will surely reprove you, if ye 
do secretly ■> accept persons. 

11 Shall not his excellency make you 
afraid?'' and his dread fall upon you? 

12 Your remembrances are like unto 
ashes, your bodies to bodies of clay. 



* Heb. leadtth i 


n. • Dan. 4 


16, ;13 


b Deut 


28 


:2» 


t Heb. 


vmnder c cliap. 
e dn.p. I6:-2. < 


23:3; 


31:3.i 


d 


sa. 1 : 18; 


Mical 


f) : 2, etc. 


Vov. 1 


7:28; 


Amos 


5:13. e 


rli 


an 


12:21,22. 


h 2 Cor. 4:2 iG 


•1.6:7 


1 I's 


J. 82 : 


,2. k Je 


r, 5 


22 


10:7.10. 


i Heb. Be tilcnt/i 


om mt 


iPaa 


23:4 


Prov. 14: 


32. 


4 Heb. prove, 



24. Taketh atvay the heart ; leaves them to be 
infatuated, and to act without wisdom or discretion. 
INSTRT'CTJONS. 

•5. Men who are greatly courted and whose influ- 
ence is eagerly sought in prosperity, are often over- 
looked ana despised in adversity, and treated as if 
they were of no worth. 

0. Though God is acquainted with all the wick- 
edness of the wicked, and they are entirely depend- 
ent on him, yet in this world he often suffers them 
to prosper, and pours upon them an abundance of 
earthly blessings. 

20. The most wise and trustworthy of men, when 
left of God. wander in darkness ; their wisdom is 
seen to be folly, and their plans come to naught. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

1. All this; God"s dealings, in his providence, 
with both the righteous and the wicked. 

3. Reason ivith God; about the cause of his 
calamities, 

4. Vorgers of lies ; they gave a false view of 
the reasons of his afflictions. Physicians of no 

636 



13 Hold- your peace, let me ^eaisso: 
alone, that I may speak, and let come on 
me what will. 

14 Wherefore do I take my flesh in my 
teeth, and put my life in my hand? 

1.5 Though 'he slay me, yet will I trust 
in him : but I will ^ maintain mine own 
ways before him. 

16 He also shall he my "" salvation: for 
a "hypocrite shall not come before him. 

17 Hear diligently my speech, and my 
declaration with your ears. 

18 Behold now, I have ordered my 
cau.se ; I know that I shall be justified. 

19 Who "is he that will plead with me? 
for now, if I hold my tongue, I shall give 
up the ghost. 

20 Only do not two things unto mc ; 
then will I not hide myself from thee. 

21 Withdraw? thy hand far from me: 
and let not thy dread make mc afraid. 

22 Then icall thou, and I will answer: 
or let me speak, and answer thou me. 

23 How many are mine iniquities and 
sins? make me to ""know my transgres- 
sion and my sin. 

24 Wherefore "hidest thou thy face, 
and boldest me for thine 'enemy? 

25 Wilt thoit "break a leaf driven to 
and fro? and wilt thou pursue the dry 
stubble? 

26 For thou writest bitter things against 
me, and makcst me to possess the iniqui- 
ties of my "" youth. 

27 Thou puttest my feet also in the 
stocks," and II lookest narrowly unto all 
my paths ; thou settest a print upon the 
heels* of my feet. 

28 And he, as a rotten thing, consum- 
eth, as a garment that is moth-eaten. 



or arpue. m Psa. 27 : I. nlsa. 33:14. o Isa. .W : 8 ; Uom. 8 : .33, 34. 
l>Psa. 39:10. q chap. 38:3. r chap. 34: 32; .John 16: 8, 9. -Van. 
102:2. t Lam. 2 : .5. a Iga. 42 : 3. t Psa. 25 : 7. wcb.ap.33: 11. 
11 Heb. obtervest. * Heb. roots. 



value ; they did not in the least remove his disease, 
or assuage his anguish. 

7. Speak wickedly for God ; attempt to justify 
his ways by falsehood. 

10. Secretly accept persons ; show partiality in 
judgment. 

14. Take tny flesh in my teeth; expose him- 
self to lose his life. 

15. Maintain mine own tvays ; show liis in- 
tegrity and that he was not a hypocrite. 

IS. Shall he justified ; proved to be innocent of 
the charges which they made against him. 

20. Do not two things; continue not his dis- 
tresses, nor overawe him with his presence. Ver. 21. 

22. I itfill ansicer ; maintain my cause. 

23. Mi)ie iniquities ; for which he was so dread- 
fully afflicted. 

26. Pnsse.<is the iniquities of my youth; be 
punished for sins committed when young. 

27. Puttest my feet — in the stocks; confined 
him by sickness as really as if put in the stocks. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
3. When the soul is concious of integrity and duly 



Of man's frailty 



JOB XIV. 



and mortality 



w 



B.c",r^'- CHAPTER XIV. 

1 Job entreateth God for favor, by the shortness of life, 
and certainty of death. 7 1 hough life once lost be 
irrecoverable, yet he waiteth for his change. 16 By 
sin the creature is subject to corruption. 

AN that is born of a woman is *of 
few days, and ^full of trouble. 

2 He ''cometh forth like a flower, and 
i.s cut down : he fleeth aLso a.s a shadow, 
and continueth not. 

3 And "^dost thou open thine eyes upon 
such a one, and ''bringest me into judg- 
ment with thee ? 

4 Who tcan bring a ''clean thing out of 
an unclean'? not one. 

5 Seeing his days are determined, the 
number of his months are with thee, thou 
hast "^ appointed his bounds that he can- 
not pass; 

6 Turn from him, that he may -rest, 
till he shall accomplish, as a hireling, 
his day. 

7 For there is hope of a tree, if it be 
cut down, that it will sprout again, and 
that the tender branch thereof will not 
cease. 

8 Though the root thereof wax old in 
the earth, and the stock thereof die in the 
ground ; 

9 Yet through the scent of water it will 
bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant. 

10 But man dieth, and * wasteth away : 
yea, man giveth up the ghost, and where 
is he ? 

1 1 As the waters fail from the sea, and 
the flood decayeth and drieth up ; 



" Heh. short of . a Eccl. 2 : 23. b P..ta. BO ; ,5-10. cPsa.l«:3. 
HPsa. 143:2. \ Heh. tL-illgive. e Pan. .M : 2, 10 : JoliiiS : 6. fver. 
14; Hel). 9:27. X Heh. ceaae. 7i Huh. is tceakentd, or exit off. 



feels its dependence on God, it will look to him 
rather than to men for help, feeling that he alone 
can grant relief. 

9. Grod does not need falsehood in his creatures to 
vindicate his dealings ; and those who are guilty of 
it, whatever be their motives, will fall under his 
righteous displeasure. 

1-5. Confidence in Grod is the grand safeguard in 
trouble, and a preparation for deliverance from it. 

21. Grod can so afflict the soul and overawe it 
with his presence, as entirely to unfit it to commune 
with him, or experience the benefit of calling upon 
him in spirit and in truth. 

26. Sins committed in early life may be the means 
of great sufferings in age, which shall continue till 
those who committed them go down to the grave. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

4. 'Not one; no one differs in natural moral char- 
acter from his parents ; but as are the parents, so 
are the children, naturally depraved and spiritually 
unclean. 

6. Rest; be freed for a little time from di-stresses. 

10. Where is he ? he does not appear again in 
this world ; his departure is final. 

12. Till the heavens be no more; then man 
shall awake from the sleep of death, and go to judg- 
ment. 

13. Remember me ; in mercy, and bestow upon 
me the blessings I need. 

14. Shall he live ? not in this world, but in* the 

11 



12 So man lieth down, and riseth not: 
till the s heavens be no more, they shall 
not awake, nor be raised out of their 
sleep. 

13 Oh that thou wouldest hide me in 
the grave, that thou wouldest keep me 
secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou 
wouldest appoint me a set time, and re- 
member me ! 

14 If a m.an die, '"shall he live again? 
all the days of my appointed time will I 
wait, till my 'change come. 

15 Thou shalt call, and I will answer 
thee : thou wilt have a desire to the work 
of thy hands. 

16 For J now thou numberest my steps : 
dost thou not watch over my sin "? 

17 INIy transgression is sealed up in a 
bag, and thou sewest up mine iniquity. 

18 And surely the mountain falling 
comethH to naught, and the rock is re- 
moved out of his place. 

19 The waters wear the stones: thou 
washest* away the things which grow 
Old of the dust of the earth; and thou 
destroyest the hope of man. 

20 Thou prevailest for ever against him. 
and he passeth: thou changest his coun- 
tenance, and sendest him away. 

21 His sons come to honor, and he 
knoweth it not; and they are brought 
low, but he perceiveth it not of them. 

22 But his flesh upon him shall have 
pain, and his soul within him shall 
mourn. 



g Psa. 102:26; Isa.iil :6;2Pct.3: 10,11; Rev. 20:11. k 1 The* 
4:U-16. i 1 Cor. 15:61-54. jProv. 5:21. H Beb. fndcth. * Heh 
overjlmvest. 



world to come. My appointed ti-nie ; of livinr 
upon the earth. Ver. .'). 

17. Seu'est up mine iniquity; keepest it in 
remembrance, till it is brought forth to judgment. 

19. The hope of man; his hope of continuing 
in this world. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. The shortness and uncertainty of life shoui<\ 
keep us from placing our affections on things below , 
and lead us to regard principally things unseen anvl 
eternal. 

4. As children inherit the same depraved natur<- 
with their parents, they ought not to marvel at tin- 
change which Christ says they must experience, i;. 
order to see the kingdom of God. John 3 : ?>. 

10. Earthly joys are uncertain, and at longcs-r 
must be of short continuance; but the joys whic). 
await the people of God, wiien the heavens shal 
pass away with a great noise and the elements iiiel. 
with fervent heat, will be sure, satisfying, and eter- 
nal. 2 Peter, 3:10. 

17. The transgressions of the wicked are never 
forgotten; and unless repented of and forgive', 
through the atonement of Jesus Christ, will b' 
brought forth to their shame and condemnation. 

21. All that is done for our own welfare or that 
of others, must be done in time. What our hands 
find to do, we should do with our might ; that when 
our days on earth shall be finished, our work may 
be done, and our souls fitted, through grace, to entw 
on the rest which remains for the people of God. 
637 



Eliphaz rcproveth Job. 



JOB XV. 



Sorrows of Ihe wicked. 



CHAPTER XV. 



1 Eliphaz reproveth Job of impiety in justifying him- 
self. 17 He proveth by iradiiiou the unquietness of 
wicked men. 

THEN an.swercd Eliphaz the Teman- 
ite, and said, 

2 Should a wise man utter *vain know- 
ledge, and fill his belly with the east wind ? 

3 Should he reason with "unprofitable 
talk ? or with speeches wherewith he 
can do no good ? 

4 Yea, thou tcastcst off fear, and re- 
strainest t prayer before God. 

5 For thy mouth ' uttereth thine iniqui- 
ty, and thou choosest the tongue of the 
crafty. 

6 Thine ''own mouth condemncth thee, 
and not I : yea, thine own lips testify 
against thee. 

7 Art thou the first man that was born ? 
or wast Ihou made "^before the hills? 

8 Hast ''thou heard the secret of God? 
and dost thou restrain wisdom to thyself? 

9 What "knowest thou, that we know 
not? ivhat understaudest thou, which is 
not in us ? 

10 With us are both the ■" gray headed 
and very aged men, much elder than thy 
father. 

11 Arc the consolations of God small 
with thee ? is there any secret thing with 
thee? 

1 2 Why doth thy heart carry thee a%ay ? 
and what do thine eyes wink at, 

13 That thou turnest thy spirit against 
God,K and Icttest such words go out of 
thy mouth ? 

14 What ^is man, that he should be 
clean ? and lie which is born of a woman, 
that he should be righteous? 

15 Behold, he putteth no trust in his 
saints ; yea, the ' heavens are not clean 
in his sight. 



* Heh. knowUilije of wind. « 1 Tim. 6 : 4, 5. \He\i.makext 
void. % Or, speech. ^ »eb. ttncheth. b Luke 19: 22. c Psa. 
90:2; I'rov.S :■.•!). d Uom. 1 1 :34 : 1 Cor. 2 : II. ecliap.I3:2. 
f cliKp. 32 : 6 9. f Mai 3: 13. hl'sa. 14:3; Prnv. 20:9; Kpli. 



CHAPTER Xy. 

2. Utter vain knowledge ; this Eliphaz ascribes 
to Job. 

4. Cast est off fear ; this, he contended, would 
be the iiatur.'d etFect of Jobs doctrine. 

.5. Thr tuiissuc of tlie crafty ; by trying to cover 
his hypocrisy with the appearance of piety. 

f). Thine oum. inoiith conilemnelh thee; Eli- 
phaz says tliat Job maintained doctrines which con- 
demned liimself, and showed that lie was a hypo- 
crite. 

1 1 . The rrnisolatidns of God; those which Eli- 
pliaz anil his friends odVred as if they came froniGod. 

I','. 'Tliiiie eyes iriii/c at ; as not worthy of at- 
tention. 

14. Should he clean ; pretend to be spiritually 
clean. 

15. He; God. 

19. Nq stranger passed among them; they 
were not visited or corrupted by forei^fners. 
638 



16 How much more abominable B.c.?6io. 
and 'filthy is man, which ^ drinketh in- 
iquity like water? 

17 I will .show thee, hear me; and that 
which I liave seen I will declare ; 

18 Which wise men have told from 
their fathers, and have not hid it: 

19 Unto ' whom alone the earth was giv- 
en, and no ""stranger passed among them. 

20 The wicked man "travaileth with 
pain all his days, and the " number of 
years is hidden to the oppressor. 

21 All dreadful sound is Pin liis ears: 
in ''prosperity the destroyer shall come 
vipon him. 

22 He believeth not that he shall return 
out of darkness, and he is waited for of 
the sword. 

23 He wandercth abroad for bread, say- 
ing. Where is it? he knoweth that the 
day of darkness is ready at his hand. 

24 Trouble and anguish shall make liim 
afraid ; they shall prevail against him, as 
a king ready to the battle. 

2o For 'he strctcheth out his hand 
against God, and strengtheneth himself 
against the 'Almighty. 

26 He runneth upon him, even on his 
neck, upon the thick bosses of his buck- 
lers : 

27 Because 'he covereth his face with 
his fatness, and maketh collops of fat on 
his flanks. 

28 And he dwelleth in desolate cities, 
and in houses which no man inhabiteth, 
which are ready to become heaps. 

29 He shall not be rich, neither shall 
his substance continue, neitlier shall he 
prolong the j^crfection thereof upon the 
earth. 

30 He shall not depart out of darkness ; 
the flame shall dry up his branches, and by 
the breath of his mouth shall he go away. 



2:3; I .Toll n, 1 : R, 10. i cliHp. 
Prop. 1 H : JR. 1 Deut 32 : 8. 
90: 12. II Heb. ^ 4ou,ul n//e 
r Isa. 27:4. > iliap. 9:4. t I 



). J Psa. M : 3. k chap. 20 : 12 : 
el 3: 17. n Krcl. 9::!. o Paa. 
I' Lev. 2fi:36. q ITbes. 6:3. 
3 : 7. etc. 



20. Is hidden; he knows not what is before him, 
or how soon or suddenly he may be cut off. 

29. Not be rich; not continue to be rich. His 
blessings shall be short-lived. 

INSTKUCTIOXS. 

4. Those doctrines wliich lead men to cast off the 
fear of God and restrain prayer, must be false. 

G. The sentiments which many profess and prop- 
agate condemn themselves, and show them to be 
wicked men, as really as if they were guilty of open 
immorality. 

13. Good men are sometimes liable to think that 
what is opposed to them, is opposed also to God ; and 
thus unjustly charge others with opposition to bini. 

20. The general and sweeping decl.arations of 
earnest disputants, while they express some impor- 
tant truth, may also express much hurtful error; 
and the true must be separated from the false, be- 
fore their statements can safely be received. 

25. Though the wicked may be greatly prospered 



Job bemoaneth 



JOB XVI, 



his calamities. 



"b "isS^ 31 Let not him that is deceived 
trust' in vanity : for vanity shall be his 
recompense. 

32 It shall be *aecomplished before ''his 
time, and his branch shall not be green. 

33 He shall shake off his unripe grape 
as the vine, and shall cast off his flower 
as the olive. 

34 For the congregation of *^ hypocrites 
shall be desolate, and fire shall consume 
the tabernacles of '^ bribery. 

35 They ^ conceive mischief, and bring 
forth t vanity, and their belly prepareth 
deceit. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

1 .Tob veproveth his friends of unmercifulness. 7 He 
showeth the pitifulnes^sof his case. 17 He inaintain- 
eth his innocency. 

THEN Job answered and said, 
2 I have heard many such things : 
miserable* "^comforters are ye all. 

3 Shall Wain words have an end? or 
what emboldeneth thee that thou answer- 
est? 

4 I also could speak as ye do: if your 
soul were in my soul's stead, I could 
heap up words against you. and e shake 
my head at you. 

5 But I would strengthen you with my 
mouth,'' and the moving of my lips should 
assuage your grief. 

6 Though I speak, my grief is not as- 
suaged : and tJiough I forbear, what Ham 
I eased ? 

7 But now he hath made me weary : 
thou hast made desolate all my company. 

8 And thou hast filled me with ' wrin- 
kles, irhich is a witness against me : and 
my leanness rising up in me beareth 
witness to my face. 



» Isa. S9 : 4. * Or, cut off. 


b Psn. .W : 23. c chap. -Zl :»■, Ua. 


33: 14. d Anioa 5: 11, 12. 


Hosea 10: 13: Gal. fi:7, 8. f Or, 


iniquiti/. t Or, troublesome 


f chap. 13:4. % Heh. words of 


wind, cinp. 15 : % i Psa. ii 


: 7. h Prov. i? : 9. |I Heb. qoeth 


frommcf i Epli 6 : 27. j cl.a 


p. 10: Iti, 17. k cliap 13:21. 1 Lam. 



for a time, and in some instances their outward 
blessings be continued to the end of life, yet, if they 
continue in their wickedness, they are destined to 
poverty, shame, and everlasting contempt. 

CHAPTER XVI. 
7. He; God. 

10. They; Job's pretended friends. Smitten 
me; they had opposed and reproached him. 

12. Was at ease ; before his afflictions came. 

13. He ponretJi out my gall; an expression 
denoting the most intense anguish. 

15. De/ileil "lyhorn ; the horn was an emblem of 
power, authority, and influence ; and the meaning 
is, he was shorn of his power, his authority was gone. 

17. Pure; free from hypocrisy, with which Satan 
charged him. 

IS. My blood — mij cry ; if he had been guilty 
of heaven-daring crimes, as his enemies charged, 
he did not ask that his crime should be hid; nor 
could he expect that God would hear his cry for 
deliverance from punishment. 



9 He Jteareth me in his wrath, who 
hateth me : he gnasheth upon me with 
his teeth ; mine '' enemy sharpeneth his 
eyes upon me. 

10 They have gaped upon me with 
their mouth ; they have ' smitten me 
upon the cheek reproachfully ; they have 
gathered™ themselves together against 
me. 

11 God "hath 'delivered me to the un- 
godly, and turned me over into the hands 
of the wicked. 

12 1 was at ease, but he hath broken me 
asunder : he hath also taken vie by my 
neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set 
me° up for his mark. 

13 His archers compass me round about, 
he cleaveth my reins asunder, and doth 
not spare ; he poureth out my gall upon 
the ground. 

14 He breaketh me with breach upon 
breach iP he runneth upon me like a 
giant. 

15 I have sewed sackcloth upon my 
skin, and defiled my horn in the idust. 

16 My face is foul with weeping, and 
on my eyelids is the shadow of death; 

17 Not '■for any injustice in my hands: 
also my 'prayer is pure. 

18 earth, cover not thou my blood, 
and let my cry have no place. 

19 Also now, behold, my witness is in 
heaven, and my record is ton high. 

20 My friends + scorn me: but mine eye 
poureth out tears unto God. 

21 Oh 'that one might plead for a man 
with God, as a man pleudeth for his 
neighbor !* 

22 When Ha few years are come, then 
I shall "go the way whence I shall not 
return. 



3 


: :iO. n 


Psa. 3.i: In. 


n chap 


1:15 


17. - Heb 


. thut me 


up. 


o 


chap. 7 


•20. P 


P.ia.42 


7. M 


chap 


30: 19. 1 


'sa. 44 : 17 


-•21. 


9 


Pa;.. 66 


1«, 19. 


t Heh 


■It the 


hrffh jftiices, Eph. 


X t H 


eh. 


a 


re my t^ornert. 


t Kmn. 


9:20. 


? 


,/riend. |i 


Heb. year 


inf 


' 


umher. 


u Keel 


1'3 : 6. 













19. My witness is in heaven; God knows that 
I am sincere, though men and devils charge me with 
hypocrisy. 

mSTRUCTIOXS. 

5. Those who have themselves suffered great 
afflictions, are most disposed and best prepared to 
sympathize with the afflictions and assuage the 
grief of others. 

9. In the depths of distress, even good men, if 
left to themselves, will have hard tiioughts, and 
complain not only of men but of God, and speak 
as if^he not only were the author of their afflictions, 
but had become their enemy. 

11. Whoever may be the instruments of afflic- 
tion to the people of God, they should not overlook 
his all-controlling hand, or feel that without his 
permission others could have any power over 
them. 

20. When the soul pours out its complaints to 
God, and looks to him for help, though he may not 
at once seem to hear, in due time he will answer 
and grant a glorious deliverance. 

639 



Job looketh for death. 



JOB XVIII 



Address of Bildad. 



CHAPTER XVII. 



1 Job appealeth from men to God. C The unmerciful 
dealing of men with the afflicted may astonish, but 
not discourage the righteous. 11 His hope is not in 
life, but in death. 

MY * breath is corrupt, my days are 
extinct, the ' graves are ready for me. 

2 Are there not mockers witli mel and 
(loth not mine eye tcontinue in their prov- 
ocation ? 

3 Lay down now, put me in a surety 
with thee; who is he that will strike 
hand.s*" with me "? 

4 For thou hast hid their heart from 
understanding: therefore shalt thou not 
exalt them. 

5 He that speaketh " flattery to his 
friends, even the eyes of his children 
shall fail. 

6 He hath made me also a byword of the 
people; and ^ aforetime I was as atabret. 

7 Mine eye also is dim by reason of 
sorrow, and all my ^members are as a 
shadow. 

8 Upright men shall be astonished at 
this, and tlie innocent shall stir up him- 
self against the hypocrite. 

9 The "^ righteous also shall hold on his 
way, and he that hath ^ clean hands shall 
be stronger and H stronger. 

10 But as for you all, do ye return, and 
come now: for I cannot find one wise 
man among you. 

1 1 My days are past, my ""purposes are 
broken off, even the *thoughts of my 
heart. 



■* Or, spirit is spent, a Psa. 88 : 3, 4. f Heb lodge, b Prov. 
S: 1. cPsa. 12:3. % Oi.htf ore them. ?f Or, Ihouf/itt. <l Psa. 
84:7, 11 ; Prov 14: 18. e Psa. 24:4. \\ Hfh. ad<l slreiiglh f Prov. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

2. Mine eye continue ; to be intently fixeil on 
their provocations. 

3. Strike hands ; be surety for me that justice 
shall be done me. 

■1. ///(/ their heart ; left them to act foolislily. 
.'). The eyes of his children shall fail ; they 
shall suffer jrreat calamities. 

8. At this; the afflictions of Job; and that his 
friends should so far take part with Satan, as to 
contend that they were sent on account of his pecul- 
iar wickedness : whereas the fact was, they were 
sent, or permitted, to show the reality and genuine- 
ness of his religion, and that those who accused him 
of hypocrisy were in the wrong. Stir up himself; 
be excited to greater fidelity in avoiding hypocrisy, 
and be guarded against considering peculiar trials 
as proofs of peculiar wickedness. 

9. Shall hold on; instead of being induced to 
give up his religion on account of his trials, or be- 
cause otliers consider them as proofs of his hypoc- 
risy, he who has true religion will persevere in it 
to the end; and whatever his condition here, will 
grow stronger and stronger in faith, patience, ex- 
perience, hope, and all the graces of the Spirit. 

10. Return; return to the argument, and say 
something that is to the purpose and that is worth 
hearing. 

13. The grave is iny house ; the place which 
640 



12 They change the night into Vc'l'S. 
day: the light is t short because of dark- 
ness. 

13 If I wait, the grave is my house: 
I have made my bed in the darkness. 

14 1 have +said to corruption, Thou art 
my father; to the worm. Thou art my 
mother, and my sister. 

15 And wliere is now my hope? as for 
my hope, who shall see it? 

16 They shall go down to the sbars of the 
pit, when our ''rest together is in the dust. 

CHAPTER XVHI. 

1 Bildad reproveth Job of presumption and impatienoi?. 
5 The calamities of the wicked. 

THEN answ^ered Bildad the Shuhite, 
and said, 

2 How long will it be ere ye make an end 
of words? mark, and afterwards we will 
speak. 

3 Wherefore are we counted as beasts, 
and reputed vile in your sight ? 

4 He 'teareth Miimself in his anger: 
shall the earth be forsaken for thee? and 
shall the rock be removed out of his 
place ? 

5 Yea, the light of the wicked j shall be 
put out, and the spark of his fire shall 
not shine. 

6 The light shall be dark in his taber- 
nacle, and his Hcandle shall be put out 
witli him. 

7 The steps of his strength shall be 
straitened, and his own ''counsel shall 
cast him down. 



16:9; 19: -21. * Ueh. possessions f Heb. nenr. | Hub. cried, 
or called, e Jon.ali 2 : fi. h rliap. 3:17-19. > chap. 1.1 : 14. 5 Heb. 
his soul, j Prov. 24:20. || Or, 'amp. k Prov. 1 : 30-32. 



I shall occupy, and where I shall remain till these 

heavens and earth pass away, 2 Peter, 3: 13, 14. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

1. We should not conclude that our work in this 
world is done, so long as we are continued in it ; 
or forget that we may be useful by patient suffer- 
ing, as well as by active benevolent labors. 

■1. When God leaves men to the wickedness and 
folly of sin, it is evidence that they are on the way 
to destruction, and that unless they change their 
course and turn their feet into the path of life, they 
will sink into unavailing sorrow. 

8. The dealings of Providence with the righteous 
will render them more and more watchful, and lead 
them more carefully to distinguish between good 
and evil, and more diligently and perseveringiy to 
pursue the one and avoid the other. 

13. As tiie grave is the house appointed for all 
the living, and the one which they will shortly occu- 
py, it should be the great object of each one so to 
live, labor, and if need be suffer, that when the body 
shall sleep in the grave the soul shall be with God, 
in those heavenly mansions where the wicked cease 
from troubling and the weary are at rest. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 
3. Wc ; Bild.ad and his two friends. 
1. lie trnreth himself ; spoken of Job. 
■'). Shill he put out ; his prosperity shall cease. 
7. Uc straitened ; he shall become feeble. 



Terrors of the wicked. 



JOB XIX. 



Job's reply to Bildad. 



own feet, and he walketh upon a snare. 

9 The gin shall take him by the heel, 
and the robber shall prevail against him. 

10 The snare is *laid for him in the 
ground, and a trap for him in the way. 

11 Terrors '•shall make him afraid on 
every side, and shall tdrive him to his feet. 

12 His strength shall be hunger-bitten, 
and destruction sliall be ready at his side. 

13 It shall devour the t strength of his 
skin : even the first-born of death shall 
devour his strength. 

14 His "^confidence shall be rooted out 
of his tabernacle, and it shall bring him 
to the king of terrors. 

15 It shall dwell in his tabernacle, be- 
cause it is none of his : brimstone shall 
be scattered upon his habitation. 

16 His ^ roots shall be dried up beneath, 
and above shall his branch be cut off. 

17 His ''remembrance shall perish from 
the earth, and he shall have no name in 
the street. 

18 He^ shall be driven from light into 
darkness, and chased out of the world. 

19 He shall "^ neither have son nor 
nephew among his people, nor any re- 
maining in his dwellings. 

20 They that come after him shall be 
astonished at his ^day, as they that II went 
before *were affrighted. 

21 Surely such are the dwellings of the 
wicked, and this is the place of him that 
knoweth ""not God. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

1 Job, complainlngof his friends' cruelty, showeth there 
is misery enougli in him to feed their cruelty. 21. '2S 
He craveth pity. %i He believeth the resurrection. 

THEN .lob answered and said, 
2 How long will ye vex my soul, 
and break me in pieces with words? 



• Prov. 5:'22; 29:fi. ' Hen. Iddden. b Jer. iO : 3, 4. f Heh. 
tcatter. tHeb.AoM. c Prov. 10: 2S. <lIsa.T:24. e P.qa. 34: Ifi. 
5 Heb. They shall ilriut hhn. f Isa. H : 22. e Psa. 37 : IT. || Or, 
lived with him. * Heb. laid hold un horror, b 2 Tlies. 1 : 8. i Gen. 



9. Gin; a snare, or trap. Ver. 10. 

12. Be hunger-bitten ; fail through hunger. 

15. Brimstone ; an emblem and cause of deso- 
lation. 

17. No name in the street ; there shall be none 
to speak of him, or keep him in remembrance after 
he is dead. 

19. Neither have son nor nepheiv; he shall 
leave no posterity. 

20. They that went before ; that lived with 
him; his contemporaries. Were ujfrighted ; at 
the greatness of his calamities. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Those who abuse or say hard things of others, 
are the persons who are most likely to be irritated 
and complain when otKers abuse or say hard things 
of them. 

5. Though evils greater than can be described are 
before the wicked, they may not come upon them 
in this life ; and the idea of Bildad and his friends, 
that a man"s character can be determined by his 



3 These 'ten times have ye reproached 
me: ye are not ashamed that ye tmake 
yourselves strange to me. 

4 And be it indeed that I have erred, 
mine error remaineth with myself. 

5 If indeed ye will J magnify yourselves 
against mc, and plead again.st me my 
reproach; 

6 Know now that God hath overthrown 
me, and hath compassed me with his net. 

7 Behold, I cry out of + wrong, but I am 
not heard : I cry aloud, but there is no 
judgment. 

8 He hath fenced up my way that I 
cannot pass, and he hath set darkness in 
my paths. 

9 He hath stripped me of my glory, and 
taken the crown /ro7« my head. 

10 He ''hath destroyed me on every 
side, and I am gone : and my hope hath 
he removed like a tree. 

1 1 He hath also kindled his wrath 
against me. and he counteth mc unto him 
as one of his enemies. 

12 His troops come together, and raise 
up their way against me, and encamp 
round about my tabernacle. 

13 He hath put my brethren far from 
me, and mine acquaintance are verily 
estranged from me. 

14 jSly 'kinsfolk have failed, and my 
familia/ friends have forgotten me. 

15 They that dwell in my house, and 
my maids, count me for a stranger: I am 
an alien in their sight. 

16 I called my servant, and hegavejncno 
answer; I entreated him with my mouth. 

17 My breath is strange to my w'ife, 
though I entreated for the children's sake 
of ^ mine own body. 

18 Yea, llyoung children despised me; 
I arose, and they spake against me. 



31:7. t Ot^ harden tfovrieloes against me. j Psa. 38; 16. ± Or, 
violence, k Lam. 2:5,6. 1 Psa. 38:11. % Heb. my (<««y. || Or, 
the wicked. 



present outward condition, is false. Their conclu- 
sion, therefore, concerning Job, that he must be a 
very wicked man, was utterly wrong. 

r2. The righteous and the wicked may both in 
this world be visited with trials; and a just dis- 
crimination between them may never fully appear 
till they enter the world of spirits. 

17. The memory of the wicked shall rot, but the 
righteous shall be bad in everhisting remembrance. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

3. Te?i; many, very often. 

4. Remaineth with myself; I must bear the 
consequences. 

G. Compassed me loith his net; brought my 
calamities upon me. 

7. No judgment ; no one appeared for his re- 
lief. 

11. Counteth; treateth. 

14. Have forgotten me; they neglected him, 
as if ho were not remembered. 

641 



Faith in God's judgment. 



JOB XX. 



Address of Zophar. 



19 All *iny inward friends abhorred 
me : and they whom I loved are turned 
against me. 

20 j\Iy * bone cleaveth to my skin and 
to my flesh, and I am escaped with the 
skin of my teeth. 

21 Have pity upon me, have pity upon 
me, ye my friends ; for the hand of God 
hath touched me. 

22 Why do ye '"persecute me as God, 
and are not satisfied with my flesh? 

23 Ot that my words were now writ- 
ten ! that they were printed in a book ! 

24 That they were graven with an iron 
pen and lead in the rock forever! 

25 For I know thai my Redeemer liveth, 
and that he shall stand at the latter day 
upon the earth ; 

26 And+ though after my skin tvorms 
destroy this body, yet in my "^ flesh shall 
I ^ see God : 

27 Whom I shall see for myself, and 
mine eyes shall behold, and not ^another; 
thoiiglt !my reins be consumed *wilhin mc. 

28 But ye should say. Why persecute 
we him, tseeing the root of the matter is 
found in me ? 

29 Be ye afraid of the sword : for wrath 
bringeth the punishment.s of the sword, 
that ""ye may know there is a judgment. 

CHAPTER XX. 

Zophar showeth the state and portion of the wicked. 

THEN answered Zophar the Naama- 
thitc, and said, 

2 Therefore do my thoughts cause me 
to answer, and for this + 1 make haste. 

3 I have heard the check of my re- 
proach, and the spirit of my understand- 
ing causeth me to answer. 

4 Knowest thou Jiot this of old, since 
man was placed upon earth, 



* Heh. the mrnii/mi/tCi-rel. » I'mi. IO-J:;>. h I'sulm H«: 26. 
t Heb. WIto will give | dr. 4/Vtr / sliall nwnke, tit, vgli thii bnily 
he ilettroyed, yet uue ofmyflesli shall I tee G"d. c 1 Tor. 1.5: .S3 
rl 1 .Tohn, .•) : J. ?( Heb. a jr<rn>i»(!r. || Or, Jiiy rriTU within me lire 
Con*umed with earnest desire for that (J;iv. "" Heb. m my hositm. 
t Or, iitul what runt nf mutter is fmmilin me ? c l"sa. 58: 10. 1 1. 



20. With the siiii- of my teeth; but just es- 
caped from death, or utter ruin. 

23. My words ; those which he was going to 
utter. Ill a book ; a durable, permanent record. 

29. A judgment ; a time when the righteous 
will be gr.'iciou.sly rewarded, and when the wicked 
will be punished according to their deserts. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. The afTlictions with which God visits us are 
greatly lessened, or increased, by the conduct of our 
friends. If they are kind, and ready to a.ssist us, 
they help us bear our burdens ; but if unkind, neg- 
ligent, and reproachful, they greatly increase our 
sorrows. 

11. No permanent or safe dependence can be 
placed upon the most intimate and endeared earthly 
friends. For the contiiuiance of their affection and 
care, we are dependent upon God ; and if they are 
forsaken of him, they may forsake us. 

25. Strong confidence in an almighty, ever-living 
642 



5 That the triumphing of the *b.c i.rao: 
wicked is ^short, and tlic joy of the hypo- 
crite but for a '"moment 1 

6 Though his s excellency mount up to 
the heavens, and his head reach unto the 
clouds ;ll 

7 Yet he shall perish for ever like ''hi.s 
own dung: they which liave seen him 
shall say, Where is he? 

8 He shall fly away as a 'dream, and 
shall not be found : yea, he shall be 
chased away as a vision of the night. 

9 The eye also ichich saw him shall see 
him no more; neither shall his place 
any more behold him. 

10 His* children shall seek to please the 
poor, and his hands shall J restore their 
goods. 

11 His bones are full of the ^sin of his 
youth, which shall lie down with him in 
the dust. 

12 Though wickedness be 'sweet in his 
monih, though he hide it under his tongue; 

13 Though he spare it, and forsake it 
not, but keep it still t within his mouth; 

14 Yet his meat in his bowels is turned, 
it is the gal! of asps within him. 

15 He hath swallowed down riches, and 
he shall vomit them up again : God shall 
cast them out of his belly. 

16 He shall suck the "'poison of asps: 
the viper's tongue shall slay him. 

17 He shall not see the rivers, the 
floods. t the brooks of honey and butter. 

18 That which he labored for sliall he 
restore, and shall not swallow it down: 
according to ^his substance shall the resti- 
tution be, and he shall not rejoice therein. 

19 Because he hath Hoppressed and hath 
forsaken the poor; because he liath vio- 
lently taken away a house which he 
builded not; 



f Hi'b. my hasle IS in me. ?j'Hfh. fr-om ntiir. f Miit. 7 ; '21. e Isa. 
U:l:i, 14. II Heb.Wiw/. h 1 Kin-s, 14: 10. iP»a 7:1:29. * Or, 
The root- shall oppress his children. s ver. 18. k rlinp. 13:26. 

I chii|.. 15 : IK. t Heb. in the midst of his palate, m KdBl. 3 : 13. 
X liT, streaming brooks. \ Heb. the substance of his exchange. 

II H-!ii. crushed. 



Redeemer, and the expectation of meeting him as a 
friend and portion, support the soul in the deepest 
affliction, and cause it to rejoice in hope of the glory 
of God. 

CHAPTER XX. 

3. To aiL^iver ; to reply to wiiat Job had said in 
opposition to his doctrine, and that of his friends. 

5. Short ; short compared with his whole exist- 
ence, though it may sometimes continue through 
life, and life be continued till old age. 

10. Please the poor; on whom they shall be 
dependent, or to whom they shall apply for help. 
Re.itoir their goods; those which they had wrong- 
fully taken away. 

11. The sin of his youth; he shall carry the 
effects of it to the grave. 

14. The gall of asps ; his pleasures are all 
turned to bitterness. 

17. The hrooks of honey and butter ; emblems 
of worldly abundance. 



Wicked men do 



JOB XXI. 



sometimes prosper. 



B.c:ilZ 20 Surely he shall not *feel qui- 
etness in his belly, he shall not save of 
that which he desired. 

21 There shall t none of his meat be ^left ; 
therefore shall no man look for his goods. 

22 In the fulness of his suHiciency he 
shall be in straits : every hand of the 
wicked t shall come upon him. 

23 Wlien he is about to fill his belly, 
God shall east the fury of his wrath upon 
him, and shall rain it upon him ''while 
he is eating. 

24 He shall flee from the iron weapon, 
aiid the bow of steel shall strike him 
through. 

25 It is drawn, and cometh out of the 
body : yea, the glittering sword cometh 
out of his gall: •'terrors are upon him. 

26 All darkness shall be hid in his 
secret places: a ''fire not blown shall 
consume him ; it shall go ill with him 
that is left in his tabernacle. 

27 The heaven shall reveal his iniqviity ; 
and the earth shall rise up against him. 

28 The increase of his house shall de- 
part, a7id his goods shall flow away in 
the day of his wrath. 

29 This is the portion of a wicked man 
from (}od, and the heritage ^ appointed 
unto him by God. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

1 Job showeth that even in the judgment of man he 
hath reason to be grieved. 7 Sometimes the wicked 
ilo so pro-iper, as they despise God. 16 Sometimes 
their destruction is manifest. 22 The happy and un- 
liappy are alike in death. 27 The judgment of the 
wicked is in another world. 

BUT Job answered and said, 
2 Hear diligently my speech, and 
let this be your consolations. 

3 Suffer me that I may speak; and 
after that I have spoken, mock on. 

4 As for me, is my complaint to man? 



- Heb. know, f Or, he nont Ir/t for hh meat. « Ercl. 6 : 13, 14. 
j: nr, troublesome, h Pa.l. 78: 30, 31. c IVsa. 7.1 : 19. "iPsa.'Jl:!); 
Mat. 3:1-2. \ Krh. of his decree from. WHeh. shurtened. « Heb. 
Look unto, e chap. 40:4. f Jer. 1-2 : 1, 2. \ Huh. peace from. 



20. Feel quietiiesi: ; be at ease. 

22. Stratis; difficulty. 

26. 'Not blown; not kindled or kept alive by man, 
but by Grod. 

29. The portion of a wicked man ; what, as 
Zophar and his friends contended, always came 
upon the wicked in this life. In the next chapter, 
Job shows by facts that their doctrine was false. 
INSTRl'CTION'S. 

2. Those are often most in haste to speak, who 
are least able to speak to the purpose, or with any 
good effect. Jas. 1:19. 

11. Sins committed in youth, may produce con- 
sequences which shall be felt in old age, and which 
shall follow transgressors to the grave and onward 
to eternity. 

18. Whatever may be the pleasures of sin for a 
season, in the end they shall be turned to bitterness 
and death. Prov. 2.3 : 32. 

29. The evils consequent upon sin are the ap- 



and if it were so, why should not my 
spirit be II troubled? 

5 Mark* me, and be astonished, and 
lay* your hand upon your mouth. 

6 Even when I remember I am afraid, 
and trembling taketh hold on my flesh. 

7 Wherefore ''do the wicked live, be- 
come old, yea, are mighty in power? 

8 Their seed is established in their 
sight with them, and their oflspring be- 
fore their eyes. 

9 Their houses are t safe from fear, 
neither is the rod of God upon them. 

10 Their bull gcndercth, and faileth 
not; their cow calveth, and casteth not 
her calf. 

1 1 They send forth their little ones like 
a flock, and their children dance. 

12 They take the timbrel and harp, 
and rejoice at the sound of the organ. 

13 They spend their days in t wealth, 
and in a moment go down to the grave. 

14 Therefore sthey say unto God, De- 
part from us ; for we desire not the 
knowledge of thy ways. 

15 \Vhat''/.sthe Almighty, that we should 
serve him? and what 'profit should we 
have, if we pray unto him ? 

16 Lo, their good is not in their hand: 
the Jcounsel of the wicked is far from me. 

17 How oft is the ^candle of the wickcil 
put out! and how oft cometh their de- 
struction upon them! God distributeth 
sorrows in his anger. 

18 They arc as stubble before the wind, 
and as cliafl'tliat the storm Hearricth away. 

19 God layeth up * his iniquity for his 
children:'' he rcwardeth him, and he 
shall know it. 

20 His eyes shall see his destruction, 
and he shall drink of the wrath of the 
Almighty. 

21 For what pleasure hath he in his 



for, mirth, e chaii. 22 : 17. liExoii. S:2. iMnl. 3:14. j Psa. 
1:1. % (1r, Inmi). || Heb. sleuleth on'iiv. * That is, the punish- 
ment of his iniquity, k Kjtod. -lO-.h; Eiek. IS: 14. 



pointment of God ; and no one can continue in it, 
and escape them. They may not, in all cases, be 
seen or felt in this world ; but they will overwhelm 
all continued transgressors, in the world to come. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

3. Mock on; go on with your discourse against 
me. 

4. To man ? merely, or principally. 

.5. Mark me; behold my affliction. Lay your 
hand tifon your inoiith; be silent. 

7. The wicked live, become old, yea. are- 
might y ; this, in opposition to the doctrine of Job's 
friends, is often the case. Psa. 73 : 3-17. 

13. I)t a moment ; without long, lingering ill- 
ness. 

14. Therefore; /RcclS-.n. 

16. Not in their hand ; not in their own power. 
It comes from G-od, and tkey are wholly dependent 
on him. 

643 



Death and the jmJgment. 



■job XXII, 



Eliphaz accuse th Job. 



house after him, wlicn the number of 
his months is cutoff in the midst? 

22 Shall "ani/ teacli God knowledge? 
seeing he judgeth those that are high. 

23 One dieth in his *full strength, being 
"wholly at ease and quiet. 

24 His tbreasts are full of milk, and his 
bones are moistened with marrow. 

25 And another dieth in the bitterness of 
his soul, and never eateth with pleasure. 

26 They shall lie down alike in the dust, 
and the worms shall cover them. 

27 Behold, I know your thoughts, and 
the devices u-hicli ye wrongfully imagine 
against me. 

28 For ye say, Where is the house of 
the prince? and where arc the' ^dwelling- 
places of the wicked ? 

29 Have ye not asked them that go by the 
way? and do ye not know their tokens, 

30 That the wicked is reserved to the 
day of destruction ? they shall be brought 
forth to the day of Hvrath. 

31 Who shall declare his way to his 
face ? and who shall repay him what he 
hath done ? 

32 Yet shall he be brought to the ilgrave, 
and shall *rcmain in the tomb. 

33 The clodsof the valley shall be sweet 
unto him, and '^ every man shall draw after 
him. as there are innumerable before him. 

34 How then comfort ye me in "^vain, 
seeing in your answers there rcmaineth 
falsehood ?t 

CHAPTER XXII. 

1 Rliphaz showeth that man's goodness profiteth not 
God. 5 He accuseth Job of divers sins. 21 He ex- 
hortcth hiin to repentance, with promises of mercy. 

THEN Eliphaz the Temanite answered 
and said, 

2 Can a man be "^profitable unto God, 
as+ lie that is wise may be profitable unto 
himself? 

3 Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, 

« Horn, il :34. * H»'b. very per/ectioHy or in the ttrength of hit 
jityffction. t Or. milk path. % Heb. tent of the tti'ternactes. 
\ HpI). wrathi. II Heb. gravet. ' Heb. u-atch in the heap. I> Heb. 
9:27. r cbapliT lil:2. ^ Heh. Irnnsgrettion. d Poiibn 1 fi : -2. 
% Or, if he mtitf fte profitable., doth liit* good success depend 

26. They shall lie dotvn alike ; God does not 
deal with them here according' to their character, 
but treats tliem in many respects alike. 

30. The vickeil /.« reserved to the day of de- 
struction ; when in the future world, they will be 
treated according to their M-orUs. 

;; 1 . Who .ihall repay h im ? no one in this world ; 
but. God shall reward him in the world ie come. 

33. Every man; shall in like maimer go to the 
^rave. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

4. In our trials and distresses we should look not 
.«o much to men for help, as to God ; and feel that 
whoever or wliatcver may be the instrument, he is 
the only source of relief. 

7. The wicked are sometimes prospered in this 
world, and receive more outward blessings than 
their pious neighbors. They may live longer, and 
644 



that thou art righteous? or is it "b.^.VH: 
gain to him, that thou makest thy ways 
perfect? 

4 Will he reprove thee for fear of thee ? 
will he enter with thee into judgment ? 

5 Is not thy wickedness great? and 
thine iniquities infinite? 

6 For thou hast taken a pledge from 
thy brother for naught, and stripped the 
naked* of their clothing. 

7 Thou hast not given water to the 
weary to drink, and thou hast withholdcu 
bread from the hungry. 

8 But a.'< for the ii mighty man, he had the 
earth : and the *honorable man dwelt in it. 

9 Thou hast sent widows away empty, 
and the arms of the fatherless have been 
broken. 

10 Therefore ^ snares are round about 
thee, and sudden fear troubleth thee ; 

1 1 Or darkness, that thou canst notseo ; 
and abundance of waters cover thee. 

12 Is not God in the height of heaven ? 
and behold the t height of the stars, how 
high they are ! 

13 And thou sayest, J How ""doth God 
know? can he judge through the dark 
cloud ? 

14 Thick clouds are a covering to him, 
that he seeth not; and he walketh in the 
circuit of heaven. 

15 Hast thou marked the old way which 
wicked men have trodden ? 

16 Which were cut down out of time, 
whose foundation was overflown with a 
flood : 

17 Which 6 said unto God, Depart from 
us : and what can the Almighty do Hfor 
them? 

18 Yet ''he filled their houses with good 
//tjx^.'.- .• but the counsel of the wicked is 
far from me. 

19 The righteous see it, and are glad: 
and the innocent laugh them to scorn. 

thereon ? % Heb.<-/oM<-» of the nuked. (] Heb. man of arm * Heb. 
eminent, or accepted for countenance. ' rli IS : R-IO ; Vfn. 1 1 : B 
t Heb. head, t Or, What. I Psn. 10 : 1 1 ; 73 : 1 1 . ^ Or, o flood tons 
poured upon their foundation. Gen. 7 : II, etc. ; i I'et. 2 : 6. { di. 
■-'1 : 14. II Or, to h ArU 14: I.-i, 17. 



die in less distress. The reason of this is to men 
not known, and it sometimes occasions them great 
perplexity. Psa. 73:2-17. 

17. However prosperous may be the condition of 
the wicked in this world, or however adverse that 
of the rigliteous, in the future world it will be re- 
versed ; the righteous will be comforted, and the 
wicked tormented. Luke 10:24, 2-'). 

30. Tile fact that men are not treated according 
to their cliaraeter in this world, is evidence of a 
coming judgment, when a just discrimination will 
be made, and each one receive according to his 
works. Mai. 3 : K3-18. 

CHAPTER XXn. 
8. He had the earth ; Eliphaz here falsely 
ch:irges .Tob with favoring the mighty and honora- 
ble, and oppressing the poor and needy. 



Joh lonseth to 



JOB XXIII. 



appear before God. 



B.'c!i5m' 20 Whereas our *substauce is not 
cut down, but tthe remnant of them the 
fire consumeth. 

21 Acquaint now thyself with t him, 
and be at * peace : thereby good shall come 
unto thee. 

22 Receive, I pray thee, the law from 
his mouth, and lay ''up his words in thy 
heart. 



3 Oh 'that I knew where I might find 
him ! that I might come even to his scat! 

4 I would order mij 'cause before him, 
and fill my mouth with arguments. 

5 I would know the words ichich he 
would answer me, and iinderstaiid whal 
he would say unto me. 

6 Will ^ he plead against me with his 
great power? No; but he would put 



23 If thou " return to the Almighty, thou ' strens^th in me. 
shalt be built up, thou shalt put away ; 7 There the righteous might dispute 



iniquity'' far from thy tabernacles. 

24 Then shalt thou lay up gold ^as dust, 
and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the 
brooks. 

25 Yea, the Almighty shall be thy 
defence,ll and thou shalt have * plenty of 
silver. 



with him ; so should I be delivered for 
ever from my judge. 

8 Behold, I go forward, but he is not 
there : *nd backward, but I cannot per- 
ceive him : 

9 On the left hand, where he doth work, 
but I cannot behold him : he hideth liim- 



26 For then .shalt thou have thy delight self on the right hand, that I cannot sec 



in the Almighty, and shalt lift up thy 
face unto God. 

27 Thou " shalt make thy prayer unto 
him, and he shall hear thee, and thou 
shalt pay thy vows. 

28 Thou shalt also ''decree a thing, and 
it shall be established unto thee : and the 
light shall shine upon thy ways. 

29 When me?i are cast down, then thou 
shalt say, There is lifting up ; and he shall 
save t the s humble person. 

30 He t shall deliver the island of the 
innocent : and it is delivered by the pure- 
ness of thy hands. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

1 Job longeth to appear before God, 6 in confidence of 
his mercy. 8 God, who is invisible, observeth our 
ways. 11 Job's innocency. 13 God's decree is im- 
mutable. 

THEN Job answered and said, 
2 Even •'to-day is my complaint 
bitter : my ^ stroke is heavier than my 
groaning. 



* Or, cttdte. f Or. their excelkncij. J Tliat is, G«d. a Is.l. 
!7:5; Phil.4:7. b Psalm 1 19: 11. c Hosea 14: 1,2. dSTim. 
2:19. ^ Or, on the dust. \\ Or, gold. " H^b. silver of ttrenglh. 
« Paa. fifi : 17--20. f Mat. 21 : 22. t Heb. him that hath low eyes. 
e 1 Peter, 5:5. J Or, The innocent shall deliver the island, Genesis 



21. Acquaint ')iow thyself with kim; Eliphaz 
ispeaks as if Job were unacquainted with Grod, and 
at enmity with him. 

24. Lay up gold ; a man's piety, in the estima- 
tion of Job's friends, might be measured by the 
amount of his worldly prosperity, and his guilt by 
his calamities. 

30. The innocent ; the innocent shall deliver or 
save the island or country for which they intercede. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

15. The history of past generations, both of the 
righteous and the wicked, is full of instruction to 
the children of men. 

21. All men who have the Bible may become 
acquainted with God. and by cordial reconciliation 
to him may have that peace which passeth all un- 
derstanding, which the world can neither give nor 
take away. 

26. Delight in the character of Grod and in the 
keeping of his commands will secure all needful 



hi 

10 But he knoweth the way that II I 
take: when 'he hath tried me, I shall 
come forth as gold. 

1 1 My foot hath held his steps, his way 
have I kept, and not declined. 

12 Neither have I gone back from the 
commandment of his lips; '"I have *es- 
teemed the words of his mouth more than 
my t necessary "food. 

13 But he is in one mind, and who can 
turn him? and what his soul dcsireth, 
even that he doeth. 

14 For he performeth the thing that is 
appointed ° for me : and many such things 
are with him. 

15 Therefore am I troubled at his pres- 
ence : when I consider, I am Pafraid of him. 

16 For God niaketh my heart soft, and 
the Almighty troubleth me : 

17 Because I was not cut off before the 
darkness, neither hath he covered the 
darkness from my face. 



IR 


:26. 


h P 


a. 


7:2-9. 


? 


Heb. ha 


nd. i 1 


«a 


26 


8; .'-.5:6.7. 


1 


sa. 43 : 26. 


k 


Is«. 57 


Ifi. 


II Heb 


is with 




1 


1 Peter, 1 : 7. 


m 


Paa 


19:9, 


la 


*Heb 


hit 


, or laid 


up. to 




ippoinied portion. 


" 


)er. 


15: 16. 


° 


1 Thes 


;t: 


3. V r 


sa. 119:1 


'M 







good to those who exercise it, and make them great 
blessings both to tliemselves and their fellow-men. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

3. Him; God. 

7. From my judge; from any one who would 
condemn him. 

10. Come forth as gold; be justified as right- 
eous, and accepted. 

15. 1 am afraid of him ; on account of the dis- 
tresses He had inflicted, and which Job expected he 
would inflict in future. 

INSTRTTCTIONS. 

3. In our distress, we sliould look away from man 
and seek that help which coiueth from God only. 
If we cannot at once find him. we should still wait 
upon him in humble, believing, afleotionate prayer, 
till he arise and have mercy on us. 

10. Though God may not at once give relief to 
his distressed people, he is never unmindful of their 
615 



Sin often goelh for J B X X I V . 

CHAPTER XXIV. 



a time unpunished. 



1 WickeJness goelh often unpunished. 17 Tliere is a 
secrft judgment for the wicked. 

"TT^HY, seeing times are not hidden from 
VV the Aliiii^'lity, do tliey that know 
him not see his days ? 

2 Some remove llie landmark.* : they vio- 
lently take away flocks, and feed *'lhcrcof. 

3 They drive away the ass of the fallicr- 
less, tliey "take the widow's ox for a pledge. 

4 They turn the needy out of the way: 
the poor of the eartli hide themselves 
together. 

5 Behold, as wild asses in the desert, go 
they forth to their work; rising betimes 
for a prey: the wilderness yicldeth fo'od 
for them and for their children. 

() They reap every one his t corn in the 
field: and tthey gather the vintage of the 
wicked. 

7 They cause the naked to lodge with- 
out clothing, that they have no covering 
in the cold. 

8 They are wet with the showers of the 
mountains, and ''embrace the rock for 
want of a shelter. 

y They pluck the fatherless from the 
breast, and take a pledge of the poor. 

10 Tliey cause him to go naked without 
clothing, and they take away the sheaf 
from the hungry; 

11 Which make oil within their walls, 
and tread their wine-presses, and suffer 
thirst. 

12 Men groan from out of the city, and 
the soul of the Mounded cricth out: yet 
God layeth not folly to ihcm. 

13 They are of those that rebel against 
the light ; they know not the ways there- 
of, nor abide in the paths thereof. 



• ' 'r. tliem. • Dent 24 : 6, 1 7. f Heb. mingled corn, or ilretlft. 

iHel). lilt wicktd giitlier the vintage, b I.iiifi. 4 : 5. c Psa. 10:K-I I. 
Prov.7:H,9. ?i Heh. scttelhhm face in tecret. e .loliii 3 : -.'0. 

sorrows ; nor will he continue them a moment longer 
than his glory, their good, and the good of his king- 
dom require. 

1-5. Even the children of God .sometimes exercise 
that fear of him which hath torment ; and which 
nothing but the manifestation of his grace and an 
increase of faith and love can cast out. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

I. Sec his ilays ; of righteous retribution on the 
just and unjust. 

(i. The wicked; gather the vintage of the poor. 

8. They ; those whom they have robbed. 

9. T/ipy; the freebooters, or robbers. Phicl-the 
fatherless ; seize little children to use them as 
slaves. 

II. Trend their wiiie-presses ; compel the poor 
to tread their wine-pres.scs without compensation, 
or HiifTcriiig them to drink of the wine. 

\'2. Jjfiyt'th init folly ; doth not punish them. 

K). Rfhel against the light ; the light they 
have ; they shun the light of day, and perform their 
deeds in darkness. 

16. Know iiot the light; carefully avoid it. 
616 



14 The <= murderer rising with ^b-cIimJ; 
the light killeth the poor and needy, and 
in the night is as a thief. 

15 'J'he eye also of the adulterer wait- 
eth foi- the ''twilight, saying. No eye shall 
sec me: and ^disguiseth his face. 

16 In the dark they dig through houses, 
u-hich ,tliey had marked for themselves 
in the daytime: '"they know not the 
light. 

17 For the morning is to them even as 
the shadow of death: if one know them, 
they are in the "^ terrors of the shadow of 
death. 

18 lie is swift as the waters; their por- 
tion is cursed in the earth : he beholdeth 
not the way of the vineyards. 

1 9 Drought and heat liconsume the sirow- 
waters : so doth the grave those which 
have sinned. 

20 The womb shall forget him: the 
worm shall feed sweetly on him ; he shall 
be no sjiiore remembered; and wicked- 
ness shall be broken as a tree. 

21 He evil entreateth the barren that 
beareth not, and doeth not good to the 
widow. 

22 He draweth also the mighty with his 
power: he riseth up, *and no man is sure 
of life. 

23 Thou<^h it be given him to be in safety, 
whereon he resteth; yet ''his eyes arc 
upon their ways. 

24 They arc exalted for a 'little while, 
but are +gone and brought low; they are 
taken t out of the way as all others, and 
cut otr as the tops of the ears of corn. 

25 And if it be not so now, who will 
make me a liar, and make my speech 
nothing worth? 



f Paalm 73 : 18, IH. )| Hcb. vioUntlp take, f PrOT. 10:7; Isninb 
2fi:U. * Or, he trttsteth not \t\»nv.n life, b Prov. 6:21-23. ■ Psa. 
37:S5,3(f. f Heb. »lo^ J Heb. <r/<w«(/ uji. 



18. Svjift; to do evil. • Beholdeth vot the 
u-ay ; the way of industry and diligence in lawful 
business. 

19. So doth the grave ; these notoriously wicked 
persons die and are buried and forgotten like others; 
there are no judgments here in the course of provi- 
dence, to distinguish them from the rest of man- 
kind. 

23. 77/,'! eyes ; the eyes of God. He sees all 
their iniquities, if he does not now punish them. 

24. A.<s all; men in this life, whatever be their 
character, are in many respects treated alike ; and 
you cannot from their present condition determine 
their character. This was the doctrine which Job 
contended was taught by facts. 

2r>. Who iftll make me a liar? disprove the 
facts; and the truth which I have maintained. 
rNSTRTCTroNS. 

2. Though God sometimes bears long with atro- 
cious offenders, and continues to pour blessings upon 
them to the end of life, yet he marks all their trans- 
gressions, and will in due time treat them accord- 
ing to their works. 

13, The wicked rebel against the light of their 



Address of Bildad. 



JOB XXVII. 



Job rcplieth. 



CHAPTER XXV. 



Bildad showeth that man cannot be justified before 
God. 

THEN answered Bildad the Shuhite, 
and said, 

2 Dominion^ and fear are with him ; he 
maketh peace in his high places. 

3 Is there any number of his armies? 
and upon '' whom doth not his light arise? 

4 How then can man be "^justified with 
God? or how can he be ''clean that is 
born of a woman ? 

5 Behold even to the moon, and it shin- 
eth not : yea, the stars are not pure in his 
sight. 

6 How much less man, that is a worm? 
and the son of man, which is a worm? 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

1 Job, reproving the uncharitable spirit of Bildad, 5 
acknowledgeth the power of God to be infinite and 
unsearchable. 

BUT Job answered and said, 
2 How ^ hast thou helped him that is 
without power ? how savest thou the arm 
that hath no strength? 

3 How hast thou counselled him that 
hath no wisdom ? and how hast thou 
plentifully declared the thing as it is ? 

4 To whom hast thou uttered words? 
and whose "^spirit came from thee ? 

.5 Dead things are formed from under 
the waters, *and the inhabitants thereof. 

G Hell s is naked before him, and de- 
struction hath no covering. 

7 He stretcheth ""out the north over the 
empty place, and hangeth the earth upon 
nothing. 

8 He bindeth 'up the waters in his 



thick clouds ; and the cloud is not rent 
under them. 

9 He holdeth back the face of his throne, 
and spreadeth his J cloud upon it. 

10 He hath compassed the waters with 
bounds,'' until the t day and night come 
to an end. 

1 1 The pillars of heaven ' tremble, and 
are astonished at his reproof. 

12 He '" divideth the sea with his power, 
and by his understanding he smiteth 
through ithe "proud. 

13 By his Spirit "he hath garnished the 
heavens ; his hand hath formed the crook- 
ed serpent. 

14 Lo, these are p parts of his way.s; but 
how little a portion is heard of him? but 
the thunder of his power who can under- 
stand? 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

1 Job protestcth his sincerity. 8 The hypocrite is with- 
out hope. 11 The blessings which the wicked have 
are turned into curses. 

MOREOVER Job ^ continued his par- 
able, and said, 

2 As God liveth, who hath taken away 
my judgment ; and the Almighty, who 
hath llvexed my soul ; 

3 All the while my breath is in me, 
and the *spirit of God is in my nostrils ; 

4 My lips shall not speak wickedness, 
nor my tongue utter deceit. 

5 God forbid that I should justify you : 
till I die I will not remove mine i integrity 
from me. 

6 My righteousness I hold fast, and will 
not let it go: my 'heart shall not re- 
proach me tso long as I live. 



a llan. 4 : .'5, 34 ; Jude 2.i. t Mat 5 : 4.5. c chapter 4:17, etc. ; 
15: H, etc.; Psa. 143:i,etc.; Rom. 5: 1,21. <lZech.l3:l; I Cor. 
6:11: l.Io'.n, 1 :>); Rev. 1 :5. e Isa. 40 : 14. f Keel. 12:7. * Or, 
with, s Fsa. I3«:8, II: Prov. 1,5:11 ; Heb. 4: 1:3. hPs.l. 104:2. 
i Gen. 1:6,7; Prov. 30:4. jPsa.97:2. kProv. 8:2i». f Heb. 



own minds, as well as the light of day and the light 
of divine truth ; they seek darkness as a covering 
for their evil deeds, and hasten on to the time when 
they will sink self-condemned into the blackness of 
darkness for ever. 

'24. Though the difference between the righteous 
and the wicked may not be seen in their condition 
in this life, the time is at hand when all will dis- 
cern between thein ; and the difference of condition 
between him that served God and him that served 
him not, will then be as great as that between 
heaven and hell. 

CHAPTER .XXV. 
4. Clean; holy. 

IN.STRUCTIONS. 
4. None who have just views of the holiness of 
G-od and the sinfulness of men, will attempt to jus- 
tifv themselves in liis sight, or expect acceptance 
and salvation except through his rich grace in Jesus 
Christ. 

CHAPTER^ XXVI. 
2. Helped hi III that !.■< ii'ithoiit pnirfr; spoken 
ironically, implying th,Tt what Bildad had said was 
not to the point, and of no avail. 



end of light with dm knett. 1 Heb. 12:26. m Fxotl. 14:21: Isa. 
.51:1.5. X Hvh.pyiile. n Pan. 4:. 37. ■> Psa. a! : 8, 7. P I Cor. 
l:i : 4, 12. % Heb. added to take up. || Heb. made my taul bilter, 
Ruth 1 : 20. ' Tliat if, the breath irhich Godaave him. Gen 2:7. 
i(ch.2:3,9. r Actii 24:16; IJoliil, 3: 19-21. i Heb. from mi) day: 



9. Holdeth back; covereth, or rendereth invisible. 

13. Garnished the heavens ; with sun, moon, 
and stars. 

14. Parts of his ways ; the ways of God ; only 
a small part of which are known by men. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

6. All things are naked and open to the all-seeing 
eye of God ; and the kingdoms of nature, provi- 
dence, and grace, are entirely under liis control. 

14. What we know or can know of the ways of 
God is but little, very little, compared with what 
remains to be known, and which will be unfolding 
with greater and greater clearness and glory for 
ever. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

1. Parable; a representation from which moral 
instruction may be drawn. 

2. Taie?/ aifai/ mi/Jndgmeiit ; refused to jus- 
tify him. or appear to do so, by removing his ca'aiiv- 
ities. 

4. Not speaJr u-ickediiess ; by condemning hinv- 
self as a hypocrite, or approving the doctrine of his 
friends. 

G. My righteousness ; his integrity. 
647 



The wicked arc accursed. 



JOB XXVIII 



Of human knowledge. 



7 Let mine enemy be as the wicked, j 22 For GocZ shall east upon him, *B.c:1i^': 
and he that riseth up against me as the i and not spare: the would fain flee out 



unrighteous 

8 For »what ?.s the hope of the hypo- 
crite, though he hath gained, when God 
takcth away his soul? 

9 Will God ''hear his cry when trouble 
cometh upon liim ? 

10 Will he delight himself in the Al- 
mighty? will he •= always call upon God? 



of his hand. 

23 Men shall clap their hands at him. 
and shall hiss him out of his place. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

1 There is a knowledge of natural things. 1'2 But wis- 
dom is an excellent gift of God. 

SURELY there is a tvcin for the sil- 
ver, and a place for gold where they 
God: that which is with the Almighty fine zV. 
will I not conceal. ' 2 Iron is taken out of the dearth, and 

12 Behold, all ye yourselves have seen brass is molten ovt of the stone. 

i/,- why then are ye thus altogether vain? 3 He setteth an end to darkness, and 

13 This is the portion of a wicked man jsearcheth out all perfection: the stones 
with God, and the heritage of oppress- 'of darkness, and the shadow of death. 

4 The flood breaketh out from the in- 
habitant ; even the icaters forgotten of the 
foot: they are dried up, they are gone 
away from men. 

5 As for the earth, out of it cometh 
bread : and under it is turned up as it 
were fire. 

6 The stones of it are the place of sap- 
phires : and it hath il dust of gold. 

7 There 'is a path which no fowl kiiow- 
eth, and which the vulture's eye liath not 
seen : 

8 The lion's whelps have not irodden it, 
nor the fierce lion passed by it. 

9 He putteth forth his hand upon tlic 
rock;* he overturneth the mountains Ly 
the roots. 

10 He Jcutteth out rivers among the 
rocks ; and his eye seelh every precious 
thing. 

11 He ''bindeth the floods from t over- 
flowing; and the thing that is 'hid bring- 
eth he forth to light. 



ors, lohich they shall receive of the Al 
mighty. 

14 If ''his children be multiplied, it is 
for the sword : and his offspring shall 
not be satisfied with bread. 

15 Those that remain of him shall be 
buried in death : and his widows shall 
not * weep. 

16 Though he heap up silver as the 
dust, and prepare raiment as the clay ; 

17 He may prepare it, ""but the just 
shall put it on, and the innocent shall 
divide the silver. 

18 He buildeth his house as a moth, 
and as a booth that the keeper maketh. 

19 The srich man shall lie down, but 
he shall not be gathered : he openeth his 
eyes, and he is not. 

20 Terrors take hold on him as waters, 
a tempest stealeth him away in the night. 

21 The east wind carrietli him away, 
and he departeth : and as a "^ storm hurl- 
eth him out of his place. 

• Mat. !6:'Jfi. bProv. 1:28. c Mat. 13:21. * Or, being in. 
d Dent. 28: ■11; 2 Kings, 10: 7,8: Hosea9:l3. e P.sairn 7S : M. 
fEcol. 2:28. B I.ukel6:22, 23. hPga. 58:9. f Ueb. injlecinf 



7. As the xviched; Job by no means approved 
of the wicked ; thougli he contended, in opposition 
to his friends, that they were sometimes prosperous 
in this world. 

8. Though he hath gained; the reputation of 
being piou.s, or ever so much worldly good. 

II. / loill teach you ; teach you the true doc- 
trine concerning the wicked. 

1"J. Seen it ; seen illustrations of the truth in 
the facts of divine providence. 

13. This is the portion, of a wicked man ; ac- 
cording to the doctrine of .Job's friends, it was al- 
ways their portion in this life. But as Job had 
shown in previous chapters, facts proved that this 
was not alw.ays true. It was sometimes so. and 
sometimes not so. Of course his calamities did not 
prove him to be a hypocrite, as his friends and as 
Satan contended. 

'I'l. God .•ihall cast upon him, and vot spare ; 
visit him with calaiiiities. This is often the case 
in this world, and always in the world to come. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 



he would /Ite. J Or, OTinr. % Or, </«»<. ]\ Or, geld ort. i <lmp. 
11:H. ' ()r,y?i>i/. jHab.3:9. k chapter 26 : & f Heb. weep- 
inn. 1 1 Cor. 4 : 6. 



but the want of it will deprive one of rest and 
peace. 1 John. 3: 20, 21. 

10. Delight in tlie Almighty will be manifested 
by habitual communion with him ; while neglect of 
communion with God, is evidence of want of love 
to him and to his ways. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 
1. Vein; mine. Fitte; retine, purify. 

3. Setteth. a?/ end to darkness ; the miner with 
his lamp enlightens the dark places under ground. 

4. They are dried np; the miner is careful to 
keep his mine dry. 

C). Bread; grain, of which bread is made. Firf; 
stones resembling fire, or combustible fiery sub- 
stances. 

6. Sapphires ; precious stones. 

7. A path ; that which is made by miners deep 
under ground. 

0. The rock; he cutteth it through, undermines, 
breaks, and removes it in search of gold and pre- 
cious stones. 

11. From overflowvg ; weeping or dripping 
down, Ko as to annoy him in working liis mine. 



.'). Conscious integrity will give confidence ^ 

God, and support the soul under the sorest trials; | The thing that is liid ; the precious treasure 



The true wisdom is 



JOB XXIX. 



the fear of the Lord. 



B.c!iKo?" 12 But "where shall wisdom be 
found ? and where is the place of under- 
standing ? 

13 Man knoweth not the '' price there- 
of; neither is it found in the land of the 
living. 

14 The depth saith, It is not in me : 
:ind the sea saith, It is not with me. 

15 It* cannot bo gotten for "^gold, nei- 
ther shall silver be weighed for the price 
thereof. 

16 It cannot be valued with the gold of 
Ophir, with the precious onyx, or the 
sapphire. 

1 7 The gold and the crystal cannot equal 
it : and the exchange of it shall not be 
for tjewels of fine gold. 

18 No mention shall be made of tcoral, 
or of pearls : for the price of wisdom is 
above rubies. 

19 The topaz of Ethiopia shall not 
equal it, neither shall it be valued with 
pure gold. 

20 Whence'^ then cometh wisdom? and 
where is the place of understanding? 

21 Seeing it is hid from the eyes of all 
living, and kept close from the fowls of 
the ^air. 

22 Destruction and death say, We have 
heard the fame thereof with our ears. 

23 God ^ understandeth the way thereof, 
and he knoweth the place thereof. 

24 For "^he looketh to the ends of the 
earth, and seeth under the whole heaven ; 

25 To s make the weight for the winds ; 
and he weigheth the waters by meas- 
ure. 



a Eccl. 7 : 24. b Prov. 3 : 13-15. • Heb. Fine gold shall not he 
given for it. c Prov. 8: U, 19; 16:lfi. f Or, veiselt. t Or, 
Ramoth. * d ver. 1*2 ; James 1 : 6, 17. % Or, heaven, o Prov. 2 : 6. 
r Prov. 15:3. gPsa. 135:7. \\ Or, number, h Deut 4 : 6; Psa. 



12. Wisdom ; the reasons of God's dispensa- 
tions ; or the wisdom which he exercises in the 
government of the world. 

13. The price ; value, or way to obtain it. 

16. Gold of Ophir; the most valuable kind. 
Onyx ; a precious gem. 

18. Coral — rubies ; precious stones. 

19. Topaz of Ethiopia ; a most precious gem. 
2.5. Weigheth the waters ; accurately adjusts 

their measure and weight. 

28. The fear of the Lord ; that which leads 
men to be governed by his revealed will, is the 
height of human wisdom ; it will give them un- 
derstanding of all which they need to know, to be 
great, good, and happy. 

IXSTRUCTIOX.'^. 

1. The goodness of God in storing the e.irth with 
;il! needful treasures, which may be obt.ained by 
iiuinan skill, industry, and perseverance, should be 
devoutly acknowledged by all, and lead them grate- 
fully to adore and serve him. 

9. Should men seek for heavenly wisdom .as sin- 
cerely, earnestly, and perseveringly as miners do 
for silver, and search for it as they do for hidden 
treasures, they might all possess that fear of the 
Lord which is true wisdom, and that knowledge of 
God and of his ways which is life to the soul. 



26 When he made a decree for the rain, 
and a way for the lightning of the thun- 
der ; 

27 Then did he see it, and II declare it; 
he prepared it, yea, and searched it out. 

28 And unto man he said, Behold the 
fear"" of the Lord, that is 'wisdom; and 
to depart from evil is understanding. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

Job beraoaneth himself of his former prosperity and 
honor. 

MOREOVER Job *continued his par- 
able, and said, 

2 Oh that I were as in. months past;, as 
in the days vhen God preserved me ; 

3 When his t candle shined upon my 
head, and when by his light I ■> walked 
through darkness ; 

4 As I was in the days of my youth, 
when the '' secret of God was upon my 
tabernacle ; 

5 When the Almighty was yet with me, 
when my children u'cre about me ; 

6 When ' I washed my steps with but- 
ter, and the rock poured t mc out rivers 
of oil ; 

7 When I went out to the gate through 
the city, when I prepared my seat in the 
street ! 

8 The young men saw me, and hid them- 
selves : and the aged arose, and stood up. 

9 The princes refrained talking, and laid 
their hand on their mouth. 

10 The* nobles held their peace, and 
their tongue cleaved to the roof of their 
mouth. 



Ill : 10; Prov. 1:7; 9:10; EccI.12:l3. ijamea3:l7. 'Heb. 
added to take up. t Or, lamp, j Psalm 23 : 4, k Psa. 26 : 14. 
1 Deut. 3.1 :24. f Heb. uiiVA mc. 5 Heb. The voice of Ihenoblet 
was hid. 



13. True wisdom is not to be found in searching 
the recesses of the earth, or ransacking the bowels 
of nature, nor is it to be discovered by human rea- 
sonings and efforts ; but it must be revealed and 
communicated by the Creator. 

23. Application for wisdom by humble, hearty 
prayer should daily be made to God ; and his com- 
munications in his word, and by his Spirit and provi- 
dence, be received in living faith. 

28. Heavenly wisdom if it prevails will lead a, 
person, so far as he understands what is right, to 
make it his great object heartily to do it as unto 
the Lord ; and so far as he understands what is 
wrong, to avoid it, and thus strive habitually to 
perfect holiness in the fear of God. 

CHAPTER XXLX. 
2. ///. mot/ths past ; in the time of his pros- 
perity. 

6. Butter and — oil; evidences of great pros- 
perity and abundance. 

7. I prepared my seat ; as a magistrate or 
judge. 

8. Stood up ; as a token of respect. 

10. And their tongue cleaved to the roof of 
their month; they were overawed and held their 
peace. 

649 



Job^s former honor is 



JOB XXX. 



turned into contempt 



1 1 When tlic ear heard me^ then it 
blessed * me ; ajid when the eye saw me, 
it gave witness to me : 

12 Because I "^ delivered the poor that 
cried, and the fatherless, and him that 
had none to help him. 

13 The blessing of him that was ready 
to perish came upon me : and I caused 
the widow's heart to sing for joy. 

14 I "^ put on righteousness, and it clothed 
me : my judgment icas as a robe and a 
diadem. 

15 I was ^eyes to the blind, and feet 
was I to the lame. 

16 I icas a father to the poor: and the 
cause*" which I knew not I searched out. 

17 And I brake the *jaws of the wicked, 
and t plucked the spoil out of his teeth. 

18 Then ''I said, I shall die in my nest, 
and I shall multiply my days as the sand. 

19 My root was +spread out by the wa- 
ters, and the dew lay all night upon my 
branch. 

20 My glory was ^ fresh in me, and my 
bow 8 was llrenewed in my hand. 

21 Unto me men gave ear, and waited, 
and kept silence at my counsel. 

22 After my words they spake not 
again ; and my speech dropped upon them. 

23 And they waited for me as for the 
rain ; and they opened their mouth wide 
as for the latter rain. 

24 //"I laughed on them, they believed 
it not; and the light of my countenance 
they ca.'Jt not down. 

25 I chose out their way. and sat chief, 
and dwelt as a king in the army, as one 
that comforteth the mourners. 



• Luke4:ii: 11 : 37. 


b Psa. 72:1-2: Prov. 21 


13; 24:11,1-2. 


eTsJl.61 : 10; F.pli.6:l4. 


d Num. 10:31. • Pro* 


. 2H:7. * Heb. 


jfttr teeth, or ffriTuUft, f 


\ic\>. cast. fPsa. 30:6. 


± Heb. opened. 


4 Hel>. tuw. f Gen. -li) 


■24. II Heb. cliangrd. 


Heb. o/ fewer 



11. Gave witness to me; to his integrity and 
usefulness. 

14. It clothed me; uprightness -was that by 
■which he was known. It was liis covering and 
ornament. 

16. I searched out; he inquired into, and ex- 
annined with impartiality, the cause of the stran- 
ger, as well as that of his acquaintance. 

17. Brake the jatvs ; overcame the oppressors, 
and delivered the oppressed. 

15. T)ie ill- mij nest ; not meet with reverses, 
but live long, and go to the grave it* peace. 

19. My root n-as spread out; lie flourished 
like a tree by a fountain of water. 

20. My boiv was renewed; the bow is an em- 
blem of strength, and a means of defence. The 
meaning is, he was kept constanfly strong. 

2"2. They gpake not again ; men were satisfied 
with his decisions. 

23. They n.-aited for me; to speak and settle 
their didiculties. * j 

2-1. They Relieved it vot ; it did not change 
their respect for him. nor his influence over them. 
INSTRUCTION'S. 

2. Prosperity is the gift of God. He grants as 
much of it to his people, and continue.s it as long, 
650 



1 Job's honor is turned into extreme contempt. 15 
His prosperity into calamity. 

BUT now they that are *younger than I 
have me in derision, whose fathers I 
would have disdained to have ■set with 
the dogs of my flock. 

2 Yea, whereto might the strength of 
their hands profit me. in whom old age 
was perished 1 

3 For want and famine they u-ere t soli- 
tary; fleeing into the wilderness Mn for- 
mer time desolate and waste: 

4 Who cut up mallows by the bushes, 
and juniper-roots /o?- their meat. 

5 They were driven forth from among 
tnenSihey cried after them as after a thief.) 

6 To dwell in the clifls of the valleys, 
m leaves of the earth, and in the rocks. 

7 Among the bushes they brayed ; un- 
der the nettles they were gathered to- 
gether. 

8 They were children of fools, yea, ''chil- 
dren of llbase men : they were viler than 
the earth. 

9 And 'now am I their song, yea, I am 
their i byword. 

10 They abhor me, they flee far from 
me, and *spare not to ''spit in my face. 

11 Because he hath loosed my cord, 
and afllictcd me, they have also let loose 
the bridle before me. 

12 Upon my right hand rise the youth : 
they push away my feet, and they raise up 
against me the ways of their destruetinn. 

13 They mar my path, they set forward 
my calamity, they have no helper. 

14 They came vpon me as a wide break- 



Ihe niglit. % Heb. vetleinhht. % Heb. lio'et. 
■ Psa. 6!1:12; Lorn. 



dans, t Or. dark 

h Pea. 41): 10-13. !| Hrh. mm of no name. 

3:14 ra. j chap. 17: a ' Heb. withhold not spittle fi 

f)0:6; Mat. 2(i:67: 27 : :!0. 



as he sees best; but no one should feel that it will 
certainly be continued to the end of life, or forget 
that it may soon and suddenly be taken away. 

18. Confidence in the continuance of peace and 
prosperity is dangerous, and often followed by dis- 
appointment and sorrow. If the Lord will, we shall 
live; and we slnll be in this condition or that, in 
prosperity or adversity, as seemeth good in his 
sight. , 

(^HAriER XXX. 

2. Old age v/s perished; they were prema- 
turely old and feeble on account of their poverty. 

3. Fleeing into the wilderness ; they were 
vagabonds, shunning the society of their fellow- 
men. 

4. Malloivs ; a plant like lettuce, sometimes 
used as a salad. 

5. They ivere driveti forth ; on account of their 
crimes. 

7. Brayed; uttered their cries. 

11. He; God. Loosed my cord; taken away 
my strength, so that I cannot defend myself, het 
loose the bridle ; cast off all restraint in afflicting 
me. 

12. Ways of their de.ttrnctioii ; ways adapted 
to destroy me. 



He bemoaneth his 



JOB XXXI. 



■wretched condition. 



B.o'S in? ill of waters: in the desolation 
they rolled themselves vpon me. 

15 Terrors are turned upon me: they 
pursue my *soul as the wind: and my 
welfare passeth away as a cloud. 

16 And now my soul is poured *out 
upon me ; the days of affliction have 
taken hold upon me. 

1 7 My bones are pierced in me in the 
night season : and my sinews take no rest. 

18 By the great force of my disease is 
my garment changed : it bindeth me 
about as the collar of my coat. 

19 He hath ''cast me into the mire, and 
I am become like dust and ashes. 

20 I cry unto thee, and thou dost not hear 
me : I stand up, and thou regardest me not. 

21 Thou art t become cruel to me : with 
thy + strong hand thou opposest thyself 
against me. 

22 Thou liftest me up to the wind ; 
thou causest me to ride upon it, and dis- 
solvest my ^substance. 

23 For I know that thou wilt bring me 
to death, and to the house "^ appointed for 
all living. 

24 Howbeit he will not stretch out his 
hand to the li grave, though they cry in 
his destruction. 

25 Did not I weep for him that was * in 
trouble 1 was not my soul grieved for the 
jioor ? 

26 When '' I looked for good, then evil 
came unto me : and when I waited for 
light, there came darkness. 

27 My bowels boiled, and rested not : 
the days of affliction prevented me. 



* Heb. principal one. a Psa. 42 : 4. b ch:ip. 9 : 31. f Heb. 
turned to be. \ Heb. the strength oj thy hand. % Or. luisdom. 
c Gen. S : 19. || Heb. heap. * Heb. hard of day. d .ler. 8 : 15. 



17. My bones are pierced; expressive of the 
keenest and most aggravated pain. 

20. Thee ; CroJ. Dost not hear ; dost not re- 
move my distress. 

22. Disso/vest my substance ; as with the fire 
of his indignation. 

24. Not stretch out his hand; in the grave he 
hoped to have rest. 

25. D id not I weep ; at the calamities of others, 
when he M-as in prosperity. 

26. I looked fur good ; in connection with his 
charitable deeds. 

27. Prevented ; went before, came upon me. 
29. Dragons ; monsters of the sea, or desert. 

Owls ; translated by some, ostriches. 

IXSTRUCTIONS. 

1. Great prosperity may speedily be followed by 
groat afflictions. None, therefore, should be unduly 
lifted up by the one, or cast down by the other. 
Both are under the control of G-od ; and in both, the 
great object of all should be to know him. 

9. To be the song of the drunkard and the jest of 
the vilest of mankind, has often been the lot of the 
virtuous ; especially of those who have been active 
in bringing punishment upon the vicious. 

17. Bodily diseases are often more distressing, 
and the pains which they occasion are harder to 
bear, than any can realize, except those who endure 



28 I went mourning without the sun : 
I stood up, and I cried in the congrega- 
tion. 

29 I am a brother to dragons, and a 
companion to +owis. 

30 My "skin is black upon me, and my 
bones are burned w-ith heat. 

31 My harp also \?,turnedio mourning, 
and my organ into the voice of them that 
weep. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

Job maketh a solemn protestation of his integrity in 
several duties. 

I MADE a covenant with mine '^eyes; 
why then should I s think upon a 
maid % 

2 For what portion of God is there from 
above? and ichat inheritance of the Al- 
mighty from on high? 

3 Is not destruction to the wicked"? 
and a strange punishment to the workers 
of iniquity? 

4 Doth ''not he see my ways, and count 
all my steps? 

5 If ' I have walked with vanity, or if 
my foot hath hasted to deceit ; 

6 Let +me be weighed in an even bal- 
ance, that God may know mine integrity. 

7 If my step hath turned out of the 
way, and my J heart walked after mine 
eyes, and if any blot hath cleaved to 
my hands ; 

8 Then let mc sow, and let another eat; 
yea, let my offspring be rooted out. 

9 If my heart have been deceived by 
a woman, or if I have laid wait at my 
neighbor's door ; 



t Or,nstriches. e Lam. 4:8; .'i:IO. f Milt, o i iS. e ProT. 6 : !». 
h John 1:48: Jer.32:19. i Psa. 44:20, -21. t Heb. him weigh 
me in halantes of Justice, i E7.ek. 14 :3-7. 



them ; and when such are neglected and reviled by 
those who ought to pity and relieve tiieni, the evil 
is greatly increased. 

20. ^\ hen good men in distress cry imto God, 
though he hears and will eventually an.swer, and do 
exceeding abundantly above all that they ask, yet 
he may not, and often does not, at once relieve them ; 
but calls them to let patience have its perfect work, 
that thus they may be perfect and entire, wanting 
nothing. 

23. The nearness and certainty of death should 
lead all to be habitually prepared for it ; and though 
deeds of mercy for Christ's sake will not secure un- 
interrupted prosperity in this world, not even the 
giving of a cup of cold water to his disciples will 
fail of an abundant reward in the life to come. 

CHArTER XXXI. 
2. What portion, of God ; what portion, if he 
transgressed, could he expect from God ? 

4. lie ; God. 

5. Hasted to deceit ; to execute a deceitful or 
fraudulent purpose. 

6. Weigkea in an even balance ; righteously 
judged. 

7. If any blot hath cleaved; if he had com- 
mitted any crime. 

9. Laid wait; to commit adultery with his 
neighbor's wife. 

651 



Job protesteth 



JOB XXXI. 



his iniegrity. 



10 Then let my wife grind unto another, 
and let others bow down upon her. 

1 1 For this IS a lieinous crime ; yea, it 
IS "an iniquity to be punished by the 
judges. 

12 For it is a fire that consumeth to 
destruction,'' and would root out all mine 
increase. 

13 If I did despise the cause of my man- 
servant or of my maid-servant, when they 
contended with me; 

14 What then shall I do when God 
riseth up? and when he visiteth, what 
shall I answer him? 

15 Did'^not he that made me in the 
womb make him? and *did not one fash- 
ion us in the womb 1 

16 If I have withheld the poor from 
iheir desire, or have caused the eyes of 
the widow to fail ; 

17 Or have eaten my morsel myself 
alone, and the fatherless hath not eaten 
thereof; 

18 (For from my youth he was brought 
up with me, as icith a father, and I have 
guided ther from my mother's womb;) 

19 If I have seen any perish for want 
of clothing, or any poor without covering ; 

20 If his loins have not ''blessed me, 
and if he were 7iot warmed with the 
fleece of my sheep; 

21 If I have lifted up my hand against 
the fatherless, when I saw my help in the 
gate: 

22 Then let mine arm fall from my shoul- 
der-blade, and mine arm be broken from 
the* bone. 

213 For "^ destruction /rom God was a ter- 
ror to me, and by reason of his Hiighness 
1 could not endure. 



» T,ev 


20:10. 


b Mill 


3:5: Heb 


13:4. 


c Prov. 2: : 5. 


* Or, 


did he notfiishi 


m ut in 


one womb? 


t TIml 


is, tht 


widow. 


d Deut. 


•u-.n. 


% Or, Otf channel hone. 


e Psa. 


ii'd 


20. fP«a. 76:7. 


B 1 Tim 


ti:I7. 


ij Hel) 


found. 


II Heb. 


light. 


* Heb 


bright. 



11. runished by the judges ; it is an offence 
not only ajrainst individuals, but .^gainRt society, 
and as such to t>c punished by the maj^istrates. 

13. If I did drsptse the cause of my man- 
servaiit or — mttid-servaiU ; if he had not been 
strictly impartial and just towards them, as well as 
towards his equals. 

11. Riscth up; to judgment. 

1.'). Make hi in ; we had one common Creator, 
have one common- nature, and are brethren. 

16. Their desire ; what they ouglit to desire 
and might reasonably expect. 

18. Her; the widow. From my molher^s 
n-nmb ; from his earliest years. 

21. Saif my help in. the gate-; when he had 
power to oppress them. 

23. Coidd iiot endure ; to oppress the father- 
less ; he was kept from it by the fear of God. 

27. Secretly enticed ; to idolize lii.s wealth, or 
worship any of the heavenly bodies. Kissed my 
hand ; a form of idolatrous worship. 

29. Lifted lip myself; been elated, and re- 
joiced when evil came upon his enemy. 
052 



24 If el have made gold my * «:?SJ 
hope, or have said to the fine gold, Thou 
art my confidence: 

25 If I rejoiced because my wealth was 
great, and because my hand had ^ gotten 
much; 

26 If I beheld the II sun when it shined. 
or the moon walking *in brightness ; 

27 And my heart hath been secretly 
enticed, or ^ my mouth hath kissed my 
hand : 

28 This '' also iccre an iniquity to he pun- 
ished by the judge : for I should have 
denied the God that is above. 

29 If I rejoiced at the destruction of him 
that hated me, or lifted up myself when 
evil found him ; 

30 Neither have I suffered my t mouth 
to ' sin by wishing a curse to his soul. 

31 If the men of my tabernacle said not, 
Oh that we had of his flesh ! we cannot 
be satisfied. 

32 The J stranger did not lodge in the 
street : but I opened my doors to the 
traveller. 5 

33 If I covered my transgressions II as 
Adam,'' by hiding mine iniquity in my 
bosom : 

34 Did I fear a great ' multitude, or did 
the contempt of families terrify me, that I 
kept silence, «)!(/ went not out of the door? 

35 Oh that one would hear me ! behold, 
my* desire is, that the Almighty would 
answer me, and that mine adversary had 
written a book. 

3G Surely I would take it upon my 
shoulder, and bind it as a crown to me. 

37 I would declare unto him the num- 
ber of my steps ; as a prince would I go 
near unto him. 



f Hel>. my hand hath kissed mp 
palate, i' Ercl. .■> : a i Is.i. BR: 7 ; Heb 
after the manner of men. k Gen. 3 
My sign is tb:ft the Almighty will an- 



h Deut. 17:2-7. t Heb- 
b. I3:i. % Or, Kfov. 11 Or, 
,12. I Exod. 23:2. * Or, 



31. If the men, of my tahervacle ; if any of 
them were left to pine in want, and say, that we 
had of his meat. 

33. Hiding mine iniquitrj ; from men, and 
trying to hide it from God. 

'34. That I kept silevep ; when he should have 
spoken. Went not out ; from fear of the contempt 
of his neighbors. Some have supposed the mean- 
ing of this verse to be. Let me be confounded before 
the multitude, let the contempt of families follow 
me, let me be silent and not go abroad, if I have 
covered my transgressions, or committed any of the 
crimes above-mentioned. 

.3"). Written a book; wriltcn out the charges 
against him, that he might understand and answer 
them ; have a fair trial, and be acquitted. 

.36. Take it upon, my shoulder; sust.nin his 
innocence, and in sucji a manner tliatall might see 
it. He would even wear the disproved accusation 
;is an ornament. 

37. As a prince vonld I go ; with confidence 
to be acquitted and approved ; not as a criminal to 
be condemned. 



Elihu reproveth Job 



JOB XXXII. 



and bis three friends. 



B.c.'^&M.' 38 If my land cry against me, or 
that the furrows likewise thereof *eom- 
plain ; 

39 If I have eaten the tfruits thereof 
without money, or have caused + the 
owners thereof to lose their "life: 

40 Let thistles grow instead of wheat, 
and ^cockle instead of barley. The words 
of Job are ended. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

1 Elihu is angry with Job and his three friends. 6 
Because wisdom cometh not from age, he excuseth 
the boldness of his youth. 11 He reproveth them for 
not satisfying of Job. 16 His zeal to speak. 

1^0 these three men ceased II to answer 
KJ Job, because he was righteous in his 
own eyes. 

2 Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu 
the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the 
kindred of Ram : against Job was his 
wrath kindled, because he justified *him- 
self rather than God. 

3 Also against his three friends was his 
wrath kindled, because they had found 
no answer, and yet had condemned Job. 

4 Now Elihu had twaited till Job had 
spoken, because they rvcre Welder than he. 

5 When Elihu saw that there was no 
answer in the mouth of these three men, 
then his wrath was kindled. 

6 And Elihu the son of Barachel the 



* Heb.wcep. j Heb. strength. t Or, the soul n/ l/ie oianers 
thereof to expire, or breathe out. a 1 Kings, 21 : 13. \ Or. noi- 
some tveeds. li Heb. from answering. " Heb. his soul, f Heb. 
expected Job in words. ^ Heh. elder for days. % Heh. few of 



38. If my land cry against vie; for having 
■wTongfiiUy obtained it, or not justly rewarding those 
who have cultivated it. 

39. Without mo7iey ; without fully paying for 
it. Caused — to lose their life ; by taking away 
their means of support. 

40. Thistles — a«(^ cocZ/e; noisome weeds. The 
words of Job ; on this subject, and in this discus- 
sion with his friends, are ended. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. True religion leads those who have it to feel 
that the eye of G-od is upon them, and strive to 
regulate their appetites and pa.ssions. and all their 
thoughts and feelings, as well as their outward con- 
duct, according to his will. 

5. Piety towards Grod will lead to justice, im- 
partiality, and kindness towards men ; to honesty, 
chastity, diligence, sobriety, and all those virtues 
which promote the welfare of individuals and of the 
community. 

11. Infidelity to the marriage covenant is a great 
crime, and those who are guilty of it are among the 
basest and most mischievous of men. 

13. Servants and masters have the same heav- 
enly Parent, and are brethren ; and they are bound 
to treat each other as such, doing, each to the other, 
as they ought to wish that the other should do to 
them. 

16. True religion is compassionate, and leads 
those who have it to assist the widow and the fa- 
therless, the poor, the sick, and the destitute, and in 
various ways, as they have opportunity and ability, 
to help the needy. 

21. Piety in magistrates \y\\\ lead to fidelity in 
the discharge of official duties ; will secure the weak 

42 



Buzite answered and said, I am H'oung, 
and ye are A^ery ''old: wherefore I was 
afraid, and II durst not show you mine 
opinion. 

7 I said, Days should speak, and mul- 
titude of years should teach wisdom. 

8 But there is a "^spirit in man: and the 
inspiration"* of tlie Almighty giveth them 
understanding. 

9 Great '"men arc not always wise: nei- 
ther do the aged understand judgment. 

10 Therefore I said, Hearken to me; I 
also will show mine opinion. 

1 1 Behold, I waited for your words ; I 
gave ear to your * reasons, whilst ye 
searched out t what to say. 

12 Yea, I attended unto you, and be- 
hold, there was none of you that convinc- 
ed Job, or that answered his words : 

13 Lest ye should say, "^We have found 
out wisdom : God thrusteth him down, 
not man. 

14 Now he hath not ^directed his words 
against me: neither will I answer him 
with your speeches. 

15 They were amazed, they answered! 
no more: they Heft off speaking. 

16 When I had waited, (for they spake 
not. but stood still, and answered no more.) 

17 J said, I will answer also my part;. 
I also will show mine opinion. 



days, b chap. 15:10. 


\\ iiPb. feared. cProv. 20:27. d Pmr 


■2:6; Pan. -2:21. • 


Mat. 11 :2->; 1 Cor. 1 : 2T. * Heb. under 


standings, f Heb. w 


,rds. f.)er, 9:21. XOt, ordered. % Heb 


removed speeches fron 


I themselves. 



and helpless against the encroachments of the strong 
and overbearing ; and will afford protection to the 
just rights of all. 

24. The increase of riclies increases the danger 
of setting the heart on them ; and men are often 
secretly idolaters, without publicly bowing down to 
idols. They deny to (rod the homage of their hearts, 
and live without loving or obeying him. 

32. It is exceedingly ditBcult for a man to recount 
his virtues and not be elated, and it is ordinarily not 
best to attempt it ; yet sometimes it is proper, and 
if done with a right spirit, may be useful ; but much 
grace is needful to prevent being so lifted up with 
pride as to fall into the condemnation of the devil. 

39. To withhold a just reward from the laborer, 
or eat the fruit of his toil without compensation, is 
a heinous sin ; and though it may be hidden from 
men. it will be brought to light by God, and be 
visited with his sore displeasure. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

1. Was righteous in. his otvn eyes; main- 
tained that lie was no hypocrite, but a pious and 
benevolent man. 

8. A spirit in man ; when enlightened by God 
to discern between right and wrong, and that true 
wisdom comes from him. 

1.3. Lest ye should say ; they had not been per- 
mitted to convince Job or settle the controversy, lest 
they should attribute it to their own wisdom and be 
lifted up with pride. God and not man must con- 
vince Job of his errors. 

14. With your speeches ; in the manner which 
they atteinpted. 

15. They; Job's three friends. 

653 



God callelh man 



JOB XXXIII. 



unto repentance. 



18 For I am full of * matter; the spirit 
withint me constrainetli me. 

19 Behold, my belly is as wine which 
hat!i+ no vent: it is ready to burst like 
new bottles. 

20 I will speak, that I may * be refresh- 
ed : I will open my lips and answer. 

21 Let mc not, I pray you, accept any 
man's person ; neither let me give flatter- 
ing titles unto man. 

22 For »I know not to give flattering 
titles; in so doing my '' Maker would soon 
take mc away. 

chaptp:r XXXIII. 

1 Elihu ofTereth himself instead of God, -with sincerity 
and meekness, to reason with Job. 8 He excnseth 
God from giving man an account of liis ways, by his 
greatness. 14 God calleth man to repentance by 
visions, 19 by afflictions, 23 and by his ministry. .31 
He inciteth Job to attention. 

"YTrHEREFORE, Job, I pray thee, hear 
\ V my speeches, and hearken to all 
my words. 

2 Behold, now I have opened my mouth, 
my tongue hath spoken in my II mouth. 

3 IMy " words shall be of the uprightness 
of my heart : and my lips shall utter 
knowledge'* clearly. 

4 The Spirit of God halhmade me. and the 
breath of the Almighty hath given me life. 

5 If thou canst answer me, set thy words 
ill order before mc, stand up. 

6 Behold, I am according to thy *wish 
ill "^God's stead: I also am t formed out 
of the clay. 

7 Behold, ^my terror shall not make 
thee afraid, neither shall my hand be 
heavy upon thee. 



» H?b. 


Dordl. 


t H 


eh. 


of 


my betty. 


t Heb. 


It not 


opened. 


5Heb. 


bre 


nihe. 


. Ga 


1 


10. 


b Psa. li 


■.■2. a. 


II Heb.j.o/ 


ate. 


e Pr<.^ 


8: 


6-9. A 


Titiia 


2 : 


".l* 


* Heb. m 


outh. 1 


ci.ap.9 


:«. 


Wt. 


t HeU 


cu 


. t cl 


np. 9 


:)4 


t 


Heb. M.». 


h cli.np 


.10:7; 


Hi: 


17; 



19. Is as wine which hath 110 vent; he was 
so full of the subject, that he could not refrain from 
speaking. 

21. Accept any man's person; use any par- 
tiality. 

22. I know not; it was not his character; or 
habit. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. In earnest controversies, an impartial by- 
stander may often see much to disapprove and con- 
demn in both parties; and when they have finished 
their arfjimieiiLs, he may to advanta";e, in a plain, 
kind, and friendly manner, point out tlieir mistakes. 
But it is generally not best to attempt this, till the 
heat of the controversy is over, and they are pre- 
pared to receive his suggestions with attention and 
candor. 

8. All true wisdom is from above, and comes 
down from the Father of lights ; and he sometimes 
imparts more of it to the young than to the aged, and 
makes those who are taught wiser than their teachers. 

13. Sometimes the errors of ;ncn are such that 
none but God can convince them, or lead them to 
embrace the tnith ; and in our attempts to do it we 
should look up to liirn, without.whose influence all 
human efforts will fail. 

21. Impartiality in the treatment of disputants 
654 



8 Surely thou hast spoken in tails', 
my + hearing, and I have heard the voice 
of '^thy words, saying, 

9 I am clean without transgression. I am 
innocent; neither js //tere iniquity in me. 

10 Behold, he findeth occasions against 
mc, 'he counteth me for his enemy ; 

11 He ^putteth my feet in the stocks, 
he marketh all my paths. 

12 Behold, in this thou art not just : I 
will answer thee, that God is greatei 
than man. 

13 Why dost thou strive ''against him? 
for he ^giveth not 'account of any of his 
matters. 

14 For God speaketh once, yea, ""twice, 
yet nmn perceiveth it not. 

15 In a dream, in a vision of the night, 
when deep sleep fallelh upon men, in 
slumberings upon the bed; 

16 Then he Hopcneth the ears of men, 
and sealeth their instruction, 

17 That he may "withdraw ma.n from 
his *purpose, and hide "pride from man. 

18 He keepeth back his soul from the 
pit, and his life from ^perishing by the 
sword. 

19 He Pis chastened also with pain 
upon his bed, and the multitude of his 
bones with strong pain : 

20 So that his life abhorreth bread, and 
his soul -dainty meat. 

21 Ilis flesh is consumed away, that it 
cannot be seen ; and his bones that were 
not seen stick out. 

22 Yea, his soul draweth near unto the 
grave, and his life to the destroyers. 



Vi 


II 


, I2;'J7 


5,fi; 


29 : H. 




cl.np 


19 


11. 


1 


chap 


1.1:27. 


k I 


oa. 


4F> 


9. 


4 Heb. 


<ins%o 


e>elh n 


•t 


IDn 


1.4 


■SB. 


n 


Psa. 02:11. 


1 H 


•h. 


reveateth, or uncoxre 


leth. 


n 


rimp. 


7: 


II. 


* 


Heb 


lonrk. 


1 


.ia. 


23 


9. 


t Heb. 


passino by. 


P 


Psa. 107: 


17. 


t 


Heb. 


meat of 


detire. 



is essential to mutual conviction ; and a deep sense 
of accountability to God, before whom all must 
shortly appear, should ever pervade our minds when 
we undertake to point out the errors and correct the 
mistakes of our fellow-men. 

CHAPTER XXXIIT. 
6. In God's stead ; he would speak for God. and 
attempt to. justify him in his dealings with Job. 

9. lam iinioceiit ; Job meant, that he was in- 
nocent of the crimes with which his friends charged 
him: but I'^lihu interpreted what he had said, to 
mean that he was free from all sin. 

10. He; God. 

11. He pittteth my feet in the stocks ; con- 
fined him by sickness. 

1"2. Thouartnotjnst ; in thus speaking of God 
as if he were unjust and cruel. 

11. God speaketh ; revealeth his will. 

IG. Scalfth their instruction ; impresses in- 
struction upon their minds and hearts, as to the 
consequences of virtue and vice. 

17. His purpose ; his purpose of committing in- 
iquity, llide pride ; make him humble. 

IS. Ki'rpeth hnch his soul from the pit ; by vis- 
iting him with sickness, and in various ways afflict- 
ing (lim. not for his destruction, but for his profit. 



God omnipotent 



JOB XXXIV 



cannot be unjust. 



R. (•' illSI' 23 If there be a messengci- with ' 
him, au interpreter, one among a thou- 
sand, to show unto man his uprightness ; 

24 Then he is gracious unto him, and 
saith. Deliver him from going down to the 
pit: I have found *a ransom. 

25 His flesh shall be fresher than t a 
child's : he shall return to the days of his 
youth : 

26 He shall pray unto God, and he will 
be favorable unto him: and he shall see 
his face with joy ; for he will render unto 
man his righteousness. 

27 Het looketh upon men, and if any 
say, 'I have sinned, and perverted that 
which ivas right, and it profited me not; 

28 He^ will deliver his soul from going 
into the pit, and his life shall see the light. 

29 Lo, all these things worketh God 
oftentimes H with man. 

30 Tobringback his soul from the''pit,to 
be enlightened with the<= light of the living. 

31 Mark well, Job, hearken unto mc : 
hold thy peace, and I will speak. 

32 If thou hast any thing to say, answer 
me : speak, for I desire to justify thee. 

33 If not, hearken unto me: hold thy 
peace, and I shall teach thee wisdom. 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

1 KUhn accuseth Job frr charging God with injustice. 
lU God omnipotent cannot be unjnst. 31 IVIan must 
humble himself unto God. 34 Elihu reproveth Job. 

"TpURTHERMORE Elihu answered and 
JD said, 
2 Hear my words, ye wise men; and 



* Or, an atonement. f Heb. cItildUoud. t Or, He shall look 
upon men, and say, I have sinned. « 1 Jolin, 1:9. % Or, He hath 
deliuered mi) sou), etc., and my life. || Heb. tu'ice nnd thrice. 



23. One among a thousand; if one should 
show him the uprightness, or righteousne.ss of God 
in his afflictions — that they are desijjned to lead 
him to repentance, and thus prepare him for a re- 
newal anil increase of blessin<rs. 

24. He is gracious; God will be gracious to 
the penitent, and deliver him from death through 
the ransom or atonement he has provided. 

•2-5. Hisjlesh shall be fresher than a child's ; 
he shall be restored to perfect health, and put on 
again the freshness and vigor of youth. 

27. If any saij, I have sinned; repent of and 
forsake his sins. 

28. See the light ; be visitsd with prosperity. 
30. To bring back his soul from the pit ; the 

general doctrine of Elihu was, that the Lord sends 
afflictions to bring men to repentance, and thus to 
save them from death and fit them for the blessings 
of his grace. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

'). If we cannot justify ourselves before frail, sin- 
ful men like ourselves, much less can we before the 
omniscient, heart-searching, rein-trying God; and 
we should not attempt it, but confess and forsake our 
sins, and turn heartily to liim, that we m.ay find mercy. 

10. Great care should be taken, that in our dis- 
tresses we do not seem to reflect upon the righteous- 
ness, wisdom, or goodness of God ; or attribute to 
him, even in thought or feeling, any thing deroga- 
tory to his holy and perfect character. 



give ear unto me, ye that have know- 
ledge. 

3 For the ear trieth words, as the *mouth 
taste th meat. 

4 Let us choose to us judgment: let us 
know among ourselves what is good. 

5 For Job hath "'said, I am righteous: 
and God hath taken away my judgment. 

6 Should I lie against my right? my 
wound t is incurable without transgres- 
sion. 

7 What man is like Job, who drinketh 
up scorning like water; 

8 Which goeth in company with the 
workers of iniquity, and walketh with 
wicked men? 

9 For he hath said. It profiteth a man 
nothing Mhat he should delight himself 
with God. 

10 Tlierefore hearken unto me, ye men 
of t understanding : far be it from God, 
that he shoidddo wickedness ; and from the 
Almighty, that he should commit iniquity. 

11 For the ""work of a man shall he 
render unto him, and cause every man to 
find according to his ways. 

12 Yea, surely God will not do wick- 
edly, neither will the Almighty pervert 
judgment. 

13 Who hath given him a charge over 
the earth? or who hath disposed Hhe 
whole world ? 

14 If he set his heart upon I'man, if he 
gather unto himself his spirit and his 
breath ; 



b Psa. 40: I :2; Isa. 38 : 17. < 
palate, i cli«ii. i? : 2. f Heb. 
i Heb. heart. I Rev. i-:: 11 



I. 56: 13; AcU 26: 18. "^ Heb. 
re. cliap. 6:1. e cbap. <) : 22, 23. 
Heb. all of it. || Heb. him. 

17. God addresses men in a great variety of ways ; 
sometimes in mercies and sometimes in trials : but 
his object is to humble them for their sins, lead them 
to repentance, and thus prepare them for his ever- 
lasting love. 

2-3. The great and effectual teacher as to the 
righteousness of God in all his dispensations, and 
the sinfulness of men, is the Holy Spirit; and if a 
man receives his teaching and obeys it, God will be 
gracious to him, overrule his trials for his ";ood. and 
through the ransom which he has provided, save 
him with an everlasting salvation. 

26. The humble and penitent soul has access to 
God by prayer and supplication, and he receives 
gracious answers of peace, and is ripening, under 
all the dispensations of Providence, for complete de- 
liverance from sin, and an entrance into that rest 
which remaineth for the people of God. 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

2. Ye n'ise men ; Job"s three friends. 
4. Judgment ; that which is right. 
.'). Taken away my judgment ; afflicts me 
■without cause. 

8. Walketh with wicked men ; pursues the 
same coiirse of argument as they do in reasoning 
about the government of God. 

9. Delight himself with God ; be a pious man. 
13. Who hath given him a charge? He is 

independent and reigns of right over all. 
655 



Man should humble 



JOB XXXV 



himself before God. 



15 All flesh shall perish together, and 
man shall turn again unto dust. 

16 If now thou hast understanding, hear 
this : hearken to the voice of my words. 

17 Shall "even he that hateth right "gov- 
ern? and wilt tliou condemn him that is 
most just? 

18 7.5 it ft to say to a ''king, Thou art 
wicked? and to princes, I'e are ungodly? 

1 9 How much less to '^him that ''accepteth 
not the persons of princes, nor regardeth 
the rich more than the poor? for they all 
are the work of his hands. 

20 In a moment shall they die, and the 
people shall be troubled at midnight, and 
pass away : and t the mighty shall be 
taken away without hand. 

21 For his ^eyes are upon the ways of 
man, and he "^seeth all his goings. 

22 There is no ^ darkness, nor shadow 
of death, where the workers of iniquity 
may '"hide themselves. 

23 For he will not lay upon man more 
than 'right; that he should tenter into 
judgment with God. 

24 He shall break in pieces mighty men 
without hiumber, and set others in their 
stead. 

25 Therefore he knoweth their works, 
and he overturneth them in the night, so 
that they are Udestroyed. 

26 He striketh them as wicked men in 
the *open J sight of others ; 

27 Because they turned back t from i 
him, and ''would not consider any of his 
ways : I 

28 So that they cause the cry of the ! 
poor to come unto him, and he ' heareth { 
the cry of the afflicted. 

29 When ""he giveth quietness, whoi 
then can make trouble ? and when he 
hideth ° his face, who then can behold 

• 2Sam.23:3. ' Heb. '<inrf. bEiod. W:28. cHeb. 1'2:28. 
■• 1 Prt- I : 17. t Heb. Ihci/ thall take away the mighty, e 2 Chron. | 
16:9. f Pi!a.l3!):2, 3. It Arnos 9:2. .3 ; Heb. 4: 13. b Rev. fi: 15, 1«. 
1 laniali 42:3: 1 Cor. 10:13. J Heb. 90. I \ieh. iearching out. 
WHeh cruthed. ' Heb. flare 0/ hehaldert. / 1 Tim. fi : 24. t Heb. 
fTomafttr. k Prov. 1 :29..30. I Eiod. 22 : 27. m Rom. 8: 31 -.34. 



\^i. All Jlesh .•shall perish ; if God so appoint; 
for all are dependent on him. 

16. Thoit ; Job. 

20. Shall thry die; if God wills it. 

33. Should it he according to thy mind? God 
will not clian;jc his plans to meet the views of men. 
lie will recompense ; treat everj- man in the end 
aocordins to his character. Refttse.or — choose; to 
sithmit to. and obey him. 

3'i. JIis n>is?''er.t for vicked men; because he 
had seemed to justify them. 

37. Mnltiplirth his vords against God; in 
.veming to speak of him as if he were unjust. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. It is wise to speak respectfully, and attempt to 
conciliate those whom we would convince of their 
errors and lead to embrace the truth. 

7, Men in controversy an- apt to put the M-or.st 
construction upon the lanpiage of their opponents. 
656 



him? whether it be done against *B.c;?wi 
a nation, or against a man only : 

30 That the hypocrite reign not, lest 
the "people be ensnared. 

31 Surely it is meet to be said unto God, 
IP have borne chastisement, I will not of- 
fend any more : 

32 That u'hich I see not ^ teach thou me : 
if I have done iniquity, ■■ I will do no more. 

33 Should it be + according to thy mind '.' 
he will recompense it, whether thou re- 
fu.se, or whether thou clioose; and not I : 
therefore speak what thou knowest. 

34 Let men of ^understanding tell me, 
and let a wi.se man hearken unto me. 

35 Job hath spoken*" without knowledge, 
and his words ^cere without wisdom. 

36 Myll desire is that Job may be tried 
unto the end, because of his answers for 
wicked men. 

37 For he addeth rebellion unto his sin, 
he clappeth his hands among us, and mul- 
tiplieth his words against God. 

CHAPTER. XXXV. 

1 Comparison is not to be made with God, because onr 
pood or evil cannot extend unto him. 9 Many cry in 
their afflictions, but are not heard for want of faith 

ELIHU spake moreover, and said, 
2 Thinkest thou this to be right, 
that thou * saidst, My righteousness is 
more than God's? 

3 For thou saidst, What "advantage will 
it be unto thee? and, What profit shall I 
have, * if I be cleansed from my sin? 

4 I will tanswer thee, and thy compan- 
ions with thee. 

5 Look unto the heavens, and see ; and 
behold the clouds which are higher than 
thou. 

6 If thou sinnest, what doest thou 
against ^'him? or i/tliy transgressions be 
multiplied, what doest thou unto him? 

'>Psa.l43:7. o 1 Kinfis 12 : 28. p D.in. 9 : 7-14. qPsa-.'K:* 
rKpli. 4:22. i Heh.f mm with thee f ^ Wch. heail. "chap. 
3l<:2. II Or, My father, let Job be tried, t cliap. 9: 17, 34; 16: 12-17; 
27:2-l>. u chapter 31 : 2, etc. • Or, by it more Man 6y my fin. 
f Hob. leturn to thee woidt. r .Jer. 7 : 19. 



and to charge them with what they do not admit, 
and with consequences which they deny. 

13. God is independent, and will govern the world 
according to his pleasure. All men are dependent 
on him for life and its enjoyments, and when he sees 
fit they instantly die. 

20. The great and the mighty are equally de- 
pendent on God with the small and the feeble, and 
all their interests are equally at his disposal. 

27. Want of consideration is a fruitful reason why 
men often turn from the ways of the Lord, and by 
oppression and cruelty draw down his judgments 
upon themselves and their fellow-men. 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

■3. Thou saidst ; .Tob had said that from which 
Elihu drew the conclusion which he here states. 

6. What doest thou against him? you do not 
so mar his happiness as to make him act unreason- 
ably towards you. 



God is jiist 



JOB XXXVI. 



in all his trays. 



B.c'ilSf' 7 If *tliou be righteous, what 
givest thou him 1 or what receiveth he of 
thy hand? 

8 Thy wickedness may hurt a man as 
thou art; and thy righteousness mayprq^f 
the sou of man. 

9 By reason of the multitude of oppres- 
sions they make the oppressed to cry : they 
cry out by reason of the arm of the 
mighty. 

10 But none saith, Where is God my 
maker, who giveth songs in the night; 

1 1 Who teacheth us more than the 
beasts of the earth, and maketh us wiser 
than the fowls of heaven? 

12 There they cry, but none giveth an- 
swer, because of the pride of evil men. 

13 Surely God will '' not hear vanity, 
neither will the Almighty regard it. 

14 Although thou sayest thou shalt not 
see him, "^yct judgment is before him; 
therefore trust thou in him. 

15 But now, because it is not so, *he 
hath visited in his anger ; yet the know- 
eth it ""not in great extremity : 

16 Therefore doth Job open his mouth 
in vain; he multiplieth words without 
knowledge. 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

1 p;iihu showeth how God is just in his ways. 16 How 
Job's sins hinder God's blessings. 24 God's works 
are to be magnified. 

ELIHU also proceeded, and said, 
2 Suffer me a little, and I will show 
thee that 1 1 have yet to speak on God's 
behalf. 

3 I will fetch my knowledge from afar, 
and will ascribe righteousness to my 
Maker. 



4 ^ipr truly my words shall not be false : 
he that is perfect in knowledge is with 
thee. 

5 Behold, God is mighty, and despiseth 
not any: he "is mighty in strength and 
wisdom.^ 

G He preserveth not the life of the wick- 
ed : but giveth right to the II poor. 

7 He "^withdraweth not his eyes from 
the righteous: but with kings are they on 
the throne; yea, he doth establish them 
for ever, and they are exalted. 

8 And 6 if they be bound in fetters, and 
be holden in cords of affliction ; 

9 Then he showeth them their work, 
and their transgressions that they have 
exceeded. 

10 He openeth also their ear to disci- 
pline, and commandeth that they return 
from iniquity. 

11 If they obey and serve him, they 
shall spend their days in prosperity, and 
their years in pleasures. 

12 But if they obey not, they shall 
perish* by the sword, and they shall die 
without knowledge. 

13 But the hypocrites in heart ''heap 
up wrath : they cry not when he bindeth 
them. 

14 Theyt die in 'youth, and their life 
is among the nmclean. 

15 He delivereth the ^ poor in his afflic- 
tion, and openeth their ears in oppres- 
sion. 

16 Even so would he have removed 
thee out of the strait i^ito a j broad place, 
where there is no straitness ; and Hthat 
which should be set on thy ''table should 
be full of fatness. 

17 But thou hast fulfilled the judgment 



a Psa. 


h : 2 ; Pro\ 


.9: 


1-2. 


Msa. 


1: 


n. c Psa. 77 : 


li-lO. * 


Tliat 


is, God. 


t Tlmt is, 


loh. 


a 


Hose 


II 


K,9. t Heb 


tliere n 


V l/ft 


„w,d,/o 


- God. « 


.ler 


.1^ 


19. 


'/ t 


eb. hearl. || 


Or, -iH 


cUd. 


f Heb. la 


:5. e Psii 


107 


:10 


* Heb 


ptui away. 


h Iloiii. 


i : h. 



7. What givest thou ? you do not so benefit him 
as to purchase his love. 

9. iheij ; the oppressors. 

10. Giveth songs ; giveth joy in adversity. 

12. They cry ; but not in a proper manner, on 
account of their pride. 

13. Not hear vanity ; vain, empty, formal, hyp- 
ocritical prayers. 

1-1. Jitdgmeut is before him; he will do only 
what is right. 

15. Because it is not so; Elihn says, that be- 
cause Job did not so trust in (rod, his afflictions were 
continued, lie knoiceth it not ; he says, Job did 
n«"it know the cause of his calamities, nor did he 
take the right way to remove them. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Men in great trials should be careful not only 
that they do not say what is not true, but also that 
they do not so express themselves as shall be mis- 
understood and do mischief to their fellow-men. 

6. The conduct of men may injure or benefit them- 
selves, but cannot add to or diminish the essential 
glory of God. 



t Heb. T/ijiV <oii( rfiVM. i Pan. 5.i : 2.3. % Ot , lodomiUt . V>ta\- 
23:17. \Or,affiictcd. jrsa.31:S. WMeXi. tht rett of thy tablt. 
It Psalm 23 : 5. 



10. Many continue in affliction, because they do 
I not in a proper manner and with a right spirit cry 

unto G-od for relief. 

11. Though G-od is invisible, yet he is perfectly 
acquainted with the wants of all the children of 
men, and gives thorn the most abundant reason at 
all times to trust in him. 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

3. From afar ; without and beyond the range of 
common thought. 

4. Perfect in, knoivledge ; this Elilm applies to 
himself. 

9. He showeth them their work; this Elihu 
states as the object of affliction. Exceeded ; that 
their transgressions have been great. 

13. They cry not ; they do not call upon G-od 
in affliction. 

\!S. Openeth their ears; to the instructions 
which his dealings are suited to impart. 

17. Fuljilled the judgment of the wicked ; 
had acted as they do, and been afflicted accord- 
ingly. 

657 



God is terrible 



JOB XXXVII. 



in his great works 



of the wicked : judgment and justice 'take 
hold on thee. 

18 Because there is wrath, beware lest 
he take thee away with his stroke: then 
a great ransom cannot tdeliver thee. 

19 Will lie esteem thy "riches? no, not 
gold, nor all the forces of strength. 

20 Desire not the night, wlien people 
are cut off in their place. 

21 Take heed, regard not iniquity: for 
this hast thou chosen rather than afflic- 
tion. 

22 Behold, God ''exalteth by his power : 
who "^teacheth like him? 

23 Who hath enjoined hinn his way? or 
who can say, Thou hast wrought ini- 
quity? 

24 Remember that thou '' magnify his 
work, which men behold. 

25 Every man may see it; man may 
behold it afar off. 

26 Behold, God is great, and wc know 
him not, 'neither can the number of his 
years be searched out. 

27 For he maketh small the drops of 
water: they pour down "^rain according 
to the vapor thereof; 

28 Which the clouds do drop and distil 
upon man abundantly. 

29 Also can any understand the spread- 
ings of the clouds, oi the noise of his 
tabernacle 7 

30 Behold, he sspreadeth his light upon 
it, and covercth the ^bottom of the sea. 

31 For by them ''judgeth he the people; 
he 'giveth meat in abundance. 

32 With clouds he covereth the light ; 
and commandeth it not to shine by the 
cloud that Cometh betwixt. 

33 The j noise thereof showeth con- 
cerning it, the cattle also concerning Uhe 
vapor. 



' Or. ihould uphold lliee. i Heb. turnt/iceniidc. •l'rovll:4. 
k Dun. 4 : 2.1. 32. cPHa.94:I-2. H p«a. 1 1 1 : "Z-*. »P«n. 102:24. 
' P«a. 147:8,9. ( Luke 17:24. J Heb. ioi./i. k Dent8:2,1.5. 
i P.a. 136:Z1; Acts 14: 17. J 1 Kinjs, IS :41 , 4r). ^ Heb. that 
which gotth up. k Dan. 10:7,8; Mnt. 28:2-4; Arta 16:2fi-29. 
II Heb. Hear in hearing. ' Heb. light f Heb. wingt. 1 P»». 



20. Tkeiught; the night of death. 

21. This; iniquity. Elihu here charges Job 
with that of which he was not CTiilty. 

23. Who hath enjoined htm? pointed out to 
God wliat he sliould do. 

30. His light; lightning. The bottom of the 
s a ; he coveretii with water. 

31. Judgeth he ; he executes judgment. 

3-3. The cattle also ; perceive wlien the storm is 
coming. 

INSTRUCTIOXS. 

2. In speaking for God, men should be careful to 
declare only his truth, and in such a manner as shall 
honor him and be useful to their fellow-men. 

10. The design of God in atllictions, is to lead 
tiii.-n to forsake their sins and to obey him. If tliey 
do this, he will in due time reward their trial's and 
bestow upon them the riches of his mercy; if thi-y 
do not, they will treasure up wrath and peri.sh witli- 
out hope. 

658 



CHAPTER XXXVII. V":?^: 

' God is to be feared because of his great works. 15 
His wisdom is unsearchable in them. 

AT this also my heart ''trembleth, and 
is moved out of his place. 

2 Hear I' attentively the noise of his 
voice, and the sound that goeth out of 
his mouth. 

3 He directeth it under the whole heav- 
en, and his *lightning unto the tends of 
the earth. 

4 After it a 'voice roareth : he ""thun- 
dereth with the voice of his excellency : 
and he will not stay them when his voice 
is heard. 

p God thundereth marvellously with his 
voice; great things doeth °he, which we 
cannot comprehend. 

6 For he saith to the snow. Be thou on 
the earth; ^likewise to the small rain, 
and to the great rain of his strength. 

7 He sealeth up the hand of every man ; 
that "all men may know his work. 

8 Then the beasts p go into dens, and 
remain in their places. 

9 Out of the ^ south cometh the whirl- 
wind : and cold out of the H north. 

10 By the breath of God ''frost is given : 
and the breadth of the waters is strait- 
ened. 

1 1 Also by watering he wearieth the 
thick cloud : he scattereth *his bright 
cloud : 

12 And it is turned round about by his 
counsels: that fhey may ^do whatsoever 
he commandeth them upon the face of the 
world in the earth. 

13 He causeth it to come, whether for 
tcorrection,' or forhisMand,or for "mercy. 

14 Hearken unto this, O Job: stand 
still, and consider the wondrous works 
of God. 

68 : :i;i. m p»a. 29 : 3. n Eco!. 3:11; Roin. H : 33. t Heb. and 
to the shineer i>f rain, and to the thotpert of tain of his strength. 
oP»a. KW:27. |> Pan. 104 :22. ^ Heb. c.humliir. || Heb. »«/- 
tering vtmii>. q Psa. 147: 17, 18. ■' Heb. the cloud of hit light. 
r Pan. 148:8. f Heb. a iW. • I Sam. 13: 18; Ezra 10 :9. t 1 Kings, 
18:4.i. u Joel 2: 23. 



18. When men have once p.'kssed the boundaries 
of probation, they are unalterably fixed in their final 
unchaiiging state. 

26. The character and ways of God are in many 
respects unsearchable, past finding out. It is our 
wisdom and duty to bow submissively before him, 
feeling that though clouds and darkness are round 
about him, justice and judgment, righteousness and 
truth are the habitation of his throne. 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 

2. The 7ioise of his voice ; the thunder. 
7. lie sealeth ii]> the hand ; by the approach of 
winter, he stops the laborer in his work. 

10, The breadth of the waters is straitened , 
by being frozen up. 

11. Jle wearieth the thick cloud; exhausts it, 
by causing it to pour out its contents of rain upon 
the earth. 

13. // ,• the rain, or storm. 



The Lord spcakelh 



JOB XXXVIII 



out of the whirlwind. 



B.ajsSt' 15 Dost thou know when God 
disposed them, and caused the light of his 
cloud to shine 1 

16 Dost thou know the balancings of 
the clouds, the wondrous works of him 
which is perfect in knowledge'? 

17 How thy garments are warm, when 
he quieteth the earth by the south ivind? 

, 18 Hast thou with him "spread out the 
sky, which is strong, and as a molten 
looking-glass 1 

19 Teach us what we shall say unto 
him; for we cannot order our speech by 
reason of darkness. 

20 Shall it be told him that I speak 1 if 
a man speak, surely he shall be swal- 
lowed up. 

21 And now men see not the bright light 
which is in the clouds: but the wind 
passeth, and cleanseth them. 

22 Fair* weather cometh out of the 
north: with God is terrible majesty. 

23 Touching the Almighty, '' we cannot 
find him out: he is excellent in "^ power, 
and in ''judgment, and in plenty of "jus- 
tice: he will not "^ afflict. 

24 Men do therefore £ fear him : he re- 
specteth not any that are ^ wise of heart. 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

1 God challengeth Job to answer. 4 God, by his 
mighty works, convinceth Job of ignorance, 31 and 
of imbecility. 

THEN the Lord answered Job out of 
the whirlwind, and said, 

2 Who is this that darkeneth counsel 
by ' words without knowledge ? 

3 Gird up now thy loins like a man; 



« Isa. 40:2:; 44:i4. * Heb. GcW. 1> ITim. S:16. c Psalm 
K:: 11; 66: 3. iiPsa. 99:4. elsa. 45:21. fLain. 3:.T). B Mat. 
10:28. b Milt. 11:2.5; 1 Cor. I : -26. i chap. 34 : 3o ; 3.") : 16. f Heb. 
make mt know, i Prov. 8 :22-30. f Heb. knowert. ^ Heb. sock. 



19. Him; God. 

20. SwaUotved up ; overwhelmed with the great- 
ness, majesty, and glory of G-od. 

23. ite ivill not afflict ; improperly, or without 
good reasons. 

24. Wise of heart ; He receives no assistance 
from the most intelligent; but forms and preserves 
his own plans, without asking counsel or receiving 
aid from any of his creatures. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

5. All the operations of nature are under the con- 
trol of G-od. He orders the seasons and all things 
with regard to them, as seemeth good in his sight ; 
as is best suited to promote his glory and the good 
of those who trust in him. 

13. Storms are sometimes sent, and property to a 
great amount swept away or destroyed, for the cor- 
rertion of those who have sought it as their chief 
good ; to show them the uncertainty of earthly tKings, 
and lead them to seek durable riches and righteous- 
ness, a treasure in heaven which will never be taken 
away. 

16. As men by doing their duty may enjoy all 
the benefits of the seasons without being able to e.v- 
plain the reasons of them, so the believer in revela- 
tion may have all its benefits without being able to 



for I will demand of thee, and tanswer 
thou me. 

4 Where J wast thou when I laid the 
foundations of the earth"? declare, if thou 
hast+ understanding. 

5 Who hath laid the measures thereof, 
if thou knowcst 1 or who hath stretched 
the line upon it? 

6 Whereupon are the ^foundations there- 
of II fastened? or who laid the corner- 
stone thereof; 

7 When the ^ morning-stars sang togeth- 
er, and all the sons of God slionted for joy? 

8 Or who shut up the sea with doors, 
when it brake forth, as if it had issued 
out of the womb ? 

9 When I made the cloud the garment 
thereof, and thick darkness a swaddling- 
band for it, 

10 And * brake up for it my decreed 
place, and set bars and doors, 

1 1 And said. Hitherto shalt thou come, 
but no further; and here shall t thy 
proud waves be 'stayed? 

12 Hast thou commanded the morning 
since thy days ; and caused the day-spring 
to know his place ; 

13 That it might take hold of the tends 
of the earth, that the wicked might be 
shaken out of it ? 

14 It is turned as clay to the seal; and 
they stand as a garment. 

1.5 And from the wicked their light is 
withholden, and the high '"arm shall be 
broken. 

16 Hast thou entered into the springs 
of the sea ? or hast thou walked in the 
search of the depth ? 

rts. \\ HA-,, made In link. kHev. 2:28. * Heb. eitablithed mn 
decree upon it. f Heb. the pride of thy waves. I Psalm 89 : 9. 
X Heb. wings, m Ps.t. 10:15. 



explain its mysteries, or understand the reasons of 
divine dispensations. 

20. Suitable views of God will always inspire 
reverence and awe, humility and holy fear, as well 
as affection, confidence, and joy. 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

2. Wlio is this? referring to Job. 

3. Gird up vow thy loins ; summon up all thy 
courage, resolution, and wisdom. 

5. Stretched the line upon it ; formed it with 
perfect regularity and exactness. 

7. Sons of God; heavenly hosts. 

8. Shut up the sea; set bounds to it, that it 
cannot pass over. 

13. Take hold of the ends of the earth; shine 
upon every part of it. Might he shaken out of 
it ; driven away by the light from their deeds of 
darkness. 

14. It is turned; the -whole earth assumes a 
fresh, new form ; like the wax under the seal, or the 
body with a new n;arment. 

15. Their light is irithholden ; they do not 
cnjov the benefit of it. The high arm shall be 
broken ; their power to do mischief is prevented by 
the approaching light of day. 

659 



God convinceth Job 



JOB xxxviir 



of ignorance and jccakness. 



17 Have the "gates of death been open- 
ed unto thee "? or hast tlioii seen the doors 
of the shadow of death ? 

18 Hast thou perceived the breadth of 
tlie earth? declare if thou knowest it 
all. 

19 Where is the way where light dwcU- 
tih^ and as for darkness, where is the 
place thereof, 

20 That thou shouldest take it *to the 
bound thereof, and that thou shouldest 
know the paths to the house thereof? 

21 Knowest thou it, because thou wast 
then born? or because the number of thy 
days is great? 

22 Hast thou entered into the treasures 
of the snow ? or hast thou seen the treas- 
ures of the hail, 

23 Which ''I have reserved against the 
time of trouble, against the day of battle 
and war? 

24 By what way is the light parted, 
ifhich scattereth the east wind upon the 
earth ? 

25 Who hath divided a watercourse for 
the overflowing of waters, or a way for 
the lightning of thunder; 

26 To cause it to "-' rain on the earth, 
where no man is; on the wilderness, 
wherein there is no man : 

27 To ''satisfy the desolate and waste 
iT'OioK/ ; and to cause the bud of the ten- 
der herb to spring forth? , 

28 Hath the rain a father? or who hath 
begotten the drops of dew ? 





]>, 


. H: l:i 




' Or 


at. 


b ExoJ 


9: 


18,24; Josh 


10 


11 ; I 


sa. 


30 


aO; 


llev. 


l«> 


■21. 


r I'Bfl 


1-17:8; 


.le 


r. H:i-2. J 


H» 


I. 107 : 


■ifi. 


e ( 


hap 


37:10 




Hfb 


taken 


tOr. 


the 


teven start , 


He 


b.f.m 


in. 


f r 


hap. 


!i:9; 


Amos fi . 


"• 4 


Hcb. Cecil 


II Or, t>ie twelve tig 


nt 


^— 








17. The gates of death; the passage to the in- 
visible worlcl, the world of spirits. 

19. Light — and — darkness; could Job explain 
their orifjin, nature, and efTects? — things which ex- 
isted and operated long before he was born. 

28. llath the rain, a father? is there any one 
but God who produced it. 

31. Pleiades; the seven stars. Orion; a con- 
stellation of stars on the equinoxial. 

32. Mazzaroth; the twelve signs of the zodiac. 
Arcturns with his sons ; a constellation of stars 
now called the G-reat Bear, and revohnng around 
the North stiir. 

33. The oriii nances of heaven ; the laws which 
govern the heavenly bodies. The dominion ; the 
influence they have upon the earth. 

37. Stay the dottles of heaven ; stop the clouds 
from pouring down rain. 

41. C'ri/ unto God; the raven and the lion, with 
the multitudes of wild animals, are provided for and 
sustained, not by man, but by God. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 

2. When men undertake to sit in judOTient on the 
works and ways of God, or to explain the reasons of 
all his dealings, they generally darken their own 
Miinds and the minds of others by words without 
knowledge. 

6. The works and ways of God in creating and 
{joverning the world, though ordered in infinite wis- 
dom and goodness, are far above and beyond the 
C60 



29 Out of who.«e womb came the *b.c-imo. 
ice? and the hoary ^frost of heaven, who 
hath gendered it ? 

30 The waters are hid as ivith a stone, 
and the face of the deep is tfrozen. 

31 Canst thou bind the sweet influen- 
ces of ^Pleiades, ''or loose the bands of 
Orion?* 

32 Canst thou bring forth !' Mazzaroth- 
in his season ? or canst thou *guide A re- 
turns with his sons ? 

33 Knowest thou the e ordinances of 
heaven ? canst thou set the dominion 
thereof in the earth ? 

34 Canst thou lift up thy voice to the 
clouds, that abundance of waters may 
cover thee ? 

35 Canst thou send lightnings, that 
they may go, and say unto thee, tHere 
we are ? 

36 Who hath put Avisdom in the ''in- 
ward parts ? or who hath given under- 
standing to the heart? 

37 Who can number the clouds in wis- 
dom ? or who can -stay the bottles of 
heaven, 

38 When the dust ^groweth into hard- 
ness, and the clods cleave fast together? 

39 Wilt thou hunt the prey for the ' lion ? 
or fill the II appetite of the young lions, 

40 When they couch in their dens, and 
abide in the covert to lie in wait? 

41 Who provideth for the Graven his 
food? when his young ones cry unto 
God, they wander for lack of meat. 



* Heh. guide them, t Jer. :11 : M, 3fi. i Heh. Behiild tit. h p.,n. 
iil:^ t Heb. niKK /« /if rfoion. ^ Or, it turned into mii-e ; Hvh. 
is poured, i Psalm IIM : il. \\ Ueh. life, j I'sairn 147 : y ; Mai. 
6:2li. 



most enlarged and exalted conceptions of men, and 
call for adoring gratitude, admiration, and praise. 

12. The regularity of day and night, and the ben- 
efits they impart to the human family, are constant 
evidences of the goodness of God ; and lay men un- 
der ever new obligations to acknowledge, trust in, 
and obey him. 

16. The greatness, wisdom, power, and goodness 
of God are seen in the sea, in the inexhaustible treas- 
ures it contains, and in the facilities it affords for 
the intercourse, health, prosperity, and happiness of 
man. 

22. The snow and the hail, the storm and the 
tempest, the lightning, thunder, rain, dew, and sun- 
shine — all governed by exact and immutable laws, 
which no man can control or evade — proclaim the 
omnipotence, and show forth the presence of an all- 
surrounding God. 

31. The nature, number, courses, and influences 
of the stars, though perfectly knowii to Him who 
calleth them all by their names and employs them 
to accomplish his purposes, can be but very imper- 
fectly comprehended by the most intelligent and 
wisest of the children of men. 

3(). All the knowledge and wisdom which men 
pos.sess, above the beasts of the field or the fowls of 
the air, come from God. Let not the wise man 
glory in his wisdoiil, neither let the mighty man 
glory in his might ; let not the rich man glory in his 
riches ; but let him that glorieth, glory in the Lord. 



Wonde7ful and goodly 



JOB XXXI. 



creatures of God. 



i:l\^*: CHAPTER XXXIX. 

1 Of the -wild goats and hinds. 5 Of the wild ass. 9 
The unicorn. 13 The peacock, stork, and ostrich. 
19 The horse. 26 The hawk. 27 The eagle. 

T^NOWEST thou the time when the 
JV wild goats of the rock bring forth? 
or canst thou mark when the *hiud.s do 
ealve ? 

2 Canst thou number the months that 
they fulfil? or knowest t-hou the time 
when they bring forth ? 

3 They bow themselves, they bring forth 
their young ones, they cast out their sor- 
rows. 

4 Their young ones are in good liking, 
they grow up with corn ; they go forth, 
and return not unto them. 

5 Who hath sent out the wild '' ass 
free 1 or who hath loosed the bands of 
the wild ass? 

6 Whose '^ house I have made the wil- 
derness, and the *barren land his dwell- 
ings. 

7 He scorneth the multitude of the city, 
neither regardeth he the crying of the 
driver, t 

8 The range of the mountains is his 
pasture, and he searcheth after every 
green thing. 

9 Will the •* unicorn be willing to serve 
thee, or abide by thy crib ? 

10 Canst thou bind the unicorn with 
his band in the furrow ? or will he har- 
row the valleys after thee ? 

11 Wilt thou trust him, because his 
strength is great? or wilt thou leave thy 
labor to him ? 

12 Wilt thou believe him, that he will 
bring home thy seed, and gather it into 
thy barn ? 

13 Gavest thou the goodly wings unto 
the peacocks ? or +wings and feathers 
unto the ostrich ? 



• Psa. -29:9. b .Irr. J : -24 ; Hosea 8: 9. c chap. 24 : ."i. • Heb. 
tall places. f Heb. exactor, c\xnp 3: 18. d Deut 33 : 17; Pna. 
92: 10. t Or, Ihc feathers of the stork and ostrich. « I,»m. 4 : 3. 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

1. Wild goats of the rod- — hinds ; those that 
live in the mountains, far away from the abodes of 
men. 

3. They bring forth their young ; dependent 
only on the care of God. 

6. House ; dwelling-place. 

9. Unicorn ; supposed by some to be a wild, fu- 
rious kind of buffalo ; by others to be tlie rhinoceros, 
an immensely strong animal, with one horn a little 
above its nose. 

16. She is hardened against her young; 
treats her young as if she had no natural affection 
for them. 

18. She lifteth up herself; to escape her pur- 
suers, running by the help of her wings with great 
swiftness. 

19. Ha^t thou clothed his neck with thun- 
der ? fitted him to inspire terror as he goes forth to 
the battle. 



14 Wliich Icavelh her eggs in the earth, 
and warmeth them in the dust, 

15 And forgetteth that the foot may 
crush them, or that the wild beast may 
break them. 

16 She is "hardened again.st her young 
ones, as though they were not hers: her 
labor is in vain without fear ; 

17 Because God hath deprived her of 
wisdom, '^neither hath he imparted to her 
understanding. 

18 What time she lifteth up herself on 
high, she scorneth the horse and his 
rider. 

19 Hast thou given the liorse strength? 
hast thou clothed his neck with thunder? 

20 Canst thou make him afraid as a 
grasshopper ? the glory of his nostrils is 
terrible.^ 

21 He" pawcth in the valley, and re- 
joiceth in liis strength : he s goeth on to 
meet the *armcd men. 

22 He moeketh at fear, and is not af- 
frighted; neither turneth he back from 
the sword. 

23 The quiver rattleth against him, the 
glittering spear and the shield. 

24 He swalloweth the ground with 
fierceness and rage: neither believcth he 
that it is the sound of the trumpet. 

25 He saith among the trumpets, Ha, 
ha ! and he smelleth the battle afar off, 
the thunder of the captains, and the 
shouting. 

26 Doth the hawk fly by thy wisdom, 
and stretch her wings toward the south ? 

27 Doth the eagle mount up t at thy 
command, and make her nest on ''high ? 

28 She dwclleth and abideth on the 
rock, upon the crag of the rock, and the 
strong place. 

29 From thence she secketh the prey, 
and her eyes behold afar off. 



f cliap. 35 : 1 1 % Heb. terrors. || Or, His feet dig. K Jer. 8 : 6. 
• Heb. armor, f Heb. lit/ thu month, h Jer. 49 : 16 ; Oba. 4. 



INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Creatures that are dependent only on the provi- 
dence of God. are by him provided for, as really as 
those wliose wants are supplied by human instru- 
mentality; while in both he equally shows his wis- 
dom, power, and love. 

9. It is not enough for usefulness to liave great 
strength, or superior natural qualities ; there must 
also be the ability and the disposition rightly to use 
them. 

16. To all classes of creatures God gives just the 
kind and degree of wisdom which they need to ac- 
complish the ends for wliich he made them ; what 
■would only be a \iselcss annovance to them, he has 
wisely and mercifully withheld. 

19. The courage, agility, and strength of the horse, 
his affection and docility, his readiness to l.^bo^. his 
patience «ven under hardship and abuse, and his 
subserviency to the various wants of men. are all 
evidences of the goodness of God, in which his hand 
should be gratefully recognized. 

COl 



Of the power of God. 



JOB XLI 



Of the behemoth. 



30 Her young ones also snck up blood: 
and "where the slain are, there is she. 

CHAPTER XL. 

1 Job humWeth himself to God. 6 God stirreth him 
np to show his righteousness, power, and wisdom, 
lo Of the behemoth. 

MOREOVER the Loud answered Job, 
and said, 

2 Shall he that ''contcndeth with the 
Almighty instruet him ? he that reproveth 
God, let him answer it. 

3 If Then Job answered the Loud, and 
said, 

4 Behold, I am ''vile; what shall I an- 
swer thee? I will ''lay iny hand upon my 
mouth. 

5 Once have I spoken ; but I will not 
answer : yea, twiee ; but I will proceed 
no further. 

G TiThen * answered the Loud unto Job 
out of the whirlwind, and said, 

7 Gird up thy loins now like a man : I 
will demand of thee, and declare thou 
unto me. 

8 Wilt thou also disannul my judg- 
ment? wilt thou condemn me, that thou 
mayest be righteous ? 

9 Hast thou an arm like God ? or canst 
thou thunder with a "^ voice like him? 

10 Deck thyself now tvith ^majesty and 
excellency ; and array thyself with glory 
and beauty. 

11 Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath: 
and behold every one that is proud, and 
abase him. 

1 2 Look on every one that i.s '■ proud, 
and bring him low ; and tread down the 
wicked in their place. 

13 Hide them in the dust together ; and 
bind their faces in secret. 

14 Tiien will I also confess unto thee 
that thine own right hand can save thee. 

1.5 Behold now * behemoth, which I 



as an o.v. 

16 Lo now, his strength i.s in his loins, 
and his force is in the navel of his belly. 

17 He tmoveth his tail like a cedar: 
the sinews of his stones are wrapped to- 
gether. 

18 His bones are as strong pieces of 
brass: his bones are like bars of iron. 

19 He is the chief of the ways of God : 
he that made him can make his sword to 
approach v)ifo him. 

20 Surely the mountains bring him forth 
food,' where all the beasts of the field 
play. 

21 He lieth under the shady trees, in 
the covert of the reed, and fens. 

22 The shady trees cover him U'ith 
their shadow ; the willows of the brook 
compass him about. 

23 Behold, he tdrinketh up a river, anJ 
hasteth not: he trusteth that he can draw- 
up Jordan into his mouth. 

24 He^ taketh it with his eyes : his nose 
pierceth through snares. 

CHAPTER XLI. 

Of God's great power in the leviathan. 

CANST thou draw out "leviathan iwith 
a hook? or his tongue with a cord 
luhich thou *lettcst down? 

2 Canst thou put a ''hook into his nose ? 
or bore his jaw through with a thorn ? 

3 Will he make many supplications 
unto thee? will he speak soft words uulo 
thee ? 

4 Will he make a covenant with thee? 
wilt thou take him for a servant for 
ever ? 

5 Wilt thou play with him as xi'ith a 
bird? or wilt thou bind him for thy 
maidens? 

6 Shall the companions make a banquet 



• M;it.24:28; Luke 17:37. h rliap. M : M! 


Isa. 27 : 4. c Kjra 


<):«; chap. .42 : 6 ; P»a. fil :4; Iiin.6:S; M:6, 


Dan. 9 : .I, 7 ; Luke 


1(1:13. d clinpt«rS9:9; Mirali7:lfi; Zecll 


2: 13; Kom. 3: 19. 


» chap. 3R : 1 , Plc f Pal. 29 : 3, 4 K Paa. 93 : 


1; 104:1. h«xod. 


IH:lli Prov. 1S:M: I»a. '2:l'i: Dan. 4 : 37. 


• Or. the tttphunt. 



30. The most rapacious and savage of the feath- 
ered tribes, who teach their young to revel in blood, 
do not take the life of their own species ; this is the 
sin of the abused understandings, and depraved 
hearts, and bloody liands of men. 

CHAPTER XL. 
•I. hny my hand iipo» my month; be silent. 
8. Di.irniiiiil : make void, or reverse, 
l.'j. Urhcmoth; supposed by some to be the ele- 
ph.\nt ; by others, the nippopotainus. 

10. The chief ; one of the most wonderful beasts 
that God has made. 

21. He taketh it vv'th his eyes; or, Can one 
t.ike him in his sight, or pierce his nose with a 
lioolc or ring ? 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
2. Complaining of the ways of God is finding fault 
with him, as if we were wiser than he. and could in- 
662 



a» some think, f <>r, telltth up. " P.ia. 104 : H. t Hel>. optni.. 
eth. % Or, Will any /</<<• Aim in hit nioht, or liort liis nvst with a 
gin? cliap. 41 : 1,2. \\ That i», a tvlia'e.ora •ekitlpml. i P8a. 
104:26: isa. 27:1. * Hcb. diuwnest. k Lsa. 37:29. 



struct him as to tho best way of governing the world ; 
and all must one day answer to him for all the hard 
speeches which they have uttered against him. 

4. Right views of God will silence objections to 
his providence, and lead us humbly to submit to all 
his dispen.sations ; saying. It is tlie Lord ; let him do 
as scemeth good in his sight. 

9. The character, works, and ways of God, show 
that he alone is fitted to govern the world ; and that 
all creatures are, and for ever must be, at his dis- 
posal. 

15. The greatest and most formidable of creatures 
on the land or in the water, are dependent on God ; 
and he can control them with as much pa.se as he does 
the smallest and weakest, and dispose of them at his 
pleasure. 

CHAPTER XLI. 

1 . Leviathan ; supposed by some to be the 
whale, by others the crocodile. 



Of God's great power 



JOB XL II, 



in the leviathan. 



L "istio'' of him? shall they part hiin among 
the merchants 1 

7 Canst thou fill his skin with barbed 
irons? or his head with fish-spears'? 

8 Lay thy hand upon him, remember 
the battle, do no more. 

9 Behold, the hope of him is in vain : 
shall not one be cast down even at the 
sight of him? 

10 None is so fierce that dare stir him 
lip ; who then is able to stand before me? 

11 Who hath * prevented me, that I 
should repay Aim? ichat soever zs under the 
whole heaven is ''mine. 

12 1 will not conceal iiis parts, nor his 
power, nor his comely proportion. 

13 Who can discover the face of his 
garment? or who can come to him *\vith 
his double bridle ? 

14 Who can open the doors of his face? 
his teeth are terrible round about. 

15 His tscales are his pride, shut up 
together as with a close seal. 

16 One is so near to another, that no 
air can come between them. 

17 They are joined one to another, they 
stick together, that they cannot be sun- 
dered. 

18 By his neesings a light doth shine, 
and his eyes are like the eyelids of the 
morning. 

19 Out of his mouth go burning lamps, 
(i,t(I sparks of fire leap out. 

'20 Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, as 
o"/ of a seething pot or caldron. 

21 His breath kindleth coals, and a 
flame goeth out of his mouth. 

22 In his neck remaineth strength, and 
sorrow hs turned into joy before him. 

23 The ^flakes of his flesh are joined 
together: they are firm in themselves; 
they cannot be moved. 

24 His heart is as firm as a stone ; yea, 
as hard as a piece of the nether millstone. 



» Kom. U::i.i. b Exod. 19:5; Dent. 10:14; Vsx. H:U SO: 12; 
I Cor. 1 n : 2fi, IS. * Or, luiMirt. t Heh. strnng pieces of thields. 
t Heb. rtjniceth. ^ Heh./allings. f, Or, hicastplate. "^ Heb. 



8. Remember the battle ; think of the conflict 
that would ensue should you attempt to take him, 
and refrain from it. 

11. Prevented me; gone before me in the be- 
stowment of favors, and laid me under obligation to 
repay them. 

13. Discover the face of his garment; strip 
off his skin. 

14. The doors of his face ; his jaws. 
18. Neesings ; sneezing. 

22. Sorrow is turned into joy ; this some have 
translated, terror danceth before him. 

23. By reasopi of breakings they purify them- 
selves ; they lose themselves with terror. 

26. Habergeon ; a covering for the breast. 
32. Hoary ; white or grey. 
34. The children of pride ; the most strong and 
courageous of the animal creation. 
INSTRUCTIONS. 
1. The principal superiority of man above many 



25 When he raiseth up himself, the 
mighty are afraid: by reason of break- 
ings they purify themselves. 

26 The sword of him that layeth at him 
cannot hold : the spear, the dart, nor the 
habergeon.il 

27 He esteemeth iron as straw, and 
brass as rotten wood. 

28 The arrow cannot make him flee : 
sling-stones are turned with him into 
stubble. 

29 Darts are counted as stubble : he 
laugheth at the shaking of a spear. 

30 Sharp *stones are under him : he 
spreadeth sharp-pointed things upon tlie 
mire. 

31 He maketh the deep 1o boil like a 
pot : he maketh the sea like a pot of 
ointment. 

32 He maketh a path to sliinc after him ; 
one would think the deep to be hoary. 

33 Upon earth there is not his like, who 
ist made without fear. 

34 He bcholdeth all high things: he is 
a king over all the children of pride. 

CHAPTER XLII. 

1 Job submitteth himself unto God. 7 God, preferring 
Job's cause, maketh his friends submit themselves, 
and accepteth him. 10 He magiiifieth and ble.ssetli 
Job. Ifi Job's age and death. 

THEN Job answered the Lord, and 
said, 

2 I know that 'thou canst do every 
thing, and that no thought +can be witli- 
holden from thee. 

3 Who ^ is he that hideth counsel with- 
out knowledge? therefore have I uttered 
that I understood not ; things too * won- 
derful for me, which I knew not. 

4 Hear, I beseech thee, and I will 
speak: "^I will demand of thee, and de- 
clare thou unto me. 

5 I have heard of thee by the hearing 
of the ear ; but now mine eye seeth thee : 



pieces i>/ potshi-ni. f Or, behave themielvet wit/iout /ear, c Gen. 
18:14; Isa. 4:i : 13 ; M.it. 19 : 2(1. f Or, of thine can be hindered. 
d chap :!« : -2, .3. ' Psa. 131 : 1 ; 139 : «. f cliap. 40 : T. 



of the beasts consists not in his size or strength of 
body, but in the faculties and powers of his mind ; 
and the cultivation and improvement of these should 
be his chief concern. 

11. None can devote any thing to God which he 
has not first given to them, or lay him under obliga- 
tions to bestow any good upon them ; but all must 
depend on his goodness, mercy, and grace. 

2-5. The fear of man which is impressed upon 
most of the animal tribes, and which adds so much 
to his safety and comfort, is a striking evidence of 
tlie goodness of God ; and lays men under obliga- 
tions to employ the influence he has given them for 
the good of all. 

CHArTER XLII. 
5. / have heard of thee ; he had bad dark and 
indistinct views of God. Now mine eye seeth 
thee ; his views of God were more clear and dis- 
tinct. 

603 



Job humbleth hinnclf. 



JOB XLII. 



God blcssitli him. 



6 Wherefore ' I ablior myself, and re- 
pent in dust and ''ashes. 

7 ^ And it \\-as so, that after the Loud 
had spoken these words unto Job, the 
Lord said to Eliphaz the Temauite, My 
wrath is kindled against thee, and against 
thy two friends: for ye have not spoken 
of me "the thing that is right, as my ser- 
vant Job hath. 

8 Tlierefore take unto you now ''seven 
bullocks and seven rams, and go to my 
servant Job, and offer up for yourselves a 
burnt-offering; and my servant Job shall 
pray *■ for you : for *him will I accept : 
lest I deal with you after your folly, in 
that ye have not spoken of me the thing 
which is right, like my servant Job. 

9 So Eliphaz the Temanitc and Bildad 
the Shuhite and Zophar the Naamalhitc 
went, and did according as the Lord 
conmiandcd them : the ""Lord also ac- 
cepted tJob. 

10 And the Lord « turned the captivity 
of Job, when he prayed for his friends : 
also the Loud +gave Job twice as nnicli 
as he had before. 

11 Then came there unto him ''all his 

• Kira9:6; cliaji. H0:4; Psa. 61 : 17; Jer. ill : !«; .)Hiiies4 : iu. 
b Dan. 9:3: Mat. U : 21. c Psa. 51 : 4. d Num. i:i : 1. « James 
.i: 16; 1 John, fi: Iti. • Heb. Iiis face, or ptrsun, 1 Sam. 55::t.'>; 
MaL 1:9. < Prov. 3 : 1 1 , H. t Heb. tUc face of Juh. g Gen. 



6. Wherefore I abhor myself ; on accountof my 
sins. 

7. As my servant Job hath ; his doctrine con- 
cerning God and his providence was more correct, 
;ind more honorable to him, than the doctrine of his 
friends. 

10. Titnied the captivity of Job; removed his 
calamities, and restored his prosperity. 

11. Did eat bread with him; a token of re- 
stored kindness and friendship. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

3. Men know very little about the character and 
ways of Grod, except as he reveals them ; and when 
they attempt to go beyond his revelation, they darken 
coimsel by words without knowledge. 

.5. Closer views of the character and will of God. 
and right feelings towards him, will lead men to 
;ilihor their sins, anil heartily to tiini from them to 



B. c. jsao. 

all they that had been of his acquaint- 
ance before, and did eat bread with him 
in his house : and they bemoaned him, 
and comforted him over all the evil that 
the Lord had brought upon him : every 
man also gave him a piece of money, and 
every one an ear-ring of gold. 

12 So 'the Lord blessed the latter end 
of Job more than his beginning : for he 
had j fourteen thousand sheep, and six 
thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of 
oxen, and a thousand she-asses. 

13 He had also seven sons and three 
daughters. 

1 4 And he called the name of the first, Je- 
mima ; and the name of the second, Kezia ; 
and the name of the third, Keren-liappuch. 

15 And in all the land were no women 
found .so fair as the daughters of Job : 
and their father gaA'c them inheritance 
among their brethren. 

16 After this lived Job a hundred and 
forty years, and saw his sons, and his 
sons' sons, even four generations. 

17 So"" Job died, being old and full of 
days. 



id: 17; Psa. 14:7; 12n : I. j Heb added all that bail bt-en to 
Job unto the double, h clia|i. 19: 13. i Deut. 8: 16 ; chap. 8 :7 ; 
JainesS:Il. j chap. 1:3. It cliap. o : '2<>. 



liim, whose favor is life, and whose loving-kindness 
is better than life. 

7. The Lord will in due time vindicate his ser- 
vants from the aspersions which men have wrongfully 
cast upon them, and bring forth their righteousness 
as the light, and their integrity as the noonday. 

10. The end of a good man is more blessed than 
his beginning : and the darkness and distress of the 
night will be followed by the light, the joy, and the 
glory of a cloudless and eternal day. 

1 3 . Many who neglect a man, or stand aloof from 
him in adversity, will return to him and be very 
friendly and kind in prosperity. 

16. Let a man be patient under trials ; if reviled, 
not revile again ; hold fast his integrity, commit 
himself to Him that judgeth righteously, and justify 
God in all his ways, and his end will oe peace and 
his eternitv blessed. 



664 



