I TBEOLOGICAL SEMlMKY.f 

. I Piincetcn, N. J. ^ 

BX 7260 .H15 Y34 1854 
Yale, Cyrus, 1786-1854. 
The godly pastor 



Digitized by tine Internet Arcliive 
in 2014 



littps://arcliive.org/details/godlypastorlifeoOOyale 



THE GODLY PASTOR. 



LIFE 



OP THE 

REV. JEREMIAH HALLOCK, 

OF CANTON, CONN. 



TO WHICH IS ADDED 

A SKETCH OF THE LITE OF 

THE REV. MOSES HALLOCK, 

OF PLAINFIELD, MASS. 

LABORERS IN THE GREAT RETIYAL OF THE WORK OF 
GOD AT THE BEGINNING OF THE PRESENT 
CENTURY. 



He gave some . . . pastors and teachers. Eru. 4 : 11. 
Feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with liis own blooJ. 
Acts 20 : 28. 

y 

BY REV. CYRUS YALE, 

OP NEW HAllTFORD, CONX. 



A NEW EDITION OF THE MEMOIR, REVISED BY TUB AUTHOR, AND ENLARGED, 
UXDEH ms SANCTION, BY TUE SKETCH FROM ANOTHER HAND. 

PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

NEW YORK: 150 NASSAU-STREET. 



CONTENTS. 



Introduction 7 

CHAPTER I. 

EARLY LEFE— COrgr-ERSION. 
Birth — Ancestry — Occupation in early life — In the army — Seriousness 
in childhood — Narrow escapes from death — Deep sense of sin and 
ruin — Conversion — Efforts for his fellow-youth — Usefulness in re- , 
ligious meetings — Enjoyment of a revival 1] 

CHAPTER II. 

PREPAEATIOX AXD LICENSE TO PREACH THE GOSPEL. 
Thinks of preaching the gospel — Commences study — Severe trial at 
Northampton — Return to the farm — Pleasant reflections — Re- 
sumes his books — Make^ a profession of religion — Activity and 
usefulness in the church — Resolutions — Goes to Connecticut — 
Enjoys a religious revival — Useful labors — Visit from his brother — 
Earnest desiie to preach — Studies with Rev. Mr. Mills and the 
late Rev. Dr. West — His opinion of Edwards on Religious Affections, 
and of Taylor on Original Sin — Applies for license to preach — Dis- 
appointments — Labor in the circle of his relations — Receives 
license to preach 23 

CHAPTER III. 

LABORS TILL HIS INSTALLATION AS PASTOR. 
His sermons — His manner in preaching — Entire devotion to his new 
and delightfid work — His pleasant grove — ^Unexpected trials — 
Supplies the pulpit in West Simsbury, afterwards Canton — General 
practice at funerals and social meetings — Some seals to his min- 
istry — Receives a call to West Simsbury — Preaches in several 
places — Invitation to settle at Ware and at Goshen — Returns to 
West Simsbury — Severe trials — Day of fasting and prayer — 
Desire to be an evangelist — A second invitation from West Sims- 
bury — Address from the youth — Ordination 42 



4 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER IV. 

FIEST TWELVE YEARS OF HIS IVUNISTRY. 
Motto after ordination — Entire devotion to his work — Marriage — Res- 
olution in view of increasing cares — Private fast — Dedication of 
his dwelling-house to God — General view of his family — Libe- 
rality — Feelings in a near view of death — Fast — Forgiveness ol 
enemies — New year resolutions — Parting with a Christian 
friend — Receives the degree of A. M. — Thoughts on a letter ot 
reproof — Useful journey — A time of thick moral darkness — Anec- 
dote — Illustrations of human dependence — a youth rowing up 
Niagara — floating ice — lost sheep — unskilful boatmen — Death of 
a sister — Refuge in trouble — Harvest thoughts — Supply of forage — 
Planting an orchard — Course to reclaim a Christian brother — Re- 
proof of au infidel — Admonition of thoughtless youth — Anecdotes 
as to a new house of worship 72 

CHAPTER V. 

REVIVALS AT THE BEGINNING OF THE PRESENT CENTURY. 
Revival among his people in 1798 and 1799 — Letters describing the 
work — its commencement-»— rapidity and power — false hopes re- 
nounced — critical moment — awful impressiveness of the scene — 
means of increasing the work — sovereignty of God — plain truths 
of Scripture — conversion of infidels — His texts — Address to those 
joining the church — Specimen of an extempore sermon . . lOG 

CHAPTER VI. 

FIRST MISSION TO VERMONT— LABORS IN REVIVALS. 
His motto on leaving home — Trials on the way — Favorable rccep 
tion — Visits an old friend — TJniversalists — Letter to his wife — 
General view of his labors — Letter to a Christian friend — Desire 
for the conversion of his children — Tonrs of preaching — New year 
reflections 149 

CHAPTER VII. 

REVIVALS IN 1805 AND 1806— CORRESPONDENCE. 
Anecdote, test of genuine conversion — Letter to his brother — General 
visit through his society with lay-brethren — Two letters to a 
Christian friend — Birthday reflections . 1H9 



CONTENTS. 



6 



CHAPTER VIII. 

SECOND MISSIOX TO VERMONT— CORRESPO>rDENCE. 
Second mission to Vermont — Sickness among his people — Letter to 
his brother — To a son — Death of a sister — His elder son grad- 
uates — Special prayer and fasting — Trial in his son's choice of a 
profession — Letters — Tour of preaching — Letters to friends — Joy 
in the divine government 193 

CHAPTER IX. 

REVIVALS IN 1812 AND 1S13 — DEATH OF HIS ONLY DAUGHTER- 
CORRESPONDENCE. 

Revivals among his people in 1812 and 1813 — Letters to his elder 
son — His younger son called to New London — Sickness and death 
of his only daughter — His younger son's sickness — His prayer — 
Mrs. Hallock's sickness — His own sickness — Kmdness of his 
people . 214 

CHAPTER X. 

LABORS IN THE MINISTRY— CORRESPONDENCE — REVIVAL OF 
1816. 

Tour of preaching — Letter to a nephew — Anecdote — Letters to a son — 
Revival in 1816 — Illness at Southampton — Letter to a son 236 

CHAPTER XI. 

CORRESPONDENCE— LABORS IN ADVANCING YEARS— RE\aVAL OF 
1S2I. 

A pleasant trait of character — Letter to one who had Ion;;: hcen a 
member of his family — Letter to his children and to a nephew — 
Ordination of missionaries — Birlhd.Ty rfllections — Anecdote, 
council of physicians — Labors in the revival of 1S21 — His vener- 
able associates in the ministry — Letter to friends at Plainfield — 
Death of his beloved physician — Letter to a nephew — Missionary 
field 253 

CHAPTER XII. 

CONVERSION OF HIS SON— CLOSING LABORS— TRAITS OF CHAR- 
ACTER. 

Conversion of his elder son — Happy mcptinsj of father and son — His 
appearance at ministers' meeting — His worth in ecclesiastical 
councils — Traits of character 273 



6 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER XIII. 
SICKNESS OF HIS WIFE— LAST PUBLIC SERVICES— DEATH. 

Severe illness of Mis. Hallock — Letter to a nephew — His increasing 
infirmities — His last labors — Renewal of his will — Death — Fune- 
ral—Address left with his will— Death of Mrs. Hallock . 291 



SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF REV. MOSES HALLOCK. 

Early history — In Yale college — Blessing on his labors in the minis- 
try — Students he instructed — Requests a colleague — pleasing in- 
cidents — Love of the Bible — Confidence in God — Training of his 
family — Family worship — Death 311 

HIS CHARACTER AS DRAWN FROM HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 

Interesting revivals — Coimsel to a teacher — Death of a daughter — 
Ancestry — Letters to his sons in college — Rev. James Richards, 
Ceylon — Spiritual counsels to his absent sons — A son entering on 
a foreign mission — Prosperous state of the churches — Days of fast- 
ing — Feelings in view of death — Temperance and the Sabbath — 
Solemn appeals — Charge to a colleague — Death of his wife — Hist 
epitaph 333 



INTUODUCTION. 



In the great revival of the work of Grod which 
began about the close of the last century, the Rev. 
Jeremiah Hallock was associated in prayer, counsel, 
and labors, with some of the worthiest of men. His 
congi-egation was contiguous to that of the Rev. Dr. 
Edward D. Griffin, who has said, "In 1799, I could 
stand at my door in New Hartford, Litchfield county, 
and number fifty or sixty congregations laid down in 
one field of divine wonders." Another fellow-laborer 
in that glorious work of grace, was the youthful pas- 
tor of the church in Washington, Conn., the late Rev. 
Dr. Ebenezer Porter, who succeeded Dr. Griffin as 
Professor of Sacred Rhetoric in the Theological Sem- 
inary at Andover. Another distinguished laborer in 
that good work, was the Rev. Dr. Nathan Strong of 
Hartford, who with others reported these mighty 
works of God in all directions, through the Connecti- 
cut Evangelical Magazine. And then there were 
his well-beloved brethren, the Rev. Samuel J. Mills, 
whose son, of the same name, had so much agency 
in the establishment of foreign missions from this 
country, and the Rev. Messrs. Alexander Gillett, 
Ammi R. Robbins, and Peter Starr, with whom Mr. 
Hallock often met for religious improvement, mutual 



8 



INTRODUCTION. 



counsel, and social prayer. Some of these men of 
prayer would at times resort to the retired grove, and 
there, after the great Model in Gethsemane, would 
lie on their faces upon the ground, with strong sup- 
plication and tears for the descent of the Holy Spirit 
upon their people. 

The oldest class of ministers now alive in the same 
field, love to look back to that memorable revival, and 
recall the great purity and extent of the work ; the 
great power of G-od, as on the day of Pentecost, in 
connection with human feebleness ; the humility and 
harmony of the favored pastors, in their abundant 
and successful labors; the lasting benefits to Zion, 
in the large increase of her numbers and graces, in 
the happy exchange of her cold formality and half- 
way covenant for vital godliness and the only true 
covenant with God and his people, and in the few 
apostasies among the many hopeful converts and 
new members of the churches. And then that glo- 
rious revival soon yielded the appropriate fruits of 
Christian missions, domestic and foreign, with tin 
long and bright train of other benevolent institutions 
which characterize and bless this age. 

The Rev. Jeremiah Hallock, as appears in his 
Memoir, was an honored pioneer in this great work. 
Twice, at the call of his brethren in the ministry, did 
he leave his beloved people, and go forth as a mis- 
sionary to the then "new state" of Vermont. As a 
young preacher was leaving the house of Dr. Strong 
to go on a mission to the state of New York, that 
great and good man said to him, " Go and stay a day 



INTRODUCTION. 



9 



with brother Hallock; he can give you more of the 
instruction and assistance you will need on your mis- 
sion, than any other man." 

A venerable father, who labored side by side with 
Mr. Hallock during the latter half of his ministry, 
and who is now deprived of his natural sight, as if 
to give greater clearness and brightness to his spirit- 
ual vision, lately said of him in his calm, well- 
weighed words, " He was a most spiritually-minded 
man. I don't know as Paul or John was more spirit- 
ual than he. They were inspired — ^he was not." 
This aged servant of Christ, with others, has ex- 
pressed an earnest desire for a new edition of this 
Memoir. It is thought to present a fair and instruc- 
tive specimen of the spirit and course of that brother- 
hood of departed and worthy pastors, with whom Mr. 
Hallock acted in " the times of refreshing from the 
presence of the Lord." 

Soon after his death in 1826, by request of the 
monthly-meeting of ministers with which he had 
long been connected, the compiler prepared a Memoir 
of the venerated and beloved man. Two editions 
were issued; he has now revised it, with a view to 
a more general circulation. Whatever has seemed 
to be of only local interest, or unnecessary to illus- 
trate the grace of God in him as a Christian and a 
pastor, in his various relations, is omitted, while some 
new matter has been introduced. 

The compiler is happy now to add to this volume, 
from another hand, a brief, yet invaluable Memoir of 
Mr. Hallock's only brother, a man of like spirit, to 
1* 



10 



INTRODUCTION 



whom he often alludes so affectionately, and with 
whom he held sweet communion through Ufe. The 
two narratives may well stand side by side, as they 
shed on each other a mild and pure light, and both 
beautifully and strongly illustrate the power of divine 
grace. 

The design of the volume is not to praise those 
who were the last to seek honor from men, and whose 
record is on high ; but to honor the grace of God, 
which, in connection with means, forms every char- 
acter of great moral worth, and to present for imita- 
tion examples of piety, fidelity, and success in the 
Christian ministry. It has been the steady aim to 
let these men of God stand forth before the eye of 
the Christian public in their own grave, plain, inim- 
itable thoughts, words, and actions. And if these 
mild stars in the late clerical constellation may still 
shine on our churches steadily, though more dimly, 
after nearly all the lovely cluster have risen to their 
fixed position in a brighter sky, the influence will 
surely be happy upon Zion and Zion's friends. 

New Hartfoed, January, 1854. 



MEMOIR 

OP 

EEV. JEREMIAH HILLOCK. 



CHAPTER I. 

EARLY LIFE— CONVERSION. 

"I WAS born," says Mr. Hallock in a brief sketch 
of his early life written about the year 1815, " on 
Monday, March 13, 1758. My native place was 
Brookhaven,* Long Island, in the State of New York. 
My father, "VVilUam Hallock, was born on Long Island 
in 1730. My mother was Alice Homan. My grand- 
father, Noah HaUock, Hved and died at a place called 
'The Old Man's,' nearly opposite New Haven." 

After stating his confidence in the piety of more 
remote ancestors, he says, " I have often heard my 
dear father date his hope at about eight years old, 
though he was more than forty when he made a pub- 
lic profession of religion. He always prayed in his 
family, and I have repeatedly found him at prayer, in 
some retired place. He appeared to regard the holy 

* He was born at " Fireplace," in Brookliaven, on the south 
side of the Island. His ancestors had resided on Long Island 
from the early settlement of our country. See page 389. 



12 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



Sabbath, to delight in the public worship of the Lord, 
to respect the Bible and preachers of the gospel, to 
love Christians, to value awakenings, and cordially 
to believe in the doctrines of grace. He ever appeared 
to think very lowly of himself, and to feel that, if a 
Christian, he was the least of all. He was hospitable, 
and felt in the distresses of the afflicted. He was gifted 
in prayer, apt to speak in conferences," or prayer-meet- 
ings, "and to converse on religion. I know of none 
with whom I could talk more freely on religious sub- 
jects than my dear father. My mother, I believe, 
made a profession of religion when I was about eight 
years old, and I trust from her life and conversation 
she really is what she professes to be. 

" My father had nine children, who lived to grow 
up, two sons and seven daughters, all of whom except 
the youngest daughter settled in the family state. 
I was the oldest child. When I was about eight 
years old, my father removed with his family to a 
part of Chesterfield now called Goshen, in Hampshire 
county, Massachusetts. Here I lived with him till 1 
was twenty-one, and went through privations and 
hardships in assisting him to bring under cultivation 
an entirely new farm." 

Besides these early toils on the unsubdued Green 
mountains, Mr. Hallock was twice called, in the war 
of the revolution, while yet in his minority, to ex- 
change the tranquillity of agriculture for the tumult 
of arms. By this discipline in his youth, God was 
preparing him for that "hardness" which he after- 
wards endured so joyfully as a good soldier of Christ. 



EARLY LIFE. 



13 



In 1777, he was in a body of troops selected for a 
secret expedition, and closely packed in boats on lake 
George. A tempest came upon tliem, and his boat 
was carried down sidewise between two tremendous 
waves. At this moment, an old sailor sprang to the 
helm, and ordered another to the bow. There was 
now a dead silence, except when the man at the helm, 
as the boat plunged, sung out, " Steady, boys," and 
when the man at the bow, as she rose again, answered, 
" All 's well." Alkiding to this night of terror near 
the close of life, Mr. Hallock said, " I have often been 
cheered, in times of commotion and peril, by remem- 
bering those words : ' Steady, boys' — ' All 's well.' " 
" I have a fresh remembrance of serious impres- 
sions when I was about six or seven years of age. 
Similar feelings, I believe, young children often ex- 
perience. If I mistake not, this anxiety was in a 
season of some awakening in the neighborhood. In 
my ninth and tenth years, death would sometimes 
appear real and near, and for a short time my mind 
would be filled with inexpressible alarm ; I think I 
had some sense of my sinfulness. But these impres- 
sions would soon wear off, and leave me almost 
totally careless of my soul. From ten to eighteen, I 
took much delight in reading the Bible, especially 
the historical parts of it ; and could repeat almost 
whole chapters. These I sometimes repeated to my 
father ; and this early reading of the Scriptures has, 
I trust, been profitable to me, in many respects, to 
this day. As I lived in a very new country, far from 
meeting, and with little advantage from schools ; as 



14 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



I neither saw nor heard of awakenings ; as the parents 
seemed to be wholly after the world, and the children 
and youth thoughtless and attached to carnal mirth, 
I grew up with little mental improvement, and gener- 
ally indifferent to spiritual things. Yet, on a certain 
Sabbath, which is still fresh in my mind, a sermon, 
preached in Williamsburgh by the Rev. Mr. Hooker, 
excited my attention, and I think my mind was 
deeply impressed with eternal realities. But I said 
nothing to any one, neither, so far as I remember, 
did I once think what it was ; for conviction, con- 
version, and revivals, were terms with which I was 
unacquainted. These impressions, so far as I recol- 
lect, continued till about the middle of the week, 
when they left me as unconcerned as I was before. 

" Once I almost miraculously escaped being in- 
stantly killed by the fall of a tree, where I was at 
work with a number of gicldy creatures. When in 
the army at Ticonderoga, in 1776, I was brought 
near the grave by the prevailing sickness. And in 
1777, as I was in a scouting party with Colonel 
Brown, after travelling in the dark woods all night, 
I became very sleepy about daybreak, when getting 
over a log, I set my gun down on the ground and 
accidentally snapped it with my foot. It had just 
been loaded, and the muzzle was at this moment 
under my chin. These narrow escapes from death 
would alarm me only for a little while. Thus I lived 
until the close of my twenty-first year, flattering my- 
self that there was time enough for repentance yet 
to come, and hoping that I should somehow escape 



EARLY LIFE. 



15 



hell and be admitted into heaven. I had no con- 
viction of the necessity of the new birth, as a moral 
meetness for a holy heaven ; but supposed that, if 
God in his mercy would only admit me there, I was 
already fitted for the place. 

" But on entering my twenty-second year, March 
13, 1779, being of age, and wishing to obtain the 
wealth of this world, my mind began to be impressed 
with a sense of my dependence on God for his bless- 
ing. While at work alone, I used to pray that God 
would bless and prosper me. One day, as I closed 
with these words, ' And when I come to die, fit me 
for death the thought occurred, ' But why put off 
this preparation for death till the closing scene ?' 
This appeared inconsistent. I saw that this great 
work ought to be first, and not delayed to a dying 
bed. Not far from this time, I had a sudden sense, 
like a flash, of the sinfulness of my heart. This, I 
scarcely remember to have thought of before, certainly 
not with an equal degree of feeling. Soon after this, 
my heart, while I was in bed, seemed so black and 
polluted, that I could hardly avoid ciying out ; but this 
deep sense of guilt soon abated. This was in the latter 
part of March, and I think my mind was on the whole 
more and more impressed in April and May, though 
in a gradual manner. I do not remember that I had 
any name for my feelings, or that I made mention 
of them to any one, or thought myself awakened. 

" In the latter part of May, I met two of my 
mates, one evening, to arrange for a ball at the ap- 
proaching state election. We were together till past 



16 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



nine o'clock, but no arrangements were made, ana 
the ball was hardly mentioned. It was a sober meet- 
ing ; no one of us appeared to have any wish for vain 
mirth, and finally, by the desire of the youth, a ser- 
mon was preached, on the day of election, at the 
meeting-house. As there had been some attention to 
singing the previous winter, it was called a singing- 
lecture. At the close of the meeting, all the youth went 
home, and nothing more was said respecting the ball. 
In June there was to be an ordination in a neighboring 
town, and some of the youth purposed to go and have 
a season of mirth, but this also came to nothing. 

"About this time, a lecture was preached at 
G-oshen by a minister from abroad — for we had then 
no settled minister — at which the youth appeared 
still mo]'e solemn. Some of them now agreed to meet 
at a private house, on the next Sabbath evening, for 
a religious conference. This, I believe, was the first 
religious meeting of young people ever held in the 
town. It was the first religious conference- I ever 
attended. We read the Bible and conversed together, 
and as all refused to pray, I made the attempt. As 
I had never before led in social prayer, nor even asked 
a blessing at table, it was not a little trying to pray 
with my fellow-youth, with whom I had been accus- 
tomed to associate in things remote from religion. 
Sobriety and solemnity marked the meeting, yet, on 
account of the shortness of the evenings, no other 
meeting was then appointed. 

My general impressions continued till some time 
in the month of August, when, as I retired one even- 



HIS CONVERSION. 



17 



ing, my mind, as T have hoped, was enlightened into 
a saving knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, and the 
way of salvation hy liim. The law of God appeared 
just, I saw myself a sinner, and Christ and the way 
of salvation by him looked pleasant. I thought it 
was a happiness to be in the hands of God, and that 
I could trust myself and my all in his hands, as the 
place of entire safety from every foe and evil. I saw 
a spii-itual beauty and excellence in these things 
which I had never seen before, though I have no re- 
membrance that it once turned in my mind, at the 
time, what all this was. But I have a fresh recol- 
lection that when I went down in the morning, and 
looked into the psalm-book, it was a new book ; or 
there was a new spiritual, weighty importance and 
beauty in it. I cast my eyes on the 144th Psalm, 
' Happy the city,' etc. This and the second stanza 
appeared excellent ; but when I came to the lines, 

" ' But moie divinely blest are those, 
On whom the all-sufficient God 
Himself, with all his grace bestows,' 

there appeared to be in them a peculiar beauty and 
excellence. "When I went into the field to work, the 
glory of God appeared in all his visible creation. I 
well remember we reaped oats, and how every straw 
and head of the oats seemed, as it were, arrayed in a 
kind of rainbow-glory, or to glow, if I may so express 
it, in the glory of God. Yet I mentioned my views 
and feelings to no one. There were three of us, I 
think, at work together, and it was a silent day, but 
one of sweet mental peace. It still never occurred 



18 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



to me, that I had experienced any thing like a change 
of heart. 

" Not many weeks after this, I was called to do 
military duty. On the release of the company for a 
little refreshment, without any plan or intention of 
mine, I found myself in a barn, near the place of 
parade, surrounded by my fellow-youth and others, 
and exhorting them on the things of religion. Some 
of them gave deep and affectionate attention. One 
of iTiy mates was then awakened, who afterwards 
obtained hope. 

"About this time the awakening, which had 
been secretly advancing, began to break forth, and 
by the first of January it was spread considerably 
over the town. And though the season was cold and 
the snow very deep, the meetings were frequent, full, 
and solemn. As we had no minister, and I was tlie 
fii-st of the apparent converts, the lead of the meet- 
ings often devolved upon me ; and my dear mates 
looked to me for instruction, showed me great respect, 
and put confidence in what I said. I frequently led 
in prayer, read, and spoke a word of exhortation — 
sometimes with freedom. I lived this winter with 

Mr. . As we were dressing flax, February 9th, 

in a back room, the flax took fire, and burnt so quick 
and furiously, the wind being high, that in a few 
minutes the flame pervaded the whole house, and it 
was consumed with all its contents, except what was 
carried out perhaps in fifteen minutes. The sudden 
burning of the house, and the shock it produced, gave 
me an impressive sense of the great burning-day at 



HIS CONVERSION. 



19 



the end of the world, and the inexpressible conster- 
nation of poor thoughtless sinners, who only mind 
earthly things, and think as little of that dreadful 
hour as the old world thought of the flood, or as we 
thought of this fire till it came. 

"Looking over the daily account which I kept at 
this time, I find that during March and April I 
attended meetings most of the evenings, went some- 
times as far as six miles, and spoke in them as much 
as a short sermon, generally from some passage of 
Scripture. I sometimes went beyond my strength, 
my bodUy health was reduced, and once I was thi-eat- 
ened with sickness. I had no special refreshings — 
sometimes was ready to give up my hope — yet it 
was a new and pleasant scene, of which I before had 
no idea. My mind for the most part was clear and 
comfortable, and I trust the Lord was graciously with 
us, and blessed my poor exhortations to his children 
and to some thoughtless sinners." 

An eye-witness of Mr. Hallock's activity and use- 
fulness in this revival, Dea. James Richards, long an 
officer in the church of Mr. Hallock's only brother at 
Plainfield, Mass., and father of the foreign missionaries, 
James and "William Richards, says, 

" My first acquaintance with him was in the sum- 
mer of 1779, in the place now called Groshen. The 
season was remarkable for the display of the power 
and mercy of Q-od, in bringing lost men from the 
bondage of sin into the liberty of the gospel. Mr. 
Hallock, I think, was the first who manifested a 
Christian hope. From this time, it seemed that his 



20 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



whole soul was engaged to promote the glory of Grod, 
the advancement of the Redeemer's kingdom, and the 
salvation of souls. I attended conferences with him 
constantly, through the awakening, or till near the 
close of it. It was his general, and perhaps I may 
say his constant practice to give an exhortation. In 
these exhortations, he did not want for ideas, nor for 
words to express them. They were fervent and 
affectionate. The spring following, I returned to the 
place of my nativity. There I continued till 17S8, 
when I came with my family to this town. In the 
autumn of 1790, he made his first visit in this place. 
On renewing our acquaintance, I found him to be the 
same humble, pious, devoted Christian, that he was 
eleven years before. When we came together, after 
the usual salutation he addressed me in these words : 
' I hope our interview will be spiritual.' And indeed 
it seemed that this was his aim in all his visits ; for 
he was eminently a spirituaUy-mmded man. I do 
not recollect that he ever visited at my house with- 
out praying before we parted. I loved, esteemed, and 
revered the man ; and the recollection of the delight- 
ful seasons I have passed with him still affords a 
solemn pleasure." 

It is not a little gratifying to find so good a begin- 
ning to that course of unwearied effort in the cause of 
Christ, which, by the grace of God, Mr. Hallock was 
enabled .steadily to pursue for almost half a century. 
Though not without seasons of darkness, yet on the 
whole the time of his spiritual espousals seems to 



HIS CONVERSION. 



21 



have been emphatically, "the day of the gladness of 
his heart." In conversation with a friend, some years 
since, he expressed the following sentiments in nearly 
the following manner. 

" The most pleasant revival, I think, which I ever 
witnessed, was that in which I obtained my hope. I 
then knew little of Satan's wiles, and the deceitful- 
ness of the heart. I was free from the care and anxiety 
of a settled pastor. The scene was new, and I gave 
myself up to the enjoyment of it. But since I receiv- 
ed the charge of souls, it has been diflbrent. I have 
found revivals to be such critical and important seasons, 
that my solicitude and sense of responsibility have 
greatly checked my joy. Now, on seeing a person 
altogether careless in a time of Grod's special mercy, 
I tremble for fear he will be left without a share in 
the blessing. If I find one under slight serious im- 
pressions, I am in distress because he has not a deeper 
sense of his sin and ruin. If I discover a case of 
pungent conviction, my joy is limited by a fear that 
tliis person will yet grieve the Holy Spirit, and be 
given over to a reprobate mind. When I meet one in 
the first transports of hope, I trust I feel a peculiar 
satisfaction, yet I cannot but remember the ' stony- 
ground' hearers, and pray God, in my poor way, to 
save from fatal delusion. "When I fijid a professor of 
Christ fast asleep, my heart sinks within me ; and on 
seeing in professors or young converts a forwardness 
to promote the work, I am sometimes afraid they will 
do serious injury, through a want of knowledge or of 
prudence. And 0, how anxiously do I watch any 



22 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



changes in the work ; how exceedingly trying to see 
evidence of its decline ! How do I tremble, for fear 
our sms as a church, and especially my own defects, 
should provoke G-od to withdraw liis gracious influence. 
Thus, brother, turn what way I will, a revival, with 
all its animating things, is to me a scene of amazing 
solemnity." 

But these feelings of pastoral solicitude must not 
be taken for a distrustful spirit. No man, in a sea- 
son of religious revival, seemed to have more entire 
reliance on the arm of Jehovah. Yet he was trem- 
blingly alive in the use of divinely appomted means. 
It should also be stated, that Mr. Hallock ever held 
in high estimation the judiciou.s efforts of laymen, and 
that he had great confidence in the leading members 
of his own church. Few clergymen have given equal 
encouragement to meetings of youth, in which con- 
verts might take an active part. This we might 
indeed expect, from a knowledge of his own early 
practice in such meetings. Within a year of his death 
he spoke with strong emotion of the assistance which 
he had received in revivals from members of his 
church ; and expressed his conviction that it was even 
more valuable than the labors of an evangelist would 
probably have been. He added, " I believe, that when 
God has a special work of grace to perform in any 
place, he usually provides some prominent instru- 
ment — that this is sometimes an obscure individual 
in the church, who receives for this purpose a fresh 
anointing, and then is peculiarly active and useful 
in arousing his more tardy brethren to duty." 



PREPARATION FOR IHE MINISTRY, 



:23 



CHAPTER II. 

PREPARATION AND LICENSE TO PREACH IHE 
aOSPEL. 

" I WOULD here notice, that for several months I 
had had almost a constant impression of my having 
a call to preach the gospel, and a strong desire to be 
thus employed, if it were the will of God. Several of 
my friends mentioned the subject to me, and asked 
me if it was not my duty to devote myself to the 
gospel ministry, and some, to encourage me, made 
me small presents. 

"In AprU, 1780, I went to Northampton to see 
Mr. Dwight, now president of Yale college, to know 
if I could attend his school the ensuing summer. 
The 20th of May was the noted dark morning. 
AVhile others around me were terrified, I do not know 
that I felt the least agitation, but spoke to them con- 
cerning Jesus. In the afternoon we had a meeting, 
and I addressed them with unusual freedom ; the 
attention of the people was greater than common. 
May 25th, I began to study with Mr. Joseph Barker, 
who was preaching in Goshen as a candidate. My 
board was given me by the neighbors. About this 
time I had, I think, rather a greater sense than com- 
mon of the wickedness of my heart, the temptations 
of this world, and my exposure to be overcome by 



2t 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



them ; also of my absolute dependence on the Lord, 
and that if saved it must be all of free grace. 

" On the 9th of June I wrote thus: ' Things do 
appear more clear than they did. Blessed be God for 
it, for ever and ever. 0 my soul, praise the Lord, and 
call upon his name ; 0 praise him, while you have 
strength to move.' I was now much in the habit of 
writing a sort of verse, like the following which T 
find in my diary, June 21. 

" 'I am a sinner, and most vile 
Of all the human race; 
Lord, wash away my sins, I pray. 
By thy free sovereign grace.' 

" On the 7th of August, I went to Northampton 
and joined Mr. Dwight's school. I was one of the 
oldest scholars, and yet the most deficient in learn- 
ing. My mind was seriously impressed ; the school 
in general were light and vain. The dry study of the 
Latin was also a great trial to me ; for I wished to 
spend my whole time in reading the Bible and 
religious books, in connection with other spiritual 
duties.* 

" My health at the same time failing, it was not 
long before I sunk into the most distressing melan- 
choly, and soon became entirely discouraged and 
went home with a view to be a farmer if G-od should 
spare my life, despairing of ever being a minister of 
the gospel. The distresses of these days and weeks 
no one can have any idea of, except by experience. 

* On the cover of his Virgil was written, " Alas, the poor 
heathen could not find Christ." 



PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY. 



25 



My soul hath the bitterness of that season still fresh 
in remembrance. I was ready to concJude that all 
was against me as a Cliristian, and trembled for fear 
I should become an apostate. But He who pitieth 
the afflicted and heareth the cries of the distressed 
and helpless, kept me in this dreadful day from total 
despair and utter ruin, and praised be his name. To 
the Lord Jesus I made my sorrows known and looked 
for relief. I greatly feared that having given up all 
idea of the ministry, I should soon get buried in the 
world, and care nothing about religion. 

" My mind became more calm, and contrary to 
my fear, I found that though I had given up all hope 
of the ministry, yet, if ever I loved religion, I loved 
it still. This, instead of destroying my hope, strength- 
ened it. On the 7th of September I wrote, ' Things 
appeared to me more clear to-day ; my soul seemed 
to long after God ; his people and his kingdom still 
appeared lovely.' After bitter complaint of coldness, 
worldly-mindedness and the like, I find written, No- 
vember 4, ' Last Wednesday night I experienced a 
great revival of religioiis feeling — whether true or 
false Grod knoweth ; I felt grieved to see or hear any 
thing against the ministers of Jesus, and I think they 
looked beautiful for their work's sake. I also felt a 
desire to be made, though unworthy, an instrument 
of the glory of God and of good in the world.' In the 
forepart of December, my hope respecting the gospel 
ministry began to revive, and on the fifteenth of this 
month I went to school again to Mr. Barker. I find 
written, December 9, ' It appears to me that I am 



26 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

the most ignorant, and that I never shall be fit for 
any service in the world ;' and also these lines : 

Though I am dark, yet Christ is light, 
Though I am weak, yet Christ is strong, 
And he can give me heavenly light. 
And in his service make me strong.' " 

Mr. Hallock spent the next year in the study of 
Latin, a part of it at Northampton, in the academic 
school of the late Dr. Dwight. He afterwards pur- 
sued his studies, for about eighteen months, with the 
Rev. Mr. Strong of "VVilliamsburgh. 

"On the 8th of March, 1781, I made a public 
profession of Christ, and united with his church in 
G-oshen. Among the things I then wrote are these 
words: '0 the solemn oath that I have made this 
day. 0 that God would give me grace to live accord- 
ing to my promise, that I might so walk as not to 
bring a reproach upon the religion of his dear Son.' 
In September, 1782, when I supposed I was fitted for 
college, I was for some time unwell, and threatened 
with serious ilhiess. I then wrote, ' Dark symptoms 
of sickness seem very different from what they once 
did. They do not appear terrifying or awful, but 
more like friends than enemies, because they are 
many times used as instruments to open the way for 
saints to their Father's house. 0 Lord, search me 
and try me, and leave me not to build upon a false 
foundation.' 

"About this time, I began to make the following 
resolves, and from time to time continued to make 
them, according to my situation and the occurrences 



PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY. 27 



of my life. These I resolved to renew once a week, 
unless unavoidably interrupted; which I have done, 
and I trust to my sph-itual profit. Endeavoring to 
lean on the Beloved for strength to perform, 

" ' 1. I am resolved to avoid all known sins, and to 
practise all known duties ; to read the word of Grod 
and other good books, and go according to the light I 
find in them. 

" ' 2. Resolved to watch over my conduct respect- 
ing my aged parents, never to give them an unkind 
word, but to love and honor them, as enjoined in the 
fifth commandment, and to obey and follow them 
wherein they follow Christ. 

" ' 3. I am resolved, three times a day, unless my 
circumstances render it impossible, to retire and read 
a portion of Scripture and pray ; to be much in ejac- 
ulatory prayer, and in times of unusual trouble to be 
more than commonly prayerful. 

" ' 4. Resolved to keep a general journal of the 
most remarkable occurrences of my life. 

" ' 5. I am resolved to be faithful to my dear 
consort, to seek to instruct, watch over, and bring 
up my children in the fear of God, and to pray and 
travail in birth for them, until Christ is formed in 
them the hope of glory. 

' ' 6. I am resolved to show my superiors, inferi- 
ors, and equals, due respect at all times, and not to 
have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect 
of persons. 

'"7. I am resolved to be careful of another's char- 
acter, and to say nothing against him directly or indi- 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



rectly, unless I think the interest of rehgion and the 
honor of Grod call me to it. 

" ' 8. Resolved, never to look upon myself to have 
attained, hut to press forward. 

" ' 9. Resolved, never to put myself forward in 
any thing, especially in matters of rehgion, hut always 
to take the lowest place. 

"'10. Resolved, in all my trouhles to he careful 
how I complain or speak of them ; and to say and do 
that which may he most for the glory of God, who 
is as worthy of praise in my adversity as in my pros- 
perity. 

'"11. Resolved, the first thing in the morning 
to give myself up to the Lord ; to study what I can 
do most for his glory that day, and hy prayer to set 
about it ; and that this shall be the last thing at night. 

" ' 12. Resolved to receive all unkindnesses with 
patience ; to keep counsel, and speak against no one, 
unless I think I am in duty called to it. 

" ' 13. Resolved, if in my power, to read at least 
four portions of Scripture, or hear them read, every day. , 

'"14. Resolved to try all my sermons by G-od's 
word, and endeavor to get good from them before I 
preach them, and to deliver them as if I was about to 
give up my last account. 

" ' 15. I am resolved not only to preach what I 
find agreeable to the word of Grod to others, but to 
endeavor to practise it myself. 

" ' 16. Resolved, that nothing be lost, but that 
what little time and strength I have be spent in the 
service of God. 



PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY. '29 

" ' 17. I am resolved to pray for all people, espe- 
cially for the church, and for my enemies. 

" ' 18. Resolved, never to he too much lifted up, 
nor too much cast down, hut to hope in Grod and not 
to indulge despair. 

" ' 19. Resolved to watch against the love of this 
world, as a sin which doth easily heset me. 

" ' 20. Resolved to inquire with candor after the 
truth for the truth's sake, taking the word of G-od as 
my only guide, looking up to the Holy Spirit to guide 
me into a right understanding of it. 

" ' 21. Resolved to watch agamst a murmuring, 
fretful spirit. 

" ' 22. Resolved, to watch in the day of prosperity, 
lest I forsake the Lord. 

'* ' 23. Resolved to ' rememher the Sahhath-day 
to keep it holy.' 

" ' 24. Resolved to avouch the Lord Jehovah, the 
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, as my God 
and Father, my Redeemer, Sanctifier, and Comforter, 
tlirough the everlasting atonement of Jesus Christ.' 

"The preceding resolves I have generally renewed 
Saturday evening, with a covenant, in which I have 
endeavored to give my heart, soul, body, name, inter- 
est, and happiness, for time and eternity, to God in 
Christ ; also my wife, children, and friends, my peo- 
ple, the world, and dearer Zion, that all might he 
consecrated to the fear, service, kingdom, and glory of 
God ; at the same time praying that God would be 
my father, and put me among liis children — that the 
Lord Jesus Christ would be my prophet, priest, and 



30 



fEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



king, my righteousness, wisdom, sanctification, and 
redemption, and the Holy Spirit my sanctifier, sup- 
porter, and comforter. And although, as I have said, 
I trust the weekly renewal of the preceding resolves 
and covenant has heen profitable, and tended to pre- 
pare my mind for the Sabbath, yet the practice has 
taught me this : that it is one thing to covenant and 
resolve, and another to do, or in other words, how 
much easier it is to covenant than to perform ; and 
that I am absolutely dependent, after all, on the gra- 
cious and quickening influences of the Holy Spirit. 

" I have considered 1783 an important year to 
me. I suppose I was fitted for college in the preced- 
ing September. On the invitation of Mr. Abraham 
Fowler, who had preached at G-oshen as a candidate, 
and with whom I had formed an agreeable acquaint- 
ance, I set out the 26th of May for his house in 
West Simsbury,* Connecticut, with a view to spend 
the summer with him in study. The day I left home 
I wrote thus : * Left one poor brother and seven sis- 
ters, as I have reason to think, in an unconverted 
state ; it is a cutting thought ; 0 Lord, pity them.' 
I did not then know what I afterwards found to be a 
fact, that my youngest sister had a hope. I tarried 
with Mr. Fowler until the 1st of October. Mr. Ed- 
mund MUls preached this summer in "West Simsbury, 
and Mr. Fowler at Salmon Brook. Mr. Mills was 
very spiritual and had great assistance from above. 

* The place where Mr. Hallock spent the remainder of his 
days, the name being afterwards changed to Canton. 



PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY. 31 



Not long after he came, a revival of religion began. 
I believe about one hundred manifested hope. Be- 
fore it commenced, the church and Sabbath were 
almost lost ; now the church was gathered, reformed, 
and increased. About the middle of August, Mercy 
Humphrey, now Mrs. Hallock, obtained hope. Be- 
sides meetings on the Sabbath, and lectures, I some- 
times attended three or four conferences," or prayer- 
meetings, "in a week. And often if there was no 
minister, I prayed, read a portion of Scripture, and 
made remarks. I wrote, nearly every day, what I 
did, and the exercises of my own mind — doubts and 
hopes, trials and comforts. But as they were nothing 
extraordinary, and quite similar, I shall only tran- 
scribe the journal of two days. 

" August 17, 1783. Lord's day, West Simsbury. 
Some enlargement in prayer this morning, in secret 
and in the family. My mind last night dwelt on the 
things of religion. I am continually in trouble, by 
reason of darkness and sin. Talked considerably last 
evening concerning the agency of God's Spii-it ; I trust 
it has been profitable. Heard Mr. Edmund Mills — 
dull for the most part — find I have a dreadfully 
wicked heart — some profitable discourse at night — 
think I have some sense of my dependence on God — 
had a conference this evening — people appeared very 
attentive. 

" August 29. Some life in closet prayer this morn- 
ing. Many temptations to fight against. Three years 
ago to-day I was discouraged, and concluded not to 
study any more ; but God has marvellously sup- 



32 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



ported me from time to time, until now. I trust I 
can look back upon all my troubles from that time 
to this, and repeat Watts' hundred and nineteenth 
psalm, last part, with application to myself. When 
one trouble comes another goes ; in prosperity, the 
world is bewitching; but adversity brings a gloom 
upon it, and I can more easily forsake it. 

" ' Puise, my soul, from earthly things 
Thy better portion take.' " 

One of the surviving subjects of this work states 
that Mr. Hallock at this time was as interesting and 
useful as he was active ; that he manifested not a 
little skUl in his defence of truth against the assaults 
of gainsayers ; that no sooner was the regular service 
of a meetmg closed, than he would be surrounded 
often by a group of listeners, who were unwilling to 
retire while one so able to give instruction was will- 
ing to impart it. 

" One thing which occurred when I lived at ]\lr. 
Fowler's, I can never forget. It was an unexpected 
visit from Moses, my only brother, and about two 
years younger than myself. I left him, in May, de- 
voted to the world. My feelings for him were some- 
times unutterable. To my surprise he came to see 
me, apparently pricked in the heart. I had heard 
that he was unwell. The news had given me much 
anxiety. Now his health was nearly restored, yet he 
was evidently under serious impressions. He remained 
with me several days. We attended many meetings ; 
two public fasts, one at Simsbury and one at Granby, 
where we parted. To me it was a solemn parting, 



PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY. 33 

and, I believe, to him. He viewed himself, as I have 
reason to think was the case, unreconciled to God 
and a child of wrath.* By him I sent letters to my 
friends in Goshen and Williamsburgh, in which I 
gave some account of the awakening in Connecticut. 
These, I afterwards found, were much read by those 
who felt an interest in such things. My father wrote 
to me in consequence, that if I wished to do good I 
must write more about the revival." 

It was possibly from this hint that Mr. Hallock, 
tlu-ouuh life, made no small use of letters in his select 
circle of Christian friends, in the social meeting, and 
in the house of God. For this purpose, he was accus- 
tomed to borrow and copy reUgious letters of marked 
interest, especially those which contained important 
facts in respect to revivals. He had indeed a rare 
talent to turn to some good account this kind of 
information. 

The follo\\dng passages show the state of his mind 
toucliing the great and good work of the Christian 
ministry : 

" Felt my heart glow to engage in the work of 
the ministry. 0 may God fit me for that great work, 
and use me for his glory in that way, if it may seem 
good to him." " I had a gi-eat desire, I believe to 
excess, to turn my study whoUy upon divinity." 

* This very dear and only brother soon after obtained hope in 
Christ, and commenced preparation for the ministry. He graduated 
at Yale college in 1788, and in 1792 was installed pastor of the 
church in Plainfield, near Goshen, Mass., where he had a prosperous 
ministry of forty-five years, till his death July 17, 1837, at the ripe 
age of 77. See page 311. 



34 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



" Felt impatient to study so long before beginning to 
preach. 0 that I might learn patience, and be quiet 
as a chUd." "What it means I cannot tell, but I 
have a desire to be an itinerant preacher. If it be 
the will of God, Amen ; but 0, may I never run of 
my own mind." 

" September 30, 1783, 1 left West Sinfisbury, and 
went to live with the Rev. Mr. Mills of Torringford, 
with whom I had formed an endearing acquaintance. 
It was trying to part with Mr. Fowler, his family, and 
the Chi-istian friends with whom I had been for more 
than four months, in a day of such mterest, with no 
thought of meeting them again, at least to Hve to- 
gether in this world. At Torringford I saw many 
good ministers, heard them preach and converse, and 
was favored with their instruction and counsel. They 
treated me with parental kindness and tenderness. 
I made a point of retiring three times a day for prayer 
and reading a portion of Scripture ; sometimes set 
apart days for private fasting and prayer. Although 
I saw my heart to be sinful, and was troubled with 
carnal affections, yet I commonly felt a peace within — 
not greatly elated, nor yet overwhelmed with dis- 
tressing doubts and slavish fears. On the 20th of 
October I received a letter from my brother Moses, in 
which he gave me an account of his conversion. It 
was like cold water to a thirsty soul. 

November 24, I left Mr. Mills' for home, wish- 
ing to go by the way of Stockbridge. Stopped with 
the Rev. Mr. Knapp of Winchester. Attended a meet- 
ing with him in the evening, and at his request made 



PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY. o5 

a prayer and said a few words. It was a time of 
revival there. Next morning had some freedom in 
prayer. Felt, I thought, as strong a desire to be an 
itinerant preacher as the thirsty traveller feels for 
cold water. After breakfast parted with the agree- 
able Mr. Knapp; called a little while on the Rev. 
Mr. Robbins of Norfolk, and was deUghted with him 
as a man and a minister of Jesus. Lodged at Shef- 
field. Here I was pecuUarly tried with a rude, pro- 
fane company, which made me desire that I might 
be made as faithful in the service of the Lord, as they 
were in the service of Satan. Next day rode to the 
Rev. Mr. West's of Stockbridge, and agreed to study 
a while with him. 

"Nov. 28. Have been from home six months. 
Think the past has been a profitable summer to my 
poor soul. Hope to see my friends at Goshen to-day. 
May I conduct like a Christian, so long as it shall 
please God to continue me there. 

" Dec. 4. Attended a wedding ; prayed with and 
spoke to the young people. They were civil and 
attentive. 

" Dec. 10. Came to the Rev. Mr. West's to study 
with him. And now, Lord, wilt thou be with me 
indeed and bless me while here, and I shall be 
blessed. Had this evening freedom in mind and 
some sweetness in meditation and prayer. 

" Dec. 16. This day finished the reading of Ed- 
wards on the Affections — approved of it 0 may I 
grow in knowledge and in grace. 

" Dec. 17. Resolved to keep this as a day of pri- 



36 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



vate fasting and prayer. Found it in some measure 
pleasant. 

" Dec. 20. Finished reading Mr. Taylor on Orig- 
inal Sin. I know that his scheme will not answer 
for me ; my wound is too deep. 0 Lord, deliver me 
from the horrid belief that we are not sinners by 
nature. 

" Dec. 31. When I am well and hungry, I delight 
to be called out to breakfast ; 0 may I deUght still 
more to be called out to prayers. May I hunger 
more after God than for my necessary food. I am 
now brought to the close of a year in which I have 
received great and innumerable mercies ; but my sins 
have been infinite every day. 0 may I sink in my 
own view, and may the Lord God only be magnified 
in my heart. 

" Jan. 1, 1784. I now enter upon a new year ; 0 
may I enter on a new life. Now I am one year nearer 
the millennium. Now I am one year nearer the 
'eternal world. ' So teach me,' 0 Lord, * to number 
my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom.' 
Set apart this day for fasting and prayer, and to 
renew my covenant and resolutions." 

Mr. Hallock having now pursued preparatory 
study nearly four years, resolved to apply for license 
to preach the gospel. Ardor of piety prompted him 
onward, as it has many other valuable ministers, 
without the advantages of a public education. While, 
however, his attainments in science and literature 
were limited, his knowledge of his great text-book 



PREPAEATIO:^ FOR THE MINISTRY. 37 

the Bible, in its various and high practical bearings 
on a world lying ia sin and ruin, exceeded that of 
most candidates for the ministry. From the time of 
his conversion he had made this holy volume, as we 
have seen, his dihgent and prayerful study. If he 
could not, with some theological students, bring to 
the investigation of Scripture a knowledge of different 
languages, and the acuteness of mere criticism on 
words and phrases, he had the advantage of most in 
that childlike simplicity with which he took God's 
plain declarations. He loved to sit at Jesus' feet ; 
and his faith could there receive with joy what his 
reason failed to comprehend. The uprightness of his 
heart, which gave him a high relish for divine truth, 
was in fact a sort of moral test, and a far safer test, 
no doubt, than the widest range of learning and the 
best rules of biblical criticism, with a heart at enmity 
with Grod. Seldom has the world seen so fine an 
illustration of our Saviour's words, " If any man 
wiU do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether 
it be of God, or whether I speak of myself," Few 
men could quote, at pleasure, from every part of the 
Bible, with so much ease and aptness. In subsequent 
life, he was indeed mighty in the Scriptures. He 
had, too, an uncommon share of good sense, prudence, 
and practical wisdom. His excellence of judgment, 
his moral dignity, his decision of character, command- 
ed universal respect. The deep feeling also, and the 
sincerity which were ever manifest in his looks, his 
conversation, his prayers, his preaching, his whole 
intercourse with men and with God, went far to give 



38 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

him that weight of influence which he possessed 
among all classes of society, and especially in the 
church of Christ. 

Yet it seems to be a principle in the government 
which God exercises over this world of sinners, that 
humility should go before honor, severe trial before 
marked success. He who prepared Moses for his 
station by a forty years' discipline on the mountains 
of Midian, and David for his throne by the persecution 
of Saul, did not allow Mr. Hallock to enter upon the 
work in which he foresaw his future eminence and 
usefulness, until he had first put to a severe test his 
faith and patience. 

" January 5, 1784. Not without some life in 
prayer. Expect, to-morrow, if the Lord will, to be 
examined as to my qualifications for preaching the 
gospel. 0 Lord, I am very unfit; 0 that thou 
wouldst sanctify me for so great a work. 

*' Rode to Egremont — rainy, the road bad — no one 
came to the association but the Rev. Mr. Avery. I told 
them my errand, but they could not proceed to examine 
me. They treated me with much kindness. Trust 
I felt in some degree willing that Grod should govern. 

" January 7. Rode home and dined with Mr. 
Avery. "We had a few small potatoes boiled, with a 
piece of salt pork, but no bread, and not a word of 
complaint. Neither did they appear mortified, but 
pleasant and agreeable. I have considered this one 
of the best dinners of my life. When I shall be ex- 
amined now, I know not. 0 Lord, may I enjoy thy 
presence, and it shall be enough. 



PRETARATION FOR THE MINISTRY. 39 

" January 8. Set apart tliis day for prayer and 
meditation ; to humble myself before the Lord, and 
to notice the dealings of his providence. Though a 
great want of spiritual life, yet I trust it has been 
profitable, 

" January 14. Set apart this day for lasting and 
prayer, 0 Lord, be pleased to grant the assistance 
of thy Holy Spirit. 

" Some spiritual life. 0 may I improve, under 
all my advantages. 

" January 19. Have been much concerned, even 
to sin, for fear something would occur to prevent my 
examination. I have, for some end, an earnest desire 
to enter the work of the ministry. This is to me a 
gloomy day, as there is a terrible storm of snow from 
the north-east, and as Rev. Mr. West has been so kind 
as to call a special meeting of the association to-mor- 
row, with a view to my examination, I find I can 
see more of my wicked heart in one day of adversity, 
than in a thousand days when things go according to 
my mind. 0 Lord, the maker of heaven and earth, 
may this dispensation of thy providence humble me, 
and may what I have seen of my wicked heart bring 
me low at thy feet for ever. 

" January 20, The wished-for day is past when 
I hoped to be examined and licensed as a candidate 
for the gospel ministry. But God saw otherwise, 
and blessed be his name. The storm was so severe 
that not one minister attended. I see now no pros- 
pect of my examination, if I should live, until April, 
the usual time for the association to meet. 0 Lord, 



40 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

thou canst open a door sooner, if thou seest it best ; 
but if not till the end of these eleven long weeks, nor 
then, thy will be done. I think my studies delight- 
some, but I long to come forward. I saw others in 
trouble to-day : was at a house where one of the dear 
children was dead. Discoursed with the afflicted par- 
ents, and prayed with them — ^had some freedom. I 
have great reason to bless Grod for his mercies, that 
I am well and enjoy uncommon serenity of mind. 
The hundred and nineteenth Psalm, last part, has 
been pleasant." 

" February 5. Goshen. I set apart this day for 
fasting and prayer — will the Lord be with me. 0 
Lord, if it be thy will, may I return to my studies 
again, and wilt thou lift upon me the light of thy 
countenance, which is better than life. 

" Some freedom in prayer. I find so little life, I 
am at times almost discouraged. I find it more than 
I once supposed, to have good evidence of personal 
piety. Spent the latter part of the afternoon with 
Christian friends. In the evening, attended a con- 
ference. Am too ready to complain of my troubles — 
made this resolution : 

" Resolved, in all my troubles, to be careful how 
I complain or speak of them, and to say and do that 
which may be most for the glory of God, who is as 
worthy of praise in my adversity as in my prosperity." 

Mr. Hallock now spent about seven weeks in Go- 
shen, reading works on theology, making religious 
visits, instructing a few youth, and attending frequent 
meetings. His practice, at this time, was to spend 



PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY. 



41 



every Thursday in private fasting and prayer. In the 
course of this period, he had the happiness to witness 
the conviction and apparent conversion of four beloved 
sisters, besides the improved state of a fifth sister 
whose hope of salvation through Christ was of earlier 
date. Some of his neighbors, also, were at this time 
aroused from the deep sleep of sin, and many back- 
slidden Christians reclaimed. On the twenty-third 
of March, he left his father's house to visit his new 
circle of friends in Connecticut. From this journey 
he returned to Stockbridge in season to attend the 
stated meeting, in April, of the Berkshii-e Association, 
by which body he was licensed to preach " the glo- 
rious gospel of the blessed Grod." 

Up to this date the compiler has had the assist- 
ance of Mr. HaUock in making selections from his 
original journal, and incorporatuig them in the nar- 
rative of his early life, which he commenced in 1815, 
and closed in 1821. Here that narrative ends, and 
we lose the benefit of Mr. Hallock's wisdom m any 
farther extracts from his private* writings, and of his 
memory to correct or illustrate them by uiuecorded 
facts 



42 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



CHAPTER III. 

LABORS UNTIL HIS INSTALLATION AS PASTOR. 

Mr. Hallock's sermons were highly evangeUcal — 
void of human philosophy — a happy mixture of doctri- 
nal, practical, experimental truth- The leading char- 
acteristic, in their structure, was unaffected simpl icity, 
in thought, arrangement, and expression. The style 
was very plain and concise. His meaning a child 
could scarce misapprehend. With the Bihle for his 
model, he rose at times to a bold and vivid imagery. 
In originality and felicity of illustration, he had few 
equals. Here, like his divine Master, he often availed 
himself of surrounding circumstances and passing 
events. He made much use of the arguments and 
language of the inspired writers. His conclusions, 
no less than his premises, were supported by Scrip- 
ture, in the application of which he had uncommon 
skill. No one suspected him of preacliing himself, 
rather than "Jesus Christ and him crucified." 

His manner was unborrowed — alike above art and 
description. The man who saw him once in the atti- 
tude of Christ's ambassador, could never forget the 
deeply solemn countenance, the tenderness of tone, 
the slow and distinct articulation. He had little 
action, and made no effort at animation, yet every 
word seemed warm from the heart. In his whole ap- 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MINISTRY. 



43 



pearance, there was the reality without the affectation 
of sanctity. For the tasteful and fastidious hearer 
he had few attractions ; yet, in the absence of many 
things which constitute what is usually termed elo- 
quence, there was often a certain undefinahle charm, 
that riveted every eye and ear — a power that reached 
and moved the soul. Perhaps it was a combination 
of sterling thought, simple language, depth of feeling, 
and tones of nature. One of the finest writers in our 
country, on hearing Mr. Hallock preach in a time of 
unusual seriousness, declared the performance the 
best specimen of sacred eloquence he had ever wit- 
nessed. In the popular sense of the term, however, 
he could not be pronounced an eloquent preacher. 
Yet he ever seemed to come from his closet to the 
pulpit prepared to diffuse light and heat throughout 
the assembly. 

In prayer he was humble, appropriate, compre- 
hensive, fervent, solemn. It seemed like the address 
of an affectionate child to a kind and beloved, yet 
revered father. No attentive hearer could avoid the 
conviction, that heaven and earth were brought near 
together. " I love to hear Mr. Hallock pray," said 
one who had often enjoyed the privilege, " because he 
speaks to G-od as if he was acquainted with him." 
To the spiritual who joined him in devotional exer- 
cises, it was indeed a luxury. 

From these general remarks on Mr. HaUock's 
appearance in the pulpit, we turn to his early course, 
after receiving license to preach the gospel. He 
now gave himself wholly to his new and delightful 



44 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



employment. For several weeks lie was in G-oshen 
and the vicinity, preaching in various towns every 
Sabbath, often on other days, and visiting from house 
to house. Almost every week he kept some time as 
a private fast. At one of these seasons he writes, 

" This forenoon I set apart for prayer and fast- 
ing, to renew my covenant and resolutions, and to 
seek G-od's grace and presence for the morrow, if I 
may be called to speak in his name : 0 may I keep 
it aright. The devil has tried what he could to hin- 
der me from keeping fasts, and I have need of pardon 
for the sins of every moment spent in fasting and 
prayer ; but, by the grace of Grod, I think this has 
been a comfortable forenoon to my soul. I know not 
that I ever had sweeter meditation and prayer. The 
life of Cotton Mather was exceedingly sweet ; blessed 
be Grod that I have seen that book. Felt willing, ii 
I was not mistaken, to be used for Grod in that way 
which he may appoint for me. 0 may I always be 
submissive to Grod." 

The next day he writes, " I think I never had 
clearer views of the excellency of Christ ; 0 may I 
ever be ravished with his beauty. Expect soon to go 
again to preach ; may I aim wholly at Grod's glory. 
Though I am but a poor dark-lantern, yet may Christ 
speak through me to his honor, and may liis power 
be seen." 

Again, " To-day, cleared a place in the woods 
for meditation and prayer ; 0 that I might find God 
there." This retreat for private devotion was near 
the house of his father. He called it his " pleasant 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MINISTRY. 



45 



grove." Similar places lie afterwards selected, in the 
various towns where he was called to labor ; and when 
he had closed liis term of service, he was as careful to 
take a formal farewell of these sequestered spots, as 
of the dear friends at his lodgings. But, while he had 
many hours of spiritual comfort, some of high dehght, 
on his entrance upon the good work, the following pas- 
sages from his journal show that his trials did not end 
with his permission to preach the gospel. 

"April 21, 1784. Some freedom in prayer. Why 
it is I know not, I feel myself in a thick cloud. My 
mind does not take hold of truth. I feel the disposi- 
tion of the poor man who buried his talent in the 
earth, and then complained of God. I had calculated 
too much on comfortable times, if I might begin to 
preach. I find I can do notliing without God. O 
may it serve to humble me. 

"May 4. Troubled and perplexed in mind last 
evening, so that I could not sleep. Am at a loss whence 
my trouble springs, whether from a disorder of the 
body or mind. Have, in some degree, enjoyed the light 
of God's countenance to-day ; but I have dark times 
this evening. Think I know something what that 
means : ' Wearisome nights are appointed unto me.' 

" June 11. Visited a friend, but with coldness. 
0 Lord, forgive my sin, and make my heart engaged. 
0 my bashfulness, when shall I be rid of it ? 0 that I 
may be delivered from this ' thorn in the flesh.' 

" June 21. Find I have a corrupt heart, there is 
no hope but in sovereign mercy. Feel grieved for 
poor unregenerate sinners. Alas, what will they do i n 



46 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



the end ? Have been disappointed in respect to some 
money — am in necessity for it : may I always con- 
sider the ravens and the lilies." 

In the conrse of the first month from the date of 
his license, Mr, Hallock received an invitation to sup- 
ply the pulpit in West Simshury, now Canton, and 
another to remain at Goshen, where he had lived from 
childhood. In comphance with the former request, he 
entered the field of his future labors the latter part of 
June. The feelings with which he commenced his 
long and useful work he has left on record. 

" June 27, 1784. West Simsbury, Sabbath. As 
usual this morning in secret and family prayer. I 
feel weak ; 0 Lord, strengthen me, I pray thee, in 
body and mind, to the duties of this day. Some free- 
dom in meditation, particularly in thinking what God 
has done for me both in spiritual and common bless- 
ings, and my poor improvement of them. Was assist- 
ed to speak with some freedom in the forenoon — more 
dull this afternoon. Attended a conference this even- 
ing with some freedom. 

" June 28. Am sometimes almost discouraged, 
and ready to return to work on a farm ; but suffer 
me not, 0 God, to look back, now that I have put 
my hand to the plough. I can do nothing of myself. 
0 thou who comfortest those that are cast down, pro- 
tect and keep me, that Satan may not sift me as wheat. 

" June 30. Scarce ever enjoyed a pleasanter morn- 
ing — freedom in discourse, and in secret and family 
prayer. 0 that the dark clouds may all be over- 
blown ; that I may ever ' sit under his shadow with 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MINISTRY. 47 

great delight,' and enjoy liis presence, the loss of 
which is more to he dreaded than death. 

" Jlly 1. Attended a fuU conference this even- 
ing. Attempted to pray, and to discourse upon the 
two thieves. The dear people are indefatigable in 
attending meetings. It is evident Grod has been 
among them. 0 that he would carry on his work 
here till the day of Christ I 

" July 2. Set apart this forenoon to renew my 
covenant with Grod, and my resolves ; to fast, pray, 
<iand ask forgiveness of sin ; to ask Grod to direct me 
to a subject and to matter for the Sabbath, and also 
to take away my cold heart and guide me into aU 
truth. Some freedom and satisfaction, but have great 
reason to mourn my deadness. Visited a friend just 
at night. Had some pleasant conversation with 
friends this evening. As usual in secret prayer, 
morning, noon, and night." 

The last sentence of the preceding extract, or some- 
what of hke import, occurs very often in the diary 
which Mr. HaUock kept at this time. It seems to 
denote a cabn, pleasant state of devotional feel- 
ing, at an equal remove from that marked eleva- 
tion and depression of spirit which he sometimes 
mentions. 

" July 3, Saturday. Prayed over my sermons 

before the Lord this afternoon. Visited Mr. J. B 

May he get weU, serve God here, and live with him 
beyorfd the grave. By what I hear, my preaching 
last Sabbath was to general acceptance. Blessed be 
the Lord. O Lord, be with me to-morrow, I pray 



48 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

thee. Find I have a dreadfully wicked heart. May 
I enter upon holy time with a heavenly mind." 

Throughout Mr. Hallock's life, he was distmguish- . 
ed for his attention to the sick. It was enough for 
him to hear of the illness of one of his dear people. 
He did not wait for a particular request to visit the 
sufferer. And his known tenderness of feeling, and 
mild, affectionate manner, added to a belief in the 
value of his prayers and counsel, always made him 
more than welcome at houses of sorrow. In no situ- 
ation did he more resemble Him who could be touch-^ 
ed with the feeUng of human infirmities, in none did 
he appear to better advantage, than when bending 
with a look of mingled love and pity over the couch 
of pain ; whether to make, in the soft tones of sympa- 
thy, some kind inquiries respecting the state of the 
body and the soul, to impart Christian instruction, 
or devoutly to intercede with the Hearer of prayer for 
the recovery of the patient, and stiU more earnestly 
for his salvation. 

In the following selections, we find frequent refer- 
ences to private devotion with his clerical brethren, at 
their houses and his own ; to the same duty in some 
retired grove, as they passed from one town to an- 
other ; to his ministerial labors out of the place of his 
residence, and to his preaching at funerals and en- 
couragement of social meetings. 

" July 9. At West Britain, in the morning, prayed 
in secret with the Rev. Mr. Miller. Eode to West 
Simsbury with the Rev. Mr. Mills and Deacon Case ; 
prayed by the way in a silent grove. This afternoon 



CANDIDATE FOE THE MIKISTRY. 40 

Mr. Mills preached two sermons. I tried to make two 
prayers, read one Psalm, and spoke a little upon the 
hook of Ruth. Agreed to return to tliis place again ; 
if it be thy will, 0 Lord, that I should come, do thou 
come with me. We have had a conference this even- 
ing ; trust I had some life. Was delivered, yesterday 
and to-day, from the fear of man; may I ever he 
humble, and esteem others better than myself; but, 
0 Lord, when I am called to speak before my vener- 
able fathers in the ministry, or elsewhere, 0 may the 
thought of flesh and blood go out of mind. 

" Ji LY 10, Saturday. This morning parted with 
the Rev. Mr. Mills ; engaged to preach for him Wed- 
nesday next. 0 Lord Jesus, wilt thou honor the meet- 
ing with thy blessed presence, and enable a poor worm 
to speak for thee. To-morrow expect to be at West 
Britain. I view myself to lie at sovereign mercy, 
without any thing at present or in prospect to recom- 
mend me to Grod ; yet I do not consider this an argu- 
ment against prayer, but a most weighty argument 
in favor of it : hence, by the help of &od, I would 
devote the remainder of this day to fastinj;;, meditation, 
and prayer, to pray over my sermons before the Lord, 
to ask his assistance for the morrow, and to renew 
my covenant and resolves. 0 may it be a good day 
to my soul. 

" July 13. Prepared a short account of the history 
of Cluist from the four evangelists. 0 that the name of 
Christ may ever strike my soul into a heavenly frame. 
Preached a lecture about sunset ; had a short confer- 
ence afterwards, as usual. Had an agreeable inter- 



ijQ JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

view with some friends in the evening. Some free- 
dom in prayer. Troubled with remaining corruptions. 
0 happy hour, when I shall get a complete vietory 
over all sin. 

" July 14. Rode to Torringford. After spending 
some time in prayer and meditation, I tried to preach; 
had uncommon freedom. 'Tis astonishing, that God 
should assist such poor creatures as we are to preach 
his word. Feel much exhausted: 0 Lord, may I be 
weary in thy work, often, and wear out for thee ; but 
0, may I never be weary o/thy work. 

" July 20. Retired early for prayer, and found 
uncommon sweetness — it is best to pray early. 

"August 1, Sabbath. Blessed be God, I am 
brought to see a new month ; may I Uve a new life. 
Spent some time, this mornmg, in prayer and repeat- 
ing my sermons. Expected all the week that I should 
hardly be able to preach, but scarce ever preached 
with greater freedom. Spent part of the intermis- 
sion in discourse, and part of it in meditation and 
prayer. Had a conference this evening. 0 the 
boundless mercy of God, that should aUow and help 
a poor worm to preach his word. 0 may I have 
grace and strength to go on until death. 0 may I 
not live idle. 

" August 2. Spent tnost of the day in visiting. 
This morning, Mrs. Rachel Case died. She was about 
eighteen years old, and left a sorrowful consort and 
one sweet babe. Towards sunset, they invited me 
to preach a funeral-sermon. 

"Augusts. Rose about sunrise. Retired about 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MINISTRY. -31 

an hour, for meditation and prayer. Was strengthened 
to study. Ahout two o'clock began the solemn ser 
vices, and was enabled to speak with freedom from 
] Corinthians, 7 : 29, 30. Nearly five hundred people 
were thought to be present; they were solemn; num- 
bers wept. 0, it was a grievous mourning. I addressed 
the mourners : had a sense, at the grave, how Christ 
has conquered death. Had a conference, this even- 
ing, of the young people." 

Mr. Hallock was always in the practice of preach- 
ing funeral-sermons on the day of the fimeral, and 
decidedly in favor of this course, where the congrega- 
tion is small and the population not dense. He was 
also much attached to those small circles for religious 
worship, the conference and prayer-meeting. For 
these he had very peculiar qualifications. To his 
discernment of this, perhaps, in connection with his 
unfeigned humility, may be ascribed the fact, that 
in the company of his clerical brethren, he uniformly 
chose rather to take a part in these meetings than to 
preach in the house of Grod. Seldom, during his whole 
Christian life, did a week pass in which he did not 
attend one or more of them. Yery often, in his journal, 
he makes mention of his high satisfaction in the con- 
ference on Sabbath evening, when Ifis feelings through- 
out the day had suff"ered no small depression. He 
was opposed to any departure from the usual order of 
exercises in pubUc worsliip, yet, in these more private 
meetings, he was without form in his mode of con- 
ducting the ser\dce. And to the endless variety which 
he introduced, may be ascribed in part, the lively in- 



52 TEUEMIAH HALLOCK. 

terest felt by those who enjoyed his presence on these 

occasions. 

"Aug. 4. Last night, a young woman in the 
neighborhood could not sleep for concern of mind. 
In the other part of the parish, the night before, a 
young man was in like circumstances. 0 may they 
be converted. Feel uncommonly well as to body and 
mind : may I be prepared for trouble, and always . 
mourn and be humble for the pride of my heart, 
which is so heaven-daring, that 'tis a wonder I am 
out of hell one moment. Rode to Hartland— tried to 
preach for the Rev. Mr. Gaylord— some freedom- 
uncommon attention— discoursed with some under 
concern for their souls. Believe the Lord is at work 
here — 0 may it go on. 

"Aug. 11. Rode with the Rev. Mr. Gillett to 
Winsted— prayed together by the way— heard him 
preach. 

"Aug. 15. Sabbath. Spent about an hour this 
morning in meditation and prayer, and in repeating 
my sermons before the Lord. Some life in the first 
prayer, but not much in the sermon. At noon felt 
as if I could not get up to preach, but was carried 
through with usual freedom— a crowded assembly. 
In the evening attended a conference— a poor young 
man appeared to be under great concern. 0 what 
shall I render to the Lord ? 0 may I wear out in Ms 
'service. 

"Aug. 16. Spent the day in visiting. Found 
gome under concern. Though I felt as if I could not 
preach yesterday, yet I believe the word was blessed. 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MIKJSTRY, 



53 



0 bless the Lord. Think that if the Lord does come 
among us, it cannot be on account of iTiy preacliing. 

"Aug. 19. I understand that the dear people of 
this place have given me a call to stay with them. 
That Grod who exalted Baasha out of the dust, has 
opened a great door and given me unmerited respect 
and good-will from my fellow-mortals. 0 Lord, 
make me humble and deliver me from the snare of 
pride." 

To show the entire bearing of these last expres- 
sions, it may here be stated, that during Mr. Hallock's 
short engagement at West Simsbury, he received one 
invitation to return to Goshen, another to preach at 
Ware, Mass., and a third to labor at New Cambridge. 
He was also at this time under engagement to the 
people of Lee, Mass., where he preached his first ser- 
mon, and where a word in season resulted in the 
hopeful conversion of a feeble youth at his lodgings. 
As the rest of the family were leaving for church, 
Mr. Hallock, with a look and tone of deep sympathy, 
turned to the young man^ and pointing to a basket, 
said impressively, "0 Joseph, if you only had an in- 
terest in Christ, it would be worth more to you than 
that basket full of gold." God made the remark an 
arrow to his heart. The youth soon obtained hope, 
united with the church, and lived to adorn his pro- 
fession till his death at the age of eighty -two. 

Mr. Hallock now spent a few weeks partly in 
visiting and preaching almost daily in places where 
revivals of religion were enjoyed, and partly in ful- 



5-1 JKILEMIAH HALLOCIv 

iilment of previous engagements to supply vacant 
pulpits. At Ware, as at Groshen and "West Sims- 
bury, the Lord vras pleased to send down the Holy 
Ghost to make his labors effectual; and here he 
received a call to settle in the ministry/ On the 
day after his arrival at Ware he writes, 

"Oct. 15, Friday. More freedom than common 
to-day, m study and prayer. Had some discourse 
with the young people this evening. 

"Oct. 16. This afternoon I set apart for prayer, 
chat God would direct me to a suitable portion of his 
word for to-morrow ; that there may be an awaken- 
ing among the people ; and that I may be enabled to 
preach in the demonstration of the Spirit ; likewise 
to renew my covenant and resolves. Trust I have 
had some life in prayer. 

"Oct. 17, Sabbath. Spent some time in medita- 
tion and prayer tliis morning. The people were very 
attentive. 0 that I may never forget the mercies of 
the Lord. Had a Viry full and attentive conference 
this evening. Had freedom in discourse, and so had 
others. Some appearance of an awakening. 0, may 
it come on — 0, may it come on. 

"Nov. 7. A remarkable meeting this evening. 
Some suppose there were three hundred persons pres- 
ent. Was enabled to preach with freedom to the 
most deeply affected auditory I ever saw. 0 Lord, 
appear and save us for thy great name's sake. 

"Nov. 13, Saturday. This forenoon I set apart 
for prayer and examination ; to pray for divine help to- 
morrow, and for Ware, where the Lord hath come of 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MINISTRY. 55 

late. Some freedom in praying for this dear people. 
If I am not deceived, think I have some evidence of 
personal religion. 

"Dec. 2. Attempted to preach a lecture this 
afternoon ; a full and remarkable conference. It was 
sweet music to hear the brethren converse freely, 
when a little while ago you could scarce get a word 
from them. 

"Dec 4. Had several people to visit me, to talk 
about their souls. 0 blessed times! It greatly 
revives my heart to see those whom I trust Grod has 
made me the happy instrument ia winning to him- 
self. 0 may they finally be presented faultless before 
the presence of liis glory. 

"Dec. 7. Spent the day in visiting. I am weary 
of company, though they are the excellent of the 
earth, because it deprives me of retirement. 

"Feb. 1. Visited my pleasant grove, and took my 
farewell of Ware. I have been there twelve Sabbaths. 
AVhen I came the young people were light and gay, 
but it has pleased a sovereign G-od to awaken them ; 
so that their frolics are turned into religious meetings, 
and to God's name be all the glory. There are about 
twelve hopeful converts. 0 Lord, take these lambs 
into thine arms, and may we all meet in thy better 
world above. God hath given me the friendship of 
this people, and of many in adjacent towns. 0 may 
I be humble, and give him all the glory. But, 0 
Lord, what is all the friendship of tliis world with- 
out thine ? I cannot Uve if thou depart. Take, 0 
Lord, all the glory to thyself, and 0, may T be used 



56 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



as a happy instrument in bringing home soiiis to 
Jesus Christ." 

About this time Mr. Hallock spent a few Sabbaths 
in his beloved Groshen, and received an invitation 
from that church to become its pastor ; yet, on the 
whole, declined the acceptance of it. On the first of 
March, he parted with his friends at Goshen, and set 
his face again towards West Simsbury. He found 
the awakening in a decline. Many flocked around him 
to express their joy at his return. But he made 
them sad by the intimation that probably he should 
not remain with them. A temporary yet severe trial 
he now experienced, in a difficulty of utterance. 
Again and again he besought the Lord to remove it, 
sometimes in the following terms: "0 Lord, show 
me, I pray thee, why thou art contending with me, 
and remove my impediment." "0, may this thorn 
never discourage me, but humble me, and be for the 
glory of God." " 0 that He, who made man's mouth, 
would, in his own time, give me a mouth and wis- 
dom to speak his word." 

" M AY 6. Find myself in the following difficulties ; 
therefore I set apart this day to fast and pray and 
look to God for help. 

"1. I have many changes in my mind concern- 
ing settlement in the gospel ministry; therefore I 
would pray God to guide me in the right way. 

" 2. I find great remaining corruptions and sins 
ready to carry me away like a mighty flood ; there- 
fore I would pray God to subdue them. 

" 3. I find many impediments, particularly that 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MINISTRY. •'57 

in my speech ; therefore I would fast and pray that 
they may be removed, and that I may have faith and 
fortitude of mind never to he discouraged. 

"4. I would examine myself as to my evidences 
of piety and of a call to the work of the ministry. 

" 5. I would renew my covenant and resolves. 

" It is a principle with me, that we have no 
authority for any religious duty unless we have it 
from Grod's word. 'In vain do they worship me, 
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.' 
Therefore, 

" 1. For authority to fast, I flee to Matthew 
6 : 16-18 ; Isa. 58 : 6, 7 ; Dan. 10 : 2, 3 ; also to such 
examples as Anna, Cornelius, etc. 

" 2. For authority to pray, I would take sanc- 
tuary under Matt. 6 : 7-14, and 7:7; Psa. 50 : 15, 
and the like passages. Also, under all the examples 
•of prayer, and of God's hearing it, in the Bible. 

" 3. The texts to which I resort in respect to the 
difficulty first mentioned, are these : ' I will instruct 
thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go : 
I will guide thee with mine eye.' Psa. 32 : 8. ' Com- 
mit thy way unto the Lord ; trust also in him, and 
he shall bring it to pass. And he shall bring forth 
thy righteousness as 'the light, and thy judgment as 
the noonday.' Psa. 37 : 5, 6. 'I would seek unto 
God, and unto God would I commit my cause.' Job 
5:8. 'If any of you. lack wisdom, let him ask of 
God, that giveth to all men liberally and upbraidcth 
not ; and it shall be given him.' James 1 : 5. 

"4. In respect to the second particular, I would 
3- 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



take sanctuary under Micali 7 : 8 and 19 : ' Rejoice 
not against me, 0 mine enemy : when I fall, I shall 
arise ; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light 
unto me. He will turn again, he will have compas- 
sion upon us ; he will subdue our iniquities ; and thou 
wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.' 
' Whom having not seen, ye love ; in whom, though 
now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy 
unspeakable and full of glory.' 1 Peter, 1:8. 

" 5. In reference to the third trial, I flee to Ex. 
4 : 11, 12 : 'And the Lord said unto him. Who hath 
made man's mouth? or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, 
or the seeing, or the blind ? Have not I the Lord ? 
Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, 
and teach thee what thou shalt say.' ' Strengthen 
ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. 
Say to them that are of a fearful heart. Be strong, 
fear not; behold, your God will come with vengeance^ 
even Grod with a recompense ; he will come and save 
you. Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, 
and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped ; then 
shall the lame man leap as a hart, and the tongue 
of the dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall waters 
break out, and streams in the desert.' Isa. 35 : 3-G. 
'And ho said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee ; 
for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most 
gladly, therefore, will I rather glory in my infirmities, 
that the power of Christ may rest upon me.' 2 Cor. 
12:9. 

"6. In respect to trying myself as a Christian, I 
,\'ould compare my life with these passages : ' We 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MINISTRY. 59 

know that we liave passed from death unto life, be- 
cause we love the brethren : he that loveth not his 
brother, abideth in death.' 1 Jolui, 3 : 14. ' Every 
branch in me that beareth not fruit, he taketh away ; 
and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, 
that it may bring forth more fruit. Herein is my 
Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit ; so shall 
ye be my disciples.' John 15 : 2, 8. ' He that hath 
my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that 
loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved of 
my Father; and I wiU love him, and will manifest 
myself to him.' John 14 : 21. ' Who are kept by 
the power of God through faith unto salvation ready 
to be revealed in the last time. "Wherein ye greatly 
rejoice, though now for a season, if need be, ye are 
• in heaviness tlirough manifold temptations : that the 
trial of your faith, being much more precious than of 
gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might 
be found unto praise and honor and glory at the 
appearing of Jesus Christ.' 1 Peter, 1 : 5-7. 

"7. In respect to my call into the ministry, I 
would try myself by 2 Tim. 4:5: ' But watch thou, in 
all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an evan- 
gelist, make full proof of thy ministry.' ' This is a 
true saying. If a man desire the office of a bishop, he 
desireth a good work. A bishop then must be blame- 
less,' etc. 1 Tim. 3 : 1-7. ' And the servant of the 
Lord must not strive,' etc. 2 Tim. 2 : 24, 25. ' And 
he said, Certainly I will be with thee: and this shall 
be a token unto thee that I have sent thee: when 
thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye 



60 



JEREMIAH HALL03K. 



shall serve God upon this mountain. And they shaL 
hearken to thy voice.' Ex. 3 : 12, 18. 

" If these thmgs accompany me, then I trust I 
have good evidence that I am sent to preach the 
gospel. 

"8. As to the propriety of renewing my covenant 
and resolves, I think I have sufficient authority for 
so doing in the example of the Israelites in the times 
of Josiah and Nehemiah. Also, we are taught always 
to he mindful of God's covenant. 1 Chron. 1 6 : 15. 

"Have had some satisfaction this day in pro- 
ceeding according to the method here proposed — the 
latter part of the day have spent chiefly in prayer. 
Now I would desire again to give myself away to 
God ; and I resolve hy the help of the Lord to spend 
the first Wednesday in each month, for one year, as 
a day of fasting and prayer, if I should live. If at 
any time circumstances are so that I cannot attend 
to it on Wednesday, then to take the first convenient 
day afterwards. 0 Lord, if I may live to see these 
days, may they he profitahle to my poor soul." 

The next two passages show that he did not 
restrict his seasons of special devotion and humilia- 
tion to this last arrangement. 

" May 19, Thursday. The remainder of the week 
I would devote to prayer and preparation for the Sah- 
hath. 0, may I always eat my sermons hefore I 
preach them. 

" May 21. 0 that fasting and prayer may be as 
natural to me as water to the thirsty, and may God's 
service he sweeter than the honey-comb." 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MINISTUY. Gl 

After unusual embarrassment in the house of God, 
he writes, " Spent most of the intermission in retire- 
ment : felt that Ufe in secret is comfortable and a 
great mercy, and more safe for me than life in public ; 
but that life in public might be more serviceable to 
the church ; therefore had a desire for it in the after- 
noon, if it was Grod's will. Uncommon freedom in 
the afternoon, and good attention from a large congre- 
gation. 0 may I give God all the praise." 

"May 31. Yesterday received a number of letters 
from my friends at Goshen ; to-day read them in pri- 
vate and prayed for each of the writers." 

On receiving a reqviest to settle at West Simsbury 
in the Cliristian ministry, Mr. Hallock proposed to 
give his answer by the 12th of May. This time had 
now passed, yet his mind on that momentous subject 
remained in a state of indecision and even distressing 
perplexity. The thought of relinquishing his favorite 
employment, itinerant preaching, was painful in the 
extreme. This apart, the line of his duty was not 
perfectly plain. But the state of his mind will better 
appear from his own pen. 

" June 23. Rose early this morning, and joined 
with Rev. Mr. Gillett in secret prayer. Having re- 
ceived a call from this dear people to settle with them 
in the great work of the gospel ministry, and being at 
a loss what to do, I would set apart this day for fast- 
ing and prayer, to give myself up to God, to spread 
my case before him, and to ask wisdom of him ac- 
cording to James 1 : 5. Also, to pray for gTace and 
ministerial gifts, to mourn over all my sins, and to 



G2 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



examine what evidences I have of grace. In giving 
myself away to God, I would first give him my heart ; 
secondly, my time and all my natural powers ; thirdly, 
I would sacrifice by the cross all my natural pas- 
sions, that so I may become crucified to the world and 
all sensual pleasures, and they to me. In asking for 
wisdom, I would ask with engagedness, and a desire 
to find the truth, with a single eye to God's glory, in 
Christ's name, and for his sake and interest. 

" In the following respects, I think it will be the 
same whether I go or stay. 

"1. In respect to doing all for the glory of God: 
this I must do in either case — I must endeavor to 
be holy as God is. 

" 2. In respect to a continual watchfulness against 
all indweUing sm. 

"3. In respect to a pilgrim's life. 

"4. In respect to fasting and prayer. 

"5. In respect to death and judgment. 

" In the following respects I think my continu- 
ance with this people will alter my circumstances : 

" 1. In respect to the necessary cares of life — new 
cares will be born. 

"2. In respect to living a single life. Though not 
absolutely necessary, yet in many respects it will be 
convenient to have a family. , 

<' 3. In respect to time for study, and opportuni- 
ties to get acquainted with the world. 

" June 26. Have been refreshed to-day in reading 
Rev. Mr. Brainerd's life. Long to be an itinerant 
preacher. A number came to see me on the subject 



CANDIDATE FOR THE M1^'1STE.Y. 63 

of settling with them; I feel as if I must leave 
them. 

"June 30. I read them my answer in the nega- 
tive. Some of the people it irritated, others it filled 
with grief, and the dear Christians seemed to hang 
their harps on the willows ; so that the scene I heheld 
was truly affecting. 0 that the mourners in Zion 
may be comforted. - 

" July 1. This morning, spent some time in my 
pleasant grove. Thought it my duty to thank the 
Lord — though the dear people mourned — for aU his 
mercies wliile I have been in this place ; Ukewise to 
pray for the people and commit them to God ; also to 
pray for myself. Thought that I could almost call 
the trees and stones in this grove to witness that I 
would be the Lord's, and give myself to him without 
reserve. Towards noon I parted with my dear friends, 
the kmd family too in which I have lived, and fi-om 
wliich I have received many favors ; and, 0 God, may 
every mouthful of food, and every comfort I have re- 
ceived from them, be a witness for them at the great 
day. I called at a few houses as I rode along, and 
not far from two o'clock P. M. passed the bounds of 
West Simsbm-y. And let me here set up a monu- 
ment of praise to God, wliils I bid this dear people a 
reluctant adieu. 

" 'Tis now two years and a few days since I first 
entered the bounds of this society, though I have not 
been here all the time. As near as I can recoUect, I 
have suppHed the pulpit twenty-tliree Sabbaths. In 
lectures, and on the Sabbath, I think I have been 



64 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

enaLled, through the great goodness of G-od, to preach 
fifty-five sermons. The first summer I was with this 
people the awakening began, and last summer there 
was a revival. We have had many very friendly con- 
ferences. And now, praise the Lord, my soul, and 
all that is within me hless his holy name ; learn to 
trust in liim, and forget not all his benefits." 

No sooner had he left this perople than the Lord 
began to make impressions on his mind in favor of 
his return. The day after his departure he wrote, 
" By turns felt as if I had done wrong in leaving West 
Simsbury — at least, feared so. Think I would gladly 
go back, whenever it shall appear to be duty." The 
next two days he wrote, " Still had those anxious 
feelings for West Simsbury." " Poor West Simsbury 
lay fresh in my mind." 

His health at this time was not good. "Feel 
weak, and have a pain in my breast, so that I am 
unable to study." " I think the eternal world some- 
times looks pleasant, and if my work is done, I would 
desire, through Grod's grace, to be willing to go. 0 
welcome death, if I am prepared I fear thee not." 
" Death seems to be near, yet I am resolved to preach 
and pray and discourse as long as I can, even while 
the breath shall enter my body. 0 that I may have 
grace thus to do." " Never enjoy myself so well as in 
retirement." 

" July 14, Torrington. This day set apart as mji 
monthly fast. 

" 1. I desire to examme myself as to my evidences 
of grace. 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MINISTRY. G5 

"2. I would apply to Grod for wisdom to know 
how to conduct in all public and private affairs ; to 
win souls to Christ; to know what texts to preach 
from, and when and where to preach. And I would 
pray for the quickening influences of the Holy Spirit,' 
that I may be alive in all duties, that every morning 
may find me up early in Grod's work, and every even- 
ing find me tired in the same. 

"3. As I am perpetually exposed to sin, I would 
pray God for sanctification, and for strength in future 
against sin and temptation. 

"4. I am here among a poor people, who to 
appearance are on the brink of ruin by reason of 
divisions in respect to the preaching of the gospel 
among them ; therefore, I would pray to God for 
them. 

"5. I would examine myself by faith, by repent- 
ance, by the aims I have in acting. 

"Had some freedom early in the morning, but 
the day has been spent with httle life— my mind m 
confusion, and my body in pain. It certainly must 
be astonishing to angels, to see such creatures as we 
are enter upon the noble worship of God with such 
dull hearts ; that his love should be so great to us, 
and ours so cold to him. 

"July 17. Spent about an hour and a half 
this morning, in retirement in a grove. Felt as 
usual till on the way to meeting ; then was much 
animated to see the people flock together — ^was too 
self-sufficient ; but had not read the first psalm before 
I was shut up, and so dragged on heavily througli 



66 



JEKEMiAlI HALLOCK. 



the forenoon. After a dull intermission, was scarcely 
able to perform in the first prayer ; forgot my sermon, 
and all the afternoon it seemed like telling a dream. 
The assembly was very lafge ; I felt hurt for them 
after meeting, to think they had been so poorly served. 
Thus G-od destroys the hope of man, and my heavenly 
Father frowns upon me ; but I would be dumb before 
his throne, and not dare dispute his will. I have 
great reason to be thankful that I was not entirely 
confounded before the people ; and to mourn that I 
am no more concerned for Grod's glory. Well might 
our Saviour cry, when his Father's presence was with- 
drawn. Grod lets me see something of my wicked 
heart ; 0 it will be a great wonder, if ever I should 
get to heaven." 

- After a few weeks, the Lord inclined the people 
he had left to renew their invitation. At first his 
course was not plain, but seeking divine guidance, he 
soon returned to West Simsbury and met a friendly 
reception. On repassing the bounds of the congrega- 
tion, he writes, "Many gloomy thoughts passed my 
mind ; I endeavored to pray, as I walked along, that 
Grod would take the matter into his own hands in 
respect to my continuance with this people." A 
little onward in his journal, these sentences occur : 
"Feel many struggles in my mind respecting this 
people." "Better as to bodily health, for which I 
would bless the Lord ; feel more as if I should settle 
here, but may my heavenly King govern wholly in 
this affah." "Having travelled about and been in 
awakenings, and found it as I trust my fife, now to 



CANDIDATE FOIL THE MINISTRY. G7 

think of being deprived of this privilege, and of stay- 
ing in one place, almost sinks me to the earth. I 
seem as much out of my element, when confined to 
one place, as a fish out of water." 

During this season of distressing perplexity to 
himself, and of no less painful suspense on the part 
of the people, Mr. Hallock received a respectful yet 
earnest and touching address from the youth of the 
congregation, in which they entreated him not to 
blight their expectations, and leave the defenceless 
lambs which Christ had given him, to be scattered 
and lost upon the mountains. The counsel of the 
Lord which standeth for ever was also in favor of his 
continuance ; and by degrees, not without much fast- 
ing and prayer to learn his duty, the gloom and agi- 
tation of his soul gave place to a sweet serenity, and 
he wrote, "I believe I have been much to blame for 
perplexing my mind about the future, and partic- 
ularly in respect to my settlement with this people. 
0 that I might ever be mindful of our Saviour's kind 
caution in the latter part of the sixth chapter of 
Matthew." "Though I have had many discourage- 
ments, yet I think it is the mind of Christ that I 
should settle here in the work of the ministry." 

A fear of inadequate support seems to have made 
no part of the good man's trial. Possibly it was on 
the principle which he afterwards applied very 
happily to another. A youth, having a call to settle 
in the ministry, came to Mr. Hallock in a state of 
indecision on the ground that the salary offered was 
too small. Mr. Hallock said to him with equal 



68 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



solemnity and kindness, "My young brother, it may 
be as much as Christ can afford to give you." In 
the twinklmg of an eye, doubt vanished ; the youth 
was settled on the salary ; and now, after an expe- 
rience of forty years, can affirm that he has "lacked 
nothing," and also that he has never felt one moment's 
uneasiness in view of his moderate income. 

"Sept. 4, 1785, Sabbath. Spent about an hour 
and a half this morning in retkement. A little 
before meeting felt gloomy, and I think never had 
such darkness and depression of spirit as I experi- 
enced throughout the meeting in the forenoon. My 
trouble was not from a fear of death, for I longed to 
die. I would be willing to bear whatever my heav- 
enly Father lays upon me. But 0, what shall I render 
to the Lord for all his kindness ! I think I can say 
this afternoon^ 'It is good for me that I have been 
afflicted.' I scarce ever enjoyed sweeter freedom. I 
don't know that I ever returned to my room with so 
great cause to be thankful, with a more cheerful 
heart, with clearer evidence of my good estate, and 
with a deeper sense of this, that I cannot preach 
without God's immediate help. Thus are our Sav- 
iour's words in some sense fulfilled: 'Your sorrow 
shall be turned into joy.' 0 welcome, welcome, 
blessed hour, when my work shall be completely 
done, and I shall enjoy Grod's presence perfectly and 
for ever." 

Arrangements for Mr. Hallock's ordination were 
now made. The manner in which he met the solemn 
scene, he thus describes : 



CANDIDATE FOR THE illNISTRY 



69 



" Oct. 24. This morning retired for prayer. Had 
some freedom in reading Paul's epistles to Timothy. 
Desired to keep this day in fasting and prayer that 
God would go up with us ; to renew my covenant 
with G-od ; to examine my evidences of grace, and 
qualifications for the great work before me. Spent the 
day in as close application as I could, especially in 
reading and praying over the first and second epistles 
to Timothy. Closed the day with the following re- 
solves in respect to the ordination : 

" 1. Resolved to meditate on answers to the ques- 
tions which I suppose will be asked, and to spend what 
time I can get in prayer. 

" 2. Resolved to endeavor to use my friends well, 
and to pray for them. 

" 3. Resolved, above all, to trust in God, and ac- 
cept of him as my on/ij hope, and to submit all the 
affairs of the approaching day into his hands. 

" Oct. 25. For ever blessed be the Lord, that I 
have had more freedom of late than formerly m pray- 
er. This afternoon the council met to assist in my 
ordination. They formed about seven o'clock this 
evening, and finished my examination about ten 
o'clock. I have reason to fear, because my soul cries 
no more to God for his gracious presence. 

" Oct. 26, 1785. Now the solemn day is come 
Avhen I expect to be set apart to the sacred work of 
the ministry. Spent a little while very early in pri- 
v;ite prayer. Prayed in the family where I lodged ; 
then joined in prayer, and also prayed with my dear 
brother Hitchcock in private ; then repaired to the 



70 JEREMIAH HALLOCTC. 

council, where I met my dear father and kind broth- 
er. Between the hours of eleven and one, the sol- 
emn services were performed. The Rev. Mr. G-illett 
made the first prayer. The Rev. Mr. Mills preached 
from Matthew 5:9:' Blessed are the peacemakers ; 
for they shall be called the children of God.' The 
Rev. Mr. Marsh made the consecrating prayer. The 
charge was given by the Rev. Mr. Robbins, and the 
right hand of fellowship by the Rev. Mr. Hawdey. 
The concluding prayer was offered by the Rev. Mr. 
Knapp. The ministers and congregation manifested 
great solemnity. No opposition appeared; love and 
unity seemed to reign. In the time of laying on hands 
I endeavored to think of the ordination mentioned in 
Acts 13 : 2, 3 ; but I have reason to mourn my dead- 
ness. 

" Bless the Lord, 0 my soul, for all his mercies, 
temporal and spiritual, and be not ungrateful to let 
his mercies die in unthankfuhiess. 0 that I may 
ever make progress, and never rest this side the skies ; 
but like a field of precious wheat, or like a fruitful 
tree by the gentle streams that never withers, may 
I bear fruit more and more, even a hundred-fold. 
And may I fulfil my part, and move in my proper 
place and station, and flourish in the Christian and 
ministerial life, and be always active, and bring out 
of the treasures of Grod's word tilings new and old ; 
that my latter end may be lUve burdened boughs, 
pressed down with yellow fruit, for Christ's sake. 
Glory be to the Father, Son, and Spirit. Amen and 
Amen." 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MINISTRY. 



71 



The mental conflict now past, Mr. Hallock found 
the new relation at once giving birth to a new affec- 
tion for the people, who were before very dear to liis 
heart. Reluctant as he had been to form the connec- 
tion, it is no sooner formed, than pastoral love swells 
his soul, and prompts to a cheerful entrance upon his 
arduous work. Tliis fact the first record of his pen 
puts in our possession. 

" Oct. 27. Had but little tune this day for medi- 
tation and prayer, yet had satisfaction in reviewing 
the transactions of yesterday ; felt my heart knit tc 
the people ; felt willing to spend and be spent for them, 
and that I had done my duty in staying with them. 
0 that God would go up with us ; 0 that we might 
lean on him, and not on our own understanding." 

In commencing his pastoral labors the Sabbatli 
after ordination, he preached in the morning from 
2 Timothy, 2 : 15 : " Study to show thyself approved 
unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, 
rightly dividing the word of truth." In the afternoon, 
his sermon was founded on 1 Thessalonians, 5 : 12, 13 : 
" And we beseech you, brethren, to know them which 
labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and 
admonish you ; and to esteem them very highly in 
love for their work's sake. And be at peace among 
yourselves." In the former discourse, his design was 
to point out " a minister's duty to God, to himself, 
and to his people ;" in the latter, to show " the duty 
of a church and people to God, themselves, and their 
minister." 



72 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



CHAPTER IV. 

FIRST TWELVE YEARS OF HIS MINISTRY. 

Soon after his ordination, he adopted for his motto, 
" "What can I do for God ?" And from his subse- 
quent Ufe, we may suppose him to have repeated this 
question every morning in his closet. Throughout 
his ministry, he had frequent seasons of bodily indis- 
position, yet he rarely omitted, for a single week, the 
appointment of religiol^s conferences and prayer-meet- 
ings, and very seldom failed to attend them. An im- 
pression was early made on the minds of his people, 
which ceased not to deepen till the day of his death, 
that he was ready to go the full extent of his strength, 
and often beyond the limits which a wakeful solici- 
tude for personal health and life might have deemed 
safe, to promote in different ways their own highest 
interest and the dear cause of his Redeemer. Some 
extracts from his diary, for several successive days, 
may here be introduced as a fair specimen of his ordi- 
nary parochial labors. 

"Friday, Dec. 2, 1785. Rose early this morn- 
ing — ^had some satisfaction in study and prayer — spent 
the day in making preparation for the Sabbath — had 
a comfortable time in visiting a sick person in the 
evening. 

" Dec. 3. Spent the day in preparing for the Sab- 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS PASTOR. 



73 



bath. As usual in prayer, morning, noon, and even- 
ing. Find it hard work to keep my own hody in 
suhjection. 

" Dec. 4. Sabbath. Rose about four o'clock. Some 
freedom in prayer, ia repeating my sermons, and ia 
meditation on the love of Grod. I would now arrange 
the duties of the day in the following order : 1. Prayer. 
2. Repeat my forenoon sermon ; then spend what time 
I can get before meeting in ejaculation and reading ; 
then spend as much as possible of the intermission in 
some profitable thoughts and conversation. 3. Watch 
over my heart after meeting, mortify my inordinate 
affections, reflect on the duties of the day, and ex- 
amine myself for a better world. 4. Labor to be 
prepared for the conference both by prayer and medi- 
tation. And 0 that I may not go to meeting tliis day 
in my own strength. Felt shut up in the forenoon. 
It was stormy, and but few people attended. This 
afternoon, more freedom. After meeting, was uncom- 
monly free from dejection — ^had some freedom in con- 
versation—caught a few minutes for meditation and 
'prayer before the- conference — some freedom in con- 
versation at the conference. 0 how sweet were the 
hymns they sung. But 0, how do I seek myself too 
much, and deny myself too little. 

" Dec. 5. As usual, in reading Dr. Doddridge's life. 
Spent the afternoon in visiting four families. AVas 
enabled to discourse some with each of them on spir- 
itual things. Spent tliis evening in study and con- 
versation ; but 0, my barrenness. 

" Dec. 6. Had little time for prayer to-day. This 

Hallnck 4 



74 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



afternoon visited a sick person, and discoursed and 
prayed with him and his family. This evening at- 
tended a conference with the young people — very 
dull — resolved to keep the morrow, if the Lord will, 
in fasting and prayer. 

Dec. 7. Rose about daybreak. Had but little 
lite in prayer this morning. Determined to keep this 
day according to my resolve on the sixth of last May. 
Had a friendly conference this evening, 

" Dec. 8. Can hardly hold up my head because of 
my sins. In the evening we had a friendly confer- 
ence. 0 that I might feel more serious and engaged 
in religion. 

" Dec. 9. Had uncommon sweetness in reading 
and praying over the thirteenth chapter of John in 
private. Think Grod lets me see a little of my unprof- 
itableness. Had a conference this evening — ^walked 
home, after meeting, ui the rain." 

In the spring of 1786 Mr. Hallock was married to 
Miss Mercy Humphrey, a daughter of Oliver Hum- 
phrey, Esq., of West Simsbury, whose family connec- 
tions in the place were numerous and respectable.' 
She was sister to the wife of Rev. Mr. Fowler, with 
whom Mr. Hallock had read divinity, and the date of 
her Christian hope, as already stated, w^as from the 
revival in 1783. Before his marriage, he writes, "0 
thou fountain of wisdom, wilt thou give me grace to 
act discreetly and wisely in this difficult matter, and 
provide me a help-meet, one of thy friends that may 
bear the burden with me ; or, if I can do thee more 
service by living a single life, ' thy will be done.' " 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS PASTOR. 73 

" JNever let me marry, I pray thee, unless it fit me for 
thy service, and be for thy glory." " If it will not be 
for the good of Christ's sheep and lambs in this place, 
0 my heavenly Father, forbid it." 

On entering the family state he did not make the 
too common plea, that an increase of secular care 
must excuse some femission of devotional exercises — 
a plea as false in principle as it is often fatal to a life 
of piety. His more correct reasoning, and his resolu- 
tion in consequence, are worthy to be set in diamonds. 
"As I have now entered a scene of new cares, so I 
would resolve to be more watchful and prayerful. 
And whereas I have had three stated times for prayer 
in twenty-four hours, I am resolved to add two more, 
until I shall think it my duty to alter ; so that my 
stated hours of prayer, if the Lord will, shall be six 
o'clock and ten o'clock a. m. ; one o'clock, six o'clock, 
and nine o'clock p. m. 0 that I might be sincere in 
these duties." 

His subsequent journal sheds no light on his actual 
practice in regard to this resolution. The compiler 
inquired of Mrs. Hallock respecting it, after the death 
of her husband. She said in reply, "I never knew 
his stated times for secret devotion, but this I can say, 
he seemed to be praying nearly all the while." A 
specimen of the manner in which his private fasts 
were observed, will not be void of interest. 

" June 28, 1786. The change in my circumstances 
of life, and many cares and concerns have so filled my 
mind, that I have not attended to fasting and prayer 
as usual. Alas, I have omitted two of my monthly 



70 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



fasts. I fear the greatest reason has been the want 
of a better heart, and my soul feels the unhappy 
effect. Therefore I would, by the will of God, set 
apart this day to fast and pray, and humble myself 
for all my sins. The method I propose is as follows : 

" 1. To pray for divine direction and assistance. 

" 2. To read m my journal, especially the history 
of my former fasts. 

"3. To examine my secular dealings with my 
fellow-men. 

" 4. To read the Bible and other good books as T 
think proper. 

"5. To sing at times. 

" 6. To look back on my past life, and search for 
my sins. Here I find I am guilty of lukewarmness — 
of carnal affection and conversation — of inordinate 
love to this world and the things of it — of unfaithful- 
ness in my calling — of backwardness in religious con- 
versation — of misspending time — of pleasing myself— 
of being too superficial in reading and study — of 
making resolves and breaking them ; particularly my 
neglect of the two last fasts. For these, and all other 
sins too numerous to mention, I would confess and 
humble myself before the Lord. 

"7. To pray for the forgiveness of my sins — for 
sanctification, that all the sins just mentioned and all 
my other sins may be subdued — for grace to do my 
duty, as the head both of a natural and spiritual 
family — for the continuance of bodily health, and that 
Grod would order my secular affairs in respect to a 
house and home of my own — for my relations — for 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS PASTOR. 77 

tliis little flock — for the church at large — for all the 
ministry — for all in authority — for all my enemies — 
for all the distressed either in body or in mind. These, 
and all other petitions which it is my duty to make, 
would I bring into my prayers this day. And 0, let 
me never forget to pray for the Holy Spbit and the 
continuance of spiritvial privileges. I would also pray 
that I may rightly unprove all mercies and judgments, 
and may be prepared for the Lord's supper next 
Sabbath. 

"8. To offer thanksgiving to Goi, for common 
mercies, as food, health, clothes, friends ; for spiritual 
mercies, as God's holy word and Spirit, opportunities 
for prayer, meditation, reading, conversation, and all 
seasons for the service of Grod, public or private. 

"9. To contemplate the glories of the upper world. 

" 10. To examine whether my evidence is clear, 
as a Christian, or as a minister. As a Christian, 
have I faith ? is my path like that of the righteous ? 
have I clean hands? have I David's repentance? 
As a minister, do I perform the work of a minister ? 
does God own me by his Spirit in giving me success ? 

"11. To renew my covenant and resolves. 

" I have spent more than twelve hours in this 
work to-day — have had but little life. I am resolved. 
Providence permitting, to keep next "Wednesday in 
like manner. 0 that I might be better prepared than 
I have been to-day. I cannot but wonder that my 
bodily health has held out so well." 

The solemn dedication of his dwelling-house to 
God may here be worthy of notice. 



70 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

" To-day I have removed into my new house. I 
call it Rehoboth, because the Lord hath made room 
for us. 0 my Grod, it is a gloomy mansion vrithout 
thee, and I would love thee more than houses or any 
thing. Lord God, I would give it up to thee, whose 
it is and every thing else, that it might be for Jesus, 
and wear out in the service of his church, and not be 
converted into food for lust, but may it be sanctifiHd 
by the word and prayer. 0 let me not feel as if it 
were my home, but only a tabernacle for a few days 
at most; hence, may I use it only in thy service, and 
in seeking that kingdom which cannot be shaken. 
Hence, 0 my Grod, I would devote it to thee, to be 
taken from me, or I be taken from it, at thy pleasure. 
Of thy grace I have received it ; I would thank thee 
for it, and for stirring up my dear people to help 
build it. 0 Lord, remember them for good. And 
praised be thy name, that my people do not appear 
to envy me, but to rejoice to see me have a comfort- 
able house. 0 give me the heart of thy servant 
David, when he came and sat before thee and said, 
' What can David say more ?' and also when he said, 
' Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reign- 
est over all ; and in thy hand is power and might ; 
and in thy hand it is to make great, and to give 
strength unto all ; now therefore, our God, we thank 
thee and praise thy glorious name. For we are 
strangers before thee and sojourners, as were all our 
fathers ; our days on the earth are as a shadow, and 
there is none abiding.' Teach me, 0 my God, to 
study what I shall render unto thee for the favor of 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS TASTOR. 



79 



this temporal house, and for all thy innumerable 
benefits." 

A family, commenced and proceeding on princi- 
ples so entirely Christian, could scarcely fail to be 
happy. In the course of a few years, God gave to 
his servant two sons and one daughter. His elder 
son, Jeremiah Humphrey, whom he educated at "Will- 
iams college, became presidmg judge in the Chcuit 
courts of Ohio, and an esteemed officer of the church 
in Steubenville, where he died, Nov. 29, 1847, in the 
57th year of liis age. His other son, William Homan, 
ever lived with Ms parents, or near them; took the 
charge of business at an early age ; and for many 
years, in connection with liis mother, almost entirely 
reheved his father from secular care. The yoimgest 
child, a daughter by the name of Sarah, died in her 
fifteenth year, as will hereafter be noticed. 

These children very early ascertained the first 
wish of their parents in respect to them. They saw 
daily proof of one steady and earnest desire to train 
them up for heaven. Yet Mr. Hallock was accus- 
tomed to say less to his children at set tunes, by way 
of formal address, than some godly parents. It was 
the deep interest which he himself ever seemed to 
feel in religious things, it was his marked Cliristian 
deportment, his inimitably solemn and affectionate 
manner, which gave lessons on the importance of early 
piety, that his children could not misunderstand. 
Often, too, when walking in a retired field with one 
of them, he would press the subject of personal relig- 
ion, and then invite his son to kneel with hun under 



80 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



a tree, and tliere ciy to G-od for the salvation of his 
soul. In his family, he seldom had recourse to the 
rod of correction, and whenever it became necessary, 
it was his uniform custom to pray with the offender 
before he dismissed him. Of his sense of the value 
of daily prayer with his children, the following fact 
is a pleasant evidence. A clergyman once lodged at 
his house when Mr. Hallock's sons had occasion to 
leave home at a very early hour. As they were pre- 
paring to depart, Mr. Hallock rose and prayed with 
them while the rest of the family were in bed, and 
afterwards attended family prayer at the usual time. 

To meet the expenses of his family he had but a 
small income, yet the needy were not turned away 
empty from his door, and he was liberal in contribu- 
tions to objects of charity. His house was always 
the resort of pious strangers, who were attracted 
tliither partly perhaps by his known hospitality, but 
chieliy by the report of his rare piety. He had also 
a large circle of relatives and particular friends, 
whose visits were as frequent as they were mutually 
pleasant and useful. At one time he writes, "For 
these nine days past I have been mostly taken up 
with company. I think we have had the privilege of 
giving more than fifty meals within about a week. 
Was visited by the dear Rev. Mr. Hopkins of New- 
port," the late Rev. Dr. Hopkins ; "he seems almost 
like one of the old apostles." Again, " I have given 
away considerable for me within a few days, and I 
trust cheerfully ; but it is all the Lord's — I am only 
his steward, and let him have all the praise ; and 0, 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS PASTOR 



81 



may I, a wretched sinner, find eternal life of his 
boundless mercy in Christ, and may my poor children 
live before him." 

The follo\Ying statement, by an eye-mtness, is 
equally illustrative of strong faith and a generous 
heart : "In the early part of Mr. Hallock's min- 
istry, I was laboring with him in his field. It was 
a year of uncommon scarcity. He had just stated 
to me his fear that he should not be able to make 
his stock of grain meet the commg harvest, when 
a colored man, a total stranger, came into the field. 
As he approached Mr. Hallock, he took off his hat, 
made a low bow, and said, " Massa, I have poor 
woman and children, and no crumb bread. I try 
get 'em some, but nobody pity negur. Good massa, 
can't you give little corn, so they no starve?' Mr. 
Hallock replied at once, with cheerfulness, ' Go with 
mo to the house.' He went to his granary and divid- 
ed the scant supply of liis children's bread with this 
stranger." 

For a short period in the autumn of 1786 his 
health seemed to be so affected as to give indications 
that his work on earth might be soon closed. At one 
time we find him lamenting his inability to retire 
longer to liis " pleasant grove," and at another making 
the following reflection : 

" I think my disorder threatening, but, through 
the goodness of God, I am not terrified. For though 
I never before had such a sense of my ill-desert, yet 
I have a sweet and all-supporting hope in Him who 
4- 



82 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

came into the world to save sinners. I do not know- 
that it ever seemed more desirable to go and be with 
the Lord. These are my feelings, if I am not de- 
ceived ; and 0 may I be thankful for such unspeak- 
able comforts, and know assuredly that I cannot stand 
a moment but as God holds me up. And now, 0 
Lord, I pray, that whether I shall die or recover, thy 
name may be glorified — ^that I may praise thee in life 
or in death." 

" I should be glad to live, that I may serve God 
and his church, and be a comfort to my dear consort, 
friends, and all mankind. As a general marches 
behind, while the enemy presses on the rear, till his 
army are all over the dangerous passage, so I should 
be glad to help my wife, and friends, and all this 
little flock down to the grave, and safely over Jordan's 
cold stream, and then follow them. But I desire to 
be calm and silent, and not dispute my Maker's will. 
Heaven's high decree shall stand, and through grace 
my soul shall say, Amen. What if I die ? God and 
the church shaU live ; therefore all will be well. I 
trust I feel in some measure reconciled to death, by 
God's great grace. I find idle hours the most irk- 
some, and am resolved to endeavor to be in some 
active service for God while I live." 

A day of fasting, which he observed at this time, 
he thus describes : 

" Sept. 5, 1786. To-morrow is my monthly fast, 
but as I view myself in a declining state, and as my 
temporal affairs are such that I can better attend to- 
day than to-morrow, I would set apart this day, 1 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS PASTOR. 83 

That I might ' hear the rod, and who hath appointed 
it.' 2. That I might serve God better for all this, 
and be purged. 3. That I might be spared a little 
longer to pray and preach. 4. That I might be ready 
for death, according to the latter part of the twenty- 
fourth chapter of Matthew, or for whatever affliction 
a holy G-od hath in store for me. 5. To take a view 
of the great mercy of God which is still continued 
towards me. 6. To examine myself : Do I love the 
church ? Have I repentance and faith ? Am I patient ? 
7. To confess my sins. 8. To pray for my dear rela- 
tives, that they may give me up to God ; to pray for 
my people and all people, but especially for dear Zion 
and this church in particular ; for the babes, children, 
young people, middle-aged, and aged. And I would 
consider that sin is the cause of the rod ; that what- 
ever good I have at any time, is God's gift at will ; 
that trouble is sent to bring me nearer to God, to try 
and humble me ; that I have received much good at 
the hand of God ; that it is God only who sends 
trouble ; that God never lifts his rod but to execute 
his own most holy, wise, and good purposes. Have 
been enabled to attend, as prescribed above, yet with 
much weakness, and not all the time. I felt as if I 
could pray for any thing above mentioned, as well as 
for my recovery ; and now I would conclude by de- 
voting myself to God, and renewing my covenant 
and resolves." 

On his return from a journey, October 13, he 
writes, " I resolved, and for the mo.st part put it in 
practice, that no company should divert me from my 



84 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK, 



wonted private duties, and I think I never enjoyed so 
much continued sweetness on a journey in my life." 

" Oct. 21. I receive many kindnesses from my 
people for which I would give thanks. 

"Dec. 14. Received, to-day and this evening, 
some unseemly treatment, but hope these persons 
had an interest in my prayers. Therefore, Hebrews 
12 : 2, and similar passages, were pleasant to me. 0 
't is a pleasant thing to forgive." 

" Jan. 1, 1787. I am now brought to see a new year : 

0 that . Of late, have not been so formal as 

common in prayer, and have had more freedom. For 
this new year I would make the following resolves : 

"1. To rise by daybreak. 

"2. To read daily one day's account from my 
journal for the year past. 

"3. To be more fervent and watchful in my usual 
times for prayer. 

" Sweet peace in my soul in the evening sacrifice ; 

and rejoiced to see Capt. willing and urgent 

that his daughter should make a public confession ; 
it strengthens the evidence I have long had of the 
piety of this sweet man. 

" Jan. 2. Rose about the break of day. Uncom- 
mon sweetness and some fervency in secret and 
family prayer ; also in reading the Bible, in singing, 
and reading in my diary, according to my resolves 
yesterday. This evening had some sweetness in con- 
versation. 

"Jan. 2-6. 0 it would be sweet living, if we could 
live only for God. Have great reason to be thankful 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS PASTOR. 85 

that trials and public commotions have not disturbed 
me of late, as formerly." 

Later in life, Mr. Hallock addressed a clerical 
friend who was agitated by difficulties, in this man- 
ner : "Be not alarmed, my young brother. Soon 
after my ordination I thought for a time they 
would kill me. One enemy opened a battery on 
the right, another on the left ; I trembled — I looked 
to see myself fall every moment — I wondered that I 
remained alive ; but I found, after a while, it was all 
roar, roar, and not a single bullet.^'' 

" Feb. 21, 1787. At noon, to-day, the dear Mr. 
Andrew Mills set out for New Haven, Vt., which caused 
many -a parting tear. My soul laments the loss of 
such a friend. He is a friend to Zion, and always 
appears attached to God's honor. In prosixn-ity and 
in adversity he discovers great calmness of mind ; a 
friend to all, much in reading and prayer, constant at 
public worship, beloved by the good, and revered by 
all. He is pleasant in his temper, and easy of access ; 
his voice sweet, his countenance manly, his life un- 
spotted. Thy fellow, 0 Mills, thou hast scarce left 
behind. Poor sinners, you have lost an unfeigned 
friend. Ye little children and babes, weep. Sigh, 0 
ye youth ; and ye mourning lambs of the church, 
cry to God that he would make up this, as to sense, 
irreparable loss; for methinks I see our Zion shake 
at the removal of such a pillar." 

Some years after this painful parting, Mr. Hallock 
made this choice friend a visit. He found him a 
deacon in the church and highly useful in the desti- 



80 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



tute region where he was located. The wisdom of 
Providence in the removal of such a man from a 
place where his services were less needed, Mr. Hallock 
now clearly saw, and at once became thankful for an 
event which had drawn from his heart the above 
touching lamentation. 

"March 20. Spent part of the day in study, part 
in conversation, and part in preaching a lecture for 
old Mrs. B . 0 'tis sweet to work for Christ. 

"Aug. G. Some sweetness in reading and medita- 
tion as I rode from Winchester home ; in visiting 
likewise. .1 felt as if I wanted to see some friends 
who, I had heard, spoke some things that looked like 
prejudice against me, that I might thank them for 
the good which I hope it hath done me. Thought I 
could bless Grod that my portion doth not lie here. 

"Aug. 26. It cuts me down to see the inconstancy 
of my people. They seem to be leaving me, who 
ought to have been my stay, Uke Aaron and Hur. 
Every wind of doctrine tosseth them about; and 
alas, what will they do in the end ? These things 
sink me down ; but hope thou in God, O my soul. 
Have lately fixed this for my motto, which I think is 
sweet, namely, ' Grod's holy will shall be my stay.' " 

At no period of his ministry did the piety and 
fidelity of Mr. Hallock save him entirely from trials 
of this painful character. He sometimes spoke of 
them with deep emotion. A pastor, whose care for his 
flock was as incessant as his love for it was strone, 
he could not see it diminish by the voluntary with- 
drawment of individuals, without intense grief. And 



FIllST TWELVE YEARS TASTOR. 

most of all he was grieved and astonished at the 
slight and absurd reasons often assigned for with- 
drawing from a congregation. Speaking of a reeent 
instance, which had cut him to the heart, he said, 
" It seems to me like this : Two neighbors, in a pas- 
sion, come to blows. One of them proves too strong 
fo;- the other. The weaker one says, ' "Well, if I can't 
have my revenge on yon, I know what I ivill do ; I 
will go home and whip my wife.' And so the poor 
inoffensive 'woman must suffer. Quite as unreason- 
able is it for persons to withdraw theu* support of 
the gospel, because some individual in the society has 
given them offence." 

" Jan. 3, 178S. Made one sweet visit, and resolved, 
if the Lord will, to make in liis strength a religious 
visit to each family in my society within the course 
of this year. Felt guilty because I prayed no more 
this evening. 

" April 17. Last week was exceedingly tried with 
an envious temper; but 0, praised, for ever praised 
be the Lord, the snare is broken, and I have, as I 
trust, escaped. It seems as if I never loved those 
persons better with whom I felt uneasy. 

" Sept. 26. On the tenth of this month Yale Col- 
lege conferred on me the honorary degree of Master 
of Arts. 0 that I might see in this the kind hand 
of Providence, be made more humble thereby, give 
G-od the praise, and have my heart lifted up in his 
ways. 

"Jc\K 14, 17S9. To-day received a kind letter 
of rebuke from Mr. H , a Baptist minister. I 



88 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



think he wrote with the spirit of a Christian, although 
in some things he has mistaken me. 0 may I receive 
his rebukes Uke a wise man. 0 may the sweet day 
come, dear Lord, when thy children shall see eye to 
eye." 

Mr. Hallock could give as well as receive reproof 
like a Christian. To a clerical brother in a select 
circle, who was expressing rather strong impatience 
in view of the remissness of his people, he mildly 
said, " My dear brother. Is this Paul, or is it Bona- 
parte ?" To another, in a state of unhappy variance 
with his people, and whose unconcern seemed to be 
indicated by a more than common attention to his 
person, he remarked with much effect in the same fra- 
ternal circle, " Brother, at such a time as this, when 
we all ought to be humbly on our knees, I am sorry 
to see you with powdered hair." After an extensive 
revival of religion, there was a difference of opinion, 
with some warmth of debate among the favored min- 
isters, as to the best mode of bringing before the 
public an account of what Grod had wrought in their 
several parishes. At length Mr. Hallock said, with 
a tone and look of grief and deep concern, " I perceive, 
brethren, that we shall all need to pray more than 
once a day oftencr than usual, or we shall get into 
divisions, and do little honor to Hun who hath done 
these marvellous things before our eyes." 

" Sept. 7. Set out on a journey to Groshen. My 
mind has been more on religion this day than com- 
mon when I set out on journeys. 

" Sept, 8. Arrived at Northampton a little after 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS PASTOR. 89 

noon ; was kindly received by my friends — ^had some 
uncommon freedom for me, in meditation, as I rode. 
About sunset arrived at my father's, where I was 
kindly received by my dear parents and kind brother 
and sisters. Spent the evening agreeably in relig- 
ious conversation with our family and some other 
friends. 

" Sept. 9. Spent part of the day in conversation 
and part in study ; towards night preached at Will- 
iamsburgh, from Rev. 22 : 17 ; had some freedom ; 
the people were attentive — spent the evening in a 
conference. 

" Sept. 10. Tliis morning visited some that were 
awakened, and some new converts. Many in this 
neighborhood who one year ago were dead and secure 
in their sins, now appear to be spiritually alive, and 
to have the image of Jesus. In the afternoon rode 
to Chesterfield ; preached a lecture, then had a con- 
ference : the young converts seemed to enjoy a little 
heaven below — one was thought to be converted in 
the meeting. 

" Sept. 11. Visited agreeably, had freedom in 
conversation and meditation, and felt as usual in 
preaching the lecture before the Lord's supper at 
G-oshen. After the lecture, six were examined to be 
received into the church, who, I think, appeared 
excellently. 

" Sept. 12. Visited all day. Was accompanied 
by dear friend Coleman and brother Moses. 

" Sept. 13, Sabbath. Rode to Chesterfield and 
preached for Rev. Mr. Allen. The work of G-od is 



99 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



visible in this place. After meeting rode to G-oslien, 
and partook of the Lord's supper there with God's 
people ; then went to my father's, sang some hymns, 

attended conference at Mr. 's, returned to father's, 

and tallied till past midnight. 

" Sept. 14. Visited this forenoon, then rode to 
Conway and spent the evening with dear Mr. E. 

B ^ who I think suffers some reproach for Jesus' 

sake. 

" Sept. 15. Visited Rev. Mr. Emerson in the fore- 
noon ; preached for him in the afternoon and this 
evening ; but in the evening sermon was almost en- 
tirely exhausted, and felt ashamed afterwards .and 
unfit for conversation. 

" Sept. 16. Rode to Williamsburgh— visited by 
the way — ^liad unexpected freedom in preaching to a 
large audience. 0 that G-od might have the praise. 

" Sept. 17. Set out for home. 

" Sept. 18. Found my family and people well, 
having been absent eleven days. It has been the 
most remarkable journey I ever took. I have been 
better in health than common when from home, 
and have seen the great power and mercy of God 
displayed in awakening and converting sinners. This 
great work appears in Conway, Ashfield, Buckland, 
Williamsburgh, Goshen, Chesterfield, Northampton, 
Easthampton, and Wcsthampton. 0 come. Lord Je- 
sus, and spread the triumphs of the cross through 
our world." 

During his ministry it was Mr. Hallock's custom 
to make an annual visit, in the autumn, to his par- 



FJRST TWELVE YEARS PASTOR, 



91 



ents at G-oshen, his brother at Plainfield, and friends 
in the vicinity. Besides this, he seldom took a jour- 
ney, if we except short tours, sometimes for preaching 
and sometimes to meet ecclesiastical bodies. It is 
highly gratifying to find him the same devout man 
and active minister abroad as at home. Whatever 
relaxation he might need at any time from the severer 
duties of his station, he seems never to have put off 
his clerical garments as too grave on a journey, or in 
the houses of near relations. Once, in prospect of a 
journey, he made these resolutions : 

" 1. To watch over my thoughts and conversation, 

"2. To take some time for private prayer and 
meditation morning and evenmg. 

" 3. To be ready to preach, if requested, and to 
do and get all the good I can." 

Again he writes, " To-morrow expect, if I live, to 
sot out with Mrs. Hallock to see our friends in G-oshen 
and Plainfield. 0 Lord, if it be thy will that we 
should go, wilt thou be with us going and coming 
and while there, and may our journey bo for thy glory, 
our spiritual comfort, and the edification of thy peo- 
ple, for Chi-ist's sake." 

On his return from one of these autumnal visits, 
he says in his journal, " In this visit, have seen and 
heard refreshing things in respect to the work of God, 
in particular at Plainfield. Have preached six times, 
besides speaking at conferences. I have had a sweet 
visit with my brother Moses ; and now, 0 my soul, 
give God all the praise, for to him only is it due." 
In bidding his brother's family farewell, at the close 



92 



JEUEMIAH KALLOCK. 



of these truly religious visits, it was his custom, as all 
the children gathered around him, to address them in 
an affectionate and solemn manner on the concerns 
of the soul. " These scenes," remarked one who was 
no stranger to them, " were among the most tender 
and impressive of my life. His visits were as a fore- 
taste of heaven, and his prayers and counsels gave us 
hope of yet receiving mercy from that God against 
whom we knew we had sinned. On one occasion 
suddenly opening a chamber-door, I saw my father 
and uncle upon their knees, and perceived their tears, 
as I believed they were wrestling in prayer for the 
salvation of then- children." 

The first twelve years after Mr. Hallock's ordina- 
tion were years of deep spiritual declension, in all the 
region round about him. "We now find him in the 
midst of this dreary period — altogether the darkest 
time of the same leng-th, which he was called to wit- 
ness in the course of his ministry. To use his own 
lang-uage, in a sermon which he published some years 
afterwards, Spiritual things appeared gradually to 
decline, and the church was reduced to a very low 
and gloomy state." Yet, in this season of peculiar 
trial, we find him at his post, diligently sowing his 
seed in the morning, and in the evening not with- 
holding his hand. 

"Dkckmof.r 20, 1789. Lord's day. To-day began 
to preach systematically. 0 that I might go forward 
in my proposed plan, only in the strength of the Lord 
Almighty. 



FIRST TWELVE TEARS PASTOR. 93 

••April 18, 1.790. Religious, matters in this 
place look darker and darker. My soul is perplexed 
to hear that children and youth get together for vanity. 

"August 8. I think that if G-od should ask me 
as he did Solomon, what he should give me, I would 
answer, ' Lord, that I might be faithful.' 

"August 4, 1792. Resolved to fast and pray: 
1. On account of my sins, the sins of my people, and 
of the land. 2. That I may be humbled under the 
testimonies of God's displeasure. 3. For Zion in her 
present melancholy state, especially in this place. 4. 
That I may search my own heart, and inquire whether 
it is not owing to my slothfulness, that the vineyard 
in this place is thus grown over with thorns, and 
broken down." 

Mr. Hallock could receive valuable hints of duty 
from the passing events of providence. Finding one 
day that one of his sheep was missing, he made some 
search for it, and returned home ; but the thought of 
the lost sheep still gave liim inquietude. At length 
he concluded to make a more thorough search, and 
found that the poor animal had passed its head be- 
tween two rails of fence, and unable to extricate itself, 
had eaten into the earth every thing green within its 
reach. He at ones inquired with himself, " Is it not 
possible, that some one of my spiritual flock is at this 
moment in deep distress of soul ? I will go through 
the congregation without delay, and ascertain the 
fact." He went, and actually found a member ot 
his church almost in despair, to whom he was happy 
to impart counsel. 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



"Marcu 1^, 1793. To-day returned from the 
monthly convention at brother Hawley's. Saw a 
number of my dear fiiends in the ministry— felt em- 
barrassed in conversation and in every performance — 
thought every body exceeded me, and felt great want 
of a Christian spirit. 

" To-day I am thirty-five years old ; feel as if I 
never had done any thing, and never should, as a 
minister or Christian. 0 may I be humbled for my 
unprofitableness, and apply my heart unto wisdom. 
Think it has of late been some comfort to me, that all 
should be done in the name of Christ. Sometimes 
have very trying temptations : 0 thou that didst de- 
liver David's soul out of all distress, wilt thou save 
me in the hour of temptation." 

Throughout his journal Mr. Hallock mourns often, 
and very bitterly, over his imperfectly sanctified heart. 
The temperament of his mind seems often to have 
led him to dwell more on the dark, than on the bright- 
er shades of his own spiritual state. Yet we are, no 
doubt, to ascribe these lamentations in great part to 
his deep knowledge of himself and of God, added to 
the high standard of spiritual attaiiunent at which he 
aimed. His sense of entire dependence on God in the 
Christian course, he illustrates in the following terms : 
" The way to heaven is up stream. It is like one 
ascending out of Ontario into Erie and the higher 
lakes. But how will the inexperienced youth, in his 
little open boat, meet the tempest and billows ? How, 
with naught but his hands and paddle, will he ascend 
the falls of Niagara ?" 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS PASTOR. 



95 



Somewhat similar imagery Mr. Hallock employ- 
ed at times, in reference to the conversion of sinners. 
He was once in a neighboring town, where there was 
a powerful work of divine grace. In going thither, he 
had travelled by the side of a river covered with 
floating cakes of ice. Surrounded as he was with 
proofs of the mighty power of G-od in the repentance 
of stout-hearted sinners, he said that the scene before 
him was not less wonderful than would be the sight, 
if the cakes of ice which he had just seen borne down 
on the strong current, should at once stop and float 
up stream. 

At another time, pointing to an adjacent moun- 
tain as he stood preaching, he made use of this simile : 
" A sheep is lost on that mountain. The wild beasts 
are howling around it. Left to itself, the poor animal 
wiU never find its way off". But the shepherd is now 
on the mountain in search of it. Possibly lie may 
find it. Just so in the case of the lost sinner. He is 
wandering in a most forlorn condition. Our only 
hope is, that the good Shepherd may yet find him, 
and bring him into the fold." 

These anecdotes are at once an illustration of ilr. 
Hallock's views in respect to the sinner's entire de- 
pendence on God for saving grace, and an example 
of his common practice in the application of surround- 
ing chcumstances to some useful end. Yet with 
these views of man's dependence, he was careful not 
to excuse any form of sin. No one could be farther 
from Antinomianism. If he could not fully explain 
the harmonious connection of divine agency and grace 



9C JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

with human freedom and accountability, he firmly 
bchevcil ill its existence on the testimony of Jehovah. 
In a circle of ministers, where the nature of the sin- 
ner's inability was the topic of discussion, he stated 
the following fact: "A man in my parish, who 
is no sailor, lately made an attempt to cross a mill- 
pond in a small boat. The water was high, and to 
his dismay he found himself gradually carried down 
towards the dam. In this extremity, not knowing 
how to manage the boat, he called to some persons 
on the shore. They cried out, ' Row on the other 
side.' All agitation, he replied, 'I can't.' They 
cried more earnestly, ' Row on the other side.^ He 
still said, tremblingly, ' I can't: They added, ' Well, 
then, E^o over the dam.' " 

" May 20, 1793. Have had some refreshment in 
preaching, but never saw my heart more wicked — 
never was pressed with greater temptations — many 
times, seemed to be destitute of faith — could get no 
comfort from the Bible, or in prayer, and the world 
seemed altogether vanity. But glory be to the Grod 
of all comfort, before I got home last evening, felt 
revived. Found brother Miller at my house ; we open- 
ed our minds to each other — went out and prayed 
together; and I trust my soul was truly refreshed. 
0 may we never forsake the Lord. 

" May 30. Last Tuesday had a public meeting 
on account of the 'drought, though the good Lord sent 
rain before the day came. Rev. Mr. Miller preached 
two sermons, and appeared to have extraordinary 
assistance. My heart, I trust, was in some measure 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS PASTOR. 97 

refreshed. Spent the evening with brother Miller, 
and rode home with him on "Wednesday. It was my 
lot to preach at West Britain, though I felt as if I 
could not ; for it has seemed at times, of late, as if I 
could not pray, and as if my poor attempts were shut 
out. Indeed, many times it has seemed almost as 
if ' the pains of hell had got hold upon me ;' hut in 
prayer and in preaching yesterday, the clouds seemed 
to disperse, and I had unusual freedom and satisfac- 
tion. The audience were very attentive, and after 
meeting I enjoyed a sweet evening. This morning, 
felt as if I could spend the day and the night in 
numbering over the richest joys. My mind is calm 
and serene, and it almost seems that I should be glad 
to leave this world, and be with Jesus. May God 
have all the praise of this deliverance ; may this mercy 
teach me for ever, in trouble and at all times, to trust, 
and cry unto him. And if these lines should ever be 
read by any one, may he or she be encouraged to 
pray without ceasing to God in trouble, and not faint ; 
knowing that God will appear for the distressed, if 
they pray to, and trust in him. 

" March 1, 1795. To-day heard of the death of 
my sister Abigail. Her natural temper was very 
agreeable, and sweetened, I trust, with true grace. 
She was the desire and crown of her husband, the 
delight of her parents, the glory of her brothers and 
sisters; kind to all, beloved by her neighbors, and 
esteemed in Zion. But her work is done. God hath 
called her away, we trust, to himself; and blessed 
be his name. May her bereaved consort, parents, 



98 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



and all of us, find this loss made up in God ; and be 
prepared to go when our turn shall come. 

" May 2, 1795. Last evening had agreeable Con- 
versation with brother Griffin.* Spent this forenoon 
with him in retirement and prayer, I trust profitably. 
Conversed until about two, and then parted with him. 
0 may we so live as to meet in a better world. 

" June 7. Yesterday my dear father came to see 
me from Goshen ; gave me a more particular account 
of my beloved sister's death, and brought some of 
her private diary, which I tliink is expressive of true 
religion. 0 may God have all the praise. 

"June 5, 1796. Had rather more freedom than 
common in private duties last evening; and was 
favored in preaching, this morning, beyond my ex- 
pectation. But in a sermon to the youth this after- 
noon, have boon dreadfully unfruitful, and had but 
little attention. Feel ashamed and confounded. 0 
that I might feel like a child under the parent's rod, 
and that God would have mercy on the youth. 

" Sept. 18, 1796. Lord's day. I am troubled 
with a dull, inconstant mind, and a treacherous mem- 
ory, so that I find it difficult to compose, to speak, 
or pray. Whence it ariseth, I cannot tell ; whether 
from disease of body or want of grace. But let it 
be from what it may, I have no way but to go to the 
Lord and wait for liis salvation. The meeting to- 
day has been thin and dull ; I have had but very 
little sense of things, either in preaching or praying. 

* The late Rev. Dr. Edward D. Griffin, Uion a youthful 
pastor in the adjacent town "f New Hartford. 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS PASTOR. O'.i 

Yet I must not forget the unusual comfort the Lord 
was pleased to grant me this morning, especially in 
family religion. But my Beloved is withdrawn as 
to his sensible presence, and I am left to mourn. 
Still, ' though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.' 

" July 2, 1797. Rather more freedom in prayer 
and preaching and at the Lord's table. Through the 
tender mcjcies of Grod, I have been more comfortable 
in mind for nine or ten days. The peace I have in 
Jesus unspeakably exceeds all the joys of this world. 
0 Lord, make and keep me humble, and draw my 
soul more and more to thee. 

"Aug. 1, 1798. I have this day, by the help of 
God, finished my little former harvest, and I would 
now bless the Lord for the harvest, and for success 
in the ingathering of it. I would confess my sins, 
that I am so carnal, and like those who make provis- 
ion only for the flesh. 0 that I might have a part 
with that happy number who will one day reap ever- 
lasting life." 

In this connection it may be proper to introduce • 
a few more of Mr. Hallock's harvest thoughts : " 0 
Lord, may we begin the harvest in thy fear, and have 
strength and grace to gather it as thine and for thee ; 
and may it all be used in thy service — may every 
swath and every sheaf be sanctified by the word and 
prayer; and 0, let thy spiritual mercies fill the earth 
also in the building of Zion." 

Again, " "We have a comfortable supply. 0 Lord, 
the harvest is thine ; thou madest it to giw — the 
favorable time to gather it, the health, the strength, 



100 



JEPlEMIAH hallock. 



the skill, the success, are all of thee, who huildest 
the house and keepest the city. And now, 0 my 
God, may we have grace and wisdom to use it wholly 
for thee, and may thy blessing, without which all is 
still in vain, rest perpetually upon us, and wilt thou 
teach us thy statutes and grant us the spiritual 
harvest, the Holy Spirit and its fruits unto eternal 
life." 

In conversation with a candidate for the ministry, 
who had been attracted to his roof by the report of 
his piety and worth, Mr. Hallock once remarked that 
one year, when the Lord gave him an uncommon 
supply of forage, he was led to inquire what it meant, 
and in what way he should use the whole to the glory 
of the Giver. He added, " Before spring the matter 
was quite plain. For there was a great revival among 
my people that winter, and I had occasion to keep at 
different times more than fifty horses for Christ's 
ministers. I now saw for what purpose God had so 
kindly and providentially filled my barn." At an- 
other time, walking out with a Cliristian friend in 
the fertile fields, he said, " How thankful we ought 
to be for this meadow. I sometimes feel afraid to 
enjoy the good things of Providence lest I should 
abuse them." 

When he purchased his place, there was a young 
and thrifty orchard upon it, from which the planter 
himself never received much, if any fruit. This or- 
chard, situated on the side of a hill, yielded a supply 
for Mr. Hallock's family in seasons when fruit in the 
valley failed. After several years the thought occurred, 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS TASTOR. 



101 



that he was under a sort of obUgation to set out an- 
other orchard for the benefit of his successor. He 
resolved at once to do it. While planting the trees 
with the assistance of his son, a young preacher came 
into the field who had lately received an invitation to 
become the minister of a neighboring congregation. 
The young man for a short time put his hand to the 
work, when Mr. Hallock, turning to his son, said, 

" Homan, when I am dead, do you give Mr. M'L 

some of these apples."* 

" Sept. 2, 1798. Feel that I have been inadver- 
tently imprudent, and am afraid that I have injured 
the feelings of some. 0 how much do ministers need 
to be ' wise as serpents and harmless as doves.' 0 
Lord, wilt thou forgive my imprudence, prevent its 
mischief, and humble me, and make me more watch- 
ful, and make me wise and prudent for the sake of 
Christ and his interest in the world." At another 
time he wTrites, " Feel as if I had been imprudent in 
saying perhaps exasperating things against the Deist. 
0 my God, I would wish to be faithful to thee, and 
always ready not only to suffer but to die for thy 
sake." 

Here it may be proper to mention that Mr. Hal- 
lock, in his habitual intercourse with his people, was 
a striking pattern of genuine ministerial prudence. 
In things indifferent he was ever ready to yield to 
the views of others with much meekness and gentle- 

* More than thirty years after, when this young clergyman's 
apple crop failed, this direction was iu a pleasing way literally 
fulfilled. 



102 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



ness, as knowing that " a soft answer turneth away 
wrath ;" but in cases which involved the interest of 
Zion, or the welfare of souls, he was bold and immov- 
able, " come life or come death." He knew nothing 
of that timidity which deserts its post at the approach 
of danger, and which too often conceals itself under 
the specious name of prudence. If he manifested 
more of the harmlessness of the dove than of the ser- 
pent's wisdom or the lion's boldness, yet in neither of 
these elements of character was he deficient. It was 
the combined influence of these qualities, ever mod- 
ifying each other in a manner peculiarly happy, which 
saved him alike from the meanness of cowardice and 
from rashness. 

On learning that any member of his church had 
been guilty of an offence, his practice was to go at 
once to the delinquent, and with great plainness and 
tenderness urge the duty of repentance. Often he 
was successful. In one instance he is said to have 
taken this course. A brother, who had been to talk 
with an offender in the church, informed Mr. Hallock 
of his ill-success, and asked if he should not make a 
second effort. " Stay," said the affectionate pastor, 
"and let me first go and see him." He went, and 
addressed the offender in nearly these words : " My 
dear brother, I have an unusual affection for you. I 
can scarce tell you how much I love you. I have 
been thinking about you of late night and day. 
My love to you has seemed stronger, within a short 
time, than ever before." The man burst into tears ; 
lie could let him proceed no further ; his heart 



FIRSI TWELVE TEARS PASTOR. 103 

melted ; he confessed his fault, and engaged to make 
requisite satisfaction to the church. 

In an interview with a parishioner unhappily 
poisoned with infidelity, and known to possess Paine's 
Age of Reason, Mr. Hallock became very earnest ; 
and in a determined solemn tone exhorted him, at 
parting, to go home and burn that pernicious book. 
Failing of success, he called upon him to remember, 
that his minister had been faithful to warn him not 
to keep in his house a book which blasphemed the 
Saviour of the world. 

On one occasion when he was present at a meet- 
ing of the school society, an open infidel was appointed 
a school-visitor. Mr. Hallock knew this infidel to be 
a man of learning and influence. He was aware 
that any interference on liis part would certainly give 
gi-eat offence to the man and his friends. But the 
lambs of his own dear flock were in peril. The cause 
of G-od was concerned. He dared not be silent. He 
felt constrained to take a bold stand, and risk con- 
sequences ; though, as in Paul's case, no man should 
stand with him. He rose, fearless as Daniel prayed, 
and pleaded the cause of Christ and of souls against 
infidelity, with an eloquence which delighted the 
friends of Christ, astonished all, and procured, through 
divine favor, a reversal of the improper appoint- 
ment. 

The good man's heart was once grieved and 
broken by the opening of a dancing-school in the 
principal village of his parish. It had long been with 
him a favorite neighborhood for religious conferences. 



104 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



He still continued his meetings there as usual. One 
evening he perceived several learners of the gay art 
in the conference-room, and remarked that, though 
painful to himself, yet he felt constrained to give a 
solemn admonition. After a proper introduction he 
said distinctly, that he feared that all who attended 
the dancing-school were in the hroad way to hell. 
In stating the matter afterwards to one of his aged 
deacons, he said, "I didn't know but they would 
kill me for it ; but then I thought, if they did, they 
could only kill the body." 

When his people had erected a house for public 
worship, there was a difference of opinion as to the 
sittings ; some were in favor of pews, others of slips. 
To settle the question, a meeting of the society was 
called. On the Sabbath preceding this meeting, Mr. 
Hallock, ever anxious to avert evil, related, at the 
close of service, substantially the following anec- 
dotes : 

"I was last week at C , and saw a poor sin- 
ner in great distress for his soul. He informed me 
that he received his first deep impressions under a 
particular sermon. After conversing with him as to 
his spiritual state, I told him I had a special reason 
for asking whether, when he heard that sermon, he 
was sitting in a slip or in a pew. '0 sir,' said he, 
' I cannot tell. My mind was so overwhelmed with 
what the preacher said, I paid no attention to other 
objects.' 

" I found another person in transports of joy. His 
tongue was loosed in the praises of Grod. He spoke 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS PASTOR. 105 

in rapture of the love of Christ. After other conver- 
sation, I made the same inquiry of him. He replied, 
with some impatience, 'I neither know nor care 
ahout that matter. It is enough for me, that God 
was pleased in his great mercy to appear there for 
my sinking soul.' " 

The people met in a spirit of conciliation, and 
reached a harmonious result. 



0* 



106 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



CHAPTER V. 

REVEALS AT THE BEGINNING OF THE PRESENT 
CENTURY. 

Near the close of the last century, commenced in 
New England what has been appropriately termed 
tlic era of revivals. Not that revivals of religion 
were till then unknown, for they had distinguished 
the ministry of Wliitefield and Wesley, Edwards and 
Tennant, and may he traced back to the memorable 
day of Pentecost, and to the earlier times of Ezra 
and Josiah ; but that they have since been more 
extensive, continuous, and powerful than before. 

At this period, so auspicious to Zion at large, very 
many churches in Cormecticut awoke from the deep 
sleep of years. The influence of the Holy Ghost was 
now, to a broad extent, marked with uncommon power. 
Mr. Hallock's people were not left without a large 
share in the glorious work. After a trial of his 
faith — he having labored and looked for refreshing 
rain, and received but a few scattering drops, vmtil 
ready to sink in despondency — to his unspeakable 
joy, at the end of twelve dark, long years, the win- 
dows of heaven were opened, not to desolate, but to 
make verdant the hills and valleys under his pastoral 
care, and to mature abundant fruit. An eye-witness 
states, that when, on entering a crowded and solemn 
evening meeting, the good man perceived the Lord to 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVAL. 107 

have come, in very deed, to dispel the gloom which 
had been so long thickening over his people, he could 
not suppress the swellings of his soul, but wept aloud. 

To this interesting point in his life and ministry 
we have now arrived, and we rejoice to be able to 
give a distinct view of this work as it existed in the 
mind of ]Mr. HallocK at the time, and was published 
by him in the Connecticut Evangelical Magazine. 

NARRATIVE 

OF A WORK OF GOD IN CANTON, CONNECTICUT, IN 
1798 AND 1799. 

" Gentlemex — Through the course of twelve te- 
dious years before tliis memorable period, the reUgion 
of Jesus gradually declined among us. The doctrines 
of Christ grew more and more unpopular ; family 
prayer, and all the duties of the gospel were less 
regarded ; ungodliness prevailed, and particularly, 
modern infidelity had made, and was making alarm- 
ing progress among us. Indeed it seemed to the eye 
of sense, that the Sabbath would be lost, and every 
appearance of religion vanish; yea, that our Zion 
must die without a helper, and that infidels would 
laugh at her dying groans. But the Grod of Zion, who 
can do every thing, was pleased to appear, and lift up 
the standard of the omnipotent Spirit against the 
enemy ; and to him be all the glory. 

'• The first appearance of the work was sudden 
and unexpected, some particulars of which are as 
follows: The second Sabbath in October, 1798, I 
exchanged with a brother in the ministry. On my 



108 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



return the next evening, I found a young person under 
deep religious impressions. ' She told me she was a 
poor sinner going down to hell ; and that her impres- 
sions began on the Sabbath in the forenoon, but in- 
creased in the afternoon. In the evening her concern 
was such that she could no longer keep it secret, 
though it had been her intention that no one should 
know it. The next evening, at a conference, there 
was an unusual solemnity, and many were in tears. 
The morning following, I found two other youth with 
the one first awakened, whose minds were likewise 
impressed. On the evening of this day, a sermon 
was preached by a neighboring minister. The meet- 
ing was uncommonly full, and the arrows of convic- 
tion reached some hearts. 

" A young man told me he had, the day before, 
drawn a number of books, at the library meeting, on 
profane history, and was determined to spend the fol- 
lowing winter in reading them and the like books ; 
but hearing of this meeting, he came thoughtlessly 
to it, and soon found he had a greater work to do than 
to read profane histories. He saw he was an undone 
sinner, and must become reconciled to God, or perish. 
His distress arose to that degree, that he seemed 
almost in despair ; he was at length brought into 
God's marvellous light. 

" After this meeting^ about fourteen children and 
youth were found, whose minds appeared to be im- 

* The preacher was the Rev. Timothy M. Cooley of Gran- 
ville, Mass. The young -w-oman was a daughter of a man who 
had no confidence in revivals. 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVAL 



109 



pressed. One of tliem said, ' I have been over a 
precipice all my days, and never saw it until now.' 
The next day it was affecting to see, by the rising of 
the sun, awakened youth coming to my house to know 
what they should do to be saved. In the latter part 
of the day, I visited a mimber of females in another 
neighborhood, where these things had been hardly 
known, and found a remarkable attention. The tear 
often flowed on the first mentioning of eternal things. 
In the evening there were found in the neighborhood 
where the work began, at a house where a meeting 
had been appointed, about thirty children and youth, 
who appeared serious, and some under deep concern. 
It was indeed an affecting scene, and one particular 
fact will not soon be forgotten. 

" A young woman deeply impressed, said to an- 
other in the same situation, ' Do not weep so ; what 
good can it do? God does not regard such selfish 
tears as you and I shed.' Upon this, the one spoken 
to took the other by the hand, and said, ' 0, you are 
trying to quiet me, but you tremble yourself ;' which 
was truly the case. 

" On the ensuing Sabbath, the work was visible 
in the house of God ; and the conference in the even- 
ing was full and very serious. One week before, 
matters never appeared darker ; but now the marvel- 
lous goings of the victorious Lamb were seen and felt. 
0 how little we know what is in the secret counsels 
of Immanuel ! The following Monday, when a ser- 
mon was preached by a neighboring minister, almost 
the whole parish came to meeting, and the work ap- 



110 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



peared to be going on. And it was a day of trembling, 
even among professors as well as others. It often 
brought these words to mmd, ' But who may abide 
the day of his coming ?' 

" Being called one evening to visit a neighbor in 
distress of mind, I received from her the followmg 
information. 'I was sober and thoughtful when a 
child, used to attend secret prayer, thought I loved 
good people, and finally concluded that I was a Chris- 
tian. But hearing that the work of God had begun 
arnon^ vs, I thought it became me to examine on 
what foundation I stood ; when I found I was build- 
ing on the sand. On Monday night my hope perish- 
ed!' I do not know that I ever saw any one in bodily 
distress manifest greater anguish. But before morn- 
ing she found relief, by havmg, as she hoped, her will 
bowed and swallowed up in the will of God. She 
told me the next morning, ' I think I can now take 
care of my family, and do all for the glory of God.' 

" Before the week was out, another came in an- 
guish of spirit, who also had been resting on a hope 
of his good estate, but now saw himself to be in the 
gall of bitterness. He expressed himself after this 
sort : ' I see my heart so opposed to God, that I could 
not be happy were I admitted to heaven ; and I should 
choose rather to be in hell than to dwell with God.' 
Indeed this was an hour when all seemed to be sha- 
ken. But while some found no rest short of entirely 
new hopes, others were confirmed. 

" The next week on Wednesday, November 1, 
another sermon was pre^-'shed by a neighboring broth- 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVAL. HI 

er, when there were but ahout half as many present 
as the week before > and we were gi-eatly afraid that 
all was about to decline and die. This was indeed a 
trying hour. No fond parent exer watched the fever 
of his child at the hour of its crisis, when the period 
of life or death had arrived, with more anxious, inter- 
ested feelings, than numbers of God's praying friends 
watched the work of the Spirit at this critical mo- 
ment. Every symptom of its being fixed and increas- 
ing was as life from the dead, but the thoughts of 
its going off were more dreadful than the grave. It 
was not long, however, before it appeared that Grod 
had in very deed come to carry on his work among 
us ; and the hearts of Zion's friends were elated with 
fresh hopes. Those whose minds were arrested, were, 
for the most part, increasingly impressed ; there were 
also instances of new awakenings. The solemnity of 
this season cannot be communicated. It is known 
only by experience. 

" A brother in the ministry, among whose people 
the same work had begun, told me that he had seen 
twenty in a room, the most of them mortally sick and 
at the point of death ; but that the scene was not so 
impressive, as to see a house filled with souls in dis- 
tress, sensible of impending and eternal wrath, and 
their feet sinking in that horrible pit whence there is 
no redemption. Nature does not afford an adequate 
comparison to set forth these scenes. They exceed 
the things of time, as the soul exceeds the body, or 
eternity exceeds time. * A wounded spirit wha can 
boar?' The appearance was like an execution-day. 



JJ2 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

An awful silence reigned, unless when it was broken 
by the cry, ' What shall I do to be saved ?' But it 
was not long before, as we hope, one and another 
•\v-ere brought to repentance and faith, and into the 
enjoyment of the pardon and comfort of the gospel. 
And to behold poor sinners who were but yesterday 
on the brink of destruction and wholly unreconciled 
to God, now brought to submit to him, and to hear 
them sing the new song, entu-ely surpassed all the 
victories of the most famous kings and generals of our 
world. 

" Here I would also mention, that the things which 
took hold of the mind were plain gospel truths, with 
which the people had long been acquainted, and which 
they had heard with indifference. I heard one say, 
< I used to think I believed there was a Grod, but I 
find I never did till of late.' The work was by no 
means noisy, but rational, deep, and still. The rational 
faculties of the soul were touched, and poor smners 
began to see that every thing in the Bible is true ; 
that God is in earnest in his precepts and tin-eaten- 
ings ; that they were wholly sinful, and in the hand 
of a sovereign God. In these things, they seemed to 
themselves and others like those awaked out of sleep. 
The heart would oppose, but reason and conscience 
were convicted, and the mouth was shut. The fost 
that you would know of persons under awakenings 
was, that they would be at all the religious meetings, 
and manifest a silent and eager attention. What are 
called the hard things, such as the doctrines of total 
depravity, divine purposes, and the like, were popular. 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVAL. 



113 



Those who were once angry whenever these things 
were preached, would cease to object when thoroughly 
convicted, and rather smite on their breasts. 

" There was a man in the place fifty years of age, 
who had neglected public worship, and had always 
been opposed to the things of the gospel, and who for 
some time was at all the meetmgs. On a certain 
evening, the first part of January, I made him a visit 
with a view to converse with him on the state of his 
mind ; when he gave me, for substance, the following 
account : 

" ' My mind began to be impressed as far back as 



September, bvit I kept it to myself. Several tilings 
seemed to conspire to increase my attention. Some- 
time in the fall, I thought in my sleep that my daugh- 
ter, who is dead, came into the room. I knew that 
she was dead, and said to her, what have you come 
for ? She replied, ' Father, I am come to tell you not 
to be damned.' Though this was but a dream, it 
tended to increase my concern. A little after this, 
these particular words, ' Prepare to meet thy G-od, O 
Israel,' sovmded daily in my ears. But last night 
my mind was so impressed that I could not sleep. I 
arose about midnight, and called up my family. We 
prayed. After which I returned to my bed again, but 
was equally distressed as before. When the day ap- 
proached I arose, and taking my garments to put on, 
it appeared to me that they were God's, and I trem- 
bled to think how I had used God's property. All 
tliat I turned my eyes on looked like God's things. 
When I opened the door and beheld the world and 



114 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



tlie rising morning, the appearance was the same. 
And the view of the terrible majesty of that God, 
whose were the heavens and the earth and all things, 
so overwhelmed my mind that it took away my bodily 
strength. I turned about and fell on my knees, for I 
had not strength to stand. I thought of poor infidels, 
that though they made light of these things, yet, if 
the strongest of them were to see the dreadful majesty 
of G-od which was now discovered to my mind, they 
would not be able to stand. After I returned into 
the house, I directly had a view of the preciousness 
of Jesus. And I could pour out my soul for Christ's 
dear ministers. Then my mind turned on the cause 
of Zion. I longed to have it built up, and the present 
work go on. I thought of the poor heathen, and said, 

0 that the angel with the everlasting gospel might fly 
through the earth. I could love my enemies, and 
pray for their conversion ; and confess to every one 
whom I had injured.' 

"This is for substance what he told me at my 
entering the house, without being asked a question. 
After a short pause he added, ' I wish you would pray 
for me, that I may be converted, if God can convert 
me consistently with his pleasure and glory ; if not, 

1 do not desire it. I wish also you would pray for 
my poor children, that God would convert them ; not 
that they are any better, or their souls worth any more 
than my neighbors'.' The daylight was now gone, and 
we went to a meeting. The 102d Psalm was sung : 

' Let Zion and her sons rejoice,' etc. 
"After suaging, he expressed himself nearly in these 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVAL. 



115 



words, ' 0 what sweet singing ! I never heard such 
singing before. This is the first Jiappy meeting I 
ever saw. I never knew what love was before. 1 
used to think I had love, but I find I never had.' This 
was Friday evening. The following Sabbath the 
Lord's supper was administered. He tarried as a 
spectator, and appeared to be fiUed with comfort and 
joy. In the intermission he observed, ' This is the first 
sermon I ever heard.' And he remarked, how glori- 
ously it looked to see Zion sitting at the table of Je- 
sus, and ^praying unto and praising her King. As he 
spoke m/ach. of his precious Jesus, I inquired, ' AYhy 
do you thus admire him ?' He answered, ' Because 
he luved his Father's law.' The question was then 
put, ' Do you think that Jesus is a friend to the divine 
law and government V His answer was, ' Yes, I be- 
lieve that Jesus has such regard for the law, that rather 
than see it made void, he would send ten worlds to 
hell.' The question then was, ' Do you love him for 
tliis ?' He rephed, ' I do,' But all this while, he did 
not speak of himself as though he thought he was 
converted. 

"The work was now evidently on the increase. 
We had lectures every week, mostly preached by 
neighboring ministers. And here I would mention, 
that the awakenings in other places, the proclamation 
from the state General Assembly respecting the Sab- 
bath and the regulations in schools, all seemxed to be 
attended with good efl"ects. Conferences were set up 
in every part of the parish. All religious meetings 
became full and solemn ; and every week, and some- 



116 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

times every day, would bring the animating news of 
some one hopefully converted. Indeed, it seemed as 
if it would be impossible for any thing to stand before 
the power of God, and that every one must bow. 
However, dreadful experience proves that natural men 
are indeed morally dead. They are harder than 
rooks, deafer than adders, and more stubborn than 
the sturdiest oaks. That which wiU break down the 
rocks, and tear up the obstinate oaks, will have no 
eflect on the carnal mind. As means did not begin 
this work of themselves, so neither did they support, 
or carry it on. But as this was the work of the om- 
nipotent Spirit, so the effects produced proclaimed its 
sovereign, divine Author. One was taken here, and 
another there ; and often those whom we should the 
least expect. I have seen some who were at this time 
under the most awakening judgments, as thought- 
less as ever; and others in full health and prosperity, 
pricked in the heart. 

" A neighbor, in the course of the winter, had a dan- 
gerous epidemical disease— which was now, in some 
instances, very mortal among us— come suddenly into 
his family in a threatening manner. Yet neither this 
terrible sickness, nor the awakening of others, could 
arouse his attention. But after the family were all 
recovered, this neighbor, as he told me, arose one 
morning as secure as ever ; but on gomg to his barn 
as usual, the thought struck his mind that he could 
not do the least thing without God. He had lived a 
careless, vain life, and made light of the awakening. 
He told me he thought it was too silly a thing for 



IsARRATIVE OF REVIVAL. 1!7 

rational creatures to attend to. He used to say, if a 
man labored hard, lie ought to live well. Hence he 
felt no obligation, nor saw any cause even for asking 
a blessing, or returning thanks. But now, when the 
thought struck liis inind that he had no independent 
power to do the least thing without G-od, it pricked 
him to the heart. This mfinite God appeared the 
great and first cause of every thing, and all centered 
in Him. He was at fir.st determined to suppress and 
conceal his convictions, but soon found it impossible. 
And after about two weeks, he was hopefully brought 
savingly to Submit to Grod. 

" Anothbr person told me thus : ' I was returning, 
on such an evening, from a conference, where I had 
seen numbers under concern, and heard others speak 
of the love of Grod, and of their hope in Clurist. But 
nothing took hold of my mind until, as I was on my 
way home, these words sounded in my ears : ' Is it 
not'hmg to you, all ye that pass by ?' These words 
were fixed in his mind, and he applied them thus : ' Is 
it nothing to me, that my neigl\bors, and those of my 
age, are ti-oubled about their sins, and some hopefully 
converted to G-od ? Have I not sins to be troubled 
about, as well as they ? And do not I also need con- 
version?' I saw this person about a fortnight after 
his mind was thus taken hold of, and his convictions 
were much increased ; when he observed thus : 'I find 
that all I do is selfish. If I pray or read, it is all 
selfish. And I feel myself like one hung upon tenter- 
hooks : his situation is very distressing, but the more 
he struggles, the deeper the painful hooks penetrate.' 



118 JEREMIAH HALLOCK.. 

This was on Saturday, and it was indeed a serious, 
trying hour. But the next day this man hopes that 
he received a new heart from the ascended Saviour. 
I have heard him say, that a new heart, or deUver- 
ance from sin, appeared, he thought, more precious 
than deliverance from hell. 

" I have observed that this spiritual shower was 
sovereign in its operation. There was a man, between 
forty and fifty, living in a remote part of the parish, 
who was a Gallic as to religion, and entirely absorbed 
in the things of the world. He had attended no con- 
ferences, and was seldom at meetings on the Sabbath. 
But one evening having gone to bed as thoughtless as 
ever, he awoke about midnight, when these words 
came forcibly to his mind : ' 0 that they were wise, 
that they understood tliis, that they would consider 
their latter end.' Here was the beginning of his 
conviction, which lasted three or four weeks. I have 
heard him say, that he found himself naked, a sinner, 
and without excuse. And before he found Jesus, he 
was brought to see that God was just, if he sent him 
to hell. 

" I said in the beginning of this letter, that before 
the awakening, modern Infidelity had made, and was 
making alarming progi-ess among us. Some who had 
been infidels for years, are among the hopeful converts, 
and are laboring to build up the faith they once sought 
to destroy. But I leave further particulars for an- 
other opportunity. 

" From your sincere friend, 

" JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

"West Simsburt. July 1(5, 1800." 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVAL. l!9 
THE NARRATIVE CONTINUED. 

" G-ENTLEMEN — I mentioned at the close of my first 
letter, that some who were Infidels are now among 
the hopeful converts. I heard one of them say, with 
tremhUng hps, ' I am the wretch who have murdered 
Christ : I have talked a great deal against the gospel ; 
but there was always something in my breast which 
said it was true, even while I was talking against it.' 
This poor man was almost in despair. But after a 
long season of distress, he found comfort. 

" From another who had been opposing the divin- 
ity of the Scriptures, I );gt5eived the following letter : 

" ' Rev. Sir — I frequently hear you mention from 
your pulpit, that there are numbers in this place who 
are opposers to Christianity. Doubtless you allude to 
me for one. If this be the case, you have good reason 
to make the allusion ; for I frankly confess, not with- 
out some sorrow, I have given great reason for such 
suspicion. It is nearly ten years since I have enter- 
tained doubts respecting the truth of revelation, not 
without a mixture of necessary belief in it, as the only 
scheme to brmg glory to &od and happiness to man. 
Could I convince you of my sincerity, I doubt not you 
would be glad when I tell you I renounce my doubts ; 
and I pray God I may never more give the world rea- 
son to call me an opposer to religion. I have often 
come to a partial resolution to make you such a con- 
fession of my errors. The first time I seriously en- 
gaged with myself to do it, was on hearing you read 
some letters which you brought from G-oshen, and 
your remarks upon them. I then reflected whether 



120 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

it belonged to me to animadvert on the ways of God's 
providence, and the authenticity of that which in 
itself looked like truth. But afterwards doubts, and 
business, and reluctance to part with my favorite 
schemes, intervened, or you would have had this letter 
before this time. 

" ' The cause of my writing this letter now is not 
the fact that religion is becoming fashionable in this 
place, or any extraordinary conviction on my mind 
'more than I have had for some time at short inter- 
vals betwixt my doubts ; which conviction, I think, is 
nothing more than that it is my duty to serve God in 
his appointed ways. I pray Grod he would guard me 
against doubts hereafter. I beg you to be assured of 
my esteem.' 

"Here was the beginning of conviction on this 
person's mind. It on the whole appeared gradually 
to increase about eight months, until it became pow- 
erful, and he saw himself wholly depraved, and in the 
hands of a sovereign Grod ; when, as he hopes, he was 
made to partake of the joys of the penitent prodigal. I 
have said the work was not noisy, but rational ; and 
one end I have in transcribing this letter is to give a 
specimen of it. 

" There is another instance among us, of one who 
says he had had no trouble for seven years past about 
futurity, concluding that death was the total end of 
man, as much as of the beasts. At first he made an 
open soofF and ridicule of the awakening. But at 
length the arrows of truth reached his conscience. 
His conviction continued and increased for some 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVAL. V.ll 

weeks until, as we trust, he became reconciled to God 
through Christ. He now appears to love the doctrines 
of the cross. Formerly he had a taste for books, and 
read much in novels, profane history, and the like ; 
but now he calls them trash, and makes the Bible his 
study, and seems to want words to set forth how much 
it exceeds all other books. 

" But to proceed to an instance or two more. I 
was at a conference in which the conversation turned 
on the doctrines of the divine purposes ; which subUme 
doctrines were not attended to now for disputation, 
but with fear and solemnity. They did not appear to 
be dry, uninteresting, disputable points, but divine 
realities, calculated to convict the sinner and refresh 
the saint. 

" At the close of the meeting, a certain man asked 
a question to tliis import : ' Does a person who is truly 
seeking after God, feel afraid that any of the di\Tne 
purposes will cut him off from salvation ?' This ques- 
tion was answered in the negative ; that the divine 
purposes were no more against prayer than an atten- 
tion to common matters, and that the only reason 
why men brought them against prayer, was their hav- 
ing no heart to pray. The person who put the ques- 
tion answered, ' I am satisfied.' But knowing him 
to have long been an opposer of these things, many 
marvelled at his answer. 

" On the next Sabbath, this man made a public 
declaration in wTiting to the congregation, which ac- 
counts for his appearing to be satisfied with those very 
doctrines which used to give him so much offence. 

Ilallock. 6 



122 



JEREMIAH HALLOGK 



In this public confession he acknowledges his pu^t 
infidelity, his opposition to Grod and his religion, to i 
the work of the Spirit, to the ministers of the gospel, 
and all who profess to belong to Christ ; and that God 
had showed him his sinful, wretched, helpless state, 
and given him to hunger for the bread of life, and to 
believe, as he trusted, in Jesus.* The writmg which 
he publicly exhibited is in these words : 

"'It having pleased the kind Sovereign of the 
universe to open my eyes, in some measure, to see 
the depravity and poison of my own heart — to see my 
desperate situation wliile opposed to God, and to the 
way of salvation by a kind Saviour — to see my total 
inability to rectify my own heart, or recover myself 
from the fatal disease of sin and death — ^to see, that if 
I am ever relieved from the plague of a proud and 
vitiated heart, and made to rejoice in the salvation of 
Christ, it must be wholly owing to the forfeited mer- 
cy and unmerited grace of a compassionate Redeem- 

* This was an accomplished gentleman, of fine taints, for- 
merly an oflicer in the army, whose kno^vn hostility to religion 
and commanding presence, says an cye-wilncss, almost awak- 
ened alarm lest he had come to interrupt the meeting. Return- 
ing from the meeting,, he reached home alter his family had 
retired, and immediately took his pen to write. His wife fear- 
ing something injurious, said to him that he seemed excited, 
and suggested that he should defer writing till morning. He 
replied, that perhaps he should never write better than at that 
moment, and proceeded to draft the subjoined letter, which he 
handed to Mr. Ilalloek tlic next morning 1o be read to the con- 
gregation on the ensuing day, should he think it suitable. He 
became a devoted servant of Christ, and is the Deacon Taylor 
to whom Mr. Hallock's letters of May, 1802, and May and No- 
vember, 1826, were addressed. 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVAL. l'^-^ 

er : — with these tilings fastened on my mind, and tn 
abide, I hope, as long as I live, I would wish to make 
some communications to this religious assembly, 
which I hope may be kindly received by them. 

" ' For several years past my mind and aflections 
have been much alienated from the new and living 
way of salvation by Jesus Clirist. I have fallen into 
the most uncomfortable doubts of his divinity, have 
doubted the authenticity of his blessed word, have 
embraced irreligious and hateful errors^Jiave turned 
my back on the blessed Redeemer, while his friendly 
hand has reached out a pardon to me, and urged me 
to take it, even while his head was filled with the 
dew, and his locks with the drops of the night. I 
have run away from the blessed Grod, while his ten- 
der mercies were all around me, and with a sweet 
voice saying unto me, ' Turn ye, turn ye, for why will 
yc die V I have Uved in dreadful security, and stop- 
ped my ears to the most melting invitations of the 
Saviour of the world. I have spent much time in 
reading books which were calculated to shake my 
faith in that holy word, which, had I sincerely believ- 
ed it, would have given me great comfort in God, and 
served in a great measure to smooth the rugged path 
of life. I have been guilty of many errors in senti- 
ment and in practice. I have slighted the blessed 
religion of Jesus Christ, the ministers of the gospel, 
and professors of religion. I have spoken Ughtly of 
the rehgious attention in this place, and have neg- 
lected to attend religious conferences, which by God's 
Holy Spirit are undoubtedly instrumental of true con- 



121 



JF.RKMIAH HALLOCK. 



\'iction. I have lieen given to many open immorali- 
ties, and have not Ijccu circumspect in my behavior, 
to set a good example before those who took know- 
ledge of me. 

" ' And now in every instance wherein I have 
oflended my heavenly Father, and mankind, I wouM 
freely acknowledge my great sin and numerous trans- 
gressions, imploring the forgiveness of that almighty 
Being, against whom I have unreasonably, and with- 
out the least provocation, so often transgressed, and 
who only can bestow pardon and eternal life on the 
chief of sinners. It appears one of the most distin- 
guished mercies, that when people have run into err(jr, 
and marred themselves by sin, there is a Being to 
whom they may apply with broken hearts, and who 
will blot out their sin with his own blood, and give 
them to eat of the bread of life. ' He that covereth 
his sms shall not prosper, but he that confesseth and 
forsaketh them shall find mercy.' Certamly there 
can be no exchange so happy as this, to part with a 
proud and wicked heart for a humble and sanctified 
one — ^to resign our enmity for love, and selfishness for 
benevolence, our filthy self-righteousness for the spot- 
less robes of a glorious Mediator, and our love of sin 
and death for holiness and eternal life. 

" ' With the foregoing considerations on my mind, 
I will implore a prayer-hearing Grod to lend a listen- 
ing ear to my requests, which I pray God to help me 
make with sincerity. My first desire is for a rectified 
heart, to have sin slam, and a principle of true holi- 
ness and love to Grod im])lanted in its stead, and a 



^lARRATlVE OF REVIVAL. 1*J5 

heart of constant repentance and unfeigned sorrow for 
sin. I pray God to grant me, all my life, a deep sense 
of my own unworthiness and ill desert ; I pray to 
realize it as long as I live, to lie in tlie very dust, at 
the feet of the great Sovereign of the universe; to 
extol, magnify, and glorify the riches of his moral rec- 
titude, his glorious attributes, his infinite perfections ; 
to entreat of him for Christ's sake to give me his bless- 
ed Spirit, to lead and guide me into all truth, to make 
me steadfast in a life of religion, to save me from a 
life of unbelief, frohv backsliding,, and apostasy, and 
finally to engage me to resolve, in the strength of the 
great Redeemer, to take his yoke on me which is 
easy, and his burden which is light, and learn of him 
who is meek and lowly, that I may find rest to my 
soul. 

'"I hope that God, by his great mercy and rich 
grace, has given me to hunger for the bread of life 
and thirst for living water — that he has given me to 
see that Christ is the way, the truth, and the life, and 
that there is salvation in no other way. And now, be- 
fore God and this solemn assembly, and I hope with 
a broken and sincere heart, I renounce the heart-tor- 
menting and heaven-provoking principles of Infidelity, 
so dishonoring to God, and pernicious to mankind. 

" ' But before I close this writing, I must drop a 
few hints to those with whom I have associated in 
Infidelity for some years past. 

" ' You will not view me as reflecting on you, for 
I sincerely pity you. I tremble for the fatal mistake 
you are making. Is deism a good scheme to embrace 



12G JEREMIAH HALLOCK:. ^ 

in death? Is there comfort in it, in view of a happy 
immortality ? Will it make a dying hour serene and 
joyful ? Can you expect to find a smiling God out 
of Christ ? C an you be satisfied that infidel principl es 
are calculated to humble the proud and rebellious 
hearts of mankind , and to exalt the Most High ? Will 
you not be persuaded to abandon a scheme which 
excludes prayer, and shuts out all heavenly contem- 
plation ? Can you bring up your dear children and 
never pray to Grod for them, nor mention a word con- 
corning religion and the great God, for fear then- 
minds may be prepossessed in favor of a scheme, of 
which, if they had come to riper years, they would 
discover the fraud, and disbelieve it for themselves? j 
When your offspring come before you with wishful 
countenances j asking for bread, do you never think 
about the bread of life ? that their souls are famish- 
ing while their bodies are nourished ? 

'"I will mention but one more consideration, ana 
that a dreadful and awful one. You must meet your 
beloved children before God's bar, and there answer 
for your conduct towards them. Should they, in con- 
sequence of your total neglect to mstruct them in 
religion, be doomed to a dreadful hell, will they not 
shriek out these heart-rending words with horrid em- 
phasis, ' Father, you never told me of this dreadful 
place ; you never told me of a glorious escape, a glo- 
rious relief by Jesus Christ; and must I lie in this 
dismal, burning lake? 0, unhappy, that you was 
ever made the instrument of my existence !' Now, 
will you come to the loving Saviour, and bring your 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVAL 



127 



w hole families with you ? There is bread enough in 
our Father's house. I pray God that he will, in great 
mercy, be pleased to open your eyes, to discern won- 
drous things in that law which you have rejected, and 
to see ineffable beauty in that Saviour whom you have 
disowned.' 

" The above communication was read. Lord's day, 
April 14, 1799, to a numerous audience. Many of 
them were much affected, and most of the infidels 
alluded to were present. 

" The author of the above communication says, 
that being at meeting on the Lord's day, a number 
of months after the revival had begun, on hearing the 
names of ten persons called, who were propounded to 
join the church, his mind was struck with the cutting 
tliought that an eternal separation was about to take 
■place between people of the same congregation, neigh- 
borhood, and family. And as there was room enough, 
he could see nothing to hinder him from coming to 
Christ too but his own unwillingness. These were 
about the first of his impressions. In the evening, he 
thought he would go to the conference ; but as he had 
never been to any of the conferences, and had even 
spoken against them, he felt many objections. Yet 
he concluded to go at all events. I have heard him 
say, the first thing that struck his mind as he entered 
the house, was the decorum and order of the meeting. 
His convictions continued and increased for a number 
of weeks, until he was brought, as he confesses, to 
sec his desperate situation, while opposed to God and 



128 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



the way of salvation by a kind Saviour ; and to see 
that Clirist is the way, the truth, and the life, and 
cordially, as he hopes, to accept of him. 

" Thus I have given some account of the work of 
G-od among us, and mentioned some particular in- 
stances in which the nature of the work appears. As 
to the extent of it, there were but few in the parish 
who were not, in a measure, solemn. Almost the 
v/hole conversation, when people were together in in- 
termissions on the Sabbath, and on week-days, was 
on religion. Even companies on training-days were 
solemn. Balls were suppressed, and religion was the 
theme at weddings and at all times. The number 
hopefully born into the kingdom of Grod is between 
sixty and seventy. The number who have made a 
public profession is fifty-nine, and it is expected that 
others will come forward and subscribe with their 
hands unto the Lord. 

"I would here notice, that though many have 
been taken who were to human view the farthest 
from the kingdom of Grod, yet 1 think that G-od in the 
midst of his sovereign, holy ways, must appear, even 
in this work, to every attentive soul, to be a prayer- 
hearing G-od. In the middle of the place there was, 
during all the past days of inattention, a praying con- 
ference kept up once a week by a few serious people 
And it was here in this conference that the work be- 
gun, and here it has been the greatest. Surely he is 
a God who hears the prayers of the destitute. 

"I shall close by giving a brief account of one 
who left the world in the height of the attention 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVAL 



]29 



among us. She died May 15, 1799, in the sixteenth 
year of her age. She was a promising youth, of bright 
natural abiUties, and of a respectable religious family. 
Her mind began to be impressed the latter part of the 
year before she died. As she had been taught the 
ways of the Lord in the family, from her childhood, 
she appeared early in the awakening to have a good 
doctrinal knowledge of the way of salvation. But 
she complained of a hard heart, and a stubborn will. 
She was at all meetings and conferences which she 
could conveniently attend, but found no relief. In 
the latter part of February she began to be unwell, 
and was soon confined. Her disease quickly became 
very threatening ; and within a few months she was 
given over by her physician. But though her bodily 
disease was distressing, yet it was in a great measure 
overbalanced by her spiritual troubles. Her complaint 
was chiefly of her selfish heart, which she felt to be at 
enmity with God ; and the prospect of going out of 
the world with arms in her hands against the Most 
High, was horrible beyond conception. She would 
often in great anguish cry out, ' I must die, and I 
cannot die so.' 

" Such a scene, especially in a day of awakening, 
was very affecting, and it excited the pity and pray- 
ers of many. A number of young people who had 
been under concern, and had obtained reUef, went one 
evening to see her, about a fortnight before she died, 
and conversed and prayed with her. As they were 
going away at a late hour, she begged their prayers. 
And her request and situation were so affecting tc 
G' 



130 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



them, that they, as I am told, after leaving her, re- 
tired, and spent an hour of the silent midnight in 
carrying the case of their distressed friend to God. 
And we have reason to hope, that on this very night 
she received from the ascended Saviour the gift of a 
new heart. There appeared to be a great alteration 
in her mind from this time ; though she had many 
doubts and fears until the morning before her death, 
when every cloud seemed to be dispelled. And I can 
say, I never saw so much triumph and victory in the 
arms of death before. She expired not far from tweh c 
on Saturday. Her joys had not the appearance of a 
vain confidence, but of a real submission to G-od, in 
view of his glory in the face of Jesus Christ. She pos- 
sessed her reason perfectly. There was a holy fear 
mixed with her joy ; and though she said many things 
while she lay dying, yet it was with as much appa- 
rent care as a considerate witness would speak in a 
case of life and death. 

" I shall here mention a few of her dying words, 
which were wiitten at the time of her death. I 
heard most of them myself, and wrote as she spoke 
them. Not far from sunrise she expressed herself 
thus : ' I have lived through a tedious night, and am 
brought to see the light of a glorious morning.' Not 
long after, she expressed herself in these words : ' Now 
I am going to Jesus to be disposed of just as he pleases. 
I am not afraid to be dead— I am not afraid to die.' 
The house was soon filled with the neighbors, and her 
young friends. But though death had evidently seiz- 
ed on her mortal body, immortal glory seemed to 



I^ARRATIVE OF REVIVAL 



131 



bloom in her soul ; and she knew and kindly received 
all who came to see her, and spoke discreetly and suit- 
ably to them. She looked on one of her mates antl said, 
' Now you see my heartstrings break.' On one's asking 
her if she might not be deceived, it engaged her serious 
attention, when she replied, ' Why, I know Jesus will 
take me : if he docs not, he will do me no injustice.' As 
she drew nigh her exit, she rattled in her throat. Being 
asked if she wished for drink, her reply was, ' Ko, it is 
notliing but the pangs of death.' On seeing her strug- 
gles, one of the spectators said, it is hard to die. She 
answered, ' It is hard, you may depend.' She calmly 
looked on her dying fingers, spoke of her grave and fu- 
neral, and bade me in her name tell her young friends 
and others at her funeral, to learn to die, and that she 
bade them farewell. In speaking of these things, she 
was as rational, calm, and deliberate as a kind parent 
on going a journey would be in giving directions to his 
family. About three minutes before she died, with a 
distinct and audible voice, she called two young people, 
who then came in, by name, saying, ' Fare you well ; 
I have almost got through this troublesome world.' 
She seemed to die with a lustre in her eyes, and a glow 
in her countenance. It was a wonderful scene of 
death and triumph. I sat before her, and looking her 
in the face, my heart naturally cried, 
' Hosanna to the Priucc of life, 

Who clothed himself in clay, 
Entered the iron gates of death, 

And tore the bars away.' 
I blessed that work wliieh issued in such a victory 
over the king of terrors, and in such a lively hope of 



132 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



immortality, and could not but bless those converted 
to Christ, and congratulate them in their happy pros- 
pects in death. 

" These things were confounding even to infidels, 
and numbers who had thought lightly of the work, 
were now ready to smite their breasts and say, truly 
it is of God. I might enlarge, but the time would 
fail. I have endeavored to state simple facts accord- 
ing to the best judgment of a fallible creature, with a 
mixture of joy and fear. 

" When I find Peter, an apostle, deceived in Simon 
Magus, and hear him when speaking of the faith of Sil- 
vanus. using the cautious language, ' A faithful broth- 
er as I suppose,'' it makes me tremble for fear how we 
shall hold out. We cannot tell what will be ou the 
morrow, and man is ignorant of the heart. Hence my 
desire is, that all whom I have alluded to in the above 
narration, will remember that this is not an hour of 
boasting, but of putting on the harness, and that it stiU 
remains to be proved by their fruits, whether they have 
true religion or not. On the other hand, there is joy and 
hope in God, and I desire to bo thankful to him, that he 
hath allowed me to stand and behold his glorious work ; 
though I must confess that I never felt so useless since 
I entered the ministry. God hath wrought, and to his 
name be all the glory. And may he strengthen his own 
work, and more abundantly increase it, until all that is 
shall, as it were, be absorbed in greater glory. 
" From your real friend, 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 
"West Simsbury, Aug. 18, 1800," 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVALS. 133 

The expectation of Mr. Hallock that more would 
unite with God's visible people, than had come for- 
ward at the date of this narrative, was not disap- 
pointed. In a printed sermon which he preached at 
the dedication of his new meetmg-house, he says, 
" Between seventy and eighty made a public profession, 
who were considered as the fruits of this awakening." 

Of the extent of his labors in this memorable 
season, as well in neighboring congregations as his 
own, the following extracts from liis journal are fair 
specimens : 

" Feb. 19, 1799, Lord's day. The assembly seri- 
ous and attentive — the conference tliis evening unu- 
sually full, and a number under deep impressions. 
Had several meetings the past week : Monday, at 

the widow R 's ; Tuesday evening, at Mr. A. 

C 's ; Wednesday, at the meeting-house ; in the 

evening, at the school-house ; Thursday, at Mr. Z. 

B 's ; Friday evening, at Mr. E . B 's ; and ] 

trust the attention is on the increase here and in 
other places. Blessed be the Lord for ever and ever. 

" March 25, Monday. Preached for brother Haw- 
ley, Northington, and attended a conference with him 
in the evening. The Lord is evidently here. 

" Tuesday. Preached for brother G-riffin, New 
Hartford. God is doing wonders here. 

" "Wednesday. A very rainy day. Rev. Mr. Gil- 
lett and Rev. Mr. GrifEn came home with me. Brotlicr 
Gillett preached in the afternoon, brother Griffin in 
the evening. The meetings were solemn, and I trust 
profitable. 



131 ^JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

" July 1, Monday. To-day returned home from 
my tour with brother Gillett. Last week on Monday, 
rode to North Canaan and preached at two o'cloc'. 
when we rode to South Canaan and preached tv 
sermons at four. Tuesday we rode to Sahshury. H( 

Mr. W , a candidate, preached. Then brotL 

Gillett preached concerning the taking of Jericli. 
then I preached from Acts 14:27, 'And when th; y 
were come, and had gathered the church together, 
they rehearsed all that God had done with them.' 
Wednesday, rode again to South Canaan, and I 
preached at ten from the history of the four lepers. 
The people were waituig for us and we had a solemn 
meeting — many wept^ — one was thought to be con- 
verted last Monday evening, and the work appears 
to be flourishing here. Rode in the afternoon and 
preached at Cornwall at four o'clock. Here the peo- 
ple were also waiting for us, and we had a full and 

serious meeting. Rev. Mr. H was preaching 

when we arrived. Then I preached, and Mr. Grillett 
followed with a pathetic exhortation. Talked with 
fi-eedom till about eleven o'clock. Surely God is at 
work in this place. On Thursday we rode to Kent ; 
I preached the first sermon from Jer. 40 : 16, last 
clause. A cloud came ovei; me, and I had but little 
freedom in prayer or preaching ; but brother Gillett 
preached the second sermon with freedom. Had a 
conference in the evening — was enabled to speak with 
freedom. Friday, visited several families ; had help 
in conversation and prayer, and the conferences, I 
trust, were edifying. About r.oon set out for War- 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVALS. 135 

reii — we stopped on the mountain and prayed. I 
preached the first sermon at "Warren from Acts 2 : 37, 
38. Had unusual assistance. Mr. G-illet preached 
from ' "Why stand ye here all the day idle ?' He spoke 
■with freedom, and numbers were in tears. Saturday 
we rode to Milton, Rev. Mr. Starr and Rev. Mr. Knapp 
being with us. Here I preached at ten o'clock. Lord's 
day, June 30, I was at "Warren, Feeble and trem- 
bling in the morning — preached in the forenoon from 
Luke 12 : 56, ' But how is it that ye do not discern this 
tmie ?' in the afternoon from Ezek. 33 : 11, ' Tm-n 
ye, turn ye, from your evil ways ; for why will ye 
die, 0 house of Israel?' Had conversation m the 
intermission, and till ten in the evening. I cannot 
but think there is some real thoughtfulness here. 
Monday we rode early to Goshen — had two melting 
visits — then came on — parted with brother Gillett at 
Torrington — stopped at Rev. Mr. Mills' and had a 
sweet interview — then rode home and went and 

preached at Mr. 's." 

Tours of this kind Mr. Hallock often performed, 
sometimes by the appointment of the ministerial asso- 
ciation, more frequently by mutual agreement. Al- 
ways ready for the service of God and his generation, 
in seasons of revival the extent of his labors was 
truly surprising. At the close of one of these favored 
times he writes, " Though attended with the catarrh 
and many infirmities, and many times ready to faint, 
yet by the merciful help of the Lord I have been 
enabled to attend the meetings — ^not less than five or 
six in a week — and I trust my bodily health is better 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

tlian it was eight months ago. I believe it is in an- ' 
swer to the prayers of the Lord's dear Peopl« 
of which I am so unworthy. 0 Lord, still hold rne 
up, and he my strength ; let me not wander from thy 
]iath, in doctrine or practice." 

" August 14, 1799. Yesterday met with the con- 
vention at Mr. aiUett's. Heard Rev. Mr Porter of 
Washington and Rev. Mr. Griffin* preach. 

" Dec U. Went to Cambridge with my dear 
brother Griffin. He preached to a solemn and atten- 
tive audience. I preached in the evening 

"Dec 27. Tuesday last, brethren Mills, GiUctt, 
and Griffin met for the private concert at my house.' 

The following, in their order, were the texts from 
xvhich he preached to his own people on several sue 
ccssive sabbaths, immediately after the commence- 
ment of the revival in 1798. 

u . Now, when they heard this, they were pricked 
in their heart, and said unto Peter and the rest of the 
apostles, Men and bretlxren, what shaU we do? Then 
Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every 
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remi. 
sion of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy 
Ghost.' Acts 2 -.37, 38. ' If any man love not the 
Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maran- 
atha' 1 Cor. 16:22. 'And I gave her space to 
repent of her fornication; and she repented not Be- 
hold I will cast her into a bed, and them that com- 
mit 'adultery with her into great tabulation exc^p 
they repent of their deeds.' Rev. 2 : 21, 22. Rc- 
. The Rev. Drs. Ebcuezcr Porter and Edwavd D. Griffin 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVALS. 137 

jcice, 0 ye nations, with liis people ; for he will 
avenge the blood of his servants, and will render ven- 
geance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto 
his land, and to his people.' Dent. 32 : 43. ' The 
heart is deceitful above all tilings, and desperately 
wicked.' Jer. 17 : 9. ' Thou hast ascended on high, 
thou hast led captivity captive : thou hast received 
gifts for men ; yea, for the rebellious also, that the 
Lord God might dwell among them.' -Psa. 68 : 18. 
' But the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory 
shall be seen upon thee.' Isaiah 40 : 2. ' And I saw 
another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the 
everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on 
the earth, and to every nation and kindred, and tongue 
and people, saying with a loud voice. Fear God, and 
give glory to him ; for the hour of his judgment is 
come : and worsliip him that made heaven and earth, 
and the sea, and the fountains of waters.' Rev. 
14 : 6, 7. ' If thy presence go not with me, carry us 
not up hence.' Exodus 33 : 15. ' Sir, we would see 
Jesus.' John 12 : 21. ' He that be'heveth on the 
Son of God, hath the witness in himself: he that be- 
lieveth not God hath made him a liar ; because he 
believeth not the record that God gave of his Son.' 
Jer. 2 : 27 ; 1 John, 5 : 10. ' Holiness becometh thy 
house, 0 Lord, for ever.' Psalm 93 : 5. ' Then he 
said, I pray thee therefore, father, that thou would- 
est send liira to my father's house : for I have five 
brethren ; that he may testify unto them, lest they 
also come into this place of torment.' " Luke 
16 : 27, 28. 



138 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



The various -states of Mr. Hallock's mind in con- 
nection with the rise and the progress of this work 
of grace, are indicated in the following passages. 

One week before its commencement, he wiites, 
"0 will the Lord think of the dry earth, and not re- 
membei the spiritual drought of Zion. 0 thou, who 
art good and doest good, wilt thou rain down right- 
eousness upon us." 

Again, " Could not attend a lecture at nor 

a conference this evening as I purposed, by reason of 
the great rain. 0 may I learn submission like a 
weaned child. Alas, how poorly and miserably do I 
spend my time, 0 my Grod, wilt thou quicken me." 

" This has been a sad day to me, as well as yes- 
terday and the day before. 0 my cold murmuring 
heart — no life in prayer, in study, or in preaching — 
unthankful for the awakening, and fear that it is 
abating : am astonished that any mortal should feel 
so dull as I am, under such circumstances. It seems 
as if I was in the way ; came home this evening mor- 
tified and ashamed : 0 God, my life, my hope, my 
rock." 

" This day has been the most refreshing to me 
that I have seen for a great while. Surely, I must 
here set up an Eben-ezer, for 'hitherto the Lord hath 
helped me.' 0 Jesus, thou Lord God of hosts, take 
all, all the glory to thyself, and make me happy in 
beholding thee glorified." 

"Tried to preach all day from Genesis 45 : 4 ; but 
it has been all day like a cold, frozen, dreadful win- 
ter. 0 thou infinite God, I would with all confidence 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVALS. 139 

justify thee, and be humbled under thy wise, good, 
and mighty hand. And 0, for Jesus' sake, may thy 
grace be sufficient for me, and thy power be made 
perfect in my weakness. Felt in some measure 
relieved at the conference." ' 

Had a sweet conference at the school-house." 
" Had an hour of sweet conversation after the 
conference." 

" My mind is cold, weak, and wandering — have 
had scarce one sweet moment to-day, either in prayer 
or preaching. Felt a little revived in the intermis- 
sion. 0 Lord, why dost thou thus hold me off"? I 
know it cannot be from any defect in thy power or 
grace, nor in the foundation which thou hast laid in 
Zion, but it must be because of my sins. But, 0 
Lord, canst thou not have mercy on sinners ? I know 
thou canst ; and 0, show favor and pity to a poor sin- 
ner, almost ready to give up his evidences of grace, 
and of a call into the ministry." 

" There are evident tokens of the departure of the 
Bridegroom. 0 Lord, how pamful is thy absence." 

" A very gloomy day, in a moral sense — cold and 
faithless myself — straitened in every view ; and Zion 
dull and sleepy, and sinners dead. 0 Lord, may we 
be humbled under thy holy, mighty hand." 

The following is one of his addresses to persons 
on receiving them into the church. 

" I now declare each of you a member of this 
church. You are members of Christ's visible body, 
and are raised up to sit together in heavenly places 
in Christ Jesus. But you will remember that you 



140 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

have not come to the rest of God ahove. The great 
wilderness of labor and patience, of enemies and com- 
bats, of hunger and of thirst, yea, and the river Jor- 
dan, which is death, lie between you and the world 
of glory. Many who passed through the sea, who ate 
of the manna and drank of the rock, died by unbe- 
lief, and never saw the rest of the Lord. And it be- 
cometh you to fear the least a^ppearance of coming 
short. I may say to you, as Joshua said to Israel, 
' Ye are witnesses against yourselves, that ye have 
chosen you the Lord to serve him.' If you should 
turn away, and in works deny him, all this wUl come 
up against you. 'Now we live, if ye stand fast in 
the Lord.' If you endure against hell, earth, and sin, 
God will be glorified, Zion will, and great will be 
your peace. But in order for this you must make a 
business of religion, of reading, of meditation, of the 
religion of the closet, the family, and the house of 
God. The covenant you have made is perpetual and 
never to be forgotten, no, not for an hour. As David 
put off Saul's sword and coat of mail, so put off all your 
own wisdom and strength, and with that lovely youth, 
meet your spiritual foes only by faith in the name of 
the Lord Jesus. Barnabas exhorted the young profes- 
sors at Antioch with purpose of heart to cleave unto 
the Lord. If you do this, your enemies will be de- 
feated, and be constrained to confess, that Jesus is of 
God, and his religion divine. And now, dearly be- 
loved, ' I commend you to God, and to the word of his 
grace, which is able to build you up and to give you an 
tnheritance among all them which are sanctified.' " 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVALS 141 

The record of the work of Grod in this chapter 
may be appropriately closed by the outline of one of 
Mr. Hallock's sermons, preached in a school-house 

at S , a neighboring congregation, where the 

Spirit was evidently descending. We are indebted 
for it to the retentive memory— strengthened perhaps 

by loss of sight— of the Rev. Mr. McL the pastor, 

who heard it with deep anxiety that it might be bless- 
ed to precious souls of his spiritual charge. " It was 
preached," he says, "at a time of special attention to 
religion among my people. It was evening. Many 
were assembled. The old and the young were anxious 
about the soul. The mind of Mr. HaUock was by 
prayer prepared for the occasion, and he announced 
the text and proceeded to apply it with almost an 
unearthly solemnity." 

" ' Whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not 
all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple.' Luke 
14:33. 

" It will be my intention, this evening, to bring 
you to the test. There is an important sense in which 
it is VERY COSTLY to bccome a disciple of Christ. You 
must count this cost, if you would be sure of heaven. 
If any of you were thinking of building some expen- 
sive edifice, you would first sit down and count the 
cost. If a king were to go to war with another king, 
he would first of all count the cost. This is the safest 
way to escape ultimate shame and disappointment. 
Thus poor sinners who would become disciples of 
Christ, must first sit do\yn and count the cost ; and 
Christ says, it will cost them a// that thei/ have. 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

'Whosoever he he of you that forsaketh not all that 
he hnlh, he cannot he my disciple.' 

" I shall first consider what God owns. I do this 
in order to ascertain what is left, for all that is left 
belon gs to the sinner, and constitutes what he must 
..ive up in order to he a disciple of Christ. God owns 
^the silver and the gold,' ' the cattle upon a thousand 
hills.' ' The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness there- 
of.' The sun, moon, and stars are his. The kingdoms 
of this world, and the church of Christ are his. The 
great and wide universe belongs to him. He "made 
all things for himself. And now, what is there .left? 
All that is left is the sinner's. 

" 1. Here is your sc/f-r/ghteousness, this is a gar- 
ment which the sinner has made himself. With this 
he has endeavored to cover over his deceitful wicked 
heart, to hide it from God. But God sees tlu-ough 
it He looks down into the very depths of the sm- 
ner's depravity, and says to him, 'I will reprove thee, 
and set thy sins in order before thine eyes.' Consider 
the poor scribes and Pharisees. They trusted in their 
self-righteousness, and perished in their sins. Your 
self-ri-htcousness is absolutely worthless. It is no 
better than filthy rags. Cast it from you as offensive 
to God, and be willing to be clothed in the white 
robe of Christ's righteousness. With this, you wiU 
be made welcome at the supper of the Lamb. 

» 2. False doctrine. This belongs to the sinner. 
To obtain eternal salvation, you must believe the 
gospel, you must be 'rooted and grounded' m the 
truth. In the work of saving immortal souls, God 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVALS. lAo 

makes use of truth, of inspired truth. Beware of 
blind guides, of false doctrine, and the command- 
ments of men. If you depart from ' the faith once 
delivered to the saints,' you grieve the Holy Spirit, 
and he will depart fi-om you. If you give heed to 
seducing fables, and doctrines of devils, I fear you 
win seal your damnation. 

" 3. Vain amusements- and carnal pleasures belong 
to the sinner. Such sources of happiness are as transi- 
tory as ' the crackling of thorns under a pot.' They 
always leave an aching void. Your jovial music and 
dancing, your house of mirth and feasting, yoiir wine 
and your card-table, must aU be forsaken ; ' your 
laughter must be turned to mourning, and your joy 
to heaviness.' Religion is a serious business with 
those who are on their way to heaven. 

" 4. Sinful associates belong to the sinner. Such 
associates are not the companions of those who are 
' strangers and pilgrims on the earth.' They belong 
to siimers. If you would be Christ's disciples, you 
must come out from the world and be separate. ' The 
companion of fools shall be destroyed.' 

"5. The hypocrite^ s hope belongs to the sinner. 
We fear there are many who lay hold on such a hope. 
It is no better than the spider's web. Dismiss it in 
this time of solemnity with you. If you hold it fast, 
' what will you do when God riseth up ; and when 
he visiteth you, what will you answer him ?' Oh, the 
false hope will be like the giving up of the ghost when 
God shall take away the soul. 

"6. Promises of future repentance are left, and 



Ill 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



belong to the sinner. To quiet tlie mind for the pres« 
ent, many such promises are made, but they are 
fearfully dangerous to the soul. Delaying sinners, 
the voice of Grod is crying in your ears, ' Behold, now 
is the accepted time ; behold, now is the day of salva- 
tion ;' but you reply, ' To-morrow shall be as this 
day, and much more abundant.' ' When I shall have 
a convenient season,' then I will repent and come to 
Christ. I am afraid that season will never come 
Death may this moment be at the door. Your safety 
consists in your immediate acceptance of Christ. 

" Thus we have considered what belongs to the 
sinner. Self-righteousness, false doctrines, vain amuse- 
ments and carnal pleasures, sinful associates, the hypo- 
crite's hope, and promises of future repentance belong 
to sinners, and must be forsaken in order to become 
the followers of Christ. 

" And now, if you will forsake all these, let me tell 
you WHAT Christ will give you, 

1. Here is pardon. Sinners in their natural 
state are under condemnation. The sentence of death 
is passed upon them. ' The soul that sinneth it shall 
die.' The language of the gospel is, ' He that beUev- 
eth not is condemned already.' For the present the 
sentence is not executed, because G-od waits upon 
sinners to be gracious, and to give them space for re- 
pentance. "While G-od thus waits, the gospel is preach- 
ed to sinners. The Spirit strives with them, and par- 
doning mercy is oflfered them, if they will forsake all 
and come to Christ. Come then, poor sinners, leave 
all that you have, and enjoy eternally the blessedness 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVALS. 



145 



of forgiveness. Come, and all your sins shall be 
removed from you as far as the east is from the west. 
They shall never return to condemn you and torment 
you. ' He that believe th on the Son of God, shall 
not come into condemnation.' 

" 2. Here is peace — peace with God, peace of 
conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Sinners while 
out of Christ and in a state of impenitence are un- 
happy. They are ' wretched and miserable and poor 
and blind and naked.' ' The wicked are like the 
troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up 
mire and dirt.' ' There is no peace, saith my God, to 
the wicked.' The past is, to them, all lost in sin. At" 
this very -.moment their hearts are contending with a 
holy God : they would flee out of his hands. In the 
future there is ' a fearful looking for of judgment and 
fiery indignation.' Unliappy sinners, 

' Your way is dark and leads to liell; 
Why will you persevere?' 

Now peace is offered to you ; it is urged upon you : a 
peace that 'passeth all understanding,' peace with 
God and heaven, peace in your own souls, joy which 
is 'unspeakable and full of glory.' If you remain in 
your sins you will never know what it is to be happy. 
Would you know the blessedness of that religion 
which is from heaven, forsake all, and come to Christ, 
the Fountain of living waters. 

" 3. Here is hope. The gospel speaks of a 'good 
hope through grace,' a hope which is like 'an anchor, 
sure and steadfast.' It is supported in the soul by 
evidence that the heart is changed by the Spirit of 



14G JE.REMIAH HALLOCK.. 

G od, that the affections are purified and placed upon 
heavenly objects, and that the soul delights in the 
doctrines of grace, and in the advancement of that 
kingdom which is not of this world. Poor guilty- 
condemned sinners have no such hope. They are 
' without hope and without Grod in the world.' They 
are like the unhappy helpless mariner who is out on 
a sea of storms and tempests without an anchor to 
hold and steady his vessel. The winds are howling, 
and the billows are dashing, and all expectation of 
entering the desired haven is cut off. You may have 
a ' good hope ;' you must have it, or be lost in reme- 
diless despair. Forsake all that you have, and this 
great anchor is yours. Then let the stormsJjeat, and 
the winds blow ; let the heavens lower and gather 
blackness ; you are safe, and you may sing the rich 
grace that conducts you to the haven of everlasting 
peace. 

" 4. Here is triumph in death. All must die. 
There is a time to die. A dying time will be a most 
distressing time to poor sinners who have made no 
preparation for death. What will their self-righteous- 
ness, then- vain pleasures and gratifications, and their 
false hopes, avail them then ? The wicked are driven 
away in their wickedness. How keen their mental 
anguish, how painful their sufferings, when flesh and 
heart shall fail ! How they will tremble and wail as 
they see their probation closing, and know that the 
Spirit of God has departed fi-om them ; and that in a 
moment they must rush into a world of lost souls. 
I have seen such poor sinners in their last moments. 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVALS. M7 

How my heart did ache, when I was driven to the 
painful conclusion that their case was hopeless. But, 
sinners, it is not necessary that you should die thus 
wi'etched. The solemnities of this evenmg are evi- 
dence that Grod is yet waiting upon you. His Spirit 
is present. Make him welcome to your heart. Grieve 
him not. Forsake all that you have, and come to 
Christ, and that holy, memorable song of triumph 
shall be yours : ' 0 death, where is thy sting ? 0 
grave, where is thy victory ? Thanks be to God, who 
giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.' 

" Finally, here is eternal glory. The impenitent 
unbelieving sinner must be lost. There is no place, 
no portion for him in heaven. For him there is no 
society, no employment, no enjoyment in heaven. The 
wicked must be turned into hell. Hear the last sol- 
emn sentence from the mouth of the offended Judge, 
the sentence that will decide for ever the allotment 
of the finally impenitent: ' Depart from me, ye cursed, 
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his 
angels.' You have an opportunity, this evening, to 
escape this dreadful doom. In the name of my Lord 
and Master, I come and offer heaven to you. Let us 
rise above this little earth, and take a view of that 
heavenly kingdom. And what is it ? It is deliver- 
ance from all sin. ' There shall in no wise enter into 
it any thing that defileth.' It is deliverance from 
all sorrow ; all tears shaU be wiped from their eyes ; 
' there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor cry- 
ing.' It is ' an exceeding and an eternal weight of 
glory.' All will be of one heart and of one mind, and 



14S 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



all the redeemed will sweetly sing the new song, {he 
song of grace. Now, sinners, are you willing to Imsc 
this heaven ? Can you endure the loss ? Will you 
tlii-ow away your immortal souls for mere trifles? 
Leave all that you have, and heaven is yours. Do 
you hesitate ? "Will you die ? Do you want a longer 
time to decide ? It does seem to me that I have made 
up my mind. Let me now plead with you for one 
moment. I must bring you to the test. Count the 
cost. Look at what you have to forsake. It is all as 
worthless as dung and dross. The longer you retain 
it, the more unhappy you are. If you keep it in your 
possession till death, you will perish with everlasting 
destruction. It is all lighter than vanity. By for- 
saking it, you lose nothing ; on the contrary, your gain 
will be infinite. Here you will have pardon, and peace, 
and hope, and triumph in death, and eternal glory be- 
yond the grave. Can you hesitate for a single 
moment ? If you will not yield, and leave all and come 
to Christ, then we must weep over you, and bid you 
adieu for ever." 

"I am pained," adds Rev. Mr. McL , "\vith 

the conviction that I have come far short of the origi- 
nal. It is difficult for me to give an adequate de- 
scription of the preaching of that man of God. AVe 
must see him and hear him, and personally witncs:^ 
his solemnity and importunity, in order to have a i'nll 
understanding of the nature and power of his public 
performances. " 



MISSION IN VERHONT. 



149 



CHAPTER VI. 

FIRST MISSION TO VERMONT — LABORS IN 
REVIVALS. 

The early and strong desire of Mr. Hallock to be 
a missionary is already before the reader. In the 
summer of 1801 the Lord called him for a time to 
this service. The Missionary Society of Connecticut, 
at that time in its infancy, applied to him to spend a 
few months in the state of Vermont. On receiving 
the application, he writes, 

" June 3, 1801. Am requested to make a tour in 
the north-east part of Vermont. The subject looks 
very weighty indeed. Many are the motives for 
going, and many are the objections. 0 Lord, divest 
mc of self, and order this matter in mercy, and guide 
me by thy counsel in the way I should go. I give 
myself to thee. 

" July 12. "Week before last I engaged to go, God 
willing, on a mission of four months into the new 
state. 0 Lord, strengthen me and guide me in this 
thy work. Things as yet have appeared to work favor- 
ably to my mission. 0 Jesus, I thank thee. Suffer 
no trials to come upon me, I pray thee, in tliis or any 
thing, above the strength which thou shalt give. 

" July 26, Lord's day. Text in the forenoon, 
• Seek first the kingdom of Grod ;' in the afternoon, 
' Put on the whole armor of God.' But little freedom, 



]f,0 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

yet the scene appeared solemn, as this was the part- 
ing Sabhath. Expect to set out to-morrow on my 
tour to Vermont. 

" July 27, 1801. Having an appointment from 
the Trustees of the Missionary Society of Connecti- 
cut, the consent of the church, and, I trust, the caU 
of Jesus, and all things being prepared, I this day, 
about eleven o'clock, bade my lovely consort and dear 
children and friends farewell, taking for my motto, 
' Jesus of Nazareth, Captain of the Lord's host, 
mv best friend.' " 

Some of his feelings on the way to the field of 
labor, he thus records : 

First day. "Some of the time was exceedingly 
depressed, and so discouraged I was almost ready to 
turn about ; at other times felt encouraged. In the 
evening, a sweet visit with my dear brother ." 

Second day. " Some part of the way exceedingly 
confused and depressed. Tried to pray, but my mind 
was weak and unfixed. It seemed as if I had but 
little evidence of faith or love ; distressing doubts pre- 
vailed, and the consolations of the word seemed to 
be gone, and I was constrained to cry, with sinking 
Peter, 'Lord, save me.' Dined at Rev. Mr. Judd's. 
Was refreshed in conversation. About three o'clock 
rode to my dear father's in Goshen. Found my 
parents well, and prospering both in body and soul, • 
but felt more depressed and discouraged than ever ; 
no appetite for food ; my heart was hard and wander- 
in*^ ; I feared I was never renewed, I had so little 
sense of the hatefulness of sin, and of the beauty of 



MISSION IN VERMONT. 



151 



holiness. The weight of the journey overwhelmed 
me. It seemed as if I could neither go back nor for- 
ward ; I was ready to wish I had never thought of 
the mission; had something of a fever, but tried to 
compose my tumultuous mind in God, and by his 
mercy, after a while went to sleep." 

Fourth day. " Arose and retired with some Chris- 
tian friends into the woods for prayer. Felt weak in 
body and mind, but not so discouraged as at some 
times ; for ever blessed be the Lord, was in a great 
measure relieved this afternoon." 

Fifth day. " A pleasant morning ; some freedom, 
I trust, in secret prayer," 

Seventh day. "Sabbath; Sunderland, Vermont. 
A distressing gloom has been on me almost ever since 
I came from home ; was confused in family and secret 
prayer last night and this morning. But 0, what 
shall I render unto the Lord for his free mercies? I 
began to feel released in the forenoon, especially in 
preaching; and this afternoon, both in prayer and 
preaching, the attention was unusual — some tears : 
thus far the Lord hath helped me. Preached a third 
sermon an hour and a half before sunset ; talked in the 
evening with some professors ; advised them to organ- 
ize anew. The Sabbath and the church are almost 
lost in this town." 

" Aug. 5. Joined with the Rev. Mr. H in se- 
cret prayer this morning, and rode to Chittenden. 

Aug. 6. Preached at four o'clock ; had but little 
freedom : the people stopped, and I talked with them 
after sermon ; some appeared attentive. 



152 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



" Aug. 7. Visited all day from house to house, iny 

dear friend H being with me. Numbers were 

tender and wept, and I cannot but think the Spirit of 
God is secretly at work in this place. At evening 
the neighbors met for prayer, and I made some re- 
marks on God's reviving his work. 

" Aug. 8. Visited as yesterday, in another neigh- 
borhood, but did not find so much feeling. 

" Aug. 9, Lord's day. Rested poorly. The morn- 
ing was rainy ; had but little opportunity for retire- 
ment, or freedom in any duty ; preached from 1 Cor. 
16 : 22 and John 3 : 14, 15 ; had much more freedom \ 
and attention than I expected. The house was crowd- 
ed ; it was very hot ; I felt as if I should faint both in 
prayer and preaching, but was carried through : had 
a full and serious conference in the evening; Chris- 
tians seemed to be revived, and to take courage that 
God was about to come among them. A few youth 
appear to be under some impressions. They have no 
church formed in this town, but there seem to be a 
few understanding, lively Christians. They have 
meetings on the Sabbath, and I cannot but think that 
God has mercy in store for this place. 

"Aug. 10. Had an affectionate parting with 
Christian friends in Chittenden ; left some poor sin- 
ners in tears ; the Lord have mercy on them. 

"Aug. 12. Sudbury. More freedom in family 
prayer and in retirement ; talked with the children ; 
they gave good attention, especially one little boy 
about twelve ; he steadily watched me while I was 
talking, with watery eyes." 



MISSION IN VERMONT 



153 



On his way to this place, Mr. Hallock writes, " As 
a stranger I knew not the way ; hence three things 
were necessary. First, that some one should inform 
me ; secondly, that he should inform me right ; thirdly, 
that I should follow the direction : so it is in spiritual 
things." 

"Aug. 13. Rode to Cornwall; preached the fu- 
neral-sermon of a youth, from Luke 13 : 24, to an 
afflicted family, and a crowded attentive audience. 
This town is all settled and large. The church con- 
tains about one hundred members. They have lately 
had some revival, and about thirty added ; feel much 
more at home than in the forepart of my journey. 
After agreeable conversation and prayer with brother 

W and visiting some sick families, rode to New 

Haven, and stopped with my good old friend deacon 
Andrew Mills ; had a precious evening, with freedom 
in prayer and conversation. 

" Aug. 16. Lord's day. Confused in mind this 
morning, but had unusual freedom in preaching in 
the forenoon to a little, attentive audience ; also m 
conversation in the intermission. 

"Aug. 17. Rode with deacon Mills to Waltham, 
about ten miles ; had sweet conversation with some 
friends from New Hartford ; in the evening had a 
meeting ; but little freedom, yet the people were at- 
tentive. There is no meeting-house nor church formed 
in this town, neither have they of late had any meet- 
ing on the Sabbath, except a few who met together 
last Lord's day. Yet in this place there arc a few 
mourning souls. 

7' 



154 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



"Aug. 18. Returned to New Haven — visited a 
sick person on the way — attended a church-meeting 

at two o'clock. Miss S was examined. Never 

could a copy more agree with its original, than her 
experience agreed with that of hopeful converts in 
Connecticut. This appeared to he the most heavenly 
meeting I have seen on my journey. At four o'clock 
preached on Christians being the light of the world, 
with more freedom than I expected. Had refresh- 
ing conversation with a number of dear Christians 
after meeting, then rode about four miles. 

"Aug. 19. Preached at four o'clock from Isa. 40 : 1. 
The meeting was full and attentive. Some scoffing 
Universalists were present, supposed to come for a dis- 
pute, but they seemed rather to smite their breasts and 
go home in silence. Thanks be to God, who hath given 
us a peaceful, serious meeting. Spent the evening 
with Christian friends in conversation and prayer." 

A clerical brother of like sentiments with Mr. Hal- 
lock, who had just lost a dear son without the conso- j 
lation of a good hope in his case, once put this ques- 
tion with rather peculiar emphasis : "Do you not 
sometimes doubt, Mr. Hallock, whether a holy and 
benevolent God will inflict eternal punishment upon j 
any part of mankind?" He promptly replied, "No, 
sir. If a man should tell me that he had just seen 
Canton meeting-house in flames, and I should hasten 
to the spot and find it not so, would he be able 
afterwards to look me in the face ? So, if there is 
to be no everlasting punishment for any of our race, 
how could Christ, after his many positive dcclara- 



MISSION IN VERMONT 



155 



tions to the contrary, hold up his head before hie 
people in the future world ?" 

"Aug. 26. Rode to Essex, twelve miles. Tired 
and faint, called at a house by the way, where they 
never so much as asked us to drink a little water. 

" Aug. 31. Rode to the lake — saw the Grand isle ; 
in the afternoon visited a school — the instructor and 
the cliildren were affected. 

" Sept. 12. My cough troublesome — some freedom 

of spirit in retirement — rode with my friend D to 

the lake, four miles, to see Mr. S , hopefnlly con- 
verted of late. In the time of the war, he was a 
British soldier. He is about sixty, and unable to 
I read ; a man of good natural sense, but before his late 
awakening he was very profane and passionate. His 
daughter-in-law is also an apparent convert. This 
house, a little while past a place of profane oaths, is 
now, I trust, a Bethel." 

Letter to his wife. 

"KiNGSTOX, Vt., Oct. 3, 1801. 
" Dearest earthly Friend — Though I am by the 
help of God as well as common, and find kind friends 
everywhere, yet the trial of so long a separation from 
you is indeed great. I have not heard a word from 
you, since I left home. These questions interest my 
heart : Are you well, or sick ? living, or dead ? sup- 
ported, or overborne with trials ? I also long to know 
if it is well with the church and parish. But when 
these and the like weighty cares overload my soul, 
I try to cast them all upon the Lord. About tluee 
weeks ago, I had a tedious cold and a most trouble- 



156 TEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

some cough, but was enabled to preach. Sabbath 
before last, I preached at Westford, administered the 
Lord's supper, and attended a meeting in the even- 
ing. It seemed just like '98 and the forepart of '99. 
A more blessed attention than what appears now in 
the south part of Westford, I never saw. I have been 
to Essex, to Swanton, to Greorgia and Waterbury, 
where the goings of the victorious Lamb are also visi- 
ble, some under concern and numbers apparently born 
of G-od. The little cloud is seen in Fairfield and in 
almost every place. About noon, September 1, 1 met 
brother Bushnell in Milton, and I can hardly think 
Aaron was more glad to see Moses. 

" A missionary wants health, a strong constitution, 
abilities, great grace, and much prudence. How much 
then must a poor invalid and one of little faith need 
your prayers, and constant support from the Lord 
Jesus. I hope dear Christians will not let their easy 
circumstances at home make them forget fainting 
missionaries and the cause in the wilderness. 

" Tell Deacon Bidwell, Deacon Mills, Deacon 
Humphrey, and Dr. Everest, they twine about my 
heart, and I should be glad to give each of them a 
letter ; but I am so taken up, I can hai-dly get time 
to read my usual chapters in the Bible." If the Lord 
will, I hope to see you the latter part of next month. 
I shall make an effort to get home on the Friday pre- 
ceding the fourth Sabbath in November ; and wish 
the concert,* if convenient, to meet on that evening, 

* This concert was hold weekly, for more than twenty 
years, in Mr. Hallock's study ; commonly on Thursday even- 



MISSION IX VERMONT. 



157 



that we may pray together once more. G-ive my 
love to Jeremiah, Homan, and Sarah ; I beUeve I think 
of you all twice, where you do of me once. Think of 
God. Choose Mary's good part. Farewell. Mr. 
Bushnell sends his love to you and to the church. 
" From your affectionate friend, 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 

" Oct. 21. Rode to G ; preached on Moses' 

lifting up the serpent. Was very coldly received here. 
The Lord forgive them. 

• " Oct. 23. In a little more than eight days, have 
rode a hundred miles, much of the way extremely bad ; 
have preached eight sermons, and attended one con- 
ference ; our lives, bones, and health have been spar- 
ed, and to God be all the glory. 0 Lord, wilt thou 
come and revive thy work in these regions of moral 
death. 0 Lord, wilt thou have mercy on the kind 
youth who hath rode with me, and grant him the 
riches of Jesus. 

" Oct. 24. Spent this evening in prayer with a 
few Christians. Three told their experience. It 
seemed as if God was there. It seemed like the still 
small voice when Elijah Worshipped. 

" Nov. 2. In Montpelier found Mr. T. R . It 

seemed to refresh me in body and mind. Brother 

R exhorted in the family — we sang — had two 

prayers, and a refreshing evening." 

ing. In compliance with the request in this letter, the breth- 
ren convened at the time proposed, and in the course of the 
meeting, to the great joy of all, Mr. Hallock arrived from his 
long journey. 



158 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



The account of this tour Mr. Hallock closes as 
follows : 

" Nov. 21. Arrived at home about seven in the 
evening, after an absence of sixteen weeks, and found 
my consort and family well. Health has generally 
prevailed in the parish, and the church appears still 
united, no schism having taken place. Had an agree- 
able meeting with a goodly number convened at our 
house on my return. 

"In my late journey have travelled about one 
thousand miles ; visited many of the towns in the 
new settlements from Middlebury to Canada line, and 
preached ninety-six sermons — on an average six in a 
week. I have assisted in the formation of two 
churches, one in Richmond and the other in Cabot, 
and have admitted thirty-two persons into the church. 

"As my motto when I set out was, 'Jesus of 
Nazareth, Captain of the Lord's host, my best 
FRIEND,' I would close with this: 'Be all the glory 
Thine, whose it is, and to whom it belongs.' " 

He adds the following as to the call for mission- 
aries in the new settlements of Vermont : 

"The inhabitants in the new settlements in Ver- 
mont are numerous far beyond what I had supposed : 
in many of the towns one hundred, and in some ris- 
ing of two hundred families. The land in general is 
rich and fertile. But as the fost settlers gave their 
attention to farms and aqueducts rather than to meet- 
ing-houses and the gospel, in a large tract of country 
not a meeting-huusc is to be found, in many places 
no visible church exists, and in some no sort of relig- 



MISSION IN VERMONT 



ious meeting, and the Lord's day is spent by the mass 
of the people in exploring land, visiting, fishing, etc. 
But in every place Clirist has his spiritual salt, and 
grieving souls are to be found ; yet as they have no 
ecclesiastical centre, what spiritual strength there is, is 
far from being concentrated, and Christians are like 
scattered sheep. E nthusiasm and many errors are prop- 
agated. Still, matters in general appear on the reform, 
the truth seems to be taking root, Christians to be 
refreshed, and divers places to enjoy special revivals. 

"If we take the south part of Canada, adjacent 
to Vermont, which is settled by our people, the mis- 
sionary ground in that quarter is equal in extent to 
the territory of Connecticut. The call for missionary 
labor is extensive and loud. The prospect is, in many 
places, that if the Christians can be gathered and 
have a little help, they will soon be able to settle and 
support ministers, and willing to become generous 
contributors for sending the gospel to others. The 
custom of giving up the Sabbath and its ordinances 
for ten or fourteen years is to be met and counter- 
acted. AVliere matters begin to put on a more favor- 
able appearance, Christians, almost hopeless, revive, 
take courage, and like the Macedonians say. Come and 
help us. Having been often deceived by strangers, the 
serious people grow cautious ; they wish for preachers 
with good credentials, and receive a missionary from 
the Connecticut Society with confidence and respect. 

"But when we contemplate the experience, the 
abilities, the faitli, labors, and self-denial requisite for 
a profitable missionary, the heart cries, ' Who is 



ICO JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

sufficient ?' As all increase is of G-od, let none for- 
get to mingle their contributions with persevering 
prayers to the Lord of the harvest. Amen." 

LABORS IN HIS OWN VICINITY. 

Letter to Deacon Taylor. 

"West Simsim-uy. May 27, 1802 

"Very dear Brother — I send you a few lines by 
your daughter, whom I am glad to see. Sabbath 
before last I was at Middle Granville. There was a 
tremendous storm — but few at meeting — yet the 
special mfluences of the divine Sphit were evident. 
The conference was full and^ very solemn ; brother 

A , who is awake, and myself, concluded we 

never saw it more so. The special attention is con- 
fined to one neighborhood ; pray that it may leaven 
the whole parish. I tarried until Monday noon. 
Every house was serious, and some under deep 
impressions. 0, how real is eternity, when the mind 
is a little enlightened. 

" C. P appears well. He gave me the follow- 
ing account of himself. About two months past he 
was at a conference ; some observations were made 
on consideration. • They took a little hold of his mind, 
but he went home and retired to rest, as usual, with- 
out prayer. He then put the question, 'Do I love 
the Lord Jesus V The answer was. No, I have not 
the least love to him, though I have been in the 
visible church. He saw his heart perfectly black, 
and remained in this terrible situation about three 
weeks. These lines of Watts occurred : 



MISSION IN VERMONT. 



161 



" •' As pilgrims on the scorching sand, 
Beneath a burning sky, 
Long for a cooling stream at hand, 
And they must drink, or die.' 

"He felt that he must drink or die — retired — and 
before he arose from his knees, the glory of God 
appeared — yet no hope respectmg himself; his dis- 
tress was gone, and he feared that stupidity, which 
he had so much dreaded, had come upon liim. About 
a week after, he had new light, attended with a hope. 
He appears humble like a little chdd — is afraid of 
his deceitful heart — but says, • If I am not deceived, 
I do love God, I do love Jcsiis, I do love Zio/i.' He 
stands amazed at the wonderful love of G-od, thai 
instead of sending Mm to hell, he should show hiw 
these things. His only claild, a daughter, and a Cluis- 

tian, married in B . He has been to see her, and 

says, 'You cannot teU, Mr. Hallock, how my poor 
child rejoiced ; she was in Christ before her father.' 

"Notliing special among us; our conference full 

last Sabbath evening. Deacon H is confined ; 

so many absent, it seems lonesome ; but Christ lives. 
Farewell, my brother, the Lord bless you and yotu- 
house. Write when you can. 

"I am, etc. 

" JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 

" Al g. 2, 1802. My soul travails in birth, either on 
holy or selfish grounds, for the conversion of my poor 
children. 0 Lord, I would commit all to thy infinite 
mercy in Christ." Again: "I find amazing stupidity 
in my family. 0 God- of mercy, my only hope for 



1G2 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



my ruined self and poor undone family, wilt thou 
come, of thy mere mercy and power, and show us our 
sins in a true light, and soften and quicken our hearts 
for Jesus' sake. 

"Aug. 22. I am so barren in study, so lifeless and 
embarrassed in preaching, and see so much opposition 
and wickedness of heart, I am almost ready to sink. 

0 Lord, wilt thou save and help me, for thy name's 
sake. 

"Aug. 23. Sensible of my unfaithfulness, as I 
trust in some measure, of the solemn charge com- 
mitted to me as a minister, and of the value of immor- 
tal souls ; considering the worth of Christ's kingdom, 
and how much Jesus has done ; I would now resolve 
to revisit .each family in this parish, to inquire after 
their eternal concerns — to spend one day at least 
every week in this work, unless sickness or special 
providences forbid, until I shall have accomplished it. 

1 would keep a particular account of my visits. And 
having had long experience of my weakness, and 
knowing that this undertaking will be attended with 
many trials, I would rely only on the Lord, for wis- 
dom and strength and for success, pleading his great 
name and holy kingdom. 

"Friday, Aug. 27. Devoted to visiting according 
to the above resolve. I think spiritual visits useful, 
and trust I feel in some measure quickened. O 
Lord, wilt thou give me strength to proceed, and give 
success. 

" Monday, August 30, 1802. Devoted this day to 
visiting. I have, for the most part, felt barren and 



LABOR IN REVIVALS. 



163 



gloomy myself, and find but little religion among the 
people. Yet wliile I lament before the Lord, I would 
not be discouraged, but seek to sow, morning and 
evening, in season, out of season, hoping that if I 
should not live to see the harvest others may. 0 
Lord, make me faithful and give increase, and thine 
be the glory. 

" Sept. 12. Trust I had some refreshing and 
strength in reading the word, and in prayer at noon. 
Tliis afternoon spent in the field. 0 may I do all 
for the gospel's sake, and nothing out of love to the 
world. 

" Oct. 3, 1803. I have been from home seven 
days — been enabled to journey not far from eighty 
miles to attend the association and council, to preach 
six times, and converse and pray repeatedly with 
Cliristian friends, I trust with some freedom and to 
some acceptance. Yet what reason I have to lament 
my hard, unthaidiful, and barren heart. 

" Oct. 17, Lord's day. Norfolk. Last Monday 
evening preached at Cambridge on the superior glory 
of the gospel. Tuesday, went with brother Cowles 
to Plymouth — we both preached — I preached again 
in the evening, on Zion as the mother of converts. 
Wednesday we both preached at Litchfield, and both 
spoke again in the evening. Thursday we preached 
at Goshen and spoke in the evening. Friday we 
preached at Harwinton, and spoke in the evening. 
Yesterday rode to this place. To-day preached, first 
on Christians so walking in Christ as they have 
received him ; then on Zion as the mother of con- 



164- JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

verts : in the evening, from ' The shout of a king is 
among them.' Have had unusual health, and some 
freedom in prayer and preaching. 

" Oct. 18. To-day returned home ; found all well 
except Jeremiah, who is still complaining. 0 Lord 
Jesus, I would tell thee. 0 Lord, wilt thou make 
the seed of the word we have been instrumental in 
sowing prosperous, and may I be humble and thank- 
ful, glorying only in thee. 

" Jan. 1, 1804. We are now brought to see the 
beginning of a new year. We of this family are yet 
alive, and all except Jeremiah have been favored with 
usual health, and his case is not desperate. I have 
not been once prevented by sickness from attending 
meeting. Have been allowed the past year to go and 
see the work of God in Chester and Middle Granville ; 
and have heard of it in many places. I am not pressed 
with debt, but have wherewith to pay my creditors, 
and we are clothed and fed to the full. The mercies 
of God, both to soul and body, are innumerable. But 
0 my unfaithfulness and spiritual barrenness, in 
prayer, in study, in every religious duty, private and 
public. My heart is most vicious, whence proceeds 
opposition to the cross of Jesus, and all corruption. 
0 Lord my God, how do I need thy grace, thy 
strength, thy righteousness, and all the riches of 
Christ Jesus. There have been about twelve deaths 
among us the past year : what times will pass over 
us this year ; who will be bereaved, or who will die ; 
what public or private changes, adverse or prosper- 
ous, is with Him who worketh all things according to 



LABOR IN REVIVALS. 



1G5 



the counsel of his own will. But this we know, it 
will be well with them that fear God, and that the 
' ready ' are blessed. 0 Lord, revive thy work, make 
us wholly thine, and be our portion. 

"Last Friday evening the dear youth Mr. W 

came to see us from his mission ; last evening, the 
precious Mr. C — — , late missionary to New Connect- 
icut," Northern Ohio. " Brother C preached in 

the forenoon and administered the Lord's supper. 

Brother W preached in the afternoon. Their 

preaching and prayers were excellent, and in the spirit 
and truths of the gospel. Both of them preached 
again, at different places, in the evening, to unusual 
acceptance. In the time of drought there is some- 
thing hopeful in seeing the clouds rise and come over 
us. 0 that these spiritual clouds might be attended 
with much rain. 

" Ja\. 2. After praying and singing together, part- 
ed with dear W . How sweet are brethren beloved 

for Jesus' sake. 

"June 16, 1804. My dear father and sister Mercy 
are with us on a visit. Have spent two days this 
week in visiting schools. I get but little time for 
study. My mind is weak, wandering, and barren. I 
feel as if I was one of the most unfruitful, useless 
ministers. 0 Lord, to thee I fly, and thee alone, for 
help. Last week attended the ordination of Rev. 
Mr. Perry over the church in Sharon. Attempted to 
make the concluding prayer, but was embarrassed 
and fruitless — greatly tried with the fear of man. I 
remain fearfully cold and comfortless under mercies 



166 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



and trials. 0 Lord, what shall I do? I fly only to 
thee. 

" June 23. Rev. Mr. T. W , a missionary, tar- 
ried with us last night. We prayed together repeat- 
edly. 0 may I be thankful for such company, and 
may the Lord go with him." 

This missionary observes, in a letter to the com- 
piler, " As I was leaving the house of Dr. Strong of 
Hartford, to go on a mission to the state of New 
York, that great and good man said, ' Gro and stay a 
day with brother Hallock. He can give you more of 
the instruction and assistance you will need on your 
mission than any other man.' Among other things that 
flowed from Mr. Hallock's heart, like rivers of living 
water, he said, ' I have lately been thinking on these 
words of the first Christian ministers, '■Bui we will \ 
g-ive ourselves continually to prayer and to the min- 
istry of the word,'' and I have almost wondered that 
every ordination sermon has not been preached from 
that text.' So well did his spirit agree with this 
passage, that there was no appearance of affectation 
in his proposal to unite in prayer both morning and 
evening in his study. Nor was it surprising that 
such a man, when he went into the barn in the course 
of the forenoon, must there kneel and pray to God in 
the name of Him who was*born in a stable. In view 
of my mission, the sum of what he said may be given 
in these words : ' In every place and in every house 
know as far as you can what interests the people, 
and take their concerns and cares into your own heart 
with a spirit of Christian sympathy. This spirit will 



LABOR II>I REVIVALS. 



be as a loadstone to draw their hearts to Christ. The 
Saviour cared for the bodies as well as the souls of 
men.' » 

"August 30. Returned home last evening after 
an absence of four days. On the Sabbath was at 
Middle Granville. In tliis place more than fifty have 
been added to the church. Monday rode to Tyring- 
ham ; found Rev. ]\Ir. Avery and his family spiritual. 
On Tuesday rode to Loudon," now Otis, "visited friends 
there, and preached in the evening. God hath a 
number of precious people in this place. I am often 
tried with the most foolish, wicked thoughts, but by 
the help of God I continue to this time. 

" Sept. 24. Visited brother Griffin, at Colonel 

Austin's. Spent the evening at Dr. B 's, with 

Rev. Messrs. Mills, Griffin, and Jerome, in prayer for 
Mrs. Jerome, who lay at the point of death. 

" Oct. 28. Lord's day. Litchfield. Preached in 
the forenoon, on the necessity of holiness ; in the 
afternoon, on coming to the great supper. "Was favor- 
ed with some freedom and attention. I trust the fear 
of God is in this place. 

"Oct. 29. Rode with Rev. Mr. Mills to Wash- 
ington. Heard him preach ; I exhorted the churcli 
to awake and pray to God, it being a time of attention 
in this place. 

" Oct. 30. Went with Rev. Mr. Porter to Roxbury. 
I preached on the depravity of man, Mr. Mills exhort- 
ed ; there were evident signs of unusual attention. 
Returned in the evening to Washington. 

" Oct. 31. The dear Rev. Mr. Swift of Roxbury 



7G8 



JEREMIAH HALi,OCK 



came to see us. At one o'clock, eleven were examin- 
ed as candidates for the church. It was a spiritual, 
solemn interview. At three, I preached on preparing 
the way of the Lord. In the evening Mr. MiUs and 
myself exhorted. The meetings were serious, the 
Lord is doing great things for this people. 

" Dec. 2, 1804. Spent Monday and Tuesday, the 
past week, in visiting with Mrs. Hallock from house 
to house. 

" March 10, 1805. This morning was almost ready 
to give up all hope of any grace in my heart. The 
extremity of this almost despair did not last long. 
Could not but think I did love divine things. Must 
say, it has been as usual with me to-day, all things 
considered ; yet, have had but little sensible comfort 
and much exhausted in the outward man. TeU me, 
0 ye ministers of Jesus, is it ever so with you ? 

"March 13, 1805. This day I am forty-seven 
years old. On meditating upon Grod's past helps and 
mercies, the trials of my life, my sins and barrenness, 
and the reason of a hope, it appears that I have much 
reason for confession and humility before G-od, much 
matter of praise, much cause to hope in God, and to 
abound in his work. And I cannot but have a trem- 
bling hope, that my heart has by divine grace been 
turned to the Lord. I would give myself and family 
entirely to the Lord ; and may I begin and spend this 
year in his service, and be prepared for all its events 
prosperous or adverse, for Jesus' sake." 



REVIVALS IN 1805. 



169 



CHAPTER VII. 

REVIVALS OF 1S05 AKD 1806 — CORRE SPON DE N CE . 

" July 14, 1805. There have been of late five or 
six among us under conviction, and one has lately 
obtained hope. At a meeting last Wednesday, the 
audience was unusually solemn. It is marvellous to 
see among us these evident tokens of the Lord's re- 
turn once more by his grace. 0 Lord, we are most 
unworthy sinners, and 0 wilt thou for Jesus' sake 
carry on thy work of salvation among us, to the honor 
of thy gi'eat name. To-day had some freedom and 
affection in prayers and conversation in the morning. 

" July 23. I trust the attention among us does 
not decrease ; three awakened youth have been to see 
me this afternoon. 0 Lord, make them thy willing 
servants. To-day finished getting in my hay and 
grain. It is all the Lord's, and I would surrender it 
up, every spear and every kernel, to him to be used 
wholly in his service. Read the hundred and third 
Psalm. 0 my soul, I call on thee for ever to praise, 
to bless, to extol the Lord. 

" Aug. 11. Five have obtained hope, and numbers 
are under concern, I think twenty or thirty. It is 
marvellous, and may God have the entire glory, for 
to him alone the whole is due. 0 God of salvation, 
wilt thou carry on thine own work, and cause that it 
may end in the sanctification and eternal life of many 



170 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



lost sinners, to the glory of thy great name, through 
Jesus Christ. On the thirty-first of last month, this 
and a number of neighboring churches met for prayer 
on account of the drought, and ere the meeting clos- 
ed the rain began — 0 thou prayer-hearing Grod. 

"Aug. 15. Visited from house to house with 
brother Gillett, and in the evening brother Mills came 
and preached. The meeting this evening was full 
and impressive, and I cannot but think the good 
Lord is carrying on his gracious work among us, 
though some things have taken place the present 
week among certain vain youth, which look discour- 
aging. 0 may the servants of the Lamb be as bold 
and faithful as the servants of the devil. 

"Aug. 18. Lord's day. Preached in the forenoon 
on resisting the Holy Grhost, and trembled myself for 
fear I had done it. Preached in the evening at Mr. 
's. Four youth are, of late, somewhat awaken- 
ed in this neighborhood " — tliree or four miles from Mr 
Hallock's house. " Shall tarry here to-night — talked 
with the awakened youth. 

" Monday. Prayed and conversed this morning 
with three of the youth. Trust the awakening is not 
decreasing. For ever praised, and for ever blessed be 
the Lord God of Zion. Amen and Amen." 

He once addressed a person under deep serious im- 
pressions, much in this manner. " Suppose a debtor 
in a large amount desirous to make payment. Not 
doubting his ability, he waits on the creditor, and 
asks him if he will accept g'old. ' 0 yes,' he replied, 
' if genuine.' He at once empties his bags on the 



REVIVAL IN 1805. 



171 



table. The creditor, glancing his eye upon it, says, 
' This is not gold — you must be under a mistake — 
examine it yourself.' On a closer inspection, the 
owner acknowledges it is not gold, and says, ' I believa 
it to be silver; will you, sir, accept silver?' at the 
same time beginning to fear he shall not have enough 
to meet the demand. The creditor expresses a will- 
ingness to take silver in payment, and the debtor be- 
gins to count it out. ' Stop,' says the receiver, ' are 
you not mistaken again ? Look closely, and I think 
you will see it is not silver.' The latter finds it even 
so, and adds tremblingly, *' It must then be copper ; 
will you take this ?'' ' Most readily,' is the reply, 
' if it is real copper, I will receive it at its proper 
value.' The poor debtor now become suspicious, 
looks at it again more narrowly, and exclaims in 
agony, * 0 it is not even copper ; it is mere dross, of 
no value at all. Alas, I am undone ! here is my all ; 
I can never, never pay the debt ! I lie wholly at your 
mercy.' " The poor trembUng sinner perceived the 
bearing of this simile, and at once seemed to see the 
entire worthlessness of his own best works, and to 
despair of ever paying his immense debt to divine 
justice. In a short time he found relief, if not deceiv- 
ed, by a cordial reliance on the mere mercy of G-od in 
Jesus Christ. 

"Oct. 3. Have been favored with the help of 
many dear brethren. We have had stated lectures 
on Wednesday, and repeated conferences and other 
meetings, so that I have had no time to write : about 
twenty have obtained hope. It is affecting to .see 



172 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



how the Holy Spirit teacheth blind, ignorant sinners 
according to the Bible, as to their depravity and help- 
lessness, and the sovereign grace of Grod. 

"Nov. 3, Lord's day. Lord's supper. This day 
eighteen were added to the church ; fifteen of them 
date their hopes in this revival. Fkst sermon from Isa. 
44 : 5 : ' One shall say, I am the Lord's,' etc. I trust 
it was an unusual day for the sweet breathings and 
comforting influences of God's Holy Spirit ; a day never 
to be forgotten to the praise of his glorious grace." 

Of this revival of religion among his people, Mr. 
Hallock in a printed sermon says, "This spiritual 
refreshing began to appear in June, and increased 
gradually for five months, until there were droppings 
more or less in almost every part of the society : 
towards thirty joined the church who were considered 
as the fruits of this little harvest." But we are 
favored with a more full description of the work from 
his own pen, as inserted in the Connecticut Evangeli- 
cal Magazine. 

NARRATIVE 

OF A REVIVAL OF RELIGION, IN CANTON, CONN E CT- 
ICUT, IN 1S05. 

"It pleased the Lord gloriously to visit this place 
by the special influences of his Holy Spirit, in the 
latter part of 179S, and in the fore part of 1799. In 
this time the drooping church was not a little quiclc- 
ened and comforted, and between seventy and eighty 
were added to it, an account of which was published 
in the first volume of the Magazine. 



REVIVAL m ISOf). 



173 



"That day can never be forgotten by the church 
in tliis place ; and to the praise of God be it spoken, 
the lapse of seven years has not weakened the faith 
of the candid beholder in the work of that day. 

" But by reason of deaths and removals, the chuich 
became considerably reduced, and inattention to di- 
vine things prevailed, and was increasing, especially 
among the youth, so that the things of religion began 
to wear a very gloomy appearance. 

" But in the early part of last June, one of the 
youth was visibly under serious impressions. This 
was soon attended with a solemn effect on the young 
people. It was not long before several others were 
awakened in the same neighborhood where the above- 
mentioned youth lived. And from this time the 
attention increased. 

"It seemed to operate like leaven hid in three 
measures of meal. New instances of awakening often 
occurred. 

"The neighboring ministers, as well as some 
more remote, were very kind to visit us and to preach 
to us. Indeed it seemed as if the Lord sent them; 
and almost every meetmg was attended with some 
visible effect, until there were some instances of 
attention in almost every part of the parish. Lec- 
tures and conferences were frequent, and public relig- 
ious meetings were full and serious. And this spir- 
itual work appeared gradually to rise, for more than 
three months. The attention has been mostly among 
young people. It seemed as if G-od had fixed his 
eyes on the youth, though numbers of children have 



174 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



been seriously impressed ; and there have also been 
some instances from the ages of thirty to sixty. 

" Of the subjects of this work, the largest propor- 
tion are females. Towards thirty have obtained hope. 
Fifteen have joined the church, and others are ex- 
pected to come forward and subscribe with their hands 
unto the Lord. As when the cry was made, ' Behold, 
the bridegroom cometh,' the virgms arose and trimmed 
their lamps, this has been a day of alarm to the 
church. They appeared to be aroused in some meas- 
ure from their formal state, into which even the wise 
are so apt to fall while the Bridegroom tarries. Some 
were ready to cry, ' Our lamps are gone out.' 

"Having noticed these things concerning the 
beginning and progress of this revival, I shall add, as 
a specimen of the work, the relation of two youth as 
written by themselves to a friend. The first writes 
thus : 

" ' De AR Sir — The following lines are a short sketch 
of what I hope the great Sovereign of the universe 
has been pleased to do for me, a poor rmworthy sin- 
ner. Time has wafted me through the days of child- 
hood, perhaps as thoughtless of God and insensible of 
eternity as any one can be. "Whenever I was aroused 
to think on death and judgment, I would silence the 
voice of conscience, and say I could not cherish such 
gloomy thoughts when I was in health and prosperity ; 
little thinking that my soul was out of health. There- 
fore I abandoned these thoughts, which ought to have 
been most dear to me. But, blessed be Grod, he has 



REVIVAL IN 1S05. 



175 



spared my life until now, and, as I hope, made me a 
living monument to adore his glorious name. 

" 'My mind began to be seriously impressed last 
July, at the funeral of Mrs, D. C. I followed the 
breatliless body to the silent mansions of the dead, 
little thinking it was a lesson for me to read. I con- 
sidered myself an uninterested beholder. But when 
I saw the corpse laid in the grave, the thought struck 
my mind. Will this suffice ? WUl the grave now shut 
its mouth, and say. Enough ? The answer was ready : 
No, it wUl not, but it will soon claim me in spite of 
all my efforts. But when I looked beyond the grave, 
eternity appeared still more awful. These words 
seemed to be duected to me : ' What meanest thou, 
0 sleeper ? Arise, and caU. upon thy God.' 

" ' This led me to look into my polluted heart, 
where I found nothing but sin and guUt, which were 
pressing me down into the pit of woe and misery; 
and my days that were past were irrecoverably 
gone for ever. But a thousand hurrying thoughts 
of the world seemed to bear me away from these 
feelings ; and many times did I put on the veil of 
cheerfulness when I had an acliing heart within, for 
fear of the ridicule of the thoughtless part of man- 
kind, who must stand at the tribunal of God, as well 
as myself. 

" ' Thus my days were spent until about the 
middle of September, when the horrors of hell ap- 
peared before me unavoidable. I felt myself to be a 
sinner, and exposed to the wrath of God, who was 
continually saying, 'Vengeance is mme, I will repay.' 



17b 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



In vain I sought relief from the Bible. Every line 
seemed to condemn me. I thought I was doing all I 
could to purchase happiness, and my reading, pray- 
ing, sighs, and moans were in such earnest, I thouglit 
I should move heaven to pity me. But all was in 
vain, it was in such a selfish manner. And I thought 
I was unjustly hound with the cords of disquietude, 
and doomed to eat the bread of sorrow, while many 
of my young companions could triumph over death 
and the grave, and sing, ' Thy love, 0 Jesus, is the 
theme ;' but I was unheard and unanswered, and 
left to wear out my hours in grief alone. This, I 
thought, was unjust, and my heart rose in dreadful 
opposition against God. Oh, how hard is the human 
heart. If it had the power, it would dethrone the 
Almighty. But blessed be God, the power is in his 
own hands. 

" *I remained in this sorrowful situation several 
days, seeking relief, but refusing the precious balm 
of Gilead. One Monday in this month was a most 
trying day to me. It seemed as if the whole universe 
gazed with an eye of contempt on its sinful, wretched 
inhabitants. But 0, the following "Wednesday ! May 
that precious day never be erased from my memory — 
the day, as I hope, in which God met my poor 
perishing soul. Having taken up the Hartford selec 
tion of hymns, I began to read the 274th : 

Cheer up, my soul, Ihcre is a mercy-seat, 
Sprinkled with blood, where Jesns answers prayer; 
There humbly cast thyself beneath his feet, 
For never needy sinner perished there.' 



REVIVAL IN ISO-') 



177 



And truly, I then said to myself, who can wish for a 
higher seat, than at the feet of sovereign mercy? 
And my heart was now ready to thank G-od that I 
was in his hands. And Q, how astonishing it was 
that his mercy was extended even to me, who had 
been contending with him all my days ; refusing all 
his blessed calls and in\'itations, trampUng under foot 
his dear Son, who had spilt his precious blood upon 
the cross for me, and yet not one moment had I spent 
in his service. Now my heart could join with the 
psalmist in saying, * 0 come, let us worship and bow 
down, let us kneel before the Lord our Maker.' Also, 
'Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord, who can 
show forth all his praise ?' His perfections were 
visible in the whole creation. A sermon was preached 
that afternoon from Solomon's Song, chap. 4:5, 8, 
' Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse,' etc. These 
appeared to be in reality Christ's words, and the ser- 
mon was sweet to my soul through the whole exercise. 
I felt as if my soul feasted on the food of eternal life, 
which G-od had prepared for all who serve him in 
spirit and in truth. And if I do not labor under a 
great mistake, it is my desire to serve God, and I can 
trust my aU with him and rely upon liis word. I 
hope I have enjoyed the presence of God most of the 
time ; but sometimes, tlirough my own negligence, 
and falling so far short of the duty which I owe him, 
I am left to lament the withdrawing of his smiles, 
and to trying doubts. But I must conclude by ask- 
ing your prayers, sir, and the prayers of all God's 
children, that I may be kept from the snares with 



178 



.TEREMJAH HALLOCK. 



which I am surrounded in this evil world, and that 
I may be preserved through the faith of Jesus unto 
death. Then, Avhen 

' ' Filled with delight, my raptured soul 
Can here no longer stay, 
Though Jordan's waves around me roll, 
Fearless I 'd launch away.' " 

" The second writes in the following words : 

"'Dear Sir — I shall now, as enabled, state to 
you some of the recent dealings of God with my soul. 
My mind began to be impressed with a sense of my 
sins, and consequent danger, in the beginning of last 
April. But the great and general stupidity with 
which I was then surrounded, together with the fear 
of becoming an object of derision, caused me to con- 
ceal my distress until the beginning of June, when 
it rose to such a height that I found concealment 
impossible. For a certain period, during two or three 
weeks, the black catalogue of the sins of my whole 
life appeared to be set in order before my eyes, 
accompanied with a deep sense of my being in the 
hands of a holy, sin-hating God, and entirely at his 
disposal. 

" 'It seemed as though nature would sometimes 
sink under the pressure ; but He who thus laid his 
hand on me, was still my support. In July, when 
the attention to religion had become considerable, I 
began to find that I had not only a wicked heart, but 
that it was entirely selfish, and filled with the most 
dreadful and daring opposition to God ; and that self- 



REVIVAL IN 180a. 



170 



ishness had been, and still was, the great movmg 
principle of all my actions. This put me to a great 
stand. My inquiry now was with more anxiety than 
ever, ' What must I do to be saved ?' I now saw that 
the prayers of the wicked are an abomination unto 
the Lord. Yet I was told that prayer was a duty 
incumbent upon me, notwithstanding my own sinful- 
ness, and that I ought to pray with a penitent heart. 
This was what I could not bear, and I found myself 
actually at war with God Almighty. It appeared to 
me that anniliilation would be far preferable to the 
situation in which I then was. I would gladly have 
changed condition with the very stones in the street, 
and frequently looked with envy on the meanest rep- 
tiles of the earth. 

" 'Whenever I opened my Bible, I found it filled 
with threatenings against me. I found also that it 
demanded true and unfeigned submission to G-od, 
as the only condition on which salvation would be 
granted. I attended many meetings, but they only 
served to augment my distress, and if possible to 
increase my opposition. For several weeks I almost 
entirely relinquished business, and spent my time 
principally walking in my chamber. Whenever I 
heard of any person's obtaining a hope, it was like 
adding fuel to the fire. My heart rose against it and 
accused God of exercisingpartiality with his creatures, 
not considering that he has a right to do what ho 
will with his own. 

" 'These exercises continued until August, when 
the terrors of hell seemed to compass me about. From 



180 JEREMIAH HALLOGK. 

Tuesday the 6th, to Wednesday the 14th, it appeared 
to me that I stood on the very confines of destruc- 
tion, and was permitted to look into the eternal 
world. Death and judgment were now most solemn 
realities, and they so overwhelmed me that I was 
many times ready to sink into despair, and give 
up all hope of ever obtaining mercy. 

" ' Then 0, how vain appeared 
All things beneath the sky, 
Like visions past, like flowers that blow 
When wintry storms are nigh.' 

But it pleased the great and merciful Grod not to keep 
me long in this painful situation. On Wednesday, 
the 14th of August, I attended a lecture, when a 
sermon was preached from John 4 : 49, ' The noble- 
man saith unto him, sir, come down, ere my child 
die.' Upon hearing these words and their explana- 
tion, I found my heart glowing with the most ardent 
love towards the Saviour. He appeared to be 'the 
chiefest among ten thousand, and altogether lovely ;' 
every way suited to my necessities. Tears flowed 
without control. The language of my heart was, 0, 
my d-^ar Saviour, come, and take an everlasting pos- 
session of my soul. I bid thee a hearty welcome to 
my heart, and would lie low at thy feet for ever. My 
emotions were so great that I found it difficult to 
keep from immediately kneeling upon the floor, and 
extending my arms where I then was, in the meet- 
ing-house. I had no idea that this was conversion. 
I returned home, and without mentioning any thing 
to the family, retired to rest as usual. And here 



REVIVAL IN 1805. 



181 



again I found my soul drawn forth in the most affec- 
tionate desires after the Saviour. I found those beau- 
tiful Unes in Dr. Watts' versification applicable to 
what I then felt : 

" ' My flesh lay resting on my bed — 
My soul arose on high.' 

With my mind composed to the most perfect peace, I 
now went to sleep. On awaking in the morning, I 
concluded that I had become entirely stupid, and 
accordingly made several attempts to bring on my 
former distress ; but this I found was impossible. I 
then resolved to walk out and reflect on the exercises 
of the day and evening preceding. But instead of 
this, the character of God himself now came into 
view, and filled my soul with joy, love, and gratitude, 
wonder and admiration, to that degree that bodily 
strength failed ; and for some minutes I became almost 
insensible to surrounding objects. Upon recovering 
myself, I found that every thing around me wore a 
new aspect. The glory of God appeared to be visible 
in every part of creation. I saw the hills, mountains, 
and fields, all lying beneath the omniscient eye of 
God, and answering the great end for which they 
were created, the glory of God. And now the thought 
occurred. Shall man, who is the noblest part of crea- 
tion, be silent ? This was an amazing thought. I 
stood like one astonished at myself. Why had I never 
thought of this before ? I now saw that I had indeed 
been wilfully blind, and that it would have been 
just in God, had he left me to my own chosen way. 
I now began to imagine that tliis might be convcr- 



182 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

sion. But I had many doubts about it, because that 
during all these exercises I had strangely forgotten 
myself. These doubts were, however, soon removed, 
when I found that I was entirely wUling that God 
should dispose of me, for time and eternity, as he 
saw best and most for his glory. And 0, what heart- 
felt joy did it give me to reflect that I was in the 
hands of God. It was like an anchor to my soul. 

" ' The Bible, religious meetings, and the duties 
of the closet became the food of my soul. The latter 
becomes every day more and more precious to me. 
How does my heart frequently expand with rapture 
while J. am praying for the advancement of the 
Redeemer's kingdom. "When gloom and darkness fill 
my mind, as is sometimes the case, in consequence 
of the remaining sinfulness of my heart, I find that 
the thought that God's kingdom is eternal, and stands 
secure, generally removes the cloud. This, sir, is, 
according to my best recollection, a short sketch of 
what I have, through the goodness of God, been 
made to experience. I would now conclude by ask- 
ing your prayers for me, that I may not be left to 
dishonor God in the profession which I have made.' 

"Having given the foregoing account of the 
sovereign and most merciful dealings of the Lord 
towards us his sinful and unworthy creatures, I 
shaU close by only observing, that days of attention 
are not trifling days, but most solemn and serious to 
all. It becometh those that are left, to tremble ; and 
such as hope, not to be high-minded, but to fear lest 



REVIVAL IN ISOr,, 



after all, they should come out withered branches, 
only fit for the fire, to the dishonor of Christ, the grief 
of Zion, and their own shame. 

•'JEREjllAH HALLOCK.'" 

"Feb. 3, 1806. Last week was at Colebrook and 
VVinsted. The Lord is carrying on his work in each 
of these places, dear Christians are comforted, and 
sinners horn again. Praised be the Grod of salvation. 
My mind was unusually calm and refreshed, Thurs- 
day evening, at AVinsted." 

As Mr, Hallock was laboring abroad in a time of 
revival, he found a man who to much ignorance of 
spiritual subjects joined an equal degree of confidence 
and joy in his own state. The man was very fluent 
in the relation of his new views and feelings ; at 
length he paused as if to hear a confirmation of his 
hope from the mouth of so experienced a Christian as 
Mr. Hallock. Understanding the case full well, Mr. 
Hallock merely said to him, " Su", if I should come 
this way six years hence, and then find that you pray 
regularly in your family, morning and evening, I 
shall think favorably of your case." Mr. Hallock 
sometimes said with a suppressed smile, "I love to 
see young converts have ears :" a remark not less au 
evidence of his discernment than of his want of con- 
fidence in religious loquacity. Yet it would be wrong 
to suppose him not to make much allowance, or not 
to expect much diversity in the case of young Chris- 
tians. Severely as he scrutinized his own spiritual 
state, his charitable feelings inclined him to form a 
favorable opinion in the case of others. 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



To the Rev. Moses Hallock, Plainfield, Mass. 

"West Simsbury, Feb. 180C. 

"Dearly beloved Brother — I think that the 
moral foundation of all real union and sohd happiness 
is holy love. Where this love reigns in the heart, if 
we are poor — a cottage for our house, and herbs for 
our dinner — if we are low, if we are sick, yea, if 
dying, still we are happy, and united in the sweetest, 
most perfect bond. But if this godlike love be absent, 
all is like a rope of sand, and there is no real happi- 
ness, although we are ever so rich, the house adorned, 
and the dinner a stalled ox, or though flourishing in 
health, or raised to a throne. Let us then seek this 
love, not the world ; and let us esteem those who have 
it — not the rich, the carnal, the honorable of this 
earth. 

" We had a short but agreeable visit from brother 
Hosford and sister. Our honored mother has been 
with us ; she is now at brother Case's ; I expect she 
will return in a few days to our house. She is com- 
fortable for her, but, at best, is very feeble in body, 
though calm and agreeable in mind. Our dear father 
has been with us a number of days, and his company 
is truly better than gold. 

" We are poor, sinful, dependent creatures — Grod 
is all in all ; let us look to him, and cast all our cares 
upon him. Give my love to sister, to William, to 
Martha, to all the children. Tell them, that in order 
to be happy, they must fear the Lord. 

" From your affectionate brother, 

" JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 



185 



At about this' time the consociation to which the 
church of Canton belonged, recommended that each 
minister in their connection should, in company with 
a lay-brother, visit every family of his congregation, 
for the purpose of prayer and religious conversation, 
A few specimens of these visits follow. 

" March 27, 1806. It is proposed that the minis- 
ter, and one or more of the church with him, visit all 
the families in the society, to converse with them on 
the concerns of the soul — to begin this day, and to 
visit one or two days in a week, until the whole parish 
is gone over. 0 Lord, all will be in vain without 
thy guidance, help, and blessing. 0 be our strength, 
our guide, and give the increase. My dear brother', 
Deacon Theophilus Humphrey, went with me to-day. 
We prayed and conversed with eleven famiUes. In 
this number, we found tliree families where prayer 
is attended, five professors of religion, three others 
who acknowledged a hope. I think it is a profitable, 
instructive way of spending time. 0 Lord, wilt thou 
give us strength and grace to go on. 

"April 2. Visited all day with Deacon Mills. 
Called on thirteen families. Prayed and discoursed 
on spiritual things in each house. Found tliree fami- 
lies in which prayer is attended, nine professors, and 
four others who trust they are born again. I trust 
the Lord was with us, and that the day was not spent 
in vain. 0 Lord, I would thank thee for thy dear 
servant. Deacon Mills, and his instructive, impressive 
prayers and observations. 

" April 9. Went this day in visiting with Deacon 



18b 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



Everest. We visited twelve families. Found family 
prayer attended in seven of them, eighteen profes- 
sors, and two whose minds are tender and with a 
trembling hope. Find such visiting days very laho- 
rious. I have great reason to lament my want of life 
tliis day, both in prayer and conversation, and the 
dreadful moral death which appears among us. 0 
Lord, wilt thou have mercy on thy mourning, wither- 
ing Zion, for Christ's sake. 

" April 16. I am ready to think, many times, was 
there ever a Christian who had so much unbelief, so 
much hardness, bondage, and opposition of heart as I 
have?" 

Letter to Beacon Taylor. 

" West Simsbury, May 23, 1806. 
" I thank you, my dear brother, for your instruc- 
tive, impressive letter. "When B arnabas saw the awak- 
ening, the grace of Grod in Antioch, his heart rejoiced, 
and he exhorted them all to continue in the faith, 
and with their hearts to cleave unto the Lord. It is 
called tlie grace of God; 0 what divine, unspeakable 
grace. Wonderful is the love of God in sending his 
dear Son — in making the great supper. But both 
Scripture and facts testify that all make light of it. 
All are by nature under the dominion of this abomi- 
nable, Grod-provoking unbelief; and hence will inev- 
itably and most justly perish, unless renewed by the 
grace of Grod unto repentance and faith. And how 
wonderful it is, that God, instead of saying, none of 
these gospel-despising sinners shall taste of my sup- 
per, should say, I wilf compel them to come to my 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 



187 



Son ; I will effectually call and draw them by my 
Holy Spirit, and they shall be mine; and I will bo 
their God. 0 what mercy, what grace divine. 

"And has the great Eternal thus come in very 

deed to B ? If any doubt it, let them answer 

the old question, ' What meaneth this V And if God 
has come, what a pity it is that all should not know 
it, attend with their whole soul, and prepare the Lord 
his way. It appears that the old Jews perished be- 
cause they did not discern the signs of the times, nor 
know that the Saviour was among them. If the blind 
man, when he asked what the noise of the passing 
multitude meant, had been told that it was Csesar's 
legions, or had received some other false answer, or 
if, when told it was Jesus, he had not beUeved nor 
applied, the poor man would never have received his 
sight ; yea, twenty minutes ' delay in his case would 
have been for ever fatal, for the passing Saviour 
would have gone by. So it is with poor siimers in 
days of awakening ; delays and inattention are most 
dangerous. Let the love of the world, an inordinate 
concern for a piece of ground, for a few yoke of oxen, 
the things of marriage, and carnal mirth, be laid aside. 
How terrible to lose the soul for the bubbles of time ! 

" This is a searching day to professors. Surely His 
bride should dress in gold of Ophir. The church must 
be ready, clothed with the humble, prayerful spirit of 
Christ. Let Zion travail now, and join in the song 
of grace, and not be found with the wrangling elder 
brother. It becomes prayerless sinners to awake. 
Dear immortals, how can they sleep. And let not 



1 

188 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

the awakened embrace a false hope, instead of Christ. 
There is great danger of resting on the faith of the 
stony ground, as the reUgion of the good ground. 'Tis 
of gi-eat importance that the great truths of the gos- 
pel, concernitag God, ourselves, and Jesu.s Christ, fill 
every meetmg and heart. I was in the old parish 
at meeting yesterday. Things look encouraging 
there. The work of the Lord goes on marvellously 
at Northampton; the seed of the prayers of the 
saints is coming up there. Let Grod have all, all, all 
the glory, and us sinners lie in the dust before him. 
The Lord Jesus be with you, my brother. 

" I am, etc. 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

"P. S. My appointments are such, it appears im- 
possible to make you a visit next week ; but I shall 
come, if the Lord will, a week from next Wednesday. 
Grive my love to brothers Eells and Cooley. Let us 
not trust in men nor means, but onlij in the living 
God." 

To the same. 

"November 1, 180G. 

"Very dear Brother — How thankful ought we 
to be for solemn Sabbaths, and for the divine in- 
crease of the graces and numbers of Zion. The Lord 
Jesus has displayed his distinguishing grace towards 

his people in B . Eternity will not be too long 

to praise him for it. The Lord said to Pharoah, ' Let 
my people go, that they may serve me.'' God redeem- 
eth his people out of spiritual Egypt, that they may 
serve himself, not idols, nor themselves. God said, 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 



189 



* Let my people go, that they may serve me in the 
wilderness: And he finally brought them to Canaan, 
to serve him in his temple there. So he will finally 
brmg all his converts to heaven, to serve him in the 
perfect service of that perfect, eternal world, in all 
the agility of the winged saraphim. 0, of what im- 
portance is it that the 'five,'' that the ' tioelve,' yea, 
that all the church, and all who may yet join, should 
continue to walk with God, and faithfully serve him 
through all the wdderness unto death. Some, after 
all, when they had got into the wilderness, turned to 
idolatry ; but to forsake the Lord after he hath re- 
deemed us, must be the sin of sins, the guilt of guilt, 
the folly of folly, and the way to the woe of woes. 
But how pleasant and profitable are the fruits of obe- 
dience. ' Let my Beloved come into his garden, and 
eat his pleasant fruits.' The depravity of the human 
heart is beyond utterance ; and the holy God is not 
seen by it, anywhere, in any thing, nor in any way, 
but to be opposed by it. How necessary is the new 
birth! 

" Rev. E,. A is here, and expects to preach for 

us to-morrow. He says the awakening has continued 
more or less for five years in Pleasant Valley. He spent 
a Sabbath there not long since ; tliinks he never saw 
Christians more awake in prayer. May we not hope 
that awakenings will continue, so long as the church 
are awake and fervent in prayer ? 

"As to your first question, my brother, it is a 
matter of doubt whether a church ought to insist on 
a confession for open sins, committed before conver- 



190 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



sion. I would not forbid, nor insist upon it. Tl: - 
whole life of the impenitent man is nothing but sin. 
And his confession of Christ implies his sorrow for all 
his past hfe of sin. But as to the second question, it 
appears to me that all confessions made by backslid- 
ing professors for open sins, should by all means be 
made in public before the world. In the year 1803, 
I wrote my own mind fully on this subject ; and to me 
the arguments have lost no weight by time or reflec- 
tion. I send you the sermon which contains the argu- 
ments. May you, may we, and all the churches be 
guided right, for Jesus' sake. 

" I am, dear sir, your true friend, 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 

" March 13, 1807. I am this day entering my 
fiftieth year : 0 solemn thought. The past mercies of 
another year are many ; but 0 how little thoughtful 
have I been, and how fruitless to God. I think I 
never saw so much unbelief, and such depths of de- 
pravity in my heart, and. such need of constant sup- 
port from Christ, as I have the past year. 0 thou 
prayer-hearing God, to thee would I look, and on thee 
would I cast all my cares, tlu*ough Jesus Christ. 
And do not let me live to dishonor thee and thy dear 
cause. If thou shalt contmue me in this world an- 
other year, wilt thou be my strength, and make me 
fruitful to thee in the gospel ministry in Zion ; may 
my shoe be iron and brass, and ' as my days, may 
my strength be.' If I am to die this year, 0 may it 
be in honor of Jesus and his cause. To this end wilt 
thou grant me the light of thy countenance. 0 cast 



HIS JOURNAL. 



191 



me not oft', now my strength is failing ; but be the 
strength of my heart and my eternal portion. And 
as my salvation is nearer, if I am thine, than when I 
beheved, 0 may I hve more like a pilgrim, and be 
more spiritually-minded ; that when thou comest I 
may love thy appearing, open to thee immediately, 
and hasten to meet thee with joy, to the praise oi 
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy 
Ghost, Amen." 

" January 7, 1807. This day, Homan, my second 
son, is twelve years old. 0 Lord, I would thank thee, 
and give him up to thee. 0 wilt thou have mercy 
on him, and make him tliine, that he may grow up 
before and for thee. 

" Jan. 18. My soul hath been in much deadness 
and darkness to-day — 0 how tedious and distressing. 
If I am not deceived, it is not this world that I want, 
nor any tiling in it. But I long for a gospel view of 
Jesus, and of the glory of God in him ; for humility 
and spiritual freedom in prayer, in meditation, and in 
all the things of the word. 0 Lord, wilt thou, who 
sufferest the swallow and the sparrow to buHd their 
nest in thine altars, let my poor soul rest under the 
light of thy glorious gospel. 

" Feb. 1. Received a precious letter from my 
greatly favored and dear brother "Williams. 0 Lord, 
I am not wortby that thou shouldst allow one of thy 
ministers or people to write to me." ' 

It was the uniform manifestation of such humility 
as breathes in the last sentence, which led the late 
Dr. Azel Backus to remark, " Brother Hallock is ono 



192 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



of those men to whom the Lord Jesus Christ will say, 
' Friend, go up higher.' " 

" Feb. S. Last Friday, my dear son Jeremiah 
set out for college. 0 Lord, I would give him up to 
thee — may he have a prosperous term, and wilt thou 
take and put him into thy service." 

This son entered Williams college in the autumn 
of 1806. Mr. Hallock's days of fasting and prayer 
were at this time very frequent. In closing the 
account of one of them, he writes, " I seemed to have 
the most liberty in praise. I sometimes think whether 
we are not apt to dwell too much on the dark side." 



SECOND MISSION TO VERMONT. 



193 



CHAPTER VIII. 

SECOND MISSION TO VE R MONT — CORRE SPONDE NCE . 

"July 29, 1807. Wednesday. About ten this 
morning I left home, after prayer, in which we en- 
deavored to commit each other to the Lord. It was 
hard to part with my family and people. 0 Lord, 
wilt thou be my strength, guide, comfort, and defence 
from my sins and all my enemies. 0. take care of my 
dear wife and cliildren and aged mother ; and be the 
shepherd of my dear flock. ]\Iake my journey pros- 
perous, and useful to thy dear children. Do all for 
us, and be all in all unto us, for Jesus' sake. Amen. 

"AcG. 7. Rode to Rochester. Found some Chris- 
tian friends here, with whom I became acquainted 
six years ago. I now begin to enter on missionary 
ground. 0 Lord of the harvest, to thee alone would 
I look for direction, strength, and success. 

" Aug. 12. Tried to compose my mind in Grod, and 
to pray, as I rode, for my family and people, and all 
the ministers and churches of the Lamb. Lodged at 
Waitsfield, with Rev. Mr. Salisbury. Brother Salis- 
bury and his wife counted thirty-two ministers, mostly 
candidates, who have been settled in this state with- 
in six years, and mostly in places which never had a 
minister before. 0 Lord, wilt thou hold them up, 
make them faithful unto the end, and give the in. 
crease. 



Hillock. 



9 



194 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



" Aug. 25. This morning left Burke and rode to 
St. Johnsbury, seventeen miles. I have been at Burke 
six days, have attended six public meetings, visited 
one school and divers families, and administered the 
Lord's supper. St. Jolmsbury has been settled per- 
haps twelve years, and contains inhabitants enough 
to fill a large meeting-house ; but they have no visible 
church of Christ in the town, nor stated public wor- 
ship. Universalism and many errors prevail. But 
one man came to the meeting, although notice was 
publicly given on the Sabbath. There was a consider- 
able number of females. I was enabled to speak with 
some freedom and plainness. The most of them gave 
attention. How true it is, that vinless the Lord leave 
a seed, we become as Sodom. This people have how- 
ever, for some reason, almost finished an elegant meet- 
ing-house, 0 that it might prove a token for good, 
and that here the Lord would appear in his glory, and 
establish and build up Zion. 

" Sept. 6. Derby, Lord's day. But little freedom 
in retirement ; as usual in the family. Preached 
with some freedom, from John 8 : 39. The people 
were attentive, and some affected. After the close of 
the forenoon meeting. Doctor Newcome, a late convert 
from open infidelity and universalism, was examined 
and taken into the church. Then we attended to the 
Lord's supper. "When Dr. Newcome gave in his rela- 
tion, it had an unusual effect on the audience. The 
church and spectators were solemn in the time of the 
supper, and many, I trust, were truly refreshed. But 
T have to lament the dreadful leanness of my own 



SECOND MISSION TO VERMONT. 195 

soul. 0 Lord Jesus, when wilt thou shine upon me, 
and fill my poor famishing soul with thy love and 
praise. The confession of faith which I had to read 
to the doctor, being long, it was towards two o'clock 
when the supper was ended ; and havmg an evening 
meeting to attend before five o'clock at the distance 
of four miles, the intermission was but half an hour. 
In this time, I neither ate nor drank. By the time I 
had finished the first head of the sermon in the after- 
noon, I found my eyes dim, my bodily strength, power 
of recollection, and utterance gone, or so gone that I 
was obliged to stop, and after a little pause to close 
with a very few words, and desire one of the brethren 
to make the closing prayer. The scene was very 
alarming and trying. 0 that I might be suitably 
numble, learn my dependence, and be thankful it was 
no worse. 0 Lord, let me not be a cause of shamo 
to them that fear thee, nor of triumph to thy enemies. 
Spent the evening in conversation, not being able to 
; attend the meeting appointed." 

Letter to his -wife. 
"Greensborough, Vt.. Sept. 21, 1S07. 

" Dear Friend — I have had no letter from you, 
though I have sent to Montpelier in hope of finding 
one. I could write of many things, but must confine 
myself to a few. Ten days ago I began to be unwell ; 
was however enabled to preach three times the next 
Sabbath, and to visit from house to house on Monday 
following. But Monday night was as sick a night as 
I remember ever to have had. Tuesday, was confined 
to my bed and called a physician. He also visited 



196 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



me on "Wednesday. By the blessing of God, felt 
some better Thursday — rode ten miles and attended 
a meeting with difficulty in the evening. Preached 
on Friday, and attended a church-meeting on Satur- 
day. Yesterday preached all day at Wheelock, ad- 
ministered the Lord's supper, and preached in the 
evening to a crowded, attentive meeting. This morn- 
ing felt very feeble and fearful of a settled fever. 
About ten o'clock set out with Deacon Fellows for 
Greensborough. After riding more than ten miles, 
most of the way the worst road I ever travelled, ar- 
rived here about sunset. By the help of God, I feel 
much better this evening, and hope to preach on the 
morrow at Glover, to spend this week and next Sab- 
bath in these parts, and then go thirty miles to the 
west, where I expect to spend the next month. I hope 
to be at Middlebury about the first of November, and 
to find a letter there from you. 

" I find it will not do for me to be anxious about 
home, or to calculate too much on seeing you again. 
I find no way but to submit all to the Lord, and cast 
every care upon him. God has his dear people in 
every place, but the church in these parts is in her 
low state — her wall demolished, and her gates broken 
down. 0 that Connecticut knew her blessings, and 
that those who wish to exchange the truth for fables, 
and to have every thing in a state of disorder, saw 
the folly of their ways. 

" I have seen no special awakening on missionary 

ground, except week before last in B . It was a 

rainy day when I was there. Out of thirteen families 



SECOND MISSION TO VERMONT. 



197 



in the settlement, sixty persons met at the lecture — 
some under deep impressions, and some with fresh 
anointings. It seemed marvellous to see the gracious 
goings of the G-od of heaven in tiie wilderness. I 
thought the angels were undoubtedly present, gazing 
with holy wonder. 

" I have been to Stanstead in Canada, where I 
lodged one night and preached a sermon. 

" I hope Jeremiah is at home and is steady and 
helpful. I want to know whether Homan minds his 
mother, is at home evenings, and how far he has pro- 
ceeded with Proverbs. Remember my love to Sarah — 
it is time she began to put away childish things, and 
to seek the Lord. Give my love to mother — she must 
go in the strength of the Lord God. Remember me 
to the deacons, to the church, and all. 

" From your feeble, needy, anxious, fearing, hop- 
ing friend, 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 

" Oct. 5. Brother W prayed in the family, 

and we mutually prayed together in a neighboring 
wood, and covenanted to remember each other Satur- 
day evening and Sabbath morning. Went and saw 
the grave of Dr. Job Swift, who died on a mission, 
at this town (Enosburg) two years ago. He was 
taken unwell at meeting. The sight of his grave was 
impressive with warning, fear, and hope. He speaks, 
though dead. He was found in his Master's field, 
and lived and died an honor to the religion of the 
gospel. 0 may I be a follower of them who, through 
faith and patience, inherit the promises. 



198 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



" Nov. 18. Arrived at home, having been absent 
sixteen weeks. 1 have been often feeble in body and 
mind, but have been enabled to ride nine hundred 
and twelve miles, 'and to preach ninety times. Have 
visited and seen many of the Lord's people. The 
meetings, for the most part, have been attentive. 
Find my dear wife and family well, and that their 
lives and health have been precious in the sight of 
the Lord. Secular matters as well as could be expect- 
ed. The pulpit has been supplied, and I am not in- 
formed of any special divisions, or root of bitterness 
appearing in the church or society. Two have died. 
This people manifest many tokens of affection. 0 
Lord, that I might be truly sensible of my sins and 
unworthiness, and that thou wouldest teach me thy 
statutes, and fill my heart with thy love and praise. 
Hold me up — draw me — make me faithful as a pro- 
fessor and as a minister, a husband and parent ; and 
0, pour out thy Spirit on this people and on my deaf 
family, that we may live more to thy glory, for Jesus' 
sake. Amen. ' 

" The last text from which I preached, the Sab- 
bath before I left home, was, ' I will go in the strength 
of the Lord God.' This text I often thought of when 
ready to faint. Whitefield's motto, ' Faint, yet pursu- 
ing,'' was applicable, and often in my mind." 

While on a visit to his friends in Massachusetts, 
Mr. Hallock writes, " Jan. 15, 1808, G-oshen. Being 
kept in by the snow, wind, and cold, the day and 
evening were spent in giving a reason, each one, of 
his hope. It was instructive and impressive. 0 Lord, 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 



199 



wilt thou search us and lead us into aH thy truth." 
A noble example this, for pious relatives in their 
seasons of friendly intercourse. 

To his brother at Plainfield. 

" Canton, June 10, 1808. 

" Very dear Brother and Sister — I received 
your letter by Jeremiah, and thank you for it. The 
things you wrote of the reformation in Plainfield, etc., 
are indeed instructive and impressive. 0 may the 
word of Grod still appear pleasant, his name glorious, 
and Jesus precious to the young converts. But they 
must expect much conflict, for heaven is obtained by 
fightmg. May God make us faithful to our children ; 
and 0, may it please him to cause them to hear the 
still small voice, which fills the soul with humble 
adoration and worship. 

" Our family are as yet, through mercy, in usual 
health ; but it is the most sickly time here we ever 
witnessed. There are perhaps one hundred in the 
town confined to their beds. In two parts of the 
town, secular business is almost wholly interrupted. 
One of Mrs. Hallock's sisters, Mrs. Alford, was bur- 
ied last Monday. The physicians call it the spot- 
ted-fever. It would take sheets to give the par- 
ticulars. The patients are generally taken almost 
instantly with a violent pain in the head — their 
strength is gone, they lose their reason, and then 
fall into a lethargy. "Where it is mortal, they gen- 
erally die in about forty-eight hours. Through mercy, 
but eleven have died; though we cannot tell what 
will become of the many sick, or of the well, for the 



200 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



fever appears to be spreading. 0 gi-acious God, spare 
thy people. 

"It is surely a day of wrath : 0 that it might he 
a (lay of healing mercy, and especially of spiritual 
blessings. How we need oil, in such a day. It is a 
day of terror, but I fear of little true conviction, 
though we hear of awakenings in other places. 

My health is poor — I feel feeble, and am as- 
tonished at my own hardness and stupidity. Pray 
for me, that it may please the Lord Jesus to shine 
upon my poor soul. On his head are many crowns 
of victory — over the world, over sin, over Satan, 
over death, the grave and hell, and every foe. And 
he conquers in behalf of his people, that they may 
be sharers in his victories. 0 happy believers! 0 
Lord, make us rich in the precious faith of the gos- 
pel, whatever else thou dost deny us. 

"Your affectionate BROTHER." 

To his son at college. 

"Lord's Day, Oct. 9, 1808. 

" A few words of advice. In the first place, think 
of the infinite Grod, of his eternal power, boundless 
goodness, and other perfections, as manifested in his 
word, works, and ways. Let him be in your thoughts 
and heart, and let him ever be before you. Secondly, 
consider that this is a fallen world, and that the 
human heart is only evil — ^think of all your sins of 
heart and life, as against Grod and deserving his 
eternal wrath — ^hate them and long for deliverance 
from them. Thirdly, remember the Lord Jesus 
Christ as he is set before us in the gospel, and fix 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 



201 



your eyes on him as the all-sufficient Saviour — the 
only hope, way, strength, light, righteousness, peace, 
eternal life, etc., of this sinful and guilty world. 
Fourthly, consider that by reason of desperate wicked- 
ness, darkness, folly, and spiritual death, none will 
or can come to Christ, hut they whom ' the Father 
draweth :' therefore ever feel not only your depend- 
ence on Grod for the great supper, hut for repent- 
ance, faith, and spiritual strength to come to Jesus. 
In this view of things, prayerfully and daily read 
some portions of Scripture, and he not a stranger to 
closet prayer. 

" As a student, he faitliful according to your health 
and strength ; shun dissolute and evil company. For 
Jesus' sake, respect your tutor, the president, and all 
the faculty of the college; conscientiously obey all 
their positive commands, and the laws of the institu- 
tion. Strive to form the habit of rising early, and be 
at your post at recitations and prayers. 

" See that you do not despise the kind hints, 
warnings, and admonitions of the president or any of 
the authority. Be a helper — ^the scholars make the 
college. Be economical of your time and money. 
Your money is Christ's, the most of it being the con- 
tributions of Grod's people for the support of the gos- 
pel ; ' let notliing be lost.' 

" From your infancy, I have daily endeavored to 
give you to God. Give your heart and all to liim. 
Consider what I say, my son, and the Lord give you 
a saving understanding of all things. 

" From your aflectionate PARENT." 
9* 



202 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



" Jani ary 1, 1809, Lord's day. Communion 
Thirty-two have died in this town the past year — 
eleven children, eight youth, thirteen in the stages of 
life more advanced. The last year has been a season 
of great spiritual barrenness with me and the church. 
It is painful to reflect how poorly we have lived. 0 
Lord, may that tender mercy which hath spared our 
lives to this new year, and which is still continuing 
unto us the gospel of grace, draw our souls and the 
souls of our children to Jesus. 0 Lord, forgive my 
coldness this day in praying, preaching, and admin- 
istering the supper-; and if it be possible, may this 
year be a spiritual year to my poor soul, and to thy 
people in this place." 

His reflections on pausing at another annual revo- 
lution are more extended. " 0 Lord, wilt thou make 
me thankful for thy kind care of me and my family, 
another year. Thou hast preserved our lives, saved 
us from settled fevers, removed our bodily complaints, 
richly fed and clothed us, and preserved us from fall- 
ing into open, scandalous sins. By thy great mercy, 
I have been allowed to continue in the ministry 
another year ; and the church and society yet con- 
tinue. And I trust that I have sometimes had a little 
freedom in prayer, study, and preaching; and that 
there has been some spiritual edification in our meet- 
ings. Surely we must say, it is altogether by the 
help of the Lord that we thus continue ; yea, of his 
merciful kindness, for our sins are exceeding many 
and great. 0 Lord, humble my soul before thee, for 
all my unbelief, impenitency, lukewarmness, and great 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 203 

unfaithfulness; and cause my soul to mourn on ac- 
count of the general spiritual drought among us. Of 
thy great mercy in Christ Jesus, wilt thou pardon my 
great and many sins, and the sins of my family and 
of this church and people ; and return and grant 
tokens of spiritual good, that thy glory may appear 
among us in the face of Jesus Chr-ist, and that our 
souls may live, rejoice, and praise thee. 

" What thou hast determined for us the present 
year wo know not. If our pilgrimage on earth shall 
be continued, 0 guard us from sin and error, and 
cause us to walk with, to serve, and to trust in thee. 
But if myself, family, or any of them must this year 
he numbered with those who die, cause that we, and 
whoever are to die, may be found ready. 0 be our 
strong habitation, to wliich we may continually re- 
sort for aU support and victory. And however it shall 
fare with the body, with this earth, and the nations 
of it, yet may Zion be kept as the apple of thine eye, 
and this be a year renowned for the building of her 
dear walls. And wilt thou work in me and all 
thy dear ministers, that we may be faithful in all 
thy work." 

From a letter to his son at College. 

"Canton, July 19, 1809. 

" My dear Son — How precious are our present 
probationary moments, and how ought sinners to 
awake without delay, and by faith in Christ to de- 
liver their souls from the horrible pit, as a roe from 
the hand of the hunter, and as a bird from the hand 
of the fowler. How many souls are lost by spiritual 



204 



JEREMIAH HALLOCB.. 



sloth and stupidity. Mankind, by nature, are such 
sluggards in the work of the Lord, they cannot win 
the immortal crown. 0 for quickening grace. 

" The judgments of Grod are heavy on the eastern 
world, and poor America must expect to drink of the 
cup of sorrow. But let us not sink into discourage- 
ment, for the good Lord liveth and ' taketh pleasure in 
them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy.' 
" Your affectionate FATHER." 

" Oct. 7. Rode to my dear father's, in Groshen. 
My beloved sister Mercy I found in her grave. She 
died the twenty-seventh of last month, in the thirty- 
fifth year of her age, having been very sick about four 
weeks. She was thought to be converted at about 
the age of four years, and ever appeared to bear the 
fruits of a Christian. Blessed be G-od for the gospel 
hope respecting her, and all who believe in Jesus. 
And 0, may this death be sanctified to the bereaved 
parents, and each of their surviving children. It was 
marvellous to me to find my dear parents have such 
support. 

" Aug. 5, 1810, Lord's day. Had more freedom 
than I expected in the forenoon; and much more 
this afternoon. So it is ; if at any time my poor soul 
can get any views of Jesus as Immanuel, it instantly 
lives. Last evening, my son Jeremiah returned from 
college, having closed his residence there. He has 
now returned to be a member of my family. 0 Lord, 
make me a father indeed to him. 0 help me to give 
him up to thee, and wilt thou direct him and respect- 
ing him, and make him thine, that he may serve 



HIS JOURNAL. 



thee. 0 may he become of Christ's body ; and if it 
is tliy will, make him a minister of Christ ; yet, not 
my will, but thine be done, for Jesus' sake. 

" Sept. 5. Attended Commencement at Williams 
college, and my son took his degree. He has been 
more than five years in getting his education. The 
cost has been not far from six hundred dollars. 0 
Lord, wilt thou make us thankful for thy innumera- 
ble mercies, and help us to live to thee. 0 may 
Christ be formed in the heart of Jeremiah, that he 
may serve the Lord, and that the time and cost of 
his education may not be consumed in the service of 
Satan. And 0, direct in mercy in respect to his 
profession ; and if consistent with thy will, may he 
be called of Grod into the gospel ministry, and may all 
his class-mates be blessed. How my soul longs to see 
him among his praying fellow-youth. 

" Oct. 26. Last Saturday rode to Norfolk. First 
sermon, on the spuitual table set before us. Psalm 
13 : 5. Second sermon, on Christ's building his 
church. Zechariah 6 : 12. In the evening, preached 
on the question, why a price is put into the hand of 
the heartless impenitent sinner. Proverbs 17 : 16. 
Found the dear Rev. Mr. Robbins in a low state of 
health — doubtful whether he will ever preach again. 
But he appeared strong in the Lord, and through 
grace to set a gospel example of patience and faith. 
Have great cause to be thankful that I live to see 
this aged servant of the Lord, whose conversation 
and conduct are so instructive and impressive. 

" Jan. 5, 1811. Saturday. Having written my 



205 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



sermons for the Sabbath, I would, through divine 
grace, devote this day to meditation, devotional read- 
ing, and prayer. I would be sparing of food at 
breakfast, and not eat afterwards till the sun be set. 
I purpose to examine myself in respect to my past 
life, especially the last year ; to lament before the 
Lord the absence of his Holy Spirit and the low state 
of religion among us, and to pray for his gracious re- 
turn ; to seek the aid and comfort of the Holy Spirit 
on the approaching Sabbath, especially in the worship 
and at the table of the Lord ; to pray over my ser- 
mons ; to renew my covenant and resolves ; to pray 
for all the ministers, churches, and interests of Jesus ; 
to pray for my family, parents, and relatives. 

" Jan. 6. I trust yesterday was not spent wholly 
in vain. Have had more freedom and aflections — 
whether they be spiritual and saving, 0 Lord, thou 
knowest — in family prayer, in public worship, and at 
the table, than is usual for me. 

" Jan. 20, 1811. Last Friday, Jeremiah went to 
Hebron, to study law with Judge Gilbert. I have 
longed and prayed that he might study divinity, and 
be a minister of the gospel ; I have felt exceedingly 
unwilling to have him go into the profession of the 
law. I consider it a scene of great temptation, and 
tremble for fear he will be led away and lost. But 
if it is not the mind of Christ to put him into the 
ministry, and if he may serve Christ with Moses and 
believing civilians, or in any other profession, though 
the lowest, how infinite will be the mercy, and may 
my soul say, Amen, and praise the Lord. 0 Lord, 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE 



207 



wilt thou allow and enable me to commit him wholly 
to thee for protection, for sanctification, for direction, 
and all things." 

To his son at Hebron. 

"Febkuary 4, 1811. 

" The only way for us sinners to prepare for 
death is by 'repentance toward Grod, and faith 
toward our Lord Jesus Christ,' in whom all fulness 
dwells for the weak and guilty sinner. 

" Homan and Sarah are gone to singing-school. 
How dreadful is the thought that any, after singing 
these pleasant notes on earth, should go to everlast- 
ing wailings. But unless born of the Spirit into true 
Usht and holy love, how shall we make spiritual 
melody to God here, and become meet to join the 
everlasting song above ? Yet let none, in view of 
their dependence on quickening grace, remain sloth- 
ful. AVho ever heard of God's shining with saving 
light into the heart of a stupid sinner ? 

"We have received no letter from you, but wait 
for one with anxiety. We wish to know how you 
like your new situation — what is the state of your 
health — what your temptations are, and how it is 
with your mind — whether you have tender serious 
thoughts, or are left to uncomfortable and alarming 
stupidity. 

" I know not which to esteem most, Moses or 
Aaron, Nehemiah or Ezra. Let our caUing be what 
it may, if it is pursued in the faith of Jesus it shall be 
well. I wish you, in all your letters, to use a filial 
freedom to your father — let me know your trials, 



208 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



doubts, hopes, and fears. Preserve the letters I write ; 
they may be of use to you when I am in the grave." 

To his parents. 

"Camton, Fl'1>. 11, 1811. 

"Honored and dear Parents — It is a day of 
great darkness over the land and world, but Grod will 
fulfil all his good promises concerning his church, 
and they who watch and keep their garments are 
blessed. The apostle speaks much about being cruci- 
fied to the world. And as that which is crucified is 
dead, so, to have the world crucified to us is to have 
it and its things dead to us, or like a putrid corpse, ] 
when considered as a portion, or as a motive to lead | 
us from Christ. Had the world been thus crucified | 
to those bidden to the great supper, it would not have 
hindered them from coming to it. And how blessed 
must it be to have the world thus dead to us in a 
dying hour. 

"How much we need the patience of the gospel 
hope in old age. I trust that through grace, my dear 
aged parents do, in some good measure, have it ; and 
that my infirm mother will be strong in weakness, 
and have heavenly support, according to her trials. 
Give my love to brother and sister Hosford, and his 
aged mother. We cannot forget little Alice, and I 
would go six miles to see her.. As I have not time 
to write to brother Moses, I hope you will remember 
my love to him and his — to brother Parse also and 
his. Let brother Moses, after you have read this — if 
vou have patience to read it — see it. I have lately 
received the following as a well authenticated fact. 



HIS CORRESPOJ^DENCE. 



209 



" In a certain place, last winter, they engaged a 
professed infidel to instruct a reading school. The 
school, when they came together one day in the after- 
noon, were not able to read. The teacher, after sev- 
eral vam attempts to have them proceed as usual, sent 
one of his scholars to the neighboring house of a Chris- 
tian professor, to request him to come mto the school. 
It so was that the minister was at this Christian's 
house, and went with him to the school. As an 
awakening had begun in the town, the minister had 
little doubt what was the occasion of this state of 
things. \y"hen he came in and saw the solemn ap- 
pearance, he first said to the teacher, ' Sir, what is 
the matter with your school ?' He replied, ' I do not 
know.' Said the minister, ' Have you not been cor- 
recting them ?' The master answered, ' No, we have 
had no disturbance.' ' Well,' said the minister, ' what 
then can be the matter ?' ' I cannot tell,' replied the 
master. ' But you must have some opinion about it ; 
tell me what you think it is.' Not able to endure any 
longer, the poor Deist burst out in tears and said, ' I 
believe it is the Spirit of God ;' and in a short time 
the teacher and fifteen of the scholars had hope in 
Christ. I had this the other evening from the mouth 
of a worthy Christian brother, who was knowing to 
the fact. 0 when shall these saving waters of the 
sanctuary become an impassable river ? 

" I send mother a little tea, to let her know I 
have not forgotten her. 

" From your affectionate son, 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 



210 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



To his son al Hebron. 

'•Marcu 4, 1811. 

" My dear Jeremiah — It affects me when I think 
of you, absent from home and among strangers, per- 
haps sick, and with little pecuniary aid. But when 
I think of that state of sin and alienation from God, 
in which all the children of Adam are by nature, it 
looks more affecting. If we have a saving acquaint- 
ance with G-od in Christ, though among strangers; 
if we have tribulation in the world, but peace in 
Jesus; if outwardly poor, but rich in faith, we are 
happy, and have cause for constant and strong conso- 
lation. But if moral strangers to Grod, spiritually 
absent from him, under condemnation, and always 
liable to be cut off and sent to eternal shame and 
perdition, how fearful and gloomy. Let us then first 
seek that wisdom which consisteth in the fear of God, 
and with all our getting, labor for a true understand- 
ing of the glory of God in the face of Jesus. 

" From your affectionate FATHER." 

" May 17. To-day, Mr. Samuel John Mills, Jun., 
candidate, preached for us. His first sermon was on 
depravity; his second, on giving aU to Christ. His 
preaching was spiritual and edifying. 0 Lord, make 
me thankful for thy mercy to thy servant Mills, in 
giving him such a son. May he ba made a faithful 
missionary and minister of Jesus, a great blessing 
to Zion ; and may my heart rejoice in the good of 
others ; and 0, wilt thou remember my poor Jeremiah 
and each of my children." 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 



211 



To his younger sDii at a boarding-school in Sharon. 

"Castom, Jan. 21, 1812. 

•' My dear Son — I think of you every day, and 
you cannot tell how much I feel your absence. One 
of the calamities of the present world is, that we do 
not sufficiently value our mercies until they are 
taken from us. 

"I find I am becoming old and feeble; and 
though the Lord makes Augustus a comfort to me, 
and though the people are kind in furnishing plenty 
of wood, yet the care of the fires and cattle, with my 
other labors, is almost too much for me." 

In the latter part of this letter, Mr. Hallock as- 
sociates with his son several youth from Canton, who 
were at the same school, and addresses them : 

" My dear young friends, a gloomy vacancy is 
made in our families by your absence. But were 
you removed to the land of silence, never to return, 
it would be far increased. If you should all live to 
return, and then find all your friends alive, the mercy 
would be great. We ought always to live as tho.se 
who wait for their Lord, not knowing when he will 
come. "Without an interest in Christ, none can go to 
heaven, and learning and every thing else will be in 
vain, yea, far worse than in vain. In a letter lately 
received from a missionary in Vermont, are these 
words : ' Tell your dear precious youth that Grod hath 
mercy in store for those who remember him while 
young.' Unspeakably the best time to serve the 
Lord is in youth and health. To delay until sick- 
ness or old age, is lilie delaying to build a house until 



212 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



the coldest day in winter. Do and get as much guoJ 
as you can — watch against all evil to which we aro 
ever exposed. Farewell. Your real friend, 

'^JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 

"July 2. I this day returned from a tour of 
preaching, with that dear servant of Christ, brotli r 
Gillett. Tuesday, June 23, we preached at Goslu n, 
and in the tour we visited both societies in Cuimvall, 
Warren, Kent, both societies in Sharon, Sahsbury, 
and both societies in Canaan, having been from home 
ten days. Though feeble in body and mind, have 
been carried through. In almost every place, there 
are spiritual droppings, and in some, particularly 
Kent and South Canaan, the beginning of a spiritual 
shower. Though one youth, s'ince I have been gone, 
has been drowned, yet my dear wife and children 
have been preserved, and my family and friends are 
in usual health. 0 Lord, 'so teach us to number 
our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.' 

" The day before I set out, heard that war was 
declared against England. It much affected me. It 
appears to me sin and folly to enter into tliis war. 0 
Lord, may thy people humble themselves, return and 
trust in thee, and wilt thou be known in Zion for a 
refuge, and in wrath remember mercy." 

This tour of preaching was by appointment of the 
association, for the benefit of churches under its care 
which enjoyed the labors of settled pastors. 

" November 5, 1812. This day went with my son 
Jeremiah to Hartford, and left him there to take the 



PAK.TS WITH HIS SON 



2i3 



stage, to-morrow, for Pittsburgh. Thence, he expects 
to go into the state of Ohio, to enter on the profession 
of law. My mind turned on the divine government, 
which, I think, looked glorious and afforded sweet 
peace to my soul. I trust, I was enabled in some 
degree to give up my dear child to Grod, and leave 
him at the feet of Jesus. Made such observations to 
him on the way as I thought might be useful. About 
two o'clock parted with him and returned home. 0 
Lord of all mercy, wilt thou lead his heart to thee, 
and be his guide and protection ; make him useful in 
Zion and the world, and happy in Jesus; prepare his 
parents for thy whole will respecting him." 

The trial of the pious father on this occasion, 
seems to have been not altogether unlike that of 
Abraham, as he went forth to offer up his beloved 
Isaac ; and in neither case did the Lord forsake his 
servant. Speaking of this journey afterwards to a 
number of friends, Mr. Halloek remarked, that when 
he took his seat in the wagon he expected it would 
be the gloomiest day of his life, but that he found it 
one of the happiest — that his mind was sweetly revolv- 
ing the words of that precious Psalm : 

■' The Lord, how absolute he reign.s," etc. 

It was probably now, that he addressed his son 
with tender emphasis and tears : " Jeremiah, I have 
been long ] raying and hoping that you might be a 
minister of the gospel — my expectation is at length 
cut off — I see it is not the will of Christ to employ 
you in this way. And now, my son, I want to ask 
you one question, IF/// yo?/ he the viinister''s friend?''^ 



2H 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



CHAPTER IX. 

REVIVALS IN 1812 AKD 1813 — DEATH OF HIS ONLY 
DAUOHTER— CORRESPONDENCE. 

The Lord now gladdened Mr. Hallock's heart by 
a third special work of grace among his dear people. 

"Dec. 6, 1812. Lord's day. Texts: 'Come, my 
people, enter thou into thy chambers,' etc. Isa. 26 : 20, 
21. ' What wilt thou say, when I shall punish thee ?' 
Jeremiah 13 : 21. More freedom than usual for me. 
Last Thursday evening, the prayer-meeting was better 
attended than common, and to me it was more solemn. 
Three young men are under conviction, and there is 
the appearance of a little cloud. 0 that it might, 
through infinite mercy, be increased, and the church 
be quickened. 

" Dec. 27. Last Thursday was kept as a day of 
fasting and prayer by this church and a number of 
the society. Had a prayer-meeting at our house in 
the forenoon. At one, went to the meeting-house — 
had two sermons, three prayers, and three songs of 
the Lord. The sermons were spiritual, instructive, 
and impressive. Met again in the evening ; Rev. Mr. 
Jerome preached. Rev. Mr. GUlett exhorted. All the 
meetings were full, and more serious than usual for 
us. The contention about singing appears to be sub- 
siding, and things look like peace. An awakened 
youth has, the past week, obtained a gleam of hope. 
One was examined this intermission, and propounded 



REVIVALS, 



215 



this afternoon, to join the church. Saw a young man 
at noon in tears for his soul. ' Not unto us, 0 Lord, 
not unto us, but unto thy name give glory.' ' 0 the 
Hope of Israel.' Have had more freedom in aU the 
public exercises than I expected, and more attention. 
' Praise the Lord, 0 my soul.' 

" Jan. 1, 1813, Friday. Spent the forenoon in 
meditation, and WTitlng on Isa. 44 : 3-5 : ' I will pour 
water on Ixim that is thirsty,' etc. Preached in the 
afternoon, before the Lord's supper. Two youth were 
present, apparent converts, who at the time of our 
last like meeting were in a state of stupidity. Some 
were present who, to appearance, are subjects of con- 
viction. 0 the Hope of Israel, carry on thy glorious 
work, and fill thy people with thy love and praise." 

To his son in Ohio. 

"January 26, 1813. 

" It has been my wish and resolve to bring up my 
children for Christ. My great desire is, that you 
might be his ; and I trust I do not cease to pray for 
you, and especially that he might be formed in your 
heart the hope of glory. 0 my dear Jeremiah, know 
that you are a sinner, a child of wrath by nature ; 
and do not rest short of winning Clirist and his ful- 
ness as your portion. And know, that we have no 
time to lose in this great inatter. May the Grod of 
Abraham direct your way and bless you, and give 
you prosperity in your profession ; but above all, make 
you rich towards God. Your dear mother wants I 
should caution you against all evil company and temp- 
tations to sin, and advise you to choose those who fear 



216 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



the Tiord for your companions, and to feel your entire 
dependence on him. 

" From your affectionate rATHEB." 

" March 7. Lecture before the Lord's supper. 
To-day there were three to one at meeting compared 
with our common number, though I was still barren 
in prayer and preaching. 0 Lord, make me humble 
in thy sight for my hardness, and quicken my dead 
soul. 0, most merciful Redeemer, are there not signs 
that thy Spirit is moving among us, and wilt thou not 
take the work into thine own hands, and malce un- 
toward hearts wiUing in this day of thy power? 0 
quicken, pardon, and strengthen me." 

Feelings not unlike these Mr. Hallock once ex- 
pressed to a Christian friend: " After I have been all 
day among my people, witnessed the relief and comfort 
of young converts, and the humble thankfulness of old- 
er Christians for the good Spirit of God among us, I 
come home to try to review my own conduct and look 
into my own heart. Though all the people seem to be 
moved, I find myself so blind and dead, that I am 
ready to conclude I am nothing but rottenness and 
hypocrisy. Sometimes, after I go to bed, I have rest- 
less, anxious nights, and am so agitated in view of 
my sin and deadness, that my bed shakes under me." 
Yet he was often raised above these depressing views, 
and then his comfort and gratitude were expressed 
with a simplicity and humility pecuhar to himself. 

In a printed sermon already noticed he says, 
" This awakening began among the youth, and ap- 



REVIVALS 



217 



peared gradually to increase thjough. the following 
winter and spring. In this season of grace, twenty- 
eight joined the church." 

To his son in Ohio. 

March 6, 1813. 

" My dear Chii.d — "\Ye yesterday received your 
letter, dated February 4, which gave us the affecting 
account of your late journeys and hardships. The 
Lord has strengthened and preserved you, and to 
him be all the praise. The montlis of your absence 
are tedious to your parents. Your dear aunt Cliloe 
Humphrey has fallen by the putrid pleurisy. It 
deeply affects your uncle, and he has set up prayets 
in his family. Five have lately obtained hope — sev- 
eral are under concern — we have frequent meetings, 
which are seriously attended. Your dear mother 
wants to have you write with whom you live — the 
moral and religious state of the people — whether the 
Lord's day is observed, and you have preaching or 
religious meetings. 0 Jeremiah, my chief concern is 
for your precious soul, that you may serve Christ 
and share in his salvation. This world, at best, is so 
vain and uncertain ; did we own the whole of it, we 
should be undone WTctches, out of Christ. But in 
him, the most poor in other respects are rich indeed, 
yea, interested in the fulness of Grod. Do not neglect 
to read, daily, the word of life, to pray, to meditate ; 
and may the Holy Spirit show you the things of Jesus. 
I wish you would write once a month. Have you a 
Bible ? Write a few words about the state of yoiur 

HaliocL. 1 0 



218 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



mind. Eternity is at the door. Be strictly honest. 
Strive to do good. Grandmother sends her love. The 
rest of us sign our names in testimony of affection. 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK, 
'•MERCY HALLOCK, 
" WM. H. HALLOCK, 
"SARAH HALLOCK." 

To the same. 

"July 3, 1813. 

" My dear Child — Having you daily in my mind, 
and hearing your affectionate mother often speak of 
you, I have set apart this day for meditation, and to 
write to you. Tlu-ough divine mercy, our family are 
yet in usual health, except Sarah, who has, this 
morning, some symptoms of the spotted-fever. Our 
outward circumstances are comfortable. The summer 
is warm — we have refreshing showers, and a favor- 
able prospect as to the fruits of the earth. The fever 
has been distressing in Barkhamsted. The dear Rev. 
Mr. Eells is among the fallen — sick about three days. 
He was a precious servant of Jesus Christ, and 
though dead yet speaketh. 

" No troops have as yet been called for from us, 
to guard our coast ; though some from the eastern 
part of the state are called to New London. We fear 
Homan will be called for. 

" In respect to spiritual matters, eleven stand 
propounded and expect to join the church to-morrow. 
I hope as many more will soon come forward, though 
I fear the attention is decUning. The work is power- 
ful at New Hartford. 0 when shall I be able to 



REVIVALS. 



219 



write these things to you respectmg Homan and 
Sarah, and the rest of our family, and to hear of them 
from you and D ? The converts naturally ad- 
dress their mates in the language of Moses to his 
brother-in-law, ' Come thou with us, and we will do 
thee good, for the Lord hath spoken good concerning 
Israel.' I fear my great unfaithfulness is the reason 
that my poor family is so passed by. I think both 
Homan and Sarah have been more attentive. 

" 0 Jeremiah, outward comforts are desirable, but 
the great thing is a portion in Jesus Christ, and that 
rest which remameth for his people. The Lord make 
darkness light before you. 

" From your parents, who feel daily and much 
for you." 

"Aug. 2. This morning, my son Homan set out 
as a soldier for New London. 0 Lord, in mercy 
save him from sin, from the pestilence, and from the 
sword, and return him in safety, if thou wilt. 

" Sept. 19. Last Friday evening, my son returned 
from his military tour of forty-five days, in health. 
Make me thankful, 0 Lord, and help us all to live 
to thee. Sanctify the child. I perceive Sarah, my 
dear daughter, is thoughtful ; 0 may she become an 
unfeigned believer in Jesus." 

The reader has already seen that Mr. Hallock 
was not left of his heavenly Father " without chastise- 
ment." We come now to a scene of severe and pro- 
tracted domestic afflictions. 

" Thurs^dav, Oct. 14, 1813. Last week on Thurs- 



220 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



day, my dear daughter Sarah was taken with a chiU, 
which was followed by a slight fever. On Friday, 
she took an emetic, which operated well, but did not 
relieve her. The next two days, her disorder in- 
creased — it was more threatening on Monday, when 
my dear friend Dr. Everest came to see her in the 
morning ; before this. Dr. Everett had visited her. 

" On Tuesday the fever, which was of the typhus 
spotted kind, still raged, and the child appeared to be 
sinking under it. Wednesday, about four o'clock in 
the morning, it was feared by the watchers that she 
was dying ; we were all called up. 0 solemn, trying 
scene ! I did not think she would breathe many 
minutes, but on the application of spirits she a little 
revived. The physician came early, and tarried all 
day. In the afternoon we took a little courage, but 
about nine in the evening she was more unwell ; our 
hopes very much subsided, and our fears prevailed. 
She has had a tossing, deranged, distressing night, 
and this morning appears to be wasting away, and 
sinking into the arms of death. 

"And now, 0 Lord, what shall I say, and where 
shall I go but to thee? I know my sins and guilt 
are great ; I have not been faithful as I ought to have 
been as a parent, especially in spiritual things. She 
was shapen in iniquity, and her sins are great. But 
0, our heavenly Father, thou hast of thy great love 
given thy Son Jesus Christ to die for us sinners. He 
hath died for us, and his blood cleanseth from all sin; 
but such is the sinful hardness of the h'lman heart, 
that unless born of thy Holy Spirit, none will believe. 



dlS DAUaHTER'S SICKJ^ESS. 221 

and share in the salvation of the Redeemer. But 0, 
thou exalted Saviour, exalted at thy Father's right 
hand to give repentance, 0 form her heart anew by 
thy blessed Spirit. 0 our Father in heaven — for the 
Father and Son are one — wilt thou effectually 
teach and draw her to the Son ; shine with thy divine 
rays in the face of Jesus into her dark mind, that 
she may be a sharer in the light of life. She is thine 
by creation and preservation, 0 pity the work of thine 
own hands. She is bought by the blood of Christ, 
has been given to him by prayer — whether in true 
faith thou, 0 Lord, knowest — and I would now, her 
mother joining with me, stUl give her up to thee, soul 
and body, to be 'disposed of, in time and in eternity, 
in life and in death, according to thy holy pleasure ; 
hoping in thy gi-eat mercy in Jesus Christ ; imploring 
through him her sanctification and pardon and eter- 
nal life. If she may live, 0 Lord Jesus, may she 
be thy handmaid, and an obedient child for thy 
sake. If it is thy will to take her now out of the 
world, help us to say from the heart, ' Thy will be 
done ;' and 0 may she be thine in death, and go and 
serve thee in heaven. "We are unworthy of the least 
common mercy: how much more so of thy dear 
children's bread — of thy Spirit and its perfect gifts ? 
But we would plead thy great mercy to sinners, the 
blood and righteousness of thy dear Son, and our 
almighty Saviour — the glory of the Father, Son, and 
Holy Ghost, one glorious Jehovah, and the increase 
and joy of thy kingdom. 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK. " 



2:>2 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

"Oct. 15, ten o'clock in -the morning. At four 
we were called up, it being supposed that Sarah was 
dying; she a little revived, hut now appears to be 
sinking very fast. 0 Lord Jesus, thou almighty, 
most merciful Saviour, 0 help us to submit, and to 
resign her up to thee and to our heavenly Father, in 
and through thee. It is all that we can do — it is all 
that thou now requirest of us respecting her, and 
may it be all we would wish to do — to leave her in 
thy almighty, merciful hands. 0 sanctify her heart, 
forgive her sins, and clothe her naked soul in the 
white raiment of Jesus. 0 Lord Jesus, wilt thou 
receive her departing spirit in mercy. 0 heavenly 
Father, wilt thou accept of her, in and through thy 
dear Son. Amen. 

" Oct. 16, Saturday morning. This morning, at 
half-past twelve o'clock, Sarah ceased to breathe, her 
age being fourteen years and six months. She had 
been unusually agreeable, fiUal, and endearing, for 
a number of months before her sickness. She has 
evidently been a subject of conviction since last 
March, and has had an impressive sense of her de- 
pravity, guilt, and danger, and of the nearness of death 
and eternity. Many prayers were made on her be- 
half in her sickness, and especially for her soul. There 
was a general sympathy in her case.- 0 Lord, help 
me and her mother to be thankful for these things 
and the blessed gospel hope, to be still and know that 
thou art God, and to make a spiritual improvement 
of this thy holy rod ; and wilt thou be our support 
and consolation, and make her death spiritually 



HIS DAUaHTER'S DEATH. 223 

profitable to her surviving brothers, the grand- 
parents, and all the relatives— to her mates, and 
every one. 

"Oct. 17, Lord's day. To-day attended Sarah's 
funeral. The dear Mr. Mills of Torr mgford preached 
on ' f he heart of the wise is in the house of mourn- 
ing.' Her precious remains were carried into the 
meeting-house; the assembly was large: she was 
beloved m life and lamented m death. 0 may we 
bless the Lord, in taking as well as in giving ; and 
truly say, His loill he done. 

"Oct. 24. The past has been a sorrowful week. 
I did not know how dear she was, until I found 
myself bereaved of her." 

The compiler well remembers his first interview 
with Mr. HaUock. It was nearly a year after this 
bereavement, and in company with a friend who, 
like hknself, was a stranger to the man of God. 
The soft appUances of Christianity had now soothed, 
but not closed the deep wound, in his heart. After 
a little conversation on general topics, he stated the 
touching circumstances of his daughter's death, and 
read one or two letters which, a little before her sick- 
ness, she had sent to some youthful companions, and 
which were the more valuable as containing some 
evidence of her preparation for an early grave. On 
his leavmg the room, I turned to my friend, tears fell 
from his eyes, his frame shook, he remamed silent 
for some moments. It was indeed an overwhelming 
exhibition of the triumph of grace in the midst of 
parental sorrow. For a number of years the name of 



224 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



Sarah was often on Mr. Hallock's lips, either to show 
his undying affection in the circle of particular friends, 
or to give tender and solemn interest to truth in the 
religious conference. The following letter to his son 
in Ohio was written immediately after her death. 

To his .Son in Ohio. « 

"My dear Child — I wrote to you last month. In 
that and in former letters I could write that all our 
family were alive, and commonly that they were in 
health. But now it is otherwise. For I must tell 
you that your dear and promising sister Sarah is in 
her grave. Solemn thought ! almost too overwhelm- 
ing for me to write, or you to hear. But let us be 
still and know that the Lord hath done it, and that 
his ways are most just, good, and wise, and that his 
rod will be most profitable to the humble. He 'is 
very pitiful, and of tender mercy.' 

" Sarah, for ten months past, has been peculiarly 
filial and agreeable, so that we have noticed her 
steady, womanly actions. As I wrote, she has been 
the subject of serious impressions the past spring and 
summer. In a letter to one of her mates, dated last 
March, she writes, after mentioning the attention of 
numbers, 'And now, Polly, does not this look as if 
the Lord is beginning his work among us ? It does, 
indeed, to me. And why cannot you and I pray to 
Him who is able to pluck us out of the fire as fire- 
brands ? I do hope that these things will not wear 
off our minds.' In another letter, dated in May, she 
writes, 'My thoughts are these to-day : 0, how vain 
and trifling is this world. It is a wonder that I am 



ins DAUOHTER'S DEATH 



225 



not cut off. Nothing can soften our hard hearts but 
the Almighty's hand. If he is willing, he can save at 
the last moment. He is allowing us to come to him ; 
every day he uives us a free ofler. 0 what unwor- 
thy creatures we are, not worthy to live. If I had my 
deserts, I had gone down to hell long ago.' The follow- 
ing lines are extracted from another of her papers, dat- 
ed July 23, 1813, written in health, not three months 
before her death : ' I think myself, how uncertain life 
is. We do not know at what time He may come 
and call us to his bar. But if we are only prepared, 
it will be no matter how soon. I think that I have not 
a gi-eat while to live ; I am on the brink of eternity.' 

"Her anxiety, the past summer, has been great, 
and her feelings exceedingly tender respecting her 
brothers. As she went to the grammar-school, she 
often visited the post-office, to see if there was not a 
letter from you or Homan. 

" Thursday morning, the seventh instant, she sat 
at breakfast with us for the last time. Soon after 
she said, 'Ma, ma, how cold I am !' She kept about, 
though drooping — had a restless night. Saturday, 
the physician was called. Lord's day, no better : I 
exchanged with Mr. Mills ; returned about ten o'clock 
in the evening ; found her exceedingly sick. She 
expressed an apprehension, as she had done from the 
first, that she could not recover. She told me she 
hoped she could trust in Christ. From this time she 
was unable to converse. She grew worse, Monday, 
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday. Fri- 
day evening her piercing groans penetrated every 
10' 



2-H] JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

room in the house. About eleven her groans ceased 
and she appeared to lie easy, hut rattled in her throat. 
This rather increased until half past twelve, when 
she expired without a struggle. Her fever was typhus. 
0 my son, you have lost an amiable, affectionate 
sister, who bade fair to be a comfort and an honor to 
you and to her parents, to the church and to the 
Avorld. The sympathy was general; Dr. Everest 
remained by her night and day. Every human means 
was used, and the prayers of Zion were made with- 
out ceasing on her behalf; but her appointed time 
was come, and she must go. Mr. Mills preached her 
funeral-sermon on the Lord's day. Her body was 
carried to the meeting-house ; her funeral procession, 
though it was rainy, was perhaps as great as we ever 
had : all Canton mourned over fallen Sarah. 

" The wound is deep and lasting. It cuts like a 
knife ; it pierces like a sword. But in the midst of 
the lightning and thunder there is a rainbow about 
His* throne. And now let us bless the Lord, see the 
emptiness of the world, realize the value of the glo- 
rious gospel of Jesus, the certainty of his coming, and 
his near approach ; prize this chastening of the Lord, 
and make a penitent, believing, prayerful use of it. 

"From your affectionate mourning parents, 

"JEREMIAH AND MERCY HALLOCK." 

* It was coiiunon with Mr. Hallock in this manner to speak 
of God. He often commenced prayer, in a small circle, with- 
out uttering any of the divine names. In a person of less depth 
of piety this might have heen exceptionable; but in one who 
appeared habitually to hold communion with his God, it seemed 
like the language of nature, and was often very impressive 



HIS DAUGHTER S DEATH 



227 



In describing to friends the scene of his daughter's 
departure, Mr. Hallock said, 

" Before the child was quite gone, if I had seen a 
man coming in the street — it would have made no 
difference whether he was a beggar, or in his coach 
and six — I should wish to say to him, ' Friend, do 
you love the Lord Jesus Christ? If you* do, you are 
the man we want to see. Come in and kneel down 
with us and pray for our dear dying daughter.' 

"At the moment her spirit left her body, these 
four truths pressed upon my mind with amazing in- 
terest : 

" 1. 0 the worth of the immortal soul ! 

" 2. 0 the value of an interest in Christ ! 

"3. 0 the emptmess of this world ! 

"4. 0 the solemnity of the close of probation ! 

" "When I saw she had breathed her last breath I 
almost involuntarily spread out my hands, and kneel- 
ed down and said, ' Come, let us pray.' But there 
was an awful vacancy. She who had so filled our 
supplications was no longer a subject of prayer. I 
seemed for a short time not to knoio what to pray 
for. The solemnity of the moment was past utter- 
ance." 

A new and protracted scene of domestic affliction 
soon opened. 

"Nov. 19, 1813. Friday. Nineteen days after 
Sarah's death, my dear son "VViUiam Homan, in his 
seventeenth year, was taken with the fever of which 
his dear sister died. This is the sixteenth day of his 



2-8 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



fever, and he is very low ; it is doubtful, to human 
view, whether he continues through the day. 

"And what shall I say ? what shall I do ? where 
shall I go ? 0 Lord, keep me from murmuring ; I 
would be dumb, because it is thy hand, nor would I 
trust in man or go to creatures ; but in thee would I 
trust, the everlastmg God of all power, grace, and 
salvation, and to thee would I go, who sayest, ' Call 
upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, 
and thou shalt glorify me.' 0 Lord Jesus, thou know- 
est whether tliis sick child can live. Thou art the 
great and everlasting Physician of soul and body. 0 
appear for our help, ere the child die. WiU it not be 
for thy glory, 0 Lord Jesus, to raise him up — to hear 
our prayers for his recovery ? 0, if it is thy will to 
grant us this great mercy, bestow it upon us, and pre- 
pare us to receive it, that thanksgiving and praise 
may be rendered to thy great and glorious name. But 
0, his precious and immortal soul, wUt thou save it 
from sin and from wrath. Tliis great spiritual salva- 
tion was thy errand into the world, and now I would 
come to thee for this unspeakable mercy. Thou dost 
suffer parents to bring their children to thee, implor- 
ing for them thy spiritual, eternal, saving mercies, 
0 heavenly Father, wilt thou by thy good Spirit open 
his understanding and his heart to receive thy dear 
Son, and make him a partaker of his fulness. He is 
a sinner by nature and by practice, and deserving the 
curse of thy law. I am sinful and unworthy of the 
least favor, how much more so of these eternal bless- 
ings ; but I would plead thy gi-eat mercy in the Lord 



HIS SON'S SICKNESS. 229 

Jesus; I would plead his atoning blood and right- 
eousness, the travail of his soul, and the edification of 
his kingdom. 0 most merciful God, if it can be con- 
sistent with thy will, that he might leave some evi- 
dence of his being a subject of gospel faith and par- 
don — but 0, that in this I might also be resigned. 
And now, 0 Lord my God, whose are all creatures, 
worlds, and things, and whose is the everlasting do- 
minion in the world of nature and of grace, wilt thou 
help us, his parents, to give him up without reserve 
to thee, soul and body, for time and eternity, implor- 
ing that he may be thine, through sanctification of 
thy Holy Spirit, in life and in death, and a sharer iu 
the pardon and great salvation of thy glorious gospel ; 
and that we may never consider him as ours, but as 
given to thee. To wliich may I, through thy assist- 
ing grace, sincerely sign my name, this nineteenth 
day of November, 1813. 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 

" The child lay for about tlxree hours in an appar- 
ently dying state — his extremities cold — ^his head 
stretched back — ^liis breath very short, attended with 
a quick, wiry, dying pulse. For several hours, we 
expected every minute to see him expire. But the 
Grod of Zion, who can save to the uttermost, was pleas- 
ed to keep his expiring breath, and to revive him. 
Encouraging symptoms attended him the following 
night and the day afterwards, Saturday, November 20. 
But he was worse Saturday evening and on the Sab- 
bath, so that I expected all day to be called out of the 
meeting-house to see him die. But the Lord was 



230 



JEKEMIAH HALLOCK 



pleased to revive him again, of his great mercy. On 
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, things still looked 
encouraging respecting his recovery. 

" On Friday the 26th, Mrs. Hallock was taken 
with the fever, and was sick about four weeks, though 
at no time so low as Homan had been. To have her 
fail was exceedingly trying to body and mind. Hav- 
ing lately bviried my only davighter, to have Mrs. 
Hallock, and m.y only surviving child at home, both 
sick in two adjacent rooms, overwhelmed my spirits. 
But I was favored with usual health, and enabled to 
preach on the Sabbath. 

" On the 20th of December, I was myself violent- 
ly seized with the fever. I had been unwell a num- 
ber of days, and kept about, hoping it would wear 
off'; but now it came on like a whirlwind, and I was 
lost, for the most part, about twelve days. I have 
now, March 14, 1814, been confined by sickness from 
public worship thirteen Sabbaths, and the most of 
the time confined to my room. I have had two re- 
lapses, and am now feeble, but just able to walk out 
a few rods in a pleasant day. These have been weari- 
some days and weBks. But my dear Saviour has not 
left me to sink in despondency. Sometimes, I trust, 
I have had refreshing views of the truth as it is in 
Jesus, and our trials have been mixed with countless 
mercies. Though the first two who had the fever 
died, namely. Deacon Andrew Mills* and Sarah, yet, 

* This was the beloved friend of Mr. Hallock. whose re- 
iDoval to Vermont and great visefulness there, have already 
heen recorded. While on a visit to Canton, he fell a victim to 



HIS OWN SICKNESS, 



231 



llrs. Hallock and Homan are restored to comfortable 
health, and I am much better ; and we are not called 
to sorrow for the deceased without hope. 

"The pulpit has been supplied, for the most part, 
by friendly neighboring ministers. The people have 
also been exceedingly kind and helpful, not only in 
word, but in deeds. Besides watching by night, and 
helping by day, and sending in needful articles, they 
have given us not less than a hundred dollars in 
money. The young men, the day after Thanksgiving, 
gave me forty-eight dollars in silver, and the female 
youth presented Mrs. Hallock a muff and tippet. 
0, may I see all these helps from the Lord, and feel 
my increased obligations to him and his people. And 
may the parents and children be blessed of the Lord, 
and rewarded of his great mercy in Jesus a thousand- 
fold for their works of sympathy and love. 

" Since I have been sick and shut up, this eccle- 
siastical society have agreed to build a house for pub- 
lic worship, and they appear to have adopted wise 
and energetic measures for its speedy accomplishment. 
This I consider a very great mercy, and may the 
Lord bless and succeed them. 

"April 8, 1814. State Fast. Had a reading meet- 
ing in the forenoon, and preached this afternoon from 
Joel 2 : 12. Had more strength and freedom than I 
expected. This is the first of my preaching since the 
19th of December, having been unable to preach for 

this fever, after an illness of three weeks, at Mr. Halloek's 
house. He died a few days before Miss Sarah Halloek was 
taken sick. 



232 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

sixteen Sabbaths. 0 Lord, if it is thy will to restore 
me to health again, wilt thou make me thankful, and 
help me to meet every trial and temptation, to be 
more faithful in the ministry of Jesus, and to serve 
thee better than I have ever done, to thy glory and 
the edification of thy people." 

The fact seems worthy of record, that besides 
these Sabbaths and a very few more just before his 
death, Mr. Halloek was prevented from preacliing only 
one Sabbath in the whole course of his pastoral life. 
In seasons of illness he ever exhibited, in attrac- 
tive lustre, the mild and lovely graces of the Chris- 
tian. At such times he seemed to make an effort to 
lighten the cares of those around him; while the 
expression of his warm thanks for every little atten- 
tion served at once to strengthen their personal attach- 
ment and heighten their already high opinion of his 
piety. 

Letter to his Son in Ohio 

"April 6, 1814. 

"Beloved Child — In my last letter to you I gave 
you an account of the death of dear Sarah, which 
caused us daily tears. I gave you some particulars 
respecting the state of her mind before and in her 
sickness, which we cannot but consider a precious 
ground of hope that it is far better with her now, 
than when she was with us. She appeared to me to 
be one of those self-diffident converts, who give evi- 
dence to others, while they profess no hope for them- 
selves, and who often make the best members of the 
church. 



HIS CORRESPOKDENCE. 



233 



"I would now give you the outline of what has 
come to pass in our family since I wrote, and which 
will account for my not writing sooner. Novemher 
4, seventeen days after Sarah's funeral, Homan was 
taken with the same fever. It soon assumed a very 
formidable appearance' — we generally had two watch- 
ers. Dr. Everest gave as constant and faithful at- 
tendance as he had done in the other case. At his 
request we sent for Dr. Bestor. Paint to yourself the 
situation of your parents :. their only daughter recently 
laid in the dust ; their elder son, whom they loved as 
their own eyes, in a far country ; and their only 
remaining son in this situation. But 0, the sixteenth 
day of his fever, on which he appeared to be as really 
dying as Sarah did just before she expired: we 
expected for more than two hours that every minute 

would be his last. Mr. E. C , who was in and 

went home, said to his wife, 'I believe poor Homan 
is dead before now.' AVe had done giving medicme, 
and were waiting the dreadful moment. 0, how in- 
supportable it looked to be deprived of them both. 
But the Grod of all mercy and help was pleased to 
appear for us, and restore him, though the scales 
hung in trembling doubt for a week or more, and it 
was some weeks before he was able to go out. He is 
now in good health, and the Lord makes him no 
little comfort to his sorrowful parents. And now let 
the Father of lights have all the praise for ever and 
ever. 

"Your dear mother was taken with the fever the 
26th of November, ten days after we supposed Homan 



234 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



•was dying ; she was sick about twenty days, but not 
so severely. I never came nearer fainting than when 
deprived of her help, and seeing the mother sick in 
one room, and the child in the other. The forepart of 
December, Homan was so well that I drew him in 
his chair into the study — he had lain in the parlor — 
he begged of me not to draw him back into that 
dreadful room, which was like the realms of sickness 
and death. He of course had a bed brought into the; 
study. When his mother, who lay in the bed-room, 
was able to sit in her chair by the kitchen fire, after 
she had sat a little while, I desired her to lie down. 
She replied, / must first go in and see Homan. It 
was one of the most exquisitely agreeable visits I 
ever witnessed. Your loving mother, by divine grace, 
is now in comfortable health, and a great blessing to 
her family. 

"On the 20th December, previously worn down 
with fatigue, anxiety, and sorrow, I was violently 
seized with the fever. I lost my reason in half an hour, 
and can remember but little for about two weeks. 
By trying to get about too soon, I have had two re- 
lapses, each of about twelve days. The most of the 
time for three tedious months I have been confined to 
my room, and much of it to my restless bed ; but, 
through mercy, am now in a great measure comfort- 
able, and hope to begin to preach again next Sabbath, 
Grod willing. Thus are we called to sing of his mer- 
cies and his rod ; but it appears to me that his mer- 
cies far exceed. 

" There has been the winter past, and is, a gen- 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 



235 



eral awakening in Simsbury. It has been po-sveiful 
in Hartford, and is great in Wethersfield. The civil 
and military events of the world are astonisliing, but 
not more so than what God is doing for Zion. The 
religious accounts from Europe and Asia, in the mag- 
azine for last month, are wonderful. I feel some- 
times as if the glorious day must be nigh ; and 
happy are they who are prepared for it. I have late 
and direct intelligence from- Goshen and Plainfield. 
Your grandfather Hallock has become very infirm, 
as well as grandmother. Your uncle Moses, and all 
the rest, well. It has been a healthy time in this 
town. There were eleven deaths the last year, be- 
sides Sarah's. This year, four. One is that precious 

man 0. C , who was instantly killed in felling a 

tree, aged thirty-five — ^he has hardly left his equal, of 
his age, in the place. Through a most kind provi- 
dence, not one has taken the fever from us, though so 
much with us, and forgetting as it were their own 
lives. Your dear sister has left a number of letters, 
altogether on spiritual matters, which, if we live, I 
intend to copy and send you. We cannot express the 
comfort your last sympathizing letter was to us, 
though they dared not show it to me, until some 
time after it was received. Do write when you can. 
Grandmother, Homan, and all of us send love to you. 
and the family where you live. 

" From your affectionate parents, 

"JEREML1H AND MERCY HALLOCK." 



236 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



CHAPTER X. 

LABORS IN THE MI N I SIR Y — COR RE Sl'ONDE NCE — 
REVIVAL OF 1816. 

In 1814, as in 1812, the Litchfield North Associa- 
tion, of which Mr. Hallock was a distinguished mem- 
ber, appointed several of its members to go, two and 
two, throughout the churches within its limits, to 
promote their spiritual interests. Mr. Hallock was 
one of the brethren designated for this service. The 
tour so much resembled some already noticed, that 
particulars may be omitted. 

"Jan. 22, 1815. Have been feeble and discour- 
aged the past week, and looked forward to this day 
with trembling ; but have been helped in every part 
of public worship beyond my expectation, especially 
in the latter sermon, so that I came home refreshed 
in body and mind. 0 Lord, help me to thank and 
praise thy glorious name, now and for ever. 

" March 12. Though full of tossings the past 
night, worried and discouraged this morning, yet 
have had more freedom, and mental comfort, and at- 
tention all day than usual. Bless the Lord, 0 my 
soul. God's spiritual law has been a pleasant theme ; 
0 let me never rest short of perfect conformity 
to it. 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE 



237 



To his nephe-n-, -William A. Hallock, soon after a revival of 
religion in Plainfield, where he was then fitting for col- 
lege -with his father. 

'•Canton, March 18, 1815. 

" My very dear Cousin "William — I thank you for 
your rich letter of February 4, so full of interesting 
intelligence. We have also received your father's 

letter of February 16, by Doctor P . This, too, 

was like cold Avater to one athirst. I do sincerely 
wish that the few of our name might not be stran- 
gers to each other. ^\liat you write respecting our 
decayed, decaying aged parents, is affecting, and full 
of awakening instruction. As you live near them, I 
hope your father wiU see that they have what is for ' 
their comfort. I hope that we may all so honor them 
as to be sharers in ' the first commandment with prom- 
ise,' instead of being tortured, after their decease, 
with the harrowing accusations of a guilty conscience. 
The situation of my afflicted sister, your dear aunt 

P , none can know but by experience. How 

comforting to hear of her apparent faith, patience, and 
submission. 0 may she have the peace of Jesus. 
And though we meet no more on earth, yet may her 
hope be realized. How sweet that eternal rest will 
be to the Lord's weary, almost fainting pilgrims ! 

" The prosperity of my beloved brother's family 
is surely joy to me. But we must never depend on 
any earthly enjoyments, which are all fleeting as the 
wind, and withering as the grass and its flowers. 
Where is your late blooming, affectionate cousin 
Sarah? Her pleasant form lies withered in death. 
Yet all God's outward blessings, viewed in their true 



238 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



light, are precious, and to be thankfully received, and 
piously used for Jesus and his cause. I am glad to 
hear that you and your brother are studying, and 
that you make proficiency. I have long been of the 
opinion, that industry is not only essential to useful- 
ness, but also to happiness. If those in heaven had 
nothing to do, or were they to become idle and in- 
active, I believe their happiness would cease. 

" Give the love of my heart to your dear sister 

Martha and Miss D ," two young converts, " with 

whom I conversed. How glorious indeed, my dear 
William, is their situation who are walking in the 
paths of peace, and preparing for a happy eternity ; 
and how do they excel those who are grovelling in 
the dust, even though they should gain the whole 
world, and the Christian live and die in the most un- 
comfortable, destitute condition. 

" In respect to your observations concerning your- 
self, I hardly know how to reply. You tliink you 
have had little or no real sense of the divine perfec- 
tions, of sin, of the hardness of your heart and its 
opposition ; and that your late serious impressions in 
the awakening are abated, so that you shudder to 
reflect on your dread situation — the harvest past, and 
you not gathered. But how came you to be sensible 
of all this ? It must be the awakening of his Spirit, 
and because it is still strivmg within you. It is 
much better to be even many years under distressing 
conviction, than to rest in the joys of a false hope. 
But there is hope in the free, almighty, sovereign 
grace of God in Christ. "We know not what God in 



HIS JOURNAL. 



239 



his great mercy may yet do for you. I hope the 
prayers and good instructions of your anxious parents 
will not be lost. May G-od prosper you in your 
studies, and shine into your heart with the rays of 
his glory in the face of Jesus. I thank you for yout 
affectionate notice of our dear Jeremiah, for whom 
my feelings have often been unutterable. I am feeble, 
yet through mercy able to supply my pulpit. 
" From your loving uncle, 

"JEREMIAH IIALLOCK." 

In Mr. Hallock's familiar circle of ministers, two 
persons were referred to who gave equal evidence of 
piety, wliile one professed a hope in Christ and the 
other did not. The question was, how far the absence 
of hope was evidence against the latter. One and 
another gave their views, when Mr. Hallock said, 
" Suppose I send down my two boys to clear out my 
well, and it caves in upon them. The neighbors help 
me dig down to them, when it occurs to me that 
possibly they might hear my voice. I cry out, ' Jere- 
miah, are you dead?' 'JVb, sir.^ 'Homan, are yore 
dead V ' Yes, si?:' They report themselves differ- 
ently, but I have equal evidence that both are aUve." 

" Saturday, April 1, 1815. Having written for 

the Sabbath, and hoping brother will come and 

be with us to-morrow, I would devote this day to 
prayer and a review of my journal. I would pray 
first for the Lord's presence with us on the morrow, 
and that we might be once more blessed with a spir- 
itual revival ; secondly, that I might be enabled to 
review my journal with gospel candor in the fear of 



210 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



God. Tlm-dly, I would look to the Lord respecting 
my health, which has been and is poor, and that I 
might be directed aright respecting medicine, and that 
his blessing might attend it. Fourthly, as the tunes 
are difficult I do not receive my salary, hence am 
rather straitened for the necessaries of life, therefore 
would make this also a subject of prayer. In review- 
ing my past life I see many things amiss, and am 
sometimes almost ready to feel as if I had no reason 
to think I am a Christian ; but on the whole cannot 
but hope I have had some spiritual views and feelings, 
though my faith is certainly small. 0 Lord, search, 
try, and quicken me. 

" April 3. Felt quite unwell, but comforted with 
the thought that perfect love casteth out fear. 

"April 4. Felt, I trust, instructed, comforted, 
and a little encouraged on reading what the apostle 
saith of the gospel treasure being in earthen vessels. 

" April 9. Have been of late feeble in body and 
faint in mind, but have found my journey to and 
from Farmingion pleasant beyond my expectation. 
Was enabled to perform on the Sabbath with more 
strength than I expected, and the evening meeting 
was attentive and precious. It seems as if I never 
had greater cause to say, 'hitherto hath the Lord 
helped me,' and ever to trust Immanuel and live in 
his praise." 

To his son in Ohio. 

"April 29, 1815. 

" There has been of late a powerful awakening 
in Yale college. About seventy of the students have 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 



241 



Obtained hope. There are revivals in other places, 
and events pertaining to Zion's interest in the world 
are truly wonderful and encouraging. My dear child, 
I feel anxious respecting your precious soul, and long 
to have Jesus formed in you the hope of glory. Our 
painful separation here will be short, and should we 
meet in heaven, never to part, our present trials will 
he forgotten. But how dreadful to be lost for ever — 
separated from all good. At my period of life I have 
some sense of the dismal state of those who in old 
age are unprepared for death and have no portion but 
in this husky world. All the kingdoms of this world 
are mere bubbles when compared with an interest in 
Christ and a preparation to meet our Judge. And 
now is the time for tliis great work. Your dear 
mother came into the study the other day, and with 
an expressive countenance and emphatic accents ex- 
pressed herself in about these words : ' I feel as if I 
could not be reconciled to have Jeremiah live so far 
from us. Do write to him, and ask him if he keeps 
and reads his Bible, and how he spends the holy Sab- 
bath. I fear many waste it in family visits.' 

" Your aged grandparents at Goshen are very 
feeble and near to death, if alive. How thankful we 
ought to be for the hope we have that they are in 
Christ, and by grace meetened for the rest above. 
Your aunt Perkins fell asleep the 8th of last March, 
comfortable in mind. Your uncle Moses and his 
family are in usual health and prosperity. 

" My sermon at the dedication of tliJ meeting- 
house is published. I cannot write the tenth part I 



242 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



wish to : must therefore close, committing you to the 
mercy of God in Christ. 

" From your affectionate PARENTS. ' 

To the fame. 

"May 27, 1815. 

" I think the following things never appeared more 
true and real. First, that this world as a portion is 
vanity of vanities and vexation of spirit, not only in 
its poorest but in its best state. Secondly, the im- 
portance of religion, or an interest m Christ, especially 
in the decline of life. And thirdly, that it is a great 
thing to be a real Christian, a partaker of the Spirit 
of Christ, and meetened for 'the inheritance of the 
saints in light.' I feel as if I had but a little while 
to stay in this world. May you be blessed in out- 
ward things, but above all be a true friend to Grod, 
have the peace of Jesus here, and his heavenly rest 
hereafter. Your calling is attended with tempta- 
tions, but abide by your old resolution to be always 
strictly honest. 

" From your affectionate FATHER." 

To the same. 

"October 22, 1815. 

" You are remembered in all our prayers. We 
pray for your outward prosperity, but especially that 
you may have an interest in the dear and only Sav- 
iour, and be saved from all the snares and tempta- 
tions of this evil world. About twelve of our children 
and youth have become serious this year, and the 
most of them hope in Christ. It is a day of unusual 



HIS CORRESrONDENCE. 2lo 

awakening in these parts, and many youth are brought 
into Grod's everlasting kingdom. We long to see you 
before we die." 

To tlie same. 

" December 25, 1815. 

" My di:ar Child — It is now more than three 
years since we saw you. The time seems long, and 
you Uttle know how much your parents want to see 
you before they die. You will not suppose that we 
impute your delay to come home to a neglect or for- 
getfulness of us; but if our lives are continued, do 
not fail to come next summer if possible. 

" Your grandfather Hallock has fallen asleep. I 
made our friends in Goshen and Plainfield a visit as 
usual in September. Parted with my dear father on 
the twelfth, and have since received a letter from 
your uncle Moses, in which he writes, ' On Saturday 
evening last, October 21, 1815, our beloved father 
deceased. I visited him on Friday, and Saturday I 
held his venerable head in my hands, and leaning on 
my breast he expired without a struggle or the least 
apparent anxiety. It hardly seemed like death. His 
funeral was attended on Monday. All was calm and 
solemn, the day pleasant, and the attendants numer- 
ous ; and all seemed to feel as if they were burying 
a friend.' 

" He was eighty-five. Last summer he raised a 
plenty of provisions for his little family with his owir 
hands. According to the time from which he used 
to date his hope, he has been a spiritual pilgrim on 
the earth seventy-seven years. He did not outlive 



.TEUEMIAH HALLOCK. 

his active usefulness. The scene to mc is very sol- 
emn and impressive, hut there is no terror or sinking 
grief. You, as Avell as I, have lost a dear praying 
friend, and we ought to he for ever thankful for such 
a parent. 

" I am still able, through grace, to continue in 
the blessed work of the gospel ministry. My catarrh 
is somewhat troublesome, but I think no worse. Your 
dear mother is afflicted with something like a pal- 
pitation of the heart, but through mercy is able to 
attend to her family concerns, in which she is greatly 
needed. Grandmother Humphrey has been very 
sick ; I think she appears more and more like a shock 
of corn fast ripening for eternal rest. She is a bright 
example of patience. She wishes to be remembered 
to Jeremiah. 

" Some of the church appear to have a little life, 
and here and there one is awakened and apparently 
converted. And now my heart cries, When shall it 
be thus with my beloved far-absent child ? 0 Jere- 
miah, we cannot hope because we may think our sins 
are small, we cannot trust in our supposed good works, 
we cannot hope in view of our hearts, for they are 
bad. And shall we hope in the present life and its 
things ? Grod forbid. The Lord Jesus is the only hope 
for us sinners. And now let us make a wise improve- 
ment of all this, and flee to Jesus as our all in aU. 
" From your affectionate father, 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 

" March 3, 1816. Lord's day. On Saturday 
attended a morning prayer-meeting. It was full 



REVIVALS 



215 



and solemn, and things look encouraging. But tliis 
has been one of the most trying days as it respects 
my own leanness. Have been greatly straitened in 
all the prayers, in the sermons, and, alas, at the 
Lord's table. It seems as if my Saviour was de 
parted. Some were indecently playful, and one, 1 
fear, who has been thoughtful. 0 wdiy am I so for- 
saken, and why these dreadful frowns ? 0 Lord, search 
me and try me. Show me why it is thou dost con- 
tend with me. Help me to search and find out 
the accursed thing and to repent. May we all lie 
in the dust under thy rebukes, and 0, have mercy, 
blot out our sins, and still carry on thy work, for 
Jesus' sake." 

Possibly it was in reference to this Sabbath that 
Mr. HaUock, quite in his own manner, once gave this 
vivid illustration of the passage, " And ice hid as it 
were our faces from him." "It looks to me lilvc 
tliis : the Lord Jesus comes into the assembly in aU 
his love and glory, stands in the broad aisle, and 
calls on poor sinners to loolv at him and live ; but the 
men raise their hats before their faces, and the women 
put up their fans, so as not to be seen." 

"April 7. We have had many religious meet- 
ings, such as lectures, conferences, and conceits, in 
the course of the last week, which have been full and 
serious. One or two have manifested a hope, and 
some are the subjects of serious impressions. It is 
hoped that the work of divine grace is still going on 
among us. 0 Grod of mercy, wilt thou abide with 
us, and support and extend thy work. 



246 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



" May 9. Election-day. At the desire of the youth 
it was proposed to have a religious meeting instead 
of the former usual vanities. Rev, Messrs. Gillett, 
Baker, and Yale, were with us. The congregation 
was large, serious, and attentive. 

" May 10. "We met at New Hartford hy request 
of the youth. The youth gave brother Yale and my- 
self the money which they had heen accustomed to 
spend at the hall. 

" May 22. Lodged last night with brother Beach, 
at my dear brother Dr. Everest's. He gave me this 
morning five dollars, of wliich I was in special want, 
and farther told me that he had crossed all his charges 
for attendance on my family for twenty-five years. 
0 Lord, may I see and know that all these needed 
mercies are from thee, and may myself and family 
make a right use of them. And 0, bless thy dear 
servant and his for ever, and may I be thankful to 
him as the instrument." 

To his elder son. 

"June 27, 1816. 

" My dear Child — Though I have not written 
for some time, it is not because you are out of my 
thoughts, but on account of my bodily infirmities and 
pressing calls in my work as a miiuster, at home 
and abroad. I feel as if I should not be able to 
endure much longer. 0 for gospel faith, patience, 
and resignation. The rest of our family are in usual 
health, and it becomes us to praise the Father of 
lights for all his great, many, and long-continued 
favors. 



REVIVALS. 



217 



" Your grandmother Hallock died, or rather fell 
asleep in Jesus, as we trust, the 8th of last AprU. 
The attention wliich began in this place early in 
March continues. Fourteen were added to the church 
on the first Sabbath in May. Day before yesterday we 
had an examining meeting at our house, when eleven 
were examined and cordially approved. More than 
five hundred have made a profession of religion within 
the limits of this association since last June, and as 
many as five hundred more have manifested hope. 
There have been spiritual showers, some of them very 
great, in other associations, 

" From your affectionate father, 

'■JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 

To tne same, soon after a visit to his parents, and his 
marriage. 

"November 5, 1816. 

" It is truly a day of wonders in respect to the 
conversion of poor sinners, and the building up of 
Zion. We rejoice to hear that you have obtained a 
house. I pray for you every day, that your little 
young family may be a Bethel. Your mother feels 
anxious for your immortal souls, and says, ' Do write 
to Jeremiah and Sarah that a solemn eternity is be- 
fore them.' Will you not, beloved children, think on' 
these things ? 0 do not neglect the great work of a 
gospel preparation." 

" Jan. 5, 1817. Fifteen were received to-day into 
the church, making sixty-four who have been admit- 
ted on profession since the first Sabbath in last May. 
Seven, the past year, have been received by letter ; 



248 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



in all, seventy-one. There are not less than twenty 
more who hope since March, and some are subjects 
of serious impressions. We are yet favored with very 
solemn, precious meetings. "When we compare the 
fruits of the present revival with those of the awaken- 
ing in 1799, they exceed those of that glorious day. 
This is a very impressive, solemn, and awakening con- 
sideration, and calls for deep humility, gratitude, and 
praise. Though attended with the catarrh and many 
infirmities, and many times ready to faint, yet, by 
the merciful help of the Lord, I have been enabled to 
attend the meetings, not less than five or six in a week, 
and I trust my bodily health is better than it was 
eight months ago. And I believe it is in answer to 
the prayers of the Lord's dear people for me, of which 
I am so unworthy. 0 Lord, still hold me up, and be 
my strength. Let me not wander from thy paths, in 
doctrine or practice. If I shall live this year, may it 
be to serve and please thee, in doing and submitting 
to thy will. If I must die, may it be in Jesus. 0 
when wilt thou come unto me as thou didst to the 
house of Zaccheus and the jailer ? 

" Parted with my brother and sister Hosford for 
Southampton, September 23, but soon grew very un- 
well with symptoms of fever. Did but just arrive at 
brother Grould's at Southampton. "Was kindly receiv- 
ed. Took an emetic administered by Dr. Woodbridge, 
which operated powerfully. Had a distressing night, 
but through mercy felt some reheved in the morning. 
Tarried all day, September 24, at brother Gould's — 
next day, went home. Neither Dr. Woodbridge nor tiie 



AI SUUllIAMPTOX 



240 



others who watched with me and took such care of 
me, would accept any recompense. May the hlessiiig 
of the Lord rest upon them." 

The following description of this scene is from a 
member of the family of Rev. Mr. Gould, with whom 
he lodged, and for whom he usually preached, in his 
annvial visit to his friends in Goshen and Plainfield. 

" I saw Mr. Hallock come up to the house much 
fatigued ; I sprang to his assistance, and said to him, 
* Are you unwell, Mr. Hallock ?' Pale and trembling, 
he replied, ' I 've come to die with you ; God has 
heard my prayer : I was afraid I should die on the 
road, and that my dear family would never know how 
I died ; I knew you would tell them : I want they 
should know how dear Christ appears to me ; I think 
he iiever appeared so precious ; I want you should tell 
them this.' These sentences he uttered with difficulty, 
leaning on my arm, and staggering into the house. 
As soon as he was upon the bed panting for breath, 

he said, ' I do wonder how brother W can give 

up such a Saviour ; how he will need him in such an 
hour as this.' A physician was immediately called, 
but could hardly get at the case, because Mr. Hal- 
lock's conversation was so full of the love of Christ. 
He sunk down, at length, and seemed to be at the 
point of death for a time, but in a day or two he was 
so far relieved as to return to his family." 

About the last meeting he attended in South- 
ampton, where for years he was a great favorite with 
the crowd that flocked together on his arrival, he re- 
marked at the close of his sermon, that probably he 
11* 



250 JEREMIAH HALLOCK 

should never see tliem again. He then sat down, but 
in a little time rose and said, " My dear friends, there 
is a difference between probability and possibility. It 
is not -probable I shall meet you here again. I am 
old and gray -headed. I live daily very near to death." 

" Sept. 28, Lord's day. "Was enabled to write 
yesterday and the day before, though with much 
weakness and infirmity. Attended the concert in 
the intermission, and the conference at five o'clock. 
Have had unusual strength and freedom, and I trust 
the Lord was with us. Have enjoyed of late un- 
usual serenity and peace of mind, I trust, in Jesus 
the consolation of Zion ; and may he have all the 
praise, to the glory of the Father. 

" Nov. 26. Homan was evidently more ill, and we 
feared his disorder was becoming putrid, and about 
one o'clock, P. M., he appeared to fail very fast. 
We feared he had but a few hours to live. He said 
he did not know that he had any reason to think he 
had an interest in Christ. Now, the anguish of my 
soul became unutterable. But not far from sunset 

my dear brother E. A having heard of our trial 

came to see us, and we kneeled in prayer, he being 
the speaker. His prayer and conversation seemed to be 
so blessed to me, that an unusual peace and calmness, 
and trust in Christ, pervaded my mind, so that I 
could converse with Christian friends who came in, 
with freedom and delight. Sometime in the evening 
a suppuration took place in his throat, and he was 
reUeved. It was therefore a night of unusual com- 
fort and praise. 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE 



251 



" Nov. 27, 1817. To see such companies of youth 
and children collecting for play and vanity, and the 
cruel practice of shooting at living fowls, is distress- 
ing, because indications of the Lord's departure, of 
our awful stupidity, and the everlasting perdition of 
all who are out of Clirist. These things try and vex 
my soul, and cause sorrow and heaviness." 

To his elder son. 

"July 11, 1818. 

L " My de ar Children — Were your mother and my- 
self to go to Steubenville corporeally as often as we 
do mentally, there would be a hard-beaten path be- 
tween us. 

"Although there is no special awakening among 
us here, but it is a day of alarming stupidity, yet the 
church are united and steadfast, and the late appar- 
ent converts seem to endure ; conferences on the Sab- 
bath, the meeting for young people, and the Thurs- 
day concert, are attended. But the church dimin- 
ishes, both by death and by removal to other places. 
We have buried seventeen since the beginnmg of the 
year. The twenty-fifth of last month our old neighbor 
and friend Ephraim Mills left this world, after a short 
sickness. This is a sore loss to me, but the thought 
that Jesus the Saviour and owner of all things still 
lives the same for evermore, strangely supports my 
sinking mind. 

"Your mother is favored with health and vigor, 
a great blessing to us for which we ought to be thank- 
ful. She would set out any day to go and see her 
Jeremiah. My general health is better : on the last 



252 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



two Sabbaths, with the intervening week, I was 
enabled to preach nine sermons, praised be the great 
Physician of soul and body. My study is pleasant to 
me. It would be agreeable in itself to have health 
while we stay, and to be called by the Lord of the 
harvest right out of his field and with sickle in hand. 
I am now in my sixty-first year, and your mother 
but about three years younger. I feel of late, espe- 
cially by turns, great anxiety for the souls of my 
children, lament my unfaithfulness, and desire to be 
more faithful in affectionately warning, instructing, 
and persuading them to come to Christ, that so they 
might please God, be blessings, and be for ever 
blessed. How these lines will find you, my dear son 
and daughter, whether stupid or thoughtful about 
eternal things, I know not ; but I beseech you, if out of 
the spiritual ark, not to rest nor let any thing hinder 
your pressing into it, and without delay. 
" From your affectionate father, 

"JEB,EMIAH HALLOCK." 

" Dec. 21, 1818. Returned from Barkhamsted 
very feeble in body and mind. Could not ride, nor 
hardly walk ; wanted sometimes to lie down in the 
road. But my mind was calm and comfortable, and 
the hope of being able to move with all the activity 
of an angel was refreshing ; also the thought that in 
that blessed world they will not have to take a third 
of the time or more to recruit a feeble, clogging, bur- 
densome body. 



CARE FOR HIS HOUSEHOLD. 



253 



CHAPTER XI. 

LABORS IN ADVANCIjS^G- YE AR S— COR RE SPON DEN 0 E 
— REVIVAL OF 1S21. 

One pleasant trait of character in Mr. Hallock 
was the deep interest which he manifested in the 
welfare of all the memhers of his household. In the 
course of his life, with the concurrence of his worthy 
partner, he took several children and trained them 
up to manliood, whom he treated with so much 
parental affection and care that a stranger could not 
distinguish them from his own children. And even 
after they went out from his roof, the strength of his 
affection and solicitude for their souls did not subside. 
Sometimes, on the day of their departure, he noted 
in his journal liis sense of unfaithfulness and liis deep 
regret. Often did he speak of them afterwards with 
the tones of a father, and it was his uniform practice 
to address to them now and then an afi'ectionate and 
parental letter. One of these letters was written to 

Mr. J. M of the city of New York, who had 

lived in Mr. Hallock's family from the age of four to 
that of twenty -two years. 

"July 19, 1819. 

" Our dear Children — "VVe thank you for your 

kind letter by Mr. H . We are always glad to 

hear from you and of your welfare, and to learn that 



254 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



you do not forget us, as we cannot forget you. It 
gave us no little joy to hear that you were Messed 
with an infant son. The lives of infants, especially 
of those so small, are a brittle thread. But that Grod 
who gives them can preserve and raise them. We 
pray in respect to yours, that it may live, that you 
may be prepared for such a mercy, be enabled to 
give yourselves and babe to the Lord, and do your 
duty towards him according to the word ; that he 
may be an obedient child, a comfort to you, useful 
in the world, a blessing in Zion, and that both the 
child and his parents may be blessed of the Lord. 
But if you should be called to part with it by death 
in its infancy, childhood, or youth, as many have 
been, 0 may you be prepared and enabled from the 
heart to bless the Lord in taking as weU as in 
giving. 

" Should the Lord of his great mercy restore the 
mother to health, and spare all your lives, do try to 
come and see us as soon as you can, and bring the 
little one with you. But should you be preserved to 
come, who of us would be alive to see you we know 
not, for we are truly sojourners, and our days on earth 
are like the passing shadow. There were twenty-six 
deaths in Canton the past year, some of all ages. 
It was frequently the case that some one at a funeral 
in health was the next carried to the grave. Truly 
the Son of man came among us the last year in a 
way and at an hour we knew not. The text for the 
new year was, ' 0 that they were wise, that they 
understood this, that they would consider their lat- 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE 



255 



ter end !' Indeed we are pilgrims, and the life of 
man in tliis world is called a way. Our latter end 
is the close of life, to which the way we now go 
will lead. 

"We read of two ways: the narrow path whose 
end is life and the eternal salvation of the soul ; and 
the broad road of sin which endeth in eternal death. 
Now if one on a journey should, though instructed 
and warned, heedlessly take a road in the morning 
Miiich, however easy, pleasant, and inviting at the 
beginning, would yet end at sunset, in reproach, 
complete poverty, and wTetchedness, all would con- 
sider such a traveller as void of wisdom, and would 
exclaim agauist his folly. But if the traveller should 
consider, and take that road in the morning which, 
though at fu'st more rough, stony, hilly, and unpleas- 
ant, wovild yet end at sunset in honor, safety, fulness, 
and happiness, who would not esteem such a man 
wise, and speak of his great wisdom ? And now, my 
dear children, for whom I daily try to pray, let us be 
as wise in spiritual tilings. We know that Jesus 
and his blessed gospel are the way to life, whatever 
reproach, crosses, and difficulties may now attend it ; 
but the way of this selfish, prayerless, impenitent, 
unbelieving, and disobedient world endeth in eternal 
woes, however pleasmg it may now appear to an eye 
of sense. Consider these lines, and the Lord give you 
understanding in all things. Farewell. 
"From your affectionate parents, 

"JEREMIAH AND MERCY HALLOCK." 



256 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



To his son in Ohio. 

"January, 19, 1819. 

" Though feeble and many times ready to faint, 
I am enabled to study, and to preach on the Sabbath 
and at other times ; and for aught I know, to usual 
acceptance. No place is so agreeable to me as my 
study, and it is often delightsome to read, write, etc. 
The world has truly almost slidden from under me, 
and is fast sliding away ; and I think my only hope 
and support is the precious Jesus and his blessed gos- 
pel. You, my Jeremiah, ai'C now in your twenty- 
ninth year, and should you live, you will not only soon 
bo in the decline of life, but where I am, advanced, 
and the world all slidden, or fast sliding from under you. 
And I often think, what will my children do when this 
approaching period shall arrive, or if they should find 
themselves by sickness or other means on their dying 
bed, and all the solemnities of the judgment at the door ? 
Nothing can then, as I know by experience, afford the 
least support, but the consolations of Jesus." 

To his nephew Wm. A. Hallock, at Williams College. 

" The account you give of the awakening in Wil- 
liamstown, as well as in other places, is wonderful 
and interesting. I am more and more convinced by 
the word, and I think by experience, that we are by 
nature destitute of holiness, carnal, sold under sin. 
Hence in need, perishing need of the new birth, or ol 
Christ as our sanctification and Saviour from wrath, 
yea, as our life and all in all. How it is with you, 
I know not. The day is approaching when you expect 
to leave college and turn your thoughts on some pro- 



HIS CORRESrONDENCE 



257 



fession. It is therefore a most interesting period to 
you, as well as to your parents, and also to me. 
How soon have your four years at College passed 
away ; and how short is our period of probation on 
earth, even at the longest : I trust I pray that you 
may, first of all, give your heart and your whole self 
unto the Lord Jesus, whose we of right are, icliose 
yoke is easy and his burden light. It is my desire to 
have you study divinity, and wear yourself out in the 
good work of the gospel. Such I know is the wish of 
your parents. But we must love and serve Christ, let 
our profession he what it may, in order to be accepted 
of him, both now and when he cometh. Farewell. 
"Your affectionate UNCLE." 

To his son in Ohio. 

"July 8, 1819. 

"Our dear children, often thought of and longed 
for, we were not a little affected to learn the poor 
state of your health, and have endeavored daily to 
remember you in our prayers. You think your dis- 
order is of the nervous kind. Soon after I was settled, 
I had nervous complaints to a very high degree. I 
know what they are. Although they are commonly 
not so mortal, yet they are deep, far out of the reach 
of medicine, and hard to cure. They are attended with 
the symptoms of almost every disorder, are apt to 
prevent sleep, and to make every tiling look gloom}, 
and discouraging. They debilitate the mind and unfit 
one for the service of God or man, I do sincerely 
pity you. But let our disorders and trials be what 
they may, ever so long and severe, they are, like 



258 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



every mercy, from the Grod of Jacob, who is the great 
Physician of soul and body, and our help is nowhere 
but in liim. President Dwight says that people 
under affliction are always attended with one of these 
three things, murmurmgs, brutal stupidity, or sub- 
mission to God. Let us watch against insensibiUty 
and murmurings, learn submission under the mighty 
hand of the Lord in all our afflictions, and resign our 
souls and bodies and all our concerns in the way of 
well-doing into his hand for time and eternity. 

"I have just read D wight's sermons on the duty 
of parents to their children, and of children to their 
parents. And while I find them very instructive and 
entertaining, I feel greatly reproved for my unfaith- 
fulness as a parent ; but all the past is sealed up for 
the judgment. Yet, blessed be the Lord, while in this 
world we are prisoners of hope. Hence, if we confess 
and forsake our sins, and return unto the Lord, he 
will abundantly pardon all our offences and purge 
away our guilt in the all-cleansing blood of Jesus. 0 
that I may, if continued in this world, have grace to 
be more faithful, as a minister and parent, and in all 
respects. 

" 'It is good,' saith the prophet, 'for a man, that 
he bear the yoke in his youth.' Thus may your 
afflictions be made beneficial, even in the liighest and 
best sense to you both. And if you are experiencing 
his restoring mercies and other favors, may liis great 
goodness lead you to repentance, and to lift up your 
hearts in his fear. The longer I live, the word of 
Cxod appears more and more real, true, divine, and 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE 



259 



precious, and our only light and hope. And as David 
said to his dear son Solomon, I wiU now, my children, 
say to you, Forsake it not, but hind it continually 
upon your hearts, and tie it about your necks ; theuf 
'when thou goest, it shall lead thee; when thou 
sleepest, it shall keep thee ; and when thou awakest, 
it shall talk with thee ;' yes, about the most wise and 
excellent things. • 

" From your aftectionate FATllEli."' 

"Oct. 3, 1819. Last Wednesday, attended the 
ordination of Messrs. Bingham and Thurston, as mis- 
sionaries to the Sandwich islands. Little did I ex- 
pect to be appointed to make the consecrating prayer. 
But the Lord Jesus supported and helped me, so that 
I trust religion and the dear cause did not suffer. AH 
the other parts were performed to edification. The 
assembly was the greatest that I ever saw at an ordi- 
nation, and the most universally solemn and interest- 
ing. 0 Lord, how unworthy am I, even of the least 
of all these thy mercies. May they all humble and 
lead my soul unto thee in hope and all spiritual 
obedience." 

To a nephew in the Theological seminary, Andover, imme- 
diately after his making a public profession of religion. 

'• March 18, 1S20. 

"Dear William — A brother was received into 
the church last Sabbath. The communion was full, 
and I thought the day and the holy ordinance were 
more refreshing than usual for us, who are so lean at 
best. Last year none were received, by profession, 
into the church. Two others wish to come forward, 



260 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



who appear well. 0 that these things might be as 
an earnest before a glorious harvest. These long 
spiritual winters of barrenness are painful and trying 
to dear Christians, who pray and plead, ' 0 Lord, how 
long V I know of no special revivals in this region. 
Our religious meetings are attended as usual, and the 
concerts for prayer are better attended than they were 
six months ago, and appear more fervent. But the 
children and youth are unusually thoughtless and 
vain. It is inexpressibly distressing to see them wast- 
ing away their forming age in forgetfulness of G-od, 
which they ought to spend in his fear ; that if they 
live to come on the stage of action, they may be pre- 
pared to be useful, and if they must die, may meet 
their Judge in peace. 

" Although the Son of G-od was made flesh — which 
was so necessary m order to his laying down his life 
for our sins, and doing many other things as the 
Mediator — yet divine honors are equally and unre- 
servedly ascribed to him in the Scriptures of truth as 
to the Fatlier ; and there is not a chapter, nor scarce 
a paragraph where Christ is spoken of, in which his 
absolute divinity does not shine ; and there is no fair 
explanation of them but by giving equal divine honors 
to the Saviour. 

" No subjects are of more importance than the 
candid examination of ourselves and daily self-denial, 
to which the selfish heart is so opposed ; for there is 
nothing in the native heart of man but sin, sin, sin. 
We therefore stand in equal need of the new birth as 
of the atonement. I am glad you went to Andover — 



ADVANCING YEARS. 



2G1 



rejoice to hear the things you wrote respecting your- 
self. If we have not received Christ, it is high time 
to do it, and to live unto him. Some of the last words 
of President Edwards to his anxious friends were, 
' Trust in God, and you need not fear.' How much 
better it is to trust in Immanuel, than in an arm of 
flesh. May it ever be your delight to rely only, con- 
tinually, and altogether on him. Be a fruitful branch 
in the true vine ; glorify God, and have the joy of 
Christ fulfilled in your own happy breast. Let us 
pray for one another, for each of our families, for 
our colleges, the seminary, and Zion. Adieu. 
" Your affectionate uncle, 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 

In a former part of this work, we saw Mr. Hal- 
lock, with no common ardor, devoting the spright- 
liness of his youth to the service of Christ. We have 
marked also how, in one steady, undeviatmg course, 
he exhausted in the same glorious cause the strength 
of manhood. We now find him, under the pressure 
of more advanced years, still in the harness, laborious 
as ever for the honor of Christ and the salvation of 
souls, praying more earnestly for divine aid, and 
making increased effort to fulfil the responsibilities 
of his station. 

" March 13, 1820. This day I am sixty-two years 
old. I have been continued almost thirty-five years 
in the ministry. It is about forty-one years since I 
trust my attention was turned to religion ; so that I 
have been professedly as long on the spiritual journey, 
as Israel was on the way from Egypt to Canaan. 



262 



TEREMIAH HALLOCK 



Surely my race must he drawing to a close. My 
mind has been interested in reading God's holy word, 
especially the ninth and tenth chapters of the Acts ; 
and the late Religious Intelligencer, in particular the 
account of revivals. If I may live a little longer, may 
Christ be my only, all-sufficient hope ; and may I live 
in the faith and religion of the holy apostles, and of 
the present revivals of the Holy Spirit. If I must die, 
may it be in this faith and with the supports of the 
gospel. My own, and the deadness of my people, is 
truly distressing, and especially the stupidity and 
vanity of our poor children and youth. But I think 
it is a consolation, that God will be glorified and his 
gospel kingdom eternally flourish, whatever becomes 
of us. 0 Lord, have mercy on us, and phick us as 
brands from the burning, for Jesus' sake. This, for 
some reason, has been to me the most solemn birth- 
day I ever knew." 

In the autumn of this year, the monthly meeting 
of ministers to which Mr. Hallock belonged, divided 
itself into classes of four and five, with a view to 
some endeavors to rouse the slumbering churches. 
It was the custom of Mr. Hallook's class to visit two 
churches every week, and attend three meetings at 
each place. After making the circuit of the whole 
a few times, one of the brethren proposed that it 
should no longer be the duty of aU the five to attend 
every meeting, but that two brethren should be present 
besides the minister of the place. " No," said Mr. 
Hallock, who had himself rarely if ever been absent, 
" we must n/f be on the ground. If I had a child 



REVIVALS. 



263 



sick, and could not make him helieve that he was in 
a dangerous state, I know of no better way to unde- 
ceive him, than to call a council of physicians. No, 
bretliren, we must all endeavor to be at every meet- 
ing, that poor, sick, dying sinners, who are so hard to 
take alarm, may begin to think something is the 
matter, and that they must attend to their souls." 
It need scarcely be added, that the arrangement 
remained without alteration. These efforts the Lord 
was pleased to bless. Some tokens of his special 
grace were immediately visible, and the following 
year was marked with uncommon mercy, not only in 
this vicinity, but in very many towns throughout 
• Connecticut. 

Tliis was the last general revival of religion in 
which Mr. Hallock took a part. Though his age and 
infirmities might seem to have pleaded eloquently for 
some remission of service, and especially in the most 
inclement seasons of the year, yet we shall find him 
at his post by night and by day, and sometimes at 
the distance of twenty miles and more from home. 
And should he, to persons who can patiently see a 
waste of fife in any thing but reUgion, seem to have 
been impelled forward by a principle little less opera- 
tive than that wliich for tliirty years animated Paul, 
and for a less period elevated Henry Martyn to a 
height of holy indifference in respect to personal com- 
fort, health, and even life itself, the writer is not 
anxious to offer an apology. His course furnished at 
least a practical comment on a sentiment which he 
often expressed in the evening of his days, in sub- 



2CA JEREMIAH HALLOCK 

Stance this ; "I view myself like a man stationed in 
a boat, witli oars put into his hands, and directions 
given him to row with all his might so long as life 
lasts." He sometimes used a kindred figure to illus- 
trate the need of severe and continued study in the 
clerical office, comparing the ministers of Christ to 
boatmen rowing up a strong current, who must ply 
every nerve to advance at all, and will certainly go 
backward if they relax for a moment. 

" Nov. 30. Thanksgiving. Met at ten for prayer, 
in the conference-house. It is affecting to think how 
many of my age are gone, and to fijid myself and 
such of them as are living, weakened, benumbed 
with age, and just going, and the poor children and • 
youth vain and thoughtless. Hope, 0 my soul, in 
the unchanging God of Zion, 

" Dec. 3, Lord's day. Attended the intermis- 
sion-prayer, and the conference in the central school- 
house. My mind was peculiarly solemn, and I trust 
refreshed, on Friday in my study, in writing on, ' Seen 
of angels.' 0 if my poor youth knew these things, 
how soon would they leave their vanities for Christ, 
and how much more honorable and happy would 
they be. 

" Jan. 14, 1821. Hear of revivals, while our fleece 
seems to be left dry. Help us, 0 Grod of our sal- 
vation. 

" Feb. 11, Lord's day. Had unusual freedom in 
all the performances — more attention than usual — a 
solemn intermission at my house — several appeared 
serious, and some old professors a little quickened. 



REVIVALS, 



266 



0 the Hope of Israel, wilt tliou not revive us again, 
and let tliy mourning saints rejoice in thee ? 

" Fkb. 15. Last Friday went with brother T to 

Goshen, Conn. ; attended a meeting in the evening at 
deacon T 's, who lately hopes for four of his child- 
ren. Had some freedom in speaking from Acts 13 : 43. 
Rev. Mr. Mills and other ministers present made ob- 
servations. It was a full, serious meeting. Yesterday 
we went to Litclifield — had freedom in speaking in the 
prayer-meeting. Rode in the evening to Mr. Mills'. 
To-day attended a fast at Torringford. Heard brother 
Beach in the forenoon. I preached in the afternoon 
from Jonah 1:6,' What meanest thou, 0 sleeper ?' 
Recent accounts of the wonderful awakenings were 
related. 0 Lord, bless this day to this thy dear peo- 
pie. We rode home in the evening and found all well, 
praised be the Lord. 

" March 4. It appears to me that the awakening, 
though small, is begun both in the church and society. 
0 Lord, cause thy saints to pray, and may the incense 
of the Angel of the covenant ascend with their pray- 
ers before the throne of grace and prevail, that all 
may not wither, but a rain of righteousness descend, 
for Jesus' sake. Amen. 

" March 12. Last Tuesday went to Bristol, and 
tarried until Friday noon. Preached four sermons, 
and heard brother Lee preach two. Made several 
family visits, etc. The impression is general — a 
goodly number have obtained hope in Christ, and 
others aiC under conviction. Friday we rode to 
Farmington and heard brother Nettleton preach in 



266 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



the evening. It was thought he had one thousand 
hearers. The work appears to be on the increase, 
Saturday I rode to Simsbury, and preached there 
yesterday. Had an intermission-meeting. A glori- 
ous work, it appears, has begun there. Hear that 
the work of the Lord has greatly revived in Bark- 
hamsted ; and more encouraging things appear of 
late in Canton. 0 Lord, the work is thine, wilt thou 
not carry it on, that thy glory may appear in the 
conversion of many to praise and serve thee. 

" March 25, Lord's day. Text in the afternoon, 
John 4 : 35, 36 : ' Say not ye. There are yet four 
months,' etc. Have attended meetings every evening 
the past week except last evening, and some in the 
daytime. Some of the meetings have been unusually 
solemn. Several appear to have come to the birth, 
and to linger. 0 Lord, do not let them go back ; do 
not let them stay where they are, but make them 
willing in this day of thy power. 

"April 15. The fii-st Sabbath in this month I 
was at Northington, the second at Bristol. I have 
attended meetings almost every evening, and some in 
the dayiime, but find myself very feeble, and ready 
sometimes to give up my hope respecting my being 
in Christ. 0 my leamiess, my leanness in prayer, in 
preaching, and every performance. 0 why am I thus ? 
Lord, if it is because I am not thine, show it to me 
in mercy, and pluck my soul as a brand from the 
burning. If it is on account of some right-hand sin, 
show it to me and help me to cut it off. If it is one 
of the trials of thy children, 0 support me under it 



REVIVALS. 



2G7 



and bring me out of it. Make me truly humble 
under thy mighty hand, and revive me in thy own 
good time and way. Although I fear and tremble to 
say it, yet I fear the awakening is declining, that 
Israel are turning their backs. 0 Lord, have mercy ; 
humble us and return again as thou didrt of old, in 
the days of Joshua, for Jesus' sake." 

The preceding selections from his journal have 
been made with particular reference to Mr. Hallock's 
labors abroad in a season of religious revival. They 
furnish a fair specimen of his common practice at 
such a time. It was an opinion which he often ex- 
pressed, and which received very happy illustrations 
in his own course, that a minister should not only be 
willing to go from a cold to a warm moral region for 
personal warmth, but equally ready to go from a 
warm to a cold region with the benevolent intent to 
diffuse any warmth of heart which God may have 
given him for the benefit of other churches. Hence, 
while, he often visited places at considerable distance, 
which were favored with a work of grace, we find 
him also, in all the revivals of religion at Canton, 
encouraging an interchange of labor with his brethi-en 
in the ministry. And unless this had been his course, 
the excellent spirit that was in him must have been, 
to human view, much circumscribed in its benign 
influence. Nor was he alone in this practice. The 
excellent ministers v/ith whom he acted, such men as 
the venerable Robbins, Grillett, Starr, and Mills, were 
accustomed to make a revival of religion anywhere 
in their circle a sort of common cause, and to foster 



268 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



it with wakeful solicitude. And this practice, under 
G-od, may go far to account for the fact, that when- 
ever a work of grace was enjoyed hy any one of the 
churches under the pastoral care of these servants of 
Christ, it was to some extent common to them all. 

But the exam-pie set by these fathers cannot he 
safely followed without a large portion of the same 
spirit. They might always go and^labor in a revival, 
however powerful, without first waiting in silence at a 
single meeting ; because, by a constant and close walk 
with Grod, they were always so much in the spirit of 
a revival. No one, it is presumed, who was well 
acquainted with Mr. Hallock, ever trembled to see 
him rise in the desk or in the conference-room, at a 
time of great divine influence, lest his feelings should 
not be sufficiently elevated. But, 

" These suns arc set — 0 rise some other sneh." 

To his nephew at Andover. 

"May 27, 1821. 

"You have heard of the showers of divine grace 
in our region. For a while it appeared as if poor 
Canton would be the marshy place, where the fertil- 
izing, reviving waters of salvation never come. But 
it pleased the God of all grace, who heareth prayer, 
to begin his gracious work among lis. It began in 
the month of March in the middle of the town, and 
in the south part about the same time. Youth who 
had been full of levity, became at once the subjects 
of deep conviction. We never saw meetings more 
visibly impressed. Poor children, they could not hold 
up their heads. We hope the awakening is on the 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 



269 



whole increasing. I cannot say exactly, but perhaps 
forty have obtained hope. Many are still serious. 
The praise is all due to Grod, and 0, may he glorify 
liis power, love, and mercy in still carrying on his 
work, until it shall extend to every district and family. 
The work has been much greater in some neighbor- 
ing places. Perhaps they hope for two hundred in 
Farmington, and one hundred and fifty in New Hart- 
ford. You do not know how much I wish to have you 
come and see us, and attend our meetings, and help 
your aged, feeble uncle." 

To friends at PUiafield. 

"Caxtox, June M, 1822. 

"It is often the case that people wish each other 
a happy new year. We have reason to think that 
1821 was a happy new year to a goodly number in 
Canton, and to hundreds and even thousands in our 
region — the year to which they will look back in a 
blessed eternity as that in which they passed, through 
free gi-ace, from the love of sin to the love of holiness, 
and from condemnation to pardon and eternal life. 
What a happy new year was the past to all such, in 
our region, nation, and world. But how many are 
left of whom it must be mournfully said, as the last 
year found, so it left them, dead in sin and children 
of wrath. What Christian would not pity them and 
pray, ' 0 that 1822 might be the happy new year of 
their repentance and pardon.' And m^ay it be the 
happy new year to all in Christ, at Canton and Plain- 
field, in which they shall love tho Lord Jesus Christ 



270 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



more, serve him better, and have greater degrees of 
his consolations. 

" Since last May, fifty-six have been added to the 
church, five of them by letter ; the most of the fifty- 
one date their hope last year, and they appear to 
stand fast in the Lord. The change among our 
youth is great and comforting." 

"April 5, 1822. Preached the funeral-sermon of 
Deacon Solomon Everest, who fell asleep, we trust 
in Jesus, the third instant. Text", 2 Timothy, 4 : 7, 
8, 'I have fought a good fight,' etc. Deacon Everest 
wanted a few days of sixty -two years. He obtained 
hope in Christ, and made a public profession in his 
youth. He adorned his profession by a life of sphit- 
ual fruits ; was one of the most beloved and success- 
ful physicians and surgeons. For many years he 
filled the office of justice of the peace with dignity ; 
and also for several years that of judge of probate. 
He had the esteem and confidence of the church as a 
Christian brother and a deacon. He was blessed with 
property and unusual mental powers. He has been 
my family physician gratis, made me many presents 
in money and other ways, and has done much more 
than any man among us for missionary and Bible 
societies, and kindred objects.* He was very edify- 
ing in prayer-meetings and conferences, and in revi- 
vals of religion. Great is our loss ; but, 0 Lord 
Jesus, thou remainest the support, friend, and builder 

* Dr. Everest left by will, for charitable purposes, about 
16,000 dollars. 



advancinct years. 



271 



of Zion. Do not leave us, but raise up some Elisha, 
instead of this departed Elijah ; and grant to poor me, 
aged and weak, thy guidance, grace, and every needed 
help, that I may be faithful and useful to death, and 
also be found of thee in peace. Amen." 

To his nephew at Aiidovcr. 

" May 2, 1822. 

'Mother Humphrey fell asleep, as we trust in 
Jesus, last autumn, in her ninety-ninth year. Indeed, 
my sun is far in the west, having just closed my sixty- 
fourth year, and it gives me feelings unutterable. 
The world all slides from under me, and I see nothing 
here but vanity. But the divinity and truth of the 
word of Grod appear more and more real and of amaz- 
ing importance. The testimony of the word con- 
cerning the sinfulness, wretchedness, and weakness 
of man ; concerning the Lord Jesus Christ as God 
with us, his atonement, righteousness, intercession, 
and infinite, unchangeable, and eternal fulness ; and 
respecting the Holy Spirit, to change and sanctify the 
heart, to show us the things of Jesus, and fill the 
broken heart with peace and consolation in him : 
these and the like things increase in my view ; all 
aside from the gospel is absolute darkness and des- 
peration. But 0, how needed and inestimably pre- 
cious is the gospel of Christ, as the true and only light 
of life. I think I can say, my study was never so 
delightful ; I would write my sermons if it were only 
for the pleasure of writing them, and my desire is to 
go out of this world testifying of Jesus to all I leave 
behind ; and that that good promise might be fulfilled 



272 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



also in poor me, 'They sliall be fruitful in old age.' 
Go on, my dear cousin ; the work you have chosen is 
truly good, the best of all callings ; and may a double 
portion of dear brother's piety, love, and faith rest 
upon you. 

"From your affectionate uncle, who loves you." 

" May 12, 1822. Last week I set apart a portion 
of my garden to the Lord, for missionary purposes, 
and planted it with corn and potatoes. Should my 
life and health be continued, and any part of it fail 
through my carelessness or sloth,^then I am to make 
it up. "Whatever it produces I consider solemnly 
consecrated to the treasury of the Lord, or the full 
worth of it in money. 0 Lord, what are we, that 
we should be in a situation to give thee thine own ! 
0, give me grace to do it from the heart, and may I 
know how solemn and blessed it is to be the Lord's, 
and live and do all to Him who hath done and suf- 
fered so mr^ch for poor sinful me and this world of 
sinners." 

Speaking of the smallness of his contributions to 
send the gospel to others, the good man once said, 
" If, through amazing grace, I at last arrive in heaven, 
possibly some redeemed soul may there come to me, 
and say with liveliest gratitude, ' Oh, I am indebted to 
your charity for my salvation.' And how should I 
feel, if this happy spirit should then ask, ^ How much 
did you give ?'' " 



CONVERSION OF HIS SON 



273 



CHAPTER XII. 

CONVERSION OF HIS SON— CLOSING LABORS- 
TRAITS OF CHARACTER. 

The parent who has long prayed and wept and 
waited for the conversion of a beloved child, will take 
no common interest in the fact now to be recorded — 
a fact equally suited to make him a partaker of an- 
other's joy, and to inspire him with confidence in the 
Hearer of prayer, slow as the gracious answer may 
seem to come. 

"May 19, 1822. Yesterday I received a letter 
from my -sweet brother. Rev. Mr. Jennings of Steu- 
benville, Ohio, containing in many respects the most 
revivmg intelligence I ever heard, namely, the news 
of the hopeful conversion of my dear son Jeremiah ; 
and of his public profession of the Lord Jesus, the 
last Sabbath in April. If ever, I now had something 
of David's feeling when he went and sat before G-od 
and said, ' AYhat can David say more unto thee ? for 
thou. Lord God, knowest thy servant.' He has been 
a child of my daily prayers ; I have often thought of 
those words, where the psalmist speaks of praying 
until his throat was dried, and of looking until his 
eyes failed. I could hardly believe for joy. And how 
reviving was the news to his dear mother. Whether 
I think of my unworthiness, or of the Lord's being a 
prayer-hearing Grod ; of the love and preciousness of 
12* 



274 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



Christ, of the emptiness of this world, the need we 
stand in of Jesus, and the blessedness of faith in him, 
or of the free grace of Grod in bestowing it ; all I can 
say is, turn which way I will, the scene is rather 
overwhelming, and the thought arises, What shall I 
render unto the Lord ? It is all the travail of Jesus' 
soul, and let him have all the praise, to the glory of 
G-od the Father. I think I have rejoiced with many 
parents, in seeing or hearing of the apparent conver- 
sion of their children; and now I want to call on 
them to rejoice with me and help me praise the Lord. 
And I would wish to do it with trembling and holy 
fear. 

" Dear Saviour, I give him afresh to thee. Do 
not let him be deceived. 0 take the full possession 
of his heart, and make him wholly and for ever thine. 
0 be his guide and support in this evil world, and 
make him useful to thy church on the earth, in the 
way in which it shall seem good to thee. 0, not only 
come into my poor unworthy family, but go through. 

0 take Sarah his wife, Homan and Clarissa, J 

and L , the grandchildren Jeremiah, Oliver, Le- 

roy, and the youth and children with me, A and 

E , S and J. A . Are not thy arm and 

grace sufficient, and the atonement and fulness of 
Jesus infinite ? Cause my soul to be humble deep 
within me ; to thank thee, to take fresh courage, to 
believe more and serve thee better as a minister of 
the gospel, as a parent, everywhere and in all things, 
unto thy coming and glorious kingdom, with which 
this world and all its good things are not worthy to 



CONVERSION OF HIS SON 



275 



be so much as named. ' Blessed be the Lord God, the 
God of Israel, who only doeth wondrous things. And 
blessed be his glorious name for ever : and let the 
whole earth be filled with his glory. Amen and Amen.' 

" JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 
" July 9, 1822. I had a sick day — some of the 
time partially deranged. When the hour of the con- 
cert cams it affected me to see the dear friends of 
Jesus meet and I could not go with them. And 
thinking this might be my last sickness, it excited 
thoughts like these : ' Farewell, pleasant conferences 
and sweet concerts of prayer ; may you ever be hon- 
ored and blessed with the presence of. the God of 
Jacob. And if I must die, 0 may the ever-living 
and most exalted Jesus come down and fill aU his 
meetings with his refreshed, joyful saints, and'quick- 
ened sinners.' For some reason I felt rather cahn m 
mind, and not anxious whether I went now or came 
back to life. That which my poor family and the 
dear church need is not me, a feeble creature, but the 
all-refreshing presence of our exalted Lord and Saviour 
Jesus. 

'< July 10. Through mercy, rested last night bet- 
ter than I feared, and things respecting my recovery 
look more encouraging. 0 Lord, fit me and my dear 
family and people for thy most holy and blessed will. 
Only grant this one blessing, that we might live 
altogether in and unto our ever-living and exalted 
Redeemer, as our blessed all in all. 0, in either case 
deny us not thy presence, so much better than life. 
Amen and Amen." 



276 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



To his elder son. 

" December 4, 1822. 

"Beloved Children — Through mercy we are 
all favored with usual health. What a contrast be- 
tween this and the autumn of 1813, when our beloved 
and deeply lamented Sarah was cut down like a 
flower in the morning. The 16th of October, nine 
years ago, we saw her draw her las{ breath and fall 
into the arms of death. Never, never can I forget 
the affecting scene, so beyond utterance ; a promis- 
ing, pleasant daughter, a dear sister — what beauty, 
honor, and strength to our family. When the same 
season arrives, it brings her fresh to our minds. 

" The Rev. Mr. Jennings' letter was surprising, 
and cause of great joy to your parents, to this church, 
and the neighboring churches and ministers. Your 
letter was most acceptable. The great change, I 
take it, much consisteth in a change of the moral 
tastes and affections respecting the gospel and its 
truths, a desire after holiness, and to follow the Lamb 
in obedience to his sayings. 0 Jeremiah, has God 
of his great mercy begun to shine into your heart, to 
show you his excellent glory - in the face of Jesus, 
with a transforming view ? It is infinitely more than 
if he had given you all this world ; and let him have 
all the praise. The Lord hold you up and daily 
quicken you to walk in his ways, that so you may 
know by happy experience that his goings forth are 
as the morning." 

" March 13, 1823. I am this day within five 
years of seventy, the age of man. I think I do not 



CONVERSION OF HIS SON. 



277 



wish to go back for the world or any of its enjoyments, 
but hope, through grace, that I can bid them a tear- 
less farewell. I think I do still love the Bible, the 
day, the meetings, and people of Grod, To part for 
ever with these and the like things of Jesus, I could 
not endure. But, blessed be Grod, we need not go 
back for these things; the brightest prospects are 
forward, even beyond the grave ; so that grim death 
doth not remove the Christian from, but bringeth him 
near the Saviour." 

" June 29, Lord's day. Second sermon on the 
election of grace. Have had, by turns at least, un- 
usual sweetness and solemnity of soul, in writing and 
in preaching this sermon. The audience appeared 
solemn and interested. Returned home with a kind 
of sweet serenity of mind. Surely the word of truth 
exalteth God alone, and nothing is so supporting and 
comforting to the Chi-istian. 

"Aug. 10. Last Friday our dear son .Jeremiah 
returned home from Steubenville with Sarah. He 
has been to Saratoga Springs for his health : trust 
they are useful — but he is feeble. I think he appears 
to be a new man in spiritual things ; 0 may he be a 
Christian indeed. 

" Sept. 7. To-day my dear Jeremiah was here, 
and partook with us at the Lord's table. 0 what 
shall I render to the Lord ? I have long prayed and 
looked for this desirable day, and now having seen 
this salvation of my Saviour, I could wish to leave 
the world and go to my Saviour. Amen." 

This meeting seems to have been scarcely less 



278 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



happy than that of the venerable Jacob and his son 
Joseph. After such a result of paternal anxieties 
and pious effort, protracted through a course of years, 
what Christian parent, long and severely as God may 
have tried his faith and patience, will not put up one 
more prayer for the conversion of his dear child ? 
Nor let the godly minister faint, who with limited 
means and many sacrifices educates a son in hope 
that he may yet minister at the altar after the father's 
removal from his work to his reward, even when his 
son prefers some less sacred employment ; for he may 
live to see and admire the wisdopi of Providence in 
the disappointment of his own plan. Strong as was 
Mr. Hallock's desire that his son might be a minister 
of Christ, and though his grief and disappointment 
were great when he saw him choose the profession of 
law, yet he lived to see him raised from the bar to 
the bench, a professed friend of Christ, an officer and 
pillar in the church; he lived to acknowledge that 
the Lord had placed him in stations where he might 
as effectually promote the cause of Zion as he prob- 
ably would have done in the clerical office. 

" Feb. 15, 1824. Lord's day. Second sermon from 
Numbers 10 : 1-10. This sermon was preached in 
reference to the bell, which was fixed in its place the 
past week, and rung to-day for the first time. 0 may 
it remind us of the Lord's day, house, and worship ; 
and, as was the case with the silver trumpets, be the 
Lord's memorial of his grace in favor of his people." 

Mr. Hallock was very happy in his choice of sub- 
jects. As his sermons were remarkably appropriate. 



CLOSING LABORS, 



270 



they contained of course great variety of matter. To 
show his care in adapting his preaching to the cir- 
cumstances of his people, he once said to a friend, " I 
never preach against card-playing, because the people 
of Canton would inquire what it is." 

" Feb. 19, 1824. This morning dear E , who 

has lived with us from a little child — sixteen or seven- 
teen years — left us with her father. I mourn for 

E . 0 if I had been more faitliful, and she had 

gone away in Christ by faith, what a consolation. 
But I fear this was not the case. 0 Lord, forgive 
my unfaithfulness, and form her heart anew in Christ 
Jesus ; and may we meet, of thy wonderful grace, in 
heaven.* 

" May 2. It seemed desirable, that if we could 
not have a revival, it might be given us to mourn, 
to give up our souls to sorrow. 0 Lord, let us not be 
stupid ; but may we either rejoice in thy return, or 
mourn with deep sorrow thine absence. 

" July 18. Lord's day. Spent last Monday in vis- 
iting the members of the church in the west district, 
with brother Taylor. Tuesday, went to Torringford 
to the monthly meeting. "Wednesday, returned. 
Thursday, spent in visiting members of the church 
on East hill, with Deacon Theophdus Humphrey. 
Friday, attended the prayer-meeting." 

It may be proper in this place to give some 
account of the monthly meeting noticed in the last 
extract, and of Mr. Hallock's practice in relation to 
it. At his ordination, an arrangement was made by 
• This youth has since given evidence of a saving change. 



280 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK, 



himself and several of the clergy located in the vicini- 
ty, to form this meeting, as well for the culture of 
Christian and ministerial friendship, as for personal 
improvement, and mutual aid in their high and holy 
calling. 

When the day arrived for the organization of this 
little band of brethren, and before he left his lodgings, 
Mr. Hallock wrote in his diary, "Resolved, to make 
no idle talk, and to attend to none ; but to endeavor 
to fix a sense of Grod always upon my mind," And 
judging from his uniform deportment, this resolution 
was not only renewed on his knees, but sacredly kept 
ever afterwards, whenever he was enabled to attend 
the meeting in its monthly return. It was more 
especially in the frequent sessions of this body, that 
his rare piety and worth became known to his breth- 
ren. Here, in the absence of that restraint which a 
man of his delicacy, or rather deep humility, is wont 
to feel in less select or larger circles, he could give 
flow to his soul. Until the last year of his life his 
seat was seldom vacant, however inclement the weath- 
er, and though the distance sometimes exceeded twen- 
ty miles. And he seemed always to come, not with 
a manuscript preparation merely, but with somewhat 
of much higher bearing on the best interests of the 
meeting — with a mind solemn, from a late look into 
eternity ; a heart dissolved in love, as under the very 
cross of his Master ; a countenance importing high 
and heavenly purpose, glowing, like Moses', with some 
lingering rays of the divine gloiy which had beamed 
upon it in his morning devotion, or as slowly and with 



TRAITS OF CHARACTER. 



281 



undiverted eye he had moved in meditation on the 
way. And when he entered the room where his 
brethren were sitting, and passed arovmd his friendly 
hand, there was at once visible a general aspect of» 
joy and of deepened solemnity, often a sort of in- 
voluntary pause and eager look throughout the circle, 
as in expectation of something fresh from above. 
If, in the course of the session, the business took a 
turn rather aside from things of moment, he was seen 
apparently absorbed in his own contemplations, as if 
remembering his early resolution to attend to no idle 
talk. At such times his eyes, half-closed and elevat- 
ed, seemed to be looking away from earth to heaven, 
as if fixed on objects unseen save by the eye of faith. 
His accustomed heavenly look now appeared to the 
best advantage. It was a mixture of devout gravity, 
with a cheerfulness calm and holy. 

If his presence ever failed to exclude levity from 
the meeting, his gentle reproof was sometimes heard, 
yet in such a tone of mingled love and reluctance, as 
to awaken only the emotions of gratitude and regret. 
He was not, however, averse to pleasant anecdotes. 
Few men could select from a richer fund ; none could 
give them more thrilling interest, or more salutary 
point. But it is worthy of particular notice, that 
facetious as were some of his anecdotes, they were 
always so modified by a peculiarity of manner quite 
past description, that the smile they brought on the 
face was without levity in the heart of the listener. 
" This fact," said one who had often tested the reali- 
ty, "is to me good evidence that Mr. Hallock's wit 



282 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



was sanctified." In the hour set apart by the meet- 
ing for devotion, he was manifestly in his element. 
Silent he often was at other times, much as his 
brethren loved to hear his voice ; but noio, his swell- 
ing soul found utterance, in the intervals of prayer ; 
and some heart-stirring intelligence, or highly spiritual 
remarks, were sure to give this season a marked in- 
terest. No other member could fill his seat at any 
time, and especially now. His entire influence was 
very peculiar, and of the most salutary kind. It is 
believed, that while his direct influence on adjacent 
churches, by personal intercourse, preaching, wise and 
friendly counsel, was great and good, the indirect 
influence which he exerted upon them, tluough his 
frequent seasons of intercourse with their pastors at 
this monthly meeting, was even greater and more 
benign.* 

* Clerical meetings of this kind are very common through- 
out Connecticut, and in olher parts of New England and the 
United States. The mode of conducting them is of course vari- 
ous. For the information of clergymen who may be strangers 
to these meetings of rare interest and utility, the order of ex- 
ercises in the one which was so dear, and so much indebted to 
I\Jr. Hallock, is here subjoined. 

Organization, by the choice of a scribe and moderator ; 
prayer by the moderator; pnlilic \\orship: friendly remarks 
on the public performance; discussion, at some length, of two 
questions, ou which writers have been appointed at a previous 
niceling; senson of prayer, in the course of which one of the 
members, by previous appointment, makes an address; theo- 
logical essay ; exegesis of some passage of Scripture ; criticism 
of a sermon ; a review ; skeleton of a sermon by each member ; 
miscellaneous conversation ; review of reading for the last 
month; proposals for doing good ; remarks on the meeting; clos- 
ing prayer by the scribe. 



CLERICAL MEETlNGfe. 



283 



" Sept. 13. Last Friday evening, my dear brother 

Moses with his son L came to see us. This 

morning, after prayer together, they set out for home. 
The visit has been unusually pleasant, and I trust 
mutually profitable in the things of the Lord. May 
I follow my dear brother wherein he followeth Jesus. 

" Sept. 19. 0 Lord, how long before, of thy 
wonderful grace, we shall see a revival among us? 
0 come, I beseech thee, for Christ's sake." 

This desired revival the excellent man lived not 
to see ; but if sainted spirits look down from their 
blessed abode on their late fields of action, "he saw 
it and was glad " in a few months after his arrival in 
heaven, when more than one hundred, under the 
early ministry of his successor, were added to this 
highly favored church. 

" Feb. 6, 1825. Last Monday set out to attend 
the installation of Rev. Mr. Lathrop over the church 
in Sahsbury. Arrived at Norfolk and lodged with 
brother Emerson. Tuesday, went on to Salisbury ; 
it was pleasant to meet the consociation. "Wednes- 
day, Mr. Lathrop was solemnly installed. There was 
a tedious snow-storm. Thvirsday we rode, the wheels 
wading through the snow, to Canton. Bless the 
Lord, 0 my soul." 

The last extract is a fair specimen of Mr. Hal- 
lock's course through life, in respect to attending 
ecclesiastical meetings. In settling the point of duty, 
he seemed scarcely to take into consideration either 
the distance or the state of the weather. In this 
instance, he left home on wheels in the heart of 



284 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



winter, to perform a journey of more than thirty 
miles, and to be absent several days, when most of 
his brethren in the consociation were younger and less 
infirm, all of them nearer the place of meeting than 
himself. And I well recollect how he went twenty 
miles, the following winter, on a similar occasion, 
when the cold was so intense that several members 
of the consociation were on their arrival much frozen. 
But this was the last time he ever met that body ; 
and such was the effect upon him, that he expressed 
some doubt of his ability to return to his family. 

His influence in the larger clerical meetings was 
great, yet he said but little. He always seemed to 
prefer silence, vmless, in his view, some point under 
discussion was likely to receive a wrong decision. In 
such case his words were few, very deliberate, mark- 
ed with much candor, and commonly decisive. He 
was peculiarly happy in pouring upon almost any 
subject whatever light the Scriptures obviously fur- 
nish. On questions of great intricacy, especially if 
their solution depended somewhat upon nice meta- 
physical disquisition, or an extensive acquaintance 
with history, either civil or ecclesiastical, he seldom 
spoke at all. The high respect in which his wisdom 
and his conciliatory turn were held by the churches 
in Connecticut, is sufficiently manifest from the fact 
that he was often a member of select councils for the 
settlement of ecclesiastical difficulties. That his ap- 
pearance to entire strangers was impressive and some- 
what peculiar, the following fact is evidence. 

Some years ago, a delegate from the general as- 



TRAITS OF CHARACTER. 



2S5 



sembly of tlie Presbyterian churcli attended the gen- 
eral association of Connecticut. On his return to the 
south, he called on a clerical friend whose residence 
for some years had been in the neighborhood of Can- 
ton. After some expressions of high satisfaction in 
the appearance of the Connecticut clergy, he said in 
a tone of marked interest, " There was one man who 
attracted my attention in particular ; but his name I 
have forgotten." He then described in vivid colors 
the person, tone, and mamier of Mr. Hallock. "0, 
that 's the apostle Jolm," said t^e once northern cler- 
g}-man, with a significant smile. " True, true," re- 
joined the other, and then had the happiness to learn 
his name and his uncommon worth. 

The most prominent feature, doubtless, of Mr. 
Hallock's character, was that first and indispensable 
requisite in a good minister of Christ, ardent piety. 
This spread over his other estimable properties a sort 
of divine lustre, and gave them sterhng value. His 
was not that periodical religion which returns only 
one day m seven, or at the hours of family devotion, 
morning and evening ; its presence and powerful in- 
fluence were daily apparent in the relaxation of the 
fireside, in the social circle, in the common affairs of 
life, as well as in the house of God, or even in the 
act of spreading forth his hands and uttering tones 
of deepest devotion at the communion-table. With 
him every day was a sort of Sabbath, every hour ap- 
parently an hour of holy intercourse with God. Ho 
seemed to fasten his hand on heaven and bid the earth 
roll beneath him. 



28G 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



We should wrong not only him, but the grace of 
God which made him what he was in piety, were 
we to omit the chastened smile which blended so 
happily with the deep gravity of his aspect and saved 
him from the charge of austerity, a charge some- 
times brought against high spiritual attainment. Few 
men if any did better than he recommend ardor of 
piety to all sorts of people by personal amiableness. 
To an uncommon extent he secured the love and con- 
fidence of youth and children. His piety shone with 
such steady lustre and in such fine proportions, and 
with so little admixture of any thing foreign or incon- 
gruous, that it was probably far more attractive, cer- 
tainly far less repulsive even to the careless and the 
vicious, than a much lower degree of piety often is 
in a character of inconsistent features. 

To all his intimate acquaintance, the uniform 
and marked agreement between his looks, language, 
and actions, denoted an Israelite indeed. Nor did 
he more resemble guileless Nathanael than he did 
godly Enoch, or Barnabas a son of consolation, or that 
disciple lohom Jesus loved. Such was the extent of 
his spiritual attamments, I mean of course in human 
view, that it would seem impossible to characterize 
him by some one or few Christian graces, as is often 
done in characters of less symmetry. It would be 
nearer the truth to say, that by the grace of God, re- 
ceived in no common measure, he had so successfully 
followed the direction of Peter in adding to his faith 
virtue, and to virtue knowledge, temperance, patience, 
and all the other graces of Christianity, that his char- 



TRAITS OF CHARACTER 



28*/ 



acter did in fact seem to combine, in very happy pro- 
portions, and in high excellence, those various traits 
which constitute a well-formed and full-grown man 
m Christ Jesus. And through the mercy of God, he 
endured to the end of his course without any blot on 
his character; his sun even increased in brilliancy 
untn it set, or rather rose above human sight to illu- 
minate and adorn a brighter sky. Not even ene- 
mies — for we carmot suppose so good a man in so 
evil a world without them, especially as his immacu- 
late Master was here crucified — not even enemies 
have whispered a suspicion of his integrity. Those 
who attack Christianity tlirough the persons of its 
professors, select other characters than the one be- 
fore us. 

Have we then found a character without any 
defects? "Was Mr. Hallock free from moral stains? 
No ; we have seen the bitterness of his own soul in 
view of his sinful heart ; we have heard him often 
groan over his pollutions ; and doubtless he more fre- 
quently poured out repentant sorrows before G-od, than 
he either spoke of them to men or recorded them in 
his journal. But without giving him a sinless char- 
acter, those who knew him best do not hesitate to 
place him, in point of consistent and mature practical 
piety, in the very first class of Christians who in any 
age or country have blessed our world. Throughout 
the circle of his acquaintance, he was commonly 
s]3()ken of as " the good Mr. Hallock." Some, and 
these always among his most intimate acquaintance, 
would add the epithet "gi-eat." That his moral out- 



288 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



shone his inteliectual quaUties, none will deny. His 
intellect, however, though at once aided and sur- 
passed by something of higher excellence, was of no 
inferior order. His associations of thought, as we 
have seen in the course of this work, were often orig- 
inal and striking. He had a power of graphic delin- 
eation which could entrance those around him. If 
the images of his imagination were not the most pic- 
turesque, they were always well-defined and vivid ; 
for they were seldom secondhand, but genuine, 
bright coin, fresh from his own mint. His memory, 
especially in regard to facts, was tenacious and exact. 
But the most prominent of his intellectual powers 
was a sterling judgment. All his faculties of mind 
seemed to owe not a little of their strength, and their 
facility of operation, to the sublimity of his moral 
and religious feelings. Probably it would not be 
wide of the truth to say, he was a great because a 
good man. 

He ever seemed to feel and act as under the eye 
of his divine Master, as one that loved his Lord and 
the service assigned him, as one who sought the 
advancement of Christ's kingdom under a constant 
sense of the final account to be given of his steward- 
ship. His sense also of the worth of souls, and his 
strong and unquenchable love for his own people, 
appeared in his unwearied efforts for their salvation. 
He is believed to have spent more time than most of 
his clerical brethren in preparation for the pulpit, 
He seemed to be shocked with the idea of bringing 
to the house of God that which had cost him nothing. 



TRAITS OF CHARACTER. 



289 



His study was emphatically his home. Yet his char- 
acter was preeminently pastoral. He found much 
time to be abroad among his people, with the sick 
and dying, visiting from house to house, and attend- 
ing funerals, conferences, and prayer-meetings. Very 
few have had an equal talent, by familiar intercourse, 
to fix attention, awaken interest, and lodge valuable 
truth in the minds of all classes. A stiU smaller 
number have been alike faithful in that part of a 
clergyman's duty termed parochial. If he did not 
adopt the resolution of one devoted servant of Christ, 
" to let no person go away from his presence without 
an effort to do him good," it is believed that few 
ever went from him without having received some 
salutary influence. A philanthropist of the true 
Christian stamp, 

" He watched, he wept, he felt, he prayed for all." 

■ In the various relations of private life, he was 
what we might expect in a man of such high aim 
and general consistency of character. He never 
seemed to forget, in moments of relaxation, that he 
was an ambassador of Jesus Christ. His general 
deportment among his fellow-men, while it com- 
manded a respect bordering on veneration, secured a 
high degree of confidence and love. His life, as the 
reader has seen, was not distinguished by remark- 
able incidents. Like the gentle and uniform stream, 
it passed along year after year with little variation, 
till at length he found himself rapidly sinking under 
the pressure of age and infirmities. He now ca.st his 



290 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



eye forward two or three years, to the age of seventy, 
as the termination of his active labor in th"e ministry, 
should God continue his life to that period. His de- 
sign was then to ask for a colleague in the work he 
loved. But Grod released him from his charge a little 
before the close of the natural day of human hfe. 

A worthy pastor, at whose ordination Mr. Hallock 
offered the consecrating prayer, says, "I still seem to 
feel at times the pressure of his hand fresh and warm 
as when he laid it on my head at that solemn hour ; 
nor shall I ever forget the words he spoke to me not 
long before his death, ' My young brother, I want to 
say one thing to you for your encouragement: I have 
been a minister almost forty years, and I find the 
work sweeter and sweeter.'" 

Another, who had spent a night with him, in 
company with a .fellow-student, writes, "After edify- 
ing conversation during the evening, as he conducted 
us to our chamber, he said, ' There is the bed I keep 
for pilgrims. A great deal of faith has slept there, 
and I hope some love.' His few words were an em- 
phatic and impressive sermon, suggestive of many an 
instructive, pleasing, profitable thought. The impres- 
sion on my own mind was that of his strong, endur- 
ing love for all the servants of Christ. Mr. Hallock 
was not a mere Sabbath preacher. He was an every 
day, and therefore an effective, eloquent, successful 
preacher. A divine unction attended his words. 
The heart and conscience felt their power." 



SICKifESS OF HIS WIFE. 



291 



CHAPTER XIII. 

SICKNESS OF HIS -WIFE — LAST PUBLIC SERVICES- 
DEATH. 

In the spring of 1825, a scene of deep affliction 
commenced in Mr. Hallock's family, which was prob- 
ably a means of hastening his dissolution. The 
wife of his youth, who had shared with liim the joys 
and sorrows of Life, to whom his affection had for 
many years been increasing in strength and tender- 
ness, and on whom, next to his Saviour, he had 
leaned as the staff of his age, was smitten with dis- 
tressing and alarming illness. "When he found that 
her disease was dropsy, and probably incurable, his 
agony of soul became intense. As she sunk gradually 
before his eyes, he felt that she must soon leave him ; 
and by anticipation already stood over her dying bed, 
pressed her cold hand, committed her soul to God, 
and her body to the dust, and felt all the loneliness 
of her absence — a trial, in his own apprehension, far 
greater than if its occurrence had been earlier in life. 
But the severity of this affliction can be best learned 
from his owti account of it, taken partly from his 
journal and partly from letters to friends. 

" March 6, 1825. My dear Mrs. Hallock is un- 
well, and not able to go with me to meeting either 
Friday, or to-day. Her disorder appears to be the 
iropsy. Her physician and friends think it danger- 



292 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



ous. She grows weaker every day. Perhaps it is 
the coming of the Son of man. 0 Lord Jesus, grant 
her thy sensible presence, and prepare poor me, with 
her anxious children and friends, for all thy will. 
Sometimes the thought of parting with her is over- 
whelming, at other times I feel more quiet and rec- 
onciled. She, for the most part, appears calm in 
mind and ready. 0 Lord, let her not be deceived, 
but may she build only on Christ, and be accepted 
in him. 0 preserve her to us a little longer, if it be 
thy blessed will. 0 may all be sanctified, and work 
to the furtherance of thy blessed kingdom in us and 
among us, for Jesus' sake. Amen. 

" March 13. 0 Lord G-od of aged David, make 
me thine, and 0 be my helper and refuge unto death. 
My wife has had a sick and trying week. I never 
heard her groan as she did Thursday night from 
about nine to three o'clock. She then grew easier 
through mercy, "We begin to hope she may be spar- 
ed to us a little longer. Prepare her, and all of us, 

0 Lord, for this mercy ; but if 0 receive her spirit, 

and be with us, our light, life, shield, and portion. 

" I am this day sixty-seven years old. I feel the 
increasing infirmities of age, and -know that the end 
of all probationary things is, to me, at hand. 0 Lord, 
quicken and strengthen me, both to live unto Jesus, 
and testify of him and his so great and needful sal- 
vation, to the children, the youth, and all.. And when 
thou shalt call, may I submissively resign my minis- 
try, life, soul, and body to thee, and go supported by 
the blessed gospel hope. Let me not be deceived ; 



SICKNESS OF HIS WIFE 



293 



teach my heart ; make it right, and lead me in the 
way which is everlasting. 

" ' 0 receive my soul at last.' 
" May 8, Lord's day. Nortliington. Mrs. Hallock 
was so unwell that I did not go until morning, and 
returned home after meeting. I greatly fear her de- 
parture is at hand. 0 may she he ready. And 0, 
Lord Jesus, strengthen and prepare me for all thy 
will, for Jesus' sake. Amen." 

To his brother at Plainfield. 
1 " Cantos, May 17, 1825. 

"Very dear and respected Brother and Sister — 
The prohahility is, that the wife of my youth has not 
long to stay in this world. For ten years she has 
been blessed with unusual health, to the great com- 
fort of her family. But sometime in January last, 
she was taken with that alarming disease the dropsy. 
I have often feared that she would not live twelve 
hours. You know she has been the builder of her 
house, under Providence. To me, she is ' as the 
loving hind and pleasant roe.' This is the greatest 
outward affliction I ever experienced. Sometimes it 
looks overwhelming, and I feel as if I should sink 
under it. At other times I feel a strange support, 
and as if I could do and bear all things, by the help 
of our blessed Jesus. Do pray for us — you know for 
what. Mrs. Hallock is for the most part calm in 
mind, leaning, as we trust, on the Beloved." 

Jlne 5, 1825. Last Friday rode ■with Mrs. Hal- 
Itick to see Doctor of Colebrook. Before we got 



294 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



home she was taken very ill, so that she could not 
endure to ride. To-day she appears to me more like 
soon leavuig us. 0 must I be bereaved of the dear 
wife of my youth ? I trust I received her in answer 
to prayer, and I would give her up at the call of Him 
who gave her, and who hath made her such a bless- 
ing to me. 0 Lord Jesus, do, I beseech thee, shine 
upon her. 0 be her support ; fit her for thy heavenly 
mansions, and receive her there. And prepare poor 
me to follow, for Jesus' sake. Amen." 

In November, Mrs. Hallock's health was so far 
improved that they performed a journey to Plainfield, 
at the close of which Mr. Hallock writes, " I think, 
for forty years I never had a more pleasant visit to 
my friends in Massachusetts, although I set out under 
gloomy appreliensions. I trust the journey has been 
beneficial to Mrs. Hallock's health. 0 may God in 
Christ have all the praise ; and may we be wholly 
his, devoted to his fear and service. Amen." 

This was his last journey to his beloved friends. 
The last Sabbath in November, he writes as follows : 
"More freedom and attention than I expected; came 
home encouraged and comfortable in mind. Had a 
more pleasant conference than usual in the evening. 
The meeting was small in number, but remarkably 
still and sweet. Why art thou so disquieted and cast 
down, 0 my soul, of late? Thank the Lord, and 
take courage. He has, he doth, and will deliver, and 
I shall yet praise him, with his saints, for the health 
and help of his countenance." 



ills CORRESPONDENCE. 



295 



To his nephew, Mr. Gerard Hallock 

"December 19, 1825. 

"Dear and much respected Cousin — I lately 
gave you an account of our remarkably pleasant 
visit at Plainfield, which I trust you have received. 
After this I received your precious letter, now on the 
table before me. The Holy One of Israel, and great 
Physician of soul and body, has raised the wife of my 
youth from the borders of the grave, so that she is 
able to oversee the affairs of her family, and go with 
me again to the house of the Lord ; and I trust, in 
answer to the many prayers put up for her precious 
life. Although she appears to me like one raised out 
of the burying-ground, what the final issue will be, 
God only knows. I think it sounds like the coming 
of the Son of man, and that this terrible dropsy will 
finally wear the dear woman out, who has been the 
builder of her family, a wife indeed to me, about forty 
years. Her mind appears calm. She says it is no mat- 
ter, if we are prepared ; and requests us to pray that 
she may be able to say, ' Thou knowest that 1 love 
thee.' If we should live till March, I shall be sLxty- 
eight, and she sixty-five. People of our age must be 
near to death. 0 may we live and die in Jesus, and 
be perfectly submissive, Hke those blessed occupying 
servants, whom their Lord, when he cometh, shall find 
waiting for him. I well remember the changes which 
have passed over you, as a member of my dear Moses' 
family. I rejoice in the prosperity of your paper,* 

* The Bostou Recorder and Telegraph, of which Mr. G 
Hallock was then one of the editors. 



296 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



which I consider of the cause of Immanuel, and to 
savor more and more of him. Let us feel our de- 
pendence on Jesus in prosperity ; know that this is a 
changing world ; and should adverse scenes arise, 
never feel as if some strange thing had happened. 

" Jeremiah, with his dear Sarah, came last sum- 
mer seven hundred miles to see a sick and dying 
mother. Their weeping mother says, ' No one can 
doubt their affection for their sick mother.' She 
styles it, ' The love of seven hundred miles and one 
hundred and fifty dollars.' Jeremiah is perhaps more 
useful in the kingdom of the Redeemer, than if he had 
entered the ministry. I do not grudge the eight hun- 
dred dollars expended for his education, or think I 
have given too much. 

" I have often thought and said I would never 
give over hoping for and expecting the new song of 
salvation from any poor sinner, so long as he was in 
any measure awake and anxious. I feel more and 
more established in this : that Christ is God, one with 
the Father ; that his atoning blood, righteousness, and 
intercession are the only hope and salvation of the 
sinner ; and that we become interested in Jesus and 
his fulness, by that faith in him which worketh love. 
I also feel that much of the experience of the Lord's 
people in this world, consists in poverty of spirit, la- 
menting their leanness and barrenness, hungering 
after righteousness, and desiring the advancement of 
Christ's kingdom in the world, and to be made in- 
struments of good to Zion. If these and the like 
things, which belong to our Lord's character of the 



LAST LABORS 



207 



blessed iu Matthew, fifth chapter, be in us, they may 
and ought to be cultivated. And if they should 
continue to pervade the mind and increase, we should 
have and give evidence that we are in Christ, and he 
in us the hope of glory. 

" From your affectionate 

" L'XCLE." 

" Jan. 1, 1826. The past has been a year of new 
and great trials, on account of Mrs. Hallock's dis- 
tressing, tlureatening dropsy. "\Ye little thought last 
spring that she would live to see this day, but God 
has been better to us than our fears or deserts ; so 
that her precious life is spared to us, and she is able 
of late to oversee the affairs of her family. 0 Lord, 
make us penitent and humble for all our sins against 
thee, thankful for thy innumerable mercies, and 
forgive, sanctify, and prepare vis for thy holy and 
blessed will. If we must die this year, may it be in 
Jesus — if bereaved, support us with thy consolation. 
Thus honor us, that by faith, love, obedience, and 
submission, we may honor thee in the Lamb of God 
who died to save us from death, and Uves for ever- 
more, the life of all his people. Amen and Amen. 

"'Jan. 29, Lord's day. \Yednesday, Thursday, 
and Friday have been three days of bodily infirmities 
and distress, so that I sometimes thought my days 
on the earth were almost closed ; I especially feared I 
should not be able to perform in public. But bless- 
ed be my good Shepherd, the Lord Jesus hath ena- 
bled me to perform as usual, and I felt in better health 
and stronger at night than in the morning. My dear 
13* 



298 



JEREMIAH HALLOClv 



companion is very low, and I fear sinking under lier 
distressing, wasting disease. 0 thou most great and 
good Physician of body and mind, prepare her and 
poor me for all thy blessed will. Amen. Amen. 

" Jan. 31. Went with brother Titus Case to attend 
the ordination of his son over the church in Groshen. 
It proved to be one of the most cold, tedious days. I 
was appointed to make the consecrating prayer, and 
was carried tlirough better than my fears. 

" Feb. 2. W e returned to Canton, and found all in 
outward peace ; but poor Mrs. Hallock is no better, 
I fear she is sinking and drawing near to death. 
But it is a pleasing thought, that Jesus holds its 
keys. By reason of the oold on Tuesday, I am so 
lame I can hardly get about. 

" Feb. 5, Lord's day. First sermon from Psalm 
72 : 6 : 'He shall come down as rain upon the mown 
grass, etc' Second sermon from Rev. 2:4: ' Never- 
theless I have somewhat against thee, because thou 
hast left thy first love.' Friday and Saturday felt very 
unwell, hardly able to sit up, and my dear wife still 
more ill ; but have been carried through another day 
of my public labor far better than my fears. 0 what 
shall I render unto the Lord for all his great and 
innumerable mercies ? 0 may my whole heart be 
Christ's, and he my blessed All in aU." 

Mr. Hallock's remarks, on each of the next four 
Sabbaths, are similar to the last extract, save that 
he speaks of his wife's increasing weakness, of his 
own unusual comfort of mind, and of the sickness of 
his beloved Deacon Humphrey — a man who had stood 



LAST LABORS 



290 



by Liim a fast friend during his entire ministry, and 
whose sickness and death at this most trying time, 
added not a Uttle to his other afllictions. 

"MARcn 26, Lord's day. Northington. Usual free- 
dom and attention. Rode home after meeting, against 
a cold northwest wind — very bad for my rheumatism ; 
called and prayed with some of the sick, on the way. 

"April 23. Trust my soul was refreshed with the 
truth I preached to others. It was wonderful to think 
of the price in our hands to get the unspeakable love 
of Christ the Lamb of God, Lumanuel, by loving 
him. How astonishing that if we vile sinners will 
but love the Lord Jesus, so exalted and divinely 
precious in himself, he will bless and honor us with 
liis love. In the afternoon felt more feeble and a 
little embarrassed. The swelling on my thi'oat more 
afflictive and threatening. 0 Lord, prepare us all 
for thy wUl. 

"April 30, Lord's day. Simsbury. Was feeble in 
body, and low in mind. 0 Lord, 'give success to thy 
truth, although spoken with so much weakness, for 
thy name's sake. Rode home after meeting, on 
account of Mrs. HaUock. Found her in some respects 
more comfortable, though, I fear, really no better. 
My dear brother M'Lean tarried with us. Spent 
the evening and morning in conversation on things 
above. 

"May 1. Confined to the bed most of the day, 
parched with thirst, and groaning with pain in my 
teeth and face. Strengthened myself, and at five 
o'clock attended the monthly concert. Though few 



300 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



attended, yet it was, I thought, a spu-itual, precious 
meeting. 

"May 2. Have had a distressing night. Poor 
Mrs. Hallock, a mere skeleton, went out and dined 
with us, which she had not done for months. 

"May 14. I have not been able to attend meet- 
ing on this nor the last Sabbath. It was trying to 
see the people go to the Lord's house, and not be able 
to be with them. 0 for a humble, resigned heart. 
I trust my ancles are getting better, and that I may 
be restored to the work of the ministry. 0 Lord 
Jesus, if this is thy will, may it be, and may I be 
more faithful and edifying, and edified. If thou hast 
otherwise determined, 0 be with and prepare me for 
the trial ; and when thou hast no more for me to do 
or suffer here, receive me, of thy great mercy, to thy- 
self in the heavenly mansions. Mrs. Hallock is more 
comfortable ; praised be the Lord. 

" May 21, 1826, Lord's day. Lord's supper. First 
sermon from John 4 : 10 : 'If thou knewest the gift of 
God, and who it is that saith to thee. Give me to 
drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he 
would have given thee living water.' Second sermon 
from Psahn 91 : 1 : ' He that dwelleth in the secret 
place of the Most High, shall abide under the shadow 
of the Almighty.' Have been strengthened and carried 
through the public performances beyond my fears. 
Praised be the Lord, my never failing helper." 

Here his public service ended. Since his death, 
one of the sisters of his church, with gushing tears, 
said to the compiler, in reference to this last exhaust- 



LAST SICKNESS. 



301 



ing effort, "I thought it would be so at the time ; I 
thought I should never see him there again ; his pale, 
deatlilike face, and his slow and faltering steps as he 
ascended the pulpit, were to me a premonition of 
what has since proved reality; he seemed, on that 
memorable Sabbath, to be finishing his work." 

"May 22 and 23. Have been very unwell; kept 
my bed most of the time, was unable to attend the 
concert, Tuesday. Monday, renewed my will ; a sol- 
emn, impressive transaction. 0 may we be Christ's, 
and Clirist onr eternal portion. Amen and Amen." 

Here ends Mr. Hallock's journal. The scene was 
now fast closing. He sunk rapidly under a debility 
of the whole system, yet was not entirely confined to 
the house. He even wrote two sermons of common 
length ; one on Acts 5 : 42, the other a funeral-ser- 
mon, on Eccl. 7:1. 

When in this declining state, the Rev. Mr. 

McL , a minister greatly beloved by Mr. Hallock, 

and who, for twenty years, had been pastor of the 
nearest sister church, called to see the dear man. 
Said this son in the gospel, " Father Hallock, I have 
two requests to make, which I hope you will not 
deny me. The first is, that you will promise me not 
to destroy your journal and other writings." Mr. 
Hallock made reply, " I had thought of burning them, 
some dark night — perhaps they would give as much 
light in that, as in any way ; but as you have made 
the request, I will not burn them." "The other 
request is, that you will tell me how you feel in view 



302 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



of death." He replied, "Brother, I am far from hav- 
ing distressing doubts. If I hav'n't loved Christ and 
Clmst's things, I don't know what I have loved." 

On the twentieth of June he for the last time 
sat with his family at the breakfast table. He also 
attended family prayers, though manifestly in a state 
of great debility. About two o'clock P. M., after a 
season of extreme restlessness, he rose from his bed, 
took a chair and said, "Let us pray." Mrs. Hallock, 
thinking him deranged, reminded him that it was 
not night. He then observed, "I am almost gone," 
went into the kitchen and called on the family to 
attend prayers. His son's wife noticed something 
singular in his appearance, and giving him a chair, 
requested him to sit. He sat down, and immediately 
sunk into a state of insensibility. A physician came 
within half an hour, and pronounced it a fit of apo- 
plexy. He lay apparently in a dying state till one 
o'clock at night, when to the surprise of all he so far 
revived as to speak, yet he was deranged, and thus 
continued until about ten o'clock. He then rose up 
in bed, clasped his hands and made a short, but able 
and connected prayer, commending himself and family 
to the care of God. 

He now lay down, but observing his little grand- 
child about eighteen months old coming up to his 
bed, he said, "Oh, you little dear, you and your 
little brothers have been the objects of my daily pray- 
ers from the time of your conception. May you long 
live and be a burning and shining light in the church 
of Christ; may you serve G-od and your generation 



LAST SICKNESS. 



303 



well. I hope to meet my dear giandchildren in 
heaven." At this time his son's wife offered him 

some medicine. He said, " I thank you, C , for all 

your kind and abundant care of me." Then turning 
to his son, "I thank you, my son, for your kind and 
filial attentions." His son remarked that if his father 
had a sentence for his absent brother Jeremiah, he 
would prize it. Mr. Hallock, after a little hesitancy 
and apparent confusion, said, " Tell him, I have always 
felt that the dying hour is the trying hour ; and we 
then want all the graces of the covenant blessings." 
An orphan youth who had been a member of Jlr. 
Hallock's family from a cliild, now came into the 
room. He rose up in bed, and leaning upon one 
elbow, extended his deathlike hand to the young man, 
and said with a heavenly smile, " 0, Augustus, attend 
to the great things that concern your everlasting 
peace." His grandchildren Jeremiah and OHver 
were called. He rose, put his hands upon their heads 
in a truly pati"iarchal form, and in a most eloquent 
and pathetic manner commended them to the God of 
their fathers ; told them they were descended from a 
long line of pious ancestors, and that rehgion was the 
great concern; charged them to give their hearts to 
God, and added, " 0 may God enlighten your hearts, 
and may you be active and useful servants of Christ 
when your grandfather is sleeping in the dust." 

]\Irs. Hallock at this time came into the room. 
He gave her his hand and said, " Poor Mrs. Hallock, 
I am glad to see you ; may Christ be sanctified in 
you : we must part, but if, as I trust, it is in Christ, 



304 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



it is well. My hope holds out strong." His whole 
appearance, in look, tone, and manner, during this 
touching scene, was peculiarly pleasant. He had 
been, throughout his sickness, as always before, very 
patient, but never so remarkably pleasant, in the judg- 
ment of his nearest friends, as in this lucid interval 
of about two hours. He now lay back upon the bed, 
and appeared to be in the agonies of death, but soon 
said, "Oh, can this be death? Trust in the Lord. 
0 mav I have peace and support. 

"'Tell me, my soul, can this be death?' " 
Those around his bed supposed he would say no 
more ; but he revived and added, " 0 saye from evil 
and error — 0 yes, from error. Oh sin, it will eat like 
a canker. Oh, my dear Homan, may he not fail of 
salvation." At this time, several of the neighbors 
came in. He addressed them separately, and gave 
them his parting blessing and farewell. He lay 
awhile in extreme distress, gasping for breath ; then 
said with difficulty, " 0 Lord, have mercy, make us 
partakers of that blessed hope. We can never be too 
solicitous about a good hope in Christ. Oh, how we 
all need the supports of Jesus in this trying hour. 0 
meeten me for, and take me to thyself. 0 thou, who 
hast said, ' I am with you alway,' 0 grant me thy pres- 
ence even unto death. 0 may I go penitent ; go in 
faith ; go in love to Jesus." He now cast his eyes 
upon his son and said, " Oh, Homan, what is not 
Christ worth in such an hour ? 0 Lord, come «nd take 
me." He lay some time apparently in a dying state : 
as little William came again into the room, he turned 



HIS DEATH, 



305 



his head and said, " 0, you little hoy, may it he said 
of you, as of Enoch, that you ' walked with God.' I 
trust I have the happiness of Christ's presence." 
Here his reason left him, and never returned. He 
lay for some hours in extreme pain, catching for 
breath ; then became more easy, was able to swallow, 
yet in a degree of stupor. In this quiet state he re- 
mained till about five o'clock in the morning, when 
he uttered a loud groan, and expired, June 23, 1826, 
aged 68, in the forty-first year of his ministry. 

The day following, his funeral was attended by 
several of the clergy and a large concourse of people 
from Canton and the adjacent towns, when a sermon 
was preached by the compiler, founded on Gen. 5 : 24, 
" And Enoch walked AAdth God ; and he was not ; for 
God took him." The general burst of grief on the 
occasion was no uncertain evidence that the church 
of Christ had lost one of its ablest supporters, the 
Christian ministry one of its purest, brightest orna- 
ments, the community a firm pillar, and each indi- 
vidual a personal friend. 

In his person, Mr. Hallock was above the middle 
stature, and of good proportion. His face was rather 
long and spare — ^his features prominent — his skin 
dark — his eyes of a bluish gray, and deep-set under 
thick black eyebrows. A chastened smile commonly 
softened the fixed and deep solemnity of his coun- 
tenance, while an expression of devout contemplation, 
kindness, humility, and grave cheerfulness, saved him 
from any thing like repulsive austerity. He walked 
with his head inclined forward, and his eyes toward 



306 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK 



the earth. All his motions, whether of the body and 
limbs, the head, the eyes, or the organs of speech, were 
slow, and with unconscious dignity. His utterance 
was naturally mild and somewhat monotonous, often 
energetic, always distinct, and inimitably grave and 
sincere. His presence was suited, in no common de- 
gree, to impress with a sort of religious awe, as well 
the young and gay, as others. He was a rare speci- 
men of clerical politeness. His very peculiar look and 
manner went further than in almost any other case to 
give emphasis to words and interest to actions. It 
might be said of him, as of Fenelon, "A noble singu- 
larity pervaded liis whole person ; and a certain un- 
definable and subUme simplicity gave to his appear- 
ance the air of a prophet." 

Mr. Hallock's Farewell Address to his bereaved wife ana 
children, found after his decease with his last will and 

" My dear Friends — As it is my desire and ex- 
pectation that you, my beloved wife and son Homan, 
will live together until separated, as you and I have 
been, by the stroke of death, 0 may you live in love, 
miited in heart, daily performing those important 
mutual duties which are incumbent on a dear parent 
and clidd. 

" As the Saviour, when dying, said to the beloved 
disciple, ' Behold thy mother !' I would say, my dear 
Homan, to you, Remember how much she hath 
borne and done for you, and feel your great obliga- 
tions to her. Sympathize with her in her lonesome, 
trying situation; seek, esteem, and hearken to her 



HIS FAREWELL ADDRESS. 



307 



advice and counsel in all things. Bear with her in- 
firmities, and despise her not, if she should live to be 
old. Always honor her, not in word only but in 
deed, according to the fifth commandment, and you 
will do right, and please God ; and it wiU be well 
with you. 

" And to you, my dear wife, I would say, ' Behold 
thy son !' Pray for, be tender of him, esteem and treat 
him with respect, cover his failings, feel in his trials, 
provoke him not, but seek and rejoice in liis w^elfare, 
and encourage him in every right way. Know, my 
dear wife and cliild, that the most wise and judicious 
arrangement of things by wiU, and ever so much of 
tliis world's things, cannot make us happy, or mutual 
blessings and comforts, if love be wanting, and hatred 
and covetousness fill the breast. After all that is or 
can be done, the whole must turn on the great hinge 
of love, with which a dinner of herbs so much ex- 
ceedeth the richest feast, where love is wanting. 

" I would now add a few words to you all, includ- 
ing each of the children.* I have endeavored to pray 
for you all daily, and give you up to the Lord, wish- 
ing above all things, that Jesus Christ might be form- 
ed in you the hope of glory — that your whole selves 
and whatever you have might be the Lord's and con- 
secrated to his service — that you might set your hearts 

* •■' By all my children, I mean my beloved Jeremiah and 
Homan, with my daughters their wives; not excluding dear 
Jonathan," brought up by Mr. Hallock years ago, " or his wife, 
Augustus, Else, or little Julia Ann." The last three were, at 

date of this address, members of his family. 



308 



JEREMIAH HALIOCK. 



and hopes on God in Christ, seek his kingdom and 
glory, and lay up a treasure in heaven ; that so you 
might be interested in the last will and testament of 
the once crucified, but now ever living and reigning 
Redeemer. Then you will be rich indeed. 

" Your times are in the hand of the Lord. It is 
he that huildeth up families and individuals, and that 
puUeth them down. Fear, therefore, and acknow- 
ledge him in all your ways, and he will perfect that 
which concerneth you. Whether we have Uttle or 
much of this world, it is equally, in itself, ashes, vain 
and perishing, as a portion : hence the wise will not 
set their hope and heart on this world and its things. 
Take, therefore, my dear children, the whole word 
of God for your portion, your study, and your 
guide in all things ; read it day and night, and med- 
itate upon it. 

" You have seen a thousand weaknesses, follies, 
and failings in me ; I ask your forgiveness and the 
forgiveness of God through Jesus Christ, to whose 
eternal mercy I commit myself and you. See that 
you love one another, and rejoice in each other's in- 
terests. Obey, love, and honor your dear mother. See 
to it that you always respect the ministers of Jesus, 
for his sake. Open your doors and your hearts to his 
missionaries, and to all his friends. Always remem- 
ber to relieve the poor and afflicted, so far as in your 
power. Feel for them. Be public spirited, not prodi- 
gal. Be cautious in contracting debts, and careful 
to pay them. Buy the truth, and sell it not. In a 
word, live soberly, deal justly, love mercy, and walk 



MRS. HALLOCK'S DEATH. 



309 



humbly with the Lord, and your end shall be peace. 
And if we die in the Lord, we shall soon meet, to part 
no more, in that comfortable and blessed eternity 
which the Son of God hath brought to light in the 
glorious gospel ; which is the prayer of your affection 
ate friend and father, 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

"Caxton, March 21, 1817." 

" N. B. The above farewell address was written 
March 24, 1817 ; and having this day, August 23. 
1822, reviewed it, I leave it with the will, as ratified 
yesterday." 

Mrs. Hallock, after the death of her husband, 
lingered out a few thrice-painful months. The last 
time she went to the house of God, she was support- 
ed to her seat to witness his funeral solemnities. 
This scene, in respect to her better conceived than 
described, God enabled her to bear in a Christian 
manner. She meekly said to one who attempted to 
impart the consolation of sympathy, yet conscious 
that the pressure of her trial left little encouragement 
to the attempt, " I found it hard to endure the last 
painful operation of the surgeon, without the aid of 
Mr. Hallock's prayers." A faint smile of resignation 
was on her countenance as she said it ; its seeming 
import, that her Saviotrr was with her. The opera- 
tion of depletion here alluded to, was performed in 
the interval between her husband's death and inter- 
mept, in the hope of enabling her to attend his 
funeral. The strongest cord now severed which had 



310 



JEREMIAH HALLOCK, 



bound her to earth, she gradually declined until early 
in November, when her released spirit joined that of 
her husband. They were lovely and pleasant in their 
lives, and in their death not divided. 




OF TML AMERICAN ~RA' 



SKETCH OF THE LIFE 

OF 

REV. MOSES HALLOCK 

OF PLAINFIELD, MASS. 

ONLY BROTHER OF REV. XEREMIAH HALLOCK, OF CANTON, CONN 

" The meek will lie guide in judgment; and the meek will he teach 
his way." 



Jereotah and Moses Hallock were so identified 
in history and in character, that a biography of the 
one can hardly be considered complete without at 
least an outline of the other. They were within two 
years of the same age, the only sons of the family, 
with seven younger sisters. The history of their 
early days up to manhood, is almost one and the 
same ; and from the point where they separated for 
public life, there is a striking resemblance. They 
were born on Long Island in 1758 and 1760, and when 
the eldest was about eight, the loss of their father's 
property at sea caused him to take them, with three 
little sisters, to G-oshen, then a part of Chesterfield, 
Hampshire county, in the mountainous wUds of West- 
ern Massachusetts, to subdue the forest and obtain the 
means of subsistence. Wlien they were at the age 



312 



MOSES HALLOCK, 



o.f eighteen and sixteen the struggle of the Revolution 
comincucccl, and both were several months in the 
army, in 1776-7, including the period of the capture 
of Burgoyne ; though few men were less inclined to 
war than their father or themselves. They were 
dutiful sons, moral and inoffensive in their Uves, but 
without relish for vital godliness, and on one occa- 
sion, Jeremiah had become so interested in a ball, 
that he sharply rebuked his brother for declining to 
attend. 

In 1779, at the age of twenty-one, Jeremiah was 
brought to the saving knowledge of Christ, and soon 
commenced study for the ministry. Four years after, 
divine grace reached the heart of Moses, and when 
he, graduating at Yale, in 1788, received the degree 
of A. B., Jeremiah, who had already entered the 
mhiistry, received that of A. M. Jeremiah labored 
almost forty years as pastor in AVest Simsbury, now 
Canton, Connecticut, till his death in 1826 ; Moses 
nearly forty-five years as pastor in Plainfield, Massa- 
chusetts, till his death in 1837. The one object of 
both was the glory of God in plucking sinners as 
brands from the burning, and raising them to heaven. 
The heart of Jeremiah was more fixed on labors as 
an evangelist, in which he was richly blessed ; while 
Moses did more in training others for the ministry 
and missionary work ; and the labors of both were 
owned by the presence and gift of the Holy Spirit in 
conversions which produced rich permanent fruits in 
a devoted and godly life. 

Both recognized the hand of God in the early dis- 



SKETCH OF HIS LIFE. 



313 



asters of their father, by which their lot was cast in 
a part of the country preeminently blessed by "tho 
great awakening of 1740." Their residence in Go- 
shen was twelve miles from Northampton, where 
President Edwards so successfully labored and wrote 
his immortal work on revivals ; Plainfield was near 
Goshen ; and Canton not far from Windsor, the birth- 
place of Edwards. That portion of the country was 
"as a field which the Lord hath blessed," not only 
in the outpouring of the Spirit in President Edwards' 
days, but in the perhaps more glorious and extensive 
revivals commencing about the year 1800, "when," 
in the language of Dr. Griffin, "that moral change 
began which swept from so large a part of New Eng. 
land its looseness of doctrine and laxity of discipline, 
and awakened an evangelical pulse in every vein of 
the American church." To the furtherance of this 
great work of God, the two brothers devoted their 
noblest energies till death. Out of it they saw the 
great and beloved missionary enterprises of the age 
evidently spring, and in it hosts of devoted men 
raised up, who are pillars in the church of God far 
and wide in our own land, and at mission stations 
abroad. 

The two pastors were located each about twenty 
miles west of Connecticut river — Plainfield being upon, 
and Canton within the Green Mountain range. They 
were sixty miles apart, but the chain of brotherly 
love, and Christian sympathy and encouragement, 
was kept bright till they were gathered into " the 
general assembly and church o ' the first-born, whose 



314 



MOSES HALLOCK, 



names are written in heaven." If either of them had 
sat for Groldsmith's picture, it could scarcely have 
been more minutely accurate. 

" Near yonder copse, where once the garden smiled, 
And still where many a garden flower grows wild ; 
There, where a few torn shrubs the place disclose, 
The VILLAGE pkeacher's modest mansion rose. 
A man he was to all the country dear, , 
And passing rich with forty pounds a year; ^ 
Remote from towns he ran his godly race. 
Nor e'er had changed, nor wished to change his place ; 
Unskilful he to fawn, or seek for power 
By doctrines fashioned to the varying hour; 
Far other aims his heart had learned to prize, 
More bent to raise the wretched, than to rise. 

" At church, with meek and unaffected grace, 
His looks adorned the venerable place ; 
Truth from his lips prevailed with double sway, 
And fools who came to scoff, remained to pray. 
The service past, around the pious man, 
With ready zeal, each honest rustic ran ; 
E'en children followed with endearing wile, 
And plucked his gown, to share the good man's smile. 
His ready smile a parent's warmth expressed ; 
Their welfare pleased him, and their cares distressed, 
To them his heart, his love, his griefs were given, 
But all his serious thoughts had rest in heaven: 
As some tall cliff that lifts its awful form, 
Swells from the vale, and midway leaves the storm. 
Though round its breast the rolling clouds are spread, 
Eternal sunshine settles on its head." 

Moses Hallock was horn in Brookhaven, Long 
Island, February 16, 1760, and died at Plainfield, 
Massachusetts, July 17, 1837, aged seventy-seven. 
He did not leave even a fragment written as a mc- 



SKETCH OF HIS LIFE. 



315 



morial of himself. A short time before his death he 
committed to the flames all his manuscripts, except 
a few that he might still wish to use ; and when his 
only daughter, who was the solace of his declining 
days, seconding the desire of her brothers, requested 
that he would prepare at least an outline of the facts 
of his history, he replied, "No, Martha; the absent 
sous might wish to see it ; but there is nothing re- 
markable about me. The grace of Grod shmes every- 
where. There are books enough to read." 

The present design is simply to give a summary 
view of his life, character, and usefulness ; and gems 
of thought and Christian counsel and instruction from 
his own private letters, preserved by those who valued 
them more highly than he did. 

In the summer of 17S3, at the age of twenty- 
three, he was brought to see his ruin by sin, and 
early in the autumn "found himself happy," says an 
intimate Christian friend, "in contemplating the 
perfections and glory of God, especially as displayed 
in the work of redemption ; not at first accounting 
for his peace and joy by his supposed adoption into 
the family of Christ ;" but from that period he dated 
his conversion. His attention being now turned to 
the ministry, he commenced study with the Rev. Mr. 
Strong, of Williamsburg, residing about three miles 
from his father's, going and returning daily on foot ; 
and in the autumn of 1784 entered Yale college, then 
under the presidency of the Rev. Dr. Stiles, whom he 
ever remembered with great veneration. In the col- 
lege strifes he was a peacemaker ; he was a member 



316 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



of the Phi Beta Kappa Society, and graduated ml788. 
He loved to recall the tender scene when, in their 
devotional exercises, the 'aged president was over- 
whelmed with emotion as he read with faltering 
tongue the lines, 

" I '11 praise Him while he lends me breath; 
And when my voice is lost in death, 
Praise shall employ my nohlcr powers/' 

On completing his college course, he found that 
his father had need of him on the farm, to which he 
devoted himself for some months, when he commenced 
the study of theology with the late Rev. Samuel Whit- 
man, who had then been settled in Goshen. At the 
time of his licensure in G-oshen, June 30, 1790, he 
was requested by the church at Plainfield to supply 
their pulpit ; and in March following received a unan- 
imous call to become their pastor. This call being 
declined, was unanimously renewed, March, 1792, 
and he was ordained and installed the first pastor of 
that church on the 11th of July following, in a com- 
modious house of worship then erected ; and retained 
" the confidence of the whole community unabated" 
iox furtij-fire years until his death. 

At the very commencement of his labors in 1790 — 
the church having been formed of fourteen members, 
August 31, 1786 — God poured out his Spirit, and the 
record is, " In consequence of this glorious work, 
seventeen joined the church in one day." Among 
the number was Joseph Beals, long a deacon of his 
church, whose history is given in the tract "Moun- 
tain Miller." 



SKETCH OF HIS LIFE 



317 



In 1797, "another effusion of the Holy Spirit 
entered into almost every part of the town, and in 
some parts was very powerful ;" and in 1798, just 
preceding the great revivals in which his brother and 
others rejoiced in Connecticut, tliirty-one persons 
joined the church, twenty-four of whom "adorned the 
aisle atone time." In September, 1805, six were ad- 
mitted, one of whom was George Vining, whose strik- 
ing conversion is narrated in the tract " The Mother's 
Last Prayer," and another was the lamented James 
Richards, missionary to Ceylon. In May, 1808, as the 
result of another visit from on high, thirty-four joined 
the church, and in July following, twenty-six. In 
September, 1816, ten w^ere received, of whom three 
were then students with Mr.Hallock ; in 1826, fifteen 
others ; and in the latter part of 1827 and begmnmg 
of 1828, at three communion-seasons, sixty-six. Ad- 
missions of one or more individuals also occur from 
time to time throughout the whole period, making 
the whole number received previous to the settlement 
of his colleague in 1831, three hundred and fifty-eight, 
nearly all upon profession of their faith; no one of 
whom was admitted without a serious examination 
of the evidences of saving conversion, a relation of 
which was usually given by the individual at a 
meeting of the church; and scarcely one of whom 
failed to adorn the gospel of Christ in a consistent, 
prayerful, and useful life. 

The town having been recently settled, his sal- 
ary small, and the opportunities of young men to ob- 
tain an education far less than at present, he received 



318 



MOSES HALLOCK- 



some students into his family in 1793, and contin- 
ued his instructions until 1824, by which means 
he ever considered that, in the providence of God, 
his usefulness to the church had been greatly in- 
creased. The whole number of these students is 
three hundred and four, of whom thirty were young 
ladies; one hundred and thirty-two entered college, 
and /(/Vy became ministers of the gospel — seven being 
missionaries to the heathen, namely, Rev. James Rich- 
ards, at Ceylon, and Rev. "William Richards, at the 
Sandwich Islands, sons of James Richards, Esq., who, 
through the whole of Mr. Hallock's ministry, was a 
beloved deacon of his church ; Rev. Levi Parsons and 
Rev. Pliny Fisk, in Palestine ; Rev. Jonas King, D. D., 
in Greece ; Rev. William M. Ferry, among the North 
American Indians, and Mr. Homan Hallock, his 
youngest son, missionary printer in Smyrna. Others 
have entered various professions, among whom are the 
late, early fallen, Rev. Professor Sylvester Hovey, and 
Rev. Dr. Bela B. Edwards, Professor of Biblical Lit- 
erature at Andover ;* Hon. "William H. Maynard, late 

* Among the clergymen who pursued classical studies wilh 
liim, exclusive of those above-named and his eldest son, were 
the following: Rev. Messrs. Clifford S. Arms, Eli Adam.s, 
Joseph M. Brewster, William M. Carmichacl, D. D., Abner 
Clark, Benjamin F. Clark, Tertius Clark, Erastus, Ralph, and 
Sumner Clapp, Charles C. Danforth, Erastus Dickinson, Adol- 
phus Ferry, Horatio Flagg, Pindar Field, Mr. Hurlbut, Caleb 
Knight, Nathanael Latham, John C. Morgan, Ansel Nash, 
Daniel Nash, Mason Noble, Isaac Oakes, Thcophilus Pack- 
ard, jun., Elijah Paine, Dudley Pliclps, Augustus Pomeroy, 
Thaddcus Pomeroy, Jephthah Pool. Austin Richards, Henry 
Richardson, John II. Russ. John W. Salter, Alden Scovel, Syl. 



SKETCH OF HIS LIFE. 019 

of the New York Senate, and Hon. Jeremiah H. Hal- 
lock, late Presiding Judge in Ohio. Many of these 
received their preparatory education at an expense 
hut little exceeding one doUar a week, and those es- 
pecially who were indigent and looking to the min- 
istry, received a father's sympathy and counsel, and 
not a small measure of gratuitous assistance. Some 
were hopefully converted while under his roof ; sev- 
eral were active helpers in promoting the spiritual in- 
terests of his congregation ; and the frequent intelli- 
gence of the godly lives and usefulness in the church 
of many, especially those among the heathen, em- 
balmed their memory in his heart, and was the rich- 
est reward of his endeavors. Only one of these three 
hundred and four students died while with him, and 
this was the only death that occurred under his roof 
for forty years. 

In 1806, he lay in a lingering typhus, for many 
days almost beyond hope of recovery, which was fol- 
lowed by a fistula in his side, that for some months 
gradually exhaust d his strength and tlureatened life; 
but after seeking medical advice in vain, a vagrant 
physician by the name of Rogers forced his services 
upon him, and at length burned out the fistula with 
a hot iron, and he was restored, and his life prolonged 
thirty-one years. 

In 1815, he buried his venerated and cherished 
fixther, at the age of eighty-five, who for sixty years 

■vcstcr Scovill, D. D., Hervey Smitli, John Starkweather, John 
Slorrs, E^lijah Tliayer, Noah Thomas, Wales Tileston, Benjamin 
B. Westfall, Joseph H. Ware, and Ebenezer B. Wright. 



320 



MIOSES HALLOCK. 



lived a life of humble godliness — leaving "one 
word," received from his father, which he wished to 
be transmitted to the latest generation : "Remember, 

THERE IS A LONG ETERNITY !" In 1826, his bcloVed 

and only brother, the Rev. Jeremiah Hallock, having 
adorned the ministry almost forty years, also rested 
from his labors, aged sixty-eight. 

On reaching his seventieth year, he communicated 
to his people the result of a decision some years pre- 
viously formed, on his arriving at that age to request 
them to unite with him in calling a colleague ; and 
as they did not abound in wealth, to prevent embar- 
rassment from pecuniary considerations, he proposed, 
on the settlement of a colleague, wholly to relinquish 
his own support. His people delayed about two years, 
when a colleague was installed; the aged pastor 
assisting in the supply of a small destitute congrega- 
tion in an adjoining town. He was, however, again 
to become sole pastor ; and continued the patriarch 
of the congregation and their bond of union till again 
they harmoniously called a colleague, who was sup- 
plying the pulpit at the time of his death. 

In December, 1835, Mrs. Hallock— formerly Miss 
Margaret Allen, of Chilmark, Martha's Vineyard— 
who iox forty-three years had been a true helpmeet 
in his toils and responsibilities, was removed by death, 
aged seventy-five ; having been permitted, a few weeks 
previous, once more to greet her long-absent son, who 
was called to this country to procure founts of type, 
and make other arrangements for the mission press. 
The period when the ravages of years must close her 



SKETCH OF KIS LIFE. 



321 



usefulness was fast approacliing, when, as she was 
knittmg in the family circle, her hands ceased to 
move, and a paralysis in about two weeks gently 
removed her to the "better country," which, from the 
age of about sixteen, in a life of daily communion 
with God, she had been anticipating with uniform 
confidence in her Redeemer, and even with humble 
boldness and exultation. Not a tear bedewed the 
cheek of her bereaved husband. He was calm and 
steadfast, recognizing the hand of God, and praising 
him for all he had done for and by her. Of this scene, 
and of his own last sickness, liis son residing with him 
has emphatically said, "Whoever saw him once, saw 
him always." Of the aid his companion afforded 
him in the Christian course, he said to a son before 
her death, that he never was desirous of spiritual 
converse when her heart seemed unprepared, or she 
diverted the theme ; and few came under their roof 
without hearing something from both, having a du-ect 
and immediate bearing on the great salvation. The 
late Rev. Seth Williston relates, that early in their 
married life, he called with a young clergyman, and 
as the wife was preparing refreshments, Mr. Hallock 
said to them, "Brethren, I wish you would walk into 
the otherroom;" adding, as they entered, "Mrs. Hal- 
lock loves to hear religious conversation. She must 
be here, and I want you should sit here." It is a 
striking fact, that not only his brother and seven sis- 
ters, but his wife's tliree brothers and six sisters, 
were all consistent, evangelical Christians ; seventeen 
of them labored to rear their own households for God ; 
14' 



•322 



MOSES HALLOCK 



and several of them were active and useful to ad- 
vanced years. The transfer of his wife to the world 
above rendered the passage more direct and less dreary 
to him who, like so many others of the aged in sim- 
ilar circumstances, was soon to follow. 

About thi-ee weeks before his death, the Rev. 
William Richards arrived with his family from the 
Sandwich Islands, at the house of his father, a ven- 
erable deacon of the church of fourscore years, and 
then entirely blind. As the pastor and his colleague 
elect sat conversing with them, the missionary called 
to him a native of the islands who had accompanied 
him, and presenting him to the aged pastor, said, 
" This is TO?/ teacher." The boy's eyes sparkled as 
he gazed on his patriarchal and furrowed counte- 
nance ; and he soon said in Hawaiian, "Day most 
gone — sun most down — most supper-time." As they 
were about to separate, the pastor was desired to close 
the interview by prayer. He proposed to each of the 
others to pray ; and then, after a pause and a few 
inquiries as to the particular circumstances calling 
for thanksgiving and supplication, offered, says the 
missionary, "one of the most heavenly prayers in 
which it was ever my privilege to join, contrasting 
the scene, with inimitable scriptural simplicity, 
with that of Joseph presenting his sons to the aged 
Jacob." 

On Tuesday, July 11, six days before his death, 
he preached the funeral-sermon of a member of his 
church of about his own age, from those emphatic 
words of the apostle, "I am in a strait betwixt two, 



SKETCH OF HIS LIFE 



323 



having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, 
Avloich is far better." 

On AYednesday he walked three mUes, making 
pastoral visits ; and on Thursday morning worked for 
some hours in the garden. About noon he seemed 
to have taken cold, and having some fever was per- 
suaded to take his bed, to which he had always great 
reluctance during the day, but which he kept mainly 
till Saturday morning, when, expressing his unwill- 
ingness to waste his hours, he rose and spent a large 
part of the day in his favorite study of the Bible. 
On Sabbath he was again more feeble, perhaps in 
part from over-exertion the preceding day; but on 
Monday morning secured the setting apart of a piece 
of ground as a gift from himself for a parsonage, which 
the congregation were proposing to erect. Towards 
evening his colleague elect had a delightful and spir- 
itual conversation with him, which was closed wdth 
prayer. To the inquiry if he ever regretted having 
entered the ministry, he rephed, "I have been an un- 
faithful, unprofitable servant, yet I am thankful that 
I was led to enter the Christian ministry :" and when 
the colleague spoke of his long-continued usefulness, 
he said, "From all I have done, and all my sins and 
short-comings, I wish to fly to Christ. I am nothing ; 
Christ is all." These were his last words. At a 
quarter before nine, while he seemed to be sleeping, 
it was found that he had ceased to breathe. Such 
only was the "dying strife" of one who, Hke his 
lamented brother, always looked upon death with a 
solemnity, not to say dread, which indeed well be- 



324 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



came their views of the deceitfulness of sin and the 
importance of the change, but others have anticipated 
their own removal from time with greater confidence 
and triumph. His work here was done ; and in such 
gentle accents did the Saviour say,' " Come up hith- 
er — be with me, where I am." 

The viscfulness of this servant of Christ was not 
from any brilliant performances, but from a uniform 
godly influence, always accumulating, and character- 
ized by kindness, sincerity, frankness, meekness, and 
a deep and heartfelt interest in the welfare of all. 

If there is one trait in which, more than in others, 
the young preacher might covet his falling mantle, it 
is his intimate acquaintance ivith the word of God. 
The proportion of time and thought which he gave to 
the inspired volume, compared with all other books, 
was uncommonly large ; and the steadfastness and 
sweetness of his reliance on its truths as from God, 
can perhaps be obtained in no other way. " If I were 
as sure of reaching heaven," said he to a neighboring 
minister, " as I am of the truth and inspiration of this 
volume, I should desire no greater certainty." " I 
have consulted your pastor on this text," said Rev. 
Mr. Jennings in his pulpit, which he some time sup- 
plied, "I always go to him. for the statute." It was 
with much reluctance that, in his latter years, he 
substituted for the copy of the Bible with Canne's 
notes, which he had long used, one of larger type. 
The son from whom he had received it visiting him, 
and meeting him in the morning pondering its sacred 
pages, "This," said he, "is an invaluable present. 



SKETCH OF HIS LIFE. 



325 



1 had rather part loilh your mother than loith this 
booky As the son was about to depart, and the 
family to engage in prayer, " I will read you," said 
he, "the psalm that I read to your uncle Jeremiah, 
when on his way to his mission in Vermont, and 
which he said often comforted him: "The Lord hoar 
thee in the day of trouble ; the name of the G-od of 
Jacob defend thee; send thes li^ l}) i'lom the sanctuary, 
and strengthen thee out of Zion," etc. Psa. 20. He 
accompanied the son twenty miles, assisted in his 
public and solemn consecration to the gospel ministry, 
liimself giving the charge ; and then sent him on his 
way to his responsible duties, bidding him his last fare- 
well on earth with the prayer, " Send thee help from 
the sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Zion." 

His colleague elect says, "I visited him daily, 
and seldom entered his room when he had not the 
Bible. At my first interview, I was forcibly reminded 
of Pharaoh's introduction to the patriarch Jacob, and 
the probable grounds of his inquiry, 'How old art 
thou?' His conversation was generally on subjects 
connected with the congregation, or on the doctrines 
of grace, the perfections of God, the divinity of Christ, 
the depravity of man, the work of the Holy Spirit in 
regeneration and sanctification, and the glories of 
heaven. His remarks were so clear, sound, and rich, 
that my stay was frequently protracted for hours. If 
all his valuable sayings could be collected, they would, 
I doubt not, fill a volume with what would feed the 
souls and strengthen the confidence of believers." 

Truth demands it to be added, that the draughts 



326 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



he so long richly and prayerfully drew from the foun- 
tain of Grod's word, only substantiated his faith in the 
great system of the doctrines of the Reformation as 
explained by Edwards and the Westmmster Assembly ; 
nor did more recent agitations in the churches at all 
diminish his sense of their preciousness, or lead him 
to distrust the course humbly pursued in previous 
years for the promotion of revivals of religion. 

In comiection with his familiarity with the Bible, 
he was led to the exercise of habitual confidence in 
God, prayer for the teaching of his Spirit, and a 
watchful observance of the indications of his provi- 
dence. Being awoke from sleep by an earthquake, 
he answered the inquiry of a parishioner on the fol- 
lowing day, by saying that his first impression was, 
"the safety of trusting in One who could so easily 
shake the world." On one occasion, lodging with a 
student for the ministry, as they retired he said with 
solemnity, " For several years I have been enabled to 
commit myself to sleep with no distressing anxiety in 
which world I should awake." To another he said, 
"I would not be in an unconverted state one moment 
for worlds." As he was visitmg his people when 
there were indications of the presence of the Spu-it, 
one of them says, " His only message was, ' I have 
come to see whether you are preparing for eternity.' " 

From the same inspu-ed pages he drew unfaihng 
lessons of practical wisdom in his intercourse with 
mankind. Among these was that, where conscience 
did not interpose, of "yielding to conquer;" he 
thought it better, by yielding a little to a wavAvard 



SKETCH OF HIS LIFE. 



327 



individual, to retaiia his friendship and access to his 
soul, than by resentment or retaliation to forfeit both. 
He was careful to "owe no man any thing;" and 
such was his punctuality in fulfilling engagements, 
that it is doubted whether an instance can be recalled 
in forty-five years in which his people waited for him 
to appear in his place after the appointed hour. He 
would not "oppress the hireling in his wages ;" and 
instead of saying, "It is naught," and afterwards 
" boasting," he often quoted the maxim of a man of 
wealth, who said he obtained it by " buying dear and 
selling cheap" — by industry and economy and the 
wise management of his concerns. 

He was "careful to entertain strangers," and into 
his own bosom came the blessing of "the liberal soul." 
Having given two of his sons a collegiate education, 
and a third being about to enter, one, who was in a 
theological seminary in 1821, wrote him for some 
credentials in reference to receiving aid from a be- 
nevolent society. " Letters from you," was the reply, 
" are always welcome ; but your present request for 
' credentials ' will not be so readily granted. Chil- 
dren should not beg bread, so long as their parents 
have enough. It is now nearly six years since I 

entered you and Gr at "Williams college. I had 

g iven you to the Lord, and I believed he would sup- 
port you. He so wonderfully prospered us, that all 
your expenses were paid in good season, and without 
the least perplexity. ' The barrel of meal wasted not, 
neither did the cruse of oil fail.' His kindness has 
been still continued. Beg of the Lord continually. 



328 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



but aslc not of man till you are suffering from want. 
If your name is already given as a beneficiary, take 
the first convenient opportunity to have it erased." 

He ruled well his own household, who "rise 
up and call him blessed." While his government 
was thorough, without undue severity, he was to his 
children perhaps the most famiUar earthly friend: 
parting with them, as duty called, without complaint, 
^vhether for absence in our own or a foreign land, but 
bearing them steadily on his heart and in his prayers 
from day to day. He gave each of his four sons in- 
struction in the languages in earlier life, with a view 
to their obtaining a public education, should they be 
thus inclined, and should other providential indica- 
tions favor it; but resolved "never to drive a son to 
college." From the first he led his children to con- 
sider their interests and those of their parents as 
identified. He never said my house or 7ny horse, but 
ours; and as soon as the older sons were able to talk 
and thinli, he began to consult them as to his plans 
for cultivating his little farm, etc., leading them to 
think and plan for themselves as if all depended on 
their own wisdom and forethought. They "ate not 
the bread of idleness ;" but in their toils had his pa- 
ternal sympathy, which always ran in the direction 
of persuading them to diminish the toil which their 
common interest induced them to pursue, and ex- 
horting them to shorten the wearisome day. He 
trained them to temperance by storing their minds 
with facts and motives by which they were induced 
voluntarily to abstain ; and habituated them to liber- 



SKETCH OF HIS LIFE 



329 



alit y by allowing no contribution to pass in which all 
did not bear a part. Nothing was secured from any 
of his family by locks. If, before the temperance 
movement commenced, into which he very early 
threw all his influence, the house contained ardent 
spirits, it was placed a little out of the way, but 
still accessible to every child; and his money was 
always where they could place their hand upon it, with 
no command to abstain from either, but the perfect 
understanding that they were sacred from their touch. 
It is a curious fact, indeed, that his house stood for 
an age unlocked, even when all left it to attend pub- 
lic worship; and that for the last twenty or thirty 
years of the life of himself and his companion, no lock 
and key whatever were retained in use. 

All liis influence in the domestic circle was sancti- 
fied and sealed by the delightful seasons oi familij wor- 
ship, the exercises of which were usually sliort; con- 
sisting of a portion from the Bible, often with connncnts, 
singing as occasion permitted, and a prayer always de- 
devotional and spiritual, in which the particular circum- 
stances of the passing day or hour, and of each member 
of the household, were remembered, and all committed 
to the kind and holy keeping of a covenant God. At 
the close of the Sabbath, his children were for many 
years taught from the catechism, chiefly by their moth- 
er; and on those and similar occasions he frequently 
made kind, practical remarks, which rarely assumed 
the form of a direct appeal, but were richly laden with 
divine instruction and incentives to early piety. 

These seasons were of especial interest at the 



330 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



time of the annual visit of his beloved only brother, 
the Rev. Jeremiah Hallock, on the first Sabbath of 
September, in reference to which he once said, that 
August was to him the most happy, and October the 
most gloomy month of the year. In these visits his 
brother was for many years accompanied by their 
godly father. Their spiritual conversation, their com- 
ments on the events of Providence as bearing on the 
interests of Zion, interwoven with illustrations and 
anecdotes, and their deep and tender concern for the 
eternal welfare of all, gave unceasing interest even to 
the child, and left the inevitable impression that they 
lived and moved "quite on the verge of heaven;" 
while their prayers seemed a barrier between an of- 
fended G-od and the rising race. Judge what must have 
been the feelings of an unconverted son, when, care- 
lessly breaking into a chamber upon the men of God, 
he found them bowed upon their knees before Him, 
and the floor wet with their tears, probably poured out 
with their wrestling cries for his own salvation. 

It may be said of the subject of this brief sketch, 
that his influence, with very small abatement, was 
all good; it was ever noiselessly exerted to prevent 
alienation and strife ; he waxed stronger and stronger ; 
and till his death, witnessed a large congregation of 
old and young filling the sanctuary from Sabbath to 
Sabbath. Who can but hope that rich blessings are 
still in store for them ! 

On the second day after his death, a funeral-ser- 
mon was preached by the Rev. Dr. Theophilus Pack- 
ard, of Shelburne ; and on Ihe Sabbath following, 



SKETCH OF HIS LIFE 



331 



another, by his colleague elect, Rev. Mr. GoocIslH, 
to crowded audiences. 

Of the bereaved church, one ow/ywho was a mem- 
ber at the time of his installation, survived him, the 
venerable Deacon James Richards. As the face of 
the aged pastor was uncovered, that the afflicted 
people might in turn approach and take their final 
leave until the resurrection, the aged deacon, now , 
entirely blind, was led to the coffin, placed his hand 
gently on the forehead of liim with whom he had for 
forty -five years shared the burden and heat of the gos- 
pel day, and stood, pouring ovit a flood of tears — tiU, 
constrained to retire, he turned away, saying, " Fare- 
well for time;'''' and the congregation moved slowly, to 
deposit in the lonely grave the body of him who had 
assisted in laying there the parents or other kindred of 
almost all — of more than an entire generation — and 
whose heart had bled with theirs in all their sorrows. 

" It will not be questioned," said Rev. Mr. G-oodsell 
in his sermon, "that this town is principally indebted, 
under God, to his labors for its present harmony and 
prosperity. He was what Paul told Timothy a bishop 
ought to be: he was sober; of good behavior; given 
to hospitaUty ; apt to teach. He was of good report, 
at home and abroad. He was an example of believ- 
ers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in 
faith, in purity. He gave attendance to reading, to 
exhortation, to doctrine. He meditated on these 
things. He was mighty in the Scriptures. His 
familiarity with the Bible, it would seem, was almost 
without a parallel. This often rendered meditation 



332 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



a feast to his own soul ; and it was this, in connection 
with his piety, that so eminently qualified him for 
administering consolation to others. 

" His theology was that of the Bible. This was 
the hook he studied, and over which he prayed to the 
end of life. He ardently loved what are commonly 
termed the doctrines of grace. These were the theme 
of his meditations day after day. It was in preach- 
ing- Ihese that Grod hlessed him — that sinners were 
converted, saints edified, and the church received its 
additions from year to year. 

" The liannony existing between him and liis 
people was never broken. Year after year there has 
been friendship and coijperatioai. 

" To the church at large he has been of eminent 
service, especially in the number of young men whose 
education he aided, and who are now employed in 
useful spheres in this and foreign lands. 

" But why dwell on the fruits of his faithfulness ? 
It was not on his services in the church of Christ 
that his hope of heaven was founded. He said, in- 
deed, on his dying bed, that he did not regret having 
devoted his life to the ministry ; that he had ' fought 
not as one that beateth the air;' but he said also, 
' I want the righteousness of Christ.' When I said 
to him, ' You have no fear,' he replied, ' No ; all is 
love.' His departure was peaceful, 'as a shock of 
corn Cometh in in his season.' Gently ceasing to 
breathe, he fell asleep in Jesus, forty-five years and 
six days IVom the time of his installation, and in the 
Sijvcnty-eiglith year of his age." 



CORRESPONDENCE 



HIS LIFE AND CHARACTER AS DRAWN FROM 
HIS PRIVATE CORRESPONDENCE. 

It will be perceived that the date of the following 
letter is four months previous to "the second Sabbath 
in October, 1798," recorded, in the memoir of the Rev. 
Jeremiah Hallock, as the beginning, in Canton, of 
the gi-eat revivals about the commencement of the 
present century. 

To his brother, Rev. Jeremiah HaUock, of West Simsbury, now Canton, Conn. 

"Pl.\infield, Sabbath Evening, June 3, 179S. 

"My very dear Brother — Although somewhat 
fatigued with the labors of the day, I am unwilling 
to miss the present opportunity to write to you, es- 
pecially as the tidings I am about to convey are so 
glorious. It has been my favored lot to see several 
awakenings before, but the present displays of divine 
power and grace in Plainfield far exceed, in my opin- 
ion, what I ever before saw. In this little place there 
are at least fifty persons hopefully born of God within 
a few montlis. And besides these, several persons 
appear to have obtained clear and comfortable evi- 
dence of their good estate, who, till these happy days, 
were in great doubt. The church seems to be greatly 
quickened, and there is a prospect of a good addition 
being made to it soon. There are so many demon- 
strative proofs that the work is the work of Grod, that 
next to none pretend to gainsay it. I believe there 
is not a man in the town that openly opposes. 

" The instances of renewing grace are to appear- 
ance mostly among the young, though not wholly 
confined to them. None have joined the church yet, 



o34 MOSES HALLOCK. 

but twenty-four stand propounded. Several of these 
appeared to be Christians before the awakening, but 
dared not make a public profession till now. Twen- 
ty-two have told their experience in the meeting- 
house — seventeen last Friday, and five to-day — before 
a crowded and solemn assembly. They will probably 
be received on the first Sabbath of July, and sit down 
with the church at the Lord's table ; and I expect 
that a number more will offer themselves before that 
time. 

" There are two young men whose conviction has 
been unusually long and clear, who have received 
comfort witliin these few weeks. At some times they 
almost appeared in despair. I heard one of them say, 
with trembling limbs, ' Oh, the eternity of misery 
that is before vie."* For a considerable time before 
they hopefully submitted to the divine and sovereign 
will, they saw and confessed the enmity of their 
hearts to G-od, and how just he would be in sending 
them to everlasting punishment. They told me that 
they felt most obstinately opposed to the way of life 
by Jesus Christ, and were it not that they believed 
in election they should be in despair. These two are 
men of bright natural parts, and considerable reading, 
and bid fair to be pillars in the church some future 
day. Their countenances are expressive of that peace 
of God which passe th all understanding. These, with 
most of the others who have told their experience, 

* The young man who uticrcd those ■words was doubtless 
Jephthah Pool, who became a licaveuly-miuded, faitliful. and 
(successful minister of Christ. 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



335 



spoke of terrible opposition of heart to Grod, and clear 
views of his justice, before regeneration, and how 
captivated and charmed they afterwards were both 
with the divine -justice and mercy. Let G-od have 
all the glory. 

" Do come and see us, as soon as is convenient. 
May we ever be engaged in the service of God, who 
hath done such great things for us. 

" From your brother, 

" MOSES HALLOCK." 

To Ebenezer Snell, Esq., of Cummlugton. who hid presented him sixty young 
apple-trees. 

" Plainfield, July 4, 1799. 

" Dear Sir — The apple-trees arrived safely. I 
received them with gratitude ; and set them out with 
some more care than if they had been purchased with 
my money. I can think of notliing of the same value 
which would have been so acceptable to me. The 
ground was ready to receive them ; but I should not 
have bought any, for it seemed to me imprudent to 
increase my debts. May I ever, with deep humility, 
ascribe the supply of my wants to the divine care. 

" In one of your kind letters, dated May 8, 1797, 
you inquire thus, ' Watchman, what of the night ? 
Is it not the latter part ? How long, think, ere the 
day will break, and the shadows flee away V 

" Though I stand in the place of a watchman on 
Jerusalem's walls, yet I am unworthy of the name, 
I am too much like an unfaithful sentinel who gets 
asleep upon his post ; and how can I tell the time 
of night ? But if a sentry in this predicament should 



MOSES HALLOCK 



be surprised by the cry, ' Yv'hat of the night ?' though 
through his dulness he has not kept the time, yet if 
he see the day-star, and hear the birds sing, he can 
answer that the morning is near. * 

" I hope, sir, that the limbs of these trees will 
hereafter bend to meet the innocent hand of some 
millennial people. Did I know this, it would put a 
tenfold value on them. I am willing to plant for 
them to eat. When I think of the happiness of the 
millennium, my soul as it were runs forward to an- 
ticipate the joy. But though it tarry, my dear brother, 
let us wait for it, for it will surely come. 

" Mrs. Hallook unites with me in our affectionate 
regards to you, your companion, and son Ebenczer, 
who brought the trees. Your kind and generous 
presents have contributed to our comfort ; we consider 
them not only as expressions of friendship to us, but 
what is infinitely more, to the ministry. May a 
gracious God accept your offerings, and verify in you 
his word, ' The liberal soul deviseth liberal things, 
and by liberal things shall he stand.' 

" I am, dear sir, your much obliged, though very 
unworthy friend, 

"MOSES HALLOCK." 

To Ins brotl.er. Rev. Jeremiah Hallock. 

" Plainfield, January 1, 1808. 

" My very dear Brother — I have the happiness 
to inform you that an awakening has begun in the 
eastern part of this place. He that appeared to 
Joshua as Captain of the Lord's host has come. Do 
road the two last verses of the fiftli chapter of Joshua. 



CORRESPONDENCE 



337 



Some- aeeni to feel -is that solemnized man did when 
he fell on his face, and loosed his shoes. Christians 
have wo>.lerfully waked up, and I hope some few 
persons are lately born again. 0 that we could praise 
the Lord of victory. Pray for us, and 'come over 
and help us" as soon as you can." 

Under another date, he says, " I attempted to 
preach yesterday from Psalm 68 : 3 : ' But let the 
righteous be glad, let them rejoice before God ; yea, 
let them exceedingly rejoice.' My object was to show 
why. 1. Because of the excellency of his nature ; 
2. His making them righteous ; 3. His care of them ; 
4. The beauty he puts upon them, ' wings of a dove ;' 
4. His distinguishing them from the wicked in many 
respects ; 6. Because he seeks his own glory in all he 
does ; 7. His saving them at last." 

To his eldest Son. who was about to commence teaching a school. 

" Plainfield, November 30, 1810. 

" For the regulation of your school, let your rules 
be few, plain, and reasonable. Seldom, if ever, 
threaten. Chide but littit-. Magnify no crime. Call 
no conduct a crime which is done through ignorance. 
Punish not for every crime : punish rarely ; and in 
punishing be merciful, for you need mercy. Never 
get angry in your school. Let the good behavior of 
the scholars, their progress in learning, and their real 
benefit, and not your wages, be your care. Their 
parents expect you will be faithful. Look to the foot 
of a class as weU as the head. Animate the despond- 
ing, and skilfully keep down the self-conceited. Be 
strictly impartial. Be cheerful, but not vain. Make 

li.lloc. 15 



338 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



the scholars' studies pleasant to them. Let subjec- 
tion be their pleasure. Keep seasonable hours. Re- 
member that the secret of governing well is to govern 
without pains. Diligently and prayerfully look to 
the morals and religious interests of the scholars, and 
your own. Treat your employers well. Backbite 
not. Intermeddle with no disputes among the people. 
Realize the greatness of your undertaking, and your 
accountability to God and man ; and may the Lord, 
in his wonderful condescension and mercy, guide you 
to discretion and teach you." 

To his brother, Rev. Jeremiah Hallock. 

" Plainfield, April 25, 1814. 

"Very dear Brother and Sister — An awaken- 
ing appears to have begun here. One of my scholars," 
(the late Rev. Professor Hovey,) " a step-son of Elisha 
Billings, Esq., of Conway, was hopefully born again 
three weeks ago. He is an unusually promising 
youth. Since his hopeful conversion, a number of 
my family, children and scholars, have become 
thoughtful, especially "William and Martha. A con- 
siderable number of the neighbors, mostly youth, are 
deeply impressed. Our meetings are frequent, crowd- 
ed, and solemn. There has been no confusion, but 
every mark of the true work of Grod. To him be all 
the glory. The sense I have of my own insufficiency 
is inexpressible. Pray for me, that I may be humble 
and know what to do. I also entreat your prayers 
for my family and people, that we may all be pre- 
pared for the spiritual blessings we need. We ex- 
cc-dingly long to see you, especially at this time." 



CORRKSPONDENCE 



339 



The fruits of this work of the Spirit seem to have 
been chiefly gathered in his own family and neighbor- 
hood. His eldest son, William A., of 'whom he speaks, 
then at the age of twenty, believing that he had no 
preparation of heart for the ministry, had declined 
study, and was working on the farm ; and though for 
some weeks, distressed for his sms and distance from 
Grod, he fasted and prayed, searched the Scriptures, 
and sought religious counsel, he gained no satisfac- 
tory evidence that he had been born again ; yet the 
impressions then made on his mind were the evident 
means of leading him to resume study, with the 
trembling hope that the mercy of G-od might yet 
reach him, and render his advantages the means, not 
of injury, but of good to himself and others. 

His second child, and only daughter, Martha, 
then eighteen, of whom he also speaks, was led to 
see the alienation and even bitter opposition of her 
heart to God, and went to the bedside of her father and 
mother at night to tell them what peace and joy she 
had found in her Saviour and Redeemer. That peace 
and joy brightened the family circle, and character- 
ized her life till its close. May 22, 1853. Her voice 
and her pen she meekly employed in doing good. 
She was active in the Sabbath-school and Bible-class, 
aiding benevolent objects, circulating the Bible and 
religious books and periodicals, seeking opportunities 
and means of usefulness, sympathizing with her par- 
ents in their prayers and efforts, especially for the 
salvation of her absent brothers ; and when called to 
struggle with disease and pain, which showed that 



310 



MOSES HALLOCK 



her loved work on earth was closed, she suffered V\'ith- 
out a murmur, and waited the bidding of her Saviour 
to his immediate presence. She conversed and wrote 
of her departure with joyful trust in Him ; and when 
all earthly arrangements were completed, even to 
giving over her spectacles to a friend, she said, 
"Nothing hut the soul now;" and of her suffering, 
"It is all right — none too much pain." "When her 
consciousness was almost gone, her brother visited 
her, and attempting to get from her one more recog- 
nition, found that one "only name" remained dear. 
" Sister Martha, how do you do?" No reply. "Are 
you in pain?" No reply. " Can I do any thing for 
you ?" No reply. " Do you love the Saviour ?" " 0, 
yes !" " Is the Saviour precious to you ?" Calmly 
and sweetly, "Yes, very precious." This daughter and 
the second son, Leavitt, who some years after united 
with the church, resided with their parents till the 
parents' death, and hence no letters from their father 
to either of them appear in these pages. The two 
other children of the family were Gerard, who, at the 
date of the above letter, was fourteen, and Homan, 
who was twelve. 

To his sons, William A. and Gerard, in Williams College. 

'•Plainfif.ld, Oct. 2A, 1815. 

" Dear Sons — Your grandfather Hallock is dead. 
He was seized with the distressing strangury, and 
died on the fifth day, Saturday, October 21, aged 85. 
T held his, to me, venerable head in my hands and 
against mv breast when he died. May you, my dear 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



311 



children, become followers of them who have 'lived 
and died in Jesus.' " 

About a year pre\dous he had proposed to his aged 
and godly father and mother to spend the remaindei 
of their days under liis own roof, where he and liia 
family might minister to their necessities. His 
father's self-distrustmg reply was in the following 
words : 

"GosuEN, November 17, 1S14. 

" My dear Son and Daughter — I thank you for 
your kind offer concerning our going to your house ; 
but, my son, when I consider the trouble it wiU make 
you and yours, I shall feel better at home with a 
crust of rye bread and lean beef, than I can at your 
table with all the rarities you can set on it. I am 
an old man ; and if I cannot get religion, I must bid 
an eternal farewell to all happiness here and hereaf- 
ter. If I had as much religion as Jonah had in the 
whale's belly, I would not give it away for all the 
kingdoms of this world. 

"Our love to you all. From 

"WILLIAM HALLOCK.'-* 
To his S™? in College. 

"Plainfield, Jlarch 19, 181(!. 
"My dear Sons — My heart glows with desire for 
your good ; and I have much to encourage me to give 
you advice. A price is put into your hands to get 
wisdom, human and divine, and much will be ex- 

* William llallock, father of Jeremiah and Moses, prepared 
a -m-itten statement of his ancestry, the substance of wliich is 
embodied iu the note, page 389. 



342 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



pected from you. Be thankful, diligent, and liuinLle 
The knowledge, not of books, but of the true Grod, 
through Jesus Christ, saves the soul. Your mother 
and I remember you both in our prayers. We feel 
interested in your scholarship and m your character ; 
but we forget these, to think of your immortal part. 
Read the first seven verses of 1 Corinthians 13. The 
Lord vs^ork that charity in each of you." 

To his older Son in Collega 

"Plainfiei.d, April 29, 181G. 

" Your condition in respect to spiritual concerns, 
excites in me the tenderest sympathy. The interest 
you feel and express in religion cannot fail to awaken 
in me desires that you may possess it. G-od sees 
your heart, and he can make you see it ; and he can 
make you feel that you must have a new heart, or 
you cannot live. He can make you feel that your 
salvation depends, not on seeing others under concern, 
not on seeing young converts, nor on any external 
means, but on the mere self-moving mercy of Grod. 
Be willing that the infinitely kind Spirit should show 
you the worst of your case. If you had a deadly sore, 
you would let a kind physician probe it to the bot- 
tom, though it might cause you much pain. Your 
interested mother has informed you of things here. 
This is the work of the invisible and wonder-working 
Clod. To him be all the glory." 

Again he says, "Death will soon dispossess you 
of all the things of time, and you ' dare not look be- 
yond its bound.' The question, ' What shall I do V 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



343 



is all-important. The answer is, Go humbhj to Jt 
sus. He is mighty to save. Neglect him no longer, 
for he is the help your soul needs. He is ready to 
make you eternally rich, if you will receive his gifts. 
Slay you and your beloved brother seek first the king- 
tlom of G-od and his righteousness." 

To the same. 

"Pl.unfield, Feb. 22, 1819. 

Having acknowledged the receipt of a letter, of 
which he says, " I am glad I have a child who pre- 
fers little somethings to great nothings;" and having 
spoken of existing revivals of religion, with a prayer 
that the college might "share largely in these divine 
blessings," he adds, 

" I am affected with your condition. It is now 
an awful crisis with you. Your collegiate course is 
drawing towards a close. And if you live, you will 
soon be involved in the pressing cares of life. These 
will have a direct tendency to cause you to forget the 
concerns of your spiritual state. Noio is the accepted 
time. Another day's delay may decide your state for 
ever. Spiritual showers are falUng on one city and 
another. Christians in some places are awake. And 
T doubt not, that not only three "—liimself, wife, and 
dauditer — "but a considerable number, have a par- 
ticular desire for your salvation in their daily prayers. 
I feel more than usual freedom to address you on this 

momentous subject. 0, W , let nothing divert 

your mind from it. G I equally love, and for his 

salvation I equally long and pray. Christ commands 



-MOSES HALLOCK. 



.liim and you to come unto him, and he will give you 
rest. How reasonable !" 

To his Sous in College. 

"Plainfield, April 13, 1819. 

" My dear Sons — I have had no direct informa- 
tion from Williamstown for some time. I long, and 
dread to hear. My earnest inquiry is not concerning 
pecuniary matters, hterary progress, appointments 
for commencement, etc., but whether your souls 
prosper. God in liis kind providence has placed you, 
my beloved sons, where you have precious religious 
privileges, especially at the present time. You not 
only hear the gospel preached in its clearness, but 
you see the efTects of God's saving power before your 
eyes. Far be it from me to be designedly the occa- 
sion of unnecessary alarm to any, especially to you ; 
yet permit me to ask whether, to human view, the 
most probable time of your obtaining an interest in 
Christ, if you are ever to be so blessed, is not now 
passing away? If so, how critical your situation! 
Your case gives me much tender concern. The Lord 
teach you your sinful state, cause you to feel your 
sins, and your obligation to repent and believe in 
Christ. The God of all grace and power divest you 
of every vain excuse for neglecting duty ; and cause 
you to discern what saving religion is, and give you 
hearts to rejoice in it. Depend not on even the best 
exterior. You cannot be saved without a change of 
heart. The nature of things is against it. The 
word of God is against it. 

" Your mother joins with me." 



CORRESPONDENCE. ;M5 

Again, after saying that the old proverb, " If a 
man gets his name up, he may lie abed till noon," is 
a bad one, for " it is much more difficult to preserve 
a good name than to get one — more difficult continu- 
ally to hold a stone when raised, than at first to lift 
it from the ground ;" and describing the diverging 
history of two students who graduate in equal stand- 
ing, but one of whom becomes negligent and reckless, 
and is despised, while the other by worth and perse- 
verance becomes useful and esteemed, he adds, 

" These remarks, my sons, I consider as preserva- 
tive, rather than restorative. Who can tell what a 
young man will do or be ? The right way is narrow, 
and yawnmg precipices are near both its sides. A 
vagrant step may lead to ruin. Therefore, ' Let 
thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyeUds look 
straight before thee. Ponder the path of thy feet, 
and let all thy ways be established. Turn not to the 
right hand, nor to the left.' Look daily and earnestly 
to God through Christ to keep you, to direct you in 
the way of your duty, and to save your souls. You 
owe him yourselves, and all you have. He has done 
much for you ; and he is infinitely worthy. Forget 
Mm not ; make not the tremendous mistake of living 
to yourselves, and not to Him who gave his life for 
our sins. Let not the kindnesses of Christ be the 
only ones you refuse to acknowledge. 

" Your affectionate father, 

" MOSES HALLOCK." 

Of the many grateful acknowledgments which he 
received from those whom ho had instructed and eu- 
1.)* 



J46 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



couraged in their education for public usefulness, 
was the following from Rev. James Richards, one of 
the pioneers in American foreign missions, who died 
in Ceylon in 1822. He was a child of the pastor's 
care, and joined his church in 1805, at the age of 
twenty-one. In 1808 we find him in "Williams col- 
lege, a class-mate of Samuel J. Mills, and that these 
were two of the five then privately consecrating them- 
selves personally to foreign missions, and of the de- 
voted circle of whom the Rev. Dr. Griffin says, they 
used to retire for prayer " to the meadow on the bank 
of the Hoosac ; and there, under the haystacks, those 
young Elijahs prayed into existence the embryo of 
American missions." He went with Mills to the 
.seminary at Andover ; and in June, 1810, they, with 
the late Dr. Judson of Burmah, and Messrs. Nott, 
Newell, and Gordon Hall, agreed in publicly offering 
themselves to the General Association of Massachu- 
setts as foreign missionaries, provided any institution 
could be found to support them — the names of Rich- 
ards and Hall being withheld from the paper pre- 
sented, lest so many as six names " should embarrass 
and defeat the measure contemplated." In February, 
1812, Judson, Nott, Newell, Hall, and Rice sailed as 
the first foreign missionaries from this country ; and in 
the next mission-ship, October, 1815, Richards sailed 
for Ceylon, witli Rev. Messrs. Poor, Meigs, "Warren, 
and Bardwell. Following his example, and imbibing 
his spirit, in 1822 his younger brother Rev. William 
Richards sailed for the Sandwich Islands, where he 
labored with great ui^efulness till his death in 1847. 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



347 



" Batticotta, Ceylon, Sept. 6, 1819, 

" Rev. and very dear Sir — I have long had it 
in contemplation to write you. I wish to acknow- 
ledge my obligations to my former tutor, my spiritual 
father, instructor, and guide. It has always given 
me pleasure to reflect upon the part which you took 
in my instruction, and upon the encouragement which 
you gave me to pursue my studies. The truths of 
the gospel which you were enabled to deliver from 
the pulpit have often refreshed my soul, and I trust 
that the same will be my support in a dying hour. 
Happy are those ministers who are so directed by the 
Spirit of God, as to preach those doctrines which will 
bear a death-bed examination, and will give a death- 
bod support. May the Lord continue to bless you 
more and more, by opening the hearts of your hearers 
to receive the gospel, and by bringing them all to the 
saving knowledge of the truth." 

Proceeding to give his own liistory in the mission, 
especially the most unexpected prostration of his firm 
and vigorous health, and appealing for reinforcements 
of devoted men, he adds, 

" I expect soon to die. I am not sorry that I have 
done all I could for the heathen, though that has been 
very httle. It is now eleven years since I resolved, 
by the grace of Grod, to spend my life among the 
heathen. That resolution has never been changed, 
but has grown stronger and stronger ; and it is a 
great part of my present aflliction, that I cannot 
preach the gospel to the heathen around me. I see 
them perishing for lack of knowledge. Do encourage 



^■iS MOSES HALLOCK. 

your pious students to come to Jafina, and engage in 
the blessed work of preaching to pagans. Yes, it is 
a blessed work. Since I have had death staring me 
m the face, I have had much religious enjoyment. 
To contemplate the perfections of God, the atonement 
of Cluist, and the joys of heaven, has given me un- 
speakable satisfaction. 

" I send my Christian salutations and best regards 
to Mrs. Hallock, and to the church of Christ in Plain- 
field. Please to accept this token of respect from 
your dying friend, 

"JAMES RICHARDS." 
To his eldest Son in the Theological Seminary, Andover. 

"Plainfield, Dec. 22. 1819. 

" My very dear and dutiful Son — I rejoice to 
see that you are not inattentive to the chief end of 
life, to what most of all concerns you and us. The 
more you understandingly attend to the concerns of 
your soul, the more important and real they will ap- 
pear. I thank the Lord for putting you in a situa- 
tion so favorable for serious reflection. You need not 
be informed that you must answer at the bar of 
Christ for the improvement you make of your distin- 
guished privileges. I hope and pray that the words 

in Isaiah may not be verified in my dear W : 

' Let favor be shown to the wicked, yet will he not 
learn righteousness ; in the land of uprightness will 
he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of 
the Lord.' I daily feel concerned that I have been 
so unfaithful to the souls of my children. I may yet, 
and soon, hear it asked by one and another of them 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



349 



iu hell, ' "Wliy did you not warn me more of this, and 
pray more fervently for my salvation?' 0 Lord, for- 
give my lamentable deficiencies, and prevent terrible 
consequences. 

" Your unworthy father, 

"ilOSES HALLOCK." 
"Plainfielu, JaQ. 22, 1S20. 

" Your last letter, stating so particularly the ex- 
ercises of your own mind, and your sense of the im- 
portance of now attending to the duties of rehgion 
and the concerns of your soul, affords me much satis- 
faction. ' Now,' saith the voice of inspiration, ' is 
the accepted time.' The psalmist said, ' I made 
haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.' 
It is altogether vmscriptural and irrational to neglect 
present duty from an expectation of being better 
prepared to perform it at some future time. To do 
so is to yield to the inclination of the carnal heart, 
for ever devising means to still conscience, while 
G-od, and the soul, and every tiling precious, are neg- 
lected. 

" If you think it to be your duty to unite with 
the visible church of Christ, you may by delaying it 
do wrong, and provoke the Lord to leave you to more 
darkness and doubt. My son, if you feel a desire to 
do service to Christ, never let the fear that you do not 
love him keep you back from duty. If you love the 
Lord because he is what he is ; if you love his service, 
and abhor every feeling and thought that is contrary 
to him ; if you love the daviour, and feel the need of 



350 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



his blood to cleanse you from your sins of heart and 
life ; if you love his children, not only the learned 
and refined, hut the ignorant and unpolished, because 
they bear his image ; if you feel satisfied with the way 
of salvation by Christ, and humbly commit yourselt 
to his teaching, guidance, and disposal, you may 
claim an humble right to the name and privileges 
of Christians. If you have ' the fruits of the Spirit,' 
it is not essential that you should be able to tell the 
time when you were born again: these prove the 
second birth as really as your existence proves the 
first. I think of you every morning and every day, 
and pray the Lord to teach you his holy will. 
" Your afiectionate father, 

"MOSES HALLOCK.-^ . 

The mother adds her concurring testimony on the 
momentous subject : 

" If you can by faith commit your soul to God, 
he will accept it, and you are his for ever. If you do 
from the heart accept of Christ as your all-sufficient 
Saviour, he is your friend and portion. If you go to 
the throne of grace as an humble, penitent beggar, 
sensible of your entire depontJenee on God, your utter 
unworthiness of the least of all his mercies, and the 
infinite obligations you are under to love him and to 
live to him for ever, you need not be afraid to venture 
your eternal all in his hands, or to trust in him as 
your all-sufficient good. Do you feel that it is suit- 
able that God should govern the universe according to 
his sovereign pleasure ; that he cannot do the least 
injustice to any of his creatures : thnt he is infinitely 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



351 



righteous in all that he does? then go on your ■way- 
rejoicing, hiess the Lord for all his mercies, strive to 
get near the throne of grace, and to render to God 
that filial ohedience which his most precious com- 
mands require. In all your ways acknowledge Imn, 
and he will direct your steps, 

" YOUR AFFECIIOKATE MOTHER." 
To the same, from his Father. 

"My dear Sox — You have publicly devoted your 
self to Christ and his service. In this act you have 
impUcitly renounced all sinful pleasure for ever. 
This, to the carnal heart, is a great sacrifice ; but in 
the view of the new man, or rather the new nature, 
it is like resolving for ever to keep away from ser- 
pents and adders. 

" I fear I shall never sufficiently acknowledge the 
goodness and mercy of Grod, manifested in exciting 
your attention to the concerns of religion. I rejoice 
that you have put your hand to the plough, and hope 
you will never look back. The sense you express of 
the sin and pollution of your heart, and your depend- 
ence on the atoning blood of Christ, is very satisfac- 
tory to me. If you truly lament that the forenoon of 
your life has been spent in doing nothing for Christ, 
you wUl from this time take heed that the afternoon 
is not wasted too." 

About this date he writes, " Through the won- 
derful forbearance of God, I have just entered upon 
my seventh ten years ; and I earnestly advise you to 
be ever watchful and prayerful, humble and conde- 
scending, circumspect and exemplary." 



352 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



To the same on a visit at Martha's Vineyard 

"You are now on the little island that gave bu-th 
to your mother. Martha's Vineyard has seen days 
of prosperity. It has been adorned with devout and 
discerning ministers, and flourishing churches. There 
a long succession of pious Mayhews wore the sandy 
road from Chabaquidick to Gayhead, and from north 
to south, to preach Christ to the Indians. Peace to 
their memory. If any of my children die on the 
Vineyard, let them be laid in the same ground which 
contains the remains of those followers of Jesus." 

To his son G , Preceptor in Amlierst Academy. 

" Plaini-ield, Jan. 25, 1820. 

" My dear Son — I view your situation as tre- 
mendously critical ; and what excites my apprehen- 
sions is a fear that you do not know the Lord. If 
you die without an interest in Jesus, from what 
hopes and heights and prospects must you faU. All 
in which you now rejoice will be the occasion of ag- 
gravating your woe. 0, be humble and holy, and 
all will turn to your eternal advantage. Come to 
the inviting and lovely Saviour, and he will love and 
bless you ; and if by some misstep you should slip 
from your present eminence, and sink in the world's 
esteem — a thing not very improbable in this state of 
change — you will have a merciful Saviour to hear 
your mournings, to forgive your follies, and heal your 

broken heart. 0 that you, and "VV and M 

and L and H , and your imperfect parents, 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



353 



were all in Christ, walking in the pleasant path to 
eternal Life. 

" Your affectionate father, 

■■ MOSES IIALLOCK.^' 

To the same. 

" Plainfield, Jan. 1, 1S21. 

" My much-beloved Sox — The Lord has distin- 
guished you with his favor. It would take you all 
the new year to recount the mercies of the past year. 
Your employment has been pleasant and honorable. 
Your opportunities for improvement in science and 
religious knowledge have been great. How can you 
render sufficient praise to your God and Saviour. If 

I should be asked. How can G spend this new 

year better than the last ? I would answer, By turn- 
ing his attention more constantly and earnestly to the 
concerns of his soul ; by inquiring prayerfully and 
impartially whether he is minding, not his own things, 
but the things of Jesus Christ. Though this work 
may be painful to him, let him not recoil from it. 
The man who is deterred from examining his accounts 
by fear of disagreeable feelings, must expect to be a 
bankrupt." 

To the same, at Andover. 

" Plain-field, March 7, 1822. 

" My attachment to you, my dear son, is stronger 
than I can express. Many prayers are daily ofiercd 
for you. If you are destitute of true religion, you 
have yet acquired nothing but what you must part 
with : in all your studies and acquisitions, you have 
laid up nothing that will be permanent. ' Whether 



354 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



there be prophecies, they shall fail ; whether there he 
tongues, they shall cease ; whether there he know- 
ledge, it shall vanish away.' There is a good part 
which can never he taken away — this is holy love. 
' Charity never faileth ;' even death increases its ex- 
cellence and vigor. 

" I seem to hear you say, ' 0 that I possessed it!' 
With the tenderness and affection of a father, I would 
press upon you the importance of reflecting on your 
spiritual state. Realize the criminality and danger 
of being an unbelieving sinner. If you turn to the 
Lord, he will have mercy on you. You prize the 
privilege of having mercy offered you through Christ : 
you would view yourself in an awful condition if 
no mercy were offered you ; but this must be your 
everlasting condition if you die in sin. This thought 
makes death terrible to the dying sinner ! To human 
view, you will never see another time so peculiarly 
favorable to the commencement of a religious life as 
the present. Come to Christ as he invites you, and 
you will be humble and happy." 

To his eldest Son, at Andover. * 

"Plainfiei.d, March 14, 1822. 

" My dear Son — The account you give respecting 

G- is indescribably interesting. We all thank 

you for it. This makes us pray. I first read it alone ; 

then to your mother and M and L ; and 

then retired to my little chamber. 

"When a beloved member of a family is sick, 
and they are afraid he will die, they watch every 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



355 



symptom, and the least favorable appearance affords 
encouragement. So we are looking on our dear 
G ; and we suffer ourselves to take a little en- 
couragement from what you have written. The God 
of all grace give him repentance and humility and 
holy faith, that the result of what now appears may 
not be a revival before irrecoverable death. Tell him 

and Mr. B , if you think proper, that not only 

their Christian friends on earth, but all heaven, are 
lookmg on them, and are ready to rejoice and give 
new praises to God, if they or either of them should 
yield themselves to Christ. Let them come to their 
Saviour, and so not disappoint, but gladden all holy 
beings. Write about them soon. 

"Your affectionate father, 

MOSES HALLOCK." 

A few weeks later he says, " C and P ," 

(two students with him,) " have, within a few weeks, 
obtained a hope." Both these youths became faithful 
ministers — one in the Protestant Episcopal church, 
the other in the Presbyterian church at the AVest. 

Again he records the temporal mercies God had 
graciously bestowed : 

" You acknowledge your obligations of gratitude 
to God for giving your mother and me to you. We 
acknowledge our obligations to the same unfailing 
source of all our enjoyments, for giving you and our 
other children to us. We rejoice that you have been 
carried through seven years in college and the semi- 
nary, and that all the expenses have been borne, and 



356 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



both you and we are bee from debt. When you and 

G entered college, I spoke to a man to lend me 

six hundred dollars from time to time as I should 
need it. But through the care of a bountiful Provi- 
dence, I have had no need to borrow a dollar. This 
is far, far beyond what I could have rationally hoped. 
Let gratitude and humility, and pity to the poor, ever 
be prominent traits m our character. 

" I tell you this, that you may join me in grate- 
fally aclaiowledging a kind Providence, who hath 
enabled us, notwithstanding the smallness of our re- 
sources, and the large amounts that have been needed, 
to answer without the least difTiculty every call. The 
hand of Grod has been so visible, that it would be very 
sinful not to notice it. One circumstance that has 
seemed solemn and interesting to me is, that often 
when I have with ease obtained what money was 
needed, I have not seen how I could then have ob- 
tained a single dollar more. The Lord knoweth the 
circumstances of every creature ; and if we trust in 
him he will make our strength as our day is. Yea, 
ho will not only provide bountifully for us in this life, 
but through Jesus Christ he will commit to us the 
true riches. When we think of G od, and when we 
pray to hini, we should ever regard him as a G-od of 
boundless goodness, and as a G-od who delights to 
make his creatures happy." 

To Ills son H , in Amherst College. 

"Plainfield, March 29, 1823. 

" My dear Son — Your situation is awfully criti- 
cal. G-od in his amazing condescension is once more 



CORRESPONDENCE 



357 



exciting your attention to the concerns of your pre- 
cious soul. Your anxiety for your own state is proof 
of this. You ought immediately to submit to the 
divine requirements. Your righteousness is filthy 
rags. The longer you remain in sin, the harder you 
become ; and the multitude of your sins increases. 
Alas, you owe already ten thousand talents, and have 
nothing to pay. As a poor beggar, fall at the feet of 
the Saviour and plead for mercy. ]\'o longer harden 
your heart. The sinner's cause is infinitely unrea- 
sonable, and he has no power to support it. How 
solemn the divine expostulation with sinners, ' Turn 
ye, for why will ye die ?' Can you disobey this call ? 
"Will my H die rather than turn ? 

"The great question, whether you will be saved 
or lost, will probably be soon decided. ' To-day if 
you will hear his voice, harden not your heart.' Ex- 
cuses for remaining impenitent have no weight. They 
are the offspring of a wicked heart. I cheerfully 
leave you to the mercy of Grod. He can do you no 
injustice. But he and all heaven would rejoice to 
see you become a humble penitent. The Saviour 
is ready to receive you. There is salvation in none 
other. Show your gratitude for his infinite atone- 
ment by receiving it. 

" I greatly rejoice to hear of the revival in Am- 
herst institution. It is a very pleasing circumstance 
that you are there. If you and your beloved room- 
mate should come to Christ, you would be happy 
indeed. If you desire the fervent prayers and exer- 
tions of others for you, you must feel deeply interested 



358 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



yourselves. How insupportable the thought, that you 
two may yet be mutual tormentors of each other inhell. 

"Remember me affectionately to F and 

C . May their prayers, and the prayers of 

many others for you, be heard. TeU Austin Rich- 
ards " (who became a faithful minister) " and D. 

P , that their Plainfield friends, especially their 

parents, and your mother and I, shall wait with much 
tender anxiety to hear of their conversion to Christ. 

" Your letter is, of aU you ever sent, the most 
interesting. Your mother and I will not cease to 
pray for you. How could we but pray for one we 
love so dearly, especially when you request our pray- 
ers for a ' son who is on the borders of hell.' 

" Our love to all that have been members of this 
family. I hope they will all improve their present 
precious opportunity to seek the Lord while he may be 
found, and call upon him while he is near. The most 
profound human science is of no worth, when compared 
with what the smallest Christian knows of Clii-ist. 
" Your affectionate father, 

"MOSES HALLOCK." 
To a Son then instructing a select School in Salem, Massachusetts. 

"Plainfield, May 3, 1S23. 

" My very dear Son — It gives me much pleasure 
to learn that you choose and have valuable friends. 
'He that walketh with wise men shall be wise.' 
May the company and counsel of the Rev. Mr. Cor- 
nelius, and other highly respected friends, be for your 
benefit as to your temporal, 'and especially your 
spiritual concerns. 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



359 



" If you were renewed by the Spirit of God, your 
outward conduct would bo, it is probable, in many 
respects as it is now ; but I hope you will never feel 
safe and easy with respect to yourself, till the love of 
Grod is shed abroad in your heart. What you say of 
prayer I approve. If any individual has a spirit of 
prayer, though no other may jom with him, he has 
reason to hope his prayer will avail. We^must pray, 
yet not depend on prayor, but on Grod. My dear 

G , if I could say any thing that would be for 

your good, it would be my delight to speak. Your 
age is more favorable to commence a life of religion, 
than it will be hereafter. Revivals are prevalent. 
Christ is ready to receive you. Come to him and live. 

" I am delighted to find that you feel an interest 

in the spiritual good of your brother H . 0 that 

he might share in the good work wliich he is per- 
mitted to see at Amherst. You and he are remem- 
bered by your parents, especially of late, oftener than 
we take our food. 

" W rejoices that you adhere so decidedly to 

the all-important doctrine of the Trinity. "What are 
the riches of Salem compared with Christ ? 

" Your affectionate father, 

^' MOSES HALLOCK.-' 

In a subsequent letter he says, " Your brother 
Homan is decided that his health will not bear a 
sedentary life, and has AATitten me to request his dis- 
mission from college. Believing that it is not the 
design of Providence that he should acquire a liberal 
education, I submit.'''' 



SCO 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



On the occasion of the annual Thanksgiving, De- 
cemher 2, 1824, all the family, consisting of the 
parents, four sons, and one daughter, met for the last 
time on that festive occasion, so full of tender recol- 
lections to the descendants of the Pilgrims ; and the 
day was closed by each one " giving a reason of the 
hope that was in him," or relating the dealings of 
God with Jjim in a spiritual view. 

To his youngest Son, in a Printing OfEoe at Andover. 

Plainfield, May 30, 1825. 

" My dear Son Homan — Your letter is truly re- 
freshing. I rejoice that you have some humbling 
sense of your mournful deficiencies in the service of 
Christ. Selfishness is the very essence of sin ; and to 
see ourselves filled with it, with hearts to mourn on 
account of it, gives reason to hope that we may he 
walking in the light of the Lord. Our carnal pride 
must be subdued, or we must fall under its weight 
for ever. Christ can deliver us from ' the body of this 
di^ath.' Let us watch and pray continually." 

To the same, on his proposing to become a Missionary Printer on the Mediterranean. 

"Plainfield, April 24, 1826. 

" My very dear Son — I long ago gave you and 
all my children to the Lord. As pleasant, therefore, 
as their company is to me, I would not detain one of 
them with me, nor in America, nor even in the world, 
contrary to the holy will of God. I want nothing to 
reconcile me to my beloved sons or daughters going 
anywhere, or being in any circumstances or employ- 
ment, but a clear conviction of a providential call. 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



361 



Since you have been learning to print, I have fre- 
quently thought whether you would he called to 
instruct by the press in some foreign land. I feel 
satisfied of your caU in providence to go to Malta to 
assist Rev. Mr. Temple ; and I mo.st cordially bid you 
and aU dear faithful missionaries God-speed. May 
many, not only of the present generation, but in ages 
to come, be saved through your instrumentality. 
Remember that the eye, not only of the Christian 
world, but of your Saviour, wiU be upon you. May 
you so improve the talents he has given you, as that 
you may obtain, what I crave above all things, his 
approbation." 

To the same. 

" Plainfield, Aug. 3, 1S26. 

" My very dear Sox — I think of you and pray 
for you daily. But my prayers are so imperfect, that 
if God should grant no blessings either to you, or 
me, or any one else in answer to them, I should have 
no reason to complain. This thought, though hum- 
bling, shall never discourage the attempt to perform 
so plain a duty. We are directed to ' pray without 
ceasing.' 

" Your undertaking to give instruction by the 
press to millions of ignorant eternity-bound souls is 
immensely important. Jlay every publication that 
shall be issued by your hands be not only free from 
mistakes, but purely evangelical. Gospel truths, not 
the inventions and traditions of men, will finally be 
blessed to the conversion of the world. And let the 
work of delivering your tracts for distribution be ac- 



362 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



companied with effectual, fervent prayer that they 
may, through the Holy Spirit, reach the heart. 

" Your voyage will probably give you opportunity 
for much useful study. Undique fontes, undique 
coelum,''^ (on every side the sea, on every side the 
sky) — "death everywhere but in the vessel, and de- 
struction for fallen man everywhere but in Christ, 
The Lord keep thee. 

" Your affectionate father, 

» MOSES HALLOCK." 
To the same, at his departure. 

"Plainfield, Oct. 5, 1826. 

" Trust in Christ. There is enough in him to in- 
spire confidence. He is everywhere. I implore his 
blessing upon you. You will have his sun and his 
moon in Malta ; may you have his presence. How 
wonderful his providence, that has raised you to your 
present prospects. The Lord make you instrumental 
of teaching many the way of life through Christ. I 
beUeve the interest of Christ and of souls calls you to 
go. Et nunc vale; mi amantissime fili, vale — (And 
now farewell, my loving son, farewell.^ 
" Your father, 

" MOSES HALLOCK." 

The mother adds to the above, 

" Your farewell letter and likeness we highly 
value, and shall endeavor carefally to preserve till 
time with us shall be no more. I hope that you may 
be greatly useful in the vineyard of the Lord ; that 
many souls may be brought into Christ's kingdom 
through your instrumentality ; and that we shall be 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



3G3 



cheerfully resigned to all the allotments of divine 
Providence respecting you. Cease not to watch and 
pray, to love your Bible and your Saviour. Trust in 
the Lord at all times, and endeavor daily to commit 
your soul and all your concerns into his wise and 
faithful hand, that you may be preserved safely to 
his heavenly kingdom. I hope you will ever be en- 
abled to go to &od as yoxir covenant God and Fa- 
ther ; to stand with your loins girt about, and your 
lamp trimmed and burning, as one who is waiting 
for the coming of our Lord." 

To his son William A., Secretary of the American Tract Society, and Gerard, one 
of the Editors of the Xew York Observer. 

"Plainfield, Dec. 26, 1S26. 

" ]My Sons — The hope that you are in the place 
and employment where duty calls, and are made in- 
struments in the hand of God of great and extensive 
good, affords me much satisfaction. God's goodness 
to you may well affect all our hearts. How you hap- 
pened to go to college, and to be industrious and 
economical there, and distinguished as scholars, and 
how you happened to employ yourselves as you did 
after you left college, and how you happened to be 
placed where you now are — I cannot tell. The only 
way to solve these mysteries is to acknowledge an 
overruling Providence in them all. Your life, health, 
reason, perseverance, and success, are from the Lord. 
He has directed your every step. He hath guided you 
to discretion, and taught you. Let us give him all the 
praise. You are raised to be chosen companions of 
the best and most ^^seful class of men in our favored 



364 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



land : humbly and thankfully acknowledge the un- 
seen hand of Him who raiseth up the poor from the 
dust, and hath set you, not among princes, but among 
people far better, the pillars of the church. Your 
employments, too, arc peculiarly eligible. Your tract 
and your paper are to the needy soul what bread is 
to the hungry ; and when the labors of distinguished 
statesmen are forgotten, you may be remembered in 
eternity. The blessing of many ready to perish will 
come upon you. My sons, thus nourished and brought 
up as children, will not, cannot rebel against their 
divine Benefactor. 

" I rejoice that, ' after eleven years' wandering,' 
you are settled together in your ' own hired house.' 
Your house is, I trust, a house of prayer. Let the 
dear little son hear you pray; though he should ex- 
press his joy to have prayer over, it may be of im- 
mense benefit to him. 

" I lately went into the forest where "W and 

I gathered the dry wood for the winter. I went to 
the brook where we drank, and the tree that had 
fallen over it on which we sat and ate our cold dinner 
together, and acknowledged God. 

" We all remember you most affectionately. 

" MOSES HALLOCK." 

To the same. 

" Plainfield, April 22, 1827. 

" Beloved Sons — One of you, in a kind letter, 

lately said : ' I wish very much to have little W 

SCO his grandpa and grandma, and to have them see 
him. I should like to have him also see his aunt, and 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



365 



Ills uncle L . His uncle Homan, alas, he will 

perhaps never see. It makes even my heart ache to 
have a brother thus separated from us by the broad 
Atlantic, with so serious a prospect that we shall 
never see liim more.' These are tender thoughts, 
I know. But a thousand consoling thuigs are con- 
nected with his removal from us. We hope he will 
be faithful and successful. There is, in my view, 
reason to think that the Lord called him thus to go 
over the sea. 

" It has long deUghted me to see what interest 
my children take in each other. Each child is, as it 
were, a parent to aU the rest. I hope and trust this 
mutual love will continue. It is very pleasant. It is 
useful. It is honorable. May we all, parents and 
children, love the Lord. It seems to me there is 
enough in Christ to make us all happy. All that is 
wanting is a holy relish for what is provided for the 
believer. My doubts whether I have this essential 
preparation for usefulness and happiness must soon 
be solved. Your great-grandfather died before your 
grandfather, and your grandfather before your father : 
I hope this regular travel of our generation into eter- 
nity will not be interrupted. According to this course, 
I go next. It may be said, with respect to my con- 
tinuance on earth, ' The day goeth away, for the 
shadows of the evening are stretched out.' 

" I hope soon to see, what I have never yet seen, 
a daughter-in-law and a grandson. 

"Yours, most affectionately, 

'uMOSES HALLOCK." 



366 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



Again he «ays, a few months later, 

"I recently had the pleasure of an interview with 
Rev. Mr. Baldwin of New York, who thmks you are 
laborious and useful. I could only reply, ' He raiseth 
up the poor from the dust.' From the disasters of 
your venerable grandfather, sixty years ago, seems to 
have arisen whatever his sons and his grandsons 
attained to. But for this kind providence I see not 
why we should not have remained on the south side 
of Long Island, depending on what we could get from 
the water and from the sand of the beach for a liveli- 
hood. Let us most cordially and gratefully adore the 
kind, unerring hand of Providence, who always brings 
good out of evil. 

" In my morning walks I now miss the company 

of little W. H . His pleasant noises charmed 

me more than the singing of the birds. May he, too, 
know the Lord." 

To his Son, at Malta. 

"Plainfield, June 25, 1827. 

"Dear and much-beloved Son — Your deliverance 
from the perils of the voyage calls for more gratitude 
and praise than our poor ' Jonah ' hearts are willing 
to render. 

" The present year is, in many places, remark- 
able for revivals of religion. The hopeful converts 
within a few months in the county of Berksliire are 
at least fifteen hundred. A good work is going on 
in Cummmgton and Worthington, and it is begun 
among us. Several have lately obtained a hope, and 



COEBESPONDENCE. 



367 



perhaps twenty are under serious impressions. "The 
kingdom of the Redeemer is advancing. Help it on- 
ward, my dear son. It is destined to fill the earth. 
Tliis kingdom is to break down all opposition, and 
overthrow all errors, and possess the world alone. 
Dan. 2 : 34, 35. Malta will yet be covered with the 
redeemed ; and aU the shores of the Mediterranean ; 
and all the habitable parts of the earth. Rev. 7 : 9. 
Keep the press going. 

Your very affectionate father, 

"MOSES HALLOCK." 

Four months later he writes, 

" The revival extends over much the greatest part 
of the town. It is a still and precious work. Twenty 
or more vn]\ probably be admitted to the <;hurch the 
first Sabbath in November. We have abundant cause 
to speak of the mercies of Grod towards us. His paths 
drop fatness. No year since I lived in Plainfield seems 
to me to have been so distinguished with temporal 
and spiritual mercies." 

In this work of grace in 1827 and 1828, in which 
he secured the assistance for some weeks of a pas- 
tor then without a charge, he had the happiness of 
receiving sixty-six persons, who gave evidence of 
saving conversion. 

To his son G , in New York. 

" Plainfield, March 30, 1828. 

" ]\Iy very dear Son — Your paper, (the Observer,) 
it seems to me, becomes more and more interesting 
and useful. "When I think that all my absent sons 



368 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



are called in providence to such employments as tend 
to advance the Redeemer's kingdom, my-obligation 
to give thanks to God, and to praise his condescend- 
ing mercy, rises before me. I consider the Observer 
and the tracts as orthodox publications. They are 
vehicles which carry the truth far and wide. May the 
Lord inspire your hearts with a holy love of the pre- 
cious truths you publish. I pray that you and E , 

and your little son, may all find special mercy. 

" I feel cordially thankful to the brethren in New 
Jersey, who proposed the day of fasting and prayer 
for the conversion of the world. How momentous 
the object ! "Where is there a saint or sinner on earth 
not interested in it ? As our annual fast was to come 
the next week, I proposed to the people to meet in the 
afternoon only ; but all I spoke to chose to meet both 
parts of the day. Both meetings were solemn and 
interesting, and we felt that we needed more time. 
Some women walked nearly two miles to attend, 
though the travelling was very bad. 

" Our state proclamations are cold things. A 
minister might as well, for matter of edifying and 
warming the hearts of his people, hold before them a 
ball of snow, as a men-pleasing. Unitarian proclama- 
tion ; but the one from New Jersey was from the 
heart, and to the heart. Why should we not pray for 
the conversion of the world, when probably tens of 
thousands of our poor race fall into everlasting de- 
struction each passing day ? It is to pray for no more 
than what Grod has revealed shall sooner or later be, 
Psalm 22 : 27." 



CORRESPONDENCE 



369 



To his Son in the McJiterraiiean. 

It seems that his son, who was engaged in the 
missionary work abroad, wrote both to his father and 
mother, begging them to answer the inquiry, "What 
are the feehngs with which you are passmg toward 
the country from which none return ?" 

To this question the father, April 22, 1828, at the 
close of a letter pertaining chiefly to the circumstances 
and responsibilities of the son, gives a characteristic 
reply only in the following words : 

"Your care for our eternal condition, and ours 
for yours, are mutual. I wish I could give a better 
account of myself. I hope, with some sense of my 
unworthiness, I can make the prayer of the publican, 
' God be merciful to me a sinner.'' " 

To the same question the mother, who seemed to 
have more of the joys of pardoned sin, to whom death 
had lost its terrors, and who had a word on her tongue 
to speak to the careless sinner, or the anxious inquirer, 
or the ripened Christian, whenever the occasion and 
propriety admitted it, gives also a reply not less 
characteristic : 

" The time of my probation appears to me draw- 
ing to a close ; yet I have no gloomy apprehensions 
as to the time or the manner of my departure, but 
would choose that it should be as a God of infinite 
perfection sees fit to order it. My hope and confi- 
dence in my precious Redeemer are unshaken. I 
daily go to him as my almighty Father and Friend, 
and trust that his gi-ace will be sufficient for me at 
all times. ' I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge 
16' 



370 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



and my fortress, my God ; in him will I trust.' 
With regard to my ' letting go of my hold on the con- 
cerns of this world,' although I continue to labor dili- 
gently with my hands, yet I think my affections 
mainly centre in God. His word and worship are 
far more precious to me than any of the perishing 
things of earth, I seldom wake in the morning with- 
out having my thoughts on God, and they are fi-e- 
quently rising to him when on my bed, while rising, 
and entering on the business of the day. Precious 
lines of Scripture, of pious authors, and hymns" — of 
which she had large stores in her memory, and from 
which she drew liberally for the early benefit of her 
children — " frequently occur to my mind through the 
day. I fijid it good to go up to the house of the Lord, 
to serve him there with reverence and godly fear. I 
trust it is in my heart to say, ' 0 come, let us worship 
and bow down; let us kneel before the Lord our 
Maker ; for He is our God, and we are the people of 
his pasture, and the sheep of his hand.' The precious 
little prayers which are scattered through the Bible, 
and other portions of the sacred word, I hope are 
daily food for my soul. But yet, my son, sins and 
follies run through my whole life ; and I need 
that pardoning mercy should be extended to me 
every day that I live, through the infinite atone- 
ment of the blessed Redeemer : and should I ever 
reach those blessed mansions which Christ has pre- 
pared for all that love him, to free, rich grace alone 
must be all the praise. My heart responds and says, 
Amen, ' praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



371 



wonderful works to the cliildren of men.' You daily 
have an interest in my affectionate remembrance. 
May you always enjoy the sensible presence of God, 
be greatly useful in his vineyard, guided in the path 
of duty, and prepared for all that is before you in 
time and eternity, through the precious Immanuel." 

It was pleasant to another absent son, returning to 
visit his parents and lodging in an apartment adjoin- 
ing theirs, as he awoke at early dawn, to hear them 
speaking to each other of their own unworthiness, of 
the abundant mercies received, of the riches of the 
grace of God, and their renewed obligations to live 
to his glory, as familiarly as if such had been the 
themes of their daily Christian communion for forty 
years. 

To the same, from his father. 

"Plainfield, October, 1828. 

" There is reason to hope that less ardent spirits 
are drunk in the land. Respectable people do not 
provide it for company. Military officers are leaving 
off the pernicious practice of ' treating.' It is hoped 
also, that more regard is paid to the Sabbath than in 
past years. Sabbath-schools likewise prosper. These 
things are encouraging, and tend to inspire the hope 
that the latter-day glory is near ; especially when we 
consider how many benevolent societies are operating 
successfully to extend the knowledge and kingdom of 
the Redeemer." 

At the same date he writes to his son G ■ in 

New York : 



372 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



" It delights me to hear of the check upon intem- 
perance. How can you serve the Lord and promote 
the good of man better, than to employ a part of your 
paper in communicating such information relative to 
this subject as shall tend to fix in the public mind the 
ruin occasioned by this sin? "Why should the fair 
character of these states be lowered and lost by the 
vices charged on abandoned Ephraim, Isa. 28 : 7, 8, 
* They also have erred through wine, and through 
strong drink are out of the way. The priest and the 
prophet have erred thi-ough strong drink ; they are 
swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through 
strong drink; they err in vision, they stumble in judg- 
ment. For all tables are full of vomit and filthiness, 
so that there is no place clean.' The present refor- 
mation seems to me not so much the result of human 
effort, as the effects of the Holy Spirit kmdly suggest- 
ing to people all around, that they must not destroy 
themselves by this shameful practice. The move- 
ment seems to be simultaneous. 

" I thank you for the honor you have done me in 
my somewhat advanced years, in your donation of 
two hundred dollars to aid the important work of the 
American Bible Society, and that you did not forget 
dear Homan in a land of strangers. The Rev. Mr. 
Temple of Malta has visited us, and brings favorable 
intelhgence. The interview was very pleasant." 

To his son G , in New York. 

" Pj.AiNFiELD, May 4, 1829. 

" My very dear Son — I walk my study about an 
hour each morning ; and that hour never passes with- 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



373 



out thinking of you and my other beloved absent sons. 
You are the only one of the five children who do not 
profess to be in Christ. In this respect you are alone. 
If you have no part nor lot in the Saviour, and should 
die afar from him, the precious truths you have so 
often, and uniformly and nobly defended, and which 
have edified and delighted thousands, will finally be 
no comfort to you. You will see the doctrines of the 
cross finally prevail, you will see Satan chained a 
thousand years, and the meek inheriting the earth 
during that long and happy period ; you will see the 
bodies of the saints raised in glory ; you will see that 
Jesus is the Lord ; you will be present at the judg- 
ment, and have enlarged views of eternity ; but none 
of these things will afford you the least consolation. 
The very things which will cause beUevers to rejoice 
will, on this gloomy supposition, be to you a source 
of unliappiness and terror. The thought that this 
may be the lot of him I so ardently love, excites in 
me sensations of sadness which I cannot describe. 

" When the millennium is in its full glory, you 
and I shall be in eternity. If then, on my speaking 
to you of the change which shall have taken place on 
the globe of our nativity — how that, from being a 
world lying in Asnickedness, it is covered with the 
redeemed, all honoring their God and Saviour, and 
delighting themselves in the abvindance of peace ; 
Popery and Mahometanism and Rationalism, and all 
the religions of human device abandoned for ever — 
you should answer that the change only heightened 
your anguish and despair, it seems now that my heart 



374 



MOSES IIALLOCK. 



would ache. 3Iy G saddened at the sight of 

Jerusalem's peace — saddened to see the proud tongue 
of the errorist silenced for ever, and the earth filled 
with the glory of God ! I run forward in my own 
imagination, and hope to he so changed as to be in- 
capable of grief ; but with my present feelings, if I 
might make the choice, and the will of G-od were so, 
I would choose my own annihilation rather than that 

G should be lost. The God of infinite mercy 

prevent it. 0 God, wilt thou make him and his 
companion holy. Dispose them to use their endow- 
ments, and all their influence, to advance thy cause. 
Bless them and their labors, and make them all bless- 
ings in time and eternity. Amen." 

To the same. 

"Plainfield, November 9, 1829. 

" My very dear Son — Your ' Boston Telegraph,' 
and since that, the Observer, have afforded me much 
instruction and pleasure, and I am truly thankful for 
them. I have more periodical works than I can read. 
The Holy Bible is my book. 

" "W , in a late letter, expresses some solici- 
tude as to the comfort of his parents in their declining 
years ; but we are well provided for. 

" The first year after your parents were married, 
I supposed we were seeing our happiest days. But 
this was a cherished error. The children the Lord 
gave us were, one after another, a source of much 
additional enjoyment, especially when we began to 
see tokens of some genius and future enterprise. 
This animated the parents to make every reasonable 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



375 



sacrifice to prepare them for future usefulness. The 
living buds stimulated and nerved the arm to culti- 
vate the little trees, hoping on some future day to see 
welcome fruit, as the expectation of Manoah and his 
wife was raised concerning Samson, when the Spirit 
of the Lord began to move him at tunes in the camp 
of Dan. ]May all our gi-andchildren be as great a 
source of comfort to their parents as our children 
have been to us." 

To his son at Malta he writes, " The thoughts 
you suggest, as to the Lord's kindness to us as a 
family, ought to excite the warmest gratitude. To 
all he has done, may he add humble, grateful, and 
obedient hearts." 

In the same letter he says, " In respect to your 
visiting us, I had much rather not see you 'till the 
heavens be no more,' than that you should leave 
Malta, if duty call you to remain there. This would 
be too much like Jonah, who fled from the presence 
of the Lord, and was, in your sea, swallowed by a 
whale." 

For many years, as above intimated, he had had 
the settled purpose that, when he should enter his 
seventieth year, however able he might feel to fulfil 
the duties of the ministry, he would, lest he should 
retain the office in advanced life at the sacrifice of 
the best interests of his people, request them to unite 
with him in the settlement of a colleague. This 
proposition he publicly made to his congregation in 
March, 1829 ; and as he feared that paying the sala- 
ry of two pastors might be felt to be a burden, he 



376 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



fully relinquished his own salary from and after tho 
time the colleague should be installed. His devoted 
and united people, of whom he had been for thirty- 
seven years the first and only pastor, were not in haste 
for a change, and delayed accepting his proposal for 
two years, when, in March, 1831, the Rev. David 
Kimball was mstalled his colleague. In his charge to 
the pastor elect, he says, 

" Almost forty years I have been the minister of 
this people ; but it has been in weakness and in fear, 
and in much trembling. I leave to you principally 
the weighty, solenm trust. The church, from a very 
small beginning, has become considerably numerous : 
these you will be careful to feed ; they are Christ's 
sheep and lambs. I also leave to your trembling care 
them that are dead in sin. I have often thought of 
them, and prayed for them, and addressed them ; but 
cannot persuade them tobe reconciled to G-od. You will 
never pray nor preach without remembering them. 
Let it be your heart's desire and prayer to Grod that 
they may be saved. One reason why I was willing 
to retire from preaching to impenitent men in this 
congregation was, that truths from other lips might 
have more impression than from mine. I hope / shall 
see, through the instrumentality of your labors, as I 
have seen by other means, scores of sinners converted 
to God. 

" ' Preach the word^ and not the religion of proud 
reason, or man's device. Tell your poor fellow-sin- 
ners what God saith of the human heart, of Christ, 
of his atonement, of death, of the resurrection, and 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



377 



of the judgment-day. Tell them what God says of 
eternity, and of the different states of the righteous 
and the wicked in that awful world." 

To his son 6 , in New York. 

" Plainfield, April 15, 1S31. 

" The information, ' Some hundreds will be added 
to the churches in New York city the next Sabbath,' 
is warming to the heart. Truly the Lord is building 
up Zion. We will ' pray for the peace of Jerusalem.' 
' They shall prosper that love her.' I wait to hear of 
the conversion of one absent friend and another ; but 
if such expectation should not be realized, I hope to 
be resigned. Though every one ovight to repent and 
believe, God is not bound to give these holy aflections 
to any sinner." 

Again he says, Sept. 16, " The awakening among 
us advances slowly. A very general solemnity ap- 
pears in our meetings, and there have been some 
more than twenty instances of hopeful conversion. 

" If you, my beloved children, should live and 
die neglecting the great salvation, you wiU miss of a 
great reward, and receive greater punishment than 
sinners in general. 0 that I could hear of the con- 
version of you both. My mind would be relieved from 
a daily concern, a heavy burden. Let each make the 
interesting inquiry, '"What are my feelings towards 
G-od ? Is he lovely in my sight ? Do I see him to be 
just in his disposaT of his creatures ? Is his word my 
delight ; and does this world, with all its riches, 
honors, and pleasures, appear to mo as nothing, com- 



378 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



pared with a heart to serve Christ, and an interest in 
his love ? Do I show, by forsaking sin, that I am a 
true penitent ? Does Christ appear to me ' the chief- 
est among ten thousand, and altogether lovely?' 

" Grod seems to be more accessible to mankind 
than ever before. I believe there is not a town around 
us but is visited by the special influence of his Spirit 
in a greater or less degree. Seek the Lord wliile he 
may be found. Let each take the whole blame of -sin, 
and justify Grod. Then the awful controversy ceases." 

To his Children in Ne\r York. 

"Plainfield, April 5, 1832. 

"My much-beloved Sons. and Daughters — ^You 
have much to do ; and I hope you are as useful as 
you are industrious. Be wdJing to wear out for 
Christ. Let not your toils and cares cause you to 
forget him, and your obligations to be his for ever. 
I hope you are -all favored with orthodox preaching. 

I think the religious scheme of is founded in error. 

All the silver and gold in the world would not make 
me willing that you should have been brought up 
under such preaching." 

Again, August 8, referring to the illness of two of 

them, he says, " I bless Grod for Gr 's recovery. 

His death would have been a heavier grief to us than 
any we were ever called to mourn. We want to hear 

the result of E 's sickness. If she should die, 

New York and Plainfield would t(^e be spread with 
gloom. It would be so especially, if she should not 
leave good evidence of having a part or lot in Christ. 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



379 



Eliza lust ! the thought would be insupportable. 
Neither of you professes a hope in Christ ; yet you 
respect religion, and in your judgment are convinced 
you must have it or be ruined. The state of such 
persons of aU others most excites the sympathy of 
Cliristians." 

His dear Eliza, soon after liis death, became a 
happy, consistent member of the church of Christ. 

Two months later he writes to his sons, " I higlily 
approve of your remaining in the city, and attending 
each to his respective business during the prevalence 
of cholera. I trust you were both very useful in that 
gloomy season." 

In September, 1833, he speaks of his labors in a 
destitute part of Windsor, adjoining Plainfield, where 
he did much to strengthen a weak congregation : 
" I continue to spend the Sabbath with them," he 
says. " Their little meeting-house goes on well. It 
wiU, I trust, be fit for use in a month or two." 

To his Children on the Mediterranean, the mission being about to be removed fronx 
Malta to Smyrna. 

"PLAiNriELD, Deo. 20, 1833. 

" My dear Son and Daughter — It gives me much 
pleasure to think of the place you fill in the vineyard 
of Christ. I would give thanks to Grod daily, that 
your lot is to spread the knowledge of salvation. 
You will probably be each instrumental of saving 
many souls. The books you publish may be blessed 
to thousands who were perishing for lack of vision. 
I hope you wiU yet hear in heaven, from the lips of 
such redeemed ones, ascriptions of praise to Him who 



380 



MOSES HALLOCI.. 



is Head over all things to the church, for sendiag you 
to Malta and Smyrna. How encouraging to tliink of 
being allowed to do something for the advancement 
of that cause for which Christ died. 

" Remember me very affectionately to the Rev 
Mr. Temple. We shall never forget his kind visit at 
Plainfield. If He who hath appointed the bounds of 
our habitation, call you far beyond Malta, I submit. 
If I am never to see you in this world, I submit ; and 
this is not hard, so long as I hope you are useful, 
though I think to spend even one hoar with you would 
be a greater luxury than I ever experienced from an 
interview with friends." 

A few days later he writes, " Your mother and I 
are very comfortable and content. We lack notliing 
but religion ; and but one of us lacks that.'''' 

To a Son in New York. 

"Plainfield, Aug. 28, 1834. 

" My very dear G After a night of anx- 

iety, king Darius said to Daniel, ' Is thy God whom 
thou servest able to deliver thee from the lions?' 
You live in the midst of temptations, dangers, and 
death. When I think of the bad examples before you 
in your city, and the thousand temptations to do 
wrong, and how many have been dying around 
you," (by cholera,) " I am ready to exclaim in the 
language of gratitude, 'Is thy God able to deliver 
thee from the lions?' Your life and health and un- 
blemished character, and numberless other blessings, 
ai i^ still continued ; may you, Ulie Daniel, serve Gcd 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



381 



continually; and as your refinement would nevei 
allow you to treat the kindness of an earthly bene- 
factor with ingratitude, see that you are not ungrate- 
ful to God." 

To another son, he says, April 20, 183-5, " Let- 
ters and tracts received of late from New York have 
been very interesting. Gr 's prosperity almost ter- 
rifies me. He has made some noble donations. If 
these have been offered in faith, as Abel offered his 
sacrifices, the Lord will have respect to them." 

To his Son in Smyrna; on the death of an infant Daughter. 

" Plain-field, March 16, 1835. 
" Mv MUCH-BELOVED SoN AND DAUGHTER YoUr full 

letter we have read several times with the deepest 

interest, and your brother W has put the most 

of it into the New York Observer, and has signed it 
Particeps. He writes, after the birth of a daughter 
in January, that the wounds wliich the death of his 
little daughter and son made in the hearts of their 
father and mother still bleed. 

" What shall I say of your little Martha ? From 
your description, I believe she was a very lovely child. 
My attachment to her is such that, if I were in 
Smyrna, I should go to the little cypress-tree and 
the grave it shades. The scene you passed must 
have been peculiarly tender ; but the cup is mingled 
with great mercy. I think there is much reason to 
believe that your little daughter is with her Saviour, 
experiencing the amazing blessings of his atoning 
blood, removed far away from this polluted and pol- 



382 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



luting world. I trust also that God has been near to 
you in your affliction, and enlarged your minds by 
spiritual discoveries, so that you can say, ' It is good 
for us that we have been afflicted.' 

To his Children in New York. 

"Plainfield, Sept. 17, 1835. 

" My dearly beloved Sons and Daughters — 
Within a few months your mother and I have seen 
all our sons and daughters, except your brother Ho- 
man's wife in Smyrna. This marks the year. It is 
a kind of new epoch, which we shall remember so 
long as we yet live. As Jacob revived when he saw 
the wagons, and as Paul thanked God and took 
courage when he saw the brethren at Appii Forum, 
so we rejoiced, especially to see Homan, whom we 
never much expected to see. Those around us were 
moved like the people of Bethlehem at the coming o 
Naomi. These things I hope we all consider as bless 
ings which call aloud for very thankful acknowledg- 
ment to God. 

" A kind Providence has placed you in stations of 
responsibility; and in respect to ability and success 
in your various employments, it may be said of you 
as of the tribes of Israel, when the Lord brought them 
out of Egypt, there is not one feeble person among 
you." 

To his three absent Sons. 

" Plainfield, Dec. 30, 1835. 

"My dear Sons and Daughters — Yesterday about 
half-past eleven your mother died. But it seemed 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



383 



more like quiet sleep than, death. A lortnight ago 
to-day she suddenly became speechless and helpless. 
Martha and I laid her on the bed. Dr. Shaw came 
very soon, and said it was a shock of paralysis. He 
visited her daily, and Mrs. Arnold Stre'eter and Mrs. 
Salem Streeter kindly assisted day and night in the 
care of her till she died. She had her reason almost 
or quite tiU the last. 

" She appeared to descend the valley of the 
shadow of death without fear. / never heard her 
express any fear of death. When about fifteen 
years of age, she was among a large ch-cle of sisters, 
brothers, and cousins, gay and sprightly. At this 
age she became thoughtful, and after about a year 
found peace. It was her lot to sit, for a considerable 
part of her youth, under preaching which excluded 
the distinguishing doctrines of the gospel ; but the 
Spirit of the Lord taught her to trust in mere sover- 
eign grace. I think, from her subsequent life, that 
this divine work upon her mind was very powerful. 
She was generally serious, sometimes cheerful, never 
vain. 

" There were many things in her life highly wor- 
thy of imitation. She followed the counsel of Paul 
to Titus : ' In all things showing thyself a pattern of 
good works ; in doctrine showing uncorruptness, grav- 
ity, sincerity.' She was blessed with skill to speak 
' a word in season ' to every one with whom she was 
conversant. Very many were favored with her pious 
counsel, especially her sons and daughter. She was 
neat, and all her things were so in their place that 



384 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



she had to spend no time to find what she wished 
to use. 

" She was kind to the poor. Solomon, in describ- 
ing ' a virtuous woman,' Proverbs 31, describes her. 
That good old religion remains the same. It is ever 
new. < She stretched out her hand to the needy.' 
Her table, spread forty thousand times, while it bore 
every mark of economy, always supplied the wants 
of those around it. ' She looked well to the ways of 
her household, and ate not the bread of idleness. 
Her children,' who, in great measure thi-ough her 
pious care as an instrument in Christ's hand, are 
what they are, ' arise up and call her blessed ; her 
husband also, and he praiseth her.' 

" Her body was conveyed to the meeting-house 
the day after her death, and the Rev. Mr. Jennings 
preached an appropriate discourse from Job 7 : 9, 10. 
I hope her sympathizing daughters wiU avoid her 
defects and imitate her amiable virtues. 

"My sons and daughters, as you loved your 
mother, and esteemed her company, will you not, by 
obedient faith in Christ, seek a part and lot with her 
in heaven ? 

" Your affectionate father, 

'•MOSES HALLOCK." 

A few days later he writes to his daughter in 
Smyrna, " The death of my companion calls aloud on 
me to be also ready. We were nearly of the same age, 
almost seventy-six. I believe no day passed, espec- 
ially in later years, in which she did not make to me 
.'iome serious observations concerning Chri-stian duties. 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



385 



Her mind seemed inclixied to holy devotion. If / do 
not repent and believe and serve the Lord, I shall be 
more guilty, and consequently miserable, than if I 
had never seen her." 

He wrote for her tombstone the simple testimony, 
" She sat at Jesus' feet and heard his word."* 

To his Children in New York. 

" Plainfield, January 22, 1836. 

" My very dear Sons and Daughters — In writ- 
ing to your brother Homan's wife in Smyrna, I 
called her my pilgrim daughter, a term which com- 
ports well with my present feelings. May we all, by 
a holy walk with God, profess ourselves to be ' stran- 
gers and pilgrims on the earth.' 

" I concluded, when your mother was sick, that 
if she should live it would be for the best, and if she 
should die it would be for the best. "We ought always 
to put such confidence in G-od as to know, when an 
event takes place, that it is best it should be so. I 
do not feel very lonesome. The loss of my valuable, 
companionable companion is not half the trouble to 
me that my own state is. I need the pow,er of relig- 
ion more than company, or any earthly good. 
" With love and gratitude, your father, 

"MOSES HALLOCK." 

* Margaret Allen was born at Chilmark, Martha's Vine- 
yard, March 22, 1760. Her father was Robert Allen, her 
mother Desire Norton. She was a descendant of the worthy 
and pious Rev. William Homes, and a niece of Rev. Zechariah 
Mayhew, the last of the five venerable missionaries of that 
name to the Indians, who married her father's sister. 

Hallurl, 1 7 



386 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



To a Son in New York. 

" Plainfield, April 22, 1836. 

" What can we spend a few thoughts upon more 
profitably, than on Christ as the head of the true 
church. He is the centre of their views, affections, and 
hopes. This is true of each individual of this holy king- 
dom. Each member of this spiritual family looks to 
Christ. Enoch and Seth and Noah, with aU then- be- 
lieving cotemporaries ; all the patriarchs, prophets, and 
apostles, with their pious cotemporaries ; and all true 
Christians who have hved since the days of Christ, 
or who shall live — all true Christians collected from 
the fallen race — aU are looking, or will look to Jesus. 
All the members of this kingdom have some saving 
acquaintance with their King ; and it is the joy of 
their hearts that he wUl reign for ever. They will 
look to Christ as the desire of their souls, and most 
cordially rejoice in his government, saying, ' To Him 
be glory and dominion for ever and ever.' 

" "What could we wish to the sinner better than 
that he should become a member of this kingdom ? 

What could you and her mother wish for Uttle H 

J more than that she should become a subject of 

this happy, everlasting kingdom ? 0 that myself, my 
children, and grandchildren may become subjects of 
this holy King of peace." 

To his Son G , in New York, 

" Plainfield, July 2, 1836. 

" My very dear Son — Your letter has afforded 
me peculiar satisfaction. I rejoice that your mind is 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



387 



not ' corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.' 
It is pleasant to hear you say, ' I have no hope but 

in him.' May you and E and myself, all hound 

to an eternal state, ever clearly see that Christ has 
most just claims to the supreme affections of ouv 
hearts. Surely to withhold them from him wrongs 
both ourselves and him. If you are not in the way 
of life, you know in what the difficulty lies : not in 
ignorance of the truth, but in want of love to it. 

" You speak of your case and E 's as singu- 
larly alike, and say, ' The prospect now is, that, 
gazing as it were upon heaven's brightness, and 
charmed with its glory, purity, and blessedness, we 
shall yet fail of that transformation of spirit wliich 
will fit us to be partakers of it — that holiness with- 
out which no man shaU see the Lord.' If I now 

knew that you and E would fad of the grace of 

Ufe, it seems to me I should almost die. It would 
be more grievous a thousand-fold than the death of 
your mother. But if you are indeed charmed with 
heaven's glory, purity, and blessedness, is not this 
love of holiness ? is not this the result of the trans- 
formation of the Spirit? But it is better to be a 
Christian and think you are not, though this is bad, 
than to think you are and be deceived. How won- 
derful would be the display of grace, if your parents, 
and their children and grandchildren, should all be 
saved. 

" What you say of your children is perfectly con 
sonant to my feehngs — 'We have no ambition for 
them equal to that of seeing them take some humble 



388 



MOSES HALLOCK. 



part in aiding the triumphs of Christ's kingdom.' Sure- 
ly this is what true benevolence would wish, rather 
than that they should reign as princes in the earth." 

This son continued many years in the state here 
described. At length, having fixed his residence in a 
destitute part of a New England city, he felt the ne- 
cessity of erecting a church there in which the gospel 
might be faithfully proclaimed ; and in the midst of 
his efforts and gifts and anxiety for the spiritual wel- 
fare of others, under the prayerful labors of the ser- 
vant of Christ elected as pastor, seventeen years after 
his father's death, he was led publicly to join himself 
to the people of God. 



INSCRIPTION ON ms TOMBSTONE IN PLAINFIELD. 

" The Rev. Moses Hallock : born in Brookhaven, 
Long Island, Feb. 16, 1760 ; reared by godly parents 
in Goshen, Mass. ; graduated at Yale College, 1788 ; 
ordained and installed first pastor of the church in 
Plainfield, July 11, 1792 ; ministered to a confiding 
and united people forty -five years; died July 17, 
1837, aged 77. At seventy, he requested a colleague, 
having received to the church three hundred and fifty- 
eight members. He had instructed three hundred 
and four pupils, of whom fifty became ministers, 
seven missionaries, A man of patriarchal simplicity, 
integrity, sincerity, kindness ; without an enemy. 
He loved, studied, preached, exernphfied the Bible, 
and gloried in the Cross." 



BRIEF SKETCH 

OF 

THE HALLOCK ANCESTRY 

IN THE UNITED STATES : 

PREPARED FOR 
THE MEMOIR OF JEKEMIAH AND MOSES HALLOCK. 

1863-1865. 



Pkter Hallock. the ancestor of those of the name in this coun- 
try, was one of thirteen pilgrim fathers, including Rev. John 
Youngs, who came over from England in 1640 and landed at New 
Haven.* There, October 21, 1G40, Rev. Mr. Youngs "gathered his 
church anew" under the auspices of Rev. John Davenport minister, 
and Theophilus Eaton governor of the New Haven colony, which 
was planted but two years earlier, April 18, 1638, under a branch- 
ing oak — a virtual theocracy, taking the Bible as their code of 
laws, ecclesiastical and civil. [See Trumbull's History of Conn.] 
In the same autumn Rev. Mr. Youngs and his church took up their 
abode in Southold then comprising the whole north-eastern branch 
of Long Island, landing at the harbor of what is now Southold vil- 
lage, on the Peconic bay, where, as a church or town, they retained 
their connection with the New Haven colony till 1662, and with 
Connecticut till 1674. Rev. Mr. Youngs here continued his minis- 
try thirty-two years, and died February 24, 1672, aged 74, as by 
his tombstone. The twelve men who with members of their fami- 
lies constituted his church were William Wells, Esq., Barnabas 
Horton, and John Conklin, (whose graves are near that of their 
pastor,) Peter Hallock, John Tuthill, Richard Terry, Thomas Mapes, 
Matthias Corwin, Robert Akerly, Jacob Corey, Isaac Arnold, and 
John Budd, the lirst white settlers in that part of the island. 

Peter Hallock's great-great-granddaughter Elizabeth Hallock, 
bom 1732, who died at Old Aquebogue February 12, 1831, aged 98, 

* Kev. John Youngs and Joan his wife, "of St. Margarett's, Suffolk," 
were in 1634 "forbidden passage" "from Yarmouth" for Salem, Mass. 
fMass. Histor. Coll.. vol. 1, p. 101.] He was soon after settled at Hingham, 
in Norfolk the adjoining county, 100 miles north-east of London. 



390 



LIFE OP HALLOCK. 



wife of Silas Corwin, gave to her granddaughters Mrs. James Hal- 
lock now of Quogue and Mrs. Rev. James T. Hamlin of Mattituck, 
Mr. Jonathan G. Horton, and others now living, the following facts, 
which are confirmed hy multiplied records and memorials : That 
Peter Hallock was the first of the thirteen who fearlessly stepped 
on shore among the Indians at Southold, that part of the village 
being still called "Hallock's Neck," and the beach extending from 
it "Hallock's beach," of which beach Mr. Horton (who lives in 
the first frame house erected at Southold by his ancestor Barna- 
bas Horton,) is one of the joint owners; that Peter Hallock pur- 
chased from the Indians the tract since called Oyster Ponds, now 
Orient, the eastern end of this branch of the island, (see Thompson's 
History of Long Island ;) that he then returned to England for his 
wife, who when he married her was a widow and had a son by her 
former husband Mr. Howell ; that he promised her that, if she now 
accompanied him, her son should share with his in his property ; 
that on coming back he found the Indians had resold what is now- 
Orient ; that he then purchased about ten miles west of Southold 
village a farm extending from Long Island Sound on the north to 
Peconic bay on the south, (three miles,) on which he settled in 
Aquebogue about two miles west of Mattituck village and creek, 
all these places being then in Southold township. 

His original homestead on Long Island and that of his wife's 
son Howell were on adjacent lots, and are still occupied (1865) by 
their respective descendants, Benjamin Laurens Hallock and Syl- 
vester Howell. On the south part of the purchase are the farms of 
Ool. Micah W. and Dea. Ezra Hallock, great grandsons of Zerubabel 
Hallock who was a great-grandson of Peter. Numerous other fam- 
ilies of Hallocks, most of them prosperous farmers, reside on or near 
this purchase by Peter Hallock, but of the burial place of either 
himself, or his only son William or his grandsons Thomas and Pe- 
ter, who inherited the same premises, they have no knowledge. 

William Hallock, who died September 28, 1684, son of Peter 
Hallock, made a will, which is preserved in the ancient records 
both of Suffolk county at Riverhead and of New York city. It is 
dated, "Southold (township,) February 10, 1682," and was proved 
October 21, 1684: "I commit my soul into the hands of Jesus Christ 
my gracious Redeemer, and my body to the earth by decent burial, 
in assured hope of the resurrection at the last day." He gives his 
property to his wife Margaret, his four sons, Thomas, Peter, William, 
and John, and his five daughters, Margaret, Martha, Sarah, Eliza- 
beth, and Abigail. "The land where I now dwell at Aquebogue" 
(near Mattituck) and the lane dividing it, he wills to Thomas and 



ANCESTRY. 



391 



Peter, giving Thomas the western half "except the swamp lot" 
near his house ; and giving Peti r llie eastern half with " the swamp 
lot" and hisdwelling. To his sDn William he gives lands in or vr-w 
Southold village, and to his son Jolin land in Wading lliver. The 
will implies that his son John had married into and joined the So- 
ciety of Friends, and has the proviso that if any one of his sons 
"shall apostatize from the Protestant doctrine and faith" as then 
held by "the Church of England," or shall "wilfully and of set 
purpose contemn and neglect the public worship of God suitable 
to the Protestant doctrine and faith," then what is here willed to 
him is to pass over to "the next lawful heir that shall steadfastly 
profess and own the said doctrine and faith." 

The Documentary History of the state of New York, in a list of 
those taxed in the township of Southold in 1675, gives but two of 
the name of Hallock, William taxed £301, and John £82; and in 
1683 three of the name of Hallock, William £230, John £80, and 
TTiomas £81 ; Richard Howell, who lived on the lot adjoining the 
original homestead of Peter Hallock, being taxed in 1075, £77 ; in 
1683, £98. In the same History a list of the total inhabitants of 
Southold township in 1698, including men, women, and children, 
in all 881, gives 254 persons bearing the names of twelve of the 
above thirteen original settlers. Among these are Margaret Hal- 
lock, widow ; and in three distinct groups the families of William's 
three sons first above-named, viz. 1. Thomas Hallock, with Hope, 
Thomas, Kingsland, Ichabod, Zerubabel bom 1696, Anna, Patience, 
and Richard; 2. Pder Hallock, with Eliza, Bethiah, Abigail, Peter 
junior, William, and Noah born 1696 ; 3. William Hallock, with 
Mary, William junior. Prudence, Zebulon, and Mary junior. John, 
William's other and probably eldest son, having removed to Brook- 
haven, all the Hallocks in Southold township in 1698 were, as 
above, twenty-three, and all of them evidently members or de- 
scendants of the family of William Hallock who died 1684. In the 
records of several of the earlier wills the signature is Halliock. 

The following facts as to the family and earlier descendants of cacJi 
of these four som of William Hallock have been chiefly obtained from 
the reliable source of wills and deeds preserved in certified records. 
It is regretted that this brief sketch could not include the female, 
perhaps the better if not the larger half of the Hallock ancestry. 
William Hallock who died 1784 had five daughters. His son John 
and grandson John had ten daughters who married into the fam- 
ilies of Powell, Underbill, Willets, Willis, and Hunt. Peter born 
1694 had nine daughters. Edward born 1717 had nine who all had 
families. 



392 



LIFE OF HALLOCK. 



I. THOMAS HALLOCK'S DESCENDANTS. 

No will or deed of Thomas Hallock, grandson of Peter of 1640, 
has been found, nor any record of bis sons Kingsland and Richard, 
named as above in the census of 1698. Jchabod, son of Thomas, wills 
1759 to his son Thomas who probably was the father of Thomas of 
New Providence, N. J., who died 1822 aged about 60, and whose son 
Smith Hallock was father of Jeremiah R. Hallock oi Newark, N. J. 

Zerubabel Hallock son of Thomas, who has a large posterity 
near the original homestead, died April 8, 1761 aged 65, and his 
■wife Esther 1773 aged 78, as by their gravestones in Mattituck. 
He wills, 1761, lands to sons Zerubabel 2d, James, Joseph; £400 to Ben- 
jamin, student, who died 1765 aged 24 ; £100 to grandson William 
(then aged 11,) to be paid him at 21, and £10 to grandson Zecha- 
riah. Zerubabel 's sons John aged 20, and William aged 24, were 
drowned 1749, William's son William being born 1750, after his 
father's death, and having no brother. These facts are confirmed 
by Mrs. Esther Hallock Reeve now 84, daughter of Zechariah. 

Zerubabel 2d, died March 31 1800 aged 78, had seven sons: 
Zerubabel M, Richard, Zechariah, John, Daniel, Caleb, Ezra. Zerubabel 
•id, died 1804 aged 59, had three sons: Zerubabel died 1803 aged 34 ; 
Jacob father of Dr. Lewis of New York and Horace of Detroit ; and 
Rupert father of David B., and Zerubabel, Baltimore. Richard had 
two sons: Richard father of Nathan Tuthill ; and Benjamin father of 
Benjamin Laurens, Jared, Jacob A. , Samuel, and Charles R. Zechariah 
died 1820 aged 71, had three sons: Zechariah 2d born 1776 father of 
Herman and Zechariah 3d ; John father of Franklin, Isaiah, WeUs, 
Caleb; Bethuel born 1790 father of Bethuel E., Edwin, Joel, John 
K. Dea. John, Ridgebury in Minisink, now Wawayanda, Orange co. 
N. Y., died 1842 aged near 90; his son Hon. John was judge and 
member of Congress, father of Dr. De Witt Clinton, Minisink. Dan- 
id had four sons: Daniel, Wayne co. N. Y. father of Livingston, 
Corydon, and Lewis ; Dr. Elisha ; Col. Micah W. father of Dr. David 
H., Southampton, Daniel B. and Moses S. of Brooklyn, Elijah and 
Elisha ; Dea. Ezra father of George W., Ezra Y. of Dallas, Polk Co. 
Oregon, and Rev. Joseph N. Caleb, Bridgewater, Oneida Co. N. Y. 
died 1830, had two sons: Caleb jun. and Phineas father of Norman 
and Daniel. Caleb jun. had five sons: Zadok H., John, and De 
Witt, at Almont, Lapeer Co. Mich.; Thomas B. at Strawberry Point, 
Clayton Co. Iowa, father of Herbert T. and three sons who died in 
the army ; and James C. who died in Orleans Co. N. Y. Feb. 1859, 
aged 46, father of Washington Irving and Dayton. Ezra father of 
William of Jamesport. 



ANCESTRY. 



393 



James, died Mattituck 1775 aged 44, wills to five sons: James, 
Jeremiah, Benjamin, William, TTtomas. James, Esq. died March 5 1852 
aged 90, had three sons: Benjamin Goldsmith ; Charles merchant in 
New York father of James ; and George in Fowler, Ohio. Bea. Jer- 
emiah, Cayuga, N. Y. died June 10, 1854 aged 83; had sons William 
J. ; and George B. father of William R. and George F. Benjamin 
died 1794 aged 21. William settled at Washtenau, Michigan, father 
of Franklin of Cazenovia, Nelson and James. Thomas, Smithtown 
Branch, born July 11, 1768, died Jan. 7, 1854, fiither of James. 

Joseph, Hog Neck opposite Southold, had sons Benjamin father of 
Benjamin Hubbard who had sons Joseph A. , Newark, and Edward 
H., Randall's Island; William state of New York; Joseph father of 
George ; and Isaac father of Benjamin S., Brooklyn. 

William son of Zerubabel 1st, drowned 1749 aged 24, had one 
son, William, born after his father's death. This William born 
1750, grandson of Zerubabel, died Riverhead, Sept. 1824 aged 74, 
buried in Upper Aquebogue, had seven sons : William, died January 
1824 aged 50, father of James of Greenpoint, Nicholas of Upper 
Aqiiebogue, Caleb ; David father of Jesse at Hermitage ; Peter father 



of Harvey, and Benjamin of New York ; James of New York died 
1832 father of James H. teacher, Sanford, and John ; Sylvanus of 
New York, bom July 21, 1784, had seven sons: Aaron, Edward, 
Sylvan us of Chicago, Samuel M., John H., Lieut. Alfred, North 
Orange, N. J., and David F. ; Koah of Riverhead, father of Terry, 
Daniel, George W., John, Charles; Gurdon died young. 

II. PETER HALLOCK'S DESCENDANTS. 

No will or deed of Peter Hallock, grandson of Peter of 1640, has 
been found. Sons by a record of his grandson William born 1730, 
Peter jun., AVilliam who died young at sea, and Koah born 1696. 

Peter Hallock Jun., homestead near Mattituck, wills, 1753, to 
sons Major Peter and William and nine daughters, one of them Mrs. 
Elizabeth H. Corwin as above. He died August 175G aged 62 ; his 
second wife Mary 1761 aged 67, and their youngest daughter Azu- 
bah 1754 aged 9, as by their gravestones in Mattituck. 

Major Peter Hallock on the old homestead, married a daugh- 
ter of Joseph Mapes Sept. 1750, died May 13, 1791, as by his grave- 
stone in Mattituck, had tive sons: Peter and James who had no 
children, Joseph, Frederick, and Dea. Jabez. Joseph fell as commander 
of an armed vessel in the war of the Revolution by the last shot 
before the attacking force surrendered. 

Frederick bom at the old homestead April 11, 1759, died at 




394 



LIFE OF HALLOCK. 



Quogue L. I. June 22, 1853, aged 94, had five sons: James, Frederick 
2d, Peki-, Ilarvey, and Benjamin F. James born at the old homestead 
Jan. 15, 1787, settled at Quogue, father of James S. Y., William S. 
0., and Harvey F. C. ; Frederick 2d father of Capt. Frederick M. of 
Franklinville, Nathan B. of Flanders, Harvey of Bridgehampton, 
John D. of Quogue, and Capt. Franklin B. who fell in the U. S. 
army ageil 33 ; Feler died May 11, 1859, aged GO, father of Peter 
R. , Atlanticville ; Harvey died at 23 ; and Benjamin Franklin. 

Dea. Jabez (who wrote his name Halleck) born at the old home- 
stead March 13, 1761, moved 1799 to Westemville, Oneida co., 
N. Y., died Sept. 17, 1863, in his 103d year, had sons Joseph, Jabez, 
and Barnabas Wines who died Aug. 31, 1859 aged 52, the two last 
having no surviving son. Joseph Esq. was a lieutenant in the war 
of 1812, a magistrate for thirty years, married a daughter of Henry 
AVager, Esq., and died June 22, 1857 aged 72. He was the father 
of Henry Wager Halleck, LL. D., born Jan. 16, 1814, "General-in- 
chief of the whole land forces of the United States," (1803,) whose mil- 
itary and civil services, at West Point, in the Mexican war, in draft- 
ing the constitution of California, and in our present civil struggle, 
as well as the valuable military and legal works he has issued, are 
before the public. He married a grand-daughter of the patriot 
Alexander Hamilton. His brother Andrew J., born Sept. 5, 1830, 
was one of his staff. Joseph Esq. had also sons Jabez died Califor- 
nia 1849 aged 28 ; Joseph, Minneapolis, Minn. ; and William Wines 
and Peter, Westemville. 

William, brother of Major Peter and father of Mary Hallock Ber- 
nard of Brooklyn, died at Old Aquebogue 1794 aged 53, had three 
sons: Willia7n, Benjamin, Samuel. William died Aug. 16, 1806 aged 
36. Benjamin settled at Middle Island, had sons Benjamin B. of 
New York; Daniel B. and Thomas J. of Patchogue; John of Mas- 
tic ; Samuel of Middle Island ; Stratford Y. of I'aphank ; Isaac D. 
of Bellport. Samuel whose son William of Mattituck is father of 
Lieut. Charles C. of Brooklyn, and John W. of Riverhead. 

Noah Hallock born 1696, settled at Blue Point in Rocky Point 
near Old Man's now Mount Sinai, opposite New Haven, died 1773 
aged 77 as by his gravestone, had three sons: Ncxth, William, Josiah. 

Noah born 1728 had five sons : Rev. Noah, Ilendrickson, Peltr, 
Thomas, and Dea. Philip. Bev. Noah, pastor at Mount Sinai, died 
1818 aged 60, father of Daniel Miner, Esq. Ilendrickson had sons 
Hendrick father of Hendrickson, and Herman who died Oct. 28, 
1863. Peler died yoimg. Thomas of Smithtown had two sons : 
Thomas father of Capt. Thomas G., Rev. Luther C, Ephraim of 
Sctauket, and Henry H. ; and Noah who had five sons: Arden M. 



ANCESTRY. 



395 



of Greenpoint ; Peter father of Elvin B., George C, and Edgar 
M. ; Daniel Miner father of Alanson and Leonard M. ; Nathaniel ; 
Conckling. Dm. Philip father of Philip and James. 

Williarrfi died, Goshen, Mass. , Oct. 21, 1815, aged 85, had two sons: 
Jeremiah and Moses. Rev. Jeremiah 40 years pastor in Canton, Conn, 
died 1826 aged 68, had sons: Hon. Jer. Humphrey, judge in Ohio, 
and William Homan father of Jeremiah S. and William. Rev. Moses, 
45 years pastor in Plainfield, Mass., died 1837 aged 77, had four 
sons: Rev. William A., 40 years Sec. Am. Tract Soc, born June 
2, 1794 : Leavitt father of Rev. William A. and Leavitt H. ; Gerard 
of New Haven father of William Homes and Charles ; and Homan 
father of Moses, Homan B., Gerard J., Samuel and William A. 

Josiah born 1732 had sons Josiah father of George, James, and 
Amos: and Jonathan father of Jesse and Samuel father of Sylvester. 

HI. WILLIAM HALLOCK'S DESCENDANTS. 
The will of William Hallock, Southold (village,) grandson of 
Peter of 1740, made 1728, proved 1736, bequeaths lands received 
from his father William to two sons Zebulon and Peter, but he evi- 
dently had a third son Joshua who settled on "Hallock's" now 
•■Old Neck" in Moriches. William Hallock now 78, who lived 
near Moriches with his father Jonathan son of Zebulon as below, 
states that his father always spoke of David son of Joshua as his 
tirst cousin, and of their fathers Zebulon and Joshua as brothers and 
sons of William of Southold, and that Peter had no children. No 
record is found of William jun., named in the census of 1698. 

* The evidence is unquestionable of the religious character of most of the 
earlier ancestry. It appears in the will of A\ illiara who died 1684. Dea. Ja- 
bez when 100 years old read " one book, his large print Bible," and traced his 
conversion to the influence of a pious ancestry. Of Noah bom 1696, his son 
William says; " He seemed to have great understanding of the .Scriptures, 
and talked much of the latter day glory. He and his wife were strict ob 
servers of the Sabbath. When there was no preaching, he often held social 
worship in his own house. He has left this one word, given me after I had 
mounted my horse to spend the day with friends, and which I should be glad 
to have transmitted to the latest generation : ' JIy sox, ke.he«ber there is a loxg 
ETERMTT.'" This William (father of Jeremiah and Moses) moved from 
Kocky Point to Fire Place." (Southhaven.) in Brookhaven, half a mile 
south of " Carman's,' at the "old dock" near the entrance of the river 
into the great South bay of the island. Here investing most of his property 
in a coasting vessel, he went out in her, when she was run into by the Brit- 
ish ship " Snow," and sunk ; his life being saved by springing aboard the 
ship. This disaster occasioned his removal to Goshen, Mass. His married 
daughters were Mrs. Alpheus Parse, Mrs. Dan Case, Mrs. Stephen Hosford, 
Mrs. Rev. Joel Chapin, Mrs. Daniel Perkins, and Mrs. Rev. Josiah Hayden, 
who died at Haydenville, Mass.. Sept. 11, 1862, aged 93. mother of Hon. Joel 
Hayden. 



39G 



LIFE OF HALLOCK. 



I. Zebulon Hallock lived near Southold village and had sons John, 
Zebulon 2d, Israel, Jonathan, and three, William, Nathan and Samuel 
who had no children, Jonathan being the youngest of seven sons. 
[Nathan Hallock died 1756 just after his marriage. In 1763 Mary 
Hallock wills to son Samuel.] 

JouN, at Ciitchoguc, died aged 84, had two sons John 2d and 
Luther. John 2d had three sons: John S. father of John S. Jun. ; 
William ; and Erastus of Cutchogue, father of Silas of Mattituck 
and Samuel P. of Brooklyn. Luther had sons Luther and Alanson. 

Zebulon 2d, born 1727, settled in Minisink now Greenville 
Orange co. N. Y. died 1814 aged 87, had four sons: Zebulon 3rf, Henry, 
Thomas W., and Joseph. Zebulon 3d, died Greenville 1825 aged 58, 
was father of Zebulon 4th who died aged 22 and father and son were 
laid in one grave ; of Daniel Booth Hallock, Waverly, N. Y., and of 
Ruth mother of Rev. Hallock Armstrong of Monroeton, Pa. Henry, 
born 1770, settled in Oneida co. N. Y. Thomas W., Lumberland, 
Sullivan co. born Dec. 31, 1781, father of Jesse of Greenville, Will- 
iam, Hosea, Andrew J., Joseph, Thomas V., Daniel V., and Oliver. 
Joseph, Greenville, died 1822 aged 38, father of Henry ; Wells, near 
South Eaton, Wyoming co.. Pa. ; Zebulon and Daniel. 

Israel, died at Ridgebury in Minisink now Wawayanda, Orange 
CO. N. Y. aged 90, had seven sons: William, Richard, Nathan, Israel 
2d, Samuel, Elisha, Parker. 

William, at Worcester, Otsego co. N. Y., died 1821 aged 65, had 
eight sons: William,, died 1862 aged 78, father of Joseph P. Esq. 
and Wm. H. of Greenville, Greene co. ; Levi G., and James M. of 
Durham ; Daniel, Maryland, Otsego co., father of Rev. William M. 
of Summit, Schoharie co. ; Stephen, father of Alpheus, William, Ste- 
phen, Nicholas, and Robert ; Linus died in New York, father of 
William of Harrisburg, Pa. , Daniel L. of New York, and John C. ; 
Bea. Richard father of Nathan ; Benton, Greenville, Greene co. father 
of Lucius Edgar, Springfield, Mass., and Lewis Benton, Durham; 
Samuel, Crawford co. Pa. ; and David, Unadilla, N. Y., father of 
Thomas and Charles. 

Ricltard, son of Israel, died in Greenville, Orange co. 1828 aged 
70, fiither of Luther who died 1860 aged 75; Eli and Calvin, Lu- 
zerne Co. Pa. ; Zebulon, judge. Pope co. 111. ; and Parker and Rich- 
ard of Greenville. Nathan settled west of Rochester N. Y., had 
sons Dennis, Olam, Hoadley, Israel, and James. 

Israel 2d died Dec. 10, 1847, aged 80, had six sons : Joseph, Na- 
than, Dr. Harvey, Gabriel, Oliver B., and Dr. Wm. A. Joseph, died 
Farm Ridge, Lasalle co. 111. Dec. 10, 1847, aged 80, had two sons : 
Henry father of David, Andrew, James and Willie; and Wells of 



ANCESTRY. 



397 



South Eaton, Wyoming co. Pa. who died Jan. 18C5 aged 50, father 
of Martin, Horace, Benj. F., Austin, and John L. Natkan was father 
of James B. P. M. Middletown, Orange co. and Harvey of Wiscon- 
sin. Dr. Ilarvey of Newton N. J. father of Israel L. Gabriel, Mount 
Hope Orange co. father of Alfred and John. Oliver B. Michigan. 
Dr. William A. Pittsburgh, Pa. father of William E and Harvey T. 

Samuel near Pome N. Y. father of Parker manufacturer, Hard- 
ing P. M. Hampton, N. Y., and Hosea. EUsha, Luzerne co. Pa. 
died Nov. 10, 1844 aged 76, whose son Ira, Orange P. 0. Luzerne 
CO., born Sept. 23, 1797 is father of Elisha W. and Nathan Parker. 
Parker died 1848 Norwich, Chenango co. N. Y. 

Jonathan, son of Zebulon, elder in the church now Manorville, 
L. I., who died about 1824 aged 86, lived near Manorville at Cherry 
Valley, where are the graves of himself and his sons Reeves and 
Jonathan, and where his son William aged 78 now lives. He had 
four sons: Reeves, Canoe Place, died Oct. 9, 1859 aged 92 father of 
Jonah of Speonk and Luther ; Jonathan of Speonk father of Zebulon 
who died aged 58 ; William, born April 25, 1786, father of Lewis 
Parker ; and Lewis lost at sea. 

II. Joshua, son of William who died 1736, owned and lived on 
" Hallock's Neck" of 500 acres, now "Old Neck," in Moriches, 
had three sons: David of Moriches, and Jonathan and Joshua who 
moved with their father to Sugar Loaf, Orange co. N. Y. 

David of Moriches, born 1743, died April 22, 1812, aged 69, and 
his son John, born April 2, 1803, is father of David Hallock P. M. 
Bridgehampton, and James, Charles, Edmund F., NicoU T., and 
Mrs. Adelaide Hallock Van Houten of Moriches. 

Dea. Jonathan Hallock settled in Chester (valley) then Monroe, 
Orange co. N. Y., was deacon and elder in Chester till his death 
March 16, 1816, aged 66, and had six sons: Joshua who died in the 
war of 1812 ; Jonathan died about 1833 ; John D. born 1790, settled 
at East Bethany near Ratavia, N. Y.; Augustus Van Courtlandl, Cli- 
max Prairie, Mich. , horn 1793, father of Thomas J. ; William J. born 
1798, Haverstraw, N. Y. father of John of Warwick and Martin ; 
and James J. Esq. at Sugar Loaf, Orange co. who died 1854 aged 59, 
father of Elbert, Daniel, William, P. M. at Sugar Loaf, James, 
George at Churchville, Monroe co. N. Y. and John captain in U. S. 
army. 

Joshua, son of Joshua of Moriches, settled at Sugar Loaf, Orange 
CO. N. Y., and moved to Romulus, Seneca co. where, in 1805, he 
deeded lands to four sons, David, Joshua jun., Jonathan, and Caleb. 
David, died Greenwood, Steuben co. July 10, 1846 aged over 70, 
had sons Simpson, Samuel, Ira, Jerome, and Oliver. Joshua jun. 



398 



LIFE OF HALLOCK. 



liad sons Nathaniel, Joel, Oliver, Jesse, Caleb. Oliver died July 
"20, 1863 aged 63, father of Halsey P. of Romulv.s, and Lewis. Jon- 
athan, died Tyrone, Steuben co. March 5, 1845 aged 58, had sons 
Lewis, Charles, Silas, Abel, Benjamin, Edwin, Eli, George, and Joel. 
Caleb settled in Aurora, Erie co. N. Y. 

IV. JOHN HALLOCK' S DESCENDANTS. 
The Westbury Monthly Meeting of Friends record the death of 
John Hallock, grandson of Peter of 1640, and that of his wife Abi- 
gail at Setauket in Brookhaven in 1737, "both very ancient and 
in unity with Friends." Deeds at Riverhead name four of his 
sons, John second, Peier, Benjamin, and William, who all settled near 
him in Setauket, as did also his son Jonathan whose children and 
William's are known to have been cousins. A deed in 1715 from 
William to his son William is now held by their descendant Ed- 
mund P. Hallock. The neat dwellings of John Hallock first and 
second still remain (1863) in Setauket, where they were a committee 
on a Friends' Monthly Meeting held for more than a century, but 
now discontinued. 

I. John Hallock second, Friends' preacher, by his will 1765, 
aged near 86, had three sons, John third, Edward, Samuel. 

John third, North Castle, Westchester co. died 1757 aged 47, 
wills to sous John, James, Daniel, Samuel. John fourth, of Somers, 
had sons John, preacher, who died 1850, and Robert. John fifth 
had sons John, (the sixth eldest son John in succession,) James C. 
New York, Allen C. Evansville, Ind., Eichard B. Princeton, Ind., 
Aaron B. Ccntreville, 111., father of William Penn, Mt. Carmel, 111. 

Robert, of Somers, had six sons: James father of Halsted; Jesse, 
of Katonah, Westchester co. ; John, of Yorktown, father of Henry 
and Edmund ; Robert R. father of Elbert of New York and William 
S. ; Edmund, of Somers ; Aaron, of Yorktown, father of John R. and 
Oscar. 

Daniel, son of John third, died at Monroe, Orange co., 1830, had 
six sons: Jonathan, Daniel, Samuel, Martin, Richard, and Josiah 11. 
Jotiathan, Stroudsburg, Pa. was father of William L., James, Sam- 
uel, and John. Daniel was father of Jesse R. of Brooklyn, who has 
sons Nathaniel P., Daniel W., and William W. Samuel was father 
of Robert L. and Samuel, Wisconsin. Martin, died Highland Mills, 
Orange co. N. Y. April 13, 1847 aged 65, had six sons: Allen C. 
father of James, Edward and Henry ; Thomas B. father of William 
H., Alanson, Thomas and Obed; Charles father of Martin L., John 
and Herbert ; James M. who has no son ; William B. of Caroline, 
Tompkins co. N. Y. father of James H., Arthur and William J. ; 



ANCESTRY. 



399 



and John, of Ithaca N. Y. father of John H. and William M. 
Richard was father of Daniel Esq. of Cincinnati. Josiah II. father 
of Stephen, Daniel and Ebenezer B. 

Edward Ilallock, Friends' Preacher, born April 8, 1717, son of 
John second, settled about 17t)2 in Marlborough now Milton, Ulster 
CO., eight miles above Kewburgh, died Nov. 1S09 aged 92, had two 
8ons, Edward jun. and James, and nine married daughters, most of 
whom had large families and lived to a great age, live having met 
in Milton when over eighty. Edward Jun., died at Milton July 1850 
aged 96, had four sons: Edward and Jonas who had no children; 
Silas; and Epenetus of Constantia N. Y., father of David, Victor, 
and Edward. 

James, preacher, died April 1820 aged 58, had six sons: Nicholas, 
Townsend, Nehemiah, William, Edward, and Nathaniel. Nicholas was 
father of Dr. Robert T. of New I'ork, James and Nehemiah of Utica, 
and Samuel T., Riceville, Pa. William's sons James, John, and 
William settled in Mendon, N. Y. Edward was father of Valentine 
H. and Nicholas of Queens, L. I., and Isaac S. of Milton. Nathaniel 
father of Thomas B. of New Y'ork. To Nathaniel his grandfather 
Edward gave many of the above facts, tracing all the Hallocks he 
knew of to one ancestor. At Milton lie the bodies of three grand- 
sons of James: Capt. Nathaniel Hallock Mann, Edward Hallock 
Ketcham, and John T. Ketcham, who bravely fell in 1863 and 1864 
at Front Royal, Richmond and Gettysburg. 

Samuel who purchased 1,000 acres adjoining his brother Edward, 
wills, 1783, to sons Elijah, John, Foster, James, and daughter Sarah 
Y. of New Y'ork. Foster's sons were Alexander father of Henry 
and Joseph of Catskill ; and George of Milton. 

n. Petkr Hallock, son of John first, born Setanket L. I. 1689, 
moved to "Nine Partners" Dutchess co. now Washington Hollow 
and vicinity near Poughkeepsie about 1750, died July 20, 1772 
aged 83, had six sons, Peter jun., Moses, Thomas, Joshua, John, Zeh- 
ulon. 

Peter Hallock jiniou's daughter Anna manicd Richard Keese 
original proprietor of Keeseville, N. Y., and a family record of An- 
derson Keese obtained b}' this Peter's great-grandson Isaac Hallock 
Allen of New York, shows that he had four sons, Isaac, Israel, Peter 
third, and Joshua. Isaac was bom in Brookhaven, 1753, was several 
years at Nine Partners and in Nantucket, and died at Hyde Park. 
N. Y. 1850, aged 97. His wife was an esteemed Friends' preacher, 
and their son Israel was father of the poet Barnabas Hallock of 
Brooklyn. Israel, brother of Isaac, settled at Guilford, Conn., and 
was father of the poet Fitz Greene Halleck of New York. 



400 



LIFE OF HALLOCK. 



Peter third, who married Mary sister of Richard Keese, and died 
in Peru near Keeseville 1846 nged 82, had sons Joshua, John Keeie, 
Isaac, George, and Joseph A. Joshua was father of Peter at Peru, and 
Fitz Greene at Keeseville ; Rev. John Keese Hallock, Jefferson, Por- 
tage CO. Ohio, of the Erie Conference, father of Elisha Arnold of 
Fayette, Iowa ; Isaac W. of Conneautville, Pa. ; and John Keese 
jun. Esq. Isaac, judge, Oakfield, Iowa, father of Richard army sur- 
geon at St. Louis, Addison Esq. , Isaac, and Melinna. George Esq. 
of Peru, N. Y., father of George P., and Charles H. Rev. Joseph 
Addison at Palatine, Cook co. , III. father of Addison. 

Joshua, son of Peter junior, died Bath, Steuben co., N. Y. 1854, 
aged 84, father of John who died at Lockport 1837, Benjamin in 
Missouri. Isaac at Clean, N. Y., and George W., banker at Bath. 

Moses, son of Peter first, had five sons: Isaiah, Peter, Obadiah, and 
Edward and Isaac who had no sons. Isaiah settled in Westerlo, 
Albany co. N. Y. had five sons: Isaac, Amos, Stephen, Moses, and 
Iieul>en. Isaac was father of Murray at Dormansville P. 0. in Wester- 
lo, of James at Deposit, Delaware co., and of Edward at Med way in 
New Baltimore, Greene co., Anws in Queensbury, Washington co. ; 
Stephen in Westerlo ; Moses and Reuben at the west. 

Peter, son of Moses, settled in Westerlo, had five sons, Morris of 
Coxsackie father of Mrs. Mary Jane Houghtaling ; William ; John 
in Berne, Albany co. father of William and Josiah ; Peter Jun. of 
Coxsackie ; and Doughty. 

Obadiah settled in Medway in New Baltimore, Greene co. N. Y., 
had two sons, Joshua father of Obadiah S. and Morris C. ; and Isa- 
iah father of James, Edward and Lester. 

Thomas, son of Peter first, Washington Hollow, died about 1806 
aged about 70, (as stated by his granddaughter Mrs. Maria William- 
son of Poughkeepsie,) had three sons, Thomas jun., Arms, and Arthur. 
Thomas jun. settled and died in Coeyman's Patent, N. Y. Arthur, 
sheriff at Athens, Greene co. N, Y. had sons Thomas and Smith. 

Amos, died at Washington Hollow 1813, aged GO, had one son 
James Cooley Hallock, who died 1849 aged 67, was some time in 
Elizabethtown, Canada ; in 1832 was an officer in the U. S. Army at 
Fort Armstrong, Rock Island, and went up the Mississippi in the 
first steamer that reached St. Paul. His only son Rev. John Clark 
Hallock, settled in 1838 at Davenport, Iowa, and died near Mount 
Vernon, Iowa, Oct. 7, 1861, aged 51. He had six sons: William 
S. Hallock Esq. St. Louis, Mo. ; Samuel W. ; Henry S. ; Emmet 
G. ; John C. jun. and Charles of Mount Vernon, Iowa, the first 
three of whom bravely fought and suffered in our contest for the 
national life. 



ANCESTRY. 



401 



Joshua, son of Peter first, died July 24, 1804 aged 63, had two 
sons: George and Peter. George, born 1776 died Jan. 26, 1862 aged 
85, had four sons: James II., Washington, Dutchess co. father of 
Lewis IT., Hibernia P. 0. Dutchess eo., Alfred, George P., Jersey 
City, and Egbert F. ; Joshua G., Montgomery, Orange co. born 1803 
father of William H. ; Thoims W., Coles co. 111. father of George 
and James ; and William II. Peter, son of Joshua, settled in Wyo- 
ming, Luzerne co. Pa. about 1806, died about 1829 father of Israel, 
James, and Peter. 

John, son of Peter first, was father of Peter and Zebulon. Peter 
settled in West N. Y. Zebulon, died at Jledway, Greene co. Aug. 
29, 1853 aged 71, bad two sons: Joseph Zebulon of Medway father 
of Stephen P. David, Andrew, Leander W. and Charlie D. ; and 
Rev. Leander of Milton, Rock co. Wis. 

Zebulon, son of Peter^first, was father of Tliomas who died in 
Medway, April 23, 1841 aged 78, and had two sons: Matthew father 
of Stephen, Edwin and Daniel B. ; and Ezra of Saratoga co. N. Y. 

m. Benjamin, son of John first, had two sons: Benjamin jun., 
and Stephen. Benjamin jun. born Setauket, Sept. 13, 1729 ; was 
married Aug. 7, 1755 to Phebe Prindle of the Congi-egational con- 
nection in Sherman, Conn, who died 1831 aged 91; settled near 
Gaylordsville in New Milford, Conn., and died Nov. 18, 1796 aged 
67, having eight sons: Wtlliam, Daniel, Benjamin, Jesse, Benajah, 
Luke, Joseph Denton, Amos. William died 1842 aged 86 father of 
William of Palmyra, Portage co, Ohio ; Benjamin ; Jehiel of Frank- 
lin, N. Y. ; Russell. William of Palm}Ta, died 1847 aged 64 had 
six sons: William R. of Rootstown, Portage co. father of Gibbs, 
Joel C, Irving W., Elijah S. ; Miron, of Bryan, Williams co. Ohio ; 
Elijah h. of Milton, Mahoming co. Ohio ; Homes W. ; Orange W. ; 
and Russell C. of Newton, Trumbull co. Ohio. Daniel, died 1810 
aged 52, had five sons: William; Benjamin, died Oneonta, Otsego 
CO. N. Y., father of David L. of Westbury, Cayuga co. N. Y., and 
John of Plymouth, Pa. ; David, died Rochester, N. Y. 1860, aged 67, 
had two sons, Erasmus D. father of Edward D. , and Edwin R. father 
of Charles W.; Daniel, of Kent, Conn. ; Jesse, ofWarren, Conn. Ben- 
jamin died 1837 aged 77 father of Daniel, Deerfield, Tioga co. Pa. ; 
Adolphus ; Ervin, Stillwater, N. Y. ; Almon died Gaylordsville, Aug. 
29, 1864 aged 60; Charles, Farm Ridge, 111. Jesse died Jan. 13, 
1837 aged 73 father of Jesse H. and of Moses G.. Farm Ridge, 111. 
Benajah, Cattaraugus co. N. Y. died 1837 aged 72 father of Powell, 
Illinois, and Abel, Oakfield, Mich. Luke, Kent, Conn, died 1843 aged 
69 father of Gerardus; Curtis, Litchfield, Conn.; Elmore and Raph- 
ael, Kent, Conn. Josq)h Denton died 1863 aged 84 father of Nel- 



402 



LIFE OF HALLOCK. 



son ; Homer ; Harvey ; John, La Grange, Dutchess co., N. Y. Amos 
died 1856 aged 74 father of Amos, Washington, Conn. 

Stephen, son of Benjamin first, married a Chamherlin in Rich- 
mond, Mass., in 1792 purchased the present residence of his" relative 
Rufus Stevens Esq., in Richmond Vt. on the Onion river, between 
mounts Mansfield and Camel's Hump, and died Oct. 31, 1802 
aged 66, as by his gravestone. He had six sons: Stephen jun. , Cm- 
tent Chamherlin, Joseph, John, Isaac, Amos, all of wliom settled and 
had families in Richmond Vt. Stephen jun., father of Denton, An- 
son, Stephen third, Benajah, Heman and Samuel, died at Sandusky 
Plains, Ohio. Content C. father of Chamherlin and Rufus, died in 
Western New York. Joseph, father of Rev. Edward .Joseph of Cas- 
tleton Vt. and Philander of Madrid St. Lawrence co. N. Y., died 
in Madrid 1834 aged 62. John, father of Theron, Calvin, Rufus, 
and Abraham, died in Western New York. Isaac, father of Ansel, 
Isaac jun., Joseph, and Stephen, died in Middlesex, Vt. Amos, fa- 
ther of Harmon, Almond, and Alfred of Grand Blanc, Genesee co. 
Mich. 

IV. Jonathan, son of John first, wills, 1768, to sons Jonathan, 
Gershom, and Daniel ; and Jonathan 2d, 1794, wills to his sons 
Jonathan, and David father of Jonas. 

V. William, Brookhaven (Stony Brook near Setauket) 6on of 
John first, died 1765, wills to his wife Dinah, sons Jesse, Williatn, 
Richard born 1724, David, and four daughters. 

Jesse, born about 1715, in 1762 took certificate to "The Purchase ' ' 
(Harrison) monthly meeting, Westchester county, and in 1705 pur- 
chased lands in Greenwich, Conn. (Horse Neck,) and the same year 
married Phebe Burling of East Chester. In 1777 he purchased at 
what is now Hallock's Mills P. 0. in Yorktown between Peekskill 
imd Somcrs, his house still remaining, where he died, will proved 
Feb. 20, 1790. His two daughters Mary and Sarah mtirried Robert 
Underhill owner of Croton Point, and Amos Dickinson. His only 
son Jesse jun., born in Greenwich 1770, died in Somers near the 
mills, 1853, aged 83, and had six sons : Reuben of New York, Will- 
iam, Jesse, Wright, James B. who all settled in the vicinity of the 
mills, and Edmund P. of Peekskill ; Jane, one of his five daughters, 
married David Hallock of Somers. 

William, born about 1722, lived many years in Stony Brook, but 
was in Greenwich during most of the Revolutionary war, in which 
he suffered much in the command of picket-boats on the Sound, and 
died about 1782. His wife was Sarah Saxton of Huntington L. I., 
of the Episcopal connection, whose sister Harriet married Zephaniah 
Piatt whose sons surveyed and settled Plattsburg, N. Y. After Mr. 



ANCESTRY. 



403 



Hallock's death she lived with her youngest daughter Anne (Mrs. 
Lodowick Hackstaflf) in Sing Sing and Xew York, and was buried 
in St. Paul s churchyard Broadway, 1806, aged 83. Mrs. Hackstaflf 
died in Brooklyn Aug. 1841, aged 74. Elizabeth, the eldest of 
William's twelve children, born Sept. 16, 1750, died 1846 aged 96, 
was mother of Hallock Bromley father of Isaac W. R. Bromley, 
Esq. of New York. Three of William's five sons were George an en- 
terprising ship-builder in Stony Brook, and father of Joseph, George 
2d, Benjamin, Charles D., Erasmus, and Nathaniel; William, jun., 
five years a volunteer in the war of the Revolution and one year 
prisoner in the old Sugar-house, New York, father of Zephaniah 
and Israel of Derby and Wm. W. of Brooklyn, ship-builders; and 
Zephaniah PlaU Hallock who died in New York 1831 aged 66, father 
of Charles S. , New York ; of Charlotte W. of Tarry town ; and 
grandfather of John Youngs Hallock merchant in San Francisco. 

Richard, born May 13, 1724, married Sarah Ludlam bom July 
10, 1737, moved from Stony Brook to "Hallock's Mills" about 
1784, purchased of his brother Jesse half the mills and land adja- 
cent, and died Feb. 12, 1821, aged 97. Of his three sons and eight 
daughters, Lknry, bom Nov. 11, 1755, died Aug. 6, 1824, was father 
of Charles trustee of Methodist church Stony Brook ; of William, 
Norwalk, Conn, who died Oct. 1860 aged 84, father of William W.; 
of Henry 2d born April 12, 1784 ; of Richard of Port Jefferson born 
Feb. 18, 1800, and of Mrs. Sarah H. Hulse of Brooklyn born Oct. 
27, 1790. Richard 2d, born July 17, 1770, died Aug. 17, 1853, o^vned 
the mills, and had six sons: Henry, Stephen, David of Somers, 
Isaac, George and Joseph T. at the mills. Richard first's daughter 
Susanna manied Benj. Hodgden of Fairfield, Conn, and moved to 
Ohio ; and his daughters Dinah and Deborah married David Hallock 
son of Jonathan of Setauket, and George Davis of Stony Brook. 

David was with his brothers in Greenwich and at the mills and 
settled at Ferrisburgh, Vt. : sons Richard of Collins, Erie co. N. Y. 
and Edward and Isaac who settled in Peru, near Keeseville, N. Y. 

WILLIAM A. HALLOCK,* 

Senior Sec. Amer. Tract Society 
Tract Hoase, 150 Nassau-street, New York, August, 1865. 

* Having had the acquaintance of most of those whose testimony is here 
given, examined most of the wills deeds and documents, visited the principal 
localities ancient residences and graves, and carefully weighed the evidence 
in every case, I regard the main statements above as unquestionably relia- 
ble. Wm. A. U . , b. 1794, son of Rev. Moses Hallock. 



404 



LIFE OF HALLOCK. 




Or-; ci n 



