saro. 210. 

THE 

HISTOID? 

OP 

JONATHAN BROWN, 

THE B^RGEM^JV. 

BT THE LATE REV. DR. CALAMY, OF LONDON. 




PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMEIIICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

ASD SOU) AT THEin DKPOSlTOnY, NO. Ui NASSAl'-STRKKT, «KAR 

THK CITY-HALL, NEW-YOHK ; AA'O BY AOENTS OF THE 

.SOCIETY, ITS BRANCHES, AND. AUXILIARIES, IN 

THE PRINCIPAL CITIES A«D TOWNS 

l.S THE U.NITKD STATi;S. 



£irO. 210. 

THE 

niSTOB.7 

OF 

JONATHAN BROWN, 

TJIE B^RGEMAJS: 



BY THE LATE REV. DR. CXLAMY, OF L0SD05. 




PUBLISHED BY THE 

a:\ierican tract , society, 

AND SOLD AT THEIR ISEPOSITORY, NO. :■» N ASSAl'-STRKET, »KAR 

THE CITY-HALL, NEW- YORK ; AKD BY AUE»TS OF THS 

fOCIETY, ITS BRANCHES, AND. AUXILIARIES, IN 

THE PRIXCIVaL cities AKD TOWNS 

IN THE UNITED STATES. 



NO. 210. 



HISTORY 



JOlVATHASr B]ROWW, 

THE BARGEMAN. 

BY THE I.ATE REV. DB. CAI^AMY, OF LONDON. 




Dr. Calamt, iu his " Historical Account of his own Life 
and Times," a manuscript, has the following narrative : 

It was my usual custom, from the time of my settlement 
in the congregation at Westminster, on the Lord's day be- 
fore every administration of the sacrament, to give notice 
of my intention to administer that ordinance, and also to 
invite such as were desirous to discourse with me about 
tX)ming to that ordinance, to be with me at my own house, 
On the Thursday evening before. Having at a certain time 
done so, (the year I cannot remember,) when 1 came 
home on that Thursday on which I expected company in 
the evening, I found several waiting for me. Among the 
•rest, there was a little old man, who, upon my entering 
the room, cried out with an audible voice, " Sir, here's 
JuTiathan Broum^ that can neitlier \wite nor read, that, a*^ 



2 HISTORY OF JONATHAN BROWN. [170 

cording to your invitation on Sunday last, is come to see 
you and hear what you have to say to him." I looked 
ahout, and knew none of the others any more than I did 
Lim ; and, perceiving he was much the oldest person in 
the company, told him, that I no more invited him than 
others ; but that, now he was come, if I could be of any 
use to him, I should rejoice in it. "Nay, but. Master," 
said he, " how can you say you did not invite mt ? for 
when you spoke, you looked me full in the face, which, to 
me, seemed all one as if you had said, Joiaathau Brown, 
do you come " I told him, thai I did not know there was 
any such person in being as Jonathan Brown, till now ; 
nor did I look at him, or invite him, any more than others ; 
but that if I could do him any service in the best respects, 
it would be a real pleasure to me, and I should be thank- 
ful to God and his providence for giving me the opportu- 
nity. He told me he was in hopes I both could and would 
do him the greatest service in the world, by directing and 

■ assisting him to steer right, in his way to heaven, which 
was the thing he most earnestly desired, 

" I, Sir," said he, " am well known, and there are few, 
if any, that do know me, but will tell you, Jonathan Brown 
is as honest a man as any in the parish. But I find this 
won't do;- 1 want something further, and I beg your ad- 
vice upon it: and that you may the better know how to 
suit your advice to my case, I have such a story to tell you 
of myself, as I dare say you never heard since you were 
born. But then. Sir," said he, " I must make this bargain 
with you, that you don't interrupt me, but let me go on my 

■ own way, till I come to the end; for if you put me out, I 
shan't know how to go on where I left off, but must begin 
agam." 

I could not but take notice of the honest simplicity of 
the poor man, and the earnestness of his spirit, and ob- 
served several signs of great concern. I therefore deter- 
mined to let him take his own way, and to endeavour to 
make such remarks on what he said, as might be a foun- 
dation whereon to bottom some advice, that, with the 
blessing of God, might do him good. I then separated him 
from the rest of the company, took him into another room, 
and told him he might tell me his whole story, and I would 
not interrupt him ; after which^ I said, I would ask him a 



171] HISTORY OP JONATHAN BROWN. 3 

tew questions, and then give him the best advice I was 
able. In this he acquiesced. 

He then told me, that he had no notion of either his 
father or mother, but was put out to nurse by he knew not 
whom, while he was very young; that his nurse was kind 
to him, and put him, when he was about six or seven years 
of age, to a barge-master, and so he was bred up in one of 
the barges that plied between VVare and London. That 
while he was a cliil i, he was employed in such little ser- 
vices as he was capable of; and as he grew up, approving 
himself diligent aud faithful, he svas oommended a;id trust- 
ed, and wanted neither for meat, drink, or clothes; and 
with his barge-master he continued till he was twenty-five 
years of age. He toid me that, from his childhood, he was 
just to every body, and wronged no one. He hated lying, 
and spoke what was true, according to the best of his 
knowledge; and found something within hiiu often telling 
him, that such ill things as he heard and saw from day to 
da> were to )e avoided. His master was kind to him, and 
much favoured him, though tiis feUow-servauts and others 
seemed to bear an ill will to him, because he would not 
speak and act as they did. But, after all, he was uneasy, 
and thought he wanted something farther; though, through 
the ignorance in which he had been trained up, he could 
not tell what that should be. He added, ^hat in all this 
time he had not any notion of worship due to the great 
God, nor had he ever been present at, or so much as heard 
of any thing of th« kiiid ; nor ever so much as heard who 
or what Christ was, or observed the name of God men- 
tioned by any that were about him, but in their oaths and 
curses : he had no knowledge of any difference between 
one day and another, or indeed between good and evil of 
any sort, but what he had from some inward stirrings in 
his own breast, which he could not account for. And upon 
mentioning this, I observed the tears running down his 
cheeks. He said, that upon the whole he grew so uneasy, 
that he could not be satisfied to continue with his master 
any longer, but resolved to go away and shift for himself 
in the wide world; and whom should he go to but to his 
old nurse, who was yet living. 

His nurse blamed him for leaving his master, when he 
had no friend to betake himself to for support, and would 



4 HISTORY OF JONATHAN BROWN. [172 

have persuaded him to return ; but he told her he couhl 
not live such a life any longer; and whatever became of 
him, he w^as fully resolved no more to return to it. And 
the great question then was, what he must do for a sub- 
sistence, as to which it was requisite he should be thought- 
ful, seeing the little money he had of bis own would soon 
be gone. She at length advised him to go to London, and 
apply to a cousin he had, that was a pipe-maker, who lived, 
I think, ii^ Wapping : this was the course upon which he 
letermined. 

Applying to this cousin, and telling him his case, he re- 
ceived him kindly, and told him he would assist him as far 
as he was able. And, one Lord's day morning, whilst he 
was there, he told me he was walking about the streets to 
make his remarks, without knowing where to go, or having 
any thing to do ; and he had wandered as far as Temple 
Bar, and walking without the gate he observed a number 
of people go in at a certain place ; and them he followed, 
reckoning they were going to see some sight. When he 
came in, he said, he saw a great many people in seats, and 
one in black, mounted high above all the rest, at which he 
was surprised. He heard the man in black talking with 
great earnestness to the people present, aud telling them 
that they had souls as well as bodies, and that there was 
another life after this ; and that all such as did not take 
Care to serve and please God, while they were in this life, 
would be miserable in the other life, and that for ever. He 
added, that he told them also of one Jesus Christ, of whom 
he had never heard any thing distinctly before, who was so 
exceedingly kind as to come from heaven to earth, to show 
us the way from earth to heaven ; and that it was only by 
his means, that any could get the favour of God, so as to 
be happy in that other life. And the poor man added, that 
he was so affected with these things, that, before he stirred, 
he took up a fixed resolution, that, for the time to come, 
he would never live any where but where he might hear 
of this Jesus Christ; that so he might become acquainted 
with him, in order to his being made happy, and having 
his soul saved by his means. Going home, he told me, he 
gave his cousin an account, with a great deal of joy, of 
what he had heard of Jesus Christ, and the resolution he 
had taken up ; and that he found his cousin had been ac- 



l73] HISTORY OF JONATHAN BROWN. 5 

nuainted with him long before, and that what he mentioned 
was no news at all to him. He therefore blamed his cou- 
sin, that he had never said any thing to him of Jesus Christ j 
but he told him the only reason was, that he thought he 
had heard about him before, as well as himself; and that, 
now, if he chose, he might hear of him every Sabbath; at 
which he was exceedingly pleased. 

At length the barge-master, who was concerned at the 
loss of his servant, after making great inquiry after him, 
found him with his cousin, the pipe-maker, and asked him 
what made him go away from him. Jonathan told him, 
that he had reason enough for it, as he would soon let him 
know. " But, Master," said Jonatuan, " can you charge 
me with doing you any wrong ?" " No," said the master^ 
" thou never wrongedst me, Jonathan, as ever I knew, of 
a farthing, but hast been the most honest and faithful ser- 
vant that I ever had." " I am glad to hear that," said 
Jonathan, " though you must have greatly injured me to 
have said I wronged you ; for I am sure I brought away 
nothing but what was my own." " Well, Jonathan," said 
the master, " thou must come and live with me again, for 
I cannot do without thee." " Have a care of tliat. Mas- 
ter," said Jonathan ; " I can assure you I shall not easily 
be brought to that." "Why, Jonathan," said the uaster, 
"if thou wantest more wages, I'll freely give thee more; 
I'll give thee what shall satisfy and content thee." " No, 
Master," said Jonathan, " no wages will tempt me." 
" Well, Jonathan," said the master, " what dost thou 
think my barge may be worth .?" " I can't well telJ, Mas- 
ter," said Jonathan, " I don't know but, take her hulk and 
tackle altogether, she may be worth four score pounds." 
" Well," said the master, " if thou'lt come and live with 
me, and be as faithful a servant to me as before, a quarter 
part of her shall be thine own." " No, Master," said Jo- 
nathan, " no offer you can make me will tempt me to be 
any more your servant." The master was very desirous to 
know the reason. Upon which Jonathan told him, that, 
though he could not say he wanted for any thing necessary , 
as to his body, while he was in his service, yet that his 
soul, which was his better part, had been wholly neglect- 
ed : he had been bred up like a mere brute, without know- 
i!ng any thing of the worship of God, or hearing any thing; 



O HISTORY OF JONATHAN BROWN, [1'74 

of Jesus Christ, by whom alone, he now understood, he 
could be saved and made happy. And that he had taken 
up a fixed resolution to live no where, for the time to come, 
but where he might have an opportunity of getting ac- 
quainted with Jesus Christ, whom he declared he esteemed 
and valued as his best friend. The master endeavoured to 
divert Jonathan from such thoughts as these, which he did 
not at all relish ; but could not move him ; and finding him 
fully resolved, and being unable to oblige him to comply 
with his own choice, left him at length to take his own 
way. 

When this shock was over, Jonathan, being sensible it 
was not fit he should live upon his cousin, without doing 
something to get his bread, offered himself to him to serve 
him as an apprentice seven years, in order to the learning 
of his trade, and he accepted of him in the capacity of a 
servant, and he served him faithfully ; and, according to 
his resolution, attended divine worship every Lord's day, 
in order to his hearing more of Jesus Christ. But, when 
his time was expired, not liking that business, he turaed 
his thoughts to the water, upon which he had been bred 
up, and first laboured in lighters and barges as a servant 
to others, living thriftily, and saving all he could; and 
Providence favouring him, he at length got, first a smaller 
vessel, and then a larger one, of his own, till he came and 
settled at Westminster, where he had an established repu- 
tation as an honest man, and-was worth money. From the 
time of his 'settling there, he told me he was a constant 
hearer of my predecessor, Mr. Allsop, as he was also of 
me upon my succeeding him; though I had never heard 
any thing of him till the time of his coming to me upon 
the occasion forementioned. 4 

When he thus came to me he was turned of three score ; 
and I began with asking him, if he knew that he was a 
sinner. He answered, that he did ; but that he hoped a 
merciful God would forgive him all that was amiss. But 
proceeding to enter upon particulars, about man's fall from 
God, his recovery by grace, the terms of forgiveness, and 
the nature of regeneration and sanctification, I found he 
was very defective in knowledge. He told me he was not 
booL-learned, and could neither read nor write, which he 
muck lamented 5 but hoped God would make him a mer- 



175 J HISTORY OF JONATHAN BROWN. 7 

ciful allowance, in consideration of his unhappy education. 
I asked him, how it came about, that, when he, for so 
many years before, had been so pleased with hearing of 
Jesus Christ, he should have taken no more pains to get 
a distinct knowledge of him in all ihis time. He told me, 
that he had attended upon God on Lord's day duly, in 
public worship, and called upon him in private as he was 
able ; and endeavoured to learn to read, on purpose that 
lie might be able to consult his Bible, and distinctly learn 
the way to heaven ; but he found himself incapable. He 
added, that he had been forced to take abundance of pains 
to pick up a livelihood, and God had therein wonderfully 
succeeded and blessed him, and that he was ashamed he 
had not made better returns ; but that this he could say, 
that he most earnestly desired to be the Lord's, and there 
was nothing that he valued like his favour. When I asked 
him why he did not apply to some Minister in private for 
direction and advice, he told me he never had an opportu- 
nity of acquaintance with any Minister, though he had 
heard a great many preach and pray, which he hoped he 
was the better for; and added, that he was afraid of con- 
versing with Ministers alone, for fear they should despise 
him when they observed his ignorance, and discourage 
him instead of giving him assistance. 

Asking him further, whether he never thought it his 
duty to remember Christ and his dying love at his 'table, 
which was a charge he had given all his followers that 
hoped to reach heaven and happiness by his means ? He 
told me he had often been thinking of it, and more than 
ever upon his hearing me discourse in the pulpit upon that 
duty, but that he knew not how to imagine, that such a 
poor, ignorant, despicable creature as he was, could ever 
be worthy of such an honour. When I blapaed him, that, 
though he had been a hearer of my predecessor, Mr. Allsop, 
for a great many years, he yet never would venture to go 
and talk with him alone; and asked him how it came 
about that he should, after all, come to me with so much 
frankness ; he told me that he had been often thinking of 
visiting Mr. AUsop, but that fear kept him back, and he 
had been discouraged by the sternness of his look ; and 
that as for me also, he soouetimes thought that I overlooked 
Him, when he was disposed to take notice oS me with plea- 



3 HISTORY -OF JONATHAN BROWN. [176 

sure and great respect. But he said, that, on the Lord's 
day before he came to me, when I invited persons to ray 
house from the pulpit, he thought I looked very pleasantly 
npon him, as if I was desirous he should come ; and that 
thereupon he took up a resolution that nothing should pre- 
vent his coming. Asking him what he now desired of me, 
and expected from me ; he told me, that what he desired 
and expected was, that, like a faithful Minister of Christ, 
I should direct him how to bottom his hopes rightly for 
heaven, that he might go upon such grounds as not to be 
in danger of miscarrying. Asking him further, whether he 
would be willing to take pains to get what knowledge was 
necessary, and was disposed to receive and listen to in- 
struction, he burst into tears, and told me he was ready 
and willing with all his soul, and should be extremely 
thankful both to God and me ; which put me in mind of 
the man in the Gospel, that cried to our Saviour, " Lord, 
I believe ; help thou mine unbelief.^'' Mark, ix. 24. 

I could not help being much affected with this poor 
man's case, and told him, that I was very willing to take 
pains with him, to help him by degrees to such knowledge 
as was necessary, without which the heart could not be 
good, nor his state safe. He told me, I should find him a 
very dull scholar, and that he knew not how to express 
Jiimself, nor indeed to take things in, like others who had 
better (.apacities ; but he would pray God to help him, and 
earnes% desired me to pray for him. I gave him a short 
explication of the principles of religion, and put him upon 
getting one to read it over to him again and again ; and 
told him that if ue would come to me at such times as I 
mentioned to him, I would discourse things over particu- 
larly with him. That, as for expressing himself to me 
about the things of religion, he might take his own plain 
way, without crauiping himself with words and phrases ; 
and that, in my discnursing with him, I would endeavour 
to turn things several ways, so that he might take them in 
one way, if he did not in another. He went away much 
pleased, and very thankful, saying again and again, he 
hoped God would reward me. 

As I had opportunity afterward, I inquired this poor 
man's character of some that lived in his neighbourhood, 
and of others that he dealt ^vitli in the way of business j 



77"! HISTORY OF JONATHAN BROWN. 

and all gave him the character of a sincere, honest jnan, 
who was ready to help any one he knew wanted help, as 
far as he was able, and that would not wrong a worm ; 
which \yas the very expression that I remember many 
made use of concerning him. He afterward visited me 
frequently, and I discoursed with him very freely about 
the main principles of religion, endeavouring to he?p him 
to right notions of the happiness of man white innocent, 
the sinfulness and misery of the state into which he fell, 
the great work of redemption, the uatare of the Gospel 
covenant, the evil of sin, the excellency of holiness, the 
duties and blessings of vital Christianity, the evidence 
with which supernatural revelation is attended, and the 
purifying nature of Christian hopes. And afterward, I 
endeavoured to give him an insight into the natnre of the 
two ordinances, that I might help him to improve his bap- 
tism, and assist him in preparing for the Lord's Supper. 
This was a work of time and pains, for Jonathan ustd in- 
tense application, and appeared very warmly concerned to 
get what knowledge was necessary upon those heads on 
which I discoursed with him ; but he found it attended 
with abundance of difficulty. Howev-^r, at length, he ar- 
rived to such a degree of knowledge, and what he did at- 
tain to was attended with such marks and evidences of 
sincerity, that I durst not deny admitting him to the Lord's 
table; notwithstanding, I found he could as well carry a 
mountain upon his shoulders, as learn to read at his age. 

He was afterwards exceedingly pleased and satisfied, 
and often declared he knew not how to express his thank- 
fulness to God, in the first place, for his great mercy to 
him ; and to me, in the next place, for the pains I had taken 
with him. His heart seemed to be wholly set upon doing 
good. In one of his visits to me, he brought a bag of money 
with him, and told me he was very sensible he had but a 
little time before him to do good in; and desired me to 
take what I thought good out of the bag, and distribute to 
such objects of charity as I was acquainted with, the re- 
lieving of whom might be for the glory of God ; and he 
signified to me, that I could not in any way give him a 
truer satisfaction and pleasure, than by directing him to 
any thing by which he might glorify that God, to whom 
he was infinitely indebted. His discourse in the whole of 



10 HISTORY OF JONATHAN BROWN. [178 

liis conversations was very serious, and all his behaviour 
exemplary. No one attended divine worship with more 
constancy, or a greater appearance of seriousness ; and the 
Lord's day was no sooner over, than he longed for the next. 
The whole of his behaviour was indeed exemplary ; and 
it continued so for the remainder of his life. 

Missing him one Lord's day, my heart misgave me, that 
he was not well, and I determined the next day to make 
inquiry after him ; but I was prevented J3y a message sent 
me early the next morning, that Jonathan Brown was very 
ill, and that if I desired to see him alive, it was requisite 
I should be with him some time that day. I went in the- 
morning, and found him in a very bad condition; and though 
he had good advice, yet nothing afforded him any relief. 
There was a mixed company in the room, talking and 
chatting with great freedom. Stepping to the bed side, I 
said. Honest Jonathan, how is it with thee r " Ah, Sir," 
said he, " Jonathan is a going." Going ! said I, whither 
art thou going ? " To my God, Sir," said he, "I hope." 
I hope so too, said I : but then I added, I pray thee, let 
me know, in a narrow cmpass, and that in thine own 
way, the ground of this thy hope. " Why, Sir," said he, 
" you know, as I have often told you, that I can neither 
read nor write : I wish I could. But I have hnard from 
several Ministers, whose faithfulness I have no reason to 
c,all in question, and from you in particular, who I am sa- 
tisfied would not impose upon me, that, if I gave myself 
heartily to the Lord Jesus Christ, God would be merciful 
even to such a poor, miserable sinner, as I am, and own 
me for his, and that this was the sum of the whole Gospel. 
Now, Sir," said he, " if ever I did any thing heartily all 
the days of my life, I gave myself, ray whole self, to Christ, 
and therefore I hope that God, for his sake, will be gra- 
cious to me, pardon my sins, and take me to himself in 
heaven, whenever he calls me hence." I endeavoured to 
strengthen, comfort, and encourage him; and afterwardfi 
recommended him to God in prayer; and he died that 
evening, not only peaceably, but triumphantly. To God be 
the praise ! 

I have told the substance of this little history at different 
times to several persons, who have been not a little pleased 
with it, and made it their request to me to leave some ac- 



ntJ] HISTOKY OF JONATHAN BROWN. 11 

count of it behind me, that it might not be lost, but remain 
for the edification of others. This request I have promised 
to comply with ; and that promise I now discharge ; so- 
lemnly assuring any whom it may concern, that I have not 
in this account at all exaggerated, but that the whole of it 
is strictly true. 

REFLECTIONS. 

1. It appears that Jonathan Brown was entirely without 
education, and that his ignorance kept him from rendering 
any worship to God, either in public or in private. La- 
mentable, however, as his condition was, " God had not 
left himself without witness " in his conscience ; but " the 
stirrings in his own breast, which he could not account 
for," had induced an uneasiness in his mind, and an im- 
pression " that he wanted something farther, though he 
could not tell what that should be." 

2. This faint light and these feeble convictions undoubt- 
edly came '■'■from above,^^ and were the commencement of 
that " good work'''' which God was producing in the heart 
of this poor man. Has then the reader of this Tract had 
light to see his ignorance, and the darkness which sur- 
rounds him ? Has he had convictions of his depravity and 
guilt, and felt uneasiness on account of the danger to which 
they expose him ? Let him cherish these impressions, and 
act upon them in every way that the providence and word 
of God point out for his comfort and relief ; and trusting 
in Christ, he shall never be forsaken. 

3. The effect of the preaching of the Gospel on the soul 
of Jonathan Brown, is well worthy of observation. When 
he first heard of Jesus Christ, and of his coming from hea- 
ven to earth to save sinners, " he was so affected, that, 
before he stirred from the place, he resolved that, for the 
time to come, he would never live any where but where 
he might hear of Jesus Christ." How happy was this poor 
man! his darkness was dispelled, the '■'■true light'''' now 
shone upon him, and his uneasiness and uncertainty were 
alleviated or removed, by hearing and accepting the faith- 
ful saying, " that Jesus Christ came into the world to save 
sinners, even the chief" 1 Tim. i. 15. Surely " there is 
salvation in no other, nor any other name under heaven 
given among men, wliereby we must be saved." Acts, iv. 



A 



12 HISTOUY OF JONATHAN EBOWiV. [180 

12. Reader, whether thou art rich or poor, learned or un- 
learned, thou art hy nature a depraved, and by practice a sin- 
ful and guilty creature. In the language of Scripture, " thou 
hast destroyed thyself; but Jesus is the hope set before thee 
in the Gospel. In him alone thy help is found; therefore 
'^'Believe in him, and tfiou shalt be saved." Acts, xvi. 31. 

4. The evidence which Jonathan Brown gave of the 
ieality of his conversion to God, in his life and conduct, 
is very pleasing and satisfactory. " His conversation was 
serious ; his behaviour exemplary ; his attendance on the 
public worship of God constant ; and a part of his little 
bag of money wa;5 devoted to the poor, ia order that God 
might be glorified thereby." Reader, there is but one 
" common salvation " for every class of mankind, and 
every description of persons in each class. All " believers 
are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the 
Spirit of our God ;" (1 Cor. vi. 11.) their souls are " puri- 
fied in obeying the truth, through the Spirit ;" ( 1 Pet. i. 22.) 
■and they produce " the fruit of the Spirit, which is in all 
goodness, righteousness, and truth." Eph. v. 9. Try your- 
self, therefore, by these marks and evidences of real, scrip- 
tural Christianity ; and remember, "if any man have not the 
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his ;" (Rom. vii. 9.) and that 
" without holiness, no man shall see the Lord." Heb. xii.l4. 

Finally, the account of Jonathan's death is very interest- 
*1ng and affecting. " If," said he with his dying breath, 
" if I ever did any thing heartily all the days of my life, 
I gave myself, my whole self, to Christ" — and he departed, 
not only " peacefully, but triumphantly." Godly simplicity 
marked the language and the conduct of this poor, but 
good man ; and that gracious Redeemer in whom he be- 
lieved, and to whom he had given himself, his whole self, 
owned, supported, and comforted his expiring servant, and 
without doubt took him to the happiness and glory of the 
heavenly state. May every poor and uninstructed man be 
encouraged by this narrative to attend the preaching of the 
Gospel, the substance of which is " Christ crucified, for the 
redemption and salvation of sinners." " To know God, and 
Jesus Christ whom he hath sent, is life eternal." John, 
xvii. 3. It is a blessed, holy, and saving knowledge ; and, 
as in the case of Jonathan Brown, it makes the poor " rich 
in faithj and heirs of the promises." 



12 HISTORY OF JONATHAN BROWN. ~" 

Bartimeus. 

" Mercy, tliou Son of David '." 

Thus blind Bartimeus pray'd ; 
^ Others by thy word are saved, 

Now to me afford thine aid." 

Many for his crybg chid him. 

But he call'd the louder still ; 
Till the gracious Saviour bid him 

" Come, and ask me what you will." 

Money, was not what he wanted. 
Though by beggirig us'd to live , 

But he ask'd, and Jesus granted. 
Alms which none but he could give : 

" Lord, remove this grievous blindness, 
" Let my eyes behold the day ;" 

Straight he saw, and, won by kindness, 
Foiiow'd Jesus in the way. 

Oh ! mefhinks I hear him praising, 

Publishing to all around, 
" Friends, is not my case amazing? 

" What a Saviour I have found \ 

" Oh ! that all the blind but knew him, 

" And would be advis'd by me ! 

" Surely would they hasten to him, 

' " He would cause them all to see." 

Rippon's Col. 

— -- ■ , \ — 

> Orders for Tracts will receive prompt attention, if a^!- 
dn^ssed to " The American Tract Societyj" No. -144 Nassau- 
street, New-York. 
No. 210 



