Tbos. J, Kiphart- 

Ct t<S a ^ 9f ATI, o. 

I 



Presented to the 

LIBRARIES of the 
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO 

by 

Nancy Kiphart Logan 

In memory of 
Her grandfather 
Thomas J. Kiphart 



JOHN WICKLIFFE 



HISTORY 

OF 

THE REFORMATION 

OF 

THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY. 

BY J. H. MERLE D^AUBIGN^, D. D., 

PRESIDENT OF THE THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL OF GENEVA, AND VICE- 
FBESIDENT OF THE SOCIETY ^VANGELIQUB. 

TRANSLATED BY H. WHITE, B. A. 

TRXNITT COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE : M. A. AND PH. DR. HEIDELBERG. 

THE TRANSLATION CAREFULLY REVISED BY DR. D'aUBIGN^, WHO HAS 
ALSO MADE VARIOUS ADDITIONS NOT HITHERTO PUBLISHED. 

VOL. IV. 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK, 



CONTENTS. 



BOOK lim^ 

THE PROTEST AND THE CONFERENCE. 

1526-1529,- 

CHAPTER i 

Twofold movement of reform — Reform the work of God — First diet 
of Spires — Palladium of reform — Firmness of the reformers — 
Proceedings of the diet — Report of the commissioners — The Pa- 
pacy painted and described by Luther — The destruction of Jeru- 
salem — Instructions of Seville — Change of policy— Holy league 
— Religious liberty proposed — Crisis of the Reformation 15 

CHAPTER II. 

Italian war — The emperor's manifesto — March on Rome — Revolt of 
the troops — The sack of Rome — German humors — Violence of 
the Spaniards — Clement VH. capitulates 27 

CHAPTER III. 

Profitable calm — Constitution of the church — Philip cf Hesse — The 
Monk of Marburg — Lambert's paradoxes — Friar Boniface — Dis- 
putation at Homburg — Triumph of the gospel in Hesse — Consti- 
tion of the church — Bishops — Synods — Two elements of the 
church — Luther on the ministry — Organization of the church — 
Luther's contradictions on state interference — Lutner to the elec- 
tor — German mass — Melancthon's instructions — Disafifection — 
Visitation of the reformed churches — Results — The reformation 
advances — Elizabeth of Brandenburg - 35 

CHAPTER IV. 

Edict of Ofen — Persecutions — Winkler, Carpenter, and Keyser — 
Alarm in Germany — Pack's forgery — League of the reformed 
princes — Advice of the reformers — Luther's pacific counsel — 
Surprise of the Papist princes — Pack's scheme not improbable — 
Vigor of the Reformation 55 

CHAPTER V. 

Alliance between Charles and Clement VH — Omens — Hostil'ty of 
the Papists — Arbitrary proposition of Charles — Resolutions of 
the d.et — The Reformation in danger — Decision of the princes — 
Violence of Ferdinand— -The Bchiem completed 65 



4 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER VI. 

The Protest — Principles of the Protest — Supremacy of the gospel — 
Christian union — Ferdinand rejects the Protest — Attempt at con- 
ciliation — Exultation of the Papists — Evangelical appeal — Chris- 
tian unity a reality — Dangers of the Protestants — The Protestants 
leave Spires — The princes the true reformers — Germany and 
reform 73 

CHAPTER VII. 

Union necessary to reform — Luther's doctrine on the Lord^s sup- 
per — A Lutheran warning — Proposed eonference at Marburg — 
Melancthon and Zwingle — Zwingle leaves Zurich — Rumors in 
Zurich — The reformers at Marburg — Carlstadt's petition — Pre- 
liminary discussions — Holy Ghost — Original sin — Baptism — Lu- 
ther, Melancthon, and Zwingle — Opening of the Conference — The 
prayer of the church — Hoc est Corpus Meum — Syllogism of CEco- 
lampadius — The flesh profiteth nothing — Lambert convinced — 
Luther's old song — Agitation in the conference — Arrival of new 
deputies — Christ's human ty finite — Mathematics and Popery — 
Testimony of the Fathers — Testimony of Augustine — Argument 
of the velvet cover — End of the conference — The landgrave me- 
diates — Necessity of union — Luther rejects Zwingle's hand — Sec- 
tarian spirit of the Germans — Bucer's dilemma---Christian char- 
ity prevails — Luther's report — Unity of doctrine — Unity in di- 
versity — Signatures — Two extremes — Three views — Germ of 
Popery — Departure — Luther's dejection — Turks before Vienna — 
Luther's battle-sermon and agony — Luther's firmness — Victory — 
IBxasperation of the Papists — Threatening prospects 85 



BOOK XIV. 

THE AUGSBURG CONFESSION. 
1530. 

CHAPTER I. 

Two striking lessons — Charles V. in Italy — The German envoys — 
Their boldness — The landgrave's present — The envoys under ar- 
rest — Their release and departure— Meeting of Charles and Clem- 
ent — Gattinara's proposition — Clement's arms — War imminent — 
Luther's objections— The Saviour is coming — Charles' concilia- 
tory language — The emperor's motives 119 

CHAPTER II. 

The coronation — The emperor made a deacon — ^The Romish church 
and the state — Alarm of the Protestants — Luther advocates pas- 
sive resistance — Brack's noble advice — Articles of faith prepared 



CONTENTS. 



5 



— Luther^s strong tower — Luther at Coburg — Charles at Inn- 
spruck— Two parties at court — Gattinara- -The king of Denmark 
won over by Charles — Piety of the elector — Wiles of the Roman- 
ists 131 



CHAPTER III. 

Augsburg — The gospel preached— The emperor^s message — The ser- 
mons prohibited — Firmness of the elector — The elector's reply — 
Preparation of the Confession — Luther's Sinai — His son and his 
father — Luther's merriment — Luther's diet at Coburg — Saxony 
a paradise below —To the bishops — Travail of the church — 
Charles — The pope's letter — Melancthon on fasting — The church 
the judge — The landgrave's catholic spirit 141 

CHAPTER IV. 

Agitation in Augsburg — Violence of the Imperialists — Charles at 
Munich — Charles' arrival — The Nuncio's blessing — The Imperial 
procession — Charles' appearance — Enters Augsburg — Te Deum — 
The benediction — Charles desires the sermons to be discontin- 
ued — Brandenburg offers his head — The emperor's request for 
Corpus Christi — Refusal of the princes — Agitation of Charles — 
The princes oppose tradition — Procession of Corpus Christi — 
Exasperation of Charles 155 

CHAPTER V. 

The sermons prohibited — Compromise proposed and accepted — The 
herald — Curiosity of the citizens — The new preachers — The 
medley of Popery — Luther encourages the princes — Veni Spir- 
itus — Mass of the Holy Ghost — The sermon — Opening of the 
diet — The elector's prayer — Insidious plan of the Romanists — 
Valdez and Melancthon — No public discussion — Evangelical 
firmness prevails 168 

CHAPTER VI. 

The elector's zeal — The signing of the Confession — Courage of the 
princes — Melancthon's weakness — The legate's speech — Delays 
— The Confession in danger — The Protestants are firm — Melanc- 
thon's despondency — Luther's prayer and anxiety — Luther's 
texts — His letter to Melancthon — Faith 181 



CHAPTER VII. 

The 25th of June, 1530 — The palatine chapel — Recollections and con- 
trast — The Confession — Prologue — Justification — The church — 
Free will and works — Faith — Interest of the hearers — The princes 
become preachers — The Confession — Abuses — Church and state 
— The two governments — Epilogue — Argumentation — Prudence 
— Church and state — The sword — Moderate tone of the Confes- 
sion — Its defects — A new baptism 193 



6 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTEE VIII. 

Effect on the Romanists — Luther demands religious liberty — His 
dominant idea — Song of triumph — Ingenuous confessions — Hopes 
of the Protestants — Failure of the Popish intrigues — The empe- 
ror's council — Violent discussions — A refutation proposed — Its 
authors — Rome and the civil power — Perils of the confessors — 
Melancthon's minimum — The emperor's sister — Melancthon's 
fall — Luther opposes concession — The legate repels Melancthon 
— The pope's decision — Question — Melancthon's school-matters — 
Answer 206 

CHAPTER IX. 

The refutation — Charles' dissatisfaction — Interview with the princes 

— The Swiss at Augsburg — Tetrapolitan Confession — Zwingle's 
confession — Affl cting divisions — The elector's faith — His peace 
— The lion's skin — The refutation — One concession — Scripture 
and the hierarchy — Imperial commands — Interview between Me* 
lancthon and Campeggio — Policy of Charles — Stormy meeting — 
Resolutions of the consistory — The prayers of the church — Two 
miracles — The emperor's menace— The princes' courage — The 
mask — Negotiations — The spectres at Spires — Tumult in Augs- 
burg 223 

CHAPTER X. 
PhUip of Hesse — Temptation — Union resisted — The Landgrave's 
dissimulation — The Emperor's order to the Protestants — Bran- 
denburg's threatening speeches — Resolution of Philip of Hesse — 
Flight from Augsburg — Discovery — Charles' emotion — Revolu- 
tion in the diet — Metamorphosis — Unusual moderation — Peace, 
peace ! ' 241 

CHAPTER XI. 

The mixed commission — The three points — Romish dissimulation — 
Abuses — Concessions — The main question — Bishops and pope 
conceded — Danger of concession — Opposition to the pretended 
concord — Luther's opposing letters — The word above the church — 
Melancthon's blindness — Papist infatuation — A new commission — • 
Be men, and not women —The two phantoms — Concessions — The 

• three points — The great antithesis — Failure of conciliation — The 
Gordian knot — A council granted — Charles' summons — Men- 
aces — Altercations — Peace or war — Romanism concedes — Protes- 
tantism resists — Luther recalls his friends 251 

CHAPTER XII. 
The elector's preparations and indignation — Recess of Augsburg — 
Irritating language — Apology of the Confession — Intim.dat. on — 
Final interview — Messages of peace — Exasperation of the Pa- 
pists — Restoration of Popery — Tumult in the church — Un on of 
the churches — The Pope and the Emperor — Close of the diet — 
Armaments — Attack on Geneva — Joy of the evangelicals — Es- 
tablishment of Protestantism 271 



CONTENTS. 



T 



BOOK XY. 

SWITZERLAND— CONQUESTS. 
1526-1530. 

CHAPTER I. 

Originality of the Swiss reform— Change — Three periods of reform — 
Switzerland Romande — The two movements in the church — 
Aggressive spirit — The schoolmaster— Farel's new baptism — 
Mysticism and scholasticism — A door is opened — Opposition — 
Lausanne — Manners of the clergy — Farel to Galeotto — Farel and 
the monk — The tribunal — The monk cries for pardon — Opposi- 
tion of the Ormonds — A false convert — Christian unity 285 

CHAPTER II. 

State of religion in Berne — Irresolution of Berne — Almanac of Here- 
tics — Evangelical majority — Haller — Zw^ngle's signal — The rad- 
icals in Berne — Victory of the gospel — Papist provocations — The 
city companies — Proposed disputation — Objections of the forest 
cantons — The church the judge of controversies— Unequal con- 
test — Zwingle — A Christ an band — The Cordelier's church — 
Opening of the conference — The sole head — Un ty of error — A 
priest converted at the altar — St. Vincent's day — The butchers— 
A strange argument — Papist bitterness — Necessity of reform — 
Zwingle-s sermon — Vis t of the King of kings — Edict of reform- 
Was the Reformation political? 301 

CHAPTER III. 

The reform accepted by the people— Faith, purity, and charity — 
First evangelical communion — Bernese propos tion to the d et — 
The cavern, and head of Beatus — Threatening storm from the 
mountains — Revolt — Confusion in Berne — Unterwalden crosses 
the Brunig — Energy of Berne — Victory — Political advan- 
tages 320 

CHAPTER IV. 

Reformation of St. Gall — Nuns of St. Catherine — Reformation of 
Glaris, Berne, Appenzell, the Orisons, Schaffhausen, and the 
Rhine district — A popish miracle — Obstacles in Basle — Zeal of 
the citizens — QEcolampadius marries — Witticism of Erasmus — ' 
First action — Half measures — Petition of the reformed 330 



CHAPTER V. 

Crisis in Basle — Half measures rejected — Reformed propositions — 
A night of terror — Idols broken in the cathedral — The hour of 
madness — Idols broken in all the churches — Reform legalized — 
Erasmus in Basle — A great transformation — Revolution and ref- 
ormatioa •••-3;i8 



8 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER VI. 

FarePs commission — ^Farel at Lausanne and Morat — Neufchatel — 
Farel preaches at Serriere — Enters Neufchatel — Sermon — The 
Monks — FarePs preaching — Popery in Neufchatel — Canons and 
monks unite — Farel at Morat and in the Vully — Reformation of 
the bishopric of Basle — Farel again in Neufchatel — Placards — 
The hospital chapel — Civil power invoked by the RomanistB- -347 



CHAPTER VII. 

Yalangin — Guillemette de Vergy — Farel goes to the Val de Ruz — 
The mass interrupted — Farel dragged to the river — Farel in 
prison — Apostles and reformers compared — Farel preaching at 
Neufchatel — Installed in the cathedral — A whirlwind sweeps over 
the people — The idols destroyed — Interposition of the governor — 
Triumph of the reformed 358 



CHAPTER VIII. 

The Romanists demand a ballot — The Bernese in favor of the re- 
form — Both parties come to the poll — The Prudhommes of Neuf- 
chatel — Proposed delay — The Vvomanists grasp the sword — The 
voting — ^Majority for reform — Protestantism perpetual — The im- 
age of Saint John — A miracle — Retreat of the canons — Popery 
and the gospel 368 

CHAPTER IX. 

Reaction preparing— Failure of the plot— Farel in Valangin and 
near the lake— De Bely at Fontaine — FarePs sufferings— Mar- 
court at Valangin — Disgraceful expedient — Vengeance — The 
reform established — French Switzerland characterized — Gather- 
ing tempest 377 



BOOK XVI. 



SWITZERLAND— A CATASTROPHE. 

1528-1531. 

CHAPTER I. 

Two great lessons — Christian warfare — Zwingle, pastor, statesman, 
and general — His noble character — Persecutions — Swiss Catho- 
lics seek an alliance with Austria — Great dissatisfaction — Depu- 
tation to the Forest cantons — ^Zwingle's proposals — Moderation 
of Berne — Keyser's martyrdom — Zwingle and war — Zwingle's 
error « 385 



9 



CHAPTER IL 

ftree preaching of the gospel in Switzerland — Zwingle supports the 
common bailiwicks — War — Zwingle joins the army — The Zur ch 
army threatens Zug — The landamman Aebli — Bernese interpo- 
sition — Zwingle^s opposition — Swiss cordiality — Order in the 
Zurich camp — A conference — Peace restored — Austrian treaty 
torn — Zwingle's hymn — Nuns of St. Catherine ^ --395 

CHAPTER III. 

Conquests of reform in Schaffhausen and Zurzack — Reform in Gla- 
ris — To-day the cowl, to-morrow the reverse — Italian bailiwicks — 
The monk of Como — Egidio's hope for Italy — Call of the monk 
of Locarno — Hopes of reforming Italy — The monks of Wettin- 
gen — Abbey of St. Gall — Kilian Kouffi — St. Gall recovers its 
liberty — The reform in Soleure — Miracle of St. Ours — Popery 
triumphs — The Grisons invaded by the Spaniards — Address of 
the ministers to the Romish cantons — God's word the means of 
unity — (Ecolampadius for spiritual influence — Autonomy of the 
church 405 

CHAPTER IV. 

Zwingle and the Christian state — Zwingle's double part — Zwingle 
and Luther in relation to politics — Philip of Hesse and the free 
cities — Projected union between Zwingle and Luther — Zwingle's 
political action — Project of alliance against the emperor — Zwin- 
gle advocates active resistance — He destines the imperial crown 
for Philip — Faults of the Reformation — Embassy to Venice — 
Giddiness of the Reformation — Projected alliance with France — 
Zwingle^s plan of alliance — Approaching ruin — Slanders in the 
five cantons — Violence — Mysterious paper — Berne and Basle vote 
for peace — General diet at Baden — Evangelical diet at Zurich — 
Political reformation of Switzerland — Activity of Zurich 422 

CHAPTER V. 

Diet of Aran — Helvetic unity — Berne proposes to close the markets 
— Opposition of Zurich — Proposition agreed to and published — 
Zwingle's war sermon — Blockade of the Waldstettes — No bread, 
no wine, no salt — Indignation of the Forest cantons — The roads 
blockaded — Processions — Cry of despair — France tries to con- 
ciliate — Diet at Bremgarten — Hope — The cantons inflexible — 
The strength of Zurich broken — Discontent — Zwingle's false po- 
sition — Zwingle demands his dismission — The council remon- 
strate — He remains — Zwingle at Bremgarten— Zwingle's fare- 
well to BuUinger — Zwingle's agony — The Forest cantons reject 
all conciliation — Frightful omens — The comet — Zwingle's tran- 
quillity 440 

CHAPTER VI. 

The five cantons decide for war — Deceitful calm — Fatal inactivity — 
Zurich forewarned — Banner of Lucerne planted — Manifesto-- 



10 



CONTENTS. 



The bailiwicks pillaged — The monastery of Cappel — ^Letter — 
Infatuation of Zurich — New warnings — The war begins — The 
tocsin — A fearful night — The war — The banner and army of 
Zurich — Zwingle^s departure — Zwingle's horse — Anna Zwin- 
gle - 458 

CHAPTER VII. 

The scene of war — The enemy at Zug — Declaration of war — Coun- 
cil — Army of the Forest cantons appears — The first gun fired — 
Zwingle's gravity and sorrow — Zurich army ascending the Al- 
bis — Halt and council at the Beech-tree" — They quicken their 
march — ^Jauch's reconnoissance — His appeal — Ambuscade-- -471 



CHAPTER VIII 

Unforeseen change — The whole army advances — Universal disor- 
der — The banneret's death — The banner in danger — The banner 
saved — Terrible slaughter — Slaughter of the pastors — Zwingle's 
last words — Barbarity of the victors — The furnace of trial — 
Zwingle^s dying moments — Day after the battle — Homage and 
outrage 480 

CHAPTER IX. 

Consteroation in Zurich — Violence of the populace — Grief and dis- 
tress — ^Zwingle is dead — Funeral oration — Army of Zurich — An- 
other reverse on the Goubel — Inactivity of the Bernese — Hopes 
and plan of Charles V. — End of the war — Treaty of peace- --492 



CHAPTER X. 

Restoration of Popery at Bremgarten and Rapperschwyl — Priests 
and monks everywhere — Sorrow of OEcolampadius — A tranquil 
scene — Peaceful death of OEcolampadius— Henry Bullinger at 
Zurich — Contrition and exultation — The great lesson — Conclu- 
sion 501 



PREFACE TO VOLUME IV. 



When a foreigner visits certain countries, as Eng- 
land, Scotland, or America, he is sometimes presented 
with the rights of citizenship. Such has been the privi« 
lege of the " History of the Reformation of the Sixteenth 
Century." From 150,000 to 200,000 copies are in circu- 
lation, in the English language, in the countries I have 
just mentioned ; while in France the number hardly 
exceeds 4,000. This is a real adoption — naturalizing 
my work in the countries that have received it with so 
much favor. 

I accept this honor. Accordingly, while the former 
volumes of my History were originally published in 
France, now that, after a lapse of five years, I think of 
issuing a continuation of it, I do so in Great Britain. 

This is not the only change in the mode of publica- 
tion. I did not think it right to leave to translators, as 
in the case of the former volumes, the task of expressing 
my ideas in English. The best translations are always 
faulty ; and the author alone can have the certainty of 
conveying his idea, his whole idea, and nothing but his 
idea. It became necessary for me to publish myself, in 
English ; and this I accordingly do. But although that 
language is familiar to me, I was desirous of securing, 
to a certain extent, the cooperation of an English literary 
gentleman. Dr. Henry White of Croydon has had the 
great kindness to visit Switzerland for this purpose, 
although such a step exposed him to much inconven- 
ience, and to pass with me at Geneva the time necessary 
for this labor. I could not have had a more enlightened 
coadjutor ; and I here express my obligations to him for 
his very able assistance. 

I therefore publish in English this continuation of 
the History of the Kei'ormation. I do not think that, as 



12 PREFACE TO FOURTH VOLUKE. 



I publish myself in this language, any one will have the 
power, or will entertain the idea of attempting another 
publication. It would be a very bad speculation on the 
part of any bookseller; for where is the reader that 
would not prefer the original text, as published by the 
author himself, to a translation made by a stranger ? 

But there is a higher question — a question of moral* 
Ity. Oi all property that a man can possess, there is 
none so essentially his own as the labors of his mind. 
He acquires the fruits of his fields by the sweat of his 
servants and of his beasts of burden, and the produce 
of his manufactures by the labor of his workmen and the 
movement of his machines ; but it is by his own toils, 
by the exercise of his most exalted faculties, that he 
creates the productions of his mind. Accordingly, in 
putting this History under the protection of the laws, I 
place it at the same time under a no less secure safe- 
guard, that of justice. I know that it is written in the 
consciences on the other side of the Channel and of the 
Atlantic, " Ye shall have one manner of law, as well 
for the stranger as for one of your own country ; for I 
am the Lord your God." Lev. 2i : 22. To English 
honor I confide this work. 

The first two Books of this volume contain the most 
important epochs of the Reformation — ^the protest of 
Spires, and the confession of Augsburg. The last two 
describe the establishment of the reform in most of the 
Swiss cantons, and the instructive and deplorable events 
that are connected with the catastrophe of Cappel. 

It was my desire to narrate also the beginnings of the 
English Reformation ; but my volume is filled, and I am 
compelled to defer this subject to the next. It is true, 1 
might have omitted some matters here treated of, but I 
had strong reasons for doing the contrary. The Refor- 
mation in Great Britain is not very important before the 
period described in this volume ; the order of time com- 
pelled me, therefore, to remain on the Continent ; for 
whatever may be the historian's desire, he cannot change 
datea and the sequence that God has assigned to the 



PEEFACE TO FOURTH VOLUME. 13 



erents of the world. Besides, before turning more espe- 
cially towards England, Scotland, France, and other 
countries, I determined on bringing the Reformation of 
Germany and German Switzerland to the decisive epochs 
of 1530 and 1531. The history of the Reformation, 
properly so called, is then, in my opinion, almost com- 
plete in those countries. The work of faith has there 
attained its apogee : that of conferences, of interims, of 
diplomacy begins. I do not, however, entirely abandon 
Germany and German Switzerland, but henceforward 
they will occupy me less : the movement of the sixteenth 
century has there made its eflTort. I said from the very 
first. It is the history of the Reformation and not of 
Protestantism that I am relating. 

I cannot, however, approach the history of the Ref- 
ormation in England without some portion of fear ; it is 
perhaps more difficult there than elsewhere. I have 
received communications from some of the most respect- 
able men of the different ecclesiastical parties, who, each 
feeling convinced that their own point of view is the 
true one, desire me to present the history in this light. 
I hope to execute mv task with impartiality and truth ; 
and thought it would be advantageous to study for some 
time longer the principles and the facts. In this task I 
am at present occupied, and shall consecrate to it, with 
God's assistance, the first part of my next volume. 
Should it be thought that I might have described the 
Reformation in Switzerland with greater brevity, I beg 
my readers will call to mind that, independently of the 
intrinsic importance of this history, Switzerland is the 
author's birthplace. 

I had at first thought of makmg arrangements for the 
present publication with the English and Scotch book- 
sellers who had translated the former portions. Rela- 
tions that I had maintained with some of these publish- 
ers, and which had gained my esteem for them, induced 
me to adopt this course. They were consequently in- 
formed by letter of my purpose, and several months 
later I had an interview with some of them at Glasgow. 



U PREFACE TO FOIiilTH VOLCJME. 



From circumstances which it is unnecessary to exp1aiii| 
no arrangement was entered into with these gentlemen. 
But at the same time, one of the first houses in Great 
Britain, Messrs. Oliver and Boyd of Edinburgh, who 
were introduced to me by my highly respected friend 
Dr. Chalmers, made me a suitable and precise oflfer. I 
oould wait no longer ; and on the very eve of my depart* 
ure from London for the Continent, after a sojourn of 
three months in Scotland and in England, I made ar 
rangements with them, which have since been definitely 
settled, and the work is now their property. 

The French laws are positive to protect literary' prop- 
erty in France, even if it belongs to a foreigner. I am 
less familiar with the English laws ; but I will not do 
England the injustice of believing that its legislation is 
sui-passed by that of France injustice and in morality 

Fi/iLTX-YiVKs, Gez<bya, Jaiiaarj, 1846. 



HISTORY OF THE EJEFORMATION. 



BOOK XIIL 

THE PEOTEST AND THE COKFEESVOB. 

1526-:5-29. 

CHAPTER I 

Twofold movement of reform — Reform the work of God—Ffrrt diet 

of Spires — Palladium of reform — Firmness of the reformen^— 
Proceedings of the diet — Report of the commissioners — The Pa- 
pacy painted and described by Luther — The destruction of Jeru- 
salem — Instructions of Seville — Change of policy— Holy league 
— Religious liberty proposed — Crisis of tne Reformation, 

We have witnessed the commencement, the strug^ 
gles, the reverses, and the progress of the Reformation ; 
but the conflicts hitherto described have been only par- 
tial ; we are entering upon a new period — that of gen- 
eral battles. Spires, 1529, and Augsburg, 1530, are 
names that shine forth with more immortal glory than 
Marathon, Pavia, or Marengo. Forces that up to the 
present time were separate, are now uniting into one 
energetic band; and the power of God is at work in 
those brilliant actions, which open a new era in the his- 
tory of nations, and communicate an irresistible impulse 
to mankind. The passage from the middle ages to mod- 
em times has arrived. 

A great protest is about to be accomplished ; and 
although there have been Protestants in the church from 
the very beginning of Christianity, since liberty and 
trutJi could not be maintained here below save by pro 



16 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



testing continually against despotism and error, Protes- 
tantism is about to take a new step. It is about to be* 
come a body, and thus attack with greater energy that 
** mystery of iniquity" which for ages has taken a bodily 
shape at Rome, in the very temple of God. 2 Thess. 2. 

But although we have to treat of protests, it must 
not be imagined that the Reformation is a negative 
work. In every sphere in^ which any thing great is 
evolved, whether in nature or society, there is a princi- 
ple of life at work — a seed that God fertilizes. The Ref- 
ormation, when it appeared in the sixteenth century, did 
not indeed perform a new work, for a reformation is 
not a formation, but it turned its face towards the be- 
ginnings of Christianity ; it seized upon them with aflTec- 
tion, and embraced them with adoration. Yet it was 
not satisfied with this return to primitive times. Laden 
with its precious burden, it again crossed the interval 
of ages, and brought back to fallen and lifeless Christen- 
dom the sacred fire that was destined to restore it to 
light and life. In this twofold movement consisted its 
action and its strength. Afterwards, no doubt, it reject- 
ed superannuated forms, and combated error ; but this 
was, so to speak, only the least of its works, and its 
third movement. Even the protest of which we have to 
speak had for its end and aim the reestablishment of 
truth and of life, and was essentially a positive act. 

This powerful and rapid twofold action of reform, by 
which the apostolic times were reestablished at the open- 
ing of modern history, proceeded not from man. A ref- 
ormation is not arbitrarily made, as charters and revolu- 
tions are in some countries. A real reformation, pre 
pared during many ages, is the work of the Spirit of 
God. Before the appointed hour, the greatest geniuses 
and even the most faithful of God's servants cannot pro- 
duce it ; but when the reforming time is come, when it 
is God's pleasure to renovate the affairs of the world, 
the divine life must clear a passage, and it is able to 
create of itself the humble instruments by which this 
life is communicated to the human race. Then, if men 
are silent, the very stones will cry out. Luke 19 :40. 



FIRST DIET OF SPIRES. 



17 



It is to the protest of Spires, 1529, that we are now 
About to turn our eyes ; but the way to this protest was 
prepared by years of peace, and followed by attempts at 
concord that we shall have also to describe. Neverthe- 
less the formal establishment of Protestantism remains ' 
the great fact that prevails in the history of the Refor- 
mation from 1526 to 1529. 

The duke of Brunswick had brought into Germany 
the threatening message of Charles the Fifth. That em- 
peror was about to repair from Spain to Rome to come 
to an understanding with the pope, and from thence to 
pass into Germany to constrain the heretics. The last 
summons was to be addressed to them by the diet of 
Spires, 1526.* The decisive hour for the Reformation 
was on the point of striking. 

On the 25th of June, 1526, the diet opened. In the 
instructions, dated at Seville, 23d of March, the emperor 
ordered that the church customs should be maintained 
entire, and called upon the diet to punish those who 
refused to carry out the edict of Worms. f Ferdinand 
nimself was at Spires, and his presence rendered these 
orders more formidable. Never had the hostility which 
the Romish partisans entertained against the evangelical 
princes appeared in so striking a manner. *^The Phari- 
sees," said Spalatin, are inveterate in their hatred 
against Jesus Christ."^ 

Never also had the evangelical princes showed so 
much hope. Instead of coming forward frightened and 
trembling, like guilty men, they were seen advancing, 
burrounded by the ministers of the word, with uplifted 
heads and cheerful looks. Their first step was to ask 
for a place of worship. The bishop of Spires, count- 
palatine of the Rhine, having indignantly refused this 
«1a:ange request, § the princes complained of it as an act 

* See Vol. III. book 10, chap. 14. The diet of Spires, held in 
1626, must not be confounded with that of 1529, at which the pro- 
test took place. f Sleidan, Hist. Ref. book 6. I Christum pha- 
risaeis vehementer fuisse invisum. Seckend. 2. 46. § Fortitef 

Inierdixit. Oochloeus, p. 138. 

2 



18 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



of injustice, and ordered their ministers to preach dailj 
in the halls of their palaces, which were immediately 
filled by an immense crowd from the city and the couu« 
try, amounting to many thousands.* In vain on the 
feast days did Ferdinand, the ultra-montane princes, and 
the bishops, assist in the pomps of the Roman worship 
in the beautiful cathedral of Spires ; the unadorned word 
of God, preached in the Protestant vestibules, engrossed 
all hearers, and the mass was celebrated in an empty 
church.f 

It was not only the ministers, but the knights and 
the grooms, "mere idiots," who, unable to control their 
zeal, everywhere eagerly extolled the word of the Lord. J 
All the followers of the evangelical princes wore these 
letters embroidered on their right sleeves : V. D. M. I. M,, 
that is to say, "The word of the Lord endureth for ever."§ 
The same inscription might be read on the escutcheons 
of the princes, suspended over their hotels. The word 
OF God — such from this moment was the palladium of 
the Reformation. 

This was not all. The Protestants knew that the 
mere worship would not suffice : the landgrave had 
therefore called upon the elector to abolish certain 
" court customs " which dishonored the gospel. These 
two princes had consequently drawn up an order of lir- 
ing which forbade drunkenness, debauchery, and other 
vicious customs prevalent during a diet.|| 

Perhaps the Protestant princes sometimes put for- 
ward their dissent beyond what prudence would have 
required. Not only they did not go to mass, and did 
not observe the prescribed fasts, but still further, on 
the fast days their attendants were seen publicly bear- 
ing dishes of meat and game, destined for their masters' 
tables, and crossing, says Cochloeus, in the presence of 

* Ingens concursus plebis et rusticorum. Cochloeus. Multif 
millibus hominum accurrentibus. Seckend. 2. 48. f Populum ft 
Bacris avertebant. Cochloeus, p. 138. J Ministri eorum, equitea 
et stabularii, idiotae, petulanter jactabant verbum Domini. Ibid, 

§ Verbum Domini manet in seternum. Ibid. || Adversus inve 
teratos illos et impios usus nitendum esse. Secjceud. 2. 46. 



FJaMNESS OF THE BEFOEMERS. 19 



the whole auditory, the halls in which the worship was 
celebrating. " It was,'' says this writer, " with the in- 
tent of attracting the Catholics by the savor of the 
meats and of the wines."* 

The elector in effect had a numerous court : seven 
hundred persons formed his retinue. One day he gave 
a banquet at which twenty-six princes with their gen* 
tlemen and councillors were present. They continued 
playing until a very late hour — ten at night. Every 
thing in Duke John announced the most powerful prince 
of the empire. The youthful landgrave of Hesse, full of 
zeal and knowledge, and in the strength of a first Chris- 
tian love, made a still deeper impression on those who 
approached him. He would frequently dispute with the 
bishops, and owing to his acquaintance with the holy 
Scriptures, easily stopped their mouths.f 

This firmness in the friends of the Reformation pro- 
duced results that surpassed their expectation. It was 
no longer possible to be deceived : the spirit that was 
manifested in these men was the spirit of the Bible. 
Everywhere the sceptre was falling from the hands of 
Rome. " The leaven of Luther," said a zealous Papist, 
" sets all the people of Germany in a ferment, and for- 
eign nations themselves are agitated by formidable 
movements."! 

It was immediately seen how great is the strength 
of deep convictions. The states that were well disposed 
towards the reform, but which had not ventured to give 
their adhesion publicly, became emboldened. The neu- 
tral states, demanding the repose of the empire, formed 
the resolution of opposing the edict of Worms, the exe- 
cution of which would have spread trouble through all 
Grcrmany; and the Papist states lost their boldness* 
The bow of the mighty was broken. 1 Sam. 2 : 4. 

Ferdinand did not think proper, at so critical a mo- 

• Ut complures allicerentur ad eorum sectam, in ferculis portar 
bantur carnes coctae in diebus jejunii, aperte in conspectu totius au- 
ditorii. Cochloeus, p. 138. f Annales Spalatini. J GermanuB 
populi Lutherico fermento inescati, et in externis quoque natioaibqs 
gravissimi erant motus. Cochloeus, p. 1 38. 



30 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



inent, to communicate to the diet the severe instmctioDt 
he had received from Seville.* He substituted a prop- 
osition calculated to satisfy both parties. 

The laymen immediately recovered the influence of 
which the clergy had dispossessed them. The ecclesi- 
asti:^s resisted a proposal in the college of princes that 
the diet should occupy itself with church abuses, but 
their exertions were unavailing. Undoubtedly a non- 
political assembly would have been preferable to the 
diet, but it was already a point gained that religious 
matters were no longer to be regulated solely by the 
priests. 

As soon as this resolution was communicated to the 
deputies from the cities, they called for the aboHtion of 
every usage contrary to the faith in Josus Christ. In 
vain did the bishops exclaim, that instead of doing away 
with pretended abuses, they would do much better to 
burn all the books with which Germany had been inun- 
dated during the last eight years. You desire," was 
the reply, " to bury all wisdom and knowledge.^f The 
request of the cities was agreed to, J and the diet was 
divided into committees for the abolition of abuses. 

Then was manifested the profound disgust inspired 
by the priests of Rome. The clergy," said the deputy 
for Frankfort, " make a jest of the public good, and look 
after their own interests only." *'The laymen," said the 
deputy from Duke George, have the salvation of Chris- 
tendom much more at heart than the clergy." 

The commissioners made their report : people were 
astonished at it. Never had men spoken out so freely 
against the pope and the bishops. The commission of 

* Some historians appear to think that these instructions were 
communicated in reality at the very opening of the diet. Ranke 
shows that this was not the case ; but adds, that he sees no reason 
Trhy the commissaries should have thought themselves authorized 
to make any other proposition. The motives that I have assigned 
appear to me the true ones. I shall state below why the commi&- 
sar.es returned afterwards to the imperial instructions. f Omneg 
libros esse comburendos. Sed rejectum est quia sic omnis doctrine 
et eruditio theologica interitura esset. Seckend. 2. 45. ^ CiyiU^ 
turn BufiTra^a mviltum valuerunt. Ibi4« 



THE PAPACY DESCRIBED. 



21 



the princes, in which the ecclesiastics and laymen were 
in equal numbers, proposed a fusion of popery and re- 
form. The priests would do better to marry," said 
they, than to keep women of ill fame in their houses , 
every man should be at liberty to communicate under 
one or both forms ; German and Latin may be equally 
employed in the Lord^s supper and in baptism ; as for 
the other sacraments, let them be preserved, but let them 
be administered gratuitously. Finally, let the word of 
God be preached according to the interpretation of the 
church," — this was the demand of Rome ; " but always 
explaining Scripture by Scripture" — this was the great 
9rinciple of the Reformation. Thus the first step was 
taken towards a national union. Still a few more efforts, 
and the whole German race would be walking in the 
direction of the gospel. 

The evangelical Christians, at the sight of this glO' 
rious prospect, redoubled their exertions. " Stand fast 
in the doctrine," said the elector of Saxony to his coun- 
cillors.* At the same time hawkers in every part of 
the city were selling Christian pamphlets, short and 
easy to read, written in Latin and in German, and orna- 
mented with engravings, in which the errors of Rome 
were vigorously attacked. f One of these books was 
entitled, The Papacy, with its Members painted and 
described by Doctor Luther In it figured the pope, the 
cardinals, and all the religious* orders, exceeding sixty, 
each with their costumes and description in verse. Un- 
der the picture of one of these orders were the following 
lines : 

Greedy priests see roll g^ld 
Forgetful of the humble lei^us: 

under another, 

We forbid you to behold 

The Bible, lest it should misle&4 you It 

• Elector Saxoniae conciliarios suos exhortatui e'^t. in doct*ij>* 
evangelica firmi. Seckend. 2. 48. f Circumfereban*ur item Uh* 
Latherani veuales per totam civitatem. Cochloeus. p. ISA 
X Dass die Schrift sie nicht verfuhr\ 
Durft ihr keiner nicht studir'. L. 0pp. 19. p. 6*^f 



213 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOH. 



and nnder a third, 

We can fast and pray the harder 
With an overflowing larder.* 

" Not one of these orders," said Luther to the reader, 
thinks either of faith or charity. This one wears the 
feonsure, the other a hood ; this a cloak, that a robe. 
One is white, another black, a third gray, and a fourth 
blue. Here is one holding a looking-glass, there one 

with a pair of scissors. Each has his playthings 

Ah, these are the palmer-worms, the locusts, the canker- 
worms, and the caterpillars, which, as Joel saith, have 
eaten up all the earth."')" Joel 1 : 4. 

But if Luther employed the scourges of sarcasm, he 
also blew the trumpet of the prophets ; and this he did 
in a work entitled, The Destruction of Jerusalem. Shed- 
ding tears like Jeremiah, he denounced to the German 
people a ruin similar to that of the holy city, if like 
it they rejected the gospel. J God has imparted to us 
all his treasures," exclaimed he ; **he became man, he 
- has served U8,§ he died for us, he has risen again, and 
he has so opened the gates of heaven that all may 

enter The hour of grace is come The glad 

tidings are proclaimed But where is the city, 

where is the prince that has received them ? They 
insult the gospel : they draw the sword, and daringly 

seize God by the beard. || .... But wait He 

will turn round; with one blow will he break their 
jaws, and all Germany will be one vast ruin." 

These works had a very great sale.^f They were 
read not only by the peasants and townspeople, but also 
by the nobles and princes. Leaving the priests alone 
at the foot of the altar, they threw themselves into the 

♦ Doch war ihr kiich nimmer leer. L. 0pp. 19. 636. f Ibid. 
635. t Libelli, parvuli quidem mole, sed virulentia perquam 
grandes; sermo Lutheri Teuthonicus de destructione Jerusalem. 
Cochloeus, p. 138. § Wird Mensch, dienet una, stirbt fiir uns 
Luth. 0pp. 14. L. 226. || Grieffen Gott zu frech in den Bari 
Ibid. Deo nimis ferociter barbam vellicant. CochloBua V Per 
q^uam plurima vendebantur exemplaria. Ibid. p. 189. 



THE INSTRUCTIONS OF SEVILLE 



23 



arms of the new gospel.* The necessity of a reform of 
abuses was proclaimed on the first of August by a gen- 
eral committee. 

Then Kome, which had appeared to slumber, awoke. 
Fanatical priests, monks, ecclesiastical princes, all gath- 
ered round Ferdinand. Cunning, bribery, nothing was 
spared. Did not Ferdinand possess the instructions of 
Seville ? To refuse their publication was to effect the 
ruin of the church and of the empire. Let the voice of 
Charles, said they, oppose its powerful veto to the dizzi- 
ness that is hurrying Germany along, and the empire 
will be saved. Ferdinand made up his mind, and at 
length, on the 3d of August, published the decree drawn 
up more than four months previously in favor of the 
edict of Worms.f 

The persecution was about to begin ; the reformers 
would be thrown into dungeons, and the sword drawn 
on the banks of the Guadalquivir would at last pierce 
the bosom of the Reformation. 

The effect of the imperial ordinance was immense. 
The breaking of an axletree does not more violently 
check the velocity of a railway train. The elector and 
the landgrave announced that they were about to quit 
the diet, and ordered their attendants to prepare for their 
departure. At the same time the deputies from the cities 
drew towards these two princes, and the Reformation 
appeared as if it would enter immediately upon a con- 
test with the pope and Charles the Fifth. 

But it was not yet prepared for a general struggle. 
The tree was destined to strike its roots deeper, before 
the Almighty unchained the stormy winds against it. 
A spirit of blindness, similar to that which in former 
times was sent out upon Saul and Herod, 1 Sam. 16 : 14- 
23, Matt. 2, then seized upon the great enemy of the 
gospel ; and thus was it that divine Providence saved 
the Reformation in its cradle. 

• Non solum plebs et rustica turba, verum etiam plerique opti- 
matum et aobilium trahebantur ia favorem aovi Evangelii, aiquein 
odium antiquaB religiouifi. CochlosuA, p. 160. f Sieidan, Uist. 
de la Ret (>. 22tf. 



24 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOIT. 



The first movement of trouble being over, the frienda 
of the gospel began to consider the date of the imperial 
instructions, and to weigh the new political combinations 
which seemed to announce to the world the most un- 
looked-for events. "When the emperor wrote these 
letters," said the cities of Upper Germany, " he was on 
good terms with the pope, but now every thing in 
changed. It is even asserted that he told Margaret, his 
representative in the Low Countries, to proceed gently 
with respect to the gospel. Let us send him a deputa- 
tion." That was not necessary. Charles had not waited 
until now to form a different resolution. The course oi 
public affairs, taking a sudden turn, had rushed into an 
entirely new path. Years of peace were about to be 
granted to the Reformation. 

Clement VII., whom Charles was about to visit, ac- 
cording to the instructions of Seville, in order to receive 
the imperial crown in Rome itself and from his sacred 
hands, and in return to give up to the pontiff the gos- 
pel and the Reformation — Clement VIL, seized with a 
strange infatuation, had suddenly turned against this 
powerful monarch. The emperor, unwilling to favor his 
ambition in every point, had opposed his claims on the 
states of the Duke of Ferrara. Clement immediately 
became exasperated, and cried out that Charles wished 
to enslave the peninsula, but that the time was come 
for refe'stablishing the independence of Italy. This great 
idea of Italian independence, entertained at that period 
by a few literary men, had not, as in our days, penetrated 
the mass of the nation. Clement therefore hastened to 
have recourse to political combinations. The Pope, the 
Venetians, and the King of France, who had scarcely 
recovered his liberty, formed a holy league, of which the 
King of England was by a bull nominated the preserver 
and protector.* In June, 1526, the emperor caused the 
most favorable propositions to be presented to the pope ; 
but his advances were ineffectual, and ihe Duke of Sessa, 
Charles^ ambassador at Rome, returning on horseback 
from his last audience, placed a court-fool behind him, 
• Sleidan, Hist, de la Ref. 6 ; Bullar. Mag. roman. 10. 



EELiaiOUS LIBERTY PROPOSKD. 35 



who, by a thousand monkey tricks, gave the Roman 
people to understand how little they cared for the pope 
and his projects. Clement responded to these bravadoes 
by a brief, in which he threatened the emperor with 
excommunication, and without loss of time pushed his 
troops into Lombardy, while Milan, Florence, and Pied- 
mont declared for the holy league. Thus was Europe 
preparing to be avenged for the triumph of Pavia. 

Charles did not hesitate. He wheeled to the right as 
quickly as the pope had done to the left, and turned 
abruptly towards the evangelical princes. " Let us sus- 
pend the edict of Worms,'^ wrote he to his brother ; let 
us bring back Luther's partisans by mildness, and by a 
good council cause the triumph of evangelical truth.'' 
At the same time he demanded that the elector, the land- 
grave, and their allies should march with him against 
the Turks, or against Italy, for the common good of 
Christendom. 

Ferdinand hesitated. To gain the friendship of the 
Lutherans was to forfeit that of the other princes, who 
were already beginning to utter violent threats.* The 
Protestants themselves were not very eager to take the 
emperor's hand. It is God, God himself," they said, 
" who will save his churches.^f 

What was to be done ? The edict of Worms could 
neither be repealed nor carried into execution. 

So strange a situation led of necessity to the desired 
solution, religious liberty. The first idea of this occur- 
red to the deputies of the cities. In one place," said 
they, " the ancient ceremonies have been preserved ; in 
another they have been abolished ; and both think they 
are right. Let us allow every man to do as he thinks 
fit, until a council shall reestablish the desired unity by 
the word of God." This idea gained favor, and the recesc 
of the diet, dated the 27th of August, decreed that a uni- 
versal, or at the least a national free council should be 
convoked within a year, that they should request the 

* Ferdinandus, ut audio, graviter minatur. Corp. Ref. 1. 801. 

t Imperator poUicetur sed nemo his promissia movetur 

Spero Deum defeusurum esse suas Ecclesias. Ibid. 

Hirt. of Bc£ IT 



26 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 



emperor to return speedily to Germany, and that untt 
then each state should behave in its own territory in 
Buch a manner as to be able to render an account to 
God and to the emperor.* 

Thus they escaped from their diflSculty by a middle 
course ; and this time it was really the true path. Each 
one maintained his rights, while recognizing another's. 
The diet of 1526 forms an important epoch in history: 
an ancient power, that of the middle ages, is shaken ; a 
new power, that of modern times, is advancing ; religious 
liberty boldly takes its stand in front of Romish despot- 
ism ; a lay spirit prevails over the sacerdotal spirit. In 
this single step there is a complete victory : the cause 
of the reform is won. 

Yet it was little suspected. Luther, on the morrow 
of the day on which the recess was published, wrote to a 
friend, "The diet is sitting at Spires in the German 
fashion. They drink and gamble, and there is nothing 
done except that."f " Le congrfes danse et ne marche 
pas,"J has been said in our days. Great things are often 
transacted under an appearance of frivolity, and God 
accomplishes his designs unknown even to those whom 
he employs as his instruments. In this diet a gravity 
and love of liberty of conscience were manifested, which 
are the fruits of Christianity, and which in the sixteenth 
century had its earliest, if not its most energetic develop- 
ment among the German nations. 

Yet Ferdinand still hesitated. Mohamnded himself 
came to the aid of the gospel. Louis, king of Hungary 
and Bohemia, drowned at Mohacz on the 29th of August, 
1526, as he was fleeing from before Soliman II., had be- 
queathed the crown of these two kingdoms to Ferdinand. 
But the Duke of Bavaria, the Way wode of Transylvania, 
and above all, the terrible Soliman, contested it against 
him. This was sufficient to occupy Charles' brother : he 
left Luther, and hastened to dispute two thrones. 

* Uausqu"sque in sua ditione ita se gereret ut rationem Deo et 
Imperatori reddcre posset. Seckend. 2. 41. f Potatur et iudi* 
tor, praeterea libil. L. Epp. 3. 126. X Tbe congress dftncea, 
but does not move forward, 



ITALIAN WAR. 



CHAPTER II. 

Italian war — The emperor^s manifesto — March on Rome — Rerolt of 
the troops — The sack of Rome — German humors — ^Violence of 
the Spaniards — Clement VII. capitulates. 

The emperor immediately reaped the fruits of his 
new policy. No longer having his hands tied by Ger- 
many, he turned them against Rome. The Reformation 
was to be exalted and the Papacy abased. The blows 
aimed at its pitiless enemy were about to open a new 
career to the evangelical work. 

Ferdinand, who was detained by his Hungarian 
aflfairs, gave the charge of the Italian expedition to 
Freundsberg, that old general who had in so friendly a 
manner patted Luther on the shoulder, as the reformer 
was about to appear before the diet of Worms.* This 
veteran, who, as a contemporary observe8,f '*bore in 
his chivalrous heart God^s holy gospel, well fortified and 
flanked by a strong wall," pledged his wife^s jewels, sent 
recruiting parties into all the towns of Upper Germany, 
and owing to the magic idea of a war against the pope, 
soon witnessed crowds of soldiers flocking to his stand- 
ard. Announce," Charles had said to his brother, "an- 
nounce that the army is to march against the Turks ; 
every one will know what Turks are meant." 

Thus the puissant Charles, instead of marching with 
the pope against the Reformation, as he had threatened 
at Seville, marches with the Reformation against the 
pope. A few days had sufiBced to produce this change 
of direction: there are few periods in history in which 
the hand of God is more plainly manifested. Charles 
immediately assumed all the airs of a reformer. On the 
11th of September, he addressed a manifesto to the pope, J 
In which he reproaches him for behaving not like the 

* See Vol. II book 7, chap. 8. f Haug marschalk, surnamed 
Zeller. i Caroli Imperat. Rescrlptum ad Clemen tis Septimi cri 
minationes Goldasti, Constitut. Imperiales, 1. 479. 



28 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



father of the faithful, but like an insolent and haughty 
man ;* and declares his astonishment that he, Christ's 
vicar, should dare shed blood to acquire earthly posses- 
sions, "which," added he, " is quite contrary to the evan- 
gelical ioctrine."f Luther could not have spoken better. 
" Let your holiness," continued Charles the Fifth, "return 
the sword of St. Peter into the scabbard, and convoke a 
holy and universal council." But the sword was much 
more to the pontiff's taste than the council. Is not the 
papacy, according to the Romish doctors, the source of 
the two powers? Can it not depose kings, and conse- 
quently fight against them ?| Charles prepared to re- 
quite " eye for eye, and tooth for tooth." Exod. 21 :24. 

Now began that terrible campaign during which the 
storm burst on Rome and on the Papacy that had been 
destined to fall on Germany and the gospel. By the 
violence of the blows inflicted on the pontifical city, we 
may judge of the severity of those that would have 
dashed in pieces the reformed churches. While retrac- 
ing such scenes of horror, we have constant need of call- 
ing to mind that the chastisement of the seven-hilled city 
had been predicted by the holy Scriptures. Rev. 18.§ 

In the month of November, Freundsberg at the head 
of fifteen thousand men was at the foot of the Alps. The 
old general, avoiding the military roads, that were well 
guarded by the enemy, flung himself into a narrow path, 
over frightful precipices, that a few blows of the mat- 
tock would have rendered impassable. The soldiers 
were forbidden to look behind them ; nevertheless their 
heads turned, their feet slipped, and horse and foot rolled 
from time to time into the abyss. In the most difficult 
passes, the surest-footed of the infantry lowered their 
long pikes to the right and left of their aged chief, by 
way of barrier, and Freundsberg advanced clinging to 

* Non jam pastoris seu communis patris laudem, sed tfuperbi et 
insolentis aomen. Goldasti, Constitut. Imperiales, 1. 487. f Cum 
Id ab evangelica doctrina prorsus alienum videtur. Ibid. 489. 

X Ulriusque potestatis aplcem Papa tenet. Turrecremata de Po 
testate Papali. § We should njt, however, restrict this prediO' 
tion to the incomplete sack of 1527, from which the city recovexod^ 



MARCH ON ROME. 



39 



the lansquenet in front, and pushed on by the ono be- 
hind. In three days the Alps were crossed, and on the 
19th of November the army reached the territory of 
Brescia. 

The constable of Bourbon, who succeeded to the chief 
command of the imperial army after the death of Pes- 
cara, had just taken possession of the duchy of Milan. 
The emperor having promised him this conquest for a 
recompense. Bourbon was compelled to remain there 
some time to consolidate his power. At length, on the 
12th of February, he and his Spanish troops joined the 
army of Freundsberg, which was becoming impatient at 
his delays. The constable had many men, but no money ; 
he resolved therefore to follow the advice of the duke of ^ 
Ferrara, that inveterate enemy of the princes of the 
church, and proceed straight to Rome.* The whole 
army received this news with a shout of joy. The Span- 
iards were filled with the desire of avenging Charles the 
Fifth, and the Germans were overflowing with hatred 
against the pope : all exulted in the hope of receiving 
their pay, and of having their labors richly repaid at 
.ast by those treasures of Christendom that Rome had 
Deen accumulating for ages. Their shouts refe'choed 
beyond the Alps. Every man in Germany thought that 
the last hour of the papacy had arrived, and prepared 
to contemplate its fall. " The emperor's forces are tri- 
umphing in Italy," wrote Luther ; *^ the pope is visited 
from every quarter. His destruction draweth nigh : his 
hour and his end are come."f 

A few slight advantages gained by the papal sol- 
diers in the kingdom of Naples, led to the conclusion of 
a truce that was to be ratified by the pope and by the 
emperor. As soon as this was known, a frightful tumult 
broke out in the constable's army. The Spanish troops 
revolted, compelled him to flee, and pillaged his tent. 
Then approaching the lansquenets, they began to shout 
as loudly as they could, the only German words they 

• Gaicciardini, History of the Wars in Italy, 18. 698. f Papu 
abiqne visitatur, ut destruatur : venit enlm finis et hora ejus. La 
U)or to Haussmann, Jan. 10, 1527. Epp. 3. 156 



aO HISTORY OP THE REFORMATIOH. 



knew: Lancet lance, money, money I* Such cries found 
an echo in the bosoms of the imperialists : they were 
moved in their turn, and also began to shout with all 
their might, Lance, lance, money, money! Preundsberg 
beat to muster, and having drawn up the soldiers around 
him and his principal oflScers, calmly demanded if he 
had ever deserted them. All was useless. The old 
affection which the lansquenets bore to their leader 
seemed extinct. One chord alone vibrated in their 
hearts: they must have pay and war. Accordingly, 
lowering their lances, they presented them, as if they 
would slay their officers, and again began to shout, 
"Lance, lance, money, money!" When Freundsberg, 
whom no army however large had ever frightened— 
Freundsberg, who was accustomed to say, "The more 
enemies, the greater the honor," saw these lansquenets, 
at whose head he had grown gray, aiming their murder- 
ous steel against him, he lost all power of utterance, 
and fell senseless upon a drum, as if struck with a thun- 
derbolt.f The strength of the veteran general was 
broken for ever. But the sight of their dying captain 
produced on the lansquenets an effect that no speech 
could have made. All the lances were upraised, and 
the agitated soldiers retired with downcast eyes. Four 
days later, Freundsberg recovered his speech. "For- 
ward," said he to the constable ; " God himself will bring 
us to the mark." Forward, forward, repeated the lan- 
squenets. Bourbon had no alternative : besides, neither 
Charles nor Clement would listen to any proposals of 
peace. Freundsberg was carried to Ferrara, and after- 
wards to his castle of Mindelheim, where he died after 
an illness of eighteen months ; and on the 18th of April, 
Bourbon toc^k that highroad to Rome, which so many 
formidable armies coming from the north had already 
trodden. 

* Laaz, lanz, gelt, gelt. f Cum vero hastas ducibus obver- 
terent, indignatione et aegritudine animi oppressus, Fronsbergiiw 
subito in deliquium incidit, ita ut in tympano quod adstabat desi- 
dere cogeretur, nullumque voibum proloqui amplius posset. So^^fe* 
end. t 79. 



THE ASSAULT. 



81 



While the storm descending from the Alps was ap- 
proaching the eternal city, the pope lost his presence of 
mind, sent away his troops, and kept only his body- 
guard. More than thirty thousand Romans capable of 
bearing arms paraded their bravery in the streets, drag- 
ging their long swords after them, quarrelling and fight- 
ing ; but these citizens, eager in the pursuit of gain, had 
little thought of defending the pope, and hoping to de- 
rive great profit from his stay, they desired on the con- 
trary that the magnificent Charles would come and set- 
tle in Rome. 

On the evening of the 5th of May, Bourbon arrived 
under the walls of the capital ; and he would have begun 
the assault at that very moment, had he been provided ^ 
with ladders. On the morning of the 6th, the army, 
concealed by a thick fog which hid their movements,* 
was put in motion, the Spaniards marching to their sta- 
tion above the gate of the Holy Ghost, and the Germans 
below.f The Constable, wishing to encourage his sol- 
diers, seized a scaling-ladder, mounted the wall, and 
called on them to follow him. At this moment a ball 
struck him : he fell, and expired an hour after. Such was 
the ena of this unhappy man, a traitor to his king and 
to his couutry, and suspected even by his new friends. 

His deattn, far from checking, served only to excite 
the army. Claudius Seidenstucker, grasping his long 
eword, first cleared the wall ; he was followed by Michael 
Hartmann, and lAese two reformed Germans exclaimed 
that God himseli was marching before them in the clouds. 
The gates were opened, the army poured in, the suburbs 
were taken, and the pope, surrounded by thirteen cardi- 
nals, fled to the easily? of St. Angelo. The Imperialists, 
at whose head was tkuw the Prince of Orange, offered 
him peace on condition <')i his paying three hundred thou- 
sand crowns. But Clement, who thought that the holy 
league was on the point of delivering him, and fancied 
he already saw their leading horsemen, rejected every 

• Guicciardini, 2. 721. f Since the new wall built by Urban 
VIII. on the top of the Janiculum, the gates of the H0I7 Ghost and 
of Beltimiana have become useless. 



32 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOlf. 



proposition. After four hours' repose, the attack wae 
renewed, and by sunset the army was master of all the 
city. It remained under arms and in good order until 
midnight, the Spaniards in the Piazza Navona, and the 
Germans in the Carapofiore. At last, seeing no demon- 
strations either of war or of peace, the soldiers disband- 
ed and ran to pillage. 

Then began the famous " sack of Rome." The Pa- 
pacy had for centuries put Christendom in the press 
Prebends, annates, jubilees, pilgrimages, ecclesiastical 
graces — she had made money of them all. These greedy 
troops, that for months had lived in wretchedness, deter- 
mined to make her disgorge. No one was spared, the 
imperial not more than the ultramontane party, the 
Ghibellines not more than the Guelfs. Churches, palaces, 
convents, private houses, basilics, banks, tombs — every 
thing was pillaged, even to the golden ring that the 
corpse of Julius II. still wore on its finger. The Span- 
iards displayed the greatest skill, scenting out and dis- 
covering treasures in the most mysterious hiding-places ; 
but the Neapolitans were the most outrageous.* "On 
every side were heard," says Guicciardini, " the piteous 
shrieks of the Roman women and of the nuns whom the 
soldiers dragged away by companies to satiate their 
lust."t 

At first the Germans found a certain pleasure in 
making the papists feel the weight of their swords. 
But ere long, happy at procuring victuals and drink, 
they were more pacific than their allies. It was upon 
those things which the Romans called "holy" that the 
anger of the Lutherans was especially discharged. They 
took away the chaTices, the pyxes, the silver remon- 
trances, and clothed their servants and camp-boys with 
the sacerdotal garments.^ The Campofiore was changed 
into an immense gambling-house. The soldiers brought 
thither golden vessels and bags full of crowns, staked 
them upon one throw of the dice, and after losing them, 

"* Jovius Yita Pompeii Colonnae, p. 191 ; Ranke, Deutsche Gesch. 
2. 398. t Guicciardini, 2. 724. I Sacras vestes profania 

induebant lixis. Cochloeus, p. 156. 



aBRMAN HUM0E3. 



33 



went in search of others. A certain Simon Baptista, 
who had foretold the sack of the city, had been thrown 
into prison by the pope ; the Germans liberated him, 
and made him drink with them. But, like Jeremiah, he 
prophesied against all. " Rob, plunder," cried he to his 
liberators ; " you shall however give back all ; the monpy 
of the soldiers and the gold of the priests will follow the 
same road." 

Nothing pleased the Germans more than to mock the 
papal court. " Many prelates," says Guicciardini, " were 
paraded on asses through all the city of Rome."* Aftei 
this procession, the bishops paid their ransom ; but they 
fell into the hands of the Spaniards, who made them pay 
it a second time.f 

One day a lansquenet named Guillaume de Sainte 
Celle put on the pope's robes, and placed the triple crown 
upon his head ; others gathered round him, adorning 
themselves with the red hats and long robes of the car- 
dinals ; and going in procession upon asses through the 
streets of the city, they all arrived at last before the 
castle of St. Angelo, to which Clement VII. had retired. 
Here the soldier-cardinals alighted, and lifting up the 
front of their robes, kissed the feet of the pretended pon- 
tiff. The latter drank to the health of Clement YII., the 
cardinals kneeling did the same, and exclaimed that 
henceforward they would be pious popes and good car- 
dinals, careful not to excite wars as their predecessors 
had done. They then formed a conclave, and the pope 
having announced to his consistory that it was his inten- 
tion to resign the Papacy, all hands were immediately? 
raised for the election, and they cried out, " Luther is 
pope I Luther is pope 1"J Never had pontiff been pro- 
claimed with such perfect unanimity. Such were the 
humors of the Germans. 

The Spaniards did not let the Romans off so easily 
Clement VII. had called them Moors," and had publish 

* Wars of Italy, 2. 723. f Eandem civem sea curiaiem 

baud raro, nunc ab Hispanis, nunc a Germanis aere mutuato rediml 
CochloBus, p. 156. i Milites itaque levasse manum ac cxcla- 

{kii^ : Lutlierus Fapa ! Lutherus Papa! Ibid 

3 



34 



mSTORi OF THE REFORMATION. 



ed a plenary indulgence for whoever should kill any cf 
them. Nothing, therefore, could restrain their fury. 
These faithful Catholics put the prelates to death in tho 
midst of horrible cruelties, destined to extort their treas- 
ures from them: they spared neither rank, sex, nor 
age. It was not until the sack had lasted ten days, and 
a booty of ten millions of golden crowns had been col- 
lected, and from five to eight thousand victims had per* 
ished, that quiet began to be in some degree restored. 

Thus did the pontifical city decline in the midst of a 
long and cruel pillage, and that splendor with which 
Eome from the beginning of the sixteenth century had 
filled the world faded in a few hours. Nothing could 
preserve this haughty capital from chastisement, not 
even the prayers of its enemies. "I would not have 
Eome burnt," Luther had exclaimed ; it would be a 
monstrous deed."* The fears of Melancthon were still 
keener : I tremble for the libraries," said he ; " we 
know how hateful books are to Mars."f But in despite 
of these wishes of the reformers, the city of Leo X. fell 
under the judgment of God. 

Clement VIL, besieged in the castle of Saint Angelo, 
and fearful that the enemy would blow his asylum into 
the air with their mines, at last capitulated. He re- 
nounced every alliance against Charles the Fifth, and 
bound himself to remain a prisoner until he had paid the 
army four hundred thousand ducats. The evangelical 
Christians gazed with astonishment on this judgment of 
the Lord. Such," said they, " is the empire of Jesus 
Christ, that the emperor, pursuing Luther on behalf of 
the pope, is constrained to ruin the pope instead of Lu- 
ther. All things minister unto the Lord, and turn against 
his adversaries."! 

* Romam nollem exustam, magnum enim portentum esset. Epp, 
8. 221. t Metuo bibliothecis. Corp. Ref. 1. 869. 

X Ut Caesar pro Papa Lutherum persequens, pro L'lthero p&p&JD 
oogatur vastore. L. Epp. 3. 188. 



A PROFITAELE CALM. 



33 



CHAPTER III. 

Prt»lltable calm — Constitution of the Church — Philip of Hesse — The 
Monk of Marburg — Lambert's paradoxes — Friar Boniface — Di& 
putation at Homburg — Triumph of the gospel in Hesse — Consti 
tution of the Church — Bishops — Synods — Two elements of the 
Church — Luther on the ministry — Organization of the Church — 
Luther's contradictions on state interference — Luther to the 
Elector — German mass — Melancthon's instructior^s — Disaffec- 
tion — Visitation of the reformed churches — Resultv -The Ref' 
ormation advances — Elizabeth of Brandenburg. 

The Reformation needed some years of repose, that 
it might increase and gain strength ; and it could not 
enjoy peace, unless its great enemies were at war with 
each other. The madness of Clement VII. was as it were 
the lightning-conductor of the Reformation, and the ruins 
of Rome built up the gospel. It was not only a few 
months' gain ; from 1526 to 1529 there was a calm in 
Germany, by which the Reformation profited to organize 
and extend itself. A constitution was now to be given 
to the renovated church. 

As the papal yoke had been broken, the ecclesiastical 
order required to be reestablished. It was impossible 
to restore their ancient jurisdiction to the bishops ; for 
these continental prelates maintained that they were, in 
an especial manner, the Pope's servants. A new state of 
things was therefore called for, under pain of seeing the 
church fall into anarchy. This was immediately pro- 
vided against. It was then that the evangelical nations 
separated definitely from that despotic dominion which 
aad for ages kept all the West in bondage. 

The diet had already on two occasions wished to 
make the reform of the church a national work ; the em- 
peror, the pope, and a few princes were opposed to it ; 
the diet of Spires had therefore resigned to each state 
the task that it could not accomplish itself. 

But what constitution were they about to substituto 
for the papal hierar<jhy 1 



86 



HISTORY OF THE EEFOEICATIOH, 



They could, while ^suppressing the pope, preserve the 
episcopal order ; it was the form nearest approximating 
that which was on the point of being destroyed. This 
was done in England, where we have an Episcopalian 
church ; but, as we have just observed, it could not be 
realized on the continent. There were no Latimers, no 
Cranniers among the continental bishops. 

They might, on the contrary, reconstruct the eccle- 
siastical order, by having recourse to the sovereignty 
oi God^s word, and by reestablishing the rights of the 
Christian people. This form was the most remote from 
the Koman hierarchy. Between these two extremes 
there were several middle courses. 

The latter plan was Zwingle's ; but the reformer of 
Zurich had not fully carried it out. He had not called 
upon the Christian people to exercise the sovereignty, 
and had stopped at the council of Two Hundred as rep- 
resenting the church. 

The step before which Zwingle had hesitated might 
be taken, and it was so. A prince did not shrink from 
what had alarmed even republicans. Evangelical Ger- 
many, at the moment when she began to try her hand 
on ecclesiastical constitutions, began with that which 
trenched deepest on the papal monarchy. 

It was not however from Germany that such a sys- 
tem could proceed. If aristocratic England was destined 
to cling to the episcopal form, docile Germany was des* 
tined the rather to stop in a governmental medium. The 
democratic extreme issued from Switzerland and France. 
One of Calvin's predecessors now hoisted that flag which 
the powerful arm of the Genevese reformer was to lift 
again in after-years and plant in France, Switzerland, 
Holland, Scotland, and even in England, whence it was 
a century later to cross the Atlantic and summon North 
America to take its rank among the nations. 

Philip of Hesse, who has been compared to Philip of 
Macedon in subtlety, and to his son Alexander in cour- 
age, was the most enterprising of all the evangelical 
princes. Philip comprehended that religion was at 
♦ Vol. III. book 9, ch, 10. 



PHILIP OF HE8SB. 



sr 



length acquiring its due importance ; and far from op* 
posing the great development that was agitating the 
people, he put himself in harmony with the new ideas. 

The morning star had risen for Hesse almost at the 
game time as for Saxony. In 1617, when Luther in 
Wittemburg was preaching the gratuitous remission of 
sins, men and women in Marburg were seen repairing 
secretly to one of the ditches of the city, and there, col* 
lected under a solitary loophole, listening eagerly to the 
words of consolation that issued from within. It was 
the voice of the Franciscan James Limburg, who, hav- 
ing declared that for fifteen centuries the priests had 
falsified the gospel of Christ, had been thrown into this 
gloomy dungeon. These mysterious assemblies lasted 
a fortnight. On a sudden the voice was silent ; these 
lonely meetings had been discovered, and the Francis- 
can, torn from his cell, had been hurried away across 
the Lahnberg towards some unknown spot. Not far 
from the Ziezenberg, some weeping citizens of Marburg 
came up with him, and hastily pufling aside the awning 
that covered his car, they asked him, " Whither are you 
going " Where God wills," calmly replied the friar.* 
He was never heard of again, and it is not known what 
became of him. These disappearances are not unfre- 
quent under the papacy. 

No sooner had Philip prevailed in the diet of Spires, 
than he resolved on devoting himself to the reformation 
of his hereditary states. 

His resolute character made him incline towards the 
Swiss reform : it was not therefore one of tlie moderates 
that he wanted. He had formed a connection at Spires 
with James Sturm, the deputy from Strasburg, who 
spoke to him of Francis Lambert of Avignon, who was 
then at Strasburg. Of a pleasing exterior and decided 
character, Lambert combined with the fire of the south 
all the perseverance of the north. He was the first in 
France to throw off the cowl, and from that time he had 
never ceased to call for a thorough reform in the church. 
" Formerly," said he, " when I was a hypocrite, I lived 
* Bommel, Phil. von. Hessen. 1. 128 



9d 



HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



in abundance ; now I consume frugally ray daily bread 
with my small family but I had rather be poor in 
Christ's kingdom, than possess abundance of gold in ihe 
dissolute dwellings of the pope." The landgrave saw 
that Lambert was just the man he required, and invited 
him to his court. 

Lambert, desiring to clear the way for the Reforma 
tion of Hesse, drew up one hundred and fifty-eight theses, 
which be entitled paradoxes," and posted them, accord- 
ing to the custom of the times, on the church doors. 

Friends and enemies immediately crowded round 
them. Some Roman-catholics would have torn them 
down, but the reformed townspeople kept watch, and 
holding a synod in the public square, discussed, devel- 
oped, and proved these propositions, ridiculing at the 
same time the anger of the Papists. 

Boniface Dornemann, a young priest full of self-con- 
ceit, whom the bishop, on the day of his consecration, 
had extolled above Paul for his learning, and above the 
Virgin for his chastity, finding himself too short to reach 
Lambert's placard, borrowed a stool, and surrounded by 
a numerous audience, began to read the propositions 
aloud.f 

" All that is deformed ought to be reformed. The 
word of God alone teaches us what ought to be so, and 
all reform that is efiected otherwise is vain."J 

This was the first thesis. Ahem," said the young 
priest, I shall not attack that." He continued. 

**It belongs to the church to judge on matters of 
faith. Now the church is the congregation of those who 
are united by the same spirit, the same faith, the same 
God, the same Mediator, the same word, by which alone 
they are governed, and in which alone they have life."§ 

* Nunc cum familiola mea panem manduco et potum capio in 
tnmsura. Lamberti Commentarii de Sacra Gonjugio. f Cum 
statura homines hujusmodi pesset ut inter Pygmaeos internosci diffl 
culter posset, scabellum sibi dari postulabat, eoque conscenso, ccepit, 
etc. Othon. Melandri Jocorum Cent. J Vana est omnis Reform 
matio quae alioqui fit. Paradoxi Lamberti, Sculteti Annal. 

§ Ecclesia est congregatia eorum quof unit idem spiritus. Ibid 



FEIAH BONIFACE 



39 



^ I cannot attack that proposition/' said the priest.* 

lie continued reading from his stool. 

" The word is the true key. The kingdom of heaven 
is open to him who believes the word, and shut against 
him who believes it not. Whoever, therefore, truly pos- 
sesses the word of God, has the power of the keys. All 
other keys, all the decrees of the councils and popes, and 
all the rules of the monks, are valueless." 

Friar Boniface shook his head and continued. 

" Since the priesthood of the law has been abolished, 
Christ is the only immortal and eternal priest, and he 
does not, like men, need a successor. Neither the Bishop 
of Rome nor any other person in the world is his repre- 
sentative here below. But all Christians, since the com- 
mencement of the church, have been and are participa- 
tors in his priesthood." 

This proposition smelt of heresy. Dornemann, how- 
ever, was not discouraged ; and whether it was from 
weakness of mind, or from the dawning of light, at each 
proposition that did not too much shock his prejudices, 
he repeated, Certainly I shall not attack that one." 
The people listened in astonishment, when one of them — 
whether he was a fanatical Romanist, a fanatical reform- 
er, or a mischievous wag, I cannot tell — tired with these 
continual repetitions, exclaimed, Get down, you knave, 
who cannot find a word to impugn." Then rudely pull- 
ing away the stool, he threw the unfortunate clerk flat 
in the mud.f 

On the 21st of October, at seven in the morning, the 
gates of the principal church at Homburg were thrown 
open, and prelates, abbots, priests, counts, knights, and 
deputies of the towns, entered in succession, and among 
them was Philip, in his quality of first member of the 
church. 

After Lambert had explained and proved his theses, 
he added, Let him stand forth who has any thing to 

* Hanc equidem baud impugnaverim. Illam ne quidem attige- 
rim. Othon. Mel. Joe. Cent. | Apagesis, nebulo ! qui quod 

Impugnes infirmesque invenire baud possis 1 Hisque dictis Bcabellum 
ei mox subtrabit, ut miser ille prseceps in lutum ageretur. Ibid. 



40 HI8T0UT OP THE REFORMATIOH. 



say against them/' At first there was a profound 
silence ; but at length Nicholas Ferber, superior of the 
Franciscans of Marburg, who in 1524, applying to Rome's 
favorite argument, had entreated the landgrave to em- 
ploy the sword against the heretics, began to speak with 
drooping head and downcast eyes. As he invoked Au- 
gustin, Peter Lombard, and other doctors to his assist* 
ance, the landgrave observed to him, " Do not put for- 
ward the wavering opinions of men, but the word of 
God, which alone fortifies and strengthens our hearts/' 
The Franciscan sat down in confusion, saying, " This is 
not the place for replying." The disputation, however, 
recommenced, and Lambert, showing all the power of 
truth, so astonished his adversary, that the superior, 
alarmed at what he called thunders of blasphemy and 
lightnings of impiety,"* sat down again, observing a 
second time, " This is not the place for replying." 

In vain did the Chancellor Feige declare to him that 
each man had the right of maintaining his opinion with 
full liberty ; in vain did the landgrave himself exclaim 
that the church was sighing after truth: silence had 
become Rome's refuge. " I will defend the doctrine of 
purgatory," a priest had said prior to the discussion ; 
**I will attack the paradoxes under the sixth head" — on 
the true priesthood — had said another ;f and a third had 
exclaimed, "I will overthrow those under the tenth 
head"— on images ; but now they were all dumb. 

Upon this Lambert, clasping his hands, exclaimed 
with Zacharias, "Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for 
he hath visited and redeemed his people." 

After three days of discussion, which had been a con- 
tinual triumph for the evangelical doctrine, men were 
selected and commissioned to constitute the churches of 
Hesse in accordance with the word of God. They were 
more than three days occupied in the task, and their new 
constitution was then published in the name of the synod, 

The first ecclesiastical constitution produced by the 

* Fulgura impietatum, tonitrua blasphemianim. f Elraal 

enim prius qui dicerent : Ego asseram purgatorium ; aUus, Ego im- 
pagnabo paradoxa tituli sexti, etc. Lamberti Epistola ad Colon. 



CONSTITUTION OF THE CHTJRCH. 41 



Reformation should have a place in history, and the more 
BO as it was then put forward as a model for the new 
churches of Christendom. 'f' 

The autonomy or self-government of the church is 
its fundamental principle: it is from the church, from 
its representatives assembled in the name of the Lord, 
that this legislation emanates ; there is no mention in 
the prologue either of state or of landgrave.f Philip, 
content with having broken for himself and for his peo- 
ple the yoke of a foreign priest, had no desire to put 
himself in his place, and was satisfied with that external 
superintendence which is necessary for the maintenance 
of order. 

A second distinctive feature in this constitution is 
its simplicity both of government and worship. The 
assembly conjures all future synods not to load the 
churches with a multitude of ordinances, " seeing that 
where orders abound, disorder superabounds." They 
would not even continue the organs in the churches, 
because, said they, " men should understand what they 
hear."J The more the human mind has been bent in one 
direction, the more violent is the reaction when it is 
unbent. The church passed at that time from the ex- 
treme of symbols to the extreme of simplicity. These 
are the principal features of this constitution : 

" The church can only be taught and governed by the 
word of its sovereign Pastor. Whoever has recourse to 
any other word shall be deposed and excommunicated. § 
Every pious man, learned in the word of God, what- 
ever be his condition, may be elected bishop if he desire 
it, for he is called inwardly of God.|| 

" Let no one believe that by a bishop we understand 

Tbls constitution will be found in Schminke, Monumenta Has- 
aiaca, vol. 2. p. 688 : " Pro Hassiae Ecclesiis, et si delude nonnuUae 
oliiB ad idem nostra exemplo provocarentur.^' f Synodus in 

nomine Domini congregata. Ibid. J Ne homines non intelli- 
gant. Ibid cap. 3. § Non admittlraus verbum aliud quam 

ipsiHS pastoris nostri. Ibid. cap. 2. |J Si quia pius, in verbc 

•ancto et exercitatus, docere petit verbiim ?aiictum, ^oa repeUatur, 
a Deo enim interne mittitur. Ibid. cap. 23. 



42 



tilSTOHY OF THE HEFOEMATION. 



any thing else than a simple minister of the word of 
God* 

" The ministers are servants, and consequently they 
ought not to be lords, princes, or governors. 

" Let the faithful assemble and choose their bishops 
and deacons. Each church should elect its own pastor.f 
Let those who are elected bishops be consecrated 
to their office by the imposition of the hands of three 
bishops ; and as for the deacons, if there are no minis- 
ters present, let them receive the laying on of hands 
from the elders of the church.^ 

If a bishop causes any scandal to the church by his 
effeminacy, by the splendor of his garments, or by levity 
of conduct, and if, on being warned, he persists, let him 
be deposed by the church.§ 

Let each church place its bishop in a condition to live 
with bis family, and to be hospitable, as St. Paul enjoins ; 
but let the bishops exact nothing for their casual duties. || 

" On every Sunday let there be in some suitable place 
an assembly of all the men who are in the number of the 
saints, to regulate with the bishop, according to God's 
word, all the affairs of the church, and to excommunicate 
whoever gives occasion of scandal to the church ; for the 
church of Christ has never existed without exercising 
the power of excommunication.^ 

" As a weekly assembly is necessary for the direction 
of the particular churches, so a general synod should be 
held annually for the direction of all the churches in the 
country.** 

* Ne quls putet, nos hie per episcopos, alios intelligere quam 
ministros Dei verbi. Moaumenta Hassiaca, cap. 23. f Eligat 

quaevis ecclesia episcopum suum. Ibid. cap. 23. { Manus im- 
ponant duo ex senioribus, nisi alii episcopi intersint. Ibid. cap. 21. 

§ Deponat ecclesia ep.scopum suum, quod ad earn spectet judi- 
care de voce pasturum. Ibid. cap. 23. || Alat quaevis ecclesia 

episcopum suum, sicque illi administret ut cum sua famiiia vivere 
possit. Ibid. cap. 23. 11 Fiat conventus fidelium in congruo 

loco, ad Quem quotquot ex viris in sanctorum numero habentur. . . , 
Christi ecclesiam nu-iquara fuisse sine excommunicatione. Ibid, 
cap. 15. ** Ut semel pro toto Hessia celebretur synodus a pud 
Harpurgum tertia dominica poet pascha. Ibid. cap. 18. 



TWO ELEMENTS IN THE CHUECIt. 



43 



"All the pastors are its natural members ; but each 
church shall further elect from its body a man full of the 
Spirit and of faith, to whom it shall intrust its powers 
for all that is in the jurisdiction of the synod.* 

"Three visitors shall be elected yearly, with com- 
mission to go through all the churches, to examine those 
who have been elected bishops, to confirm those who 
have been approved of, and to provide for the execution 
of the decrees of the synod." 

It will no doubt be found that this first evangelical 
constitution went in some points to the extreme of eccle- 
siastical democracy ; but certain institutions had crept 
in that were capable of increase and of changing its 
nature. Six superintendents for life were afterwards 
substituted for the three annual visitors — who, accord- 
ing to the primitive institution, might be simple mem- 
bers of the church — and as has been remarked, f the en- 
croachments, whether of these superintendents or of the 
state, gradually paralyzed the activity and independence 
of the churches of Hesse. This constitution fared like 
that of the Abh6 Si^yes, in the year eight — a. d. 1799 — 
which although intended to be republican, served through 
the influence of Napoleon Bonaparte to establish the des- 
potism of the empire. 

It was not the less a remarkable work. Romish 
doctors have reproached the Reformation for making the 
church a too interior institution. J In effect, the Reforma- 
tion and Popery recognize two elements in the church — 
the one exterior, the other interior ; but while Popery 
gives precedence to the former, the Reformation assigns 
it to the latter. If however it be a reproach against the 
Reformation for having an inward church only, and for 
not creating an external one, the remarkable constitu- 
tion of which we have just exhibited a few features, will 
save us the trouble of replying. The exterior ecclesias- 

* Uaiversi episcopi. . . . Quaelibet ecclesia congregetur et eligat 
ex 8e ipsa unum plenum fide et Spir.tu Dei. Monumeuta Hassaica, 
•jap. ] 8. t i^ettig, Die Freie Kirche. t I'^is is the opinion 
et forth in the Symbolik of Dr. Mohler, the most celebrated defender 
of the Romish doctrine among our contemporaries. 



44 HISTOHr OF THE REFORMATION. 



tical order, which then sprang from the very heart of the 
Reformation, is far more perfect than that of Popery. 

One great question presented itself: Will these 
principles be adopted by all the churches of the Refor^ 
mation? 

Every thing seemed to indicate that they would. At 
that time the most pious men were of opinion that the 
ecclesiastical power proceeded from the members of the 
church. On withdrawing from the hierarchical extreme, 
they flung themselves into a democratical one. Luther 
himself had professed this doctrine as early as 1523. 
When the Calixtins of Bohemia found that the bishops 
of their country refused them ministers, they had gone 
so far as to take the first vagabond priest. "If you 
have no other means of procuring pastors," wrote Lu- 
ther to them, ** rather do without them, and let each 
head of a family read the gospel in his own house, and 
baptize his children,* sighing after the sacrament of the 
altar as the Jews at Babylon did for Jerusalem.^f The 
consecration of the pope creates priests — not of God, 
but of the devil, ordained solely to trample Jesus Christ 
under foot, to bring his sacrifice to naught, and to sell 
imaginary holocausts to the world in his name.J Men 
become ministers only by election and calling, and that 
ought to be effected in the following manner : 

" First, seek God by prayer ;§ then being assembled 
together with all those whose hearts God has touched, 
choose in the Lord^s name him or them whom you shall 
have acknowledged to be fitted for this ministry. After 
that, let the chief men among you lay their hands on 
them, and recommend them to the people and to the 
church. II 

Luther, in thus calling upon the people alone to 

♦ See Vol. I. p. 151 bot. f Tutius enim et salubrias esset, 
quemlibet patrem-familias suae domui legere Evangelium. L. 0pp. 
Lat. 2. 363. X Per ordines papisticos non sacerdotes De\ sed 

eacerdotee Satanse, tantum ut Christum conculcent. lb d. 364. 

§ Orationibus turn privatis turn publicis. Ibid. 370. || Eligite 
qaem et quos volueritis. Turn impositis super eos manibuB, sint hoc 
ipso yestri episcopi, vestri miaistri, seu pastorea Ibid. 



LUTHER ON STATE INTERFERENCE. 43 



nominate their pastors, submitted to the necessities of 
the times in Bohemia. It was requisite to constitute 
the ministry ; and as the ministry had no existence, it 
could not then have the legitimate part that belongs to 
it in the choice of God's ministers. 

But another necessity, proceeding in like manner 
from the state of affairs, was to incline Luther to devi- 
ate in Saxony from the principles he had formerly laid 
down. 

It can hardly be said that the German Keformation 
began with the lower classes, as in Switzerland and 
Prance ; and Luther could scarcely find anywhere that 
Christian people which should have played so great a 
part in his new constitution. Ignorant men, conceited 
townspeople, who would not even maintain their minis- 
ters, these were the members of the church. Now what 
could be done with such elements ? 

But if the people were indifferent, the princes were 
not so. They stood in the foremost rank of the great 
battle of the Reformation, and sat on the first bench in 
the council. The democratic organization was therefore 
compelled to give way to an organization conformable 
to the civil government. The church is composed ot 
Christians, and they are taken wherever they are found, 
high or low. It was particularly in high stations that 
Luther found them. He admitted the princes — as Zwin- 
gle did the council of Two Hundred — as representatives 
of the people, and henceforward the influence of the state 
became one of the principal elements in the constitution 
of the evangelical church in Germany. 

Thus Luther, setting out in principle from the demo- 
cratic, arrived in fact at the Erastian extreme. Never 
perhaps was there so immense a space between the 
premises laid down by any man and the conduct he 
adopted. If Luther crossed that wide interval without 
hesitation, it was not from mere inconsistency on his 
part; he yielded to the necessities of the times. The 
rules of church government are not, like the doctrines 
of the gospel, of an absolute nature; their applicatioE 
depends in a measure on the state of the church. Never 



46 



HISTORY OF THE HEFORMATION. 



theless there was some inconsistency in Luther : he ofteD 
expressed himself in a contradictory manner on what 
princes ought and ought not to do in the church. This 
is a point upon which the reformer and his age had no 
very settled opinions ; there were other questions to be 
cleared up. 

In the mind of the reformer the tutelage of the princee 
was only to be provisional. The faithful being still in 
their minority, they had need of a guardian ; but the era 
of the churches majority might arrive, and then would 
come its emancipation. 

As we said in another place,* we will not decide on 
this great controversy of church and state. But there 
are certain ideas which can never be forgotten. God is 
the principle from which every being emanates, and who 
ought to govern the whole world — societies as well as 
individuals — the state not less than the church. God 
has to do with governments, and governments with God. 
The great truths of which the church is the depository 
are given from above to exert their influence on the 
whole nation — on him who is seated on the throne, as 
well as on the peasant in his cottage ; and it is not only 
as an individual that the prince must be partaker of this 
heavenly light, it is also that he may receive a divine 
wisdom as governor of his people. God must be in the 
state. To place nations, governments, social and politi- 
cal life, on one side, and God, his \vord, and his church 
on the other, as if there were a gn.at gulf between them, 
and that these two rrders of things should never meet, 
would be at once high treason against man and against 
God. 

But if there ought to be a close union between these 
two spheres, the 9hurch and state, we ought to seek the 
means best calculated to obtain it. Now, if the direc- 
tion of the church is intrusted to the civil government, 
as was the case in Saxony, there is great reason to feai 
lest the reality of this union should be compromised, aiid 
the infiltration of heavenly strength into the body of ttije 
nation be obstructed. The church administered bj a 
• Vol n. 381. 



aOD IN THE STATi.. 



47 



civil department will often be sacrificed to political ends, 
and gradually becoming secularized, will lose its pris- 
tine vigor. This at least has taken place in Germany, 
where in some places religion has sunk to the rank of a 
temporal administration. In order that any created be 
ing may exercise all the influence of which it is capable, 
it ought to have a free development. Let a tree grow 
unconfined in the open fields, you will better enjoy its 
cool shade, and gather more abundant fruits, than if you 
planted it in a vase and shut it up in your chamber 
Such a tree is the church of Christ. 

The recourse to the civil power, which was perhaps 
at that time necessary in Germany, had still another 
consequence : when Protestantism became an affair of 
governments, it ceased to be universal. The new spirit 
was capable of creating a new earth. But instead of 
opening new roads and of purposing the regeneration of 
all Christendom and the conversion of the whole world, 
Protestantism shrank back, and Protestants sought to 
settle themselves as comfortably as possible in a few 
German duchies. This timidity, which has been called 
prudence, did immense injury to the Reformation. 

The organizing power being once discovered in the 
councils of the princes, the reformers thought of organi- 
zation, and Luther applied to the task ; for although he 
was in an especial manner an assailant and Calvin an 
organizer, these two qualities, as necessary to the re- 
formers of the church as to the founders of empires, were 
not wanting in eitlier of these great servants of God. 

It was necessary to compose a new ministry, for 
most of the priests who had quitted the papacy were 
content to receive the watchword of reform without hav- 
ing personally experienced the sanctifying virtue of the 
truth. There was even one parish in which the priest 
preached the gospel in his principal church, and sang 
mass in his succursal.* 

But something more was wanting ; a Christian peo- 
ple had to be created. Alas," said Luther of some 

* In aede parochiali evangelico more docebat, in filiali mifisifloai 
Hi Sepk. p. 102. 



48 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 



of the adherents of the reform, " they have abandoned 
their Romish doctrines and rites, and they scoflf a.t 
ours."* 

I uther did not shrink from before this double neces* 
sity, and he made provision for it. Convinced that a 
general visitation of the churches was necessary, he ad- 
dressed the elector on this subject, on the 22d of October, 
1 526. " Your highness, in your quality of guardian of 
youth, and of all those who know not how to take care 
of themselves," said he, " should compel the inhabitants 
who desire neither pastors nor schools, to receive these 
means of grace, as they are compelled to work on the 
roads, on bridges, and such like services.f The papal 
order being abolished, it is your duty to regulate these 
things ; no other person cares about them, no other can, 
and no other ought to do so. Commission, therefore, 
four persons to visit all the country ; let two of them 
inquire into the tithes and church property ; and let two 
take charge of the doctrine, schools, churches, and pas- 
tors." It may be asked, on reading these words, whethei 
the church which was formed in the first century without 
the support of princes, could not in the sixteenth be re- 
formed without them ? 

Luther was not content with soliciting in writing 
the intervention of the prince. He was indignant at 
seeing the courtiers, who in the time of the Electoi 
Frederick had shown themselves the inveterate enemies 
of the Reformation, now rushing, sporting, laughing, 
skipping," as he said, on the spoils of the church. Ac- 
cordingly, at the end of this year, the elector having 
come to Wittemberg, the reformer repaired immediately 
to the palace, made his complaint to tii9 prince-electoral, 
whom he met at the gate, and then, without caring about 
those who would have stopped him, forced his way into 
the elector's bedchamber, and addressing this prince, 
who was surprised at so unexpected a visit, begged him 
to remedy the evils of the church. The visitation of the 

• Sic enim sua papistica neglexerunt, et nostra contemnunt 
L. Epp. 2. 24. t Als oberster Vormund der Jugenc und ailef 
die 68 bedurfeu, soil sie mit GewaU dazu balten. Ibid. 130. 



MELANCTHON'S INSTRUCTIONS. 49 



churcues was resolved upon, and Melancthon was com- 
missioned to draw up the necessary instructions. 

In 1526, Luther published his German Mass,'' by 
which he signified the order of church service in general. 
*^ The real evangelical assemblies," he said, do not take 
place publicly, pell-mell, admitting people of every sort ;* 
but they are formed of serious Christians, who confesi^ 
the gospel by their words and by their lives, f and in 
the midst of whom we may reprove and excommunicate 
those who do not live according to the rule of Christ 
Jesus.J I cannot institute such assemblies, for I have 
no one to place in them ;§ but if the thing becomes pos- 
sible, I shall not be wanting in this duty." 

It was with a conviction that he must give the 
church, not the best form of worship imaginable, but the 
best possible, that Melancthon, like Luther, labored at 
his Instructions. 

The German Reformation at that time tacked about, 
as it were. If Lambert in Hesse had gone to the ex 
treme of a democratical system, Melancthon in Saxony 
was approximating the contrary extreme of traditional 
principles. A conservative principle was substituted 
lor a reforming one. Melancthon wrote to one of the 
inspectors, II "All the old ceremonies that you can pre- 
serve, pray do so.^ Do not innovate much, for every 
innovation is injurious to the people."** 

They retained, therefore, the Latin liturgy, a few 
<}erman hymns being mingled with it ;f f the communion 
in one kind for those only who scrupled from habit to 
take it in both ; a confession made to the priest without 

* Non publice, sive promiscue et admissa omnis generis plebe. 
De Missa Germ. f Qui nomina sua in catalogum referrent, 

adds he. Ibid. f Excommunicari qui Christiano more se non 

gereront. Ibid. § Neque enim habeo qui sint idonel. Ibid. 

!l Dr. De Wette thinks this letter is Luther's, L. Epp. 3. 352. 
It appears clear to me, as also to Dr. Bretschneider, that it is Me- 
ISLQCthon's. Luther never went so far in the way of concess on. 

IF Observo quantum ex veteribus ca3remoniis retineri potest, 
retineas. Corp. Ref. 2. 990. ** Omnis novitas nocet in Tulgo. 

Ibid. ft Non aboleas earn totam — the Latin mass: — satis est 
alicubi miscere Germanicas cantationes. Ibid. 

Hist Rc< IV 



50 HlSTORl OF THE REFORMATIOF. 



being in any way obligatory ; many saints^ days, tht 
Bacred vestments,* and other rites, "in whicb,^' said 
Melancthon, " there is no harm, whatever Zwingle may 
8ay."f And at the same time they set forth with reserve 
the doctrines of the Reformation. 

It is but right to confess the dominion of facts and 
circumstances upon these ecclesiastical organizations ; 
but there is a dominion which rises higher still — that of 
the word of God. 

Perhaps Melancthon did all that could be effected at 
that time ; but it was necessary for the work to be one 
day resumed and reestablished on its primitive plan, and 
this was Calvin's glory. 

A cry of astonishment was heard both from the camp 
of Rome and from that of the Reformation. " Our cause 
is betrayed," exclaimed some of the evangelical Chris- 
dans ; " the liberty is taken away that Jesus Christ had 
given us."J 

On their part the Ultramontanists triumphed in Me- 
lancthon's moderation ; they called it a retraction, and 
took advantage of it to insult the reform. Cochloaus 
published a "horrible" engraving, as he styles it him- 
self, in which, from beneath a single hood was seen 
issuing a seven-headed monster representing Luther. 
Each of these heads had different features, and all utter- 
ing together the most frightful and contradictory words, 
kept disputing, tearing, and devouring each other.§ 

The astonished elector resolved to communicate Me* 
lancthon's paper to Luther. But never did the reformei's 
respect for his friend show itself in a more striking 
manner. He made only one or two unimportant addi' 
tions to this plan, and sent it back accompanied with the 
highest eulogiums. The Romanists said that the tiger 
caught in a net was licking the hands that clipped his 
talons. But it was not so. Luther knew that the aim 

♦ Ut retineantur vestes usitatae in sacns. Corp. Ref ad Joaam, 
Dec. 20, 1527. f Vel si Zwinglius ipse pr89dicaturu8 sit. Corp. 
Ref. 2. 910. { Alii dicerent prodi causam. Camer. Vita Mel ano 
thon. p. 107. § MoQstrosus ille Germaaias partuit, Lailiero3 
Bopticeps. CoohloBus, p. 169. / 



yiBITATIOK OF THE CHUECHBS. 51 



of Melancthon's labors was to strengthen the very soul 
of the Reformation in all the churches of Saxony. That 
was sufficient for him. He thought besides, that in 
every thing there must be a transition ; and being justly 
convinced that his friend was more than himself a man 
of transition, he frankly accepted his views. 

The general visitation began. Luther in Saxony, 
Spalatin in the districts of Altenburg and Zwickau, Me- 
lancthon in Thuringia, and Thuring in Franconia, with 
ecclesiastical deputies and several lay colleagues, com- 
menced the work in October and November, 1528. 

They purified the clergy by dismissing every priest 
of scandalous life ;* assigned a portion of the church 
property to the maintenance of public worship, and 
placed the remainder beyond the reach of plunder. They 
continued the suppression of the convents, and every- 
where established unity of instruction. " Luther's greatr 
er and smaller catechisms,'' which appeared in 1529, con- 
tributed more perhaps than any other writings to prop- 
agate throughout the new churches the ancient faith of 
the apostles. The visitors commissioned the pastors of 
the great towns, under the title of superintendents, to 
watch over the churches and the schools ; they main- 
tained the abolition of celibacy ; and the ministers of 
the word, become husbands and fathers, formed the germ 
of a third estate, whence in after-years were diffused in 
all ranks of society learning, activity, and light. Thia 
is one of the truest causes of that intellectual and moral 
superiority which indisputably distinguishes the evan- 
gelical nations. 

The organization of the churches in Saxony, not- 
withstanding its imperfections, produced for a time at 
least the most important results. It was because the 
word of God prevailed ; and because, wherever this 
word exercises its power, secondary errors and abuses 
are paralyzed. The very discretion that was employed 
really originated in a good principle. The reformers, 
unlike the enthusiasts, did not utterly reject an institu* 

* Viginti fere rudes et inepti, multiqae concubiiuurii ei potsr 
tores depreh^Qfli sunt Seckeud. p. 10^. 



63 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 



tion because it was corrupted. They did not say, fox 
example, " The sacraments are disfigured, let us do with- 
out them ; the ministry is corrupt, let us reject it but 
they rejected the abuse, and restored the use. This pru- 
dence is the mark of a work of God ; and if Luther 
sometimes permitted the chaff to remain along with the 
wheat, Calvin appeared later, and more thoroughly 
purged the Christian threshing-floor. 

The organization which was at that time going on 
in Saxony, exerted a strong reaction on all the German 
empire, and the doctrine of the gospel advanced with 
gigantic strides. God^s design in turning aside from 
the reformed states of Germany the thunderbolt that he 
caused to fall upon the seven-hilled city, was clearly 
manifest. Never were years more usefully employed; 
and it was not only to framing a constitution that the 
Reformation devoted itself, it was also to extending its 
doctrine. 

The duchies of Luneberg and Brunswick, many of 
the most important imperial cities, as Nuremberg, Augs- 
burg, Ulm, Strasburg, Gottingen, Gosslar, Nordhausen, 
Lubeck, Bremen, and Hamburg, removed the tapers 
from the chapels, and substituted in their place the 
brighter torch of the word of God. 

In vain did the frightened canons allege the author- 
ity of the church. " The authority of the church," re- 
plied Kempe and Zechenhagen the reformer of Hamburg^ 
"cannot be acknowledged unless the church herself 
obeys her pastor Jesus Christ."* Pomeranus visited 
many places to put a finishing hand to the reform. 

In Franconia, the Margrave George of Brandenburg, 
having reformed Anspach and Bayreuth, wrote to his 
ancient protector, Ferdinand of Austria, who had knit 
his brows on being informed of these proceedings, **I 
have acted thus by God^s order ; for he commands 
princes to take care not only of the bodies of their sub- 
jects, but also of their souls.^f 

• Evangelici auctoritatem Ecclesi® non aliter agnoscendam esse 
eontendebant quain si vocem pastoris Christi sequeretur. Seek. 1. 245. 
\ NoQ modo quoad corpus, sed ^tiam quoad ai^imom. Ibid. 2. 121 



ELIZABETH OF BRANDENBUtta. dS 



In East Friesland, on new-year's day, 1527, a Domin- 
ican named Resius, having put on his hood,* ascended 
the pulpit at Noorden, and declared himself ready to 
maintain certain theses according to the tenor of the 
gospel. After silencing the abbot of Noorden by the 
soundness of his arguments, Resius took off his cowl, 
left it on the pulpit, and was received in the nave by 
the acclamations of the faithful. Ere long the whole of 
Friesland laid aside the uniform of popery, as Resius 
had done. 

At Berlin, Elizabeth, electress of Brandenburg, hav- 
ing read Luther's works, felt a desire to receive the 
Lord's supper in conformity with Christ's institution. A 
minister secretly administered it at the festival of Eas- 
ter, 1528 ; but one of her children informed the elector. 
Joachim was greatly exasperated, and ordered his wife 
to keep her room for several days ;f it was even rumored 
that he intended shutting her up. J This princess, being 
deprived of all religious support, and mistrusting the 
perfidious manoeuvres of the Romish priests, resolved 
to escape by flight ; and claimed the assistance of her 
brother. Christian II. of Denmark, then residing at Tor- 
gau. Taking advantage of a dark night, she quitted 
the castle in a peasant's dress, and got into a rude coun- 
try wagon that was waiting for her at the gate of the 
city. Elizabeth urged on the driver, when, in a bad 
road, the wain broke down. The electress, hastily un- 
fastening a handkerchief she wore round her head, flung 
it to the man, who employed it in repairing the damage, 
and erelong Elizabeth arrived at Torgau. " If I should 
expose you to any risk," said she to her uncle the elec- 
tor of Saxony, I am ready to go wherever Providence 
may lead me." But John assigned her a residence in 
the castle of Lichtenberg, on the Elbe, near Wittemberg. 
Without taking upon us to approve of Elizabeth's flight, 
let us acknowledge the good that God's providence de- 

* Resius, cucuUum indutus, suggestum ascendit. Scultet. Ann. 
p. 93. t Aliquot diebus a marito in cubiculo detenta fuisse, 

Seckend. 2. 122. | Marchio statuerat earn immurare. L. Epp. 
ftd LenkioiCf 3. 296. 



54 



HISTORY OP THE RE FORMA TICK. 



rived from it. This amiable lady, who lived at Lichten* 
berg' in the study of his word, seldom appearing at court, 
frequently going to hear Luther's sermons, and exercis- 
ing a salutary influence over her children, who some- 
times had permission to see her, was the first of those 
pious princesses whom the house of Brandenburg has 
counted, and even still counts among its members. 

At the same time, Holstein, Sleswick, and Silesia de- 
cided in favor of the Reformation ; and Hungary, as well 
as Bohemia, saw the number of its adherents increase. 

In every place, instead of a hierarchy seeking its 
righteousness in the works of man, its glory in external 
pomp, its strength in a material power, the church of 
the apostles reappeared, humble as in primitive times, 
and like the ancient Christians, looking for its righteous- 
ness, its glory, and its power, solely in the blood of the 
Lamb and in the word of God. Rev. 13 : 11. 



EDICT OF OPEN 



CHAPTER IV. 

Edict of Ofen — Persecutions — Wiukler, Carpenter, and Reyser— 
Alarm in Germany — Pack's forgery — League of the reformed 
princes — Advice of the reformers — Luther's pacific counsel- - 
Surprise of the Papist princes — Pack's scheme not improbable- - 
Vigor of the Reformation. 

These triumphs of the gospel could not pass unper- 
ceiVed; there was a powerful reaction, and until politi- 
cal circumstances should permit a grand attack upon the 
Reformation on the very soil where it was established, 
and of fighting against it by means of diets, and if nec- 
essary by armies, the adversaries began to persecute it 
in detail in the Romish countries with tortures and the 
Bcaifold. 

On the 20th of August, 152T, king Ferdinand, by 
the edict of Ofen in Hungary, published a tariff of 
crimes and penalties, in which he threatened death by 
the sword, by fire, or by water,* against whoever should 
say that Mary was like other women ; or partake of the 
sacrament in a heretical manner; or consecrate the 
bread and wine, not being a Romish priest: and fur- 
ther, in the second case, the house in which the sacra- 
ment should have been administered was to be confis- 
cated or razed to the ground. 

Such was not the legislation of Luther. Link having 
asked him if it were lawful for the magistrate to put the 
false prophets to death, meaning the Sacramentarians, 
whose doctrines Luther had so violently attacked, f the 
reformer replied, I am slow whenever life is concerned, 
even if the offender is exceedingly guilty.| I can by no 
means admit that the false teachers should be put to 

• Die sollen mit dem Feuer, Schwerdt oder Wasser gestrafk wer- 
den. Ferd. Mandat. L. 0pp. 19. 696. f Contra hostes sacra- 

mentarios strenue nobiscum certare. Epp. to Lenk, July 14, 1528 

} Ego ad judicium sanguinis tardus sum, etiam ubi mehtuio 
ftbuiidat Ibid. 



56 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



death :* it is sufficient to remove them." For ages the 
Romish church has bathed in blood. Luther was the 
first to profess the great principles of humanity and 
religious liberty. 

Recourse was sometimes had to more expeditious 
means than the scaffold itself. George Winkler, pastor of 
Halle, having been summoned before Archbishop Albert 
in the spring of 1527, for having administered the sac- 
rament in both kinds, had been acquitted. As this min- 
ister was returning home along an unfrequented road in 
the midst of the woods, he was suddenly attacked by a 
number of horsemen, who murdered him, and immediately 
fled through the thickets without taking any thing from 
his person.f "The world," exclaimed Luther, "is a 
cavern of assassins under the command of the devil ; an 
inn, whose landlord is a brigand, and which bears this 
sign, Lies and Murder: and none are more readily put 
to death therein than those who proclaim Jesus Christ." 

At Munich, George Carpenter was led to the stake 
for having denied that the baptism of water is able by 
its own virtue to save a man. " When you are thrown 
into the fire," said some of his brethren, " give us a sign 
by which we may know that you persevere in the faith.^ 
"As long as I can open my mouth, I will confess the name 
of the Lord Jesus."| The executioner stretched him on 
a ladder, tied a small bag of gunpowder round his neck, 
and then flung him into the flames. Carpenter immediate- 
ly cried out, " Jesus, Jesus f and while the executioner 
was turning him again and again with his hooks, the mar- 
tyr several times repeated the word Jesus, and expired. 

At Landsberg nine persons were consigned to the 
flames, and at Munich twenty-nine were thrown into the 
water. At Scherding, Leonard Keyser, a friend and 
disciple of Luther, having been condemned by the bishopp^ 
had his head shaved, and being dressed in a sraockfrock, 

• Nullo modo possum admittere falsos doctores occidi. Lpp. tc 
Lenk, July 14, 1528. f Mox en:m ut iuterfecerunt, aufugeruat 
per avia loca, nihil praedae aut pecuniae capientes. Cochl. p. 162. 

X Dum OS aperire licebit, Servatoris nostri nomen profiteri nun 
quam intermittam. Scultet. 2. 110. 



PERSECUTIONS. 



57 



was placed on horseback. As the executioners were 
cursing and swearing because they could not disentan- 
gle the ropes with which his limbs were to be tied, he 
said to them mildly, " Dear friends, your bonds are not 
necessary ; my Lord Christ has already bound me.'' 
When he drew near the stake, Keyser looked at the 
crowd and exclaimed, Behold the harvest ! 0 Master, 
send furth thy laborers." He then ascended the scaffold 
and said, " 0 Jesus, save me ; I am thine." These were 
his last words.* Who am I, a wordy preacher," cried 
Luther, when he received the news of his death, "in 
comparison with this great doer ?"f 

Thus the Reformation manifested by such striking 
works the truth that it had come to reestablish ; namely, 
that faith is not, as Rome maintains, a historical, vain, 
dead knowledge,! but a lively faith, the work of the 
Holy Ghost, the channel by which Christ fills the heart 
with new desires and with new affections, the true wor- 
ship of the living God. 

These martyrdoms filled Germany with horror, and 
gloomy forebodings descended from the thrones among 
the ranks of the people. Around the domestic hearth, in 
the long winter evenings, the conversation wholly turned 
on prisons, tortures, scaffolds, and martyrs ; the slight- 
est noise alarmed the old men, women, and children. 
Such narratives gathered strength as they passed from 
mouth to mouth ; the rumor of a universal conspiracy 
against the gospel spread through all the empire. Its 
adveisaries, taking advantage of this terror, announced 
with a mysterious air that they must look during this 
year, 1528, for some decisive measure against the re- 
form. § One scoundrel. Pack, resolved to profit by thi-S 
state of mind to satisfy his avarice. 

* Incenso jam igne, clara voce proclamavit : TutLs sum, Jesu! 
Salva me ! Seckend. 2. 85. f Tarn impar verbosus praedicar 

tor, illi tam potent! verbi operator. L. Epp. 3. 1214. X Si quia 
dixerit fidem non esse veram fidem, licet noa fit viva, aut eum qui 
6dem sine charitate habet, non esse christianum, anathema sit. 
done. Frid. Sess. 6, p, 28. § Neacio quid mirari quod hoc anno 
X>Dtra reformationem expectandum sit. Seckend. 2. 101. 



58 HISTORY OF THE EEFORMATIOK 



No blows are more terrible to a cause than those 
which it inflicts upon itself. The Reformation, seized 
with a dizziness, was on the verge of self-destruction. 
There is a spirit of error that conspires against the cause 
of truth, beguiling by subtlety, 2 Cor. 11:3; the Ref- 
ormation was about to experience its attacks, and to 
stagger under the most formidable assault — perturbs 
iion of thought, and estrangement from the ways oi 
wisdom and of truth. 

Otho Pack, vice-chancellor to Duke George of Saxony, 
was a crafty and dissipated man,* who took advantage 
of his oflSce, and had recourse to all sorts of practices to 
procure money. The duke having on one occasion sent 
him to the diet of Nuremberg as his representative, the 
bishop of Merseburg confided to him his contribution 
towards the imperial government. The bishop having 
been afterwards called upon for this money. Pack de- 
clared that he had paid it to a citizen of Nuremberg, 
whose seal and signature he produced. This paper wa» 
a forgery ; Pack himself was the author of it.f The 
wretch, however, put an impudent face on the matter, 
and having escaped conviction, preserved the confidence 
of his master. Erelong an opportunity presented itself 
of exercising his criminal talents on a larger scale. 

No one entertained greater suspicions with regard 
to the papists t-han the landgrave of Hesse. Young, 
susceptible, and restless, he was always on the alert. 
In the month of February, 1528, Pack happening to be 
at Cassel to assist Philip in some difficult business, the 
landgrave imparted to him his fears. If any one could 
have had any knowledge of the designs of the papists, 
it must have been the vice-chancellor of one of the great- 
est enemies to the Reformation. The crafty Pack heaved 
a sigh, bent down his eyes, and was silent. Philip im- 
mediately became uneasy, entreated him, and promised 
to do nothing that would injure the duke. Then Pack, 
as if he had allowed an important secret to be torn from 

• Homo erat versutus, et praeterea prodigus, quo vitio ad alia 
Inductas est. Seckend. 2. 94. f It is still to be seen in the 

records of Dresden. 



PACK'S FOEaEEY 



59 



him with regret, confessed that a league against the Lu- 
therans had been concluded at Breslau, on the Wednes- 
day following Jubilate Sunday, 12th of May, 1527 ; and 
engaged to procure the original of this act for the land- 
grave, who offered him for this service a remuneration 
of ten thousand florins. This was the greatest transao 
tion that the wretched man had ever undertaken ; but it 
tended to nothing less than the utter overthrow of the 
empire. 

The landgrave was amazed: he restrained himself, 
however, wishing to see the act with his own eyes before 
informing his allies. He therefore repaired to Dresden. 
" I cannot," said Pack, *• furnish you with the original ; 
the duke always carries it about his person to read it to 
other princes whom he hopes to gain over. Recently at 
Leipsic, he showed it to Duke Henry of Brunswick. But 
here is a copy made by his highness' order." The land- 
grave took the document, which bore all the marks of 
the most perfect authenticity. It was crossed by a cord 
of black silk, and fastened at both ends by the seal of 
the ducal chancery.* Above was an impression from 
the ring Duke George always wore on his finger, with 
the three quarterings that Philip had so often seen ; at 
the top the coronet, and at the bottom the two lions. 
He had no more doubts as to its authenticity. But how 
can we describe his indignation as he read this guilty 
document ? King Ferdinand, the electors of Mentz and 
of Brandenburg, Duke George of Saxony, the dukes of 
Bavaria, the bishops of Salzburg, Wurtzburg, and Bam- 
berg, had entered into a coalition to call upon the elec- 
tor of Saxony to deliver up the arch-heretic Luther, with 
all the apostate priests, monks, and nuns, and to re^fa- 
tablish the ancient worship. If he made default, his 
states were to be invaded, and this prince and his de- 
scendants for ever dispossessed. The same measure 
was next to be applied to the landgrave, only — " it was 
your father-in-law Duke George," said Pack to Philip, 
" who got this clause inserted " — his states were to be 

* Cui filum sericum circumligatum, et sigillum caneellaris imf 
preesom erat. Seek. 2. 94. 



50 HISTORY OP THE REFORMATIOIT. 



restored to him in consideration of his youth, if he be» 
came fully reconciled to the holy church. The document 
stated, moreover, the contingents of men and money to 
be provided by the confederates, and the share they were 
to have in the spoils of the two heretical princes.* 

Many circumstances tended to confirm the authen- 
ticity of this paper. Ferdinand, Joachim of Branden- 
burg, and George of Saxony, had in fact met at Breslau 
on the day indicated, and an evangelical prince, the Mar- 
grave George, had seen Joachim leave Ferdinand^s apart- 
ments, holding in his hand a large parchment to which 
several seals were attached. The agitated landgrave 
caused a copy to be taken of this document, promised 
secrecy for a time, paid Pack four thousand florins, and 
engaged to make up the sum agreed upon, if he would 
procure him the original. And then, wishing to prevent 
the storm, he hastened to Weimar to inform the elector 
of this unprecedented conspiracy. 

"I have seen,'' said he to John and his son, *'nay 
more, I have had in my hands a duplicate of this horri- 
ble treaty. Signatures, seals, nothing was wanting.f 
Here is a copy, and I bind myself to place the original 
before your eyes. The most frightful danger threatens 
us, ourselves, our faithful subjects, and the word of 
God.'' 

The elector had no reason to doubt the account the 
landgrave had just gi^en him ; he was stunned, con- 
founded, and overpowered. The promptest measures 
alone could avert such unprecedented disasters ; every 
thing must be risked to extricate them from certain 
destruction. The impetuous Philip breathed fire and 
flames ; J his plan of defence was already prepared. He 
presented it, and in the first moment of consternation 
carried the consent of his ally as it were by assault 
On the 9th of March, 1528, the two princes agreed* to 
employ all their forces to defend themselves, and even 
to take the offensive, and sacrifice life, honor, rank, sub- 

• Hortleder, De Bello Germanico, 2. 579. f Nam is aflSjN 

mabat se archetypon vidlsse, commemorabat o^^payidag. Corp. Bef. 
1. 986. t Mirabiliter iucensus erat. Ibid. 



LEAGUE OF THE PRINCES. 



61 



jects, and states, that they might preserve the word of 
God. The dukes of Prussia, Mecklenburg, Liineburg, 
and Pomerania, the kings of Denmark and Poland, and 
the margrave of Brandenburg, were to be invited to 
enter into this alliance. Six hundred thousand florins 
were destined for the expenses of the war ; and to pro- 
sure them, they would raise loans, pledge their cities^ 
and sell the offerings in the churches.* They had already 
begun to raise a powerful army.f The landgrave set 
out in person for Nuremberg and Anspach. The alarm 
was general in those countries ; the commotion was felt 
throughout all Germ any, J and even beyond it. John 
Zapolya king of Hungary, at that time a refugee at 
Cracow, promised a hundred thousand florins to raise an 
army, and twenty thousand florins a month for its main- 
tenance. Thus a spirit of error was misleading the 
princes ; if it should carry away the reformers also, the 
destruction of the Reformation would not be far distant. 

But God was watching over them. Supported on 
the rock of the word, Melancthon and Luther replied, 
" It is written, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." 
As soon as these two men whom the danger threatened — 
for it was they who were to be delivered up to the papal 
power — saw the youthful landgrave drawing the sword, 
and the aged elector himself putting his hand on the 
hilt, they uttered a cry, and this cry, which was heard 
in heaven, saved the Reformation. 

Luther, Pomeranus, and Melancthon immediately for- 
warded the following advice to the elector: "Above all 
things, let not the attack proceed from our side, and let 
no blood be shed through our fault. Let us wait for the 
enemy, and seek after peace. Send an ambassador to 
the emperor to make him acquainted with this hateful 
plot.'' 

Thus it was that the faith of the children of God, 
which is so despised by politicians, conducted them 

* Venditisque templorum donariis. Seckend. 2. 95. f Magno 
Btadio validum comparaverunt ambo exercitum. CochlcEus, p. 17L 

t Non leviter oommotos esse uostrorum animos. Corp. Eef, 
t 98^. 



93 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



aright, at the very moment when the diplomatists were 
going astray. The elector and his son declared to the 
landgrave that they would not assume the offensive. 
Philip was in amazement. "Are not the preparatiras 
of thfe Papists worthy an attack?" asked he.* "What, 
we will threaten war, and yet not make it? We will in- 
flame the hatred of our antagonists, and leave them time 
to prepare their forces ? No, no ; forward. It is thus 
we shall secure the means of an honorable peace." "If 
the landgrave desires to begin the war," replied the 
reformer, "the elector is not obliged to observe the 
treaty ; for we must obey God, rather than men. God 
and the right are above every alliance. Let us beware 
of painting the devil on our doors, and inviting him as 
godfather.f But if the landgrave is attacked, the elec- 
tor ought to go to his assistance ; for it is God's will 
that we preserve our faith." This advice which the re- 
formers gave cost them dear. Never did man, con- 
demned to the torture, endure a punishment like theirs. 
The fears excited by the landgrave were succeeded by 
the terrors inspired by the Papist princes. This cruel 
trial left them in great distress. "I am worn away 
with sorrow," cried Melancthon ; **^and this anguish puts 
me to the most horrible torture.J The issue," added he, 
" will be found on our knees before God."§ 

The elector, drawn in different directions by the 
theologians and the politicians, at last took a middle 
course: he resolved to assemble an army, "but only," 
said he, " to obtain peace." Philip of Hesse at length 
gave way, and forthwith sent copies of the famous treaty 
to Duke George, to the dukes of Bavaria, and to the 
emperor's representatives, calling upon them to renounce 
such cruel designs, "I would rather have a limb cut 
off," said he to his father-in-law, " than know you to be 
a member of such an alliance." 

* Landgravius praeparamenta adversariorum pro aggressione 
habebat. Seckend. 2. 95. f Man darf den Teufel nicht iiber die 
Thiir malen, noch ihn zu gevattern bitten. L. Epp. 3. 321. 

X Curae vehementer cruciarunt. Corj). Ref. 1, § K> 



SURPRISE OF THE PAPIST PEINOES. 



03 



The surprise of the German courts, when they read 
this document, is beyond description. Duke George im- 
mediately replied to the landgrave, that he had allowed 
himself to be deceived by unmeaning absurdities ; that 
he who pretended to have seen the original of this act 
was an infamous liar, and an incorrigible scoundrel; 
and called upon the landgrave to give up his authority, 
or else it might well be thought that he was himself the 
inventor of this impudent fabrication. King Ferdinand, 
the elector of Brandenburg, and all the pretended con- 
spirators, made similar replies. 

Philip of Hesse saw that he had been deceived ;* his 
confusion was only exceeded by his anger. He had in 
this affair justified the accusations of his adversaries 
who called him a hot-headed young man, and had com 
promised to the highest degree the cause of the Refor- 
mation and that of his people. He said afterwards, "If 
that business had not happened, it would no more hap- 
pen now. Nothing that I have done in all my life has 
caused me greater vexation." 

Pack fled in alarm to the landgrave, who caused him 
to be arrested ; and envoys from the several princes 
whom this scoundrel had compromised met at Cassel, 
and proceeded to examine him. He maintained that the 
original act of the alliance had really existed in the 
Dresden archives. In the following year the landgrave 
banished him from Hesse, proving by this action that he 
did not fear him. Pack was afterwards discovered in 
Belgium ; and at the demand of Duke George, who had 
never shown any pity towards him, he was seized, tor- 
tured, and finally beheaded. 

The landgrave was unwilling to have taken up arms 
to no purpose. The archbishop-elector of Mentz was 
compelled, on the 11th of June, 1528, to renounce in the 
camp of Herzkirchen all spiritual jurisdiction in Saxony 
and Hesse.f This was no small advantage. 

Scarcely had the arms been laid aside before Luthei 

• Wir fuhlten dass wir betrogen waren. Hortleder 4. 667t 
t Kopp, Hess. Gerichts. Verf 1. 107. 



64 HISTORY OP THE REFORMATION 



took up his pen and began a war of another kind, ** Im 
pious princes may deny this alliance as long as they 
please," wrote he to Link ; " I am very certain that it is 
not a chimera. These insatiable leeches will take no 
repose until they see the whole of Germany flowing with 
blood.'''*^ This idea of Luther's was the one generally 
entertained. " The document presented to the landgrave 
may be," it was said, " Pack's invention ; but all this 
fabric of lies is founded on some truth. If the alliance 
has not been concluded, it has been conceived."f 

Melancholy were the results of this affair. It inspired 
division in the bosom of the Reformation, and fanned the 
hatred between the two parties.^ The sparks from the 
piles of Keyser, Winkler, Carpenter, and so many other 
martyrs, added strength to the fire that was already 
threatening to set the empire in flames. It was under 
such critical circumstances, and with such menacing 
dispositions, that the famous diet of Spires was opened 
in March, 1529. The empire and the Papacy were in 
reality preparing to annihilate the Reformation, although 
in a manner different from what Pack had pretended. 
It was still to be learned whether more vital strength 
would be found in the revived church than in so many 
sects that Rome had easily crushed. Happily the faith 
had increased, and the constitution given to the church 
had imparted greater power to its adherents. AH were 
resolved on defending a doctrine so pure, and a church 
government so superior to that of Popery. During 
three years of tranquillity, the gospel tree had struck 
its roots deep ; and if the storm should burst, it would 
now be able to brave it. 

♦ Sanguisugae insatiabiles quiescere nolunt, nisi Grermaniam san- 
guine madere sentiant. June 14, 1528. f Non enim prorsu? 
oonficta res. Corp. Ref. 1. 988. t Haec minae apud inimicos 
cdia anxerint. Ibid. 985. 



ALLIAUCE OF CHARLES AND CLEMENT. 65 



CHAPTER V. 

Alliance between Charles and Clement VII — Omens — Hostility of 
the Papists — Arbitrary proposition of Charles — Resolutions of 
the diet — The Reformation in danger — Decision of the princes — 
Violence of Ferdinand — The schism completed. 

The sack of Rome, by exasperating the adherents of 
the Papacy, had given arms to all the enemies of Charles 
V. The French army under Lautrec had forced the im- 
perial army, enervated by the delights of a new Capua, 
to hide itself within the walls of Naples. Doria, at the 
head of his Genoese galleys, had destroyed the Spanish 
fleet, and all the imperial power seemed drawing to an 
end in Italy. But Doria suddenly declared for the em- 
peror ; pestilence carried off Lautrec and half of his 
troops ; and Charles, suffering only from alarm, had 
again grasped the power with a firm resolution to unite 
henceforward closely with the pontiff, whose humiliation 
had nearly cost him dear. On his side Clement VII., 
hearing the Italians reproach him for his illegitimate 
birth, and even refuse him the title of pope, said aloud, 
that he would rather be the emperor^s groom than the 
sport of his people. On the 29th of June, 1 528, a peace 
between the heads of the empire and of the church was 
concluded at Barcelona, based on the destruction of 
heresy ; and in November a diet was convoked to meet 
at Spires on the 21st of February, 1529. Charles was 
resolved to endeavor at first to destroy the reform by a 
federal vote ; but if this means did not suffice, to employ 
his whole power against it. The road being thus traced 
out, they were about to commence operations. 

Germany felt the seriousness of the position. Mourn- 
ful omens filled every mind. About the middle of Jan- 
uary, a great brightness in the sky had suddenly dis- 
persed the darkness of the night.* **What that fore- 
* Au aurora borealis. Magaum chasma, quo noz lota illumf 
imbatuj-." L. Epp. 3. 420. 

5 



66 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



bodes,'* exclaimed Luther, " God only knows." At the 
beginning of April there was a rumor of an earthquake 
that had engulfed castles, cities, and whole districts in 
Carinthia and Istria, and split the tower of St. Mark at 
Venice into four parts. If that is true," said the re- 
former, " these prodigies are the forerunners of the lay 
of Jesus Christ."* The astrologers declared that the 
aspect of the quartiles of Saturn and Jupiter, and the 
general position of the stars, was ominous. f The wa- 
ters of the Elbe rolled thick and stormy, and stones fell 
from the roofs of churches. "All these things," ex- 
claimed the terrified Melancthon, "excite me in no tri- 
fling degree."! 

The letters of convocation issued by the imperial 
government agreed but too well with these prodigies. 
The emperor, writing from Toledo to the elector, accused 
him of sedition and revolt. Alarming whispers passed 
from mouth to mouth that were sufficient to cause the 
fall of the weak. Duke Henry of Mecklenburg and the 
elector-palatine hastily returned to the side of popery. 

Never had the sacerdotal party appeared in the diet 
in such numbers, or so powerful and decided. § On the 
5th of March, Ferdinand the president of the diet, after 
bim the dukes of Bavaria, and lastly the ecclesiastical 
electors of Mentz and Treves, had entered the gates of 
Spires surrounded by a numerous armed escort. || On 
the 13th of March, the elector of Saxony arrived, attend- 
ed only by Melancthon and Agricola. But Philip of 
Hesse, faithful to his character, entered the city on the 
18th of March, to the sound of trumpets, and with two 
hundred horsemen. 

The divergence of men's minds soon became manifest. 
A papist did not meet an evangelical in the street with- 
out casting angry glances upon him, and secretly threat 

* Si vera sunt, diem Christi praecurrunt hxc monstra. L. Epp 
3, 438. t Adspectum rerpaydvuv Saturni et Jovis. Corp. Ref 

1 1075. t Ego non leviter commoveor his rebus. Ibid. 1076 

§ Nunquam fuit tanta frequentia ullis coacUiis apxupiuv quanta 
in his est. Ibid. 1039. || Mogantinum et Treviren(»em cum 

oomitatu armato. Seckend. 2. 129. 



HOSTILITY OF THE PAPISTS. 



67 



ening him with perfidious machinations.* The elector^ 
palatine passed the Saxons without appearing to know 
them ;f and although John of Saxony was the most 
important of the electors, none of the chiefs of the oppo- 
site party visited him. Grouped around their tables, 
the Roman-catholic princes seemed absorbed in games 
of hazard.;!; 

But erelong they gave positive marks of their hostile 
disposition. The elector and the landgrave were pro- 
hibited from having the gospel preached in their man- 
sions. It was asserted even at this early period that 
John was about to be turned out of Spires, and deprived 
of his electorate. § We are the execration and the 
sweepings of the world," said Melancthon ; but Christ 
will look down on his poor people, and will preserve 
them.^ll In truth, God was with the witnesses to his 
word. The people of Spires thirsted for the gospel, and 
the elector wrote to his son on Palm-Sunday, "About 
eight thousand persons were present to-day in my chapel 
at morning and evening worship." 

The Roman party now quickened their proceedings : 
their plan was simple, but energetic. It was necessary 
to put down the religious liberty that had existed for 
more than three years, and for this purpose they must 
abrogaie the decree of 1526, and revive that of 1521. 

On the 15th of March, the imperial commissaries 
announced to the diet that the last resolution of Spires, 
which left all the states free to act in conformity with 
the inspirations of their consciences, having given rise 
to great disorders, the emperor had annulled it by virtue 
of his supreme power. This arbitrary act, which had no 
precedent in the empire, as well as the despotic tone 
.11 which it was notified, filled the evangelical Chris* 
tians with indignation and alarm. " Christ," exclaimed 

* Vultu significant quantum nos oderint, et quid machinentur, 
Corp. Ref. 1. 1040. f Pfalz kenat kein Sachsen mehr. Epp 

Alberti Mansfeld. J Adversae partis proceres alea tempus per- 
dere. L. Epp. 3. 438. § Alii exclusum Spir*, aiii ademtuni 
elecioratum. Ibid. || Sed Christus respiciet et salvabit popu* 
^um pauperem. Corp. Ref. 1. 1040. 



68 HISTOEY OF TEE EEFORMATIOir. 



Sturm, " has again fallen into the hands of Caiaphas and 
Pilate."* 

A commission was charged to examine the fmperial 
proposition. The archbishop of Salzburg, Paber, and Eck, 
that is to say, the most violent enemies of the Reforma- 
tion, were among its members. " The Turks are better 
than the Lutherans," said Faber, for the Turks observe 
fast-days, and the Lutherans violate them.f If we must 
choose between the holy Scriptures of God and the old 
errors of the church, we should reject the lcrmer."J 
"Every day in full assembly Faber casts some new 
stone at us gospellers," says Me]ancthon.§ " Oh, what 
an Iliad I should have to compose," added he, " if I were 
to report all these blasphemies." 

The priests called for the execution of the edict of 
Worms, 1521, and the evangelical members of the com- 
mission, among whom were the elector of Saxony and 
Sturm, demanded on the contrary the maintenance of 
the edict of Spires, 1526. The latter thus remained 
within the bounds of legality, while their adversaries 
were driven to coups dieted. In fact, a new order of 
things having been legally established in the empire, no 
one could infringe it; and if the diet presumed to de 
stroy by force what had been constitutionally established 
three years before, the evangelical states had the right 
of opposing it. The majority of the commission felt 
that the reestablishment of the ancient order of things 
would be a revolution no less complete than the Refor- 
mation itself. How could they subject anew to Rome 
and to her clergy those nations in whose bosom the 
word of God had been so richly spread abroad? For 
this reason, equally rejecting the demands of the priests 
and of the evangelicals, the majority came to a resolu- 
tion on the 24th of March that every religious innova- 
tion should continue to be interdicted in the places where 

* Christus est denuo in manibus Caiaphi et Pilati. Jung Bey 
trage, p. 4. f Vociferatus est Turcos Lutheranis meliores esse. 
Corp. Ref. p. 1041. X Malle abjicere Scripturam quam vetereg 
errores Ecclesiae. Ibid. p. 1046. § Faber lapidat noe quotidie 
pro ooQoione. Fold. 



THE REFORMATION IN DANaER. 69 



the edict of Worms had been carried out ; and that in 
those where the people had deviated from it, and where 
they could not conform to it without danger of revolt, 
they should at least effect no new reform, they should 
touch upon no controverted point, they should not oppose 
the celebration of the mass, they should permit no Ro- 
man-catholic to embrace Lutheranism,* they should not 
decline the episcopal jurisdiction, and should tolerate no 
Anabaptistsf or Sacramentarians. The status quo and no 
proselytism were the essentials of this resolution. 

The majority no longer voted as in 1526 ; the wind 
had turned against the gospel. Accordingly this prop- 
osition, after having been delayed a few days by the 
festival of Easter, was laid before the diet on the 6th of 
April, and passed on the 7th.J 

If it became a law, the Reformation could neither be 
extended into those places where as yet it was unknown, 
nor be established on solid foundations in those where 
it already existed. The refe'stablishment of the Romish 
hierarchy, stipulated in the proposition, would infallibly 
bring back the ancient abuses ; and the least deviation 
from so vexatious an ordinance would easily furnish the 
Romanists with a pretext for completing the destruction 
of a work already so violently shaken. 

The elector, the landgrave, the margrave of Bran- 
denburg, the prince of Anhalt, and the chancellor of 
Luneburg on one side, and the deputies for the cities on 
the other, consulted together. An entirely new order of 
things was to proceed from this council. If they had 
been animated by selfishness, they would perhaps have 
accepted this decree. In fact they were left free, in 
appearance at least, to profess their faith ; ought they 
to demand more ? Could they do so ? Were they bound 
to constitute themselves the champions of liberty of con- 
science in all the world? Never, perhaps, had there 
been a more critical situation ; but these noble-mmded 

* Nec catholicos a libero religionis exercitio impediri debere, ne« 
que cuiquam ex his licere Lutheran ismum amplecti. Seckend. 2^ 
127. t As they were called by their opponents- t Sleidaa 
I. 261 



70 HISTORY OP THE REFORMATIOK 



men came victorious out of the trial. What, should they 
legalize by anticipation the scaffold and the torture? 
Should they oppose the Holy Ghost in its work of con- 
verting souls to Christ? Should they forget their Mas- 
ter's command, " Go ye into all the world, and preach the 
gospel to every creature?" If one of the states of the 
empire desired some day to follow their example and be 
reformed, should they take away its power of doing so ? 
Having themselves entered the kingdom of heaven, 
should they shut the door after them? No; rather 
endure every thing, sacrifice every thing, even their 
states, their crowns, and their lives. 

"Let us reject this decree," said the princes. **In 
matters of conscience the majority has no power." *^ It 
is to the decree of 1526," added the cities, that we are 
indebted for the peace that the empire enjoys : its abo- 
lition would fill Germany with troubles and divisions 
The diet is incompetent to do more than preserve relig- 
ious liberty until a council meets." Such in fact is the 
grand atti^bute of the state, and if in our days the Prot- 
estant powers should desire to influence the Romish 
governments, they should strive solely at obtaining for 
the subjects of the latter that religious liberty which the 
pope confiscates to his own advantage wherever he 
reigns alone, and by which he profits greatly in every 
evangelical state. Some of the deputies proposed refus- 
ing all assistance against the Turks, hoping thus to 
force the emperor to interfere in this religious question. 
But Sturm called upon them not to mix up political 
matters with the salvation of souls. They resolved 
therefore to reject the proposition, but without holding 
out any threats. It was this noble resolution that gain- 
ed for modern times liberty of thought and independence 
of faith. 

Ferdinand and the priests, who were no less resolute, 
determined, however, on vanquishing what they called a 
daring obstinacy ; and they commenced with the weaker 
states. They began to frighten and divide the cities, 
which had hitherto pursued a common course. On the 
1 2th of April they were summoned before the diet: in 



TIOLENJE OF FERDINAND 



71 



vain did they allege the absence of some of their num- 
ber, and ask for delay. It was refused, and the call 
was hurried on. Twenty-one free cities accepted the 
proposition of the diet, and fourteen rejected it. It was 
a bold act on the part of the latter, and was accom- 
plished in the midst of the most painful sufferings. ** This 
is the first trial," said Pfarrer, second deputy of Stras^ 
burg ; "now will come the second : we must either deny 
the word of God, or be burnt."* 

A violent proceeding of Ferdinand's immediately 
commenced the series of humiliations that were reserved 
for the evangelical cities. A deputy of Strasburg should, 
in conformity with the decree of Worms, have been a 
member of the imperial government from the commence- 
ment of April. He was declared excluded from his 
rights until the reestablishment of the mass in Stras- 
burg. All the cities united in protesting against this 
arbitrary act. 

At the same time, the elector-palatine and King Fer- 
dinand himself begged the princes to accept the decree, 
assuring them that the emperor would be exceedingly 
pleased with them. "We will obey the emperor," re- 
plied they calmly, " in eviery thing that may contribute 
to maintain peace and the honor of God." 

It was time to put an end to this struggle. On the 
18th of April it was decreed that the evangelical states 
should not be heard again ; and Ferdinand prepared to 
inflict the decisive blow on the morrow. 

When the day came, the king appeared in the diet, 
surrounded by the other commissaries of the empire, and 
by several bishops. He thanked the Roman-catholics 
for their fidelity, and declared that the resolution hav 
ing been definitively agreed to, it was about to be 
drawn up in the form of an imperial decree. He then 
announced to the elector and his friends, that their only 
remaining course was to submit to the majority. 

The evangelical princes, who had not expected so 
positive a declaration, were excited at this summons, 

* Das Wort Gottes zu wiederrufen oder aber brennen. Jung 
Boytrage, p. 37. 



2 



HISTOUT OP THE RSFOEMATIOK. 



and passed, according to custom, into an adjoining cham- 
ber to deliberate. But Ferdinand was not in a humoi 
to wait for their answer. He rose, and the imperial 
commissaries with him. Vain were all endeavors to 
stop him. " I have received an order from his imperial 
majesty,'' replied he; "I have executed it. AH is 
over.'' 

Thus did Charles' brother notify an order to the 
Christian princes, and then retire without caring even 
if there was any reply to be made. To no purpose they 
sent a deputation entreating the king to return. " It is 
a settled affair," repeated Ferdinand; "submission is 
all that remains."* This refusal completed the schism : 
it separated Kome from the gospel. Perhaps more jus- 
tice on the part of the empire and of the papacy might 
have prevented the rupture that since then has divided 
the western church. 

• Die Art&el waren besohloGBon. Jung Beytr. p. 90. 



THE PUOTBST. 



73 



CHAPTER VI. 

The Protest— '"rinciplea of the Protest — Supremacy of the gospel— 
Christian union — Ferdinand rejects the Protest— Attempt at con- 
ciliation — Exultation of the Papists — Evangelical appeal — Chris- 
tian unity a reality — Dangers of the Protestants — The Protestants 
leave Spires — The princes the true reformers — Germany and 
reform. 

If the imperial party displayed such contempt, it 
was not without a cause. They felt that weakness was 
on the side of the Reformation, and strength with Charles 
and the pope. But the weak have also their strength ; 
and of this the evangelical princes were aware. As 
Ferdinand paid no attention to their complaints, they 
ought to pay none to his absence to appeal from the 
report of the diet to the word of God, and from the em- 
peror Charles to Jesus Christ the King of kings and 
Lord of lords. 

They resolved upon this step. A declaration was 
drawn up to that effect, and this was the famous Protest 
that henceforward gave the name of Protestant to the 
renovated church. The elector and his allies having 
returned to the common hall of the diet, thus addressed 
the assembled states :* 

" Dear Lords, Cousins, Uncles, and Friends — Having 
repaired to this diet at the summons of his majesty, and 
for the common good of the empire and of Christendom, 
we have heard and learned that the decisions of the last 
diet concerning our holy Christian faith are to be repeal 
ed, and that it is proposed to substitute for them certain 
restrictive and onerous resolutions. 

" King Ferdinand and the other imperial commissa- 
ries, by affixing their seals to the last recess of Spires, 

• There are two copies of this act ; one of them is brief, and the 
other, which is longer, was transmitted in writing to the imperial 
commissaries. It is from the latter we extract the passages in the 
text. They will both be found in Jung Beytrage, p. 91-106. See 
also Miiller's HiBtorie der Protestation, p. 52. 

HiiCofRcf.lT 



74 



HISTOEY OF THE REFORMATIOK 



had promised, however, in the name of the emperor, to 
carry out sincerely and inviolably all that it contained, 
and to permit nothing that was contrary to it. In like 
manner also, you and we, electors, princes, prelates, 
lords, and deputies of the empire, bound ourselves to 
maintain always and with our whole might every article 
of that decree. 

" We cannot therefore consent to» its repeal : 

"Firstly, because we believe that his imperial maj 
esty, as well as you and we, is called to maintain firmly 
what has been unanimously and solemnly resolved. 

"Secondly, because it concerns the glory of God and 
the salvation of our souls, and that in such matters we 
ought to have regard, above all, to the commandment of 
God, who is King of kings and Lord of lords ; each of 
us rendering him account for himself, without caring the 
least in the world about majority or minority.* 

" We form no judgment on that which concerns you, 
most dear lords ; and we are content to pray God daily 
that he will bring us all to unity of faith, in truth, char- 
ity, and holiness, through Jesus Christ, our throne of 
grace and our only Mediator. 

"But in what concerns ourselves, adhesion to your 
resolution — and let every honest man be judge — would 
be acting against our conscience, condemning a doctrine 
that we maintain to be Christian, and pronouncing that 
it ought to be abolished in our states, if we could do so 
without trouble. 

"This would be to deny our Lord Jesus Christ, to 
reject his holy word, and thus give him just reason to 
deny us in turn before his Father, as he has threatened, 

" What, we ratify this edict ! We assert that when 
Almighty God calls a man to his knowledge, this man 
nevertheless cannot receive the knowledge of God ? Oh, 
of what deadly backslidings should we not thus become 
the accomplices, not only among our own subjects, but 
also among yours. 

" For this reason we reject the yoke that is imposed 

* Eia jeglicher fiir Bich selbst vor Gott Btehen. Jong BeyiragO) 
p. 96. 



THE PROTEST. 



t6 



on ns. And although it is universally known that in 
our states the holy sacrament of the body and blood of 
our Lord is becomingly administered, we cannot adhere 
to what the edict proposes against the Sacramentarians, 
seeing that the imperial edict did not speak of them, 
that they have not been heard, and that we cannot resolve 
upon such important points before the next council. 

"Moreover," and this is the essential part of the 
protest, **the new edict declaring the ministers shall 
preach the gospel, explaining it according to the writ- 
ings accepted by the holy Christian church, we think 
that for this regulation to have any value, we should 
first agree on what is meant by the true and holy 
church. Now, seeing that there is great diversity of 
opinion in this respect; that there is no sure doctrine 
but such as is conformable to the word of God ; that 
the Lord forbids the teaching of any other doctrine ; that 
each text of the holy Scriptures ought to be explained 
by other and clearer texts ; that this holy book is in all 
things necessary for the Christian, easy of understand- 
ing, and calculated to scatter the darkness, we are re- 
solved, with the grace of God, to maintain the pure and 
exclusive preaching of his only word, such as it is con- 
tained in the biblical books of the Old and New Testa- 
ment, without adding any thing thereto that may be 
contrary to it.* This word is the only truth ; it is the 
sure rule of all doctrine and of all life, and can never 
fail or deceive us. He who builds on this foundation 
shall stand against all the powers of hell, while all the 
human vanities that are set up against it shall fall before 
the face of God. 

" For these reasons, most dear lords, uncles, cousins, 
and friends, we ea^rnestly entreat you to weigh carefully 
our grievances and our motives. If you do not yield to 
our request, we protest by these presents, before God, 
our only Creator, Preserver, Redeemer, and Saviour, and 
who will one day be our Judge, as well as before all 
men and all creatures, that we, for us and for our peo- 

• Allein Gottes wort» lauter md rein, und nichts das dawiedei 
]aL Jung Bejtrage, p. 101. 



76 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



pie, neither consent nor adhere in any manner wbatso 
ever to the proposed decree, in any thing that is con- 
trary to God, to his holy word, to our right conscience, 
to the salvation of our souls, and to the last decree of 
Spires. 

" At the same time we are in expectation that his 
imperial majesty will behave towards us like a Chris- 
tian prince who loves God above all things ; and we 
declare ourselves ready to pay unto him, as well as unto 
you, gracious lords, all the affection and obedience that 
are our just and legitimate duty.'' 

Thus, in presence of the diet, spoke out those cou- 
rageous men whom Christendom will henceforward de- 
nominate The Protestants. 

They had barely finished when they announced their 
intention of quitting Spires on the morrow.* 

This protest and declaration produced a deep impres- 
sion. The diet was rudely interrupted and broken into 
two hostile parties, thus preluding war. The majority 
became the prey of the liveliest fears. As for the Prot- 
estants, reljingfjure humanOy upon the edict of Spires, 
and Jure divino, upon the Bible, they were full of courage 
and firmness. 

The principles contained in this celebrated protest 
of the 19th of April, 1529, constitute the very essence 
of Protestantism. Now this protest opposes two abuses 
of man in matters of faith : the first is the intrusion of 
the civil magistrate, and the second the arbitrary author- 
ity of the church. Instead of these abuses, Protestant- 
ism sets the power of conscience above the magistrate, 
and the authority of the word of God above the visible 
church. In the first place, it rejects the civil power in 
divine things, and says with the prophets and apostles, 
We must obey God, rather than man. In presence of tho 
crown of Charles the Fifth, it uplifts the crown of J esus 
Christ. But it goes farther : it lays down the principle, 
that all human teaching should be subordinate to the 
oracles of God. Eren the primitive church, by recog- 
nizing the writings of the apostles, had performed an 

^ Also 8U yerritten Urlaub genommen. Jung Bejtrage, p. 6Z 



THE SUPREMACY OF THE aOSPEL. 



77 



act of submission to this supreme authority, and not an 
act of authority, as Rome maintains ; and the establish- 
ment of a tribunal charged with the intevpretation of 
the lUble, had terminated only in slavishly subjecting 
man to man in what should be the most unfettered, 
conscience and faith. In this celebrated act of Spires 
no doctor appears, and the word of Gcd reigns alone. 
Never has man exalted himself like the pope ; never 
have men kept in the background like the reformers. 

A Romish historian maintains that the word Frotes 
tant signifies, enemy of the emperor and of the pope."^ If 
he means that Protestantism, in matters of faith, rejects 
the intervention both of the empire and of the Papacy, 
it is well. But even this explanation does not exhaust 
the signification of the word, for Protestantism threw off 
man's authority solely to place Jesus Christ on the 
throne of the church, and his word in the pulpit. There 
has never been any thing more positive, and at the same 
time more aggressive, than the position of the Protes- 
tants at Spires. By maintaining that their faith alone 
is capable of saving the world, they defended with in- 
trepid courage the rights of Christian proselytism. We 
cannot abandon this proselytism without deserting the 
Protestant principle. 

The Protestants of Spires were not content to exalt 
the truth, they defended charity. Faber and the other 
papal partisans had endeavored to separate the princes, 
whu in general walked with Luther, from the cities that 
ranged themselves rather on the side of Zwingle. (Eco- 
lampadius had immediately written to Melancthon, and 
enlightened him on the doctrines of the Zurich reformer. 
He had indignantly rejected the idea that Christ was 
banished into a corner of heaven, and had energetically 
declared, that according to the Swiss Christians, Christ 
was in every place upholding all things by the word of 
his power.f "With the visible symbols," he added, 

* Perduelles ia Pontificem ac Caesarem. Pallavicini, C. T. 1. 
p. 217. 

t Ubiqae sit et portet omnia verbo virtutis sosd. Hospin. Hist 
8aor. 2. 112 



78 HISTORY OF THE HEPORMAXIOH. 



"we pve and we receive the invisible grace, like all 
the faithful."* 

These declarations were not useless. There were at 
Spires two men who from different motives opposed the 
efforts of Faber, and seconded those of (Ecolampadius. 
The landgrave, ever revolving projects of alliance in his 
mind, felt clearly that if the Christians of Saxony and 
of Hesse allowed the condemnation of the churches of 
Switzerland and of Upper Germany, they would by that 
very means deprive themselves of powerful auxiliaries.f 
Melancthon, who unlike the landgrave was far from 
desiring a diplomatic alliance, lest it should hasten on 
a war, defended the great principles of justice, and ex- 
claimed, " To what just reproaches should we not be 
exposed, were we to recognize in our adversaries the 
right of condemning a doctrine without having heard 
those who defend it." The union of all evangelical 
Christians is therefore a principle of primitive Protes' 
tantism. 

As Ferdinand hart not heard the protest of the 19th 
of April, a deputation of the evangelical states went the 
next day to prpsont it to him. The brother of Charles 
the Fifth received it at first, but immediately after 
desired to return it. Then was witnessed a strange 
scene — the king refusing to keep the protest, and the 
deputies to take it back. At last the latter, out of 
respect, received it from Ferdinand's hands ; but they 
laid it boldly upon a table, and directly quitted the 
hall. 

The king and the imperial commissaries remained in 
presence of this formidable writing. It was there, 
before their eyes — a significant monument of the cour- 
age and faith of the Protestants. Irritated against this 
silent but mighty witness, which accused his tyranny, 
and left him the responsibility of all the evils that were 
about to burst upon the empire, the brother of Charles 
the Fifth called some of his councillors, and ordered 

♦ Xapiv yap ttjv doparov fierd tCjv gvu^oTluv doaruv, Hospin. Hist 
Sacr. 2. 112. f Onmi studio laborabat ut illoe uniret. Seek. 
2. 127. 



ATTEMPT AT CONCILIATION. 



T9 



them instantly to carry the important document back to 
the Protestants. 

All this was unavailing ; the protest had been regis- 
tered in the annals of the world, and nothing could erase 
it. Liberty of thought and of conscience had been con» 
quered for ages to come. Thus all evangelical Ger- 
many, foreseeing these things, was moved at this cou- 
rageous act, and adopted it as the expression of its will 
and of its faith. Men in every quarter beheld in it not 
a mere political event, but a Christian action ; and the 
youthful electoral prince, John Frederick, in this respect 
the organ of his age, cried to the Protestants of Spires, 
** May the Almighty, who has given you grace to confess 
energetically, freely, and fearlessly, preserve you in that 
Christian firmness until the day of eternity."* 

While the Christians were filled with joy, their ene- 
mies were friglitened at their own work. The very day 
on which Ferdinand had declined to receive the protest, 
Tuesday, April 20, at one in the afternoon, Henry of 
Brunswick and Philip of Baden presented themselves as 
mediators, announcing, however, that they were acting 
solely of their own authority. They proposed that there 
should be no more mention of the decree of Worms, and 
that the first decree of Spires should be maintained, but 
with a few modifications ; that the two parties, while 
remaining free until the next council, should oppose 
every new sect, and tolerate no doctrine contrary to the 
sacrament of the Lord's body.f 

On Wednesday, April 21, the evangelical states did 
not appear adverse to these propositions ; and even 
those who had embraced the doctrines of Zwingle de- 
clared boldly that such a proposal would not compromise 
their existence. " Only let us call to mind," said they, 
" that in such difficult matters we must act, not with the 
Bword, but with the sure word of God.| For, as Saint 

• In eo mansuros esse, nec passuros ut uUa hominum machina- 
tione ab ea sententia divellerentur. Seckend. 2. 121. f Ver- 

gleich Artikel. Jung Beytrage, p. 55. X diesen sshweren 

Sachen oichts mit Gewalt noch Schwerdt, sondera mit Gottes gewie* 
Wort. Ibid. p. 69. This document is from the pen of Storm. 



80 HISTORY OF THE REFORM A.TIOH. 



Paul says, *What is not of faith is sin.' If therefore 
we constrain Christians to do what they believe unjust, 
instead of leading them by God's word to acknowledge 
what is good, we force them to sin and incur a terrible 
responsibility." 

The fanatics of the Roman party trembled as they 
saw the victory nearly escaping from them ; they re- 
jected all compromise, and desired purely and simply 
the reestablishment of the Papacy. Their zeal overcame 
every thing, and the negotiations were broken off. 

On Thursday, April 22, the diet reassembled at 
seven in the morning, and the Recess was read precisely 
as it had been previously drawn up, without even men- 
tioning the attempt at conciliation which had just 
failed. 

Faber triumphed. Proud of having the ear of kings, 
he tossed himself furiously about, and to look at him, 
one would have said, according to an eye-witness, that 
he was a Cyclops forging in his cavern the monstrous 
chains with which he was about to bind the Reformation 
and the reformers.* The papist princes, carried away 
by the tumult, gave the spur, says Melancthon, and flung 
themselves headlong into a path filled with dangers.f 
Nothing was left for the evangelical Christians but to 
fall on their knees and cry to the Lord. **A11 that re- 
mains for us to do," repeated Melancthon, "is to call 
upon the Son of God."J 

The last sitting of the diet took place on the 24th of 
April. The princes renewed their protest, in which four- 
teen free and imperial cities joined ; and they next 
thought of giving their appeal a legal form. 

On Sunday, April 25, two notaries, Leonard Stet- 
ner of Freysingen and Pangrace Saltzmann of Bamberg, 
were seated before a small table in a narrow chamber 
on the ground-floor of a house situated in St. John's 
lane, near the church of the same name in Spires, and 

* Cyclops ille nunc ferocem se facit. Corp. Ref. 1. 1062. 
t Ut ingrediantur lubricum isti iter, impingendo stimulis caloea 
Ibid. 

X De quo reliquum est ut invocemuB Filium Dei. Ibid. 



0HEI8TIAN UNITY A REALIir. 81 



auround them were the chancellors of the princes and of 
the evangelical cities, with several witnesses.* 

This little house belonged to an humble pastor, Peter 
Muterstatt, deacon of St. John's, who, taking the place 
of the elector or of the landgrave, had offered a domicile 
for the important act that was preparing. His name 
shall in consequence be transmitted to posterity. The 
document having been definitively drawn up, one of tho 
notaries began reading it. " Since there is a natural 
communion between all men,'' said the Protestants, and 
since even persons condemned to death are permitted to 
unite and appeal against their condemnation, how much 
more are we, who are members of the same spiritual 
body, the church of the Son of God, children of the same 
heavenly Father, and consequently brothers in the 
Spirit,f authorized to unite when our salvation and eter- 
nal condemnation are concerned.'' 

After reviewing all that had passed in the diet, and 
after intercalating in their appeal the principal docu- 
ments that had reference to it, the Protestants ended 
by saying, " We therefore appeal for ourselves, for our 
subjects, and for all who receive or who shall hereafter 
receive the word of God, from all past, present, or future 
vexatious measures, to his imperial majesty, and to a 
free and universal assembly of holy Christendom." This 
document filled twelve sheets of parchment ; the signa- 
tures and seals were afifixed to the thirteenth. 

Thus in the obscure dwelling of the chaplain of St 
John's was made the first confession of the true Chris- 
tian union. In presence of the wholly mechanical unity 
of the pope, these confessors of Jesus raised the banner 
of the living unity of Christ ; and as in the days of our 
Saviour, if there were many synagogues in Israel, there 
was at least but one temple. The Christians of electoral 
Saxony, of Luneburg, of Anhalt, of Hesse and the Mar- 
gravate, of Strasburg, Nuremberg, Ulm, Constance, Lin- 

• Unten in einem kleinen Stiiblein. Jung Beytrage, p. 73. In- 
Btramentum Appellatioais. f Membra unius corporis spiritualis 
Jesii Christi, et filil unius Patrls ccelestis, ideoque fratres spirituai6& 
Seokond. 2. 130. 

6 



82 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



dan, Memmingen, Kempten, Nordlirigen, Heilbronn, 
Reutlingen, Isny, St. Gall, Weissemburg^ and Wiiids- 
heim, took each other's hands on the 25th of April, near 
the church of St. John, in the face of threatening perse- 
outions. Among them might be found those who, like 
Zwingle, acknowledged in the Lord's supper the entirely 
spiritual presence of Jesus Christ, as well as those who, 
with Luther, admitted his corporeal presence. There 
existed not at that time in the evangelical body any 
sects, hatred, or schism ; Christian unity was a reality. 
That upper chamber in which, during the early days of 
Christianity, the apostles with the women and the breth- 
ren continued with one accord in prayer and supplica 
tion," Acts 1 : 14, and that lower chamber where, in the 
first days of the Reformation, the renewed disciples of 
Jesus Christ presented themselves to the pope and the 
emperor, to the world and to the scaffold, as forming but 
one body, are the two cradles of the church ; and it is in 
this its hour of weakness and humiliation that it shines 
forth with the brightest glory. 

After this appeal each one returned in silence to his 
dwelling. Several tokens excited alarm for the safety 
of the Protestants. A short time previously Melanctbon 
hastily conducted through the streets of Spires towards 
the Rhine his friend Simon Grynaeus, pressing him to 
cross the river. The latter was astonished at such pre- 
cipitation.* " An old man of grave and solemn air, but 
who is unknown to me," said Melancthon, appeared 
before me and said. In a minute officers of justice will 
be sent by Ferdinand to arrest Grynaeus." As he was 
intimate with Faber, and had been scandalized at one of 
his sermons, Grynaeus went to him, and begged him no 
longer to make war against the truth. Faber dissem- 
bled his anger, but immediately after repaired to the 
king, from whom he had obtained an order against the 
importunate professor of Heidelberg.f Melancthon 
doubted not that God had saved his friend by sending 

• Miraati quae esset tantae festinationis causa. Camerarius Vita 
Mel. p. 113. t Faber qui valde offenderetur orationi tali, db^ 

eimulare tamen omnia. Ibid. 



/ 



THE PROTESTANTS LEAVE SPIRES, 83 

one of his holy angels to forewarn him. Motionless on 
the banks of the Rhine, he waited until the waters of 
that stream had rescued Grynaeus from his persecutors. 
"At last," cried Melancthon, as he saw him on the oppo- 
site side, " at last he is torn from the cruel jaws of those 
who thirst for innocent blood."* When he returned to his 
house, Melancthon was informed that officers in search 
of Grynseus had ransacked it from top to bottom.f 

There was nothing to detain the Protestants longer 
in Spires, and accordingly, on the morning after their ap- 
peal, Monday, the 26th of April, the elector, the landgrave, 
and the dukes of Luneburg quitted the city, reached 
Worms, and then returned by Hesse into their own 
states. The appeal of Spires was published by the land- 
grave on the 5th, and by the elector on the 13th of May. 

Melancthon had returned to Wittemberg on the 6th of 
May, persuaded that the two parties were about to draw 
the sword. His friends were alarmed at seeing him agi- 
tated, exhausted, and like one dead. J It is a great event 
that has just taken pl-ace at Spires," said he ; an event 
pregnant with dangers, not only to the empire, but to 
religion itself § All the pains of hell oppress me."|| 

It was Melancthon^s greatest affliction that these 
evils were attributed to him, as indeed he ascribed them 
himself. " One single thing has injured us," said he ; 
" our not having approved, as was required of us, the 
edict against the Zwinglians." Luther did not take this 
gloomy view of affairs, but he was far from compre- 
hending the force of the protest. " The diet," said he, 
" has come to an end almost without results, except that 
those who scourge Jesus Christ have not been able to 
satisfy their fury."^ 

* Ereptus quasi e faucibus eorum qui sitiunt sanguinem innocen- 
fcium. Mel. ad Gamer. April 23, Corp. Ref. 1. 1062. f Affluit 

armata quaedam manus ad comprehendum Gryngeum missa. Gamer. 
Vit. Mel. p. 113. t Ita fuit perturbatus ut primis diebus peae ex- 
tinctus sit. Corp. Ref. 1. 1067. § Non enim tantum imperium, sed 
religio etiam periclitantur. lb. || Omnes dolores inferai oppres- 
Berant me. lb. 1067, 1069. IT Christo-mastiges et Psycho- tyranni 
saum furorein non potuerunt explere. L. Epp. Linco, May 6, 1629. 



84 HISTOEY OF THE REFORMATION. 



Posterity has not ratified this decision, and on the 
contrary, dating from this epoch the definitive formation 
of Protestantism, it has hailed in the protest of Spires 
one of the greatest movements recorded in history. 

Let us see to whom the chief glory of this act be- 
longs. The part taken by the princes, and especially by 
the elector of Saxony, in the German Reformation, must 
strike every impartial observer. These are the true 
reformers, the true martyrs. The Holy Ghost, that blow- 
eth where it listeth, had inspired them with the courage 
of the ancient confessors of the church ; and the God of 
election was glorified in them. Somewhat later, per- 
haps, this great part played by the princes may have 
produced deplorable consequences ; there is no grace of 
God that man cannot pervert. But nothing should pre- 
vent us from rendering honor to whom honor is due, and 
from adoring the work of the eternal Spirit in these emi- 
nent men, who, under God, were in the sixteenth century 
the liberators of Christendom. 

The Reformation had taken a bodily form. It was 
Luther alone who had said No at the diet of Worms ; 
but churches and ministers, princes and people, said No 
at the diet of Spires. 

In no country had superstition, scholasticism, hie- 
rarchy, and popery, been so powerful as among the Ger- 
manic nations. These simple and candid people had 
humbly bent their neck to the yoke that came from the 
banks of the Tiber. But there was in them a depth, a 
life, a need of interior liberty, which, sanctified by the 
^ord of God, might render them the most energetic or- 
f^ans of Christian truth. It wais from them that was 
destined to emanate the reaction against that material, 
external, and legal system which had taken the place 
of Christianity ; it was they who were called to shattei 
in pieces the skeleton which had been substituted for the 
spirit and the life, and restore to the heart of Christen- 
dom, ossified by the hierarchy, the generous beatings ol 
which it had been deprived for so many ages. The uni- 
versal church will never forget the debt it owes to the 
prinoee of Spires and to Luther. 



IINIOK NECESSARY TO REFORM. 85 



CHAPTER VII. 

Dolon necessary to reform — Luther's doctrine on the Lord's sap- 
per — A Lutheran warning — Proposed conference at Marburg— 
Melancthon and Zwingle — Zwingle leaves Zurich — Rumors in 
Zurich — The reformers at Marburg — Carlstadt's petition — Pre- 
liminary discussions — Holy Ghost — Original sin — Baptism — Lu- 
ther, Melancthon, and Zwingle — Opening of the Conference — The 
prayer of the church — Hoc est Corpus Meum — Syllogism of CEco- 
lampadius — The flesh profiteth nothing — Lambert convinced — 
Luther's old song — Agitation in the conference — Arrival of new 
deputies — Christ's humanity finite — Mathematics and Popery — 
Testimony of the Fathers — Testimony of Augustine — Argument 
of the velvet cover — End of the conference — The landgrave me- 
diates — Necessity of union — Luther rejects Zwingle's hand — Sec- 
tarian spirit of the Germans — Bucer's dilemma — Christian char 
ity prevails — Luther's report — Unity of doctrine — Unity in di- 
versity — Signatures — Two extremes — Three views — Germ of 
Popery — Departure — Luther's dejection— Turks before Vienna- 
Luther's battle-sermon and agony — Luther's firmness — Victory — 
Exasperation of the Papists — Threatening prospects. 

The Protest of Spires had still further increased the 
indignation of the papal adherents ; and Charles the 
Fifth, according to the oath he had made at Barcelona, 
set about preparing a suitable antidote for the pesti- 
lential disease with which the Germans were att«icked, 
and to avenge in a striking manner the insult offered to 
Jesus Christ."* The pope, on his part, endeavored to 
combine all the other princes of Christendom in this cru- 
sade ; and the peace of Cambray, concluded on the 5th 
of August, tended to the accomplishment of his cruel 
designs. It left the emperor's hands free against the 
heretics. After having entered their protest at Spires^ 
it was necessary for the evangelicals to think of main- 
taining it. 

The Protestant states that had already laid the foun- 
dations of an evangelical alliance at Spires, had agreed 

* niatamque Christo injuriam pro viribas ulciscentur. Dumon^ 
Corp Univ. Diplomatique, 4. 1, 6. 



86 HISTOUr OF THE REFORMATIOK 



to send deputies to Rothach ; but the elector, staggered 
by the representations of Luther, who was continually 
repeating to him, "In returning and rest shall ye be 
saved ; in quietness and in confidence shall be your 
strength/'* Isa. 30:15, ordered his deputies to listen to 
the propositions of his allies, but to decide upon nothing. 
They adjourned to a new conference, which never took , 
place. Luther triumphed, for human alliances failed. 
" Christ the Lord will know how to deliver us without 
the landgrave, and even against the landgrave," said he 
to his friends.f 

Philip of Hesse, who was vexed at Luther's obstina- 
cy, was convinced that it arose from a dispute about 
words. " They will hear no mention of alliances be- 
cause of the Zwinglians," said he ; " well then, let us 
put an end to the contradictions that separate them from 
Luther." 

The union of all the disciples of the word of God 
seemed in fact a necessary condition to the success of 
the Reformation. How could the Protestants resist the 
power of Rome and of the empire, if they were divided ? 
The landgrave no doubt wished to unite their minds, that 
he might afterwards be able to unite their arms ; but the 
cause of Christ was not to triumph by the sword. If 
they should succeed in uniting their hearts and prayers, 
the Reformation would then find such strength in the 
faith of its children, that Philip's spearmen would no 
longer be necessary. 

Unfortunately this union of minds, that was now to 
be sought after above all things, was a very difficult 
task. Luther in 1519 had at first appeared not only to 
reform, but entirely renovate the doctrine of the Lord's 
supper, as the Swiss did somewhat later. " I go to the 
sacrament of the Lord's supper," he had said, "and 1 
there receive a sign from God that Christ's righteous- 
ness and passion justify me : such is the use of the sac- 
rament."! This discourse, which had gone through sev- 

♦ L. Epp. 3. 454. t UnBer Herr Christus, etc. Ibid. This con- 
fidence of Luther shocks a Lutheran historian — Plank, 2. 454. X Iq 
the writing entitled, Dass diese Worte noch feste ttehen. L. 0pp. 19 



A LUTHERAN WAKNING. 87 

eral impressions in the cities of Upper Germany, had 
prepared men^s minds for the doctrine of Zwingle. Ao« 
cordingly Luther, astonished at the reputation he had 
gained, published this solemn declaration in 1527: "I 
protest before God and before the whole world that I 
have never walked with the Sacramentarians.'' 

Luther in fact was never Zwinglian as regards the 
communion. Far from that, in 1519 he still believed in 
transubstantiation. Why then should he speak of a 
sign ? It was for this reason. While, according to 
Zwingle, the bread and wine are signs of the body and 
blood of Christ ; according to Luther, the very body and 
blood of Jesus Christ are signs of God^s grace. These 
opinions are widely different from one another. 

Erelong this disagreement declared itself. In 1527, 
Zwingle, in his Friendly Expositions'^ refuted Luther^s 
opinion with mildness and respect. Unluckily the pamph- 
let of the Saxon reformer " against the enthusiasts " 
was then issuing from the press, and in it Luther ex- 
pressed his indignation that his adversaries should dare 
to speak of Christian unity and peace. " Well," exclaim- 
ed he, " since they thus insult all reason, I will give 
them a Lutheran warning.f Cursed be this concord; 
cursed be this charity : down, down with it to the bot- 
tomless pit of hell I If I should murder your father, your 
mother, your wife, your child, and then, wishing to mur- 
der you, I should say to you, * Let us be at peace, my 
dear friend ;^ what answer would you make ? It is thus 
that the enthusiasts, who murder Jesus Christ my Lord, 
God the Father, and Christendom my mother, wish to 
murder me also ; and then they say. Let us be friends I" • 

Zwingle wrote two replies " to the excellent Mar- 
tin Luther," in a cold tone and with a haughty calmness 
more diflficult to pardon than the invectives of the Saxon 
doctor. We ought to esteem you a vesrel of honor, 
and we do so with joy," said he, " not with standin^j your 
faults." Pamphlet followed pamphlet, Luther always 

• Arnica exegesis, id est, Expositio Eucharistiae negotii ad M. Lu- 
therum. Zw. 0pp. t ^^^^ Lutherische Warauag. L, Opp 

19. 891. Wider die Schwarmgeister, 



88 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



writing with the same impetuosity, and Zwinglo with 
unalterable coolness and irony. 

Such were the doctors whom the landgrave under- 
took to reconcile. Already, during the sitting of the 
diet of Spires, Philip of Hesse, who was aiBicted at hear- 
ing the Papists continually repeating, "You boast of 
your attachment to the pure word of God, and yet you 
are nevertheless disunited,^'* had made overtures to 
Zwingle in writing. He now went farther, and invited 
the theologians of the different parties to meet at Mar- 
burg. These invitations met with various receptions. 
Zwingle, whose heart was large and fraternal, answered 
the landgrave's call ; but it was rejected by Luther, who 
discovered leagues and battles behind this pretended 
concord. 

It seemed, however, that great difl5culties would 
detain Zwingle. The road from Zurich to Marburg lay 
through the territories of the emperor and of other ene- 
mies to the Reformation ; the landgrave himself did not 
conceal the dangers of the journey ;f but in order to 
obviate these difficulties, he promised an escort from 
Strasburg to Hesse, and for the rest " the protection of 
6od."J These precautions were not of a nature to reas- 
sure the Zuricbers. 

Reasons of another kind detained Luther and Me- 
lancthon. " It is not right," said they, " that the land- 
grave has so much to do with the Zwinglians. Their 
error is of such a nature that people of acute minds are 
easily tainted by it. Reason loves what it understands, 
particularly when learned men clothe their ideas in a 
scriptural dress." 

Melancthon did not stop here, but put forth the very 
extraordinary notion of selecting Papists as judges of 
ihe discussion. " If there were no impartial judges," 
gaid hC; the Zwinglians would have a good chance of 
boasting of victory."! Thus, according to Melancthon. 

* Inter nos ipsos de religionis doctrina non consentire. Zw. Epp 
2. 287. t Viam Francofurdi capias, quam autem hac pericuk)- 
dorem esse putamus. Ibid. p. 312. f Juvaate Deo tuti. Ibid 
p. 329. II Papistische als uuparteischc. Corp. Ref. 1 1066 



MELANCTHON AND ZWINGLE. 



89 



Papists would be impartial judges when the real pres- 
ence was the subject of discussion ! He went still far- 
ther. " LfCt the elector," he wrote on the 14th of May to 
the prince-electoral, " refuse to permit our journey to 
Marburg, so that we may be able to allege this excuse/' 
The elector would not lend himself to so disgraceful a 
proceeding ; and the reformers of Wittemberg found 
themselves compelled to accede to the request of Philip 
of Hesse. But they did so with these words : " If the 
Swiss do not yield to us, all your trouble will be lost f 
and they wrote to the theologians among their friends 
who were convoked by the prince, Stay away, if you 
can ; your absence will be very useful to us."* 

Zwingle, on the contrary, who would have gone to 
the end of the world, made every exertion to obtain per- 
mission from the magistrates of Zurich to visit Marburg. 
"I am convinced," said he to the secret council, "that 
if we doctors meet face to face, the splendor of truth 
will illuminate our eyes."f But the council, that had 
only just signed the first religious peace,J and who 
feared to see war burst out afresh, positively refused to 
allow the departure of the reformer. 

Upon this Zwingle decided for himself. He felt that 
his presence was necessary for the maintenance of peace 
in Zurich ; but the welfare of all Christendom summoned 
liim to Marburg. Accordingly, raising his eyes towards 
heaven, he resolved to depart, exclaiming, "0 God, thou 
hast never abandoned us ; thou wilt perform thy will 
for thine own glory."§ During the night of August 31, 
Zwingle who was unwilling to wait for the landgrave^s 
safe-conduct, prepared for his journey. Rodolph Collins 
the Greek professor was alone to accompany him. The 
reformer wrote to the smaller and to the great council, 
If I leave without informing you, it is not, most wise 
lords, because I despise your authority; but. knowing 

* Si potes, noli adesse. L. Epp. 3. 601. f Ut veritatis 
splendor oculos nosiros feriat. Zw. Epp. 2. 321. X See below, 
Book XVI. chap. 2, anno 1529. 

§ Dei nunquam falientis, qui nos nunquam deseruit, gratiam r& 
patavit Zw. Epp ^. 356 



90 HISTOEY OF THE REFORMATION 



the love you bear towards me, I foresee that your anx 
iety will oppose my going." 

As he was writing these words, a fourth message 
arrived from the landgrave, more pressing still than the 
preceding ones. The reformer sent the prince's letter 
t(» the burgomaster with his own; he then quitted his 
house privily by night,* concealing his departure both 
from friends whose importunity he feared, and from 
enemies whose snares he had good cause to dread. He 
did not even tell his wife where he was going, lest it 
should distress her. He and Collins then mounted two 
horses that had been hired for the purpose,*)" and rode 
ofif rapidly in the direction of Basle. 

During the day the rumor of Z wingless absence spread 
through Zurich, and his enemies were elated. " He has 
fled the country," said they ; " he has run away with a 
pack of scoundrels." " As he was crossing the river at 
Bruck," said others, the boat upset, and he was drown- 
ed." " The devil," affirmed many with a malicious smile, 
" appeared to him bodily and carried him off." J " There 
was no end to their stories," says Ballinger. But the 
council immediately resolved on acceding to the wish 
of the reformer. On the very day of his departure they 
appointed one of the councillors, Ulrich Funck, to accom- 
pany him to Marburg, who forthwith set out with one 
domestic and an arquebusier. Strasburg and Basle in 
like manner sent statesmen in company with their theolo- 
gians, under the idea that this conference would doubt- 
less have also a political object. 

Zwingle arrived safely at Basle, § and embarked on 
the river on the 6th of September with (Ecolampadius 
and several merchants. || In thirteen hours they reached 
Strasburg, where the two reformers lodged in the house 
of Matthew Zell the cathedral preacher. Catherine the 
pastor's wife prepared the dishes in the kitchen, waited 

* Sabbati die. mane ante lucem, 1 Septembris. Zw. Epp. 2. 556. 

t EqUiS conductoriis. rbid. 361. X Der Tufel vere by Imm 
geftin. Bulling. 2. 224. § Integer et sanus Basiliam pervenit 
Zw. Epp. 2. 361. II Aliquos mercatonim tide dlgaos, comites 

Ibid. 



THE REFORMER AT MARBURG. 



91 



at table, according to the ancient German manners,* 
and then sitting down near Zwingle, listened attentively, 
and spoke with so much piety and knowledge, that the 
latter soon ranked her above many doctors. 

After discussing with the magistrates the means of 
resisting the Romish league, and the organization to be 
given to the Christian confederacy, f Zwingle quitted 
Strasburg ; and he and his friends, conducted along by- 
roads, through forests, over mountains and valleys, by 
secret but sure paths, at length reached Marburg, es- 
corted by forty Hessian cavaliers. J 

Luther, on his side, accompanied by Melancthon, 
Cruciger, and Jonas, had stopped on the Hessian fron- 
tier, declaring that nothing should induce him to cross 
it without a safe-conduct from the landgrave. This 
document being obtained, Luther arrived at Alsfeld, 
where the scholars, kneeling under the reformer's win- 
dows, chanted their pious hymns. He entered Marburg 
on the 30th of September, a day after the arrival of the 
Swiss. Both parties went to inns ; but they had scarce- 
ly alighted, before the landgrave invited them to come 
and lodge in the castle, thinking by this means to bring 
the opposing parties closer together. Philip entertained 
them in a manner truly royal. § Ah," said the pious 
Jonas, as he wandered through the halls of the palace, 
" it is not in honor of the Muses, but in honor of God 
and of his Christ, that we are so munificently treated in 
these forests of Hesse." After dinner, on the first day, 
(Ecolampadius, Hedio, and Bucer, desirous of entering 
into the prince's views, went and saluted Luther. The 
latter conversed affectionately with (Ecolampadius in 
the castle court ; but Bucer, with whom he had once 
been very intimate, and who was now on Zwingle's side, 

* Ich bin 14 Tag Magd und Kochin gewesen. Fiissl. Beytr. 5. 
813. See her remarkable correspondence with the superintend- 
ent Rabus. Ibid. 191-354. f De jure praesidendi conciliis civi- 
tatum christianarum. Fussl. Beytr. 5. 364. See Book XVI. of thie 
History. J Per devia et sylvas, montes et valles, tutissimos ei 

occultos. Ibid. 368. § Excepit in arce hospitio et meosa 
gaii. Corp. Ref. i. 1096, 



HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



having approached him, Luther said to him, smiling and 
making a sign with his hand, " As for you, you are a 
good ibr-nothing fellow and a knave."* 

The unhappy Carlstadt, who had begun this dispute, 
was at that time in Friesland, preaching the spiritual 
presence of Christ, and living in such destitution that 
he had been forced to sell his Hebrew Bible to procure 
bread. The trial had crushed his pride, and he wrote 
to the landgrave, "We are but one body, one house, 
one people, one sacerdotal race ; we live and die by one 
and the same Saviour.f For this reason, I, poor and in 
exile, humbly pray your highness, by the blood of Jesus 
Christ, to allow me to be present at the disputation." 

But how bring Luther and Carlstadt face to face? 
and yet how repel the unhappy man ? The landgrave, 
to extricate himself from this difficulty, referred him to 
the Saxon reformer. Carlstadt did not appear. 

Philip of Hesse desired that, previously to the public 
conference, the theologians should have a private inter- 
view. It was however considered dangerous, says a 
contemporary, for Zwingle and Luther, who were both 
naturally violent, to contend with one another at the 
very beginning ; and as (Ecolampadius and Melancthon 
were the mildest, they were apportioned to the roughest 
champions.J On Friday, October 1, after divine ser- 
vice, Luther and (Ecolampadius were conducted into 
one chamber, and Zwingle and Melancthon into another. 
The combatants were then left to struggle two and two. 

The principal contest took place in the room of Zwin- 
gle and Melancthon. "It is affirmed," said Melancthon 
tc Zwingle, " that some among you speak of God after 
the manner of the Jews, as if Christ was not essentially 
God." " I think on the Holy Trinity," replied Zwingle, 
"with the council of Nice and the Athanasian creed.'' 
" Councils, creeds I What does that mean ?" asked Me- 
lancthon. " Have you not continually repeated that you 
recognize no other authority than that of Scripture ?^ 

* Subridens aliquantulum respondit: tu es nequam et nebtUo 
Sculteti Annal. ad 1529. f State Papers of Cassei. 
I Abgetheilt zu den riiheren. Boll. 2. 225. 



VIEWS OF THE REFORMERS 



93 



'•We have never rejected the councils," replied the 
Swiss reformer, " when they are based on the authority 
of the word of God * The four first councils are truly 
sacred as regards doctrine, and none of the faithful have 
ever rejected them." This important declaration, handed 
down to us by (Ecolampadius, characterizes the reformed 
theology. f 

" But you teach," resumed Melancthon, " like Thomas 
Munster, that the Holy Ghost acts qmte alone, indepen- 
dently of the sacraments and of the word of God." " The 
Holy Ghost," replied Zwingle, works in us justification 
by the word, but by the word preached and understood, 
by the soul and the marrow of the word, by the mind 
and will of God clothed in human language."| 

" At least," continued Melancthon, " you deny orig- 
inal sin, and make sin consist only in actual and exter- 
nal works, like the Pelagians, the philosophers, and the 
Papists." 

This was the principal difficulty. " Since man nat- 
urally loves himself," replied Zwingle, " instead of lov- 
ing God ; in that there is a crime, a sin that condemns 
him."§ He had more than once before expressed the 
same opinion ;|| and yet Melancthon exulted on hearing 
him. " Our adversaries," said he afterwards, " have 
given way on all these points." 

Luther had pursued the same method with (Ecolam- 
padius as Melancthon with Zwingle. The discussion 
had in particular turned on baptism.^ Luther com- 
plained that the Swiss would not acknowledge that by 
this simple sacrament a man became a member of the 
church. "It is true," said (Ecolampadius, "that we 
require faith — either an actual or a future faith. Why 
should we deny it ? Who is a Christian, if it be not he 

* Ubi unquam concilia rejicimus, verbi divini auctoritati eufful- 
laT Zw. 0pp. 4. 191. f The word reformed is used to distin- 
guish the doctrine and the church of Zwingle and Calvin from those 
of Luther. X Mens et medulla verbi, mens et voluntas Dei 

amicta tamen humanis verbis. Zw. Epp. 4. 173. § Malum, peo- 
oatum. Ibid. 172. || De peccalo original! ad Urb. Rhegium 

Ibii. S, 632. IT Vol. I. p. 151 boi 



94 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 



who believes in Christ ? However, I should be uiiwill 
ing to deny that the water of baptism is in a certain 
sense a water of regeneration ; for by it he whom the 
church knew not becomes its child,"* 

These four theologians were in the very heat of their 
discussions when domestics came to inform them that 
the prince's dinner was on the table. They immediately 
arose, and Zwingle and Melancthon meeting Luther and 
(Ecolampadius, who were also quitting their chamber, 
the latter approached Zwingle, and whispered mourn- 
fully in his ear, " I have fallen a second time into the 
bands of Dr. Eck."f In the language of the reformers 
nothing stronger could be said. 

It does not appear that the conference between Lu- 
ther and (Ecolampadius was resumed after dinner. Lu- 
ther's manner held out very little hope ; but Melancthon 
and Zwingle returned to the discussion, and the Zurich 
doctor, finding the Wittemburg professor escape him 
like an eel, as he said, and take "like Proteus a thou- 
sand different forms," seized a pen in order to fix his 
antagonist. Zwingle committed to \^riting whatever 
Melancthon dictated, and then wrote his reply, giving it 
to the other to read.J In this manner they spent six 
hours, three in the morning and three in the afternoon. § 
They prepared for the general conference. 

Zwingle requested that it should be an open one ; 
this Luther resisted. It was eventually resolved that 
the princes, nobles, deputies, and theologians should be 
admitted ; but a great crowd of citizens, and even mam 
scholars and gentlemen who had come from Frank 
fort, from the Rhine districts, from Strasburg, from 
Basle, and other Swiss towns, were excluded. Brentz 

* Atqae adeo ipse non negarim, aquam baptismi esse aquam re^ 
generantem: fit enira puer eeclesise, qui dudum ab ecclesia non 
agnoscebatur. Zw. 0pp. 4. 193. f Lutherum (Ecolampadem 

ita excepit, ut ad me venieos clam queratur, se denuo ia Eccium 
incidisse. Zw. Epp. 2. 369. t At Melancthon. cum nimis 

lubricus esset et Protei in morem se in omnia translormaret, me com- 
palit, ut sumpto calamo manum armarem. Ibid. § Istud col<^ 
quium sex in horas traximus. Ibid 370, 



OPENCNa OF THE CONFEEEKCE. 



95 



speaks of fifty or sixty hearers ; Zwingle of twenty-foui 
only.* 

On a gentle elevation watered by the Lahn is situ- 
ated an old castle overlooking the city of Marburg ; in 
the distance may be seen the beautiful valley of the 
Lahn, and beyond the mountain-tops rising one above 
another, until they are lost in the horizon. It was be- 
neath the vaults and gothic arches of an antique cham- 
ber in this castle, known as the Knight's Hall, that the 
conference was to take place. 

On Saturday morning, the 2d of October, the landgrave 
took his seat in the hall, surrounded by his court, but 
in so plain a dress that no one would have taken him 
for a prince. He wished to avoid all appearance of act- 
ing the part of a Constantino in the affairs of the church. 
Before him was a table which Luther, Zwingle, Melano- 
thon, and (Ecolampadius approached. Luther, taking a 
piece of chalk, bent over the velvet cloth which covered it, 
and steadily wrote four words in large characters. All 
eyes followed the movement of his hand, and soon they 
read. Hoc est Corpus MEUM.f Luther wished to have 
this declaration continually before him, that it might 
strengthen his own faith, and be a sign to his adver- 
saries. 

Behind these four theologians were seated their 
friends, Hedio, Sturm, Funck, Frey, Eberhard, Thane, 
Jonas, Cruciger, and others besides. Jonas cast an 
inquiring glance upon the Swiss : " Zwingle," said he, 
" has a certain rusticity and arrogance ;J if he is well 
versed in letters, it is in spite of Minerva and of the 
muses. In CEcolampadius there is a natural goodness 
and admirable meekness. Hedio seems to have as much 
liberality as kindness ; but Bucer possesses the cunning 
d1 fox, that knows how to give himself an air of sense 
and prudence." Men of moderate sentiments often meet 
with worse treatment than those of the extreme parties. 

* Quinquaginta aut sexaginta colloquio prtesentes. Zw. 0pp. 
4. 201. Pauci arbitri ad summum quatuor et viginti. Epp. 2. 370 

t This is my body. Zw. 0pp. 4. 175. i In Zwinglio agresto 
^uiddam est et arrogantalum. Corp. Ref. 1. p. 1097. 



96 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOIT. 



Other feelings animated those who contemplated this 
assembly from a distance. The great men who had led 
the people in their footsteps on the plains of Saxony, on 
the banks of the Rhine, and in the lofty valleys of Swit- 
zerland, were ther^ met face to face ; the chiefs of Chris- 
tendom who had separated from Rome were come to- 
gether to see if they could remain one. Accordingly, 
from all parts of Germany, prayers and anxious looks 
were directed towards Marburg. "Illustrious princes 
of the word,''* cried the evangelical church through the 
mouth of the poet Cordus, " penetrating Luther, mild 
CEcolampadius, magnanimous Zwingle, pious Snepf, elo- 
quent Melancthon, courageous Bucer, candid Hedio, ex- 
cellent Osiander, valiant Brentz, amiable Jonas, fiery 
Oraton, Msenus whose soul is stronger than his body, 
great Dionysius, and you Myconius — all you whom prince 
Philip, that illustrious hero, has summoned, ministers 
and bishops, whom the Christian cities have sent to ter 
minate the schism and to show us the way of truth ; 
the suppliant church falls weeping at your feet, and 
begs you by the bowels of Jesus Christ to bring this 
matter to a happy issue, that the world may acknow- 
ledge in your resolution the work of the Holy Ghost 
himself."f 

The landgrave's chancellor, John Fiege, having re- 
minded them in the prince's name that the object of this 
colloquy was the reestablishment of union, I protest," 
said Luther* "that I differ from my adversaries with 
regard to the doctrine of the Lord's supper, and that I 
shall always differ from them. Christ has said, * This is 
my body.^ Let them show me that a body is not a body. 
I reject reason, common-sense, carnal arguments, and 
mathematical proofs. God is above mathematics.^ We 
have tne word of God ; we must adore ii, and per- 
form It." 

*'lt cannot be denied," said CEcolampadius, "that 

♦ Iivsignes verbi proceres. Bull. 2. 236. 

t Et cupido siipplex vobis Ecclesia voto 
Vestros cadit flens ad pedes. Ibid. 
) Daum ess^ supra mathemaljlcam. Zw. 0pp. 4. 17{k 



SYLLOGISM OF 0ECOLAMPADIU8. 



there are figures of speech in the word of God ; as, * John 
is Elias/ ' the rock was Christ/ * I am the vine/ The 
expression, * This is my body/ is a figure of the same 
kind." Luther granted that there were figures in the 
Bible, but denied that this last expression was figu- 
rative. 

All the various parties, however, of which the Chris- 
tian church is composed see a figure in these words. 
In fact, the Romanists declare that ''this is my body'' 
signifies not only my body," but also my blood," *'my 
Boul," and even ''my divinity," and "Christ wholly."* 
These words, therefore, according to Rome, are a synec- 
doche, a figure by which a part is taken for the whole. 
And as regards the Lutherans, the figure is still more 
evident.f Whether it be synecdoche, metaphor, or me- 
tonomy, there is still a figure. 

In order to prove it, GEcolampadius employed this 
syllogism : 

What Christ rejected in the sixth chapter of St. 
John, he could not admit in the words of the Eucharist. 

" Now Christ, who said to the people of Capernaum, 
'The flesh profiteth nothing,' rejected by those very 
words the oral manducation of his body. 

Therefore he did not establish it at the institution 
of his supper." 

Luther. I deny the minor — the second of these proph 
ositions ; Christ has not rejected all oral manducation, 
but only a material manducation, like that of the flesh 
of oxen or of swine.J 

(EcoLAMPADius. There is danger in attributing too 
much to mere matter. 

Luther. Every thing that God commands becomes 
spirit and life. If we lift up a straw by the Lord's 
order, in that very action we perform a spiritual work. 

* If any body denies that the body and blood of our Saviour 
Jesus Christ, with his soul and his divinity, and consequently the 
whole Jesus Christ — totum Christum-^is contained in the sacrament 
of the Eucharist, let him be anathema. Council of Trent, sess. 13. 

t Tota Christ! persona. Form, concord. 8. f Quails est car- 
Uis bovill® aut suillse. Scult. p. 217. 

HI*, of Rat IV. 7 



98 



HISTORT OF THE RE FORMATION 



We must pay attention to him who speaks, and not 
what he says. God speaks : men, worms, listen. God 
commands : let the world obey ; and let us all together 
fall down and humbly kiss the word.* 

(EcoLAMPADius. But siuce we have the spiritual eatr 
ing, what need of the bodily one ? 

Luther. I do not ask what need we have of it ; but I 
see it written, " Eat, this is my body." We must there- 
fore believe and do. We must do, we must do.f If God 
should order me to eat dung, I would do it, with the 
assurance that it would be salutary. | 

At this point Zwingle interfered in the discussion. 

" We must explain Scripture by Scripture," said he. 
" We cannot admit two kinds of corporeal manducation, 
as if Jesus had spoken of eating, and the Capernaites 
of tearing in pieces, for the same word is employed in 
both cases. Jesus says that to eat his flesh corporeally 
profiteth nothing, John 6 : 63 ; whence it would result 
that he had given us in the supper a thing that would 
be useless to us. Besides, there are certain words that 
seem to me rather childish ; the dung, for instance. The 
oracles of the demons were obscure, not so are those of 
Jesus Christ." 

Luther. When Christ says the flesh profiteth nothing, 
he speaks not of his own flesh, but of ours. 

Zwingle. The soul is fed with the Spirit, and not with 
the flesh. 

Luther. It is with the mouth that we eat the body ; 
the soul does not eat it.§ 

Zwingle. Christ's body is therefore a corporeal nour- 
ishment, and not a spiritual. 

Luther. You are captious. 

Zwingle. Not so ; but you utter contradictory things. 
Luther. If God should present me wild apples, I 
should eat them spiritually. In the Eucharist, the mouth 

* Quum praecipit quid, pareat mundus ; et onmes osculemur ver 
bum. Zw. 0pp. 4. 176. 

t Man miLss es thun, saepe inculcabat. Ibid. J Si jubere* 
Qmum comedere) facerem. Ibid. § Ajiima qou edit ipsam {oor« 
pus^ corporaliter. Zw. Epp. 2, 370. 



LUTHER'S OLD SONa. 



99 



receives the body of Christ, and the soul believes in his 
words. 

Zwingle then quoted a great number of passages 
from the holy Scriptures, in which the sign is described 
by the very thing signified ; and thence concluded that, 
considering our Lord^s declaration in St. John, Th^ 
flesh profiteth nothing," we must explain the words of 
the Eucharist in a similar manner. 

Many headers were struck by these argumenta. 
Among the Marburg professors sat the Frenchmai. 
Lambert ; his tall and spare frame was violently agi- 
tated. He had been at first of Luther's opinion,* and 
was then hesitating between the two reformers. As he 
went to the conference, he said, I desire to be a sheec 
of blank paper, on which the finger of God may write 
his truth." Erelong he exclaimed, after hearing Zwin* 
gle and (Ecolampadius, "Yes, the Spirit, 'tis that 
which vivifies."f When this conversion was known, 
the Wittembergers, shrugging their shoulders, called it 
"Gallic fickleness." ''What," replied Lambert, ^-was 
St. Paul fickle because he was converted from Pharisa- 
ism ? And have we ourselves been fickle in abandoning 
the lost sects of popery ?" 

Luther was, however, by no means shaken. " This 
is my body," repeated he, pointing with his finger to the 
words written before him. " * This is my body the 
devil himself shall not drive me from that. To seek to 
understand it, is to fall away from the faith."J 

" But, doctor," said Zwangle, '' St. John explains how 
Christ's body is eaten, and you will be obliged at last to 
loave off singing always the same song." 

*' You make use of unmannerly expressions," replied 
liUther.§ The Wittembergers themselves called Zwin- 
gle's argument '* his old song."|| Zwingle continued 

* See his commentary on St. Luke 22 : 19, 20. f He added, 
that the body of Christ was in the Eucharist neither mathematically 
or commensurably, nor really — neque mathematics eeu commensura« 
tiv^, neque re ipsa. Episti. Lamb, de Marb. col. i Si iuterrogo, 
excido a fide. Zw. Epp. 2. 177. § Invidiose ioqueris. BaiJ^ 

8. 228. II Veterem suam cantilenam. Zw. 0pp. 4. 221. 



100 HISTOKY OF THE REFOEMAllOK . 



mthout being disconcerted, " I ask you, doctor, whethef 
Christ in the sixch chapter of St. John did not wish to 
reply to the question that had been put to him 

Luther. Master Zwingle, you wish to stop my mouth 
by the arrogancy of your language. That passage has 
nothing to do here. 

Zwingle, hastily. Pardon me, doctor, that passage 
breaks your neck. 

Luther. Do not boast so much. You are in Hesse, 
and not in Switzerland. In this country we do not 
break people's necks. 

Then turning towards his friends, Luther complained 
bitterly of Zwingle ; as if the latter had really wished 
to break his neck. He makes use of camp terms and 
blood-stained words,'' said he.* Luther forgot that he 
had employed a similar expression in speaking of Carl- 
stadt. 

Zwingle resumed : " In Switzerland also there is strict 
justice, and we break no man's neck without trial. That 
expression signifies merely that your cause is lost and 
hopeless." 

Great agitation prevailed in the Knight's Hall. The 
roughness of the Swiss and the obstinacy of the Saxon 
had come into collision. The landgrave, fearing to be- 
hold the failure of his project of conciliation, nodded 
assent to Zwingle's explanation. " Doctor," said he to 
Luther, "you should not be offended at such common 
expressions." It was in vain: the agitated sea could 
not again be calmed. The prince therefore arose, and 
they all repaired to the banqueting hall. After dinner 
they resumed their tasks. 

**I believe," said Luther, "that Christ's body is in 
heaven, but I also believe that it is in the sacrament. 
It concerns me little whether it be against nature, pro- 
Tided that it be not against faith.f Christ is substan- 
tially, in the sacrament, such as he was born of the 
Virgin " 

* Verbum ietud, tanquam castrense et cruentum. Hospia. 131. 
t Non euro quod elt contra naturam, modo non contra fidexn 
Zw. 0pp. 4.17JI 



ARRIVAL OF NEW t>EPrJTIES. 



101 



(EcotAMPADiTjs, quoting a passage from St. Paul : 
«*We know not Jesus Christ after the flesh.'' 2 Cor 
5 :16. 

Luther. After the flesh means, in this passage, aftej' 
our carnal aflections.* 

(EcoLAMPADius. You will not allow that there is a 
metaphor in these words, "This is my body,'' and yet 
you admit a synecdoche. 

Luther. Metaphor permits the existence of a sign 
only ; but it is not so with synecdoche. If a man says 
he wishes to drink a bottle, we understand that he 
means the beer in the bottle. Christ's body is in the 
bread as a sword in the scabbard, f or as the Holy Ghost 
in the dove. 

The discussion was proceeding in this manner, when 
Osiander pastor of Nuremberg, Stephen Agricola pastor 
of Augsburg, and Brentz pastor of Halle in Swabia, 
author of the famous Syngrarama, entered the hall. 
These also had been invited by the landgrave. But 
Brentz, to whom Luther had written that he should take 
care not to appear, had no doubt by his indecision re- 
tarded his own departure as well as that of his friends. 
Places were assigned them near Luther and Melancthon. 
" Listen, and speak if necessary," they were told. They 
took but little advantage of this permission. "All of 
us, except Luther," said Melancthon, "were silent per 
Bonages."J 

The struggle continued. 

When Zwingle saw that exegesis was not sufficient 
for Luther, he added dogmatical theology to it, and sub- 
sidiarily, natural philosophy. 

"1 oppose you," said he, "with this article of our 
faith : Ascendit in caelum — he ascended into heaven. H 
Christ is in heaven as regards his body, how can he be 
in the bread ? The word of God teaches us that he was 
like his brethren in all things. Heb. 2 : H. He there- 
fore cannot be in several places at once." 

• Pro carnalibus affectibus. Zw. 0pp. 4. p. 202. f Corpuf 

cet In pane sicut gladius ia vagina. Ibid. % FuimuB nufa no^ 
cnjTra. Corp. Ref. 1. 10^8. 



102 mSTOKY OF THE UEFOUMATlOl? 



Luther. Were I desirous of reasoning thus, I WDiild 
nndertake to prove that Jesus Christ had a wife ; that 
he had black eyes,* and lived in our good country of 
Germany.f I care little about mathematics. 

"There is no question of mathematics here,'' said 
Zwingle, " but of St. Paul, who writes to the Philippians, 

Luther, interrupting him. Read it to us in Latin or 
in German, not in Greek. 

Zwingle, in Latin. Pardon me : for twelve years past 
I have made use of the Greek Testament only. Then 
continuing to read the passage, he concluded from it that 
Christ's humanity is of a finite nature like our own. 

Luther, pointing to the words written before him. 
Most dear sirs, since ray Lord Jesus Christ says. Hoc est 
corpus meumj I believe that his body is really there. 

Here the scene grew animated. Zwingle started 
from his chair, sprung towards Luther, and said, strik- 
ing the table before him,§ 

"You maintain then, doctor, that Christ's body is 
locally in the Eucharist; for you say Christ's body is 
really there, there, there," repeated Zwingle. " There is 
an adverb of place.|| Christ's body is then of such a 
nature as to exist in a place. If it is in a place, it is in 
heaven, whence it follows that it is not in the bread." 

Luther. I repeat that I have nothing to do with 
mathematical proofs. As soon as the words of conse- 
cration are pronounced over the bread the body is there, 
however wicked be the priest who pronounces them. 

Zwingle. You are thus refe'stablishing Popery.^ 

Luther. This is not done through the priest's merits, 
but because of Christ's ordinance. I will not, when 
Christ's body is in question, hear speak of a particular 
place : I absolutely will not. 

* Quod uxorem et nigros oculos habuisset. Scultet. p. 225. 

t In Germania diuturnum contubernium egisse. Zw. Opp- 4 
202. t Having taken the form of a servant. Phil. 2 : 7. 

§ Ibi Zwinglius illico prosiliens. Scultet. p. 225. /| Da, da, 
da. Ibi est adverbium loci. Ibid. % Damit riohtcnd ir dae 

papstum uf, Zw. 0pp. 3. 57. 



TESTIMONY 01^ THE FATHERS. 103 



ZwTNGLE. Must every thing, then, exist precisely as 
yon will it ? 

The landgrave perceived that the discussion was 
growing hot ; and as the repast was waiting, he broke 
off the contest.* 

The conference was continued on the next day, Sun- 
day, October 3, perhaps because of an epidemic — the 
sweating sickness — that had just broken out at Mar- 
burg, and which did not allow any great prolongation 
of the colloquy. Luther, returning to the discussion of 
the previous evening, said, 

" Christ^s body is in the sacrament, but it is not there 
as in a place." 

ZwiNGLE. Then it is not there at all. 

Luther. Sophists say that a body may very well be 
in several places at once. The universe is a body, and 
yet we cannot assert that it is in a particular place. 

ZwiNGLE. Ah, you speak of sophists, doctor ; are you 
really, after all, obliged to return to the onions and flesh- 
pots of Egypt ?f As for what you say, that the universe 
is in no particular place, I beg all intelligent men to 
weigh this proof. 

Then Zwingle, who, whatever Luther may have said, 
had more than one arrow in his quiver, after establish- 
ing his proposition by exegesis and philosophy, resolved 
on confirming it by the testimony of the fathers of the 
church. 

" Listen," said he, " to what Fulgentius bishop of 
Euspa in Numidia said, in the fifth century, to Trasa- 
mond king of the Vandals : * The Son of God took the 
attributes of true humanity, and did not lose those of 
true divinity. Born in time according to his mother, he 
lives in eternity according to the divinity that he holds 
from the Father : coming from man, he is man, and con- 
sequently in a place ; proceeding from the Father, he is 
God, and consequently present in every place. Accord- 
ing to his human nature, he was absent from heaven 
while he was upon earth, and quitted the earth when he 

• Gcena instabat et diremit certamen. Zw. 0pp. 4. 179. 

f Ad Cttpas et ollas ^gyptiacas Ibid. 2. part 3, 57. 



104 HISTOEY OF THE RE^'Ofl^ATIOW. 



ascended into heaven ; but according to his divine nature, 
he remained in heaven when he came down thence, and 
did not abandon the earth when he returned thither.' "* 

But Luther still replied, "It is written, * This is my 
body/'' Zwingle, becoming impatient, said, "All that 
is idle wrangling. An obstinate disputant might also 
maintain this expression of our Saviour to his mother, 
•Behold thy son,' pointing to St. John. Vain would be 
every explanation, he would continue crying, No, no ; 
he said, Eccejilius tuus. Behold thy son, behold thy son 1 
Listen to a new testimony ; it is from the great Augus- 
tine : ' Let us not think,' says he, * that Christ according 
to his human form is present in every place ; let us 
beware, in our endeavor to establish his divinity, of 
taking away his truth from his body. Christ is now 
everywhere present, like God ; and yet, in consequence 
of his real body, he is in a definite part of heaven.' "f 

" St. Augustine," replied Luther, " is not here speak- 
ing of the Eucharist. Christ's body is not in the Eucha- 
rist as in a place." 

(Ecolampadius saw that he might take advantage of 
this assertion of Luther's. "The body of Christ," said 
he, " is not locally in the Eucharist, therefore no real 
body is there ; for every one knows that the essence of 
a body is its existence in a place." 

Here finished the morning's discussion. 

(Ecolampadius, upon reflection, felt convinced that 
Luther's assertion might be looked upon as an approxi- 
mation. " I remember," said he after dinner, " that the 
doctor conceded this morning that Christ's body was not 
in the sacrament as in a place. Let us therefore inquire 
amicably what is the nature of Christ's bodily presence.'' 

"You will not make me take a step further," ex- 
claimed Luther, who saw where they wished to drag 
him ; " you have Pulgentius and Augustine on your side, 
but all the other fathers are on ours." 

* Secundum humanam substantiam absens coelo, cum esset in 
terra, et derelinquens terram cum ascendisset in coelum. Fulgen,- 
tius to King Trasamond, lib. ii. f In loco aliquo cceli proptei 

veri corporis modum. Aug. Ep. p. 57 



BND OF THE CONFERENCE 



109 



(Ecolampadius, who seemed to the Wittembergera 
to be vexatiously precise,* then said, " Name these doc- 
tors. We will take upon ourselves to prove that they 
are of our opinion." 

" We will not name them to you,"f said Luther. " It 
was in his youth," added he, "that Augustine wrote 
what you have quoted ; and besides, he is an obscure 
author." Then retreating to the ground which he had 
resolved never to quit, he was no longer content to 
point his finger at the inscription, Hoc est corpus meum, 
but seized the velvet cover on which the words were 
written, tore it off the table, held it up in front of Zwin- 
gle and (Ecolampadius, and placing it before their eyes, J 
"See," said he, "see ! This is our text: you have not 
yet driven, us from it, as you have boasted, and we care 
for no other proofs." 

" If this be the case," said (Ecolampadius, " we had 
better leave off the discussion. But I will first declare, 
that if we quote the fathers, it is only to free our doc- 
trine from the reproach of novelty, and not to support 
our cause by their authority." No better definition cap 
be given of the legitimate use of the doctors of the 
church. 

There was no reason, in fact, for prolonging the con- 
ference. A breach was inevitable. The Catholics, who 
were appealed to by Melancthon as judges — though 
much more inclined to favor Luther than Zwingle, and 
more impartial in this affair than such Lutherans as 
Seckendorf — here blame Luther. § 

The chancellor, alarmed at such a termination of the 
colloquy, exhorted the theologians to come to some un- 
derstanding. " I know but one means for that," said 
Luther ; " and this it is : Let our adversaries believe- as 
we do." "We cannot," answered the Swiss. "Well 

* Quern omnes sperassemus mitiorem, interdum videbatur paulo 
morosior, sed citra contumeliam. Zw. 0pp. 4. 201. f Non 

aominabimua illos. Scultet. p. 228. f Da hub Luther die 

Sammatendeck auf, und zeigt ihm den Spruch, den er mit Kreyden 
hett fiir sich geschrieben. Osiander ; Niederer's Nachrichteu, 2 111 

§ See Maimbourg, Hist, of Luth., vol. II., year 1829. 



i06 HISTORY OF THE REPOUMAIION 



then,'' rejoined Luther, "I abandon you to G.jd's jadg* 
ment, and pray that he will enlighten you.'' " We will 
io the same," added CEcolampadius. 

While these words were passing, Zwingle sat silent, 
motionless, and deeply moved ; and the liveliness of his 
affections, of which he had given more than one proof 
during the conference, was then manifested in a very 
different manner. He burst into tears in the presence 
of all. 

The conference was ended. It had been in reality 
more tranquil than the documents seem to show, or per- 
haps the chroniclers appreciated such matters differently 
from ourselves. " With the exception of a few sallies, 
all had passed off quietly, in a courteous manner, and 
with very great gentleness," says an eye-witness.* 
"During the colloquy no other words than these were 
heard, ' Sir, and very dear friend, your charity,' or other 
similar expressions. Not a word of schism or of heresy. 
It might have been said that Luther and Zwingle were 
brothers, and not adversaries."f This is the testimony 
of Brentz. But these flowers concealed an abyss, and 
Jonas, also an eye-witness, styles the conference "a 
very sharp contest."! 

The contagion that had suddenly broken out in Mar- 
burg was creating frightful ravages, and filled every 
body with alarm. § All were anxious to leave the city. 
" Sirs," remarked the landgrave, " you cannot separate 
thus." And desirous of giving the doctors an opportu- 
nity of meeting one another with minds unoccupied by 
theological debates, he invited them to his table. TWr 
was Sunday night. 

Philip of Hesse had all along shown the most con- 
stant attention, and each one imagined him to be on his 
side. "I would rather place my trust in the simple 

• Omnia humanissim^ et summa cum mansuetudine transigehan- 
tur. Zw. 0pp. 4. 201. f Amicissirae Domine, Vestra charicas, 
et id genus. . . . Dixisses Lutherum et Zwinglium non adversaries. 
Ibid. X Acerrimo certamine. Corp. Ref. 1. 1096. § Nisi 

Sudor Anglicus subito Marburgum invasisset et terrore omaioflQ 
wmos percutisset. Hospin. p. 131. 



THE LANDORAVE MEDIATES. 107 



words of Christ, than in the subtle thoughts of man," 
was a remark he made, according to Jonas ;* but Zwin- 
gle affirmed that this prince entertained the same opin- 
ions as himself, although with regard to certain persons 
he dissembled the change. Luther, sensible of the weak- 
ness of his defence as to the declarations of the fathers, 
transmitted a note to Philip, in which several passages 
were pointed out from Hilary, Chrysostom, Cyprian, Ire* 
naeus, and Ambrose, which he thought were in his favor. 

The time of departure drew near, and nothing had 
been done. The landgrave toiled earnestly at the union, 
as Luther wrote to his wife.f He invited the theologi- 
ans one after another into his closet ;| he pressed, en- 
treated, warned, exhorted, and conjured them. " Think," 
said he, **of the salvation of the Christian republic, and 
remove all discord from its bosom."§ Never had gen- 
eral at the head of an army taken such pains to win a 
battle. 

A final meeting took place, and undoubtedly the 
church has seldom witnessed one of greater solemnity. 
Luther and Zwingle, Saxony and Switzerland, met for 
the last time. The sweating sickness was carrying ofi 
men around them by thousands ;|| Charles the Fifth and 
the pope were uniting in Italy ; Ferdinand and the Ro- 
man-catholic princes were preparing to tear in pieces 
the Protest of Spires ; the thundercloud became more 
threatening every day; union alone seemed capable of 
saving the Protestants, and the hour of departure was 
about to strike, an hour that would separate them per- 
haps for ever. 

" Let us confess our union in all things in which we 
agree," said Zwingle; "and as for the rest, let us re- 
member that we are brothers. There will never be 
peace between the churches if, while we maintain the 

* Dicitur palam proclamasse. Corp. Ref. p. 1097. f Da ar- 
beit der Landgraf heftig. L. Epp. 3. 512 J Unumquemque nos- 
trum seorsim absque arbitris. Zw. 0pp. 4. 203. § CompellanSj 
rogans, monens, exhortans, postulans ut Reipublicae Christianae ratio 
aem haberemus, et discordlam e medio tollereous. Ibid. 

II Malta perierunt millia. Hospin. p. 131. 



108 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOll. 



grand doctrine of salvation by faith, we cannot differ oa 
secondary points."* Such is, in fact, the true principle 
of Christian union. The sixteenth century was still too 
deeply sunk in scholasticism to understand this : let us 
hope that the nineteenth century will comprehend it 
better. 

"Yes, yes," exclaimed the landgrave, "you agree, 
give then a testimony of your unity, and recognize ono 
another as brothers." " There is no one upon earth with 
whom I more desire to be united, than with you," said 
Zwingle, approaching the Witteraberg doctors.f (Eco- 
lampadius, Bucer, and Hedio said the same. 

"Acknowledge them, acknowledge them as broth- 
ers," continued the landgrave.J Their hearts were 
moved ; they were on the eve of unity : Zwingle, burst- 
ing into tears, in the presence of the prince, the cour- 
tiers, and divines — it is Luther himself who records 
this§ — approached Luther, and held out his hand. The 
two families of the Reformation were about to be united ; 
long quarrels were about to be stifled in their cradle ; 
but Luther rejected the hand that was offered him: 
" You have a different spirit from ours," said he. These 
words communicated to the Swiss as it were an elec- 
tric shock. Their hearts sunk each time Luther repeat- 
ed them, and he did so frequently. He himself is our 
informant. 

A brief Consultation took place among the Wittem- 
berg doctors. Luther, Melancthon, Agricola, Brentz, 
Jonas, and Osiander, conferred together. Convinced 
that their peculiar doctrine on the Eucharist was essen- 
tial to salvation, they considered all those who rejected 
it as without the pale of the faith. " What folly,"|| said 
Melancthon, who afterwards nearly coincided with Zwin- 
gle's sentiments : " they condemn us, and yet they de- 

* Quod nulla unquam Ecclesiarum pax constituta sit, si non io 
multis aliis disseutiendi a se facultatem faciant. Scultet. p. 207. 

t Es werendt keine liith uff Erden. Bull. 2. 225. J Idque 

Princeps valde urgebat. L. Epp. 3. 613. § Zwinglius pa)ai» 
lacrymans coram Langravio et omnibus. Hospin. p 136. 

il Vide eorum stultitiam! Corp. Ref. 1. 1108. 



SECTARIAN SPIRIT OF THE aifiRMAKS. 109 



gire we should consider them as our brothers !" " What 
versatility," added Brentz ; " they accused us but lately 
of worshipping a bread-god, and they now ask for com- 
munion with us !"* Then turning towards Zwingle and 
his friends, the Wittembergers said, **You do not be- 
long to the communion of the Christian church ; we can- 
not acknowledge you as brethren I'^f 

The Swiss were far from partaking of this sectarian 
spirit. "We think," said Bucer, "that your doctrine 
strikes at the glory of Jesus Christ, who now reigns at 
the right hand of the Father. But seeing that in all 
things you acknowledge your dependence on the Lord, 
we look at your conscience, which compels you to re- 
ceive the doctrine you profess, and we do not doubt that 
you belong to Christ." 

" And we," said Luther, " we declare to you once 
more that our conscience opposes our receiving you as 
brethren." " If such is the case," replied Bucer, " it 
would be folly to ask it." 

" I am exceedingly astonished that you wish to con 
sider me as your brother," pursued Luther. " It shows 
clearly that you do not attach much importance to your 
own doctrine." 

" Take your choice," said Bucer, proposing a dilem- 
ma to the reformer : " either you should not acknow- 
ledge as brethren those who differ from you in any 
point — and if so, you will not find a single brother in 
your own ranks J — or else you will receive some of 
those who differ from you, and then you ought to re- 
ceive us." 

The Swiss had exhausted their solicitations. "We 
are conscious," said they, " of having acted as if in the 
presence of God. Posterity will be our witness."§ They 
were on the point of retiring : Luther remained like a 
rock, to the landgrave's great indignation. || The Hes- 

* Nos tanquam adoratores panifici Dei traduxerant. Zw. 0pp. 
4. 203. t a communione Ecclesiae Christianae alienos esse 

Ibid. t Nemo alter! vel inter ipsos frater erit. Ibid. 194. 

§ Id testabitur posteritas. Ibid. || Principi illud dnnur 

Videbatur. Ibid. 203. 



no HISTOEY OF THE REFOUMATIOK. 

Bian divines, Kraft, Lambert, Snepf, Lonicer, and Melan* 
der, united their exertions to those of the prince. 

Luther was staggered, and conferred anew with his 
colleagues. **Let us beware," said he to his friends, 
"of wiping our noses too ro-ughly, lest blood should 
come."* 

Then turning to Zwingle and (Ecolampadius, they 
said, " We acknowledge you as friends : we do not con- 
sider you as brothers and members of Christ's church ;f 
but we do not exclude you from that universal charity 
which we owe even to our enemies."^ 

The hearts of Zwingle, (Ecolampadius, and Bucer 
were ready to burst, § for this concession was almost a 
new insult. " Let us carefully avoid all harsh and vio- 
1-ent words and writings," said they ; "and let each one 
defend himself without railing." || 

Luther then advanced towards the Swiss, and said, 
*'We consent, and I offer you the hand of peace and 
charity." The Swiss rushed in great emotion towards 
the Wittembergers, and all shook hands.^ Luther hint- 
self was softened ; Christian charity resumed her rights 
in his heart. " Assuredly," said he, " a great portion of 
the scandal is taken away by the suppression of our 
fierce debates ; we could not have hoped for so much. 
May Christ's hand remove the last obstacle that sepa- 
rates us.** There is now a friendly concord between 
us, and if we persevere in prayer brotherhood will 
come." 

It was desirable to confirm this important result by 
a report. " We must let the Christian world know," 
said the landgrave, " that except the manner of the pres- 
ence of the body and blood in the Eucharist, you are 

* Ne nimis mungendo, sanguinem eliceremus. L, Epp. in hia 
letter written to Gerbellius on the same day, Monday. f Agnos- 
cere quidem velimus tanquam amicos, sed non tanquam fratres. 
Zw, 0pp. 4. 203. :| Charitate quEe etiam hosti debetur. Ibid. 

190, § Indignissime aflfecti sunt. Ibid. || Quisque suam 
Bententiam doceat absque invectivis. L. Epp. 3. 514. IT Dedi- 
mus tamen manus pacis et caritatis. Ibid. 613. ** Utinam et 
Ule reliquus scruputus per Christum tandem tollatur — ^in his letter 
written to Gerbellius after leaving this meeting. 



LUTHER'S REPORT. 



Ill 



agreed in all the articles of faith."^ This was resolved 
on ; but who should be charged with drawing up the 
paper ? All eyes were turned upon Luther. The Swiss 
themselves appealed to his impartiality. 

Luther retired to his closet lost in thought, uneasy, 
and finding the task very difficult. " On the one hand/' 
said he, " I should like to spare their weakness ;f but on 
the other, I would not in the least degree strike at the 
holy doctrine of Christ." He did not know how to set 
about it, and his anguish increased. He got free at last 
" I will draw up the articles," said he, " in the most accu- 
rate manner. Do I not know that whatever I may write 
they will never sign them V^X Erelong fifteen articles 
were committed to paper, and Luther holding them in 
his hand repaired to the theologians of the two parties. 

These articles are of importan^^e. The two doctrines 
that were evolved in Switzerland and in Saxony, inde- 
pendently of each other, were brought together and com- 
pared. If they were of man, there would be found in 
them a servile uniformity, or a remarkable opposition. 
This was not the case. A great unity was found between 
the German and the Swiss reformations, for they both 
proceeded from the same divine teaching ; and a diversity 
on secondary points, for it was by man's instrumentality 
that God had effected them. 

Luther took his paper, and reading the first article, 
eaid, 

" First, we believe that there is one sole, true, and 
natural God, creator of heaven and earth and of all crea- 
tures ; and that this same God, one in essence and in 
nature, is threefold in person, that is to say. Father, 
Son, and Holy Ghost, as was declared in the Nicen© 
council, and as all the Christian church professes." 

To this the Swiss gave their assent. 

They were agreed also on the divinity and humanity 

• Ui orbi Christiano notum fieret eos in omnibus Mei capitibui 
conwntire. Hospin. p. 127. f Het gern ihrer Schwachheit ver- 
echont. Niederer Nachr. 2. 120. J Doch zuletz sprach er : Ici» 
will die artikel auf aller besste BtcUen, sy werdens doch oicht aiixi» 
Xa&tL XbicL 



112 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



of Jesiis Christ, on his death and resurrection, on orig- 
inal sin, justification by faith, the operation of the Holy 
Ghost and of the word of God, baptism, good works, 
confession, civil order, and tradition. 

Thus far all were united. The Wittembergers could 
not recover from their astonishment.* The two parties 
had rejected, on the one hand, the errors of the Papists, 
who make religion little more than an outward form; 
and on the other, those of the enthusiasts, who speak 
exclusively of internal feelings ; and they were found 
drawn up under the same banners between these two 
camps. But the moment was come that would separate 
them. Luther had kept till the last the article on the 
Eucharist. 

The reformer resumed : 

**We all believe with regard to the Lord's supper, 
that it ought to be celebrated in both kinds, according 
to the primitive institution ; that the mass is not a work 
by which a Christian obtains pardon for another man, 
whether dead or alive ; that the sacrament of the altar 
is the sacrament of the very body and very blood of 
Jesus Christ ; and that the spiritual manducation of this 
body and blood is specially necessary to every true 
Christian."! 

It was now the turn of the Swiss to be astonished. 
Luther continued : 

" In like manner, as to the use of the sacrament, we 
are agreed that, like the word, it was ordained of Al- 
mighty God, in order that weak consciences might be 
excited by the Holy Ghost to faith and charity." 

The joy of the Swiss was redoubled. Luther contin- 
ued : And although at present we are not agreed on 
the question whether the real body and blood of Christ 
are corporeally present in the bread and wine, yet both 
the interested parties shall cherish more and more a 
truly Christian charity for one another, so far as con- 
science permits ; and we will all earnestly implore the 

* Quod mirari non satis potuimus. Brentius, Zw. 0pp. 4. 203. 
t Quod spiritualis maaducatio hujus corporis et 8anguioi» uni^ 
sakue Christiano praecipue nccessaria sit Scultet. p. 232. 



UNITY IN DIVERSITY 



113 



Lord to condescend by his Spirit to confirm us in the 
Boond doctrine."* 

The Swiss obtained what they had asked : unity in 
diversity. It was immediately resolved to hold a solemn 
meeting for the signature of the articles. 

They were read over again. QtCcolampadiua^ Zwin- 
gle, Bucer, and Hedio, signed them first on one oc py; 
while Luther, Melancthon, Jonas, Osiander, Brentz, and 
Agricola, wrote their names on the other ; both parties 
then subscribed the copy of their adversaries, and this 
important document was sent to the press.f 

Thus the Reformation had made a sensible step at 
Marburg. The opinion of Zwingle on the spiritual pres- 
ence, and of Luther on the bodily presence, are both 
found in Christian antiquity ; but both the extreme doc- 
trines have been always rejected : that of the Rational- 
ists on the one hand, who behold in the Eucharist nothing 
but a simple commemoration ; and of the Papists, on the 
other, who adore in it a transubstantiation. These are 
both errors ; while the doctrines of Luther and Zwingle 
and the medium taken by Calvin, already maintained by 
some of the fathers, were considered m ancient times 
as different views of the same truth. If Luther had 
yielded, it might have been feared that the church would 
fall into the extreme of Rationalism ; if Zwingle, that it 
would rush into the extreme of Popery. It is a salutary 
thing for the church that these different views should be 
entertained ; but it is a pernicious thing for individuals 
to attach themselves to one of them in such a manner as 
to anathematize the other. There is only this little 
stumbling-block," wrote Melancthon, " that embarrasses 
the church of our Lord." J 

• Osiaader, a Lutheran, employs the accusative, " in den rechten 
Verstand,'' which would indicate a movement towards an object that 
we do not possess ; Bullinger and Scaltet, both reformed divines, 
hava the dative. f Bullinger and others indicate the 3d of 

October as the day on which the articles were signed ; Osiander, an 
eye-witness, and whose narrative is very exact, says it was the 4th, 
which agrees with all the other data. { Hie unus in Ecclesia 

bearet scrupulus. Corp. Ref. 1. 1106. 

8 



114 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 



All, Eomanists and Evangelicals, Saxons and Swiea, 
admitted the presence, and even the real presence of 
Christ ; but here was the essential point of separation : 
Is this presence effected by the faith of the communi- 
cant, or by the opus operatum of the priest ? The germs 
of Popery, Sacerdotalism, Puseyism, are inevitabl}^ con* 
tained in this latter thesis. If it is maintained that a 
wicked priest, as has been said, operates this real pres- 
ence of Christ by three words, we enter the church of 
the pope. Luther appeared sometimes to admit this 
doctrine, but he has often spoken in a more spiritual 
manner ; and taking this great man in his best moments, 
we behold merely an essential unity and a secondary 
diversity in the two parties of the Reformation. Un- 
doubtedly the Lord has left to his church outward ordi- 
nances, but he has not attached salvation to them. 
The essential point is the connection of the faithful with 
the word, with the Holy Ghost, with the Head of the 
church. This is the great truth which the Swiss reform 
proclaims, and which Lutheranism itself recognizes. 
After the Marburg conference, the controversy became 
more moderate. 

There was another advantage. The evangelical di- 
vines at Marburg marked with one accord their separa- 
tion from the Papacy. Zwingle was not without fear — 
unfounded, no doubt — with regard to Luther : these fears 
were dispersed. "Now that we are agreed," said he, 
" the papists will no longer hope that Luther will ever 
be one of them.''* The Marburg articles were the first 
bulwark erected in common by the reformers against 
Rome. 

It was not then in vain, that after the protest of 
Spires, Philip of Hesse endeavored, at Marburg, to bring 
together the friends of the gospel. But if the religious 
object was partially attained, the political object almost 
entirely failed. They could not arrive at a confederation 
of Switzerland and Germany. Nevertheless, Philip of 
Hesse and Zwingle, with a view to this, had numerous 
* Pontifici non ultra possunt sperare Lutherum SQum fore Zw 
»>pp. 2. 370. 



JiUTHER'S DEJECTION. 



110 



rt*cr(jt conversations, which made the Saxons uneasj , aa 
they were not less opposed to Zwingle's politics than to 
his theol ogy, " When you have reformed the peasant's 
cap," sa d Jonas to him, " you will also claim to reform 
the sab]*^ hat of princes." 

The landgrave having collected all the doctors at hia 
table on the last day, they shook hands in a friendly 
manner,* and each one thought of leaving the town. 

On Tuesday, October 5, Philip of Hesse quitted Mar- 
burg early, and in the afternoon of the same day Luther 
departed, accompanied by his colleagues ; but he did not 
go forth as a conqueror. A spirit of dejection and alarm 
had taken possession of his mind.f He writhed in the 
dust like a worm, according to his own expression. He 
fancied he should never see his wife and children again, 
and cried out that he, " the consoler of so many tortured 
souls, was now without any consolat-ion."! 

This state might partly arise from Luther's want of 
brotherly feeling ; but it had other causes also. Soliman 
had come to fulfil a promise made to king Ferdinand. 
The latter having demanded, in 1528, the surrender of 
Belgrade, the sultan had haughtily replied, that he would 
bring the keys himself to Vienna. In fact the Grand 
Turk, crossing the frontiers of Germany, had invaded 
countries "on which the hoofs of the Mussulman war- 
horses had never trod," and eight days before the con- 
ference at Marburg, he had covered with his innumera- 
ble tents the plain and the fertile hills in the midst of 
which rise the walls of Vienna. The struggle had begun 
under ground, the two parties having dug deep galle- 
ries beneath the ramparts. Three different times the 
Turkish mines were exploded ; the walls were thrown 
down ;§ the balls flew through the air like a flight of 
Bmall birds," says a Turkish historian ; " and there wa» 

* Die Hand einander friintlich gebotten. Bui. 2. 236. 

t Ego vix et aegre domum reversus sum. L. Epp. 3. 620. 

X Sic me vexante aagelo Satanae, ut desperarim me vivum et 
•alyum visurum meos. Ibid. 

§ Ipsam urbem in tribus locis, suffosso solo et pulTere suppocuti 
d^icit et patefecii Ibid. 618. 



116 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 



a horrible banquet, at which the genii of death joyously 
drained their glasses."* 

Luther did not keep in the background. He had 
already written against the Turks, and now he publish- 
ed a BaMe-sermon. " Mahomet,'' said he, " exalts Christ 
as being without sin ; but he denies that he was the true 
God ; he is therefore his enemy. Alas, to this hour the 
world is such that it seems everywhere to rain disciples 
of Mahomet. Two men ought to oppose the Turks : the 
first is Christian, that is to say, prayer; the second is 
Charles, that is to say, the sword." And in another 
place, " I know my dear Germans well, fat and well-fed 
swine as they are; no sooner is the danger removed, 
than they think only of eating and sleeping. Wretched 
man, if thou dost not take up arms, the Turk will come ; 
he will carry thee away into his Turkey ; he will there 
sell thee like a dog ; and thou shalt serve him night and 
day, under the rod and the cudgel, for a glass of water 
and a morsel of bread. Think on this ; be converted, 
and implore the Lord not to give thee the Turk for thy 
schoolmaster."-}* 

The two arms pointed out by Luther were, in reality, 
vigorously employed; and Soliman, perceiving at last 
that he was not the " soul of the universe," as his poets 
had styled him, but that there was a strength in the 
world superior to his own, raised the siege of Vienna on 
the 16th of October ; and "the shadow of God over the 
two worlds," as he called himself, "disappeared and 
vanished in the Bosphorus." 

But Luther imagined that, when retiring from before 
the walls of Vienna, " the Turk, or at least his god, who 
is the devil," had rushed upon him ; and that it was this 
enemy of Christ and of Christ's servants that he was 
destined to combat and vanquish in his frightful agony. J 
There is an immediate reaction of the violated law upon 
him who violates it. Now Luther had transgressed the 

* Dschelalsade, quoted by Ranke. f Heerpredigt wider die 
Tiirken. L. 0pp. W. 22. 2691. % Forte ipsum Turcam partinr 
in iato agone cogor ferre et viucere, ealtem ejus deum, dic^boJum 
L. Bpp. 3. 530 



LUTHER'S AGONY AND FIRHNESS. 117 



royal law, which is charity, and he suffered the penalty. 
At last he reentered Wittemberg, and flung himself into 
the arms of his friends, "tormented by the angel of 
death."* 

Let us not, however, overlook the essential qualities 
of a reformer that Luther manifested at Marburg : there 
are in God's work, as in a drama, different parts. What 
various characters we see among the apostles and among 
the reformers. It has been said that the same charac- 
ters and the same parts were assigned to St. Peter and 
to Luther, at the time of the formation and of the ref- 
ormation of the church.f They were both in fact men 
of the initiative, who start forward quite alone, but 
around whom a-n army soon collects at the sight of the 
standard which they wave. But there was perhaps in 
the reformer a characteristic not existing to the same 
degree in the apostle : this was firmness. 

As for Zwingle, he quitted Marburg in alarm at Lu- 
ther's intolerance. " Lutheranism," wrote he to the land- 
grave, " will lie as heavy upon us as Popery." J He 
reached Zurich on the 19th of October. "The truth," 
said he to his friends, " has prevailed so manifestly, that 
if ever any one has been defeated before all the world, 
it is Luther, although he constantly exclaimed that he 
was invincible."§ On his side, Luther spoke in a similar 
strain. "It is through fear of their fellow-citizens," 
added he, " that the Swiss, although vanquished, are 
unwilling to retract."|| 

If it should be asked on which side the victory really 
was, perhaps we ought to say that Luther assumed the 
air of a conqueror, but Zwingle was so in reality. The 
conference propagated through all Germany the doctrine 
of the Swiss, which had been little known there until 
then, and it was adopted by an immense number of per- 

* Angelas Satanae, vel quisquis est diabolus mortis, ita me fati- 
gai. L. Epp. 3. 615. f Dr. Viaet. t Das Lutherthun 

werde so schwer, als das Papsthum. Zw. Epp. 374. 

§ Lutherus impudens et contumax aperte est victus. Ibid. 37C 
II Metaebaut plebem suam ad quam non licuisset reverti Zw 
0pp. 2. 19. 



118 HISTOUY OF THE REFORMATlCjN 



80DS. Among these were Laffards, first rector of Saint 
Martin's school at Brunswick, Dionysius Melander, Jus- 
tus Lening, Hartmann, Ibach, and many others. The 
landgrave himself, a short time before his death, declar- 
ed that this conference had induced him to renounce the 
oral macducation of Christ * 

Still the dominant principle at this celebrated epoch 
was unity. The adversaries are the best judges. The 
Roman-catholics were exasperated that the Lutherans 
and Zwinglians had agreed on all the essential points 
of faith. " They have a fellow-feeling against the Catho- 
lic church,'^ said they, " as Herod and Pilate against 
Jesus Christ." The enthusiastic sects said the same,f 
and the extreme hierarchical as well as the extreme 
radical party deprecated alike the unity of Marburg. 

Erelong a greater agitation eclipsed all these rumors, 
and events which threatened the whole evangelical body 
proclaimed its great and intimate union with new force. 
The emperor, it was everywhere said, exasperated by 
the Protest of Spires, had landed at Genoa with the pomp 
of a conqueror. After having sworn at Barcelona to 
reduce the heretics under the power of the pope, he was 
going to visit this pontiff, humbly to bend the knee be- 
fore him ; and he would rise only to cross the Alps and 
accomplish his terrible designs. " The emperor Charles," 
said Luther, a few days after the landing of this prince, 
has determined to show himself more cruel against us 
than the Turk himself, and he has already uttered the 
most horrible threats. Behold the hour of Christ's agony 
and weakness. Let us pray for all those who will soon 
have to endure captivity and death.^J 

Such v/as the news that then agitated all Germany. 
The grand question was, whether the Protest of Spirea 
could be maintained against the power of the emperor 
and of the pope. This was seen in the year 1530. 

* Rommel's Anmerkungen, p. 227-229. f Pontificiis tt catar 
bbptistis multum displicuit consensus Marpurgi. Scultet. p. 208. 

X Carolus Csesar multo atrocius minatur et sesvire statait in my 
qioam Turca L. Epp. 3. 324. 



TWO STRIKINa LESSONS. 



119 



BOOK XIV. 

THE AUGSBURG CONFESSION. 
1S30. 

CHAPTER I. 

Two Btriking lessons — Charles V. in Italy — The German envo7f^— 
Their boldness — The landgrave's present — The envoys under 
rest — Their release and departure — Meeting of Charles and Clem- 
ent — Gattinara's proposition — Clement's arms — War imm nent — 
Luther's objections — The Saviour is coming — Charles' concilia- 
tory language — The emperor's motives. 

The Reformation was accoraplished in the name of a 
spiritual principle. It had proclaimed for its teacher 
the word of God ; for salvation, faith ; for king", Jesus 
Christ; for arms, the Holy Ghost; and had by these 
very means rejected all worldly elements. Rome had 
been established by "the law of a carnal command- 
ment;" the Reformation, by "the power of an endless 
life." Heb. 7:16. 

If there is any doctrine that distinguishes Christian' 
ity from every other religion, it is its spirituality. A 
heavenly life brought down to man, such is its work ; 
thus the opposition of the spirit of the gospel to the 
spirit of the world, was the great fact which signalized 
the entrance of Christianity among the nations. But 
what its Founder had separated, had soon come together 
again : the church had fallen into the arms of the world 5 
and by this criminal union it had been reduced to the 
deplarable condition in which we find it at the era 0/ 
the Reformation. 

Thus one of the greatest tasks of the sixteenth cen- 
tury was to restore the spiritual element to its rights. 
The gospel of the reformers had nothing to do with the 



120 



HISTORY OF THE EE FORMATION 



world and with politics. While the Roman hierarchy 
had become a matter of diplomacy and a court intrigue, 
the Reformation was destined to exercise no other influ* 
ence over princes and people than that which proceeds 
from the gospel of peace. 

If the Reformation, having attained a certain point, 
became untrue to its nature, began to parley and tem- 
porize with the world, and ceased thus to follow up the 
spiritual principle that it had so loudly proclaimed, it 
was faithless to God and to itself. 

Henceforward its decline was at hand. 

It is impossible for a society to prosper, if it be un- 
faithful to the principles it lays down. Having aban- 
doned what constituted its life, it can find naught but 
death. 

It was God's will that this great truth should be in- 
scribed on the very threshold of the temple he was then 
raising in the world ; and a striking contrast was to 
make this truth stand gloriously prominent. 

One portion of the reform was to seek the alliance 
of the world, and in this alliance find a destruction full 
of desolation. 

Another portion, looking up to God, was haughtily 
to reject the arm of the flesh, and by this very act of 
faith secure a noble victory. 

If three centuries have gone astray, it is because 
they were unable to comprehend so holy and so solemn 
a lesson. 

It was in the beginmng of September, 1529, that 
Charles Y., the victor by battles or by treaties over the 
pope and the king of France, landed at Genoa. The 
shouts of the Spaniards had saluted him as he quitted 
the Iberian peninsula ; but the dejected eyes, the bended 
heads, the silent lips of the Italians given over to his 
hands, alone welcomed him to the foot of the Apennines. 
Every thing led to the belief that Charles would indem- 
nify himself on them for the apparent generosity with 
which he had treated the pope. 

They were deceived Instead of those barbarous 



THE aERMAN ENVOYS 



131 



chiefs of the Goths and Huns, instead of those proud and 
fierce emperors who more than once had crossed the 
Alps and rushed upon Italy sword in hand and with 
cries of vengeance, the Italians saw among them a 
young and graceful prince, with pale features, a delicate 
frame, and weak voice, of winning manners, having 
more the air of a courtier than of a warrior, scrupulously 
performing all the duties of the Romish religion, and 
leading in his train no terrible cohorts of German bar- 
barians, but a brilliant retinue of Spanish grandees 
who condescendingly paraded the pride of their race and 
the splendor of their nation. This prince, the victor of 
Europe, spoke only of peace and amnesty ; and even the 
duke of Ferrara, who of all the Italian princes had most 
cause of fear, having at Modena placed the keys of the 
city in his hands, heard from his friendly lips the most 
unexpected encouragements. 

Whence did this strange conduct proceed ? Charles 
Lad shown plainly enough, at the time of the captivity 
of Francis I., that generosity towards his enemies was 
not his dominant virtue. It was not long before this 
mystery was explained. 

Almost at the same time with Charles there arrived 
in Italy, by way of Lyons and Genoa, three German bur- 
gesses, whose whole equipage consisted of six horses.* 
These were John Ehinger, burgomaster of Memmingen, 
who carried his head high, scattered money around him, 
and was not remarkable for great sobriety ; Michael 
Caden, syndic of Nuremberg, a worthy, pious, and brave 
man, but detested by the count of Nassau, the most 
influential of Charles' ministers ; and lastly, Alexis 
Frauentraut, secretary to the margrave of Brandenburg, 
who, having married a nun, was in very bad odor among 
the Roman-catholics. Such were the three men whom 
the Protestant princes assembled at Nuremberg com- 
missioned to bear to the emperor the famous Protest of 
Spires. They had purposely chosen these deputies from 
A middle station, under the impression that they would 

* Legatis attribuertmt equos sex. Seckend. 2. 134. 

»at«f RoC IT 



122 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 



incur lees danger.* To carry such a message to Charlea 
V. was, to say the truth, a task that few persons cared 
to execute. Accordingly a pension had been secured to 
the widows of these envoys in case of misfortune. 

Charles was on his way from Genoa to Bologna, and 
staying at Piacenza when the three Protestant deputies 
overtook him. These plain Germans presented a singu- 
lar contrast in the midst of that Spanish pomp and Rom- 
ish fervor by which the young prince was surrounded. 
Cardinal Gattinara, the emperor's chancellor, who sin- 
cerely desired a reform of the church, procured them an 
audience of Charles V. for the 22d of September ; but 
they were recommended to be sparing in their words, 
for there was nothing the emperor so much disliked as 
a Protestant sermon. 

The deputies were not checked by these intimations ; 
and after handing the protest to Charles, Frauentraut 
began to speak : "It is to the Supreme Judge that each 
one of us must render an account,'- said he, " and not to 
creatures who turn at every wind. It is better to fall 
into the most cruel necessity, than to incur the anger 
of God. Our nation will obey no decrees that are based 
on any other foundation than the holy Scriptures.^f 

Such was the proud tone held by these German citi- 
zens to the emperor of the west. Charles said not a 
word — it would have been payii.g them too much honor ; 
but he charged one of his secretaries to announce an 
answer at some future time. 

There was no hurry to send back these paltry ambas- 
sadors. In vain did they renew their solicitations daily 
Gattinara treated them with kindness, but Nassau sent 
them away with bitter words. A workman, the armorer 
to the court, having to visit Augsburg to purchase arms, 
begged the Count of Nassau to dispatch the Protestant 
deputies. You may tell them," replied the minister of 
Charles Y., "that we will terminate their business in 
order that you may have travelling companions.'' But 

* Ut essent tutiores. Seckend. 2. 133. 

t Neque suarem esse virium aut officii, ut eos ad impossibiUa ot 
aoxia adigant. Ibid. 134. 



THE LANDaHAVE'S PRESENT. 



123 



the armorer having found other company, they were 
compelled to wait.* 

These envoys endeavored at least to make a good 
use of their time. " Take this book," said the landgrave 
to Caden at the very moment of departure, giving him a 
French work bound in velvet, and richly ornamented, 
•*and deliver it to the emperor."f It was a summary 
of the Christian faith, which the landgrave had received 
from Francis Lambert, and which had probably been 
written by that doctor. Caden sought an opportunity 
of presenting this treatise ; and did so one day, as 
Charles was going publicly to mass. The emperor took 
the book, and passed it immediately to a Spanish bishop. 
The Spaniard began to read it, J and lighted upon that 
passage of Scripture in which Christ enjoins his apostles 
not to exercise lordship. Luke 22 : 26. The author took 
advantage of it to maintain that the minister, charged 
with spiritual matters, should not interfere with those 
which are temporal. The papist prelate bit his lips, and 
Charles, who perceived it, having asked, Well, what is 
the matter ?" the bishop in confusion had recourse to a 
falsehood. § "This treatise," replied he, "takes the 
sword from the Christian magistrate, and grants it only 
to nations that are strangers to the faith." Immediately 
there was a great uproar : the Spaniards above all were 
beside themselves. " The wretches that have endeavored 
to mislead so young a prince," said they, " deserve to be 
hung on the first tree by the wayside." Charles swore, 
in fact, that the bearer should suffer the penalty of his 
audacity. 

At length, October 12, Alexander Schweiss, imperial 
secretary, transmitted the emperor^s reply to the depu- 
ties. It said that the minority ought to submit to the 
decrees passed in diet, and that if the Duke of Saxony 
and his allies were contumacious, means would not be 
wanting to compel them.|| 

• Hortleder, von den Ursachen des deutschen Kriegs, p. 60. 
t Libellum eleganter ornatum. Scultet. p. 253. { Cum obitw 
legisset. Ibid. § Falso et maligne relatum esset. Seek. 2. 133i 
II Sibi noD defore media quibus ad id compellerentar. Ibid. 



124 HISTORY OP THE REFORMATION 



Upon this, Ehinger and Oaden read aloud the appeal 
to the emperor drawn up at Spires, while Frauentraut, 
who had renounced his quality of deputy and assumed 
that of a notary,* took notes of what was passing. 
When the reading was finished, the deputies advanced 
towards Schweiss, and presented the appeal. The im- 
perial secretary rejected the document with amazement ; 
the deputies insisted ; Schweiss continued firm. They 
then laid the appeal on the table. Schweiss was stag- 
gered ; he took the paper, and carried it to the emperor. 

After dinner, just as one of the deputies, Caden, 
had gone out, a tumult in the hotel announced some 
catastrophe. It was the imperial secretary, who return- 
ed duly accompanied. "The emperor is exceedingly 
irritated against you on account of this appeal," said he 
to the Protestants ; " and he forbids you, under pain of 
confiscation and death, to leave your hotel, to write to 
Germany, or to send any message whatsoever.^f Thus 
Charles put ambassadors under arrest as he would the 
oflBcers of his guard, desirous in this manner of showing 
his contempt, and of frightening the princes. 

Caden's servant slipped in alarm out of the hotel, and 
ran to his master. The latter, still considering himself 
free, wrote a hasty account of the whole business to the 
senate of Nuremberg, sent ofi" his letters by express, and 
returned to share in the arrest of his colleagues. J 

On the 23d of October, the emperor left Piacenza, 
carrying the three Germans with him. But on the 30th 
he released Ehinger and Prauentraut, who, mounting 
their horses in the middle of the night, rushed at full 
speed along a route thronged with soldiers and robbers. 

As for you," said Granvelle to Caden, " you will stay, 
under pain of death. The emperor expects that the book 
vou presented to him will be given to the pope."§ Per- 
haps Charles thought it pleasant to show the Roman 
pontiff this prohibition issued against the ministers of 

* Tabellioais sive notarii oflacium. Seckend. 2. 133. f Sub 
capitis poena, ne pedem a diversario moveant. Ibid. X ^ fanaulo 
certior factus, rem omnem penatui aperuit. Ibid. § Ut idem 
Bcriptom exhibeat quoque Pontifici. Scaltet. p. 254. 



MEETiya OF CHARLES AND CLEMENT. 12fl 

God to mingle in the government of nations. But Caden, 
profiting by the confusion of the court, secretly procured 
a horse, and fled to Ferrara, thence to Venice, from 
which place he returned to Nuremberg.* 

The more Charles appeared irritated against Germa- 
ny, the greater moderation he showed towards the Ital- 
ians : heavy pecuniary contributions were all that he 
required. It was beyond the Alps, in the centre of Chris- 
tendom, by means of these very religious controversies, 
that he desired to establish his power. He pressed on, 
and required only two things : behind him, peace ; with 
him, money. 

On the 5th of November he entered Bologna. Every 
thing was striking about him ; the crowd of nobles, the 
splendor of the equipages, the haughtiness of the Span- 
ish troops, the four thousand ducats that were scattered 
by handfuls among the people ;f but above all, the maj- 
esty and magnificence of the young emperor. The two 
chiefs of Romish Christendom were about to meet. The 
pope quitted his palace with all his court ; and Charles, 
at the head of an army which would have conquered the 
whole of Italy in a few days, affecting the humility of a 
child, fell on his knees, and kissed the pontiff's feet. 

The emperor and the pope resided at Bologna in two 
adjoining palaces, separated by a single wall, through 
which a doorway had been opened, of which each had a 
key ; and the young and politic emperor was often seen 
visiting the old and crafty pontiff, carrying papers in his 
hand. 

Clement obtained Sforza's forgiveness, who appeared 
before the emperor sick and leaning on a staff. Venice 
also was forgiven : a million of crowns arranged these 
two matters. But Charles could not obtain from the 
pope the pardon of Florence. That illustrious city was 
sacrificed to the Medici, ^' considering," it was said, "that 
it is impossible for Christ's vicar to demand any thing 
that is unjust.'' 

The most important affair was the Reformatiou. 

• Silentio conscendit equuro. Scultet. p. 254. f In vulgm 
iparsum aurum quatuor millia ducatorum. L. Epp. 3. 563. 



126 HlSTOKr OF THE REFORMATION 



Some represented to the emperor, that, victor o^er all 
his enemies, he should carry matters with a high hand, 
and constrain the Protestants by force of arms.* Charles 
was more moderate ; he preferred weakening the Prot- 
estants by the Papists, and then the Papists by the 
Protestants, and by this means raising his power above 
them both. 

A wiser course was nevertheless proposed in a sol- 
emn conference. "The church is torn in pieces," said 
Chancellor Gattinara. "You," Charles, "are the head 
of the empire ; you," the pope, " the head of the church. 
It is your duty to provide by common accord against 
unprecedented wants. Assemble the pious men of all 
nations, and let a free council deduce from the word of 
God a scheme of doctrine such as may be received by 
every people."f 

A thunderbolt falling at Clement's feet could not 
have startled him more. The offspring of an illegitimate 
union, and having obtained the papacy by means far 
from honorable, and squandered the treasures of the 
church in an unjust war, this pontiff had a thousand 
personal motives for dreading an assembly of Christen- 
dom. "Large congregations," replied he, "serve only 
to introduce popular opinions. It is not by the decrees of 
councils, but with the edge of the sword, that we should 
decide controversies."! 

As Gattinara still persisted, " What," said the pope, 
angrily interrupting him, "you dare contradict me, and 
excite your master against me I" Charles rose up ; all 
the assembly preserved profound silence, and the prince 
resuming his seat, seconded his chancellor's request. 
Clement was content to say that he would reflect upon 

* Armis cagandos. Seckend. 2. 112 ; Maimbourg, 2. 194. 

t Oratio de CoQgressu BoQoniensi, in Melancthoais Orationum, 
4. 87, and Caelestlnus Hist. Concil. 1830, Augustas, 1. 10. Respect- 
Bble authors, Walsh, Muller, and Beausobre, incorrectly quote at 
full length the speeches delivered at this conference. They are am- 
plifications ; but to deny that they have some historical foundation 
would be flying to the opposite extreme. i Non concil ii decre* 
tis, sed armis controversias dirimendas. Scultet. p. 428 ; Maimbourg 
0^ Jesuit, a. 177. 



LUTHER'S OBJECTIONS. 



131 



h. He then began to work upon the young emperor in 
their private conferences, and Charles promised at last to 
constrain the heretics by violence, while the pope should 
summon all other princes to his aid.* "To overcome 
Germany by force, and then erase it from the surface of 
the earth, is the sole object of the Italians," they wrote 
from Venice to the elector.f 

Such was the sinister news which, by spreading 
alarm among the Protestants, should also have united 
them. Unfortunately a contrary movement was then 
, taking place. Luther and some of his friends had re- 
vised the Marburg articles in a sense exclusively Lu- 
theran, and the ministers of the elector of Saxony had 
presented them to the conference at Schwabach. The 
reformed deputies from Ulm and Strasburg had immedi- 
ately withdrawn, and the conference was broken up. 

But new conferences had erelong become necessary. 
The express that Caden had forwarded from Piacenza 
had reached Nuremberg. Every one in Germany under- 
stood that the arrest of the princes^ deputies was a 
declaration of war. The elector was staggered, and 
ordered his chancellor to consult the theologians ofWit- 
temberg. 

"We cannot on our conscience," replied Luther on 
the 18th of November, " approve of the proposed alliance. 
We would rather die ten times than see our gospel cause 
one drop of blood to be shed.J Our part is to be like 
lambs of the slaughter. The cross of Christ must be 
borne. Let your highness be without fear. We shall 
do more by our prayers than all our enemies by their 
boastings. Only let not your hands be stained with the 
blood of your brethren. If the emperor requires us to 
be given up to his tribunals, we are ready to appear. 
You cannot defend our faith : each one should believe at 
his own risk and peril."§ 

* Pontifex, ut caeteri Christiani principes, ipsos pro viribusjuvent 
Guicciardini, 19. 908. f Ut Germania vi et armis opprimatur, 
funditus deleatur et eradicetur. CcBlestin. 1. 42. J Liebfir 

Eehn mal todt seya. Epp. 3. 526. ^ Auf sein ei^en Grefabr 

|laabe&. Ibid. 257. 



138 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOK 



On the 29th of November, an evangelical congTesa 
was opened at Smalkald, and an unexpected event ren- 
dered this meeting still more important. Ehinger, Caden, 
and Frauentraut, who had escaped from the grasp of 
Charles Y., appeared before them.* The landgrave had 
no further doubts of the success of his plan. 

He was deceived. No agreement between contrary 
doctrines, no alliance between politics and religion, were 
Luther^s two principles, and they still prevailed. It was 
agreed that those who felt disposed to sign the articles 
of Schwabach, and those only, should meet at Nurem- 
berg on the 6th of January. 

The hori^ m became hourly more threatening. The 
Papists of Germany wrote one to another these few but 
significant words: "The Saviour is coming,"f **Ala8," 
exclaimed Luther, " what a pitiless savior. He will 
devour them all, as well as us." In elfect, two Italian 
bishops, authorized by Charles Y., demanded in the pope's 
name all the gold and silver from the churches, and a 
third part of the ecclesiastical revenues ; a proceeding 
which caused an immense sensation. " Let the pope go 
to the devil," replied a canon of Paderborn, a little too 
freely.:^ " Yes, yes," archly replied Luther, " this is your 
savior that is coming." The people already began to 
talk of frightful omens. It was not only the living who 
were agitated, a child still in its mother^s womb had 
uttered horrible shrieks. § **A11 is accomplished," said 
Luther ; *^ the Turk has reached the highest degree of his 
power, the glory of the papacy is declining, and the 
world is splitting on every side."|| The reformer, dread* 
ing lest the end of the world should arrive before he 
had translated all the Bible, published the prophecies ol 
Daniel separately, "a work," said he, "for these iattes 
times." "Historians tell us," he added, "that Alexan* 
der the Great always placed Homer under his pillow • 

* Adveneraat et gesta referebant. Seckend. 2. 140 j Sleidan 
1. 235. t Invicem scriptillant, dicentes : Salvator venit L 

Epp. 3. 540. t Dat de Diiwel dem Bawst int Leifl fare. Ibid. 
§ Infans in utero, audiente tota familia, bis vociferatug est Ibid 
g Dedication of Daniel to Joiin Frederick. Ibid. 666. 



OHAELES' CONCILIATORY LANaUAaE. 129 



the prophet Daniel is worthy that kings and princes 
should not only lay him under their heads, but carry him 
in their hearts ; for he will teach them that the govern- 
ment of nations proceeds from the power of God. We 
are balanced in the hand of the Lord as a ship upon the 
sea, or a cloud in the sky."* 

Yet the frightful phantom that Philip of Hesse had 
not ceased to point out to his allies, and whose threat- 
ening jaws seemed already opening, suddenly vanished, 
and they discovered in its place the graceful image ol 
the most amiable of princes. 

On the 21st of January, Charles had summoned all 
the states of the empire to Augsburg, and had endeavor- 
ed to employ the most conciliatory language. Let us 
put an end to all discord," he said, " let us renounce our 
antipathies, let us offer to our Saviour the sacrifice of all 
our errors, let us make it our business to comprehend 
and weigh with meekness the opinions of others. Let 
us annihilate all that has been said or done on both 
sides contrary to right, and let us seek after Christian 
truth. Let us all fight under one and the same leader, 
Jesus Christ, and let us strive thus to meet in one com- 
munioa, one church, and one unity ."f 

What language I How was it that this prince, who 
hitherto had spoken only of the sword, should now speak 
only of peace? Some may say that the wise Gattinara 
had a share in it ; that the act of convocation was drawn 
up under the impression of the terror caused by the 
Turkish invasion ; that the emperor already saw with 
how little eagerness the Roman-catholics of Germany 
seconded his views ; that he wished to intimidate the 
pope ; that this language, so full of graciousness, was 
but a mask which Charles employed to deceive his ene- 
mies ; that he wished to manage religion in true imperial 
fashion, like Theodosius and Constantine, and seek first 
to unite both parties by the influence of his wisdom and 

• Schwebt in seiner Macht, wie ein Schiflf auf dem Meer, ja wie 
eine Wolke unter dem Himmel. L. Epp. 3. 555. f Wie Ti^ 

alle unter einem Christo seju. und streiten. Forstemaan's Urkoii' 
denbucb, 1. I. 

9 



130 HiblORY OF THE REFORMATIOK. 



of his favors, reserving to himself, if kindness should 
fail, to employ force afterwards. It is possible that 
each of these motives may have exercised a certain in- 
fluence on Charles, but the latter appears to us nearer 
the truth, and more conformable to the character of this 
prince. 

If Charles, however, showed any inclination to mild 
ness, the fanatical Ferdinand was at hand to bring him 
back. " I will continue negotiating without coming ta 
any conclusion," wrote he to his brother ; " and should 
I even be reduced to that, do not fear ; pretexts will not 
be wanting to chastise these rebels, and you will find 
men enough who will be happy to aid you in your re- 
veille.''* 

* Bcoholz Geechichtp Ferdiaaiids, 3. i8Z. 



THE COROKATION. 



iSl 



CHAPTER II. 

The (H)ronatioii — The emperor made a deacon — The Romish church 
and the state — Alarm of the Protestants — Luther advocates pas- 
sive resistance — Bruck's noble advice — Articles of faith prepared 
— Luther^s strong tower — Luther at Coburg — Charles at Inn- 
spruck —Two parties at court — Gattinara — The king of Denmark 
won over by Charles — Piety of the elector — Wiles of the Roman^ 
ists. 

Charles, like Charlemagne in former times, and Na- 
poleon in later days, desired to be crowned by the pope, 
and had at first thought of visiting Rome for that pur- 
pose ; but Ferdinand^s pressing letters compelled him to 
choose Bologna.* He appointed the 22d of February 
for receiving the iron crown as king of Lombardy, and 
resolved to assume the golden crown, as emperor of the 
Romans, on the 24th of the same month, his birthday 
and the anniversary of the battle of Pa via, and which 
he thought was always fortunate to him.f 

The offices of honor that belonged to the electors of 
the empire were given to strangers ; in the coronation 
of the emperor of Germany, all was Spanish or Italian. 
The sceptre was carried by the marquis of Montferrat, 
the sword by the duke of Urbino, and the golden crown 
by the duke of Savoy. One single German prince of 
little importance, the count-palatine Philip, was pres- 
ent; he carried the orb. After these lords came the 
emperor himself between two cardinals ; then the mem- 
bers of his council. All this procession defiled across a 
magnificent temporary bridge erected between the palace 
and the church. At the very moment the emperor drew 
•near Uhe church of San Petronio, where the coronation 
was to take place, the scaffolding cracked behind him 
and gave way ; many of his train were wounded, and 
the multitude fled in alarm. Charles calmly turned back 

• Sopravennero lettere di Germania che io sollicittavano a trans- 
ferirai in quella provlncia. Guicciardini, 50. 20. f Natali suo 
quem 8emi>er felicem habuit. Seckend. 2. 150. 



13» HISTORY OF THE REFOEUATlOlir 



and smiled, not doubting that bis lucky star bad saved 
him. 

At length Charles V. arrived in front of the throne 
on which Clement was seated. But before being made 
emperor, it was necessary that he should be promoted 
tc the sacred orders. The pope presented him with the 
surplice and the amice to make him a canon of St. Pe- 
ter's and of St. John Lateranus, and the canons of these 
two churches immediately stripped him of his royal or- 
naments, and robed him with the sacerdotal garments. 
The pope went to the altar and began mass, the new 
canon drawing near to wait upon him. After the oflFer- 
tory, the imperial deacon presented the water to the 
pontiflF; and then kneeling down between two cardinals, 
he communicated from the pope's hand. The emperoi 
now returned to his throne, where the princes robed 
him with the imperial mantle brought from Constantino- 
ple, all sparkling with diamonds, and Charles humbly 
bent the knee before Clement VII. 

The pontiff, having anointed him with oil and given 
him the sceptre, presented him with a naked sword, say- 
ing, **Make use of it in defence of the church against 
the enemies of the faith." Next taking the golden orb, 
studded with jewels, which the count-palatine held, he 
said, " Govern the world with piety and firmness." Last 
came the duke of Savoy, who carried the golden crown 
enriched with diamonds. The prince bent down, and 
Clement put the diadem on his head, saying, " Charles,^ 
emperor invincible, receive this crown, which we place 
on your head as a sign to all the earth of the authority 
that is conferred upon you." 

The emperor then kissed the white cross embroidered 
on the pope's red slipper, and exclaimed, *' I swear to 
be, with all my powers and resources, the perpetual de* 
fender of the pontifical dignity and of the church of 
Rome."* 

The two princes now took their seats under the same 

* Omnibus viribus, ingeuio, et facultatibiu suis Pontificiie digni- 
tatis et Romanaa EcclesiaB perpetuum fore defeosorem. Ccelestiii 
Hilt. Commit. Aug. 16. 



ALARM OF THE PROTESTAITTS. 133 



canopy, but on thrones of unequal height, the emperor's 
being half a foot lower than the pontiff's, and the car- 
dinal-deacon proclaimed to the people, "The invincible 
emperor, defender of the faith." For the next half houi 
nothing was heard but the noise of musketry, trumpets, 
drums and fifes, all the bells of the city, and the shouts 
of the multitude. Thus was proclaimed anew the close 
union of politics with religion. The mighty emperor, 
transformed to a Roman deacon and humbly serving 
mass like a canon of St. Peter's, had typified and de* 
dared the indissoluble union of the Romish church with 
the state. This is one of the essential doctrines of pop- 
ery, and one of the most striking characteristics that 
distinguish it from the evangelical and the Christian 
church. 

Nevertheless, during the whole of the ceremony the 
pope seemed ill at ease, and sighed as soon as men's 
eyes ceased to gaze on him. Accordingly, the French 
ambassador wrote to his court that these four months 
which the emperor and pope had spent together at Bo- 
logna, would bear fruit of which the king of France 
would assuredly have no cause to complain.* 

Scarcely had Charles V. risen from before the altar 
of San Petronio, ere he turned his face towards Ger- 
many, and appeared on the Alps as the anointed of the 
papacy. The letter of convocation, so indulgent a,nd 
benign, seemed forgotten: all things were made new 
since the pope's blessings : there was but one thought 
in the imperial train, the necessity of rigorous measures ; 
and the legate Campeggio ceased not to insinuate irri- 
tating words into Charles' ear. " At the first rumor o( 
the storm that threatens them," said Granvelle, " we 
shall see the Protestants flying on every side, like timid 
doves upon which the Alpine eagle pounces."f 

Great indeed was the alarm throughout the empire ; 
already even the affrighted people, apprehensive of the 
greatest disasters, repeated everywhere that Luther and 

• Letter to M. L^ Admiral, the 26th of February. Legrand, Hi* 
toire da Divorce, 8. 386. f Tanquam columbse, adveniente aquiUv 
dlspergentor. Rommel, Anmerkang^Q, p. 2S6. 



134 HISTORY OP IHE REFORlilATlOK 



Melancthon were dead. "Alas," said Melancthon, cott- 
sumed by sorrow, when he heard these reports, ** the 
rumor is but too true, for I die daily."* But Luther, on 
the contrary, boldly raising the eye of faith towards 
heaven, exclaimed, "Our enemies triumph, but erelong 
to perish." In truth the councils of the elector displayed 
an unprecedented boldness. " Let us collect our troops,^ 
Baid they; "let us march on the Tyrol, and close the 
passage of the Alps against the emperor."f Philip of 
Hesse uttered a cry of joy when he heard of this. The 
sword of Charles had aroused his indolent allies at last. 
Immediately fresh couriers from Ferdinand were sent to 
hasten the arrival of Charles, and all Germany was in 
expectation. 

Before carrying out this gigantic design, the elector 
desired to consult Luther once more. The emperor in 
the midst of the electors was only the first among his 
equals ; and independent princes were allowed to resist 
another prince, even if he were of higher rank than them- 
selves. But Luther, dreading above all things the inter- 
vention of the secular arm in church affairs, was led to 
reply on the 6th of March in this extraordinary manner: 
" Our princes' subjects are also the emperor's subjects, 
and even more so than princes are. To protect by arms 
the emperor's subjects against the emperor, would be as 
if the burgomaster of Torgau wished to protect by force 
his citizens against the elector." 

" What must be done then ?" " Listen," replied Lu* 
ther. " If the emperor desires to march against us, let 
no prince undertake our defence. God is faithful; he 
will not abandon us." All preparations for war were 
immediately suspended, the landgrave received a polite 
refusal, and the confederation was dissolved. It was 
the will of God that his cause should appear before the 
emperor without league and without soldiers, having 
faith alone for its shield. 

* Ego famam de qua scribis intelligo nimis veram esse, morior 
enim quotidi^. Corp. Ref. 2. 122. t Cum copiis quas habitant 
per Tyrolensem ditionem inoedenti oocurrere et Alpium tranaitiun 
impedire. Seckend. 2. 160. 



BRUOK'S N0B1.E ADVICE 



135 



Nerer perhaps has such boldness been witnessed in 
feeble and unarmed men ; but never, although under an 
appearance of blindness, was there so much wisdom and 
understanding. 

The question next discussed in the elector's council 
was, whether he should go to the diet. The majority of 
the councillors opposed it. "Is it not risking every 
thing," said they, " to go and shut one's self up within the 
walls of a city with a powerful enemy?" Bruck and the 
prince-electoral were of a different opinion. Duty in their 
eyes was a better councillor than fear. " What," said 
they, " would the emperor insist so much on the presence 
of the princes at Augsburg only to draw them into a 
snare ? We cannot impute such perfidy to him." The 
landgrave, on the contrary, seconded the opinion of the 
majority. " Remember Piacenza," said he. '* Some un- 
foreseen circumstance may lead the emperor to take all 
his enemies in one cast of the net." 

The chancellor stood firm. "Let the princes only 
comport themselves with courage," said he, " and God's 
cause is saved." The decision was in favor of the nobler 
plan. 

This diet was to be a lay council, or at the veiy 
least a national convention.* The Protestants foresaw 
that a few unimportant concessions would be made to 
them at first, and then that they would be required to 
sacrifice their faith. It was therefore necessary to settle 
what were the essential articles of Christian truth, in 
order to know whether, by what means, and how far they 
might come to an understanding with their adversaries. 
The elector accordingly had letters sent on the 14th of 
March to the four principal theologians of Wittemberg, 
setting them this task before all other business.f Thus, 
instead of collecting soldiers, this prince drew up arti- 
cles ; they were the best armament. 

Luther, Jonas, and Melaucthon — Pomeranus remaiu- 
ing" at Wittemberg — arrived at Torgau in Easter- week, 

• Cum haec comitia pro concilio aut conventu nationali haberi 
rixideantur. Seckend. 2. 17. Letter to the elector, Corp. Ref. 2. 20» 
t Omoibufi BepositU allis rebus. L. Epp. 3. 664. 



136 HISTORY OP THfi REFOEMaTIOIT 



asking leave to deliver their articles in person to Charles 
the Fifth ♦ "God forbid/' replied the elector; "I also 
desire to confess my Lord." 

John having then confided to Melancthon the defini- 
tive arrangement of the confession, and ordered general 
prayers to be offered up, began his journey on the 3d of 
April, with one hundred and sixty horsemen clad in rich 
scarlet cloaks embroidered with gold. 

Every man was aware of the dangers that threatened 
the elector, and hence many in his escort marched with 
downcast eyes and sinking hearts. But Luther, full of 
faith, revived the courage of his friends by composing 
and singing with his fine voice that beautiful hymn, since 
become so famous, EirC feste Burg ist unser Ootte — Our 
God is a strong tower.f Never did soul that knew its 
own weakness, but which, looking to God, despised every 
fear, find such noble accents. 

With our own strength we naught can do, 

Destruction yawns on every aide : 
He fights for us, our champion true. 

Elect of God to be our guide. 
What is his name ? The anointed One, 

The God of armies he ; 
Of earth and heaven the Lord alone — 
With him, on field of battle won, 
Abideth victory. 

This hymn was sung during the diet, not only at 
Augsburg, but in all the churches of Saxony, and its 
energetic strains were often seen to revive and inspirit 
the most dejected minds.J 

On Easter-eve the troop reached Ooburg, and on the 
23d of April the elector resumed his journey ; but at the 

♦ Different projects will be found in Forstemann's Urkundenbuchy 
1. p. 63-108, and in the Corp. Ref. 4. p. 973, sqq. Those that wert 
presented were doubtless the Articuli non cencedendi — Articles aoi to 
be conceded. They treat of the communion in both kinds, of celibacy, 
the mass, orders, the pope, convents, confession, distinction of meats, 
and of the sacraments. Corp. Ref. 4. 981. f We have attemp<> 
ed a very feeble translation of the second stanza. X tristem 
etiam et abjectum animum erigere et exhilarare, et velut Mimaf^^ 
poasent Soalt. p. 270 



LtJTHER AT COBtiHO. 



vety moment of departure Luther received an order to 
remain. Some one has said, * Hold your tongue, you 
have a harsh voice,'" wrote he to a friend.* He sub- 
mitted, however, without hesitation, setting an example 
of that passive obedience which he so boldly advocated. 
The elector feared that Luther's presence would still 
further exasperate his adversaries, and drive Charles to 
extreme measures ; the city of Augsburg had also writ- 
ten to him to that effect. But at the same time John 
was anxious to keep the reformer within reach, that he 
might be able to consult him. He was therefore left at 
Coburg, in the castle overlooking the town and the river 
Itz, in the upper story on the south side. It was from 
this place he wrote those numerous letters dated from 
the region of birds; and it was there that for many 
months he had to maintain with his old enemy of the 
Wartburg, Satan, a struggle full of darkness and of 
anguish. 

On the 2d of May, the elector reached Augsburg ; it 
had been expected that he would stay away, and, to the 
great astonishment of all, he was the first at the ren- 
dezvous. f He immediately sent Dolzig, marshal of the 
court, to meet the emperor and to compliment him. On 
the 12th of May, Philip of Hesse, who had at last resolv- 
ed on not separating himself from his ally, arrived with 
an escort of one hundred and ninety horsemen ; and al- 
most at the same time the emperor entered Innspruck, 
in the Tyrol, accompanied by his brother, the queens of 
Hungary and Bohemia, the ambassadors of France, Eng- 
land, and Portugal, Campeggio the papal legate, and 
other cardinals, with many princes and nobles of Ger* 
many, Spain, and Italy. 

How to bring back the heretics to obedience to the 
hurch, was the great topic of conversation in this brill- 
ant court among nobles and priests, ladies and soldiers, 
councillors and ambassadors. They, or Charles at least, 
were not for making them ascend the scaffold, but they 
wished to act in such a manner that, untrue to theii' 
* Sed erat qui diceret : Tace tu, habes malam vocem. L. Ep^ 
L% t MirantibuB hominibos. Seek. 2. 153. 



138 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



faith, they should bend the knee to the pope. Charles 
stopped at Innspruck to study the situation of Germany, 
and insure the success of his schemes. 

Scarcely was his arrival known ere a crowd of peo- 
ple high and low flocked round him on every side, and 
more than 270,000 crowns, previously raised in Italy, 
served to make the Germans understand the justice of 
Bome's cause. " All these heretics," was the cry, " will 
fall to the ground and crawl to the feet of the pope."* 

Charles did not think so. He was, on the contrary, 
astonished to see what power the Reformation had gain- 
ed. He momentarily even entertained the idea of leaving 
Augsburg alone, and of going straight to Cologne, and 
there proclaiming his brother king of the Romans.f 
Thus religious interests would have given way to dy- 
nastic interests, at least so ran the report. But Charles 
the Fifth did not stop at this idea. The question of the 
Reformation was there before him, increasing hourly in 
strength, and it could not be eluded. 

Two parties divided the imperial court. The one, 
numerous and active, called upon the emperor to revive 
simply the edict of Worms, and without hearing the 
Protestants, condemn their cause.J The legate was at 
the head of this party. **Do not hesitate," said he to 
Charles ; confiscate their property, establish the inqui- 
sition, and punish these obstinate heretics with fiie and 
sword."§ The Spaniards, who strongly seconded these 
exhortations, gave way to their accustomed debauchery, 
and many of them were arrested for seduction. || This 
was a sad specimen of the faith they wished to impose on 
Germany. Rome has always thought lightly of morality. 

Gattinara, although sick, had painfully followed in 

* Zum kreutz kriechen werden. Mathesius Pred. p. 91. The 
allaslon is to the cross embroidered on the pope's slipper. 

t Iter Coloniam versus decrevlsse. Epp. Zw. May 13. 

t Alii censent Caesarem debere, edicto proposito, sine ulla cogi* 
tatione damnare causam nostram. Corp. Ref. 2. 57. § Instruo 
tio data Csesari dal Reverendissimo Campeggio. Ranke, 3. 288. 

II Slch die Spanier zu luspruck uoflathig gehalten. Corp. £ef 
2 66. 



THE KINO OF DET^MARK 



139 



Charles' train to neutralize the influence of the legate 
A determined adversary of the Roman policy, he thought 
that the Protestants might render important services to 
Christendom. " There is nothing I desire so much," said 
he, " as to see the elector of Saxony and his allies per- 
severe courageously in the profession of the gospel, and 
call for a free religious council. If they allow them- 
selves to be checked by promises or threats, I hesitate 
myself, I stagger, and I doubt of the means of salva- 
tion."* The enlightened and honest members of the 
papal church — and of whom there is always a small 
number — necessarily sympathize with the Reformation. 

Charles Y., exposed to these contrary influences, de- 
sired to restore Germany to religious unity by his per- 
sonal intervention : for a moment he thought himself on 
the eve of success. 

Among the persons who crowded to Innspruck was 
the unfortunate Christian, king of Denmark, Charles' 
brother-in-law. In vain had he proposed to his subjects 
undertaking a pilgrimage to Rome, in expiation of the 
cruelties of which he was accused : his people had ex- 
pelled him. Having repaired to Saxony, to his uncle the 
elector, he had there heard Luther, and had embraced 
the evangelical doctrines, as far at least as external 
profession goes. This poor dethroned monarch could 
not resist the eloquence of the powerful ruler of two 
worlds, and Christian, won over by Charles the Fifth, 
publicly placed himself again under the sceptre of the 
Roman hierarchy. All the papal party uttered a shout 
of triumph. Nothing equals their credulity, and the 
importance they attach to such valueless accessions. 
"I cannot describe the emotion with which this news 
has filled me," wrote Clement VII. to Charles, his hand 
trembling with joy ; " the brightness of your majesty's 
virtues begins at last to scatter the darkness : this ex- 
ample will lead to numberless conversions." 

Things were in this state when duke George of Sax- 
ony, duke William of Bavaria, and the elector Joachim 
* Semper vacillaturum de vera et oerta ssilutis adipisoeudie rsr 
tlone. Seek. 2. 67, 



140 HISTORY OP THE REFOUMATIOK. 



of Brandenburg, the three German princes who were the 
greatest enemies to the Reformation, hastily arrived at 
Innspruck. 

The tranquillity of the elector, whom they had seen 
at Augsburg, had alarmed them, for they knew not the 
source whence John derived his courage: they fancied 
he was meditating some perfidious design, " It is not 
without reason,'' said they to Charles, " that the elector 
John has repaired the first to Augsburg, and that he 
appeared there with a considerable train : he wishes to 
seize your person. Act then with energy, and allow us 
to offer your majesty a guard of six thousand horse."* 
Conference upon conference immediately took place. 
The Protestants were affrighted. They are holding a 
diet at Innspruck," said Melancthon, " on the best means 
of having our heads."f But Gattinara prevailed on 
Charles to preserve his neutrality. 

While this agitation prevailed in the Tyrol, the evan« 
gelical Christians, instead of mustering in arms, as they 
were accused, sent up their prayers to heaven, and the 
Protestant princes were preparing to render an account 
of their faith. 

The elector of Saxony held the first rank among them. 
Sincere, upright, and pure from his youth, early disgust- 
ed with -the brilliant tourneys in which he had at first 
taken part, John of Saxony had joyfully hailed the day 
of the Reformation, and the gospel light had gradually 
penetrated his serious and reflective mind. His great 
pleasure was to have the holy Scriptures read to him 
during the latter hours of the day. It is true that, hav- 
ing arrived at an advanced age, the pious elector some- 
times fell asleep, but he soon awoke with a start, and 
repeated the last passage aloud. Although moderate 
and a friend of peace, he yet possessed an energy that 
was powerfully aroused by the great interests of the 
faith. There is no prince in the sixteenth century, and 
none perhaps since the primitive times of the church, 

* Ut mascale ageret, sex mille equitum, praesidium ei offerentea 
Seek. 2. 156. f Ibi habentur de nostris cervicibus oomiti^i 

Corp. Ref. 2. 45. 



WILES OF THE ROMANISTS. 



141 



who has done so much as John of Saxony for the cause 
of the gospel. Accordingly it was against him that the 
first efforts of the papists were directed. 

In order to gain him over, they wished to put in 
operation very different tactics from those which had 
been previously employed. At Spires the evangelicals 
Had met with angry looks in every quarter ; at Augs- 
burg, on the contrary, the Papists gave them a hearty 
welcome ; they represented the distance that separated 
the two parties as very trifling, and in their private 
conversations made use of the mildest language, " seek- 
ing thus to entice the credulous Protestants to take the 
bait,'- says a historian * The latter yielded with sim- 
plicity to these skilful manoeuvres. 

Charles the Fifth was convinced that the simple Ger- 
mans would not be able to resist his star. " The king 
of Denmark has been converted," said his courtiers to 
him, " why should not the elector follow his example ? 
Let us draw him into the imperial atmosphere." John 
was immediately invited to come and converse familiarly 
with the emperor at Innspruck, with an assurance that 
he might reckon on Charles' particular favor. 

The prince-electoral, John Frederick, who on seeing 
the advances of the Papists had at first exclaimed, " We 
conduct our affairs with such awkwardness, that it is 
quite pitiable," allowed himself to be caught by this 
stratagem. " The Papist princes," said he to his father, 
" exert every means of blackening our characters. Go 
to Innspruck in order to put a stop to these underhand 
practices; or if you are unwilling, send me in your 
place." 

This time the prudent elector moderated his son's 
precipitancy, and replied to Charles' ministers, that it 
was not proper to treat of the affairs of the diet in any 
other place than that which the emperor had himself 
appointed, and begged, in consequence, that his majesty 
would hasten his arrival. This was the first check that 
Ghaxles met with. 

* Seckeodorf 



142 



HISTORr OF THE REFOilMATlOSI 



CHAPTER III. 

Angsburg — The gospel preached— The emperor message — The 8e^ 
mons prohibited — Firmness of the elector — The elector's reply — 
Preparation of the Confession— Luther's S nai — His son and his 
father — Luther's merriment — Luther's diet at Coburg — Saxony 
a paradise below —To the bishops — Travail of the church — 
Charles— The pope's letter — Melancthon on fasting— The church 
the judge — The landgrave's catholic spirit. 

Meantime Augsburg was filling more and more every 
day. Princes, bishops, deputies, gentlemen, cavaliers, 
soldiers in rich uniforms, entered by every gate, and 
thronged the streets, the public places, inns, churches, 
and palaces. All that was most magnificent in Germa- 
ny was there about to be collected. The critical cir- 
cumstances in which the empire and Christendom were 
placed, the presence of Charles V. and his kindly man- 
ners, the love of novelty, of grand shows, and of lively 
emotions, tore the Germans from their homes. All those 
who had great interests to discuss, without reckoning a 
crowd of idlers, flocked from the various provinces of 
the empire, and hastily made their way towards this 
illustrious city.* 

In the midst of this crowd the elector and the land- 
grave were resolved to confess Jesus Christ, and to 
take advantage of this convocation in order to convert 
the empire. Scarcely had John arrived when he ordered 
one of his theologians to preach daily with open doors 
in the church of the Dominicans.f On Sunday, the 8th 
of May, the same was done in the church of St. Catherine ; 
on the 13th, Philip of Hesse opened the gates of the 
cathedral, and his chaplain Snepfif there proclaimed the 
word of salvation ; and on the following Sunday, May 
16, this prince ordered Cellarius, minister of Augsburg 
and a follower of Zwingle, to preach in the same temple. 
Somewhat later the landgrave firmly settled himself in 

* Omnes alliciebat. Cochloeus, p. 191. t Rogantibus Au- 

gasianis public^ in templum Dominicorum. Seek. Lat. p. 193» 



THK aOSPEL PREACHED 



U3 



the cburch of St. Ulric, and the elector in that of St. 
Catherine. These were the two positions taken up 
these illustrious princes. Every day the gospel was 
announced in these places to an immense and attentive 
crowd.* 

The partisans of Rome were amazed. They expected 
to see criminals endeavoring to dissemble their faults, 
and they met with confessors of Christ with uplifted 
heads and words of power. Desirous of counterbalanc- 
ing these sermons, the bishop of Augsburg ordered his 
suffragan and his chaplain to ascend the pulpit. But the 
Romish priests understood better how to say mass than 
to preach the gospel. They shout, they bawl," said 
some. " They are stupid fellows," added all their hear- 
ers, shrugging their shoulders. f 

The Romanists, ashamed of their own priests, began 
to grow angry,J and unable to hold their ground by 
preaching, had recourse to the secular power. "The 
priests are setting wondrous machines at work to gain 
Caesar^s mind," said Melancthon.§ They succeeded, and 
Charles made known his displeasure at the hardihood of 
the princes. The friends of the pope then drew near 
the Protestants, and whispered into their ears, that " the 
emperor, victor over the king of France and the Roman 
pontiff, would appear in Germany to crush all the Gospel- 
lers. || The anxious elector demanded the advice of his 
theologians. 

Before the answer was ready, Charles' orders arrived, 
brought by two of his most influential ministers, the 
counts of Nassau and of Nuenar. A more skilful choice 
oould not have been made. These two nobles, although 
devoted to Charles, were favorable to the gospel, which 
they professed not long after. The elector was there- 
fore fully disposed to listen to their counsel. 

• Taglig in den kirchen, unverstort ; dazu kommt sehr viel 
Volks. Corp. Ref. 2. 53. f Clamant et vociferantur. Audires 
homines stupidissimos atque etiam sensu communi carentes. Ibid. 86, 

J Urebat hoc pontifices. Scultet. p 271. § 'Oi apxupeii 

miris machinis oppugnant. Corp. Ref. 2. 7P, || Evangelioos 

omnes obtaritarum. Scultet. p. 269, 



144 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOK 



On the 24th of May the two counts delivered their 
letters to John of Saxony, and declared to him the em- 
peror's exceeding grief that religious controversies should 
disturb the good understanding which had for so many 
years united the houses of Saxony and Austria ;* that 
he was astonished at seeing the elector oppose an edict — 
that of Worms — which had been unanimously passed by 
all the states of the empire ; and that the alliances he 
had made tended to tear asunder the unity of Germany, 
and might inundate it with blood. They required at last 
that the elector would immediately put a stop to the 
evangelical preachings, and added, in a confidential tone, 
that they trembled at the thought of the immediate and 
deplorable consequences which would certainly follow 
the elector's refusal. "This," said they, "is only the 
expression of our own personal sentiments." It was a 
diplomatic manoeuvre, the emperor having enjoined them 
to give utterance to a lew threats, but solely as if pro- 
ceeding from themselves.f 

The elector was greatly agitated. " If his majesty 
forbids the preaching of the gospel," exclaimed he, " I 
shall immediately return home."J He waited, however, 
for the advice of his theologians. 

Luther's answer was ready first. "The emperor is 
our master," said he ; " the town and all that is in it 
belong to him. If your highness should give orders at 
Torgau for this to be done, and for that to be left undone, 
the people ought not to resist. I should prefer endeav- 
oring to change his majesty's decision by humble and 
respectful solicitation ; but if he persists, might makes 
right ; we have but done our duty."§ Thus spoke the 
man who has often been represented as a rebel. 

Melancthon and the others were nearly of the same 
opinion, except that they insisted more on the necessity 
of representing to the emperor, that " in their sermons 
nothing controversial was introduced, but they were 

• These instructions may be found in Coelestin, 1. 50, and Fors- 
iemann Urk. 1. 220. f Quidquid duri Elector! denuntiabani 

tao veluti nomine et injussi dicebant. Seek. 2. 156. X 
TuLcbsten beim zu reiten. Corp Ref. 2. 88. § L. Epp. 4. 16, , 



FIRMNESS OF THE ELECTOR. 



145 



content simply to teach the doctrine of Christ the Sav- 
iour.* Let us beware, above all," continued they, " of 
leaving the city. Let your highness with an intrepid 
heart confess in presence of his majesty by what won- 
derful ways you have attained to a right understanding 
of the truth,f and do not allow yourself to be alarmed 
at these thunder-claps that fall from the lips of our ene- 
mies." To confess the truth, such was the object to 
which, according to the reformers, every thing else 
should be subordinate. 

Will the elector yield to this first demand of Charles, 
and thus begin, even before the emperor's arrival, that 
list of sacrifices the end of which cannot be foreseen ? 

No one in Augsburg was firmer than John. In vain 
did the reformers represent that they were in the em- 
peror's city, and only strangers :J the elector shook his 
head. Melancthon in despair wrote to Luther : " Ala«, 
how untractable is our old man."§ Nevertheless he 
again returned to the charge. Fortunately there was an 
intrepid man at the elector's right hand, the chancellor 
Bruck, who feeling convinced that policy, honor, and 
above all duty, bound the friends of the Reformation to 
resist the menaces of Charles, said to the elector, " The 
emperor's demand is but a worthy beginning to bring 
about the definitive abolition of the gospel. || If we 
yield at present, they will crush us by and by. Let us 
therefore humbly beg his majesty to permit the continu- 
ance of the sermons." Thus at that time a statesman 
stood in the foremost rank of the confessors of Jesus 
Christ. This is one of the characteristic features of this 
great age, and it must not be forgotten, if we would 
understand its history aright. 

On the 31st of May, the elector sent his answer in 
writing to Charles' ministers. " It is not true," it bore, 
that the edict of Worms was approved of by the six 

* NuUas materias disputabiles a nobis doceri. Corp. Ref. 2. 72. 

t Quo modo plane inenarrabili atque mirifico. Ibid. 74. 

X In cujus urbe jam sumus hospites. Ibid. 46. § Sed nostei 
senex dlfficilis est. Ibid. || Ein fiigsamer Anfang dar Nidea^ 

bringung des Evangelii, Ibid, 76. 

Htot.«rFK. IT 10 



148 HISTORY OF THE REFOHMATIOlf 



electors. How could the elector my brother, and my« 
self, by approving it, have opposed the everlasting word 
of Almighty God ? Accordingly, succeeding edicts have 
declared this edict impossible to be executed. As for 
the relations of friendship that I have formed, their only 
aim is to protect me against acts of violence. Let my 
accusers lay before the eyes of his majesty the alliance* 
they have made ; I am ready to produce mine, and the 
emperor shall decide between us. Finally, as to the 
demand to suspend our preachings, nothing is proclaim- 
ed in them but the glorious truth of God, and never was 
it so necessary to us. We cannot therefore do without 
it."* 

This reply must necessarily hasten the arrival of 
Charles ; and it was urgent they should be prepared tc 
receive him. To proclaim their belief, and then be silent, 
was the whole plan of the Protestant campaign. A con- 
fession was therefore necessary. One man of small 
stature, frail, timid, and in great alarm, was commis 
sioned to prepare this instrument of war. Philip Me 
lancthon worked at it night and day ; he weighed everj 
expression, softened it down, changed it, and then fre- 
quently returned to his first idea. He was wasting 
away his strength ; his friends trembled lest he should 
die over his task ; and Luther enjoined him, as early as 
the 12th of May, under pain of anathema, to take meas* 
ures for the preservation of " his little body," and not 
" to commit suicide for the love of God."f " God is as 
usefully served by repose," added he, " and indeed man 
never serves him better than by keeping himself tranquil. 
It is for this reason God willed that the Sabbath should 
be so strictly observed."^ 

Notwithstanding these solicitations, Melancthon's 
application augmented, and he set about an expositioD 
of the Christian faith at once mild, moderate, and a0 
little removed as possible from the doctrine of the Latin 

♦ Quo carere non posset. Seek. 166 ; Miiller, Hist. Prot. 606. 

^ Ut sub anathemate cogam te in regulas servandi corpuscal? 
tai. L. Epp. 4. 16. t Ideo euiiii Si^bbs^tum voluit im rigi^ 
pree ooeteris servari. Ibi4. 



PREPARATION OF THE CONFESSION. 147 



lharch. At Coburg he had already put his hand to the 
task, and traced out in the first part the doctrines of the 
faith according to the articles of Schwabach; and in 
the second, the abuses of the church according to the 
articles of Torgau, making altogether quite a new work 
At Augsburg he gave a more correct and elegant form 
to this Confession.* 

The Apology, as it was then called, was completed 
on the 11th of May; and the elector sent it to Luther, 
begging him to mark what ought to be changed. " I 
have said what I thought most useful," added Melano- 
thon, who feared that his friend would find the Confes- 
eion too weak ; " for Eck ceases not to circulate against 
us the most diabolical calumnies, and I have endeavored 
to oppose an antidote to his poisons."f 

Luther replied to the elector on the 15th of May, "t 
have read Master Philip's Apology ; I like it well enough, 
and have no corrections to make. Besides, that would 
hardly suit me, for I cannot walk so meekly and so si- 
lently. May Christ our Lord grant that this work may 
produce much and great fruit." 

Each day, however, the elector's councillors and 
theologians, in concert with Melancthon, improved the 
Confession, and endeavored to render it such that the 
charmed diet should, in its own despite, hear it to the 
very end.J 

While the struggle was thus preparing at Augsburg, 
Luther at Coburg, on the summit of the hill, "on his 
Sinai," as he called it, raised his hands like Moses tow- 
ards heaven.§ He was the real general of the spiritual 
war that was then waging; his letters ceased not to 
bear to the combatants the directions which they needed, 
and numerous pamphlets issuing from his strong-hold, 
Jike discharges of musketry, spread confusion in the 
nemy's camp. 

The place where he had been left was, by its solitude, 

^ More rhetorically. Feci aliquando hjropiKUTepov quam Cobur- 
g» Bcripseram. Corp. Ref. 2. 40. f Quia Eckius addldit doi^Ai* 
uuTOTag diaficX^ coQtra nos. Ibid. 45. {In Apologia quotidid 
Qolta mutamaa. Ibid. 60. § Matbesias Predigten, p. 9^. 



148 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOIT. 



favorable to study and to meditaticn.* " I shall make a 
Zion of this Sinai," said he on the 22d of April, " and 1 
shall build here three tabernacles ; one to the Psalms, 
another to the Prophets, and a third — to Esop !" Thi« 
last word may well startle us. The association belongs 
neither to the language nor the spirit of the apostles. 
It is true that Esop was not to be his principal study; 
the fables were soon laid aside, and truth alone engaged 
Luther. " I shall weep, I shall pray, I shall never be 
silent," wrote he, " until I know that my cry has been 
heard in heaven."f 

Besides, by way of relaxation, he had something bet- 
ter than Esop ; he had those domestic joys whose pre- 
cious treasures the Reformation had opened to the minis- 
ters of the word. It was at this time he wrote that 
charming letter to his infant son, in which he describes 
a delightful garden where children dressed in gold are 
sporting about, picking up apples, pears, cherries, and 
plums ; they sing, dance, and enjoy themselves, and ride 
pretty little horses, with golden bridles and silver sad- 
dles.f 

But the reformer was soon drawn away from these 
pleasing images. About this time he learned that his 
father had gently fallen asleep in the faith which is in 
Jesus Christ. "Alas," exclaimed he, shedding tears 
of filial love, "it is by the sweat of his brow that he 
made me what I am."^ Other trials assailed him ; and 
to bodily pains were added the phantoms of his imagina- 
tion. One night in particular he saw three torches pass 
rapidly before his eyes, and at the same moment heard 
claps of thunder in his head, which he ascribed to the 
devil. His servant ran in at the moment he fainted, and 
after having restored him to animation, read to him the 
epistle to the Galatians. Luther, who had fallen asleep, 
said as he awoke, "Come, and despite of the devil, let 

• Longe amoenissimus et studiis commodissimus. L. Epp. 4. 2. 

t Orabo igitur et plorabo, non quieturus doaec, etc. Ibid. 

X This letter, whicli is a masterpiece of its kind, may be found in 
Lather's Epp. 4. 41, and also in Riddle's " Luther and his Timea,*' 
^ 268. § Per ejus sudores aluit ^t finxit qjualis sum. Epy. 4. 33^ 



LUTHER»S MERRIMENT. 



149 



as fling the Psalm, ' Out of the depths have I cried unto 
thee, 0 Lord.' They both sang the hymn. While Lu- 
ther was thus tormented by these internal noises, he 
translated the prophet Jeremiah, and yet he often de- 
plored his idleness. 

He soon devoted himself to other studies, and poured 
out the floods of his irony on the mundane practices of 
courts. He saw Venice, the pope, and the king of France, 
giving their hands to Charles V. to crush the gospel. 
Then, alone in his chamber in the old castle, he burst 
into irresistible laughter. "Mr. Par-ma-foy^^ — it was 
thus he designated Francis I. — In-nomine'Dominiy^ the 
pope, "and the republic of Venice, pledge their goods 

and their bodies to the emperor Sanctissimum fcedus, 

A most holy alliance truly I This league between these 
four powers belongs to the chapter Non-credimus, Ven- 
ice, the pope, and France become imperialists! But 

these are three persons in one substance, filled with un- 
speakable hatred against the emperor. Mr. Par-ma-foy 
cannot forget his defeat at Pa via ; Mr. In-nomine-Domini 
*s, first, an Italian, which is already too much ; second, 
a Florentine, which is worse ; third, a bastard, that is 
to say, a child of the devil ; fourth, he will never forget 
the disgrace of the sack of Rome. As for the Venetians, 
they are Venetians : that is quite enough ; and they 
lave good reason to avenge themselves on the posterity 
)f Maximilian. All this belongs to the chapter Firmiter' 
credimus. But God will help the pious Charles, who is 
a sheep among wolves. Amen."* The ex-monk of Er- 
furth had a surer political foresight than many diploma- 
tists of his age. 

Impatient at seeing the diet put off from day to day, 
Luther formed his resolution, and ended by convoking 
it even at Coburg. " We are already in full assembly 
wrote he on the 28th of April and the 9th of May 
" You might here see kings, dukes, and other grandees, 
deliberating on the affairs of their kingdom, and with 
indefatigable voice publishing their dogmas and decrees 
in the air. They dwell not in those caverns which yon 
* To Gasp, of Teutleben, June 19. L. Epp. i. 37. 



150 HiSTORT OF THE REFORMATIOH. 



decorate with the name of palaces: the heavens m 
their canopy ; the leafy trees form a floor of a thousand 
colors, and their walls are the ends of the earth. They 
have a horror of all the unmeaning luxury of silk and 
gold ; they ask neither courses nor armor, and have all 
the same clothing and the same color. I have not seeji 
or beard their emperor ; but if I can understand them, 
they have determined this year to make a pitiless war 
upon — the most excellent fruits of the earth. Ah, my 
dear friends," said he to his colleagues,* to whom he 
was writing, "these are the sophists, the papists, who 
are assembled before me from all quarters of the world 
to make me hear their sermons and their cries." These 
two letters, dated from the " empire of ravens and crows/* 
finish in the following mournful strain, which shows us 
the reformer descending into himself after this play of 
his imagination: Enough of jesting — jesting which 
is, however, sometimes necessary to dispel the gloomy 
thoughts that overwhelm me."f 

Luther soon returned to real life, and thrilled with 
joy at beholding the fruits that the Reformation was 
already bearing, and which were for him a more power- 
ful "apology" than even the Confession of Melancthon. 
" Is there in the whole world a single country to be com- 
pared to your highness^ states," wrote he to the elector, 
** and which possesses preachers of so pure a doctrine, 
or pastors so fitted to bring about the reign of peace T 
Where do we see, as in Saxony, boys and girls well 
instructed in the holy Scriptures and in the Catechism, 
increasing in wisdom and in stature, praying, believing, 
talking of God and of Christ better than has been done 
hitherto by all the universities, convents, and chapters 
of Christendom ?"J " My dear Duke John, says the Lord 
to you, I commend this paradise to thee, the most beau* 
tiful that exists in the world, that thou mayest be its 
gardener." And then he added, "Alas, the madness ol 

* An seine Tischgesellen — messmateR or table-companions. Li 
Epp. 4r. 7. t Sed serio et necessario joco qui mihi irruentes cogi- 
tationes repelleret. lb. 14. X ^ wachst jetzt daher die earle 
/ageod von Knablein und Middlein. Ibid. 21. 



TRAVAIL 0? THE CHURCH. 161 



the Papist princes changes this paradise of God into a 
dirty slough, and corrupting the youth, daily peoples with 
real devils their states, their tables, and their palaces.'' 

Luther, not content with encouraging his prince, 
desired also to frighten his adversaries. It was with 
this intent that he wrote at that time an address to the 
members of the clergy assembled at Augsburg. A 
crowd of thoughts, like lansquenets armed cap-a-pie, 
" rushed in to fatigue and bewilder him and in fact 
there is no want of barbed words in the discourse he 
addresses to the bishops. " In short,'' said he to them 
in conclusion, " we know and you know that we have 
the word of God, and that you have it not. 0 pope, if 
1 Hve I shall be a pestilence to thee ; and if I die, I shall 
be thy death.^f 

Thus was Luther present at Augsburg, although 
invisible ; and he effected more by his words and by his 
prayers than Agricola, Brentz, or Melancthon. These 
were the days of travail for the gospel truth. It was 
about to appear in the world with a might destined to 
eclipse all that had been done since the time of St. Paul ; 
but Luther only announced and manifested the things 
that God was effecting : he did not execute them him- 
self. He was, as regards the events of the church, what 
Socrates was to philosophy: "I imitate my mother'' — 
she was a midwife — this philosopher was in the habit 
of saying ; " she does not travail herself, but she aids 
others." Luther — and he never ceased repeating it — 
has created nothing ; but he has brought to light the pre- 
cious seed hidden for ages in the bosom of the church. 
The man of God is not he who seeks to form his age 
according to his own peculiar ideas, but he who, dis- 
tinctly perceiving God's truth, such as it is found in his 
word, and as it is hidden in his church, brings it to his 
contemporaries with courage and decision. 

Never had these qualities been more necessary, for 
matters were taking an alarming aspect. On the 4th 

• Ut plurimos Lansknecktos prorsus vi repellere cogar, qui in- 
lalutati noQ cessant obetrepere. L. Epp. 4. 10. f Pestis erain 
riyuB, moriens ero mors tua, Papa. L. 0pp. 20. 154 



162 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



of June died Chancellor Gattinara, who was to Charlei 
the Fifth " what Ulpian was to Alexander Severus,** 
gays Melancthon, and with him all the human hopes ol 
the Protestants vanished. " It is God," Luther had said^ 
" who has raised up for us a Naaman in the court of the 
king of Syria." In truth, Gattinara alone resisted the 
pope. When Charles brought to him the objections ol 
llome, " Remember," said the chancellor, " that you are 
master." Henceforward every thing seemed to take a 
new direction. The pope required that Charles should 
be satisfied with being his ** lictor," as Luther says, to 
carry out his judgments against the heretics.* Eck, 
whose name, according to Melancthon, was no bad imi- 
tation of the cry of Luther's crows, heaped one upon 
anotherf a multitude of pretended heretical propositions, 
extracted from the reformer's writings. They amounted 
to four hundred and four, and yet he made excuse that, 
being taken unawares, he was forced to restrict himself 
to so small a number, and he called loudly for a dispu- 
tation with the Lutherans. They retorted on these prop- 
ositions by a number of ironical and biting theses on 
" wine, Venus, and baths, against John Eck ;" and the 
poor doctor became the general laughing-stock. 

But others went to work more skilfully than he. 
Cochloeus, who became chaplain to duke George of Sax- 
ony in 1527, begged an interview with Melancthon, 
** for," added he, ** I cannot converse with your married 
ministers."! Melancthon, who was looked upon with 
an evil eye at Augsburg, and who had complained of 
being more solitary there than Luther in his castle, § 
was touched by this courtesy, and was still more fully 
penetrated with the idea that things should be ordered 
in the mildest manner possible. 

The Romish priests and laymen made a great up- 
roar because on fast-days meat was usually eaten at 

* Tantum lictorem suum ia haereticos. Epp. 4. 10. f Magnum 
acervum conclusionum congessit. Corp Ref. p. 39. % ^^ns 
uxoratis presbyteris tuis privatim colloqui noa intendimua Ibid 
p. 82. § Nos noQ rniaua samus monachi quam vos iu ilia am 
restra. Ibid. p. 46. 



THE CHURCH THE JUDOE. 



153 



the elector's court. Melancthon advised his prince to 
restrict the liberty of his attendants in this respect. 

This disorder," said he, far from leading the simple- 
minded to the gospel, scandalizes them." He added, in 
his ill humor, " A fine holiness truly, to make it a matter 
of conscience to fast, and yet to be night and day given 
up to wine and folly !"* The elector did not yield to 
Melancthon's advice ; it would have been a mark of 
weakness of which his adversaries would have known 
how to take advantage. 

On the 31st of May, the Saxon Confession was at 
length communicated to the other Protestant states, 
who required that it should be presented in common in 
the name of them all.f But at the same time they de- 
sired to make their reservations with regard to the influ 
ence of the state. We appeal to a council," said Me- 
lancthon ; " we will not receive the emperor as our 
judge ; the ecclesiastical constitutions themselves forbid 
him to pronounce in spiritual matters. J Moses declares 
that it is not the civil magistrate who decides, but the 
sons of Levi. St. Paul also says, * Let the others judge,' 
1 Cor. 14, which cannot be understood except of an en- 
tire Christian assembly ; and the Saviour himself gives 
us this commandment : * Tell it unto the church.' We 
pledge, therefore, our obedience to the emperor in all 
civil matters ; but as for the word of God, we demand 
liberty." 

All were agreed on this point ; but the dissent came 
from another quarter. The Lutherans feared to com- 
promise their cause if they went hand in hand with the 
Zwinglians. *'This is Lutheran madness," replied Bu- 
cer ; it will perish of its own weight."§ But, far from 
allowing this madness "to perish," the reformed aug- 
mented the disunion by exaggerated complaints. " Id 

* Und dennoch Tag und Nacht voll und toll seyn. Corp. Ref. 
2. 79. t In gemein in aller Fiirsten und Stadte Nahmen. lb 
2. 88. t Die constitutiones canonicae den Kaysern verbleten 
zu richten und sprechen in geistlichen Sachen. Ibid. p. 66. 

§ De Lutheranis furoribus .... sua ipsi mole ruent. Zw. Epp 
). 432. 



154 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



Saxony they are beginning to sing Latin hymns again,^ 
said they ; " the sacred vestments are resumed, and obla* 
tioDS are called for anew.* We would rather be led to 
slaughter, than be Christians after that fashion.^ 

The afflicted landgrave, says Bucer, was "between 
the hammer and the anvil f and his allies caused him 
more uneasiness than his enemies.f He applied to Rhe- 
gius, to Brentz, to Melancthon, declaring that it was his 
most earnest wish to see concord prevail among all the 
evangelical doctors. " If these fatal doctrines are not 
opposed," replied Melancthon, " there will be rents in the 
church that will last to the end of the world. Do not 
the Zwinglians boast of their full coffers, of having sol- 
diers prepared, and of foreign nations disposed to aid 
them ? Do they not talk of sharing among them the 
rights and the property of the bishops, and of proclaim- 
ing liberty ? . . . Good God, shall we not think of pos- 
terity, which, if we do not repress these guilty seditions, 
will be at once without throne and without altar ?"j 
"No, no; we are one," replied this generous prince, 
who was so much in advance of his age ; "we all con- 
fess the same Christ, we all profess that we must eat 
Jesus Christ, by faith, in the eucharist. Let us unite." 
All was unavailing. The time in which true catholicity 
was to replace this sectarian spirit, of which Rome is 
the most perfect expression, had not yet arrived. 

* Hinc Latinae resumuntur cantiones, repetuntur sanctse vested. 
Zp. Epp. 2. 457. t Cattas inter sacrum et eaxum stat, et dfi 

Bociis magis quam hostibus solicitus est Ibid. \ Keine Siiobe 
and kein Regiment. Corp. Bef. 2. 95. 



AGITATION IN AUGSBDlia 



1S6 



CHAPTER IV. 

Agitation in Angsbnrg — Violence of the Imperialists — Charles at 
Munich — Charles' arrival — The Nuncio's blessing — The Imperial 
procession — Charles' appearance — Enters Augsburg — Te Deum— 
The benediction — Charles desires the sermons to be discontin- 
ued — Brandenburg offers his head — The emperor's request for 
Corpas Christi — Refusal of the princes — Agitation of Charles — 
The princes oppose tradition — Procession of Corpus Christi — 
Exasperation of Charles. 

In proportion as the emperor drew near Augsburg 
the anxieties of the Protestants continued increasing. 
The burghers of this imperial city expected to see it 
become the theatre of strange events. Accordingly they 
said that if the elector, the landgrave, and other friends 
of the Reformation were not in the midst of them, they 
would all desert it.* " A great destruction threatens us,^ 
was repeated on every side.f One of Charles^ haughty 
expressions above all disquieted the Protestants. What 
do these electors want with me he had said impa- 
tiently ; " I shall do what I please."J Thus arbitrary 
rule was the imperial law destined to prevail in the diet. 

To this agitation of men^s minds was added the agi- 
tation of the streets, or rather one led to the other. 
Masons and locksmiths were at work in all the public 
places and crossings, laboriously fastenirg barriers and 
chains to the walls, that might be closed or stretched at 
the first cry of alarm. § At the same time about eight 
hundred foot and horse soldiers were seen patrolling the 
streets, dressed in velvet and silk,|| whom the magis- 
trates had enrolled in order to receive the emperor with 
magnificence. 

Matters were in this state, and it was about the 

• Wo Sachsen, Hessen, und andere Luther ische nit hie waren. 
Corp. Ref. 2. 89. t Minatur nobis Satan grande exitium. lb. 92 

X Er wolte es machen, wie es Ihm eben ware. Ibid. 88. 

§ Neu aufgerichte Ketten und Stock. Ibid. 66. || Mit sam 
met und seide aufs kostlichst ausgestrichen. Ibid. 



156 



HISTORY OF THE REFORMATtON. 



middle of May, when a number of insolent Spanish quar 
termasters arrived, who, looking with contemptuous 
eyes on these wretched burghers, entered their houses, 
conducted themselves with violence, and even rudely 
tore down the arms of some of the princes.* The mag 
istrates having delegated councillors to treat with them 
the Spaniards made an impudent reply. '*Alas,'' sai 
the citizens, "if the servants are so, what will theii 
master be ?" The ministers of Charles were grieved at 
Cheir impertinence, and sent a German quartermaster 
who employed the forms of German politeness to make 
ihem forget this Spanish haughtiness. 

That did not last long, and they soon felt more s^rioua 
alarm. The council of Augsburg were asked what was 
the meaning of these chains and soldiers, and they were 
ordered, in the emperor's name, to take down the one 
and disband the other. The magistrates of the city an- 
swered in alarm, "For more than ten years past we 
have intended putting up these chains ;+ and as for the 
soldiers, our object is simply to pay due honor to his 
majesty." After many parleys it was agreed to dismiss 
the troops, and that the imperial commanders should 
select afresh a thousand men, who should make oath to 
the emperor, but be paid by the city of Augsburg. 

The imperial quartermasters then resumed all their 
insolence ; and no longer giving themselves the trouble 
of entering the houses and the shops, they tore down 
the signboards of the Augsburg citizens, and wrote in 
their place how many men and horses the latter would 
be required to lodge.;}; 

Such were the preludes to the work of conciliation 
that Charles V. had announced, and that he was so 
slow in beginning. Accordingly his delay — attributed 
by some to the crowds of people who surrounded him 
with their acclamations ; by others, to the solicitations 
of the priests, who opposed his entry into Augsburg 

* Den jungen Fursten zu Neuburg ihre Wappen abgerissen. 
Corp. Ref. 2. 55. f Vor zehn Jahren in Sinn gehabt. Ibid. 66 

X Gehen nicbt mebr in die Hauser und schreiben nn die Thikr. 
Ibid 89. 



CHARLES' ARRIVAL. 



157 



tmtil he had imposed silence on the ministers ; and by 
others, finally, to the lessons the pope had given him in 
the arts of policy and stratagem,* — still more estranged 
the elector and his allies. 

At last Charles, having quitted Innspruck two days 
after Gattinara's death, arrived at Munich on the 10th ol 
June. His reception was magnificent. About two miles 
from the town a temporary fortress had been erected, 
around which a sham fight took place. Soldiers mounted 
to the assault, mines were exploded ; discharges of artil- 
lery, clouds of smoke, the clash of arms, the shouts of the 
combatants, delighted the eyes and ears of the emperor ;f 
within the city, theatres had been raised in the open air, in 
which the Jewish Esther^ the Persian Gamhyses, and other 
pieces not less famous, were represented ; and the whole, 
combined with splendid fireworks, formed the welcome 
given by the adherents of the pope to him whom they 
styled their savior. 

Charles was not far distant from Augsburg. As early 
as the 11th of June, every day and every hour members 
of the imperial household, carriages, wagons, and bag- 
gage, entered the city to the sound of the clacking whip 
and of the horn ; J and the burghers in amazement gazed 
with dejected eyes on all this insolent train, that fell 
upon their city like a flight of locusts. § 

At five o^clock in the morning of the 15th of June,|[ 
the elector, the princes, and their councillors, assembled 
at the town-hall, and erelong arrived the imperial com- 
missaries, with orders for them to go out and meet 
Charles. At three in the afternoon the princes and dep- 
uties quitted the city, and having reached a little bridge 
across the river Lech, they there halted and waited for 
the emperor. The eyes of every member of the brilliant 
assemblage thus stopping on the smiling banks of an 

* Caesarem instructum arte pontificum quaerere causas moraB. 
L. Epp. 4. 31. t Das hat Kais. Maj. wohl gefallen. Forste- 

mann, Urkunden, 1. 246. X AUe stund die Wagen, der Troea 

und viel gesinds uach einander herein. Corp. Ref. 2. 90. 

§ Fiadea aber wenig Freudenfeuer. Ibid. || Zu Mortem 

\m funf Uhr. F Urkimden, 1. 



158 HISTORY OF THE RjsFOaMATIOK 



alpine torrent, were directed along the road to Manich. 
At length, after waiting two or three hours, clouds ol 
dust and a loud noise announced the emperor. Two 
thousand of the imperial guard marched first ; and as 
soon as Charles had come to within fifty paces of the 
river, the electors and princes alighted. Their sona^ 
who had advanced beyond the bridge, perceiving the 
emperor preparing to do the same, ran to him and beg- 
ged him to remain on horseback;* but Charles dis- 
mounted without hesitation,f and approaching the princes 
with an amiable smile, cordially shook hands with them. 
Albert of Mentz, in his quality of arch-chancellor of the 
empire, now welcomed the emperor, and the count-pala- 
tine Frederick replied in behalf of Charles. 

While this was passing, three individuals remained 
apart on a little elevation ;J these were the Roman 
legate, proudly seated on a mule, glittering with purple, 
and accompanied by two other cardinals, the archbishop 
of Salzburg and the bishop of Trent. The nuncio, be- 
holding all these great personages on the road, raised 
his hands, and gave them his blessing. Immediately 
the emperor, the king, and the princes who submitted 
to the pope, fell on their knees ; the Spaniards, Italians, 
Netherlanders, and Germans in their train, imitated 
their movements, casting however a side glance on the 
Protestants, who, in the midst of this humbly prostrate 
crowd, alone remained standing. § Charles did not ap- 
pear to notice this, but he doubtless understood what it 
meant. The elector of Brandenburg then delivered a 
Latin speech to the legate. He had been selected be- 
cause he spoke this language better than the princes of 
the church ; and accordingly Charles, when praising his 
eloquence, slily put in a word about the negligence of 
the prelates. II The emperor now prepared to remount 
his horse ; the prince-electoral of Saxony, and the young 

Ab electorum filiis qui procurrerant rogatus. Seek. 2. 101. 
t Mox ab equis descenderuat. Cochloeus. t Auf eia Orl 

geriickt. F. Urkunden, 1. 256. § Primum constantiae 8peci« 

men. Seek. 2. 101 || Frelatorum autem negligentiam Mm 

«iret Ibi^. 



THE IMPERIAL PROCESSION. 159 

princes of Lnneberg, Mecklenburg, Brandenbui^, and 
Anhalt, rushed towards him to aid him in getting into 
his saddle : one held the bridle, another the stirrup, and 
all were charmed at the magnificent appearance of their 
powerful sovereign.* The procession began to move on. 

First came two companies of lansquenets, command- 
ed by Simon Seitz, a citizen of Augsburg, who had made 
the campaign of Italy, and was returning home laden 
with gold.f Next advanced the households of the six 
electors, composed of princes, counts, councillors, gen- 
tlemen, and soldiers ; the household of the dukes of 
Bavaria had slipped into their ranks, and the four hun- 
dred and fifty horsemen that composed it marched five 
abreast, covered with bright cuirasses, and wearing red 
doublets, while over their heads floated handsome many- 
colored plumes. Bavaria was already in this age the 
main support of Rome in Germany. 

Immediately after came the households of the emperor 
and of his brother, in striking contrast with this warlike 
show. They were composed of Turkish, Polish, Arabian, 
and other led horses ; then followed a multitude of young 
pages, clad in yellow or red velvet, with Spanish, Bohe- 
mian, and Austrian nobles in robes of silk and velvet ; J 
among these the Bohemians had the most martial air, 
and gracefully rode their superb and prancing coursers. 
Last the trumpeters, drummers, heralds, grooms, foot- 
men, and the legate's cross-bearers, announced the ap- 
proach of the princes. 

In fact these powerful lords, whose contentions had 
BO often filled Germany with confusion and war, now 
advanced riding peacefully side by side. After the princes, 
appeared the electors ; and the elector of Saxony, accord- 
ing to custom, carried the naked and glittering imperial 
sword immediately before the emperor. § 

Last came the prince, on whom all eyes were fixed.fl 

♦ Conflcendentem juniores principes adjuverunt. Ibid, and F 
Urkunden, 1. 258. t Bekleit von gold ; literally, clothed w th 
gold. F. Urkunden, 1. 258. t Viel sammete und seiden Rocke, 
L. 0pp. 20. 201. § Noster princeps de more praetulit ensem. Corp. 
Bef. % I Omnium ocuIub in se convortit Seek. 2. 



160 



HISTORY OF THE REFOEMAlIOir. 



Thirty years of age, of distinguished port and pleasiitg 
features, robed in golden garments that glittered all 
over with precious stones,* wearing a small Spanish 
hat cn the crown of his head,f mounted on a beautiful 
Polish hackney of the most brilliant whiteness, riding 
beneath a rich canopy of red, white, and green damask 
borne by six senators of Augsburg, and casting around 
him looks in which gentleness was mingled with gravity, 
Charles excited the liveliest enthusiasm, and every one 
exclaimed that he was the handsomest man in tne empire, 
as well as the mightiest prince in the world. 

He had at first desired to place his brother and the 
legate at his side ; but the elector of Mentz, attended by 
two hundred guards arrayed in silk, had claimed the 
emperor's right hand ; and the elector of Cologne, with 
a hundred well-armed attendants, had taken his sta- 
tion on the left. King Ferdinand and the legate came 
next; to whom succeeded the cardinals, ambassadors, 
and prelates, among whom was remarked the haughty 
bishop of Osma, the emperor's confessor. The impe- 
rial cavalry and the troops of Augsburg closed the 
procession. 

Never, according to the historians, had any thing so 
magnificent been seen in the empire ;J but they advanc- 
ed slowly, and it was between eight and nine o'clock in 
the evening before they reached the gates of Augsburg.§ 
Here they met the burgomaster and councillors, who 
prostrated themselves before Charles, and at the same 
time the cannon from the ramparts, the bells from all 
the steeples in full peal, the noise of trumpets and kettle- 
drums, and the joyful acclamations of the people, re- 
echoed with loud din. Stadion, bishop of Augsburg, and 
his clergy robed in white, struck up the Advenisti desir 
rabilis; and six canons, advancing with a magnificent 
canopy, prepared to conduct the emperor to the cathe- 
dral, when Charles' horse, startled at this ut usual sight, 

* Totus gemmis coruscabat. Seek. 2. 160. f Ein fclein Spanisch 
Hutlein. F. Urk. 1. 260. J Antea in imperio non erat visa. 

Seek. 2. 160. § Ingressas est in urbem intra octavam et nonam. 



THE BENEDICTION. 



161 



suddenly reared,* and the emperor had some difficulty 
in mastering him. At length Charles entered the min- 
ster, which was ornamented with garlands and flowers, 
and suddenly illuminated by a thousand torches. 

The emperor went up to the altar, and falling on his 
knees, raised his hands towards heaven. f During the 
Te Deum, the Protestants observed with anxiety that 
Charles kept conversing in a low tone with the arch- 
bishop of Mentz ; that he bent his ear to the legate, who 
approached to speak to him, and nodded in a friendly 
manner to duke George. All this appeared to them of 
evil omen ; but at the moment when the priests sang the 
Te ergo qucesimuSf Charles, breaking off his conversa- 
tions, suddenly rose, and one of the acolytes running to 
him with a gold embroidered cushion, the emperor put it 
aside, and knelt on the bare stones of the church. All 
the assembly knelt with him ; the elector and the land- 
grave alone remained standing. Duke George, aston- 
ished at such boldness, cast a threatening glance at his 
cousin. The margrave of Brandenburg, carried away 
by the crowd, had fallen on his knees ; bu4; having seen 
his two allies standing, he hastily rose up again. 

The cardinal-aichbishop of Salzburg then proceeded 
to pronounce the benediction j but Campeggio, impatient 
at having as yet taken no part in the ceremony, hastened 
to the altar, and rudely thrusting the aichbishop aside, 
said sharply to him,| This office belongs to me, and 
not to you " The other gave way, the emperor knelt 
down, and the landgrave, with difficulty concealing a 
smile, hid himself behind a candelabrum. The bells now 
rang out anew, the procession recommenced its march, 
and the princes conducted the emperor to the palati- 
nate— the name given to the bishop's palace — which had 
been prepared for him. The crowd now dispersed : it 
was after ten at night. 

The hour was come in which the partisans of the 
papacy flattered themselves with the prospect of render- 

* Da entsetzt sich K. M. Hengst fiir solchem Himmel. F. Urk 
1. 261. t Ihr hand aufgehebt. Ibid. t Cardinalem legatus 
OiLstigatuia abegit Seek. 2. 161. 

II 



162 



HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



ing the Protestants untrue to their faith. The arrival 
of the emperor, the procession of the holy sacrament 
that was preparing, the late hour, all had been calculated 
beforehand ; " the nocturns of treason were about to 
begin," said Spalatin. 

A few minutes of general conversation took place in 
the emperor's apartments ; the princes of the Romish 
party were then allowed to retire ; but Charles had given 
a sign to the elector of Saxony, to the landgrave of 
Hesse, to George margrave of Brandenburg, to the prince 
of Anhalt, and to the duke of Luneburg, to follow him 
into his private chamber.* His brother Ferdinand, who 
was to serve as interpreter, alone went in with them. 
Charles thought that so long as the Protestant princes 
were before the world, they would not yield ; but that 
in a private and friendly interview, he might obtain all 
he desired of them. 

" His majesty requests you to discontinue the ser- 
mons," said Ferdinand. On hearing these words the 
two elder princes, the elector and the margrave, turned 
pale and did not speak :f there was a long silence. 

At last the landgrave said, " We entreat your majesty 
to withdraw your request, for our ministers preach only 
the pure word of God, as did the ancient doctors of the 
church, St. Augustine, St. Hilary, and so many others. 
Of this your majesty may easily convince yourself. We 
cannot deprive ourselves of the food of the word of God, 
and deny his gospel."^ 

Ferdinand, resuming the conversation in French§ — 
for it was in this language that he conversed with his 
brother — informed the emperor of the landgrave's answer. 
Nothing was more displeasing to Charles than these 
citations of Hilary and Augustine ; the color mounted 
to his cheeks, and he was nearly giving way to hie 
anger.|| "His majesty," said Ferdinand in a more posi- 

* Ad conclave suum. Corp. Ref. pp. 106, 114. f l^i® beedo 
alt3 Fiirsten zum hochstea entsetz. Ibid. t Se non posse cibo 
rerbi Dei carere, nec sana coQscieatia Evangelium negare. Ibid. 
116. § In Franzosischer Sprache. Ibid. 107. [j Sich dATob 
etwas angerot nnd erhitzt. Ibid. 115^ 



1>JBCISI0N OF THE ^AKaRAVE. 168 



fcive tone, "cannot desist from his demand." "Your 
conscience," quickly replied the landgrave, "has no 
right to command ours."* As Ferdinand still persisted, 
the margrave, who had been silent until then, could con- 
tain himself no longer; and without caring for inte? 
preters, stretched out his neck towards Charles, exclaim- 
ing in deep emotion, " Rather than allow the word of 
the Lord to be taken from me, rather than deny my God, 
I would kneel down before your majesty and have my 
head cut off I" As he uttered these simple and magnan- 
imous words, says a contemporary, f the prince accom- 
panied them with a significant gesture, and let his hands 
fall on his neck like the headsman^s axe. The excite- 
ment of the princes was at its height ; had it been neces- 
sary, they would all four have instantly walked to the 
scaffold. Charles was moved by it ; surprised and agi- 
tated, he hastily cried out in his bad German, making a 
show of checking the landgrave, " Dear prince, not the 
head, not the head !" But he had scarcely uttered these 
few words, when he checked himself. 

These were the only words that Charles pronounced 
before the princes during all the diet. His ignorance of 
the German language, and sometimes also the etiquette 
of the Escurial, compelled him to speak only by the 
mouth of his brother or of the count-palatine. As he 
was in the habit of consecrating four hours daily to 
divine worship, the people said, "He talks more with 
God than with men." This habitual silence was not 
favorable to his plans. They required activity and elo- 
quence ; but instead of that, the Germans saw in the 
dumb countenance of their youthful emperor a mere 
puppet, nodding his head and winking his eyes. Charles 
sometimes felt very keenly the faults of this position. 
" To be able to speak German," said he, " I would will- 
ingly sacrifice any other language, even were it Spanish 
or French, and more than that, one of my states." J 

* K. M. Gewissen sey aber keyn Herr und Meyster iiber ihr Ge^ 
wissen. Corp. Ref. p. 115. t Ut simpliciter, ita magnani miter, 
says Brentn. Ibid. t Es ware Sp^nisch oder FranzoslBoh uad 
da^u eiues Landes miader. Ibid 1 14 



164 HISTOEY OF THE EEFORMATION. 



Ferdinand saw that it was useless to insist on the 
cessation of these meetings, but he had another arrow 
in his quiver. The next day was the festival of Corpus 
Christij and by a custom that had never as yet been in- 
fringed, all the princes and deputies present at the diet 
were expected to take part in the procession. Would 
the Protestants refuse this act of courtesy at the very 
opening of a diet to which each one came in a concilia- 
tory spirit ? Have they not declared that the body and 
blood of Christ are really in the host ? Do they not boast 
of their opposition to Zwingle, and can they stand aloof 
without being tainted with heresy ? Now, if they share 
in the pomp that surrounds " the Lord's body f if they 
mingle with that crowd of clergy, glittering in luxury 
and swelling with pride, who carry about the God whom 
they have created ; if they are present when the people 
bow down, will they not irrevocably compromise their 
faith? The machine is well prepared; its movements 
cannot fail ; there is no more doubt. The craft of the 
Italians is about to triumph over the simplicity of these 
German boors. 

Ferdinand therefore resumes, and making a weapon 
of the very refusal that he had just met with, " Since 
the emperor," said he, " cannot obtain from you the sus- 
pension of your assemblies, he begs at least that you 
will accompany him to-morrow, according to custom, in 
the procession of the holy sacrament. Do so, if not from 
regard to him, at least for the honor of Almighty God."* 

The princes were still more irritated and alarmed 
" Christ," said they, " did not institute his sacrament to 
be worshipped." Charles persevered in his demand, and 
the Protestants in their refusaLf Upon this the emperor 
declared that he would not accept their excuse, that he 
would give them time for reflection, and that they must 
be prepared to reply early on the morrow. 

They separated in the greatest agitation. The prince* 
electoral, who had waited for his father in the first hall 

* Et saltern in houorem Dei illud facerent. Corp. Ref. 2. 116. 
t Persifitit Csesar in postulatione, persisterunt ilU in recasation^, 
Ibid. 116. 



THE PRTKCES* REFUSAL. 



165 



Along with other lords, sought, at the moment the princes 
issued from the emperor's chamber, to read on their 
countenance what had taken place. Judging from the 
emotion depicted on their features that the struggle had 
been severe, he thought that his father was incurring 
the greatest dangers, and accordingly, grasping him bj 
the hand, dragged him to the staircase of the palace, 
exclaiming in affright, as if Charles' satellites were 
already at his heels, " Come, come quickly." 

Charles, who had expected no such resistance, was 
in truth confounded, and the legate endeavored to exas • 
perate him still more.* Agitated, filled with anger and 
vexation, and uttering the most terrible threats, f the 
young emperor paced hastily to and fro the halls of his 
palace ; and unable to wait for the answer until the 
morrow, he sent in the middle of the night to demand 
the elector's final decision. "At present we require 
sleep," replied the latter; to-morrow we will let you 
know our determination."! As for the landgrave, he 
could not rest any more than Charles. Scarcely had he 
returned home, when he sent his chancellor to the Nurem- 
berg deputies, and had them awoke to make them ac- 
quainted with what had taken place. § 

At the same time Charles' demand was laid before 
the theologians, and Spalatin, taking the pen, drew up 
their opinion during the night. "The sacrament," it 
bore, " was not instituted to be worshipped, as the Jews 
worshipped the brazen image. || We are here to confess 
the truth, and not for the confirmation of abuses. Let 
us therefore stay away." This opinion confirmed the 
evangelical princes in their determination ; and the day 
of the 16th of June began. 

The elector of Saxony, feeling indisposed during the 
night, commissioned his son to represent him ; and at 

* A saevitia Legati Romanensium captivi. Corp. Ref. 2. 116. 

f Hinc secutae sunt gravissimae minae, jactatae saevissimae Caesaria 
indignationea. Ibid. | Qiiiete sibi opus esse dicens, responsum 
in diem alterum distulit. Seek. 2. 162. § Hat Nachten uqs auf 
wecken lassen. Corp. Ref. 2, 106. |j Wie die Juden die Schlang€ 
lukben angebethet. Ibid. 111. 



166 



HISTORY OF THE REFORMAlIOJT. 



seven o^clock the princes and councillors repaired on 
horseback to the emperor's palace.* 

The margrave of Brandenburg was their spokesman 
"You know," said he to Charles, "how, at the risk ci 
our lives, my ancestors and myself have supported youi 
august house. But in the things of God, the command?? 
of God himself oblige me to put aside all commandment 
of man. We are told that death awaits those who shalJ 
persevere in the sound doctrine; I am ready to suffer 
it." He then presented the declaration of the evangeli 
cal princes to the emperor. " We will not countenance 
by our presence," said they, " these impious human tra 
ditions, which are opposed to the word of God. We 
declare, on the contrary, without hesitation, and with 
one accord, that we must expel them from the church, 
lest those of its members that are still sound should be 
infected by this deadly poison."f " If you will not ac- 
company his majesty for the love of God," said Ferdi- 
nand, ''do so at least for love of the emperor, and as 
vassals of the empire.l His majesty commands you." 
" An act jof worship is in question," replied the princes, 
" our conscience forbids it." Then Ferdinand and Charles 
having conversed together in a low tone, " His majesty 
desires to see," said the king, "whether you will obey 
him or not."§ At the same time the emperor and his 
brother quitted the room; but the princes, instead ol 
following him, as Charles had hoped, returned full of joy 
to their palaces. 

The procession did not begin till noon. Immediately 
behind the canopy under which the elector of Mentz car- 
ried the host, came the emperor alone, with a devout 
air, bearing a taper in his hand, his head bare and shorn 
like a priest's, although the noonday sun darted on him 
its most ardent rays.|| By exposing himself to these 

* Heute zu sieben Uhren sind gemeldete Fiirsten. . . . Corp. 
Eef. 3. 107. t Caelestin. 1. 82. t Ut vassalli et principes im« 
peril. Cochloeus, 192. § Sie wolie sehen, ob sie I. M. gehop- 

Bam leisten oder aicht. Corp. Ref. 2. 108. || Clericaliter, de^ 

tonso capillo. Zw. Epp. 2. 471. Nudo capita sub meridiani solw 
«(.rdoribu8. PiUavicini, 1. 228. 



THE PROCESSION OF CORPUS CHEISTI. 167 

fatigues, Charles desired to profess aloud his faith in 
"what constitutes the essence of Roman-catholicism. In 
proportion as the spirit and the life had escaped from 
the primitive churches, they had striven to replace them 
by forms, shows, and ceremonies. The essential cause 
of the Romish worship is found in that decline of charity 
and faith which catholic Christians of the first ages have 
often deplored ; and the history of Rome is summed up 
in this expression of St. Paul : " Having a form of godli- 
ness, but denying the power thereof." 2 Tim. 3 : 5. 
But as the power was then beginning to revive in the 
church, the form began also to decline. Barely a hun- 
dred citizens of Augsburg had joined in the procession 
of the 16th of June. It was no longer the pomp of 
former times : the Christian people had learned anew to 
love and to believe. 

Charles, however, under an air of devotion concealed 
a wounded heart. The legate was less able to command 
himself, and said aloud that this obstinacy of the princes 
would be the cause of great mischief to the pope.* 
When the procession was over — it had lasted an hour — 
Charles could no longer master his extreme irritation; 
and he had scarcely returned to his palace, when he 
declared that he would give the Protestant princes a 
Bafe-conduct, and that on the very next day these obsti- 
nate and relDellious men should quit Augsburg ;f the 
diet would then take such resolutions as were required 
for the safety of the church and of the empire. It was 
no doubt the legate who had given Charles this idea, 
which, if executed, would infallibly have led to a relig- 
ious war. But some of the princes of the Roman party, 
desirous of preserving peace, succeeded, though not 
without difficulty, in getting the emperor to withdraw 
his threatening order.J 

* Sarpi, Council of Trent, 1. 99. f Ut mox altera die, cum 
Balvo-conductu, Lutherani abirent domum. Cochl. p. 193. 

X Pacis et concordise avidi, supplicarunt ejus majestati ut sedate 
Ira. , . Ibid. 



168 filSXOtlY OP tHS 5,£P0&ltA.II0R. 



CHAPTER V. 

l!ke sermons prohibited — Compromise proposed and accepted — ^T*he 
herald — Curiosity of the citizens — The new preachers — Th6 
medley of Popery — Luther encourages the princes — Veni Spir- 
itus — Mass of the Holy Ghost — The sermon — Opening of the 
diet — The elector's prayer — Insidious plan of the Romanista— 
Valdez and Melanothon — No public discussion — Evangelical 
firmness prevails. 

Charles, being defeated on the subject of the proces- 
sion, resolved to take his revenge on the assemblies, for 
nothing galled him like these sermons. The crowd 
ceased not to fill the vast church of the Franciscans, 
where a Zwinglian minister of lively and penetrating 
eloquence was preaching on the book of Joshua.* He 
placed the kings of Canaan and the children of Israel 
before them : his congregation heard them speak and 
saw them act, and every one recognized in the kings of 
Canaan the emperor and the ultra-montane princes, and 
in the people of God the adherents of the Reformation. 
In consequence, his hearers quitted the church enthusi- 
astic in their faith, and filled with the desire of seeing 
the abominations of the idolaters fall to the ground. On 
the 16th of June, the Protestants deliberated on Charles' 
demand, and it was rejected by the majority. " It is 
only a scarecrow," said they ; " the Papists only desire 
to see if the nail shakes in the wall, and if they can start 
the hare from the thicket." 

The next morning, June 17, before breakfast, the 
princes replied to the emperor. " To forbid our minis* 
ters to preach purely the holy gospel would be rebellion 
against God, who wills not that his word be bound. 
Poor sinners that we are, we have need of this divine 
word to surmount our troubles.f Moreover, his majesty 

* Maximus populi concursus amplissima aede. Cochl. 193. 
t Nec se illo animae nutrimento carere. Caelestinus, Hist. Comit 
1. 88 J Forst. Urkunden, 1. 283. 



A COMPEOlill^E ViSiOTOUtD. 169 



has declared, that in this diet each doctrine should be 
examined with impartiality. Now, to order us hence- 
forward to suspend the sermons, would be to condemn 
ours beforehand." 

Charles immediately convoked the other temporal 
and spiritual princes, who arrived at midday at the 
palatine palace, and remained sitting until the even- 
ing ;* the discussion was exceedingly animated. " This 
very morning," said some of the speakers, the Protes- 
tant princes, as they quitted the emperor, had sermons 
delivered in public."f Exasperated at this new affront, 
Charles with diflBculty contained himself. Some of the 
princes, however, entreated him to accept their media- 
tion, to which he consented ; but the Protestants were 
immovable. Did these heretics, whom they imagined 
to reduce so easily, appear in Augsburg only to humili- 
ate Charles ? The honor of the chief of the empire must 
be saved at any cost. Let us ourselves renounce our 
preachers," said the princes ; "the Protestants will not 
then persist in keeping theirs." 

The committee accordingly proposed that the empe- 
ror should set aside both Papist and Lutheran preachers, 
and should nominate a few chaplains, with authority to 
announce the pure word of God without attacking either 
of the two parties.^ " They shall be neutral men," said 
they to the Protestants ; " neither Faber nor his parti- 
sans shall be admitted." " But they will condemn our 
doctrine." " By no means. The preacher shall do noth- 
ing but read the text of the gospels, epistles, and a 
general confession of sins."§ The evangelical states 
required time to reflect upon it. 

" We must accept it," said Melancthon ; tor if our 
obstinacy should lead the emperor to refuse hearing our 
confession, the evil would be greater still." 

* Usesar a meridie. Seek. 165. Den gangen Tag. Corp. Ref. 
2. 113. t Eo ipso die conciones continuatse. Seckend. 105. 

X Csesare omnes tain papistarum quam evangelicorum concionea 
Corp Ref. 2. 116. 

§ Qui tantum recitent Evangelium et epistolam yftof^TuUif 
Cbid. 119. 

UiA^iKaL IT 



170 ttlsTORY OF THE REPORMATIOIT. 



'*We are called to Augsburg," said Agricoia, "tc 
give an account of our doctrine, and not to preach.''* 

" There is no little disorder in the city,'' remarked 
Spalatin. " The sacramentarians and enthusiasts preach 
here as well as we : we must get out of this confusion." 

" What do the Papists propose said other theolo- 
gians ; " to read the gospels and epistles without expla- 
nation. But is not that a victory ? What, we protest 
against the interpretations of the church ; and lo, priests 
who are to read the word of God without their notes 
and commentaries ; that is to say, transforming them- 
selves into Protestant ministers !" " Oh, admirable wis 
dom of the courtiers !" exclaimed Melancthon, smiling.')' 

To these motives were added the opinions of the 
lawyers. As the emperor ought to be considered the 
rightful magistrate of an imperial city, so long as he ^ 
made it his residence, all jurisdiction in Augsburg really 
belonged to him. 

" Well, then," said the Protestant princes, ** we agree 
to silence our preachers, in the hope that we shall hear 
nothing offensive to our consciences. If it were other- 
wise, we should feel ourselves constrained to repel so 
Berious an insult." J Besides," added the elector, as he 
withdrew, " we expect that if at any time we desire to 
hear one of our chaplains in our own palace, we shall 
be free to do so."§ 

They hastened to the emperor, who desired nothing 
better than to come to an understanding with the Prot- 
estants on this subject, and who ratified every thing. 

This was Saturday. An imperial herald was imme- 
diately sent out, who, parading the streets of the city 
at seven in the evening to the sound of trumpets, || made 
the following proclamation : " 0 yes, 0 yes Thus 
ordains his imperial majesty, our most gracious lord : 

* Nou sumus parochi Augustanorum, added he. Corp. Ref. 2. 
119 t Vide miram sapientiam Aulicorum. Ibid. J Ut de 
remediiB propulsandae injurise cogitent. Seek. 2. 105. ^ Ob je 
Einer einen Prediger in seiner Herberg fiir sich predigen liess. 
Corp. Ref. 2. 113 || Per tubicines et heraldum. StormiuB, 
Epp. p. 466. V Hort, Hort! Corp. Ref. 2. 124. 



OtTRIOSlTY OF THE CITIZENS. 



lU 



No one shall be allowed to preach in Augsburg except 
by his majesty's nomination, under penalty of incurring 
the displeasure and punishment of his majesty." 

A thousand different remarks were exchanged in the 
houses of the citizens of Augsburg. We are very im- 
patient," said they, " to see the preachers appointed by 
the emperor, and who will preach — 0 unprecedented 
wonder I — neither against the evangelical doctrine nor 
against the doctrine of the pope."* We must expect," 
added another, " to behold some tragelaph, or some chi- 
mera with the head of a lion, a goat's body, and a drag- 
on's tail."f The Spaniards appeared well satisfied with 
this agreement, for many of them had never heard a 
single sermon in their lives ; it was not the custom in 
Spain; but Zwingle's friends were filled with indigna- 
tion and alarm.J 

At length Sunday, the 19th of June, arrived ; every 
one hastened to the churches, and the people who filled 
them, with eyes fixed on the priest and with attentive 
ears,§ prepared to listen to what these new and strange 
preachers would say.|| It was generally believed that 
their task would be to make an evangelico-papistical 
discourse, and they were very impatient to hear tliis 
marvel. But 

"The mountain in labor gave birth to a mouse." 

The preacher first read the common prayer ; he then 
added the gospel of the day, finished with a general 
confession of sins, and dismissed his congregation. Peo- 
ple looked at one another in surprise : Verily," said 
they, " here is a preacher that is neither Gospeller nor 
Papist, but strictly textual."^ At last all burst into 

* Omnes hunc avidissime expectant. Corp. Ref. 2. 116. 

t Chimaeram aut Tragelaphum aliquem expectamus. Ibid. The 
tragelaph is a fabulous animal partaking of the nature of a goat 
and a stag. Representations of it were common on drinking-bowla 
and gablets among the ancient Greeks. J Multos deterreat 

Sturm to Zwingle, Epp. p. 466. § Arrectis auribus. Corp. 

Eef. 2. 116. II Quid novi novus concionator allaturus sit. 

Ibid 117. ^ Sic babes concionatorem neque evangclioaa 

neque papisticum, sed nudum textualem. Ibid. 



m HTarOHY OP THE REPORliATION. 



laughter "and truly," adds Brentz, "there was reason 
enough."* In some churches, however, the chaplains, 
after reading the gospel, added a few puerile words, 
void of Christianity and of consolation, and in no way 
founded on the holy Scripture.f 

After the so-called sermon, they proceeded to th6 
mass. That in the cathedral was particularly noisy 
The emperor was not present, for he was accustomed to 
sleep until nine or ten o'clock, J and a late mass was 
performed for him ; but Ferdinand and many of the 
princes were present. The pealing notes of the organ, 
the resounding voices of the choir, echoed through the 
minster, and a numerous and motley crowd, rushing in 
at all the doors, filled the aisles of the temple. One 
might have said that every nation in the world had 
agreed to meet in the cathedral of Augsburg. Here 
were Frenchmen, there Spaniards, Moors in one place, 
Moriscos in another, on one side Italians, on the other 
Turks, and even, says Brentz, those who are called Stra- 
tiots.§ This crowd was no bad representation of the 
medley of popery. 

One priest alone, a fervent Romanist, dared to oflfer 
an apology for the mass in the church of the Holy Cross. 
Charles, wishing to maintain his authority, had him 
thrown into the Grayfriar's prison, whence they con- 
trived to let him escape. As for the evangelical pastors 
of Augsburg, almost all left the city to hear the gospel 
elsewhere. The Protestant princes were anxious to 
secure for their churches the assistance of such distin- 
guished men. Discouragement and alarm followed close 
upon this step, and even the firmest were moved. The 
elector was inconsolable at the privation imposed upon 
him by the emperor. " Our Lord God," said he, heaving 

• Rident omnes, et certe res valde ridicula est. Corp. Ref. 2. 117. 

t Paucula quaedam, eaque paerillia et inepta, nee Christian^, 
absque fundamento verbi Divini et coQSolatione. Seek. 2. 165. 

X Dormire solet usque ad nonam aut decimam. Corp Ref. 2. 117. 

§ Ibi videas hie Gallos, hie Hispanos, hie Ethiopes, iUie etiaiD 
fithlopissas, hie Italos, iUic etiam Tureas, aut quos voeant Stiati- 
ota& Ibid. 



ELATION OF THE PAPISTS. 



173 



a deep sigh, has received an order to be silent at the 
diet of Augsburg."* From that time forward Luther 
lost the good opinion he had previously entertained of 
Charles, and foreboded the stormiest future. See what 
will be the end of all this," said he. " The emperor, who 
has ordered the elector to renounce the assemblies, will 
afterwards command him to renounce the doctrine ; the 
diet will enter upon its paroxysm, and nothing will re- 
main for us but to rely upon the arm of the Lord." Then 
giving way to all his indignation, he added, *'The papists, 
abandoned to devils, are transported with rage ; and to 
live, they must drink blood.f They wish to give them- 
selves an air of justice by giving us one of obstinacy. 
At Augsburg you have not to deal with men, but with 
the very gates of hell." Melancthon himself saw his 
hopes vanish. " All, except the emperor," said he, " hate 
us with the most violent hatred. The danger is great, 

very greatj Pray to Christ that he may save us." 

But Luther, however full of sorrow he might be, far from 
being cast down, raised his head and endeavored to re- 
animate the courage of his brethren. Be assured and 
doubt not," wrote he to them, that you are the confes- 
sors of Jesus Christ, and the ambassadors of the great 
King."§ 

They had need of these thoughts, for their adversa- 
ries, elated by this first success, neglected nothing that 
might destroy the Protestants, and taking another step 
forward, proposed forcing them to be present at the 
Romish ceremonies. || The elector of Saxony," said the 
legate to Charles, " ought in virtue of his office of grand- 
marshal of the empire to carry the sword before you in 
all the ceremonies of the diet. Order him therefore to 
perform his duty at the mass of the Holy Ghost, which 
is to open the sittings." The emperor did so immedi- 
ately, and the elector, uneasy at this message, called 

♦ Hac ratioae, Deo ejusque verbo silentium est impositum. Seek. 
2. 165. t Ut nisi sanguinem biberint, vivere non possint. Ibid. 

X Magnum omnino periculum est. Corp. Ref. 2. 118. § Ea 
fides vivificabit et consolabitur vos, quia Magni Regis estis legati- 
L. Epp. 4. 69. 0 Sarpi, Hist. Council of Trent, book 1. 99. 



174 HlSXOBY OF THE HEFORMATIOB 



together bis theoU gians. If he refused, his dignity would 
be taken away ; /md if he obeyed, he would trample hia 
faith under foot, thought he, and would do dishonor to 
the gospel. 

But the Lutheran divines removed the scruples of 
their prince. '' It is for a ceremony of the empire," said 
they, "as grand-marshal, and not as a Christian, that 
you 3iTe summoned ; the word of God itself, in the his- 
tory of Naaraan, authorizes you to comply with this 
invitation."* 2 Kings 5 : 18. The friends of Zwingle 
did not think so ; their walk was more decided than that 
of Wittemberjj. " The martyrs allowed themselves to 
be put to death," said they, " rather than burn a grain 
of incense before the idols." Even some of the Protes- 
tants, hearing that the Veni Spiritus was to be sung, 
said, wagging their heads, "We are very much afraid 
that the chariot of the Spirit, which is the word of God, 
having been taken away by the Papists, the Holy Ghost, 
despite their mass, will never reach Augsburg."*}* Nei- 
ther these fears nor these objections were listened to. 

On Monday, the 20th of June, the emperor and his 
brother, with the electors and princes of the empire, 
having entered the cathedral, took their seats on the 
right side of the choir ; on the left were placed the le- 
gate, the archbishops, and bishops; in the middle were 
the ambassadors. Without the choir, in a gallery that 
overlooked it, were ranged the landgrave and other Prot- 
estants, who preferred being at a distance from the host.J 
The elector, bearing the sword, remained upright near 
the altar at the moment of the adoration. The acolytes, 
having closed the gates of the choir immediately after, § 
Vincent Pompinello, archbishop of Salerno, preached the 
sermon. He commenced with the Turks and their ra^ 
e,ges, and then, by an unexpected turn, began suddenly 

• Exemplo Naamanis. Seek. 2. 167 ; Sarpi, p. 99. f Ne 

B.blato Spiritus vehiculo, quod est verbum Dei, Spiritus Sanctus ad 
Augustam prae pedum imbecillitate pervenire non possit. Corp. Bel. 
2. 116. t Abstinondo ab adoratioae hostise. Seek. 2. 119. 

§ Eraat enim chori fores elausae, nee quisquam orationi interfuit. 
Corp. Ref. 2. 120. 



Tii£ SPIRIT OF POPERT. 



175 



to exalt the Turks even above the Germans "The 
Turks," said he, have but one prince whom they obey ; 
but the Germans have many who obey no one. The 
Turks live under one sole law, one only custom, one 
only religion ; but among the Germans there are some 
who are always wishing for new laws, new customs, 
new religions. They tear the seamless coat of Christ ; 
they abolish by devilish inspirations the sacred doctrines 
established by unanimous consent, and substitute for 
them, alas, buffoonery and obscenity.* Magnanimous 
emperor, powerful king," said he, turning towards 
Charles and his brother, sharpen your swords, wield 
them against these perfidious disturbers of religion, and 
thus bring them back into the fold of the church.f There 
is no peace for Germany so long as the sword shall not 
have entirely eradicated this heresy.^ 0 St. Peter and 
St. Paul, I call upon you : upon you, St. Peter, in order 
that you may open the stony hearts of these princes with 
your keys ; and upon you, St. Paul, that if they show 
themselves too rebellious, you may come with your 
sword, and cut in pieces this unexampled hardness." 

This discourse, intermingled with panegyrics of Aris- 
tides, Themistocles, Scipio, Cato, the Curtii, and Scaevola, 
being concluded, the emperor and princes arose to make 
their offerings. Pappenheim returned the sword to the 
elector, who had intrusted it to him ; and the grand- 
marshal, as well as the margrave, went to the offertory, 
but with a smile, as it is reported. § This fact is but 
little in harmony with the character of these princes. 

At length they quitted the cathedral. No one, ex- 
cept the friends of the nuncio, was pleased with the ser- 
mon. Even the archbishop of Mentz was offended at it, 
•* What does he mean," exclaimed he, by calling on St, 
Paul to cut down the Germans with his sword ?" Noth- 

* Diabolica persuasioae eliminaat, et ad scurrilia ac impudica 
quceque deducunt. Pallavicini, Hist. Trid. C. 1. 23. f Exacuaat 
gladios quos in perversos illos perturbatores. Corp. Ref. 2. 120. 

t Nisi eradicata funditus per gladium hieresi ilia. Ibid. 

^ Protestaates etiam ad ofiferandum munuscula ia altari, ui mo 
HB erat, acoessisse, sed cum risu. Spalat. Seek. 2. 167. 



176 HISTORY OF THE REFOEMATIOK. 



ing Imt a few inarticulate sounds had been heard in tiba 
nave ; the Protestants eagerly questioned those of their 
party who had been present in the choir. " The more 
these priests inflame people's minds, and the more they 
urge their princes to bloody wars/' said Brentz at that 
time, the more we must hinder ours from giving way 
to violence."* Thus spoke a minister of the gospel of 
peace after the sermon of the priests of Rome. 

After the mass of the Holy Ghost, the emperor en- 
tered his carriage, f and having reached the town-hall, 
where the sittings of the diet were to take place, took 
his seat on a throne covered with cloth of gold, while 
his brother placed himself on a bench in front of him j 
then all around them were ranged the electors, forty- 
two sovereign princes, the deputies from the cities, the 
bishops, and ambassadors; forming, indeed, that illus- 
trious assembly which Luther, six weeks before, had 
imagined he saw sitting in the air.J 

The count-palatine read the imperial proposition. It 
referred to two points : the war against the Turks, and 
the religious controversy. " Sacrificing my private inju- 
ries and interests to the common good," said the empe- 
ror^ "I have quitted my hereditary kingdoms, to pass, 
not without great danger, into Italy, and from thence to 
Germany. I have heard with sorrow of the divisions 
that have broken out here, and which, striking not only 
at the imperial majesty, but still more at the command- 
ments of Almighty God, must engender pillage, confla^ 
gration, war, and death."§ At one o'clock the em- 
peror, accompanied by all the princes, returned to hie 
palace. 

On the same day the elector gathered around him all 
his coreligionists, whom the emperor's speech had great- 
ly excited, and exhorted them not to be turned aside by 
a.ny threats from a cause which was that of God him* 

* Ut nostros principes ab importuna violentia retineamus. Corp 
Bef. 2. 120. t Imperator cum omnibus in curiam vectus est. 

Sturm to Zw. Epp. 2 430. J Ex volucrum monedularumquti 

regno. L. Epp. 4. 13. § Nicht andersdann su Eaubj Brandy 
und Krieg. F. Urkunden, 1. 307. 



THE ELECTOR'S PEATER. 



177 



self.* All seemed penetrated with this expression of 
Scripture : " Speak the word, and it shall not stand ; for 
God is with us.'- Isa. 8:10. 

The elector had a heavy burden to bear. Not only 
had he to walk at the head of the princes, but he had 
further to defend himself against the enervating influ- 
ence of Melancthon. Throughout the whole of the diet 
this prince offers to our notice no mere abstraction of 
the state, but the noblest individuality. Early on Tues- 
day morning, feeling the necessity of that invisible 
strength which, according to a beautiful figure in the 
holy Scriptures, causes us to ride upon the high places 
of the earth ; and seeing, as was usual, his domestics, 
his councillors, and his son assembled around him, John 
begged them affectionately to withdraw.f He knew 
that it was only by kneeling humbly before God that 
he could stand with courage before Charles. Alone in 
his chamber, he opened and read the Psalms ; then fall- 
ing on his knees, he offered up the most fervent prayer 
to God ;| next, wishing to confirm himself in the im- 
movable fidelity that he had just vowed to the Lord, he 
went to his desk, and there committed his resolutions to 
writing. Dolzig and Melancthon afterwards saw these 
lines, and were filled with admiration as they read 
them.§ 

Being thus tempered anew in heavenly thoughts, 
John took up the imperial proposition, and meditated 
over it ; then, having called in his son and the chancel- 
lor Bruck, and Melancthon shortly after, they all agreed 
that the deliberations of the diet ought to commence 
with the affairs of religion ; and his allies, who were 
consulted, concurred in this advice. 

The legate had conceived a plan diametrically op' 
posed to this. He desired to stifle the religious ques- 
tion, and for this end required that the princes should ex* 

* Cohortatus est ad intrepidam causae Dei assentionem. Seck- 
end. 2. 108, f Mane remotis omnibus consiliariis et minis- 

trie. Ibid. 169. X Precibus ardentisfiimis a Deo successum 

negotii petiisset. Ibid § Quae cum admiratione leginee di 

cuntur. Ibid. 



178 HISTORY OF THE . REFORMATION. 



amine it in a secret committee.* The evangelical Chri» 
tians entertained no doubt that if the truth was pro- 
claimed in the great council of the nation, it would gain 
the victory ; but the more they desired a public confea* 
sion, the more it was dreaded by the pope's frienda 
The latter wished to take their adversaries by silence^ 
without confession, without discussion, as a city is takcD 
by famine without fighting and without a storm : to gag 
the Reformation, and thus reduce it to powerlessiiess 
and death, were their tactics. To have silenced the 
preachers was not enough ; the princes must be silenced 
also. They wished to shut up the Reformation as in a 
dungeon, and there leave it to die, thinking they would 
thus get rid of it more surely than by leading it to the 
scaffold. 

This plan was well conceived : it now remained co 
be put in execution, and for that purpose it was neceB- 
sary to persuade the Protestants that such a method 
would be the surest for them. The person selected for 
this intrigue was Alphonso Yaldez, secretary to Charles 
v., a Spanish gentleman, a worthy individual, and who 
afterwards showed a leaning towards the Reformation. 
Policy often makes use of good men for the most perfidi- 
ous designs. It was decided that Valdez should address 
the most timid of the Protestants, Melancthon. 

On the 16th or 11th of June, immediately after the 
arrival of Charles, Valdez begged Melancthon to call on 
him. " The Spaniards," said he, " imagine that the Lu- 
therans teach impious doctrines on the Holy Trinity, on 
Jesus Christ, on the blessed mother of God.f Accord- 
ingly, they think they do a more meritorious work in 
killing a Lutheran than in slaying a Turk." 

I know it," replied Melancthon, " and I have not 
yet been able to succeed in making your fellow-country- 
men abandon that idea." 

But what, pray, do the Lutherans desire ?" 

♦ Si acturi sunt secreto et inter sese, nulla publica dlBpatationt 
ve\ audientia. L. Epp. 4. 43. f Hispanis persuasum esse Lqp 
theranos impid de Sanctiseima Tiinitate. .... ibc relatloiie 8|A 
tftti in Seek. 2. 16^. 



1 SECRET CONFEEENCB. 



17» 



"The Lutheran question is not so complicated and 
fio unseemly as his majesty fancies. We do not attack 
the Catholic church, as is commonly believed and the 
whole controversy is reducible to these three points: 
the two kinds in the sacrament of tbe Lord's sup- 
per, the marriage of pastors, and the abolition of pri 
rate masses. If we could agree on these articles, it 
would be easy to come to an understanding on the 
others." 

Well, I will report this to his majesty.'* 
Charles V. was charmed at this communication. 
" Go," said he to Valdez, " and impart these things to 
the legate, and ask Master Philip to transmit to you in 
writing a short exposition of what they believe and 
what they deny." 

Valdez hastened to Campeggio. "What you relate 
pleases me tolerably," said the latter. " As for the two 
kinds in the sacrament, and the marriage of priests, 
there will be means of accommodation ;f but we cannot 
consent to the abolition of private masses." This would 
have been in fact cutting off one of the greatest revenues 
of the church. 

On Saturday, June 18, Valdez saw Melancthon again. 
"The emperor begs of you a moderate and concise 
exposition," said he, " and he is persuaded that it will 
be more advantageous to treat of this matter briefly 
and privately,! avoiding all public hearing and all 
prolix discussion, which would only engender anger 
and division." " Well," said Melancthon, " I will reflect 
upon it." 

Melancthon was almost won over ; a secret confer- 
ence agreed better with his disposition. Had he not 
often repeated that peace should be sought after above 
all things? Thus every thing induced the legate to 
hope that a public struggle would be avoided, and that 

* Non adeo per eos Ecclesiam Catholicam oppugnari, quam 
vulgo putaretur. Ex relatione Spalati in Seek. 2. 100. f Mii 

beider Grcstalt Sacramenis oder der Pfaffen und Monch Ehe. Corp. 
Ref. 2. 123. I Die Sache Iq eiaer Ea^ ind Stille yonanehiiieQ. 



180 HISTOUY OF THE EE FORMATION. 



he might be content as it were to send mutes against 

the reform, and strangle it in a dungeon.* 

Fortunately the chancellor and the elector Frederick 
did not think fit to entertain the propositions with which 
Charles had commissioned the worthy Valdez. The reso- 
lution of these lay-members of the church saved it from 
the false step its doctors were about to take, and the 
wiles of the Italians failed against evangelical firmness 
Melancthon was only permitted to lay the Confession 
before the Spaniard, that he might look into it, and in 
despite of the moderation employed in it, Valdez exclaim- 
ed, These words are too bitter, and your adversaries 
will never put up with them.^'f Thus finished the le- 
gate's manoeuvre. 

* Co&lestia. Hist. Comit. August, p. 193. Intelligo hoc tq¥c ipx**" 
pioc moliri, ut omnino nihil agatur de negotiis ecclesiasticis. Corp. 
Ret 2. 57. t Ac plane putarit niKport^.^ esse quam at ferre poe 
esnt adTersarii Ibid. HO. 



TH£ ELECTOE'S ZEAL. 



181 



CHAPTER VI. 

The elector's zeal — Tne signing oi the Confession — Ccurage of the 
princes — Melancthon's weakness — The legate's speech — Delajn 
—The Confession in danger — The Protestants are firm — Melan<y 
thoQ^B despondency — Luther's prayer and anxiety — Luther'a 
texts — His letter to Melancthon — ^Faith. 

Charles, compelled to resign himself to a public sit- 
ting, ordered, on Wednesday, the 22d of June, that the 
elector and his allies should have their Confession ready 
for the ensuing Friday. The Roman party were also 
invited to present a confession of faith ; but they excused 
themselves, saying that they were satisfied with the edict 
of Worms. 

The emperor's order took the Protestants by sur- 
prise, for the negotiations between Yaldez and Melanc- 
thon had prevented the latter from putting the finishing 
stroke to the Confession. It was not copied out fair ; 
and the conclusions, as well as the exordium, were not 
definitively drawn up. In consequence of this, the Prot- 
estants begged the archbishop of Mentz to obtain for 
them the delay of a day ; but their petition was refused.* 
They therefore labored incessantly, even during th« 
night, to correct and transcribe the Confession. 

On Thursday, the 23d of June, all the Protestant 
princes, deputies, councillors, and theologians met early 
at the elector^s. The Confession was read in German, 
and all gave their adhesion to it, except the landgrave 
and the Strasburgers, who required a change in the 
article on the sacrament.f The princes rejected their 
demand. 

The elector of Saxony was already preparing to sign 
it, when Melancthon stopped him ; he feared giving too 
political a coloring to this religious business. In his 

• Dasselbige abgeschlagen. Corp. Ref. 2. 127. f Argentl- 
nenses ambierunt aliquid at excepto articulo sacrament! susr^lparei^ 
tv. Ibid. 166. 



182 HISTORY OF THE REFORAiATIOH. 



idea it was the church that shouli appear, and not the 
Qtate. " It is for the theologians and ministers to pro 
pose »these things,"* said he ; " let us reserve for other 
matters the authority of the mighty ones of the earth.'' 
God forbid that you should exclude me,'' replied the 
elector; "I am resolved to do v^hat is right without 
troubling myself about my crovm. I desire to confess 
the Lord. My elect-oral hat and my ermine are not so 
precious to me as the cross of Jesus Christ. I shall 
leave on earth these marks of my greatness ; but my 
Master's cross will accompany me to heaven." 

How resist such Christian language? Melancthon 
gave way. 

The elector then approached, signed, and handed the 
pen to the landgrave, who at first made some objections ; 
however the enemy was at the door ; was this a time for 
disunion? At last he signed, but with a declaration 
that the doctrine of the Eucharist did not please him.f 

The margrave and Luneburg having joyfully sub- 
scribed their names, Anhalt took the pen in his turn, and 
Baid, " I have tilted more than once to please others ; 
now, if the honor of my Lord Jesus Christ requires it, I 
am ready to saddle my horse, to leave my goods and 
life behind, and rush into eternity, towards an everlast- 
ing crown." Then, having signed, this youthful prince 
said, turning to the theologians, "I would rather re- 
nounce my subjects and my states, rather quit the coun- 
try of my fathers staff in hand, rather gain my bread by 
cleaning the shoes of the foreigner, than receive any 
other doctrine than that which is contained in this Con- 
fession.'' Nuremberg and Reutlingen alone of the cities 
subscribed their signatures ;| and all resolved on demand- 
ing of the emperor that the Confession should be read 
publicly.§ 

* Non principum nomine edi sed docentium, qui theologi vocan- 
tar. Gamer. 120. f Landgravius subscribit nobiscum, sed tamen 
dicit sibi de sacramento a nostris non satisfieri. Corp. Ref. 2. 166. 

t Confession! tantum subscripserunt Nuremberga et Reutlingen. 
Ibid. § Decretum est ut publicse reoitandiB concMsio ab Iny 
peratore peteretur. Seek. 2. 160. 



COtTBAOE OF THE PRINCES. 



183 



The courage of the princes surprised every one. 
Rome had crushed the members of the church, and had 
reduced them to a herd of slaves, whom she dragged 
silent and humiliated behind her ; the Reformation en- 
franchised them, and with their rights it restored to 
them their duties. The priest no longer enjoyed the 
monopoly of religion ; each head of a family again be- 
came priest in his own house, and all the members of 
the church of God were thenceforward called to the 
rank of confessors. The laymen are nothing, or almost 
nothing, in the sect of Rome, but they are the essential 
portion of the church of Jesus Christ. Wherever the 
priestly spirit is established, the church dies ; wherever 
laymen, as these Augsburg princes, understand their 
duty and their immediate dependence on Christ, the 
church lives. 

The evangelical theologians were moved by the de- 
votedness of the princes. " When I consider their firm- 
ness in the confession of the gospel," said Brentz, the 
color mounts to my cheeks. What a disgrace that we, 
who are only beggars beside them, are so afraid of con- 
fessing Christ."* Brentz was then thinking of certain 
towns, particularly of Halle, of which he was pastor, 
but no doubt also of the theologians. 

The latter, in truth, without being deficient in devot- 
edness, were sometimes, wanting in courage. Melano- 
thon was in constant agitation ; he ran to and fro, slip- 
ping in everywhere, says Cochloeus in his Philippics, 
visiting not only the houses and mansions of private 
persons, but also insinuating himself into the palaces of 
cardinals and princes, nay, even into the court of the 
emperor; and whether at table or in conversation, he 
spared no means of persuading every person, that noth- 
bg was more easy than to restore peace between the 
two parties.f 

One day he was with the archbishop of Salzburg, 
who in a long discourse gave an eloquent description of 

* Robore Buffundor non mediocri, quod nos, prae illis mendici, 
ate. Corp. Ref. 2. 125. -| Cuisitabat bine inde^ perreptans ao 
penetraaa. CochL Pbil. 4. in Apol, 



184 



HISTORf OF THE REFORMATION 



the troubles produced, as he said, by the Reformationi 
and ended with a peroration " written in blood,*^ as Me* 
lancthon characterized it.* Philip in agony had ven- 
tured during the conversation to slip in the word con- 
science "Conscience," hastily interrupted the arch- 
bishop, " conscience I What does that mean ? I teU 
you plainly that the emperor will not allow confusion to 
be thus brought upon the empire." "Had I been in 
Melancthon's place," said Luther, " I should have imme- 
diately replied to the archbishop. And our Emperor, 
ours, will not tolerate such blasphemy." "Alas," said 
Melancthon, " they are as full of assurance as if there 
was no God."f 

Another day Melancthon was with Campeggio, and 
conjured him to persevere in the moderate sentiments 
he appeared to entertain. And at another time, as it 
would seem, he was with the emperor himself;^ " Alas," 
said the alarmed Zwinglians, " after having qualified one 
half of the gospel, Melancthon is sacrificing the other."§ 

The wiles of the Ultramontanists were added to Phil- 
ip's dejection, in order to arrest the courageous proceed- 
ings of the princes. Friday, the 24th of June, was the 
day fixed for reading the Confession, but measures were 
taken to prevent it. The sitting of the diet did not begin 
till three in the afternoon ; the legate was then announc- 
ed ; Charles went to meet him as far as the top of the 
grand staircase, and Campeggio, taking his seat in front 
of the emperor, in king Ferdinand^s place, delivered a 
harangue in Ciceronian style. " Never," said he, " has 
St. Peter's bark been so violently tossed by such various 
waves, whirlwinds, and abysses. || The holy father has 
learned these things with pain, and desires to drag the 
church from these frightful gulfs. For the love of Jesus 
Clu:ist, for the safety of your country and for your own, 

* Addebat Epilogum plane sanguine scriptum. Corp. Ref. 2. 126. 

{ Securi sunt quasi nullus sit Deus. Ibid. 166. J MelanC' 
thon a Caesare, Salisburgensi et Campegio vocatus est. Zw. Epp. 
2. 473. § Ut cum mitigarit tarn multa, cedat et reliqua. Ibid. 

II Neque unquam tam variis sectarum turbiuibus navicula Petit 
flootuaverit. Seek. 2. 169. 



THE EMPEROR'S REFUSAL. 



0 mighty prince, get rid of these errors, deliver Germa' 
ny, and save Christendom." 

After a temperate reply from Albert of Mentz, the 
legate quitted the town-hall, and the evangelical princes 
stood up ; but a fresh obstacle had been provided. Dep- 
uties from Austria, Carinthia, and Carniola, first received 
a hearing.* 

Much time had thus elapsed. The evangelical princes, 
however, rose up again, and the chancellor Bruck said, 
" It is pretended that new doctrines not based on Scrip- 
ture, that heresies and schisms are spread among the 
people by us. Considering that such accusations com- 
promise not only our good name, but also the safety of 
our souls,f we beg his majesty will have the goodnesfti 
to hear what are the doctrines we profess.'' 

The emperor, no doubt by arrangement with the le^ 
gate, made reply that it was too late ; besides, that thi? 
reading would be useless ; and that the princes should 
be satisfied with putting in their confession in writing 
Thus the mine, so skilfully prepared, worked admirably ; 
the Confession, once handed to the emperor, would be 
thrown aside, and the Reformation would be forced to 
retire without the Papists having even condescended to 
hear it, without defence, and overwhelmed with con- 
tumely. 

The Protestant princes, uneasy and agitated, insisted. 
" Our honor is at stake," said they ; " our souls are 
endangered.^ We are accused publicly; publicly we 
ought to answer." Charles was shaken ; Ferdinand 
leaned towards him, and whispered a few words in his 
ear :§ the emperor refused a second time. 

Upon this the elector and princes, in still greater 
alarm, said for the third time, with emotion and earnest* 
aess,[l " For the love of God, let us read our Confeseion 

• Oratio vald^ Ingubris et miserabilis contra Turcas. Corp. Re(, 
2. 154. t Verum etiam ad animse dispendium aut salut^m aeter- 
nam. Seek. 2 189. i Ihre Seele, Ehre und Glimpf belanget. 

Corp. Ref. 2. 128. § Viderant enim eum subinde aliquid illi in 
aorem insusurrare. Seek. 2. 169. || Zum dritWa mal heftig 

aagebaltea. Corp. Ref. 2. 128. 



186 



HISTORY OP THE REFORMATION. 



No person is insulted in it." Thus were seen, on tho 
one hand, a few faithful men desiring with loud cries to 
confess their faith ; and on the other, the great emperor 
of the west, surrounded by a crowd of cardinals, prel- 
ates, and princes, endeavoring to stifle the manifestation 
of the truth.* It was a serious, violent, and decisive 
Straggle, in which the holiest interests were discussed. 

At last Charles appeared to yield : His majesty 
grants your request," was the reply to the princes ; 
** but as it is now too late, he begs you to transmit him 
your written confession, and to-morrow, at two o'clock, 
the diet will be prepared to hear it read at the palatine 
palace." 

The princes were struck by these words, which, seem- 
ing to grant them every thing, in reality granted noth 
ing. In the first place, it was not in a public sitting at 
the town-hall, but privately in his own palace, that the 
emperor was willing to hear them ;f then they had no 
doubt that if the Confession left their hands it was all 
over with the public reading. They therefore remained 
firm. " The work has been done in great haste," said 
they, and it was the truth ; " pray leave it with us to^ 
night, that we may revise it." The emperor was obliged 
to yield, and the Protestants returned to their hotels full 
of joy ; while the legate and his friends, perceiving that 
the Confession was inevitable, saw the morrow approach 
with continually increasing anxiety. 

Among those who prepared to confess the evangel- 
ical truth, was one, however, whose heart was filled 
with sadness — it was Melancthon. Placed between two 
fires, he saw the reformed, and many even of his own 
friends, reproach his weakness ; while the opposite 
party detested what they called his hypocrisy. His 
friend Camerarius, who visited Augsburg about this 
time, often found him plunged in thought, uttering deep 
sighs, and shedding bitter tears.J Brentz, moved with 

• Circumcistebant Csesarem magao numero cardinales et praelati 
eccieeiastici. Seek. 2. 169. \ Non quidem public^ in prsetorio, 
■ed privatim in palatio suo. Corp. Ref. 2. 124. { Non mode 

•iiiq[»irantem Bed profundentem lacrymas coospexi. Camer. 121 



MELANCTHON'S DESPONDEKOl. 



187 



compassion, coming to the unhappy Philip, would sit 
down by his side and weep with him ;* and Jonas en- 
deavored to console him in another manner, by exhort- 
ing him to take the book of Psalms, and cry to God with 
all his heart, making use of David's words rather than 
of his own. 

One day intelligence arrived which formed a general 
topic of conversation in Augsburg, and which, by spread- 
ing terror among the partisans of the pope, gave a mo- 
mentary relief to Melancthon. It was said that a mule 
in Rome had given birth to a colt with crane's feet. 
"This prodigy," said Melancthon thoughtfully, "an- 
nounces that Rome is near its end ;"'|* perhaps because 
the crane is a bird of passage, and that the pope's 
mule thus gave signs of departure. Melancthon had 
immediately written to Luther, who replied that he was 
exceedingly rejoiced that God had given the pope so 
striking a sign of his approaching fall.J It is good to 
recall to memory these puerilities of the age of the 
reformers, that we may better understand the high 
range of these men of God in matters of faith. 

These idle Roman stories did not long console Me- 
lancthon. On the eve of the 25th of June, he was pres- 
ent in imagination at the reading of that Confession 
which he had drawn up, which was about to be pro- 
claimed before the world, and in which one word too 
many or too few might decide on the approbation or the 
hatred of the princes, on the safety or ruin of the Ref- 
ormation and of the empire. He could bear up no longer, 
and the feeble Atlas, crushed under the burden of the 
world upon his shoulders, gave utterance to a cry of 
anguish. "All my time here is spent in tears and 
mourning," wrote he to Vitus Diedrich, Luther's secre- 
tary in the castle of Coburg ;§ and on the morrow he 

• Brentius assidebat haec scribenti, una lacrymans. Corp. Ref. 
2. 126. t Romae quaedam mula peperit, et partus habuit pedes 

grois. Vides significari exitium Romae per scbismata. Ibid. 126. 

X Gaudeo Papse signum datum in mu\a puerpera, ut citiua pe- 
reat L. Epp. 4. 4. § Hie consumiter omne miiu tempua lu 

laorymis et luctu. Corp. Ref. 2. 126, 



188 HISTORY DF THE REFORMATIOH . 



wrote to Luther himself: " My dwelling is in perpetual 
tears.* My consternation is indescribable.f 0 my 
father, I do not wish my words to exaggerate my 
sorrows, but without your consolations, it is impossible 
for me to enjoy here the least peace." 

Nothing in fact presented so strong a contrast to 
Melancthon^s distrust and dejection, as the faith, calm- 
ness, and exultation of Luther. It was of advantage to 
him that he was not then in the midst of the Augsburg 
vortex, and to be able from his strong-hold to set his 
foot with tranquillity upon the rock of God^s promises. 
He was sensible himself of the value of this peaceful 
hermitage, as he called it. J "I cannot sufficiently ad- 
mire,'' said Vitus Diedrich, " the firmness, cheerfulness, 
and faith of this man, so astonishing in such cruel 
times." 

Luther, besides his constant reading of the word of 
6od,§ did not pass a day without devoting three hours 
at least to prayer, and they were hours selected from 
those the most favorable to study. || One day, as Die- 
drich approached the reformer's chamber, he heard his 
voice,^ and remained motionless, holding his breath, a 
few steps from the door. Luther was praying, and his 
prayer, said the secretary, was full of adoration, fear, 
and hope, as when one speaks to a friend or to a father.** 
" I know that thou art our Father and our God," said 
the reformer, alone in his chamber, " and that thou wilt 
scatter the persecutors of thy children, for thou art thy- 
self endangered with us. All this matter is thine, and 
it is only by thy constraint that we have put our hands 
to it. Defend us then, 0 Father." The secretary, mo- 
tionless as a statue, in the long gallery of the castle, 

* Versamur hie in miserrimis curis et plane perpetuis lacrymis. 
Corp. Ref. 2. 140. i Mira consternatio animorum nostrorum. lb. 

t Ex eremo tacita. L. Epp. 4. 51. It is thus he dates his letter. 

§ Assidue autem ilia diligentiore verbi Dei tractatione alit. 
CJorp. Ref. 2. 159. || Nullus abit dies, quin ut minimum trei 

horas easque studiis optimas in orationibus ponat. Ibid 

U Semel mihi contiglt ut orantem eum audirem. Ibid. 

** Tanta epe et fide ut cum patre et amico ooUoqui seutiat xu 



LUIHER'S ANXIETY. 189 

lost not one of the words that the clear and resounding 
voice of Luther bore to his ears.* The reformer was 
earnest with God, and called upon him with such unc- 
tion to accomplish his promises, that Diedrich felt his 
heart glow within him.f " Oh," exclaimed he, as he 
retired, "how could not these prayers but prevail in 
the desperate struggle at Augsburg !" 

Luther might also have allowed himself to be over- 
come with fear, for he was left in complete ignorance 
of what was taking place in the diet. A Wittemberg 
messenger, who should have brought him forests of let- 
ters, according to his own expression, having present- 
ed himself, " Do you bring any letters ?" asked Luther. 
"No." "How are those gentlemen T "Well." Lu- 
ther, grieved at such silence, returned and shut himself 
up in his chamber. 

Erelong there appeared a courier on horseback car- 
rying despatches from the elector to Torgau. " Do yon 
bring me any letters ?" asked Luther. " No." " How 
are those gentlemen ?" continued he, fearfully. " Well." 
" This is strange," thought the reformer. A wagon hav- 
ing left Coburg laden with flour — ^for they were almost 
in want of provisions at Augsburg — Luther impatiently 
awaited the return of the driver ; but he returned empty. 
Luther then began to revolve the gloomiest thoughts in 
his mind, not doubting that they were concealing some 
misfortune from him.J At last another individual, Jobst 
Nymptzen, having arrived from Augsburg, Luther rushed 
anew towards him, with his usual question : " Do you 
bring me any letters ?" He waited trembling for 
the reply. "No." "And how are those gentlemen?" 
" Well." The reformer withdrew, a prey to anger and 
to fear. 

Then Luther opened his Bible, and to console him- 
oelf for the silence of men, conversed with God. There 
were some passages of Scripture in particular that he 

* Turn orantem clara voce, procul stans, audivi. Corp. Ref. 2. 
169. t Ardebat mihi quoque animus singulari quodam impetjL 
Ibid. X Hie coepi cogitare tristia, suspirans tob aliquid mail 

me oelare velle. L. Epp. 4. 60. 



190 



HISTORY OF THE REiOEMATlON. 



read continually. We point them out below He did 
more ; he wrote with his own hand many declaraticM 
of Scripture over the doors and windows, and on the 
walls of the castle. In one place were these words from 
the 118th Psalm : " I shall not die, but live, and declare 
the works of the Lord." In another, those of the 12th 
chapter of Proverbs : " The way of the wicked seduceth 
them and over his bed, this passage from the 4th 
Psalm : ** I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep ; 
for thou, Lord, only makest me dwell in safety." Never 
perhaps did man so environ himself with the promises of 
the Lord, or so dwell in the atmosphere of his word and 
live by his breath, as Luther at Coburg. 

At length letters came. " If the times in which we 
live were not opposed to it, I should have imagined 
some revenge," wrote Luther to Jonas; "but prayer 
checked my anger, and anger checked my prayer.f I 
am delighted at that tranquil mind which God gives our 
prince. As for Melancthon, it is his philosophy that 
tortures him, and nothing else. For our cause is in the 
very hands of Him who can say with unspeakable dig- 
nity, * No one shall pluck it out of my hands.' I would 
not have it in our hands, and it would not be desirable 
that it were so.J I have had many things in my hands, 
and I have lost them all ; but whatever I have been able 
to place in God's, I still possess." 

On learning that Melancthon's anguish still contin- 
ued, Luther wrote to him; and these are words that 
should be preserved : 

"Grace and peace in Christ — ^in Christ, I say, and 

• 2 Tim. 3:12; Phil. 2:12,13; John 10:17, 18; Matt. 16:18; 
Fsa. 46:1, 2; lJohn4:4; Psa. 55:23; 27:14; John 16 : 33 ; Luke 
17:5; Psa. 32:11; 145: 18, 19 ; 91 : 14, 15; Sirach 2 : 11 ; 1 Mac 
2:61; Matt. 6:31; IPeter 5:6,7; Matt. 10:28; Rom. ch. 4, 6; 
Heb. ch. 6, 11; ISam. 4:18; 31:4-8; 2:30; 2Tim. 2:17, 18,19; 
1 : 12 ; Eph. 3 : 20, 21. Among these passages will be observed two 
verses taken from the Apocrypha, but whose equivalents might 
easily be found in the word of God. f Sed orandi tempus noo 
fiinebat irasci, et ira non sinebat orare. L. Epp. 4. 46. 

I Nec Tellem, neo consultum esset, in nostra manu etae. Ilu4- 



LUTHEE TO MELAWCTHOlf. 



191 



not in the world. Amen. I hate with exceeding hatred 
those extreme cares which consume you. If the cause 
is unjust, abandon it ; if the cause is just, why should 
we belie the promises of Him who commands us to sleep 
without fear? Can the devil do more than kill us? 
Christ will not be wanting to the work of justice and of 
touth. He lives, he reigns; what fear, then, can we 
have? God is powerful to upraise his cause if it is 
overthrown, to make it proceed if it remains motioa- 
less, and if we are not worthy of it, he will do it by 
others. 

"I have received your Apology,* and I cannot un- 
derstand what you mean when you ask what we must 
concede to the Papists. We have already conceded too 
much. Night and day I meditate on this affair, turning 
it over and over, diligently searching the Scriptures, and 
the conviction of the truth of our doctrine every day 
becomes stronger in my mind. With the help of God, I 
will not permit a single letter of all that we have said 
to be torn from us. 

" The issue of this affair torments you because you 
cannot understand it. But if you could, I would not 
have the least share in it. God has put it in a * common 
place,' that you will not find either in your rhetoric or in 
your philosophy : that place is called faith.f It is that 
in which subsist all things that we can neither under- 
stand nor see. Whoever wishes to touch them, as you 
do, will have tears for his sole reward. 

If Christ is not with us, where is he in the whole 
universe ? If we are not the church, where, I pray, is 
the church ? Is it the dukes of Bavaria, is it Ferdinand, 
is it the pope, is it the Turk, who is the church ? If we 
have not the word of God, who is it that possesses it ? 

" Only we must have faith, lest the cause of faith 
6hould be found to be without faith. J 

" If we fall, Christ falls with us, that is to say, the 

* The Confession revised and corrected. f Deus posuit eani 
in k)Oum quendam communem, quern in tua rhetorica non babes neo 
in philoBopbIa tua ; is vocatur fides. L. Epp. 4. 53. X TauiODi 
69i opm fide, ne causa fidei sit sine fide. Ibid. 6%, 



192 HISTOEY OF THE EEFOEMATIOH 



Master of the world. I would rather fall with Christi 

than remain standing with Cessar." 

Thus wrote Luther. The faith which animated him 
flowed from him like torrents of living water. He was 
indefatigable ; in a single day he wrote to Melancthon, 
Spalatin, Brentz, Agricola, and John Frederick, and they 
were letters full of life. He was not alone in praying, 
speaking, and believing. At the same moment, the 
evangelical Christians exhorted one another everywhere 
to prayer.* Such was the arsenal in which the weapons 
were forged that the confessors of Christ wielded before 
the diet of Augsburg. 

* Wittembergffi scribimt, tarn diligenter ibi Eeclesiam oraro. L 
Bpp. 4. 69. 



\ 



THE PALATINE CHAPEL. 



193 



CHAPTER VII 

llie 25th of June, 1530 — The palatine chapel — Recollections and Ci.Q. 
tfast — The Confession — Prologue— Justification — The church — 
Free will and works — Faith — Interest of the hearers — The princes 
becomo preachers — The Confession — Abuses — Church and state 
—The two governments — Epilogue — Argumentation — Prudence 
—Church and state — The sword — Moderate tone of the Confes-, 
sion — Its defects — A new baptism. 

At length the 25th of June arrived. This was des- 
tined to be the greatest day of the Reformation, and one 
of the most glorious in the history of Christianity and 
of mankind. 

As the chapel of the palatine palace, where the em- 
peror had resolved to hear the Confession, could contain 
only about two hundred persons,* before three o'clock 
a great crowd was to be seen surrounding the building 
and thronging the court, hoping by this means to catch 
a few words ; and many having gained entrance to the 
chapel, all were turned out except those who were, at 
the least, councillors to the princes, 

Charles took his seat on the throne. The electors 
or their representatives were on his right and left hand ; 
after them, the other princes and states of the empire. 
The legate had refused to appear in this solemnity, lest 
he should seem by his presence to authorize the reading 
of the Confession.f 

Then stood up John elector of Saxony, with his son 
John Frederick, Philip landgrave of Hesse, the margrave 
George of Brandenburg, Wolfgang prince of Anhalt, 
Ernest duke of Brunswick-Luneburg, and his brotlier 
Francis, and last of all the deputies of Nuremberg and 
Reutlingen. Their air was animated and their features 
radiant with joy.| The apologies of the early Chris- 
tians, of Tertullian and Justin Martyr, hardly reached 

* Capiebat forsan ducentos. Jonas, Corp. Ref. 2. 157. 
t Sai-pi, Hist. Council Trent, 1. 101. t Lseto et alacn animo 
:ut vultu. Scultet. 1. 273. 

pist. of Ee£ rr j ^ 



1.94 history: uf the kefoematioit 



in writing the sovereigns to whom they were addressed. 
But now, to hear the new apology of resuscitated Chris- 
tianity, behold that puissant emperor, whose sceptre, 
ptretching far beyond the columns of Hercules, reaches 
the utmost limits of the world, his brother the king ol 
the Romans, with electors, princes, prelates, deputies, 
ambassadors, all of whom desire to destroy the gospel^ 
but wh: are constrained by an invisible power to listen^ 
and by that very listening to honor the Confession. 

One thought was involuntarily present in the minds 
of the spectators, the recollection of the diet of Worms.* 
Only nine years before, a poor monk stood alone for this 
same cause in a hall of the town-house at Worms, in 
presence of the empire. And now in his stead behold 
the foremost of the electors, princes, and cities. What 
a victory is declared by this simple fact! No doubt 
Charles himself cannot escape from this recollection. 

The emperor, seeing the Protestants stand up, mo- 
tioned them to sit down ; and then the two chancellors 
of the elector, Bruck and Bayer, advanced to the middle 
of the chapel, and stood before the throne, holding in 
their hands, the former the Latin, and the other the Ger- 
man copy of the Confession. The emperor required the 
Latin copy to be read.f " We are Germans," said the 
elector of Saxony, " and on German soil ; I hope there- 
fore your majesty will allow us to speak German." If 
the Confession had been read in Latin, a language un- 
known to most of the princes, the general effect would 
have been lost. This was another means of shutting 
the mouth of the gospel. The emperor complied with 
the elector's demand. 

Bayer then began to read the evangelical Confession, 
slowly, seriously, distinctly, with a clear, strong, and 
sonorous voice, which refe'choed under the arched roof oi 
the chapel, and carried even to the outside this great 
testimony paid to the truth.| 

* Ante decennium in conventu Wormatiensi. Corp. Ref. 2 153. 

t Caesar Latinum prelegi volebat. Seek. 2. 170. t Qui clar^ 
distincte, tard^, et voce adeo graudi et sonora earn pronunciavit 
Soultet. 276, 



THE CONFESSION 



195 



" Most serene, most mighty and invincible emperor 
and most gracious lord," said he, *'we who appear in 
your presence, declare ourselves ready to confer amica- 
bly with you on the fittest means of reetoriug one sole, 
true, and same faith, since it is for one sole and same 
Christ that we fight.* And in case that these religious 
dissensions cannot be settled amicably, we then offer to 
your majesty to explain our cause in a general, free, and 
Christian council.^f 

This prologue being ended, Bayer confessed the Holy 
Trinity, conformably with the Nicene council, J original 
and hereditary sin, " which bringeth eternal death to all 
who are not born again,"§ and the incarnation of the Son, 
" very God, and very man."|| 

" We teach, moreover," continued he, that we can- 
not be justified before God by our own strength, our 
merits, or our works ; but that we are justified freely 
for Christ^s sake through faith,^ when we believe that 
our sins are forgiven in virtue of Christ, who by his 
death has made satisfaction for our sins : this faith is 
the righteousness that God imputeth to the sinner. 

''But we teach at the same time, that this faitb 
ought to bear good fruits, and that we must do all the 
good works commanded by God, for the love of God, 
and not by their means to gain the grace of God." 

The Protestants next declared their faith in the Chris- 
tian church, " which is," said they, " the assembly of alJ 
true believers and all the saints,"** in the midst of 
whom there are, nevertheless, in this life, many false 
Christians, hypocrites even, and manifest sinners ; and 

* Ad unam veram concordem religionem, sicut omnes sub uno 
yhristo sumus et miUtamus. Confessio, Praefatio. Urkund. 1. 474. 

1 Causam dicturos in tali generali, libero, et Christiano concilia 
Ibid. 479. { Et tamen tres sunt personae ejusdem essentiae. Ibid. 
682. § Vitium origir.is, afferens seternam mortem his qui non 
ranascuntur. Ibid. 483. || Unus Christus, vere Deus, et verd 

homo. Ibid. IT Quod homines non possint justificari coram Deo, 
propriis viribus, meritis, aut operibus, sed gratis, propter Christum, 
per Mem. Ibid. 484. Congregatio sanctorum et v^rdi at© 

dentlum. Ibid. 487. 



196 HISTORY OF THE RfiFOEllATrOK. 



they added, " that it is sufficient for the real unity of thi 
church that they agree on the doctrine of the gospel 
and th(3 administration of the sacraments, without the 
dtes and ceremonies instituted by men being every- 
where the same/'* They proclaimed the necessity of 
baptism, and declared that " the body and blood of Christ 
are really present and administered in the Lord's supper 
to those who partake of it."f 

The chancellor then successively confessed the faith 
of the evangelical Christians touching confession, pen- 
ance, the nature of the sacraments, the government of 
the church, ecclesiastical ordinances, political govern- 
ment, and the last judgment. " As regards free will," 
continued he, we confess that man's will has a certain 
liberty of accomplishing civil justice, and of loving the 
things that reason comprehends ; that man can do the 
good that is within the sphere of nature — ^plough his 
fields, eat, drink, have a friend, put on a coat, build a 
house, take a wife, feed cattle, exercise a calling; as 
also he can, of his own movement, do evil, kneel before 
an idol, and commit murder. But we maintain, that 
without the Holy Ghost he cannot do what is righteous 
in the sight of God." 

Then returning to the grand doctrine of the Refor- 
mation, and recalling to mind that the doctors of the 
pope " have never ceased impelling the faithful to pue- 
rile and useless works, as the custom of chaplets, invo- 
cations of saints, monastic vows, processions, fasts, 
feast-days, brotherhoods," the Protestants added, that as 
for themselves, while urging the practice of truly Chris- 
tian works, of which little had been said before their 
time, J " they taught that man is justified by faith alone ; 
not by that faith which is a simple knowledge of the 
history, and which wicked men and even devils possess, 

• Ad veram uaitatem Ecclesiae, satis est consentire de doctrina 
Bvangelii et administratione sacramentorum, nec necesse eat, etc. 
Confessio, Priefatio. Urkund. 1. 486. f Quod corpus et sanguii 
Christi, vere adsint et distribuantur vescentibus in coena Domini. 
F. Urkund. 1. 488. t De quibus rebus olim parum docebant con? 
eionfttores *, tantum puerili et non necessaria opera urgebant. Xb^ 495 



EFFECT OF THt? READIKa. Iflt 

but by a faith which believes not only the history, bui 
alflo the effect of the history;* which believes thai 
through Christ we obtain grace ; which sees that in 
Christ we have a merciful Father; which knows this 
Gol; which calls upon him: in a word, which is not 
without God, as the heathen are." 

" Such," said Bayer, " is a summary of the doctrine 
professed in our churches, by which it may be seen that 
this doctrine is by no means opposed to Scripture, to 
the universal church, nor even to the Romish church, 
such as the doctors describe it to us ;f and since it is 
so, to reject us as heretics is an offence against unity 
and charity." 

Here terminated the first part of the Confession, the 
aim of which was to explain the evangelical doctrine. 
The chancellor read with so distinct a voice, that the 
crowd which was unable to enter the hall, and which 
filled the court and all the approaches of the episcopal 
palace, did not lose a word.| This reading produced 
the most marvellous effect on the princes who thronged 
the chapel. Jonas watched every change in their coun- 
tenances,! and there beheld interest, astonishment, and 
even approbation, depicted by turns. The adversaries 
imagine they have done a wonderful thing by forbidding 
the preaching of the gospel," wrote Luther to the elec* 
tor ; " and they do not see, poor creatures, that by the 
reading of the Confession in the presence of the diet, 
there has been more preaching than in the sermons oi 
ten doctors. Exquisite subtlety I admirable expedient ! 
Master Agricola and the other ministers are reduced to 
silence ; but in their place appear the elector of Saxony 
and the other princes and lords, who preach before his 
imperial majesty and the members of the whole empire 

* Non tantum historiae netitiam, sed fidem quae credit non tan- 
turn historiam, sed etiam effectum historiae. F. Urkund. 1. 498. 

t Nihil inesse quod discrt pat a Scripturis vel ab Ecclesia Ca^ 
tholica, vel ab Ecclesia Romana, quaterms ex Scriptoribus nota est 
Ibid. 501. J Verum etiam in area inferiori et vicinis locis eX' 

audiri potuerit. Scultet. 274. § Jouas scribit vidisse se vultufi 
omnium de quo mihi spoadet narrationem coram. L. Epp. 4. 7L 



ISB Hls:?Oilf OP THE IlEPO&MATIbK 



freely, to their beard, and before their noses. Yell, 
Christ IS in the diet, and he does not keep silence : th^ 
word of God cannot he bound. They forbid it in the pulpit, 
and are forced to hear it in the palace ; poor ministers 
cannot announce it, and great princes proclaim it ; the 
servants are fcrbidden to listen to it, and their masters 
ar^ compelled to hear it ; they will have nothing to do 
with it during the whole course of the diet, and they are 
forced to submit to hear more in one day than is heard 

ordinarily in a whole year When all else is 

silent, the very stones cry out, as says our Lord Jesus 
Ohrist."* 

That part of the Confession destined to point out 
errors and abuses still remained. Bayer continued : 
he explained and demonstrated the doctrine of the two 
kinds ; he attacked the compulsory celibacy of priests, 
maintained that the Lord^s supper had been changed 
into a regular fair, in which it was merely a question of 
buying and selling, and that it had been refe'stablished in 
its primitive purity by the Reformation, and was cele- 
brated in the evangelical churches with entirely new 
devotion and gravity. He declared that the sacrament 
was administered to no one who had not first made con- 
fession of his faults, and he quoted this expression of 
Chrysostom : " Confess thyself to God the Lord, thy real 
Judge ; tell thy sin, not with the tongue, but in thy 
conscience and in thy heart." 

Bayer next came to the precepts on the distinction 
of meats and other Roman usages. " Celebrate such a 
festival," ^aid he ; repeat such a prayer, or keep such 
a fast ; be dressed in such a manner, and so many other 
ordinances of men, this is what is now styled a spiritual 
and Christian life ; while the good works prescribed by 
God, as those of a father of a family who toils to support 
his wife, his sons, and his daughters ; of a mother who 
brings children into the world, and takes care of them ; 
of a prince or of a magistrate who governs his subjects, 
are looked upon as secular things, and of an imperfect 
nature." As for monastic vows in particular, he repre 
♦ L. Epp. 4. 82. 



EPISCOPAL AKD TEMPORAL POWER. 199 



sented that, as the pope could give a dispensation from 
them, those vows ought therefore to be abolished. 

The last article of the Confession treated of the au- 
thority of the bishops: powerful princes crowned with 
the episcopal mitre were there; the archbishops of McDtz, 
Cologne, Salzburg, and Bremen, with the bishops of Bam- 
berg, Wurzburg, Eichstadt, Worms, Spires, Strasburg, 
Augsburg, Constance, Coire, Passau, Liege, Trent, Brix- 
en, and of Lebus and Ratzburg, fixed their eyes o-n the 
humble confessor. He fearlessly continued, and ener- 
getically protesting against that confusion of church and 
state which had characterized the middle ages, he called 
for the distinction and independence of the two societies. 

" Many," said he, have unskilfully confounded the 
episcopal and the temporal power ; and from this confu- 
sion have resulted great wars, revolts, and seditions.* 
It is for this reason, and to reassure men^s consciences, 
that we find ourselves constrained to establish the differ- 
ence which exists between the power of the church and 
the power of the sword.f 

" We therefore teach that the power of the keys or 
of the bishops is, conformably with the word of the Lord, 
a commandment emanating from God, to preach the goa 
pel, to remit or retain sins, and to administer the sacra- 
ments. This power has reference only to eternal goods, 
is exercised only by the minister of the word, and does 
not trouble itself with political administration. The 
political administration, on the other hand, is busied 
with every thing else but the gospel. The magistrate 
protects, not souls, but bodies and temporal possessions. 
He defends them against all attacks from without, and 
by making use of the sword and of punishment, compels 
men to observe civil justice and peace. J 

" For this reason we must take particular care not 

* Nonnulli incommode commiscueruntpotestatemecclesia^ticam 
el pctestatem gladii ; et ex hac confusioiie, etc. Urkund. Confes. 
Augs. 1. 535. t Coacti sunt ostendere discrimen ecclesiasticas 

potestatig et potestatis gladii. Ibid. { Politica administratio 

Tersatur enim circa alias res quam Evangelium ; magistratus defers 
•iit non uieuteg ned corpora — et coercet homines gladio. lb. 541. 



200 ttiSDOilY Of THE EEPORMATIOK. 



to mingle the power of the church with the power of the 
state * The power of the church ought never to invade 
an office that is foreign to it ; for Christ himself said, 
' My kingdom is not of this world.' And again, * Who 
made me a judge over you V St. Paul said to the Phi- 
lippians, * Our citizenship is in heaven,'f Phil. 3 : 20 ? 
and to the Corinthians, 'The weapons of our warfare 
are not carnal, but mighty through God.' 

" It is thus that we distinguish the two governments 
and the two powers, and that we honor both as the most 
excellent gifts that God has given here on earth. 

"The duty of the bishops is therefore to preach the 
gospel, to forgive sins, and to exclude from the Christian 
church all who rebel against the Lord, but without hu- 
man power, and solely by the word of God. J If the 
bishops act thus, the churches ought to be obedient to 
them, according to this declaration of Christ : * Whoever 
heareth you, heareth me.' 

" But if the bishops teach any thing that is contrary 
to the gospel, then the churches have an order from God 
which forbids them to obey. Matt. *I : 15 ; Gal. 1:8; 
2 Cor. 13 : 8, 10. And St. Augustine himself, in his letter 
against Pertilian, writes, * We must not obey the cath- 
olic bishops, if they go astray, and teach any thing con- 
trary to the canonical Scriptures of God."§ 

After some remarks on the ordinances and traditions 
of the church, Bayer came to the epilogue of the Cojh 
fession. 

" It is not from hatred that we have spoken," added 
he, " nor to insult any one ; but we have explained the 
doctrines that we maintain to be essential, in order that 
it may be understood that we admit of neither dogma 
nor ceremony which is contrary to the holy Scriptures, 
and to the usage of the universal church, ' 

* Non igitiir commiscendae sunt potestates ecclesiasticse et ©ivi* 
leg. Urkund. Conies. Augs. 1. 641. f Greek, noh,Tevfia. Scott 
and Henry Comment. X Excludere a communione Ecclesiw^ 

erne vi humana sed verbo. Urkund. Confes. Augs. 1. 544. 

§ Nec catbolicis episcopis consentiendum est, sicuti forte faUcmr 
tnr, aut contra canonicas Dei scrip tur as aliquid eentiunt. Ibid. 



OHARACTlilll OF THE CONFESBIOK. 20l 



Bayer then ceased to read. He had spoken for two 
hours : the silence and serious attention of the assembly 
were not once disturbed.* 

This Confession of Augsburg will ever remain one of 
the masterpieces of the human mind enlightened by the 
Spirit of God. 

The language that had been adopted, while it was 
perfectly natural, was the result of a profound study oi 
character. These princes, these warriors, these poli 
ticians who were sitting in the palatine palace, entirely 
ignorant as they were of divinity, easily understood the 
Protestant doctrine ; for it was not explained to them 
in the style of the schools, but in that of every-day life, 
and with a simplicity and clearness that rendered all 
misunderstanding impossible. 

At the same time the power of argumentation waB 
so much the more remarkable, as it was the more con- 
cealed. At one time Melancthon — for it was really he 
who spoke through the mouth of Bayer — was content to 
quote a single passage of Scripture or of the fathers in 
favor of the doctrine he maintained ; and at another he 
proved his thesis so much the more strongly, that he 
appeared only to be declaring it. With a single stroke 
he pointed out the sad consequences that would follow 
the rejection of the faith he professed, or with one word 
showed its importance for the prosperity of the church ; 
BO that, while listening to him, the most violent enemies 
were obliged to acknowledge to themselves that there 
was really something to say in favor of the new sect. 

To this force of reasoning the apology added a pru- 
dence no less remarkable. Melancthon, while declining 
with firmness the errors attributed to his party, did not 
even appear to feel the injustice of these erroneous im- 
putations ; and while pointing out those of Popery, ho 
did not say expressly they were those of his adversaries ; 
thus carefully avoiding every thing that might irritate 
their minds. In this he showed himself wise as a ser- 
pent and harmless as a dove. 

But the most admirable thing of all is the fidelitj 
• Mit grosser StiUe und Ernst. Briich's Apologie, p. 69. 



202 HISTOUY 01? THS HEIfORMATIOK 



with which the Confession explains the doctrines most 
essential to salvation. Rome is accustomed to repre* 
sent the reformers as the creators of the Protestant doo 
trines ; but it is not in the sixteenth century that we 
must look for the days of that creation. A bright track 
of light, of which Wickliffe and Augustine mark the 
most salient points, carries us back to the apostolio 
3ige : it was then that shone in all their brilliancy the 
creative days of evangelical truth. Yet it is true — and 
if this is what Rome means, we fully concur in the idea — 
never since the time of St. Paul had the Christian doc- 
trine appeared with so much beauty, depth, and life, as 
in the days of the Reformation. 

Among these doctrines, that of the church, which had 
been so long disfigured, appeared at this time in all its 
native purity. With what wisdom, in particular, the 
confessors of Augsburg protest against that confusion 
of religion and politics which, since the deplorable epoch 
of Constantine, had changed the kingdom of God into an 
earthly and carnal institution. Undoubtedly what the 
Confession stigmatizes with the greatest energy is the 
intrusion of the church into the affairs of the state ; but 
can it be thought that it was to approve the intrusion 
of the state in church affairs ? The evil of the middle 
ages was the having enslaved the state to the church, 
and the confessors of Augsburg rose like one man to 
combat it. The evil of the three centuries which have 
passed away since then, is to have subjected the church 
to the state ; and we may believe that Luther and Me- 
lancthon would have found against this disorder thun- 
ders no less powerful. What they attack in a general 
sense, is the confusion of the two societies ; what they 
demand, is their independence, I do not say their separa- 
tion, for separation of church and state was quite un- 
known to the reformers. If the Augsburg confessors 
were unwilling that things from above should monopolize 
those of the earth, they would have been still less will- 
ing for things of earth to oppress those from heaven. 

There is a particular application of this principle, 
which the Confession points out. It wills the bishops 



MSLAKCTHON^S MOBERATIOK. 208 



jshonld reprimand those who obey wickedness, "but 
without human power, and solely by the word of God.'* 
It therefore rejects the use of the sword in the chastise- 
ment of heretics This we see is a primitive principle, 
fundamental and essential to the Reformation, as the 
contrary doctrine is a primitive principle fundamental 
and essential to the Papacy. If among Protestants we 
find some writing, or even some example opposed to this, 
it is but an isolated fact, which cannot invalidate the 
oflScial principles of the reform — it is one of those excep- 
tions which always serve to confirm the rule. 

Finally, the Augsburg Confession does not usurp the 
rights of the word of God ; it desires to be its handmaid, 
and not its rival ; it does not found, it does not regulate 
the faith, but simply professes it. " Our churches teach,'' 
it says ; and it will be remembered that Luther consid- 
ered it only as a sermon preached by princes and kings. 
Had it desired more, as has since been maintained, by 
that very circumstance it would have been nullified. 

Was, however, the Confession able to follow in all 
things the exact path of truth? We may be permitted 
to doubt it. 

It professes not to separate from the teaching of 
the Catholic church, and even from that of the Romish 
church — by which is no doubt signified the ancient Ro- 
man church — and rejects the popish particularism which, 
for about eight centuries, imprisoned mei^s consciences. 
The Confession, however, seems overlaid with supersti- 
tious fears when there is any question of deviating from 
the views entertained by some of the fathers of the church, 
of breaking the toils of the hierarchy, and of acting as 
regards Rome without blamable forbearance. This, at 
least, is what its author, Melancthon, professes. " We 
do not put forward any dogma," said he " which is not 
founded on the gospel or on the teaching of the Catholic 
church ; we are prepared to concede every thing that is 
necessary for the episcopal dignity ;* and provided the 
bishops do not condemn the gospel, we preserve all the 

* Concessuros omnia quae ad dignitatem Episcoporum stabilien- 
lam pertinent. Corp. Ref. 2. 431. 



204 HlStOEY OF THE REPOUHATIOIT 



rites that appear indifferent to us. In a word, there is no 
burden that we reject, if we can bear it without guilt.'^* 

Many will think, no doubt, that a little more inde- 
pendence would have been proper in this matter, and 
that it would have been better to have passed over the 
ages that have followed the times of the apostles, and 
have frankly put in practice the grand principle which 
the Reformation had proclaimed : " There is for articles 
of faith no other foundation than the word of God."f 

Melancthon's moderation has been admired; and in 
truth, while pointing out the abuses of Rome, he was 
silent on what is most revolting in them, on their dis- 
graceful origin, their scandalous consequences, and is 
content to show that they are in contradiction to the 
Scripture. But he does more ; he is silent on the divine 
right claimed by the pope, on the number of the sacra- 
ments, and on several other points. His great business 
is to justify the renovated, and not to attack the deform- 
ed church. " Peace, peace," was his cry. But if, instead 
of all this circumspection, the Reformation had advanced 
with courage, had wholly unveiled the word of God, and 
had made an energetic appeal to the sympathies of re- 
form then spread in men's hearts, would it not have 
taken a stronger and more honorable position, and would 
it not have secured more extensive conquests ? 

The interest that Charles the Fifth showed in listen- 
ing to the Confession seems doubtful. According to 
some, he endeavored to understand that foreign lan- 
guage ;J according to others, he fell asleep. § It is easy 
to reconcile these contradictory testimonies. 

When the reading was finished. Chancellor Bruck, 
with the two copies in his hand, advanced towards the 
empercr's secretary and presented them to him. Charles 
the Fifth, who was wide awake at this moment, himself 
took the two Confessions, handed the German copy, con- 

* Nullum detractavimus onus, quod sine scelere suspici posset 
Corp. Ref. 2. 431. f Solum verbum Dei condit articulos fidei 

X Satis attentus erat Caesar. Jonas in Corp. Ref. 2. 184. 

§ Cum nostra confessio legeretur, obdormivit. Brentios in Corpi 
Bef. 2. 245. 



JO^ OF THE PROTESTANTS. 



Bidered as official, to the elector of Mentz, and kept the 
Latin one for himself.* He then made reply to the 
elector of Saxony and to his allies, that he had gra- 
ciously heard their Confession ;f but as this alTair was 
one of extreme importance, he required time to deliberate 
npon it 

The joy with which the Protestants were filled shone 
tr their eyes. J God had been with them ; and they saw 
ihat the striking act which had so recently been accom- 
plished imposed on them the obligation of confessing the 
truth with immovable perseverance. " I am overjoyed," 
wrote Luther, "that I have lived until this hour, in 
which Christ has been publicly exalted by such illus- 
trious confessors and in so glorious an assembly."§ Tlie 
whole evangelical church, excited and renovated by this 
public confession of its representatives, was then more 
intimately united to its divine Chief, and baptized with 
a new baptism. " Since the apostolic age," said they — 
these are the words of a contemporary — there has 
never been a greater work, or a more magnificent con- 
fession."|j 

The emperor, having descended from his throne, ap 
preached the Protestant princes, and begged them in a 
low tone not to publish the Confession ;^ they acceded 
to his request, and every one withdrew. 

* The Latin copy, deposited in the archives of the imperial house, 
should be found at Brussels ; and the German copy, sent afterwards 
to the council of Trent, ought to be in the Vatican. f Gnedich* 
lich vernohmen. F. Urkund. 2. 3. t Cum incredibili protestan- 
tium gaudio. Seek. 2. 170. § Mihi vehementer placet vixisee 
in hanc horam. L. Epp. 4. 71 || Grosser und hoher Werh 

M&thcsius, Hist. 93-98. H In still angeredet und geVctben 

Oorp Raf 2. liS. 



806 HISIORY OF XHE REFOB-HATIOK. 



CHAPTER VIII 

Effect on the Romanists — Luther demands religious liberty His 
dominant idea — Song of triumph — Ingenuous confessions — Ilopee 
of the Protestants — Failure of the Popish intrigues — The empe^ 
ror^s council — Violent discussions — A refutation proposed — Itp 
authors — Rome and the civil power — Perils of the confessors — 
Melancthon's minimum — The emperor's sister — Melancthon's 
fall — Luther opposes concession — The legate repels Melancthon 
— The pope's decision — Question — Melancthon's school-matters — 
Answer. 

The Romanists had expected nothing like this. In- 
stead of a hateful controversy, they had heard a striking 
confession of Jesus Christ ; the most hostile minds were 
consequently disarmed. "We would not for a great 
deal/' was the remark on every side, " have missed being 
present at this reading."* The effect was so prompt, 
that for an instant the cause was thought to be defini- 
tively gained. The bishops themselves imposed silence 
on the sophisms and clamors of the Fabers and the 
Ecks.f "All that the Lutherans have said is true," 
exclaimed the bishop of Augsburg ; "we cannot deny 
it."J " Well, doctor," said the duke of Bavaria to Eck, 
in a reproachful tone, " you had given me a very differ- 
ent idea of this doctrine, and of this affair."§ This was 
the general cry ; accordingly the sophists, as they called 
them, were embarrassed. " But after all," said the duke 
of Bavaria to them, " can you refute by sound reasons 
the Confession made by the elector and his allies 
" With the writings of the apostles and prophets, no^^ 
replit>i Eck ; " but with those of the fathers and of the 
councils, yes."|| "I understand," quickly replied the 

♦ Briioks Geschichte der Handl. in den Sachen des Glaubens zu 
Augsburg. Forsteraann Archiv. 60. f Multi episcopi ad pacem 
•unt inclinati. L. Epp. 4. 70. J Ilia quae recitata sunt, vera 

•unt, sunt pura Veritas; non possumus inficiari. Corp. Ref. 2. 154. 

§ So hab man Im vor nicht gesagt. Mathes. Hist. 99. |i Mit 
Propheteu and Apoeteln echrlften— nicht. Mathes. Hist 99. 



EELiaiOUS LIBEUTY DEMANDED. 207 



duke, " I understand. The Lutherans, according to you, 
are in Scripture ; and we are outside." 

The archbishop Hermann elector of Cologne, the 
count-palatine Frederick, Duke Erick of Brunswick- 
Luneburg, Duke Henry of Mecklenburg, and the 
dukes of Pomerania, were gained over to the truth; 
and Hermann sought erelong to establish it in his eleo 
torate. 

The impression produced in other countries by the 
Confession was perhaps still greater. Charles sent copies 
to all the courts : it was translated into French, Italian,* 
and even into Spanish and Portuguese ; it circulated 
through all Europe, and thus accomplished what Luther 
had said : " Our Confession will penetrate into every 
court, and the sound thereof will spread through the 
whole earth."f It destroyed the prejudices that had 
been entertained, gave Europe a sounder idea of the 
Reformation, and prepared the most distant countries to 
receive the seeds of the gospel. 

Then Luther^s voice began to be heard again. He 
saw that it was a decisive moment, and that he ought 
now to give the impulse that would gain religious liberty. 
He boldly demanded this liberty of the Eoman-catholic 
princes of the diet ;J and at the same time endeavored 
to make his friends quit Augsburg.' Jesus Christ had 
been boldly confessed. Instead of that long series of 
quarrels and discussions which was about to become 
connected with this courageous act, Luther would have 
wished for a striking rupture, even should he seal with 
his blood the testimony rendered to the gospel. The 
stake, in his idea, would have been the real catastrophe 
of this tragedy. " I absolve you from this diet, in the 
name of the Lord/^§ wrote he to his friends. "Now 

• Caesar sibi fecit nostram confessionem reddi Italica et Gallica 
lingua. Corp. Ref. 2. 155. The French translation will be founO 
Id Forstemann^s Urkunden, 1. 357. Articles principaulx de b foy. 

t Perrumpet in omnes aulas Frincipum et Regum. L. Epp. 
4. 96. t Epistle to the elector of Mentz. Ibid. 74. 

§ Igitur absolvo yds in nomiae Domini ab isto conventn Ibjd 
p 06. 



208 HISTOAY OF THE REFOHltATlON. 



home, return home ; again I say, home. Would to Cxod 
that I were the sacrifice offered to this new council, as 
John Huss at Constance.^'* 

But Luther did not expect so glorious a conclusion ; 
he compared the diet to a drama. First, there had been 
the exposition, then the prologue, afterwards the action, 
and now he waited for the tragic catastrophe according 
b) some, but which, in his opinion, would be merely 
comic.f Every thing, he thought, would be sacrificed 
to political peace, and dogmas would be set aside. This 
proceeding, which, even in our own days, would be in 
the eyes of the world the height of wisdom, was in Lu- 
ther's eyes the height of folly. 

He was especially alarmed at the thought of Charles' 
intervention. To withdraw the church from all secular 
influence, and the governments from all clerical influ- 
ence, was then one of the dominant ideas of the great 
reformer. "You see," wrote he to Melanctbon, "that 
they oppose to our cause the same argument as at 
Worms, to wit, still and for ever the judgment of the 
emperor. Thus Satan is always harping on the same 
string, and that emaciated strength^ of the civil power 
is the only one which this myriad-wiled spirit is able to 
find against Jesus Christ." But Luther took courage, 
and boldly raised his head. "Christ is coming," con- 
tinued he ; " he is coming, sitting at the right hand — 
of whom ? not of the emperor, or we should long ago 
have been lost, but of God himself : let us fear nothing 
Christ is the King of kings and the Lord of lords. If he 
loses this title at Augsburg, he must also lose it in all 
the earth, and in all the heavens." 

Thus a song of triumph was, on the part of the con- 
fessors of Augsburg, the first movement that followed 
this courageous act, unique doubtless in the annals oi 
tne church. Some of their adversaries at first shared in 

* Vellem ego sacrificium esse hujus novissimi concilii, sicut Jo- 
hannes Hubs Constantiae. L. Epp. 4. 110. f Sod catastrophen 
illi tragicam, nos comicam expectamus. Ibid. 86. t Sic Satan 
ohorda semper oberrat eadem, et mille-artifex ille mm habet conte 
Christum, nisi unum illud elumbe robnr. Ibid, 100. 



INaENUOUS CONFESSIONS. 



209 



their triumph, and the others were silent ; but a powe^ 
ful reaction took place erelong. 

On the following morning, Charles having risen ib 
ill-humor and tired for want of sleep, the first of his 
ministers who appeared in the imperial apartments was 
the count-palatine, as wearied and embarrassed as his 
master. We must yield something," said he to Charles ; 
"and I would remind your majesty that the emperor 
Maximilian was willing to grant the two kinds in the 
Eucharist, the marriage of priests, and liberty with 
respect to the fasts." Charles the Fifth eagerly seized 
at this proposition as a means of safety. But Granvelle 
and Campeggio soon arrived, who induced him to with- 
draw it. 

Rome, bewildered for a moment by the blow that 
had struck her, rose up again with energy. "I stay 
with the mother," exclaimed the bishop of Wartzburg, 
meaning by it the church of Rome, " the mother, 
the mother." My lord," wittily replied Brentz, " pray 
do not, for the mother, forget either the Father or the 
Son.^ "Well, I grant it," replied the archbishop of 
Salzburg to one of his friends ; " I also should desire 
the communion in both kinds, the marriage of priests, 
the reformation of the mass, and liberty as regards food 

and other traditions But that it should be a monk, 

a poor monk, who presumes to reform us all, is what we 
cannot tolerate."* "I should have no objection," said 
another bishop, "for divine worship to be celebrated 
everywhere as it is at Wittemberg ; but we can never 
consent that this new doctrine should issue from such a 
corner."f And Melancthon insisting with the archbishop 
of Salzburg on the necessity of a reform of the clergy, 
" Well, and how can you wish to reform us ?" said the 
latter abruptly ; " we priests have always been good 
for nothing." This is one of the most ingenuous confes- 
sions that the Reformation has torn from the priests. 
Every day fanatical monks and doctors brimful of soph- 
isms were seen arriving at Augsburg, who endeav- 

* Sed quod unus monachus debeat nos reformare omnes. Corp 
R«f. 2. X66. t Aus dem Loch und Winckel. L. Opp 20 307, 



210 HISTOR-i OF THE BEFORMATION 



ored to inflame the hatred of the emperor and of the 
princes.* "If we formerly had friends," said Melano* 
thon on the morrow of the Confession, " now we possess 
them no longer. We are here alone, abandoned by all, 
and contending against measureless dangers."f 

Charles, impelled by these contrary parties, affected 
a great indifference. But without permitting it to be 
Been, he endeavored, meanwhile, to examine this affair 
thoroughly. " Let there not be a word wanting," he had 
said to his secretary when requiring from him a French 
translation of the Confession. " He does not allow any 
thing to be observed," whispered the Protestants one to 
another, convinced that Charles was gained ; for if it 
were known, he would lose his Spanish states: let ua 
maintain the most profound secrecy." But the emperor's 
courtiers who perceived these strange hopes, smiled 
and shook their heads. "If you have money," said 
Schepper, one of the secretaries of state, to Jonas and 
Melancthon, " it will be easy for you to buy from the 
Italians whatever religion you please ;| but if your 
purse is empty, your cause is lost." Then assuming a 
more serious tone, "It is impossible," said he, "for 
the emperor, surrounded as he is by bishops and cardi- 
nals, to approve of any other religion than that of the 
pope." 

This was soon evident. On the day after the Con- 
fession, Sunday, the 26th of June, before the breakfast 
hour,§ all the deputations from the imperial cities were 
collected in the emperor's antechamber. Charles, desir- 
ous of bringing back the states of the empire to unity, 
began with the weakest. " Some of the cities," said the 
count-palatine, "have not adhered to the last diet of 
Spires : the emperor calls upon them to submit to it." 

Strasburg, Nuremberg, Constance, Ulm, Reutlingen, 
Heilbronn, Memmingen, Lindau, Kempten, Windsheim, 
Isny, and Weissemburg, which were thus summoned to 

* Quotidie confluunt hue sophistae ac mouachi. Cor. Ref. 2. 141, 
+ Nos hie soli ae deserti. Ibid. t Nos, si pecuniam habe- 

remuB facile religionem quam vellemus emtiiros ab Italis. Ibid 

Id^. ^ Houte Yov dem Morgenessen. Ibid. 



PAILUEE OP POPISH INTRIOUES 



211 



renounce the famous protest, thought the moment curi- 
ously chosen. They asked for time. 

The position was complicated : discord had beet 
thrown in the midst of the cities, and intrigue was 
laboring daily to increase it.* It was not only between 
the popish and the evangelical cities that disagreement 
existed, but also between the Zwinglian and the Lu- 
theran cities, and even among the latter, those which 
had not adhered to the Confession of Augsburg mani- 
fested great ill-humor towards the deputies of Reutlingen 
and Nuremberg. This proceeding of Charles the Fifth 
was therefore skilfully calculated, for it was based on 
the old axiom, Divide et impera. 

But the enthusiasm of faith overcame all these strat- 
agems, and on the next day, the 2tth of June, the dep- 
uties from the cities transmitted a reply to the emperor, 
in which they declared that they could not adhere to the 
recess of Spires " without disobeying God, and without 
compromising the salvation of their souls.^f 

Charles, who desired to observe a just medium more 
from policy than from equity, wavered between so many 
3ontrary convictions. Desirous nevertheless of essaying 
jiis mediating influence, he convoked the states faithful 
to Rome, on Sunday, the 26th of June, shortly after his 
conference with the cities. 

All the princes were present : even the pope's legate 
and the most influential Roman divines appeared at this 
council, to the great scandal of the Protestants. " What 
reply should be made to the Confession was the ques- 
tion proposed by Charles the Fifth to the senate that 
surrounded him.| 

Three different opinions were proposed. "Let us 
beware," said the men of the papacy, " of discussing our 
adversaries' reasons, and let us be content with exe- 
cuting the edict of Worms against the Lutherans, and 

* Es sind uater uns St'adten, viel practica und Seltsames We* 
Bens. Corp. Ref. 2. 151. 

t Ohne Verletzung der Gewissen gegen Gott. F. Urkund. 2. 6. 

i Adversarii nostri jam deliberaat quid velini respoudere. Corp 
Bef. 2. June 26, 



212 HISTORY OF THE ilEFOEMATIOH . 



with constraining them by arms."* " Let us submit iho 
Confession to the examination of impartial judges," said 
the men of the empire, " and refer the final decision to 
the emperor Is not even the reading of the Confession 
an appeal of the Protestants to the imperial power?" 
Others, in the last place — and these were the men of 
tradition and of ecclesiastical doctrine — were desirous 
of commissioning certain doctors to compose a refutation, 
which should be read to the Protestants and ratified by 
Charles. 

The debate was very animated: the mild and the 
violent, the politic and the fanatical, took a decided 
course in the assembly. George of Saxony and Joachim 
of Brandenburg showed themselves the most inveterate, 
and surpassed in this respect even the ecclesiastical 
princes.f certain clown, whom you know well, is 
pushing them all from behind,"J wrote Melancthon to 
Luther ; and certain hypocritical theologians hold the 
torch and lead the whole band." This clown was doubt- 
less Duke George. Even the princes of Bavaria, whom 
the Confession had staggered at first, immediately ral- 
lied round the chiefs of the Eoman party. The elector 
of Mentz, the bishop of Augsburg, the duke of Brunswick, 
showed themselves the least unfavorable to the evan 
gelical cause. " I can by no means advise his majesty 
to employ force," said Albert. " If his majesty should 
constrain their consciences, and should afterwards quit 
the empire, the first victims sacrificed would be the 
priests ; and who knows whether, in the midst of these 
discords, the Turks would not suddenly fall upon us 
But this somewhat interested wisdom of the archbishop 
did not find many supporters, and the men of war imme^ 
diately plunged into the discussion with their harsh 
Toices. " If there is any fighting against the Luther* 
ans," said Count Felix of Werdenburg, " I gratuitously 
offer my sword, and I swear never to return it to its 
scabbard until it has overthrown the strong-hold of Lu* 

* Rem agendam esse vi, non audiendam causam. Corp. Re*, 
SS. 164. t Hi sunt duces, et quidem acerrimi alterius partis. lb 
t Omnea uuus guberuat rusticus. IWd. June 26, 176. 



OPINIONS OF THE PAPISTS. 



213 



ther/' This nobleman died suddenly a few days after, 
from t consequences of his intemperance. Then the 
moderate men again interfered : " The Lutherans attack 
no one article of the faith," said the bishop of Augsburg ; 
" let us come to an arrangement with them ; and to 
obtain peace, let us concede to them the sacrament in both 
Kinds, and the marriage of priests. I would even yield 
more, if it were necessary." Upon this loud cries arose : 
" He is a Lutheran," they exclaimed, and you will see 
that he is fully prepared to sacrifice even the private 
masses." " The masses I we must not even think of it," 
remarked some with an ironical smile ; " Rome will 
never give them up, for it is they which maintain her 
cardinals and her courtiers with their luxury and their 
kitchens."* The archbishop of Salzburg and the elector 
of Brandenburg replied with great violence to the motion 
of the bishop of Augsburg. " The Lutherans," said they 
abruptly, " have laid before us a confession written with 
black ink on white paper. Well, if I were emperor, I 
would answer them with red inkJ^-\ " Sirs," quickly 
replied the bishop of Augsburg, take care then that the 
red letters do not fly in your faces." The elector of Mentz 
was compelled to interfere and calm the speakers. 

The emperor, desirous of playing the character of an 
umpire, would have wished the Roman party at least to 
have placed in his hands an act of accusation against 
the reform : but all was now altered ; the majority, 
becoming daily more compact since the diet of Spires, 
no longer sided with Charles. Full of the sentiment oi 
their own strength, they refused to assume the title of a 
party, and to take the emperor as a judge. " What are 
you saying," cried they, " of diversity between the mem- 
bers of the empire ? There is but one legitimate party. 
It is not a question of deciding between two opinions 
whose rights are equal, but of crushing rebels, and of 
aiding those who have remained faithful to the constitu- 
tion of the empire." 

* Cardinel, Churtusanen, Pracht und Kiichea. Bruck ApoL 
p. 63. t Wir wollten antvortea mit einer Sckrift, mit Eubrickon 
geschriebeu. Corp. Ref. 2. 147. 



214 HISTORY OF THE UEPOKMATION 



This haughty language enlightened Charles : he found 
they had outstripped him, and that, abandoning his lofty 
position of arbiter, he must submit merely to be the ex- 
ec ter of the orders of the majority. It was this major- 
ity which henceforward commanded in Augsburg. They 
excluded the imperial councillors who advocated more 
equitable views, and the archbishop of Mentz himself 
ceased for a time to appear in the diet.* 

The majority ordered that a refutation of the evan- 
gelical doctrine should be immediately drawn up by 
Romish theologians. If they had selected for this pur- 
pose moderate men like the bishop of Augsburg, the 
Reformation would still have had some chance of suc- 
cess with the great principles of Christianity; but it 
was to the enemies of the reform, to the old champions 
of Rome and of Aristotle, exasperated by so many de- 
feats, that they resolved to intrust this task. 

They were numerous at Augsburg, and not held in 
very great esteem. The princes," said Jonas, " have 
brought their learned men with them, and some even 
their unlearned and their /ooZs."f Provost Faber and 
Doctor Eck led the troop ; behind them was drawn up a 
cohort of monks, and above all of Dominicans tools of 
the inquisition, and impatient to recompense themselves 
for the opprobrium they had so long endured. There 
was the provincial of the Dominicans, Paul Hugo, their 
vicar John Bourkard, one of their priors Conrad Koelein, 
who had written against Luther's marriage, with a 
number of Carthusians, Augustines, Franciscans, and 
the vicars of several bishops. Such were the men who, 
to the number of twenty, were commissioned to refute 
Melancthon. 

One might beforehand have augured of the work by 
the workmen. Each one understood that it was a ques- 
tion, not of refuting the Confession, but of branding it. 
Campeggio, who doubtless suggested this ill-omened 
list to Charles, was well aware that these doctors were 
incapable of measuring themselves with Melanotljon; 

• Non venit in senatum. Corp. Ref. 2. 176. f QuidexQ 

ettam Buos ineruLditos et ineptos. 



itOllE AND THE CIVIL POWER. 218 



but their Dames formed the most decided stand aid of 
popery, and announced to the world clearly and imme- 
diately what the diet proposed to do. This was the 
essential point. Rome would not leave Christendom 
even hope. 

It was, however, requisite to know whether the diet, 
a.nd the emperor who was its organ, had the right of 
pronouncing in this purely religious matter. Charles 
put the question both to the evangelicals and to the 
Romanists.* 

" Your highness," said Luther, who was consulted by 
the elector, " may reply with all assurance. Yes, if the 
emperor wish it, let him be judge. I will bear every 
thing on his part ; but let him decide nothing contrary 
to the word of God. Your highness cannot put the em- 
peror above God himself.f Does not the first command- 
ment say, * Thou shalt have no other gods before me V 

The reply of the papal adherents was quite as posi- 
tive in a contrary sense. We think," said they, " that 
his majesty, in accord with the electors, princes, and 
states of the empire, has the right to proceed in this 
affair, as Roman emperor, guardian, advocate, and sove- 
reign protector of the church and of our most holy faith."J 
Thus, in the first days of the Reformation, the evangel- 
ical church frankly ranged itself under the throne of 
Jesus Christ, and the Roman church under the sceptre 
of kings. Enlightened men, even among Protestants, 
have misunderstood this double nature of Protestantism 
and Popery. 

The philosophy of Aristotle and the hierarchy of 
Rome, thanks to this alliance with the civil power, were 
at length about to see the day of their long-expected 
triumph arrive. So long as the schoolmen had been left 
to the force of their syllogisms and of their abuse, they 
had been defeated; but now Charles the Fifth and the 
diet held out their hands to them; the reasonings of 

* See the document extracted from the archives of Bavaria in 
F Urkund. 2. 9. f Konnen den Kaiser nicht iiber Gott setzea 
L. Epp. 4. 88. X Romischen Kaiser, Vogt, Advocaten und ob 
risten Beschirmer der Kirchen. F. Urkund. 2. 10. 



216 



HISTORY OF THE UEFORMATIOIT. 



Faber, Eck, and Wimpina were about to be connter 
signed by the German chancellor, and confirmed by the 
great seals of the empire. Who could resist them? 
The Romish error has never had any strength except by 
its union with the secular arm ; and its victories in the 
old and in the new world are owing, even in our days, 
iiO state patronage.* 

These things did not escape the piercing eye of Lu- 
ther. He saw at once the weakness of the argument of 
the papist doctors and the power of Charles^ arm. " You 
are waiting for your adversaries' answer," wrote he to 
his friends in Augsburg ; " it is already written, and here 
it is : The fathers, the fathers, the fathers ; the church, 
the church, the church ; usage, custom ; but of the Scrip- 
tures — nothing."f "Then the emperor, supported by 
the testimony of these arbiters, will pronounce against 
you ;J and then will you hear boastings from all sides 
that will ascend up to heaven, and threats that will 
descend even to hell." 

Thus changed the situation of the reform. Charles 
was obliged to acknowledge his weakness ; and to save 
the appearance of his power, he took a decisive part 
with the enemies of Luther. The emperor's impartiality 
disappeared : the state turned against the gospel, and 
there remained for it no other savior than God. 

At first many gave way to extreme dejection : above 
all, Melancthon, who had a nearer view of the cabals of 
the adversaries, exhausted moreover by long vigils, fell 
almost into despair. § In the presence of these formi- 
dable evils," cried he, " I see no more hope."|[ And then, 
however, he added, " Except the help of God." 

The legate immediately set all his batteries to work. 
Already had Charles several times sent for the elector 
and the landgrave, and had used every exertion to de- 

* Otaheite, for instance. f Patres, Patres, Patres ; Ecclesia 
Bcclesia ; usus, consuetude, prseterea e Scriptura nihil. L. Epp. 4. 
96. t Pronuntiabit Caesar contra vos. Ibid. § Quadaxn 

tristitia et quasi desesperatione vexatur. Corp. Ref. 2. 163. 

II Qciid nobis sit sperandum in tantis odiis iuimicorom. Ibid 

145 



MELANCTHON'S MINIMUM^ 



217 



tach them from the evangeh'cal confession.* Melano- 
thon, uneasy at these secret conferences, reduced the 
Confession to its minimum, and entreated the elector to 
demand only the two kinds in the Eucharist and the 
marriage of priests. " To interdict the former of these 
points," said he, would be to alienate a great number 
of Christians from the communion ; and to forbid the 
second^ would be depriving the church of all the pastors 
ca-pable of edifying it. Will they destroy religion and 
kindle civil war, rather than apply to these purely eccle- 
siastical constitutions a mitigation that is neither con- 
trary to sound morals nor to faith ?"f The Protestant 
princes begged Melancthon to go himself and make these 
proposals to the legate.^ 

Melancthon agreed : he began to flatter himself with 
success ; and in truth there were, even among the pa- 
pists, individuals who were favorable to the Reforma- 
tion. There had recently arrived at Augsburg, from be- 
yond the Alps, certain propositions tolerably Lutheran, § 
and one of the emperor's confessors boldly professed the 
doctrine of justification by faith, cursing those asses 
of Germans," said he, **who are incessantly braying 
against this truth."|| One of Charles' chaplains ap- 
proved even the whole of the Confession. There was 
something farther still : Charles the Fifth having con- 
sulted the grandees of Spain, who were famous for their 
orthodoxy, " If the opinions of the Protestants are con- 
trary to the articles of the faith," they had replied, 
" let your majesty employ all his power to destroy this 
faction ; but if it is a question merely of certain 
changes in human ordinances and external usages, let 
all violence be avoided."^ " Admirable reply 1" ex- 
claimed Melancthon, who persuaded himself that the 

* Legati Norinberg ad Senatum. Corp. Ref. 2. 161. 

t Melaiicthon ad Due. Sax. Elect. Ibid. 162. { Principea 

:ioetri mis^Tunt nos ad R. D. V. Ibid. 171. § Pervenerunt ad 
nofl pi^posltiones qusedam Italicae satis Lutheranae. Ibid. 163. 

II Istis Germaais asinis, nobis in hac parte obgannientibus. lb. 

^ Hispanic! proceres praeclare et sapienter responierunt Cffisari 
[hid, 179. 



218 



HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



Romish doctrine was at the bottom in accordance with 
the gospel. 

The Reformation found defenders in even still higher 
stations. Mary, sister of Charles the Fifth, and widow 
of king Lcuis of Hungary, arriving at Augsburg three 
days after the reading of the Confession, with her sister- 
fn-law the queen of Bohemia, Ferdinand^s wife, assidu- 
ously studied the holy Scriptures ; she carried them with 
her to the hunting parties, in which she found little 
pleasure, and had discovered therein the jewel of the 
reform — the doctrine of gratuitous salvation. This pious 
princess made her chaplain read evangelical sermons to 
her, and often endeavored, although with prudence, to 
appease her brother Charles with regard to the Prot- 
estants.* 

Melancthon, encouraged by these demonstrations, and 
at the same time alarmed by the threats of war that the 
adversaries did not cease from uttering, thought it his 
duty to purchase peace at any cost, and resolved in con- 
sequence to descend in his propositions as low as possi- 
ble. He therefore demanded an interview with the 
legate in a letter whose authenticity has been unrea- 
sonably doubted.f At the decisive moment the heart 
of the reform champion fails, his head turns, he stag- 
gers, he falls ; and in his fall he runs the risk of drag- 
ging with him the cause which martyrs have already 
watered with their blood. 

Thus speaks the representative of the Reformation 
to the representative of the Papacy : 

"There is no doctrine in which we differ from the 
Roman church ; J we venerate the universal authority of 
the Roman pontiff, and we are ready to obey him, pro- 
vided he does not reject us, and that of his clemency, 
which he is accustomed to show towards all nations, he 
will kindly pardon or approve certain little things that 
ft is no longer possible for us to change. . . . Now then, 
will you reject those who appear as suppliants before 

* H &6eK^ avTOKparopoc studet nobis placare fratrem. Corp. Ref 
2. 178. t See the Corp. Ref. 2. 168. t Dogma niUluns 

tifltbemus diyersum ab Ecclesia Romana. Ibid. 170, 



LUTHER OPPOSES CONCESSlOxf. 219 



you ? Will you pursue them with fire and sword f . . . 
Alas, nothing draws upon us in Germany so much 
hatred, as the unshaken firmness with which we main* 
tain the doctrines of the Roman church.* But with the 
aid of God, we will remain faithful, even unto death, to 
Christ and to the Roman church, although you should 
Eeject us."f 

Thus did Melancthon humble himself. God permitted 
this fall, that future ages might clearly see how low the 
Reformation was willing to descend in order to maintain 
unity, and that no one might doubt that the schism had 
come from Rome ; but also, assuredly, that they might 
learn how great, in every important work, is the weak- 
ness of the noblest instruments. 

Fortunately there was then another man who upheld 
the honor of the Reformation. At this very time Luther 
wrote to Melancthon, "There can be no concord be- 
tween Christ and Belial. As far as regards me, I will 
not yield a hair^s breadth.J Sooner than yield, I should 
prefer suffering every thing, even the most terrible evils. 
Concede so much the less, as your adversaries require 
the more. God will not aid us until we are abandoned 
by all."§ And fearing some weakness on the part of his 
friends, Luther added, " If it were not tempting God, 
you would long ago have seen me at your side."|| 

Never, in fact, had Luther^s presence been so neces- 
sary, for the legate had consented to au interview, and 
Melancthon was about to pay court to Campeggio.^ 

The 8th of July was the day appointed by the legate. 
His letter inspired Philip with the most sanguine hopes. 
" The cardinal assures me that he will accede the usage 
of the two kinds, and the marriage of priests," said he ; 
"I am eager to visit him.'-** 

* Quam quia Ecclesiae Romanae dogmata summa constantia de* 
fendimus. Corp. Ref. 2. 170. f Vel si recusabitis nos in gra- 

tiam recipere. lb. J At certe pro mea persoaa, ne pilum qui- 
dem cedam. L. Epp. 4. 88. § Neque enim juvabimur nisi desert! 
prius simus. lb. 91. || Certc jamdudum coram vidissetis me. 

Ibid. 98. IF Ego multos prehensare soleo et Campegium etiam 
Corp. Ref. 2 193. ** Propero enim ad Campegium. Ibid. 174 



220 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOIT. 



This visit might decide the destiny of the church. If 
the legate accepted Philip's ultimatum, the evangelical 
countries would be replaced under the power of the 
Romish bishops, and all would have been over with the 
Reformation ; but it was saved through the pride and 
blindness of Rome. The Papists, believing it on the 
brink of the abyss, thought that a last blow would set^ 
tie it, and resolved, like Luther, to concede noth^'ug, 
" not even a hair's breadth." The legate, however, even 
while refusing, assumed an air of kindness, and of yield- 
ing to foreign influence. " I might have the power of 
making certain concessions, but it would not be prudent 
to use it without the consent of the German princes ;* 
their will must be done : one of them in particular con- 
jures the emperor to prevent us from yielding the least 
thing. I can grant nothing." The Roman prince, with 
the most amiable smile, then did all he could to gain the 
chief of the Protestant teachers. Melancthon retired 
filled with shame at the advances he had made, but still 
deceived by Campeggio. "No doubt," said he, "Eck 
and Cochloeus have been beforehand with me at the 
legate's."f Luther entertained a different opinion. " 1 
do not trust to any of these Italians," said he ; " they 
are scoundrels. When an Italian is good, he is very 
good ; but then he is a black swan." 

It was truly the Italians who were concerned. Short- 
ly after the 12th of July arrived the pope's instructions. 
He had received the Confession by express, J and sixteen 
days had sufficed for the transmission, the deliberation, 
and the return. Clement would hear no mention either 
of discussions or of council. Charles was to march 
straight to the mark, to send an army into Germany, 
and stifle the Reformation by force. At Augsburg, how- 
ever, it was thought best not to go so quickly to work, 
and recourse was had to other means. 

**Be quiet ; we have them," said the Romish doctors. 

• Se nihil posse decernere, nisi de voluntate principum Gei> 
maniae. Corp. Ref. 2. 174. f Forte ad legatum veniebant Eo- 
cios et Cochloeus. Ibid. 175. % Nostra (Jonfessio ad Romam 

per veredarios missa est Ibid. 186, 219, 



MELANo HON'S EXPLAN ATIOM . 



221 



Sensible of the reproach that had been made against 
them, of having misrepresented the Reformation, they 
accused the Protestants themselves of being the cause. 
"These it is,'' they said, "who, to give themselves an 
air of being in accord with us, now dissemble their 
heresy ; but we will catch them in their own nets, if 
they confess to not having inserted in their Confessicn 
all that they reject, it will be proved that they are tri- 
fling with us. If, on the contrary, they pretend to have 
said every thing, they will by that very circumstance be 
compelled to admit all that they have not condemned." 
The Protestant princes were therefore called together, 
and they were asked if the Reformation was confined to 
the doctrines indicated in the Apology, or if there was 
something more.* 

The snare was skilfully laid. The papacy had not 
even been mentioned in Melancthon's Confession ; other 
errors besides had been omitted, and Luther himself 
complained of it aloud. " Satan sees clearly," said he, 
" that your Apology has passed lightly over the articles 
of purgatory, the worship of saints, and above all, of the 
pope and of antichrist." The princes requested to con- 
fer with their allies of the towns ; and all the Protes- 
tants assembled to deliberate on this momentous inci- 
dent. 

They looked for Melancthon's explanation, who did 
not decline the responsibility of the affair. Easily de- 
jected through his own anxiety, he became bold when- 
ever he was directly attacked. " All the essential doO' 
trines," said he, " have been set forth in the Confession, 
and every error and abuse that is opposed to them has 
been pointed out. But was it necessary to plunge into 
all those questions so full of contention and animosity, 
that are discussed in our universities? Was it neces- 
sary to ask if all Christians are priests ; if the primacy of 
the pope is of right divine ; if there can be indulgences ; 
if every good work is a deadly sin ; if there are more than 
seven sacraments ; if they may be administered by a lay- 

* An plura velimus Caesan prasponere controversa quam f«9or^ 
Corp. Bef. 2. 188. 



222 HISTORY OF THE HEFOEMATIOW. 



man} if divine election has any foundation in our owd 
merits ; if sacerdotal consecration impresses an indelible 
character ; if auricular confession is necessary to salvar 
tion ? . . . No, no ; all these things are in the province 
of the schools, and by no means essential to faith."* 

It cannot be denied that in the questions thus pointed 
out by Melancthon there were important points. How- 
ever that may be, the evangelical committee iveve soon 
agreed, and on the morrow they gave an answer to 
Charles' ministers, drawn up with as much frankness as 
firmness, in which they said, that " the Protestants, de* 
sirous of arriving at a cordial understanding, had not 
wished to complicate their situation, and had proposed 
not to specify all the errors that had been introduced 
into the church, but to confess all the doctrines that 
were essential to salvation ; that if, nevertheless, the ad- 
verse party felt itself urged to maintain certain abuses, 
or to put forward any point not mentioned in the Con- 
fession, the Protestants declared themselves ready to 
reply in conformity with the word of God.^f The tone 
of this answer showed pretty clearly that the evangelical 
Christians did not fear to follow their adversaries where- 
ever the latter should call them. Accordingly the Ro- 
man party said no more on this business. 

* Melancthonis Judicium. Corp. Ref. 2. 182. f AuaGotnes 
Wovt weiter B'^rictt zu than. F. UrkuEd. 2. 19. 



THE EEFUTATIOH 



323 



CHAPTER IX 

rhe refutation — Charles^ dissatisfaction — Interview with the prinoea 

— The Swiss at Augsburg — Tetrapolitan Confession — Zwingle* 
confession — Afflicting divisions — The elector's faith — His peace 
— The lion's skin — The refutation — One concession — Scripture 
and the hierarchy — Imperial commands — Interview between Me- 
lancthon and Campeggio — Policy of Charles — Stormy meeting — 
Resolutions of the consistory — The prayers of the church — Two 
miracles — The emperor's menace — The princes' courage — The 
mask — Negotiations — The spectres at Spires — Tumult in Augs- 
burg. 

The commission charged to refate the Confession 
met twice a day,* and each of the theologians who com- 
posed it added to it his refutations and his hatred. 

On the 13th of July the work was finished. "Eck 
with his band,"f said Melancthon, " transmitted it to the 
emperor." Great was the astonishment of this prince 
and of his ministers at seeing a work of two hundred 
and eighty pages filled with abuse.| "Bad workmeu 
waste much wood," said Luther, and impious writers 
soil much paper." This was not all ; to the re^ntation 
were subjoined eight appendices on the heresies that 
Melancthon had dissembled, as they said, and wherein 
they exposed the contradictions and "the horrible sects'' 
to which Lutheranism had given birth. Lastly, not con- 
fining themselves to this official answer, the Romish 
theologians, who saw the sun of power shining upon 
them, filled Augsburg with insolent and abusive pamph 
lets. 

* There was but one opinion on the Papist refutation ; 
it was found confused, violent, thirsting for blood.§ 
Charles the Fifth had too much good taste not to per- 
ceive the difference that existed between this coarse 

* Bis die convenire dicuntur. Zw. Epp. 2. 472. f Ecciuf 

cum sua commanipulatione. Corp. Ref. 2. 193. J Longum et 
plenum conviciis t<criptum. Ibid. § Adeo confusa, incondita^ 
npleuta, sanguinolenta et crudeiis ut puduerint. Ibid. 198, 



224 HISTORY OF THE KEFGUMATION 



work and the noble dignity of Melancthon's Confession. 
He rolled, handled, crushed, and so damaged the two 
hundred and eighty pages of his doctors, that when ho 
returned them two days after, says Spalatin, there were 
not more than twelve entire. Charles would have been 
ashamed to have such a pamphlet read in the diet, and 
he required, in consequence, that it should be drawn up 
anew, shorter, and in more moderate language.* That 
was not easy, " for the adversaries, confused, and stupe- 
fied,'' says Brentz, by the noble simplicity of the evan- 
gelical Confession, neither knew where to begin nor 
where to end ; they accordingly took nearly three weeks 
to do their work over again."*}* 

Charles and his ministers had great doubts of its 
success ; leaving, therefore, the theologians for a mo- 
ment, they imagined another manoeuvre. " Let us take 
each of the Protestant princes separately," said they; 

isolated, they will not resist." Accordingly, on the 
15th of July, the margrave of Brandenburg was visited 
by his two cousins the electors of Mentz and of Bran- 
denburg, and by his two brothers the margraves Fred- 
erick and John Albert. "Abandon this new faith," said 
they to him, " and return to that which existed a cen- 
tury ago. If you do so, there are no favors that you 
may not expect from the emperor; if not, dread his 
anger."J 

Shortly after, the duke Frederick of Bavaria, the 
count of Nassau, De Rogendorf, and Truchses were an- 
nounced to the elector on the part of Charles. "You 
have solicited the emperor," said they, "to confirm the 
marriage of your son with the princess of Juliers, and 
to invest you with the electoral dignity ; but his majesty 
declares, that if you do not renounce the heresy of Lu 
ther, of which you are the principal abettor, he canriot. 
accede to your demand." At the same time the duke of 
Bavaria, employing the most urgent solicitations, accom- 

* Hodie auctoribus ipsis Sophistis, a Caesare fufrus esse redditam 
at emendetar et civilias compoiiatur. Corp. Ref. 2. 198. 

t Nostra confessione ita stupidos, attonitos, et cont'usoB. Ibid 
t Corp. Ref. 2. 206 ; F. Urkuud. 2. 98, 



THE SWISS AT AUaSBURa. 



225 



pauied with the most animated gestures* and the most 
sinister threats,f called upon the elector to abandon his 
faith. It is asserted," added Charles' envoys, " that 
you have made an alliance with the Swiss. The empe- 
ror cannot believe it ; and he orders you to let him know 
the truth." 

The Swiss ! it was the same thing as rebellion. This 
alliance was the phantom incessantly invoked at Augs- 
burg to alarm Charles the Fifth. And in reality depu- 
ties, or at least friends of the Swiss, had already appeared 
in that city, and thus rendered the position still more 
serious. 

Bucer had arrived two days before the reading of the 
Confession, and Capito on the day subsequent to it.J 
There was even a report that Zwingle would join them.§ 
But for a long time all in Augsburg, except the Stras- 
burg deputation, were ignorant of the presence of these 
doctors.jl It was only twenty-one days after their arri- 
val that Melancthon learned it positively,^ so great was 
the mystery in which the Zwinglians were forced to 
enshroud themselves. This was not without reason : a 
conference with Melancthon having been requested by 
them, " Let them write," replied he ; "I should com- 
promise our cause by an interview with them." 

Bucer and Capito in their retreat, which waR like a 
prison to them, had taken advantage of their leioure to 
draw up the Tetrapolitan Confession^ or the confession of 
the four cities. The deputies of Strasburg, Constance, 
Memmingen, and Lindau, presented it to the emperor.** 
These cities purged themselves from the reproach of 
war and revolt that had been continually objected 

* Mit reden und Gebehrden prachtig erzeigt. F. Urkund. 2. 207. 

t Minas dlras promissis ingentibus adjiciens. Zw. Epp. 2. 184. 

X Venimus hue, ego pridie solemnitatiu Divi Johannis, Capito die 
dominica sequente. Ibid. 472. § Rumor apud nos est, at te 

com tuis Helvetiis comitia advolaturum. Ibid. 431, 467. 

II Ita latent ut non quibuslibet sui copiam faciant. Corp. Ref. 
196. t Capito et Bucerus adsunt. Id hodie certo coior^ri. lb. 

•* CinglianjE civitates propriam Confessionem obtulerunt Ctesari. 
Ibid. 187. This Confession will be found in Niemeyer, CoUeotio 
ConfMffioQum, p. 470 

15 



226 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOIT. 



against them. They declared that their only motive wa<! 
Christ's glory, and professed the truth " freely, boldly, 
but without insolence and without scurrility."* 

Zwingle about the same time caused a private con- 
tession to be communicated to Charles, f which excited 
a general uproar. " Does he not dare to say," exclaimed 
the Romamsts, **that the mitred and withered race — by 
which he means the bishops — is in the church what 
humpbacks and the scrofula are in the body ?"J " Does 
he not insinuate," said the Lutherans, **that we are 
beginning to look back after the onions and garlic of 
Egypt ?" One might say with great truth tnat he had 
lost his senses," exclaimed Melancthon.§ " All ceremo- 
nies, according to him, ought to be abolished ; all the bish- 
ops ought to be suppressed. In a word, all is perfectly 
Helvetic^ that is to say, supremely barbarous." 

Ome man formed an exception to this concert of re* 
preaches, and this was Luther. Zwingle pleases me 
tolerably," wrote he to Jonas, " as well as Bucer."|| 
By Bucer, he meant no doubt the Tetrapolitan Confes- 
sion : this expression should be noted. 

Thus three confessions laid at the feet of Charles 
the Fifth attested the divisions which were rending 
Protestantism. In vain did Bucer and Capito endeavor 
to come to an understanding with Melancthon, and write 
to him, "We will meet where you will, and when you 
will ; we will bring Sturm alone wita us, and if you 
desire it, we will not even bring him."^ AH was una- 
vailing. It is not enough for a Christian coi).fess 
Christ ; one disciple should confess another disciple, 
even if the latter lies under the shame of the world ; 
but they did not then compreiiend tnis duty. " Schism 

• Ingenu^ ac fortiter ; citra procaciam tamen et sannas, id fateri 
et dicere quod res est. Zw. Epp. 2. 485, f See Niemever Coii. 
Conf. p. 16. X Pedatum et mitratum genus Episcoporum, id 

esset in Ecclesia, quc-i gibbi et strumata in corpore. Ibid. Zw in- 
gle compares the bishops to the dry and fruitless proDS that supporl 
the vine*, § Dicas simpllciter mente captum esse. Corp. Ref. 
p 193. II Zwinglius mihi sane placet, et Bucerus. L. Epp. 

110. f Yeaiemui quo et quando tu YOies. Corp. Ref. 2. %^ 



AFFLICTINa DIVISIONS. 



227 



h in the schism," said the Romanists, and the emperor 
flattered himself with an easy victory. Return to the 
church," was the cry from every side ; " which means," 
interrupted the Strasburgers, **let us put the bitinyoui 
mouths, that we may lead you as we please."* 

All these things deeply afflicted the elector, who wa© 
besides still under the burden of Charles' demands and 
threats. The emperor had not once spoken to him,f and 
it was everywhere said that his cousin George of Saxony 
would be proclaimed elector in his stead. 

On the 28th of July there was a great festival at the 
court. Charles, robed in his imperial garments, whose 
value was said to exceed 200,000 gold ducats, and dis- 
playing an air of majesty which impressed respect and 
fear, J conferred on many princes the investiture of their 
dignities ; the elector alone was excluded from these 
favors. Erelong he was made to understand more plain- 
ly what was reserved for him, and it was insinuated, 
that if he did not submit the emperor would expel him 
from his states, and inflict upon him the severest pun- 
i8hment."§ 

The elector turned pale, for he doubted not that such 
would certainly be the termination. How with his small 
territory could he resist that powerful monarch who had 
just vanquished France and Italy, and now saw Germa- 
ny at his feet ? And besides, if he could do it, had he 
the right ? Frightful nightmares pursued John in his 
dreams. He beheld himself stretched beneath an im- 
mense mountain under which he lay painfully struggling, 
while his cousin George of Saxony stood on the summit 
and seemed to brave him. 

John at length came forth from this furnace. **I 
must either renounce God or the world," said he. Well^ 
my choice is not doubtful. It is God who made me elec- 
tor — me, who was not worthy of it. I fling myself into 

* Una tamen omnium vox : Revertimini ad Ecclesiam. Zw. Epp^ 
%. 484 t Colloquium ejus noudum frui potuisse. Seek. 2. 154. 

} Apparuit Caesar majestate .... insiguitus vestibus suis impe- 
rialibus. Corp. Ref. 2. 242. § Miiller, Gesch. der Protest* 

tioQ, 1^ 715. 



228 HI8T0EY OF THE REPOEMATIOM. 



His arms, and let him do with me what shall seem good 
to him." Thus the elector by faith stopped the mouths 
of lions and subdued kingdoms. Heb. 11 : 33, 34. 

All evangelical Christendom had taken part in the 
struggle of John the Persevering. It was seen that 11 
ho should now fall, all would fall with him ; and they 
endeavored to support him. " Fear not," cried the Chris- 
tians of Magdeburg, " for your highness is under Christ's 
banner."* "Italy is in expectation," wrote they from 
Venice ; "if for Christ's glory you must die, fear noth- 
ing."f But it was from a higher source that John's 
courage was derived. " I beheld Satan as lightning fall 
from heaven," said his Master. Luke 10 : 18. The elec- 
tor, in like manner, beheld in his dreams George fall 
from the top of the mountain, and lie dashed in pieces at 
his feet. 

Once resolved to lose every thing, John, free, happy, 
and tranquil, assembled his theologians. These gener- 
ous men desired to save their master. " Gracious lord," 
said Spalatin, " recollect that the word of God, being the 
sword of the Spirit, must be upheld, not by the seculai 
power, but by the hand of the Almighty ."J " Yes," said 
all the doctors, " we do not wish that, to save us, you 
should risk your children, your subjects, your states, 

your crown We will rather give ourselves into 

the hands of the enemy, and conjure him to be satisfied 
with our blood."§ John, touched by this language, re- 
fused, however, their solicitations, and firmly repeated 
these words, which had become his device, " I also desire 
to confess my Saviour." 

It was on the 20th of July that he replied to the 
pressing arguments by which Charles had endeavored 
to shake him. He proved to the emperor, that being his 
brother's legitimate heir, he could not refuse him the 
investiture, which, besides, the diet of Worms had se- 

♦ Unter dem Heerpannyr Jesu Christi. Miiller, p, 131 
t Etiamsi mors subeunda tibi foret ob Christi gloriam. Corp. 
Bef. 2. 228. L. P. Roselli. J Gottes Wort keineewegs durcb 

weitlich Schwert F. Urkund. 2. 82. § Sie wollen iliDev 

an ihrem Blate geniigen lassen. Ibid. 90. 



CONTOOATION OP THE STATES. 229 



cnred to hitn. He added, that he did not blindly oelieve 
wLat his doctors said, but having* recognized the word 
of God to be the foundation of their teaching, he con- 
fessed anew, and without any hesitation, all the articles 
of the Apology. " I therefore entreat your majesty,'' 
continued he, " to permit me and mine to render an ao 
count to God alone of what concerns the salvation of out 
Bouls.''* The margrave of Brandenburg made the same 
reply. Thus failed this skilful manoeuvre, by which the 
Romanists had hoped to break the strength of the Ref- 
ormation. 

Six weeks had elapsed since the Confession, and as 
yet there was no reply. " The Papists, from the moment 
they heard the Apology," it was said, " suddenly lost 
their voice."f At length the Romish theologians handed 
their revised and corrected performance to the emperor, 
and persuaded this prince to present it in his own name. 
The mantle of the state seemed to them admirably adapt- 
ed to the movements of Rome. "These sycophants," 
said Melancthon, "have desired to clothe themselves 
with the lion's skin, to appear to us so much the more 
terrible."! All the states of the empire were convoked 
for the next day but one. 

On Wednesday, the 3d of August, at two o'clock in 
the afternoon, the emperor sitting on his throne in the 
chapel of the palatinate palace, attended by his brother, 
with the electors, princes, and deputies, the elector of 
Saxony and his allies were introduced, and the count- 
palatine, who was called " Charles' mouth-piece," said to 
them, " His majesty having handed your Confession to 
several doctors of different nations, illustrious by their 
knowledge, their morals, and their impartiality, has read 
their reply with the greatest care, and submits it to you 
as his own."§ 

Alexander Schweiss then took the papers and read 

♦ Forstemann's Urkundenbuch, pp. 80-92, 113-119. 
f Papistas obrautuisse ad ipsorum Confessionem. Cochl. p. 195 
X Voluerunt sycophantae theologi XeovTfjv illam sibi circumdare 
ot CBsent nobis formidabiliores. Corp. Ref. p. 252. § Velat 

saum suaque publica auctoritate roboratum. Urkund. 2. Ui. 



230 HISTORY OP THE REPOUMATION 



the refutation. The Roman party approved some artf 
cles of the Confession, condemned others, and in ceitain 
less salient passages it distinguished between what 
must be rejected and what accepted. 

It gave way on an important point, the opus operatum. 
The Protestants having said in their thirteenth article 
that faith was necessary in the sacrament, the Romish 
party assented to it ; thus abandoning an error which 
the papacy had so earnestly defended against Luther in 
that very city of Augsburg, by the mouth of Cajetan. 

Moreover, they recognized as truly Christian the 
evangelical doctrine on the Trinity, on Christ, on bap- 
tism, on eternal punishment, and on the origin of evil. 

But on all the other points, Charles, his princes, and 
his theologians, declared themselves immovable. They 
maintained that men are born with the fear of God, that 
good works are meritorious, and that they justify in 
union with faith. They upheld the seven sacraments, 
the mass, transubstantiation, the withdrawal of the cup, 
the celibacy of priests, the invocation of saints, and 
denied that the church was an assembly of the saints. 

This refutation was skilful in some respects, and 
above all, in what concerned the doctrine of works and 
of faith. But on other points, in particular on the with- 
drawal of the cup and the celibacy of priests, its argu- 
ments were lamentably weak, and contrary to the well- 
known facts of history. 

While the Protestants had taken their stand on the 
Scriptures, their adversaries supported the divine origin 
of the hierarchy, and laid down absolute submission to 
its laws. Thus the essential character which still dis- 
tinguishes Rome from the Reformation, stood promi- 
nently forth in this first combat. 

Among the auditors who filled the chapel of the 
palatinate palace, concealed in the midst of the deputies 
of Nuremberg, was Joachim Camerarius, who, while 
Schweiss was reading, leaned over his tablets and care- 
fully noted down all he could collect. At the same time 
others of the Protestants, speaking to one another, were 
indignant, and even laughed, as one of their opponents 



EFFECTS OF THE REFUTATIOK. 



231 



aasuies us.* Really," said they with one consent, 
" the whole of this refutation is worthy of Eck, Faber, 
and Cochloeus." 

As for Charles, little pleased with these theological 
dissertations, he slept during the reading ;f but he 
awoke when Schweiss had finished, and his awakening 
was that of a lion. 

The count^palatine then declared that his majesty 
found the articles of this refutation orthodox, catholic, 
and conformable to the gospel ; that he therefore re- 
quired the Protestants to abandon their Confession, now 
refuted, and to adhere to all the articles which had just 
been set forth ;J that, if they refused, the emperor would 
remember his office, and would know how to show him- 
self the advocate and defender of the Roman church. 

This language was clear enough ; the adversaries 
imagined they had refuted the Protestants by command- 
ing the latter to consider themselves beaten. Violence, 
arms, war, were all contained in these cruel words of 
Charles' minister. § The princes represented that, as 
the refutation adopted some of their articles and rejected 
others, it required a careful examination, and they con- 
sequently begged a copy should be given them. 

The Romish party had a long conference on this de- 
mand : night was at hand ; the count-palatine replied 
that, considering the late hour and the importance of 
this affair, the emperor would make known his pleasure 
somewhat later. The diet separated, and Charles the 
Fifth, exasperated at the audacity of the evangelical 
princes, says Cochloeus, returned in ill humor to his 
apartments. II 

The Protestants, on the contrary, withdrew full of 
peace ; the reading of the refutation having given them 
as much confidence as that of the Confession itself.^ 

• Multi e Lutheranis inept^ cachinnabantur. Cochl. 895. 

t Imper&tor iterum obdormivit. Corp. Ref. 2. 245. { Petiit 
Cseear ut omnes in iUos articulos consentiant. lb. § Oratioiii« 
lumma atrox. Ibid. 253. || Caesar noa ajquo animo ferebat 

eorum contumaciam. Cochl. 195. ^ Facti sunt orectiore anima 
Corp Ref. 2. 269. 



232 HISTOHr OP THS REFORMATIOIT. 



They saw in their adversaries a strong attachment to 
the hierarchy, but a great ignorance of the gospel, a 
characteristic feature of the Romish party; and this 
thought encouraged them. Certainly," said they, 
"the church cannot be where there is no knowledge of 
Christ."* 

Melancthon alone was still alarmed : he walked by 
eight and not by faith, and remembering the legate's 
smiles, he had another interview with him as early as 
the 4th of August, still demanding the cup for the laity, 
and lawful wives for the priests. " Then," said he, "our 
pastors will place themselves again under the govern- 
ment of bishops, and we shall be able to prevent thos 5 
innumerable sects with which posterity is threatened.^'f 
Melancthon's glance into the future is remarkable : it 
does not, however, mean that he, like many others, pre- 
ferred a dead unity to a living diversity. 

Campeggio, now certain of triumphing by the sword, 
disdainfully handed this paper to CochlcBus, who hast- 
ened to refute it. It is hard to say whether Melancthon 
or Campeggio was the more infatuated. God did not 
permit an arrangement that would have enslaved his 
church. 

Charles passed the whole of the 4th, and the morn- 
ing of the 5th of August, in consultation with the ultra- 
montane party. " It will never be by discussion that 
we shall come to an understanding," said some; "and 
if the Protestants do not submit voluntarily, it only 
remains for us to compel them." They nevertheless 
decided, on account of the refutation, to adopt a middle 
course. During the whole of the diet, Charles pursued 
a skilful policy. At first he refused every thing, hoping 
to lead away the princes by violence ; then he conceded 
a few unimportant points, under the impression that the 
Protestants, having lost all hope, would esteem so much 
the more the little he yielded to them. This was what 
he did again under the present circumstances. In the 
afternoon of the 5th, the count-palatine announced that 

* Ecclesiam ibi non esse, ubi ignoratur Christus. f Quod niti 
9et, quid in tot seotis ad posteros fu^urum sit. Corp. Ref. 2. 148^ 



IKBiaNATION OF THE PAPISlB. 233 



the emperor would give them a copy of the refutation, 
but on these conditions: namely, that the Protestants 
should not reply, that they should speedily agree with 
the emperor, and that they would not print or communi- 
cate to any one the refutation that should be confided to 
them.* 

This communication excited murmurs among the 
Protestants. "These conditions," said they all, "are 
inadmissible." "The Papists present us with theii 
paper," added the Chancellor Bruck, " as the fox offered 
a thin broth to his gossip the stork." 

The savory broth upon a plate by Reynard was served up, 

But Mistress Stork, with her long beak, she could not get a fiap.t 

** If the refutation," continued he, " should come to be 
known without our participation — and how can we pre- 
vent it? — we shall be charged with it as a crime. Let 
us beware of accepting so perfidious an ofier.J We 
already possess in the notes of Camerarius several arti- 
cles of this paper, and if we omit any point, no one will 
have the right to reproach us with it." 

On the next day, the 6th of August, the Protestants 
declared to the diet that they preferred declining the 
copy thus offered to them, and appealed to God and to 
his majesty.§ They thus rejected all that the empe- 
ror proposed to them, even what he considered as a 
favor. 

Agitation, anger, and affright were manifested on 
every bench of that august assembly. || This reply of 
the evangelicals was war, was rebellion. George of 
Saxony, the princes of Bavaria, all the violent adherents 
of Rome, trembled with indignation ; there was a sud- 
den, an impetuous movement, an explosion of murmurs 
and of hatred ; and it might have been feared that th^ 
two parties would have come to blows in the very pres- 

* F. Urkund. 2. 179; Corp. Ref. 2. 256; Briick, Apol. 72. 

t Gluck wie der Fuchs brauchet, da or den Storch zu gast lud 
Briick, Apol. 74. J Quando exemplum per alios in vulgus exire 
poterat. Corp. Ref. 2. 76. § Dass sie esGott undKays. M^j. be- 
fehlen mussten. Urkund. 2 181. 1* Uud darob wie man Spuioo 
mag ein EnUetzen gehabt. Ibid. 



234 



HISTORY OF TH^ EEFORMATIOK. 



ence of the emperor, if Archbishop Albert, the elector of 
Brandenburg, and the dukes of Brunswick, Poraerania, 
and Mecklenburg, rushing between them, had not con- 
jured the Protestants to put an end to this deplorable 
combat, and not drive the emperor to extremities.* TLe 
diet separated, their hearts filled with emotion, ajpre^ 
hension, and trouble. 

Never had the diet proposed such fatal alternatives. 
The hopes of agreement set forth in the edict of convo- 
cation had only been a deceitful lure : now the mask 
was thrown aside ; submission or the sword — such was 
the dilemma offered to the Reformation. All announced 
that the day of tentatives was passed, and that they 
were beginning one of violence. 

In truth, on the 6th of July, the pope had assembled 
the consistory of cardinals in his palace at Rome, and 
had made known to them the Protestant ultimatum : 
namely, the cup for the laity, the marriage of priests, 
the omission of the invocation of saints in the sacrifice 
of the mass, the use of ecclesiastical property already 
secularized, and for the rest, the convocation of a coun- 
cil. " These concessions," said the cardinals, " are op- 
posed to the religion, discipline, and laws of the church.f 
We reject them, and vote our thanks to the emperor for 
the zeal which he employs in bringing back the desert- 
ers." The pope having thus decided, every attempt at 
conciliation became useless. 

Campeggio, on his side, redoubled in zeal. He spoke 
as if in his person the pope himself were present at 
Augsburg.J " Let the emperor and the right-thinking 
princes form a league," said he to Charles ; " and if these 
rebels, equally insensible to threats and promises, ob- 
Btinately persist in their diabolical course, then let his 
majesty seize fire and sword, let him take possession of 
all the property of the heretics, and utterly eradicate 

* Hi accedunt ad nostros principes et jubent omittere hoc certa- 
men, ne Caesar vehementius commoveatur. C »rp. Ref. 2. 254. 

t Oppositas religioni, disciplinse, legibusque Ecclesiae. Pallay. 
1. 234. I Als were der Papst selbst gegenwartig gewest. Bruck, 
Apol. 62. 



THE PRATEBS OF THE CHITRCH. 



235 



these venomous plants.* Then let him appoint holy 
inquisitors, who shall go on the track of the remnants 
of Reformation, and proceed against them, as in Spain 
against the Moors. Let him put the university of Wit- 
temberg under ban, burn the heretical books, and send 
back the fugitive monks to their convents. But thia 
plan must be executed with courage." 

Thus the jurisprudence of Rome consisted, according 
to a prophecy uttered against the city which is seated 
on seven hills," in adorning itself with pearls that it 
had stolen, and in becoming drunk with the blood of the 
saints. Rev. ch. It, 18. 

While Charles was thus urged on with blind fury by 
the diet and the pope, the Protestant princes, restrained 
by a mute indignation, did not open their mouths,f and 
hence they seemed to betray a weakness of which the 
emperor was eager to profit. But there was also strength 
concealed under this weakness. "We have nothing left," 
exclaimed Melancthon, " but to embrace our Saviour's 
knees." In this they labored earnestly. Melancthon 
begged for Luther's prayers ; Brentz for those of his 
own church : a general cry of distress and of faith ran 
through evangelical Germany. You shall have sheep," 
said Brentz, if you will send us sheep : you know what 
I mean."J The sheep that were to be offered in sacrifice 
were the prayers of the saints. 

The church was not wanting to itself. Assembled 
every day," wrote certain cities to the electors, we beg 
for you strength, grace, and victory — victory full of joy." 
But the man of prayer and faith was especially Luther. 
A calm and sublime courage, in which firmness shines 
at the side of joy — a courage that rises and exults in 
proportion as the danger increases — is what Luther's 
letters at this time present in every line. The most 

* Se alciini .... perseverassero in questa diabolica via quella 
S. M. potra mettere la mano al ferro e al foco et radicitus extirpare 
questa venenata pianta. Instructio data Caesari a reverendissimo 
Canipeggi in dieta Augustana, 1530. f Tacita indignatio. 

Corp. Ref. 2. 254. | Habebitis oves, si oves ad nos mittatif '. 

intelligitis qu» volo. Ibid. 246. 



236 HISTOHY- OF THE REF011M.ATI0JT. 



poetical images are pale beside those energetic exprefr 
sions which issue in a boiling torrent from the reformer'a 
B^ul. " I have recently witnessed two miracles," wrote 
he on the 6th of August to Chancellor Bruck : " this ig 
the first. As I was at my window, I saw the stars and 
the sky, and that vast and magnificent firmament i? 
which the Lord has placed them. I could nowhere dis- 
cover the columns on which the Master has supported 
this immense vault, and yet the heavens did not fall. . , 

"And here is the second. I beheld thick clouds 
hanging above us like a vast sea. I could neither per- 
ceive ground on which they reposed, nor cords by which 
they were suspended ; and yet they did not fall upon us, 
but saluted us rapidly and fled away. 

" God,'' continued he, " will choose the manner, the 
time, and the place suitable for deliverance, and he will 
not linger. What the men of blood have begun, they 
have not yet finished. . . . Our rainbow is faint. . . their 
clouds are threatening. . . . the enemy comes against us, 
with frightful machines. . . . But at last it will be seen 
to whom belong the ballistae, and from what hands the 
javelins are launched.* It is no matter if Luther per- 
ishes : if Christ is conqueror, Luther is conqueror also."f 

The Roman party, who did not know what was the 
victory of faith, imagined themselves certain of success. 

The doctors having refuted the Confession, the Prot- 
estants ought, they imagined, to declare themselves con- 
vinced, and all would then be restored to its ancient 
footing : such was the plan of the emperor's campaign. 
He therefore urged and called upon the Protestants ; but 
instead of submitting, they announced a refutation of 
the Refutation. Upon this Charles looked at his sword, 
and all the princes who surrounded him did the same 

John of Saxony understood what that meant, but he 
remained firm. " The straight line," said he — the axiom 
was familiar to him — is the shortest road." It is this 
indomitable firmness that has secured for him in history 

♦ In fine videbitur ciyus toni. ... L. Epp. 4. 130. f Yincal 
Gbristus modo, nihil refert si pereat Lutherus, quia yictore Chhi^ 
victor erit. Foid. 139. 



THB COMEDIANS BEFORE CHARLES. 237 



the name of John the Persevering. He was not alone : 
all those Protestant princes who had grown up in the 
midst of courts, and who were habituated to pay an 
humble obedience to the emperor, at that time found in 
their faith a noble independence that confounded Charles 
the Fifth. 

With the design of gaining the Marquis of Branden- 
b'jrg, they opened to him the possibility of according 
aim some possessions in Silesia on which he had claims. 
" If Christ is Christ," replied he, the doctrine that I 
have confessed is truth." " But do you know," quickly 
replied his cousin the Elector Joachim, **what is your 
stake ?" " Certainly," replied the margrave, it is said 
I shall be expelled from this country. Well, may God 
protect me." One day Prince Wolfgang of Anhalt met 
Doctor Eck. "Doctor," said he, "you are exciting to 
war, but you will find those who will not be behindhand 
with you. I have broken many a lance for my friends 
in my time. My Lord Jesus Christ is assuredly worthy 
that I should do as much for him." 

At the sight of this resolution, each one asked him- 
self whether Charles, instead of curing the disease, was 
not augmenting it. Reflections, criticisms, jests, passed 
between the citizens ; and the good sense of the people 
manifested in its own fashion what they thought of the 
folly of their chief. We will adduce one instance. 

It is said that one day, as the emperor was at table 
with several Roman-catholic princes, he was informed 
that some comedians begged permission, according to 
custom, to amuse their lordships. First appeared an 
old man wearing a mask, and dressed in a doctor^s robe, 
who advanced with difficulty carrying a bundle of sticks 
in his arms, some straight and some crooked.* He 
approached the wide fireplace of the Gothic hall, threw 
down his load in disorder, and immediately withdrew. 
Charles and the courtiers read on his back the inscrip- 
tion, John Reuchlin. Then appeared another mask with 
an intelligent look, who made every exertion to pair 

* Persona larva contecta, habitu doctorali, portabat Btruem 
ooram. T. L. Fabricius, opp. omnia, 2. 231. 



238 HISTORY OF THE KEFORMaTIOK. 



he straight and the crooked pieces ;* but finding his 
labor useless, he shook his head, turned to the door, and 
disappeared. They read, Erasmus of Rotterdam. Almost 
immediatel}'' after advanced a monk with bright eye and 
decided gait, carr3ring a brasier of lighted coals f He 
put the wood in order, set fire to it, blew and stiiTcd it 
up, so that the flame rose bright and sparkling into the 
air. He then retired, and on his back were the words, 
Martin Luther. 

Next approached a magnificent personage, covered 
with all the imperial insignia, who, seeing the fire so 
bright, drew his sword, and endeavored by violent 
thrusts to extinguish it ; but the more he struck, the 
fiercer buraed the flames, and at last he quitted the 
hall in indignation. His name, as it would seem, was 
not made known to the spectators, but all divined it. 
The general attention was soon attracted by a new 
character. A man, wearing a surplice and a mantle of 
red velvet, with an alb of white wool that reached to 
his heels, and having a stole round his neck, the ends 
ornamented with pearls, advanced majestically. Be- 
nolding the flames that already filled the hearth, he 
wrung his hands in terror, and looked around for some- 
thing to extinguish them. He saw two vessels at the 
very extremity of the hall, one filled with water, and 
the other with oil. He rushed towards them, seized 
unwittingly on that containing the oil, and threw it on 
the fire.J The flame then spread with such violence 
that the mask fled in alarm, raising his hands to heaven ; 
on his back was read the name of Leo X. 

The mystery was finished ; but instead of claiming 
their remuneration, the pretended actors had disappear- 
ed. No one asked the moral of this drama. 

The lesson, however, proved useless ; and the ma* 
iority of the diet, assuming at the same time the part 
assigned to the emperor and the pope, began to prepare 
the means necessary for extinguishing the fire kindled 

* Hie conabatur curva rectis exaequare lignis. T. L. Fabricius 
opp. onmia, 2. 231. f In azula fereris ignem et prunas. Ibid, 
t CurreoB in amphoram oleo pleuam. Ibid. 232. 



THE SPECTRES AT SPIEES. 



239 



by Luther. They negotiated in Italy with the duke of 
Mantua, who engaged to send a few regiments of light 
cavalry across the Alps ;* and in England with Henry 
VIII., who had not forgotten Luther's reply, and who 
promised Charles through his ambassador, an immense 
subsidy to destroy the heretics. f 

At the same time frightful prodigies announced the 
gloomy future which threatened the reform. At Spires 
fearful spectres in the shape of monks with angry eyes 
and hasty steps had appeared during the night. " What 
do you want they had been asked. We are going," 
they replied, "to the diet of Augsburg." The circum- 
stance had been carefully investigated, and was found 
perfectly trustworthy. J The interpretation is not dif- 
ficult," exclaimed Melancthon ; " evil spirits are coming 
to Augsburg to counteract our exertions, and to destroy 
peace. They forebode horrible troubles to us.''! No 
one doubted this. " Every thing is advancing towards 
war," said Erasmus.|| "The diet will not terminate," 
wrote Brentz, " except by the destruction of all Germa- 
ny."^ There will be a slaughter of the saints," ex- 
claimed Bucer, " which will be such that the massacres 
of Diocletian will scarcely come up to it."** War and 
blood 1 this was the general cry. 

Suddenly, on the night of Saturday, the 6th of Au- 
gust, a great disturbance broke out in the city of Augs- 
burg.ff There was running to and fro in the streets ; 
messengers from the emperor were galloping in every 
direction ; the senate was called together and received 

• Che tentano col Duca di Montana d' avere 11 modo di condurre 
1,000 cavalli leggier! d' Italia in caso si facesse guerra in German- 
ica. Nic. Tiefolo Relat. f Cui (Cassari) ingentem vim pecunige 
in hoc sacrum bellum contra haereticos Anglus promisisse fertur. 
Zw. Epp. 2. 484. i Res et diligenter inquisita et explorata 

maximeque d^Lomaroc. Corp. Ref. 2. 259. § Monachorum Spi- 

rensium <}>dafia plane significat horribilem tumultum. Ibid. 260. 

II Vides rem plane tendere ad bellum. Corp. Ref. Aug. 12, p. 268. 

IF Comitia non finientur nisi totius Germanice malo et exitio. 
Corp. Ref. 2. 216. Laniena sanctorum qualis vix Diocletiani 

tempore fuit. Buc. Ep. Aug. 14, 1530. ft Tumultum magnua 
^liase la civitate. Corp. Ref. 2. 277. 



240 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 

an order to allow no one to pass the gates of the city.* 
All were afoot in the imperial barracks ; the soldiers got 
ready their arms ; the regiments were drawn up, and at 
daybreak — about three o'clock on Sunday morning — ^the 
emperor's troops, in opposition to the custom always 
observed in the diet, relieved the soldiers of the city and 
hook possession of the gates. At the same time it was 
reported that these gates would not be opened, and that 
Charles had given orders to keep a strict watch upon 
the elector and his allies. f A terrible awakening for 
those who still flattered themselves with seeing the 
religious debates conclude peacefully. Might not these 
anheard-of measures be the commencement of wars, and 
the signal of a frightful massacre ? 

* Facto autem intempesta nocte Caesar senatui mandavit. 06 
qiienquam per port is urbis suae emittsnt. Corp. Ref. 2. 277. 

t Dass man auf den ChurfiiiiBt zjl Sachsen Aufsehen haben soil. 
Bitick. ApoL p. 80. 



PHILIP OF HB8SE 



241 



CHAPTER X. 

Philip of Hesse — Temptation — Union resisted — The Landgrave'a 
diesinmlation — The Emperor's order to the Protestants — Bran- 
denburg's threatening speeches — Resolution of Philip of Hesse — 
Flight from Augsburg — Discovery — Charles' emotion— Revolu- 
tion in the diet — Metamorphosis — Unusual moderation — Peace, 
peace! 

Trouble and anger prevailed in the imperial palace, 
and it was the landgrave who had caused them. Firm 
as a rock in the midst of the tempest with which he was 
surrounded, Philip of Hesse had never bent his head to 
the blast. One day in a public assembly, addressing 
the bishops, he had said to them, My lords, give peace 
to the empire ; we beg it of you. If you will not do so, 
and if I must fall, be sure that I will drag one or two 
of you along with me.'' They saw it was necessary to 
employ milder means with him, and the emperor endeav- 
ored to gain him by showing a favorable disposition 
with respect to the county of Katzenellenbogen, about 
which he was at variance with Nassau, and to Wurtem- 
berg, which he claimed for his cousin Ulric. On his 
side Duke George of Saxony, his father-in-law, had as- 
sured him that lie would make him his heir if he would 
submit to the pope. " The}' carried him to an exceeding 
high mountain, whence they showed him all the king- 
doms of the world, and the glory thereof,''* says a chron- 
icler, but the landgrave resisted the temptation 

One day he heard that the emperor had manifested a 
desire to speak to him. He leaped instantly on his horse 
and appeared before Oharles.f The latter, who had with 
him his secretary Schweiss and the bishop of Constance, 
represented that he had four complaints against him : 
namely, of having violated the edict of Worms, of de- 
spising the mass, of having during his absence exciteo 

* Auf den hohen berg gefiihrt. Lanze's Chronik. t 
(Hm eelbst gen Hof geritten. Corp. Ref. 2. 165, 

BififCIUr. XT I 5 



242 HISTORY OP THE REFORMATION. 



all kinds of revolt, and finally, of having transmitted 
to him a book in which his sovereign rights were at- 
tacked. The landgrave justified himself ; and the en» 
peror said that he accepted his replies, except with 
regard to the faith, and begged him to show himself in 
that respect entirely submissive to his majesty. " What 
would you say,'' added Charles, in a winning tone, " if I 
elevated you to the regal dignity ?* But if you show 
yourself rebellious to my orders, then I shall behave as 
becomes a Roman emperor." 

These words exasperated the landgrave, but they 
did not move him. " I am in the flower of my age," 
replied he, " and I do not pretend to despise the joys of 
life and the favor of the great; but to the deceitful 
goods of this world I shall always prefer the ineflable 
grace of my God." Charles was stupefied ; he could not 
understand Philip. 

From this time the landgrave had redoubled his ex- 
ertions to unite the adherents of the Reformation. The 
Zwinglian cities felt that, whatever was the issue of the 
diet, they would be the first victims, unless the Saxons 
should give them their hand. But this there was some 
difficulty in obtaining. 

" It does not appear to me useful to the public weal, 
or safe for the conscience," wrote Melancthon to Bu(*er, 
" to load our princes with all the hatred your doctrine 
inspires."f The Strasburgers replied, that the real 
cause of the Papists' hatred was not so much the doo* 
trine of the eucharist as that of justification by faith. 
" All we who desire to belong to Christ," said they, " are 
one, and have nothing to expect but death."J 

This was true ; but another motive besides checked 
Melancthon. If all the Protestants united, they would 
feel their strength, and war would be inevitable. Ther^ 
fore, then, no union. 

The landgrave, threatened by the emperor, rejected 

* Quin et in regem te evehendum curabimus. Rommel, Philip 
der Gr. 1. 268. f Nostios principes onerare invidia vestri dofj^ 
matit. Corp. Ref. 2. 221. X Arctlssime quoque inter nof ooo* 
jancti essemus, qaotquot Christi esse volumus. Ibid. 236^ 



OHAELES AND THE LANDOEAVK. 



243 



by the theologians, began to ask himself what he did at 
Augsburg. The cup was full. Charles' refusal to com- 
municate the Romish refutation, except on inadmissible 
conditions, made it run over. Philip of Hesse saw but 
one course to take, to quit the city. 

Scarcely had the emperor made known the ccndi 
tidna which he placed on the communication of the r© 
ply, than on Friday evening, the 6th of August, the 
landgrave, going alone to the count-palatine, Charles 
minister, had begged for an immediate audience with 
his majesty. Charles, who did not care to see him, pre- 
tended to be busy, and had put oflF Philip until the fol- 
lowing Sunday.* But the latter answered that he could 
not wait; that his wife, who was dangerously ill, en- 
treated him to return to Hesse without delay ; and that, 
being one of the youngest princes, the meanest in under- 
standing, and useless to Charles, he humbly begged his 
majesty would permit him to leave on the morrow. The 
emperor refused. 

We may well understand the storms this refusal ex- 
cited in Philip's mind, but he knew how to contain him- 
self ; never had he appeared more tranquil ; during the 
whole of Saturday, the 6th of August, he seemed occu- 
pied only with a magnificent tourney in honor of the 
emperor and of his brother Ferdinand.f He prepared 
for it publicly ; his servants went to and fro, but under 
that din of horses and of armor, Philip concealed very 
difierent designs. *'The landgrave conducts himselt 
with very great moderation," wrote Melancthon to Lu- 
ther the same day.J He told me openly that, to pre- 
serve peace, he would submit to conditions still harder 
than those which the emperor imposes on us, and accept 
all that he could without dishonoring the gospel." 

Yet Charles was not at ease. The landgrave's de- 
mand pursued him ; all the Protestants might do the 
Bame, and even quit Augsburg unexpectedly. The clue 

* Gum imperator dilationem respondendi astu quodam accepiasett 
Corp. Ref. 2. 254, 276. f Ad ludos equestres in honorem Caesarif 
InBtituendos publice sese apparavit. Seek. 2. 172 X Laodgra^ 
v|i|8 valde moderate se gerit Corp- Ref. 2 254. 



244 HISTOEY OF THE REFOEMATION. 



that he had hitherto so skilfully held in his hands, was 
perhaps about to be broken : it was better to be violent 
than ridiculous. The emperor therefore resolved on 
striking a decisive blow. The elector, the princes, the 
deputies, were still in Augsburg ; and he must at every 
risk prevent their leaving it. Such were the heavy 
thougrhts that on the night of the 6th of August, while 
the Protestants were calmly sleeping,* banished repose 
from Charles' eyes ; and which made him hastily arouse 
the councillors of Augsburg, and send his messengers 
and soldiers through the streets of the city. 

The Protestant princes were still slumbering, when 
they received, on the part of the emperor, the unexpect- 
ed order to repair immediately to the hall of the chap- 
ter.f 

It was eight o'clock when they arrived. They found 
there the electors of Brandenburg and Mentz, the dukes 
of Saxony, Brunswick, and Mecklenburg, the bishops of 
Salzburg, Spires, and Strasburg, George Truchses the 
margrave of Baden's representative, Count Martin of 
(Elting, the abbot of Weingarten, and the provost of 
Bamberg. These were the commissioners nominated by 
Charles to terminate this great affair. 

It was the most decided among them, Joachim of 
Brandenburg, who began to speak. " You know," said 
he to the Protestants, with what mildness the emperor 
has endeavored to reestablish unity. If some abuses 
have crept into the Christian church, he is ready to cor- 
rect them, in conjunction with the pope. But how con 
trary to the gospel are the sentiments you have adopted. 
Abandon then your errors, do not any longer remain 
separate from the church, and sign the refutation with- 
out delay.| If you refuse, then through your fault how 
many souls will be lost, how much blood shed, what 
countries laid waste, what trouble in all the empire 
And you," said he, turning towards the elector, " youi 

* Ego vero somno sopitus dulciter quiescebam. Corp. Ref. 2. 
273. t Mane facto Caesar .... convocavit nostros principeSi 

Ibid. 277 ; Briick, Apol. 79. t Ut sententiae quam in refutatiouf 
f^i^divieseut Bubscribant. Corp. Ref. 2. 277. 



THE LANDaRAVE LEAVES AUaSBURa. 246 



electorate, your life, all will be torn from you, and oer 
tain ruin will fall upon your subjects, and even upon 
their wives and children." 

The elector remained motionless. At any time this 
language would have been alarming : it was still more 
BO now that the city was almost in a state of siege 
"We now understand," said the Protestants to one an* 
other, "why the imperial guards occupy the gates oi 
the city."* It was evident, indeed, that the emperor 
intended violence.*}" 

The Protestants were unanimous : surrounded with 
soldiers, at the very gates of the prison, and beneath 
the thousand swords of Charles, they remained firm. 
All these threats did not make them take one step back- 
wards. J It was important for them, however, to con- 
sider their reply. They begged for a few minutes' de- 
lay, and retired. 

To submit voluntarily, or to be reduced by force, 
such was the dilemma Charles proposed to the evangeli- 
cal Christians. 

At the moment when each was anxious about the 
issue of this struggle, in which the destinies of Chris- 
tianity were contending, an alarming rumor suddenly 
raised the agitation of all minds to its height. 

The landgrave, in the midst of his preparations for 
the tournament, meditated the most serious resolution 
Excluded by Charles from every important deliberation, 
irritated at the treatment the Protestants had undergone 
during this diet,§ convinced that they had no more 
chance of peace, || not doubting that their liberty was 
greatly endangered in Augsburg, and feeling unable to 
conceal under the appearance of moderation the indigna- 
tion with which his soul was filled, being besides of a 
quick, prompt, and resolute character, Philip had decid«*d 
on quitting the city and repairing to his states, in order 

* Intelligis nunc cur portse munitae fuerunt. Corp. Ref. 2 277. 

t Quia volebat Caesar nostros violentia ad suam sententiam cO' 
gere. Ibid. J Sed hae minae nostros nihil commoverunt : per- 

Btant in sententia, nec vel tantillum recedunt. Ibid. § Comrao 
tas indignitate actionum. lb. 260. || Spem pacis al^ecisse. lb. 



246 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOK. 



to act freely, and to serve as a support to the Refoi^ 
mation. 

But what mystery was required. If the landgrave waa 
taken in the act, no doubt he would be put under arrest. 
This daring step might therefore become the signal of 
those extreme measures from which he longed to escape. 

It was Saturday, the 6th of August, the day for 
which Philip had requested the emperor's leave of ab- 
sence. He waits until the commencement of the night, 
and then, about eight o'clock, disguised in a foreign 
dress, without bidding farewell to any of his friends,* 
and taking every imaginable precaution,f he makes for 
the gates of the city about the time when they are usu- 
ally closed. Five or six cavaliers follow him singly, 
and at a little distance.^ In so critical a moment will 
not these men-at-arms attract attention? Philip trav- 
erses the streets without danger, approaches the gate,§ 
passes with a careless air through the midst of the 
guard, between the scattered soldiers ; no one moves, 
all remain idly seated, as if nothing extraordinary was 
going on. Philip has passed without being recognized. || 
His five or six horsemen come through in like manner. 
Behold them all at last in the open country. The little 
troop immediately spur their horses, and flee with head- 
long speed far from the walls of the imperial city. 

Yet Philip has taken his measures so well, that no 
cue as yet suspects his departure. When during the 
night Charles occupies the gates with his own guards, 
he thinks the landgrave still in the city.*|[ When the 

* Clam omnibus abit. Corp. Bef. 2, 260. f Mult a cum cao- 
tela. Seek. 2. 172. J Clam cum paucis equitibus. Corp. Ret 
2. 277 ; Mit fiinf oder sechs Pferden. Ibid. 263. § Seckendorf, 
and M. de Rommel no doubt after him, say that the landgrave went 
out through a secret gate — ^porta urbis secretiori, Seek. 2. 172 : Rom* 
mel, 1. 270. I prefer the contemporary evidence, particularly that 
of Brentz, which says, Vesper i priusquam portae urbis elauderentur, 
iirbe elapsus est. Corp. Ref. 2. 277. The chief magistrate of Aug&« 
durg, who alone had the keys of the wicket, would never have dared 
to favor the departure of the landgrave. || Abierat ille ignotua 
Corp. Ref. 2. 261. ^ Existimabat jenim Csesar adhuc prsBsto 

adesse. Ibid. 



THE EMPEROR ENRAaEB. 



247 



Protestants were assembled at eight in the morning in 
the Chapter-hall, the princes of both parties were a 
little astonished at the absence of Philip of Hesse. They 
were accustomed, however, to see him keep aloof, and 
thought he might be out of humor. No one imagined 
he was between twelve and fifteen leagues from Augn 
burg. 

After the termination of the conference, and as all 
were returning to their hotels, the elector of Branden- 
burg and his friends on the one hand, elated at the 
speech they had delivered, the elector of Saxony and 
his allies on the other, resolved to sacrifice every thing, 
inquiries were made at the landgrave^s lodgings as to 
the reason of his absence ; they closely questioned Saltz, 
Nuszbicker, Mayer, and Schnepf. At last the Hessian 
councillors could no longer keep the secret. " The land- 
grave," said they, " has returned to Hesse." 

This news circulated immediately through all the 
city, and shook it like the explosion of a mine. (Jharles 
especially, who found himself mocked and frustrated in 
his expectations — Charles, who had not had the least sus- 
picion,* trembled, and was enraged.f The Protestants 
whom the landgrave had not admitted to his secret,^ were 
as much astonished as the Roman-catholics themselves, 
and feared that this inconsiderate departure might be the 
immediate signal for a terrible persecution. There was 
only Luther who, the moment he heard of Philip^s pro- 
ceeding, highly approved of it, and exclaimed, " Of a 
truth all these delays and indignities are enough to 
fatigue more than one landgrave."§ 

The chancellor of Hesse gave the elector of Saxony 
a letter that his master had left for him. Philip spoke 
in this ostensible document of his wife^s health ; but he 
had charged his ministers to inform the elector in private 
of the real causes of his departure. He announced, more- 

♦ Caesare nihil suspicante. Corp. Ref. 2. 277. t Imperator 
re insperata commotus. Seek. 2. 172. J Unwissend des Chur- 
fursten von Sachsen and unserer. Corp. Ref. 2. 263. 

§ Es mochte wohl ista mor et aindignitas noch einen landgraTcq 
mude machen. E. Epp. 4. 134. 



248 



HISTORY OF THB HEFOEMATlOlf . 



over, that he had given orders to his ministers to assist 
the Protestants in all things, and exhorted his allies to 
permit themselves in no manner to be turned aside from 
the word of God.* As for me," said he, " I shall fight 
for the word of God, at the risk of my goods, my states, 
my subjects, and my life." 

The effect of the landgrave's departure was instan- 
taneous : a real revolution was then effected in the diet 
The elector of Mentz and the bishops of Franconia, 
Philip's near neighbors, imagined they already saw him 
on their frontiers at the head of a powerful army, and 
replied to the archbishop of Salzburg, who expressed 
astonishment at their alarm, "Ah, if you were in oui 
place you would do the same." Ferdinand, knowing the 
intimate relations of Philip with the duke of Wurtem- 
berg, trembled for the estates of this prince, at that 
time usurped by Austria ; and Charles the Fifth, unde- 
ceived with regard to those princes whom he had be- 
lieved so timid, and whom he had treated with so much 
arrogance, had no doubt that this sudden step of Philip's 
had been maturely deliberated in the common council of 
the Protestants. All saw a declaration of war in the 
landgrave's hasty departure. They called to mind that 
at the moment when they thought the least about it, 
they might see him appear at the head of his soldiers, 
on the frontiers of his enemies, and no one was ready ; 
no one even wished to be ready. A thunderbolt had 
fallen in the midst of the diet. They repeated the 
news to one another with troubled eyes and affrighted 
looks. All was confusion in Augsburg ; and couriers 
bore afar, in every direction, astonishment and conster- 
Dation. 

This alarm immediately converted the enemies of th^ 
reform. The violence of Charles and of the princes w&e 
broken in this memorable night as if by enchantment; 
and the furious wolves were suddenly transformed intc 
meek and docile lambs.f 

* Ut nullo modo a verbo Dei abstrahi aut terreri se patiatur 
Beck. 2. 172. f Sed banc violentiam abitus Landgravii inter 
rupit. CJorp. Ref. 2. 277. 



EFFECT OF THE LAKDaUAVE'S FLIGHT. 249 



It was still Sunday morning : Charles the Fifth im^ 
mediately convoked the diet for the afternoon.* "The 
landgrave has quitted Augsburg,'* said Count Frederick 
from the emperor ; " his majesty flatters himself that 
even the friends of that prince were ignorant of his 
departure. It is without the emperor^s knowledge, and 
even in defiance of his express prohibition, that Philip 
of Hesse has left, thus failing in all his duties. He has 
mshed to put the diet out of joint.f But the emperor 
conjures you not to permit yourselves to be led astray 
by him, and to contribute rather to the happy issue of 
this national assembly. His majesty's gratitude will 
thus be secured to you." 

The Protestants replied, that the departure of the 
landgrave had taken place without their knowledge; 
that they had heard of it with pain, and that they would 
have dissuaded him. Nevertheless they did not doubt 
that this prince had solid reasons for such a step ; be- 
sides, he had left his councillors with full powers, and 
that, as for them, they were ready to do every thing to 
conclude the diet in a becoming manner. Then, confi 
dent in their rights, and decided to resist Charles' arbi- 
trary acts, they continued, It is pretended that the 
gates were closed on our account. We beg your maj- 
esty to revoke this order, and to prevent any similar 
orders being given in future." 

Never was Charles the Fifth less at ease ; he had just 
spoken as a father, and they remind him that a few hours 
oack he had acted like a tyrant. Some subterfuge was 
requisite. "It is not on your account," replied the 
count-palatine, " that the emperor^s soldiers occupy the 

gates. ... Do not believe those who tell you so 

Yesterday there was a quarrel between two soldiers,J 
and a mob was collected. . . . This is why the emperor 
took this step Besides, such things will not be done 
again without the elector of Saxony, in his quality : i 

* Nam cum paucis post horis resciscunt Landgravium elapsum, 
tonvocant iteriim nostros. Corp. Ref. 2. 277. f Zertrennung 
dieses Reichstags zu verursachen. Ibid. 264. { Es habe eia 

Trabant mit einem andem ein IJnwill gehabt. Ibid. 265. 



250 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



marshal of the empire, heing first informed of them.'' 
An order was given immediately to reopen tne gates. 

No exertions were now spared by the Roman party 
to convince the Protestants of their good- will : there 
was an unaccustomed mildness in the language of tho 
co^nt-palatine and in the looks of Charles.* The prince* 
of the papal party, once so terrible, were similarly trans* 
fo) med. They had been hastily forced to speak out ; if 
they desired war, they must begin it instantly. 

But they shrunk back at this frightful prospect. How, 
with the enthusiasm that animated the Protestants, take 
up arms against them ? Were not the abuses of the 
church everywhere acknowledged, and could the Roman 
princes be sure of their own subjects ? Besides, what 
would be the issue of a war but the increase of tlie em- 
peror's power? The Roman-catholic states, and the 
duke of Bavaria in particular, would have been glad to 
see Charles at war with the Protestants, in the hope that 
he would thus consume his strength ; but it was, on the 
contrary, with their own soldiers that the emperor de- 
signed attacking the heretics. Henceforth they rejected 
the instrumentality of arms as eagerly as they had at 
first desired it. 

Every thing had thus changed in Augsburg : the 
Romish party was paralyzed, disheartened, and even 
broken up. The sword already drawn was hastily thrust 
back into the sheath. Peace, peace I was the cry of all. 

* NuUo alio tempore mitius et benignius quam tunc coso pro 
teetantibaB egerit Seek. 2. 172. 



THfi MIXED COMMISSIOK, 



251 



CHAPTER XI. 

ITie miyed commission — The three points — Romish dissimalatioa — 
Abuses — Concessions —The main question — Bishops and pope 
conceded — Danger of concession — Opposition to the pretended 
concord— Luther's opposing letters — The word above the church— • 
Melancthon's blindness — Papist infatuation — A new commission — 
Be men, and not women — The two phantoms — Concessions — The 
three points — The great ant thesis — Failure of conciliation — The 
Gordian knot — A council granted — Charles' summons — Men- 
aces — Altercations — Peace or war — Romanism concedes — Protes- 
tantism resists — Luther recalls his friends. 

The diet now entered upon its third phasis, and as 
the time of tentatives had been followed by that of men- 
aces, now that of arrangements was to succeed the 
period of threatenings. New and more formidable dan- 
gers were then to be encountered by the Reformation. 
Rome beholding the sword torn from its grasp^ had 
seized the net, and enlacing her adversaries with cords 
of humanity and bands of love," was endeavoring to 
drag them gently into the abyss. 

At eight o'clock on the morning of the 16th of Au- 
gust, a mixed commission was framed, which counted on 
each side two princes, two lawyers, and three theolo- 
gians. In the Romish party, there were duke Henry of 
Brunswick, the bishop of Augsburg, the chancellors of 
Baden and Cologne, with Eck, Cochloeus, and Wimpina ; 
on the part of the Protestants, were the margrave George 
of Brandenburg, the prince-electoral of Saxony, the chan* 
cellors Bruck and Heller, with Melancthon, Brentz, and 
Schnepf.* 

They agreed to take as basis the Confession of the 
evangelical states, and began to read it article by article. 
The Romish theologians displayed an unexpected conde- 
scension. Out of twenty-one dogmatical articles, there 
were only six or seven to which they made any objec- 
tion. Original sin stopped them some time ; at length 
• F. Urkundenbuch, 2. 219t 



252 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



they came tc an understanding ; the Protestants admit 
ted that baptism* removed the guilt of the sin, and the 
Papists agreed that it did not wash away concupiscence. 
As for the church, they granted that it contained sancti- 
fied men and sinners ; they coincided also on confessoin. 
The Protestants rejected especially as impossible the 
enumeration of all the sins prescribed by Rome. Dr 
Eck yielded this point.f 

There remained three doctrines only on which they 
differed. 

The first was that of penance. The Eomish doctors 
taught that it contained three parts : contrition, confes- 
sion, and satisfaction. The Protestants rejected the lat- 
ter, and the Romanists clearly perceiving that with sat- 
isfaction would fall indulgences, purgatory, and other 
of their doctrines and profits, vigorously maintained it 
" We agree," said they, " that the penance imposed by 
the priest does not procure remission of the guilt of sin ; 
but we maintain that it is necessary to obtain remission 
of the penalty." 

The second controverted point was the invocation of 
saints ; and the third, and principal one, justification by 
faith. It was of the greatest importance for the Roman- 
ists to maintain the meritorious influence of works : all 
their system in reality was based on that. Eck there- 
fore haughtily declared war on the assertion that faith 
alone justifies. " That word soZe," said he, we cannot 
tolerate. It generates scandals, and renders men bru- 
tal and impious. Let us send back the sole to the 
cobbler."! 

But the Protestants would not listen to such reason- 
ing ; and even when they put the question to each other, 
Shall we maintain that faith alone justifies us gratui- 
tously? " Undoubtedly, undoubtedly," exclaimed one of 
them with exaggeration, '^gratuitously and uselessly. 

* See vol. I. p. 151 bot. f Die siind die man nicht wisse, die 
diirff man nicht beichten. F. Urkenden. 2. 228. t Man soil die 
sole ein Weil zam Schuster schicken. Urkund. 2. 225. This wretch 
ed pun of Eck's requires no comment. § Omnino, omnino^ 

fvddendum eimm frustra. Scultet. p. 289. 



ROMISH DISSIMULATION 



253 



They even adduced strange authorities : Plato,^ said 
they, " declares that it is not by external works, bu^ by 
virtue, that God is to be adored ; and every one knr'wt 
these verses of Cato's : 

Si deu8 est animus, nobis ut carmina dicunt. 
Hie tibi praecipue pura sit mente colendus.^** 

"Certainly," resumed the Romish theologians, "it k 
only of works performed with grace that we speak • 
but we say that in such works there is something mer- 
itorious." The Protestants declared they could not 
grant it. 

They had approximated however beyond all hope. 
The Roman theologians, clearly understanding their 
position, had purposed to appear agreed rather than be 
so in reality. Every one knew, for instance, that the 
Protestants rejected transubstantiation ; but the article 
of the confession on this point, being able to be taken 
in the Romish sense, the Papists had admitted it. Their 
triumph was only deferred. The general expressions 
that were used on the controverted points would per- 
mit somewhat later a Romish interpretation to be given 
to the Confession; ecclesiastical authority would de- 
clare this the only true one ; and Rome, thanks to a 
few moments of dissimulation, would thus reascend the 
throne. Have we not seen in our own days the Thirty- 
nine Articles of the Anglican church unfairly interpreteo^ 
in accordance with the council of Trent? There are 
causes in which falsehood is never wanting. This plot 
was as skilfully executed as it was profoundly con- 
ceived. 

The commissioners were on the best terms with one 
another, and concord seemed restored. Ojie single un- 
easiness disturbed that happy moment ; the idea of the 
landgrave : " Ignorant that we are almost agreed," said 
they, " this young madbrain is doubtless already assem* 
bling his army ; we must bring him back, and make 
him a witness of our cordial union." On tlie morning 

* If God is a spirit, as the poets teack, he should be worshipped 
with a pare miad. 



354 



HISTOHf OF THE EEFOHMATION. 



of the ISth, one of the members of the commission^ 
Duke Henry of Brunswick, accompanied by a councillor 
of the emperor, set out to discharge this difiBcult mis- 
sion.* Duke George of Saxony supplied his place as 
arbitrator. 

They now passed from the first part of the Confession 
to the second — ^from doctrines to abuses. Here the 
Romish theologians could not yield so easily, for if they 
appeared to agree with the Protestants, it was all over 
with the honor and power of the hierarchy. It was 
accordingly for this period of the combat that they had 
reserved their cunning and their strength. 

They began by approaching the Protestants as near 
as they could, for the more they granted, the more they 
might draw the reform to them and stifle it. **We 
think," said they, " that with the permission of his holi- 
ness, and the approbation of his majesty, we shall be 
able to permit, until the next council, the communion in 
both kinds, wherever it is practised already ; only your 
ministers should preach, at Easter, that it is not of divine 
institution, and that Christ is wholly in each kind.*} 

Moreover, as for the married priests," continued 
they, " desirous of sparing the poor women whom they 
have seduced, of providing for the maintenance of their 
innocent children, and of preventing every kind of scan- 
dal, we will tolerate them until the next council, and we 
shall then see if it will not be right to decree that mar- 
ried men may be admitted to holy orders, as was the 
case in the primitive church for many centuries.^ 

" Finally, we acknowledge that the sacrifice of the 
mass is a mystery, a representation, a sacrifice of com- 
m**^oration, a memorial of the sufferings and death of 
Chri&t accomplished on the cross."§ 

This was yielding much : but the turn of the Protes* 

* Brunswigus coactus est abire irodc rdv uaiUdova quem timent 
oontrahere exercltum. Scultet. p. 299. f Vorschlage dea 

A-nschlusses der Sieben des Gegentheils. Urkund. 2. 251. 

\ Wie von alters ia der ersten Kirche etliche Hundert Jahre, in 
Gebrauch gewesen. Ibid. 254. § Za Errianeron^ and 

^act^tniss. Ibid. 



BISHOPS AND POPE CONCEDED 255 



tants was come ; for if Rome appeared to give, it was 
on\j to take in return. 

The grand question was the church, its maintenance, 
and government ; who should provide for it ? They could 
see only two means : princes or bishops. If they feared 
the bishops, they must decide for the princes ; if they 
feared the princes, they must decide for the bishops. 
They were at that time too distant from the normal 
Btate to discover a third solution, and to perceive that 
the church ought to be maintained by the church itself — 
by the Christian people. " Secular princes in the long 
run will be defaulters to the government of the church," 
said the Saxon divines in the opinion they presented on 
the 18th of August ; "they are not fit to execute it, and 
besides, it would cost them too dear:* the bishops, on 
the contrary, have property destined to provide for this 
charge." 

Thus the presumed incapacity of the state, and the 
fear they entertained of its indifference, threw the Prot- 
estants into the arms of the hierarchy. 

They proposed, therefore, to restore to the bishops 
their jurisdiction, the maintenance of discipline, and the 
superintendence of the priests, provided they did not 
persecute the evangelical doctrine, or oppress the pas- 
tors with impious vows and burdens. " We may not," 
added they, without strong reasons rend that order by 
which bishops are over priests, and which existed in the 
church from the beginning. It is dangerous before the 
Lord to change the order of governments." Their argu- 
ment is not founded upon the Bible, as may be seen, but 
upon ecclesiastical history. 

The Protestant divines went even farther, and taking 
a last step that seemed decisive, they consented to ac- 
knowledge the pope as being — but of human right — 
supreme bishop of Christendom. "Although the pope 
is antichrist, we may be under his government as the 
Jews were under Pharaoh, and in later days under Cai- 
phas." We must confess these two comparisons were 

* Ist Omen auch nicht moglich. Daza kostet es zq viel Udi 
2.247. 



266 



HISTORY OF THE KEFORMATlOiC. 



not flattering to the pope. Only," added tnt^ dictorai 

" let sound doctrine be fully accorded to us." 

The chancellor Bruck alone appears to have been 
conscious of the truth : he wrote on the margin with a 
firm hand, "We cannot acknowledge the pope, because 
we say he is antichrist, and because he claims the pri* 
macy by divine right."* 

Finally, the Protestant theologians consented to agree 
with Rome as regards indifferent ceremonies, fasts, and 
forms of worship ; and the elector engaged to put under 
sequestration the ecclesiastical property already secu- 
larized, until the decision of the next council. 

Never was the conservative spirit of Lutheranism 
more clearly manifested. ''We have promised our ad 
versaries to concede to them certain points of church 
government, that may be granted without wounding the 
conscience," wrote Melancthon,f But it began to be 
very doubtful whether ecclesiastical concessions would 
not drag with them doctrinal concessions also. The 
reform was drifting away .... still a few more fathoms, 
and it would be lost. Already disunion, trouble, and 
affright were spreading among its ranks. " Melancthon 
has become more childish than a child," said one of his 
friends ;J and yet he was so excited, that the chancellor 
of Luneberg having made some objections to these un- 
precedented concessions, the little master of arts proudly 
raised his head, and said with a sharp, harsh tone of 
voice, " He who dares assert that the means indicated 
are not Christian is a liar and a scoundrel."§ On which 
the chancellor immediately repaid him in his own coin. 
These expressions cannot, however, detract from Melano- 
thon's reputation for mildness. After so many useless 
efforts, he was exhausted, irritated, and his words cut 
the deeper, as they were the less expected from him. 
He was not the only one demoralized. Brentz appeared 
clumsy, rude, and uncivil ; Chancellor Keller had misled 

* Cum dicimus eum Antichristum. Urk. 2. 247. f Nos po- 
ll tica queedam concessuros quae sine offensione conscientiae. Corp^ 
Bef. 2. 302. i Philippus ist kindischer denn ein Kind worden. 
Baamgartner. lb. 363. § Der liige als ein Bosewiobt. . lb. 894. 



LUTHER'S OPPOSINa LETTERS 



257 



the pious margrave of Brandenburg, and transformed 
the courage of this prince into pusillanimity : no other 
human support remained to the elector than his chancel- 
lor Bruck. And even this firm man began to grow 
alarmed at his isolation. 

But he was not alone : the most earnest protesta 
were received from without. '*If it is true that you 
are making such concessions," said their affrighted 
friends to the Saxon divines, Christian liberty is at an 
end.* What is your pretended concord? a thick cloud 
that you raise in the air to eclipse the sun that was be- 
ginning to illumine the church. f Never will the Chris- 
tian people accept conditions so opposed to the word of 
God ; and your only gain will be furnishing the enemies 
of the gospel with a specious pretext to butcher those 
who remain faithful to it." Among the laymen these 
convictions were general. Better die with Jesus 
Christ," said all Augsburg,| " than gain the favor of the 
whole world without him." 

No one felt so much alarm as Luther when he saw 
the glorious edifice that God had raised by his hands on 
the point of falling into ruin in those of Melancthon. 
The day on wbich this news arrived, be wrote five let- 
ters, to the elector, to Melancthon, to Spalatin, to Jonas, 
and to Brentz, all equally filled with cou and with 
faith. 

" I learn," said he, that you have begun a marvel- 
lous work, namely, to reconcile Luther and the pope ; 
but the pope will not be reconciled, and Luther begs to 
be excused.§ And if in despite of them jou succeed 
in this affair, then after your example I will bring to- 
gether Christ and Belial. 

**The world I know is full of wranglers who ci> 
Bcure the doctrine of justification by faith, and of fa- 
natics who persecute it. Do not be astonished at it, but 
continue to defend it with courage, for it is the heel of 

• Actum est de Christiana libertate. Baumgartner, Corp. Ref. 
2. 295. t Quid ea concordia aliud esset quam aatae jam et divuU 
gatae luci obducere nubem. Ibid. 296. J Die gange Stadt sagt. 
lb. 297. § Sed Papa uolet, et Lutherusdeprecatur. L. Epp. 4. 144 

17 



258 



HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOiSf. 



the seed of the woman that shall bruise the head of the 
serpent.* 

" Beware also of the jurisdiction of the bishops, for 
fear we should soon have to recommence a more terrible 
struggle than the first. They will take our concessions 
widely, very widely, always more widely, and will giv$ 
us theirs narrowly, very narrowly, and always more 
narrowly.f All these negotiations are impossible, unless 
the pope should renounce his papacy. 

pretty motive indeed our adversaries assign. 
They cannot, say they, restrain their subjects, if we do 
not publish everywhere that they have the truth on 
their side : as if God only taught his word that our ene- 
mies might at pleasure tyrannize over their people. 

" They cry out that we condemn all the church. No, 
we do not condemn it ; but as for them, they condemn 
all the word of God, and the word of God is more than 
the church.'^l 

This important declaration of the reformers decides 
the controversy between the evangelical Christians and 
the papacy : unfortunately we have often seen Protes- 
tants return, on this fundamental point, to the error of 
Rome, and set the visible church above the word of God. 

" I write to you now," continues Luther, to believe 
with all of us, and that through obedience to Jesus 
Christ, that Campeggio is a famous demon. § I cannot 
tell how violently I am agitated by the conditions which 
you propose. The plan of Campeggio and the pope 
has been to try us jBrst by threats, and then, if these do 
not succeed, by stratagems ; you have triumphed over 
the first attack, and sustained the terrible coming of 
Caesar: now then for the second. Act with courage, 
and yield nothing to the adversaries, except what can 
be proved with evidence from the very word of God. 

* Nam hie est iUe unicus calcaneus seminis antique serpenti ad- 
vereantis. L. Epp. 4. 151. f Ipsi enim nostras concessione* 

large, largius, largissime, suas vero, stricte, strictius, strictissime. 
Ibid. 145. t Sed ab ipsis totum verbum Dei, quod plus 

quam ecdesia est, damnari. Ibid. 145. § Quod Campeggiuf 
mi unua maguus «t iasignis diabolus. Ibid. 147. 



MELAJ^CTliON'S BLINDJS'EjSS. 



259 



" But if, which Christ forbid, you do not put forward 
all the gospel — if on the contrary you shut up that glo- 
rious eagle in a sack, Luther — doubt it not — Luther 
will come and gloriously deliver the eagle,* As cer* 
tainly as Christ lives^ that shall be done.'' 

Thus spoke Luther, but in vain : every thing in Augs* 
burg was tending towards approaching ruin ; Melanc- 
thon had a bandage over his eyes that nothing could 
tear off. He no longer listened to Luther, and cared 
not for popularity. **It does not become us," said he, 
" to be moved by the clamors of the vulgar ;"}* we must 
think of peace and of posterity. If we repeal the epis- 
copal jurisdiction, what will be the consequence to our 
descendants ? The secular powers care nothing about 
the interests of religion. | Besides, too much dissimi- 
larity in the churches is injurious to peace: we must 
unite with the bishops, lest the infamy of schism should 
overwhelm us for ever."§ 

The evangelicals too readily listened to Melancthon, 
and vigorously labored to bind to the papacy by the 
bonds of the hierarchy that church which God had so 
wonderfully emancipated. Protestantism rushed blind- 
fold into the nets of its enemies. Already serious voices 
announced the return of the Lutherans into the bosom of 
the Romish church. They are preparing their defec- 
tion, and are passing over to the Papists," said Zwingle.|| 
The politic Charles the Fifth acted in such a manner that 
no haughty word should compromise the victory; but 
the Roman clergy could not master themselves : their 
pride and insolence increased every day. " One would 
never believe," said Melancthon, the airs of triumph 
which the Papists give themselves." There was good rea- 
son ; the agreement was on the verge of conclusion : yet 
one or two steps — and then, woe to the Reformation 1 

* Veniet, ne dubita, veniet Lutterus, banc aquilam liberaturus 
aiagQifice. L. Epp. 4. 165. f Sed nos nibil decet vulgi cla* 

moribus moveri. Corp. Ref. 2. 303. i Profani jurisd ctionein 

jcclesiasticam et similia negotia religionem non curent. Ibid. 

§ Ne scbismatis infamia perpetuo laboremas. Ibid. 

y Lutheran! defectionem parant ad Papistas. Zw. Epp. 2. 461, 



260 



HlfcJTOR^ OF THE EEFOHllATIOK. 



Who could prevent this desolating ruin? It wafl 
Luther who pronounced the name towards which all 
eyes should be turned : " Christ lives," said he, " and 
He by whom the violence of our enemies has been con- 
quered will give us strength to surmount their wiles." 
This, which was in truth the only resource, did not dis- 
appoint the Reformation. 

If the Roman hierarchy had been willing, under cer- 
tain admissible conditions, to receive the Protestants 
who were ready to capitulate, all would have been over 
with them. When once it held them in its arms, it 
would have stifled them ; but God blinded the Papacy, 
and thus saved his church. No concessions," had de- 
clared the Romish senate ; and Campeggio, elated with 
his victory, repeated, "No concessions." He moved 
heaven and earth to inflame the Catholic zeal of Charles 
in this decisive moment. From the emperor he passed 
to the princes. " Celibacy, confession, the withdrawal 
of the cup, private masses," exclaimed he : " all these 
are obligatory ; we must have all." This was saying 
to the evangelical Christians, as the Samnites to the 
ancient Romans : " Here are the Caudine forks ; pass 
through them." 

The Protestants saw the yoke, and shuddered. God 
revived the courage of confessors in their weakened 
hearts. They raised their heads, and rejected this hu- 
miliating capitulation. The commission was immediate- 
ly dissolved. 

This was a great deliverance ; but soon appeared a 
fresh danger. The evangelical Christians ought imme- 
diately to have quitted Augsburg ; but said one of 
them,* " Satan, disguised as an angel of light, blinded 
the eyes of their understanding." They remained. 

All was not yet lost for Rome, and the spirit of false 
hood and of cunning might again renew its attacks. 

It was believed at court that this disagreeable ter 
mination of the commission was to be ascribed to some 
wrong-headed individuals, and particularly to Duke 
George. They therefore resolved to name another. 
* Baumgartner to Spengler. Corp. Ref. 2. 363 



THE SENTIMENTS 0? PHILIP. 



261 



composed of six members only: on the one side, Eck, 
with the chancellors of Cologne and Baden ; on the other, 
Melancthon, with the chancellors Bruck and Heller. The 
Protestants consented, and all was begun anew. 

The alarm then increased among the most decided 
followers of the Reformation. " If we expose ourselve? 
unceasingly to new dangers, must we not succumb at 
last ?"* The deputies of Nuremberg in particular de- 
clared that their city would never place itself again 
under the detested yoke of the bishops. " It is the 
advice of the undecided Erasmus that Melancthon fol- 
lows," said they. " Say, rather, of Ahithophel," 2 Sam. 
15, replied others. "However it may be," added they, 
^*if the pope had bought Melancthon, the latter could 
have done nothing better to secure the victory for him."f 

The landgrave was especially indignant at this cow- 
ardice. "Melancthon," wrote he to Zwingle, "walks 
backwards like a crab."| From Friedwald, whither he 
had repaired after his flight from Augsburg, Philip of 
Hesse endeavored to check the fall of Protestantism. 
" When we begin to yield, we always yield more," wrote 
he to his ministers at Augsburg. " Declare therefore to 
my allies, that I reject these perfidious conciliations. If 
we are Christians, what we should pursue is, not oui 
own advantage, but the consolation of so many weary 
and afflicted consciences, for whom there is no salva- 
tion if we take away the word of God. The bishops are 
not real bishops, for they speak not according to the 
holy Scriptures. If we acknowledge them, what would 
follow ? They would remove our ministers, silence the 
gospel, ree'stablish ancient abuses, and the last state 
would be worse than the first. If the Papists will per 
mit the free preaching of the pure gospel, let us come 
to an understanding with them ; for the truth will be 
'he strongest, and will root out all the rest. But if 
act No. This is not the moment to yield, but to re- 

* Fremunt et alii socii ac indignantur regnum Episcoporum 
restitui. Corp. Ref. 2. 328. f Si conductus quanta ipse vo- 

laieset pecunia a Papa esset. Ibid. 333. t Betro it, ut canoer 
Zvr Epp. 2. 606. 



2iii HISTOUT OF THE REFOEEATiON 



main firm even to death. Baffle these fearful combina 
tions of Melancthon, and tell the deputies of the cities, 
from me, to be men, and not women.* Let us feai 
nothing : God is with us." 

Melancthon and his friends, thus attacked, sought to 
justify themselves : on the one hand they maintained, 
that if they preserve the doctrine it would finally over- 
throw the hierarchy. But then why restore it? Was 
it not more than doubtful whether a doctrine so enfee- 
bled would still retain strength sufficient to shake the 
Papacy ? On the other hand, Melancthon and his friends 
pointed out two phantoms before which they shrunk in 
affright. The first was war, which, in their opinion, was 
imminent. " It will not only," said they, " bring num- 
berless temporal evils with it — the devastation of Ger- 
many, murder, violation, sacrilege, rapine — but it will 
produce spiritual evils more frightful still, and inevita- 
bly bring on the perturbation of all religion."f The 
second phantom was the supremacy of the state. Me- 
lancthon and his friends foresaw the dependence to 
which the princes would reduce the church, the increas- 
ing secularization of its institutions and of its instru- 
ments, the spiritual death that would result, and shrank 
back with terror from the frightful prospect. " Good 
men do not think that the court should regulate the 
ministry of the church,"| said Brentz. Have you not 
yourselves experienced," added he ironically, **with 
what wisdom and mildness these boors — 't is thus I 
denominate the officials and prefects of the princes — 
treat the ministers of the church, and the church itself? 
Bather die seven times." see," exclaimed Melanc- 
thon, what a church we shall have if the ecclesiastical 
government is abolished. I discover in the future a 
tyranny far more intolerable than that which has existed 
to this day."§ Then, bowed down by the accusations 

* Das sie nicht weyber seyen sondern manner. Corp. Ref. 2 
A27. t Confasio et perturbatio religionum. Ibid. 382. 

X Ut aula ministeriuDi in ecclesia ordinet bonis non videiar con- 
Bultum. Ibid. 362. § Video postea multo intolerabili ;ei» fti 
turam tyrannidem quam unquam antea fuisse. Ibid. 384. 



THE aREAT ANTITHESIS. 



263 



that poured upon him from every side, the unhappy 
Philip exclaimed, " If it is I who have aroused this torn 
pest, I pray his majesty to throw me, like Jonah, into 
the sea, and to drag me out only to give me up to tor 
ture and to the stake."* 

If the Romish episcopacy were once recognized, all 
seemed easy. In the Commission of Six, they conceded 
the cup to the laity, marriage to the pastors, and the 
article of prayer to saints appeared of little importance. 
But they stopped at three doctrines which the evangeli- 
cals could not yield. The first was the necessity of 
human satisfaction for the remission of the penalties of 
sin; the second, the idea of something meritorious in 
every good work ; the third, the utility of private masses. 
" Ah," quickly replied Campeggio to Charles the Fifth, 
" I would rather be cut in pieces than concede any thing 
about masses.^f 

" What," replied the politicians, " when you agree on 
all the great doctrines of salvation, will you for ever 
rend the unity of the church for three such trivial arti- 
cles? Let the theologians make a last effort, and we 
shall see the two parties unite, and Rome embrace Wit- 
temberg." 

It was not so : under these three points was con- 
cealed a whole system. On the Roman side, they enter- 
tained the idea that certain works gain the divine favor^ 
independently of the disposition of him who performs 
them, and by virtue of the will of the church. On the 
evangelical side, on the contrary, they felt a conviction 
that these external ordinances were mere human tradi- 
tions, and that the only thing which procured man the 
divine favor was the work that God accomplished by 
Christ on the cross ; while the only thing that put him 
in possession of this favor was the work of regeneration 
that Christ accomplishes by his Spirit in the heart of the 
sinner. The Romanists, by maintaining their three arti- 
cles, said, "The church saves," which is the essentia] 

* Si mea causa hsec tempestas coacta est, me statim velut Jonam 
In mart ejiciat. Corp. Ref. 2. 382. f Er wollte sich ehe aul 

Stiicke zerreissen lassen L. 0pp. 20. 828. 



264 HISTOEY OF THE UEFORMATION 



doctrine of Rome ; the evangelicals, by rejecting them, 
said, "Jesus Christ alone saves,'' which is Christianity 
itself. This is the great antithesis which then existed, 
and which still separates the two churches. With these 
three points, which placed souls under her dependence, 
Rome justly expected to recover every thing ; and sho 
showed by her perseverance that she understood her 
position. But the evangelicals were not disposed to 
abandon theirs. The Christian principle was maintained 
against the ecclesiastical principle which aspired to 
swallow it up ; Jesus Christ stood firm in presence of 
the church, and it was seen that henceforward all con- 
ferences were superfluous. 

Time pressed ; for two months and a half Charles the 
Fifth had been laboring in Augsburg, and his pride suf- 
fered because four or five theologians checked the tri- 
umphal progress of the conqueror of Pavia. "What," 
said they to him, " a few days sufficed to overthrow the 
king of France and the pope, and you cannot succeed 
with these gospellers I" They determined on breaking 
off the conferences. Eck, irritated because neither strat- 
agem nor terror had been effectual, could not master 
himself in the presence of the Protestants. " Ah," ex- 
claimed he, at the moment of separation, " why did not 
the emperor, when he entered Germany, make a general 
inquest about the Lutherans? He would then have 
heard arrogant answers, witnessed monsters of heresy, 
and his zeal suddenly taking fire, would have led him to 
destroy all this faction* But now Bruck's mild lan- 
guage and Melancthon's concessions prevent him from 
getting so angry as the cause requires." Eck said 
these words with a smile, but they expressed all hie 
thoughts. The colloquy terminated on the 30th of An* 
gust. 

The Romish states made their report to the emperor. 
They were face to face, three steps only from each other, 
without either side being able to approach nearer, even 
by a hair's breadth. 

*^ Hsec inflammassent Imperatorem ad totam banc factionem 
lendam. Corp. Ref. 2. 836. 



•WAR APPEARS INEVITABLE. 



265 



Tims, then, Melancthon had failed ; and his enormous 
concessions were found useless. From a false love of 
peace, he had set his heart on an impossibility. Melanc- 
thon was at the bottom a really Christian soul. God 
preserved him from his great weakness, and broke the 
clue that was about to lead him to destruction. Noth- 
ing could have been more fortunate for the Reformation 
than Melancthon's failure ; but nothing could, at the 
same time, have been more fortunate for himself. His 
friends saw that though he was willing to yield much, 
he could not go so far as to yield Christ himself, and his 
defeat justified him in the eyes of the Protestants. 

The elector of Saxony and the margrave of Branden- 
burg sent to beg Charles^ leave to depart. The latter 
refused at first rather rudely, but at last he began to 
conjure the princes not to create by their departure new 
obstacles to the arrangements they soon hoped to be 
able to conclude.* We shall see what was the nature 
of these arrangements. 

The Romanists appeared to redouble their exertions. 
If they now let the clue slip, it is lost for ever ; they 
labored accordingly to reunite the two ends. There 
were conferences in the gardens, conferences in the 
churches, at St. George^s, at St. Maurice's, between the 
duke of Brunswick and John Frederick the elector's son, 
the chancellors of Baden and of Saxony, the chancellor 
of Liege and Melancthon ; but all these attempts were 
unavailing. It was to other means they were going to 
have recourse. 

Charles the Fifth had resolved to take the affair in 
hand, and to cut the Gordion knot, which neither doctors 
nor princes could untie. Irritated at seeing his advances 
spurned and his authority compromised, he thought that 
the moment was come for drawing the sword. On the 
4th ol* September, the members of the Roman party, 
who were still endeavoring to gain over the Protestants, 
whispered these frightful intentions in Melancthon's ears : 
" We scarcely dare mention it," said they ; the sword 
is already in the emperor's hands, and certain people 

* Antwort des Kaisers, etc. Urkuad. 2. 313. 
Blat. of R«r. IV 



268 



HISTOUY OF THE REFOUMATJON, 



exasperate him more and more. He is not easily en 
raged ; but once angry, it is impossible to quiet him."* 

Charles had reason to appear exacting and terrible. 
He had at length obtained from Rome an unexpected 
ccneession, a council. Clement YII. had laid the empe- 
ror's request before a congregation : " How will mer 
who reject the ancient councils submit to a new one?' 
they had replied. Clement himself had no wish for at 
assembly, which he dreaded alike on account of his birth 
and conduct.f However, his promises at the castle oi 
St. Angelo and at Bologna rendered it impossible for 
him to give a decided refusal. He answered, therefore, 
that " the remedy would be worse than the disease ;J 
but that if the emperor, who was so good a Catholic, 
judged a council absolutely necessary, he would con- 
sent to it, under the express condition, however, that 
the Protestants should submit in the meanwhile to the 
doctrines and rites of the church." Then as the place 
of meeting he appointed Rome. 

Scarcely had news of this concession spread abroad, 
than the fear of a reformation froze the papal court. 
The public charges of the Papacy, which were altogether 
venal, immediately fell, says a cardinal, and were offered 
at the lowest price, § without even being able to find 
purchasers. II The Papacy was compromised; its mer- 
chandise was endangered ; and the price current imme- 
diately declined on the Roman exchange. 

On Wednesday, the 7th of September, at two in the 
afternoon, the Protestant princes and deputies having 
been introduced into the chamber of Charles the Fifth, 
the count-palatine said to them, that the emperor, con- 
sidering their small number, had not expected they 
would uphold new sects against the ancient usages of 

* Nescio an ausim dicere, jam ferrum in manu Caesaris esse. 
Corp. Ref. 2. 342. f In earn (concilii celebrationem) Pontificis 

animus hand propendebatur. Pallavi'^ini, 1. 251. J Al contrario, 
remedio e piu pericoloso e per partorir maggiori mali. Lettere di 
Principe, .2. 197. ^ Evulgatus concilii rumor .... publica RoipaB 
niiinera .... jam in vilissimum pretium decidissent. Pallav, 1. 
251 . II Che non se non trovano danarL Lett, di Prin. 3. 6 



CHARLES' DEMAND AND MENACJlS. 



267 



the universal church ; that, nevertheless, being desirous 
of appearing to the last full of kindness, he would re- 
quire of his holiness the convocation of a council ; b^it 
that in the meanwhile they should return immediateiy 
into the bosom of the Catholic church, and restore every 
thing to its ancient footing."* 

The Protestants replied on the morrow, the 8th of 
September, that they had not stirred up new sects con- 
trary to the holy Scriptures ;f that, quite the reverse, 
If they had not agreed with their adversaries, it was 
because they had desired to remain faithful to the word 
of God ; that by convoking in Germany a general, free, 
and Christian council, it would only be doing what pre- 
ceding diets had promised; but that nothing should 
compel them to reestablish in their churches an order 
of things opposed to the commandments of God." 

It was eight in the evening when, after a long delib- 
eration, the Protestants were again called in. His 
majesty," said George Truchses to them, ^*is equally 
astonished, both that the Catholic members of the com- 
missions have accorded so much, and that the Protestant 
members have refused every thing. What is your party 
in the presence of his imperial majesty, of his papal holi- 
ness, of the electors, princes, estates of the empire, and 
other kings, rulers, and potentates of Christendom ? It 
*s but just that the minority should yield to the major- 
ity. Do you desire the means of conciliation to be pro- 
tracted, or do you persist in your answer ? Speak 
frankly ; for if you persist, the emperor will immediately 
see to the defence of the church. To-morrow at one 
o'clock you will bring your final decision." 

Never had such threatening words issued from 
Charles' mouth. It was evident he wished to subdue 
the Protestants by terror ; but this end was not attain- 
ed. They replied the next day but one — a day more 
having been accorded them — that new attempts at con- 
ciliation would only fatigue the emperor and the diet , 

* Interim restitui debere omnia Papist's. Corp. Ref. 2 355. See 
alBO Erklarung des Kaisers Karl Y. Urkiind. 2. 391. f Nit aeu« 
Sec ten wieder die heilige Schriflft. Briick, Apol. 136. 



268 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 

that they only required regulations to maintain political 
peace until the assembling of the council.* " Enough," 
replied the redoubtable emperor ; "I will reflect upon it ; 
but in the mean time let no one quit Augsburg.'' 

Charles the Fifth was embarrassed in a labyrinth 
from which he knew not how to escape. The state had 
resolved to interfere with the church, and saw itself 
compelled to have immediate recourse to its ultima ratw, 
the sword. Charles did not desire war, and yet how 
could he now avoid it ? If he did not execute his threats, 
his dignity was compromised, and his authority rendered 
contemptible. He sought an outlet on one side or the 
other, but could find none. It therefore only remained 
for him to close his eyes, and rush forward heedless of 
the consequences. These thoughts disturbed him ; these 
cares preyed upon him ; he was utterly confounded. 

It was now that the elector sent to beg Charles 
would not be offended if he left Augsburg. " Let him 
await my answer,'' abruptly replied the emperor ; and 
the elector having rejoined that he would send his min- 
isters to explain his motives to his majesty, "Not so 
many speeches," resumed Charles, with irritation ; "let 
the elector say whether he will stay or not."f 

A rumor of the altercation between these two pow- 
erful princes having spread abroad, the alarm became 
universal ; it was thought war would break out imme- 
diately, and there was a great disturbance in Augs- 
burg.| It was evening : men were running to and fro ; 
they rushed into the hotels of the princes and of the 
Protestant deputies, and addressed them with the sever- 
est reproaches. " His imperial majesty," said they, " is 
about to have recourse to the most energetic measures " 
They even declared that hostilities had begun : it was 
whispered that the commander of Horneck, Walter of 
Kronberg, elected by the emperor grand-master of the 
Teutonic order, was about to enter Prussia with an 

* Urkenden, 2. 410; Briick, Apol. p. 139. ^ f Kurtz mit 
solchen Worten, ob er erwarten wolte oder nicht? Briick, Apol. 
p. 143. t Ein beschwerlich Geschrey zu Augsburg den Be1be9 
4bend ausgebrochea. Ibid. p. 145, 



A CtEW NEaOTlATIOlf 



269 



army, and dispossess Duke Albert, converted by Luther.* 
Two nights successively the same tumult was repeated. 
They shouted, they quarrelled, they fought, particularly 
in and before the mansions of the princes : the war wa,s 
nearly commencing in Augsburg. 

At that crisis, September 12, John Frederick, prince- 
electoral of Saxony, quitted the city. 

On the same day, or on the morrow, Jerome Wehe 
chancellor of Baden and Count Truchses on the one side, 
Chancellor Bruck and Melancthon on the other, met at 
six in the morning in the church of St. Maurice.f 

Charles, notwithstanding his threats, could not decide 
on employing force. He might no doubt by a single 
word to his Spanish bands or to his German lansquenets 
have seized on these inflexible men, and treated them 
like Moors. But how could Charles, a Netherlander, a 
Spaniard, who had been ten years absent from the em- 
pire, dare, without raising all Germany, offer violence 
to the favorites of the nation ? Would not the Roman- 
catholic princes themselves see in this act an infringe- 
ment of their privileges ? War was unseasonable. 
" Lutheranism is extending already from the Baltic to 
the Alps," wrote Erasmus to the legate ; " you have but 
one thing to do : tolerate it."J 

The negotiation begun in the church of St. Maurice 
was continued between the margrave of Bandenburg and 
Count Truchses. The Eoman party onl}' sought to save 
appearances, and did not hesitate, besides, to sacrifice 
every thing. It asked merely for a few theatrical deco 
rations — that the mass should be celebrated in the sacer- 
dotal garment, with chanting, reading, ceremonies, and 
its two canons. § All the rest was referred to the next 
council, and the Protestants, till then, should conduct 

* Man wiirde ein Kriegsvolk in Preussen schicken Briick. 
Apol. p. 143. t Ibid. p. 165-160. 

X A mare Baltico ad Helvetios. Eras. Epp. 14. 1. 

§ In gewcihnlichen Kleidungen mit Gesang und Lesen. Urk 
2. 418. The canon was a frame of card-board placed on the alt&i 
before the priest, and which contained the Apostles' Creed with 
Farious prajert. 



270 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 



themsefves so as to render account to God, to the conn* 
cii, and to his majesty. 

But on the side of the Protestants the wind had also 
changed. Now they no longer desired peace with Rome ; 
the scales had at last fallen from their eyes, and they 
discovered with affright the abyss into which they had 
BO nearly plunged. Jonas, Spalatin, and even Melano 
thon weie agreed. "We have hitherto obeyed the com- 
mandment of St. Paul, *Be at peace with all men,'" said 
they ; ** now we must obey this commandment of Christ, 
'Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is 
hypocrisy.' On the side of our adversaries is nothing 
but cunning and perfidy, and their only aim is to stifle 
our doctrine, which is truth itself.* They hope to save 
the abominable articles of purgatory, indulgences, and 
the papacy, because we have passed them by in silence.f 
Let us beware of betraying Christ and his word in order 
to please antichrist and the devil."J 

Luther at the same time redoubled his entreaties to 
withdraw his friends from Augsburg. " Return, return,'' 
cried he to them ; return, even if it must be so, cursed 
by the pope and the emperor. § You have confessed 
Jesus Christ, offered peace, obeyed Charles, supported 
insults, and endured blasphemies. I will canonize you, 
I, as faithful members of Jesus Christ. You have done 
enough, and more than enough ; now it is for the Lord 
to act, and he will act. They have our confession, they 
have the gospel ; let them receive it, if they will ; and if 
Ihey will not, let them go — . If a war should come, 
let it come. We have prayed enough ; we have discuss- 
ed enough. The Lord is preparing our adversaries as 
the victim for the sacrifice ; he will destroy their mag- 
nificence, and deliver his people. Yes, he will preserve 
us even from Babylon, and from her burning walls." 

* Eitel List, gefahrliche Tiicke, etc. Jonas, Urkuad. 2. 423. 
t Die grauliche Artikel. Spalat. Ibid. 428. De Frimatu Papea^ 
da Purgatorio, de Indulgentiis. Melancthon, Corp. Ref. 2. 374. 
X Dem teufel und antichrist zu gefallen. Urk. 2. 481. 
^ Tel m&ledicti a Papa et Caesare. L. Epp. 4. 162-171 



VKZ liJUECTOil'S PilEPAEATIOKS. 271 



CHAPTER XII. 

Tks elector^s preparations and indignation — Recess of Augsburg- 
Irritating language — Apology of the Confession— Intim dat'on — 
Final interview — Messages of peace — Exasperation of the Par 
pists — Restoration ot Popery — Tumult in the church — Uu'ou of 
the churches — The Pope and the Emperor — Close of the diet— 
Armaments — Attack on Geneva — Joy of the evangelicals — Es 
tablishment of Protestantism. 

Thus Luther gave the signal of departure. They 
replied to the reformer's appeal, and all prepared to quit 
Augsburg on Saturday, September 17. At ten at night, 
Duke Ernest of Luneburg assembled the deputies of 
Nuremberg and the ministers of the landgrave in his 
notel, and announced to them that the elector was de- 
termined to leave the next morning without informing 
any one, and that he would accompany him. " Keep 
the secret," said he to them, and know that if peace 
cannot be preserved, it will be a trifling matter for me 
to lose, combating with you, all that God has given 
me."* 

The elector's preparations betrayed his intentions. 
In the middle of the night Duke Henry of Brunswick 
arrived hastily at his hotel, beseeching him to wait ;f 
and towards morning Counts Truchses and Mansfeldt 
announced that on the morrow, between seven and 
eight, the emperor would give him his conge. 

On Monday, September 19, the elector purposing to 
.eave Augsburg immediately after his audience with 
Charles, breakfasted at seven o'clock, then sent ofi' his 
baggage and his cooks, J and ordered his officers to be 
ready at ten o'clock. At the moment when John quitted 
the hotel to wait upon the emperor, all the members of 
his household were drawn up on each side booted and 

• AUes das, so Ihra Gott geben hatt, darob zu verlieren ein 
geringes ware. Corp. Ref. 2. 379. t der selben Nacht. Ibid 
J Pnemissis fere omnibus impedimeivK' ou4> cow* 



272 



HISTORY OF THE REFOilMATlOK. 



epurred;* but, having been introduced to Charles, he 
was requested to wait two, four, or six days longer-. 

As soon as the elector was alone with his allies, his 
indignation burst forth, and he even became violent. 
" This new delay will end in nothing,"f he said ; " I am 
resolved to set out, happen what may. It seems to mCj 
from the manner in which things are arranged, that I 
aa,ve now completely the air of a prisoner.'' The mar- 
grave of Brandenburg begged him to be calm. " I shall 
go," the elector still replied. At last he yielded, and 
having appeared again before Charles the Fifth, he said, 
" I will wait until Friday next ; and if nothing is done 
by that time, I shall leave forthwith." 

Great was the anxiety of the Protestants during these 
four days of expectation. Most of them doubted not that, 
by acceding to Charles' prayers, they had delivered them 
selves into the hands of their enemies. " The emperoi 
is deliberating whether he ought to hang us or let us 
live," wrote Brentz.J Fresh negotiations of Truchses 
were without success. § 

All that now remained for the emperor was to draw 
up, in common with the Romish states the recess of the 
diet. This was done ; and that the Prot^estants might 
not complain of its having been prepared without their 
knowledge, he assembled them in his palace on Thurs- 
day, September 22, the day previous to tb^t fixed for 
the elector's departure, and had his project read to them 
by the count-palatine. This project was insuH and war. 
The emperor granted to the elector, the five princes, and 
the six cities, II a delay of six months, until th*^ 15th of 
April next year, to come to an arrangement with the 
church, the pope, the emperor, and all the princes and 
monarchs of Christendom. This was clearly announo- 
ing to them that the Romanists were very willing to 

* Gestiefelt und gespornt. Corp. Ref. 2. 380. j Etwa« da- 
rob Bchwermiitig uad hitzig erzeight. Ibid. J A<?Hu<^ deliberul 
Caesar pendendum ne nobis sit, an diutius vivendum. Ib'd. 

§ Urkund. 2. 455-472. || Nuremberg and Reutlingen, t« 

wliich were added the cities of Kempton, Heilbronn, U iudfiliciia, 
cmd WelBsemburg. Ibid. 474-478. 



THE RECESS OF AUaSBURO. 273 



delay until the usual period for bringing armies into 
the field. 

Nor was this all : the delay was granted only on the 
express condition that the Protestants should immedi- 
ately join the emperor in reducing the Anabaptists,* 
and all those who opposed the holy sacrament, ty which 
were meant the Zwinglian cities. He wished by this 
means to tie the hands of the Protestants, and prevent 
the two families of the Reformation from uniting during 
the winter. 

Finally, the Protestants were forbidden to make any 
innovations, to print or sell any thing on the objects oi 
faith, or to draw any one whatever to their sect^ since 
the Confession had been soundly refuted by the holy 
Scriptures." Thus the Reformation was officially pro- 
claimed a sect, and a se;t contrary to the word of God. 

Nothing was more calculated to displease the friends 
of the gospel, who remained in Charles' presence aston- 
ished, alarmed, and indignant.f This had been foreseen ; 
and at the moment when the Protestants were about to 
enter the emperor's chamber, Truchses and Wehe, mak- 
ing signs to them, mysteriously slipped a paper into 
their hands, containing a promise that if, on the 15th of 
A-pril, the Protestants required a prolongation of the 
delay, their request would certainly be granted. J But 
Bruck, to whom the paper was given, was not deceiv- 
ed. A subtle ambuscade," said he ; a masterpiece of 
knavery. God will save his own, and will not permit 
them to fall into the snare."§ This trick in fact served 
only still more to increase the courage of the Protes 
tants. 

Bruck, without discussing the recess in a political 
point of view, confined himself to what was principally 
at stake, the word of God. **We maintain," said he. 
*Hhat our Confession is so based on the holy word of 
God, that it is impossible to refute it. We consider it 

* As they were called by their opponents. f Protestantes 
vehementer hoc decreto minime expectato territi. Seek. 2. 200. 

t Briick, Apologie, p. 182. § Betriige, Meisterstuck, ab«i 

Gott errettet die seinen. Ibid 

i8 



274 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



as the very truth of God, and we hope by it to stand 
one day before the judgment-seat of the Lord." He then 
announced that the Protestants had refuted the Refuta- 
tion of the Romish theologians, and holding in his hand 
the famous Apology of the Confession of Augsburg 
written by Melancthon, he stepped forward, and oflfered 
It to Charles the Fifth. The count-palatine took it, and 
tae emperor was already stretching out his hand, when 
Ferdinand having whispered a few words, he beckoned 
to the count, who immediately returned the Apology to 
Doctor Bruck.* This paper, and the "Commonplaces,'' 
are the reformer's masterpieces. The embarrassed em- 
peror told the Protestants to come again at eight the 
next morning. 

Charles the Fifth, resolving to employ every means 
to get his decree accepted, began by entreaties ; and 
scarcely was the margrave of Brandenburg seated to 
take his evening repast, when Truchses and Wehe ap- 
peared before him, using every kind of discourse and 
argument, but without success.f 

The next day, Friday, September 23, the evangelical 
princes and the deputies of the cities assembled at five 
in the morning at the margrave's hotel, where the recess 
was again read in the presence of Truchses and Wehe, 
Chancellor Bruck assigning seven reasons for its rejec- 
tion. " I undertake," said Wehe, to translate the recess 
into German in such a manner that you can accept it. 
As for the word sect^ in particular, it is the clerk who 
placed it there by mistake."! The mediators retired in 
haste to communicate to Charles the complaints of the 
Protestants. 

Charles and his ministers gave up every idea of rec- 
onciliation, and hoped for nothing except through fear. 
The Protestants having reached the imperial palace at 
oight o'clock, they were made to wait an hour ; the 
elector of Brandenburg then said to them in Charles' 

* Auf Konig Ferdinaadus Wincke wieder geben. Apologie, p. 
184. t Nacht cssen allerley Rede, Disputation und Persuasioa 
ftirgewendt. Urk. 2. 601. J Sondern vom Schreiber gesetsl* 

der dis nicht geacht. Tbid. 606. 



THE PROTESTANTS TAKE LEAVE. 276 



liame, His majesty is astonished beyond measure that 
you still maintaiii your doctrine to be based on the holy 
Scriptures. If jou say the truth, his majesty^s ances- 
tors, so many kings and emperors, and even the ances- 
tors of the elector of Saxony, were heretics. There is 
no gospel, there is no scripture, that imposes on us the 
obligation of seizing by violence the goods of another, 
and of then saying that we cannot conscientiously re- 
store them. It is for this reason," added Joachim, after 
these words, which he accompanied with a sardonic 
smile, I am commissioned to inform you, that if you 
refuse the recess^ all the Germanic states will place their 
lives and their property at the emperor's disposal, and 
his majesty himself will employ the resources of all his 
kingdoms to complete this affair before leaving the 
3mpire." 

" We do not accept it," replied the Protestants firmly. 
* His majesty also has a conscience," then resumed the 
elector of Brandenburg, in a harsh tone ; and if you 
do not submit, he will concert with the pope and the 
other potentates on the best means of extirpating this 
sect and its new errors." But in vain did they add 
threat to threat ; the Protestants remained calm, re- 
spectful, and unshaken. "Our enemies, destitute of all 
confidence in God," said they, " would shake like a reed 
in presence of the emperor's anger, and they imagine that 
we should tremble in like manner ; but we have called 
unto God, and he will keep us faithful to his truth." 

The Protestants then prepared to take their final 
leave of the emperor. This prince, whose patience had 
been put to a severe trial, approached to shake hands 
according to custom ; and beginning with the elector )f 
Saxony, he said to him in a low voice, Uncle, uncle, I 
should never have expected this of you." The elector 
was deeply affected ; his eyes filled with tears ; but 
firm and resolute, he bent his head and quitted Charles 
without reply. It was now two in the afternoon. 

While the Protestants were returning to their hotels 
calm and happy, the Romish princes retired to theirs 
ooiifused and dispirited, uneasy and divided. They 



276 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOK., 



doubted not that the congS which had just been granted 
to the Protestants would be regarded by them as a dec- 
laration of war, and that on quitting Augsburg thej 
would rush to arms. This thought terrified them. Ac- 
^ cordingly, the elector of Saxony had hardly reached his 
palace, when he saw Dr. Euhel, councillor of the elector 
of Mentz, hastening towards him, commissioned by his 
master to deliver this message : " Although my brother 
the elector Joachim of Brandenburg has declared that 
the states of the empire are ready to support the empe- 
ror against you, know that both myself and the minis- 
ters of the elector-palatine and of the elector of Treves 
immediately declared to his majesty that we did not 
adhere to this declaration, seeing that we thought very 
favorably of you.* I intended saying this to the empe- 
ror in your presence, but you left so precipitately, that 
I was unable." 

Thus spoke the primate of the German church, and 
even the choice of his messenger was significant : Dr. 
Euhel was Luther^s brother-in-law. John begged him 
to thank his master. 

As this envoy retired, there arrived one of the gen- 
tlemen of Duke Henry of Brunswick, a zealous Romanist. 
He was at first refused admittance on account of the 
departure, but returned hastily, just as Bruck^s carriage 
was leaving the courtyard of the hotel. Approaching 
the carriage-door, he said, The duke informs the elec- 
tor that he will endeavor to put things in a better 
train, and will come this winter to kill a wild boar with 
him."f Shortly after, the terrible Ferdinand himself 
declared that he would seek every means of preventing 
an outbreak. J All these manifestations of the affrighted 
Roman-catholics showed on which side was the real 
strength. 

At three o'clock in the afternoon the elector of Sax- 
ony, accompanied by the dukes of Luneburg and the 
princes of Anhalt, quitted the walls of Augsburg. " God 

• Wiissten aiich nicht anders denn wohl und gut. Urkaad 
p. 210. t Ein Sawe fahen helfen. Ibid. 2\h 

t Corp. Ref. 2. 397, 



VIOLENCE OF THE EMf EROH. 



2T7 



be praised," said Luther, " that our dear prince is at last 
out of hell."* 

As he saw these intrepid princes thus escaping from 
his hands, Charles the Fifth gave way to a violence that 
was not usual with him.f They want to teach me a 
new faith," cried he ; but it is not with the doctrine 
that we shall finish this matter: we must draw the 
sword, and then shall we see who is the strongest." J 
All around him gave way to their indignation. They 
were astonished at the audacity of Bruck, who had dared 
call the Romanists heretics. § But nothing irritated 
them so much as the spirit of proselytism which in those 
glorious days characterized evangelical Germany ; and 
the anger of the Papists was particularly directed against 
the chancellor of Luneburg, *'who," said they, "had sent 
more than a hundred ministers into different places to 
preach the new doctrine, and who had even publicly 
boasted of it."|| Our adversaries thirst for our blood," 
wrote, as they heard these complaints, the deputies of 
Nuremberg, who remained almost alone at Augsburg. 

On the 4th of October, Charles the Fifth wrote to 
the pope — ^for it was from Rome that the new crusade 
was to set out — **The negotiations are broken off; our 
adversaries are more obstinate than ever ; and I am 
resolved to employ my strength and my person in com- 
bating them. For this reason I beg your holiness will 
demand the support of all Christian princes." 

The enterprise began in Augsburg itself. The day 
on which he wrote to the pope, Charles, in honor of St. 
Francis of Assisi, whose feast it was, refe'stablished the 
Cordeliers in that city, and a monk ascending the pulpit 
said, All those who preach that Jesus Christ alone has 
made satisfaction for our sins, and that God saves us 
without regard to our works, are thorough scoundrels. 
There are, on the contrary, two roads to salvation : the 

♦ Ein mal au8 der Holle los ist. L. Epp. 4. 175. t I^er Kai- 
oei ist fast hitzig im Handel. Corp. Ref. 2. 591. t Es gehoren 
die Fauste dar zu. Ibid. 592; Urkund. 2. 710. § Fiir Ketzer 
angezogen. lb. || Bis in die hundert Prediger in andere Lande 
BChiken, helfen daselbst die neue Lehre zu predigen. Urk. 2, 646. 



278 HISTORY OF THE REFOUMATIOlf 



common road, namely, the observance of the command 
ments ; and the perfect road, namely, the ecclesiastical 
state." Scarcely was the sermon finished ere the con- 
gregation began to remove the benches placed in the 
church for the evangelical preaching, breaking them 
violently, for they were fixed with chains, and throwing 
them one upon another. Within these consecrated walla 
two monks, in particular, armed with hammers and 
pincers, tossed their arms, and shouted like men pos- 
sessed. " From their frightful uproar," exclaimed some, 
"one would imagine they were pulling down a house."* 
It was in truth the house of God they wished to begin 
destroying. 

After the tumult was appeased, they sang mass. As 
soon as this was concluded, a Spaniard desired to recom- 
mence breaking the benches, and on being prevented by 
one of the citizens, they began to hurl chairs at each 
other; one of the monks, leaving the choir, ran up to 
them and was soon dragged into the fray ; at length 
the captain of police arrived with his men, who distrib 
uted their well-directed blows on every side. Thus be- 
gan in Germany the restoration of Roman-catholicism • 
popular violence has often been one of its most powe^ 
ful allies. 

On the 13th of October the recess was read to all the 
Romish states, and on the same day they concluded a 
Roman league.f 

Two cities had signed the Confession, and two others 
had assented to it; the imperialists hoped, however, 
that these powerless municipalities, affrighted at the 
imperial authority, would withdraw from the Protestant 
union. But on the 17th of October, instead of two or 
four cities, sixteen imperial towns, among which were 
the most important in Germany, declared it was impos- 
sible to grant any support against the Turks, so long 
as public peace was not secured in Germany itself.| 

An event more formidable to Charles had just taken 

* Ein alt Haus abbrechen. Corp. Ref. 2. 400. f Katechlag, 
rttc. Urkund. 2. 737-740. t Wo sie nicht einen gemeinen Frl© 
dens versichert. . . . Corp. Ref. 2. 411, 416. 



OHAHLES PP.EPAIIES FOR WAE, 279 



place. The unity of the Reformation had prevailed 
"We are one in the fundamental articles of faith," had 
said the Zwinglian cities, " and in particular, notwith- 
standing some disputes about words among our theo- 
logians, we are one in the doctrine of the communion in 
the body and blood of our Lord. Receive us." The 
Saxon deputies immediately gave their hands. NothiLg 
unites the children of God so much as the violence of 
their adversaries. ** Let us unite," said all, **for the 
consolation of our brethren and the terror of our ene- 
mies."* 

In vain did Charles, who was intent on keeping up 
division among the Protestants, convoke the deputies 
of the Zwinglian cities ; in vain, desiring to render them 
odious, had he accused them of fastening a consecrated 
wafer to a wall and firing bullets at it ;f in vain did he 
overwhelm them with fierce threats : all his efforts were 
useless. At length the evangelical party was one. 

The alarm increased among the Roman party, who 
resolved on fresh concessions. "The Protestants call 
for public peace," said they ; *' well then, let us draw up 
articles of peace." But on the 29th of October, the 
Protestants refused these offers, because the emperor 
enjoined peace to all the world without binding him- 
self. " An emperor has the right to command peace to 
his subjects," haughtily answered Charles ; " but it has 
never been heard that he commanded it to himself."J 

Nothing remained but to draw the sword ; and for 
that Charles made every preparation. On the 25th of 
October, he wrote to the cardinals at Rome, "We in- 
form you that we shall spare neither kingdoms nor lord- 
ships ; and that we shall venture even our soul and our 
body to complete such necessary matters." 

Scarcely had Charles' letter been received, before his 
major-domo, Pedro de la Cueva, arrived in Rome by 
express. " The season is now too far advanced to attack 

* Diesetn Theil desto mehr Freude und Trost und dera Gkjgea- 
theil Erschrecken. Urkund. 2. 728. f An eine Wand gehefte* 
und dazu geschossen. Corp. Ref. 2. 423. t These negotiation! 
will be found in Forstemann's Urkunden. 750-793, 



280 HISTORY OF TH£ REFORMATION. 



the Lutherans immediately," said he to the pope; "but 
prepare every thing for this enterprise. His majesty 
thinks it his duty to prefer before all things the accom- 
plishment of your designs." Thus Clement and the em- 
peror were also united, and both sides began to concen- 
trate their forces. 

On the evening of the 11th of November the recess 
was read to the Protestant deputies, and on the 12th 
they rejected it, declaring that they did not acknow- 
ledge the emperor's power to command in matters of 
faith.* The deputies of Hesse and of Saxony departed 
immediately after, and on the 19th of November the 
recess was solemnly read in the presence of Charles the 
Fifth, and of the princes and deputies who were still in 
Augsburg. This report was more hostile than the pro- 
ject communicated to the Protestants. It bore among 
other things — and this is only a sample of the urbanity 
of this official doctrine — that " to deny free-will was the 
error not of man, but of a brute." " We beg his maj- 
esty," said the elector Joachim, after it was read, "not 
to leave Germany until by his cares one sole and same 
faith be reestablished in all the empire." 

The emperor replied, that he would not go farther 
than his states of the Low Countries. They desired that 
deeds should follow close upon words. It was then 
nearly seven in the evening ; a few torches lighted up 
here and there by the ushers, and casting a pale light, 
alone illuminated this assembly : they separated with- 
out seeing each other ; and thus ended, as it were by 
stealth, that diet so pompously announced to the Chris- 
tian world. 

On the 22d of November, the recess was made public, 
and two days after, Charles the Fifth set out for C jlogne. 
The ruler of two worlds had seen all his influence baf- 
fled by a few Christians ; and he who had entered the 
imperial city in triumph, now quitted it gloomy, silent, 
and dispirited. The mightiest power of the earth was 
broken against the power of God. 

But the emperor's ministers and officers, excited by 
♦ Urkundea, 2. 823 j Corp. Ref. 2. 437 



ATTACK ON aENEVA 



281 



the pope, displayed so much the more energy. The 
fitates of the empire were bound to furnish Charles, for 
three years, 40,000 foot, 8,000 horse, and a considerable 
Bum of money ;* the margrave Henry of Zenete, the count 
of Nassau, and other nobles, made considerable levies 
on the side of the Rhine ; a captain going through the 
Black forest called its rude inhabitants to his standard, 
and there enrolled six companies of lansquenets ; king 
Ferdinand had written to all the knights of the Tyrol 
and of Wurtemberg to gird on their cuirasses and take 
down their swords; Joachim of Talheim collected the 
Spanish bands in the Low Countries, and ordered them 
towards the Rhine ; Peter Scher solicited from the duke 
of Lorraine the aid of his arms ; and another chief has- 
tily moved the Spanish army of Florence in the direction 
of the Alps. There was every reason to fear that the 
Germans, even the Roman-catholics, would take Luther^s 
part ; and hence principally foreign troops were levied.f 
Nothing but war was talked of in Augsburg. 

On a sudden a strange rumor was heard. J The sig- 
nal is given, said every one. A free city, lying on the 
confines of the Germanic and Roman world, a city at 
war with its bishop, in alliance with the Protestants, and 
which passed for reformed even before really being so, 
had been suddenly attacked. A courier from Strasburg 
brought this news to Augsburg, and it circulated through 
the town with the rapidity of lightning. Three days 
after Michaelmas, some armed men, sent by the duke of 
Savoy, pillaged the suburbs of Geneva, and threatened 
to take possession of the city, and put all to the edge of 
the sword. Every one in Augsburg was amazed. " Ho," 
exclaimed Charles the Fifth, in French, "the duke of 
Savoy has begun too soon."§ It was reported that Mar- 
garet, governor of the Low Countries, the pope, the 
dukes of Lorraine and Gueldres, and even the king of 

• 40,000 zu Fuss and 8,000 zu Ross. Corp. Ref. 2. 399. 

t Legati Norinb. ad Senatum, October 11. Ibid. 402 ; Legati 
Sax. ad Electorem, October 10. Urkund. 2. 711. J Shortly be- 
fore the close of the diet. § Hatt der Kayser unter andern in 
Franzdsisch geredet. Urk. 2. 421, 



282 HISTOfir OF THE REFORMATIOK 



Prance, were directing their troops against Geneva. It 
was there that the army of Rome intended fixing its 
pmnt d^appui. The avalanche was gathering on the first 
slopes of the Alps, whence it would rush all over Swit- 
zerland, and then roll into Germany, burying the gospel 
and the Reformation under its huge mass.* 

This sacred cause appeared to be in great danger, 
and never in reality had it gained so noble a triumph. 
The coup de main attempted on those hills, where six 
yeais later Calvin was to take his station, and plant the 
standard of Augsburg and of Nazareth, having failed, 
all fears were dispelled, and the victory of the confessors 
of Christ, for an instant obscured, shone forth anew in 
all its splendor. 

While the emperor Charles, surrounded by a numer 
ous train of princes, was approaching the banks of the 
Rhine sad and dispirited, the evangelical Christians were 
returning in triumph to their homes. Luther was the 
herald of the victory gained at Augsburg by faith. 
" Though our enemies should have around them, beside 
them, with them, not only that puissant Roman emperor 
Charles, but still more the emperor of the Turks and 
his Mahomet," said he, they could not intimidate, they 
could not frighten me. It is I who in the strength of 
God am resolved to frighten and overthrow them. They 
shall yield to me ; they shall fall, and I shall remain 
upright and firm. My life shall be their headsman, and 

my death their hell."f God blinds them, and hardens 

their hearts ; he is driving them towards the Red sea ; 
all the horses of Pharaoh, his chariots and his horsemen, 
cannot escape their inevitable destiny. Let them go 
then, let them perish, since they will it so.J As for us, 
the Lord is with us." 

ITius the diet of Augsburg, destined to crush the 
Eeformation, was what strengthened it for ever. It has 
been usual to consider the peace of Augsburg, 1555, 

• Geneva expugnata, bellum etiam urbibus Germaniae Superioris 
Inerretur. Corp. Ref. 2. 402. f Mein Leben soli ibr Heoker 

ieyn. L. 0pp. 20. 804. | Yadant igitur et pereant, quomodc 
»ic volant. L. Epp. 4. 167 



ESTAPLISHMENT OF PROTESTANTISM. 283 



as the period when the reform was definitively estab- 
lished. That is the date of legal Protestantism ; evan- 
gelical Christianity has another — the autumn of 1630. 
In 1555 was the victory of the sword and of diplomacy; 
in 1530 was that of the word of God and of faith ; and 
this latter victory is in our eyes the truest and the sur- 
est. The evangelical history of the Reformation in Ger^ 
many is nearly, finished at the epoch we have reached, 
and the diplomatic history of legal Protestantism begins. 
Whatever may now be done, whatever may be said, the 
church of the first ages has reappeared ; and it has re- 
appeared strong enough to show that it will li\e. There 
will still be conferences and discussions ; there will still 
be leagues and combats ; there will even be deplorable 
defeats ; but all these are a secondary movement. The 
great movement is accomplished : the cause of faith is 
won by faith. The effort has been made ; the evangel- 
ical doctrine has taken root in the world, and neither the 
storms of men nor the powers of hell will ever be able 
to tear it up. 



THE 8WI88 R£FO&M. 



285 



BOOKXY. 

SWITZERLAND— CONQUESTS. 
1526-1530. 

CHAPTER I. 

Originality of the Swise reform — Change — Three periods of refoim— 
Switzerland Romande — The two movements in the church- 
Aggressive spirit — The schoolmaster— Farel's new baptism- 
Mysticism and scholasticism — A door is opened — Opposition — 
Lausanne — Manners of the clergy — Farel to Galeotto — Farel and 
the monk — The tribunal — The monk cries for pardon — Opposi- 
tion of the Ormonds — A false convert — Christian unity. 

The divisions which the Reformation disclosed within 
its bosom on its appearance before the diet of Augsburg, 
humbled it and compromised its existence ; but we must 
not forget that the cause of these divisions was one of 
the conditions of the existence of the regenerated church. 
No doubt it would have been desirable for Germany and 
Switzerland to have agreed ; but it was of still greater 
importance that Germany and Switzerland should have 
each its original reform. If the Swiss Reformation had 
been only a feeble copy of the German, there would have 
been uniformity, but no duration. The tree, transplanted 
into Switzerland without having taken deep root, would 
soon have been torn up by the vigorous hand that was 
erelong about to seize upon it. The regeneration ol 
Christianity in these mountains proceeded from forces 
peculiar to the Helvetic church, and received an organi- 
zation in conformity with the ecclesiastical and political 
condition of that country. By this very originality it 
communicated a particular energy to the principles of 
the Reformation of much greater consequence to the 
cornmon cause than a servile uniformity. The strength 



286 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



of an SiTmj arises in great measure from its being com* 
posed of soldiers of different arms. 

The military and political influence of Switzerland 
was declining. The new developments of the European 
nations subsequent to the sixteenth century, were about 
to banish to their native mountains those proud Helve 
tians who for so long a period had placed their two* 
handed swords in the balance in which the destinies of 
nations were weighed. The Keformation communicated 
a new influence in exchange for that which was depart- 
ing. Switzerland, where the gospel appeared in its sim- 
plest and purest form, was destined to give in these new 
times to many nations of the two worlds a more salu- 
tary and glorious impulse than that which had hitherto 
proceeded from its halberds and its arquebuses. 

The history of the Swiss Reformation is divided into 
three periods, in which the light of the gospel is seen 
spreading successively over three different zones. From 
1519 to 1526, Zurich was the centre of the Reformation, 
which was then entirely German, and was propagated 
in the eastern and northern parts of the confederation. 
Between 1526 and 1532, the movement was communi- 
cated from Berne : it was at once German and French, 
and extended to the centre of Switzerland, from the 
gorges of the Jura to the deepest valleys of the Alps. 
In 1532, Geneva became the focus of the light; and the 
Reformation, which was here essentially French, was 
established on the shores of the Leman lake, and gained 
strength in every quarter. It is of the second of these 
periods, that of Berne, of which we are now to treat. 

Although the Swiss Reformation is not yet essential 
ly French, still the most active part in it is taken by 
Frenchmen. Switzerland Bomande^ is yoked to the 
chariot of reform, and communicates to it an accelerated 
motion. In the period we are about to treat of, there ia 
a mixture of races, of forces, and of characters, from 

* The French part of Switzerland, comprising the cantons ol 
Geneva, Vaud, Neufchatel, and part of thoee of Friburg, Berne, and 



SWITZEELAND ROMAlfBE: 



287 



which proceeds a greater commotion. In no part of the 
Christian world will the resistance be so stubborn ; but 
nowhere will the assailants display so much courage. 
This petty country of Switzerland Romande, enclosed 
within the colossal arms of the Jura and the Alps, was 
for centuries one of the strongest fortresses of the Papa- 
cy. It is about to be carried by storm ; it is going to 
turn its arms against its ancient masters ; and from 
these few hillocks, scattered at the foot of the highest 
mountains in Europe, will proceed the reiterated shocks 
that will overthrow, even in the most distant countries, 
the sanctuaries of Rome, their images and their altars. 

There are two movements in the church : one is 
effected inwardly, and its object is its preservation ; the 
other is effected outwardly, and the object aimed at is 
its propagation. There is thus a doctrinal church and a 
missionary church. These two movements ought never 
to be separated, and whenever they are disunited, it is 
because the spirit of man, and not the Spirit of God pre- 
\;ails. In the apostolic ages these two tendencies were 
evolved at the same time and with equal power. In the 
second and third centuries the external tendency pre- 
vailed ; after the Council of Nice, 325, the doctrinal 
movement resumed the superiority : at the epoch of the 
irruption of the northern tribes the missionary spirit 
revived ; but erelong came the times of the hierarchy 
and of the schoolmen, in which all doctrinal powers 
warred within the church to found therein a despotic 
government and an impure doctrine, the Papacy. The 
revival of Christianity in the sixteenth century, which 
emanated from God, was destined to renovate these two 
movements, but by purifying them. Then indeed the 
Spi it of God acted at once externally and internally. 
In the days of the Reformation there were tranquil and 
Internal developments, but there was also a more pow- 
erful and aggressive action. Men of God had for ages 
studied the word, and had peacefully explained its salu* 
tary lessons. Such had been the work of Vesalia, Goch, 
Groot, Radewin, Ruybrook, Tauler, Thomas a Kempis, 
and John Wessel ; now, something more was required 



288 HISTORY OF THE UEFOEMATIOir 



The power of action was to be combined with the powei 
of thought. The Papacy had been allowed all necessary 
time for laying aside its errors ; for ages men had been 
in expectation ; it bad been warned, it had been entreat* 
ed ; all had been unavailing. Popery being unwilling 
reform itself, it became necessary for men of God to 
Lake its accomplishment upon themselves. The calm 
and moderate influence of the precursors of the reform 
was succeeded by the heroic and holy revolutionary 
work of the reformers ; and the revolution they effected 
consisted in overthrowing the usurping power to refe's- 
tablish the legitimate authority. To every thing there 
is a season," says the preacher, "and a time to every 
purpose under heaven: a time to plant, and a time to 
pluck up that which is planted ; a time to break down, 
and a time to build up." Eccl. 3:1. Of all reformers, 
those who carried the aggressive spirit to its highest 
degree were the men who came from France, and more 
especially Farel, whose labors we have now to con- 
sider. 

Never were such mighty effects accomplished by so 
puny a force. In the government of God we pass in an 
instant from the greatest to the least of things. We 
now quit the haughty Charles Y. and all that court of 
princes over which he presides, to follow the steps of a 
schoolmaster ; and leave the palaces of Augsburg to 
take our seats in the lowly cottages of Switzerland. 

The Rhone, after issuing, near St. Gothard, from the 
mountains of the Furka, from beneath an immense sea 
of eternal ice, rolls its noisy waters through a rugged 
valley separating the two great chains of the Alps ; then 
issuing from the gorge of St. Maurice, it wanders through 
a more smiling and fertile country. The sublime Dent 
du Midi on the south, the proud Dent de Morcles on the 
north, picturesquely situated opposite each other, point 
out from afar to the traveller's eye the beginning of this 
latter basin On the tops of these mountains are vast 
glaciers and threatening peaks, near which the shejx- 
herds in the midst of summer lead their numerous flocks 
to pasture : while, in the plain, the flowers and fruits of 



THE SCHOOLMASTER URSINUS. 



289 



aoathern climes grow luxuriantly, and the laurel blooms 
beside the most exquisite grapes. 

At the opening of one of the lateral valleys that lead 
into the Northern Alps, on the banks of the Grande Eau 
that falls in thunder from the glaciers of the Diablerets, 
is situated the small town of Aigle, one of the most 
s<.iithern in Switzerland. For about fifty years it had 
belonged to Berne, with the four parishes, mandemens, 
which are under its jurisdiction, namely, Aigle, Bex, 
Ollon, and the chalets scattered in the lofty valleys of 
the Ormonds. It is in this country that the second epoch 
of the Swiss Reformation was destined to begin. 

In the winter of 1526, '27, a foreign schoolmastei 
named Ursinus arrived in this humble district. He was 
a man of middle stature, with red beard and quick eyes, 
and who, with a voice of thunder, says Beza, combined 
the feelings of a hero : his modest lessons were inter- 
mingled with new and strange doctrines. The benefices 
being abandoned by their titularies to ignorant curates, 
the people, who were naturally of rude and turbulent 
habits, had remained without any cultivation. Thus did 
this stranger, who was no other than Farel, meet with 
new obstacles at every step. 

While Lefevre and most of his friends had quitted 
Strasburg to reenter France, after the deliverance of 
Francis I., Farel had turned his steps towards Switzer- 
land ; and on the very first day of his journey, he re- 
ceived a lesson that he frequently recalled to mind. 

He was on foot, accompanied by a single friend. 
Night had closed around them, the rain fell in torrents, 
and the travellers, in despair of finding their road, had 
sat down midway, drenched with rain.* " Ah," said 
Farel, " God, by showing me my helplessness in these 
little things, has willed to teach me how weak I am in 
the greatest, without Jesus Christ.'^f At last Farel, 
springing up, plunged into the marshes, waded through 

* Gravabat nox, opprimebat pluvia .... coegit viae difficultas 
in media sedere via sub pluvia. Farel to Capito and Bucer. Neuf 
ohatel MS. f Voluit Dominus per infirma hajc, docere quid po5 
9it homo in majoribus. Coct. Epp. MS. of Neufchatel. 

UmL of R«c nr y ^ 



200 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



the waters, crossed vineyards, fields, hills, forests, and 
valleys, and at length reached his destination covered 
with mud and soaked to the skin. 

In this night of desolation, Farel had received a new 
baptism. His natural energy had been quelled ; he be- 
came, for some time at least, wise as a serpent and 
harmless as a dove ; and as not unfrequently happens 
to men of such disposition, he at first overstepped his 
aim. Believing that he was following the example of 
the apostles, he sought in the words of OEcolampadius, 
"by pious frauds to circumvent the old serpent that 
was hissing around him."* He represented himself to 
be a schoolmaster, and waited until a door should be 
opened to him to appear as a reformer.*}* 

Scarcely had Magister Ursinus quitted the school- 
room and his primers, than, taking refuge in his modest 
chamber, he became absorbed in the Greek and Hebrew 
Scriptures, and the most learned treatises of the theo- 
logians. The struggle between Luther and Zwingle 
was commencing. To which of these two chiefs should 
the French reform attach itself? Luther had been known 
ill France for a much longer time than Zwingle, yet 
Farel decided in favor of the latter. Mysticism had 
characterized the Germanic nations during the middle 
ages, and scholasticism those of Roman descent. The 
Fr<^nch were in closer relation with the dialectician 
Zwingle than with the mystic Luther; or rather, they 
were the mediators between the two great tendencies 
of the middle ages ; and while giving to the Christian 
thought that correct form which seems to be the province 
of southern nations, they became the instruments of God 
to spread through the church the fulness of life and d1 
thf Spirit of Christ. 

It was in his little chamber at Aigle that Farel read 
the first publication addressed to the German by the 
Swiss reformer.^ With what learning," cries he, 

* Piis artibus et apostolicis veraatiis ad circumveniendum iUum 
opus est. OEcol. to Farel, Dec. 27, 1526. Neufchatel MS. f Ubi 
ostium patuerit, tunc adversariis liberius obsistetur. lb. I Piael 
arnica ad Lutheri serraonem apologia. 0pp. Vol. II. t. 2, p. 1. 



FAREL IN THE PULPIT. 



291 



"does Zwingle scatter the darkness; with what hol^/ 
ingenuity he gains over the v/ise, and what captivating 
meekness he unites with deep erudition. Oh that by 
the grace of God this work may win over Luther, so 
that the church of Christ, trembling from such violent 
shocks, may at length find peace.^^* 

The schoolmaster Ursinus, excited by so noble an 
example, gradually set about instructing the parents as 
geell as the children. He at first attacked the doctrine 
of purgatory, and next the invocation of saints. " As 
for the pope, he is nothing," said he, **or almost noth- 
ing, in these parts ;f and as for the priests, provided 
they annoy the people with all that nonsense which 
Erasmus knows so well how to turn into ridicule, that 
is enough for them." 

Ursinus had been some months at Aigle : a door was 
opened to him ; a flock had been collected there, and he 
believed the looked-for moment had arrived. 

Accordingly, one day the prudent schoolmaster dis- 
appears. " 1 am William Farel," said he, " minister oi 
the word of God." The terror of the priests and magis- 
trates was great when they saw in the midst of them 
that very man whose name had already become so for- 
midable. The schoolmaster quitted his humble study ; 
ne ascended the pulpit, and openly preached Jesus 
Christ to the astonished multitude. The work of Ursi 
nus was over : Farel was himself again. J It was then 
about the month of March oi April, 1521, and in that 
beautiful valley, whose slopes were brightening in the 
warm rays of the sun, all was fermenting at the same 
time, the flowers, the vineyards, and the hearts of this 
sensible but rude people. 

Yet the rocks that the torrent meets as it issues 
from the Diablerets, and against which it dashes at 
every step as it falls from eternal snows, arc more tri- 
fling obstacles than the prejudice and hatred that were 

* Ui Christi succussa undique Ecclesia, pacis non nihil scntiat. 
Zw. Epp. 2. 26. t Papa aut uullus aut modicus hlc est. lb. 36. 

X The name of Ursinus was doubtless takea from the bear, una 
which was on the shield of Berne. Ursinus meant Bernese. 



292 HISTORY OF THE EEFORMATIOK 



shown erelong in this populous valley to the word of 
God. 

The council of Berne, by a license of the 9th of March, 
had commissioned Farel to explain the holy Scriptures 
to the people of Aigle and its neighborhood. But the 
arm of the civil magistrate, by thus mingling in relig- 
ious affairs, served only to increase the irritation of 
men's minds. The rich and lazy incumbents, the poor 
and ignorant curates, were the first to cry out. " If 
this man," said they one to another, continues preach- 
ing, it is all over with our benefices and our church."* 

In the midst of this agitation, the bailiff of Aigle, and 
the governor of the four mandemens, Jacques de Ko- 
verea, instead of supporting the minister of their excel- 
lencies of Berne, eagerly embraced the cause of the 
priests. The emperor," said they, is about to declare 
war against all innovators. A great army will shortly 
arrive from Spain to assist the Archduke Ferdinand."*}* 
Farel stood firm. Upon this the bailiff and Roverea, 
exasperated by such boldness, interdicted the heretic 
from every kind of instruction, whether as minister or 
schoolmaster. But Berne caused to be posted on the 
doors of all the churches in the four mandemens a new 
decree, dated the 3d of July, in which their excellencies, 
manifesting great displeasure at this interdiction of the 
very learned Farel from the propagation of the divine 
word,J ordered all the oflScers of the state to allow him 
to preach publicly the doctrines of the Lord." 

This new proclamation was the signal of revolt. On 
the 25th of July, great crowds assembled at Aigle, at 
Bex, at Ollon, and in the Ormonds, crying out, No more 
submission to Berne ; down with Farel I" From words 
they soon proceeded to actions. At Aigle the insurgents, 
headed by the fiery syndic, tore down the edict, and pre- 
pared to fall upon the reformed. These, promptly unit- 
ing and surrounding Farel, resolved to defenc^ him. The 

♦ J. J. Hottinger, H. K. G., 3. 364. f Ferdinando adrentu- 
rum esse ingeatem ex Hispania exercitum. Zw. Epp. 2. 64 ; dated 
May 11, 1527. 

t Inhibita verbi diviiii piopagatio. Choupard MS. 



DISSOLUTE PRIESTS 



293 



two parties met face to face, and blood was near flow- 
ing. The firm countenance of the friends of the gospel 
checked the partisans of the priests, who dispersed, and 
Farel, quitting Aigle for a few days, carried his views 
farther. 

In the middle of the beautiful valley of the Leman, 
on hills which overlook the lake, stands Lausanne, the 
city of the bishop and of the Virgin, placed under the 
patronage of the dukes of Savoy. A host of pilgrims, 
assembling from all the surrounding places, knelt de- 
voutly before the image of Our Lady, and made costly pur- 
chases at the great fair of indulgences that was held in 
its precincts. Lausanne, extending its episcopal crosiei 
from its lofty towers, pretended to keep the whole coun- 
try at the feet of the pope. But owing to the dissolute- 
life of the canons and priests, the eyes of many began 
to be opened. The ministers of the Virgin were seen in 
public playing at games of chance, which they season 
ed with mockery and blasphemy. They fought in the 
churches ; disguised as soldiers, they descended by night 
from the cathedral hill, and roaming through the streets 
Bword in hand and in liquor, surprised, wounded, and 
sometimes even killed the worthy citizens ; they de- 
Dauched married women, seduced young girls, changed 
their residences into houses of ill-fame, and heartlessly 
turned out their young children to beg their bread.* 
Nowhere, perhaps, was better exemplified the descrip- 
tion of the clergy given us by one of the most venerar 
ble prelates at the beginning of the sixteenth century: 
" Instead of training up youth by their learning and 
holiness of life, the priests train birds and dogs ; instead 
of books, they have children ; they sit with topers in 
the taverns, and give way to drunkenness."f 

Among the theologians in the court of the bishop 
Sebastian of Montfaucon, was Natalis Galeotto, a man 
of elevated rank and great urbanity, fond of the society 

• Histoire de la Reformation Suisse by Ruchat, 1. 35. 

t Pro libros sibi liberos comparant, pro studio concubinas amant. 
Tritheim Instit. Vitae Sacerdotalis, p. 765. The play upon /i&r.v 
and liberosj books and children, cannot be conveyed in Engliskr 



294 HISTOHY OF THE UEFOUMATION 

of scholars, and himself a man of learning,* but never* 
theless very zealous about fasts and all the ordinances 
of the church. Farel thought that if this man could be 
gained over to the gospel, Lausanne, "slumbering at 
the foot of its steeples," would perhaps awaken, and all 
the country with it. He therefore addressed himself to 
him. " Alas, alas," said Farel, " religion is now little 
better than an empty mockery, since people who think 
only of their appetites are the kings of the church. 
Christian people, instead of celebrating in the sacra- 
ment the death of the Lord, live as if they commem- 
orated Mercury the god of fraud. Instead of imi- 
tating the love of Christ, they emulate the lewdness 
of Venus ; and when they do evil, they fear more the 
presence of a wretched swineherd than of God Al- 
mighty.^'f 

But Galeotto made no reply, and Farel persevered. 
" Knock ; cry out with all your might," wrote he in a 
second letter ; redouble your attacks upon our Lord." J 
Still there was no answer. Farel returned to the charge 
a third time, and Natalis, fearing perhaps to reply in 
person, commissioned his secretary, who forwarded a 
letter to Farel full of abusive language. § For a season 
Lausanne was inaccessible. 

After having thus contended with a priest, Farel 
was destined to struggle with a monk. The two arms 
of the hierarchy by which the middle ages had been 
governed were chivalry and monachism. The latter 
still remained for the service of the papacy ^ although 
falling into decay. " Alas," exclaimed a celebrated Car- 
thusian, " what an obstinate devil would fear to do, a 
reprobate and arrogant monk will commit without hesi* 
tation."|| 

* Urbanus, doctus, magnus, consuetudine doctorum obligatus* 
Farel to Galeotto. Neufcbatel MS. f Pluris faciunt miserrimi 
Bubulci aspectum quam omnipotentis Dei. Ibid. t Pulsare, 

vociferari perge, nee prius cessa quam, etc. Ibid. § Naeniis 

totas implevit et couviciis. Ibid. || Quod agere veretur ob 

Btiaatus diabolus, iutrepide agit reprobus et contumax moa&ohoa 
Jncob vou Juterbock : de Negligentia Prelatorum. 



?AREL AND THE MONK. 



295 



A mendicant friar, who dared not oppose the reformer 
fn a direct manner at Aigle, ventured into the village of 
Noville, situated on the low grounds deposited by the 
Rhone as it falls into the lake of Geneva. The friar, 
ascending the pulpit, exclaimed, " It is the devil himself 
who preaches by the mouth of the minister, and all those 
who listen to him will be damned." Then, taking cour- 
age, he slunk along the bank of the Rhone, and arrived 
at Aigle with a meek and humble look, not to appear 
then3 against Farel, whose powerful eloquence terribly 
alarmed him, but to beg in behalf of his convent a few 
barrels of the most exquisite wine in all Switzerland. 
He had not advanced many steps into the town before 
he met the minister. At this sight he trembled in every 
limb. " Why did you preach in such a manner at No- 
ville demanded Farel. The monk, fearful that the 
dispute would attract public attention, and yet desirous 
of replying to the point, whispered in his ear, " I have 
heard say that you are a heretic and misleader of the 
people." " Prove it," said Farel. Then the monk " be- 
gan to storm," says Farel,* and hastening down the 
street, endeavored to shake off his disagreeable compan- 
ion, "turning now this way, now that, like a troubled 
conscience. "f A few citizens beginning to collect around 
them, Farel said to them, pointing to the monk, "You 
Bee this fine father ; he has said from the pulpit that I 
preach nothing but lies." Then the monk, blushing and 
stammering, began to speak of the offerings of the faith- 
ful — the precious wine of Yvorne, for which he had come 
begging — and accused Farel of opposing them. The 
crowd had now increased in number, and Farel, who 
only sought an opportunity of proclaiming the true wor- 
ship of God, exclaimed with a loud voice, " It is no man's 
business to ordain any other way of serving God than 
that which he has commanded. We must keep his com- 
mandments without turning either to the right hand or 

* Commen^a de se tempester ; In the narrative he gives of thiA 
adventure to the nuns of Vevay. Neufchatel MS. f Touraant 
main tenant de 9 a, maintenant de la, comme fait la comicieace maj 
assur^e. Ibid. 



206 HISTORY OV THE REFORMATION. 



to the left.* Let us worship God alone in spirit and ic 
truth, offering to him a broken and a contrite heart." 

The eyes of all the spectators were fixed on the two 
actors in this scene, the monk with his wallet, and the 
reformer with his glistening eye. Confounded by FarePs 
daring to speak of any other worship than that which 
the holy Roman church prescribed, the friar " was out 
of his senses ; he trembled and was agitated, becoming 
pale and red by turns. At last, taking his cap off his 
head, from under his hood, he flung it on the ground, 
trampling it under foot, and crying, * I am surprised that 
the earth does not gape and swallow us up.'^f . . . . 
Farel wished to reply, but in vain. The friar with 
downcast eyes kept stamping on his cap, " bawling like 
one out of his wits and his cries resounding through 
the streets of Aigle, drowned the voice of the reformer. 
At length one of the spectators who stood beside him 
plucked him by the sleeve, and said, " Listen to the min- 
ister, as he is listening to you." The affrighted monk, 
believing himself already half dead, started violently 
and cried out, Oh, thou excommunicate, lay est thou 
thy hand upon me 

The little town was in an uproar ; the friar at once 
fui'ious and trembling, Parol following up his attack 
with vigor, and the people confused and amazed. At 
length the magistrate appeared, ordered the monk and 
Farel to follow him, and shut them up, "one in one 
tower and one in another."^ 

On the Saturday morning Farel was liberated from 
his prison, and conducted to the castle before the officers 
of justice, where the monk had arrived before him. The 
minister began to address them : " My lords, to whom 

* II n'appartient a personne vivante d^ordonner autre mani^*t2 
de faire service a Dieu, que celle qu^il a commandee. Nous devoM 
garder ses commandemens, sans tirer ni a la dextre, ni a la senestre. 
Neufchatel MS. f Hors de sens, trembloit, s'agitoit, palissoit 

et rougissoit tour a tour. Enfin tirant son bonnet de sa tete, hon 
du chaperon, il le rua a terre, jettant et mettant son pled sus, 
B'^criant : " Je suis esbahi comme la terre ne nous abyme 1" (bid 

t L^un en une tour, et Pautre en Pautre. Ibid. 



tHE TRIBUNAL. 



297 



our Saviour enjoins obedience without any exception, 
this friar has said that the doctrine which I preach ia 
against God. Let him make good his words, or, if he 
cannot, permit your people to be edified." The violence 
of the monk was over. The tribunal before which he 
was standing, the courage of his adversary, the power 
of the movement which he could not resist, the weakness 
of his cause, all alarmed him, and he was now ready to 
make matters up. Then the friar fell upon his knees, 
saying. My lords, I entreat forgiveness of you and of 
God. Next turning to Farel, And also, Magister, what 
I preached against you was grounded on false reports. 
I have found you to be a good man, and your doctrine 
good, and I am prepared to recall my words."* 

Farel was touched by this appeal, and said, "My 
friend, do not ask forgiveness of me, for I am a poor 
sinner like other men, putting my trust not in my own 
nghteousness, but in the death of Jesus."f 

One of the lords of Berne coming up at this time, the 
friar, who already imagined himself on the brink of mar- 
tyrdom, began to wring his hands, and to turn now 
towards the Bernese councillors, now towards the tribu- 
nal, and then to Farel, crying, " Pardon, pardon." " Ask 
pardon of our Saviour," replied Farel. The lord of Berne 
added, *'Come to-morrow and hear the minister's ser- 
mon ; if he appears to you to preach the truth, you shall 
confess it openly before all ; if not, you will declare your 
opinion : this promise in my hand." The monk held out 
his hand, and the judges retired. " Then the friar went 
away, and I have not seen him since, and no promises 
or oaths were able to make him stay."J Thus the Eef- 
ormation advanced in Switzerland Romande. 

B it violent storms threatened to destroy the work 

* Lore le frere se jeta a genoux disant : Messeigneurs, je 

mande merci a Dieu et a vous Et aussi, Magister, ce que 

j'ai preche centre vous a et6 par de faux rapports, etc. Neuf. MS. 

t Je suis pauvre pecheur comme les autres, ayant ma fiance, non 
en ma justice, mais a la mort de Jesus. Ibid. I Puis quand la 
frere fut parti, depuis n? I'ai vu, et nulles promesses ni sermens no 
I ont pu faire demeurer. Ibid. 



298 HISTOSY OF THE REFORMATION. 

that was hardly begun. Romish agents from the Valais 
and from Savoy had crossed the Rhone at St. Maurice, 
and were exciting the people to energetic resistance. 
Tumultuous assemblages took place, in which danger- 
ous projects were discussed; the proclamations of the 
government were torn down from the church doors, 
'rroops of citizens paraded the city; the drum beat in 
Ihe streets to excite the populace against the reformer 
everywhere prevailed riot and sedition. And hence, 
when Farel ascended the pulpit on the 16th of Febru- 
ary, for the first time after a short absence, some papist 
bands collected round the gate of the church, raised their 
nands in tumult, uttered savage cries, and compelled the 
minister to break off in his sermon. 

The council of Berne thereupon decreed that the 
parishioners of the four mandemens should assemble. 
Those of Bex declared for the reform ; Aigle followed 
their example, but with indecision ; and in the moun- 
tains above OUon, the peasants, not daring to maltreat 
Farel, excited their wives, who rushed upon him with 
their fulling-clubs. But it was especially the parish of 
the Ormonds which, calm and proud at the foot of its 
glaciers, signalized itself by its resistance. A compan- 
ion of FarePs labors named Claude — probably Claude de 
Gloutinis — when preaching there one day with great 
animation, was suddenly interrupted by the ringing of 
the bells, wnose noise was such that one might have 
said all hell was busy pulling them. " In fact," says 
another herald of the gospel, Jacques Camralis, who 
chanced to be present, "it was Satan himself, who, 
breathing his anger into some of his agents, filled the 
ears of the auditors with all this uproar."* At another 
time, some zealous reformers having thrown down the 
altars of Baal, according to the language of the times^ 
the evil spirit began to blow with violence in all the 
chalets scattered over the sides of the mountains ; the 
shepherds issued precipitously like avalanches, and fell 
upon the church and the evangelicals. "Let us only 

• Sed Sathaa per ejus servos, voluit auras auditorum (yus sonc 
cymbali implere. Neufchatel MS. 



PERSEVERANCE OF FAREL 



29S 



find these sacrilegious wretches," cried the furious Or- 
mondines ; " we will hang them, we will cut off theii 
heads, we will burn them, we will throw their asheh 
into the great water."* Thus were these mountaineer^^ 
agitated, like the wind that roars in their lofty valleys 
with a fury unknown to the inhabitants of the plains. 

Other difiSculties overwhelmed Farel. His fellow- 
laborers were not all of them blameless. One Christcv 
pher Ballista, formerly a monk of Paris, had written to 
Zwingle : " I am but a Gaul, a barbarian,f but you will 
find me pure as snow, without any guile, of open heart, 
through whose windows all the world may see."J Zwin- 
gle sent Ballista to Farel, who was loudly calling for 
laborers in Christ's vineyard. The fine language of the 
Parisian at first charmed the multitude ; but it was soon 
found necessary to beware of these priests and monks 
di8gusted with popery. Brought up in the slothfulness 
of the cloister, gluttonous and lazy," says Farel, Bal- 
lista could not conform to the abstemiousness and rude 
labors of the evangelists, and soon began to regret his 
monk's hood. When he perceived the people begin- 
ning to distrust him, he became like a furious monster, 
vomiting wagon-loads of threats."§ Thus ended his 
labors. 

Notwithstanding all these trials, Farel was not dis- 
couraged. The greater the difficulties, the more his en- 
ergy increased. " Let us scatter the seed everywhere,'' 
said he, " and let civilized France, provoked to jealousy 
by this barbarous nation, embrace piety at last. Let 
there not be in Christ's body either fingers, or hands, or 
feet, or eyes, or ears, or arms, existing separately and 
working each for itself, but let there be only one heart 
that nothing can divide. Let not variety in secondary 
things divide into many separate members that vital 

* Quo invento suspenderetur primum, deinde dignus comburi, 
ulterius capitis obtruncatione, novissime in aquis mergeretur. Neuf 
ohatel MS. f Me quantumvis Galium et barbarum. Zw. Epp 

2. 205. X Abfique ullo fuco, niveum, et aperti fenestratique 

pectoris. Ibid. § Quam beatus hie venter Incanduitl quot 

minarum plaustra I Solent tales belluae, etc. Neufchatel MSi 



300 HISTORY OF THE HEFORMATIOH 



principle which is one and simple.* Alas, the pastures 
of the church are trodden under foot, and its waters are 
troubled. Let us set our minds to concord and peace 
When the Lord shall have opened heaven, there will not 
be so many disputes about bread and water.f A fervent 
charity, that is the powerful battering-ram with which 
we shall beat down those proud walls, those material 
elements, with which men would confine us "J 

Thus wrote the most impetuous of the reformers. 
These words of Farel, preserved for three centuries in 
the city where he died, disclose to us more clearly the 
intimate nature of the great revolution of the sixteenth 
century, than all the venturesome assertions of its popish 
interpreters. Christian unity thus from these earliest 
moments found a zealous apostle. The nineteenth cen- 
tury is called to resuiae the work which the sixteenth 
century was unable to accomplish. 

* Ne in digitos, manus, pedes, oculos, nares, aures, brachia, cor , 
quod unum est discindatur, et quae in rebus est varietas, principium 
non faciat multiplex. Neufchatel MS. t allusion to the con- 
troversies on baptism and the real presence. Non tanta erit super 
aqua et pane contentio, nec super gramine, solutaque obsidione. 
Ibid. The sense of these latter words is obscure. J CharitijS 

fortiflsimus aries. Farel to Bucer, May 10, 1629. 



aELiaiON IN BERNE 



301 



CHAPTER II. 

QbSste cf religion in Berne — Irresolution of Berne — Almanac of Hero- 
tics — Evangelical majority — Haller — Zwingle's signal — The rs/d- 
icals in Berne — Victory of the gospel — Papist provocations — The 
city companies — Proposed disputation — Objections of the forest 
cs.ntons — The church the judge of controversies— Unequal con- 
test — Zwingle — A Christian band — The Cordelier's church — 
Opening of the conference — The sole head — Unity of error — A 
priest converted at the altar — St. Vincent's day — The butchers— 
A strange argument — Papist bitterness — Necessity of reform — 
Zwingle's sermon — Visit of the King of kings — Edict of reform — 
Was the Reformation political? 

Of all the Swiss cantons, Berne appeared the least 
disposed to the Reformation. A military state may be 
zealous for religion, but it will be for an external and a 
disciplined religion ; it requires an ecclesiastical organ- 
ization that it can see, and touch, and manage at its 
will. It fears the innovations and the free movements 
of the word of God ; it loves the form, and not the life. 
Napoleon, by restoring religion in France in the Con- 
cordatf has given us a memorable example of this truth. 
Such also was the case with Berne. Its government, 
besides, was absorbed in political interests, and although 
it had little regard for the pope, it cared still less to see 
a reformer put himself, as Zwingle did, at the head of 
public affairs. As for the people, feasting on the '* but- 
ter of their kine, and milk of their sheep, with fat ol 
lambs," Deut. 32 : 14, they remained closely shut up 
within the narrow circle of their material wants. Re- 
ligious questions were not to the taste either of the 
rulers or of their fellow-citizens. 

The Bernese government, being without experience 
in religious matters, had proposed to check the move- 
ment of the reform by its edict of 1523. As soon as it 
discovered its mistake, it moved towards the cantons 
that adhered to the ancient faith; and while thai poi- 
tion of the people whence the great council was recruit^ 



302 filSTORY OF THE REFOHMATIOiC 



ed listened to the voice of the reformers, most of the 
patrician families, who composed the smaller council, 
believing their power, their interests, and their honor 
menaced, attached themselves to the old order of things. 
From this opposition of the two councils there arose a 
general uneasiness, but no violent shocks. Sudden, 
movements, repeated starts, announced from time to 
time that incongruous matters were fermenting in the 
natiun : it was like an indistinct earthquake, which 
raises the whole surface without causing any rents ; 
then anon all returns to apparent tranquillity."^ Berne, 
which was always decided in its politics, turned in re- 
ligious matters at one time to the right, and at another 
to the left, and declared that it would be neither popish 
nor reformed. To gain time was, for the new faith, to 
gain every thing. 

What was done to turn aside Berne from the Refor- 
mation, was the very cause of precipitating it into the 
new way. The haughtiness with which the five primi- 
tive cantons arrogated the guardianship of their con- 
federates, the secret conferences to which Berne was 
not even invited, and the threat of addressing tht; peo- 
ple in a direct manner, deeply offended the Burnese 
oligarchs. Thomas Murner, a Carmelite of Lucerne, one 
of those rude men who act upon the populace, but who 
inspire disgust in elevated minds, made the cup run 
over. Furious against the Zurich calendar, in which 
the names of the saints had been purposely omitted, he 
published in opposition to it the Almanac of Heretics 
and Church-robbers," a tract filled with lampoons and 
invectives, in which the portraits of the reformers and 
of their adherents, among whom were many of the most 
considerable men of Berne, were coupled with the most 
brutal inscriptions.f Zurich and Berne in conjunction 
demanded satisfaction, and from this time the union Oi 
these twr states daily became closer. 

* Hundeshagen, Conflikte der Bernischen Kircbe, p. 19, 

t Quum nudas-tertius Murneri Calendarium legissem, paitim 

ridendo homiiiis stultissimam irapudentiam. CEcolamp. to Zwmgio, 

Feb. 1627, Epp. 2. 26. 



HALLER AiN-D ZWIKaVE. 



303 



This change was soon perceived at. Berne. The elec- 
tions of 1527 placed a considerable number of friends 
of the reform in the great council ; and this body forth- 
with resuming its right to nominate the members of the 
smaller council, which had been usurped for twenty 
years ty the Bannerets and the Sixteen, removed from 
the government the most decided partisans of the Ro 
man hierarchy, and among others Gaspard de Mulinen 
and Sebastian de Stein,* and filled the vacancies with 
members of the evangelical majority. The union oi 
church and state, which had hitherto checked the prog- 
ress of the reform in Switzerland, was now about to 
accelerate its movements. 

The reformer Haller was not alone in Berne. Kolb 
had quitted the Carthusian monastery at Nuremberg, in 
which he had been compelled to take refuge, and had 
appeared before his compatriots, demanding no other 
stipend than the liberty of preaching Jesus Christ. 
Already bending under the weight of years, his head 
crowned with hoary locks, Kolb, young in heart, full oi 
fire, and of indomitable courage, presented boldly before 
the chiefs of the nation that gospel which had saved 
him. Haller, on the contrary, although only thirty-five 
yeais old, moved with a measured step, spoke with 
gravity, and proclaimed the new doctrines with unusual 
circumspection. The old man had taken the young 
man's part, and the youth that of the graybeard. 

Zwingle, whose eye nothing escaped, saw that a 
favorable hour for Berne was coming, and immediately 
gave the signal. The dove commissioned to examine 
the state of the waters is returning with an olive-branch 
into the ark," wrote he to Haller ; " come forth now, 
thou second Noah, and take possession of the land. 
Enforce, be earnest, and fix deeply in the hearts of men 
the hooks and grapnels of the word of God, so that they 
oai: never again be rid of them.^f Your bears," wrote 

• MuUinea e Senatoria digaitate protrusua est. Lapides quo 
que. Haller to Zwingle, April 25, 1527. f Aculeos ac hamoH 

Bio lu mortalium pectora dimitte, ut etium si vrelint, uoa posdin^ 
J5w. Epp. 2. 10. 



304 



HISTOHY OF THE REFORMATION 



he to Thomas ab Hofeu, "have again put forth theit 
claws. Please God that they do not draw them back 
until they have torn every thing in pieces that opposes 
Jesus Christ." 

Haller and his friends were on the point of reply- 
ing to this appeal, when their situation became compli- 
cated. Some of the radicals arriving at Berne in 152T, 
led away the people from the evangelical preachers " on 
account of the presence of idols."* Haller had a use- 
less conference with them. To what dangers is not 
Christianity exposed," cried he, wherever these furies 
have crept in."f There has never been any revival in 
the church, without the hierarchical or radical sects im- 
mediately endeavoring to disturb it. Haller, although 
alarmed, still maintained his unalterable meekness. 
" The magistrates are desirous of banishing them," said 
he ; **but it is our duty to drive out their errors, and not 
their persons. Let us employ no other weapons than the 
sword of the Spirit."| It was not from popery that the 
reformers had learned these principles. A public dispu- 
tation took place. Six of the radicals declared them- 
selves convinced, and two others were sent out of the 
country. 

The decisive moment was drawing near. The two 
great powers of the age, the Gospel and the Papacy, 
were stirring with equal energy ; the Bernese councils 
were to speak out. They saw on the one hand the five 
primitive cantons taking daily a more threatening atti- 
tude, and announcing that the Austrian would soon 
reappear in Helvetia, to reduce it once more into sub- 
jection to Rome ; and on the other, they beheld the gos- 
p< 1 every day gaining ground in the confederation. 
Which was destined to prevail in Switzerland; the 
lances of Austria, or the word of God? In the uncer- 
tainty in which the councils were placed, they resolved 

* Ne plebem dehortentur ab auditione concionum nostranim ob 
idolorum praesentiam. Zw. Epp. 2. 49. t Consideravimus omnes 
periculum urbis nostraD et totius Christianismi, ubi illas furise irrep 
serin t. Ibid. 60 t Nostrum est, omnia gladio Spiritus refel 

lere. Ibid. 



OPPOSITION OF THE ADVERSARY 305 



to side with the majority. Where could they disco vei 
a firm footing, if not there ? Vox populi^ vox Dei, " No 
one," said they, can make any change of his own pri- 
vate authority : the consent of all is necessary."* 

The government of Berne had to decide between two 
mandates, both emanating from its authority : that of 
1523, in favor of the free preaching of the gospel, and 
that of 1526, in favor " of the sacraments, the saints, 
the mother of God, and the ornaments of the churches." 
State messengers set out and traversed every parish : 
the people gave their votes against every law contrary 
to liberty, and the councils, supported by the nation, 
decreed that " the word of God should be preached pub- 
licly and freely, even if it should be in opposition to the 
statutes and doctrines of men." Such was the victory 
of the gospel and of the people over the oligarchy and 
the priests. 

Contentions immediately arose throughout the canton, 
and every parish became a battle-field. The peasants 
began to dispute with the priests and monks, in reliance 
on the holy Scriptures. " If the mandate of our lords," 
said many, " accords to our pastors the liberty of preach- 
ing, why should it not grant the flock the liberty of act- 
ing ?" Peace, peace," cried the councils, alarmed at 
their own boldness. But the flocks resolutely declared 
that they would send away the mass, and keep their 
pastors and the Bible.f Upon this the papal partisans 
grew violent. The banneret Kuttler called the good 
people of Emmenthal, ^' heretics, rascals, wantons ;" but 
these peasants obliged him to make an apology.| The 
bailiff of Trachselwald was more cunning. Seeing the 
inhabitants of Rudersweil listening with eagerness to 
the word of God, which a pious minister was preaching 
to them, he came with fifers and trumpeters, and inter- 
rupted the sermon, inviting the village girls by words 
and by lively tunes to quit the church for the dance. 

* Ut privata auctoritate nemo quippiam immutate praBSiimat. 
Haller to Vadian. t Incolas vallis Emmenthal Senatum adiisse^ 
ifimamque missam fecisse. Zw. Epp. 2. 104 X Fueros, here 

tioos, et homines lascivos. Ibid. 106. 

20 



306 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 



These singular provocations did not check the reforiD 
Six of the city companies, the shoemakers, -weavers, 
merchants, bakers, stonemasons, and carpenters, abol- 
ished in the churches and convents of their district all 
masses, anniversaries, advowsons, and prebends. Thrco 
lathers, the tanners, smiths, and tailors, prepared to irai 
"tate thera ;* the seven remaining companies were unde- 
cided, except the butchers, who were enthusiastic for 
the pope. Thus the majority of the citizens had em- 
braced the gospel. Many parishes throughout the can 
ton had done the same ; and the avoyer d'Erlach, that 
great adversary of the Reformation, could no longer 
keep the torrent within bounds. 

Yet the attempt was made : the bailiffs were ordered 
to note the irregularities and dissolute lives of the monks 
and nuns ; all women of loose morals were even turned 
out of the cloisters. f But it was not against these 
abuses alone that the Reformation was levelled ; it was 
against the institutions themselves, and against popery 
on which they were founded. The people ought therefore 
to decide. " The Bernese clergy," said they, " must be 
convoked, as at Zurich, and let the two doctrines be dis- 
cussed in a solemn conference. We will proceed after- 
wards in conformity with the result." 

On the Sunday following the festival of St. Martin, 
November 11, the council and citizens unanimously 
resolved that a public disputation should take place at 
the beginning of the succeeding year. " The glory of 
God and his word," said they, will at length appear." 
Bernese and strangers, priests and laymen, all were 
invited by letter or by printed notice to come and dis- 
cuss the controverted points, but by Scripture alone, 
without the glosses of the ancients, and renouncing all 
subtleties and abusive language. J Who knows, said 
they, whether all the members of the ancient Swi«s con- 
federation may not be thus brought to unity of faiUi ? 

* Hall<?T to Zwingle, November 4, 1527. Epp. 2. lOij. 

t J. J. Hottinger, H. Kirch&n. 8. 394. J Solam aacram 

Bcripturam, absque veterum glossematis. Haller to 2»wiDgle, No- 
vember 19, 1627. Epp. 2. 113. 



OBJECTIONS TO THE C0NFERE1S5E. 307 

Thus within the walls of Berne the struggle was 
about to take place that would decide the fate of Swit- 
zerland ; for the example of the Bernese must necessa- 
rily lead with it a great part of the confederation. 

The five cantons, alarmed at this intelligence, met 
at Lucerne, where they were joined by Friburg, Soleure, 
and Claris. There was nothing either in the letter or 
in the spirit of the federal compact to obstruct religious 
liberty. " Every state," said Zurich, " is free to choose 
the doctrine that it desires to profess." The Wald- 
stettes,* on the contrary, wished to deprive the cantons 
of this independence, and to subject them to the federal 
majority and to the pope. They protested, therefore, in 
the name of the confederation, against the proposed dis- 
cussion. "Your ministers," wrote they to Berne, "daz- 
zled and confounded at Baden by the brightness of 
truth, would desire by this new discussion to hide their 
shame ; but we entreat you to desist from a plan so 
contrary to our ancient alliances." " It is not we who 
have infringed them," replied Berne ; " it is much rather 
your haughty missive that has destroyed them. We 
will not abandon the word of our Lord Jesus Christ." 
Upon this the Roman cantons decided on refusing a safe- 
conduct to those who should proceed to Berne. This 
was giving token of sinister intentions. 

The bishops of Lausanne, Constance, Basle, and Sion, 
being invited to the conference under pain of forfeiting 
all their privileges in the canton of Berne, replied that, 
since it was to be a disputation according to the Scrip- 
tures, they had nothing to do with it. Thus did these 
priests forget the words of one of the most illustrious 
Roman doctors of the fifteenth century : " In heavenly 
things man should be independent of his fellows, and 
trust in God alone."f 

The Romanist doctors followed the example of the 
bishops. Eck, Murner, Cochloeus, and many others, said 
wherever they went, "We have received the letter o/ 

* The inhabitants of the primitive democratic cantons, Schwyta, 
O^ri, Underwald, and Lucerne, to which Zug may be added, 
t Jo]tiQ Grochy Dialogue de quatuor erroribus, p. 237, 



30S 



HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



this leper, of this accursed heretic, Zwingle* Thej 
want to take the Bible for their judge ; but has the 
Bible a voice against those who do it violence ? We 
will not go to Berne ; we will not crawl into that ob- 
scure corner of the world ; we will not go and combait 
in that gloomy cavern, in that school of heretics. Let 
these villains come out into the open air, and contend 
with us on level ground, if they have the Bible on their 
side, as they say." The emperor ordered the discussion 
to be adjourned ; but on the very day of its opening, the 
council of Berne replied, that as every one was already 
assembled, delay would be impossible. 

Then, in despite of the doctors and bishops, the Hel- 
vetic church assembled to decide upon its doctrines. 
Had it a right to do so ? No ; not if priests and bishops 
were appointed, as Rome pretends, to form a mystio 
bond between the church and our Lord : Yes ; if they 
were established, as the Bible declares, only to satisfy 
that law of order by virtue of which all society should 
have a directing power. The opinions of the Swiss re- 
formers in this respect were not doubtful. The grace 
which creates the minister comes from the Lord, thought 
they ; but the church examines this grace, acknowledges 
it, proclaims it by the elders, and in every act in which 
faith is concerned, it can always appeal from the minis- 
ter to the word of God. *'Try the spirits," prove all 
things," it says to the faithful. 1 John 4 : 1 ; 1 Thess 
5 : 21. The church is the judge of controversies ;f and it 
is this duty, in which it should never be found wanting, 
that, it was now about to fulfil in the disputation at 
Berne. 

The contest seemed unequal. On one side appeared 
the Roman hierarchy, a giant which had increased in 
strength during many centuries ; and on the other, there 
was at first but one weak and timid man, the modest. 
Berthold Haller. " I cannot wield the sword of the 
word," said he in alarm to his friends. " If you do not 
stretch out your hands to me, all is over." He then 

* Epistolam leprosi, damnati, hieretici Zwinglii accept. Eclr 
Q. A. Zlell, Zw. Epp. 2. 126. f Judex contrpversiaruiii. 



ZWIKaLE VISITS BERNE 



309 



threw himself trembling at the feet of the Lord, and soon 
arose enlightened and exclaiming, Faith in the Saviour 
gives me courage, and scatters all my fears."* 

Yet he could not remain alone ; all his looks were 
turned towards Zwingle : " It was I who took the bath at 
Baden," wrote (Ecolampadius to Haller, " and now it id 
Zwingle who should lead off the bear-dance in Berne."f 
"We are between the hammer and the anvil," wrote 
Haller to Zwingle ; " we hold the wolf by the ears, and 
know not how to let him go.J The houses of De Watte- 
ville, Noll, Tremp, and Berthold are open to you. Come, 
then, and command the battle in person." 

Zwingle did not hesitate. He demanded permission 
of the council of Zurich to visit Berne, in order to show 
there " that his teaching was full of the fear of God, and 
not blasphemous ; mighty to spread concord through 
Switzerland, and not to cause troubles and dissensioa."§ 
At the very t^me that Haller received news of Zwingle^s 
coming, (Ecolampadius wrote to him, " I am ready, if it 
be necessary, to sacrifice my life. Let us inaugurate 
the new year by embracing one another to the glory of 
Jesus Christ." Other doctors wrote to the same effect. 

These then," cried Haller with emotion, these are the 
auxiliaries that the Lord sends to my infirmity, to aid 
me in fighting this rude battle." 

It was necessary to proceed with circumspection, for 
the violence of the oligarchs and of the five cantons 
was well known. II The doctors of Glaris, Schafiliausen, 
St. Gall, Constance, Uim, Lindau, and Augsburg assem- 
bled at Zurich, to proceed under the same escort as 
Zwingle, Pellican, Collin, Megander, Grossman, the com- 
mander Schmidt, BuUinger, and a great number of the 
rural clergy, selected to accompany the reformer, 
"When all this game traverses the country," said the 
pensioners, " we will go a hunting, and see if we cannot 

* Fides in Dominum me animat, ut nihil verear. Zw. Epp. 2. 123. 

t An allusion to the dispute at Baden, a celebrated bathing-place, 
and to the arms of Berne. Ibid. 118. { Lupum auribus tenemus, 
Ztirich MS. § Neque ad perturbaiionem nostrse almae Helvetiasi 
Zw. Epp. 2. 130, II Oligarchae in angulis obmurmurent. lb. 1*23. 



310 HISTOHr OF THE REFORMATION. 

kill some, or at least catch them and put them mto a 
cage.'' 

Three hundred chosen men, selected from the com 
panics of Zurich and from the parishes within its pre- 
cincts, donned their breastplates and shouldered their 
arquebuses ; but in order not to give the journey of 
these doctors the appearance of a military expedition, 
they took neither colors, fife, nor drum ; and the trum- 
peter of the city, a civil officer, rode alone at the head 
of the company. 

On Tuesday, January 2, they set out. Never, had 
Zwingle appeared more cheerful. Glory be to the 
Lord," said he, "my courage increases every day."* 
The burgomaster Roust, the town-clerk of Mangoldt, 
with Funck and Jafe'kli, both masters of arts, and all 
four delegated by the council, were on horseback near 
him. They reached Berne on the 4th of January, hav- 
ing had only one or two unimportant alarms. 

The Cordelier's church was to serve as the place of 
conference. Tilmann, the city architect, had made ar- 
rangements according to a plan furnished by Zwingle.f 
A large platform had been erected, on which were placed 
two tables, and around them sat the champions of the 
two parties. On the evangelical side were remarked; 
besides Haller, Zwingle, and (Ecolampadius, many dis- 
tinguislied men of the reformed church, strangers to 
Switzerland, as Bucer, Capito, and Ambrose Blarer. On 
the side of the Papacy, Dr. Treger of Friburg, who en- 
joyed a high reputation, appeared to keep up the fire of 
the combat. As for the rest, whether through fear or 
contempt, the most famous Roman doctors were absent 

The first act was to publish the regulations of the 
conference. "No proof shall be proposed that is not 
drawn from the holy Scriptures, and no explanation shall 
be given of those Scriptures that does not come from 
Scripture itself, explaining obscure texts by such as are 
clear." After this, one of the secretaries, rising to call 

* Crescit Domino gloria, mihi animus in hac pugna. Zw. Epp. 
Vadiano. f Tillmannus urbis architectus locum juxta tuftoi 

deformationem operabit. Ibid. 2. 12S. 



CONFERENCE OF BERNE. 



311 



over the roll, shouted with a loud voice that refe'choed 
through the cluirch, The Bishop of Constance. No one 
reph'ed. He did the same for the bishops of Zion, Basle, 
and Lausanne. Neither of these prelates was present 
at this meeting, either in person or by deputy. The 
word of God being destined to reign alone, the Roman 
hierarcl y did not appear. These two powers cannot 
walk together. There were present about three hun- 
dred and fifty Swiss and German ecclesiastics. 

On Tuesday, January 7, 1528, the burgomaster Ya- 
dian of St. Gall, one of the presidents, opened the dispu- 
tation. After him the aged Kolb stood up and said, 
" God is at this moment agitating the whole world ; let 
VLB therefore humble ourselves before him f and he pro- 
nounced with ferv or a confession of sins. 

This being ended, the first thesis was read. It ran 
thus : " The holy Christian church, of which Christ is the 
sole head, is born of the word of God, abideth in it, and 
listeneth not to the voice of a stranger." 

Alexis Grat, a Dominican monk. The word sole is 
not in Scripture. Christ has left a vicar here bc-ow. 

Halt.er. The vicar that Christ left is the Hol}'^ Ghost. 

Treger. See then to what a pass things have come 
these last ten years. This man calls himself a Lutheran, 
that a Zwinglian ; a third, a Carlstadtian ; a fourth, an 
(Ecolampadist ; a fifth, an Anabaptist. . . .* 

BucER. Whosoever preaches Jesus as the only Sav- 
iour, we recognize as our brother. Neither Luther, nor 
Zwingle, nor CKcolampadius, desires the faithful to bear 
his name. Besides, you should not boast so much of a 
mere external unity. When antichrist gained the upper- 
hand tlroughout the world, in the east by Mahomet, in 
the west by the pope, he was able to keep the people 
'n unity of error. God permits divisions, in order ihat 
ho8(j who belong to him may learn to lotk not to men, 
out to the testimony of the word, and to the assurance 
of the Holy Ghost in tiieir hearts. Thus then, dearly 
beloved brethren, to the Scriptures, the Scriptures If 0 

* So called by their opponents. f Darum fromme Christea 
Zux Schrirt, zur Schnft! Acta Zw. 2. 92. 



312 



HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



church of Berne, hold fast to the teaching of Him who 
said, Come unto me," and not, " Come unto my vicar." 

The disputation then turned successively on tradi- 
tion, the merits of Christ, transubstantiation, the mass, 
prayer to the saints, purgatory, images, celibacy, and 
the disorders of the clergy. Rome found numerous de- 
fenders, and among others, Murer, priest of Rapperswyl, 
who had said, "If they wish to burn the two ministers 
of Berne, I will undertake to carry them both to the 
stake.' 

On Sunday, January 19, the day on which the doc- 
trine of the mass was attacked, Zwingle, desirous of act- 
ing on the people also, went into the pulpit, and reciting 
the apostles' creed, made a pause after these words : 
" He ascended into heaven, and sitteth at the right hand 
of God the Father Almighty ; from thence he shall come 
to judge the quick and the dead." " These three arti- 
cles," said he, " are in contradiction to the mass." All 
his hearers redoubled their attention ; and a priest, 
clothed in his sacerdotal vestments, who was preparing 
to celebrate the holy sacrifice in one of the chapels, 
stopped in astonishment at Zwingle's words. Erect 
before the consecrated altar on which lay the chalice 
and the body of the Saviour, with eyes fixed upon the 
reformer, whose words electrified the people, a prey to 
the most violent struggles, and beaten down by the 
weight of truth, the agitated priest resolved to give up 
every thing for it. In the presence of the whole assem- 
bly, he stripped off his priestly ornaments, and throwing 
them on the altar, he exclaimed, " Unless the mass re- 
poses on a more solid foundation, I can celebrate it no 
longer 1" The noise of this conversion, effected at the 
very foot of the altar, immediately spread through the 
city,* and it was regarded as an important omen. So 
long as the mass remains, Rome has gained every thing : 
as soon as the mass falls, Rome has lost all. The mass 
is the creative principle of the whole system of Popery. 

* Das lachet menklich und ward durch die gantzen Stadt kundt 
Bulling. 1. 436. In this and other quotations, we preserve the or 
thography of the times. 



FESTIVAL OF ST. VINCENT. 



313 



Three days later, January 22, was the feast of Si 
Vincent, the patron of the city. The disputation that 
had been continued during Sunday was suspended on 
that day. The canons asked the council what they were 
to do. " Such of you," replied the council, " as receive 
the doctrine of the theses ought not to say mass ; the 
:)thers may perform divine worship as usual."* Every 
preparation was accordingly made for the solemnity. 
3n St. Vincent^s eve the bells from every steeple an- 
nounced the festival to the inhabitants of Berne. On 
the morrow the sacristans lit up the tapers ; incense 
filled the temple, but no one appeared. No priests to 
say mass, no faithful to hear it. Already there was a 
vast chasm in the Roman sanctuary, a deep silence, as 
on the field of battle where none but the dead are lying. 

In the evening it was the custom for the canons to 
chant vespers with great pomp The organist was at 
his post, but no one else appeared. The poor man left 
thus alone, beholding with sorrow the fall of that wor- 
ship by which he gained his bread, gave utterance to 
his grief by playing a mourning hymn instead of the 
majestic Magnificat : " Oh, wretched Judas, what hast 
thou done, that thou hast thus betrayed our Lord?" 
After this sad farewell, he rose and went out. Almost 
immediately some men, excited by the passions of the 
moment, fell upon his beloved organ, an accomplice in 
their eyes of so many superstitious rites, and their vio- 
lent hands broke it to pieces. No more mass, no more 
organ, no more anthems. A new supper and new hymns 
shall succeed the rites of Popery, 

On the next day there was the same silence. Sud- 
denly, however, a band of men with loud voices and 
i^asty step was heard. It was the Butchers^ company 

* Ballinger says, on the contrary, that the council positively 
forl)ade the mass. But Bullinger, who is a rery animated writer, is 
act always exact in diplomatic matters. The council would not 
Iiave come to such a resolution before the close of the discussion. 
Other contemporary historians and official documents leave no roonj 
for doubt on this point. Stettler, in his Chronicle, pars 2. 6, ad an* 
num 1528, details these proceedings as in the text. 

Hivt. «»f Re^. IV, 



314 HISTOEY OF THE REFORMATION. 



that, at this moment so fatal to Rome, desired to support 
it. They advanced, carrying small fir-trees and green 
branches, for the decoration of their chapel. In tho 
midst of them was a foreign priest, behind whom walk- 
ed a few poor scholars. The priest officiated ; the sweet 
^''oices of the scholars supplied the place of the mute 
irgan, and the butchers retired proud of their victory. 

Tht; discussion was drawing to a close: the comba 
f>ar.ts had dealt vigorous blows. Burgauer, pastor of 
St. Gall, had maintained the real presence in the host; 
but on the 19th of January he declared himself con 
vinced by the reasonings of Zwingle, (Ecolampadius, 
and Bucer ; and Matthias, minister of Saengen, had done 
the same. 

A conference in Latin afterwards took place between 
Parol and a Parisian doctor. The latter advanced a 
Btrange argument. " Christians," said he, " are enjoined 
to obey the devil ;* for it is said, * Submit unto thine 
adversary,' Matt. 5 :25 ; now our adversary is the devil. 
How much more, then, should we submit to the church." 
Loud bursts of laughter greeted this remarkable syllo- 
gism. A discussion on baptism and other subjects ter- 
minated the conference. 

The two councils decreed that the mass should be 
abolished, and that every one might remove from the 
churches the ornaments he had placed there. 

Immediately twenty-five altars and a great number 
of images were destroyed in the cathedral, yet without 
disorder or bloodshed; and the children began to sing 
in the streets, as Luther informs us,f 

By the word at length we 're saved 
From a god in a mortar brayed. 

The hearts of the adherents of the Papacy were filled 
Tnth bitterness as they heard the objects of their adora- 
tion fall one after another. "Should any man," said 
Jjhn Schneider, " take away the altar of the Butcliers' 

* Nos teaemur obedire diabolo. J. J. Hottinger, 3. 406. 
t Pueri in plateis caataat : 8e esse a Deo pisto iiberatos, L. Epp 
d. 290 



NECESSITY OF REFORlt. 



315 



ootnpany, I will take away his life." Peter Thonnan 
compared the cathedral stripped of its ornaments to a 
stable. "When the good folks of the Oberland come to 
market," added he, " they will be happy to put up their 
cattle in it." And John Zehender, member of the great 
council, to show the little value he set on such a place 
of worship, entered it riding on an ass, insulting and 
cursing the reform. A Bernese who chanced to be 
there having said to him, " It is by God's will that these 
images have been pulled down." " Say rather by the 
deviPs," replied Zehender ; when have you ever been 
with God so as to learn his will ?" He was fined twenty 
livres, and expelled from the council.* "What times, 
what manners," exclaimed many Romanists ; " what 
culpable neglect. How easy would it have been to 
prevent so great a misfortune. Oh, if our bishops had 
only been willing to occupy themselves more with learn- 
ing and a little less with their mistresses."f 

This reform, was necessary. When Christianity in 
the fourth century had seen the favor of princes succeed 
to persecution, a crowd of heathens rushing into the 
church had brought with them the images, pomps, stat- 
ues, and demigods of paganism, and a likeness of the 
mysteries of Greece and Asia, and above all of Egypt, 
had banished the word of Jesus Christ from the Chris- 
tian oratories. This word returning in the sixteenth 
«entury, a purification must necessarily take place ; but 
it could not be done without grievous rents. 

The departure of the strangers was drawing near 
On the 28th of January, the day after that on which the 
images and altars had been thrown down, while their 
pih.^d fragments still encumbered here and there the 
porches and aisles of the cathedral, Zwingle crossing 
tl ese eloquent ruins, once more ascended the pulpit in 
the midst of an immense crowd. In great emotion^ 
directing his eyes by turns on these fragments and on 
the people, he said, Victory has declared for the truth, 

* History of Berne, by Tillier. 3. 257. f Si stud.orum qu8.in 
Eoortornm uostri ep scopi amantiores essent. Ruchat, I. 676, Le(^ 
t«r of J. de Munster, pr.est at Soleure. 



310 



HISTORY OF THE REFORMATlOlf . 



bat perseverance alone can complete the triumph. Christ 
persevered even until death. Ferendo vincitur fortuna 
Cornelius Scipio, after the disaster at Cannes, having 
learned that the generals surviving the slaughter medi- 
tated quitting Italy, entered the senate-house, although 
not yet of senatorial age, and drawing his sword, con- 
strained the affrighted chiefs to swear that they would 
not abandon Rome. Citizens of Berne, to you I address 
the same demand ; do not abandon Jesus Christ." 

We may easily imagine the effect produced on the 
people by such words, pronounced with Zwingle's ener- 
getic eloquence. 

Then turning towards the fragments that lay near 
him, "Behold," said he, "behold these idols. Behold 
them conquered, mute, and shattered before us. These 
corpses must be dragged to the shambles, and the gold 
you have spent upon such foolish images must hence- 
forward be devoted to comforting in their misery the 
living images of God. Feeble souls, ye shed tears over 
these sad idols ; do ye not see that they break, do ye 
not hear that they crack like any other wood, or like 
any other stone? Look, here is one deprived of its 
head" — Zwingle pointed to the image, and all the peo- 
ple fixed their eyes upon it — "here is another maimed 
of its arms.* If this ill usage had done any harm to 
the saints that are in heaven, and if they had the power 
ascribed to them, would you have been able, I pray, to 
cut off their arms and their heads ?" 

" Now, then," said the powerful orator in conclu- 
sion, "stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has 
made you free, and be not entangled again with the 
yoke of bondage. Gal. 5:1. Fear not. That God who 
has enlightened you will enlighten your confederates 
also, and Switzerland, regenerated by the Holy Ghost^ 
shall flourish in righteousness and peace." 

The words of Zwingle were not lost. The mercy of 
God called forth that of man. Some persons condemned 
to die for sedition were pardoned, and all the exiles were 

* Hie liit einer, dem ist's houpt ab, dem andern ein arro, eto. 
Zw 0pp. 2, 228, 



THE ROMANISTS DEPRESSED. 817 



recalled. " Should we not have done so/' said the coun- 
cil, " had a great prince visited us ? Shall we not much 
more do so, now that the King of kings and the Redeem- 
er of our souls has made his entry among us, bearing an 
everlasting amnesty ?"* 

The Romish cantons, exasperated at the result of the 
discussion, sought to harass the return of the doctors. 
On arriving before Bremgarten, they found the gates 
closed. The bailiff Schutz, who had accompanied them 
with two hundred men-at-arms, placed two halberdiers 
before Zwingle^s horse, two behind him, and one on 
each side; then putting himself at the reformer's left 
hand, while the burgomaster Roust stationed himself on 
the right, he ordered the escort to proceed, lance in 
rest.f The avoyers of the town being intimidated, 
came to a parley ; the gates were opened ; the escort 
traversed Bremgarten amidst an immense crowd, and 
on the 1st of February reached Zurich without acci* 
dent, which Zwingle reentered, says Luther, like a con- 
queror.J 

The Roman-catholic party did not dissemble the 
check they had received. " Our cause is falling," said 
the friends of Rome.§ 0 that we had men skilled in 
the Bible. The impetuosity of Zwingle supported our 
adversaries ; his ardor was never relaxed. That brute 
has more knowledge than was imagined. || Alas, alas, 
the greater party has vanquished the better."^ 

The council of Berne, desirous of separating from 
the pope, relied upon the people. On the 30th of Janu- 
ary, messengers going from house to house convoked 
the citizens ; and on the 2d of February, the burgesses 
and inhabitants, masters and servants, uniting in the 
cathedral, and forming but one family, with hands up- 

* Da der Konig aller konige .... Haller, by Kirchhofer, 439. 

t Mit iren Spyessen fiir den Hauffen. Bull. Chr. 1. 439. 

i Zwingel triuraphator et imperator gloriosiis. L. Epp. 3. 290. 

§ Ruunt res nostrae. Letter of the priest J. de Muller, an ey©' 
witness of the discussion. Ruchat, 1. 675. || Doctior tamen haeo 
bellua est quam putabam. Ibid, t Yicitque pars major moUa 
t^m. Ibi4. 



318 HISTORY OF THE REPOEMATION. 



raised to heaven, swore to defend the two councils in 
all they should undertake for the good of the state or of 
the cLurch. 

On the *Ith of February, 1528, the council published 
a general edict of reform, and ** threw for ever from the 
necks of the Bernese the yoke of the four bishops, who/ 
said they, **know well how to shear their sheep, but 
not how to feed them."* 

At the same time the reformed doctrines were spread- 
ing among the people. In every quarter might be heard 
earnest and keen dialogues, written in rhyme by Manuel, 
in which the pale and expiring mass, stretched on her 
deathbed, was loudly calling for all her physicians, and 
finding their advice useless, at length dictating with a 
broken voice her last will and testament, which the peo- 
ple received with loud bursts of laughter. 

The Reformation generally, and that of Berne in par- 
ticular, has been reproached as being brought about by 
political motives. But on the contrary, Berne, which of 
all the Helvetic states was the greatest favorite of the 
court of Rome, which had in its canton neither a bishop 
to dismiss nor a powerful clergy to humiliate — Berne, 
whose most influential families, the Weingartens, Man- 
uals, Mays, were reluctant to sacrifice the pay and the 
service of the foreigner, and all whose traditions were 
conservative, ought to have opposed the movement. The 
word of God was the power that overcame this political 
tendency.f 

At Berne, as elsewhere, it was neither a learned, 
nor a democratic, nor a sectarian spirit that gave birth 
to the Reformation. Undoubtedly the men of letters, 
the liberals, the sectarian enthusiasts, rushed into the 
great struggle of the sixteenth century; but the dura- 
tion of the reform would not have been long had it 
received its life from them. The primitive strength ol 
Christianity, reviving after ages of long and complete 
prostration, was the creative principle of the Refornia- 
tion ; and it was erelong seen separating distinctly from 

* BuiL ChroQ. 1. 466. f Hoiid^shagen, CouflU^te der B^roi* 
■Chen Kirche, 2^ 



XHE EEFORM NOT POLITICAL. 319 



the false allies that had presented themselves, rejecting 
an incredulous learning by elevating the study of the 
classics, checking all demagogic anarchy by upholding 
the principles of true liberty, and repudiating the enthu- 
siastic sects by consecrating the rights of the word and 
of the Christian people. 

But while we maintain that the Reformation was at 
Berne, as elsewhere, a truly Christian work, we are far 
from saying that it was not useful to the canton in a 
political sense. All the European states that have em- 
braced the Reformation have been elevated, while those 
which have combated it have been lowered 



820 HISTOEY OF THE REFORMATIO!!. 



CHAPTER III. 

Tbe •eform accepted by the people— Faith, purity, and chfrifiy— 
F irst evangelical communion — Bernese proposition to the diet— 
The cavern, and head of Beatus — Threatening storm from the 
mountains — Revolt — Confusion in Berne — Unterwalden croRsee 
the Brunig — Energy of Berne — Victory — Political advantages. 

It now became a question of propagating throughout 
all the canton the reform accomplished in the city. On 
the nth of February, the council invited the rural par- 
ishes to assemble on the following Sunday to receive 
and deliberate upon a communication. The whole 
chuich, according to the ancient usage of Christendom, 
was about to decide for itself on its dearest interests. 

The assemblies were crowded ; all conditions and 
ages were present. Beside the hoary and the trembling 
head of the aged man might be seen the sparkling eye 
of the youthful herdsman. The messengers of the coun- 
cil first read the edict of the Reformation. They next 
proclaimed that those who accepted it should remain, 
and that those who rejected it should withdraw. 

Almost all the assembled parishioners remained in 
their places. An immense majority of the people chose 
the Bible. In some few parishes this decision was ac- 
companied with energetic demonstrations. At Arberg, 
Zofingen, Brugg, Aran, and Buren, the images were 
burnt. At Stauffberg," it was said, " idols were seen 
carrying idols, and throwing one another into the 
flames."* 

The images and the mass had disappeared from this 
vast canton, " A great cry resounded far and wide,'* 

* Da tregt ein Gotz den andern in das Fhiiwr. Bull. Chron. 
2. 1. A man whose business it was to shear the flocks, and who 
had been nicknamed Gotz-scherer — idol-shearer — had made himsell 
very distinguished among those who carried the images to the fire. 
Such was the origin of this popular legend, and it la the kej to 
many othei^ 



CHARITY FOLLOWS FAITH. 



321 



writes Bullinger.* In one day Rome had fallen through- 
out the country, without treachery, violence, or seduc^ 
ticn, by the strength of truth alone. In some places 
however, 'n the Hasli, at Frutigen, Unterseen, and Grin- 
dewald ehe malcontents were heard to say, If hey 
abolish the mass, they should also abolish tithes/^ The 
Roman form of worship was preserved in the Upper 
Simmenthal, a proof that there was no compulsion on 
the part of the state. 

The wishes of the canton being thus manifested, 
Berne completed the Reformation. All excesses in gam- 
bling, drinking, and dancing, and all unbecoming dress, 
were forbidden by proclamation. The houses of ill-fame 
were destroyed, and their wretched inhabitants expelled 
from the city.f A consistory was appointed to watch 
over the public morals. 

Seven days after the edict, the poor were received 
into the Dominican cloister, and a little later the convent > 
of the island was changed into a hospital ; the princely 
monastery of Konigsfield was also devoted to the same 
useful purpose. Charity followed everywhere in the 
steps of faith. We will show," said the council, that 
we do not use the property of the convents to our own 
advantage and they kept their word. The poor were 
clothed with the priests' garments ; the orphans deco- 
rated with the ornaments of the church. So strict were 
they in these distributions, that the state was forced to 
borrow money to pay the annuities of the monks and 
nuns ; and for eight days there was not a crown, in the 
public treasury.| Thus it was that the state, as it has 
been continually asserted, grew rich with the spoils of 
the church. At the same time they invited from Zurich 
the ministers Hofmeister, Megander, and Rhellican to 
spread throughout the canton the knowledge of the clas- 
sics and of the holy Scriptures. 

At Easter the Lord's supper was celebrated for the 
first time according to the evangelical rites. The two 

* Das wyt und breit eia gross Geschrey und Wunder gepar. 
Bull. Ohroa. 2. 1. f J. J. Hottinger, 3. 414. t Hoc unum 
iibi 4ico secretissim^. Haller to Zwingle, January 21, 1630 
21 



322 HISTORY OF THE REFORHATJOIf. 



councils and all the people, with few exceptioiiS, partook 
of it. Strangers were struck with the solemnity of this 
first coniraunion. The citi.7ens,of Berne and their wives, 
dressed in decent garments, which recalled the ancient 
Swiss simplicitj^ approached Christ's table with gravity 
and fervor;* the heads of the state showed the same 
holy devotion as the people, and piously received the 
bread from the hands of Berthold Haller. Each one felt 
that the Lord was among them. Thus Hofnieister, 
charmed at this solemn service, exclaimed, " How can 
the adversaries cf the word refuse to embrace the truth 
at last, seeing that God himself renders it so striking a 
testimony ?"f 

Yet every thing was not changed. The friends of 
the gospel witnessed with pain the sons of the chief 
families of the republic parading the streets in costly 
garments, inhabiting sumptuous houses in the city, 
dwelling in magnificent mansions in the country — true 
seignorial abodes — following the chase with hound and 
horn, sitting down to luxurious banquets, conversing in 
licentious language, or talking with enthusiasm of for- 
eign wars and of the French party. Ah," said the 
pious people, "could we but see old Switzerland revive 
with its ancient virtues." 

There was soon a powerful reaction. The annual 
renewal of the magistracy being about to take place, 
the councillor Butschelbach, a violent adversary of the 
gospel, was ejected for adultery ; four other senators 
and twenty members of the great council were also 
replaced by friends of the Reformation and of public 
morality. Emboldened by this victory, the evangelical 
Bernese proposed in the diet that every Swiss should 
renounce foreign service. At these words the warriors 
of Lucerne started under their weighty armor, and re- 
plied with a haughty smile, When you have returned 
to the ancient faith, we will listen to your homilies ^ 

* Relucet enim in illorum vestitu et habitu nescio quid veteris 
lllius Helvetia simplicitatls. Hofmeister to Zwingle. Zw. Epjk. 
2. 167. t Ea res magnam spem mihi i^jecit de illiB liu;raDdi8 

^ui hactenus fueruut male morigeri verbo. Ibid. 



THE DEAD BURY THEIE DEAD. 



323 



All the members of the government, assembled at Berno 
in sovereign council, resolved to set the example, and 
solemnly abjured the pay of foreign princes. Thus the 
Reformation showed its faith by its works. 

Another struggle took place. Above the lake of 
Tlmn rises a chain of steep rocks, in the midst of which 
is situated a deep cavern, where, if we may believe tra- 
dition, the pious Breton Beatus came in ancient times 
CO devote himself to all the austerities of an ascetic life , 
but especially to the conversion of the surrounding dis- 
trict, that was still heathen. It was aflSrmed that the 
head of this saint, who had died in Gaul, was preserved 
in this cavern ; and hence pilgrims resorted thither from 
every quarter. The pious citizens of Zug, Schwytz, Uri, 
and Argovia, groaned as they thought that the holy 
head of the apostle of Switzerland would hereafter re- 
main in a land of heretics. The abbot of the celebrated 
convent of Muri in Argovia and some of his friends set 
out, as in ancient times the Argonauts went in quest of 
the golden fleece. They arrived in the humble guise of 
poor pilgrims, and entered the cavern ; one skilfully 
took away the head, another placed it mysteriously in 
his hood, and they disappeared. The head of a dead 
man I and this was all that Rome saved from the ship- 
wreck. But even this conquest was more than doubt- 
ful. The Bernese, who had gained information of the 
procession, sent three deputies on the 18th of May, who, 
according to their report, found this famous head, and 
caused it to be decently interred before their eyes in the 
cemetery belonging to the convent of Interlaken. This 
contest about a skull characterizes the church that had 
just given way in Berne before the vivifying breath of 
the gospel. " Let the dead bury their dead." 

The Reformation had triumphed in Berne ; but a 
fltorm was gathering unperceived in the mountains, 
which threatened to overthrow it. The state in union 
with the church recalled its ancient renown. Seeing 
itself attacked by arms, it took up arms in its turn, and 
ftcted with that decision which had formerly saved K.»m.e 
in similar dangers. 



824 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



A secret discontent was fermenting among tie peo- 
ple of the valleys and mountains. Some were still 
attached to the ancient faith ; others had only quitted 
the mass because they thought they would be exempted 
from tithes. Ancient ties of neighborhood, a common 
origin, and similarity of manners had united the inhabit- 
ants of the Obwald — Unterwalden — to those of the Hasli 
and of the Bernese Oberland, which were separated only 
by mount Brunig and the high pass of the Yoke. A 
rumor had been set afloat that the government of Berne 
had profaned the spot where the precious remains of 
Beatus, the apostle of these mountains, were preserved, 
and indignation immediately filled these pastoral people, 
who adhere more firmly than others to the customs and 
superstitions of their forefathers. 

But while some were excited by attachment to Rome, 
others were aroused by a desire for liberty. The sub- 
jects of the monastery of Interlaken, oppressed by the 
monkish rule, began to cry out, " We desire to become 
our own masters, and no longer pay rent or tithes.'' 
The provost of the convent in afltright ceded all his rights 
to Berne for the sum of one hundred thousand florins,* 
and a bailiff accompanied by several councillors went 
and took possession of the monastery. A report was 
soon spread that they were about to transfer all the 
property of the convent to Berne ; and on the 21st of 
April, bands of men from Grindelwald, Lauterbrunnen, 
Ringelberg, Brienz, and other places, crossed the lake, 
or issued from their lofty valleys, and taking forcible 
possession of the cloister, swore they would go even to 
Berne in quest of the goods which the citizens had dared 
to take from them. 

They were quieted for a time ; but in the beginning 
of June, the people, at the instigation of Unterwalden, 
again arose in all the Hasli. The Landsgemeindef hav- 
ing been convoked, it decided by a majority of forty 
voices for the establishment of the mass. The pastor 
Jafe'kli was immediately expelled ; a few men crossed 
^ Totum regnum 8uum tradiderunt ia manms map^istratus nostri 
Ealler tf) Zwiogle, March 31. f The assembly of all the people 



CONFUSION IN BERNfi. 



325 



the Brunig, and brought back some priests from Unter- 
walden, to the sound of fifes and trumpets. They were 
seen from afar descending the mountain, and shouts 
both loud and long reph'ed to them from the bottom of 
the valley. At last they arrived : all embraced one an- 
other, and the people celebrated the mass anew with 
great demonstrations of joy. At the same time, the 
people of Frutigen and of the fertile valley of Adclbo 
den assailed the castellan Reuter, carried off his flocks, 
and established a Roman-catholic priest in the place of 
their pastor. At Aeschi even the women took up arms, 
drove out the pastor from the church, and brought back 
the images in triumph. The revolt spread from hamlet 
to hamlet and from valley to valley, and again took 
possession of Interlaken. All the malcontents assem- 
bled there on the 22d of October, and swore, with hands 
upraised to heaven, boldly to defend their rights and 
liberty. 

The republic was in great danger. All the kings oJ 
Europe, and almost all the cantons of Switzerland, wen 
opposed to the gospel. The report of an army from Aug 
tria, destined to interpose in favor of the pope, spread 
through the reformed cantons.* Seditious meetings took 
place every day,f and the people refused to pay their 
magistrates either quit-rent, service, tithes, or even obe- 
dience, unless they shut their eyes to the designs of the 
Roman-catholics. The council became confused. Amazed 
and confounded, exposed to the mistrust of some and to 
the insults of others, they had the cowardice to separate 
under the pretext of gathering the vintage, and folding 
their arms in the presence of this great danger, they 
waited until a Messiah should descend from heaven, says 
a reformer, to save the republic.J The ministers point- 
ed out the danger, forewarned and conjured them ; but 
they all turned a deaf ear. " Christ languishes in Berne,'' 

• Audisti nimirum quam se apparent Austriaci ad bellum, ad« 
versus quos ignoratur. Suspicantur quidam ia Helvetios. (Ecol 
to Zw. Epp. 2. 161. t Seditiosorum concursus sunt quotidianl 
Zw. Epp. 2. 227 i Nunc, nunc suum Messiam adveuisse 6p» 

rautei. Ibid. 



326 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 



said Haller, " and appears nigh perishing."* The peo* 
pie were in commotion ; they assembled, made speecheis, 
murmured, and shed tears. Everywhere, in all their 
tumultuous meetings, might be heard this complaint of 
Manuel on Papists and the Papacy :f 

With rage our foes their hateful threat* denounce, 
Because, 0 Lord, we love thee best of all ; 
Because at sight of thee the idols fall ; 

And war and bloodshed, shuddering, we renounce. 

Berne was like a troubled sea, and Haller, who lis- 
tened to the roaring of the waves, wrote in the deepest 
anguish, *^ Wisdom has forsaken the wise, counsel has 
departed from the councillors, and energy from the chiefs 
and from the people. The number of the seditious aug« 
ments every day. Alas, what can the bear, oppressed 
with sleep, oppose to so many and to such sturdy hunt- 
ers ?J If Christ withdraw himself, we shall all perish." 

These fears were on the point of being realized. The 
Bmaller cantons claimed to have the power of interfering 
in matters of faith without infringing the federal com- 
pact. While six hundred men of Uri kept themselves 
ready to depart, eight hundred men of Unterwalden, 
bearing pine branches in their hats, symbols of the old 
faith, with haughty heads, with gloomy and threatening 
looks, crossed the Brunig under the ancient banner of 
the country, which was borne by Gaspard de Flu^, a 
very unworthy grandson of the great Nicholas.§ This 
was the first violation of the national peace for many a 
year. Uniting at Hasli with the men of Brienz, this little 
army crossed the lake, passed under the cascades of 6ies« 
bach, and arrived at Unterseen thirteen hundred strong, 
and ready to march on Berne to refe'stablish the pope, the 
idols, and the mass, in that rebellious city. In Switzer- 
land, as in Germany, the Reformation at its outset met 
with a peasant war. At the first success, new combat* 

• Ita languet Christus apud nos. Zw. Epp. 2. 227. 

"I Dass wir hand d' Gotzen geworfen hin. Hymn and Prayer. 

i Quid haec inter tot et tantos venatores robustos. Zw. Epp. % 
223. ^ A celebrated hermit who prevented a civil war in Swlt 
Kerland in 1481. 



THE REBELS DISHEARTENED. 327 



ants would arrive and pour through the passes of the 
Brunig upon the unfaithful republic. The army was 
only six leagues from Berne, and already the sons of 
Unterwalden were proudly brandishing their swords m 
the banks of the lake of Thun. 

Thus were the federal alliances trodden under foot 
by those very persons who aspired to the name of con- 
servatives. Berne had the right to repel this criminal 
attack by force. Suddenly calling to mind her ancient 
virtues, the city roused herself, and vowed to perish 
rather than tolerate the intervention of Unterwalden, 
the restoration of the mass, and the fiery violence of the 
peasants.* There was at that moment in the hearts of 
the Bernese one of those inspirations that come from 
above, and which save nations as well as individuals. 
" Let the strength of the city of Berne,'' exclaimed the 
llvoyer d^Erlach, "be in God alone, and in the loyalty of 
its people." All the council and the whole body of the 
citizens replied by noisy acclamations. The great ban- 
ner was hastily brought forth, the townspeople ran to 
arms, the companies assembled, and the troops of the 
republic marched out with the valiant avoyer at their 
head. 

Scarcely had the Bernese government acted thus 
energetically, before it saw the confidence of its friends 
increase, and the courage of its adversaries diminish. 
God never abandons a people who are true to them- 
selves. Many of the Oberlanders became intimidated, 
and deserted the ranks of the revolt. At the same time 
deputies from Basle and Lucerne represented to Unter- 
walden that it was trampling the ancient alliances un- 
der foot. The rebels, disheartened by the firmness of 
the republic, abandoned Unterseen, and retired to the 
convent of Interlaken. And soon after, when they be. 
held the decision of their adversaries, distressed besides 
by the cold rains that fell incessantly, and fearing that 
the snow, by covering the mountains, would prevent 
their return to their homes, the men of Unt<^rwaldcn 

* Quam missam reducem aut violeatiam villancram pdtL Hal- 
ler tc ZwiDgle, October 26. 



328 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



evacuated Interlaken during the night. The BerDesej 
to the number of five thousand men, entered it imme- 
diately, and summoned the inhabitants of the Hasli and 
of the bailiwick of Interlaken to assemble on the 4th of 
November in the plain that surrounds the convent.* 
The day being arrived, the Bernese army drew up in 
order of battle, and then formed a circle within which 
D'Erlach ordered the peasants to enter. Hardly had he 
placed the rebels on the left and the loyal citizens on 
the right, before the muskets and artillery fired a gen 
eral discharge, whose report refechoing among the moun- 
tains, filled the insurgents with terror. They thought 
it the signal of their death. But the avoyer only in- 
tended to show that they were in the power of the 
republic. D'Erlach, who addressed them immediately 
after this strange exordium, had not finished his speech, 
before they all fell on their knees, and confessing their 
crime, begged for pardon. The republic was satiftfied ; 
the rebellion was over. The banners of the district 
were carried to Berne, and the eagle of Interlaken in 
union with the wild goat of Hasli hung for a time be- 
neath the bear, as a trophy of this victory. Four of the 
chiefs were put to death, and an amnesty was granted 
to the remainder of the rebels. **The Bernese,'' said 
Zwingle, " as Alexander of Macedon in times of old, 
have cut the gordion knot with courage and with glo- 
ry.''f Thus thought the reformer of Zurich ; but expe- 
rience was one day to teach him, that to cut such knots 
is required a different sword from that of Alexander and 
of D'Erlach. However that may be, peace was restored, 
and in the valleys of the Hasli no other noise was heard 
than the sublime tumult borne afar by the Reichenbach 
and the surrounding torrents, as they pour from the 
mountain-tops their multitudinous and foaming waters. 

While we repudiate on behalf of the church the 
fiwords of the Helvetic bands, it would be unwise not 

* Tradition says that it was on the spot where the hvitel of In- 
terlaken now stands. f Bernenses pro sua dignitate nodum hunCf 
quemadmodum Alexander Macedo Gordium dissectari. Zw. Epp. 
2. 243. 



STRENaTH OF THE aOSPEL. 329 



to acknowledge the political advantages of this victory. 
The nobles had imagined that the reformation of the 
church would endanger the very existence of the state. 
They now had a proof to the contrary : they saw that 
when a nation receives the gospel, its strength is dou- 
bled. The generous confidence with which, in the hour 
of danger, they had placed some of the adversaries of 
the Reformation at the head of affairs and of the army, 
produced the happiest results. All were now convinced 
that the Reformation would not trample old recollec- 
tions under foot : prejudices were removed, hatred was 
appeased, the gospel gradually rallied all hearts around 
it, and then was verified the ancient and remarkable 
saying, so often repeated by the friends and enemies of 
that powerful republic, "God is become a citizen of 



330 HISXORr OF THE REPOEMATION . 



CHAPTER IV 

Reformation of St. Gall — Nuns of St. Catherine — Reforaatioa ot 
Glarip Berue, Appenzell, the Grisons, Schaflfhausen, and (he 
Rhine district — A popish miracle — Obstacles in Basle — Zeal o( 
the citizens — CGcoIampadius marries — Witticism of Erasmus— 
Mrst action — Half measures — Petition of the reformed. 

The reformation of Berne was decisive for several 
cantons. The same wind that had blown from on high 
with so much power on the country of De Watteville 
tod Haller, threw down "the idols" in a great part of 
Switzerland. In many places the people were indignant 
at seeing the Reformation checked by the timid prudence 
of diplomatists ; but when diplomacy was put to flight 
at Berne, the torrent so long restrained poured violently 
onwards. 

Vadian, burgomaster of St. Gall, who presided at tho 
Bernese disputation, had scarcely returned home, when 
the citizens, with the authority of the magistrates, re- 
moved the images from the church of St. Magnus, car- 
ried to the mint a hand of the patron saint in silver, 
with other articles of plate, and distributed among the 
poor the money they received in exchange ; thus, like 
Mary, pouring their precious ointment on the head of 
Christ.* Matthew 26 : 7. The people of St. Gall being 
curious to unveil the ancient mysteries, laid their hands 
on the abbey itself, on the shrines and crosses which 
had so long been presented to their adoration; but in- 
stead of saintly relics they found, to their great surprise, 
nothing but some resin, a few pieces of money, several 
paltry wooden images, some old rags, a skull, a large 
tooth, and a snaiPs shell. Rome, instead of that nobie 
fall which marks the end of great characters, sunk in the 
midst of stupid superstitions, shameful frauds, and the 
ironical laughter of a whole nation. 

* War gemiinset und den Armen aoBgetheili. J. J. Hottinger 



VIOLENT STRUaG-LE AT (JLAEIS. 



331 



Such discoveries unfortunately excited the passions 
of the multitude. One evening some evil-disposed per- 
sons, wishing to alarm the poor nuns of St. Catherine, 
who had obstinately resisted the reform, surrounded the 
convent with loud cries. In vain did the nuns barricade 
the doors ; the walls were soon scaled, and the good 
wine, meat, confectionaries, and all the far from ascetic 
delicacies of the cloister, became the prey of these rude 
jesters. Another persecution awaited them. Doctor 
Schappeler having been appointed their catechist, they 
were recommended to lay aside their monastic dress, and 
to attend his heretical sermons "clothed like all the 
world," said the sister Wiborath. Some of them cm- 
braced the reform, but thirty others preferred exile.* 
On the 5th of February, 1528, a numerous synod framed 
the constitution of the church of St. Gall. 

The struggle was more violent at Glaris. The seeds 
of the gospel truth which Zwingle had scattered there, 
prospered but little. The men in power anxiously re- 
jected every innovation, and the people loved better **to 
leap and dance, and work miracles, glass in hand^^^ as 
an old chronicle says, " than to busy themselves about 
the gospel." The landsgemeinde having pronounced, on 
the 15th of May, 1528, in favor of the mass by a majority 
of thirty-three voices, the two parties were marked out 
with greater distinctness : the images were broken at 
Matt, Elm, and Bettschwanden, and as each man remain- 
ed aloof in his own house and village, there was no 
longer in the canton either council of state or tribunal 
of justice. At Schwanden the minister Peter Rumelin, 
having invited the Roman-catholics to a disputation with 
him in the church, the latter, instead of discussing, 
marched in procession to the sound of drums round the 
place of worship in which the reformed were assembled, 
and then rushing into the pastor's house, which was sit- 
uated in the middle of the city, destroyed the stoves and 
the windows : the irritated reformed took their revenge 
and broke the images. On the 15th of April, 1521^, an 

• Arx. Gesch. St. Gall, 2. 629. J. J. Hoitinger, 416. MiiUer 
Hottlnger. 2. 91. 



332 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



agreement was concluded, by virtue of which every man 
was free to choose between the mass and the sermon. 

At Wesen, where Schwytz exercised sovereignty 
conjointly with Glaris, the deputies of the former canton 
threatened the people. Upon this the young men took 
the images out of the churches, carried them to an open 
place near the banks of the picturesque lake of Wallen- 
stadt, above which soar the mountains of the Ammon 
and of the Seven Electors, and cried, Look ; this road/^ 
that by the lake, leads to Coire and to Rome ; that,** 
to the south, *Ho Glaris; this other," to the west, "to 
Schwitz ; and the fourth," by the Ammon, " to St. Gall. 
Take which you please. But if you do not move off, you 
shall be burnt." After waiting a few moments, these 
young people threw the motionless images into the fire, 
and the Schwytz deputies, eye-witnesses of this execu- 
tion, withdrew in consternation, and filled the whole 
canton with projects of vengeance that were but too 
soon realized." 

In the canton of Appenzell, where a conference had 
been opened, there suddenly appeared a band of Roman 
catholics, armed with whips and clubs, and crying out, 
" Where are these preachers ? we are resolved to put 
them out of the village." These strange doctors wound- 
ed the ministers and dispersed the assembly with their 
whips. Out of the eight parishes of the canton, six 
embraced the reform, and Appenzell became finally di- 
vided into two little sections, the one Romanist and the 
other reformed. 

In the Grisons, religious liberty was proclaimed ; the 
parishes had the election of their pastors, several castles 
were rased to the ground to render all return to arbi- 
trary government impossible, and the affrighted bishop 
went and hid in the Tyrol his anger and his desire for 
vengeance. " The Grisons," said Zwingle, " advance 
daily. It is a nation that by its courage reminds us of 
the ancient Tuscans, and by its candor of the ancient 
Swiss."* 

* Gens ammo veteref Tuscos refereos, candore veteres Helvetios^ 
2w. Epp. 



SUPEItSTITiONS OVERTHROWN 



333 



SchaflThausen, after having long " halted between two 
opinions," at the summons of Zurich and of Berne re- 
moved the images from its churches without tumult oi 
disorder. At the same time the Reformation invaded 
Thurgovia, the valley of the Rhine, and other bailiwicks 
subordinate to these cantons. In vain did the Roman 
catholic cantons, that were in the majority, protest 
against it. "When temporal affairs are concerned," 
replied Zurich and Berne, " we will not oppose a plural- 
ity of votes ; but the word of God cannot be subjected 
to the suffrages of men." All the districts that lie along 
the banks of the Thur, of the lake of Constance, and of 
the Upper Rhine, embraced the gospel. The inhabitants 
of Mammeren, near the place where the Rhine issues 
from the kke, flung their images into the water. But 
the statue of St. Blaise, after remaining some time up- 
right, and contemplating the ungrateful spot whence it 
was banished, swam across the lake to Catahorn, situ- 
ated on the opposite shore, if we may believe the account 
of a monk named Lang.* Even while running away 
popery worked its miracles. 

Thus were the popular superstitions overthrown in 
Switzerland, and sometimes not without violence. Every 
great development in human affairs brings with it an 
energetic opposition to that which has existed. It nec- 
essarily contains an aggressive element, which ought to 
act freely, and by that means open the new path. In 
the times of the Reformation the doctors attacked the 
pope, and the people the images. The movement almost 
always exceeded a just moderation. In order that hu- 
man nature may make one step in advance, its pioneers 
must take mary. Every superfluous step should be 
condemned, and yet we must acknowledge their neces- 
sity. Let us not forget this in the history of the Refor 
Qiation, and especially in that of Switzerland. 

Zurich was reformed ; Berne had just become so . 
Basle still remained, before the great cities of the con- 
federation were gained over to the evangelical faith. 
The reformation of this learned city was the most im 
• J*. J. Hottingcr, 3. 42d, 



334 HISTORY OF THE KEFORMaTION. 

portant consequence resulting from that of the warlike 
Berne. 

For six years the gospel had been preached in Basle. 
The meek and pious (Ecolampadius was always waiting 
for happier times. " The darkness," said he, ** is about 
to retire before the rays of truth."* But his expectation 
was vain. A triple aristocracy — the superior clergy, 
the nobles, and the university — checked the free expan- 
sion of Christian convictions. It was the middle classeei 
who were destined to eflfect the triumph of the Reforma- 
tion in Basle.f Unhappily the popular wave invades 
nothing without tossing up some foul scum. 

It is true that the gospel had many friends in the 
councils ; but being men of a middle party, they tacked 
backwards and forwards like Erasmus, instead of sailing 
straight to the port. They ordered " the pure preaching 
of the word of God," but stipulated at the same time 
that it should be "without Lutheranism." The aged 
and pious Bishop Utenheim, who was living in retire- 
ment at Bruntrut, tottered daily into the church, sup- 
ported by two domestics, to celebrate mass with a bro- 
ken voice. Gundelsheim, an enemy of the Reformation, 
succeeded him erelong; and on the 23d of September, 
followed by many exiles and with a train of forty horses, 
he made his triumphal entry into Basle, proposing to 
restore every thing to its ancient footing. This made 
(Ecolampadius write in alarm to Zwingle, " Our cause 
hangs upon a thread." 

But in the citizens the reform found a compensation 
for the disdain of the great, and for the terrors inspired 
by the new bishop. They organized repasts for fifty 
and a hundred guests each ; (Ecolampadius and his col- 
leagues took their seats at these tables with the people, 
where energetic acclamations and reiterated cheers 
greeted the work of the Reformation. In a short time 
even the council appeared to incline to the side of the 
gospel. Twenty feast-days were retrenched, and the 

• Sperabam enim tenebras veritatis radio cessuras tandem. Zw 
ifipp. 2. 136. t Major pars civitatis quae toto corde dolet taatis 
Doe dissidiitt laborare. Ibid. 36. 



MARfiUaE OF (EC0LAMPADIU8 335 



priests were permitted to refuse celebrating the roasa 
^ It is all over with Roma," was now the cry. But (Eco 
lampadius, shaking his head, replied, I am afraid that, 
by wishing to sit on two stools, Basle will at last fall to 
the ground."* 

This was at the period of his return from the discus- 
sion at Berne. He arrived in time to close the eyes of 
!iifl pious mother ; and then the reformer found himself 
alone, succumbing under the weight of public and do- 
laestic cares ; for his house was like an inn for all fugi- 
tive Christians. I shall marry a Monica,"f he had 
often said, or else I shall remain a bachelor." He 
thought be had now discovered the " Christian sister" 
of whom he was in search. This was Wilibrandis, 
daughter of one of the emperor Maximilian^s knights, 
and widow of a master of arts named Keller — a woman 
already proved by many trials. He married her, saying, 
I look to the ordinances of God, and not to the scowl- 
ing faces of men." This did not prevent the sly Erasmus 
from exclaiming, Luther's affair is called a tragedy ; 
but I maintain it is a comedy, for each act of the drama 
ends in a wedding." This witticism has been often re- 
peated. For a long time it was the fashion to account 
for the Reformation by the desire of the princes for the 
church property, and of the priests for marriage. This 
vulgar method is now stigmatized by the best Roman 
controversialists as "a proof of a singularly narrow 
mind. The Reformation originated," add they, **in a 
true and Christian, although unenlightened zeal."| 

The return of CEcolampadius had still more impor- 
tant consequences for Basle than it had foi himself. The 
discussion at Berne caused a great sensation there. 
"Berne, the powerful Berne, is reforming," was passed 
from mouth to mouth. " How, then," said the people 
one to another; "the fierce bear has come out of his 

• Vereoique ne dum semper utraque sella sedere velit, utraque 
«xtrudatur aliquando. Zw. Epp. 2. 157. f The name of St. 

Augustine's mother. J See Mohler's Symbolik, both in th« 

preface and in ine body of the work. This is one of the most impor* 
tsmi writings produced by Eome since the time of Bossuet. 



S36 HISTORY OF THE RLFORMATION. 



den .... he is groping about for the rays of the son . . 
and Basle, the city of learning — Basle, the adopted city 
of Erasmus and of (Ecolampadius, remains in darkness." 

On Good-Friday, April 10, 1528, without the know- 
ledge of the council and (Ecolampadius, five workmen 
of the Spinner's company entered the church of St. Mar* 
tin, which was that of the reformer, and where the mass 
was already abolished, and carried away all the " idols.** 
On Easter-Monday, after the evening sermon, thirty-four 
citizens removed all the images from the church of the 
Augustines. 

This was going too far. Were they desirous, then, 
of drawing Basle and its councils from that just medium 
in which they had till this moment so wisely halted? 
The council met hastily on Tuesday morning, and sent 
the five men to prison ; but on the intercession of the 
burghers, they were released, and the images suppressed 
in five other churches. These half measures suflSced foi 
a time. 

On a sudden the flame burst out anew with greater 
violence. Sermons were preached at St. Martin's and 
St. Leonard's against the abominations of the cathedral ; 
and at the cathedral the reformers were called " heretics, 
knaves, and profligates."* The papists celebrated mass 
upon mass. The burgomaster Meyer, a friend of the 
reform, had with him the majority of the people; the 
burgomaster Meltinger, an intrepid leader of the parti- 
sans of Rome, prevailed in the councils : a collision be- 
came inevitable. "The fatal hour approaches," says 
(Ecolampadius, " terrible for the enemies of God."f 

On Wednesday, the 23d of December, two days before 
Christmas, three hundred citizens from all the companies, 
pious and worthy men, assembled in the hall of the 
Gardeners' company, and there drew up a petition to 
the senate. During this time the friends of Popery, who 
resided for the most part in Little Basle, and the suburb 
of St. Paul, took up arms, and brandished their swoids 
and lances against the reformed citizens at the vary 
* Ketzer, Schelmen, und Biiben. Bulling. 2. 36. f Matuiatay 
^atolis bora et tremenda bostibus Dei. Zw. Epp. 2. 213. 



PETITION OF THE CITIZENS. 337 



moment that the latter were bearing their petition to 
the council, and endeavored, although ineffectually, to 
bar their road. Meltinger haughtily refused to receive 
the petition, and charged the burghers, on the faith of 
their civic oath, to return to their homes. The burgo- 
master Meyer, however, took the address, and the senate 
fi^rdered it to be read. 

"Honored, wise, and gracious lords," it ran, "we, 
your dutiful fellow-citizens of the companies, address 
you as well-beloved fathers, whom we are ready to obey 
at the cost of our goods and of our lives. Take God's 
glory to heart ; restore peace to the city ; and oblige all 
the pope's preachers to discuss freely with the ministers. 
If the mass be tru^, we desire to have it in our churches ; 
but if it is an abomination before God, why, through 
love for the priests, should we draw down His terrible 
anger upon ourselves and upon our children ?" 

Thus spoke the citizens of Basle. There was noth- 
ing revolutionary either in their language or in their 
proceedings. They desired what was right with decis- 
ion, but also with calmness. All might still proceed 
with order and decorum. But here begins a new period : 
the vessel of reform is about to enter the port, bat not 
antil it has passed through violeiit storms. 



22 



338 filSTOEY OF THB ftEFORKATIOK. 



CHAPTER V 

Criflie in Basle — Half measures rejected — Reformed proposilioni^— 
A night of terror— Idols broken in the cathedral — The hour <A 
madness — Idols broken in all the churches — Reform legalized— 
Erasmus in Basle — great transformation — Revolution and ref- 
ormation. 

The bishop's partisans first departed from the legal 
course. Filled with terror on learning that mediators 
were expected from Zurich and Berne, they ran into the 
city, crying that an Austrian army was coming to their 
aid, and collected stones in their houses. The reformed 
did the same. The disturbance increased hourly, and in 
the night of the 25th of December the papists met under 
arms: priests with arquebuse in hand were numbered 
among their ranks. 

Scarcely had the reformed learned this, when some 
of them running hastily from house to house, knocked 
at the doors and awoke tlieir friends, who, starting out 
of bed, seized their muskets and repaired to the Garden- 
ers' hall, the rendezvous of their party. They soon 
amounted to three thousand. 

Both parties passed the night under arms. At every 
moment a civil war, and what is worse, "a war of 
hearths," might break out. It was at last agreed that 
each party should nominate delegates to treat with the 
senate on this matter. The reformed cbose thirty men of 
respectability, courage, faith, and experience, who took 
up their quarters at the Gardeners' hall. The partisans 
of the ancient faith chose also a commission, but less 
numerous and less respectable : their station was at the 
Fislimongers' hall. The council was constantly sitting. 
All the gates of the city, except two, were closed ; 
atrcng guards were posted in every quarter. Deputies 
from Lucerne, Uri, Schaffhausen, Zug, Schwytz, Mulhaa- 
sen, and Strasburg, arrived successively. The agitation 
aiid tumult increased from hour to hour 



HO HALF MEASURES ACCEPTED. 339 



It was necessary to put an end to so violent a crisis. 
The senate, faithful to its ideas of half measures, decreed 
that the priests should continue to celebrate the mass ; 
but that all, priests and ministers, should preach the 
word of God, and for this purpose should meet once 
% week to confer upon the holy Scriptures. They then 
called the Lutherans together in the Franciscan church, 
and the papists in that belonging to the Dominicans. 
The senate first repaired to the former church, where 
they found two thousand five hundred citizens assem- 
bled. The secretary had hardly read the ordinance be- 
fore a great agitation arose. That shall not be," cried 
one of the people.* We will not put up with the mass, 
not even a single one," exclaimed another ; and all re- 
peated, " No mass, no mass ; we will die sooner."f 

The senate having next visited the Dominican church, 
all the Romanists, to the number of six hundred, among 
whom were many foreign servants, cried out, " We are 
ready to sacrifice our lives for the mass. We swear it, 
we swear it," repeated they with uplifted hands. "If 
they reject the mass, to arms, to arms."J 

The senate withdrew more embarrassed than ever. 

The two parties were again assembled three days 
after. (Ecolampadius was in the pulpit. "Be meek 
and tractable," said he ; and he preached with such unc- 
tion that many were ready to burst into tears. § The 
assembly ofiered up prayers, and then decreed that it 
would accept a new ordinance, by virtue of which, fif- 
teen days after Pentecost, there should be a public dis- 
putation, in which no arguments should be employed 
but such as were drawn from the word of God : after 
this a general vote should take place upon the mass, 
that the majority should decide the question, and that in 
the meanwhile the mass should be celebrated in three 
churches only ; it being however understood, that noth- 

• Quidam e plebe clamitabat : Hoc non fiet I Zw. Epp. 2. 255. 
t Nos plaae ea noa feremus, aut moriemur omaes. Ibid. 
I At altera pars minitabat praelia si missam rejicerent. Ibid. 
^ Ut nemo non commoveretur, et profecto fere mihi lacrymio 
ozomiBisset. Ibid. 



340 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOK. 



ing should be taught there that was in opposition to the 
holy Scriptures. 

The Romanist minority rejected these propositions : 
" Basle/' said they. is not like Berne and Zurich. Its 
revenues are derived in great measure from countries 
opposed to the Reformation." The priests having re- 
fused to resort to the weekly conferences, they were 
fluspended ; and during a fortnight there was neither 
sermon nor mass at the cathedral, or in the churches of 
St. Ulric, St. Peter, and St. Theodore. 

Those who remained faithful to Rome resolved upon 
an intrepid defence. Meltinger placed Sebastian MuUer 
in the pulpit at St. Peter's, from which he had been in- 
terdicted, and this hot-headed priest vented such abusive 
sarcasms against the reform, that several of the evan* 
gelicals, who were listening to the sermon, were insulted 
and nearly torn in pieces. 

It was necessary to arouse Basle from this night- 
mare, and strike a decisive blow. ** Let us remember 
our liberty," said the reformed citizens, " and what we 
owe to the glory of Christ, to public justice, and to our 
posterity."* They then demanded that the enemies of 
the Reformation, friends and relations of the priests, who 
were the cause of all these delays and of all these trou- 
bles, should no longer sit in the councils until peace 
was reestablished. This was the 8th of February. The 
council notified that they would return an answer on 
the morrow. 

At six o'clock in the evening, twelve hundred citi- 
zens were assembled in the corn-market. They began 
to fear that the delay required by the senate concealed 
some evil design. "We must have a reply this very 
night," they said. The senate was convoked in great 
haste. 

From that period alfairs assumed a more threatening 
attitude in Basle. Strong guards were posted by the 
burghers in the halls of the different guilds ; armed men 
patrolled the city, and bivouacked in the public places, 

* Gogitans quid glorise Christi, quid justitias publics?, quidqus 
|>O0teritati suae deberet. CE^col. Zuricb MS. 



THE CITIZENS IN ARMS. 



341 



to anticipate the machinations of their adversaries ;* the 
chains were stretched across the streets ; torches were 
lighted, and resinous trees, whose flickering light scat- 
tered the darkness, were placed at intervals through the 
town ; six pieces of artillery were planted before the 
town-hall ; and the gates of the city, as well as the 
arsenal and the ramparts, were occupied. Basle was in 
a state of siege. 

There was no longer any hope for the Romish party. 
The burgomaster Meltinger, an intrepid soldier and one 
of the heroes of Marignan, where he had led eight hun- 
dred men into battle, lost courage. In the darkness he 
gained the banks of the Rhine with his son-in-law the 
councillor Eglof d^Offenburgh, embarked unnoticed in a 
small boat, and rapidly descended the stream amid the 
fogs of the night.f Other members of the council es- 
caped in a similar manner. 

This gave rise to new alarms. **Let us beware of 
their secret manoeuvres," said the people. "Perhaps 
they are gone to fetch the Austrians, with whom they 
have so often threatened us." The affrighted citizens 
collected arms from every quarter, and at break of day 
they had two thousand men on foot. The beams of the 
rising sun fell on this resolute but calm assembly. 

It was midday. The senate had come to no decision : 
the impatience of the burghers could be restrained no 
longer. Forty men were detached to visit the posts. 
As this patrol was passing the cathedral, they entered 
it, and one of the citizens, impelled by curiosity, opened 
a closet with his halberd, in which some images had been 
hidden. One of them fell out, and was broken into a 
thousand pieces against the stone pavement.J The 
sight of these fragments powerfully moved the specta* 
tors, who began throwing down one after another all 
the images that were concealed in this place. None of 
them offered any resistance : heads, feet, and hands, all 

• Ne quid forte ab adversariis insidiarum strueretur. CEcoL 
Zurich MS. f Clam conscensa navicula fuga, nesclo senatu, 

elapsus est. Ibid. X Cum halpardls quasi per ludum aperirent 
armarium idolorum, unumque idolum educerent. Ibid. 



842 HISTORY OP THE REFORMATION. 



were heaped in confusion before the halberdiers. "I am 
much surprised," said Erasmus, ** that they performed no 
miracle to save themselves ; formerly the saints worked 
frequent prodigies for much smaller offences."* Some 
priests ran to the spot, and the patrol withdrew. 

A rumor, however, having spread that a disturbance 
had taken place in this church, three hundred men came 
to the support of the forty. Why," said they, " should 
we spare the idols, that light up the flames of discord V 
The priests in alarm had closed the gates of the sana 
tuary, drawn the bolts, raised barricades, and prepared 
every thing for maintaining a siege. But the towns- 
people, whose patience had been exhausted by the delays 
of the council, dashed against one of the doors of the 
church : it yielded to their blows, and they rushed into 
the cathedral. The hour of madness had arrived. These 
men were no longer recognizable, as they brandished 
their swords, rattled their pikes, and uttered formidable 
cries : were they Goths, or fervent worshippers of God, 
animated by the zeal which in times of yore inflamed 
the prophets and the kings of Israel ? However that 
may have been, these proceedings were disorderly, since 
public authority alone can interfere in public reforms. 
Images, altars, pictures, all were thrown down and de- 
stroyed. The priests, who had fled into the vestry, and 
there concealed themselves, trembled in every limb at 
the terrible noise made by the fall of their holy decora- 
tions. The work of destruction was completed without 
one of them venturing to save the objects of his worship, 
or to make the slightest remonstrance. The people next 
piled up the fragments in the squares and set fire to 
them ; and during the chilly night the armed burghers 
stood round and warmed themselves at the crackling 
flame.f 

The senate collected in amazement, and desired to 
interpose their authority and appease the tumult ; but 
they might as well have striven to command the winds. 
The enthusiastic citizens replied to their magistrates 

* Erasm. 0pp. p. 291. \ Lignis imaginum usi Bunt vigilefl^ 
pro arcenUo frigore nocturno. Zurich MS. 



POLITICAL AND RELIiriOUS LIBERTY. 343 



fn these haughty words : " What you have not been 
able to effect in three years, we will complete in one 
hour."* 

In truth the anger of the people was no longer con 
fined to the cathedral. They respected all kinds of pri 
vatc property, f but they attacked the churches of St 
Peter, St. Ulric, St. Alban, and of the Dominicans ; ai^d 
in all these temples the idols" fell under the blows of 
these good citizens of Basle, who were inflamed by an 
extraordinary zeal. Already they were making prepara- 
tions to cross the bridge and enter Little Basle, which 
was devoted to the cause of Popery, when the alarmed 
inhabitants begged to be allowed to remove the images 
themselves, and with heavy hearts they hastily carried 
them into the upper chambers of the church, whence 
they hoped to be able after a time to restore them to 
their old position. 

They did not stop at these energetic demonstra- 
tions : the most excited talked of going to the town-hall, 
and of constraining the senate to accede to the wishes 
of the people ; but the good sense of the majority treat- 
ed these brawlers as they deserved, and checked their 
guilty thoughts. 

The senators now perceived the necessity of giving 
a legal character to this popular movement, and of thus 
changing a tumultuous revolution into a durable reforma- 
tion.! Democracy and the gospel were thus established 
simultaneously in Basle. The senate, after an hour's 
deliberation, granted that in future the burghers should 
participate in the election of the two councils ; that 
from this day the mass and images should be abolished 
throughout all the canton, and that in every deliberation 
which concerned the glory of God or the good of the 
state the opinion of the guilds should be taken. The 
people, delighted at having obtained these conditions, 
which secured their political and religious liberty, re- 

* De quo vos per triennium deliberastis, nihil efficientes, nos in- 
tra horam omuem absolvemus. (Ecol. Capitoui, Basle MS. 

t Null! eiiim vel oboium abstuleruat. Ibid. | Cedenduxn 

phbi. Ibid. 



344 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



turned joyful to their houses It was now the close of 
day.* 

On the morrow, Ash- Wednesday, it was intended to 
distribute the ruins of the altars and other ornaments of 
the church among the poor, to serve them for firewood 
But these unhappy creatures, in their eagerness for the 
fragments, having begun to dispute about them, great 
piles were constructed in the cathedral close and set on 
fire " The idols," said some wags, " are really keeping 
their Ash-Wednesday to-day." The friends of Popery 
turned away their horror-stricken eyes from this sacri- 
legious sight, says (Ecolampadius, and shed tears of 
blood. " Thus severely did they treat the idols," con- 
tinues the reformer, " and the mass died of grief in con 
sequence."f On the following Sunday, hymns in Ger- 
man were sung at every church; and on the 18th of 
February a general amnesty was published. Every 
thing was changed in Basle. The last had become first, 
and the first last. While (Ecolampadius, who a few 
years before had entered the city as a stranger, without 
resources and without power, found himself raised to the 
first station in the church, Erasmus, disturbed in the 
quiet study whence during so long a period he had 
issued his absolute commands to the world of letters, 
saw himself compelled to descend into the arena. But 
this king of the schools had no desire to lay down his 
sceptre before the sovereign people. For a long time 
he used to turn aside his head when he met his friend 
(Ecolampadius. Besides, he feared by remaining at 
Basle to compromise himself with his protectors. " The 
torrent," said he, " which was hidden under ground, has 
burst forth with violence, and committed frightful rav 
ages.| My life is in danger : (Ecolampadius possesses 
all the churches. People are continually bawling in 
my ears ; I am besieged with letters, caricatures, and 

* His conditionibus plebs laeta domum rediit, sub ipsura noctis 
crepusculum. OEcol. Capitoni, Zurich MS. f saevitum est 

in idola, ac missa pras dolore expiravit. Ibid. J Basilica tor- 

reus quidem, qui sub terra labebatur, eubitp erumpenB, etc. Err 
Epp. ad Pirkheimer, July. 163y. 



A OREAT TRANSFORMATIOK. 345 



pamphlets. It is all over : I am resolved to leave Basle, 
Only shall I or shall I not depart by stealth ? The one 
is more becoming, the other more secure." 

Wishing as much as possible to make his honor and 
his prudence agree, Erasmus desired the boatman with 
whom he was to descend the Rhine to depart from an 
unfrequented spot. This was opposed by the senate, 
2Uid the timid philosopher was compelled to enter the 
boat as it lay near the bridge, at that time covered with 
a crowd of people. He floated down the river, sadly 
bade adieu to the city he had so much loved, and re- 
tired to Friburg in Brisgau with several other learned 
men. 

New professors were invited to fill the vacant chairs 
in the university, and in particular Oswald Myconius, 
Phrygio, Sebastian Munster, and Simon Grynaeus. At 
the same time was published an ecclesiastical order and 
confession of faith, one of the most precious documents 
of this epoch. 

Thus had a great transformation been effected with- 
out the loss of a single drop of blood. Popery had fallen 
in Basle in despite of the secular and spiritual power. 
" The wedge of the Lord," says (Ecolampadius, " has 
split this hard knot."* 

We cannot, however, help acknowledging that the 
Basle reformation may afford ground for some objec- 
tions. Luther had opposed himself to the power of the 
many. "When the people prick up their ears, do not 
whistle too loud. It is better to suffer at the hand of 
one tyrant, that is to say, of a king, than of a thousand 
tyrants, that is to say, of the people." On this account 
the German reformer has been reproached for acknow- 
IfHlging no other policy than servilism. 

Perhaps when the Swiss reformation is canvassed 
a contrary objection will be made against it, and the 
reform at Basle in particular, will be looked upon as a 
revolution. 

The Reformation must of necessity bear the stamp of 
the country in which it is accomplished : it will be mo 
* Malo nodo suus cuneus obvenit. CEcol. Capit. 



346 HI»10EY OF THE REPORMATIOH 



narchical in Germany, republican in Switzerland. Nev 
erlheless, in religion as in politics, there is a great dif 
ference between reformation and revolution. 

In no sphere does Christianity desire either despotism, 
servitude, stagnation, retrogression, or death. But while 
looking for progress, it seeks to accomplish it by refor 
mtion, and not by revolution. 

* Reformation works by the power of the word, of doc 
trine, cultivation, and truth ; while revolution, or rathei 
revolt, operates by the power of riot, of the sword, and 
of the club. 

Christianity proceeds by the inner man, and charters 
themselves, if they stand alone, cannot satisfy it. No 
doubt political constitutions are one of the blessings of 
our age, but it is not suflBcient for these securities to 
be committed to parchment ; they must be written in the 
heart, and guaranteed by the manners of the people. 

Such were the principles of the Swiss reformers ; 
such were those of the reform at Basle, and by these it 
is distinguished from a revolution. 

There were, it is true, some excesses. Never per- 
haps has a reformation been accomplished among men 
without some mixture of revolution. But it was doc- 
trines, however, that were in question at Basle : these 
doctrines had acted powerfully on the moral convictions 
and on the lives of the people ; the movement had taken 
place within before it showed itself without. But more 
than this, the Reformation was not satisfied with taking 
away ; it gave more than it took ; and far from confining 
itself to the work of destruction, it scattered rich bless 
ings over all the people.* 

* Hagenbaoh, Yorlesongen, 2. 125, 20a 



PAEEL'S COMMISSION. 



347 



CHAPTER VI. 

CVyrePs commission — Farel at Lausanne and Morat — Neufchatel— 
Farel preaches at Serriere — Enters Neufchatel — Sermon — The 
Moaka— Farel's preach ng — Popery in Neufchatel — Canons and 
moaks unite — Farel at Morat and in the Vully — Reformation of 
the bishopric of Basle — Farel again in Neufchatel — Placards — 
The hospital chapel — Civil power invoked by ttie Romanists. 

The recoil of the discussion at Berne had overthrown 
popery in a considerable part of German Switzerland, 
It was also felt in many of the churches of French Swit- 
zerland, lying at the foot of the Jura, or scattered amid 
the pine forests of its elevated valleys, and which up to 
this time had shown the most absolute devotion to the 
Roman pontiff. 

Farel, seeing the gospel established in the places 
where the Rhone mingles its sandy waters with the 
crystal Leman, turned his eyes to another quarter. He 
was supported by Berne. This state, which possessed 
jointly with Friburg the bailiwicks of Morat, Orbe, and 
Granson, and which had alliances with Lausanne, Aven- 
ches, Payerne, Neufchatel, and Geneva, saw that both its 
interest and its duty alike called it to have the gospel 
preached to its allies and subjects. Farel was empow- 
ered to carry it among them, provided he obtained the 
consent of the respective governments. 

One day, therefore, journeying towards Morat, Farel 
arrived and preached the gospel at the foot of those 
towers and battlements that had been attacked at three 
different periods by the armies of Conrad the Salic, Ro- 
dolph of Hapsburg, and Charles the Bold. Erelong the 
friends of the reform amounted to a great number. A 
general vote having nevertheless declared in favor of 
the pope, Farel proceeded to Lausanne. 

He was at first driven away by the bishop and the 
clergy, but soon reappeared provided with a letter from 
the lords of Berne. " We send him to you," said theil 



348 HISTORY OF THE REFOEMATION. 



excellencies to the authorities of the city, "to defend 
his own cause and ours. Allow him to preach the word 
of God, and beware that you touch not a hair of his 
head." 

There was great confusion in the councils. Placed 
between Berne and the bishop, what could they do T 
The council of Twenty-four, finding the matter very 
serious, convoked the council of Sixty ; and this body 
excusing itself, they convoked the council of Two Hun- 
dred, on the 14th of November, 1629. But these in their 
turn referred the business to the smaller council. No 
one would have any thing to do with it. The inhabi- 
tants of Lausanne, it is true, complained loudly of the 
holy members of their chapters, whose lives, they said, 
were one long train of excesses ; but when their eyes 
turned on the austere countenance of the reform, they 
were still more terrified. Besides, how deprive Lau- 
sanne of her bishop, her court, and her dignitaries? 
What, no more pilgrims in the churches ; no more suitors 
in the ecclesiastical courts; no more purchasers in the 
markets, or boon companions in the taverns ? The wid- 
owed and desolate Lausanne would no longer behold 
the noisy throng of people that were at once her wealth 
and her glory. Better far a disorder that enriches, than 
a reform that impoverishes. Farel was compelled tp 
depart a second time. 

He returned to Morat, and soon the word gained 
over the hearts of the people. On feast-days, the roads 
from Payerne and Avenches were covered with merry 
bands, who laughingly said to one another, *' Let us go 
to Morat and hear the preachers f and exhorted each 
other slyly, as they went along the road, " not to fall into 
the nets of the heretics." But at night all was changed. 
Grasped by the strong hand of truth, these very people 
returned, some in deep thought, others discussing with 
animation the doctrines they had heard. The fire was 
sparkling throughout all this district, and spreading in 
every direction its long rays of light. This was enough 
for Farel : he required new conquests. 

A.t a short distance from Morat lay one of- the strongs 



PAREL AT NEUFCHATEL. 



349 



holds of Popery, the earldom of Neufchatel. Joan of 
Hochberg, who had inherited this principality from her 
ancestors, had married, in 1504, Louis of Orleans, duke 
of Longueville. This French nobleman having support- 
ed the king of France in 1612, in a war against the 
Swiss, the cantons had taken possession of Neufchatel, 
but had restored it to his widow in 1529. 

Few countries could have presented greater difficul 
ties to the daring reformer. The princess of Longue- 
ville, residing in France in the suite of Francis I., a 
woman of courtly habits, vain, extravagant, always in 
debt, and thinking of Neufchatel only as a farm that 
should bring her in a large revenue, was devoted to the 
pope and Popery. Twelve canons with several priests 
and chaplains formed a powerful clergy, at whose head 
was the provost Oliver of Hochberg, natural brother to 
the princess. Auxiliaries full of zeal flanked this main 
army. On the one side there was the abbey of the Pre- 
monstrantes of Fontaine- Andrd, three quarters of a league 
beyond the town, the monks of which, after having in 
the twelfth century cleared the ground with their own 
hands,* had gradually become powerful lords ; and on 
the other side, the Benedictines of the island of St. John, 
whose abbot, having been deposed by the Bernese, had 
taken refuge, burning with hatred and vengeance, in hia 
priory at Corcelles. 

The people of Neufchatel had a great respect for an- 
cient rights, and it was easy to take advantage of this 
state of feeling, considering the general ignorance, to 
maintain the innovations of Popery. The canons im- 
proved the opportunity. For the instructions of the 
gospel, they substituted pomps and shows. The church, 
situated on a steep rock, was filled with altars, chapels, 
and images of saints ; and religion, descending from this 
sanctuary, ran up and down the streets, and was trav- 
estied in dramas and mysteries, mingled with indul- 
gences, miracles, and debauchery.f 

The soldiers of Neufchatel, however, who had made 

• Propriis manibus. Hist, of Neufchatel, by F. de Cham brier, 
p IS. t M^moires sur F^glise colUgiaU de Neufchatol, p. 240 



350 HISTOBT OF THE REFORMATION 



the campaign of 1529 with the Bernese army, brought 
back to their homes the liveliest enthusiasm for the evan^ 
gelicai cause. It was at this period that a frail boat 
quitting the southern bank of the lake, on the side oppo 
site Morat, and carrying a Frenchman of mean appear 
ance, steered towards the Neufchatel shore. Parol, foi 
it was he, had learned that the village of Serri^re, sit 
uated at the gates of Neufchatel, depended as to spirit- 
ualities on the evangelical city of Bienne, and that Emer 
Beynon, the priest of the place, **had some liking for 
the gospel." The plan of his campaign was immediately 
drawn up. He appeared before parson Emer, who re- 
ceived him with joy ; but what could be done ? for Farel 
had been interdicted from preaching in any church what- 
ever in the earldom. The poor priest thought to recon- 
cile every thing by permitting Farel to mount on a stone 
in the cemetery, and thus preach to the people, turning 
his back upon the church.* 

A great disturbance arose in Neufchatel. On one 
side the government, the canons, and the priests, cried, 
" Heresy 1" but on the other, " some inhabitants of Neuf- 
chatel, to whom God had given a knowledge of the 
truth,''f flocked to Serriere. In a short time these last 
could not contain themselves: "Come," said they to 
Farel, " and preach to us in the town." 

This was at the beginning of December. They en- 
tered by the gate of the castle, and leaving the church 
on the hill to the left, they passed in front of the canons' 
houses, and descended to the narrow streets inhabited 
by the citizens. On reaching the market-cross, Farel 
ascended a platform and addressed the crowd, which 
gathered together from all the neighborhood : weavers, 
vine-dressers, husbandmen, a worthy race, possessing 
more feeling than imagination. The preacher's exteiior 
was grave, his discourse energetic, his voice like thun- 
der : his eyes, his features, his gestures, all showed him 

* M. de Perrot, ex-pastor of Serriere, and author of a work en- 
titled, ''L'f^glise et la Reformation/' has shown me the stone on 
which Farel stood. f " Aucuns de Neufchatel, auxquels Dieu 
avfut 4onn^ coanoissance de U v^rit^,'' eto. Choupard M3> 



PAREL'S PREACHINO. 



351 



a man of intrepidity. The citizens, accustomed to run 
about the streets after the mountebanks, were touched 
by his powerful language. " Farel preached a sermon 
of such great efficacy," says a manuscript, "that he 
gained over much people."* 

Some monks, however, with shaven crownsf glided 
among his hearers, seeking to excite them against the 
heretical minister. " Let us beat out his brains," said 
some. "Duck him, duck him," cried others, advancing 
to throw Farel into a fountain, which may still be seen 
near the spot where he preached. But the reformer 
stood firm. 

This first preaching was succeeded by others. To 
this gospel missionary every place was a church ; every 
stone, every bench, every platform was a pulpit. Al- 
ready the cutting winds and the snows of December 
should have kept the Neufchatelaus around their fire- 
sides ; " the canons made a vigorous defence ;"J and in 
every quarter "the shorn crowns" were in agitation, 
supplicating, menacing, shouting, and threatening, but 
all was useless. No sooner did this man of small stat- 
ure rise up in any place, with his pale yet sunburnt 
complexion, with red and uncombed beard, with spark- 
ling eye and expressive mouth, than the monks' labor 
was lost : the people collected around him, for it was 
the word of God that fell from his lips.§ All eyes were 
fixed on him : with open mouth and attentive ears they 
tiung upon his words. || And scarcely did he begin to 
speak, when — Oh, wonderful work of God I he Bimself 
exclaims— this multitude believed as if it had but one 
soul. 

The word of God carried the town, as it were, at the 
first assault ; and throwing down the devices Rome had 
taken ages to compose, established itself in triumph on 
the ruins of human traditions. Farel saw in imagina- 
tion Jesus Christ himself walking in spirit through the 

* Quoted in the Choupard MS. f Rasorum remoramenta. 
Farellus Molano, Neufchatel MS. t Contra tyraunica praw ep- 

ta. Ibid. § Ad verbum fe^tinareat. Ibid. || Avid^ 1^9 
^ieotes. Ibid. 



392 



HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOK. 



midst of this crowd, opening the eyes of the blind, soft 
ening the hard heart, and working miracles ;* ... so that 
scarcely had he returned to his hnmble residence before 
he wrote to his friends with a heart full of emotion, 
" Render thanks with me to the Father of mercies, io 
that he has shown his favor to those bowed down by a 
weighty tyranny and falling on his knees, he wor- 
shipped God.f 

But during this time what were the adherents of the 
pope doing in Neufchatel ? 

The canons, members of the General Audiences, of 
which they formed the first estate, treated both priests 
and laymen with intolerable haughtiness. Laying the 
burden of their offices on poor curates, they publicly 
kept dissolute women, clothed them sumptuously, en- 
dowed their children by public acts, fought in the church, 
haunted the streets by night, or went into a foreign 
country to enjoy in secret the produce of their avarice 
and of their intrigues. Some poor lepers placed in a 
house near the city were maintained by the produce of 
certain offerings. The rich canons, in the midst of their 
banquets, dared take away the bread of charity from 
these unhappy wretches. 

The abbey of Fontaine- Andrd was at a little distance 
from the town. Now the canons of Neufchatel and the 
monks of Fontaine were at open war. These hostile 
powers, encamped on their two hills, disputed each 
other's property, wrested away each other's privileges, 
launched at one another the coarsest insults, and even 
came to blows. " Debaucher of women," said the canons 
to the abbot of Fontaine- Andre, who returned the com- 
pliment in the same coin. It is the Reformation which, 
through faith, has reestablished the moral law in Chris- 
tendom, a law that Popery had trodden under foot. 

For a long time these conventual wars had disturbed 
fclie country. On a sudden they ceased. A strange 
event was passing in Neufchatel — the word of God was 

• Quid Christus in suis egerit. Far. Mol. Neufchatel MS. 
t Gratias ergo, Fratres, mecum agite Patri misericordiarum, ^nod 
idi pro(*itiu8 gravi pressis tlranuide. Ibid. 



PAREL PERSECUTED. 



353 



pleached there. The canons, seized with affright in the 
midst of their disorders, looked down from their lofty 
dwellings on this new movement. The report reached 
Fontaine-Andrd. The monks and priests suspended their 
orgies and their quarrels. The heathen sensualism that 
had in vaded the church was put to the rout ; Christliui 
spiritualism had reappeared. 

Immediately the monks and canons, so long at war, 
embrace and unite against the reformer. We must 
save religion," said they, meaning their tithes, banquets, 
scandals, and privileges. Not one of them could oppose 
a doctrine to the doctrine preached by Farel : to insult 
him was their sole weapon. At Corcelles, however, they 
went farther. As the minister was proclaiming the gos- 
pel near the priory, the monks fell upon him : in the 
midst of them was the prior Rodolph de Benoit, storm- 
ing, exciting, and striving to augment the tempest. He 
even had a dagger in his hand, according to one writer.* 
Farel escaped with difficulty. 

This was not enough. Popery, as it has always done, 
had recourse to the civil power. The canons, the abbot, 
and the prior, solicited the governor George de Rive at 
the same time. Farel stood firm. The glory of Jesus 
Christ," said he, *^ and the lively affection his sheep bear 
to his word, constrain me to endure sufferings greater 
than tongue can describe."f Erelong, however, he was 
compelled to yield. Farel again crossed the lake ; but 
this passage was very different from the former. The 
fire was kindled. On the 22d of December he was at 
Morat, and shortly after at Aigle. 

He was recalled thence. On the Tth of January, 
religion was put to the vote at Morat, and the majority 
was in favor of the gospel. But the Romish minority, 
supported by Friburg, immediately undertook to recov* 
er its ancient position by insults and bad treatment. 
Farel, Farel," cried the reformed party J 

* Rosselet ia Annotat. Farel Leben von Kirchofer. 

t At levia facit omnia Christus, added he. Farel to Dumoulia, 
December 15. Neufchatel MS. | Choupard MS. Cliambrier. 
QiBt. de Neufchatel, p. 293 



854 



HLSTORY OF THE HEFORMATIOK. 



A few days after this, Farel, accompanied by a Ber 
nese messenger, scaled that magnificent amphitheatre 
of mountains above Yevay, whence the eye plunges into 
the waters of the Leman ; and soon he crossed the es- 
tates of Count John of Gruy^re, who was in the habit of 
saying, " We must burn this French Luther."* Scarcely 
had Farel reached the heights of Saint Martin de Vaud,f 
when he saw the vicar of the place with two priests 
running to meet him. " Heretic, devil !" cried they. 
But the knight, through fear of Berne, remained behind 
his walls, and Farel passed on. 

The reformer, not allowing himself to be stopped by 
the necessity of defending himself in Morat, or by the 
inclemency of the season, immediately carried the gos- 
pel to those beautiful hills that soar between the smiling 
waters of lakes Morat and Neufchatel into the villages 
of the VuUy. This manoeuvre was crowned with the most 
complete success. On the 15th of February four depu- 
ties from the Vull^' came to Morat to demand permission 
to embrace the reform, which was immediately granted 
them. Let our ministers preach the gospel," said their 
excellencies of Berne to the Friburgers, and we will 
let your priests play their monkey tricks. We desire 
to force no man."| The reform restored freedom of will 
to the Christian people. It was about this time that 
Farel wrote his beautiful letter "to all lords, people, 
and pastors," which we have so often quoted. § 

The indefatigable reformer now went forward to new 
conquests. A chain of rocks separates the Juran valley 
of Erguel, already evangelized by Farel, from the coun 
try of the ancient Rauraci, and a passage cut through 
the rock serves as a communication between the two 
districts. It \vas the end of April when Farel, passing 
through the Pierre-FertuiSy\\ descended to the village of 
Tavannes, and entered the church just as the priest was 
Baying mass. Farel went into the pulpit : the aston- 

* Missive of Borne to the Count of Gruyere, January 5 and 16, 
1530. t To the left of the modern road from Vevay to Friburg, 

t Missive of Berne, Choupard MS. § A tous seigneurs, pea« 
plet, et pasteurs. See above, vol 3, book 12. || Petra Fertusa. 



FAREL AGAIH IN NELTFCHATEL, 355 



iflhed priest stopped, the minister filled his hearers with 
emotion, and seemed to them an angel come down from 
heaven. Immediately the images and the altars fell, 
and the poor priest who was chanting the mass could 
not finish it."* To put down Popery had required less 
time than the priest had spent at the altar. 

A great part of the bishopric of Basle was in a few 
weeks ga-ined over to the Reformation. 

During this time the gospel was fermenting in Neuf- 
chatel. The young men who had marched with Berne 
to deliver Geneva from the attacks of Savoy, recounted 
in their jovial meetings the exploits of the campaign, 
and related how the soldiers of Berne, feeling cold, had 
taken the images from the Dominican church at Geneva, 
saying, " Idols of wood are of no use but to make a fire 
with in winter." 

Farel reappeared in Neufchatel.f Being master of 
the lower part of the town, he raised his eyes to the lofty 
rocks on which soared the cathedral and the castle. The 
best plan, thought he, is to bring these proud priests 
down to us. One morning his young friends spread 
themselves in the streets, and posted up large placards 
bearing these words, ''All those who say mass are robbers^ 
murderers, and seducers of the peopleJ^l Great was the 
uproar in Neufchatel. The canons summoned their peo- 
ple, called together the clerks, and marching at the head 
of a large troop, armed with swords and clubs, descended 
into the town, tore down the sacrilegious placards, and 
cited Farel before the tribunal as a slanderer, demanding 
ten thousand crowns damages. 

The two parties appeared in court, and this was all 
that Farel desired. I confess the fact," said he, " but 
I am justified in what I have done. Where are there to 
bo found more horrible murderers than these seducers 
who sell paradise, and thus nullify the merits of our 
Lord Jesus Christ ? I will prove my assertion by the 

* Done le pauvre pretre qui chantoit sa messe ne la peut paa 
achever. Old MS. quoted in the Choupard MS. f Farellua 

sue more magna fortitudine jam-jam agit. Megander to Zw/ngle, 
August 6, 1530. X l>e Chambrier, Hist, de Neufchatel, 1. 203. 



356 



HISTORY OF THE REFOkMATlOK. 



gospel." And he prepared to open it, when the canonSj 
flushed with anger, cried out, "The common law ol 
Neufchatel, and not the gospel, is in question here. 
Where are the witnesses ?" But Farel, constantly re- 
verting to that fearful assertion, proved by the word of 
God that the canons were really guilty of murder and 
robbery. To plead such a cause was to ruin popery. 
The court of Neufchatel, that had never heard a similai 
case, resolved according to ancient custom to lay it be- 
fore the council of Besan9on,''^ which not daring to pro- 
nounce the first estate of the General Audiences guilty 
of murder and robbery, referred the matter to the em* 
peror and to a general council. Bad causes gain noth- 
ing by making a disturbance. 

At every step they wished to drive him back, Farel 
made one in advance. The streets and the houses were 
Btill his temple. One day when the people of Neufchatel 
were around him, "Why," cried they, "should not the 
word of God be proclaimed in a church ?" They then 
hurried Farel along with them, opened the doors of the 
hospital chapel, set the minister in the pulpit, and a nu« 
merous crowd stood silent before him. " In like manner 
as Jesus Christ, appearing in a state of poverty and 
humility, was born in a stable at Bethlehem," said the 
reformer; "so this hospital, this abode of the sick and 
of the poor, is to-day become his birthplace in the town 
of Neufchatel." Then feeling ill at ease in the presence 
of the painted and carved figures that decorated the 
chapel, he laid his hands on these objects of idolatry, 
removed them, and broke them in pieces.f 

Popery, which anger had blinded, now took a step 
that it undoubtedly had a right to take, but which de- 
stroyed it ; it had recourse to the secular arm, and the 
governor sent a deputation to the Bernese council, pray- 
ing the removal of Farel and his companions. 

But almost at the same time deputies from the towns- 
people arrived at Berne. " Did not these hands bear arms 
at Interlaken and at Bremgarten to support your reforma/ 
tion ?" said they, " and will you abandon us in ours 
* Tren^ leB entraive*. f Choupftrd MS. 



THE BANNERET'S llESSAOE. 357 



Berne hesitated. A public calamity was at that time 
filling the whole city with mourning. One of the most 
illustrious citizens of the republic, the banneret of Wein- 
garten, attacked by the plague, was expiring amid the 
tears of his sons and of his fellow-citizens. Being in« 
formed of the arrival of the Neufchatelans, he rallied hia 
waning strength : Go,'' said he, " and beg the senate in 
my name to ask for a general assembly of the people of 
Neufchatel for Sunday next."* This message of the 
dying banneret decided the council. 

The deputies from Berne arrived in Neufchatel on 
the 7th of August. Farel thought that during the de- 
bates he had time to make a new conquest, and quitted 
the city. His zeal can be compared only to St. PauPa. 
His body was small and feeble, but his activity was 
wholly apostolic ; danger and bad treatment wasted 
him every day, but he had within him a divine power 
that rendered him victorious. 

* Wingarterus iste infectus peste apud Benatum noetrata, pla 
Icgatioae. Meg&nder to Zwingle. 



368 HlSTOIiY 0^ THE REFORMATION 



CHAPTER VII. 

Valangin — Guillemette de Vergy — Farel goes to the Val dc Rnz— 
The mass interrupted — Farel dragged to the river— Farel la 
prison — Apostles and reformers compared — Farel preaching ftt 
Neufchatel — Installed in the cathedral — A whirlwind sweeps over 
the people — The idols destroyed — Interposition of the governor — 
Triumph of the reformed. 

At the distance of a league from Neufchatel, beyond 
the mountain, extends the Val de Ruz, and near its en- 
trance, in a precipitous situation, where roars an impet- 
uous torrent surrounded by steep crags, stands the town 
of Valangin. An old castle built on a rock raises its 
vast walls into the air, overlooking the humble dwellings 
of the townspeople, and extending its jurisdiction over 
five valleys of these lofty and severe mountains, at that 
time covered with forests of pine, but now peopled by 
the most active industry.* 

In this castle dwelt Guillemette de Vergy dowager- 
countess of Valangin, strongly attached to the Romish 
religion, and full of respect for the memory of her hus- 
band. A hundred priests had chanted high mass at the 
count's burial, when many penitent young women had 
been married, and large alms distributed : the curate of 
Locle had been sent to Jerusalem, and Guillemette her- 
self had made a pilgrimage for the repose of the soul of 
her departed lord. 

Sometimes, however, the countess of Gruy^re and 
other ladies would come and visit the widow of Vergy, 
who assembled in the castle a number of young lords. 
The fife and tambourine re^'choed under its vaulted roofs, 
chattering groups collected in the immense embrasures 
of its gothic windows, and merry dances followed hard 
upon a long silence and gloomy devotion.f There was 
but one sentiment that never left Guillemette — this was 

• Here are situated Chaux de Fjnds, Locle, etc. f Cham' 

brier, Hist, de Neufchatel, p. 276. 



THE MASS INTERRUPTED. 



359 



ber hatred against the Reformation, in which she waa 
warmly seconded by her intendent, the sieur of Belle- 
garde. 

Guillemette and the priests had in fact reason to 
tremble. The 15th of August was a great Romish fes- 
tival, Our Lady of August, or the Assumption, which all 
the faithful of the Val de Ruz were preparing to keep. 
This was the very day Farel selected. Animated by the 
fire and courage of Elijah, he set out for Valangin, and 
a young man, his fellow-countryman, and as it would 
appear a distant relation, Anthony Boyve, an ardent 
Christian and a man of decided character, accompanied 
him.* The two missionaries climbed the mountain, 
plunged into the pine forest, and then descending again 
into the valley, traversed Valangin, where the vicinity 
of the castle did not give them much encouragement to 
pause, and arrived at a village, probably Boudevilliers, 
proposing to preach the gospel there.f 

Already on all sides the people were thronging to 
the church ; Farel and his companion entered also, with 
a small number of the inhabitants who had heard him 
at Neufchatel. The reformer immediately ascended the 
pulpit, and the priest prepared to celebrate the mass 
The combat began. While Farel was preaching Jesus 
Christ and his promises, the priest and the choir were 
chanting the missal. The solemn moment approached ; 
the ineffable transubstantiation was about to take place ; 
the priest pronounced the sacred words over the ele- 
ments. At this instant the people hesitate no longer; 
ancient habits, an irresistible influence, draw them tow- 
ards the altar ; the preacher is deserted ; the kneeling 
crowd has recovered its old worship ; Rome is trium- 
phant Suddenly a young man springs from the throng, 

* Annals of Boyve and a family MS. This family hai? since 
^ven several pastors to the church of Neufchatel. f There are 
two original manuscripts, both quoted in the Choupard MS., which 
give an account of this transaction. One says that Farel preached 
at Valangin, the other indicates a village near Valangin, Ruchat 
has adopted the former version *, I think the latter preferable. The 
teoond MS. appears to me older and more correct than the tot. 



360 HISTOEY OF THE REFORMATIOJST 



traverses the choir, rushes to the altar, snatches the 
host from the hands of the priest, and cries, as he turns 
towards the people, "This is not the God whom you 
should worship. He is above, in heaven, in the majesty 
of the Father, and not as you believe, in the hands of a 
priest."* This man was Anthony Boyve. 

Such a daring act at first produced the desired eSect, 
The mass was interrupted, the chanting ceased, and the 
crowd, as if struck by a supernatural intervention, re- 
mained silent and motionless. Farel, who was still in 
the pulpit, immediately took advantage of this calm, and 
proclaimed that Christ " whom the heaven must receive 
until the times of restitution of all things." Acts 3 : 21. 
Upon this the priests and choristers with their adhe- 
rents rushed to the towers, ran up into the belfry, and 
sounded the tocsin. 

These means succeeded ; a crowd was collected, and 
if Farel had not retired, his death and Boyve's would 
aave been inevitable. **But God," says the chronicle, 
delivered them." They crossed the interval that sep- 
arates Boudevilliers from Valangin, and drew near the 
steep gorges of the torrent of the Seyon. But how trav 
erse that town, which the tocsin had already alarmed ? 

Leaving Chaumont and its dark forests to the left, 
these two heralds of the gospel took a narrow path that 
wound beneath the castle : they were stealing cautiously 
along, when suddenly a shower of stones assailed them, 
and at the same time a score of individuals, priests, 
men, and women, armed with clubs, fell furiously upon 
them. "The priests had not the gout either in their 
feet or arms," says the chronicler ; the ministers were 
so beaten that they nearly lost their lives."f 

Madame de Vergy, who descended to the terrace^ 
far from moderating the anger of the priests, cried out, 
"Drown them, drown them ; throw them into the Seyon ; 
these Lutheran dogs, who have despised the hostl"| 

* Choupard MS. f Les pretres n'avoient pas la goutte aux piedi 
et aux bras, et ils les battirent tellemeat que peu s^en fallut qu'ils ne 
perdissent la vie. Ibid. t A Teau, a Peau! jettez les dana l€ 

Seyon ces chlenB de Luth^riens qui out m^pris^ le boo Dieu ! Ibid, 



THE REFORMERS IMPRISONBD. 361 



In fact the priests were beginning to drag the two 
heretics towards the bridge. Never was Farel nearer 
death. 

On a sudden, from behind the last rock that hides 
Valangin in the direction of the mountain, there ap- 
j)eared certain good persons of the Val de Ruz, coming 
ft'om Neufchatel"* and descending into the valley. 

What are you doing asked they of the priests, with 
the intention no doubt of saving Farel ; put them 
rather in a place of safety, that they may answer for 
their proceedings ? Would you deprive yourselves of 
the only means in your power of discovering those in- 
fected by the poison of heresy ?" 

The priests left off at these words, and conducted 
the prisoners to the castle. As they were passing before 
a little chapel which contained an image of the Virgin, 
" Kneel down," said they to Farel and Boy ve, showing 
them the statue; "prostrate yourselves before Our 
Lady." Farel began to admonish them : " Worship one 
God alone, in spirit and in truth," said he to them, 
**and not dumb images without life or power." But 
they, continues the chronicle, greatly vexed at his 
words and his firmness, inflicted on him so many blows, 
that he was covered with blood, which even spirted on 
the walls of the chapel. For a long time after, the traces 
of it might still be seen."f 

They resumed their march ; they entered the town ; 
they cli:nbed the steep road that led to the esplanade 
where Guillemette de Vergy and her attendants waited 
for the Lutherans ;" so that, continues the chronicle, 
"from beating them thus continually, they were con- 
ducted all covered with filth and blood to the prisons, 
and let down almost lifeless into the dungeon (croton) 
of the castle of Valangin." Thus had Paul at Lystra 
been stoned by the Jews, drawn out of the city, and left 
for dead. Acts 14 : 19. The apostles and the reft rm- 

* Choupard MS. f Ibid. Mais eux, rudemcnt fach^s de seg 
propos et Constance, lui donnerent tant de coups, qu'ils le mirent tout 
en sang, jusques la que son sang jaillissoit sur les murailles db U 
dhapelle. On en voyoit long temps apres encore les marquea 

Hist of R«f; lY 



303 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



ers preached the same doctrine and suffered the same 
treatment. 

It may perhaps be said that Farel and Boyve were 
too violent in their attack ; but the church of the middle 
ages, which had fallen back into the legal spirit of Ju- 
daism, and into all the corruptions that flow from it, 
needed an energetic opposition to lead it again to tho 
principle of grace. Augustine and St. Paul reappeared 
in the church of the sixteenth century; and when we 
read of Boyve rushing in great emotion on those who 
were about to worsiiip the bread of the mass, may we 
not recall to mind the action of St. Paul, rending his 
clothes, and running in among the people, who were 
desirous of worshipping " men of like passions with 
themselves?'' Acts 14 : 14. 

Farel and Boyve, thrust into the dungeons of the 
castle, could, like Paul and Silas in the prison at Phi- 
lippi, " sing praises unto God," Messire de Bellegarde, 
ever ready to persecute the gospel, was preparing for 
them a cruel end, when some townsmen of Neufchatel 
arrived to claim them. Madame de Valangin dared not 
refuse, and at the demand of the Bernese even instituted 
an inquiry, " to put a good face on the matter," says a 
manuscript. " Nevertheless the priest who had beaten 
Farel most, never after failed to eat daily at the lady's 
table, by way of recompense."* But this was of little 
consequence : the seed of truth had been sown in the 
Val de Ruz. 

At Neufchatel the Bernese supported the evangelical 
citizens. The governor, whose resources were exhaust- 
ed, sent deputies to the princess, " begging her to cross 
the mountains to appease her people, who were in terrible 
trouble in consequence of this Lutheran religion."f 

Meantime the ferment increased. The townspeople 
prayed the canons to give up the mass ; they refused ; 
whereupon the citizens preeented them their reasons in 
writing, and begged them to discuss the question with 
Farel. Still the same refusal. " But, for goodness' sake, 
speak either for or against." It was of no use. 

* Gboupard MS. f Letter from the governor tc the prineefii. 



IStTCCESS 0^ THE PEOPLE 



363 



On Sunday, the 23d of October, Farel, who had re- 
turned to Neufchatel, was preaching at the hospital. 
He knew that the magistrates of the city had deliberated 
on the expediency of consecrating the cathedral itself to 
the evangelical worship. ** What then," said he, will 
yo*: not pay as much honor to the gospel as the other 
party does to the mass ? . . . . And if this superstitious 
act is celebrated in the high church, shall not the gospel 
be proclaimed there also At these words all his hear- 
ers arose. " To the church," cried they, " to the church I" 
Impetuous men are desirous of putting their hands to 
the work, to accomplish what the prudence of the bur- 
gesses had proposed.* They leave the hospital, and 
take Farel with them. They climb the steep street of 
the castle : in vain would the canons and their fright- 
ened followers stop the crowd ; they force a passage. 
Convinced that they are advancing for God^s glory, 
nothing can check them. Insults and shouts assail them 
from every side, but in the name of the truth they are 
defending they proceed; they open the gates of the 
church of Our Lady ; they enter, and here a fresh strug- 
gle begins. The canons and their friends assembled 
around the pulpit endeavor to stop Farel, but all is 
useless. They have not to deal with a band of rioters. 
God has pronounced in his word, and the magistrates 
themselves have passed a definitive resolution. The 
townspeople advance, therefore, against the sacerdotal 
coterie ; they form a close battalion, in the centre of 
which they place the reformer. They succeed in making 
their way through the opposing crowd, and at last 
place the minister in the pulpit without any harm be- 
falling him.f 

* This is the conclusion I draw from various papers, and in par- 
ticular from the report of the meeting held at Neufchatel by the 
Bernese deputies, in which the heads of the burgesses declare, th4i£ 
it appeared to them a very good matter to take down the altars, 
etc. llitherto only one phasis ol this action has been seen, the 
popular movement ; and the other, namely, the legal resolution ol 
the magistrates of the city, appears to have been overlooked 

t Choupard MS. 



364 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



Immediately all is calm within the church and with- 
out ; even the adversaries are silent ; and Farel delivers 
"one of the most effective sermons he had hitherto 
preached." Their eyes are opened ; their emotion in- 
creases; their hearts are melted; the most obstinate 
appear converted ; and from every part of the old churcb. 
these cries resound : " We will follow the evangelicaJ 
religion, both we and our children, and in it will we live 
and die."* 

Suddenly a whirlwind, as it were, sweeps over this 
multitude, and stirs it up like a vast sea. FarePs hear- 
ers desire to imitate the pious king Josiah. 2 Chroa 
34 : t. " If we take away these idols from before our 
eyes, will it not be aiding us," said they, **in taking 
them from our own hearts ? Once these idols broken, 
how many souls among our fellow-citizens, now dis- 
turbed and hesitating, will be decided by this striking 
manifest£ition of the truth. We must save them as it 
were by dre."f 

This latter motive decided them, and then began a 
scene that filled the Romanists with horror, and which 
must, according to them, bring down the terrible judg- 
ment of God on the city. 

The very spot where this took place would seem to 
add to its solemnity. To the north, the castle walls rise 
above the pointed crags of the gloomy but picturesque 
valley of the Seyon, and the mountain in front of the 
castle presents to the observer's eye little more than 
bare rocks, vines, and black firs. But to the south, be- 
neath the terrace on which this tumultuous scene was 
passing, lay the wide and tranquil waters of the lake, 
with its fertile and picturesque shores ; and in the dis- 
tance the continuous summits of the higher Alps, with 
their dazzling snows, their immense glaciers, and gigan- 
tic peaks, stretch far away before the enraptured eye. 

On this platform the people of Neufchatel were itt 
commotion, paying little attention to these noble scenes 
of nature. The governor, whose castle adjoined the 
churchy was compelled to remain an idle spectator of tha 
♦ Choupard MS. t Ibid. 



THE IDOLS DESTROYED. 



excesses that he could not prevent ; he was content to 
leave us a description of them. " These daring fellows," 
says he, " seize mattocks, hatchets, and hammers, and 
thus march against the images of the saints." They 
advance — they strike the statues and the altars — they 
dash them to pieces. The figures carved in the four- 
teenth century by the " images " of Count Louis are not 
spared ; and scarcely do the statues of the counts them- 
selves, which were mistaken for idols, escape destruc- 
tion. The townspeople collect all these fragments of an 
idolatrous worship — they carry them out of the church, 
and throw them from the top of the rock. The paintings 
meet with no better treatment. " It is the devil," thought 
they with the early Christians, who taught the world 
this art of statues, images, and all sorts of likenesses."* 
They tear out the eyes in the pictures of the saints, and 
cut off their noses. The crucifix itself is thrown down, 
for this wooden figure usurps the homage that Jesus 
Christ claims in the heart. One image, the most ven- 
erated of all, still remains : it is Our Lady of Mercy, 
which Mary of Savoy had presented to the collegiate 
church ; but Our Lady herself is not spared. A hand 
more daring than the rest strikes it, as in the fourth cen- 
tury the colossal statue of Serapis was struck.f " They 
have even bored out the eyes of Our Lady of Mercy, 
which the departed lady your mother had caused to be 
made," wrote the governor to the Duchess of Longueville 
The reformed went still further : they seized the 
patens in which lay the corpus Domini^ and flung them 
from the top of the rock into the torrent ; after which, 
being desirous of showing that the consecrated wafers 
are mere bread, and not God himself, they distributed 

them one to another and ate them At this sight 

the canons and chaplains could no longer remain quiet. 
A cry of horror was heard ; they ran up with their ad- 
herents, and opposed force to force. At length began 
the struggle that had been so much dreaded. 

* Diabolum saeculo iutulisse artifices 8tatuarum et imagiuun) 
omuls generis simuiacroriim. TertuUiaa, de idolatria, cap. 3. 
t Socrates 5. 16. 



368 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



The provost Oliver of Hochberg, the canons Simon 
of Neufchatel and Pontus of Soleilant, all three members 
of the privy council, had repaired hastily to the castle, 
as well as the other councillors of the princess. Until 
this moment they had remained silent spectators of the 
scene : but when they saw the two parties coming to 
blows, they ordered all " the supporters of the evangeli- 
cal doctrine" to appear before the governor. This was 
like trying to chain the winds. Besides, why should the 
reformers stop ? They were not acting without legiti- 
mate authority.* " Tell the governor," replied the towns- 
people haughtily, " that in the concerns of God and of 
our souls he has no command over us."f 

George de Rive then discovered that his authority 
failed against a power superior to his own. He must 
yield, and save at least some remnants. He hastened 
therefore to remove the images that still remained, and 
to shut them up in secret chambers. The citizens of 
Neufchatel allowed him to execute this measure. Save 
your gods," thought they, " preserve them under strong 
bars, lest perchance a robber should deprive you of the 
objects of your adoration 1"| By degrees the tumult 
died away, the popular torrent returned within its chan- 
nel ; and a short time after, in commemoration of this 
great day, these words were inscribed on a pillar of the 
church : 

L'AN 1530, LE 23 OCTOBRE, FUT OTEE ET ABATTUB 
LTOOLATRIE DE CEANT PAR LES BOURGEOIS. § 

An immense revolution had been effected. Doubtless 
it would have been better if the images had been taken 
away and the gospel substituted in their place with 
calmness, as at Zurich ; but we must take into consid- 

* " Par les quatre du dit Neufchatel," by the Four — the munici- 
pal authorities — of the said Neufchatel, remarks the priest Besance- 
net. See also the recess of the council held at Neufchatel by MM. 
of Berae, November 4, 1530. f The governor's letter to the 

princess. % Cur vos sub validissimis clavibus, ingentibusque 

Bub claustris conservatis, ne forte fur aliquis irreptat? Arnobiua 
contra, gentes, 6. 257. § On the 23d of October, 1530, idolatry 
was overthrown and removed from this church by the citizens 



TRIUMPH OF THE REFORM. 



367 



cration the diiBculties that so profound and contested a 
change brings with it, and make allowance for the inex- 
perience and excesses inseparable from a first explosion. 
He who should see in this revolution its excesses only, 
would betray a singularly narrow mind. It is the gos^ 
pel that triumphed on the esplanade of the castle. It 
was no longer a few pictures or legends that were to 
speak to the imagination of the Neufchatelans : the rev- 
elation of Christ and of the apostles, as it had been pre- 
served in the holy Scriptures, was restored to them. Id 
place of the mysteries, symbols, and miracles of Popery, 
the Reformation brought tliem sublime tenets, powerful 
doctrines, holy and eternal truths. Instead of a mass 
void of God, and filled with human puerilities, it restored 
to them the supper of our Lord Jesus Christ, his invisi- 
ble yet real and mighty presence, his promises giving 
peace to the soul, and his Spirit which changes the 
teart, and is a sure pledge of a glorious resurrectfou. 
All is gain in such a.n exchange. 



368 



HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 



CHAPTER VIII. 

The Romanists demand a ballot — The Bernese in favor of the 
form - -Both parties come to the poll — The Prudhommes of Neuf 
jhatel — Proposed delay — The Romanists grasp the sword — The 
voting — Majority for reform — Protestantism perpetual — The im^ 
age of Saint John — A miracle — Retreat of the canons — Popery 
and the gospel. 

The governor and his trusty friends had not, how- 
ever, lost all hope. It is only a minority,'' said they 
at the castle, " which has taken part in the destructioi 
of the images ; the majority of the nation still obeys the 
ancient doctrine." M. de Rive had yet to learn that if, 
in a popular movement, the minority only appears, it is 
in some cases because the majority, being of the same 
mind with it, prefers leaving the action to others. How 
ever that may be, the governor, thinking himself upon 
sure ground, resolved to put the preservation of the mass 
to the vote. If the majority were doubtful, the combined 
influence of the government and clergy would make it 
incline to the side of Rome. The friends of the Reforma- 
tion perceiving this trick, and feeling the necessity erf 
securing the integrity of the votes, demanded the pres- 
ence of Bernese commissioners. This was at first re- 
fused. But Neufchatel, divided into two hostile parties, 
might at any time see her streets run blood ; De Rive 
therefore called Berne to his aid. 

Anthony Noll and Sulpice Archer, both members of 
the council, with Jacques Tribolet, bailiff of the Isle of 
St. John, all three devoted to the reform, made their 
entry into Neufchatel on the 4th of November — an event- 
ful day for the principality, and one which would decide 
its reformation. The deputies proceeded to the castle, 
where they spoke with great haughtiness.* "Their 
excellencies of Berne," said they to the governor, are 
* Trois ambassadeurs qui me tinrent assez gros et rudes propoa 
The governor the princess 



ASSEMBLY OF THE PEOPLE. 



369 



niQch astonished that you should oppose the true and 
pure word of God. Desist immediately, or else your 
state and lordship may suffer for it."* 

George de Rive was amazed ; he had thought to sum- 
mon helpers, and he had found masters. He made, how- 
ever, an attempt to escape from the strait in which he 
was caught. The Roman-catholic cantons of Lucerne, 
Friburg, and Soleure, were also allies of the state. The 
governor insinuated to the Bernese deputies, that he 
might well claim their intervention. At these words 
the deputies indignantly arose, and declared to M. de 
Rive, that if he did so, he might be the cause of his 
sovereign's losing Neufchatel. The governor saw the 
impossibility of escaping from the net into which he had 
fallen. There remained no alternative but submission, 
and to watch the current of events which it was impos- 
sible for him to direct. 

It was not thus with the canons and the nobles. Not 
considering themselves beaten, they surrounded the Ber- 
nese ; and mingling religion and politics, as is their wont 
in similar cases, endeavored to shake them. Do you 
not see," said they, that unless we support the spirit- 
ual power, we shall compromise the civil power ? The 
surest bulwark of the throne is the altar. These men, 
whose defenders you have become, are but a handful 
of mischief-makers : the majority are for the mass.'' 
"Turn which way you like," replied one of the stub- 
born Bernese, " even though the majority should be on 
your side, still you must go that way ; never will our 
lordships abandon the defenders of the evangelical 
faith."t 

The people assembled at the castle for the definitive 
vote. The destiny of Neufchatel was about to be de- 
cided. On one hand were crowded around the governor 
the privy council, the canons, and the most zealous of 
the Romanists ; on the other, were to be seen the four 
aldermen, the town-council, and a great number of the 

* The governor to the princess. f Chambrier, Hist, de 

Neufchatel, p. 296. The governor's letter. Quand bien le plus 
sera des votres, si passerez vous par la, etc. 

24 



870 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIO!?. 



citizens, gravely ascending the steep avenue leading tJ 
the government-house, and drawing up in front of theii 
adversaries. On both sides there was the same attach- 
ment to their faith and the same decision ; but around 
the canons were many anxious minds, troubled hearts, 
and downcast eyes, while the friends of the reform ad- 
vanced with uplifted heads, firm looks, and hearts full 
of hope. 

George de Rive, wishing to gain over their minds, 
began to a*ddress them. He described the violence with 
which the reformed had broken the images and thrown 
down the altars : " And yet," continued he, " who found- 
ed this church ? It was the princess' predecessors, and 
not the citizens. For which reason, I demand that all 
those who have violently infringed our sovereign's au- 
thority, be obliged to restore what they have taken 
away, so that the holy mass and the canonical hours 
may be celebrated anew."* 

Upon this the prudhommes of Neufchatel advanced. 
They were not a troop of young and giddy persons, as 
the papists had pretended; they were grave citizens, 
whose liberties were guaranteed, and who had weighed 
what they had to say. By the illumination of the Holy 
Ghost," replied they, " and by the holy doctrines of the 
gospel, which are taught us in the pure word of God, 
we will show that the mass is an abuse, without any 
utility, and which conduces much more to the damnation 
than to the salvation of souls. And we are ready to 
prove, that by taking away the altars, we have done 
nothing that was not right and acceptable to 6od."f 

Thus the two parties met face to face with "great 
hatred and division," says the Bernese report. The 
arbitrators consulted together. The governor persisted, 
feeling that this movement would decide the future. A 
few votes would suffice for the triumph of Rome, and he 
reckoned on gaining them by his assurance. "Icon 
should understand," said he, " that the majority of this 
town, men and women, adhere firmly to the ancient faith. 
The others are hot-headed young soldiers, vain of tbeii 
* Qhoupard MS. ; Recea du MM. 4e Berae. f IWL 



DECI810XI OF THE REPOEMED. 37i 



persons, and puffed up with the new doctrine."* Well,'' 
replied the Bernese deputies, " to prevent all mischief, 
let us s^^ttle this difference by the plurality of suffrages, 
in accordance with the treaty of peace made at Brem- 
garten between the cantons." 

This was what the reformed desired. " The vote, the 
vote 1" cried they according to the expression conse- 
crated to such cases.f But the lord of Prangins and the 
priests, who had desired it when they were alone, shrunk 
back in the presence of Berne. " We ask for time," said 
they. If the reformed allowed themselves to be cheated 
by these dilatory measures, all was over. When once 
the Bernese had quitted Neufchatel, the governor and the 
clergy would easily have the upperhand. They there- 
fore remained firm. " No, no," said they, " now : no 
delay ; not a day, not an hour." But the governor, in 
the face of a proceeding that would decide the legal fall 
of Popery, trembled, and obstinately opposed the cries 
of the people. The magistrates were already indignant, 
the burghers murmured, and the most violent looked at 
their swords. " They were resolved to compel us, sword 
in hand," wrote the governor to the princess. A fresh 
storm was gathering over Neufchatel. Yet a few more 
minutes' resistance, and it would burst forth upon the 
church, the town, and the castle, destroying not only 
statues, images, and altars, but "there would have re- 
mained dead men," said the lord of Rive.| He gave 
way in trouble and affright. 

At the news of this concession, the partisans of Rome 
saw all their danger. They conferred, they concerted 
their measures, and in an instant their resolution was 
taken : they were resolved to fight. § " My lord," said 
they, turning to M. de Rive, and touching the hilt of 
their swords, all of us who adhere to the holy sacra- 

• Devez entendre que la pluspart de cette ville, hommes et 
femmes, tiennent fermement a I'ancienne foi. Les autres sont 
Jeunes gens de guerre, forts de leurs personnes, remplis de la nou- 
velle doctrine, ajants le feu a la tete. Choupard MS. ; Reces da 
MM. de Berne. f Le plus, the majority. J The governof'i 
lieticr to the princess. ^ Ibi4. 



372 HISTOEY OF THE EEFORMATIOK. 



ment are resolved to die martyrs for our holy faith.*^ 
This demonstration did not escape the notice of the 
young soldiers who had returned from the Genevese war. 
One minute more and the swords would have been 
drawn, and the platform changed into a battle-field. 

Monseigneur de Prangins, more wily than orthodox, 
shuddered at the thought. " I cannot suffer it," said he 
to the most violent of his party; "such an enterprise 
would forfeit my mistress' state and lordship.^f **I 
consent," said he to the Bernese, "to take the votes, 
with reserve, nevertheless, of the sovereignty, rights, and 
lordship of Madame." ** And we," replied the townspeo- 
ple, " with the reserve of our liberties and privileges." 

The Romanists, seeing the political power they had 
invoked now failing them, felt that all was lost. They 
will save their honor at least in this great shipwreck; 
they will subscribe their names, that posterity may know 
who had remained faithful to Rome. These proud sup- 
porters of the hierarchy advanced towards the governor ; 
tears coursed down their rough cheeks, betraying thus 
their stifled anger. They wrote their signatures as wit- 
nesses at the foot of the solemn testament that Popery 
was now drawing up in Neufchatel, in the presence ol 
the Bernese deputies. They then asked, with tears in 
their eyes, that " the names and surnames of the good 
and of the perverse should be written in perpetual mem- 
ory, and declared that they were still good and faithful 
burghers of Madame, and would do her service unto 
death."! 

The reformed burgesses were convinced that it was 
only by frankly bearing testimony to their religi^a6 con- 
victions that they could discharge their duty bulore God, 
their sovereign, and their fellow-citizens. So that the 
Catholics had scarcely protested their fidelity towards 
their lady, when, turning towards the governor, the 

• The governor's letter to the princess. f Ibid. 

i Alors iceux dirent en pleurant que les noms et les surnoms det 
bona et des pervers fussent ecrits en perpetuelle memoire, et quails 
protestoient etre bons et fideles bourgeois de Madame, et lui fair« 
eorvice jusqu'a la mort 



THE REFORMED VIOTORIOaS. 373 



reformed cried out, " We say the same in every othei 
thing in which it shall please our mistress to command 
UB, save and except the evangelical faith, in which we 
will live and die.''* 

Every thing was then prepared for taking the votes. 
The church of Our Lady was opened, and the two par 
ties advanced between the shattered altars, torn pic- 
tures, mutilated statues, and all those ruins of Popery, 
which clearly foretold to its partisans the last and irre- 
vocable defeat it was about to undergo. The three lords 
of Berne took their station beside the governor as arbi- 
trators of the proceedings and presidents of the assem- 
bly, and the voting began. 

George de Rive, notwithstanding the despondency of 
his friends, was not altogether without hope. All the 
partisans of the ancient worship in Neufchatel had been 
forewarned ; and but a few days previously the reformed 
themselves, by refusing a poll, had acknowledged the 
numerical superiority of their adversaries. But the 
friends of the gospel in Neufchatel had a courage and a 
hope that seemed to repose on a firmer basis. Were 
they not the victorious party, and could they be van- 
quished in the midst of their triumph ? 

The two parties, however, moved forward, confounded 
with one another, and each man gave his vote in silence. 
They counted each other : the result appeared uncer- 
tain ; fear froze each party by turns. At length the 
majority seemed to declare itself ; they took out the 
votes ; the result was proclaimed. A majority of eigh- 
teen voices gave the victory to the Reformation, and the 
last blow to the Papacy. 

The Bernese lords immediately hastened to profit by 
this advintage. " Live henceforth," said they, " in g<3od 
understanding with one another ; let the mass be no 
longer celebrated ; let no injury be done to the priests ; 
and pay to your lady, or to whomsoever they may be 
justly due, all tithes, quit-rent, cense, and revenues.'* 

* Governor's letter. Nous disons le semblable en toute autre 
chose ou il plaira a Madame nous commander, sauf et reserve icelle 
foi 6vangeUque, dans laquelle nous voulons vivre et mourir. 



874 HISTORY 0? THE RBFOHllATIOH. 



These different points were proclaimed by the assemblyj 
and a report was immediately drawn up, to which the 
deputies, the governors, and the magistrates of the city 
of Neufchatel affixed their respective seals.* 

Farel did not appear in all this business ; one might 
have said that the reformer was not at Neufchatel : the 
citizens appealed only to the word of God ; and the gov- 
ernor himself, in his long report to the princess, does 
not once mention him. It was the apostles of our Lord, 
St. Peter, St. John, St. Paul, and St. James, who by 
their divine writings reestablished the true foundations 
of the church in the midst of the people of Neufchatel. 
The word of God was the law of the prudhommes. In 
vain will the Roman church say, " But these very Scrip- 
tures, it is I who give them to you ; you cannot there- 
fore believe in them without believing in me." It is not 
from the church of Rome that the Protestant church 
receives the Bible. Protestantism has always existed 
in the church. It has existed alone in every place 
where men have been engaged in the study of the holy 
Scriptures, of their divine origin, of their interpretation, 
and in their dissemination. The Protestantism of the 
sixteenth century received the Bible from the Protes- 
tantism of every age. When Rome speaks of the hie- 
rarchy, she is on her own ground ; as soon as she speaks 
of the Scriptures, she is on ours. If Farel had been put 
forward in Neufchatel, he would not perhaps have been 
able to stand against the pope ; but the word of Christ 
alone was concerned, and Rome must fall before Jesus. 

Thus terminated, by a mutual contract, that day at 
first so threatening. If the reformed had sacrificed any 
of their convictions to a false peace, disorder would have 
been perpetuated in Neufchatel. A bold manifestation 
of the truth, and the inevitable shocks that accompanied 
It, far from destroying society, preserved it. This mani- 
festation is the wind that lifts the vessel from the rocks 
and brings it into the harbor. 

The lord of Prangins felt that, between fellow citi- 

• Reces de MM. de Berae, MS. Et que Von paie a Madams ou i 
qui 11 sera dik justement dimes, cons, rentes et revenus, 



IMAaE OF ST. JOHN 



375 



asens, " it is better to touch one another, even if it be by 
collision, than to avoid each other continually." The 
free explanation that had taken place had rendered the 
opposition of the two parties less irritating. I give 
my promise," said the governor, " to undertake nothing 
against the vote of this day, for I am myself a witness 
that it has been honest, upright, without danger, and 
without coercion."* 

It was necessary to dispose of the spoils of the van- 
quished party : the governor opened the castle to them. 
Thither were transported the relics, the ornaments of 
the altars, the church papers, and even the organ ; and 
the mass, expelled from the city, was there mournfully 
chanted every day. 

All the ornaments, however, did not take this road. 
Some days after, as two citizens named Fauciie and 
Saugc were going out together to their vineyards, they 
passed a little chapel, in which the latter had set up a 
wooden figure of St. John. Fauche said to his companion, 
"There is an image 1 shall heat my stove with to-mor- 
row." And in fact, as he returned, he carried away the 
saint and laid it down in front of his house. 

The next morning he took the image and put it on 
the fire. Immediately a horrible explosion spread dis- 
may through this humble family. The trembling Fauche 
doubted not that it was a miracle of the saint, and has- 
tened to return to the mass. In vain did his neighbor 
Sauge protest to him upon oath that, during the night, 
he had made a hole in the statue, filled it with gunpow- 
der, and closed it up again. Fauche would listen to 
nothing, and resolved to flee from the vengeance of the 
saints. He went and settled with his family at Morteau 
in Franche Comtd.* Such are the miracles upon which 
the divinity of Rome reposes 1 

By degrees every thing became settled ; some of the 
canons, as Jacques Baillod, William de Fury, and Bene- 
dict Ohanibrier, euj braced the Reformation. Others were 
recommended by the governor to the priory of Mo tiers, 

* Uagefahrlich, ungezwungen, aufrecht und redlich. Berne tc 
tLe goveruor, Dec. 17, 1530. f Boyve Aaaals, MS. 



376 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



in the Val de Travers ; and in the middle of November, 
at the time when the winds began to rage among the 
mountains, several canons, surrounded by a few sinf^- 
ing-boys — sad relics of the ancient, powerful, rich, vo- 
luptuous, and haughty chapter of Neufchatel — painfully 
tlimbed the gorges of the Jura, and went to conceal in 
these lofty and picturesque valleys the disgrace of a 
defeat which their long disorders and their insupporta* 
ble tyranny had but too justly provoked. 

During this time the new worship was organized. 
In room of the high-altar were substituted two mar bio 
tables to receive the bread and wine, and the word of 
God was preached from a pulpit stripped of every orna 
ment. The prefe'minence of the word, which characterizes 
the evangelical worship, replaced in the church of Neuf- 
chatel the preeminence of the sacrament, which charac- 
terizes Popery. Towards the end of the second century, 
Rome, that ancient metropolis of all religions, after hav- 
ing welcomed the Christian worship in its primitive 
purity, had gradually transformed it into mysteries ; a 
magic power had been ascribed to certain forms ; and 
the reign of the sacrifice ofifered by the priest had suc- 
ceeded to the reign of the word of God. The preaching 
of Farel had restored the word to the rights which be- 
longed to it; and those vaulted roofs, which the piety 
of Count Ulric II. had, on his return from Jerusalem, 
dedicated to the worship of the Virgin, served at last, 
after four centuries, to nourish the faithful, as in che 
time of the apostles, " in the words of faith and of go'^d 
doctrine." I Tina. 4 ; 6. 



EBACTION PEEPi^EIKa. 



377 



CHAPTER IX 

Reaction preparing — Failure of the plot — Farel in Valangia and 
near the lake — De B^ly at Fontaine — FarePs sufferings — Mar« 
court at Valangin — Disgraceful expedient — Vengeance — The 
reform established — French Switzerland characterized — Gather- 
ing tempest. 

The convention drawn up under the mediation of 
Berne stipulated that "the change should take place 
only in the city and parish of Neufchatel." Must the 
rest of the country remain in darkness ? This was not 
FarePs wish, and the zeal of the citizens, in its first fer- 
vor, effectually seconded him. They visited the sur- 
rounding villages, exhorting some, combating others. 
Those who were convpelled to labor with their hands 
during the day went thither at night. "Now, I am 
informed," writes the governor to the princess, "that 
they are working at a reformation night and day." 

George de Rive in alarm convoked the magistrates 
of all the districts in the earldom. These good folks 
believed that their consciences, as well as their places, 
depended upon Madame de Longueville. Affrighted at 
the thought of freely receiving a new conviction from 
the word of God, they were quite ready to accept it from 
the countess as they would a new impost — a sad helot- 
ism, in which religion springs from the soil, instead of 
descending from heaven. " We desire to live and die 
under the protection of our lady," said the magistrates 
to the lord of Rive, " without changing the ancient faith, 
until it be so ordered by herJ^* Rome, even after her fall, 
could not receive a deeper insult 

These assurances of fidelity and the absence of the 
Bernese restored De Rivers confidence, and he secretly 
prepared a reaction among the nobles and the l^wer 

• Choupard MS. Nous voulons vivre et mourir fious la protec- 
tion de Madame, sans changer Pancienne foifjusqu^ ^ ce que parelh 
911 $9it ordonni. 



378 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



classes. There is in every historical catastrophe, in the 
fall of great establishments, and in the spectacle of theii 
ruins, something which excites and improves the mind. 
This was what happened at the period in question. 
Some were more zealous for popery after its fall than in 
itw day of power. The clergy gliding into the houses 
said mass to a few friends mysteriously called together 
aivvund a temporary altar. If a child was born, the 
piiest noiselessly arrived, breathed on the infant, made 
the sign of the cross on its forehead and breast, and 
baptized* it according to the Roman ritual.f Thus they 
were rebuilding in secret what had been overthrown in 
the light of day. At length a counter-revolution was 
agreed upon, and Christmas-day was selected for the 
restoration of Roman-catholicism. While the Christians' 
Bongs of joy should be rising to heaven, the partisans 
of Rome were to rush into the church, expel the hereti- 
cal assembly, overthrow the pulpit and the holy table, 
restore the images, and celebrate the mass in triumph. 
Such was the plan of the Neufchatelan vespers.J 

The plot got wind. Deputies from Berne arrived at 
Neufchatel on the very eve of the festival. You must 
see to this," said they to the governor ; ** if the reformed 
are attacked, we their coburghers will protect them with 
all our power." The conspirators laid down their arms, 
and the Christmas hymns were not disturbed. 

This signal deliverance augmented the devotion and 
zeal of the friends of the gospel. Already Emer Beynon 
of Serri^re, where Farel had one day landed from a small 
boat, ascending the pulpit, had said to his parishioners, 
" If I have been a good priest, I desire by the grace of 
Ood to be a still better pastor." It was necessary for 
these words to be heard from every pulpit. Farel re- 
commenced a career of labors, fatigues, and struggles, 
'3^?hich the actions of the apostles and missionaries alone 
can equal. 

Towards the end of the year 1530, he crossed the 
mountain in the middle of winter, entered the church ol 

• See Vol. I. p. 151 bot. f Berne to Neufchatel, Decembei 17. 
t Berne to the Governor, December 23, 



DE BELY AT FONTAIHE. 



379 



ValaDgin, went into the pulpit, and began to preach at 
the very moment that Guillemette de Vergy was coming 
to mass. She endeavored to shut the reformer's mouth, 
but in vain, and the aged and noble dowager retired 
precipitately, saying, I do not think this is according 
to the old gospels ; if there are any new ones that en- 
courage it, 1 am quite amazed."* The people of Valaa- 
gin embraced the gospel. The affrighted lieutenant ran 
to Neufchatel, thence to Berne, and on the 11th of Feb- 
ruary, 1531, laid his complaint before the council ; but 
all was useless. " Why," said their excellencies of Berne 
to him, " why should you disturb the water of the river? 
let it flow freely on." 

Farel immediately turned to the parishes on the 
slopes between the lake and mount Jura. At Corcelles 
a fanatic crowd, well armed and led on by the curate of 
Neufchatel, rushed into the church where the minister 
was preaching, and he did not escape without a wound. 
At Bevay the abbot John of Livron and hia monks col- 
lected a numerous body of friends, surrounded the church, 
and having thus completed the blockade, entered the 
building, dragged the minister from the pulpit, and drove 
him out with blows and insults. Each time he reap- 
peared, they pursued him as far as Au vernier with stones 
and gun-shots. 

While Farel was thus preaching in the plain, he sent 
one of his brethren into the valley ; it was John de Bely, 
a man of good family from Crest in Dauphiny. Beyond 
Valangin, at a little distance from Fontaine, on the left 
side of the road to Cernier, was a stone that remains 
to this day. Here in the open air, as if in a magnificent 
temple, thie herald of the gospel began to proclaim sal- 
vation by grace.f Before him stretched the declivity of 
Chaumont, dotted with the pretty villages of Fenin, Vil- 

• Chambrier, Hist, de Neufchatel et Valangin, p. 299. Je ne 
orois pas que ce so t seloa les vieux ^vangiles 5 s'U y en a de noa- 
voaux qui fassent cela faire, j'en suis esbahie. f It Joes not 

appear that Bely could have stood and preached on this stone, as 
Is generally said, unlesd what now remainii is but a fra^^meot of the 
original. 



380 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



lars, Sole, and Savagnier, and beyond, where the moan* 
tains fell away, might be seen the distant and pictu- 
resque chain of the Alps. The most zealous of his hear* 
ers entreated him to enter the church. He did so ; but 
suddenly the priest and his curate " arrived with great 
noise." They proceeded to the pulpit, dragged Bdly 
down; and then turning to the women and young per- 
sons of the place, excited them to beat him and drive 
aim away."* 

John de Bdly returned to Neufchatel, hooted and 
bruised, like his friend after the affair at Valangin ; but 
these evangelists followed the traces of the apostle Paul, 
whom neither whips nor scourges could arrest. 2 Cor. 
11 : 24, 25. De Bely often returned to Fontaine. The 
mass was abolished erelong in this village ; B^ly was 
its pastor for twenty-seven years ; his descendants have 
more than once exercised the ministry there, and now 
they form the most numerous family of agriculturists in 
the place. 

Farel, after evangelizing the shores of the lake to 
the south of Neufchatel, had gone to the north and 
preached at St. Blaise. The populace, stirred up by the 
priests and the lieutenant, had fallen upon him, and 
Farel escaped from their hands, severely beaten, spit- 
ting blood, and scarcely to be recognized. His friends 
had thrown him hurriedly into a boat, and conveyed 
him to Morat, where his wounds detained him for soine 
time.f 

At the report of this violence the reformed Neuf 
cbatelans felt their blood boil. If the lieutenant, the 
priest, and his flock have bruised the body of Christ's 
servant, which is truly the altar of the living God, why 
should they spare dead idols ? Immediately they rush 
to St. Blaise, throw down the images, and do the same 
at the abbey of Fontaine-Andrd, a sanctuary of the an- 
cient worship. 

The images still existed at Valangin, but their last 
nour was about to strike. A Frenchman, Anthony Map 

* MS. AA. in the Choupard MS. f De Perrot ; L'Egline el 
la Reformation, 2. 233. 



THE INSULT AVENGED 



381 



conrt, had been nominated pastor of Neufchatel. Tread- 
ing in FarePs footsteps, he repaired with a few of the 
citizens tu Valangin on the 14th of June, a great holiday 
in that town.* Scarcely had they arrived, when a nu- 
morons crowd pressed around the minister, listening to 
his words. The canons, who were on the watch in their 
houses, and Madame de Vergy and M. de Bellegarde 
from their towers, sought how they could make a diver- 
sion against this heretical preaching. They could not 
employ force because of Berne. They had recourse to a 
brutal expedient worthy of the darkest days of popery, 
and which, by insulting the minister, might divert, they 
imagined, the attention of the people, and change it into 
shouts and laughter. A canon,f assisted by the count- 
ess' coachman, went to the stables and took thence two 
animals, which they led to the spot where Marcourt was 
preaching. We will throw a veil over this scene : it is 
one of those disgraceful subjects that the pen of history 
refuses to transcribe.^ But never did punishment follow 
closer upon crime. The conscience of the hearers was 
aroused at the sight of this infamous spectacle. Tho 
torrent, that such a proceeding was intended to check, 
rushed out of its channel. The indignant people, under- 
taking the defence of that religion which their opponents 
had wished to insult, entered the church like an aveng- 
ing wave ; the ancient windows were broken, the shields 
of the lords were demolished, the relics scattered about, 
the books torn, the images thrown down, and the altar 
overturned. But this was not enough: the popular 
wave, after sweeping out the church, flowed back again, 
and dashed against the canons' houses. Their inhabi- 
tants fled in consternation into the forests, and every 
thing was destroyed in their dwellings. 

• This incident is generally attributed to Farel, but Choupard, 
following an older manu<^cript, says, le ministre de JSTeufchatel, by 
which title he always means Marcourt, and never FareL 

t Some historians say "the coachman of the countess.;" but 
Choupard, on three different occasions, writes a canon. The lattei 
U no doubt more revolting, but tLere is nothing incredible in it 
} De equo admissario loquitur qui equam init. 



382 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATlOlf 



Guillemette de Vergy and M. de Bellegarde, ablated 
and trembling behind their battlements, repented, but 
too late, of their monstrous expedient. They were the 
only ones who had not yet felt the popular vengeance. 
Their restless eyes watched the motions of the indignant 
townspeople. The work is completed: the last house 
is sacked. The burgers consult together. 0 horror 1— 
they turn towards the castle — they ascend the hill — 
they draw near. Is then the abode of the noble counts 
of Arberg about to be laid waste ? But no. " We come,'* 
said the delegates standing near the gate of the castle, 
" we are come to demand justice for the outrage com- 
mitted against religion and its minister.'' They are per- 
mitted to enter, and the trembling countess orders the 
poor wretches to be punished who had acted solely by 
her orders. But at the same time she sends deputies to 
Berne, complaining of the "great insults that had been 
oflTered her."* Berne declared that the reformed should 
pay for the damage, but that the countess should grant 
them the free exercise of their worship. Jacques Velu- 
zat, a native of Champagne, was the first pastor of Valan- 
gin. A little later we shall see new struggles at the 
foot of mount Jura. 

Thus was the Reformation established at Valangin, 
as it had been at Neufchatel : the two capitals of these 
mountains were gained to the gospel. Erelong it re- 
ceived a legal sanction. Francis, marquis of Rothelin, 
son of the duchess of Longueville, arrived in the princi- 
pality in March, 1531, with the intention of playing ojt 
this small theatre the part of a Francis I. But he soon 
found out that there are revol utions which an irresistible 
hand has accomplished, and that must be submitted to. 
Rothelin excluded from the estates of the earldom the 
canons, who had hitherto formed the first power, and 
replaced them by four bannerets and four burgesses. 
Then, availing himself of the principle that all abandoned 
property falls to the state, he laid his hands upon their 
rich heritage, and proclaimed freedom of conscience 

* Curate of Bezancenet's Chroniqle. Des grands vituperes qu'oQ 
(q1 avcUt falt9. 



EEAL CAUSES OF EVENTS. 



Sdd 



throughout the whole country. All the necessary forms 
having been observed with Madame, the politic M. de 
Rive became reformed also. Such was the support Rome 
received from the state, to which she had looked for her 
deliverance. 

A great energy characterized the reformation d 
French Switzerland ; and this is shown by the event* 
we have just witnessed. Men have attributed to Farel 
this distinctive feature of his work, but no man has ever 
created his own times ; it is always, on the contrary 
the times that create the man. The greater the epoch, 
the less do individualities prevail in it. All the good 
contained in the events we have just related came from 
that almighty Spirit of which the strongest men are 
but weak instruments. All the evil proceeded from the 
character of the people ; and indeed it was almost always 
popery that began these scenes of violence. Farel sub- 
mitted to the influence of his times, rather than the times 
received his. A great man may be the personification 
and the type of the epoch for which God destines him ; 
he is never its creator. 

But it is time to quit the Jura and its beautiful val- 
leys, brightened by the vernal sun, to direct our steps 
towards the Alps of German Switzerland, along which 
thick clouds and horrible tempests are gathering. The 
free and courageous people, who dwell there below tho 
eternal glaciers, or on the smiling banks of the lakes, 
daily assume a fiercer aspect, and the collision Ihreatena 
to be sudden, violent, and terrible. We have just been 
witnessing a glorious conquest : a dreadful catftstrophe 
awaits us. 



rWO ajtEAT LESSONS, 



385 



BOOK XVI. 

SWITZERLAND— A CATASTROPHE. 

1528-1531. 

CHAPTER L 

TV/o great lessons — Christian warfare — Zwingle, pastor, statesmajij 
and general — His noble character — Persecutions — Swiss Catho- 
lics seek an alliance with Austria — Great dissatisfaction — Depu- 
tation to the Forest cantons — Zwingle's proposals — Moderation 
of Berne — Keyse'r^s martyrdom — Zwingle and war — Zwingle^s 
error. 

It was the will of God that at the very gates of his 
revived church there should be two great examples to 
serve as lessons for future generations. Luther and the 
German reformation, declining the aid of the temporal 
power, rejecting the force of arms, and looking for vic- 
tory only in the confession of the truth, were destined 
to see their faith crowned with the most brilliant suc- 
cess ; while Zwingle and the Swiss reformation, stretch- 
ing out their hands to the mighty ones of the earth, and 
grasping the sword, were fated to witness a horrible, 
cruel, and bloody catastrophe fall upon the word of 
God, a catastrophe which threatened to engulf the evan- 
gelical cause in the most furious whirlpool. God is a 
jealous God, and gives not his glory in another ; he 
claims to perform his own work himself, and to attain 
his ends sets other springs in motion than those of a 
skilful diplomacy. 

We aro far from forgetting that we are called upon 
to relate faots, and not to discuss theories ; but there is 
a principle which the history we are narrating sets forth 
in capital letters : it is that professed in the gospel, 



386 



HlStOil^ OF THE REFORMATIOil . 



where it says, The weapons of our warfare are noi 
CARNAL, BUT MIGHTY THROUGH GoD." In maintaining this 
truth we do not place ourselves on the ground of any 
particular school, but on that of universal conscience 
and of the word of God. 

Of all carnal support that religion can invoke, there 
is none more injurious to it than arms aad diplomacy 
The latter throws it into tortuous ways ; the former 
hurries it into paths of bloodshed ; and religion, from 
whose brow has been torn the double wreath of truth 
and meekness, presents but a degraded and humiliated 
countenance that no person can, that no person desires 
to recognize. 

It was the very extension of the reform in Switzer- 
land that exposed it to the dangers under which it sunk. 
So long as it was concentrated at Zurich, it continued a 
religious matter ; but when it had gained Berne, Basle, 
Schafir[)ausen, St. Gall, Glaris, Appenzell, and numerous 
bailiwicks, it formed in tercan tonal relati(»ns ; and — here 
was the error and misfortune — while the connection 
should have taken place between church and church, it 
was formed between state and state. 

As soon as spiritual and political matters became 
mingled together, the latter took the upj erhand. Zwin- 
gle erelong thought it his duty to examii e not only doc- 
trinal, but also federal questions ; and the illustrious 
reformer might be seen, unconscious of the snares be- 
neath his feet, precipitating himself into a course strewn 
with rocks, at the end of which a cruel death awaited 
him. 

The primitive Swiss cantons had resigned the right 
of forming new alliances without the consent of all j 
but Zurich and Berne had reserved the power. Zwingle 
thought himself therefore quite at liberty to promote an 
alliance with the evangelical states. Constance was 
the lirst city that gave her c>dhesion. But this Christian 
coburghery, which might bvHi-^me the germ of a new 
confederation, immediately raised up numerous adversa^ 
ries against Zwingle, even among the partisans of the 
Reformation. 



CHRISTIAN WARFARE. 



387 



There was yet time : Zwingie might withdraw Iromi 
public affairs, and occupy himself entirely with those of 
the gospel. But no one in Zurich had, like him, that 
application to labor, that correct, keen, and sure eye, so 
necessary for politicians. If he retired, the vessel of 
the state would be left without a pilat. Besides, he 
was convinced that political acts alone could save the 
reform. He resolved, therefore, to be at one and the 
same time the man of the state and of the church. The 
registers prove that in his later years he took part in 
the most important deliberations ; and he was commis- 
sioned by the councils of his canton to write letters, 
compose proclamations, and draw up opinions. Already, 
before the dispute with Berne, looking upon war as pos- 
sible, he had traced out a very detailed plan of defence, 
the manuscript of which is still in existence.* In 1528 
he did still more ; he showed in a remarkable paper 
how the republic should act with regard to the empire, 
France, and other European states, and with respect to 
the several cantons and bailiwicks. Then, as if he had 
grown gray at the head of the Helvetic troops — and it 
is but just to remark that he had long lived among sol- 
diers — he explained the advantages there would be in 
surprising the enemy ; and described even the nature of 
the arras and the manner of employing them. In truth, 
an important revolution was then taking place in the 
art of war. The pastor of Zurich is at once the head of 
the state and general of the array: this double, this 
triple part of the reformer was the ruin of the reforma- 
tion and of himself. Undoubtedly we must make allow- 
ances for the men of this age, who, being accustomed to 
see Rome wield two swords for so many centuries, did 
not understand that they must take up one and leave 
the other. We must admire the strength of that supe- 
rior genius which, while pursuing a political course in 
which the greatest minds would have been absorbed, 
ceased not, however, to display an indefatigable activity 
as pastor, preacher, divine, and author. We must ao 
knowledge that the republican education of Zw'ngle had 
* £8cher et Hottinger, Archives 2. 263. 



388 



HISTOEr OF THE REFORMATION. 



taught him to confound his country with his religiou^ 
and that there was in this great man enough to fill up 
many lives. We must appreciate that indomitable cour- 
age which, relying upon justice, feared not, at a time 
when Zurich had but one or two weak cities for allies, 
to confront the redoubtable forces of the empire and of 
the confederation ; but we should also see in the great 
and terrible lesson that God gave him, a precept for all 
times and for every nation ; and finally, understand what 
is so often forgotten, that "the kingdom of Christ is not 
of this world." 

The Roman-catholic cantons, on hearing of the new 
alliances of the reformed, felt a violent indignation 
William of Diesbach, deputy from Berne at the diet, was 
forced to submit to the keenest reproaches. The sitting, 
for a while interrupted, was resumed immediately after 
his departure. "They may try to patch up the old faith," 
said the Bernese as he withdrew, " it cannot, however, 
last any longer."* In truth, they patched away with 
all their might, but with a sharp and envenomed needle 
that drew blood. Joseph Am Berg of Schwytz and 
Jacques Stocker of Zug, bailiffs of Thurgovia, behaved 
with cruelty towards all who were attached to the gos- 
pel. They enforced against them fines, imprisonment, 
torture, the scourge, confiscation, and banishment : they 
cut out the ministers' tongues, beheaded them, or con- 
demned them to be burned.f At the same time they took 
away the Bibles and all the evangelical books ; and if 
any poor Lutherans, fleeing from Austria, crossed the 
Rhine and that low valley where its calm waters flow 
between the Alps of the Tyrol and of Appenzell — if these 
poor creatures, tracked by the lansquenets, came to seek 
a refuge in Switzerland, they were cruelly given up to 
their persecutors. 

The heavier lay the hands of the bailiffs on Thurgo- 
via and the Rheinthal, the greater conquests did the 
gospel make. The bishop of Constance wrote to the 

* Mogen sie blatzea am alten Glauben. Hottinger, Zwingli, 
p. 389. t Die Zungeu gescblitzt, mit dem Schwerdt richtea 

aad verbraant. Bull. 2. 81. 



AN AUSTRIAN ALLIANCE. 



389 



Eve cantons, that if they did not act with firmness, all 
the country would embrace the reform. In consequence 
of this, the cantons convoked at Frauenfeld all the prel 
ates, nobles, judges, and persons of note in the district; 
and a second meeting taking place six days after, De^ 
cember 6, 1528, at Weinfeld, deputies from Berne and 
Zurich entreated the assembly tc consider the honcr of 
God above all things, and in no respect to care for the 
threats of the world.* A great agitation followed upon 
this discourse. At last a majority called for the preach- 
ing of the word of God ; the people came to the same 
decision ; and the Rheinthal, as well as Bremg-arten, fol- 
lowed this example. 

What was to be done ? The flood had become hourly 
more encroaching. Must then the Forest cantons open 
their valleys to it at last? Religious antipathies put 
an end to national antipathies ; and these proud moun- 
taineers, directing their looks beyond the Rhine, thought 
of invoking the succor of Austria, which they had van- 
quished at Morgarten and at Sempach.f The fanatical 
German party that had crushed the revolted Swabian 
peasants was all-powerful on the frontiers. Letters 
were exchanged ; messengers passed to and fro across 
the river ; at last they took advantage of a wedding in 
high rank that was to take place at Feldkirch in Swabia, 
six leagues from Appenzell. On the 16th of February, 
1529, the marriage party, forming a brilliant cavalcade, 
in the midst of which the deputies of the five cantons 
were concealed, made their entry into Feldkirch, and 
Am Berg had an immediate interview with the Austrian 
governor. **The power of the enemies of our ancient 
faith has so increased," said the Swiss, " that the friends 
of the church can resist them no longer. We therefore 
turn our eyes to that illustrious prince who has saved in 
(lermany the faith of our fathers." 

This alliance was so very unnatural, that the A us* 
trians had some difficulty in believing it to be sincere. 
••Take hostages," said the Waldstettes, write the aiti* 

♦ Die Eer Gottes, uwer Seelen HeiL Bulling. Chron. 2. 2d, 

t Ibid. 48. 



390 HISTORY OP THE REPORMATIOK 



cles of the treaty with your own hands ; command, and 
we will obey/' "Very good," replied the Austrians; 
"in two months you will find us again at Waldshut, 
and we will let you know our conditions/' 

A rumor of these negotiations which spread abroad 
excited great dissatisfaction, even in the partisans of 
Rome In no place did it burst out with greater force 
than in the council of Zug. The opposing parties were 
violently agitated ; they stamped their feet, they started 
from their seats, and were nearly coming to blows ; but 
hatred prevailed over patriotism. The deputies of the 
Forest cantons appeared at Waldshut ; they suspended 
the arms of their cantons by the side of those of the op- 
pressors of Switzerland ; decorated their hats with pea- 
cocks^ feathers — the badge of Austria — and laughed, 
drank, and chattered with the imperialists. This strange 
alliance was at last concluded.* " Whoever shall form 
new sects among the people,'' it ran, " shall be pun- 
ished with death ; and if need be, with the help of Aus- 
tria. This power, in case of emergency, shall send into 
Switzerland six thousand foot soldiers, and four hun- 
dred horse, with all requisite artillery. If necessary, 
the reformed cantons shall be blockaded, and all provis- 
ions intercepted." To the Romish cantons then be- 
longs the initiative of this measure so much decried. 
Finally, Austria guaranteed to the Waldstettes the pos- 
session, not only of the common bailiwicks, but of all 
the conquests that might be made on the left bank of 
the Rhine. 

Dejection and consternation immediately pervaded 
all Switzerland. This national complaint, which BuUin* 
ger has preserved, was sung in every direction : 

Wail, Helvetians, wail, 
For the peacock's plume of pride 

To the forest caatoas* savage bull 
In friendship is allied. 

All the cantons not included in this alliance, with the 
exception of Friburg, assembled in diet at Zurich, and 
* Bui linger gives the treaty at full length. Chron. 2. 4S)--69. 



MODERATION OF BERNE. 



391 



resolved to send a deputation to their mountain confed* 
erates, with a view to reconciliation. The deputation, 
admitted at Schwytz in the presence of the people, was 
able to execute its mission without tumult. At Zug 
there was a cry of " No sermon, no sermon.'' At Altorf 
the answer was, "Would to God that your new faith 
was buried for ever." At Lucerne they received thia 
haughty reply: "We shall know how to defend our- 
selves, our children, and our children's children, from 
the poison of your rebellious priests." It was at Unter- 
walden that the deputation met with the worst recep- 
tion. ** We declare our alliance at an end," said they. 
" It is we — it is the other Waldstettes who are the real 
Swiss. We graciously admitted you into our confedera- 
tion, and now you claim to become our masters. The 
emperor, Austria, France, Savoy, and Valais will assist 
us." The deputies retired in astonishment, shuddering 
as they passed before the house of the secretary of state, 
where they saw the arms of Zurich, Berne, Basle, and 
Strasburg hanging from a lofty gibbet. 

The deputation had scarcely returned to Zurich and 
made their report, when men's minds were inflamed. 
Zwingle proposed to grant no peace to Unterwalden, if 
it would not renounce foreign service, the alliance with 
Austria, and the government of the common bailiwicks. 
" No, no," said Berne, that had just stifled a civil war in 
its own canton, " let us not be so hasty. When tho rays 
of the sun shine forth, each one wishes to set out ; but 
»s soon as it begins to rain, every man loses heart. The 
word of God enjoins peace. It is not with pikes and 
lances that faith is made to enter the heart. For this 
reason, in the name of our Lord's sufferings, we entreat 
you to moderate your anger." 

This Christian exhortation would have succeeded, if 
the fearful news that reached Zurich on the very day 
when the Berneso delivered their moderate speech, had 
not rendered it unavailing. 

On Saturday, May 22, Jacques Keyser, a pastor and 
father of a family in the neighborhood of the Grelffen- 
6ee« after coasting the fertile shores of this little lake^ 



392 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



crossed the rich past: res of the bailiwick of Gruningen, 
passed near the Teutonic house of Bubikon and the con- 
vent of Ruti, and re&ched that simple and wild district 
bathed by the upper part of lake Zurich. Making his 
way to Oberkirk, a parish in the Gaster district, between 
the two lakes of Zurich and Wallenstadt, of which he 
had been nominated pastor, and where he was to preach 
on the morrow, he crossed on foot the lengthened and 
rounded flanks of the Buchberg, fronting the picturesque 
heights of the Ammon. He was confidently advancing 
into those woods which for many weeks he had often 
traversed without obstruction, when he was suddenly 
seized by six men, posted there to surprise him, and 
carried off to Schwytz. " The bailiffs," said they to the 
magistrates, " have ordered all innovating ministers to 
be brought before the tribunals: here is one that we 
bring you." Although Zurich and Glaris interposed — 
although the government of Gaster, where Keyser had 
been taken, did not then belong to Schwytz, the lands- 
gemeinde desired a victim, and on the 29th of May they 
condemned the minister to be burnt alive. On being 
informed of his sentence, Keyser burst into tears.* But 
when the hour of execution arrived, he walked cheer- 
fully to death, freely confessed his faith, and gave thanks 
to the Lord even with his latest breath. Go and tell 
them at Zurich how he thanks us," said one of the 
Schwytz magistrates, with a sarcastic smile, to the Zu- 
rich deputies. Thus had a fresh martyr fallen under the 
hands of that formidable power that is "drunk with the 
blood of the saints." Rev. 17:6. 

The cup was full. The flames of Keyser's pile be- 
came the signal of war. Exasperated Zurich uttered a 
cry that resounded through all the confederation. Zwin- 
gle above all called for energetic measures. Every* 
where, in the streets, in the councils, and even in the 
pulpits, he surpassed in daring even the most valiant 
captains. He spoke at Zurich — he wrote to Berne. " Let 
us be firm, and fear not to take up arms," said he. " This 
peace, which some desire so much, is not peace, but war ; 
* Weinet hafiftig. Bull. 2. 14a 



ERUOS, OF ZWOt^LE 



393 



while the war that we call for is not war, out peace * 
We thirst for no man^s blood, but we will clip the wings 
of the oligarchy.*!" If we shun it, the truth of tKi gos- 
pel and the ministers' lives will never be secure among 
us." 

Thus spoke Zwingle. In every part of Europe ho 
beheld the mighty ones of the earth aiding one another 
to stifle the reviving animation of the church ; and he 
thought that without some decisive and energetic mov^ 
ment, Christianity, overwhelmed by so many blows, 
would soon fall back into its ancient slavery. Luther 
under similar circumstances arrested the swords ready 
to be crossed, and demanded that the word of God alone 
shQuld appear on the field of battle. Zwingle thought 
not thus. In his opinion war was not revolt, for Swit- 
zerland had no master. Undoubtedly," said he, "we 
must trust in God alone ; but when He gives us a just 
cause, we must also know how to defend it, and like 
Joshua and Gideon, shed blood in behalf of our country 
and our God." 

If we adopt the principles of justice which govern 
the rulers of nations, the advice of Zwingle was judi- 
cious and irreproachable. It was the duty of the Swiss 
magistrates to defend the oppressed against the op- 
pressor. But is not such language, which might have 
been suitable in the mouth of a magistrate, blamabln in 
a minister of Christ ? Perhaps Zwingle forgot his qual- 
ity of pastor, and considered himself only as a citizen, 
consulted by his fellow-citizens ; perhaps he wished to 
defend Switzerland, and not the church, by his counsels ; 
but it is a question if he ought ever to have forgotten 
the church and his ministry. We think we may go even 
further, and while granting all that may be urged in 
fa vor of the contrary supposition, we may deny that tho 
secular power ought ever to interfere with the sword to 
protect the faith. 

To accomplish his designs, the reformer needed even 
in Zurich the greatest unity. But there were many men 
* Bellum cui nos instamus, pax est, non belidm. Vita ZwingUi 
per 0. Myconium. f OligarGhiae nervi succidantur. Ibid. 



S94 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



ill that city devoted to interests and superstitions which 
were opposed to him. " How long," he had exclaimed 
in the pulpit on the 1st of December, 1528, "how long 
will you support in the council these unbelievers, these 
impious men who oppose the word of God ?"* They had 
decided upon purging the council, as required by the 
cef:^rraer; they had examined the citizens individually, 
and then had excluded all the hostile members. 

* Dea rath, reinlgen. FiissL Beytrage, 4. 9L 



THE GOSPEL IN SWITZERLAND 395 



CHAPTER II. 

I?ree preachinfij of the gospel in Switzerland — Zwingle supports the 
common bailiwicks — War — Zwingle joins the army — The Zaricb 
army threatens Zug — The landamman Aebli — Bernese interpo 
sition — Zwingle's opposition — Swiss cordiality — Order in the 
Zurich camp — A conference — Peace restored — Austrian treaty 
torn — Zwingle's hymn — Nuns of St. Catherine. 

On Saturday, the 15th of June, 1529, seven days 
after Keyser's martyrdom, all Zurich was in commotion. 
The moment was come when Unterwalden should send 
a governor to the common bailiwicks ; and the images 
having been burnt in those districts, Unterwalden had 
sworn to take a signal revenge.* Thus the consterna^ 
tion had become general. " Keyser's pile," thought they, 
"will be rekindled in all our villages." Many of the 
inhabitants flocked to Zurich, and on their alarmed and 
agitated features one might, in imagination, have seen 
reflected the flames that had just consumed the martyr. 

These unhappy people found a powerful advocate in 
Zwingle. The reformer imagined that he had at last 
attained the object he never ceased to pursue, the free 
preaching of the gospel in Switzerland. To inflict a 
final blow would, in his idea, suflSce to bring this enter- 
prise to a favorable issue. " Greedy pensioners," said 
Zwingle to the Zurichers, " profit by the ignorance of the 
mountaineers to stir up these simple souls against the 
friends of the gospel. Let us therefore be severe upon 
these haughty chiefs. The mildness of the lamb would 
only serve to render the wolf more ferocious.f Let us 
propose to the five cantons to allow the free preaching 
of the word of the Lord, to renounce their wicked alli- 
ances, and to punish the abettors of foreign service. 
As for the mass, idols, rites, and superstitions, let no 
one be forced to abandon them. It is for the word of 

• Den Gozenbrand an inen mitt der Hand zu rachen. Bull. Ghroa 
Z, 193. t Lupus lenitate agni, magls magisque vorax fit Zw 
Gpp. 2. 296. 



S96 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



Ood alone to scatter with its powerful breatli all thia 
idle dust.* Be firm, noble lords, and in despite of cer- 
tain black horses, as black at Zurich as they are at Lu- 
cerne,f but whose malice will never succeed in o\er- 
turning the chariot of reform, we shall clear this difficult 
pass, and arrive at the unity of Switzerland and at unity 
of faith." Thus Zwingle, while calling for force against 
political abuses, asked only liberty for the gospel ; but 
he desired a prompt intervention, in order that this liber- 
ty might be secured to it. (Ecolampadius thought the 
same : " It is not a time for delay," said he ; "it is not 
a time for parsimony and pusillanimity. So long as the 
venom shall not be utterly removed from this adder in 
our bosoms, we shall be exposed to the greatest dan- 
gers."! 

The council of Zurich, led away by the reformer, 
promised the bailiwicks to support religious liberty 
among them ; and no sooner had they learned that An- 
thony ab Acker of Unterwalden was proceeding to Baden 
with an army, than they ordered five hundred men to 
set out for Bremgarten with four pieces of artillery. 
This was the 6th of June, and on the same evening the 
standard of Zurich waved over the convent of Mouri. 

The war of religion had begun. The horn of the 
Waldstettes re^Jchoed afar in the mountains : men were 
arming in every direction, and messengers were sent 
off in haste to invoke the assistance of the Valais and of 
Austria. Three days later, Tuesday, the 8th of June, six 
hundred Zurichers under the command of Jacques Werd- 
mtiller set out for Eapperschwyl and the district of Gas- 
ter ; and on the morrow four thousand men repaired to 
Cappel, under the command of the valiant Captain George 
Berguer, to whom Conrad Schmidt, pastor of Kussnacht, 
had been appointed chaplain. " We do not wish you to 
go to the war," said Burgomaster Roust to Zwingle; 
"for the pope, the Archduke Ferdinand, the Romish can* 
tons, the bishops, the abbots, and the prelates hate you 

• Dei ^erbum eaim hos pulveres omnes facile flatu suo disperget 
Zw. Epp. 2. 296. t The pensioners. Exceptis aliquot nigri? 

oquiB. Ibid. 298. X Venenum a domestico illo colubro. Ibid. 



WAR PREPARATIONS. 



397 



mortally. Stay with the council ; we have need of you.'' 
" No,^ replied Zwingle, who was unwilling to confide so 
important an enterprise to any one ; when my breth- 
ren expose their lives I will not remain quietly at home 
by my fireside. Besides, the army also requires a watch- 
ful eye, that looks continually around it." Then taking 
down his glittering halberd, which he had carried, as 
tliey say, at Marignan, and placing it on his shoulder, 
the reformer mounted his horse and set out with the 
army.* The walls, towers, and battlements were cover- 
ed with a crowd of old men, children, and women, among 
whom was Anna, Zwingle^s wife. 

Zurich had called for the aid of Berne ; but that city, 
whose inhabitants showed little disposition for a religious 
war, and which besides was not pleased at seeing the 
increasing influence of Zurich, replied, ** Since Zurich has 
begun the war without us, let her finish it in like man- 
ner." The evangelical states were disunited at the 
very moment of struggle. 

The Romish cantons did not act thus. It was Zug 
that issued the first summons ; and the men of Uri, of 
Schwytz, and of Unterwalden had immediately begun to 
march. On the 8th of June, the great banner floated 
before the town-house of Lucerne, and on the next day 
the army set out to the sound of the antique horns that 
Lucerne pretended to have received from the emperor 
Charlemagne. 

On the 10th of June, the Zurichers, who were posted 
at Cappel, sent a herald at daybreak to Zug, who was 
commissioned, according to custom, to denounce to the 
five cantons the rupture of the alliance. Immediately 
Zug was filled with cries and alarm. This canton, the 
smallest in Switzerland, not having yet received all the 
confederate contingents, was not in a condition to de- 
fend itself. The people ran to and fro, sent off* mes- 
sengers, and hastily prepared for battle ; the warriors 
fitted on their armor, the women shed tears, and the 
children shrieked. 

* Sondern eass auf eiu Ross, und fuhrte elne hubeche Helparten 
wi den Achsela. Fiissl. Beytr. 4. loa. 

I 



398 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOJI. 



Already the first division of the Zurich array, amounii 
hig to two thousand men, under the command of Will- 
iam Thoming, and stationed near the frontier below 
Cappel, was preparing to march, when they observed, 
in the direction of Baar, a horseman pressing the flanks 
of his steed, and galloping up as fast as the mountain 
which he had to ascend would permit. It was Aebli, 
landamman of Glaris. The five cantons are prepared,** 
said he as he arrived, " but I have prevailed upon them 
to halt, if you will do the same. For this reason I en- 
treat my lords and the people of Zurich, for the love of 
God and the safety of the confederation, to suspend 
their march at the present moment." As he uttered 
these words, the brave Helvetian shed tears.* ** In a 
few hours," continued he, " I shall be back again. I 
hope, with God's grace, to obtain an honorable peace, 
and to prevent our cottages from being filled with wid- 
ows and orphans." 

Aebli was known to be an honorable man, friendly 
to the gospel, and opposed to foreign service ; his words 
therefore moved the Zurich captains, who resolved to 
halt. Zwingle alone, motionless and uneasy, beheld in 
his friend's intervention the machinations of the adver- 
sary. Austria, occupied in repelli»ng the Turks, and un- 
able to succor the five cantons, had exhorted them to 
peace. This, in Zwingle's opinion, was the cause of the 
propositions brought to them by the landamman of 
Glaris. So at the moment Aebli turned round to return 
to Zug,f Zwingle, approaching him, said with earnecst- 
ness, " Gossip landamman, you will render to God an 
account of all this. Our adversaries are caught in a 
sack, and hence they give you sweet words. By and 
by they will fall upon us unawares, and there will be 
none to deliver us." Prophetic words, whose fulfilment 
went beyond all foresight. *'Dear gossip," replied the 
landamman, *^ I have confidence in God that all will go 
well. Let each one do his best." And he departed. 

• Das redt er mitt weynendea Ougen. Bull. Chron. 2, 169. 
t Alls nun der Amman wiederumm zu den fiinf orten ryteis 
V7olli. lb. 170. Zwingle was godfather to one of Aebli's cMldren. 



SSWINOLE'S OPPOSITION. 



399 



The army, instead of advancing upon Zug, now be* 
gan to erect tents along the edge of the forest and the 
brink of the torrent, a few paces from the sentinels of 
the five cantons ; while Zwingle seated in his tent, 
silent, sad, and in deep thought, anticipated some dis- 
tressing news from hour to hour. 

He had not long to wait. The deputies of the Zu- 
rich council came to give reality to his fears. Berne, 
maintaining the character that it had so often filled as 
representative of the federal policy, declared that if Zu- 
rich or the cantons would not make peace, they would 
find means to compel them : this state at the same time 
convoked a diet at Aran, and sent five thousand men 
into the field, under the command of Sebastian Diesbach. 
Zwingle was struck with consternation. 

Aebli^s message, supported by that of Berne, was 
sent back by the council to the army ; for, according to 
the principles of the time, " wherever the banner waves, 
there is Zurich." " Let us not be staggered," cried the 
reformer, ever decided and firm ; our destiny depends 
upon our courage : to-day they beg and entreat, and in 
a month, when we have laid down our arms, they will 
crush us. Let us stand firm in God. Before all things, 
let us be just : peace will come after that." But Zwin- 
gle, transformed to a statesman, began to lose the influ- 
ence which he had gained as a servant ot God. Many 
could not understand him, and asked if what they had 
heard was really the language of a minister of the Lord, 
** Ah," said one of his friends, who perhaps knew him 
best, Oswald Myconius, Zwingle certainly was an in- 
trepid man in the midst of danger ; but he always had a 
horror of blood, even of that of his most deadly enemies. 
The freedom of his country, the virtues of our forefathers, 
^ind above all, the glory of Christ, were the sole end olr 
all his designs.* I speak the truth, as if in the presence 
of God," adds he. 

While Zurich was sending deputies to Arau, the two 
armies received reinforcements. The men of Thurgovia 

* Libertas patriae, virtutes avitse, et imprimis glcria Chiip.ti 
Qsw. Myc. De vita Zw. 



400 HISTOiiy OF THE HEFORMATION 



and St. Gall joined their banners to that of Zurich , the 
Valaisans and the men of St. Gothard united with the 
Romanist cantons. The advanced posts were in sight 
of each other at Thun, Leematt, and Goldesbrunnen, on 
the delightful slopes of the Albis. 

Never, perhaps, did Swiss cordiality shine forth 
bi ighter with its ancient lustre. The soldiers called to 
.">ne another in a friendly manner, and shook hands, styl- 
ing themselves confederates and brothers. "We shall 
not fight," said they. "A storm is passing over our 
heads, but we will pray to God, and he will preserve us 
from every harm." Scarcity afflicted the army of the 
five cantons, while abundance reigned in the camp of 
Zurich.* Some young famishing Waldstettes one day 
passed the outposts : the Zurichers made them prisoners, 
conducted them to the camp, and then sent them back 
laden with provisions, with still greater good-nature 
than was shown by Henry IV. at the siege of Paris. 
At another time, some warriors of the five cantons 
having placed a bucket filled with milk on the frontier 
line, cried out to the Zurichers that they had no bread. 
The latter came down immediately, and cut their bread 
into the enemies' milk, upon which the soldiers of the 
two parties began with jokes to eat out of the same 
dish — some on this side, some on that. The Zurichers 
were delighted that, notwithstanding the prohibition of 
their priests, the Waldstettes ate with heretics. When 
one of the troop took a morsel that was on the side of 
his adversaries, the latter sportively struck him with 
their spoons, and said, " Do not cross the frontier." Thus 
did these good Helvetians make war upon one another ; 
and hence it was that the burgomaster Sturm of Stras 
burg, one of the mediators, exclaimed, " You confeder 
ates are a singular people. When you are disunited, 
you live still in harmony with one another, and you' 
ancient friendship never slumbers."f 

The most perfect order reigned in the camp of Zurich 

* A measure of corn was sold for a florin, and one of wine for d 
h&If-batz, about three half-pence. Bull. Chron. 2. 182. 
t Wenn ihr schon uneins sind, so sind Ir eina Ibid. 18S>* 



THE TREATY CONCLUDED. 



401 



Every day Zwingle, the commander Schmidt, Zink abbot 
of Cappel, or some other minister, preached among the 
soldiers. No oath or dispute was heard ; all disorderly 
women were turned out of the camp ; prayers were offer- 
ed up before and after every meal ; and each man obeyed 
ois chiefs. There were no dice, no cards, no games cal* 
culated 1o excite quarrels ; but psalms, hymns, national 
songs, budily exercise, wrestling, or pitching the stone, 
were the military recreations of the Zurichers.* The 
spirit that animated the reformer had passed into the 
army. 

The assembly at Arau, transported to Steinhausen in 
Ihe neighborhood of the two camps, decreed that each 
army should hear the complaints of the opposite party. 
The reception of the deputies of the five cantons by the 
Zurichers was tolerably calm ; it was not so in the other 
camp. 

On the 15th of June, fifty Zurichers, surrounded by a 
crowd of peasants, proceeded on horseback to the Wald- 
stettes. The sound of the trumpet, the roll of the drum, 
and repeated salvos of artillery announced their arrival. 
Nearly twelve thousand men of the smaller cantons, in 
good order, with uplifted heads and arrogant looks, 
were under arms. Escher of Zurich spoke first, and 
many persons from the rural districts enumerated their 
grievances after him, which the Waldstettes thought 
exaggerated. *'When have we ever refused you the 
federal right asked they. " Yes, yes," replied Funk, 
Zwingle^s friend ; we know how you exercise it. That 
pastor," Keyser, appealed to it, and you referred him to 
the executioner." Funk, you would have done better 
to h ive held your tongue," said one of his friends. But 
the words had slipped out : a dreadful tumult suddenly 
arose ; all the army of the Waldstettes was in agitation ; 
tlie most prudent begged the Zurichers to retire prompt- 
ly, and protected their departure. 

At length the treaty was concluded on the 26th ol 
June, 1529. Zwingle did not obtain all he desired 

* Sondern sang, sprang, wurf uad tiess die Stelae. Fussl Beyi 
1 103. 

26 



402 HISTOitY OF THE REFORMATION. 



Instead of the free preaching of the word of God, the 
treaty stipulated only liberty of conscience ; it declared 
that the common bailiwicks should pronounce for or 
against the reform by a majority of votes. Without 
decreeing the abolition of foreign pensions, it was rec- 
ommended to the Romish cantons to renounce the alliance 
formed with Austria ; the five cantons were to pay the 
expenses of the war, Murner to retract his insulting words, 
and an indemnity was secured to Keyser's family.* 

An incontrovertible success had just crowned the 
warlike demonstration of Zurich. The five cantons 
felt it. Gloomy, irritated, silently champing the bit that 
had been placed in their mouths, their chiefs could not 
decide upon giving up the deed of their alliance with 
Austria. Zurich immediately recalled her troops, the 
mediators redoubled their solicitations, and the Bernese 
exclaimed, " If you do not deliver up this document, we 
will ourselves go in procession and tear it from your 
archives." At last it was brought to Cappel on the 26th 
of June, two hours after midnight. All the army was 
drawn out at eleven in the forenoon, and they began to 
read the treaty. The Zurichers looked with astonish- 
ment at its breadth and excessive length, and the nine 
seals which had been affixed, one of which was in gold. 
But scarcely had a few words been read, when Aebli, 
snatching the parchment, cried out, " Enough, enough.'' 
" Read it, read it," said the Zurichers ; " we desire to 
learn their treason." But the bailiff of Glaris replied 
boldly, " I would rather be cut in a thousand pieces than 
permit it." Then dashing his knife into the parchment, 
he cut it in pieces in the presence of Zwingle and the 
soldierSjf and threw the fragments to the secretary, who 
committed them to the flames. **The paper was not 
Swiss," says Bullinger with sublime simplicit3^ 

The banners were immediately struck. The men of 
Unterwalden retired in anger ; those of Schywtz swore 
they would for ever preserve their ancient faith ; while 

* Supra, p. 302. The treaty is given entire in Bullinger, 2. 185, 
and Ruchat, 2. f Tabella; foederis a prastore Pagi Glaronensil 
gla4io concisae et 4elet«, id quod ipse vidi. Zw. Epp, Z, 310, 



ZWINaLE'S HYMN. 



403 



the troops of Zurich returned in triumph to their homea 
But the most opposite thoughts agitated Zwingle's mind. 
" I hope," said he, doing violence to his f&elings, " that 
we bring back an honorable peace to our dwellings. It 
was not to shed blood that we set out.* God has once 
again shown the great ones of the earth that they can 
do nothing against us." Whenever he gave way to his 
natural disposition, a very different order of thoughts 
took possession of his mind. He was seen walking apart 
in deep dejection, and anticipating the most gloomy fu- 
ture. In vain did the people surround him with joyful 
shouts. " This peace," said he, which you consider a 
triumph, you will soon repent of, striking your breasts.'' 
It was at this time that, venting his sorrow, he com- 
posed, as he was descending the Albis, a celebrated 
hymn often repeated to the sound of music in the fields 
of Switzerland, among the burghers of the confederate 
cities, and even in the palaces of kings. The hymns of 
Luther and of Zwingle play the same part in the German 
smd Swiss reformation as the Psalms in that of France. 

Do thou direct thy chariot, Lord, 

And guide it at thy will ; 
Without thy aid our strength is vain, 

And useless all our skill. 
Look down upon thy saints brought low, 
And prostrate laid beneath the foe. 

Beloved Pastor, who hast saved 

Our souls from death and sin, 
Uplift thy voice, awake thy sheej> 

That slumbering lie within 
Thy fold, and curb with thy right hand, 
The rage of Satan^s furious band. 

Send down thy peace, and banish strife, 

Let bitterness depart ; 
Revive the spirit of the past 

In every Switzer's heart : 
Then shall thy church for ever sing 
The praises of her heavenly King. 

• (Him non caedem factum profecti sumus. Zw. Epp. 2. 810, 



404 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOIT. 



An edict, published in the name of the confederatea^ 
ordered the revival everywhere of the old friendship and 
brotherly concord ; but decrees are powerless to work 
Buch miracles. 

This treaty of peace was nevertheless favorable to 
the reform. Undoubtedly it met with a violent opposition 
in some places. The nuns of the vale of St. Catherine 
in Thurgovia, deserted by their priests and excited by 
Bome noblemen beyond the Rhine, who styled them in 
their letters, " Chivalrous women of the house of God,'* 
Bung mass themselves, and appointed one of their num- 
ber preacher to th^ convent. Certain deputies from the 
Protestant cantons having had an interview with them, 
the abbess and three of the nuns secretly crossed the 
river by night, carrying with them the papers of the 
monastery and the ornaments of the church. But such 
isolated resistance as this was unavailing. Already, in 
1529, Zwingle was able to hold a synod in Thurgovia, 
which organized the church there, and decreed that the 
property of the convents should be consecrated to the 
instruction of pious young men in sacred learning. Thua 
concord and peace seemed at last to be re()*8tablished in 
the confederation. 



OOKQUESTS OF REFOEX. 405 



CHAPTER III. 

OoDqaeets of reform in Schaflfhausen and Zurzack — Reform in OI»i 
ris — To-day the cowl, to-morrow the reverse — Italian bailiwicks— 
The monk of Como — Egidio^s hope for Italy — Call of the monk 
of Locarno — Hopes of reforming Italy — The monks of Wettin- 
gen— Abbey of St. Gall— Kilian Kouffi— St. Gall recovers ita 
liberty — The reform in Soleure— Miracle of St Ours— Popery 
triumphs — The Grisons invaded by the Spaniards — Address of 
the ministers to the Romish cantons — God^s word the means of 
unity — (Ecolampadius for spiritual influence — Autonomy of the 
church. 

Whenever a conqueror abandons himself to his tri- 
umph, in that very confidence he often finds destruction. 
Zurich and Zwingle were to exemplify this mournful 
lesson of history. Taking advantage of the national 
peace, they redoubled their exertions for the triumph of 
the gospel. This was a legitimate zeal, but it was not 
always wisely directed. To attain the unity of Switzer- 
land by unity of faith was the object of the Zurichers ; 
but they forgot that by desiring to force on a unity it is 
broken to pieces, and that freedom is the only medium 
in which contrary elements can be dissolved, and a sal- 
utary union established. While Rome aims at unity by 
anathemas, imprisonment, and the stake. Christian truth 
demands unity through liberty. And let us not fear that 
liberty, expanding each individuality beyond measure, 
will produce by this means an infinite multiplicity. 
While we urge every mind to attach itself to the word 
of God, we give it up to a power capable of restoring its 
diverging opinions to a wholesome unity. 

Zwingle at first signalized his victory by legitimate 
conquests. He advanced with courage. " His eye and 
his arm were everywhere." " A few wretched mischief- 
makers," says Salut, a Romanist chronicler, " penetrat- 
ing into the five cantons, troubled men's souls, distrib- 
uted their frippery, scattered everywhere little poemi^ 



406 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATlOlff 



tracts, and testaments, and were continually repeating 
that the people ought not to believe the priests."* This 
was not all : while the reform was destined to be con- 
fined around the lake of the Waldstettes to a few fruit- 
less efforts, it made brilliant conquests among the can- 
tons, the allies and subjects of Switzerland ; and all the 
blows there inflicted on the papacy reechoed among the 
lofty valleys of the primitive cantons, and filled them 
with affright. Nowhere had popery shown itself more 
determined than in the Swiss mountains. A mixture of 
Eomish despotism and Helvetian roughness existed there. 
Rome was resolved to conquer all Switzerland, and yet 
she beheld her most important positions successively 
wrested from her. 

On the 29th of September, 1529, the citizens of Schaff- 
hausen removed " the great God "f from the cathedral, 
to the deep regret of a small number of devotees whom 
the Roman worship still counted in this city ; then they 
abolished the mass, and stretched out their hands to 
Zurich and to Berne. '^'^'^ 't' ^ 

At Zurzack, near the confluence of the Rhiiief^nd the 
Aar, at the moment when the priest of the place, a man 
devoted to the ancient worship, was preaching with 
zeal, a person named Tiifel, (devil,) raising his head,, ob- 
served to him, "Sir, you are heaping insults on good 
men, and loading the pope and the saints of the Roman 
calendar with honor ; pray, where do we find that in the 
holy Scriptures This question, put in a serious tone 
of voice, raised a sly smile on many faces, and the con- 
gregation with their eyes fixed on the pulpit awaited 
the reply. The priest in astonishment and at his wit's 
end, answered with a trembling voice, "Devil is thy 
name ; thou actest like the devil, and thou art the devil. 
For this reason I will have nothing to do with thee." 
He then hastily left the pulpit, and ran away as if Satan 
himself had been behind him. Immediately the images 
were torn down, and the mass abolished. The Roman- 
catholics sought to console themselves by repeating 

* Die sectischen haltend vil elends Hiidel volk gefunden, etc 
Balat. Chron. f Le bon Dieu, probably the patron saint. W. 



OPPOSITION to REFORM. 407 

everywhere, "At Zurzack it was the devil who intro- 
duced the Reformation."* 

The priests and warriors of the Forest cantons be- 
held the overthrow of the Romish faith m countries that 
lay nearer to them. In the canton of Glaris, whence, 
by the steep passes of the Klaus and the Pragel,j* the 
reform might suddenly fall upon Uri and Schwytz, two 
men met face to face. At Mollis, Fridolin Brunner, who 
questioned himself every day by what means he could 
advance the cause of Christ,J attacked the abuses of the 
church with the energy of his friend Zwingle,§ and en- 
deavored to spread among the people, who were pas- 
sionately fond of war, the peace and charity of the gos- 
pel. At Glaris, on the contrary, Valentine Tschudi 
studied with all the circumspection of his friend Eras- 
mus to preserve a just medium between Rome and the 
reform. And although, in consequence of Fridolin's 
preaching, the doctrines of purgatory, indulgences, mer- 
itorious works, and intercession of the saints, were 
looked at by the Glaronais as mere follies and fables, || 
they still believed with Tschudi that the body and blood 
of Christ were substantially in the bread of the Lord's 
supper. 

At the same time a movement in opposition to the 
reform was taking place in that high and savage valley 
where the Linth, roaring at the foot of vast rocks with 
jagged crests, enormous citadels which seem built in 
the air, bathes the villages of Schwanden and Ruti with 
its waters. The Roman-catholics, alarmed at the prog- 
ress of the gospel, and wishing to save these mountains 
at least, had scattered with liberal hands the money they 
derived from their foreign pensions ; and from that time 
violent hostility divided old friends, and men who ap- 
peared to have been won over to the gospel basely 

* That der TiifFel den ersten Angriff. f This is the road by 
which the army of Suwaroff escaped in 1799. \ Nam quotidie 

iogitare soleo quanam re Christianum adjuvem profectun. Zw. 
Epp. 2. 13. § Audeo ego intrepide omnem eccles.ae abusura et 

omnia humana pra^cppta in enunciatione yerbi Dei damnare. Ibid. 

11 Nugas esse et fabulas. Ibid. 



/ 



408 HISTORY OP THE REFORMATIOK. 

sought for a pretext to conceal a disgraceful flight.^ 
Peter I" and I/' wrote Rasdorfer, pastor of Ruti, in de- 
fipair, " are laboring in the vineyard, but alas, the grapes 
we gather are not employed for the sacrifice, and the 
very birds do not eat them. We fish, but after having 
toiled all night, we find that we have only caught 
leeches.J Alas, we are casting pearls before dogSj and 
roses before swine." The spirit of revolt against the 
gospel soon descended from these valleys with the noisy 
waters of the Linth as far as Glaris and Mollis. " The 
council, as if it had been composed only of silly women, 
shifted its sails every day," said Rasdorfer ;§ " one day 
it will have the cowl, on the next it will not."|| Glaris, 
like a leaf carried along on the bosom of one of its tor* 
rents, and which the waves and eddies drive in different 
directions, wavered, wheeled about, and was nearly 
swallowed up. 

But this crisis came to an end : the gospel suddenly 
regained strength, and on Easter Monday, 1530, a gei>« 
eral assembly of the people " put the mass and the altars 
to the vote." A powerful party that relied upon the 
five cantons vainly opposed the reform. It was pro- 
claimed, and its vanquished and disconcerted enemies 
were forced to content themselves, says Bullinger, with 
mysteriously concealing a few idols, which they reserved 
for better days. 

In the meanwhile the reform advanced in the exterior 
Rhodes of Appenzell,T[ and in the district of Sargans. 
But what most exasperated the cantons that remained 
faithful to the Romish doctrines, was to see it pass the 
Alps and appear in Italy, in those beautiful districts 

* Jam aere coavicti palinodiam canunt. Zw. Epp. 2. 292. 

] Pierre Rumelia, pastor of Schwanden. % Tota enim nocto 
piscantes, sanguisugas, aspendios cepimus. Zw. Epp. 2. 13. Ras- 
dorfer evidently aUudcs to what Pliny says of a kind of vine termed 
Aspendios : E diverso aspendios, damnata aris. Ferunt earn nec ab 
alite ulla attingi. Hist. Nat. lib. 14. cap. 18. § 22. § Verti vela 
indies senatus noster muliercularum more. Ibid. || Vult jam 

cucullum. post non vult. Ibid. That is, at one time it recogni*e§ 
at another rejects the abbot of St. Gall. IT See Benedict NoU'a 
Letter to Zwingle, Epp. 2. 635 



IHE MONK EGHDIO. 



4oe 



round lake Maggiore, where, near the embouchure of 
the Maggia, within the walls of Locarno, in the midst of 
laurels, pomegranates, and cypresses, flourished the no- 
ble families of Orelli, Mural to, Magoria, and Duni, and 
where floated since 1612 the sovereign standard of the 
cantons. "What," said the Waldstettes, "is it not 
enough that Zurich and Zwingle infest Switzerland? 
They have the impudence to carry their pretended reform 
even into Italy, even into the country of the pope !" 

Great irregularities prevailed there among the clergy : 
" Whoever wishes to be damned must become a priest,'' 
was a common saying.* But the gospel succeeded in 
making its way even into that district. A monk of 
Como, Egidio k Porta, who had taken the cowl in 1611, 
against the wishes of his family,f struggled for years in 
the Augustine convent, and nowhere found peace for his 
soul. Motionless, environed, as it appeared to him, with 
profound night, he cried aloud, "Lord, what wilt thou 
that I should do Erelong the monk of Como thought 
he heard these words in his heart : " Go to Ulrich Zwin- 
gle, and he will tell thee." He rose trembling with emo- 
tion. " It is you," wrote he to Zwingle immediately — 
" but no, it is not you, it is God who, through you, will 
deliver me from the nets of the hunters." " Translate 
the New Testament into Italian," replied Zwingle ; " I 
will undertake to get it printed at Zurich." This is 
what the reform did for Italy more than three centuries 
ago. 

Egidio therefore remained. He commenced translat- 
ing the gospel ; but at one time he had to beg for the 
convent, at another to repeat his "hours," and then to 
accompany one of the fathers on his journeys. J Every 
thing that surrounded him increased his distress. He 

♦ St. Charles Borromeo, archbishop of Milan, suppressed some- 
what later several convents in this district: Monialium non dicam 
collegia, sed amantium contubernia," said he. Die evangel. Gem. 
In Locarno von F. Meyer, 1. 109. f Subduxi memet a parentum 
pairocinio, cucullumque nigrum ex animo suscepi. Zw. Epp. 1. 4<i& 

t Confratres nonnulli viri certe et pietate et eruditione Qeqa» 
qu&Dl conic mptibiler^. Ibid. 533. 

UiTwoTRcBr.. 



410 HISTOR-y OP THE REFORMATION 



Bavf his country reduced to the greatest misery by des 
olating wars, men formerly rich holding out theii 
hands for alms, crowds of women driven by want to the 
most shameful degradation. He imagined that a great 
political deliverance could alone bring about the relig- 
ious independence of his fellow-countrymen. 

On a sudden he thought that this happy hour was 
arrived. He perceived a band of Lutheran lansquenets 
descending the Alps. Their serried phalanxes, their 
threatening looks, were directed towards the banks of 
the Tiber. At their head marched Freundsberg, wear- 
ing a chain of gold around his neck, and saying, If I 
reach Rome, I will make use of it to hang the pope.'' 
" God wills to save us," wrote Egidio to Zwingle : write 
to the constable ;* entreat him to deliver the people 
over whom he rules — to take from the shaven crowns, 
whose God is their belly, the wealth which renders them 
so proud, and to distribute it among the people who are 
dying of hunger. Then let each one preach without fear 
the pure word of the Lord. The strength of antichrist 
is near its fall." 

Thus, about the end of 1526, Egidio already dreamed 
of the reformation of Italy. From that time his letters 
cease: the monk disappeared. There can be no doubt 
that the arm of Rome was able to reach him, and that, 
like so many others, he was plunged into the gloomy 
dungeon of some convent. 

In the spring of 1530, a new epoch commenced for 
the Italian bailiwicks. Zurich appointed Jacques Werd- 
miiller bailiff of Locarno ; he was a grave man, respect- 
ed by all, and who even in 1524 had kissed the feet of 
the pope ; he had since then been won over to the gos- 
pel, and had sat down at the feet of the Saviour. Luke 
10 : 39. " Go," said Zurich, " and bear yourself like a 
Christian, and in all that concerns the word of God con- 
form to the ordinances." Werdmiiller met with nothing 
but darkness in every quarter. Yet, in the midst of this 
gloom, a feeble glimmering seemed to issue from a con- 

* Bourbon, who commanded in Italy on behalf of the empercf 
Bapra, book 13, p. 29. 



THE MONK. OP LOCARNO 



411 



vent situated on the delightful shores of lake Maggiore. 
Among the Carmelites at Locarno was a monk named 
Fontana, skilled in the holy Scriptures, and animated 
with the same spirit that had enlightened the monk of 
Como. The doctrine of salvation, " without money and 
without price," which God proclaims in the gospel, filled 
him with love and joy. **As long as I live," said he, 
I will preach upon the epistles of St. Paul for it 
was particularly in these epistles that he had found the 
truth. Two monks, of whose names we are ignorant, 
shared his sentiments. Fontana wrote a letter to all 
the church of Christ in Germany," which was forwarded 
to Zwingle. We may imagine we hear that man of 
Macedonia who appeared in a vision to Paul in the 
night, calling him to Europe, and saying, Come over 
and help us." Acts 16:9. "0 trusty and well-beloved 
of Christ Jesus," cried the monk of Locarno to Germany, 
" remember Lazarus the beggar in the gospel, remem- 
ber that humble Canaanitish woman longing for the 
crumbs that fell from the Lord^s table ; hungry as David, 
I have recourse to the show-bread placed upon the altar. 
A poor traveller devoured by thirst, I rush to the springs 
of living water.f Plunged in darkness, bathed in tears, 
we cry to you who know the mysteries of God to send 
us by the hands of the munificent J. Werdmiiller all the 
writings of the divine Zwingle, of the famous Luther, of 
the skilful Melancthon, of the mild (Ecolampadius, of the 
ingenious Pomeranus, of the learned Lambert, of the 
elegant Brentz, of the penetrating Bucer, of the studious 
Leo, of the vigilant Hiitten, and of the other illustrious 
doctors, if there are any more. Excellent princes, pivots 
of the church our holy mother, make haste to deliver 
from the slavery of Babylon a city of Lombardy that 
has not yet known the gospel of Jesus Christ. We are 
but three who have combined together to fight on behalf 

• Se dum vivat satis de Epistolis Pauli concionaturum esse. 2w 
Epp. 2. 497. t Debilis ct infirmus apud piscinam, salutem mei ei 
patriae to to mentis affectu citissime expecto. Hottinger, saeoni 16^ 
pars 2, p. 619, 



412 



HlSTOHr OF THE REFORMATION. 



of the truth but it was beneath the blows of a bmall 
body of men, chosen by God, and not by the thousauda 
of Gideon, that Midian fell. Who knows if, from a small 
spark, God may not cause a great conflagration 1^ 

Thus three men on the banks of the Maggia hoped at 
that time to reform Italy. They uttered a call to which, 
for three c(mturies, the evangelical world has not replied. 
Zurich, however, in these days of its strength and of its 
faith, displayed a holy boldness, and dared extend her 
heretical arms beyond the Alps. Hence Uri, Schwytz, 
Unterwalden, and all the Romanists of Switzerland gave 
vent to loud and terrible threats, swearing to arrest, 
even in Zurich itself, the course of these presumptuoua 
invasions. 

But the Zurichers did not confine themselves to this : 
they gave the confederates more serious cause of fear 
by waging incessant war against the convents, those 
centres of ultramontane fanaticism. The extensive mon- 
astery of Wettingen, around which roll the waters of 
the Limmat, and which, by its proximity to Zurich, was 
exposed more than any other to the breath of reform, 
was in violent commotion. On the 23d of August, 1529, 
a great change took place: the monks ceased to sing 
mass ; they cut off each other's beards, not without 
shedding a few tears ; they laid down their frocks and 
their hoods, and clothed themselves in becoming secular 
dresses.f Then, in astonishment at this metamorphosis, 
they listened devoutly to the sermon which Sebastian 
Benli of Zurich came and preached to them, and erelong 
employed themselves in propagating the gospel, and in 
singing psalms in German. Thus Wettingen fell into 
the current of that river which seemed to be everywhere 
reviving the confederation. The cloister, ceasing to be 
a house for gaming, gluttony, and drunkenness, was 
changed into a school. Two monks alone in all the 
monastery remained faithful to the cowl. 

The commander of Mulinen, without troubling him- 

* Goafederati coojuuctique in expeditionem veritatis tres taDium 
oamero surnus. Hottinger saecul. 16, pars 2, p. 620, f Beklel 
teQd Bich in erbare gemeine L<aadskleyder. Bull. Chron. 2. 31. 



THJi ABBEY OP ST. GALL. 



413 



Bsif about the threats of the Romish cantons, earnestly 
pressed the comraandery of St. John at Hitzkirch tow- 
ards the Reformation. The question was put to the 
vote, and the majority declared in favor of the word of 
God. " Ah," said the commander, I have been long 
pushing behind the chariot."* On the 4th of September 
the commandery was reformed. It was the same with 
that of Wadenswyl, with the convent of Pfefferg, and 
others besides. Even at Mury, the majority declared 
for the gospel ; but the minority prevailed through the 
support of the five cantons.f A new triumph, and one 
of greater value, was destined to indemnify the reform, 
and to raise the indignation of the Waldstettes to the 
highest pitch. 

The abbot of St. Gall, by his wealth, by the number 
of his subjects, and the influence which he exercised in 
Switzerland, was one of the most formidable adversaries 
of the gospel. In 1529, therefore, at the moment when 
the army of Zurich took the field against the five can- 
tons, the abbot Francis of Giesberg, in alarm and at the 
brink of death, caused himself to be hastily removed into 
the strong castle of Rohrschach, not thinking himself 
secure except within its walls. Four days after this, 
the illustrious Vadian, burgomaster of St. Gall, entered 
the convent, and announced the intention of the people 
to resume the use of their cathedral church, and to re- 
move the images. The monks were astonished at such 
audacity, and having in vain protested and cried for 
help, put their most precious eflfects in a place of safety, 
and fled to Einsidlen. 

Among these was Kilian Kouffi, head steward of the 
abbey, a cunning and active monk, and like Zwingle, a 
native of the Tockenberg. Knowing how important it 
was to find a successor to the abbot before the news of 
his death was bruited abroad, he came to an understand- 
ing with those who waited on the prelate ; and the latter 
dying on Tuesday in holy week, the meals were carried 

• Diu me in hoc curru promovendo laborasse, priusquam tain 
longe processit. Zw. Epp. 2. 334 f Das das minder miist dae 
meer fin. Ball. 2. 241. 

I 



414 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



as usual into his chamber, and with downcast eyes anil 
low voice the attendants answered every inquiry about 
his health. While this farce was going on round a dead 
body, the monks who had assembled at Einsidlen repair- 
ed in all haste to Rapperschwyl, in the territory of St 
Gall, and there elected Kilian, who had so skilfully man- 
aged the affair. The new abbot went immediately to 
Rohrschach, and on Good-Friday he there proclaiir 
his own election and the death of his predecessor. Zu- 
rich and Glaris declared they would not recognize him, 
unless he could prove by the holy Scriptures that a 
monkish life was in conformity with the gospel. We 
are ready to protect the house of God,*' said they, " and 
for this reason we require that it be consecrated anew 
to the Lord. But we do not forget that it is our duty 
also to protect the people. The free church of Christ 
should raise its head in the bosom of a free people." At 
the same time the ministers of St. Gall published forty- 
two theses, in which they asserted that convents were 
not "houses of God, but houses of the devil/'* The 
abbot, supported by Lucerne and Schwytz, which with 
Zurich and Glaris exercised sovereign power in St. Gall, 
replied that he could not dispute about rights which he 
held from kings and emperors. The two natives of the 
Tockenburg, Zwingle and Kilian, were thus struggling 
around St. Gall — the one claiming the people for the 
abbey, and the other the abbey for the people. The 
army of Zurich having approached Wyl, Kilian seized 
upon the treasures and muniments of the convent, and 
fled precipitately beyond the Rhine. As soon as peace 
was concluded, the crafty monk put on a secular dress, 
and crept mysteriously as far as Einsidlen, whence on a 
sudden he made all Switzerland refe'cho with his cries, 
Zurich in conjunction with Glaris replied by publishing 
a constitution, according to which a governor, "coa* 
firmed in the evangelical faith," should preside over the 
district, with a council of twelve members, while the 
election of pastors was left to the parishes.f Not long 

• Thesis 8. Bull. 2. 115. f Die Pfarer soil den Gmeindeiiirt 
^Uens zu erkiessen zu^estelt ejn. Ibid. 263, 



THE CONTEST IN SOLEURE. 416 



afterwards the abbot, expelled and a fugitive, while 
crossing a river near Bregentz, fell from his horse, got 
entangled in his frock, and was drowned. Of the two 
combatants from the Tockenburg, it was Zwingle who 
gained the victory. 

The convent was put up for sale, and was purchased 
hy the town of St. Gall, " with the exception," says Bui- 
linger, "of a detached building called ffelly where the 
monks were left who had not embraced the reform."* 
The time having arrived when the governor sent by 
Zurich was to give place to one from Lucerne, the peo- 
ple of St. Gall called upon the latter to swear to their 
constitution. " A governor has never been known," re- 
plied he, " to make an oath to peasants ; it is the peasants 
who should make oath to the governor." Upon this he 
retired: the Zurich governor remained, and the indig- 
nation of the five cantons against Zurich, which so 
daringly assisted the people of St. Gall in recovering 
their ancient liberties, rose to the highest paroxysm of 
anger. 

A few victories, however, consoled in some degree 
the partisans of Rome. Soleure was for a long time 
one of the most contested battle-fields. The citizens and 
the learned were in favor of reform ; the patricians and 
canons for popery. Philip Grotz of Zug was preaching 
the gospel there, and the council desiring to compel him 
to say mass, one hundred of the reformed appeared ia 
the hall of assembly on the 13th of September, 1529, and 
with energy called for liberty of conscience. As Zu- 
rich and Berne supported this demand, their prayer was 
granted. 

Upon this the most fanatical of the Roman-catholics, 
exasperated at the concession, closed the gates of the 
city, pointed the guns, and made a show of expelling 
the friends of the reform. The council prepared to pun- 
ish these agitators, when the reformed, willmg to set an 
example of Christian moderation, declared they would 
forgive them.f The great council then published through- 

* Alein was ein gebuw die Hell genampt, das liees man doo 
Miinchen bl^ben. Bull 2. 271. f Ruchat. 2. 139. 



416 HISTORY OF THE REPORMATIOIT. 



out the canton that the dominion of conscience belongs 
mg to God alone, and faith being the free gift of his 
grace, each one might follow the religion which he 
thought best. Thirty-four parishes declared for the Ref- 
ormation, and only two for the mass. Almost all the 
rural districts were in favor of the gospel, but the ma- 
jority in the city sided with the pope.*^ Haller, whom 
the reformed of Soleure had sent for, arrived, and it was 
a day of triumph for them. It was in the middle of winr 
ter : " To-day," ironically observed one of the evangeli- 
cal Christians, " the patron saint," St. Ours, " will sweat.** 
And in truth — 0 wonderful ! — drops of moisture fell 
from the holy image 1 It was simply a little holy water 
that had frozen, and then thawed. But the Romanists 
would listen to no raillery on so illustrious a prodigy, 
which may remind us of the blood of St. Januarius at 
Naples. All the city resounded with piteous cries, the 
hiAls were tolled, a general procession moved through 
the streets, and high mass was sung in honor of the 
heavenly prince who had shown in so marvellous a man- 
ner the pangs he felt for his dearly beloved. " It is the 
fat minister of Berne," Haller, who is the cause of the 
saint's alarm," said the devout old women. One of them 
declared that she would thrust a knife into his body; 
and certain Roman-catholics threatened to go to the Cor- 
deliers' church and murder the pastors who preached 
there. Upon this the reformed rushed to that church 
and demanded a public discussion : two hundred of their 
adversaries posted themselves at the same time in the 
church of St. Ours and refused all inquiry. Neither of 
the two parties was willing to be the first to abandon 
the camp in wliich it was intrenched. The senate, wish- 
ing to clear the two churches thus in a manner trans- 
formed into citadels, announced that at Martinmas, that 
is, nine months later, a public disputation should take 
pla'it. But as the reformed found the delay too long, 
both parties remained for a whole week more under 
arms. Commerce was interrupted, the public offices 
* Major pars agri abolita superstitione a parte nostra stat. Ma 
fox el potior pars urbis a papistis. Zw. Epp. 2. 489. 



ALi.EM IN THE aRISONS 



417 



were closed, messengers ran to and fro, arrangements 
were proposed ; but the people were so stiff-necked,* 
that no one would give way. The city was in a state 
of siege. At last all were agreed about the discussion, 
and the ministers committed four theses to writing, 
which the canons immediately attempted to refute. 

Nevertheless they judged it a still better plan to 
dude them. Nothing alarmed the Romanists so much 
as a disputation. What need have we of any?" said 
they. " Do not the writings of the two parties declare 
their sentiments ?" The conference was therefore put 
off until the following year. Many of the reformed, in- 
dignant at these delays, imprudently quitted the city ; 
and the councils, charmed at this result, which they 
were far from expecting, hastily declared that the peo- 
ple should be free in the canton, but that in the city no 
one should attack the mass. From that time the re- 
formed were compelled every Sunday to leave Soleure 
and repair to the village of Zuchswyl to hear the word 
of God. Thus Popery, defeated in so many places, tri- 
umphed in Soleure. 

Zurich and the other reformed cantons attentively 
watched these successes of their adversaries, and lent a 
fearful ear to the threats of the Roman-catholics, who 
were continually announcing the intervention of the 
emperor; when on a sudden a report was heard that 
nine hundred Spaniards had entered the Grisons ; that 
they were led by the chatelain of Musso, recently in- 
vested with the title of marquis by Charles the Fifth; 
that the chatelaines brother-in-law Didier d^Embs was 
also marching against the Swiss at the head of three 
thousand imperial lansquenets ; and that the emperor 
himself was ready to support them with all his forces. 
The Grisons uttered a cry of alarm. The Waldstettes 
remained motionless ; but all the reformed cantons as- 
f^embled their troops, and eleven thousand men began 
their march.f The emperor and the duke of Milan sav- 
ing soon after declared that they would not support the 
* Tarn duraB cervicis populus est. Zw. £pp. 2, 489, t BvdJU 
Chrcm. 2. 357. 

27 



118 HlSTOBy OF THE REFORMATION. 



chatelain, this adventurer beheld his castle razed to the 
ground, and was compelled to retire to the banks of the 
Sesia, giving guarantees of future tranquillity; v^hile 
the Swiss soldiers returned to their homes fired with 
indignation against the five cantons, who by their inac- 
tivity had infringed the federal alliance.* " Our prompt 
and energetic resistance," said they, "has undoubtedly 
baffled th^ir perfidious designs ; but the reaction is only 
adjourned. Although the parchment of the Austrian 
alliance has been torn in pieces, the alliance itself still 
exists. The truth has freed us, but soon the imperial 
lansquenets will come and try to place us again under 
the yoke of slavery " 

Thus in consequence of so many violent shocks, the 
two parties that divided Switzerland had attained the 
highest degree of irritation. The gulf that separated 
them widened daily. The clouds, the forerunners of the 
tempest, drove swiftly along the mountains, and gath- 
exed threateningly above the valleys. Under these cir- 
cumstances Zwingle and his friends thought it their duty 
to raise their voices, and if possible to avert the storm. 
In like manner, Nicholas de Flue had in former days 
thrown himself between the hostile parties. 

On the 5th of September, 1530, the principal minis- 
ters of Zurich, Berne, Basle, and Strasburg — (Ecolampa- 
dius, Capito, Megander, Leo Juda, and Myconius — were 
assembled at Zurich in Zwingle's house. Desirous of 
taking a solemn step with the five cantons, they drew 
up an address that was presented to the confederates at 
the meeting of the diet at Baden. However unfavorable 
the deputies were, as a body, to these heretical minis- 
ters, they nevertheless listened to this epistle, but not 
without signs of impatience and weariness.f " You are 
iware, gracious lords, that concord increases the power 
of states, and that discoid overthrows them.^ You are 
yourselves a proof of the first of these truths. Setting 

* Ward ein grosser Unwill wieder sie. Bull. Chroti. 2 361. 

t Lecta est epistola nostra in comitds Badeusibus. (Ecol. to 
Bucer, December 28, 1630. J Wie mit Eiuhelligkeit kieiae Ding 
grooo werdend. Zw. 0pp. 2. 78. 



AUTONOMY OF THE CHURCH. 



419 



out from a small beginning, you have, by a good under- 
standing one with another, arrived at a great end May 
God condescend to prevent you also from giving a strik- 
ing proof of the se^rond. Whence comes disunion, if 
not from selfishness ? and how can we destroy this fatal 
passion, except by receiving from God the love of tlio 
common weal ? For this reason we conjure you to allow 
the word of God to be freely preached among you, as 
did your pious ancestors. When has there ever existed 
a government, even among the heathens, which saw not 
that the hand of God alone upholds a nation ? Do not 
two drops of quicksilver unite so soon as you remove 
that which separates them ? Away then with that which 
separates you from our cities, that is, the absence of the 
word of God ; and immediately the Almighty will unite 
us, as our fathers were united. Then placed in your 
mountains, as in the centre of Christendom, you will be 
an example to it, its protection and its refuge ; and after 
having passed through this vale of tears, being the ter- 
ror of the wicked and the consolation of the faithful, you 
will at last be established in eternal happiness." 

Thus frankly did these men of God address their 
brothers the Waldstettes. But their voice was not 
attended to. " The ministers' sermon is rather long,"* 
said some of the deputies yawning and stretching their 
arms, while others pretended to find in it new cause of 
complaint against the cities. 

This proceeding of the ministers was useless: the 
Waldstettes rejected the word of God, which they had 
been entreated to admit ; they rejected the hands that 
were extended towards them in the name of Jesus Christ. 
They called for the pope, and not for the gospel. All 
hope of reconciliation appeared lost. 

Some persons, however, had at that time a glimpse 
of what might have saved Switzerland and the Reforma- 
tion — the avionomy^ self-government, of the church, and 
its independence of political interests. Had they been 
wise enough to decline the secular puwer to secure the 

* Libeilum supplicem ad quinqiie pago» breviorem vellent 
Bpp. 2. 511. Fastidiunt tarn sancta (Ecol. 



420 HISTORYiOP THE EEFOEMATIOK. 



triumph of the gospel, it is probable that harmony might 
have been gradually established in the Helvetic cantons, 
and that the gospel would have conquered by its divine 
strength. The power of the word of God presented 
chances of success that were not aflforded by pikes and 
muskets. The energy of faith, the influence of charity, 
would have proved a securer protection to Christians 
against the burning piles of the Waldstettes than diplo- 
matists and men-at-arms. None of the reformers under- 
stood this so clearly as CEcolampadius. His handsome 
countenance, the serenity of his features, the mild ex- 
pression of his eyes, his long and venerable beard, the 
spirituality of his expression, a certain dignity that in- 
spired confidence and respect, gave him rather the air of 
an apostle than of a reformer. It was the power of the 
inner word that he particularly extolled ; perhaps he 
even went too far in spiritualism. But however that 
may be, if any man could have saved the reform from the 
misfortunes that were about to befall it, that man was 
he. In separating from the Papacy, he desired not to 
set up the magistracy in its stead. "The magistrate 
who should take away from the churches the authority 
that belongs to them," wrote he to Zwingle, " would be 
more intolerable than antichrist himself — ^that is, the 
pope."* " The hand of the magistrate strikes with the 
sword, but the hand of Christ heals. Christ has not 
said. If thy brother will not hear thee, tell it to the mag- 
istrate, but, tell it to the church. The functions of the 
state are distinct from those of the church. The state is 
free to do many things which the purity of the gospel 
condemns."f CEcolampadius saw how important it was 
that his convictions should prevail among the reformed. 
This man, so mild and so spiritual, feared not to stand 
forth boldly in defence of doctrines then so novel. He 
expounded them before a synodal assembly, and next 

* Intolerabilior enim Antlcbristo ipso magistratos, qui Ecclesiig 
auctoritatem suam adimit. Zw. Epp. 2. 510. f Ipsornm functio 
alia est et ecclesiastica, multaque ferre et facere potest qu» puritm 
•vangelica aon agnosclt. Ibid. 



A DIET AT BASLE. 



421 



developed them before the senate of Basle.* It is a 
strange circumstance that these ideas, for a moment at 
least, were acceptable to Zwingle ;f but they displeased 
an assembly of the brethren to whom he communicated 
them ; the politic Bucer, above all, feared that this inde- 
pendence of the church would in some measure check 
the exercise of the civil power. J The exertions of (Eco- 
lampadins to constitute the church were not, however, 
entirely unsuccessful. In February, 1531, a diet of four 
reformed cantons — Basle, Zurich, Berne, and St. Gall — 
was held at Basle, in which it was agreed, that when- 
ever any difficulty should arise with regard to doctrine 
or worship, an assembly of divines and laymen should 
be convoked, which should examine what the word of 
God said on the matter.§ This resolution, by giving 
greater unity to the renovated church, gave it also fresh 
strength. 

* Orationis meae quam, fratrum nomine, coram senatu habui. 
Zw. £pp. 2. 510. t Ut mihi magis ac magis arridet. Ibid. 618. 

{ Ut noQ impediat alicubi magistratum ChriBtianum. Booer to 
Zw. p. S36. ^ J. J. Hottiager, 3. 664. 



422 HISTOEY OP THE EEFOEMATION 



CHAPTER IV. 

Zwingle and the Christian state — Zwingle^s double part — ^Zwinglo 
and Luther in relation to politics — Philip of Hesse and the free 
cities — Projected union between Zwingle and Luther — Zwingle^fi 
political action — Project of alliance against the emperor — Zwin- 
gle advocates active resistance — He destines the imperial crown 
for Philip — Faults of the Reformation — Embassy to Venice — 
Giddiness of the Reformation — Projected alliance with France — 
Zwingle's plan of alliance — Approaching ruin — Slanders in the 
five cantons — Violence — Mysterious paper — Berne and Basle vote 
for peace — General diet at Baden — Evangelical diet at Zurich — 
Political reformation of Switzerland — Activity of Zurich. 

But it was too late to tread in this path which would 
have prevented so many disasters. The Reformation had 
already entered with all her sails set upon the stormy 
ocean of politics, and terrible misfortunes were gather- 
ing over her. The impulse communicated to the reform 
Cd,me from another than (Ecolampadius. Zwingle's proud 
and piercing eyes, his harsh features, his bold step, all 
proclaimed in him a resolute mind and the man of action. 
Nurtured in the exploits of the heroes of antiquity, he 
threw himself, to save reform, in the footsteps of Demos- 
thenes and Cato, rather than in those of St. John and St. 
Paul. His prompt and penetrating looks were turned 
to the right and to the left — to the cabinets of kings and 
the councils of the people, while they should have been 
directed solely to God. We have already seen, that as 
early as 1521, Zwingle, observing how all the powers 
were rising against the Reformation, had conceived the 
plan of a coburghery or Christian state,* which should 
unite all the friends of the word of God in one holy and 
powerful league- This was so much the easier as Zwin- 
gle^s reformation had won over Strasburg, Augsburg, 
Ulm, Reutlingen, Lindau, Memmingen, and other towns 
of Tipper Germany. Constance in December, 1527, Berne 
in June, 1528, St. Gall in November of the same yeaXi 
* Civitas Christiana. 



ZWINGLE'S TWOFOLD PART. 



423 



Bienne in January, 1529, Mulhausen in February, Basle 
in March, Schaffhausen in September, and Strasburg in 
December, entered into this alliance. This political 
phasis of Zwingle's character is in the eyes of some 
persons his highest claim to glory ; we do not hesitate 
to acknowledge it as his greatest fault. The reformer, 
deserting the paths of the apostles, allowed himself to 
be led astray by the perverse example of Popery. The 
primitive church never opposed their persecutors but 
with the sentiments derived from the gospel of peace. 
Faith was the only sword by which it vanquished the 
mighty ones of the earth. Zwingle felt clearly that by 
entering into the ways of worldly politicians, he was 
leaving those of a minister of Christ ; he therefore sought 
to justify himself. " No doubt it is not by human 
strength," said he, " it is by the strength of God alone 
that the word of the Lord should be upheld. But God 
often makes use of men as instruments to succor men. 
Let us therefore unite, and from the sources of the Rhine 
to Strasburg let us form but one people and one alli- 
ance."* 

Zwingle played two parts at once : he was a reformer 
and a magistrate. But these are two characters that 
ought not more to be united than those of a minister 
and of a soldier. We will not altogether blame the 
soldiers and the magistrates: in forming leagues anl 
drawing the sword, even for the sake of religion, they 
act according to their point of view, although it is not 
the same as ours ; but we must decidedly blame the Chris- 
tian minister who becomes a diplomatist or a general. 

In October, 1529, as we have already observed, Zwin- 
gle repaired to Marburg, whither he had been invited by 
Philip of Hesse ; and while neither of them had b(;en 
able to come to an understanding with Luther, the land- 
grave and the Swiss reformer, animated by the same 
hold and enterprising spirit, soon agreed together. 

The two reformers differed not less in their political 
than in their religious system. Luther, brought up in 

* Dass Toa^ oben hiaab hie dises Rhyas, bis gen Strasburg eiil 
Volk unci Bundniss wiirde. Zw. 0pp. 2. 28, 



m HISTORY OF THE EEPORMATIOK. 



the cloister and in monastic submission, was imbued !o 
youth with the writings of the fathers of the church; 
Zwingle, on the other hand, reared in the midst of Swiss 
liberty, had, during those early years which decide the 
course of all the rest, imbibed the history of the ancient 
republics. Thus, while Luther was in favor of a passive 
obedience, Zwingle advocated resistance against tyrants. 

These tv/o men were the faithful representatives of 
their respective nations. In the north of Germany, the 
princes and nobility were the essential part of the na- 
tion, and the people, strangers to all political liberty, 
had only to obey. Thus, at the epoch of the Reforma- 
tion they were content to follow the voice of their doc- 
tors and chiefs. In Switzerland, in the south of Ger- 
many, and on the Rhine, on the contrary, many cities, 
after long and violent struggles, had won civil liberty ; 
and hence we find in almost every place the people tak- 
ing a decided part in the reform of the church. There 
was good in this, but evil was close at hand. The 
reformers, themselves men of the people, who dared not 
act upon princes, might be tempted to hurry away the 
people. It was easier for the Reformation to unite with 
republics than with kings. This facility nearly proved 
its ruin. The gospel was thus to learn that its alliance 
is in heaven. 

There was, however, one prince with whom the re 
formed party of the free states desired to be in union ; 
this was Philip of Hesse. It was he who in great meas- 
ure prompted Zwingle's warlike projects. Zwingle de- 
sired to make him some return, and to introduce his new 
friend into the evangelical league. But Berne, watch" 
ful to avert any thing that might irritate the emperor 
and its ancient confederates, rejected this proposal, and 
thus excited a lively discontent in the Christian state." 
" What," cried they, " do the Bernese refuse an alliance 
that would be honorable for us, acceptable to Jesus 
Christ, and terrible to our adversaries?"* "The bear,'' 

** Ipsis et nobis boDestius, ob religionis et caritatls causam, ChriBto 
gratius, ob conjunctas vires utUiua, bOBtibiuque terribiliua. Zw. 
Epp. 2. ^1. 



2WING-LE IMMOVABLE. 



425 



s&id the high-spirited Zwingle, " is jealous of the lion," 
Zurich; "but there will be an end to all these artifices, 
and victory will remain with the bold." It would ap» 
pear, indeed, according to a letter in cipher, that the 
Bernese at last sided with Zwingle, requiring only that 
this alliance with a prince of the empire should not be 
made public 

Still CEcolampadius had not given way, and his 
meekness contended, although modestly, with the bold- 
ness of his impetuous friend. He was convinced that 
faith was destined to triumph only by the cordial union 
of all believers. A valuable relief occurred to reanimate 
his exertions. The deputies of the Christian coburghery 
having assembled at Basle in 1530, the envoys from 
Strasburg endeavored to reconcile Luther and Zwingle. 
QCcolampadius wrote to Zwingle on the subject, begging 
him to hasten to Basle,f and not show himself too un- 
yielding. "To say that the body and blood of Christ 
are really in the Lord's supper, may appear to many too 
hard an expression," said he ; " but is it not softened, 
when it is added, spiritually and not bodily ?"| 

Zwingle was immovable. "It is to flatter Luther 
that you hold such language, and not to defend the 
truth. § Edere est credere Nevertheless there were 
men present at the meeting who were resolved upon 
energetic measures. Brotherly love was on the eve of 
triumphing ; peace was to be obtained by union. The 
elector of Saxony himself proposed a concord of all 
evangelical Christians, to which the Swiss cities were 
invited by the landgrave to accede. A report spread 
that Luther and Zwingle were about to make the same 
confession of faith. Zwingle, calling to mind the early 
professions of the Saxon reformer, said one day at table 

• Tantum recusaverunt aperte agere. Zw. Epp. 2. 487. This 
cipher (3) appears to indicate the Bernese. f Si potes, mox 

advola. Ibid. 547. t Christi corpus et sanguinem adesse ver6 
in coena fortasse cuipiam durius sonat ; sed mitigatur dum adjungi- 
tur animo non corpore. Ibid. § Hsec omnia fieri pro Luthero 
Deque pro veritate propugnandi causa. Ibid. 550. U To eat in 
to believe. Ibid. 



42C HISTORY OP THE REFORMATlOif . 



before many witnesses, that Luther would not think so 
erroneously about the Eucharist, if he were not misled 
by Melancthon.* The union of the whole of the Refoi' 
mation seemed about to be concluded ; it would have 
vanquished by its own weapons. But Luther soon 
proved that Zwingle was mistaken in his expectations. 
He reqtiired a written engagement by which Zwingle 
ar.d (Ecolampadius should adhere to his sentiments, and 
the negotiations were broken off in consequence. Con- 
cord having failed, there remained nothing but war. 
(Ecolampadius must be silent, and Zwingle must act. 

And in truth from that hour Zwingle advanced more 
and more along that fatal path into which he was led by 
his character, his patriotism, and his early habits. Stun- 
ned by so many violent shocks, attacked by his enemies 
and by his brethren, he staggered, and his head grew 
dizzy. From this period the reformer almost entirely 
disappears, and we see in his place the politician, the 
great citizen, who beholding a formidable coalition pre- 
paring its chains for every nation, stands up energeti- 
cally against it. The emperor had just formed a close 
alliance with the pope. If his deadly schemes were not 
opposed it would be all over, in Z wingless opinion, with 
the Reformation, with religious and political liberty, and 
even with the confederation itself. " The emperor," said 
he, "is stirring up friend against friend, enemy against 
enemy ; and then he endeavors to raise out of this con- 
fusion the glory of the Papacy, and above all, his own 
power. He excites the chatelain of Musso against the 
Grisons, Duke George of Saxony against Duke John, the 
bishop of Constance against the city, the duke of Savoy 
against Berne, the five cantons against Zurich, and the 
bishops of the Rhine against the landgrave ; then, when 
the confusion shall have become general, he will fall 
upon Germany, will offer himself as a mediator, and en 
snare princes and cities by fine speeches, until he has 
them all under his feet. Alas, what discord, what disas- 

* MemiDi dudum Tiguri te dicentem cum convivio me ezcipereBi 
Lntherum doq adeo perperam de Eucharistia sentire, nisi quod 
ULQCthon ex alio earn cogeret. Zw. Epp. 2. 562 



ADVOCATES ACTIVE RESISTANCE. 4*i5/ 

ters, under the pretence of reestablishing the empire and 
restoring religion I"* Zwingle went farther. The re- 
former of a small town in Switzerland, rising to the 
most astonishing political conceptions, called for a Euro 
pean alliance against such fatal designs. The son cf a 
peasant of the Tockenburg held up his head against the 
heir of so many crowns. That man must either be a 
traitor or a coward," wrote he to a senator of Constance, 
" who is content to stretch and yawn when he ought to 
be collecting men and arms on every side to convince 
the emperor that in vain he strives to refe'stablish the 
Romish faith, to enslave the free cities, and to subdue 
the Helvetians.f He showed us only six months ago 
how he would proceed. To-day he will take one city in 
hand, to-morrow another ; and so, step by step, until 
they are all reduced. Then their arms will be taken 
away, their treasures, their machines of war, and all 
their power. . . . Arouse Lindau, and all your neigh- 
bors ; if they do not awake, public liberty will perish 
under the pretext of religion. We must place no confi- 
dence in the friendship of tyrants. Demosthenes teaches 
us that there is nothing so hateful in their eyes as rriv 
Tuv noXeuv eJuvi^epiav.'l The emperor with one hand offers 
us bread, but in the other he conceals a stone."§ And 
a few months later, Zwingle wrote to his friends in Con- 
stance, " Be bold ; fear not the schemes of Charles. The 
razor will cut him who is sharpening it."|| 

Away then with delay. Should they wait until 
Charles the Fifth claimed the ancient castle of Haps- 
burg? The papacy and the empire, it was said at Zu- 
rich, are so confounded together,^ that one cannot exist 
or perish without the other. Whoever rejects Popery 

* Quae dissidia, quas turbas, quae mala, quas cladesi Zw. Epp. 
2 429. t Romanam fidem restituere, urbes liberas capere, Hel- 
veiios in ordiaem cogere. Ibid., March, 1530. i ''The freedom 
of cities.'^ These words are in Greek in the original. § Ctesar 
altera manu panem ostentat, altera lapidem celat. Zw. Epp. March, 
1530. II Incidet in cotem aliquando novacula. Ibid. 544. 

H Bapst und Keyserthumen habead sich dermassna in einanderi! 
geflickt. Ball. 2. 343. 



428 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 



should reject the empire, and whoever rejects the em« 
peror should reject the pope. 

It appears that Zwingle's thoughts even went be- 
yond a simple resistance. When once the gospel bad 
ceased to be his principal study, there was nothing that 
could arrest him. " A single individual,'^ said he, "must 
not take it into his head to dethrone a tyrant ; this would 
be a revolt, and the kingdom of God commands peace, 
righteousness, and joy. But if a whole people vrith 
common accord, or if the majority at least, rejects him 
without committing any excess, it is God himself who 
acts."* Charles V. was at that time a tyrant in Zwin- 
gle's eyes ; and the reformer hoped that Europe, awaken- 
ing at length from its long slumber, would be the hand 
of God to hurl him from his throne. 

Never since the time of Demosthenes and of the two 
Catos had the world seen a more energetic resistance to 
the power of its oppressors. Zwingle, in a political 
point of view, is one of the greatest characters of modern 
times : we must pay him this honor, which is perhaps, 
for a minister of God, the greatest reproach. Every 
thing was prepared in his mind to bring about a revolu' 
tion that would have changed the history of Europe. 
He knew what he desired to substitute in place of the 
power he wished to overthrow. He had already cast 
his eyes upon the prince who was to wear the imperial 
crown instead of Charles. It was his friend the land- 
grave. " Most gracious prince," wrote he on the 2d of 
November, 1529, "if I write to you as a child to a 
father, it is because I hope that God has chosen you for 
great events .... I dare think, but I dare not speak of 
them.f . . . However, we must bell the cat at last.J . . . 
All that I can do with my feeble means to manifest the 
truth, to save the universal church, to augment your 
power and the power of those who love God, with God's 
help, I will do." Thus was this great man led astray, 

* So ist es mit Gott. Zw. 0pp. 2. f Spero Deum te ad mag- 
nas res ... . quas quidem cogitare sed noa dicere licet. Zw. Epp« 
2. 666. I Sed fieri non potest quia tintinnabulam aliquaado 
fell adnectator. Ibid 



EMBASSY TO VENICE. 



429 



It is the will of God that there be spots even in those 
who shine brightest in the eyes of the world, and that 
only one upon earth shall say, "Which of you con- 
dnceth me of sin ?" We are now viewing the faults of 
the Reformation ; they arise from the union of religion 
with politics. I could not take upon myself to pass 
them by ; the recollection of the errors of our predeces- 
sors is perhaps the most useful legacy they have be- 
queathed to us. 

It appears that already, at Marburg, Zwingle and the 
landgrave had drawn out the first sketch of a general 
alliance against Charles Y. The landgrave had under- 
taken to bring over the princes, Zwingle the free cities 
of Southern Germany and Switzerland. He went still 
further, and formed a plan of gaining over to this league 
the republics of Italy — the powerful Venice at leas1>— 
that she might detain the emperor beyond the Alps, and 
prevent him leading all his forces into Germany. Zwin- 
gle, who had earnestly pleaded against all foreign alli- 
ances, and proclaimed on so many occasions that the 
only ally of the Swiss should be the arm of the Almighty, 
began now to look around for what he had condemned, 
and thus prepared the way for the terrible judgment 
that was about to strike his family, his country, and his 
church. 

He had hardly returned from Marburg, and had made 
no oflScial communication to the great council, when he 
obtained from the senate the nomination of an ambassa- 
dor to Venice. Great men, after their first success, 
easily imagine that they can do every thing. It was 
not a statesman who was charged with this mission, but 
one of Zwingle^s friends, who had accompanied him into 
Germany, to the court of the future chief of the new 
empire, the Greek professor Rodolph Collins, a bold and 
skilful man, and who knew Italian. Thus the reform 
stretched its hands to the doge and the procurator of 
St. Marc. The Bible was not enough for it ; it must 
have the Golden Book : never did a greater humiliation 
befall God's work. The opinion which Protestants then 
entertained of Venice may, however, partly excuse Zwin- 



430 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



gle. itier^ was in that city more independence of the 
pope, more freedom of thought, than in all the rest of 
Italy, Luther himself about this time wrote to Gabriel 
Z willing, pastor at Torgau, With what joy do I learn 
what you write to me concerning the Venetians. God 
be praised and glorified, for that they have received nis 
word.''* 

Collins was admitted, on the 26th of December, to an 
audience with the doge and senate, who looked with an 
air of astonishment at this schoolmaster, this strange 
ambassador, without attendants, and without parade. 
They could not even understand his credentials, in so 
singular a style were they drawn up, and Collins was 
forced to explain their meaning. I am come to you," 
said he, in the name of the council of Zurich and of the 
cities of the Christian coburghery, free cities like Venice, 
and to which common interests should unite you. The 
power of the emperor is formidable to republics ; he is 
aiming at a universal monarchy in Europe ; if he suc- 
ceeds, all the free states will perish. We must there- 
fore check him."f The doge replied, that the republic 
had just concluded an alliance with the emperor, and be- 
trayed the distrust that so mysterious a mission excited 
in the Venetian senate. But afterwards, in a private 
conference,! the doge, wishing to preserve a retreat on 
both sides, added, that Venice gratefully received the 
message from Zurich, and that a Venetian regiment, 
armed and paid by the republic itself, should be always 
ready to support the evangelical Swiss. The chancellor, 
covered with his purple robe, attended Collins to the 
door, and at the very gates of the ducal palace confirm- 
ed the promise of support. The moment the Reformat 
tion passed the magnificent porticos of St. Marc it was 
seized with giddiness ; it could but stagger onwards to 
the abyss. They dismissed poor Collins by placing in 

* Laetus audio de Veactis quae scrlbis, quod verbum Dei recepe- 
rint ; Deo gratia ac glorira. March 7, 1528. L. Epp. 3 289. 

t Forinidaadam rebus-publicis poteatiam Caesar is, quae omnino 
ad Europae monarchiam vergit. Zw. Epp. 2. 445. X Postea 

privatim alia respoudisse. Ibid. 



OVERTURES PROM FRANCE- 



43i 



his hands a present of twenty crowns. The run or ol 
these negotiations soon spread abroad, and the less sus- 
picious, Capito for example, shook their heads, and could 
see in this pretended agreement nothing but the accus- 
tomed perfidy of Venice.* 

This was not enough. The cause of the reform was 
fated to drink the cup of degradation to the very dregs. 
Zwingle, seeing that his adversaries in the empire in- 
creased daily in numbers and in power, gradually lost 
his ancient aversion to France ; and although there was 
now a greater obstacle than before between him and 
Francis I. — the blood of his brethren shed by that mon- 
arch — he showed himself favorably disposed to a union 
that he had once so forcibly condemned. 

Lambert Maigret, a French general, who appears to 
have had some leaning to the gospel — which is a slight 
excuse for Zwingle — entered into correspondence with 
the reformer, giving him to understand that the secret 
designs of Charles V. called for an alliance between the 
king of France and the Swiss republics. Apply your- 
self," said this diplomatist to him in 1530, " to a work 
BO agreeable to our Creator, and which, by God^s grace, 
will be very easy to your mightiness. Zwingle was 
at first astonished at these overtures. " The king of 
France," thought he, cannot know which way to turn."| 
Twice he took no heed of this prayer ; but the envoy of 
Francis I. insisted that the reformer should communicate 
to him a plan of alliance. At the third attempt of thf 
ambassador, the simple child of the Tockenburg moun- 
tains could no longer resist his advances. If Charles V. 
must fall, it cannot be without French assistance ; and 
why should not the Reformation contract an alliance 
with Francis I., the object of which would be to estab- 
lish a power in the empire that should in its turn oblige 
the king to tolerate the reform in his own dominions ? 
Every thing seemed to meet the wishes of Zwingle ; the 

* Perfidiam adversus Csesarem. Mem videri volunt. Capito. Zw. 
Epp. 2. 445. t Operi Creatori nostro acceptissimo. Dominatioai tuaa 
facillimo, media gratia Dei. Zw. Epp. 2. 413. i Regem admodum 
desesperare et iaopem concilii esse, ut uesciat quo se vertat. lb 414. 



432 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 

fall of the tyi-ant was at hand, and he would drag the 
pope along with him. He communicated the generaPg 
overtures to the secret council, and Collins set out, 
commissioned to bear the required project to the French 
ambassador.* "In ancient times," it ran, "no kings or 
people ever resisted the Roman empire with such firm- 
ness as those of France and Switzerland. Let us not 
degenerate from the virtues of our ancestors. His most 
Christian majesty — all whose wishes are that the purity 
of the gospel may remain undefiledf — engages therefore 
to conclude an alliance with the Christian coburghery 
that shall be in accordance with the divine law, and that 
shall be submitted to the censure of the evangelical the- 
ologians of Switzerland." Then followed an outline of 
the difierent articles of the treaty. 

Lanzerant, another of the king's envoys, replied the 
same day, February 2^, to this astonishing project of 
alliance about to be concluded between the reformed 
Swiss and the persecutor of the French reformed, under 

reserve of the censure of the theologians This was 

not what France desired : it was Lombardy, and not the 
gospel that the king wanted. For that purpose, he 
needed the support of all the Swiss. But an alliance 
which ranged the Roman-catholic cantons against him 
would not suit him. Being satisfied therefore, for the 
present, with knowing the sentiments of Zurich, the 
French envoys began to look coolly upon the reformer's 
scheme. " The matters you have submitted to us are 
admirably drawn up," said Lanzerant to the Swiss com- 
missioner, " but I can scarcely understand them, no 

doubt because of the weakness of my mind We 

must not put any seed into the ground unless the soil be 
properly prepared for it." 

Thus the reform acquired nothing but shame from 
these propositions. Since it had forgotten these pre- 
cepts of the word of God, " Be ye not unequally yoked 
together with unbelievers," 2 Cor. 6 : 14, how could it 

• Bis negavi, et tertio misi, non sine consclentia ProbulataruiiL 
Zw. Epp. 2. 422. t Nihil eaim aqui esse In votis CbristianissimI 
Regis, atque ut Evangelii puritas lllibata permaneat Ibid* 417. 



GENERAL DIET AT BADEK. 



433 



fail to meet with striking reverses ? Already Zwingle's 
friends began to abandon him. The landgrave, who had 
pushed him into this diplomatic career, drew towards 
Luther, and sought to check the Swiss reformer, partic- 
lAarly after this saying of Erasmus had souaded in the 
ears of the great : "They ask us to open our gates, crying 
uloud, The gospel, the gospel ! . . . Raise the cloak, and 
tinder its mysterious folds you will find democracy.'' 

While the reform, by its culpable proceedings, was 
calling down the chastisement of heaven, the five can- 
tons, that were to be the instruments of its punishment, 
accelerated with all their might those fatal days of anger 
and of vengeance. They were irritated 4t the progress 
of the gospel throughout the confederation, while the 
peace they had signed became every day more irksome 
to them. " We shall have no repose," said they, " until 
we have broken these bonds and regained our former 
liberty.''* A general diet was convoked at Baden for 
the 8th of January, 1531. The five cantons then de- 
clared that if justice was not done to their grievances, 
particularly with respect to the abbey of St. Gall, they 
would no more appear in diet. " Confederates of Glaris, 
Schaflfhausen, Friburg, Soleure, and Appetizell," cried 
they, aid us in making our ancient alliances respected, 
or we will ourselves contrive the means of checking this 
guilty violence ; and may the holy Trinity assist us in 
this work."f 

They did not confine themselves to threats. The 
treaty of peace had expressly forbidden all insulting 
language ; " for fear," it said, that by insults and cal- 
umnies, discord should again be excited, and greater 
troubles than the former should arise." Thus was con- 
cealed in the treaty itself the spark whence the confia* 
gration was to proceed. In fact, to restrain the rude 
tongues of the Waldstettes was impossible. Two Zu- 
richers, the aged prior Ravensbiihler, and the pensioner 
Gaspard Godli, who had been compelled to renounce, the 
nue his convent, and the other his pension, especially 
• Nitt ruv^ea, hiPS sy der Banden ledig. Bull. 2. 324 
t Darzu hel^e uns die helig Dryfaltikeit. Ibid. 330. 



434 HISTORY OF THE REFOEMATIOK. 



arousel the anger of the people against their native city 
They used to say everywhere in these valleys, and with 
impunity, that the Zurichers were heretics ; that there 
was not one of them who did not indulge in unnatural 
sins, and who was not a robber at the very least ;* that 
Zwingle was a thief, a murderer, and an arch-heretic j 
and that, on one occasion at Paris — where he had never 
been — he had committed a horrible offence, in which Leo 
Juda had been his pander.f " I shall have no rest,'' 
Baid a pensioner, until I have thrust my sword up to 
the hilt in the heart of this impious wretch." Old com- 
manders of troops, who were feared by all on account 
of their unruly character ; the satellites who followed in 
their train ; insolent young people, sons of the first per- 
sons in the state, who thought every thing lawful against 
miserable preachers and their stupid flocks ; priests in- 
flamed with hatred, and treading in the footsteps o^" these 
old captains and giddy young men, who seemed to take 
the pulpit of a church for the bench of a pot-house, all 
poured torrents of insults on the reform and its adher- 
ents. "The townspeople," exclaimed with one accord 
those drunken soldiers and fanatic priests, " are heretics, 
soul-stealers, conscience-slayers ; and Zwingle, that hor- 
rible man who commits infamous sins, is the Lutheran 
OodrX 

They went still further. Passing from words to deeds, 
the five cantons persecuted the poor people among them 
who loved the word of God, flung them into prison, im- 
posed fines upon them, brutally tormented them, and 
mercilessly expelled them from their country. The peo- 
ple of Schwytz did even worse. Not fearing to announce 
their sinister designs, they appeared at a landsgemeinde 
wearing pine-branches in their hats, in sign of war, and 
iio one opposed them. " The abbot of St. Gall," said 
they, " is a prince of the empire, and holds his investi- 
ture from the emperor. Do they imagine that Charles V. 

* Es were kein Zurycber er hatte chuy und merchen gehygt 
Bull. 2. 336. t Alls der zu Parys ein Esel gehygt; und habe 

imm Leo Jud denselben gehept. Ibid. | Dei LutherlscheQ 

GoU. Ibid. 3^7, 



OALUMNIlsS AND THREATS. 



435 



^11 not avenge him ?" " Have not these heretics,^ said 
others, *Mared to form a Christian fraternity, as if old 
Switzerland was a heathen country ?" Secret councils 
were continually held in one place or another.* New alli- 
ances were sought with the Valais, the pope, and the em- 
perorf — bl am able alliances, no doubt, but such as they 
might at least justify by the proverb, " Birds of a feather 
go together which Zurich and Venice could not say. 

The Yalaisans at first refused their support : they 
preferred remaining neuter ; but on a sudden their fanat- 
icism was inflamed. A sheet of paper was found on an 
altar — such at least was the report circulated in their 
valleys — in which Zurich and Berne were accused of 
preaching that to commit an offence against nature is a 
smaller crime than to hear mass. J Who had placed this 
mysterious paper on the altar ? Came it from man f 
Did it fall from heaven ? . . . They know not ; but how- 
ever that might be, it was copied, circulated, and read 
everywhere ; and the effects of this fable, invented by 
some villain, says Zwingle,§ was such that Valais im- 
mediately granted the support it had at first refused. 
The Waldstettes, proud of their strength, then closed 
their ranks ; their fierce eyes menaced the heretical can- 
tons ; and the winds bore from their mountains to their 
neighbors of the towns a formidable clang of arms. 

At the sight of these alarming manifestations the 
evangelical cities were in commotion. They first assem- 
bled at Basle in February, 1531, then at Zurich in March. 
" What is to be done said the deputies from Zurich, 
after setting forth their grievances ; " how can we pun- 
ish these infamous calumnies, and force these threaten- 
ing arms to fall ?" " We understand," replied Berne, 
that you would have recourse to violence ; but think 
of these secret and formidable alliances that are forming 
with the pope, the emperor, the king of France, with so 

* Radtschlagtend und tagentend heymlich v. c. Bull. 2. 336. 

t Niiwe friiadschafteii, by den Walliseren, dem Bapst, und den 
Keysserischen. Ibid. % si quis rem obscaenam cum jumeutc 
eive bove habeat, minus peccare quam si missam inaudiat. Zw. Epp, 
p. 610. ^ Perfidorum ac sceleratoram hominum oommeutuzn. 0> 



43e 



HISTOEY OF THE REFOKICATIOH. 



many princes, in a word with all the priests' party, to 
accelerate our ruin ; tiiink on the innocence of so many 
pious souls in the five cantons, who deplore these per- 
fidious machinations ; think how easy it is to begin a 
war, but that no one can tell when it will end."* Sad 
foreboding 1 which a catastrophe beyond all human fore- 
sight accomplished but too soon. "Let us therefore 
send a deputation to the five cantons," continued Berne ; 
" let us call upon them to punish these infamous calum- 
nies in accordance with the treaty ; and if they refuse, 
let us break off all intercourse with them." " What will 
be the use of this mission ?" asked Basle. " Do we not 
know the brutality of this people ? And is it not to be 
feared that the rough treatment to which our deputies 
will be exposed, may make the matter worse ? Let us 
rather convoke a general diet." Schaffhausen and St. 
Gall having concurred in this opinion, Berne summoned 
a diet at Baden for the 10th of April, at which deputies 
from all the cantons were assembled. 

Many of the principal men among the Waldstettes 
disapproved of the violence of the retired soldiers and 
of the monks. They saw that these continually repeat- 
ed insults would injure their cause. **The insults of 
which you complain," said they to the diet, " afflict us 
no less than you. We shall know how to punish them, 
and we have already done so. But there are violent 
men on both sides. The other day a man of Basle hav- 
ing met on the highroad a person who was coming from 
Berne, and having learned that he was going to Lu- 
cerne, 'To go from Berne to Lucerne,' exclaimed he, 'is 
passing from a father to an arrant knave.'" The me- 
diating cantons invited the two parties to banish every 
cause of discord. 

But the war of the chatelain of Musso having then 
broken out, Zvvingle and Zurich, who saw in it the first 
act of a vast conspiracy destined to stifle the reform in 
every place, called their allies together. "We must 
waver no longer," said Zwingle ; " the rupture of the 

* Aber sin end uod ussgang mochte nieman bald wusson. Ball. 

I. m. 



WARLIKE TONE OP ZXjfilCH. 437 



alliapoe on the part of the five cantons, and the unheard- 
of insults with which they load us, impose upon us the 
obligation of marching against our enemies,* before the 
emperor, who is still detained by the Turks, shall have 
^ expelled the landgrave, seized upon Strasburg, and sub- 
jugated even ourselves." All the blood of the ancient 
Swiss seemed to boil in this man^s veins; and while 
Uri, Schwytz. and Unterwalden basely kissed the hand 
of Austria, this Zuricher, the greatest Helvetian of the 
age, faithful to the memory of old Switzerland, tut not 
so to still holier traditions, followed in the glorious steps 
of Stauffacher and Winkelried. 

The warlike tone of Zurich alarmed its confederates. 
Basle proposed a summons, and then, in case of refusal, 
the rupture of the alliance. Schaffhausen and St. Gall 
were frightened even at this step : " The mountaineers, 
so proud, indomitab4e, and exasperated," said they, " will 
accept with joy the dissolution of the confederation ; and 
then shall we be more advanced ?" Such was the pos- 
ture of affairs, when, to the great astonishment of all, 
deputies from Uri and Schwytz made their appearance. 
They were coldly received ; the cup of honor was not 
offered to them ; and they had to walk, according to 
their own account, in the midst of the insulting cries of 
the people. They unsuccessfully endeavored to excuse 
their conduct. " We have long been waiting," was the 
cold reply of the diet, **to see your actions and your 
words agree."f The men of Schwytz and of Uri return- 
ed in sadness to their homes ; and the assembly broke 
up, full of sorrow and distress. 

Zwingle beheld with pain the deputies of the evan- 
gelical towns separating without having come to any 
decision. He no longer desired only a reformation of 
the church, he wished for a transformation in the con- 
federacy ; and it was this latter reform that he now was 
preaching from the pulpit, according to what we learn 
from Bullinger.| He was not the only person who do- 

• Sy gwaltig zu iiberziehen. Bull. 2. 366. f Und wortt und 
verk mit einandern gangen werind. Ibid. 367. t Trang gar hafitig 
off eine gemeiae Reformatioa gemeiner Eydgenoschafl. Ibid. S68. 



438 HISTORY OF THU REFORMATIOK. 

eired it. For a long time the inhabitants of the most 
populous and powerful towns of Switzerland had com 
plained that the Waldstettes, whose contingent of men 
and money was much below theirs, had an equal share in 
the deliberations of the diet, and in the fruits of their vic- 
tories. This had been the cause of division after the 
Burgundian war. The five cantons, by means of their 
adherents, had the majority. Now Zwingle thought 
that the reins of Switzerland should be placed in the 
hands of the great cities, and above all in those of the 
powerful cantons of Berne and Zurich. New times, in 
his opinion, called for new forms. It was not sufiScient 
to dismiss from every public oflBce the pensioners of 
foreign princes, and substitute pious men in their place ; 
the federal compact must be remodelled, and settled 
upon a more equitable basis. A national constituent 
assembly would doubtless have responded to his wishes 
These discourses, which were rather those of a tribune 
of the people than of a minister of Jesus Christ, hasten- 
ed on the terrible catastrophe. 

And indeed the animated words of the patriot re- 
former passed from the church where they had been 
delivered into the councils and the halls of the guilds, 
into the streets and the fields. The burning words that 
fell from this man's lips kindled the hearts of his fellow- 
citizens. The electric spark, escaping with noise and 
commotion, was felt even in the most distant cottage. 
The ancient traditions of wisdom and prudence seemed 
forgotten. Public opinion declared itself energetically. 
On the 29th and 30th of April, a number of horsemen 
rode hastily out of Zurich ; they were envoys from the 
council, commissioned to remind all the allied cities of 
the encroachment of the five cantons, and to call for a 
prompt and definitive decision. Reaching their several 
destinations, the messengers recapitulated the griev- 
ances.* "Take care," said they in conclusion; great 
dangers are impending over all of us. The emperor and 
King Ferdinand are making vast preparations ; they are 



♦ They are to be found in Bullinger, 2. 86a-37<l 



OHITICAL POSTURE OF AFFAIRS. 439 



al>ont to enter Switzerland with large sums of money, 
and with a numerous army." 

Zurich joined actions to words. This state, being 
resolved to make every exertion to establish the free 
preaching of the gospel in those bailiwicks where it 
shared the sovereignty with the Roman-catholic cantons, 
desired to interfere by force wherever negotiations could 
not prevail. The federal rights, it must be confessed, 
were trampled under foot at St. Gall, in Thurgovia, in 
the Rheinthal ; and Zurich substituted arbitrary decis- 
ions in their place, that excited the indignation of the 
Waldstettes to the highest degree. Thus the number of 
enemies to the reform kept increasing ; the tone of the 
five cantons became daily more threatening, and the in- 
habitants of the canton of Zurich whom their business 
called into the mountains, were loaded with insults, and 
sometimes badly treated. These violent proceedings 
excited in turn the anger of the reformed cantons. Zwin- 
gle traversed Thurgovia, St. Gall, and the Tockenburg, 
everywhere organizing synods, taking part in their pro- 
ceedings, and preaching before excited and enthusiastic 
crowds. In all parts he met with confidence and re- 
spect. At St. Gall an immense. crowd assembled under 
his windows, and a concert of voices and instruments 
expressed the public gratitude in harmonious songs. 

Let us not abandon ourselves," he repeated continual- 
ly, " and all will go well." It was resolved that a meet- 
ing should be held at Aran on the 12th of May, to de* 
liberate on a posture of affairs that daily became more 
critical. This meeting was to be the beginning of Bor^ 
rowfiL 



440 HISTORY OF THE EEFO&MATIOH. 



CHAPTER V. 

Diet of Arau —Helvetic unity — Berne proposes to close the markets 
— Opposition of Zurich — Proposition agreed to and published— 
Zwingle's war sermon — Blockade of the Waldstettes — No bread, 
no wine, no salt — Indignation of the Forest cantons — The roads 
blockaded — Processions — Cry of despair — France tries to con- 
ciliate — Diet at Bremgarten — Hope — The cantons inflexible— 
The strength of Zurich broken — Discontent — Zwingle^s false po* 
Bition — Zwingle demands his dismission — The council remon- 
strate — He remains — Zwingle at Bremgarten — Zwingle's fare- 
well to BuUinger — Zwingle's agony — The Forest cantons reject 
al- conciliation — Frightful omens — The comet — ^Zwingle's tran- 
quillity. 

Zwingle's scheme with regard to the establishment 
of a new Helvetian constitution did not prevail in the 
diet of Arau. Perhaps it was thought better to see the 
result of the crisis. Perhaps a more Christian, a more 
federal view, the hope of procuring the unity of Swit- 
zerland by unity of faith, occupied men's minds more than 
the preeminence of the cities. In truth, if a certain 
number of cantons remained with the pope, the unity of 
the confederation was destroyed, it might be for ever 
But if all the confederation was brought over to the 
same faith, the ancient Helvetic unity would be estab- 
lished on the strongest and surest foundation. Now was 
the time for acting, or never ; and there must be no fear 
of employing a violent remedy to restore the whole body 
to health. 

Nevertheless, the allies shrank back at the thought 
of restoring religious liberty or political unity by meang 
of arms ; and to escape from the difficulties in which the 
confederation was placed, they sought a middle coursa 
between war and peace. There is no doubt," said the 
deputies from Berne, " that the behavior of the cantons 
with regard to the word of God fully authorizes an arm- 
ed intervention ; but the perils that threaten us on the 
side of Italy and the empire, the danger of arousing the 



DIET OF ARAU. 



441 



lion from his slumber, the general want and miserj that 
afiBict our people, the rich harvests that will soon cover 
our fields, and which the war would infallibly destroy, 
the great number of pious men among the Waldstettes, 
and whose innocent blood would flow along with that of 
the guilty — all these motives enjoin us to leave the 
sword in the scabbard. Let us rather close our markets 
against the five cantons ; let us refuse them corn, salt, 
wine, steel, and iron : we shall thus impart authority to 
the friends of peace among them, and innocent blood 
will be spared."* The meeting separated forthwith, to 
carry this intermediate proposition to the different evan- 
gelical cantons ; and on the 15th of May, again assem- 
bled at Zurich. 

Convinced that the means apparently the most violent 
were nevertheless both the surest and the most humane^ 
Zurich resisted the Bernese proposition with all its might. 

By accepting this proposition,'' said they, " we sacii- 
fice the advantages that we now possess, and we give 
the five cantons time to arm themselves, and to fall upon 
us first. Let us take care that the emperor does not 
then assail us on one side, while our ancient confeder- 
ates attack us on the other : a just war is not in oppo- 
sition to the word of God, but this is contrary to it : 
taking the bread from the mouths of the innocent as 
well as guilty ; straitening by hunger the sick, the aged, 
pregnant women, children, and all who are deeply afflict- 
ed by the injustice of the Waldstettes.f We should 
beware of exciting by this means the anger of the poor, 
and transforming into enemies many who at the present 
time are our friends and our brothers.'' 

We must acknowledge that this language, which 
was Zwingle^s, contained much truth. But the other 
cantons, and Berne in particular, were immovable, 
**When we have once shed the blood of our brotliers,'* 
said they, " we shall never be able to restore life to 
those who have lost it ; while from the moment the 

* Und dadurch unshuldiez Bliit erspart wurde. Bull, 2. 383. 

t Kranke, alte, pUwangere wyber, kinder und eunst betrobtw 
Ibid 384. 



442 HISTORY OP THE REFORMATION. 



Waldstettes have given us satisfaction, we shall be able 
to put an end to all these severe measures. Wc are 
resolved not to begin the war." There were no means 
of running counter to such a declaration. The Zurich- 
ers consented to refuse supplies to the Waldstettes; 
but it was with hearts full of anguish, as if they had 
foreseen all that this deplorable measure would cost 
them.* It was agreed that the severe step that was 
now about to be taken should not be suspended except 
by common consent, and that, as it would create great 
exasperation, each one should hold himself prepared to 
repel the attacks of the enemy. Zurich and Berne were 
commissioned to notify this determination to the five 
cantons ; and Zurich, discharging its task with prompti- 
tude, immediately forwarded an order to every bailiwick 
to suspend all communication with the Waldstettes, 
commanding them at the same time to abstain from ill- 
usage and hostile language. Thus the Reformation, be- 
coming imprudently mixed up with political combina- 
tions, marched from fault to fault ; it pretended to preach 
the gospel to the poor, and was now about to refuse 
them bread. 

On the Sunday following— it was Whit-Sunday — the 
resolution was published from the pulpits. Zwingle 
walked towards his, where an immense crowd was wait- 
ing ibr him. The piercing eye of this great man easily 
discovered the dangers of the measure in a political 
point of view, and his Christian heart deeply felt all its 
cruelty. His soul was overburdened, his eyes dowritast. 
If at this moment the true character of a minister of the 
gospel had awoke within him — if Zwingle with his pow- 
erful voice had called on the people to humiliation before 
God, to forgiveness of trespasses, and to prayer, safety 
might yet have dawned on "broken-hearted" Switzer- 
Aand. But it was not so. More and more the Chris- 
tian disappears in the reformer, and the citizen alone 
remains ; but in that character he soars far above all, 
and his policy is undoubtedly the most skilful. He sa^v 
clearly that every delay may ruin Zurich ; and after hav^ 
* Schmerzlich uud kummersachlich. Bull. 3y 386. 



WAR SERMOK. 



443 



ing made his way through the congregation, and closed 
the book of the Prince of peace, he hesitated not to 
attack the resolution which he had just communicated 
to the people, and on the very festival of the Holy Ghost 
to preach war. " He who fears not to call his adversary 
a criminal," said he in his usual forcible language, 
"must be ready to follow the word with a blow.* If 
he <loes not strike, he will be stricken. Men of Zurich, 
you deny food to the five cantons as to evil-doers ; well, 
let the blow follow the threat, rather than reduce poor 
innocent creatures to starvation. If, by not taking the 
offensive, you appear to believe that there is not suffi- 
cient reason for punishing the Waldstettes, and yet you 
refuse them food and drink, you will force them by this 
line of conduct to take up arms, to raise their hands, and 
to inflict punishment upon you. This is the fate that 
awaits you." 

These words of the eloquent reformer moved the 
whole assembly. Zwingle^s politic mind already so in- 
fluenced and misled all the people, that there were few 
souls Christian enough to feel how strange it was, that 
on the very day when they were celebrating the out- 
pouring of the spirit of peace and love upon the Chris- 
tian church, the mouth of a minister of God should utter 
a provocation to war. They looked at this sermon only 
in a political point of view : It is a seditious discourse ; 
it is an excitement to civil war," said some. " No," 
replied others, " it is the language that the safety of the 
state requires." All Zurich was agitated. " Zurich has 
too much fire," said Berne. Berne has too much cun- 
ning," replied Zurich.f Zwingle's gloomy prophecy was 
too soon to be fulfilled. 

No sooner had the reformed cantons communicated 
this pitiless decree to the Waldstettes than they hasten- 
ed its execution, and Zurich showed the greatest strict 

• Dass er wortt und faust mitt einander gan lasse. Bull. 2. 388 
t It was Zwiugle who thus characterized the two cities : 

Bern : klage Zurich ware zu hitzig ; 

Zorich : Berne ware zu witzig. Stettler. 



444 HISTORY OP THE HEFORBIATION. 



ness respecting it. Not only the markets of Zurich and 
of Berne, but also those of the free bailiwicks of St. 
Gall, of the Tockenburg, of the district of Sargans, and 
of the valley of the Rhine, a country partly under the 
sovereignty of the Waldstettes, were shut against the 
five cantons. A formidable power had suddenly encom- 
passed with barrenness, famine, and death, the noble 
founiers of Helvetian liberty. Uri, Schwytz, Unterwal- 
den, Zug, and Lucerne, were, as it seemed, in the midst 
of a vast desert. Their own subjects, thought they, at 
least the communes that have taken the oath of alle- 
giance to them, would range themselves on their side. 
But no ; Bremgarten, and even Mellingen, refused all 
succor. Their last hope was in Wesen and the Gastal. 
Neither Berne nor Zurich had any thing to do there : 
Schwytz and Claris alone ruled over them ; but the 
power of their enemies had penetrated everywhere. A 
majority of thirteen votes had declared in favor of Zu- 
rich at the landsgemeinde of Glaris ; and Glaris closed 
the gates of Wesen and of the Gastal against Schwytz. 
In vain did Berne itself cry out, " How can you compel 
subjects to refuse supplies to their lords ?" In vain did 
Schwytz raise its voice in indignation ; Zurich immedi 
ately sent to Wesen gunpowder and bullets. It was 
upon Zurich, therefore, that fell all the odium of a meas- 
ure which that city had at first so earnestly combated. 
At Aran, at Bremgarten, at Mellingen, in the free baili- 
wicks, were several carriages laden with provisions for 
the Waldstettes. They were stopped, unloaded, and 
upset : with them barricades were erected on the roads 
leading to Lucerne, Schwytz, and Zug. Already a year 
of dearth had made provisions scarce in the five can- 
tons ; already had a frightful epidemic, the sweating sich- 
ness, scattered everywhere despondency and death : but 
now the hand of man was joined to the hand of God ; 
the evil increased, and the poor inhabitants of these 
mouutains beheld unheard-of calamities approach with 
hasty steps. No more bread for their children ; no more 
wine to revive their exhausted strength ; no more salt for 
their fiocks and herds. £very thing failed them that man 



IHDIOKATION OP THB FIVE CANTOKS 445 



requires for subsistence.* One could not see such 
things, and be a man, without feeling his heart wrung. 
In the confederate cities, and out of Switzerland, numer- 
ous voices were raised against this implacable measure. 
What good can result from it ? Did not St. Paul write 
to the Romans, *^ If thine enemy hunger, feed him ; if he 
thirst, give him drink : for in so doing thou shalt heap 
coals of fire on his head ?" Rom. 12 : 20. And when 
the magistrates wished to convince certain refractory 
communes of the utility of the measure, **We desire 
no religious war," cried they. " If the Waldstettes will 
not believe in God, let them stick to the devil." 

But it was especially in the five cantons that earnest 
complaints were heard. The most pacific individuals, 
and even the secret partisans of the reform, seeing fam- 
ine invade their habitations, felt the deepest indignation. 
The enemies of Zurich skilfully took advantage of this 
disposition ; they fostered these murmurs ; and soon the 
cry of anger and distress refechoed from all the moun- 
tains. In vain did Berne represent to the Waldstettes 
that it is more cruel to refuse men the nourishment of 
the soul than to cut off that of the body. " God," re 
plied these mountaineers in their despair, God causes 
the fruits of the earth to grow freely for all men."f 
They were not content with groaning in their cottages, 
and venting their indignation in the councils ; they tilled 
all Switzerland with complaints and menaces.^ " They 
wish to employ famine to tear us from our ancient faith ; 
they wish to deprive our wives and our children of bread, 
that they may take from us the liberty we derive from 
our forefathers. When did such things ever take place 
in the bosom of the confederation ? Did we not see, in 
the last war, the confederates with arms in their hands, 
and who were ready to draw the sword, eating together 
from the same dish? They tear in pieces old friend- 
ships, they trample our ancient manners under foot, 

* Beshalb sy bald grossen mangel erlittend an allein dem, das 
der Meush gelaben soil. Bull. 2. 396. f Hartmana von Hallwyll 
to Albert of Mulinen, August 7. I Klagtend sich ^tlieat balbeu 
wp and breit. Bull. 2. 397. 



446 HISTORY OP THE REFORMATIOIT. 



th*^y violate treaties, they break alliances. . . . We in- 
voke the charters of our ancestors. Help, help I . . . Wise 
men of our people, give us your advice, and all you who 
know how to handle the sling and the sword come and 
maintain with us the sacred possessions for which our 
fathers, delivered from the yoke of the stranger, united 
their arms and their hearts." 

At the same time the five cantons sent into Alsace, 
Brisgau, and Swabia, to obtain salt, wine, and bread; 
bat the administration of the cities was implacable; the 
orders were everywhere given and everywhere strictly 
executed. Zurich and the other allied cantons inter- 
cepted all communication, and sent back to Germany 
the supplies that had been forwarded to their brethren. 
The five cantons were like a vast fortress, all the issues 
from which are closely guarded by watchful sentinels. 
The afflicted Waldstettes, on beholding themselves alone 
with famine between their lakes and their mountains, 
had recourse to the observances of their worship. All 
sports, dances, and every kind of amusement were inter- 
dicted ;* prayers were directed to be offered up ; and 
long processions covered the roads of Einsidlen and 
other resorts of pilgrims. They assumed the belt and 
staff and arms of the brotherhood to which they each 
belonged ; each man carried a chaplet in his hands, and 
repeated paternosters ; the mountains and the valleys 
reechoed with their plaintive hymns. But the Wald- 
stettes did still more : they grasped their swords, they 
sharpened the points of their halberds, they brandished 
their weapons in the direction of Zurich and of Berne, 
and exclaimed with rage, " They block up their roads, 
but we will open them with our right arms.^f No one 
replied to this cry of despair ; but there is a just Judge 
in heaven to whom vengeance belongs, and who will 
soon reply in a terrible manner, by punishing those mis- 

* Stelltent ab Spielen, Tanzen. Tschudi der Capeller krieg, 
1631. This MS. is attributed to Egidius Tschudi, who must have 
written it in 1633, in favor of the five cantons, and was printed io 
the " Helvetia," vol. 2. 165. f Trowtend auch, die Straa^Q 

\iSm tbun mit gwalt. Bull. 2. 397. 



DIET AT BREMaAETEN. 



447 



guided persons who, forgetful of Christian mercy, and 
making an impious mixture of political and religious 
matters, pretend to secure the triumph of the gospel by 
famine and by armed men. 

Some attempts, however, were made to arrange mat- 
ters ; but these very efforts proved a great humiliation for 
Switzerland, and for the reform. It was not the minis- 
ters of the gospel, it was France — more than once an 
occasion of discord to Switzerland — that offered to re- 
store peace. Every proceeding calculated to increase 
its influence among the cantons was of service to its 
policy. On the 14th of May, Maigret and Dangertin — 
the latter of whom had received the gospel truth, and 
consequently did not dare return to France* — after 
some allusions to the spirit which Zurich had shown in 
this affair — a spirit little in accordance with the gospel — 
said to the council, The king our master has sent you 
two gentlemen to consult on the means of preserving 
concord among you. If war and tumult invade Switzer- 
land, all the society of the Helvetians will be destroyed, f 
and whichever party is the conqueror, he will be as much 
ruined as the other." Zurich having replied that if the 
five cantons would allow the free preaching of the word 
of God, the reconciliation would be easy, the French 
secretly sounded the Waldstettes, whose answer was, 
We will never permit the preaching of the word of 
God as the people of Zurich understand it."J 

These more or less interested exertions of the for- 
eigners having failed, a general diet became the only 
chance of safety that remained for Switzerland. One 
was accordingly convoked at Bremgarten. It was 
opened in presence of deputies from France, from the 
duke of Milan, from the countess of Neufchatel, from the 
Grisons, Valais, Thurgovia, and the district of Sargans ; 
and met on five different occasions : on the 14th and 
20th of June, on the 9th of July, and the 10th and 23d 

* Ep. Rugeri ad Bulling., November 12, 1560. \ Uaiversi 

cocietas Helvetiorum dilabetur, si tumultus et bellum inter eanj 
eruperit Zw. Epp. 2. 604. X Responderuat verbi Dei predi- 

Qfttioi&em noQ laturos, (^uomodo nps intelligamus. Ibid. 607. 



€48 HISTORY OF THE REFOEMATiON 



of August. The chronicler Bullinger, who \^as pastor 
of Bremgarten, delivered an oration at the opening, in 
which he earnestly exhorted the confederates to union 
and peace. 

A gleam of hope for a moment cheered Switzerland, 
The blockade had become less strict; friendship and 
good neighborhood had prevailed in many places over 
the decrees of the state. Unusual roads had been open- 
ed across the wildest mountains to convey supplies to 
the Waldstettes. Provisions were concealed in bales of 
merchandise ; and while Lucerne imprisoned and tor- 
tured its own citizens who were found with the pamph- 
lets of the Zurichers,* Berne punished but slightly the 
peasants who had been discovered bearing food for Un- 
terwalden and Lucerne ; and Claris shut its eyes on tke 
frequent violation of its orders. The voice of charity, 
that had been momentarily stifled, pleaded with fresh 
energy the cause of their confederates before the re- 
formed cantons. 

But the five cantons were inflexible. "We will not 
listen to any proposition before the raising of the block- 
ade," said they. " We will not raise it," replied Berne 
and Zurich, "before the gospel is allowed to be freely 
preached, not only in the common bailiwicks, but also 
in the five cantons." This was undoubtedly going too 
far, even according to the natural law and the principles 
of the confederation. The councils of Zurich might con- 
sider it their duty to have recourse to war for maintain- 
ing liberty of conscience in the common bailiwicks ; but 
it was unjust, it was a usurpation, to constrain the five 
cantons in a matter that concerned their own territory. 
Nevprtheless the mediators succeeded, not without much 
trouble, in -drawing up a plan of conciliation that seemed 
to harmonize with the wishes of both parties. The con- 
ference was broken up, and this project was hastily 
transmitted to the diU erent states for their ratification. 

The diet met ag{*in a few days after; but the five 
cantons persisted in their demand, without yielding in 
any one point. In t ain did Zurich and Berne represent 
♦ Warf Bi# in Gef angniss. Bull. 8. 30. 



STRENGTH OF ZURICH BROKEN. 449 

to them, that by persecuting the reformed the cantons 
violated the treaty of peace ; in vain did the mediators 
exhaust their strength in warnings and entreaties. Thr 
parties appeared at one time to approximate, and then 
on a sudden they were more distant and more irritated 
than ever. The Waldstettes at last broke up the third 
conference by declaring, that far from opposing the 
evangelical truth, they would maintain it, as it had 
been taught by the Redeemer, by his holy apostles, by 
the four doctors, and by their holy mother the church — 
a declaration that seemed a bitter irony to the deputies 
from Zurich and Berne. Nevertheless Berne, turning 
towards Zurich as they were separating, observed, " Be- 
v/are of too much violence, even should they attack you." 

This exhortation was unnecessary. The strength of 
Zurich had passed away. The first appearance of the 
Reformation and of the reformers had been greeted with 
joy. The people, who groaned under a twofold slavery, 
believed they saw the dawn of liberty. But their minds, 
abandoned for ages to superstition and ignorance, being 
unable immediately to realize the hopes they had con- 
ceived, a spirit of discontent soon spread among the 
masses. The change by which Zwingle, ceasing to be 
a man of the gospel, became the man of the state, took 
away from the people the enthusiasm necessary to resist 
the terrible attacks they would have to sustain. The 
enemies of the reform had a fair chance against it, so 
soon as its friends abandoned the position that gave 
them strength. Besides, Christians could not have re- 
course to famine and to war to secure the triumph of the 
gospel, without their consciences becoming troubled. 
The Zurichers " walked not in the Spirit, but in the 
flesh ; now, the works of the flesh are hatred, variance, 
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions." Gal. 5:19, 20. Tho 
danger without was increasing, while within, hope, 
anion, and courage were far from being augmented : men 
saw on the contrary the gradual disappearance of that 
harmony and lively faith which had been the strength 
of the reform. The Reformation had grasped the sword, 
%ad that very sword pierced its heart. 

29 



460 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 



Occasions of discord were multiplied in Zurich. By 
the advice of Zwingle, the number of nobles was dimin- 
ished in the two councils, because of their oppositix)ri to 
the gospel ; and this measure spread discontent among 
the most honorable families of the canton. The millers 
and bakers were placed under certain regulations, which 
the dearth rendered necessary, and a great part of the 
townspeo^ple attributed this proceeding to the sermons 
of the reformer, and became irritated against him. Ro- 
dolph Lavater, bailiff of Kibourg, was appointed captain- 
general, and the officers who were of longer standing 
than he were offended. Many who had been formerly 
the most distinguished by their zeal for the reform, now 
openly opposed the cause they had supported. The ar- 
dor with which the ministers of peace demanded war 
spread in every quarter a smothered dissatisfaction, and 
many persons gave vent to their indignation. This un- 
natural confusion of church and state, which had cor- 
rupted Christianity after the age of Constantine, was 
hurrying on the ruin of the Reformation. The majority 
of the great council, ever ready to adopt important and 
salutary resolutions, was destroyed. The old magis- 
trates, who were still at the head of affairs, allowed 
themselves to be carried away by feelings of jealousy 
against men whose non-official influence prevailed over 
theirs. All those who hated the doctrine of the gospel, 
whether from love of the world or from love to the pope, 
boldly raised their heads in Zurich. The partisans of 
the monks, the friends of foreign service, the malcon- 
tents of every class, coalesced in pointing out Zwingle 
as the author of all the sufferings of the people. 

Zwingle was heart-broken. He saw that Zurich and 
the Reformation were hastening to their ruin, and lie 
could not check them. How could he do so, since, with- 
out suspecting it, he had been the principal accomplice 
in these disasters ? What was to be done ? Should the 
pilot remain in the ship which he is no longer permitted 
to save ? There was but one means of safety for Zurich 
and for Zwingle. He should have retired from the polit- 
ical stage, and fallen back on that '^kingdom which is 



ZWINOLE^S FALSE POSITION. i51 



not of this world he should, like Moses, have kept his 
hands and his heart night and day raised towards heav* 
en, and energetically preached repentance, faith, and 
peace. But religious and political matters were united 
in the mind of this great man by such old and dear ties> 
that it was impossible for him to distinguish their line 
of separation. This confusion had become his dominant 
idea ; the Christian and the citizen were for him one and 
the same character; and hence it resulted, that all re- 
sources of the state, even cannons and arquebuses, were 
to be placed at the service of the truth. When one 
peculiar idea thus seizes upon a man, we see a false con- 
science formed within him, which approves of many 
things condemned by the word of the Lord. 

This was now Zwingle^s condition. War appeared to 
him legitimate and desirable ; and if that was refused, 
he had only to withdraw from public life; he was for 
every thing or nothing. He therefore, on the 26th of 
July, appeared before the great council with dimmed 
eyes and disconsolate heart : " For eleven years," said 
he, " I have been preaching the gospel among you, and 
have warned you faithfully and paternally of the woes 
that are hanging over you, but no attention has been 
paid to my words ; the friends of foreign alliances, the 
enemies of the gospel, are elected to the council, and 
while you refuse to follow my advice, I am made respon- 
sible for every misfortune. I cannot accept such a posi- 
tion, and I ask for my dismission." The reformer retired 
bathed in tears. 

The council shuddered as they heard these words. 
All the old feelings of respect which they had so long 
entertained for Zwingle were revived ; to lose him now 
was to ruin Zurich. The burgomaster and the other 
magistrates received orders to persuade him to recall 
his fatal resolution. The conference took place on the 
same day ; Zwingle asked time for consideration. For 
three days and three nights he sought the road that he 
should follow. Seeing the dark storm that was collect- 
ing from all quarters, he considered whether he ought 
to quit Zurich and seek refuge on the lofty hills of the 



452 HISTOUY OF THE REFORMATION 



Tockenbnrg, where he had been reared, at a time whoik 
his country and his church were on the point of being 
assailed and beaten down by their enemies, like corn by 
the hailstorm. He groaned and cried to the Lord. He 
would have put away the cup of bitterness that wag 
presented to his soul, but could not gather up the voso- 
lution. At length the sacrifice was accomplished, and 
the victim was placed shuddering upon the altar. Three 
days after the first conference, Zwingle reappeared in 
the council : " I will stay with you," said he, " and I will 
labor for the public safety, until death." 

From this moment he displayed new zeal. On the 
one hand, he endeavored to revive harmony and courage 
in Zurich ; on the other, he set about arousing and excit- 
ing the allied cities to increase and concentrate all the 
forces of the Reformation. Faithful to the political voca- 
tion he imagined to have received from God himself, 
persuaded that it was in the doubts and want of energy 
of the Bernese that he must look for the cause of all the 
evil, the reformer repaired to Bremgarten with Collins 
and Steiner, during the fourth conference of the diet, 
although he incurred great danger in the attempt. He 
arrived secretly by night, and having entered the house 
of his friend and disciple Bullinger, he invited the depu- 
ties of Berne, J. J. de Watteville and Im Hag, to meet 
him there with the greatest secrecy, and prayed them in 
the most solemn tone earnestly to reflect upon the dan- 
gers of the reform. " I fear," said he, " that in conse- 
quence of our unbelief, this business will not succeed. 
By refusing supplies to the five cantons, we have begun 
a work that will be fatal to us. What is to be done? 
Withdraw the prohibition? The cantons will then be 
more insolent and haughty than ever. Enforce it ? They 
will take the offensive, and if their attack succeed you 
will behold our fields red with the blood of the believ* 
ers, the doctrine of truth cast down, the church of Christ 
laid waste, all social relations overthrown, our adver- 
saiies more hardened and irritated against the gospel, 
and crowds of priests and monks again filling our rural 
districts, streets, and temples. . , . And yet,'' added 



A MYSTERIOUS PERSONAaE. 



453 



Zwingle, after a few instants of emotion and silence, 
" that also will have an end." The Bernese were filled 
with agitation by the solemn voice of the reformer. 
" We see," replied they, " all that is to be feared for our 
common cause, and we will employ every care to pre- 
vent such great disasters." " I who write these things 
;^as present and heard them," adds Bullinger.* 

It was feared that if the presence of Zwingle at 
Bremgarten became known to the deputies of the five 
cantons, they would not restrain their violence. Dur- 
ing this nocturnal conference three of the town-council- 
lors were stationed as sentinels in front of BuUinger's 
house. Before daybreak, the reformer and his two 
friends, accompanied by Bullinger, and the three coun- 
cillors, passed through the deserted streets leading to 
the gate on the road to Zurich. Three different times 
Zwingle took leave of Bullinger, who was erelong to be 
his successor. His mind was filled with a presentiment 
of his approaching death ; he could not tear himself from 
that young friend whose face he was never to see again ; 
he blessed him amidst floods of tears. 0 my dear 
Henry," said he, " may God protect you. Be faithful to 
our Lord Jesus Christ, and to his church." At length 
they separated ; but at that very moment, says Bullin- 
ger, a mysterious personage, clad in a robe as white as 
snow, suddenly appeared, and after frightening the sol- 
diers who guarded the gate, plunged suddenly into the 
water, and vanished. Bullinger, Zwingle, and their 
friends did not perceive it ; Bullinger himself sought for 
it all around, but to no purpose ;f still the sentinels 
persisted in the reality of this frightful apparition. 
Bullinger in great agitation returned in darkness and 
in silence to his house. His mind involuntarily com- 
pared the departure of Zwingle and the white phantom ; 
i.nJ he shuddered at the frightful omen which the thought 
of this spectre impressed upon his mind. 

Sufierings of another kind pursued Zwingle to Zu- 

* These words are in Latin ; Haec ipse, qui haec Hcribo, ab illia 
Audiyi, praesens colloquio. Bull. 3. 49. f Menscheo in ein 
sohneeweissen Kleid. Ibid. 



454 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOH. 



rich. He had thought that by consenting to remain at 
the head of affairs, he would recover all his ancient 
influence. But he was deceived : the people desired to 
Bee him there, and yet they would not follow him. The 
Zurichers daily became more and more indisposed tow 
ards the war which they had at first demanded, and 
identified themselves with the passive system of Berne. 
Zwingle remained for some time stupefied and motionless 
before this inert mass, which his most vigorous exertions 
could not move. But soon discovering in every quarter 
of the horizon the prophetic signs, precursors of the 
storm about to burst upon the ship of which he was the 
pilot, he uttered cries of anguish, and showed the signal 
of distress. " I see," exclaimed he one day to the people 
from the pulpit, whither he had gone to give utterance 
to his gloomy forebodings, " I see that the most faithful 
warnings cannot save you; you will not punish the 
pensioners of the foreigner. . . . They have too firm a 
support among us. A chain is prepared — ^behold it en- 
tire — it unrolls link after link : soon will they bind me 
to it, and more than one pious Zuricher with me. ... It 
is against me they are enraged. I am ready ; I submit 
to the Lord's will. But these people shall never be my 
masters. ... As for thee, 0 Zurich, they will give thee 
thy reward; they will strike thee on the head. Thou 
wiliest it. Thou refusest to punish them ; well, it is 
they who will punish thee.* But God will not the less 
preserve his word, and their haughtiness shall come to 
an end." Such was Zwingle's cry of agony ; but the 
immobility of death alone replied. The hearts of the 
Zurichers were so hardened that the sharpest arrows of 
the reformer could not pierce them, and they fell at his 
feet blunted and useless. 

But events were pressing on, and justified all hia 
fears. The five cantons had rejected every proposition 
that had been made to them. " Why do you talk of pun- 
ishing a few wrongs ?" they had replied to the media- 
tors ; " it is a question of quite another kind. Do you 
not require that we should receive back among us the 
^ Btraafen willt sy nitt, des warden sy dich straafea. Bull. & 62. 



FRiaHTFUL SPECTACLES 



45d 



heretics whom we have banished, and tolerate no other 
priests than those who preach conformably to the word 
of God ? We know what that means. No, no ; we will 
not abandon the religion of our fathers ; and if we must 
Bee our wives and our children deprived of food, our 
hands will know how to conquer what is refused to us : 
to that we pledge our bodies, our goods, our lives." It 
was with this threatening language that the deputies 
quitted the diet of Bremgarten. Ihey had proudly 
shaken the folds of their mantles, and war had fallen 
from them. 

The terror was general, and the alarmed citizens 
beheld everywhere frightful portents, terrific signs, ap- 
parently foreboding the most horrible events. It was 
not only the white phantom that had appeared at Brem- 
garten at Zwingle's side ; the most fearful omens, pass- 
ing from mouth to mouth, filled the people with the most 
gloomy presentiments. The history of these phenomena, 
however strange it may appear, characterizes the period 
of which we write. We do not create the times ; it is 
our simple duty to paint them as they really were. 

On the 26th of July, a widow chancing to be alone 
before her house, in the village of Castelenschloss, sud- 
denly beheld a frightful spectacle — blood springing from 
the earth all around her.* She rushed in alarm into the 
cottage ; . . . . but, 0 horrible, blood is flowing every- 
where, from the wainscot and from the stones ;f it falls 
in a stream from a basin on a shelf, and even the child's 
cradle overflows with it. The woman imagines that the 
invisible hand of an assassin has been at work, and 
rushes in distraction out of doors, crying murder, mur- 
der IJ The villagers and the monks of a neighboring 
convent assemble at the noise — they succeed in partly 
effacing the bloody stains ; but a little later in the day, 
the other inhabitants of the house, sitting down in ter- 
ror to eat their evening meal under the projecting eaves, 

• Ante et post earn purus sanguis ita acriter ex dura terra ef- 
fluxit, ut ex vena inoisa. Zw. Epp. 2. 627. f Sed etiam san- 
guis ex terra, lignis, et lapidibus effluxit. Ibid. J Uv modern 
nxoorreret oedem clamitans. Ibid. 



456 HlSlOHr OF THE REFCRMATION. 



suddenly discover blood bubbling up in a pond — ^blood 
flowing from the loft — blood covering all the walls of 
the houae. Blood, blood, everywhere blood I The bailifl 
of Schenkenberg and the pastor of Dalheim arrive, in- 
quire into the matter, and immediately report it to the 
lords of Berne and to Zwingle. 

Scarcely had this horrible recital — the particulars of 
which are faithfully preserved in Latin and in German — 
filled all minds with the idea of a horrible butchery, than 
in the western quarter of the heavens there appeared a 
frightful comet,* whose immense train of a pale yellow 
color turned towards the south. At the time of its set- 
ting, this apparition shone in the sky like the fire of a 
furnace.f One night — on the 15th of August as it would 
appear! — Zwingle and George Miiller, formerly abbot of 
Wettingen, being together in the cemetery of the cathe- 
dral, both fixed their eyes upon this terrific meteor. 
" This ominous globe," said Zwingle, " is come to light 
the path to my grave. It will be at the cost of my life 
and of many good men with me. Although I am rather 
shortsighted, I foresee great calamities in the future.§ 
The truth and the church will mourn ; but Christ will 
never forsake us." It was not only at Zurich that this 
flaming star spread consternation : Yadian being one 
night on an eminence in the neighborhood of St. Gall, 
surrounded by his friends and disciples, after having 
explained to them the names of the stars and the mira- 
cles of the Creator, stopped before this comet, which 
denounced the anger of God ; and the famous Theophras- 
tus declared that it foreboded not only great bloodshed, 
but most especially the death of learned and illustrious 

* Ein gar eschrocklicher comet. Bull. 2. 46. It was Halley'i 
oomet, that returns about every 76 years. It appeared last in 1835- 

f Wie ein f hiiwr in einer ess. Ibid. Perhaps BuUinger alludes 
In this way to the phenomenon remarked by Appian, astronomer to 
Charles V., who observed this comet at Ingolstadt, and who says 
that the tail disappeared as the nucleus approached the horizon. 
In 1456, its appearance had already excited great terror. 

X Cometam jam tribus noctibus viderunt apud nos alii, ego una 
tantum, puto 15 Augusti. Zw. Epp. p. 634. § Ego caeculua 

non unam calamitatem expecto. Ibi*' fi'*^ 



I 



ZWINaLE'S TRANQUILLITY 457 

men. This mysterious phenomenon prolonged its fright- 
ful visitation until the 3d of September. 

When once the noise of these omens was spread 
abroad, men could no longer contain themselves. Theii 
imaginations were excited ; they heaped fright upon 
fright; each place had its terrors. Two banners wav- 
ing in the clouds had been seen on the mountain of the 
jBrunig ; at Zug, a buckler had appeared in the heavens ; 
on the banks of the Reuss, reiterated explosions were 
heard during the night ; on the lake of the four cantons, 
ships with aerial combatants careered about in every 
direction. War, war I blood, blood I these were the 
general cries. 

In the midst of all this agitation, Zwingle alone 
seemed tranquil. He rejected none of these presenti- 
ments, but contemplated them with calmness. "A heart 
that fears God," said he, "cares not for the threats of 
the world. To forward the designs of God, whatever 
may happen, this is his task. A carrier who has a long 
road to go, must make up his mind to wear his wagon 
and his gear during the journey. If he carry his mer- 
chandise to the appointed spot, that is enough for him. 
We are the wagon and the gear of God. There is not 
one of the articles that is not worn, twisted, or broken ; 
but our great Driver will not the less accomplish by 
our means his vast designs. Is it not to those who fall 
upon the field of battle that the noblest crown belongs ? 
Take courage then in the midst of all these dangers 
through which the cause of Jesus Christ must pass. Be 
of good cheer, although we should never here below see 
its triumphs with our own eyes. The Judge of the 
combat beholds us, and it is he who confers the crown. 
Others will enjoy upon earth the fruits of our labors, 
while T\e, already in heaven, shall enjoy an eternal re^ 
77a nl."* 

Thus spoke Zwingle, as he advanced calmly towards 
the threatening noise of the tempest, which, by its repeat- 
ed flashes and sudden explosions, foreboded death. 

* Zw. 0pp. Comment, in Jeremiam. This work was oomposed 
the very year of Zwiugie's death. 

Uwt oflUl IV. 



458 



HISTOBY OP THE REFORMATION. 



CHAPTER VI 

The five cantons decide for war — Deceitful calm — Fatal inactivity- 
Zurich forewarned — Banner of Lucerne planted — Manifesto— 
The bailiwicks pillaged — The monastery of Cappel — Letter — 
Infatuation of Zurich — New warnings — The war begins — The 
tocsin — A fearful night — The war — The banner and army of Zu- 
rich — Z wingless departure — Zwingle's horse — Anna Zwingle. 

The five cantons assembled in diet at Lucerne ap- 
peared full of determination, and war was decided upon. 
" We will call upon the cities to respect our alliances," 
said they, " and if they refuse, we will enter the common 
bailiwicks by force to procure provisions, and unite our 
banners in Zug to attack the enemy/' The Waldstettcs 
were not alone. The nuncio, being solicited by his Lu- 
cerne friends, had required that auxiliary troops, paid 
by the pope, should be put in motion towards Switzer- 
land, and he announced their near arrival. 

These resolutions carried terror into Switzerland ; 
the mediating cantons met again at Aran, and drew up a 
plan that should leave the religious question just as it 
had been settled by the treaty of 1529. Deputies imme- 
diately bore these propositions to the different councils. 
Lucerne haughtily rejected them. " Tell those who sent 
you,'' was the reply, " that we do not acknowledge them 
as our schoolmasters. We would rather die than yield 
the least thing to the prejudice of our faith." The medi- 
ators returned to Aran trembling and discouraged. This 
useless attempt increased the disagreement among the 
reformed, and gave the Waldstettes still greater confi- 
dence. Zurich, so decided for the reception of the gos- 
pel, now became daily more irresolute. The members 
of the council distrusted each other; the people felt no 
interest in this war ; and Zwingle, notwithstanding his 
unshaken faith in the justice of his cause, had no hope 
for the struggle that was about to take place. Berne, 
on its side, did not cease to entreat Zurich to avoid pr^ 
cipitation. ** Do not let us expose ourselves to the » 



AV AVALANCHE IMPENDTNO. 4^9 

proach of too much haste, as in 1529," was the general 
remark in Zurich. " We have sure friends in the midst 
of the Waldstettes ; let us wait until they announce to 
ns, as they have promised, some real danger/' 

It was soon believed that these temporizers were 
right In fact the alarming news ceased. That con- 
stant rumor of war which incessantly came from the 
Waldstettes, discontinued. There were no more alarms, 

more fears. Deceitful omen I Over the mountains 
and valleys of Switzerland hangs that gloomy and mys- 
terious silence, the forerunner of the tempest. 

While they were sleeping at Zurich, the Waldstettes 
were preparing to conquer their rights by force of arms. 
The chiefs, closely united to each other by common in- 
terests and dangers, found a powerful support in the 
indignation of the people. In a diet of the five cantons, 
held at Brunnen on the banks of the lake of Lucerne^ 
opposite Grutli, the alliances of the confederation were 
read ; and the deputies, having been summoned to de- 
clare by their votes whether they thought the war just 
and lawful, all hands were raised with a shudder. Im- 
mediately the Waldstettes had prepared their attack 
with the profoundest mystery. All the passes had been 
guarded ; all communication between Zurich and the 
five cantons had been rendered impossible. The friends 
upon whom the Zurichers had reckoned on the banks 
of the lakes Lucerne and Zug, and who had promised 
them intelligence, were like prisoners in their mountains. 
The terrible avalanche was about to slip from the icy 
summits of the mountain, and to roll into the valleys, 
even to the gates of Zurich, overthrowing every thing 
in its passage, without the least forewarning of its fall 
The mediators had returned discouraged to their can* 
tons. A spirit of imprudence and of error — sad fore- 
runner of the fall of republics as well as of kings — had 
spread over the whole city of Zurich. The council had 
at first given orders to call out the militia ; then, de- 
ceived by the silence of the Waldstettes, it had impru- 
dently revoked the decree, and Lavater the commander 
of the army had retired in discontent to Rybourg, and 



460 HISTOEY OF THE REFORMATION, 



indignantly thrown far from him that sword whiiih thej 
had commanded him to leave in the scabbard. Thua 
the winds were about to be unchained from the moun- 
tains ; the waters of the great deep, aroused by a terri- 
ble earthquake, were about to open ; and yet the vessel 
of the state, sadly abandoned, sported up and down with 
indifference over a frightful gulf — its yards struck, its 
sails loose and motionless — without compass or crew— 
without pilot, watch, or helm. 

Whatever were the exertions of the Waldstettes, they 
could not entirely stifle the rumor of war, which from 
chalet to chalet called all their citizens to arms. God 
permitted a cry of alarm — a single one, it is true — to 
resound in the cars of the people of Zurich. On the 4th 
of October, a little boy, who knew not what he was 
doing, succeeded in crossing the frontier of Zug, and 
presented himself with two loaves at the gate of the re- 
formed monastery of Cappel, situated in the farthest limits 
of the canton of Zurich. He was led to the abbot, to 
whom the child gave the loaves without saying a word. 
The superior, with whom there chanced to be at that 
time a councillor from Zurich, Henry Feyer, sent by his 
government, turned pale at the sight. " If the five can- 
tons intend entering by force of arms into the free baili- 
wicks," had said these two Zurichers to one of their 
friends in Zug, " you will send your son to us with one 
loaf ; but you will give him two, if they are marching at 
once upon the bailiwicks and upon Zurich." The abbot 
and the councillor wrote with all speed to Zurich. " Be 
upon your guard; take up arms," said they; but no 
credit was attached to this information. The council 
were at that time occupied in taking measures to pre- 
vent the supplies that had arrived from Alsace from en- 
tering the cantons. Zwingle himself, who had never 
ceased to announce war, did not believe it. "These 
pensioners are really clever fellows," said the reformer. 

Their preparations may be, after all, nothing but a 
French manoeuvre."* 

* Dise ire riistung mochte woll eine franzosische prattik Rein 
Bull 3. 86 



ZURICH FOREWAEITED. 



461 



He was deceived ; they were a reality. Four days 
were to accomplish the ruin of Zurich. Let us retrace 
in succession the history of these disastrous moments. 

On Sunday, the 8th of October, a messenger appeared 
at Zurich, and demanded, in the name of the five cantons, 
letters of perpetual alliance.* The majority saw in thi.s 
»ie\) nothing but a trick ; but Zwingle began to discern 
the thunderbolt in the black cloud that was drawing 
near. He was in the pulpit: it was the last time he 
was destined to appear in it ; and as if he had seen the 
formidable spectre of Rome rise frightfully above the 
Alps, calling upon him and upon his people to abandon 
the faith, " No, no," cried he, never will I deny my 
Redeemer." 

At the same moment a messenger arrived in haste 
from Mulinen, commander of the knights-hospitallers of 
St. John at Hitzkylch. On Friday, the 6th of October," 
said he to the councils of Zurich, " the people of Lucerne 
planted their banner in the great square.f Two men 
that I sent to Lucerne have been thrown into prison. 
To-morrow morning, Monday, the 9th of October, the 
five cantons will enter the bailiwicks. Already the 
country people, frightened and fugitive, are running to 
us in crowds." " It is an idle story," said the councils.^ 
Nevertheless they recalled the commander-in-chief Lava- 
ter, who sent off a trusty man, nephew of James Winck- 
ler, with orders to repair to Cappel, and if possible as far 
as Zug, to reconnoitre the arrangements of the cantons. 

The Waldstettes were in reality assembling round 
the banner of Lucerne. The people of this canton ; the 
men of Schwytz, Uri, Zug, and Unterwalden ; refugees 
from Zurich and Berne, with a few Italians, formed the 
main body of the army, which had been raised to invade 
the free bailiwicks. Two manifestoes were published, 
one addressed to the cantons, the other to foreign priucee 
and nations. 

* Die ewige Bund abgefordert. J. J. Hottinger, 3. 577. Ac- 
oording to Bullinger, this did not take place until Monday, 
t Ire paner in den brunuen gesteckt. Bull. 3. 86. 
X Ein gepoch uiid progerey und unt darauff setzend. Ibid 



46li HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOH. 



The five cantons energetically set forth the attacks 
made upon the treaties, the discord sown throughout the 
confederation, and finally the refusal to sell them pro- 
visions — a refusal whose only aim was, according to 
them, to excite the people against the magistrates, and 
to establish the reform by force. It is not true," added 
they, "that, as they are continually crying out, we op- 
pose the preaching of the truth and the reading of the 
Bible. As obedient members of the church, we desire to 
receive all that our holy mother receives. But we reject 
the books and the innovations of Zwingle and his com 
panions."* 

Hardly had the messengers charged with these mani- 
festoes departed, before the first division of the army 
began to march, and arrived in the evening in the free 
bailiwicks. The soldiers having entered the deserted 
churches, and seen the images of the saints removed 
and the altars broken, their anger was kindled ; they 
spread like a torrent over the whole country, pillaged 
every thing they met with, and were particularly en- 
raged against the houses of the pastors, where they 
destroyed the furniture with oaths and maledictions. 
At the same time the division that wa8 to form the main 
army marched upon Zug, thence to move upon Zurich. 

Cappel, at three leagues from Zurich, and about a 
league from Zug, was the first place th^y would reach 
in the Zurich territory, after crossing th^^ frontier of the 
five cantons. Near the Albis, between two hills of simi- 
lar height, the Granges on the north, and the Ifelsberg 
on the south, in the midst of delightful pastures, stood 
the ancient and wealthy convent of the Cistercians, in 
whose church were the tombs of many ancient and no- 
ble families of these districts. The abbot Wolfgang 
Joner, a just and pious man, a great friend of the arts 
and letters, and a distinguished preacher, had reformed 
his convent in 1521. Full of compassion, rich in good 
works, particularly towards the poor of the oanton of 
Zug and the free bailiwicks, he was held in great honor 

• Als wii* vertruwen Gott und der Welt antwurt «u ^bao. 
Bull 3.101. 



INFATUATION OF ZURICH. 



463 



IMronghout the whole country.* He predicted what 
would be the termination of the war ; yet as soon as 
danger approached, he spared no labor to serve his 
country. 

It was on Sunday night that the abbot received posi- 
tive intelligence of the preparations at Zng. He paced 
up a ad down his cell with hasty steps; sleep fled frona 
his eyes ; he drew near his lamp, and addressing his 
intimate friend Peter Simmler, who succeeded him, and 
who was then residing at Kylchberg, a village on the 
borders of the lake, and about a league from the town, 
he hastily wrote these words : " The great anxiety and 
trouble which agitate me prevent me from busying my- 
self with the management of the house, and induce me to 
write to you all that is preparing. The time is come .... 
the scourge of God appears.f . . . After many journeys 
and inquiries, we have learned that the five cantons will 
march to-day, Monday, to seize upon Hitzkylch, while 
the main army assembles its banners at Baar, between 
Zug and Cappel. Those from the valley of the Adige 
and the Italians will arrive to-day or to-morrow." This 
letter, through some unforeseen circumstance, did not 
reach Zurich till the evening. 

Meanwhile the messenger whom Lavater had sent, 
the nephew of J. Winckler, creeping on his belly, glid- 
ing unperceived past the sentinels, and clinging to the 
shrubs that overhung the precipices, had succeeded in 
making his way where no road had been cleared. On 
arriving near Zug, he had discovered with alarm the 
banner, and the militia hastening from all sides at beat 
of drum ; then traversing again these unknown passes, 
he had returned to Zurich with this information. | 

It was high time that the bandage should fall from 
the eyes of the Zurichers ; but the delusion was to en- 
dure until the end. The council which was called to- 
gether met in small number. "The five cantons," said 

* That armen liitea vil guts . . , . und by aller erbarkeit in gros- 
lem ansahen. Bull. 3. 141, f Die zyt ist hie, dass die riit Got- 
tes sich wil erzeigea. Ibid. 37. J Naben dea Wa^/kteu, durcfa 

nmwag und gestriipp. Ibid. 



484 HISTOE.Y OF THE REFORMATION 



they, are making a little noise to frighten us, and to 
make us raise the blockade."* The council, however, 
decided on sending Colonel Rodolph Dumysen and 
Ulrich Funck to Cappel, to see what was going onj 
and each one, tranquillized by this unmeaning step, 
retired to rest. 

They did not slumber long. Every hour brought 
fresh messengers of alarm to Zurich. " The banners of 
f jur cantons are assembled at Zug," said they. They 
are only waiting for Uri. The people of the free baili- 
wicks are flocking to Cappel, and demanding arms. . . . 
Help, help 1" 

Before the break of day the council was again assem- 
bled, and it ordered the convocation of the Two Hundred. 
An old man, whose hair had grown gray on the battle- 
field and in the council of the state, the banneret John 
Schweitzer, raising his head enfeebled by age, and dart- 
ing the last beam, as it were, from his eyes, exclaimed, 
"Now, at this very moment, in God's name, send an 
advanced guard to Cappel ; and let the army, promptly 
collecting round the banner, follow it immediately." 
He said no more ; but the charm was not yet broken, 
" The peasants of the free bailiwicks," said some, " we 
know to be hasty, and easily carried away. They make 
the matter greater than it really is. The wisest plan is 
to wait for the report of the councillors." In Zurich 
there was no longer either arm to defend or head to 
advise. 

It was seven in the morning, and the assembly v*i»8 
still sitting, when Rodolph Gwerb, pastor of Riftur- 
schwyl, near Cappel, arrived in haste. " The people of 
the lordship of Knonau," said he, " are crowding round 
the convent, and loudly calling for chiefs and for aid. 
The enemy is approaching. Will our lords of Zurich, 
say they, abandon themselves, and us with them? Do 
they wish to give us up to slaughter ?" The pastor, 
who had witnessed these mournful scenes, spoke with 
animation. The councillors, whose infatuation was to 
be prolonged to the last, were offended at his messK^e 
• Sy machtend alein ein geprag. Bull. 3 IQHi. 



THE WAE COMMENCED 



465 



"They want to make us act imprudently/' replied they, 
turning in their arm-chairs. 

They had scarcely ceased speaking before a new 
messenger appeared, wearing on his features the marks 
of the greatest terror ; it was Schwytzer, landlord of the 
"Beech Tree" on mount Albis. "My lords Dumysen 
and Funck," said he, **have sent me to you with all 
speed to announce to the council that the five cantons 
have seized upon Hitzkylch, and that they are now col- 
lecting all their troops at Baar. My lords remain in the 
bailiwicks to aid the frightened inhabitants." 

This time the most confident turned pale. Terror, so 
long restrained, passed like a flash of lightning through 
every heart.* Hitzkylch was in the power of the enemy, 
and the war was begun. 

It was resolved to expedite to Cappel a flying camp 
of six hundred men with six guns ; but the command 
was intrusted to George G5dli, whose brother was in 
the army of the five cantons, and he was enjoined to 
keep on the defensive. Godli and his troops had just 
left the city, when the captain-general Lavater, sum- 
moning into the hall of the smaller council the old ban- 
neret Schweitzer, William Toning captain of the arquo- 
busiers, J. Dennikon captain of the artillery, Zwingle, 
and some others, said to them, " Let us deliberate 
promptly on the means of saving the canton and the 
city. Let the tocsin immediately call out all the citi- 
zens." The captain-general feared that the councils 
would shrink at this proceeding, and he wished to raise 
the landsturm by the simple advice of the chiefs of the 
army and of Zwingle. " We cannot take it upon our- 
selves," said they ; " the two councils are still sitting ; 
let us lay this proposition before them." They hastened 
towards the place of meeting ; but — fatal mischance I — 
there were only a few members of the smaller council 
on the benches. "The consent of the Two Hundred is 
necessary," said they. Again a new delay, and the 
enemy were on their march. Two hours after noon the 
great council met again, but only to make long and 
• Pieser Bottschaft ershrack menklich iibel. Bull. S. 104. 

30 



466 HISTORY OF THE EEFORMATIOH. 



useless speeches.* At lengt?i the resolution was takeHi 
and at seven in the evening the tocsin began to sound 
in all the country districts. Treason united with this 
dilatoriness, and persons who pretended to be envoys 
from Zurich stopped the lands turm in many places, as 
being contrary to the opinion of the council. A great 
number of citizens went to sleep again. 

It was a fearful night. The thick darkness — a vio» 
lent storm — the alarm-bell ringing from every Bteeple — 
tho people running to arms — the noise of swords and 
guns — the sound of trumpets and of drums, combined 
with the roaring of the tempest, the distrust, discontent, 
and even treason, which spread affliction in every quar- 
ter — the sobs of women and of children — the cries which 
accompanied many a heart-rending adieu — an earthquake 
which occurred about nine o'clock at night, as if nature 
herself had shuddered at the blood that was about to be 
spilt, and which violently shook the mountains and the 
valleys :f all increased the terrors of this fatal night — a 
night to be followed by a still more fatal day. 

While these events were passing, the Zurichers en- 
camped on the heights of Cappel to the number of about 
one thousand men, fixed their eyes on Zug and upon the 
lake, attentively watching every movement. On a sud- 
den, a little before night, they perceived a few barks 
filled with soldiers coming from the side of Arth, and 
rowing across the lake towards Zug. Their number 
increases — one boat follows another ; soon they distinct* 
ly hear the bellowing of the bull (the horn) of Uri.J and 
discern the banner. The barks draw near Zug; they 
are moored to the shore, which is lined with an immense 
crowd. The warriors of Uri and the arquebusiers of the 
Adige spring up and leap on shore, where they are re- 
ceived with acclamations, and take up their quarters for 
the night. Behold the enemies assembled. The council 
are informed with all speed. 

* Ward 80 vil und lang darin geradschlagt. Bull. 8. 104. 

^ Ein starker Erdbidem, der das Land, auch Berg und Thai 
gwaltiglich erschiitt. Tschudi, Helvetia, 2. 186. i Vil Schiflfen 
off Zug faren, und hort maa luyen den Uri Stier. Bull X 109, 



APATHY AKD DEirfPONDENOT. 



461 



The agitation was still greater at Zurich than at 
Cappel ; the confusion was increased by uncertainty. 
The enemy attacking them on different sides at once, 
tiiey knew not where to carry assistance. Two hours 
after midnight five hundred men with four guns quitted 
the city for Bremgarten, and three or four hundred men 
with five guns for Wadenschwyl. They turned to ths 
right and to the left, while the enemy was in front. 

Alarmed at its own weakness, the council resolved 
to apply without delay to the cities of the Christian co- 
burghery. "As this revolt,'' wrote they, "has no other 
origin than the word of God, we entreat you once, twice, 
thrice, as loudly, as seriously, as firmly, and as earnest- 
ly as our ancient alliances and our Christian coburgh* 
ery permit and command us to do, to set forth without 
delay with all your forces. Haste, haste, haste 1 Act as 
promptly as possible ;* the danger is yours as well as 
ours." Thus spoke Zurich ; but it was already too late. 

At break of day the banner was raised before the 
town-house. Instead of flaunting proudly in the wind, 
it hung drooping down the staff — a sad omen, that filled 
many minds with fear. Lavater took up his station 
under this standard ; but a long period elapsed before 
a few hundred soldiers could be got together.f In the 
square and in all the city disorder and confusion pre- 
vailed. The troops, fatigued by a hasty march or by 
long waiting, were faint and discouraged. 

At ten o'clock, only seven hundred men were under 
arms. The selfish, the lukewarm, the friends of Rome 
and of the foreign pensioners had remained at home. A 
few old men who had more courage than strength, sev- 
eral members of the two councils who were devoted to 
the holy cause of God's word, many ministers of the 
church who desired to live and die with the reform, the 
boldest of the townspeople, and a certain number of 
peasants, especially those from the neighborhood of the 
city — such were the defenders who, wanting that moral 
force so necessary for victory, incompletely armed, and 

♦ Ylentz, ylentz, ylentz, uffs aller schncllist! Bull. 3. 1)0. 

t Sammlet lich dooh daA Yolck gmachsam. Ibid. 112. 



468 HISTORY OP THE REPORMAIIOIT. 



without uniform, crowded in disorder around the bannei 
of Zurich. 

The army should have numbered at least four thou- 
Rand men. They waited still ; the usual oath had not 
been administered ; and yet courier after courier arrived, 
breathless and in disorder, announcing the terrible dan- 
ger that threatened Zurich. All this disorderly crowd 
was violently agitated ; they no longer waited for the 
commands of their chiefs, and many without taking the 
oath rushed through the gates. About two hundred men 
thus set out in confusion. All those who remained pre- 
pared to depart. 

Zwingle was now seen issuing from a house before 
which a caparisoned horse was stamping impatiently. 
It was his own. His look was firm, but dimmed by 
sorrow. He parted from his wife, his children, and his 
numerous friends without deceiving himself, and with a 
bruised heart.* He observed the thick waterspout which, 
driven by a terrible wind, advanced whirling towards 
him. Alas, he had himself called up this hurricane by 
quitting the atmosphere of the gospel of peace, and 
throwing himself into the midst of political passions. 
He was convinced that he would be its first victim. 
Fifteen days before the attack of the Waldstettes, he 
had said from the pulpit, " I know the meaning of all 
this : I am the person specially pointed at. All this 
comes to pass — in order that I may die."f The council 
according to an ancient custom, had called upon him to 
accompany the army as its chaplain. Zwingle did not 
hesitate. He prepared himself without surprise and 
without anger — with the calmness of a Christian who 
places himself confidently in the hands of his God. If 
the cause of reform was doomed to perish, he was ready 
to perish with it. Surrounded by his weeping wife and 
friends — ^by his children, who clung to his garments to 
detain him, he quitted that house where he had tasted 
80 much happiness. At the moment that his hand wag 

* Anna Rheinhard par G. Meyer of Knonau, and Bull . 3. 33. 
t Ut efi[o (ollar fiuat omnia. De vita et obitu ZwiagUi, Hyoo 
ulna 



DEPAETURE OF THE ARMY. 469 

apon his horse, just as he was about to mount, the ani- 
mal violently started back several paces, and when he 
was at last in the saddle, it refused for a time to move, 
rearing and prancing backwards, like that horse which 
the greatest captain of modern times had mounted as he 
was about to cross the Niemen. Many in Zurich at that 
time thought with the soldier of the grand army when he 
saw Napoleon on the ground, It is a bad omen ; a 
Roman would go back."* Zwingle having at last mas- 
tared his horse, gave the reins, applied the spur, started 
forward, and disappeared. 

At eleven o'clock the flag was struck, and all who 
remained in the square, about five hundred men, began 
their march along with it. The greater part were torn 
with difficulty from the arms of their families, and walked 
sad and silent, as if they were going to the scaffold in- 
stead of battle. There was no order, no plan : the men 
were isolated and scattered, some running before, some 
after the colors, their extreme confusion presenting a 
fearful appearance ;f so much so, that those who remain- 
ed behind, the women, the children, and the old men, 
filled with gloomy forebodings, beat their breasts as 
they saw them pass ; and many years after, the remem- 
brance of this day of tumult and sadness drew this groan 
from Oswald Myconius : " Whenever I recall it to mind, 
it is as if a sword pierced my heart." Zwingle, armed 
according to the usage of the chaplains of the confedera- 
tion, rode mournfully behind this distracted multitude, 
Myconius, when he saw him, was nigh faiuting.| Zwin- 
gle disappeared, and Oswald remained behind to weep. 

He did not shed tears alone ; in all quarters were 
heard lamentations, and every house was changed into 
a house of prayer.§ In the midst of this universal sor- 
row, one woman remained silent ; her only cry was a 

• S^gur: Hist, de NapoUon et de la Grande Arm^e, 1. 142. 

t NuUus ordo, nulla consilia, nuUse mentes. tanta animcrum diar 
■onantia, tarn horrenda facies ante et post signa sparsim currentium 
hominum. De vita et ob. Zwinglii. X Quem ut vidl repentino 
dolore cordis vix consistebam. Ibid. § Manebamus nou oert^ 
■me jugibus suspiriiB, non sine precibus ad Deum. Ibid* 



470 HISTORY OF iHE REFORMATION. 



bitter neart, her only language the mild and suppliant 
eye of faith : this was Anna, Zwingle's wife. She had 
seen her husband depart, her son, her brother, a great 
number of intimate friends and near relations, whose 
approaching death she foreboded. But her soul, strong 
&8 that of her husband, offered to God the sacrifice of 
her holiest affections. Gradually the defenders of Zurich 
precipitated their march, and the tumult died away in 
the distance. 



TEB SCENE OF WAft 



471 



CHAPTER VII 

The tcene of war — The enemy at Zug — Declaration of war— -Conar 
cil — Army of the Forest cantons appears — The first gun tired— ^ 
Zwingle's gravity and sorrow — Zurich army ascending the Al« 
— Halt and council at the Beech-tree" — They qnicken their 
march — Jauch's reconnoissance — His appeal — Ambuscade. 

This night, which was so stormy in Zurich, had not 
been cahner among the inhabitants of Cappel. They had 
received the most alarming reports one after another. 
It was necessary to take up a position that would allow 
the troops assembled round the convent to resist the 
enemj^'s attack until the arrival of the reinforcements 
that were expected from the city. They cast their eyes 
on a small hill which, lying to the north towards Zurich, 
and traversed by the high-road, presented an uneven, but 
sufficiently extensive surface. A deep ditch that sur- 
rounded it on three sides defended the approaches ; but 
a small bridge, that was the only issue on the side of 
Zurich, rendered a precipitate retreat very dangerous. 
On the south-west was a wood of beech-trees ; on the 
south, in the direction of Zug, was the high-road and a 
marshy valley. " Lead us to the Granges," cried all the 
soldiers. They were conducted thither. The artillery 
was stationed near some ruins. The line of battle was 
drawn up on the side of the monastery and of Zug, and 
sentinels were placed at the foot of the slope. 

Meantime the signal was given at Zug and Baar : 
the drums beat ; the soldiers of the five cantons took up 
their arms. A universal feeling of joy animated them. 
The churches were opened, the bells rang, and the ser- 
ried ranks of the cantons entered the cathedral of St. 
Oswald, where mass was celebrated and the host offered 
up for the sins of the people. All the army began their 
march at nine o'clock, with banners flying. The avoycr 
John Golder commanded the contingent of Lucerne ; the 
landamman James Troguer, that of Uri ; the laadammas 



473 history'of the reformatioh. 



Rychijauth, a mortal enemy of the Reformation, that of 
Scbwytz ; the landamman Zellger, that of Unterwalden ; 
and Oswald Dooss that of Zug. Eight thousand men 
marched in order of battle : all the picked men of the 
five cantons were there. Fresh and active after a quiet 
night, and having only one short league to cross before 
reaching the enemy, these haughty Waldstettes ad- 
vanced with a firm and regular step under the coma and 
of their chiefs. 

On reaching the common meadow of Zug, they halted 
to take the oath : every hand was upraised to heaven, 
and all swore to avenge themselves. They were about 
to resume their march, when some aged men made signs 
to them to stop. " Comrades," said they, we have long 
oflfended God. Our blasphemies, our oaths, our wars, 
our revenge, our pride, our drunkenness, our adulteries, 
the gold of the stranger to whom our hands have been 
extended, and all the disorders in which we have in- 
dulged, have so provoked his anger, that if he should 
punish us to-day, we should only receive the desert of 
our crimes." The emotion of the chiefs had passed into 
the ranks. -AH the army bent the knee in the midst of 
the plain ; deep silence prevailed, and every soldier, 
with bended head, crossed himself devoutly, and repeat- 
ed in a low voice five paters, as many aves, and the 
credo. One might have said that they were for a time 
in the midst of a vast and stilly desert. Suddenly the 
noise of an immense crowd was again heard. The army 
rose up. " Soldiers," said the captains, " you know the 
cause of this war. Bear your wives and your children 
continually before your eyes." 

Then the chief usher — grand sautier — of Lucerne, 
wearing the colors of the canton, approached the chiefs 
of the army : they placed in his hands the declaration of 
war, dated on that very day, and sealed with the arms 
of Zug. He then set off on horseback, preceded by a 
trumpeter, to carry this paper to the commander of the 
Zurichers. 

It was eleven in the morning. The Zurichers soon 
diiscovered the enemy's army, and cast a sorrow ful glance 



DECISION OF THE COUNCIL. 473 



on the small force they were able to oppose to it. Every 
minute the danger increased. All bent their knees, their 
eyes were raised to heaven, and every Zuricher uttered 
a cry from the bottom of his heart, praying for deliver* 
ance from God. As soon as the prayer was ended, they 
got ready for battle. There were at that time about 
twolve hundred men under arms. 

At noon the trumpet of the five cantons sounded not 
far from the advanced posts. Godli, having collected 
the members of the two councils who happened to be 
with the army, as well as the commissioned and non- 
commissioned officers, and having ranged them in a cir- 
cle, ordered the secretary Rheinhard to read the declara- 
tion of which the sautier of Lucerne was the bearer. 
After the reading, G5dli opened a council of war. We 
are few in number, and the forces of our adversaries are 
great," said Landolt, bailiff of Marpac, but I will here 
await the enemy in the name of God." Wait," cried 
the captain of the halberdiers, Rodolph Zigler ; " impos- 
sible ; let us rather take advantage of the ditch that 
cuts the road to effect our retreat, and let us every- 
where raise a levde en massed This was in truth the 
only means of safety. But Rudi Gallmann, considering 
every step backwards as an act of cowardice, cried out, 
stamping his feet forcibly on the earth, and casting a fiery 
glance around him, *^ Here, here shall be my grave."* 
*'It is now too late to retire with honor," said other 
officers. " This day is in the hands of God. Let us suf- 
fer whatever he lays upon us." It was put to the vote. 

The members of the council had scarcely raised their 
hands in token of assent, when a great noise was heard 
around them. " The captain, the captain 1" cried a sol- 
dier from the outposts who arrived in haste. " Silence, 
silence," rej)lied the ushers, driving him back; "they 
are holding a council." " It is no longer time to hold 
% council," replied the soldier. " Conduct me immedi- 
ately to the captain." .... Our sentinels are falling 
back," cried he with an agitated voice, as he arrived 
before GiJdli. The enemy is there — they are advancing 
* Da, da mas min Kirohhof sin. Bull. % 118 



474 HISTORY OP THE llEFORMATION. 



Ihrongh the forest with all their forces and with great 
tumult." He had not ceased speaking before the senti- 
nels, who were in truth retiring on all sides, ran up, and 
the army of the five cantons was soon seen climbing the 
slcpe of Ifelsberg in face of the Granges, and pointing 
their guns. The leaders of the Waldstettes were exam- 
mijig the position, and seeking to discover by what 
means their army could reach that of Zurich. The Zu- 
richers were asking themselves the same question. The 
nature of the ground prevented the Waldstettes from 
passing below the convent, but they could arrive by 
another quarter. Ulrich Briider, under-bailifif of Husen, 
in the canton of Zurich, fixed his anxious look on the 
beech-wood. " It is thence that the enemy will fall 
upon us." "Axes, axes," immediately cried several 
voices : " let us cut down the trees."* Gbdli, the abbot, 
and several others were opposed to this : " If we stop 
up the wood, by throwing down the trees, we shall our- 
selves be unable to work our guns in that direction," 
said they. Well, at least let us place some arquebu- 
siers in that quarter." " We are already so small a num- 
ber," replied the captain, " that it will be imprudent to 
divide the forces." Neither wisdom nor courage were 
to save Zurich. They once more invoked the help of 
God, and waited in expectation. 

At one o'clock the five cantons fired the first gun : the 
ball passing over the convent fell below the Granges ; 
a second passed over the line of battle ; a third struck 
a hedge close to the ruins. The Zurichers, seeing the 
battle was begun, replied with courage ; but the slow- 
ness and awkwardness with which the artillery was 
served in those days prevented any great loss being 
inflicted on either side. When the enemy perceived 
this, they ordered their advanced guard to descend from 
Ifelsberg and to reach the Granges through the mead- 
ow ; and soon the whole army of the cantons advanced 
in this direction, but with difficulty and over bad roada 
Some arquebusiers of Zurich came and announced the 

* Ettliche schriiwend uach Achsea, dass man das Waldl yerballta 

Ball a. iia 



DESPONDENCY OF ZWINGLE 475 



disorder of the cantons. " Brave Zurichers,'* cried Rudi 
Gallmann, " if we attack them now, it is all over with 
thern." At these words some of the soldiers prepared 
to enter the wood on the left, to fall upon the disheart- 
ened Waldstettes. But Godli perceiving this movement, 
cried out, " Where are you going ? do you not know that 
wc have agreed not to separate ?" He then ordered the 
skirmishers to be recalled, so that the wood remained 
entirely open to the enemy. They were satisfied with 
discharging a few random shots from time to time to 
prevent the cantons from establishing themselves there. 
The firing of the artillery continued until three o'clock, 
and announced far and wide, even to Bremgarten and 
Zurich, that the battle had begun. 

In the meanwhile the great banner of Zurich and all 
those who surrounded it, among whom was Zwingle, 
came advancing in disorder towards the Albis. For a 
year past the gayety of the reformer had entirely disap- 
peared ; he was grave, melancholy, easily moved, hav- 
ing a weight on his heart that seemed to crush it. Often 
would he throw himself weeping at the feet of his Mas- 
ter, and seek in prayer the strength of which he stood 
in need. No one had ever observed in him any irrita- 
tion ; on the contrary, he had received with mildness 
the counsels that had been offered, and had remained 
tenderly attached to men whose convictions were not 
the same as his own. He was now advancing mourn- 
fully along the road to Cappel; and John Maaler of 
Winterthour, who was riding a few paces behind him, 
heard his groans and sighs, intermingled with fervent 
prayers. If any one srpoke to him, he was found firm 
and strong in the peace that proceeds from faith ; but 
he did not conceal his conviction that he should never 
Bee his family or church again. Thus advanced the 
forces of Zurich. A woful march ; resembling rather a 
funeral procession than an army going to battle. 

As they approached they saw express after express 
galloping along the road from Cappel, begging the 
Zurichers to hasten to the defence of their brothers.* 
^ Dm nla Maaong uff die aoder van Cappel kamm. BulL 3. IIA 



476 HISTORY OF THE REFOEMATIOH. 



At Adliswyl, having passed the bridge under which 
flow the impetuous waters of the Sihl, and traversed the 
village through the midst of women, children, and old 
men, who, standing before their cottages, looked with 
sadness on this disorderly troop, they began to ascend 
the Albis. They were about half-way from Cappel when 
the first cannonshot was heard. They stop, they listen ; 
e, second, a third succeeds. . . . There is no longer any 
doubt. The glory, the very existence of the republic 
are endangered, and they are not present to defend it I 
The blood curdles in their veins. On a sudden they 
arouse, and each one begins to run to the support of his 
brothers. But the road over the Albis was much steeper 
than it is in our days. The badly harnessed artillery 
could not ascend it; the old men and citizens, little 
habituated to marching, and covered with weighty 
%rmor, advanced with difficulty; and yet they formed 
the greater portion of the troops. They were seen stop- 
ping one after another, panting and exhausted, along 
the sides of the road near the thickets and ravines of the 
Albis, leaning against a beech or an ash tree, and look- 
ing with dispirited eyes to the summit of the mountain 
covered with thick pines. 

They resumed their march, however; the horsemen 
and the most intrepid of the foot-soldiers hastened on- 
wards, and having reached the *' Beech Tree," on the top 
of the mountain, halted to take counsel. 

What a prospect then extended before their eyes. 
Zurich, the lake, and its smiling shores ; those orchards, 
those fertile fields, those vine-clad hills, almost the whole 
of the canton. Alas, soon perhaps to be devastated by 
the forest bands. 

Scarcely had these noble-minded men begun to delib- 
erate, when fresh messengers from Cappel appeared be- 
fore them, exclaiming, " Hasten forwards 1" At these 
words many of the Zurichers prepared to gallop towards 
the enemy.* Toning, the captain of the arquebusiers, 
stopped them. "My good friends," cried he to them, 
" against such great forces what can we do alone ? Lat 
* Uff Rossen haftig ylttend zum angrifil BolL S. lia 



ZWIKaLB ON THB BATTLE-FIELD 4T7 



as wait here until our people are assembled, and then 
let ud fall upon the enemy with the whole army." " Yes, 
if we had an army," bitterly replied the captain-general, 
who, in despair of saving the republic, thought only of 
dying with glory ; " but we have only a banner and no 
soldiers." " How can we stay calmly upon these heights,'' 
said Zwingle, " while we hear the shots that are fired at 
our fellow-citizens? In the name of God I will march 
towards my brother warriors, prepared to die in order 
to save them."* " And I too," added the aged banneret 
Schweitzer. " As for you," continued he, turning with 
a contemptuous look towards Toning, wait till you are 
a little recovered." " I am quite as much refreshed as 
you," replied Toning, the color mantling on his face, 
"and you shall soon see whether I cannot fight." All 
hastened their steps towards the field of battle. 

The descent was rapid ; they plunged into the woods, 
passed through the village of Husen, and at length ar- 
rived near the Granges. It was three o'clock when the 
banner crossed the narrow bridge that led thither ; and 
there were so few soldiers round it that every one trem- 
bled as he beheld this venerated standard thus exposed 
to the attacks of so formidable an enemy. The army of 
the cantons was at that moment deploying before the 
eyes of the new-comers. Zwingle gazed upon this ter- 
rible spectacle. Behold, then, these phalanxes of sol- 
diers: a few minutes more, and the labors of eleven 
years will be destroyed perhaps for ever I . . . 

A citizen of Zurich, one Leonard Bourkhard, who 
was ill-disposed towards the reformer, said to him in a 
harsh tone, Well, Master Ulrich, what do you say about 
this business? Are the radishes salt enough? . . . who 
will eat them now?"f *'I," replied Zwingle, "and many 
a brave man who is here in the hands of God ; for we 
are his in life and in death." "And I too, I will help 
to eat them," resumed Bourkhard immediately, asham- 
ed of his brutality, "I will risk my life for them," 

♦ Ich will racht, in den namen Gotts, zu den biderben liiten und 
Willig mitt und under inen sterben. Bull. 3. 123. \ Sind di<i 

Ruben gesaltzen, wer will sie ausessen? J, J. Uottinger 3. S89> 



478 HISTOEY OF THE REFOEMATIOK. 



And he did so, and many others with him, adds the 
chronicle. 

It was four o'clock ; the sun was sinking rapidly ; 
the Waldstettes did not advance, and the Zurichers le- 
gan to think that the attack would be put off till the 
morrow. In fact, the chiefs of the five cantons seeing 
the great banner of Zurich arrive, the night near at hand, 
and the impossibility of crossing under the fire of the 
Zurichers the marsh and the ditch that separated the 
combatants, were looking for a place in which their 
troops might pass the night. "If at this moment any 
mediators had appeared," says Bullinger, "their propo- 
sals would have been accepted." 

The soldiers, observing the hesitation of their chiefs, 
began to murmur loudly. " The big ones abandon us,'* 
said one. " The captains fear to bite the fox's tail," said 
another. "Not to attack them," cried they all, "is to 
ruin our cause." During this time a daring man was 
preparing the skilful manoeuvre that was to decide the 
fate of the day, A warrior of Uri, John Jauch, formerly 
bailiff of Sargans, a good marksman and experienced 
soldier, having taken a few men with him, moved tow- 
ards the right of the army of the five cantons, crept 
into the midst of the clump of beech-trees, that, by form- 
ing a semicircle to the east, unite the hill of Ifelsberg 
to that of the Granges,* found the wood empty, arrived 
to within a few paces of the Zurichers, and there, hidden 
behind the trees, remarked unperceived the smallness of 
their numbers, and their want of caution. Then stealth- 
ily retiring, he went to the chiefs at the very moment 
the discontent was on the point of bursting out. "Now 
is the time to attack the enemy," cried he. " Dear gos* 
sip," replied Troguer, captain-in-chief of Uri, "you do 
not mean to say that we should set to work at so late 
an hour ; besides, the men are preparing their quarters, 
and everybody knows what it cost our fathers at Naples 
and Marignan for having commenced the attack a little 

* This wood no longer connects the two hills. The present pas> 
tor of Cappel told me that when first he went into that district the 
woo4 wfts much more extemsive than it is at preseut. 



THE AMBUSCADE 



before night. And then it is Innocent's day, and our • 
ancestors have never given battle on a feast-day."* 
"Don't think about the Innocents of the calendar/' re- 
plied Jauch, but let us rather remember the innocents 
that we have left in our cottages." Gaspard G5dli of 
Zurich, brother of the commander of the Granges, added 
bis entreaties to those of the warrior of Uri. We must 
either beat the Zurichers to-night," said he, or be beaten 
by them to-morrow. Take your choice." 

All was unavailing ; the chiefs were inflexible, and 
the army prepared to take up its quarters. Upon this 
the warrior of Uri, understanding like his fellow-coun- 
tryman Tell that great evils require great remedies, 
drew his sword and cried, "Let all true confederates 
follow me."f Then hastily leaping to his saddle, he 
spurred his horse into the forest ;J and immediately 
arquebusiers, soldiers from the Adige, and many other 
warriors of the five cantons, especially from Unterwal- 
den, in all about three hundred men, rushed into the 
wood after him. At this sight Jauch no longer doubted 
of the victory of the Waldstettes. He dismounted and 
fell upon his knees, " for," says Tschudi, " he was a man 
who feared God." All his followers did the same, and 
together invoked the aid of God, of his holy mother, and 
of all the heavenly host. They then advanced; but 
Boon the warrior of Uri, wishing to expose no one but 
himself, halted his troops, and glided from tree to tree 
to the verge of the wood. Observing that the enemy 
was as incautious as ever, he rejoined his arquebusiers, 
led them stealthily forward, and posted them silently be- 
hind the trees of the forest,§ enjoining them to take their 
aim so as not to miss their men. During this time the 
chiefs of the five cantons, foreseeing that this rash man 
was about to bring on the action, decided against their 
will, and collected their soldiers around the banners, 

• An einem solchen Tag Blut ze vergiessen. Tschudi, Helv. 2. 
189. t Welche redlicher Eidgeaossen wart sind, die louffind uzB 
nach. Bull. 3. 125= X Sass ylends wiederum uff sin Ross. Tschu- 
di« Helv. 2. 191. § Zertheilt die Hagken hinter die Baum iiD 

Wald in groeser Stiile. Ibid. 



480 HISTOET OF THE EEFOEMATION. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

jJaforeBeen change — The whole army advancea—Universal diior 
der— The banneret's death — The banner in danger — The banner 
saved — Terrible slaughter — Slaughter of the pastors — Zwingle'a 

last words — Barbarity of the victors — The furnace of trial 

Zwingle's dying moments — Day after the battle — Homage and 
outrage. 

The Zurichers, fearing that the enemy would seize 
upon the road that led to their capital, were then direct- 
ing part of their troops and their guns to a low hill by 
which it was commanded. At the very moment that the 
invisible arquebusiers stationed among the beech-trees 
were taking their aim, this detachment passed near the 
little wood. The deepest silence prevailed in this soli- 
tude : each one posted there picked out the man he de- 
sired to bring down, and Jauch exclaimed, " In the name 
of the Holy Trinity — of God the Father, the Son, and the 
Holy Ghost — of the holy mother of God, and of all the 
heavenly host — fire I" At the word the deadly balls 
issued from the wood, and a murderous carnage in the 
ranks of Zurich followed this terrible discharge. The 
battle, which had begun four hours ago, and which had 
never appeared to be a serious attack, now underwent 
an unforeseen change. The sword was not again tc be 
returned to the scabbard until it had been bathed in 
torrents of blood. Those of the Zurichers who had not 
fallen at this first discharge, lay flat on the ground, so 
tnat the balls passed over their heads ; but they soon 
sprang up, saying, Shall we allow ourselves to be 
butchered ? No, let us rather attack the enemy.'' La- 
vater seized a lance, and rushing into the foremost rank 
exclaimed, *' Soldiers, uphold the honor of God and of 
our lords, and behave like brave men." Zwingle, silent 
and collected, like nature before the bursting of the tern* 
pest, was there also, halberd in kand. " Master Ulricb,*' 



A OENERAL BATTLE. 



481 



8aid Bernard Sprungli, " speak to the people and encour- 
age them." Warriors," said Zwingle, ''fear nothing 
If we are this day to be defeated, still our cause is good. 
Comraend yourselves to God." 

The Zurichers quickly turned the artillery they were 
dragging to another quarter, and pointed it against the 
wood ; but their bullets, instead of striking the enemy, 
only reached the top of the trees, and tore off a few 
branches that fell upon the skirmishers.* 

Rychmuth, the landamraan of Schwytz, came up at a 
gallop to recall the volunteers ; but seeing the battle 
begun, he ordered the whole army to advance. Imme- 
diately the five banners moved forward. 

But already Jauch^s skirmishers, rushing from among 
the trees, had fallen impetuously upon the Zurichers, 
charging them with their long and pointed halberds. 

Heretics, sacrilegists," cried they, we have you at 
last." "Man-sellers, idolaters, impious papists," repli- 
ed the Zurichers, '' is it really you ?" At first a shower 
of stones fell from both parties and wounded several ; 
immediately they came to close quarters. The resist- 
ance of the Zurichers was terrible.f Each struck with 
the sword or with the halberd : at last the soldiers of 
the five cantons were driven back in disorder. The Zu- 
richers advanced, but in so doing lost the advantages of 
their position, and got entangled in the marsh. Some 
Roman-catholic historians pretend that this flight of their 
troops was a stratagem to draw the Zurichers into the 
Bna.re.| 

In the mean time the army of the five cantons has- 
tened through the wood. Burning with courage and 
with anger, they eagerly quickened their steps ; from 
the midst of the beech-trees there resounded a confused 
and savage noise — a frightful murmur ; the ground 
shook; one might have imagined that the forest was 
tittering a horrible roar, or that witches were holding 

• Denn das die Aest auf sie fielent. Tschudi, p. 182. 

t Der angriff war hart uad wahrt der Weiderstand eia gute Wyh 
Ibid. 192. t Catholici autem, posltis iusldiis, retroceasemnti 

fugam Bimulantes. Cochloeus, Acta Luth. p. 214. 

Hift of R«£ IT. ^ I 



483 



HISTORY OF THE REFOKMATIOK. 



their nocturnal revels in its dark recesses * In vnin did 
the bravest of the Zurichers offer an intrepid resistance ; 
the Waldstettes had the advantage in every quarter. 
" They are surrounding us/^ cried some. " Our men are 
fleeing," said others. A man from the canton of Zag, 
mingling with the Zurichers, and pretending to be of 
their party, exclaimed, " Fly, fly, brave Zurichers ; yoa 
are betrayed." Thus every thing is against Zurich. 
Even the hand of Him who is the disposer of battles 
turned against this people. Thus was it also in times of 
old that God frequently chastised his own people of Is- 
rael by the Assyrian sword. A panic terror seized upon 
the bravest, and the disorder spread everywhere with 
frightful rapidity. 

In the meanwhile the aged Schweitzer had raised 
the great banner with a firm hand, and all the picked 
men of Zurich were drawn up around it ; but soon their 
ranks were thinned. John Kammli, charged with the 
defence of the standard, having observed the small num- 
ber of combatants that remained upon the field of battle, 
said to the banneret, " Let us lower the banner, my lord, 
and save it, for our people are flying shamefully." " War- 
riors, remain firm," replied the aged banneret, whom no 
danger had ever shaken. The disorder augmented ; the 
number of fugitives increased every minute ; the old man 
stood fast, amazed and immovable as an aged oak beaten 
by a frightful hurricane. He received unflichingly the 
blows that fell upon him, and alone resisted the terrible 
storm. Kammli seized him by the arm : " My lord," 
said he again, " lower the banner, or else we shall lose 
it : there is no more glory to be reaped here." The ban* 
neret, who was already mortally wounded, exclaimed, 
Alas, must the city of Zurich be so punished ?" Then, 
dragged off by Kan] mil, who held him by the arm, he 
retreated as far as the ditch. The weight of years, and the 
wounds with which he was covered, did not permit him tc 
cross it. He fell in the mire at the bottom, still holding the 
glorious standard, whose folds dropped on the other bank. 

* Der Bodea erzittert ; und nit aaders war, denn aU ob der Wald 
lut Undelete. TfiChudi, p. 12S. 



DEATH OF THE BAUTNEKET. 



483 



The enemy ran up with loud shouts, being attracted 
by the colors of Zurich, as the bull by the gladiator's 
flag. Kammli seeing this, unhesitatingly leaped to the 
bottom of the ditch, and laid hold of the stiff and dying 
hands of his chief, in order to preserve the precious 
ensign, which they tightly grasped. But it was in 
vain ; the hands of the aged Schweitzer would not loose 
the standard. " My lord banneret," cried this faithful 
servant, it is no longer in your power to defend it." 
The hands of the banneret, already stiffened in death, 
still refused ; upon which Kammli violently tore away 
the sacred standard, leaped upon the other bank, and 
rushed with his treasure far from the steps of the enemy 
The last Zurichers at this moment reached the ditch; 
they fell one after another upon the expiring banneret, 
and thus hastened his death. 

Kammli, however, having received a wound from a 
gunshot, his march was retarded, and soon the Wald- 
stettes surrounded him with their swords. The Zuricher, 
holding the banner in one hand, and his sword in the 
other, defended himself bravely. One of the Waldstettes 
caught hold of the staff, another seized the flag itself 
and tore it. Kammli with one blow of his sword cut 
down the former, and striking around him, called out, 
" To the rescue, brave Zurichers ; save the honor and 
the banner of our lords." The assailants increased in 
number, and the warrior was about to fall, when Adam 
Naef of Wollenwyd rushed up sword in hand, and the 
head of the Waldstette who had torn the colors rolled 
upon the plain, and his blood gushed out upon the flag 
of Zurich. Dumysen, member of the smaller council, 
supported Nseff with his halberd, and both dealt such 
lusty blows, that they succeeded in disengaging the 
standard-bearer. He, although dangerously wounded, 
sprang forward, holding the blood-stained folds of the 
banner in one hand, which he carried off hastily, drag- 
ging the staff behind him. With fierce look and fiery 
eyC; he thus passed, sword in hand, through the midst of 
friends and enemies : he crossed plains, woods, and 
marshes, everywhere leaving trails of his blood, which 



484 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 



flowed from numerous wounds. Two of his enemieSi 
one from Schwytz, the other from Zug, were particularly 
eager in his pursuit. "Heretic, villain," cried they, 
surrender and give us the banner." You shall have 
my life first," replied the Zuricher. Then the two hostile 
soldiers, who were embarrassed by their cuirasses, stop- 
ped a moment to take them off. Kammli took advantage 
of this to get in advance : he ran ; Huber, Dumysen, 
and Dantzler of Naenikon were at his side. They all 
four thus arrived near Husen, half way up the Albis. 
They had still to climb the steepest part of the mountain 
Huber fell covered with wounds. Dumysen the colonel 
general, who had fought as a private soldier, almost 
reached the church of Husen, and there he dropped life- 
less : and two of his sons, in the flower of youth, soon 
lay stretched on the battle-field that had drunk their 
father's blood. Kammli took a few steps farther ; but | 
halted erelong, exhausted and panting, near a hedge 
that he would have to clear, and discovered his two ene- 
mies and other Waldstettes running from all sides, like 
birds of prey, towards the wavering standard of Zurich. 
The strength of Kammli was sinking rapidly, his eyes 
grew dim, thick darkness surrounded him : a hand of 
lead fastened him to the ground. Then, mustering all 
his expiring strength, he flung the standard on the other 
side of the hedge, exclaiming, " Is there any brave Zu- 
richer near me ? Let him preserve the banner and the 
honor of our lords. As for me, I can do no more." Then 
casting a last look to heaven, he added, " May God be my 
helper." He fell exhausted by this last effort. Dantzler, 
who came up, flung away his sword, sprung over the 
hedge, seized the banner, and cried, "With the aid of 
God, I will carry it off." He then rapidly climbed the Al- 
bis, and at last placed the ancient standard of Zurich in 
safety. God, on whonr these warriors fixed all their 
hopes, had heard their prayers, but the noblest blood of 
the republic had been spilt. 

The enemy were victorious at all points. The sol- 
diers of the five cantons, and particularly those of Unter- 
i«raldcn, long hardened in the wars of the Milanese, 



TERRIBLE SLAUaHTER 



485 



showed themselves more merciless towards their con« 
federates than they had ever been towards foreigners. 
At the beginning of the battle, G5dli had taken flight : 
and soon after he quitted Zurich for ever. Lavater the 
captain-general, after having fought valiantly, had fallen 
into the ditch. He was dragged out by a soldier, a?id 
escaped. 

The most distinguished men of Zurich fell one after 
another under the blows of the Waldstettes.* Eudi 
Gallman found the glorious tomb he had wished for, and 
his two brothers stretched beside him left their father's 
house desolate. Toning, captain of the arquebusiers, 
died for his country as he had foretold. All the pride of 
the population of Zurich, seven members of the smaller 
council, nineteen members of the Two Hundred, sixty- 
five citizens of the town, four hundred and seventeen 
from the rural districts — the father in the midst of his 
children, the son surrounded by his brothers, lay on the 
field. 

Gerold Meyer of Knonau, son of Anna Zwingle, at 
that time twenty-two years of age, and already a mem- 
ber of the council of Two Hundred, a husband and a 
father, had rushed into the foremost ranks with all the 
impetuosity of youth. " Surrender, and your life shall be 
spared," cried some of the warriors of the five cantons, 
who desired to save him. "It is better for me to die 
with honor than to yield with disgrace," replied the 
son of Anna, and immediately struck by a mortal blow, 
he fell and expired not far from the castle of his an- 
cestors. 

The ministers were those who paid proportionally 
the greatest tribute on this bloody day. The sword that 
was at work on the heights of Cappel thirsted for their 
blood : twenty-five of them fell beneath its stroke. The 
Waldstettes trembled with rage whenever they discov- 
ered one of these heretical preachers, and sacrificed him 
with enthusiasm, as a chosen victim to the Virgin and 

* Optimi et docti viri, quos necessitas traxerat in commune perv 
culum patriae et ecclesiae veritatisque defensandse, quam et sao saQ' 
g^ine redemerunt. PelL Vit. MS. p. 6. 



488 HISTORY OF THE REPOHMATION 



the saints. There has perhaps never been any battle 
in which so many men of the word of God have bitten 
the dust. Almost everywhere the pastors had marched 
at the head of their flocks. One might have said that 
Cappel was an assembly of Christian churches, rather 
than an army of Swiss companies. The abbot Joner, 
receiving a mortal wound near the ditch, expired in 
eight of his own monastery. The people of Zug, in pur- 
suit of the enemy, uttered a cry of anguish as they passed 
his body, remembering all the good he had done them.*' 
Schmidt of Kussnacht, stationed on the field of battle in 
the midst of his parishioners, fell surrounded by forty of 
their bodies.f Geroldsek, John Haller, and many other 
pastors, at the head of their flocks, suddenly met in a 
terrible and unforeseen manner the Lord whom they had 
preached. 

But the death of one individual far surpassed all 
others. Zwingle was at the post of danger, the helmet 
on his head, the sword hanging at his side, the battle- 
axe in his hand.| Scarcely had the battle begun, when 
stooping to console a dying man, says J. J. Hottinger, 
a stone hurled by the vigorous arm of a Waldstette 
struck him on the head and closed his lips. Yet Zwin- 
gle arose, when two other blows, which hit him succes- 
sively on the leg,§ threw him down again. Twice more 
he stands up ; but a fourth time he receives a thrust 
from a lance, he staggers, and sinking beneath so many 
wounds, falls on his knees. Does not the darkness that 
is spreading around him announce a still thicker dark- 
ness that is about to cover the church ? Zwingle turns 
away from such sad thoughts ; once more he uplifts 
that head which had been so bold, and gazing with 
calm eye upon the trickling blood, exclaims, "What 
matters this misfortune ? They may indeed kill the 

* Es klagtend inn insonders die Ziiger. Bull. 3. 151. 

t Uf der Walstett ward er funden, under und by sinen KiiBsna* 
chern. Ibid. 147. t The chaplains of the Swiss troops stili 

wear a sword. Zwingle did not make uso of his arms. 

§ Hatt auch in den Schenklen zween stiche. Tschudi, Helv 
2. 194. 



TREATMENT OF THE WOUNDED. 487 

body, but they cannot kill the soul."* These were his 
last words. 

He had scarcely uttered them ere he fell backwards 
There, under a tree — Z wingless pear-tree — in a meadow, 
he remained lying on his back, with clasped hands, and 
eyes upturned to heaven.f 

While the bravest were pursuing the scattered sol* 
diers of Zurich, the stragglers of the five cantons had 
pounced like hungry ravens on the field of battle. Torch 
in hand, these wretches prowled among the dead, cast- 
ing looks of irritation around them, and lighting up the 
features of their expiring victims by the dull glimmering 
of these funereal torches. They turned over the bodies 
of the wounded and the dead ; they tortured and stripped 
them. J If they found any who were still sensible, tney 
cried out, Call upon the saints, and confess to our 
priests." If the Zurichers, faithful to their creed, reject- 
ed these cruel invitations, these men, who were as cow- 
ardly as they were fanatical, pierced them with their 
lances, or dashed out their brains with the but ends of 
their arquebuses. The Roman-catholic historian Salat 
of Lucerne makes a boast of this. " They were left to 
die like infidel dogs, or were slain with the sword or the 
spear, that they might go so much the quicker to the 
devil, with whose help they had fought so desperately."! 
If any of the soldiers of the five cantons recognized a 
Zuricher against whom they had any grudge, with dry 
eyes, disdainful mouth, and features changed by anger, 
they drew near the unhappy creature w^rithing in the 
agonies of death, and said, "Well, has your heretical 
faith preserved you? Aha, it was pretty clearly seen 
to-day who had the true faith. . . . To-day we have 

* In genua prolapsum dixisse: "Ecquid hoc infortunii? Age! 
corpus quidem occidere possunt, animam non possunt.'^ Osw. My- 
cor.ius, Vit. Zw. f Was er noch lebend, lag an dem riiggen 

and hat seine beide hand zamen gethan, wie die betenden, sach mit 
Bynen angen ob sich in hymel. Bull. 3. 136. f Ein gross pliin- 
deren, ein ersuchen und usgiessen der todten und der wunden. lb. 
135. § Damit sie desto eher zum Teufel, damit sie mil alien vid' 
ren fechtend, gefiihrt wiirdend. Salat. 



i88 HISTORY OF THE REPORMATIOH. 



drag-ged your gospel in the mud ; and jou too, even yon 
are covered with your own blood. God, the Virgin, and 
the saints have punished you." Scarcely hac* they utter- 
ed these words before they plunged their swords into 
their enemy's bosom. "Mass or death,'' was their 
watchword. 

Thus triumphed the Waldstettes ; but the pious 
Zurichers who expired on the field of battle called to 
mind that they had for God one who has said, " If ye 
endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons ; 
for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not?" 
" Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him." It is in 
the furnace of trial that the God of the gospel conceals 
the pure gold of his most precious blessings. This 
punishment was necessary to turn aside the church of 
Zurich from the " broad ways " of the world, and lead it 
back to the "narrow ways" of the Spirit and the life. 
In a political history, a defeat like that of Cappel would 
be styled a great misfortune ; but in a history of the 
church of Jesus Christ, such a blow, inflicted by the 
hand of the Father himself, ought rather to be called a 
great blessing. 

Meanwhile Zwingle lay extended under the tree, near 
the road by which the mass of the people was passing. 
The shouts of the victors, the groans of the dying, those 
flickering torches borne from corpse to corpse, Zurich 
humbled, the cause of reform lost — all cried aloud to him 
that God punishes his servants when they have recourse 
to the arm of man. If the German reformer had been 
able to approach Zwingle at this solemn moment, and 
pronounce those oft-repeated words, "Christians fight 
not with sword and arquebuse, but with sufferings and 
with the cross,"* Zwingle would have stretched out his 
dying hand, and said, " Amen." 

Two of the soldiers who were prowling over the 
field of battle having come near the reformer with- 
out recognizing him, *^ Do you wish for a priest to con- 
fess yourself?" asked they. Zwingle, without speaking, 

* Christen sind nicht die fiir sich selbst mit dem Schwerdt odei 
Biichsen streiten, sondern mit dem Kreaz und Leyden. Lath. Op|K 



DEATH OF ZWINGLE. 



489 



for he had not strength, made signs in the negative. 
" If you cannot speak," replied the soldiers, " at least 
think in thy heart of the mother of God, and call upon 
the saints." Zwingle again shook his head, and kept 
his eyes still fixed on heaven.* Upon this the irritated 
soldiers began to curse him. "No doubt," said they, 
" you are one of the heretics of the city." One of them^ 
being curious to know who it was, stooped down and 
turned Zwingle's head in the direction of a fire that had 
been lighted near the spot.f The soldier immediately 
let him fall to the ground. I think," said he, surprised 
and amazed, " I think it is Zwingle." At this moment 
Captain Fockinger of Unterwalden, a veteran and a 
pensioner, drew near; he had heard the last words of 
the soldier. " Zwingle I" exclaimed he ; that vile here- 
tic Zwingle, that rascal, that traitor?" Then raising 
his sword, so long sold to the stranger, he struck the 
dying Christian on the throat, exclaiming in a violent 
passion, ** Die, obstinate heretic 1" Yielding under this 
last blow, the reformer gave up the ghost ; he was 
doomed to perish by the sword of a mercenary. " Pre- 
cious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints." 
The soldiers ran to other victims. All did not show the 
same barbarity. The night was cold ; a thick hoarfrost 
covered the fields and the bodies of the dying. The 
Protestant historian BuUinger informs us that some 
Waldstettes gently raised the wounded in their arms, 
bound up their wounds, and carried them to the fires 
lighted on the field of battle. " Ah," cried they, why 
have the Swiss thus slaughtered one another ?" 

The main body of the army had remained on the 
field of battle near the standards. The soldiers con- 
versed around the fires, interrupted from time to time 
Dy the cries of the dying. During this time the chiefs 
assembled in the convent sent messengers to carry the 
news of their signal victory to the confederate cantons, 
and to the Roman-catholic powers of Germany. 

At length the day appeared. The Waldstettes spread 

♦ Und sach uber sich in Hymel. Bull. 3. 136. t Beym Fuwi 
beoach. Tscbudi. Helv. 2. 194. 



490 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOM. 



over the field of battle, running here and there, stopping, 
contemplating, struck with surprise at the sight of their 
most formidable enemies stretched lifeless on the plain ; 
but sometimes also shedding tears as they gazed on 
corpses which reminded them of old and sacred ties of 
friendship. At length they reached the pear-tree under 
which Zwingle lay dead, and an immense crowd collect 
ed around it His countenance still beamed with ex 
pression and with life. "He has the look," said Bar- 
tholomew Stocker of Zug, who had loved him, "he has 
the look of a living rather than of a dead man.* Such 
was he when he kindled the people by the fire of his 
eloquence." All eyes were fixed upon the corpse. John 
Schonbrunner, formerly canon of Zurich, who had retired 
to Zug at the epoch of the Reformation, could not re- 
strain his tears : " Whatever may have been thy creed," 
said he, " I know, Zwingle, that thou hast been a loyal 
confederate. May thy soul rest with God." 

But the pensioners of the foreigner, on whom Zwin- 
gle had never ceased to make war, required that the 
body of the heretic should be dismembered, and a por- 
tion sent to each of the five cantons. Peace be to the 
dead ; and God alone be their judge," exclaimed the 
avoyer Golder and the landamman Thoss of Zug. Cries 
of fury answered their appeal, and compelled them to 
retire. Immediately the drums beat to muster ; the 
dead body was tried, and it was decreed that it should 
be quartered for treason against the confederation, and 
then burnt for heresy. The executioner of Lucerne car- 
ried out the sentence. Flames consumed Zwingle's dis- 
jointed members ; the ashes of swine were mingled with 
his ; and a lawless multitude rushing upon his remains, 
flung them to the four winds of heaven.f 

Zwingle was dead. A great light had been extin- 
guished in the church of God. Mighty by the word as 
were the other reformers, he had been more so than they 

* Nicht einem Todten sondern einem Lebenden gleich. Zwingli 
Ciir das Volk von J. J. Hottinger. f Tschudi Helvet. 2. 195. 

Cadaver Zwinglii .... in auatuor partes secatur, in ignem coi\ji. 
oitnr, in cinerem resolvitur " Myo. de Vit. Zw. 



THE END OP A BISHOP IN ARMS. 



491 



in action ; but this very power had been his weakness, 
and he had fallen under the weight of his own strength. 
Zwingle was not forty-eight years old when he died. II 
the might of God always accompanied the might of mau, 
what would he not have done for the Reformation in 
Switzerland, and even in the empire ? But he had wield- 
ed an arm that God had forbidden ; the helmet had cov- 
ered his head, and he had grasped the halberd. His 
more devoted friends were themselves astonished, and 
exclaimed, " We know not what to say ; .... a bishop 
in arms I"* The bolt had furrowed the cloud, the blow 
bad reached the reformer, and his body was no more than 
a handful of dust in the palm of a soldier. 

• Ego nihil certe apud me possum slatuere, maxime de Episcopo 
In amiis. Zuickius Ecolampadio, November 8, 1531, Zurich MSb 



492 HI3TQET OF THS ESFO&KATlOir. 



CHAPTER IX. 

OcMiBternatioQ in Zurich — Violence of the populace — Grief and di& 
tress — ^Zwingle is dead — Funeral oration — Army of Zurich — An* 
other reverse on the Goubel — Inactivity of the Bernese — Hopes 
and plan of Charles V. — ^End of the war — Treaty of peace. 

Frightful darkness hung over Zurich during the night 
that followed the afflicting day of Cappel. It was seven 
in the evening when the first news of the disaster ar- 
rived. . . . Vague but alarming reports spread at first 
with the rapidity of lightning. It was known that a 
terrible blow had been inflicted, but not of what kind ; 
soon a few wounded men, wuo arrived from the field of 
battle, cleared up the frightful mystery. "Then," said 
Bullinger, whom we shall allow to speak, " there arose 
suddenly a loud and horrible cry of lamentation and 
tears, bewailing and groaning." The consternation was 
so much the greater because no one had expected such 
a disaster. " There is not enough for a breakfast," had 
said some haughty worldly men ; " With one blow we 
shall be masters of the five chalets^^^ had said another ; 
and an old soldier added, with disdainful sneer, "We 
shall soon have scattered these five dunghills." The 
Christian portion, convinced that Zurich was fighting in 
a good cause, had not doubted that victory would be on 
the side of truth. . . . Thus their first stupefaction was 
succeeded by a violent outburst of rage. With blind 
fury the mob accused all their chiefs, and loaded with 
insults even those who had defended their country at 
the price of their blood. An immense crowd, agitated, 
pale, and bewildered, filled all the streets of the city. 
They met, they questioned, and replied ; they questioned 
Bgain, and the answer could not be heard, for the shouts 
of the people interrupted or drowned the voice of the 
speakers. The councillors who had remained in Zurich 
repaired in haste to the town-hall. The people, who 
bad already assembled there in crowds, looked on with 



COMMOTION IN ZURICH. 



49d 



threatening eyes. Accusations of treason burst from 
every mouth, and the patricians were pointed out to the 
general indignation. They must have victims. " Before 
going to fight against the enemy on the frontiers/' fcaid 
the mob, "we should defend ourselves against those 
who are within our walls.'' Sorrow and fear excited 
the minds of all. That savage instinct of the populace 
which in great calamities leads them like a wild beast 
to thirst for blood, was violently aroused. A hand from 
the midst of the crowd points out the council-hall, and a 
harsh and piercing voice exclaims, Let us chop off the 
heads of some of the men who sit in these halls, and let 
their blood ascend to heaven, to beg for mercy in behalf 
of those whom they have slain." 

But this fury is nothing in comparison with that 
which broke out against the ministers, against Zwingle, 
and all those Christians who were the cause, say they, 
of the ruin of the country. Fortunately the sword of 
the Waldstettes had withdrawn them from the rage of 
their fellow-citizens ; nevertheless, there still remained 
some who could pay for the others. Leo Juda, whom 
Zwingle's death was about to raise to the head of relig- 
ious affairs, had scarcely recovered from a serious ill- 
ness ; it was on him they rushed. They threatened, they 
pursued him ; a few worthy citizens carried him off and 
hid him in their houses. The rage of these madmen was 
not appeased: they continued shouting that atonement 
must be made for the slaughter at Cappel, by a still more 
frightful slaughter within the very walls of the city. But 
God placed a curb in the mouths of these infuriate beasts 
of pcey, and subdued them. 

On a sudden, grief succeeded to rage, and sobs 
choked the utterance of the most furious. All those 
whose relatives had marched to Cappel, imagined that 
they were among the number of the victims. Old men, 
women, and children, went forth in the darkness by the 
glimmering light of torches, with haggard eyes and hur- 
ried steps ; and as soon as some wounded man arrived, 
they questioned him with trembling voice about those 
whom they were seeking. Some replied, " I saw bim fall 



49i 



KISTORr OF THE REFORMATIOH. 



close by my side." '' He was surrounded by so many 
enemies," said others, "that there was no chance oi 
Bafety for him."* At these words the distracted family 
dropped their torches, and filled the air with shrieks and 
groans. 

Anna Zwingle had heard from her house the repeated 
discharges of artillery. As wife and mother, she had 
passed in expectation many long hours of anguish, offer 
ing fervent prayers to heaven. At length the most ter 
rible accounts, one after another, burst upon her. 

In the midst of those whose cries of despair refe'choed 
along the road to Cappel was Oswald Myconius, who 
inquired with anxiety what had become of his friend. 
Soon he heard one of the unfortunate wretches who had 
escaped from the massacre, relating to those around him 
that Zwingle had fallen.f .... Zwingle is no more 1 
Zwingle is dead I The cry was repeated : it ran through 
Zurich with the rapidity of lightning, and at length 
reached the unhappy widow. Anna fell on her knees. 
But the loss of her husband was not enough : God had 
inflicted other blows. Messengers following each other 
at short intervals announced to her the death of her son 
Gerold of Knonau, of her brother the bailiff of Reinhard, 
of her son-in-law Antony Wirz, of John Lutschi the hus- 
band of her dear sister, as well as of all her most inti- 
mate friends. This woman remained alone, alone with 
her God — alone with her young children, who, as they 
saw her tears, wept also, and threw themselves discon- 
solate into their mother's arms. 

On a sudden the alarm-bell rang. The council, dis- 
tracted by the most contrary opinions, had at last re- 
solved to summon all the citizens towards the Albis. 
But the sound of the tocsin ree'choing through the dark- 
ness, the lamentable stories of the wounded, and the 
distressful groans of bereaved families, still further in- 
creased the tumult. A numerous and disorderly troop 

• Dermassen umbgaben mit Fygenden, dass kein Hoffnung dei 
rettung iiberig. Bull. 3. 163. f Ut igiter mane videram ex 

eantem, ita sub noctem audio nuntium, pugaatum quidem acriter 
Uunen iAfeliciter, et ZwingUum nobis j^eriiase. Mjo. Yit Zw. 



ZURICH RALLIES HER FORCES. 496 



of citizens rushed along the road to Cappel. Among 
them was the Valaisan, Thomas Plater. Here ne met 
with a man that had but one hand* — there with others 
who supported their wounded and bleeding heads with 
both hands ; further still was a soldier whose bowels 
protruded from his body. In front of these unhappy 
creatures peasants were walking with lighted torches^ 
for the night was very dark. Plater wished to return ; 
but he could not, for sentinels placed on the bridge over 
the Sihl allowed persons to quit Zurich, but permitted 
no one to re^fnter. 

On the morrow the news of the disgraceful treatment 
of Zwingle's corpse aroused all the anger of Zurich ; and 
his friends, uplifting their tear-bedimraed eyes, exclaim- 
ed, " These men may fall upon his body ; they may kin- 
dle their piles, and brand his innocent life, .... but he 
lives — this invincible hero lives in eternity, and leaves 
behind him an immortal monument of glory that no 
flames can destroy.f God, for whose honor he has 
labored, even at the price of his blood, will make his 
memory eternal." **And I," adds Leo Juda, upon 
whom he has heaped so many blessings, will endeavor, 
after so many others, to defend his renown and to extol 
his virtues." Thus Zurich consecrated to Zwingle a 
funeral oration of tears and sighs, of gratitude and 
cries of anguish. Never was there a funeral speech 
more eloquent. 

Zurich rallied her forces. John Steiner had collected 
on the Albis some scattered fragments of the army for 
the defence of the pass : they bivouacked around their 
fires on the summit of the mountain, and all were in 
disorder. Plater, benumbed with cold — it is himself 
who gives us the account — had drawn off his boots to 
warm his feet at the watch-fire. On a sudden an alarm 
was given, the troop was hastily drawn up, and while 
Plater was getting ready, a trumpeter who had escaped 

• Ettlich kamen, batten nur eiae hand. Lebensbeschreibung 
Plateri, p. 297. f Vivit adhunc, et aeternum vivit fortif-simud 

heros. Leonls Jxidad exhort, ad Chf Sect, flnchiridio Psalm. Zwin* 

praemiasa. 



496 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOU . 



from the battle seized his halberd. Plater took it back, 
and stationed himself in the ranks ; before him stood the 
trumpeter, without hat or shoes, and armed with a long 
pole. Such was the army of Zurich. 

The chief captain Lavater rejoined the army at day- 
break. Gradually the allies came up : 1,500 Grisons^ 
under the orders of the captain-general Frey of Zurich, 
1,500 Thurgovians, 600 Tockenburgers, and other aux- 
iliaries besides, soon formed an army of 12,000 men. 
All, even children, ran to arms. The council gave or- 
ders that these young folks* should be sent back to 
share in the domestic duties with the women. 

Another reverse erelong augmented the desolation 
of the reformed party. While the troops of Berne, Zu- 
rich, Basle, and Bienne, amounting to 24,000 men, were 
assembling at Bremgarten, the five cantons entrenched 
themselves at Baar, near Zug. But Zwingle was want- 
ing to the reformed army, and he would have been the 
only man capable of inspiring them with courage. A 
gust of wind having thrown down a few fir-trees in the 
forests where the Zurichers were encamped, and p.aused 
the death of some of their soldiers, they failed not to see 
in this the signal of fresh reverses. 

Nevertheless Frey called loudly for battle ; but the 
Bernese commandant Diesbach refused. Upon this the 
Zurich captain set ofi* in the night of the 23d of October, 
at the head of 4,000 men of Zurich, Schafi'hausen, Basle, 
and St. Gall ; and while the Bernese were sleeping qui- 
etly, he turned the Waldstettes, drove their outposts 
beyond the Sihl, and took his station on the heights that 
overlook the Goubel. His imprudent soldiers, believing 
victory to be certain, proudly waved their banners, and 
then sunk into a heavy sleep. The Waldstettes had 
observed all. On the 24th of October, at two in the morn- 
i^Gf ^ bright moonlight, they quitted their camp in 
profound silence, leaving their fires burning, and wear- 
ing white shirts over their dresses that they might rec- 
ognize one another in the obscurity. Their watchword 
was, " Mary the mother of God." They glided stealth 
• Jimgea Fasel^—young brood. Bull. Chi* 3. 17C. 



JOI OF THE KINO AND EMPEROR. 



497 



Uy into a pine forest, near which the reformed troops 
were en camped. The men stationed at the advanced 
guard of the Zurichers having perceived the enemy, ran 
up to the fires to arouse their friends, but they had 
scarcely reached the third fire before the Waldstettes 
appeared, uttering a frightful shout.* " Har, Har. Har, 
Har 1 Where are these impious heretics ? Har, Har, 
Har, Har The army of the cities at first made a vig- 
orous resistance, and many of the white shirts fell cov- 
ered with blood ; but this did not continue long. The 
bravest, with the valiant Frey at their head, having bit- 
ten the dust, the rout became general, and 800 men 
were left on the field of battle. 

In the midst of these afflictions the Bernese remained 
stubborn and motionless. Francis Kolb, who, notwith- 
standing his advanced age, had accompanied the Ber- 
nese contingent as chaplain, reproached in a sermon the 
negligence and cowardice of his party. " Your ances- 
tors,'^ said he, " would have swum across the Rhine, and 
you — this little stream stops you I They went to battle 
for a word, and you even the gospel cannot move. For 
us it only remains to commit our cause to God." Many 
voices were raised against the imprudent old man, but 
others took up his defence ; and the captain, James May, 
being as indignant as the aged chaplain at the delays 
of his fellow-citizens, drew his sword, and thrusting it 
into the folds of the Bernese banner, pricked the bear 
that was represented on it, and cried out in the pres- 
ence of the whole army, "You knave, will you not show 
your claws ?"f But the bear remained motionless. 

The whole of the Reformation was compromised. 
Scarcely had Ferdinand received intelligence of the 
death of the arch-heretic Zwingle, and of the defeat at 
Cappel, than with an exclamation of joy he forwarded 
these good news to his brother the emperor Charles the 
Fifth, saying, " This is the first of the victories destined 
to restore the faith." After the defeat at the Goubel, he 
wrote again, saying, that if the emperor were not so 

• Mit einem gross^m grusamen geschrey. BuUinger, 3. 20L 
f B^ts, betz,willt dan nicht kretzenl Ibid. 215. 

32 



i9d HISTORY OP THE REFORMATTOlf. 



near at hand, he would not hesitate, however weak ha 
might be, to rush forward in person, sword in hand, to 
terminate so righteous an eLterprise. " Remember,'* 
said he, " that you are the first prince in Christendom, 
and that you will never have a better opportunity of 
covering yourself with glory. Assist the cantons with 
your troops ; the German sects will peiish, when they 
are no longer supported by heretical Switzerland/'* 
"The more I reflect," replied Charles, "the more I am 
pleased with your advice. The imperial dignity with 
which I am invested, the protection that I owe to Chris- 
tendom and to public order — ^in a word, the safety of the 
house of Austria, every thing appeals to me." 

Alreiady about two thousand Italian soldiers, sent by 
the pope and commanded by the Genoese De PIsola, had 
unfolded their seven standards and united, near Zug, 
with the army of the five cantons. Auxiliary troops, 
diplomatic negotiations, and even missionaries to con- 
vert the heretics, were not spared. The bishop of Veroli 
arrived in Switzerland in order to bring back the Lu- 
therans to the Roman faith by means of his friends and 
of his money.f The Roman politicians hailed the victory 
at Cappel as the signal of the restoration of the papal 
authority, not only in Switzerland, but throughout the 
whole of Christendom. J At last this presumptuous Refor- 
mation was about to be repressed. Instead of the great 
deliverance of which Zwingle had dreamed, the imperial 
eagle, let loose by the Papacy, was about to pounce on 
all Europe, and strangle it in its talons. The cause of 
liberty had perished on the Albis. 

But the hopes of the Papists were vain : the cause of 
the gospel, although humbled at this moment, was des- 
tined finally to gain a glorious victory. A cloud may 
hide the sun for a time ; but the cloud passes and the 

* Que se perdo deslar i camino para remediar las quiebras de 
nueslra fe y ser Va. Md. Senor de Allemana. Ferdinand to Charlea 
V. November 11, 1531. t Con proposila di rimover Luthe- 

riani dalla loro mala opinione, con mezzo di alcuni suoi amici e con 
denari. Report of Basadonna, Archbishop of Venice. J Baokei 
Deutehe Geechichte, 3. 867. 



k TEEATY OF PEACE. 



499 



Bnn reappears. Jesus Christ is always the same, and 
the gates of hell may triumph on the battle-field, but 
cannot prevail against his church. 

Nevertheless every thing seemed advancing towards 
a grand catastrophe. The Tockenburgers made peace 
and retired. The Thurgovians followed them ; and next 
the people of Gaster. The evangelical army was thus 
gradually disbanded. The severity of the season was 
joined to these dissensions. Continual storms of wind 
and rain drove the soldiers to their homes. , 

Upon this the five cantons with the undisciplined 
bands of the Italian general Isola threw themselves on 
the left bank of the lake of Zurich. The alarm-bell was 
rung on every side ; the peasants retired in crowds into 
the city, with their weeping wives, their frightened chil- 
dren, and their cattle that filled the air with sullen low- 
ings. A report too was circulated that the enemy in- 
tended laying siege to Zurich. The country people m 
alarm declared that if the city refused to make terms, 
they would treat on their own account. 

The peace party prevailed in the council ; denutiPR 
were elected to negotiate. " Above all things, preserve 
the gospel, and then our honor as far as may be possi- 
ble." Such were their instructions. On the 16th of 
November, the deputies from Zurich arrived in a meadow 
situated near the frontier, on the banks of the Sihl, in 
which the representatives of the five cantons awaited 
them. They proceeded to the deliberations. " In the 
name of the most honorable, holy, and divine Trinity,'* 
began the treaty, " Firstly, we the people of Zurich bind 
ourselves and agree to leave our trusty and well-beloved 
confederates of the five cantons, their well-beloved co- 
burghers of the Valais, and all their adherents lay and 
ecclesiastic, in their true and indubitable Christian faith,* 
renouncing all evil intention, wiles, and stratagems. 
And on our side, we of the five cantons, agree to leave 
our confederates of Zurich and their allies in posses- 
sion of their faith.'^f At the same time, Rapperschwyl, 

* By ihren wahren ungezwyillten christenlicben glaaben. Taobll' 
ii, p. 247. t ihren Glaaben. Ibid. 



500 HISTORY OF THE HEFORMATION. 



Gaster, Wesen, Brem^arten, Mellingen, and the common 
bailiwicks, were abandoned to the five cantons. 

Zurich had preserved its faith — and that was all. 
The treaty having been read and approved of, the pleni- 
potentiaries got off their horses, fell upon their knees, 
and called upon the name of God.* Then the new cap- 
tain-general of the Zurichers, Escher, a hasty and elo- 
quent eld man, rising up, said as he turned towards the 
Waldstettes, " God be praised that I can again call you 
my well-beloved confederates f and approaching them, 
he shook hands successively with Golder, Hug, Troguer, 
Rychmuth, Marquart, Zellger, and Thoss, the terrible 
victors at Cap pel. All eyes were filled with tears.f 
Each took with trembling hand the bottle suspended at 
his side, and offered a draught to one of the chiefs of the 
opposite party. Shortly after, a similar treaty was con- 
cluded with Berne. 

* Kniiwet mencklich nider und battet. Bull. S. 26S. f Und 
loifend ihnen alien die Augen iiber. Tuohcdi, 24£k 



aBSTORATION OF POPERY. 



502 



CHAPTEE X. 

Roetoration of Popery at Bremgarten and Rapperschwyl — Pnoflta 
and monks everywhere — Sorrow of CEcolampadius — A tranquil 
scene — Peaceful death of GEcolampadius — Henry Bullinger at 
Zurich — Contrition and exultation — The great lesson — Conclu- 
sion. 

The restoration of Popery immediately commenced 
in Switzerland, and Rome showed herself everywhere 
pioud, exacting, and ambitious. 

After the battle of Cappel, the Romish minority at 
Claris had resumed the upperhand. It marched with 
Schwytz against Wesen and the district of the Gaster. 
On the eve of the invasion, at midnight, twelve deputies 
came and threw themselves at the feet of the Schwytzer 
chiefs, who were satisfied with confiscating the national 
banners of these two districts, with suppressing their 
tribunals, annulling their ancient liberties, and condemn- 
ing some to banishment, and others to pay a heavy fine. 
Next the mass, the altars, and images were everywhere 
re^fstablished, and exist until the present day.* Such 
was the pardon of Schwytz. 

It was especially on Bremgarten, Mellingen, and the 
free bailiwicks, that the cantons proposed to inflict a ter- 
rible vengeance. Berne having recalled its army, the 
avoyer of Bremgarten, Mutschli, followed Diesbach as 
far as Aran. In vain did the former remind the Bernese 
that it was only according to the orders of Berne and 
Zurich that Bremgarten had blockaded the five cantons. 
"Bend to circumstances," replied the general. On this 
the wretched Mutschli, turning away from the pitiless 
Bernese, exclaimed, "The prophet Jeremiah has well 
said, * Cursed be he that trusteth in man.'" The Swiss 
and Italian bands entered furiously into these flourish- 
ing districts, brandishing their weapons, inflicting heavy 

* Eb wiirdent mass, altar and gotzen vieder off gericht. Bull 
ft. 277. 



502 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOK. 



fiDes on all the inhabitants, compelling the gospel mini8> 
ters to fiee, and restoring everywhere at the point of 
the sword, the mass, idols, and altars. 

On the other side of the lake the misfortune was still 
greater. On the 18th of November, while the reformed 
of Rapperschwyl were sleeping peacefully in reliance on 
the treaties, an army from Schwytz silently passed the 
wooden bridge nearly two thousand feet long which 
crosses the lake, and was admitted into the city by the 
Romish party. On a sudden the reformed awoke at the 
loud pealing of the bells, and the tumultuous voices of 
the Catholics ; the greater part quitted the city. One 
of them, however, by name Michael Wohlgemuth, bar- 
ricaded his house, placed arquebuses at every window, 
and repelled the attack. The exasperated enemy brought 
up some heavy pieces of artillery, besieged this extern- 
poraneous citadel in regular form, and Wohlgemuth 
was soon taken and put to death in the midst of horri 
ble tortures. 

Nowhere had the struggle been more violent than 
at Soleure; the two parties were drawn up in battle- 
array on each side of the Aar, and the Romanists had 
already discharged one ball against the opposite bank, 
another was about to follow, when the avoyer Wenge, 
throwing himself on the mouth of the cannon, cried out 
earnestly, " Fellow-citizens, let there be no blood shed^ 
or else let me be your fii-st victim." The astonished 
multitude dropped their arms ; but seventy evangelical 
families were obliged to emigrate, and Soleure returned 
under the papal yoke. 

The deserted cells of St. Gall, Muri, Einsidlen, Wet- 
tingeu, Rheinau, St. Catherine, Hermetschwyll, and Gna- 
aenthall witnessed the triumphant return of Benedictines, 
Franciscans, Dominicans, and all the Romish militia; 
priests and monks, intoxicated with their victory, over 
ran country and town, and prepared for new conquests. 

The wind of adversity was blowing with fury; the 
evangelical churches fell one after another, like the pines 
in the forest whose fall before the battle of the Goubel 
bad raised such gloomy presentiments. The five cantom^ 



ILLNESS OF (ECOLAMPADITTS. 503 



full of gratitude to the Virgin, made a solemn pilgrimage 
to her temple at Einsidlen. The chaplains celebrated 
anew their mysteries in this desolated sanctuary; the 
abbot, who had no monks, sent a number of youths into 
Swabia to be trained up in the rules of the order, and 
this famous chapel, which Zwingle's voice had conv^erted 
into a sanctuary for the word, became for Switzerland, 
what it has remained until this day, the centre of the 
power and of the intrigues of the Papacy. 

But this was not enough. At the very time that 
these flourishing churches were falling to the ground; 
the reform witnessed the extinction of its brightest 
lights. A blow from a stone had slain the energetic 
Zwingle on the field of battle, and the rebound reached 
the pacific (Ecolampadius at Basle, in the midst of a life 
that" was wholly evangelical. The death of his friend, 
the severe judgments with which they pursued his mem- 
ory, the terror that had suddenly taken the place of the 
hopes he had entertained of the future — all these sor- 
rows rent the heart of QCcolampadius, and soon his head 
and his life inclined sadly to the tomb. "Alas," cried 
he, " that Zwingle, whom I have so long regarded as my 
right arm, has fallen under the blows of cruel enemies 
He recovered, however, sufficient energy to defend the 
memory of his brother. " It was not," said he, on the 
heads of the most guilty that the wrath of Pilate and 
the tower of Siloam fell. The judgment began in the 
house of God ; our presumption has been punished : let 
our trust be placed now on the Lord alone, and this will 
be an inestimable gain." GKcolampadius declined the 
call of Zurich to take the place of Zwingle. My post 
is here," said he, as he looked upon Basle, 

He was not destined to hold it long. Illness fell upon 
him in addition to so many afflictions ; the plague was 
in the city ; a violent inflammation attacked him,f and 
erelong a tranquil scene succeeded the tumult of Cappel. 
A peaceful death calmed the agitated hearts of the faith- 

* Zwinglium nostrum, quem pro manu altera nunc multo tem« 
pore habui. Zurich MS. f Ator carbunculus quovis carbunculo 
in demo Dei epleadidiorem perdidit. J. J. Hettinger, 3. 634. 



504 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 



ful, and replaced by sweet and heavenly emotions the 
terror and distress with which a horrible disaster had 
filled them. 

On hearing of the danger of QEcolampadins, all the 
city was plunged into mourning ; a crowd of men of 
every age and of every rank rushed to his house. Re- 
joice/' said the reformer with a meek look, " I am going 
to a place of everlasting joy." He then commemorated 
the death of our Lord with his wife, his relations, and 
domestics, who shed floods of tears. "This supper,^ 
said the dying man, " is a sign of my real faith in Jesus 
Christ my Redeemer.'' 

On the morrow he sent for his colleagues: "My 
brethren," said he, " the Lord is there ; he calls me 
away. Oh, my brethren, what a black cloud is appear- 
ing on the horizon — what a tempest is approaching I Be 
steadfast; the Lord will preserve his own." He then 
held out his hand, and all these faithful ministers clasped 
it with veneration. 

On the 23d of November, he called his children around 
him, the eldest of whom was barely three years old. 
" Eusebius, Irene, Alethea," said he to them, as he took 
their little hands, " love God who is your Father." Their 
mother having promised for them, the children retired 
with the blessing of the dying servant of the Lord. The 
night that followed this scene was his last. All the pas* 
tors were around his bed : " What is the news ?" asked 
(Ecolampadius of a friend who came in. "Nothing," 
was the reply. "Well," said the faithful disciple of 
Jesus, "I will tell you something new." His friends 
awaited in astonishment. " In a short time I shall be 
with the Lord Jesus." One of his friends now asking 
him if he was incommoded by the light, he replied, put- 
ting his hand on his heart, " There is light enough here.^ 
The day began to break ; he repeated in a feeble voice 
the 51st Psalm : " Have mercy upon me, 0 Lord, accord- 
ing to thy loving kindness." Then remaining silent, as 
if he wished to recover strength, he said, " Lord Jesus, 
help me." The ten pastors fell on their knees around 
his bed with uplifted hands; at this moment the sun 



DEATH OF (ECOLAMPADIUS. 



505 



rose, and darted his earliest rays on a scene of sorrow 
BO great and so afflicting with which the church of God 
was again stricken.* 

The death of this servant of the Lord was like his 
life, full of light and peace. (Ecolampadius was in an 
especial degree the Christian spiritualist and biblical 
divine. The importance he attached to the study of the 
books of the Old Testament imprinted one of its most 
essential characters on the reformed theology.f Con- 
sidered as a man of action, his moderation and meek- 
ness placed him in the second rank. Had he been able 
to exert more of this peaceful spirit over Zwingle, great 
misfortunes might perhaps have been avoided. But like 
all men of meek disposition, his peaceful character 
yielded too much to the energetic will of the minister 
of Zurich ; and he thus renounced, in part at least, the 
legitimate influence that he might have exercised over 
the reformer of Switzerland and of the church. 

Zwingle and (Ecolampadius had fallen. There was 
a great void and great sorrow in the church of Christ. 
Dissensions vanished before these two graves, and noth- 
ing could be seen but tears. Luther himself was moved. 
On receiving the news of these two deaths, he called to 
mind the days he had passed with Zwingle and (Ecolam- 
padius at Marburg ; and the blow inflicted on him by 
their sudden decease was such, that many years after 
he said to Bullinger, " Their death filled me with such 
intense sorrow, that I was near dying myself "J 

The youthful Henry Bullinger, threatened with the 
scaffold, had been compelled to flee from Bremgarten, 
his native town, with his aged father, his colleagues, and 
sixty of the principal inhabitants, who abandoned their 

* De Joannis (Ecolampadis obitu, per Symonem Gryneum. Epp. 
(Ecol. et Zwinglii, libri 4. f See his Commentaries on Isaiah, 

1625, first chapter; on Ezekiel, 1527: Haggai, Zachariah, Malachi, 
162" ; Daniel, 1530 ; and the commentaries published after his death, 
with interpretations, on Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Oba- 
diah, Jonah, and the first and second chapters of Micah. 

X De cujus morte dolorem concepi . . . . ita ut eoruiu casus me 
penc exanimaverit. L. Epp. 5. 112. 

K jC of R«r. 17. 



506 HISTORY OF THE REFOUMATIOK. 

houses to be pillaged by the Waldstettes.* Three daya 
after this, he was preaching in the cathedral of Zurich : 
** No, Zwingle is not dead," exclaimed Myconius ; " or, 
like the phoenix, he has risen again from his ashes." 
Bui linger was unanimously chosen to succeed the great 
reformer. He adopted Z wingless orphan children, Wil- 
helm, Regula, and Ulrich, and endeavored to supply the 
place of their father. This young man, scarcely twenty 
eight years of age, and who presided forty years with 
wisdom and blessing over this church, was everywhere 
greeted as the apostle of Switzerland.f 

Yet as the sea roars long after the violent tempest 
has subsided, so the people of Zurich were still in com- 
motion. Many were agitated from on high. They came 
to themselves ; they acknowledged their error ; the weap- 
ons of their warfare had been carnal ; they were now of 
a contrite and humble spirit; they arose and went to 
their Father and confessed their sin. In those days 
there wks great mourning in Zurich. Some, however, 
stood up with pride, protested by the mouth of their min- 
isters against the work of the diplomatists, and boldly 
stigmatized the shameful compact. " If the shepherds 
sleep, the dogs must bark," exclaimed Leo Juda in the 
cathedral of Zurich. My duty is to give warning of the 
evil they are about to do to my Master's house."J 

Nothing could equal the sorrow of this city, except 
the exultation of the Waldstettes. The noise of drums 
and fifes, the firing of guns, the ringing of bells, had 
long resounded on the banks of their lakes, and even to 
their highest valleys. Now the noise was less, but the 
effect greater. The five cantons, in close alliance with 
Friburg and Soleure, formed a perpetual league for the 
defence of the ancient Christian faith with the bishop of 
Sion and the tithings of the Valais ; and henceforward 
carried their measures in the federal affairs with bold- 
ness. But a deep conviction was formed at that period 
In the hearts of the Swiss reformed. " Faith comes from 

* Ne a quinque pagis aut obtruncarer aut comburerer. Bull ad 
llyc. November, 1531. f Haller ad Bollinger, 
X Ich mass bellen. BuUinger, 3. 321. 



KO t:iNa BUT JESITS CHRIST. 5(17 



God/' said they; "its success does not depend on the 
life or death of a man. Let our adversaries boast of our 
ruin, we will boast only in the cross."* God reigns,'' 
wrote Berne to Zurich, and he will not permit the bark 
to founder." This conviction was of more avail than the 
victory of Cappel. 

Thus the Reformation, that had deviated from the 
right path, was driven back by the very violence of the 
Essault into its primitive course, having no other power 
than the word of God. An inconceivable infatuation 
had taken possession of the friends of the Bible. They 
had forgotten that our warfare is not carnal, and had 
appealed to arms and to battle. But God reigns ; he 
punishes the churches and the people who turn aside 
from his ways. We have taken a few stones, and piled 
them as a monument on the battle-field of Cappel, in 
order to remind the church of the great lesson which 
this terrible catastrophe teaches. As we bid farewell 
to this sad scene, we inscribe on these monumental 
stones, on the one side, these words from God's book : 
" Some trust in chariots, and some in horses ; but we 
will remember the name of the Lord our God. They are 
brought down and fallen ; but we are risen, and stand 
upright." And on the other, this declaration of the Head 
of the church : " My kingdom is not of this world." If, 
from the ashes of the martyrs at Cappel, a voice could 
be heard, it would be in these very words of the Bible 
that these noble confessors would address, after three 
centuries, the Christians of our days. That the church 
has no other king than Jesus Christ ; that she ought not 
to meddle with the policy of the world, derive from it 
her inspiration, and call for its swords, its prisons, it» 
treasures ; that she will conquer by the spiritual pow- 
ers which God has deposited in her bosom, and above 
all, by the reign of her adorable Head ; that she must 
not expect upon earth thrones and mortal triumphs, but 
that her march resombles that of her King, from the 
manger to the cross, and from the cross to the crown: 

* Gloriaatibus adversariis in ruinam, nos in cruce gloriemar 
Ad CEcoiamp. November 29, 1531. Zurich UA 



508 HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOIT. 



such is the IftRson to be read on the blood-stained page 
that has crept into our simple and evangelical nar» 
rative.* 

But if God teaches his people great lessons, he also 
gives them great deliverances. The bolt had fallen from 
heaven. The Reformation seemed to be little better thar 
a lifeless body cumbering the ground, and whose dis 
severed limbs were about to be reduced to ashes. But 
God raises up the dead. New and more glorious desti- 
nies were awaiting the gospel of Jesus Christ at the 
foot of the Alps. At the south-western extremity of 
Switzerland, in a great valley which the white giant of 
the mountains points out from afar — on the banks of the 
Leman lake, at the spot where the Rhone, clear and blue 
as the sky above it, rolls its majestic waters — on a small 
hill that the foot of Csesar had once trod, and on which 
the steps of another conqueror, of a Gaul, of a Picar- 
dine,f were destined erelong to leave their ineffaceable 
and glorious traces, stood an ancient city, as yet cov- 
ered with the dense shadows of Popery, but which God 
was about to raise to be a beacon to the church, and a 
bulwark to Christendom. 

* Zwingle's pear-tree having perished, a rock has been placed 
over the spot where this iUustrious reformer died; and on it ar€ 
engraved suitable inscriptions, different, however, from those in the 
text. t John Calvin of Nojon. 



