BV 4515 

■H57 

Copy I 



HISTORY OF LUCY JACKSON, 

If 

AND OTHER 

BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 




PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK. 
28 CORNHILL, BOSTON. 



CONTENTS. 



9. HISTORY OF LUCY JACKSON. 

10. HYMNS FOR CHILDREN. 

11. HISTORY OF HONEST ROGER. 

12. HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH BIBLE. 



17 



THE 

HISTORY 

OF 

LUCY JACKSON 




PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK. 




IT? 



LUCY JACKSON. 



At a small village in the south of England 
lived Mr. North, who was the rector of the place. 
From the windows of Mr. North's house you may 
see the churchyard, and a low white building, cov- 
ered with jessamine, which stands in it. This 
building was fitted up for the use of the Sabbath- 
school when Mr. North came to the parish, and a 
great number of children met there every Sabbath 
to learn to read God's word, and thus be made 
" wise unto salvation." 

Mr. North and his daughter made it a con- 
stant rule to visit the school every Sabbath to 
hear the children read, to give them lessons, and 
to distribute occasional rewards to those whose 
good behavior and attention to learning appeared 
to deserve it. 

One Sabbath evening Miss North brought to 
the school a parcel of little books on moral and 
religious subjects, to give to such children as de- 
served them. Among the good children who re- 
ceived these rewards was Jane Clarke, a little girl 
whose parents were both dead ; but she lived with 



6 



THE HISTORY OF 



her grandmother, who had endeavored to instruct 
her in the right way. 

Jane was very much pleased with a new gilt 
book that was given her, and thanked Miss North 
for her kindness. As she was returning home 
from school, a dirty, ragged girl ran up to her and 
snatched the book from her hand. This little girl 
was Lucy Jackson. She was the eldest daughter 
of a carpenter who lived riot far from Jane Clarke. 
Poor Lucy's parents would scarcely work, or do 
any thing to maintain their family. Tom Jack- 
son, her father, had scarcely any business ; for peo- 
ple did not like to employ a man who spent what 
he earned at the tavern. He passed almost all 
his time in idling about ; and his wife, discouraged 
by her husband's sad conduct, gave herself up to 
idleness and drinking. You may suppose, that 
Lucy had been quite neglected. She did not know 
how to read or work ; nor was she taught that 
swearing and lying are heinous sins ; for her par 
ents never took any care of her themselves, nor 
sent her to the Sabbath-school. 

Jane begged Lucy Jackson to give her the book 
again; but Lucy refused to do it. "You are tear- 
ing the leaves," said Jane ; " what will Miss 
North say to me if she finds my book torn ?" 

" I only wanted to look at the pictures," said 



LUCY JACKSON. 



7 



Lucy, as she threw the book on the ground. 
" There, take your book, for I don't care about 
it." 

Jane stooped down to pick up the book, and at 
the same time shed some tears. Jane did not cry 
merely because Lucy had torn her book, but be- 
cause she was so wicked. When Lucy and Jane 
were very little children they used often to be 
playfellows, but of late Lucy had become so 
naughty, that Jane did not care to play with her, 
though she still loved her ; for she thought, that 
if any body had taken a little trouble with her, 
and taught her what was right, she might have 
become a good girl. 

"What is the matter, my dear?" said her 
grandmother to Jane, who continued weeping after 
she entered her cottage. After Jane had told her 
all that had happened, her grandmother thus 
began : 

"The best return, my dear child, that you can 
make to God for his kindness to you in giving 
'you friends to take care of you, and good clothes 
and food, is to try to be useful to those poor people 
who are not so well provided for as yourself. It 
is true, that you have not money to give to others 
as rich people have, but then you may be useful 
in another way. It is your duty, and the duty of 



8 THE HISTORY OF 

every body, whether rich or poor, to do as much 
good as they can. Poor Lucy Jackson has no kind 
friends to teach her what is right as you have ; 
she does not go to the Sabbath-school ; and her 
parents are very wicked, and teach her to do 
things which she ought not to do. Now, perhaps, 
if you were to take some pains with her, and teach 
her gently and kindly what is right, and try to 
convince her of the wickedness of lying and steal- 
ing, she may mind what you say, and you may, 
by the help of God, be the means of her becoming 
a good girl. She is now alone in the cottage, as 
her parents are both gone out, and have taken the 
four younger children with them. But, my dear 
Jane, if Lucy, instead of minding what you say, 
should begin to talk wickedly, tell her how wrong 
it is, but do not stay long with her. It is never 
the duty of any body, much less of so young a 
person as you are, though you may mean ever so 
well, to continue in bad company, lest they make 
you as bad as they are themselves ; for St. Paul 
says, ' Evil communications corrupt good man- 
ners.' " 

Jane, jumping up, said, " I will go to poor Lucy 
Jackson, and I will tell her how she may become 
a good girl, that God may love her, and take her 
to heaven when she dies." 



LUCY JACKSON. 



9 



" But before you go," said the old woman, "put 
up your books in the drawer ; for you know, my 
dear Jane, all good children take care of the books 
and rewards that their teachers are so kind as to 
give them." Jane did as her grandmother bade 
her, and then ran out of the cottage to look for 
Lucy Jackson, whom she found crying as if her 
heart would break. 

" I am sorry to see you crying," said Jane, run- 
ning up to Lucy ; "I wish, indeed, I could give 
you the book you want ; but you know I must not 
part with the rewards that Miss North is so kind 
as to give to me ; that would not be right at all ; 
but I think I know how you could get a book 
quite as pretty." 

" How ?" cried Lucy, who still looked very an- 
grily at her. 

" Oh, Lucy," said she, " if you would but be a 
goo& girl, and go to the Sabbath-school, you would 
get many books as pretty as mine ; and, what is 
better than that, God would love you, as he does 
all good people. I know that you have not such 
good advisers as I have, or many other little girls, 
who have kind friends to teach them what is right ; 
but yet, if you would make the best of the oppor- 
tunities you have, you might learn to read the 
Bible." 



10 



THE HISTORY OF 



" I should be ashamed to go to the Sabbath- 
school," said Lucy, "for I am as old as you are, 
and I don't know my letters, and you can read in 
the Testament." 

" Well, then," answered Jane, <: though you 
might go to school even now, as ignorant as you 
are, yet I will teach you a little ; and then you 
will be more willing to go to Mr. North's school." 

" I have no time for learning," said Lucy ; "I 
am forced to nurse my little brother almost all 
day." 

" I am sure you cannot spend your time better 
than in nursing your little brother," answered 
Jane; " but I think you may contrive to learn to 
spell when your brother is asleep. I will come 
and try to teach you to pray to our heavenly Fa- 
ther, the giver of all good, that he would give you 
his grace to amend your ways, and to dispose your 
heart to learn. Do you know that it is said in 
the Bible by God himself, that all liars will have 
their portion in a lake burning for ever with fire 
and brimstone ? Mind, you must never take any 
thing which belongs to another person, nor use 
naughty words., nor quarrel, nor fight ; for if you 
do these things God will be very angry with you, 
and punish your soul for ever after your body 
dies." 



LUCY JACKSON. 



11 



" Indeed !" said Lucy, " is this all true ? for I 
never heard of it before." 

" I am very sorry your parents have not taught 
you these things ; but I as sure youthey are very 
true." 

"What, then, shall I do?" said Lucy, crying; 
"for I am sure God must be angry with me, for 
I have often told lies, and stolen other people's 
things ; and I have quarrelled with my playfel- 
lows, and called them names." 

" If you are sorry for what you have done," 
said Jane, " and will try to amend your doings, 
and sincerely pray to God, especially every morn- 
ing and evening, to assist you by his Holy Spirit, 
that you may not wilfully disobey his command- 
ments, he is so good and merciful that he has pro- 
vided a mediator, Jesus Christ our Lord, who died 
to redeem sinners like you — and through whom 
you may be forgiven ; and when you die he will 
take your soul to heaven, where you will live 
with angels, and the spirits of good people made 
perfect." 

" I will try to be a good girl," said Lucy, " and 
I hope that God will love me. Nobody ever told 
me so much as you have ; and we never go to 
church to hear Parson North." 

" I shall always be glad to teach you what I 



12 



THE HISTORY OF 



know," answered Jane, " and I will pray to God 
that you may become a good girl. Another day 
I will come and see you again ; but I cannot stay 
any longer with you now, for I know my grand- 
mother will want me." 

The two girls then parted, and Jane ran home 
to her grandmother with great joy to tell her of 
all she said to Lucy. 

" God bless you, my dear child," said the old 
woman, " for your readiness to instruct this poor 
girl ; and may God bless your instructions to the 
good of her soul." 

Jane then sat down by her grandmother to eat 
her supper, while the old woman read a chapter 
out of the Bible, which she always did on an even- 
ing, and afterwards she committed their souls and 
bodies to the care of the blessed God in humble 
prayer. 

As soon on Monday morning as Jane had swept 
the house and breakfasted, her grandmother gave 
her the book and her knitting to take to school. 
Jane set off that morning somewhat earlier than 
usual, that she might call upon Lucy Jackson, 
and see how she had taken what had been said 
the night before. 

Jane knocked some time at Lucy's door before 
it was opened ; at last Lucy came and unlatched 



LUCY JACKSON. 



13 



the door ; but she seemed hardly awake, though 
it was eight o'clock. " Well," said she, " come 
in, Jane." 

" This place is very unlike my grandmother's 
little cottage," said Jane to herself; "how I pity 
Lucy, who has such bad parents." The floor 
looked as if it had not been swept for a month ; 
every thing was in disorder ; and the three young- 
er children were sprawling upon the ground, and 
screaming for their breakfast. 

" Where is your mother ?" said Jane ; "is she 
not up yet ?" 

" She never gets up very early," answered 
Lucy; "so there is nobody but myself to dress 
the children." 

" But I hope you will get up earlier," said Jane ; 
" for if you do, I can come and teach you the let- 
ters and the catechism before she comes down." 

" Sometimes I am forced to get up early," said 
Lucy ; " but if you will come and teach me my 
catechism, I will gladly get up as soon as you 
like." 

" Indeed, Lucy," said Jane, " if you wish to 
have God's blessing, and be of some use to your 
parents, you should always get up early in the 
morning, and sweep the house, and wash and dress 
the children, and as your mother comes down so 



14 



THE HISTORY OF 



late, you may get all this done, and offer up a 
prayer to God, and sometimes learn to spell a few 
words before she is down ; and then, when you 
have had your breakfast, you should try to help 
her in any thing she has to do ; for you are old 
enough now to do a great many useful things ; so 
when you have any time, don't waste it in idle 
play, but try to mend your clothes, or learn your 
catechism, or even teach any thing that you know 
to your eldest brother." 

" Well, I will try to do these things," said Lucy. 

" God will assist you in your endeavors," said 
Jane, " if you pray to him fervently from the 
heart, for his help. Have you prayed to him this 
morning ?" 

"JNTot yet," answered Lucy; " I don't know 
how to pray." 

" Come, then," said Jane, " we will pray to- 
gether." So, kneeling down, she bade Lucy repeat 
the Lord's prayer after her. 

" When we are engaged in prayer," said Jane, 
" we should try to think of God, and not of our 
household work, or our play ; for you know God not 
only sees what we are doing, but he can tell what 
we are thinking of; and if we think of things we 
ought not to think of, he will be angry with us. 

" I will just repeat to you the prayers which I 



LUCY JACKSON 



15 



have learned by heart ; and when you come to 
see me, my grandmother will tell you the mean- 
ing of every line in them ; for we should not think 
God accepts or answers a mere set of words, while 
we are careless about their meaning. This is 
appearing to draw near to God with our mouths, 
while our hearts are far from him. 

MORNING- PRAYER. 
" Preserve me, Lord, amidst the crowd, 
From every thought that's vain and proud; 
And raise my wondering mind to see 
How good it is to trust in thee : 
From all the enemies of thy truth 
Do thou, 0 Lord, preserve my youth ; 
And raise my mind from worldly cares, 
From youthful sins, and youthful snares. 
Lord, though my heart's as hard as stone, 
Let seeds of early grace be sown; 
Still watered by thy heavenly love, 
Till they spring up to joys above !" 

EVENING PRAYER. 

"I go to bed as to my grave, 
And pray to God my life to save ; 
But should I die before I wake, 
I pray to God my soul to take : 
Blest Jesus, now to thee I cry, 
To grant me mercy ere I die, 
To send me light, and grant me grace, 
That heaven may be my dwelling-place. ?J 



r 



16 



THE HISTORY OF 



" They are very pretty," said Lucy, bursting 
into tears ; " but 0, will God forgive me my wick- 
edness, and will he indeed hear me when I pray 
to him ?" 

" Yes, my dear Lucy," replied Jane, with her 
heart full of tenderness, "God will hear and for- 
give you, for the sake of Jesus Christ." 

Jane then sat down and taught Lucy the first 
four letters of her alphabet, and then she left her, 
for it was time to go to school. 

When Jane was gone, Lucy immediately set 
about sweeping the room, and making it clean, 
and getting breakfast ready. Indeed, said she to 
herself, I see it is very easy to be of some use ; it 
is much better to clean the house than to idle 
about, and quarrel with my brothers and sisters. 
She then sat down on the step, and while she was 
washing her little brother, she repeated the four 
letters to herself ; and afterwards she tried to teach 
them to her eldest brother. This is a very good 
method, and I wish all boys and girls would fol- 
low it. When they have learned any useful thing, 
if they would teach it to one of their little play- 
fellows, they would remember it a great deal 
better themselves, and at the same time make 
themselves very useful to others. 

By and by her mother, Mrs. Jackson, came 



LUCY JACKSON 



17 



down stairs. When Lucy saw her she began to 
be afraid, for she appeared very cross, and soon 
began to scold her. Indeed, almost all the time 
that her mother was at breakfast she was finding 
fault with her on various accounts, for which the 
poor child was not to blame. Lucy felt almost 
ready, as usual, to say something unkind to her 
mother ; but she remembered that Jane Clarke 
had told her that if she would bear her mother's 
anger with patience, and obey and love God, God 
would love her, and make her one of his children. 
She therefore endeavored to bear with meekness 
all the angry words of her mother, not answering 
again. 

This is certainly the best way ; for if you answer 
people gently who are cross and unkind, they will 
much sooner get into good-humor than if you con- 
tinue to provoke them with harsh words ; for it 
is said in the Bible, " A soft answer turneth away 
wrath ;" and I must say for Mrs. Jackson, that 
she was more kind to Lucy when she found her so 
mild and so ready to do any thing to assist her. 

Whenever J:ne called upon her, Lucy always 
knew her lesson, and she would talk to her about 
good things ; indeed she had become quite another 
sort of child, and the household things began to 
look clean and neat. Lucy's father, though he 
18 



18 



THE HISTORY OF 



was an idle, drinking man, was very glad to find 
his supper ready for him in a clean dish when he 
came home and I do think that this more encour- 
aged him to work than all the good advice he had 
received from his neighbors. 

One Saturday morning, I think it might be 
about two months after Lucy had begun to attend 
to her learning, Jane said to her, " I don't sea 
what is to hinder you from going to the Sabbath- 
school, now you can read a little ; for indeed you 
might have gone when you did not know one 
letter from another." 

" Oh, if my mother would }et me," said Lucy, 
" how glad I should be ; but then who will take 
care of my little brother when I am away ?" 

" Let us go to my grandmother," said Jane ; 
" she can tell you best what to do." 

When the old woman saw Lucy, and knew 
that she wanted to go to the Sabbath-school, she 
said, 

" I have heard, my dear child, of your good 
conduct ; I will go myself to your mother, and 
speak to her about sending you to the Sabbath- 
school, and beg her to take care of your little 
brother while you are gone ; but first let me look 
at your gown. Little girls that go to the Sab 
bath-school should try to make themselves as neat 



LUCY JACKSON. 



19 



as tliey can, and this gown might be mended so 
as to look much better.", - 

While the old woman was gone to talk with 
Mrs. Jackson, Lucy mended her gown. When 
she came back she said, "Well, Lucy, your mother 
has consented at last to let you go." When Lucy 
heard this she almost cried for joy, and thanked 
her and Jane many times for their kindness. 

"You deserve every thing I can do for you, 
Lucy," said the old lady, " for the pains you have 
taken to become a good girl. Now return home, 
and let your mother see that you are thankful to 
her for permitting you to go to the Sabbath- 
school." 

Lucy did as the old lady bade her, and thanked 
her mother for her kindness, and before she went 
to bed she remembered also to thank God for the 
kind friends he had given her. 

The next morning she rose at a very early hour, 
and at eight o'clock called upon Jane Clarke, with 
whom she was to go to the Sabbath-school. It was 
a beautiful summer's morning, and the village 
bells were ringing cheerfully, and might have 
brought to one's mind the exhortation of the apos- 
tle Paul: "Awake thou that sleepest, and arise 
from the dead ; and Christ shall give thee light." 

When Jane Clarke saw Lucy coming she ran 



20 



THE HISTORY OF 



out, and brought her into her grandmother's cot- 
tage. 

The old woman, looking kindly at her, said, 
" My dear Lucy, you have made such good use of 
the little opportunities you have had of learning, 
that I have no doubt you will mind all that is 
said to you at the Sabbath-school. Endeavor to 
learn all you can. When you have said your 
lesson, you will go to church with the other chil- 
dren ; but as I am afraid you have not often been 
there, I will try to explain the nature of the Sab- 
bath, and for what purposes we go to the house 
of the Lord." 

Lucy and Jane were silent, and the good woman 
thus began : " God is a spirit, and knows our 
thoughts as perfectly as we know them ourselves ; 
and therefore, to be acceptable in his sight, 'we 
must worship him in spirit and in truth.' This 
may be done anywhere, and at any time, by 
truly Christian people ; and God, the giver of all 
good, is prayed to, and praised daily, by all who 
know their own unworthiness and sinfulness, and 
desire his forgiveness and favor. We meet, how- 
ever, with so many hinderances while engaged in 
our lawful callings, that our good and gracious 
God has commanded us to lay aside worldly cares 
and labors for one day, at least, in every seven. 



LUCY JACKSON. 



21 



The Sabbath was instituted that the poor may 
rest from their toils, and the rich from their anxi- 
eties, and meet together as children of one Father — 
who ' maketh poor and maketh rich,' who bring- 
eth low, and raiseth rip — and as seekers of the 
same common salvation, which is promised to 
penitent sinners through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Public worship, or worship in which many people 
unite, is as complete a representation of heaven 
as any thmg upon earth can possibly be. It is 
ordained by Christ, the head of the church, as . 
the means of grace, or the method whereby true 
worshippers on earth are prepared for the perfec- 
tion of worship and of happiness in heaven. Re- 
member, therefore, to keep holy the Sabbath-day ; 
for if you keep holy the Sabbath, God the Holy 
Ghost will sanctify you, and direct your way 
comfortably through this life to a better. 

"In our way to the house of God we should 
avoid all trifling and foolish discourse. What it 
may be lawful to converse about on the working- 
days, may be sinful conversation on the Sabbath ; 
for our Sabbaths ought to be employed on better 
things — on subjects whereby we may learn to love 
God more and serve him better. "When we enter 
the church, we should lift up our hearts to G od in 
prayer. It ought to be our desire that God would 



22 



THE HISTORY OF 



make the service profitable to our souls, as oui 
weekly labor has been to our subsistence — that he 
would enable us to worship him aright by the 
influence of the Holy Spirit on our hearts — that 
those things may please him in which we are 
about to be engaged — that the rest of our lives 
hereafter may be sincere and holy — and that, at 
the last, through Christ Jesus, we may come to 
his eternal kingdom and glory." 

When the good woman had ended her discourse, 
Lucy thanked her for what she had told her, and 
promised never to forget it. The two children 
then set out for the school, talking all the way 
about what they should do there, and of what 
they had just heard. As soon as they were come 
to the Sabbath-school room, Jane placed Lucy 
upon one of the benches where the little boys and 
girls were sitting. 

As soon as Miss North saw Lucy, she said to 
her, " I am very glad to see you here ; I hope that 
you will come regularly, and not play about on 
Sabbaths, as you have done." Miss North then 
asked Lucy if she knew her letters. She was 
afraid to speak for a minute, but afterwards she 
told the lady what trouble Jane Clarke had taken 
to teach her, and how by her persuasion she had 
come to the Sabbath-school. When Miss North 



LUCY JACKSON. 



23 



heard this, she called Jane Clarke to her. " I am 
very much pleased," said she. " with what I hear 
of your kindness to this child ; I am sure, my dear 
girl, it will provide you friends in this world, and 
God's blessing will rest upon you. You see, my 
little friends/' she added, turning to the other chil- 
dren, " that it is in your power, young as you are, to 
do a great deal of good, and I hope you will all fol- 
low the example that Jane Clarke has set you. We 
cannot begin too early to endeavor to be useful to 
our fellow-creatures." Miss North then gave a 
pretty book of stories to Lucy to encourage her. 
When the children had said their lessons, they 
walked very orderly and thoughtfully to church. 

When the service was over, the children sepa- 
rated and returned home to dinner. Thomas 
Jackson was very much pleased when his daugh- 
ter Lucy showed him her new book ; for though 
he was but a bad sort of man himself, he was 
glad to see any improvement in his daughter's 
conduct. Lucy went to the Sabbath-school again 
in the afternoon ; and at night, before she lay 
down in bed, she thanked God for the opportu- 
nity he had given her, and which so many poor 
children had never enjoyed. 

On Wednesday morning, Mr. North called at 
their cottage while Thomas Jackson and his wife 



24 



THE HISTORY OF 



were at breakfast, and Lucy was gone on an er 
rand for her mother. " I am come," said he, as 
lie sat down by the- door, "to talk to you about 
your little girl. My daughter was very much 
pleased with her coming to the Sabbath-school ; 
but I am afraid she does not owe much of the 
good she has learned to any pains you have taken 
with her. Indeed, Thomas," added Mr. North, 
"to 'speak plainly to you, I must say that I have 
seen very much in your conduct which, if you 
wish well to your family or to your own soul, you 
must think of amending immediately. You are 
answerable to God for more than you seem to be 
aware. It is your duty, at least, to bring up your 
family in as decent a way as you can — to turn 
what you can obtain honestly to the best account, 
and to spend it in your family. You will be an- 
swerable at the day of judgment for the use you 
make of your time, and the words that fall from 
your lips. This is a serious matter, and I would 
have you think seriously of it. For any care you 
have taken with Lucy, she may be an idle, un- 
godly woman, and die under the wrath of God ; 
and are you sure that your other children may not 
be inclining to wicked courses, which they may 
follow through life, and which may lead them to 
everlasting destruction?" 



LUCY JACKSON. 



25 



Thomas laid down his bread and cheese, and 
looked on the ground, while the tears almost came 
from his eyes ; but his wife did not seem to care 
for what Mr. North said. She looked angry, and 
could scarce hinder herself from telling Mr. North 
that he had no right to interfere with other peo- 
ple's affairs . 

" I have spoken so plainly to you, Thomas," 
said Mr. North — who saw that the man's mind 
was softened—" not to make you uneasy, but that 
you may, in time, repent of your faults, and be- 
come a better man. Believe in Christ, and you 
will not find amendment so difficult as you may 
think ; and I promise you, that if you love and 
serve him, and pray for his forgiveness and grace, 
and endeavor to lead a sober life, I will be your 
friend ; what is more, God will be your friend, 
and then his blessing will rest upon you in time 
and eternity." 

Mr. North, turning to Sarah Jackson, added, 
" What I have said to your husband will not, I 
hope, be lost upon you. Whatever faults you have, 
it is as much your duty as it is his, to pray to God 
to be forgiven ; and remember, Christ Jesus came 
into the world to save sinners." The woman 
made no answer, but turned sullenly away. Thom- 
as followed Mr. North to the door, but could not 



2G THE HISTORY OF 

speak a word. " Well, Thomas," said Mr. North, 
" think of what I have said ; another day I will 
call upon you again." 

When the minister was gone, Thomas went to 
his workshop very thankful for the good advice he 
had received, and resolving in his mind that he 
would do the best he could, and try to avoid re- 
peating his old faults. Indeed, for some time, 
when he was by himself, and no bad companions 
were present to tempt him to evil, he was both 
diligent and sober. It must be confessed, it is a 
very hard thing for sinful creatures as we are, 
when we have formed evil habits, to lay them 
aside ; and for that reason we should be very 
careful, that in our youth we take the advice of 
good people, and not fancy, as some young folks 
foolishly do, that it is time enough to think of 
doing well when, by bodily infirmities, we are act- 
ually unable any longer to lead a riotous life. 

Thomas as yet did not even try in the best way 
he could to pray to God in private, that God would 
keep him by his grace from falling into sin, and 
enable him to lead a new life ; and, for want of 
asking God's help through Christ, he often neg- 
lected what he had learned, and fell into evil. 
Sometimes he seemed to be very well inclined, 
and sorry for his past sins ; he would resolve never 



LUCY JACKSON. 



27 



to go to the tavern again ; and perhaps the next 
hour one of his old companions would come to 
entreat him to go with him there ; and he but too 
readily would consent. Thus he was continually 
forgetting the good advice Mr. North gave him, 
and would often return to his evil habits, because 
he had not courage to bear a laugh from a few of 
his worthless, drunken companions. After a time, 
however, he became more sober and serious. I 
wish I could say his wife regarded what Mr. North 
said as much as her husband did ; but she was a 
very bad woman, and had such foolish pride, that 
she thought it beneath her to be advised by others. 
When Thomas used to tell her of her faults, she 
would fly into such a passion, and make use of 
such words, that it was quite shocking to hear 
her. Lucy felt very thankful to God for having 
inclined her father to attend to the concerns of his 
soul ; and she thought it her duty to do all in her 
power to lead him to heaven by reading the holy 
Scriptures to him, as all children should do, when 
they can. Sometimes, when her mother was 
scolding, and would not mind what Thomas said 
to her about the wickedness of her tongue, he also 
would give way to passion, and threaten, that if 
he could not be quiet at home, he would go to the 
tavern, and try to be quiet there. Lucy would 



28 



THE HISTORY OF 



always on these occasions talk to him so dutifully 
about any good things she knew, that he would 
presently become pacified, and feel happy that she 
had prevented his going from home. As he could 
not read himself, she would in the evening read 
to him some good book that Miss North had lent 
her, as a reward for her regular attendance at 
school. By these means she often kept her father 
from bad company, and, by the grace of God, put 
serious thoughts into his mind. 

About this time Sarah Jackson was taken very 
ill, and confined at home. For some time she 
would not have the doctor sent for. She dreaded 
to be told her life was in danger, so much was 
she afraid of any thing that put her in mind of 
death. At last, about two months after she had 
become sick, Thomas sent for the doctor. She 
was now wasted almost to a skeleton, and at times 
tormented with pain, and was moreover so fierce 
and impatient, that it was dreadful to see her. 
When the doctor came, he said " there was no 
hope, as the woman could not live many days." 
Thomas then begged Mr. North to come and pray 
with her ; for he wished that his wife might be 
brought to a sense of her sins, and obtain the for- 
giveness of God. "When Mr. North came, he found 
her in a most shocking state. Her eyes looked 



LUCY JACKSON. 



29 



wild, and cold sweats came over her, and she 
seemed to have lost her reason. When she ap- 
peared composed, Mr. North began to talk to her 
on the wickedness of her life, and recommended 
her to pray to God, that, for Christ's «ake, he 
would have mercy upon her never-dying soul, 
though at almost the last hour of her bodily life. 
The dying creature could hardly bear to hear 
him. 

" No," she said, " do not talk to me of repent- 
ance- — it is too late — I cannot hope for mercy — I 
have been a very wicked sinner — I have neglected 
my family, and taught my children, by my exam- 
ple, to lie and steal and swear and disobey God's 
commandments ; and now, by my own fault, I 
have brought on myself this dreadful disorder, 
which will put an end to my wretched life, and, 
what is more, I fear I shall be miserable for ever. 
My portion will be among the wicked in hell, and 
I dare not, I cannot hope for mercy." 

Poor Lucy, who was almost always standing by 
the bedside, when she heard her mother speak in 
this way, would cry as if her heart would break. 
" Oh, Lucy," cried the £qor woman, "you have 
no cause for grief; you have early taken the right 
path, and God will be your friend, and bless you 
here and in the world to come. May you never 



30 



THE HISTORY OF 



forget the dying state of your wretched mother, 
and learn from that to flee the ways of wicked- 
ness, which end in death eternal." 

This unhappy woman soon lost her speech, and 
seemed determined not to listen to what Mr. Worth 
said, but appeared to be in the greatest agony of 
mind. In that state she remained for some days, 
and died as if in absolute despair of forgiveness. 
"Whether it was so or not, God only knows. 

The shocking death of his ivife, and the repeat* 
ed conversations of Mr. North, had, by the grace 
of God, such an effect upon Thomas, that he ever 
after abhorred his former evil courses, became dili- 
gent and conscientious, and regularly frequented 
public worship ; and as might be expected, was 
a very industrious man through the latter part of 
his life. 

I am sorry, however, to say, that Jackson's 
former habits of sottishness were supposed to have 
been the cause of the bad state of health which he 
often experienced. This was a hard trial for Lucy. 
Through his frequent illness, her father's labor 
was not enough to maintain a whole family; so 
she tried, with the help of her two eldest brothers^ 
who were stout, hearty boys, to obtain a little 
work of various kinds from the people of the vil- 
lage. Very diligent indeed they were ; and with 



LUCY JACKSON. 



what their father could occasionally do, they kept 
themselves decent and comfortable. An honest, 
industrious person, though he may be in a state of 
poverty, need never despair ; for he may be sure 
God has sent that trial upon him for the good of 
his soul, and that he will deliver him out of his 
distress in the best time and way. Thus it was 
with Thomas and his family. They did as much 
as they could ; and then they knew they might 
trust to God for the rest. 

Lucy, young as she was, was much respected 
throughout the village, and her dutiful and kind 
behavior to her father was not overlooked by the 
neighbors. It was a pleasing sight to see Thomas 
and his family sitting together in an evening, and 
Lucy, who, with God's blessing, had been the 
means of all the good in the house, diligent at her 
work, while one of the younger children was read- 
ing a chapter of the Bible, or a portion of some 
religious book which was lent them. The father, 
when ill health prevented his going out, used to 
say, that he never was so happy as when he was 
listening to one of his children while reading a 
good book to him, or when he was giving them 
any seasonable advice. He considered it as a par- 
ticular blessing, that God had put his children in 
the way of obtaining religious learning, as he, 



32 THE HISTORY OF LUCY JACKSON. 

poor man, had often pursued very evil ceurses 
from not knowing how to read his Bible, or to find 
happiness at home. 

It need only be added, that Jane Clarke, by 
whose first instructions so happy a change had 
been produced in Jackson's family, dutifully at- 
tended upon her good grandmother, who had be- 
come blind through age, and had bequeathed to 
Jane the freehold cottage in which they lived. 
After the death of this good woman, Jane was 
married to a respectable man, became a teacher 
at the Sabbath-school, and continued to be beloved 
by all who knew her. 



HYMNS 

FOR 

CHILDREN AND YOUTH, 




TABLE OF F 



IUST LINES. 



No. 



A sinner, Lord, behold I stand, - 28 
Christ the Lord is risen to-day, - 17 
Come, humble sinner, in whose 

breast, - 41 

Com), let us join our cheerful 

songs, --- 13 

Come, my soul, thy suit pre- 
pare, 36 

Come, thou Fount of every 

blessing, 18 

Come, ye sinners, poor and 

wretched, 23 

For the mercies of this day, - - - 39 
From all that dwell below the 

skies, --- — r 5 

Glory to God on high, 12 

God, " only wise," to thee I look, 37 
Gracious Spirit, love divine, - -- 34 
Great God, how infinite art 

thou, 2 

Hasten, 0 sinner, to be wise, - - 20 

Holy Bible, book divine, 1 

How blessed was the day, 8 

How dreadful, Lord, will be the 

day, --- 47 

How gracious is my God, 3 

Jesus, and shall it ever be, 10 

Jesus, Lord, we look to thee, - - 33 
Jesus was once despised and low, 9 
Lo, at noon, 'tis sudden night, 16 
Lord, dismiss us with thy bless- 
ing, 48 

Lord, I have dared to disobey, - 29 
Lord, I would own thy tender 

care, - — 4 

Lord of the Sabbath, I rejoice,- 35 
My God, thy service well de- 
mands, - 44 



No. 



Now that my journey 's just be- 
gun, 40 

Now the morning's cheerful 
light,-- --- ---- 38 

Once more, before we part, 49 

Praise God, from whom all 
blessings flow, 50 

Shall I presume to venture near, 25 

Soon as my youthful lips can 
speak, 32 

Stop, poor sinner, stop and 
think, ' : -- 21 

Swift as the winged arrow flies, 42 

Thee we adore, eternal Name,- 46 

There is a fountain filled with 
blood, 15 

There is a path that leads to 
God, 24 

This is the day when Christ 
arose, - - 6 

Thou Guardian of our youthful 
days, 11 

'Tis but a short, uncertain space, 19 

'Tis religion that can give, 22 

To thee I look, OLord, 30 

What is there, Lord, a child 
can do, - — 27 

When daily I kneel down to 
pray, — --- 26 

When languor and disease in- 
vade, — 43 

When marshalled on the night- 
ly plain, 14 

Where shall I be when I shall 
go, 45 

When to the house of God we 
go, 7 

With humble heart and tongue, 31 



HYMNS 



FOR 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 



1. EXCELLENCY OF THE BIBLE. 7'a. 

1 HOLY Bible, book divine ; 
Precious treasure, thou art mine; 
Mine, to tell me whence I came ; 
Mine, to teach me what I am ; 

2 Mine, to chide me when I rove ; 
Mine, to show a Saviour's love; 
Mine art thou, to guide my feet, 
Mine, to judge, condemn, acquit : 

3 Mine, to comfort in distress, 
If the Holy Spirit bless ; 
Mine, to show by living faith, 
Man can triumph over death : 

4 Mine, to tell of joys to come, 
And the rebel sinner's doom : 
0 thou precious Book divine ; 
Precious treasure, thou art mine! 




4 



HYMNS FOR 



2. GOD INFINITE AND ETERNAL. C. M. 

1 GRJEAT God, how infinite art thou; 

What worthless worms are we ! 
Let the whole race of creatures bow, 
And pay their praise to thee. 

2 Thy throne eternal ages stood, 

Ere seas or stars were made : 
Thou art the ever-living God, 
Were all the nations dead. 

3 Nature and time quite naked lie 

To thine immense survey, 
From the formation of the sky 
To the great burning day. 

4 Eternity, with all its years, 

Stands present in thy view : 
To thee there's nothing old appears ; 
To thee there's nothing new. 

5 Our lives through various scenes are drawn, 

And vexed with trifling cares - y 
While thine eternal thought moves on 
Thine undisturbed affairs . 

6 Great God, how infinite art thou ; 

What worthless worms are we ! 
Let the whole race of creatures bow, 
And pay their praise to thee. 

3. THANKSGIVING FOR HEALTH. S. M. 

1 HOW gracious is my God, 
Who gives me more than wealth, 

And more than mortals could bestow, 
The precious gift of health. 

2 That health I would devote 
To spread his praise abroad, 

And would my youthful hours employ 
To love and serve my God. 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 



3 How many children lie 
On beds of grief and pain; 

They hope and wait for health and ease, 
But hope and wait in vain. 

4 Oh, may I ne'er forget 
My God so good and kind, 

But serve him with my every power 
Of body and of mind. 

4. BLESSINGS OF PROVIDENCE. CM. 

1 Lord, I would own thy tender care, 

And all thy love to me ; 
The food I eat, the clothes I wear, 
Are all bestowed by thee. 

2 'Tis thou preservest me from death 

And dangers, every hour ; 
I cannot draw another breath, 
Unless thou give the power. 

3 My health and friends, and parents dear, 

To me by God are given ; 
I have not any blessing here, 
But what is sent from heaven. 

4 Such goodness, Lord, and constant care, 

A child can ne'er repay ; 
But may it be my daily prayer, 
To love thee and obey. 

5. UNIVERSAL PRAISE. L. M. 

1 FROM all that dwell below the skies, 
Let the Creator's praise arise 5 

Let the Redeemer's name be sung 
Through every land, by every tongue. 

2 Eternal are thy mercies, Lord, 
Eternal truth attends thy word ; 

Thy praise shall sound from shore to shore, 
Till suns shall rise and set no more. 



HYMNS FOR 



6. LORD'S DAY MORNING. C. M. 

1 THIS is the day when Christ arose 

So early from the dead ; 
"Why should I keep my eyelids closed., 
And waste my hours in bed ? 

2 This is the day when Jesus broke 

The power of death and hell ; 
And shall I still wear Satan's yoke, 
And love my sins so well ? 

3 To-day with pleasure Christians meet 

To pray and hear the word : 
And I will go with cheerful feet 
To learn thy will, 0 Lord. 

4 I '11 leave my sport, to read and pray, 

And so prepare for heaven ; 
0 may I love this blessed day, 
The best of all the seven. 

7. ATTENDING PUBLIC WORSHIP. L. M 

1 WHEN to the house of God we go, 
To hear his word and sing his love, 
We ought to worship him below 
As saints and angels do above : 

2 For God is present everywhere, 

And watches all our thoughts and way? 
He marks who humbly join in prayer, 
And who sincerely sing his praise. 

3 The triflers too his eye can see, 
Who only seem to take a part ; 
They move the lip and bend the knee, 
But do not seek him with their heart. 

4 0 may we never trifle so, 

Nor lose the days our God has given ; 
But learn, by Sabbaths here below, 
To spend eternity in heaven. 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 



8. THE BIRTH OF CHRIST. S. M. 

1 HOW blessed was the day 
When Christ appeared on earth ; 

Angels and men together join 
To hail the Saviour's birth. 

2 How kind that he became 
A little child like me ; 

A child of poor and lowly name 
The Saviour deigned to be. 

3 The stable was his room, 
The manger was his bed ; 

The birthplace of the King of kings 
Was where the oxen fed. 

4 Hail, gracious heavenly Prince ! 
To thee let children fly ; 

And on thy kindest providence 
0 may we all rely. 

9. CHRIST'S CONDESCENSION. C. M. 

JESUS was once despised and low, 

A stranger, and distressed ; 
Without a home to which to go, 
Or pillow where to rest : 

Once he was bound with prickly thorns, 

And scoffed at in his pain ; 
Now a bright crown his head adorns, 
And he is King again. 

Eut what a condescending King ! 

Who, though he reigns so high, 
Is pleased when little children sing, 
And listens to then* cry. 

He sees them from his heavenly throne, 

He watches all their ways, 
And stoops to notice for his own 
The youngest child that prays. 



HYMNS FOR 



10. NOT ASHAMED OF CHRIST. L. M. 

1 JESUS, and shall it ever be, 

A mortal man ashamed of thee ? 
Ashamed of thee, whom angels praise, 
Whose glories shine through endless days ? 

2 Ashamed of Jesus ! sooner far 
Let evening blush to own a star ; 
He sheds the beams of light divine 
O'er this benighted soul of mine. 

3 Ashamed of Jesus ! just as soon 
Let midnight be ashamed of noon ; 
'Tis midnight with my soul till He, 
Bright Morning-Star, bids darkness flee. 

4 Ashamed of Jesus ! that dear Friend 
On whom my hopes of heaven depend ! 
No 5 when I blush, be this my shame, 
That I no more revere his name. 

5 Ashamed of Jesus ! yes, I may, 
When I've no guilt to wash away, 
No tear to wipe, no good to crave, 
No fears to quell, no soul to save. 

6 Till then, nor is my boasting vain — 
Till then I '11 boast a Saviour slain : 
And 0 may this my glory be, 
That Christ is not ashamed of me. 

. CHRIST THE CHILDREN'S FRIEND. C. M. 

1 THOU Guardian of our youthful days, 

To thee our prayers ascend : 
To thee we'll tune our songs of praise ; 
Thou art "the children's Friend." 

2 From thee our daily mercies flow, 

Our life and health descend : 
0 save our souls from sin and woe, 
Jesus, "the children's Friend." 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 



3 Teach, us to prize thy holy word, 

And to its truths attend ; 
Thus shall we learn to fear the Lord, 
And love "the children's Friend." 

4 Lord, draw our youthful hearts to thee, 

From every ill defend ; 
Help us in early life to flee 

To thee, "the children's Friend." 

5 0 may we taste of Jesus' love, 

To him our souls commend; 
For Jesus left the realms above, 
To be "the children's Friend." 

6 Let all our hopes be fixed on high, 

And when our lives shall end, 
Then may we live above the sky 
With thee, "the children's Friend." 

12. LOVE OF CHRIST. S. M. 

1 GLORY to God on high, 
Let peace on earth abound ; 

Ye angels shout through all the sky, 
And men repeat the sound. 

2 Jesus appeared on earth, 
Not as a prince or king ; 

He came a child of humble birth, 
Good-will and peace to bring. 

3 The young received his love, 
His blessing and his care ; 

And now he reigns supreme above, 
May we that blessing share. 

4 This day may he impart 
The riches of his grace, 

That we may now, with broken heart, 
In earnest seek his face. 



10 



HYMNS FOil 



5 Thus may the young begin 
To love the ways of truth ; 
To shun the slippery paths of sin, 
And walk with God in youth. 

13. V/ORTHY THE LAMB. C. M. 

1 COME, let us join our cheerful songs 

With angels round the throne j 
Ten thousand thousand are their tongues, 
But all their joys are one. 

2 " Worthy the Lamb that died," they cry, 

" To be exalted thus : 
"Worthy the Lamb," our lips reply, 
" For he was slain for us." 

3 Jesus is worthy to receive 

Honor and power divine : 
And blessings more than we can give, 
Be, Lord, for ever thine. 

4 Let all that dwell above the sky, 

And air and earth and seas, 
Conspire to lift thy glories high, 
And speak thine endless praise. 

5 The whole creation join in one, 

To bless the sacred name 
Of Him that sits upon the throne, 
And to adore the Lamb. 

14. THE STAR OF BETHLEHEM. L. M- 

1 WHEN, marshalled on the nightly plain s 
The glittering host bestud the sky, 

One star alone of all the train 
Can fix the sinner's wandering eye. 

2 Hark ! hark ! to God the chorus breaks 
Prom every host, from every gem ; 
But one alone the Saviour speaks, 

It is the Star of Bethlehem. 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 

3 Once on the raging seas I rode ; 

The storm was loud — the night was dark — 
The ocean yawned — and rudely blowed 
The wind that tossed my foundering bark 

4 Deep horror then my vitals froze, 
Death-struck, I ceased the tide to stem ; 
When suddenly a star arose, 

It was the Star of Bethlehem. 

5 It was my guide, my light, my all, 
It made my dark forebodings cease ; 

And through the storm and danger's thrall. 
It led me to the port of peace. 

6 Now safely moored, my perils o'er, 
I'll sing, first in night's diadem, 
For ever, and for evermore, 

The Star, the Star of Bethlehem. 

15. THE BLOOD OF CHRIST. C. M. 

1 THERE is a fountain rilled with blood, 

Drawn from Immanuel's veins, 
And sinners plunged beneath that flood, 
Lose all their guilty stains. 

2 The dying thief rejoiced to see 

That fountain in his day ; 
And there would I, though vile as he, 
Wash all my sins away. 

3 Dear dying Lamb, thy precious blood 

Shall never lose its power, 
Till all the ransomed church of God 
Be saved, to sin no more. 

4 Ere since by faith I saw the stream 

Thy flowing wounds supply, 
Redeeming love has been my theme 5 
And shall be till I die. 



HYMNS FOR 



5 Then in a nobler, sweeter song, 
I'll sing thy power to save; 
When this poor lisping, stammering tongue 
Lies silent in the grave. 

16. CRUCIFIXION OF CHRIST. 7's. 

1 LO, at noon 'tis sudden night ! 

Darkness covers all the sky ! 
Rocks are rending at the sight ! 
Children, can you tell me why ? 

What can all these wonders be ? 

Jesus dies at Calvary ! 

2 Nailed upon the cross, behold 

How his tender limbs are torn ! 
For a royal crown of gold, 

They have made him one of thorn : 
Cruel hands, that dare to bind 
Thorns upon a brow so kind ! 

3 See, the blood is falling fast 

From his forehead and his side ! 
Hark ! he now has breathed his last ! 
With a mighty groan he died ! 
Children, shall I tell you why 
Jesus condescends to die? 

4 You were wretched, weak, and vile ; 

You deserved his holy frown : 
But he saw you with a smile, 
And to save you hastened down : 

Listen, children — this is why 

Jesus condescends to die. 



17. RESURRECTION OF CHRIST. 7's. 

1 CHRIST the Lord is risen to-day ! 
Sons of men and angels say ; 
Raise your joys and triumphs high: 
Sing, ye heavens, and earth reply. 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 13 

2 Love's redeeming work is done ; 
Fought the fight, the battle won : 
Lo, the sun's eclipse is o'er, 

Lo, he sets in blood no more. 

3 Vain the stone, the watch, the seal, 
Christ has burst the gates of hell : 
Death in vain forbids his rise ; 
Christ has opened Paradise. 

4 Lives again our glorious King ! 
"Where, 0 Death, is now thy sting?" 
Once he died our souls to save ; 
"Where's thy victory, boasting grave?'* 

18. GRATITUDE TO CHRIST. Ts. 

1 COME, thou Fount of every blessing, 

Tune my heart to sing thy grace ; 
Streams of mercy never ceasing, 
Call for songs of loudest praise. 

2 Teach me some melodious measure, 

Sung by raptured saints above ; 
Fill my heart with sacred pleasure 
While I sing redeeming love. 

3 Jesus sought me when a stranger, 

Wandering from the fold of G-od ; 
He to rescue me from danger, 
Interposed his precious blood. 

4 Oh, to grace how great a debtor 

Daily I'm constrained to be ; 
Let that grace now, like a fetter, 
Bind my wandering heart to thee. 

19. DANGER OF DELAY IN RELIGION. C. M< 

1 'TIS but a short uncertain space 
Allowed us here to live : 
Death, unperceived, comes on apace, 
And may no warning give. 



14 



HYMNS FOR 



2 Nor great, nor small, nor old, nor young, 

His fatal dart can fly ; 
The rich, the poor, the weak, the strong, 
Without distinction die. 

3 This day, for any thing we know, 

May prove to be our last ; 
For death may strike the fatal blow, 
Ere the next hour be past. 

4 And shall we trifle and delay, 

And still keep sinning on ; 
Neglect ourselves from day to-day, 
Till life and time are gone ? 

5 The present moment let us seize, 

For this alone is ours ; 
Now set ourselves our G-od to please, 
With all our active powers. 

6 To-day, while it is called to-day, 

Let as regard this truth ; 
Since danger must attend delay, 
To every thoughtless youth. 

20. DANGER OF DELAY. L. M. 

1 HASTEN, 0 sinner, to be wise, 
And stay not for the morrow's sun ; 
The longer wisdom you despise, 
The harder is she to be won. 

2 0 hasten, mercy to implore, 

And stay not for the morrow's sun ; 
For fear thy season should be o'er, 
Before this evening's stage be run. 

3 0 hasten, sinner, to return, 

And stay not for the morrow's sun; 
For fear thy lamp should cease to burn 
Before the needful work is done. 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH 



4 0 hasten, sinner, to be blest, 

And stay not for the morrow's sun ; 
For fear the curse should thee arrest, 
Before the morrow is begun. 

5 0 Lord, do thou the sinner turn ; 
Now rouse him from his senseless *tate 
Oh, let him not thy counsel spurn, 
Nor rue his fatal choice too late. 

21. ALARM. P.M. 

1 STOP, poor sinner, stop and think, 

Before you further go ; 
"Will you sport upon the brink 

Of everlasting woe ? 
Once again, I charge you, stop ! 
For unless you warning take, 
Ere you are aware, you drop 

Into the burning lake ! 

2 Say, have you an arm like God, 

That you his will oppose ? 
Fear not you that iron rod 

With which he breaks his foes ? 
Can you stand in that dread day, 
When he judgment shall proclaim, 
And the earth shall melt away, 

Like wax before the name ? 

3 Pale-faced Death will quickly come 

To drag you to his bar ; 
Then to hear your awful doom 

Will nil you with despair : 
All your sins will round you crowd, 
Sins of a blood-crimson dye, 

Each for vengeance crying loud, 

And what can you reply ? 

4 Though your heart be made of steel, 

Your forehead lined with brass, 
God at length will make you feel, 
He will not let you pass : 



HYMNS FOR 



Sinners then in vain will call, 
Though they now despise his grace — 
"Rocks and mountains on us fall. 
And hide us from his face." 

22. THE PLEASURES OF RELIGION. 7's. 

1 'TIS religion that can give 
Sweetest pleasures while we live ; 
'Tis religion must supply 

Solid comforts when we die. 

2 After death its joys shall be 
Lasting as eternity : 

Be the living God my friend, 
Then my bliss shall never end. 

23. COME TO CHRIST. 8, 7, 4. 

1 COME, ye sinners, poor and wretched, 

Weak and wounded, sick and sore, 
Jesus ready stands to save you, 
Full of mercy, joined with power : 

He is able, 
He is willing : doubt no more. 

2 Come, ye weary, heavy laden, 

Lost and ruined by the fall 5 
If you tarry till you're better, 
You will never come at all. 

Not the righteous, 
Sinners Jesus came to call. 

3 "View him prostrate in the garden ; 

On the ground your Saviour lies ! 
On the bloody tree behold him : 
Hear him cry before he dies, 

"It is finished!" 
Sinner, will not this suffice ? 

4 Lo, the incarnate God ascended, 

Pleads the merit of his blood : 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 



17 



Venture on him, venture wholly, 
Let no other trust intrude ; 

None but Jesus 
Can do helpless sinners good. 

24. THE LITTLE PILGRIM. C. M. 

1 THERE is a path that leads to God, 

All others go astray ; 
Narrow, but pleasant, is the road, 
And Christians love the way. 

2 It leads straight through this world of sin, 

And dangers must be past ; 
But those who boldly walk therein, 
Will come to heaven at last. 

3 How shall an infant pilgrim dare 

This dangerous path to tread ; 
For on the way is many a snare 
For youthful travellers spread ; 

4 While the broad road, where thousands go, 

Lies near, and opens fair ; 
And many turn aside, I know, 
To walk with sinners there ? 

5 But lest my feeble steps should slide, 

Or wander from thy way, 
Lord, condescend to be my guide, 
And I shall never stray. 

25. CHILDREN ENCOURAGED TO SEEK THE LORD. CM. 

1 SHALL I presume to venture near 

A God so just and true ? 
Or, sinful as I am, appear 
Before his piercing view ? 

2 How oft I grieve Ms holy eye, 

And break his righteous law, 
And think some thought of vanity 
With every breath I draw. 
20 



18 



HYMNS FOR 



3 Yet, Lord, a sinful child may turn 

To wisdom's pleasant ways ; 
For Jesus' sake, thou wilt not spurn 
My feeble prayer and praise. 

4 He died, that sinners such as I 

May have their sins forgiven ; 
He died, that sinners when they die, 
May live with him in heaven. 

5 It is for this I come to pray, 

And on his grace depend, 
That even at the judgment-day 
The Lord may be my friend. 

26. AGAINST WANDERING THOUGHTS. C. M. 

1 When daily I kneel down to pray 

As I am taught to do, 
God does not care for what I say, 
Unless Ifeel it too. 

2 Yet foolish thoughts my heart beguile . 

And when I pray or sing, 
I'm often thinking all the while, 
About some other thing, 

3 Some idle play or childish toy, 

Can send my thoughts abroad; 
Though this should be my greatest joy, 
To love and seek the Lord. 

4 Oh, let me never, never dare 

To act the triner's part ; 
Or think that God will hear a prayer 
That comes not from my heart j 

5 But if I make His ways my choice, 

As pious children do, 
Then, while I seek him with my voice, 
My heart will love him too. 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 



19 



27. FOR A CHILD THAT FEELS IT HAS A WICKED 
HEART. CM. 

1 WHAT is there, Lord, a child can do. 

Who feels with guilt opprest ? 
There's evil, that I never knew 
Before, within my breast. 

2 My thoughts are vain ; my heart is hard ; 

My temper apt to rise ; 
And when I seem upon my guard, 
It takes me by surprise. 

3 Often when I begin to pray, 

And lift my feeble cry, 
Some thought of folly or of play, 
Prevents me when I try. 

4 On many Sabbaths, though I've heard 

- Of Jesus and of heaven, 
I ' ve scarcely listened to thy word, 
Or prayed to be forgiven. 

5 0 look with pity in thine eye 

Upon a heart so hard : 
Thou wilt not slight a feeble cry, 
Or show it no regard. 

6 The work I cannot undertake, 

I leave to thee alone ; 
And pray thee, for thy mercy's sake, 
To change this heart of stone. 

28. A CHILD'S CONFESSION AND PRAYER. C. M. 

1 A SINNER, Lord, behold I stand. 

In thought and word and deed ; 
But Jesus sits at thy right hand, 
For such to intercede. 

2 From early infancy, I know, 

A rebel I have been ; 
And daily, as I older grow, 
I fear I grow in sin. 



20 



HYMNS FOR 



3 But God can change this evil heart, 

And give a holy mind ; 
And, his own heavenly grace impart, 
Which those who seek shall find. 

4 Then let me all my sins confess, 

And pardoning grace implore ; 
That I may love my follies less, 
And love my Saviour more. 

29. FOR A CHILD THAT IS SORRY FOR A FAULT. L. M 

1 LORD, I have dared to disobey 

My friends on earth, and thee in heaven ; 
0 help me now to come and pray, 
For Jesus' sake, to be forgiven. 

2 I cannot say I did not know, 

For I ' ve been taught thy holy will, 
And while my conscience told me so, 
And bade me stop, I did it still. 

3 But thou wast there to see my crime, 
And write it in thy judgment-book ; 
O make me fear, another time, 

A sinful thought, or word, or look. 

4 Forgive me, Lord, forgive, I pray, 
This wicked thing that I have done ; 
And take my sinful heart away, 
And make me holy like thy Son. 

30. THE SOUL CAN NEVER DIE'. S. M, 

1 TO thee I look, 0 Lord, 
Oh hear my early cry, 

And on my memory this record, 
" The soul can never die.' 5 

2 Each day, in all I do, 
May I sincerely try 

This solemn thought to keep in view 
" The soul can never die." 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 



21 



3 May I the Sabbath keep, 
And fear to tell a lie : 

And always think, before I sleep, 
" The soul can never die." 

4 If some so wicked are, 

From thoughts like this to fly, 
They, though too late, the truth must hear, 
" The soul can never die." 

5 May I on earth be blest 
Beneath thy gracious eye, 

My soul then in thy presence rest, 
Where it shall never die. 

31. EARLY DEVOTION TO GOD. S. M. 

1 WITH humble heart and tongue, 
Great God, to thee I pray ; 

0 may I learn, while I am young, 
To walk in wisdom's way. 

2 Now, in my early days, 
Teach me thyself to know j 

0 God, thy sanctifying grace 
Betimes on me bestow. 

3 My heart, to folly prone, 
Renew by power divine ; 

Unite it to thyself alone, 
And make me wholly thine. 

4 Make my defenceless youth 
The object of thy care ; 

Help me to choose the way of truth, 
And flee from every snare. 

5 0 let thy word of grace 

My warmest thoughts employ ; 
Be this, through all my following days, 
My treasure and my joy. 



HYMNS FOR 



32. LORD, REMEMBER ME. CM. 

1 SOON as my youthful lips can speak 

Their feeble prayer to thee, 

0 let my heart thy favor seek ; 
Dear Lord, remember me. 

2 In all life's following years, my tongue 

Tuned to thy praise shall be ; 
And this th' expressive, humble song, 
Dear Lord, remember me. 

3 From every sin that wounds the heart, 

May I be taught to flee ; 
Oh, bid them all from me depart ; 
Dear Lord, remember me. 

4 When with life's heavy load opprest, 

I bend the trembling knee, 
Then give my suffering spirit rest ; 
Dear Lord, remember me. 

5 0 let me, on the bed of death, 

Thy great salvation see ; 
And cry with my expiring breath, 
Dear Lord, remember me. 

33. BREATHING AFTER HOLINESS. 7's. 

1 JESUS, Lord, we look to thee, 
Meek and humble may we be ; 
Pride and anger put away, 
Make us holy day by day. 

2 May we hate a lying tongue, 
Never seek another's wrong ; 
From all paths of fraud abstain, 
Leading to eternal pain. 

3 Teach us for our friends to pray, 
And our parents to obey ; 
Richest blessings from above, 
Give them for their tender love. 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 23 

4 May we find the sweets of prayer 
Sweeter than our pastimes are ; 
Love the Sabbath, and the place 
Where we learn to seek thy face. 

5 Cleanse our hearts, our sins forgive, 
Form us new, that we may live — 
Live to love thee, live to rise 

To thy temple in the skies. 

34, PRAYER FOR THE HOLY SPIRIT. 7's. 

1 GRACIOUS Spirit, love divine, 
Let thy light within me shine ; 
All my guilty fears remove ; 
Fill me full of heavenly love. 

2 Speak thy pardoning grace to me ; 
Set the burdened sinner free ; 
Lead me to the Lamb of God ; 
"Wash me in his precious blood. 

3 Life and peace to me impart ; 
Seal salvation on my heart ; 
Enter thou within my breast — 
Earnest of hrrmortal rest. 

4 Let me never from thee stray ; 
Keep me in the narrow way ; 
Fill my soul with joy divine ; 
Keep me, Lord, for ever thine. 

35. YOUTH'S PRAYER FOR SABBATH MORNING. C. M 

1 LORD of the Sabbath, I rejoice 

Thy holy day to see ; 
May I, assisted by thy grace, 
Begin this week with thee. 

2 I go this day to hear thy word, 

To sing, to pray, and praise ; 
To learn of thee, my gracious Lord, 
Religion's pleasant ways. 



HYMNS FOR 

3 0 may the Holy Spirit bless 

These sacred means of grace ; 
That I may learn thy righteousness, 
And seek in youth thy face. 

4 Creation on this day began — - 

This holy morn was blest, 
When Christ, who died for sinful man, 
Ascended to his rest. 

5 There, though he reigns exalted high, 

The young he deigns to see ; 
He hears the contrite sinner's sigh, 
And stoops to notice me. 

I. ENCOURAGEMENT TO PRAYER. 7's. 

1 COME, my soul, thy suit prepare, 
Jesus loves to answer prayer j 

He himself has bid thee pray, 
Therefore will not say thee nay, 

2 Thou art coming to a King, 
Large petitions with thee bring ; 
For his grace and power are such, 
None can ever ask too much. 

3 With my burden I begin — 
Lord, remove this load of sin ; 
Let thy blood, for sinners spilt, 
Set my conscience free from guilt. 

4 Lord, I come to thee for rest, 
Take possession of my breast ; 

There thy blood-bought right maintain, 
And without a rival reign. 

6 Show me what I have to do, 
Every hour my strength renew, 
Let me live a life of faith, 

Let me die thy people's death, 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 



25 



37. PRAYER FOR ASSISTANCE IN LEARNING. C. M. 

1 GOD, "only wise," to thee I look; 

On me thy grace bestow, 
To read and understand my book, 
That I may wiser grow. 

2 0 may I love thy word of truth, 

And all my lessons learn ; 
Because these precious days of youth 
Will never more return. 

3 Give me an humble, active mind, 

From sloth and folly free ; 
Give me a cheerful heart, inclined 
To truth and piety. 

4 A faithful memory "bestow, 

With useful learning store ; 
And still, 0 Lord, as more I know, 
May I obey thee more. 

5 May I things excellent discern, 

Hold fast what I approve ; 
And more than all, delight to learn 
The lessons of thy love. 

38. YOUTH'S MORNING PRAYER. 7's 

1 NOW the morning's cheerful light 
Drives away the gloom of night j 
Rise, my soul, in praises rise, 
Far above the lofty skies. 

2 Keep me, gracious God, this day, 
Dangers press around my way j 
Every sinful passion quell, 

Let no secret thought rebel. 

3 Let no sin an entrance find, 
To pollute my youthful mind ; 
Guard my soul from every snare, 
Keep me with almighty care. 



HYMNS FOR 

4 Whither shall a sinner fly 
When temptation hovers nigh ? 
Unto Jesus Christ alone — 

He the tempter's power has known. 

5 Feeling weakness, I would rest 
On my Saviour's tender breast ; 
May his wisdom, grace, and truth, 
Guide me through the snares of youth. 

39. YOUTH'S EVENING PRAYER. 7's. 

1 FOR the mercies of this day, 
Thanks to thee, my God, I pay ; 
Now, as I retire to rest, 

Let my soul by thee be blest. 

2 Through each dark and silent hour, 
Oh preserve me by thy power ; 
Keep me safe from every fear, 
Thankful that my God is near. 

3 Let the sins which I have done 
All be pardoned through thy Son ; 
From whose dying sacrifice 

All my hopes and joys arise. 

4 Saviour, I my soul resign, 

To those pierced hands of thine, 
Which shall keep my sleeping breath, 
Which shall guard my sleep in death. 

5 In the morning let me wake, 
Of thy goodness to partake ; 
Or, if I am called to die, 
Raise me to thy throne on high. 

40. EARLY WILL I SEEK THEE. C. M. 

1 NOW that my journey's just begun, 
My road so little trod, 
I'll come before I further run, 
And give myself to God. 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 



2 "What sorrows may my steps attend 

I never can foretell ; 
But if the Lord will be my friend, 
I know that all is well. 

3 If all my earthly friends should die, 

And leave me mourning here, 
Since God can hear the orphan's cry, 
0 what have I to fear ? 

4 If I am poor, he can supply 

Who has my table spread ; 
Who feeds the ravens when they cry, 
And fills his poor with bread. 

5 If I am rich, he'll guard my heart, 

Temptation to withstand ; 
And make me willing to impart 
The bounties of his hand. 

6 But, Lord, whatever grief or ill, 

For me may be in store, 
Make me submissive to thy wilJ, 
And I would ask no more. 

41. THE SUCCESSFUL RESOLVE. C. M. 

1 COME, humble sinner, in whose breast 

A thousand thoughts revolve ; 
Come, with your guilt and fear opprest, 
And make this just resolve : 

2 " I '11 go to Jesus, though my sin 

Hath like a mountain rose ; 
I know his courts, I '11 enter in, 
Whatever may oppose. 

3 "Prostrate I'll lie before his throne, 

And there my guilt confess ; 
I '11 tell him I'm a wretch undone, 
Without his sovereign grace. 



HYMNS FOR 



4 "I'll to the gracious King approach, 

Whose sceptre pardon gives; 
Perhaps he may command my touch, 
And then the suppliant lives. 

5 " Perhaps he will admit my plea, 

Perhaps will hear my prayer ; 
But if I perish, I will pray, 
And perish only there. 

6 " I can but perish if I go ; 

I am resolved to try ; 
For if I stay away, I know 
I must for ever die. 77 



42. THE SWIFTNESS OF TIME. C. M. 

1 SWIFT as the winged arrow flies, 

My time is hastening on ; 
Quick as the lightning from the skies, 
My wasting moments run. 

2 My follies past, 0 God, forgive • 

My every sin subdue ; 
And teach me henceforth how to live, 
With glory in my view. 

3 'Twere better I had not been born 

Than live without thy fear ; 
For they are wretched and forlorn 
Who have then* portion here. 

4 But thanks to thine unbounded grace, 

That in my early youth 
^ v I have been taught to seek thy face, 
^ % And know the way of truth. 

5 0 let thy Spirit lead me still 

Along the happy road ; 
Conform me to thy holy will, 
My Father, and my God. 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 



43. W SICKNESS. C. M. 

1 When languor and disease invade 

This trembling house of clay, 
'Tis sweet to look beyond our cage, 
And long to fly away. 

2 Sweet to look inward, and attend 

The whispers of his love ; 
Sweet to look upward to the place 
Where Jesus pleads above. 

3 Sweet on His faithfulness to rest, 

Whose love can -never end; 
Sweet on his covenant of grace 
For all things to depend. 

4 Sweet, in the confidence of faith, 

To trust his firm decrees ; 
Sweet to lie passive in his hands, 
And know no will but his. 

5 If such the sweetness of the streams, 

What must the Fountain be, 
Where saints and angels draw their bliss 
Immediately from thee ? 

44. RECOVERY FROM SICKNESS. CM. 

1 MY God, thy service well demands 

The remnant of my days ; 
Why was this fleeting breath renewed, 
But to renew thy praise ? 

2 Thine arms of everlasting love 

Did this weak frame sustain, 
When health and life both ebbed apace 
From every sinking vein. 

3 Back from the borders of the grave 

At thy command I come ; 
Nor would I urge a speedier flight 
To my celestial home. 



30 



HYMNS FOR 



4 Where thou appointest my abode, 
There would I choose to be ; 
For in thy presence death is life, 
And earth is heaven, with thee. 

45. ON DEATH. L. M. 

1 WHERE shall I be when I shall go 
Erom this vain world of care and woe ? 
None ever have returned to tell 

The joys of heaven or pains of hell. 

2 Yet heaven must be a world of bliss, 
Where God himself for ever is ; 
Where saints around his throne adore, 
And never sin nor sutler more. 

3 And hell's a state of endless woe, 
Where unrepenting sinners go; 

Though none that seek the Saviour's grace 
Shall ever see that dreadful place. 

4 0 let me, then, at once apply 
To Him who did for sinners die ; 
And this shall be my great reward, 
To dwell for ever with the Lord. 

'46. ON THE FRAILTY OF LIFE. C. M. 

1 THEE we adore, eternal Name ! 

And humbly own to thee, 
How feeble is our mortal frame : 
What dying worms are we ! 

2 Our wasting lives grow shorter still, 

As nionths and days increase ; 
And every beating pulse we tell, 
Leaves but the number less. 

3 Great God, on what a slender thread 

Hang everlasting things ; 
Th' eternal states of all the dead 
Upon life's feeb! strings. 



CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 



31 



4 Infinite joy, or endless woe, 

Attends on every breath. ; 
And yet how unconcerned we go 
Upon the brink of death ! 

5 Waken, 0 Lord, our drowsy sense, 

To walk this dangerous road ; 
And if our souls are hurried hence, 
May they be found with God. 

47. THE DAY OF JUDGMENT. L. M. 

1 HOW dreadful, Lord, will be the day 
When all the tribes of dead shall rise ; 
And those who dared to disobey 

Be dragged before thy piercing eyes ! 

2 The wicked child who often heard 
His pious parents speak of thee, 
And fled from every serious word, 
Shall not be able then to flee. 

3 While they appear at thy right hand, 
With saints and angels round the throne, 
He, a poor guilty wretch, shall stand, 
And bear thy dreadful wrath alone ! 

4 No parent then shall bid him pray 
To Him who now the sinner hears j 
For Christ himself shall turn away, 
And show no pity to his tears. 

5 Great God, I tremble at the thought ; 
And at thy feet for mercy bend ; 
That when to judgment I am brought, 
The Judge himself may be my friend. 

48. DISMISSION. 8,7,4. 
1 LORD, dismiss us with thy blessing ; 
Fill our hearts with joy and peace : 
Let us each, thy love possessing, 
Triumph in redeeming grace : 

0 refresh us, 
Travelling through this wilderness. 



HYMNS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 



2 Thanks we give, and adoration, 

For thy gospel's joyful sound; 
May the fruits of thy salvation 
In our hearts and lives abound ; 

Ever faithful 
To the truth may we be found. 

3 So whene'er the signal's given 

Us from earth to call away, 
Borne on angel-wings to heaven, 
Glad the summons to obey, 

May we ever 
Reign with Christ in endless day 

49. AT PARTING. S. M. 

Once more, before we part, 
We '11 bless the Saviour's name ; 
Record his mercies, every heart, 
Sing every tongue the same. 

50. PRAISE. L. M. 

PRAISE God, from whom all blessings flow , 
Praise him, all creatures here below ; 
Praise him above, ye heavenly host ; 
Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 



21 



THE HISTORY 

OF 

HONEST R 0 (} E Pt 




-11 — 

PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK 



THE HISTOKY 

OF 

HONEST ROGER. 



Some years ago I was travelling in "Wales, at a 
season of the year when every thing around me 
was interesting in the highest degree, for it was 
just before the beginning of harvest, when "the 
pastures were clothed with flocks, the valleys were 
also covered with corn," the woods were clad with 
foliage, where " the fowls of the heaven had their 
habitation, and sung among the branches," and 
the orchards presented innumerable trees laden 
with fruit. How kind, thought I, is the great 
Parent of the universe. " The earth is full of his 
riches." " 0 that men would praise the Lord for 
his goodness." 

In pursuing my journey, the lofty mountains at 
a distance raising their heads in the clouds, af- 
forded me subjects for thought ; great things seen 
even afar off are important. Could we but see by 
faith " the things that are eternal," how profit- 
able as well as noble would be our reflections. 



G 



THE HISTORY OF 



The scenes around us, though charming and de- 
lightful, would lose their power to engross our 
affections, and our minds would soar in holy con- 
templation to the " everlasting hills which never 
can be moved." 

With such reflections as these, suggested, I 
humbly trust, by the Spirit of God, I arrived early 
in the day at the place of my destination, where 
business was to detain me for a few days. After 
refreshing myself and providing for my faithful 
beast, I took a walk in the evening through the 
village. It was situated on the banks of a small 
rivulet ; the houses were plain, rural, and clean. 
The inhabitants were industrious and apparently 
content ; order and decency pervaded the place ; 
while all appearance of profaneness, which I had 
frequently witnessed with pain on my journey dur- 
ing the day, seemed to be studiously avoided. In 
several houses I heard the sound of singing, but 
the tunes were not those of foolish songs, but such 
as accompany " psalms and hymns." I more than 
once saw groups of various ages returning from 
their labors in the field, whose " mouths were filled 
with the praises of God." The romantic scenery 
and fruitful fields, gardens, and orchards which on 
every side surrounded me, together with the sim- 
ple and virtuous manners of the people, gave to 



HONEST ROGER. 



7 



my mind a degree of pleasure which may be more 
easily conceived by those " who approve the things 
that are excellent," than can be described by my 
pen. 

Thus pleased with, and interested in all that 
came under my observation, my walk led me up 
a lane, on each side of which a row of oaks inter- 
mingled their branches over my head, forming a 
shade which was calculated to inspire a train of re- 
flections truly solemn and highly profitable. In a 
few steps I found my walk terminate at the gates 
of the churchyard. Ah, thought I, how many 
will experience an end like this to all their pleas- 
ing reveries. Delighted with their good things 
on earth, they soon shall awake from their dreams 
of worldly felicity at their near approach to 4 'the 
house appointed for all living." 

I entered with solemn delight into the sacred 
ground where many a hillock proclaimed to me, 
" Thou art mortal." The church was a modem 
structure, built in the gothic style of architecture ; 
the doors were open, as if to invite a stranger to 
enter. Having been educated according to the 
rites of the establishment, and having, I humbly 
trust, imbibed the spirit of piety which the : Scrip- 
tures breathe, the invitation was irresistible. The 
inside was in every way suited for a place of wor- 



8 



THE HISTORY OF 



ship ; every thing indicated that " God's sanctuary 
was reverenced." The very first appearance of the 
church accounted for the manners of the inhabi- 
tants which I had already so much admired. 

While examining the various parts of this inter- 
esting place, I often wished for a small ray of that 
light which shines in the Meditations of Hervey 
in his walks among the tombs. I had consola- 
tion, however, in reflecting that the same God 
who receives the tribute of the higher orders of his 
servants, will also graciously accept the service of 
the lowest. I rejoiced in the opportunity afforded 
me to offer up my thanks to Him who had cast my 
lot in this land. 0 what thanks ought I to give 
daily to Him who caused me to be born in a land 
of gospel light, and not in the dark heathen lands 
of India — to Him who has taught me to worship 
the true God in a Christian church, when I might 
have been offering bloody rites in a pagan temple. 
" Bless the Lord, 0 my soul, and all that is within 
me, bless his holy name." 0 give him thanks for 
my " creation, preservation, and redemption ; for 
the means of grace, and the hope of glory." 

In returning towards the village, I met a fu- 
neral procession moving slowly up the hill towards 
the church. As every one's countenance and be- 
havior seemed to indicate unfeigned sorrow and 



HONEST ROGER. 



9 



mourning, I returned with the multitude. The 
burial service was performed in a very solemn and 
impressive manner by a minister whose heart 
seemed to feel the important truths which he pro- 
nounced ; hence, it is no wonder that his hearers 
felt them. While the thirty-ninth Psalm was 
alternately recited by the minister and all the 
people in a slow and reverential tone, how insig- 
nificant did all the affairs of this world appear in 
comparison with those sublime advantages which 
religion confers. In the appropriate chapter, 1 Cor. 
15, which had been selected for the occasion, the 
glorious Redeemer was presented to our view in 
such a way as was calculated to raise in us the 
most fervent gratitude and love. The triumph of 
faith over death and the grave, as exhibited in 
that chapter, appeared to excite in every breast a 
desire to live the life and die the death of the 
righteous. 

When the chapter was ended, after a solemn 
pause of a few minutes, which was only inter- 
rupted by the tolling of the bell and the sighs of 
the mourners, the verses from the Olney Hymns, 

" Oft as the bell, with solemn toll, 
Speaks the departure of a soul, 
Let each one ask himself, ' Am I 
Prepared, should I be called to die ?' " 



10 



THE HISTORY OF 



were sung by all present, which produced an ef- 
fect which I shall never forget. Singing is gener- 
ally the most enlivening part of divine worship, 
but on this occasion it seemed to elevate the soul 
from earth to heaven. 

We afterwards proceeded to the grave, where 
the rest of the service was conducted in a manner 
the most instructive that I ever attended. No 
sooner had the coffin been lowered into the grave, 
and "the earth cast upon the body" committed 
to its long home, than the following words were 
sung : " I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto 
me, ■Write ; from henceforth blessed are the dead 
which die in the Lord : even so saith the Spirit ; 
for they shall rest from their labors."' Then the 
whole congregation kneeled, according to the pious 
custom of that part of the country, during the 
prayers which followed. 

After the apostolical benediction was pronounced, 
and the congregation rose from their knees, the 
minister exclaimed with tears and with uplifted 
hands, " Now I have buried the most honest man 
in the parish" This drew tears from many 
around him, for all seemed to feel the force of 
the assertion. Many answered, " Yes, yes," with 
great emphasis. The impression made on my 
mind was astonishment mixed with a desire to 



HONEST ROGER. 



11 



learn the particulars in the life of a man who had 
been thus publicly honored after death. My de- 
sire was happily granted soon afterwards by the 
excellent minister himself, who gave the following 
account of the education, life, and death of honest 
Roger. 

His father was once a wealthy freeholder, who 
led a " quiet and peaceable life in all godliness 
and honesty," training up a numerous family of 
both sexes " in the way wherein they ought to go." 
Through becoming security for some of his friends 
in distress, he was so reduced in his circumstances 
as to be obliged to sell all his property, and to 
spend the rest of his life in a cottage as a day-la- 
borer. His children consequently were obliged to 
provide for themselves as well as they were able. 

The day when this good but unfortunate man 
was about to leave his paternal estate, and have 
his children separated from him, he called them 
all together, and after family prayer, which he had 
never omitted, he thus addressed them : 

" My dear children, I had hoped to see you all 
grow up under my own roof in peace and plenty ; 
but God in his wisdom has thought fit to dis- 
appoint my hopes. His blessed ivill be done. I 
thank God that I have been able to give you all a 
little learning : you can read and write ; and each 



12 



THE HISTORY OF 



of you has a copy of the Holy Bible. This is all 
the portion I can give you ; but, blessed be G od, it 
is a good one if you use it well. You remember 
how your dear mother and myself accustomed our- 
selves to use our Bible, which we found the best 
companion both in prosperity and adversity. Let 
me beseech you all to follow our example. 

" Rise early, that you may have time to pray 
m private, and to read your Bible for a few min- 
utes ; then go to the business of the day with 
cheerfulness. Remember what God has com- 
manded you : ' six days ' of the week you are to 
' labor and do all your work ' faithfully and honest- 
ly. Conclude the day in the same pious manner 
as you began it, then your sleep will be easy and 
pleasant. Keep in mind during the day the por- 
tions of Scripture you have read in the morning, 
and they will preserve you from evil thoughts and 
make your work doubly sweet. 

" Remember also the Sabbath-day to keep it 
holy. On that day, which God has blessed for 
your good, you must £ do no manner of work ' but 
that of necessity or charity. Go, as you have been 
taught, to church early, and twice. Pray to God 
with a penitent and humble heart. Hear the ser- 
mon with attention and prayer. Examine your- 
selves every Sabbath evening, that you may know 



HONEST ROGER. 



13 



what good you have learned by the instructions 
which you have received. 

" You have a Father in heaven who will be al- 
ways with you, if you apply to him through his 
Son Jesus Christ. He loves you infinitely more 
than I can. Trust in him and you will never 
want. He may correct you by sending you afflic- 
tions, but it will be for your good. Remember 
Joseph : it is better to suffer than to sin. Re- 
member Moses, who chose rather to suffer afflic- 
tion with the people of G-od, than to enjoy the 
pleasures of sin for a season. 

"At least once every year you must all come 
to see me, when we shall go together to church 
Let me hear from each of you every month. I 
shall always pray for you — pray for me. The 
Lord bless you. The Lord be with you all for 
ever. Farewell." 

After this solemn and pious address, a written 
copy of which he gave to each of them, this inter- 
esting family separated, thenceforth to provide for 
themselves by their individual exertions. Their 
separate histories abundantly testify the advan- 
tages of the early instruction they received. But 
we will confine our attention to the history of 
honest Roger, w 7 ho was the youngest, and whose 
age then did not exceed twelve years. 



14 



THE HISTORY OF 



Before we proceed, it may not be amiss to ask 
those parents who have now read the above ac- 
count, if they have taught their children to read 
their Bible, and to join sincerely in the worship of 
God ? Beloved friends, can your children read 
the Bible, and have they Bibles to read ? Have 
they been taught to work during the week, and 
to " hallow the Sabbath ?" These questions ought 
to be considered by you now, for an answer will 
be required in the day of judgment. 

Honest Roger was employed by a farmer who 
was a man that truly " feared God and wrought 
righteousness." His house was a Bethel. The 
Lord was there daily " worshipped in spirit and in 
truth." He was a father not only to his own 
children, but to all the members of his household. 
He taught them all, both by precept and example, 
to "keep the way of the Lord, and to do justice 
and judgment." By his kind and judicious con- 
duct he made all under his roof to love and fear 
him. His commands were readily obeyed, because 
they were reasonable and right. 

Nor were the working-days alone pleasant to 
all this good man's domestics ; the Sabbath was 
in the highest degree a day of joy and delight to 
them. The week's work was always so contrived 



HONEST ROGER 



15 



that nothing remained undone on Saturday even- 
ing. All went to bed earlier that night than usu- 
al, and rose early on Sabbath morning ; there was 
therefore no hinderance in the way of attending 
divine worship. Every individual went to church 
twice that day, for there was nothing to detain 
any at home, unless there was sickness in the 
family. The " cattle," too, enjoyed rest according 
to God's command, for there were no journeys nor 
visits to make. The evening of the Sabbath was 
spent by this excellent man in catechizing all his 
household. The young people were required to 
give some account of what they had heard at 
church. When this exercise was ended, prayer 
and praise concluded the day, and all went early 
to bed. 

In this family Roger continued for six years in 
health and comfort ; for the seeds of piety and vir- 
tue which were sown in his heart in childhood 
were watered by the example and teachings of the 
pious farmer. He was happy because he " fol- 
lowed that which was good." He did his work 
faithfully, and received his wages without care or 
anxiety. 

But he found, as all others sooner or later will 
do, that tranquillity on earth is of short continu- 
ance. His venerable father, whom he had visited 



16 



THE HISTORY OF 



once a year according to his request, was removed 
to a better world, and soon afterward his worthy- 
employer died of a fever. Roger was therefore 
compelled to seek another place, and being inex- 
perienced in the world, he hired himself to the 
first farmer that offered him a place, thinking, in 
the simplicity of his heart, that all persons of the 
same rank bore the same character. 

His new master was, however, quite the reverse 
of his old one, and his situation very different in 
all respects. Family prayer was never performed. 
The Sabbath-day was awfully profaned. The 
master was often drunk, at other times angry, and 
at all times ungodly. In short, as piety was neg- 
lected, happiness could never visit, much less 
abide in the house. This place proved therefore 
to Roger to be full of sorrows. He would have 
left it immediately had he not hired himself for 
the year ; but he thought it would not be right to 
break his engagement, and he recollected the max- 
im, that " honesty is the best policy." 

As a workman, Roger was the best on the farm, 
and being true in all his words, and faithful in all 
his actions, he gained the esteem of his employer, 
who, bad as he was himself, could safely trust him ; 
and here it was that he first obtained the name 
of Honest Roger, which he preserved through 



HONEST ROGER. 



17 



life, and by which he is still kept ill memory by 
his relatives. He did his work, whoever neglect- 
ed it ; and whatever he did, he gave a correct 
account of to his employer. 

Although his conduct raised the envy and sneers 
of the vicious, he nevertheless acquired many 
friends. He often looked at the paper which con- 
tained his father's parting address to his children, 
which taught him " the good and right way." 
This led him to pray to God for help, and he 
found it. By God's help he was enabled to live 
" a godly, righteous, and sober life." 

Here let me ask heads of families what course 
they pursue ? Are you, my friends, like the for- 
mer or like the latter of these farmers, whose his- 
tories you have just read ? If like the former, 
you are happy ; if like the latter, you are miser- 
able. You see, then, what makes the difference. 
It is religion. 

Your domestics, too, will be much influenced by 
your example. If you are godly, you do much to 
make them so ; if you are ungodly, either they will 
be the same, or their situation will be trying and un- 
comfortable. 0 that you would but consider this 
subject as its infinite importance deserves. 

Honest Roger at the end of the year offered him- 
self as an under-gardener in the employ of a gen- 
?2 



18 



THE HISTORY OF 



tleman of very large fortune, who inquired for the 
character of Roger from his former employer. 
The inquiry was thus answered : 

" Sir — Roger is an honest young man. 

"I am yours," etc., etc. 

This letter of recommendation, though it was 
short, comprehended much. Nor was the gentle- 
man disappointed. Roger, hy a course of sobri- 
ety, industry, and strict fidelity, obtained the good- 
will of all that knew him. He could be safely 
trusted in any situation, for he had been taught to 
" do justly," as well as to " walk humbly with 
God." 

After he had spent two or three years in this 
happy way of living, one of his brothers persuad- 
ed him to join with himself in a trade which ap- 
peared to offer them many advantages and great 
profits. They accordingly removed to a distant 
part of the country, where they entered upon their 
new business. Here they acted in all their deal- 
ings uprightly and honestly ; they were civil and 
kind to all ; they were sober, frugal, and industri- 
ous; and as success crowned their labors, they 
"did not forget the poor" whose necessities called 
for their compassion and relief. But in dispens- 
ing their bounty, they were prudent as well as 



HONEST ROGER. 



19 



liberal, seeking out deserving objects who were 
actually in need of their assistance. 

Their prosperity, however, did not continue 
long. They entered into partnership with two 
other young men, who seemed, indeed, decent 
and honest ; but alas, were quite the reverse. 
These, under the most specious pretences of friend- 
ship and integrity, deceived their honest and un- 
suspicious partners, and soon brought the concern 
into discredit, and eventually into ruin. The 
four partners not only lost all, but were involved 
in a debt which they were utterly incapable of 
paying. 

The grief of Honest Roger and his brother on 
this occasion was very great. They had indeed 
no cause to accuse themselves for any neglect, but 
they were exceedingly sorry, because they were 
incapable of fulfilling the scripture command to 
" owe no man any thing." This state of distress 
was more than Roger's brother could bear — he 
sickened and died. 

Roger's two remaining partners told him that 
if he would go with them to London, where their 
parents and friends lived, they could soon raise 
the money which they owed, and a sum suffi- 
cient to enable them to begin business afresh. 
To this he consented ; but their design was only 



4 



20 



THE HISTORY OF 



to leave the kingdom. Roger however refused 
to accompany them. He wrote to his creditors 
and assured them of his honest design to pay them 
all as soon as Providence enabled him. The man- 
ner in which he fulfilled his upright intentions 
shall be now related, as an example of what may 
be done by industry and perseverance in well- 
doing. 

It would be difficult to describe the distress of 
mind which Roger felt when he was left by his 
companions. They had brought him into trouble, 
and like the world in general, left him there to 
suffer or to struggle out of it as well as he was 
able. He was sensible that he had acted up- 
rightly in all his dealings, and this consideration 
supported him ; his sorrow however was great, 
because he had joined those men whose motives 
and principles were the reverse of his own ; but 
in this he had nothing to blame himself for, inas- 
much as he was deceived. 

Roger's distress did not produce inactivity and 
despair ; but it caused exertion and diligence. As 
a pious man, " he called upon God in the day of 
trouble," being well assured that he had the prom- 
ise of an answer to his prayer ; and as an honest 
man, who was bound to "do justly," as well as 
to " walk humbly with God," Micah 6 : 8, he re- 



HONEST ROGER. 



21 



solved to enter upon some regular employment, 
and labor diligently that he might raise a fund 
wherewith to discharge all his debts. 

He lost no time in putting his resolution into 
practice. After surmounting some difficulties 
which generally meet a stranger in London, he 
entered into the service of a gardener, a situation, 
as we have already seen, for which he was well 
suited. 

Here he labored with uncommon diligence for 
sixteen hours every day. He lived on the mean- 
est fare, and seldom drank any thing but water. 
And, while he thus worked on the week-days, the 
early instructions of his pious parents were never 
disregarded by him. The sacred duties of the 
Sabbath were sweet to his heart, and left a savor 
behind them throughout the week. He spent an 
hour every Sabbath morning in reading his Bible, 
and in private prayer. He then went to worship 
God in public, and to hear his word. He returned 
to his dinner, and went always to church in the 
afternoon. His Sabbath evenings were also spent 
at home in reading, meditation, and prayer alone, 
or with a friend. 

The attentive reader will not be surprised to 
hear that "the Lord was with" Roger, as he 
reads of his being with " Joseph" of old, and that 



22 



THE HISTORY OF 



" all he did prospered in his hand." He gained 
the esteem and confidence of his employer, as well 
as the respect of all that knew him. Though in- 
deed he, like all good men, was sometimes laughed 
at and reproached for his religion, he nevertheless 
was beloved and honored. The God whom he 
served made all men, and " all things work to- 
gether for his good." 

When Roger had spent two years in this situa- 
tion, a gentleman who frequently dealt with his 
employer, in purchasing plants, etc., to stock his 
own garden which he was making at his country- 
seat, and who had many opportunities of observing 
Roger's good behavior and skill, offered to engage 
him as his own head-gardener. Though his em- 
ployer was extremely loath to part with him, he 
was prevailed upon to accept the offer for the sake 
of having greater means to increase his fund for 
paying his debts. He soon entered upon his new 
employ, and there served both God and his master 
as a good and an honest man. 

In this new situation he was beset with many 
temptations to swerve from the direct line of duty, 
but his constant watchfulness and prayer procured 
him help from above to keep a " conscience void of 
offence towards God and man." The means of 
grace, which he constantly attended, had such an 



HONEST ROGER. 



23 



influence on his conduct in life, as to keep him 
from all evil, and " direct his steps in the way of 
righteousness." 

"We might relate many anecdotes of his upright- 
ness and honesty ; but we will only mention one or 
two. A gentleman called one evening in the twi- 
light to pay for some shrubs which he had bought 
of Roger's employer, and in the darkness, much 
increased by the shade of the trees which sur- 
rounded the lodge, he gave him a five pound note 
instead of a one pound note. 

When Roger had lighted his candle some time 
afterwards as usual, to read his evening chapter 
in the Bible, he discovered the gentleman's mis- 
take. He immediately ran after him and restored 
the note. 

Another time a valuable diamond had been lost 
by one of the family while walking in the garden, 
which, after great search, was given up as irre- 
coverable, for none knew where it had been drop- 
ped. About a year afterwards Roger found it 
among some flower-roots. He immediately re- 
turned it to the owner, and would receive nothing 
for his fidelity, He said that " he had done only 
what was his duty." Luke 17 : 10. 

After having continued in the faithful discharge 
of his duties for some years, he took all his savings 



24 



THE HISTORY OF 



in his pocket, and went to the town where he had 
been engaged in trade with his brother and the 
two young men already mentioned, in order to 
"pay the uttermost farthing " of what he and his 
brother owed. This he accomplished, to the no 
small astonishment of all who knew it. Before, 
however, he could clear the whole, he was obliged 
to sell even his coat and buckles. He then worked 
on the highway for money to carry him home. 
When he returned he kept a day of thanksgiving 
to God for enabling him to arrive at a state in which 
he " owed no man any thing." Romans 13:8. 
He resumed his labors with cheerfulness, and con- 
tinued a useful, exemplary Christian, honoring God 
both in life and in death. Reader, " go thou and 
do likewise." 

The latter years of Roger's life were spent in 
the practice of piety towards God, and of justice 
towards man. As soon as he had disentangled 
himself from his embarrassments he married an 
industrious, godly woman, by whom he had three 
sons, who were brought up by him in the fear of 
the Lord. His diligence in his business, and 
other virtues, endeared him to all his relations 
and acquaintance, procured him peace of mind, 
and, what was better than all, brought down upon 



HONEST ROGER. 



25 



hirn "the blessing of God," which alone "maketh 
rich." 

Soon after his marriage he entered upon a small 
farm, on which he lived for some years, an exam- 
ple of honesty, sobriety, diligence, and consistent 
piety. 

He afterwards acquired means to take a much 
larger farm, where he continued until his death 
Here he was called to various stations of public 
responsibility, in all of which he acted conscien- 
tiously and piously. He never feared to do his 
duty ; nor did he suffer any loss for discharging it 
faithfully. He " adorned the doctrine of God his 
Saviour in all things." 

During the latter years of his life he superin 
tended a large Sabbath-school, which was made a 
blessing to many hundreds of poor children. 

The admirable regularity of his plan, and the 
strict propriety of its execution, were universally 
approved. His services hi the Sabbath-school can 
never be duly appreciated until the great day of 
account. 

Nor was Roger remarkable as a public charac- 
ter only. We have seen some conduct public busi- 
ness or a Sabbath-school with great credit, while 
they have been very deficient in the performance 
of their duties at home. Roger, however, was 



26 



THE HISTORY OF 



uniform and consistent in all the relations of life 
which he filled. As a husband, he was tender and 
affectionate ; as a father, he was kind and careful ; 
as a master, he was upright and prudent ; as a 
neighbor, he was just and friendly. In short, he 
was, by the influence of divine grace, enabled to 
exemplify, as fully as any man perhaps ever did, 
the directions respecting our duty to God and to 
our neighbor, which are contained in the sacred 
Scriptures. "He believed in Christ; he feared 
and loved God. he worshipped him" in the church, 
in his family, and in his closet; "he gave him 
thanks, he put his trust in him, he called upon him, 
he honored his holy name and his word, and served 
him all the days of his life." 

To a good degree, "he loved his neighbor as 
himself, and did to all men as he would be done 
by ; he loved, honored, and succored his father 
and mother ; he submitted himself to all his gov- 
ernors, teachers, and spiritual pastors ; he hurt 
nobody by word or deed," but was a benefactor 
to all ; " he was true and just in all his dealings ; 
he bore no malice or hatred in his heart ; he kept 
his hands from taking any thing not his own, and 
his tongue from evil-speaking, lying, and slander- 
ing ; he kept his body in temperance, soberness, 
and chastity ; he did not covet nor desire other 



HONEST ROGER. 



27 



men's goods, but learned and labored to do his 
duty in that state of life unto which it pleased 
God to call him." 

And here I beg the reader to take notice that 
Koger was " not able " to do, any more than others, 
" these things of himself, nor to walk in the com- 
mandments of God, and to serve him, without his 
special grace." He had been early taught by his 
parents, and he followed their teaching, " to call 
at all times upon God by diligent prayer for his 
special grace;" and God was pleased to give him 
grace, and strengthen him by his power. This I 
earnestly entreat the reader to keep in view, as 
explaining the connection between the cause and 
the effect . Roger was eminently holy ; but it was 
not by his own might or power that he was thus 
enabled to live to the Lord, and constantly to use 
the means of grace. 

Having surveyed his life, let us take a view of 
his death ; and this, too, will afford us some in- 
teresting lessons. 

He was taken ill suddenly. Being confined to 
his bed, he sent for his minister to visit him, who 
found him in a calm and peaceful state of mind, 
though apparently near his end. At Roger's re- 
quest he engaged in prayer. Roger joined hearti- 



23 



THE HISTORY OF 



ly in each petition and thanksgiving. When the 
service wag concluded, he shook hands with each 
of his family, and implored the blessing of God on 
them. all. 

As the minister was going to retire, Roger most 
affectionately pressed his hand and said, " My 
dear sir, farewell ; I shall meet you in heaven." 
In a few hours Roger said, " Lord, now lettest 
thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy 
word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation ;" and 
with that breathed his last. During the whole of 
his sickness he had manifested Christian resigna- 
tion and hope ; and salvation was on his lips when 
he actually departed. Such was his death, happy 
and full of instruction. 

The Lord does not always see fit to give his 
people such a tranquil passage from this world of 
pain and sorrow, but we know that he doeth all 
things well ; and we may leave this, as well as 
other events, in his hand, being assured that he 
does not afflict willingly ; but as a father chasten- 
eth his children for their good, so he deals with us. 
It may, however, be observed, that this peaceful 
end is perhaps most frequently granted to those 
who have been enabled the most simply to com- 
mit all their concerns to him, constantly " looking 
to Jesus ;" and we may be assured that the more 



HONEST ROGER. 



29 



simply we are enabled to do this, the more shall 
we be supported under the trials and temptations 
of this life. The nearer a child is to its parent, 
the less is it troubled with, and fearful of what 
passes around. 

The following directions may assist to help 
those who desire, like Honest Roger, to show the 
power of holiness and righteousness in their daily 
walk and conduct. 

1 . Be sure that a good foundation is laid : this 
can be only by the change of your heart through 
the powerful working of the Holy Spirit. We are 
" by nature the children of wrath." Eph. 2:3. 
"We have all, like sheep, gone astray." Isaiah 
53 : 6. " If we say we have no sin, we deceive 
ourselves." 1 John, 1:7. The Saviour himself 
has declared, " Except a man be born again, he 
cannot see the kingdom of Grod." John 3:3. 
Has such a change taken place in your heart ? 
Do you delight in Christ and his holy commands ? 
Do you hate and abhor sin ? 

2. Be sure constantly to bear in mind the rules 
by which you are to walk. They are given to us 
in the Bible ; therefore constantly study the Scrip- 
tures, which alone are able to make us wise unto 
salvation ; ask yourself continually, Am I follow- 



30 



THE HISTORY OF 



ing the example of Christ ? And while you read, 
pray earnestly that, by the divine teaching, you 
may profit and grow thereby. Psalm 19 : 7, 11. 

3. Be sure that you propose to yourself a right 
end to be attained by your" holy walk and con- 
duct. Think not to obtain heaven by your good 
works. " Not by works of righteousness which we 
have done, but according to his mercy he saved 
us." Titus 3:5. " The gift of God is .eternal 
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord." Rom. 6 : 23. 
"We are required to walk humbly with our God." 
Micah 6:8. Surely the man who trusts in his 
own righteousness, and thinks to gain heaven 
thereby, does not walk humbly with God. He 
does not tell us that we can win heaven by our 
holiness. " When ye shall have done all those 
things which are commanded you, say, We are 
unprofitable servants." Luke 17:10. But there- 
by you show your love and thankfulness to Christ, 
through whom alone we can obtain salvation. 
" If ye love me, keep my commandments." John 
14 : 15. "Let your light so shine before men, 
that they may see your good works, and glorify 
your Father which is in heaven." Matt. 5:16. 

4. Walk in constant dependence upon God, 
looking to him for strength and support, for it is 
not in man to direct his own way. Avoid care- 



HONEST ROGER. 



fully every thing which may tempt you to sin. 
Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest 
he fall. Our own strength is perfect weakness, 
but " wait on the Lord ; he of good courage, and 
he shall strengthen thy heart." Psalm 27 : 14. 

5. Reflect constantly what will he your thoughts 
when your dying hour is come. No man when 
he is on his death-bed ever regretted having led a 
holy life ; but how many, even of the people of 
God, have found thorns in their pillow from for- 
mer neglects of his will. 

6. Above all, remember that there is no real 
support for you on a death-bed but faith in Christ 
Jesus ; to him alone can you look for present 
peace and future glory. " Christ is all." Medi- 
tate continually upon him ; seek him in public, 
by attendance upon his ordinances ; in private, by 
prayer and reading his word. Come to him in 
all your troubles, he will hear you and answer 
you ; let not unbelief keep you from him. Rest 
upon him, believing in the promise of salvation to 
all who will receive it. He has said, " Ask, and 
it shall be given you ; seek., and ye shall find." 
Luke 11:9. "Him that cometh unto me, I will 
in no wise cast out." John 6 : 37. 



THE HISTORY OF HONEST ROGER. 



"0 that the Lord would guide my waya 
To keep his statutes still ; 
0 that my God would grant me grace 
To know and do his will. 

" 0 send thy Spirit down to write 
Thy law upon my heart, 
Nor let my tongue indulge deceit, 
Nor act the liar's part. 

"From vanity turn off mine eyes • 
Let no corrupt design, 
Nor covetous desires arise 
Within this soul of mine. 

" Order my footsteps by thy word, 
And make my heart sincere ; 
Let sin have no dominion, Lord, 
But keep my conscience clear. 

"My soul hath gone too far astray, 
My feet too often slip ; 
Yet since I've not forgot thy way, 
Bestore thy wandering sheep. 7 * 



23 



HISTORY 

OF 

THE ENGLISH BIBLE: 

SHOWING 

THE INEFFECTUAL EFFORTS OF POPERY TO PREVENT 
ITS CIRCULATION. 




— 12— 

PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 

150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK 



IHE 

HISTORY 

OF 

THE ENGLISH BIBLE. 



PROGRESS MADE IN TRANSLATING THE BIBLE 
BEFORE THE TIME OF WICKLIFFE. 

The history of the English Bible includes a 
period of nine hundred years, extending from 
about A. D. 700, to the completion of the present 
translation in the reign of James the First, A. D. 
1611. 

The psalter and the gospel were translated into 
the Anglo-Saxon towards the beginning of the 
eighth century, by the venerable Bede, who is 
said to have finished the last chapter of the gos- 
pel as he expired. The whole Bible was trans- 
lated into the Anglo-Saxon by order of king 
Alfred. He undertook the version of the psalms 
himself, but he did not live to complete it. 

We pass rapidly over a wide and dreary waste, 
reaching from the days of Alfred to William the 

r- 

S3 



6 



THE HISTORY OF 



Conqueror, and even as far down as the reign of 
Edward I. In the eleventh century the state of 
England was superlatively wretched. In conse- 
quence of the successful invasion of the ferocious 
Danes, murder and rapine marched hand in hand 
through the kingdom with wasteful triumph. 
During this period of horror and desolation, relig- 
ion, corrupted by repeated abuses, degenerated 
into superstition. In these calamitous times, and 
for some ages after, those who presided over that 
hallowed fountain of living waters, the Scriptures, 
suffered them to flow with only a niggard stream, 
and that polluted. 

In 1274 the price of a Bible, with a commen- 
tary fairly written, was £30 — a most enormous 
sum, for at that time the pay of a laboring man 
was only three half-pence a day ; so that such a 
work would have cost him more than fifteen years' 
labor ; and the expense have been greater than 
building two arches of London bridge, which, in 
1240, cost £25. 

One of the first attempts at a translation into 
the English language, appears to have been made 
by Richard Rolle, a hermit of Hampole, in York- 
shire, who translated and wrote a gloss upon the 
psalter, and a metrical paraphrase of the book of 
Job. He died in 1349. 



THE ENGLISH BIBLE 




In Spain, James I. king of Arragon, who died 
in 1276, required all, whether clergy or laity, who 
possessed any of the books of the Old and New 
Testament in the vulgar tongue, to bring them to 
the bishop to be burned. The translations thus 
condemned had probably been made by those early 
opponents of superstition, the Albigenses. But 
while one part of Spain was interdicted the word of 
God, another was favored with it ; for Alphonsus 
king of Castile, who lived A. D. 1280, with pious 
liberality, took care to have the sacred books trans- 
lated into the Castilian. his native dialect. 



* 



8 THE HISTORY OF 

WICKLIFFE'S TRANSLATION. 

The first complete translation of the whole 
Bible into English was made by John Wickliffe. 
This appeared between 1360 and 1380. 

The New Testament of WicklifFe's version sold 
for four marks and forty pence, or £2 16s. 8cL, 
as appears from the register of W. Alnwick, bishop 
of Norwich, 1429, as quoted by Fox. 

In 1390 a bill was brought into the House of 
Lords to prohibit the use of English Bibles. The 
bill, however, being strongly reprobated and op- 
posed by John duke of Lancaster, "WicklifFe's pat- 
ron, was rejected. The duke is related to have 
said, "We will not be the dregs of all, seeing 
other nations have the law of God, which is the 
law of our faith, written in their own language." 

About A. D. 1408, Arundel, archbishop of Can- 
terbury, decreed, in a convocation of the clergy at 
Oxford, that no unauthorized person should trans- 
late any text of Scripture into English, or any 
other language, by way of book or treatise ; and 
that no translation, made either in or since Wick- 
line's time, should be read, till approved by the 
bishop of the diocese, or in a provincial council. 
This decree was enforced by great persecutions ; 
and as about the same time Pope Alexander Y. 
condemned all translations into the vulgar tongue. 



THE ENGLISH BIBLE . 



9 



they were, as much as it was possible, suppressed 
till the Reformation. 

It appears, indeed, from our bishops' registers, 
that in consequence of Arundel's commission, sev- 
eral persons were burned on refusing to abjure 
their principles, for having read" the New Testa- 
ment and the ten commandments in WicklifFe's 
translation. 

In the second year of the reign of Henry Y. a 
law was passed by which all Lollards, or those 
who possessed or read any of WicklifFe's books, 
were declared to be guilty of treason, and their 
goods ordered to be confiscated. This law was 
considered as particularly directed against those 
who read the New Testament in English in Wick- 
lifFe's translation. The following extract shows 
how the passage of this law was regarded by many 
in that day : "In the said parliament — namely, one 
held at Leicester — the king made this most blas- 
phemous and cruel act to be a law for ever, that 
whatsoever they were that should read the Scrip- 
tures in their mother tongue — which was then call- 
ed Wicklieu Lerning — they should forfeit land, 
cattle, body, life, and goods from their heirs for ever, 
and to be condemned for heretics to God, enemies to 
the crown, and most errant traitors to the land." 

In 1429, Nicholas Belward was accused of hav 



10 



THE HISTORY OP 



ing in his possession a New Testament which he 
had bought in London for four marks and forty 
pence, or £2 16s. Sd., a sum equivalent to more 
than forty pounds at present — an astonishing price 
to be paid by a laboring man ! 

THE FIRST PRINTED BIBLES 

No sooner was the art of printing invented in 
Germany, than Dr. Fust, or Faustus, employed it 
in multiplying copies of the Bible. Having printed 
off a considerable number of copies to imitate 
those which were commonly sold in manuscript, 
he undertook the sale of them at Paris, where the 
art of printing was then unknown. As he sold 
his printed copies for sixty crowns, while the 
scribes demanded five hundred, this created uni- 
versal astonishment ; but when he produced copies 
as fast as they were wanted, and also lowered his 
price to thirty crowns, all Paris was agitated. The 
uniformity of the copies increased the wonder. It 
is said that informations were given in to the 
magistrates against him as a magician ; his lodg- 
ings were searched, and a great number of copies 
being found, they were seized. The red ink with 
which they were embellished was said to be his 
blood. It was seriously adjudged that he was in 
league with the devil ; but on discovering his art, 



THE ENGLISH BIBLE 



1 I 



the parliament of Paris made an act to discharge 
him from all persecution in consideration of his 
useful invention. 

The very first printed edition of fhe Bible, in 
any language, was that of the Latin Yulgate, 
which was printed at Mayntz in 1462. (N. B. 
This must be understood to denote the first edi- 
tion of the whole Bible which bears the name of 
a printer, and the place and year of its execution.) 
The first printed edition of the Bible, in any mod- 
ern language, was in the German, there being a 
copy preserved in the public library in the city of 
Leipsic, which was printed in 1467. 

TYNDAL'S TRANSLATION. 

In 1526, William Tyndal, a native of Wales 
printed at Antwerp, without a name, his Englisli 
New Testament. In England the importers and 
venders of Tyndal' s translation were condemned 
by Sir Thomas More, the lord chancellor, to ride 
with their faces to the horses' tails, with papers 
on their heads, and with the books which they had 
dispersed tied about them, to an appointed spot in 
London, where they themselves were compelled 
to throw them into the fire, and were afterwards 
amerced in a considerable fine. Tyndal, through 
the treachery of Henry Philips, was strangled and 



12 



THE HISTORY OF 



burned in 1536 for heresy, near Fiiford, or Ville- 
fort castle, the place of his imprisonment, between 
Brussels and Antwerp, in Flanders. He expired 
praying, with repeated earnestness, " Lord, open 
the king of England's eyes." It was at Antwerp 
he finished his favorite work, with the assistance 
of John Fry, or Fryth, and William Hoye ; the for- 
mer of whom was burned in Smithfield for heresy, 
July, 1552 ; and the latter suffered that dreadful 
death in Portugal on the same accusation." 

At the request of the. clergy several severe 
proclamations were issued by king Henry VIII. 
against all who read or kept by them Tyndal's 
translation of the New Testament ; so that a 
copy of this book found in the possession of any 
person, was sufficient to convict him of heresy, 
and subject him to the flames. "But the fervent 
zeal of these Christian days," says the good old 
martyrologist, Fox, " seemed much superior to 
these our days and times, as manifestly may 
appear by their sitting up all night in reading or 
hearing ; also by their expenses and charges in 
buying of books in English, of whom some gave 
five marks, some more, some less, for a book, and 
some gave a load of hay for a few chapters of 
St. James, or of St. Paid, in English." 

In 1543 an act of parliament was obtained by 



THE ENGLISH BIBLE. 



13 



the adversaries of translations, condemning Tyn- 
dal's Bible, and the prefaces and notes of all other 
editions. It was therefore enacted, " That no 
women, except noble women, and gentlewomen, 
who might read to themselves alone, and not to 
others — and for which indulgence they were in- 
debted to Cranmer — nor artificers, apprentices, 
journeymen, serving-men, husbandmen, nor labor- 
ers, were to read the Bible or New Testament in 
English, to himself or to any others, privately or 
openly, upon pain of one month's imprisonment." 

A similar act was also passed in 1546, prohibit- 
ing Coverdale's as well as Tyndal's Bible. 

The New Testament was published by Luther, 
after it had been revised by Melancthon, in 1522. 

Tyndal's translation of the New Testament, 
from the Greek, was printed in octavo, as we 
have seen, in 1526. The written copies of Wick- 
liffe's translation had been long known ; but this 
was the first time that any part of the Scriptures 
was printed in English. Wolsey and the bishops 
published prohibitions and injunctions against it 
as false and heretical. Tonstal, bishop of London, 
and Sir Thomas More, bought up almost the whole 
impression, and burned it at St. Paul's Cross. The 
sale of these copies, however, enabled Tyndal to 
prepare another and more correct edition, which 



14 



TRL HISTORY OF 



was printed in 1534. " Cardinal Wolsey declaim- 
ed," says Mr. Baxter, " against the art of printing, 
as that which would take down the honor and 
profit of the priesthood, by making the people as 
wise as they." 

At that time the people were so little acquaint- 
ed with the Scriptures, that upon the appearance 
of printed editions in the Hebrew and Greek orig- 
inals, some of the more illiterate monks declaimed 
from the pulpits, that " there was now a new 
language discovered, called Greek, of which the 
people should beware, since it was that which 
produced all heresies ; that in this language was 
come forth a book called the New Testament, 
which was now in every body's hands, and was 
full of thorns and briars. And there had also 
another language now started up, which they 
called Hebrew ; and that they who learned it were 
termed Hebrews." 

" The art of reading," says Lord Kaimes, " made 
a very slow progress. To encourage that art in 
England, the capital punishment for murder was 
remitted, if the criminal could hut read, which, 
in law language, is termed benefit of clergy. One 
would imagine that the art must have made a 
very rapid progress when so greatly favored, bu+ 
there is a signal proof of the contrary ; for so 



THE ENGLISH BIBLE. 



15 



small an edition of the Bible as six hundred copies, 
translated into English in the reign of Henry 
VIII., was not wholly sold off in three years." 

" The clergy," says Dr. Henry, " were very sen- 
sible of their danger from this quarter, and ex- 
erted all their power to prevent the circulation ol 
the New Testament in English, which they rep- 
resented as perfect poison to the souls of Chris- 
tians. But all their efforts were ineffectual." 

TRANSLATION MADE UNDER THE SUPERIN- 
TENDENCE OF CRANMER, COMMONLY CALLED 
COVERDALE'S BIBLE. 

Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, having 
obtained king Henry's permission to translate the 
New Testament, divided it into nine parts, chose 
nine of the best Greek scholars he could find, and 
committed the translating of one of those parts to 
each. When they were all translated and return- 
ed to him, he sent one of those parts to one of the 
most learned of his brethren the bishops, to be 
corrected, and returned with their observations. 
When the day came, every man sent to Lambeth 
their parts corrected ; only one portion, namely, 
that which had been sent to Stokesley, bishop of 
London, was wanting. Cranmer wrote to the 
bishop a letter for his part, requiring him to delivei 



16 



THE HISTORY OF 



it unto the messenger, his secretary. He received 
the archbishop's letter at Fulham, unto which he 
made this answer : "I marvel what my lord of 
Canterbury meaneth, that thus abuseth the people 
in giving them liberty to read the Scriptures, which 
doth nothing else but infect them with heresy. I 
have bestowed never an hour upon my portion, 
nor ever will, and therefore my lord shall have 
his book again, for I will never be guilty of bring- 
ing this simple folk into error." 

Mr. Thomas Lawney, chaplain to the old duke 
of Norfolk, hearing the archbishop speak of Stokes- 
ley's untowardness, said, " I can tell your grace 
why my lord of London will not bestow any labors 
or pains this way ; your grace knoweth well that 
his portion is a piece of the New Testament. 
But he, being persuaded that Christ had not be- 
queathed him any thing in his Testament, thought 
it mere madness to bestow any labor or pains 
where no gain was to be gotten ! And besides 
this, it is the Acts of the Apostles, who were sim- 
ple, poor fellows ; and therefore my lord of Lon- 
don disdained to have to do with any of them !" 

There was nothing that the friends of the old 
learning — as the tenets of popery were then call- 
ed — more dreaded and deprecated than the trans- 
lation of the Scriptures into English, and granting 



THE ENGLISH BIBLE . 



17 



the use of them to the people ; nor was there any 
thing that the friends of the Reformation more 
ardently labored to procure. There was a long 
and violent struggle between the two parties. 
Archbishop Warham sent a pastoral Jetter to all 
the prelates of his province, A. D. 1526, acquaint- 
ing them that certain children of iniquity, blinded 
by malice, had translated the New Testament into 
English, to spread heresy and ruin men's souls, 
and that some of these pernicious books had been 
brought into England. He directed them, there- 
fore, to command all persons in their diocese, who 
had any of these dangerous books, to deliver them 
up to their bishop, or his commissary, within thirty 
days, under the pain of excommunication, and of 
being punished as heretics. 

Four years after this, the cry for a translation 
of the Bible, and the opposition to it still continu- 
ing, the king published a proclamation, in which 
he told his subjects that he had consulted the two 
primates and several other bishops and learned 
men, " and that by all these virtuous, discreet, and 
well-learned personages in divinity, it is thought 
that it is not necessary the Scriptures be in the 
English tongue, and in the hands of the common 
people ; and that, having respect to the malignity 
of this present time, with the inclinations of the 
24 



lb 



THE HISTORY OF 



people to erroneous opinions, the translation of the 
New Testament and the Old into the vulgar tongue 
of the English should rather be the occasion of con- 
tinuance or increase of errors among the said peo- 
ple, than any benefit to their souls." Such were the 
sentiments of the king and prelates of England on 
this subject at that time. But after Henry began to 
quarrel with the pope, and Cranmer was advanced 
to the primacy, he changed his opinion, and began 
to listen to the opinions of his subjects to have the 
Scriptures in a language they understood. 

When Dr. Cranmer was advanced to the pri- 
macy, he stood in the highest degree of favor with 
the king, which was the cause of his unexpected 
promotion.. This gave him so much influence and 
authority in the church, that the convocation of 
his province, December the 9th, 1534, consulted 
and agreed that he should make application to 
the king to name and appoint certain honest and 
learned men to translate the Scriptures into Eng- 
lish, to be put into the hands of the people for 
their instruction. Cranmer applied to the king 
accordingly, and obtained a commission for himself 
and some other learned men to prepare a transla- 
tion of the whole Bible for the instruction of his 
subjects. For expedition in this work, which he 
had much at heart, he divided the Bible into sev- 



THE ENGLISH BIBLE . 



19 



eral parts, and gave one to each translator. When 
the translation was finished, the printing of it was 
committed to Richard Grafton and Edward Whit- 
church, who obtained permission from Francis to 
print it at Paris. 

"About this time," says archbishop iSTewcome, 
" an event happened which showed the vigilance 
and jealousy of the Romanists with respect to 
vernacular translations of the Bible. Grafton had 
permission from Francis the First, at the request 
of king Henry himself, to print a Bible at Paris, 
on account of the superior skill of the workmen, 
and the comparative goodness and cheapness of 
the paper. But, notwithstanding the royal license, 
the Inquisition interposed by an instrument dated 
December 17th, 1538. The French printers, their 
English employers, and Coverdale, the corrector 
of the work, were summoned by the Inquisitors, 
and the impression, consisting of 2,500 copies, was 
seized and condemned to the flames. But the 
avarice of the officer who superintended the burn- 
ing of these heretical books, for so they were call- 
ed, induced him to sell some chests of them to a 
haberdasher for the purpose of wrapping his wares. 
The English proprietors, who fled at the alarm, 
returned to Paris when it subsided, and not only re- 
covered some of those copies which had escaped the 



20 



THE HISTORY OF 



fire, but brought with them to London the presses, 
types, and printers. . When Cranmer received some 
copies of this Bible, he said it gave him more joy 
than if he had received ten thousand pounds ! > 

The king, by proclamation, A. D. 1537, com- 
manded one of these Bibles, at the equal expense 
of the clergyman and the parishioners, to be de- 
posited in every parish church, to be read by all 
who pleased ; and as some towns and parishes did 
not obey this first proclamation, it was enforced in 
a second, with severe penalties. At last Cranmer 
procured permission, A. D. 1539, to all the subjects 
to purchase copies of this English Bible for the use 
of themselves and their families. By such slow 
steps the people of England obtained the inestima- 
ble privilege of perusing the word of God in their 
own language, which had been long denied them. 

Coverdale's Bible, in folio, was published in 
1535. " This," says Newcome, " is the first Eng- 
lish Bible allowed by royal authority, and the 
first translation of the whole Bible printed in our 
language. It was objected to by the bishops as 
faulty ; but as they admitted that it contained no 
heresies, the king said, Then, in God's name, let 
it go abroad among my people. An order was 
soon after issued out that every church should be 
furnished with one of these Bibles." 



THE ENGLISH BIBLE. 



21 



: " It was wonderful," says Strype, "to see with 
what joy this book of God was received, not only 
among the more, learned sort, and those that were 
noted as lovers of the Reformation, but generally 
all England over, among all the vulgar and com- 
mon people ; and with what greediness God's 
word was read,' and what resort there was to 
places where it was read. Every body that could, 
bought the book and busily reacf it, or got others 
to read it to them if they could not themselves ; 
and divers elderly people learned to read on pur- 
pose ; and even little boys flocked among the rest 
to hear portions of the holy Scriptures read." 

One William Maldon mentions, that when the 
king had allowed the Bible to be set forth to be 
read in the churches, immediately several poor 
men in the town of Chelmsford, in Essex, where 
his father lived, and he was born, bought the 
New Testament, and on Sundays sat reading it 
in the lower end of the church. Many would 
flock about them to hear their reading ; and he, 
among the rest, being then but fifteen years old, 
came every Sunday to hear the glad and sweet 
tidings of the gospel. But his father observing it 
once, angrily brought him away, and would have 
him say the Latin matins with him, which grieved 
him much. As he returned at other times to hear 



22 



THE HISTORY OF 



the scriptures read, his father still would bring 
him away. This put him upon the thought of 
learning to read English, that he might read the 
New Testament himself, which, when he had by 
diligence effected, he and his father's apprentice 
bought a New Testament, joining their stocks 
together, and to conceal it, laid it under the bed 
straw, and read it at convenient times. 

On the passing of the act of Parliament before 
mentioned, in 1546, prohibiting Coverdale's Bible, 
the following singular note was made by a poor shep- 
herd in a spare leaf of Polydore Yirgil's work on the 
Invention of Things, printed by Grafton, 1546. 

" At Oxforde the yere 1546, broivt doivn to 
Seynbury by John Darby e, pryce lid. When I 
kepe Mr. Letymer's shepe I bout thys boke ivhen 
the Testament ivas obberagatyd that shepherdys 
might not red hit, I pray God amende that 
Uyndness. Writ by Robert Wilyams keppynge 
%hepe upon Seynbury hill, 1546." 

Henry VIII. dying in January, 1547, was suc- 
ceeded by his son, Edward VI. The young king 
favored the Reformation, and repealed the acts 
which prohibited the translation of the scriptures. 
During his short reign all persons were allowed 
the use of translations. New editions were pub- 
lished, and copies placed in the churches. Every 



THE ENGLISH BIBLE. 



23 



ecclesiastical person under the degree of bachelor 
of divinity was enjoined to provide a New Tes- 
tament in Latin and English, with the para- 
phrase of Erasmus ; and G ardiner, bishop of Win- 
chester, was committed to the Fleet for refusing 
compliance, and at length deprived of his bishop- 
ric. • • 

Among many who glorified God by suffering 
martyrdom in the reign of Q,ueen Mary, Joan 
Waste, a poor woman, deserves never to be for- 
gotten. Though blind from her birth, she- learned* 
at an early age, to knit stockings and sleeves, and 
to assist her father in the business of rope-making, 
and always discovered the utmost aversion to 
idleness or sloth. After the death of her parents, 
she lived with her brother, and by daily attend- 
ance at church, and hearing divine service read 
in the vulgar tongue, during the reign of king 
Edward, became deeply impressed with religious 
principles. This rendered her desirous of possess- 
ing the word of God ; so that at length, having 
by her labor earned and saved as much money as 
would purchase a New Testament, she procured 
one ; and as she could not read it herself, got 
others to read it to her, especially an old man 
seventy years of age, a prisoner for debt in the 
common hall at Derby, and clerk of the parish, 



24 



THE HISTORY OF 



who read a chapter to her almost every day. She 
would also, sometimes give a penny or two, as 
she could spare, to those who would not read to 
her without pay. By these means she became 
well acquainted with the New Testament, and 
could repeat many chapters without hook ; and 
daily increasing in sacred knowledge, exhibited 
its influence in her life, till, when she was about 
twenty-two years of age, she was condemned for 
not believing the doctrine of transubstantiation, 
and burned at Derby, August 1, 1546. 

TRANSLATIONS SUBSEQUENT TO CRANMER'S. 

During Mary's reign, the Gospellers, as the 
Reformers were then called, fled abroad, and a 
new translation of the Scriptures into English 
appeared at Geneva, of which the New Testa- 
ment was published in 1557. This is the first 
New Testament in English, with the distinction 
of verses by numerical figures. 

"When Elizabeth acceded to the throne in 1558, 
she was indirectly requested, at her coronation, to 
countenance a translation, the Bible being pre- 
sented to her hi the procession, which she accept- 
ed with great appearance of gratitude and ven- 
eration ; and the bishops were soon afterwards 
appointed to prepare a translation. 



THE ENGLISH BIBLE . 



25 



In 1560 the whole Bible, in quarto, was printed 
at Geneva by Rowland Harte — some of the Eng- 
lish refugees continuing in that city solely for this 
purpose. 

An act of parliament was passed in England 
for a translation of the Bible in Welsh, of which 
the New Testament was printed in 1567; the 
whole Bible appeared in 1588. 

In 1568 Archbishop Parker's English transla- 
tion appeared ; this is called the Bishop's Bible. 
' The Roman Catholic Rhemish Testament was 
published in 1582. Their Douay Old Testament 
appeared in two quarto volumes ; the former in 
1609, and the other in 1610. "Nor were they 
ashamed to confess, that we forced them to trans- 
late the Scriptures into English against their 
wills." 

KING JAMES' TRANSLATION, OR THE PRESENT 
RECEIVED VERSION. 

In 1604, King James L, in consequence of a 
request made by Dr. Reynolds, the head of the 
Non-conformist party, at a conference held at 
Hampton Court in 1603, appointed fifty- four learn- 
ed persons, chosen from both universities, to make 
a new and more correct translation. Seven of 
these probably either declined the work from dif- 
fidence, or were prevented engaging in it by death, 



26 



THE HISTORY O'F 



as only forty-seven appear in the list of translators. 
The translation was begun in 1607, and completed 
in 1611. Seven of the translators were created 
bishops in a few years. " Blessed be they, and 
most honored be their name, that break the ice 
and give the first onset upon that which helpeth 
forward to the saving of souls." 

Thus, after the lapse of almost one hundred 
years from the first appearance of the English 
printed Scriptures by the labors of Tyndal, we 
are come to the present authorized version, of 
which it has been remarked, that " it is the birth- 
right of our numerous ^population, and has proved 
the means of knowledge, holiness, and joy to mill- 
ions ; and we trust it is destined, for ages yet to 
come, to be the glory of the rich, and the inher- 
itance of the poor — the guide to the way-worn 
pilgrim, and the messenger of peace to many a 
dying sinner." 

REFLECTIONS. 

I. How thankful should ive be for this un- 
speakable gift. But, as Tyndal said, " Thoughe 
a man hadde a precyous jewel, and a ryche, yet 
yf he wist not the value thereof, nor wherfore it 
served, he were neyther the better nor rycher of 
a strawe." 



TH'E ENGLISH BIBLE. 



2 7 



Millions of the i till abit ants of this country, in 
the ages of popish darkness, died without the sight 
of a Bible. "Translation it is that openeth the 
window to let in the light ; that breaketh the 
shell, that we may eat the kernel ; that putteth 
aside the curtain, that we may look into the most 
holy place ; that moveth the cover of the well, 
that we may come by the water, even as Jacob 
rolled away the stone from the mouth of the well, 
by which means the flocks of Laban were water- 
ed. The present age may be denominated the 
age of Bibles. The efforts which are now making 
for the universal circulation of the Scriptures in- 
spire all good men with hope and joy. Great 
opposition should be expected : and we rejoice with 
trembling, when we think of the awful weight of 
responsibility which must attach to those who are 
so highly privileged. 

II. JV e should inquire diligently whether ice 
maize the proper use of this holy book. Let the 
reader examine himself. 

1. The Bible was given, that we may form just 
conceptions of the object of worship. As I see the 
sun by its own light, do I in God's light see God ? 

2. The Bible was given, that we may have be- 
fore us the rule of duty. " He hath showed thee, 

* Preface by King James' translators. 



28 • : the history of r 

0 man, what is good." Micali 6:8. Does my 
conscience bear witness that this is my rule, not 
only in worship, but in buying and selling, and in 
every part of my conduct? 

3. The Bible was given, that perishing sinners, 
who deserve to perish, may learn the way of sal- 
vation. Jesus proclaims — may his words be trans- 
lated speedily into all languages — "I am the way, 
and the truth, and the life; no man cometh unto 
the Father, but by me." John 14 : 3. Am I 
walking in this way ? Have I seen and felt the 
necessity of his atoning sacrifice ? Is it the foun- 
tain in which I daily wash ? Is my conscience 
purified by the sprinkling of that blood ? Do I, 
renouncing every other hope, esteem his obedi- 
ence and sufferings as the garments of salvation ? 
Zechariah 13:1; Hebrews 9:14; 12 : 24 ; Isa- 
iah 61 : 10. 

4. The Bible was given, that mourners may be 
comforted in this vale of tears. It is like the 
spring that Hagar saw in the wilderness. It has 
revived many who were ready to perish. Can I 
truly adopt the prophet's language ? " Thy words 
were found, and I did eat them , and thy word 
was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart." 
Jer. 15 : 16. 

5. The Bible was given, that we may be slim- 



THE ENGLISH BIBLE. 



29 



ulated by the purest and brightest examples. Jas. 
5 : 10 ; 1 Cor. 11 : 1; 1 Pet. 2 : 21. Are these 
the patterns I am daily copying; and, above all, 
do I set the Lord Jesus always before me? 

6. The Bible was given to arm us against all 
our spiritual enemies. Am I daily using this 
sword of the Spirit ? Or am I utterly a stranger 
to the word of God in this view of it ? 
; 7. The Bible was given to conduct us to the 
full enjoyment of the supreme good. Have I con- 
sidered, that if this be the map of the road to the 
heavenly Canaan, I cannot travel securely and 
comfortably without it ? 

Read with reverence. For the contents are, in 
many places, profoundly mysterious. " I adore," 
said Tertullian, " the fulness of Scripture." " Men 
we are all," said Archbishop Parker, "and all that 
which we know is not the thousandth part of that 
we know not." 

Read with interest, as if no one before you had 
read ; or as a young man reads his father's last 
will and testament. 

Read with gratitude. What shall we render 
to the Lord for a Bible inspired by the Holy 
Spirit — completed by slow degrees, at sundry 
times, from Moses the prophet to John the apos- 
tle, during the lapse of more than a thousand 



30 



THE HISTORY OF 



years— preserved so long, while multitudes of an- 
cient books are lost ; translated into our language 
by learned and faithful men, with the hazard, if 
not the sacrifice of their own lives ; printed with 
great labor and accuracy, and published for the 
benefit of the poor ? 

Head v/ith diligence. Many read who do not 
search the Scriptures. We are required to imitate 
those who dig for hidden treasures. Proverbs 
2 : 1-6. "Let the word of Christ dwell in you 
richly." Colos. 3 : 16. 

Read with constancy. We should value the 
word of God, as Job did, more than our necessary 
food which we eat every day. Job 23 : 12. The 
Bereans are commended for searching the Scrip- 
tures daily. 

Head with 'prayer. " Open thou mine eyes," 
said David, " that I may behold wondrous things 
out of thy law. -I am a stranger in the earth; 
hide not thy commandments from me." Psalm 
119 : 18, 19. 

Finally, read with a 'practical purpose. Not 
merely for speculation, amusement, or debate, but 
that you may have a lantern to your path ; that 
you may cleanse your way ; that you may be fur- 
nished for every good word and work. Thus the 
encouraging oracle speaks : "To him that ordereth 



81 



THE 



ENGLISH BIBLE. 



31 



his conversation aright, will I show the salvation 
of God." Psalm 50 : 23. 

III. Hoiv zealous should ice he to promote the 
knoivledge of this blessed book among oar fellow- 
sinners, to the utmost of our ability and' oppor- 
tunity . 

1 . It is a book that speaks to ail men through 
the world. " He that is ignorant," says Cranmer, 
" shall find there what he should learn. He that 
is a perverse sinner, shall there find what should 
make him tremble for fear. He that laboreth to 
serve God, shall find there his glory and the pro- 
missions of eternal life, exhorting him more dili- 
gently to labor. Herein may princes learn how to 
govern their subjects — subjects, obedience to their 
princes. Husbands, how they should behave them 
unto their wives, how to educate their children 
and servants.; and contrary, the wives, children, 
and servants may know their duty to their hus- 
bands, parents, and masters. Here may all man- 
ner of persons, men, women, young, old, learned, 
unlearned, rich, poor, priests, laymen, lords, ladies, 
officers, tenants, and mean men, virgins, wives, 
widows, lawyers, merchants, artificers, husband- 
men, and all manner of persons, of what estate or 
condition soever — they may here, in this book, 
leam all things which they ought to believe, what 



32 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH BIBLE 

tliey ought to do, and what they should not do, as 
well concerning Almighty God, as also concerning 
themselves and all others." 

2. Multitudes of our fellow-sinners are perishing 
for want of it. The plentiful benefits we have 
found will suffice for them also. Shall we not, 
then, publish the good news ? - The four lepers 
at the gate of Samaria said, one to another, " We 
do not well ; this day is a day of good tidings, and 
we hold our peace." 2 Kings, 7:9. 

3. If in this cause we be supine, God will be 
angry, and our ingratitude will be punished with 
a severity proportioned to the aggravations of our 
guilt. "Will not Jesus say again, " I tell you, that 
if these should hold their peace, the stones would 
immediately cry out ?" Luke 19 : 40. 

4. Let us often think, if Wickliffe and Tyndal 
and Luther and Cranmer were now living, and 
blest with our advantages, how they would bestir 
themselves in this good work. They would not 
rest till they had filled every street in every city 
with the light of these heavenly lamps. They 
would not rest till they saw the light spreading in 
all directions, so as to form one glorious blaze of 
illumination to the honor of God in this dark 
world. 



> 



LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



1 






ill Hi 1 








020 511 


' 19: 


L 5 | 



