
---Ba^atyi 



J^' 



.-^^ 



<:^^^i^-r- 



HOPE FOR THE HOPELESS 



AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY 



OF 



JOHN VINE HALL, 



VUTHOR 0¥ ''THE SINKER'S FRIEND." 



EDITED BY 

KEY. NEWMAN HALL, LL.B 

OF SUEEEY CHAPEL, LONDON. 



ABRIDGED WITH THE AUTHOR'S SANCTION. 




PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU-STEEET, NEW YOEK. 



\ Hz/)3 



The Rev. Newman Hall, successor of Eo^iand HiU in Sur- 
rey cliapel, London, committed the English edition of this 
work, comprising nearly five hundred pages, to the American 
Tract Society, to be abridged as judged best for its ^\ddest 
usefulness. It has been curtailed by omitting Mr. Yine Hall's 
more extensive records of his labors for criminals and prison- 
ers and of his applying Perkins' electric or "metalhc trac- 
tors " for the rehef of suffering, and by dropping many of his 
letters and sundry other details. 

The Adtal aim to strengthen the gi'eat principles of the 
Temperance Reformation, in the origin of which he was in- 
deed "a burning and a shining hght," sometimes presenting 
himself to assembled thousands as oue hopelessly lost, but res- 
cued by Divine gi'ace from the depths of ruin ; and his aim 
to magnify that gTace in the writing and marvellous success 
of "The Sinner's Friend," have been scrupulously cherished 
and sacredly regarded. 



TO THE AMERICAN READER. 



On the lip of the Mediterranean, in an obscure street, stands 
a small, gloomy chapel. In itself uninteresting, it attracts multi- 
tudes of pilgrims from all quarters of the world, and of all sects. 
The secret of its attractiveness is, that it enshrines three pieces of 
unique and beautiful statuary, each of Hfe size, and of exquisite 
workmanship. So liighlj^" are they esteemed as specimens of art, 
that their weight in silver coin, it is said, has been offered for 
their purchase. 

The subject rei3resented by one of these is a dead Christ, just 
taken from the cross. The anatomy of the figure perfect ; the 
expression in the features of placid and grateful repose, blended 
strangely with the traces of recent agony, wonderfully impressive ; 
the whole covered with a veil, but figure and veil alike chiselled 
from the same block of marble. 

Another figure, which is specially to the present pui^pose, and 
which is also created from an entire block, represents a young 
man enveloped by a net. Despair and hope are as mysteriously 
blended in this countenance as are repose and agony in the other. 
The captive is in the act of struggling for escape. Every nerve is 
strained. He has grappled frantically with his toils, and one or 
two of the meshes have given way. But behind him, away from 
his line of vision, stands his guardian angel, now acting as his 
helper. His agency is unsuspected, but real ; and every spectator, 
sympathizing with the captive of vice, exclaims unawares, "He 
will get free ! " 

What is thus beautifully symbolized in the sombre chapel of 
Naples, is shown as a reahty in the book here presented. The pit- 
iless tyranny of the giant vice of our day; the horror and despera- 
tion of one conscious at last of the power that enthralls him ; his 
wild struggles for deliverance ; his despair alternating i;\dth hope '; 
his sinking faintness; his rallying resolution, his discouragements, 



4 TO THE AMEEICAN EEADEK. 

Ins relapses, his impotence, his helpers — are all depicted to the life 
iu the marble group and in the Avritten book. 

But here the parallel ends. The emblem culminates in the 
presence of the angel and the heginning of emancipation. But the 
book portrays the efficiency of the angel : the success, the exulta- 
tion, the clustering fruits of emancipation, perennial through a 
long and peaceful life. The emblem is rich ; the reality richer. 
The emblem, though touch i ugly suggestive, is mute ; the reality, 
eloquent. The one is marble ; the other, Hfe. In that the artist 
bespeaks your pity and sympathy for another; inthis, the freed- 
man tells you of himself. You have the record of his experience, 
the burning words -^vrung from his ovra heart, his quivering notes 
of thanksgiving, his fervid ascriptions of " Grace, grace!" his sad 
analysis of the thi-aldom, his subdued rapture of dehverance. And 
he also tells you, modestly but truthfully, oi the blessed usefulness 
to which one maybe raised even from the very mii-e and impotence 
of hopeless degradation. 

Many hints are incidentally given in these pages by which, if 
our Temperance Volunteers vriil seize upon and ponder them, they 
will be the better equipped and the better skilled for theii- heroic 
warfare. May God grant it ; for if any soldiery need discretion 
as well as valor, surely and eminently do they. 

A word to those who are in the net. A word ! No. Before 
him who though dead yet speaketh, the writer will be dumb. AVe 
only commend his words. They echo to your esperience. They 
breathe the sympathy of a true heart for your sadness and your 
condition. They are big mth hope. 'V\Tien you have read them, 
hope you must, hope you icill And then — and then ? Act on hope ? 
Some angel — perhaps unseen — icUl stand near to help. God will 
provide. 



PREFACE 



This book is a genuine autobiography. The manu- 
script was so carefully written, that, scarcely a word 
needed correction, and I have abstained from editorial 
comments. My work has been simply that of selecting, 
from fourteen closely written large quarto volumes, those 
portions which I thought most likely to interest the 
reader, to illustrate impartially the character of the auto- 
biographer, and to accomplish his main object in writing. 

If any reader should censure me for making the 
book too large, he might, could he see the quantity of 
material before me, give me some credit for self-restraint 
in publishing so little. 

The repetition towards the end of the diary niay 
appear tedious, but it is a faithful representation of the 
habitual character of the autobiographer's penitence, 
gratitude, and zeal, and may be a useful lesson of " pa- 
tient continuance in well-doing." 

I hope I shall be excused for having inserted a few 
out of many references to myself. To have excluded 
the whole would have been an affectation of modesty on 
my part, and would have implied an unnatural omission 
on that of my father. 

If any reader is surprised that a son should publish 
a record of painful circumstances which haK a century 
of godliness and philanthropy had obliterated from the 
memory of every one but the father who wrote it, my 



6 PREFACE. 

reply is, that the very love and reverence I cherish tow- 
ards that father demand, at any cost of personal feel- 
ing, the fulfilment of his own long cherished purpose. 
He often spoke of his diary, intimating that after his 
death it would be made public. It bears internal evi- 
deiice of this intention. On several occasions he sol- 
emnly intrusted the task to myself. Having undertaken 
it at all, I was bound to execute it so as to accomplish 
his own object. All who knew him and all who read 
his autobiography must feel that this object, during 
nearly fifty years, was, by his own history, to magnify 
the mercy of God in the salvation of sinners. Knowing 
him only after his great deliverance, I feel pained in per- 
petuating a record of what is so contrary to the idea of 
him with which alone I am familiar. But no personal 
considerations would have justified the omission, or even 
the softening down of his own language, in relation to 
his earlier life. Moreover, as with the biographies of 
the Bible, the record of the faults of God's saints is not 
the least profitable element in their history. 

May he who during life was made so useful to mul- 
titudes, and who " being dead, yet speaketh," still, by 
the Divine blessing on this autobiography, encourage 
. desponding sinners to trust in the sinner's Friend, and 
stimulate many professed Christians to a life of more 
fervent love to God and more habitual zeal in his service. 

NEWMAN HALL. 

Hampstead, (near London,) Feb. 1, 1865. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

INCIDENTS OF LIFE TILL HIS MARRIAGE. 

Providential escapes. Youtliful dissipation. Infidelity. Settle- 
ment at Worcester. Courtship and marriage 11 

CHAPTER II. 

CONFLICT AND DEFEAT. 

Smoke-sliops. Appeal of conscience. Ruin. Imtemperance, 
"Lucky escape." Penitence. Death of his mother. Member of 
the Methodist church. Trustee and treasurer. Public prayer and 
exhortation. Fall. Christian charity. Recovery. Repeated falls. 
Self-abhorrence. Wrestling in prayer. In the gulf 37 

CHAPTER III. 

CONFLICT AND VICTORY. 

Temptation resisted. Sermon by Dr. Adam Clarke. Eeturn to 
Maidstone. Eelapse. Power of tenderness. The verge of de- 
spair. Alternations of success and failure. A ray of hope. Hope ; 
help; defeat. Desperate resolve. Falling and repenting. Fallen 
again. Elvers of tears. Spirituous liquors abandoned. Strength 
and joy. Liberation. Divine grace large and free. Family wor- 
ship. Porter dangerous ; abandoned. The last evil leaven re- 
jected. Sad remembrances - 51 

CHAPTER IV. 

EMANCIPATION. 

Peace of mind. Fate of early companions. Thanksgivings. 
Temptations. Grateful review. Precious blessings. All of grace. 
Helping a fellow-sinner. The rewards of kindness 85 



8 CONTENTS. 

CHAPTEE Y. 

* "THE SIXNEE'S FEIEXD." 

Origin of "The Sinner's Friend." First edition of one thou- 
sand. Sowing seed. Second edition of two thousand. The seed 
taking root. The dumb woman. The prison chaplain. The Wa- 
terloo veteran and Lord E . Eighth edition of "The Sinners 

Friend." Tenth and eleventh editions. Fifteenth and twentieth 
editions. "Welsh edition. Tahitian edition. The seed broadcast 
99 

CHAPTEE YI. 

''WISDOM'S PATHS PEACE." 
Daily conflicts. Gratitude to God. Indwelling sin. Study of 
the Bible. Isms. Happier than a king. Eev. H. Townley. 
Temptations. Joy for emancipation. Wine "disgusting." Chris- 
tian affinity ; or interview with the Earl of . Joyous pride. 

Deliverance from frightful temptation. Old kindnesses repaid. 
Wedding anniversary. A despaii'ing deist. Prisoners raised to 
usefulness. Suffering and hope for inebriates. Joyous reunion 
- '- 118 

CHAPTEE YII. 

"WHO MAKETH THEE TO DIFFEE?"- 

Dangerous illness. Wine, as medicine, refused. A trip to 
France. Forty years ago, and now. Old companions. To the 

Hon. S. T . Why grace for me ? Precious fruits from ' ' The 

Sinner's Friend." An old companion saved. Eich results of to- 
tal abstinence. Mr. Williams the missionary. Deep sense of sins. 
God oui- refuge and strength - - - - -- 137 

CHAPTEE Yni. 

''BEIXGING IX SHEAVES." 

Spiritual Joy. Sixty-sixth birthday. Ovei-whelming gratitude. 
Wonderful grace. Usefulness of "The Sinner's Friend." Public 

testimony to God's grace. Grateful reminiscences. To Col. H . 

The fiddler of every pai'ty. " The Sinner's Friend " at Jerasalem, 
and in France. Papal edict. "The Sinner's Friend" in Ger- 
many ; in Eussia. Increasing circulation of it. Christ precious. 



CONTENTS. 9 

Twenty-five years a Eechabite. Bemarkable answer to prayer. 
Blessings of total abstinence. ' ' Wonderful escape " 152 

■-OHAPTEE IX. 

CONTENT. 

" Tbe Sinner's Friend " in Greek ; in Earatonga. Doctors Kaf- 
fles and Harris. Albion chapel. Hull. In cottages. In the 
docks. Buoyant at seventy. Missionaries from Tabiti. Tearful 
gratitude and joy. "What I was, and what I am." To his son 
Newman. Poor Okill. Bible studies. Bunyan and Newton. Dr. 
Malan. To his son Arthur. Letter from the queen. Dr. Gor- 
don. Pleasing incidents. To daughter Eleanor 170 

CHAPTER X. 

SERENE AGE. 

Alone, and not alone. Eightieth year. K-eoeption by the arch- 
bishop of Canterbury. Blessings inward and outward. Eemoval 
to London. The negro Christian. Wealth "more than ever." 
"The Sinner's Friend" in Chinese. An old companion. Won- 
der, love, and praise. Visit to the archbishop. Sad memories ; 
pleasant ones. Mercies recounted. Trip to Wales. Mutiny in 
India. Address at Surrey chapel. Forty years' total abstinence. 
Then and now. The Great Eastern. Marriage of his son. Last 
sickness and death - - 202 

CHAPTEE XI. 

FILIAL EEMINISCENCES BY THE EDITOE. 

Pleasant companion. Courage. Diligence in business. Punc- 
tuality. Caution. Maxims. As a deacon. Generosity. Tender- 
ness. As a son. As a father. Sunday evening at home. Long 
conflict between conversion and triumph over besetting sin. Ar- 
gument for total abstinence. Answers to prayer. His Christi- 
anity charitable, humble, and zealous. His monument — - 244 



JOHN VINE HALL.* 



CHAPTEK I. 

INCIDENTS OF LIFE TILL HIS MAEEIAGE. 

A. D. 1774 TO 1806, AGE 32, 

SuKEOUNDED HOW — 1820 — witli every blessing, 
my mind is led to contrast present happiness with 
past trials, and to reflect on tlie manifold wisdom 
of God in his dealings towards me. The great 
scroll of Providence has been gradually unfolding 
from my birth to the present hour. 

I am now seated as master of that house in 
which as a hoj I occupied the lowest place. I was 
of a willing disposition, and desirous to please 
everybody. God blessed my endeavors, and in turn 
everybody became pleased with "little Jack." In 
the course of time I became more useful, and 
drudgery work was conferred on another. I con- 

* Jolm Vine Hall was born at Diss, in Norfolk, England, March 
14, 1774, and died 1860, in his 87th year. His father faihng in 
business, "Little Jack," at twelve years of age, was sent to earn 
his own bread as an errand-boy in the shop of Mr. M , a sta- 
tioner and wine-merchant at Maidstone. The body of the volume 
consists of his own records of his history, the closing chajpter be- 
ing a summary view of his life and character by the editor, Eev. 
Newman Hall. 



12 JOHN VINE HALL. 

tinued to rise step after step, but tlirough scenes of 
wickedness of eyerj description, till my heart be- 
came changed and filled with desire^ to love and 
honor that God whose lay/s I had set at defiance. 
Oh the depths of the mercy of God to sinners, even 
if their sins have been red as crimson, for mine 
were surely such ; and yet I have been restored 
through Jesus Christ, who has indeed "redeemed 
my life from destruction, and crowned me with lov- 
ing kindness and tender mercies." 

Indeed I may well say that God himseK hath 
saved my Hfe from absolute destruction, when I 
record the following accidents which have abeady 
happened to me, although I have doubtless been 
preserved by the same invisible hand from a far 
greater number of unseen dangers. 

When about four years old, I fell through the 
ice upon a small river, at Gissing, in Norfolk, but 
was rescued fi'om death. About the same time a 
horse I was playing with in a field kicked me in the 
stomach and threw me into the air, but did me no 
other injury than a few bruises. When eight years 
of age, I got a horse out of my father's stable, 
mounted his bare back, and stood my brother Jo- 
seph up before me, he being only four years old. 
In this manner we were suffered to proceed several 
miles. When turning the horse to return home, he 
set off at fuU gallop. My brother fell off first and 
was taken up for dead, and I was pitched upon my 
left shoulder and taken up with my left arm broken. 

The next year — 1783 — ^I was playing with other 
boys in a loft, and trying to jump across a large space 



LIFE TO HIS MAKEIAGE. 13 

in the floor, I fell to tlie ground below, and my head 
was thrown with great violence against the edge of 
a sharp flint- stone, which sunk into my forehead 
close over my left eye, and made a dreadful wound. 
I was taken up for dead, but I recovered after a 
long illness, retaining a scar which forms a very 
prominent feature in my countenance, to keep me 
in remembrance of the mercy of God. But as I was 
a sadly wicked boy, these great escapes had no 
effect whatever to make me better. I was become 
so notoriously bad, that when any mischief was per- 
petrated, all the neighbors would cry out, " Ah, it is 
done by that v/icked boy. Vine Hall." 

"When I had attained my eleventh year, my fa- 
ther put me apprentice to Mr. G , a schoolmas- 
ter, who taught me to write the law hands, and by 
way of making the most of me, hired me to the then 
clerk of the peace. Going one morning to the office, 
my attention was attracted by some birds' nests in 
the elm-trees. I soon climbed up and made myself 
master of the eggs, which I placed in my moiith 
and began to descend; but a bough gave way, and 
I fell on some spiked palings below, which pressed 
hard into my loins, and I was suspended for a coh- 
siderable time, till the agony I endured was so great, 
that by a violent effort I threw myself off the pales 
upon the ground, where I lay for haK an hour un- 
able to move. 

"While engaged in the office of Mr. P , I was 

sent all kinds of errands, many of which were to the 

shop of Mr. M , stationer and wine-merchant. 

It so happened that at Christmas, 1785, my master 



14 JOHN VINE HALL. 

failed, aud in couseqiience I was sent home. Soon 
after, a letter was received by my father . from Mr. 
M , stating that he had before written two let- 
ters to know whether he would Kke his Httle boy to 
be an errand-boy in his shop, and if so, to send him 
down to Maidstone by the first coach. This thu'd 
letter being the fii'st my father had received, he hur- 
ried me off in an instant, on Tuesday, January 24, 
1786, and here commenced that good fortune which, 
under the direction of heayen, has followed me ever 
since. But to return to absolute accidents. 

In the summer of 1798, 1 was one evening return- 
ing in a boat by myself from " Gibraltar," a tea- 
drinking house on the Medway, about a mile below 
Maidstone. I pushed the boat along by means of 
a single oar. Coming to where the water was deep- 
er, I put the oar into the water as before, leaning 
upon it with all my might, supposing it would be 
sure to reach the bottom ; but here I was terribly 
mistaken, and I plunged head foremost into fifteen 
feet water. Down I went, and up I came again. 
Down I went again, and the sudden effect of the 
first plunge being a Httle over, I began to swim for 
my hfe, and reached the shore in safety, with only 
the loss of my hat. 

About five years afterwards, two porters were 
putting dov^Ti a hogshead of wine into my cellar, 
the steps of which were exceedingly steep. I de- 
sired them to stop till I had gone down to place 
straw at the bottom in case of accidents. TThile 
there, my leg being between the two sides of the 
pulley, and an iron bar being close behind the calf 



LIFE TO HIS MAEEIAGE. 15 

of my leg, a voice called out, "Take care." On 
looking up I saw the hogsliead of wine descending 
with the utmost rapidity, the men having lost their 
hold. Through the mercy of God I extricated my 
leg in the twinkling of an eye, and before I had time 
to breathe, the cask passed close to my stomach 
and tore its way through the straw to the floor. 
Had my leg been in the least entangled, or had I 
been a single moment later in jumping from be- 
tween the pulley, I should have been thrown upon 
my back, my leg torn to pieces, and the weight of 
the cask would have stripped my face completely 
off, from the chin to the forehead. 

In the same year, riding in a gig from Worces- 
ter to Malvern "Wells, the horse started at full gal- 
lop, overturning the chaise, by which I was thrown 
out with great velocitj^, but was preserved from 
broken bones or severe bruises. On the 15th of 
November, 1810, at Kidderminster, it being tre- 
mendously dark, I was walking in a proper direc- 
tion towards the bridge, as I thought, but finding 
that the toe of my foot did not rest firmly on the 
ground, I bent forward to examine more closely into 
my situation, when I found that I had got* to the 
very farthest edge of a dipping-place in the side of 
the river, which at that time was swollen to the 
edge of the bank, from the quantity of rain that 
had lately fallen. Had I stepped only six inches 
further, I should ^lave been precipitated into a rapid 
stream, in total darkness, and lost for ever. But 
again that same invisible hand was stretched forth 
to give me renewed time for repentance. 



16 JOHX TINE HALL. 

On the 13tli of Marcli, 1811, 1 went to S , to 

visit Mr. B , and we drank so mucli wine, that 

I lost my recollection, and instead of returning into 
the house, I wandered down the hill amid the blaz- 
ing fires of the iron works, and the frightful coal- 
pits with which that country abounds. I wandered 
insensibly till I found myself rolling oyer and oyer 
down a precipice and was suddenly stopped by 
something. This brought me to a momentary rec- 
ollection, and I was struck yith the most incon- 
ceiyable terror on finding myself close to the edge 
of a deep canal. I lay motionless to sui*yey the 
danger and to study my escape, and I perceiyed 
that if I had rolled oyer only once more I should 
haye been plunged into a yery deep place, where 
the sides were bricked up perpendicularly, and thus 
my thirty -sixth bii'thday would haye commenced 
in eternity. I now began to consider how I should 
reascend the sloping bank, and I had sense enough 
left to be aware that if I offered to stand upon my 
feet, I should in all probability fall backwards into 
the water. I therefore turned gently round, so as 
to get my heels towards the canal, and by fixing my 
hands one after the other firmly into the gTound, I 
crawled gently up the steep, but more frightened 
than ever I had been in my Hfe, for I saw death so 
very close that even the rolling of a stone might 
have brought on destruction. The night was ex- 
ceedingly dark, and I began to recollect that I had 
passed the dangerous coal-pits in safety, but if I 
should attempt to return I might not be so fortu- 
nate. Next morning, on passing the place, I felt 



LIFE TO HIS MAEEIAGE. 17 

that nothing but an invisible hand had rescued me 

from death. When I arrived at Mr. B 's, I found 

that their fears on my account had been so great 
that they had employed a vast number of persons 
to go among the coal-pits, and also to search the 
coimtry round with lanterns, and had sat up all 
night with fearful apprehensions that I had fallen 
into one of the coal-mines, which are left so exposed 
that any straggling traveller, without being intoxi- 
cated, might unwarily fall into them. Some are five 
hundred feet deep. 

I was so stung with remorse at the grief which 
had been occasioned, that I took a hasty leave and 
returned to Worcester, with one of my usual deter- 
minations never to drink any wine again as long as 
I lived. But this resolution, like all the others 
which had been formed in my ow^n strength, gave 
way to the very next temptation that assailed me ; 
and one evening, as I was attempting to go down 
the wine-vault stairs, I fell from top to bottom in- 
stantaneously. The steps were almost perpendic- 
ular, and I pitched upon my head in the midst of 
three or four dozen bottles of wine, which were 
broken in all directions. But most providentially 
my hat remained firm upon my head, and none of 
the splinters were permitted to wound me. I lay 
some minutes after the fall to consider whether I 
was or was not dreadfully cut by the glass bottles ; 
and not feeling any pain or any moisture from the 
flowing of blood, I carefully extricated myself and 
regained the house. While I review these wonder- 
ful escapes, I would most humbly bow before that 



18 JOHN VINE HALL. 

aliniglitj Being whose saying power alone has 
effected these deliverances, and whose long suffer- 
ing has preserved me to be a monument of his 
great love. 

In early life I made several attempts to quit 
this house, iDut God overruled all my endeavors. 
At the age of seventeen, I fancied that the situation 
of a writer to an attorney would suit my purpose, 

and therefore I waited on Mr. B of Wrotham, 

but without success. I next turned my attention to 
the navy, and was on the point of engaging myself 
as clerk to Captain W 'of the Majestic, then fit- 
ting out as part of the Channel-fleet, under Lord 
Howe. But duty interposed. I found my mother 
had been pacing the room all night in distraction. 
She wept bitterly, and implored me not to leave 
her, for then all her comfort would be gone. My 
heart was melted, and the command, *' Honor thy 
father and thy mother," nished upon my mind. My 
resolution was immediately changed ; for although 
I was indifferent about rehgion, or rather, hated it, 
yet this commandment had long been impressed 
upon my mind so strongly, that I used to take hold 
of it as a kind of anchor, and say to myself, '' If I 
honor my poor mother, I shall be siu^e to do well." 
Thus I gave uj) all my airy schemes of becoming a 
purser of a man-of-war, and acquii'ing wealth to 
support my mother in her old age. But a gracious 
God had appointed other means by which I should 
j)erform that pleasing duty till her eyes were closed 
in death. 

Soon after, an anxious affair had very nearly 



LIFE TO HIS MASRIAGE. 19 

determined my fate. My mind had been so much 
harassed, that in an hour of phrensy I determined 
to enlist as a soldier. I packed up a small change 
of linen in a bundle, and putting a flute in my 
pocket, actually quitted the house without taking 
leave of any person, intending to go to Gravesend, 
where troops were embarking for India. Fully bent 
on my mad-brained scheme, I walked very rapidly 
till I began to ascend Boxley hill, when, becoming 
fatigued, I stopped to rest. I considered that I 
was flying from every prospect of doing well, and I 
was also deserting my poor mother, whose grey 
hairs would probably be brought with sorrow to 
the grave. While thus musing, the lines, "Turn 
again, Whittington," rushed forcibly on my mind, 
and although I thought it very foolish, yet I could 
not get rid of the impression. Blessed be God, I 
did turn again, and retracing my steps, reached 
home before my absence had been discovered. 
Thus was I again saved from inevitable ruin. 

My restless spirit, however, soon broke forth 
again, and my next effort was to obtain the situa- 
tion of quartermaster in the Fourteenth regiment 
of Dragoons. I qualified this attempt by thinking 
that I should be enabled to allow my mother some- 
thing comfortable out of my pay ; but my designs 
were frustrated by a new regulation, that the situa- 
tion should be filled by old sergeants only. From 
the respectability of my application, I was almost 
certain of being appointed, and some stress was laid 
upon my belonging to the Coxheath troop of yeo- 
manry cavalry, in which corps I had acquired a 



20 JOHN YIXE HALL. 

very expert use of tlie sword, so much so, that I 
frequently ofliciatecl as fiigleruan. 

It appeared unaccountable that I should be so 
restless, when I had every thing comfortable around 
me and was highly resT)ec'ced. My employer kept 
a horse on pm'pose for my use in the cayahy, of 
which he himself was also a member; and so mas- 
ter and servant frequently rode together through 
the street armed at all points. He also felt pleas- 
vjre in taking me with him to the weekly concerts, 
where I played principal flute, and sometimes ex- 
hibited my talents in performing a solo. But this 
talent was mischieyous, as it filled me with pride, 
and also drew me into evil company. Indeed at 
this time I was hying in all kinds of wickedness — a 
deist in principle and practice. Tolney's "Law of 
Nature" and Paine's "Age of Reason" were my 
favorite pocket companions, and I followed their 
pernicious precepts most faithfully. I was a truly 
jolly fellow, sitting up late at nights, either at cards 
or dancing, I had not then become intemperate in 
drinking, but in every thing else I was sensual and 
devihsh. 

At this time I belonged to a spouting society, 
and we became so pleased with oui' own perform- 
ances, that it was determined to fit up an old ware- 
house as a theatre, where it feU to my lot to per- 
form the part of Robin in "No Song, No Supper," 
and of Justice Mittimus in "The Tillage Lawyer." 
All things being prepared, a representation was 
announced, and tickets issued gratis, which brought 
a crowded audience, and we received great applause, 



LIFE TO HIS MAEEIAGE. 21 

particularly tlie female performers, wlio consisted of 
mantua-makers and milliners. On this occasion I 
began the folly by strutting through the prologue. 
There being a company of comedians in the town, 
performing at the public theatre, I was tempted by 
my own vanity, of which I had a large stock, and 
the entreaties of one of the performers, for his ben- 
efit, to undertake the part of Henry Y/oodville, in 
the "Wheel of Fortune;" upon which occasion the 
house was completely filled, and the applause award- 
ed me induced me to repeat the same folly. Most 
fortunately my theatrical mania now subsided, but 
not so my disposition to v/ander. 

A short time afterwards a new temptation as- 
sailed me, arising from a correspondence carried on 
between myself and the daughter of a clergyman at 

E , where my uncle resided as an apothecary. 

Nothing could serve my turn but to become a sur- 
geon; and for this purpose I furnished myself with 
a set of instruments, being resolved to reside with 
my uncle, so that I might be constantly near the 
object of my attentions. I now made sure of quit- 
ting a house where I had been fostered for eight 
years; yet my attempts were again frustrated by 
the lady herself giving me a formal notice to retreat, 
and make way for a gentleman who would be more 
attentive than I had latterly been. 

My ardor had akeady been a little damped from 
the following circumstance : A poor cottager, resid- 
ing about tv/o miles from E , had, through sick- 
ness, been unable to make his payments in proper 
time ; so his only bed had been taken from him by 



22 JOHN VINE HALL. 

his creditors, and deposited for security in a farm- 
liouse. His wife and children had now no other 
place for repose than a cold brick floor. I hap- 
pened at this time to be on a -visit to my uncle, and 
the story having reached my ears, and my heart 
also, I was on the tiptoe to render assistance. I 
remonstrated with the creditor, and obtained his 
consent that the bed should be restored, which gave 
me so much delight, that my feet were instantly 
dh-ected towards the farm-house where the bed was 
deposited. So gTeat was my eagerness, that I quite 
overlooked an engagement to meet the lady at noon, 
and instead of spending two or three hours in an 
unprofitable manner, I trudged away to be a mes- 
senger of comfort. The farmer had no servants at 
home to convey the bed to the poor family; there- 
fore, full of youthful ardor, I took it on my back, 
and after toiling with gTeat pleasure upwards of a 
mile and a half, along a dii^ty road and under a 
pleasant perspiration, I found the cottager's abode. 
It was a miserable hovel indeed. I did not stay to 
knock, but opened the door without ceremony, and 
> found a poor sickly woman, with two small children, 
sitting before a few embers, in a state of wretched- 
ness. The poor woman was speechless with sur- 
prise as I dragged the bed through the narrow door- 
way; but a gTateful smile illuminated her haggard 
countenance when I told her that the creditor had 
relented, and would not trouble her husband again. 
Having endeavored to cheer her sxDiiits, I threw five 
shillings into the poor creature's lap and took my 
leave, not a little pleased with my adventure. I 



LIFE TO HIS MAEKIAGE. 23 

now hastened to the waiting lady to account for my 
breach of promise. I was so well pleased with my 
own conduct that I thought every person would be 
the same, and particularly the lady in question; 
but to my great mortification, she did not approve 
of my having forfeited my word, even upon such an 
interesting occasion. From that moment I began 
to cool, and at length I received a point-blank dis- 
charge for neglect— a happy discharge for me. The 
new lover soon became cool also, and left the lady 
in the lurch; but she was afterwards married to a 
respectable surveyor in London. I now gave up 
all thoughts of physic, and returned once more to 
business. 

My next attempt to quit the counter seemed to 
promise a greater prospect of success than any pre- 
vious effort. I had imbibed a strong desire to be- 
come a clerk in the Bank of England. I v^^aited on 

Mr, B , a director, and was received with special 

kindness, but gladly returned to the work which I 
had so proudly sneered at, for I considered tlie sal- 
ary of <£50 to be very inadequate to the security 
required. This was X2,000; and though I had no 
relatives to help me, my character stood so high in 

the estimation of Mr. S of Maidstone, that he 

nobly came forward as my bondsman for the whole 
amount. I returned to my old quarters with a new 
resolution to be contented; and when my employer 
inquired if I was going to the Bank of England, I 
replied that " I had been to London to find out that 
I was better off in the country." 

I went on in a most dangerous course for the 



24 JORX TIXE HALL. 

next seven years, not iiayiug tlie fear of God before 
mj eyes, and spending tlie Sunday with other riot- 
ous young men who, hke myself, with good charac- 
ters for integrity, were in the constant practice of 
immoraht3\ Frequently I did not enter a place of 
worship for months. Instead of looking into any 
rehgious book on Sunday, I amused myself with 
Paine's "Age of Season," or Macleod's "Answer to 
the Apology for the Bible." I felt great pleasure 
in these dreadful pubhcations, therefore treated the 
Bible as a "cunningly devised fable." I not only 
read these books myself, but preached them to 
others. Oh what an astonishing wonder that a holy 
God did not consign. ma to perdition! 

During all these seven years I was a member of 
the Coxheath yeomamy cavalry, and was not a Ht- 
tle proud of being a soldier. I took gTeat pains in 
being well versed in the use of the sword; and hav- 
ing cherished Lord Chesterfield's maxim, that "if 
it is worth while to do any thing, it is worth while 
to do it as it should be," I was punctual in my 
attention to duty and cleanhness, and was often 
complimented on being one of the best soldiers in 
the troop. 

I was very regular at the business all the day, 
so that my employer left it entirely *to my care ; 
but my evenings were always spent in the company 
of careless young men like myself. If vre some- 
times went to chui'ch, it was more to see and be 
seen than fi'om any sense of rehgious duty. I well 
remember it once came into my head while at 
church, that I woidd endeavor to supj)ose myself in 



LIFE TO HIS MARKIAGE. 25 

the immediate presence of God, and try to worship 
him for once in sincerity, just to see how I should 
feel. I shut my eyes and went through part of the 
Litany in this manner, fancying that God stood be- 
fore my face. It was too much for me ; I could not 
endure it. The thought of being holy and giving, 
up my reigning lusts, or sink into hell, operated so 
powerfully upon my imagination, that I opened my 
eyes to get rid of the impression, and resolved never 
to try the same scheme again, but to go on as care- 
lessly as before. Thus I completely turned my back 
on this ray of conviction. 

I was blessed v/ith a disposition to do good to 
any person in distress, and also to forgive any one 
who had offended me. Indeed I was all on fire to 
do anybody service, no matter who. I thought that 
thus I should rub out bad practices, and make a 
kind of balance between good and evil. I totally 
discarded the idea that a merciful God would ever 
punish the frailties of human nature. Oh the de- 
ceitfulness of the heart ! 

Thus I murdered away seven years of my time 
in all manner of sin, and yet preserved a fair char- 
acter with the people of the world. Sitting one 

evening chatting with Mr. P , a wine-merchant, 

he unexpectedly said to me, "I wish you would 
come and live with me as my clerk," and named his 
salary, which was more than I had ever received. 
I now proposed to quit the scene of my boyish days ; 
and although I had many times before endeavored 
to change my situation, yet now that I was on the 
point of doing so, my feelings were so much excited 

John Vine Hall. 2 



26 JOHN VINE HALL. 

tliat I was very unwell for several days. But the 
pleasing liope of being enabled to render more 
assistance to my impoyerished mother operated as 
a powerful stimulus; and following the impulse of 
nature, aided by a sense of duty, I tore myseK away 
from the place in which I had remained from twelve 
years of age until I had nearly completed my twenty- 
seventh year. 

Kow commenced a course of life worse than ever. 
Public-houses of all descriptions were to be visited 
for my new employer at all hours, and where all 
sorts of vile and low company resorted. I blushed 
and shuddered at first; but the recollection that this 
was now my path of duty soon reconciled me. And 
yet I did not think so much of the evil connected 
with my situation as I did of my wounded pride in 
being obhged to enter the lowest kind of gin-shops 
to ask for orders. To commit sin in a cleanly man- 
ner was not in the least unpleasant to my feehngs ; 
but to be seen doing a dirty action was rather more 
than my pride could endm-e. But Oh what filthi- 
ness did I wallow in when the shades of night pre- 
vented the deeds of darkness being witnessed by my 
fellow-sinners. Had not the Almighty God prom- 
ised to turn the scarlet into snow and the crimson 
into wool, the very remembrance of the deprp.vity 
in which I then encouraged myself would annihilate 
every hope of mercy. But, blessed be His name, 
with him there is plenteous redemption. 

I was a deist in principle and in practice. Card- 
playing and singing foohsh songs were often my 
Simday amusement. I was so desperately hardened 



LIFE TO HIS MAERIAGE. 27 

tliat I could scarcely utter a sentence without mak- 
ing use of some blasphemous expression ; but I was 
never known to tell a lie. This was a meanness 
which I abhorred, and therefore I was always hon- 
ored with the title of an honest fellow, although at 
all times ready to join in revelry and dissipation. 
Little did I think that I should ever be brought to 
feel a burning and sincere affection towards that 
God whose written word I so lightly esteemed, and 
whose commands, except "Honor thy father and 
thy mother," my conduct openly defied. Yet I dare 
not say that conscience did not often accuse me, 
but my love of sin stopped my ears, so that I would 
not hear. 

My daring and open avowal of infidelity reached 
the ears of the Rev. Mr. Cole, curate of Maidstone 
at that time, 1802, and he requested me to read 
Porteus' "Evidences of Christianity.' I was quite 
indifferent about the subject; but Mr. Cole entreat- 
ed me vfith so much good-nature, that I deter- 
mined to read the book merely from complaisance. 
Through the infinite mercy of God, my eyes began 
to see what they had never seen before. I found 
that I had been led away by sophistry. I com- 
menced reading Porteus a second time, and became 
so fully convinced of the fallacy of Paine's "Age of 
Reason," that I took that infamous book from off 
the shelf and stamped upon it, denouncing the 
author as a liar. I then threw it into the fire, say- 
ing, " Go to the flames with you, Tom Paine; you've 
deceived me long enough ; you shall do so no lon- 
ger." One would naturally have thought that a 



28 JOHN VINE HALL. 

conviction so strong as this was would have pro- 
duced some alteration in my conduct, but this was 
reserved for a future day. 

My situation as a wine-merchant's clerk de- 
manded that I should be continually in company 
with persons who could drink and sing, and my 
inclinations were in unison with these circumstan- 
ces, although I never, at that time, indulged in pri- 
vate drinking ; but the vivacity of my nature made 
me the life and soul of a company. I went on in a 
continual round of gayety till the latter end of the 
year 1803, when a gracious God opened a way for 
my escape. 

On Saturday morning, September 24, 1803, I 
was very much distressed on account of my dread- 
fnlly irregular and wicked conduct, and finding my- 
self unfit for business, I determined to take a ride. 
Without having any fixed course in view, I suffered 
my horse to turn whichever way he pleased. He 
took the road to Ashford, and as I rode along I was 
led to reflect on the dreadful consequences which 
would ensue if I should be cut off while pursuing 
such a wicked course. The more I thought of this, 
the more deeply was my mind impressed with the 
danger which surrounded me; and yet it seemed 
almost impossible to escape. As I passed up a 
narrow lane between Harrietsham and Charing- 
heath, my feelings so overpowered me that the tears 
began to flow, and I cried out in an agony of dis- 
tress, that if God would but open a door for my 
escape, I would willingly give up my situation, how- 
ever enviable it might appear to some, and would 



LIFE TO HIS MABBIAGE. 29 

hQ content to dig in a hop-garden, so that I might 
be rescued from such a dreadful state of wickedness. 
I believe I prayed with sincerity, and I well remem- 
ber that I looked very sharp around me to see if 
any person had observed my conduct, for I felt half 
ashamed, although I was in hopes that I had not 
acted the hypocrite. "When I reached the "Eed 
Lion," the landlord said, "Mr. Hall, here is a news- 
paper, just brought by the postman, and perhaps 
you would like to read it while your breakfast is 
preparing." The very first thing that struck my 
attention was this advertisement : " An eligible op- 
portunity offers, in one of the genteelest cities in 
England, for any industrious young man with a 
small capital, to take an old established business in 
the bookselling and stationery trade. Por particu- 
lars, apply, etc." 

I was struck with astonishment, because it ap- 
peared as if God had answered my prayer in the 
most extraordinary manner; for if I had not stopped 
at this very public-house, I should never have seen 
the newspaper, and if I had been a few minutes 
sooner or later, the paper would most likely not 
have arrived or have been sent out of the house. I 
felt an awful responsibility to answer the advertise- 
ment immediately. The situation was in the city 
of Worcester, to which place I repaired on the 5th 
December, 1803, and entered into such negotiations 
as led me to settle in that city on the 25th Febru- 
ary, 1804. 

From this important circumstance arose all the 
happiness which has since followed me, and which 



30 JOHN VINE HALL. 

promises to end in mj eternal felicity. Yet on the 
conclusion of this yery journey, and after I had 
despatched this letter of inquiry, I became so intem- 
perate that I rode my horse at full speed into Maid- 
stone, and was thrown oyer his head upon the paye- 
ment, and picked up in a state of complete insensi- 
bility, but without any marks or outward appear- 
ance of bruises, although the horse was standing 
oyer me, with one of his feet close up to my stom- 
ach. Surely if God had not been slow to anger, he 
would haye cut me down for this daring rebellion. 

When I quitted Maidstone I felt like Jacob when 
he passed oyer Jordan with nothing more than his 
staff. I passed oyer the Medway with no more 
than fiye poirnds in the world, except my clothes; 
and in addition to this I had my poor mother to 
support. I went to Worcester quite unconscious of 
any work of grace haying been begun in my soul; 
but I was tired of what I now knew to be a sinful 
life, and therefore determined to reform and liye a 
life of sound morality. 

My character stood yery fair, notwithstanding 
all my leyity of conduct, and upon my character 
alone I borrowed £300. The house I had taken 
was well situated for trade, being in the High-street, 
but the business had been ruined by the idleness 
and extrayagance of the two former tenants. I de- 
termined to be an example of industry, as well as to 
deserye the good opinion of those who had entrust- 
ed me with their property. I arose early and went 
to bed early, and constantly studied Franklin's 
"Way to Get Wealth." My conduct was soon 



LIFE TO HIS MARRIAGE. 31 

noticed by the citizens, and new customers came 
daily to encourage my exertions. I broke off in- 
stantly from old habits of drinking wine, altliough 
my mother, who kept my house, frequently request- 
ed me to take a glass or two, as she was fearful 
that the sudden change might injure my health. 
Still I persevered in sobriety, and was blessed with 
abundance of health and strength. 

On Sunday eyening, 25th March, 1804, an even- 
ing never to be forgotten by me, I was strolling 
along the High-street, when a gentleman accosted 
me by saying, "What are you going to do this 
evening?" I replied that, being a total stranger in 
Worcester, I was merely sauntering about the city. 
" Come along with me," said he, " and I Vvill take 
you to hear a funeral sermon." I accompanied 
him, and was so much pleased with the good lan- 
guage of the preacher, the Rev. George Osborn, 
that I made up my mind to attend regularly, and 
accordingly applied for a seat. My mother also 
attended with me. Being lame, she always walked 
to chapel leaning on my arm, and my heart was 
gladdened by the opportunity of becoming her stay 
and support. 

The second Sunday of our attendance I was 
particularly struck with the serious deportment of 
a young lady who sat opposite to myself. When 
my eyes were not fixed on the preacher they came 
in contact with hers. I found that, similarly to 
myself, this young person was accompanied by an 
elderly lady, who appeared to be her mother ; and 
the thought struck me that she might be a widow 



32 JOHN VINE HALL. 

blessed with a dutiful daughter. This thought was 
too much in unison with the vivacity of my imag- 
ination to die away. I watched them out of the 
chapel, the elderly lady leaning on the arm of the 
younger; but as they were utter strangers, I had 
to wait the tedious appipach of another Sabbath, 
when the same scene was renewed, and my hopes 
and fears were again excited. 

I now made up my mind that if this young lady 
should prove to be a person of good character, I 
would make an attempt to gain her affections, and 
trust to Providence for the result. But I knew 
neither her name nor residence. On Sunday, 20th 
May, I watched her return from worship, and found 
that she took the road which led across the bridge 
into the village of St. John ; and knowing that she 
could not return to the afternoon service by any 
other path, I posted myself on the bridge to await 
the approach of my interesting unknown. She 
came, and came alone. She passed me, and I spoke 
with my eyes, but my tongue was mute. I followed 
gently behind her till we approached the chapel. 
From that time commenced an acquaintance which 
has proved to be the happiest of my life. 

The next morning a gentleman surprised me by 
asking how long I had known Miss Teverill. " Miss 
TeveriU! "Who is Miss Teverill?" rephed I. He 
answered, "The young lady with whom you were 
walking yesterday afternoon." This was the very 
thing I wanted to know ; and the questions, " Who 
is she? Where does she reside ?" were asked all in a 
breath. The reply was of such a nature that I said 



LIFE TO HIS MAKRIAGE. 33 

mentally, "Then she is mine, if perseverance can 
gain her ;" and I immediately commenced a regular 
siege. I soon obtained a very respectable introduc- 
tion, and was admitted a visitor at the only house 1 
thought of any consequence in the county of Wor- 
cester. 

Every thing went on favorably. Mutual affec- 
tion ripened apace ; but an enemy was lurking un- 
seen to poison all my hopes. Her father requested 
me to desist ; but my affection was too deeply root- 
ed to be extinguished, and the prospect of happi- 
ness too bright to be given up for trifles. My char- 
acter was unimpeachable as to integrity and indus- 
try, and my natural ardor was not to be damped by 
a few heavy clouds. Her extreme youth was the 
next plea. I agreed to wait, but never to give up. 
I could not do it; it was against all reason, and 
against my nature, and therefore I stood as firm as 
Ajax. Opposition only strengthened our attach- 
ment. 

Five days after this I was electrified by receiv- 
ing consent to renew my visits. I supped with the 
family on the following Wednesday evening. On 
the Saturday following, only three days, a friend 
called on me, and made me understand that Miss 
Teveri]l had been hurried away from home to a 
friend's house about ten miles from Worcester. This 
was on a market day, when the city was full of peo- 
ple and my shop full of customers. But I was de- 
termined to follow her even to the world's end. It 
was towards evening, and my road lay near Per- 
shore, to which town I directed my steps. Being 

2* 



34 JOHN TINE HALL. 

on foot, I availed myself of a butcher's cart return- 
ing fi'om market. Night had now come on, and as 
the country I had to travel was very intricate, I 
passed the night at the Angel Inn, arose at three 

o'clock the next morning, and set out for S , 

where, after innumerable inquiries, I arrived at six 
o'clock. The family had not arisen, but a maid- 
servant soon appeared, and I despatched her with 
a note to Miss Teverill, to say that I had found her 
retreat. I found she had been forced away at an 
hour's warning. This only increased our attach- 
ment. We passed the day most happily together; 
but this happiness was soon to be interrupted. 

We were walking in the fields in the evening, 
when suddenly a post-chaise appeared. We were 
alarmed, and fearing the worst, renewed our vows 
of constancy. The chaise slowly approached, con- 
veying Mr. and Mrs. Teverill, and I desired my 
Mary not to fear, but to take hold of my arm and 
advance boldly. I civilly inquired after their wel- 
fare ; and although I knew that a storm would soon 
break forth, yet I could not help smiling at their 
chagrin at finding that I had been too cunning for 
them. This brought on a parley, and it was finally 

agreed that she should remain at S in quiet, if 

I would leave the house. I reasoned with Mrs. 
Teverill on the impropriety of treating me with so 
much kindness on the Wednesday, and then forcing 
her daughter away from me in three days after- 
wards, without assigning any other reason than that 
she had changed her mind. She was as hard as a 
flint; and yet she afterwards became as fond of me 



LIFE TO HIS MAEKIAGE. 35 

as if I had been her own son. During this dis- 
course dear Mary had been ordered into another 
apartment, and I was fearful that some scheme 
might be planned to take her away without my 
'knowledge; therefore, to prevent a surprise of this 
kind, I quitted the room a little abruptly, and found 
out the post-chaise, from which, unperceived by any 
one, I took away the pole, and deposited it in the 
middle of a large field. Having thus prevented the 
return of Mr. and Mrs. Teverill, I went again into 
the room, and told Mrs. Teverill that I should not 
quit the house until I had taken leave of her 
daughter. I then restored the pole of the chaise, 
and agreed not to write to Mary, provided her 
friends allowed her to remain in quiet retirement 

at S . 

I was miserably tormented by these circumstan- 
ces, and my mother having left me, I had no one 
to converse with after the business of the day, and 
having lost all relish for reading, I began to spend 
my evenings with the citizens at the Porter Rooms, 
or " smoke shops," as they were called. This was 
a bad resource, and bad it proved in the end. 
Many and many a gloomy night, when the darkness 
might almost be felt, I have stolen into the garden 
around her father's house, and waited among the 
shrubs to catch a glance only of her who had such 
complete possession of my heart.^ 

* The autobiograi3lier goes on to relate liow the mental conflict 
between love for her future hnsband, whom she could not resign, 
and honor for her parents, whom she would not disobey, so seri- 
ously threatened Miss Teverill's health, that full consent to the 
marriage was at length given. 



36 JOHN VINE HALL. 

The long-expected day at length aniTed, and on 
Tuesday, the 26th of Angnst, 1806, we were married 
at St. Clement's church, "Worcester. 

Having nan-ated the way in which it pleased 
God to bestow on me his greatest earthly blessing, 
I must enter my protest against the doctrine oi 
chance. Chance did not lead me to my fii'st situa- 
tion. Chance did not preseiwe me there through all 
the attempts to Cjiiit it. Chance did not lead me to 
Worcester: neither did chance lead me to the chapel 
to behold for the fii'st time her who was to become 
the happiness of my fiitiu'e hfe. Chance did not 
give me perseverance in pnrsning that object: nei- 
ther did chance bring it to a happy termination. 
Chance did not obtain for me my fiiends; neither 
did chance preserve to me that friendship when I 
deseiwed to lose it. Chance did not preserve my 
life under the various accidents which have befallen 
me: neither did chance raise me to be master in 
that house into which I hi'st entered as a poor boy. 
Chance did not biing me accjuainted with Dr. Day, 
who was the instiaiment in the hand of God to 
reheve me in a gTeat measure fi'om the influence of 
a di'eadful malady; neither did chance restore my 
forfeited character. Lastly, chance does not give 
me a gi'ateful heait to God for all his mercies ; but 
it is God himself who has done all these things for 
me, to whom be all the elorv. 



CONFLICT AND DEFEAT, 37 



CHAPTEE II. 

CONFLICT AND DEFEAT. 

1810 TO 1813-AGE 36-39. 

Febeuaey 2, 1810. Almighty God, kindest Fa- 
ther of every thing, Oh look with pity, yet with just 
reproach upon the sad misdeeds of thy humble 
suppliant, and when he reads what may be penned 
in a moment of reflective intoxication — sad idea ! — 
or in actual inebriety, may he be sensible of thy 
goodness in not snatching him to eternity in a mo- 
ment so unprepared. 

Apkil 16. My friend Mr. E kindly opened 

my eyes. No more smoke shops for me. John 
Vine Hall, be more careful how you walk. You 
have a wife and children. Do you love them ? Then 
Oh forbear. Would you be a slave to the worst of 
tyrants? Rather prepare for a glorious struggle, 
and persevere till you conquer this hideous mon- 
ster, then shall you be indeed a prince of conquer- 
ors. Come, John Vine Hall, listen to me, your true 
friend. Conscience ; and if you have ever done any 
good actions, do not erase them by the indulgence 
of bad ones. I shall be sure to accuse you, and 
with great severity, if you shun my admonition; 
but if you will only obey my warning voice, I will 
surely promote your future happiness and draw a 
veil over the past. Eouse yourself then, and I will 
assist you in the battle. Think of the rich prize to 



3S JOHN VINE HALL. 

be gained. Think of your affectionate wife, and let 
this day be the dawn of liberty and of glory. 
July 24. Drunkenness — horrible depravity.* 
Jan. 17, 1811. Xever suffered so much fi'oni the 
bile in my life ; will never have a repetition if I can 
help it. Must be careful, or die, and of all events 
that is what I am the least prepared for; but the 
time may come, and I trust it will. Once more 
returned to a sense of duty, and looking back with 
the deej^est regTet, I trust that these sentiments, 
and affection for my children and too good a Tvife, 
will unitedly prevail. 

Maech 12. "Walked to H , where I was most 

hospitably received. Mr. B and seji diTcnk out 

two bottles of vrine, and fi'om my being fatigued, it 
so ovei-powered me that, on going out of the house 
after dark, I lost mv wav. When I awoke next 



* Maii5ST0>t:, Aug. 6, 1S3S. On looking over tliis journal, find- 
ing these blajik leaves, I here record the astonis hi ng mercy of God 
towards so dreadful a sinner as I have been. 

At the time of the entries made on the preceding page, my busi- 
ness ^vas gone, health destroyed, character ruined, a dear wife 
miserable. Oh -what a change do I ^tness this morning! Busi- 
ness fiourishing, health most perfect, my dear -vnfe and children 
happy, my otvti character restored, and myself, thi-ough especial 
grace, a deacon of the Lidependent chapeL My house a house of 
prayer, my heart a heart of prayer : and twenty years have passed 
a^vay, during the whole of which not a drop of spirituous Hquor 
has ever passed the surface of my tongue. Oh what wonder has 
the Lord wrought ! 

^Maech 11, 184o. Again looking into this journal of my former 
depravity, I record the continuing mercy of my gracious God. 
Twenty-seven whole years without ever once having drunk a drop 
of spirituous liquor 1 Oh what mercy, that Jesus Christ ever Hves 
in my heart a million, million times welcome guest, the joy of' my 
soul, my only hope, my confidence and tmst. 



CONFLICT AKD DEFEAT. 39 

morning all was strange ; yet, as I found myself 
alive and well, it so far satisfied me. On making 
inquiries, I found tiiat I was in a public-liouse, to 
wliicli I liad been conducted by some man wlio had 
discovered me wandering in the dark, and who 
feared that I might fall into some one of the numer- 
ous coal-mines in that romantic country. I walked 
back to Mr. B — — 's, and when I saw the path of 
my night wandering, I hugged myself to find what 
a lucky escape I had experienced from either being- 
drowned in the canal or breaking my neck in a coal- 
pit. A strange frolic, but entirely owing to Mr. 
B 's wine. 

Sunday, Feb. 2, 1812. Attended Pump -street 
Chapel and took sittings. Mr. Byron preached two 
very searching sermons. No flattery ; all plain truth, 
and home to the conscience. 

Maboh 1-6. Drunkenness — six days drunk; aw- 
ful ruin ! 

Makch 14. My birthday; not only a birthday- of 
nature, but, O God, a birthday unto repentance, 
and a forsaking of all sin according to thy most 
gracious call this very morning. Oh give me 
strength to make another effort to leave off every 
kind of sin. This morning, while busied in the 
shop, and being fretted, the effect of recent intem- 
perance, I said with petulance, " Aye, aye, it 's no 
use my endeavoring to become steady. My sins 
are too great to be forgiven." The fretful thought 
was stopped suddenly by a voice whispering in my 
ear, " If thou wilt forsake thy sins, they shall be 
forgiven thee." The emphasis upon forsahe and 



40 JOSy VINE EALL. 

■shaU was so strong, tliat I could have fancied that 
some person really stood behind me : but it "vras all 
within, and I, who bnt the yerr instant before was 
quite in a passion, was struck as with a flash of 
Hghtningj and the tears ran down my cheeks, I 
knew not why. The Liore I tried to suppress them, 
the more they would flow. Finding it useless to go 
on with business, I went up stairs; but there I got 
worse, and I began to think, sui'ely this is the Toice 
of mercy once more calling me to repentance. I 
took up the Bible and hastily scanned my farorite 
fifty-eighth chapter of Isaiah, and this affected me 
so deeply, that I instantly fell on my knees and 
poured out my soul to God, and confessing my sins, 
implored most fervently, and with heartfelt sighs 
and tears, that he would hare mercy upon me. I 
never knew — to my shame — what it was to pray 
with the heart till now. I felt ciuite a new crea- 
ture, and thus I trust that n:y birthday may become 
a day of earthly and eternal joy. 

Si^DAY, ^Iaech 15. Eenewed my confessions of 
sin, and prayed mo^ fervently for mercy, and for 
the fii-st time — Oh shame! — since I have been in 
Worcester, commenced family prayer. TVhat a sad, 
abominable life I have led, even while surrounded, 
by every blessing. Oh gracious Lord, make me 
truly penitent, and preserve me to be a striking 
monument of thy redeeming mercy. In the after- 
noon we had a church of our own at home. At 
night we attended chapel again, and after supper 
we had family prayer. Thank God for it. 

!Map.ch is. Farewell, a long farewell to thee, my 



CONFLICT AND DEFEAT. 41 

poor and long afflicted mother. Thou art gone to 
rejoice for ever in the presence of Jesus, whom thou 
hast long served with faith and patience under afflic- 
tions of the most excruciating nature for more than 
twenty years. Oh may thy God become my God, 
so that I may meet thee in those happy realms. 
My dear mother departed this life this evening, 
under great bodily pain. She died praying two 
hours for me, her prodigal son. Her latest breath 
was for me, in earnest cry, " The Lord bless him — 
the Lord. bless him — the Lord bless him;" and so 
she entered heaven. God of all mercies, I thank 
thee for thy goodness in raising me up to support, 
for so many years, a virtuous and afflicted parent, 
and didst make it my happiness to contribute to all 
her earthly wants." I deeply lament my total un- 
worthiness of thy favor ; but Oh, have mercy upon 
me, and turn my heart from all evil. 

Maech 24:. Mr. C took me to a Methodist 

class-meeting. 

Maech 28. Kather low in spirits, thinking I could 
not consistently receive the sacrament to-morrow. 
I prayed fervently several times in the day, and 
kept a strict watch over every thought, determined 
to resist every temptation to evil. 

Eastee-day. The feast of the Lamb of God. Oh 
what a feast ! Chapel at seven o'clock ; again at 
half-past ten. In the afternoon upwards of four 
hundred sinners knelt before the Lord at his table. 
Eeahzed the presence of Jesus Christ granting a 
free pardon and an assurance of protection if we 
* His mother used to call Mm her "Joseph in Egypt." 



42 JOHN VINE HALL. 

persevere in forsaking oar eTil vtslts. My heart 
beat liigli in raptiii'e when I took the seal of the 
covenant ; and as a sick man takes from the hand 
of his physician the long wished for medicine that 
shall cure the raging disorder in his body, so did I, 
with grateful tears, diink of that blessed cup which 
was, throngh faith, to heal the disorder of a long- 
distempered sonl. 

ITaech 31. I went to the class this evening. 
Such meetings are of great advantage to those who 
are seeking the Lord Jesus. Private prayer is a 
blessing indeed. Even my di'eams are di'eams of 
prayer and happiness in rehgion. I this morning 
made my fii'st essay to pray with the family with- 
out a book. 

SrxDAT xoExrs'G, Appjl 5. Again I put up our 
petitions fi'om my heart without the aid of a book. 
Oh may God make me as bold as St. Paul in the 
gospel. "What an honor it would be if I should ever 
be allowed to become a champion in the cause of 
Christianity, and to be the instrument of bringing 
souls to God. Oh that He would give me a bold- 
ness of speech to declare to many thousands that 
"his m&rcy endureth for ever." Indeed his mercy 
does endui'e for ever, or my soul would have been 
cut off and destroved manv, manv vears aQ:o. 

Apeil 17. IMi'. B induced me to become a 

tiiistee to the new chapel, and I also entered my 
name to lend £oO towards the buHdiag. 

Apeel 21. I, even myseK, made another effort in 
pubhc to show forth the goodness of God. I be- 
lieve that my prayer aroused the gratitude of many 



CONFLICT AND DEFEAT. 43 

a heart in supplications for a continuance of mercy 
to me. Wonderful indeed that my sentiments should 
have been so completely changed as to enable me 
in six weeks to come boldly forward and declare 
in pubhc prayer before the people the great and 
mighty things which God, through my firm faith in 
Jesus Christ, had done for me. O God of all mercy, 
continue thy work, and make a repentant prodigal 
useful to all people by declaring thy goodness in his 
life and conversation. Oh may he ever be upon the 
watch to resist temptation. 

April 30. P and T drank tea with us. 

We boldly declared ourselves Methodists. Yes, 
poor despised Methodists. I felt glad to show forth 
to my gay companions the change which religion 
had effected. This day I received a ticket of admis- 
sion into the Society of Methodists. A great honor. 

May 6. Mr. C and Mr. E , old compan- 
ions from Maidstone, called on me. I stopped Mr. 

K in his swearing, and rather surprised them 

both by a serious conversation. This evening, 
being at the prayer-meeting, I gave the people an 
exhortation to watch and pray. 

May 18. I am suddenly fixed into four offices for 
the church of God : trustee, treasurer, committee- 
man, and prayer-man. See v/hat the Almighty can 
perform in a short time. A sinner snatched from 
the very centre of hell, and made an instrument of 
public service in the house of God in a very few 
days. What a miracle, even in this our day. 

May 19. I was so happy in prayer this morning 
that I could hardly contain myself 



44 JOHN VINE HALL. 

May 21. At our class I expounded, and was 
blessed with a lively affection towards my hearers, 
and with gratitude for such a precious privilege. 
Oh my Saviour, though my sins have exceeded 
every thought, yet thy mercy is gTeater still. I am 
indeed a brand plucked from the burning, and Oh 
may I ever Hve to praise and glorify thy holy 
name. 

May 28. Class-meeting. Oh what delight to 
have a spiritual appetite ! Our gracious Lord fur- 
nishes the table with a delicious repast, ^' without 
money and without price." Now this is very con- 
trary to the way of the devil, for his dishes are 
charged at a very high price indeed, and they turn 
sour into the bargain ; but he is too cunning to 
suffer his guests to see what kind of food he has 
been cramming down their throats ; he cruelly 
gives fresh poison to his already infatuated vic- 
tims, and then lulls them to sleep in his infernal 
embrace. 

May 30. Eleven weeks I have been preserved in 
the battle, and I trust in the assistance of my new 
Master for strength sufficient to drive that old drag- 
on completely off the field. I knov/ that he will 
keep continually skulking and prowhng about the 
camp, but I hope to be guarded at every avenue, 
but not in my own strength. 

June 10. I was in such a state of serenity that 
I could not even fancy a doubt or a fear. As if a 
person ajDproached me on my left hand with a de- 
mand for a debt, while in my right hand I held the 
means of paying it, and therefore no trouble could 



CONFLICT AND DEFEAT. 45 

arise on that account. So I trusted would be the 
case in any new trial. Yet boast not thyself, O 
young man, but rejoice with trembling and be hum- 
ble before thy God. Some of my old gay compan- 
ions would think me a madman, but God knows my 
heart and kills the fatted calf for his prodigal son, 
now brought back from feeding swine and wallow- 
ing in filth and mire. 

June 16. We had a prayer-meeting, and were all 
on fire ; perhaps enthusiasts, says the world. No 
matter. Godly enthusiasts are preferable to devil- 
ish wise men. 

June 30. Half mad at having been quite off my 
guard, and by this means falling from a tremendous 
height into a most dreadful ambush of the enemy. 
Oh, how mournful for the saints and those who love 
God. Soaring too high without the wings of humil- 
ity, I fell into the horrible pit of intemperance, while 
Satan hugged me again with his infernal arms. 
Horrible indeed ! I could have shed rivers of tears. 
God have mercy upon me. There is not a greater 
sinner in existence. 

July 6.. Quarterly meeting. The brethren were 
all glad to see me among them again, although so 
unworthy. How brotherly is this regard for the 
welfare of each other's souls. I do not believe there 
is such another society in the world as the Metho- 
dists for the exercise of brotherly sympathy. Oh 
that I had not grieved them ! Oh what sorrow does 
sin introduce ; and when Satan gets his victims 
down, how cruelly he presses upon them. But the 
blood of Christ can overcome a thousand Satans. 



46 JOHN VINE HALL. 

The time will come — but stay in quiet, and trust in 
the mercies of the everlasting God. 

July 29-31. Fighting most desperately night 
and day, by prayer, repentance, and abstinence — 
not haying had any sleep for three nights — and 
have entreated with bitter tears that the Almighty 
would restore me. Oh what a hell does the soul 
feel that has once enjoyed the love of God and has 
lost it again by giving way to temptation. What 
punishment so great as an accusing conscience for 
having o:ffended the best of Fathers. But the 
mercy of God is, hke himself, infinite. 

Aua. 1. Still in misery. Under a dreadful cloud. 
Satan, Satan, loose my bonds. Constant prayer and 
the firmest rehance on the blood of Jesus will surely 
prevail ; jet how long must I wait for the sweet re- 
turn of grace ? 

Aug. 13. Only eight persons at class. It is the 
race-week, but I hope that none of our people were 
present at the race-course. 

E ACE-WEEK. Dissipation. A drawing back from 
God. 

Sept. 9. Worcester music -meeting. Bustle, 
dress, singing, and dancing, and some pleased, and 
some otherwise. Poor Christian ! Vanity fair after 
aU. 

Sept. 13. A blessed relief from all the noise and 
confusion of the week. Find nij'self, by the sole 
support of my Saviour, quietly rising out of the 
slough of sin ; but I am almost afraid to open my 
Hps to any one, and I go about the house as quiet 
as a mouse. 



CONFLICT AND DEFEAT. 47 

Sept. 21. Persons newly awakened are too apt 
to talk at a great rate, and then stumble. I liope 
my experience of tlie liellisL. angnisli wliich accom- 
panies drawing back from God will ever keep me 
humble. 

Oct. 5. Worcester election. I intend quietly to 
perform my promise, and then stay within doors. 

Oct. 17. Every thing out of sorts all the week, 
and a dreadful state of unsteadiness. Endeavoring 
to repent and pray. It is hard work, yet I am 
determined not to yield. What, shall I, who have 
experienced much of the love of God, yield to the 
devil? No. God and Christ forbid. Try again, 
try again. 

Oct. 22. The bile. Never had it so bad in my 
life. What a mercy ! I hope it will stimulate me 
to repentance. My poor Mary is incessantly kind, 
though she is very unwell through my misconduct. 
What a contrast, and how despicable does it make 
me appear ; but I do hope that even yet I shall not 
only return unto the blessed Jesus, but unto my 
Mary also. Oh that my Saviour would draw me so 
close to him that I could never depart again. 

Oct. 23. Very bad still with the bile, and w^orse 
' with the deepest compunction. 

Oct. 28. Oh how hard is the struggle, and what 
constant watchfulness and prayer does it require to 
enable a sinner to stand his ground even for a mo- 
ment. I thank God that I do depend upon him, 
through Jesus Christ, with lively faith. 

Sunday, Nov. 1. Oh that I could repent deeper 
and deeper and incessantly for all my past dread- 



48 JOHN VINE HALL. 

ful sins. The Lord's supper was administered this 
eyening, bnt I retii^ed ; not that I doubted the 
mercT and pardon of God, but I had not been able 
to forgive myself, and therefore came home, and in 
private prayer implored the mercy and support of 
the blessed Saviom\ 

Dec. 13. Oh that Christ would warm my heart. 
I want more power to resist temptation, but thanks 
be to God that I am what I am. 

Dec. 30. The bile and heU. Oh that God would 
blot out the last week from the sad catalogue of my 
sins, and give me grace that I may never sin again. 
TVTiat a horrible thing is sin, and the more so as 
God is so good. I Cjuite abhor myself as being the 
most deservedly detestable monster in existence ; 
and jet the mercy of God and the intercessions of 
the blessed Jesus unite to give me repentance. Oh 
come, repentance, come in thy humblest, fullest 
form. 

Eastee-day, 1S13. An encouraging discoui'se on 
repentance. It just suited my desperate case, and 
brought me fi-om the verge of despaii' to cry out 
once more to God. Oh how true it is that there is 
no peace to the wicked. "WTiat a sea of misery has 
broken over me for the last fortnight, and how very, 
very dj.'eadfully deep have I again fallen into that 
horrible pit, fi'om which nothing but the arm of God 
can rescue me. Oh vrhen will it end ? 

Easter ]Mo^T)AT. Full of anguish. Pleading 
with God for the gift of repentance. The heavens 
appear ahnost shut against my cry, yet I feel deter- 
mined to pray unceasingly. Went to the prayer- 



CONFLICT AND DEFEAT. 49 

meeting, and struggled against a hard heart, a flinty 
heart. Oh sin, sin, what a delusive tyrant thou art, 
and how galling are thine accursed bonds. I groan- 
ed and sighed, and pleaded the blood of Christ; but 
all was dark and dreary. 

Eastee Tuesday. After a restless night, spent 
partly in terrific dreams and partly in prayer, I 
threw myself on my knees and entreated for mercy. 
Horror and dismay now opened a battery against 
my soul. The Bible and hymn-book lay open be- 
fore me, and I attempted to read; but it was all to 
no purpose, and the gate of mercy seemed closing, 
hell yawning wide to swallow up its victim, and 
devils anticipating their infernal joy. But stop ; a 
gleam of light twinkHng through the dark discovers 
the gracious invitation, "Knock, and it shall be 
opened." Yet even this promise seemed not to 
extend to me. But to stay on Satan's ground was 
certain death ; therefore I prostrated myself before 
the throne in an agony of distress. Oh, it seemed 
to be aiast effort, and I never in all my life prayed 
in such a manner before. God Almighty heard me, 
and by the blessed Jesus sent me an answer of 
peace and consolation. I arose in a flood of tears. 
My pain was gone, and my gratitude seemed as if 
it would drive me into a delirium of joy. Now this 
may be considered to arise merely from a strong 
irritation of the nervous system. Well, let all this be 
called by whatever name it may by others, I would 
humbly attribute it to the forgiving mercy of God. 
Could mere imagination change the soul of a man 
from grief to joy, make that a delight which was 

John Vins Hall. 3 



50 JOHN VINE HALL. 

before a dreadful torment, and induce a man to 
endeavor to cut off a right arm and pluck out a 
right eye in the hope of becoming acceptable to 
God by the blood of the blessed Eedeemer? I 
think not. 

April 12. Have made it a determination, by 
divine help, to pray unto God several times every 
day, that I may be kept in a spirit of watchfulness 
and gratitude, and be preserved from any kind of 
sin. O God of mercy, help me, for the sake of 
Christ, for I am weak and a profligate Ts-retch in- 
deed. But thou canst blot out all my offences, and 
blessed be thy name for giving me to believe that 
to forgive is one of thy chieiest delights, and that 
thou hadst rather pardon than destroy. 

April 25. By the blessing and power of God I 
have been preserved to this day in a spirit of watch- 
fulness and prayer ; but I want to feel a continual 
sense of my own depravity and ingratitude, that I 
may the more deeply repent before God Almighty, 
and be reconciled unto him once again, through 
and by the merits and sacrifice of Jesus. 

May 2, 1813. Another week has been granted 
me of peace and comfort. Blessed be God. 



CONFLICT AND VICTOBY. 61 



CHAPTEK III. 

CONFLICT AND VICTORY. 

1814 TO 1819— AGE 40-45. 

On the 30th of January, 1814, 1 received a letter 
from my truly valuable friend, Alderman Christo- 
pher Smith, M. P. for St. Albans, and since Lord 
Mayor of London, acquainting me that my old 

master, Mr. B , was dead, and that the disposal 

of his business had devolved upon himself; there- 
fore he wished me to come to London immediately, 
in order to consult with our kind friend Mr. Pick- 
ard, as to his willingness to unite with Mr. Smith 
in raising a sufficient sum of money to enable me to 
take the whole of the business. This letter aston- 
ished me exceedingly, because I had no reason to 
hope for such a change of fortune ; and even at the 
very time of receiving this intelligence I was suffer- 
ing from a dreadful bilious attack, brought on by 
intemperance. But Oh the mercy and long suffer- 
ing of God, who, while I was " dead in trespasses 
and sins," even then was at work for my good, and 
was opening a door for my future prosperity in 
temporals, and also preparing a way for my escape 
from my dreadfully besetting sin. Li conformity 
with this letter, I set out on the 2d of February for 
London. I had but one companion in the coach, a 
student, a pious young man, and we did nothing but 
talk of the mercies and dealings of a gracious Sav- 



62 JOHN VINE HALL. 

iour. At Oxford, I walked into a byplace at mid- 
niglit, while tlie outside passengers v/ere at supper, 
and kneeling down upon the stones, poured out mj 
soul to God for liis pardoning mercy and protecting 
care. 

The w^eather at this season was excessively se- 
vere, the snow covering the ground everywhere, and 
the frost so intense that the river Thames was fro- 
zen completely over, and the ice so thick that booths 
were erected and skittle-alleys formed, and large 
fires kept up upon the ice from London Bridge to 
Westminster Bridge, and all sorts of pastime insti- 
tuted. I went over the Thames upon the ice, which 
presented a dangerous ap23earance on account of 
the many chasms, and yet was crowded with thou- 
sands of men, women, and children. I was tempted 
to take a glass of Avine, that I might say in after- 
times that I had not only visited the booths on the 
ice, but that I had actually myself taken refresh- 
nient there ; but my mountain then stood strong, 
and temptation had no avail. I was mercifully pre- 
served in this manner during the whole twelve days 
that I was kept in a state of idleness and suspense 
in London. There were many apphcants for the 
concern, but my friend was so determined to put 
me into possession of what he considered an excel- 
lent opportunity of gaining a good maintenance, 
that he told me that he would sooner lose five hun- 
dred pounds than I should be disappointed. Mr. 
Pickard tendered his services by the loan of one 
thousand pounds towards the sum necessary. Oh 
the mercy of God in creating such a disposition in 



CONFLICT AND VICTORY. 53 

those whose hearts had been so severely grieved by 
my misconduct. 

Sunday, Feb. 6. At Mr. Wesley's chapel, in the 
City Koad, I heard a sermon by Dr. Adam Clarke. 
His sermon, which I took down from his lips, was 
on the thirtieth Psalm, which he divided into three 
parts : namely, Exultation, Distress, and Recovery. 
"This psalm," Dr. Clarke observed, "presents three 
different states of experience. The first state is of 
a soul when first brought to God ; then the ease 
which this state brings; then the presumption aris- 
ing from this ease, and the fall in consequence of 
this presumption, and the recovery by prayer." Oh 
how my ears were all awake at this beginning, be- 
cause it seemed as if it was the very subject suited 
to my own individual case. In speaking upon the 
eighth verse, " I cried unto God," Dr. Clarke ob- 
served, " We are apt to think that if God were but 
to pardon, it would be well : no, not half well ; we 
must be healed." In explaining the ninth verse, he 
observed that David might say, " If I am cut off in 
my backshding, and yet am desirous to return to 
God, who will believe the promises, ' Return, thou 
backsliding Israel, and I will heal your backslid- 
ings ; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be 
as v/hite as snow?' " " Therefore," said Dr. Clarke, 
" let no backslider ever despair." Oh how deeply 
did this sink into my poor v/ounded heart. I was 
all attention, aU hope ; and it seemed as if this ser- 
mon was preached for me alone. And it appeared 
the more so when the preacher went on to say that 
" some people will ask, How can a man who has 



54 JOHN VINE HALL. 

repeatedly trifled witli raercy," exactly my unliappy 
case, "expect that God -mil hear him again? Why," 
said Dr. Clarke, "if the man had no sorrow, we 
should fear his state ; but if the man desires to be 
saved, we know that such desii'e comes fi*om God, 
and therefore he cannot be lost. And if this argu- 
ment would but be taken hold of by poor backsHd- 
ers, they would not be unwilling to apply again 
unto God, who is ever ready to hear their cry." 
Oh, thought I, this is the very cordial for my 
wounded soul, and heaven itself can bear witness 
how earnestly I desire grace to Hve to the glory oi 
God, but am prevented by the strength of sin. "I3 
it not the breath of God in your own souls ?" said 
Dr. Clarke. " As to your convictions of your own 
unworthiness, that falls to nothing before the blood 
of Christ ; your sins can never be too great to be 
forgiven. Take Christ in the fi'ont of your petitions, 
and God will turn your mourning into dancing. If 
you have lost your God, do not rest till you find him 
again. Of what avail is it to the devil that he was 
once in heaven ; and what avail will it be to the 
sinner that he once possessed the favor of God, if 
he does not continue to possess that favor ? But a 
soul that is penitent can never be lost, for a single 
spark of grace can never go to hell; and God stands 
ready to receive the penitent, let him come when- 
ever he will, or however deep his guilt." WeU, 
thought I, this is aU for me ; and as the Lord's sup- 
per is to be administered here this morning, I TvdU 
assuredly partake of it ; and so I did, and my soul 
rejoiced. 



CONFLICT AND VICTORY. 55 

On Tuesday, 15tli of FebruarYj I awoke very 
early, and prayed earnestly to God to blot out my 
sins and disperse every unholy thought, and I was 
for once so completely engaged in imploring salva- 
tion from sin into perfect obedience to the will of 
God, that I quite forgot to pray for my dear wife 
and children ; but he who searches all hearts, knows 
mine also. I continued in a most anxious state of 
uncertainty about the business until Tuesday, the 
5th of April, 1814, when a letter arrived saying that 
the difficulties were now removed. Accordingly, on 
Monday, the 11th of April, I arrived in Maidstone, 
and took possession of the whole concern. 

Now then began a new career of life, and I found 
myself unexpectedly placed as the master over that 
very house which I entered as errand-boy on the 
24th day of January, 1786, and remained till the 
12th day of January, 1801. Oh how was my poor 
heart agitated with hopes and fears, and strong 
determinations never again to offend that God who 
had done such mighty deeds for one who had so 
awfully rebelled against him. But how weak are 
our best resolutions when made in our own strength ; 
and so I soon found it to my cost and sorrow, for it 
was only on the Saturday fortnight, April 30, that 
some of my old companions came to congratulate 
me upon my arrival at Maidstone, and insisted on 
taking wine by way of wishing me success. "Well, 
I thought a glass or two could not do me any harm, 
particularly as I had worked hard all the week, and 
had now obtained fortitude and resolution to stop 
at three or four glasses at the very outside. But 



56 JOHN VINE HALL. 

how ti'eacherons is tlie limnan lieart ! I went on, 
glass for glass, vritli iqt compamons, till reason be- 
gan to totter, and at this very moment, which I shall 
never forget, the door opened, and who shonld stand 
before mj face to witness my folly and conftLsion, 
but Mr. Pickard ? Yes ; even my best friend, who 
had come down from London for the sole purpose 
of giving me comfort and advice in this trying mo- 
ment. Oh how my heart recoiled at my own deep 
ingratitnde towards snch a benevolent friend, and I 
stood speechless. But he did not npbraid me, for 
Ms heart was too fall of compassion to augment the 
anguish which he knew wonld take possession of 
my sonl when reason resumed her seat. He gently 
retreated, and looking me fall and expressively in 
the face, said, ■'■' I will see you in the morning." I 
dismissed my conipardons with reproaches and re- 
tired to bed, when I passed a restless night. As 
soon as I had breakfasted I waited on Mr. Pickai'd. 
"When he saw me, he took my hand, and with a si- 
lent squeeze looked forgiveness. He soon proposed 
a walk, and we had scarcely got iato the street when 
he turned upon me, and with a voice of sympathy 
said, '•' I do not condemn you, for I deeply pity you." 
This kindness entered my very soul, and I could 
only say, "' God bless you, sii*." Here again I have 
reason to bless that merciful Being who did not 
utterly take his loving kindness fi'om me. neither 
suffer my friends to forsake me. 

After this time I began to apply myseK more 
earnestly to business than ever ; but still mj pre- 
va il i n g propensity kept fast hold, and although I 



CONFLICT AND VICTORY. 57 

was very circumspect at tinies for three or four 
weeks together, yet at other intervals I went off 
into the most dreadful indulgences, to the disgrace 
of myself and to the astonishment and grief of those 
who were truly desirous for my happiness. Among 

these was Mr. M , who had known me from a 

child, and who combated the remarks of my ene- 
mies till at last he was almost in despair ; and added 
to all this, and as the height of my depravity, I had 
been blessed with the best of wives, one who feared 
God, and whose life seemed to be bound up in my- 
self, and whose tenderness towards me, even in the 
midst of my cruelty, was beyond all expression or 
description ; and although I was fully sensible of 
all this, as well as of the wonderful mercy of God 
in not cutting me dov/n, still I had no power to 
resist my heart-rending propensity, although the 
happiness of my family and friends was all involved 
in my conduct. Added to all this was my own im- 
mediate danger of eternal misery, as also my fre- 
quently being rendered completely insane for sev- 
eral days after I had desisted from the use of wine 
or liquors. All these things only increased my 
weakness and my misery, for I often saw such 
dreadful sights and heard such dreadful sounds, 
when recovered from intoxication, that I was fre- 
quently led to exclaim, in all the horror of despair, 
that I was certain that my thoughts of rehgion 
were ail delusion, and that I was doomed by heaven 
itself to eternal destruction. Indeed one day as I 
was shaving myself, after I had been in a dreadful 
state for several days together, the devil suggested 

3* 



58 JOHN VINE HALL. 

to me that I had. better cut my throat at once, for 
I had outliyed my former respectabihty, and was 
become such a disgrace to my poor wife and chil- 
dren, that the sooner I was out of the way the bet- 
ter. But again the same in-^dsible hand preseryed 
me, and I kept on sinning and repenting at various 
times during the remainder of the years 1814 and 
1815 ; sometimes walking uprightly to the appear- 
ance of men for many weeks together, and continu- 
ing incessant in prayer to God for dehyerance, still 
hoping eyen against hope. At length the time drew 
nigh for my escape from Doubting Castle and from 
the chains of Giant Despair. I had been most 
alarmingly ill of a bihous feyer, brought on by in- 
temperance, and was so near death that I began to 
think I must now die, and go to receive the reward 
of my sins ; and yet hope was not entu-ely taken 
from me, for when I was in the greatest bodily ag- 
ony I remembered the words of David, and cried to 
the Lord, and said, "What profit is there in my 
blood ; shall the dead praise thee ? O Lord, let 
me live for Christ's sake, and let it be seen that 
thine arm is not shortened that it cannot save. Oh 
save me, vile as I have been, that even yet I may 
live to thy glory as a monument of thy mercy." 
My tears and my poor heart went together, and a 
voice seemed to say, " Thou shalt recover ;" and 
blessed be God, I did recover, T^ith a broken and a 
contrite heart. 

I became much humbled, and thought if my 
friends would place me in a private mad-house, or 
some confinement, I should be content to live on 



CONFLICT AND VICTOKY. 59 

bread and water all the days of my life, if I could 
be preserved from sinning against God. While I 
was ruminating in this manner, and making fresh 
determinations ^o set out again for the kingdom of 

heaven, my dear wife and my friend Mr. M 

had been consulting whether there was any possi- 
bility of my being benefited by medical advice, and 
had actually applied to Dr. Day, who gave great 
hopes that if I could be brought to take such med- 
icines as he should prescribe, a cure might be ex- 
pected ; but that the first great difficulty would be 
to make me acquainted with their deliberations, 
and to obtain my consent to conform to their plans. 
At the very same time my gracious God was him- 
self working in me a strong desire to make use of 
every means that could be suggested. This was on 
the ever-to-be-remembered first day of March, 1816. 

Mr. M kindly came to visit me, though I was 

then unworthy of his notice, and as I was deeply 
deploring my sad, sinful, and ungrateful conduct 
towards God and all my friends, I said, " I wonder 
whether Dr. Day could possibly point out any plan 
for my relief," . as I was willing to undertake any 
thing in the world to prove how desirous I was to 

be freed from this dreadful wickedness. Mr. M 

and my dear wife looked at each other with aston- 
ishment, and she exclaimed, " The hand of God is 
certainly in this thing." They then informed me 
of what they had been doing, and how troubled 
they were to know in what manner they should 
make me acquainted with their plans, fearing that 
I should be offended. 



60 JOHN VINE HALL. 

Here, my dear children, if ever you should read 
tills book, here was a ray of light bursting upon 
your poor father's head, which led him from the pit 
of despair to the gates of heaven, s Here his hopes 
were again revived ; here your poor mother felt the 
mercy of God pouring consolation into her almost 
broken heart ; and here a new song of praise arose 
to that God whose mercy is everlasting. Dr. Day 
was immediately requested to "vdsit me, and after 
putting various questions, he agreed to take me 
under his care, and even went so far as to say that 
he would never leave me until he had, through the 
blessing of ' God, effected a cure. Oh what a day 
was this ; what hopes and fears alternately played 
in all our minds ! The very thought of being 
healed of such a malady, and of being restored to 
society and respectabihty, was too delicious to be 
endured without showers of tears. I began to take 
the remedies prescribed that very night, and was 
enabled to trust in God for his assistance to enable 
me to persevere. But it was not merely the medi- 
cines, but a great solace was given to my mind by 
Dr. Day's kind commiseration of my situation, 
which he declared demanded the fall exercise of 
pity, instead of that heavy censure which had been 
cast upon me. The voice of pity ! Oh how sweet 
it is to the deeply burdened heart, overpowered by 
a sense of its own depravity ! In consulting with 
my physician, I told him how deeply my mind was 
impressed with a sense of the heinousness of my 
sin against God, whom I desired to love, and yet 
had no power to resist the dreadful evil which came 



CONFLICT AND VICTORY. 61 

Upon me periodically about once a month. His 
answer was, that he could not view my case in the 
same depraved light, for he was confident, from 
what he had discovered respecting my nervous sys- 
tem, that I could no more prevent the mischief 
when the fit came upon me, than any person sub- 
ject to the gout could prevent a return of the same 
disorder. Oh what a valve of hope was now opened 
to my ardent imagination, to think even for a mo- 
ment that there were persons who thought me less 
guilty than I had condemned myself to be. Yet 
still I considered this by far too favorable an opin- 
ion, for I had no desire to forgive myself, even 
though all my friends and even my Creator should 
do so. I desired to consider myself quite as vile as 
ni}^ outward conduct appeared to be, even though I 
had no desire to lose my hope in God ; for all things 
were possible to him. The medicines were draughts 
composed principally of steel, mixed in about two 
ounces of peppermint water, to be taken twice a 
day ; and with these he allov/ed me to take two or 
three glasses of port-wine after dinner, but to re- 
frain entirely from the use of spirits in any way 
whatever ; and to make use of toast and water at 
my meals, v/ith a very moderate use of small beer 
or a little porter, but no ale. 

I desired to feel exceedingly grateful that I was 
allowed so bountiful a supply, and the more partic- 
ularly when so great a good was connected with it ; 
for I had determined in my own poor strength that 
I would cheerfully drink nothing but water during 
the whole of my life, if such an expedient could at 



62 JOHN VINE HALL. 

all be the means of my escaping the dreadful evil 
which had entwined itseK around me for so many 
years. I went on in a tolerably steady manner for 
several weeks, strictly attending to my medicines 
and watching against temptation, taking also espe- 
cial care to read the Bible for nearly an hour every 
morning before breakfast, with prayer and suppK- 
cation for divine help, and as long as I continued 
in this regular course I received daily blessings. 
My health and strength were indeed renewed as 
the eagle's, and I began to think that my mountain 
would now stand against every attack of my secret 
foe. Thus I became lifted up with pride, which led 
me to be less attentive to prayer and reading the 
Bible; and in consequence, at an unguarded hour 
I was again the captive of my enemy. 

Dr. Day again watched over me with the great- 
est tenderness, and desired me not to be discour- 
aged, as he had not expected that I should over- 
come in a few weeks an evil which had been grow- 
ing upon me for several years. I took fresh courage, 
and set out again with a strong determination to be 
so very watchful that nothing should surprise me 
for the future. But how vain are the strongest 
human efforts when unassisted by divine grace, and 
how prone is human nature to refuse that powerful 
aid which is so freely offered by the Creator of the 
universe, "who giveth Hberally, and upbraideth not." 
This was not a battle between myself and another 
of my fellow-creatures, in which superior strength, 
or skill, or accident, might gain the victory; this 
was a contest with inbred corruption and habits of 



CONFLICT AND VICTOEY. 63 

long standing and increasing growth, and whicli, if 
not subdued, would inevitably sink the soul as well 
as the body into endless ruin. However, I set out 
again in the same manner as before, adhering to 
my medicines and my Bible, and I thought myself 
upon surer ground than ever, and particularly as I 
had been recovered from my last fall in five days 
instead of fifteen or twenty as was formerly the 
case ; and this circumstance gave my physician as 
well as myself considerable reason to hope that we 
had at least made some impression upon the force 
and power of my strong propensity. 

Still these hopes were delusive, for in nine days 
afterwards I fell into the very same situation again, 
and brought deep distress into my own soul as well 
as poignant anguish into the heart of a beloved wife 
and all my friends. I might be asked. How can 
you have a sincere aflection for your wife if you 
indulge in these disgraceful extremes ? All I could 
answer would be that, from the bottom of my soul, 
I detest and abhor my own conduct, and yet have 
not the power to resist that which I hate. But to 
proceed. Dr. Day himself was much chagrined as 
well as myself, but he was not at all out of heart; 
and when in the anguish of my mind I entreated 
him not to leave me through disgust at my conduct, 
he kindly reassured me that he would never leave 
me till he had brought me through every difficulty. 
And he the more insisted upon it that his hope was 
considerably increased, because in these two last 
times of falHng into this distress 1 had been recov- 
ered each time in ^yq days. Yet it would appear 



64 JOHN VINE HALL. 

Tery naturallT to some minds that the blessinf^s of 
the Ahnightr ordv serTed to render my heart more 
hardened instead of reducing it to obedience, for he 
had graciously given me another son, Newman, 
between these two last falls, the first of which ter- 
minated on the 18th of May, and the last of which 
commenced on the 27th of the same month; and in 
this interral I was so far recovered and so redeter- 
mined to persevere, that on the day my dear wife 
was safely delivered, which was on Wednesday, the 
22d of -'lay, 1816, I voluntaiily di'ew up of my own 
mind, and wi'ote with my own hand, a complete 
grant of power to Dr. Day to make use of what- 
ever means he should deem most expedient to effect 
my recovery, even to the confinement of my person; 
and this document I signed in the presence of Dr. 

Day and my friend Hr. M , into whose hands I 

gave this writing, to be by him securely kept and 
brought forward, in vindication of Dr. Dav's con- 
duct, if ever my situation should become so unfor- 
timate as to obhge him to have recourse to severe 

measures. Dr. Day and Mi'. M were both of 

them deeply afiected by this instance of my ardent 
desne to overcome this evil, and they felt con- 
strained to acknowledge that I had by this act 
evinced aU the sincerity that it was possible for a 
man to display ; and they went away more stren,£rth- 
ened than ever in their opinion that all would yet 
end well. Indeed I myself had stronger hopes than 
ever, because I felt an inward desire to five to the 
glory of God. even though my present conduct 
seemed to be dii-ectly opposite to every thing: like 



CONFLICT AND VICTOEY. 65 

such a desire^ and gave more encouragement than 
ever to my enemies to hope for my speedy destruc- 
tion. But' He who had determined my deliverance, 
had also determined that I should pass through 
more trials, but at the same time he mercifully gave 
me an increase of resolution to persevere. 

Yet my mind underwent many painful struggles 
through fear that, even after all that had been said 
and done, it was still possible that I had been de- 
ceived in my hopes of recovery from so dreadful a 
malady, ancl particularly as it had been a strongly 
received opinion that persons addicted to drunken- 
ness were very seldom recovered. However, I took 
fresh courage, and felt my fears considerably abat- 
ed when I read the lives of Bunyan, Perkins, Gardi- 
ner, and Newton, all of whom had been notorious 
sinners, and yet had all been rescued from destruc- 
tion by the same almighty hand ; and why should not 
that same hand save even me, notwithstanding I had 
outsinned them all ? My faith in God revived, and I 
commenced taking my medicines again on the first 
day of June, and accompanied them w^ith fervent 
prayer and a strict attention to reading the Bible 
every morning for one hour before breakfast. In 
this manner I went steadily forward till the 23d of 
July, when, to my dreadful grief and the grief of all 
my friends, I yielded again to temptation, and fell 
into the same dreadful state of intemperance and 
distress as before. I remained under the effects of 
this fall for six days, when it pleased God to spare 
my life once more, and to renew my determination 
to rise again and enter upon a new combat with my 



66 JOHN VINE HALL. 

mortal foe. Bnt no language can depict the anguish 
of my mind to find liow dreadfully I had rebelled 
against my Creator ; and it seemed to be the most 
incomprehensible thing in the world how I could be 
so drawn aside, after having tasted and relished the 
goodness of God and delighted in his ways; and 
indeed it was such an astonishment to my own 
mind, that I was frequently constrained to look 
upon myself as the greatest hypocrite under the 
sun, and yet I could not give up my hope that my 
prayers, which I thought were at least sometimes 
sincere, if not always so, T\ould eventually be an- 
swered. 

Under these circumstances I set out once more, 
looking entii'ely to heaven for help, and continued 
my medicines and reading the Bible T^ith great 
regularity every day. Thus I was helped forward 

again, and my kind fiiends Dr> Day and Mr. M 

were every day anxiously overlooking all my steps, 
and watching for the completion of their fervent 
wishes. Hopes and fears now alternately rose in 
my mind. The prize to be obtained was of immense 
value, therefore the fears of losing it were gi'eat 
indeed ; and imder these impressions I pressed for- 
ward with great circumspection, until I had become 
so far estabhshed as to discontinue my medicines 
entirely. But most unfortunately my dear wife 
was absent at this time at Worcester, and having 
no person to converse with in the evening after the 
close of business, I frequently went into company, 
when I should other^^-ise have been happy at my 
own fireside. Still, however, through the mercy of 



CONFLICT AND VICTOEY. 67 

God, I maintained my ground, but not with so much 
firmness as I should have done if I had been favored 
with a companion to engage my vacant hours. Yet, 
notwithstanding all these dangers, I began to think 
myself fully established in such strength of resolu- 
tion as to resist any temptation, and the more par- 
ticularly as I had quite declined the use of medi- 
cine. But this was false security, for being invited 
to dine with Mr. A on the 10th day of Septem- 
ber, 1816, in company with my kind and watchful 

friend Mr. M , and several other good friends, I 

passed a very happy day; and although I did not 
drink more than a pint of wine, yet it was so much 
more than I had lately been accustomed to take, 
that it produced a stimulus in my system, which 
induced a desire for more when I got home, and I 
insensibly gave way to the desire, and thus stag- 
gered again out of the right path. But when I 
returned to my senses, and found what I had been 
guilty of in thus abusing the mercy of G od, my dis- 
tress was more poignant if possible than ever. I 
had seemed to be so near the attainment of all my 
best wishes, and. of the hopes which my friends had 
so long entertained, that I had only to stretch forth 
my hand and seize the crown ; yet it again vanished 
from my embrace, and the disappointment almost 
broke my heart. I wept rivers of tears, and pros- 
trated myseK before the mercy-seat of God, and 
implored his assistance even once more, that mine 
enemy might not have to boast that his power was 
stronger than the grace of the Most High. My 
prayers were heard, and I was restored from this 



68 JOHN VINE HALL. 

fall in four days, and I immediately recommenced 
taking my medicines, being strengthened with a 
determination never to give np the contest. 

During all these contests I had been allowed to 
take two or three glasses of wine a day, or a small 
quantity of spirits and water, according to circum- 
stances ; but then I had not prudence or resolution 
enough always to stop at the right point, and this 
often led to bad consequences. At length Dr. Day 
reasoned with me as to the necessity of confining 
myseK wholly to water, small-beer, or porter, as the 
uttermost degree of strong drink that I might ven- 
ture to ta.ke. My desire to conquer every enemy 
being now more deeply rooted than ever, I entered 
into my physician's views of the subject, and prayed 
for grace to help me in this my time of need. My 
dear wife was now also returned from Worcester, 
which made my home more comfortable, and gave 
new life to new resolutions. Accordingly I began on 
Sunday, the 22d of September, 1816, to rehnquish 
the use of wine of every description, and also all 
kinds of spirituous liquors and ale, having also 
pledged myself that if porter or table-beer were too 
strong for my constitution, I would cheerfully con- 
fine myself to water rather than offend a merciful 
Creator. I continued taking my medicines with the 
greatest regularity till about the 10th of October, 
when my health becoming more and more estab- 
lished, I found them unnecessary, and after having 
taken three hundred and seventy-six bottles of the 
chalybeate draughts, I relinquished them entu'ely; 
and. through the mercy of God have never had any 



CONFLICT AND VICTORY. 69 

occasion to recur to the use of these medicines from 
the 10th of October, 1816, even to the present mo- 
ment of writing this passage, which is written on 
this 29th day of November, 1817. 

During the whole of this period, that great Being 
who was accomplishing so wonderful a work, was 
also giving me an increasing desire to study his 
holy word; and through his constraining influence 
I have never passed a single day without reading 
the Bible for one hour, or nearly so, every morning 
before breakfast, besides at several other times in 
the day, and praying most earnestly to have my 
understanding illuminated, that the precepts and 
doctrines of the Scriptures might be deeply fixed in 
my heart, and form the constant rule of my life 
before God and man. By these means I have been 
kept in a state of continual happiness, my health 
has been uninterruptedly good, and all my comforts 
have abounded, and I trust that I am daily Hving 
to the praise of the glory of God, as a wonderful 
monument of his free grace and great salvation. 

I would not have any one suppose that the 
great good here " recorded was obtained without 
many struggles. It is no easy .thing to overcome 
long-established habits, particularly when the natu- 
ral inclinations are ever ready to contribute to their 
strength. And this was my case, inasmuch as I 
was of a lively, cheerful disposition, and fond of 
company ; and because I could sing a good song or 
tell a good tale, I was continually invited into par- 
ties of drinking and pleasure. All this was to be 
overcome, and pursuits of an opposite tendency 



70 JOHN VINE HALL. 

were to be encouraged with the utmost energy and 
perseverance. Now nothing short of divine help 
could possibly accomplish so desirable an end ; but 
this help was to be had simply by asking it, with a 
sincere and contrite mind, of Him who has gTa- 
ciously declared that all who seek shall find. I 
am sure that I am a living witness of the faithful- 
ness of God to all his promises. But did the seek- 
ing the kingdom of heaven make me less cheerful 
or less lively ? Far from it ; all this natural vivac- 
ity continued to flow, but it was turned into another 
channel. My business v/as pursued with as much 
avidity as ever ; but the perplexities which used to 
occasion peevishness were now all softened by a 
serenity that made crooked things straight and 
rough places plain, thus exemplifying the words of 
Scripture, that the ways of reHgion "are ways of 
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace." Yet my 
feelings were often deeply oppressed when I beheld 
any poor creature tottering in the streets under the 
influence of intoxication, and the recollection of my 
own former distressing state impelled a fervent ejac- 
ulation that God would mercifully become the friend 
of these ]Door creatures, who had lost all friendship 
for themselves and were totally insensible of their 
danger. Indeed I never see persons in liquor but 
my heart groans for their rehef, as I well know that 
nothing short of Omnipotence can stay the raging 
of such an unmerciful enemy. Those persons who 
had laid many bitter things to my charge all became 
quiet when it was known that I not only abhorred 
this conduct mj^self, but that I had also placed 



CONFLICT AND VICTORY. 71 

myself under the entire direction of a physician of 
long tried abilities, in order that I might be reliev- 
ed from this formidable malady, which he most 
unequivocally denominated disease and not inclina- 
tion; and that it was a disease induced by a strong 
affection of the whole nervous system, which ren- 
dered it almost impossible to escape the effects 
produced. This testimony softened the malice of 
my foes into pity; and when they were credibly 
informed that I was continually striving against it, 
they almost universally wished me success. My 
friends all gathered around me with the kindest 
expressions of encouragement, and this gave me a 
zest to persevere ; and when I also beheld my dear 
children and a beloved wife all deeply involved in 
my fate, my heart was elevated to heaven at the 
very thought of being restored to them in health 
and happiness. 

It was a Christmas day, 1816, when we were all 
sitting round the fire, my wife on one side and 
myself on the other, with our four healthy boys, 
Edward, Yine, Stephen, and Newman, playing be- 
tween us, and ourselves enjoying a serenity of hap- 
piness springing from the mercy of our God, that 
the prospect of future bliss and the high enjoyment 
of present comfort quite overpowered our feelings, 
and with hearts lifted up in fervent gratitude to the 
Author of our blessings, we sang, "Praise God, 
from whom all blessings flow," and we sang it with 
the heart full in tune, while tears of unspeakable 
delight rolled down in sympathy with our exalted 
affections. It was a day of pure delight, such as 



72 JOHN YIXE HALL. 

we had never Tvitnessed before, because our affec- 
tions were never before so sincerely fixed on our 
great Redeemer. And besides all tliis, I bad been 
preserved ninety-four days without tasting even a 
drop of any strong liquor, and this had never before 
occuiTed since I was seventeen years of age. All 
this increased our joy and gave additional vigor to 
hopes of the future, and the more particularly as 
God Almighty had himseK given me strength to 
pluck out a right eye and cut off a right hand in 
order that I might enter the kingdom of heaven. 
I now close this narrative with the strongest and 
most powerful exhortation to my dear children, that 
.if ever they felt any affection for their father, or 
would desire to reap advantage by his painful as 
well as happy experience, they would closely study 
and highly value that blessed book the Bible, 
which is able, under the influence of the Holy Spir- 
it, to make them ^vise unto salvation ; and not only 
happy with respect to eternity, but its precepts, if 
followed, will soften all the cEtres of this life, and 
enable them to pass through the world with honor 
to themselves and with gloiy to that God whose 
mercy is everlasting, and whose wondrous power 
has changed the heart of their father from the very 
spirit of infidehty to a decided behef and immov- 
able confidence in the all-sufiiciency of the atoning 
blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, upon whom his soul 
now securely rests for eternal fehcity. 

:^Lm)5T0XE, MoxDAT, Sept. 22, 1817. "What an 
anniversary is this to my poor soul, and what j)i'0- 
digious blessings has the Lord bestowed upon me 



CONFLICT AND VICTORY. 73 

during the whole of the last year ; for it was this 
day twelve months ago that God himself enabled 
me to set out afresh for the kingdom of heaven, 
being released by his almighty arm from the domin- 
ion of my easily besetting sin. This dreadful sin 
was a constant desire to drink to excess, by which 
all my faculties were paralyzed, and my soul was 
sinking fast into despair; but at length the power 
of Jesus snatched my soul from that horrible pit 
over vfhich it had long been suspended, and from 
which it seemed impossible to escape. But the 
mercy of God is from everlasting to everlasting 
upon those who fear him, and his grace alone has 
enabled me during the whole of the last year to 
resist every temptation to drink even a single glass 
of wine of any description, or to taste any kind of 
spirituous hquors or strong drink. Is it possible ! 
Yes ; and also God has given me the constant desire 
to study that best of books the Bible, which I have 
studied every day for one hour before breakfast to 
the edification and delight of my heart. He also has 
made it the delight of my soul to hold converse with 
him all the day long, whether engaged in walking 
or reading, or in the perplexities of business. But 
if any one should ever get hold of this book and 
read what I have alread}^ penned, I would not have 
him suppose that even this happy year was passed 
through without conflict. Far otherwise ; it was a 
very severe struggle between life and death; and 
nothing short of the whole armor of God could have 
enabled me to withstand in the evil day. But by 
the grace of God I am what I am; and though I 

John Vine Hall. 4- 



74 JOHN VINE HALL. 

have been thns far preserved, still I daily tremble 
for fear that I may do something to dishonor the 
name of my God. When I reflect upon the strange 
events of my hfe contrasted with the lives of New- 
ton, of Bunyan, and other dreadful sinners, and 
lastly, of St. Paul, who styled himself the chief of 
sinners, I am often led to exclaim, that they scarce- 
ly knew what sin was, when put into the scale against 
the depravities which have marked my progress, for 
I verily beheve that I have outsinned them all to- 
gether. I mention this to show forth the long-suf- 
fering of God, who has raised such a creature from 
the very centre of hell to sing his praises and to 
live to his glory, and to be a witness in these latter 
times that he is as wilhng as ever to receive all who 
call upon him in sincerity and truth. 

Thursday, Jan. 1, 1818. Ah, my poor dear chil- 
dren, your happy father scarcely knows how to 
begin his record of another year. The mercies of 
the year that is past are so great, that your poor 
father hardly knows where to begin the praises of 
that God who has saved his life from destruction, 
and who has crowned him with loving-kindness 
and tender mercies. But, my dear sons, as I have 
already brought dov/n my narrative to the 29th of 
November last, I will shortly state to you the sim- 
ple occurrence of Christmas day. In the morning 
of that blessed anniversary, you, my dear children, 
together with your mother and your father, were all 
assembled round the fire before breakfast, wishing 
each other a happy Christmas, and being full of 
joy, we all joined in singing, "Praise God, from 



CONFLICT AND VICTOEY. 75 

whom all blessings flow." Your mother and my- 
self, looking at each other and then on you our 
dear children, and feeling in our hearts the love of 
that beneficent Being who has been so merciful 
towards us, were constrained to lift up our hearts 
with gratitude, while our eyes did indeed overflow^ 
with joy. Even you, my dear children, young as 
you were, appeared to enter into these feelings, for 
you united in singing, "Grace, 'tis a charming 
sound," and you sung it with all your might; after 
which we had family prayer, and at the proper 
time we attended the morning service at chapel. 
We spent the happiest Christmas day that we had 
ever known in our whole life before ; yet neither 
your mother nor your father tasted even a drop of 
any kind of wine or liquor. As not even the cheer- 
fulness o£ Christmas could move your father from 
his purpose, so your kind mother also was deter- 
mined that she would not take any wine .on this 
day. Have we not boundless cause to rely with 
implicit confidence on that benevolent Being who 
has already done such great things for us, and who 
has brought your poor father out of a horrible pit 
and placed his feet on a rock, and put a new song 
into his mouth, even the praise of God. Now, my 
dear children, this is the entire work of that gra- 
cious God, who has brought your father through 
fire and through water to feel unfeigned delight in 
studying his holy word every day for the last fifteen 
months; and the Bible has indeed been "a lamp to 
his feet and a light to his path," to guard him from 
evil and to guide him, under the influence of the 



76 JOHN VINE HALL. 

Holy Spiiit, into the -^ay of life eyerlasting. Oil 
tlien listen to the admonition of joni' anxious par- 
ent, ^ho is himseK a striking monnnient of the 
mercT of that God, who TviU siu'elv answer your 
prayers if yon call upon him in sincerity and truth, 
through the medium of his beloved Son, who not 
only made atonement for your sins, but shed his 
precious blood for the sins of the whole world. 
Therefore I beseech you, by the mercies of God, 
never to listen to the insinuations of Satan, that 
your sins are too great to be pardoned, (or that 
can never be the case while Jesus Christ continues 
to be our Advocate and Intercessor at the throne of 
mercy; and there he stands for ever employed in 
that glorious work till the final consummation of all 
things. Therefore do not suffer any circumstances, 
however desperate they may appear, to diive you 
to despaii', but consider what severe trials, tempta- 
tions, a^id miserable falls David encountered, and 
consider his repentance and restoration; and last 
of aU, consider the painful trials of your own once 
miserable, but now ha23py father, who has been res- 
cued from the very depths of hell by sovereign grace 
alone, to enjoy daily and houiiy communion with 
God, imder the hvehest hope of eternal fehcity. 

MoxDAT. 3Iaech 2, 1818. Yesterday my dear wife 
and myself joined with the chiu'ch, at the Indepen- 
dent meeting in TTeek-street, in celebrating the 
Lord's supper. I was admitted a member on Wed- 
nesday last, the 25th of Febniary ; and here surely 
I may praise that merciful God who has brought 
me into his banqueting house, and placed me under 



CONFLICT AND VICTORY. 77 

his banner of love. O that I might "dwell in the 
house of the Lord for ever!" 

I had brought down my narrative to the 1st of 
January last, but had omitted to mention that the 
Kev. Edmund Jenkins, pastor of the Independent 
meeting in Week-street, was an inmate in our family 
for nearly four months, until Wednesday, the 14th of 
February last, on which day he quitted us, and was 
married the next morning. During Mr. Jenkins' 
residing with us we experienced many blessings of 
a spiritual nature, particularly in having family 
prayer, which had long been abandoned before he 
came; but on the day of his departure it pleased 
God to give me grace and strength to go forward 
with this important duty, which we have regularly 
continued with great delight and inward satis- 
faction. 

Monday, Sept. 21, 1818. This auspicious day 
completes a period of two whole years, during 
which, by the grace of God alone, I have been most 
miraculously preserved from drinking any kind of 
wine or spirits, but have confined myself to porter 
or water. Yet I was seduced by a depraved nature 
to drink more porter than was right, by which I 
was brought into a distressing situation ; but I have 
abundant reason to be deeply thanldul to a merci- 
ful God, that when the enemy came in like a flood, 
his almighty arm was lifted up in my defence, and 
I was recovered from the snare in less time than 
ever before, being only one day under the power of 
my adversary. The last time was on Wednesday, 
the 15th of July, when, the weather being sultry in 



78 JOHN YINE HALL. 

the extreme, I drank porter till I became ashamed 
of myself; yet the hand of God never forsook me, 
neither was I suffered to taste even so much as a 
drop of any kind of wine or spirits, although there 
was a quantity of each within my reach, and no 
human being present to prevent my taking it if I 
had been so inchned. But my gTeat Deliverer had 
issued his sovereign mandate, "Hitherto shalt thou 
come, but no farther." I felt very deep anguish 
for my transgressiori, and I entreated grace to give 
up every idol. Porter had indeed been my idol, 
and was to my taste the gTeatest luxury; but this 
must also be given up. I pondered these things in 
my mind without coming to a decision, till our faith- 
ful minister, in one of his pastoral visits, put the 
following question to me in the most impressive 
mannei*, "Do you love porter better than Christ?" 
The appeal went home to my soul, and I instantly 
resolved, by divine help, that I would not only give 
up my long favorite beverage, but every thing else 
that should retard my journey to heaven. Accord- 
ingly I ceased immediately from the use of porter, 
and from the 19th of July to the present day, Sep- 
tember 21, I have never tasted any other beverage 
than my own table-beer and water. Here then I 
have more abundant reason than ever to praise that 
merciful Being who has thus subdued three of my 
great enemies, and placed them under my feet. 
Shall I ever agaui distrust the continuance of that 
mercy which has been so greatly manifested in my 
deliverance from so dreadful a bondage? Oh be 
such a thought far fi'om me, and let me ever rest 



CONFLICT AND VICTOEY. 79 

secure that He who hath begun the good work will 
indeed carry it out to full perfection. But let me 
take heed. 

New-yeae's day, 1819. What an eventful year 
has the last been to me, and what astonishing mer- 
cies have been poured out upon my unworthy head. 
Who could have thought it possible, after what I 
have already recorded, that I should ever again fall 
into the net of my deadly enemy ? Yet so unwatch- 
ful have I been, and so lifted up by pride, that I 
considered myself now completely secure against 
my former propensity, and that it was totally im- 
possible ever to be overcome by table-beer. But 
one unhappy day I was thus again brought into 
disgracefijl distress. Yet there was still abundant 
reason for thankfulness, as God restrained me from 
either spirits, porter, wine, or ale. But this table- 
beer was a little leaven which would soon have 
leavened the whole lump. Although God had ena- 
bled me to cut o£l the right hand almost, yet the 
retaining the use of beer was something 'like retain- 
ing one little finger of that hand. I was not suffered 
to remain long in this painful state, which com- 
menced on Monday afternoon, the 16th of Novem- 
ber, for on the Wednesday following I was seized 
with a most dreadful fit of the bile, and then began 
to recover. I felt myself to be an ungrateful, sin- 
ful creature, and desired to fall before a throne of 
grace, that I might obtain mercy and strength to 
set out again in the right path. I now found, by 
bitter experience, that it was absolutely necessary 
to give up every thing that could bring my soul 



80 JOHN VINE HALL. 

into similar distress from a similar cause, and that 
if I liad a spark of sincere love towards God, I must 
from this hour give up the use of all kinds of liquid 
containing any spirit. Accordingly, having received 
from God himself a holy desu^e to live to his glory, 
I called upon him to give me strength, and set for- 
ward again on Thursday evening, the 19th of No- 
vember, with the determination never to allow any 
thing stronger than tea or coffee to enter my lips 
again. In this blessed resoKition I have been ena- 
bled, through divine assistance, to continue to the 
present moment, and have uniformly substituted 
water for malt liquor with my meals, and instead of 
a glass of beer after my meals, I have ex^Dcrienced 
unspeakable comfort in taking nothing but milk 
and water. Oh, the greatness of the power of the 
grace of God ! It is indeed unconquerable, and I 
am a living witness of its miraculous influence. 
May my benevolent Creator grant, for Jesus Christ's 
sake, that I may remain a faithful witness to all 
eternity. 

October, 1820. How many humiliating circum- 
stances do I find when looking over my ledgers. En- 
tries scarcely legible, yet piercingly plain as to the 
miserable state I was reduced to through the abuse 
of wine when such entries were made. I view them 
with agony and grief. I then turn with grateful 
astonishment to the present circumstances of my 
spared life, and ardently desire to be filled with 
deep repentance before a gracious and patient God. 

I rejoice on account of my beloved wife and dear 
Mends, who are no longer fearful of evil tidings as 



CONFLICT AND VICTOKY. 81 

heretofore when my name is mentioned, and who 
are no longer ashamed of their relationship to a 
person who had caused them so much grief. What 
a contrast to those dreadful times when such fearful 
sights appeared before my eyes, that if I were not 
at this present time in the full possession of my 
senses, the very mention of such scenes would cre- 
ate a suspicion of insanity. At one time, being in 
bed and fully awake, with my dear wife sitting be- 
side me, I saw the figures of two frightful looking 
men extending their bodies apparently over the top 
of the bed, with long whips in their hands, with 
which they were flogging me, amid dreadful impre- 
cations, on account of my evil conduct. I caught 
fast hold of my wife, and screamed out in an agony 
of fright, which so alarmed her that she endeav- 
ored to escape from me ; but so great was my terror 
that I- held her fast in my arms, fearing that these 
demons should carry me away if she quitted the 
room. She alarmed the house, v/hich brought her 
sister and two maid-servants into the chamber; but 
I would not allow her to leave me during the night. 
This was after a fit of intoxication had subsided, 
but which had so deranged my nerves as to pro- 
duce temporary insanity; yet I recollect the cir- 
cumstances as plainly as if they were in action at 
the present moment. 

At many other times strange figures appeared 
before me, accusing me of all my former sinfal prac- 
tices, which were as plainly brought before my rec- 
ollection as if they had but recently taken place. 
Sometimes flashes of lightning appeared to ]3ass be- 



82 JOHN YIXE HALL. 

fore me, and ^vhen I inqiTired of these figures what 
sucli appearances signified, they would seem to an- 
swer that thej came from hell, and that they were 
commissioned to drag me there. All these things 
appeared real to my poor agitated mind, and al- 
most droye me distracted. One Sunday morning, 
while the people were passing to chni-ch, I jumped 
out of bed to follow a spirit with which I had 
been conyersing ; the supposed phantom leading 
me doyrn stairs to the door, which I opened to ad- 
mit of its departure. At this time I was perfectly 
fL'ee fi'om intoxication, but my neryes were all de- 
ranged in consequence of a yery late fit of intem- 
perance. 

Appearances of the strangest kind were contin- 
ually presented not only to my mind, but to my 
eyesight, and from this circumstance I can account 
for the tales of apparitions which haye seemed to 
appear to persons laboring under neryous iiTita- 
tion. But still these things appeared to be real, 
and were fi-ightfully distressing. At other times I 
haye been tempted to destroy myself, that the world 
might be rid of such a monster ; but now here I am, 
with my life redeemed fi'om destruction,' my health 
renewed hke the eagle's, my soul and body deyoted 
to God, to the honor and praise of his almighty 
power ; and for this reason, because " his mercy 
endureth for eyer." 

Often haye I taken the di^eadful glass into my 
hand, and looked at the wine with a sort of sensi- 
ble horror, yet had no power to resist the strong 
impulse to let it pass my throat. Many and many 



CONFLICT AND VICTOEY. 83 

a time lias conscience plainly told me that this con- 
duct would assuredly bring me to ruin, my children 
to beggary, and my wife to an untimely grave ; yet, 
with all these reflections, the dreadful habit was so 
strong, that I gave way to its force. Many a tinie 
also I have looked with strong emotion upon poor 
ragged children playing in the streets, and when 
my sympathies have been excited even to tears, the 
same faithful monitor has whispered to my mind, 
" Such will be the fate of your own children, unless 
you break off this destructive habit." But all these 
things were unavailing ; affliction, tenderness, con- 
science, had no power, and nothing short of Om- 
nipotence could perform the mighty act. 

My happiness is now unspeakably great, arising 
from constant temperance and sobriety, and from 
being also at all times ready to meet the business 
and difficulties of the day, thus living in some very 
small degree to the glory of God. Even in the 
midst of all these blessings, how much anguish does 
it occasion my soul to catch myself sometimes mus- 
ing over scenes of past sensual indulgence, till for- 
mer sins appear to be almost recommitted. What 
but the precious blood of Christ could atone for 
such deeply-rooted pollution? I have been often 
pained by the most abominable thoughts crowding 
upon my mind, even in the midst of secret prayer 
as weU as in the house of God, and have therefore 
been led to suspect whether I was truly sincere in 
the profession which I had made. These things are 
very painful, and yet I not only delight, yes, greatly 
delight in the ordinances of God, both public and 



84 JOHN VINE HALL. 

private, but feel great pleasure also in the society 
of those who love his blessed name, and who by his 
grace are enabled to praise him in their lives and 
conversation. I do indeed feel great delight, un- 
speakably so, in the company of a sincere Chris- 
tian, and I hate every evil way and every thing 
within myself as well as others that would dishonor 
the Son of God. It now affords me great, unspeak- 
able pleasure to point out to poor perishing sinners 
the willingness of God to forgive all who repent and 
turn from their sins, and also to stand forth as a 
witness to his faithfulness and power to subdue the 
most inveterate habits. I, who was a most dread- 
ful drinker, even I am become one of the most sober 
men in England, through the power of God alone. 



EMANCIPATION. 85 



CHAPTEE lY. 

EMANCIPATION. 

1819 TO 1821— AGE 45-47. 

Feb. 18, 1819. Blessed be God tliat thirteen 
weeks have now passed in which I have enjoyed 
the uninterrupted gratification of never tasting any 
other hquids than coffee, tea, or milk and water. 
Oh what mercy ! And so much have I enjoyed this 
latter beverage, that it becomes sweeter and sweeter 
to my taste every day, and my health and spirits 
are kept in a finer tone than ever, through the rich 
mercy of that Redeemer whose power and goodness 
have been so resplendently displayed in healing all 
my diseases and redeeming my life from destruc- 
tion. The peaceful state of my mind, and my pros- 
pects of futurity, are beyond description ; and I now 
look forward with ineffable delight, accompanied 
with a brilliant hope that I shall be enabled to 
spend the remainder of my days on earth to the 
honor and glory of God, and to be with him for 
ever in heaven. 

Maech 14. The rich mercy of God has permit- 
ted me to see another birthday, after struggling for 
seven years against a most fatal evil ; and although 
his goodness has prevented my being cut down as 
a cumberer of the ground, yet how many have en- 
tered the gates of death by the very same path from 
which, by the most astonishing mercy, He has res- 



86 JOHN VINE HALL. 

ciied my soul. I deeply lament that mv gi'atitude 
bears so little proportion to liis goodness ; and the 
more particularly when the contrast is so very and 
so awfully striking between my present condition 
and the fate of my old companions. My early 
fi'iends snatched away, and gone — where? J. 

S , my bosom-fiiend, died at thu'ty-six — gone ; 

J. T died suddenly, in a shocking state of dis- 
ease, at forty — victims of intemperance. My old 

companion Lieut. K , wild and intemperate, cut 

off at thirty-one. J. S at thirty went the same 

dreadful path to death. T. K , paralytic, be- 
ginning in intemperance, died at thirty-nine. W. 

C at twenty-eight, the same. J. P , a man 

whom one would call excellent at times, died raying 
mad from intemperance, at. forty-two. Why was it 

not my fate ? T. E , whom I often enyied for 

his sobriety, became so much the yictim of intem- 
perance as to be removed to a mad-house, where he 
now hes, insane. And yet I, the most unworthy of 
all, I am preserved to tell the dismal tale, aind not 
only these my companions have fallen, but others 
also, with whom I joined in the midnight revel, are 
reduced to beggary, and are now wandering about 
in misery and contempt. I feel deeply on their 
account, 

* ' And fain mv pity -would reclaim, 
And snatch the firebrand from the flame ; 
But feeble my compassion proves." 

None but God ! 

July 19. Blessed be God that a whole year has 
now passed away since I tasted any thing stronger 



, EMANCIPATION. 87 

than table-beer. And yet I desire to look back with 
humble sorrow that even table-beer was too strong 
for me in November last. But again I desire to 
rejoice in the strength of that grace which has ena- 
bled me to give up what I was so exceedingly fond 
of. I cannot, I will not restrain the rejoicing of my 
heart and soul in consequence of the goodness of 
my redeeming God in removing one propensity 
after another, to make way for my more complete 
enjoj^ment of his blessed self. Had I all the pow- 
ers of all the finest orators upon the earth, I could 
not describe the inward joy that I feel in being 
brought to love my God. When my feet were first 
turned from the w^ays of sin, I was exceedingly anx- 
ious to know what the world thought of me, but 
now I seem only concerned to live in close union 
with Christ my Lord, through the sanctifying influ- 
ences of his Holy Spirit. I am indeed a brand 
plucked from the burning of hell, and now my soul 
burns towards the living God. The being saved 
from the power of my former habits causes this 
great exultation ; and now that, by the grace of 
God, I am enabled to live to his praise in the bo- 
som of my family and before the world, I find my 
heart filled with ineffable delight in being myself 
brought out to speak to his faithfulness, who has 
declared that he willeth not the death of a sinner. 
My appetite for holy things increases. I love the 
people of God, and it is my delight to open my 
house and heart to receive his ministers. Daily do 
I delight to study the Scriptures, and I feel an in- 
creasing desire to obtain a knowledge of the whole 



88 JOHN VINE HALL. 

counsel of God, that I may, in my poor way, be at 
all times ready to give an answer to myself and to 
others. I have also abundant reason to rej.oice in 
the goodness of God in making all my enemies to 
be at peace with me, and in continuing to me the 
friendship of good men. He also condescends to 
make me useful to others^ and to dispose my heart 
to support his cause to some considerable extent, 
although it is grief to me that I have not a pocket 
equal to my desires. These things, my dear chil- 
dren, I T\T:ite for your example, entreating you al- 
ways to be liberal towards God, and never withdraw 
your hand from doing good. God will assuredly 
bless you most abundantly; I am his mtness. You 
Vv^iU have many difficulties, but the greatest of all 
will be the opposition of your own heart to the 
ways of God ; yet all these tilings, which are the 
lions, the grace of God can surmount. Kemember 
your poor father, B-emember how he used to kneel 
with you, morning and evening, in prayer to God, 
and how he used to join with you in repeating 
hymns, and in singing, " Praise God, from whom all 
blessings flow." Kemember these things, and do not 
forget that your father was once averse to all such 
engagements, till the grace of God enabled him to 
fight every battle, and to conquer — for his glory, 
the glory of the Lord. 

July 28. The Bev. J. Liefchild and the Eev. J. 
Slatterie supped and slept at my house. 

Sept. 23. Had the pleasure of entertaining six 
ministers this evening : namely, G. Burder, J. Slat- 
terie, J. Roife, J. Chapman, G. Bentliff, and E. Jen- 



EMANCIPATION. 89 

kins, and I felt it a delightful honor to entertain 
so many servants of my Lord. What a wonderful 
change has the Almighty made in my heart and 
mind, that it should be my greatest delight to min- 
gle with those persons whom I formerly despised, 
at least despised their holy conversation. 

I often look back with astonishment at my pre- 
sumption in engaging in public prayer at "Worces- 
ter, and I now tremble at every temptation of my 
own mind even to think of engaging in such a man- 
ner again. My place is to be still, and see and 
hear. 

Jan. 14, 1820. Temptation — a flattering one. 

This day J. B gave a dinner to a select party 

of eight gentlemen, and invited me to be one of the 
number. The invitation was highly flattering to 
me. There were also some peculiar circumstances 
respecting this dinner, in which I was principally 
concerned, by having been the instrument of efi'ect- 
ing a reconciliation between two of the persons in- 
vited; but I declined, stating that I never drank 
wine, and therefore could not sit at table with any 
comfort where the party were to meet for the ex- 
press purpose of enjoying a glass of wine together. 

Mr. B urged his request by saying that if I 

would only favor him with my presence, I should 
be allowed to drink nothing but milk and water ; 
and this he urged with so much good-nature, that 
it seemed hard to refuse, and I told him I would 
consider the matter and send him an answer. I 
instantly repaired to my closet, and kneeling before 
a throne of mercy, entreated power from God to 



90 JOHN VINE HALL. 

withstand this temptation, half incHned to yield. 
Satan had finely gilded this invitation by the insin- 
uation that my company was so much esteemed, 
that if I would but join the party, they would excuse 
my drinking wine. The snare did not take. The 
Lord was my defence, strength was given me to 
stand fast for the honor of Christ, and I wrote Mr. 
B a polite note, stating that I could not over- 
come the obstacle to my accepting his polite invi- 
tation. Blessed be God, who giveth power to the 
faint. 

I was tempted in the same kind of way about 
four months ago to dine with the grand-jury, when 
I was one of that body, and the temptation was 
strong from within as well as outwardly, and I be- 
gan to reason with myself, but started as from a 
dream, and mentally exclaimed, " No, Lord, no ; and 
for thine own honor I pray thee give me strength 
to resist every solicitation." I quitted the party 
and sat down to dinner with my own family ; but I 
had not been seated five minutes when the foreman 
called for me to accompany him to the dinner. He 
was astonished at my refusal, and went away de- 
claring that he would levy a fine for my non-attend- 
ance, which was accordingly done, and I escaped 
as a bird from the snare of the fowler. Blessed be 
God! 

Makch 14. The eighth return of that memorable 
day in which God was pleased to commence his 
work in my soul. He has mercifully kept alive his 
love in my heart, and my bodily health and tempo- 
ral comforts have been uninterrupted since my last 



- EMANCIPATION. 91 

birthday. I have also experienced much delight in 
the daily study of the Bible, committing to memory 
twenty-five hymns, with seven of the prose psalms — 
27, 34, 51, 103, 116, 121, 139— and these were quite 
a treasure to me, either in walking or in retirement, 
so that my religious stock is much enriched with 
knowledge truly precious. My desire after heav- 
enly things has likewise considerably increased, and 
instead of God being never in my thoughts, as in 
former times, he is now always in my affections, 
whether at my desk or at any other employment. 
Indeed his mercy is so great in giving me power to 
resist temptation, that I conceive it to be impossi- 
ble for human language to express my love towards 
him, or my fervent desire to be holy ; and yet, with 
all these gifts, I tremble more than ever I have 
done before through fear that I may do or speak, 
or even think, any thing that should bring dishonor 
upon his blessed name, a name more dear to my 
soul than ever. Many talk of the great merit due 
to myself for giving up every kind of liquor and 
abstaining from company, but this is a sort of blas- 
phemy to my ears, and I never allow any person to 
leave my presence without warmly declaring that 
the whole work is the work of God alone, by whose 
strength and grace, shed abroad in my heart, all 
these blessings are maintained. "I will praise thee, 
O Lord ; for thou hast delivered my soul from the 
lowest hell." I may indeed say from the lowest hell 
when I consider my former miserable state. So 
dreadful was the effect of intoxication upon my 
body, that my face and eyes after a fit remained so 



92 JOHN VINE HALL. 

swollen and disfigured as to be trnly frightful even 
to myseK. My hands and fingers were also hard 
and stifi', my beard gTown long and hard, and more 
like the hair of a horse than a human creature. 
My mind full of horror and the most dismal appre- 
hensions, temper iiTitable and ii'ritated at the least 
noise or movement ; body full of agony and entu-ely 
sleepless for several days and nights together, wan- 
dering from room to room ^vith feelings of anguish 
and despair, attended with dreadful temptations to 
commit suicide, that the world might be ridden of 
such a monster. A man was kept in the house for 
thi^ee months to watch me at every step and to sup- 
ply my wants. All my former sins harrowed up my 
soul, accompanied with temptations to doubt the 
power and Tvillingness of God to forgive so gTeat a 
rebel. This is but a faint picture of the fulness of 
trouble brought upon one who seemed lost beyond 
hope. The exceeding riches of the mercy of God 
shone forth and rescued me from the kon hand of 
Satan, and brought me out with a victorious arm as 
a monument of the power of divine grace. " Oh to 
grace how great a debtor !" 

My dear vriie was now made completely happy. 
She had faithfully and tenderly watched over me, 
and instead of uttering reproaches, only reproached 
me by her tears, and still encouraged me not to de- 
spair, as she considered that I was sincerely desn^- 
ous to conquer my besetting sin. She was incessant 
hkewise in her apphcations at the throne of mercy, 
praying even against hope. The Lord heard her 
cries and mine also, and with a hand all divine 



EMANCIPATION. 93 

snatclied me from the arms of Satan to erect a fam- 
ily altar to his praise and glory. I was formerly 
termed a good singer and a jovial fellow, which fre- 
quently led me into dissipation. But now, blessed 
be God, I sing the songs of Zion, and have strength 
given me to reject every invitation to join the social 
board, and am more respected than ever, even by 
the persons with whom I refuse to associate. My 
bodily health is also superlatively good, being free 
from every kind of pain or disease, having at all 
times an excellent appetite, and confining myself to 
plain food, and never drinking any other liquors 
than tea, coffee, milk and water, or toast and water. 
Thus has a merciful God completely changed my 
appetite as well as my inordinate desires, and he 
has made me to be the happiest man in the world. 
Blessed be his name. 

Sept. 30. I have made it a constant rule, for the 
last eighteen months, never to quit the shop, when 
it has been closed at night, without kneeling and 
expressing hearty thanks to God for his gracious 
care over me ; and I never quit my room, when I go 
at eleven o'clock to dress and shave, without kneel- 
ing before the throne to return thanks for preser- 
vation to such part of the day, and to implore a 
continuance of divine aid for the remainder ; for I 
feel myself so very weak and so hable to sin, that I 
dare not trust myself even for a moment. 

Oct. 6. I have been thinking, should I die this 
day, v/hat are my prospects of futurity, and should 
I Hve many years, what do I expect to obtain from 
a life of holiness as a merit. If I could attain to 



94 JOHN VINE HALL. 

the holiness of an archangel, still the blood of the 
Son of God must be my only plea, my only trust ; 
therefore, if I am not safe in Jesus now, even at 
this moment, I cannot expect that any advance in 
hoHness will entitle me to a place in heaven as a 
reward. All, all must be of the free mercy of God, 
in and through and for the sake of his beloved Son, 
who shed his blood for me individually as well as 
for the whole world. These are my present pros- 
pects, and Christ is all my trust. But shall I not 
fall again into my besetting sin ? No. Although I 
feel my weakness, yet the promise of God is my 
support. He will not forsake the work of his own 
hand. The honor of Christ is also on my side, a 
strong defence, and my hearty love to Christ and 
to his cause is also another defence. Christ is also 
my Shepherd, to protect me against the assaults of 
my foe ; and yet with all this I feel it every moment 
necessary* to cherish the apostle's admonition, "Let 
him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he 
fall." 

Cheisti^ias day. How many mercies have we to 
thank thee for, O Lord. This day our aged mother 
passed the day with us in happiness and comfort, 
surrounded by our children. After dinner we sang, 
" Praise God, from whom all blessings flow," and 
then we repeated hymns in rotation, beginning with 
myself, my dear wife, down to the youngest that 
could speak, even our Eleanor, who, though only 
two years and a half old, could repeat three or four 
hymns in a- very pretty manner. Oh, it was delight- 
ful to hear a whole family engaged in praising our 



' EMANCIPATION. 95 

glorious God for liis infinite mercy in preserving 
our feefc in tlie patli to heaven. May we all press 
forward to the end. 

Sunday, Jan. 14, 1821. Why am I permitted to 
hail with joy the opening of this day, and to feel an 
ardent desire to go to the house of my God that I 
may worship him with a grateful and contrite spirit? 
"Why am I not now lying on yonder couch, as afore- 
time, in a state of intoxication and madness, dis- 
graceful and disgusting? Why is all this change, 
all this reverse ? It is because the compassions of 
my God fail not. Why is it delightful thus alone 
to meditate on the blessed expectation which my 
God hath given me of a happy immortality, mixed 
with a fervent desire to honor him in all my ways? 
It is because he hath blotted out my sins, for his 
own name's sake, that in me, as well as in Paul, yes, 
even in me, He might show forth all long-suffering, 
and exhibit his sovereign power over the heart of 
the stoutest rebel that ever was turned from the 
path of sin to delight in the Lord his God. Dear 
Jesus, it is to thy sacrifice that I am indebted for 
all the happiness that surrounds me, and for that 
lively hope which ever lives within me. Oh help 
me to live to thy glory. 

Jan. 17. Went to see poor Mr. B . Found 

him lying in bed in a most dreadful state from re- 
cent intoxication, a living picture of what I once 
was. Poured out my heart in thankfulness to God 
for his unspeakable mercy and forbearance towards 
myself in having raised me up from the depths of 
hell and granting dehverance from my dreadful foe. 



96 JOHN VINE HALL. 

Entreated tlie Lord to have mercy on poor B , 

and raise him up to become a monument of sparing 
mercy. Warned, exhorted, and encouraged him still 
to trust in God. Told him that millions of sinners 
who were once in as bad a state had been recov- 
ered. Desired him to look at myself, who had 
been worse than he had ever been, though now a 
wondrous monument of the power of the gTace oi 
God. Bade him look up with lively hope. 

Jan. 20. Mr. B called on me this morning 

in a state of deep penitence, and quite recovered. 
He was full of sorrow, and expressed determination 
to set out again in the ways of God. Said he was 

sorely tempted at J. M 's, but resisted every 

solicitation. 

Maech 14. Birthday. This day commences my 
forty-eighth year, under brighter and happier pros- 
pects than any former year of my life. May I not 
then call upon my soul to bless God's holy name ? 
This morning I renew my covenant with my God, 
and call upon him to take me under the shadow of 
his wings, and grant me strength to walk before his 
face in happy obedience and cheerful confidence, 
trusting solely in the sacrifice of my Lord and Sav- 
iour Jesus Christ. 

Apbil 24. This being a remarkably fine morn- 
ing, my dear Mary, self, and children, went down 
the river in a boat, and we sang " Praise God" over 
the very spot where I once fell into the water, twenty 
feet deep, and escaped vvdth my life. 

May 22. As soon as I alighted fi'om the coach 
in London, I stepped aside and mentally thanked a 



EMANCIPATION. 97 

gracious God for Ms protection, and entreated he 
would keep me from all kind of sin. "When I ar- 
rived at home, I stepped into the churchyard before 
going to my own house, and then poured out my 
heart to God in thankfulness for haying protected 
me throughout the day, and for having enabled me, 
by his powerful grace, to go to London and back 
again without tasting any kind of refreshment on 
the road, and drinking only a glass of water, except 
breakfast, all the time I was in London. 

Mrs. S of Strood is a remarkable instance 

of the goodness of God towards me in favoring my 
exertions to render service to others. About twenty 
years ago she lived in Maidstone as under-servant, 
and having been ill-treated, she made her complaint 
to me, which prompted me instantly to insert an 
advertisement in the paper for a housekeeper's sit- 
uation. In consequence of this she was engaged 

as housekeeper to the late T. S , Esq. Her 

conduct was so exemplary that within two years he 
made her an offer of marriage, which she accepted, 
and became the wife of a man possessed of two 
thousand a year in landed property. Mr. S — — 
died about four years ago, and bequeathed to his 
widow five hundred pounds per year during her 

life. Mrs. S very lately acknowledged her ob- 

Hgations to my instrumentality. I thank God for 
this great instance of his goodness, and desire to 
say, from the bottom of my heart, "Not unto me, O 
Lord, but unto thyself be all the praise." 

Peovidence. I had been walking by the side of 
the river, and having arrived at the place where a 

John Vine Hall. 5 



98 JOHX TINE HALL. 

poor widow resided wlio had received me into lier 
liouse in July, 1818, at tlie time tliat I was close to 
the water, and insensible fi'om drinking, I was in- 
duced to call and see the person who had kindly 
sheltered me. She was at the washing-tnb hard at 
work, but exceedingly dejected, and shed tears as I 
approached her. I found that she had been hard 
pressed for repayment of two pounds which she had 
borrowed and was not able to pay, and being threat- 
ened by the lender, she was greatly distressed. I 
told her that I saw the hand of God most clearly 
in directing me to her house at such a crisis. The 
poor creatiu'e's countenance soon became brighter, 
and I thanked God for haying enabled me to re- 
pay the kindness I had experienced from this poor 
woman. 



**THE SINNER'S FRIEND.*' 99 



CHAPTEK Y. 

«'THE SINNER'S FRIEND." 

"The Sinner's Friend." March 1, 1821. Ke- 
flecting upon the astonishing goodness of God tow- 
ards such a great sinner as myself, and considering 
how much benefit and encouragement I had received 
from the perusal of " Bogatzky's Golden Treasury," 
I felt deeply concerned that books of this nature 
were not more easily attainable by the poor. It 
was suggested to my mind that a small selection 
might be made from this valuable little work, and 
distributed at a low price, or gratis, throughout the 
town of Maidstone, whereby it might please the 
Lord to awaken or encourage the downcast to seek 
for mercy. I determined to set about the work, but 
was immediately deterred by the fear of having 
been led to think of this plan more for my own 
honor than for the glory of my God. This harassed 
me considerably, and the more I felt desirous of 
prosecuting my plan, the more I became fearful of 
indulging self-complacency. I hesitated several 
days, and finding that I could not overcome the 
first suggestion, I made it a matter of fervent prayer 
to be directed how to act. After struggling three 
weeks, I v/as brought to a resolution to make a 
small selection of the most encouraging portions 
from Bogatzky and print them as a tract. I thought 



100 JOHN VINE HALL. 

lialf a slieet, containing sixteen portions, would be 
sufficient, and for tliis ]Dni'pose I selected about fifty 
of the choicest, from T^-liich I intended to cnll out 
sixteen ; but when I had proceeded thus far, I found 
that so many good portions still remained behind, 
that I could not bring myself to give them up ; 
therefore I extended my yiews from half a sheet to 
a whole sheet. Again and again I prayed the Lord 
to take the whole matter into his own hand, and 
root out of my heaii; every disposition contrary to 
his honor and glory. 

Hawing fixed upon thii'ty portions fi'om Bogatz- 
ky, I wrote two portions myself by way of introduc- 
tion, being the first and second, ^d put the whole 
to press."^ At first I thought of r)rinting only five 
hundred copies: but considering that if I should 
find this number insufiicient, I should have much to 
regret after the press should have been broken up, 
I resolved upon printing a thousand, which were 
completed on the 29th of May, when my httle book 
appeared, in a neat, blue cover, bearing the title of 
"The Sixntik's Feizxd." I was now puzzled to 
know in what manner to get them into cii'culation, 
as I wished to do it as secretly as possible, having 
never mentioned the ciiTumstance to any person. 

]Mat 29. This morning, with an anxious heart, 
and having first entreated of the Lord wisdom ancP 
discretion, I set out to distribute my little book. I 

* From time to time the compiler of "Tiie Sinner's Fiiend" 
TVTote a page and substituted it for one of those oiiginallv exti-act- 
ed from Bogatzlrr, -iintil at length it was almost entirely his own 
work 



''THE SINNEB'S FRIEND." 101 

put three dozen into my pocket, and proceeded over 
the bridge towards the houses of the poor in "West 

Borough, and the first person I met was Mr. F , 

who had been an old associate at cards and dissi- 
pation, to whom I presented the first copy. I then 
walked up to the houses, but had not courage to 
open a single door; and while I stood pondering 
what to do, a poor woman approached, leading a 
little child. I plucked up courage and requested 
her to accept a little book, which she received with 
an expression of countenance that led me to think 
she knew the truth, and she kindly undertook to 
deliver ten copies to her neighbors. I was pleased 
with this beginning, and thanked God for it. I 
then went under the cliff and left four copies at 
three poor houses, and from thence I went to the 
top of Stone-street, and gave twenty-four copies at 
different houses, including four to strangers whom 
I met on the road. I prayed the Lord to bless 
them to poor sinners. I returned home and replen- 
ished . myself, and left six copies at each of eight 
little shops, to be disposed of at threepence each ; 
and to encourage the people to put them into their 
windows, I gave them the books to sell for their 
own benefit. 

I had not returned home more than half an hour, 
when a stranger came with one of the books in his 
hand, which he had purchased at one of the places 
where I had left them for sale, and requested to 
have a dozen, which I gave him, but refused to take 
any thing for them, stating that I was authorized to 
disti-ibute them gratis. 



102 JOHN VINE HALL. 

June 2. This evening being Saturday, I walked 
to and fro upon the Barming road, and distributed 
twenty-two copies among the poor people returning 
from market. I have thus disposed of two hundred 
and thirty-nine copies in various ways. Some I 
threw into the houses where I found the door or 
windows open, and left them to the mercy of God 
to bless them to the inmates. 

June 5. This morning a poor old woman inquired 
for the gentleman who had given away " The Sin- 
ner's Friend" at the different houses. She said 
that a neighbor had lent her one of them, which she 
had read, and she should be thankful to procure 
one for herself. She said it was a sweet book. I 
asked her how she came to think so. She rephed, 
"Because she was a sinner, and it just suited her." 
Miss E picked up one of the books in the pas- 
sage leading into her uncle's house, and was sur- 
prised at finding it there. SupiDosed some travel- 
ling bookseller must have left it, but she could not 
imagine how the man should know that she was a 
sinner ; said the book just suited her case, and she 
would not part with it for any money. 

June 9. I disposed of thirty-five at the poor 
houses behind Week-street. In one of these saw 
three hearty children sleeping on the hearthstone 
before the fireplace, huddled together with their 
arms around each other's necks. The father and 
mother were out at work, and had left the two 
youngest, three and four years old, under the care 
of the eldest, about eight years old. It was now 
afternoon, and they had not had any food since the 



''THE SINNEE'S FEIEND." 103 

morning, and did not expect to have any till their 
father and mother came home at night. While the 
eldest was telling me this tale, the youngest cried 
out to me, "More dinney." Poor Httle creatures! 
The eldest boy said that his father worked on 
Penenden heath from morning till night, and his 
mother at the paper-mill ; that himself and broth- 
ers were left at home all day, and had only a bit of 
bread in the morning and the same at night. Gave 
the eldest sufficient to purchase a loaf of bread and 
cheese, and away they all scampered to the chand- 
ler's shop. 

June 14. Gave eight to Mr. P , who said that 

a person who had seen one of them, had been led 
to make inquiry for the way of salvation in conse- 
quence of being alarmed at what he read in " The 
Sinner's Friend." As my little book was now in- 
quired for, and as many persons expressed their 
comfort from having perused it, I found it neces- 
sary to pray for a humble, watchful spirit, that I 
might not be led away by any notions that I had 
done any thing of myself, and I told all the people 
to give their thanks to God, and not to me. 

June 16. Saw Mary S , who said she had 

received a book called "The Sinner's Friend," 
sealed up and directed. She said that when she 
read the words, "Sinner, this little book is for you," 
she felt hurt, and thought it was an insult; but 
when she read the contents, she was convinced that 
the book was sent to her from the best of motives, 
and that she intended coming to chapel to hear Mr. 
Jenkins preach. I now began to be very thankful 



104 JOHN VINE HALL. 

that I had not been so narrow-minded as to print 
only five hundred copies. 

July 20. Having now disposed of all my copies 
of "The Sinner's Friend," I desire most humbly 
and most heartily to bless my God for all his mercy 
towards me, and to entreat a constant supply of 
grace to keep me ever watchful against pride, seK- 
sufficiency, and complacency, on account of having 
been employed in his blessed service. 

Nov. 13. The second edition, two thousand cop- 
ies, of " The Sinner's Friend," was published tliis 



Four copies of "The Sinner's Friend" dropped 
in the street, and saw them picked up by laboring 
men going home from market. Twelve tO' Mr. 

M , a most notorious blasphemer about two 

years ago, but he has become a wonderful instance 
of the transforming power of divine grace. He 
told me that he had given one to a swearing man 
at Stilebridge at the very moment he was pouring 
forth the most horrid imprecations. The man took 
the book in his hand, looked earnestly at the title, 
paused, heaved a deep sigh, and instead of letting 
loose a volley of oaths, he tremblingly said, " I am 
sure there is something good in this book, and I 
shall keep it for your sake ;" and then with great 
emotion he added, " I shall never forget you." 

Six to my friend N on a visit at my house, 

which gave me an opportunity of entreating her to 
seek the Lord with the fullest purpose of heart. 

Four to a poor woman who had repeatedly ob- 
tained them to distribute among her poor acquaint- 



''THE SINNEE'S FKIEND." 105 

ances. Three to H , and conversed with him 

on the necessity of seeking the Lord. 

New edition of " The Sinnee's Feiend." Through 
the mercy of God, I have been allowed to publish a 
new edition — three thousand copies — of " The Sin- 
ner's Friend," and having already had the pleasure 
of distributing upwards of three thousand copies 
gratuitously, I propose to sell the present edition 
at or about prime cost. 

Three days' journey to France. Distributed 
"The Sinner's Friend" to sailors belonging to the 
pier at Dover ; to a lady and gentleman at the inn, 
and spoke to them on the mercy of God ; to a gen- 
tleman on board the packet-boat ; thrown into the 
cabin ; to a lady at Calais ; to the minister at Ca- 
lais, etc. 

John Akhent called to remind me that four years 
ago I had given him six copies, one of which was 
made useful to his poor mother, who was then in 
great grief on account of her eldest son having been 
killed by an accident. At this time she read the 
portion on the eighth page, "Despair not," etc., 
and the Lord was pleased to bless it to her soul. 

Thirteen to a wagoner's mate, James Crouch of 
Staplehurst. This lad, seventeen years ago, came 
to purchase a copy of " The Sinner's Friend," which 
gave me an opportunity of speaking to him on the 
way of salvation, and I was delighted to find this 
humble peasant in his round frock rejoicing in the 

Lord. Fifty to Mrs. W , the woman who keeps 

the entrance to the castle at Hastings, to dispose of 
to visitors who go to inspect the ruins. She wrote 

5* 



106 JOHN VINE HALL. 

me requesting a few more copies, as she had dis- 
posed of those left her by my dear wife a few weeks 
ago. How merciful is the Lord to open this new 
way of placing " The Sinner's Friend" in the hands 
of persons visiting the castle. 

Six to a poor lame man, and preached the Lord 
Jesus to him with energy and fire. The poor man 
was exceedingly thankful. Four to a poor dumb 
woman. There was something exceedingly inter- 
esting in this case. This poor creature, a stranger, 
came into the shop and spread open a sampler on 
which was worked a yerse indicative of the joys of 
heaven. She motioned me to read it, and then 
pointed to some blue-covered memorandum-books, 
and holding threepence in her hand, gave me to 
understand that she wanted one. I laid them be- 
fore her, but she did not want a blank-book, and 
she pointed to the letters on the sampler to make 
me comprehend that she wanted a printed book. I 
put several before her; still she was uneasy, and 
again pointed to the verse on the sampler to make 
me understand that she wanted a book about sal- 
vation. I was still at a loss, but as she still pre- 
sented the threepence, I was induced to lay " The 
Sinner's Friend" before her; but as it was in a 
brown cover, she was still dissatisfied, till I opened 
the title-page, and then her eyes sparkled with joy, 
and she again offered me the money, which was 
refused. I gave her four copies, when she instantly 
put out her hand and shook mine, then put her 
hand on her bosom and looked upwards, pointing 
with her finger, and with a grateful smile indicated 



"THE SINNEE'S FEIEND.'* 107 

that she had got what she wanted, and she imme- 
diately went away. It occurred to me afterwards 
that she must have seen one of the former editions 
of " The Sinner's Friend" in a blue cover, and this 
led her to point to the blue-covered books when she 
first came into the shop. 

Three to Dick S , a notorious drunkard. 

Saw him this evening in a sober condition, and 
spoke to him of sin, and of Christ to pardon. The 
poor fellow listened with great attention. On my 
knees implored the Lord to have mercy on this 
poor man, and save him from drunkenness as he 
had done me. 

The chaplain to the county prison called and 
acquainted me that he had distributed these little 
books to some of the poor wretches in prison. He 
said he had no book so calculated to do good to 
the prisoners. Blessed be God for his mercy in 
thus favoring my little book, and may the Lord 
have all the praise. 

Twelve copies to the Eev. Eowland Hill person- 
ally at my house. 

Three to a poor sailor who knew James Covey, 
the poor seaman who lost both his legs in Lord 
Duncan's victory, and of whom a tract is circulated. 
Spoke to him of Christ. He said that James Covey 
used to give him good advice, and tell him to seek 
the Lord. The poor man shook hands with me to 
express his feehngs of gratitude. God be thanked 
for granting me this mercy. 

April 26, 1830. Six to Kev. Eowland Hill's 
coachman, D . He said "The Sinner's Friend'* 



108 JOHN VINE HALL. 

had been made useful. Thanks, ten thousand thou- 
sand thanks to my gracious God for having spared 
my Hfe to the present hour, and granted me the 
opportunity of distributing 9,000 copies of the little 
work gratuitously, besides the sale of 5,835 copies, 
making 14,835 since it was first published in 1829. 
Surely the Lord's blessing and mercy is indeed in 
this thing, and to his name I desire to render gTate- 
ful praise. 

Twelve to T. C , a staff-sergeant at the bat- 
tle of Waterloo. Had been in twenty-two engage- 
ments and escaped unwounded. After Waterloo he 
became converted to the Captain of salvation, and 
was emx3loyed by the Naval and Military Bible As- 
sociation to distribute the word of God. He had 
been lately out of employ, and leaving his wife des- 
titute in London, he went all the way to Brighton 
to present a memorial to the king, to which no reply 
was given. Last week he walked from Brighton to 

Maidstone to wait upon General B , but without 

success. In this extremity he addressed a letter to 

Lord K , and yesterday took the letter himself, 

and had an interview with his lordship, who dismiss- 
ed him unrelieved. The poor humble follower of 
Christ had prayed earnestly to the Lord of glory to 
appear for him in his utter destitution, and the Lord 
heard his cry and answered it in the following re- 
markable manner. 

In the evening, after returning from Lord 

B 's, the poor man received a letter from his 

lordship to wait on him the next day. The poor 
man was naturally surprised, and while he sat mus- 



"THE SINNEK'S FKIEND." 109 

ing in a small apartment occupied by one Epps, a 

tanner, who should open the door but Lord E 

himself! Something which the poor soldier had 
either said or written had made such an impression 

on Lord R 's mind, under the influence of the 

Spirit of God, that he could not rest till he saw this 
poor man again, and instead of waiting till three 
o'clock in the afternoon, according to his own ap- 
pointment, he was with him so early as noon, and 
sat nearly an. hour patiently listening to a poor sol- 
dier detailing the wonderful ways of the Lord ; and 
then Lord E presented the poor penniless, ser- 
vant of God with no less a sum than one hundred 
and twenty-five pounds sterling, and quitted the 
house. " Oh that men would praise the Lord for 
his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the 
children of men !" Had I not taken the notes into 
my own hands, I should scarcely have believed it, 
but I found them to be genuine and good. It is 

impossible to account for Lord R 's conduct in 

any other way than by ascribing it to the immedi- 
ate influence of God in making his lordship the 
instrument of his mercy towards his poor servant 

in the distressing hour, because Lord E is not 

a man likely to be led away by any enthusiastic 
feeUng, nor by want of judgment or sound discre- 
tion ; therefore it is the Lord's doing from begin- 
ning to end. I received the above astonishing nar- 
rative from T. C himself, who had come to 

purchase a small pocket-book in which to secure 
his treasure. He returned to London this after- 
noon by the three o'clock coach, furnished with the 



no JOHN VINE HALL. 

means of liquidating his debts and softening the 
anguish of his poor "vvife, who had been turned out 
of her lodgings since he quitted her a few days since, 
and their bed and furniture had been taken away. 

June 11, 1831. It has pleased a merciful God to 
spare my life to publish a new edition of this little 
work, which he has so greatly honored with his 
especial blessing as to bring it into increasing de- 
mand. This morning the eighth edition was pub- 
hshed. I laid the first copy before the Lord, pour- 
ing out my heart before him in thankfulness for 
past mercies, and entreated him to keep me exceed- 
ingly watchful and humble, that I might not be 
Ufted up with pride and self-complacency, and thus 
forfeit his future protection of my httle book, which 
I had dedicated anew to his tender care. Oh may 
his Holy Spirit ever preserve me in a humble, watch- 
ful, penitent, and believing frame of mind, that I 
may hve imceasingly to his glory. 

Six to B , a pious bricklayer, who 'told me 

that he had lately heard of two instances in which 
"The Sinner's Friend" had been made a blessing. 

I visited Mr. S ; he said, "Y/ords cannot 

express my thankfulness for ' The Sinner's Friend,' 
and for your kindness in coming to see me." On 
asking him what portion of " The Sinner's Friend" 
had been useful to him, he said, " Pardon for the 
worst of sinners," page 10. My heart was instantly 
overpowered with thankfulness to the Lord for his 
great mercy in thus honoring this portion, which 
I had written expressly for the purpose of meeting 
the case of the most abandoned. Mr. S said 



''THE SINNEE'S FEIEND." Ill 

that when he read that murderers were pardoned, 
he was immediately filled with hope, and from that 
hour the Lord began the work of conversion in his 
soul. 

Nov. 24. One personally to W. "Wilberforce, Esq., 
the champion for liberating the slaves in the West 
Indies. Mr. Wilberforce is residing with his son 
the Kev. E. Wilberforce, the rector of East Ear- 
leigh. I walked over to see Mr. Wilberforce, who 
received me with Christian courtesy, and chatted 
for some time, and shook me kindly by the hand as 
a brother in Christ. Mr. Wilberforce is extremely 
feeble, almost worn out with old age, yet lively and 
cheerful. 

Thirteen to a poor man, James Perry, from 
Chatham, to sell for his own benefit. This poor 
but very decent man had v/alked from Chatham 
this morning to sell matches. There was some- 
thing so exceedingly prepossessing in his appear- 
ance, that I was constrained to speak to him of 
Christ, and to my great delight I found him to be 
one born of the Holy Spirit. He had seen better 
, days. Gave him money and food. He had prayed 
the Lord to direct his course to some Christian 
friend who might relieve his wants. 

My dear friend Mr. Slatterie told me that a 
young man at Chatham, nephew to Mr. Foster, 
dated his first impressions of serious things of eter- 
nity from reading "The Sinner's Eriend." This 
young man joined the church of Christ. 

Mabch 14, 1833. This morning, on which I en- 
tered my sixtieth year, I am permitted the great 



112 JOHN VINE HALL. 

privilege and happiness to bring forth the tenth 
edition of " The Sinner's Friend," which I humbly 
dedicate to the Lord, with earnest prayer that he 
would be pleased to bless these as he has done 
those gone before. 

Twelve to Lady Le D , on her calHng pur- 
posely for conversation. 

Ten on going to Gravesend. Six at six cottages 
on Boxley Hill. Had some interesting conversa- 
tion with a respectable female in the van. Gave 
her a "Sinner's Friend," which she received with 
greaitemotion, saying, " This is the book which was 
made the means of conversion to a young relative 
of mine, who has since joined Mr. Slatterie's church." 
Blessed be the Lord. 

Feb. 11, 1834. This day I had the happiness of 
publishing the eleventh edition — seven thousand 
copies — of " The Sinner's Friend." With heartfelt 
gratitude I took twelve copies in my hand, and 
kneeling before the Lord, humbly dedicated them 
to him, with thankfulness for past blessings on this 
little work, and earnest entreaty for his favor on 
every copy of the new edition, for Christ's sake. 

A yoimg man, J. T , now residing at Green- 
street, near Sittingbourne, received his first impres- 
sions of religion from reading " The Sinner's Friend," 
and he is now become a preacher of the gospel 
which he once despised. 

A poor woman at Shaftesbury informed me — 
" You sent several copies of ' The Sinner's Friend.' 

I heard that the wife of H , who lately ran away, 

was in great affliction of body and mind. I sent 



''THE SINNER'S FEIEND." 113 

her a copy of ' The Sinner's Friend,' and from the 
time she first received this Httle book till the hour 
of her death, it was scarcely ever out of her eager 
grasp. She said that it had made her very, very 
happy. She slept with it upon her pillow, and died 
literally clasping it to her bosom." Blessed, for 
ever blessed be the Lord for so many and such re- 
peated proofs of his wondrous goodness in over- 
shadowing this little work with his especial favor, 
to the conversion and salvation of souls. I was so 
overpowered by this renewed token of mercy, that 
tears of gratitude rushed forth to the Lord. Oh 
may I be more humble and ^vatchful than ever. 

Fifteenth edition, 7,000 copies. May 25. Bless- 
ed be the Lord God Almig^ity for his great mercy 
in making it needful to print a new edition of "The 
Sinner's Friend," which he has so largely favored 
by the conversion of sinners. Oh may my heart be 
more than ever humble, that I lose not his precious 
favor by the allowance of pride or self-complacency 

or any kind of sin. Twelve to Mrs. B , the first 

copies of the new edition. Laid these twelve cop- 
ies before the Lord, imploring his blessing upon 
them and upon every copy of the new edition. 
When shall my wondering soul begin to praise 
him for so much mercy to so great a sinner as I 
am? 

On board the steam-packet from Gravesend to 
London. One to a lady who sat on the deck read- 
ing a book. Four to a gentleman who sat reading. 
I addressed him by saying, " I am an agriculturist 
sowing seed for the kingdom of heaven ; permit me, 



114 JOHN VINE HALL. 

sir, to present jou with, some of the seed." I spoke 
also to two other gentlemen on the way of salvation. 

Thirteen to yarions persons on my journey to 
and from Westerham, with earnest prayer that the 
Lord would bless every copy to the glory of his 
own most holy name and for the honor of his bless- 
ed Son. No tongue can tell, no mind can conceive 
of the ecstacy of my soul when exercised in pro- 
moting the glory of God. The name of Christ, or 
rather, the love of Christ, puts me into a perfect 
blaze, a very fire of ecstacy and delight. Oh may 
the Lord preserve me from extinguishing this fire, 
and may his grace uphold and keep me from the 
indulgence of any kind of sin. 

By the infinite memy of the Lord, I am spared 
to see the twentieth edition of "The Sinner's 
Friend." Y^hat ca.n I possibly render unto the 
Lord for all his benefits towards me? I took 
twelve copies of this new edition in my hand, and 
kneeling before the Lord, implored his blessing 
upon the work of his own hands. 

I had purposely dropped a copy of " The Sin- 
ner's Friend" in the pathvray, and a gentleman 
picked it up and came to me with the book in his 
hand, saying, " Sir, this book just suits me, for I 
am a sinner." He then said, "My name is Bar- 
nett, the 'Le Fevre of No Fiction.' " He after- 
wards accompanied Arthur and myself in our chaise 
nearly four miles, entertaining us with his strange 
adventures. 

TwENTY-riKST EDITION — IN Y/elsh. Six thousand 
two hundred copies now printing in London. 



"t:be sinner's friend." 115 

Fifty to Captain P , bound to Quebec "witli 

emigrants. I liad intended these for A. T , to 

take with her to Demarara, but not being able to 
find the ship, I hailed the Martha, and requested 
to speak with the captain, to y/hom I expressed my 
wishes, and to my great delight, he most readily 
complied, and said that he would take care to put 
them into circulation, which he did instantly, in my 
presence, to the officers and men who wxre on deck; 
and I saw the sails hoisted, and the ship get under 
weigh for America. Oh, how did my heart praise 
the Lord for this most unexpected opportunity of 
sending the gospel invitation abroad, by a person 
whom I had never seen before, but who I hope is* a 
willing disciple of the Lord. 

I had the high gratification this day of learning 
that it had pleased the Lord to put it into the 
heart of some* kind lady to translate "The Sinner's 
Friend" into the Irish language. 

While at Tunbridge Wells, I received a letter 
from dear Mr. Knill, thanking me for " The Sinner^ s 
Friend," and stating that his brother Williams, a 
missionary from Tahiti, considered "The Sinner's 
Friend" to be the very thing for the people of the 
South Sea Islands, and that he would translate it 
into Tahitian if I would find paper and printing. I 
laid the matter before the Lord, and he gave me a 
determination to run all risks and have it printed 
instantly, and then beg for the means of payment. 
The first person to w^iom I named my determina- 
tion was Mr. C- , who gave mo thirty shillings ; 

Lady B , one pound; and the third person, Lord 



116 JOHN VINE HALL. 

B , gave me ten pounds. Praised be the Lord, 

who instantly answered my prayer. Eeceived from 
the Bishop of Chester a sovereign towards the trans- 
lation of "The Sinners Friend" into the Tahitian 
language. 

Nov. 17, 1836. The total number of copies of 
"The Sinner's Friend" sent out of our house this 
year, from January 1 to the present day, November 
17, is 75,878, in 322 days; 235 per day average, and 
208 over. Oh the goodness of the Lord ! Blessed 
be the Lord for opening fresh streams everywhere 
for extending the circulation of " The Sinnner's 
Friend" in so many parts of the world, and accom- 
panying it with his especial blessing. 

Feb. 21, 1837. This morning I had the inex- 
pressible pleasure of receiving a letter from Mr. 
Hallock, the Corresponding Secretary of the Amer- 
ican Tract Society, announcing the dehghtfol fact 
that the Society had adopted "The Sinner's Friend," 
a copy of which was enclosed, with a kind hope 
expressed that they might circulate tens of thou- 
sands of this httle work. A tract, "The Wonderful 
Escape," was also enclosed, containing my speech 
at the Temperance Society at Exeter Hall, in May, 
1836.^ This tract is ado]3ted and published by the 

* "In the town where I reside," he said, "were twelve young 
men who were accnstomed early in life to meet together for 
indulgence in di'inking and all manner of excess. Eight of them 
died under the age of forty, without a hope beyond the grave, vic- 
tims of intemperance. Three others are still living in the most 
abject poverty. 

' ' One more, the last of the twelve, the worst of all, remains to 
be accounted for. He was a sort of ringleader; and being in the 
wine and spmt trade, his business was to take the head of the 



**THE SINNEK'S FEIEND." 117 

American Tract Society, (No. 358.) O may tlie 
Lord mercifully bless every copy of each of these 
messengers of mercy, to the conversion of sinners 
and the glory and honor of the Lord Jesus Chris* ; 
and may I myself be preserved from pride and self- 
complacency, and never forget the immensity of my 
own obligations to the Lord for his delivering grace 
and tender mercies.^ 

table at convivial parties, and set up whole nights drinking and 
inducing others to do the same, never going to bed sober. He 
was an infidel, a blasphemer, a disciple of Tom Paine, both in 
principle and practice. 

"One dark night, being in the neighborhood of Stourbridge, 
he had been drinking to excess, wandered out of the house, and 
staggered among the coalpits, exposed to fall into them and be 
lost. He proceeded on till he fell, and rolled down the bank of 
the canal; but God, who is rich in mercy, had caused a stone to 
lie directly in his path, and the poor drunkard was stopped from 
rolling over into the water, where, by one turn more, he would have 
sunk into eternal ruin. His senses returned for a moment; he 
saw that if he attempted to stand, he would fall headlong into the 
canal, and crawled back again into the road. But this miraculous 
preservation had no effect upon him; he merely called it a lucky 
escape." 

* The English edition here contains an interesting chapter of 
Mr. J. Y. Hall's persevering and evidently successful ' ' Labors for 
Prisoners," especially George Dunk the forger, and Hartley the 
murderer. 



118 JOHN VINE HALL. 



CHAPTEK VI. 

"WISDOM'S PATHS PEACE." 
1822 TO 1821— AGE 48-50. 

March 14, 1822. I am forty-eiglit years old this 
day. Ten years ago, on this blessed day, my gra- 
cious God sent his arrows of conviction through my 
rebelKous heart, and brought me to a sense of my 
dreadful situation as a lost sinner. Ten years has 
the Lord assisted me in the gxeat conflict which I 
have had to sustain daily and almost hourly with 
myself and Satan; and this morning my soul is 
overwhelmed with gTateful feelings for the mercy 
which has been so largely bestowed upon me. Min- 
gled tears of bitter sorrow and unspeakable delight 
rolled down my face while before the Lord this 
morning in private; and while the ingratitude of 
my former days stood in view before my awakened 
imagination, my heart seemed overpowered with 
the weight of mercy which a gracious God had 
poured out upon my unworthy and polluted soul. I 
hope that I do indeed bless the Lord with all my 
ransomed powers, and that I feel more happy in his 
love than ever, and more truly desirous that I may 
constantly, under all circumstances, Hve to his glory. 
My fervent desu-e is that the Lord Jesus may ever 
have full possession of my heart, and there reign 
without a rival and with uncontrolled sway. 

Y/hat great reason have I also, in a temporal 



''WISDOM'S PATHS PEACE." 119 

point of view, to bless and serve the Lord. Ten 
years ago my character was ruined, my trade fast 
declining, misery in my family, and misery in my- 
self. But now, my character reestablished, my 
trade overflowing, and instead of misery in my fam- 
ily, we are all happy in the favor of the Lord our 
God. Oh how can I ever sufficiently praise and 
honor the Lord, who hath done such great things 
for me ! He hath indeed delivered my soul from 
the lowest hell, and established my goings, with a 
song of thanksgiving continually in my mouth. 
Blessed be his name for ever and ever. Amen and 
amen. "Watch — watch — watch. 

March 21. Notwithstanding my ardent desire to 
live to the glory of God, yet I seem to be more har- 
assed than ever with evil thoughts. My soul is 
grieved beyond measure at the depravity of my 
own heart; and I constantly pray God to fill me 
with his Holy Spirit, that every evil imagination 
may be destroyed, and that my every breath may 
be holy. 

May 1. Experienced more than usual delight at 
a throne of grace this morning. I had dreamed of 
having taken the forbidden draught, and I remem- 
ber that, even in my dream, I felt ashamed of my- 
self; but, blessed be God, I awoke in safety, and 
had only seen in vision what had once been my 
unhappy state. I thanked my God for having heard 
my former petitions in regard to the study of the 
Bible, and for having made it my delight during 
the last six years, and I entreat grace to make it 
my daily study to the end of my life, and not to 



120 JOHN VINE HALL. 

read it that I miglit merely say I had read so much, 
but that I might study it effectually, in order to hve 
to his glory; and that henceforth the Bible might 
ever be the food of my soul, the dehght of my life J 
and the hght of my path; that its precepts might 
be bound around my heart and fixed in the centre, 
and that the influences of the Holy Spirit might 
enable me to Hve according to the rule of the word 
of God in all things. 

Aug. 14. I desire to bless God that for several 
months past a secret impulse has often led me into 
the summer-house, there to bend my knee before 
God. This delightful exercise grows upon me, and 
becomes a kind of second nature ; but I have prayed 
the Lord that it may never rest in mere habit, but 
that it may be the earnest desire of my soul to He 
prostrate before him at aU times in humihty and 
deep repentance. I have found prayer to be very 
strengthening to my soul, and a powerful support 
in my daily walk, amid ten thousand temptations 
from without, and a far greater number from within. 

Oct. 24. His Bible. For the benefit of my dear 
children, my sons and daughters. I have now 
searched this blessed book to the end of the second 
chapter of the first of Peter for the third time, and 
my soul is fiUed with unutterable delight arising 
from desu^e and anticipation of beginning the Old 
Testament again, to search and enjoy more than 
ever the heavenly food so profusely prepared for" 
those who love God, and who are by his especial 
mercy brought to live upon his holy word. This 
increasing desire to study the Bible in preference 



''WISDOM'S PATHS PEACE." 121 

to every other book, is the gift of God in answer to 
earnest prayer, and it has preserved me from thou- 
sands of evils. I therefore affectionately entreat 
you, my dear children, to seek earnestly and con- 
stantly for this grace. My daily prayer has long been 
that the word of God may ever be the food of my * 
soul, the increasing delight of my life, and the light 
of my path, that its precepts may be bound around 
my heart and fixed in the centre, and that the influ- 
ences of the Holy Spirit may enable me to live 
according to the word of God in all things, that 
thus hving I may live to his glory and to the honor 
of his beloved Son. I write these remarks with 
fervent prayer that they may be made a blessing to 
my dear children when I, who was once the great- 
est sinner upon earth, am singing before the throne 
of God as one of those who have been redeemed by 
the precious blood of Christ. J. V. Hall. I have 
found the'pearl of great price, blessed be God. 

Cheistmas day. This day my dear wife and self, 
with our seven living children and our aged moth- 
er, all united in singing, "Praise God, from whom 
all blessings flow." My poor heart danced for joy, 
while tears of gratitude started forth in honor of 
my God, and for his mercy in preserving me from 
the dissipation of Christmas festivity which reigns 
around, and in which I was once most deeply en- 
gaged, sitting up whole nights in revelry and iniqui- 
ty. But the grace of God alone preserves me, and 
the sense of this mercy overwhelms me with un- 
speakable gratitude. I daily read accounts of the 
dreadful effects of sin — men dying in a state of 

John Vine HaU. 6 



122 JOHN YIXE HALL. 

intoxication. I cannot express tlie tlionsandtli part 
of my feelings on account of the love and mercy of 
God towards me. His service is indeed my gTeat- 
est deliglit and the joy of my heart. T^Tien I look 
around and perceive that all my old associates still 
remain in the bonds of iniquity, while I am emanci- 
pated, is it any wonder that I should express myseK 
so warmly ? The very stones would cry out were I 
not to declare the goodness of the Lord. 

Maech 1-i, 1823. Awoke this morning about three 
o'clock, A^-ith a heart full of gratitude to my gracious 
God for having permitted me to hve so long as to 
see the commencement of my fiftieth year. "\Mien 
I arose, I went to the Lord and renewed my cove- 
nant with him to be his devoted servant. I seem 
to fear nothing so much as offending my God; jet, 
notwithstanding this fear, I continually sin against 
him. TTithout the blood of Christ, I feel assured I 
can never be saved. What is all the boast of refor- 
mation to do for a poor sinner? Xothing! Noth- 
ing but the efficacious sacrifice made on Calvary 
can satisfy my soul ; and that does satisfy it. Bless- 
ed be God for this Hving faith, which banishes every 
fear. Still I say, "Watch and pray." 

Appjl 24 When I feel how deeply I have sinned 
against the Lord, I feel astonished that I have any 
hope of salvation ; yet I have not only a ho|)e, but 
a very hvely one ; and I do trust that, through the 
alone righteousness of Christ, I shall one day stand 
before the throne of God with a golden harp in my 
hand, singing vrith. a loud voice, '-'Glory, glory to 
God in the highest !" I cannot look upon my sins 



^'WISDOM'S PATHS PEACE." 123 

and not feel horror, deep liorror and shame, at their 
enormity and magnitude; neither can I look upon 
the blood of Christ without feeling a thrill of delight 
run through my whole soul, as it does at this mo- 
ment while I am penning these words. Yes, the 
eternal Son of God is all my hope, trust, and desjre. 
I desire to have him always in my heart, as my King 
to rule over me, that every act of my Hfe, every wish 
of my soul, and every breath I draw, may all tend 
to his glory. This blessed theme may possibly 
form part of our rejoicing with our friends in heav- 
en, where, I have no doubt, we shall know each 
other. My opinion of the tender mercy of the Lord 
is, that whatever may increase our felicity m heav- 
en will form a part of the inheritance ; and we must 
think that it will afford amazing pleasure to tread 
the golden streets with those who accompanied us 
on earth in our walk to the celestial city. « 

Isms. I desire to bless the Lord tliat I embrace 
no isms. Show me the man who loves the Lord 
and hates sin, and who desires to honor God in 
every thought, word, and deed, depending on the 
influences of the Holy Spirit to enable him to do so, 
that man is my brother, whatever be his color, na- 
tion, or sect. My daily prayer is that the Lord may 
be pleased to prosper every society, of whatever 
denomination, which has for its object the glory of 
God and the honor of his beloved Son. My dear 
children, you who will read this book when I am 
gone to my rest, to you I bequeath this principle 
as the best gift of an affectionate father, although 
you can only possess it through the mercy of a gra- 



124 JOHN VINE HALL. 

cioiTS God and under the influences of his Holy 
Spirit. Pray for it, and it is yonrs ; but remember 
to pray for it as for a gift that will free yon from 
bondage. 

JuxE 21. I can truly say that Scott's Bible has 
been an unspeakable blessing to myself during the 
last seven years, in the course of which time I have 
studied it daily, and have read the vrhole of the Old 
Testament twice,«the Kew Testament three times, 
and have just finished reading the gospels for the 
fourth time, with increased dehght and thankful- 
ness to God for his mercy in haviag preserved to 
me a spiritual appetite. My daily prayer has long- 
been that the word of God may ever be the food of 
my soul, the increasing delight of my life, and the 
light of my path; that its precepts may be bound 
around my heart, and that the influences of the 
Holy Spirit may enable me to hve according to the 
rule of the word of God in all things ; that thus Liv- 
ing, I may hve to his glory and to the honor of his 
beloved Son. This prayer the Lord has ansvrered, 
and does continually answer, to the joy of my heart. 
Who on earth has so gTeat reason as I have to bless 
and praise the name of the Lord ? 

Juke 26. Spent half an hour at the bedside of a 
dying saint, who said he was happier than a king. 
To behold a dying saint beckoning death to ap- 
proach, and looking upon his dart with unutterable 
delight, what a pleasure. Ko murmurs, though 
nothing but bare walls and parish allowance. One 
cannot call this dying. Happier than a king! I 
think I shall never forget these words, nor the ani- 



^'WISDOM'S PATHS PEACE.'* 125 

mation with wliicli they were uttered. This is the 
grandest sight I ever beheld — better than a corona- 
tion. I repeated to him the whole of the twenty- 
fifth Psalm, with which he appeared pleased. I 
desire to praise the Lord for having caused so many 
portions of Scripture to be delightful to my own 
soul, and also for having given me grace to commit 
many of them to memory, that they may be useful 
to others as well as to myself. I have'^now upon 
my heart and mind the following Psalms: 25th, 
27th, 30th, 34th, 51st, 91st, 103d, 116th, 121st, 130th, 
139th, and 145th; also twenty-four choice hymns. 
These form the principal part of my living stock, 
being always fresh upon my memory, and ready for 
use on all suitable occasions. 

Among the hymns are those commencing, " Come, 
my soul, thy suit prepare;" "God moves in a mys- 
terious way;" " Guide me, O thou great Jejiovah;" 
"Oh for a thousand tongues to sing;" "Jesus, and 
shall it ever be;" "Oh for a heart to praise my 
God;" "Oh for a closer walk with God;" "When 
all thy mercies, O my God ;" " Grace, 'tis a charm- 
ing sound;" "When with my mind devoutly pressed;" 
"How sweet the name of Jesus sounds;" and "The 
star, the star of Bethlehem." 

How infinitely superior are these " Songs of 
Zion" to my old, foolish, worldly vanities ! Blessed 
be God. With what delight do I take up the lan- 
guage of the ninety-first Psalm; for the Lord hath 
indeed made me to "tread upon the lion and the 
adder" — wine and spirituous liquors; and he hath 
truly "delivered me and honored me" in a most 



126 JOHN YIXE HALL. 

peculiar manner. The Lord has honored me with 
the friendshij^ of his chosen people ; and some of 
the ministers of the everlasting gospel are now 
among mj dearest Mends. The Lord has also 
honored me by making me useful among the poor, 
and also in distributing religious books, j^articularly 
" The Sinner's Friend." Nothing on earth is so 
truly dehghtful to my soul as to speak boldly for 
the honor t)f the Son of God whenever I have an 
opportunity. Great thanks to the Lord for this 

gift. 

July 9. Eey. H. Townley took up his abode at 
my house. He had recently returned from Calcut- 
ta, where he has been laboring during the last ^\e 
years as a missionaiy. About thirteen years ago, 
he followed the profession of the law in Doctors' 
Commons, and lived in a style of luxury and dissi- 
pation, fi'equenting operas and masquerades. He 
was also a sceptic in religion, dehghting in the 
works of Yoltaire, Hume, and other infidel writers. 
On looldng over a newspaper, he saw an advertise- 
ment of a new edition of Palev's " Evidences of the 
Christian Rehgion," and never having heard of the 
work, he sent one of his clerks to purchase a copy, 
which he perused with the gTeatest eagerness ; and 
so wonderfully was conviction fastened on his mind, 
that on the very next Sabbath-day he became a 
preacher in his own family, by reading the word of 
God, and commencing family prayer. While Mr. 
Townley was relating this circumstance my heart 
bounded for joy, and I told him how the Lord had 
dealt with myself, by turning me fi'om deism. On 



''WISDOM'S PATHS PEACE." 127 

the Sabbath morning, after family prayer, he ad- 
dressed my four sons : "Here are yonr father and I, 
we have known other gods, but we found that they 
could not save us. "We now know the true Lord, 
and him we desire to serve." Ah, how great is the 
mercy of the Lord to have called me by his grace, 
and to have delivered me from my abominations 
before my children had arrived at an age to have 
witnessed such heartrending depravity. I may well 
say, "I love the Lord, because he hath heard my 
voice and my snppKcations, and hath delivered my 
soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet 
from falling." Blessed be his holy name ! Even 
the very smell of wine is become disgusting, and I 
rejoice in the thought that my mouth will never 
again be polluted by strong drink of any descrip- 
tion. The Lord feeds me, as he did Daniel; and I 
have more strength of body and health of counte- 
nance than ever I had when I drank my pint or 
bottle of wine each day. 

July 20. My four dear boys assembled with me 
this morning, and we sang a hymn and then read 
the fourteenth and fifteenth chapters of St. John, 
verse by verse alternately, and then sang another 
hymn. I then exhorted them to seek the Lord 
with full purpose of heart, that when I should be 
removed, they might have God for their Father 
and their Friend. 

One day, on leaving Dr, D 's house, I spoke 

to his footman on the necessity of seeking the Lord. 
G-ave him "Scripture Help," "Bickersteth on Pray- 
er," and " The Sinner's Friend." He was exceed- 



128 JOHN VINE HALL. 

ingly thankful for my adyice. This man called on 
me six months afterwards, and with tears of grati- 
tude said, " I thank God, sir, that you spoke to me 
in the manner that you did one night when you 
were leaving my master's house, as till then I was 
going on in a wild path ; but nov/ I am seeking the 
Lord, and feel happy in his service." 

July 27. Saw Dr. D this morning at his own 

house. Found him in a low, desponding state. 
Endeavored to encourage and comfort him. I told 
him if he had, in his own person, committed all the 
sins that ever were committed by the whole world, 
from Cain to the present hour, still the blood of 
Christ w^as more than sufficient to blot them all 
out. 

Aua. 16. My case is somewhat like a poor man 
placed on the top of a very high house surrounded 
on all sides by fire ; the spectators below unable to 
afford relief, while the poor man keeps running 
from side to side to escape the rising flames ; but 
suddenly, and just at the moment when every hope 
is given up, a hand is seen issuing from the clouds, 
snatching the half-distracted man from his perilous 
situation and placing him securely on the ground. 
"Would the man thus rescued from destruction ever 
forget his benefactor ? And when speaking of his 
marvellous escape, would not his heart be full? 
Just so I have been snatched from the fire of hell ' 
by the hand of the Lord; therefore I can never 
speak but with enthusiasm when opening my Hps 
to the praise of God. 

Feb. 28. A stranger came to purchase Dr. Ma- 



' WISDOM S PATHS PEACE." 129 

lan's Tracts; and said tliey were delightful tracts, 
but tliat Malan was now dreadfully persecuted at 
Lausanne, and was silenced, being forbidden to 
preach the gospel. I replied that there was no oc- 
casion to go to Lausanne to find persecution. "No," 
said the stranger, " for as soon as we express love 
for the Lord Jesus Christ, the enmity immediately 
appears. Many persons will speak of the mercy of 
God, but if the Lord Jesus Christ be named, and 
the necessity of being found in him, then they are 
deemed enthusiasts and madmen." The stranger 
then went on in an animated manner to speak of 
the love of God in Jesus Christ, and of the neces- 
sity of the influences of the Holy Spirit, and also 
that we should never be ashamed of the cross. He 
drew from his pocket a Bible, and turning to the 
fifth chapter of the first epistle of St. John, read in 
an energetic manner the tenth to the fifteenth verse. 
I looked at him with great delight, wondering who 
he could be, and my curiosity was upon the full 
stretch. I said to him, " Sir, I know not lolio jou 
are, but I know ivliat you are, and I desire to bless 
God that he has shown you the way of salvation, 
and granted you his Holy Spirit. I rejoice also to 
see that book in your hand, because it speaks for 
itseE"-^- 

Maech 10. I find a great portion of vanity and 
self-complacency mixed with all mj actions ; but if 
we abstain from exertion till vanity be eradicated, 

* This proved to be the Earl of , between whom and the 

author a very cordial correspondence on religious subjects was 
maintained for many years. 

6* 



130 JOHN VINE HALL. 

we shall become totally nseless ; therefore we must 
not allow ourselves to be cheated of opportunities 
to do good, but pray to God to keep us ever hum- 
ble, watchful, prayerful, penitent, and obedient. 

Makch 14, 1824. Jubilee. Fifty years! I feel 
such an overwhelming sense of the mercy and good- 
ness of God towards me, that I scarcely know where 
to begin to praise him : 

" Wheu all thy mercies, Oil my God, 
My rising soul surveys, 
Transported with the view, I 'm lost 
111 wonder, love, and praise. " 

I have not only been preserved, but have been 
indulged with many privileges for which I can never 
be sufficiently thankful. It has been my gTeat hap- 
piness to attend the dying beds of several individu- 
als who are now singing before the throne of God; 
and I have also been favored with the unspeakable 
pleasure of repeated conversations with rich and 
poor on the love and mercy of the Redeemer. I 
have also had the pleasure to distribute 2,787 cop- 
ies of " The Sinner's Friend," in various directions, 
among high and low, rich and poor. And above 
all, I have been brought to feel more than ever my 
own innate depravity and the absolute need of a 
Saviour, as well as the continual influences of the 
Holy Spirit to sanctify and keep me in the path of 
holiness. I long to be holy, and because I am not 
so I feel increasing grief. I am also still pursuing 
the daily study of Scott's Bible, which has been the 
increasing dehght of my hfe during the last eight 
years. This is a great mercy. I have also had the 



^'WISDOM'S PATHS PEACE." 131 

enjoyment of entertaining tlie ministers of the Lord, 
and have been profited by their prayers and pious 
conversation. I love the messengers of Zion, what- 
ever may be their talents, and I bless the Lord for 
this great and happy change in my affections, see- 
ing there was a time when I would sooner have 
shut my doors against a minister of the gospel than 
have admitted him under my roof. 

" Oil to grace how great a debtor!" 

What great things the Lord hath done for me ! 
Blessed be his holy name. 

When I approach the footstool of the Lord in 
the first of the morning, I feel constrained to say, 
" O Lord, to thee alone am I indebted for these 
comforts, and it is from thy mercy alone that I am 
not stretched on this floor in drunkenness, or in a 
workhouse, or in a madhouse, or lifting up my eyes 
in endless torment. Having done such marvellous 
things for me, O Lord, mercifully prevent my doing 
the slightest thing to dishonor thee, or bring disre- 
pute on the name of thy beloved Son." This is my 
daily, hourly prayer ; and I pray also that the least 
motion of inward sinfulness may give me exquisite 
pain, that I may fly instantly to the Lord for shel- 
ter and support. I seem to think that no one can 
possibly have so great cause to love the Lord as I 
have, because no one can have sinned so much 
against him, and yet have received so many favors 
and such signal displays of his almighty power. 
He has not only removed from me every disj^osition 
or inclination for strong drink, but has mercifully 



132 JOHN VINE HALL. 

implanted so opposite a feeling, that the very smell 
of wine or strong drink in any person creates a 
shuddering and horror beyond description, and I 
ejacnlate, "Is it possible that my month was ever 
polluted with such filth ?" 

Aug. 13. I had the pleasure of sending my old 

friend Mr. S an acknowledgment of his great 

kindness to me many years ago, when he was in 
prosperity ; but he is now in adversity, having run 
through a fortune of thhty thousand pounds, and 
remaining totally ignorant of Christ. Who has 
made me to differ in opinion as well as in circum- 
stances ? Oh that all my old friends had found the 
Lord. I pray for them daily, beseeching the Lord 
to bless them with a knowledge of himself. 

Aug. 26. "Wedding-day. Blessed be the Lord 
that I have been spared to v/itness and rejoice in 
the eighteenth anniversary of this auspicious day, 
which finds my beloved wife and self in excellent 
health, and more dear to each other by far than 
when we were first united. Our blessings are of 
the most exalted kind, the love of God filling our 
hearts, giving us unspeakable delight. "What 
shall we render to the Lord?" May we ever re- 
member and honor the Lord our God with the first 
fruits of all our increase, and give ourselves unre- 
servedly to him who hath done all these things for 
us. 

Sept, 10. I went with my dear wife to visit a 
poor despairing widov/. The Bible lay before her. 
She was in the most disconsolate state, because she 
could not believe in Jesus Christ. A professed 



''WISDOM'S PATHS PEACE." 133 

deist had ruined lier peace of mind. Witli nplifted 
hands and in mental agony she exclaimed, " Oh, 
what will that man have to answer for, who has thus 
deceived me and ruined the soul of my poor de- 
parted husband !" I never saw so pitiable an object 
in my life. I tried to encourage her. How can I 
ever be sufficiently thankful to the Lord for his 
wondrous mercy in rescuing me from this delusion 
of the devil and Tom Paine. 

Sept. 11. Poor widow B . I had been solic- 
ited to visit this poor aged widow, seventy-nine 
years of age. I found her in great distress of mind, 
with the Testament open before her. I spoke to her 
at considerable length on the mercy and goodness 
of God in Christ, and took her hand in mine with 
as much tenderness as I could express. She then 
said, "I am so glad you are come, sir; it is so com- 
fortable to hear you talk so. I knew you, sir, thirty 
years ago, when you were a very gay young man 
and knew nothing of this language. But what a 
change!" I replied that my old companions con- 
sidered me mad; that I had expressed my Avishes 
to them that the Lord would make them equally 
mad. 

"When I entered my own house I found a gen- 
tleman waiting to see me. He was well dressed, 
in black, and had twelve copies of "The Sinner's 
Friend," which he had purchased. He surprised 
me by saying, "You do not recollect me now, sir, 
but you gave me one of these little books when you 
came to the prison where I was confined, and spoke 
upon the mercy of God to poor prisoners. It cheer- 



134 JOHN VINE HALL. 

ed my heart and did me good." The Lord was 
pleased to visit him in prison, and to humble his 
heart; and he himself now proclaims the news of 
salvation to poor sinners in the neighboring villages 
of Gravesend, where he holds a respectable situa- 
tion, and is a teacher in one of the schools. 

Sept. 15. I find when my mind has been consid- 
erably disturbed, if I can but sit down to my Bible, 
for even a few minutes only, there comes a season 
of refreshing which quiets the agitated feelings and 
enables me to take a fresh start. Blessed be the 
Lord for that mercy which has placed me in a sit- 
uation where not a day passes without my having 
the supreme happiness of speaking to one or more 
persons, high or low, on the way of salvation : yes- 
terday to Lady , the day before to the Hon. 

Mr. N . I have also poor brethren and sisters 

in the Lord, who come to my door with matches; 
so that my cup does indeed abound, and "the lines 
are fallen to me in pleasant places." 

Nov. 19. I frequently entreat the Lord to put his 
restraining bridle upon me, and keep it tight in his 
own almighty hand. My soul is daily grieved at 
the prevalence of sin, and when I see a drunken 
man staggering along the streets I shudder involun- 
tarily and call upon the Lord to have mercy upon 
the poor lost, fallen creature. When expressions of 
blasphemy are uttered, I feel as though some sharp 
instrument had been pressed against me, while the 
prayer of pity arises in my heart, and I remember 
with grief and shame that such was I before the 
Lord embraced me with his saving love. Let any 



^'WISDOM'S PATHS PEACE/' 135 

person whose mind soars above the very folly he 
commits, yet feels an overpowering propensity to 
indulge in strong drink which he would forsake but 
cannot, think of my case, and be comforted with the 
assurance that if he will but go to the Lord and 
penitently entreat his aid he shall surely become a 
conqueror. There are doubtless a vast number of 
persons who have been seduced, step by step, into 
intemperance, but would give the universe to be 
enabled to retreat from their accursed bane; yet 
from the almost insurmountable difficulty of the way, 
they remain engulfed till death overtakes them with 
all the horrors of a guilty conscience. I have been 
upon the very verge of this destruction, but the 
Lord stretched forth his mighty arm and snatched 
me from the yawning gulf. I knew personally a 
fine young man in Worcestershire, the eldest son of 
a wealthy baronet, who accompanied one of his col- 
lege friends into Scotland during a vacation, and 
while there imbibed such a habit of drinking whis- 
key, that when he returned to his father's house he 
found the dreadful poison to be irresistible; but, 
being a young man of superior attainments, the 
degradation of his mind became insupportable, and 
in an agony of despair he committed suicide to avoid 
the shame of being a drunkard. I have been tempt- 
ed to do the same, but God preserved me. 

Dec. 10. Study of the Sceiptuees. Although I 
have now studied the blessed Scriptures many years, 
yet I find new beauties every day, and I have a 
clearer perception of passages which had not shone 
in my view before, or had been but little regarded. 



136 JOHN VINE HALL. 

This is to me a decisive proof of the influences of 
the Holj Spirit in enlightening by degrees the mind 
which could not at first have encountered all the 
effulgence of divine truth. I rejoice in this gradual 
unfolding of the precious truth, because the soul is 
thus continually receiving new enjoyment, as well as 
renev/ed impulse to search after hidden treasure. 

Dec. 21. My dear boys were now returned from 
school; we were all seated round the table. My 
heart v/as surcharged with gratitude to God for his 
goodness in having preserved us. I could not re- 
frain from tears. I addressed my dear children on 
the mercy of God, and told them how great would 
be our happiness in heaven when we should all sur- 
round the throne of glory. Hequested them to unite 
in singing, "Praise God, from whom all blessings 
flow." I was so deeply affected that I found it dif- 
ficult to set the tune. Afterwards we joined my 

dear Mary and her infant A , and now there 

were nine of us,, all united in love. Praised be the 
Lord. 

Dec. 22. Death of Mks. Teveeill, Our joy of 
yesterday was interrupted this morning by the al- 
most sudden death of our dear mother. It so hap- 
pened in the providence of God that the dear and 
respected old lady, who once endeavored to prevent 
my becoming the husband of her daughter, had long 
found a comfortable retreat in my house, and she 
had also become sincerely attached to me. 



''WHO MAKETH THEE TO DIFFER?" 137 

CHAPTEE YII. 

''WHO MAKETH THEE TO DIFFEE?" 

1825 TO 1838-AGE 51-64. 

Januaby 1, 1825. Sickness. A woman had been 
hired to nurse my dea^r wife. She had just come 
from nursing a man who had died of typhus fever, 
but having fumigated her rooms she was not sup- 
posed to be Hable to convey the contagion. About 
Christmas day, 1824, I began to droop. My sur- 
geon entreated me to take wine to strengthen me. 
I positively refused. My two daughters now ap- 
peared to be dechning very rapidly.^ Mary the 
worst. At this juncture the nursemaid was attack- 
ed and soon lost her senses, while I was in great 
danger, and my dear wife expected to be bereft of 
child and husband. Dear Mr. Slatterie came over 
twice from Chatham on purpose to see me. He 
knelt at my bedside and earnestly entreated the 
Lord's compassion. During the fortnight of my ex- 
treme ilkiess the Lord nursed me in the hollow of 
his hand, and prevented any wicked thoughts com- 
ing near me. I lay in his hand like a little child, 
and my heart was incessantly overflowing with the 
most intense gratitude. It was not affliction, but a 
continued outpouring of mercy. 

"When I partially recovered, Dr. S prescribed 

wine or porter. I replied that I neither could nor 



138 JOHN VINE HALL. 

would take either, but that I could and would trust 
in the Lord to give me strength without wine or 
porter. I knew that he had raised up Daniel upon 
pulse and water, and he could, and I doubted not 
would, in tender mercy do as much for me; espec- 
ially as it was my heart's desire to honor the Lord, 
whom I took at his word : " Because he hath set his 
love upon me, therefore will I dehver him; I will 
be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and honor 
him." All this did the Lord accomplish in my case, 
and caused my strength to return without the aid of 
strong drink. My heart did indeed rejoice in this 
faithfulness of the Lord to a poor creature who had 
put his Vv^hole trust in him, in 023j)osition to the advice 
kindly tendered by the physician. There was a still 
greater mercy developed by this trial, inasmuch as 
the Lord proved that he had removed every dispo- 
sition towards drinking wine ; for had this propensi- 
ty only lain dormant, how gladly would sinful nature 
have embraced the opportunity. But no, the Lord 
had completed the work of his own hands, and to 
his name be aU the praise.^ 

May 8. A trip to France. My health had con- 

* Some may regard the autobiographer's refusal to take "udne 
medicinally, and Ms confidence that God would restore him "v^ithout 
it, as the eiTor of enthusiasm. But it must be borne in mind that 
in certain cases the smallest indulgence in alcoholic drinks arouses 
the old passion, to subdue which total abstinence as a means is 
absolutely essential. Many reclaimed drunkards have gone back 
to their former habits of excess through taking wine medicinally. 
There may be cases where it is far better to run the physical risk 
than the moral. The present instance was one of these. At the 
same time it must be borne in mind that what is now known as 
" teetotahsm, " renounces wine as a beverage only. 



"WHO MAKETH THEE TO DIFFEK?" 139 

tinned gradually to amend, but my friends insisted 
on my absenting myself -entirely from business, that 
I might enjoy the benefit of a few days at the sea- 
side ; therefore on Tuesday, the 3d of May, I set out 
for Dover. The next morning I arose in excellent 
health, knelt before the Lord, read the fourteenth 
chapter of John, and at seven walked round Dover 
harbor down to the sea, and put up prayer and 
praise to the Lord while the foaming waves were 
rolling at my feet. I gave a "Sinner's Friend" to 
each of three sailors who were watching the ships, 
and then returned to my inn to breakfast. At Calais 
I was struck with the surprising difference between 
the manners and customs of people who resided at 
so short a distance from each other. It appeared 
as though one had got into another world. In the 
evening I strolled through the streets much jjleased 
with the happiness which seemed to pervade all 
ranks. Not a sad countenance to be seen. I sat 
down on a bench and watched the old men smoking 
their pipes at their doors chatting with their wives, 
while the children were playing around them — all 
happy. I thought of my own dear wife and chil- 
dren, praying the Lord to bless them. At Boulogne, 
having paraded the streets, I turned my horse tow- 
ards Bonaparte's pillar. The sun was shining in 
splendor, the larks were singing melodiously over 
my head, and the whole scenery was so enlivening, 
that as I rode along I put up a fervent prayer of 
praise and thanksgiving to my gracious God, en- 
treating him to keep me holy and fill my heart with 
heavenly love for Christ's sake. As the vessel enter- 



140 JOHN VINE HALL. 

ed Dover harbor, I poured out my heart in praise for 
God's mercy in having preserved my going out and 
my coming in. Blessed be his name. I had thought 
much of the Lord during my journey, and my heart 
v/as continually hf ted up to him to preserve me from 
every evil thought and way. He did preserve me. 
Arrived in safety at my own house, I returned thanks 
to a gracious God for finding my health and strength 
greatly increased by this excursion, though it had 
been for only four deijs and a half. 

TuESDAy,VAN. 24, 1826. Forty years! On Tues- 
day, Jan. 24, 1786 — forty years ago, the same day 
of the week and the same day of the month — I left 
my father's house on Snow Hill, London, and came 
to the house I now occupy, a little errand-boy not 
twelve years old. Then I was the youngest in the 
house ; now the oldest, and raised up to be master 
over all. I know not how to express my gratitude 
when reflecting on the goodness of God during so 
many years. EebeUion and ingratitude not only 
marked my younger days, but have reached even 
to my grey hairs, and yet I live, and am not cut 
down as a cumberer of the ground. Yes, I live ; 
but it is in, through, and by my blessed Jesus that 
I live, resting on him who has borne with my man- 
ners in the wilderness for forty years, and b^^ whose 
mercy I have been raised from the depths of hell to 
delight in the way of the Lord my God. 

"Jesus souglit me when a stranger, 
Wandering from the fold of God ; 
He, to rescue me from danger, 
Interposed his precious blood." 



"WHO MAKETH THEE TO DIFFER?" 141 

Precious to me indeed ; and Oli may I never lose 
tlie influence of that blessed Holy Spirit, by which 
my heart is quickened, cheered, and warmed into a 
flame of heavenly love. To the Lord be all the 
praise. " O Lord, truly I am thy servant ; for thou 
hast loosed my bonds, and brought up my soul from 
the grave, and kept me alive, thafc I should not go 
down to the pit." 

My former companions in iniquity, where are 
they ? Tremendous thought ! Almost all cut down 
in their sins in early life, while I remain to tell the 
wondrous tale of redeeming love. Of eleven young 
men who, with m^^-self, at the age of twenty, rioted 
in all manner of sin, often sitting together around 
the same table, drinking and singing and swearing, 
of these eleven not one is left ; the whole of them 
have passed into eternity without a shadow of hope 
or the least desire to know the Lord. How marvel- 
lous then are my mercies, and how great my respon- 
sibility. I have been spared to study the word of 
God with great delight and with constant prayer, 
searching every word of the sacred pages with an 
increasing appetite, earnestly desiring to have the 
precepts of the Lord bound around my heart as the 
rule of my life in all things, that I may live to his 
glory and to the honor of his beloved Son. But I 
must refrain. There is no end to this blessed 
theme. 

Awful change! Why not John Vine Hall? Only 

the mercy of God. Mr. G , a student at R 

college, prea,ched the gospel ; but aftervv^ards turned 
wine-merchant, became a drunkard, and a cruel hus- 



142 JOHN VINE HALL. 

band. Died in a hospital, aged thirty-three. Was 
once a good-natured man, but became cruel through 
strong drink. Why was it not I ? Oh how great 
are my obligations to the mercy and grace of God ! 

Sept. 1. To the Hon. S T : "Perhaps I 

cannot do better than open my heart before you 
and detail my own once miserable case, and thus 
convince you how truly desirous I am to assist you 
out of the snare of the devil. Sometimes I sank 
into the dreadful practice of drinking two bottles 
of wine per day, for ten or twelve days in succes- 
sion, rendering myself unfit for business or society, 
as well as exciting such a nervous irritability of 
temper, that I was waspish and cruel even to those 
whom at other times I most tenderly loved. After 
so terrible an indulgence and abuse of the mercies 
of God, I frequently, when quite alone, saw the 
most extraordinary phantoms dancing before my 
eyes, eluding my grasp, while strange noises and 
voices assailed my ears, drawing me into conversa- 
tion, so that I became nearly like a person in a 
state of insanity; and when I recovered from these 
fits of intemperance, I was so enraged with myself 
that I could not endure the sight or conversation 
of my dearest friends. I have envied thavery dogs 
in the streets. I appeared to be lost even beyond 
the reach of hope. At last the late excellent Dr. 
Day was consulted as to the possibility of affording 
relief to overcome so dreadful a propensity by the 
use of medicine. The doctor gave a favorable an- 
swer, and the Lord made we willing to submit to 
any trial, ajid I placed myself entirely under the 



"WHO MAKETH THEE TO DIFFER?" 143 

care of this dear physician, "whose prescription, 
under the immediate blessing of God, accompanied 
with fervent prayer, enabled me in the course of six 
months to discontinue the use of wine or spirituous 
liquors. My life has been ten years redeemed from 
destruction, as well as crowned with loving-kind- 
ness and tender mercy, and I am now the living 
monument of the power (and mercy of that gracious 
God who is become my light and my salvation, and 
who will become yours also, my dear sir, if you will 
only put your trust in him and submit to be guided 
by his counsel. He will do so for the sake of his 
beloved Son. Arouse yourself then. Think what 
you are and are likely to be in society; but Oh, 
think also what you must become if you live and 
die in sin. 

"I took between three hundred and four hundred 
bottles of steel-draughts in six months, and had I 
taken ^Ye thousand, the result would have been a 
rich reward. I have now dealt with you as though 
you were my own son. Think, Oh think of your 
poor soul. You may die to-morrow, or this day. 
Oh then set out instantly for the kingdom of heav- 
en, and may the blessing of God attend you. You 
may be made whole if you are but willing. The 
way is now clearly pointed out to you by one who 
has proved the efficacy of that way, and who has 
been in a thousand times worse condition than your- 
self, but has been long restored to be a comfort and 

* Sulphate of iron, 5 grains ; magnesia, 10 gr. ; peppermint- 
water, 11 drachms ; spirit of nutmeg, 1 di-achm. This forms one 
draught ; two di-aughts to be taken each day. 



144 J0H2!T YIXE HALL. 

encouragement to otliers, and ^lio prajs the Lord 
to bless Toii with a iii-m cleterniination to forsake 
eyery idol for the sake of Christ." 

Apeil 22, 1828. We had the jDrivilege of enter- 
taining at oiu^ house the Eey. Eowland Hill, eighty- 
three years of age. 

Feb. 25, 1837. Poor Bob S . This man had 

been one of my old wicked companions in very early 
days. He was now an inmate of the workhouse- 
hospital, where I had attended during the last five 
years on the Sabbath to read the Scriptures and 
exhort the people to turn to the Lord. He was one 
of my hearers during the last three years, and it 
pleased God to touch his heart while he heard from 
his old companion the joyful news of salvation. 
Many a time have I seen tears of repentance roll 
down his cheeks when speaking of the mercy of 
God to his souJ. as the vilest and most undeserving. 
He was taken ill, and confined to his bed when I 
visited him. Two days before he died he said to 
me with intense feehng, '' Christ is the gTeatest 
comfort I ever felt in my hfe." He then put up his 
hands in fervent prayer, to which I added my heart's 
Amen. He prayed like a man who felt the need of 
a Saviour. 

Feb. 28. This day I had the thrilling pleasure 
of receiving intelligence from ]Mr. G of Glas- 
gow, that he was about to pubhsh " The Sinner's 
Friend" in the Gaehc langTiage, for the use of the 
Highlanders. The above encouraging testimony 
brought me on my knees before my gracious God 
for this new testimony of his mercy and goodness. 



"WHO MAKETH THEE TO DIFFEE?" 145 

Maech 10. This day it has pleased the Lord to 
grant me the' great privilege of witnessing an edi- 
tion of "The Sinner's Friend" in the Irish lan- 
guage, translated under the direction of the daugh- 
ter of the bishop of Meath. Oh may the divine 
blessing attend every copy in that benighted coun- 
try. I humbly dedicate these to the Lord with ear- 
nest prayer and thanksgiving. 

May 5. At the Tract Meeting in Exeter Hall, 
the Eev. J. Williams said that " he held in his hand 
a valuable tract, entitled * The Sinner's Friend.' 
The editor had told him that if he would translate 
it into the Tahitian language, the means should be 
famished of enabling him to print twenty thousand. 
He had accomplished the work, and the tract was 
published." 

Sept. 22. This day completes twenty-one years 
since even so much as a teaspoonful of wine of any 
description has ever passed the surface of my 
tongue. On the contrary, the very smell of strong 
drink is most abhorrent to my feelings. Oh the 
wondrous change which the grace of God can effect 
upon the renewed soul ! I never drink any thing 
but tea, or coffee, or milk, and yet at sixty-three 
years of age I am stronger in body and mind than 
I was thirty years ago when indulging in all kinds 
of strong drink. But it is not my body only which 
has been strengthened, but my soul, blessed be God, 
has been growing in grace, producing the most ex- 
quisite enjoyments in this new Hfe devoted to God. 
During all this time my aim has been to direct poor 
sinners to the " Lamb of God who taketh away the 

John Vine Hall. >. 7 



^^ 



146 JOHN VINE HALL. 

sin of the world," and the Lord has been pleased to 
bless my efforts in the most astonishing manner. 
To the Lord alone be all the praise, and to him I 
desire most humbly to devote every power of body, 
soul, and spirit. Li Jesus, my salvation, my only 
hope and trust, I desire ever to be found, in full 
assurance of faith that he will never cast me away 
from his presence, nor suffer my soul to be lost. 
His word standeth sure, and I am safe in him — in 
his righteousness, not in my own, nor in any 
change of heart or life, but solely, wholly, and 
fully in the righteousness of the everlasting Son of 
God. 

Jan. 14, 1838. Dear Mr. WiUiams, who trans- 
lated "The Sinner's Friend" into Tahitian, dined 
with me this Sabbath, and I presented him with 
the stereotype plates, for which he was exceedingly 
thankful. He returns to the South Seas in a few 
weeks, taking with him 20,000 copies of " The Sin- 
ner's Friend" in the Tahitian language. May the 
Lord be pleased to bless every copy for Christ's 
sake. 

Fkagihents of time. How little do people in 
general think how much may be gained by gather- 
ing up the fragments of time. In my walk every 
morning from my cottage on Penenden Heath to 
Maidstone, I thought I might gain food for my soul 
by reading the New Testament for ten minutes. 
Being quite alone, I enjoyed this refreshing repast 
almost every day, blessing and praising the Lord 
for giving me such an appetite for heavenly food, 
and it was with no small gratitude that I found this 



4 



''WHO MAKETH THEE TO DIFFEK?" 147 

morning that I liad thus completed reading the 
whole of the New Testament. 

May 9. Deep conviction of sin. In consequence 
of my son's absence, I slept at the house in High- 
street. When I arose this morning surrounded by- 
mercies, not the least of which I had deserved, I 
felt my heart overwhelmed within me, and poured 
out my soul before the Lord nearly as follows : 

" Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul this 
morning, in the very place, in the very room where 
I have committed so much iniquity. On this very 
spot do I desire to sink into the earth with shame 
at the remembrance of my past sins, crying out, 
' Unclean, u.nclean ; God be merciful to me a sin- 
ner !' And, O Lord, I pray thee to cleanse me from 
all my pollution, in the name of him who has given 
me hope by declaring that they who come unto thee 
by Him -shall in no wise be cast out. Help me, O 
Lord, to rise above every fear, and do thou merci- 
fully destroy within me all sinful inclinations, and 
let holiness to the Lord fill my heart and be exem- 
plified by a happy obedience to thy commands. 
Oh keep me humble, watchful, penitent, prayerful, 
and believing, that I may live increasingly to thy 
glory. And Oh thou blessed SjDirit, come and pre- 
pare my heart for the ever blessed Son of God. 
And Oh thou blessed Jesus, thou who art the Chief 
among ten thousand, the Altogether Lovely, Oh 
come and abide in me, and help me to abide in thee 
as a branch of the true vine, bringing forth much 
fruit to the praise and glory of God. Oh my God, 
preserve me in my eyes, thoughts, and desires, that 



148 JOHN VINE HALL. 

all my ways may please tliee, and that I may bless 
thee at all times and have thy praise continually in 
my mouth." 

I had arisen from my slumber in the very cham- 
ber where, in the days of my youth, nearly fifty 
years ago, I had often deeply sinned against the 
Lord ; and finding myself now in the way to Zion, 
I felt my past sins rush upon my mind in all the 
horror of their depravity, and this recollection 
brought me to cry out the more earnestly for the 
blood of Christ to wash my filthy soul from its 
abominable pollution. I do trust that the Lord 
did indeed hear my prayer, the breathing of a con- 
trite soul. My sin comes before me so powerfully 
every morning of my life, that when I look upon it 
I am astonished that I have not destroyed myself 
by my own hand. No one can possibly conceive of 
the bitter anguish of my mind. O God, remember 
not my sins. Hide thy face from them. Blot them 
out of the book of thy remembrance. Oh merci- 
fully grant me the joy of thy salvation. Oh the 
agony, the agony, the agony of an accusing con- 
science. O Lord my God, hold me fast for Christ's 
sake. I cannot look back upon my past sins but 
with an abhorrence which no language can reach, 
no heart feel like my own. "God be merciful to 
me a sinner," is ever uppermost and accompanies 
me everywhere — never absent. Oh what should I 
do without the appropriation of the precious blood 
of Christ to my own individual case. I must per- 
ish. Were I given to intemperance, suicide would 
immediately follow. 



*'WHO MAKETH THEE TO DIFFER?" 149 

June 14. Blessed for ever be the Lord for his 
great goodness and patience in sparing my life to 
witness an edition of " The Sinner's Friend" in the 
Manx language, for the poor people in the Isle of 
Man. By the kindness of a few followers of the 
Son of God, I shall have the happy privilege of 
Bending five thousand copies gratuitously. 

July 19. Twentieth anniversary of the Lord's 
mercy. "He shall tread upon the lion and the 
adder, the young lion and the dragon," strong drink, 
" shall he trample under feet." " I will deliver him, 
and honor him. With long life will I satisfy him, 
and show him my salvation." Surely the Lord has 
mercifully and abundantly verified his own word in 
my own individual case, and this blessed day testi- 
fies that twenty whole years have passed away since 
I discontinued the use of porter, of which I was ex- 
tremely fond ; but not a drop has entered my lips 
since the 18th day of July, 1818. But this is only 
part of the Lord's mercies towards me. He has 
kept me in the l^oUow of his hand, filling my heart 
with increasing love to him, making it my supreme 
dehglit to make known his salvation. He has also 
preserved to me my dear, aflectionate wife, that best 
of gifts, except his beloved Son, whose affectionate 
tenderness and patience were with me in all my 
wretchedness ; and when sunk in transgression and 
shame, this dear wife never forsook me a single 
hour, but continued her kind attentions with ear- 
nest prayer that the Lord would be pleased to pity 
and have mercy upon me, and deliver me out of the 
hand of my strong enemy. The Lord has answered 



150 JOHN YINE HALL. 

these prayers to the rejoicing of her heart. But 
^'hen I recollect ray former nnkinclness, the effect 
of strong drink, against this clear vrife, my heart is 
agonized almost to distraction; grief is never ab- 
sent from my mind,*and I should certainly take 
away my own life were I to fall into the sin of 
drunkenness as heretofore. I mourn in secret. I 
strive to keep it fi'om everybody. I dare not, can- 
not disclose the whole of my agony. I mourn in 
the midst of plenty, and gi'oan in the midst of gos- 
pel pri^dleges, even with my soul truly devoted to 
God. Well may I cry out, "Why art thou cast 
down. Oh my soul?" "My life is smitten down to 
the ground." "But why should a man complain 
for the punishment of his sins?" Still I would cry 
out in the name of Christ, " God be merciful to me 
a sinner." Notwithstanding all this painful experi- 
ence, no one but the Lord can tell the yearning I 
have increasing^ after souls to bring them to 
Christ. 

The Eev. T. W. C , dean of Trinity col- 
lege, Cambridge, ^T:ote me the particulars of the 
conversion of a profligate young man, converted, 
by especial mercy, by reading " The Sinner's 
Friend," portion page 10, "Pardon for the worst 
of sinners." Blessed, ever blessed be the name of 
the Lord. 

Feench axd German editions. The Lord in his 
tender mercy has been pleased to put it into the 
hearts of two pious ladies to send me an offer to 
translate "The Sinner's Friend" gratuitously into 
these languages, if I would undertake to pubhsh 



''WHO MAKETH THEE TO DIFFEK?" 151 

them, which I have gratefully assented to do. May 
God add his blessing for Christ's sake. Amen. 

Oct. 14. America. Received a letter from New 
York, stating that the Tract Society at New York 
has printed in the whole 64,000 copies of " The Sin- 
ner's Friend," and 94,000 copies of my speech at the 
Temperance meeting at Exeter Hall. 



152 JOHN VINE HALL. 

CHAPTEE VIII. 

"BEINGING IN SHEAVES/' 
1839 TO 1841— AGE 65-67, 

January 24, 1839. No tongue on earth can tell 
tlie rapture of my soul wlien speaking for the Lord 
Jesus Christ. Every power in me all on fire, in a 
]3erfect blaze, when telhng of redeeming love. But 
when I look at myself, and see the blackness of my 
heart and remember my dreadful sins, my soul sinks 
within me, and had I not a clear view of the mighty, 
the almighty sacrifice for sin, I should sink into de- 
spair. But Christ says, "No, I have redeemed thee, 
poor sinner. Thou art mine, and none shall ever 
pluck thee out of my hands." Thanks be to God for 
his unspeakable gift. I, once a poor drunken blas- 
phemer, have now been many years a deacon of the 
church of Christ. Oh marvellous mercy ! Surely I 
may well say, 

"Who could believe such lips could praise, 
Or think my dark and winding ways 
Should ever lead to God?" 

Maech 14. This day commences my sixty-sixth 
year — a poor sinful creature, laden with iniquity, 
yet overwhelmed by the mercy and goodness of my 
gracious God, who has plucked me indeed as a 
brand from the burning. On Monday evening, 
March 11, I, in the absence of our beloved pastor, 
was presiding at the prayer-meeting, and while 



^'BRINGING IN SHEAVES." 153 

standing at tlie desk reading tlie blessed word of 
God, I was, quite overcome with the recollection 
that on the same evening, March 11, 1811, I was 
wandering, a poor drunkard in a dark night, among 
the coal-mines at Stourbridge, and haying passed 
and escaped these horrible pits, I rolled down the 
bank of a canal, and in one moment more, had not 
the Lord held me, should have rolled over into the 
canal and should have been lost for ever. Is it any 
wonder that I should have felt the vast difference ? 
Why, the very stones would cry out were I to hold 
my tongue. How wonderful that such a wretch 
should have been raised up from the very depths of 
hell to send invitations to tens of thousands of sin- 
ners to seek the Lord; and more wonderful still, 
that the Lord should have blessed those invitations 
to the conversion of many souls. Paul says that he 
was raised up as a pattern of long-suffering to those 
who should hereafter believe. I am sure that I 
have been raised up as a witness of the forbearance 
and long-suffering of an offended God, that no sin- 
ner, however vile, may despair. I returned home 
weeping with an agony of gratitude, talking with 
the Lord, telling him of his marvellous loving-kind- 
ness, and praying him to keep and preserve me 
from pride or any kind of sin. I felt like a poor 
wicked child before a tender father — a prodigal 
returned. God be praised. Oh the matchless, 
boundless love of God ! 

I have always before me the remembrance of 
sin, filling my heart with unutterable anguish. But 
what astonishing things has the Lord been pleased 

7* 



154 JOHN VINE HALL. 

to effect by the instnimentalit j of my little book ! 
What numbers of poor sinners liaye been brought 
to seek the Lord by this simple means ! My Lord 
has also given me a son to be an ambassador for 
the Lord Jesus Christ. But the marvellous change 
is all of God, to whom I burn with ardent desire 
that every breath may be to his glory, through my 
gracious Redeemer, now my chiefest dehght, ever 
in my heart, a milHon, milhon times welcome guest, 
there to Hve and reign. 

The Eev. J. Black, Dunkeld, June 13, 1839, 
wrote me the blessed intelligence of a remarkable 
conversion of a colonel by the reading of "The Sin- 
ner's Friend." I fell on my knees with tears, clasp- 
ing my hands, crying, "Lord, accept my thanks, 
accept my thanks, and keep me humble. Oh keep 
me humble, but accept my thanks for Christ's bless- 
ed sake." 

June, 1839. That dear servant of God, the Eev. 

H. P of the Established church, has been giving 

a lecture every Wednesday evening from " The Sin- 
ner's Friend," and in a letter of the 5th of June, 1839, 
T^Tites me, "We shah take the last page of 'The 
Sinner's Friend' on Wednesday evening, July 3. 
And now what I desire is, that you write us a letter 
which I may read to my congregation on conclud- 
ing your Httle work. Bejoice with me, my friend, 
that a young female, about eighteen years of age, 
has been turned from the power of sin and Satan 
unto God by my lecture on the thirteenth page of 
'The Sinner's Friend.'" 

July 15. French edition, 3,000. Blessed be God 



'^BKINGING IN SHEAVES.' 155 

for liis great goodness that a French translation of 
"The Sinner's Friend" was pubhshed this day, and 
humbly dedicated to the living God. Oh may his 
rich mercy acc(^mpany this little work, now circu- 
lated in ten languages in various parts of the world, 
tcf the comfort and conversion of many sinners. 

I stop and ask myself this question : Am I doing 
these things from, sincere love to God and to his 
beloved Son; or am I led away by any desire to 
obtain the good opinion of my (ellow-sinners ? I 
am so jealous of myself, that I dare not answer the 
question, but cast myself at the feet of Jesus, and 
like poor Peter, say, "Lord, thou alone knowest 
whether I love thee or not." But I do pray most 
earnestly that my whole heart and the warmest 
affections of my soul may be entirely and unreserv- 
edly given up to thee. 

July 30, 1839. To Col. H . "Like you, I was 

the fiddle of every convivial party. 1 could take 
the head of the table, and sit all night, drinking, 
swearing, playing cards, and every abomination. 
At a ball I was always sure of a partner, because I 
could dance well and was never tired ; therefore the 
cry was, ' Oh, we must have Mr. Hall, for he will 
keep us all alive.' But Oh, how does my heart 
now grieve to think of these things ; and how aston- 
ished am I to think that God did not cut me down 
in my horrid blasphemies and daring rebellion 
against him; and then to think of the wondrous 
change ! The blasphemer an ambassador for 
Christ ! The drunkard a Kechabite ! The prayer- 
less rebel presiding at a prayer-meeting ! 



156 JOHN VINE HALL. 

" 'Wonders of grace to God belong, 
Eepeat his mercies in your song.' 

The companion of tlie licentious the friend of the 
pious! Tlie bawler of profane songs the author of 
'The Sinner's Friend!' Oh, hoTv does this exalt 
the glorr of the grace of God, for nothing else could 
possibly effect such a change. How does it exalt 
his mercy — higher than the heayens. What reason 
haye we then to fear, my dear friend, that God will 
eyer leaye unfinished that which he has so mani- 
festly and so gloriously begun ? Oh no, no, neyer. 
But then those eyil thoughts; what are we to do 
with them ? "Why, my fiiend, you must do as I do 
with them; caiTj them to the foot of the cross, the 
only place to get rid of them. I was myself most 
distressingly plagued with fears on this account till 
I read ' Owen on Indwelling Sin,' and here I found 
that the people of God harassed themselyes by the 
expectation that they were to get rid of indwelling 
sia before they get to heayen, which can neyer be 
the case ; and it should be enough for them to know- 
that, although sin dwells in. them, yet, by the grace 
of God, it does not reign oyer them as it once did. 
This gaye me quite a new light upon the subject, 
and made me content to be always fighting, trust- 
ing in the Lord. I remember also hearing a dear 
siLyer-haii'ed preacher of the gospel comforting his 
hearers by saying, ' The deyil will worry the saints 
all the way to the yery gate of heayen ; but, blessed 
be God, he can neyer get in after them.' " 

Nov. 25. This morning I started from !Maidstone 
at nine o'clock on a journey to Xorwich, to a meet- 



"BEINGING IN SHEAVES." 157 

ing of the Norwicli Union Life Office. I supplied 
my bag "vyith a goodly number of "The Sinner's 
Friend," praying for opportunities. There were 
three passengers and myself in the coach, and be- 
fore we had got four miles I had the happiness of 
introducing the subject nearest my heart. They 
listened with earnest attention to what I had to say 
of redeeming love. Early next morning I left Lon- 
don by the Norwicli coach. When daylight ap- 
peared I began to look round upon my fellow-trav- 
ellers, but was no way encouraged. We went on 
silently for about &Ye miles, when I took out a copy 
of " The Sinner's Friend," as though I were going 
to read it, when a lady passenger immediately said, 
" You have got a most interesting little book, sir." 
*'How do you know it to be so, madam?" "Oh, 
sir," she replied, " I know it well, and that it has 
had a most astonishing circulation." The lady said 
she knew the author, naming a gentleman of Nor- 
wich. This brought on the desired conversation, 
and we kept on praising God to the very last min- 
ute, as the coach drove up the streets of Norwicli, 
and then my fellow-passengers gave me a hearty 
shake of the hand, repeating their thanks. 

Mr. T. G took me to a large meeting of the 

teachers of the various Sunday-schools. How great 
was my surprise to hear my own name pronounced 
by the chairman as th-e author of " The Sinner's 
Friend," and that I would address a few words to 
the compan}^ I arose and opened my mouth for 
the Lord, who mercifully, as he always does, gave 
me utterance, and I hope I did not bring any dis- 



158 JOHN YIXE HALL 

honor upon that blessed cause which I so dearly 
love. Before the meeting broke up, I requested 

Mr. G to procure thi'ee hundred copies of " The 

Sinner's Friend" from the bookseller in Xor^dch, 
and present a copy to each person in the room. 

Mr. G took me with him the next morning 

to a select prayer-meeting, consisting of six dear 
devoted men who had met for prayer that the bless- 
ing of the Lord might attend the annual meeting of 
the City Mission, at which it was planned that I 

should speak. Mr. G then took me with him 

to ^dsit a poor dying woman anxious for her soul's 
conversion. "The Sinner's Friend" was lying on 
the chair by her bedside. She was very feeble, 

but when Mr. G told her that I was the person 

who -^Tote "The Sinner's Friend," her countenance 
brightened up as she exclaimed, " Do I indeed be- 
hold the gentleman who -^Tote that book which has 
afforded me so much comfort?" I reminded her 
of the words of the Lord Jesus Christ, who had 
most emphatically declared, "Him that cometh to 
me I will in no wise cast out," and, "Xone shall 
pluck you out of my hand." I then told her, if 
Satan should suggest doubts and fears to her mind 
as to her safety, to look immediately upon this note 
of hand, signed, "Jesus Christ the Son of God," 
"Xone shall j^luck you out of my hand." 

At the meeting of the City Mission there were 
upwards of one thousand persons. In the strength 
of the Lord I boldly declared my obhgations to 
God's mercy, and then brought forth four instances 
of the value of missionary efforts, either in speaking 



^'BEINGING IN SHEAVES." 159 

to people living in sin, or going to their houses, or 
being faithful at their bedside, or in giving a tract. 
I then gave an account of the Lord's dealings with 
my own soul, and said that the way of my dehver- 
ance was so w^onderful, that it would appear almost 
as a fable invented for effect ; but the man of whom 
I had been speaking, as I had spoken in the third 
person, was now alive and in good health; then 
pausing a moment, I concluded by saying, "And it 
is from his lips you now hear of the goodness of 
that God whose mercy endureth for ever." There 
was a dead silence ; the feelings of the people had 
been wrought up to a high pitch ; not a sound was 
heard, but several dear people upon the platform 
came up to me and pressed my hand in the most 
expressive manner. They felt the goodness of the 
Lord; so did L He was with me from the begin- 
ning to the end. Praised be his name. One gen- 
tleman came up, and with a half incredulous inquiry 
asked me if I was really the person who had lain at 
the edge of the canal. 

Feb. 25, 1840. On looking into my journal this 
morning, I turned to the entry made on the 15th of 
March, 1812, when I was in great distress on ac- 
count of my sinful course ; and on reading the peti- 
tion which the Lord at that time put into my heart, 
that I might become a signal monument of the 
power and goodness of God, I w^as overwhelmed 
witli gratitude at his wondrous mercy in answering 
prayer in so remarkable a manner, that for upwards 
of twenty-three years not a drop of wine or spirit- 
uous liquor has ever passed my tongue, and that I 



160 JOHN TINE HALL. 

have been enabled to be an ambassador of Jesus 
Chiist. I fell on mv knees and ivith. tears of grati- 
tncle endeavored to thank the Lord for his wondi'ous 
long-snffering. Oh Tvhat enconragement does mj 
case afford to the most abandoned sinner to cast 
himself at the feet of Jesus, who has promised that 
none shall be cast out who come to God by him. 
Xo heart was ever so much at enmity against God 
as miue: and vet how dearly do I love hi m now, 
and have done for many years. This is all his own 
work, not mine. Blessed be his name. 

Maech 14. This day commences my sixty-sev- 
enth year. "What shall I say of the goodness and 
mercy of God to so vile a sinner ? I stand astonished 
at my new nauu'e,. scarcely beliewlng my own senses : 
that I, who hated holiness, should feel the most 
exquisite as well as the most unutterable delight in 
walking m the ways of God : that this blessed feeling 
should also have occupied the chief place in my heart 
for upwards of twenty years, without the smallest 
diminution, daily, hourly, momentarily increasing, 
tiQ my whole sotd glows with a constant blaze of 
heavenly love. I cannot hear the blessed name of 
the Saviour without feeling a fire within me stealing 
into my eyes with streams of gratitude for what ho 
has done for my soul. I could praise him for ever. 
And Oh, how many opportunities has he given me 
for doing this within the last year, in joiumeys by 
coaches or steam-boats, or othei'wise ; and ho"^ has 
my heart been eni'aptured in such opportunities in 
proclaiming to persons whom I had never seen be- 
fore the amazing love of God in the person of his 



*'BEINGING IN SHEAVES." 161 

beloved Son. Oh wondrous grace, matchless mercy ! 
Yes, blessed be his name, I am his, and nothing 
shall ever separate me from his love. 

Jerusalem. It is impossible to express the exqui- 
site pleasure which I experienced. May 29, by the 

receipt of a letter from the Rev. J. N , dated 

Mount Zion. He proposes to translate "The Sin- 
ner's Friend " into the Hebrew and Arabic. I was 
overjoyed at the letter, which I laid before the Lora 
on my knees, with thanksgiving that " The Sinner's 
Friend " had been accepted in that very city where 
my gracious Redeemer shed his blood for the sins of 
the whole world, and for me. Blessed be his name. 

Mr. A. W went to France on June 4, prin- 
cipally to circulate "The Sinner's Friend" in the 

French language. Mr. W took five hundred 

copies for that purpose. Oh may the Lord be mer- 
cifully pleased to bless every copy for Jesus' own 
sake. Mr. B has been circulating "The Sin- 
ner's Friend" in Spain, from whence he was driven. 
"The Christian Spectator" pubhshes a Papal edict 
against it. 

June 30. This day the seventy-first edition of 
"The Sinner's Friend" was published, with three 
entirely new portions which the Lord had merci- 
fully put into my heart to write. I took one of 
these copies in my hand, and kneeling before the 
Lord, humbly dedicated them to him with earnest 
prayer for his blessing to attend every copy. 

July 13. Wrote Dr. Pinkerton that I wished the 
Frankfort Tract Society to adopt " The Sinner's 
Friend;" that I would send them gratuitously one 



162 JOHN VINE HALL. 

thousand copies ; and also would present tliem with 
the stereotype plates. I laid my letter and the Httle 
book before the Lord, and on my knees entreated 
him to influence the Committee of the Frankfort 
society to adopt "The Sinner's Friend." 

Aug. 13. For a long time my heart has been 
irresistibly drawn to the exercise of prayer about the 
middle of the day. When the men have gone to 
their dinner, I have retired to the printing-office for 
a few minutes to kneel before the Lord with thank- 
fulness and praise for the continuance of his great 
and many mercies. I have felt it refreshing thus to 
hold communion with God in the very midst of 
business, to arm me against the many yexations 
which momentarily assail me. I am sui'e it is good 
often to run to the Lord, to take shelter under the 
shadow of his almighty wings, that he may protect 
us from ourselyes as well as from the world and 
Satan. 

Aug. 16. This day I received from "W 

K , Esq., Eussian merchant at St. Petersburg, a 

letter saying his son-in-law "gave 'The Sinner's 

Friend' to Baron H , a colonel in the Grand 

Duke's regiment. He is dehghted '^ith it, and calls 
it the best epitome of the gospel that he ever saw. 
His copy is lent out, and is going a round among 
his hiends ; but he wants a French copy, to lend to 
those who do not understand German. We shall 
also lose no time in having it translated into Euss. 
It vdYl suit the Eussians." 

Sept. 5. This day I had the exquisite pleasure of 
sending off by Hambiu'g steam-packet, the stereo- 



''BKINGING IN SHEAVES." 163 

type plates of the German edition of " The Sinner's 
Friend," as a present to the Lower Saxony Tract 
Society, in the name of the "Lord Jesus. O may his 
richest blessing accompany every copy. 

OcTOBEE 14, 1840. Wednesday morning, seven 
o'clock. Is Christ really precious to my soul; or is 
he not? Is Christ dear to my heart ; or is he not ? Is 
it my earnest desire to have him ever with me ; or is 
it not? If called to die this very moment, is my con- 
fidence firm in Christ; or is it not? What answer 
does my soul give to these questions? Surely I can 
truly say that Christ is indeed the altogether love- 
ly, precious to my soul, and my supreme desire ; with 
the deepest sorrow for sin, yet with the most implicit 
confidence in that precious blood which cleanseth 
from all sin, even my sins. Then if called to die 
this day, or even before I finish this entry, I am now 
safe in Christ, and a thousand years of holy living 
would not make me more fit for heaven than at the 
present moment ; for I can enter heaven only an un- 
worthy sinner having no righteousness of my own, 
but all in Christ, for he is my sanctification, my 
peace, my way to God. Such are my thoughts at 
this moment with the word of 'God before me, and 
before I proceed to read its blessed contents. Bless- 
ed be God for this lively faith in his beloved Son. 

J. V. H. 

Nov. 7. O blessed be the Lord that I live to see 
the day up to which he has mercifully enabled me 
by his great bounty to give away upwards of forty 
thousand copies of " The Sinner's Friend." O what 
can I render to the Lord for all his goodness tow- 



164 JOHN VINE HALL. 

ards me, so great, so utterly luideseryed? I desire 
to give liim mj wliole heart, and to devote all my 
life to liis blessed service-for Christ's sake. Lord, 
accept my heart, and seal it thine. 

Not. 16. I -wrote the Eehgious Tract Society an 
offer of " The Sinner's Friend," to print it as a tract. 
To this proposition they assented. May the Lord 
add his blessing. Amen. [Up to midsummer, 18-i3, 
the Tract Society published ninety thousand copies, 
in fifteen editions.] 

A note from the son of the Bishop of Calcutta 
announces that "The Sinner's Friend" is akeady 
translcited into Bengalee, and widely ch'culated. 
Praised, O praised be the Lord. 

Maech 14, 1841. This day completes my sixty- 
seventh year. I can scarcely beheve it possible 
that I am so old. My health vigorous, and my soul 
all on fire for the Lord Jesus. O what wondrous 
things has the Lord done for me during the last 
twenty-five years, making me not only a Eechabite, 
but a follower of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

jMay 12. A new portion for " The Sinner's Friend," 
""What must I do to be saved?" Li reading in 
my usual course the sixteenth chapter of Acts, I was 
impressed vdth the importunity of the poor jailer to 
know what he could do to be saved; and as many 
persons are anxious to know this, I felt as it were a 
sudden call to ^Tite a few thoughts on this passage, 
and then transfer it to the pages of " The Sinner's 
Friend." I immediately laid the matter before the 
Lord, imploring his aid to warm my heart, and then 
instruct me what to VTite in strict accordance with 



''BKINGING IN SHEAVES." 165 

his lioly word. In answer to tliis petition, the 
Lord was mercifully pleased to direct my mind 
to write the new portion which will appear in the 
new edition, eighty-eight, on page 4, " Salvation 
through faith — not by works." May the Lord 
accompany it with his blessing, for Christ's sake. 
Amen. 

The Kev. J. Angell James, Birmingham, writes, 
"I greatly rejoice with you in the usefulness to 
which God has called you by the publication of this 
little work. It will outlive its author, and be send- 
ing up converted and glorified saints to heaven to 
follow him to the realms of bliss. How sweet is the 
thought of doing something for Christ even after we 
are dead." 

June 8. Awoke early this morning out of a 
heavenly dream, in which I had been engaged with 
several persons in a house of prayer. I was myself 
apparently engaged in the exercise of most earnest 
supplication, with an intensity of energy far more 
than when I am awake. This blessed vision was in 
answer to earnest prayer the last thing before I 
closed my eyes in sleep. It has long been my cus- 
tom, when I get into bed, to pray the Lord that, 
if it be not too much to ask, he will be pleased to 
preserve me from sinful dreams, and that when my 
body is locked in sleep my soul may be engaged in 
his blessed service, either in praise or prayer ; so that, 
whether sleeping or waking, I may always be en- 
gaged in his blessed service. I have reason to bless 
the Lord that he continually grants my requests to 
the rejoicing of my soul, so that with David I am 



166 JOHN VINE HALL. 

enabled to say, " Wlien I awake I am still with tliee." 
Blessed be the Lord. 

The faithfulness of God to his peomises. What? 
a blessing is prayer ; and Oh what mercy that God 
should hear us ! It has been a great comfort to me 
in my ]Dilgrimage to trust in the promise of our dear 
Eedeemer, "Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, 
that will I do." The Lord is ever faithful to his 
word. I have proved it to be so in a most remark- 
able "manner in the following instance. My love 
and reverence for the Lord have led me to leave the 
whole direction of my concerns in his hands ; pray- 
ing him to make me holy and acquiescent in his will, 
rather than specify to the Lord any particular bless- 
ing. But a few years ago my beloved wife was laid 
on a bed of sickness, and considered to be within a 
few minutes of eternity, not the slightest hope ; so 
that the physician told me that her duration in life 
would not exceed ten minutes. She had parted, 
finally as we thought, T^ith myself, and I had retir- 
ed to another apartment, while she sent for my 
eldest son to attend her bedside to receive her bless- 
ing. I stepped gently into her room again unob- 
served by any one, to catch the last sound of her 
dear voice, and while I Vv^as thus remaining in most 
painful suspense, even then unwilhng to dictate to « 
the Lord, but rather feehng, " Though he slay me, 
yet will I trust in him," and love him too, a voice 
from heaven whispered in my ear, " There is a prom- 
ise laid up for you in the trying hour : I know your 
faith, your love, and that you would rather not spec- 
ify a blessing, but vrould humbly trust my mercy; 



*'BKINGING IN SHEAVES." 167 

but now make use of this promise, ' Wliatsoever ye 
shall ask in my name, that will I do.' " "With a haK 
suffocated voice I cried out in agony, " Lord, I be- 
seech thee, for the honor of the word of thy dear 
Son, do grant me the life of my wife." I sank back 
in my chair, overwhelmed with the intensity of my 
feelings, and could say no more, not a syllable. I 
could only weep. But Oh the mercy and faithfulness 
of God ! The angel of death, his arrow poised, was 
forbidden to strike ; and from that very moment my 
beloved wife began to recover, and she who was sup- 
posed to be within ten minutes of death has been 
many years, and is now, the solace of my life, the 
joy of my heart, uniting every energy of heart and 
soul with myself in the work of the Lord, having 
herself written one of the portions, " Word to the 
Poor," in " The Sinner's Eriend." Blessed be the 
Lord. 

September 22, 1841. Twenty-five years of eman- 
cipation. I discontinued wine and spirituous liquors 
Sunday, September 22, 1816. I am more full of life 
and fire at nearly seventy years of age than I was 
at thirty, when I drank freely of every thing. By 
not taking malt liquor I never feel the pain of thirst, 
therefore do not require liquid aliment in the same 
degree as heretofore, tea and coffee being sufficient. 
But besides this, it has pleased God to put " a new 
song into my mouth ;" and he has enabled me by 
his almighty grace to live to his glory, a monument 
of redeeming love. 

"The Wonderful Escape." This tract, the sub- 
stance of my speech at Exeter Hall, at the anniver- 



168 JOHN YINE HALL. 

saiy of tlie Temperance Society, May, 1836, was 
adopted and 136,000 copies printed by the New 
York Tract Society entirely -without my knowledge. 
Blessed be the Lord. T\Tio would have thought, 
when I made this speech, that it would have been 
made a blessing in America ? 

Dec. 1. Mr. E. M died this day, aged sixty- 
three. He was one of my early companions in a 
society of twenty or more gay young men indulging 
in folly and sin: we two were the only persons left; 
all the others cut down in the prime of life. I had 

spoken and T\Titten to Mr. M , and I gave him a 

copy of "The Sinner's Friend," with strong entreaty 
that he would read it with attention. His death is 
a warning. The whole society, of which I was a 
leader, is now broken up, all gone except myself. 
Shortly I too must die. I behold David and Saul 
and Peter, a murderer, a blasphemer, and a back- 
shder, yet all these three are in heaven, notwith- 
standing their misdeeds. How came these to find a 
place there? Because God is long-suffering, gra- 
cious, and merciful to all who seek him through Jesus 
Christ. Though all men may deem me beside my- 
seK, yet no philosophy nor argument can ever dis- 
suade me of my firm behef that Jesus Christ hves 
and reigns even in my heart, wliich once dared to 
despise his rule, and which was determined to in- 
dulge in every kind of sin. David said he was "a 
wonder unto many;" so am I and have been among 
my former acquaintances, but I am the greatest 
wonder to myself. But " wonders of grace to God 
belong." It is all wonder fi^om beginning to end. 



^'BKINGING IN SHEAVES." 169 

Some of my friends seem to think that I have a 
peculiar warmth of manner in expressing my love to 
Christ. Ah, dear friends, ice itself would become 
fire with indignation, were I not to burn and blaze 
whenever my dear Redeemer's name is the theme. 
The wonder is that I am not in the hottest hell in- 
stead of singing the praises of God. If any inquire 
why it is that I love so much, I refer them to the 
Saviour's own words, " Because he hath much for- 
given." Glory, glory, glory be to the Lord. Amen. 
Lord, keep me humble, keep me humble for Jesus' 
blessed sake. 



Jonn Vine Hall. 



170 JOHN VINE HALL. 



CHAPTER IX. 

CONTEXT. 

18i2 TO 1852~AGE 68-78. 



Maech 14, 1842. Tliis day ended my sixty-ninth 
year, and tlie tliirtieth year of my new birth. The 
Lord has indeed fulfilled his word in my case : " With 
long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salva- 
tion," Psa. 91 : with long life, inasmuch as I have now 
onthved all my friends, the associates of my youth. 
My own time mnst, however, shortly come. But I 
have not the slightest fear. Not because of my new 
nature, a total change of heart, but fi'om the impos- 
sibility of God to be unfaithful to his word. And 
he has said by his beloved Son, that whosoever be- 
heveth on him shall have everlasting life. By the 
grace of God I do believe in Christ, although I was 
once an infidel, and he has become the very chiefest 
object of my affections, with a constant hatred of all 
manner of sin. In my old age, and with plenty of 
this world's goods, I am still a beggar, begging my 
way from earth to heaven every hour of my life. 
But I feel enriched by fr-ee, unmerited gTace. It is 
my desire ever to lie at the foot of the cross with 
deep rej)entance and love towards that divine Ee- 
deemer who ever lives and reigns in my heart. This 
blessed feeling has been increasing daily in my soul 
more than twenty years. God be praised evermore. 
O may my beloved wife and all my dear children 



CONTENT. 171 

eiijoy the same heavenly delights, that we may all 
meet round the throne in blissful union to sing for 
ever of redeeming love. 

A letter from the Keligious Tract Society in- 
forms me that "The Sinn,er's Friend" is to be print- 
ed at Athens in the Greek language. How wonder- 
ful, that where Paul made known the then unknown 
God, and possibly even on Mars hill, " The Sinner's 
Friend," by the blessing of God, may be the means 
of directing some poor sinner to the cross. 

May 2. When the late martyr WiUiams was at 
my house, I wrote an affectionate letter to Makea, 
king of Earotonga, which Mr. "Williams engaged to 
deliver to him on his return to that island ; but as 
Mr. Williams was murdered, I never expected to hear 
any thing about my letter. To my surprise, a letter 
was delivered to me this day from Makea David, son 
of the late king of Earotonga, translated by Mr. 
Buzacott, resident missionary, saying, "I under- 
stand that Jesus the Messiah is your rejoicing, by 
w^hat you have said in your writing to Makea. I also 
understand the little book, 'The Sinner's Friend;' a 
book very excellent, and enlightening to read." - 

April 19. This morning dear Newman and self 
set off from Eotherham to Thorne, on our way to 
Hull. In the packet were several emigrants for 
America, to whom I spoke of the mercy of God. In 
the cabin I also found four dear Christians, to whom 
I opened my mouth for the Lord, encouraging them 
to put their trust in Him. At Hull we were most 
courteously welcomed by Sir William Lowthrop. In 
the evening to a prayer-meeting, which was being 



172 JOHN VINE HALL. 

held at Mr. Stratten's chapel to implore the divine 
blessing npon the new chapel to be opened on the 
morrow. Mr. Stratten astonished me by saying, 
"A stranger, who is now here, unknown to us per- 
sonally, but well known as the author of 'The Sin- 
ner's Friend,' will, I hope, engage in prayer when 
the hymn has been sung. As soon as the service 
was over, about a dozen ministers and others came 
round me with kind shakes of the hand. O how 
great is the goodness of the Lord towards me. On 
our return we found the Eev. Dr. Eaffles and Dr. 
Harris, who had come to officiate at the opening of 
Albion chapel on the morrow. 

Apeil 20. Opekeng of Albion chapel, Hull. The 
Eev. J. Stratten commenced the service by a dedi- 
catory prayer. The Eev. Dr. Harris preached from 
"Thy will be done." There was breathless atten- 
tion for an hour and a half. In the evening the 
Eev. Dr. EafSes threw open the gate of mercy wide 
as infinity, from "The grace of God that bringeth 
salvation hath appeared unto all men." Oh it was 
enough to awaken the dead, and I trust that many 
a soul was made glad indeed in the Lord. I had 
some very pleasant private conversation with Lady 
Lowthrop upon the mercy of God to sinners. Af- 
terwards I spoke to the butler about the way of 
salvation. He said he was not a converted man, but 
he hoped to become so. He appeared truly thank- 
ful, and promised to attend to my admonition. I 
spoke to him a second time, urging him to seek the 
Lord without delay. I entreated him so warmly 
that he appeared deeply affected. 



CONTENT. 173 

Apeil 22. At ShefSeld a respectable woman ad- 
dressed me, " Sir, you gave a very instructing little 
book, 'The Sinner's Friend,' to a person here, the 
other, day. "Would you be so kind as to give one to 
me?" She asked with such a look of importunity 
that I said, " Oh yes, and I bless God that you have 
asked me." I then took hold of her hand in a kind 
manner and said, " Do you know Jesus ?" The tears 
started in her eyes, and she looked that she knew 
him. Shaking her kindly by the hand, I commend- 
ed her to the blessing of the Lord ; and when I got 
into the street I could scarcely refrain from crying 
aloud, "Lord, thou art ever blessing me; and thou 
knowest that it is the joy of my heart ever to be 
praising thee. My heart, my heart praises thee, O 
God." I was quite in rapture at this very unexpect- 
ed opportunity of speaking for the Lord. 

Apeil 25. Mr. W 's butler walked with me 

to the railway station, which gave me the opportu- 
nity of speaking to him on the great importance of 
being decidedly a Christian. At the station-house 
I conversed with a young female on the necessity 
of being found in the ways of God. Gave her a 
copy of "The Sinner's Friend," thankful to God 
for the opportunity of beginning the day in his 
service. 

July 13. Hull. This day it pleased God to 
allow my dear wife and self the privilege of witness- 
ing our dear son I^ewman's being ordained a min- 
ister of Jesus Christ. Newman had been unani- 
mously invited by the deacons and church of Christ 
assembled in Albion chapel to take uj)on him this 



lU JOHN VIXE HALL. 

important office, and tliis day about tTvelre minis- 
ters were assembled for the service. The Eev. T. 
James proposed tlie usual questions to Xewman, 
whose sti'aightfoTward account of the principles of 
Ms faith and the motives which had led him to 
desire the office of a Christian minister, awakened 
the deepest sympathies, and drew tears from many. 
I wept with gratitude to hear him declare that from 
a child he had been taught the way of the Lord, 
early instructed by his dear parents to walk in the 
way of holiness and ti'uth. He spoke of his early 
advantages, but acknowledged that his religion was 
merely outward, until a ckcumstance aroused him 
seriously to seek salvation in Chiist Jesus. This 
was simple, but made eiiectual by the Holy Spiiit. 
It was a letter fi'om a younger sister. Here again 
I had abimdant reason to praise the Lord that my 
dear children had not been taught in vain to seek 
Hun. 

Saebath-day, July 17. Albion chapel, HuU. 
Dear Xewman commenced his arduous services as 
pastor. BGls fii'st text was, '•' Brethren, pray for us ;" 
and in the eve nin g, ''I am determined to know 
nothing among you, save Chiist, and him cracified." 
The Lord's supper was administered after the even- 
ing service to about eighty communicants, 

July 19. I embarked on board the Tivid steam- 
er: there were foui^ Wesleyan ministers on board, 
and when the company were assembled to tea, one 
of them asked the divine blessing upon oui' refi'esh- 
ment. I could not refrain fr'om expressing my pleas- 
m^e, and at the same time saying that I should be 



CONTENT. 175 

very glad to have a prayer-meeting in the saloon at 
half-past seven o'clock, when about twenty persons 
united in prayer and praise until half-past nine. 
The next morning at half-past ten we renewed this 
exercise for an hour. 

Aua. 6. At Hull I had the opportunity of speak- 
ing to many persons, particularly to Sir W. L 's 

butler, that he might overcome his besetting sin of 
intemperance and find a refuge in Jesus Christ. I 
took him by the hand and spoke to him tenderly, 
till his eyes told the feelings of his heart. My son 
Newman says in a letter from Hull, " On Thursday 

last H came to offer himself as a member for 

church-fellowship, and stated that it was my father 
who first led him to think seriously of his soul. 
How my heart rejoiced for one of the first batch of 
new members to be my father's spiritual son." 
When I read this I fell down on my knees in joy 
and gratitude, and could only articulate with con- 
vulsive accent, ''O my Lord, mercifully accept my 
thanks, and bless that man with establishing grace 
for Christ's sake, and keep me humble." What 
delight have I experienced in speaking for Christ 
in steam-boats, coaches, railways, omnibuses, and 
anywhere when opportunity has occurred. It has 
been my highest delight to "bless the Lord at all 
times, and to have his praise continually in my 
mouth," and to say, "Come and hear, all ye that 
fear God, and I will declare what he hath done for 
my souL" This is the second instance of a gentle- 
man's servant having been brought to think seri- 
ously of his soul in consequence of my admonition. 



176 JOHN VINE HALL. 

Oct. 20. A servant provoked me by obstinate 
argument when I endeavored to explain to liim his 
error. I felt angry, and spoke hastily. I was sorry 
for it, and immediately fell on my knees beseeching 
the Lord to pardon my sin. " Set a watch before 
my month," etc. How needful this for every pro- 
fessor of religion. 

Jan. 4, 1843. Newman writes that one of the 
members admitted to church-fellowship last week 
attributed to reading "The Sinner's Friend" her 
first religious impressions. Also that he had been 
sent for to see a sick man who had been without 
any religion or hope ; but a copy of " The Sinner's 
Friend" had been lent him, and Newman found 
him sqbbing with penitence and joy. 

JouENEY TO Hull. Makch 12. In the afternoon 
of this Sabbath I had the pleasure of conducting 
the service at "Wincobank chapel, near Sheffield. 
About three hundred present. I spoke for an hour, 
my soul all on fire. March 14. Hull. Arrived at 
Dr. Gordon's. At Dr. Gordon's met ministers of 
the Established, the Presbyterian, and Independent 
churches. We heartily agreed upon the essential 
points of the gospel — none but Christ. How de- 
lightful to meet with sincere Christians of every 
denomination. March 17. Accompanied Sir W. 

L to the prison, and addressed a few words to 

the debtors. Afterwards addressed the female pris- 
oners, who were also assembled in a room, where 

Lady L was reading to them from the Bible. 

March 19. Bethel Floating chapel. Conducted-the 
service on board the Floating chapel, and spoke for 



CONTENT. 177 

about an hour to six liundred persons, sailors and 
others. The ship was literally crammed. March 23. 

Mrs. H of Welton told me that a gentleman who 

was taken ill requested particularly that she should 
be sent for to speak to him about a Saviour. Mrs. 

H read several portions from "The Sinner's 

Friend," which so comforted his soul that he press- 
ed the little book to his bosom with gratitude, and 
shortly afterwards died. March 26. Penitentiary. 

Sir W. L and Miss M took me to address 

the inmates, twenty-six young females. Spoke ten- 
derly to these unfortunates, many of whom wept 
exceedingly. I felt that I myself was far worse 
than any of these poor females. The Lord has 
saved me; why not save them? March 29. Un- 
ceasingly alive to his mercy, I felt constrained, as I 
walked along the streets, to be continually praising 
the Lord. I hope it is indeed the true desire of my 
soul that my God may be glorified by me in every 
word and thought and deed, and that Christ may 
occupy every space of my heart, to the exclusion of 
every kind of sin. March 30. Enjoyed a walk of 
three hours with Lady L , wdio kindly intro- 
duced me to many exceedingly poor Christians, liv- 
ing in such obscure places that I was surprised she 
had found them out ; but she was in the habit of 
reading and praying with them. In these visits I 
heard of two persons who had been brought to the 
Lord through "The Sinner's Friend." April 8. 
Home. Dear Marj^ and self knelt together before 
the Lord to thank him for his great mercy during 
our absence, and for the kindnesses from the whole 

8* 



178 JOHN YIXE HALL. 

of our Mends diu'ing oiir stay in Torksliire. I Lad 
neyer had so delightful a relaxation from business. 
My dear Mary being my companioUj made my joy 
complete. Blessed be the Lord. 

]Mapx'H 14:, 1814. Seventy years of age. "Were it 
not for a correct reckoning of the past years, I could 
scarcely beheye it possible. No lassitude, no dis- 
ease -whatever. I may well call upon my soul and 
all that is within me to bless the Lord. I awoke 
very early this morning, praising him for preserv- 
ing my health and causing me to rejoice in Christ 
as my all-sufficient Savioui', But in the midst of 
mercies almost beyond compare, still my nature is 
prone to sin. I lament it deeply, with earnest cry 
for a truly penitent heart. 

I\Iaech 26. This day we took possession of our 
new residence, and my dear Mary and self knelt 
together before the Lord to dedicate ourselves and 
our new tenement to the Lord, beseeching his bless- 
ing to accompany us in this and in every cfrcum- 
stance of our future life. Li the evening, at our 
family altar, we again, with our childi'en and ser- 
vants, repeated the same heartfelt offering to him. 

"The Sinner's Friend" is now adopted and pub- 
lished by the four largest Tract Societies in the 
world; also in Lidia by the Calcutta Translation 
Society, under the superintendence of Bishop Wil- 
son, in various dialects. Oh what do I not owe to 
the Lord for his wonderful mercy in thus bestowing 
such great honor on my little work I 

May 8. It was again my privilege to speak to 
the people in Weak-street chapel, our dear pastor 



CONTENT. 179 

being absent in London. My principal design was 
to urge the great importance of being one with 
Christ, and in every situation of life to have him 
always with us. The blessed reward of being one 
of his sheep — eternal life. The security — never 
perish; "No man able to pluck them out of my 
hand." Blessed security! Although I had no 
thought or desire to have been thus engaged, and 
would rather have relinquished it to any other per- 
son, yet when I was so engaged my heart was all 
on fire, overflowing with the most intense feeling to 
induce my fellow-sinners to seek a close union with 
our blessed Kedeemer, and through him to be one 
with the Father. 

Sunday, Maech 2, 1845. The Lord's supper. It 
was on Sabbath, March 2, 1818, that I partook 
of the Lord's supper for the first time in Weak- 
street chapel, having been received on the previous 
Friday as a member of Christ; and this day I 
had the great privilege to officiate as a deacon, to 
which office I had been unanimously elected many 
years ago, and the Lord has mercifully preserved 
me until the present day. I felt overwhelmed 
with gratitude, and I requested our dear minister 
to return thanks to the Lord publicly on my behalf. 

Hull. Makch 24. Walked about the docks to 
circulate " The Sinner's Friend." This evening a 
district meeting of Christian friends was held in Sir 

W. L 's drawing-room.. To my unspeakable 

gratitude five or six persons referred to "The Sin- 
ner's Friend" as having been made a blessing to 
their souls, by directing them to the Saviour. Oh 



180 JOHN YIXE HALL. 

how merciful is the Lord to me, the very chiefest of 
the worst of sinners. !N"obody knows how bad I 
have been but myself. Yet the Lord knows it aU; 
but blessed be his name, the blood of his dear Son 
cleanseth fi'om all sin — ^from my sins. 

Juke 7. This morning Mr. O , a perfect stran- 
ger, came to Maidstone for no other purpose than 
to pay me a visit. He addressed me in the most 
enthusiastic manner,, saying that he had distributed 
many thousand copies of "The Sinner's Friend," 
and knew of the good that had been effected by its 
circulation, in cases almost exceeding credibihty, 

'only he knew them to be true. The Key. J 

from Tahiti came in the evening. So that the 
Lord was this day pouring forth a river of dehght 
in bringing me into close communion with his dear 
people. On this day we had the great pleasui'e of 
entertaining the missionaries, etc., who had come 
to attend the annual meeting. Our room was ht- 
erally crammed. Twelve ministers among them. I 
was truly thankful for a house and a heart to receive 
the friends of my Lord. 

Aug-. 26. Anniversary of our wedding-day, com- 
pleting thii'ty-nine years united to my beloved 
Mary, more beloved than ever. But Oh, how my 
heart aches at the remembrance of the pain I have 
occasioned her to feel; and Oh, how my soul mourns 
at the recollection of my sins against a holy God. 
The very mercies of God made me quite miserable, 
because they were so greatly undeserved. I was 
indeed and always am truly sorry for my sin, but 
I have imphcit confidence in the blood of Christ 



CONTENT. 181 

to atone for all my guilt, altliough of the deepest 
dye. 

Sept. 23. Astonisliing that sucli a wretcli as I 
was should be permitted to speak for Christ. But 
the ways of God are not our ways, and he in infi- 
nite mercy first grants conversion to the most un- 
likely, like Saul of Tarsus, and then bestows upon 
them a commission, saying, "Feed my sheep." The 
change is truly as great as from darkness into light, 
hell into heaven. "But," says the sceptic, "where 
is the proof?" To such a one I would say, "Look 
at yonder wretched object, prostrate on the ground, 
covered with filth, frightful to behold, his eyes glar- 
ing, and cheeks bloated with intoxication. Hear 
those dreadful oaths and curses at every "word 
belching from his stammering lips. Look at the 
wretcli — lost! a very beast. Appalling sight! Turn 
from the loathsome object, and enter yon temple of 
the Lord, and there behold the striking contrast. 
An aged pilgrim presiding at a prayer-meeting, 
giving out the hymns with a pathos and solemnity 
that bespeak a hea.rt full of adoration, thanksgiv- 
ing, and love to the Bedeemer. Listen to the glow- 
ing effusion of his soul in prayer, all on fire for God, 
confessing the enormity of his past sins, yet hum- 
bly exulting and glorying in the sanctifying influ- 
ences of the Holy Spirit to prepare his heart for 
the reception of the ever blessed Son of God, that 
he may there ever live and reign, a million, million 
times welcome guest, the joy of his soul, the daily 
increasing delight of his life. But who is this aged 
pilgrim with silver hair, so full of heavenly fire? 



182 JOHN VINE HALL. 

"Who is he ? Listen, earth, and yoii, ye angels of 
God, who rejoice over a penitent sinner turned from 
the error of his ways. Listen, ye angels, Hsten ! 
"Who is he ? VTiij, the aged silvery-haii-ed pilgTini 
is no other than the once poor blasj)heming rebel 
whom yon saw prosti'ate on the gTonnd, in all the 
horrors of intoxication, covered with filth. Yes, 
praise to the tender mercy of God, this is the very 
wi'etch whom Jesiis saw weltering in his blood, bade 
him hve as the lost whom he came to save, and then 
put on him a new robe, and made him the author of 
' The Sinner's Friend.' Is any thing too hard for 
the Lord? This is the proof of the j^ower of chang- 
ms: o-race." Merciful God I O God of wonders ! 
Well may this poor man sing, 

" Througli all etemity to thee 
A joyful song I 'H raise, 
Bnt OIl etemitr 's too short 
To litter all thy praise." 

Is it any wonder then that when I speak of Chiist 
I am all in a blaze? Why, the very stones would 
rise up against me were I to be silent one single 
moment. The Lord Jesus is always in my thoughts, 
my heart, my tongue, and I can no more help or cease 
speaking of him than I can hve without breathing. 
Oct. 10. The natural birthday of my dear, dear 
wife, dearer than ever, dearer than when she com- 
pleted her nineteenth year as my wife. Xow she 
has hved to see the retiums of her bii'thday forty 
times since we have been miited in the bonds of 
increasing love, a numerous offsjDring, and om- chil- 
di'en's children, with mercies on every side. Oh 



CONTENT. 183 

what reason to call upon our souls and every power 
within us to -bless and praise the Lord. We had a 
happy family party. After dinner we united heart 
and voice in singing, " Praise God, from whom all 
blessings flow." After tea we repeated hymns, and 
I took the opportunity to address my dear children, 
entreating them to make the Lord their trust, and 
then they would find him to be as kind to them as 
he had been to' their father. When I am dead and 
gone perhaps they will think of this. Oh may the 
Lord fix it upon their souls. 

" May 26, 18-16. I take up my pen to write you 
in the midst of tears. ' But why should my father 
shed tears ?' I '11 tell you, dear Newman. I have 
just been reading the thrilling tale of Joseph and 
his brethren, and although I have read it so often, 
yet it is ever exciting to the highest degree, and I 
cannot help it, old fool as I am. Talk of romance 
or tales of imagination ; why, nothing in the world 
exceeds this simple unvarnished truth. And then I 
began to think of the mercy of God to myself in an 
almost similar but far different respect, because I 
was not ruler of all Egypt ; but God had raised me 
up to nourish a dearwmother who had been by mis- 
fortune reduced from respectability and plenty to 
poverty ; and then God sent me into a strange land — • 
Worcester — unknown to any one, and without a shil- 
ling of my own ; and there God gave me power and 
money, and a heart of love to my poor parent, whose 
letters to me were often commenced, ' My dear Jo- 
seph in Egypt, the meal is almost gone,' and then 
through the Lord's mercy I was enabled most will- 



184 JOHN VINE HALL. 

ingly to supply all her wants until she entered 
heaven ; her last words, for two hours, invoking 
blessings upon her son. The recollection of all this 
made me weep again, as I now do, to think of the 
goodness of God towards me; and then to give 
me such a wife, and to load me with temporal and 
spmtual blessings till my heart is overwhelmed with 
joy and sorrov/, sorrow of the deepest kind at the 
remembrance of my past ingratitude to my forgiv- 
ing God. And then, again, to think of the excess of 
his goodness in making me a herald of salvation to 
hundreds of thousands of sinners in every part of 
the world. Oh, it is too much. The Lord preserve 
me fi'om pride or self-complacency. But Oh, how 
I do love the Lord, his ways, his people, and how 
my heart does rejoice when I can speak a word for 
his holy name. 

" Poor Okili is yet alive, but I think to-mor- 
row may be his last; he is now a wonder to all 
his famil}^ — so changed. They see it with over- 
whelming gratitude. He appears to have no doubt 
of acceptance with God. This trophy of divine 
grace, once a tiger in temper, is now as a lamb, so 
patient, so thankfal, and is often heard to ejacu- 
late, ' Blessed Lord, blessed Lord !' I was once 
obliged to discharge him because his blasphemies 
were not to be endured. I am with him every day, 
always invited by him to engage in prayer, and 
then he holds my hand in his own, and with a con- 
vulsive squeeze endeavors thus to express the gTate- 
ful feelings of his heart. God be praised. Marvel- 
lous mercv! What a chanoe too in jL . One 



i 



CONTENT. 185 

of his fellow- workmen, wlio works close beside liiro 
in an apartment where there are thirty dissipated 

men, among whom M was the worst, informed 

me that he stands his ground before them all, man- 
ifesting the power of changing grace ; that they all 

wonder, but do not follow him. M , with a heavy 

sigh, told me that he used to pay a man to sing pro- 
fane songs. The kingdom of God is full of wonders. 
"NoY. 14. When a single string of the body 
is out of tune we begin to utter discordant notes. 
How much worse is it when the soul becomes dis- 
ordered, when carelessness or indifference obscures 
our view of that celestial light which is intended to 
warm our affections into a glow of heavenly ardor, 
blazing, burning with love to God. Nothing but a 
close union with Christ can possibly keep this light 
from becoming dim ; therefore how needful for 
every believer to strive for a closer walk with God. 
I feel it, dear Newman, more and more every hour, 
and I pray to be ever on my guard that Satan may 
not get an advantage of me in my old age, and thus 
bring my silvered hairs with shame and sorrow to 
the grave. It is one of the greatest absurdities in 
the world for a professor to think himself safe be- 
cause he is old. Oh no, Satan will worry the saints 
throughout their whole pilgrimage, even to the very 
gates of heaven; but blessed be God, he cannot get 
in after them. Why, the cunning old chap is al- 
ways at me exhibiting a .black catalogue of sins, 
black as hell itself, which would obliterate even a 
glimpse of hope, were it not for that reviving and 
encouraging declaration, "The blood of Christ 



186 JOHN VINE HALL. 

cleanseth from all sin ;" and wlien I say, " Satan, 
look at that," lie assumes a horrible grin, expands 
his wings, and away he goes to frighten some poor 
wretch who has never been at the foot of the cross 
and taken shelter under the Rock of ages. What 
should I have done had it not been for the blood of 
Christ? We want something more than a mere 
change of life — we want an indwelling Spirit, to be 
full of love of the most exquisite degree, ever pant- 
ing after God, every thing within us new ; then it 
is that we shall not only possess hope, but implicit 
confidence in Christ, and peace and joy. We have 
procured Bunyan's 'Jerusalem Sinner,' and also 
Dr. Eobinson's ' Biblical Eesearches in Palestine,' 
3 vols., which, with Home's ' Critical Study of 
the Scriptures,' will quite occupy our little time. 
Home's work was exceedingly instructive to me a 
few years ago while I was daily rioting in ' Scott's 
Commentary.' Had I not received so much ben- 
efit to my own soul by the study of ' Scott's Com- 
mentary,' 'The Sinner's Friend' would never, in 
all probability, have made its appearance ; but the 
comfort which I myself had enjoyed created a sigh 
that others might also enjoy the same blessings, but 
which they would not be likely to do from want of 
time or the means of purchasing such expensive 
books, and this led me to a feeling of pity that the 
truths of the gospel could not be reduced into a nut- 
shell, that people might see them in a moment with- 
out the labor of study. 

" I shut m}^ Bible, and on my knees entreated 
the Lord that if it were his pleasure that I should 



CONTENT. 187 

compile or write sometliing to direct sinners to seek 
salvation, li^ would be pleased to instruct me what 
to say and wliat to write. My mind was directed 
to produce ' The Sinner's Friend,' which has been 
made a blessing in every quarter of the world, thus 
proving that from apparently very small causes 
great effects arise. 

"On looking into the pages of Bunyan's 'Jerusa- 
lem Sinner,' the thought occurred to me that in the 
class of sinners, Bunyan, Newton, and your poor 
father, might be named together, only in that class 
your poor father taking the lead; but in the class 
of saints your father must be at an immense dis- 
tance behind either of them, and yet not separated 
from the Saviour. Oh no, for I am sure, and all 
the arguments in the world could not convince me 
to the contrary, that Jesus ever lives in my heart a 
most welcome guest, dearly loved, my soul's un- 
ceasing joy. Yes, he is my never ceasing joy, 
although I never cease to mourn for sin, sins for- 
given. This expression may appear very paradox- 
ical to those who do not understand the subject ; 
but I mourn because of my past ingratitude, that 
in the midst of an ocean of mercy I rebelled against 
the hand whence all my blessings came ; but this 
does not in the least interrupt my confidence in par- 
don purchased by a Saviour's blood. What infinite 
mercy, dear Newman, that you as a minister for 
Christ are placed in a position to preach this 
blessed doctrine, forgiveness of sins that are past to 
a lost and ruined world, and that not even the most 
abondoned shall be rejected — coming to Christ. 



188 JOHN VINE HALL. 

May almighty grace bless and preserve you in 
every step you take, tliat you may be kept humble 
and watchful, especially against the temptation of 
popularity. Take care; be watchful. Dr. Gor- 
don's conversion I pray for." 

Maech 20, 1847. This day the Tract Society 
published a new edition of "The Sinner's Friend" 
in Italian, and I received the first copy. I took it 
into my hand, and on my knees entreated the Lord 
to accept and accompany it with his blessing for 
Christ's sake. 

Death of Col. H . Edinburgh. This dear 

redeemed sinner passed from earth to heaven March 
6. He had maintained the Christian conflict nine 
years, giving a bright evidence to all around of the 
great change Vv^hich had been effected in his soul : 
once a profane swearer, turned to a man of ^ fervent 
prayer — ever praising God. He told the Eev. J. 

B that "The Sinner's Friend" had been the 

saving of his soul, by directing him to Christ the 
sinner's true Friend. 

June 24. This evening we had a most delightful 
prayer-meeting in our house of about forty. We 
esteemed it a great mercy to be allowed and dis- 
posed to open a place in our house for prayer. Oh 

what especial mercy to hear M and S pour 

out their hearts in praise and prayer, two men who, 
five years ago, were drunkards and most profane 
blasphemers. But these dear men were not so de- 
praved as John Vine Hall, yet the Lord has made 
him a praying man for the last thirty years. 

My dear son Newman visited Dr. Malan of Ge- 



CONTENT. 189 

neva, at liis own residence, on the 16th of Angust. 
He took a letter and a copy of " The Sinner's 
Friend" from me. He says, " On entering the en- 
closure, we saw through an open window a com- 
fortable party at tea, one an old man with grey 
hairs in curly luxuriance flowing over his shoulders. 
On our entering the door, he came forward, and 
without asking my business, introduction, or any 
thing else, drew us both to the table and made us 
sit down. I said to him, ' But you do n't know who 
I am ;' to which the doctor replied, ' Oh, but I know 
if you did not love Jesus, you would not take the 
trouble to come and see me.' " 

Sept. 7. This day I most unexpectedly received 
a copy of " The Sinner's Friend" in the Dutch lan- 
guage. On my knees I presented the copy before 
the Lord. I was quite overwhelmed by such an 
unexpected favor, as I had not known of "The Sin- 
ner's Friend" having been translated into the Dutch 
language. 

Oct. 21. This morning I received from St. Pe- 
tersburg copies of two editions of "The Sinner's 
Friend," in two different languages spoken in the 
Bussian empire. I was quite overwhelmed with 
gratitude that it has pleased God in infinite mercy 
to clear the way for the circulation of " The Sin- 
ner's Friend" in Russia. I immediately on my 
knees presented copies to the Lord, earnestly pray- 
ing that his blessing may accompany every copy 
circulated in Russia. 

" December, 1847. Dear Arthur, your poor father 
has experienced the bitterness of sin, though through 



190 JOHN VINE HALL. 

the mercj of God lie lias found the antidote, the 
precious blood of Christ. Read that beautiful chap- 
ter, second of Ephesians, ' You hath he quickened 
who were dead, dead in sin.' Dead — not mere nat- 
ural death; then there would be no resistance to 
the divine will ; but it is spiritual death. Think of 
the power, but think much more of the love of God 
to obdurate sinners. Dead in sins, without Christ! 
Perhaps it may have been so even with us, dear 
Arthur. Without Christ! Misery complete. No 
hope, nothing but fearful apprehension of all evil 
for ever. But now through Christ made nigh, nigh 
to God. But do we think what the blood of Christ 
implies ? What suffering to bring us nigh ! Do we 
lay these things to heart, dear Arthur ? The eye 
runs over the words, ' The blood of Christ,' but is 
the heart impressed? Oh the cost of that precious 
blood ! The efficacy also- of that blood : peace to 
those who were at enmity with God ; peace also 
from the great anxieties of life — anxieties in every 
station, even among the rich, for they often have 
far more anxieties than the poorest of the poor. 
Access to the Father ; what an honor ! ' Fellow- 
citizens with the saints, and of the household of 
God.' Household of God ! His family, his chil- 
dren ! What felicity, what security against harm ; 
safe from every foe. Household of God ! ' Habi- 
tation of God !' God resides in the human heart, in 
those hearts once in rebellion against him? Match- 
less grace ! How careful then we ought to be not 
to allow any other occupant to engross the heart 
created anew and quickened for the habitation of 



CONTENT. 191 

God in the person of his beloved Son. All our sal- 
vation depends on Christ ; all blessings in, by, and 
through Christ ; all our blessings in him. To him 
we owe all our deliverance in times of danger. 
Your deliverance from blindness or death when 
you fell on the steps in the tower at Tintern Abbey. 
I fear I may be tiresome to you, dear Arthur, but 
my mind was so deeply impressed with the beauty 
and the vital importance of the second chapter of 
Ephesians, that I could not refrain from writing 
you a few of my thoughts thereon. - May the grace 
of God ever be with you, to keep you from all evil 
either in thought, word, or deed, that you may 
never have to grieve as your father does over the 
sins of early days." 

Makch 14, 1848. I enter my seventy-fifth year in 
perfect bodily health, my soul panting for the liv- 
ing God. I rely solely on the atonement of Ch^jist 
for acceptance with God, and for the pardon of all 
my dreadful sins. Blessed be the Lord, he hath 
given me plenty of this world's goods, more than 
enough, to which he has bountifully added a bank- 
note of eternal life. " None shall pluck you out of 
my hands." Oh marvellous mercy ! 

May 9. " Come to Jesus." This little work was 
published this ds^j, the production of my dear son 
Newman. I took several in my hand, and on my 
knees held them up before the Lord, entreating his 
blessing to accompany them in the same successful 
manner as " The Sinner's Friend." Oh what mercy 
that father and son are each engaged in calling sin- 
ners to the Saviour. 



192 JOHN VINE HALL 

May 26. This clay I liacl tlie blessing of giving 
the fiftj-thonsanclth gratuitous copy of " The Sin- 
ner's Friend " to a poor shoemaker. What infinite 
mercy to have been thus spared in life, and to have 
had the power, the means, and the will to disperse 
these messengers of mercy gratuitously, in addition 
to many thousands for which I obtained the money 
fi'om pious Christians by begging the same for the 
sake of my dear Eedeemer. 

Not. 2. Dr. Gordon, Hull. A letter from New- 
man, with intelhgence of the increasing illness of this 
excellent man^ this kind and generous fiiend, suifer- 
ing excruciating inward ^^ain, which he tries to con- 
ceal from his friends, but all in vain. He is reduced 
to a skeleton, yet patient in the extreme. 

NoY. 14. Kent Auxiliary Bible Society. Annual 
Meeting. Court Hall, Maidstone. "While presid- 
ing at this meeting, I put up a silent prayer to the 
Lord to accept my thanks for the gTeat honor be- 
stowed upon me, entreating him to keep me humble, 
that I might not be hfted up with pride. Oh the 
blessed change, that I who once in the very same 
room, in the days of my youth, had sported in 
the giddy dance, the most conceited coxcomb upon 
earth, and had mingled also in conyivial drinking 
parties under the very same roof — that I should 
be now presiding at a Bible meeting, praising God. 
Oh it was a great change indeed. 

Dec. 7. " The Wonderfid Escape," my speech at 
Exeter Hall, May, 1836. This day received a letter 
fi'om Mr. Hallock of the Xew York Tract Society, 
stating that they had printed 322,267 copies of that 



CONTENT. 193 

Rpeecli. Who would ever have ventured to conjec- 
ture it ? 

Jan. 22, 1849. Vfrote dear Dr. Gordon a long 
note of gratitude and praise for the mercy of the 
Lord towards him, and encouraged hini to trust 
implicitly for the continuance of grace until the^ 
end. 

Sent two copies of "The Sinner's Friend" to the 
Queen and the Prince. Beply from th^ Secretary 
of the Privy Purse : * 

"Buckingham Palace, Jan. 16, 1849. 
"Sir — I am directed to express to you the Queen's and the 
Prince's thanks for the copies of your traet, which her Majesty and 
his Eoyal Highness have most graciously received. You must allow 
me, sir, to bear my humble testimony to the practical usefulness 
of your little work, several cases of which have come under my own 
personal observation. There is no tract which I have more pleas- 
ure in distributing than that whose title and text refer to 'The 
Sinner's Friend. ' I have the honor to be, sir, your obedient ser- 
vant,' etc. 

Jan. 30. Dr. Gordon still lingers on earth, rejoic- 
ing with ecstacy in redeeming love. His new birth 
has unlocked his heart and loosened his tongue, so 
that he is now full of rapture in speaking boldly of 
Christ. He preaches the gospel affectionately to 
every one who visits him, and openly tells what 
great things the Lord hath done for him. He is 
indeed "a wonder unto many," but especially to 
those about his bed, who have long been the follow- 
ers of our gracious Lord and Saviour. He is sink- 
ing gradually to the tomb, awaiting the approach of 
death without a particle of fear, but rather rejoicing 
in the prospect before him. He is lovely in his 
meekness and temper, confessing himself a sinner 

John Vine Hall. 9 



194: JOHX VINE HALL. 

mth implicit confidence in tiie rigliteousness of 
Clirist alone for the salvation of his sonl. His say- 
ings are of the most excjiiisite kind — so gennine, so 
tiaily the teaching of the Holy Spirit as to preclude 
every doubt of his acceptance Tvith God. 

Feb. 3. Journey to HulL TTe vrere very soon at 
the bedside of the dying saint. But what a meet- 
ing I Xo language can possibly describe it. The 
joy of Dr. Gordon surpassed all imagination. His 
look of love spoke unutterable things while he 
told us the great things Christ had done for him. 
TVe remained with him till near midnight. His 
testimony of what Christ had done for his soul was 
of the most thi'illing description. The beautiful 
hymn, " There is a happy land," was sung in his 
chamber by his wish, and I was requested to offer 
prayer. My heart was full. It was the gate of 
heaven. 

Sabbath, Feb. 4. Dr. Gordon much worse this 
morning. "We came to Hull just in time. New- 
man's text, " Lord, now lettest thou thy servant de- 
part in peace, according to thy word, for mine eyes 
have seen thy salvation." Had some dehghtful 
conversation with dear Dr. Gordon. He wished me 
continually to speak of Christ, as he was never tired 
of hearing. He kept his hand in mine with warm 
pressiu'e of affection. It was worth a thousand 
journeys of two hundred miles to see and hear him, 
so splendid a monument of redeeming love. Told 
him how great pleasui'e I received fi'om speaking to 
him of Christ, because he now understood me — that 
he now knew experimentally the love of God. Dr. 



7 



CONTENT. 195 

Gordon is the most interesting evidence of the 
power and love of God I ever beheld. In the 
afternoon the Lord's supper was administered in 
his room ; the hymn, " There is a land of pure de- 
light," was sung. Oh what a dying scene ! May 
my latter end be like his. 

May 2. Pleasing incident. "Cast thy bread 
upon the waters, and thou shalt find it again after 

many days." This day Mrs. A addressed me 

as follows: "About six years ago, sir, you were 
travelling with me in an omnibus, when you gave 
the passengers copies of ' The Sinner's Friend.' 
On reading the words, ' Sinner, this little book is 
for you,' I felt offended, because I then thought 
myself to be a Christian ; but on reading the little 
book I discovered my mistake, which led me to seek 
the kingdom of God in right earnest, and ultimately 
to unite myself with the church of Christ." On my 
knees I returned thanks to the Lord for this new 
instance of his mercy. What encouragement to 
sow the seed of the kingdom of heaven on every 
opportunity. 

July 6. Scott's Commentary on the Bible. Be- 
gan the New Testament again with an increased 
appetite for this blessed book, which I had previous- 
ly read six times throughout, making large extracts 
from the same. I had previously occupied seven- 
teen years in the study of Scott's Commentary on 
the Old and New Testament with unspeakable de- 
light and satisfaction. It has been my great hap- 
piness to have now been in the daily study of the 
word of God thirty-four years, never ceasing to feel 



196 JOHN VINE HALL. 

delight therein, with earnest prayer for the teach- 
ing of the Holy Spirit. I began in right earnest in 
1815. 

Oct. 10. Your dear mother's birthday. What 
mercy to have her continued to us so many years, 
yet so soon gone. But there is a state where time 
will be unknown, and we shall enjoy felicity /or ever. 
I have been in an agony of joy this morning — feel- 
ings which God alone can understand — the results 
of his own splendid mercy. This morning brought 
me a supply of contributions to the full extent of 
my prayers for answering a call to procure Mala- 
gasy translations of "The Sinner's Friend" and 
" Come to Jesus." I knelt before the Lord almost 
suffocated with gratitude ; being alone, I wept aloud 
for joy that the Lord has never forsaken me when 
my heart has been directed to his glory. I pray 
daily that "Come to Jesus" and "The Sinner's 
Friend "may run together calling sinners to Christ. 
What mercy, what cause for humility that father 
and son should be allowed to be God's instruments 
in directing sinners to the ^ Saviour ! The nearer 
I approach the end of my course, the more deeply 
I feel my own dreadful sinfulness; and I should 
derive very little comfort from a change of heart, 
were it not that "the blood of Jesus Christ cleans- 
eth from all sin." Let him that thinketh he stand- 
eth, take heed. Take heed. 

1849. Honor thy father and thy mother. No 
forms, notions, subscriptions to charities, building 
chapels, or any thing else which looks like faith, 
zeal, or piety, can prove that man to be a true 



CONTENT. 197 

Christian who neglects to honor his father and 
mother, or to supply their wants according to his 
ability. Matt. 15 : 1-9. The blessing of the Lord 
always attends the observance of this duty. I know 
it by experience. The Lord mercifully gave me the 
opportunity, ability, and practice to my dear moth- 
er, which he has blessed a thousand-fold. 

Feb. 14, 1850. Scott's Commentary on the Bible. 
Blessed be God, I have now purchased eight copies 
of this invaluable work for my dear children, a copy 
for each. Oh may this book be made as great a 
blessing to my beloved children as it has been to 
their father, who has with intense earnestness and 
prayer read the whole of the Old Testament and 
notes four times, and the New Testament six times, 
making many extracts. 

Makch 14. Blessed be God, my first waking 
thoughts early this morning went up to him with 
grateful praises that he had brought me to the 
commencement of my seventy-seventh year in per- 
fect health, surrounded with every temporal com- 
fort. But I grieve in my soul on account of my 
dreadful sins. Tet, had they been a million times 
worse, they are not beyond the cleansing sacrifice 
of my precious Bedeemer. Thirty-eight years ago 
on this day, March 14, 1812, the Lord sent his 
arrow of conviction into my heart to bring me to 
that precious blood which cleanseth from all sin, 
even my sins. Oh what a monument of mercy 
am I! 

Maech 16. To his daughter Eleanor. "As I sup- 
pose you liave received Scott's Bible, I pray that 



198 JOHN VINE HALL. 

our gracious God may make the reading of tliis 
splendid Commentary as great a blessing to your 
soul as it has been to the soul of your now poor old 
father. It has been an especial mercy that I have 
been enabled to present a copy of this work to 
every one of my eight children, to whom I trust a 
large portion of the grace of the Holy Spirit will be 
poured out, that they may be indeed the children of 
the Most High. "What pleasure does it impart to 
us that your dear husband preaches the gospel in 
aU its fulness, purity, and truth. The Lord bless 
him in all his ways. What a blessing to have Jesus 
always in the heart. Under every trial or perplex- 
ity we thus have a Rock to rest upon that nothing 
can possibly remove. He is ^never unwilling to do 
his people good ultimately, though the blessing 
sometimes seems retarded almost beyond our 
strength, to try our faith whether we can really trust 
him or not under every circumstance. Ah, dear 
child, this does indeed requhe great strength of 
faith, only to be had at the Fountain; but that 
Fountain is always open and always free for every 
thirsty seeking soul. May you find it, dear Nora, 
and rejoice in it also. May Christ, our dear, dear 
Lord, be ever the welcome occuiDant of your dear 
affectionate heart. Amen." 

Sept. 1. Yisited Mrs. S at the almshouse. 

Found her ill in bed. Spoke to her of Christ, the 
only way to heaven. She wept exceedingly, and 
for soma time could not speak distinctly, sobbing, 
"What shall I do?" Directed her to look to the 
Lord Jesus Christ as the eternal Son of God, whose 



CONTENT. 199 

blood cleansetli from all sin, and that none wlio 
come to God by him shall be rejected. She had 
known me from the time I was twelve years of age, 
and had witnessed the follies of my youth. "We 
had often danced together at balls and private par- 
ties, at which time it was not at all probable that I 
shoiild ever come to speak to her about salvation. 
She had been for many years a professed Unita- 
rian, therefore it was trying work to speak to her of 
Christ as the only way to God. Told her of what 
God had done for my own soul, and that he had 
sent me to tell her the way of acceptance by his 
only begotten Son — no other way. Oh may the 
Lord make my visit useful to her soul. 

Sept. 22. This day commences the thirty-fifth 
year of my great emancipation from wine and spirit- 
uous liquor, and also my separation from the world 
and worldly company. Christ has been my constant 
companion and my greatest joy. It has been my 
supreme delight and the very ecstasy of my soul to 
speak of him and his mercy to poor sinners. Hun- 
dreds of delicious opportunities have I been per- 
mitted to enjoy of this kind during the last thirty- 
five years, to testify by voice and life that I am not 
ashamed of the gospel of Christ, for I know by 
happy experience that it is the power of God unto 
salvation— salvation in the hour of temptation. Oh 
what horrid temptations have been spread in my 
path, frequently, suddenly, into some of which I 
might have fallen had it not been for the grace of 
God, and all my prospects and usefulness would 
have for ever been destroyed. A voice, seemingly 



200 JOHN VINE HALL. 

from heaven, said to me one day in a moment of 
great temptation, "Flee." I ran away in a moment 
and escaped tlie net. Psa. 25 : 15. 

Dec. 11. This morning, between six and seven 
o'clock, I repeated fifteen psalms, twenty hymns, 
and the fifty-fifth and fifty-eighth chapters of Isaiah, 
and the second chapter of Ephesians and part of 
chapter six, from verse 10 to 20, praising God for 
a retentive memory and for the pleasure of retain- 
ing heavenly things. Oh it is indeed good to praise" 
the Lord sleeping and waking. 

Makch 8, 1852. This afternoon my beloved wife 
and self took possession of our sweet cottage at 
Penenden Heath. "We dedicated ourselves and the 
house in prayer to our gracious God, with thank- 
fulness and praise for so sweet a retirement in our 
old age. 

Maech 16. Dear Arthur and Warren. These 
dear, affectionate, assiduous sons have been most 
persevering in getting all the accounts posted up to 
the last hour of my retu-ement from business. They 
have been the great comfort of my life, attending 
to business with so much cheerfulness and untuning 
perseverance. 

May 6. A delightful day at the summer-house on 
Boxley Hill, from eleven in the morning till seven in 
the evening. A large family party, including dear 
Newman and C , dined and had tea at the sum- 
mer-house. Nightingales singing sweetly, and we 
sang several hymns praising God for his great 
mercies. 

Oct. 6. This morning, in my walk into Maid- 



CONTENT. 201 

stone, I repeated the following Psalms : 23, 25, 27, 
30, 34, 51, 86, 91, 103, 116, 121, 130, 139, 143, 145. 
Oct. 7. This morning, in my walk into Maidstone, 
I repeated twenty-one hymns, which occupied me 
till I reached the bottom of Brewer-street. These 
exercises keep the soul active. I bless the Lord for 
the pleasure thus afforded. 



9* 



202 JOHN VINE HALL. 

CHAPTEK XI. 

SERENE AGE. 
1853 TO 1860-AGE 79-86. 

January 1, 1853. Throiigli the infinite mercy of 
God, my beloved wife and self are brought in com- 
fort to the commencement of another year. We are 
now, as it were, alone; onr dear children all sepa- 
rated from ns : Edward in Maidstone, M E 

at Toyil, Newman at Hull, E at Eyam, Arthur 

and William at Camden Town, S in China, and. 

Yine at Calcutta. But we are not alone, for the 
Lord is ever with us, the Hfe of our souls. The lines 
also are fallen to us in very pleasant places, and we 
have a goodly heritage. Through the kind prov- 
idence of God we are favored in our old age with 
more than sufficient for all our wants, and plenty for 
the poor and for the service of God, and above all, 
our love for each other is warmer than ever. Prais- 
ed be the Lord. 

March 14. This day, by the mercy of God, I 
commence my eightieth year, in full bodily health 
and vigor of mind, surrounded by every comfort. 
Long before the dawning of the day my heart was 
lifted up to God with praise. In my dream I had 
been praising God with most rapturous feehngs. I 
was quite overwhelmed with ecstasy at his mercy 
towards me. My tenderly beloved wife was also 
spared to me in increasing love, if possible, and we 



SEEENE AGE. 203 

praised God that lie had preserved us together in 
happj union upwards of forty-six years, our hearts 
mutually united to the Lord Jesus Christ, whom we 
dearly love as our only hope and trust, with whom 
we desire ever to live and reign. He is indeed to us 
" the Chief among ten thousand, and the altogether 
lovely." 

Apeil 18. I was honored this morning by the 
kindness of the pious Archbishop of Canterbury, at 
his palace at Lambeth. His lordship met me in the 
kindest manner, putting forth his hand with ex- 
pressions of real pleasure on seeing me. I opened 
my whole heart to him, and spoke warmly on the 
love of Christ. In speaking of my dear son's little 
work, "Come to Jesus," he said it contained evan- 
gelical truths without going round about ; and when 
I spoke of my littl#work, "The Sinner's Friend," he 
emphatically said, "Not a little book. I call it a 
great book, for it has done great good in the world." 

May 20. A day ever to be remembered ; for this 
day 1804, forty-nine years ago, was the first time of 
my speaking to my dear Mary, of whose name and 
residence I was perfectly ignorant. I had only 
watched her coming and going to Angel-street chap- 
el, Worcester, with an elderly lady, and I myself 
was engaged in the same manner, with my dear 
mother leaning on my arm, and the similarity of our 
situation awakened my sjaiipathies, so that I fell in 
love with this young stranger, determined to find 
her out, and endeavor to win her affections. She 
had not then reached her seventeenth year. A 
gentleman, who saw me apparently in conversation 



204 JOHN VINE HALL. 

with her, asked me the next day how long I had 
been acquainted with Miss Teverill, the cleyerest 
girl in all Worcester. Thus I learnt her name and 
address. The next day I was introduced to the fam- 
ily, and thus commenced a courtship which has 
proved the greatest bhss of my hfe. Yf e have loyed 
each other most ardently forty-nine years, and I 
think, I am sure, our love to each other is now more 
warm than when we were first united on Tuesday, 
August 26, 1806. 

July 27. I do trust that my heart pants after 
God, although deeply laden with sin. I am sur- 
rounded with mercy upon mercy, a paradise to dwell 
in, all the free gift of God. My dear, dear wife is 
to me next to hea^yeu itself. I bless the Lord with 
every breath for the gift of such a wife, who has 
been the dear object of my aiiectigjQ more than forty- 
nine years, and I love her now better than ever. 
She is the joy of my life. We shall soon, soon be 
separated on earth, only to be reunited in eternal 
glory with him whom we both so dearly love. Prais- 
ed be his dear name. He has long been the wel- 
come occupant of each of our hearts. May he be 
the same to each of our dear children and their chil- 
dren, that we may all meet together to praise God 
for ever and ever. 

Oct. 5. My heart increasingly mourning on 
account of past sins. I awake praying the Lord 
for pardon. I walk in my garden praying earnestly 
to the Lord. I take off my hat, and looking earnest- 
ly up to heaven, I pray the Lord Jesus to look upon 
the purchase of his precious blood, and come and 



SERENE AGE. 205 

take fall possession of my lieart, that heart so great- 
ly changed by sovereign grace and almighty love. 
My heart is ever yearning after the Lord Jesus. 

My dear son S has had "Come to Jesus" 

translated into Chinese, and printed at Ningpo, at 
his own expense. 

Januaey 20, 1854:. A feeling of deep heartfelt 
sorrow for sin came upon me this day. Sins of 
youth, sins of age all crowd upon me and cause my 
soul to grieve before God. I cry for mercy, mercy 
treasured up in Christ Jesus. O what should I do 
without Christ? I have no other refuge. He is my 
all in all. I do love him dearly. It is the greatest 
delight of my life to tell of his wondrous mercy to 
my own soul, and to declare boldly what he will do 
for all who come to God by him. It is a comfort 
that " a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou 
wilt not despise." 

Jan. 22. Visited the schools and classes in Albion 
chapel. Addressed a class of young men, about thir- 
ty. Then addressed a class of females, about thirty. 
Then addressed another class of church-members, 
and concluded by addressing about thirty candidates 
for church-fellowship. 

Feb. 22. This day a copy of " The Sinner's 
Friend," in modern Greek, was sent me from Athens. 
My heart beat high and warm while on my knees I 
presented the copy to the Lord, praying his bless- 
ing to accompany " The Sinner's Friend" in Greece. 

Makch 14. This morning, by the mercy of God, 
I commenced my eighty-first year in sound bodily 
health, mental vigor, my soul devoted to God. I 



206 JOHN VINE HALL. 

liave no words wherewith to praise the Lord ac- 
cording to my feelings of his wondrous goodness 
in providence and gTace: in providence, a goodly 
heritage, lines in pleasant places ; in gi-ace, a pen- 
itent heart, deep sorrow for sin, trusting alone in 
the blood and righteousness of Christ for salvation, 
the Lord Jesus my only refuge as the Saviour of the 
lost. 

Maech 28. To his son Newman. " How shall I 
begin to praise the Lord for his great mercy in the 
bestowment of a son to sound forth salvation in the 
very pulpit where Eowland Hill called sinners to 
repentance ? No words can express what I feel for 
the goodness of God to us for so great a blessing. 
After pouring forth our heartfelt thanks, our prayer 
was for humihty, and to be kept where only we are 
safe, at the foot of the cross. But we have to pray 
also for our dear son, that he may not be lifted up 
above measure, but be kept in a constant holy sj)ir- 
itual frame, looking momentarily to the Lord, to 
enable him to discharge his responsible duties to the 
glory of God. It might ajDpear out of place that a 
mere disci]3le should venture to admonish a minister; 
but when that disciple is the minister's father, he 
may be allowed to remind his dear son that angels 
are looking upon him, that the Chi'istian world is 
looking upon him, desirous that he should not only 
perform the duties of his station, but that his lamp 
should be always burning with a clear, unmistak- 
able hght, evidencing that the grace of the Lord 
Jesus occuj)ies his heart to the very full. My dear 
Newman will pardon his aged father, not dictating, 



SERENE AGE. 207 

but most affectionately admonisliing a greater watch- 
fulness than ever, seeing that the honor of Christ 
himself is closely nnited with the walk and conver- 
sation of his disciples in the midst of a glowing pro- 
fession and an ensnaring world. I will only add, 
may the Lord bless you, dear Newman, in all your 
ways, for Christ's sake. Amen." 

June 19. At a meeting of deacons I resigned my 
deaconship, after holding it twenty-four years. "What 
infinite mercy that I, once an unbeliever, should ever 
have been unanimously elected by the church to be- 
come an officer in the service of God. Praised be 
the Lord that he has kept me all these years in the 
hollow of his hand, and not allowed me to bring any 
disrepute upon the name of Christ. Oh that my 
heart may ever be the abode of my blessed Lord. 

July 2. Sabbath-day at Surrey chapel. Dear 
Newman commenced his pastorate this day. At the 
door we were welcomed by our dear Edward, and 
were soon joined by our dear Arthur. In the even- 
ing we all sat in the same pew, exactly opposite the 
pulpit, praising God. Newman's morning text, 
"Who is sufficient," etc., and, "Brethren, pray for 
us." Evening, "Other foundation can no man lay 
than that is laid, which is Christ Jesus." A pray- 
er-meeting was held in the vestry the previous even- 
ing by the elders and trustees. Newman and self 
present. 

July 17. To his son. " I am not insensible to the 
mercy of God in your transition to the pulpit of the 
sainted Eowland Hill. It is not only a great change 
but a great responsibility, pregnant with events of 



208 JOHX TINE HALL. 

the most important kind. Woe to the ambassador, 
if he be not faithful to the charge ! He may well 
exclaim, 'TTho is sirOicient for these things?' Yet, 
his feet firmly on the Hock of ages, he may boldly 
express his confidence that 'other foundation can 
no man lay than that is laid.' The prayers of hun- 
dreds, nay, thousands, have been offered for you, but 
by none more earnestly and affectionately than by 
your father and mother. Yv^e. are now agitated with 
much anxiety on account of our own projected re- 
moval to London, that we may all as a family be 
united in the service of our gTacious God. The 
time will very soon arriye when we shall be again 
separate, only for a short time, to be reunited in a 
kingdom of neyer-ending holiness and bhss. If there 
is one thing in the world which I long and pray for 
more than any other, it is a holy, contrite, beheying 
heart, full, overfuU of love to my gracious Lord and 
Sayiour, who has piu'chased me with his precious 
blood. To him be endless praises. Amen." 

Saebath, Sept. 3'. To-day my beloved wife and 
self renewed oui' tows to oiu' Lord at Week-street 
chapel, probably the last time. Our dear pastor in 
a most feehng manner spoke of our expected de- 
parture. After the celebration of the Lord's supper 
I addressed the commujiicants, commending them 
to that gracious God from whom we had exj)erienc- 
ed such gTeat mercies during nearly forty years' 
membership at Y'eek-street, and during which time 
I had been twenty-four years a deacon. 

Sept. 12. This mornmg we bade farewell to 
Maidstone, and were heartily welcomed by our 



SERENE AGE. 209 

dear sons Arthur and Warren at Camden Town, near 
London. 

Sept. 20. Tins evening my dear sons Newman 
and Arthur were engaged in open-air preaching 
near the Obelisk, Blackfriars road, to about four 
hundred persons, all attentive and res|)ectful. Oh 
what mercy that dear Arthur should have thus been 
engaged vath his brother in speaking for the Sav- 
iour. Praises ten thousand times to our gracious God. 

Sept, 22. This evening my beloved wife and self 
took possession of our new dv/elling, Heath Cottage, 
Kentish Town. We on our knees consecrated our 
dwelling and ourselves anew to our gracious God, 

with thankfulness and praise. N , C , A , 

and W , came to supper, and we closed the 

evening with prayer and chanting the twenty-third 
Psalm. What infinite mercy that all my children are 
seeking the Lord. 

Oct. 27. Saw a poor old negro, and on convers- 
ing with him found that he was a servant of the 
Lord Jesus. He had been a slave from Africa, but 
his master had given him his freedom. My heart 
praised the Lord for this great treat in meeting a 
poor black folloAver of Jesus. When, with a few 
pence, I put a copy of "Come to Jesus" into his 
hand, he looked at the title and pathetically exclaim- 
ed, "Jesus! ah, he has been with me many years. 
Yes, he is my strength and my support." On ask- 
ing him how he came to know all this, he said his 
master had taught him, and he hoped he was in 
heaven, for he v/as a good master. I hope to see this 
black Christian again. 



210 JOHX VINE HALL. 

Dec. 21. At the request of my son Newman, I 
addressed nearly one linndred persons in the school- 
room of SiuTey chapel, on the loye of Christ, his 
willingness to take possession of eyer j heart. I was 
exceedingly warm in exhortation and encouragement 
to all to come to Jesus. The people were excessiye- 
ly kind, yery many of them stretching forth their 
hands to take hold of mine, expressing their thanks. 

Cheistxas day. I drove dear Mary to Surrey 
chapel, a large congregation. Family party to din- 
ner. Xo wine. Sang and jDraised God. 

Dec. 27. Saw the poor negro sweeping the foot- 
path near the model prison. Gaye him a shilhng 
for Jesus' stike. The poor man looked on the mon- 
ey with a smile and said, ^'Ah, my Massa sent me 
dis." Special prayer-meeting this eyening, Kentish 
Town CongTegational chui'ch, for the influence of 
the Holy Spirit. Mr. Fleming yery faithful in ad- 
dressing the congTegation, as to what progress they 
had made in the ways of God during the last fifty- 
two weeks. If I inquire of myself, how haye I been 
making progress during the last year, I think I can 
answer sincerely, I loye the Lord more than eyer; 
I repent of sin more than eyer ; I hate sin more than 
eyer; I pant after holiness more than ever; I trust 
entirely in the sacrifice of Christ more than eyer for 
the salvation of my soul; I feel gratitude to God for 
his mercies to myself, my dear wife, and my chil- 
dren more than ever; I love my dear yife more than 
ever ; I feel an earnestness, a warmth in prayer more 
than ever; I exercise and enjoy mental and ejacula- ^ 
tory prayer more than ever ; the Lord Jesus is ever 



SEKENE AGE. 211 

in my heart, my exceeding joy and my supreme de- 
liglit, more than ever. Praised be his dear name. 
I beheve that what I have here written is the very 
breath of my soul, the truth. 

Dec. 31. "Watch-night. I drove my dear Mary 
and Eleanor to Surrey chapel this morning, and in 
the evening we went again to be present at the 
watch-night service. The chapel literally crammed. 
Many persons could not obtain admission. About 
2,500 present. 

Januaey 16, 1855. The Eev. W. C. Milne sent 
me the first copy of " The Sinner's Friend," trans- 
lated by him into Chinese. On my knees I present- 
ed this copy to the Lord, with praise that he had 
spared my life to behold this httle work printed in 
Chinese. "What mercy that I should have been 
spared to witness the publication of two hundred 
and ninety editions of the tract, in twenty-th]:ee 
languages, comprised in 1,268,000 copies. All praise 
to the Lord, for it is entirely his own work in putting 
it into my heart to write this apparently mere trifle, 
which the Lord has so greatly accompanied with his 
blessing to poor sinners. 

May 2. I attended the meeting of the Bible So- 
ciety at Exeter Hall. 3. Attended meeting of the 
London City Mission. Dear Newman spoke. 4. 
Tract Society meeting, Exeter Hall. I was prevent- 
ed attending this meeting by a cold — much disap- 
pointed. Mr. Gill, from Earotonga, spoke warmly 
of " The Sinner's Friend," as the fourth publication 
in the native language. 9. London missionary ser- 
mon at Surrey chapel. Dr. Eaffles preached one 



212 JOHN VINE HALL. 

hour and a half. W- and self held collecting 

boxes at the doors. 10. Attended the anniversary 
of the London Missionary Society. Went at eight 
o'clock. The chair was taken by Lord Shaftesbury 
at ten o'clock. Concluded at three. 

June 28. I visited a man named C— — near 
Surrey chapel, confined to his bed several years. 

Mr. C had known me in Maidstone, from 1800 

to 1803, having been One of my early companions. 
He had heard of my conversion forty years ago, and 

was so rejoiced at it that he told it to Mr. K , 

one of ray old companions, who on hearing it said 
he should not wonder now at any thing. At his re- 
quest I prayed with him. He knew me when I was 

a poor blasphemer. Mrs. C also knew me at 

that time. O what a change does she now see. 
Now we knelt together at the footstool of divine 
mercy. Praised be the Lord. What a glorious 
manifestation of his saving power. Conducted the 
inquirers' prayer-meeting at Surrey chapel. Spoke 
very warmly from the words, "The Lord will abun- 
dantly pardon." I felt very warm indeed towards 
these dear people, young and old, about forty of 
whom came up to shake me kindly by the hand. 
The Lord be praised for any good which may arise. 
Oh for a humble heart. 

July 1. Arthur preached in the open air this 
evening in a field. Newman preached in the open 
air at the Obelisk, after evening service at Surrey 
chapel. Oh what infinite mercy that my two dear 
sons are thus engaged in calling sinners to seek the 
Lord. 



SEEENE AGE. 213 

Aug. 26.' Wedding day. Forty-nine years ago 
my beloved Mary and self were united in matrimo- 
ny. I think we love eacli other better than ever, 
praising the Lord for his great mercy in having 
brought us together, and preserved us in health and 
comfort to the present time. I drove my dear Mary 
and Newman to Surrey chapel this morning. 

Sept. 10. Wonder, love, and praise. What great 
things hath the Lord done for me, once an infidel, 
blasphemer, and every thing evil, to have the heart 
so completely changed to love the Lord Jesus Christ 
with sincerity of soul, and to have been raised up to 
become tv/enty-two years a deacon in the cluirch of 
Christ at Maidstone, and now invited to become one 
of the elders in the church of Christ in Surrey chapel, 
and my dear son Newman the pastor of the said 
church. Praised be the Lord. Oh for a humble 
heart and a watchful spirit, that I may never forget 
the hole of the pit whence I have been digged. May 
I set the Lord always before me. 

Oct. 16. From Eev. Eichard Knill. "Dear old 
Saint — I bless God that you w^ere ever born, and 
that you were born again, and that you have written 
for the glory of God and for the good of souls. And 
now dear Newman and Arthur are following their 
father's steps. Please give my love to dear Mrs. 
Hall and your beloved children. While I was pre- 
paring to preach in the fields at Tint worth I rup- 
tured a bloodvessel, and was nearly drowned in my 
own blood. God has been very gracious to me, so 
that I am able to preach once a vfeek again, but I 
have lost my youthful buoyancy, and wish to stand 



214 JOHN VINE HALL. 

in a waiting posture every day to obey the summons 
to depart and to be with. Christ. I hope to see you 
coming after me, if I go first; and what a meeting 
we shall have! Shall I sing louder than you? I 
should like to do so. Farewell till we meet in glory." 

Oct. 16. This day T A and myself visit- 
ed the archbishop at Addington. His grace met 
me at the door of his study, and put forth his hand 
with a hearty shake, expressing great pleasure at 
seeing me again. On making some excuse for my 
warmth of feeling, he said he was glad to see it, for 
there was apt to be too much coldness. And on my 
expressing thankfulness for his kindness, he said he 
should not expect anybody to be unkind to the 
author of " The Sinner's Friend." He said he thought 
that much of its usefulness might be attributed 
to its containing gospel truths without going round 
about. I was all in a blaze in sjDeaking of the Lord 
Jesus, the love of God in each of our hearts. There 
appeared no difference between us. Who would 
ever have thought, fifty years ago, that poor J. V. 
H., then engulfed in misery and sin, should become 
a welcome visitor to the ib.'chbishop of Canterbury, 
to unite with him in j)raises to God ? Also to have 
been chosen an elder of Surrey chapel. To God 
alone be all, all the glory. 

Oct. 22. This evening Mr. Webb and myself 
were publicly acknowledged and received as elders 
of Surrey chapel. Newman announced this inter- 
esting setting apart in the most touching manner, 
alluding to his own early introduction to acquaint- 
ance with holy things by his dear mother, who was 



SERENE AGE. 215 

present, having directed Ms mind tliat way by read- 
ing "Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress," and comment- 
ing thereon. The school-room was literally cram- 
med; a most solemn, holy occasion. Oh bless the 
Lord, my soul, for this especial mercy in haying de- 
livered my soul from death, and raised me up to be 
numbered with his people in prayer and praise. Is 
any thing too hard for the Lord ? 

Dec. 16. I desire to bless the Lord that I am 
brought to rest all my hopes of eternal bliss upon 
Jesus Christ alone. I have been greatly tried by 
looking to my past dreadful sins, of which I deeply 
repent every moment, daily praying the fifty-first 
Psalm. 

Dec. 31. Present at the prayer-meeting and the 
watch-night. J. V. H. engaged in prayer. At half- 
past ten the watch-night service commenced; a 
most glorious assemblage of upwards of 2,500 per- 
sons. The prayer-meeting was indeed a meeting of 
solemn and heartfelt prayer, with warm thankfulness 
to God for his mercy during the past year. Eev. E. 
Cecil first gave a lecture on the past; Eev. "W. Brock 
on the present; dear Newman on the future. A 
watch-night service was also held at Kentish Town. 
Our dear Arthur presided. They had a glorious 
meeting. Oh what infinite mercy, my dear children, 
with father and mother, all engaged and dehghting 
in the service of the Lord. Praised be his holy name. 
Amen and Amen. 

Februaey 9, 1856. Dear Newman and my dear 
wife quite scold me for mourning so much on ac- 
count of my past sins. Ah, they little think of the 



216 JOHN VINE HALL. 

nature and filth of the sins of my youth. I have in- 
deed sunk in deep mire, and although I have been 
snatched as it were from the very centre of hell, and 
have been preserved nearly forty years, yet I can- 
not forget my vileness, nor cease to grieve from the 
heart with the deepest sorrow for sin. I mourn in 
agony and pain. Still I would endeavor to trust in 
that precious blood shed for all manner of sin. 

Feb. 17. Teloogoo edition of "The Sinner's 
Friend" presented me this day fi^om the Tract So- 
ciety. Prayed the Lord to accept my thanks. 

Makch 4. B , gardener, here at work, sober. 

Spoke encouragingly to him not to be out of heart, 
but make use of prayer for strength to resist his be- 
setting sin, once my own, but God has dehvered me. 

Why not cleHver B ? Lord, have mercy upon 

him, and deliver him for Christ's sake. 

June 17. I feel my soul more quieted by repos- 
ing entirely upon the sacrifice of Christ. If I perish, 
I perish at the foot of the cross. O Lord increase 
my faith. I am looking to Christ every hour. He 
is all in all to me. If I did not believe his word I 
should sink into utter despair. Neither repentance 
nor amendment of hfe, nothing but the payment of 
my debt by the sacrifice of Christ, can possibly save 
me from eternal ruin. But, blessed be God, the 
blood of Christ was shed for the sins of the whole 
world, for ever}^ one who believes in him. Praised 
be the Lord for such magnificent mercy. This 
morning I called on the archbishop at Lambeth 
Palace. He welcomed me as a brother in Jesus, 
and was pleased to sslj that I had done much for 



SEEENE AGE. 217 

his cause, intimating hj "The Sinner's Friend." 
His grace presented me with a small Bible, on a 
blank leaf of which he wrote, " J. B. Cantnar, to the 
author of 'The Sinner's Friend.'" He said, "You 
are very warm-hearted, Mr. Hall;" to which I re- 
plied, " Yes, my lord, it is because Jesus Christ ever' 
occupies my heart, and this it is which keeps me ever 
in a glow of warmth when speaking of him." 

July 19. Praised be the Lord, this day completes 
thirty-eight years since porter, ale, or malt liquor 
has ever passed my tongue. My heart full of grat- 
itude to God, yet full of sorrow on account of past 
sins. But I cast my whole soul upon the sacrifice 
of Christ for the sins of the world. 

July 21. Trip to Wales, Liverpool, and the Isle 
of Man. This morning dear Mary, Newman, and 
self set off to the Welsh mountains. We flew by 
express to Bangor. We found dear Arthur at Ban- 
gor, where he had obtained lodgings at a temperance 
hotel. Dear Mary and self knelt before the Lord 
with thanks for his protecting care. Mountains far 
and near, leading the heart to him who made them 
all. In the evening we drove to the tubular and 
suspension bridges. Wonders of art beyond all 
description. 22. By train to Carnarvon, where we 
inspected the ancient castle. My dear Mary as- 
cended to the top of the very highest tower. Gave 
Welsh "Sinner's Friend" to the guide of the castle. 
By car to Beddgelerfc. Heard a language that we 
understood not. Shoes and stockings seemed to 
have been dispensed with by boys, girls, and women. 
Gave two Welsh "Sinner's Friend" to two female 

John Vina Hall. 10 



215 JOHN VINE HALL. 

cottagers. 23. Snowdon. Tliis moiiiiiig my dear 
Maiy and self on ponies, vdth Xewnian and AitlinTj 
reached tlie snniniit in two lionrs and a half. A 
clond on the top prevented a prospect, bnt the va- 
rious yiews in our ascent were snblinie. Near the 
top is a narrow path three yards wide, called "the 
Saddle/' 3,000 feet high, with a precipice on each 
side a thousand feet. Over this frightful place we 
rode with perfect safety, but not withont some little 
thonght as to the fatal result if the horses shonld 
stniable. TTe fomid several traTellers on the top, 
where were three conee-honses. and we were soon 
snpphed with broiled ham and good coffee. Gave 
thi'ee ■'• Sinner's rriend,'" TTelsh, to three Welshmen. 
I rode all the way n'om the top of Snowdon to 
Beddgelert, where, as soon as we arriyed, my dear 
Mary and seh loieit before the L :r:l with thankful- 
ness. Below the snmmit of the i_:->intain all was 
fine and clear. Eight and a haK hours occnpied in 
this excursion. I wonld not imdertake it agaia npon 
any representation, although the whole prospect is 
of the most exciting description, a world of wonders. 
Three men at the top sang some anthems most de- 
hghtfully. Newman and Arthur in Tain attempted 
to persuade me to approach the edge of a precipice 
over a most fi"ightful abyss, but my dear Mary had 
more courage and she Tentured nearer than I dared 
to do. "What mercy that no dizziness came upon 
her. I had prayed the Lord to protect her. She 
waited down the dreadful dechrity of •'the Saddle,*' 
Xewman and Arthur close by her side. Arthur had 
placed my mackintosh cape on the gi'ound for his 



SEKENE AGE. 219 

dear mother to sit upon, but he forgot to take it up 
again, therefore it was lost, though it may prove a 
welcome prize to some poor traveller, 

Aug. 26. Wedding day. Fifty years have now 
been completed since I was united to my beloved 
wife, still continued to me in good health by the 
abounding mercy of an ever gracious God. Bless- 
ings upon blessings have attended us all our days. 
We are both in the enjoyment of good health, sur- 
rounded by every comfort, affectionate children, and 
above all Jesus Christ in our hearts. God be prais- 
ed for the unspeakable gift of his beloved Son. 

Sept. 22. On the 22d of September, 1816, forty 
years ago, I was enabled, by divine grace and mer- 
cy, to abandon entirely the use of wine of any kind 
and spirituous liquor, not a drop of either having 
passed the surface of my tongue during all those 
forty years. God be praised. And what is almost 
miraculous, not the slightest desire after them has 
ever haunted me; but on the contrary, the most 
positive disgust has occupied my mind at the very 
smell. Having been many years the slave of strong- 
drink, I might have been tempted to return to it, 
but God in tender mercy changed the whole of my 
nature, and enabled me to triumph over my once 
besetting sin, in his strength and in that alone. 
Also he has caused the love of Christ to occupy my 
soul, making it my supreme delight to promote his 
glory. "I'm lost in wonder, love, and praise," 
when I consider what God has done for me in prov- 
idence as well as grace. Beginning life without a 
shilling. He raised me up to be a Joseph in Egypt 



220 JOHN VINE HALL. 

to my poor motlier and my two brothers, all long 
since gone tlie way of all flesh. My poor mother, 
in writing me for pecuniary aid, addressed me, "My 
dear Joseph in Egypt, the corn is almost gone, and 
I look to you again to supply my need." It pleased 
God so to prosper me, that I was able to supply all 
her temporal wants. She died praying for her then 
prodigal son. The Lord gave me the disposition 
and opportunity to help many others, to the grate- 
ful rejoicing of my heart. In adition to a vast num- 
ber of various tracts, I have enjoyed the privilege 
of distributing gratuitously upwards of 57,800 cop- 
ies of " The Sinner's Friend." But it is all of the 
Lord. He put it into my heart to write " The Sin- 
ner's Friend," which he has followed with his bless- 
ing. " Oh that men would praise the Lord for his 
goodness." 

Nov. 3. Death of Eev. Edmund Jenkins. This 
faithful servant of the Lord had been forty years 
the beloved pastor over the Independent church at 
Maidstone, esteemed by all who knew him. He 
had been to us a most faithful friend in every 
trial. 

Nov. 8. I have loved Christ dearly many, many 
years, and aU his people of every denomination, 
and I do love them still, and the Lord Jesus more 
and more, and this causes increasing pain that I 
have sinned so deeply against him. I mourn hourly 
ou accoimt of sin ; still I dare hope for mercy through 
the sacrifice of Christ. This day attended the fu- 
neral of our late pastor. Newman gave an impres- 
sive address. A large number of ministers and many 



SEBENE AGE. 221 

Mends proceeded to the Wesleyan burying-ground 
amid heavy rain. ■ Kindly greeted by several of our 
old acquaintances. The street was lined with spec- 
tators up to the grave. 

Feb. 26. This evening my dear Mary and self, 
with Newman and , went to the House of Com- 
mons to hear the debate on China. Newman and 
self sat in the speaker's gallery; my dear Mary and 

C in the ladies' gallery. The debate was most 

animated. The house rose at twenty minutes past 

twelve. Mr. F. C was exceedingly courteous, 

found his way to C and Mary, and gave them 

ices and tea, and then brought us oranges. He 
afterwards conducted us into various parts of the 
magnificent building. 

Makch 14. The Lord has spared me to enter my 
eighty-fourth year in fall health of body and niind, 
but a sinful heart. The Lord in my own person 
has verified the truth of the ninety -first psalm: 
"With long life will I satisfy him;" the Lord has 
also "delivered me and honored me" in various 
ways, by giving me the friendship and love of so 
many dear Christian friends. Dined at Newman's. 
Received congratulatory letters from several of my 
children. 

• July 23. Frightful mutiny of native troops in 
India. Forty Europeans, men, women, and chil- 
dren, murdered at Delhi, which city is in possession 
of the rebels, who amount to many thousands. The 
Golden Fleece^ commanded by dear Yine, chartered 
to take troops. Aug. 3. Delhi still in possession of 
the rebels. Forty of the rebels blown away from 



222 JOHN VINE HALL. 

the mouths of guns. These troubles in India are 
a retribution for our unjust attack on China. 

Aug-. 27. Took the chair at temperance meeting 
at Surrey chapel. Eey. T. Cujler, from New York, 
gave a lecture. Eev. Hugh Allen proposed a vote 
of thanks to Mr. Cujler. Eighteen hundred per- 
sons present. I commenced the meeting by a short 
address, as follows : 

" Allow me, my friends, to introduce myself to 
you as an old teetotaller, probably the oldest in this 
assembly. When it pleased God, many years ago, 
to call me by his grace, I felt it necessary to forego 
the use of wine and strong diink, lest at an un- 
guarded moment I might abuse the use of the same, 
and bring dishonor upon the name of Christ. I 
prayed God to give me strength to resist every 
temptation to evil. The Lord mercifully answered 
that prayer. This was more than forty years ago, 
and from that time to the present hour, blessed be 
God, not so much as a single drop of wine or spu'- 
ituous liquor has ever passed the surface of my 
tongue. I never drink any thing stronger than tea 
or coffee, and although the enemies of temperance 
may insinuate that such simple beverages will never 
give strength, yet I stand here a witness to the con- 
trary ; for although a few years have passed since 
my eightieth birthday, I am, through the mercy of 
God, full of health and strength, the love of God 
cheering my soul, and the Lord Jesus ever dwelling 
in my heart a welcome guest, my only hope of glory. 
I am so convinced by hap^^y experience of the bless- 
ings of total abstinence, that I would not depart 



SEKENE AGE. 223 

from it in the smallest instance for all the wealth 
in the world. I would sooner die. I do not make 
these resolutions in my own strength, but in the 
strength of that merciful God who has delivered my 
soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet 
from falling ; therefore with humble gratitude I 
would say, Not unto me, O Lord, not unto me, but 
to thy name be all the praise. I think temperance, 
accompanied by the grace of God, is the greatest 
blessing in the world." 

At the conclusion of the meeting, I entreated 
the people not to depend entirely on the pledge, 
but to get the love of Christ in their hearts, as the 
best security against the temptations to indulge in 
strong drink. 

Dec. 9. Dear Newman's new volume of hymns, 
with a dedication to his dear mother. What mercy 
to have been spared to our dear children, to witness 
their respectful and tender affection on every occa- 
sion. Praised be the Lord. 

"Mother, to tliee, ofriglit, this book belongs ; 

For, seated on tliy knee, an infant weak, 

Witli lisping tongue, I learnt from thee to speak 
*In psalms and hymns and spiritual songs.' 

Oft didst thou stroke my head and kiss my cheek. 
And weep for joy to hear thy child repeat 

How the good Shepherd came from heaven to seek 
His wandering lambs, and how his hands and feet 

Were pierced with nails ; while he, the sufferer meek, 
Prayed for his foes, then mounted to his throne. 
With themes like these my years have still upgrown, 

Through thy persuasive teaching, tender care, 

Thine and a loving father's life of prayer. 
The book I offer thee is thus thine own. " 



224 JOHN VINE HALL. 

Dec. 21. Prayer-meeting at Surrey chapel. "Was 
requested to offer the first prayer, previous to which 
I gave the congregation a solemn admonition. 22. 
Tea-meeting of members. Newman called on me to 
speak first. I felt all on fire to open my mouth to 
tell of the mercy of the Lord. Blessed be his name. 

Cheistmas day. Family Christmas meeting, sey- 
enteen m all. After dinner sang, "Praise God." 
Arthur entertained us with microscope and magic- 
lantern. We had abundant cause to be thankful 
for this happy meeting. 

Jan. 23, 1858. "Walked from Camden Tovm to 
St. John's Y/ood, then walked in Regent's Park, 
and from thence walked all the way to Heath Cot- 
tage — a great feat. 24. This day, seventy-two years 
ago, I first entered the old house, Maidstone, as a 
little errand-boy. 

Feb. 8. Prayer-meeting this evening at Surrey 
chapel. Offered the first prayer ; not in a spiritual 
frame. After prayer-meeting went with Newman 
to Exeter Hall to hear Mr. Gough. 

Feb. 22. Prayer-meeting. A temperance-meet- 
ing afterwards in Surrey chapel. I took the chair. 
About fifteen hundred persons present. Dear Ar- 
thur- made a most impressive speech, detailing his 
own experience and the way in which he had been 
brought to sign the pledge; also the mercy of God 
in having rescued him from infidelity, and brought 
him to seek the Lord and become a minister for 
Christ. Arthur alluded in the most touching man- 
ner to his dear mother's teaching in his youth. 
Dear Newman also confirmed Arthur's testimony 



SEKENE AGE. 225 

of liis dear mother's teaching and example of a 
consistent walk as a Christian. 

March 14. My birthday. Completed my eighty- 
fourth year. How great has been the mercy of God 
throughout the whole of my long life ! But my heart 
aches with the deepest sorrow that I have so deeply 
offended against so good a God. Have mercy upon 
me, O Lord. 

March 22. Went to Surrey chapel prayer-meet- 
ing. Remained afterwards at the temperance-meet- 
ing. About seventeen hundred present. At the 
close, I told the people to begin their temperance 
life at the foot of the cross, to seek to have Christ 
in the heart, then they would have strength to resist 
temptation to evil. 

May 18. "Wedding ring. My dear Mary's first 
wedding ring being completely worn asunder, I pre- 
sented her with a new one this day, which I placed 
on her finger with a heartfelt kiss of love and grat- 
itude to Almighty God for his great mercy in hav- 
ing continued us to each other so many years as 
husband and wife, with love to each other more 
than ever. Married fifty-one years, eight months, 
and three weeks. 

June 17. Praised be the Lord, I have him for 
my defence — Christ the occupant of my heart. Rev. 
Dr. Legge, from China, called this afternoon and 
cheered our hearts respecting our son Stephen. 

June 19. I feel it quite time to be prepared to 

meet my God ; but Oh the meeting — a holy God 

and an unholy rebellious sinner. Nothing but the 

sacrifice of Christ can possibly deliver me from the 

10* 



226 JOHN VINE HALL. 

lowest liell. I look to Christ at once for deliver- 
ance and salvation. My eyes, my heart, my soul 
are up to tliee, O Jesns, my rock and my defence, 
my everlasting hope. 

Aug. 9. The Lord's prayer. Mr. T referred 

to the simplicity of its language, yet the weight of 
its meaning. It breathed a filial spirit, " Father ;" 
a catholic spirit, " Our;" a reverential spirit, "Hal- 
lowed;" a missionary spirit, " Thy kingdom come;" 
an obedient spirit, " Thy will be done ;" a depend- 
ent spirit, " Give us this day our daily bread ;" a 
forgiving spirit, " As we forgive," etc. ; an adoring 
spirit, " Thine is the kingdom," etc. 

Oct. 10. My dear Mary's birthday. What infi- 
nite mercy the Lord has bestowed upon us during 
the last fifty years, through many a cloudy day, 
crowning us with loving-kindness and tender mercy. 
Blessed be his name. Li the afternoon dear Mary 
and self united in prayer and thanksgiving, each 
oifering praises and prayer to our gracious God. 

Oct. 13. This afternoon dear Mary and self set 
out to visit Edward at Oxford. Found Edward 
waiting for us at the -station. Dear Mary and self 
knelt before the Lord with thankfulness for safety 
in our journey. 14. Inspected the University Press ; 
a wonderful stock of Bibles. Gave a " Sinner's 
Friend" to the foreman, who had been there forty 
years. 

Nov. 14 Enjoyed a private prayer-meeting; self 
and dear Mary both engaged in prayer. Heartily 
thanked the Lord for the blessing of a praying wife. 
I pray the fifty-first psalm every morning, beseech- 



SEKENE AGE. 227 

ing the Lord to give me a humble contrite spirit, 
soul-sorrow for sin, with humble yet implicit confi- 
dence in that precious blood which cleanseth from 
all sin. I believe that I do indeed love the Lord 
most sincerely, with the most earnest desire to live 
to his praise in thought, word, and deed, that every 
power within me may be devoted to his blessed 
service. 

Nov. 19. Anniversary. God be praised for his 
great mercy in giving me grace, on the 19th of No- 
vember, 1818, to give up entirely the use of strong 
drink of any description whatever. During the 
whole of the forty years which have now passed 
away I have never had the slightest temptation to 
take either wine or spirituous liquor or malt liquor 
of any description whatever, but on the contrary 
have shuddered even at the smell of strong drink 
of any kind. Marvellous mercy ! Praised be the 
Lord. The Lord has also mercifully sustained me 
during forty years as his servant, Jesus Christ ever 
in my heart, my only hope of salvation. The Lord 
has preserved me from bringing any disrepute upon 
his holy name, and has given me many opportuni- 
ties of exhorting sinners to seek his face. Blessed 
be his dear name, dear to my heart. 

Nov. 27. I not only with grief confess to the 
Lord that I have sinned deeply, but I enumerate 
my dreadful sins, praying the Lord to give me soul- 
felt repentance and implicit confidence in his dear 
Son. 

Dec. 30. This evening attended the watch-night 
at Surrey chapel. Upwards of two thousand pres- 



228 JOHN VINE HALL. 

ent. Home at 1.15. The Lord has mercifullj 
brought us through another year ^th much com- 
fort, bestowing upon us grace to feel our smfudness 
and his mercy. Before quitting Heath Cottage for 
Surrey chapel, dear Mary finished reading the 
psalms, last chapters of Malachi and Eevelation. 
Afterwards we Imelt and prayed, ea<}h of us, with 
gi'atitude and praise. Our mercies and blessings 
unspeakably great. Thani: the Lord for such a 
dear wife. 

Zsew-tzae's TaY, 1S59. Praised be the Lord for 
health to co mm ence the new year under the shadow 
of the Almighty, -Jesus Christ the million times wel- 
come occupant of each of our hearts. 

]VIaech 7. Blessed be the Lord, "'The Sinners 
Friend" has been the instiTiment of leading a man 
eighty years of age to the Sayiour. This is record- 
ed in the "Eehgious Tract Society's Pieporter" for 
the present month. The poor sinner was once a 
wecilthy sohcitor, an infidel, reduced to poverty bj 
intemperance. Had led a godless hfe till then. 
"Why was it not my own case ? It womd have been 
so but for the grace of God. 

HaPwCH 14 This day I enter my eighty-sixth 
year in perfect bodily health, thi'ough the abound- 
ing mercy of God, to whom my soul pants with 
gratitude and praise. Six childi*en and a gi^and- 
child breakfasted with us. 

Apeil 23. I want, I sigh, I pray for my heart to 
be fi'ee from sin. Praised be the Lord, my bodily 
health is perfectly good. "Oh for a closer walk 
with God.'' 



SERENE AGE. 229 

June 11. I called on Kev. Henry Townley. 
Affectionately received. Mr. Townley had been 
very nnwell. Gave a workman "Sinner's Friend" 
and "Come to Jesns." Praised be the Lord, I have 
now circulated gratnitonsly upwards of sixty thou- 
sand copies of "The Sinner's Friend" in various 
parts of the world. 

June 21. My heart mourns on. account of sin, 
but the blood of Jesus cleanseth all. Once I was 
the most miserable wretch upon earth, but I have 
been restored by the grace of God. Once a dirty, 
wicked boy, cursing, swearing, minghng with the 
lowest scum of society, no friend to counsel or help 
me, and yet raised up by especial grace to be a dea- 
con in the house of God and author of "The Sin- 
ner's Friend." God be praised for ever and ever. 
Amen. 

June 27. I conducted the prayer-meeting and 
spoke warmly, then attended the temperance meet- 
ing and gave the first speech. 

July 1. Arthur's departure for Luddenden Foot 
to preach the gospel of our blessed Lord. O may 
the Lord be ever with him, and make him faithful 
and useful. 17. Dear Mary and self had a private 
prayer-meeting for Arthur and Newman. Aug. 14. 
Prevented enjoyment of the sanctuary, but the Lord 
was with us in our cottage, and we united in praise 
and prayer, alternately pouring out our hearts be- 
fore him. 

Aug. 26. Excursion to Luddenden Foot. At 
Wakefield Arthur was waiting for us. Arrived at 
Luddenden, we all knelt before the Lord with 



230 JOHN VINE HALL. 

thankfulness. We attended Arthur's new clmrcli; 
the first time we had ever heard him preach. A 
most searching sermon. What abundant cause for 
us to bless the Lord for having so evidently called 
Arthur to the ministry. Sept. 6. Dear Newman 
walked from Halifax. My beloved Mary, Newman, 
and self each engaged in prayer for dear Arthur. 
His ordination took place this evening. He gave 
a most exciting statement of the way in which the 
Lord had led him to the ministry. Newman gave 
the charge in a most impressive manner. My dear 
Mary and self had abundant reason to bless the 
Lord for the public testimony of Newman and 
Arthur to the consistency of their father and moth- 
er as professed followers of the Lord Jesus. 7. I 
am so overwhelmed with gratitude for the mercy of 
God, that I am ready to burst forth with songs of 
joy for his great benefits — a dear wife to cheer my 
declining years with her precious love, also for 
afi'ectionate children. God be praised for so many 
choice and precious gifts. 

Sept. 11. Sabbath. A most exciting day. New- 
man and Arthm^ conducted the service this morn- 
ing. In the afternoon Newman preached again. 
Two or three hundred people following Arthur h'om 
open-air preaching to the church, singing the praises 
of God. Newman preached again in the evening. 
Hundreds could not gain admittance. Arthur took 
them into the school-room and preached to them 
there. To witness both our sons engaged in the 
service of the sanctuary was most exciting to us. 
Praised be the Lord. 22. Mercy upon mercy. This 



SEBENE AGE. 231 

day forty-three years ago I discontinued the use of 
wine and spirituous liquors. Not a drop of either 
has ever passed the surface of my tongue during 
the whole of those years. All praise to the Lord. 

Oct. 10. My dear Mary's birthday. Praised be 
God for his great mercy in having spared her to me 
during so many years, and that we love each other 
more than ever, the Lord Jesus the welcome occu- 
pant of each of our hearts. 11. Knelt together in 
thanksgiving to our gracious God for his mercy 
during seven weeks and five days that we had been 
with dear Arthur. Found Edward, Newman, and 
Warren waiting to welcome us home. Knelt before 
the Lord with thankfulness. 

Oct. 31. Arthur's birthday. Praised be the 
Lord that he is now an ordained minister of Christ. 
Nov. 3. Walked to and from Highgate hill, Andrew 
Marvell's cottage, and dined with Newman and 

C . Attended Surrey chapel in the evening. 

25. Body perfectly well, but my sin is ever before 
me. I pray God daily, hourly, to give me sincere 
repentance and humble confidence in that precious 
blood which cleanseth from all sin. 

Nov. 26. Disappointment. Eight times I have 
gone round by the railway arch to see the poor 
blind man, a Christian, to give him copies of " Come 
to Jesus" and "The Sinner's Friend," and some- 
times a shilling for Christ's sake. This morning I 
went again on purpose ; he was not there. I have 
often conversed with this poor man about the love 
of Christ. He reads the Scriptures by means of 
raised letters for the blind. I have given him many 



232 JOHN VINE HALL. 

copies of "Come to Jesus" and "Sinner's Friend" 
for sale for his own benefit, intimating to him that 
I did so for the love of Christ. Mr. Freeman, Mrs. 

F- ;, and J called on me. We passed an hour 

in spiritual converse. Mr. Freeman engaged in 
prayer. It was a delicious meeting. 28. Went to 
the railway arch to see the poor blind man. He was 
not there — the ninth time I have sought him. Gave 
"Come to Jesus" and "Sinner's Friend" to various 
persons on the pavement. 

Dec. 8. Dear Mary and self attended a prayer- 
meeting at the Sunday School Union. 14 Prayer- 
meeting at Crosby Hall. 30. Crosby Hall. A full 
attendance. Ten persons prayed. 31. This even- 
ing dear Mary and self kept New-year's eve at 
home. We prayed alternately, and at two minutes 
before midnight we knelt in silent prayer v/hile 1859 
was making place for 1860. We of all people had 
most abundant reason to praise the Lord for innu- 
merable mercies heaped upon us during the past 
year: Arthur become a minister for Christ; New- 
man continued useful in the Lord; yet I have a 
constant heartache on account of sin. I have also 
a foreboding of some evil. This is very weak and 
foolish, if not sinful, doubting the mercy of that 
gracious God who has never left us even under the 
most trying circumstances. Oh for more faith ! 

Jan. 1, 1860. Dear Mary and seK united with the 
disciples of the Lord this day in commemorating 
his dying love. It was a blessed time. Newman's 
text, "Eedeemed with the precious blood of Christ." 
12. Dear Mary and self, with Newman, attended a 



SEKENE AGE. 233 

communion service at eleven o'clock at Poultry 
chapel ; very many ministers present. Afterwards 
we attended a prayer-meeting in Exeter Hall. Af- 
terwards we took tea with the old women at Eow- 
land Hill's almshouses. Afterwards attended ser- 
vice at Surrey chapel. A superb day. 

Feb. 7. A blessed spiritual day. Dear Mary and 
self attended prayer-meetings at Crosby Hall and 
Exeter Hall. Lord Shaftesbury presided. After- 
w^ards enjoyed a most delightful interview v/ith Lord 
Eoden. A day to be remembered with gratitude. 
9. Crosby Hall prayer-meeting. I offered fifth 
prayer. In the evening we attended Surrey chapel. 
Then dear Newman persuaded us to go to Exeter 
Hall to hear Gough conclude a lecture on temper- 
ance. A great treat of good things. 

Makch 1. This day, 1816, Dr. Day was consult- 
ed on my propensity for strong drink, against which 
he gave a prescription, which I took daily until the 
end of September following, from which time to the 
present hour, forty-three years, I have never taken 
even so much as a single drop of wine or spirituous 
liquor of any kind. Praised be the Lord. 

Maech 13. The Lord is very merciful and gra- 
cious towards me in preservation so many years. 
This evening, 1811, I was delivered from the lowest 
hell. I was lying in intoxication at the edge of a 
canal, on a dark night, near Brierly hill. A stone 
lay in the way, by the mercy of God, to prevent my 
rolling into the canal. One turn more and I should 
have been lost for' ever. "Bless the Lord, O my 
soul, who hath redeemed my life from destruction, 



234 JOHX VINE HALL. 

and crowned me Tvitli loying-kindness and tender 
mercT." Oil may I never forget his benefits. 14. 
Mt bii'thdaT; enter my eighty-seyentli year tliis 
day. Praise the Lord. 

Apeil 6. To his son Arthur. *•' When yon see a 
poor yile sinner eyincing the smallest desire to re- 
tnrn from the error of his way, haK afraid to trust 
in the promises; let the ease of yoni' once lost father 
lead you to give him. encouragement to trast in that 
gi'acions God who is not willing that any, even the 
Tilest, should r)eiish; for there is no one too bad for 
Christ, whose precious blood is sufficient for all. 
Tou win forgive my preaching to you, dear Aithur, 
an ordained minister, and beheve me ever," etc. 

Apeil 20. Sent a parcel of '•' Sinner's Friend" to 
!Mis3 Marsh, Beckenham : also to St. Pancras work- 
house. Sent them with prayer. Tine was this day 
appointed to command the Great Eastern on ac- 
count of his skill as a sailor. He had no patronage. 

3Iat 1. This day oui' son TVaiTen was married 
by his brother Xewman. After breakfast, prayer 
was offered by Piev. Francis Tucker. It was a 
deeply interesting service, and we had abundant 
reason to bless the Lord. 2. Xewman accompanied 
us to a pubHc meeting of Field-lane Eagged School. 
Lord Shaftesbury in the chair. The Bishop of Ei- 
pon made the first speech, succeeded by our New- 
man. 6. A glorious Sabbath, to be remembered 
with praise. Dear Mary and self, after the morn- 
ing service and sacrament, remained in the vestiy 
with dear ZSTewman, and dined ofi' sandwiches and 
tea. Li the afternoon we accompanied him to St. 



SERENE AGE. 235 

James' Hallj where he preached to a very large 
congregation. Afterwards we returned to Surrey 
chapel, and attended evening service, which was 
overcrowded. Our hearts were fuU of gratitude to 
the Lord for giving us so much enjoyment. 

May 8. To meeting of Band of Hope. Exeter 
Hall crammed to suffocation. 

May 13. At Surrey chapel. Mr. Brownlow North 
gave a most energetic address. 15. Warren with 
his bride returned to his new dwelling, where we 
were waiting to receive them. After tea, prayer 
was offered that the Lord would bless them and 
dwell ever in their hearts. 

May 22. Newman's birthday. Most lovely morn- 
ing. Nightingales singing while I lay in bed. We 
all went to Leith hill in an open van. A fall. Lad- 
der gave way with myself, by which I was thrown 
to the ground, with a severe bruise on my right leg. 
Mercy that no bones were broken nor hurt on my 
back, but pain very severe. Praise the Lord. 

May 23. Arose with great difficulty, assisted by 
my dear Mary. Leg painful, but better. Kesolved 
to go home this day. 24. Dear Mary so kind. 26. 
Shaved myself. Praise the Lord that, except the 
bruise, which is black all round, my bodily health 
is good. Oh that my soul were in an equally com- 
fortable state. I mourn on account of sin, but I 
pray the Lord almost hourly to forgive my sins, and 
give me more faith in the blood shed on Calvary. 
27. Swelling very bad; must have patience two or 
three weeks. 30. Dr. Carlill encouraged me about 
my leg, but says it will take many weeks for recov- 



236 JOHN VINE HALL. 

erj. 31. Three doctors, Dr. Carlill, Dr. Hillier, Mr. 
Quain; favorable opinion, bnt patience. 

June 1. N , C , M , and H gone 

to dine with their brother Yine on board the Great 

Eastern. 3. Sabbath. Kewman called with C 

on the way to Surrey chapel, and prayed. After 
they had gone, Mary and self prayed alternately 
for Newman and Arthur as ministers of the gosj)el. 
The large print Testament and Psalms presented to 
me, yery useful at the present time ; my daily com- 
panions. My beloTed wife so tender and kind. 
Praise God for such a wife. 4. Newman called. 
Yesterday he asked the communicants at the Lord's 
supper to pray for me. 5. The patience and kind- 
ness of my dear Mary. Praise the Lord for so dear 
a wife. ■ 6. Need of more patience. Lord, be pleas- 
ed to grant it. 8. .On my bed. New Testament 
and Psalms great comfort; they cheer my heart. 
Dr. Hillier thinks the sweUing smaller. Walked 
round the bed; praise the Lord. Newman called; 
brought strawberries; prayed. 9. My soul looking 
to the Lord. My dear Mary so kind; my comforfc 
and joy. Walked round the bed, going and return- 
ing from the sofa, praising God. Sent twenty-five 

"Sinner's Friend" to E . 10. Sabbath. Dear 

Mary read the Scriptures ; we repeated hymns and 
prayed together. Praise the Lord. 11. Swelhng 
not reduced. Doctor recommends opening. 13. 
In doubt respecting operation; I fear pain. I am 
perfectly well in health. Praise the Lord. 

June 14. Operation. Yast quantity* of black 
blood poured out. 16. Leg better. My dear Mary 



( 



SERENE AGE. 237 

SO untiring; in good health, praised be the Lord. 
18. Dear Henry Townley called; prayed with us; 
wept with tenderness ; kissed hands. Arthur came. 
20. Leg no better ; want more humility and patience. 
Arthur is a great comfort. 23. Praise the Lord, I 
am a Httle better. Twenty-five thousand volunteers 
reviewed in Hyde park. Newman called and pray- 
ed. 24. E came to see us, and repeated hymns 

with us. 

Monday, June 25. My beloved Mary so active, 
so kind ; full of health, praise the Lord. 

The entry of June 25th is the last. 

For some time he progressed favorably, his gen- 
eral health being unimpaired. A slight operation 
was followed by erysipelas, and this, combined with 
an attack of congestion of the lungs, threatened to 
terminate his life within a few hours. The doctors 
recommended wine. My mother at once said the 
proposal was useless. Then it was suggested that 
beer might be less objectionable. My father, who 
had been lying in a state of great weakness, ap- 
parently unaware of what was said, emphatically 
groaned out. Never, never ! Though wine was 
thought essential, and only twenty-four hours were 
given as the limit of life, to the astonishment of all, 
he rallied so as to leave his bed and go out in a 
Bath-chair. 

It was my great privilege to be with him very 
much during his illness. I was reminded of the 
similar honor and happiness I enjoyed in the case 
of my deTir friend and father-in-law. Dr. Gordon. 
He, during eleven years "grown familiar with the 



238 JOHN VIXE HALL. 

Sides," was now waiting to welcome tlie aged pil- 
grim wlio had so often prayed for him and affec- 
tionately spoken to Mm of the Friend of sinners. 
For a short time the enemy strove to darken my 
father's mind with doubts as to whether he had 
ever been truly a child of God. I told him I conld 
not remember the time when he was not habitnally 
wal kin g with God. " Aii. bnt at a great distance.''' 
Then after a panse, "But he has plucked my feet 
out of the net, and established my goings." "What 
would be your answer if Christ were now to say, 
liovest thou me?" He rephed ferrently, "Lord, 
thou knowest that I love thee.'' I read the follow- 
ing words of Rowland TTill on his death-bed : "Mod- 
est words before God become us best. Strong ex- 
pressions of personal interest may do for some, but 
not for alL I can see more of the Saviour's glory 
than of my interest in him. God is letting me down 
gently into the grave, and I shall creep into heaven 
through some crevice of the door. I have no rap- 
turous joys, but peace, a good hope through grace — - 
all through grace/' He replied, " Ye^. I "ve peace, 
I hope.'' 

He said on different occasions, "If this should 
carry me cii. I "ve nothing to fear, nothing to ask 
for. Tiiis is not the experience of an hour, or a 
day, or a month, but of forty years. I've been 
travelling to that home many years. To think of 
laving down this shabby tabernacle and having one 
all of white I Xothing to soil it ; without spot or 
wrinkle, or any such thing. 2s o. nothing shall sep- 
arate from the love of Chi-isr." I said, "'Trhat a 



SEKENE AGE. 239 

difference between wliat we were and what we shall 
be." He responded, "Yes, and what we areT 
"All things are overruled; this accident to bring 
me nearer to Christ, and it may be to bring me 
home." "You '11 kiss this hand when I sha'n't feel 
it." " But we shall meet again. Yes, we 're on the 
same road. Glory, glory, glory! I've no raptur- 
ous joy, but I've a humble dependence on the 
Lord Jesus Christ." 

Reminding him of our motto for the year, " Re- 
deemed with the precious blood of Christ," he said, 
" I have prayed every day for many years that he 
would come and take possession of the heart he 
purchased with his blood." I referred to his hav- 
ing been always ready to speak of Christ. "Be- 
cause the subject was always nearest my heart." It 
was said that many who had been led to heaven by 
"The Sinner's Friend" were waiting to give him a 
triumphal entry. "Oh, if I can but crawl in on 
my hands and knees, I shall be very well satisfied. 
Lord, have mercy upon me a sinner; this is my 
prayer every day, and many times a day. I so 
grieve that I have sO little grief for my sins. I 've 
been a great sinner, and I need a great Saviour." 
On Sunday morning he said to me, "Preach about 
Christ and his salvation; I've proved it. It's not 
less valuable after forty years. Better than ever; 
I 've proved it." 

His thankfulness of spirit was continually exhib- 
ited. He regretted giving what he called so much 
trouble to those who felt it the greatest privilege 
to minister to him. One day, while being fed, he 



240 JOHN VINE HALL. 

lifted up his hand. When asked if it was a sign 
that he declined any more, he answered, " To praise 
God." I read a letter to him from a lady, who spoke 
of the usefulness of the Portuguese edition of " The 
Sinner's Friend." He lifted up his hands solemnly, 
saying, " Praise the Lord ! praise the Lord ! praise 
the Lord !" Hearing of some instances of useful- 
ness, he said, "Praise the Lord; he makes me to 
bring forth fruit in old age. How wonderful that I 
should make known Christ. There was a good 
woman who was told that I had gone to pray with 
a sick man. 'What,' said she, 'Mr. Vine Hall? 
Then I shall never despair of any one.' " 

He still endeavored to be useful to others. 
Within a very few days of his death he gave orders 
for various parcels of his little book to be sent for 
distribution to Christian friends whom he named. 
To his barber he said, "You'll not have to shave 
me much oftener. Here 's a little book. I wrote it 
years ago. It has been blessed to thousands. I 
hope it will be blessed to you. Follow its direc- 
tions. Seek Christ with your whole heart. I hope 
to meet you in heaven." He sent affectionate mes- 
sages to absent members of the family, enjoining 
them to meet him above. To his son Yine he sent 
word: "Tell him that, while captain of the Great 
Eastern, he must not forget that God placed him 
there. He must have Christ for Ms Captain, and 
then he can smile at the storm." To his son Ste- 
phen at Hong Kong, who had been abroad upwards 
of thirty years, and had often expressed his inten- 
ti6n of returning to England to see his parents once 



SERENE AGE. 241 

more, "Tell him how I love him — how glad I should 
have been to see him; but he must meet me in 
heaven."^ 

Sept. 15. He was evidently much weaker. I 
said, "You are not so well, dear father, to-day." 
He replied, "I wish the last were here." "The" 
promise of long life has been fulfilled." "Yes, long 
ago." "Your only plea is Jesus." "Nothing else." 
On Sunday morning, September 16th, I asked him 
if he had any message for the congregation. He 
replied, " Give my Christian love to them, and thank 
them for all their affection towards me." After this 
he almost entirely lost the power of speech, but in 
the afternoon he turned his eyes towards my moth- 
er and myself as we were standing at the foot of 
the bed, and said, "God bless you both." We felt 
it a patriarchal and a parting benediction. 

On Tuesday morning he looked affectionately 
towards his sorrowing wife and several times utter- 
ed her name with considerable distinctness, "Mary! 
Mary! Mary!" A few hours after, having suffered 
much from difficulty of breathing, he again made a 
successful effort to speak, and said with great ear- 
nestness, " Jesus I Jesus ! Jesus /" It was very touch- 
ing and very characteristic, this mention of the two 
names most dear to him — expressive of his earthty 
and his heavenly love. For upwards of fifty years 
his heart had been linked with that of his wife by 
ties never surpassed in strength and tenderness. 
For upwards of forty years the name of Jesus had 
been music to his soul. These two passions absorb- 
ed his whole being. He enjoyed all pleasures, per- 

John Vln« Hall. 11 



242 JOHN YINE HALL. 

formed all duties, loved all relations and Mends, 
in connection -svitli tliem. He liad no aim, no aJBfec- 
tion apart. 

On Tlinrsdaj morning he endeavored in vain 
to speak to us so that we could understand him. 
These words alone were distinguished : " Passing 
away, passing away." Then, "Jesus! Jesus!" Then, 
" He is ! he is !" I suggested, " He is here, he is 
precious." He nodded assent, and we caught the 
word " Pray." "We knelt round his bed in supphca- 
tion that Jesus would speedily release his dear ser- 
vant, and take him to join the great congregation of 
the saints made perfect. He earnestly resjDonded, 
■"Amen !" hfting ujd his hands as if eager to be gone. 
Then after putting his arm once more round my 
mother's neck, he gTadually sank into a state of 
stupor, out of which, on Satiu'day morning, Septem- 
ber 22d, at twenty minutes past -Qre, he awoke in 
the immediate presence of "The Sinner's Friend." 

What welcomes greeted him: fi'om many dear 
friends gone before, with whose hearts his own had 
beaten in warm response as they spoke together of 
Jesus; fi'om himdi'eds, j^erkaps thousands of ran- 
somed souls who had been guided to heaven by his 
instrumentality; from the angels to whom he had 
been the means of giving so much bhssful work in 
their " rejoicing over one sinner that repenteth ;" 
above all, fi'om Him whose name had so long been 
music to his ears, the thought of whom had so long 
ravished his heart. 

He had told my mother where to find a letter for 
her to read after his decease. After many expres- 



SEEENE AGE. 243 

sions of the most fervent love to herself, the letter 
closes thus: "Grieve not, dearest, that your ever 
tenderly loved husband is taken from you, only to 
be restored in the Lord's time ; but rather rejoice that 
his soul is relieved from its tenement of clay, to be 
for ever with the Lord. Yes, /or ever with the Lord. 
I hope there may be no presumption in this asser- 
tion, nothing rash, irreverent, or bold ; nothing un- 
becoming a poor redeemed sinner, in whose heart 
the Lord Jesus has held occupation so many years, 
ever a million million times welcome Guest, always 
the delight of my life, the joy of my soul. 

" Our blessed and merciful God will never leave 
you, never forsake you. We have proved and ex- 
jperienced his faithfulness. 

"As my soul has long mourned over my sin with 
deep repentance, my God has forgiven it too, but I 
have never forgiven myself, nor have I ever ceased 
to feel the deepest sorrow. But God be praised, 
* the precious blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin ;' 
yes, even from my sins, crimson as they are. And 
oh what special mercy that I have long been deliv- 
ered from all fear as to the article of death or the 
act of dying. Whether my body expire in agony, 
or in peace and gentleness, I know the Lord will 
give me dying grace, and I wish to know no other 
will than his. I love him too warmly to distrust 
him a single moment. 

"August 24, 1858." 



244 JOHN YIXE HALL. 

CHAPTEE XI. 

FILIAL HEIIIXISCLXCES BY THE EDITOS. 

Ix this supplementary chapter I- propose to lay 
before the reader a fe^v additional facts illustrative 
of niT father's history and character. 

John Tine Hall was bom at Diss, in Xorfolt, 
March 14, 1774, the year when the Americans drew 
the sword of independence, and sixteen years before 
the fii'st French revolution. His father had accu- 
mulated considerable property in business, but lost 
it in speculation; so that ''little Jack," as he was 
called, was sent at eleven years of age to earn his 
own bread, as related on page 11. He often used to 
speak of his early struggles and hard toil when a 
mere child. 

Those who knew him only in old age mil not be 
sui'prised to learn that, as a young man, his company 
was much valued. He was innately courteous, both 
in disposition and manners a " gentkmcrn.'" He was 
a good musician. At foui'score he still played well 
on the flageolet, and drew from the flute a peculiar- 
ly rich tone; while the fijie tenor voice h© conse- 
crated to " psalms and hymns and spiritual songs," 
must have been a great acquisition in the convivial 
cii'cles of his earher years. He was to the last witty 
and facetious, had a store of capital anecdotes, and 
could imitate to perfection the Scotch, Iiish, and 
Welsh diction. 



FILIAL EEMINISCENCES. 245 

The physical manliness and courage he manifest- 
ed in youth aided him when he became a good sol- 
dier of Jesus Christ. He was always ready to help 
the weak against the strong. He often related how, 
on hearing the shrieks of a woman in the market- 
place at Maidstone, he rushed to her assistance, and 
with one blow of his fist felled to the ground the 
ruffianly husband who was beating her, receiving 
for his reward a blow from the woman's patten, 
which left its mark on his forehead till the day of 
his death. He said that afterwards, whenever he 
saw a man and woman quarrelling, he moderated 
his indignation by saying to himself, "Kemember 
the patten." He once pinioned a highwayman sin- 
gle handed, retaining him in his grasp till assist- 
ance came. On another occasion, returning home 
on horseback with a large sum of money, he saAV a 
man apparently drunk rolling about a lonely part of 
the road. Suspecting a trick, he pulled up, drew 
his pistol and threatened to fire if the man did not 
instantly stand aside. The click of the trigger put 
the pretended drunkard to flight. On reaching home 
he fouijd his pistol had no priming. When the first 
Napoleon was threatening to invade this country 
my father joined the Yeomanry Cavalry, and at a 
grand review before George III. was selected, as the 
best swordsman of his regiment, to go through the 
exercise before his majesty. It fell to his duty as a 
volunteer to form one of the escort who guarded the 
conspirators tried at Maidstone for complicity in 
the mutiny at the Nore, from Maidstone to Sheer- 
ness. A celebrated German swordsman was at that 



246 JOHN VINE HALL. 

time employed by government at the Maidstone 
military d6p6t to instruct the soldiers, and gave an 
exhibition in the Town-hall before a large company 
of the aristocracy and military. My father was 
urged to accept his challenge with naked swords. 
Using great caution, he parried all the cuts and 
thrusts of his adversary, and then seizing his op- 
portunity, ripped up the embroidered sleeve of the 
German from wrist to elbow amid the plaudits of 
the assembly. 

As a man of business he was eminent for dili- 
gence, punctuality, and caution. He made himseK 
master of every department, and was never asham- 
ed of any thing which was necessary or expedient 
for him to do. Whatever he did, however trivial, 
he did thoroughly. He could not endure slovenh- 
ness or waste in little things. He was exact in the 
daily balance of cash, and kept a watchful eje to the 
stock in trade. He was never idle. On commenc- 
ing at Worcester, he had to -restore the character of 
the house. There was little genuine business, but 
as it would be ruin to be idle he used to take down 
reams of paper, count the quires, and tie them up 
again ; or he would rule paper hour after hour. One 
day he overheard a laborer who was passing ex- 
claim, "Hey, but that's a working chap, he's always 
at it." "Go on, my good friend," said my father to 
himself, " that's right, spread it over the city." He 
frequently used to mention this in after-years as a 
lesson to young men. He has been known to spend 
weeks together without leaving the house except for 
a place of worship, diligently engaged fi*om morning 



FILIAL REMINISCENCES. 247 

to niglit in carrying on an extensive and complicat- 
ed business. Years would elapse without his hay- 
ing a week's holiday. He kept up this assiduity 
until he had worked off the chief portion of his 
heavy pecuniary obligations, and until his sons 
growing up rendered such close application less 
necessary. 

He was punctuality itself. At seven in the morn- 
ing he was regularly seated at Scott's Bible, At 
eight, to a minute, he rang for family worship. He 
never kept any one waiting for him a moment. He 
wrote with his watch open before him to secure ex- 
actness. When the time came, he would quit any 
occupation, however absorbing and pleasant, to keep 
the appointment of the hour. Nothing could draw 
him away from doing the right thing at the right 
time. From the business of the present moment he 
would let nothing deter him. 

His punctuality in monetary transactions was not 
less remarkable. No traveller called twice for an 
account. Conversing once with a banker about the 
interest charged on overdrawn accounts, my father 
remarked, "You never charge me any." "No," said 
the banker, "you never give us a chance." 

He used to relate the following incident as a cau- 
tion not to make confidants of strangers. Coming 
once from London by the stage, a fellow-traveller 
became exceedingly communicative to the passen- 
gers respecting the business which was taking him 
to Maidstone. His object was to establish a county 
newspaper on a plan which would not fail of crush- 
ing all competitors : and he was good enough to ex- 



248 JOHN VINE HALL. 

plain in detail all tlie secrets of liis intended diplo- 
macy, to the immense amusement of my father and 
his fellow-townsmen. The talkatiye stranger con- 
cluded by asking Mr. Hall the names of the princi- 
pal booksellers in the town, that he might enlist 
them in his cause. Mr. Hall included his own name 
in the list. The next morning he observed the 
would-be newspaper proprietor approaching his shop 
accompanied by a well-known fiiend, and immedi- 
ately placed himself in a<?onspicuous position at the 
door. The talkatiye gentleman suddenly stopped, 
made some observation to his companion, turned on 
his heel, and nothing more was heard of him or his 
project, the secrets of which he had so prematurely 
disclosed. 

The following were favorite business maxims: 
"Civihty is cheap, and goes a great way." ''Mind 
youi- business, and youi* business will mind you." 
"If you would have your business done, go ; if not, 
send." " "Watch your stock as you would watch a 
thief." "Take care of the pence, and the pounds 
vnJl take care of themselves." "There's only one 
way to do business, and that is the right way." "If 
a thing 's worth doing at all, it 's worth doing well." 
" Never back a bill, even for your own brother or 
father, unless you can answer two questions : When 
due, can I pay it ; and am I able and ^"iliing to lose 
it? Beware of the plea, 'It 's only a form.' " 

While by far the most dihgent man in his house, 
he was never exacting towards others, nor indiffer- 
ent to their infirmities. He was very unlike some 
employers, who seem only to calculate how much 



FILIAL EEMINISCENCES. 249 

profit tliey can get out of their work-people, careless 
of the welfare of those who have helped them to 
prosperity. When he took the business at Maid- 
stone, he found there an elderly man who had acted 
as foreman during many years, and who very soon 
fell ill. Nevertheless his weekly wages were paid 
him till he died, although he never came near the 
printing-office; the amount thus given to the old 
servant of a predecessor being upwards of £100. 

As a deacon of the church he was as exemplary 
as in other relations. He ever cherished and man- 
ifested towards his minister sincere respect and 
affection. As. treasurer he received and disbursed 
the pew-rents, and when the quarter came round, 
whatever might have been the delay in supplying 
his official treasury, there was never a day's delay 
in paying the ministerial stipend. He always sup- 
plied the pastor with books and stationery, receiv- 
ing no payment and sending in no account. What- 
ever the claims of his business, he was always pres- 
ent at the prayer-meeting on Monday, and the 
weekly lecture on Wednesday, as well as at the dea- 
cons' meetings and church-meetings. Whoever might 
be absent, his pastor might always rely on him. His 
motto was, "God first, business next, pleasure last." 

He was remarkably generous and unselfish. A 
striking instance of this was his transfer to the ben- 
efit of his employer of the ofi'er of alderman Chris- 
topher Smith to advance him money when required 
to go into business. The alderman was surprised 
and pleased, advanced the £1,000, and renewed his 
promise to my father, which he afterwards nobly 

11* 



250 JOHN VINE HALL. 

redeemed by lendicg liim several tliousand pounds 
on his personal security. It was no difficult j to him 
to do good to others, whether by speech or letter, 
to mstruct or console them, or by hand and j)urse 
to relieye their sufferings. He could not deny street- 
beggars even, though he might suspect the truth of 
their tale. He used to say that, even if an imposter 
should happen to get the money, it would not be 
lost if given in the name of Christ. A "converted" 
Jew called on him once vdth a letter of introduction, 
and begged the loan of a few pounds, which were 
promptly lent hi that Name. The Jew promised re- 
payment, " As sui'e as I am a Christian." My father 
used to tell this with great effect, adding, " The Jew 
kept his word, he did not pay." He often scolded 
stui'dy mendicants, but the scolding was an invari- 
able antecedent to a gift. Accosted once by an 
Lish beggar, he said, " Now you know, Pat, that if 
I give you something you'll spend it in whiskey." 
" No, your honor," replied Pat, " I 've not had any 
whiskey this three months." " That 's only because 
you have had no money to buy it," rejoined my fa- 
ther. " That 's true, yer honor," said Pat, laughing 
all over. An extra gift, of course, was the reward 
of this reply, which my father often dehghted to 
repeat. T\'hen he gave tracts to the poor he wrap- 
ped up pence in them, and after his death his coat- 
pockets were found stored with this ammunition of 
love, without which he never went out of the house. 
Not only would he give generously from his jourse, 
but his heart yearned with kind sympathy to every 
one. He was always ready to hear patiently any 



FILIAL REMINISCENCES. 251 

tale of distress or anxiety. I liave heard liim groan 
in sympathy with one ; I have seen him weep with 
another ; and I have seen him in ecstacy of thank- 
fulness with those who had good news to commu- 
nicate, responding to their tale with, "Praise the 
Lord." Thus literally fulfilling the injunction to 
" rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with 
them that weep." 

He had a most tender spirit. Any tale of suf- 
fering or affliction brought tears to his eyes. There 
were incidents in his own life which he had related 
hundreds of times, but to which he could not refer 
without choking with emotion in the attempt. This 
was specially so when, in answer to our earnest re- 
quest, he would sometimes tell us the tale of Dunk's 
deliverance, or of his first acquaintance with my 
mother. My earliest remembrance of him arises 
partly from this feature of his character. My mother 
was from home, and in the early morning I clam- 
bered out of my little crib into his bed and begged 
him to tell me a story. He told me about Joseph 
in Egypt with such emotion that I felt as if he him- 
self had witnessed the circumstances he so feelingly 
described, especially Joseph's making himself known 
to his brethren, an incident over which my father 
wept perhaps as much as Joseph himself. Morning 
after morning the request was repeated, " Tell me 
again about Joseph," and morning after morning the 
narrative was repeated with undiminished emotion. 

His affection for his mother was very strong. 
For many years she was supported by him, and when 
his pecuniary resources were very small he loved to 



252 JOHN VINE HALL. 

minister to lier necessities. He had sent at the usual 
time, tliroiigli tlie post-office, a £5 note wliicli Tvas 
stolen. His mother anxiously waited till her re- 
sonrces were nearly exhausted. At length she wi'ote, 
"My son Joseph in Egypt, the corn is nearly gone." 
Great was his gxief. Another note was promptly 
posted in a letter, on the outside of which was writ- 
ten, "This letter contains a £5 note. The last was 
stolen. Please let this pass ; it is for a poor widow." 
It arrived safely. Often have his children heard 
him speak with choking utterance and streaming 
eyes of how this mother died with these words on 
her hps : " The Lord bless him, my Joseph in 
Egypt ; the Lord bless him, bless him, bless him." 
Terily the prayer was answered, and the promise 
hterahy fulfilled, "Thy days shall be long in the 
land."^ 

Li the domestic circle he was all tendernes's and 
unselfishness, dehghting to provide for the comfort 
and enjoyment of his family, but seeking no separate 
gratification for himself. I should think there have 
been few whose personal expenses were so small as 
compared with the measui'e of his outlay for others. 
To his wife, as the jouimal abundantly testifies, he 
ever showed the most tender and considerate affec- 
tion : an ardent lover as well as a faithful husband 
to the very last. He entered with all his heart into 
the joys, sorrows, and projects of his elder childi'en, 
and dehghted to romp with the younger. He treas- 
ured up with gi'eat interest specimens of om- lu'st 
efibrts in writing and drawing. His generosity of 
heart led him to rejoice in the pleasures of others, 



FILIAL KEMINISCENCES. 253 

even tnougii lie could not share them. Many times 
when, through pressure of business, he was unable 
to join his family in their excursions of pleasure, he 
took the greatest interest in their comfort and enjoy- 
ment, tapping his barometer to see if the weather 
would be suitable, and parting with them at the 
door with the kindest expressions; then, on their 
return, meeting them so pleasantly, and hearing with 
evident delight and gratitude their accounts of a 
happy day. The family scene on a Sunday evening, 
when parents and children sat round the fire repeat- 
ing hymns, will ever be fresh in the memory. of us 
all. He always commenced, the child on his left 
hand following, and so on, round and round the 
circle, till it was time to break up for evening ser- 
vice. With what pathos would he repeat his special 
favorites, such as, "Oh for a heart to praise my 
God," " Guide me, O thou great Jehovah," etc. And 
sometimes, with peculiar solemnity, he would inter- 
rupt the repetition by urging on us to give our 
hearts entirely to God, so that we might all meet, a 
redeemed family in heaven. This hallowed exercise 
of speaking to one another in psalms and hymns 
and spiritual songs would then close by all uniting 
in singing, 

"May the grace of Christ our Saviour, 
And the Father's boundless love, 
With the Holy Spirit's favor, 
Eest upon us from above : 

May we thus abide in union 

With each other and the Lord, 
And possess in sweet communion 

Joys which earth cannot afford." 



254 JOHN VINE HALL. 

This " liymn-repeating " is continued by his children 
to the third generation— a valuable incentive to per- 
sonal piety by those at home, and a precious bond 
of sympathy with those afar ojff. My brother Ar- 
thur, referring to these family gatherings, writes, 
" Hallowed seasons these. Often, when tossed upon 
the billows of the deep, or upon the still more dan- 
gerous depths of sin, has the returning Sabbath 
eve'ning hour of hymns and psalms been to my soul 
like the sheet-anchor to a storm-tossed mariner. 
'They are now engaged in repeating hymns, and I 
in the service of the devil.' Often have tears start- 
ed at the thought. Such w^ere some of the cables 
which bound our hearts to the family circle, and 
held us in many a hurricane of temptation from 
being driven upon the rocks of sin. It was the 
holy, consistent life of my honored parents at home 
that alone saved wx from falling into the fearful 
abyss of infidelity. I had joined an infidel club. 
In my ignorance I deemed the arguments against 
the Bible conclusive. I tuanted to disbelieve what 
marred my sinful pleasure. I began to inspect the 
lives of professors, and tried to put them aU down 
as more or less deceived or deceivers, as hypocrites 
and humbugs. But when I looked at home, I felt 
that there at any rate Avere two whose lives were 
daily evidences of the truthfulness of their profes- 
sion. I believe it would have rejoiced me to have 
detected a flaw in the religious consistency of my 
parents; but I could not, and their Uves upset all 
the sophistry of the debating-room. I said to my- 
self, 'Whatever others may be, I know that my 



FILIAL EEMINISCENCES. 255 

father and motlier are sincere. Their holy lives 
persuade me there must be something in religion, 
after all.-' " 

It is worthy of remark that, whereas my father 
dated his conversion from March 14, 1812, it was 
not till November 19, 1818, that he was finally vic- 
torious over his besetting sin. During upwards of 
six years the conflict lasted, and often the flesh 
seemed to have gained complete victory over the 
spirit. Was he then insincere in his rehgious con- 
victions during that period ? None who read the 
original diary can think -so; few who read the ex- 
tracts given in this volume. My own full persua- 
sion is that, from the 14th of March, 1812, my father 
became a real Christian, in spite of his lamentable 
failures while the stern struggle lasted with the evil 
habits by which he was "tied and bound." Surely 
his example teaches the duty of long- suffering for- 
bearance towards all who manifest any desire for 
reformation, however numerous and distressing 
may be their temporary relapses. In this respect 
the conduct of the Methodists at Worcester well 
deserves praise and imitation. God's forbearance 
with us should make us forbearing with our fellow- 
sinners. The church should never sanction sin, but 
should never cease to bear with it patiently, and 
should never cast off its erring members so long as 
they have any compunction for their faults. Better 
to err on the side of charity than of sternness — to 
hold a fallen brother too long, so as to incur the 
charge of complicity, than to cast him off too soon, 
so as to plunge him into hopeless despair. 



256 JOHN VINE HALL. 

But ho-^ vrs.5 it tliat the conflict lasted so long? 
How came it to pass that, in spite of the grace of 
God, the study of the Bible, the preaching of the 
gospel, the holy sacraments, the society of Chris- 
tians, and earnest prayer — how came it to pass that 
again and again he fell so grievously, and often 
seemed so nearly lost? TVere all human means 
used which were appropriate ? In my father's case 
habit had become a second nature. 3IoreoTer, the 
occasional lu5t for wine had assumed the diseased 
form known as oinomania. For him, entne absti- 
nence was essential as a preventive of excess. There 
were times when a single glass acted as a spark to 
gunpowder. The spark might have been withheld ; 
but when apphed, the explosion was unavoidable. 
But this thought did not occur to his anxious and 
disti'essed n-iends. Still they placed wine and spu-- 
its on their tables, partaking of those beverages in 
his presence, and Aicouraging him to join them, 
only with the advice to be moderate — advice inap- 
plicable to him. At length medical treatment was 
resorted to and medicine prescribed. But that 
medicine failed till abstinence was practised. My 
opinion is, that it may render total abstinence less 
difficult ; but that total abstinence without the med- 
icine will be successful, while the medicine without 
total abstinence will only encourage vain hopes, 
and do more harm than good. 

Had my father abstained altogether, fi-om March 
14, 1812, all that conflict, disgrace, agony, and peril 
had been spared. "Would it have been nnphilosoph- 
ical or imscriptui'al if his friends had said, " Broth- 



FILIAL EEMINISCENCES. 257 

er, your safety requires you to relinquish these bev- 
erages entirely. It is especially difficult for you, 
with habits so inveterate and a morbid craving so 
strong, to give them up. It is scarcely possible for 
you to do this if to your other difficulties is super- 
added that of standing alone, and being remarked 
in every society. It is easy for us who have not 
your infirmity. For your sake then we will join 
you in a resolution of abstinence. We will not hold 
before your eyes, and praise in your hearing, and 
enjoy in your presence that which we know you 
cannot safely drink yourself. We will not place 
before you a temptation too strong for you to resist. 
And so to encourage you in what is for you abso- 
lutely necessary, we will agree with you totally to 
discontinue the use of these drinks as beverages." 
Who can doubt that, with my father's deep convic- 
tions, earnest resolutions, and the help of divine 
grace so evidently imparted to him, this course 
would have been successful from the first ? 

But as with many other useful discoveries, the 
thing which is simple when known, was not then 
conceived of. But it is different now. The simple 
method of cure by abstinence, the application to 
this special case of our Saviour's precept, "See that 
ye enter not into temptation," is well known, and is 
the means of rescuing thousands of drunkards annu- 
ally. I am almost weekly applied to for advice by 
persons in the upper classes of society on behaK of 
some friend whose besetting sin is intemperance. 
Beyond the general advice which every Christian 
would give, I have but one reply : The person thus 



258 JOHX VIXE HALL. 

ensnared mnst abstain, and liis friends must show 
tlieir sincerity on his loehalf by abstaining too, in 
order to render it easier for him. I yentiu'e to ask 
whether such a coui'se would be opposed to that 
Christianity which says, '''Unless a man take up his 
cross and deny himself, he cannot be my disciple. 
Let no man place a stumbling-block, or an occasion 
to fall, in his brother's way. It is s-ood neither to 
eat flesh, nor to di'ink wine, nor any thing whereby 
thy brother stumbleth, is oflended, or made weak." 

Bending oyer these memorials, was it fanatical 
if my brother Ai'thur and myself resolyed, by the 
help of God, more feryently than eyer to wage war 
against those pernicious di'inking cu^oms which 
annually destroy so many thousands of precious 
souls, and to which our honored father so nearly 
fell a yictim ? Had he not been rescued, how use- 
ful a hfe. how bright an example would haye been 
lost to the church; how precious a jewel would haye 
been missing fi'om the SaAiour's crown! And what 
would his childi-en haye become ? 

My father's strong faith in the power of prayer 
was aided by seyeral remarkable instances in his 
own history. On March 14z, 1812, when he seemed 
to hear a yoice saying, "If thou wilt forsake' thy 
sins they shaU be forgiyen thee," a day which he 
always regarded as that of his spiiitual as well as 
his natural bh'th, my mother had been more than 
ordinarily earnest in prayer, in consequence of the 
sad condition into which at that time he had fallen. 
Having, in the last exti*emity, implored some special 
succor when, without an almost mkaculous interyen- 



FILIAL EEMINISCENCES. 259 

tion, utter ruin seemed inevitable, she went out 
on some domestic affairs; and when she returned 
found my father, as above described, "a new crea- 
ture." 

My brother Arthur says, "One department of 
his business at Maidstone was an extensive wine 
trade, handed down from his predecessor. Though 
an abstainer from wine from personal considera- 
tions, he did not then see any impropriety in the 
traffic, as he did not supply public-houses, but only 
the nobility and gentry of the neighborhood. The 
formation of Total Abstinence Societies led to the 
discussion of the traffic question. At that time I 
despised teetotalism, and expressed my determina- 
tion that when I had a share of the business I 
would push the wine department. When circum- 
stances had led me to London for a time, my father 
saw the danger to which I should be exposed on my 
return, and in my absence determined to give up 
the trade, refusing to sell it as such, at a premium, 
and simply making over the stock at a valuation to 
another wine-merchant. He earnestly prayed that 
the opposition I should certainly make to his act 
might be removed. That prayer was answered. 
Unknown to my parents, I had at the same time, 
in London, become convinced of the importance of 
teetotalism as an agent of physical, political, and 
moral good, not then seeing its vast importance in a 
religious point of view. I determined to go home 
and sign the pledge in my native town, where I was 
well known as an enemy of total abstinence. I 
sent word that I was coming, but did not explain my 



260 JOHN YIXE HALL. 

object. Before entering the lionse I went to the 
secretary of the society and signed the pledge. 
This detained me some little T^diile. Well do I re- 
member that night. Mj father had given me up, 
as the omnibus had passed the door s-everal min- 
utes, and he was pleasurably astonished to see me 
enter. 'T\Tiat makes you so late?' said he. 
' I \e been to sign the pledge,' I rephed. My par- 
ents looked at each other speechless, my father's 
arms npraised in gratitude and astonishment. Their 
prayer had been answered. That night was a 
memorable one in my history. Signing that pledge 
was the first step to the cross of Christ, though I 
knew it not then. As with thousands, so vdth. me, 
it was my stepping stone to salvation." 

His relioion exhibited a remarkable combination 

o 

of personal strictness, with charitable consideration 
of others. He had no rehsh for general society, or 
for amusements which some devout people regard 
as unobjectionable. But he never made his own 
conduct a rule for others, or questioned the sincer- 
ity of those who differed from liimseK in reference 
to what was not absolutely condemned by the word 
of God. He would never tolerate conversation which 
had even the appearance of backbiting or slander. 
Kor could he endure any apj)roach to angiy alterca- 
tion. He has often quietly left the room, when even 
a pleasant argument has been carried on, as he 
thought, too warmly. His was the charity that "en- 
vieth not, is not puffed up, is not easily provoked, 
thinketh no evil," but "hopeth all things andendur- 
eth all things." v 



FILIAL EEMINISCENCES. 261 

The modest character of his Christian confidence 
and joy is illustrated by the following conversation, 
which he frequently quoted, between the Eev. Eow- 
land Hill and himself. On the second visit of this 
eminent preacher, my father, in reply to an inquiry 
after his welfare, said, "I am just where you left 
me." "What," said Mr. Hill, "got no further?" 
"No," said my father, "not a step." "Where was 
it then?" inquired Mr. Hill. "Kejoicing with trem- 
bling," was the reply. "Be sure and stop there," 
eagerly responded the venerable evangelist, " do n't 
try to go a step beyond. I 've met sometimes with 
people who got further than that, and when I have 
asked about them they had got away out of sight 
altogether. My old book says, 'Blessed is the man 
that feareth always.' " 

I never met with any Christian who was so con- 
stantly bearing witness to the love of Christ. He 
was indeed "instant in season and out of season." 
For many years he regularly visited the prison, and 
conducted a religious service weekly in the work- 
house. But his chief labors were with individuals. 
It was scarcely possible to be in his company a 
few minutes without hearing from his lips some tes- 
timony for God. He used to delight in placing in 
the hedges copies of "The Sinner's Friend" open at 
the page, " Sinner, this little book is for you." Be- 
ing reminded of this during his illness, he said, 
"Yes ; and I always stuck them up with a prayer." 
In coaches, steam-boats, by the roadside, it was his 
habit to present a religious tract to young and old, 
rich and poor, and generally to enter into conversa- 



262 JOHN VINE HALL. 

tion Tdtli tliem. That wLicli would have been felt 
intmsiYe in most people, did not seem so in liim. So 
impressive yet so benevolent and courteous was liis 
manner, that even when the theme was uncongenial 
he himself was listened to with interest. However 
busv he might be he was always ready to speak of 
Christ, and to engage in rehgious exercises. I have 
often seen him, when immersed in cares and labors, 
lay down his pen on the entrance of a Christian 
fiiend, speak to him for a few minutes with the ut- 
most spiiitual ardor on heavenly subjects, and then 
resume his work as if there had been no interiiijD- 
tion. He often said he was hke a bottle containing 
water and oil; when shaken, the oil is mixed with 
the water, but the moment the bottle is at rest, the 
oil mounts to the surface. Fervent love to God in 
Christ, to a hving, personal, divine Saviour and 
Friend, was habitually the dominant emotion in his 
soul, and out of the abundance of his heart his mouth 
spoke. 

He concerned himself very little with abstruse 
theological questions. His all-absorbing thought 
was this, " God is love. Jesus is the Fiiend of sin- 
ners. He has saved me, even me. He is able to 
save to the uttermost all who come unto God by 
him. He is able and willing to save you." This 
was the burden of his speech for nearly fifiy years. 
This was the message which he sent all over the 
world by his httle tract. And I feel I cannot close 
this sketch in a manner more pleasing to himself 
than by quoting his appeal on the first page of that 
ti-act : 



FILIAL REMINISCENCES. 263 

" Sinner, this little book is for you : to give you 
liope and comfort, joy and peace. 

" Only believe in the willingness of God to for- 
give every penitent sinner, and pray earnestly to 
Mm for mercy, and rest assured that if you are truly 
penitent, not else, he will pardon you, yes, even 
you, for the sake of his beloved Son. 

"Remembeb, 'the Lord waiteth to be gracious' 
unto you, therefore put away the temptations of 
Satan, who would have you distrust the mercies of 
God, and persuade you to believe that your sins are 
too great to be pardoned. This is impossible; and 
the reason is, because the blood of Cheist cleansetli 
us from ALL sin. 1 John 1 : 7. 

" 'Let not conscience make you linger, 
Nor of fitness madly dream ; 
Tlie only fitness He requireth, 
Is to feel your need of Him.' 

" Secret, esiTnesi prayer, is the never failing meth- 
od of obtaining relief and comfort in seasons of the 
deepest distress. 

" A tender, broken, contrite heart ; a humble 
consciousness of having merited condemnation ; an 
earnest application for mercy — these are things 
which accompany salvation, and will always be re- 
ceived by our gracious God. 

" The reader of this little book must remember, 
that, of himself, he can do nothing to inerit the favor 
of God; but he need not be discouraged, for God is 
willing to bestow his Holy Spirit on every one who 
asketh ; and also to give repentance, faith, and the 
spirit of prayer to every seeking soul ; none denied.'' 



264 JOHN VINE HALL. 

The mortal remains of Mr. J. Y. Hall were in- 
terred in Abney Park cemetery, on September 26, 
1860. 

His true monument, "The Sinner's Friend," is in 
every land. His tombstone in the cemetery bears 
this inscription : 

In g^tw;mr)| 

OF 

JOHN VINE HALL, 

THE BELOYED AOT) HONOEED AUTHOR OF "THE SINNER'S FRIEND/ 
WHO ENTERED INTO THE JOY OF HIS LORD, 

SEPTE^MBEE 22, 1860, 
IN HIS EIGHTY-SEYENTH YEAR. 

"REDEEMED "WITH THE PRECIOUS BLOOD OF CHRIST." 



/ 



Deac : ' r:_;-:-=:::-T?:e-:::e;i 

Treatmsr: Date: r.'.a\' 2:^^o 

PreservationTechnologies 

A WORLD LEADER JN PAPER PRESERVATIOM 

\ 1 1 Thcmsco Paj'K Dn-.-e 
Cranbeny TcwTishiP. PA 1 6066 
f724)779-2tn 



i 



LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 





014 168 875 3 



