






o«o^ ,^*^ 



O * 



J- "V 





















.0^ 















MT. FUJIYAMA AND AN INLAND VALLEY.— Frontispiece. 



KESA AND SAIJIRO: 



OR, 



LIGHTS AND SHADES OF LIFE 
IN JAPAN. 



BY 



MRS. J. D. CARROTHBRS. 




AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK CITY. 



JAPAN REFERENCE 
LIBRARY 

NEW YORK 






COPYRIGHT, i8S8, 
BY AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 




• i 



.^ 



!i 



MP"*'' 







CHAPTER I. 
"Alas! Master, it is a daughter " .. 7 

CHAPTER n. 
The Schoolmaster's Boy 15 

CHAPTER III. 

New Japan 22 

CHAPTER IV. 

A Midsummer Day 34 

CHAPTER V. 

The Story of the Hairdresser 41 

CHAPTER VI. 

Saijiro climbs the Mountain ^ 54 

CHAPTER VII. 

Tama's New Home 62 

CHAPTER VIII. 

On the other side of the Hakones 76 

CHAPTER IX. 

Rinjiro's Question 92 

CHAPTER X. 

Seeing Buddha's Face 105 

CHAPTER XI. 

A Midsummer Festival ii.^ 



4 CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER XII. 

Winter in Yamamidzu 131 

CHAPTER XIII. 

Mitsu's Troubles 14^ 

CHAPTER XIV. 

Sunset o!i the Hakones 157 

CHAPTER XV. 

The Good Doctor 167 

CHAPTER XVI. 

The Storm in the Mountains 180 

CHAPTER XVII. 

From Yamamidzu to Tokio 188 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

The ChaptI Service 206 

CHAPTER XIX. 

A Country Boy in Tokio 215 

CHAPTER XX. 

School Days 2^9 

CHAPTER XXI. 

Midwinter in Tokio 245 

CHAPTER XXII. 

spring Blossoms 262 

CHAPTER XXIII. 
" Mushi " 277 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

Harukichi and Chiye - 2S7 

CHAPTER XXV. 
The Dismantled Shrine 302 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

?Iis»ionarics on the Hakones 315 



CONTENTS. 5 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

The Midnight Prayer 328 

CHAPTER XXVni. 
The Little Visitor 343 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

Some Letters and a Wedding 356 

CHAPTER XXX. 

Kesa and her Father 370 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

A Winter Journey 376 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

The Home and the Prison 393 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

Jinrikisha Rides 403 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

A Sabbath in Hiroshima 411 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

A Beautiful Isle of the Sea 416 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 
Home Again 423 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 

Some Happy Days 428 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

Christian Homes and Christian Work 431 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 
Saijiro's Resolve — — ....... 437 



ILLUSTRATIONS. 



MT. FUJIYAMA AND AX INLAND VALLEY__Frontispiecr. 

YAMAMIDZU i5 

TOKIO AND VICINITY— Map 22 

YETARO'S SCHOOL 35 

A JAPANESE COOPER 40 

MEGUCHI, KESA, AND RINJIRO 46 

YENOSKE AND THE PACK-HORSE 54 

FEMALE MUSICIANS -' 70 

JINRIKISHA TRAVELLERS 85 

JAPANESE CARPENTERS 105 

KESA AND MITSU - 127 

THE EIGHT-HEADED DRAGON 130 

THE RABBIT AND THE CROCODILES 135 

A JAPANESE TINSMITH . 288 

A JAPANESE MANSION 292 

A JAPANESE BARBER _ 319 

MOUNTAIN GIRLS -.. 326 

A JAPANESE SANDAL-MAKER 383 



KESA AND SAIJIRO, 



CHAPTER I. 

*'ai,as! master, it is a daughter." 

The sun was just rising over Japan when the 
officer Fujisawa's fifth little daughter was born ; 
and she was named Kesa, which means Morning. 

Five girls in a Japanese family, and never a 
boy to inherit the father's name or to perpetuate 
the glory of his house ! But Fujisawa was a man 
who accepted with patience "whatever the gods 
saw fit to send." So when the woman Meguchi, 
for years a faithful servant in the family, came to 
him with the words, "Master, it is a daughter; 
truly, a misfortune!" he simply said, "It is 
well," and turned away to hide whatever disap- 
pointment he may have felt. 

Before he went to the custom-house that 
morning he spoke kindly to his wife and glanced 
at the little baby. Then he took in his arms the 
ailing three-year-old Hana and placed her in a 
sheltered nook of the garden, bidding some one 
look after her. 



8 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

There were no rejoicings, no congratulations 
or sending of presents, as there would have been 
had a boy come into the household. The girl- 
baby was not w^orth any of these. 

But Fujisawa was really fond of his children. 
And already the eldest was betrothed to the son 
of a valued friend, a rich merchant of Hakodate — 
a merchant, and yet of high-born family. There 
w^as no questioning as to whether the young peo- 
ple would care for one another when they were 
married. The match was simply a matter of 
business between the two fathers, and those most 
concerned were asked nothing about it. 

The home of the little Fujisawas was near an 
old yashiki^ or prince's dwelling, in the high part 
of Tokio called the Kudan. This place overlooks 
the bay and commands a beautiful view of the 
city, with its low buildings, its temples and 
proves. The horizon is bounded on all sides by 
mountains, the Hakones and the Nikko and 
Kadzusa ranges, while to the southwest rises 
Mt. Fuji, the sacred, "matchless" mountain, the 
pride and glory of the Japanese. 

The house of Fujisawa was large and airy 
and was kept scrupulously clean. The family 
lived for the most part down stairs, the one long 
room of the upper story being a sort of smoking- 
room for Fujisawa and his friends. Especially 
did they enjoy this room during the long summer 
evenings, when the slides were drawn back, and 



"alas! master, it is a daughter." 9 

those who were assembled there could look down 
over the lights of the city and up to the distant, 
silent stars. 

The large parlor below was almost without 
furniture. The spotless white mats, the polished 
woodwork, the elegant vases with tastefully-ar- 
ranged flowers, and the handsome scrolls were 
sufficient to show the high social standing of the 
family. Nor was there much furniture elsewhere 
in the house ; only a few little tables and some 
mattresses, the latter now spread out to air in the 
morning sun. 

The garden was the great delight of the Fuji- 
sawas and their visitors. 

In the centre was a pond where hundreds of 
gold-fish sported, their backs now and again re- 
flecting a ray of sunshine. Near the house a little 
stone bridge crossed the pond, and rocks were 
scattered picturesquely along its banks. At in- 
tervals, on the water's edge, were stone lanterns, 
in which lights were placed on festival occasions. 
And in the springtime there were beds of iris, 
purple and white. 

All through the grounds were artificial hil- 
locks covered with azaleas, and in one corner of 
the garden the graceful wistaria hung from a lat- 
tice in grape-like clusters. Grand old maples 
and cedars shadowed all, making a home for in- 
numerable crows. But the chief ornaments of 
the garden, to Japanese eyes, were the cherry and 



lO KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

peach blooms, which now, on this beautiful May 
morning, mingled their snowy white and pale 
pink in charming contrast. It was amid such 
surroundings that little Kesa came into the world. 

The five girls were Tama, which means Pre- 
cious Stone ; Mitsu, Honey ; Chiye, Wisdom ; 
Hana, Flower ; and now the baby Kesa. Tama 
was ten years old ; Mitsu, seven ; Chiye, five ; and 
Hana, three. 

There was no such variety of complexion and 
hair among them as is common in American 
families. They all had dark skins and black 
hair and eyes, and all had round, rosy cheeks, 
except Hana, who had always been delicate. 

Their hair was dressed according to their 
ages, as is customary with Japanese girls ; while 
the baby would soon have to submit to the usual 
process of shaving, which is rather severe on the 
poor little tender heads. 

Every morning, except on the national holi- 
days, the faithful Meguchi took Tama and Mitsu 
to the school near by, where they spent at least 
five hours in learning how to read and write and 
count a little. Their books were those which the 
Japanese think suitable for their girls, "The Wo- 
man's Great Learning," "The One Hundred 
Poems," and some of the sayings of Confucius. 
They had no grammar nor geography nor history 
to learn. 

The girls were separated from the boys. The 



*'ALAs! master, it is a daughter." II 

scholars sat on the floor, held their brush-pens 
straight in their hands, dipped them in India ink, 
and covered the soft Japanese paper with queer 
black characters. Then the copy-books were 
hung up in the sun to dry. The children carried 
their noon lunches of cold rice, radishes, and fish 
to school in little wooden boxes which they called 
bentos. 

The street down which the Fujisawas had to 
pass on their way to school was a quiet one. 
They went by the old yashiki. This is an inclos- 
ure with the daimio^s or prince's house in the cen- 
tre and the retainers' dwellings on the outside, 
looking from the street like a wall with windows, 
or rather lattices, for the Japanese had no glass. 

Some of these inclosures are very beautiful, 
and since the princes have ceased to occupy them 
they have been put to various uses, such as Gov- 
ernment schools, soldiers' barracks, residences for 
foreigners, etc. 

In one of the outside houses of the yashiki 
lived Aka, a young w^oman whom the children 
knew. Aka often cried because the gods had 
not sent her a little child. She went almost every 
day to the temple and prayed, clapping her hands 
and calling on the gods to hear her. Tama and 
Mitsu felt sorry for her, her eyes were so red 
and her face was so sad. Besides, their mother 
often spoke of her as being so unfortunate, and 
said that her husband would soon send her home 



12 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

and get another wife, to whom perhaps the gods 
would grant a little son. 

At one of the windows the children almost 
always saw an old lady, bent nearly double, 
whom they called "Baba" (grandmother). She 
always smiled and spoke pleasantly to them as 
they went by. There were also two girls who 
were taking lessons on the samisen^ and Tama 
and Mitsu w^ould listen to the music, the ''tum- 
tum " of the Japanese guitar. 

When school was out Meguchi would go for 
the little girls, and sometimes they all had per- 
mission to walk to a little hill from which they 
could see a short distance into the country on one 
side and in another direction could look at the 
white sails in the bay. 

They always stopped at a tea-house to get a 
cup of tea and some sweetmeats, for which they 
gave a few copper coins. Chiye usually accom- 
panied them on such occasions, and the three 
little girls looked so pretty and behaved so nice- 
ly, bowed so civilly and answered questions so 
politely, that strangers would often ask who they 
were. Then Meguchi would answer, 

"Truly, thanks. These are the children of 
my master, the high officer Fujisawa." 

And if any one asked her if he had a son, she 
would shake her head and say, 

"Truly, a misfortune; no." 

Then a shadow would fall for a moment over 



''alas! master, it is a daughter." 13 

the hearts of the older children. It was indeed 
an unfortunate thing that they were not boys. 
But their sadness lasted only for a moment, and 
they would soon be playing again as if Japanese 
girls were of just as much value as boys. 

At six o'clock the children were expected to 
be at home to meet their father, who returned 
about that time from the custom-house. 

When they entered the house they would go 
immediately to find their mother and say to her, 
"We have returned." And when the servant 
announced that the "master" had come, they 
would run to meet him, bowing down to the 
ground before him. 

The evening meal of rice, tea, and fish fol- 
lowed the father's return, and soon after that the 
little ones would all be asleep on their stuffed 
futons^ or mattresses, their heads resting on wood- 
en pillows. Thus passed day after day in the 
Fujisawa household. 

But now a diversion had come — in the new 
little sister, who, on this first morning of her life, 
lay by her mother's side fast asleep. She knew 
not yet the mother's face nor listened for her 
voice. She heeded not the sunshine nor cared 
for the flowers. But she was strong and large, 
and the mother looked fondly on the little head 
covered with long, soft black hair. Her gar- 
ments were of silk, fashioned after the same pat- 
tern as those of the older members of the family. 



14 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Her tiny hands were almost lost in the wide 
sleeves. Her little feet were covered by the long 
robe. 

The morning hours passed quietly by. Tama 
and Mitsu went off to school. Chiye and Hana 
played together in the garden. The baby slept 
on. 

Afar off lay the Hakone Mountains, like a soft 
cloud-blank against the sky. On this very same 
morning a little child on those mountains wept 
bitterly because his mother gave no heed to his 
cries, having gone into that unknown land of the 
dead which Japanese and Americans alike have 
to enter. 



THE schoolmaster's BOY. 15 



CHAPTER II. 

THE schoolmaster's BOY. 

In the heart of the Hakone Mountains, on the 
banks of one of those wild rivers which come 
rushing down their sides, dashing against rocks 
and leaping over precipices, is the little village, 
or rather hamlet, of Yamamidzu. It is truly in 
the shadow of the mountain, for the sun shines 
on it only a few hours in the middle of the day. 
The people, looking up, can see only a bit of sky 
directly overhead. On both sides tower the cliffs, 
thickly wooded and covered with a dense under- 
growth of bushes. 

The villao:e itself consists of a cluster of ten or 
twelve houses on one side of the river. Among 
these are an inn, a temple, and a schoolhouse. 
The hamlet is out of the usual line of travel up 
the Hakones, and there is consequently but little 
use for the inn, which is old and dilapidated. 

Just below Yamamidzu the foaming torrent 
makes a plunge over the rocks in a beautiful cas- 
cade. From its violence you would think that 
it was going to carry everything before it; but, 
to your surprise, you would find at the bottom a 
calm and rather shallow pool, whose waters flow 
underground until the river is apparently lost. 



1 6 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

And so it looked on the day when little Kesa 
came to her father's beautiful home in the great 
''East Capital." 

Young Yenoske, the son of the innkeeper, had 
a pack-horse, the only one in the village, and 
occasionally went down the mountain for sup- 
plies. This was almost the only communication 
which the villagers had with the outside world. 
But they loved the mountain and the river and 
were proud of their waterfall and the still pool, 
where the children bathed on the warm summer 
days. 

At one end of the village a rude bridge cross- 
ed the torrent. It was a frail, dangerous struc- 
ture, without a railing and with no supports. It 
swayed under the lightest tread, and any one who 
trod it carelessly was in danger of being sudden- 
ly plunged into the rapids below. 

There was but one house on the side of the 
stream opposite the village, and this was a mis- 
erable shanty. The thatched roof scarcely served 
to keep out the rain, the mats were old and w^orn, 
and the futojis ragged and thin. In one room 
there was a chest of drawers, in another a little 
Japanese table on which lay the customary ink- 
stone. Some books were piled up in a corner 
and papers were scattered around. 

Seated on the floor near the table, his face 
buried in his hands, was a man about thirty years 
of age. He seemed feeble in body and disturbed 



THE schoolmaster's BOY. J-J 

in mind, and now and again moaned and rocked 
himself to and fro. The man was Yetaro, the 
village schoolmaster. Two years before he had 
come to Yamamidzu with his wife and infant 
son. Not one of the simple inhabitants of the 
village knew whence they came, and at first all 
looked upon them with distrust. Yetaro built 
a small house away from all the other houses of 
the village. It was in a wild, lonely place on the 
mountain-side and ever in the deepest shade. 

The woman was frail and delicate. Some 
even said that she was possessed of the fox, ac- 
cording to a strange superstition which the people 
entertain concerning those who are in the slight- 
est degree deranged. The young mother's sole 
pleasure was in her baby, whom she carried on 
her back long after the strong, healthy boy was 
too heavy a burden for one so weak and ailing. 
The father was a scholar, and gathered the vil- 
lage children into a school. But the pittance 
thus gained was scarcely enough to keep his fam- 
ily supplied with the barest necessaries of life. 
They were often hungry and cold and shivered 
in their scanty garments. But Saijiro, the baby, 
grew strong and ruddy and was happy with his 
mother, riding on her back or trotting by her side 
the livelonof dav. Of the silent father he saw 
little. 



•& 



But now a great change had come. The gen- 
tle Kochi was no more. All the morning she 

KocA KU'l Siiljiro. -^ 



l8 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

had lain on her wretched bed breathing quietly, 
but taking no notice of the boy she loved so fond- 
ly. Every now and then he stopped his play to 
come and nestle close to her side. He would 
pass his hand over her face and lisp, ''^ Ka-chan^ 
l:a-chan ! I am very hungry, ka-chan. Wake up 
and give me some rice." But the mother did not 
answer him. 

The village doctor sat by the sick woman's 
side, but had no power to help her. A priest 
came over from the village and mumbled his 
prayers, but Kochi did not seem to hear him. 
An old baba^ the only person on whom Yetaro 
would call for help, from time to time adminis- 
tered nourishment. Yetaro sat for hours by the 
table, never looking up and not speaking a 
word. 

At ten o'clock the end had come. The doc- 
tor went back to the village. Saijiro came in 
once more to speak to his mother, but no one 
paid any attention to him, and he went crying 
from the house. He was a sluxJy little fellow of 
three years, with bright black eyes and round 
rosy cheeks. The officer Fujisawa would have 
given half his wealth and influence to possess 
him; and Aka's tears would have been dried 
could she have called him, even in his rags and 
dirt, her own. 

Poor little Saijiro ! He trotted away from 
the house down to a corner of the iT:arden where 



THE SCHOOLMASTER S BOY. 1 9 

there was an altar to the fox-god, Inari. He was 
hungry and lonely, and no one listened to his 
cries. Something was the matter with ka-chan; 
she heeded him not. So he lay sobbing under 
the shadow of the mountain, until his quick ear 
caught the sound of rapidly approaching foot- 
steps. He looked up to see a boy of fifteen com- 
ins: towards him. In an instant the child w^as on 
his feet, running with outstretched arms to meet 
his friend, who stooped to take him on his back. 

*'Why do you cry, Saiji?" asked the new- 
comer. 

"I am hungry, Yenoske, and the honorable 
father is sad and the honorable mother gives me 
no rice. When will the mother wake up, Ye- 
chan, and cook the rice?" 

*'The honorable mother is dead and finished, 
Saiji, but Baba and I wdll take care of you and 
give you rice. See ! I have brought you beans. 
We will go up on the mountain and gather 
flowers to lay on the mother's coffin." 

The hungry child ravenously ate the sweet- 
ened beans. Then, with his hand clasped in 
Yenoske's, he bravely climbed the mountain- 
side, looking for flowers and screaming with de- 
light when he could point one out to his friend. 
Yenoske gathered them for him until they could 
carry no more. The snow had scarcely melted 
on the Hakones. There were still white patches 
here and there. But in sheltered places lovely 



20 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

flowers grew, and the trees were beautiful in 
their fresh green dress. Saijiro chatted merrily 
to Yenoske and was as happy as the birds twit- 
tering in the branches above him. 

In the little house below lay the dead mother, 
and the father sat overwhelmed with grief. 

Before Saijiro, and before the little Kesa in 
Tokio, stretched a long and untried path. Old 
Japan was passing away, and the new generation 
would find much to trouble and perplex them. 
But the baby slept on, and Saijiro knew nothing 
of pain or care. He felt safe with Yenoske and 
he loved the mountain. Its towering sides had 
grown as familiar to him as the faces of father 
and mother. When the mountain smiled with 
sunshine and held out flowers for him to gather, 
he rejoiced. When the mountain was sad and 
sent rain like his mother's tears down over the 
little house, he often w^ept in sympathy. When 
once upon a time he had seen it all white and 
glittering with snow, he had clapped his hands 
and danced for joy and called ka-chan to come 
and see it too. 

It is not often that the eastern slope of the 
Ilakones is covered with snow. The western 
exposures are much colder. On the eastern side 
are hot springs, which are a resort for invalids 
even in winter. 

On this May day everything was lovely, and 
it was late in the afternoon when Yenoske and 



THK schoolmaster's BOY. 21 

Saijiro went back to the home where the dead 
mother lay. 

Old Baba had prepared the body for burial. 
The priest had shaved poor Kochi's head; for the 
people believe that the departed become priests, 
and must enter the realm of the dead with shaven 
heads. Kochi w^as dressed in her wedding gar- 
ments, and on the evening of the third day the 
square, box-like coffin in which the body was 
seated was carried to the temple. The priests 
chanted a solemn dirge over it. Then they bore 
it to the Buddhist cemetery and laid it in the 
ground. 

The little son looked on and wondered what 
it all meant 



22 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 



CHAPTER III 



NEW JAPAN. 

In the summer of i868, while Kesa was only 
a few weeks old, a great battle took place in 
Tokio, or Yedo, as the city was then called. It 
was fought at the beautiful temple inclosure 
Uyeno. The adherents of the Tycoon, who had 
been declared a usurper, met the Mikado's troops. 
The former were defeated, and the Tycoon soon 
retired from Yedo into private life in the old cas- 
tle at Shidzuoka; while the Mikado removed his 
court from Kioto to Yedo, and changed that city's 
name to Tokio, which means the "eastern capi- 
tal." 

Tama, Mitsu, Chiye, and Hana heard from 
their house in the Kudan the noise of the battle, 
and were much frightened. But the baby Kesa 
knew no fear. 

Do you ask how there came to be two rival 
rulers in Japan ? Will you listen to a little story ? 

The history of Japan begins with a man called 
Jimmu, 660 years B. C. He was the sole emper- 
or, and founded the sovereignty of the Mikados, 
who held their court at Kioto. Almost divine 
honors were paid to the IMikado, but in the course 
of a few centuries his real power was much re- 



NEW JAPAN. 23 

duced by the rise of a military supremacy, exer- 
cised alternately by two rival clans, who were 
frequently at war with one another. In 1180 the 
reigning Mikado was forced by Kiyomori, the 
chieftain of the clan then in power, to abdicate in 
favor of his son, a child of three years, while Ki- 
yomori, the boy's maternal grandfather, himself 
became regent. After Kiyomori's death, a year 
later, Yoritomo, the leader of the rival clan, es- 
tablished his supremacy and took up his resi- 
dence at Kamakura. In 1192 the then reigning 
Mikado appointed him Shogun, or military " com- 
mander-in-chief" of the empire — the office to 
which the title of " Tycoon" has been commonly 
but erroneously applied. 

Thus the Mikado continued to be a sort of 
puppet, to whom great honors were paid, while 
the Shogun, or sometimes the Shogun' s regent, 
was the real ruler of the empire and the leader of 
the armies. 

Near the close of the sixteenth century a fa- 
mous general named Hideyoshi acquired the 
chief military power, though he was never ap- 
pointed to the office of Shogun. All Japanese 
children are acquainted with the stories of Yori- 
tomo and Hideyoshi, the latter being better 
known as Taykosama, a title which means "my 
lord, the great lord." A few years after the death 
of Hideyoshi, which occurred in 1594, one of his 
generals, named Tokugawa lyeyasu, was appoint- 



24 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

ed Shogim by the Mikado and held his court at 
Yedo. That city continued to be the residence 
of the succeeding Shoguns, all of whom were of 
the Tokugawa dynasty, until the revolution of 
1868 put an end to the office. 

Early in the sixteenth century some Portu- 
guese traders came to Japan. These traders were 
soon followed by Roman-catholic missionaries. 
They were Jesuits, and at their head was a man 
known through all the Christian world, Francis 
Xavier by name. 

It is said that these first missionaries to Japan, 
though not free from the errors of the Church of 
Rome, were pious and self-denying men who la- 
bored faithfully among the Japanese. They 
gained many converts, and were loved by the 
people, whom they loved in return. But after 
Francis Xavier was dead, changes took place. 
Other representatives of the Romish Church came 
over, and they quarrelled among themselves. 

What the Japanese thought of this we cannot 
tell. But at last the Portuguese formed a con- 
spiracy against the Government, which was dis- 
covered, and they were driven out of the country. 
Then a terrible persecution of Japanese Christians 
took place. The converts were brave and patient, 
and many preferred a terrible death to giving up 
their faith. 

The next people who had commercial rela- 
tions with Japan were the Dutch. On the 24tli 



NEW JAPAN. 25 

of June, 1598, there sailed from Holland a Dutch 
ship with an English pilot on board. This 
pilot's name was William Adams. The crew had 
a terrible vovasre. Adverse winds drove them 
hither and thither and sickness broke out among 
them. At last they were driven on the shores of 
Japan, where they were kindly received. But 
after waiting nearly two years for the decision of 
the Shogun concerning them, they were informed 
that they could not have their ship any more, and 
that they must make up their minds to spend the 
rest of their days *' happily and peacefully in 
Japan." 

The Dutchmen scattered themselves in differ- 
ent parts of the island, while Adams went to the 
Shogun' s court at Yedo, where he became a fa- 
vorite, had a fine salary, and rose to "high distinc- 
tion." But he was verv sad during- his longr so- 
journ in Japan. He had left a wife and children 
in England, and was never permitted to see them 
again. He tried several times to send letters, but 
whether they were ever received or not no one 
knows. 

The Dutch and Portuguese were together in 
Japan for a time. At length, as we have learned, 
the Portuguese were expelled from the country. 
We learn from reliable sources that the Dutch 
assisted the Japanese in their persecution of the 
native Christians. This is a great blot on the 
record of the Dutch in Japan, although some 




JAPAN REFERENCE 
LIBRARY 



NEW YORK 



26 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

writers try to excuse them. One of their own 
number says, "The Japanese both hated and de- 
spised us for what we had done." 

In 1 641 the Dutch were ordered to Nagasaki, 
and were confined in Deshima, a little island in 
the harbor. Here they submitted, for the sake of 
trade, to the most terrible humiliations. They 
were scarcely allowed to hold divine service on 
Sundays. They had " to leave off praying and 
singing in public and to avoid the sign of the 
cross." All of the Japanese ofBcials connected 
with the Dutch factory wxre obliged to "trample 
upon the cross." 

The Dutchmen were constantly watched. Oc- 
casionally they were allowed to take a walk into 
the country, but were always surrounded by spies. 
The principal men of the factory had to make 
journeys to Yedo to visit the Shogun. During 
these trips they gained some knowledge of the 
country. Deshima, although called an island, 
is in reality separated from the city of Naga- 
saki by a canal; it is scarcely more of an isl- 
and than the Foreign Concession at Tokio. The 
scenery by which the Dutchmen were surround- 
ed was very beautiful. High hills encircle the 
land-locked harbor and the verdure is almost 
tropical. 

England and Russia made attempts to trade 
with Japan, but were imsuccessful. The law 
was fixed and unalterable. No foreigner, and no 



NEW JAPAX. 27 

Japanese who had been away from his own coun- 
try, should ever step upon its shores again. And 
this law was in operation for two hundred years. 

It was in the year 1852 that a squadron w^as 
fitted out by the United States Government for 
the purpose of visiting Japan and establishing 
commercial relations with that long shut-up 
country. The expedition was under the com- 
mand of Com. Matthew S. Perry, and every 
American bov and girl ouo:ht to know about it. 

The Mexican war had closed. California had 
become a part of the United States. The mag- 
nificent harbor of San Francisco was now ready 
for the commerce of the Orient. The Golden 
Gate was open to the trade of China and India. 
Naturally all eyes were turned towards Japan 
as a country on the great highway betw^een the 
Occident and the Orient. 

For a little more than two hundred years, 
from 1641 to 1852, Japan had been shut up. 
There had been no intercourse wnth any otlier na- 
tion except the limited trade carried on with the 
Dutch. No one had gone out of the country or 
come into it. Two hundred years ! Think of 
what our country was only one hundred years 
ago, and perhaps you can form some idea of the 
stationary condition of Japan. 

But on the 24th of November, of the year 
1852, Com. Perry sailed from Norfolk, Virginia, 
on the steamship *' Missouri," commissioned to 



28 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

arrange a treaty with Japan. He carried a letter 
from the President to the Emperor. His orders 
v/ere to deliver the letter to the proper authori- 
ties and to demand an answer. 

The story of the squadron's progress around 
the world would be well worth reading. They 
stopped at many ports and saw many wonderful 
things. On the morning of July 7, 1853, they first 
came in sight of Japan. Those of us who also 
have seen Japan for the first time on a summer 
morning know how those lovely shores must have 
looked to the ships' crews as they steamed slowly 
up the coast. At first the land was only dimly 
visible through the mist. Then as the sun rose 
higher and higher, dissipating the fogs, Japan 
stood revealed with her wooded hills, her green 
shores, her river flowing down to the sea, her lit- 
tle villages nestling under the cliffs and scattered 
along the water's edge. 

We can imagine the consternation of the fish- 
ermen out in their junks when the steamers be- 
came visible, the hurrying and scurrying of peo- 
ple upon the shore. Then what ridiculous means 
they employed to keep the foreigners from seeing 
them, stretching cloths before the towns ! They 
were curious, nevertheless. Men, women, and 
children climbed the hills to oraze at the strano^ers. 
Bells were rung, guns were fired, and beacon-fires 
were lighted along the shores. A general sur- 
prise and alarm prevailed throughout the empire. 



NEW JAPAN. 29 

So far as etiquette was concerned Com. Perry 
met the Japanese upon their own ground. He let 
them see that he was a commissioner from a ruler 
of dignity and power. After a great many vexa- 
tious delays the first interview with the Japanese 
authorities was granted, and the President's letter 
was delivered. An exchange of hospitalities hav- 
ing been made, the fleet left Japan with the un- 
derstanding that the Commodore was to come 
again in the winter for the Emperor's answer. 

Accordingly, in February of the next year he 
returned, and the treaty was concluded without 
war or bloodshed. Thus did Com. Perry succeed 
in opening the gates of Japan. 

Other nations were not long in making similar 
treaties, and foreigners flocked into Japan. It 
was during this period that the title of "Ty- 
coon " originated. It was really with the minis- 
ters of the Shogun at Yedo that these first treaties 
were made, under the impression on the part of 
the foreign Powers that he was the actual Em- 
peror of Japan; and the ministers of the Shogun 
called him the Taikiin^ that is, " great ruler." It 
was not until 1868 that his true position became 
known and that the Mikado's ratification of the 
treaties made with the Shogun or "Tycoon" was 
obtained. 

In 1868 a great revolution took place. This 
was just about the time when our story begins. 
Kesa was a mere infant and Saijiro a toddler of 



30 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

three years. The "Tycoon's" troops fought 
with the ^likado's troops. The former were de- 
feated, and the "Tycoon" retired into private 
life. So there is now but one ruler in Japan. 
You see that while Kesa and Saijiro were yet 
small children momentous changes were taking 
place in the empire. God had, indeed, great 
things in store for them. 

No shadow of anxiety, however, or forecast of 
trials to come, had power over the brightness of 
their baby lives. Little Kesa learned how to use 
her eyes, looking at first wonderingly at the sun- 
beams, the gay flowers, the pretty colored balls 
which are given to Japanese babies to play with. 

Dressed gorgeously in silk and crape, she was 
taken to the temple and had her name recorded 
there as a member of the Fujisawa family. She 
learned how to stretch out her hands for things, 
how to cry when she did not get what she want- 
ed, how to creep, to stand, to walk. 

She had her first little sandals, then her wood- 
en clogs; had some falls in learning how to use 
them; was taught how to step out of her shoes at 
the door and how to make a bow. She learned, 
also, to lisp in baby fashion the soft, sweet words 
of the Japanese language. Kesa was an active, 
healthy child, a great contrast to the peevish, 
weak little Hana. The tiny bell which she wore 
at her waist would be heard now' in one corner of 
the garden, now in another, as she trotted hap- 



NEW JAPAN. 31 

pily from place to place. Often was the mother's 
heart relieved by the tinkle of that little bell 
when the child would be missed for a few mo- 
ments. 

One day when Kesa was about two years old 
the whole family, except Fujisawa himself, were 
going up to the temple. It was a Buddhist tem- 
ple with the usual toriye^ or bird-rest, in front. A 
flagged walk led up to the steps, and on each side 
of this walk were shops where the children could 
buy toys. Within the temple inclosure there was 
an image of a horse, and a tree in which a sacred 
snake was said to dwell. 

The children gave some money to a man to 
have him free a number of caged birds. This is 
one of the acts of Buddhist worship. Within the 
temple were idols. Some of these were hideous 
and frightened the children; others had beautiful 
faces, on which they loved to look. Even little 
Kesa was taught her prayers, although she could 
not at all understand them, but she clapped and 
rubbed her hands, made her bows, and repeated 
the same words as the others. 

This particular day was a festival. One of the 
gods was taken out in a gorgeous car. Those 
who were carrying him shouted and rocked the 
car violently, becoming much excited. There 
were many people in the street, and most of them 
had flowers. On the way the Fujisawas met Aka 
carrying a great wooden doll dressed in silk and 



33 KHSA AND SAIJIRO. 

<:rape. She looked very happy, and she told 
them why: she and her husband were going to 
adopt a beautiful boy, the son of a relative. In 
the meantime she consoled herself by dressing 
and caring for the doll. Soon the empty heart 
and home would be filled. No wonder Aka's 
face was bright with smiles. The children ad- 
mired the doll and rejoiced with Aka. The 
young woman went on towards her home, and 
then something happened which the little Fuji- 
sawas remembered for many and many a day. 

They had often heard of the foreigners who 
had made their way into the country, and they 
had listened to the story of those days when Com. 
Perry was at anchor in Yedo Bay, when beacon- 
fires were lighted, guns discharged, and bells 
tolled, as danger signals throughout the country. 
That was seventeen years before the time of which 
we are writing, and a number of foreigners had 
come to Japan since then. But the officer Fuji- 
sawa's wife and children, living in a secluded 
way near the outskirts of the city, had never seen 
any of these strange people of the Western Conti- 
nent. They knew that Fujisawa himself had 
dealings with them at the custom-house, and that 
their sojourn in the city was a source of much 
perplexity to him and the cause of endless dis- 
cussions in the little circle which assembled in 
the garden or in the upper room. 

The children's secret curiosity to see the stran- 



NEW JAPAN. 33 

gers was this afternoon to be gratified. As they 
were walking slowly along they heard the " Hai, 
hai !" of a runner, and immediately a pony-car- 
riage passed, in which were a gentleman, a lady, 
and a little child. The group of sisters pressed 
closely to their mother and Meguchi, a trifle 
alarmed, yet interested in the lady and the fair, 
blue-eyed baby. The lady looked kindly at them 
and smiled on Kesa, who lifted her bright face 
but for an instant, then hid it in her mother's 
dress. It was but a flashing interchange of glan- 
ces, and all passed on their different ways. But 
in the coming years they were to meet again and 
again. 



Kesa and SalJIro. 



34 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

CHAPTER IV. 

A MIDSUMMER DAY. 

The midsummer day was warm in Yamamid- 
zu. It seemed as if every breath of air was shut 
out by the steep hillsides. The people sat in the 
street by the river and used their fans. The 
horse could not discover a cool place in which to 
stand, and found switching his tail to keep off the 
flies rather violent exercise. The dogs panted 
with heat, and went often to lap the cool water of 
the river. 

At one end of the village, in the little school- 
house, stood Yetaro, the master, reading in a loud 
tone some of the maxims of Confucius. The chil- 
dren liked to hear also of Confucius, or Kong- 
foo-tse, himself. He was born in the province of 
Ivoo, China, about 550 years before Christ. He 
was a wise and serious child, continually surpri- 
sing his parents and grandparents by his remarks. 
Twice in his life, after deservedly occupying a 
high position, he was driven out of his native 
province. For twelve years he wandered about 
an exile, often hunted and harassed. The last 
five years of his life were happy and peaceful, 
passed in a pleasant valley, with friends around 
him. The literary work which he did has been 



A MIDSUMMER DAY. 35 

of great service to China, and his books are stud- 
ied to this day in all of the schools. The teach- 
ings of Confucius in many respects are very good, 
but they do not recognize any Supreme Being. 
They inculcate reverence towards parents and an- 
cestors. Obedience is taught, and everything is 
to be done ^'decently and in order;'' but no 
remedy is provided for the power and curse of sin. 

The Yamamidzu scholars, a few mountain 
girls and boys, strove to imitate Yetaro's reading, 
teacher and scholars screaming at the top of their 
voices. The stick which Yetaro held in his hand 
was more for the purpose of emphasizing his 
words than for the punishment of the pupils, who 
were docile and obedient enouo:h and did their 
best to learn what was set before them. But do 
you think that on such days even a Japanese boy 
will not sometimes cast a glance out of the open 
slides and look with envy on the bees and flies 
and free little birds in the tree-tops? or that a 
vision of cool clear water does not flit across his 
mind's eye, and that he is not pleased when the 
hour for dismissal comes ? 

It was a poor little place, that schoolhouse. 
The roof was thatched and in some parts moss- 
grown, and it leaked when the heavy rains came 
pouring over the mountains. The matting was 
yellow with age and soiled and worn. 

In a corner of the room Saijiro, now a little 
round-faced, rosy-cheeked boy of five years, clad 



36 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

in a simple white garment, his chubby brown 
hands clasping some lilies, lay asleep. What lit- 
tle wind there was just stirred the damp, dark 
locks that fell on his forehead. The little mo- 
therless boy had become the pet and pride of the 
villagers, who prophesied that he would be a 
scholar and fill his father's place in the school. 

And now it was time to dismiss school for the 
day. Yetaro laid down his stick and gave the 
scholars permission to go. They made their bows 
and passed out, singing and shouting as they 
went down the street. But the big boy, Yenoske, 
remained. Going up to where the little one lay 
sleeping, and shaking him gently, he said, 

^'Up, up, Saiji ! School is out. We are go- 
ing home." 

The child opened his almond-shaped eyes, 
rubbed them, stood up, and then, as if suddenly 
recovering his senses, leaped lightly on Yenoske's 
back. Thus he w^as carried rapidly through the 
village, and was soon on the frail bridge which 
crossed the river. Saijiro was used to it, and 
never trembled as the frail structure swayed to 
and fro under Yenoske's firm tread, w^hile the tor- 
rent boiled and hissed below. 

Yetaro followed them down the street, saw 
them safely over the bridge, and then turned in at 
the temple gate. He remained some time at his 
devotions, repeating one prayer over and over 
again. Yenoske knew his habits; so when he 



A MIDSUMMER DAY. 37 

had reached the one house on the other side of the 
river he set Saijiro down on the little veranda 
and took his place beside him. 

''I am going down the mountain to-morrow, 
Saiji," he said. 

The child looked sorry, for these two were in- 
separable friends, and the little one was lonely 
with only his quiet father for a companion. " In 
how many days will you return, Yechan?" he 
asked. 

"In three days," Yenoske answered. "And 
I will bring you something, Saiji — new shoes and 
candies. I will tell you, too, of everything I see. 
Some day, when you are big enough, you shall go 
with me, Saichan." 

" Will it be very long before I am big enough, 
Yenoske ?" 

"Oh, a long time, Saiji. You must learn 
how to read and write and count." 

"I shall soon learn, Yenoske. I am five 
years old." 

Thus the two friends, big and little, talked 
until Yetaro was seen coming up the walk. Ye- 
noske rose to make his bow, and Saijiro too salu- 
ted his father. 

Politeness is so bred in the Japanese character 
that the poorest and humblest have manners that 
would grace an English drawing-room. 

The villagers did not know exactly what to 
make of the sensei^ or teacher. He was proud of 



38 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

his boy, but seemed to care little for his society, 
and left him to the tender mercy of others so far 
as pleasure and companionship were concerned. 
The Yamamidzu people said that the sensei was 
under a vow. When out of school he passed 
much of his time in the temple, prostrate before 
the idols or pacing up and down the stone walk. 
Many were his ablutions, his washings of head, 
hands, and feet. Many an hour did he spend in 
calling upon the gods. Sometimes he would dis- 
miss school for a few weeks and go off to some 
shrine, walking until his feet were blistered and 
his bones ached, going over mountains, fording 
streams, in sunshine and storm, heeding neither 
flood nor tempest. 

At such times Saijiro would be left to the care 
of a village "Baba," as pleasant and cheery an 
old body as the one in \\\^yasJiiki near Fujisawa's 
house. The little one liked the change, for he 
could play with the village children, while "Ba- 
ba" was tender and kind to the motherless boy. 
But his love for Yenoske was the strongest pas- 
sion of his little heart, and Yenoske' s devotion to 
him was unbounded. 

Do the Japanese ever seem very strange to 
you and like the inhabitants of another world? 
Do you think they have not their chosen friends, 
their heart-loves, their joys and sorrows, their 
smiles and tears, just as you have? It seemed so 
to some of us at first, before we came to know 



A MIDSUMMER DAY. 39 

them as well as we do now. We have long since 
learned that all the races of the human family are 
nearly related, and that the human heart is the 
same in all countries and ages. 

The next dearest friend to little Saijiro was a 
dog, Ts'koi by name, which Yenoske had rescued 
from some cruel fate and given to him. Ts'koi 
was not by any means a handsome dog; he look- 
ed very much like a wolf; but he was faithful 
and fond of his little master. 

But the sensei had come home; so Yenoske 
went back to the village to prepare for his trip to 
the great town at the foot of the mountain. 

Yetaro made tea for himself and the boy, 
pouring it over some cold rice. Saijiro could use 
his chop-sticks as fast as any one, and soon emp- 
tied his bowl. The night came on. Saijiro lay 
down on his little ////^/^, with Ts'koi beside him. 
Boy and dog were soon fast asleep. Yetaro 
lighted a tallow candle and bent over his Buddh- 
ist books, trying to find some light and comfort 
for his darkened, sin-burdened heart. The moon 
climbed high in the sky, peeping over the house 
and over all Yamamidzu. The river was golden 
under the yellow light. 

The villagers sat outside their houses, some 
talking, some listening to the singing and playing 
of three blind musicians. The occasional cry of 
the Japanese nightingale, which hides in the 
thickest shades of the wood, was heard. The 



40 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

river rushed and roared. It was night on tlie 
Hakones. A little later, every one was asleep 
under the dark green mosquito nets, with the 
slides all shut. It would have been almost im- 
possible to rouse any one, even if you had wished 
to do so. 

It is hard to realize how poor these mountain- 
eers are. No cows are on the mountain waiting 
to be milked; there are no full larders, no fields 
of waving grain. The people on the Hakones 
depend for their supplies mostly upon what can 
be brought on pack-horses from the towns at the 
foot of the mountain. They make cups, bowls, 
and other articles from the beautiful woods which 
they find around them, and give these in ex- 
change for dry-goods and rice. The charcoal 
business is also carried on by the mountaineers. 

As for their housekeeping, it is very simple. 
Rice is cooked when it is wanted, and daikons^ 
large radishes, are pickled for family use. There 
is no furniture beside the cooking utensils and oc- 
casionally a table and a chest of drawers. A few 
fish are caught in the streams and a few vegetables 
are cultivated in almost perpendicular gardens. 

Japan could not support its many millions of 
people if they did not live in the most economi- 
cal manner and cultivate every inch of ground. 
Where they cannot use horses for ploughing, men 
do the work with their own hands. 



THE STORY OK THE HAIRDRESSER. 41 



CHAPTER V. 

THE STORY OE THE HAIRDRESSER. 

" Stotsu, futalsu, mitsu, yotsu, 
Itsutsu, mutsu, nanatsu." 

So sang in a weird minor key Fujisawa 
Mitsu, as she bounded her ball on the veranda 
and kept count of the strokes — one to eight. 

The slides of the best room were open, and 
Mrs. Fujisawa, Tama, and Aka sat on the clean 
mats, each busied with some piece of needlework. 
Mrs. Fujisawa was putting together a dress which 
had been washed, Tama was embroidering a 
skirt, and Aka was sewing on a little garment for 
Rinjiro, her adopted boy. The poor doll lay neg- 
lected in a corner of Aka's room. She had no 
time to make doll's clothes now. She had 
plenty of work in these days, the happiest of her 
life. 

On a little mattress near the ladies lay Hana, 
her eyes protected from the light by a blue cotton 
cloth laid lightly over them. This cloth had 
been dipped in holy water, w^ater in which the 
image of the child Buddha had been washed. 
Both Hana and her mother confidently expected 
help from it. The little girl lay on her ftiton^ 
quiet and patient, listening to the voices of other 



43 ' KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

children at their play and to the murmur of 
wind through the tree-tops. 

Chiye stood on the edge of the pond feeding 
the gold-fish with a thin wafer-like substance 
which they eagerly devoured. In one corner of 
the garden, near a little summer-house, sat Me- 
guchi, sewing a seam and watching two of the 
children. One of these was Kesa, now almost 
two and a half years old, and the other was the 
merry-looking Rinjiro, six months older. They 
were loving playmates. Aka said jokingly that 
they should be betrothed now, and marry when 
they were old enough. 

The children were not encumbered with much 
clothing. They wore simple white garments 
and had neither shoes nor stocking. They were 
rolling poor Darn ma Sama backward and for- 
ward. Their delighted shouts reached Hana's 
ears and brought a smile to her pale face. 

Daruma Sama was a Japanese saint. The 
story runs that, wishing to cross the sea on a leaf, 
he spent many years in prayer before he could ac- 
complish the feat, so many years that he wore off 
his lower limbs. His image, therefore, has a 
large head and arms, while the rest of his body is 
a hemisphere that rolls about to the great delight 
of children. 

It was August, and the garden was lovely 
with its late summer flowers. There were lilies 
there as white and pure as those Saijiro loved so 



THE STORY OF THE HAIRDRESSER. 43 

dearly on his mountain. By the pond bloomed 
pale pink and blue hydrangeas. Early chrysan- 
themums looked up at the children with bright 
faces. Magnificent lotus-flowers reclined as lan- 
guidly on their broad leaves as Oriental beauties 
on soft couches. Oto, the gardener, was pains- 
taking and faithful, so that everything was care- 
fully tended in his domain. 

At last Mitsu's ball bounded away from her, 
rolling down towards the pond and Chiye. Mitsu 
slipped her feet into the straw sandals lying near 
her on the ground and went after the ball. But 
when she had picked it up she did not return to 
her play. She stood, instead, by Chiye, watch- 
ing the feeding fish. 

''Mitsu," said Chiye, as she threw her last 
wafer, "do you see that big fellow over there? 
the one that shines so and has the 'drop' on his 
forehead ?' ' 

"Yes," answered Mitsu. 

"Well, I call him Shaka Sama"* — a Japan- 
ese name for Buddha. "He has rays coming out 
from him, and that mark in his forehead is like 
Shaka Sama's." 

"Oh, Chiye!" said the shocked Mitsu, "you 
should not say that a fish is like Shaka Sama. 
We must not speak disrespectfully of the gods. 
Shaka Sama is so good and gentle. I love to 

* Sama is a respectful title meaning " my lord " or " my 
lady." 



44 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

look upon his face. It is so different from those 
terrible oitis^^ (devils). 

Chive did not seem much impressed. But 
there is no telling what answer she might have 
made, for just then the opening and shutting of 
slides in the house and the murmur of voices an- 
nounced the arrival of the hairdresser. 

"There is Kei," said Chiye, listening to the 
sounds. "Let us go in." 

Salutations were not yet over when the chil- 
dren entered the room where the new-comer was 
and went down upon the floor with the others. 

"Truly, a long time," murmured Kei. 

"For the favors of long ago we thank you," 
answered the children. 

"Truly, thanks," said Kei. "How is your 
honorable father? and your honorable selves — are 
you well?" 

A servant brought tea, which they all drank. 
Then Kei and Mrs. Fujisawa took a whiff from 
their pipes, knocking the ashes into the hibachi^ 
or fire-box. 

Now the hairdresser in Japan usually carries 
all gossip from one house to another. She is, in 
consequence, an interesting personage. She will 
tell how Miss Cho wore her mother's dress to the 
festival, how Miss Tama broke her wooden shoes 
and fell in the street, how Mrs. Kuginuki is al- 
ways crying, and how the "go-between" has set- 
tled a marriage of this person and that. But Kei 



THE STORY OF THE HAIRDRESSER. 45 

was not so fond of gossip as most ot the hair- 
dressers. She was a bright-looking woman with 
gray hair. She wore a dark gown and sash and 
carried a tobacco-pouch at her side. She talked 
merrily to the children while making prepara- 
tions for her task. First an old mat was brought, 
upon which oil, combs, and a polished steel mir- 
ror were placed. Then Mrs. Fujisawa with a 
bow excused herself to her eldest daughter for 
being first and sat down. Kei unbound her 
thick long hair. 

"Kei," said Mitsu, as she watched the pro- 
cess, '^you promised some time to tell us about 
the fishing-village where you lived when you 
were a little girl." 

"Truly, I did, O Mitsu," said the woman. 
"But it was a very poor place, a little place on 
one of the islands of the Inland Sea, near the 
town of Onomichi. There were only four or five 
houses — not like your honorable father's honor- 
able mansion, but dirty and ill-smelling, fit for 
dogs. Still we loved to watch the water and the 
beautiful islands. Dogii ! those islands are al- 
ways green ! We would sit on the shore looking 
for the boats and wondering how many fish the 
men would bring home. When they brought 
enough, the women had to carry them to Ono- 
michi. This is a pretty place. The houses are 
large and clean, and there is a beautiful walk on 
a terrace where one can sit and see the water." 



4-6 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Here Meguclii interrupted the story by com- 
ing up to the veranda with sleepy little Kesa on 
her back and Rinjiro clinging to her skirt. Kei 
had to stop and admire the children. 

"She has very large eyes," said the mother 
regretfully, referring to Kesa; for this was not in 
accordance with Japanese ideas of beauty; and 
Mrs. Fujisawa felt troubled, too, about her baby's 
round rosy cheeks. 

Kesa, being sound asleep, was laid upon the 
floor, while Meguchi sat beside her to keep off the 
flies. Rinjiro crept to his mother's side, and Kei 
went on. 

"It was a long walk to Onomichi. The 
women got very tired, carrying heavy baskets on 
their heads and heavy babies on their backs. 
Then, too, the women had to plant rice. Work- 
ing with their feet in water and the sun beating 
down upon their heads gave them terrible head- 
aches. Dogic r^ — which means in Japanese, 
Alas! — "it was a hard life, O Mitsu. Yet 
often we did not have enough to satisfy hun- 
ger — only a little rice, some pieces of daikon^ 
and some poor weak tea. Often the men got 
no fish. They came home tired and cross. 
They drank sake^'^^ (an intoxicating drink made 
of rice) "and slept heavily; but the women must 
go on working. The fishing nets were very 
heavy; we had to mend them and hang them up 
to dry. 



! M'^ 




MEGUCHI, KESA, AND RINJIRO 



THE STORY OF THE HAIRDRESSER. 47 

*'One day when the father had brought some 
fish, the mother took me with the other girls to 
Onomichi. Honorable mother carried the baby 
on her back. We tramped all around the town, 
selling our fish, and at last started for home tired 
and hungry. The mother looked worn and sick. 
At last her strength failed. She put the baby 
upon the ground, sinking down herself. We 
were all little ones and did not know what to do. 
Some of the children cried, some fell asleep. By- 
and-by two men came along, and we begged 
them to help us. They carried poor honorable 
mother home. She never went to Onomichi 
again. Z^<?^// / she died. " 

Kei wiped the tears from her eyes. The chil- 
dren looked sorry. Mitsu was waiting patiently 
for Kei to go on with her story. 

"Nantaro was my darling. I loved him and 
gave him the best of everything. When the 
nights were cold I spread my own covering over 
him. He always had enough to eat, while I 
went hungry. 

"One day the father brought a man to the 
house and said I must marry him. I hated the 
man, but I had to obey the father's command. 
He was rough and cross with me and beat Nan- 
taro. I tried to run away. But Nantaro was too 
heavy for me to carry, so I had to go back. One 
day while the husband was out in his boat there 
came up a terrible storm. Rinto, the sea-god, was 



48 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

very angry. Waves dashed over the islands. I 
never heard of the husband any more. 

* ' Then the honorable father was sick for a 
long time before he died. The beloved Nantaro 
turned out a bad boy. He grew unkind to me, 
running away at last altogether and for ever." 

Poor Kei's tears streamed so fast that the chil- 
dren wept for sympathy, wiping their eyes on 
their sleeves. Presently the story was continued. 

^'' Dogu! I cried night and day. I thought 
that the gods were angry with me for my sins, 
and I resolved to go on a pilgrimage." 

"But, Kei," said little Chiye, "you had not 
done anything very wrong, had you?" 

''^ Dogu ! it seemed not, O Chiye; yet the gods 
were surely angry. I had heard of the holy place 
where, before foreigners came into the country 
and the war broke out, the Son of Heaven (the 
Mikado, lived. I wanted to worship at one of the 
temples there. I waited until a junk came to 
take me off the island. I went on board, with 
some clothes wrapped in a handkerchief, and 
sailed through the Inland Sea to Hiogo. I was 
sick and cold and miserable. The wind was bad, 
and we were a long time getting into the port. 
Please to wait a little, Mitsu," Kei interrupted 
her story to say, as Mitsu was about to take Ta- 
ma's place. "I brought some pretty new hair- 
pins for you and Chiye. Please to condescend to 
select, darlings." 



THE STORY OF THE HAIRDRESSER. 49 

The hairpins were sprigs of delicate crape 
flowers. Mitsu chose some cherry-blossoms, and 
Chiye tiny chrysanthemums. Then came tea, 
and for the elders a few whiffs from their pipes. 
At last, Mitsu being seated under Kei's skilful 
hands, the story went on. 

*' Hiogo is a beautiful town. Back of it there 
is a fine waterfall, where I went one day with 
another woman. We bathed in the deep pool 
and let the stream pour over our heads, and as we 
bathed we prayed that our sins might be washed 
away. Afterwards we prayed again at the temple. 
Then I started to walk to Kioto, carrying my 
bundle on the end of a stick. It rained. I was 
wet and weary. At last I came to a large city 
which I knew to be Osaka. I thought I would 
stay there a while and see if- 1 could learn any- 
thing about my boy, my truant Nantaro. I lived 
with a woman close by a temple where there was 
a pagoda. Every day I tramped up and down 
the stone walk leading to the temple three hun- 
dred times, repeating the holy name of Buddha 
one thousand times.'' 

Here Mrs. Fujisawa, who was a very religious 
woman, looked with wonder at Kei, covered her 
face with her hands, and said, "Truly, very 
good!" 

Kei shook her head and went on. 

**The stones were hard and my feet were 
sore. At last I could walk no more. The 

Ke»a and Saljiro, A 



50 KESA AND SAIJIRO. j 

woman brought me some books to read; but I did 

not care for stories. I wanted to know the way i 
of the gods, to know how I could please them, so 
that they would be good to me and make me 

happy. I studied with a priest, telling him of ! 

my troubles and my wish to please the gods. \ 

But what could he say? Only, ^ Dogu ! I do not j 

know how to help you. I cannot understand it j 

very well myself.' At last I would go up to j 

Kioto. A man had offered me a ride in his boat. i 

I bade farewell to the woman and the priest. i 

"It was pleasant to sit in the boat, watching ; 
the trees on the bank and the light ripples in the i 
water. Truly, Kioto is a wonderful place ! The 
temples are larger and finer even than these in ! 
your honorable city. There are mountains all j 
about, and in the mountains there are shrines 
where the devout go up to pray. But I, alas ! j 
could find no peace for my soul in Kioto, though i 
I walked many and many a mile in the moun- 
tains, though I fasted and prayed. For all the ; 
while I was thinking of my boy and that perhaps j 
I might find him. The gods would not hear me, 
because I sorrowed more for him than I did for j 
my sins. Come, O Chiye." 1 

Chiye had only to have her hair combed and I 

the pretty hairpin stuck through a little knot on \ 

top of her head. While Kei was finishing her i 

task the story too was finished. i 

"I tried not to think of Nantaro. I went on i 



THE STORY OF THE HAIRDRESSER. 5I 

many a pilgrimage. I put on the pilgrim's white 
garments and climbed the sacred Fuji to worship 
the great Buddha at the crater. Truly, it was a 
weary time; yet I got down to the foot of the 
mountain as sorrowful as ever. All the holy 
water of all the holy shrines could not wash away 
my sins. At last I came to Tokio. Here I 
joined some women-priests, shaved my head like 
theirs, and beat on a drum." 

At this point, much to Mrs. Fujisawa's won- 
der, Kei threw back her head and laughed. 

''The women were not holy. They talked of 
all sorts of things, wrong as well as silly, while 
they were beating their drums. Their eyes were 
everywhere. They never thought of the gods. 
So I gave it all up, learned how to dress hair, and 
got my little house." 

" But did you never find Nantaro?" asked lit- 
tle Chiye. 

''^ Dogii^ no; my boy is lost. I would go all 
over Nippon to find him. I think that is the rea- 
son why the gods do not bless me. I would do as 
much to find Nantaro as I would to please them. 
Truly, dogiLP' 

Kei's tale was told, and after more tea and to- 
bacco, more bows and compliments, she went 
away. 

Soon after, Meguchi went with the five little 
sisters to the bath-house. There they splashed 
about in the great tank of hot water with their 



52 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

playmates. Apparently Kei's sad story was for- 
gotten. But it had sunk deep into one little 
heart; Mitsu, after many years, would think of it 
often. 

The soft evening light was falling over Tokio 
when the children came out of the bath-house and 
started for home. The canal beside which they 
had to pass was all golden in the sunshine. Boats 
laden with charcoal were being poled slowly 
along. 

*' Where does charcoal come from, Meguchi?" 
asked Chiye. 

Meguchi pointed to the dark line of hills in 
the west. The baby Kesa raised her dark eyes 
to the heights where Saijiro lived. But she was 
only following the direction of Meguchi' s finger. 
Her attention was immediately diverted to a man 
who passed them carrying some gayly decorated 
toj^s. She stretched her hands out eagerly. 

*' Who will buy my toys? Who will buy my 
toys?" cried the man. 

Meguchi shook her head at him and said to 
the little one, "Condescend to wait for another 
time, darling." 

Kesa asked for the toys no more. As for the 
charcoal, the children had all forgotten about it. 

They were all at home to meet their father 
w^hen he returned from the custom-house; but 
they had seldom seen him look so hard and stern. 
He said little at the evening meal, and soon after 



THE STORY OF THE HAIRDRESSER. 53 

went with some brother officers to the upper 
room where they so often smoked and talked. A 
terrible thing had occurred in Tokio. There was 
great excitement throughout the city. The boiler 
of an English steamer had exploded, and many 
Japanese were among the wounded and the dead. 
The anti-foreign party, always ready for the 
slightest excuse to rebel against the presence of 
the strangers, were threatening severe measures. 
So Fujisawa and his friends sat far into the night 
discussing the unsettled state of things in the em- 
pire, and almost momentarily expecting a sum- 
mons to the custom-house. 

At the shrine in her chamber Mrs. Fujisawa 
knelt and prayed to her idol gods, vowing obedi- 
ence to them if only her sick child might be 
cured. 



54 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 



CHAPTER VI. 

SAIJIRO CLIMBS THE MOUNTAIN. 

Early in the morning of the day on which 
Kei told her story to the children, Yenoske 
and the pack-horse stole qnietly out of the 
village, went up to the main road and then 
down towards the great town at the foot of the 
mountain. 

When Saijiro opened his eyes he remembered 
that Yenoske had gone and that it was a school 
holiday. His father's place by his side was va- 
cant, and Saijiro knew that he should find him at 
his books. He sprang up, went out into the fresh 
air, and washed his face and hands at the spring 
which bubbled up near the shrine of the god 
Inari. 

The day was as bright and beautiful on the 
Hakones as in Tokio. In the great capital the 
little Fujisawas had the beautiful, sparkling bay 
with its sail-boats to look at and the Hakones in 
the distance. In Yamamidzu, Saijiro had the 
river, and the mountain towering above him cov- 
ered with trees and bushes and with lilies grow- 
inof on almost inaccessible heiQihts. The child 
stood for a moment when he had finished his 
toilet, and with water pouring from his dark hair 



SAIJIRO CLIMBS THE MOUXTAIX:. 55 

clasped his hands and bowed his head before the 
fox-god's shrine. He then went to find his 
father. Pushing back the slides, he saw him sit- 
ting at the writing-table, and went down on his 
knees, touching his forehead to the floor. Yetaro 
acknowledged the salutation and pointed to a 
bowl containing a little rice. Saijiro ate the rice 
and a small piece of radish. 

"Is there no more, honorable father?" he 
asked, his hunger scarcely appeased. 

Yetaro shook his head, but added, "Yenoske 
will bring some rice, my son." 

Saijiro went quickly to a pile of Buddhist 
books which were in one corner of the room and 
began to look at the pictures. Some of these 
were representations of Buddhist hells. The god 
Yemma sat in state, trying the dead as they were 
brought to him. Saijiro was frightened as he 
looked at pictures of men thrown into caldrons of 
boiling oil. The terrible devils, some with one 
great glaring eye in the middle of their foreheads, 
did not tend to reassure him. 

" Honorable father, " said he at last, "where 
do all these devils live ? and why do they throw 
the people into boiling oil ?" 

"It is jigokii (hell), Saichan," answered the 
father, "and the onis arc punishing the wicked." 

"But what is 'wicked'?" 

"Saichan," answered Yetaro, "I will tell Ye- 
noske to get you some books the next time he 



56 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

goes down the mountain. You cannot under- 
stand these." 

Saijiro piled the books up in the comer and, 
followed by Ts'koi, went out into the garden. 
His favorite corner was just back of the house, 
where a hedge separated the schoolmaster's 
ground from the side of the mountain. The 
child had never attempted to go beyond the 
hedge, so the father felt no uneasiness about him. 
For a w^hile he amused himself making a little 
garden, working industriously as he cleared away 
stones, dug, and planted. A big bee hummed 
around him. Some toads came out of their holes 
and looked at him, and ants w^orked near him, 
getting ready for the winter. There were birds 
in the trees above him, and occasionally a tiny 
li/jard glided past him. 

But bees, toads, ants, birds, and reptiles were 
safe at the hands of the little Buddhist boy ; for 
the Buddhists say that when a man dies his soul 
enters into the body of some lower animal, and 
great fear is felt of crushing the frail tenement of 
some human soul. Saijiro^s father was especial- 
ly careful upon this point. The child was never 
allowed to kill or torture a fly. Often when he 
went to the temple with Yetaro, the latter 
w^ould slip cash into his hands to enable him 
to pay for the release of some imprisoned bird; 
and the child, as he watched their happy flight 
into the sky, would feel that he had done some- 



SAIJIRO CLIMBS THE MOUNTAIN. 57 

tiling good, and had gained ** merit with the 
gods. ' ' 

Ts'koi lay down on the ground near Saijiro 
and watched him as he went backward and for- 
ward at his play. Ts'koi had coarse yellow hair 
and dull, inexpressive eyes. But he was devoted 
to his little master and to Yenoske. And well he 
might be, for they had discovered him one day 
on a rock in the middle of the rushing river, 
whining and yelping, evidently hurt and unable 
to help himself. Yenoske plunged at once into 
the torrent. Although rapid, the river was not 
very deep, and Yenoske succeeded in reaching 
the rock and bringing the dog to the shore and to 
his little friend. The dog's wounded leg was 
duly attended to by Baba, and he became Saiji- 
ro' s inseparable companion. 

At last Saijiro tired of garden-making. Far 
up on the mountain grew some white lilies. He 
could see them gleaming in the distance. If Ye- 
noske had been there, he would have lost no time 
in going up to get them. Suddenly Saijiro con- 
cluded that he might possibly reach them him- 
self. There w^as a hole in the hedge which he 
easily made larger. He crept through and stood 
for the first time on the other side. As a matter 
of course Ts'koi followed, and soon the two were 
on their way up the mountain. 

The mountain-side was steeper here than the 
road up which Yenoske and the horse had gone 



58 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

ill the early morning. But Yenoske and the 
horse had charcoal to carry, while Saijiro and 
Ts'koi were unencumbered. Saijiro had to take 
fast hold of the bushes and pull himself up by 
them. Stones, dislodged by his feet, went bound- 
ing down to the hedge, and the great trees seemed 
ever calling to him to come up higher. Poor 
Ts'koi was puzzled. He panted and puffed, but 
still kept on. At last the lilies were reached, and 
Saijiro, clinging to a bush, almost lost his bal- 
ance as he plucked them from their stems. 

And now he began to think of going back. 
But when he looked down, the dizzy height 
frightened him. Poor little boy ! Tears gather- 
ed in his eyes and rolled down his rosy cheeks. 
The distance to the top of the peak did not look 
so great, and something still seemed to impel him 
upward. So on he climbed, every step rendering 
his return more difficult. At last, giving one 
desperate pull at a bush and drawing himself up, 
he stood on the summit. It was a beautiful 
place. Tall trees grew in an almost perfect 
circle around a grass-plot. Rocks, with soft 
mosses cling.ing to them, were scattered here and 
there; and in one spot was a tiny spring, whose 
ice-cold waters danced merrily over some bright 
pebbles. 

But near the centre of the grass-plot was a 
fire, and around the fire bits of charred wood were 
lying. Saijiro stood for a moment watching the 



SAIJIRO CLIMBS THK MOUNTAIN. 59 

flames and wondering who could have made the 
fire in this lonely place. Suddenly there appear- 
ed from behind a clump of bushes a wild-looking 
man with long dishevelled hair and blackened 
face. In an instant the thought of demons and 
caldrons of boiling oil rushed into the child's 
mind. The harmless charcoal-burner appeared, 
to him as some terrible being sent to punish him 
for running away. With a wild shriek he started 
down the other side of the mountain as fast as he 
could go, poor perplexed Ts'koi at his heels. 
The charcoal-burner tried in vain to make him 
understand that he would not harm him. The 
harder the man tried, the faster ran the terrified 
child. At last the charcoal-burner gave up the 
chase and sat down, wiping the perspiration from 
his face and uttering the expressive Japanese 
''DoguP' 

Saijiro and Ts'koi continued their flight 
down the mountain. The slope was gradual, the 
descent easy. They were both hot and breath- 
less, both faint with hunger and thirst. Then 
Saijiro fell and lay exhausted on the ground, 
crying piteously. Presently he thought he heard 
children's voices, and getting up he went around 
some rocks, and to his great joy discovered sev- 
eral Yamamidzu boys bathing in a pond. The 
bathers ran up to the terrified child. 

'* What is it, Saiji? What have you done?" 
"A very great thing has happened," gasped 



6o KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Saijiro. '*I have seen a terrible devil on the 
mountain.'* 

This created something of a panic among the 
children. One or two wanted to go home. 

*' What was it like?" asked a boy of twelve 
or thirteen. 

* * DogiL P ' answered Saij iro ; " I do n' t know ; 
only he ran after me, and had hair all over his 
face and a great shining eye in the middle of his 
forehead." 

The boys were somewhat awed, but as mo- 
ments passed and nothing appeared, they went 
on with their play. Saijiro pulled off his one 
little garment, jumped into the pond, and was 
soon as merry as the rest. They sailed boats, 
poled themselves about on logs, splashed, ducked 
their heads under the waterfall, and brought them 
out w4th water streaming from their black hair. 

Saijiro forgot all about his father, Yenoske, 
and everything else, for the time. At last the 
boys concluded to go home. At the entrance of 
the village Saijiro met his father, who had been 
searching for hours with a new terror at his heart. 
He said little to the boy, however. Taking him 
by the hand, he led him to Baba's house and left 
him in the old woman's care. The demon of un- 
rest had taken possession of him, and he was go- 
ing on another long pilgrimage. 

A cloud rested on the top of the mountain that 
night, and the next day the rain poured down 



SAIJIRO CLIMBS THE MOUNTAIN. 6l 

heavily over Japan. It saturated the thatched 
roof of the little house where Saijiro and Baba 
passed the day and kept the little Fujisavvas in- 
doors. If they had gone outside they could not 
have seen the Hakones; these were covered with 
mist and rain. The teacher Yetaro, wrapped in 
his rain-coat, plodded along the great highway 
across the Hakones, scarcely heeding the storm. 

Yenoske and the horse travelled all day up 
the steep, slippery mountain road. It was almost 
night when they reached the village. Saijiro 
heard them, and rushed out to meet them in the 
pouring rain. 



62 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

CHAPTER VII. 

TAMA'S NEW HOME. 

The 3'ear in Japan is marked by flowers. 
Early in the spring the cherry, peach, and plum 
trees blossom. A little later and the lovely cam- 
ellia blooms, the iris and the wistaria make the 
gardens lovely. When summer comes on the 
hills are bright with azaleas, the lotus unfolds its 
grand flowers, hydrangeas bloom, and far up on 
the mountain-side fair white lilies bow to the 
breeze. In the early autumn come the chrysan- 
themums, the glory of Japan and her chosen em- 
blem. In the winter we have the bright berry 
nauten^ the single camellia, and the yellow jon- 
quil. The seasons of these flowers as they come 
are celebrated by festivals, all the people doing 
honor to their beautiful favorites. 

So three bright years came and went for little 
Kesa. Loving care was given her in her pleasant 
home. Her mother was tender and kind, her 
father proud and fond, her sisters usually good 
and gentle. There were tears for little Kesa, as 
there are for all children in this great round world 
of ours. Sometimes things would grieve and dis- 
appoint her, or her heart would be swollen with 
anger, when she would throw herself down and 



Tama's new home. 63 

sob in a passionate outbreak. But as a general 
thing she was merry and happ>% loving and 
loved. She was a handsome child, large and 
finely developed for her age, and she still kept the 
round, laughing eyes of her babyhood. She was 
living her baby life still, untrammelled by school 
duties, spending most of her time in the garden 
with Rinjiro or playing with a good-natured 
tailless cat. 

Now had come a busy summer for the Fujisa- 
was. The five years of Tama's betrothal were 
over, and soon she was to leave her father's house 
for her Hakodate home. How interested Kesa 
and all of them had been in the beautiful silks, 
satins, and crapes which the merchants had 
brought to the house 1 Fujisawa spared no 
money, and the ladies selected the richest materials 
for dresses and skirts and the most elegant bro- 
cades for sashes. The gay hairpins of the young 
girl were given up for long skewers of tortoise- 
shell and amber. Everything w^as ready, and 
in a short time the child-bride would look upon 
the face of her future husband. 

A steamer had come into port at Yokohama 
on board of which were the young Mesoburo, the 
bridegroom-elect, his father, mother, and the go- 
between. 

If you could have looked at the fifteen-year- 
old Tama as she sat in the upper room, you 
would have seen a slight, oval-faced girl, heauti- 



6\. KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

ful in Japanese eyes, dressed in the most fasli ion- 
able style, and neatness itself in every detail of 
dress and adornment. Her hair was brought over- 
the top of her head, rolled with exquisite crape, 
and confined by a large amber hairpin. Her eye- 
brows were shaved off, her face was powdered, 
her finger-nails stained and polished, her lips 
painted. No wonder kissing is unknown in 
Japan. Who would wish to kiss painted lips ? 

Her crape dress was of that soft gray shade 
which the Japanese love, and her crimson bro- 
caded sash was the richest that could be purchased 
in the city. 

Tama could read the ** Great Learning" and 
repeat the *'One Hundred Poems;'* she was a 
good performer on the samisen and could sing a 
number of Japanese songs. At the tea-school she 
had learned how to make tea and how to present 
it gracefully to guests. She was skilled in sew- 
ing and embroidery, well instructed in all matters 
of Japanese etiquette. The principles of obedi- 
ence to father, mother, father-in-law, and mother- 
in-law had been duly inculcated. Indeed Tama 
was not inclined to anything else. She and 
]\Iitsu were children after their mother's own 
heart, passive and gentle, rendering obedi- 
ence as a matter of course and reverencing the 
gods. 

But the rough, blunt little Chiye, whom Fuji- 
sawa called his boy, the mother did not under- 



Tama's new home. 65 

stand quite so well ; ai:d Kesa, too, was inclined 
to question and rebel. 

Fujisawa met his friends in Yokohama, and 
they went immediately to Tokio. In the after- 
noon the two young people who were to be so 
closely united met for the first time. There were 
no hand-claspings, no kisses, no caresses, no lov- 
ing words. They bowed low and exchanged 
formal salutations. 

*' Truly, welcome to our humble abode," said 
Tama. 

^' Truly, I am well received and entertained,'* 
answered young Mesoburo. 

But, as it happened, the young people w^ere 
mutually pleased. Tama was considered a beau- 
ty by the Japanese, and Mesoburo was a fine- 
looking, courteous young man. 

Kei's tears fell fast over Tama's dark hair as 
she arranged it next day for the bridal. ''^ DoguP'* 
she said, **I have done this for you since you 
were a baby. How proud you were of your first 
little hairpins!'* 

Tama showed her the long pin of golden 
amber which her father had given her. Kei ad- 
mired it exceedingly, but in her heart she wished 
she were sticking flowers and butterflies in her 
darling's hair. 

Then came the process of teeth-blacking. 
This was to show Tama's devotion to her hus- 
band. She would never marry another, and no 

Ke«a Riiil Paljlro, C 



66 JCESA AND SAIJIRO. j 

man should look on her to desire her for his 
wife. 

"It is very becoming," said the mother and 
sisters when Tama's white teeth were covered | 
with the ugly stuff. ' 

Tama herself was more inclined to cry than to ■ 
be pleased, but she said nothing. 

They dressed her for the bridal. She wore a j 
robe of white crape ; her white sash was heavily 
embroidered with gold and silver threads. 

Poor little child-bride going forth into an un- ] 
tried life, so young and unprepared ! What were 
her thoughts as she contemplated leaving the 
beautiful home of her childhood and going off to 1 
the north with the stranger Mesoburo? Since I 
she was ten years old she had heard it all talked 
about as a very fine thing and as a settled fact. 
It must be, and she accepted it. And the mo- \ 
ther? Ah, mothers are mothers everywhere. 
Mrs. Fujisawa shed many a tear over her child's : 
departure. 

Early in the evening, when the lamps had just i 
been lighted in the city and the new crescent ' 
moon was shining in the west, there came to Fu- i 
jisawa's door four sedan-chairs, each carried by i 
four coolies. | 

The ladies were all ready and waiting. 

"The chairs have arrived," announced a i 
servant. ' 

Kei stood in one corner of the room weeping j 



TAMA'S NKW HOME. G"] 

as though her heart would break, and the women- 
servants were shedding tears. 

.Tama arose and quietly bade the servants 
good-by, putting a coin into the hand of each. 
They bowed to the ground before her. Llegu- 
chi\s sobs were heard all through the house. 

"Come, daughter!'' called Fujisawa. - 

Tama, carefully attended by her mother and 
Aka, went out of the house and took her place in 
the second chair. Fujisawa occupied the first. 
After Tama came her four sisters, and after them 
some friends. In the rear of the procession were 
coolies carrying boxes containing Tama's ward- 
robe. The Fujisawa servants stood at the door 
watching the bridal train as far as they could see 
it, then turned and closed the slides. One of the 
five daughters had gone out from that home, and 
it was changed for ever. _^ 

People stopped to gaze as the party passed 
down the street. "It is a wedding," they said. 
"The daughter of the high officer Fujisawa is to 
be married and go far to the north." 

At the gate of the house which Mesoburo had 
rented for the occasion, and to which he took his 
father and mother, that everything might be done 
in the best style, stood servants who prostrated 
themselves when the bearers stopped. Then 
they rose, opened the gates, assisted the bridal 
party to alight, and conducted them all into the 
great empty parlor. 



68 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

V Welcome/^ said the father-in-law, saluting 
the bride; *'and welcome to all. Truly, it is 
like poison to your soul to enter my humble resi- 
dence. How are all the honorable members of 
your honorable family?" 

^ In the meantime Tama and Mesoburo were 
down on the floor exchanging most formal and 
polite compliments. Would the bows and meas- 
ured speeches never cease ? 

At last, however, all were upright, with the 
apparent intention of remaining so for some time. 
They took their places for the wedding ceremony. 
Tables were placed before the bride and groom 
on which were cups of sal^e and some sweetmeats. 
The go-between, the two fathers, and the two 
mothers sat near the happy pair, and the others 
arranged themselves so as to form a circle about 
them. Three cups of sake were taken with the 
usual pledges, and the two became husband and 
wife. It was a simple ceremony which did not 
take long. But after it came feasting, drinking, 
and smoking that lasted until a late hour. 

*'The bride is dressed very beautifully. How 
fine everything is!" *'How handsome is the 
bridegroom!" *'How happy are the father-in- 
law and mother-in-law to receive such a daughter 
into their house !" "What large boxes of clothes 
and wedding-presents!" "Great happiness ! very 
great happiness !" Such were some of the com- 
ments of the guests. Then followed whole days 



TAMA'S NEW HOMK. 69 

of feasting and merriment. Fujisawa made a 
dinner, and to it came the young married people, 
the father-in-law, the mother-in-law, the go- 
between, Aka, and Baba, dressed in her best suit 
of gray and smiling all over. What a splendid 
entertainment it was ! The Fujisawa mansion 
had been duly swept and garnished. The mats 
were new and spotless; the woodwork was polish- 
ed until it shone like glass. A lacquered table 
was placed before each guest. Tall candlesticks 
supporting elegant wax candles were arranged at 
intervals, producing a beautiful effect. 

At first there were only silver chopsticks on 
the tables and a small quantity of delicate rice 
candy. As the guests partook of this they made 
jokes and puns and congratulated the bride and 
groom. One said, ''The snow of the north is like 
the whiteness of this confection." And another, 
*'More beautiful than the faint gilding of the 
sunrise on a mountain-top is the pink of this rice- 
cake." And still another, " May the young peo- 
ple be as happily united as is the pink of this rice- 
cake with the white of that one." 

Then, as though by magic, in came a great 
feast — soups in lacquered bowls : bean soups, 
thickened and sweetened; fish soups, with hard- 
boiled eggs floating about; rice in great bowls, 
heaped and white as snow. Each guest had a 
small rice-bowl which the attentive servants kept 
filled, this ^rain taking the place of bread. Then 



70 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

came immense platters of vegetables, and fisli 
dyed all sorts of brilliant colors. There were 
lotus-roots and lily-roots and pieces of bamboo, 
crabs, lobsters, and eels, sweetmeats again, and 
j-^y^/and pipes. 

The feast lasted two hours. All talked, 
laughed, and were merry. The father-in-law 
from the north told stories of the Ainos, the orig- 
inal inhabitants of Japan, how they wear beards, 
and how they catch seals in the waters around 
Yezo. Fujisawa told the Hakodate friends of 
changes in Tokio, of the foreigners there and 
what they were doing. The ladies simpered and 
giggled behind their fans. The children were 
glad, enjoying everything, yet well-behaved. 

After the feast some slides were pulled back, 
and a band of female musicians appeared. Two 
had samisejis^ two beat drums, and one had a sort 
of tambourine which she struck. They gave an 
overture which would have sounded strange 
enough to our ears, but which the Japanese 
thought very beautiful. 

The children knew the tambourine-girl. Her 
name was Cho, and she supported her aged father 
by her musical abilities. 

Suddenly the musicians began a song — a dis- 
mal sort of chant it would have seemed to us — 
and from some corner came a dancing girl. She 
was dressed modestly, and all her movements 
were graceful. 



ww^ 




FEMALE MUSICIANS. 



TAMA S NKW HOMK. 71 

"Beautiful upon the mountains is the waving 
of the branches of the pine-trees, O yorokobi P^ 
— i. e. , joyful — chanted the singers. 

The dancer moved her fan in imitation of the 
trees swayed by the wind. 

" Sweetly upon the blue, ethereal sky fleet the 
white clouds, O yorokobi T^ 

The dancer extended her arms and moved 
them to imitate the fleeting of the clouds. 

"Fair upon the wooded heights bloom the 
lilies, nodding in the wind, O yorokobi T^ 

The dancer's hands were swept along the 
floor. 

"Exquisite is the breath of the mountain 
zephyr upon the cheek of the tired traveller, O 
yorokobi P ' 

The girl raised her fan and blew gently 
upon it. 

"Sad is the fate ot the blind one who can- 
not look upon the beauties of nature, O ka- 
waiso r^ — sorrowful. 

The dancer walked back and forth imitating 
the uncertain step of the blind. 

" But happy, thrice happy, they who see these 
things and love them, O yorokobi P'' 

The girl walked as one bounding gracefully 
along. 

"Strong and light of heart comes the lover 
over the mountain-path." 

The girl assumed an expectant attitude. 



72 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

" Fair is the maiden and pure who thus ad- 
vances to meet him, O yorokobi T'' 

With timid, hesitating steps the dancer ad- 
vanced. 

" Happy the pair thus united; 

*' May they long live together; 

** May their children be as the fruit of the 
orange, beautiful, golden, and many." 

The dancer bowed and retired amid the cheers 
and thanks of the spectators. 

It was late, and Fujisaw^a's grand feast in 
honor of his daughter's marriage was over. 

The wadding occurred during the feast of 
chrysanthemums. All Tokio was gay wuth the 
sun-like flowers. The temple gardens were mag- 
nificent and all the people were going to see 
them. "We will go on the fifteenth day," said 
Fujisawa. "We will take the children and have 
a picnic." 

Children and grown people bowled low at this 
announcement, and on the morning of the fif- 
teenth they all assembled at the house to take jin- 
rikishas for the gardens. It was a beautiful, 
golden October day, and the young folks were 
very happy. In the party w^ere Aka, Rinjiro, 
and the baba from the yashiki. Meguchi, Kesa, 
and Rinjiro were in one jinrikisha. Kesa had 
on a crape dress and a little coat of rich em- 
broidered silk. She wore nothing on her head. 



TAMA S NEW HOME. 73 

Her face was powdered. Hanging from her belt 
was a bag in which she kept her amulet or charm. 
Rinjiro's dress was very much the same, except 
that the colors were graver and his sash narrow- 
er. The children could look down upon the city 
and the bay as the coolies drew the cart along the 
way. 

''A great many sails, Meguchi !" said Rinjiro, 
as he looked down on the water. 

"They are fishing-boats, Rinchan, going out 
to catch fish." 

A whole fleet of boats was just going out of 
the Sunnida River towards the sea, and it was 
their white sails which had attracted Rinjiro. 

But the coolies w^ere pulling the jinrikishas 
farther inland. The bay was soon lost sight of. 
They went along a canal, past many a "go- 
down," or fire-proof house in which the Japanese 
store their goods. The streets were very quiet; 
only a few people passed them. They were go- 
ing around the outskirts of the city to some large 
gardens on the west. Meguchi and the two little 
ones were in the very last jinrikisha. The older 
people were laughing and talking, occasionally 
calling from one jinrikisha to another. Hana 
was with her mother. Even she enjoyed the 
fresh air, the bright waters of the canal, the trees 
and flowers. The gardens were filled with peo- 
ple, all walking about and admiring the grand 
display of chrysanthemums. 



74 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

'' See, Keclian," said Meguclii, " there is Mo- 
motaro. ' ' 

Momotaro, or Peach Boy, is a favorite with 
Japanese children. The story goes that he came 
out of a peach which an old woman found. She 
and her husband adopted the baby, and he be- 
came a great man. Kesa looked up, and there, 
sure enough, was Momotaro, made out of chrysan- 
themums, standing up with drawn sword, ready 
to attack the strong devils. Not far away was 
**Red Boy;" and in another corner was the 
mighty Shogun Yoritomo, with flaming robe and 
sword. 

The children chatted away to ]\Ieguchi, who 
told them stories about these various j)ersonages. 
They ran hither and thither under the great trees, 
up and down the long avenues of chrysanthe- 
mums, with doves hopping about their feet and 
birds flying over their heads, always gentle, never 
quarrelsome or rough or rude. The older people 
walked about leisurely or sat to drink tea. 

Oh, that display of chrysanthemums ! There 
were bright yellow ones, massed together until 
they shone like the sun itself There were pure 
white ones, so stainless that none could pass them 
without exclaiming. There were shades of pur- 
ple and red and blue so many that the eyes of the 
gazer were dazzled. The Hakodate friends were 
charmed. "It is beautiful!" they said. "For 
the first time we have gazed upon such wonders." 



TAMA'S NKW HOME. 75 

The whole effect was heightened by the dresses 
of the people, in color like the flowers, and all this 
wonderful variety under a blue and cloudless sky. 
Happy little Kesa to grow up amid such scenes ! 

The next day Tama went away with Mesoburo 
and his father and mother. She wept at leaving 
her home, and her mother's heart was full of sor- 
row. Of all words of farewell there is none which 
has a sadder sound than the Japanese saiofiara^ "if 
it must be so." Tama bowed low on the floor and 
spoke the farewell word to father, mother, and lit- 
tle sisters, and long years passed before Kesa saw 
her again. 

The marriage did not turn out badly. Tama 
was well treated in her northern home, and did 
her best to be a dutiful daughter-in-law and wife. 
The house in Hakodate was pleasant. From the 
veranda Tama could look over to the shipping in 
the bay. Doubtless she thought often of her 
Tokio home and of the father, mother, and sisters 
so far away. 



'j6 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE HAKONES. 

Who will turn from the festivities and gaye* 
ties of the city to the silence and solitudes of the 
mountains ? Who is willing, after mingling with 
those who fare sumptuously and dress richly, to 
tarry a while with the poor mountaineers who 
have scarcely food enough to satisfy their hunger? 

Even the inn at Yamamidzu looked attractive 
in the bright October sunlight one day when Sai- 
jiro was about eight years old. In the courtyard 
a little group, not altogether unknown to us, had 
assembled. It consisted of a young man, a horse, 
a boy, and a dog. These were Yenoske and the 
pack-horse, Saijiro and Ts'koi. 

The dog w^as lying quietly near the veranda 
in front of his little master, who was performing 
a variety of antics, now standing on his head, 
again on his feet, leaping, singing, and behaving 
altogether in a wild sort of way, which Ts'koi 
evidently regarded with distrust. Yenoske was 
sitting on the veranda with one foot under him 
and the other on the ground. Several pairs of 
getas^ wooden shoes, and zoris^ straw sandals, 
were beside him. Near him on the veranda were 
wooden dippers, plates, cups, spoons, boxes, and 



ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE HAKONES. ^^ 

toys. Yenoske was counting all these things and 
packing them into two large hampers. He had 
turned merchant in a small way, and was going 
up to Hakone and down the other side of the 
mountain to peddle his goods in some of the large 
cities. The teacher had gone off to Tokio and 
had given Saijiro permission to accompany Ye- 
noske. Ts'koi would go with them, and of course 
the horse was going too. 

The rainstorms of September were over, and 
although the mornings and evenings were frosty, 
the weather was pleasant. 

"Do you think we shall see foreigners?'' 
asked Saijiro. 

^ ' Perhaps so, ' ' answered Yenoske. * ' We shall 
see some of the things they use. And we shall see 
the great Nagoya castle and the wonderful gold- 
fish, the Hakone Lake, and such beautiful tem- 
ples, Saiji, with such godsl You never saw any- 
thing so nice — grand golden images of Shaka 
Sama and his disciples. Our images here are 
ugly, old, and broken.'' 

" I am going to carry Hotel Sama with me," 
answered the child, taking a little image from his 
sleeve. 

Hotel Sama is the patron saint of children and 
has eyes in the back of his head — a very necessary 
arrangement for one who is supposed to observe 
all the actions of small people. 

"Saijiro," said Yenoske, "we must go after 



78 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

supper to the temple and make an offering and 
pra3% It is not right to set out upon a journey 
without first praying to the gods.'^ 

Saijiro willingly assented. So after their even- 
ing meal the two friends, with Ts'koi at their 
heels, went down to the temple. Yenoske stood 
at the foot of the steps, rang the bell which was 
there, bowed his head, rubbed his hands, and re- 
peated a few words of a Buddhist prayer. He 
then threw a few bits of coin into the money-box. 
Saijiro followed his example in every respect. 
There were a number of children playing about 
the steps. The temple grounds are like our 
parks. There babies are taken for an airing, 
there children romp, there all the gossips congre- 
gate. 

It was almost dark when Yenoske and Saijiro 
returned to the inn. They found Yenoske's fa- 
ther and mother at supper, and sat down upon 
the floor beside them. 

"Be very careful of the little one," said the 
mother, "and take great care of yourself." 

" Worship at Inari's shrine whenever you see 
one, my son," said the father, "for the rice-god 
has not been good to us. There is a hard winter 
ahead. Baba will suffer with the cold. Her 
stuffed dress is worn out, she has no soft mat to 
sit upon, and there is no money." 

Yenoske said little, but he purposed in his 
heart to bring Baba a padded dress and a mat. It 



ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE HAKONES. 79 

is hard to keep warm in a Japanese house when 
the sun does not shine in the winter. The little 
hibachis do not heat the rooms very well, and old 
men and women suffer with cold. Baba's face 
looked pinched and wan; she had scarcely food 
enough to nourish her; but she laughed as much 
as ever and always had something pleasant to say. 

With the first gleam of the morning Yenoske 
and his companion were on the road, travelling 
over a steep mountain path which led by a round- 
about way to Hakone. Saijiro started off bravely 
and kept up with Yenoske, who went singing 
along. In one of the loveliest recesses of the 
mountain was a little tea-house, kept for the con- 
venience of travellers who passed that way. A 
bright, fresh-looking girl and an old woman had 
charge of the place and dispensed tea and sweet- 
meats to chance guests. 

"Come and rest; come and rest," they called 
to Yenoske. 

He and Saijiro sat on a bench and had refresh- 
ments. 

*' Where are you going?" asked Yen, the 
girl. 

"Up to Hakone and down to Nagoya," an- 
swered Yenoske. 

" Oh, a long way," said the girl. "And the 
little master ?" 

"Thanks, he is going with me." 
• "A brave little man," said the old Baba. 



8o KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

It was a wild place, a sort of glen. Rocks 
rose behind the tea-house and on two sides of it. 
In front was a tiny waterfall like an end of ribbon 
fluttering on the side of the mountain. It was 
almost too late for flowers, but the changing Oc- 
tober foliage made up for the lack of them. 

^* Truly, a nice place," said Yenoske. 

*'The honorable grandmother loves it," said 
the girl. *' She has been- here ever since she was 
as young as I am, and I expect to stay here until 
I am as old as she. ' ' 

Then the grandma laughed and showed her 
toothless gums. 

The Japanese are very fond of places like this 
and take great delight in the beauties of nature, 
so many persons stopped and chatted with Yen 
and the old lady. They had for refreshments beau- 
tiful peppermint cakes, as pure and white as any 
which are made in this country, some little cakes 
to eat with tea, hard-boiled eggs, and some of the 
famous bean candy. Everything was very neatly 
arranged, and Yen was a cheerful attendant. 

The tea-house was on the road to the hot sul- 
phur springs. Yenoske and Saijiro, after saying 
good-by to the girl and her grandmother, had not 
far to go before coming to a beautiful hotel. The 
wood about the house had been left in its natural 
state and was very odd and grotesque in its ap- 
pearance, being gnarled, knotted, and twisted in 
all sorts of peculiar shapes. Here Saijiro for the 



ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE HAKONES. 8l 

first time in his life saw a chair, and he was 
allowed not only to examine it closely, but to sit 
in it. He saw sick people gathered at the springs, 
some of them covered with loathsome sores. The 
sulphur water is very hot and comes hissing and 
boiling out of the ground. 

Saijiro was tired in the afternoon, so Yenoske 
put him on the horse; and thus they came in 
the early evening to the village of Hakone. Ye- 
noske was well known there. He went immedi- 
ately to the hotel where he v/as accustomed to 
stop. Arriving, they saw a blind shampooer, or 
rubber, just passing the door. His head was 
shaved. He carried a staff and blew a whistle. 
Behind him walked a coolie carrying a stick over 
one shoulder, on each end of which \\as a large 
bundle of paper. 

A woman sat on the veranda washing her feet. 
One foot was in a little tub, and she was wiping 
the other with a blue towel. The landlady had 
some cloth in her hand, examining it, and another 
woman was just going up stairs. A maid-servant 
was kneeling near the landlady and looking on 
with much interest. 

^'Welcome, Yenoske," said the landlady as 
she saw him approaching. 

Yenoske bowed low. 

Just then the landlady spied poor little Saijiro 
asleep upon the horse. *'Aud who is the young 
master?" she asked. 

K«»a and Saljlrot. 5 



82 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

*' Truly, thanks; that is the son of the Yama- 
midzu teacher. He is going with me down the 
mountain." 

"He is welcome," said she. And when Sai- 
jiro was lifted from the horse she took charge of 
him, giving him a finer supper than he had ever 
had in all his life before, pressing him to eat, until 
for once the child was fully satisfied. Next she 
made him a bed in her own room. There he slept 
quietly until morning, never heeding the opening 
and closing of slides, the going and coming of 
travellers. 

While Yenoske was sitting at the door after 
supper a party of travellers came up the street in 
sedan-chairs carried by coolies. As soon as the 
hotel people saw them they raised most deafening 
cries. 

*' Come in, come in; come in and rest. Con- 
descend to partake of our humble refreshment." 

"Honorable lady," said the coolies, address- 
ing one of the party, "this is the best hotel in 
Hakone." 

"So!" said the lady. "Then we will stop 
here." 

From the chair alighted two persons, evi- 
dently mistress and servant. They went up to 
the other chair and saluted its occupant. The 
lady spoke. 

"Honorable grandfather, we will rest here. 
How is vour honorable health?" 



ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE HAKONES. St^ 

''^Dogur^ said the grandfather, *' I am very 
cold." 

"Then," said the lady, addressing the hotel 
servants, " will you give the respected old gentle- 
man a seat by the kitchen fire-box and get ready 
quickly a cup of tea?" 

Grandfather, shivering, was placed by the 
kitchen fire. The lady and her servant were 
shown up the broad, slippery staircase into the 
best room. The landlord came and went down 
before them on hands and knees. 

"Truly, a beautiful day," said he. 

"Truly, very beautiful," the lady answered. 

"And how far have you travelled?" 

"Thanks, from Tokio." 

* ' The honorable grandfather, how old is 
he?" 

"Truly, thanks. The respected parent is 
seventy-nine years." 

"A great age. And what," said the landlord, 
" will you condescend to order?" 

"We will take fish, eggs, and rice. The old 
gentleman will have soup." 

The meal was soon served. Grandfather had 
2i futon near the fire, and after taking a picture of 
a Buddhist god from his sleeve and mumbling a 
prayer, he went to sleep. 

The next morning Yenoske and Saijiro saw 
these travellers get into their kagos^ which the 
coolies lifted and carried away. The lady was 



84 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Kesa's aunt, on her way to her home in Na- 
goya, the great city beyond the Hakones. 

Yenoske lingered in Hakone for a day, that 
Saijiro might see the lake there. The child had 
never seen so large a body of water. To go out 
in a real boat was a great pleasure. It was much 
better than pushing a log about the pond at Ya- 
mamidzu. 

Hakone is indeed a beautiful place, famous in 
Japan for its sulphur springs and fine scenery. 
Sick and feeble people go from all over the coun- 
try to bathe in its waters. Long promontories jut 
out into the lake. The little village lies prettily 
beside it. The wonder of it all is to find a large 
lake high among the mountains. There, too, 
side by side are hot and cold springs. 

Saijiro had a happy day at Hakone. But 
next morning none of the kind landlady's persua- 
sions could induce him to eat any breakfast. 
Even the old gate at Hakone, about which Ye- 
noske had told such pretty stories, failed to in- 
terest him. 

In ancient times, Yenoske said, nobles who 
went up to the court of the Shogun had to 
part with their wives and little children at 
the gate, because, for a time, the Government 
w^ould not permit a noble's family to live in the 
capital. 

But Saijiro would not look at the gate. Great 
trees waved their branches over him and the 



\^«-y:, ^, 




JINRIKISHA TRAVELLERS 



ON THK OTHER SIDE OF THK IIAKONICS. 85 

late wild-flowers smiled at him in vain. He 
walked listlessly along and at last began to cry. 

Yenoske lifted him on the horse. Even that 
did not help matters. His head rolled about. He 
felt giddy and sick. He was in a high fever, and 
Yenoske' s heart was very heavy. 

At last Yenoske lifted the little boy down 
from the horse and laid him on the ground. He 
got some things from the pack and made a bed 
by the wayside. He wet his handkerchief at a 
little spring near by and laid it on Saijiro's head. 
The child tossed and moaned. 

Some fine people passed by in kagos^ never 
stopping'to see what ailed a poor pack-horse dri- 
ver and his little comrade. At last Yenoske 
walked down the road to see if he could find help. 
In a few moments, hearing voices and following 
the direction of these sounds, he came upon a 
group of three persons. A jinrikisha man was 
sitting in his cart; near him were two women, 
one sitting on the ground, the other leaning 
against a post. Yenoske hastened towards them, 
and they all bowed. 

'''' DoguP'' said Yenoske, " I am very sad." 

The man asked why. 

^'' Dogu! I have my master's little son with 
me, and he is lying on the roadside Very ill." 

Then the man got up from his cart, and with 
the women accompanied Yenoske to the spot where 
Saijiro lay in a heavy sleep, Ts'koi by his side. 



86 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

^''DoguP^ said i\\^ jinrikiya^ "truly, a fine 
child." And he added, "Bring him to our vil- 
lage, and we will get a doctor." 

Saijiro was lifted into the jinrikisha, and they 
all went off the main road into a village. Here 
the hotel was a poor one, dirty and ill-kept. A 
fire blazed on some stones in the kitchen, and 
over the fire hung a kettle. An old woman sat 
near the fire, and beside her was a man smoking. 
Another man was repairing his straw sandals as 
he sat on the edge of the kitchen floor, which was 
raised from the ground. A traveller was just 
passing the hotel. He wore a broad-brimmed hat 
and carried a staff. Behind him walked a girl 
who evidently made some attempt at style. 

"Come and rest, come and rest," said the 
landlady, when she saw Saijiro and Yenoske. 
Then accosting the jinrikiya she asked, " Who is 
this?" 

The jinrikiya said, "I found them in the 
mountain, and the little one is very sick." 

"Where is the doctor?" asked Yenoske, ma- 
king his bows. 

Saijiro was carried into the house, and the 
village doctor came. He had a case of medicines 
with him. He sat on the floor, looking very 
wise. Then he went through the process of cup- 
ping Saijiro, put medicated paper upon the 
child's temples, and gave him some powders. 
The next morning, to Yenoske's great joy, Saijiro 



ON THE OTHER SIDE OK THE HAKONES. 87 

was himself again, and the pair went on their 
way down the mountain. 

At the foot of the mountain there is a laree 
town called Mishima. A stream passes through 
it, cold and clear, running bright and rippling to 
join the river which is to carry it down to the 
sea. A lovely grove is there also, and in the 
grove a temple. It is always dark in the grove; 
the shade of the trees is very dense. Saijiro 
thought it a very solemn place as he and Yenoske 
approached the temple. For Yenoske had vowed 
that if Saijiro should get well he would repeat a 
certain prayer two hundred times. He was now 
going to fulfil his vow. He had some beans in 
his hand, bought from a man near the temple, 
and every time he said a prayer he dropped a 
bean into a box. " Amida Dai Butsu, Amida 
Dai Butsu," said Yenoske over and over, as he 
paced the stone walk leading up to the temple. 
When he had repeated these words two hundred 
times his vow was fulfilled, and he went to look 
for Saijiro. The horse was the only one of the 
trio he could find. The boy and dog were gone. 

Yenoske, searching anxiously around, soon 
discovered that there was a great commotion in 
the town. Men, women, and children were rush- 
ing down the street, apparently in pursuit of 
some one. Several of the women had babies on 
their backs, and the poor babies' heads were roll- 
ing from side to side. Many of the children cried 



88 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

with fright, and one sturdy urchin lay screaming 
on the ground. Yenoske joined in the chase, not 
so much for the sake of seeinof what was s:oino[' on 
as for the purpose of finding Saijiro. 

**What is it?" he asked of a breathless 
neighbor. 

" A foreigner !" gasped the man. 

Yenoske felt a sense of relief, but kept on. At 
last the foremost runner reached the hotel, and 
there those that were nearest to the foreigner saw 
him alight from a jinrikisha and take his seat on 
the kitchen floor, which, being slightly raised, 
gave him the privilege of putting his feet on the 
ground. 

All the servants of the hotel shouted, " Come 
and rest. Come in, come in." 

After a parley with the landlord, to which the 
crowd listened eagerly, the stranger was taken up 
stairs. The slides were drawn, and the multitude 
beheld him no more. 

Now Yenoske spied Saijiro with several other 
urchins in the courtyard of the hotel. Immedi- 
ately the little boy ran to tell Yenoske about the 
wonderful stranorer. 

*' I have seen him ! I have seen the foreigner ! 
How white his skin is, how strange his hair, and 
what funny clothes he wears I I never saw any- 
thing like it before, Yenoske. Does he sit in a 
chair, and eat with a knife and fork like those 
we saw in the hotel ?^' 



ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE HAKOXES. 89 

So Saijiro was much excited over the foreign- 
er, and when, the next morning, he actually 
walked beside the jinrikisha for a short distance, 
and the gentleman looked at him and gave him a 
little book, he felt very happy, and stored all 
these things in his mind to tell old Baba. 

The pleasant morning changed into a dull, 
rainy day. Yenoske wrap^Ded Saijiro up in oiled 
paper, put a broad-brimmed hat on him, and 
placed him on the horse. Yenoske himself had 
on his straw rain-coat. The hampers containing 
wooden articles were also covered with paper. 
Every person they inet was similarly provided 
for. Great umbrellas sheltered women and chil- 
dren, while their high wooden getas kept them 
out of the mud. Saijiro thought it fun to see 
these women running through the rain, holding 
umbrellas over their babies, securely fastened in 
their outside garments. The babies peeped over 
their mothers' shoulders with bright black eyes. 
He pitied the beggars who lay almost naked 
along the roadside. They asked Yenoske for 
money as he passed; but money was scarce 
enough, and he had little to spare. Meanwhile 
the foreigner was shut up tight in his jinrikisha 
and saw but little of the country. 

So the day passed, with rain coming down 
drearily. Yenoske and Saijiro stopped a little 
while at noon for rest and food, and then went on 
to the place where they were to lodge for the 



90 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

night. Here a pleasant surprise awaited Saijiro: 
the foreign gentleman was to put up at the same 
hotel. The boy heard him utter a few Japanese 
words and could tell that he spoke kindly to the 
servants who waited on him. 

The large city which they entered after several 
days' further travel w^as Nagoya. Saijiro had 
never seen so important a place before. He was 
never weary of looking at its castle and the im- 
mense ofold-fish in the towers. He wondered at 
the great temple; its idols were far finer than 
those in the old temple at Yamamidzu. The 
shops and houses, too, w^ere grand in his eyes. 
Then the people ! The child had never known 
that there were so many in the world. He went 
to the theatre, saw the acrobats perform, and Ye- 
noske also took him to see some wrestlers. 

Yenoske disposed of his woodenware, the 
money for which he carefully hid in his dress. 
Yet he did not forget t« procure a warm wadded 
gown for old Baba to wear and a cushion for her 
to sit upon. He also bought some clothing for 
his father and mother. ^^ Dogn P^ he said, "I 
wish I could get a garment for every person in 
the village, Saiji. I fear the people will suffer 
through the long cold winter." 

Indeed, when after several weeks Yenoske and 
Saijiro returned to the village, snow had already 
fallen on the Hakones; winter had begun. 
Dreary enough it was in Yamamidzu through the 



ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE HAKONES. QI 

cold season. Only occasionally, when the sun 
shone, did Baba get out of the house. Most of the 
time she sat on the floor beside the hibacJii^ often 
holding her poor cold hands over the coals. Many 
were the stories she told Yenoske and Saijiro 
about Old Japan, the Japan of her younger days, 
before foreigners came. For Baba, although in- 
terested in hearing about foreigners, believed in 
her heart that they were in some mysterious man- 
ner connected with the failure of the rice crop in 
Japan. She chought the gods were showing their 
displeasure against the Japanese by blighting the 
crop. 

The teacher had returned, and the school went 
on during the winter. Saijiro was among the 
scholars. He showed his father the book which 
the gentleman had given him. It was in Eng- 
lish, and the master could not read it. But there 
was in it a picture on which the master often 
gazed. A man hung on a cross, with a look of 
wonderful love in his eyes. 

" Who is it, Yenoske?" he asked one day. 

^^ Dogu .'" said Yenoske, " I do not know very 
well, but I believe it is Jesus, one of the gods of 
the Christians." 

The master's next question was uttered deep 
in his own heart only: "Can he forgive sin? 
Can he forgive sin?" 



92 KESA AND SAIJIRO, 

•CHAPTER IX. 

RINJIRO'S QUESTION. 

Kesa and Rinjiro had been working merrily 
all day, gettino; ready for the festivities of the New 
Year. Kesa was in her eighth year, a bright, ac- 
tive little maiden; and Rinjiro had developed into 
a manly boy. Both children went to school. 

Chiye and Kesa, every morning as they went 
down the street, were sure to find Rinjiro waiting 
for them at the yasJiiki gate. 

Servants took the oranges and berries which 
the children handed them and fastened them over 
the doors. There were pretty flowers, too, and 
ornaments of bamboo and straw, symbolical of 
long life and prosperity. 

"I am eight years old," said Rinjiro. "I 
shall go to another school before long, Kechan.'' 

Kesa looked sorry. How she would miss 
him ! 

But no shadow of any parting troubled her 
when the New Year came. She and Rinjiro, 
dressed in bright new clothes and the recipients 
of numberless toys, exchanged Japanese greetings 
of the season. 

"A great happiness. Truly, the spring has 
come. A great happiness I" 



RINJIRO'S QUESTION. 93 

Then away went Kesa to play ball with the 
girls, while Rinjirc ran with other boys to fly his 
new kite. But his head, as he tried to watch that 
gaudy paper butterfly mounting towards the sky, 
felt strangely heavy. By-and-by he went crying 
to his mother. He was burning with fever. 

Poor Aka 1 Days passed, and the fever still 
burned. Her little boy tossed on his pallet. The 
hope in her heart grew fainter and fainter. She 
sat by his side \veeping, her hair dishevelled. 
Yet she tried constantly to cool his head and 
soothe his wild ravings. She vowed an offering 
to the gods, the best of her earthly possessions, if 
her boy, her merry Rinjiro, were spared. She 
called and called upon the gods to spare him; but 
it was of no avail. The doctor cupped and blis- 
tered and administered his powders in vain. A 
dark, dreary day was just drawing to its close. 
Aka was sitting in her usual place, putting a wet 
cloth on the boy's hot head, when the slides of 
the room were pushed gently aside, and Kesa 
crept in softly and sat down beside her. 

" Is Rinjiro better?" she asked. 

''^ Dogtcl no; Rinjiro is going to die, Kechan." 

"But cannot the great god Bind^uru help 
him, Aka?" 

Aka shook her head sorrowfully. '''' Dogu ! I 
have prayed and prayed, and called upon the gods 
night and day, Kechan, but they will not hear." 

Aka rocked backward and forward in her an- 



94 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

guisli. Kesa wept in sympathy; but Rinjiro lay 
unconscious of all this love and suffering. Then 
Meguchi came and took Kesa away. She w^as 
frightened when she found the child by Rinjiro's 
side, breathing that tainted air. 

Darker and darker grew the room. One of 
tliQf as/it^i women brought a lantern. Baba came 
and offered Aka a cup of tea and some rice, bnt 
she refused everything. A priest arrived and 
mumbled some prayers over the sick child, but 
Aka would not listen to him. So passed the dark 
night. The river rolled on sullenly towards the 
sea. The wind blew. The waters of the bay- 
were rough and wild. Few fishermen ventured 
out that night. The temple bells and drums, 
sounding solemnly through the still hours, were 
like mockery to Aka's heart. She knew that 
worshippers were calling on the gods who would 
not listen to her cries and before whom her tears 
were of no avail. Just at daybreak Rinjiro 
gazed into Aka's face with a conscious look in his 
eyes, the first for many days. 

"Honorable mother, am I very sick?'* he 
asked. 

''^ Dogn ! yes, my darling." 
" But must I die, mother?" 
''^ Dogu! I fear you must, my darling." 
"Then, mother, why was I born?" 
Oh ! if Aka had only known that not far from 
her there were those who had been sent to ex- 



RIKJIRO'S QUESTION. 95 

plain the mystery of life and death. They might 
have told the dying little one how our Heavenly 
Father places us here to live our appointed time, 
be it long or short, and gives us this life in wliicli 
to prepare for a better one. They might have 
knelt beside this dying bed and commended this 
soul to the Good Shepherd, who loves his lambs 
and gave his own life for them. But these teach- 
ers did not know of Rinjiro; and long afterwards 
kind hearts were pained to hear of the little boy 
who had died asking, "Mother, why w^as I 
born?" 

The pretty kites which had been given to Rin- 
jiro for the New Year lay all untouched in one 
corner of the room. The new dresses and shoes 
were all unworn. The active, eager child would 
never again be seen playing about the yashiki or 
waiting for Kesa at the gate. Rinjiro was dead. 
The little body, prepared for the grave, was 
placed in a sitting posture in the coffin. Books, 
playthings, and money were buried with him. 

"He may need them in the other world," said 
Aka. 

Kesa, with the other mourners, followed the 
little coffin to the temple. She felt very solemn. 
Rinjiro had gone away — where she did not know, 
and no one seemed to know. 

The coffin was placed on the altar, amid 
lights and artificial flowers. Priests mumbled 
prayers over it. Then Rinjiro was laid to rest in 



c;6 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

the Buddhist cemetery and a new name was 
written on his tomb. 

Aka expected now to go back to her parents, 
but for some reason her husband did not send her 
away. He adopted a young man to succeed him 
in his business, and he brought home another wo- 
man to be a wife to him. This woman twitted 
and teased Aka ^as of old Hagar taunted Sarah, 
Abraham's wife. Aka's tears fell like the rain 
and she had no peace. 

After the funeral Kesa went and sat down by 
Hana's side. ''Who will take care of Rinjiro 
now ?" she asked of the weary, restless child, who 
was lying in her mother's room beside the hibachi, 

"The honorable mother tells me of the good 
hotoke y\zo who takes care of little children when 
they go into paradise," said Hana. 

*' Aka prayed and prayed to the gods to make 
Rinjiro well, Hana. And you and the honorable 
mother ask them every day to make your eyes 
better. I'm not going to pray, sister. The gods 
never listen." 

"Oh, Kesa," said Hana, "you don't know 
what you are talking about. The gods are angry, 
and I must pray a great many times before they 
will hear me. I have said Shaka Sama's name 
over five hundred times to-day. I counted the 
times on my beads. The holy Daruma spent 
nine years on his knees, and Shaka Sama's dis- 
ciples had long patience before they became 



RIN'JIRO'S QUESTION. 9/ 

Buddhas. And some of the hotokcs^ like the p^od 
Jizo, have been thousands of years on the way to 
perfection. The honorable mother quiets my 
pain by telling me of the holy life and deeds of 
Shaka Sama. I should like to be with the gods 
in paradise, Kechan." 

''What would you do there?" asked Kesa. 
To this healthy, merry child death seemed a long 
way off and paradise vague enough. 

Hana merely answered, " I am going to think 
all the time of the holy Buddha." 

But Kesa's little heart found no satisfying an- 
swer to its deep questioning. Rinjiro had gone 
away. Why? Where? Would she ever see 
him again? One day late in February of that 
same year the slides of Aka's room were pushed 
softly back and Kesa's bright face appeared. 
Aka dearly loved the child, her Rinjiro' s little 
playmate and his affianced bride. 

"Aka," said she, "the honorable mother 
sends you these cherry-blossoms and wishes you 
to go with us to 'see flowers' to-morrow." 

It was the season of the year when Japan is 
full of blossoms, the time when the peach and 
plum trees bloom, the time of festivity, merri- 
ment, song, and dance. 

Poor Aka shook her head, but the little one 
still pleaded. 

"Please, Aka, condescend to accompany us. 
Honorable mother sends lier compliments. W^e 

Ke<.i «n 1 Saljiro. Y 



9^ KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

are to go in a house-boat down the canals and up 
the river to Mukojima." 

**Last year," answered Aka sadly. ''Rinjiro 
was here. He walked beside us and held my 
hand. Now I cannot go without him. Thank 
the honorable mother and sisters, darling. Dogii ! 
thanks, thanks." 

So all the next day, while the Fujisawas were 
on the water or under the cherry trees at Muko- 
jima, Aka sat in her room mourning for her lost 
boy. 

Kesa was very happy seated on top of a house- 
boat with Chiye and her father beside her. They 
were not allowed to go out much, these carefully 
trained children of Fujisawa's, and were always 
interested in what they saw. Indeed any one 
might have enjoyed the scene that morning. 
There were so many boats on the narrow canals 
that collisions were frequent. Then the sailors 
with their long poles would push the boats apart, 
making a deafening noise the while. Sometimes 
the Fujisawas would pass a boat containing a 
party of their friends and would exchange pleas- 
ant greetings, mostly about the weather and sweet 
spring flowers. 

"What a large boat!" suddenly said Chiye. 
*'And what fine ladies are coming down the 
steps." 

They wxre passing a yasJiiki^ and the ladies 
were daughters of one of the old-time nobles. 



RINJIRO'S QUESTION. 99 

They were dressed in handsome silks and crapes. 
Servants carried immense umbrellas over them. 
Behind them were other attendants who carried 
lunch-boxes and tea-caddies. They were evident- 
ly going to have a great feast somewhere. On 
swept the boat down the great tidal canals, so 
full of life that morning. The merry people 
were singing and dancing, with their heads keep- 
ing time to music, or telling jokes and stories. 

Little Hana lay on her pallet in the boat look- 
ing out upon the water and holding in her hands 
a bunch of fair white blossoms. Mitsu sat beside 
her. Childhood for Mitsu was over, and there is 
no golden period of girlhood in Japan. 

'^ Mitsu," said Hana, "Aka would not come 
to see flowers because Rinjiro is dead. Do you 
think the gods have flowers in paradise?" 

'''' Dogu P^ said Mitsu, on whose heart a dark 
shadow was falling, "I do not know. We cannot 
get into paradise for a long time; not for thou- 
sands of years, perhaps. And if we are wicked, 
we shall come back to the earth a worm or a dog 
or a poor bug." 

Hana looked sorrowful. 

"What are you saying to the child?" asked 
the mother almost angrily. She could not bear 
to see a cloud over her darling's face. So the 
conversation dropped. 

By-and-by they entered Yedo Bay, and FujI- 
sawa said, " There is the custom-house, and there 



lOO KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

are the houses where the honorable foreigners 
live." 

The boats danced merrily over the bay. Chiye 
and Kesa, looking towards the south, could see 
the forts built when Com. Perry arrived off the 
coast. To the north was the river; to the east 
the fishermen's island, Skudajiwa; and to the 
west the great city, with the long dark line of the 
Hakones behind it, and back of them still Mt. Fuji. 

As they passed the mission-houses they saw a 
lady with a little girl standing on the veranda 
watching the boats — the missionary's wife and 
her little daughter Marion. But they were not 
allowed time to see anything long. Up the river 
they went, under the bridges, over the bright 
laughing waters, beside the daiinios\ or nobles', 
homes, past trees bending over the water with 
crows cawing in their branches, now catching a 
glimpse of some great temple roof, now delighted 
with a great mass of flowers, as some cherry or 
peach swept its blossoms over the boat. 

When they came to the landing the sailors 
fastened the boat to the shore and they all scram- 
bled out. A beautiful road, sloping gradually from 
the water, led to the ''cherry-tree walk." This is 
a lovely avenue with cherry-trees on one side and 
peach-trees on the other. Fujisawa led his fam- 
ily to some benches under the trees and ordered 
tea. 

They took some, but it was bitter and they 



RINJIRO'S OUKSTION. lOI 

did not like it very well. Then up came a man 
with flowers, sweet blossoms from the trees. 

A few copper casJi bought as many of the 
blossoms as they cared for. Kesa and Chiye, 
leaving the flowers, walked with Meguchi down 
the avenue. Kesa missed her 'little playmate 
Rinjiro, who was always so merry on festival 
days; and she and Chiye thought often of Aka. 
But, like all children, they were not sad long, 
and laughed with Meguchi, enjoying the gay 
scenes. At noon they went to an eel restaurant, 
where Fujisawa ordered eels broiled on skewers 
for them all, with the usual accompaniments of 
rice, radishes, and tea. It was a real feast for the 
children and they enjoyed it greatly. 

lyate in the afternoon they crept Into the boat 
again, Chiye and Kesa getting inside wath the 
others. The tide was with them and they re- 
turned rapidly. The oarsmen had nothing to do 
but to guide the boat. The moon was just rising 
when they reached their home. 

"Truly, thanks," said the children to their 
father; " we have had a happy day." 

Fujisawa went to smoke in the upper room. 
He was not altogether satisfied about his children. 
Deep in his heart he longed for something better 
than the old ways of Japan afforded them. But 
still he shrank from putting them under the direct 
influence of foreigners, especially the Christians. 
There was a school for ofirls in connection with 



I02 KESA AXD SAIJIRO. 

the Government school. Why not send Chive 
and Kesa to that ? 

I^ater in the spring an invitation to Aka to ac- 
company Mrs. Fujisawa, INIitsu, and Kesa to 
Inoshima, Kamakura, and Dai Biitsu was eagerly 
accepted. Aka was so glad to have an opportuni- 
ty to worship before the great image of Buddha 
and offer flowers and fruits upon the altar there. 

Kesa was happy at the prospect of a journey 
in the cars to the great foreign city Yokohama, 
and looked forward with anticipations of pleasure 
to the day of starting. 

She was almost frightened, though, by the 
rapid motion of the cars, and at first clung to her 
mother's dress. Soon, however, growing braver, 
she enjoyed the view from the window. They 
passed rapidly through the fields and villages 
which lie between Tokio and Yokohama. They 
were soon in the latter city, for it is only an 
hour's ride. There they spent the day at a 
friend's house, so as to start early the next morn- 
ing for Inoshima. 

Kesa enjoyed a jinrikisha ride on the " Bluff," 
where so many of the foreigners reside. She 
thought the houses very grand and the little 
English children on donkeys very pretty, with 
their long fair hair imder broad-brimmed hats. 
Her mother pointed out to her the consulates, 
postoffice, and fine shops. Kesa had never seen 
such grand things in all her life before. 



RIN'JIRO'vS QUESTION. IO3 

The next day they took jinrikishas and went 
over the fields to Inoshima, a beautiful peninsula 
on the coast dedicated to the goddess Benten Sa- 
naa. They stopped often during the day, so that 
it was evening before they crossed the sandy 
isthmus which connects the peninsula with the 
mainland. Inoshima was lovely in the light of 
the evening sun. ''Truly beautiful!" "For 
the first time!" "Wonderful!" These were 
some of the exclamations of the Tokio ladies. 

The sea broke along the shore, thundering on 
the rocks in some places and dancing in bright 
ripples up to the shore in other places. Some 
naked children, standing in the shadows of the 
rocks, were catching crabs. 

The ladies left their jinrikishas at the foot of 
the one steep street of the village. They paid the 
coolies, received their thanks, and went to one of 
the hotels. After their supper of fish and rice 
they sat at the open window and looked out on 
the ocean. Very early in the morning, before 
sunrise, they were all on the beach, waiting to 
worship the sun when it came up out of the 
sea. As it appeared, mounting above the 
red and golden waters, they bowed their heads 
in adoration. A missionary looking from his 
slides saw the group upon the sands, the 
three women and the little child, and thought 
with sadness of their ignorance; but even then 
the thought was in his heart, "Would that 



I04 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

sucli reverence and fervor always characterized 
the worship rendered to the Sun of Righteous- 
ness !" 

What a grand ride Kesa and all of them had 
that morning along the shore to Dai Butsu! The 
waves dashed headlong over the land. Kesa 
shrank back whenever one came too near and 
was afraid of being sw^ept away. But the coolies 
knew their business well and brought them up 
safely to the great bronze image. Kesa wor- 
shipped reverently with the others, all of them 
chanting, "Amida Dai Butsu, Amida Dai 
Butsu." They also placed flowers before the 
idol, which looked down upon them calm and 
dignified, as it had done upon worshippers for 
many long years. 

A pretty ride through the rice-fields brought 
them to Kamakura, from Yoritomo's time to 1333 
the Shoguns' capital, where they saw many relics 
of Yoritomo and visited his grave. 

These were pleasant days for Mrs. Fujisawa, 
Mitsu, and Kesa. Aka was happier than she had 
been since Rinjiro's death. Hana heard all about 
it when they were at home again. The grand 
image had been her dream by night and day, and 
she lono-ed to see it for herself. 




^- m. 



-I'l > 



SEEING BUDDHA'S FACE. lO' 



CHAPTER X. 



Spring had come on the Hakones, too. The 

Fujisawa children could see that there was less 
snow on them as they looked at them from their 
garden. 

There were several boys of Saijiro's size in 
Yamamidzu. Chintaro, the barber's boy, was an 
especial friend, with his rosy cheeks, sparkling 
eyes, and fun-loving nature. Alantaro, the car- 
penter's son, was noted for his acrobatic perform- 
ances. His greatest delight was to propel a board 
down to the very edge of the cataract, jump from 
it into the raging river, and after battling with 
the strong current for a time, to the terror of 
spectators, suddenly reappear on the bank, drip- 
ping, and grinning from ear to ear. He was the 
best stilt-walker and kite-flyer in the village and 
excelled in all boyish games. Then there was 
Nanjiro, a delicate child of ten years, who always 
had a baby strapped on his back. Ginjiro and 
IMejiki lived in the largest house of the place and 
were good scholars. 

The girls were Ken, Riki, Hisa, Tama, and 
Taka. Besides these there were some little chil« 
dren and three or four babies. 



IC6 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Near tlie temple lived a little blind boy, Ko- 
jiro by name. He spent most of his time in the 
temple among the grim old idols. He loved to 
hear the monotonous chanting of the priests, the 
sweet sound of the bell, and the cooing of the 
doves. 

At noon one day, when the sun was shining 
over Yamamidzu, Saijiro sat with Kojiro on the 
temple steps. The child's sightless eyes were 
turned upward towards the sun. 

*'It is warm, Saijiro," he said, **and the air 
is svv'eet." 

Saijiro answered, ''Yes; the sun is shining, 
Ko, and that makes it warm." 

"I think, Saichan, the sun must be like Slia- 
ka Sama's face and the warm air like his breath. 
You know the image of Shaka Sama behind the 
altar? I have seen the faces of all the other gods, 
Saiji, but I cannot reach his; and oh ! I want so 
much to touch it." 

" You shall, Ko," answ^ered the eager Saijiro, 
ready to do anything for his friend. "I will 
help you. We will climb up and see Shaka 
Sama." 

The two boys rose and went up the rickety 
temple steps. Kojiro did not need Saijiro's guid- 
ance into the building, for he knew every hole 
and crack of it. But before entering he stood for 
an instant, pulled the bell-rope which hung there, 
folded his hands, and bowed his head while he 



SEEING BUDDHA'S FACE. I07 

uttered a prayer. The two priests who usually 
officiated in the temple had gone to dinner, and 
the children had the place to themselves. Saijiro 
took hold of Ko's hand when the latter had fin- 
ished his prayer and led him to the altar. Be- 
fore it was a table, and on the table were offerings 
of rice and beans and pyramids made of carrots 
and turnips. 

" Ko, be careful," said Saijiro, as he led his 
friend to the narrow, slippery steps up which 
they had to climb before reaching the great 
image. 

Kojiro shivered a little. It was cold and dark 
in the temple. "Am I near Shaka Sama?" he 
asked. "I cannot feel any warmth, as I do from 
the sun." 

But Saijiro held him firmly by the hand, and 
he patiently mounted the stairs. Then they had 
to make their way along a narrow ledge, around 
tall candles and artificial flowers. Kojiro trem- 
bled as for the first time he touched these things 
which were so sacred to him. At last the boys 
came up to the image of Buddha. It was seated 
on a lotus-flower, and looked down on them calm 
and majestic, as are all images of Buddha. 

"Now, Ko," said Saijiro, "climb up on the 
lotus." 

By placing theii feet carefully upon the petals 
of the flower the boys managed to get up to the 
image itself. Then Saijiro was puzzled. The 



loS KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

surface was smooth; there was nothing for his 
friend to take hold of. At last he succeeded in 
scrambling up the side and getting on the im- 
mense hand of the image. Now, holding by- 
Buddha's sacred thumb, he stooped down and 
pulled Kojiro up. But still the blind boy could 
not reach the face. 

"Get up on my shoulder, Ko." 

Ivojiro tried this, but it was not easily accom- 
plished. There was nothing for him to stand on, 
nothing for him to hold on by. Kojiro felt al- 
most as though he were doomed to disappoint- 
ment. Should he never see Shaka Sama^s 
face? 

Saijiro examined the idol carefully. ''There 
is a place on Shaka Sama's neck where the folds 
of his honorable robe are. I think I can lift 
you up." 

This feat was not accomplished without diffi- 
culty, even danger. But at last Kojiro stood on 
the holy Buddha's neck. Then, lost to every- 
thing else, he passed his fingers over the sacred 
face that he had so Iouq: desired to touch. His 
thin little fingers traced and retraced the outlines. 
He felt the eyes, the nose, the forehead, the lips, 
the chin. Never had image a more devout wor- 
shipper. 

"I see him I I see him !" he called to Saijiro, 
who stood waiting on the sacred thumb. "My 
hands have touched his face. I have seen Shaka 



SEEING Buddha's face. 309 

Sama ! I know he is beautiful because he is so 
smooth. ' ' 

"But we must go down, Ko," called Saijiro 
at last. 

Poor little Ko ! how was he to Q-et down ? 
Fearless as he generally was, everything was new 
here. He had nothing to cling to. 

"I cannot come down, Saiji," he cried. "I 
shall fall." 

Indeed, Saijiro himself began to be alarmed. 
'''' Dogu! what can we do?" he said. 

Just then the old priest came in. 

"I will call to the bon-sama^'^^ said Saijiro. 

The priest, hearing voices, looked this way 
and that in the temple, but failed to discover the 
boys. 

"Bon-sama ! Bon-sama !" called Saijiro. 

The voice sounded far off to the priest. He 
began to tremble. Always superstitious, the Jap- 
anese are ready to believe anything. 

> "Bon-sama! Bon-sama!" shouted Saijiro 
desperately from his height on Buddha's thumb. 

The old priest lifted his eyes to the altar, and 
in the gloom and distance just discovered two 
moving figures on Shaka Sama's arms and neck. 
They were oiiis calling to him ! With a cry he 
rushed from the temple, meeting on the step his 
younger, jollier brother. 

"What has happened?" asked bon-sama num- 
ber two. 



no KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

*''' Dogu! onis in the temple !" 

This somewhat stag^gered the younger priest; 
but some villagers coming along and being told 
the story, all agreed to enter the temple together. 
In the meantime the children, thoroughly fright- 
ened themselves, stood trembling and clinging to 
the idol. It was a relief to Saijiro to see the men 
enter, armed as they were with clubs and farming 
implements. 

"Let us call together, Ko," he said, as the 
searchers peered cautiously into corners and up at 
the altar. So together they shouted. 

* ' Who are you ?' ' questioned the men. 

"We are Saijiro and Kojiro," the boys an- 
swered, " and we came up to see the holy Shaka 
Sama's face and cannot get down." 

The ''DogusP' and " Wonderfuls !" and 
"Strange things!" were not few among the as- 
sembled company. 

A strong man went up to the idol, lifted 
Saijiro down to the altar, and then rescuing 
Kojiro carried him quite down to the temple 
door. 

"What were you doing, Ko?" asked his fa- 
ther as he led him home. 

"Honorable father, pardon," answered the 
child. " I wished to see Shaka Sama's face." 

A day or two after the adventure in the tem- 
ple, as Saijiro and Ts'koi were running up the 
village street, they met Baba with the large girl 



SEEING BUDDHA'S FACE. Ill 

Tama. Baba leaned heavily upon her stick, and 
Tama carried a bundle of clothes. 

"Where are you going?" asked Baba of Sai- 
jiro, who made her a respectful salutation. 

Saijiro knew well enough where Baba and 
Tama were going. They were making their way 
slowly down to the pool to wash their clothes. It 
was Sunday. The simple mountaineers knew 
that the Japanese Government had ordered the 
seventh day to be observed as a day of rest, in- 
stead of one day in six, as of old. They also 
knew that the year began much earlier than for- 
merly and that the months were changed. The 
Government so ordered it, and the changes were 
easily effected. Saijiro, who was running about 
with no definite purpose, turned and went with 
Baba and Tama down the path along which the 
villagers frequently trod; for the women all had 
to go to the pool to do their washing. The river 
was too rapid and dangerous to allow of any liber- 
ties being taken with it. 

It was a lovely day. Just enough of winter 
lingered in the air to make it fresh and bracing. 
The patch of sky overhead was of a deep blue. 
The mountain was beautiful in its fresh spring 
dress. Sweet little flowers bloomed by the road- 
side. There was even, at the end of the village, 
a single cherry-tree white with blossoms. The 
people thought it the most wonderful and beauti- 
ful thing they had. Fruit-trees were rare in that 



112 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

region, and the people on the mountain came to 
Yamamidzu to see this tree. If they could but 
have seen the cherry walk at Mukojima, where 
the Fujisawa children spent such pleasant hours ! 

But Saijiro was happy enough. He ran on 
ahead of Baba, carrying the bundle on his head. 
Tama had laughingly tossed it to him when they 
met, then taking Baba's hand to lead her care- 
fully down the steep descent. 

''DoguP' said Baba, " the little flowers are 
very pretty, and how beautiful is the honorable 
cherry-tree." 

" Saichan, Saichan !" called a little voice from 
above. 

Saijiro looked up to see little blind Ko stand- 
ing at the head of the path. He wore a white 
dress, his feet were bare, and his long hair, not 
yet cut as a priest's — for it was Ko's desire to be a 
priest — floated behind him on the breeze. Saijiro 
gave his bundle a toss which sent it rolling down 
to the pond; then running rapidly back towards 
Ko, he took him upon his back and was at the 
pond before the others, whom he had passed each 
time with a polite "Excuse me." He safely de- 
posited Kojiro upon the ground and found a 
mossy seat for Baba beside him. 

Tama rolled up her dress and waded out into 
the water with the clothes, which she beat be- 
tween two stones. Saijiro lay down on the 
ground between Baba and Kojiro. It was a pret- 



1^3 

ty scene. From the height above them down 
tumbled the waterfaH. The pond was like a 
pearl set with emeralds, so pure was the water, so 
green the earth. All around grew^ pretty spring 
wild-flowers. The blossoms of the cherry-tree 
could be seen, a mass of white among the trees, 
as they looked up towards Yamamidzu. 

"Baba," asked little Ko, "shall I ever see ?'» 

"Ko sees many things, Baba,'' broke in 
Saijiro. *'He sees more things than I can 
think of." 

Tama w^as all this while busy washing her 
clothes and Baba's. She had ripped apart their 
dresses of blue cotton cloth and was beating the 
pieces on the rocks. She did it cheerfully, and 
sang in a low monotone a song of spring. It 
could not be called a merry tune. It sounded 
plaintive enough. But Baba and the children 
enjoyed it so much that at last they stopped their 
talk to listen. It was one of the songs of the Hia- 
kiuiinishiu^ or *'One Hundred Poems," of which 
Japanese women are so fond. 

"Oh, my love!" sang Tama. "I have lost 
him in this world. Shall I ever see him aq-ain ? 
Shall I meet him in the next?" 

"Riki is learning to play the sainiseit^''^ Tama 
called out to Baba when she had ended her sonq^. 
*' Old Kinchi is teachinof her." 

"That is fine," answered Baba. "We shall 
have music in Yamamid^^u now. Are your 

KcHa an aijiro. 3 



114 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

clothes all washed clean, Tama? It is growing 
late, and we must go home." 

Tama led Baba, and Saijiro carried Ko up the 
steep path to the village. Leaving Ko at his 
home, Saijiro turned and crossed the bridge. Be- 
fore reachinof his house he heard his father's 
voice. 

*' The honorable father is at prayer," said Sai- 
jiro to himself. 

Yetaro was prostrate before the idols in his 
bedchamber. Candles were burning on the altar 
and the smoke of incense filled the room. 

^^DoguP^ thought Saijiro, "I wish the honor- 
able father could find the honorable foreigners' 
God — the one who hung upon the cross." 



A MIDSUMMER FESTIVAL. II 5 

CHAPTER XI. 

A MIDSUMMER FESTIVAL. 

Kesa and Chiye, under their mother's careful 
direction, were changing the water of the vases 
on the altar. Neither of these two girls had the 
reverence for the deities of Japan which the mo- 
ther tried so hard to inculcate. Fujisawa himself 
was something of a skeptic; but he encouraged 
his wife and daughters to be regular in their at- 
tendance at the temnles, believing that a Japan- 
ese woman should love and worship the gods. 

"Kesa, be careful. Do condescend to take a 
little more pains, child," called the mother, as 
the contents of a vase were spilled upon the floor. 

"Pardon me, honorable mother," said the 
child. 

Meguchi hastened to wipe the water from the 
mat. "The honorable elder sisters would not 
have done so," she said. 

"How beautiful!" said the servants when 
they saw Benten Sama's freshly decorated shrine. 
It looked like the altar in a Roman-catholic 
church, with artificial flowers, candles, and in- 
cense-boxes. 

Benten Sama was a favorite goddess with the 
children. Tliev loved to hear stories of her life 



Il6 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Oil the beautiful islaud of Inoshima — of how she 
could change herself into a swan or a snake, and 
of how she appeared to people in trouble — a gra- 
cious goddess with long, flowing hair and beauti- 
ful robes. They had pictures of her standing, 
with the other "gods of luck^" on top of the 
treasure-boat which is thought to come into the 
harbor at Tokio at the new year and bring pres- 
ents and good cheer for all. Mrs. Fujisawa's 
Benten Sama looked very pretty, standing serene- 
ly in an elegant lacquered case, with flowers and 
candles before her. 

Chiye and Kesa found the duties of idol-wor- 
ship rather irksome. They could not see the use 
of placing flowers and eatables before images. 

**They do not eat," said Chiye in confidence 
to Mitsu one night. 

"No; but the gods in paradise see that we 
offer things to their images and they are pleased," 
answered Mitsu. 

"Mitsu, the honorable foreigners don't have 
images of their gods," said Chiye. 

" But some of them do," answered Mitsu. "I 
have myself seen the honorable strangers' images — 
a woman, like Benten Sama; and a child, like 
the holy infant Buddha; and men, like Shaka 
Sama's disciples." 

"Well, Fusa goes to school, and she says they 
have no images. Oh, Mitsu, how I wish the 
honorable father would let me 0:0 to the school ! 



A MIDSUMMER FESTIVAL. 117 

I have seen Fiisa's books; they are about all the 
different countries in the world. We do n't learn 
anything except about Japan and the gods and 
heroes. ' ' 

"What more does a Japanese girl want to 
know?" asked Mitsu. 

Chiye Fujisawa seemed to have been born 
with a thirst for knowledge. Long before this 
.she had mastered all that a Japanese girl ordi- 
narily learns in school, and had begged to be al- 
lowed to study the Chinese classics. Fujisawa 
engaged a Chinese teacher for her, but even the 
classics failed to satisfy the eager girl. 

Tama and Mitsu played beautifully on the 
samisen^ but neither Chiye nor Kesa cared much 
for music. They loved to hear Mitsu' s skilful 
touch on the instrument and to listen to her songs 
of old Japan, but had no fancy for playing or 
singing themselves. 

''Where are you going?" asked Chiye of 
Kesa a few hours later, as she came into the room 
where Chiye was studying. 

"I am going with Mitsu and Aka to carry 
flowers to Rinjiro's grave," answered the child. 

Just then Mitsu appeared, all ready for a walk 
and carrying beautiful flowers. 

She gave some of them to Kesa, and after a 
respectful saionara to their mother the two girls 
went to the yasJiiki for Aka, who joined them at 
the large gate. It was where Rinjirc had always 



IlS KKSA AND SATJIRO. 

met Kesa in the days when they went to school 
together. 

Aka carried lilies. "How beautiful!" said 
Mitsu and Kesa as she showed them the pure 
white flowers. They were mountain lilies, and 
just then Saijiro had his hands full of them and 
was carrying them to Baba at Yamamidzu. 

"Aka, if it had not been for what Kei said 
that day she told us her story, I believe I should 
have liked to be a nun," said Mitsu as they 
walked. "But I so well remember her words: 
* The women are not holv.' She said that while 
they beat the drums and prayed their hearts were 
far away, and that they did all sorts of WTong and 
foolish things." 

''^ DogjtP'' said Aka, " I long to go on pilgrim- 
age. Many vv'omen go. Why cannot we?" 

They were going np the broad walk to the 
temple. Doves came and hopped about Kesa's 
feet. 

"Why does Hachiman Sama, the god of war, 
have doves for his messengers?" asked Kesa. 
" He looks so fierce and is so ngly, I shouldn't 
think the doves would like him at all." 

Near the grim idol Hachiman stood a white 
horse made of wood. He was Hachiman's ser- 
vant, as the fox is fabled to be the servant of the 
god Inari. 

Kesa stopped for a moment nnder a grand 
maple-tree. On one side of l:er w^as a terrible ojit 



A MIDSUMMER FESTIVAL. I19 

holding ill one arm a "heavenly lamp." On the 
other side was the tree where the sacred snake 
was said to dwell. But neither Kesa nor any one 
else had ever seen the snake. While Aka and 
Mitsu went up to the temple, Kesa bought some 
rice from a man and fed the doves. They crowd- 
ed around, cooing softly as the child threw the 
grain to them. 

The cemetery w^as just behind the temple. 
Kesa followed Aka and Mitsu to a well-known 
grave. A little pair of wooden shoes hung on the 
tombstone, and near by were playthings. Aka 
threw away the faded flowers which were there 
and put fresh ones in their place, and then sat 
down and wept for the little Rinjiro who lay 
buried under the stone. 

At last she said, "Kesa, you must come 
and help me make rice-cakes, sweep the rooms, 
and get Rinjiro's toys and clothes ready. Rin- 
jiro is coming to be watli us, and we must pre- 
pare. ' ' 

"Will he really come?" asked Kesa. 

" Yes, my darling, at the feast of the Bony 

"There is going to be a preaching; let us go 
and hear the sermon," said Mitsu as they went 
back towards the temple. 

A number of people were making their way up 
to the steps. Many of them were very old. Hun- 
dreds of shoes were near the temple steps, for no 
one goes into the temples with shoes. 



I20 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

''Who will preach?" asked Aka of a man. 

The man made a low bow and said, "The 
great boii-sama from Shibo preaches to-day of the 
holy Shaka Sama." 

The people, about five hundred in number, sat 
on the temple floor, with their faces turned to- 
wards the altar. Aka, Mitsu, and Kesa sat near 
the door. An aged, venerable priest, with shaven 
head and yellow robes, occupied as chief speaker 
the place of honor, and around him were grouped 
priests of inferior rank. 

The western sun sent long rays of light into 
the temple. They fell on the gilded images of 
the Buddhas and on the golden lotus-flowers. 
The priests began a low monotonous chant; and 
some boys, likewise with shaven heads, swung in- 
cense, the odor of which filled the temple. 

The priests chanted the praise of Buddha, 
their holy Shaka Sama. 

" Pure and holy and absorbed in heavenly 
contemplation was the great Amida. He left his 
father's palace and dwelt with the poor and low- 
ly. Amida Dai Butsu! Amida Dai Butsu!" 

Then the old priest rose, and stretching out 
his hands said, 

"Listen, O people, to the doctrines of the ho'y 
and blessed Buddha. 

' ' He was born in the far-off country India, a 
prince of high degree. He despised the delights 
cf his father's house, and determined to becom.e a 



A MIDSUMMER FESTIVAL. 121 

priest to the most liigh and holy one, the Brahma 
of the Indians. But neither did he find peace in 
listening to the teachings of Brahma. 

''He looked forth one day and beheld a man 
killing a poor dumb animal. He heard its cries 
and saw its precious life-blood spilled. 

"Then his spirit was roused within him. He 
retired under a banyan-tree and spent days and 
nights in holy contemplation. He saw beau- 
tiful visions, knew all things, and became a god. 

"He travelled far and wide over Tartary, 
Nankin, and Ceylon. Many were his disciples 
and gentle were his precepts. Read, O people, 
the story of the sixteen disciples of Buddha, who 
were ' flowers of heaven. ' ' ' 

Here the people all bowed their heads. The 
great image of Buddha was resplendent in the 
sunshine. 

" He founded hospitals for the sick. He gave 
in mercy to the poor. He became absorbed into 
the divine essence. 

" Study the eight steps to perfection: 

"I. Right belief. 

* ' H. Right judgment. 

"HI. Right utterance. 

"IV. Right motives. 

"V. Right living. 

" VI. Right occupation. 

"VII. Right memory. 

*'VIII. Ri^ht meditation. 



122 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

*'The devout Buddhist, O people, must be- 
lieve the correct thing, must apply his faith to his 
daily life, must speak the truth, must always 
have a perfect end and aim in view; his outward 
life must be without sin; he must faithfully do 
his duty; he must remember correctly his past con- 
duct and keep his mind fixed on permanent truth. 

^'Listen, also, to the ten commandments: 

*'L Do not kill. 

''II. Do not steal. 

*'IIL Do not commit adultery. 

*'IV. Do not lie. 

*' V. Do not become intoxicated. 

*' VI. Take no solid food after noon. 

*'VII. Do not visit dances nor concerts nor 
theatrical representations. 

"VIII. Use no ornaments nor perfumery in 
dress. 

*' IX. Use no luxurious beds. 

*' X. Accept neither gold nor silver.'' 

The people bowed and murmured assent to 
each of these precepts and commandments. Lit- 
tle Kesa heard it all, sitting by Aka's side that 
summer afternoon. The doctrines were good, but 
they brought no peace to Aka's soul, no hope of 
meeting her darling again. 

But the crowd was dispersing, and in the sum- 
mer twilight the three walked quietly home. 

A few days later Kesa went to help Aka get 
ready for the great festival of the "j^^?;/." For 



A MIDSUMMER FESTIVAL. 1 23 

''the spirits of the dead come back and spend 
three days of every year with, their friends," say 
the people. 

It is a solemn festival and comes in midsimi- 
nier, when the sacred lotus is blooming in the 
ponds, emblem of the sanctity, seclusion, and rest- 
fulness of the Buddhas. Kesa and Aka made 
lice-cakes and placed them on the shrines erected 
to the memory of the dead. They unfolded Rin- 
jiro's clothes, that he might find them ready for 
him. They laid out for the child -spirit the gaudy, 
unused toys. 

" Oh, if we could see him ! If he would only 
come and play with us and tell us what the gods 
do in paradise!" said Kesa, as she assisted in 
sweeping, dusting, and making everything ready. 
She and Aka talked a great deal about Rinjiro 
during the three days that the spirits were sup- 
posed to spend in the house. 

" He would have been your husband, Kechan. 
The honorable father and I had promised that he 
should be your honorable husband and that you 
should be his honorable wife." 

"But we should have played together for a 
long while," said Kesa, whose ideas of the rela- 
tions of husband and wife were rather indefinite. 

" Yes; you would have gone to school togetli- 
er and played together for a long while yet," an- 
swered Aka; and she sighed when she Uiought of 
all their lost happiness. 



124 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

The Fujisawa mansion was also swept and 
cleaned and ready for the spirits. No child had 
left the house, but there were grandfathers and 
grandmothers, for two or three generations back, 
to come. Rice, flowers, and clothing were made 
ready for them. Drums were beaten incessantly, 
and the very air seemed filled with prayers of the 
living and spirits of the dead. 

Kesa went with Aka on the evening of the 
third day of the feast to the bank of a canal. The 
tide was going out. They lighted little tapers, 
placed them carefully on the water, and they were 
carried out to the sea. Rinjiro's spirit was being 
lighted back to its shadowy home. 

"Good-by, Rinjiro, until next year," said 
Kesa; and Aka's tears fell fast. 

The streets were full of people, all carrying 
tapers or watching them as they were borne by 
the tide out to the ocean. ]\Ien were dancing 
in the streets the sacred Bon dance, chanting a 
solemn litany, waving their fans, and swaying 
their bodies to and fro. How weird it all was! 
Kesa held fast to Aka's hand as they walked 
rapidly through the streets to their own quiet 
homes. 

A few days after this the summer vacation 
was over, and Kesa went back to school. She 
was not fond of books, as Chiye was. In a pas- 
sive way she went through the school routine, 
giving little trouble, but paying little attention; 



A MIDSUMMKR FESTIVAL. 1 25 

reading monotonously the dull Confucian books, 
and mechanically repeating their precepts. The 
teacher was getting old. He had taught the fa- 
thers and mothers of some of the children, keep- 
ing on in the same routine year after year. 

A foreigner going into the school during a 
reading lesson would have seen the sensez v^alking 
about with a ruler in his hand and the pupils all 
sitting on the floor with books open before them. 
But such a noise ! They all read together, em- 
phasizing the small words, drawing in their 
breath, and making a peculiar inflection at the 
end of each sentence. 

Kesa read out her lesson clearly; her voice 
could be heard above the others as they chanted 
the precepts of the ''Woman's Great Learning." 

''When children are able to take their food 
they should be taught the use of the right hand. 

"When able to talk, the lads must be instruct- 
ed to answer in a quick, bold tone, and the girls 
in a slow, gentle tone. 

"A leathern girdle should be given to the 
lads, and a silken one to the girls. 

" At the age of seven they should be taught to 
count and to name the cardinal points. 

"At the age of seven boys and girls must not 
sit on the same mat nor eat at the same table. 

"At eight, when going out or coming in, they 
must wait for their superiors, being taught to pre- 
fer others to themselves. 



126 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

"At nine they mnst learn to number tlie days 
of the month. 

"Girls, after they are ten years of age, must 
not leave their apartments. 

"Placed under governesses, they must be 
taught to be mild, both in deportment and lan- 
guage. They must learn to spin, wind off thread, 
and to weave cloth and silken stuffs, and thus 
perform those duties which properly belong to 
women in providing clothes for their families. 
They may see to the preparations for the sacrifi- 
ces, and arrange the vessels and the offerings of 
wines and veofetables. " 

In the " Bock of Rites'' are these precepts; 

" Let children be always taught to speak the 
simple truth, to stand upright in their proper 
places, and to listen with respectful attention." 

"Wives must serve their husbands' fathers 
and mothers as their own. 

"At the first cock-crowing they must arise, 
wash their hands, rinse their mouths, comb their 
Lair; they must fasten on their bags of perfumery, 
then cro to the chamber of their father and mo- 

o 

ther and father-in-law and mother-in-law, and 
having entered, in a low and placid tone they 
must inquire whether their dress is too warln or 
too cold. 

"In asking and presenting them what they 
wish to eat they must cheer them by their mild 
manner, and must wait until their father and mo- 



A MIDSUMMER FESTIVAL. 12/ 

tlier and father-in-law and motlier-in-law have 
eaten, and then retire." 

"Children must not occupy the principal 
place in the house nor seat themselves in the 
middle seat nor walk in the middle of the way 
nor stand in the middle of the door. They must 
not ascend high places nor approach steep pre- 
cipices, nor may they indulge in slander or ridi- 
cule." 

Poor little Kesa! These maxims are all good 
enough in their way, but she might have studied 
them all the bright days of her childhood and 
never have known anything of the beautiful 
world in which she lived — of its trees and plants 
and flowers, of its animals, and of its races of men 
and their history. No wonder that Chive was 
dissatisfied. 

Kesa wrote Chinese characters in her copy- 
books, and Mitsu taught her the "One Hun- 
dred Poems." Mitsu was also her teacher 
in sewing, embroidery, and paper-flower ma- 
king. But Kesa was not a very apt scholar 
in these things and often tried her teacher's 
patience. 

Neither did she like her samisen lessons. The 
teacher went to the house twice a week, and the 
little girl would sit patiently beside her and try 
to imitate her as she struck the strings of the 
instrument with her ivory stick and sang her 
songs of love and beauty. But Kesa was no 



128 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

musician and samisejt-^Xsiymg had no attraction 
for her. 

"Come, Kesa, it is time for your sewing,'' 
said Mitsu one day as the child stood idly by the 
lotus pond. "For shame!" she added, as Kesa 
turned petulantly away. She was not fond of 
sewing. 

"But I have a pretty story, a new one, for 
you," said the gentle Mitsu; and Kesa went 
slowly towards the house. "The mother waits 
with her work, Kesa, and Hana is anxious to 
hear the story." 

Kesa quickened her pace and went into the 
room where her mother and sisters were sitting. 
Mitsu put Kesa's embroidery into her hands with 
many directions as to how the work should be 
done. Then she began her story. 

"Once upon a time, just when the world was 
made — " 

"Who made it?" asked Kesa. 

"The gods, of course, little sister. But let 
me go on with the story. Well, the whole world 
belonged to a fairy who had three children, two 
sons and a daughter. Now the fairy was about 
to die—" 

" I didn't know that fairies ever died," inter- 
rupted Hana. 

"Well, this one died or went away from the 
w^orld, and he left the moon to one boy and the 
sea to another and the sun to his daughter. The 



A MIDSUMMER FESTIVAL. 1 29 

boy who had the moon was very much pleased, 
and he has it yet." 

"But he takes it away sometimes, sister," 
said little Kesa. 

"Yes; but he always brings it back again. 
Well, the boy who had the sea did not like 
his part. He hated to be cold and wet all the 
time. The girl had the sun, and one day 
when she was spinning with her maidens the 
sea-boy rushed in and overturned the spin- 
ning-wheels and frightened them all so that 
the sun-girl ran and hid herself in a cave. 
Then the world w^as all dark, because the light 
of the sun really came from her beautiful 
eyes. 

"So the fairies went and begged her to come 
out, but she would not. At last they went and 
danced before her door. Then Ama opened just 
a little crack and peeped out. 

" 'See, here is a fairy more beautiful than 
you are,' said the dancers, holding a mirror 
before her face. Ama was very curious to 
know who the fairy was, so she came out of 
the cave, and then the rest of the fairies closed 
the door. 

"Ama promised to go back to the sun if the 
wicked Susano were banished. So Susano went 
down to the earth, and as he was walking sorrow- 
fully along he saw^ an old man and woman crying 
over a beautiful young girl. Susano asked what 



130 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

the matter was, and they told him that every year 
a terrible eig-ht-headed drao^on came and devoured 
one of their dausrhters and that this was the last 
one of eight. They told him, too, that the drag- 
on was to come again that very day and that they 
would lose their last daughter if no one was found 
to rescue her. 

"Susano told them to dry their tears, for he 
could easily destroy the dragon. Then he showed 
them how to brew some beer, and they made a 
fence with eight gates and placed a vat of beer at 
each gate. 

" Pretty soon the dragon came trailing along. 
He was so large that he covered eight hills and 
eight valleys. When he smelled the beer he went 
up to it and drank so much that he became in- 
toxicated. Then Susano went to him and cut off 
all his heads. When the dragon was quite dead 
Susano stepped up to his tail and began to cut 
that in pieces. His sword struck something very 
hard, which proved to be the most beautiful sword 
that had ever been seen. So Susano took it out 
and the Emperor of Japan has it. 

"Then Susano married the beautiful girl, and 
they lived in a fine palace and were happy ever 
after.'' 

Kesa and Hana thought this a fine story; but 
Chiye said it was very foolish and she did not be- 
lieve it ever happened at all. 



WINTER IN YAMAMIDZU. I3I 

CHAPTER XII. 

WINTER IN YAMAMIDZU. 

While Kesa was studying the "Woman's 
Great Learning" in Tokio, Saijiro on the moun- 
tain was likewise gaining a knowledge of Confu- 
cius and Mencius, and their counsels to bo\s. 

"At ten," says the book, "lads must be sent 
abroad to tutors and remain day and night, study- 
ing the arts of writing and arithmetic, wearing 
plain apparel, always learning to demean them- 
selves in a manner becoming their age, and, both 
in receiving instruction and in practice, acting in 
sincerity of purpose." 

"At thirteen they must attend to music and 
poetry." 

"When the father calls, his son must answer 
promptly and without delay; he must drop what- 
ever work he has in hand, or if he is eating and 
has food in his mouth, he must spit it out and run 
quickly. If the son who has aged parents goes 
away from the house, it must not be now to this 
place and then to that, nor must he delay his re- 
turn beyond the proper time nor retain an un- 
disturbed countenance when his parents are af- 
flicted by sickness." 

"It is the dutv of everv son in winter to warm 



132 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

and in summer to cool his parents' beds; in the 
evening to wish them rest, and in the morning to 
inquire after their health; when going out to an- 
nounce it to his parents, and on returning to go 
into their presence. His walks abroad must al- 
ways be through the same places; he must have 
some settled business." 

"While the tutor gives instruction the pupil 
must learn, and with gentleness, deference, and 
self-abasement receive implicitly every word his 
master utters. When he sees virtuous people he 
must follow them. When he hears good maxims 
he must conform to them. In a gentle and sub- 
missive manner he must perform the duties which 
he owes to his parents and brothers, and must 
never behave proudly, presuming on his own abil- 
ities. 

"He must cherish no wicked designs, but al- 
ways act uprightly. Whether at home or abroad, 
he must have a fixed residence and associate with 
the benevolent. He must carefully regulate his 
personal deportment and control the feelings of 
his heart. He must, both when rising and at 
rest, keep his clothes in order. Every morning 
he must learn something new and rehearse the 
same every evening, doing all with the most re- 
spectful and watchful attention." 

" Of the three thousand crimes included under 
the five kinds of punishment, there is none greater 
than disobedience to parents." 



WINTER IN YAMAMIDZU. 1 33 

Saijiro had also to learn the "One Thousand 
Character Classic," which consists of maxims and 
precepts. One thousand characters are used in 
this book, no two of which are alike. The max- 
ims are poetical in the original, and the children 
repeated them in a sing-song style, drawing in 
their breath and prolonging some of the words. 

Saijiro studied faithfully and was a good boy 
in school. But he loved play too, and many a 
merry game did he have with the village chil- 
dren. 

There came a happy New Year's Day for the 
Yamamid^u people. It was warm and sunn)-, 
and even Baba could sit outside on her cushion 
and watch the games. The whole village joined 
in the sports. Yenoske had been down to the 
town and had brought up a supply of provisions. 
The women had pounded the rice into a fine pow- 
der and had made mocJii^ hard cakes, from it. 
They had candy and plenty of rice and daikons. 
The girls had bright sashes, balls, and battledores 
and shuttlecocks. The boys had new belts and 
gorgeous kites. The village hairdresser and bar- 
ber had done their best. The bath-house had 
been well patronized and everything was bright 
and fresh for the New Year. 

Congratulations were heard on all sides. Ya- 
mamidzu was bright and beautiful, and the people 
forc^ot that there were such thins^s in the world as 
hunger, cold, and weariness. Kojiro was happy, 



134 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

too, Oil this bright New Year, and laughed and 
clapped his hands with the rest of the children. 

The boys and men flew kites, and the girls 
and women played battledore and shuttlecock. 
The girls counted and sang merrily as the pretty 
feathers were tossed to and fro. 

Some wandering minstrels had stopped in the 
village to make music for the people. A blind 
woman sat on a mat in the middle of the street, 
and while she sang and played her daughter, a 
girl of thirteen, danced. She gained great ap- 
l)lause, and all the Yamamidzu people said she 
did well. The woman sang of the new year, and 
of the opening of the peach and plum blossoms. 

Later in the day a story-teller recited some 
tales of ancient Japan and of the glories of Tay- 
kosama. Then the children gathered around him 
and clamored for a story. 

"Ah," said the man, "I will tell you the 
story of the eighty-first brother." Then the chil- 
dren all dropped their toys and listened. The 
man sat on a mat and held a fan, with which he 
rapped on a small table. 

"Once upon a time there were eighty -one 
brothers. They were all jealous of each other, 
and all wanted to rule the same kinordom and to 
marry the same princess. The princess lived in 
the province of Inaba, and all the brothers started 
off to find her. All of the eighty brothers joined 
in hating the eighty-first brother, and they treated 




THE RABBIT AND THE CROCODILES. 



WINTER IN YAMAMIDZU. 1 35 

him shamefully and made him carry the heavy 
luggage." 

Here the man held up before the children a 
picture which represented the eighty-one brothers 
travelling among the mountains, the eighty-first 
brother carrying the pack. 

''By-and-by the brothers came across a poor 
hare lying in the road and crying. His hair was 
all plucked out and he looked very miserable. 
The brothers told him to go and bathe in the sea 
and then lie down on a mountain and let the wind 
blow over him. But the poor hare was then in 
still greater distress; the wind blowing over his 
cracked skin put him in terrible pain. While he 
lay crying there the eighty-first brother came 
along:. He asked the hare how he frot in such a 
plight. Then the hare told him that he was on 
an island and wanted to get over on the main- 
land. So he called to a crocodile, and they made 
a bargain. They were to count how many croco- 
diles there were in the sea and how many hares 
there were on the land. So the crocodiles rano^ed 
themselves in a long row to be counted and the 
liare crossed over on their backs." 

Here the story-teller showed the children 
another funny picture. All the crocodiles were 
in a long row, and the hare was running across. 

^'But," continued the man, "the silly hare, 
just as he had gained the land, laughed aloud 
and told the crocodiles his scheme; and the 



136 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

last crocodile seized liiin and plucked off all liis 
hair. 

"The hare further told the eighty-first brother 
that he had followed the advice of the eighty bro- 
thers and had bathed in the sea. Then the 
eighty-first brother told him to bathe in the river_ 
and take a good roll in the bushes. Having done; 
this the hare was quite cured, and he befriended 
the eighty-first brother, so that he married the 
beautiful princess." 

"A very great thank-you," said the children, 
and they clapped their hands and went away. 

About noon two visitors entered Yamamidzu. 
They were Yen and the old grandmother from 
the mountain tea-house. Yen's face was pow- 
dered, and she wore a silk sash and finer hair- 
pins than the village girls had ever seen before. 
She was a real belle among them, and was greet- 
ed with many exclamations of surprise and de- 
light. But she led the old grandmother carefully 
by the hand and was mindful of her comfort in 
every respect. 

"Truly, welcome," said the villagers, crowd- 
inof around them. "It is a lonof walk for the 
grandmother. And how is the honorable old 
lady?" 

" Thanks ! Baba is very well, and she is very 
happy to come," answered Yen. 

Then the grandm^other was seated on the mat 
beside the Yamamidzu Baba, and the two Babas 



WINTER IN YAMAMIDZU. 1 37 

laughed and chatted and smoked their pipes. 
Yen joined the merry group of girls, and soon her 
laugh was heard above the others. Saijiro and 
Ts'koi were here and there among the people, 
and even the schoolmaster Yetaro tried to be 
cheerful. 

Yenoske was invaluable to the little boys. 
He helped with the kite-flying and shouted with 
the children if some kite made a particularly high 
flight into the blue sky. 

But the bright hours wore away and the 
cold winter night came on. The people had 
to go into their houses, but the story- telling, 
playing, and singing were kept up until a late 
hour. 

It was the last time that the Yamamidzu Baba 
went out. The next day an unusually severe 
storm set in. The wind swept through the 
mountain gorge and carried the snow in great 
drifts throuirh the villagfc street. Baba's streno-th 
seemed suddenly to fail, and she lay on \\er futon ^ 
scarcely caring to move. She could still tell her 
stories, however, and Saijiro and Yenoske often 
be^reed for them. Her thouo^hts went back to the 
old days when her children were small and her 
strong young husband went up and down the 
great mountain Fuji. 

'''' Dogu ! I was not one of the holy ones wdio 
went up to the summit, although honorable hus- 
band spent two months every summer up there," 



138 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

said Baba one night when Yenoske and Saijiro 
sat beside her. 

"At the very top, Baba? And what did he 
do there?" asked Saijiro. 

"Every year," answered Baba, "during the 
sixth and seventh months the mountain was 
'open,' and pilgrims came from all over the 
country to worship at the crater. Dogu ! it ivas 
a sight when the pilgrims came in their white 
dresses, carrying their staves. Hundreds and 
hundreds passed by the house every summer. At 
the top was a village where the pilgrims could 
rest, and honorable husband had charge of one of 
the houses and fed the holy travellers, taking a 
few pence from each for rice, tea, and sweet 
sake. 

"I was very lonely when the husband went 
up the mountain. I would go with him as far as 
I dared. There were beautiful flowers at the 
base of Fuji — lilies, jDoppies, and other beautiful 
plants. But farther up there was nothing but 
ashes. Our feet would sink in them, and we 
could scarcely walk. Then honorable husband 
would send me back with the baby, and I 
would work in the garden and keep the house 
clean. 

" Often the top of the mountain would be hid- 
den from me by the clouds, and then again it 
would stand out clear and white against the sky. 
There was always snow on it. I was ^dad to see 



WINTER IN YAMAMIDZU. 139 

the top, and often looked up to where the honor- 
able husband \vas. 

" But, dogii ! one day he went up to spend the 
two months on the mountain, and never came 
back again. Some said he fell down the crater; 
others that he had been murdered. Search was 
made for him, but he was never found." 

"What did you do then, Baba," asked Ye- 
noske. 

"Honorable father-in-law was a servant of a 
samjirai^-'" and I went to live with him. The 
house was in a lonely place, and we had to work 
very hard. Our master the daiinio was severe, 
too, and we were heavily taxed; we scarcely 
knew what was our own. At last some of the 
farmers determined that they would not stand it 
any longer, and they rose in a body and killed 
some of the officers. It was a long time before 
the strife ceased, and we were all very unhappy. 
But at last peace was declared between the daimio 

^ Under the Shoguns the feudal system prevailed in Japan, 
the damiws, or territorial nobles, owning- tracts of land within 
whose limits their will was law. The whole population was 
then divided into four classes : the samta-ai, or military fami- 
lies, from whom the retainers of the daimios were recruited, 
and who had the right to wear two swords, as a sign of gentle 
birth, the farmers, the artisans, and the merchants or traders. 
Since the revolution of 1868 the feudal system has been abol- 
ished ; the daimios have surrendered their lands, castles, and 
retainers to the Government, and the people of Japan are 
now divided into the three classes of nobles, gentry, and com- 
moners, the last including the peasantry, artisans, and traders. 



140 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

and his servants, and we were all ordered to 
Yedo. 

"The daimio's household was very large; and 
then there were the two-sworded men and their 
retainers and wives and children. Dogjt! it was a 
great train. We moved very slowly. The daimid 
rode in a beautiful closed norimoiio^^ (a large litter, 
carried by several bearers), "and all the people 
prostrated themselves before him as he passed. 
Hotels and tea-houses were made ready for his ac- 
commodation; but we, who were in the train, of- 
ten orot no rest dav or nio^ht. 

"Dead bodies of thieves and murderers were 
exposed along the road, that men might see that 
justice had been done. Sometim-es the whole 
train was stopped by a man throwing himself in 
the road before us and presenting a petition to 
the daimio. 

"At last we reached the orreat citv and were 
comfortably settled in our yasJiiki. The daimio 
had feasts, mock-battles, and theatricals, and 
there was much visiting. The samurai were 
idle and drank much sake. The women had 
nothing to do and quarrelled among themselves. 

" One day all Yedo was excited. The soldiers 
were called out, temple bells were rung, and fires 
were lighted. Some strange ships were in the 
bay. They were from America, and all they 
wanted was to deliver a letter to the great Emper- 
or. When this was done thev went awav. Soon 



WINTER IN YAMAMIDZU. 141 

after there was a terrible earthquake. There 
was no difference between the land and the sea. 
The earth trembled and seemed to rise in great 
waves beneath our feet. Houses were shaken 
down and people were killed. 

* ' Some years after that there was a great bat- 
tle in Yedo. I don't know just what the fight- 
ing was all about, but our prince's establish- 
ment was broken up, and my son, Yenoske's fa- 
ther, came to Yamamidzu, and I followed him." 

All this was not told without many interrup- 
tions. Baba had to be rubbed and warmed, and 
cups of tea were given her. 

*' Baba, you are very old; shall you die soon?" 
asked Saijiro. 

''^ Dogu! I suppose I shall," answered the 
old woman. 

*'But you haven't been wicked enough to be 
put into burning oil, have you, Baba?" said the 
child, who still retained vivid impressions of the 
Buddhist hells. 

Poor Baba could not answer this question. 
Soon after telling her story she grew almost un- 
conscious, only rousing now and then to take a 
little nourishment. 

The stormy weather continued. Small -pox 
broke out in the village, and some of the babies 
died. One day there was an unusual stir in the 
town. In the midst of a drivinof storm some men 
arrived carrvinor ^ car in which was an imasre of 



142 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

the god of the sick. From village to village in 
the mountains, wherever there was sickness or 
distress, this idol liad been carried. The Yama- 
midiju priests met it and services were held. But 
the sickness did not cease. Provisions grew 
scarce. Yenoske w^orked hard at his carving, and 
at last started down the mountain with his wood- 
en ware, in order to get some food. Saijiro went 
with him to the end of the village street. Ye- 
noske had on high wooden shoes, which kept him 
out of the wet snow, but his clothing was scanty 
and his feet and hands were red with cold. There 
were few travellers on the road. Two w^omen go- 
ing up to Hakone carried umbrellas which were 
weighed down by the snow that had fallen on 
them. 

At a large tea-house a girl leaned against an 
open slide looking over the white landscape. 
She recognized Yenoske, and asked him to sit 
down and have a cup of tea. *'How are the peo- 
ple of Yamamidzu?" she inquired. 

''^ Dogu! ihey have small-pox there, and there 
is much distress. Baba is dying, and we have 
little food," answered Yenoske. 

'' Truly, misfortunes !" said the g^irl. 

Yenoske did not linger longer to talk, but hur- 
ried down to Odawara, got his rice, and went 
back to the village. 

The school was carried on during the w-inter, 
but Yetaro was sick and couqfhed a ofreat deal. 



WINTKR IN YAMAMIDZU. 143 

One day lie went in to see old Baba. She opened 
her eyes and said, ''^ Sensei^ your boy is a good 
boy." 

The teacher sighed and said, " Baba, you are 
going to die, and I shall soon follow you. Where 
are we going?" 

But Baba went back into her stupor again 
and made no reply. Thus she slept her life 
away. One golden April evening a coffin was 
carried up to the temple. All the Yamamidzu 
people followed it; and when the funeral services 
were over the slow procession went up the 
mountain to the cemetery where poor Kochi lay, 
and Baba's body was laid to rest. 



144 KESA AND SAIJIE.O. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

MITSU'S TROUBLES. 

^'' DogiL ! honorable father, dogu^ dogii! please 
do not make me marry the man.'^ 

Fujisawa Mitsu was pleading with her father. 
A brother ofBcer had sent a go-between to ask 
IMitsn in marriage for his son. Some business re- 
lations made the match a particularly desirable 
one for Fujisawa, and he insisted on his daugh- 
ter's acceptance of the offered husband. 

Mitsu had seen the young Akichi, knew his 
father's family, and dreaded going to live with 
him. 

^^ Dogn ! Mitsu, you are sixteen years old; it is 
time for you to be married. And as to happiness, 
some women are happy and some are not, and 
that is all there is about it. I expect to be obey- 
ed, and you need say no more." Fujisawa closed 
the slides behind him and went away. 

Mitsu's tears were fallino: fast. The orentle 

o o 

mother felt sorry for her suffering child, but dared 
not interfere. Fujisawa was liberal in many 
ways, and for the most part kind to his wife and 
children, but he expected implicit obedience from 
them, and would suffer no remonstrances when 



MITSU'S TROUBLES. 145 

once lie had made up his mind as to what they 
should do. So he went off to the custom-house 
leaving Mitsu crying and Mrs. Fujisawa trying 
in vain to comfort her. 

At last little Kesa slipped in arid sat down by 
her sister's side. "Why are you crying, honor- 
able sister?" said she. 

^^ Dogu^ I must be married!" answered Mitsu. 

"But is that vciy bad, honorable sister?" 
asked Kesa, who remembered well Tama's happy 
marriage, with its feastings, rejoicings, and con- 
gratulations. "You'll have beautiful things — 
silk dresses, amber hairpins, and beautiful sashes. 
Oh, Mitsu, I should like to get married ! But 
now I shall never marry. Rinjiro was to have 
been my honorable husband, and n'ow he is 
dead." 

"Oh, Kesa," said Mitsu, smiling in spite of 
her tears at the child's earnest way of taking her 
early widowhood, " there are other husbands left, 
and you w411 find one, and a good one too, dar- 
ling. But, Kechan, I do not want any fine 
clothes. It is Akichi, and we hate him; and his 
home is so dirty and noisy." 

So Mitsu sobbed on, while Kesa sat by her 
side not knowing what to do and with a sorrow- 
ful, puzzled look in her dark eyes. 

"The gods bless you, my daughter," said Mrs. 
Fujisawa, who always turned to her idols for com- 
fort in trouble. 

Kesa an.l Saijiro. IQ 



146 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Then she went to Hana, and Kesa got ready 
for school. Mitsu went out of the house, down 
the quiet street to Aka. They had grown to be 
loving friends of late. Something drew them to- 
gether in a strong sympathy; and Aka forgot her 
own troubles as she listened to Mitsu' s story, and 
shed tears which were not for Rinjiro. 

Fujisawa gave Mitsu beautiful dresses and an 
amber hairpin, but there was no interest felt in 
the preparations such as there had been for Tama. 
Fujisawa was stern and gloomy, Mrs. Fujisawa 
quiet and sympathetic, and Mitsu tearful and sul- 
len by turns. Kesa felt that a shadow rested over 
her home, and often sought Mitsu and sat beside 
lier. The sisters said little, but Mitsu found com- 
fort in Kesa's presence. She was a blundering 
little thing, not very quick to learn, not always 
obedient; but her heart was full of love and her 
sympathies were deep and strong. 

Old Kei shed tears when she arranged Mitsu's 
hair for the wedding, but they were not like those 
which had fallen for Tama. 

It was a dull March evening when Mitsu was 
taken to Akichi's home as his bride. The house 
was a gloomy place near the east wall of the 
castle. In the spring the grass on the slope 
which stretches from the wall to the moat is 
green and beautiful; but it was dry and brown 
when ]\Iitsu went to her new home, and every- 
thing looked dreary. The house was noisy and 



MITSU'S TROUBLES. 147 

disorderly, very different from Fujisawa's refined, 
beautiful home. The father-in-law had a num- 
ber of women in the house beside his lawful wife. 
Some had children and some had none; and the 
women disputed, quarrelled, and drank sake. 

No loving welcome was given to Mitsu. A 
room was assigned her with no outlook except at 
one corner, where she could catch a glimpse of 
the castle wall, with the trees above it and a 
gleam of shining water at the foot of the slope. 

The only one of the family at all congenial to 
Mitsu was a young girl named Hota, who had 
been sold as a kind of slave to an old man in the 
family. She told Mitsu of her love for the young 
Jukichi and of his love for her. She showed 
Mitsu a fan on which her lover had written verses 
composed by himself They likened the pale 
Japanese girl to branches of plum-trees, rich 
peach-blooms, and snow on the mountain Fuji. 
The other women of the household hated Mitsu 
and Hota, were jealous of their mutual friendship, 
and gave them no peace. 

There came a spring morning which Mitsu 
long remembered. It was when the blossoms 
were all beautiful upon the trees — the blossoms to 
which Jukichi had compared his love. Hota was 
not to be found in the house. Late in the day 
some fishermen discovered her body floating in the 
bay. She held in her hand the pretty fan, and in 
the folds of her dress were trinkets given her by 



148 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

her lover. She had thus ended her miserable life. 
So Mitsu's only friend left her, and the days 
passed heavily and wearily. 

One cold, wintry day almost a year after Mit- 
su's wedding an old woman and a young girl 
were walking down one of the side streets of To- 
kio, going towards the castle. Their heads were 
mufiled in their d::ukius^ or winter hoods, so that 
only their eyes could be seen. Those of the old 
woman were bright, though her form w^as bent; 
and the sparkling face of the girl could not be 
entirely hidden even by the covering that she 
wore. 

They were Fujisawa Chive and Meguchi. 
Both of them carried small objects that looked 
like sticks, but which were in reality something 
very highly prized by the Japanese — plum 
branches that would bloom out when put in 
water. 

"Meguchi," asked Chiye suddenly, "do you 
think that IMitsu will have a vase to put the 
plum-blossoms in ?' ' 

^'•DoguP'' answered Meguchi, "poorMitsu! 
I fear not." 

"Then let us stop and buy a pretty bamboo 
vase for her," said Chiye. 

The little shop where such things were kept 
for sale w^as near them. They turned aside, and, 
sitting down en the floor of the shop, asked the 
shop-keeper to show them some vases. There 



MITSU'S TROUBLES. 149 

were a good many styles — some simply a hollow 
piece of bamboo, and some cut into quite elabo- 
rate patterns; some were painted, and some had 
Chinese characters written on them. 

"Here is one with a pretty poem from the 
Hiakuninishm on it," said Chi ye. " Mitsu loves 
the HiakunmisJiiii, ' * 

After a little bargaining the vase was bought, 
and Chiye and Meguchi went on, going all the 
while towards the castle. 

There was a beautiful display of tea-cups, tea 
pots, and little dishes in the shops. This was the 
street for china. 

Then they turned into the paper street, where 
all the merchants sold paper. These merchants 
sat by the hibacJiis^ with their pipes, and called to 
the passers-by to examine their fine stock of pa- 
per. But Meguchi and Chiye kept on, and at last 
reached the house where Mitsu lived. They 
stood outside and called, "It is very cold." 

An answer was heard from within, and a sour- 
visaged woman opened the door. She saluted 
them and bade them enter. The room was dark 
and gloomy. No pride was taken in keeping 
mats clean and woodwork polished, as in the Fu- 
jisawa mansion. There were no bright coals in 
the JiibacJd^ and Meguchi shivered, while Chiye 
looked at things with contempt. 

"Poor Mitsu, to have such a place to live 
In!" she thought. 



150 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Then slie said aloud, "Where is Mitsu?" 

There were several women in the room. One 
of them was ripDingf a dress, preparatory to wasli- 
ino- it. She nodded in the direction of some 
slides, behind which Mitsu was supposed to be. 
Chiye and j\Ieo:uchi, foUowinof this direction, 
went UP to the slides, drew one of them open, and 
discovered Mitsu sitting- on the floor in a dejected 
posture. She looked pleased to see Chiye and 
]Me.o:uchi. 

The latter .^lanced hastily around the room. 
"Where is the little baby?" she said. 

"Z^<?f//," said Mitsu, her eyes filling with tears, 
"he is dead and finished. He died day before 
yesterday, and they took him away and buried 
him somewhere. Such a nice little boy, too !" 

Meguchi sat down beside her and began to rub 
her — a Japanese way of giving consolation. 

'^ Dog?i,'' said Mitsu, "it is hard. The hus- 
band was very cruel, and he has not looked at me 
since. He drinks much sal'e\ and is often angry. 
Oh, Meguchi, where is the mother? I wish I 
could go home." 

Meguchi longed in her heart to take her home, 
but dared not. Chiye unwrapped the bamboo 
vase and showed it to Mitsu, with the plum 
branches. "They will come out in a few days," 
she said. "They are the first we have had, and 
we bought a vase with a poem written on it." 

Mitsu found w^ords to thank her young sister. 



MITSU'S TROUBLES. I5I 

althouo:li lier heart was so heavy. It is wonderful 
how fond the Japanese are of the plum-blossom. 
They are very poetical, and the unfolding of the 
buds has a deep significance to them. Possibly 
the blossoms may have reminded Mitsu of the 
little budding life of her baby. 

^^ DogtcP^ said Meguchi, "it was a darling lit- 
tle one. It is very sad, O Mitsu. But there is 
trouble at home. Aka weeps night and day. Her 
tears fall like the rain. Hana is very weak and 
sick, and the mother never leaves her. Her eyes 
are bad, and the doctor does her no good. A let- 
ter has come from Tama. She is always happy. 
Her little boy is well and strong, and the father- 
in-law and mother-in-law are very kind. Truly, 
Tama is fortunate." 

Poor Mitsu ! the tears gathered in her eyes ; 
but just then a rough voice called her name, and 
she hurried away to perform some services for her 
mother-in-law, w4iom she was bound to obey, and 
who seized every opportunity of annoying her. 
Mitsu grieved and pined in this uncongenial home 
until she was a mere shadow of her former self. 
She longed to die, yet had no hope that death 
would bring her anything better. 

The afternoon was turning bitterly cold. Me- 
guchi and Chiye hurried home to get out of the 
cutting wind. The storm grew wilder and wild- 
er. The storm-slides were all closed; yet the wind 
rattled them and pierced through the crevices. 



15^ KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Many an old woman and little child that night 
trembled for fear that their house might fall on 
them. 

At midnight there came the dreaded cry, 
*'Fire! fire!" All the bells in the city set up a 
terrible clanging, and all the people were roused. 

Fujisawa, opening a slide in the upper room, 
saw a fierce red glare in the direction of the castle. 
He had listened apparently unmoved to the story 
that Meguchi and Chiye had to tell. The mar- 
riage was his work; he alone was to blame; and 
he was unwilling to acknowledge all its evil even 
to himself. But when he saw the wild light of 
the conflao:ration he thouo^ht of his child's dan- 
ger, and hastily slipping on a warm garment, and 
calling Oto to follow with a lantern, he went out 
into the cold of the winter night. 

Oh, how the wind blew, and how rapidly the 
flames spread ! He had but a short distance to go 
before getting into the midst of the turmoil. Peo- 
ple were running with mats, slides and household 
furniture, and big bundles of bedding and cloth- 
ing. Beggars and coolies, merchants and soldiers, 
rich and poor, high and low, mingled in one mass 
of anxious, hurrying humanity. Parents and 
serv^ants carried children on their backs. Sons 
carried their aged parents. There was no thought 
of anything save escape from the flames. 

Strange to say, most of the people carried lan- 
terns, although the light from the fire was sufii- 



MITSU'S TROUBLES. 1 53 

clent for all purposes. The fire-gods were carried 
around and the firemen were all out. Oh, the 
wildness and confusion of one of these great fires 
in Tokio ! It takes such a little while to burn 
down thousands of the frail wooden houses. 
Many of them have fire-proof structures, or go- 
downs, attached to them, where the people can 
store their goods until the fire is out, and during 
the progress of a fire men carry mud around, with 
which they plaster up all the cracks in the go- 
downs. This English word, which seems a mis- 
nomer as applied to the only buildings that do not 
**go down" before a fire, is a corruption of the 
Malay gadong^ warehouse. 

Fujisawa and his servant were advancing 
against the crowd, and had difficulty in making 
their way. At last, by going through the back 
streets, they reached the house where Chiye and 
Meguchi had seen Mitsu in the afternoon. It was 
still standing, but the people were preparing to 
leave. Fujisawa muffled his head, and in the 
confusion no one noticed him. He found himself 
surrounded by a group of frightened, screaming 
women, who in a great panic were trying to gath- 
er up some of their possessions; but he saw no 
]\Iitsu. He went through the outer room, and, 
going up to the slide, softly spoke her name. 
Tremblingly she opened the door, revealing to 
her father a pale, frightened girl. 

"Mitsu,'' said the father, *'come with me." 



154 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

"Shall I take the clothino;, father?" she 
asked. 

"Bring some things, and come quickly." 

Hastily she selected the articles that she most 
prized and made them up into a bundle* Fuji- 
sawa took her by the arm, and they slipped out of 
the house. 

The wind had increased, and the confusion was 
terrible. The hot flames rolled on. Birds left 
their lodging-places in the trees and flew about 
terrified and screaming. Horses made a stampede, 
and dogs and cats joined in the wild flight. The 
temple bells were tolled and the drums were beat- 
en. Fujisawa, still holding on to Mitsu, had to 
run with the others. Poor Mitsu soon felt her 
strength giving way and sank down at his side. 

The servant came and offered Fujisawa the 
lantern, saying, "I can carry her on my back." 

So IMitsu was lifted on to Oto's back, and on 
they went. No one else had paid any attention 
to the fainting girl. Kvery one was occupied with 
his own affairs. The tops of the palace trees were 
all on fire. Thickly the sparks flew, and children 
shrieked as the burniuQf cinders fell about them. 
At last Fujisawa came near his own residence; 
Mitsu had recovered somewhat and was able to 
walk; the fire and crowd were left behind; and 
thus, at midnight, Fujisawa Mitsu was brought 
home. 

The morninof dawned on a scene of desolation. 



MITSU'S TROUBLES. I55 

The burned district covered a great portion of 
the central part of the city. Thousands were left 
homeless. But they went immediately to work, 
and before evening temporary shelter had been 
erected for many families. 

Fujisawa Mitsu lay for days sick and helpless 
on her pallet, tended by old Meguchi, and Chiye 
and Kesa had to go to school by themselves. 

It was the third day of the month, and Chiye 
and Kesa, with Fusa and Cho, two girls from the 
yashiki^ had been enjoying the ' ' feast of dolls. ' ' 
The dolls which had been in the Fujisawa fam- 
ily from time unknown were brought out and 
arranged in the usual order. The emperor and 
empress occupied the highest places, and the in- 
ferior dolls were placed below them. The girls 
had mild, sweet sake and candies. Chiye, as the 
eldest, did the honors. She had pretty spring 
hairpins in her hair; they were of crape, fashion- 
ed into flowers and butterflies. When the girls 
were tired of the dolls, they took their battledores 
and shuttlecocks and played in the garden. In 
this new springtime the garden was as lovely as 
ever. Never had iris or wistaria bloomed more 
beautifully; the grass never was smoother, the 
sun never was brighter, and the girls never were 
happier. With faces powdered, lips touched with 
bcni^ pretty dresses and bright sashes, they tossed 
the shuttlecocks gracefully and skilfully. 

"The wind-god is good," said Fusa, Chiye's 



156 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

friend; and tliey all sang that little song whicH 
Japanese children have sung for so many genera- 
tions, praying that the wind might not blow too 
hard during the game of battledore and shuttle- 
cock. 

]\Iitsu and Hana watched them from the house. 
Poor Hana never could play with the children, 
but she accepted her sufferings patiently. 

Kesa had permission to go with Meguchi to 
see the young visitors home. They bowed very 
politely to Mrs. Fujisawa when they went away 
and said that they had had a pleasant time. 

As the girls went down the street they saw a 
flower-seller with pretty spring flowers on his 
stand, and stopped to look at the blossoms. 

"Will you not condescend to buy some, my 
little ladies?" said the man. 

Kesa asked to be allowed to carry Aka a 
flower, and IMeguchi consented. 

"But Vvhat is this?" they all asked, as they 
spied something new to them. 

'''' Dogii^ that is a foreign flower — the thorn- 
rose," said the man. The children looked long- 
ingly at it, but had not money enough to buy it, 
so they got a bunch of camellias and gave them 
to Aka, who smiled on .Kesa, while her eyes filled 
with tears. 



SUNSET OX THE HAKONES. 1 57 

CHAPTER XIV. 

SUNSET ON THE HAKONES. 

While Kesa was playing with the girls in 
Tokio, Saijiro was having a merry time with the 
boys on the Hakones. 

It was a holiday, and the children had spent 
the whole afternoon in the temple inclosure. 
They played leap-frog, hide-and-seek, catching- 
the-devil, and fox-and-goose. Kojiro had clapped 
his hands and cheered as londly as any of the 
boys, and even the old priest laughed as he 
watched the plays. 

These mountain boys were fond of play, and 
Saijiro was one of the strongest, brightest, and 
merriest of them all. But he was also fonder of 
study than most of them, and his air indicated a 
superiority of birth and breeding which the villa- 
gers did not fail to recognise; to all, as to Ye- 
noske, he was the "little master." 

It was orrowinof late, and the sun had already 
gone down behind the mountains. Yenoske had 
joined the group of boys who, tired of play, were 
resting on the temple steps. 

" Let us tell stories," said Kojiro. 

The boys agreed, and called upon Yenoske for 
the first. 



153 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

^^ Dogu, what Story do I know?" said Yenoske, 
rubbing his head. 

But the boys insisted, and Yenoske began: 

*'Once upon a time there was a very wicked 
prince. He lived in the province of Hizen. He 
had a great castle and a great many retainers. 
These all carried swords and fought for the 
prince. Near the castle lived an old man who 
reverenced the fox-god and every morning oflfered 
sacrifices on his altar. The prince ridiculed the 
old man and his wife and would not worship the 
fox-god. Then the fox-god sent terrible dreams 
to the prince. Every night on oni^ ten feet high, 
with only one eye, and wrapped in white, came 
to his bedside. The prince would shiver and 
shake in his bed and at last grew so thin and 
pale that every one noticed it. 

" One day he went to the old man and began 
to talk with him. 

*' 'Why do you take so much pains to worship 
the fox-god?' he said. 'You are poor; the crops 
are not good ; your wife is sick. ' 

"Then the old man said, *Why do you look 
so thin and pale ? I know the fox-god is visiting 
you with his vengeance.' 

" Then the prince grew paler still and wanted 
to kill the old man. But he went back to his 
house, and every night the demon grew larger 
and larger, and his one eye more and more terri- 
ble. At last the prince had a war with a neigh- 



SUNSET ON THE HAKONES. 1 59 

boring prince. He was defeated and cut himself 
open. And every one said it was because he ridi- 
culed the fox-god and the poor old man who 
prayed to him." 

"Thanks, very great thanks, Yenoske," said 
the boys, who had listened with eyes and mouths 
wide open to this story of the demon. 

"Now, Chintaro, it is your turn." 

"I like Momotaro," said Chintaro, throwing 
himself down on the grass. 

"He likes Momotaro because he was fat like 
himself," said the boys. 

" I like him because he was good to his adopt- 
ed parents," said the indignant Chintaro. 

"Well, go on with your story," persisted the 
crowd. 

So Chintaro told the well-known tale. "One 
day an old woman went down to the stream to 
wash. A great peach rolled down and ihe old 
woman took it home to her husband. ' Husband, 
here is a peach for you,' said she as she entered 
the house. 

^^ ^ Dogu^ what a large peach!' said the old 
man, who was feeble and lay on his couch. 

"The old woman cut it into two pieces, and 
out rolled a baby. The baby grew to be a fine 
large boy and made his adopted parents very 
happy. But he read in a book of a demon who 
had great treasures beyond the sea. His parents 
were old and poor, and Momotaro wanted to get 



l6o KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

the treasure and make the old man and woman 
comfortable. So he bowed a saionara to them 
and went off. He had gone but a short distance 
when up came a dog, a bird, and an ape, who 
oiFerect to help him. So they all got into a boat 
and went to the demon's home. The door was 
of wood, very heavy, and strongly bolted. But 
IMomotaro and his three brave companions beat 
open the door, killed the demon, and got the 
treasures. So they all came home in a big sail- 
boat, with coral, gold, and clothes; and the old 
woman and the old man were comfortable and 
happy ever afterwards." 

Chintaro turned a few somersaults and went 
on. "I like to hear about the thunder-god. My! 
wouldn't I like to help him beat his drum! And 
yesterday we read in school about the big turtle 
who carries the world on his back, and when he 
shakes himself we have an earthquake." 

Then little Nanjiro was called upon for hisstory. 

Giving two or three jumps for the benefit of 
the baby hanging on his back, he began: " Once 
there was a very bad girl. She cried when her 
hair was combed, and a little black demon went 
and sat on her head. She was angry because she 
had to sew, and demons pulled her work to pieces. 
She didn't want to go to school, and black de- 
mons pinched her legs. At last the demons 
pulled her out from her father's house and she 
had to go and live in a dark, bad place. 



SUNSET ON THE HAKONES. l6l 

"There was another girl who was very good. 
She was patient while her hair was being dressed, 
and beautiful white fairies came and gave her 
lovely hairpins. She was diligent in school, 
and the fairies made beautiful flowers Q:row alonir 
her pathway. She worked long and diligently at 
her sewing, and the fairies gave her beautiful 
clothes, and at last she got a fine husband and a 
beautiful boy.'' 

"Who cares to hear about girls?" said Chin- 
taro contemptuously. "Mantaro, tell us about 
the old man who made the trees blossom." 

So ]\Iantaro told the story that the Japanese 
love so well, of the good old man who sprinkled 
ashes on the trees. The trees burst into beautiful 
blossoms, and the prince of the country, who was 
resting in the shade, came and rewarded the old 
man. 

Then a bad old man tried to do the same 
thing, but he only succeeded in sprinkling ashes 
in the eyes of the prince and made him very 
angry. 

Then Saijiro was called upon for his tale. 

"Well," said he, "I will tell about a book I 
am reading w^th the honorable father. Once 
upon a time there was a man who wanted to 
travel. So he visited a great many kingdoms. 
One was the kingdom of Babyland. In it 
there lived a great number of very small peo- 
ple who had no teeth and no hair and wdio had 

Kcs.i an I Ra-.jiro. I J 



l62 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

to be carried about. And they spoke a strange 
language. It was 'goo-goo' and 'da-da' and 
' mama. ' ' ' 

'''' Dogu ! Taijiki belongs to that countr}^," said 
the boys, as they laughed heartily. Taijiki was 
Nanjiro's baby. 

"Then," continued Saijiro, "he went into 
the kingdom of Avarice, where the people would 
not do anything unless they were paid. He had 
to go on some sort of a flying-machine, and got 
caught in a tree. He begged the people to take 
him down, but they only came and looked at 
him and said, ' Honorable sir, if you have mon- 
ey and can pay us, we will bring a ladder and 
help you down.' 

"There is a picture of a man in a tree, with 
all the people looking at him. At last he took 
some money out of his sleeve, showed it to the 
people, and they let him come down. 

"Then he went into the kingdom of Lying. 
He found a schoolhouse, and on it w^as a notice that 
the honorable teacher would teach lying on a cer- 
tain day. The man went there on the appointed 
day, but there was no teacher. Only there was 
another notice, telling the scholars to come the 
next day. Every day he went, and every day 
there w^as the same notice posted up. At last he 
got very angry, found the man, and asked what 
he meant. 

* ' ' Honorable sir, do not be so angry, ' said the 



SUNSET ON THE HAKONES. 163 

man ; ' I advertised to teach lying, and that is the 
way I do it. ' " 

The boys thought Saijiro's stories very fine. 
They had never heard any of them before. 

''Now Mejiki," they said, when they had 
discussed the various kingdoms. 

Mejiki thought a moment, and said, ''I have 
a new book which honorable father brought from 
Tokio. It was sent by my honorable uncle. In 
it is a new story. Once there was an old man 
who had a terrible lump on the side of his face. 
One evening he went out to take a walk, and 
while he was walking the sun went down, and he 
lost his way. He didn't know what to do, and 
at last hid in the hollow of a tree. While he was 
there he heard a noise as of many people singing 
and talking. The old man peeped out of the 
tree and saw some imps coining down the road. 
At first he was much frightened. 

"The imps stopped near the tree and made a 
fire. Then they began to dance. The old man 
was so pleased that at last he got out from the 
tree and began to dance too. The imps cheered 
and said, ' Old man, you dance well. We will 
take off your lump.' Then they took the old 
man's lump off, and he, very much pleased, went 
home without it. 

"Now he had a neighbor who had a lump on 
his face. When he saw the cured old man, he 
thought he would go and see if the imps would n't 



164 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

take off bis lump too. The good old man told 
him where to go; so he went and hid in the tree, 
and when the imps came he got out and danced. 
But the imps said, ' You do not dance well. 
Shame, old man, shame !' And they took the 
lump v/hich the other man had had and clapped 
it on the other side of his face. So he went home 
with two lumps." 

This was a new story to the boys, and they 
thought it very interesting. 

Ginjiro thought up a new story too. 

*'The story of the wicked badger is in our 
book," he said. " There was no food in the land 
where the badgers and the foxes lived. Poor mo- 
ther-fox was sorry for baby-fox, who cried with 
hunger. Then said wicked Mr. Badger, ' Mo- 
ther-fox, I will pretend to be dead, and you can 
take me to the town and sell me; and when you 
get the money I will run away !' So mother-fox 
took the badger to town and sold him. She got 
the money and bought some food. The badger 
ran home, and for a time they had plenty to eat. 
But at last the food was all gone. Then said the 
badger, ' Mother- fox, it is your turn. You must 
pretend to be dead, and I will carry you to town.' 
So mother-fox pretended to be dead, and Mr. 
Badger carried her to town and sold her. But 
to the man wdio bought her he said, 'Take care; 
that fox is not dead; she is only pretending. 
Then the man took a club and struck her on the 



SUNSET ON THE HAKONES. 1 65 

head and killed lier. So Mr. Badger had all the 
money. He bought food and ate it all himself, 
while baby- fox looked on and cried. At last 
baby-fox grew up. He was determined to be re- 
venged. So he made the badger change himself 
into a man and go and bow before the prince. 
But the prince cried out, ' A badger ! a badger !' 
and ordered the servants to kill him. The baby- 
fox stood behind a tree and laughed. ' ' 

There was no one but little Kojiro left to tell a 
story now, and the air was growing chilly. 

"Boys, you had better go home," said an old 
priest who had been standing near and listening. 

"lyCt Ko tell something first," begged the 
children. 

"I will tell what Saijiro told me," said Ko, 
drawing close to his friend. ' ' There was once a 
boy in China named Tsu I^oo. He had to go fifty 
miles to get rice for his parents. But he went 
cheerfully and never minded the hard work. 
And afterwards, when he grew up and became 
rich and honored, he was not so happy as when 
he was poor and worked for his parents. 

"There was another boy whose name was 
Keang Kih. He lived alone with his mother 
and was very kind and good to her. A time of 
trouble arose in the province, and he ran away, 
carrying his mother on his back. He was very 
much afraid of meeting robbers, and at last did 
meet them. They were about to rob him, but 



l66 KHSA AND SAIJIRO. 

when they saw how kind he was to his mother 
they let him go. 

" Til ere was another boy whose father and 
mother died when he was very young. When 
he grew older he grieved all the time because he 
could do nothing for his parents. So he made 
two wooden images, one of his father and one of 
his mother, and served them. ' ' 

The boys all liked Ko's stories. But the dark- 
ness was falling over Yamamidzu. Nanjiro had 
long ago taken the baby home, and all the other 
boys were ready for their suppers. Saijiro ran 
over the bridge. His father had eaten his even- 
ing meal, and the boy swallowed his rice in si- 
lence and went to bed. 



THE GOOD DOCTOR. 167 



CHAPTER XV. 

THE GOOD DOCTOR. 

The silence of a summer midnight rested over 
Tokio. It was not dark. The moon rode high in 
the heavens, and there were lights scattered here 
and there over the city. Far out in the bay fish- 
ermen's torches could be seen, and lamps gleamed 
from lighthouses and watch-towers. The mos- 
quitoes were holding high festival. Now that 
most of the people were asleep, it was their 
time. 

But there is never an hour when every one in 
a great city is asleep; and in Tokio that night 
there were many who rested not. There were 
priests in the temples tending the sacred altars, 
beating the sacred drums, and praying to their 
idols. There were wicked men abroad, thieves, 
robbers, would-be murderers, lurking around in 
the darkest streets and trying to avoid the watch- 
men, who, striking their staves with bells heavily 
on the ground, gave evil-doers a chance to escape 
if they were so inclined. The low haunts of sin 
and vice w^ere open. ]\Ien w^ere drinking, gam- 
bling, and committing deeds of shame which they 
dared do only under cover of the night. There 
were sick people turning restlessly upon their pal- 



l68 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

lets, and men and women whose hearts were too 
full of cares and anxieties to sleep. 

In one of the mission-houses in the Foreign 
Concession a light was still burning in the room 
of a missionary, a man on whose heart rested the 
burden of human souls. He was bowed in prayer 
before God in the midst of a great heathen city. 

In Fujisawa's house in the Kudan most of the 
family were sleeping under the great green nets 
which Japanese use to protect themselves from 
mosquitoes. Fujisawa himself had gone to the 
upper room. Mitsu, Chive, and Kesa had their 
futons under one net in a large room down stairs. 
Kesa slept quietly between her two sisters. The 
servants occupied apartments at one end of the 
large house. The slides were closed, the lamps 
burned dimly, the busy bustle of the day was 
over. But through the house, every few mo- 
ments, there resounded a low cry, a cry of pain, 
which was immediately followed by tones of 
soothing tenderness in another voice, the voice of 
a mother trying to comfort her suffering child. 

Before the altar in Mrs. Fujisawa's room can- 
dles were burning brightly in tall polished candle- 
sticks. Fresh flowers, fruits, and vegetables were 
set out on lacquered tables for the gods. On a 
little writing-table near by were books which the 
good woman had been reading. They were books 
of Buddhist doctrines, teaching absorption into 
the divine essence, the heavenly contemplations, 



THE GOOD DOCTOR. 1 69 

the migrations of the soul — all the vague mys- 
teries of Buddhism. There was the book, too, 
which Mrs. Fujisawa loved best — a story of the 
sixteen disciples of Shaka Sama, their devout 
lives, their peaceful deaths. From this book she 
often read to Hana, thus quieting her pain. 

But now she sat by Hana's side, rubbing her 
aching limbs, bathing her head, holding her hot, 
restless hands, and soothing the tired little heart 
with comforting and loving words. 

**Ah," says the Japanese proverb, ''mother- 
love is higli as the mountain and deep as the 
sea. ' ^ 

For thirteen years Mrs. Fujisawa had thus 
tended this suffering child. Now the disease 
dreaded most by the Japanese — the y^^y^^'^had 
taken strong hold of her, a disease which, 
beginning in the feet, creeps gradually up to 
the heart — a slow, sure death. There is no es- 
cape, no doubt of the end. Mrs. Fujisawa knew 
that her little flower was withering fast out of her 
sight. 

''Honorable mother," said Hana, "the doctor 
says I have kake\ If so, I must die." 

^^ Dogit! yes, my darling." 

"I want to be with the gods in paradise, but I 
do not want to leave you, kacJian^ nor Mitsu nor 
Chiye nor Kesa nor the honorable father. I do 
not know whether I could see you again; and 
oh, hachan^ I have thought and thought, but I do 



170 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

not know whether any of the gods love nie. I 
have said Shaka Sama's name over and over so 
many times, and yet he does not help. KacJian^ 
kachan^ who can tell me?" 

Poor mother! All of her Buddhist books have 
not told her of love, nor whether dear ones that 
part in such agony here will meet again in heav- 
en. She cannot help her darling as she sees her 
drawing near to the shadow of death. 

The flickering candles lighted up the golden 
faces of the gods. There they sat in solemn state 
amid the lights and flowers, Benten Sama, Ye- 
bisu, Daikoku, the beautiful image of Buddha — 
Hana could look into their faces; kindly, benevo- 
lent faces they were, sweet and compassionate in 
their expression. Surely there was nothing to be 
feared from them! Surely they would look merci- 
fully upon a child's soul going alone into the 
dread unknown! Yet the child was unsatisfied, 
and the mother, who would gladly have given her 
life for her, was unable to comfort her. 

''^ Dogu^ darling," she said, '' to-morrow we 
will go to Asaxa to Bindzuru's most holy shrine. 
You shall pass your hands over his honorable 
body, and perhaps he will give you rest. We 
will pray again and again. But, dogii,! daughter, 
what the gods will is best. Oh, sleep now, my 
darling; sleep, sleep." 

She lay down beside Hana and sang one of 
the songs of Old Japan, a song of blossoms and 



THE GOOD DOCTOR. 171 

waving trees. The child listened and was soothed. 
At last both slept. 

"I shall take Hana to Asaxa to-day," an- 
nounced the mother to the family at breakfast. 

"Please take me, too," begged Kesa. "It is 
a holiday, kachan ; I don't have to go to school." 

^^ Dogti, Kesa, you are so rough and noisy; you 
trouble Hana." 

" I will be quiet, honorable mother." 

]\Irs. Fujisawa sent the servant to order jin- 
rikishas. " Bring old Sankichi," she said. 

The man came and prostrated himself before 
her while she gave her orders. 

"Sankichi, I w^ant to take my sick child to 
Asaxa. Can you take her gently, so that she w^ill 
not be jarred?" 

"I will be very careful, honorable mistress," 
answered the man. 

' ' Then bring tw^o jinrikishas. Mitsu and 
Kesa will go with us. ' ' 

Hana w^as dressed and carefully "wrapped in 
blankets and lifted into the cart; Mrs. Fujisawa 
got in beside her: Mitsu and Kesa occupied the 
other jinrikisha: Chiye went to see her friend 
Fusa, and the house was left almost as still as it 
was at the midnight hour. 

The coolies drew the carts slowly through the 
streets. They left the quiet of the Kudan and 
came out upon the broad Tori, the principal busi- 
ness street of Tokio, and a part of the same great 



172 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

national road alono^ which Yenoske, Saijiro, and 
the teacher went so often in their journeyings to 
and fro on the Hakones. 

"See, Hana," said the mother, " these houses 
are like those of the honorable foreigners, with 
doors and windows." 

The child raised her eyes wearily to look at 
the new houses. Just then a coach passed them 
filled with Englishmen, and on the sidewalk were 
a foreign lady and gentleman and a little girl, 
who wore a white hat trimmed with blue 
ribbons. 

"Oh, Mitsu," said Kesa, delighted, "seethe 
little girl ! How I wnsh I knew her." 

"It is the same one we saw at the honorable 
foreigners' house the day we passed in the boat," 
said Mitsu. "I have heard of them. They are 
called Jesus-teachers. They do not believe in our 
Shaka Sama." 

" Chiye and I do not care for Shaka Sama." 

"Oh, Kesa," said Mitsu, "you and Chiye 
must not talk together about the gods. You will 
grieve the honorable mother and make the honor- 
able father very angry." 

"But," persisted Kesa, "the other day old 
Daikoku Sama fell down and broke his nose, and 
had to o-c and o:et mended. I don't think the 

o o 

gods can help us when they can't help them- 
selves." 

Mitsu sighed, but could not answer. 



THE GOOD DOCTOR. 1 73 

Just then they were crossing Nippon bridge, 
the most wonderful bridge of all Japan; for it is 
the centre of Japan, and, consequently, the centre 
of the world. From it all distances are reckoned 
in the empire. 

"A long while ago," said IVIitsu to Kesa, 
*' there were edicts written on boards which were 
nailed up here. They said that any one who lis- 
tened to the Jesus-teachers, and believed in their 
doctrines, should be put to death." 

" I am glad they are not there now," said Ke- 
sa, "for I like the Jesus- teachers." 

"You do not know anything about them, 
Kesa," Mitsu said severely. 

On went the coolies through the crowded city 
streets, until at last they came up to the temple. 
There are always people going to worship there, 
and when Mrs. Fujisawa and her children got out 
of their jinrikishas at the gate, they found them- 
selves in a crowd of gayly dressed people who car- 
ried new summer umbrellas. It was a holiday. 
One of the gods was to be carried out in his car. 
Poor Hana could scarcely walk. Her mother and 
Mitsu carefully assisted her up the steps, while 
Kesa danced on ahead. 

"Be reverent, my daughter," said Mrs. Fuji- 
sawa. "You w^ill anger the great god Bindzuru, 
and Hana will get no help." 

So Kesa stopped her dancing, and worshipped 
with the others before entering the temple. The 



174 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

old wooden statue of Bindzuru stood near the 
door. His nose and ears were almost gone and 
his eyes could scarcely be seen. All of his body 
was worn smooth by the rubbing of thousands of 
afflicted ones. "For," said the people, "what- 
ever part of your body is pained, rub the corre- 
sponding member of the god's body, and help 
will come." 

Hana and her mother approached the idol and 
waited for their turn. Another mother stood 
there with her blind baby. She folded its little 
hands, made it bow its little head, then guided 
its tiny fingers to the eyes of the image. A lame 
man rubbed the god's feet. A weeping woman 
besought Bindzuru for some loved sufferer at 
home. Hana's turn came at last. There was 
something strangely spiritual in her looks. All 
her faith in the gods had returned. She had 
come for help and was sure of getting it. With 
a rapt expression on her face she passed her 
trembling hand over Bindzuru's body. 

"Truly, very sick," murmured the bystand- 
ers, nodding to one another as they noted her 
pale face and wasted form. They saw her lifted, 
almost fainting, into the jinrikisha. "It is too 
late," they said. 

]\Iitsu and Kesa took their places. The coo- 
lies lifted the shafts and waited respectfully for 
directions. 

"We will go and see Kei," said Mrs. Fujisa- 



THE GOOD DOCTOR. 1 75 

wa. *' Nippon Bosliii," i. e. bridge, ''first street 
to the right, number 48." 

When the coolies called, ^''Otaiio mosJiimasti^'^'^ 
— "I call !" the polite way of announcing one's 
arrival on a visit — old Kei pushed aside the 
slides. Seeing who her visitors were, her face 
beamed with delight. 

"Truly, welcome," she said. "A great sur- 
prise! Come in." 

Hana was laid carefully on 2. futon to rest. 
The others sat on the floor. Tea was brought, 
fans were handed round, many com.pliments were 
exchanged. 

Now Kei had just found a wonderful book. 
She had been absorbed in it when her visitors ar- 
rived, and had laid it down beside the hibachi. 
Her spectacles w^ere still between the pages, and 
the place they marked read thus : 

"And at even, when the sun did set, they 
brought unto him all that were diseased and them 
that were possessed with devils. And all the city 
was gathered together at the door. And he healed 
many that were sick of divers diseases." 

Mrs. Fujisawa saw the book and asked what 
it was. 

^^ Dogu^^'' said Kei, "it is one of the Jesus- 
teachers' books." 

Mrs. Fujisawa looked shocked. "But the 
Jesus-teachers instruct their pupils to give up all 
worship of our gods. Hov/ can they be right?" 



1/6 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Kei answered, ^^ Dogii^ I don't know. But it 
is the most interesting book I ever read. I have 
heard how this Jesus, with the Father, God, made 
the world." 

"But," said Mitsu, "we know already how 
the gods made Japan. What does it matter how 
the Christians' country w^as made?" 

"It tells some wonderful thino^s about the 
Jesus-God," persisted Kei. "He could open the 
eyes of the blind and make the lame walk." 

" Shaka Sama did far more wonderful things," 
said Mrs. Fujisawa. " I have heard how the God 
of the Christians walked on the water; but Darn- 
ma Sama came over from China on a leaf. Ho- 
tel Sama floats on the water on his rice pouch. 
I cannot see but that our gods do just as wonder- 
ful things as the God of the Christians." 

"Z>^^//," answered Kei, "I don't know about 
that. I never saw a book like this before, and I 
mean to read it. The honorable foreign doctor 
has great skill and good medicines; why don't 
you take Hana to him?" 

"I fear," was the gentle answer, "that no 
one can do good who despises Shaka Sama and 
his teachings." 

Here the conversation ended. The guests 
drank more tea and then w^ent home. 

Hana grew worse rather than better, and her 
faith in Bindzuru was sorely tried. 

"Take the child to the foreign doctor in the 



THE GOOD DOCTOR. 1 77 

Concession," said Fujisawa to his wife as one day 
Hana's low moans reached his ears. Poor Mrs. 
Fujisawa! It was her last hope. Both mother 
and child shrank from the Christians and from all 
knowledge of the Christians' God. But, oh! to 
have her darling's life spared ! So it happened 
that, one June afternoon, among the many others 
who crowded the good doctor's dispensary in the 
mission, Mrs. Fujisawa and Hana awaited their 
turn and the doctor's decision. 

Does any life lived upon earth come nearer to 
that which the Lord Jesus lived than that of the 
missionary doctor? Surely, the people crowding 
about the door of the house where the Saviour 
tarried in Capernaum were like these who, on 
that summer afternoon in Japan, waited for the 
word and touch of his disciple. There were 
blind and lame and withered. There were those 
covered with loathsome sores and those grievous- 
ly tormented with pain. The doctor went from 
one to another, administering remedies and speak- 
ing kindly words. He stood, at last, before Hana 
and her mother. 

*' What is it that you want, my good woman ?" 
he asked. 

The mother lifted her eyes to that friendly face 
and was reassured by what she saw there. "My 
little daughter has been sick and we fear that she 
will die; and we do not know where her spirit 
will go. She is afraid. We have heard of your 

Kesa and Saijiro. I 2 



178 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

skill and have come to ask you to save her 
life." 

The doctor looked into Hana's worn face, felt 
her feeble pulse, examined her swollen limbs. 
The dire disease was there and slowly creeping 
upward to her heart. All of his skill would avail 
nothing. His heart yearned over the child, 
shrinking back even now from the darkness, the 
uncertainty of death; over the mother, dreading 
to see her child go into it without her. He bent 
over Hana as if to examine more closely. In 
reality he was seeking for some words to meet 
the need of child and mother. The stillness of 
the room was broken only by the "swish, swish" 
of waves against the breakwater and by the soft 
sighing of the summer .wind. 

"Do you see the picture on the wall, my 
child?" asked the doctor at last. 

It was a picture of a shepherd leading his 
flock. In his arms he carried a tender lamb. 

" Is it the Jesus-God of the Christians ?' ' asked 
Mrs. Fujisawa. 

"No," answered the doctor, "it is only a 
shepherd. But the Lord Jesus sa)'s that he is 
like a shepherd. He loves children as a shep- 
herd loves his lambs. He holds them in his 
arms. He carries them in his bosom." 

To the darkened souls who heard the doctor's 
words this Jesus-God was only one of many gods. 
But "loves," "holds," "carries;" not one of 



THE GOOD DOCTOR. 1 79 

the Buddhas, not one of the gods of Japan, ever 
spoke such words as these. The three little 
words were like three little seeds dropped into 
Hana's heart. But it was long ere they found 
strength to germinate. Always, however, she 
bore in her memory the picture of the shepherd 
leading his lambs. Her extreme dread of the 
foreio^ners was gfone from that time. 

"But can you help my child, honorable doc- 
tor?" inquired the mother anxiously. 

" I think I can give her some medicine which 
will relieve her pain, my good woman. And you 
must come again." 

Kesa was watching for them when they re- 
turned home. She was eaQ:er to hear what thev 
had seen and what they had done. Had they 
seen the little foreign girl ? Hana was too weary 
to answer questions, and the mother was never 
communicative. So Kesa's curiosity remained 
ungratified. 



l8o KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

THE STORM IN THE MOUNTAINS. 

Just beyond the Hakones, near the town of 
Shidzuoka, where the ex-Shogun lives, lies the 
Oyama range. Within its dark recesses, so say 
the people, dwells a dread deity whose anger 
must be appeased by most solemn and mysterious 
rites, who grants forgiveness to those only who 
perform severe penances. One sultry July morn- 
insr, not lonor after the day on which Hana and 
her mother visited the missionary doctor, some 
men were dragging a heavy cart up one of the 
steepest of the Oyama passes. 

There was scarcely a breath of air on the 
mountain. The leaves were drooping on the 
trees; flowers and grasses hung their heads. The 
perspiration stood in great drops on the men's 
bodies; but they did not stop either for rest or for 
refreshment. They went on, on with that weary 
load, deeper and deeper into the heart of the 
mountain. Climbing, they chanted a wild song, 
often calling upon the name of the god and stri- 
king their breasts. Their breasts were bruised 
and sore, their feet torn and bleeding, their faces 
pale and distorted with the violence of their wor- 
ship. Their hands were cut by the cart-rope. 



THK STORM IN THE MOUNTAINS. l8l 

Never a word spoke tliey to each other. Over 
and over again they chanted their prayer. 

First of all, bearing the chief weight of the 
burden, went Yetaro, the Yamamid^u school- 
teacher, Saijiro's father.. How he panted ! Fre- 
quently a terrible cough racked his frame. But 
he did not falter. He was trying his last chance 
for favor with the gods of Japan. This failing, 
he had nothing left. At last, however, the weary 
chanters paused for an instant. But it was only 
to listen for something. Faintly, from afar off, 
came mingled sounds as of drums, of gongs, of 
human cries. 

"We near the temple," said one. " At noon 
we shall worship there." 

''Take courage, brother," said a second. 

"The great Buddha be praised!" chimed in 
a third. 

The temple which the new-comers gained at 
last was small. The densest shade, unbroken 
by a single ray of sunshine, was all around it. 
Never a ray of hope had entered the hearts of 
those who worshipped there. Never a traveller 
had descended that mountain with new peace in 
his heart. It was an altar of despair, a place cf 
gloom and of the shadow of death. 

Up came the weary wretches with their cart 
before the gate. A priest advanced to meet them 
and all prostrated themselves. 

" It is well, O friends," said the priest. "You 



1 83 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

liave drawn the sacred car up the mountain. En- 
ter and pray." 

Yetaro let go the rope. A sickening sense of 
exhaustion and of utter misery rushed over his 
spirit, a loathing of life and of the rites of Buddh- 
ism. But he struggled through the gate and 
went to a fountain to bathe before entering the 
temple. How terribly oppressive the air was! 
How difhcult for those failing lungs to do their 
work! How hard for the faltering heart to find 
strength to worship! Yetaro' s heart and flesh 
were failing. He entered the temple and pros- 
trated himself before the altar. Poor feet, cut 
and torn! Poor hands, bruised and wounded! 
Poor heart, broken and without hope! There he 
lay before the idols, the grim, ugly, unforgiving 
idols. He had come there, but now he found no 
words to call upon the god, no strength to beat 
the drums or sound the gongs. The din around 
him increased with the ardor of the worshippers. 

* ^ Beat the drums !' ' called the priests. ' ' Shout 
the name of the god. Call upon him; he is away. 
Call, call, call!" 

But Yetaro heard it all dimly, as at a distance; 
it seemed to him only an empty, frightful din. A 
sad hopelessness had seized him. In his weak- 
ness there came a thought of his boy playing hap- 
pily in peaceful Yamamidzu, a thought of the 
time when Kochi had gone in and out before him, 
with his bright, merry baby on her back. Then 



TIII.V STOiai IN thp: mountains. 1S3 

came a memory of sweet running water in his 
village home and of the lilies Saijiro loved so 
well, but never a thought of the god before 
whose shrine he lay. It was all over for Yetaro; 
the weary pilgrimage of the years was finished; 
the crying to Japan's gods for mercy would be 
heard from his lips no more. 

While the priests and people chanted the 
praise of this god a severe storm burst over the 
temple. Yetaro joined not in the song, but in a 
lull of the rain went away from the temple with 
the sound of the chant ringing in his ears. With 
difficulty he made his way back to the main road. 
The rain poured down upon him, wetting him to 
the skin. Little streams swollen into torrents 
tried to turn him back. He waded through them 
down, down, away from the terrible mountain to 
the great highway. He would look upon his 
boy's face once more and die. 

At sunset that evening Yetaro sat at a little 
wayside tea-house just where the mountain road 
meets the Tokaido, the great highway between 
Tokio and Kioto. The heavy clouds had rolled 
over and were broken into great fleecy masses of 
white, with borders of gold and tinged with sun^ 
set colors, pinks, purples, and blues. The setting 
sun threw long rays of light over the landscape. 
Yetaro sat on a bench drinking a cup of tea. For 
days he had eaten little and was well nigh ex- 
hausted. Lifting up his eyes he saw a man com- 



184 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

ing from the Hakones, a traveller like liimself. 
Yetaro arose and they bowed down to the ground. 

*' From what place are you?" asked Yetaro. 

"Thanks," answered the man, "I have come 
fromTokio." 

"Are you going up to the mountain to pray ?" 
asked the teacher. 

"No," answered the stranger, "I worship the 
idols no more. I have heard the Jesus- teachers, 
and I want to believe as they do. I do not un- 
derstand very well, but I have a book from which 
I read. I am going back to Tokio to learn more. ' ' 
He drew from one of his big sleeves a copy of the 
Gospel of ]\Iark, Kei's beloved volume. 

^^DoguT^ said Yetaro. "Does it tell about a 
man who hung on the cross?" 

"Yes," answered the traveller; " I will find 
you the place. ' ' 

So in the fading light Yetaro and the stranger 
read together IMark's story of the crucifixion. 

"Do you know why he hung there?" asked 
Yetaro when they could see no more. 

''^ Dogu!'^ answered the man, "I cannot tell 
very well, but the teacher said it was because we 
have all sinned, and he bore our punishment." 

A great joy shot through Yetaro's heart. His 
resolution was taken. He would go to Tokio 
and find the Jesus- teacher, and Saijiro should go 
with him. 

Late the next afternoon Yetaro came into the 



THE STORM IN THK MOUNTAINS. 185 

village, where Saijiro was having a merry game 
with the boys. There was a new teacher from 
Tokio at the Yamamidzu school, and the instruc- 
tion was no longer confined to the Chinese clas- 
sics; the boys and girls were taught something 
besides these. The teacher, dressed partly in for- 
eign style, sat by a table, while his books were 
neatly arranged in a bookcase instead of being 
piled up on the floor. The schoolhouse itself had 
been repaired. There were clean mats on the 
floor and the roof no longer leaked. There was a 
blackboard in the hall, and the pupils learned the 
Japanese syllabary and Chinese characters from 
that. The girls were delighted with the charts, 
from which they had object lessons. Even blind 
Ko's hands were guided around the great globe, 
as he with the others learned the shape of the 
world and the relative positions of the countries. 
Graded readers had been introduced with inter- 
esting stories in them; and the pupils learned of 
Washington, Napoleon, and other noted charac- 
ters. The Japanese Government had determined 
that all the people should be instructed in the 
new sciences. 

Saijiro stopped playing when he saw his father 
and saluted him, bowing down to the ground. 

''You will come home with me, my son," 
said Yetaro; and together they crossed the little 
swinging bridge. 

The boy, eager to prepare the evening rice for 



l86 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

his father, walked on without asking any ques- 
tion as to his journey. 

"Saijiro," said the father at last, *'in two 
days you will be ready to go with me to Tokio. ' ' 

Much astonished as Saijiro was, he merely 
bowed his head. The father continued his direc- 
tions. "We will shut up the house and carry 
what clothing we can with us." 

" Shall we be long away, honorable father?" 
asked Saijiro. 

"A very long time, my son. I shall come 
back no more, and you will remain with the hon- 
orable foreigners." 

That evening Yenoske learned the teacher's 
intention of leavinof Yamamidzu and g:oinQf to 
Tokio. His heart was heavy at the thought, and 
he stood for a long while in the starlight, leaning 
aofainst the side of the house and thinkinof over a 
plan he had in his mind. At last he went in, 
and finding his aged father and mother sitting on 
their mats smoking pipes preparatory to retiring, 
he said as he prostrated himself before them, 

" Honorable parents, the scnsei and the little 
master go to-morrow to Tokio. The sensei is 
very ill, and will die and leave the little master 
alone in the great city. Dogii ! I crave your hon- 
orable permission to go with them. I cannot let 
them ofo alone." 

^^ Dogtc ! dogu P' said the old man and the old 
woman together. "We can ill spare you. Ye- 



TIIK STORM IN THE MOUNTAINS. 1S7 

noske. Who will take care of us and manage the 
business ?" 

^^ DogiL^ honorable parents, how can \h.^ se7tsei 
and the child go alone?" questioned Yenoske in 
his turn. 

''It is true,-' said the father; " as you please, 
my son. You will return to us by-and-by. Rev- 
erence the gods. ' ' 

"Thanks; a great thank-you," answered Ye- 
noske. "May you rest well, honorable parents. 
Goodnight." 



l88 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

FROM YAMAMIDZU TO TOKIO. 

Very early in the morning of the second day 
after the teacher returned to Yamamidzu Yenoske 
pushed aside the slide of his parents' house; pass- 
ing softly out, he went to the shed where the 
horse was chewing a bit of rice straw, and stood 
for a moment with his arm thrown lightly over 
the animal's neck. 

There was something wonderfully alike in the 
pair. Yenoske was patient, so was the horse; 
Yenoske often went hungry, so did the horse; 
Yenoske asked no questions, neither did the 
horse. Many and many a mile had they travelled 
together through summer heat and winter cold, 
treading rough, toilsome ways and bearing heavy 
burdens without murmur or complaint. Yenos- 
ke' s heart was too loyal to allow him to part from 
his faithful friend without regret. He stroked 
the animal's mane, looked into his eyes, and then, 
leaving an extra supply of rice straw where he 
could get it, turned away and went towards the 
house. 

Strong as was his love for the mountains, for 
father, mother, and home, he had a yet stronger 
passion, and that was his love for Saijiro. The 



FROM YAMAMIDZU TO TOKIO. 189 

boy was liis darling, his heart's desire, and his 
little master. Yenoske had always obeyed every 
command of the child, carrying him on his back, 
climbing precipices for lilies, and wading into 
deep streams for lotus flowers and bulbs. When 
he left home his last thought was for " Saichan.'' 
During his journeys everything that could inter- 
est or please the child was stored away in his 
memory to be related on his return. There was 
always something for Saijiro stored away in his 
sleeves or in the bosom of his dress. 

This morning Yenoske had his head bound 
with a blue 'kerchief, and in one hand he carried 
a broad-brimmed hat. He wore a loose robe 
pulled up above his knees. He was all ready for 
his journey. Just as he reached the house the 
slides were pushed open, and his mother, who 
had evidently just arisen from her bed, stood be- 
fore him. Yenoske saluted her. 

**Get ready quickly, honorable mother. I 
hear the little master coming, and it is time to 
start." 

Saijiro had come across the bridge, and Ye- 
noske could hear the sound of his wooden clogs 
as he came rapidly up the village street. 

"Is the honorable father all ready, Saijiro?'^ 
asked Yenoske* 

" He will meet us at the brido^e." 

In a few minutes Yenoske, accompanied by 
Ills parents, turned away from the hotel and went 



190 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

to the bridge, where they found the teacher wait- 
ing for them. It was growing lighter, and they 
could just see the outlines of the house where Ye- 
taro had lived so long, where Saijiro had spent 
his childhood, and where Kochi had died. Ye- 
taro gave one backward glance as they stood there, 
and the little company moved on. 

As they passed the temple little Ko joined 
them. He had been waiting long for Saijiro, 
and now ran to him and took hold of his hands, 
sobbing with grief at the thought of losing 
him. 

" Don't cry, Ko. I will come back again and 
tell you such beautiful stories of what I see in the 
city," said Saijiro. 

"Tell me about the beautiful gods you see, 
Saijiro; and if you should go to the great Buddha's 
image which the bon-sama has told me about, 
think of me and tell me about it." 

They were going up a narrow mountain path. 
Yamamidzu lies down on the side of the mount- 
ain, so they had to go up some distance before 
reaching the Tokaido, or great Bast-Sea-Road, 
which leads down into the town. The road was 
steep and slippery, and only the great stones kept 
them from sliding at every step. Brighter and 
brighter grew the morning, until at last up came 
the sun over the mountain, and all the flowers 
woke to beauty and all the birds to song. Then 
the inn-keeper and his wife and Yenoske saluted 



FROM YAMAMIDZU TO TOKIO. I9I 

the sun, rubbed their hands, bowed their heads, 
and prayed. The warm beams poured down over 
their heads and filled the valley with light. But 
the sun listened not to their prayers. 

Yetaro did not worship, and Saijiro, watching 
his father, likewise remained silent; but Ko's 
worship came from the depths of his little heart 
as he turned his face upwards as though to receive 
a blessing. 

At last they came to the main road and the 
time of parting. It was a beautiful spot. Just 
where the two ways met was a waterfall, and 
directly in front of the waterfall a lovely glade, 
with rocks and trees and clinging vines. A sum- 
mer-house was there, and in the summer-house 
w^ere two ladies, evidently from the city. They 
were admirinof the scenerv. 

" Beautiful, truly beautiful !" said one. 

" For the first time," said the other. 

The ladies had on plaid sashes and trailing 
dresses. They looked curiously at the little party 
from the village, and covered their mouths wdth 
their sleeves as they passed. Their coolies were 
on the road opposite the tea-house eating their 
morning rice. 

It was in this place near the tea-house that 
the Yamamidzu friends separated. 

"Farewell, sensei^''^ said the innkeeper and 
his wife to Yetaro; and "Farewell, little mas- 
ter," to Saijiro. 



193 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Ko's tears were falling again, and lie clung to 
Saijiro. 

The old woman wept mncli when she bade fare- 
well to her son, and even his father wiped his eyes. 

^^Saionaj-a; you have been a good son, Ye- 
noske. Take care of the honorable sensei and the 
little master," said his mother. 

'''' Saioitara^ my son; don't forget to worship," 
said the father. 

*'Be good to Ko, Baba," urged Saijiro, the 
tears gathering in his eyes. 

Down upon the ground they all fell, saying 
their last farewells and parting with real sorrow. 
Then, taking little Ko, Yenoske's parents went 
back to their village. The others, lifting upon 
their shoulders the sticks to which their bundles 
were tied, went on under great overhanging trees 
down towards Odawara. A grand old highway, 
that, between the two capitals of Japan ! Over it 
the dairnios used to pass with their trains in the 
days of old Japan. The Dutch passed along it on 
their yearly visits to the Shogun's capital. 

The morning being so lovely, our travellers 
went on cosilv enouQ:h. Yetaro w^as feelinor bet- 
ter, and talked to Saijiro as they walked. Perhaps 
you would not have guessed that the guttural 
sound issuing from Yenoske's throat was singing. 
Yet he was considered a good singer in Yamamid- 
zu. He knew the words of all the best Japanese 



FROM YAMAMIDZU TO TOKIO. I93 

The sun grew hotter and hotter. Yetaro's 
strength was easily exhausted, and at an early 
hour they stopped for their nooning. A clear lit- 
tle brook flowed by the roadside. They took their 
blue 'kerchiefs, dipped them in the brook, and 
wiped faces, hands, and chests. Then stooping 
down they drank. Seating themselves under a 
tree, Yenoske opened a box and took out rice and 
daikon. This, with some tea bought from a tea- 
house near by, was their frugal meal. The spot 
could not have been more lovely. The trees 
formed a roof thick enough to protect them from 
the sun. Soft moss made a couch better than any 
to which they had been accustomed. The brook 
ran close by, and all around were flowers and 
vines. The music of a waterfall sounded in their 
ears. There were katydids, grasshoppers, and 
tree- toads about them, but nothing hurtful. 

Almost hidden from our travellers by a turn in 
the road was a little thatched cottage. Near it 
the brook suddenly widened. Some women were 
standiuQ: in the water wash ins: clothes. Their 
voices could be heard through the sounds of dip- 
ping and pounding. One could almost distinguish 
what was said. Yenoske and the teacher lay upon 
the ground resting and smoking their pipes. Sai- 
jiro amused himself by watching the women and 
turning occasional glances upward at the fleecy 
clouds. 

But at last the women finished their washing 

Kesa aixl Saijini. J •? 



194 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

and carried the clean clothes away in tubs to the 
cottage. Some men passed by on their way up 
the mountain. A fine lady w^ent by on a litter. 
A traveller, like our Yamamidzu peoj^le, appeared 
and saluted them. He asked where they were 
going. 

^'Thanks; we are on our way to Tokio." 

"Ah," returned the stranger, "I am just from 
Tokio. Do you go to see the sights or to pray at 
one of the shrines?" 

Yetaro answered, *'No; we are going to look 
for the Jesus-teachers and find out about one of 
their gods, one who died upon a cross." 

The stranger had heard of the Jesus-teachers, 
lie said. "But I have never listened to their 
teachings. The old way is good enough for 
me." 

The day was passing. Yetaro and his com- 
panions rose to continue their journey. The af- 
ternoon grew hot; the way was steep and weari- 
some. Early in the evening they reached Oda- 
wara and went to a hotel. There the occupants 
were already preparing for the night. As usual, 
the large gloomy kitchen was in front. Servants 
were busy boiling rice, cutting daikons^ frying 
fish, making tea, and doing a thousand other 
things. Girls, carrying trays, rice-bowls, and tea- 
pots, were hurrying from the kitchen to the upper 
story, where guests were assembled. Every now 
and then was heard a loud clapping of hands from 



FROM YAMAMIDZU TO TOKIO. 195 

the guests, followed by a prolonged ' ' Hai P ' from 
the kitchen. There was a splashing of w^ater in 
a large tank where travellers availed themselves of 
the luxury of a hot bath. In another apartment 
blind shampooers were hard at work rubbing and 
pounding tired travellers. 

After seeing that Yetaro and the boy had a 
room and some refreshments, Yenoske went off 
with the servants. Candles were brought, green" 
nets were hung, futons and pillows were provided, 
and Yetaro and Saijiro lay down side by side. 

Yenoske woke first. "Come," he said, light- 
ly touching the sleeping boy, "it is time to get 
up and make ready for the journey. Get water 
for the honorable father and then bring rice and 
tea." 

Saijiro rubbed his eyes. He had forgotten that 
they were in Odawara. He jumped up and hur- 
ried out into the courtyard of the hotel. Early 
as it was, most of the coolies had gone — some to 
carry kagos up the mountain, some to drag jin- 
rikishas along the great highway, and others still 
to lead pack-horses up the narrow passes, or them- 
selves, transformed into mere beasts of burden, to 
bear heavy loads. 

The day was sultry. Not a breath of air came 
from land or sea. Saijiro bathed himself at a 
fountain, and then begged a basin in which to 
carry water to his father. A girl gave him one, 
and also a blue cotton towel. 



196 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Yetaro was up when Saijiro reentered their 
chamber. 

The servants brought rice and tea, and Yetaro 
and Saijiro ate breakfast. 

"Honorable se?isei^^^ said Yenoske, stepping 
just inside the room and stooping in a reverential 
manner, "shall you take a jinrikisha? Dogii^ the 
way is long, and you are weak!" 

The teacher shook liis head. 

A few minutes later they started on their jour- 
ney, still going toward the East Sea and the 
great city Tokio. Yenoske had spoken truly. It 
was a long way and a weary one. The sun poured 
his fiercest rays upon their unsheltered heads; 
the sand of the road burned and blistered their 
feet. Not a tree along the highway for shade 
and coolness ; not a green field to invite them 
to rest and refreshment. There were few travel- 
lers. Once a party of pilgrims passed on their 
way to ]Mt. Fuji. Yetaro shuddered wdien he 
saw them. 

"It is all of no use, my boy," he gasped, as 
he saw Saijiro looking earnestly at the men iii 
their white dresses. "I have done it, and I know 
no peace." 

Once Yenoske urg^ed him to sfo and rest in a 
temple inclosure; but Yetaro would not enter. 

"I have done it all," he reiterated. "I am on 
my way to the Jesus-teachers. ' ' 

At noon they came to a quiet river rippling 



FROM YAMAMIDZU TO TOKIO. 1 97 

brightly along on its golden sands. Yenoske went 
to find a boat, leaving Saijiro with his father. 
The teacher looked very white. Indeed, Yenoske 
had gone bnt a few steps when Saijiro was calling 
after him: "Oh, Yenoske! what is the matter 
with the honorable father?" 

Yetaro had fainted. Yenoske brought w^ater 
quickly, and, some men coming up, he was lifted 
into a boat that had just arrived. The rest, the 
cool breeze, and some rice procured on the other 
side of the river revived the dying man. Slow- 
ly, slowly they went along the Tokaido, and in the 
evening they came to a little town where Yenoske 
said they must remain a while. 

"To-morrow night," murmured Yetaro, "we 
shall be in Tokio." 

The little village at which they had stopped 
stood in the midst of some rice-fields. The Ha- 
kones were scarcely visible; but all around were 
foot-hills, green as emeralds and covered with 
trees, maples, cedars, and pines. Around one of 
these hills, the one nearest the hotel, wound a 
beautiful stream. Flowers bloomed in the hotel 
garden. The air was cool and pleasant. How 
different it was from crowded, noisy Odawara ! 

"Oh, honorable father, isn't it nice!" said 
Saijiro, as they sat at the open slides of an upper 
room eating their supper. 

The sun had gone down, and the soft evening 
light gave the landscape a red tinge. Saijiro had 



198 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

never before seen rice-fields when the grain was 
ripening. His eyes were delighted with the rich 
green. 

When Yetaro lay resting under the mosquito- 
net, Saijiro and Yenoske stole out for a walk over 
the fields. One of the hotel girls offered to ac- 
company them. The three went together over a 
narrow path leading through the rice-paddies. 
The ground was very wet, and frogs were trying 
to see which one of them could make the most 
noise. The girl suggested that they should go to 
see the waterfall. Already the boys could hear 
the sound of it. Yenoske' s heart gave a great 
bound. It was like home, his home in the Ha- 
kones. But Saijiro looked rather contemptuously 
at the baby waterfall, scarcely higher than his 
head. 

*'Do you call that a waterfall?" said he. 
^'Why, in our country we can't see up to the 
heights from which the water tumbles." 

"And where,*" asked the girl, "may your 
honorable country be?" 

^^ Dogn! it is in the Hakones. We are going 
to Tokio to find the Jesus-teachers. The honor- 
able father wants to learn their doctrine." 

"Two of the Jesus-teachers stopped here 
seven days ago," the girl said. "They were on 
their v/ay to the Hakones. They told us about 
one God, and sang some songs about him and a 
happy land. But the song said that the land was 



FROM YAMAMIDZU TO TOKIO. 1 99 

far, far away, and I do not know where it can be. 
I like this country well enough." 

The speaker was dressed in a blue calico. 
Her sleeves were tied up, that she might not be 
impeded in her work. She had a round, rosy face 
and well-developed limbs. She leaned against 
the hillside, while Saijiro lay at her feet looking 
at the rice-fields. Yenoske sat by the little wa- 
terfall. He loved its music. Ts'koi lay curled 
lip in a heap near his master. Smoke, tinged 
with the sunset red, rose from different parts of 
the rice-paddies. Thatched cottages of farmers 
made the scene more picturesque. 

The last day's journey was over rice-fields 
and under shady trees, until they came to the 
lower land near the sea and the great plain 
on which Tokio lies. There was no smoke 
rising from high chimneys, no domes or min- 
arets or towers, to indicate the neighbor- 
hood of the large city. They came upon it sud- 
denly in the evening, entering by way of the 
Kudan. 

The teacher looked long and earnestly over 
the city as they stood on one of the heights above 
Fujisawa's house. *'The Jesus-teacher lives 
over by the bay," he whispered. 

His strength was fast failing. The boys could 
see that he was very pale and haggard in the twir 
light. 

They passed Fujisawa's door, The whole 



200 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

family stood there making their saionaras to Kei, 
who had been dressing the ladies' hair. 

" Kesa," said Chive, ''see that poor sick man, 
-vvith the boy and servant and that funny yellow 
dog." 

In truth Yetaro was very ill; and at last, his 
strength failing utterly, he sat down on the steps 
of a small temple. Saijiro hung over him in 
some alarm, while Yenoske went for water. Just 
then old Kei came up to them. Now the Japan- 
ese will often pass dying persons in the street, 
leaving them to their pain and woe without so 
much as giving a word of sympathy. It is strange 
that the same religion which teaches them not to 
tread upon a worm nor to torture a fly should be 
so indifferent to human life and suffering. But a 
man is only a man; and a worm may be an ances- 
tor or some great and holy person in this vile 
form! Kei had been reading too much of the 
gospel, and its truth had made too deep an im- 
pression on her heart, not to be touched at the 
sight of the dying man and the distressed boy. 

"What is it?" she asked of Saijiro. 

Yetaro opened his eyes. 

''^DognP'' said Saijiro, " this is my honorable 
father; he has travelled a long way, and he is 
very ill." 

"From Vv'hence did you come?" asked Kei. 

" Thanks; from the Hakones." 

Just then the sunset light was gilding those 



FROM YAMAMIDZU TO TOKIO. 20I 

mountain-tops, making a long bright line along 
the horizon. 

"We have come to find the Jesus-teacher," 
added Saijiro. " My father wants to know of the 
doctrine." 

Then Kei's heart was touched indeed. Ye- 
noske came with the water and Yetaro was some- 
what revived. A coolie w^as called, and the sick 
man was lifted into a jinrikisha. 

"Take me to the Jesus- teacher," he said; "I 
have no time to spare." 

Slowly went the little procession through the 
darkening streets, that seemed endless to Saijiro, 
and on down to the mission-house on the bay. 
The coolies drew the cart up before the gate, and 
Kei asked for " the honorable missionary doctor." 
He came immediately. 

^^ DogiLP^ said Kei, making her bow, " I have 
found a sick man who has come all the way from 
the Hakones to learn of your doctrine." 

The doctor saw at a glance that poor Yetaro' s 
hours were numbered. 

"Make ready a room in the servants' quar- 
ters," he said. "Give the stranger some refresh- 
ments, and I will come." 

Yetaro was lifted out of the cart and laid on a 
pallet in one of the servants' rooms. He took a 
little tea and then asked impatiently for the doc- 
tor. 

The doctor came soon and sat down beside 



202 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

him. " What is it, my friend ?" he asked kindly, 
administering some strengthening draught. 

''I am dying," said Yetaro, "but I wish to 
know of your teaching. I have worshipped the 
Japanese gods in vain. I have wasted the years 
of my life in going from shrine to shrine." 

^^ Dogu P^ ejaculated Kei, who stood near. 
The man's story was like her own. 

''I have stood on Fuji's top," continued Ye- 
taro, "I have prayed to Isuye," a holy shrine. " I 
have fasted and chastised myself, have made and 
kept most solemn vows. Dogu^ I have had no 
rest. I want forgiveness for my sins. Dogii^ I 
have been very wicked!" 

Then came a violent fit of coughing, followed 
by a terrible exhaustion. Again the doctor ad- 
ministered a stimulant. The tears rolled down 
old Kei's cheeks. Saijiro and Yenoske were with 
the servants, taking their evening meal. 

"I was taught the principles of Confucius," 
continued Yetaro at last, "respect and obedience 
to parents and all maxims of truth and right. 
But I was unkind and rough to my parents; I 
cared nothing for them, but only for sal:e and 
gambling and all sorts of wicked things. One 
night, when drunk, I quarrelled with one of my 
companions, and in my anger I killed him. When 
I knew what I had done I fled from the place, and 
no one pursued me. Dogii, ! the people care little 
about a man who mav be found dead bv the wav- 



FROM YAMAMID^U TO TOKIO. 203 

side; and that one was a stranger and had no near 
relatives. 

''But the dreadful deed sobered me. I be- 
came a student, and was industrious and temper- 
ate. Especially did I study the doctrine of the 
gods to find some way to wash away my sin. But 
my guilt has ever been present with me. I had 
no rest. Often I longed to go back and confess 
my sin to the officers of my own country. But I 
did not. At last I married, and when my boy 
was a mere infant I went to live in Yamamidzu. 
I was often impatient and irritable with my wife. 
Our food w^as scanty and poor, and at last she 
died, worn out with suffering and sorrow. I have 
done all I can to get peace and pardon for my sins 
in the Japanese way, and now I have come to ask 
of the Jesus-doctrine, and if I may be forgiven. 
And I want my boy to be brought up in the way 
of truth and right. 

"Once when he was on the Tokaido travel- 
ling down to Nagoya, a foreigner met him and 
gave him a book. It had this picture in it.'* 
Yetaro took from his breast the little book and 
showed the picture of the crucifixion. "Ever 
since I have wanted to know about the man on 
the cross. A man in the mountain told me some- 
thing about it a few days ago. I am dying; but 
oh, tell me about the man on the cross! Can he 
forgive me? Can he forgive me?" Gasping for 
breath, Yetaro fell back on his pallet. 



'204 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

The missionary, Mr. West, had come in, and 
had listened with deep interest to the sick man's 
story. Kei stood wiping lier eyes in one corner 
of the room. Saijiro crept close to his father 
and took his hand. Yenoske stood with the ser- 
vants at the door. Some one brought a candle, 
and its flickering light shone upon Yetaro's head 
as he lay on his pallet. The doctor administered 
a stimulant and beckoned to the missionary to 
draw near. His eye fell upon the little book, 
which he recognized as one he himself had given 
to Saijiro when he first came to Japan and was 
travelling to Nagoya. 

"My friend," said he, "I will read of the 
Man who hung upon the cross, and of one who 
was crucified with him, and will teach you the 
prayer of this one, who was a thief and perhaps a 
murderer." 

Yetaro held the little book in his hand while 
the missionary read the evangelist Luke's account 
of the thief upon the cross. The sick man re- 
peated after the missionary the prayer of the peni- 
tent one, who, acknowledging the justice of his 
punishment, said with faith, " Lord, remember 
me when thou comest into thy kingdom." And 
eagerly did Yetaro listen to the Saviour's gracious 
answer, "To-day shalt thou be with me in para- 
dise." 

"He came from heaven, the beloved Son of 
God, and died to save sinners; he died that we 



FROM YAMAMIDZU TO TOKIO. 205 

might live; he bore our punishment in our stead, 
because he loved us. Do you believe this, Ye- 
taro?" 

The sick man bowed his head. 

*' Do you believe that he died forjj^^//, Yetaro ?" 

Again he nodded assent. 

"Let us pray," said the missionary. 

The servants bowed their heads. Yenoske 
fell prostrate to the floor. Saijiro clung fast to 
his father's hand. Kei drew nearer to hear the 
words of the prayer. 

"Oh, thou blessed Saviour, thou who didst 
hang upon the cross that our sins might be for- 
given, have mercy upon this poor soul who has 
been so lonof seekino^ thee. Reach down and 
take this poor wandering one unto thyself Grant 
him all he wants — forgiveness of his sins, the 
peace that thou alone canst give, life and blessed- 
ness with thee for ever." 

A restful look came into Yetaro's eyes. "I 
have found him at last," he said, " the Man who 
hung on the cross. I only ask now that you teach 
my boy. He will repay you as well as he can." 

The promise was readily given. 

Yetaro sank rapidly and soon passed away, 
and Saijiro was left an orphan in a great city. 



2o6 KESA AND SAIJIRO, 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

THE CHAPElv SERVICE. 

It was Sunday morning, the beginning of a 
warm summer day. Aka had risen early from 
her pallet. Her heart was too sorrowful to let 
her rest long. The woman who had come to 
live in the house after Rinjiro's death had been 
more than usually unkind the day before. She 
often left her heavy baby to the weak and weary 
Aka's care. Aka loved the little one. She 
would carry him away into her room, and laying 
his cheek to hers would listen to his baby prattle. 
But her health was so delicate it seemed some- 
times as if she could not bear the care of him. 
Her trembling frame tottered under his weight. 

Now Aka slipped quietly out of the house and 
stood for a moment in the street. The sun had 
just risen. Old Fuji was hidden behind clouds 
and mist. The storm which had broken so re- 
lentlessly over the teacher was still raging on its 
summit, although all was so calm in the fields 
below. 

Aka looked towards Fujisawa's house and her 
heart went out towards little Kesa, just then 
soundly asleep by Chiye's side. " My Rinjiro's 



THE CHAPEL SERVICE. 207 

little bride, ' ' she thought. ' ' How handsome and 
happy they would have been together!" 

Then she turned and went to the temple. The 
court was quite deserted; but within ]3riests were 
chanting a solemn dirge and the deep tones of a 
bell could be heard. Aka said her prayer at the 
steps and threw her money into the box, then she 
walked into the cemetery and straight towards a 
well-known grave. Birds were twittering in the 
boughs above her; doves hopped around her feet. 
Her tears fell on the stone which bore Rinjiro's 
new name, as she stood and thought of him. 
With a wooden dipper that lay near the grave 
she dipped out the water from the hollow in the 
stone; then she filled the hollow with beautiful 
flowers and poured fresh water over them. 

lyook, Aka! the sun rises over the hilltop and 
gilds the temple roof. For you a new morning 
is dawning. This very day you shall catch the 
first glimmer in your darkened soul of the Sun of 
Righteousness. 

She stole into the house on her return as 
quietly as she had crept out and went to her own 
room. Here everything was neat and pretty. In 
one corner a little table held some books which 
she had been reading. The books were a novel, 
one of the long Japanese novels in many volumes, 
each volume consisting of two books. Nothing 
of this insipid sort could comfort Aka's aching 
heart, but still she must do something; time hung 



1208 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

heavily on her hands. So on this Sabbath morn- 
ing she took up the seventeenth vohime of her 
novel and tried to become interested in it. 

In the meantime the household of the Fuji- 
sawas had begun the day. Very early the ser- 
vants were all astir. They drew water, kindled 
charcoal, swept mats and verandas, and opened 
slides. There is no such thing as sleep while all 
this is going on or after it is done. So at a little 
past seven a pleasant bustle began. Chiye and 
Kesa slipped on their blue cotton dresses, washed 
ther. Mitsu came into the family room, and soon 
faces and hands, and went to salute father and mo- 
after Hana appeared there. Hana had improved 
somewhat imder the foreign doctor's treatment; 
she suffered less pain. 

The servants brought in breakfast. Each 
member of the family had a little lacquered table 
on which were tiny cups and dishes. The meal 
consisted of rice and tea, with some salt fish and 
pickles. They chatted together pleasantly as 
they ate. 

"Soon you will go to the foreign school, '^ 
said the father, addressing Chiye and Kesa. 

Chiye' s eyes sparkled. Kesa bowed. 

"We have a request, honorable father," said 
Mitsu. "We wish to go to the Christian temple 
this afternoon. This is the rest-day of the honor- 
able foreigners. If you please, we beg." 

"Z^<?^/^," said Fujisawa, "I do not know. 



THE CHAPEL SERVICE. 209 

You will not find it interesting, and the day will 
be very hot. What is it, Hana?" he asked, no- 
. ticing that the child had turned pale and clung 
to Mitsu. 

*'0h,'* said Hana, "I like the good doctor 
and his sweet little daughter; but, dogu! they do 
not love our Shaka Sama. They teach the peo- 
ple to w^orship their god in Shaka Sama's place. 
And they never pray to Bindzuru." 

''I never heard them say anything against 
Shaka Sama," cried Chiye. "And I don't think 
that Bindzuru has helped you much, Hana. Be- 
sides, I think he is very ugly, with his eyes and 
nose all rubbed off and his feet nearly gone. Yes- 
terday mamma's beautiful Benten Sama fell dowm 
and her head rolled off." 

' ' DoguP ' ejaculated Mrs. Fujisawa, who avoid- 
ed discussions with Chiye. 

"Well," said Fujisawa, "do as you please." 

He went up stairs to smoke and a brother offi- 
cer dropped in to talk w4th him, for Sunday was 
now a day of rest in Japan, and there were no 
official duties to perform. 

In the little house at Nippon Boshi sat old Kei 
reading her wonderful book. " Strange ! Won- 
derful !" she murmured, perusing for the twenti- 
eth time the story of the cross. The slides were 
pushed back so that she could see what was going 
on in the street. Crowds of people were going 
towards the bridge, and other crowds were going 

Kes,i aiil Saijiro. J A 



2IO KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

from it. Hours passed. Still Kei sat reading, 
more and more absorbed. She thought too of the 
man who had come from the mountain. He was 
to be carried that very day to the grave. She 
thought of the orphan Saijiro. 

Aka, still reading her novel, heard a childish 
voice at the door. She called, " Come in." The 
slides were pushed aside and there was Kesa's 
bright face. 

"Welcome, Kechan," said Aka. 

*' Mitsu's compliments," said Kesa, "and she 
would like to have you go with her to the Chris- 
tian temple this afternoon." 

"Give ]\Iitsu my thanks and tell her I will 
go; and," Aka added, "I will ask Baba to go 
too." 

Baba, Aka, ]\Iitsu, Chiye, and Kesa all en- 
joyed the jinrikisha ride over to the Concession. 
Old Baba, who rode with Chiye and Kesa, asked 
many a question about the foreigners and the 
school as they were rolled rapidly through the 
streets of Tokio. Aka and i\Iitsu had common 
sorrows to draw them together and talked in a 
low tone. 

All of the missionary teachers. Dr. and ]Mrs. 
Fielding, w4th their little daughter, and Mr. West 
and Miss Wilton, were at the mission-house to 
meet any who might come and show them the 
way to the chapel. They knew the Fujisawa 
party and greeted them warmly. 



THE CHAPKL SKRVICE. 211 

Baba had never been in a foreign house before. 
*' Magnificent ! Exceedingly fine!" said the old 
lady when she saw the high ceilings, the carpets 
and furniture. 

On the mantel-piece was a picture, and near it 
were some flowers in vases. Baba thought the 
picture some god of the Christians, and before 
Mrs. Fielding could prevent it the old lady was 
prostrate before it, muttering Buddhist prayers. 

*'0h, don't do that !" cried the doctor's wife 
in dismay. "That is a picture of my sister in 
America. Besides, we do not pray before pic- 
tures. ' ' 

The old lady rose with an apology, and Mrs. 
Fielding showed her the photograph and told her 
of her dear young sister in America. 

Kesa had brought a beautiful lotus-flower for 
Marion, and it was duly admired before being 
placed in a large vase. Others gathered from 
time to time, and quite a large party went from 
the mission-house to the chapel. Kei was among 
the number. 

"I rejoice much at seeing you," said Kei 
when she spied Aka, Baba, and Mitsu. "The 
teachinof is verv o-ood." 

The missionary looked down from his pulpit 
that day upon two hundred upturned faces. 
There were people of all ages and all classes. 
There were old babas and jisans (grandmothers 
and grandfathers), babies in arms, and little tod- 



212 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

dlers whose bells tinkled as they moved in their 
seats. There were mothers and fathers, sons and 
daughters, all come to listen to the new teaching. 
Officers, artisans, merchants, and coolies mingled 
together; and apart, at one end of the room, was 
a group of Buddhist priests. It was an interest- 
ing scene. So thought the young missionary as 
he began his simple sermon. 

"Dear friends, I have just returned from a 
visit to the Hakone Mountains. I thought them 
very beautiful, but it seemed strange to me to find 
no sheep there, no shepherd leading his flock to 
the clear streams or watching them feed upon the 
sunny slopes. It was not like this in the country 
where Jesus lived. There many a strong man 
found occupation in tending sheep. Shepherds 
there watched over many flocks by night and by 
day. They found pasture for them and water in 
the wilderness. They helped the weak ones and 
carried the lambs in their arms. They defended 
them against lions and bears and wolves. They 
would give up their own lives for the sheep. 
Nay, they even called each sheep by its name, 
and each sheep knew its own shepherd and fol- 
lowed him. Now I will read you what the Lord 
Jesus calls himself in the tenth chapter of the 
Gospel of John." 

Mr. West then read slowly and distinctly the 
verses he had referred to. 

'' Dear friends, the Lord Jesus is the Shepherd 



THE CHAPEL SERVICE. 213 

and his people are the sheep. There are many 
weak ones among them whom he leads and helps. 
Little children are the lambs of the Lord Jesus. 
Beloved, I hear so many voices calling you. 
There are so many false teachers, so many who 
pretend to be shepherds, but are not. They call 
you to go this way and that, until you are bewil- 
dered and do not know where to turn. There is 
but one Shepherd, but one way. Beloved, I pray 
you to listen to that voice and walk in that way,'* 

Then followed the reading and explaining of 
another passage of Scripture, to which the audi- 
ence listened attentively. There was compara- 
tively little disorder. Once a man coming in 
went up and shook hands with the preacher; oth- 
ers who came late saluted their friends. A man 
occasionally went round with a stick and poked 
up any who had fallen asleep. The meeting 
closed with an old, familiar hymn. The people 
stood and sangr in their own lanofuagie "There is 
a happy land," and then quietly dispersed. 

"Kechan," said Aka as they walked away, 
" I should like to ask the teacher some time more 
about the Good Shepherd. I wish Rinjiro had 
known Him." 

The sun had gone down and the yellow moon 
had come up from the sea. Old Kei sat in her 
upper room. Before her was a row of idols, and 
Kei was gazing earnestly at them. There was 
Daikoku with his round, jolly face, Yebisu with 



214 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

his fish, an image of Bindzuru, some household 
gods, a beautiful gilt figure of Benten, and some 
pictures. Kei looked at them long. Tears gath- 
ered in her eyes and rolled down her cheeks. She 
had trusted to these gods so long and had spent so 
much time in trying to please them. 

Presently she took a square of cloth and tied 
all the idols up in it. A moment later she was 
in the street going towards the river. It was a 
glorious night. The canals were golden in the 
moonlight, the river ran in bright ripples down to 
the sea. Kei went quietly along the darkest, nar- 
rowest streets, and at last reached the river. In 
a lonely spot, where she was hidden by some 
buildings, she dropped her bundle down, down 
into the deep, mysterious water. There was a 
heavy splash. She shuddered a little, but soon 
turned, and with a firm step and a lighter heart 
went home. 



A COUNTRY BOY IX TOKIO. 215 

CHAPTER XIX. 

A COUNTRY BOY IN TOKIO. 

To Saijiro and his faithful friend Yenoske a 
room in the servants' quarters had been assigned 
when Yetaro died. "Take time and rest, my 
boy," the missionary had kindly said. For Sai- 
jiro had gone to the doctor after the funeral, had 
stood before him respectfully, and said, 

" Honorable doctor, we have no money. We 
have to work. My father wished me to learn 
your doctrine and to go to your school, and Ye- 
noske and I will work for my education." 

There was something noble in the appearance 
of the boy. He was tall and manly, and seemed 
to bring a breath of his native mountain air with 
him, so fresh was his complexion, so bright 
his eye, and so straightforward his look. 

" x\ll in good time, my boy," answered the 
doctor. "Take time and rest." 

Is it not pleasant to note the workings of 
God's providence, the little links in the great 
chain which binds us to his throne? A few 
months before, in far-off Pennsylvania, a mother 
and her boy sat talking together of that boy's fu- 
ture. 

"I will be a missionary, mamma," said the 



2l6 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

eager boy, *'a missionary in Japan. But it will 
be so long before I can go. I can hardly wait, 
mamma, I can hardly wait." 

And now there had come to the doctor's wife 
a letter from that same mother. It read thus: 

"Dear friend: I may never look into your 
eyes nor feel the pressure of your hand nor listen 
to the tones of your voice, but my very soul 
goes out to you when I read of your good work in 
Japan. ]\Iy husband is a clergyman in this place, 
and our church is deeply interested in missions. 
We have been blessed with seven children. A 
few weeks ago our eldest boy, a bright, happy lad 
of thirteen, w^as taken from us after an illness of a 
few hours. We have six children left, six sweet, 
loving little ones. But there is a vacant place in 
my heart. My boy had chosen to be a missionary 
in Japan. It was his constant thought. Dear 
friend, we want to take into our hearts a Japanese 
boy. We want to love and educate him for our 
Harry's sake." 

All of the thirteen years during which Saijiro 
had been growing up on the mountain Harry 
Rindberg had lived his happy life in the little 
town in Pennsylvania. And now that he had 
been taken away, the mother's heart yearned for 
some better monument to the boy's memory than 
any marble could afford. 

''Surely the Lord's hand is in this," said Dr. 
Fielding as he read the letter. " Saijiro shall be 



A COUNTRY BOY IN TOKIO. 21/ 

Mrs. Rlndberg's boy. May he comfort her for 
her lost Harry!" 

"The God of the Christians has sent you a 
mother, my boy," he said to Saijiro. 

The boy lifted his eyes in surprise and Ye- 
noske bowed low. Then the doctor told of Harry, 
and of the mother's wish for a Japanese boy to be 
to her as a son in her lost one's place. Saijiro 
could scarcely comprehend, but from that time his 
heart went out to his " mother in America." Ye- 
iioske was taken as a servant in the doctor's fam- 
ily. The coolie who had been the under-servant 
had left, and Yenoske gladly took his place. 

"But," said the doctor as he unfolded his 
plans concerning them, "take a day or two and 
see this wonderful city before you begin to work." 

So early the next morning Saijiro and Yenoske 
started off to explore Tokio. What New York is 
to one of our rustics, Tokio is to a country boy in 
Japan, and Saijiro greatly enjoyed the sight-see- 
ing. The canals looked silvery in the pale light 
just before the sunrise, and the air was still and 
warm. The sea-breeze had not yet sprung up 
over the city. Fuji's outlines were dimly visible, 
and more than once Yenoske turned his eyes in 
the direction of the Hakone Hills. Yenoske loved 
his mountain home and often longed for its wild, 
free life. But his devotion to Saijiro remained 
unchanged, and he never once thought of going 
back. 



2l8 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

They made their way down towards the Tori, 
choosing to go to the railroad station and see the 
train 0^0 out. Thev were astonished at the lonof 
row of foreign-built houses with their pretty col- 
onnades. 

"What a fine jinrikisha you have," said Sai- 
jiro, addressing a coolie who sat upon the ground 
beside his cart. 

"/)^^?/," said the man, "it is a fine kariima^'^^ 
cart, " but it is very heavy." 

"Is it hard work to pull it?" inquired Ye- 
noske. 

The man answered, "Yes; and sometimes for 
two or three days I have no customers. I like to 
draw the honorable foreigners; they pay three 
times as much as the Japanese do." 

" But do they beat you?" asked Yenoske. 

^^ Dogu^ they never beat me. I like the 
Jesus-teachers; they are always kind and reason- 
able." 

Just then the man spied a foreigner crossing 
the street, and started towards him. Saijiro and 
Yenoske saw the stranger stop the jinrikisha. 
They wanted to hear what was said. 

" How much to go to the station?" 

* * Two boos. " Kboo is twelve and a half cents. 

"That is "too much. One boo^''^ said the for- 
eigner, holding up a finger. 

After considerable parleying the two compro- 
mised for one boo and a half. Even that was too 



A COUNTRY BOY IN TOKIO. 219 

much. But the gentleman got into the cart and 
was borne off towards the station. 

By this time the sun had risen. The streets 
were filling with people. Some clouds had gath- 
ered overhead. These who met and saluted said 
it was going to rain. The two mountain boys 
passed through a great fish-market which interest- 
ed them exceedingly. Fish, except mountain 
trout, was rare enough in their home in the heart 
of the Hakones. Some sailors passed them carry- 
ing an immense shark. 

'' What is that big fish ?" Saijiro asked. 

Even Yenoske had never seen a shark before, 
and so could not answer. 

They followed the three men, and when these 
had deposited the shark upon a board and were 
preparing to cut it, Saijiro put his question again. 

The men answered it, adding, "Where did 
you come from, little master?" 

*'From the Hakone Mountains." 

"Where did you get the shark ?" now inquired 
Yenoske. 

" i?^^//," replied one of the sailors, "we have 
been out all night on the bay. It was rough, and 
we caught nothing until we speared this big fel- 
low." 

The boys continued their walk around the 
market. There were oysters, clams, and crabs. 
There were fine salmon from Hakodate and tiny 
sardines from the more southern coasts. Saijiro 



220 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

admired the tai — a species of carp — and bora^ with 
their beautiful, delicate scales, and looked with 
interest at the seaweed, mosses, and curious cut- 
tle-fish. 

Having passed through the market, the boys 
found themselves presently on a bridge which 
crossed a large canal. A number of boats were be- 
ing propelled slowly up the canal towards the cas- 
tle. There was a long line of house-boats fastened 
by staples and ropes to the shore. A great many 
people were crossing the bridge, some in jinriki- 
shas and some on foot. All of these had to make 
way for a Japanese soldier, who urged his horse 
carelessly and rapidly through the crowd. 

"/^^^//," said a lady whose jinrikisha the 
horse had grazed in passing, " these foreigners 
make us a great deal of trouble, teaching our peo- 
ple to ride like that." 

Just after the boys had crossed the bridge it 
began to rain. Those few clouds had gradually 
covered the sky. A heavy shower fell on Tokio. 
Tho. jinrikiyas pulled oil-paper covers over their 
carts. Women drew their skirts up over their 
heads and ran laughing along. Those who had 
babies stopped under the projecting eaves of the 
houses. 

" It w^ill be over soon," said Yenoske as Sai- 
jiro shook the drops from his hair. 

Sure enough, by the time they entered Shiba 
the sun was shining brightly again, and all the 



A COUNTRY BOY IN TOKIO. 221 

wet tree-tops were resplendent in its beams. The 
boys went up to the great gateway, and after ad- 
mirinof it entered the inclosure. Of all the tern- 
pies of Tokio, this is the most beautiful. Saijiro 
and Yenoske walked up the broad flagging to the 
temple steps, but not to worship. Some thoughts 
were in their minds which made them hesitate. 
*' What is this place ?" Yenoske asked of a priest, 
who in yellow robes and with shaven head was 
hurrying by them, an incense-box in his hand. 

^''Dogii r^ answered he, surprised, " do you not 
know? This is Shiba, where the Shoguns are 
buried." 

The boys stood in a broad avenue. Grand 
forest trees bent over them, through whose inter- 
laced branches poured the rich sunlight. Under 
these trees grew violets, ferns, and mosses. Not a 
sign was at hand of the large city they had just 
left. They might, indeed, have been deep in the 
solitudes of their own mountains. The little tem- 
ples dedicated to the Shoguns were of the most 
exquisite workmanship, the gates of many of 
them being of solid bronze. Beautiful Shiba! 
Never before had Saijiro seen anything like it. 
Taking off his shoes, he went into a temple. 
Over the altar were dainty lilies and pomegran- 
ates, made of gold and suspended by golden 
chains. The ceiling was of inlaid work, and the 
floor of wonderfully polished wood. 

From Shiba the boys made their way to the 



222 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

railway station, where Saijiro was soon intensely 
interested in the cars. There were foreign ladies 
and gentlemen waiting in the station to take the 
next train for Yokohama. 

*' Why doesn't the yonng master ride down to 
Shinao^awa?" asked an official who was standing: 
near. "It is only a few miles and costs but a 
few seji.^^ 

So Saijiro and Yenoske followed a crowd of 
Japanese into a third-class car. They were all 
l^acked closely together; but it was an open car, 
and they had plenty of fresh air. The rapid mo- 
tion almost frightened the two friends at first. 
They had scarcely had time to become accustomed 
to it when the train stopped, and they had to get 
out. 

Every precaution is taken for the safety of 
passengers, and of people crossing the tracks, in 
Japan. A sentinel is posted at every crossing, 
and wherever it is possible the road goes either 
under or over the track. The boys carefully ex- 
amined the "iron road." They went upon a 
brido:e which crossed it and stood looking^ at the 
forts. An old man observed them, and drawing 
near, entered into conversation with them. The 
forts were very pretty, appearing like little green 
islands in the blue waters of the bay. 

"/7^^//," began the old man, following the di- 
rection of Saijiro's gaze, "those forts were built 
when the honorable foreigners first came into the 



A COUNTRY BOY IN TOKIO. 223 

country with their great iron ships. ' ' Dogu ! 
how frightened we all were. Honorable grand- 
father died with fright." 

Saijiro looked concerned. The "honorable 
foreigners" certainly did a great deal of mischief. 

"The ships," continued the man, " were an- 
chored right off there. We saw them very early 
one morning; they seemed like black mountains 
in the mist. Some fishermen hastened ashore to 
tell us what they were. Then we kindled fires, 
to show that the country was in danger, and every 
one was terribly distressed. The thunder and 
lightning from the cannon made us terribly 
afraid. Oh, what a calling upon the gods there 
was ! Honorable grandmother sat all day count- 
ing her beads. We set off to the ships in our sam- 
pans to sell vegetables and fruits. But the for- 
eigners would not let any one go aboard." 

" But they did n't really hurt any of the Jaj^an- 
ese, did they?" questioned Saijiro. 

''''DoguP^ said the man, "no; but there has 
been a great deal of trouble since." 

The boys now made their way slowly back to 
Tokio. They had seen quite enough for one day. 

That afternoon the Fujisawas had some com- 
pany. Dr. and Mrs. Fielding, with their little 
daughter Marion, came to make them a long- 
promised visit. The coolies who had drawn the 
jinrikishas from the Concession to Fujisawa's 
door were just about to call, " O tano inosJiiinasu^'^^ 



224 KESA AND SAIJIPvO. 

when the slides were pushed open, and Kesa's 
bright face appeared. 

' ' You are very welcome, ' ' said she. 

The guests stopped a moment to exchange 
their heavy shoes for slippers. No one wishes to 
tread with shoes on spotless white mats. Kesa 
stood quietly by until the visitors were ready, and 
then conducted them into the parlor, where the 
family were assembled. Pleasant were the greet- 
ino^s exchano^ed. 

Mrs. Fujisawa directed her servant to bring in 
tea. The girl handed each cup on a little tray, 
getting down on her knees to present it. Then a 
beautiful bowl was brought and placed before 
Mrs. Fujisawa. This was filled with ice-cold wa- 
ter. Near it w^as set a dish of pears which looked 
like russet apples. These the lady of the house 
peeled daintily and cut into small pieces, letting 
them fall into the ice-water. Then with chop- 
sticks she presented a piece to each guest. They 
found them refreshingly juicy and cold. 

The children soon went into the garden to play 
among the flowers. 

*' How old are you?" Kesa asked of Marion. 

The little American answered, " I am ten,"- 

^' x\nd so am I," cried Kesa. 

The fair skin, blue eyes, and light, curling 
hair of one child presented a great contrast to the 
olive complexion, dark eyes, and straight, black 
locks of the other. Yet they were not altogether 



A COUNTRY BOY IN TOKIO. 225 

unlike. Blue eyes and black eyes both had the 
same look, at once fearless and earnest; and both 
children were well developed physically. Each 
in her own way presented a picture of childish 
health and beauty. 

They stood for a time upon the knoll, gazing 
at the distant mountains. 

*'01d Fuji is almost hidden to-day,^' said 
Marion. "We cannot see the mountains of the 
Kadzusa range at all. But what a pretty garden 
you have, Kesa, and how nice it must be to play 
here.'' 

They wandered at last into the little summer- 
house where, eight years before, Kesa and Rinjiro 
had been playing when Kei came and told her 
plaintive story of Nantaro and her weary search 
for him. On a shelf in one corner were some 
broken toys, and on a little table Daruma himself 
reposed in solemn state. 

"I played with them when I was a baby," 
said Kesa, pointing out the toys, "and that Daru- 
ma Sama was Rinjiro's." 

"Where is Rinjiro now?" asked Marion. 

''^ Dogu ! he is dead and finished. He was my 
husband, or he would have been if he had lived." 

But such grave thoughts do not long occupy 
the minds of children, and these were soon play- 
ing again, bright, happy, and careless. When 
tired, they went indoors to look at some pictures. 

"What is this?" asked INIarion. 

Kc«a «n<l Saijiio. I C 



226 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

The picture she held represented a man 
dressed like a prince, with a princely feast spread 
before him. Beside him sat a beautiful woman in 
a court dress. Behind the pair were two fishes 
dressed as servants and with heads bowed respect- 
fully. Before them was a row of fishes, waiting 
as if to receive orders; while two other fishes 
seemed to be coming up from the depths of the 
sea, one bearing a table, and the other a covered 
dish. 

''Oh, we have a whole set of those pictures,'* 
said Chiye. "They illustrate the story of Ura- 
shima." 

"Tell me about it," urged IMarion. "I love 
to hear stories of Old Japan, and these pictures are 
very pretty." 

The first of the set showed a fisherman in a 
little boat. In one hand he held a tortoise, which 
he was just putting back into the sea. 

"That man," said Chiye, "is Urashima. 
Long, long years ago he lived in a fishing-village 
on the coast. One day he went out in his boat to 
fish. He let down his net and caught a tortoise. 
Now the tortoise lives a thousand years, and Ura- 
shima, seeing that this was a young one, thought 
it would be a pity to deprive it of its long, happy 
life; so he dropped it back into the sea. 

"The next picture shows Urashima asleep in 
his boat. A beautiful young lady has risen out 
of the waves to sit witli him in the boat while he 



A COUNTRY BOY IN TOKIO. 22/ 

is still sleeping. On awaking lie was naturally 
astonished at the unexpected vision. To his sur- 
prise the young lady told him that she was the 
tortoise whose life he had spared. As a rew^ard 
for his kindness he might now be her husband 
and go down ^vith her to her beautiful palace 
under the sea. Urashima agreed. So they went 
down, down to the promised dwelling. The 
leaves of the trees there were of emeralds, the 
fruits were rubies, and the dewdrops were pearls. 
They lived in perfect happiness until Urashima 
began to think he must go home and see his aged 
parents; he imagined he had been away only a 
few weeks. 'You may go,' said the beautiful 
princess, ' but you must take this box wuth you. 
Do not open it, for if you do you will never find 
your way back to me. ' 

" Urashima took the box, bade farewell to his 
lovely wife, and rose slowly, slowly out of the 
sea. At last he found himself on his own shore 
and stood lookinsf about for his cotta^re. But 
everything had gone. An old man came up and 
spoke to him. ' What are you looking for, young 
man?' 'Alas,' answered Urashima, ' can you tell 
me w^here Urashima's cottage is?' 'Urashima's 
cottage ! Why, Urashima was drowned in the sea 
three or four hundred years ago. ' 

"Then Urishama was sad and could only think 
of hurrying back to the palace where the lovely 
princess waited for him. But he did not know 



228 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

the way back. He thought of his box. ' I will 
open it. Perhaps I shall find the way then.' So, 
forgetting the command of the princess, he opened 
the box. A great white cloud arose from it. Ura- 
shima found himself shrivelling, his strength go- 
ing. In a few minutes he was dead. So he never 
got back to that palace under the sea, though the 
beautiful princess waited long for him, though 
the emerald leaves, the ruby fruits, and the pearly 
dewdrops shone and gleamed as gladly as of old." 

"That is the prettiest Japanese story I have 
ever heard," said Marion. " It is a little like our 
Rip Van Winkle." 

"Tell us that," begged Kesa. 

But Marion's father and mother had finished 
their visit and were calling to her, and the saio- 
naras must be said. 

"How nice it was, mamma," said she, nest- 
ling close to her mother's side in the jinrikisha as 
they rode. 



SCHOOL DAYS. 229 



CHAPTER XX. 

SCHOOL DAYS. 

"Be very careful, Kesa, and do study more, 
child. The teacher at the school- says you are so 
idle and careless. ' ' 

Thus spoke JNIrs. Fujisawa to Kesa as she and 
Chiye stood waiting for the jinrikishas which were 
to carry them to the foreign school. Chiye was 
radiantly happ}^, and Kesa was not unwilling to 
go with her favorite sister to the school, although 
she was not fond of study and the teacher's com- 
plaint was but too well founded. 

The girls were dressed with care and taste, as 
befitted the daughters of the high officer Fujisawa. 
Their dresses were of a delicate, soft gray, with 
which their red sashes contrasted prettily; and the 
lovely crapes at the neck and in the hair were of 
the most charming shades. Each had a fition^ 
with a warm wadded covering, a wooden pillow, 
and a little table, besides books and clothing. A 
coolie was loading a cart with their things, and 
the jinrikishas were being drawn up the street. 

"There com.e the carts," said Chiye, spying 
the vehicles as they came around the corner. 

^'' Saionara^ honorable mother. Again on the 



230 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

sixth day," said the girls, prostrating themselves 
before their mother. 

^^ Saionara^ my daughters; may the gods pro- 
tect you," said ]\Irs. Fujisawa, sighing when she 
remembered that both children had positively re- 
fused to carry idols with them to the school. 

''^Saionara^ honorable sisters," and again before 
Mitsu and Hana Chiye and Kesa were prostrate. 

'^^ Saionara^ saioiiara^'^'* responded the sisters, 
who would be lonely enough through the long 
days of the week. 

^^Saio?iara^^^ said the servants, who were stand- 
ing in a line to witness the departure. 

Then the girls, almost hidden by the immense 
bouquets they carried, got into one jinrikisha, and 
Fujisawa, carefully holding a lacquered box, took 
his seat in the other. It was a lovely September 
morning and the girls enjoyed the ride down to 
the mission compound. 

Children had come in jinrikishas from all 
parts of the city, and all carried presents for their 
dear teacher — flowers, eggs, and beautiful lacquer 
and china ware. The children were all bright 
and happy, glad to get back to school after the 
long summer vacation. ]\Iiss Wilton received 
them lovingly and listened with sympathy to their 
accounts of the way in which they had spent the 
summer. 

" I have been to see my aunt in Yokohama," 
said one. 



SCHOOL DAYS. 231 

'*I have visited the mountains," said another. 

*'And I went across the bay to the Kadzusa 
Hills," said a third. 

"Ah, there come the Fujisavvas," cried Fusa, 
Chiye's friend, as she saw the three jinrikishas. 

Miss Wilton hastened to meet them. 

Fujisawa alighted from the cart and bowed. 
" For the favor of many days ago I thank you," 
he said. 

"You are truly welcome," answered Miss 
Wilton. 

"For my daughters I beg your honorable 
care. They are very stupid girls and do not l^arn 
well. If you please, I beg your kind considera- 
tion and your honorable attentions." 

" Thanks, Mr. Fujisawa; I will gladly accept 
the charge," said Miss Wilton, who already had 
noticed Chiye's bright intelligence and Kesa's 
winning manners. 

"Truly, a small present, scarcely worthy of 
your consideration," said Fujisawa, presenting a 
pair of exquisite bronze vases. 

The girls bowed gracefully and presented their 
flowers. The house was already one mass of blos- 
soms. Lilies, chrysanthemums, and hydrangeas 
all bore testimony to the love of the pupils for 
their teacher. 

"If you please, I wish my daughters to learn 
English," said Fujisawa, when Miss Wilton had 
thanked them for the beautiful gifts. "They 



232 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

will come hereafter, as you wish, on Sunday 
mornings, and remain until Friday evening. I 
will accompany them myself or send a servant 
for them." 

''You know that we teach them the Bible 
and send them to church," said Miss Wilton. 

''It is well," answered Fujisawa. It made 
little difference to him what they were taught 
concerning religion. 

"You have a friend here," said Miss Wilton 
to Chiye, when Fujisawa had bowed himself away. 

Chiye smiled. "Yes, my dear friend Fusa. 
We have sworn an eternal friendship; we are al- 
w^ays going to the same school, and we shall 
never, never be separated." 

The teacher was amused. Chiye^s words re- 
minded her of American girls and their eternal 
friendships. But she called Fusa and told her to 
show the girls the dormitory and their apartments; 
so they all went off together. Fusa led the way 
into a spacious, well-ventilated room, where each 
girl was assigned a small compartment, separated 
from the others by fixed screens. A servant 
brought up the bedding and other things, and 
Fusa helped the Fujisawas arrange everything 
nicely and then took them down to the school- 
room. This was furnished with foreign desks 
and chairs, and Chiye' s eyes fairly shone as she 
noted the blackboards, maps, and pictures on the 
walls. 



SCHOOL DAYS. 233 

**I will study so hard that I will soon be able 
to go on with you in your English classes," she 
said to Fusa. 

"Have you read any English at all?" asked 
Miss Wilton of the Fujisawas. 

"No, honorable seiisei. We have read only 
Japanese and Chinese," they answered. But 
while Chiye was put into the lowest English 
class, she was far ahead of all the other girls in 
Chinese, and had to study alone. 

There were no classes that day, and when the 
girls had been examined they were sent off. 
Chiye went up to her room with her precious 
book, and Kesa wandered out into the garden. 

She walked about in a listless way at first, but 
soon her attention was arrested by the sound of 
children's voices, and she peeped through the 
hedge which separated the doctor's yard from the 
school compound. 

Marion Fielding was working in her garden, 
and near her was a boy of seven, her motherless 
cousin Carroll. He wore a white suit and a 
broad-brimmed straw hat; a shower of golden 
curls fell on his shoulders; and Kesa thought she 
had never seen anything so charming as his 
whole appearance. She could not understand 
what the children were saying, but thought it 
must be something connected with the flowers. 

"Marion san P^ she called at last. San is a 
respectful address, like Sir or Madame. 



234 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Marion looked up to see Kesa's eyes fixed 
upon her, and greeted her warmly. "Come and 
siee my garden, Kesa," she said, turning quickly 
from Bnglish to Japanese. 

Kesa was soon standing by Marion and Car- 
roll. "Why do you work yourselves?" she 
asked. ' ' Old Oto takes care of our garden. Does 
not the honorable father allow you servants?" 

"Oh, yes, but we love to work with the flow- 
ers. They are the dearest flowers on earth to us 
—these that we plant and take care of our- 
selves." 

"How do you like the school, Kesa?" asked 
Carroll. " Is your lesson hard ?" 

But Kesa made no answer. She had a vague 
feeling that she ought to be with Chiye, studying 
her lesson; but it was pleasanter in the garden, 
and she stood looking in a dreamy way at the 
bright water, the trees, and the flowers, and 
watching IMarion and Carroll as they dug, plant- 
ed, and watered. 

Yet all the while her little heart was not idle; 
deep impressions were being made; and when the 
doctor's wife came out of the house and stood by 
her little daughter, and Marion eagerly explained 
to her what she had been doing, Kesa noted the 
mother's full interest and sympathy and turned 
away with an indefinite feeling of sorrow and un- 
rest. This child had a warm, loving heart, 
and the rather cold and indifferent manner of 



SCHOOL DAYS. 235 

lier mother — a genuine Japanese — never seemed 
to satisfy its cravings. 

"Where have you been, Kesa? And have 
you studied your lesson?" asked Chiye, as her 
sister entered the dormitory. 

" No, sister." 

"What have you been doing?" 

" Nothing, sister." 

" Kesa, the honorable father will be much dis- 
pleased if you are so idle. Sit down, and I will 
show you about the lesson. See, I have already 
learned one page. ' ' 

One page ! Poor little Kesa ! Would she ever 
know what was on that page? 

But Chiye was patient and helped her, until 
she could read and translate with tolerable ease, 
"The girl has a doll." 

"We are to begin school to-morrow, and we 
must learn our lessons," said Chiye. 

"Did you bring Daikoku Sama and Benten 
Sama with you?" asked one of the new girls of 
Kesa in the afternoon. They were in the dormi- 
tory, sitting on a mat. The windows were open, 
and they could see some boats out on the water. 

"No; I don't like them, and the people here 
don't have images," said Kesa. 

" But I have," said the girl; and taking Kesa 
to her compartment and drawing aside a curtain, 
she showed her little shrine on which sat the gods 
of luck. 



236 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

*'0h, Chiye, Riki has Daikoku Sama and Ye- 
bisu Sama with her," said Kesa. 

** Well, she will not keep them long. All of 
the girls bring their idols with them, but they 
soon throw them away," said Fusa. 

The next morning school began in good 
earnest for Chiye and Kesa. By six o'clock 
the girls were all up, and then came a time of 
washing, dressing, and airing futons. Then 
some of the girls knelt and prayed to the un- 
seen God; one or two offered their devotions to 
the idols which they had brought; and a large 
girl, Haru, saluted the sun. 

*'To whom shall we pray, sister?" asked 
Kesa. 

*' Dogu^ I should like to pray to the true God, 
but I do n't know what to say, Kesa." 

"How did the teacher pray last night, 
Chiye?" 

" He asked the true God to bless us and make 
us happy, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake." 

Kesa knelt by her sister's side while Chiye 
prayed: "Oh, true God, bless us and make us 
happy, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake." 

"I think that will do, Chiye," said Kesa, as 
they rose from their knees. 

They followed the rest of the girls into the 
dining-room, where they found, each on her 
own little table, a bowl of rice, steaming hot, 
and a cup of tea. Kesa sat by Chiye and was 



SCHOOI. DAYS. 237 

just taking up her chopsticks to begin eating, 
when her sister called, 

*'Wait, Kesa." 

Kesa saw all the girls bowing their heads and 
waited while an elderly woman, who resembled 
Kei in appearance and dress, said a simple 
grace. 

"What did Kotu say, sister?" asked Kesa. 

"She thanked God for giving us this food," 
said Chiye. 

"I think that was very nice," rejoined Kesa, 
and then took up the chopsticks and soon made 
way with the rice. 

After breakfast the girls had time for a walk 
beside the ba}'. At nine they all went into the 
schoolroom, where the day's exercises were begun 
with singing, prayer, and Bible-reading. The 
Scripture lesson occupied half an hour, and all 
listened attentively to the native teacher's ex- 
planation of the story of creation. 

All of the servants came in and sat near the 
door. Yenoske tried to understand, but thought 
the subject very puzzling. He knew that the 
world was beautiful and that he loved it, but he 
cared little as to how it was made or who 
made it. 

Then came the English clashes. When each 
reading class was dismissed the girls composing 
it were sent to the translation teacher, who saw 
that they understood what they read. These 



238 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

classes occupied the time until twelve o'clock, 
when there was an intermission of two hours. 

The noon meal was like the breakfast, except 
that the girls had also fish with sauce and a dish 
of greens stood beside each rice-bowl. They al- 
ways had greens or Japanese ''sugar potatoes" 
or lily and lotus roots for dinner. 

The girls had their Chinese writing and Jap- 
anese and Chinese reading lessons in the after- 
noon. They wrote in the dining-room at the 
same little tables on which they had their rice- 
bowls at meals. 

At four all assembled in the schoolroom, and 
after a hymn and some words from their teacher 
they were dismissed. 

After this a half-hour was spent in Bible study 
by those who especially desired it. Chiye quick- 
ly joined this Bible-class, but Kesa preferred go- 
ing out to play wdtli the younger girls, and most of 
the day scholars went home. 

Again in the evening the boarding pupils as- 
sembled around the large table in the study-room, 
where, after worship, they had talks with their 
teacher. It was hard at first to get them to talk 
freely, but they were learning to come to her with 
their petty grievances, with their questionings 
about things which they did not understand, and 
with their pleasures as well as their sorrows and 
perplexities. ]\Iiss Wilton knew all their homes 
and could talk with them of father, mother, bro- 



SCHOOL DAYS. 239 

thers, and sisters, thus drawing tlieni close to her 
with her intelligent sympathy. She thought this 
evening hour the very pleasantest of all the pleas- 
ant hours of the day, and so thought the girls. 

Many a day passed thus for Chiye and Kesa; 
many a day thus came and went for their devoted 
teacher. 

''I thought, when I had made the one great 
sacrifice, that that was the end of little worries; 
but I find that life is the same in the mission-field 
as anywhere else," said Miss Wilton one day to 
the doctor's wife] 

*' Yes, life is made up of little things here as 
well as in America, dear Miss Wilton," answered 
Mrs. Fielding. And the teacher soon learned to 
go cheerfully through the routine of school-work 
and to bear bravely all the annoyances which fell 
to her lot. 

Chiye soon left Kesa far behind in her studies. 
Miss Wilton gloried in the older sister's rapid 
progress, but she loved the little Kesa. The 
child had an irresistibly winning way of giving a 
bright upward glance at her teacher's face when 
she had spelled or read a word, and she had not 
been long in the school before Miss Wilton no- 
ticed her sweet, clear voice rising above all the 
others when the girls sang their h}-mns. 

*'I often make them sing, 'I am so glad that 
our Father in heaven,' in order to hear that 
child's voice ring out, 'Jesus loves even mc,' '* 



240 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Miss Wilton said one day, when Mrs. Fielding 
had been speaking of Kesa and her own increas- 
ing interest in Marion's little friend. 

In the meantime Saijiro w^as making good 
progress in his English studies in the boys' school 
in the adjoining compound. He also studied 
Chinese and Japanese and was gaining knowl- 
edge of the Scriptures. His ambition was to 
write a letter to his "mother in America;" and 
bravely did he work over the English alphabet, 
and tried to hold his pen in the English way. 
His room-mate was a studious, thoughtful youth, 
named Harukichi. 

"I w^ish to study and be a teacher of the 
Christian doctrine," he said to Saijiro one day. 

*'And can you not, Harukichi?" asked the 
boy. 

^'' Dogii! the honorable parents will not hear 
of it; if I do it, I may not go home nor look upon 
their honorable faces again. When I went home 
last summer I begged them to let me become a 
Christian teacher; but honorable mother's honor- 
able tears fell fast, and she beat her breast and 
tore her hair. What will your honorable parents 
say, Saijiro, if you wish to be a Christian?" 

'''' Dogu^ I have no honorable parents, except 
my mother in America," answered Saijiro. 

The conversation dropped, but Saijiro knew 
that the Chinese Bible was Harukichi' s favorite 
volume. Day and night he studied it, and one 



SCHOOL DAYS. 24 1 

day Saijiro, coming in unexpectedly, found him 
engaged in earnest prayer. 

"Have you no image which you worship?'* 
asked Saijiro. 

''No; I worship the Christians' God," Haru- 
kichi answered. 

Yenoske, all this time, was faithfully dischar- 
ging 'his duties as under-servant in the doctor's 
family, carrying wood, bringing water, perform- 
ing the most servile tasks with the cheerfulness 
and readiness which had always characterized 
him. Often his eyes turned longingly and lov- 
ingly to the long line of the Hakone Hills; but he 
never complained or spoke of his yearning for 
his mountain home. And he gained from his 
mistress that which she said seemed to her the 
highest of all titles — that of "faithful servant." 

One morning, late in September, when the 
girls went to take their exercise on the beach, 
they noticed that the clouds w^ere very dark over- 
head and that the waves were breakins: into w4iite 
caps. Thousands of ugly-looking black bugs, 
which had their homes in the crevices of the 
rocks of the breakwater, came creeping up on 
the shore and on the sides of the mission-house. 

"Ah, a taifuP^ — great wind — said the girls; 
and some of the little ones began to cry. In 
truth, a typhoon is something to be dreaded. 
These terrible winds sweep the coast of China 
and Japan once a year, always in the late summer 



242 KESA AXD SAIJIRO. 

or early fall; and woe to the ships which are 
cang^ht in their centre ! 

When the girls first noticed the approaching 
storm the fishermen were hastening into the 
river with their boats.* Right gallantly did the 
frail-looking little sampans ride the waves, never 
taking in a drop of water, but always high and 
dry on top of the billows. Bravely did the boat- 
men work their oars, and beautifully did the sail- 
boats bend to the wnnd and allow themselves to 
be driven into the harbor. In came all the fish- 
ing-boats, all the pleasure-craft, all the junks, all 
the sampans — a whole fleet of vessels running in 
front of the gale into the safe river. Outside rode 
some men-of-war, tossed like cockles by the fierce 
waves. 

Higher and higher rose the billows; darker 
and darker grew the clouds. The waves leaped 
over the breakwater and at last dashed on the 
second-story veranda of the mission-house. Tiles, 
fence-rails, gate-posts, everything that was in the 
least degree loose, flew about like so many feath- 
ers before the wind. Oh, the creaking and groan- 
ing of the rafters, the sound of the rushing, 
roaring waters, the rough voice of the howling 
wind ! 

There was no school that day; but in the 
evening Miss Wilton sent word to the girls to 
gather in the study-room, and soon came to them, 
accompanied by IMakichi, the venerable teacher 



SCHOOL DAYS. 243 

wlio conducted the Bible exercises in the school- 
room every morning. 

*'Ah, a great storm! Have you feared, my 
children?" asked Makichi. 

"Truly, yes, honorable j^;/j-^/. " 

*' I have come," he said, " to read you a story 
of the Lord Jesus when he was in a storm on the 
Sea of Galilee." 

The girls listened while Makichi read these 
sweet words of the evangelist Mark : 

''And there arose a great storm of wind, and 
the waves beat into the ship, so that it was now 
full. And he was in the hinder part of the ship, 
asleep on a pillow: and they awake him, and 
say unto him. Master, carest thou not that we 
perish ? And he arose, and rebuked the wind, 
and said unto the sea, Peace, be still. And the 
wind ceased, and there was a great calm." 

"It is very beautiful," said the older girls. 

"But," asked one, "does the God of the 
Christians do everything himself? Has he no 
servants? Our Hachiman Sama has horses and 
doves. Inari Sama has the fox. And there are 
the Thunder-god and the Pain-god and so many 
others." 

"The book of God," answered Makichi, 
"this Bible which I hold in my hands, tells us 
that the winds, the rain, the frost, the snow, and 
the thunder are all the servants and messengers 
of the great true God who made the heavens and 



244 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

the earth. By-and-by you will study philosophy 
and learn how God uses these things, become ac- 
quainted with some of the laws by which he reg- 
ulates them." Then Makichi prayed with the 
girls, and they went to bed calm and peaceful in 
the midst of the storm. 

The next morning the wind had ceased, all 
the clouds had rolled away, and out shone the 
sun, seemingly brighter and more glorious than 
ever. The sea and sky were alike of a deep 
blue. All the little fishing-boats, all the junks 
and sainptins and pleasure-craft, came out of the 
river and danced on the waters. Japan was beau- 
tiful, all fresh and green, and the hearts of the 
people rejoiced. The girls crowded on the upper 
veranda of the mission-house to see IMt. Fuji. 
There it stood, a grand white cone rising far 
above the other mountains. 

*' It is beautiful," said the missionaries. " No 
wonder the Japanese, from their standpoint, wor- 
ship it, the grandest thing in all Dai Nippon." 

"But to worship at its top cannot make peo- 
ple holy. Only the blood of Christ can wash 
away our sins," said a Christian girl. 



MIDWINTER IN TOKIO. 245 

CHAPTER XXI. 

MIDWINTER IN TOKIO. 

Warm September gave place to golden Octo- 
ber. October passed, and November's cold, 
dreary days came. It rained a great deal, and 
the children had to go to school in jinrikishas 
covered with oiled paper. And now it was far on 
in December and nearing the happy Christmas 
and New Year's time. 

*' Next week," said Kesa, as she sat by Hana's 
side one Friday afternoon when she and Chiye 
had returned to their home after the week in 
school, ' ' there will be a great feast of the Chris- 
tians." 

"What is it?" asked Hana. 

*' They call it Christmas, and it is in honor of 
tlie birthday of Christ." 

"What will the Christians do ?" 

" The boys of the school are going to get trees 
and berries, and the teacher will have Chinese 
oranges, nuts, and other foreign things for us. 
We are learning some songs for Christmas, but 
they are in English, and you wouldn't under- 
stand them, Hana." 

"Do you understand them, Kesa?" 

"Not very well. But oh, Hana, Marion saiz 



246 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

has sucli a pretty new hat with a red feather in it, 
and a new cloak! She says that her grandmother 
in America sent them to her. And the teachers 
all have new clothes, and every one is happy for 
the holidays." 

''Well, and aren't we getting new things for 
the holidays too, Kesa ? Tell me about your 
book." 

"Well, I read a story about a lazy man who 
went and sat down in the sun. Hana, I think 
that is very foolish. How could a man go and 
sit down in the sun?" 

"I don't know how he could get up there," 
said Hana. 

' ' It is in the honorable foreigners' book, ' ' said 
Kesa. 

" Wj will ask Chiye," said Hana, ''and she 'II 
tell us about the Christmas hymns. You don't 
seem to understand anything very w^ell, Kesa." 

In truth, poor little Kesa was blundering along 
in the dark. Chiye was kind to her, but often 
failed in giving needed help, chiefly because she 
did not realize that it was needed. 

The child learned the letters and words In a 
mechanical way which deceived her teachers, who 
were far from suspecting how little she under- 
stood or how often the bright eyes were filled 
with tears as she tried to study. But she was 
naturally merry and happy, and quickly forgot 
her troubles when playtime came. 



MIDWINTP:r IX TOKIO. 247 

Cliiye, on the other hand, grasped everything, 
so when Hana, a little later, asked her about 
Christmas and the hymns, she was able to explain 
them. 

"They are hymns," she said, "about the in- 
fant Jesus, who was born in a stable in a town 
called Bethlehem. There were shepherds watch- 
ing their flocks at night, wdien the angel of the 
Lrord came down and told them that Jesus was 
born. And then a great many angels came and 
sang and told the shepherds where to go. And 
they w^ent and worshipped the holy child." 

*' Sister, there is something about a star," said 
Kesa. 

"Oh, yes. Some wise men in another coun- 
try wanted to find the infant Jesus, and a star 
went before them and stood over the place where 
he was. And the men went in and gave gifts." 
^^ Dogu r^ said Mrs. Fujisawa. 

She and Hana remained firm in their Buddh- 
ist faith, although they liked the Bible stories, 
and the lives of the "Sixteen Holy Disciples" 
had somewhat lost their charm. 

The girls had to leave home early Sunday 
morning in order to get to the mission in time for 
the Sunday-school, which was held from half-past 
nine until eleven. Then the boys and girls had 
time for study and rest until the hour for afternoon 
service. The girls had of their own accord organ- 
ized a noon prayer-meeting, and very sweet and 



248 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

simple and full of faith were the petitions which 
they put up. 

Long before two o'clock that afternoon people 
began to gather together for the service. Kei, 
whose interest in her wonderful book was increas- 
ing, came from her little house near Nippon Bo- 
shi. Aka, Mitsu, and the yashiki Baba were 
there with their Testaments, and Fusa gladly wel- 
comed her parents for the first time. 

The church was a low wooden building with 
high windows, and furnished with benches. A 
table served for a pulpit; this was on a platform 
covered with neat Chinese matting. At the side 
of the platform was a good-sized cabinet organ. 
The warm sunlight poured through the windows. 
There were flowers on the table, and everything 
looked cheerful and pleasant. 

The services were long; the Japanese seemed 
to expect this; it was not worth while to come so 
far and then go away immediately* Sometimes 
a little child would grow restless and trot 
around the church, the little bell it wore tink- 
ling as it went hither and thither. Sometimes 
a drowsy person would fall asleep, when one 
of the ushers would poke the offender with a long 
stick. 

The sermons were simple expositions of the 
gospel with many texts interspersed. " Sow the 
w^ord, the pure word of God, and ask his blessing 
on it,'' said the missionary. And the people lis- 



MIDWINTER IN TOKIO. 249 

tened attentively, while the truth sank deep into 
many a heart. 

On this Sabbath before Christinas the story of 
the Babe of Bethlehem was told to the people ; 
and many an eye brightened with interest as they 
listened. 

When the prayer after the sermon was ended, 
Mr. West said, "We will sing 'Rock of Ages.' '* 

Old Kei sang with all her heart, 

" Nothing in my hands I bring, 
Simply to thy cross I cling." 

Had she not gone with offerings — even the very 
best she possessed — to the idol shrines ? Had she 
not cut off the long black tresses from her head 
and hung them up in the temple ? Had she not 
gone on toilsome pilgrimages and made many 
prayers in weariness and painfulness? And all to 
no avail. And now she stood up and sang the 
sweet words which have been the comfort of so 
many weary hearts, and was happy. 

The people lingered after the service to greet 
one another and to talk; and many said that the 
doctrine was good, and many thanked God for his 
blessings to them. 

Of all the people who Avent away from the 
church that afternoon, none had listened more 
closely than Chive Fujisawa; no one had tried 
harder to understand them than Kesa; no one was 
more respectfully attentive than Saijiro; and no 
one was more puzzled than Yenoske. 



250 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

In tlie evening the boys and girls gathered to- 
gether to receive Bible instruction in the mission 
chapel on the girls' compound. They repeated 
verses and studied a simple catechism. 

One would think they would have wearied, 
but that night, when Miss Wilton was sitting by 
the fire, thinking that the day's work was over, 
she heard a timid knock at the door. 

" Come in," she said. 

It was Chiye who had knocked; and when she 
and the other girls had come and crowded around 
their teacher she said, *'0h, scnsei^ we want to 
know more; please, please teach us more.'^ 

The girls and boys had a happy Christmas at 
the mission. They sang around the tree, which 
Saijiro and some of the other boys had brought 
from a garden near Tokio, and pretty gifts were 
distributed among them. They called the day 
the *' birthday of Jesus,'* and most of them knew 
the meaning of the hymns and the reason why 
such pretty presents were given them. *' As the 
Father has given to us the great gift of his Son, 
so do we present gifts to one another." 

Saijiro was one of the boys who carried around 
the candy-bags and Chinese oranges to the girls. 
Kesa looked up to thank him as she took hers, 
and for the first time their eyes met. 

And now it was time for them to separate for 
the two weeks' vacation; so in the gathering 
twilight of the late winter afternoon, and with 



MIDWINTER IN TOKIO. 251 

the prayers and the blessings of the teachers, the 
girls and boys dispersed to their homes. 

Mrs. Fujisawa had been more than once to her 
door to look for her children, and was glad to hear 
the welcome sound of the jinrikishas. 

" I have a Chinese orange and a bag of foreign 
candy for you, Hana," said Kesa. 

** A very great thank-you," said Hana, reach- 
ing out her hand to take the treasures. 

"We are going to take our teachers presents 
on New Year's day," said Kesa. 

"I wish I could send the doctor's good wife 
something," sighed Hana. 

"So you shall, darling," said the mother, and 
brought her a piece of beautiful crape. 

"Thanks, honorable mother," said the sick 
girl, and laid it away to give to Kesa on the New 
Year's morning. 

The year opened beautifully in Tokio. There 
was scarcely a cloud in the sky all day, and the 
winter flowers, the camellias and jonquils, and the 
red berries were glorious. The missionary ladies 
and children had gathered in the parlor, which 
was tastefully decorated with flowers and berries. 

"Holidays are the homesick times," said the 
doctor's wife, drawing her little daughter closer 
to her. "I feel sorry to think that my Marion 
has missed the winter joys of the home-land: the 
gathering together of the happy band of relatives; 
the snow-balling, sleighing, skating; the nuts and 



252 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

apples around the fire; grandpa's and grandma's 
kisses and welcomes. But she shall know them 
some time." 

''Yes, these anniversaries are the hardest 
days of the year," responded Miss Wilton, who 
was also thinking of the dear ones at home. 

But their thoughts were diverted by a shout 
from Carroll, and looking from the window they 
saw a long line of jinrikishas, filled with laugh- 
ing, happy girls, coming along the Blind (levee), 
bound for the mission. The g^irls wore brio^ht 
new sashes and hairpins, and each one carried 
some gift for her teachers and friends. 

"Happy New Year!" they all shouted at 
once, as they alighted from the jinrikishas and 
saw their friends, who had hastened out on the 
veranda to meet them. 

" Happy New Year !" responded the mission- 
aries, and the merry girls were conducted into 
the parlor. 

Daintily and gracefully they presented their 
gifts. 

"Will you condescend to stoop down and ac- 
cept a little token from me?" said one, offering a 
beautiful lacquered box. 

"May I lift up a small, poor gift to you?" 
said another, presenting flowers and eggs. 

There were cups and balls for Marion and Car- 
roll, and boxes of confectionery, silks, and crapes 
for the ladies. 



MIDWINTER IN TOKIO. 253 

*'My sick sister Hana sends this to you, and 
begs your honorable acceptancej" said Chive, 
handing the doctor's wife Hana's exquisite piece 
of crape. 

" Thank your cister very much for me, Chiye. 
How is she?" said Mrs. Fielding. 

"Thanks, she suffers less pain." 

**And she does not yet believe in the Chris- 
tians' God, Chiye?" 

** Dogii^ she loves to listen to the stories of the 
Lord Jesus, but she also loves Shaka Sama. She 
does not know which to believe." 

" But she has the picture of the shepherd and 
the lambs that you gave her, and often looks at 
it," said Kesa. 

'' Many, many thanks for your coming and yor.r 
gifts," said the ladies as the girls rose to depart. 

"We should like to have you remain longer, 
but cannot keep you from your own homes," said 
Miss Wilton. 

The Qrirls left with bows and saio7iaras and 
many good wishes. 

"That is the most beautiful Japanese child I 
ever saw," said INIrs. Fielding, as Kesa Fujisawa 
waved a saionara from her jinrikisha. 

" The Japanese do not consider her pretty," 
answered Miss Wilton. "But these Fujisawa 
girls both look you in the eye, and it is seldom 
that any of the others will do that. They seem 
like American Q-irls to me." 



254 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

*'I am going over into the city to a prayer- 
meeting to-night," said Harukichi to Saijiro one 
cold winter afternoon during the vacation. 

"Ah, I should like to go with yon," said Sai- 
jiro, and one or two of the other boys begged per- 
mission to be of the party. 

Harukichi was glad to have them accompany 
him and readily granted permission. 

Yenoske, hearing of the meeting, asked if he 
might go too. So in the early evening quite a 
little company started from the mission-house to 
go to the prav-^r-meeting in the city. The night 
was cold and dark, and all weie closely muffled 
and carried lanterns. Their wooden clogs made 
a sharp, ringing noise on the stones, and as they 
walked they talked together in low, musical 
tones. 

"Ah," said Makichi, "I remember well the 
days when those who wished to study with the 
honorable foreigners stole over these walks at 
night, one at a time, in order to avoid the notice 
of the officers." 

"Yes," answered a friend; "and you were 

threatened, Makichi. Did you not feel afraid?" 

^^ Dogu^ the flesh is weak, and sometimes I did 

tremble; but I know I should have had strength 

to endure even the horrors of a prison." 

They w^ere w^alking through the Foreign Con- 
cession and came at last to the bridge which di- 
vides it from the city proper. 



MIDWINTER IN TOKIO. 255 

*'This is where the guards were stationed in 
the olden times. Dogit^ one night some anti-for- 
eign outlaws broke through and got into Tokiji'* 
(the Foreign Concession). "What a time that 
was !" said Makichi. 

"Yes," answered the other, "the honorable 
foreigners could not go out unaccompanied by 
guards. ' ' 

They passed the gate and entered a wide 
street. Lanterns hung from the houses on each 
side. A blind shampooer was walking along, 
now and then blowing his shrill whistle. Another 
man was trundling a cart and crying out, "5^V- 
iiray This is a kind of soup of which the Japan- 
ese are very fond. A few children were playing 
in the street, and occasionally a man or woman 
passed by. Every one was muffled and carried a 
lantern. The coolies who drew the jinrikishas 
found it difficult to keep their lanterns burning. 
The wind would often extinguish their lights, and 
then they would go on without any until stopped 
by a policeman. 

On went the little company of believers 
through the great heathen city, until they came 
to the Tori. There all was life and activity. The 
lanterns made a beautiful display as the swiftly- 
moving crowd shifted from place to place. The 
cries of the fishmongers, the sojiura men and the 
sweet-i"^^^ venders, the whistle of the ainas (shani- 
pooers), the appeals of the story-tellers, and the 



256 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

strange sounds of the coolies as they toiled under 
their heavy loads, all made a deafening uproar. 

The teacher led the way quickly across the 
Tori to one of the back streets, and passing 
through a dark, narrow alley, they stopped at the 
entrance of a large house. They were evidently 
expected, for some one from within quickly admit- 
ted them and led them through the kitchen to a 
room in the rear. 

Here were gathered about seventy people. An 
elderly man, evidently the proprietor, rose to greet 
the company from the mission, and the rest of the 
people bowed. There were three or four large hi- 
bacJiis in the room filled with glowing coals. Over 
these sat some old people, warming their hands. 
Some fine-looking young men with Bibles sat in 
one corner, and in another were some young wo- 
men and children. Three or four blind men sat 
by a little table, and near them was a thoughtful- 
looking priest in yellow robes. There was no 
light in the room save that thrown out by the 
coals in the JiibacJiis and the flickering flames of 
three or four tallow candles. 

"Dear friends," said Makichi after the open- 
ing services, ' ' we have come together for a prayer- 
meetinof. This is the first one we have had in 
this neighborhood, and many of you have come to 
pray to the Christians' God for the first time. We 
do not have to call loudly to him. We do not 
have to beat drums or ring bells or strike on the 



MIDWINTER IN TOKIO. 257 

ground with our staves. Neither do we have to 
repeat his name over and over, and so gain merit. 
He tells us that he is our Father and that we 
are his children; and prayer is asking him for 
what we want, telling him our troubles, begging 
him to relieve our distresses and pardon our sins, 
and thanking him for mercies, through our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ. 

" Now I know that some of you here to-night 
have wants and cares, that you need God's help, 
and that you also have many mercies for which 
you can thank him. I see old Maka crying bit- 
terly. My friends, her sorrow is a heavy one. 
We all know that her beloved son is in prison for 
committing a crime. Can the Lord help Maka? 
Oh, yes; he can give her strength to bear her 
troubles. And prison walls cannot keep out the 
Lord Jesus. He can visit poor Jujiro in his cell 
and can turn his heart to Him. Listen to what he 
says to those who were thieves: 'Let him that 
stole steal no more; but rather let him labor, 
working with his hands.' And here is another 
text, ' The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth 
us from all sin.' Dearly beloved, there is hope 
for a thief. Let us pray for Maka and her 
son." 

The w^oman stopped her sobbing to listen while 
one of the Christian men poured out his heart in 
her behalf 

*'And now," continued Makichi, "I hear that 

Kesa ana Saijlro. I "J 



258 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Rosuki has lost some of his worldly goods and 
that his heart is sorely troubled." 

Rosuki bowed. 

"Dear friends, listen to what the Lord Jesus 
says to such : 

"*Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon 
earth, where moth and dust doth corrupt, and 
where thieves break through and steal ; but lay up 
for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither 
moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do 
not break through nor steal ; for where your treas- 
ure is, there will your heart be also.' Let us pray 
for Rosuki. ' ' 

Harukichi led in a short, ferv^ent prayer; and 
as he prayed the hearts of the people were 
drawn upward to the glorious inheritance of the 
saints. 

"And poor Riki " — again the teacher spoke — 
"has lost her two darling children, the joy and 
the pride of her heart. Ah, how lovingly the 
Lord speaks to the bereaved mother! He says, 
' Suffer the little children to come unto me, and 
forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of 
God.' Rejoice, O friends, for Riki is going to 
start on a pilgrimage to the land where her babies 
have gone, to the land where Christ, the Good 
Shepherd, leads his flock beside the still waters 
and in the green pastures. 

"I know there are those here whose life is a 
toiling for daily bread, and sometimes they know 



MIDWINTER IN TOKIO. 259 

not where they shall find house or food or 
clothing. Dearly beloved, the Lord speaks also 
to you, and says: 

''*Be not anxious for your life, what ye shall 
eat or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, 
what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than 
food and the body than raiment? Behold the 
fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do they 
reap nor gather into barns; yet your Heavenly 
Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better 
than they?"' 

And thus the meeting went on, and some hun- 
gry souls eagerly seized the bread of life; thirsty 
souls drank joyfully of the pure waters. The 
weary, the sad, the burdened ones listened grate- 
fully to the words of Jesus. 

"Thanks, oh! a great thank-you," said the 
listeners when Makichi ceased, and then the com- 
pany quietly dispersed. 

Another week, and the girls all gathered back 
to the school. 

One evening when Miss Wilton had gone to 
her room after worship she was startled by a suc- 
cession of shrieks from the girls' dormitory. 

"They must be on fire; nothing else would 
make them scream so," she thought, as she rushed, 
terrified, from her room. But when she reached 
the dormitory she found the room totally dark 
and the children huddled together in a corner. 
Some of the older girls had hurried up from the 



26o KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

study-room on hearing the screams, and were try- 
ing to pacify the little ones. 

*'What is it?" asked the startled teacher. 

*' Hono saw a ghost, a terrible monster dressed 
in white, and with fire coming out of its eyes; and 
we were all frightened and put out the lamps." 

*' Light the lamps again," said Miss Wil- 
ton. 

*'Now, Hono, take your lantern and go around 
with me, and we will see if there is anything to 
make you afraid in the room." 

Into every corner and cranny peered Miss Wil- 
ton, followed by the trembling Hono with her 
lantern. There was nothing unusual to be seen, 
nothing to alarm any one; and after a while all 
settled down quietly for the night. 

The next evening, when the time came for 
their talk. Miss Wilton referred to their last even- 
ing's alarm and asked an explanation. " If any 
one was trying to frighten Hono, I want to know 
it. Mitsuye, was it you ?" 

By way of answer, Mitsuye rose and threw 
herself down at her teacher's feet. 

''Oh, get up, Mitsuye. That is not the 
way we do in America," said Miss Wilton. 
"But I am glad to have you tell me what you 
did." 

'' Dogu ! dogu ! forgive me; your condescend- 
ing forgiveness I crave," said Mitsuye. 

' ' Think, Mitsuye, how you frightened Hono 



MIDWINTER IN TOKIO. 26l 

and put all the little girls in a panic; and you 
might have done more mischief." 

Mitsuye promised never to do such a thing 
again, and the teacher sent her to her seat. 

"Now see at what a foolish thing you were 
alarmed," said Miss Wilton, turning to the other 
girls. "It was simply Mitsuye trying to frighten 
Hono. When will you girls learn not to believe 
in bakernonos P^ 

"Japanese mothers and nurses tell such stories 
to the children to frighten them and make them 
keep still," said one of the girls. "And some- 
times children sit and tell ghost stories until they 
are so frightened that they scream and run from 
the house. ' ' 

"Well, there must be none of it in the school," 
rejoined the teacher. ' ' The Bible tells us of strong 
and holy angels who are God's messengers, and 
whom he employs for the good of those who trust 
in him. It also tells us of evil spirits; but they 
are all under God's control, and if we trust him 
all will be well." 

Then the girls learned this verse, which tells 
of God's care for his children: " He shall give his 
angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy 
ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands, 
lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. ' * 



262 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

SPRING BLOSSOMS. 

The sweet springtime had come again and 
Japan was full of flowers. The girls and boys had 
all been to "see flowers," and the vases in the 
mission-house and school were filled with beauti- 
ful blooms of peach and cherry. 

"Good morning, Harukichi. Oh, a great 
thank-you !" said the doctor's wife as the young 
man, followed by Saijiro and Ts'koi, came up 
and presented her with a flower-pot in which 
grew both pink and white blossoms from the same 
stalk. 

"I thank you," said Mrs. Fielding. "What 
an exquisite branch !" 

Turning then to the mountain lad she said, 
" Well, Saijiro, so that is your dog, is it?" 

" Yes, sensei^''^ answered Saijiro, making a low 
bow. 

" How do you like the school?" 

"Thanks, honorable lady, I am glad to 
learn." 

"But still you would like to see your own 
mountain home?" 

^^Dogu, yes, sensci. I want more than all to 
see little Ko." 



SPRING BLOSSOMS. 263 

"And who is Ko?" 

" He is my friend, and he is blind.'' 

" Poor little fellow !" said Mrs. Fielding. "Is 
your little friend going to be an amaf'' 

"No, sensei^ he wishes to be a priest. He 
loves Shaka Sama." 

"I wish we could tell him of the Lord Jesus, 
Saijiro." 

^^ Dogii^ sensei^ Yenoske and I talk about it. 
Yenoske did not care anything about Jesus until 
he knew that he opened the eyes of the blind." 
The school-bell was ringing, and Saijiro, bowing, 
went off to school. 

Harukichi had many things to trouble and per- 
plex him. When he left the ladies he turned and 
went across a small court to the room which Mr. 
West, the missionary, occupied. 

"Come in," said Mr. West in answer to Haru- 
kichi' s knock; and the young man entered the 
well-known apartment and stood before the mis- 
sionary. 

It was a pleasant room, one window looking 
towards Mt. Fuji and the sunset and the other 
commanding a view of the river and the bay. 
There had been many long, serious talks in that 
room, and many prayers had gone up from it. 

"Sit down, Harukichi. Is there something 
you wish to say to me ?" inquired the missionary. 

" Yes, seiisei^^^ answered the young man. " I 
have studied the Bible long; I love its teachings; 



264 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

I know that they are true. But I love and honor 
my parents, and they hate Christianity." 

"Your father is a wealthy man and has a 
beautiful home, I hear, Harukichi. " 

" Yes, scnsei ; and when I asked his honorable 
permission to be baptised and to become a teacher 
of Christian doctrines he was very angry and 
threatened to disinherit me." 

" But can you not make up your mind to en- 
dure losses ?' ' 

"Yes, scnsei. It is not that so much as the 
honorable mother's grief and tears that I dread. 
Dogii^ she thinks some terrible evil will happen to 
all of us if I become a Christian. It frightens 
her." 

"I think I understand about it, Harukichi." 

"It is very hard for me to know what to do, 
sensd. ' ' 

"Yes, Harukichi, I know it is hard. But 
what says your own heart?" 

"My heart, sensei^ is no good guide; some- 
times it says one thing and sometimes another." 

"Then, Harukichi, you must ask guidance of 
One better than your own heart. Let us go to 
God in prayer," and they knelt together. 

"Dear Lord," prayed Mr. West, " thou seest 
before thee this young man who desires to walk 
in thy way. Thou knowest how many obstacles 
there are in his path; thou knowest how many 
times he will stumble and falter in it. Show him 



SPRING BLOSSOMS. 265 

thy will; teach him thy way. Bless his ignorant 
parents and soften their hearts. Oh, Sheplierd, 
leading thy flock, cause this soul to follow thee." 

''Thanks, seiisei^ I will think," said Haru- 
kichi as he left the missionary; and Mr. West 
kept him in his thoughts and in his prayers all 
day. 

Suddenly in the evening of that day of flowers 
and sunshine there came a great earthquake. 
The solid ground shook and trembled and the 
mission-houses rocked like ships upon the sea. 
Doors and window-shutters were burst violently 
open, bells were rung, and small articles were 
thrown down from tables and mantelpieces. 

The terrified girls ran from the dining-room, 
wdiere they were eating their rice, out into the 
open air. The missionaries, who were also at 
tea, stood up and held on to their plates, dishes, 
and lamps as well as they could. A feeling of 
faintness and terror came over each one as the 
shocks continued. 

The disturbance lasted only for a moment or 
two, but it was enough to make them all realize 
the uncertainties of earth; and the girls were still 
pale and trembling when they gathered in the 
study-room for evening worship. 

"We will take the earthquake for our lesson 
to-night," said Miss Wilton. " You were afraid, 
girls." 

"And you also, scnsei^ and the honorable doc- 



266 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

tor's wife and the honorable children?" ques- 
tioned the girls. 

*' Yes," answered Miss Wilton, *' we did fear. 
It is a terrible feeling to have the ground sud- 
denly give way under you. But we have a beau- 
tiful Psalm, part of which I will teach you soon. 
What do you think causes the earthquakes, Chi- 
ye?" 

^'' Dogu^ sensci^ the Japanese have a foolish 
notion that the world rests on the back of a tur- 
tle, and that when the turtle moves the earth 
shakes !" 

" What do they say the turtle rests on ?" 

"That I do not know, scnsciy 

*' The ancient Greeks and Romans had a fable 
that the sky rested on the shoulders of a giant 
named Atlas, and that he became so weary of the 
burden that he tried once to induce some one else 
to assume it for him. How different is our God, 
who made and upholds all things by the word of 
his power and never falters or wearies." 

*'5^;/5'^/," said one of the girls, " Tokio was 
almost destroyed by an earthquake once, and a 
tidal wave swept over this part of Japan and even 
washed the head of Dai Butsu." 

*'Yes, I often think how carelessly we live 
here day after day, when at any time we may be 
swallowed up in the depths of the earth," said 
the teacher. 

"We never think of the earthquakes until 



SPRING BLOSSOMS. 267 

they come, and then for a little while after," re- 
joined one of the girls. 

"What is the best thing to do, sensei ? Kei 
told us one day when we had a slight shock to go 
out on the roof, and when the house fell we would 
be on top." 

Miss Wilton smiled. She tried to imagine 
these excitable girls sitting quietly on the roof in 
the event of such a catastrophe ! But she an- 
swered, "The best place, in case a house falls, is 
a doorway, I am told. Some persons advise car- 
rying out of doors a plank or a door, to bridge 
over any fissures caused by the cracking open of 
the earth's crust. But the plank might be too 
short to be of any service. It is hard to know 
what to do. ' ' 

"What do the honorable foreigners say about 
earthquakes, sensei V^ asked Chiye. 

"They have a great many theories, but it is 
not known yet exactly what causes them. We 
know, however, that Japan is composed of vol- 
canic islands and that there are fires under us; 
volcanoes form safety-valves for these fires; and 
any volcanic country is subject to earthquakes." 

Then the girls learned the following verses 
from the forty-sixth Psalm, and went off quieted 
and comforted: 

"God is our refuge and strength, a very pres- 
ent help in trouble. 

"Therefore will not we fear, tliough the earth 



268 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

be removed and though the mountains be carried 
into the midst of the sea; 

*' Though the waters thereof roar and be trou- 
bled, though the mountains shake with the sw^ell- 
ing thereof" 

"Bring me some water, Yenoske," said Car- 
roll Fielding in a quick, peremptory tone, not at 
all befitting a little child of seven. 

Yenoske obeyed, and Carroll took the water 
without a word of thanks, drank what he wanted, 
and then threw the remaining contents of the 
cup on Yenoske' s feet. 

"Ah," thought the patient young Japanese, 
** these young Americans are rude. The little 
master never did so." 

"Carroll, come to me," now called the doc- 
tor's wife from the veranda whence she had 
watched these proceedings. 

The child slowly and sullenly walked tow^ards 
the house. 

* ' Why do you speak so to Yenoske, Carroll ?' ' 

" He is only a Japanese coolie, auntie." 

" Yenoske is w^orth a great deal to me, Car- 
roll, and I do not wish you to speak or act in 
that w^ay to any Japanese." 

This little Carroll Fielding was a hard child to 
manage; he was passionate and full of self-conceit, 
never willing to obey, and always thrusting in his 
opinions. The day thus begun proved a peculiar- 
ly trying one for his aunt and himself; and when 



SPRING BLOSSOMS. 269 

at last ill the evening Mrs. Fielding left him 
asleep in his crib, she felt utterly discouraged and 
dismayed. 

*'I do not know what to do with him," she 
said to her husband, as they sat together on the 
veranda. 

"Dear Mary, let us leave the child in God's 
hands. He can subdue his heart," said the doc- 
tor. 

'' I am afraid he will have to suffer, then." 

"Yes, Mary, but the Father loves him and 
will do all things well for him." 

The next morning the doctor went off on a 
missionary tour, and the children stood and waved 
to him from the mission-house as far as they could 
see the jinrikisha. 

The school-bell was rung at nine o'clock, and 
Carroll went, as usual, to his aunt for lessons. He 
was quiet, she thought, but at recess went out to 
play. Missing him soon from the garden, how- 
ever, Mrs. Fielding went to look for him, and 
found him asleep on the parlor floor. It was some- 
thing unusual for him to sleep in the morning, 
and Mrs. Fielding felt a vague sense of uneasi- 
ness, though she scarcely knew why. She called 
Yenoske, who laid him on a sofa, where he was 
left to finish his nap. And so it was for two or 
three days. 

" What is the matter, Carroll?" his aunt would 
ask; and the reply invariably would be, 



270 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

*' Nothing, auntie;" and he would get up and 
go on with his play. 

*' Come and look at Carroll," said Mrs. Field- 
ing to her husband on the evening of his return 
from his three-days' trip. "He seems languid 
at times, and I am uneasy about him." 

The doctor bent over the little bed. The child 
was sleeping quietly, but his fair hair was very 
damp and his hands were very white. "Why, 
Mary!" the doctor exclaimed; and the troubled 
expression of his countenance deepened as he ex- 
amined the boy more closely. 

"Oh, what is it, Richard? I did not think he 
was very sick. He has just been a little languid, 
but he has had his lessons and has played most of 
the time." 

" Mary," said the doctor, drawing her to him, 
"a few days ago we resolved to leave this child, 
for whom we have had so many anxieties, in our 
Heavenly Father's hands. Mary, he is going to 
take him to himself; in a few days our boy will be 
safe at home. ' ' 

The doctor left his wife and went with sad- 
dened heart to stand for a moment at the bedside 
of their own little daughter. 

Mrs. Fielding went and knelt by Carroll's 
side. She could not think, she could not pray. 
Only she took one of the little waxy hands in hers 
and laid her head on the pillow close to that of 
the sleeping boy. 



SPRING BLOSSOMS. 2/1 

Could it be possible? 

^* He is not sick. He is not sick," she repeat- 
ed again and again to herself. "He never com- 
plained of any pain, and he has been playing and 
happy all the time." 

The little bed was moved to Mrs. Fielding's 
room. 

'* How came I here, auntie?" asked the child 
with a bright smile the next morning. 

** We feared you were not well, Carroll," an- 
swered the doctor. 

*'But I am well, uncle." And he sprang up 
and dressed, and came in to breakfast looking so 
bright that Mrs. Fielding whispered, **Were you 
not mistaken, Richard?" 

* ' No, Mary, there can be no mistake. Is he 
not always this way early in the morning?" 

'' You may omit your lessons, Marion, and go to 
play with Carroll; and when he is tired, come in. 
I have something to tell you." And the children 
went out into the garden. They went around to 
the side of the house and took their little spades, 
while the mother watched them from the window. 
The picture they made was one she remembered 
for years and years. Snatches of the conversation 
were wafted in through the open casement. At 
first it was all about the flowers. 

"I am going to have chrysanthemums in my 
garden, and in the fall they will be so pretty," 
said Marion. 



2/2 ICESA AND SAIJIRO. 

*'0!i, I can't wait for chrysanthemums; I 
must have something that will bloom right away. 
I told Yenoske to make haste and bring me some 
lilies," said Carroll, digging earnestly with his 
little spade. *'I love lilies," continued Carroll. 
*' Saijiro has often told me of how Yenoske gath- 
ered lilies for him on the mountains." 

Carroll's aunt had sometimes said that his 
love for flowers was a very pleasant and hopeful 
trait in his character. It was, indeed, a passion 
with him. Mrs. Fielding had often given him a 
bunch of flowers when his hot little temper had 
gained the mastery and his impatient little heart 
was boiling over with rage; and the sweet influ- 
ence of the fair blossoms would calm him when 
nothing else could. Sometimes, too, they would 
miss him at sunset, and find him alone, drinking 
in the beauty of the evening sky. " Do n't speak, 
auntie, don't speak," he had called one evening 
when Mrs. Fielding had thus discovered him; and 
he moved his little hand and turned again to the 
rich coloring of the west. 

The children's prattle went on; and still the 
mother sat at the window, watching as it were a 
dark cloud coming up to overshadow her darlings, 
who were as yet in the bright sunshine, all un- 
conscious of the approach of darkness. 

**My papa is going to take me to America 
soon,'' said Carroll, with one foot resting on his 
spade. 



SPRING BLOSSOMS. 273 

"And my mamma is going to take me," 
chimed in his cousin; " and in the winter we are 
to have apples and nuts by the fire. ' ' 

"I am to have a sled and skates," said Car- 
roll. "But, oh, let us go in and rest, Marion; I 
am so tired!" 

A deathly sickness and languor had seized the 
little fellow and he went with difficulty into the 
house. His aunt met him and he was lifted on 
to the sofa. 

"Bring your chair, Marion, and sit by us," 
said Mrs. Fielding when Carroll's faint turn had 
passed off, leaving him weary and restless. ' ' I 
heard you talking in the garden, dear children, 
about going to America and to grandpa's house." 

"Yes, mamma, and Carroll wants a sled and 
some skates." 

"But suppose, my little Carroll, that you 
were to go to a better country than America and 
a safer, happier home than grandpa's." 

"What country is better than America, aun- 
tie?" 

"I mean heaven, my darling, and our Fa- 
ther's house on hio^h." 

"But, auntie," and the child lifted his eyes 
to her face with a frightened expression, "that 
means dying." 

"Yes, darling, I know w^e call it dying, but 
in reality, if we love the Lord Jesus Christ, it is 
only going into God's beautiful country, where 

Kesa ami Paljlro. J 8 



274 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

the flowers ever bloom and where all is beautiful, 
pure, and good. My little Carroll must trust 
himself to the Saviour, and there he will never 
be naughty or passionate any more. He will 
always be happy and good." 

"Oh, mamma, /////i"/ he go ?' ^ cried Marion. 

" Papa says so, darling, and he knows. Do n't 
sob so, my daughter. If the Lord Jesus, who 
loves little children, wants to take Carroll, will 
he not be willing to go? and shall we not be 
willing to let him go, darling?" 

Then the doctor came in with strong w^ords of 
comfort, and they talked of Christ and of heaven 
until he and they grew happy in the prospect. 

During the days that followed Carroll was the 
happiest, brightest, and bravest of them all. He 
talked cheerfully of his new home, he gave his 
little treasures away, he repented of all his naughty 
ways and gave himself to Christ with all his 
heart. 

"I should like to see Yenoske," he said one 
day; "and, auntie, may I give him my little Tes- 
tament?" 

Yenoske was called and went quietly to the 
bed. The sight of the pale little face among the 
pillows almost broke the heart of the sympathetic 
Japanese. 

"I beg your pardon, Yenoske, for all the 
naughty things I have done, and will you keep 
mv little book?" 



SPRING BLOSSOMS. 275 

''^Dogu^ little master — " but Yeuoske could 
say no more. 

One day ]\Iarion wandered into the garden, 
and soon Kesa, who thought much about the 
dying boy, was at her side. 

"Must Carroll die?" she asked. 

" Yes, Kesa, papa says he must." 

*' Is he afraid, Marion?" 

*' No, Kesa, he is glad." 

"What makes him glad? My sister Hana is 
always afraid to die." 

"He is going to a beautiful country full of 
flowers and sunshine, and the Lord Jesus loves 
him and takes care of him." 

Kesa treasured all this in her heart to tell to 
Hana. She was learning better lessons than those 
in the books. 

It was at sunset that Carroll entered the land 
of everlasting day. He bade them all good-by, 
folded his little hands, and quietly went to sleep. 

"He is safe now, Mary," said the doctor; and 
in spite of their weeping there was a deep peace 
in their hearts, a feeling that the Lord Jesus was 
specially near and tenderly assuring them that it 
was well with their little one. 

The school children attended the short and 
simple service in the mission-house parlor. How 
restful seemed the reclining of the little body 
compared with the cramped sitting posture of the 
Japanese dead; how peaceful the crossed hands 



2jG KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

holding the lilies that Saijiro and Yenoske had 
brought; how sweet the expression on the little 
face ! 

Mr. West, the missionary, read in Japanese 
** Suffer the little children to come unto me, and 
forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom of 
God.'^ 

"Dear friends and children," he said then, 
*' this child, whose body is lying here, gave him- 
self to God, and He has taken him home. Jesus, 
the Good Shepherd, carries him in his arms and 
holds him in his bosom." 

After a few more words and a prayer all sang 
in Japanese the hymn beginning, 

"Jesus loves me! this I know," 

and soon Carroll was taken away. 

Not long after Carroll's death Aka, Mitsu, 
Chiye, and Harukichi joined the class of candi- 
dates for baptism; and so the days went on, and 
all were growing in knowledge. 



MUSHI." 277 



CHAPTER XXIII 



The most unpleasant season of all the year 
had come in Japan. It was that which the Japan- 
ese call ''^ imisJii^'^^ a time of heat and constant rain, 
a time when everything is damp and mouldy and 
every person is sick and miserable. 

"I cannot take up my shoes to put them on 
in the morning without finding them covered 
with mould. Nothing can be aired on account of 
the constant rains, our pillows are so damp and 
musty that we can scarcely bear to lay our heads 
on them, and rice kept for a day will be full of 
worms. We have to kindle great fires in our bed- 
rooms and sitting-rooms, every closet door and 
bureau drawer is left open, and we never think of 
making up a bed until night." Thus wrote Mrs. 
Fielding to a friend in America one rainy Mon- 
day morning during the ^^ nmsJii^^ season. 

Marion was standing at the window looking 
rather disconsolately at the falling rain. The ex- 
treme heat and excessive dampness made every 
one feel thoroughly uncomfortable. The Sab- 
bath had been so stormy that very few of the 
girls had come back to school, and Miss Wilton 



278 KHSA AND SAIJIRO. 

had begun her week's work with a few boarders 
who had not gone home on Friday at all. 

"There is a jinrikisha, mamma," said Mari- 
on, "and it is coming here." 

The jinrikisha stopped and Kesa stepped out, 
carrying a bunch of red lilies and a little cage. 

"Why, Kesa, did you come alone in this pour- 
ing rain?" asked Mrs. Fielding. 

"Thanks, Chiye is with me. I came to offer 
these flowers and this cage of fireflies to Marion 
sail. Please graciously to accept the poor gift." 

Maribn took them with thanks, and Kesa 
went to school. 

"How sweet she is, mamma, and I like the 
flowers; but the poor fireflies! I hate to have 
them crowded together in the cage. What is the 
reason, mamma, when the Japanese are so kind 
to insects, that they will catch and confine these 
fireflies every year?" 

"That is a question pretty hard to answer, 
daughter. But I must goon with my letter, or it 
wall not be ready for the mail." 

Marion carried her cage into a dark closet and 
amused herself for a while by sprinkling water 
over it; this caused the fireflies to emit a bright 
lio:ht which illuminated the closet. Then she 
made a hole in the top of the cage and hung it 
where the insects could crawl out. She had a 
number of such gauze cages which had been given 
her from time to time, and also some, of exquisite 



279 

workmanship, made of bamboo. The bamboo 
cages had contained singing crickets, of which 
the Japanese are especially fond, and which had 
been given to Marion with directions how to feed 
them with cucumbers. But the poor crickets 
never lived very long in their pretty cages, and 
their singing soon came to an end. 

Then Marion was constantly the recipient of 
white mice and gold-fish, gifts which always dis- 
tressed her, as invariably the fish died and the 
mice came to an untimely end. 

*' I like flowers, eggs, and pictures, or pretty 
lacquered boxes and teacups, but I don't like 
live presents," she would say. 

At last, however, the doctor had a fish-pond 
made and committed it to the care of the Japan- 
ese servants, who understood it; and the fish were 
as contented on the mission premises as they had 
been in the Fujisawa pond. As for the mice, Ye- 
noske was very fond of them, and made them a 
house near his own room and fed them with his 
own hand. 

One mornincr during: the miisJii Yenoske 
came into Mrs. Fielding's sitting-room and said, 
" Please, honorable mistress, I have something to 
say to you. ' ' 

"Very well, Yenoske, say it right out then. 
Don't tell me that your mother is sick or dead 
and that you wish to leave.'* 

"Please, honorable mistress, my honorable 



28o KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

parents are well; but" — here Yenoske looked 
rather conscious and foolish — "I wish to return 
for a time to my own country." 

" Why, Yenoske, I shall be sorry to lose you. 
You have been a good, faithful servant. Aud 
what will become of Saijiro?" 

"' Dogn^ honorable mistress, I shall not be 
away long. I wish to look upon the faces of my 
honorable parents; and, dogtt^ I wish to get a 
Avife." 

Mrs. Fielding could not complain of any lack 
of directness in the manner in which the last an- 
nouncement was made. She smiled and said, 
"But surely, Yenoske, you do not wish to go in 
all this rain !" for all over Japan the rain had 
been pouring almost incessantly for three weeks, 
and there was no immediate prospect of a change. 

^^ DogH^ I will wait until the rain is over, hon- 
orable mistress; but I wish to send a letter to a 
go-between and have the honorable bride read}-, 
so that I need not be kept away very long." 

"But can you live with your wife in your 
small room, Yenoske?" 

''^ Dogu^ it is a beautiful room, honorable mis- 
tress, and we are only too fortunate." 

"Very well, Yenoske, I wisli you success and 
much joy." 

So it happened that one day, about two weeks 
later, Yenoske bade farewell to Saijiro and his 
friends at the mission-house, went out of the city 



"mushi." 281 

and travelled along the great highway to Oda- 
wara. Saijiro longed to go too, but it was thouglit 
best that he should not, so he contented himself 
with sending a great many messages to his friends 
in Yamamidzu, especially to Ko. 

Oh, how Yenoske's heart thrilled as he stood 
at the foot of the mountain, staff in hand, all ready 
for a climb! What long breaths he took of the 
pure mountain air! How like music to his ears 
was the sound of the waterfall! How he sang of 
the trees and the flowers! The only thing that 
marred his happiness was that he had heard 
not a word from his go-between, and knew not 
whether his fair one had accepted him. But 
still with swift feet he climbed the mountain, 
often leaving the highway and jumping from rock 
to rock. 

At last he came to the turn of the road, and, 
looking down the mountain path, saw the houses 
of Yamamidzu. He ran quickly down into the 
village, passing the old shrine of Inari, where he 
had so often stopped to pray. He had not yet be- 
come a Christian, but he had lost his reverence 
for Inari and his fear of him, and could pass the 
fox-god without stopping. 

All this time he had seen nothinof ot the villa- 
gers, but at the end of the street he now saw the 
old priest coming towards him. 

^^ Dogti^ Yenoske, you are welcome. How is 
the little master ? We have heard that the honor- 



282 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

able sejisci is dead and finished," said the bon- 
sama. 

"Thanks, the little master is well; and the 
honorable teacher is buried in the Buddhist ceme- 
tery in Tokio." 

"Does the little master go to school?" 

"Thanks, yes; he is learning many things of 
the honorable foreigners and is happy. But tell 
me where I can find Bokichi." 

"Ah, Bokichi is in his home," answered the 
priest, smiling; and Yenoske went on. 

But out from the temple came Kojiro, running; 
he had heard Yenoske's voice. The child could 
scarcely speak from excitement, so anxious was 
he to hear from Saijiro. 

" The little master is well, Ko," said Yenoske, 
taking him by the hand; "and he told me to tell 
you how the honorable teachers tell him of Jesus, 
who cured the blind." 

"Z>^^?/," said Kojiro, "I wish they would 
come and tell me about him." 

"They liave sent some books, and some day 
they are coming themselves," answered Yenoske. 

The two were hurrying up the street to the 
little inn, where Yenoske stopped to go in and 
greet his parents. Then he hastened to find Bo- 
kichi, the go-between. 

^^ Dogti^ the honorable Yen consents and is 
ready," said Bokichi. 

In truth, the bright, happy Yen of the moun- 



283 

tain was the one whom Yenoske had selected as 
his bride. The old baba was dead, and Yen had 
come to live in Yamamid^u. 

"Thanks for your kindness; yoti have attend- 
ed to my business well," said Yenoske. 

In the evening the villagers, the blushing Yen 
amonof them, crowded around Yenoske on the 
temple steps. Close to his side crept little Kojiro, 
eager for news of his friend. The old priest had 
been in Tokio, and asked something about the 
city. Yenoske told them of the foreign-built 
houses in the Tori and of the foreign cars and om- 
nibuses which run up and down the wide streets. 

^^ Dogu^ it must be very dangerous to the Jap- 
anese. Are children killed?" asked one of the 
villagers. 

"I have never heard of a child having been 
killed," answered Yenoske. "They have Jap- 
anese grooms to run in front of the horses, and 
they lift the children out of the way." 

"Tell us about the iron road with iron horses 
breathing out fire. Have you had a ride on it, 
Yenoske? and were you terribly frightened?" 
asked the landlord, Yenoske' s father. 

"The little master and I rode a fev/ miles 
once," answered Yenoske. 

^ ' Dogu ! dogu P ' said the mother. 

"Very wonderful!" said the father. 

"We went very fast, and sat on w^ooden 
benches and held on tightly." 



284 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

"Are the honorable foreigners good to you, 
my son?" asked the anxious mother. 

"Very, very kind, honorable mother. I have 
never known such kind masters. They tell us 
that the 'Jesus-books' teach them to be kind and 
good to all. DogiL^ I cannot understand the doc- 
trines well, but they are good." 

' ' Tell us about the sensei^ ' ' said the priest. 

"He believed in the Jesus-book before he 
died. He looked happier than I ever saw him 
look before." 

"My son, be careful. Our gods may be very 
angry. It is better to be safe and to reverence the 
gods of your fathers, and not to neglect the wor- 
ship of your honorable ancestors," said the mo- 
ther. 

"Z>^^?/, honorable mother, I am not a Chris- 
tian; I cannot understand the doctrines well 
enough yet. But I know that they are all good. 
And when the little foreign master died they 
said that he had gone to a happy country to be 
with their God, and that they too were going 
there some day and should see him. And he 
gave me a book;" and Yenoske took the little 
Testament out of his sleeve. 

"Z?<?^//," said the mother, taking hold of the 
book carefully as though afraid of it; "I don't 
know; but be careful." 

A few days after this there was a wedding in 
the villao-e. All of the villasfe g-irls went and es- 



285 

corted the pretty bride with her newly blackened 
teeth to the inn, where Yenoske, a happy bride- 
groom, waited with his parents. Yen was warm- 
ly welcomed into the family and the usnal cere- 
monies took place. Then came a feast of sake^ 
sweetmeats, and soup for the villagers. 

The following morning the happy pair trudged 
away, Yenoske carrying the luggage — two bright 
paper boxes, each swung on one end of a pole — on 
his shoulders. The stronof, heartv mountain o^irl 
walked by his side, and on the fourth day they 
came to Tokio. 

"Ah, Yenoske," said the doctor, 'S'ou are 
back; and this is your wife?" 

Yen had been instructed to shake hands with 
the foreigners and put out her right hand tim- 
idly. 

The missionaries all came out to greet them, 
and Saijiro ran over from the scfiool to offer his 
couQ^ratulations and hear from the villaQ:e. 

The servants had a feast and Yen began house- 
keeping in her small room. A hibachi^ two ///- 
tons^ with coverings and pillows, two paper boxes 
containing the trousseau, some small utensils and 
dishes, and some pictures completed the list of 
household goods. 

And now the school term was about to close 
and the girls and boys were getting ready for their 
examinations. 

Chiye had long since entered the Third Reader 



2o6 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

class with her friend Fusa. Kesa had plodded 
through the First Reader and had just begun the 
Second. Saijiro had almost finished the Second 
Reader, was able to write to his "mother in Amer- 
ica," and had developed a wonderful quickness in 
mathematics. 

The few months at school had changed them 
all. New intelligence was expressed in their faces. 
They had learned a great deal, thought a great 
deal, seen a great deal, and were vastly improved. 

"What does your father say, Chiye?" asked 
Miss Wilton, when Chiye came to her one day 
and expressed a desire to be baptized with Aka 
and I\Iitsu. 

"He said that we might receive baptism, sen- 
sci^ if we said nothing to him about it and did 
not let him know just when it was done." 

So on the Sabbath before school closed Aka, 
]\Iitsu, Chiye, and Harukichi were admitted into 
the church through the ordinance of baptism. 
Not one of them all gave evidence of a more in- 
telligent and loving trust in Christ than Chiye. 
Harukichi, looking on her sweet face, loved her, 
and purposed in his heart that some day, God 
willing, he would make her his wife. But of 
that Chiye knew nothing. 



IIARUKICHI AND CHIYK. 287 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

IIARUKICHI AND CHIYE. 

There were very few at the prayer-meeting; 
in the mission chapel on the Wednesday evening 
after school closed. The pupils had scattered for 
the summer vacation, some of them going far into 
the country. Harukichi and Saijiro were there, 
and after the meeting they lingered to speak to 
the missionary. 

*'So, Harukichi, you leave us to-morrow," 
said Mr. West kindly. 

' ' Yes, sc7isci^ and I ask }'our honorable permis- 
sion for Saijiro to accompany me as far as Oji." 

'' Certainly, Harukichi; and may God be with 
you and bless you." 

" 5^/^7/<^r^, " said Harukichi. 

" Saionara^^^ responded Mr. West, with a 
warm grasp of Harukichi' s hand. 

Harukichi was going home. Before him lay 
the hard task of informing his parents of his pub- 
lic confession of Christ and his intention to study 
for the Christian ministry. The struggle had 
been sore, but was now over. He was ready to 
meet his father's anger, ready to give up all his 
earthly hopes, ready even to bear the sight of his 
mother's tears. 



'2^o KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Before sunrise the next morning Haru- 
kichi and Saijiro were on their way out of the 
city. Their road at first led them along the 
river bank. They passed the great temple 
Asaxa, where Hana had been taken to rub the 
god Bindzuru. 

^' I cannot think how I ever worshipped those 
idols," said Harukichi. "Last night when Mr. 
West prayed with me and begged our Heavenly 
Father to watch over and protect me, I thought 
how absurd it would be to pray thus to Shaka 
Sama. We were always afraid that the gods were 
angry with us, and the idea of their loving us 
never entered our heads." 

*' Yes; my honorable father spent all his life in 
trying to turn away the anger of the gods," an- 
swered Saijiro. 

" I have heard of your father, Saijiro; he died 
a Christian." 

The Sim was just rising over Tokio, coming up 
out of the Eastern Sea. Some laborers, going out 
to their daily toil, stopped when they saw the sun 
and stood facing it with clasped hands and bowed 
heads. One man caught the reflection in a pail 
of water which he carried, and stooping over wor- 
shipped that. 

"O Saijiro, I mt/st give my life to teaching 
them better things," said Harukichi. 

" But isn't it better that they should worship 
the sun than those images?" said Saijiro. 



IIARUKICHI AND CHIYE. 28g 

**They must go higher than the sun, Saijiro, 
to the God who made it." 

Then the man with the pail of water, observ- 
ing that they did not worship, asked, ''Honora- 
ble masters, how is it that you do not worship the 
sacred luminary?" 

*'We are Christians, and we worship one true 
God. He made the sun, and we worship him," 
said Harukichi. 

The man shook his head and said, *'I do not 
understand, ' ' and went away. 

Harukichi and Saijiro followed the path across 
the green, beautiful fields to Oji. In the midst of 
rice-paddies were every now and then clumps of 
trees, and under the trees thatched farmhouses. 
The people were just beginning to stir. Men and 
women were performing their morning ablutions 
on the verandas and by the brooks, and naked 
children were playing around. Some jinrikisha 
men were getting their carts dusted and their 
blankets cleaned and aired before going out to 
seek for customers. They looked up anxiously 
at Harukichi and Saijiro, but the rich man's son, 
who had always been accustomed to take the 
finest jinrikishas and kagos^ now felt that he must 
save his money, so he shook his head and walked 
on. 

The 'friends walked quickly on, enjoying the 
summer morning, and at last came into the vil- 
lage. They walked down its one street, with the 

Kesa and Saljlro. JQ 



290 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

clear stream on one side of them and the long 
row of hotels on the other, never heeding the in- 
vitations to stop and rest which were urged upon 
them. Reaching the end of the village, they sat 
down on a bench at a tea-house and took a cup 
of tea. 

"Z?^^//," said Harukichi, feeling really sorry 
to part from the bright boy who had been his 
companion all through the winter, "I wish I 
could ask you, Saijiro, to come and visit me this 
summer; but, dogit ! I have no home; the honor- 
able father will not receive me, and the honorable 
mother will be ill with grief." 

Saijiro did not know exactly what consolation 
to offer. " But you will come back to the school, 
Harukichi," he said at length. 

''Yes; I must find some work, and I must 
study to be a Christian teacher. But now you 
must go back, Saijiro, and I will go on to Nikko." 

"Ah, I have heard that it is very beautiful at 
your home, Harukichi." 

*'Yes, Saijiro, Nikko is a beautiful place. 
Oh, if you could see the trees, the waterfalls, the 
flowers, and my honorable parents ! Oh, they 
have been so good to me, Saijiro; I cannot bear 
to displease them!" 

"Why do they hate the Christians so, Haru- 
kichi? I think the Christians are good and kind; 
and what they tell us is not foolish, like the sto- 
ries of our own reliq:ion." 



HARUKICHI AND CIIIYE. 29I 

*' I hope the honorable parents will know bet- 
ter some day, Saijiro. But now good-by; I must 
go on alone." 

So they parted, Saijiro to go back to the lone- 
ly schoolhouse in Tokio, and Harukichi to the 
sacred mountains of Nikko. 

For several days he travelled slowly along the 
great highway. At night he stopped at the hum- 
blest inns; he contented himself with the cheap- 
est food. Sometimes he would bathe his weary 
feet in a spring by the w^ayside; sometimes he lay 
down to rest on the soft moss under the grand old 
trees. He had always before travelled with ser- 
vants, and had commanded all the luxuries possi- 
ble to travellers in Japan. He had gone home to 
receive the fondest, proudest greetings from father 
and mother; now he expected only anger and tears. 
But Harukichi enjoyed these days of solitude on 
the highway. A sweet peace filled his breast, 
and as he went he often sang the hymns of the 
church and read the loved stories of the Sa- 
viour's life on earth.- 

Oh, you in more favored Christian lands who 
have never yet had to leave "house or brethren 
or sisters or father or mother or wife or chil- 
dren or lands" for Christ's sake and the gospel's, 
you do not realize the blessedness of the "hun- 
dred-fold" reward which those who are called to 
such surrender receive even in this life. 

Going up the magnificent avenue w^iich leads 



292 . KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

to Nikko's temples, Harukichi met a friend, and 
under the great archway they saluted. 

"Welcome home, Harukichi. The father 
ani mother will greatly rejoice," said the friend. 

Gently and firmly Harukichi answered, " Kos- 
kiki, I have become a Christian, I have been bap- 
tized, and I fear there will be no rejoicings." 

The friend looked concerned, and said, 
^'' Dogu^ I fear the honorable father will be very 
angry." 

Harukichi bowed and they passed on, the 
friend going dow^n the mountain and Harukichi 
still ascendinor it towards Nikko. 

o 

The temples of Nikko are the finest of all 
Japan. IMarvellous are the gates of bronze, ex- 
quisite the gildings and carvings, magnificent the 
stone pavements and the lanterns. In the sol- 
emn shades priests are ever attending to the du- 
ties of their ritual, gliding in and out in their 
white and yellow robes; never-ceasing prayers 
are made, and incense continually fills the tem- 
ples. Harukichi passed them all by without 
stopping and went around the mountain-side to 
his own home. It was almost dark when he 
reached the house, and no one had observed his 
approach. 

The house was situated in the midst of beauti- 
ful gardens. At one side a waterfall from the 
mountain fell over the terraced grounds into a 
pond, where were innumerable gold and silver 



HARUKICHI AND CIIIVK. 293 

fish. Clumps of trees were scattered here and 
there, and all the summer flowers of Japan were 
blooming in the gardens. The house was large 
and arrano:ed with a view to the comfort and 
pleasure of its occupants. There were rooms in 
the upper story affording the most advantageous 
outlook upon the beautiful view presented in 
every direction. From one point the highest 
peaks of Nikko were visible, their tops almost 
veiled in mist. From another one had a sight of 
the waterfall, from its start on the rocky moun- 
tain to where it fell into the fish-pond. Another 
point revealed the winding road down the moun- 
tain, w^ith trees and vines and sunny slopes be- 
tween. There were tea-houses in the gardens, 
and arbors and shady retired nooks, into some of 
which one had to climb by means of steps cut in 
the solid rock. Harukichi stood and looked on 
the familiar scene for a moment; tears came into 
his eyes and his courage suddenly failed. He 
turned away and entered a little grove. The 
last rays of the setting sun touched one spot far 
up in the tree-tops, making a golden glory in the 
midst of the darkness. 

Harukichi knelt, and bowing his head prayed 
thus: 

"Dear Lord, I am a poor ignorant Japanese, 
weak and sorrowful. Give me strength to tell fa- 
ther and mother that I have learned to love thee 
and am determined to serve thee. Soften their 



294 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

hearts and turn them unto thee. And now, O 
Lord Jesus, give me strength. ' ' 

And strength was given. Harukichi walked 
firmly to the house. The father and mother were 
sitting in the family room, waiting for the dinner 
to be served. Harukichi entered and prostrated 
himself before them. 

"Welcome, my son," said the father. 

*' A very great happiness," said the mother. 

**How are your honorable healths?" asked 
Harukichi, raising his head, but immediately 
lowering- it again. 

o o 

"Thanks, we are well. And your honorable 
health, my son?" 

"Thanks, I am well," answered Harukichi. 
Then he sat up and waited respectfully to see 
what would come next. 

"You have come home now to remain, my 
son," said the father. "You need not to study 
any more." 

"Thanks, no, honorable father; I have not 
come home to stay. I have been baptized as a 
Christian, O my father, and am going back to 
study to be a teacher of Christianity to my people. 
Pardon me, O honorable parents, and still receive 
me as your son." 

Then came angry expostulations and rebukes 
on the part of the father and bitter weeping from 
the mother. She thought it shameful, this igno- 
rant Japanese woman, that her only son should 



HARUKICHI AND CHI YE, 295 

forsake the religion of his fathers and follow other 
teachings. 

"I hate the Christians," she said; *'they teach 
children to disobey their parents. Oh, my son, I 
fear the wrath of the gods. And will you no more 
worship at the ancestral tablets, no more go up 
with me to the holy shrine, no more read with 
me the holy doctrines of Buddha? Dogn! dogu ! 
dogiL P'' The poor woman rocked to and fro in her 
agony. 

"See," said the father, *'you are crushing 
your mother with sorrow." 

Harukichi had risen and stood upright. 
"Honorable father," he said, "one of the chief 
commandments of the Christian religion is, 'Hon- 
or thy father and thy mother.' But when the 
commands of God are different from those of our 
earthly parents, we are to obey God. It grieves 
my heart to see my mother's tears, but, honorable, 
beloved parents, my resolution is taken ; I am a 
Christian and shall remain one." 

Then said the father, "You know my will. 
Go out from my house and come back no more, 
nor expect anything from me, until you repent of 
your evil and return to the faith of your ances- 
tors." 

Harukichi bowed and went out. Some of the 
servants, meeting him, saluted him with joy ; he 
answered them kindly and passed on down the 
mountain-side. He cared not for shelter or re- 



296 KESA AND SAIJIRO, 

freshmeiit, but throwing himself down under a 
tree on the soft moss, slept an uneasy sleep until 
the morn in Of. 

A few days after, weary and travel-worn, he 
stood before Mr. West in his study at Tokio. 

*'So, Harukichi, you have come back," said 
the missionary. 

"Yes, sensei^ the honorable father has driven 
me from his home. Now I must work, so that I 
can go on with my education." 

The missionary gave him copying to do for the 
summer, and when school began he took charge 
of some of the small boys. It was a great change, 
but he bore it bravely, and the little ones loved 
him. 

The days passed on, and Chiye and Kesa had 
been nearly two years in school. Kesa was now 
in the Third Reader, and was beginning to under- 
stand a little better and to take a greater interest 
in her studies. Chiye had gone through book af- 
ter book in her eager thirst for knowledge, and 
was now a member of the most advanced class in 
the school. Never had the devoted teacher en- 
joyed a class more than this one in Moral Science. 
The discussions on the various subjects brought up 
by the text, of right and wrong, of conscience, 
responsibility, and other matters, just suited and 
pleased the thoughtful girls ; and of all of them 
Chiye Fujisawa was the brightest and the most 
beloved. 



HARUKICHI AND CHIYE. 297 

One day as Miss Wilton was passing through 
the hall her quick ears caught the sound of sup- 
pressed sobbing, and as she turned around she dis- 
covered Cliiye weeping bitterly in a corner. 

"Why, Chiye, what is the matter?" she asked, 
hastening to the girl. 

^^ DogiL, sensei^ I have been very wicked; I called 
Haru a fool, and she will not forgive me." 

"I should think she would find it hard to for- 
give, Chiye. You must be careful. It is well to 
speak out just what you think sometimes, instead 
of trying to cover up unpleasant truths, as the 
Japanese do ; but one must remember to be kind 
and not hurt any one's feelings." 

Only a few evenings after this, when the girls 
came to say good night, the teacher missed Chiye 
from am on Of them. 

"Where is Chiye Fujisawa?" she asked. 

^''Dogti^ she is very sick; blood comes from 
her mouth when she speaks, and she feels very 
ill." The doctor was summoned, and looked 
grave. 

For days after that Cliiye Fujisawa lay on her 
pallet, thus suddenly stricken down in the midst 
of her young, strong, vigorous life, never again 
to know perfect health, always to be more or less 
a sufferer, but always cheerful, patient, and lov- 
ing. 

Kesa, in her own sweet way, would comfort 
Chiye, not by words, for this quiet little maiden 



29S KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

had few of them, but by her presence, never being 
contented to remain long away from her beloved 
sister. Sometimes Miss Wilton would be ready 
to chide the child for restlessness and inattention 
in school, and the words would be arrested by the 
wistful look in Kesa's eyes. 

*^Will you take your book and sit by Chiye?" 
she would ask. 

Then a glad light would come to Kesa's eyes 
and she would slip off to the dormitory. Hour 
after hour, if permitted, she would stay there, pa- 
tient and gentle, never seeming to weary, never 
wanting to play. 

The father and mother came and went as they 
could. IMiss Wilton thought Fujisawa cold and 
indifferent. But he deeply mourned the fate of 
his favorite child, and his heart grew more hard 
and bitter. 

Old Kei came often and sat with Chiye, and 
one day Meguchi stole into the room and sang 
low lullabies, such as the women sing to their 
sleeping infants ; and Chiye listened and was 
soothed. 

Miss Wilton missed Chiye in the schoolroom. 
She had never known before how she had de- 
pended upon her as a leader among the girls, how 
many hopes were centred in her as a helper in 
the Christian work. She had always been bright, 
active, and strong. Her fearless way of speaking 
the truth and her honest methods of dealing with 



HARUKICHI AND CHIYP:. 299 

every one had been a relief from the weak, vacil- 
latinof characters of most of the other o-'n-ls. 

One evening, before the lamp had been lighted 
in the sick-room, Miss Wilton stole qnietly in and 
sat down by Chive's side. 

* ' 5^;/ j-^r/, " murmured the young sufferer. 

*'Did you know it was I, Chiye?" 

*' Yes; I shall always know when you are with 
me." 

"I was thinking that when I came over to 
Japan and first saw the shores of this pleasant 
country, I was a perfect stranger and knew no one. 
Now how different it would be if I should go back 
to America and return here ao-ain. How manv 
pleasant anticipations of meeting dear ones I 
should have! And I think, Chiye, it is something 
like our looking forward to the heaven of which 
we are told. We already know some who are 
with the Lord and who are waiting to welcome 
us there." 

"Yes, sensei; I know Carroll and Rinjiro, 
and there is Saijiro's father." 

" But best of all the Lord Jesus, Chiye. Just 
as you felt my presence when I came in and sat 
by you without speaking, so do w^e feel at times 
his nearness; and we will be no strangers in the 
land whose Prince is our own familiar friend." 

Haru at first had kept away from Chiye, but 
one day she came to the teacher and begged to be 
allowed to help with the nursing. 



300 KKSA AND SAIJIKO. 

*' Have you quite forgiven her, Haru?" asked 
Miss Wilton kindly. 

Haru's eyes filled with tears. *'See,'' she 
said, holding up before Miss Wilton a beautifully- 
embroidered/^/;7/j/^//('/ or kerchief, ' ' Chiye worked 
night and day to get this done for me; I almost 
think it made her sick to work so hard; and I 
never thanked her." Haru was crying bitterly 
by this time. 

Miss W'ilton led her to Chiye, and on return- 
ing after a time found her sitting by Chiye's side, 
happy and at peace. 

So, through the long days of sickness and 
nights of pain, a sweet, restful atmosphere perva- 
ded the sick-room and even made itself felt all 
over the mission building. 

At last there came a day when Chiye was 
taken home. She begged to be laid by Hana's 
side; she had something to tell Hana. 

"Are you very sick, sister ?" asked the young- 
er girl. 

" Yes, Hana darling." 
• "Are you going to die, as I am ?" 

"I do not know. But, oh, Hana, I am not 
afraid. I should go into the country where Car- 
roll is, and the Lord Jesus would be with me." 

"I w^sh I were not afraid, sister." 

" You need not be, darling. If you were one 
of the lambs you w^ould not be afraid to follow the 
shepherd, would you?" 



HARUKICHI AND CHIYH. 30I 

**No, sister; I often look at the picture, and 
the shepherd's face is so kind and the country 
where he is tending his flock is so fair." 

" Chiye, the honorable doctor has forbidden 
you to talk," called the anxious mother. 

Hana turned away and slept; but she never 
forgot that Chiye was not afraid to die. ' 

There came a letter soon after this to Fuji- 
sawa; it was from the aunt in Nagoya, and beg- 
ged a visit from Chiye. Thinking that the 
change might do her good, Fujisawa consented, 
and Chiye was carried up into the bracing air of 
the Hakones. After spending some time at the 
springs, she was taken down to Nagoya. 

When Chiye went away Kesa almost made 
herself sick with crying. The parting with her 
favorite sister was her first real sorrow. Miss 
Wilton noticed her loneliness and gave her more 
thought and care. The child appreciated this at 
once, and soon learned to love her teacher with 
all the fervor of her little undisciplined heart. 



302 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

THE DISMANTLED SHRINE. 

It was Friday afternoon. The week's work 
at the school was done, and the skirls were eettino- 
ready to go to their homes. Already several jin- 
rikishas were waitinor at the o-ates. 

" Kesa, can you come to me and hear a let- 
ter from Chiye?" called Miss Wilton. 
Kesa ran quickly to her teacher. 

" Has your jinrikisha not yet come?'' 

"No, scnsei^^^ answered the child; *' please 
condescend to read me the letter." 

Miss Wilton put her arm around the little girl, 
drew her to her side, and then read slowly and 
distinctly Chiye's English letter. 

"Dear Teacher: I love you very much. I 
hope you take great care of your body and not get 
sick. I thank you, I am much better. No more 
bleeding come from my lungs. I thank God for 
this. I want to get well and teach poor ignorant 
Japanese the way of the true God. ]\Iy aunt will 
not believe. She lets me read the Bible to her at 
some time, but she too much like the doctrine of 
the Japanese. Pray for her. She is very strict 
Buddhist woman, like my mother. Dear teacher, 
I feel for my sister Hana. She is going to die, 



Th:^ dismantled shrinp:. 303 

and she does not know what she believe, and she 
fear to pain the honorable mother's heart if she 
believe in true God and on our lyord Jesus Christ. 
Will you not pray for her and teach her better ? 
And I fear for my little sister Kesa. She think 
not much of anything. She very careless and do 
many wrong things. But she in school. I talk 
with my sister Hana before I came away. I tell 
her I not afraid to die, but she does not know 
where she is going. 

*^Dear teacher, my heart feel dark and sad 
sometimes. But I try to think that God will hear 
my prayer. I think next year I come home, but 
I think I not see my sister Hana any more. Na- 
goya is a nice place. My aunt's house near a 
beautiful castle. But it a great Buddhist place. 
The people worship so much. They go early in 
the morning to the temple, and I can hear the 
bell-ringing and praying in the temple. Then 
my heart feel sorry. 

*'Dear teacher, I want missionary come here. 
I want to see all the girls, but more than all I 
want to see my little sister Kesa. Dear teacher, 
I send you my love and my love to all the girls. 
I hope you write me soon. 

"CHIYE FUJISAWA." 

ICesa's eyes had filled with tears while Miss 
Wilton read the letter. "I am going to try and 
be a good girl, and to think more about what I 
am doing," she said. 



304 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

Just then she spied her jinrikisha and old Mc- 
guchi, and soon after was rolling through the 
streets towards the Kudan. 

*' Hana is very sick to-day, and she is looking 
for you; she has been wanting you all day, Ke- 
chan," said Meguchi. 

So when Kesa had saluted her mother she 
went to Hana and sat down by the fuion on 
which the sick girl was lying. 

'^Please read to me, Kesa, about the Shep- 
herd," said Hana. 

Mitsu often read and talked to Hana. What 
Carroll had said about the sinless, painless, joy- 
ful country to which he was going, where the 
Lord Jesus was the Shepherd of his flock, had 
been talked about again and again. Aka, too, 
would talk with Hana and read to her from the 
Japanese New Testament. And Hana listened to 
them both. But, strange to say, she rather turned 
for help and comfort to the little sister, the 
heedless, careless child who, Cliiye said, thought 
so little and did so many wrong things. 

''Have you learned anything more about 
Jesus?'* No one knew it, but this was the ques- 
tion that Hana put week after week to Kesa, as 
she came home on Fridays. And Kesa listened, 
for Hana's sake more than for her own, to every- 
thing that v/as said about the Lord Jesus; and 
when they were alone she would tell Hana that 
she had heard this and that of him. He had said 



THE DISMANTLED SHRINK. 305 

tliat if a man believed in him lie should never die. 
He had raised Lazarus from the dead and had 
healed the sick daughter of the Syrophoeniciau 
woman. The stories comforted Hana, and they 
fell like seed into Kesa's own heart. 

Kesa sat patiently by Hana's side and read of 
the Shepherd who gave his life for the sheep, 
until she was called to the evening meal. It was 
dark and the candles were lighted. Fujisawa 
v\^as away on some business, and the mother was 
occupied with Hana, so Kesa and Mitsu ate their 
dinners together. 

"A letter came from Chiye to-day to the sen-- 
sci^^'' said Kesa. 

^* And how is Chiye?" asked Mitsu. 

'' She is better, and she sends her love. How 
can people send love in a letter, Mitsu?'* 

*'Kesa, you ask such foolish questions some- 
times," said Mitsu. 

'*But the Japanese send 'compliments, com- 
pliments,' " persisted Kesa, ''and the honorable 
foreigners send love. Do you think, sister, that 
the Japanese love their children as well as the 
honorable foreigners do ?' ' 

^'' Dogtc^ Kesa," said Mitsu, not knowing what 
else to say, and scarcely daring to meet those ear- 
nest eyes. 

But Kesa did not w^ait for an answer. " ]\Iar- 
ion's mother takes her in her arms and kisses 
her, and calls her her darling and talks to her; 

KosH Rivl S:\ljiro. 20 



30J KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

and they make gardens together, and she helps 
Clarion with her dolls, and — and — But my mo- 
ther never calls me her darling nor talks to me 
nor helps me with my dolls. Japanese dolls are 
not like American dolls, are they, sister ? Their 
clothes are sewed on them, and we don't play 
with them as the American girls do. / should 
like to be an American girl and to have a doll 
that I could love and a mother who loved me." 

*'Kesa," said IMitsu, astonished at this out- 
burst, '*you have had everything you have want- 
ed all your life, and it is a shame to say that the 
mother does not love you." 

''Oh, I didn't mean that," said Kesa. 

*'And see," continued Mitsu, "how for so 
many years the mother has given up everything 
to Hana. She never goes out; for two years she 
has had no new clothes; she gets no rest at night. 
Kesa, how can you say that Japanese mothers do 
not love their children ? You are an ungrateful 
girh" 

A dim sense of not being understood passed 
through Kesa's heart, but there the conversation 
dropped. 

The mother and daughters spent the evening 
together in Hana's room, and at about ten o'clock 
Mitsu and Kesa went to bed. Mrs. Fujisawa 
busied herself for a time in making preparations 
for the night. She shook up the pallet and ar- 
ranged the pillow. Hana had a comfortable pil- 



THE DISMANTLED SHRINE. 307 

low which the doctor's wife had sent her, and 
had long ago discarded the wooden one. Then 
Mrs. Fujisawa gave Hana her medicine, and after 
that she got down in a corner of the room to mend 
a dress to be ready for Kesa in the morning. 
Hana lay quite still for a time, and her mother 
thought she was asleep; but she was looking up 
at the shrine where the candles burned and where 
the flowers filled the vases. There was the gilded 
image of Benten Sama, and there the jolly faces 
of Daikoku and Yebisu. There were little ima- 
ages of other gods also, and pictures and scrolls. 

Hana looked at them long and earnestly and 
then called, " Honorable mother." 

" Yes, my darling;" and the mother hastened 
to the pallet. 

*' Honorable mother, I have something to 
ask." 

"And what is it, my child ?" 

*' I want you to take away the images; I can- 
not bear to see them any more. IMother, mother, 
please take them away." 

Take away the idols, dismantle the shrine be- 
fore which the mother had prayed during so many 
years ! Surely some terrible calamity would hap- 
pen to her if she did! 

''Oh, mother, mother," pleaded the girl, who 
saw her hesitation, *' I cannot bear to see them. 
I am going to die, mother, and I cannot die look- 
ing at them. I want to have the Lord Jesus with 



303 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

me when I die, mother. I know he could come 
even if they were here; but oh, mother, please 
take them away." 

Mrs. Fujisawa, trembling and crying, went 
up to the shrine and began to take down the ima- 
ges. She carried them carefully into an inner 
room and set them up in a corner. What would 
the gods think to have their images so dishon- 
ored ! 

But the ancestral tablets were left and the 
flowers and the candles and the incense-boxes. 

"Oh, take them all away, mother," still 
pleaded the girl. "I cannot worship the spirits 
of our ancestors; they cannot help me. O mo- 
ther, I am going to die, and I cannot die in peace. 
Oh, do not cry so, mother; the gods will not hurt 
us; and I am going to be with Carroll and with 
the Lord Jesus in the Christians' paradise." 

With sobs convulsing her whole frame the 
poor mother took away the flowers and put out 
the candles. Then she took from the altar the 
offerimrs to the idols and removed the altar- 
cloth. 

The sick girl watched her with eager eyes 
until it was all over and there was nothing left, 
not even the boards of the altar, to mark the 
place of worship. Then the books were put 
away, the books which ^Irs. Fujisawa had read 
so often, and in their place were laid some copies 
of the Gospels. 



THE DISMANTI.KD SHRINK. 309 

"Now, honorable mother, come and lie down 
by me." 

Mrs. Fujisawa laid her pallet down by Hana's, 
and the girl pnt her arm around her. " Dear mo- 
ther," she said, "we have prayed to them so 
many years and they have done us no good. Now 
I have peace; I believe in the Lord Jesus, and he 
has forgiven my sins. Will the honorable father 
allow me to be baptized?" 

"Z?^^^/," said the poor puzzled mother, who 
felt as if everything was sliding away from her, 
"I do not know." 

"Oh, mother, I can go to sleep now; I have 
peace. ' ' 

They were the last words that Hana uttered. 
When the morning came the poor suffering life 
on earth was over and Hana had gone away. 

Miss Wilton, sitting by her window, saw Kesa 
coming in a jinrikisha with a servant. She has- 
tened to meet her and drew the sobbing child into 
the house. 

" My sister Hana is dead; she died last night. 
But oh, before she died she had all the idols 
taken away, and she believed in the true God!" 

"I am glad, Kesa. Her pain is over. Wait 
and I will go with you to your house." 

Miss Wilton, sitting by the sorrowing mother, 
heard with tears in her eyes the story of Hana's 
last evening upon earth. She tried to comfort 
the mother and to lead her also to the Shepherd 



3 TO KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

in whom at last her suffering child had trusted; 
but her mind seemed singularly darkened, and 
the teacher on leaving her felt discouraged and 
sad, not knowing what a deep impression her ten- 
der sympathy had made in the heathen woman's 
heart. 

Kesa sat beside her mother, holding her hand, 
and ]\Iitsu and Aka were in the room. All strove 
to lead Mrs. Fujisawa to some comfort. But "I 
do not know; I do not know," was still her cry. 

Soon old Kei came to pour out her tears. How 
changed the home was ! It seemed only a few 
davs to Kei since it was full of merrv, lau^jhinof 
children. Tama had lonof since orone to her 
northern home and had a little family growing 
up around her, Chiye was away on the other side 
of the Hakones, Hana was dead, and Kesa was 
almost all the time away at school; so there was 
left only the quiet, saddened Mitsu. 

Fujisawa was summoned to his home and 
reached it late in the afternoon. Life seemed too 
much of a disappointment to him in respect to 
his children. Tama, to be sure, had done just as 
he had willed, and was prosperous and happy; 
but after all he had an idea that her life did not 
amount to much. ]\Iitsu was a poor, weak crea- 
ture, sad and suffering, and a Christian. His pet 
and pride, Chiye, would never make the scholar 
he had hoped; his plans for her were frustrated. 
Hana was lying dead in the beautiful home. The 



THE DISr^IAXTLED SIIRIXI;. 31 1 

I 

bright clirysantliemiims were blooming in vain 
for her. And Kesa? Well, she was still a child; 
she should do what he pleased; she should not be 
allowed to act as the others had done — forsake her 
mother's religion and follow strange doctrines. 
She was too young yet, he thought, to be much 
influenced by the Christians. He would take her 
away from school soon and marry her into some 
high family, for she was fit to be a princess, he 
said to himself, and his heart filled with pride. 
He knew something of the admiration that this 
beautiful Japanese child excited among foreign- 
ers, and yet he had hardened his heart into almost 
hating her. Grief and disappointment had no 
softening effect upon this father's heart. He was 
growing cold and bitter, and all his hardness and 
coldness and bitterness seemed likely to find a 
vent in tyrannizing over his youngest child. 

Kesa meantime was sitting disconsolate, and 
with vague wondering thoughts in her heart, by 
the side of the fish-pond, bright sunshine over 
her and bright flowers all around her. Oh, if 
Chiye were only at home ! she thought. She 
and Chiye could talk together. If her mother 
were only like Marion's mother and her father 
like Marion's father! Where was the "happy 
land" to which Carroll and Hana had gone? 
And the Shepherd of whom they spoke so confi- 
dently, did he care for her ? Kesa sobbed in her 
perplexity and did not hear a soft footstep behind 



312 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

her, and did not know that her teacher was near 
her, until she found herself taken into those lov- 
ing arms and tenderly soothed and comforted. 

''My little Kesa," said Miss Wilton, "why 
do you cry so? Is it because Hana is dead? You 
know how great her pain was and how hard it 
was to bear, and are you sorry because she has 
gone to the country where there is no pain and 
where no one says, ' I am sick ' ?' ' 

*'No, scjisei^^^ sobbed the child, "I was cry- 
ing for myself. It is so lonely." 

"But I am here, my little Kesa, and God 
loves you." 

Oh, the wistful, questioning look in those dark 
eyes! ]\Iiss Wilton's heart yearned in unexpressed 
tenderness over the child, and she seemed to come 
under the shadow of the cloud that was overhang- 
ing Kesa herself "Kesa," she said, "I must 
go. But remember, dear, that I love you, and 
above all, that our Heavenly Father loves you." 

Kesa heard the jinrikisha wheels as she was 
carried away. But the little girl felt comforted 
and went and sat down quietly by her mother's 
side. 

Hana's body was given up to the Buddhist 
priests and buried near Rinjiro in the old Buddh- 
ist cemeter}^, under the same trees that overshad- 
owed Rinjiro' s grave. Aka and Mitsu often went 
to carry flowers there and sometimes Kesa went 
with them. 



THE DISMANTLED SHRINE. 313 

Kei for more than a year had been an active 
Bible-woman in the employ of the missionaries. 
She seemed absolutely untiring in her work, com- 
ing home after a long day's tramp over the city 
as fresh as when she started, eager to tell where 
she had been and to w^hom she had spoken. 
Neighborhood meetings for prayer and Bible- 
reading w^ere often conducted by Kei under the 
superintendence of one of the missionaries. 

Once ]Mitsu went with Aka to one of these 
meetings and prayed with the women. Fujisawa 
heard of it and sternly forbade her doing so any 
more. "I will not have a daughter of mine do- 
ing such foolish things," he said. And Aka's 
husband, too, was angry. 

The two friends wandered in sadness to the 
cemetery the next day. 

*' What can we do, Aka?" said IMitsu sorrow- 
fully. *'The teachers tell us that we shofild 
work now that we are Christians, and we want to 
teach our people." 

"Well," said Aka, *'I have thought that we 
can do much by talking quietly to any who come 
to us. Baba listens now. She is too old and fee- 
ble to leave her bed, and sometimes when no one 
else is there she will let me read one of the Bible 
stories. And there are other women in \h(tyashiki 
who listen, and a man who says he believes." 

So Aka and Mitsu spoke many a word cf 
peace that winter in a quiet way. 



3X4 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Kesa attended school reo^ularly, and Cliiye 
lived rather a lonely life in Nagoya, longing for 
school and home. 

One evening after school had closed and when 
the missionaries were getting ready for a summer 
trip to the Hakones, Saijiro appeared before the 
doctor looking as though he wanted something. 

*' Well, my boy," said the doctor. 

*'0h, please, scnsei^ may I not go with you? 
I will go as a servant, only I want to see my old 
home and the people. But, dear teacher, I want 
more than all that you should talk to the people 
about the true God; and I want to tell Ko about 
how the Lord Jesus opened the eyes of the blind, 
and that he '11 be able to see in heaven." 



MISSIONARIES ON THE) IIAKONES. 315 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

MISSIONARIES ON THE HAKONES. 

" Aitchu, Aitchn, Aitchu, 
Aitchu, Aitchu, Aitchu." 

THIS unmeaning musical refrain in a minor 
key sang the coolies carrying kagos up the steep 
road which leads to Hakone. It was a summer 
morning, and the missionaries, after an uncom- 
fortable night amid the heat, dust, and noise of 
Odawara, were charm.ed with the mountain soli- 
tudes, the tumbling waterfalls, the great trees, 
and the birds and flowers. Beside the kagos 
which contained the ladies of the party walked 
and leaped Saijiro. He carried a long staff and 
jumped from rock to rock, growing more and 
more excited as he neared Yamamidzu. The 
doctor and Mr. West were also walking. 

"I have just been thinking," said Mrs. Field- 
ing to her husband, ' ' of the universality of inartic- 
ulate sounds. The bark of a dog, the neigh of a 
horse, the moo of a cow, are unmistakable wher- 
ever you may go. The leader of that grand orches- 
tra of birds would have no difficulty in making 
himself understood in any land. That crow who 
seems to be delivering a speech on top of the 
farmhouse yonder might fly to England or India, 



31 6 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

make tlie same address, and be equally well under- 
stood. And a cat concert here is fully as good as 
one in our own land." 

*'Yes," answered the doctor, "the animals 
certainly were not included in the confusion of 
tongues at the tower of Babel. And I love to lis- 
ten to the great voices of nature and remember 
that they are the same as at home. The sea 
thunders along the coast here just as it does on 
the other side; the wind whispers to the trees in 
the same tones; the rain has the same patter; the 
waterfall makes the same sweet music. Sun, 
moon, and stars tell of the glory of God here just 
as they do at home. We are not strangers in a 
strange land. It is our Father's country and we 
are always at home." 

" I never realized before coming to Japan how 
little we need speech for the bare necessities of 
life," said Mr. West, who had joined them and 
was listening to the conversation. "We can 
make known our animal wants without it. We 
can even express sympathy, love, hatred, and a 
thousand other things without it. But, oh! what 
a gift from our Heavenly Father it is, and how 
thankful we should be for our own rich language, 
through which every sentiment of the human 
heart can be made known. Even on the printed 
page we can read words that thrill and burn, that 
bring tears from the eyes and laughter from the 
lips." 



MISSIONARIES ON THE HAKONES. 317 

There burst upon the ears of the talkers a 
strain of sweet music and words of a Christian 
hymn. The ladies behind them were singing in 
their kagos. In a moment all had joined — Mrs. 
Fielding with, a rich alto, the doctor with his 
deep bass, and Mr. West with a fine tenor. Sweet 
and clear, loud and strong, sounded the w^ords in 
the solitude. 

" Oh, how beautiful their feet upon the mountains 
The tidings of peace who bring 
To the nations of the earth who sit in darkness 
And tell them of Zion's King!" 

The coolies stopped their wild chanting to lis- 
ten and kept step to the rhythm of the hymn. 
Then followed hymn after hymn, and at last the 
coolies begged to be taught one. So they learned 
one verse of the little hymn, "Jesus loves me," 
and sang it very well by the time they reached 
the turn in the road which leads down to Yama- 
midzu. 

"Oh, sejtsei^'''' said Saijiro, with eager en- 
treaty in his eyes, "may I run down the short 
path to the cottage?" 

"Go, Saijiro," said the doctor, smiling at his 
excitement. 

Down bounded Saijiro and soon entered the 
village. It looked just as it did when he left it. 
There was the temple, and there the swinging 
bridge, and over there the little house, unoccu- 
pied now and all crumbling into ruins. He turned 



31 8 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

into the temple grounds and almost ran over the 
old priest. 

^''Dogu! It is Saijiro, the young master," 
said the priest. '' How is your honorable health, 
and how are the honorable ladies?" 

Saijiro in his eagerness to see Ko had forgot- 
ten that his first duty in Yamamidzu was to go to 
the inn and bid Yenoske's parents prepare for the 
travel lets. 

The priest's inquiry reminded him, and with 
a bow and "Thanks" and "Tell Ko to come to 
the hotel," he sprang lightly on up the street into 
the courtyard of the inn and stood before Yenos- 
ke's mother. The old lady almost overwhelmed 
him in her delight. " The little master, the little 
master has come ! A great boy ! A fine young 
gentleman ! A great happiness ! An unexpected 
pleasure ! A very, very great happiness !" 

In came Yenoske's father, in gathered the 
people who had seen the boy coming up the 
street, and who hastened to get news from Tokio. 

^^Dogu! the honorable teachers, four ladies 
and two gentlemen, are on their way down the 
mountain and will stop here to-night," said Sai- 
jiro. 

Then the old lady was at her wit's end and 
really frightened. " But the food and the beds for 
the honorable foreigners!" she gasped when she 
had recovered a little from her first astonishment. 

"Oh," said Saijiro, " they have some bedding 



iiiii|t:f 

,!i*si!i Ipifi 

\MuMmm} \mmBi ; ^ Bmi wm: M^-f^^ 



Ur^j 




A JAPANESE BARBER. 



MISSIONARIES ON THE HAKONES. 319 

and some food. Only give them room and they 
will be all right. But hasten, honorable mother, 
for they come soon." 

Oh, the excitement of the Yamamidzu people! 
What bustle there was in the little inn ! Such a 
pushing of slides and sweeping of floors and sha- 
king oi futons and polishing of wood- work ! The 
hibachis were filled with fresh coals and rice was 
put on to boil. Children were sent all over the 
neighborhood to look for fresh eggs. Saijiro's 
senseis had come from Tokio, the people who had 
been so kind to him and to Yenoske ! All the 
village turned out to do them honor, real grati- 
tude mingling ^vith the curiosity that was felt. 

Yenoske's father, the landlord, hastened to 
the barber's to have his hair neatly dressed, then 
donned his best coat and went to the entrance of 
the village to welcome the guests. All of the 
men, women, boys, girls, and babies were there, 
with smiling Saijiro and happy Ko at their head. 

When the missionaries appeared, coming down 
the mountain into Yamamidzu, low bowed the 
landlord. ''Welcome, truly welcome, a very 
great welcome. Thank? for your kindness to my 
son. Truly, it is w^onderful, truly! I never knew 
anything like it before. Come to my humble 
residence. Come and partake of rest and refresh- 
ment." 

Then low bowed the people and all the chil- 
dren as the travellers passed. There were five 



320 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

kagos^ one for each lady, ^Mrs. Fielding, Marion, 
and I\Iiss Wilton, and two others who had joined 
the party. And there were coolies carrying bag- 
gage and the two gentlemen walking. 

At the hotel were Yenoske's mother and sev- 
eral other old babas 2in6.jisa7is^ all smiling, bright, 
and happy, to welcome Yenoske's master and mis- 
tress and Saijiro's teachers. And when the trav- 
ellers were seated on the mats in the best room in 
came the priests and teacher to pay their re- 
spects. And then arrived the children who had 
been sent for eggs, and who tendered them with 
compliments as presents; and some brought flow- 
ers and some carried grasses and leaves. The 
old mother's attention was divided between pre- 
paring rice and tea for her guests, thanking, them 
for their kindness to Yenoske, and apologizing 
for her poor accommodations. In truth, the hotel 
did not afford manv comforts for tired foreifrners. 
There were no chairs, no tables, no beds, little 
food, and plenty of fleas and flies. 

But the scenery made up for all deficiencies in 
these respects. The travellers were seated almost 
over tlie rushing, rapid river, and two miles from 
them towered the mountains, still holding lilies 
like those that Saijiro had loved so from his baby- 
hood. 

*' So, Saijiro, this is your home," said the doc- 
tor, " and this is Kojiro. Come to me, my boy, 
and let me see those eves. ' ' 



MISSIONARIES ON THE HAKOXKS. 32 1 

Kojiro lifted his sightless eyes to the doctor, 
who looked at them long and earnestly. 

*'0h, honorable doctor," said the boy, *'Sai- 
jiro has told me how the Jesus of whom you teach 
could open the eyes of the blind by a touch. Can 
yoti do so, honorable doctor ?" 

"No, my boy," said the doctor; **the Lord 
Jesus could do that because he was God and could 
do all things. But I think, if you could go with 
me to Tokio and submit to some pain, I might, 
wnth the blessing of the Saviour, make you see." 

Oh, the joy that filled Ko's heart ! 

*'I will see your parents, Kojiro," said the 
doctor. " You must be patient." y 

And now dinner was served, and how fortu- 
nate were those who were able to see the honora- 
ble foreigners eat ! Knives, forks, and spoons ! 
how could they use such things instead of simple 
chopsticks ? And the bread ! A piece was hand- 
ed to the observers for examination. What a cu- 
riosity it was ! And butter ! Oh, horrible to put 
such grease on the honorable bread! But the 
honorable foreigners could make way with rice 
and eggs; and right hungry were they after their 
morning on the mountain; so they did full justice 
to the meal, which was certainly the best the 
place could afford. 

Next came a delightful walk, w^ith Saijiro for 
a guide, down the street to the temple, and down 
the steep descent to the stream. How beautiful 

KeMA and Saiiiio. 21 



2,22 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

was the waterfall, how sweet and powerful the fra- 
grance of the flowers ! But nothing could tempt 
the ladies across the little swinging bridge; so 
Saijiro and the two gentlemen went over and stood 
in the little decayed house where Kochi had lived 
and died, where Saijiro spent the happy days of 
his earlier life, and where the teacher had bowed 
in prayer and suffered such penance for so many 
years and from which he had gone out never to 
return. There was Inari's deserted shrine. No 
tapers burned there now, no flowers bloomed on 
the altar; but the mountain was unchanged still, 
and Saijiro leaned his head against its hoary side 
and felt like a child returning to his father or as 
one who has found again a faithful friend. 

"Where can we meet the people this evening 
to talk?" asked Mr. West as the early evening 
shadows began to darken around them. 

*'It is pleasanter outside," said Saijiro, "by 
the river-bank." 

So when the moon came up and all Yama- 
midzu lay glorified under its beams a little com- 
pany gathered on the river-bank. The priests, 
with yellow robes and shaven heads, stood a little 
apart from the rest. The school teacher had 
come as near to the missionaries as possible. 
Children with babies on their backs and children 
without babies pressed a little timidly near their 
mothers. Venerable old men and women stood 
or reclined at full length on the ground. vSaijiro, 



MI£SIONARIi:S ON THE IIAKOXrS. • 323 

witli Ko ever at liis side, stayed near the doctor; 
and in strong contrast to the Japanese appeared 
the missionary ladies and Marion. 

"Dear friends," said Mr. West, 'Sve want to 
have a little talk this evening. I want you to 
feel free, and to ask questions if you will. Saijiro 
has begged us to come and see you and to stop 
over this night on our way up to Hakone; and 
we are glad, very glad, to do so, and thank you 
for your kind welcome to us." 

The people all bowed. 

" We were glad that the teacher Yetaro came 
to us before he died, to hear of the true God and 
of forgiveness through his Son Jesus Christ. You 
all know how sorrowful Yetaro was because of the 
great crime he had committed, and how for many 
years he sought forgiveness and peace from the 
Japanese gods, but found none. At last he came 
to us and heard of the Lord Jesus who died upon 
the cross to save sinners. He believed in him 
and found peace. We are glad too, friends, to 
have Saijiro with us. God, our true God, has 
raised up for him a mother in America, who loves 
him and is going to educate him in the place of 
her own dead boy who three years ago went home 
to heaven. We are glad, too, to have our faithful 
servant Yenoske and his wife Yen from your 
mountain home; and we thank you again for your 
kind welcome. And now we want you to let us 
take the boy Ko, who has never yet seen the light 



324 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

of the sun nor looked upon the flowers lie loves 
so much, and with the blessing of our God we 
want to try to make him see." 

Ko's father and mother called out their thanks 
and all the people bowed. 

*'Now, friends," said ]\Ir. West, *'we would 
like to sing some of our Christian hymns and 
read to you a few words of our Christian Book 
and pray to our God before we go to rest. These 
words w^ill not hurt you, but you can think upon 
them, and we hope they will sink into your heart. 
Dear friends, are you not sometimes sorrowful? 
Our Lord Jesus says that any one who is sad may 
come unto him and rest. Are you not sometimes 
cold and hungry and miserable? Do not your 
wrong thoughts and words and acts fill your life 
with troubles? Our Book tells us of a blessed 
country to which we shall go when we die, if we 
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and obey the 
commandments of our God, where we shall never 
more hunger or thirst, where no cold, piercing 
wind ever blows, and where the sun shall no more 
scorch us. Do not sickness and pain come to you ? 
and do not your loved ones go away into the shad- 
ows of the tomb and leave you here weeping ? I 
know they do, for Saijiro's mother and father have 
gone, and so has old Baba who cared for Saijiro 
in his childhood, and so have many of your little 
babies. Our Book tells us of a land where God 
gathers all those whose sins are forgiven for 



MISSIONARIES ON THE HAKONES. 325 

Christ's sake, and where we shall always be happy 
and with the I^ord. Dear friends, listen to some 
of our Christian hymns, and do not be afraid." 

Then the missionaries sang to the people; and 
the people listened, and at last tried to learn the 
words of "Jesus loves me" and "There is a hap- 
py land." And then Mr. West read the story of 
blind Bartimeus, and the people thought it won- 
derful. Then followed a short, simple explana- 
tion of the Christian doctrine and a prayer com- 
mending these sheep scattered thus iipon the moun- 
tains to the Good Shepherd's care. The people 
listened attentively, and many thanks were ex- 
pressed to the missionaries, who went back to the 
inn. 

"This is the hardest part of travelling in Jap- 
an," said Miss Wilton to Marion, as they were 
shut up in the close room prepared for the night; 
" I hate the odor of those green curtains, and never 
did like to sleep on the floor." 

The missionaries had their own pillows, which 
they used as jinrikisha cushions by day. They 
spread sheets over their futons and crept under 
the curtains; but with heat and fleas the night 
passed miserably enough, to the older people at 
least. Early in the morning they were up and 
off, going the roundabout way up the mountain 
to Hakone. Saijiro remained to spend a few days 
in Yamamidzu and to help prepare Kojiro for the 
journey to Tokio. 



326 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

The missionaries passed the deserted tea-house 
in the recess of the rock where Yen and her grand- 
mother had dispensed tea and sweetmeats to trav- 
ellers. They visited the hot springs and saw the 
miserable wretches who were gathered there. 

" IIow dreadful it all is!" said the doctor's 
wife one day as they had turned, heart-sick and 
weary, from the sight of the terrible ravages of 
disease and evidences of depravity which were 
exposed on every side. " I do shrink from such 
close contact with sin and misery. Richard, 
sometimes I wonder how you can go about so 
among these people, and not dread to minister to 
their foul bodies and their yet fouler souls. I 
know that it is the Lord Jesus who helps you. It 
is his vSpirit within you that gives you this love 
and grace and patience." 

The missionaries spent a lovely summer day 
in Hakone by the side of the lake. Several times 
during the day a crowd gathered around them to 
be taught, or some man would come alone and ask 
to be instructed. 

"I am so glad to know these mountains bet- 
ter," said one of the stranger missionary ladies ; 
*' I have looked at them so often from my house 
in Tokio. Now I know what they contain — the 
waterfalls, the mountain streams, the sunny slopes, 
the deep ravines, and above all, Hakone and its 
lake." 

**Yes," said Miss Wilton, ''this lake always 




MOUNTAIN GIRLS. 



MlSvSlOXARIKS OX THK HAKONKS. 327 

remiuds me of the Sea of Galilee. And those 
workmen making ready the way for the emperor, 
did they not remind you of the prophecy, ' Be- 
hold, I will send my messenger, and he shall pre- 
pare the way before me ' ?" 

Ko was never tired of hearing Saijiro tell and 
read the stories of the Saviour's healing of the 
blind. 

"Oh, Saichan," he said one day, "have the 
Christians an image of him, and can I pass my 
hand over his face?" 

" They have no image of their God," said Sai- 
jiro. " They worship him by faith; they believe 
in him." 

One day, after the missionaries had returned 
to their home and the doctor had made every- 
thing ready, a successful operation was performed 
and Ko's eyes gained the power of vision. They 
let him take off the bandaores one eveninof when 
the sun was setting. Like a ball of fire, but with 
its light tempered by the mist, it was sinking into 
the sea when the boy's eyes were first permitted 
to look upon it. He gazed for one moment; then 
turning to Saijiro, he asked, 

"Is it God?" 

" It is the work of God, dear Ko," answered 
the doctor. " See ; it has gone. " 



328 KIvSA AND SAIJIRO. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

THE MIDNIGHT PRAYER. 

-' Friday afternoon liad come again and Miss 
Wilton's busy week in school was over. The 
girls had gone to their homes. The last one from 
whom the teacher had parted was Kesa Fujisawa, 
whose jinrikisha she had stood watching until the 
coolie had turned a corner and was out of sight. 
Something between a sigh and a prayer rose to 
Miss Wilton's lips. Then seeing the doctor's w^ife 
alone on the veranda she joined her, and the two 
sat in silence for a time, watching the water and 
listening to the never-ceasing song of the waves 
as they beat against the shore. 

"How strange," said Miss Wilton, *'that the 
most restless thing in the world, this heaving 
ocean, should be the most restful to us! I often 
come out here wearied almost to sickness, after a 
day in school, and only a few moments spent in 
watching the water, feeling the ocean breeze, and 
listening to the sound of the waves will make me 
feel strong again and ready for anything." 

*' Yes," answered Mrs. Fielding. "The words 

of the old hymn my mother used to sing, and 

sings yet, I suppose, often come to my mind: 

" * There sliall I bathe my weary soul 
In seas of heavenly rest.' " 



THE MIDNIGHT PRAYKR. 329 

*'I sometimes wonder," said Miss Wilton, 
'*' whether we do not educate these girls beyond 
their surroundings; that is, if the education they 
receive here does not make them discontented 
with their own homes." 

"Are you thinking of any one of the girls in 
particular?" asked Mrs. Fielding, noticing the 
expression of Miss Wilton's face. 

" Yes; of that pretty child of the officer Fnji- 
sawa's — Kesa. When she first came here I 
thought her the most modest, most lovable Jap- 
anese child I ever saw. She and her sister were 
more like American girls than any others in the 
school. The little one was never very forward in 
her studies, but always happy and bright. Late- 
ly she has changed and seems irritable and moody, 
and I cannot find my way into her heart. I have 
been to the house often to see them. The father 
is silent and stern towards Kesa; the mother, 
since Hana's death, has been sadly failing in 
health herself. Mitsu is a good girl, but not a 
very strong character. And so the child has no 
one to understand her, and something is wrong, 
something is fretting and jarring her sensitive 
spirit." 

"It is a solemn thing to toiich human souls," 
said IMrs. Fielding. "But, dear Miss Wilton, 
sometimes I see a shadow over the heart of my 
own darling which I am not quite able to soothe 
away. It is true that every human soul must 



T,^0 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

bear its own burden, and we must remember that 
the Shepherd of whom we speak so often to the 
Japanese loves these wandering ones better than 
we do. I have to say that to myself again and 
again. 'God is light, and in him is no darkness 
at all.'" 

*' Thanks, dear Mrs. Fielding, for your 
words. ' ' 

The darkness was gathering around them, and 
the two ladies separated. But far on into the 
night the teacher turned and tossed on her bed 
with the burden of the child's soul on her heart. 
Something in the pathetic depths of the eyes 
turned to her as she said good-by had touched her 
beyond expression. 

"Dear Lord," she prayed, " I know that thou 
who didst die on the cross for such as this one 
dost love her better than I, and that her soul is 
infinitely more precious to thee than it is to me. 
Give me grace to yield her up to thee. Teach 
me to trust thee for her, and for all those whom 
thou hast given into my charge. Oh, Lord, for- 
bid that through my carelessness or neglect any 
one of them should be lost!" 

"Marion," said Mrs. Fielding the next day, 
"you are often with Kesa Fujisawa; do you 
think she feels happy now?" 

"Mamma," answered Marion, "I think 
sometimes Kesa wants to be loved by her mam- 
ma and papa as you and papa love me." 



TinC MIDXKiliT PRAYER. 331 

you must 
try and comfort her, darling." 

Marion Fieldins: was to ^o home to attend 

o o 

school soon. Kesa knew this, and her heart was 
sad at the thought of parting from her friend. 
She did not care much for the Japanese girls, and 
Marion was often her only companion. 

The doctor rightly thought that his little 
daughter ought to know that there are such 
things as pain and sorrow in the world, and that 
she should learn how to meet and comfort the suf- 
fering. So he often had her in the visiting-room 
of his dispensary at the time when the women and 
children were most apt to assemble there. Mari- 
on had early learned to go about among them, di- 
recting the frightened children, reassuring the 
timid mothers, and speaking a word here and giv- 
ing a touch there. The Japanese loved her, and 
she in her turn learned many a lesson in the dis- 
pensary among the sick, the blind, and the 
maimed. 

Her mother wondered at times if she did right 
in permitting her childhood to pass in this heath- 
en land, with no playmate of her own nation. 
But she equally dreaded sending her away, and so 
kept the child, trusting to the sweet home influ- 
ences to counteract any injurious effects of too 
much intercourse with the Japanese. Only once, 
in her earliest childhood, had Marion visited the 
home-land, and she had scarcely any recollection 



332 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

of her grandfather's house and of the uncles, 
aunts, and cousins who loved her there. Now the 
time had come when the parents felt that she 
must spend some years in her native land. So 
she was to go with her mother, to remain three 
years, while the mother would return the next 
summer. 

Kesa was Marion's chosen playmate among 
the Japanese. "She is a good little girl," she 
would say, and never could Mrs. Fielding's closest 
questionings draw anything from her save in 
evidence of Kesa's gentleness, truthfulness, and 
purity. So during Kesa's four years at school the 
girls had many a play together. 

Kesa wondered at first why Marion should 
love a doll and tend and dress it as if it were a 
child. She thought that perhaps there was some- 
thing more lovable in a foreign doll than in one 
of the Japanese dolls, and in her heart of hearts 
she loncred to have one like Marion's. But the 
reticent child never told her desire. Only in se- 
cret at home she tried to fashion a doll something 
like the pretty "Daisy," and made it a dress 
after the pattern of Daisy's dresses. Long after- 
wards, when Kesa had gone from her father's 
house, and Mrs. Fielding was trying to comfort 
the sorrowing mother, Mitsu brought the poor 
uncouth doll to her and told her of the child's 
longing; and the doctor's wife sighed as she 
thought of the little girl's unsatisfied yearning, 



THE MIDNIGHT PRAYTIR. 2>33 

and said regretfully, *'If I had only known, I 
would have given her one like Marion's." 

One pleasant June Sabbath Marion Fielding 
stood at the schoolroom-window looking for Kesa. 
She knew that when the next Sabbath dawned 
she and her father and mother would be far out 
on the ocean, every moment taking her farther 
and farther away from her dark-eyed friend. The 
girls were already beginning to come over the 
commons to the school, most of them carrying 
flowers, and all looking bright and happy, as 
though glad to get back. 

"There she is, mamma. I know the old jin- 
rikisha and Meguchi," said Marion at last, has- 
tening to meet Fujisawa's daughter. 

Kesa had not only lovely flowers, but a beauti- 
ful lacquered box and handsome crapes to give to 
]\Iarion. " The mother, Mitsu, and Aka send these 
with their compliments," she said, "and wish 
you to accept them and take them to America 
with you." 

''''Okiarigato^^ — a great thank-you — responded 
the American girl. " Will not Aka and Mitsu be 
at the church this afternoon, Kesa? You know 
that Saijiro, Yenoske, and Yen are to be baptized, 
and mamma is so happy to see them enter the 
Christian church before she goes away." 

"They will be here," said Kesa, and the girls 
went into the house. 

Saijiro was now a tall, studious boy of seven- 



334 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

teen. He had almost completed the course of 
study in the boys' school. Harukichi was still his 
faithful friend, and Saijiro had decided to follow 
in his footsteps and preach the gospel to the Jap- 
anese. 

Yenoske had long ago been promoted to the 
position of dining-room servant in the doctor's 
family. Yen was as smiling as ever, and her 
baby as bright and rosy as though it had been 
born in America. The hearts of Yenoske and 
Yen had been touched by the Spirit of God, and, 
forsaking their old beliefs, they had accepted the 
Saviour as theirs. Yenoske's devotion to his 
*' little master" was unchanged, and when Saiji- 
ro had decided to receive Christian baptism Ye- 
noske had begged that he and Yen might be ad- 
mitted into the church at the same time. Ko, full 
of love to every one, and especially to the Lord 
Jesus, who had opened the eyes of the blind, stood 
at Saijiro's side. 

Mr. West, as he looked on the little group 
from the mountain, gave thanks in his heart to 
the Good Shepherd who thus had led his sheep. 
\'ery solemn and touching was the engagement of 
those who had been servants of idols to be faithful 
and earnest in serving the Lord. 

"I cannot believe as quickly as Chiye did, 
Marion," said Kesa a little sadly, as the two girls 
went out of church toq:ether after the communion. 

^' But vou will some time, Kesa." 



THE MIDNIGHT PRAYER. 335 

"I hope so; I will try to be good. I wish I 
were eoingf with vou." 

" You will write to me, Kesa, and I will write 
to yon, and tell you all about America and grand- 
mamma's house. And three years w^ill pass away 
quickly, mamma says." 

But Kesa's heart was heavy with sadness and 
loneliness. She kept close to Marion's side dur- 
ing the last few days of her tarrying in Japan. 
Together they carefully packed away the old doll 
Daisy and her wardrobe. Together they tended 
the flowers, some of which Carroll's hands had 
planted, but whose blossoms he never saw. 

The day before the steamer sailed Marion 
whispered a request to her father. He smiled 
and said, "I will see, daughter," and went away. 
Some hours after he returned, and in answer to 
his child's questioning eyes said, "All right, dar- 
ling." 

" Oh, papa, did you really see the officer Fuji- 
sawa, and did he say Kesa might go to Yoko- 
hama?" 

" Yes, daughter," said the doctor, replying to 
both questions at once; and Marion ran off to tell 
Kesa that she was to go with her to the ship. 

A sorrowful group gathered in the mission 
chapel the morning that Mrs. Fielding and Mar- 
ion went away. The old teacher, Makichi, con- 
ducted the morning worship, and amid the tears 
of servants and friends he read Paul's address to 



2)1)6 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

the Ephesian elders, with the touching words at 
the close: 

"And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled 
down and prayed with them all. And they all 
wept sore and fell on Paul's neck and kissed him, 
sorrowing most of all for the words which he 
spake, that they should see his face no more. 
And they accompanied him unto the ship." 

Exquisitely touching was the venerable man's 
prayer as he thanked the Lord for sending such 
missionaries to Japan, and begged for the divine 
protection in behalf of those who were about to 
depart and for their safe return in due time to the 
people who loved them. 

Mrs. Fielding and Marion bade their friends 
farewell with tears. They felt like turning back 
and saying, "We will remain with you," but it 
was necessary for them to go, and amid tears and 
pra}'ers and flowers which were showered upon 
them they left the shelter of the mission-house. 

Soon Kesa and Marion were seated by the car 
window looking out upon the landscape as the 
train hurried along. 

"There is Fujisan," said Kesa as she spied 
the top of the mountain. 

" How I wish we had something we could both 
look at while we are separated," said INIarion. 

"Well, there are the stars," responded Kesa. 

" Yes, and the sun and the moon," said Mar- 
ion. 



thp: midnight frayer. 337 

" But I have the English Bible you gave me, 
Maichan, and you have my Japanese Testament, 
and they are better than anything else." 

*'Yes," answered Marion. "But see how- 
pretty the fields are, Kesa, in their bright summer 
dress. I do love them so. I wonder if America 
is as pretty as Japan. ' ' 

It was only ten o'clock when the party reached 
Yokohama, and they started immediately for the 
ship, which lay far out in the harbor. After get- 
ting through the custom-house they had a ride in 
a Japanese sampan far over the bright waters. 
The bay was full of life that morning. The sound 
of the hammer was heard from many of the ves- 
sels as work went on preparatory to going to sea 
again. A ship under full sail was just coming 
into port after a long voyage around the cape, 
and a steamer was slowly making her way up to 
the anchorage. The low hills which ran up from 
the water's edge were all bright green, and Kesa 
and Marion could still see Mt. Fuji and the Ha- 
kones. The boatman sang as he propelled the 
boat rapidly over the waves. 

Up to the great steamer "City of Tokio" 
they came at last, passing around under her sides 
to the stairway. With some difficulty they got 
on the platform and went up the steps. 

Kesa had never seen anything like this mag- 
nificent vessel before and was almost awed by the 
size of the ship, its mirrors, carpets, and beauti- 

Kosa aii'l Saijiro. 22 



2,T,S KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

fill furnishings. But there was no time to linger. 
A peep into Marion's room and she must go. 

Mrs. Fielding drew the girl into her arms for 
a moment and whispered a few words in her ear. 

" I think the love of the Americans is deeper 
than that of the Japanese," said Kesa. 

" But the love of the Lord Jesus is deeper than 
all, my little Kesa," she said, and let her go. 

An hour later Kesa stood with Miss Wilton 
on a high bluff overlooking the sea and watched 
the departing steamer until it was a mere speck 
on the distant ocean. 

"Dear Kesa, do not cry so," said Miss Wil- 
ton. ' ' They who love one another are never sep- 
arated in heart, and our Father will watch over 
us all." 

Kesa felt better after listening to her teachers 
soothing words; but the next day she was listless 
and indifferent, and at last positively refused to 
obey some simple command of Miss Wilton. 

Miss Wilton was surprised and repeated her 
order, but still the girl refused to obey. 

"Then, Kesa, take your seat," she said. 

Kesa arose, left her class, walked slowly to 
her seat, and sat down. Then, to the amazement 
of her teacher and the consternation of the girls, 
she threw her book across the room. 

There was a moment's silence. Never before 
had such an instance of insubordination been 
known among the Japanese girls. Insolent disre- 



THE MIDNIGHT PRAYER. 339 

gard of the commands of a teacher was something 
nnprecedented among them, something that they 
looked upon with horror, as the breaking of a 
direct command of their sages and religious 
teachers. 

" Kesa Fujisawa" — the clear voice of the 
teacher rang through the school — "take your 
book and go to your room. You are suspended 
from the regular exercises of the school until you 
do as I bid you and bring me a sentence written 
on your slate." 

It was quite early in the morning, and all the 
long summer day Kesa sat in her room alone 
with the slate and pencil. A girl of her own age, 
one of her friends, several times went up to her 
and begged her to obey the command of her 
teacher. It was touching to see the sorrow of all 
the Japanese girls, sorrow which even brought 
tears to their eyes; but Kesa's were dry and her 
heart was unmoved. She heard the school-bells 
rung as hour after hour passed away and change 
after change of class was made. She knew when 
the noon-hour came. Some one brought her rice 
and tea, but she pushed them aside and left them 
untouched. She heard the girls go into the room 
below for the Chinese writing lesson, and knew 
when the hour for Bible-reading came, which she 
usually enjoyed so much. Then she heard the 
day-scholars go away, and the boarders came up 
and got ready for their walk and left her alone.. 



34^ KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Still by her side lay the empty slate and the un- 
used pencil. Then the sun neared its setting, 
and when it had almost sunk in the west she 
heard soft footsteps in the dormitory and felt her- 
self encircled by gentle arms and drawn out to 
where she could see the sunset. 

" Kesa, dear Kesa, the sun is going down." 

Then rushed into Kesa's heart the memory of 
the last Bible-lesson they had before Marion went 
away and the words that they had read together: 
''Let not the sun go down upon your wrath; 
neither give place to the devil." She gave her 
teacher one look, wliich lingered long in Miss 
Wilton's memory, and then rushed for her slate. 

In a few moments she brought it to Miss Wil- 
ton, and on it was written, "This is a beautiful 
day, but my heart is dark. God bless me and 
take away my darkness and give me light." 
Then sob after sob shook the girPs frame until 
jNIiss Wilton was almost alarmed and could do 
nothing but soothe and comfort. 

"Dear, dear child," she said, 'God will give 
you light." 

And something soon came to Kesa which was 
more of a comfort to her than anvthinof else could 
have been. The Shepherd sent help to his suffer- 
ing lamb. When she arrived at home the next 
day for her Saturday's holiday there seemed an 
unusual stir and brightness about the house. Lis- 
tening for an instant, she caught the tones of a 



TIIK MIDNIGHT PRAYER. • 34I 

well-remembered voice, and in another moment 
was with Chiye — Chiye come back from Nagoya 
to be a helper and guide to her younger sister. 

Kesa was radiant with happiness when she 
and Chiye started off to the mission on Sunda)' 
morning. How delightedly she anticipated lead- 
ing Chiye to her teacher ! How surprised Miss 
Wilton would be ! 

But when they arrived at the school the sad 
news of Miss Wilton's sudden, serious illness met 
them, and Chiye had to go home without seeing 
her. Poor Kesa ! Her heart was sad enough. 
She missed her teacher's sympathy and could not 
bear to think of her pain. 

The evening at the school was very quiet. 
The girls sat in the dormitory in small groups 
and talked of the sick teacher. From the chapel 
came the sound of the students' voices as they 
read the evening Scripture lesson. 

^'Kesa, cannot God make the teacher well?'* 
asked little Koko. 

"Yes, I suppose so," said Kesa. 

"Well, cannot we ask him ?" 

"Yes, Koko, we will when we say our even- 
ing prayer." 

The girls went to bed early and the house was 
very quiet. Kesa could not sleep. She loved 
her teacher dearly. More than that, she clung to 
her and feared to be away from her. A terrible 
thought came into her mind as she lay tossing on 



342 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

her pallet: **Wliat if Miss Wilton should die?'* 
For a moment she felt as though she were sinking 
in deep waters with no helper near. At last she 
could bear it no longer. " We must ask God to 
spare our teacher," she resolved, and going from 
one pallet to another she roused the sleepers. 

*' What is it?" asked the astonished girls. 

"It is I, Kesa Fujisawa, and we must rise 
and pray. I fear the sensei will die, and we must 
ask God to spare her life." 

The clocks were striking the midnight hour 
when those Japanese girls arising from their sleep 
poured out their hearts in prayer for their be- 
loved teacher. With a sweet strong faith they 
earnestly asked for what they wanted, and then 
went to their rest again. 

"What were you doing in the middle of the 
night?" asked Miss Wilton of one of the older 
girls the next morning as, much relieved, she sat 
propped up in the bed. 

"We were having a prayer-meeting. Kesa 
Fujisawa called us up to pray for you." 

* ' Tell Kesa to come to me. ' ' 

The girl came quickly, stood for a moment in 
the doorway, then rushed suddenly to the bedside 
and nestled in her teacher's arms. " Oh, seiisei^'^'' 
she said, " I do think I am a Christian now; I 
never loved God before." 



TIIIC LITTLK VISITOR. 343 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

THE LITTLE VISITOR. 

The hearts of Saijiro and his "mother in 
America" had become closely bound together. 
The poor minister's wife in Pennsylvania, with 
her six children to care for, had many a sacrifice 
to make in order to provide means for Saijiro' s 
education in Japan. But she never regretted the 
adoption of the boy, and the influence of her lov- 
ing spirit was very beneficial to her own children. 
Early they learned to deny themselves many little 
gratifications, that they might do something for 
their "brother in Japan," and they watched 
eagerly for letters from that far-off land which 
had become such a reality to them. 

"What shall we do in order to become more 
interested in missions?" asked the leader of a 
" band " one day of a returned missionary. 

"Do more work for them," was the reply. 
And it is a fact that the more we do for them the 
more interest we shall take in them, the nearer 
will the heathen nations seem to us. 

One summer evening, in the twilight. Clay 
Rindberg came home from the postofiice with a 
letter bearing the well-known Japanese stamp. 

"A letter from Saijiro, mamma. Do light 



344 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

the lamp," he cried; aud the other children 
crowded around. 

Even ' ' papa ' ' threw down his papers, and all 
gathered about the table. This is what Mrs. 
Rindberg read : 

"Dear Mother: I know that to hear I have 
become a Christian and have been baptized will 
make you very happy. Long time I think I give 
my heart to God. But my heart very hard, and 
I think I love not the Lord Jesus. 

"I have in mountain a little friend Kojiro. 
He for lonof time blind, cannot see anvthinQf. 
One day I go with my kind teacher back to my 
home at Yamamidzu. I very happy to see my 
old friends, but I happiest of all to see Ko. The 
doctor look at Ko's eyes and he say he can make 
them see. Then we all very glad. Ko's father 
and mother cry for joy. They think he always 
be blind, and they very sorry. So the doctor 
bring Ko to Tokio, and he take the things from 
his eyes by which he not see. Then first Ko see 
the setting sun, and he think it the face of God. 
But the missionary say, 'No, that is not God's 
face. That is the sun, which is God's work.' 

"Then Ko want to know all about God and 
the Lord Jesus Christ. So I teach him. We beg 
that he stay here at school, and some of the bo}'S 
earn money that he may be taught. 

Ko soon love God very much. Then he say 
to me, ' Saijiro, why you not love God ?' Ko 



THE LITTLE VISITOR. 345 

want to be baptized, but lie say, ' No, I wait for 
Saijiro.' So we read about Jesus curing blind 
men, and Ko say to me, * Saijiro, do you not love 
him because lie cure blind men?' But I do not 
love him. 

"Then w^e read how he hung on the cross to 
save sinners, and Ko say, 'Saijiro, do you not love 
him because he save sinners ?' Then I think how 
my father glad when he hear that, and how he 
believe on Jesus and love him very much. But I 
still cannot love him because he died on the cross. 

"Then my heart sad and Ko's heart sad, and 
I go to my friend Harukichi and I say, 'Why 
cannot I love God and be a Christian?' And 
Harukichi say, ' I do not know. ' Then he pray 
with me and ask God that I might be a Christian. 
Then all boys pray that I become a Christian; 
and I pray too, and say, ' Oh, God, make me a 
Christian.' And still my heart hard. 

"Then one day I sit and think of my good 
mother Kochi, who carried me around when I 
was a little baby. I think how good my father 
was and the old haba who took care of me when 
my mother die. I think of Yenoske who was so 
good, and of the kind missionary teachers, and of 
my good friend Harukichi, and of my dear mo- 
ther in America. And I think, 'God give me 
all these things;' and I say, ' I am wicked boy.* 

"Then I cry, and Harukichi say, 'Why you 
cry?' And I say, 'I am wicked boy, Harukichi.' 



34^ KHSA AND SAIJIRO. 

"Then Harukiclii tell me, 'I am glad yoii 
think you wicked boy. Now your heart soft; 
now you come to God.' 

"Then I see, and then my heart soft because 
I know I am wicked, and because God love me 
and save me from my sins. 

"All Yamamidzu people who are here have 
receive baptism — Yenoske who was good to me 
when I little, and Yen his wife, and also Kojiro, 
who clapped his hands because he so happy for 
me. 

" I send love to my mother, father, sisters, and 

brothers in America. 

"I love you. 

"SAIJIRO." 

Great joy did this letter from Saijiro give to 
the little group at the parsonage, and the glad 
news of the boy's conversion went through the 
village. Two months afterw^ards Saijiro and 
Harukichi read Mrs. Rindberg's answer. 

All the while that Chiye had been in Nagoya 
Harukichi had heard little or nothing of her. 
But his heart remained unchanged, and great was 
his joy to see her one day at the service with 
Kesa, Aka, and Mitsu. 

"I must speak with her or in some way make 
known to her my love," he said in his heart. 

The next day he went to his faithful friend 
and counsellor Mr. West. "Honorable sensei\ 
what do you do in America when you purpose to 



THE LITTLE VISITOR. 347 

marry a girl and want to tell her of your love?'* 
he asked. 

"Sometimes we go to the girl and tell her" 
plainly and in a manly way that we love her, and 
then, if she returns the love, we speak to the fa- 
ther. Or some speak to the father first. But, as 
a general thing, the two most interested know 
first each of the other's love. But will you tell 
me, Harukichi, of whom you speak and who has 
now your love ?' ' 

"Thanks, honorable sensei^ yes; it is the officer 
Fujisawa's daughter Chiye of w^hom I speak. I 
w^as baptized at the same time with her. I saw 
her face, and felt sure that I should love her more 
than any one else in the whole world. Then she 
became ill and went away, but I never let her go 
out of my heart. Last Sunday I saw her at the 
mission chapel, and I think she is well, and I want 
to tell her of my love and ask her to become my 
wife." 

"In this case, Harukichi, I think it best that 
you should go to the father, tell him of your love, 
and ask permission to marry his daughter," said 
the missionary. 

So Harukichi went up to the custom-house and 
asked to be admitted to the presence of the high 
officer Fujisawa. Fujisawa rather admired the 
manly-looking youth, with his air of courtesy and 
good-breeding, and politely inquired wdiat he 
wanted. 



348 

* ' I have a strong love for your honorable daugh- 
ter Chiye. For many months I have cherished 
her memory in my heart. I crave your honorable 
permission to make her my wife." 

*' Why did you not employ a go-between?" 
asked Fujisawa, who had listened patiently enough 
and without any apparent displeasure. 

"Because I do not like the Japanese custom 
of employing go-betweens," answered Harukichi. 
"I have come myself to ask for your honorable 
daughter." 

"Tell me of your business and prospects. I 
hear that your parents are wealthy and are able to 
give you a fine establishment." 

^^ Dogii! in truth, honorable sir, my parents 
are wealthy, but they have disinherited me," an- 
swered Harukichi sorrowfully. 

"And why?" asked Fujisawa. 

" I have become a Christian and am studying 
for the Christian ministry, and my parents hate 
the new doctrines." 

Fujisawa's whole manner changed. "You 
may not say anything to my daughter until you 
have become reconciled to your parents. These 
Christians have done great harm in the country 
by setting one member of the family against the 
others. What difference does your belief make? 
The doctrines of the Christians have made trou- 
ble and division in my own household, and I will 
have no more of them." 



THE LITTLE VISITOR. 349 

Then said Harukiclii, " Honorable sir, the 
Japanese families were full of dissension and bit- 
terness before the foreigners came. There is no 
more disturbance than there was before. And in 
many a household peace has come where before 
there was trouble. But it is well. I will not 
speak now to your daughter." And Harukiclii 
bowed and retired. 

" Chiye, come here to me," said Fujisawa, 
when he returned to his house that evening. 

Chiye obeyed in fear and trembling, on account 
of the sternness of her father's voice. 

"What do you mean by encouraging a young 
man who has not the decency to conform to Jap- 
anese customs, who is disinherited by his parents, 
and is studying to preach the Jesus-doctrines?" 

" But, honorable father, I know nothing about 
it," said Chiye. 

Fujisawa would listen to none of her denials. 
He was unrelentingly angry, and all of Chiye^s 
protestations were in vain. 

" I did not know that he loved me, honorable 
father," she said repeatedly, bewildered and terri- 
fied, for the father's angry voice could be heard 
all over the house. 

Mitsu and Kesa had crept into their mother's 
room. 

"Z>^^//," said Mrs. Fujisawa, *^ this new doc- 
trine makes a great deal of trouble for us, Mitsu. 
In former times, before you knew anything about 



350 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

it, we were all so much happier. The honorable 
father never grew so angry." 

" Dogji^ honorable mother, do you not remem- 
ber how angry the honorable father was when I 
objected to my marriage?" asked Mitsu. 

"What can Chiye have done that he should 
talk so to her?" wondered the mother, as the fa- 
ther's tones of command and the gentle accents 
of expostulation came to her ears. 

' ' Dogu^ I know not, honorable mother, ' ' an' 
swered Mitsu. 

Then Chiye was dismissed, sobbing and trem- 
bling, to her own apartment. Fujisawa sought 
liis wife, and the two sisters went to Chiye. 

"What is the matter?" asked Mitsu; and Ke- 
sa's questioning eyes were filled with tears. 

''^ DoguP^ answered Chiye, "the young Haru- 
kichi, of whom you have heard, and who gave up 
everything for the sake of preaching the gospel, 
has asked me in marriage of the honorable father, 
and he is very angry. ' ' 

"Do you love him, sister?" asked Kesa. 

"I have not thought of it, darling. But I 
think I might love him. He is good and noble, 
not like other Japanese young men whom I 
know. ' ' 

Chiye said no more, and the subject was not 
mentioned again. But in her heart a seed of love 
had been dropped which grew and strengthened. 
In some way the two young people, without ex- 



THE LITTLE VISITOR. 351 

chano:iiio: a word, came to know each of the other's 
love and patience, and determined to wait with 
meekness "the Lord's time." 

The school year closed, and Kesa was to go to 
school no more. Fujisawa positively forbade it, 
and the girls trembled lest they should be forbid- 
den to attend the Sabbath services. Sorrowfully 
Kesa and her dear teacher took leave of each other. 
Miss Wilton's heart yearned over Kesa, and she 
found it hard to leave her with God and to trust 
him for her. 

In the early autumn there came to the Fuji- 
sawas a young visitor who did much to restore 
the happiness of former days, for a time at least. 
This was no other than Genski, the eldest child 
of Tama and Mesoburo. He was a straight, man- 
ly little fellow of eight, somewhat imperious in his 
manner, but lovable withal. He brought with 
him a brightness and freshness which affected 
pleasantly all the members of the family. It was 
something new to have a boy. All of the old 
toys with which Kesa and Rinjiro had played 
were brought down from their shelf and speedily 
demolished. Old Meguchi worshipped the lad, 
and the aunties were only too happy to show him 
everything which could possibly interest him. 

" Do you have acrobats in Hakodate, Genski?'* 
asked Chiye one day. 

"Oh, yes; but perhaps not such as you have 
in Tokio," answered Genski. 



352 ICESA AND SAIJIRO. 

** Then we will go over to Asaxa and see the 
acrobatic performances to-day," said Chive. 

Three in a jinrikisha — Kesa, Chive, and Gen- 
ski, with Aka and Mitsu in another cart behind 
them ! They were all happy that bright October 
morning. 

" Hakodate is not like this. It is more quiet. 
There are only a few pack-horses in the place 
and a few jinrikishas standing around." 

This Genski said as they rode through the 
crowded city streets. 

* ' Have you ever seen the men fishing for sal- 
mon there?" asked Kesa. 

'* Oh, yes, my honorable father has often taken 
me out in a boat to see the men fishing. I have 
also seen the Ainos spearing seal in the waters 
near Hakodate." 

" How does the snow seem when it covers 
everything up in winter?" asked Chiye of the lit- 
tle northern boy. 

'^Oh, I like it; we have fun then making 
snowballs and Daruma Samas, and pelting one 
another. But it is very cold." 

So the young folks chatted until they reached 
Asaxa, where they were to see the acrobats. 

A crowd of people had gathered, and the per- 
formers were all ready. They were dressed in 
bright scarlet, and had feathers in the little caps 
which they wore on their heads. There were 
some poles near them, and a platform where a 



THE LITTLE VISITOR. 353 

man sat beating a drum and humming a most do- 
lorous tune. 

The chief acrobat ascended the platform, and 
addressing the spectators said, "You are now 
about to behold a most wonderful performance. 
Look and wonder, O people." 

Then suddenly throwing himself on his back, 
he raised his feet high in the air, while a small 
child ran up the sides of the platform like a mon- 
key and perched himself on the man's feet. He 
stood for a second, bowed to the people, then, 
rolled himself up into a ball and w^as tossed up 
in the air and caught on the man's feet, always 
coming down right side up and always laughing. 

When he had finished some boys a little 
larger came and balanced themselves one on top 
of another, until the last one, standing on top of 
all, was a great distance from the ground, and one 
not accustomed to such things might tremble and 
wonder how he was going to g^t down. 

But in an instant they were all down on the 
ground again, and the man, springing up, made a 
bow, while the people cheered lustily. 

Then followed feats of jugglery, knife-swal- 
lowing cutting off heads, and other performances. 
The Fujisawas and their little guest looked, cheer- 
ed, and threw copper coins until they were tired; 
and then they went to see wax-figures in the long," 
low wooden building back of the temple. 

The figures were wonderfully human in their 



354 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

appearance, and Genski was much interested. 
He knew all the characters represented, and was 
as familiar with the story of Old Japan as Chiye 
herself. There in wax was the sacred white 
horse, the servant of Hachiman; and the change- 
able goddess Benten was there in a number of 
forms. Genski recognized Kintaro, the "red 
boy," Momotaro, Yoritomo, Hideyoshi, and a 
number of others, all in stalls like so many horses. 
A man exhibited the figures and told the story of 
each, pointing with a long stick. 

"Don't you go up to worship. Aunt Mitsu?" 
asked Genski, noticing that none of the party 
paid any attention to the idols. 

"No, Genski, we do not worship idols any 
more. We have learned of the true God." 

"Will you teach me about him?" 

"Yes, Genski, we will teach you; and when 
you go home you can tell your mother." 

Fujisawa himself took Genski to see the wrest- 
lers, the "strong men" of Japan. These men 
^ive public boxing and wrestling matches in 
thronged amphitheatres. 

On another day the proud grandfather took 
Genski to see a play. It was one of the old plays 
of Japan, and Genski in this way learned some of 
the ancient customs of the country and saw the 
old armor and court-dresses. There was an exe- 
cution in the play, when the heads of the actors 
apparently rolled down on the stage and were 



THE LITTLE VISITOR. 355 

carried away in baskets; and the principal actor 
committed suicide by disembowelling himself iu 
the siofht of his retainers. 

The play was over by six o'clock in the even- 
ing, and Genski was safe at home early. This is 
a great advantage which Japanese theatres possess 
over those of this country; everything is done be- 
tween sunrise and sunset. 

Genski' s visit did good to all the family. 
Even the poor mother, whose health had been 
failing since Hana's death, enjoyed the mirth and 
pranks of her bright little grandson. 

Old Kei came to see him and almost over- 
whelmed him with caresses; and Aka saw in 
him something to remind her of her lost Rinjiro. 

Greatly to the disappointment of the girls, 
Fujisawa determined to send him to one of the 
Government schools. But little Genski, like Chi- 
ye and Kesa, had an early, deep-rooted aversion 
to idols, and dearly loved to hear of the God who 
made the sun, moon, and stars and the beautiful 
world. 

Kesa studied with Chiye, and found in her a 
dear companion and friend. And so for the Fuji- 
sawas another winter passed away, and Kesa was 
fifteen years old. 



35^ KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

SOME LETTERS AND A WEDDING. 

How it rained ! Genski had gone merrily ofT 
to school in a jinrikisha. The sisters had watch- 
ed him from the window as long as they could see 
the top of the cart with its oiled-paper coverings, 
and when their precious little charge was quite 
out of sight had turned to their sewing. 

As a general thing a Japanese house is a terri- 
bly close, gloomy place during a rainstorm. The 
paper slides, which have to be closed to exclude 
the rain, do not admit much light, and no one can 
see out. When the storm is very severe the wood- 
en shutters also have to be closed, and the air 
becomes very close and oppressive. But Fujisawa 
had had glass put in the upper room, and the girls 
could see away down the steep and slippery streets 
and look up to the heights above them; and al- 
though the rain came down heavily and persist- 
ently, there was no wind, and the side of the 
house was open. 

The three girls sat on the floor w4th their sew- 
ing. Japanese women have to rip their dresses 
every time they are washed. The pieces, after 
being cleansed thoroughly in very hot water, for 
they have no soap, are spread on boards to dry, and 



SOMK LETTERS AND A WEDDING. 357 

are as smooth when finished as if they had been 
ironed by the most accomplished laundress. Then 
the dresses have to be put together again. 

The sisters did not usually talk much while 
thus working. Japanese ladies are generally great 
gossips, and many are their jealousies, bitterness- 
es, and heart-burnings. But the Fujisawa girls 
had never been allowed to gossip even in their 
earlier days, and now that they had become Chris- 
tians they were still less inclined to it. 

The missionary teachers had learned the be- 
setting faults of Japanese women and had faith- 
fully labored to correct these faults. The seeds of 
truth which they had planted had in many in- 
stances sprung up and borne fruit — fruit which 
had taken the place of the evil weeds of slander, 
envy, hatred, and malice. 

" Chiye, who is that man who comes here so 
often to see the honorable father?" asked Kesa, 
who had been quietly sewing her seam. 

''^ Dogti^ I do not know," answered Chiye, and 
Mitsu looked grave. 

" Sometimes I feel afraid that it is one of those 
dreadful go-betweens, and that he has come to 
ask one of us in marriage," said Kesa. " I shall 
never marry a man whom I do not know because 
the honorable father wishes it, Chiye; I have 
made up my mind." 

'' He will make you do it, darling," said Mit- 
su, whose suspicions had been aroused by the con- 



353 Ki:SA AND SAIJIRO, 

stant visits of a man, his long talks with her 
father, and the sighs and averted looks of her mo- 
ther. 

"But, sister, I will not. I will run away. 
And I am going some time to be baptized. The 
honorable father seldom looks at me now, and he 
never speaks kindly, but is always hard and cruel. 
Sister, I am very unhappy." 

Then said Chiye, the comforter, "Dear Kesa, 
so might I be very unhappy. But you know the 
teachings of the honorable senseis at the school — 
that God does what is right and that we must 
trust him." 

"You trust him, Chiye, but I do not," said 
Kesa. 

"Who is that coming in the rain?" asked 
Chiye. 

The girls, looking from the window, saw that 
a jinrikisha had stopped at the entrance. They 
could not see the occupant, so covered was the 
cart with oiled paper. And when the person in- 
side got out they could scarcely tell whether it 
was a Japanese or a foreigner, a man or a woman, 
so enveloped was the unrecognized guest in wa- 
terproof and hood. But soon the girls, to their 
surprise and joy, recognized Miss Wilton, and 
hastened to greet her. They removed her drip- 
ping outer garments, brightened up the coals in 
the hibachi^ brought hot tea, and w^elcomed her 
with loving words. 



SOME LETTKRS AND A WEDDING. 359 

"I am not in the least wet," she said, laugh- 
ingly submitting to all these attentions. " I have 
a letter for you, Kesa, from Marion, and as I was 
not eno;ao:ed in school this morninor somethinof 
impelled nie to come and bring it to you myself. 
I am hungry for news from Marion myself, so I 
thought we could all enjoy the letter together. 
How is the honorable mother?" 

"Thanks, the honorable mother is very poorly. 
Will you go in and see her after we have read the 
letter?" said Mitsu. 

They gathered around the JiibacJii^ taking oc- 
casional sips of hot tea while Miss Wilton read 
the letter. Kesa's brio;htness had come back to 
her for a time, and she listened with sparkling 
eyes to the words her young friend had penned. 

"Dear Kesa: I have been thinking of you 
so much to-day that I must sit down and write. 

" I am very happy at the school, only lonely 
now that mamma has left me, and I do want to 
see you all again. At night when I go to bed 
and on Sundays I think of Japan, of how the sea 
is washing its shores, and of how the little chil- 
dren are playing in the water, catching crabs, 
and of the boats dancing over the waves. I want 
to see the bay and the river and the little thatched 
cottages and the mission-houses. 

"How are Yenoske and Yen and the funny 
little baby Cho ? I know she must be having a 
good many falls with her first little clogs. 



360 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

" I do not see half as many funny things here 
as I did in Japan. 

' ' How is our o:arden ? Do vou take care of 
the plants now? Oh, I forgot; your papa does 
not allow you to go to school any more, so of 
course you cannot take care of the garden. But 
you can go on Sundays and look after the flowers 
and see the gold-fish. How many of the fish have 
died? I am sure some have, because they were 
always dying. 

* ' Papa and mamma will go back to Japan in 
October. They have gone away from me. Kesa, 
I cried until I was almost sick when they went 
away. It was so hard to let them go, and I 
wanted to go back to dear, dear Japan too. I love 
Japan; and, Kesa, I have determined to go back 
there and be a missionary; and you and I will be 
together in a school, and we will teach the chil- 
dren God's way. 

*'I have something else to tell you, Kesa; I 
am a member of the church. Oh, Kechan, if we 
could go to the communion together ! 

**The girls here have a missionary society 
and I am a member. Next month the subject 
will be Japan, and I am going to dress in my Jap- 
anese costume, and we are to have an exhibition 
of Japanese curios. Do you remember how much 
fun we had with my Japanese dress, Kesa? I 
have had to take out the tuck that Mitsu put in. 
I have grown so tall that you would n't know me. 



SOMK LETTERS AND A WEDDING. 36 1 

"I wish you were here at school with me. 
You will soon see papa and mamma, and they 
will tell you all about me. 

"I am so glad that Chiye is back. Give my 
love to her and to Aka and Mitsu. Tell them 
how I want to see them. And oh, kiss a flower 
or a tree or something in dear Japan for me ! 

" Please write very soon to your friend, 

" MARION FIELDING." 

Miss Wilton read the letter in English and 
then translated it. 

Mrs. Fujisawa had come in and listened atten- 
tively. She was the first to speak when the teach- 
er ceased her reading. 

^^ Dogu^ these Christians have a very deep love 
in their hearts. They never forget. For all your 
kindness to my daughters we give you thanks ; 
dogtc^ a very great thank-you." 

"We love to be kind to all, dear Mrs. Fuji- 
sawa. But how is your honorable health ?" 

^^Dogu^ I am poorly enough these days. I 
have no strength, and often have fever and sweats 
at night," answered the mother. 

Miss Wilton was not surprised a few days later 
to hear that Mrs. Fujisawa was prostrated with 
gastric fever, which for a time seemed to baffle 
the efforts of all the physicians. 

Those were dreary days for Kesa, Mitsu, and 
Chiye, and in their care and anxiety for the mo- 
ther the dreaded go-between was forgotten. He 



2,02 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

did not appear during ^Irs. Fujisawa's worst time 
of sickness and passed out of the girls' minds. 

Early in the summer bright little Genski went 
back to his northern home. 

"Good-by, darling," said Chiye as he turned 
to bid her farewell. "Tell the honorable mother 
of the true God." 

In October Dr. and Mrs. Fielding returned to 
Japan and hastened to the anxious family, where 
the mother still lay on her bed of suffering. The 
doctor's skilful treatment soon effected a chancje 
in her condition; and when care and nourishing 
food were all that she needed a day seldom passed 
without a call from some one from the mission 
with some strengthening or appetizing prepara- 
tion. 

One day, as Mrs. Fielding was busily engaged 
about the invalid, Fujisawa, who w^as watching 
them, said, "I have never seen such love as this 
before. It is wonderful." 

Then said the doctor's wife, hoping to make 
an impression on the man's heart, " It is our reli- 
gion that impels us to do thus. It is the loving 
spirit of Jesus." 

But Fujisawa' s face grew hard and he turned 
away, and Mrs. Fielding went home sorrowing. 

"Chiye, you know how the honorable father 
let you and Mitsu be baptized and said nothing 
about it. Do you think, sister, that / might re- 
ceive baptism from the missionary and tell the 



SOME LETTERS AND A AVEDDIXG. 363 

father nothing?" Kesa said this to Chive one 
eveninof when the two sisters were too-ether in one 
of the bedrooms. 

' ' You forget, Kesa, that the father has posi- 
tively forbidden your baptism. He would be very 
angry if you were to go against his wishes. I 
hoped that the dear mother's illness and all the 
kindness of the missionaries would soften his 
heart, but it seems it has not." 

"I hoped, Chiye, that it would, and that I 
might ask his permission to be baptized." 

"Kesa," said Chiye after a little pause, "did 
you know that that man was here last night 
again ? He brought a large box to the honorable 
father. I am sure he is a go-betw^een. Oh, Ke- 
chan, I will never marry any one except Haruki- 
clii; and if it should be you, darling!" 

" Chiye, I will not marry any one in that way. 
I will run away." 

But Kesa's heart was sad and a terrible fear 
came over her. Something made her feel sure 
that it was she whom her father was thus bargain- 
ing away. She went and sat down by her mo- 
ther's side. Incapable of understanding her 
youngest born with all her needs and question- 
ings as that mother was, undemonstrative as she 
had ever been towards all of her children except 
Hana, her heart was still the mother-heart to 
which the child crept in her trouble and hers the 
sympathy which soothed and comforted. 



3^4 ICKSA AND SATJIRO. 

''^ Ka-chan^^^ Kesa said, " who is the man that 
comes here to see the honorable father?" 

Mrs. Fujisawa shrank from a direct answer to 
that question, and Kesa saw the shrinking. 

' ' Ka-chaii^ please tell me. Is he a go-between ? 
and does he want me?" 

"Yes, darling," answered the mother. But 
she was hardly prepared for the cry of anguish 
which burst from her daughter's lips. 

^^ Ka-chaji^ ka-chajt ! is the father going io sell 
me? He sold Mitsu, and he will not let Chive 
marry good Harukichi, whom she loves and who 
loves her; and now he would sell me. Ka-chan^ 
I hate him!" 

^^ Dogii^ dogu^ Kesa, what can I do ? You must 
obey the commands of the honorable father." 

Chiye, hearing the disturbance, went in and 
spoke gently to Kesa — Chiye, who was so pa- 
tiently bearing her own cross. "Darling, you 
are distressing the mother," she said. "Come, 
and we will do as the teachers at the mission tell 
us, carry our troubles to God." 

So the two girls went to an unoccupied room 
at the end of the house and knelt there, and the 
elder sister prayed : 

"Dear Lord, this is my sister Kesa and her 
heart is very sad. She does not know where to 
turn nor w^hat to do. Lead her through her trou- 
bles, soften the father's heart, and bless us all, for 
Jesus' sake." 



SOME LETTERS AND A WEDDING. 365 

"To-morrow I will go and talk to the teach- 
er," said Kesa, rising. 

Soon the house was quiet, and Kesa, worn out 
by her emotions, fell asleep. 

The next day Miss Wilton, sitting in her room, 
heard a gentle knock at the door and was sur- 
prised to see Kesa enter in answer to her response. 

"What is it, Kesa?" she asked, noting the 
troubled expression of the girl's face. "Is the 
mother worse? or is Chiye sick again?" 

" No, sejisei; they are as well as usual. I am 
troubled and have come to talk with you. Sensei^ 
the honorable father is very angry with me. Pie 
will scarcely speak to me and does not wish me 
to come and see you or to be baptized. And, oh, 
scnsei^ we fear he is going to make me marry a 
man whom I do not know, and I cannot do it." 

Kesa's tears fell fast, and the teacher's heart 
was sorely pained. 

"Dear Kesa, I am sorry to hear all this. I 
had hoped that the father's heart would be soft- 
ened and that all would be well with you. It 
will surely be well, Kesa, if you give yourself to 
God and trust in him — well with you and with 
Chiye and Harukichi too, dear child. How 
would you like to go with me to Shiba this after- 
noon ? I have something to tell you and feel like 
going under those grand old trees." 

The day was warm and bright, although it 
was already winter; and when the coolies drew 



366 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

the jinrikislias within the temple enclosure Kesa 
and her teacher could hear the twittering of birds 
and see bright red camellias blooming among their 
glossy green leaves. 

Miss Wilton directed the coolies to turn away 
from the temples into the forest which surround- 
ed them. The jinrikishas went on through broad 
avenues and winding paths until they reached 
the deepest shade of the trees. Then, ordering 
the coolies to wait, Miss Wilton led the way to a 
lovely nook where the golden sunshine poured 
through the trees, making glorious the mosses 
and ferns below, while above was a patch of blue 
sky. It was a lovely, quiet scene, and the two 
sat for some time without speaking. A peace 
seemed to steal into Kesa's heart, a deep, sweet 
peace, as though sent from above. 

Miss Wilton's voice broke the silence. "Kesa, 
I told you I had something to say to you." 

' ' Yes, scnsci. ' ' 

*'I am going away, Kesa. I am going to be 
married." 

A look almost of terror came into the girl's 
eyes. She loved and trusted this teacher so thor- 
oughly; she relied so implicitly on her for help in 
her trouble; she knew that she could flee to her at 
any moment for protection; and now she had just 
told her that she was going away, and that, too, 
in the hour of the girl's greatest need. 

"Dear Kesa," said the teacher, drawing her 



SOME LETTERS AXD A WEDDING. 367 

nearer, "do not look like that. I am not foing 
out of Japan, only down to the southern country. 
I will come back to Tokjo, dear Tokio, some day; 
and perhaps you will come to see me." 

"Is it where old Kei lived, senseiT^ 

"Near there, dear, and perhaps we can find 
Nantaro, Kei''s brother. Kei -is talking of com- 
ing down to try to find Nantaro and to establish 
Bible-readings. Dear Kesa, do not sob so, child." 

Then with loving tenderness the teacher tried 
to make this poor weak lamb feel the care of the 
Shepherd, and at last Kesa grew stronger and 
calmer. 

They separated at the great gate of the temple. 
Kesa went with her own faithful coolie up to the 
Kudan, while Miss Wilton went back to the mis- 
sion-house which she was so soon to leave. 

True it was that her work in Tokio was over. 
The days of patient seed-sowing had not been in 
vain. Many of the little ignorant Japanese chil- 
dren for whom she had cared had grown to be 
faithful, intelligent girls and women, rejoicing 
her heart by their Christian steadfastness. Now 
a sweet surprise had come into her own life, and 
with one who loved her, and whom she loved in 
return, she was to go to one of the cities of the In- 
land Sea. 

Kesa sat by her little table in the evening 
writing a letter to Marion. Chiye was by her 
side, now and then helping her to a word. 



368 KESA AXD SAIJIRO. 

^' Dear Marion:" thus the letter read, "My 
heart was very sad this afternoon. I have very 
great trouble in it. My father angry with me. 
He scarcely speak to me. He will not permit me 
to go to school any more. He not permit my 
baptize. I fear he want me to marry some strange 
man, as my sister Mitsu did so long ago, and she 
have so much trouble. My heart feel very dark 
and sad. 

"Then Chiye and I go and tell my troubles to 
God and I feel better. And next day, that is to- 
day, I go to see Miss Wilton, and she take me to 
beautiful place in Shiba, and we sit and she say 
nothing for a long time. But the birds sing in 
the trees and the wind sound among the leaves 
and the sun shine down on the grass. And the 
blue sky is above us all, so beautiful and so peace- 
ful, and I think, * God is love.' And then Miss 
Wilton tell me that she go away, and when I cry 
she say, * Do not cry, Kesa, for the lyord Jesus is 
with you.' 

" Then I think I will trust him and give him 
my heart, and I will believe he do right. Now 
I have peace, and Chiye and Mitsu are very glad. 
But I not marry the man. 

"I see your garden every Sunday. Yenoske 
take great care. Six gold-fish are dead. And 
Yen and the baby are well. The baby walk and 
fall down some time and some time cry. Chiye 
is better, but she look very white and not strong. 



SOME LETTERS AND A WEDDING. 369 

My mother, too, get better every day. Many 
girls go to church on Sundays. Thanks for your 
letter. We all send love. 

*^ Your dear friend, 

"KESA FUJISAWA." 

A few days after this letter was written Miss 
Wilton was married at the mission. The "girls" 
were invited to the wedding and saw for the first 
time in their lives the simple Christian ceremony. 
Chiye and Kesa were there, dressed in new gar- 
ments, with bright, beautiful sashes and elegant 
hair-pins. 

''How pretty they all look!" said Mrs. Field- 
ing as she watched the girls partaking of some 
simple refreshment and noted their gentle man- 
ners, their neat dresses and bright faces. 

"Dear Mrs. Fielding," said their teacher, 
"how thankful I am for what you have always 
tried to impress upon my too doubting heart — 
that the Shepherd loves these lambs better than 
I do. But, oh, watch over Kesa for me. My 
heart bleeds for the child." 



Kwi ati'I Paiilro. 



24 



370 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

CHAPTER XXX. 

KESA AND HER FATHER. 

No wonder that Fujisawa felt angry with his 
youngest daughter. He was trying to harden his 
heart against her, trying to do her a great injury; 
and we always feel harsh towards one whom we 
are attempting to injure. Yet after all he was 
really fond and proud of Kesa. Heretofore he 
had met with nothing but submission in his chil- 
dren. Mitsu had submitted when he ordered her 
to marry the man from whom she shrank. Chiye 
had submitted when he forbade her to marry or to 
see Harukichi, whom she loved. He had no 
thought but that Kesa would acquiesce when he 
commanded her to marry. 

It was one morning before he went to the cus- 
tom-house that he summoned her. 

"The honorable father wishes to speak with 
you, Kesa," said Chiye; and when Kesa went, 
Chiye prayed that the Lord Jesus would be with 
her and bless her and give her strength. 

Kesa rose when Chiye called her, went quick- 
ly, and stood before her father. She did not pros- 
trate herself, but was respectful, and quietly 
awaited his words. 

" Kesa, I have completed the arrangements for 



KESA AND HER FATHER. 371 

your marriage. You will be the bride of Susumi, 
the son of the high officer Masanawa." 

*' Thanks, honorable father, but I cannot 
marry Susumi Masanawa," answered the girl. 

" And whom will you marry? I suppose you 
are like Chiye, and love some one among those 
wretched Christians." 

"No, honorable father, I care for no one. 
But I will not marry a man whom I do not know 
and for w^hom I do not care. Dogu^ father, for- 
give me," she added, seeing the look of anger and 
hatred on her father's face. "I cannot; oh, I 
cannot. Oh, honorable father, remember Mitsu 
and all that she has suffered. Please, please for- 
give me; but I cannot; oh, I cannot!" 

"There is no use in your talking so to me, 
Kesa. This marriage shall take place, and I 
command you to prepare for it." 

"Honorable father," respectfully began Kesa; 
but the continued expostulation only angered Fu- 
jisawa the more, and he pushed her from him. 

"It is the Christian religion that has done all 
this. I will have no miore of it. My youngest 
child shall obey me. Kesa, I forbid your having 
anything more to do with the foreigners. Neither 
you, Chiye, nor Mitsu shall with my permission 
ever go to the Concession again." 

In his anger Fujisawa seized some of Kesa's 
books which were lying near him and threw 
them into a dark closet. 



l-]2 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

The poor weak mother, with Chiye, Mitsit, 
and Aka, sat trembling in another apartment. 
They dared not go to Kesa lest their interference 
should still more excite the father. 

''I wish not to see you, Kesa, until you have 
made up your mind to obey me without more 
ado; for obey you shall. You are already prom- 
ised to Susumi; the preparations for the wedding 
will go on." 

Fujisawa closed the slides and went away. 
That there was any danger of his plans being 
thwarted the father never dreamed. 

Poor Kesa ! She felt stunned and bewildered. 
Chiye went and sat down by her side; and after a 
little time of silent comforting, Kesa said, 

"Chiye, I am going to run away. Come 
quickly and help me; there is no time to lose." 

"No, no; don't be in a hurry, little sister. 
Stop and think," said Chiye gently. 

"But, sister, I Jiave thought and thought and 
thought. My mind is all made up." 

"But where are you going, Kesa? and how 
can you go alone ?' ^ 

"I am going down to Kei's country to find 
my teacher. Chiye, come and help me. I must 
be a long way off before the father comes back to- 
night from the custom-house." 

^'' Dogu ! where can you go? and how angry 
the father will be!" said poor benumbed Mrs, 
Fujisawa. 



KHSA AND HKR FATIIKR. 373 

Mitsu said nothing at first, seemingly lost in 
her own thoughts. Then suddenly turning to 
Kesa she asked, "Did you not tell me, darling, 
that Kei thought of going back to her country?'' 

" Yes, sister." 

"Then I will go quickly and ask her to ac- 
company you." 

"Take me quickly to Nippon Boshi," said 
Mitsu a few moments later, as she got into a jin- 
rikisha. 

The coolie was not long in reaching Kei's 
house. An old man sat on the mat near Kei, and 
a sickly-looking child lay on the floor. Kei was 
reading some sweet words of Scripture to them. 

"Truly welcome, O Mitsu," she said, as she 
rose to welcome her guest. 

"Kei, can you finish your reading and listen 
to me?" asked Mitsu. 

" Rosuki, you and Tono may go now, and 
soon I will read you more." But long months 
passed ere Kei came back to finish her reading. 

" Kei, the father insists upon Kesa's marriage, 
and she is going away to find her teacher in the 
southern country. We wish you to go with her — • 
and ricrht aw^av," said Mitsu. 

^^ Dogii^ doguP'' said Kei; and after asking a 
few questions she made ready, and leaving the 
house in the charge of a neighbor, \vent off in the 
jinrikisha with Mitsu. 

" Send word for me to the honorable mission- 



374 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

aries," begged Kei; "and, O Mitsu, go and read 
to my people sometimes." 

Mitsu promised to do what she could, remem- 
bering sadly that she had been forbidden to have 
any intercourse with the foreigners. "Aka will 
do it all," she thought. 

Kesa was all ready for her journey when Mitsu 
and Kei came to the house, and Aka was there. 
Both Kei and Kesa carried a few necessaries done 
np in blue 'kerchiefs. Japanese ladies do not 
need much when they travel. 

The servants had prepared rice and made tea, 
but the family group sitting on the floor by the 
little table was sorrowful enough. The mother's 
heart felt like breaking, and Chiye mourned 
sorely, while Mitsu felt as though the brightness 
of her life was to be taken away. But there was 
little time for farewell words or tears. 

'''' Saiojtara^ darling, darling!" 

*''' Saionara^^^ answered Kesa. 

Kei bowed low, and in a moment they were 
gone — gone from the sheltered home out into the 
great world. Kesa's childhood was over. She 
gave one long, lingering look at the house and at 
the group of dear ones left behind, the coolies 
lifted the shafts, and they were off. 

It was far into the evening before Kesa would 
let the coolies stop. They went in the moonlight 
through the fields over which Yetaro, the teacher, 
had travelled so wearily. 



KESA AND HER FATHER. 375 

^'Dogu^ darling, we must stop," said Kei as 
they came into a village late in the evening. 

All of the people in the little thatched inn had 
gone to bed, and the travellers rattled the door 
and called for some time before any one heard 
them. 

"It is a poor place, Kesa," said Kei when at 
last they were admitted by a sleepy-looking wo- 
man. 

" I do not care," said the weary girl; and worn 
out by her day of sufifering and travel, she threw 
herself down on the poor pallet and fell into a 
heavy sleep. 



T^-/6 KI<:SA AND SAIJIRO. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 



A WINTER JOURNEY. 



* ' Kawaiso /" It was Kei who spoke the word, 
and it means sorrowful. She had just risen from 
her pallet and was looking at Kesa, who was still 
asleep. The girl looked pale and exhausted, and 
for a moment Kei thought with dismay of the 
long journey before them. 

''^ Dogii^ where is your faith?" she said to her- 
self, and pushed open the slides and went out into 
the little ofarden. A f^lorious mornino: had bro- 
ken over Nippon. There was not a cloud to be 
seen, and the cold air was fresh and bracing. 

A servant-girl was washing rice in a little 
wooden tub. Her long sleeves were strapped 
across her back and she had a blue handkerchief 
bound about her head. 

^^O hayo^'' (good morning), said Kei. 

*' O hayo^^^ responded the girl pleasantly. 

*' Fine weather," said Kei. 

"Truly, very fine," answered the girl. 

" Bring me some of your honorable water and 
get ready some honorable rice. The jo sania^'*^ 
young lady, "and I wish to proceed on our jour- 



The orirl brouo:ht Kei some water in a shallow 



A WINTER JOURNEY. 377 

copper basin, and she washed her face and hands, 
wiping them on a blue towel which she took out 
of her sleeve. Then pouring out the water she 
refilled the basin and left it on the veranda for 
Kesa. 

"(9 hayo^^^ she said when she went in and 
found Kesa already up. 

* ' O hayo^ ' ' said Kesa. 

"The honorable water waits for you, Kesa, 
and we must set out for the river." 

While Kesa was washing the servant went 
into the room, opened all the slides, rolled up the 
beds, brushed up the floor with a little paper 
broom, and then brought in some rice and tea 
with a few little pieces cf daikoti. 

"Truly, a poor breakfast," said the girl as 
Kei and Kesa took their chopsticks and began to 
eat. 

"We hear that the rice is very scarce this 
year," said Kei. 

^^ Dogu^ yes; people are very sad and find it 
hard work to get enough to eat." 

The fresh air, the cold water, and the break- 
fast made Kesa feel better. "Let us go now," 
she said. 

^'^ Dogu^ no, not until I have spoken a Vv^ord of 
the true doctrine," answered Kei. 

There were very few people at the little way- 
side inn, and only an old man, a woman, and the 
servant-girl came to listen to Kei, 



37S KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

^^l^ogu^ what do you want?" said the old man 
to Kei. 

*'To have prayer." 

" But already I have worshipped at the shrine 
of Inari this morning. Where is your god ?" 

"We cannot see him and we have no image, 
but we have a book, and I will read it to you." 

' ' Do you not offer anything to him ?' ' asked 
the woman. 

"He tells us to give him our hearts," said 
Kei. 

Then she turned to the Sermon on the Mount 
and read the Saviour's gracious words to all those 
who are troubled in their hearts as to food or rai- 
ment or shelter; and the old man listened and 
nodded his head and said it was all very good. 
Then Kei and Kesa knelt and repeated together 
the Lord's Prayer. 

"What do you call your God?" asked the 
man. 

"Our Father," answered Kei. 

''^ Dogii, it has been a long time since I called 
any one father,'^ said the man. 

Kei left them a little book called "The True 
Way of the Cross," and then she and Kesa said 
" Saionara^^ and went on their way to the river. 
Our travellers were well wrapped in padded coats 
and dziikins^ and the rapid exercise kept them 
warm. 

There were few people on the road. After 



A WINTER JOURNEY. 379 

walking about an hour the two passed the inn 
where Yetaro with Saijiroand Yenoske had spent 
the night. Kesa enjoyed the keen frosty air and 
the rapid walking. The color came back to her 
cheeks and the brightness to her eyes. By the 
time they came to the river there was a change 
in the weather. The wind blew sullenly, as 
though bringing a storm, the sky was overcast, 
and the water of the river was dark and rough. 

^''Hai! hail hail lendo P"^ Kei clapped her 
hands and shouted for the boatman, who was on 
the other side ; but he did not hear. 

''Oh, Kei, who is that?" cried Kesa suddenly, 
and Kei turned quickly and saw a man running 
swiftly towards them. 

To the girl's excited fancy it was a essenger 
sent after her by her father, and she grew so white 
and trembled so violently that Kei ran up to her, 
saying, 

^^ Dogtt^ Kesa, don't be so frightened; it is 
only a postman running with the mail." 

The man was all out of breath when at last he 
reached the river and threw the mail-bag on the 
sand. 

Another man, with two horses, had come up, 
and they all stood on the bank and gave one pro- 
longed ^^Hai-iP^ which brought the ferryman 
over. 

The boat was large and flat-bottomed, and there 
was room for the horses too. So they all got in, 



3S0 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

and the ferryman worked the boat rapidly through 
the water. 

''There are not many travellers on the road," 
said the postman to the ferryman. 

"No; I get very little money from the ferry 
now, and rice is scarce and high. In the summer 
the boat is constantly going to and fro, and it is 
always filled with people," said the ferryman. 

" Do you ever carry any of the honorable for- 
eigners?" asked Kei. 

"Oh, yes; some of them drink a great deal of 
sake. ' ' 

" But those are not the Jesus-teachers." 

"No; I can always tell the Jesus- teachers. 
One of them gave me a book once, but I cannot 
read well enough to understand it." 

"The doctrine is very good. Try to get some 
one to read it for you," said Kei. 

Kesa and Kei had their noon rice at a misera- 
ble little inn, and Kesa felt wearied and home- 
sick. It began to drizzle. Dogs and chickens 
huddled under the eaves of the house, and some 
half-naked beggars, covered with loathsome sores, 
came up and asked alms. Kesa put some cop- 
per coins in their hands, and turned away dis- 
gusted. 

The jinrikisha ride that afternoon was dreary 
enough. The two travellers wrapped themselves 
up in the blankets and had the top of the cart 
covered with oiled paper, so that the only outlook 



A WINTER JOURNEY. " 38 1 

they had was from the front. Occasionally from 
one of the houses they would hear the "twang, 
twang" of a samisen mingling with the sound of 
the rain pouring from the eaves. Once or twice 
ajinrikisha passed them, and several times they 
passed a traveller on foot, closely muffled and 
carrying an umbrella. 

"Kei," said Kesa, ''I wonder what the mo- 
ther and Chiye and Mitsu are doing, and whether 
the honorable father knows I have gone. O Kei, 
do you think he will be very angry and make the 
others very unhappy ? I heard him say that they 
should go no more to the church; and how sad 
that will make them; and I have brought all this 
on them!" 

"Ah, Kesa, they would rather endure the fa- 
ther's anger than have you marry that man. Be 
of o:ood courao^e and all will be ri2:ht. The hon- 
orable teacher will advise you what to do. Let 
us be patient, and all will be well." 

"But, Kei, I thought when the honorable 
sciisci was sick that I had learned to love God ; 
and now my heart is dark. Mitsu, Chiye, and 
Harukichi have sorer trouble than I have, but 
they are happy, for they love and trust God. But 
I am not. What can I do, Kei ? I do not like 
the Japanese way, but I am not a Christian. I 
can't believe anything, and I do n't love any one, 
and my heart is cold and hard and full of anger." 

^' Dogii^ Kesa, we will read the Book, and you 



382 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

can talk with, the honorable sensei^ and all will 
yet be well.'^ 

Kei longed to have Kesa talk with the teacher. 
She felt utterly unable to guide the poor wanderer 
herself. But the Shepherd was looking after his 
sheep all the time, and Kei felt his comforting 
presence, although Kesa did not. 

In the late afternoon, while the cold rain still 
came pouring down, they reached the great city 
Odawara. The hotel servants came out to greet 
them, and the weary, wet travellers were taken up 
to the best room, where they warmed themselves 
over hibacJiis filled with glowing coals, and had 
hot soup and tea. 

"This is very good," said Kesa, holding the 
soup-bowl close to her mouth and tossing in the 
soup with chopsticks. 

"What is it made of?" asked Kei of the girl 
who sat near them, ready to pour more tea or to 
fill their rice-bowls. 

"It is made of /(^/-fish, and has eggs and tofii 
in it," said the girl. 

" Very good /^//," said Kei. 

TofiL is a very light sort of omelet which the 
Japanese like very much. 

It grew dark, and the girl brought in candles. 

"Have any of the Jesus- teachers been here?" 
asked Kei. Her heart was ever in her work. 

" Yes ; they stop here very often, and sing 
hymns about Jesus and a happy country and talk 



V'A 




A JAPANESE SANDAL-MAKER. 



A WINTER JOURNEY. 3S3 

to US. They have left us some of their books," 
answered the girl. 

*' Are there any believers here?" asked Kei. 

^'' Dogu^ no; but there is an old woman here 
who wants to learn. You might go to her." 

After dinner, in the pouring rain and through 
the dimly lighted streets, Kei and Kesa followed 
a man with a lantern to a house back of the hotel. 
They could hear through the storm the sound of 
the waves beating on the shore. 

*' Ah, much snow has fallen. It will be rough 
for theyb samay 

"They<? saina is strong and not afraid of the 
storm. But can you tell me where to buy some 
high^^^^i", that our feet may be kept out of the 
wet?" 

*' Yes," said the man ; "here is a shoe-store 
now." 

Down went the shoe-seller on his forehead 
when he saw his customers. "You have well 
come, honorable strangers," he said. 

Kei and Kesa bowed. 

" It is truly bad weather." 

"Truly, bad weather." 

" 'V\\^jo sama will like some fine gctas f" 

"Thanks, they^ sa7na is travelling and wishes 
some high shoes to keep her feet from being wet. " 

Then the man brought down from the shelves 
some common wooden getas with very high under- 
pieces, and Kei and Kesa each selected a pair. 



384 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

' ' Dogu^ Kel, I never wore such liigh shoes, ' ' 
said Kesa. 

''Nor such rough ones; but you will need 
them," answered Kei. 

They paid two boos each for the shoes. The 
man thanked them over and over, and they said 
o^ood-bv and went to find larQ^e rain umbrellas. 

"Now let us go to the w^oman who wishes to 
learn the Jesus-doctrine," said Kei. 

The house was not much larger than Kei's 
own and was all dark. But when they called, 
" O tano inoshimasu^^^ they heard a rustling with- 
in, and soon the slides were pushed open by a 
middle-ao-ed woman. 

" Ah, Kato," said the woman, " is that you?" 

" Yes, honorable mistress. I have brought 
some strangers from Tokio. They are learned in 
the honorable doctrines of the honorable foreign- 
ers. ' ' 

"They are welcome, truly welcome. Conde- 
scend to enter my humble abode." 

"Truly, thanks," answered Kei and Kesa, 
and they all weut in. 

" Houorable husband has just retired, but he 
will rise when he hears of the honorable guests 
from the great city." 

The woman lighted a tallow candle which was 
stuck in the end of a high wooden candlestick, 
fanned the coals of a JiihacJii^ and put on them a 
kettle of water for tea. 



A WINTER JOURNEY. 385 

It was Kei's own precious book, the Gospel ac- 
cording to Mark, that the woman had; and soon 
they were deep in the story of the Saviour-s life 
upon earth. And so absorbed were Kei and the 
woman and the man that they could not stop until 
they had gone through most of the volume. 

Poor Kesa, weary with the journey, fell asleep, 
and it was nearly midnight when Kei roused her 
to go back to the hotel. But Kei was radiant. 

''You are very happy, Kei," said Kesa, won- 
dering. 

"Yes," answered Kei; "teaching the Jesus- 
doctrine is very happy work." 

Kei might have sung, 

" I love to tell the story, 
It did so much for me ; 
And that is just the reason 
I tell it now to thee." 

The next morning they stood at the hotel door 
all ready for a climb, looking up at the mountain. 
The rain was over and the sun shining brightly, 
but the roads were muddy, and up on the moun- 
tain they could see the snow lying in great drifts. 

"I have seen the Hakone Mountains all my 
life," said Kesa, "but I have never been so near 
before. ' ' 

Kago men pressed about them, eager to carry 
the old lady and ih.^ jo santa up the mountain, but 
Kei refused to engage them. She and Kesa were 
strong and carried trusty mountain-staves, and 

Kesa anl Saijiro. 25 



386 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

why should they not walk? So said Kesa; and 
they went out of the city in the early winter morn- 
ing and began the ascent of the mountain. 

"It is over this mountain that Yenoske has 
gone so often, and he has often told Marion san of 
how he used to gather lilies for Saijiro," said 
Kesa. 

They stopped for their noon rice at the little 
tea-house at the turn of the road which led down 
to Yamamidzu. Inari and Ji/:o stood up in the 
snow as pleasant and smiling as ever. They 
might have told Kei and Kesa how often Saijiro 
and Yenoske had stopped there to worship, but 
they were sjDeechless, and neither Kei nor Kesa 
knew how near they were to Yamamidzu, of 
which tliey had heard so much. 

In the afternoon they fell in with a party of 
travellers going, like themselves, to Hakone, and 
a merry time they all had in the snow. It was 
Kesa's first experience, and many a tumble she 
had on the high gctas^ and many a shout of laugh- 
ter was heard on the mountain that afternoon. 

It was bitterly cold when they got into Ha- 
kone. Snow lay on the ground, and the wind 
howled dismally. The lake was rough, but look- 
ed very beautiful with its setting of white and 
pure snowy mountains encircling it. 

"The missionaries come here every summer 
and hold meetings, and many people on, the 
mountain read the Jesus-books, and some be-. 



A WINTER JOURNEY. 387 

lieve," said the landlady, in answer to Kei's ques- 
tion as to whether they had listened to the Jesiis- 
teaching. 

The woman was the same one who was so 
kind to Saijiro when he passed over the mountain 
with Yenoske. She listened to the Scripture- 
reading and heard Kesa sing, and she and all the 
people who gathered in the hotel that evening 
said the doctrine was " very good." 

And so for several days did Kei and Kesa trav- 
el, going down the highway to Nagoya. They 
found the weather warmer on the other side of the 
mountain as they journeyed south. 

They came at last to Nagoya, and found 
Kesa's aunt. Her house was the very perfection 
of neatness — not a spot on the white mats, not a 
speck on the dark, polished wood-work. Beauti- 
ful camellias were blooming in the garden, and 
splendid gold-fish, the finest Kesa had ever seen, 
were swimming in the pond. 

The aunt herself was one of the strictest of 
Buddhist women, and had her head shaved as a 
sort of priestess; she wore no ornaments, went 
three times daily to the temple, fasted often, and 
repeated the name of Shaka Sama a thousand 
times a day. 

"I am Kesa Fujisawa, the sister of Chive," 
said Kesa, when she was ushered into the presence 
of this grave personage. 

^^ Dogu^ dogu r^ said the aunt, at first some-. 



388 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

what surprised out of her usual calm dignity. 
*' And what are you doing here, child? Did the 
honorable father send you to me ?" 

' ' No, honorable aunt. I have run away from 
my father, because he wanted me to marry; and I 
am on my way to the southern country." 

"That is what comes of letting children go to 
foreign schools and learn foreign religions," said 
the aunt. "I warned your honorable father 
ao:ainst it and told him no grood would come of it. 
Chiye was always reading her Christian books, 
and never went to the temple nor repeated Shaka 
Sama's holy name nor counted her beads. Dogu^ 
dogu! what is to become of Nippon?" 

Nevertheless she invited Kei and Kesa to 
make their home with her while they remained 
in Nagoya. Unfortunately the next day was 
Sunday and they had to remain tw^o nights, and 
Kesa and her aunt grew more and more antago- 
nistic all the while. 

" Your eyes are too large and your cheeks are 
too red and you have no manners," she would 
say to Kesa; and Kesa would return these com- 
pliments by thoroughly disliking her and won- 
dering how Chiye endured her so long. It was a 
relief to all when Monday morning came at last 
and the travellers could proceed on their journey. 

"I hate her!" exclaimed Kesa as soon as they 
were well away from the house; "I hate her 
shaven head and her nun's dress!" 



A WINTER JOURNEY. 389 

*'Kesa, that is one reason why you cannot 
love God and become a Christian. Your heart is 
so quickly filled with anger. You are hard and 
luiforgivino^ to your father; you are half inclined 
to despise your gentle mother; you hate this per- 
son and that person without much reason; and 
when you do love any one you cling to that per- 
son instead of to God. ' ' 

''^ Dogii^ Kei !" protested Kesa. But her eyes 
were filled with tears. 

Kei looked sorrowful and wished that Kesa 
had not met her aunt, and wondered liow she 
could ever follow the loving Shepherd with so 
much hatred in her heart. 

Still they went on, patiently treading the great 
highway, hoping to reach Kioto before the next 
Sabbath. 

"Kei, do you think you will find Nantaro?'* 
asked Kesa one day. 

"I am asking God every day to lead me to 
him," Kei answered; and that evening she asked 
Kesa to read to her the story of Joseph. They 
wept over the beautiful history, and Kei said, " If 
God so led Joseph's brethren to him, he can lead 
me to Nantaro." 

As they approached the great spiritual capital, 
Osaka, they passed many temples and pagodas 
and noticed the great number of priests on the 
road. "They must worship a great deal down 
here," said Kesa; and Kei sighed. 



390 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

But when they entered the hill-surrounded 
city with all its grand temples and images, Kei's 
heart was delighted by the number of those who 
were listening to the words she loved so well. 
There she found schools and colleges and mis- 
sionary houses and churches. And they told her 
that in all the mountain solitudes, even at the 
holiest shrines, the doctrines of the cross were pre- 
sented and that there were many believers, as 
well as in the city itself 

"Let us go to the temple where I lived with 
the woman and where I studied with the priest," 
she said to Kesa one day. 

They went through a long, crowded street 
and came to the same little house that Kei re- 
membered. She stood and called, " O iano mosJii- 
masu^'''' and a woman of about her own age came 
out. It was the friend of years ago, and she had 
become a*Christian, and there was great rejoicing. 

But the priest was dead, and Kei sorrowed 
much because she could not tell him the glad 
story of the cross. She showed Kesa the pave- 
ment where she had walked until her feet were 
sore, and the money-box into which she threw 
the beans, and the bell which she rang to call the 
attention of the god. 

' ' Dogu^ dogii^ dogic P ' said Kei. 

Then Kesa begged to climb the pagoda; and 
they went up the rickety old stairs, which shook 
so that Kei was afraid and clunq: to the side of 



A WIXTKR JOURNEY. 39I 

the building. But when they reached the top of 
the pagoda they had a glorious view of all Osaka, 
with its canals and splendid bridges, its castle and 
Government buildings. 

"Truly a great city, and truly to God a great 
thank-you," said Kei. 

From Osaka they went by train to Kobe, and 
spent a pleasant Sabbath in that little city by the 
sea. They saw the school on the hill where so 
many girls have been trained for service in the 
Master's cause. There was a meeting of the 
Christians from Kioto, Osaka, the hill country, 
and the islands round about, and Kei heard an 
address from a man who came from her own na- 
tive region; she clasped her hands in thankfulness 
when she knew that the "Word" was preached 
there also. 

But Kei was anxious to continue the journey, 
so they took passage for Onomichi, and one morn- 
ing when the sun rose they were sailing among 
the countless islands of the Inland Sea. 

"It is very beautiful, Kei," said Kesa as they 
stood on the deck of the steamer. 

From all the little islands fishing-boats were 
coming, darting out of hidden nooks and dancing 
in the glory of the sunshine. The steamer was 
windinor in and out amongf islands of fantastic 
shapes. Now before them stood a huge elephant, 
now a monstrous sugar-loaf, now a castle with 
domes and towers, and now a humped camel. 



392 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

Ill the evening they came to Onomichi and 
went ashore. 

It was not until the next morning that they 
could go to the fishing hamlet. 

* ' Here is the place where honorable mother 
fell by the wayside," Kei said. 

To a woman whom they met Kesa said, 

"This is Kei, who used to live here, and we 
have come to get news of her brother Nantaro." 

*' Only a few days ago," said the woman, " we 
had news of Nantaro." 

" Do you know where he is ?" 

^^Dogu^ kaivaiso r^ said the woman; *Mie is in 
prison for a great robbery. ' * 

''In what prison?" asked Kesa. 

"In Hiroshima." 

Kei heard this sad news, and yet she rejoiced; 
not because he was in prison, but because she 
knew where to find him, and could go to him and 
tell him of peace and pardon through Jesus. 

The two travellers remained in the hamlet all 
night, and Kei talked with her old friends and 
promised to return and tell them more. 

The next day they went back to Onomichi 
and took another little steamer for Hiroshima. 

The next morning they came to the little 
island Ujina, clambered down the side of the 
steamer into a small boat, and were rowed to the 
shore. 



THE HOME AND THE PRISON. 393 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

THE HOME AND THE PRISON. 

On landing, Kesa and Kei climbed up on a 
high bank, on one side of which were fields, with 
mountains in the distance, and on the other a 
river, whose clear waters, rippling over the sandy 
bottom, seemed in the sunshine to flow over gold- 
en sands. Coarse grass, reeds, and rushes grew 
on the water's edge, and the wind murmured 
gently through them. The tide was full, and 
fishing-boats were going out to sea. 

*' Ah," said Kei, pointing out an island higher 
and bluer than the rest, " that is Itsukushima, or 
Miajima, the Beautiful." 

"It is one of the seven places in Japan noted 
for beauty. I have read about it and have seen 
pictures of it," said Kesa. 

Some of the hills about Hiroshima were but 
dimly visible through the mist ; others stood out 
clear and distinct; the islands rising out of the 
sea looked themselves like mountains. The views 
were wondrously fair, and Kesa thought of Chive, 
and wished that she too could enjoy that bright 
morning view. 

" Look at these beautiful fishes," said Kesa. 

Some men were passing, carrying large bas- 



394 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

kets filled with fisli of most exquisite colors. Some 
were all silver, some silver tinged with beautiful 
pinks and blues, and some a golden red. In the 
fields to the left grew^ egg-plants and sugar-pota- 
toes; and pumpkin-vines with bright yellow flow- 
ers trailed along the ground. 

But as they gazed on all these beauties they 
saw a gang of prisoners in flesh-colored garments 
coming across the field, and Kei turned aside her 
head. 

" How shall we find the scnseiV^ asked Kesa. 

^'' Dogn^ there are few foreigners in Hiroshima; 
we can inquire." 

A laborer was coming towards them, carrying 
a large rope and a basket. 

" O hayo^''^ said Kei, accosting him. 

'''' hayo^^^ returned the man. "Where are 
you going?" 

"Thanks, we are looking for the honorable 
foreigners' home," answered Kei. 

"Ah," said the man, pointing to the roof of a 
quaint old Japanese house just ahead of them, 
"you will find the honorable strangers in that 
house. ' ' 

"Thanks, truly," said Kei, and she and Kesa 
walked rapidly on. 

A flight of stone steps led from the bank down 
to the gateway. Entering the gates, they passed 
on towards the house. But before they reached 
the door Kesa heard a familiar voice in the gar- 



THE HOME AND THE PRISON. 395 

den on the other side of the enclosure. ^'' Satsei f 
scnsei P^ she cried, and in a moment stood beside 
her beloved teacher. 

When the first excitement of meeting was 
over, the travellers were taken into the house 
and a warm breakfast was given them. Kesa 
told of her refusal to marry Susumi and of her 
running away from her father; and Kei told how 
she had heard that her brother was in prison in 
Hiroshima, and that she could not rest until she 
had seen him. 

Then said Mr. lyevering, the missionary, "I 
will go with Kei to the authorities and see if we 
can gain admittance to the prison." 

So they w^ent off, and Kesa and the teacher 
were glad to be left together. 

" I must show you my house and garden first, 
Kesa," said Mrs. Levering. "It reminds me 
somewhat of your father's house and garden in 
Tokio, only it is not kept so nicely." 

It was a strange, rambling old house, built for 
a noble of the olden time, and containing many 
rooms which were never used. 

"This is my bedroom; you w^ll think it a per- 
fect labyrinth." 

Mrs. Levering pushed open the slides and they 
entered a narrow place that suddenly widened 
into a square, eight feet each way, wdiich formed 
the main part of the room. The windows were 
of pajper, and for protection against thieves there 



39^ KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

were bamboo bars, which looked very frail in- 
deed. The third division of the room was a 
closet, with a board floor nicely polished, and 
an inner closet with sliding doors. Then there 
was a dressing and bath room. 

'-' Dogti^ I should think you would not find 
this very comfortable," said Kesa. 

"Oh, it is comfortable enough. I rather like 
the slides. There are no doors slamminof and 
swinging on their hinges. The only door in 
the house on hinges is this one," pointing to the 
bath-room door, "and this is where I saw the 
ghost." 

'' SenseiP' 

"True, Kesa. One morning I hung a sheet 
over this door and forgot it. When I came back 
in the evening I saw this tall white thing moving 
silently to and fro, and it was a moment or two 
before I fully comprehended that it was the sheet 
hanging on the door. I thought it a veritable 
Japanese ghost, like the one Hono saw." 

Kesa laughed merrily. 

"Oh, sensei r^ she suddenly cried. There be- 
fore her on the washstand was an enormous spi- 
der, and creeping over the walls were two or 
three lizards. 

"Well, I have found that these things are 
harmless," said Mrs. Levering. "At first I was 
terribly afraid of them, but now I w^atch the rats 
playing on the rafters above my head and see 



THE HOME AND THE PRISON. 397 

these spiders running around without fear, and 
can touch one of those cold, slimy lizards in the 
dark without screaming. But the worst things 
are the little w^orms which eat our bamboo chairs, 
and in the summer the mosquitoes are terrible, I 
am told." 

*' How the furniture sinks into the mats, sen- 
seiy 

" Yes, Kesa; beds, tables, and chairs are sadly 
out of place in a Japanese house, but we cannot 
do without them." 

*' This is our cellar," said the teacher, taking 
Kesa into a dark apartment in which were 
hanging -shelves. On the shelves were covered 
stone jars, the lids of which were held down by 
bricks, flat-irons, and every available heavy 
thing. 

" You see we have to protect ourselves against 
rats," said Mrs. Levering. 

''^ DoguP'' said Kesa. 

Then they went into the kitchen, which con- 
tained a range and an oven for baking bread, and 
from there into the dining-room, furnished with 
table and chairs. 

The sitting-room had a little stove in it and 
some glass slides, and opened on a long veranda, 
very much like that of the Fujisawa mansion in 
Tokio. There was a cabinet-organ in one cor- 
ner, and there were book-shelves, tables, chairs, 
pictures, and other things which gave the room 



2,gS KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

quite a home-like appearance in the eyes of the 
missionaries in this far-away land. 

"We will go out into the garden before we 
have our talk up stairs," said the teacher; and 
she and Kesa went and stood by the side of the 
lotus pond. 

The wind was swaying the immense leaves 
gently, and they were bowing like so many Jap- 
anese. A little arched bridge crossed the lotus 
pond, and Kesa and her teacher went over it to a 
bamboo grove. The place was charming. The 
sunshine crept in and out between the leaves, 
which, like those of the lotus, moved in the slight- 
est breeze. Azalea bushes with pretty, delicate 
flowers made the garden attractive ; and there 
were artificial hillocks, with stones scattered here 
and there over them. Under the bamboos dowm 
by the pond, hidden by the coarse grass and 
leaves, twining over the bushes and clinging to 
the trees, grew vines of many varieties, and in the 
low, damp places were ferns and ivy. 

" I like the garden," said Kesa simply as they 
turned and went into tlie house. 

Mrs. Levering led Kesa to the one room in 
the upper story and drew aside the slides. The 
view was magnificent. Everywhere the plain 
was bounded by mountains or mountainous isl- 
ands, and Kesa could catch a glimpse of the river 
and watch the clouds in their ceaseless changes 
and the lights and shadows on the hillside. 



THE HOME AND THE PllISOX. 399 

Kesa and her teacher sat quietly for a while. 
At last Kesa raised her eyes to Mrs. Levering' s 
face, and in answer to their mute pleading the 
teacher said, 

" Now, dear child, tell nie all about it." 

*'0h, sensci^ I could not marry the man, and 
so I came away." 

"But, Kesa, your father can find you and j 
compel you to return." 

"Yes, scnsci^ but I hoped he would think 
about it and not insist on it." 

" Did Chiye advise you to come?" 

"No, scnsci ; but she and the mother and 
Mitsu helped me to get ready." 

" How is it with your own heart, Kesa?" 

"Z>^^?/, scnsei^ I cannot feel happy. I have 
been angry with my father and I hated my aunt. 
Why cannot I be like Chiye?" 

" Dear Kesa, I hope there are better things in 
store for you. Will you put yourself under my 
o:uidance and do what I ask ?" 

"Yes, sensei^ if I can." 

"Then sit down and write a letter to your 
father and tell him where you are and why you 
went away; and try to put anger and hatred out of 
your heart while you write. Will you do this?" 

' ' Yes, sensci, ' ' 

Kesa was supplied with materials and began 
her writing; Mrs. Levering took up her needle- 
work, and the room, was quiet again. 



400 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

" I have finished, sensei^^^ said Kesa at length, 
and proceeded to read her letter. 

"Honorable Father: Compliments, com- 
pliments. 

*' I beg your honorable forgiveness for running 
away from my home. I could not marry that 
man. Oh, honorable father, please do not make 
me. And do not think it is because I am a Chris- 
tian that I ran away. My heart is hard and heavy 
and I am not a Christian. Mitsu is a Christian 
and she does what you tell her to do. Chiye is a 
Christian and she submits quietly to your honor- 
able will. But pity your poor Kesa and do not 
make her marry that man. Please, compliments, 
compliments. 

" KESA FUJISAWA. 

"At Hiroshima." 

** That will do nicely, Kesa, and now I have 
something for you. Did you think I was not ex- 
pecting you?" 

Mrs. Levering put a letter in Kesa's hands. 

*'It is from Chiye," she said as she took it, 
and burst into tears. 

It was written in English and was the first 
word she had had from home. Thus it read: 

*' Dear Sister: You will want to know how 
we all are at home. The father not know you 
have gone for two days. Then he ask, ' Where is 
Kesa?' and I tell him that you have gone away. 
He say nothing, but his face grow very black and 



THE HOME AND THE PRISON. 4OI 

he go away. For three days now he say 
nothing at all, but is always quiet, and we do 
not know what to think. Eut he not try to find 
you. 

^^The mother is very sad, but she never say 
she sorry you go away; and sometimes I read the 
Bible to her. 

** Dear sister, we miss you. Mitsu and I w^ant 
our dearest sister. We talk often how you com- 
fort us when you come and sit beside us w^hen 
we feel sick or sad. And every day we pray, 
'Lord Jesus, bless Kesa and bring her back; but 
oh, soften her heart and make her a Christian !' 
And we know God will hear our prayer. 

* ' We send much love to you. 
*' Your loving sisters, 

"MITSU AND CHIYE FUJISAWA." 

Mrs. Levering said nothing as she listened to 
Kesa's passionate sobs after reading this letter. 
She let her weep on, and prayed God to comfort 
her. Her own letter from Chiye had touched her 
very soul, with its strong faith in the midst of 
this hour of trouble and its fulness of love and 
pity. "Surely Chiye Fujisawa is a Christian if 
ever one lived on this earth," she thought. 

" Seal your letter now, and we w411 take it to 
the postoffice," said Mrs. Levering gently and 
firmly to Kesa after a time. 

The letter was sealed and directed, and as they 
walked to the postoffice they talked on indifferent 

KeB.i flii-l Saijiro. 25 



402 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

subjects and discussed the beauties of the land- 
scape. 

When they returned to the house they found 
ICei. Sh2 had been weeping, indeed, but joy 
shone in her eyes. Sick and in prison, after a life 
of desperate crime, she had found Nantaro, and 
although he turned away from her at first, he had 
at last talked with her and seemed softened. 

"He must serve his time out, and at the end 
receive that dreadful flogging," said Kei, and she 
shuddered. "But then I shall have him, and I 
will teach him of the Lord Jesus, and of how his 
blood can cleanse us from all sin." 



JINRIKISHA RIDES. 403 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

JINRIKISHA RIDES. 

*' While you are waiting for an answer to 
your letter we will take some peeps at this beauti- 
ful country," said Mrs. Levering to Kesa the 
next morning. 

So in the afternoon Tom, the horse, was 
brought to the gate all saddled and bridled, ready 
for the missionary to ride, and jinrikishas were 
called for the ladies, while all the children in the 
neighborhood assembled to see the "honorable 
foreigners" start out. 

"Have there never been any foreigners down 
in this part of the country before, senseiV^ asked 
Kesa, as she noted the eager, expectant look on 
the dirty little faces. 

"Very few, Kesa. An English gentleman 
was here with his family for a while, but the peo- 
jDle are not much accustomed to foreigners." 

The shafts were lifted, and Tom was all ready 
for a start; and then began a race between the 
coolies, the horse, and the children, the latter be- 
ing at last outstripped. 

They looked like little savages. Some had 
very scanty clothing, and others none at all. One 
boy seemed like a very imp of mischief, and Kesa 



404 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

watched him with some interest as he stood now 
on his head and now on his feet; then, gathering 
up his dress, he would start off on a run, and at 
last Kesa, thinking he was left far behind, turned 
to see him breathless and grinning at a turn of the 
road. 

The friends were going to Nigitsu, the finest 
temple in the city. They passed through some of 
the most crowded streets, and then crossed a long 
bridge and came to a part less densely populated. 
To the left was a canal, with great cedar-trees on 
its banks. Above was the blue, cloudless sky, 
and all around were hills upon hills and islands 
upon islands. Oh, the beauty of these southern 
winter days ! with sunshine warm enough to give 
heat to the old people, who sit out of doors in 
preference to shivering over charcoal braziers in 
the house. 

The entrance to Nigitsu was beautiful. From 
the soft turf rose great cedar-trees, and at inter- 
vals under them were placed huge stone lanterns. 
The gateway was ornamented with the usual 
gilding and carving; it was very old; its build- 
ers had long been sleeping in the Buddhist grave- 
yard. 

"What a magnificent pavement!" said Mrs. 
Levering, as they went up to the old unsightly 
temple, the walls of which were crumbling away. 

"Why is it that these people, with so much 
building material around them, do not build bet- 



JINRIKISIIA RIDES. 405 

ter houses?" asked the missionary, as they looked 
at the blocks of granite and the decaying mud. 

Having seen Nigitsu, the party took horse and 
jinrikishas again for Iwahana. Out of the town, 
past rows of tumble-down cottages in the out- 
skirts, into a pleasant road with hills on one side 
and a clear stream on the other, rolled the jinriki- 
shas until the coolies dropped the shafts at a little 
tea-house opposite Iwahana. 

'' Do you know what Iwahana means, senseiT^ 
inquired Kesa. 

"Yes; rock-flower, Kesa; and very pretty it 
is too. ' ' 

On the hill were rocks lying scattered about, 
and from these the hill derived its name. There 
were other flowers beside the ' ' rock-flowers ' ' there, 
and the whole party climbed the steep ascent, and 
came down with hands filled with bright blossoms 
and leaves of red sumach. 

*' How beautiful it all is," said Mrs. Levering 
as they started off again. 

They turned into a lane skirted with hedges, 
and passed pretty little farmhouses almost hidden 
in the foliage. Then they went far out into the 
fields, where men, women, and children were at 
work. 

*'What long distances your people walk. 
They could not do that in America, where it is so 
far from one town to another, with no tea-houses 
scattered between." 



4o6 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

A mist filled the valley as they went home, 
but it seemed to make everything even more 
beautiful as it lifted to disclose now a mountain 
and now a gleam of shining water. 

'''' DogiiP'' said Kei, out of breath. 

Two or three days had passed, and the friends 
were climbing some steps cut in a steep hillside, 
going up to a temple. 

"What are those little sticks with papers for?" 
asked Mrs. Levering. 

"There are prayers written on the papers," 
said Kei; and Mrs. Levering noted the Chinese 
characters on every one. 

The temple, which they gained after some hard 
climbing, was on a ledge just about large enough 
to hold it. From three sides they could look down 
a precipice. 

Climbing still higher up the steep hillside, 
they at last gained a point from which the islands 
burst upon their view. 

"There is Miajima," said Kesa. 

"Yes; we can always tell it by its blueness 
and its three curves," said the teacher. 

"Did you ever walk on such hollow ground 
before?" asked Mr. Levering. 

It did indeed seem almost as though it might 
give way beneath their feet. 

"How do you account for it, Lynn?" Mrs. 
Levering inquired. 

"Only by supposing that there are lava-beds 



JIXRIKISriA RIDKS. 407 

under ns. You can see the effects of ancient fires 
over there." 

The descent was very difficult, but at last, af- 
ter sliding and slipping several times, they reached 
the jinrikishas and Tom, and were off again. 

"Towards the sunrising," called the mission- 
ary to the coolies, and away they went to the cas- 
tle, across a bridge, and by the side of the river. 
Then turning to the east, they came to a broad 
road and rolled along under grand cedars. An- 
other turn, and they saw before them an oddly 
shaped hill. x\nd so the jinrikishas went wind- 
ing in and out among the hills until they reached 
the rice-fields. Here the road was so rough that 
the ladies all preferred walking to enduring the 
jolting of the springless jinrikishas. Next came 
a bamboo grove, the sunlight glancing through 
the leaves. 

Some people came out of their houses to see 
the foreign lady walking through the fields. 

"The people down here are afraid of us, Ke-. 
sa," said Mrs. Levering; "they think we will be- 
witch them;" and Kesa smiled to see a womau 
pulling her husband into the house. 

In the afternoon they came to a temple. Kesa. 
counted a hundred steps as they toiled up to it. 

"I wonder why the Japanese put their templesi> 
in such high places," said the missionary. 

" Do they think there is any merit in climbing^; 
up to them, Kei?" asked Mrs. Levering. 



4oS KHSA AND SATJir.O. 

''^ DogJt^ yes, honorable snisei^^^ answered Kei. 
**They can climb up and down a certain number 
of times, and thus do penance.'' 

" The view is certainly grand," said the mis- 
sionary, as they stood on the edge of a precipice 
and looked over the country. Rivers, hills, 
islands, plains were spread out in one grand pano- 
rama before them. 

For the next few days there was a storm of 
wind and rain which kept them all in the house. 

Kesa felt the time pass a little heavily, so she 
was glad to awake one morning and find the sun 
shining brightly, with only a few soft white clouds 
floating lazily in the sky. 

''Now for our trip to Hijiyama," said Mrs. 
Levering at the noon meal. 

So the jinrikishas were called, and they were 
soon making their way over the bridges and across 
the fields to Hiji hill. 

The hill was very steep, and at its foot the 
coolies let down the shafts. The ascent had to be 
made on foot. It was hard climbing, but the road 
was exceedingly beautiful. On one side of the 
narrow footpath there was an abrupt descent, and 
on the other the hill towered above them. Trees, 
shrubs, and grasses were of the richest green, and 
occasional rocks gave variety to the coloring. At 
the feet of the climbers and on all the hillside 
bloomed quantities of wild flowers. 

"lyCt us stop and see this little cemetery,'* 



JINRIKISHA RIDKS. 4O9 

called Mr. Levering, who was acting as guide, to 
the climbers behind him ; and they all went in 
to wander for a time among the graves. The 
tombstones were of handsome granite, and not 
crowded together as the stones in the Buddhist 
cemeteries usually are. 

On one granite stone Kei read, "To my eldest 
son." The eldest son is the most important mem- 
ber of a Japanese family. He is " ni sa7t^'''* hon- 
orable brother, to the younger children, and his 
father's hope and heir. 

On other graves hung straw sandals, and on 
children's graves toys were placed. The Japanese 
fill the children's coffins with their playthings; 
and in former times the young samurai took with 
him into the grave his little sword. 

"Ah," said Mrs. Levering suddenly, "here is 
something homelike;" and she pointed to a stone 
on which was written in English, " Fell asleep in 
Jesus." 

It marked the grave of a little English child, 
whose mother had to go far away wdien the fa- 
ther's engagement at the Government school in 
Hiroshima terminated. 

"His mother in England must often think of 
her baby lying here," said Mrs. Levering; and 
they lingered a while near the baby's grave and 
laid some flowers upon it. 

The view which greeted theii eyes from the 
top of the hill fully repaid them for all their toil. 



4IO KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

It was more beautiful than anything they had 
seen before, and they stood for a long time ga* 
zing on the entrancing scene. 

The place where they tarried was a soldiers^ 
cemetery. One stone was cut into a beautiful 
urn, while others were cubes and others still were 
small shafts; in all were hollow places for hold- 
ing water, and in many of them were fresh 
flowers. 

"The Japanese bring flowers to the graves of 
their loved ones as we do," said Mrs. Levering. 

"It reminds me of an extract I found the other 
day," said her husband; " I will read it while we 
are resting : 

" 'Do not keep the alabaster boxes of your love 
and tenderness sealed until your friends are dead. 
Fill their lives with sweetness. Speak approving, 
cheering words while their ears can hear them 
and while their hearts can be thrilled by them.. 
The thing you mean to say when they are gone, 
say before they go. The flowers you mean to 
send to their coffins, send to brighten and sweeten 
their homes before they leave them. I would 
rather have a coffin without a flower, and a fu- 
neral without a eulogy, than a life without the 
sweetness of love and sympathy.' " 

But the darkness drove them home. The hill- 
side was all quiet as they went down; no sound of 
human voices reached their ears. 



A SABBATH IN HIROSHIMA. 41I 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

A SABBATH IN HIROSHIMA. 

The Sabbath is not entirely disregarded 
through the Japanese Empire. It is a holiday. 
Few indeed among the people of Hiroshima un- 
derstood its sacredness, but it was an advantage 
to the missionary to have it observed to the extent 
of being an official and school holiday. It gave 
the officers and pupils leisure for study of the 
Scriptures, and the old daimio" s house became 
the resort of those who wished to study the Jesus- 
way. 

One summer evening, when the rain had been 
pouring down all day, and the missionary had 
given up all thought of any more guests and had 
shut up the house for the night, he heard the 
familiar call at the door, and opened it to admit 
a grave-looking man of pleasing appearance. Hq 
had come up in the rain from the village. His 
parents were Buddhists, bitterly opposed to the 
teachings of the foreigners, but he had heard of 
the new religion and had come to learn for him- 
self. Since then, during the fall and winter even- 
ings, after the lamps were lighted and when the 
fire was crackling in the stove, a little company 
of learners had gathered around the table in the 



413 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

sitting-room to study about Jesus. The stranger 
who came in the summer rain attended faithfully 
himself, and sometimes brought others. Then 
Bible-classes for Sabbath mornings were started 
and a preaching service was asked for. Thus was 
the way opened for proclaiming the gospel in Hi- 
roshima. 

All this Mr. and Mrs. Levering told to Kei 
and Kesa the Sunday after they reached Hiro- 
shima. 

Several men from the village, with Owada, 
Masuda, Imai, and Noda, young men from the 
Government school, came in to the Bible-lesson, 
and the morning passed pleasantly. 

They were just beginning the study of Gene- 
sis, and Iwada read in Japanese, 

^'In the beginning God created the heaven 
and the earth. ' ' 

*'Ah, Mr. Iwada," said the missionary, *'the 
almighty God, the everlasting Father, created the 
world. Is this any harder to accept than your 
old belief that ' Isanagi ' made it?" 

*'No, sensei. There are many ridiculous sto- 
ries connected with Isanagi that Japanese who are 
not Christians do not believe," answered Iwada. 

They read on how God made the light and 
the expanse of heaven, the dry land and the seas, 
the grass and trees, the lights of heaven, fish and 
reptiles and birds, the beasts, and last of all man, 
and made them all *'very good.'* 



A SABBATH IN HIROSHIMA. 413 

" Is there anything unworthy of our belief in 
all this, Mr. Owada?" 

'' No," answered the young student. 

"I wish more of our people would come and 
learn these truths," said one of the men from the 
town. 

"What does this mean, scnsciV^ asked Noda, 
and he read, "And God created man in his own 
image." 

"It refers," said the missionary, " to the spirit 
of man, which God made to bear a likeness to him- 
self in its power to know and think and w411 and 
love, but especially in the holiness of its thinking 
and willing and loving. Made thus in the image 
of God, man at first knew and loved and obeyed 
God. How he lost this holy likeness to God by 
disobedience we shall see in another lesson. When 
we learn that man was made to know and delight 
in God we cannot wonder that now he is restless 
and dissatisfied until he finds Him." 

"No, sensei ; many of the Japanese feel so," 
said Noda. 

The young men were much interested in the 
lesson and promised to think of it all at home. 

In the afternoon Kesa and Mrs. Levering sat 
for a while on the upper veranda. For miles and 
miles around them in every direction, in the val- 
leys and on the islands of the Inland Sea, w^ere the 
heathen people bowing to their false gods and 
worshipping their graven images. 



414 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

*'Are you not lonely sometimes, sensei?^'' 
asked Kesa. 

*' Yes, Kesa, sometimes. No one can be thus 
far away from home and friends and not feel 
lonely. Sometimes I even long for the storms and 
cold of northern climates and dream of ice and 
snow. But how is it with you, Kesa ?" 

*'0h, seiisci^ I do long sometimes so much for 
my home. I hope that I shall soon get a letter 
from my father and that he will tell me that I can 
come. ' ' 

" I hope so, dear. But I have been thinking 
to-day, sadly, I fear, of Sabbaths at home, of our 
grand churches and solemn music, and of how the 
multitudes go up to worship." 

"Would you rather be there than here, sen- 
sciV 

" No, dear child," was the hearty reply. 

Mr. Levering, wlio had joined them while his 
wife was speaking, said, "And I too have been 
thinkinof of the difference between Christian life 
here and at home, and I rather like this phase 
better than that. True, we cannot go up to the 
house of God with the multitude, have our souls 
uplifted by the music of the organ, join in the 
singing, or bow in prayer with the great congrega- 
tion; but we can as certainly have the presence of 
God, and our religion must be real heart- worship, 
without hypocrisy; there's no room for that here. 
When I look at the people in our plain churches, 



A SABBATH IN HIROSHIMA. 4:5 

sitting Oil mats or on rude benches, and drinking 
in so eagerly the simple word of life, I cannot 
wish for more luxury, more elaborate displa}', 
more learned preaching." 

"Ah," said Mrs. Levering as her husband 
stopped speaking, " there are the boys coming to 
sing. Let us go down to the organ." 

Soon over the fields floated the old tunes, " An- 
tioch " and "Coronation," as both Americans 
and Japanese joined in the singing. 



4l6 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

A BEAUTIFUL ISLE OF THE SEA. 

*' Do you think we can venture, Lynn?'* 

Mrs. Levering was standing at the gateway 
looking anxiously up at the clouds. Four jin- 
rikishas were waiting, and the missionaries, with 
Kesa and Kei, were all ready for a trip to Miaji- 
ma, the beautiful island down the coast. 

*' What dojvu think about it, Julius Caesar?" 
asked the missionary. 

*' Julius Caesar " was a coolie who bore a curi- 
ous resemblance to the pictures of the hero of that 
name in old Roman history. He now looked 
wisely at the clouds, scratched his ear, and an- 
swered, ^'' Dogii^ honorable master, the honorable 
rain comes not down to-day." 

The friends had relied on Julius Caesar's favor- 
able prophecy the day previous, when the clouds 
looked equally threatening, and had no occasion 
to regret their trust; so they had confidence in 
him again and started off. 

After crossinof several lonor bridcres and ridinof 
over some pretty fields they reached the little 
town Kusatsu. Here a few drops fell, followed 
shortly by a few more, and at last the rain came 
down in torrents. The road over which they 



A BEAUTIFUL ISLE OF THE SEA. 417 

were travelling was the most romantic they had 
yet seen. Even in the pouring rain and the par- 
tially obscuring mist it Avas charming. On one 
side the sea, dark and stormy, dashed up against 
the shore; on the other towered a mountain half 
concealed by the fog. 

The roadway itself was very bad, being sandy 
and full of holes. It seemed as though it would 
all be washed away at no very distant day. At 
leuQfth the island rose before them like an im- 
mense sugar-loaf, with small cedar-trees growing 
on its steep sides in strange positions and at nearly 
regular intervals. 

"It is trying to lose so much of the beauty 
around us," said Mrs. Levering, as they went on 
in the view-obscuring storm, through green fields, 
and with the "everlasting hills" about them. 

The weather was forlorn enough when they 
reached the place where they were to take a boat 
for ]\Iiajima, and they went immediately to the 
landing:. 

"How much for a boat to Miajima?" asked 
^Ir. Levering. 

"Seventy-five cents," said the boatman. 

"I will give you thirty cents," said Mr. Lev- 
ering. 

" Fifty cents," said the boatman. 

But the charge was too high, and the whole 
party went to the hotel, dried their clothes as 
best they could, and ordered dinner. They had 

Kwa »n<1 Sa-Jlro. 27 



4l8 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

rice and fish brought them, and while they were 
eating the expected message came; the sailors 
would go for thirty cents. 

It was almost dark when the party reached 
the landing to cross to the island, and the gray, 
rou2:h water did not look invitinof. The boat was 
tolerably large, but it had the usual low cabin, 
into which they crowded, and in which they could 
not stand upright. A single lantern swung from 
the cabin roof. 

After a time the moon came out and shone 
dimly through watery clouds, and as the rain had 
ceased, the party crept out of the cabin and stood 
on the deck, watching the scarcely visible shore 
and the dark water. It was a strauQre scene. 
The coolies, as they worked their oars, w^ere rap- 
idly chanting a peculiar strain and rocking their 
almost naked bodies backward and forward, while 
ahead loomed IMiajima, growing more and more 
distinct, until at last the boat struck the shore. 
A rope was thrown out, a plank was laid down, 
and the travellers crossed over and were in Mia- 
jima. 

As they turned to go up the hill a deer crossed 
their path and Kesa stopped to pet it. 

" How tame it is, scnsci^^^ she said. 

The landlord of the hotel to which they were 
going went out to meet them, politely ushered 
them into the best room, and brought tea and 
cold water. 



A BEAUTIFUL ISLE OE THE SEA. 419 

While supper was being prepared the travel- 
lers sat on the veranda and viewed the place as 
well as they could in the darkness. 

At supper they talked with the landlord and 
landlady about Miajima and the deer. 

They passed a comfortable night on mattresses 
stuffed with cotton and placed on the floor, but all 
night long the rain poured in torrents on the roof 
and ran in streams from the eaves. 

In the morning the prospect was no brighter. 
" I do not fancy being shut up in a Japanese hotel 
all day," said Mrs. Levering; but the words were 
scarcely uttered wdien there came a cheering burst 
of sunshine, and the clouds all rolled away. 

''Go to Momiji first," the landlord advised. 

This w^as a grove of maples, and as they went 
towards it beautiful views greeted their eyes in 
all directions. They came first to a place where 
a rapid mountain-stream rushed over immense 
rocks, making tiny cascades and whirlpools. A 
bridge crossed the stream, and the friends went 
over the bridge and clambered down on the rocks 
to a little tea-house built in the middle of the 
stream. There were chairs in the tea-house, but 
they all preferred sitting in Japanese fashion on 
the floor, so as to be near the water as it came 
hurrying and tumbling over the rocks. At the 
entrance of the beautiful grove Momiji was an old 
man selling toothpicks. 

"Please buy, honorable foreigners," he said 



420 KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

as the missionaries passed; and they bought some, 
the old man assuring- them that they were medi- 
cated and that one using them would never have 
toothache. 

The next visit was to an old temple, on the 
walls of which hung some curious pictures, and 
among them was one evidently given by the 
Dutch. It was a queer old picture, and they all 
looked at it with a great deal of interest. A king 
and queen were standing by the seashore with 
courtiers and maids of honor behind them, and a 
ship under full sail was just coming into port. 
The picture was painted in brilliant colors. 

*'That shows that we are in the country of 
the Dutchmen," said I\Ir. Levering, referring to 
the long residence of the Dutch in that part of the 
country. 

Then they clambered down some stone steps 
and made their way to the seashore, to see the 
famous torii^ or bird-rest, which is found in front 
of the temple gates. This is about the largest 
lorii in Japan. When the tide is full it is in deep 
water, but at this time it stood high and dry. 

''It will not do not to stand under it," said 
Kesa; so off came her wooden clogs and short 
stockings, and she waded out in the shallow 
water, stood under the toj-ii^ looked up at the 
massive timbers, and smiled at the friends on the 
shore. 

The temple to which, this iorii was the entrance 



A EKAUTIFUL ISI,E OF THE) SKA. 42 1 

was the most curious one they had ever seen. At 
high tide it also is in the water. It consists en- 
tirely of long open galleries with pictures on both 
sides. Some of these pictures were of wood, and 
carvings of animals and flowers attracted the at- 
tention of the travellers. 

"Oh, sensci^ here is another Dutch painting," 
called Kesa; and there, indeed, hung another one 
on the wall beside the antiquities of Japan. 

At the end of the last gallery was a bright- 
eyed little boy, who accosted them politely and 
asked them to buy some of his beans to feed the 
deer. Kesa bought some for a few cash and let 
the pretty creatures come up and eat out of her 
hand. 

But the day's bright hours were hurrying 
away, and the party wished to reach home by 
nightfall. So, returning to the pretty hotel, they 
called for a boat. Strange to say, although the 
day was perfectly clear, the sailors had a supersti- 
tion that on the next day there would be a great 
storm, and all the boats were put away in antici- 
pation of the hurricane. 

It was some time before the men could be per- 
suaded to bring out a boat, and the ladies spent 
tlie intervening time in exploring the hotel gar- 
den. At last a boat was obtained, and bidding 
farewell to the kind people of the inn, the travel- 
lers started homeward. The boat-ride was more 
pleasant than the dark voyage of the night before, 



422 KHSA AND SAIJIRO. 

and they all sat on top of the cabin and watched 
the magnificent sunset. 

*' I wait for these sunsets every day, wonder- 
ing what new beauties will be disclosed," said 
Mrs. Levering, as they watched the grand display. 

Nearing the shore, they discovered Julius 
Caesar and his friends waiting for them, bowing 
and smiling on the breakwater. 

''Truly, fine weather," said the coolies. 

"Truly, fine weather," responded the travel- 
lers, as they took their places in the jinrikishas. 

It was late when the friends reached the house 
by the river. 

"An honorable guest has arrived," said one 
of the servants as they entered the gates. 

Wondering who it could be, they went into 
the house, and Kesa stood face to face with her 
father. 



IIOMK AGAIN. 423 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

HOMK AGAIN» 

*' Honorable father!" 

*' My daughter!" 

Nothing more was said, and the low bows were 
very formal, but Kesa, looking into her father's 
eyes, felt that all was right. 

"It is in answer to IMitsu's and Chiye's pray- 
ers," she said afterwards; and she wept as she 
thought- of the love and patience of her sisters, 
the real affection of her parents, and her own way- 
wardness and ingratitude. 

''God is good to me, sensei^ God is good," she 
repeated over and over; and ]\Irs. Levering in her 
heart thanked the Good Shepherd for thus fol- 
lowing his sheep. 

"How is the honorable mother? And the 
honorable sisters, are they well?" asked Kesa of 
her father when the first salutations were over. 

"The honorable mother and the honorable 
sisters are well, my daughter, and wait for your 
return," answered Fujisawa. 

Then the missionary and his wife came in and 
welcomed the guest, and all sat down to a cheer- 
ful dinner, served partly in Japanese and partly in 
American stvle. 



424 KHSA AXD SAIJIRO. 

The few days that Fiijisawa spent in Hiro- 
shima were occupied chiefly in going about the 
town, in which he was much interested. He and 
the others went to see the workmen fashioning 
umbrellas and immense Chinese lanterns. They 
looked at the castle, and went again to visit Ni- 
gitsu, Iwahana, and beautiful Hijiyama. Mr. 
Levering told Fujisawa of the busy work in the 
cotton-fields during the previous summer, when 
all the people were gathering cotton and the whole 
town was white with the snowy balls. 

The day before Kesa and her father went away 
was sad for them all. Kei's brother, Nantaro, 
was released from prison, and had to receive his 
stripes. From the house, though all the doors 
and windows were closed, they could hear dis- 
tinctly the sound of the lash and the cries of the 
victim. Poor Kei shut herself in her room, and 
rocked to and fro and moaned, as the sound of her 
brother^ s agony reached her ears. 

*'/)^^?/," said the indignant Fujisawa, "such 
punishments are abolished by law." 

"I thought so," said Mr. Levering, "but it 
seems that the law is not enforced down here." 

Then Fujisawa told them of the great reform 
in the prison system throughout Japan, and gave 
some details of the horrors of Japanese prisons and 
punishments in former days. 

"The prisoners were crowded together in fil- 
thy places where they could not get a breath of 



HOME AGAIX. 425 

fresh air," said he; "and heads were cut off by 
the dozen, the victims kneeling in rows, with 
hands tied behind them, each awaiting his turn. 
Heads were placed in the public thoroughfares, 
where all could see them." 

At last the terrible sounds in the prison-yard 
w^ere over. The gentlemen went with Kei and 
took charge of her brother. A bed had been pre- 
pared, and in less than an hour Kei sat by the suf- 
ferer's side, happy in once again being allowed to 
minister to the wants of her beloved Nantaro. 

The leave-takings were cheerful this time; 
Kesa felt glad to go home, and her teacher was 
thankful and hopeful for her. As the boat bore 
them away from the shore Kesa's eyes rested for a 
moment on the glory of the mountain-tops. '*It 
would remind Marion of the ' City of God,* " she 
said to herself Then she called her father's at- 
tention to some fishermen who were standing in 
the water casting their nets. They passed the 
little island Ujina. The water was bright and 
sparkling; all the hills were sunlit; they had a 
pleasant ride over a placid sea, and in due time 
reached the steamer, clambered up the side, and 
were soon going rapidly in the direction of 
Kobe. They saw the pretty city Tomo in the 
morning, stopped at a town on the great island of 
Shikoku, spent a whole day again among the lit- 
tle islands, and landed in Kobe at midnight. 
Then a sea-trip to Yokohama, a railroad journey 



426 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

of an hour to Toklo, a rattle tlirougli the streets of 
the city in a jinrikisha, and Kesa was at home 
again with her dear mother and sisters. 

"We prayed for you all the time, Kesa," said 
Chiye. 

And Kesa answered, " I knew it." 

Saturday afternoon had come, and Saijiro and 
Harukichi were in the little room that they had 
occupied together for so long. 

Saijiro was now almost nineteen years old. 
He was taller than the Japanese ordinarily are 
and very studious. He had nearly completed the 
course of studies in the school and was a young 
man of whom the ''mother in America" might 
well be proud. 

Harukichi had just laid down the sermon he 
had been studying. On the next day he was to 
preach for the first time as a regularly ordained 
minister in his own church in Tokio. By teach- 
ing and working during his entire theological 
course he had managed to support himself. 

"I wonder, Harukichi, how you have waited 
and have had patience all these years," said Sai- 
jiro. '' I could not have done it." 

''You do not know, Saijiro. God gives us 
strength. But I cannot tell you how often I have 
felt my patience giving way. I long for my pa- 
rents, and I long for the time to come when I can 
have my beloved one to myself and when she and 
I can work together in this great harvest-field." 



IIOMK AGAIN. 427 

But later on this Saturday afternoon, when 
Saijiro had gone off on some expedition with the 
other boys, Harukichi sat by the window in the 
twilight when two jinrikishas appeared, coming 
slowly along the road. At first he watched them 
mechanically; but as they drew nearer the figures 
in them seemed strangely familiar. Could it be 
possible ? Yes, surely ! Nearer and nearer they 
came, and Harukichi' s heart gave a wild throb 
and he hastened down to greet his father and mo- 
ther. 

The old lady literally lifted up her voice and 
wept. "My son, my son," she said, "we can 
live without you no longer and have come to see 
for ourselves. ' ' 

Oh, the happiness in the mission family that 
evening ! The news was carried from one to an- 
other, " Harukichi' s father and mother have come. 
The Lord has answered his prayers." 

Among those who heard Harukichi' s first ser- 
mon to his beloved flock the next day were his 
" honorable parents " and his heart's love, Chiye. 



428 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 

SOME HAPPY DAYS. 

And now there came some bright, pleasant 
times for our friends. The Fujisawa mansion was 
all thrown open again and filled with children, 
who ran and laughed and shouted through the 
house and played in the garden; for Tama and 
T\Iesoburo came down from the north and brought 
Genski and his sisters — two dainty little ladies — 
and his baby brother. 

Almost the first thing Genski did after the 
salutations were over was to go to his aunt Chiye 
and whisper in her ear, " Honorable auntie, we all 
go to the mission-school and the honorable father 
and mother attend the mission chapel." And 
Chiye thanked God in her heart. 

Tama had not been in Tokio very long before 
she made a discovery. "Who is that young man 
who looks so often at Mitsu ? and why does he 
hang around the house and follow her to the 
church?" she asked. 

Then Kesa laughed and said, "Oh, that is 
Toichi, and we all make fun of him, he is so tall 
and awkward." 

But Mitsu said nothing. 

And it happened that one day two young men 



SOME HAPPY DAYS. 429 

called on Fujisawa at the custom-house, one be- 
inq: the aforesaid Toichi and the other Haruki- 
chi. 

Toichi, being the elder, spoke first, and said, 
"Honorable sir, I know and esteem your daugh- 
ter, the honorable jMitsu. I am not wealthy and 
am engaged in Christian work, but I will love 
and protect her." 

And what answer did the high officer Fujisa- 
wa make? He knew something of Toichi, and 
he said, "My friend, if you will consent to come 
into my family, adopt my name and have your 
children bear it, and be to me as a son, you may 
have my daughter ]\Iitsu." For the husband of 
lonqf aofo was dead and JMitsu was free. 

Then Harukichi made his request and said, 
"Honorable high officer, some years ago you re- 
fused me your daughter Chiye on the ground of 
my parents' disinheritance of me. I have the 
pleasure to tell you that they have received me 
aq:ain as their son. I am now a Christian minis- 
ter settled over a church in Tokio. I am able to 
make your daughter comfortable and happy. 
Your honorable permission I crave." 

Then Fujisawa gave to Harukichi the beloved 
Chiye to be his wife. 

Not long after that day there was a double 
wedding in the Fujisawa mansion in the Kudan. 
Toichi and Mitsu and Harukichi and Chiye stood 
up before the venerable Makichi and promised in 



430 KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

the name of the Lord to be faithful husbands and 
wives. 

Kesa was happy as a princess; and when Ma- 
kichi in his earnest prayer thanked the Lord who 
had given such grace and patience to these dear 
young people, tears rose to her eyes — not rebel- 
lious tears, but tears of love and peace. She 
slipped her hand into Mrs. Fielding's, saying, ''I 
wish Marion were here." 

Then came a pleasant year for Kesa at school, 
and both she and Marion finished their course of 
studies the next June. 

One happy day Kesa accompanied Marion's 
mother to Yokohama, and went out to the great 
American steamer in a sampan to meet and wel- 
come her young friend. 

*' Dear Kesa," said Marion when they had an 
opportunity to talk together, ''are you not yet a 
Christian?" 

And Kesa said, "I cannot be like Chiye, 
Maichan; Chiye is always the same, but my heart 
is often dark; but I do love the Lord who died for 
me, and I do think I am a Christian. I was wait- 
ing for you to come and now I will be baptized." 

So one August Sunday Kesa was baptized. 
Then, by Marion's side, she ate of the broken 
bread and drank of the poured-out wine, v/hile 
the presence of the Lord filled both their hearts 
with peace. 



CHRISTIAN HOMES AND WORK. 43I 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

CHRISTIAN HOMES AND CHRISTIAN WORK. 

One cold winter morning Fujisawa was in- 
dulging in a romp with liis little grandson, tlie 
child of ]\Iitsu and Toichi. The old home still 
looked bright and pleasant; Mitsu was well and 
liappy, and Toichi seemed very proud of her and 
the baby. 

**It is the time for the morning worship," 
called Toichi at last. 

"Will you not remain, honorable father?'* 
asked Mitsu. 

But Fujisawa shook his head and went off, al- 
though not at all angered. 

Then came the servants and the Qrentle mo- 
ther, who, although still worshipping her idols in 
secret, would always listen to Mitsu when she read 
the Scriptures to her, and attended family pray- 
ers and went occasionally to the meetings. Ke- 
sa followed her mother and some of the neighbors 
came in. Toichi read and explained a few verses 
of Matthew's Gospel and prayed, and then Kesa 
led in singing a Christian hymn. 

"Where are you going to-day, Kesa?" asked 
IMItsu, when the simple service was ended. 

"Thanks, honorable sister^ I am going to see 



432 KESA AND SAIJIKO. 

Cliiye, and then to the girls' missionary meeting 
at the school," said Kesa. 

Chiye's house was near Shiba. Money in plen- 
ty was at Harukichi's command, but only so much 
as was sufficient to maintain his family in comfort 
did he retain. The rest was given freely to the 
work of spreading the gospel among the Japanese. 

When Kesa arrived at the pretty little house 
she called, *' Excuse me," and then pushed open 
the slides and went through to the back room, 
where Chive sat near a JiibacJii. 

Harukichi stood beside his wife, and in one 
corner a merry little girl was playing with some 
toys. The baby looked up and smiled when Ke- 
sa entered, and Harukichi and Chiye w^elcomed 
her with lovino^ words and looks. 

*' Where are you going to-day, honorable bro- 
ther?" asked Kesa. 

*' Thanks, young Saijiro and I go to the out- 
skirts of the city towards the west, to hold meet- 
ings, and shall be away all day. Good-by, dear 
wife ; good-by, honorable sister ; good-by, little 
one." 

*'It always seems so quiet and peaceful here, 
Chiye," said Kesa when Harukichi had gone. 

Then Chiye pointed to a long scroll on which 
was beautifully written in Chinese characters, 
*' Peace be unto this house;" and Kesa under- 
stood. 

Then came a cry at the door, and the servant 



CHRISTIAN HOMES AND WORK. 433 

soon after entered with a letter lying on a beauti- 
ful lacquered tray. She stooped low to the floor 
and handed the tray to Chiye. 

Her pale cheeks flushed and there was a glad 
look in her bright eyes. " It is from Kei, Kesa,'^ 
she cried; and the sisters read the letter together. 

" Beloved, beloved, greetings in the Lord. I 
rejoice to tell you how blessed I am in my work. 
God has kept me in peace and in health, although 
I have travelled much over mountains and 
through valleys and in boats on the sea. The 
people listen gladly, and the work is blessed. 
Nantaro, my brother, goes with me and will not 
leave my side. I think he will soon believe. 
Pray for him. Please, your honorable prayers I 
crave. Compliments, compliments to the honor- 
able mother and sisters and to the honorable hus- 
bands. Compliments, compliments." 

Great was the rejoicing over this letter, and 
Chiye and Kesa read it over and over, while the 
baby Michi played in her corner. 

Early in the afternoon the two sisters took a 
jinrikisha for the mission-school, where Marion 
met them, and the three went together to a room 
consecrated by work and prayer for many a long 
5'ear. Bright girls and pleasant-faced young wo- 
men gathered here, and after some opening exer- 
cises took out their work. Some were embroi- 
dering, some were dressing dolls, and others had 
plainer sewing. All the articles were to be sold 

KpKa iiBfl Sahi.o. 28 



434 KESA AXD SAIJinO. 

for the benefit of some poor cluirch or Sunday- 
school, and the workers talked together pleasant- 
ly of what they had heard concerning the progress 
of the cause that they loved. 

*' Old Momo died trusting in Jesus," said one. 

'^Momoki believes," said another. 

A third had a sad tale to tell of one who had 
gone back to heathenism, and they all grieved, 
and prayed that the girl's faith might be restored. 

The subject for the day was their neighboring 
country, Corea. 

"Good news has come to us," said Kesa ; 
"work among the girls has begun in Corea. 
Some are already studying with the honorable 
foreign teachers, and some are learning to be 
nurses in the hospitals." Then Kesa, taking an 
English magazine, fluently read and translated an 
account of the good work begun among the women 
of Corea. 

A girl was then asked to thank God, and she 
said, "Dear Lord, we thank thee that thou hast 
been so good to the women of Corea, and we 
thank thee for the new schools in Osaka, Kioto, 
and Kanazawa, and we pray thee to bless the 
schools in Yokohama and in Tokio and all over 
the land. Bless the Bible-women and all the 
Christian workers all over the land. This we ask 
for the dear Saviour's sake." 

"I am never happy except when I am work- 
ino: hard," said Kesa to Chive as thev rode home 



CHRISTIAN HOMES AND WORK. 435 

together in the jinrikisha. "I could never be 
quiet and suffer pain like you, and be happy." 

Then said Chiye, " I hope you will have some 
hard work given to you, Kesa." 

*'You and Mitsu do so much in speaking to 
the women and children and living such beauti- 
ful lives." 

True it was that Chiye and ^litsu found con- 
stant opportunities of usefulness in a quiet way, 
and many wandering ones were directed by them 
into the safe and happy path. Aka too was use- 
ful; she had long ago joined a class for married 
women, and what she learned she imparted to 
other women in her neighborhood. She was con- 
tented and cheerful, very different from the sad 
weeper of days gone by. Fusa, Chiye' s friend, 
was in a training-school for nurses; and slow 
Haru had found that medicine was her forte, and 
was studying to be a doctor. 

Connected with the various schools were kin- 
dergartens, and there were normal classes for the 
girls who wished to learn the system. Some of 
the older pupils taught the little ones; and there 
were Bible-readings, prayer-meetings, and schools 
for poor children — work in plenty for all. 

lyOok at Tokio on a Sunday morning not long 
ago. Kesa, Mitsu, Aka, and other Christian wo- 
men and girls are starting out to gather poor and 
outcast children for the Sunday-schools. To the 
fishermen's children, to \\\^ jinrikiyas'^ children, 



43^ KESA AND SAIJIRO. 

to poor, blind, halt, and withered, they go; and 
by nine a large number are gathered together to 
hear the Christian teaching. Later come the 
great congregations to the churches; to the For- 
eign Concession, to the Kudan, to the Tori, to 
many a place in the suburbs, they flock, and all 
Tokio resounds with Christian hymns and the 
melody of organs and the voices of the under- 
shepherds as they tell of the love of the chief 
Shepherd for his sheep. 

And not only in Tokio, but in many other cit- 
ies of Japan — in Yokohama, in Hakodate, in Ki- 
oto, Osaka, and Kobe, and even in far western 
Kanazawa, the gospel is preached. On the Ha- 
kones, on the islands of the Inland Sea, every- 
where the good news is being carried, and hearts 
rejoice. 

Besides all this, many a little seed is dropped 
in private and many a heart in secret goes up to 
God in prayer. 



SAIJIRO S RKSOLVE. 437 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

SAIJIRO'S RESOLVE. 

The story of the Good Shepherd searching lor 
and leading home his lost sheep cannot be told too 
often, especially in this present age, when so many 
are looking for a better way than that marked out 
in the Vv'ord of God and a better leader than the 
Lord Jesus Christ. There are even those born in 
Christian lands wdio are trying to persuade men 
-that Buddhism is a better religion than Christian- 
ity. But what has Buddhism done for the world 
in comparison with the blessings of which Chris- 
tianity is the source? What is its art compared 
with Christian art? its music compared with 
Christian music? its science compared with Chris- 
tian science? its literature compared with Chris- 
tian literature ? its morality compared with Chris- 
tian morality? its charity compared with Chris- 
tian charity? What sins has it washed away, 
what fears has it banished, what tears has it 
dried, and what soul has it led safely through 
this world to that of which the gospel tells us? 

You have seen the great changes which have 
taken place since the spring day when Kesa came 
into the world and when Saijiro cried for his mo- 
ther on the mountain. But do not think that all 



43^ KKSA AND SAIJIRO. 

the work is done. It is true there are schools, 
colleges, theological seminaries, normal classes, 
training-schools, mothers' classes, Bible-readings, 
prayer-meetings, and churches scattered through 
the land. The Bible has been translated into 
Japanese and some Christian literature has been 
given to the people. There are thousands of edu- 
cated young men and women, and scores of preach- 
ers and teachers; but the cry ever is for more la- 
borers, and the motto on the Christian banner is 
still, "Forward !" For the Japanese are num- 
bered by millions and the native Christians only 
by thousands. The number of idol-worshippers 
is appalling; and infidelity, as soul-destroying as 
superstition, is abroad in the land. 

One evening Harukichi and Saijiro stopped to 
rest after a day of labor at one of the temples in 
the suburbs of Tokio. The mountain child whom 
we first knew was now a strong, vigorous young 
man, just completing his course of studies in the 
theological seminary and ready to go to work. 

Harukichi had listened with joy and thankful- 
ness to his earnest talk that day to the crowds who 
had gathered to listen. " God bless you, my bro- 
ther," he had said as they left the preaching- 
place. 

But Saijiro was quiet and thoughtful and did 
not speak until the two were resting on the grassy 
slope in the temple enclosure; then suddenly he 
said, "Oh, my friend, I have thought over the 



SAIJIRO S RKSOLVK. 439 

proposal made me to take charge of one of these 
city churches. It would be pleasant to work 
w^ith you and have you ever by my side, but my 
heart is in the mountain with my people, and to 
them I must go. ' ' 

Then Harukichi, although grieved to lose his 
young friend, stretched out his hand to him and 
said, "It is well, Saijiro; you have decided well; 
and the blessing of God be with you." 

But Saijiro had something more to say. " Oh, 
Harukichi," and he spoke with kindling eyes, 
"my heart goes out to the youngest daughter 
of the high officer Fujisawa, your beloved 
wife's sister. Dogit^ I have nothing but pov- 
erty and hard work to offer her. Do you 
think that I micrlit ask her to be mv wife?" 

Then Harukichi smiled wisely and said, "Ask 
her, Saijiro; and God be with you." 

A week or two later there had been a gather- 
ing of Christians in the grand temple enclosure 
Uyeno. The church members had held a solemn 
convocation. Hundreds had met to pray and 
talk and sing, and three hundred Christian women 
had come together and told of what the Lord had 
done for them. And now the crowds were dis- 
persing and the people were going back to their 
homes. 

In one corner of the temple grounds a little 
group had gathered, all friends whom we well 
know. There w^ere Mitsu and Toichi, with Sai- 



440 KKSA AND SAPJIRO. 

kichi, their queer, bright little boy, between them, 
and Chive and Harukichi, with little Michi. Aka 
was near talking with Kojiro, still under in- 
struction in one of the missions, and not far 
away were Dr. and Mrs. FieMing and Marion; 
while Yenoske and Yen were arranging some 
baskets, and Cho was trying hard to help her 
mother. The sun was setting, and long beams of 
glory streamed through the trees. 

"It is time to go home," said Chiye at last; 
"but where is Kesa?" 

Harukichi smiled and pointed down the walk, 
saying, "See, dear wife." 

And, truly, there came Kesa and Saijiro hand 
in hand. When they reached the little group 
Saijiro said, "Rejoice with me, my friends, for 
Kesa has promised to be my wife and go with me 
to the mountain." 

Then the others crowded about the newly-be- 
trothed pair, and there was abundance of joy and 
well-wishinof. 

Chiye came and stood by Kesa's side, and 
when the others had ceased speaking she said, 

"You will have your longed-for hard work, 
dear sister. May the Good Shepherd be Avith you 
for ever!" 

And all the others responded, "Amen." 



GLOSSARY, 



AiNO, singular and plural. The aborigines of Japan. 

AiTCHU. The burden of a coolie's cry or song. 

Ama. a Buddhist nun. 

Amida. a title of Buddha. 

Baba. Grandmother, or nurse. 

Bakemono. a ghost. 

Bent. A pink coloring matter. 

Benten. The name of a goddess. 

Bento. a little wooden box. 

Bon. a Japanese priest. 

BoN-SAMA. A respectful title for a priest. 

Cash. A petty coin ; lo make a cent. 

Chan. A term of familiarity, added to the first syllable 
of a child's name or title. Thus "Kechan" means " Dear 
Kesa." 

Dai. Great, noble, exalted. 

Dai Butsu. A chief idol of Japan. 

Daikoku. a Japanese idol. 

Daikon. a large radish. 

Daimio. a territorial noble of former days. 

Dai Nippon. " Great Japan." 

DoGu! Alas! a common exclamation of surprise or 
sorrow. 

DzuKiN. A winter hood for females. 

FuRUSHiKi. A kerchief or scarf. 

Futon. A stuffed mattress. 



442 KICSA AND SAIJIRO. 

Geta. a wooden shoe, 

Hai! Yes, or Look out! 

HiAKUNiNiSHiu. "One hundred poems," a collection 
very popular in Japan. 

HiBACHi. A brazier or fire-box. 

HoTOKE. A saint. 

JiNRiKisHA. A two-wheeled carriage drawn by men. 

JiNRiKiYA, singular and plural. Men who draw jinrikishas. 

Kago. a sedan-chair. 

Mikado, The title of the emperor. 

MocHi. Hard cakes made of rice. 

MusHi. The hot and wet season in Japan. 

Nippon. Japan. 

Oxi. Evil spirit, 

Saionara ! Farewell ! If it must be so ! 

Sake. An intoxicating drink made from rice, 

Sama. a title of respect to men, women, or idols. 

Samisen. The Japanese guitar. 

Sampan. A small boat. 

Samurai. The military class. 

San. a respectful title. 

Sensei. Teacher. 

Shaka. a title of Buddha, 
• Shogun. a military commander-in-chief. 

Tai-fu. a "great wind," or typhoon. 

Tai-kun. "Great ruler." 

Taykosama. " The great lord," the name of a famoi:s 
prince of old Japan. 

Toriye, or ToRii. A bird-rest before a temple. 

Yashiki, a gentleman's dwelling; and outbuildings in- 
closed. 

Yebisu. a Japanese idol. 

ZoRi. A sanda 






'^' 







!B00> 

Neutralizing agent: Magnesium Oxide 



A,^ ^ « Deacidified using the Bookkeeper process. 



O Treatment Date: April 2003 

PreservationTechnologles 



* A WORLD LEADER IN PAPER PRESERVATION 

o 111 Thomson Park Drive 

' r CranberryTownship, PA 16066 .-i 

Q' (724)779-2111 *:.., '''■ 















HECKMAN 

BINDERY INC. 



/^^ APR 85 



_ N. MANCHl 

J^^ INDIANA 46962 











V . s • • ^ r> <>>^ 



