Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 






y 



V 

■n 



11 

11 

11 

!i 

II. 
II 
If 



It 

I 



V\ oA' • 



■ . Vy^ r^v > s^f 



>\^S 







Leo BERTRAM; 



OR, 



THE BRAVE HEART. 

FROM THE GERMAN OF FRANZ HOFFMAN. 



E, T. DISOSWAY 



<' There ape briers besetting every patlv 
W^hich call for patient oare— 

Tiiere is a cross in every lot, 

And an earnest need for prayer. 

But a lo-wly heart that leans on Thea 
Is happy anyvirhere." 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK. 



5» 



1 

i 



»t- 



_ • - 

.574650 \ 




c^ ' ' , - 



•X >^*-' 









COPYRIGHT, i88ob 
BY AMERICAN IRaCT SOCISTT. 



I 



'\ 



CONTENTS. 



■♦- 



^ - mi 



^. ' * 



CHAPTER I. 
The House on the Shore page 5 

CHAPTER II. 
1 

Good Deeds bear Good Fruit 20 



o- CHAPTER III. 

Departure from Home 34 

■ 

CHAPTER IV. 
The Pilot 49 

CHAPTER V. 



/' 



' ■» 



The Listener 61 

CHAPTER VI. 
Conrad Elshoft 72 

CHAPTER VII. 



ij 



•■^r 



'Lead US not into temptation" 77 

cz 

d CHAPTER VIII. 

The Bear Hunt 96 



4 CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER IX. 
The Boat Wj 

CHAPTER X. 
The Hermits -— - 136 

CHAPTER XL 
Captain Rembrant •••• 151 

CHAPTER XII. 
At Home again •—.—..... 162 



LEO BERTRAM 



CHAPTER I. 

THE HOUSE ON THE SHORE. 

" Press on, Willy ; more to the right 
There — so we will not strike the sand. So, 
my boy. Now we have our fine supply in. 
How delighted mother will be, for she need 
have no further anxiety for a week at least. 
I will get three thalers for these in Bremen, 
I do not doubt, for they are splendid fellows. 
Only look, Willy, at these perch ; one alone 
must weigh nine or ten pounds; and there 
are the others besides, and all the shellfish — 
they will sell well. Fasten the chain in its 
place, Willy ; wind it around the stake a 
couple of times, hook it, and then help me 
carry the fish to the house," 



6 LEO BERTRAM. 

These words were spoken by a fine lad of 
nineteen to his younger brother. They had 
been out fishing. The appearance of the 
boat, upon which a pile of nets was lying, 
and the garb of the two brothers betokened 
their trade very plainly, and there were also 
proofs testifying to their skill and success, as 
they loaded themselves with the spoils. Willy 
would have taken the oars also with him, but 
his brother objected. " Leave them there," 
he said ; " I must start for Bremen at day- 
break to-morrow; no one will trouble the 
oars to-night — at least I advise them not to." 

Willy threw them back in the boat, and 
followed his brother's rapid steps along the 
shore, until they turned to the right, and saw 
a one-story tiled-roof house standing in a 
thick grove of trees. 

Perhaps our readers some time may have 
seen a house so home-like and attractive in 
its appearance that they have exclaimed in- 
voluntarily, " I would willingly pass my life 
there;" and this cottage, the home of the 
brothers, would have prepossessed you in its 
favor. 



THE HOUSE ON THE SHORE. 7 

The sun was sinking fast, its disk already 
touched the surface of the sea, the atmos- 
phere was mild, and the reflection of the sky- 
fell on the rippling waves through a transpa*- 
rent film. A few rosy clouds floated in the- 
air, and on the mirror of the water glitteredk 
some sails whose dazzling whiteness con- 
trasted finely against the brilliantly-dyed 
western sky as they sailed like gigantic swans 
across the billows. 

The sun's last rays flashed over the sea 
like a great sword, and sent a farewell to the 
little house on the shore. The polished clear- 
windows blazed in the light as it stole through, 
the wild grapevine that surrounded and form- 
ed a natural and pleasant drapery for the win- • 
dows. It was in the first part of the month/ 
of May; everything was green, the trees as- 
well as the bushes. The flowers in the gar- 
den were waking into fresh life and beauty^ 
and the little house was nestled in the midst. 
A splendid linden overshadowed it with its 
great branches stretching far out to the right 
and the left. The flourishing garden was filled 
with alders, crimson crocuses, blue lilacs, and 



£ 



8 LEO BERTRAM. 

^hite snowballs, and the birches rose behind 
tthe garden with their silver-white slender 
'.stems. The delicate boughs, and millions of 
bright green leaves fluttering in the evening 
^vind, formed a pretty picture as the sun 
glanced upon it and wove golden threads 
among the luxuriant foliage. Yes, it was an 
attractive house — small, peaceful, and seclu- 
ded, but large enough for its contented occu- 
pants, the good mother Martha and her two 
sons, Leo and Willy. And its fine situation, 
with the splendid view of the sea, with its 
many changes and thousand-fold beauties, 
made it still more attractive. 

Leo threw down his burden before the 
house, breathed heavily, and wiped the per- 
spiration from his forehead. " Bring the rest 
of the fish in, Willy," he said to his brother ; 
" I will run back and attend to the nets. Tell 
mother I will soon return. Do you hear T 

Willy nodded, and Leo rapidly retraced 
liis steps to the shore, and met on his way 
an elderly man dressed in dark clothes, who 
asked abruptly, " Does Martha Bertram live 
in yonder little house ?" 



.'I 



THE HOUSE ON THE SHORE. 9 

Leo regarded the stranger attentively, and 
hesitated before answering, wondering to him- 
self what this man could want of his mother. 
■** You must be dumb, or perhaps you do not 
know who lives there," said the stranger, with 
some impatience. 

*' I ought to know where my mother lives," 
replied Leo. " Go right on ; if she is not in 
the house, you will probably find her in the 
garden, or Willy may show you the way. I 
would go with you myself, but I must see to 
hanging the nets for drying, or they will be- 
come mildewed." 

The man turned into the path leading to 
the house without another word, and Leo ran 
to the shore, threw the nets over his shoul- 
ders, not without some difficulty, and quickly 
returned, wondering in the mean time over 
the object of this visit to his mother. He 
would have left the nets until later, but it was 
a duty that could not be postponed, and must 
be attended to before any other ; so he de- 
spatched his work with a dextrous hand, and 
when it was completed he went into the house, 
and finding Willy in the front room, at once 

Leo Bertram. 2 



10 LEO BERTRAM. 

questioned him about the stranger and his 
mother. 

" He is in the arbor," replied Willy. 

" Do you know what brought him here ?" 

" No, Leo ; I only know this much : his 
pocket was filled with papers which he spread 
out on the table." 

'* Humph ! Another time I will look far- 
ther," thought Leo. " The man did not please 
me; he was mighty short dealing with me 
when I met him on my way to the nets. I 
hope he will not make mother any trouble,, 
but he shall understand that I am not to be 
trifled with." 

"Be quiet, dear brother," said Willy. 
** Mother sent me from the garden when the 
man came, and she would not^be willing ta 
have you go there. See, I believe he has al- 
ready gone." 

" That is so," said Leo, looking from the 
window. *' Now I will ask mother what wind 
brought him here." 

He ran to the garden. His mother was 
still sitting in the arbor, but not busily em- 
ployed with her work as usual. She was rest- 



THE HOUSE ON THE SHORE. n 

ing her head upon her hand, apparently deep- 
ly absorbed in painful thoughts. The net 
she had been mending lay half finished by 
her side, and on the table before her a paper 
upon which her eyes were fixed. She started 
when she saw Leo, and endeavored to con- 
ceal this ; but it was too late ; he saw it, and 
also noticed her anxiety and dejection. 

" What has occurred, dear mother ?" ex- 
claimed Leo excitedly. " You are weeping. 
What did that man want .^ He cannot be far 
o£E ; if he has worried you, I will follow him 
and make him beg your pardon on his knees." 

" No, no, Leo," answered his mother, seiz-^ 
ing his hand. " The man is innocent of any 
offence ; he has only done his duty in brings 
ing me some very sad news. Let him go in 
peace, my son." 

" And what may this news be ?" question- 
ed Leo. " It must be trouble indeed if it 
forces tears from you. Oh, do not withhold 
it from me, dear mother ; you know well you 
may confide in me." 

" It would be useless to try and conceal it 
from you, my son," she replied. " In a few 



12 LEO BERTRAM. 

weeks you would know all, and then the blow 
would only be harder to bear, for if you are 
unprepared it will fall more severely. Leo, a 
wicked man, who has already given us great 
trouble, will take away from us our house and 
turn us out without pity." 

Leo was shocked, but tried to conceal his 
feelings. " Who is this man ?" he asked an- 
grily ; " and has he any right to deprive us of 
our inheritance ? If he has no right, and yet 
the law is on his side, he shall see that I will 
have something to do with him." 

" He has the might, my child, even if I 
doubt his right," said his mother, shaking 
her head hopelessly. "The law has once 
before decided in his favor, and I fear it will 
do so again in this case. Ah, if he would 
only leave me this house as a last refuge, 
where we have lived for so many years con- 
tented and happy; and the garden where 
your dear father sleeps his last sleep. It will 
break my heart to leave it, for I can no lon- 
ger pray beside his resting-place and deck his 
grave with flowers." 

" Never, no, never shall you be driven 



THE HOUSE ON THE SHORE. 13 

from it, mother, if I can prevent it!" said 
Leo, with deep emotion. ** Indeed, he must 
be a wicked man who would rob a poor wid- 
ow of her all. But how can this be done, 
mother ? for the house and garden belong to 
you." 

" I always hoped and believed this was so, 
my son ; but the stranger who has just left 
us has taken away all hope. Leo, this is a 
sad story, and you may as well hear it now as 
at any other time. Your father, as you know^ 
was a shipmaster. He owned a small house 
in Bremen, and also a boat; and with this 
help he earned his bread honestly. Oh, that 
he had never wished to better a lot with 
which we were all so contented ! But listen : 
When you were seven years old, and Willy 
two, a tempter came to your father and per- 
suaded him to sell his boat and invest the 
proceeds of the sale in a vessel. The man 
who made the suggestion proposed to pro- 
vide whatever should be necessary in furnish- 
ing the vessel, and that each should have an 
equal share of the profits. The proposal 
seemed tempting enough, and in fact some 



14 LEO BERTRAM. 

money was made, and with a portion of that 
your father bought this house and garden, in 
order to use it as headquarters in lading and 
discharging the cargo of the vessel ; and as 
the situation and fine view of the sea were so 
attractive, he spent his summers here. Now, 
as you can certainly remember, your father 
became very ill, and it was necessary to give 
the command of the ship to another person ; 
and, unhappily, soon after the ship and cargo 
were wrecked in a fearful storm. When the 
news came, it is true, your father was dis- 
tressed, but still he was not discouraged, for 
he said to me, ' The accident is not so terri- 
ble as it appears, for the ship and cargo were 
fully insured, and in a year's time, with indus- 
try, we can make up for this disaster if I re- 
gain my health.' Ah, in the mysterious wis- 
dom of God, this wish was not granted. 
Whether your father was more overcome by 
the news of the shipwreck than he was will- 
ing to acknowledge, or whether his illness 
was augmented by some other cause, God 
only knows. He was attacked with violent 
fever, lost his recollection, and in a few weeks 



THE HOUSE ON THE SHORE. 15 

after the loss of the vessel God called him to 
himself. That was a hard blow for me, Leo. 
You and your brother were too young to 
realize it, but it fell upon me so heavily I 
would have followed him willingly, only for 
the consciousness that I must care for you, 
poor orphans, and that was my only consola- 
tion. But this was not all. God placed a 
harder cross upon me ; another blow was in 
store, of which I had not the slightest sus- 
picion. Having heard what your dear father 
had said, I believed that we would not have 
to struggle for the necessaries of life, as the 
vessel was fully insured, and belonged partly 
to me. At least, I should have the house in 
Bremen and the small one in which we live ; 
but before many weeks passed away, not hear- 
ing from your father's partner, I wrote, beg- 
ging him to settle the affairs with me, for I 
had you and Willy to provide for; and then 
he answered very curtly that I had not the 
slightest claim upon him, and that as the 
ship had been insured entirely at his own 
cost, I had no right to any share of its valu- 
ation. He also said he had other claims 



i6 LEO BERTRAM. 

upon your father, and threatened to prose- 
cute me for them if I did not leave him in 
peace. I now considered it my duty to se-- 
cure legal advice, but my lawyer gave me lit- 
tle hope. 'That man is a villain,* he said. 
* If your husband still lived, he would not 
dare to make this assertion; but now he can 
do so, because there is no written proof to 
deny his falsehood, and he who leaves the 
path of honesty to serve Mammon will find 
ways and means for carrying out his designs, 
and very often time is not long enough to 
prove who has the right. He may escape an- 
earthly judge, but not the heavenly.' 

" I questioned the lawyer as to what should 
be done, and we decided to bring a suit against 
this dishonest man. But it all happened as 
the lawyer had predicted ; the rascal produced 
papers and swore to their validity, and the 
judge was compelled to decide in his favor, 
although he and we all believed in our secret 
hearts that he had perjured himself. But the 
contempt he received prevented him from 
presenting at the time another claim which 
he intended to establish, and he withdrew it. 



k 



THE HOUSE ON THE SHORE. ij 

I was obliged to sell the house in Bremen to 
pay for the expense of the lawsuit, and try 
and provide for my children until they were 
old enough to earn their own bread ; and with 
God's help I have succeeded. The money is 
gone, it is true ; but with your fish trade, dear 
Leo, you have kept us from want, and we 
might have lived on peaceful and contented,, 
if this man had not disturbed our happiness. 
He asserts that your father owed him three 
hundred thalers, and if I cannot pay this our 
house and garden must be sold. 

" This is what I have learned from the 
man who has just left ; and I am in deep dis- 
tress, for the law will decide on the side of 
dishonesty, and we, poor and helpless,, must 
be turned out of doors. Oh, what will be-^ 
come of us if this man should also take your 
boat and nets, and deprive you of all means 
of support ? for so far they have protected us 
from poverty." 

" Mother, as long as I live that shall never 
happen," said Leo, with indignation. " I will 
see who can tear our possessions from us — 
my possessions, I say, for the nets and tackle 



L«o Bertram. 



xS LEO BERTRAM. 

are mine, honestly gained by hard work. 
Grieve no more, dear mother. I will go to 
the city to-morrow and find out what can be 
done. Only tell me the lawyer's name, and 
the name of the liar who cheated you. I 
must have both before I can act." 

" The good lawyer is Libarius, and lives 
in the Rathkellers ; any child can point him 
out to you. The other is Elshoft, the sailor, 
your father's nearest relative," 

" There, mother," cried Leo hastily, " now 
it is all clear. This is why I have never vis- 
ited our cousin when I have been in Bremen. 
But why have you concealed this man's wick- 
edness from me so long T 

" In order to prevent you from hating 
him," returned his mother. "You cannot 
doubt that I have suffered and shed many 
tears over this injustice in the silent night 
watches. Ah, after your father's death he 
should have been your protector; but the 
voice of nature was stifled, and you may thank 
your nearest relative for our bitterest cares." 

Leo leaned against the post of the arbor 
and reflected long and silently ; then he said, 



*♦ 



THE HOUSE ON THE SHORE. 19 

** Do not despair, mother. The wickedness 
of men is often brought to light before the 
Almighty, and we will hope that God will 
assist us in our need, and falsehood will not 
finally triumph over truth, let who may de- 
cide the cause. You shall keep this house 
and garden as long as you live, depend upon 
that, mother." 

The widow urged her son to disclose his 
plan for avoiding the blow which was about 
to fall upon them, but in vain. Leo was 
silent, only repeating his confident assurance, 
and raising his mother's hopes by his own 
confidence. Meanwhile the evening stole in 
upon them, and a cold wind blew from the 
sea ; so she gathered her work together, and 
they returned to the house. 

Leo remained quiet and thoughtful during 
the evening, but it was easy to see that he 
was forming plans for defeating the wicked- 
ness of his cousin Elshoft 



20 LEO BERTRAM. 



CHAPTER II. 

"GOOD DEEDS BEAR GOOD FRUIT." 

By the middle of the next day Leo was in 
Bremen ; the captain of a steamboat whom 
he knew took his craft in tow, and conse- 
quently he made a speedy trip to the city. 
Leo disposed of his fish as soon as he ar- 
rived, and then repaired to the lawyer Liba- 
rius, in order to ask his advice in the present 
difficulty. He soon found the house, and 
Herr Libarius listened patiently and atten- 
tively as he explained the matter to him, and 
then waited for the advocate to give his opin- 
ion. The lawyer took the papers and shook 
his head. " The same case as happened nine 
years ago," he said. " I would willingly stake 
my life for it, the account is all false ; but 
wicked men gain their cause ; for as soon as 
the suit comes up, and a lie will serve them, 
they will utter it. My son, your sainted fa- 
ther cannot return from the other world to 



/ 



GOOD DEEDS REWARDED. 21 

refute this. However, I will undertake the 
matter for you. We do not know certainly 
that he will swear falsely again ; perhaps his 
hardened conscience may be touched, and he 
may give up the claim when he discovers 
that we are not terrified by his threats." 

" No, no ; he is too cautious for that," 
thought Leo. " It would be far better for me 
to pay the money," he said. 

" Then in a couple of years he will come 
again and perhaps demand one thousand tha- 
lers, instead of three hundred," said Libarius. 
*' This must be the last he shall wring from 
you ; leave it to me, my boy ; I will see to 
this cheat, and he can turn upon me if he 
undertakes to press his false claim." 

" But a suit will cost a great deal of mon- 
•ey, and I do not believe I can procure more 
than three hundred thalers." 

"Do not let that trouble you, my lad," 
replied Libarius, clapping Leo on the shoul- 
der ; " I will bear the costs. Your father ren- 
dered me many a service with pleasure, and 
so far as it lies in my power I will try and 
help his children. Be silent on that subject. 



22 LEO BERTRAM. 

but tell me how you will obtain the three 
hundred thalers demanded by this rascal." 

Leo would have preferred not to explain 
this ; but Libarius pressed him so earnestly, 
he at last opened his heart and confided his 
plans to his sympathizing friend. " One of 
my neighbors has told me that there is in 
Bremen a wealthy merchant who is now fit- 
ting out a ship for the whale-fisheries. This 
Melchior Rankendorf is still in want of sail- 
ors for his Arctic expedition. The wages are 
excellent, and I have decided to go and offer 
my services, if it be true that all who return 
from the Polar Sea will receive three hun- 
dred thalers." 

"Humph!" murmured Libarius. "Love 
for your mother induces you to brave the ice, 
the cold, and the bears of the North Pole. 
Well, my boy, this is very good of you, and I 
am pleased with it ; but you are too young 
for such a perilous undertaking; you cannot 
stand the dangers and trials. And besides, 
who will take care of your mother when you 
are so far away ?" 

"Willy, my brother Willy," said Leo 



GOOD DEEDS REWARDED. 25 

quickly. " He 's a fine fellow and a very skil- 
ful fisherman, and he is almost fifteen years- 
old. If Willy remains, my mother will be 
well cared for." 

" But will your mother consent to your 
leaving her, in order to face so many unavoid- 
able dangers ?" questioned Libarius, thought- 
fully shaking his head. " A voyage in those 
Arctic seas is no child's play, Leo, and I fear 
you will repent your rash decision when it is 
too late to help you." 

" I shall not repent it, if it cost my life,'" 
replied Leo. " No, no, my good mother has. 
already sufiEered so much trouble, she shall 
at least not lose what she loves and values 
* most. I am strong and healthy, Herr Liba- 
rius, and my courageous heart will not fail 
me, at least. And if the cold be intense, and 
the dangers that surround me ever so great,, 
and if bitter toils face me, still I will cheer- 
fully bear all if I can only succeed in drying 
my mother's tears. I would sooner die than 
see her suffer. A year soon passes by, dear 
Herr, and if God guards and cares for me, 
and I trust in him, I shall be doubly happy 



24 LEO BERTRAM. 

when I return. It is certain that something 
must be done for my mother, and it is my 
duty to do all in my power." 

" Certainly, certainly, my dear boy, far be 
it from me to turn you aside from your duty, 
or reproach you for it ; but I fear the sacri- 
fice may be in vain. The voyage may be 
'long and tedious, the ship may be overtaken 
'by misfortunes ; but if God watches over you, 
your life may be preserved, and I will hope 
that God will assist and protect you. But 
we must also prepare ourselves for the worst, 
and if you do not return you will lose the 
reward, and your mother will be deprived of 
the strong arm of her son, who might pro- 
vide for her declining years." 

" I have thought of all that," answered 
L,eo, in a low, sad tone. " But," he added 
with more courage, " the result lies in God's 
hand. My will is good, at least ; and if my 
life is taken, God will provide ways and means 
to avert bitter trials from my mother, and 
Willy my brother will never leave her, for he 
loves her as well as I do. I have faith in the 
Almighty^ Herr Libarius. I can see no other 



GOOD DEEDS REWARDED. 25 

way of saving my mother from her persecu- 
tor, and so in God's name I will venture my 
life." 

" Do you still maintain this resolution ?" 
questioned Herr Libarius, not without emo- 
tion. " Will you bid defiance to every dan- 
ger and toil, and not shun the bitter cold and 
terrors of the North, for your mother's sake ?" 

" I shun nothing; I will brave even greater 
hardships, if I can help my mother," answered 
Leo with firmness. 

" Now listen," said Libarius. " I am not 
blessed with great riches ; but see here, my 
lad. I make this promise : your mother shall 
not leave her house during your absence; 
you may carry that consolation with you, at 
least. If you should never return from the 
Polar Sea, old Libarius will keep his word. 
And now, come. I will accompany you to 
Rankendorf 's ; you are young, and might be 
easily embarrassed. Come, my boy, Melchior 
Rankendorf is a good friend of mine; you 
may need a bondsman, and I will guarantee 
your good conduct." 

Libarius drew on another coat, took his 

L«aB«rtnuik A. 



26 LEO BERTRAM. 

hat and stick, and accompanied Leo to the 
wealthy merchant's ; and when they reached 
the house, Leo was surprised at the number 
of people who wished to speak with Ranken- 
dorf. Porters and clerks were hurrying to 
and fro, and amid all the business and bustle 
Leo might have lost his self-possession, and 
not have been able to state the object of his 
visit if he had been alone. Herr Libarius 
pushed his way through the crowd, seized his 
proteg^ by the hand, and stepped into a spa- 
cious room, where Herr Rankendorf and 
some of his clerks were at work. He was 
sitting by a large writing-table, and by turns 
wrote in his note-book, spoke with his busi- 
ness men, and counted out or took in money. 
In a word, he was uncommonly busy. But 
when he saw Libarius he let everything stand, 
shoved back his spectacles, and running to 
the lawyer, shook his hand warmly. " What 
wind blew you here, my dear friend.?" he 
asked. 

" A wind from the North," answered the 
lawyer, laughing. " See for yourself. Look 
at this lad ; is he not a fine fellow ?" 



GOOD DEEDS REWARDED. 27 

Rankendorf glanced hastily at Leo and 
nodded approvingly. " What is to be done 
with him?" he questioned. "You have 
brought him here with some design. Can I 
serve you ? If so, speak out." 

" There you miss the mark, my friend,"^ 
replied the advocate. " But in helping this, 
young person, you can help me, for he is my 
friend. He wishes to go to the North Pole 
and catch whales." 

" Humph," murmured Herr Rankendorf^ 
looking at Leo from head to foot. But Leo 
stood the test calmly, and met his glance 
with an open, frank and modest expression 
as if he would have said, " Only try me, dear 
sir; you can rely upon my honesty and in- 
tegrity." 

"A mere boy; very young, but strong 
and healthy," said Herr Rankendorf in an 
undertone to the lawyer. "We will see. 
You must have some interest in him or you 
would not have brought him here. Confess, 
old friend." 

Libarius nodded, drew the rich man to a 
corner, and talked with him for some time in 



28 LEO BERTRAM, 

a low voice. Herr Rankendorf hummed 
diligently, pushed up his spectacles and gave 
Leo many a glance, at last pressed his friend's 
hand heartily. 

" The fellow shall go," he said. " And 
the amount of his wages I may as well count 
out now, as at any other time. Dutiful boy! 
Humph! Heaven will watch over him and 
bring him safely back; and if not, it is no 
matter if the expedition sinks a few thalers. 
Let my cashier count out the money, Libarius. 
And as to the fellow Elshoft, he is good for 
nothing, and will not escape punishment. 
Humph, why does Rembrant delay.? Ah, 
here he is." 

The door opened and a broad-shouldered, 
stout man stepped in. His face was rosy 
and pleasant, his eyes clear and sharp, and 
his gait betrayed the sailor. With respect, 
but also with a certain hearty confidence, he 
greeted the merchant, who beckoned him to 
approach. 

" How is it with the Dolphin, Captain 
Rembrant T he asked. " Is she fully manned T 

" Almost, commander," answered the cap- 



GOOD DEEDS REWARDED. 29 

tain. " Thirty stout fellows, sound, healthy- 
boys have already promised to brave the 
polar dangers. We only need six more, and 
Martin the pilot has provided five, but we 
had better go without that one, than run the 
risk of sticking fast in the North Sea. Time 
is flying, the sooner we sail the better. Every 
day we gain is a year almost to us at this 
season." 

" I understand. - Consider that the sixth 
man is found, captain. Cast your eyes over 
there. There he is." 

Captain Rembrant stepped up to Leo, and 
looked at him sharply. " A fine fellow, but 
very young," he said. "So you want to go 
on my ship. Have you ever been on one, 
my lad.?" 

"No, but only because I have not had 
the chance," replied Leo. " I could not go 
for I have had to take care of my mother." 

" And who will do that now ?" 

" My brother Willy is old enough now to 
take my place, and in a year I wall be back," 
said Leo. 

" Sooner than that, I hope," answered the 



30 LEO BERTRAM. 

captain. *' Now, if you have the will, we can 
make a way. Can you go immediately ?" 

" I must first take leave of my mother," 
said Leo. " But the ship must sail directly 
by our house ; I could join her there." 

"How could that be done?" asked the 
captain, with a laugh. " Where is the house ?" 

Leo explained how it might be done, and 
then the captain inquired if he were fitted out 
for the voyage. Leo was compelled with 
blushes to acknowledge that besides a few 
garments in the wash, the clothes he wore 
comprised his entire wardrobe. 

" And you will sail for the North Pole 
in a linen jacket !" cried Captain Rembrant. 
^' Hark ye, my lad. Remain at home and 
keep warm by your fire, for you will freeze 
at the first northeast gale." 

Leo blushed deeply and almost burst into 
tears. It was lucky that Libarius had accom- 
panied him, for Herr Rankendorf nodded to 
his friend, and then turned to Captain Rem- 
brant. " Captain, you will do me the kindness 
•of providing whatever may be necessary for 
this lad on the voyage. The purchases can 



GOOD DEEDS REWARDED. 31 

be carried on board the Dolphin to-day. Let 
me know what they cost, and I will deduct it 
from Leo's reward when the Dolphin returns. 
I will be willing to trust him until then for 
everything." 

'*That can be done easily. But, Herr 
Libarius, you seem to take a great interest 
in this young fellow," said the captain. 

" Certainly ; and I have good reasons for 
doing so, that I will tell you of," replied the 
lawyer. " But we have no time for chattering 
now. Leo must be off to acquaint his mother 
with the news as soon as possible ; and we, 
captain, must make his purchases for him." 

"All right," cried the captain, " if my com- 
mander has no other orders for me." 

Leo would have forced his thanks upon 
Herr Rankendorf, but he only remarked that 
every man should do what he could in a good 
cause ; and very much pleased with his suc- 
cess, Libarius pressed his friend's hand and 
left him. The captain shook his head, and 
said to Leo, " Hark, my lad. I would not say 
what I wished before the shipowner, because 
I saw that he wanted to send you on the wha- 



32 LEO BERTRAM. 

ling voyage. But now take my advice ; you 
do not know what you are undertaking, nor 
can you form any idea of the trials and hard- 
ships to which you will be exposed." 

" I know that it is no sport," said Leo. 
" But I have been on the water. No, no, cap- 
tain; you cannot turn me from my decision." 

"As you will," said the captain, rather 
shortly, "but you will repent it. Come, Li- 
barius." 

He turned his back upon Leo, but as they 
went on together the lawyer explained why 
the lad was so anxious to undertake the voy- 
age, and the captain finally declared that he 
was a brave fellow, and went to work select- 
ing the necessary articles for him, and bought 
a warm fur coat, which he added as a gift 
from himself, saying, " I will send it to him, 
and I think he will find it not superfluous. 
The lad is a fine fellow and should be as- 
sisted." 

Libarius rejoiced as much over the coat 
as if he had given it himself. He pressed 
the captain's hand warmly as he said, " God 
will reward you, Rembrant. See here. Thia 



GOOD DEEDS RE WARDED. 33 

is another proof that good men still live un- 
der the blue canopy of heaven. How pleased 
the poor lad will be when he finds that his 
filial love and devotion are fully appreciated. 
No good deed goes without its fruit, captain." 

" And no wicked one but sooner or later 
will be overtaken and punished by a righteous 
Judge," added Rembrant earnestly. "Mark 
me, that rascal Elshoft will not escape." 

" God be with you, my friend ; send the 
goods to be put on the ship to-day, for we 
shall weigh anchor early to-morrow morning." 

" Much happiness on the voyage, captain," 
replied the lawyer, again shaking the stout 
seaman's hand. " Heaven accompany you 
and bring you back in peace and safety." 

The two men separated, each went his 
own way, and many months would go by be- 
fore they would stand face to face again. 



34 LEO BERTRAM. 



CHAPTER III. . 
DEPARTURE FROM HOME. 

While Captain Rembrant and Libarius 
were attending to Leo's outfit, he flew with 
a light heart to the banks of the river, unfas- 
tened his boat from the stake where it was 
tied fast, seized the oars, and sent it skim- 
ming over the waves ; and although he was 
going with the tide, Leo did not relax his 
speed, but divided the dark water with rapid 
and even strokes, in order to reach home be- 
fore nightfall. 

In the mean time, as his boat was gliding 
over the waves, he considered long and care- 
fully whether he should let his mother know 
all that had happened, or conceal it from her, 
and only unfold his entire plan to Willy at 
first. When he thought of his mother's tears, 
and the entreaties she would use to urge him 
to abandon his purpose, he could not bear to 
disclose all to her, and he decided to remain 
silent on the subject He could not stay at 



DEPARTURE FROM HOME. 35 

home ; he must leave her in order to preserve 
her home ; and besides, as he had promised 
to go on the ship, nothing should prevent 
him. And yet the question arose, "Am I 
right in going without obtaining her con- 
sent?" But the consciousness that he was 
trying to do what was for the best comforted 
him ; and as he had been acting on his own 
responsibility for several years, and his mother 
had been satisfied with him, he hoped she 
would not blame him in this matter. She 
would get over the first sharp pain of separa- 
tion, the voyage would not be so very long, 
he might return before Christmas, and the 
result of the enterprise would console her for 
the parting. 

Leo no longer repented his decision, and 
as he drew nearer home he became more de- 
termined to let his mother hear of his depart- 
ure through Willy. As he went into the 
room his mother and brother were sitting 
near the table, mending their nets by the 
light of the lamp. It was a peaceful picture 
of quiet domestic life. As his eyes rested 
upon it, a feeling of sorrow came over his 



36 LEO BERTRAM. 

heart as he said to himself, " This is the last 
evening I may ever pass with them." 

His anger rose fiercely against the man 
whose greedy avarice was driving him from 
his little home out into the world, perhaps to 
death. But his hatred subsided, and his heart 
beat higher with no ignoble pride when he 
thought that he was ready and willing to 
make the hardest sacrifices in order to pre- 
serve his mother's comfort and happiness. 
This consciousness gave him strength to 
meet them with his ordinary composure, and 
he greeted' his mother with the consoling 
words, " Fear no more, mother. My plan 
has succeeded, and our persecutor will be 
powerless." 

He pressed Willy's hand, and then seat- 
ing himself between his brother and mother, 
he related how he had sold his fish, and that 
the good lawyer had promised to look out 
for their interests, and see that his mother's 
rights were protected. He said nothing 
about himself and his intention of starting on 
a dangerous voyage the following day; but 
the sorrow of the coming separation weighed 



i 



DEPARTURE FROM HOME. 37 

down his heart, and he sank in quiet reflec- 
tion, which was only broken by a chance word 
from Willy or a question from his mother. 
Then he spoke carelessly, and laughed and 
joked, in order to conceal the bleeding wound 
in his heart ; but the sharp eyes of a mother 
could not be deceived. She remembered the 
strange tone of his voice, and scanned his 
features earnestly, but she was silent, think- 
ing it better to defer her questions until 
they were alone. Perhaps he did not wish 
Willy to hear what was disturbing him, for 
that something worried him she could not 
doubt. 

At last the hour came for retiring. The 
tall cuckoo-clock called out monotonously 
ten o'clock, and his mother rose. Leo also 
stood up. He rushed to her, kissed her ten- 
derly, and said in a low voice, " Bless me, 
mother." 

"Ah, my son!" She placed her arms 
around him. " Certainly ; but, Leo, you are 
concealing something that troubles you." 

" Yes, mother," answered Leo, " but makes 
me happy too. To-morrow at this hour you 



.r o 



LEO BERTRAM. 



Willy sprang up immediately, and a few mo 
ments later stood in Leo's room. 

" Brother," said Leo, " we must go out on 
the water. I beg that you will go down to 
the shore immediately, and I will soon follow 
you." 

Willy complied, wondering to himself 
why his brother had not made his prepara- 
tions the evening before, as he did usually; 
and Leo, writing a few farewell words on a 
bit of paper, folded it and placed it in his belt, 
in order to give it to Willy to hand to his 
mother when he returned home. Then he 
went to the room where his mother was sleep- 
ing, perhaps lost in loving dreams, and cer- 
tainly without a suspicion that it would be a 
long time before she would again see her son. 
As he approached the door, he hesitated and 
listened. She breathed calmly. Leo felt his 
heart failing, and he was impelled to open 
the door. Lightly, very lightly would he 
creep to the foot of the bed, in order to carry 
the last impression of his mother's features 
upon his memory. Already his hand was 
stretched towards the handle, determined to 



DEPARTURE FROM HOME. 41 

carry out this wish. But no; what if his 
mother were to question him as to what had 
led him there at that unusual hour. Should 
his last words to her be a lie ? No, that must 
not happen! The memory of his home 
should be without reproach; he must look 
back upon a blameless record. Again he 
knelt and implored the blessing of heaven to 
rest upon his beloved parent, and then kiss- 
ing the threshold her feet had so often trod, 
he murmured, " Farewell, dear mother !" 

He rose, passed his hand over his eyes, 
composed himself, and with a noiseless step 
went out of the house. He lingered a mo- 
ment by the grave of his father, and then 
turned resolutely towards the sea, over which 
streamed the golden rays of the sun, and with 
quick steps ran to the shore. Willy was 
ready to push the boat from the land. Leo 
silently sprang in, seized the oars, and turned 
the prow towards the open sea. 

" Brother, shall we not cast our nets here?" 
said Willy, at last breaking the silence. " This 
was a very good place day before yester- 
day." 



42 LEO BERTRAM, 

" No, Willy, I did not come out to fish 
this morning," said Leo, rowing farther out. 

His brother glanced at him a moment in 
wonder, shook his head, and then dipping his 
oars again in the water, sent the craft on far- 
ther towards the open sea. Suddenly Leo 
threw down his oars, and said, " I have 
changed my mind, Willy. My last business 
at home shall be devoted to the interests of 
my dear mother." 

" You speak very strangely to-day, broth- 
er," said Willy. " Your head must be a little 
wrong." 

"You will soon learn and comprehend 
all," answered Leo. " Now to work." 

Willy said nothing, and silently proceeded 
to cast out the nets without asking another 
question. After obtaining what they wished, 
Leo let the boat float on the waves, and hold- 
ing his head on his hand looked thoughtfully 
over the water, and then suddenly asked, " Is 
it not true, Willy, that you love mother as 
well as I ?" 

" There is no doubt of that, you may be 
sure," replied Willy. 



DEPARTURE FROM HOME. 45 

" And if I were no longer with you, would 
you not stand by her and care for her, as we 
have always done together ?" 

" I would have to work very industriously 
to stand in your place," said Willy simply, 
** But you will not leave us, brother ?" 

'* I must, I must," cried Leo, with great 
earnestness, in order to dismiss every objec- 
tion of his brother's. " Listen to me, and 
then you will see that I must go." 

Willy drew in his oars also, and let the 
boat drift as it would, noting only his broth- 
er's words as Leo related clearly what he had 
learned from his mother in the arbor, and 
how he had planned to disappoint the wicked 
design of their cousin. " Now decide, Willy^ 
whether I have done right," he asked, as he 
closed the narration. "Your heart will tell 
you if you can dare to blame me." 

Willy looked frankly in Leo's face, and 
answered, without hesitation or doubt, " You 
have behaved nobly and well. I praise you 
for it, and if you were not older than I, I 
would take your place ; but I see you have 
the advantage in this matter. God will go 



44 LEO BERTRAM. 

with you ; his blessing will not fail. And 
have no anxiety on mother's account. If I 
am not as strong or skilful as you, we shall 
not want for the necessaries of life, for I will 
be twice as industrious." 

" But what will mother say if I leave her 
without bidding her farewell ?" 

" She will weep, Leo. She certainly will 
shed many tears, but her blessing will rest 
upon you," said Willy. " And depend upon 
it, I will console her as well as I can, and 
when the first pain is over, she will love you 
more than ever. You have done right. I 
envy you your good fortune, but still I have 
this consolation, I can be useful when you 
have left us." 

" Certainly, Willy, if I am serving mother 
in doing this, the greatest help comes from 
you, for without you I could do nothing at 
all," replied Leo. " But now I can go with a 
light heart, for you approve of my design, 
and can aid me by the work of your hands. 
If I only knew that mother approves of my 
plan ! This worries me, Willy. If I thought 
that I was adding to her care and anxiety by 



DEPARTURE FROM HOME, 45 

going away, my courage and strength would 
desert me." 

Willy shook his head and looked thought- 
fully towards the house in the distance, that 
shone like a polished shield on the declivity 
overlooking the sea. 

" Brother !" he suddenly exclaimed ; " if 
you were certain that mother's blessing went 
with you on the voyage ?" 

" If I only knew that in my heart," inter- 
rupted Leo, " and that she knew I was fulfill- 
ing my duty as a son — -" 

" But, Leo, if you only knew T 
" How can it be known, Willy T 
" Oh, it is very simple. The idea came 
suddenly into my head as I looked back to- 
wards our house. Leo, as soon as you are 
on board of the Dolphin, I will row home, re- 
late all to mother, and if she thinks as I be- 
lieve she will, I shall take a great white sheet 
and fasten it to the peak of the house. Such 
a banner can be seen for miles at sea, and 
when you spy it fluttering in the wind, you 
can believe that it sends a thousand greetings 
and good wishes for you from mother." 



46 LEO BERTRAM. 

" That 's a splendid plan," cried Leo, his 
eyes flashing with joy. " And you will prom- 
ise not to deceive me, Willy ?" 

" No ; I think that would be wrong," 
said his brother. " Let us row nearer to the 
land, so that as soon as you are on board the- 
Dolphin I can succeed in my plan. The 
sooner the flag is hoisted, the better for you." 

"You are right;" and Leo seizing the 
oars, they both sent the boat swiftly over the 
waves. 

" And when you tell mother, give her 
this note. I have written my farewell in it. 
Do not forget it." 

Willy placed it in his pocket, promising 
Leo to carry out all his requests conscien- 
tiously ; and now the two lads talked of what 
was uppermost in their hearts — of the dan- 
gers that might overtake Leo in his perilous 
journey, and the joy of his return. They 
also spoke of what could be done for their 
mother during his absence, in case she was 
cdisturbed'or distressed by their cousin Elshoft. 
The lawyer had promised to befriend them, 
and Willy must seek his advice if necessary. 



DEPARTURE FROM HOME. 47 

With this conversation the time passed, 
until they reached a convenient spot near 
the shore, where the Dolphin would neces- 
sarily pass. It was almost noon, and they 
expected to see the ship every moment ; but 
an hour passed away before the white sails 
were seen in the distance, coming nearer and 
then vanishing behind the forest-covered 
heights of the land, following the bends of 
the river until finally the form of the ship be- 
came defined distinctly, sailing like a graceful 
swan upon the bosom of the water. 

" Npw is the time," niurmured Leo sadly. 
** We must run nearer." 

They seized their oars, and a few mo- 
ments after, their boat was by the side of the 
whaler. 

The brothers embraced. "Farewell; 
God protect you," said Leo in a trembling 
voice, as he tore himself away from his broth- 
er. Soon he stood upon the deck of the 
Dolphin, leaning against the ta£Frail, and 
waved a last parting to the little skiff. Willy 
dashed a tear from his eyes, turned the prow 
of his boat toward the shore, and rowed 



48 



LEO BERTRAM. 



with all his might. When he reached it he 
looked back at the Dolphin, whose white 
sails were flying over the glittering surface of 
the water. 

"Willy waved his handkerchief, and 
murmuring, " God bless you, my brother," he 
ran on to the house, with quick steps and a 
hopeful heart, to relate all to his mother. 



THE PILOT. 49' 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE PILOT. 

Leo was still watching his brother, when 
Captain Rembrant clapped him on his shoulder 
aftd exclaimed, " Welcome on the Dolphin, 
my lad. Don't get down-hearted, With 
the help and blessing of God, we will see 
them all again in a few months ; or, if you 
repent this hasty step, it is not yet too late 
to turn back." 

" No," said Leo, " I do not regret it. If 
I have the firm conviction that I am doing 
right, I cannot repent this step." 

** Well done ! I welcome you again, and 
hope as long as we remain together you will 
honestly do your duty. Follow me to old 
Martin, the pilot. I have predicted that you 
will become an able seaman and a good whaler, 
and I cannot do better than give you old 
Martin as your teacher. Rough and harsh 
he is, it is true, but a braver seaman never 
trod the deck of a ship. Come, my lad." 

LMBertrun. *t 



so LEO BERTRAM, 

The captain led the way. Leo followed, 
until he stood by the side of a broad-shoul- 
dered, undersized man, every inch a seaman. 
Rough enough he was, certainly. He wore 
a coarse pea-jacket, and a low-crowned felt 
hat shaded his broad, honest face, and under 
it twinkled his sharp gray eyes. His cheeks 
and brow were as brown as mahogany from 
exposure to the weather — the sun of the 
tropics and cutting cold of the polar regions ; 
and his toilsome struggles, of which Leo 
could have little conception, had left deep 
furrows in his features. 

As the captain approached with his 
young charge, Martin glanced at him, and 
then, with a good-natured laugh, offered his 
hand. " Now, lad," he said, in a deep, bass 
voice, '' you will also become a sailor, as your 
father was in his time. I knew your father; 
we made several voyages together. For his 
sake and your own, for the captain has told 
me something that speaks well for you, I will 
take you in hand. Understand me aright, 
my boy, I have n*t time to show anything to 
a lazy booby or a fine dandy. If you stand 



THE PILOT. 51 

under my orders, you will have as much to 
do as the others, and do not think I will 
overlook carelessness or negligence. You 
will have to work night and day, and not go 
with the crowd. If you are punctual and 
industrious, you wiH still find time for your- 
self. You can shirk your duties, it is true ; 
but to be a good seaman, that is another 
question. Now you have heard what I have 
to say." 

Leo did not hesitate. He pressed the 
pilot's hand, and looking frankly in his weath- 
er-beaten face, said resolutely, " I will work 
under you, Martin, that I will ! and do my 
duty as far as possible, and if you put me 
out for idleness or inattention, I shall not 
complain." 

" Bravely spoken, lad !" 

Martin grasped Leo's hand like a vice. 
" If you are only half as good as you promise, 
we will be fast friends." 

"I hope that, indeed!" said Captain Rem- 
brant. " He is young, but is of good metal, 
without and within. Mould him well, Mar- 
tin; and you, Leo, see that you do not dis- 



52 LEO BERTRAM. 

grace your master. There, my boy, you 
need not speak ; I know what you wish to 
say, and I will believe it beforehand. Do not 
be afraid of Martin ; if you have a good will, 
you two will get along very well together." 

The captain gave him a friendly nod and 
left them. 

Leo remained standing near the pilot. 
He looked around him, but was soon lost in 
deep thought, and old Martin, for the time, 
paid no more attention to him. Leo glanced 
back towards the shore, it was receding far- 
ther and farther in the distance. He looked 
for his mother's house, and soon saw it, shi- 
ning like a polished shield, beyond the water. 

"Ah, mother!" Now, perhaps, she had 
learned all, and was stretching out her arms 
to detain her son, who was being carried far- 
ther away from her each moment. Her eyes, 
dimmed with tears, sought to forgive him ; 
but her voice could not reach him, and Leo 
now bitterly repented having taken his de- 
parture without her consent. He looked for 
the white signal Willy had promised to wave 
from the peak of the house, but his search 



THE PILOT. 53 

was not successful, and his heart grew heav- 
ier and heavier. If his mother would not 
forgive him, if she could not overlook the 
hasty and rash step he had taken in order to 
spare her trouble and sorrow, if instead of 
blessing, she should show her displeasure by 
preventing Willy from sending the white 
message ! 

Long and wistfully Leo looked at the dis- 
tant house. " O mother !" he sighed ; " I 
only left you to save you from the persecu- 
tion of a pitiless man. Forgive me for doing 
what I thought to be my honest duty." 

Again he looked, and looked until the 
tears came in his eyes, while he prayed softly 
and earnestly that God would give peace to 
his mother's heart, and take away the heavy 
doubts and fears that oppressed his own. 

With full sails, the ship glided over the 
water, as a bird cutting through the air. 
The land receded farther into the distance, 
but still the white house could be seen, a 
solitary point, over the green waves. But it 
must soon disappear, and with it, Leo now 
realized, his peace of mind. 



54 LEO BERTRAM. 

" Lad, why are you gazing back at the 
land ?" questioned the pilot, placing his heavy 
hand on his shoulder. " It will be an ill voy- 
age if the body sails with the ship and the 
heart remains at home. Forward ! Forward, 
my boy ! What a man undertakes he must 
enter into with body and soul, for you will 
haye need of both." 

Leo turned his glance from his home. 
He bit his lip, to conceal his emotion from 
Martin's sharp eyes; but Martin saw the 
starting tears, and frowned. 

'* Listen," he said roughly, " weak-hearted 
mother s baby, afraid of the voyage to the 
North Pole. That needs courage and a 
brave heart. You had better have consider- 
ed all this before you came on board of the 
Dolphin." 

" I am no baby, Martin," replied Leo, 
" and if you knew what worries me, you would 
be milder." 

The expression of the old seaman's face 
changed as he questioned Leo, and when he 
confessed the cause of his depression, Martin 
said, in a kind voice, " That is another thing. 



7HE PILOT, 55. 

my lad. It is said that everything succeeds 
with God's blessing ; but if the mother s bless- 
ing is wanting, much is wanting, indeed, and 
no wonder your heart is heavy. Now, now^ 
lad, something may yet be done. We can 
see the house for an hour or so more, and 
that is a long time. Go, fetch my spyglass ; 
perhaps we can discover something with that." 

Leo ran off quickly, and asking a sailor 
where he should find Martin's bunk, soon 
brought the spyglass. 

*• So, lad," said Martin, " that 's it. Now 
take the glass and look through it carefully. 
We will not give up hope, for a mother's 
heart is a treasure-house, filled with the best 
stores." 

" So — that is right, and if you discover 
anything, let me know, and we will enjoy it 
together." 

Leo placed the spyglass before his eye 
and peered through it, for news from the lit- 
tle house which enclosed all that he held 
most dear in this world. He saw it clearly ,^. 
with its silver-white walls, and the green 
grapevines which formed the drapery for the 



S6 LEO BERTRAM, 

windows. Plainly, in spite of the distance, 
he could distinguish everything, even the 
point on the roof, and it seemed to him as if 
he could see his mother sitting by the win- 
dow, in the black dress which she had worn 
since his father's death. But really that 
might only be the shadow of a dark tree, 
which fell on the clear, glistening pane. Leo's 
hand trembled, and he sent a thousand loving 
greetings to the shadow. But the white 
.sheet — where was it ? 

It was not there, and the ship was sailing 
farther and farther away, and the point was 
;growing smaller to the eyes of the anxious 
boy. In a short half hour the little white 
house would disappear behind the horizon, 
and the thorn pressing into Leo's heart would 
remain there for a long time. He began to 
feel the gnawing of the worm that men call 
, remorse, but he still hoped, though scarcely a 
breath of hope remained. His cheeks were 
white, his hand trembled, and he murmured 
sadly, " O Willy, if you had not thought of 
this signal, I would at least have been left in 
•doubt, and have had during my voyage the 



THE PILOT. 57 

consolation that I was trying to do my duty ; 
but now I seem to feel conscious that my 
mother's displeasure rests upon me." 

" I cannot see it, Martin," he said, handing 
the glass to the pilot with a trembling hand. 
" The house has vanished behind the waves, 
and all hope is gone." 

His voice gave way as he uttered the last 
words, and old Martin, taking the glass from 
him, placed it before his own eyes. He 
laughed to himself. 

" The land rat ! the land rat !" he mutter- 
ed. " I have seen water all my life, and have 
been well soaked in it. My boy, the white 
sheet is floating yonder." 

*' Can it be 1 Is it true, Martin V cried 
Leo, doubtfully seizing the glass again, with 
heightened color. " I saw no sign of it just 
now.'' 

" Your eyes did not look far enough, my 
boy," replied Martin, laughing heartily. 
" There it flutters and waves over the sea, 
like an admiral's flag. Be quiet, be quiet. 
If your hand trembles, you cannot recognize 
it through the glass." 

Lm B«rtrftin. S 



58 LEO BERTRAM. 

Leo, indeed, was trembling like an aspen 
leaf, and his fresh, red cheeks were blanched 
white as linen. But he endeavored to com- 
pose himself as he rested the glass on the 
railing in order to hold it firmly, and as he 
looked through it again, a smile of joy light- 
ened his face. " It waves! It flutters ! Ah, 
my mother has forgiven me, and her blessing 
follows me ! Thank God that she approves 
of my undertaking !" 

Old Martin rubbed his hands together 
with pleasure and looked at his young charge 
with great interest. Leo's eyes were still fas- 
tened upon the fluttering white sheet. 

" Yes," murmured the pilot. *' The feel- 
ings of men are always the same. It was just 
so with me when I left home thirty years ago. 
I was fourteen when I saw my home for the 
last time. Thinks I, * My heart must break, 
and will break.' But it did not, and hard 
work is the best comforter and cure for home- 
sickness. Ah, can you no longer see it, my 
boy ?" 

He turned to Leo, who had taken the 
glass from his eyes. " Now we are over the 



THE PILOT. 59 

line, but if you will climb to the top of the 
mast you may catch another glimpse of the 
flag which does you so much good to see. I 
do not object to it. You cannot help me 
now, and the heart of a young lad who is 
leaving home and mother for the first time 
must have its rights. Run, lad. There will 
be no one there to disturb you if you please 
to hold a conversation with yourself." 

Leo did not hesitate to avail himself of 
this permission from his fatherly friend, for 
in this light he already regarded old Martin ; 
and he had soon ascended the mast, and 
watched the shore through the glass until the 
sea, earth, and sky, were blended in one line, 
and nothing could be discerned but the im- 
measurable water, the blue heaven, and from 
time to time a bird darting with outspread 
wings over the glassy billows. 

Leo folded his arms as he sat for a few 
moments in quiet thought. Perhaps he rais- 
ed his heart in prayer in this solitary place. 
He passed his hand over his* eyes, and then 
said to himself, " Enough ! From this time 
my strength shall be devoted to my duties. 



€o LEO BERTRAM, 

and only in quiet hours will I think of home, 
mother, and brother. Old Martin may look 
like a polar bear, but his roughness is only 
on the outside. My standing here in this 
place is the safest assurance of his kind, no- 
ble heart. Never shall he have cause to com- 
plain of me." 

He threw one more glance in the direc 
tion of home, then closing the spyglass, he 
descended lightly, and soon after stood by old 
Martin's side with clear eyes and frank face 
as his good friend greeted him with a rough, 
but well-meant grasp of the hand. 



•'^uy, 






THE LISTENER. 6i 



CHAPTER V, 

THE LISTENER. 

Thb wind was favorable, and the Dolphin 
sailed on gallantly over the water, and Cap- 
tain Rembrant thought it would matter little 
chat the season for starting on the whaling- 
voyage was a little later than usual, for in a 
couple of months, if winds continued favor- 
able, they might steer for home with a full 
cargo. Old Martin was in a good humor, 
and the sailors were cheerful. Leo was ac- 
tive and obliging, and Martin was not wrong 
in believing that work and constant industry 
would banish every shadow from the heart of 
his young friend. Martin and Captain Rem- 
brant were not alone in the good opinion 
formed of Leo. The good-natured and pleas- 
ant lad soon made friends among the crew, 
and only a few regarded him with mistrust 
and jealousy, envying him the favor shown by 
his superiors. Leo did not pay them back in 
the same coin, but was pleasant and good* 



52 LEO BERTRAM. 

natured to every one, and the fatherly affec- 
tion displayed by old Martin made him more 
zealous in his service and doubly anxious to 
please him. 

One night it happened that Martin and 
Leo were keeping watch on deck at the same 
hour. It was a clear, peaceful night. The 
moon was glittering in the sky and lighted 
the sea with its streaming rays, and the waves 
dashed against the prow of the Dolphin as 
she cut through the water. In spite of the 
high latitude the air was mild and refreshing, 
and there were no dangers to fear. Martin 
sat near the wheel, his eyes roved carefully 
around, and as he could discern nothing to 
cause any alarm, he called Leo, who was 
leaning over the railing of the vessel lost in 
thought, and made a place for him by his 
side. 

" There, rest a bit, my lad," he said in a 
friendly tone. " The night is warm, the moon 
clear, and the ship is sailing splendidly. The 
others will keep good watch, and it is a fine 
night to spin yarns. Let me hear what 
brought you on board of the Dolphin. I 



THE LISTENER. 63 

have heard this and that from the captain 
already, but now I would like to learn the 
whole story from you." 

Leo was very willing to relate all to the 
pilot, who had proved to be a kind friend 
both to his parents and himself, and he there- 
fore made no attempt to conceal anything 
from him. While he was speaking, one of 
the sailors, who had been walking to and fro 
on the deck, seated himself close by, where 
he could hear every word Leo uttered, al- 
though he appeared to have only thrown him- 
self carelessly upon the block to gain a little 
rest. He leaned his head back upon his 
hand and turned his face towards the water, 
in order to conceal his design by his indiffer- 
ent attitude, while Leo and Martin continuec 
their conversation, unconscious of being over- 
heard. Indeed all the world might have 
heard, for he only spoke the truth. So Leo 
related the story at full length, and Martin 
listened attentively and without interrupting 
him until Leo mentioned that after the death 
of his father his partner had asserted that the 
wrecked vessel was not owned equally, anc? 



64 LEO BERTRAM. 

that the widow Bertram had no written proof 
to the contrary. 

At this old Martin sprang up. " That is 
the worst thing I have heard of old Elshoft!' 
he exclaimed. " I know the whole story, be- 
cause I had command at the time of the Ura- 
nus — the name of the lost ship, and had taken 
your father's place. I knew him well, as 1 
have often said, and when he was ill he beg- 
ged me to take his place until he became well 
again. That I could not do, for I was en- 
gaged as pilot for a ship bound to the East 
Indies, and it was then that your father said 
he was only responsible for half of the value, 
and could not do as well for me as he would 
have done if he had been the sole owner. It 
is plain the knave has lied to your mothe 
Shameful! Disgraceful to steal all the de* 
pendence from the orphans and widow!" 

" Ah, that could have been borne," said 
Leo ; " but he wishes to extort more money 
from my mother, and that is the reason I 
have taken service on the Dolphin." 

**And how could the rascal do that?* 
asked Martin, sitting down again to listen. 



THE LISTENER, 65 

Leo related what we already know, and 
Martin, who was usually a mild-tempered 
man, allowed himself to become so excited 
that he uttered an angry curse against El- 
shoft. 

" God forgive me !" he exclaimed quickly ; 
•*but this is enough to break the thread of 
one's patience if it were as thick as the an- 
chor-cable! And so, after treating youT 
mother so shamefully, he would also drive 
her from her only place of refuge !. Now see, 
my lad. You were willing to sacrifice your- 
self for your mother's sake. That* will bring 
you credit, but your courage and resolution 
shall be rewarded. If God only permits me 
to return to Bremen, the rascal shall give up 
his plunder, as true as my name is Martin 
and I am an honest man. We will see if he 
dare deny to my face what your father af- 
firmed in his presence. We will see about 
it. He dare not bring his witnesses against 
me. He shall give back pound for pound, 
penny for penny. Only patience, my lad, pa- 
tience. God has led you on board of the 
Dolphin in order to bring the truth to light, 



66 LEO BERTRAM. 

and the voyage to the North Pole will not be 
in vain. We will unearth this fox ; he shall 
not only disgorge the plunder, but pay the 
interest for the bygone years." 

" Good Martin, that need not be done,' 
replied Leo. ** The rascal is already tracked, 
and the lie will be uncovered, if possible, foi 
Herr Libarius has done all that he could to 
secure my mother's rights. Every one saw 
that right was on her side, but this was not 
sufficient; the law decided in favor of the 
cheat, he laughed in his sleeve, and brought 
in papers and witnesses to confirm his false- 
,hood;' 

"We will see! we will see!" answered 

/Martin confidently. " If we show that the 

c right is on your mother's side, God must 

; stand by the right. It would indeed be won- 

^erful if the word of an honest seaman is not 

held better than that of a well-known liar, or 

any heap of papers he may swear to. Mis- 

•deeds cannot always remain concealed. God 

is watching over wickedness and injustice, 

and the day will come when the timid will be 

ashamed of their fears. Patience, Leo; God 



THE LISTENER. 67 

will bring wickedness into clear daylight, if 
the lie has been buried in the deepest depths 
of earth." 

Leo shook his head doubtfully; still he 
did not gainsay old Martin, but thought it 
blessing enough to have obtained the position 
on the Dolphin, and averted misfortune rom 
his mother in time of her necessity. 

While Leo and Martin had been engaged 
in earnest conversation, the sailor who over- 
heard every word rose slowly, and paced to 
and fro on the deck as before, without having 
been particularly noticed by either of the 
speakers. 

"So it is all right, is \\.T he muttered. 
** I will see that this disgrace and shame does 
not become discovered. Miserly my father 
may be, but he is no liar; and yet he served 
the widow a mean trick. Why did he not 
leave her in peace, and not root up the old 
story for a beggarly three hundred thalers } 
The avaricious miser !" 

He crossed his arms over his breast, and 
leaning on the railing looked absently in the 
distance, but no eye could see what was in 



68 LEO BERTRAM. 

his soul. He was busy with thoughts and 
plans which carried him far away from his 
surroundings. An hour passed away, and 
when it was time to change the watch, Mar- 
tin turned around sharply and spoke to a 
sailor, who was then sitting on the coil of 
ropes. 

*• Hark! Who kept the first watch with 
us?'^ 

" Ernest Bohme and Conrad Elshoft," 
said the sailor. 

" Conrad Elshoft ! Note that fellow," said 
old Martin, turning back to Leo. " If he is 
his father^s son, he may feel disposed to play 
us some kind of trick." 

" But I cannot believe he is," said Leo. 

*• Old Elshoft is rich, and would not send his 

only child on such a perilous northern voy- 

. age, unless he would let him go in order to 

fit him for the command of a vessel." 

" Very good. It may be so. The fox is 
wretchedly miserly, and it is the fashion now 
to go to the Polar regions. He may intend 
to send a ship there. If fortune be favorable, 
it would pay well. Depend upon it, he has 



THE LISTENER. 69 

not sent his son with us to learn the trade for 
nothing. If we are lucky, next year he may 
send out a ship, and place his son on it as 
captain or pilot. If not successful, at least 
nothing is lost, and the boy has his reward of 
three hundred thalers. This is his way of 
reckoning, for one egg is like another, and 
the old proverb says, * The apple does not fall 
far from the stem ;' the son probably is no 
better than the father." 

" But would Captain Rembrant have ta- 
ken the fellow if he had known that he was 
old Elshoft s son V^ questioned Leo. 

" No, the captain has not imagined any 
underhand dealing. We will call the fellow 
here and question him." 

" That will be useless if he has overheard 
us," said Leo. " But how could he hear it ? 
He was sitting near the capstan." 

" Still foresight is necessary in all things. 
Come, my lad," said the pilot. 

Martin rose, crossed the deck, and Leo 
followed him. Conrad, who saw them ap- 
proaching, remained quiet and appeared to 
pay no attention until Martin called to him. 



70 LEO BERTRAM. 

" Ho, fellow ! You seem to keep your 
watch sleeping." 

He sprang up, and rubbed his eyes as if 
he had really been overcome by sleep. 

" Take care," said the pilot sternly. " If 
it happen again, you might get the cat as pun- 
ishment. What is your name ?" 

" Conrad Elshoft." 

" Where born .?" 

" Hamburg." 

" Hum ! Only good seamen come from 
there," muttered the pilot, " though they may 
degenerate. Hold better watch hereafter. I 
will overlook your offence this time. Always 
keep your eyes open, and remember we are 
not on the land." 

Conrad made no reply, and Martin turned 
to Leo. " It is better so ; our whole voyage 
would have been spoiled if old Elshoft's son 
had been along — for me, at least. Aid will 
come, my boy. Go to your hammock now 
and sleep soundly ; we have chatted enough 
for one day, I think." 

Leo quickly disappeared below deck, and 
Martin again took his post at the wheel. 



THE LISTENER. 71 

"Yes," he muttered, "I was too suspicious. 
The fellow was really asleep, for he was not 
prepared to deny it. I need not fear him. 
Woe to old Elshoft if God carries us back to^ 
Bremen safely! 

While Martin was so confident in his^ 
predictions, Conrad shook his clenched fist 
at him, and said with bitterness, " Take care, 
you people. You shall not rob my father of 
his money, nor of his honor, if he be inno- 
cent. And if he be not ! But he must sure- 
ly be. The very doubt of it is terrible." He 
was silent again, and sank, deeply absorbed' 
in his own thoughts, until the next watch rcr- 
lieved him of his duty. 



A. 
\ 



7« LEO BERTRAM. 



CHAPTER VI. 

CONRAD ELSHOFT. 

How wonderful is the human heart! Its 
feelings are vacillating as the wind, and 
driven to and fro by impulse, if not regulated 
and guided by principle. Conrad in his ham- 
anock was agitated by conflicting emotions. 
:He was not devoted to his father with deep 
•affection, and yet his disgrace and dishonor 
tortured him, and he had heard him accused 
and condemned without being able to utter 
one word in his defence. He hoped, at least, 
that he was innocent of the crimes of which 
he was accused, but dared not deny them, 
because his conscience softly whispered that 
Leo had right on his side. The voice of na- 
ture was not dumb; it commanded him to 
honor his father, although he could not es- 
teem him highly. Until now he had believed 
him to be only avaricious ; must he Believe 
him also to be dishonest and the oppressor of 
the widow and orphans? He struggled to 



CONRAD ELSHOFT. 73 

defend his parent, for he would share a por- 
tion of the disgrace ; and whatever may have 
been his faults, Conrad was not quite indif- 
ferent to honor and shame. 

In his first impulse of anger, Conrad gave 
himself up to hard and revengeful thoughts. 
*' If I should prevent Leo and Martin from 
returning to Bremen," he said to himseli\ 
'" there will be no witness against my father, 
and the disgrace will be averted." But how 
•could he hinder their return.? He thought 
of violence, but shuddered at the crime, and 
dismissed it from his mind. His hands should 
not become stained with innocent blood, 
which would make him miserable for time 
and eternity. Far better bear the shame and 
ren^in innocent, than commit a crime which 
even repentance and prayer could never re- 
pair. But how could he ? 

He turned and tossed restlessly in his 
hammock, and the morning dawned before 
he reached any decision. At one time this 
thought flashed upon him : that could he in 
the future make amends for what had been 
done in the past, he might throw himself at 

liBo Bertram. I O 



74 l^O BERTRAM. 

hs father's feet when he returned to Bremen 
2=d beseech him to restore what he had taken 
trom the widow, and thus make amends for 
his tather s sin, and Leo and Martin would 
forget the past. 

But ah, these good dioug^ts soon vanished 
from Conrad's heart, and the idea was aban- 
doned. ** Father will not do it," he cried; 
* money is more to him than the esteem of 
men and the misery erf his own child.** 

Conrad did not speak without experience^ 
He well knew the avariciousness of his fa- 
ther ; his harsh treatment had compelled him 
when a lad of fourteen to leave home and bind 
himself out as cabin4x>y on an East Indian 
\iesseL During a long absence from home 
his father had not cared for his fate, and when 
he returned, five years later, he was soon 
dri\-en from home, and forced to make his 
own way in the world. When he was older, 
as his father discovered that his son did not 
need his assistance, a reconciliation had been 
brought about, but still there was not and 
ne\-er could be any warm feeling of affection 
between the parent and child. After a short 



CONRAD ELSHOFT. 75 

residence at home, Conrad had again entered 
service as sailor, and with changing fortune 
had at last succeeded in getting on the Dol- 
phin. Here he hoped to earn a little money 
as capital, which in time might serve to make 
him independent of his father. 

But this plan would be hopeless if the 
elder Elshoft was proved to be a rogue after 
the Dolphin's return. The son of an ac- 
knowledged rogue could not hope to suc- 
ceed. No one would trust him or engage in 
business with him. Conrad in vain turned 
over ways and means to ward off the im- 
pending blow. He was not especially dis- 
honest by nature, however he might be chan- 
ged by his hard life, and no one could pre- 
dict how he would turn out when disgrace 
and infamy stared him in the face. At last 
he determined to cling to the hope of his fa- 
ther's innocence. 

Conrad might have chtsen a better way, 
by believing in his parent's integrity as long 
as possible ; and if his guilt should be proved, 
he could declare that he had no part in it, 
and make amends by giving back with his 



76 LEO BERTRAM. 

own hands the widow's share. This would 

« 

<:lear him ; no reproach could fall upon him, 
and his conscience would be pure before God 
and man. But Conrad was cowardly; he 
dreaded the contempt of his comrades, and 
believed if one told a lie he must stick to it. 
He hoped that fate would assist him in some 
way. Whale-fishing was a dangerous busi- 
ness ; the ship might be wrecked, and Martin 
and Leo perhaps by some disaster lose their 
lives; or an accident might prevent them 
from returning to Bremen. So he decided 
to let the matter rest for the present, and to 
act as circumstances permitted. 

He remained silent, and attended punc- 
tually to his duties, but not with the hearti- 
ness and cheerfulness displayed by the other 
:seameh, and especially by our friend Leo. 
He was silent and distant with his compan- 
ions, and in spite of their jokes and jeers they 
'^ould scarcely force from him a single smile. 



LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION, if 



CHAPTER VII. 

LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION. 

After a long but fortunate voyage, the 
Dolphin at last arrived at the whaling ground. 
It was now necessary to keep a sharp look- 
out, not only from the deck, but from the 
masthead, and. often the sailors swarmed in 
the rigging in order to catch a first glimpse 
of the dark back of a whale in the water or 
see it spout. Leo was no idler. In the uni- 
versal excitement he hung from morning till 
night on the ropes, and searched with eager 
eyes far and wide over the water, scarcely 
taking time to appease his appetite. He 
would snatch a few mouthfuls, and again with 
great dexterity climb to the top of the mast^ 
and laughed at old Martin, who warned him 
against his temerity. 

" A rash lad," he muttered to himself. 
" He will shortly be one of our best sailors. 
Captain Rembrant will not regret taking 
him on board the Dolphin. I really have as 



78 LEO BERTRAM. 

much pride in him as if he were my own 
son. Only let us see how it will be when we 
go for the first whale. Nimble and strong 
enough he certainly is, but we will see, we 
will see." 

So far fortune had appeared to favor the 
Dolphin ; but n6w it changed. Weeks pass- 
ed away, and not a whale could be seen, and 
not for a moment was the watch for the huge 
monsters neglected. Captain Rembrant grew 
dissatisfied, old Martin grumbled, and the 
joyous spirits of the sailors seemed to have 
deserted them. Another week passed by, 
and then Captain Rembrant went to Mar- 
tin, shook his head, and said, " It cannot go 
on this way much longer, Martin. Our time 
for returning is very near; scarcely a month 
is left before the ice will enclose us, and 
leave us to winter at the North Pole, and 
all that the Dolphin has accomplished will ' 
cost a smart sum of money !" 

" Very true," answered Martin ; " but 
what can be done } The sly fellows will not 
show themselves; they must know that v.c 
are looking out for them." 



LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION 79 

" I have thought of a plan that will save 
us from returning to Bremen empty-handed," 
said the captain. " You know all the world 
will laugh at us if we do not have at least 
one fish on board." 

" Very true ; but the rascals will not let 
us even see them, captain." 

" I think that we can steal a march upon 
them, instead of diving about here and there, 
hoping to come across them. Waiting makes 
many fools. What do you say about sailing 
towards Spitzbergen .»*" 

Martin looked at the captain with undis- 
guised amazement. "Ah, that is a daring 
undertaking at this season of the year," he 
said. 

" We could turn back after we reach the 
more open sea," continued the captain. 
" Nothing venture, nothing have, Martin." 

" Yes, and a bold venture is half won," 
said Martin, who also began to think of sail- 
ing farther north. " We shall certainly find 
whales there, and after they are on board, 
spread every sail, turn back in time to avoid 
the icebergs. Well, captain, old Martin has 



8o LEO BERTRAM. 

nothing to say against your plan, but we 
dare not hesitate long." 

" Forward, then I Turn the helm, my old 
sea-bear !" 

Martin with his strong hand seized the 
spokes of the wheel, and turned the prow of 
the Dolphin toward the north. The sails, 
were properly set, and away sped the vessel 
over the glimmering waves. Every sailor 
knew that it was dangerous at this time of 
the year to sail farther north, but not a man 
murmured, and the captain's orders were re-^ 
ceived with cheers and hurrahs, for all the 
stout hearts were eager for a struggle with 
the monsters of the deep, and they consider- 
ed the danger as nothing compared with the 
mortification of returning home with empty 
hands. Old Martin's face, indeed, grew 
serious when he consulted the calendar, which 
reminded him that the season was already far 
advanced, but he banished his forebodings, 
and muttered, " Nothing venture, nothing 
win. And surely we are only doing our duty 
to our worthy Herr Rheder, in whose service 
we are employed, and fieaven will help us." 



I , 



LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION. 8i 

A strict watch was kept up constantly, 
still no whales were seen, and Captain Rem- 
brant grew more and more anxious as each 
day passed by, and one evening he said to 
his pilot, " It is useless ; our luck has desert- 
ed us. We can only believe that it is the 
will of Providence, and turn back." 

"Not until we see the sharp peaks of 
Spitzbergen," said Martin. " No one shall 
say that we shirked our duty, and if we fail 
then, we will console ourselves that it is 
God's will, and turn homeward." 

" I well know that is your opinion, cap- 
tain, and you will leave the decision to me ; 
but you do not know old Martin, if you think 
his heart is not in the right spot at the right 
moment. Yes, captain, we must see the top 
of Spitzbergen, and then we may perhaps find 
the success that seems flying from us." 

The captain looked carefully at the heav- 
ens, and reflected upon the position of the 
sun, which was sinking beneath the sea. 
" The days are very short," he said, " but so 
be it, we will not turn back until we see 
Spitzbergen, if we have to sail through ice- 

Leo Bertram. f I 



«a LEO BERTRAM. 

bergs first Keep the prow towards the 
north." 

Martin did not leave his post until morn- 
ing. The ship was exposed to many dangers 
during the night, and now great floating ice- 
bergs sailed by them majestically, and were 
still more frequently met as they approached 
the polar regions, resembling vast solitary 
islands, driven away from their foundations 
by the winds and tides. When morning 
dawned, the sea was again clear, and in the 
extreme distance could be seen the icy point 
of Spitzbergen, and there was no fear of that 
becoming loosened from the fetters that have 
chained it for a long period of time. 

Martin called Leo to him, placed him by 
the wheel, with orders to stand by it firmly 
and steadily, while he went below to snatch 
a little sleep. He bade Leo waken him if 
any icebergs floated very near, and Leo 
promised to carry out his directions faithfully 
while his friend enjoyed a rest after his long 
night watch, though old Martin would not 
have closed his eyes but from sheer necessi- 
ty. But his feet had scarcely touched the 



LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION. Zi 

stairway when a loud cry rang out from the 
top of the mast, and a joyful voice shouted, 
*^ Whales! whales ! A whole school!" 

" Where ?" cried the pilot, the thought of 
sleep all vanishing at the sound. " Where, 
Hans ?" he called, as he came quickly up the 
stairs. 

"In the northwest. Two, three, five, 
seven," shouted Hans. " They are spouting 
the water like fountains. And, oh, pilot, five 
more in the north. Hurrah for the spoil!" 

The rest of the crew, who had been roused 
from their hammocks, joined in the general 
cry, as they rushed upon deck. 

" Hurrah, boys !" exclaimed the captain. 
" Out with the harpoons ; swing the boats 
from their fastenings. There *s a whole herd 
of the jolly fellows. We will soon see what 
can be done. Hurry up, lads." 

A scene of indescribable excitement en- 
sued, all running to and fro, some lowering 
and springing into the boats from the deck, 
others throwing in the ropes and harpoons, 
while others drew on their coats, ready for 
starting at the first word of command. 



84 LEO BERTRAM. 

"We have seven boats, captain," said 
Martin quickly. " Three of them can be kept 
in reserve by the boys. I will take charge of 
two, the others under Pilot Barte and Boat- 
swain Korp ; they are good harpooners. And 
Leo, quick in that boat. To-day we will see 
what you have learned." 

Captain Rembrant willingly agreed to 
Martin's suggestions, and Martin, with Leo, 
jumped in the best boat, which was ready 
for departure. Away flew the light craft, as 
the sailors dipped their oars in the water, and 
the rest of the stout men selected by Martin 
arranged and fastened the ropes to the sharp 
harpoons, while Leo recalled the instructions 
and suggestions he had received from the 
pilot. His face glowed, his eyes sparkled, 
his heart beat high, but he listened with at- 
tention to the orders given by Martin, and 
tried to imprint them upon his memory. 

" Keep close by my side, and if you see 
that the whale cannot escape, use your own 
skill and judgment, but watch well, my boy, that 
you do not get entangled in the ropes. It 
would be an unfortunate thing if the rope 



LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION 85 

should become wound around you when a 
harpoon is driven into the back of a whale, 
for you will be lost beyond hope in that case. 
The greatest care is necessary." 

Leo listened attentively, and now the boat 
was within a cable's length of the whale. 

" Now, Leo, mark well how I make the 
assault. I must direct my aim as near as 
possible. Attention ! I see a fellow whose 
acquaintance I intend to make." 

Martin was standing in the boat's bow as 
he spoke, the harpoon was in his hand, his 
left foot was planted firmly before him, as he 
paused a moment and considered the position 
of the monstrous fish, which was floating free- 
ly and unsuspiciously in the clear waters, 
without the least fear of the approaching 
boat. He drew a long breath and raised his 
hand, armed with the harpoon. 

" Now, children," he said breathlessly, but 
with confidence in himself, yet in spite of his 
self-command his voice trembled. "On, a. 
boat's length ; if possible, get nearer. There, 
a little more to the right, so that he cannot 
strike the boat with his tail Heaven help us V 



86 LEO BERTRAM. 

He raised his armed hand a little higher, 
hesitating, while the crew watched him with 
breathless interest, dividing their attention 
between their pilot and the whale. Suddenly 
he hurled the harpoon into the black side of 
the animal as if it had darted from the mouth 
of a cannon. The sharp point of the steel- 
edged weapon pierced deeply into the whale's 
back, and its handle quivered some seconds 
from the force of the blow, as the boat drew 
back out of reach. Old Martin's features re- 
lapsed into a grim smile, and seizing the rope 
quickly he muttered more to himself than to 
the crew, " This fellow shall not escape, and 
we will not turn back to Bremen with empty 
hands." 

There was no time for other words, for 
the whale had no sooner felt the blow than 
he struggled to escape. He elevated his tail 
high in the air, and struck the waves with 
such monstrous blows the report was like the 
sound of a cannon. It was well for the boat 
it had escaped the blows. Now a stream of 
blood and water, thick as a man's arm, issued 
from the nostrils of the whale, which darted 



LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION. 87 

below the surface with h'ghtning-like swift- 
ness, to hide in the sea beyopd the reach of 
his enemies. But it was useless for him to 
try and save himself by flight, the harpoon 
was so carefully secured to the rope, and this 
was unwound from the windlass with such 
dangerous rapidity, the rope smoked and 
threatened to catch fire. 

"Sprinkle water on the cable," shouted 
Martin, seizing a second harpoon, in order to 
have it ready when the whale again rose to 
the surface. 

One of the sailors sprang forward to obey 
the command, while the others rowed towards 
the spot pointed out by the pilot, where the. 
animal, when he needed air, would probably 
reappear. Several minutes elapsed. In? 
breathless silence every eye was waiting for 
the whale's reappearance, all hands were busy 
keeping the boat as near the animal as possi- 
ble. Leo drew near Martin, and kept a sharp 
outlook for the chances of the chase. 

The whale rose again only a few rods 
from them, and plunged about in the water vio- 
lently. The sailors needed no further orders p 



88 LEO BERTRAM. 

they rowed towards the immense creature, 
and another harpoon, hurled from Martin's 
hand, sunk in his back. Leo threw down his 
oar, seized a harpoon, and sprang upon the 
edge of the boat to follow Martin's example. 
The harpoon flew and struck the whale, but 
just at that instant the boat gave a sudden 
lurch, Leo stumbled, and falling overboard, 
sank with a cry in the whirling waters. 

There rose a general outcry from all the 
sailors but one, who sat silent and white in 
the back of the boat. No sound escaped 
through his half-opened lips, although his 
face expressed the utmost horror. 

"What has happened?" cried Martin in 
a loud voice. 

" Leo is overboard !" 

The old pilot, whose face had been glow- 
ing with excitement, grew pale as a freshly- 
whitened wall. 

" Good heaven," he cried, " then the poor 
lad is lost ! But no, let the whale go to the 
bottom ; a man's life is worth more than any 
money. Back, men! Cut the ropes if tha 
fish drags us on." 



LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION 89 

It was fortunate for Leo that he had 
gained the affection and good will of his com- 
rades, otherwise they would not have relin- 
quished their chances for success in the 
chase in order to rescue him. The boat was 
turned, the whale again disappeared beneath 
the water, while every eye sought for the 
missing lad, and his friends needed no spur 
to urge them on in this work. As the waves 
subsided, a man's face rose from the deep, 
pale, with wet hair clinging about it, and Mar- 
tin without hesitation plunged in. In a few 
moments he had reached Leo's unconscious 
body, and holding him with one hand out- 
stretched over the water, swam slowly and 
safely to the boat. None of the sailors now 
showed more zeal and interest than the one 
who seemed most deeply affected by the acci- 
dent. As Leo was drawn into the boat he 
burst into tears, hid his face in his hands, and 
murmured some words which no one could 
understand. Leo before many minutes came 
to himself, and shook the water from his drip- 
ping brown curls. 

" I am all right, Martin," he cried to the 

12 



90 LEO BERTRAM. 

honest pilot, whose face now beamed with 
joy, as he saw his young friend before him 
safe and apparently uninjured by his acci- 
dent. " See here, the next harpoon I swing 
shall not fail an inch less than the first 
Where is the whale ?" cried the boy. 

" Ah, if that is the way you speak, then 
we will see to the stout fellow again," laughed 
the pilot. " But enough of the harpoons ; 
now we will lay on the lances. On with the 
boat, boys; and you, Leo, be careful; you 
have found out that this is no child's play." 

With these words Martin looked anxious- 
ly around for his half-conquered enemy. 

" On we go," he shouted. " The line is 
running out fast. We have won ; our dan- 
ger is over, unless he should turn." 

The old pilot's words acted like a charm 
upon the sailors ; they went to the work with 
fresh zeal, and the boat sped over the water 
rapidly. In a few minutes they reached the 
spot where Martin supposed the whale would 
reappear. He was right in his surmises; the 
wounded fish rose to the surface, and a large 
circle around him was dyed with dark red 



LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION. 91 

blood, mixed with oil, which spurted like a 
fountain from his nostrils. On flew the boat, 
and soon Martin and Leo buried their lances 
in the already half-exhausted creature. The 
death-struggle of the huge animal was terri- 
/ ble. He lashed the crimsoned waves with 

his tail so violently that the water rose in 
great waves, and the noise was alike deafen- 
ing. It was necessary for the sailors to man- 
age the boat with the greatest skill in order 
to avoid the blows, which would have shat- 
tered it into a thousand pieces* But the 
brave crew kept up the assault, and the whale 
soon discovered that his only refuge would 
be in flight. He attempted to dive down 
deep beneath the water, but had to return 
often to the surface to breathe, his efforts be- 
coming weaker each time. Once more he 
rose, a hollow gurgle issued from his opened 
throat, then with a, great tremor he breathed 
his last. 

Three loud cheers rang out from the sail- 
ors, announcing the victory, and a white flag 
soon fluttered in the wind. This could be 
seen from the Dolphin ; and the pilot, well 



<j'j LEO BERTRAM. 

satisfied with his success, said, as he wiped 
the perspiration from his brow, " Now, my 
lads, we have made a master-stroke. Without 
doubt this will bring the shipowner one thou- 
sand thalers, and you have honestly earned 
your reward. Now, what do you say .? Shall 
we carry this to our comrades, or renew the 
attack while that fellow yonder is resting on 
his fins ?" 

The men, whose zeal had been kindled 
anew by the success of the chase, wished to 
continue it 

" I thought so," exclaimed Martin. " Well, 
so be it, if you will." 

With a loud hurrah the sailors seized 
their oars, old Martin directing them to row 
towards the boats which had been kept in 
reserve during the attack. Meanwhile he 
carefully examined the harpoons and lines, 
laying aside those that were damaged and 
useless, and when he had an opportunity 
he asked Leo what had caused him to fall 
overboard. 

Leo could not account for his accident, 
and the other sailors knew no more about it 



LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION. 93. 

than he. One sailor remained silent on the 
subject, until old Martin, turning to him, said» 
" Elshoft, you were sitting behind and could 
see what happened ; tell us all about it" 

** I know nothing," answered Elshoft has- 
tily, and his cheeks were blanched white as 
he spoke ; " I was only looking at the whale^ 
I did not notice Leo as he fell overboard." ^ 

Old Martin gave him a long, searching^ 
glance. Elshoft turned his head away ta 
conceal his emotion. 

" I will keep a sharp eye on him," thought 
the pilot. " I believe the fox knows more 
than he confesses." 

But this created no suspicion among the 
crew, every one supposing that Leo had lost 
his balance and stumbled, while Conrad's 
conscience whispered to him the petition, 
" Lead me not into temptation, and deliver 
me from the evil thoughts that constantly 
assail my heart." But he did not make it his 
sincere prayer. Strength from heaven alone 
could shield and strengthen him against the 
bitter, revengeful suggestions presented by Sa- 
tan. A scarcely perceptible motion of the boat 



94 LEO BERTRAM. 

had thrown Leo from his balance ; whether 
this was intentional or accidental no one 
knew, only God above, "who searches the 
hearts and tries the reins of men." If the 
temptation offered itself of freeing himself 
from Leo by this opportunity, probably he 
also knew that Martin would plunge after his 
favorite, and both possibly might be lost be- 
neath the waves. The diving of the whale 
at the time saved them, but whether Conrad 
really rejoiced at this, who could say } 

The men again went heartily to work, 
and in a few moments were engaged in an- 
other scene of terrible danger. Two of the 
largest whales were secured, the others found 
safety in flight, and no one thought of follow- 
ing them, for they already had enough to 
keep them busy for that day in carrying the 
spoils to the ship. Ropes were fastened to 
the tails of the monsters, and they were towed 
to the Dolphin, where preparations were made 
to secure the valuable cargo. Two days were 
spent in carrj^ing the blubber and bones on 
board. No one could think or talk of any- 
thing but the adventures of the chase, and 



LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION. 95 

not a man would listen to turning back to- 
wards home, although the season was far ad- 
vanced, and the ice-floes they saw warned 
them that there was danger of the ship's be- 
coming imprisoned if the winter set in sud- 
denly upon them. The sails of the Dolphin 
were spread, and with a good wind she sailed 
still farther north. 



/ ■ 



96 LEO BERTRAM. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

THE BEAR-HUNT. 

In the succeeding three weeks the Dol- 
phin remained anchored off the coast of 
Spitzbergen. Seven whales had been taken, 
and the ship had now a full cargo, and Cap- 
tain Rembrant announced his determination 
of starting for Bremen the following morn- 
ing, after certain necessary repairs had been 
attended to, for the ship had not escaped some 
damages during her voyage. Every heart 
was light, the Dolphin had been remarkably 
fortunate, and no one doubted but that they 
would all reach home without any further 
accident. A few of the sailors were busy 
calking and repairing the ship, others were 
engaged in carefully stowing the cargo, and 
only a few were idle. Among these were 
Martin, Leo, and Elshoft, whose services 
were not needed just at that time. 

Martin was speaking with Leo of their 
success, and of the joy of Leo's mother when 



THE 3EAR-HUNT. 97 

ber son should come back in safety to her 
dear home and her loving arms. 

It was a clear, cold day. The sun stood 
in a cloudless sky, and the rays of light 
glanced on the sharp, ice-covered summits of 
the nearest island, which glittered like dia- 
monds, and objects miles distant could be 
seen distinctly through the transparent at- 
mosphere. Leo looked attentively at the 
wrrounding country, which, in spite of its 
b^^rrenness and solitude, was not without its 
attractions. He rested his eyes upon the 
fields of ice, then on the creeks flowing 
through the crevasses of the jagged island, 
then upon the snow-decked mountains th3t 
1 eared their silver-bright summits in the blue 
heaven. 

"All dead, bairen, and unprofitable," he 
said. " No blade of grass adorns this wild 
scene ; no tree waves its green crown in the 
breeze ; no bird sings on the hard, stiff- 
pointed rocks ; no butterfly sports in this 
barrel clime. Nevertheless it has its own 
charm, and shows the skill and power of the 
^reat Creator." 



9S LEO BERTRAM. 

"Certainly; that is true, my boy," said 
old Martin. ** Nothing is without beauty 
that comes from the hand of the Creator. 
And do not believe that all nature is as dead 
as it appears to be. Amid this wintry bar- 
renness living creatures are creeping. The 
bear roams over the icy surface seeking its 
nourishment ; the seal and walrus are on the 
coast ; foxes and wolves bid defiance to the 
northern winter, and even birds are not want- 
ing, although they have not the brilliant plu- 
mage and the blithe song of their southern 
brothers. Eider ducks, seagulls, stormy pe- 
trels, and great white north owls, have their 
haunts among these rocks, and the polar sea 
swarms with an incredible number of fish. 
Yes, my boy, we find God's care over every- 
thing ; and where we, with our short sight, 
only see slumber and death, there is life and 
motion. There, do you see the shaggy figure 
of a bear on yonder ice ?" 

" I see, I see," said Leo, holding his hand 
above his eyes to protect them from the 
blinding sunlight streaming over the glitter- 
ing ice surface. " And see, Martin, a young 



2HE BEAR-HUN2\ 99 

one IS creeping after her. Ah, Martin, if it 
were only possible to capture them !" 

" Humph! It might be," said Martin, as 
his sharp eyes followed the movements of the 
creatures. " If they only dared to venture 
on that ice-field, where we could cut off their 
retreat, it might be done. The ham of a 
bear is not so bad, and the skin would be a 
good thing to take to the shipowner. If we 
could keep out of his scent and make the at- 
tack, we might capture both. Captain Rem- 
brant, a word !" 

The captain, who was superintending the 
carpenter's work at the other end of the ship, 
came forward quickly. ** What is it, Mar- 
tin ?" 

" Leo and I have discovered a bear. If 
we attack him, he can hardly escape, and it 
can be done in an hour. What do you 
think } It would give us furs and provision." 

" I have nothing to say against it, only we 
can ill spare the men. I do not see the beast. 
Where is he ?" 

" Just there, in a direct line from where 
we stand." 



574650 



100 LEO BERTRAM. 

" Now I can distinguish his shaggy coat 
from the surface of the snow," exclaimed the 
captain. " It is hard to tell the difference. 
But we need our men, Martin, and dare not 
waste our time." 

" Leo, I, and Elshoft, are enough," said 
Martin, who longed for the hunt. " We can 
take harpoons in the boat, and will return in 
two hours with the old and young one." 

Captain Rembrant yielded He went to 
the cabin, brought out three good rifles and 
some powder and balls. In the meantime, 
Martin lowered the best boat, sprang in, and 
seized the oars. Elshoft threw in the weap- 
ons, he and Leo jumped in, and the boat 
was on the point of starting when Captain 
Rembrant called, " Martin, you had better re- 
main. There are some gray clouds gathering 
in the sky, and I fear we will have a snow- 
storm before we are three hours older. See, 
the sun looks dim." 

Martin looked at it sharply and shook 
his head. " Say no more, captain," he said ; 
"we will be back before the bad weather 
comes. It 's hardly a sea mile." 



THE BEAR' HUNT, loi 

" Throw in some furs, in case you need 
them," said Captain Rembrant. One of the 
crew obeyed this order, some wolves' skins 
were thrown in, and the boat rowed toward the 
point, which they reached within an hour. 
The bear did not appear to notice them at 
all, but walked unconsciously over the field 
of ice, in search of food for herself and young. 

" They shall not escape us," said Martin, 
as the boat shot around the point, and was 
close to the ice-bound shore. " Quick, El- 
shoft, get out the harpoons, and, Leo, you 
take care of the ammunition and rifles. So, 
make the boat fast to the ice. All right. 
Now, children !" 

Each of the three hunters took a loaded 
rifle, and carefully following Martin, who was 
reconnoitring, Leo and Elshoft stopped when 
the old pilot hesitated. 

" There she comes. She is looking for a 
seal. Wait a bit. Bruin. You will soon lose 
your appetite if we can only get a little near- 
er and get a good shot. We must take the 
head or breast for our mark, and do not fire, 
boys, until we are sure of our prey. On no 



* ». 



102 LEO BERTRAM. 

account injure the young one ; if the old one 
falls, he cannot escape. But do not fire until 
we are fifty steps nearer. Should she scent 
us, and probably she will, for their scent 
is very keen, stand and await her attack, 
and fire when she is twenty feet from us ; 
first Leo, and then you, Elshoft, if necessary ; 
but I do not think it will be, for she will fall 
at the second, if not the first. Now on, and 
Heaven help us." 

They went on, but were not entirely 
around the point, when Martin stopped sud- 
denly. " I have thought of a better plan," 
he said. "One can never predict what may 
happen on a bear-hunt. It would be better to 
have the boat in reserve to fall baick upon, in 
case of an attack. Do you remain in it, El- 
shoft, and Leo and I will go on, and you fire, 
if you find it necessary." 

Elshoft made no objection; he returned 
to the boat, carrying some of the ammuni- 
tion and his rifle, and promised to keep a 
good watch, while Martin and Leo, with their 
rifles cocked, and the harpoons trailing be- 
hind them, advanced, with heads bent down. 



THE BEAR-HUNT, loj 

to the place where the bear stood, watching 
for a seal to rise from the hole for a breath 
of fresh air. She had not seen them, but 
now, when they were within one hundred feet 
of her, she suddenly raised her head, and 
sniffed the ain With a short, deep growl 
she turned to her young, as if to shield it 
from danger, then opened her mouth and ut- 
tered a loud roar, displaying her blood-red 
tongue and double row of sharp, pointed 
teeth. 

" Down ! down, my boy !" whispered Mar- 
tin. " She has not seen us yet. Perhaps we 
can creep nearer to her. There, she turns 
away, and the young one plays around her as 
cheerfully as if there were no such things as 
guns and powder in the world. A moment 
more, then we can go forward." 

Martin and Leo remained motionless on 
the ice, while the bear resumed her former 
position, and turned her back upon both. 
The young one followed, tumbling on the 
ice, rolling here and there in the snow-drifts, 
from time to time uttering sharp cries. 

" That little animal is our best ally," said 



C04 LEO BERTRAM. 

Martin. " 1 ake care, Leo, do not tread upon 
the brittle ice ; it will crack and betray us. 
Follow my footsteps." 

With care the hunters followed the bear 
up the height, and then dropped upon their 
knees, avoiding the unsafe spots, and trying 
to keep a snowdrift constantly between them 
and their prey, which would serve to cover 
their advance. They succeeded in doing 
this for thirty feet without arousing the bear's 
attention. 

" What is it T whispered Leo. 

" The little beast is close by us. I have 
a mind to shoot. A young bear is olten 
duller than a sheep." 

The two hunters remained motionless, 
and the young bear, which had discovered 
them, stared at its pursuers. They slowly 
crept nearer, and when within three feet, it 
still remained staring and growling. 

" The little beast will bring the old one 
around our necks," said Martin, "if we do 
not silence him. We can do nothing else. 
Give me the harpoon from your belt, Leo." 

Leo obeyed ; but scarcely had he put out 



THE BEAR-HUNT. 105 

his arm, when the little animal, to whom 
their neighborhood now seemed to be disa- 
greeable, turned away, growling fiercely. 

" Now it is all up, you may be sure," said 
the pilot, " There she comes !" 

Old Martin was not wrong. The old one 
turned, and spying the two men, howled 
ferociously, as they awaited her attack. Leo 
was somewhat alarmed, as he for the first 
time faced the wild beast. His nerves had 
been overtaxed already by the new and exci- 
ting pursuit, but his heart beat courageously, 
although his arm trembled as he raised his 
weapon, aiming for the head of the bear. On 
she came, until she was within thirty feet dis- 
tance, then she stretched herself, and rising 
on her hind feet, opened the blood-red mouth 
and struck her fore-paws wildly in the air. 

" Attention !" cried Martin ; " I will shoot. 
If she does not fall, fire ; but do not be too 
hasty, Leo." 

" Rest assured, Martin," said Leo, with 
confidence, although his cheeks grew white ; 
" I would not desert you if I died ten thou- 
sand deaths." 

Leo Bertram. J^ 



io6 LEO BERTRAM. , 

Martin hesitated but a second, then the re. 
port of a rifle sounded in the still air, and a 
blood-red stream issued from the shaggy hide 
of the bear, showing that his aim had not 
missed. The animal sank on all-fours, stum- 
bled a moment here and there, and then sum- 
moning her strength, sprang suddenly upon 
Martin, who was felled to the earth by the 
powerful shock. 

" Shoot, Leo." he cried, " shoot, or we are 
both lost." 

Leo mustered all his courage as he ap- 
proached the bear, who had now fastened her 
claws upon Martin's breast. She looked up 
at her new enemy with rolling, ferocious eyes. 
Leo fired; the animal sprang back with a 
wild growl, and shook her bleeding head. 
Leo's ball had hit, but he could not decide if 
it had been fatal. Martin, recovering himself, 
rose quickly, with his wits still about him, 
and taking the harpoon, hurled it at the bear 
with all his might. The wounded beast raised 
another fearful howl. 

" Now steady, Leo ; she cannot last long, 
for she stumbles ; hold the harpoon ready." 






THE BEAR-HUNT. 107 

Leo seized it, expecting a fresh attack 
from the animal, and Martin, snatching up 
an empty rifle, resolved to use it as a club, if 
necessary. But to every appearance the ani- 
mal had no desire to renew the combat. Call- 
ing her young one, who had been behind her 
during the contest, she turned her back upoa 
the two hunters and slowly walked away. 

" Now we are safe," cried Martin joyfully. 
" Load the rifle, Leo, and after her quickly. 

" Shall I not call Elshoft to our help ? 
asked Leo. 

" No, no, we can get along without him ;. 
but call to him that we want the boat. Now 
forward, or our prey may escape us." 

Martin started while he was speaking,, 
and ran with short steps over the snow. Leo 
followed, and in a few moments they had 
overtaken the bear. 

" She is weary and crippled by the loss of 
blood; she cannot hold out much longer,"^ 
said the pilot. 

They redoubled their speed, always keep- 
ing the prey in sight, when suddenly she dis- 
appeared. 



io8 LEO BERTRAM. 

" She IS off," cried Leo. 

"Yes, but we will find her again," an- 
swered Martin. 

In a few moments they reached the place 
where the animal had disappeared, and Mar- 
tin uttered an exclamation of surprise as he 
noticed an opening in the ice-wall through 
which she had made her escape. This was 
plain from the bloody tracks in the snow. 

" She has escaped, but we must not let 
her outwit us ; she cannot be far off," said 
Martin. 

Leo hesitated ; he cast an uneasy glance 
at the sky, which meanwhile had become over- 
cast with thick clouds, the sun had vanished 
under the dimness, and the Dolphin could 
just be seen through the thick gray fog. Leo 
silently pointed this out with his finger. 

" There is nothing to fear," said the pilot, 
as he glanced at the ominous signs. " So long 
as the wind is right and the snow does not 
fall, we need not dread the fog. We will ven- 
ture on a little way, and then there will be time 
enough to turn back. If we cannot carry the 
bear with us, we can at least take the skin." 



THE BEAR-HUNT. 109 

They started on without further delay, 
Martin overstepping his usual prudence in 
the eagerness of the pursuit, and Leo follow- 
ing with a troubled heart. He would have 
detained the pilot willingly, for he felt a pre- 
monition of coming evil, but he feared that 
Martin might consider him wanting in cour- 
age, and no consideration would have induced 
him to leave his friend ; so he followed close 
upon his footsteps, hoping that the wounded 
bear, from pain and loss of blood, would not 
be able to travel much farther; and indeed, 
after five minutes, they succeeded in getting^ 
through the chasm, and emerged in an open 
space. Martin uttered a joyful cry when he 
saw the object of their search again within 
reach. She lay stretched out on the snow, 
which was dyed on all sides with blood, and 
her young one howled and jumped anxiously 
around its parent. She now made no effort 
to elude her pursuers. As they advanced 
she attempted to rise, but her strength was 
spent, and a well-aimed shot from Martin's 
rifle ended her sufferings, and she was life- 
less. 



1 1 o LEO BERTRAM. 

Martin threw a noose around her as she 
lay helpless and powerless on the earth, the 
knives were instantly out, and the two men 
went hastily to work, when Martin looked up 
suddenly, and then bent his head on one side. 
Leo also stopped his work and looked with 
surprise at his companion, whose features ex- 
pressed anxious apprehension. 

" Do you not hear something, Leo ?" he 
asked. 

" Certainly — a strange howling in the dis- 
tance. It seems to be coming nearer. It 
may be nothing but a wind-flurry passing 
over the ice-fields, and caught in the clefts of 
the mountains." 

" God grant that you may be right," said 
old Martin ; " but no," he added with a pale 
face, "this is no wind-flurry. Hark! hark! 
how it comes howling on ! The sky is dark- 
ening. Merciful Heaven ! there is a snow- 
flake ! Away, away, lad ! Leave everything ! 
Gather all your strength, so that we may 
reach the boat and save ourselves. Away as 
wquickly as your feet can carry you !" 

No words were needed to spur Leo on, 



THE BEAR-HUNT. i : t 

for he knew as well as Martin that this snow- 
storm might cost them their lives, if they were 
not under the shelter of a roof. If they suc- 
ceeded in reaching the boat, it would serve to 
protect them. By turning it upside down, 
and crawling beneath, they could sit like 
snails in their house, while the weather might 
rage and fret as it would. With this shelter 
and the warm furs which they had brought, 
the storm could be defied, and even the in- 
tense cold which accompanies a snow-fall in 
the polar regions. If Elshof t had only, rowed 
to the designated spot, and assisted thetn as 
a faithful comrade ! Without speaking a 
word, for it could not have been heard amid 
the howling of the sudden storm, Martin and 
Leo ran through the narrow valley, whose 
high icy walls fortunately served to protect 
them from its fury. As they emerged from 
it the snowflakes fell less thickly, and it 
seemed as though what had so suddenly 
come upon them would as suddenly subside. 
" We are saved !" said Leo, breathing 
heavily. " The air is quiet and the sky is 
clear." 



112 LEO BERTRAM, 

"On, on, my lad," exclaimed Martin. 
" These are deceitful signs ; it is only a pause 
for the storm to gather new strength, and it 
will soon break upon us with greater fury, 
God grant that Elshoft is waiting in the boat!" 

With redoubled speed they ran forward, 
and in a few minutes reached the edge of the 
ice-field, and looked anxiously for their com- 
panion. But no trace of the boat was discov- 
ered as far as their eyes could see, and Mar- 
tin ground his teeth together to conceal his 
agitation. " We are lost, my poor lad ! Why 
did I bring you to this T 

Leo looked out over the coast at the sea, 
and a faint cry of hope trembled on his lips. 
"See there, Martin. There is the boat on 
the sea, and Elshoft is rowing towards the 
ship with all his might." 

The mist, which had been resting thick 
and heavy on the water, lifted for a moment, 
and Martin saw the boat plainly. It was still 
within the reach of his voice, and the pilot, 
holding both hands before his mouth, in or- 
der to make his cry louder, called out in a 
thundering voice, 



THE BEAR-HUNT. iiy 

" Boat ahoy ! Boat ahoy !" 

Without doubt Elshoft caught the sound, 
for he turned his head toward the recedinij: 
shore, and resting his oars, seemed to be 
reflecting as to what he should do. 

" The rascal will desert us," said Martin, 
"in order to save his own pitiful life; he 
leaves us to our fate, though honor and duty 
call him back." 

" But hark ! What is that T 

A low murmur echoed over the sea. Soon, 
another followed, and after a short time, a 
third. 

" They are the signal guns, calling us tO' 
the ship," said Leo. 

" Yes," added Martin bitterly ; " and yon- 
der villain understands them as well as we, 
for he runs away faster and abandons us to 
our fate ; but retribution will overtake him 
when he least expects it. But come, every 
moment is precious, my lad. We must re- 
turn to the bear, and wrap ourselves in the 
skin, if possible." 

They hurried towards the chasm, and had 
scarcely entered it, before a new storm burst 

LMBertraia. IC 



114 LEO BERTRAM. 

upon them. The snow fell in masses, and it 
became suddenly so intensely cold, the breath 
was frozen as it came from their mouths, and 
a freezing numbness stiffened Leo's less 
hardened limbs. " I cannot go on," he said, 
staggering and leaning against the ice wall 
for support. " Save yourself, Martin, and 
leave me to my fate." 

" With God's help, I will not," said Mar- 
tin. " Here, lean on my arm, and struggle 
onward." 

Leo endeavored to proceed, but at each 
step his limbs refused their service, and he 
sank down fainting and powerless. 

" Mercy upon us !" exclaimed Martin. 
** What can be done .? Leo, you must go on, 
or in a few moments you will be still and 
dead." 

" Then leave me to die," stammered Leo, 
• for my strength is gone." 

Martin threw a wild, imploring glance to- 
wards heaven, and wrung his hands. " No, 
no," he murmured to himself. " I will not 
leave you. You must go on. God will give 
me strength." 



THE BEAR-HUNT. 113 

He bent down towards Leo, drew the half- 
frozen boy on his shoulders, and started 
afresh to run through the valley and breath- 
less and exhausted, succeeded in reaching the 
spot where the bear was lying. He tore off 
the hide, wrapped it around Leo, himself, and 
the young bear, and soon felt that his young 
friend was returning to life. 

Leo sighed, and asked, with returning 
consciousness, " Where am I T 

" In safety for the present, at least," said 
the old pilot jo)rf uUy. " The bear's hide and 
the young bear's warmth have saved us. We 
lie here covered and warm, and the little 
fellow gives out as much heat . as a stove. 
Only patience, Leo. Things will go wrong 
sometimes, but all may yet be well, if this 
weather does not continue, and the Dolphin 
is not torn from her anchor. The cold and 
snow can do us no further harm." 

Indeed, our friends had nothing more to 
fear from the weather, so far as their bodily 
wants were concerned, although the fearful 
commotion of the elements could be distinctly 
heard by them in their place of refuge, and from 



ii6 



LEO BERTRAM. 



time to time a terrible cracking, as if the 
foundations of the earth were shattering. It 
was impossible for Leo or Martin to explain 
the noise, which would have sounded above 
the roaring of a hundred cannon. They af- 
terwards le^arned that these horrible sounds 
were caused by approaching icebergs, which 
had been uprooted by the raging waves, torn 
from the shore, and precipitated into the sea 
with the shock of an earthquake. Leo and 
Martin listened with anxious hearts, and 
awaited the quieting of the storm ; but many 
hours passed by before they ventured to leave 
their place of retreat, and work their way out 
of the thick piles of snow that were heaped 
over them. 



•r -• »- 



*fv 



V 



THE BOAT. \i% 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE BOAT. 

When Martin and Leo had been enclosed 
in this living grave for twenty-four hours, the 
pilot awaked from a kind of stupor, for it 
could not be called sleep, and sat up. Some- 
thing had startled him. He roused himself, 
but all was still. 

"Are you awake, Leo?" he questioned* 
" A fox has just now awakened me." 

" I am awake," replied Leo, who had been 
disturbed by the movement of his friend. 

" It seems to me the foul weather has 
passed over," continued the pilot ; " at least, 
I can only hear the breathing of our young 
bear, who is still comfortable and warm under 
her mother's skin. Let us make a search 
and creep out of our grave, Leo." 

Martin, groping around in the dark, soon 
found the end of the hide, and unwound him- 
self from it. He tapped the snow with his 



ii8 LEO BERTRAM. 

outstretched hand and endeavored to push it 
one side. This was difficult, for it was very 
fine and dry, and would not pack readily, 
but scattered like sand when Martin pushed 
it aside. Leo came to his assistance, and 
with their combined efforts, they succeeded 
in working through several feet. 

" Immense masses of snow must have 
fallen," said Leo impatiently. " Shall we not 
come to daylight soon ?" 

" Patience," answered Martin ; " I can 
see already a faint glimmer which can only 
come from the sun. Yes, there it is. But 
how cold !" 

Cold indeed as ice was the air which 
streamed in through the opening. Martin 
quickly withdrew his hand, less willing to 
leave his warm bed. "But this is foolish- 
ness," he murmured to himself, after a short 
pause. " If we would find the Dolphin, we 
must get out, and be quick about it." 

Again they began their work, with new 
zeal, and in a short time emerged in the open 
air. The change from the thick darkness of 
their place of shelter to the clear sunlight re- 



THE BOAT 11^ 

fleeted on the dazzling surface, blinded them, 
and it was some time before they could open 
their eyes, and then they saw nothing before 
or around them but a white stretch of snow, 
and behind them, in the distance, the jagged 
peaks of Spitzbergen, towering like terrible 
crystals, towards the blue sky. The valley 
or chasm through which they had escaped 
and found the bear s hide, had entirely disap- 
peared, and there was nothing left of the 
open sea but a small stream in the distant: 
south. The whole space was filled with 
great ice-floes floating — solitary icebergs, 
which had been driven hither and thither hj 
the storm, and then suddenly frozen together 
in immense masses by the intense cold, 
while over all the snow had spread a sheet of 
dazzling whiteness. 

The pilot stood in dumb astonishment at 
the wonderful transformation. "What has 
become of the Dolphin T he exclaimed. " If 
the storm has driven her to the south, we are 
lost beyond doubt." 

" That would be terrible," murmured Leo,, 
in a trembling voice. " Oh, my poor mother. 



ti20 LEO BERTRAM. 

what will become of her when she believes 
that I am lost ! But no, Martin, we must not 
give up all hope. If Elshoft succeeded in 
getting on board of the Dolphin, Captain 
Rembrant knows that we are still living, and 
will wait for our return. We must go over 
the ice-field and get a sight of the water." 

Martin shook his head sadly. " Entirely 
impossible! You would sink knee-deep at 
'every step, and it would take a whole day to 
reach the point you wish. No, abandon that 
thought, for we should soon sink down over- 
come with fatigue, and die of hunger and 
starvation. Also, do not, dear Leo, hope that 
Captain Rembrant can wait for us to return. 
The polar winter is here, and every moment s 
<ielay only threatens surer destruction to the 
ship and crew. God alone can help us. Noth- 
ing remains but to summon all our fortitude, 
V in order to bid defiance to the terrors of the 
advancing winter. We are imprisoned, my 
boy, and it is vain to hope for aid before next 
summer. Heaven have mercy upon us ! This 
^ a bitter trial." 

The old pilot looked vacantly about him 



\ 



*' 



THE BOAT. 121 

in utter despair, while Leo, in his distress, 
thought more of his poor mother's anguish 
and sorrow than of his own hard fate, and as 
he pictured her in her disappointment and 
sadness, he sobbed aloud. 

Martin regarded him with deep compas 
sion. " Yes, my poor boy, you have a right 
to weep. God only knows what horrors are 
before us, and whether we can stand the 
northern winter with its endless night and 
terrible cold. But I declare to you, my boy, 
that I will care for you as if you were my own 
son, and may evil fall upon me if I fail to 
keep this promise. Whatever I can do by my 
advice and strength shall be done. Keep up 
your courage. We must not cast hope aside. 
With perseverance and patience we can ac- 
complish much, if we will cling to one steady 
purpose. My foolhardiness brought you into 
this trouble, and I must make up for it if pos- 
sible. If I had really known that Elshoft was 
as great a scamp as his namesake in Bremen, 
this misfortune would not have occurred ; but 
who would have thought of such treachery ? 
Faithful comrades cling together so long as 

LeoB«rtruiL JQ 



122 LEO BERTRAM. 

there b a chance of saving life. Ah, it was 
pitiful" 

*^ But his own life was at stake, if he had 
attempted to save us," said Leo, excusing 
Elshoft 

" What say you, my boy ? Would you 
have done the same if you had been in his 
place? No; nor I. And that is enough to 
condemn him. But the fox will be recom- 
pensed for this act when the time comes ; and 
depend upon it, Leo, it certainly must come. 
God will punish him. Let us look for an- 
other place. We must find winter-quarters, 
where we will be protected from the cold. 
The hard months will pass away in time." 

" But shall we not first look out and see 
if the Dolphin has not returned?" asked Leo. 
" Let us climb yonder hill, Martin ; it is not 
too high, and if our ship is near we can see 
it." 

" It is useless, Leo, entirely useless. I 
know already; but you shall have your way," 
answered the pilot, as he followed the boy in 
the direction indicated. 

After a toilsome half-hour's travel they 



THE BOAT. 123 

reached the spot, and Martin was underta- 
king the ascent himself, when a call from 
Leo interrupted him. 

" What is that, Martin ?" — he pointed to 
a small, shapeless, dark mass projecting from 
the snow at some distance from them. 

" It may be a bit of wreck which a strong 
wave has dashed on the shore ; you can tell 
by the ice that we are standing close by the 
sea. We will examine it after we have as- 
sured ourselves that we have no hope of see- 
ing the ship." 

With indescribable fatigue they both 
climbed the hill, and after several fruitless 
attempts succeeded in reaching its summit, 
and looked far and near, but a narrow strip 
of water was all that remained of the sea. 
Leo thought he descried a distant sail, and 
pointed it out to Martin, who soon convinced 
him that he had been deceived by a white 
cloud. The Dolphin had vanished, and 
probably by this time was far beyond their 
sight or reach. Leo, whose heart sank more 
heavily, gathered all his firmness, and said, 
" So be it, Martin. What God does is well 



124 LEO BERTRAM. 

done. We have been spared thus far, and 
we must not murmur. Our hearts are as wax 
in his hand, but he can also temper them as 
steel. My poor mother will find peace and 
consolation in this hope and in her prayers 
to him. And, Martin, we must not lose our 
confidence in God, even if it be his will to 
abandon us on this ice-bound coast. We 
must still lean upon him." 

" So be it, my boy," but Martin's voice 
trembled. " If you do not complain, an old 
tough sailor will stand it. But now, away 
from this place ; the day is hardly an hour 
longer, and we have enough work to do be- 
fore night. Let us first look at the wreck. 
If it cannot be of any other use, it will at 
least serve as fuel for the snow-hut we must 
build to protect us against the cold." 

The two hermits, as we may now call our 
friends, cut off from all intercourse with the 
neighboring country, speedily descended the 
hill. This was far easier than the ascent, and 
in a few moments they arrived at the bit of 
wreck buried in the snow, which they tried 
to push aside with their hands and feet. 



THE BOAT. 125 

" Ah, what IS this ?" cried Martin, picking 
up a bit of fur ; " how came this here, I won- 
der ? We will soon find out if this is not a 
boat, instead of a broken spar or mast. Hur- 
ry, Leo ; let us get it out before night." 

They went on heartily with the work, 
which diverted them from their sad thoughts 
and the stinging cold. Their benumbed fin- 
gers glowed like fire, and the perspiration 
stood in drops on their foreheads. 

" This is good exercise." Leo paused, 
panting and breathless. 

" Certainly," answered Martin. " And ex- 
ercise in the open air will be the surest means 
of overcoming the bitter winter cold ; what we 
feel at present is only like the mild frost of 
autumn, compared with what will follow. But 
see ! If I were not sure that Elshoft escaped 
with our boat, I would be willing to swear 
that this was it." 

" It is indeed wonderfully like it," said 
Leo. " Bqt all of the boats in the whale-fish- 
ery are as like as two peas. I believe that we 
can now turn it upside down." 

" Not yet, said the pilot. " We must dig 



126 LEO BERTRAM. 

deeper, and then it will be easier. Lend a 
hand to this." 

They made the hole deeper, and then with 
their united strength lifted the boat over on 
one side. The heavy masses of snow still 
held it down, but at last the keel gave way 
and fell over. A cry of astonishment burst 
from their lips when they saw the figure of a 
man, partly wrapped in furs, stretched out 
under the boat, and recognized the recreant 
Elshoft. He was stifiE and white, and judg- 
ing from appearances, his soul had left his 
body. 

" See, the hand of God has overtaken the 
miscreant in his own wickedness !" exclaimed 
Martin, after a pause which followed the dis- 
covery. " God is just. He ran away from 
honor and faith, and the Almighty throws 
him back upon this island in order to give us 
a sign that we are still remembered. Yes, 
Heaven is just, and no criminal can escape 
his righteous arm." 

" But, Martin, perhaps there is still life in 
him," said Leo ; " we must try to save him." 

" Not I ; my hand shall not relieve one 



THE BOAT: 127 

whom God has struck/' answered the honest 
but unforgiving pilot. " Let his corpse lie 
there under the open sky for the wolves and 
bears to feed upon. I shall do nothing for 
him." 

" But, Martin, perhaps he turned back of 
his own free will in order to help us, or at 
least to share our fate," said Leo nobly. " The 
Lord commands us to love our enemies, and 
this man may not even be an enemy, but a 
true friend." 

Martin made no reply to this, and turned 
his back upon Leo, who immediately set 
about the restoration of the half-frozen El- 
schoft. He rubbed his face and hands with 
snow, and worked away long and heartily, 
till at last a faint sigh issued from the lips. 

" He is alive, Martin, he is alive ! For 
pity s sake lend your aid. If we leave him 
here helpless, our consciences would convict 
us of murder in the sight of God." 

Leo continued his efforts while he was 
speaking, and saw with pleasure that his 
words were not lost upon Martin. The old 
pilot approached, it is true, with a distant and 



128 LEO BERTRAM. 

dissatisfied expression, but still stretched out 
his hand to his enemy, as he considered him, 
to snatch him from the jaws of death. Once 
actively engaged, hatred soon, vanished from 
his stout heart, and his coldness melted as 
the snow in his hands with which he rubbed 
the benumbed limbs. The sinister expres- 
sion left his face, and his mouth relaxed into 
a laugh as he said cheerfully, " Indeed he is 
returning to consciousness. If it be God's 
will to restore him that he may repent and 
make amends for his sins, I will not hinder 
it. See, Leo, he opens his eyes ! Now, then, 
rub his breast and his temples. Hurrah ! we 
have him alive again !" 

Under the hands of the compassionate 
Samaritans, Elshoft's consciousness slowly 
returned. He felt warmth and sensation 
stealing through- his benumbed body, and 
opening his eyes, he yawned and stretched 
himself out as a man who wakes from a long, 
deep slumber. Finally his white lips parted, 
and he murmured, " O God, where am I ?" 

" Not in heaven, nor in a canopied bed, 
certainly," said Martin; " but I think you are 



THE BOAT. 129 

saved for the time being, and that is more 
than I would have believed ten minutes since^ 
Give your thanks to God, fellow, and ma)r 
you in future be a better man. But I wilt 
say nothing more now; a better and more, 
favorable time will come. Drink this.'*" 

He placed a flask which he had found' 
under the boat to Elshoft's lips, and with the 
draught new life crept through his limbs; he 
roused himself, his eye turned from Martin 
to Leo. " Is it you who have saved me ?" he 
stammered. " I have not deserved this from 
your hands," he murmured. 

" Certainly not," retorted the old seaman ; 
"and if I had had my will, you would have 
lain there until the trump of judgment sound- 
ed, but yonder brave lad came to your rescue.. 
There, I will not drive the probe deeper now. 
But when you are grateful, turn to Leo, for 
indeed I had no wish to restore you." 

The old pilot's eyes were sparkling with 
gladness in spite of his severe words. Doubt- 
less, Conrad's life was more to him now than 
before, for when our Lord said, " Love your 
enemies," he meant that the kindness we be- 

LeoBertnun. . \*^ 



130 LEO BERTRAM. 

stow upon them should also create a love for 
them in our own hearts. 

Elshoft had heard Martin, but only partly 
comprehended what he had said. His fea- 
tures were agitated with contending emotions, 
and his cheeks changed from white to red. 
He looked at Leo, and then suddenly seized 
his hand and exclaimed in a stifled voice, " I 
thank you; I thank you, my noble-hearted 
comrade. Yes, and with God's help I will 
make amends for the wrong done to you and 
yours." 

Leo returned the pressure of his hand, 
and Martin cried with his rough voice, 
^* Heaven help you to stick to your good res- 
olutions. It was a mean, knavish trick to 
-desert us; but repentance asks forgiveness 
for wrong, and the next thing is to sin no 
more. Hold out as long as we herd together 
on this island, and I will say no more about 
this afiEair. A good comrade never betrays ; 
and in sooth we have need to be good com- 
rades, for a winter in Spitzbergen is no 
pleasure-party. But now forward, if you 
have the strength ; the sun is down already, 



THE BOAT 131 

and we must get to our old quarters before 
our ears and noses are frozen. The wind is 
coming sharp from the north, and cuts like a 
knife." 

Conrad stood up and tried to drag him- 
self along after Leo and Martin, but he was 
still too weak to attempt such an underta- 
king, and he sank down before they had 
gone twenty feet. " Leave me here, friends," 
he begged in a faint voice. "Wrap me in 
the fur, and cover me over with the boat ; it 
will be better for me to remain here until the 
morning." 

Leo glanced at Martin. The pilot shrug- 
ged his shoulders. " Humph ! After all, the 
boat will be as good a shelter as the bear's 
skin, considering that we have found some 
furs here, in which he can be wrapped. If 
we only had the little bear here !" he added, 
after a moment's reflection. " The little 
beast is as warm as a stove. Leo, you re- 
main here; cover that half-frozen fellow up 
warmly, and I will go and secure the young 
bear and cut a ham from the old fellow, and 
bring everything over here. We have eaten 



132 LEO BERTRAM. 

nothing for twenty-four hours, and a bit of 
meat will not taste bad." 

Leo made some objections to this plan; 
but Martin, paying no attention, started off 
without further delay, while Leo carried the 
helpless Conrad to the boat, wrapped him 
carefully in the skins, and arranged a place 
for him on the side, where he was protected 
from the sharp, cutting wind. Conrad soon 
fell in deep slumber, and Leo, who was great- 
ly fatigued, buried himself partly in the snow, 
wrapped his fur around him, and awaited 
Martin's return. He was confident that he 
would not remain away longer than was ne- 
cessary ; and in two hours the pilot returned, 
driving the young bear, tied by a rope, before 
him, as if he had been a goat or a sheep, and 
carrying on his back a ham from the old 
bear, wrapped in its hide, and in his hand a 
rifle which he had dropped the day before 
and had come upon accidentally. 

He drew a heavy breath as he threw his 
spoils in the boat, for the burden and toil- 
some way through the snowdrifts had greatly 
fatigued him. 



THE BOAT. 133 

•• There they are," he said. " Now, Leo, 
let us put the things in the boat, and then 
kindle a good fire, so that we may cook a 
bearsteak. It can all be done in an hour, 
and we will sleep the better for it afterwards. 
Where is Conrad T 

" He is asleep." Leo pointed to him. 

"Let him sleep on until we can hold a 
piece of broiled steak under his nose ;" and 
Martin began his preparations without fur- 
ther delay. He broke a couple of oars in 
pieces, and with the help of a handful of dried 
tow and some blazing powder, he soon made 
a bright fire. He then cut some steaks from 
the bear's ham, and fastened them to the 
muzzle of the gun, and roasted them as well 
as if he had seen service as an excellent cook. 
Leo assisted in silence, while Elshoft still 
slumbered. 

" I wonder why he deserted us in our ne- 
cessity," said Martin at last. " It was fear ; 
fear and cowardice, I 'm sure. When he saw 
that the snowstorm was about overtaking us 
his heart sank, and he ran away hoping to 
get on the Dolphin in safety. He may have 



134 LEO BERTRAM. 

thought that we should perish in our encoun- 
ter with the bear, and in that case his deser- 
tion would never be known, for he could tell 
his own story when he was on the ship, and 
nc one could gainsay it. But Heaven did not 
permit him to earn the fruit of his cowardice, 
for he was doubtless caught with the snow 
and whirlwind and thrown back on the coast. 
Now we will see what he will do next. If he 
proves honest, we will take no further notice 
of his bad behavior." 

The pilot believed in his heart that El- 
shoft had another motive for his action. He 
did not doubt that Conrad was related to the 
man who had treated Leo's mother so un- 
justly, and whose persecution had led his son 
to brave the dangers of the polar sea. But 
Leo ascribed his flight only to an impulse to 
save his own life ; and with his usually kind 
spirit began to excuse Conrad's flight, since 
it had almost cost him his life. 

When the steak was done he aroused the 
bpy, and the three, cut off from the society 
of their fellow-creatures, made a hearty meal 
upon their single dish, and then collecting 



THE BOAT. 135 

all their strength, they turned the boat over^ 
crept under it, wrapped themselves in fur,, 
and taking with them the young bear, who^ 
had also shared a part of the meal, they allt 
slept through the long night undisturbed' 
until the following morning, when the}^ 
awoke to new toils and dangers. 



^ 

\ 

s 

/ 



A 









136 LEO BERTRAM. 



CHAPTER X. 

THE HERMITS. 

The glimmering rays of the sun light- 
"ened the darkness when Martin aroused his 
companions with a loud shout. He knew 
better than they what was to be done in or- 
der to prepare for the seVerity of the north- 
ern winter, and was not the man to yield to 
indolence or laziness when it was necessary 
to take proper precautions. He stated to his 
companions the difficulties that were before 
them. He knew the first and most impor- 
tant matter would be securing a safe and 
comfortable roof to shelter them, and he ad- 
vised them to build a hut such as the Green- 
landers use during their long cold winters. 

Leo and Conrad were very willing to 
carry out his suggestion, but Conrad men- 
tioned that during a residence in Holland, 
where he had seen ship-service, he had heard 
some sailors who had been engaged in the 
whale-fishery for many years speak of a hut 



THE HERMITS. 137 

built of timber somewhere on the coast of 
Spitzbergen in this neighborhood. This, he 
thought, might yet be in a state of preserva- 
tion, and he proposed that they should first 
hunt for that, which would certainly be more 
comfortable and protect them better than the 
boat or a hut of ice. 

" That may be," said Leo, " but how are 
we to find it ? Spitzbergen is a large island, 
and we may be dead with cold and hunger 
before we reach it." 

After a short consultation they decided 
at least to investigate the southern coast, as 
this was the part of the island upon which 
they were, and the hut, if standing, would be 
probably found not very far away. 

" Let us see," said old Martin. " If the 
Hollanders needed such a hut, they without 
'doubt would select a spot which would be 
most accessible in summer, and protected in 
winter against the fearful northeast storms. 
This could only be done by placing the hut 
at the foot of a mountain lying towards the 
south. Look well about us. We can see 
two mountains from here, one on the right, 

Leo B«i-tram. iS 



138 LEO BERTRAM. 

the other on the left. That one in the back^ 
ground is too distant from the coast; it 
would be foolish to settle there. My plan 
would have been to build directly under yon- 
der wall of rock ; it defies the northern storms, 
and the projection protects it from the east 
wind. That is the best situation here, but a 
position on the southern coast of the island 
would be better, and if I am not greatly mis- 
taken, the shrewd Dutchmen's eyes were as 
good as ours. If they built a hut, they leaned 
it against that wall, and I advise that we 
make our search there. If we find it, well 
and good. It is a blessing from God. We 
will lose nothing by the search, and will only 
be nearer the point where we shall desire to 
build ourselves. Forward, my boys." 

The reasons of the sagacious old pilot 
were so well founded and so easily under- 
stood, that neither Leo nor Conrad objected, 
but followed Martin without hesitation, and 
reached the point indicated in half an hour. 
The jagged sides of the ice-wall were covered 
with projections of ice, and here they silently 
began their search, Martin taking first the 



THE HERMITS. 139 

angle formed by the side and a projecting 
cliff. But he made no discovery, and his 
companions, who were at a little distance, 
only found masses and drifts of snow which 
had been hurled there by the wind ; and crest- 
fallen they returned to Martin. 

" Do not be discouraged," he called out 
consolingly. " From the first I did not be- 
lieve that the Dutchmen would have left it 
standing here if it had been worth taking 
away, for they are a very frugal and econom- 
ical people. Let us think no more about it, 
but shovel away the snow on this side, so that 
we can find a foundation for our house. This 
is the most sheltered nook on the whole coasts 
and we will make use of it. Steady, my 
lads ! By working we will at least forget our 
troubles." 

In order to lay the foundation on the 
ground, they would have to dig deep in the 
snow ; and our three adventurers were com- 
pelled to use their oars as spade and pick. 
They went heartily to work, and succeeded 
in digging a deep hole in the snow. Still 
they had not reached the earth, and Martin, 



I40 LEO BERTRAM. 

intent upon his proposed plan, stepped upon 
an apparently very thick crust of ice, in order 
to test its strength. He stamped on it heav- 
ily, the ice cracked and split, and with a loud 
cry the unfortunate man sank in the opening 
and disappeared ! 

With a sharp cry Leo pieered over into 
the dark gulf in which his best and only 
friend had so suddenly vanished. He clasp- 
ed his hands and remained as if transfixed 
into a lifeless statue. Conrad stood behind 
him with pale cheeks and lips. He glanced 
at Leo, stepped forward, and raised his hand, 
while a wicked voice whispered within, " The 
grave conceals everything ; no sound can rise 
from that depth, and my honor would be saved 
before the world should he disappear with his 
friend !" 

The hand was outstretched; one push, 
and all would be over. Leo was unconscious 
' of the dark thoughts that were surging in 
Conrad's heart. He had no suspicion, and 
could have offered no opposition. His life 
seemed hanging at that instant on a single 
thread. 



THE HERMITS. 141 

Suddenly, with an effort, Conrad drew 
himself back, fell on his knees, and murmur- 
ed, " No, no, I dare not Deliver me from 
evil, and save me, Lord, from myself. These 
hands shall not injure one who has saved my 
life !" 

His voice trembled. Leo was not think- 
ing of him. He had not heard the words, 
forced from his companion in his conflicting 
emotions. Leo leaned over the chasm in 
which Martin was buried, and with a deep 
groan, as the tears fell over his white cheeks, 
he cried, " Martin ! Martin ! Be merciful, O 
God, and restore my friend. Martin, Mar- 
tin ! Do you hear me ?" 

All was silent. No friendly voice answer- 
ed the wild, anxious cry, and Leo, throwing 
himself on the cold, icy ground, wept bitter- 
ly. He had often heard that deep holes and 
chasms existed in the polar regions, covered 
by a thin crust of ice, which gave way under 
an unsuspicious foot, precipitating the trav- 
eller in the abyss. He believed that Martin 
was lost in such a chasm, and his heart was 
deprived of all hope of ever seeing him again. 



142 LEO BERTRAM. 

In the meantime Conrad, who had recov- 
ered from his agitation, stepped by the side 
of Leo, and said, with apparent composure, 

" Do not give way to despair ; let us try 
to save Martin." 

" Martin ! save Martin ?" cried Leo, spring- 
ing up from the ground. " Ah, Conrad, that 
brings me back to life. Do you believe it 
possible to save him ?" 

" Let us try," said Conrad ; " the crevice 
may not be very deep, and if we work hard 
we can dig him out. We can but try it." 

Without a word, they seized their oars, 
and eagerly began their work. Snow and ice 
flew on every side. Suddenly they stopped, 
and held their breath. 

" Leo ! Conrad ! My lads, are you within 
call ?" thundered a voice from the depths, and 
Leo exclaimed joyfully, 

" He lives ! Heaven be praised ! Martin 
is alive !" His eyes beamed with delight. 

" Martin," he cried, " How can we help 
you ? Are you hurt T 

" Only a little jarred and bruised," echoed 
the voice, " but my bones are not broken by 



THE HERMITS. 143 

the tumble, and I have my wits about me 
now. How long have I been here ?" 

" Not long ; scarcely ten minutes ; but 
how can we help you ?" 

" Wait a bit, my boy, and get away from 
the crevice, so that more light can fall into 
my prison just here. I am well enough, but 
I cannot find out what kind of a place I have 
fallen into." 

Leo stepped back, and waited patiently 
for new directions from Martin. 

" O Conrad," he said, "what a blessing 
that Martin is not killed, for without him we 
should certainly perish here." 

" Yes, Leo, and I am thankful in my in- 
nermost heart," said Conrad. " You do not 
know how, but certainly God has saved me 
in these painful moments, and you also, and 
here I resolve henceforth to keep from temp- 
tation. Yes, if I die for it." 

" What do you mean ? What have you 
done ?" asked Leo, startled by the mysterious 
language of his companion. " What led you 
into temptation ?" 

"Sin," answered Conrad. "You shall 



i A 4 ZJSO BERTRAM. 

some time learn all, but not yet. I hear 
Martin's voice agarn. Hark !" 

The shout sounded again from the crev- 
ice. Leo and Conrad rushed to the opening. 

" Hear, lads !" called the old pilot. " I be- 
lieve I have discovered the hut. At least I 
find I am surrounded by timbers, and by the 
faint light that falls in my prison, I believe 
that everything is in good condition. Ah, 
there is a door ; perhaps I can open it." 

They heard the thumping and rapping in 
the depths, and then again all was still 

" It will not give way," cried Martin, " I 
can only open it a little ; the snow-drifts are 
heaped against the entrance. But there is 
no more doubt about it, my lads ; this is the 
Dutchmen's hut, and this discovery is worth 
a fortune. It seems to be in good order, and 
I believe I fell through the opening for a 
chimney. Measure ten feet toward the south- 
east, and then dig and. shovel away as if your 
life depended upon it. When you are deep 
enough, you will strike the door, and then 
we can open it. In the meantime, throw me 
down an oar ; I will see what I can do." 



THE HERMITS. 145 

They obeyed his directions, and Leo and 
Conrad dug away with all their might. It 
was very difficult, for the masses of ice and 
hard-packed layers of snow resisted their ef- 
forts, and they had no suitable implement for 
work. But with strength and determination^ 
they finally succeeded in conquering the dif« 
ficulties, and found, after two hours' hard la- 
bor, that they had almost reached the ground. 
Martin, too, was working as industriously as 
his young friends. 

" We must now dig sideways, for we are 
certainly deep enough," said Conrad. 

" Not yet," replied Leo. " The hut is cer- 
tainly not built on the snow, and we must 
not venture to dig in another direction until 
we first strike the ground and foundation," 

Conrad saw the wisdom of the sugges- 
tion, and worked on with redoubled zeal. In 
a few minutes Leo stood on the hard, frozen 
earth, and saw that he had been correct in 
his surmise. 

" The wall which separates us from our 
friend cannot be very thick," he said, and 
now, instead of digging deeper, they shovelled 

Leo Bertram. I Q 



146 LEO BERTRAM. 

the snow on one side, hoping to break the 
ice from beneath. Their efforts were soon 
successful. The whole ice-wall tottered, 
Some of the pieces bounced off, and Leo and 
his comrade had scarcely time to spring back 
to avoid the masses which, loosened, sudden- 
ly fell forward. At the same time, a door 
of oaken planks gave way, forced open by 
the pressure of Martin on the other side. 

Several seconds passed before the reuni- 
ted friends could see each other plainly, for 
they were enveloped with the snow which 
had clung to them ; but they felt that they 
were again standing safely side by side, and 
with a cry of joy, Leo fell in Martin's arms, 
while the tears started in Conrad's eyes. 

" O God !" he murmured, ** I thank thee 
for permitting me to see this moment. How 
my conscience would have tortured me, had 
I yielded to the fearful temptation ! Let it 
never again find place in my soul." 

" Now, Conrad, you are glad that we are 
together again, safe and sound," cried Mar- 
tin. 

**From my soul," said Conrad, stepping 



THE HERMITS. 147 

forward and shaking Martin's hand heartily. 
" Yes, I rejoice as much as if my own life had 
been saved from death." 

" Then we have gained an honest com- 
rade in you," said Martin. " I was doubtful 
of it before, but you have shown us the right 
kind of spirit to-day, and we will remain firm 
friends until next summer. Keep up your 
courage, lads. We have discovered this 
splendid hut, and need not fear the winter ; 
with God's help we will stand it. The hut 
is a fortunate find for us ; and now, as we 
have some daylight, we will examine it more 
closely." 

They stepped in over the snowdrifts 
through the open door, and found that the 
hut was in a state of perfect preservation, 
although it had probably not been occupied 
for years. The accumulated piles of snow, 
which had been heaped upon it season after 
season, had only served to protect it more 
securely from the influences of the severe 
weather. They found cooking utensils, and 
Leo discovered a great heap of wood and coal. 
Doubtless the Hollanders before their depart- 



x/jS LEO BERTRAM. 

ure, following an impulse of compassion, had 
left this for others who might like themselves 
be cast ashore there. The new-comers hailed 
it as a blessing from Heaven. The furniture 
was tolerably good, consisting of a table made 
of rough planks and a few wooden chairs. 
A fireplace and large stone chimney were on 
one side of the room, and Martin had tum- 
bled through the latter, as he had supposed^ 
into the hut. There were also conveniences 
for smoking fish and meat, which could be 
used again. They then decided to bring the 
remainder of the bear's flesh to the hut, and 
cut and dry the pieces, and also to kill the 
young bear, as they would not be able to pro- 
vide food for it during the long winter. The 
boat, too, would be more useful near the hut, 
as in case of necessity it could be turned into 
fuel, and so that was brought up. Martin 
soon kindled a good fire in the stove, closed 
the chimney with a fireboard, which fortu- 
nately was found in a corner, filled a pot with 
snow, and with the assistance of his comrades 
carried the bear's meat to the hut. A piece 
was put in the pot when the snow had changed 



THE HERMITS. 149 

to water; and while the supper was cooking 
Martin went out to execute his purpose of 
killing the young bear. By the time this un- 
pleasant but necessary business was over, the 
meat was done, and our three exiles sat down 
to their simple but nourishing meal with feel- 
ings of deepest gratitude to God, by whose 
help they had been preserved and sustained 
through the day. A genial warmth was dif- 
fused through the room, and Martin laughed 
as he thought that there were many poor 
•creatures in his Fatherland who had neither 
shelter, warmth, nor smoking bear's meat, 
and who would willingly change places with 
them. 

" Indeed," he said earnestly, " until now 
we could not realize what toils and hardships 
might have overtaken us if the winter had 
broken upon us with all its strength, and 
God had not thus kindly provided for us." 

"We will not predict what might have 
happened," said Leo. " I feel that God will 
protect us, for my beloved mother sent her 
blessing after me on my voyage. Ah, Mar- 
tin, how heavy my conscience would be now 



IS© LEO BERTRAM. 

if my brother had not happily thought of the 
signal which served as a means of communi- 
cation between my mother and me." 

"Yes, it was a good plan," said Martin. 
** They say, * A mother's blessing builds the 
children's houses,' and we will hope that your 
mother's will help to build our house ; so we 
will put our trust in God, and hope that all 
will be well." 

Conrad was silent; but that night, before 
he closed his eyes in slumber, he knelt and 
confessed all before God, and prayed for par- 
don for Christ's sake, and for strength to 
keep him in the right path, and murmured to 
himself, " If we are spared to return to Bre- 
men, I will show Martin and Leo that my heart 
can be honest and manly. Leo has saved my 
life, and he shall discover that I can be grat^ 
ful." 



CAPTAIN REMBRANT. 151 



CHAPTER XI. 
CAPTAIN REMBRANT. 

Our adventurers, however, notwithstand- 
ing their good fortune, led a hard life on the 
island of Spitzbergen. The solitary days 
passed in monotonous weariness, and the 
long nights were as dull. Their only amuse- 
ment was an occasional bear or seal hunt, 
which brought a little change in their lives. 
When a favorable opportunity arrived, they 
roamed over the island, looking for means of 
subsistence. One day they found some wa- 
ter-cresses hidden away under the snow, in a 
sheltered spot. Their rifles, which fortunate- 
ly had been found in the boat, were very use- 
ful, and the ammunition was sufficient to sup- 
ply them for their hunting expeditions, and 
Martin considered the necessity for hunting 
as a most fortunate thing. "Without this 
excitement we should grow dull and listless,, 
and if we would remain in a healthy condi- 



152 LEO BERTRAM, 

tion we must take this daily exercise in the 
open air," said the pilot. 

There were no forests to hunt in, so our 
three friends strolled about the shore, looking 
for bits of wrecks and fragments of wood for 
fuel to replenish their stock. They found 
sufficient, but often, after long and tiresome 
searching under the snow; they brought the 
^burdens on their backs to the hut, and piled 
them in the partition where they had found 
the wood and coal. 

" The more wood we have, my lads, the 
better for us," said old Martin, when they 
staggered beneath the heavy loads. " We 
have scarcely begun to feel the cold yet ; but 
you will soon find out what a polar winter is, 
and we shall not have to wait for it much 
Jonger." 

Indeed, by the beginning of October the 
^old was intense, and increased fearfully each 
^ay ; but in their sheltered position and strong 
liut they were protected, and although the 
stove was heated until it glowed red hot, it 
did not warm their room thoroughly.'' The 
frost forced through every tiny crevice in the 



CAPTAIN REMBRANT. 1 53 

walls ; every fluid that was not standing on 
the fire became a solid cake of ice ; if the door 
was opened a moment, the atmosphere con- 
gealed and was like a thick mist of snow, and 
fell on the floor as if it had been in the open 
air. Outside it was still worse. Their breath 
froze as soon as it mingled with the air, and 
they were obliged to keep themselves thickly 
wrapped in furs, in order to resist the influ- 
ence of the piercing, cruel cold. 

In their adventures they always kept to- 
gether, and watched each other closely, for if 
the nose or ears became like wax, they knew 
they were frozen, and applied remedies imme- 
diately, before it was too late, rubbing the 
stiffened limb or features with snow for res- 
toration. Their situation became worse when 
the sun vanished entirely, by the middle of 
October. It would not return for a long 
time, and they felt the need of the friendly 
light painfully. They had no compensation 
but in the comparatively dim splendor of the 
Aurora Borealis and the distant stars. When 
the cold reached its highest degree, they 
wrapped themselves in the furs, put their feet 

Leo BtrtruD. 20 



154 ^EO BERTRAM. 

to the stove, and dared scarcely venture out 
far in the open air. They made no attempt 
at hunting, but in order to keep up the daily 
exercise they ran from the hut for a quarter 
of a mile, and then returned quickly. It was 
fortunate that they had taken care to provide 
fuel against the day of necessity, for without 
it they must have perished. But one day 
vanished after another, until the weather be- 
came milder; and by the end of January their 
hearts were lighter, for although the sun 
could not be seen, yet the dim light was a 
precursor of its appearance. Four weeks 
later, a part of the sun was distinctly visible 
above the horizon, and its appearance was 
greeted by our friends with joyful hearts and 
expressions of thanksgiving. 

In March they were able to resume their 
hunting, which was necessary in order to re- 
plenish the diminishing stock of provisions. 
They then succeeded in capturing a bear and 
several seals, so that they could dismiss all 
anxiety, and await with patience the arrival 
of ships, which without doubt would sail 
northwards, bound for the whale-fisheries. 



CAPTAIN REMBRANT, 155 

In spite of their numerous privations and 
toils, by the favor of God they had remained 
in a healthy condition, having neglected no 
precaution and taken daily exercise. Conrad 
had displayed his zeal and sincerity, and once 
had been able to save Leo, when huntings 
from the hug of a bear. The animal's em- 
brace would have resulted fatally if it had not 
been for Conrad's interposition ; and from 
that time forward Martin and Leo placed en- 
tire confidence in him. 

April came and vanished ; May followed. 
The air became mild. The immense fields of 
ice, which had covered the entire coast, were 
broken and scattered by the winds and waves, 
the sea was open again, and day after day the 
three exiles with longing eyes looked eagerly 
over its surface, hoping to see an approach- 
ing sail, which might prove to be the means 
of releasing them from their long imprison- 
ment. They often mistook a white cloud 
rising in the distant horizon for the spread 
canvas of a ship, and their disappointment 
was great when they found they had been 
deceived by their hopes. 



ISO LEO BERTRAM. 

Birds came in flocks to build their nests 
among the rocks on this remote coast ; the 
sea teemed with inhabitants at this season of 
the year ; whales and dolphins sported in the 
waters ; but no ship gladdened their hearts, 
no flag or pennon fluttered in the breeze to 
herald their deliverance. 

" They believe that we are dead/' said 
Leo, in deep dejection. " No one asks about 
us, and after a while another long, dreadful 
northern winter will fall upon us. My poor 
mother !" 

" Patience ! Patience !" answered Martin 
consolingly. " Captain Rembrant is a man 
of honor; he will surely at least make an 
effort to save us. A thousand accidents may 
have detained him in a voyage to the polar 
sea, and besides it is yet early in the year. 
We cannot reckon upon his arrival before 
the middle of June." 

New hopes, new disappointments. A ship 
appeared on the horizon ; it was a ship, a real 
ship; it could not be a deception, and our 
friends embraced each other and wept with 
delight ; but alas ! the vessel vanished in the 



CAPTAIN RE MB RANT. 1 5 7 

distance and their rejoicing was changed tO' 
sadness. 

" It will never come 1" said Leo and Con- 
rad. 

" It will come !" said Martin, with confi- 
dence. " If God spares his life, Captain Rem- 
brant will come to our rescue." 

Again and again the exiled men stood 
watching on the shore for a friendly sail, until 
the evening of the fourteenth of June, and 
Martin, sadly shaking his head, returned as 
usual to the hut with disappointed hopes. 

" My lads," he said, " the time has come 
for us to help ourselves. Our boat is in good 
condition. We will carry it to the water to-^ 
morrow, and row out bravely on the open 
sea. iFarther in the south we must certainly 
fall upon whalers, and we will reach one safely 
if God does not withdraw his aid. We can 
no longer depend upon Captain Rembrant, 
whatever the reason may be that detains him. 
Shall we venture T 

" Certainly, at all hazards," said Leo ; " for 
it would scarcely be possible for us to survive 
another winter here on this coast." 



iS8 LEO BERTRAM, 

" With God's help I hope it may not be 
necessary," said Martin. "We start, then, 
to-morrow." 

If the determination to do the best in our 
power is made at a time of anxiety and sor- 
row, with a steadfast waiting upon God, the 
heart becomes lighter and looks more hope- 
fully towards the future. It was so with our 
friends. The weariness of hope deferred and 
painful watching was now removed, and they 
slept more soundly than they had done for 
several nights. 

About dawn Martin was roused suddenly 
from slumber by the sound of voices, but im- 
agined that Conrad and Leo were talking in 
their sleep. He lay down again, but had 
scarcely closed his eyes when he again heard 
voices, strange voices without doubt, for im- 
mediately after some one knocked on the 
door of the hut. 

With a loud cry Martin sprang up. " My 
lads, help has come in the night !" Leo and 
Conrad were on their feet in an instant, while 
the door was assailed with a shower of blows, 
and " Heaven grant that you are alive and 



CAPTAIN REMBRANT. 159 

well " fell in welcome accents on their ears. 
Captain Rembrant stepped into the room, 
Martin fell in his outstretched arms, and Leo 
and Conrad, overcome by their emotions, 
wept and laughed over their unexpected de- 
liverance, while a loud cheer arose from the 
sailors outside of the hut, who had accompa- 
nied Captain Rembrant in his search for his 
friends. 

It was some time before their feelings per- 
mitted them to speak. Then came explana- 
tions and an account of their adventures, and 
Captain Rembrant listened in wonder as they 
related how they had been providentially pre- 
served through their privations and dangers. 

Leo asked about his mother and brother, 
and learned with a thankful heart that both 
were well and still clung to the hope of seeing 
him alive again. The captain had confirmed 
this by his own confidence in Martin, for he 
believed that if the honest pilot had escaped 
from the claws and teeth of the bear, he 
would find ways and means of defying the 
severe winter. He also said that Martin 
would be able to calculate about the ship — 



i6o LEO BERTRAM. 

knowing- it would be impossible for it to re- 
turn to their aid till spring — when driven to- 
ivards ^he routh by the winds and waves at 
that dangerous season of the year. On his 
arrival in Bremen he had acquainted the mer- 
chant shipowner with these unfortunate cir* 
cumstances, and it had been decided that an 
attempt to save the exiles should be made in 
the spring. The vessel was ready to start 
by the first of March, but had been delayed 
by adverse winds on her voyage. He had 
also to say, from the lawyer Libarius, that 
Leo's enemy was powerless, having been sum- 
moned by death to a higher tribunal to an' 
swer for his misdeeds. 

When old Elshoft's name Was mentioned 
Conrad turned pale, but no person noticed 
his emotion. 

Leo and Martin had also to relate how 
they had been overtaken by the storm, but 
not a word was said respecting Conrad's 
treachery. It was passed over in silence, for 
the honest sailors would have regarded Con- 
rad with contempt if the truth had been 
known. Martin pressed his hand, and whis- 



CAPTAIN RE MB RANT. 1 6 1 

pered, " Never fear, Conrad, What has pass- 
ed is all forgiven and forgotten, and your 
faithfulness has made us friends for life." 

Conrad returned the pressure. " I thank 
you, Martin, and if we return to Bremen 
safely, you and Leo will find that you have 
in me a true friend." 

In the mean time Captain Rembrant and 
his companions were making their prepara- 
tions to return to the Dolphin. The posses- 
sions of the three friends were to be carried 
to the ship, excepting the wood, which was 
left there to save some poor castaway in the 
future from perishing, and Captain Rembrant 
promised to add a hundred weight of coal to 
this stock ot fuel. Finally all were in the 
boat, which was rowed to the Dolphin. Mar- 
tin was a stout and rugged old seaman, but 
when he stood again on the deck of the ship, 
and recognized all of the familiar surround- 
ings, and grasped the wheel in his strong 
hand again, a thrill of joy ran through his 
frame, and tears rolled over his weather- 
beaten cheeks. 



21 



i63 LEO BERTRAM. 



CHAPTER XII. 



AT HOME AGAIN. 



One fine September evening, a ship with 
furled sails slowly approached the coast, upon 
whose highest point a white house, partly 
covered with green vines, gleamed through 
its dark drapery. The ship was lying about 
a quarter of a mile from the land, when a 
boat shot from it over the water. A hearty 
young lad had jumped into it, followed by an 
older man, who seated himself in the stern, 
while the other, with beaming eyes, seized 
the oars, and dipped them in the waves. 

" A happy voyage and a quick return," 
cried a voice after them from the ship to the 
rowers. " I hope to hear from you soon, my 
friends." 

" Certainly, captain," answered the older 
man, "Before a week passes by, we will 
come to Bremen for our reward A good 
voyage to you alL" 



A2' HOME AGAIN. i6j 

A loud hurrah from the ship followed the 
departure ; then the sails were unfurled, and 
the Dolphin, in spite of her heavy cargo, 
flew swiftly on toward the mouth of the Weser 
river. 

The boat, which our readers may recog- 
nize as an old acquaintance, approached the 
shore with steady strokes, and was steered 
directly under the point upon which the 
house was standing. Its keel grated on the 
sand, Martin jumped out, secured it to a 
stake, and held out his hand to assist Leo. 
*' Welcome home to your native land safe 
and sound," he said. " What a joy is in 
store for your mother, when you walk in and 
take her by surprise 1" 

Leo's voice trembled with emotion as 
he replied, " Certainly, Martin. And Willy 
is at home, for there is the familiar old boat 
in which we have been out so often fishing. 
Yet I tremble. If mother is only living V 

" Without doubt, my boy," answered Mar- 
tin confidently, as they walked rapidly up the 
hill ; '' in a few moments you will be in her 
arms.*' 



i64 LEO BERTRAM. 

Leo panted for breath, his cheeks burned, 
his eyes beamed, his heart was beating with 
agitation at the thought of the coming meet- 
ing. All was quiet, peaceful, unchanged 
about the house. Perhaps the vine clamber^ 
ed more luxuriantly around the window. The 
last rays of the sun fell upon it, the door 
stood open, the window-shutter also was open, 
so that the refreshing air could enter. Leo 
stepped in the door, he glanced at the room 
where his mother was usually engaged with 
her duties. It was empty. He ran out into 
the garden. Willy was there digging. 

" Willy ! Willy !" he cried. 

The boy glanced up from his work, and 
throwing down his spade, in an instant was 
in Leo's outstretched arms. " Safely home, 
dear brother !" exclaimed Willy. " How we 
have prayed for you! Every day mother 
and I have implored God for your preserva- 
tion, and here you are, only taller and stouter 
than you were before. How delighted moth- 
er will be I Let us find her." 

" Is she well ?" asked Leo, almost trem- 
bling. 



AT HOME AGAIN. 165 

" Alive and well, and more proud of you 
than ever," replied Willy. *' You cannot 
doubt that. Come, come 1 We shall find 
her in the attic room. She is often there at 
evening, looking out on the sea, and think- 
ing of you." 

They turned toward the house. Leo 
cried, " Mother I" for there she was, standing 
in the doorway, tears in her eyes, a glad 
smile on her lips, and a world of tenderness 
and love in her glance, as she held out her 
arms to her. dear son. 

" Thank God !" she murmured, as Leo 
embraced her. " Thank God, my dear boy, 
that we see each other again 1" 

Old Martin drew his rough hand over his 
eyes as he said to himself, " This is worth a 
winter in Spitzbergen. Such joy angels 
might have in heaven." 

Indeed, the delight of the return was so 
great, that all the hard, toilsome, weary day§ 
and anxious, sleepless nights, were for the 
moment entirely forgotten in the joy that 
welled up from their grateful hearts. Leo 
did not forget his faithful friend, and as night 



i66 LEO BERTRAM. 

came on he related how much he owed, to 
the friendship and kindness of Martin, and 
the thanks and affection of the family em- 
barrassed the old pilot, who endeavored to 
conceal his emotion under some blustering 
sailors' jokes, until he could recover his 
equanimity, and with Leo describe the cares 
and perils they had undergone together du- 
ring the winter. He lost no opportunity of 
praising Leo's courage and hardihood. 

They shed tears of joy, mingled with 
gratitude, as they dwelt upon the mercy and 
goodness of God, which had preserved them 
so wonderfully in those long, tedious, dark 
months of exile from friends and home. Leo 
realized this fully, and his future would show 
still more clearly how his misfortunes had 
proved a blessing in disguise. 

So we often, foolish and short-sighted 
mortals as we are, consider our afflictions 
as great misfortunes, while in the inscrutable 
wisdom of God they are only serving to help 
us to place our entire confidence and depend- 
ence upon a power and strength beyond our 
own. A merciful and loving God will never 



A T HOME A GAIN. 1^7 

place upon his people burdens that they can- 
not bear ; and however dark their path, there 
is light before them. 

Five or six days passed swiftly, and one 
evening Martin decided that it was time for 
them to report at Bremen, as their leave of 
absence was nearly over, and he and Leo had 
not yet received their money. His mother 
anxiously inquired if Leo intended entering 
service again on the Dolphin, and was very 
much relieved when he assured her that he 
preferred to remain at home and return to 
his old employment. So the departure for 
Bremen was settled the following day, and 
Martin must promise to spend the coming 
winter with the family of his young friend, a 
proposition that he did not oppose very 
strongly. 

The next morning, as they were sitting 
at breakfast, Martin, hearing the sound of 
wheels, ran to the window, and announced 
that a carriage was approaching the house. 
The others, in wonder, collected around the 
window, and to the astonishment of Martin 
and Leo, Conrad, the companion of their 



i68 LEO BERTRAM. 

trials and troubles, alighted. They scarcely 
recognized him at the first glance, for he was 
handsomely dressed, and his face was unusu- 
ally pale. They gave him a hearty welcome. 

" What wind blew you here ?" asked Mar- 
tin, after Conrad had been introduced to 
Leo's mother and brother. . " I thought you 
were with your relatives, and here you come 
sailing along under entirely strange colors. 
I hope you bring good news." 

" Good for Leo and his family, if painful 
and deeply mortifying to me." said Conrad, 
in a low voice. " I came to seek forgiveness 
and make amends for a wrong. But," he 
added, " I will make everything right. I will 
confess all, even if it brings your hatred upon 
me." 

" Whoever confesses a fault and seeks to 
make reparation, cannot receive contempt 
from good people," said Martin. " Speak 
out freely, my lad. You have been a faithful 
comrade, and you can depend upon our 
friendship. Is it not so, Leo ?" 

Leo pressed Conrad's hand by way of an- 
swering. 



AT HOME AGAIN. 169 

" Now, then, hear my confession, and 
mildly judge a repentant sinner. 

" First, I must acknowledge that I am 
the son of the man who defrauded you. I 
lied about that, for the man was my own fa- 
ther. I am his rightful son and heir." 

Martin shook his head, Willy frowned, 
and his mother regarded Leo with painful 
anxiety ; but he only said gently, " Do not 
judge him harshly. It was not through Con- 
rad that we suffered; he is not responsible 
for his father's actions." 

" That is true,'^ said Martin. "It was not 
your guilt, and you need not share his dis- 
grace. We can only pity, not condemn you, 
my lad." 

" After my return home," added Conrad, 
with more confidence, " by my father's books 
and papers I found — yes, the truth must 
come out— he had defrauded this good wo- 
man. The shipwrecked vessel Uranus was 
insured for 80,000 thalers, and that sum 
should have been equally divided between my 
father and his partner. Receive your part," 
said he, handing a paper to Leo's, mother* 

Ii«o Bertram. 22 



[ 



170 LEO BERTRAM. 

" This is the sum, with the interest ; this pa- j 

per can easily be turned into money." \ 

They sat in silence as Conrad presented I 

the paper. The old pilot first sprang up, 
and grasping Conrad by the hand, exclaimed, 
with deep feeling, " You are an honorable 
fellow. Old Martin declares this, and woe 
betide any one who shall doubt it. What- 
ever injury you may have done me in your 
heart, I freely forgive." 

" No, hear me out ; I have not finished," 
said Conrad, in a trembling voice. " Anoth- 
er crime, in intention only, still rests upon 
my conscience. You remember in our first 
attack on the whale Leo tumbled overboard. 
This was my doing. I gave the boat the 
sudden lurch which caused him to fall. I 
hoped that if he were swallowed up by the 
waves, my father and I would be saved from 
infamy and disgrace. God, in his infinite 
mercy, prevented the accomplishment of my 
design ; but I am guilty of the sin, and am 
willing to make any reparation in my power. 
I will su£fer any punishment." 

** O Conrad," cried Leo, throwing his arms 



AT HOME AGAIN. 171 

around the penitent, "you have been suffi- 
ciently punished by this confession, and then, 
you saved my life in the struggle with the 
bear, and that was expiation. I bear no 
grudge against you. God, who can read my 
heart, knows that I esteem you more than 
before. No, you are not to be punished for 
this sin ; you are exculpated by noble confes- 
sion." 

" So I think," said Martin. " Give me 
your hand, my lad. You are my friend, and 
shall remain so as long as I live." 

Willy and his mother also took his hand 
kindly, and a heavy burden was lifted from 
Conrad's breast. 

With a sigh, he said, " If you can forgive 
me, whom I would have so deeply wronged, I 
can hope that God, in his boundless mercy, 
can forgive a sinner. I thank you all for 
making me a happier man." 

New assurances of friendship and confi- 
dence followed this (Ksplay of Conrad's feel- 
ing, and at last Leo, taking the paper in his 
hands, exclaimed, "Conrad, I must accept 
some of this money in justice to my mother 



T72 LEO BERTRAM. 

but tak€ half of the sum and keep it for your 
self/' 

" I do not need it. My father, although 
he always appeared to be poor, left me a 
large fortune. I only need your kindness 
and good-will." 

" You have that, and the future will show 
that it comes from my heart. Whoever re- 
pents and does right deserves kindness and 
friendship. And we may all thank the Lord, 
who was designing our highest good, even 
when we were in our deepest care and anx- 
iety." 

"Whom the Lord loves, he chastens," 
said the widow. 

These words came to them all with a new 
force and meaning, and taught them to put 
their trust in God, with fresh confidence and 
faith in his love and wisdom. 

The blessing of the Lord did not depart 
from the widow's family and their friends. 

The blossoms of truth and piety adorned 
their path in life and cheered their declining 
years. 

" Whom God loves, he chastens," softened 



AT HOMJ^ AGAIN. 175 

many a trial, and guided them like a star 
through dark nights of sorrow. Truly the 
salvation of the righteous is of the Lord ; he 
is their strength in time of trouble. And the 
Lord shall help them, and deliver them ; he 
shall deliver them from the wicked, and save 
them, because they trust in him. 



t 



Little Maid Marigold 

Br ELEANOR H. STOOKE 

#jflw. 22J pMgB. iUusirMUd . • • • 75«. 

The pages of this duiiuiug stoiy will be read by many 
with keen interest U is not the story of some wonderful 
prodigy, but of a sweet young giil, wtio won the hearts of all 
with vrhom she became associated. The *' Little Maid " wil 
have many fiiends as soob as she has become ioiown through 
the pages of this book. It b a story not merely for youqg 
girii^ though it is of a girl, but for youi^ People geonally. 



ELMCOVE 

By Mb. HARRIET A. GHEEVER 
ismo, 334 PHI*^' lUmsirsUd • • • • Si^oo 

This b a story of the power exerted by a lovdy giilt 
who by an accident became a confirmed invalid and cripple. 
This shut-in one was able to affect the life of a town to such 
an extent that it not only wrought a great transformation 
in a church, but also directly affected a serious and stubborn 
labor strike. The story b told in a most interesting and 
straightforward manner. The various characters, of which 
there are a number, sustain their parts well, and hdp to make 
the narrathfe most interesting. Sybil Earle, the central figure 
of the story, bluff old Captain Ranson, faithful Oliver Bruce, 
and others, will find many admirers among those who shall 
fead the story. It will not fail to do good wherever it b read. 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, NEW YORK 



BY LEAPS AND BOUNDS 

New Testament 
with Notes $L00 

POCKET EDITION 

Printed on fine, thin p^tptr, bound in teaihefp divatUy 
drcttit, red under gold edges* Sise, S^x3%x}i inches. 

18 MONTHS AGO 'we advertised that we had sold 
upwards of I75t000 COPIES of the New Testament with 
notes, instructions and references. 6 MONTHS AGO we 
advertised that the sales of this book amounted to 185^000 
COPIES. We NOW announce the book as having sold 
up to 195,000 COPIES. 

Surely a book of this character, with such a sale, must 
have merit. 

The salient feature of this work is, that on tb$ satne pag$ 
you have the Scripture, References and Commentary, all in 
such a convenient size that it can be carried in the pocket 

<kr Aim is to Sett ONE MHUON COPIES 

Send us ONE DOLLAR^ for which a copy will be 
sent you postpaid, and we are sure you will not only be 
satisfied with 'your purchase, but will wonder how the book 
was ever made for that amount. 



AMERICAN TRACT SOdETV 

JSO NASSAU STREET NEV Y<»K 



The Glory and Joy 
of the Resurrection 

By JAMES PATON, D J). Qoth, 277 pp. ti-oo 

The author of this splendid book states that the height of 
his ambition is that to devout readers of his book " there may 
come some portion of the glory and joy which manifestly thrilled 
the heart and tired the brain of the followers of Jesus in those 
Early Apostolic Days." 

The following press notices will give some idea of the 
author's success in attaining his object, viz. : 



**The author writes with the deep 
spiritual fervor of a man convinced 
of the reality of a living Christ/'— 
The 'BookseUer. 

**Many wiU be strengthened and 
blessed in reading these pages.'* — 
ITbe Cbriiiian Guardian. 

** The volume is a valuable one in 
Its contents, and written in a st3rle 
that is virile, convincing and inspir- 
ing."— T** Stewrfarrf. 

** Biblical, argumentative and de- 
Totional.'* — Literary World. 

•* A unioue treatment of the sub- 
ject of the Resurrection." — Christian 
union Herald. 

*'An will be thankful to Dr. Paton 
for his systematic and helpful presen- 
tation of the subject.*' — Ptttsburg 
Christian Advocate. 

** Clear, analytical and spiritually 
stimulating.**— TVn* Watebman. 

** Earnest, devout and spiritual.'* 
--jCbristian Intelligencer, 

**A clear-cut statement of the 
Scriptural basis for a belief in the 
Resurrection.'* — Auburn Seminary 
Rtviettfm 

^^Scholarship and devotion go hand 
In hand in this book.**-^Tbe Living 
Cburcb. 



** Dr. Paton believes In the Resur^ 
rection, and he lifts the soul of his 
reader on the same wings of faith 
that bear him up." — The Morning 
Star. 

''The reader will find himself 
carried along by both his arguments 
and his fervor.*' — The Lutheran 
(^server, 

''Personal conviction of the 
presence of a living Christ may be 
strengthened by this Book.*' — The 
Congregationalist. 

" This volume is sure to do great 
good by turning the thoughts of 
many to this great and glorious 
truth." — fVestem Recorder, 

"A valuable study of the Resur- 
rection.*' — Christian Work and 
Evangelist. 

" Time spent in reading this book 
will be a profitable investment.**— 
tMarjfland Christian Endeavor. 

" The reader will be surprised and 
greatly stirred and quickened by the 
accumulating testimony to the his- 
torical fact and its vast importance. 
At the dose, he will, with th<e author, 
bow his heart and worship and ob«r 
the risen and glorified Son of ManJ^ 
— Central Presbyterian, 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, NEV YORK 



^ 




